Nephrology and Urology
ofSmall Animals
EDITEDBY
Joe Bartges and David J. Polzin
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Nephrology and Urology of
SmallAnimals
Nephrology and Urology
of Small Animals
Edited by
Joe BartgeS, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine), DACVN
Professor of Internal Medicine and Nutrition
The Acree Endowed Chair of Smalfl Animal Research
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN
David J. Polzin, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Professor of internal Medicine
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
St. Pauf, MN
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
This edition first published 2011  2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical and Medical business to forrn Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Ofces: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fe is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 22 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a
photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payments hasbeen arranged. The fee codesfor users of the
Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8 138-1717-0/2011.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. Albrand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned
subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional should be sought.
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientifc research, understanding, and discussion
 only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific method,
diagnosis, or treatment by practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and
specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any irmplied warranties of fitness for a
regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the
oa ii sons o las sid au u pd uou au ineaa pue maai li in si li
medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage
and for added warnings and precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact
that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further
information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or
Website may provide or recormmendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet
Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when
it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the
publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Nephrology and urology of smallanimals / edited by Joe Bartges, David J. Polzin.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1717-0 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary nephrology. 2. Veterinary urology.
3. Pet medicine. 1. Bartges, Joe. ll. Polzin, David James.
[DNLM: 1. Kidney Diseases-veterinary. 2. Cat Diseases. 3. Dog Diseases. 4. Urologic Diseases-
veterinary. SF 992.K53]
SF992.K53N47 2011
636.089661-dc22
2010026394
A catalogue record for this book is available frorm the British Library.
This book is published in the following electronic formats: ePDF 9780470958810; ePub 9780470958889
Set in 10.5/12.5pt Minion by Aptara@ Inc., New Delhi, I1ndia
12011
Dedications
To Carl Osborne, Del Finco,Don Low, and Ken Bovee, the “fathers"of Veterinary Nephrology and
Urology. Their visions and efforts are responsible for the subspecialty as we know it today and have
made this book possible.
To the book's contributors and the clinicians and researchers that generated the knowledge,
expertise, and skills included in this book.
To the students, in schoo! and out of school, who stimulate our pursuit of discovering new
To the clients that we have worked with and their children whom they entrusted to our care.
And most importantly. to the dogs and cats that participated, some by giving their lives, in the many
studies that have contributed to our knowledge, expertise, and skills in the field of veterinary
nephrology and urology.
Joe Bartges dedicates this book:
· To Joe Bartges, father: "'ve realized that I need him, when I look into my father's eyes" - "My
Father's Eyes", Eric Clapton
Saaog 'uny daaiy ay buiya., - u daau ayn buiym 'uo pue uo saoo 1! pua., :ue saaeg
and Messina
· To Donna Raditic, friend, soul mate, and love: "Have I told you lately that I love you? Fill my heart
with gladness, take away my sadness, ease my troubles that's what you do" - "Have I Told You
Lately?", Van Morrison
no anasaud 'ydeubooud e aaey 1 'ag isnw 1! 'obe buon., isabjreg jore yo Arouau au ol ·
memories" - "old Friends", Simon and Garfunke!
·For their love and support - and for putting up with me!
· To everyone who I am fortunate to calfl friend: "To all the good friends I've known. . . And I'm gonna
David Polzin dedicates this book:
· To my parents, Eimer and Patricia, who instilled in me the desire to fearn
· To my wife Brenda, who has given me the joy and happiness needed to persevere
· To Keisey and Elfiot, my daughter and son, who are the future and make fife interesting
· To my colleagues and friends that put fife in perspective
·To the numerous pets in my life, that constantly remind me of the importance of what we do
Contents
Contributors
xi
10
Urinary enzyme activity for detection
of acute kidney injury
70
Preface
xvi
Richard Goldstein
11
Diagnosis of uroabdomen
73
Section 1
 Anatomy and physiology
1
Michael M. Fry
Anatomy of the kidney and proximal
12
 Urinary saturation testing
75
ureter
3
Joe Bartges
Christina E. Clarkson and Thomas F.
Fetcher
13
Blood pressure determination
86
Rebecca L. Stepien
 Physiology of the kidneys
10
Scott Brown
14
 Renal function testing
91
Herve P. Lefebvre
 Anatomy of the lower urogenital
tract
18
15
 Radiographic imaging in urinary
Thomas F. Fletcher and Christina E.
tract disease
97
Clarkson
Daniel A. Feeney and Kari L. Anderson
16
Ultrasonography of the urinary
Section 2  Diagnostic testing
23
tract
128
Sike Hecht and George A. Henry
Historical information and physical
examination
25
17
Computed tomography and
Joe Bartges and David Polzin
magnetic resonance imaging of the
urinary tract
146
5
The ins and outs of urine collection
28
Alexander G. Macleod and
Carl A. Osborne, Jody P. Lufich, and
Erik R. Wisner
Hasan Albasan
18
 Renal scintigraphy
161
6
Nephropyelocentesis and antegrade
Gregory B. Danie!
pyelography
43
Silke Hecht
19
 Diagnostic urologic endoscopy
173
Julie Byron and Dennis CheW
Urinalysis
46
Michael M.Fry
20
Vaginoscopy
188
Margaret Root Kustritz
8
Urine protein and microalbuminuria
58
Mary B. Nabity
21
Urologic laparoscopy
192
Jacqueline Whittemore
Urine culture
62
Joe Bartges
22
Urodynamic studies
197
India F. Lane
vii
vili
Contents
23
 Renal biopsy
209
36
 Feline urethral obstruction
367
George E. Lees and Anne Bahr
Cari A. Osborne, Jody P. Lulich, and
David J. Poizin
24
 Renal pathology
215
Cathy Brown
37
Voiding urohydropropulsion
375
Jody P. Lufich and Carf A. Osborne
25
 Biopsy of the lower urinary
tract
229
38
 Urethral bulking for urinary
Jody Lulich and Carl Osborne
incontinence
379
Joe Bartges
26
Cytology of the urinary tract and
prostate
234
39
Laser ablation of ectopic ureter
383
Michael M. Fry
Joseph W. Bartges
27
Diagnosis of infectious diseases of
40
 Drug therapy with renal failure
386
the urinary tract
241
Joe Bartges and Tomas Martin-Jimenez
Meryl P. Littman
Section 4 (
 Clinical syndromes
391
Section 3
 Therapeutic techniques
253
41
Azotemia and uremia
393
28
Hemodialysis
255
Sheri J. Ross
Cathy Langston
42
Polyuria and polydipsia
400
29
Continuous renal replacement
James Katherine
therapy
286
MarkJAcierno
43
 Proteinuria and microalbuminuria
410
Hattie Syme and Jonathon Elliott
30
Peritoneal dialysis
293
Mary Anna Labato
44
 Nephrotic syndrome
415
Barrak Pressler
31
Renal transplantation
306
Christopher A. Adin
45
 Abnormal renal palpation
422
Claudia Kirk and Joe Bartges
32
Indwelling urinary catheters and
stents
329
46
 Discolored urine
425
Allyson Berent
Joe Bartges
33
 Extracorporeal shock wave
47
 Clinical signs of lower urinary tract
lithotripsy
340
disease
428
Larry G. Adams and
Joe Bartges
Corinne K. Goidman
34
 Intracorporeal laser lithotripsy
349
Section 5
Upper urinary tract
Jody P. Lulich, Carf A. Osborne, and
disorders
431
Hasan Albasan
48
Chronic kidney disease
433
35
Canine retrograde
David J. Poizin
urohydropropulsion
358
Carl A. Osborne, Jody P. Lufich, and
49
 Acute kidney insufficiency
472
David J. Poizin
Larry D. Cowgill and Cathy Langston
Contents
ix
50
 Prognosis of acute renal failure
524
65
Phosphorus disorders
657
Gilad Segev
David. J Poizin
51
 Prognosis of renal failure-chronic
528
66
 Metabolic acid-base disorders
662
David J. Poizin
Marie E. Kerf
52
Renal manifestations of systemic
67
Mixed acid-base disorders
668
disease
531
Mark J. Acierno
Linda Ross
53
Glomerular disease
538
Section 7  Systemic arterial
Shelly L. Vaden and
hypertension
675
Gregory F. Grauer
68
 Systemic arterial hypertension
677
54
Amyloidosis
547
Scott Brown
 Joe Bartges and Jonathan Wall
55
Disorders of renal tubules
555
Section 8
3 Upper and lower urinary
Joe Bartges
 tract disorders
685
56
Congenital kidney diseases
568
69
Canine and feline urolithiasis:
George E. Lees
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 687
Jody P. Lulich, Carf A. Osborne, and
57
Renal neoplasia
577
Hasan Albasan
Carolyn Henry
70
 Pathophysiology of urinary
58
Diseases of the ureter
583
obstruction
707
Gilad Segev
Joe Bartges
59
 Renal trauma
591
71
Urinary tract infection—bacterial
710
Patricia Sura
David Senior
60
 Renal and ureteral surgery
596
72
 Fungal urinary tract infection
717
Karen Tobias
Barrak Pressler
73
Viruses and urinary tract disease
725
Section 6
Fluid, electrolyte, and
John M. Kruger, Carl A. Osborne,
acid-base disorders
617
Annabel G. Wise, Brian A. Scansen,
and Roger K. Maes
61
Sodium disorders
619
David J. Poizin
74
Nematodes of the upper and lower
urinary tract of dogs and cats
734
62
Potassium disorders
625
Carl A. Osborne, Jody P. Lufich, and
Andrea J. Sotirakopoulos and
Hasan Albasan
Sheri J. Ross
63
Magnesium disorders
638
Section 9  Lower urinary tract
Elizabeth Rozanski
disorders
743
64
Calcium disorders
642
75
 Feline idiopathic cystitis
745
John M. Kruger and Cari A. Osborne
Jodi L. Westropp
X
Contents
76
Micturition disorders
755
83
Surgery of the lower urinary tract
835
Jufie Fischer and india F. Lane
Karen Tobias
77
Urethral diseases
778
Joe Bartges
Section 10  Urinary disorders of
avian and exotic companion animals
855
78
Prostatic disease
787
Margaret Root Kustritz
84
 Avian and exotic companion animals 857
Cheryl B. Greenacre
79
Neoplasia of the lower urinary tract
797
Jeffrey Phillips
Section 11
Counseling clients
877
80
Congenital diseases of the lower
urinary tract
809
85
Counseling clients
879
Joe Bartges and John M. Kruger
Elizabeth Strand
81
Inappropriate urination
818
Appendix: Physiology of the lower
Elizabeth A Shulf
urogenital tract
883
82
Lower urinary tract trauma
828
Index
889
Patricia Sura
Contributors
Mark J. Acierno, MBA, DVM, DACVIM
The Acree Endowed Chair of Small Animal
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Research
Associate Professor of Internal Medicine
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Dialysis Services Coordinator
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
The University of Tennessee
School of Veterinary Medicine
Knoxville, TN 37996
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Allyson Berent, DVM, DACVIM (Small Animal
Internal Medicine)
Larry G. Adams, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Director, Interventional Endoscopy Services
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Animal Medical Center
Professor of Internal Medicine
New York, NY 10065
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Purdue University
Cathy A. Brown, VMD, PhD, DACVP
West Lafayette, IN 47907
(Anatomic Pathology)
Professor of Anatomic Pathology
Christopher A. Adin, DVM, DACVS
Athens Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Assistant Professor of Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
University of Georgia
The Ohio State University
Athens, GA 30602
Columbus, OH 43210
Scott Brown, VMD, PhD, DACVIM (Small Animal
Hasan Albasan, DVM, MS, PhD
 Internal Medicine)
Research Associate
Professor of Internal Medicine
 Minnesota Urolith Center
 Head, Department of Small Animal Medicine and
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
 University of Minnesota
University of Georgia
St. Paul, MN 55108
Athens, GA 30602
Kari L. Anderson, DVM, DACVR
Associate Clinical Professor of Medical Imaging
Julie Byron, DVM, MS, MS, DACVIM (Small Animal
Internal Medicine)
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
University of Minnesota
College of Veterinary Medicine
St. Paul, MN 55108
University of llinois
Anne Bahr, DVM, DACVR, MS
Urbana, IL 61802
Chief Radiologist
PetRays Teleradiology Consultants, PA
Dennis Chew, DVM, DACVIM (Small Animal
The Woodlands, TX 77380
Internal Medicine)
Professor of Internal Medicine
Joe Bartges, DVM, PhD
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
DACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine),
The Ohio State University
DACVN
Columbus, OH 43210
Professor of Internal Medicine and Nutrition
xi   Contributors
Christina E. Clarkson, DVM, PhD
Michael M. Fry, DVM, MS, DACVP
Assistant Professor
(Clinical Pathology)
Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences
Associate Professor of Clinical Pathology
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Pathobiology
University of Minnesota
College of Veterinary Medicine
St. Paul, MN 55108
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
Larry D. Cowgill, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Corinne K. Goldman, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Professor
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Department of Medicine & Epidemiology
Associate
 Co-Director, University of California Veterinary
 South Carolina Veterinary Specialists
 Medical Center-San Diego
Columbia, SC 29210
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California-Davis
Richard E Goldstein, DVM, DACVIM (Small Animal
Davis, CA 95616
Associate Professor of Medicine
Gregory B. Daniel, DVM, MS, DACVR
Department of Clinical Sciences
Professor of Radiology
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Head, Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences 
Cornell University
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary
Ithaca, NY 14853
Medicine
Virginia Tech University
Gregory F. Grauer, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Blacksburg, VA 24061
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Professor of Internal Medicine
Jonathan Elliott, MA, Vet MB, PhD, Cert SAC,
Jarvis Chair of Small Animal Internal Medicine
DECVPT, MRCVS
Department of Clinical Sciences
 Professor of Clinical Pharmacology
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Vice Principal - Research
Kansas State University
 Royal Veterinary College
Manhattan, KS 66506
Royal College Street
London, NW1 0TU, UK
Cheryl B. Greenacre, DVM, DABVP (Avian and Exotic
Companion Mammal)
Daniel A. Feeney, DVM, DACVR
Professor of Avian and Zoological Medicine
Professor of Radiology
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
 College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Tennessee
University of Minnesota
Knoxville, TN 37996
St. Paul, MN 55108
Silke Hecht, Dr Med Vet., DACVR, DECVD1
Julie R. Fischer, DVM, DACVIM (Small Animal
Assistant Professor of Radiology
 Internal Medicine)
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Associate
College of Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Specialty Hospital of San Diego
The University of Tennessee
San Diego, CA 92121
Knoxville, TN 37996
Thomas F. Fletcher, DVM, PhD
Carolyn J. Henry, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Oncology)
Professor
Professor of Oncology
Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences
Director, Tom and Betty Scott Endowed Program in
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Oncology
University of Minnesota
Faculty Facilitator, Mizzou Advantage One Health,
St. Paul, MN 55108
One Medicine
Contributors  xili
 Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery
India F. Lane, DVM, MS, EdD, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
and
Associate Professor of Internal Medicine
 Division of Hematology/Oncology, School of
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
 University of Missouri
The University of Tennessee
Columbia, MO 65211
Knoxville, TN 37996
George A. Henry, DVM, DACVR
Cathy Langston, DVM, DACVIM (Small Animal
Clinical Associate Professor of Radiology
Internal Medicine)
 Department of Small Animal Clinical
Head of Nephrology, Urology, and Hemodialysis Unit
Sciences
Animal Medical Center
College of Veterinary Medicine
New York, NY 10065
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
George E. Lees, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Small Animal
Internal Medicine)
Katherine M. James, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Professor of Internal Medicine
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Veterinary Education Coordinator
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Information Network
Texas A&M University
Davis, CA 95616
College Station, TX 77843
Marie E. Kerl, DVM, DACVIM (Small Animal
Hervé P. Lefebvre, DVM, PhD, DECVPT
Internal Medicine), DACVECC
 Professor of Physiology and Therapeutics
Associate Teaching Professor
Department of Clinical Sciences
University of Missouri
National Veterinary School of Toulouse
Columbia, MO 65211
Toulouse, France
Claudia A. Kirk, DVM, PhD, DACVN, DACVIM
Meryl P. Littman, VMD, DACVIM (Small Animal
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
 Internal Medicine)
 Professor of Internal Medicine and Nutrition
Associate Professor of Internal Medicine
Head, Department of Small Animal Clinical
School of Veterinary Medicine
Sciences
 University of Pennsylvania
College of Veterinary Medicine
Philadelphia, PA 19104
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
Jody P. Lulich, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Small Animal
 Internal Medicine)
John M. Kruger, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Professor of Internal Medicine
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Minnesota Urolith Center
Professor of Internal Medicine
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
Michigan State University
St. Paul, MN 55108
East Lansing, MI 48824
Alexander G. MacLeod, DVM, DACVR
Mary Anna Labato, DVM, DACVIM
Staff Radiologist
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Veterinary Specialty and Emergency Center
Clinical Professor of Internal Medicine
Langhorne, PA 19047
Section Head, Small Animal Medicine
 Department of Clinical Sciences
Roger K. Maes, DVM, MS, PhD
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
 Professor, Department of Microbiology and Molecular
Tufts University
Genetics
North Grafton, MA 01536
Section Chief, Virology
xiv   Contributors
Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health
College of Veterinary Medicine
Michigan State University
University of Minnesota
East Lansing, MI 48910
St. Paul, MN 55108
Tomas Martin-Jimenez, DVM, PhD, DECVPT,
Linda Ross, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Small Animal
DACVCP
Internal Medicine)
Associate Professor of Pharmacology
Associate Professor of Internal Medicine
Department of Comparative Medicine
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Tennessee
Tufts University
Knoxville, TN 37996
North Grafton, MA 01536
Mary B. Nabity, DVM, DAVCP (Clinical Pathology)
Sheri J. Ross, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Small Animal
Clinical Assistant Professor of Clinical Pathology
Internal Medicine)
 Department of Pathobiology
 Clinical Faculty
College of Veterinary Medicine
Nephrology, Urology, and Hemodialysis
Texas A&M University
University of California Veterinary Medical
College Station, TX 77843
Center
San Diego, CA 92121
Carl A. Osborne, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Elizabeth Rozanski, DVM, DACVIM (Small Animal
Professor of Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine), DACVECC
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine and
College of Veterinary Medicine
Emergency and Critical Care
University of Minnesota
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
St. Paul, MN 55108
Tufts University
North Grafton, MA 01536
Jeffrey Phillips, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Oncology)
Assistant Professor of Oncology
Brian A. Scansen, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Assistant Professor of Cardiology and Interventional
College of Veterinary Medicine
Medicine
The University of Tennessee
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Knoxville, TN 37906
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
David J. Polzin, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Columbus, OH 43210
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Professor of Internal Medicine
Gilad Segev, DVM, DECVIM (Companion Animal)
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Clinical Lecturer in Internal Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Head, Department of Small Animal Internal
University of Minnesota
Medicine
St. Paul, MN 55108
Koret School of Veterinary Medicine
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Barrak M. Pressler, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Rehovot 76100, Israel
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine
David F. Senior, BVSc, DACVIM (Small Animal
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Internal Medicine), DECVIM
School of Veterinary Medicine
( Companion Animal)
Purdue University
Professor of Internal Medicine
West Lafayette, IN 47907
Associate Dean of Advancement and Strategic
Initiatives
Margaret V. Root Kustritz, DVM, PhD, DACT
 School of Veterinary Medicine
Associate Professor of Theiogenology
Louisiana State University
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Baton Rouge, LA 70810
Contributors XV
Elizabeth A. Shull, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology),
Shelly L. Vaden, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
DACVB
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Appalachian Veterinary Specialists and Gentle Pet Vet
Professor of Internal Medicine
Pet Wellness Center
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Louisville, TN 37777
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27606
Andrea J. Sotirakopoulos, BVSc, MS
 Small Animal Internal Medicine
Jonathan Wall, BSc, PhD
San Diego, CA 92130
Professor, Human Immunology and Cancer
Program
Rebecca L. Stepien, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Director, Preclinical and Diagnostic Molecular
Clinical Professor of Cardiology
Imaging Laboratory
School of Veterinary Medicine
Graduate School of Medicine
University of Wisconsin
The University of Tennessee
Madison, W1 53706
Knoxville, TN 37920
Elizabeth Strand, LCSW, PhD
Jodi L. Westropp, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Clinical Associate Professor of Veterinary Social Work
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Director, Veterinary Social Work
Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine
Department of Comparative Medicine
Director, G. V. Ling Urinary Stone Analysis
College of Veterinary Medicine
Laboratory
The University of Tennessee
 Department of Medicine and Epidemiology
Knoxville, TN 37996
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California
Patricia A. Sura, MS, DVM, DACVS
Davis, CA 95616
Assistant Professor of Surgery
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Jacqueline C. Whittemore, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
The University of Tennessee
Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine
Knoxville, TN 37996
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Harriet Syme, BSc, BVetMed, PhD, MRCVS, DACVIM
The University of Tennessee
(Small Animal Internal Medicine), DECVIM
Knoxville, TN 37996
(Companion Animal)
Senior Lecturer in Internal Medicine
Annabel G. Wise, DVM, MS, PhD
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Academic Specialist in Virology
Royal Veterinary College
Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health
University of London
Michigan State University
Hatfield
East Lansing, MI 48910
Hertfordshire, AL9 7TA, UK
Erik R. Wisner, DVM, DACVR
Karen M. Tobias, DVM, MS, DACVS
Professor of Radiology
Professor of Surgery
Chair, Department of Surgical and Radiological
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Tennessee
University of California
Knoxville, TN 37996
Davis, CA 95616
 I will not use the knife, even upon those suffering from
physiology, diagnostic and therapeutic techniques, and
 stones, but I will leave this to those who are trained in
the pathophysiology and management of diseases of the
this craft.
urinary system. It is divided into the following 11 sec-
Original Hippocratic Oath ("The Hippocratic Oath"
tions:
National Institute of Health. http:// www. nlm.nih.gov/
hmd/greek/greek_oath.html. (accessed May 14, 2010))
· Anatomy and physiology
· Diagnostic testing
The practice of urology is one of the oldest medical spe-
· Therapeutic techniques
cialties and surgical removal of uroliths is one of the
· Clinical syndromes
oldest surgical techniques known. The original Hippo-
Upper urinary tract disorders
cratic Oath refers to the surgical removal of uroliths
· Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
and obligates medical practitioners to leave such special-
· Systemic arterial hypertension
ized procedures to specialists. In fact, the oldest known
 Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
urolith was discovered in the body of a boy in Egypt dated
· Lower urinary tract disorders
approximately 4800 Bc. Over the centuries, advances were
· Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion
made in the diagnosis and management of urinary dis-
animals
eases. From Susruta in India in 10o0 Bc through the uro-
· Counseling clients
scopists of the Middle Ages to hemodialysis, lithotripsy,
 and transplantation, the science and art of nephrology
With the expertise of 66 authors contributing 85 chap-
and urology grew. The field of veterinary nephrology and
ters, we intend this book to be a resource for veterinary
urology has also blossomed into a subspecialty includ-
students, house officers, general practitioners, and spe-
 ing many practices and techniques performed in human
cialists. Our goal is to provide a readily accessible resource
 medicine such as hemodialysis, lithotripsy, stent place-
providing information ranging from basic to advanced,
ment, and transplantation.
and to cover all aspects of nephrology and urology We
acknowledge that scientific information is dynamic and
To say that the kidney produces urine is to say that
that some information contained herein may already be
 Michelangelo produced marble chips.
outdated by the date of publication. We ask the reader to
Anonymous
 inform us of errors and discrepancies.
In addition to the time and effort put forth by the
The urinary tract is truly an amazing system. The purpose
authors, whom we thank, we also appreciate the efforts
of this book is to provide the best available compilation
that Nancy Simmerman of Wiley-Blackwell expended in
of the “state of the art and science” of the anatomy and
helping us to complete the book.
xvi
Section 1
Anatomy and physiology
Anatomy of the kidney and proximal ureter
Christina E. Clarkson and Thomas F. Fletcher
The kidney removes waste via blood filtration followed
face encased within a fibrous capsule. Sectioning the
by tubular reabsorption and secretion. This chapter
kidney reveals an outer layer of dark-colored, highly
highlights renal anatomy of the dog and cat, including
vascular cortex, surrounding a lighter colored medulla
 anatomy of the renal pelvis and proximal ureter.
(Figure 1.1).
Gross anatomy
Renal cortex and medulla
Kidney topography and surface features
 The cut surface of the renal cortex has a relatively rough
texture due to collections of capillary tufts (glomeruli)
The kidneys of the dog and cat are similar in structure and
and a labyrinth of tubules (cortical labyrinth). Medullary
relative size. They are paired, bean-shaped, and located
rays, smooth striations that appear to be radiating out
dorsally in the abdominal cavity. Kidneys are retroperi-
of the medulla toward the periphery of the cortex, are
toneal, dorsal to the peritoneal cavity, and covered by
scattered throughout the cortex.
 parietal peritoneum only. The surface facing laterally is
 The renal medulla is composed of renal pyramids that
convex; the medial surface is concave, with an indented
fuse to form a central ridge called the renal crest. The
region called the hilus (hilum) where vessels, nerves, and
pyramids, wedges of medull separated by interlobar ves-
the ureter enter/exit the kidney. The right kidney is posi-
sels, are apparent in marginal planes of the section. Each
tioned cranial to the left, with its cranial pole situated
 pyramid has an apex (papilla) directed toward the renal
within a recess of the caudate lobe of the liver.
pelvis. ( Renal pyramids are remaining evidence ofembry-
 In the dog, the right kidney is more firmly attached to
onic lobation.) The medulla contains papillary ducts that
the dorsal body wall than the left kidney. Thus, the loca-
 open onto the renal crest surface.
tion of the right kidney is more predictable, extending
from vertebrae Tis to L2. The left kidney is approxi-
 mately half a kidney length caudal to the right (Osborne
Renal peivis and proximal ureter
et al. 1972); its looser attachment can result in move-
Urine collects in the renal pelvis, a dilatation of the prox-
ment during respiration or body positioning. In the cat,
both kidneys are pendulous, moveable, and more cau-
imal end of the ureter. The pelvis is located within the
renal sinus, a fat-containing, medial recess situated at the
dally located than in the dog. The feline right kidney is
hilus. In the carnivore, the funnel-shaped renal pelvis
positioned at the level of vertebrae L to L4, left kidney at
the level of L2 to Ls (Nickel et al. 1973).
has irregular margins due to reflection around interlo-
bar vessels. The scalloped outpockets between vessels are
The kidney develops embryologically from discrete
lobes that fuse for the most part in the dog and cat.
referred to as pelvic recesses (Figure 1.1).
The ureter is an extension of the renal pelvis. It runs
The carnivore kidney is classified as unilobar. It is devoid
retroperitoneally along the dorsal wall of the abdominal
of lobe demarcations externally, presenting a smooth sur-
cavity and through the lateral ligament of the bladder.
The pelvis and ureter are lined by transitional epithelium
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
and have smooth muscle walls. Peristaltic contraction
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
waves initiated in the wall of the renal pelvis travel down
3
4  Anatomy and physiology
radially through the cortex toward the kidney surface,
some extending into the capsule (Nickel et al. 1973).
 In the cat, additional small branches from renal artery
Rena
artery
rami travel along the periphery of the kidney to supply
Kidney
Renal
vein
the cortical surface and renal capsule (Fuller and Huelke
surface
(capsule)
1973).
 Interlobular arteries give off afferent arterioles. Each
Ureter
afferent arteriole gives rise to a ball of capillary loops,
Interlobal
called a glomerulus. Glomerular capillaries unite to form
(a)
(b)
 an efferent arteriole that feeds a second capillary network
surrounding renal tubules. The kidney is unusual in hav-
Renal medulla
(outer zone)
ing two capillary beds connected by an arteriole, and thus
Renalmedulla
an arterial portal system. The glomerulus constitutes the
(inner
zone)
first capillary bed.
 Efferent arterioles from glomeruli located periph-
erally in the cortex supply peritubular capillaries
Rena
around cortical tubules, whereas efferent arterioles from
cres
Ureter
juxtamedullary glomeruli supply peritubular capillaries
(G)
(d)
around medullary tubules (Figure 1.2). In the medulla,
Rena
Interlobularvessels
Pelvic
pelvis
Vein
ecess
Artery
Interlobar
ocation
Ureter
recess
(e)
(什)
Figure 1.1 Anatomy of the canine kidney, pelvis, and ureter.
(a) The intact kidney appears unilobar and enclosed in a fibrous
capsule. Vessels and the ureter connect at the hilus of the kid-
ney. (b) when sliced marginally on a sagittal plane, the cut surface
reveals a fibrous capsule, a continuous renal cortex, and a medulla
segregated into renal pyramids by interlobar arteries. The papilla
of each pyramid is within a recess of the renal pelvis. (c) when
sliced transversely, inner and outer zones of medulla can be seen
surrounded by cortex. Along the midline, renal pyramids have
fused into a renal crest located above the renal pelvis. (d) A mid-
Arcuatevessels
sagittal slice of kidney reveals renal crest rather than pyramids
Renal pelvis and fat occupy a space designated renal sinus.
(e) Extemal view of an isolated renal pelvis and ureter. (f) Side
Vasa
view of an isolated renal pelvis and ureter. The wall of the renal
recta
pelvis is scalloped, divided into pelvic recesses by wall projections
around interlobar arteries (modified from Evans, 1993).
 the ureter, conveying urine into the bladder. ( The distal
ureter is discussed in chapters on the lower urinary tract.)
Figure 1.2 From an interlobular artery, blood flows to the
glomerulus via an afferent arteriole (a). The glomerulus constitutes
Renal vesseis
the first capillary network within the kidney. Efferent arterioles (e)
convey blood to a second capillary bed that supplies the renal
In most cases, a single renal artery divides into dorsal and
tubules, peritubular capillaries (arrows). Efferent arterioles from
ventral rami before entering the renal hilus (Marques-
peripheral glomeruli (upper corpuscle) form a capillary network
Sampaio et al. 2007). Further branching gives rise to
around cortical tubules; efferent arterioles from juxtamedullary
interlobar arteries that enter kidney parenchyma. Arcu-
glomeruli(lower corpuscle) form capillary networks around tubules
ate arteries are branches of interlobar arteries at the
located in the medulla. Medullary vessels (vasa recta) are closely
corticomedullary junction. Interlobular arteries (corti-
associated with the loop of Henle. Peritubular capillaries drain via
cal radial arteries) arise from arcuate arteries and run
venules primarily into the interlobular veins.
Anatomy of the kidney and proximal ureter 
the peritubular capillary network forms between
ent arteriole is usually larger than that of the efferent.
descending efferent arterioles and venules that ascend
Arteriolar size is autoregulated to maintain a consistent
back toward the cortex. These more or less straight
glomerular filtration rate over a wide range of systemic
vessels and their connections are referred to as vasa
arterial pressures. Intraglomerular mesangial cells and
recta. They participate in an important countercurrent
matrix occupy the spaces between capillary loops within
exchange between vessels and tubules. (Less commonly,
the glomerulus (see below).
peritubular capillaries arise from afferent arterioles or
The blind-ended beginning of the renal tubule, called
arcuate arterial branches (Christensen 1952; Nickel et al.
Bowman's capsule, surrounds the glomerulus. The cap-
1973).)
sule is cup-shaped, with inner and outer layers separated
 Kidney veins are generally satellites of arteries. Venules
by a cavity, the urinary space. The outer layer of the
arise from capillary beds surrounding cortical and
capsule, called the parietal layer, is continuous with the
medullary tubules. Veins travel with arterial branches,
emptying into interlobular, arcuate, interlobar, and
of the renal corpuscle. The inner layer of the cup, called
finally renal veins. A subcapsular venous system drains
the visceral layer, is composed of specialized cells called
the renal capsule. In the cat, these veins are located within
podocytes.
or immediately under the capsule (capsular veins); in the
 Podocytes have elaborate primary and secondary pro-
dog, the veins are deeper within the cortex (stellate veins)
cesses (foot processes) that interdigitate with processes
(Yadava and Calhoun 1958; Nickel et al. 1973). The cat's
of neighboring podocytes. Podocytes cover glomerular
prominent capsular veins continue around the kidney
endothelial cells and intraglomerular mesangial cells.
 periphery to the hilar region where they drain directly
An intervening glomerular basement membrane (GBM)
into the renal vein (Fuller and Huelke 1973). In the dog)
separates podocytes from endothelial cells and intra-
the stellate veins drain into cortex and eventually into
glomerular mesangial cells. The GBM is formed by fusion
the renal vein (Christensen 1952). (The canine renal vein
of podocyte and endothelial cell basal laminae (Figure
may also receive a direct contribution from stellate veins
1.3a) (Abrahamson 1987).
near the hilus (Fuller and Huelke 1973).)
Mesangial cells are found among glomerular capillar-
ies (intraglomerular) and also outside the glomerulus
Microscopic renal anatomy
near its vascular pole (extraglomerular). The latter are
associated with the juxtaglomerular apparatus (described
Nephron
below). Mesangial cells function to maintain a “clean"
 GBM for blood filtration, by extending cytoplasmic pro-
The nephron (renal corpuscle plus renal tubules) is the
 cesses between the GBM and endothelial cells for phago-
functional unit of the kidney. Urine produced within
cytosis of debris. Additionally, mesangial cells secrete
the nephron is further modified as it travels through the
collecting duct system. (The term “uriniferous tubule"
refers to the nephron plus its associated collecting duct.)
GBM
Nephron: renal corpuscle
The renal corpuscle is composed of a spherical complex
of capillaries (glomerulus) surrounded by a double-wall 
capsule (Bowman's capsule). Arterioles enter/exit the cor-
puscle at its vascular pole, and ultrafiltrate exits at the
 opposite end of the corpuscle, the urinary pole.
Renal corpuscles are typically scattered throughout
the cortex, although there is a small region immedi-
(a)
Endothelial cell
(b)
ately below the capsule where they are absent in the
Figure 1.3 A segment of glomerular capillary loop is drawn to
canine (Sherwood et al. 1969; Bulger et al. 1979). The
demonstrate cellular relationships among endothelial cells (e),
glomerular basement membrane (GBM), mesangial cells (m), and
number of corpuscles per kidney varies with species:
podocytes (p). (a) Several podocytes (one shaded) wrap around
400,000-600,000 in the dog (Horster et al. 1971; Finco
a portion of glomerular capillary loop. The GBM, endothelium,
and Duncan 1972; Eisenbrandt and Phemister 1979) and
and mesangial cells are revealed deep to the podocytes. (b) End
approximately 200,000 in the cat (Kunkel 1930).
view of a capillary surrounded by podocytes (shaded). An arrow
The glomerulus is formed by an afferent arteriole that
 indicates flow from blood to urinary space, passing through cap-
gives rise to a ball of capillary loops, which then coa-
illary pores, GBM, and between podocyte foot processes. A slit
lesce, into an efferent arteriole. The diameter of the affer-
diaphragm spans the spaces between podocyte foot processes
6  Anatomy and physiology
a variety of biologically active molecules and prolifer-
ate in response to glomerular injury. The mesangium
(mesangial cells and associated matrix) provides phys-
ical support for the glomerulus (Sakai and Kriz 1987).
 Glomerular endothelial cells and mesangium together
are surrounded by the GBM.
Renal "filter"
Urine formation begins as an ultrafiltrate within the uri-
nary space of the renal corpuscle. The three major com-
ponents of the renal "flter" are as follows (Figure 1.3b):
OS
1. Endothelial cells of the glomerulus
2.GBM
 3. Podocytes of the visceral layer of Bowman's capsule
TAL
IS
Endothelial cells possess large fenestrations (pores);
however, negatively charged material occupies much
of this space. This represents the first barrier to fl-
tration (Rostgaard and Qvortrup 2002). The GBM is
Thin
limbs
thought to be the main filtration barrier to cells and
large molecules. The GBM is also negatively charged.
Podocyte foot processes form a discontinuous covering
 on the urinary space side of the GBM. Spaces between
apposing foot processes are referred to as filtration slits.
Filtration of smaller molecules is blocked by the presence
Figure 1.4 A drawing of one feline uriniferous tubule (nephron
of a thin negatively charged membrane within the fil-
 plus collecting duct). Glomerular ultrafitrate flows into the urinary
trations slits (slit diaphragm) (Rodewald and Karnovsky
space in Bowman's capsule (*) and then through the following
1974).
tubules: proximal convoluted tubule (PCT), loop of Henle (i.e.
thick descending limb (TDL), thin limbs, and thick ascending limb
 dependent on molecular size and charge. Blood cells and
(TAL), distal convoluted tubule (DCT), connecting tubule (CNT),
most proteins are too large to pass through endothelial
and collecting ducts (CD). Urine exits the kidney at the papillary
fenestrations, and negatively charged macromolecules
duct opening (arrow). The cortex contains convoluted tubules. The
 p s    p 
outer zone of the medulla may be subdivided into outer stripe (OS)
and inner stripe (IS) based on the presence of thick descending
"filter."
limbs of Henle's loop in the outer stripe. The inner zone of the
medulla contains only thin limbs of Henle's loop and collecting
Nephron: tubular components
ducts.
In addition to the renal corpuscle, the nephron has
the following renal tubules: proximal convoluted tubule,
munication). The following cellular features exhibited by
loop of Henle, and distal convoluted tubule (Figure 1.4).
simple cuboidal epithelium of the PCT may be present
to varying degrees on other renal tubular epithelial cells:
· Microvilli(brush border): An apical membrane modif-
Proximal convoluted tubule
 cation that provides increased surface area for absorp-
Ultrafltrate within the urinary space travels first into the
tion, modification, and intracellular transport of lumi-
proximal convoluted tubule (PCT). This highly coiled
nal material.
tubule is the major tubule type of the cortical labyrinth.
·Basolateral intercellular interdigitations: They are
PCT cells feature apical intercellular tight junctions that
extensive and serve to increase available cell membrane
limit intercellular (paracellular) movement of molecules
for transcellular transport of materials.
from the lumen to the intercellular compartment. The
· Mitochondria: They provide energy for the extensive
PCT contains the only renal tubular epithelial cells with
reabsorption that occurs within the tubule. Verti-
intercellular gap junctions (evidence ofintercellular com-
cally oriented mitochondria are closely associated with
Anatomy of the kidney and proximal ureter  7
infoldings of the basolateral cell membrane, producing
the collecting duct (i.e., ureteric bud derivation) is open
a striated appearance. This close association provides
to debate. Interestingly, it has been shown in a variety
energy for intramembranous transport pumps.
of mammalian species (rats, rabbits, and humans) that
CNTs pass in close proximity to the afferent arteriole,
Loop of Henle
feeding the glomerulus of origin (Barajas et al. 1986;
Vio et al. 1988; Dorup et al. 1992). There is evidence of
The loop of Henle is a straight tubular loop that initially
 paracrine signaling occurring between CNTs and afferent 
descends from cortex into the medulla and then ascends
arterioles, a feedback arrangement. The epithelium of the
back to the cortex. It is composed of a thick descend-
CNT is simple cuboidal with less mitochondria and less
 ing limb, thin limbs of the loop, and a thick ascending
limb:
intercellular interdigitations than PCT epithelium.
· The thick descending limb of Henle's loop is often
Collecting duct system
described with proximal tubules and referred to as the
Nephrons (including CNTs) drain into a collecting duct
proximal straight tubule. This segment is lined by sim-
system. Several nephrons join the same collecting duct
ple cuboidal epithelium. It has less extensive cellular
and several collecting ducts unite to form a papillary duct.
modifications than the PCT (shorter microvilli, fewer
The renal medulla contains collecting ducts, papillary
cellular interdigitations, and smaller mitochondria).
 ducts, and the loops of Henle. Papillary ducts open onto
· The descending and ascending thin limb of Henle's
 the renal crest surface. There is a progressive change from
-enbs adus o uu idnqe ue ym suaq doo
 cuboidal to columnar epithelium along the collecting
mous epithelium. This thin segment descends into the
duct system.
medulla and then abruptly turns to ascend toward the
Collecting ducts have two cell types: principal and
cortex. Ultrastructural characterization of this epithe-
intercalated cells. The principal cells (collecting duct cells,
lium reveals a heterogeneous cellular population that
light cells) are cuboidal, with short microvilli. These cells
varies with species, length of loop, and specific region.
have distinct lateral borders that are noninterdigiting.
Microvilli and lateral interdigitations are underdevel-
Additionally, the cell base is filled with infoldings that
oped or absent, and organelles are sparse in most thin
displace organelles and create a visibly lighter zone. The
limb regions. The thin limbs of Henle's loop in com-
darker appearing intercalated cells (dark cells) are most
bination with its surrounding vascular network (vasa
frequently found in collecting ducts, although low num-
 recta) play an important role in concentrating urine
bers can occur in the DCT and CNT. Several subtypes of
and maintaining a medulla high in solute concentra-
intercalated cells exist with differing roles in acid or bicar-
tion.
bonate secretion. The intercalated cell has many mito-
The thick ascending limb (TAL) of Henle's loop (distal
 chondria, but basal infoldings are absent.
straight tubule) is the last segment of the loop of Henle.
Tubular organization gives rise to regions within the
Its simple cuboidal epithelium is similar to the PCT
renal medulla (see Figure 1.4):
but with less developed microvilli. The TAL ascends
into the cortex to the vicinity of the vascular pole of its
· Distinct inner and outer zones of the medulla are due
glomerulus of origin. TAL epithelial cells in the vicinity
 to a difference in renal tubular segments.
of the afferent arteriole will become a specialized group
· The inner zone of the medulla contains only thin limbs
 of cells called the macula densa, a component of the
of Henle's loop, collecting ducts, vasa recta, and a rel-
juxtaglomerular apparatus (described below).
atively large component of interstitium. (Collecting
ducts originate in a medullary ray of the cortex.)
Ultrafiltrate within Henle's loop travels next into the
· The outer zone of the medulla is where the thick limbs
distal convoluted tubule (DCT). This tubule is shorter in
of the loop of Henle are located. It is subdivided gen-
length and has less developed microvilli than the PCT.
Similar to PCT cells, there are many basolateral interdig-
i s        
in the dog). The junction of the inner and outer stripes
itations; differing from the PCT, DCT has an even higher
correlates with the transition from thick tubules to thin
concentration of mitochondria.
 segments of the descending limb of Henle's loop. In the
cat and most species, this transition occurs within the
Connecting tubule
outer zone. In the dog, this transition occurs at or near
The connecting tubule (CNT) runs from the DCT to a
the corticomedullary junction, and therefore the outer
cortically located collecting duct within a medullary ray.
stripe is absent (Bulger et al. 1979).
The classification of this tubule as part of the nephron
· The cat and dog normally have long loops of Henle.
(i.e., derived from the nephrogenic ridge) or as part of
 so  o  ad 
8 Anatomy and physiology
Henle that extend all the way to the inner zone of
as granular cells. The release of renin in response to sig-
the medulla (Beeuwkes and Bonventre 1975; Bulger
nals from the macula densa cells generates a cascade of
et al. 1979). (In most mammals, the length of Henle's
reactions leading to increased systemic blood pressure,
loop is variable and related to the position of its associ-
 thus increasing glomerular perfusion pressure.
ated corpuscle within the cortex. Peripherally located
The macula densa is a specialization of epithelial cells
corpuscles have shorter loops of Henle, only reaching
in the TAL of Henle's loop near the afferent and efferent
the outer medulla, and juxtamedullary corpuscles have
arterioles. The cells are tall columnar versus the adjacent
long loops of Henle, extending deep into the medulla
cuboidal epithelium. Cells of the macula densa detect
(Schmidt-Nielsen and O'Dell 1961).)
changes in luminal sodium chloride concentration. In
response, they generate paracrine signals that result in
Juxtaglomerular apparatus
 changes in arteriolar resistance and renin release by jux-
taglomerular cells.
The juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA) is an anatomically
Extraglomerular  mesangial cells  are  interposed
distinct region at the vascular pole of the glomerulus.
between the two arterioles and macula densa cells.
The JGA has three components: juxtaglomerular cells,
 The cells are continuous with intraglomerular mesan-
macula densa cells, and extraglomerular mesangial cells
gial cells. A key feature of extraglomerular cells is the
(Figure 1.5).
gap junctions they form with neighboring cells includ-
Juxtaglomerular cells are modified smooth muscle
ing juxtaglomerular cells, normal smooth muscle cells,
cells in the walls of afferent and rarely efferent arterioles.
and other mesangial cells (but not with macula densa
The cells contain renin granules and may be referred to
cells). Although their entire role is unclear, the cells
are thought to take part in coordinating JGA activities
through gap junction communication. Also, because of
their observed cytoskeletal "bridging"” within the juxta-
 glomerular region, they are thought to help structurally
reinforce this region.
ME
Renal interstitium, lymphatics, and nerves
The interstitium—a composite of fibers, matrix, and
cells—provides structural support for the kidney. The
major cell type is the fibroblast, functioning to pro-
duce stroma and maintain structural connections to
other cells, nerves, and epithelial basement membranes
(Kaissling et al. 1996). Dendritic cells are also present,
playing a role in immune regulation within the kidney
(Dong et al. 2005). Macrophages and rarely lymphocytes
may be present under normal conditions (Kaissling et al.
1996).
Lymphatic vessels are located within the renal cortex in
RC
US
association with vessels, encircling corpuscles and tubules
and penetrating the renal capsule. The renal medullalacks
PCT
CEClarke
lymph vessels (Albertine and O'Morchoe 1980; Eliska
1984). Connective tissue sheaths surrounding vessels and
Figure 1.5 A drawing of a renal corpuscle with its associated jux-
tubules may serve as an avenue for lymph to move out of
taglomerular apparatus (JGA): juxtaglomerular cel (JG), macula
the medulla.
densa (MD), and extraglomerular mesangial cells (EM). The JGA is
 Sympathetic nerves typically travel along periarterial
located at the vascular pole of the glomerulus between the affer-
ent arteriole (a) and efferent arteriole (e). Several capillary profiles
connective tissue sheaths (Barajas 1978) and innervate
(*) are evident. Extraglomerular mesangial cells of the JGA are
vascular smooth muscle (Fourman 1970). Tubules in
continuous with intraglomerular mesangial cells (IM). Bowman's
close proximity to the arteries may be under a direct
capsule consists of the parietal epithelial cells (PC) and the layer
neuronal influence (Barajas 1978). Efferent innervation
of podocytes (p). Ultrafiltrate within the urinary space (Us) flows
is still not completely understood and even less is known
into the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT).
 about the afferent innervation of the kidney.
Anatomy of the kidney and proximal ureter
References
Fuller, PM. and D.F Huelke ( 1973). Kidney vascular supply in the rat,
cat and dog. Acta Anat 84(4): 516-522.
Abrahamson, D.R. ( 1987). Structure and development of the glomeru-
Horster, M., et al. (197l). Intracortical distribution of number and
lar capillary wall and basement membrane. Arm I Physiol 253(5 Pt
volume of glomeruli during postnatal maturation in the dog. I Clin
2): F783-F794.
Invest 50(4): 796-800.
Albertine, K.H. and C.C. O'Morchoe (1980). An integrated light and
Kaissling, B., et al. ( 1996). Morphology ofinterstitial cells in the healthy
 electron microscopic study on the existence of intramedullary lym-
kidney. Amat Embryol 193(4): 303-318.
phatics in the dog kidney. Lymphology 13(2): 100- 106.
Kunkel, P.A. ( 1930). The number and size of glomeruli in the kidney
Barajas, L. (1978). Innervation of the renal cortex. Fed Proc 37(5):
of several mammals. Bull Johrms Hopkins Hosp 47: 285-291.
1192-1201.
Marques-Sampaio, B.P, et al. (2007). Dog kidney: anatomical rela-
Barajas, L., et al. (1986). Immunocytochemical localization of renin
tionships between intrarenal arteries and kidney collecting system.
and kallikrein in the rat renal cortex. Kidney Int 29(5): 965-970.
Anat Rec 290(8): 1017-1022.
Beeuwkes, R., III and J.V. Bonventre ( 1975). Tubular organization and
Nickel, R., et al. ( 1973).Urinary organs. In: The Visera ofthe Domestic
vascular-tubular relations in the dog kidney. Arm I Physiol 229(3):
Mammals. Berlin; New York: Springer.
695-713.
Osborne, C., et al. ( 1972). Applied anatomy of the urinary system. In:
Bulger, R.E., et al. ( 1979). Survey of the morphology ofthe dog kidney.
Canine and Feline Urology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Anat Rec 194(1): 41-65.
Rodewald, R. and M.J. Karnovsky ( 1974). Porous substructure of the
Christensen, G.C. (1952). Circulation of blood through the canine
glomerular slit diaphragm in the rat and mouse. I Cell Biol 60(2):
kidney. Arm I Vet Res 13(47): 236-245.
423-433.
 Dong, X., et al. (2005). Antigen presentation by dendritic cell in renal
 Rostgaard, J. and K. Qvortrup (2002). Sieve plugs in fenestrae of
lymph nodes is linked to systemic and local injury to the kidney.
glormerular capillaries—site of the filtration barrier? Cells Tissues
Kidney Int 68(3): 1096-1108.
Organs 170(2-3): 132-138.
Dorup, J., et al. (1992). Tubule-tubule and tubule-arteriole contacts
Sakai, T. and W. Kriz (1987). The structural relationship between
in rat kidney distal nephrons. A morphologic study based on
mesangial cells and basement membrane of the renal glomerulus.
computer-assisted three-dimensional reconstructions. Lab Invest 
Anat Embryol 176(3): 373-386.
Tech Methods Pathol 67(6): 761-769.
Schmidt-Nielsen, B. and R. O'Dell (1961). Structure and concentrating
Eisenbrandt, D.L. and R.D. Phemister (1979). Postnatal development
mechanism in the mammalian kidney. Am I Physiol 200: 1119-
of the canine kidney: quantitative and qualitative morphology. Am
1124.
I Anat 154(2): 179-193.
 Sherwood, T., et al. ( 1969). Renal magnification angiograms in the dog.
Eliska, O. (1984). Topography of intrarenal lymphatics. Lymphology
Observations on responses to vasodilators and surgical trauma. Br
17(4): 135-141.
I Radiol 42(496): 241-246.
Evans, H.E. ( 1993). Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edition. Philadel-
Vio, C.P., et al. (1988). Anatomical relationship between kallikrein-
phia, PA: WB Saunders.
containing tubules and the juxtaglomerular apparatus in the human
Finco, D.R. and J.R. Duncan ( 1972). Relationship of glomerular num-
kidney. Am I Hypertens J Am Soc Hypertens 1(3 Pt 1): 269-
ber and diameter to body size of the dog. Am I Vet Res 33(12):
271.
2447-2450.
Yadava, R.P. and M.L. Calhoun ( 1958). Comparative histology of the
 Fourman, I. ( 1970). The adrenergic innervation of the efferent arteri-
kidney of domestic animals. Am I Vet Res 19(73): 958-968.
oles and the vasa recta in the mammalian kidney. Experientia 26(3):
293-294.
Z
Physiology of the kidneys
Scott Brown
Homeostatic role of the kidneys
blood flow traverses the cortex, 10% perfuses the outer
medulla, and 1% the medulla and papilla
The kidneys act as the sum of the functions of individual
 Blood flow to the kidney is equivalent to perfusion
nephrons (approximately 200,000 per kidney in cats and
pressure (systemic arterial pressure) divided by renal
500,000 per kidney in dogs) (Brown et al. 1990; Brown
vascular resistance. Afferent and efferent arteriolar tone
and Brown 1995) and their primary overall function is
provide the bulk of renal vascular resistance and these
regulation of the composition of extracellular fluid. In
vessels exert predominant control over renal blood flow
doing so, the kidneys play a major role in the regulation
(Carmines et al. 1987). When assessed by micropunc-
of blood volume, extracellular fluid volume, systemic
ture techniques, pre- and postglomerular resistances are
arterial blood pressure, hematocrit, acid-base balance,
) si pe siop rou un ba edde
and plasma concentrations of electrolytes, minerals, and
et al. 1990; Brown and Brown 1995).
metabolic waste products.
Glomerular fitration
Formation of glomerular filtrate occurs as a result of
Specific renal functions and their control
Starling forces in the glomerular capillary bed; these
determinants of glomerular filtration have been quan-
Renal blood flow
titatively evaluated in dogs and cats (Table 2.1) (Brown
In dogs and cats, the kidneys receive approximately 25%
et al. 1990; Brown and Brown 1995). The filtration bar-
of cardiac output, despite the fact that they account for
rier is composed of three layers: fenestrated endothe-
only about 0.5% of total body weight, providing a flow
lium, anionic basement membrane, and podocyte slit
of 4 mL/min/g of kidney weight (Brown et al. 1990;
diaphragm. Recent advances in our understanding of
Brown and Brown 1995). This high flow exceeds that
 podocyte biology and molecular structure (e.g., discov-
ery of nephrin) ermphasize its previously underappreci-
of other vascular beds, including brain, heart, and active
skeletal muscle. Although formation of urine represents
 ated importance in health and disease (Barisoni et al.
a metabolic energy requirement, hemodynamic rather
2009; Hauser et al. 2009). Although plasma protein con-
than oxygen demands are apparently the determining
 centration averages 68 g/100 mL, the filtration barrier
factors for this high perfusion rate.
is believed to result in a protein content of filtrate that
Cortical blood flow is considerably greater than
rarely exceeds 10 mg/100 mL, and the colloid osmotic
 medullary. Inert gas washout studies in anesthetized dogs
 pressure within the fltrate is so small that its contribu-
demonstrated that blood flow in the cortex averaged 4.6
tion to the filtration process is negligible. Recently, it has
mL/min/g of kidney tissue, 0.7 mL/min/g in the outer
been suggested that filtrate may contain more protein
medulla, and 0.1 mL/min/g kidney in the inner medulla
 then previously thought, though this hypothesis remains
(Bovee and Webster 1972). Approximately 90% of renal
unproven (Comper et al. 2008). The process of glomeru-
lar filtration is still generally accepted as being driven by
glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure and opposed
by both plasma colloid osmotic pressure and Bowman's
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
capsule hydrostatic pressure.
10
Physiology of the kidneys  1 1
Table 2.1 Representative values for forces controlling renal fluid
 1987). Most vasoactive compounds affecting renal blood
and solute movement in cats (Brown and Brown 1995)
flow and glomerular filtration rate act by altering the
relative or absolute tone of these arterioles.
Glomerular filtration
Beyond effects of changes in arteriolar tone, addi-
tional local control of the fltration process is provided
Hydrostatic pressures (mm Hg):
by glomerular mesangial cells, which possess actin and
Glomerular capillary pressure
59
myosin contractile filaments (Ennulat and Brown 1997).
Bowman's space
18
 The main effect of mesangial cellular contraction is
Difference (△P; favors filtration)
41
believed to be a reduction in the glomerular capillary
Colloid osmotic pressures (mmHg):
Glomerular
22
surface area and/or the glomerular wall's permeability
Bowman's space
0
to water, which reduces glomerular filtration rate. The
Difference (△π: opposes filtration)
22
mesangial cells contract in response to several hormones
Mean filtration pressure
and other vasoactive substances, such as angiotensin I1.
△P - △π = (41 - 22) mmHg = 19 mmHg
A central concept of renal hemodynamics is that renal
blood flow and glomerular filtration rate tends to remain
Tubular reabsorption
constant despite variations in mean systemic arterial
s pue sop ui bu 0t pue s uaamq anssad
Hydrostatic pressures (mm Hg):
(Brown et al. 1995). This capacity is referred to as renal
Peritubular capillary pressure 
10
Interstitial space
(-5)
autoregulation because it occurs in the denervated, iso-
Difference (△P: opposes reabsorption)
15
lated perfused kidney and is thus an intrinsic property of
Colloid osmotic pressures (mmHg):
 the kidney. Whole kidney and single nephron glomerular
Peritubular capillary
35
filtration rate and glomerular capillary pressure are also
Interstitial space 
5
autoregulated. The tone of preglomerular vessels alters
Difference (△π; favors reabsorption)
30
 glomerular capillary pressure and perfusion rate simi-
Mean reabsorptive pressure
larly and thus the vascular site primarily responsible for
△π - △P = (30 - 15) mmHg = 15 mmHg
autoregulatory adjustments is the afferent arteriole.
Tubular reabsorption
Mechanisms controlling renal blood flow and
Due to the formation ofglomerular filtrate,there is a large
glomerular fitration
decrease in hydrostatic pressure and increase in oncotic
The driving force for glomerular filtration rate, glomeru-
pressure in the peritubular capillary (Table 2.1). Phys-
lar capillary hydrostatic pressure, is controlled by the
ical factors play an important role in regulating total
relative resistance of the afferent and efferent arterioles
solute and water reabsorption. For example, extracellu-
(Carmines et al. 1987). While constriction of either type
lar fluid volume expansion causes fluid to accumulate
of arteriole tends to reduce renal blood flow, afferent arte-
 in the interstitium, thereby lowering interstitial colloid
riolar constriction tends to reduce glomerular capillary
osmotic pressure and raising interstitial hydrostatic pres-
pressure and filtration rate and efferent arteriolar con-
sure. Both changes act to inhibit tubular solute and water
striction tends to increase glomerular capillary pressure
reabsorption, with the resultant diuresis and natriure-
and thus glomerular filtration rate. As glomerular capil-
sis returning extracellular fluid volume toward normal.
lary pressure drives the formation of glomerular filtrate,
Conversely, volume contraction (e.g., dehydration) has
the relative tone of these arterioles can contribute to the
the opposite effects, appropriately enhancing renal reab-
regulation of glomerular filtration rate. The relative tone
sorption of salt and water.
of the afferent and efferent arterioles affects the propor-
Although more than 100 L of glomerular filtrate is
tion of glomerular plasma that is filtered, referred to as
formed daily by the average normal dog, less than 1% of 
the filtration fraction. On a whole organ basis, filtration
this ultimately becomes urine. Due to the large quantity
fraction is equal to glomerular filtration rate divided by
of water and electrolytes in the filtrate, tubular reab-
renal plasma flow, and it averages 0.25-0.35 in normal
sorption is essential for the maintenance of homeostasis
dogs and cats. For example, a decline in efferent arterio-
(Table 2.2). The reabsorptive process is arranged axi-
lar tone will increase renal plasma flow but may decrease
ally along the nephrons, with proximal reabsorptive pro-
glomerular filtration rate, causing a decrease in filtration
 cesses occurring in an isotonic manner without regard
fraction. However, the relationship between arteriolar
to body needs utilizing high-capacity, low-affinity trans-
tone and filtration fraction is complex (Carmines et al.
port systems. As fluid progresses along the length of
12
 Anatomy and physiology
Table 2.2 Renal solute and water handling?
 Sites of transport 
 Molecule
(normal renal handling)
Factors affecting renal handling
Conserved solutes
Glucose
 Proximal tubule (>99% 
Glucosuria results from filtered load exceeding tubular transport maximum.
reabsorption)
Plasma glucose concentration at which glucosuria first occurs is referred to as
the renal threshold for glucosuria, which is approximately 180-200 mg/100 mL
 in normal dogs and 290 mg/100 mL in normal cats.25
Jo panbe aq Aeu Apede uodsuen lenqn panat oi anp eunson
congenital and may be selective (renal glucosuria) or associated with
generalized proximal tubular reabsorptive defects (e.g., Fanconi syndrome).
Amino acids
Proximal tubule (>99%
Family of transporters
reabsorption)
Aminoaciduria almost always due to reduced transport capacity. which may be
selective (e.g.. cystinuria) or generalized (e.g.. Fanconi syndrome)
Felininuria is normal in cats.
Balanced solutesb
unos
Proximal and distal
2/3 reabsorbed in proximal tubule without regard to body needs.
tubule, loop of Henle
(>99% reabsorption)
Na-K-2Cl cotransport in loop, inhibited by loop diuretics, contributes to
medullary hypertonicity.
Distal reabsorption enhanced by aldosterone.
Proximal reabsorption enhanced by angiotensin Il and inhibited by atrial
natriuretic factor.
Potassium
Proximal and distal
2/3 reabsorbed in proximal tubule without regard to body needs.
tubule (60-90%
reabsorption)
Distal secretion enhanced by aldosterone, diuresis, and the presence of anions
(e.g., bicarbonate).
 Phosphate
Proximal tubule
Proximal reabsorption inhibited by parathyroid hormone.
(80-90% reabsorption)
Calcium
Proximal tubule (>90%
Only ionized and chelated fractions are freely filtered (~50% of total plasma
reabsorption: widely
calcium); remainder is protein bound.
variable, according to
body needs)
Reabsorption enhanced by parathyroid hormone.
Reabsorption inhibited by loop diuretics, enhanced by thiazide diuretics.
 Bicarbonate
Proximal tubule (>99%
Proximal tubule reabsorption in accordance with body needs: reabsorption
reabsorption)
generally complete in dogs and cats on an animal protein diet; vegetable protein
diet and/or dietary alkalinization may lead to appropriate bicarbonaturia and
alkaluria.
Protons
Distal tubule and 
 Secreted in proximal and distal tubule
collecting duct (widely
variable, according to
body needs)
Proximal secretion leads to bicarbonate reabsorption.
Distal proton secretion alters final urine pH and results in formation of titratable
acid (combination with phosphate) or ammonium ion.
Physiology of the kidneys  13
Table 2.2 (Continued)
Sites of transport 
Molecule
(normal renal handling)
Factors affecting renal handling
Excreted Solutes
Uremic toxins
Variable
Most are freely filtered unless protein bound.
Tubular reabsorption and/or secretion occurs for some.
Creatinine
Proximal tubule in dogs
Freely filtered
Some proximal tubular secretion in dogs, especially males or dogs with kidney
disease.
 No tubular transport in cats.
Urea
Loop of Henle and
Tubular reabsorption and secretion occur.
collecting duct
Renal excretion directly related to tubular flow rate.
Organic molecules
Proximal tubule
Family of transporters
Net secretion
Renal water handling
Water
All tubular segments
Water is freely filtered.
(>99% reabsoption)
Dramatic excess is filtered (3-4 mL/min/kg or approximately 5 L/kg per day).
Reabsorption of 85% of filtered load is obligate, without regard to body need,
occurring in the proximal tubule, loops of Henle, and early distal tubule
Reabsorption of remaining 15% is regulated by antidiuretic hormone (ADH),
whose release is controlled primarily (90% of control) by extracellular fluid 
osmolarity and secondarily (10% of control) by blood volume.
ADH causes insertion of aquaporin-2 water channels in the luminal membrane of
epithelial cells in the late distal tubule and principal cells of the collecting ducts.
Water is reabsorbed by osmosis, dependent on high medullary interstitial
concentrations of Na, Cl, and urea.
Chronic ADH stimulation causes increased expression of urea transporters in the
distal collecting duct, enhancing interstitial urea concentration and maximal
urinary concentrating capacity
 All listed solutes and water are freely filtered, unless protein bound.
bFor balanced solutes, normal reabsorptive rates vary according to body balance.
the tubule, reabsorption occurs in accordance with body
Fractional excretion (%)
needs through low-capacity, high-affinity transport pro-
100 x urine volume x [solute]u
cesses. For conserved solutes, such as glucose and amino
=
GFR x [solute]p
acids, this entire process of reabsorption occurs in the
proximal tubule, and all (>99%) of the filtered solute
Here, [solute]p and [solute]u represent the concen-
is normally removed from the tubular fluid. For other
trations of solute in plasma and urine, respectively, and
solutes, such as sodium, the bulk (2/3) of filtered solute
GFR is the glomerular filtration rate. Some freely fil-
is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule, with the amount
tered solutes, glucose and amino acids, require metabolic
present in the urine being adjusted according to body
energy to produce and these are conserved in the kid-
needs in the distal tubule and collecting duct. Many
ney, with near complete reabsorption of fltered load
hormones have effects on these tubular reabsorptive
(>99%) by the end of the proximal tubule. Thus, for
processes.
glucose and amino acids, the fractional excretion is nor-
The fraction of the filtered solute that ultimately
mally <1% (Kruth and Cowgill 1982). Normal fractional
 appears in urine is termed the fractional excretion (%),
excretion values for balanced solutes depend on body
or fractional clearance, of a solute: (Brown et al. 1995)
needs for maintenance of homeostasis. For example, if
14  Anatomy and physiology
a dog's ration were switched from a low-salt (e.g., 0.2%)
Abnormalities of renal acid-base handling occur in
sodium) to a normal-salt (e.g-, 0.6% sodium) diet, uri-
a variety of renal diseases. Because dogs and cats usu-
nary fractional excretion for sodium would be expected
o   i s r no e s n
to increase threefold in order to maintain balance. This
 acid, renal diseases are more commonly associated with
would be a normal homeostatic response, not a defect
acidosis than alkalosis in these species. Renal acidosis
in the reabsorption of sodium. Hence, interpretation of
 may be due to a tubular defect in bicarbonate reabsorp-
values for fractional excretion rates for balanced solutes
tion (proximal renal tubular acidosis), tubular defect
(i.e., sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphate, magne-
in proton secretion (distal renal tubular acidosis), or a
sium, and bicarbonate) requires knowledge of the ani-
reduced overall capacity for proton secretion due to loss
       s
of functional renal mass (uremic acidosis) (DiBartola
by dietary intake, fluid therapy, and other factors.
2000).
Some clinical utility may be obtained from calculation
of fractional excretion of a given solute obtained from a
Water reabsorption—the urine concentrating
single urine sample, according to the following formula:
mechanism
Fractional excretion (%)
Extracellular fluid volume and plasma osmolality are
100 × [creatinine]p ×[solute]u
regulated by the kidneys. This regulation is dependent
[creatinine]u × [solute]p
upon control of renal water excretion in accordance with
However, there are several limitations to the single
body needs (Table 2.2). The loop of Henle plays a vital
role in water homeostasis. In particular, the thick por-
sample or spot determination of fractional excretion.
tion of the ascending limb reabsorbs solute via luminal
Because of variations in normal values for plasma cre-
 Na-K-2Cl cotransport driven by the Na electrochemical
atinine concentration, plasma creatinine concentration
provides only a crude reflection of glomerular filtration
 gradient created by the Na-K ATPase in the basolateral
membrane (Boone and Deen 2008; Halperin et al. 2008).
rate. Fluctuations in urinary excretion of solutes related
 to food intake or circadian rhythms are generally not time
This solute reabsorption causes a progressive decrease in
tubular fluid tonicity and leading to tubular fluid hypo-
averaged by such single sample determinations.
tonicity in the early distal tubule. Urea also contributes to
the urine concentrating mechanism by passively concen-
Renal contribution to acid-base homeostasis
trating in the medullary interstitium under the influence
 Bicarbonate freely passes the filtration barrier and reab-
of antidiuretic hormone. Urea movement through var-
sorption is according to body needs for maintenance of
ious portions of the nephron is facilitated by diffusion
acid-base homeostasis. Bicarbonate reabsorption in the
through carriers belonging to a family of urea trans-
 proximal tubule can be inhibited by volume expansion,
 porters (Bagnasco 2005).In the absence of further water
alkalemia, parathyroid hormone, and carbon dioxide. It
transport, dilute (hypotonic) urine is produced. Distal
is stimulated by potassium depletion, elevated luminal
tubular fluid is more hypotonic in normal canine kid-
 pH, and increased glomerular filtration rate. Bicarbonate
neys and, thus, can produce a more maximally dilute
reabsorption in the proximal tubule of normal dogs and
urine than in cats.However, if antidiuretic hormone is
( (<) n si n d    s
released from the posterior pituitary in response to an
unlike most electrolytes, there are several mechanisms
increase in plasma osmolarity or a low extracellular fluid
contributing to control of bicarbonate reabsorption in
volume as detected by low pressure baroreceptors, it
the proximal tubules.
will bind to receptors on the basolateral membrane of
Although the addition of alkalinizing agents (e.g-)
principal cells of the distal tubule and collecting duct
sodium bicarbonate, potassium citrate, or calcium car-
and stimulate adenyl cyclase enzyme activity. This effect
bonate) or the ingestion of a vegetable- or cereal-based
of antidiuretic hormone increases intracellular levels of
diet may have a net alkalinizing effect, cats and dogs
cyclic adenosine monophosphate, which subsequently
ingesting a meat-based diet must usually generate acidic
enhances water permeability through the incorporation
urine to maintain acid-base balance. Proton secretion
of aquaporin-2 water channels in the luminal membrane
by the distal tubules and collecting ducts is responsible
(Boone and Deen 2008; Halperin et al. 2008). In the
for the final adjustment urine pH and maintenance of
 presence of antidiuretic hormones, water will be pas-
body acid-base balance. Protons secreted into the distal
sively reabsorbed along the osmotic gradient provided
tubular lumen combine with ammonia and phosphate,
by the medullary hypertonicity. Antidiuretic hormones
which act as urinary buffers resulting in the production
also upregulate urea transporter activity in the distal col-
of the ammonium ion and titratable acid (phosphate),
lecting duct. This effect is gradual, requiring days to be
two nonreabsorbed solutes.
fully manifest, and its absence contributes to the loss
Physiology of the kidneys  15
of urinary concentrating ability associated with chronic
Erythropoietin
polyuria with low ADH levels.
Erythropoietin is essential for the growth of erythroid
stem cells and the rate of red blood cell production is
Renal endocrine functions
largely determined by serum erythropoietin concentra-
The kidney is responsible for secretion of a variety
tions. The primary (90%) site of erythropoietin produc-
of autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine factors and is
tion in adult animals is the kidney, largely renal corti-
responsive to many of these factors as well as other hor-
cal peritubular fibroblasts. In the adult, erythropoietin
mones. These play a vital role in renal regulation of extra-
production is inversely related to oxygen availability in
cellular fluid.
the kidney. Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), which are
 constitutively expressed transcription factors, are mod-
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
ified and degraded in the presence of oxygen (Nangaku
(Lefebvre et al. 2007; Fyhrquist
 and Eckardt 2007). When renal cortical oxygen tension
and Saijonmaa 2008)
is reduced, accumulated HIFs activate a signaling cas-
cade that leads to enhanced erythropoietin production
Renin is released into afferent arteriolar plasma from
 and release. Erythropoietin production is affected by a
the granular cells of the juxtaglomerular apparatus in
variety of kidney diseases, including those with com-
response to various stimuli, including a decline in sys-
plete or localized renal ischemia (enhanced production)
temic arterial pressure and direct sympathetic stimu-
and chronic kidney diseases (Cowgill et al. 1998) with
lation. Renin cleaves a ten amino acid fragment from
 generalized loss of functional renal tissue (reduced pro-
angiotensinogen (a globulin produced by the liver, which
duction). There are a variety of commercially available
is also known as renin substrate). This peptide fragment
 preparations that permit administration of exogenous
is termed angiotensin I. Angiotensin-converting enzyme,
 erythropoietin as well as related erythropoiesis stimu-
present on the surface of vascular endothelial cells and
lating agents with longer half-lives, such as darbopoi-
elsewhere, cleaves a terminal two amino acid fragment
etin and continuous erythropoietin receptor activator
from angiotensin I, converting it to angiotensin I1. The
(CERA). Besides their effect to enhance red blood cell
latter two compounds (angiotensin I and I1) have short
production, erythropoietin and related compounds have
half-lives, generally <1 min.
a variety of other functions, including a supportive effect
There are other cleavage products (i.e., the heptapep-
 on cellular metabolism, positive effects on angiogenesis
tides angiotensin Ill and IV), but angiotensin II is gener-
ally held to be the most important product and is a potent
and vascular tone, and a neuroprotective effect. The effect
on vascular tone may raise blood pressure in animals
vasoconstrictor for systemic arterioles that increases renal
vascular resistance in efferent (preferentially) and affer-
like compounds.
ent arterioles. Although there is a family of cell mem-
brane receptors, the type l receptor (AT1) mediates
most known effects of angiotensin II (Aplin et al. 2009).
Renal eicosanoids
Angiotensin Il also augments proximal tubular reab-
sorption of sodium and release of aldosterone from the
Eicosanoids
S(prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and
adrenal cortex, which subsequently enhances distal tubu-
leukotrienes) are derived locally from cell membrane
lar sodium reabsorption. Overall effects of angiotensin
 phospholipids and have many effects on the renal vascu-
 II include an increase in systemic arterial blood pres-
lature. Vasodilatory prostaglandins (prostaglandins E2
and 12) are opposed by the vasoconstrictive effects of
tance and blood volume) and an increase in glomerular
thromboxane A2 and leukotrienes (Brown et al. 2000;
capillary pressure (secondary to the increases in effer-
Giovanni and Giovanni 2002). Although apparently
ent arteriolar tone and systemic arterial blood pressure).
 having unimportant effects on renal function in normal
Angiotensin II may decrease, increase, or have little effect
animals, vasodilatory prostaglandins can be important
 on the glomerular filtration rate, depending on the pre-
for the maintenance of renal blood flow and glomerular
existing physiological state of the animal. The kidney, as
fltration rate when renal hemodynamics are compro-
well as several other tissues of the body, contains all of the
mised. These are referred to as high-renin states, which
components necessary to generate angiotensin I1 locally.
 include dehydration, anesthesia, renal failure, converting
This local rennin-angiotensin system may be more
enzyme inhibition, and urinary tract obstruction. Both
important than the classic systemic rennin-angiotensin
normal and diseased kidneys contain constitutively
system, as measurement of angiotensin II concentrations
expressed   cyclooxygenase-1  and   cyclooxygenase-2
have suggested that intrarenal levels of this compound
activities, explaining why cyclooxygenase-nonselective
may exceed systemic concentrations by 1,0oo-fold.
and cyclooxygenase-2 selective agents can have effects
16
 Anatomy and physiology
Table 2.3 Homeostatic renal functions
 Function
Important regulatory mechanisms
Volume regulation
Antidiuretic hormone controls extracelular fluid osmolarity by regulating water excretion via urinary
concentrating mechanism.
Blood pressure regulation
Changes in blood pressure are opposed by altering NaCl excretion (pressure natriuresis)
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone, controlled by intrarenal mechanisms, contributes to blood pressure
regulation through vasoconstriction and enhancement of sodium reabsorption in proximal
(angiotensin Il-mediated) and distal (aldosterone-mediated) sites.
Red cell production
Acid-base balance
Bicarbonate reabsorption (proximal tubule) and proton secretion (distal tubule) regulated in
accordance with acid-base status of animal.
Electrolyte and mineral
Total body content and extracellular fluid concentration of Na, Cl, K, Mg, and P controlled by renal
homeostasis
mechanisms with hormonal influences
Calcium homeostasis is regulated by interactions of intestinal tract, vitamin D, parathyroid hormone,
 and the kidney.
See Table 2.2.
Excretion of metabolic
 Uremic toxin removal is dependent on glomerular fitration and tubular reabsorption.
wastes
High tubular flow rates enhance excretion of many of these molecules by limiting reabsorption.
Dehydration
↑Plasma
↑ Serum [Nat]*
pue) po↑
[total protein]*
extracellular
Autoregulatory
fluid) volume
adjustments of afferent
arteriolar tone leading to
↑Plasma
↑Serum
↑Serum
no change in renal blood
oncotic pressure
osmolarity
[antidiuretic
nchno
flow and GFR unless
hormone]
mean BP<60mmHg
↓Glomerular
↑Water (and
↓Systemic
filtration rate
possibly
↑Water
arterial blood
(GFR)
sodium) intake
reabsorption in
pressure (BP)*
 Activation of the renin-
 distal tubule
angiotensin-aldosterone
↑Plasma
and collecting
↑ Na* reabsorption
system
[creatinine]*
duct
and [BUN]*
↑Urine specific
gravity (up to
↑Serum [Na*]*
1.060 in dogs and
1.080 in cats)*
All parameters
return to normal
(may require 2-5
(skep
Figure 2.1 An illustration of the mechanisms by which the kidney regulates fluid volumes and blood pressure, using a dehydrated
patient as an example. The rennin-angiotensin-aldosterone system also helps to sustain systemic arterial blood pressure through
further explanation. *Parameters that may be readily assessed in a clinical patient
Physiology of the kidneys  17
on renal function during high-renin states (Giovanni
References
and Giovanni 2002).
Aplin, M., M.M. Bonde, et al. (2009). Molecular determinants of
angiotensin II type l receptor functional selectivity. I Mol Cell Car-
diol 46: 15-24.
Renal innervation
Bagnasco, S.M. (2005). Role and regulation of urea transporters.
Pflugers Archt 450: 217-226.
Both nonmyelinated and myelinated nerve fibers are
Barisoni, L., H.W. Schnaper, et al. (2009). Advances in the biology
found in the kidneys, which are predominantly alpha-
and genetics of the podocytopathies: implications for diagnosis and
adrenergic sympathetic fibers. These fibers enter the renal
therapy. Arch Pathol Lab Me 133: 201-216.
parenchyma with the renal arterial branches and inner-
Barton, M.(200s). Reversal of proteinuric renal disease and the emerg-
vate the renal arterioles, tubular epithelium, and jux-
ing role of endothelin. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol4: 490-501.
taglomerular apparatus. In a normal dog or cat at rest,
chronic kidney disease patients. Perit Dial Int 27: S293-S297.
renal nerves are believed to have only a small influence on
Boone, M. and P.M. Deen (2008). Physiology and pathophysiology
 glomerular fltration rate and renal blood flow. During
of the vasopressin-regulated renal water reabsorption. Pflugers Archt
extreme exercise or pathophysiological states (e.g-, con-
456: 1005-1024.
 gestive heart failure or systemic hypotension), increased
Bovee, K.C. and G.D. Webster ( 1972). Values for intrarenal distribution
 sympathetic nerve activity may be responsible for a
of blood flow using xenon 133 in the anesthetized dog. Arm I Vet Res
33: 501-510.
decrease in renal blood flow and glomerular filtration
Brown, S., D. Finco, et al. ( 1990). Single nephron adaptations to partial 
rate and enhanced release of renin. Renal nerve activity
renal ablation in dogs. Arm I Physiol 258: F495-F503.
may also be important in the genesis and/or maintenance
Brown, S.A. and C.A. Brown (1995). Single nephron adaptations to
of systemic hypertension through a variety of tubular and
 partial renal ablation in cats. Arm I Physiol 269: R1002-R1008.
vascular effects, (Blankestijn 2007) though little is known
Brown, S.A., C. Brown, et al. (2000). Effect of dietary fatty acid supple-
mentation in early renal insufficiency in dogs. I Lab Clin Med 135:
about this phenomenon in dogs and cats.
275-286.
Brown, S.A., D.R Finco, et al. (1995). Impaired renal autoregula-
tory ability in dogs with reduced renal mass. I Am Soc Nephtrol 5:
Other renal hormones
1768-1774.
Carrmines, P.K., et al. (1987). Effects of preglomerular and post-
 Two compounds, endothelin and endothelium derived
glomerular vascular resistance alterations on fltration fraction. Kid-
relaxing factor (nitric oxide or a related compound),
ney Int 31: S229-S235.
 n      
Comper, W.D., B. Haraldsson, et al. (2008). Normal glomeruli filter
duce either marked, prolonged contraction (endothelin)
nephrotic levels of albumin. I Arm Soc Nephrol 19: 427-432.
Cowgill, L.D, K.M. James, et al. (1998). Use of recombinant human
(Barton 2008) or relaxation (endothelium derived relax-
m snn pe sp u ee o   ua
ing factor) (McCarthy et al. 2008) of vascular smooth
renal failure. IArm Vet Med Asso. 212: 521-528.
muscle, with particularly important effects on the renal
DiBartola, S.P. (2000). Clinical approach and laboratory evaluation of
arterioles. Atrial natriuretic factor, a peptide released
renal disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by
S.J. Ettinger and E.Feldman.Philadelphia: Saunders,pp. 1600-1614.
from atrial myocytes in response to distention, causes
Ennulat, D. and S.A. Brown ( 1997). Efects of growth factors on canine
an increase in renal blood flow, glomerular filtration
and equine mesangial cell proliferation. Arm J Vet Res58: 1308- 13 13.
rate, and urinary sodium excretion. Vasodilatory effects
Fyhrquist, F and O. Saijonmaa (2008). Renin-angiotensin system revis-
of atrial natriuretic factor apparently occur at the afferent
ited. J Intern Med 264: 224-236.
arteriole.
Giovanni, G. and P. Giovanni (2002). Do non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs and COx-2 selective inhibitors have different
renal effects? I Nephrol 15: 480-488.
Halperin, M.L., K.S. Kamel, et al. (2008). Mechanisms to concentrate
Renal homeostatic functions
the urine. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 17: 416-422.
Hauser, P.V., F Collino, et al. (2009). Nephrin and endothelial injury.
 The individual renal functions described above permit
Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 18: 3-8.
the kidney to regulate blood volume, extracellular fluid
Kruth, S.A. and L.D. Cowgill (1982). Renal glucose transport in the
volume, systemic arterial blood pressure, hematocrit,
cat. Proceedings, American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Scientifc Forum, San Diego, p. 78 (abstract).
 acid-base balance, and plasma concentrations of elec-
Laing, C.M. and R.J. Unwin (2008). Renal tubular acidosis. I Nephrol
trolytes, minerals, and metabolic waste products ( Table
19: S46-S52.
2.3). Of particular importance in clinical patients, the 
Lefebvre, H., S. Brown, et al. (2007). Angiotensin-converting enzyme
kidney regulates blood and extracellular fluid volume
inhibitors in veterinary medicine. Curr Pharm Des 13: 1347-1361.
McCarthy, H.O., J.A. Coulter, et al. (2008). Gene therapy via inducible
indirectly through a complex  interaction of renal
nitric oxide synthase: a tool for the treatment of a diverse range of
sodium and water handling and glomerular fltration
pathological conditions. I Pharmacol 60: 999-1017.
that involves a central role for antidiuretic hormone
Nangaku, M. and K.U. Eckardt (2007). Hypoxia and the HIF system
(Figure 2.1).
in kidney disease. I Mol Med 85: 1325-1330.
3
Anatomy of the lower urogenital tract
Thomas F. Fletcher and Christina E. Clarkson
The lower urinary tract consists of the urinary bladder
tains the urachus or its remnant. The lateral ligament of
and urethra plus the caudal segment of each ureter. The
the urinary bladder is bilateral. The ureter and umbilical
three functional components of the lower urinary tract
artery run in the lateral ligament.
are determined ultimately by innervation (Fletcher et al.
Three urinary bladder regions are defined (Figure 3.1):
2010):
· The apex is the cranial blind end.
· Detrusor muscle, which expels urine, is the smooth
· The neck is the funnel-shaped region located between
muscle coat of the bladder apex and body.
ureter openings and the urethra.
· Smooth muscle sphincter (internal urethral sphincter)
· The body is the region situated between the neck and
consists of the muscle coat of the bladder neck and
apex.
cranial urethra.
· Striated urethral sphincter (external urethral sphinc-
 Each ureter passes obliquely through the bladder wall
ter) is the urethralis muscle that encircles the caudal
and terminates in a slit opening at the cranial margin of
urethra.
the vesical neck. The oblique intramural passage plus
Blood supply to the lower urinary tract is delivered by
intramural tension produced by intravesical pressure
the internal iliac artery. One of its branches, the umbilical
combine to close the terminal ureter to preclude urine
artery, supplies cranial vesical arteries to the apex of the
reflux. The muscle coat of the ureter is mainly circular
bladder. Another branch, the internal pudendal artery,
but inner and outer longitudinal fascicles are augmented
terminates in the vestibule/penis. Before terminating, the
in the terminal ureter. Outer fascicles are contributed by
artery gives off a vaginal/prostatic branch that supplies
the bladder. Inner longitudinal muscle bundles continue
blood to the bladder (caudal vesical arteries) and urethra
 into the bladder trigone.
(Evans 1993).
The bladder trigone is evident as triangular smooth
mucosa on the dorsal internal wall of the bladder neck.
The trigone attaches ureters to the bladder neck and ure-
Urinary bladder
thra. The cranial border of the trigone is formed by lon-
The position of the urinary bladder depends on its vol-
gitudinal muscle fascicles from each ureter crossing the
ume. An empty contracted bladder may be tucked into
midline. The lateral borders and apex are formed by the
the pelvic cavity. A full bladder can extend cranially to the
ureter's longitudinal muscle that continues caudally into
level of the umbilicus. The bladder is coated by visceral
the urethral crest (Figure 3.2).
peritoneum. Three ligaments run from the bladder sur-
Like the ureter, the urinary bladder is lined by tran-
face to parietal peritoneum: The ventral median ligament
sitional epithelium. The epithelium is bacteriostatic by
connects along the ventral midline of the abdominal wall
virtue of a glycosaminoglycan secretion that impairs bac-
as far cranially as the umbilicus; in the neonate, it con-
terial adhesion to the epithelium (Gasser and Madsen
1993). A rich capillary plexus is present immediately
deep to the transitional epithelium in the lamina pro-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
pria region of the mucosa. The presence of a muscu-
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
laris mucosae between lamina propria and submucosa is
18
Anatomy of the lower urogenital tract 19
fascicles of the trigone, the muscle coat of the neck is
composed predominantly of circular fascicles. The circu-
Ureter
Rectum
lar muscle fascicles of the neck continue into the urethra.
 Oblique muscle fascicles of the detrusor run onto the
Uterus
Vagina
bladder neck in order to open it.
Neck
Vestibule
CAWASAXASO
Body
Urethra
Symphysis pelvis
Female urethra
Female lower urinary tract
Unlike male urethrae, female urethrae are anatomically
Figure 3.1 Cartoon of a female lower urinary tract and related
similar in dogs and cats (Cullen et al. 1981a, 1983b). The
pelvic viscera. The urinary bladder has three regions: apex, body.
female urethra runs from the internal urethral orifice
and neck. The urethra conveys urine from the bladder to the floor
at the bladder neck to the external urethral orifice in
of the vestibule.
the vestibule. The external orifice opens on the floor of
the cranial vestibule in a urethral tubercle (dog) or as a
groove (cat). The apparent vesicourethral junction can
 inconsistent. When empty, bladder mucosa and submu-
shift slightly because of funneling differences associated
cosa exhibits folds that disappear during distension.
with different intravesical pressures.
The smooth muscle coat of the apex and body of the
 Transitional epithelium lining the urethral lumen is
bladder constitutes the detrusor muscle. Its muscle fasci-
2-3 cells thick, thinner than in the bladder. Urethral
cles are variably organized rather than arranged in con-
epithelium gradually becomes stratified cuboidal in the
sistent layers. As the bladder distends, the muscle coat
 middle of the urethra and stratified squamous at the ter-
becomes thinner and individual muscle fascicles shift
minal end of the urethra. The submucosa contains elastic
their positions relative to one another. With major dis-
fibers, more than in the bladder, and a stratum spongio-
tension, the general direction of detrusor fascicles shifts
sum (venous sinuses) that becomes more plentiful from
from an encompassing orientation toward a tangential
cranial to caudal along the urethra (Figure 3.3).
 one. As a result, the detrusor loses mechanical advantage
The urethral muscle coat is smooth muscle in the cra-
for generating intravesical pressure as bladder volume
nial, two-thirds of the urethra and striated muscle in
expands and wall tension becomes tangential.
the caudal third. The muscle types overlap in the canine
In contrast to the detrusor, the bladder neck has a
mid-urethra and further caudally in the cat. Urethral
sphincter function. The submucosa of the bladder neck
is relatively rich in elastic fibers. Excepting longitudinal
Trigone
Longitudinal
Fascicles from ureter
Ureter opening
Urethral crest
Ductus deferens opening
Colliculus seminalis
Prostatic duct opening
Figure 3.2 Schematic diagram of longitudinal muscle fascicles
from the ureters giving rise to the trigone and urethral crest in 
a male. The musde fascidles anchor the ureters to the bladder
Figure 3.3 Transverse section through the caudal urethra of a
neck and urethra. The trigone is located on the inner surface of
bitch. The urethra was fixed by perfusion, so stratum spongiosum
the dorsal wall of the bladder neck and the colliculus seminalis is
is dlearly evident within the submucosa, which is surrounded by
located in the dorsal wall of the prostatic urethra.
striated urethralis muscle. (From Cullen 1981a).
20
 Anatomy and physiology
External anal
sphincter
 Rectum
Urethralis
muscle
Vagina
Urethra
Dog
ProstaticUrethra Transections
Constrictor
Pelvic symphysis
vulvae and vestibulae
Figure 3.4 Cartoon showing that urethralis musdle initially encir-
cles only the urethra but further caudally it encirdles both urethra
and vagina. (From Fletcher 1996).
Cat
smooth muscle is predominantly circular in orientation,
like the bladder neck. Longitudinal fascicles are signifi-
Figure 3.5 Transverse sections through prostatic urethrae of a
cant only within the urethral crest. The crest is a dorsal
dog (top) and a cat (below). In both cases, the prostate is bi-
lobed, but it is smaller and restricted to the dorsal surface in the
submucosal ridge that typically runs the length of the
cat. Smooth muscle is significant only within trabeculae enclosing
female urethra.
gland lobules. Fascicles of striated urethralis muscle are present
Striated urethralis muscle (external urethral sphinc-
ventrally in the feline section. (From Cullen 1981b and Cullen
ter) entirely replaces smooth muscle in the distal third
1981a).
 of the urethra. Urethralis muscle is relatively longer and
thicker in the bitch than in the queen. The striated mus-
cle completely encircles the urethra, and further caudally
     e  s 
of each ductus deferens and numerous prostatic ducts
encircling both, the muscle effectively anchors the cau-
are visible on the coliculus seminalis, a dorsal region of
dal end of the urethra to the more massive genital tract
thickened submucosa (Figure 3.2).
 providing sphincter stability.
The feline prostate gland consists of dorsally posi-
tioned bilateral lobes (Figure 3.5); each lobe is composed
of lobules partitioned by trabeculae. Smooth muscle is
Male feline pelvic urethra
present within trabeculae and as a thin coat on the sur-
The urethra of the male cat runs through the pelvic canal
face of the prostate but smooth muscle does not surround
(pelvic urethra) and continues into the penis (penile ure-
 the submucosa and lumen of the prostatic urethra. Post-
thra). A small bi-lobed prostate gland is positioned in
prostatic striated muscle fascicles coat the ventral surface
the middle of the pelvic urethra. The body of the prostate
of the prostatic urethra.
gland is a landmark for dividing the pelvic urethra into
The postprostatic urethra runs from the body of the
 preprostatic, prostatic, and postprostatic divisions.
prostate gland to the root of the penis where paired
The preprostatic urethra extends from the bladder
bulbourethral glands are present in the cat. The post-
neck to the prostate gland and resembles the cranial half
prostatic submucosa features a rich stratum spongiosum
of the female urethra. The smooth muscle coat is mainly
and disseminated glandular tissue ( which stains like bul-
circular, like the bladder neck. Longitudinal fascicles from
bourethral gland (Cullen et al. 1983a). Entirely replacing
the trigone are evident dorsally in the urethral crest.
smooth muscle, the striated urethralis muscle forms a
The prostatic urethra is ventral to the body of the
 thick muscle coat encircling urethral submucosa. Striated
prostate gland. The submucosa is rich in elastic fibers but
fascicles also cover each bulbourethral gland, as bulbog-
generally deficient in smooth muscle. A bilateral opening
landularis muscle (Martin et al. 1974).
Anatomy of the lower urogenital tract  21
Male canine pelvic urethra
Innervation
The pelvic urethra of the male dog has two divisions:
Although the ureter receives autonomic innervation, it
prostatic and postprostatic (membranous). A large bi-
is not functionally dependent on innervation. The blad-
lobed prostate gland completely encircles the prostatic
 der and urethra, however, require innervation to func-
urethra (Figure 3.5). Within the prostate, the urethral
tion effectively. They are innervated via bilateral pelvic
lumen appears enlarged and a prominent coliculus sem-
plexuses (Oliver et al. 1969). Part of each pelvic plexus
inalis occupies the dorsal submucosa.
 spills onto the caudal bladder as a vesical plexus. Nerves
The prostatic submucosa is rich in elastic fibers but
in the bladder wall are tortuous to accommodate disten-
lacks encircling smooth muscle (except for a short
sion.
distance at the cranial edge of the prostatic urethra).
 Autonomic ganglia within pelvic plexuses contain
Smooth muscle is associated principally with trabeculae
both sympathetic and parasympathetic postganglionic
that partition prostate lobules; it is sparse on the outer
neurons, predominantly the latter. Postganglionic axons
capsule of the prostate. Thus, in the prostatic urethra,
 are nonmyelinated. Their terminal branches have preter-
smooth muscle is not structured for a urethral sphincter
minal and terminal varicosities (enlargements) that con-
 role; instead, it is designed to contract prostatic lobules.
tain synaptic vesicles (Fletcher et al. 1969). The vesicles
Thus, the smooth muscle sphincter in male dogs is
release neurotransmitter molecules that diffuse variable
 restricted primarily to the bladder neck (Cullen et al.
 distances and bind to receptors on myocytes. Distinct
198la).
neuromuscular junctions are not evident.
The canine postprostatic urethra features a thick coat
 Parasympathetic innervation to the detrusor muscle
 of striated urethralis muscle. The muscle fascicles overlap
begins with preganglionic neurons located in interme-
the caudal surface of the prostate gland and they contact
diate gray matter of the sacral spinal cord (Si-s). Axons
bulbospongiosus muscle at the ischial arch. There is not 
reach the pelvic plexus via the pelvic nerve, which is a
significant smooth muscle in the postprostatic urethra.
branch of the sacral portion of the lumbosacral plexus
Within the submucosa, islands of disseminate prostate
(Figure 3.6). Postganglionic neurons are within pelvic
gland are evident and a rich stratum spongiosum sur-
ganglia. Parasympathetic nerves release acetylcholine
rounds the urethral lumen (Cullen et al. 1981b).
which leads to detrusor contraction.
Male cat lower urinary tract innervation
L-4 Rami commuinicantes
Ventral branches: S-1 S-2
- Sympathetic trunk
Lumbosacral
Lumbar splanchnic nn.
plexus
Caudal mesenteric
Pelvic
ganglion
Hypogastric
nerve
 Pudendal
nerve
nerve
Ureter
Urinary bladder
Pelvic
plexus
Bulbourethral
gland
Detrusor
Smooth sphincter
muscle
Urethralis muscle 
 Penis
 Preprostatic
Postprostatic
urethra
urethra
Figure 3.6 Diagram of nerves to the lower urinary tract of the male cat. The ureter, detrusor, and smooth sphincter are supplied bilateraly
by a pelvic plexus. Sympathetic innervation from the lumbar spinal cord reaches the plexus via the hypogastric nerve. Parasympathetic
innervation from the sacral spinal cord reaches the plexus via the pelvic nerve. The striated urethralis muscle is innervated by axons of
 sacral somatic neurons that run in the pudendal nerve.
22
 Anatomy and physiology
Sympathetic innervation to the bladder and urethra
sphincter neurons. More lateral in the pons, a pontine
 originates with preganglionic neurons located in the
continence center gives rise to axons that descend in the
intermediolateral nucleus of the lumbar spinal cord
dorsal half of the lateral funiculus. The axons activate the
(L2-4). The preganglionic axons travel through lum-
 striated urethral sphincter and pelvic diaphragm (Hol-
bar splanchnic nerves to the caudal mesenteric gan-
stege et al. 1986).
 glion where the majority synapse. The continuing path-
Midbrain periaqueductal gray matter receives spinal
way involves right/left hypogastric nerve and pelvic
input and forebrain input and communicates with pon-
plexus. Sympathetic postganglionic axons release nore-
tine centers. The limbic system, including the hypothala-
pinephrine, which leads to contraction of smooth mus-
mus, septum, amygdala, and cingulate cortex becomes
cle in the bladder neck and urethra but inhibition of the
involved because micturition timing is influenced by
detrusor ( Janig and McLachlan 1987).
emotional status. Finally, the medial frontal cortex ulti-
Somatic innervation of the urethralis muscle involves
mately decides whether to urinate or not and so notifies
motor nuclei in the ventral horn of the sacral spinal cord
the pons via the midbrain (Blok and Holstege 2001 ).
(S2,3). The axons travel through the sacral part of the
lumbosacral plexus and pudendal nerve to release ace-
tycholine at neuromuscular junctions of the urethralis
References
muscle, as well as striated muscles of the anal canal and
Blok, B.F.M. and G. Holstege (200l). The neural control of micturi-
root of the penis. Somatic afferent activity from these
tion and urinary continence. In: The Urinary Sphincter, edited by J.
muscles and from genitalia, anal canal, and skin of the
Corcos and E. Schick. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 89-99.
 perineum is also conveyed by the pudendal nerve.
Cullen, W.C., et al. (198la). Histology of the canine urethra. I. mor-
Visceral afferent innervation starts with bladder free
phometry of the female urethra. Anat Rec 199: 177-186.
Cullen, W.C., et al. ( 1981b). Histology of the canine urethra. II. mor-
nerve endings and mostly nonmyelinated axons. The sen-
 phometry of the male pelvic urethra. Anat Rec 199: 187-195.
sation of pain is conveyed by afferent axons with endings
Cullen, W.C., et al. (1983a). Morphormetry of the male feline pelvic
in the submucosa (Uemura et al. 1975). The axons travel
urethra. J Urol 129: 186-189.
through hypogastric nerves to the lumbar spinal cord.
Cullen, W.C., etal. ( 1983b). Morphometry of the female feline urethra.
 Pain afferents synapse on dorsal horn projection neu-
I Urol 129: 190- 193.
rons that generally receive somatic afferent input also.
Evans, H.E. ( 1993). Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA:
Thus, bladder pain may be interpreted as coming from
WB Saunders.
Fletcher, T.F. (1996). Applied anatomy and physiology of the feline
the body surface (referred pain). The spinothalamic tract
lower urinary tract. In: Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
 is the ascending pain pathway.
Animal Practice. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 18l-195.
The sense of bladder fullness that leads to micturi-
Fletcher, T.F, et al. ( 1969). Nerve endings in the urinary bladder of the
tion is conveyed by thin C and A-delta axons associated
cat. IComp Neur 136: 1-20.
Fletcher, T.F., et al. (20l0). Lower Urinary Tract. Available at:
with slowly adapting mechanoreceptors within the mus-
http://vanat.cvm.umn.edu/lut/.
cle coat. The axons travel through the pelvic nerve to
Gasser, T.C. and P.O. Madsen (1993). Influence of urologic irrigation
 the sacral spinal cord where they synapse on projection
fluids on urothelial bacterial adherence. Urol Res 21(6): 401-405.
neurons that send axons ventrally in the lateral funicu-
Holstege, G., et al. ( 1986). Anatomical and physiological observations
lus to the midbrain, hypothalamus, and thalamus. ( The
 on supraspinal control of bladder and urethral sphincter muscles in
same primary afferent neurons synapse on interneurons
the cat. I Comp Neur 250: 449-461.
Janig, W. and E.M. McLachlan ( 1987). Organization of lumbar spinal
responsible for sympathetic spinal reflexes involving the
         
smooth muscle sphincter.)
1332-1400.
Several brain structures are concerned with micturi-
Martin, W.D., et al. (1974). Perineal musculature in the cat. Anat Rec
tion. In the dorsal pons, a medial pontine micturition
180: 3-14.
center enables micturition by dispatching a descend-
Oliver Jr, J.E., et al. ( 1969). Spinal cord representation of the micturi-
tion reflex. I Comp Neur 137: 329-346.
ing pontospinal pathway through the ipsilateral ventral
Uemura, E., et al. (1975). Distribution of lumbar and sacral affrent
funiculus. Pathway axons excite parasympathetic pre-
axons in submucosa of cat urinary bladder. Arat Rec 183: 579-
 ganglionic neurons that supply the detrusor and inhibit
588.
Section 2
Diagnostic testing
4
Historical information and physical examination
Joe Bartges and David Polzin
The urinary system consists of kidneys, ureters, urinary
may recognize polyuria by decreased color or odor of
bladder, and urethra, and is intimately associated with
urine, increased time while voiding, or larger clumps of
the genital system. The upper urinary tract comprises
litter in boxes. Normal urine production is 10-60 mL/kg
the kidneys and ureters; the lower urinary tract com-
per day; cats consuming dry formulated diets often uri-
 prises the bladder and urethra. Diseases of the urinary
nate 5-10 mL/kg per day. Polyuria is defined as urine
tract are common in dogs and cats and may involve indi-
production exceeding 50 mL/kg per day (see Chapter
vidual parts, multiple sites, or the entire urinary system.
42).
Diagnostic evaluation of dogs and cats with urinary tract
Pollakiuria refers to excessively frequent urination
diseases begins with historical data collection and physi-
and must be differentiated from polyuria (see Chapter
cal examination.
47). Pollakiuria is often associated with other signs of
lower urinary tract disease such as stranguria (slow and
painful urination) and dysuria (difficult urination). Pol-
History and signalment
lakiuria must also be differentiated from constipation
where attempts at defecation are mistaken for attempts
The historical evaluation should include information
 at urination. Anuresis (inability to pass urine) may result
on frequency of urination, volume of urine produced,
from urinary outflow obstruction or to inability of the
 changes in water intake, appearance and odor of urine,
urinary bladder to contract, and may also be confused
and the presence or absence of polysystemic signs of
with constipation. Periuria is defined as urinating in
disease. General information should also be gathered
 inappropriate locations (ie., outside of the litter box,
including vaccination and heartworm status, possible
on the carpet, etc.). It may occur with polyuric states or
exposure to infectious agents or toxins, appetite, energy
with lower urinary tract disease. Enuresis refers to uri-
level, changes in behavior, etc.
nary incontinence especially occurring at night or during
 Polydipsia is defined as excessive thirst and is more
periods of relaxation. It may occur with or independent
easily recognized by owners than is polyuria. Polyuria is
of periuria. Hematuria refers to red blood cells (hemor-
defined as passage of abnormally large quantity of urine.
rhage) in urine, and can be present with many diseases
Asking owners to measure intake can be attempted, but is
of the upper and lower urinary tract (see Chapter 46).
usually unsuccessful because animals may consume water
Collection of historical information from owners
s  sn go io s s so  so 
should include information on diet fed, frequency of
puddles outside, or even their own urine. Normally, water
feeding, possible exposure to toxins, and medications
consumption is 5-30 mL/kg per day; however, it is depen-
administered. Many owners do not consider over-the-
dent on composition of diet (i.e., dry versus canned diet,
s o se o p, se suu no
salt content of diet, etc.). Polydipsia is defined as water
plements as potentially harmful, although some may be,
intake of greater than 100 mL/kg per day including water
particularly if given inappropriately (e.g-, ibuprofen to
from food and water that is directly consumed. Owners
dogs).
 diagnoses and direct diagnostic evaluation. Congeni-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
tal anatomic disease (see Chapters 56 and 80) is more
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
25
26  Diagnostic testing
common in pediatric or young adult animals, whereas
both kidneys are palpable and easily moveable. Ureters
neoplasia occurs more commonly in older animals. Renal
are normally not palpable.
failure (see Chapter 48) occurs more commonly in older
animals, but nephrotic syndrome occurs more com-
Urinary bladder
monly in young to middle-aged adult animals. Bacterial
The urinary bladder can be palpated in most dogs and
urinary tract infections occur more commonly in female
cats unless it is empty or the animal is obese. It is easiest
dogs than in male dogs, and occur uncommonly in cats
to palpate while the animal is standing using one hand
(see Chapters 71 and 72). Prostatomegaly in a dog that has
placed on the caudal ventral abdomen with the thumb
been castrated more than six months prior to discovery
positioned on one side of the caudal ventral abdomen and
suggests neoplasia, whereas benign prostatic hypertro-
the fingers positioned on the other side. Gently squeeze
phy is more likely if the dog is reproductively intact (see
thumb and fingers together and slide them forward and
Chapters 78 and 79).
backwards. The urinary bladder is evaluated for position
in the abdomen, degree of distension, evidence of pain,
thickness of wall, the presence of intramural masses (i.e.,
Physical examination
neoplasms) or intraluminal masses (i.e., calculi). A full
A complete physical examination is a routine part of
bladder has a spherical and taut shape and may be situ-
patient evaluation. With suspected or confirmed uri-
ated more cranially than expected. The presence of a full
nary tract disease, the physical examination should also
bladder with pain and dehydration may indicate a ure-
include a rectal examination and an ocular fundic exam-
thral obstruction; heart rate may be lower than expected
ination. Hydration status is evaluated using skin turgor,
in a stressed animal due to hyperkalemia-induced brady-
mucous membrane moistness, and a comparison of cur-
cardia. The presence of a full bladder in a dehydrated
animal without urethral obstruction suggests polyuria. A
rent body weight to recent body weight as rapid changes
 in body weight often reflect changes in hydration sta-
moderately distended bladder will be more pliable and
 tus. The presence of subcutaneous edema or ascites may
less spherical, and more caudally situated. A bladder that
be associated with proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome.
is empty may not be palpable or may be small and firm.
Examine the oral cavity for halitosis, pale mucous mem-
Urethra
brane color, ulcers, or necrosis of tongue tip that may be
 present in patients with uremia. Examine ocular fundus
The urethra is examined as well. This is difficult in male
for edema, detachment, hemorrhage, or vascular tortu-
and female cats with sedation or anesthesia, but can be
 osity that may be associated with systemic arterial hyper-
performed in most awake male and female dogs.
tension. In young dogs and cats with congenital renal
 In male dogs, extrude the penis and examine the ure-
failure, fibrous osteodystrophy ("rubber jaw") may be
thral orifice at the tip of the penis in addition to the
 present. Palpate the mandible and maxilla for swelling.
 preputial sheath. Palpate along the length of the urethra
pain, deformity, and ability to bend abnormally. In ani-
especially at the base of the os penis, which is a common
mals with urinary incontinence, a thorough neurological
site for urethral obstruction due to calculi. The perineal
 and musculoskeletal examination is performed including
 and penile urethra cannot be palpated, per se, but the
evaluation of the lumbosacral area. Rectal temperature
course of the urethra is palpated for abnormalities such
may be increased with infectious disease.
as masses or calculi. Rectal examination should be per-
formed in all male dogs regardless of age or reproductive
status. The urethra can be palpated on midline dorsal to
Kidneys and ureters
the pubic symphysis and the prostate may be palpable cra-
 Palpate the abdomen for renal location, size, shape, con-
nial to the cranial edge of the pelvis. Transrectal palpation
sistency and pain. Canine kidneys are bean shaped, while
of the prostate may be facilitated by using the other hand
feline kidneys are more spherical. In dogs, the right kid-
 to push upwards on the caudal ventral abdomen, which
ney is located level with the first three lumbar verte-
"pushes" the prostate toward the finger inserted rectally.
brae and situated almost entirely under the ribs, while
 In female dogs, the urethra can be palpated transrectally
the left kidney is more caudal at the level of the second
 as described before. Vaginal palpation should also be con-
through fourth lumbar vertebrae. In cats, the right kid-
 sidered and vaginoscopy using an otoscope and cone or
ney is located ventral to the first through fourth lumbar
vaginascope may be performed usually without sedation
vertebrae and the left kidney is located more caudally. In
or anesthesia.
dogs, usually only the left kidney is palpable and occa-
In cats, examination of the urethra usually requires
sionally the caudal pole of the right kidney, while in cats,
 sedation or anesthesia unless the animal is obtunded. In
Historical information and physical examination  27
male cats, the penis should be extruded and examined
tion is suspected. Aerobic bacteriological urine culture is
visually and by palpation. Rectal palpation of the urethra
performed when bacterial or fungal urinary tract infec-
can also be done in male and female cats, and should
tions may be present (see Chapter 9). Indirect arterial
be performed in cats with signs of lower urinary tract
 blood pressure determination and ocular fundic exami-
disease that are sedated or anesthetized.
 nation is performed in all cases of renal disease (see Chap-
ter 13). Other testing may include screening for systemic
Additional diagnostic testing
infectious disease (i.e., leptospirosis or rickettsia; see
Chapter 27), imaging (i.e., radiography, ultrasonography,
Additional diagnostic testing depends on clinical signs,
 contrast radiography or computed tomography or mag-
results of historical and physical examination, and
netic resonance imaging; see Chapters 15-17), visualiza-
required diagnostic work-up. Collection of urine for
tion (i.e., endoscopy, laparoscopy, or surgical exploration;
analysis is a routine part of a minimum database and
see Chapters 19-21), biopsy of one or more areas of the
should be performed in all cases of urinary tract disease
urinary tract (see Chapters 23, 25, and 26), endocrino-
(see Chapter 7). Complete blood cell counts and serum
logical testing (i.e., adrenal gland disease, etc.), or urinary
or plasma biochemical analysis may be performed as part
function testing (i.e., determination of glomerular filtra-
of the minimum database, particularly in the cases where
tion rate, tubular function, or urodynamic testing; see
renal disease, nephrotic syndrome, or urinary obstruc-
Chapters 14 and 22).
5
The ins and outs of urine collection
Carl A. Osborne, Jody P. Lulich, and Hasan Albasan
Overview
often contain contaminants (detergents, food, cosmet-
ics, etc.) that may interfere with reagent strip tests. Use
Collection of urine is an integral part of urinalysis.
 of transparent containers, made of glass or plastic, facili-
The method of collection and the collection container
tates observation of macroscopic characteristics of urine.
itself may influence test results and their interpretation.
       o
 Patients should be protected from iatrogenic compli-
minutes following collection, opaque containers should
cations associated with collection techniques, including
be considered to minimize photochemical degradation of
trauma to the urinary tract and urinary tract infection.
The sample being collected should be one whose in vitro
1981).
characteristics are similar to its in vivo characteristics.
Urine obtained for bacterial culture must be collected
The collection container should be selected with care.
in sterilized syringes or sterilized containers with tight-
Since drugs may alter laboratory test values by a variety of
fitting lids. Sterilized containers may be obtained by (1)
 pharmacologic, physical, and/or chemical mechanisms,
 sterilizing disposable plastic cups in ethylene oxide gas,
urine samples collected for diagnostic purposes should
(2) sterilizing glass or metal drinking cups in an autoclave,
be collected prior to the administration of diagnostic or
and (3) purchasing them from commercial manufactur-
 therapeutic agents. Withholding the administration of
ers.
fluids prior to sample collection is especially important
since oral or parenteral fluids may significantly alter the
specific gravity of urine. The significance of sterile urine
Collection techniques
bacterial cultures obtained from a patient that has been
receiving antibiotics should be ascertained. Erroneous
 Urine may be collected from the urinary bladder by using
conclusions formulated on the basis of erroneous labo-
several methods: natural voiding, manual compression
ratory data may lead to an incorrect diagnosis (Osborne
of the urinary bladder, transurethral catheterization,
1985).
 or cystocentesis. The method used should minimize
iatrogenic trauma to the urethra and bladder. Proper
techniques must be used to prevent iatrogenic urinary
Collection containers
tract infection. Urine samples voided early in the
 Disposable and reusable containers ( designed specifically
morning are likely to be highly concentrated. Since
for collection of urine from humans) may be obtained
consumption of water is likely to be greatest during the
from a variety of medical supply houses. We routinely
daytime, samples voided throughout the day are less
use disposable plastic cups which are clean, readily avail-
likely to be concentrated. Knowledge about the level of
able, inexpensive, and have tight-fitting lids. They may
urine concentration provides important information
be sterilized with ethylene oxide gas. Use of containers
about the status of renal function. Red and white blood
improvised by owners is not recommended since they
cells will lyse in dilute urine (i.e., urine with a specific
 J  (o   
volumes of dilute urine tends to reduce the concentration
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
of all substances present in the sample. Therefore, the
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
significance of debris, cells, or microscopic organisms
28
The ins and outs of urine collection  29
in urine sediment should be interpreted with knowledge
sufficient volume of urine to facilitate this technique; (3)
of the method of urine-specific gravity. This should be
samples may be contaminated with cells, bacteria, and
recorded on the form used to record urinalysis results.
other debris located in the genital tract, or on the skin
and hair. Therefore, they are unsatisfactory for bacterial
Normal voiding
culture; (4) micturition may be difficult to induce in some
patients, especially male cats; (5) bladder urine contam-
The primary advantage of this technique is that it is not
inated or infected with bacteria may be forced into the
associated with any risk of patient complications. The
prostate gland, ureters, renal pelves, and kidneys (Feeney
primary disadvantages of this method are (1) samples
et al. 1983). Unlike normal micturition (where detrusor
 may be contaminated with cells and bacteria located in
contraction is associated with a coordinated relaxation of
distal urethra, genital tract, and/or on the skin and hair,
voluntary and involuntary urethral sphincters), manual
(2) samples may be contaminated by substances in the
collection container and the external environment, and
sure, but may not be associated with simultaneous relax-
(3) the patient (the collectee) will not always void at the
ation of the urethral sphincters. Application of digital
will of the collector. Voided samples are satisfactory for
pressure to the urinary bladder for a prolonged period is
routine urinalysis which is obtained to screen patients
associated with a greater risk of reflux than application
for abnormalities of the urinary tract and other body
of digital pressure for a transient period; and (6) it is
systems. Depending on specific circumstances, however,
unsatisfactory for use during the immediate postopera-
it may be necessary to repeat the analysis on a subsequent
tive phase of cystotomies.
sample collected by cystocentesis.
Voided samples are also satisfactory for serial evalua-
Another technique is to outline the urinary bladder by
abdominal palpation. Generally, this will not be success-
tion of various chemical tests (glucose, ketones, biliru-
ful in the conscious patient unless the bladder contains at
bin, etc.). Comparing abnormal results in voided urine
least 10-15 mL of urine. The patient may be in a standing
samples with urinalysis results collected by cystocentesis
 or catheterization, may aid in localizing the underlying
or recumbent position. The technique requires gradual
exertion of moderate digital pressure over as large an area
cause(s) of abnormal results (e.g., is the disorder proxi-
of the bladder as possible, with the fingers and thumb
mal and/or distal to the urinary bladder). When possible,
of one hand or with the fingers of both hands (Figure
the first portion of the urine stream should be excluded
 5.1). Digital pressure should be directed toward the neck
from the sample submitted for analysis as it is often con-
 of the urinary bladder. A gradual but steady increase
taminated due to contact with the genital tract, skin,
and hair. In order to do this, two cups may be used to
collect the sample. The portion of the sample collected
in the second cup, will represent a mid-stream sample.
The sample in the first cup may be discarded or used to
help localize hemorrhage or inflammatory disease to the
urethra or genital tract. If technical difficulties prevent
collection of the sample in two cups, the sample in the
first cup is still available for analysis.
Manual compression of the urinary bladder
Induction of micturition (by application of digital pres-
sure to the urinary bladder through the bladder wall)
may be used to collect urine samples from dogs and cats.
The primary advantages of this procedure are (1) the risk
of iatrogenic lower urinary tract infection and iatrogenic
-   ss  ()   n 
lected from patients (collectees) with distended urinary
bladders at the convenience of the collector. The primary
disadvantages of this procedure are (1) the urinary blad-
 der may be traumatized if excessive digital pressure is
Figure 5.1 Collection of urine by manual compression of the
used. Not only is this detrimental to the patient, but the
urinary bladder. The fingers of both hands are used to gradually
associated hematuria may interfere with interpretation
exert moderate digital pressure over as large an area of the bladder
of the results; (2) the urinary bladder may not contain
aspossible.
30   Diagnostic testing
in pressure should be applied rather than forced inter-
into a syringe may be facilitated by the use of two rectan-
mittent squeezing motions. Vigorous palpation and/or
gular microscope slides. The goal is to use the edges of the
excessive pressure should be avoided since the latter is
 microscopic slides to form a deeper pool of urine that can
more readily be aspirated. The long edges of two micro-
by trauma. Moderate digital pressure should be sustained
scopic slides should be placed flat on the table surface so
until the urethral sphincters relax and urine is expelled
that the small sample of urine is between them. The slides
from the bladder. Several minutes of digital pressure may
should be parallel to each other, and tilted away from the
be required before micturition is induced. If the bladder
urine sample at an angle. With the edges of the slides in
is overdistended with urine because of partial obstruc-
close contact with the table, the slides should be advanced
toward each other. This will cause the urine to pool along
not to rupture the bladder or urethra.
the edges of the slides. During this time, an assistant with
Diuretics (such as furosemide) are recommended by
a syringe and needle should aspirate the urine as it pools
some investigators to facilitate collection of urine sam-
in front of the microscope slides. When the slides meet,
ples by increasing urine formation. However, a notable
they will form a V-shaped trough, from which most of the
drawback of this procedure is that it results in alteration
voided urine may be collected. Urine samples collected in
of the specific gravity values of urine. Use of diuretics
this fashion are satisfactory for screening urinalysis pro-
   a  n  
vided they are analyzed soon after collection. The value
is therefore best suited for serial urine sample collec-
of the results will be influenced by the cleanliness of the
tions when quantitative information about urine specific
table from which the sample was collected. To determine
 gravity, and semi-quantitative information about chem-
if disinfectant solutions agents used to clean table tops
ical tests and structures found in urine sediment, are not
will interfere with reagent-strip tests, evaluate results of
significant. If voiding does not occur following applica-
a urinalysis performed before and after exposure to the
tion of digital pressure to the urinary bladder, return the
disinfectant.
 patient (cat) to the ward with a container of plastic lit-
ter, or walk the patient (dog) outside (Lees and Osborne
Transurethral catheterization
1984). Ifthe bladder contains a sufficient volume of urine,
the patient will often voluntarily void it at that time.
Avoid unnecessary catheterization! If selected, the goal of
catheterization should be to use an atraumatic and asep-
tic technique by persons familiar with correct procedure.
Collection of table-top urine samples
Due to the risks of trauma and bacterial urinary tract
Patients with a lower urinary tract disease often have
infection, it is not a technique that should be conducted
reduced bladder capacity and urge incontinence. As a
by inadequately trained personnel who are unaware of
result, collection of urine into a cup during the voiding
the consequences. Indications for transurethral catheter-
phase of micturition, or by cystocentesis, is difficult. Fre-
ization of the urinary bladder may be categorized as
quently, small quantities of urine are voided before they
diagnostic or therapeutic (Table 5.1). The purpose(s)
can be collected. Collection of urine for analysis from
 of catheterization largely determines which of the three
smooth clean table-tops by aspiration through a needle
 general types of catheterization will be most appropriate.
 Table 5.1 Indications for transurethral catheterization of the urinary bladder
Diagnostic
Collection of a urine sample for analysis or bacterial culture
Collection of accurately timed volumes of urine for renal function studies
Measurement of urine output
Measurement of postmicturition residual urine volume
Instillation of contrast material for radiographic studies of the bladder, urethra, or prostate gland
Verification and localization of urethral obstruction
Catheter aspiration biopsy of urethral, prostatic, or bladder lesions
Therapeutic
Relief of urethral obstruction to urine flow
Relief of urine retention
Instillation of medications into the urinary bladder
Facilitation of surgery of the bladder, urethra, or surrounding structures
The ins and outs of urine collection  31
Single brief catheterization is appropriate when the need
to the tips of the catheters are commonly called “eyes."
for a catheter is a few hours or less. However, when need
Catheters may have as few as one, or as many as six,
for catheterization spans longer periods, intermittent or
or more, eyes. The edges of the eyes of polypropylene
indwelling catheterization is required. Size, composition,
catheters are sometimes rough and, as a consequence,
and types of catheters should be carefully considered.
may irritate the mucosa of the bladder and urethra. On
the basis of the site of their insertion, human catheters
Size
are classified as urethral or ureteral catheters. Human
urethral catheters are usually too large (and sometimes
The Fr scale of measurement (commonly abbreviated
too short) for routine use in veterinary medicine. Human
as F) is most often used for calibrating the diameter of
catheters. Each Fr unit is equivalent to 1/3 mm. and hence,
ize male and female dogs. Urethral catheters with inflat-
Fr units may be converted to millimeters by dividing by 3.
able balloons located at the tip are called ( Thomas) Foley
A 9 F catheter has an external diameter of3 mm. Catheters
catheters (Figure 5.2)'. By inflating the balloon following
are available in a variety of diameters and lengths.
insertion of the catheter into the bladder, the tip of the
catheter cannot migrate out of the bladder lumen. Foley
Composition
catheters are designed to be used as indwelling (or self
Urinary catheters are fabricated from a variety of mate-
retention) catheters. Foley catheters are sometimes used
rials including rubber, plastic, metal, nylon, latex, and
for retrograde contrast urethrography and retrograde
woven silk. Catheters impregnated with radiopaque
vaginography. Angiographic catheters with inflatable bal-
material are of value when used in conjunction with
loons (Swan-Ganz flow-directed balloon catheters) may
radiographic evaluation of the urinary system. Catheters
be used for retrograde urethrocystography (Figure 5.2)2.
 impregnated with antimicrobial agents have been recom-
mended to minimize iatrogenic infection.
Canine urinary catheters
Flexible plastic? and rubber catheters, similar in diame-
Types (Figure 5.2)
ter and length, to human ureteral catheters may be used
A wide variety of catheters are available for use in human
to catheterize male or female dogs. As they are relatively
inflexible, polypropylene catheters frequently traumatize
and veterinary medicine and each is designated to serve
a particular need (Figure 5.2). The openings adjacent
the urethra of male dogs as they curve around the ischial
arch. Metal catheters designed for use in female dogs are
 not recommended because their rigid structure is fre-
 quently the cause of iatrogenic trauma to the mucosa
of the urethra and urinary bladder. Swan-Ganz flow-
(a)
directed balloon catheters designed for human angiog-
raphy are very useful for collection of quantitative urine
specimens from dogs (and cats) (Figure 5.2). (Garner
(b)
and Laks 1976)
(c)
Feline urinary catheters
Disposable polypropylene tomcat catheters (3 1/2 to 5 F)
(c)
are available from commercial manufacturers'. Infant
feeding tubes and polyethylene tubing may also be used
to catheterize cats. Minnesota olive tip feline urethral
catheters° are often used to remove plugs from the distal
urethra ofmale cats. They are too short to reach the lumen
of the bladder. Rigid metal tomcat catheters should not
Figure 5.2 Drawings of catheters used for retrograde contrast
be used since they often cause trauma to the urethral and
urethrocystography, retrograde contrast vaginography, and vari-
bladder mucosa. Wysong urethral catheters? constructed
ous types of collection of urine from the urinary bladder. Key: (a)
aul po we saddn aui yhnoun papalu sy laauen Aalog peiad
of a silicone elastomer are designed for indwelling use
catheter will inflate the balloon (arrows): (b) polypropylene ure-
in male cats (Wysong 1983). Jackson cat catheters& are
thral catheter with two eyes: (c) whistle-tip ureteral catheter: (d)
also designed for indwelling use in male cats. However,
Swan-Ganz flow-directed balloon catheter. Air injected into the
their relatively rigid construction may cause trauma to
valve (lower arm) will inflate the balloon (insert).
 the urinary bladder vertex as it contracts.
32  Diagnostic testing
Filiforms and followers
microwave oven. In addition to the catheter, a beaker with
water must be placed in the oven to absorb excessive heat.
Filiforms and followers are instruments commonly used
The microwave oven is set at 12 minutes (high power).
in human medicine to locate and dilate ureteral strictures.
The authors emphasized the need to avoid *cold areas" in
Filiforms are solid structures made of pliable synthetic
the microwave oven. It is recommended that this proce-
material. They have a variety of different types of tips
dure be validated with each hospital's microwave before
(i.e., coude and corkscrew). Followers may be solid or
using it to sterilize urinary catheters. This may be accom-
hollow. Hollow followers permit catheterization.
plished by culturing contaminated urinary catheters for
bacteria before and after microwaving them.
Sounds
Chemical sterilizing solutions containing quaternary
Sounds are special instruments made of solid metal that
ammonia compounds may be used, but these are less
may be used to explore the urethral lumen for stenoses
effective than sterilization by autoclaving or ethylene
and to dilate the urethra and the bladder neck. Sounds are
oxide gas. If residual antiseptic solutions are not thor-
available in a wide variety of designs. Human textbooks of
 oughly rinsed from catheters, they may irritate the
urology provide specific details about filiforms, followers,
mucosa of the urethra or urinary bladder, interfere with
and sounds.
growth of bacteria, and/or alter chemical and enzyme
It is useful to designate a special drawer in the hospital
 tests. Disposable catheters which are prepackaged in ster-
as a catheter drawer (analogous to an auto mechanics
 ilized wrappers may be obtained from commercial man-
tool box). Sterilized catheters of all sizes, composition,
ufacturers.
and types should be stored in this drawer so that they
are readily available when needed. Speculums and light
Potential complications of transurethral
sources may also be stored in the catheter drawer.
catheterization
Urinary catheters may produce two general types of
Care of urinary catheters
adverse effects: (1) trauma to the urinary tract - dur-
Only sterilized catheters that are in excellent condition
ing insertion or continued presence of the catheter, and
should be used. Catheters that have been weakened dur-
(2) initiation of bacterial urinary tract infection (UT1).
ing use or abuse may break apart while in the patient. The
The risk of these adverse effects varies from patient to
"eye” is the weakest part of flexible catheters. Catheters
patient as is it caused by numerous factors.
   s a    
mucosa of the urethral and urinary bladder. Not only
Status of the urinary tract
are they detrimental to the patient, iatrogenic hema-
turia may interfere with interpretation of the urinalysis.
Among the key variables that affect the risk of catheter-
Pre-sterilized catheters are recommended. Non-sterilized
induced complications is the physical and functional sta-
catheters should be individually packaged prior to use.
tus of the patient's urinary tract (especially the urethra
The use of transparent packages that may be sterilized
and bladder) during and following catheterization.
with ethylene oxide? enable storage and selection, since
When diseases of the urinary tract make catheteriza-
they permit visualization of the catheter. Unsterilized
tion mechanically difficult, bacterial contamination and
catheters should not be used because they may cause
urinary tract trauma are likely.
iatrogenic infection of the urinary system. Also, they may
Local urinary tract defense mechanisms are usually
contaminate urine that is collected for bacterial culture.
compromised by urinary tract diseases. Thus, animals
with urinary tract disorders have a greater risk of catheter-
Sterilization
induced complications. Unfortunately, it is these very
patients for whom catheterization is required most often.
Catheters must be thoroughly cleaned prior to steriliza-
tion. Cleansing solutions should be completely rinsed
Patient profle
from the surface of catheters since they may interfere
with enzymatic and chemical tests. Repeated autoclaving
The risks of catheter-induced complications are also
of nonmetal catheters may reduce their longevity. Ethy-
dependent on factors such as species, sex, size, tempera-
lene oxide sterilization is an excellent method.
ment, and general health status. Cats are generally more
A technique that uses microwave ovens to sterilize uri-
difficult to catheterize than dogs. However, dogs are more
nary catheters has been described (Douglas et al. 1990).
susceptible to UTI than cats. Regardless of species, males
Basically, this technique involves putting flexible urinary
are more easily catheterized than females. Perhaps this,
 catheters in reusable freezer bags and placing them in a
 and other sex-related risk factors, are associated with the
The ins and outs of urine collection 33
 greater risk of catheter-induced UT1 in female dogs as
tic purposes, transurethral catheterization of the urinary
 compared to male dogs.
bladder should be performed carefully and with appro-
As veterinary patients vary greatly in size and cooper-
priate caution.
ativeness, the equipment and techniques that work opti-
mally for some patients are less satisfactory for others. It
Axioms
 is detrimental to use methods that are not appropriate
1. Avoid unnecessary catheterization, especially in
for the particular patient. Catheter-induced UTI can lead
 patients with increased risk of bacterial UTI and its
to episodes of bacteremia, particularly when a catheter is
 removed from an infected urinary tract.
sequela. This includes patients with urinary disease,
especially of the lower urinary tract; hyperadrenocor-
General health status and concomitant disorders can
ticism; diabetes mellitus; and polyuria.
influence the risk of catheter associated complications.
2.
 Urinary catheterization should only be performed by
Dogs with Cushing's syndrome, diabetes mellitus, and
properly trained personnel.
renal failure have higher susceptibility to UT1. Patients
3.
 If the need for catheterization spans more than a
with valvular cardiac disease have increased risk of devel-
few hours, intermittent catheterizations as well as
oping bacterial endocarditis as a result of such bac-
indwelling catheterization should be considered. If
teremia.
 a single brief catheterization is required for a high-
risk patient, consider an antibiotic excreted in high
Techniques
concentration in urine and administer it 8-12 hours
before and 8-12 hours after catheterization.
Techniques of catheterization influence the frequency
To minimize damage to bladder mucosa, avoid
and nature of adverse sequela. Abrasions, contusions,
 lacerations, and even puncture of the urethra and blad-
overinsertion of catheters.
5.
If indwelling urethral catheters are required, strive to
der can occur during catheterization. Prevention of these
maintain a closed system.
undesirable outcomes is dependent on the selection and
6.
Select indwelling urethral catheters which are con-
careful use of an appropriate catheter. The frequency and
structed of materials least likely to cause irritation
duration of catheterization also influences the risk of
and inflammation of the adjacent mucosa.
catheter-induced complications; latrogenic infection is
7.
 Consider administering antibiotics during indwelling
least likely to occur as a consequence of a single brief
urethral catheterization only if evidence of infection
catheterization. Studies of repeated intermittent brief
catheterization have revealed that the risk of inducing
is detected. This minimizes the likelihood of infec-
tion with bacteria resistant to antimicrobial agents.
infection is similar following each catheterization. Thus,
If catheter-induced infection develops and remains
the cumulative risk of catheter-induced UT1 is propor-
asymptomatic, treat the infection following removal
tional to the number of catheterizations. Risk of iatro-
of the catheter. Periodically perform urinalysis and
genic infection is greatest during indwelling catheteriza-
bacterial culture during the period of indwelling ure-
tion, especially when the portion of catheter protruding
thral catheterization, and at the time the catheter is
from the urethra is not connected to a receptacle (i.e., it
removed.
is open) (Lees et al. 198l; Lees and Osborne 1984). In
 general, the risk of infection during indwelling catheter-
Technique—generalities for male and female
ization is proportional to the duration of catheterization
dogs and cats
(Lees et al. 1981; Lees and Osborne 1984; Barsanti et al.
1985). When there is need for long-term catheterization,
 Regardless of the specific procedure being employed,
intermittent catheterization is often safer because it is
meticulous aseptic and gentle “feather touch" technique
less likely to induce UTI than indwelling catheterization.
should be used to prevent damage to the delicate tissues
 Indwelling catheters may cause continuous trauma to
of the genital tract, urethra, and urinary bladder. Only
the urinary tract, and may elicit a foreign body reaction
 well-trained individuals who comprehend the potential
in surrounding tissue (Lees et al. 1980). In some situa-
consequences of iatrogenic trauma and UTI should be
tions, however, the higher risk of urethral trauma caused
given the responsibility to catheterize the urethra and
by repeated insertion of a catheter makes indwelling
 urinary bladder. Conscious patients should be restrained
catheterization the safer alternative. Due to the risk of
by an assistant in order to minimize contamination of the
inducing infection of the bladder as a result of catheter-
catheter as well as trauma to the urethra. Animals should
ization, indiscriminate use of this technique is not rec-
be gently restrained in a comfortable position in order
ommended. However, this generality must be kept in
 to minimize the possibility of sudden unexpected move-
 perspective. When necessary for diagnostic or therapeu-
 ment which may result in contamination of the catheter
34  Diagnostic testing
or trauma to the urinary tract. Some types of sedation
Injection of a sterilized mixture of aqueous lubricant,
may be required for male cats and is usually required for
whose viscosity has been diluted with sterilized water or
female cats. Appropriate caution should be exercised so
saline, through the lumen of the catheter may be effective.
as not to use a drug that alters the diagnostic, physical, or
If these steps are unsuccessful, a catheter with a smaller
chemical composition of urine. Use the smallest diameter
diameter should be used. The tip of the catheter should
catheter that will permit the objective of catheterization.
be positioned so that its eyes are located just beyond the
Few patients will tolerate the passage of large catheters
junction of the neck of the bladder with the urethra. In
without some form of sedation.
 most instances, this may be accomplished by inserting
Catheters with flared ends are recommended, par-
ticularly if the length of the catheter is similar to the
which urine flows through the catheter lumen. This posi-
length of the urethra. If the end is not flared, the catheter
tion may be verified by injection of a known quantity of
 may migrate into the urethra to a point where it can-
air through the catheter into an otherwise empty blad-
not then be manually removed. In this event, insertion
der lumen. Inability to remove most of the air indicates
of a Swan-Ganz flow-directed balloon catheter inside
improper positioning ofthe catheter. The catheter should
the lumen of the damaged catheter, followed by disten-
be repositioned until the quantity of air injected into the
tion of the balloon, will be needed to withdraw it. Many
bladder lumen can be readily aspirated into the syringe.
commercially prepared catheters have flared ends which
 Proper positioning of catheters facilitates removal of all
accommodate the tip of a syringe. If a stylet is used, it 
the urine from the bladder and minimizes the possibil-
should be lubricated before it is inserted into the lumen of
ity of catheter-induced trauma. Urine may be aspirated
the catheter. If the stylet is not lubricated, it may be diffi-
from the bladder with the aid of a syringe. Aspiration
cult to remove it after the catheter is placed in the patient
 must be gentle in order to prevent trauma to the bladder
(especially male dogs). If necessary, structures adjacent to
  o ni  po n e se   
the external urethral orifice should be cleansed with ger-
of the catheter. An attempt to force urine through the
micidal soap, water, and sterilized sponges. The soap and
catheter by application of digital pressure to the blad-
water mixture should be thoroughly removed by rins-
der is not the recommended routine procedure since it
 ing to prevent contamination of the urine sample. Soapy
increases the likelihood of catheter-induced damage to
water may (a) impart a cloudy appearance to the sam-
the bladder mucosa. Use of a two-way or three-way valve
ple, (b) inhibit bacterial growth, (c) cause lysis of cells,
minimizes inadvertent injection of bacteria into the blad-
and/or (d) interfere with chemical and enzyme tests. The
der. Unless specifically required for a study, the first sev-
distance from the external urethral orifice to the begin-
eral milliliters of urine obtained via the catheter should
ning of the lumen of the bladder lumen should be esti-
be discarded since it may be contaminated with bacteria
 mated and mentally transposed to the catheter. This step
and cells from the genital tract and urethra. In patients
will reduce the likelihood of traumatizing the bladder
who run a high risk of developing iatrogenic infection as
mucosa due to over-insertion of the catheter. It will also
a result of catheterization, sterilized solutions of antimi-
prevent the catheter from reentering the urethral lumen.
crobial drugs may be injected into the bladder lumen
The tip of the catheter and the adjacent area should be lib-
as a prophylactic measure. However, local instillation of
erally lubricated with sterilized aqueous lubricant. Proper
antimicrobial agents should not be used as a substitute for
lubrication of the catheter will minimize discomfort to
 orally or parenterally administered antimicrobial agents
the patient and reduce catheter-induced trauma to the
if the risk of iatrogenic bacterial UTI warrants antimicro-
urethra. Local anesthesia may be induced with a topical
bial therapy. Follow-up urinalyses or bacterial cultures
 anesthetic such as lidocaine hydrochloride?.
should be considered several days later in order to detect
d e    r 
 iatrogenic infection at a subclinical stage.
dure. The catheter should not be allowed to come in
contact with the hair or skin of the patient or clinician.
Transurethral catheterization of the urinary bladder of
The catheter may be manipulated (1) through the pack-
male dogs (Figure 5.3)
aging material in which it is contained, (2) with the aid of
a sterilized pediatric hemostat, (3) with sterilized surgical
Reference should be made to the general discussion about
 gloves, and (4) by holding the distalend only. The catheter 
catheterization. The length and diameter of the catheter
should never be forced through the urethra. If difficulty
varies with the size of the patient. Four to ten Fr catheters
is encountered in inserting the catheter through the ure-
are satisfactory for most dogs. The length of human
thra, withdraw the catheter for a short distance and insert
ureteral and veterinary ureteral catheters usually does not
it again with a gradual rotating motion. If dificulty per-
vary. The external urethral orifice should be exposed by
sists, the diameter of the catheter should be reevaluated.
reflecting the prepuce away from the penis. To retract the
The ins and outs of urine collection 35
the catheter back into the bladder lumen with the objec-
tive of releasing the tight bend in the catheter wall, (b)
Apply a liberal quantity of sterilized lubricant to the out-
side wall of the catheter, and inject a dilute solution (2
 parts lubricant to 1 part water) of sterilized lubricant into
the catheter lumen. Apply gentle, steady traction to the
catheter with the objective of dilating the urethral lumen
ventral to the os penis thereby enabling the catheter to
be withdrawn. The force of the traction being applied
should be carefully monitored as extra force could tear
the urethral mucosa, and (c) If the catheter cannot be
removed by steady traction, a liberal quantity of dilute
sterilized aqueous lubricant should be injected through
and around the catheter. An assistant should then occlude
the lumen of the pelvic urethra by applying digital pres-
sure against the ischium through the ventral wall of the
rectum (refer to the chapter describing the technique
of retrograde urohydropropulsion). Next, a catheter of
appropriate size with an attached syringe (loaded with
Figure 5.3 Proper position of the tip of the flexible catheter in the
sterilized saline) should be placed in the penile urethra via
lumen of the urinary bladder of a male dog. Rigid plastic catheters
 the external urethral orifice. Using digital pressure, the
are often unsatisfactory because they may cause trauma and pain
during passage through the curved portion of the perineal urethra.
external urethral orifice should be compressed around
the both catheters. As a result of these maneuvers, a
 portion of the urethra, from the external urethral orifice
 prepuce, apply caudal pressure with the index finger at the
 to the bony pelvis, becomes a closed system. Saline should
point where the prepuce reflects onto the ventral abdom-
 then be injected into the urethra until a definite rebound
inal wall. Grasp the penis through the prepuce with the
is perceived through the syringe plunger. This rebound
 other hand, and push it cranially. Once exposed, the tip of
 should be associated with a palpable increase in the diam-
the penis and the external urethral orifice should be thor-
eter of the pelvic urethra. At this point, another assistant
oughly cleansed with soap and water. Once reflected, the
 should grasp the bent catheter and attempt to remove
 prepuce must not be allowed to contact the catheter as it 
it with gentle but steady pressure. If the portion of the
is being advanced through the urethral lumen. Difficulty
urethral lumen ventral to the os penis dilates sufficiently,
in advancing the catheter through the urethral lumen
the catheter may be removed from the uretha. If the
may be encountered at the level of the os penis and at
  s  e   n
the site where the urethra curves around the ischial arch.
ous contrast agent should be injected into and around the
 Resistance encountered at the level of the os penis may
 catheter with the objective of visualizing the exact nature
be minimized by grasping the penis through the pre-
of the problem via contrast radiography. Anesthetize the
puce and pushing it forward along the ventral body wall.
patient and repeat step (b) or (c). Stretching the ure-
Resistance of the catheter at the ischial arch may be min-
thral lumen with the catheter is likely to induce a lesser
imized by application of digital pressure over the top of
degree of injury than a urethrotomy. If all of the above
the catheter as it is slowly advanced. Care must be taken
 steps are unsuccessful, consider removing the catheter by
not to insert an excessive length of the catheter because
urethrotomy.
it may follow the curvature of the bladder wall, double
back on itself, and reenter the urethral lumen. As the
Transurethral catheterization of the urinary bladder of
catheter is withdrawn, the loop of the catheter becomes
female dogs (Figures 5.4-5.7)
 progressively smaller until the point where the wall of
Equipment
the catheter bends. The catheter often bends at the eye
since it is the weakest point of the catheter wall. As the
 Flexible veterinary urethral or human ureteral catheters,
bent catheter is withdrawn, it usually lodges at the cau-
identical to those used for male dogs, are recommended.
dal end of the os penis. If a catheter gets lodged in the
Rigid metal catheters are not recommended for routine
wall of the urethra as a result of bending itself, the fol-
use as they have a tendency to traumatize the mucosa
lowing procedures, which are listed in order of priority.
 of the vagina, urethra, and urinary bladder. A vari-
should be considered (Osborne et al. 1972) (a) Advance
ety of endoscopes may be used in the vagina to aid
36  Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5 Preferred position of nasal speculum used as a vaginal
Figure 5.4 Catheterization of a female dog with the aid of an
endoscope to permit visualization of the external urethral orifice
endoscope made from a disposable syringe container. The endo-
of female dogs.
scope was made by removing a rectangular section from the side
of the syringe case (a). Following insertion of the endoscope into
the vagina with the open side positioned ventrally, a catheter can
fice is located on a small tubercle in the ventral wall of
readily be directed into the extemal urethral orifice (b).
the vagina. In mature, small to medium-sized dogs, the
external urethral orifice is approximately 3-5 cm cranial
to the ventral commissure of the vulva. The clitoral fossa
visualization of the external urethral orifice, including
lies just caudal to the external urethral orifice. Catheters
(1) human nasal specula, (small size Figure 5.5), (2)
and endoscopes inserted into the vagina must be carefully
specula fashioned from disposable syringe cases (Figure
directed above and past this structure.
 5.4), (3) pyrex test tubes from which the end has been
removed and the edge fire-polished (4) otoscope cones,
Catheterization via endoscopy
(5) laryngoscopes, (6) cystoscope sheaths, and (7) tran-
silluminator ( Welch-Allen) light sources for otoscopes. If
Restraint, a good light source, and a comfortable
necessary, remove excessive hair from around the vulva.
 position for both patient and clinician are important
Cleanse the perivulvar skin and vulva with germicidal 
considerations. Having the dog in a standing position is
soap, water, and sterilized sponges. If required, flush the
recommended as it facilitates the anatomical orientation
lumen of the vagina with sterilized water or saline injected
required to locate the external urethral orifice (Figure
     i  e 
5.5). Ideally, the speculum must be large enough to
the distal lumen of the vagina. The external urethral ori-
remove the folds of the vaginal wall by distending
The ins and outs of urine collection  37
palpated, entry of the catheter into the urethra can be
determined when the tip of the catheter disappears into
the floor of the vagina. The most common error caused by
lack of experience with this technique, is over-insertion
 of the catheter into the vaginal lumen. Those inexperi-
enced with this technique should first place a catheter
 into the urethra with the aid of an endoscope and light
source. After the catheter is in place, remove the endo-
scope. Thereafter, insert a gloved index finger into the
vaginal lumen and palpate the catheter at the site of the
external urethral orifice. Next, pull the catheter out just
enough so that the tip of the catheter is just distal to the
external urethral orifice. Practice reinserting the catheter
into the urethra with the aid of the index finger. This is
 somewhat reminiscent of learning how to swim or how
Figure 5.6 llustration depicting correct techniques of guiding
to ride a bicycle, once you become familiar with the tech-
a flexible catheter into the external urethral orifice of a female
 nique, you will never forget how to do it.
jejoieue ui spie uosod bupueis e ui suaed au budaay bo
orientation during blind digital palpation of the vaginal lumen
Blind catheterization (Figure 5.7)
its lumen. Injection of air into the vagina sometimes
This technique is more difficult than the methods
enables dilatation of the lumen.
described above. Blind catheterization is useful when
visualization or digital palpation of the external urethral
Foley catheter technique
 orifice is not feasible as patients may be uncooperative,
have a small vulva, or have vaginal strictures. The position
 For patients who are too smal to permit visualization of
of the portion of the catheter within the vaginal lumen
the external urethral orifice with the aid of an endoscope,
cannot be visualized, hence caution must be exercised to
an 8-10 F Foley catheter may permit catheterization.
 prevent trauma to the genital tract. The patient should
Insert the Foley catheter into the vagina as far as possi-
be standing to facilitate anatomical orientation. The lips
ble and inflate the balloon. Insert a small nasal speculum
of the vulva should be parted. A sterilized, lubricated
into the vagina and open the blades. Gently pull the Foley
catheter outward. The urethral orifice may be visualized
as a small opening in the ventral midline of the vaginal
floor. Insertion of the urethral catheter is usually not hin-
dered by the Foley balloon. If it is, however, the balloon
should be deflated.
Digital technique (Figure 5.6)
 Female dogs that are large enough to permit digital pal-
pation of the vaginal lumen may be catheterized with-
out the requirement for direct visualization. However,
this technique is more likely to be associated with bacte-
rial contamination of the urinary tract, than the use of
endoscopy to directly visualize the external urethral ori-
fice. The dog should be standing as this facilitates anatom-
ical orientation. The external urethral orifice is located
on the ventral midline of the vaginal floor. Using steril-
ized disposable surgery gloves, an index finger should be
lubricated and gently inserted into the vagina. A sterilized
flexible catheter should be inserted into the lumen of the
Figure 5.7 Schematic drawing illustrating the proper direction
vagina, dorsal to the clitoral fossa, and guided along the
and curvature of a flexible catheter during blind advancement
midline of the vaginal floor toward the external urethral
through the vaginal lumen into the extemal urethral orifice of a
orifice. Although the external urethral orifice cannot be
female dog.
38  Diagnostic testing
catheter should be inserted into the vagina and directed
 penis with germicidal soap, water, and sterilized sponges.
above the clitoral fossa. With the long axis of the catheter
Displace the extended penis in a dorsal direction until
directed in a cranioventral direction with respect to the
 d e si e  jo sxe  s
long axis of the vagina, the tip of the catheter should be
 the vertebral column. This maneuver will facilitate atrau-
slowly advanced along the ventral midline of the vaginal
matic catheterization by reducing the natural curvature
floor. Detection of increased resistance to advancement 
of the caudal portion of the urethra. Gently insert the
of the catheter indicates that it has encountered the vagi-
tip of the catheter into the external urethral orifice and
nal fornix. In this situation, the catheter should be with-
advance it to the lumen of the urinary bladder. Vari-
drawn to a position just cranial to the clitoral fossa and
able degrees of resistance may be encountered in normal
the procedure should be repeated. Successful entry into
cats because of the curvature of the urethra adjacent to
the bladder is ascertained at the point where there is a
the bony pelvis, and/or voluntary contraction of skele-
lack of resistance to advancement of the catheter, and/or
tal muscle that surrounds the distal urethra. Resistance
by passage of urine through the lumen.
may be minimized by advancing the catheter with a grad-
is no n s e   hi 
Transurethral catheterization of the urinary bladder of
isotonic fluid to distend the urethral lumen (caution:
male cats (Figure 5.8)
injection of fluids may alter test results). Use care not to
 over-insert the catheter into the bladder lumen.
Commercially prepared flexible catheters that are 3-5
F in diameter are usually appropriate for this process.
Transurethral catheterization of the urinary bladder of
Catheters made from polyethylene tubing may be pre-
female cats
pared by cutting one end at a 45° angle, and flaring
the other end with heat (using a Bunsen burner, a
Flexible catheters used for catheterization of male cats
match, etc.). Rigid metal catheters should be avoided
are suitable. Otoscope cones provide satisfactory vaginal 
for transurethral catheterization of the urinary bladder
as they often induce trauma to the mucosal lining of the
often required. Carefully insert the tip of the catheter
urethral and bladder. Although manual restraint by an
into the slit-like external urethral orifice located in the
assistant is usually adequate, sedation may be required for
midline of the vaginal floor, and advance it to the lumen
uncooperative cats. Appropriate caution should be taken
of the urinary bladder.
in the selection of sedatives, in order to prevent alter-
ations in the diagnostic, physical, and chemical compo-
Indications for indwelling transurethral
nents of urine. Extend the penis from the preputial sheath
catheters
by pulling it in a caudal direction. Wash the end of the
Indwelling catheters should generally be used only dur-
ing intensive care of critically ill patients when continu-
ous measurement of urine production is required, and
during the initial management period following relief of 
urethral obstruction. In this situation, the purpose of the
catheter is to assure urethral patency and prevent con-
tinued urine retention. The three main situations where
(b)
indwelling catheters are used following the initial relief
of urethral obstruction are (1) lack of a relatively normal
urine stream, (2) persistence of intraluminal material or
extraluminal compression likely to cause re-obstruction,
and (3) loss of detrusor muscle contractility and over
H
distention of the bladder that has resulted in ineffective
micturition despite urethral patency. If these abnormal-
ities do not exist following relief of urethral obstruc-
tion, indwelling catheterization is usually unnecessary
Figure 5.8 Catheterization of a male cat. The penis has been
and should be avoided.
extended from the preputialsheathbypulling it in a caudal position
 If indwelling catheters are employed, closed drainage
(a). The natural curvature of the caudal portion of the urethra
 systems should be used. Even if an antimicrobial drug
is then minimized by displacing the extended penis in a dorsal
is administered, UT1 may still develop. Therefore, the
direction with the objective of aligning the long axis of the urethra
catheter should be removed as soon as it has served
with the long axis of the vertebral column (b).
its purpose and bacterial urine culture should then be
The ins and outs of urine collection 39
obtained to detect iatrogenic infection. Urine retention
caused by neurogenic disorders of urinary tract func-
tion (e.g-, spinal cord disease, reflex dyssynergia, etc.) is
optimally managed by manual compression of the blad-
der to expel the urine, or by intermittent catheterization.
 Indwelling catheterization is the least desirable method
 of combating urine retention in these situations because
of the likelihood of iatrogenic infection and trauma.
Cystocentesis (Figures 5.9 and 5.10)
Cystocentesis is a form of paracentesis, consisting of nee-
dle puncture of the urinary bladder for the purpose
of removing a variable quantity of urine by aspiration.
Extensive clinical experience has revealed that correctly
performed cystocentesis is of great diagnostic and ther-
Figure 5.10 Schematic drawing illustrating the escape of urine
through the bladder wall adjacent to the needle tract as a result
apeutic value. This technique is usually associated with
of excessive digital pressure used to localize and immobilize the
a lesser risk of iatrogenic infection than catheterization
bladder. S represents skin of the abdominal wall, and B represents
and is often better tolerated by patients (especially cats
the wall of the urinary bladder.
and female dogs) than catheterization.
-  m s    sn 
vent contamination of urine samples with bacteria, cells,
of the urinary system, when urethral obstruction or her-
etc. from the lower urogenital tract, to aid in localization 
 niation of the urinary bladder prevents normal micturi-
of hematuria, pyuria, and bacteriuria, and to minimize
tion. It is frequently used to decompress the urinary tract
iatrogenic UTl caused by catheterization, especially in
of obstructed male cats and dogs prior to reverse flush-
patients with diseases that predispose them to bacterial
ing or other nonsurgical techniques designed to restore
 UTI. Therapeutic cystocentesis may be employed to pro-
 patency of the urethral lumen.
vide temporary decompression of the excretory pathway
Contraindications
The main contraindications to cystocentesis are: (a) an
insufficient volume of urine in the urinary bladder, and
(b) the patient's resistance to restraint and abdominal
palpation. Blind cystocentesis performed without digital
localization and immobilization of the urinary bladder
is usually unsuccessful, and may cause damage to the
bladder or adjacent structures. Cystocentesis of patients
with recent cystotomy incisions should be performed
with appropriate caution. In our experience, collection
of urine by cystocentesis from patients with bacterial
UTI has not been associated with a detectable spread of
infection outside the urinary tract. In fact, collection of
a urine sample for bacterial culture that has not been
contaminated by passage through the urethra and geni-
tal tract is a frequent reason for performing cystocentesis.
The major diagnostic limitation of cystocentesis is that
it is frequently associated with varying degrees of micro-
scopic hematuria. The magnitude of hematuria induced
Figure 5.9 Schematic illustration of cystocentesis in a cat. A 22-
by cystocentesis is greatest in patients with inflammation
gauge 3-in. spinal needle has been inserted through the ventral
and/or congestion of the urinary bladder. Therefore, cys-
wall of the urinary bladder at an oblique angle. The point of inser-
 tocentesis is not recommended for monitoring remission
tion is several centimeters cranial to the junction of the bladder
 of microscopic hematuria originating from the urinary
with the urethra.
bladder following diagnosis.
40  Diagnostic testing
Equipment
tal localization and immobilization, the patient may be
given oral fluids or a diuretic. Although diuretics such as
We routinely use 22-gauge needles. Depending on the
furosemide may be used to facilitate collection of urine-
size of the patient and the distance of the ventral bladder
wall from the ventral abdominal wall, 1.5-in. hypoder-
samples by increasing urine formation, alteration of urine
 specific gravity and urine pH are notable drawbacks of
mic or 3-in. spinal needles can be used. Small-capacity
this procedure. Even the quantity of bacteria per milliliter
(~2-12 mL) syringes are usually employed for diagnostic
 of urine may be significantly reduced, thereby altering the
cystocentesis, while large-capacity (20-60 mL) syringes,
results of quantitative urine cultures. Use of diuretics to
separated from the hypodermic needle by an intravenous
enhance urine collection by augmenting urine flow is
extension set and a two-way or three-way valve, are used
for therapeutic cystocentesis.
therefore best suited for serial urine sample collection in
situations where information about urine specific grav-
ity, urine pH, and semi-quantitative evaluation of routine
Site
test components is not significant.
The risk to the patient can be minimized by careful plan-
ning of the site and direction of the needle puncture of
Techniques of cystocentesis
the bladder wall. Some clinicians recommend insertion
of the needle into the dorsal wall of the bladder to mini-
In order to minimize the risk to the patient, careful plan-
mize gravity-induced leakage of urine into the peritoneal
ning of the site and direction of needle puncture is essen-
cavity following withdrawal of the needle. However, we
tial. The bladder must contain a sufficient volume of urine
recommend that the needle be inserted in the ventral or
 to permit immobilization and localization by palpation.
ventrolateral wall of the bladder in order to minimize
Excessive hair should be removed with scissors or clip-
the chance of trauma to the ureters and major abdomi-
pers. The ventralabdominal skin penetrated by the needle
nal vessels (Figure 5.9). If therapeutic cystocentesis is to
should be cleansed with an antiseptic solution each time
be performed, we recommend insertion of the needle a
skin is usuall unnecessary. Appropriate caution should
short distance cranial to the junction of the bladder with
the urethra, rather than at the vertex of the bladder. This
be taken to avoid iatrogenic trauma and/or infection of
will permit removal of the urine and decompression of
the urinary bladder and surrounding structures.
 In cats, it is usually easiest to perform the procedure
the bladder without the need for reinsertion of the needle
into the bladder lumen. If the needle is placed in, or adja-
with the patient in lateral or dorsal recumbancy. In
cent to, the vertex of the bladder, it may not remain within
large dogs, the procedure may also be performed when
the bladder lumen as the bladder progressively decreases
 the patient is standing. In order to enhance recovery
in size following aspiration of urine. We also recommend
of crystalline material that may have gravitated to the
that the needle be directed through the bladder wall at an
dependent portion of the bladder lumen, urine within the
angle of approximately 45° so that an oblique needle tract
bladder may be gently agitated via abdominal palpation
is created (Figure 5.9). By directing the needle through
just prior to cystocentesis. Elevating the rear of the dog
by lifting with the legs ( wheelbarrow position) may help.
the bladder wall in an oblique fashion, the elasticity of the
vesical musculature and the interlacing arrangement of
 Following localization and immobilization of the urinary
individual muscle fibers will provide better sealing of the
bladder, the needle should be inserted through the ventral
abdominal walland advanced to the caudoventral aspect
small pathway created by the needle when it is removed.
In addition, subsequent distension of the bladder wall (as
of the bladder. The precise location of entry of the needle
the lumen refills with urine) tends to force the walls of
into the bladder wall is not critical. The needle should
the needle tract into apposition in a fashion somewhat
be inserted through the bladder wall at an oblique angle.
analagous to the flap valve of the ureterovesical junction.
If a large quantity of urine is to be aspirated, the needle
should be directed so that it will enter the bladder lumen
a short distance cranial to the junction of the bladder with
Precystocentesis considerations
the urethra. While the needle and bladder are immobi-
Insertion and withdrawal of a 22-gauge needle through
lized, urine should be gently aspirated into the syringe.
the walls ofthe abdomen and bladder cause only marginal
discomfort. Hence, tranquilization, general anesthesia,
bladder wall while the needle is in its lumen, in order to
and local anesthesia are rarely required for diagnostic
 prevent urine from being forced around the needle into
or therapeutic cystocentesis. If the urinary bladder does 
the peritoneal cavity (Figure 5.10). When the ventral
 nd   j a ts   
 surface of the bladder wall is more than 1-1.25 in. from
The ins and outs of urine collection  41
the ventral abdominal wall, the use of a 3-in. spinal
of all urine formed during a known period of time. A
needle rather than a 1.5-in. hypodermic needle facilitates
metabolism cage is frequently used to collect all urine
immobilization of the urinary bladder without puling it
formed during a 24-hour interval, in order to deter-
mine the quantity of electrolytes or hormones (cortisol
tity of urine for analysis and/or bacterial culture should
metabolites, etc.) excreted per day. For the best results,
be aspirated into the syringe. If disease of the bladder
two or more 24-hour collections should be performed
wall or virulence of urinary pathogens are likely risks
after the patient has had one or more days to adapt to
for complications associated with loss of urine into the
 the metabolism cage. Also, the urinary bladder should be
 peritoneal cavity, the bladder should be emptied as com-
emptied with the aid of a urinary catheter at the begin-
pletely as is consistent with atraumatic technique. These
ning and at the end of each timed collection period.
 potential complications have not been a problem in our
Oral or parenteral administration of appropriate antimi-
 patients.
crobial agents at least 8 hours prior to catheterization
and for 2-3 days following catheterization, will mini-
Postcystocentesis considerations
 mize the likelihood of catheter-induced bacterial urinary
tract infections.
The need for prophylactic antibacterial therapy follow-
Normal 24-hour urine volume is variable. It is influ-
ing cystocentesis must be determined on the basis of the
enced by water consumption, dietary moisture, dietary
status of the patient and retrospective evaluation of the
ingredients that affect urine concentrating capacity, envi-
technique. In most instances, it is not required. In order
ronmental conditions, and activity of the patient. Nor-
to minimize contamination of the peritoneal cavity with
mal dogs produce approximately 12-30 mL of urine per
urine, unnecessary digital pressure should not be applied
pound of body weight every 24 hours. Normal cats pro-
to the urinary bladder immediately following cystocen-
duce approximately 4.5-9.0 mL of urine per pound of
tesis.
body weight every 24 hours.
Postcystocentesis complications
Other than hematuria, we have not observed antemortem
Endnotes
 complications. Potential complications include damage
1. Available from Rusch, Inc., 2450 Meadowbrook Parkway, Duluth,
to the bladder wall or adjacent structures with the needle,
Georgia 30136.
local or generalized peritonitis, vesicoperitoneal fistulas,
2. Available from Baxter-Edwards Laboratories, Inc., P.O. Box 1l150,
adhesion of adjacent structures to the bladder wall, and
Santa Ana, California 92711.
sudden collapse (Koch et al. 2001). We have encountered
3. Polypropylene catheters, Sherwood Medical Industries, Inc., St.
Louis, Missouri 63 103.
a few instances in which penetration of a loop of intes-
4.
. Sterile disposable feeding tube and urethral catheter, Sherwood
 tine by the needle has resulted in false-positive significant
Medical Industries, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri 63 103.
bacteriuria. Varying degrees of microscopic hematuria
 5. Tomcat catheter, Sherwood Medical Industries, Inc., St. Louis, Mis-
are expected for a short period of time following cysto-
souri 63 103.
centesis, especially if the needle passes through an area of
6. Available from Ejay International, Inc., P.O. Box 1835, Glendora,
active inflammation.
California 91740.
 7. Available from Wysong Medical Corporation, 4925 Jefferson Ave.,
Midland, Michigan 48640.
Samples for quantitative versus qualitative
 8. Available from Arnold's Veterinary Products Ltd., 14 Tessa Road,
Richfield Avenue, Reading, England RGl 8NF.
analysis
9. Anestacon, Conal Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Chicago, Illinois 60640.
Xylocaine 2% Jelly, Astra Pharmaceutical Products, Inc., Westbor-
Urine samples collected without considering the rate
 Ough, Massachusetts 01581. Uro-Jet Delivery System (2% lidocaine
 of urine formation (i.e., number of mililiters per unit
HC1 Jelly), International Medications Systems Ltd., 1886 Santa
of time) are only suitable for qualitative and semi-
Anita Ave., South Elmonte, California 91733.
quantitative evaluation of substances, because the con-
centration of any solute will vary with the quantity of
References
water being excreted at that time. Samples for routine
analysis are usually collected in this fashion.
Barsanti, J.A., et al. (1985). Urinary tract infection due to indwelling
Collection of urine specimens during a specified
bladder catheters in dogs and cats. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 187: 384-
388.
period of time is required for quantitative analysis. Quan-
Douglas, C., et al. ( 1990). Microwave: practical cost-effective method
titative renal function tests (glomerular filtration rate,
for sterilizing urinary catheters in the home. Urology 35: 219-
dearances of various analytes, etc.) require collection
222.
42
Diagnostic testing
Feeney, D.A., et al. (1983). Vesicoureteral reflux induced by manual
Lees, G.E., et al. (l98l). Adverse effects of open indwelling ure-
compression of the urinary bladder of dogs nod cats. JAm Vet Med
thral catheterization in normal male cats. Arm I Vet Res 42U: 825-
Assoc 182: 795-797.
833.
Garner, D. and M.M. Laks (1976). Technique for the performance of
Osborne, C.A. (1985). Techniques of urine collction and preserva-
repeatable urine clearances in the conscious male dog. Nephron 16:
tion. In: Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A.
143-147.
Osborne and D.R. Finco. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins,
Koch, A.J., et al. (200l). Severe bradyarrhythmia in a patient with
Pp. 100-121.
Alzheimer's disease and a patient with cerebral ischemia, both
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 1972). Carine and Feline Urology. Philadelphia,
induced by acute distension of the bladder. Int I Clin Pract 55:
PA: WB Saunders.
323-325.
Osborne, C.A. and J.B. Stevens ( 1981). Handbook of Canine and Feline
Lees, G.E. and C.A. Osborne (1984). Use and misuse of indwelling
Urimalysis. St. Louis, MO: Ralston Purina Co.
urinary catheters in cats. Vet Clin North A 14: 599-608.
Wysong, R.L. (1983) A new indwelling tomcat urethral catheter. Vet
Lees, G.E., et al. ( 1980). Adverse effects caused by polypropylene and
Med Small Anim Clirn 78: 703-708.
polyvinyl feline urinary catheters. Am J Vet Res 41: 1836-1840.
6
Nephropyelocentesis and antegrade pyelography
Silke Hecht
Dilatation of the renal pelvis can result from obstruc-
A sterile 2.5-3.5-inch (6.4-8.9 cm), 22-25-gauge spinal
tion, or it can be related to a variety of nonobstruc-
needle is advanced into the renal pelvis at a 45° angle
tive disorders including pyelonephritis (Pugh et al. 1994;
through the greater curvature of the renal parenchyma,
Felkai et al. 1995; Confer and Panciera 2001). Imaging-
opposite the renal hilus (Ling et al. 1979; Figure 6.1).
guided interventional procedures (nephropyelocentesis
The procedure can be performed freehand. Use of a
and antegrade pyelography) may be considered in cases
biopsy guide attached to the transducer is preferred by
where a diagnosis of pyelonephritis or obstructive pyelec-
 some as it allows visualization of the needle path prior
        
to insertion of the needle. After successful positioning of
descriptions of these techniques, fluoroscopy was uti-
the needle tip in the renal pelvis, the stylet is removed,
lized to guide a needle into a dilated renal pelvis fol-
a syringe or a syringe equipped with an extension set is
lowing excretory urography (Ling et al. 1979; Ackerman
attached to the needle, and fluid is aspirated from the
et al. 1980). Disadvantages of this method include the
renal pelvis.
need for intravenous administration of contrast medium
A technique for ultrasound-guided drainage  for
and associated risks of adverse effects, radiation expo-
treatment of pyelonephritis (pyonephrosis) in dogs is
sure of the examiner, and the presence of iodinated con-
described below (Szatmari et al. 2001). After administra-
trast material in the sample obtained from the renal
tion of a broad-spectrum antibiotic to prevent puncture-
pelvis. With increasing use of ultrasonography in the 
associated sepsis, a large-bore (18-gauge or larger) IV
diagnosis of urinary tract disorders, ultrasound-assisted
 catheter or pigtail catheter is inserted percutaneously
interventional procedures have become commonplace
using the trocar or Seldinger technique. For the trocar
(Penninck and Finn-Bodner 1998; Nyland et al. 2002;
technique, the trocar pigtail catheter is introduced per-
D'Anjou 2008).
cutaneously and advanced to the correct depth under
ultrasound guidance. The inner stylet is removed, and
 the catheter is deployed by advancing the catheter over
Nephropyelocentesis
 the outer stylet. The outer stylet is then removed, and the
It is beneficial to perform laboratory analysis and (bac-
 catheter is secured. For the Seldinger technique, a needle
terial) culture on samples obtained directly from a
is introduced into the renal pelvis under ultrasound guid-
dilated renal pelvis especially in cases of chronic or ther-
ance, a working wire is passed through the needle, and the
apy resistant urinary tract infections. Ultrasound-guided
 needle is removed. The drainage catheter and stiffener are
then advanced over the wire, the catheter is deployed, the
sedation, although general anesthesia might be required
stylet and wire are removed, and the catheter is secured.
in some animals. On the basis of the examiner's prefer
After as much pus as possible has been aspirated from
ence, the animal is positioned in dorsal or lateral recum-
the renal pelvis, a 1:9 solution of povidone iodine in
bency, and the skin is clipped and aseptically prepared.
 0.9% NaCl is injected into the renal pelvis using the same
catheter and then the catheter is removed. The volume
of lavage solution should be approximately 50-60% of
 the volume aspirated during nephropyelocentesis. The
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
lavage procedure is repeated until the solution appears
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
43
44  Diagnostic testing
Figure 6.2 Antegrade pyelography of the left kidney in a cat
Figure 6.1 Ultrasound-guided pyelocentesis in a cat. Note the
to rule out ureteral obstruction. Moderate dilation of renal pelvis
placement of the needle (arrows) in the dilated renal pelvis (P)
and proximal ureter and irregularity/tortuosity of the ureter are
(From D'Anjou 2008. Reprinted with permission.)
consistent with pyelonephritis and ureteritis and/or ureteral scar-
ring/fibrosis. There is no evidence of ureteral obstruction. (Note
the small size of the right kidney due to chronic renal disease.)
grossly clear. Following the procedure, the catheter is
removed. Ultrasound-guided drainage and lavage of the
renal pelvis should be repeated daily until the renal pelvis
ing risk of adverse reactions to contrast medium, which
is so small that it can no longer be punctured.
is beneficial especially in patients with preexisting renal
insufficiency (Fox et al. 1993). The procedure should be
 performed under general anesthesia. Patient preparation
Antegrade pyelography
and needle placement in the dilated renal pelvis are per-
 Differentiating obstructive from nonobstructive pyelec-
formed as described above. Nephropyelocentesis is per-
tasia is important, since obstructive uropathies require
formed until the transverse diameter of the renal pelvis
is reduced to approximately 50% of its original diameter.
early intervention to prevent progressive deterioration of
A volume of aqueous, iodinated contrast media equal to
renal function (Fink et al. 1980; Andren-Sandberg 1983).
one-half of the aspirated volume of urine is then infused
 Several imaging modalities have been described to aid in
under direct ultrasonographic visualization ( Rivers et al.
the diagnosis of ureteral obstruction in dogs and cats.
1997). Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs are obtained
Survey radiographs may show a ureteral calculus, but
 do not give information about the presence or degree of
    s   
ureteral obstruction (Kyles et al. 2005). Excretory urogra-
medium (Figure 6.2).
 phy may show dilatation of renal pelvis and ureter prox-
The most common complication of this procedure
 is leakage of contrast material from the retroperitoneal
imal to the obstructive lesion, but opacification of the
space or renal pelvis, preventing proper flling of the
affected kidney and ureter can be poor if renal function
is decreased (Hardie and Kyles 2004). Ultrasonography
ureter and potentially rendering a nondiagnostic study.
 Other potential complications include laceration of the
has a high sensitivity for the detection of pyelectasia and
renal pelvis, subcapsular hemorrhage, hemorrhage into
obstructive ureteral calculi but lacks diagnostic informa-
the renal pelvis, and ureteral obstruction with blood clot
following the procedure (Rivers et al. 1997; Adin et al.
et al. 1995; Kyles et al. 2005). Initial studies investigat-
2003).
ing diuretic renal scintigraphy in dogs and cats with
ureteral obstruction have been promising (Hecht et al.
2006; Hecht et al. 2010), but the procedure is limited
References
Ackerman, N., et al. (1980). Percutaneous nephropyelocentesis and
and studies investigating accuracy of this procedure are
antegrade ureterography: a fluoroscopically assisted diagnostic tech-
lacking.
nic in canine urology. Vet Radiol 21(3): 117-122.
Ultrasound-guided antegrade pyelography has been
Adin, C.A., et al. (2003). Antegrade pyelography for suspected ureteral
used in the diagnosis and localization of ureteral obstruc-
obstruction in cats: 1l cases (1995-2001). I Arm Vet Med Assoc
222(11): 1576-1581.
tion in dogs and cats (Rivers et al. 1997; Adin et al.
Andren-Sandberg, A. ( 1983). Permanent impairment of renal function
2003). The procedure has the advantage of good contrast-
demonstrated by renographic follow-up in ureterolithiasis. Scand J
 medium flling of renal pelvis and ureter while minimiz-
Urol Nephrol 17(1): 8 1-84.
Nephropyelocentesis and antegrade pyelography 4
45
Confer, A.W. and R.J. Panciera (200l). The urinary system. In: Thom-
Kyles, A.E., et al. (2005). Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic,
and ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats with ureteral cal-
Carlton, and J.F. Zachary, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, Pp.
culi: 163 cases (1984-2002). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226(6): 932-
235-277.
936.
D'Anjou, M.A. (2008). Kidneys and ureters. In: Atlas of Small Amimal
Ling, G.V, et al. (1979). Percutaneous nephropyelocentesis and
Ultrasonography, edited by D.G. Penninck and M.A. d'Anjou. Ames,
nephropyelostomy in the dog: a description of the technique. Am I
IA: Blackwell Publishing, Pp. 339-364.
Vet Res 40( 11): 1605- 1612.
Felkai, C., et al. ( 1995). Lesions of the renal pelvis and proximal ureter
Nyland, T.G., et al. (2002). Urinary Tract. In: Small Animal Diagmostic
in various nephro-urological conditions: an ultrasonographic study.
Ultrasound, edited by T.G. Nyland and J.S. Mattoon, 2nd edition.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36(5): 397-401.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 158- 195.
Fink, R.L., et al. ( 1980). Renal impairment and its reversibility follow-
Penninck, D.G. and S.T. Finn-Bodner (1998). Updates in interven-
ing variable periods of complete ureteric obstruction. Aust N Z I
tional ultrasonography. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28(4):
Surg 50(1): 77-83.
1017-1040.
Fox, L.E., et al. (1993). Urinary obstruction secondary to a retroperi-
 Pugh, C.R., et al. (1994). Iatrogenic renal pyelectasia in the dog. Vet
toneal carcinoma in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 34(3): 181-184.
Radiol Ultrasound 35( 1): 50-51.
 Hardie, E.M. and A.E. Kyles (2004). Management of ureteral obstruc-
Rivers, B.J., et al. ( 1997). Ultrasonographic-guided, percutaneous ante-
tion. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 34(4): 989-1010.
grade pyelography: technique and clinical application in the dog and
cat. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 33: 61-68.
with urolithiasis (abstract). IVRA/ACVR/ECVDI Scientific Meeting,
Szatmari, V., et al. (2001). Ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage
August 7-11, 2006, Vancouver, Canada.
for treatrment of pyonephrosis in two dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
Hecht, S., et al. (2010). 9mTc-DTPA diuretic renal scintigraphy in cats 
218(11): 1796-1799.
with nephroureterolithiasis. J Fel Med Surg 12(6): 423-430.
Urinalysis
Michael M. Fry
"Urinalysis is the best bargain in veterinary medicine."
reader is asked to keep in mind that full, accurate interpre-
Dr. Jeanne W. George
tation of urinalysis results requires the clinician to inte-
 grate these findings with all the available patient data,
Introduction
including history, physical examination, clinical signs,
and results of other diagnostic tests.
The aim of this chapter is to provide a concise overview
of routine urinalysis in dogs and cats, with an empha-
sis on the most important analytical aspects. The chap-
In-house versus send-out testing
ter will also consider preanalytical sample variables that
It makes sense for most veterinary practices to do uri-
may influence urinalysis results, as well as preanalytical
 patient variables other than those related to disease. Sam-
nalysis in-house, from the standpoint of both practice
economics and quality of care. The test requires only
pling techniques, expected urinalysis results with various
basic laboratory supplies (Table 7.1), and can be per-
diseases, other tests performed on urine, and recom-
formed easily by clinic technical staff if they are prop-
mended therapy are covered elsewhere in this text. Excel-
erly trained—thus, it is an inexpensive and technically
lent resources are available to readers who want more
feasible test to perform (Table 7.2). By doing urinalysis
comprehensive information about urinalysis in small ani-
in-house rather than sending samples to a commercial
mals (Osborne and Stevens 1999; Osborne and Stevens
diagnostic laboratory, practices can offer the test at an
2006; Wamsley and Alleman 2007).
Together with a complete blood count and a serum
affordable cost to the client and still make a reasonable
profit. In-house testing is also preferred because of the
or plasma biochemical profle, urinalysis is considered
faster turnaround time and greater accuracy of results,
 nalysis provides information about renal concentrating
since delayed analysis is a potential source of introduced
error (see Preanalytical sample variables, below). Another
ability, glomerular permeability, other processes involv-
ing the urinary system (e.g-, crystalluria, inflammation,
advantage of in-house testing is that results can be cor-
related more easily with the rest of the patient's clinical
infection, hemorrhage, and tubular damage), and pro-
cesses involving other body systems (e.g-, carbohydrate
picture.
metabolism, intravascular hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis,
and acid-base disturbances). Urinalysis is indicated to
Preanalytical sample variables
help determine a diagnosis in virtually all ill patients, to
monitor progression of disease and/or response to therapy in
Ideally, a urine sample submitted for analysis will be free
 patients with known disease, and to screen asymptomatic
of any contaminants, collected in a clean, opaque, air-
individuals for underlying disease (e.g-, as part of pre-
tight and sterile container and analyzed within 60 min-
anesthetic evaluation or annual wellness examination or
utes of collection. However, as this is not always the case,
in individuals with a genetic or environmental predispo-
the clinician should consider the influence of preanalyti-
sition to diseases with urinary manifestations). Although
cal sample (i.e., nonbiologic) variables when interpreting
this chapter is not intended as an interpretive guide, the
urinalysis results. The most important of these variables
are the collection method and, if the sample is not ana-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
lyzed immediately, the storage time and conditions. The
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
collection method is particularly relevant with regard to
46
Urinalysis   47
Table 7.1 Urinalysis supplies
Equipment
· Centrifuge
●Refractometer—-preferably a temperature-compensated veterinary model with a feline-specific scale for urine-specific gravity
·Microscope-
—set to optimize contrast for unstained samples
·+/- Automated dipstick reader (optional)
Disposables
 Specimen container—should be clean, opaque, air-tight, sterile
· Disposable pipettes
· Conical centrifuge tubes 
●Urine dipsticks
·Glasslides and coverslips
●+/- Sediment stain (optional)
potential contamination of the urine sample. For exam-
teroids and diuretics interfere with renal concentrating
ple, samples collected by cystocentesis typically have a
 ability; corticosteroids may cause proteinuria; antimicro-
small amount of iatrogenic blood contamination; voided
 bials may mask urinary tract infections or form crystals;
samples often contain contaminants from the lower uro-
hydroxyethyl starch interferes with measurement of spe-
 genital tract (e.g-, bacteria, epithelial cells, spermatozoa,
cific gravity, and radiographic contrast agents may inter-
and blood) or the environment (e.g-,bacteria, plant mate-
fere with measurement of specific gravity or biochemical
i    ss s  
analytes or may form crystals.
zation may contain lower urogenital tract contaminants
or iatrogenic hemorrhage; and samples obtained from
the floor or examination table or from a litter box lined
Components of routine urinalysis
with nonabsorbent material are often contaminated with
microbes and debris. Storage time and conditions may
 Basic components of routine urinalysis include descrip-
also affect urinalysis results. For example, refrigeration
tion of gross appearance and odor of the urine (odor is
may promote crystal formation; prolonged storage of
 typically not reported by commercial laboratories), mea-
samples at room temperature may result in degeneration
surement of urine specific gravity using a refractometer,
of cells and casts, altered crystal formation, or bacterial
measurement of urine biochemistry using a commercial
overgrowth and resultant secondary artifacts (e.g-, altered
multi-analyte dipstick, and microscopic examination of
pH and decreased glucose concentration); and exposure
urine sediment. Table 7.2 provides a step-by-step pro-
to light or air may alter the composition of the sample as
cedural guide to urinalysis, and Figure 7.l provides a
a result of photodegradation, oxidation or evaporation.
sample reporting form. Each component of urinalysis is
discussed in more detail below.
Preanalytical patient variables
Gross appearance and odor of urine
Other chapters in this text discuss the influence of dis-
ease on urinalysis results. This chapter's mention of the
 s sd   adde ss a
influence of preanalytical patient (i.e., biologic) variables
mation about the composition of the sample. Normal
on urinalysis results will be limited to common physio-
logic variables or introduced variables related to treatment
low in color, and transparent to faintly cloudy. Highly
or diagnosis. Physiologic variables that commonly affect
concentrated urine is darker than more dilute urine,
urinalysis results include diet, time of day, and reproduc-
although color is not a reliable indicator of renal con-
tive factors. For example, diet may influence urine pH
 centrating ability. High number of cells or bacteria may
or crystal formation; samples collected first thing in the
impart turbidity, and blood, free hemoglobin, myo-
morning tend to be more concentrated, and may have
globin, or bilirubin may impart discoloration. Urine odor
altered cellular morphology or microbial viability; and
 may also provide clues about pathology-for example,
estrus or recent breeding may influence microscopic find-
an ammoniacal odor suggests the presence of urease-
ings. Introduced patient variables that commonly affect
 producing bacteria, and a fruity odor suggests the pres-
urinalysis results include administration of drugs, flu-
ence of ketones-but odor is considered a nonspecific and
ids, or other exogenous agents. For example, corticos-
 generally an unreliable diagnostic indicator of disease.
48  Diagnostic testing
Table 7.2 Urinalysis procedure
Sample submission
● Make sure the specimen identification matches the request/reporting form(s)
● The specimen container should be labeled with the patient's name or number and the date.
·The request/reporting form(s) should include the following information
● The patient's name or ID number and signalment.
· The date.
●The time and method of urine collection.
(suabe iseuos siydeiboen 'shnsp "b'a) suabe ssouneip so snadeiaun suaai no juans ur 
● If the same sample is to be used for urine culture, the portion for culture should be removed first into a sterile container (after gently mixing the
sample) to avoid subsequent contamination.
Analysis
· General
· Record the time the urinalysis is performed.
· Record whether the sample has been refrigerated—if so, allow it to reach room temperature before proceeding.
· Gently mix the sample by inverting the container at least 5 times.
●Transfer 5 ml wellmixed urine to a clear conical centrifuge tube, saving the remainder of the sample for any further testing that may be
 indicated; if there is <5ml, then transfer the entire available volume to the conical tube.
·Record the gross appearance of the urine in the conical tube.
·Dipstick biochemistry
● Individuals performing urinalysis should read the dipstick package insert for details of the recommended procedure for that particular
product. These instructions assume that dipstick results will be evaluated by direct visual inspection. If using an automated dipstick analyzer,
consult the manufacturer for the recommended procedure.
eai au buwn pes kaeaww ynsdp ay aaowai aidwes panguasun aunn paxwili au ui sped puabeai ynsdip le asiawwl 
and drag the edge of the reagent strip against the rim of the tube to remove any excess urine and help prevent cross-contamination of
reagents (which may cause erroneous results).
●Allow the specified time to elapse, then immediately read the results by using the color key provided by the dipstick manufacturer. Typically.
the incubation time and the color key are printed on the dipstick container label.
·Record dipstick results for the following tests:
·Protein
PH
Blood
· Glucose
·Ketones
·Bilirubin
The folwing dipsticktests are eithernreliable,inferiortoother ests that are part of urinalsisorof itle clinical significance in ds
and cats and should not be recorded: specific gravity, leukocytes, nitrite, urobilinogen.)
Joj mojaq aas) aldwes pabnjuuan e woy jueieuadns ayn buisn siskjeue ypnsdip jeadan 'piqint Aybiy jo Apooig Aissoib s! aldwes aun jl ●
centrifugation instructions).
 Specific gravity
●If the urine is clear (ie., not turbid),use a well-mixed uncentrifuged sample. If the urine is turbid, use the supernatant from a centrifuged
sample (see below for centrifugation instructions).
· Record the specific gravity of the urine.
·Urine sediment examination
● Centrifuge the 5 ml sample in the conical tube. The centrifuge should be set for 5 minutes at 1,500-2,0o0 rpm (or relative centrifugation
force of 450).
●Remove the supernatant by decanting or using a disposable transfer pipet, saving the supernatant for any further testing that maybe
indicated.
ay buyy Aq jo anadid jajsuen algesodsip e yr uosuadsns-al ay buxw 'sueeuadns u ls'o u! ,allad, pauawpas aui puadsns-ay o
tube with a finger. If <5 ml urine is centrifuged, then re-suspend the sediment in a proportionally smaller amount of supernatant (e.g., if 3
ml is centrifuged, re-suspend in 0.3-0.6 mL).
· Using a disposable pipette, transfer a small drop of the re-suspension to a clean glass microscope slide and place a glass coverslip over it.
There should be enough fluid to fll the area of the coverslip, but not enough to make it float.
·The microscope should be set up to optimize contrast. This can be accomplished easily by closing the condenser diaphragm (if the
microscope has one) or by lowering the condenser. Phase contrast microscopy also works well.
●Survey the entire slide at low power (1 0x objective), then examine representative fields at high power (40x-60x objective) to verify and
enhance observations made at lower power and to detect any bacteria.
· Record the results of microscopic examination of the urine sediment.
f dinically significant crystalluriaisoted inasamle thathasbeenrfrigeratd,ortored formore thaneveral hours under any conditins
microscopic examination should be repeated on a fresh, unrefrigerated sample.
Urinalysis 
49
Date:
 Patient information
Animal's name/Owmer's name
Patient ID#:
Age:
Species:
Breed:
Sex:
Intact/neutered:
Recent therapeutic or diagnostic agents administered?
Sample information
Time of collection:
Method of collection:
Was the sample refrigerated?
Sample also submitted for culture?
Gross appearance:
:JoPO
Dipstick results
pH
Protein
Glucose
Ketones
 Bilirubin
Refractometer specific gravity:
Sediment examination (# per 40x to 60x field)
Cells
RBCs
WBCs
Epithelial cells
Crystals/type(s)
Casts
Organisms
 Other (lipid, sperm, debris)
Figure 7.1 Example urinalysis reporting form.
50
  Diagnostic testing
Urine-specific gravity
Increasing amounts of blood (L to R):
Urine-specific
gravity
(USG) is an index
of
concentration—the higher the USG, the more concen-
None
Grossly
trated the urine—-and is measured using a refractometer
visible
(see Chapter 4l). Refractometers are not all the same,
and will not all yield identical results (George 2001).
Calibration scales for USG are different for humans
Dipstick results:
and animals, and notably so for cats. If a refractometer
Protein
with a scale calibrated for human urine is used for cat
Blood
urine, the measured value will be falsely increased; the
more concentrated the urine, the more pronounced the
(blank
difference. Although the magnitude of the difference
dipstick
is not great, it is potentially of clinical significance,
Figure 7.3 Urine dipstick results are semi-quantitative estimates
especially when the USG is near the threshold value for
based on the degree of color change in the reagent pads. This 
determining full concentrating ability. A feline urine
image illustrates the greater sensitivity of the blood reagent pad
sample with a USG of 1.034 will be measured as 1.040
compared to the protein reagent pad: the sample in the second
using a human scale, which potentially could lead a
tube from the right is negative for protein, but strongly positive
clinician to misinterpret the result as evidence of full
for blood.
concentrating ability. Any laboratory or veterinary
practice that performs urinalysis on feline samples
which underestimate USG as ambient temperature
should have a refractometer with a separate
eUSG
calibration scale for feline samples (Figure 7.2). As of
increases above 68°F.
 Marked proteinuria or glycosuria will cause a slight
2001, only two refractometers had a separate scale for
 overestimation of urine concentration. For every gram
feline USG: the Vet 360 manufactured by Misco Corp-,
 per deciliter present in the urine, protein will add approx-
and the Vet 360 manufactured by Leica (George 2001).
imately 0.003-0.005, and glucose willadd approximately
Temperature-compensated refractometers are preferred
0.004-0.005, to the USG value (Stockham and Scott
to those that are not temperature-compensated and
 2008). Intravenous administration of hetastarch in dogs
 causes a false increase in USG that is presumably transient
(Smart et al. 2009).
Temperature compensated
Urine S.G.
14
Urine biochemistry
Dog
Cat
Large animals 
13
=1.060
Urine biochemistry is routinely evaluated using the dip-
1.060
12
stick method. The degree of the color change on the
11
dipstick reagent pad correlates with the concentration
1.050
E10
1.050
of the analyte (Figure 7.3). Results are evaluated semi-
三
l
quantitatively, usually as negative, trace and 1+ to 4+;
1.040
8
the concentration ranges that correlate with the semi-
1.040
quantitative values are not identical for all dipsticks
1.030
(Stockham and Scott 2008). Results may be obtained
1.030
5
either by visual inspection of the dipstick or by an instru-
mlm
4
ment that scans the dipstick automatically. A recently
1.020
1.020
3
published study comparing visual and automated eval-
mll
2
uation methods found them similar in terms of results,
山
1.010
Serum
ease of use, and turnaround time (Bauer et al. 2008).
1.010
mlml
m
or plasma
The study noted that a clear advantage of the automated
Protein
method is the ability to transmit results electronically to
1.000
三1.000
 gms/100 mL
the laboratory information system, which not only saves
Figure 7.2 It is advisable to use a refractometer with a separate
urine specific gravity scale for feline samples. This is from a Reichert
transcriptional) error.
VET 360 model. (Used with permission by Reichert Technologies,
 In general, it is advisable to perform the urine dip-
Depew, NY.)
stick test on a well-mixed uncentrifuged sample, since
Urinalysis  51
cells or particles may not be present in the supernatant
stick reagent reacts only with certain ketones (acetoac-
of a centrifuged sample. Usually, it does not make much
etate and acetone, but not β-hydroxybutyrate).
difference whether dipstick assays are performed on a
well-mixed uncentrifuged sample or supernatant of a
Specific gravity
centrifuged sample. The dipstick method is inexpen-
The dipstick method is an unreliable means of measuring
sive, easy to use, and quite a reliable means of detect-
ing some urine abnormalities. Note that false-negative
specific gravity. Refractometry is the method of choice
or false-positive dipstick results may occur under some
(see above).
conditions and pigmenturia (abnormal urine color) may
interfere with interpretation of dipstick results. Readers
Blood (sometimes known as "blood
are strongly advised to consult the package insert for the
protein", "occult blood", or
urine dipstick used in their practice, and to familiarize
"heme", or "heme protein")
themselves with recommended protocol and recognized
The dipstick reagent for blood reacts with heme, and
interferents. The most common urine dipstick analytes
therefore yields a positive test result in cases of hema-
are listed below.
turia (erythrocytes lyse in contact with the reagent pad),
hemoglobinuria, or myoglobinuria—thus, it is impor-
pH
tant to correlate dipstick results with microscopic urine
 The dipstick method is an unreliable means of measuring
sediment findings and with the gross appearance of the
pH. If accurate measurement of urine pH is important, a
urine and plasma (see Chapter 46). This dipstick test is
pH meter should be used—-relatively inexpensive hand-
very sensitive, that is, it takes very little of any of these
held instruments are commercially available (Johnson
heme-containing substances to produce a positive result.
et al. 2007). Inaccuracy of the dipstick method is most
It is much more sensitive than the regular protein dipstick
likely to be of clinical significance when the urine pH is
test (see below). In the absence of any other abnormal
close to neutral. A recently published study in dogs found
protein in the urine, it typically takes a strongly positive
that the dipstick method tended to overestimate pH, in
blood result to cause a weakly positive regular protein
some cases yielding an alkaline result for a sample that
result, so it is common to have a positive result for the
had a mildly acidic urine as determined by the reference
former and a negative result for the latter (Figure 7.3).
method (Johnson et al. 2007).
Protein
Glucose
The dipstick method is quite a reliable means of detecting
The dipstick method is a reasonably accurate means of
 protein in the urine. The dipstick reagent reacts strongly
detecting glucose in the urine (glycosuria). Glycosuria
 with albumin, which is usual the predominant type
occurs whenever the renal tubular reabsorption thresh-
 of protein in the urine in cases of clinically significant
old is exceeded due to hyperglycemia, even if only tran-
 proteinuria, but does not react with some globulins (e.g--
siently, and may also occur due to defective renal tubular
Bence Jones proteins). Some evidence indicates that false-
function.
 positive results occur with alkaline urine, but at least one
recent study suggests that this occurs infrequently ( Welles
Bilirubin
et al. 2006). Trace to 1+ proteinuria may be found inci-
dentally in dogs with USG of ≥1.020 (but may also occur
The dipstick method is a reasonably accurate means of
 due to pathology); however, proteinuria is otherwise an
detecting conjugated bilirubin in the urine. Trace to mild
abnormal finding in dogs and is always an abnormal
bilirubinuria (1+ or occasionally higher in highly con-
finding in cats.
centrated urine) is within normal limits in dogs, most
 For many years, most laboratories have included
commonly in male dogs, but otherwise bilirubinuria is
 another semi-quantitative method, the sulfasalicylic acid
a pathologic finding. Bilirubinuria is expected in any
(SSA) precipitation test, as a component of routine
patient with abnormally high plasma concentration of
urinalysis, to verify urine dipstick protein findings. A
bilirubin in the plasma (hyperbilirubinemia).
 recently published study found the dipstick method to
be a more sensitive means of detecting proteinuria in
Ketones
dogs and cats than the SSA method, using a quanti-
The dipstick method is a common means of detecting
 tative microprotein assay as the basis for comparison.
ketoacidosis. A positive result is always an abnormal find-
The overall specificity of the dipstick and SSA tests were
ing. However, false negatives may occur because the dip-
 comparable, although the dipstick was more likely to
52
 Diagnostic testing
 o o (+  ) n m  e P
quantitative method (Welles et al. 2006). On the basis
of these findings, a similar study was done in our labo-
ratory, comparing protein values obtained using a dip-
stick method (Bayer Multistix 10 SG, Bayer Corporation,
 Elkhart, IN) or the SSA method with those obtained using
a quantitative method on our automated chemistry ana-
lyzer (Hitachi 91l analyzer; Roche Urinary/CSF Protein
reagent) and found the dipstick method to have higher
sensitivity than and equal specificity to the SSA method
as suon ou m (eiep pausndun) sieo pue sop u!
the SSA test in our laboratory for canine or feline urine
samples. Our recommendation is to do a quantitative
urine protein measurement and urine protein to creati-
Figure 7.4 Normal and crenated RBCs in unstained urine sedi-
  n  nd   o 
ment. (0sbome and Stevens 1999. Used with permission.)
significant proteinuria (see Chapter 8).
Recently, commercially available microalbuminuria
clinical pathologists and medical technologists prefer to
assays have become widely available for dog and cats.
examine unstained urine sediment, and with a properly
The microalbuminuria assay detects urinary albumin in
concentrations below the detection limits of the dipstick
than examining stained preparations. A rationale offered
and SSA methods—and it has been suggested that the
for this preference is that the disadvantages of using a
 microalbuminuria assay may be appropriate for use as a
urine sediment stain, especially the introduced varia-
screening test ( Whittemore et al. 2006, 2007). At present,
tion (dilution, variable staining quality, potential stain
however, a clear rationale for incorporating this assay
precipitation or contamination) outweigh the advan-
into the “minimum database" is lacking. (See Chapter 8
tages. However, there is evidence that a different type
 in this book for additional information on urine protein
of staining technique helps with detection of bacteri-
testing.)
uria: a blinded prospective study comparing routine
unstained wet-mounted preparations and air-dried mod-
Urobilinogen
ified Wright-stained preparations of urine sediment with
This test is of little clinical value.
results of quantitative urine culture found that this stain-
ing method improved sensitivity, specificity positive pre-
dictive value, and test efficiency (Swenson et al. 2004).
Nitrite
This principle is illustrated in Figure 7.7. Rapid stains
The dipstick method is an unreliable means of detecting
commonly used in the practice setting (e.g-, Diff-Quik
bacteria in urine and is of little clinical value.
Leukocytes
The dipstick method is an unreliable means of detect-
ing leukocytes in the urine, especially in cats. Micro-
scopic examination of the urine sediment is the method
of choice (see below).
Urine sediment evaluation
Much information can be gained from microscopic
examination of the urine sediment. Urine sediment
stains, stains that are mixed with urine sediment before
applying a drop of the resuspension to a glass slide and
10.0μm
coverslipping it, are commercially available, and novice
microscopists often find it easier to examine stained
rather than unstained “wet-mounted"” preparations. A
Figure 7.5 WBCs and bacterial rods in unstained urine sediment
good rule of thumb is to always look at the unstained
(the rods are in a slightly different focal plane and are out of focus
sediment first. It is the author's experience that most
in this image).
Urinalysis 53
20.0μm
50.0pm
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.6 (a), (b) Epithelial cells and RBCs in unstained urine sediment: (a) Individual epithelial cells found incidentally in a feline
sample: (b) Clustered epithelial cells found in a canine sample (further testing may be indicated to evaluate for possible urinary tract
neoplasia or other underlying disease).
or Camco) would be likely to confer a similar benefit.
nation) or in females in estrus. RBCs in increased num-
 Another approach to staining urine sediment is to use a
bers in the urine (hematuria) are indicative of a hemor-
microhematocrit tube to introduce new methylene blue
 rhage. It is within normal limits for RBCs in urine to have
under the coverslip of a wet mount by capillary action.
a crenated morphology.
Stained and unstained preparations can be placed side-
by-side on the same slide, allowing for a direct "before
and after" comparison.
Leukcocytes (Figure 7.5)
It is within normal limits to see low numbers (5/hpf) of
Erythrocytes (Figure 7.4)
leukocytes (white blood cells, WBCs) in urine. WBCs in
It is within normal limits to see low numbers (5/hpf) of
increased numbers in the urine (pyuria) indicate inflam-
erythrocytes (red blood cells, RBCs) in urine, or more in 
mation. Mildly increased numbers of WBCs in the urine
samples obtained by cystocentesis (iatrogenic contami-
may also occur as a result hematuria, but the increase is
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.7 (a), (b) Unstained and Wright-stained preparations of urine from a dog with transitional cell carcinoma and bacterial cystitis.
Staining helps with detection of bacteriuria.
54
 Diagnostic testing
50.0μm
50.0μm
(a)
(q)
20.0μm
(c)
[d)
[e]
(1)
Figure 7.8 (a-f), Examples of some of the more commonly encountered crystals in urine (unstained sediment) from small animals:
(a) struvite: (b) calcium oxalate dihydrate: (c) bilirubin: (d) calcium oxalate dihydrate (dosed arrow) and monohydrate (open arrows):
 pasiape ane siaea (uoissad ym pasn eat suaars pue auogo p) aen wnoe () ranepyouo arelexo wnpie (a)
consult other references (Osborne and Stevens 1999: Osbome and Stevens 2006) for more comprehensive crystalluria images, including 
images of rarely-encountered crystals.
Urinalysis   55
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.9 (a), (b) Low power (a) and 400x power (b) images of melamine-cyanuric acid crystals in unstained urine sediment from a cat.
(mages courtesy of Dr. Brent Hoff, Animal Health Laboratory, University of Guelph. Used with permission.)
 generall undetectable because the proportion of WBCs
from the floor, table, or litter box (mixed bacteria). It is
is so low compared to RBCs.
-s aq puqo sades u ssueo s on lou pou
tocentesis. Pyuria is expected in cases of UTI (see Chap-
Epithelial cells (Figures 7.6 and 7.7)
  a  s o   s
compromised patients. Not seeing any bacteria does not
It is within normal limits to see low numbers of epithe-
exclude the possibility ofa urinary tract infection (UTI).A
lial cells in urine samples. Normal epithelial cells include
transitional cells (urothelium) in samples obtained by
culture is a more sensitive means of detection (see Chap-
 ter 9). Fungi or parasite eggs may rarely be found in urine
cystocentesis, transitional cells and/or squamous epithe-
lial cells in voided samples or samples obtained by
samples as pathogens or contaminants (see Chapters 72
and 74).
catheter, and even rare renal tubular cells in any type of
sample. Large, atypical epithelial cells, or high numbers
of any type of epithelial cells, are an abnormal finding.
and may indicate further testing to evaluate for possible
urinary tract neoplasia or other underlying disease (see
Chapter 79).
Crystals (Figures 7.8 and 7.9)
20.0μm
 Urine crystals may be seen as an incidental finding (e.g-
monohydrate in ethylene glycol toxicity, ammonium biu-
rate in patients with portosystemic shunts, etc.). Crys-
talluria does not correlate highly with urolithiasis (see
Chapter 69). Some of the more commonly encountered
crystals in dogs and cats are shown in Figure 7.8. However,
it is worth keeping in mind that previously unreported
crystals may occur, as was the case with the recent out-
break of melamine and cyanuric acid contamination of
pet food (Figure 7.9).
Figure 7.10 Budding yeast in unstained urine sediment from a
Organisms (Figures 7.5, 7.7, and 7.10)
dog. Cryptococcus neoformans was cultured from this sample. The
It is within normal limits to see low numbers of bacteria
organism's characteristic narrow-based budding is evident, but its
in voided samples (especially cocci) or samples obtained
oeedaid siun u suaedde pou si ansden psuapeie
56
6 Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.11 (a-d) Examples of casts in unstained urine sediment: (a) mixed granular cast containing what appears to be a cel and
surrounding granular epithelial cells: (b) mixed granular and waxy cast: (c) hyaline cast and amorphous debris: (d) bilirubin-stained waxy
cast with surounding bilirubin crystals, fat droplets, and occasional cells. (a-c: Osborne and Stevens 1999. Used with permission.)
Casts (Figure 7.11)
Lipid (Figure 7.12)
Casts are cylinder-shaped forms that literally are casts
Fat droplets are occasionally noted in urine, most often
of the renal tubules (the tubular lumen acts as a mold);
 in cats, and are usually an incidental finding. They may
the presence of casts in the urine is sometimes called
be confused with bacterial cocci, but typically are of more
cylinduria. Casts are composed mainly of a mucoprotein
variable size than organisms.
( Tamm-Horsfall protein) secreted by cells lining certain
parts of the nephron, and often have cells incorporated
Debris (Figures 7.11c and 7.12)
within them. Casts are classified as cellular (individual
cells are discernible), granular (cells have partially dis-
Amorphous to granular debris is commonly seen in urine
integrated), waxy (cells have disintegrated and the casts
 as an incidental finding.
have a smooth, waxy texture), or hyaline (casts are acel-
lular, clear, and colorless). The presence of rare hyaline or
Spermatozoa (Figure 7.12)
 granular casts is considered within normal limits; other-
wise, cylinduria indicates urinary tract (usually tubular)
Spermatozoa are often present in urine from intact males
pathology.
(even in samples obtained by cystocentesis), and are occa-
 sionally noted in females after breeding.
Urinalysis  
57
Osborne, C.A. and J.B. Stevens. (1999). Urinalysis: A Clinical Guide to
Compassionate Patient Care. Shawnee Mission, Kansas: Bayer Cor-
poration.
Osborne, C.A. and J.B. Stevens. (2006). Urine Sedirment Reference
Guide. Shawnee Mission, Kansas: Bayer Corporation.
Smart, L., K. Hopper, et al (2009). The effect of hetastarch (670/0.75)
on specific gravity and osmolality of urine in the dog. I Vet Irtern
Med 23: 388-391.
Stockham, S.L. and M.A. Scott. (2008). Urinary system. In: Fur-
damentals of Veterinary Clinical Pathology, edited by S.L. Stock-
ham and M.A. Scott, 2nd edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell, pp. 415-
494.
Swenson, C., A. Boisvert, et al (2004). Evaluation of modified
Wright-staining of urine sediment as a method for accurate detec-
tion of bacteriuria in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 224: 1282-
Figure 7.12 Other common findings in urine sediment indlude
1289.
Wamsley, H. and R. Alleman. (2007). Complete urinalysis. In: BSAVA
lipid droplets, amorphous granular debris, and/or spermatozoa,
all of which are present in this image. Osborne and Stevens 1999.
Manual of Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by J.
Elliott and G.F. Grauer, 2nd edition. Waterwells, UK: British Small
Used with permission.)
 Animal Veterinary Association, pp. 87-116.
Welles, E., E. Whatley, et al. (2006). Comparison of Multistix PRO dip-
References
sticks with other biochermical assays for determining urine protein
(UP), urine creatinine (UC) and UP:UC ratio in dogs and cats. Vet
Bauer, N., S. Rettig, et al. (2008). Evaluation of the Clinitek status
Clin Pathol 35: 31-36.
Whittemore, J, V. Gill, et al (2006). Evaluation of the association
 trade mark automated dipstick analysis device for semi-quantitative
testing of canine urine. Res Vet Sci 85(3): 467-472.
between microalbuminuria and the urine albumin-creatinine ratio
George, I. (200l). The usefulness and limitations of hand-held refrac-
and systemic disease in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 229: 958-
tometers in veterinary laboratory medicine: a historical and techni-
963.
cal review. Vet Clin Pathol 30: 201-210.
Whittemore, I., Z. Miyoshi, et al. (2007). Association of microalbu-
Johnson, K., J. Lulich, et al. (2007). Evaluation of the reproducibility
minuria and the urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio with systemic
 and accuracy of pH-determining devices used to measure urine pH
disease in cats. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 230: 1165-1169.
in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 230: 364-369.
8
Urine protein and microalbuminuria
Mary B. Nabity
Normal urine should contain little protein, since the
Currently, the UPC is considered abnormal if >0.5 in an
glomerulus prevents large proteins from entering the
adult dog and >0.4 in an adult cat, although the UPC is
urine filtrate and the tubules reabsorb most small pro-
generally <0.2 in most healthy adult animals (Lees et al.
teins that pass through. In addition, tubules only secrete a
2005; Grauer et al. 1985). The UPC can be measured by
small amount of protein. Thus, protein normally present
 most reference laboratory chemistry analyzers. A bench
in urine is not detectable with common screening meth-
top chemistry analyzer is now available to the general
ods (urine dipstick, SSA; see Chapter 7) ( Table 8.1). When
 practitioner. In addition, semi-quantitative urine dip-
the dipstick is positive for proteinuria it is abnormal, and
sticks can be used to estimate the UPC in dogs (Welles
the next steps are to (1) confirm proteinuria if it is a trace
et al.2006)
or 1+ reaction (many advocate the SSA or microalbu-
Serial UPC measurements are recommended to estab-
minuria test as confirmatory tests), and (2) determine
lish persistence of proteinuria (defined as proteinuria
the origin of the protein. Before additional specific test-
detected on three separate occasions ≥ 2 weeks apart)
ing of the proteinuria is performed, it should be localized
 and to assess progression and treatment of renal disease.
to the kidney (rule out prerenal and postrenal causes of
When monitoring the UPC in dogs, one study suggests
 proteinuria), and the sediment should ideally be inactive
 that in order to determine if a value has changed from
(absence of hematuria, particularly gross hematuria, and
baseline (when the baseline is between 0.5 and 12), it
pyuria). However, if a large degree of proteinuria is found
must increase or decrease by a minimum of 35-80%
with an active sediment, it could indicate renal disease
with a higher percent change required at lower UPC
(Vaden et al. 2004). In this case, the proteinuria should
values (Nabity et al. 2007).
be re-evaluated after the sediment is cleared, if possible.
Qualitative evaluation of proteinuria
Quantitative evaluation of proteinuria
Qualitative evaluation of proteinuria refers to identifi-
Once the source of the protein has been localized to the
cation of specific proteins in the urine or patterns of
kidney, the degree of proteinuria should be quantified
proteins (as identified by proteomics techniques) rather
( Table 8.1) since the magnitude of proteinuria appears
than the magnitude of proteinuria. These proteins and
to correlate with worse disease and a poorer prognosis in
 protein patterns can help determine whether tubular
dogs and cats with chronic renal disease (see Chapters 43
and/or glomerular disease is present. Qualitative pro-
and 53) (Jacob et al. 2005; Syme et al. 2006). Proteinuria is
     oe n 
classically defined as excretion of >15-20 mg protein/kg
acute renal injury and chronic renal disease, although
 per day in dogs and cats based on a 24-hour urine collec-
additional studies in veterinary medicine are required.
tion (Lulich and Osborne 1990) (Monroe, 1989; Adams,
Glomerular proteinuria refers to the presence of inter-
1992). However, the most convenient method to quantify
mediate (~60-90 kD, e.g-, albumin) to large (≥100 kD,
 proteinuria is the urine protein/creatinine ratio (UPC).
e.g-, IgG) molecular weight proteins due to a compro-
mised filtration barrier. Tubular proteinuria refers to the
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
predominance oflow molecular weight (LMW) proteins
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
(<60 kD) (Zini et al. 2004). The proteins present with
58
Urine protein and microalbuminuria  
59
Table 8.1 Methods for measuring urine protein
Methodology of
 protein
 Protein type
Lower limit of 
Test type
measurement
measured 
detection
 False-negative False-positive
Comments
Semi-quantitative
urine dipstick
Colorimetric
Indicator dyea
Mostly
15-30 mg/dL Dilute urine,
Highly
Good initial
binds amino
albumin;
proteins other 
concentrated
 screening tool;
 groups;: pad
 others to
than albumin 
urine, extreme
must take into
 buffered at pH3 
lesser extent
alkaluria,
account SG
quaternary
 ammonium salts,
chlorhexidine
Sulfo salicylic acid   Turbidometric 
 Acid denatures
All protein
 5-10 mg/dL
 Dilute urine,
Turbid urine,
Confirmatory test
test (SSA)
protein resulting
 alkaluria
radiographic
for dipstick; must
in precipitation
contrast agent,
account for SG
some antibiotics,
Crystal
 precipitation 
E.R.D.-
Immunoassay
Monoclonal
Albumin
1mg/dL
Proteins other Reportedly 100% Standardized by
HealthScreenTM
antibody against
than albumin  specific
SG;
(dipstick)b
albumin
species-specific
Quantitative
UPCE
Colorimetric
CBB", PVD, PSF
All protein
5 mg/dL
 Dependent on Dependent on
Not affected by
methodology
 methodology
urine volume and 
concentration
24-hour collection 
Colorimetric
Same as for UPC  All protein
5 mg/dL
 Dependent on Dependent on
Gold-standard,
methodology
methodology
cumbersome
(metabolic cage
or catheter)
ERDTM test9
Immunoassay
Monoclonal
Albumin
1 mg/dL
Proteins other Reportedly 100% Standardized by
antibody against 
 than albumin 
specific
SG,
albumin
species-specific
aTetrabromphenol blue.
bHeska, Ft. Collins, CO.
Creatinine measured by amidohydrolase, iminohydrolase, or alkaline picrate method.
UPC = Urine protein/creatinine ratio.
dCoomassie brilliant blue.
EPyrocatechol violet dye.
FPonceau S.
9Antech Diagnostic Laboratories.
tubular proteinuria can originate from two main sources:
normalized to 1.010. The standard urine dipstick does
(1) damaged tubular cells, and (2) plasma. The proteins
not reliably detect this small degree of albumin, and MA
 originating from the plasma are LMW and appear in the
 may be a significant indicator of renal disease even in the
urine secondary to decreased reabsorption due to tubu-
absence ofa positive dipstick or an increased UPC. MA is
lar injury and/or overload. Many tubular proteins have
associated with renal disease progression and increased
shown promise in the detection and monitoring of acute
mortality in humans (Basi and Lewis 2006), and it has
and chronic renal disease ( Table 8.2).
been associated with underlying disease in both dogs and
cats ( Whittemore et al. 2006, 2007). It may also precede
overt proteinuria in dogs with hereditary glomerular
Microalbuminuria
disease that leads to renal failure ( Vaden et al. 2001; Lees
Microalbuminuria (MA) is defined as albumin present
 et al. 2002). However, while persistent MA is considered
between 1-30 mg/dL when the specific gravity (SG) is
an abnormal finding, it does not always indicate
60
  Diagnostic testing
Table 8.2 A sampling of urinary proteins that may be promising indicators of renal tubular damage 
 Protein 
Origin
Evaluated in cats or dogs (if known)
Decreased presence in urine:
Cauxin
Proximal tubules
Cats
Tamm-Horsfall protein
Distal tubules
Dogs
Increased presence in urine:
α1-microglobulin
 Plasma
Dogs
β2-microglobulin
 Plasma
Dogs
Clusterin
 Proximal tubules
Cystatin C
Plasma
Cysteine-rich protein 61
 Proximal tubules
y-glutamyl transferase
 Proximal tubules
 Dogs and cats
Glutathione-s-transferase
Tubules
Interleukin 18
Tubules
Kidney injury molecule 1
 Proximal tubules
Lysozyme
 Plasma and tubules
Dogs
N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase
 Proximal tubules
Dogs and cats
Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin
 Plasma and tubules
Dogs
Pap X 5C10 antigen
 Papillary collecting ducts
Retinol-binding protein
Plasma
Dogs and cats
Transthyretin
Plasma
Dogs
 Vitamin D-binding protein
 Plasma
Dogs
progressive or clinically significant renal disease. Prog-
cats with surgically induced chronic renal failure. I Vet Intern Med
nostic studies are still needed in veterinary medicine, and
6( 1): 36-40.
the list of causes for MA is extensive and includes a variety
Basi, S. and J. Lewis (2006). Microalbuminuria as a target to improve
cardiovascular and renal outcomes. Am I Kidney Dis 47(6): 927-
of extra-renal diseases as well as renal diseases. There-
946.
  a   s s  
Grauer, G., et al. ( 1985). Estimation of quantitative proteinuria in the
 systemic disease and renal disease when MA is detected.
'ui e o o -in-ud an a s o
 The available tests to detect MA in dogs and cats are
voided sample. Arm I Vet Res 46( 10): 2116-2119.
normalized to SG 1.010 to account for urine concen-
Jacob, F., et al. (2005). Evaluation of the association between ini-
tration (Table 8.1). They use a species-specific mono-
tial proteinuria and morbidity rate or death in dogs with natu-
rally occurring chronic renal failure. Arm J Vet Res 226(3): 393-
clonal antibody so only those tests designed specifically
400.
for the cat or dog should be used. If MA is detected a
Lees, G., et al. (2005). Assessment and management of proteinuria
follow-up UPC is recommended to quantify the protein-
s) sais ssson  io tooz sieo pue shop u
uria. Although there is reasonably good positive correla-
animal).VetIrterrMed19{3):377-385.
tion between UPC and MA concentration, one does not
Lees, G., et al. (2002). Persistent albuminuria precedes onset of overt
proteinuria in male dogs with X-linked hereditary nephropathy. I
always predict the results of the other. In fact, some cats
Vet Intern Med 16(3): 353A.
with a negative MA test had an increased UPC (Mardell
Lulich, I. and C. Osborne (1990). Interpretation of protein-creanine
and Sparkes 2006). MA can be useful to confirm protein-
ratios in dogs with glomerular and nonglomerular disorders. Comp
uria when results for conventional tests are equivocal or
Cont Ed Pract Vet 12(1): 59-72.
conflicting. However, in general, it is not worthwhile to
Mardell, E.and A. Sparkes (2006). Evaluation of a commercialin-house
test for microalbuminuria when the UPC > 2, since most
test for the semi-quantitative assessment of microalbuminuria in
cats. I Feline Med Surg 8(4): 269-278.
of the protein in that case should be albumin.
Monroe, W. et al. (1989). Twenty-four hour urinary protein loss in
healthy cats and the urinary protein-creatinine ratio as an estimate.
Endnote
Am I Vet Res 50(11): 1906- 1909.
Nabity, M., et al. (2007). Day-to-day variation of the urine pro-
1. VetTest Chemistry Analyzer, IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.
tein:creatinine ratio in female dogs with stable glomerular protein-
uria caused by X-linked hereditary nephropathy. I Vet Imtern Med
References
21(3): 425-430.
Syme, H., et al. (2006).Survival of cats with naturally occurring chronic
Adams, L. et al. ( 1992). Correlation of urine protein/creatinine ratio
renal failure is related to severity of proteinuria. J Vet Intern Med
and twenty-four-hour urinary protein excretion in normal cats and
20(3): 528-535.
Urine protein and microalbuminuria  
61
Vaden, S., et al. (200l). Longitudinal study of microalbuminuria in 
Whittemore, J., et al. (2006). Evaluation of the association between
soft-coated wheaten terriers. I Vet Interm Med 15(3): 300A.
microalbuminuria and the urine albumin-creatinine ratio systemic
Vaden, S., et al. (2004). Effects of urinary tract inflammation and
disease in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 229(6): 958-963.
sample blood contamination on urine albumin and total protein
Whittemore, J., et al. (2007). Association of microalbuminuria and the
concentration in canine urine samples. Vet Clin pathol 33(1): 14
urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio with systemic disease in cats. J
19.
Am Vet Med Assoc 230(8): 1165-1169.
Welles, E., et al. (2006). Comparison of multistix PRO dipsticks with
Zini, E., et al. (2004). Diagnostic relevance of qualitative proteinuria
other biochermical assays for determining urine protein, urine cre-
evaluated by use of sodium dodecyl sulfate-agarose gel electrophore-
atinine, and UP:UC ratio in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 35( 1):
sis and comparison with renal histologic findings in dogs. Am J Vet
31-36.
Res 65(7): 964-971.
Urine culture
Joe Bartges
 Urinary tract infections (UTIs) develop when a tempo-
Urine culture
rary or permanent breach in host defense mechanisms
allows virulent microbes to adhere, multiply, and persist
As already mentioned, urine culture is the gold standard
within the urinary tract (see Chapters 71, 72, and 73).
for diagnosis of bacterial UTl. A diagnosis of UTI based
solely on clinical signs or urinalysis findings of hema-
UTls are most commonly caused by bacteria although
turia and/or urinary tract inflammation may result in a
fungi and viruses may also infect the urinary tract. Analy-
sis of urine for infection (urine culture and antimicrobial
misdiagnosis, as it does not allow precise identification
of the infecting organism or determination of sensitivity
to various antimicrobials, and thus possibly inadequate
and treating bacterial UTls.
or inappropriate treatment. Under some circumstances,
antimicrobial therapy may be considered without first
Urine collection
obtaining the results of urine culture; however, samples
for urine culture should be collected before drug ther-
Ideally, urine samples submitted for culture should be
apy is started. If antimicrobial therapy has occurred, it 
collected by cystocentesis (see Chapter 5). In animals with
should be discontinued for 3-5 days prior to collection
severe clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease, collec-
of urine for urine culture to minimize in vitro inhibition
tion of urine by this method may be difficult because of
 of microbial growth.
frequent voiding. In these patients it may be necessary to
 Following collection of urine, samples should be pre-
collect urine by catheterization or, less desirably, voiding.
served and transported so as to avoid bacterial contami-
Urine collection by catheterization requires cleansing of
nation, proliferation, or death (Padilla et al. 1981). Urine
the pet's external genitalia prior to catheterization and the
specimens for aerobic bacterial culture should be stored
 perivulvar fur may require clipping to prevent contami-
and transported in sealed, sterilized containers, and pro-
nation. Although urinary catheterization of male dogs is
usually accomplished without chemical restraint, many
cessing should begin as soon as possible. A variety of ster-
ile containers can be used which do not contain preserva-
female dogs and all cats require sedation or anesthesia.
tives or inhibitors; these are suitable only when samples
 A sterile catheter and collection container (a syringe or
  ssd    
a collection cup with a tight-fitting lid) should be used.
Urine samples collected during natural voiding should
ology laboratories, as they will not prevent bacterial pro-
idealy be “mid-stream,” thus avoiding bacterial contam-
liferation (thus, falsely increasing the number of colony.
forming units [CFU] per milliliter of urine) or even-
ination that may result from initial flushing out of resi-
tual death (thus resulting in false-negative results). When
dent flora in the distal urethra and external genitalia. If the
these standard transport containers are used and labora-
results of quantitative culture of urine samples obtained
tory processing is delayed by more than 30 minutes, urine
by catheterization or mid-stream voiding are equivocal
specimens should be refrigerated at 4°C (Ling 1984; Lees
after culture (Table 9.1), urine should be collected by
1996). Bacterial counts may double every 20-45 minutes
Cystocentesis.
at room temperature (Lees and Osborne 1979). Multi-
 plication or destruction of bacteria may occur within 1
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
hour of collection.
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
62
Urine culture 
63
Table 9.1 Interpretation of quantitative urine cultures in dogs and catsa
Significant 
 Suspicious
Contaminant
 Sample type 
Dogs
Cats
Dogs
Cats
Dogs
Cats
Cystocentesis
≥1,000
≥1,000
100-1,000
100-1,000
≤100
≤100
Catheterization
≥10,000
≥1,000
1,000-10,000
100-1,000
≤1,000
≤100
Mid-Stream voiding
≥100,000b
≥10,000
10,000-90,000
1,000-10,000
≤10,000
≤1.000
Manual compression
≥100.000b
≥10.000
10,000-90,000
1,000-10,000
≤10,000
≤1,000
Source: From Lulich and 0sborne (1999)
aValues are given in colony-forming units per milliter of urine (CFU/mL). Data represent generalities. Occasionally, bacterial UTI may be
detected with fewer organisms (i.e., false-negative results).
Due to the contamination level of mid-stream samples may be 10,oo0 CFU/mL or higher (i.e., false-positive result), these samples should
not be used for routine diagnostic culture.
 If samples cannot be processed immediately for urine
phologic information that aids in the identification of
culture, several alternatives are available. In-clinic urine
cultures allow immediate processing of urine and may
are incubated or placed under an incandescent light (Fig-
also decrease cost to owners by allowing veterinarians to
ure 9.2) (Saunders et al. 2002).
select only positive samples for species identification and
If bacterial growth is noted within 48 hours, the plates
sensitivity testing by outside laboratories. Blood agar and
 may be submitted for identification and determination
     sd  
 of antimicrobial sensitivities (Figure 9.3) (Blanco et al.
bated for 24-48 hours. A calibrated bacteriologic loop or
2001; Saunders et al. 2001). If no growth occurs after
48-72 hours, the plates may be discarded.
 or 0.001 mL of urine to the culture plates should be used
Commercially available urine culture collection tubes
to estimate CFU per mL, and urine should be streaked
containing preservative, which may or may not be
over the plates by conventional methods (Figure 9.1).
 combined with refrigeration, may be used to preserve
Blood agar supports the growth of most aerobic bacte-
rial uropathogens, and MacConkey's agar provides mor-
Figure 9.2 Incubation of an inoculated blood agar plate using a
Figure 9.1 Use of a calibrated loop for inoculation of urine on a
 60-watt incandescent light bulb to maintain a surface temperature
 blood agar culture plate.
on the culture plate of 38°℃.
64
4  Diagnostic testing
Table 9.2 Commensal bacterial genera in the urogenital tract of
normal dogs
Distal urethra 
Genus
of males
Prepuce
Vagina
Acinetobacter
+
+
Bacteroides
+
Bacillus
+
Citrobacter
+
Corynebacterium
+
+
Figure 9.3 Blood agar plate with microbial growth after inocula-
Enterococcus
+
tion with a calibrated loop and incubation under an incandescent 
Enterobacter
+
light bulb for 24 hours.
Escherichia
十
+
+
Havobacterium
+
+
+
specimens for up to 72 hours before processing occurs
Haemophilus
+
+
Kebsiella
(Allen et al. 1987). The advantage of these preservative
+
+
+
Micrococcus
tubes is that they allow veterinarians to delay submission
+
 of samples for urine culture until results of other diag-
Moraxella
+
+
Mycoplasma
+
+
nostic tests, such as urinalysis, become available. Innoc-
Neisseria
+
ulation of urine into an “enrichment” media (such as
Pasteurella
+
+
thioglycollate) may allow detection of low numbers of
Proteus
+
+
bacteria; this is most useful when urine culture during
Pseudomonas
+
antimicrobial therapy cannot be avoided.
Staphylococcus
+
+
+
Streptococcus
+
+
+
Qualitative urine cuiture
Ureaplasma
十
+
十
Qualitative urine culture refers to isolation and identifi-
Source: From Barsanti (2006).
cation of bacteria in urine without precise quantification
of bacterial numbers. Although urine in the bladder is
in urine collected aseptically by cystocentesis indicates a
normally sterile, urine that passes through the distal uro-
UTl. Although urine obtained from most dogs without a
 genital tract often becomes contaminated with resident
UTI by any method is usually sterile or contains less than 
microflora (see Table 9.2).
10,000 CFU/mL, counts of 100,000 CFU/mL, or higher
Therefore, the presence of bacteria in urine collected
nevertheless occur with sufficient frequency to make col-
by catheterization or voiding may be difficult to inter-
lection of urine by mid-stream voiding or manual expres-
 pret, even with quantification of bacteria. For this reason,
sion unsatisfactory in most cases (Barsanti 2006).
 purely qualitative urine cultures are not recommended,
and a diagnostic urine culture should include quantita-
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing
tion of bacterial numbers in addition to precise iden-
tification of the infecting organism and antimicrobial
Antimicrobial drugs are the cornerstone of treatment for
susceptibility testing.
UT1. The antimicrobial agent selected should be (1) easy
to administer, (2) associated with few, if any, adverse
Quantitative urine cuiture
effects, (3) inexpensive, (4) able to attain urine con-
centrations (and tissue concentrations in the event of
 A quantitative urine culture includes isolation and iden-
kidney or prostatic infection) that exceed the minimum
tification of the infecting organism and determination
 inhibitory concentration (MIC) for the uropathogen by
of the number of bacteria (i.e., CFU per unit volume).
at least fourfold, and (5) unlikely to affect the animal's
Quantitation allows interpretation of the significance of
resident gastrointestinal flora adversely. In most cases the
bacteria present in a urine sample. Suggested ranges for
antimicrobial agent chosen should be based on suscepti-
number of CFU per mL of urine that likely indicate true
bility testing of the uropathogen.
infection have been suggested for each method of urine
collection, and differ in dogs versus cats (Table 9.1); in
Agar disk diffusion technique
cats, significant bacteriuria requires lower numbers of
organisms because this species is more resistant to UTI
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing is often performed
than dogs. The presence of bacteria, even in low numbers,
using agar disk diffusion (i.e., Kirby-Bauer technique),
Urine culture  
65
which is adequate for most bacterial UTls. This method
the concentration of most antimicrobial drugs in the
consists of Mueller-Hinton agar plates that have been
 paper disks is comparable to the typical serum concen-
inoculated with a standardized suspension of a single
tration of the drug, drugs that are found to have inter-
uropathogen isolated from the patient's urine. Paper
 mediate susceptibility by the agar disk diffusion method
 disks impregnated with different antimicrobial drugs are
may still be effective in the urinary tract if they are
placed on the plate. After 18-24 hours? inoculation at
excreted in high concentrations in urine (e.g., ampicillin,
 38°C, antimicrobial susceptibility is estimated by mea-
cephalexin).
suring zones of inhibition of bacterial growth surround-
 ing each disk. The zones of inhibition are then inter-
Antimicrobial dilution technigue
preted in light of established standards and reported as
“resistant, “susceptible” or"intermediate susceptibility”
Antimicrobial dilution susceptibility testing determines
Due to differences in the ability of various antimicro-
the minimum concentration of an antimicrobial drug
bials to diffuse through agar, the antimicrobial disk sur-
that will inhibit the growth of the uropathogen (i.e.,
rounded by the largest zone of inhibition is not neces-
the minimum bacteriostatic concentration, or MlC).
sarily the drug most likely to be effective. Also, because
After inoculation and incubation of uropathogens into
Table 9.3 Mean concentrations of selected antimicrobial agents in canine (D) or feline (C) urine
Daily dosage
Route of
Drug
(mg/kg)
 ad ministration
Mean urine concentration (± SD)
Amikacin
5
SQ
342 ± 143 μg/mL (D)
Amoxicillin
11
PO
202 ± 93 μg/mL (D)
Ampicilin
26
PO
309 ± 55 μg/mL (D)
Cefovecin
8 (q15 d)
SQ
12 hours post: 9 ± 6.5 μg/mL (D)
12 hours post: 66 ± 37 μg/ml (C)
15 days post: 0.9 ± 0.7 μg/ml (D)
15 days post: 3 ± 1.6 μg/mL (C)
Cephalexin
18
PO
 500 μg/ml (D)
Chloramphenicol
33
PO
124 ± 40 μg/mL (D)
Difloxacin
5
PO
0.3 μg/mL (D)
Doxycycline
5
PO
53 ± 24 μg/mL (D, C)
 Enrofloxacin 
5
PO
40 ± 10 μg/mL (D)
 Gentamicin 
2
SQ
107 ± 33 μg/mL (D)
Hetacillin 
26
PO
300 ± 156 μg/mL (D)
Ibafloxacin
15
PO
36-85 μg/ml (C)
Kanamycin
4
SQ
530 ± 151 μg/mL (D)
 Marbofloxacin
2.75
PO
14 μg/mL (D)
Meropenem
20
IV, SQ
1296 μg/ml (D)
 Nitrofurantoin
4.4
PO
100 μg/mL (D)
Norfloxacin
5
PO
34 ± 15 μg/ml (D)
20
PO
57 ± 18 μg/mL (D)
 Penicillin G
36.700 U/kg
PO
295 ± 211 μg/mL (D)
 Penicillin V
26
PO
148 ± 99 μg/mL (D)
Sulfasoxazole
22
PO
1466 ± 832 μg/ml (D)
Tetracycline
18
PO
139 ± 65 μg/mL (D)
20
PO
145 ± 39 μg/mL (D, C)
Trimethoprim/sulfadiazine
13
PO
55 ± 19 μg/mL (D)
Tobramycin
2.2
SQ
66 ± 39 μg/mL (D)
Vancomycin
15
IV
24 ± 15 μg/mL (D)
Source: Adapted from Ling (1984)
SD, Standard deviation; SQ, subcutaneous: PO, per os (by mouth): D, dog: C, cat.
66
 Diagnostic testing
Table 9.4 In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility testing 
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing for urinary pathogens in dogs and cats is often reported as susceptible (S), intermediate 
susceptibility (), or resistant (R), and is based on standardized methods published by the National Commiee for Clinical Laboratory 
Standards (NCLS). The criteria and interpretations are based on studies from human beings, but can be extrapolated to dogs and cats.
Using the SIR system:
● S indicates that the infection due to the identified organism may be appropriately treated with the dosage of antimicrobial agent
recommended.
●l indicates that the response rates may be lower than those for susceptible isolates of the identified organism. This category
implies that drugs that achieve high concentrations in urine may still be used and effective.
● R indicates clinical efficacy of this antimicrobial agent has not been reliable or is unlikely to be effective.
Antimicrobial agents against Gram negative bacteria (except Pseudomonas spp)
MIC (μg/mL) Interpretation 
Antimicrobial
s
1
R
Penicillins
 Penicillin G
N/A
N/A
N/A
P/O
Ampicillin
≤8
16
≥32
O/P
Amoxicillin
P
Ticarcillin
≤16
32-64
≥128
P
Mezlocilin
≤16
32-64
≥128
P
Piperacillin 
≤16
32-64
≥128
0
Amoxicillin/cdavulanate
≤8
16
≥32
0
Ampicillin/sulbactam
P
Piperacillin/tazobactam
≤16
32-64
≥128
P
Ticarcillin/clavulanate
≤16
32-64
≥128
Cephalosporins
A
Cepholothin
≤8
16
≥32
0
Cephalexin
Cefadroxil
P
Cephapirin
0
Cefaclor
P
Ceftiofur
≤8
16
≥32
P
Cefazolin
≤8
16
≥32
P
Cefoxitin
≤8
16
≥32
P
Ceftazidime
≤8
16
≥32
P
Cefepime
≤8
16
≥32
Q
Cefotaxime
≤8
16-32
≥64
0
Cefpodoxime
≤2
4
≥8
P
Ceftriaxone
8≥
16-32
≥64
0
 Cefuroxime axetil
≤4
8-16
≥32
P
Cefixime
≤1
2
≥4
Carbapenems
P
Imipenem
≤4
≥16
P
Meropenem
≤4
8
≥16
Monobactams
P
Aztreonam
≤8
16
≥32
 Aminoglycosides
P
Gentamicin
≤4
8
≥16
P
Amikacin
≤16
32
≥64
P
Tobramycin
≤4
8
≥16
P
Netilmycin
≤8
16
≥32
P
Kanamycin
≤16
32
≥64
Urine culture  
67
Table 9.4 (Continued)
MIC (μg/mL) Interpretation 
 Antimicrobial
S
1
P
Quinolones
O/P
 Enrofloxacin
≤0.5
1-2
≥4
0
Orbifloxacin
≤1
2-4
≥8
0
Difloxacin 
≤0.5
1-2
≥4
0
Marbofloxacin
≤1
2
≥4
 Tetracyclines
P
Tetracycline
≤4
8
≥16
P
Doxycycline
Minocycline
Other
P
Trimethorprim/sulfa
≤2/38
≥4/76
Nitrofurantoin
≤32
64
≥128
P
Chloramphenicol
≤8
16
≥32
A
Fluphenicol
 Antimicrobial agents against Staphylococcus spp.
Penicillins
P
Penicillin G
≤0.12
≥0.25
P/O
Ampicillin
≤0.25
≥0.5
O/P
Amoxicillin
P
Oxacillin 
≤8
≥16
0
Amoxicillin/cdavulanate
≤4
≥8
0
Ampicillin/sulbactam 
P
Piperacillin/tazobactam
≤8
≥16
P
Ticarcillin/clavulanate
≤8
≥16
Cephalosporins
P
Cepholothin
≤8
16
≥32
0
 Cephalexin
0
Cefadroxil
P
 Cephapirin 
0
Cefaclor
P
Ceftiofur
≤8
16
≥32
Cefazolin
≤8
16
≥32
P
Cefoxitin
≤8
16
≥32
P
Ceftazidime
≤8
16
≥32
P
Cefepime
≤8
16
≥32
P
Cefotaxime
≤8
16-32
≥64
0
Cefpodoxime
≤2
4
≥8
P
Ceftriaxone
≤8
16-32
≥64
0
 Cefuroxime axetil
≤4
8-16
≥32
Carbapenems
P
Imipenem
≤4
8
≥16
P
Meropenem
≤4
8
≥16
(Continued)
68
3 Diagnostic testing
Table 9.4 (Continued)
MIC (μg/mL) Interpretation 
Antimicrobial
S
1
R
Aminoglycosides
P
Gentamicin
≤4
8
≥16
P
 Amikacin
≤16
32
≥64
P
Tobramycin
≤4
8
≥16
Netilmycin
≤8
16
≥32
P
Kanamycin
≤16
32
≥64
Quinolones
O/P
 Enrofloxacin
≤0.5
1-2
≥4
0
Orbifloxacin
≤1
2-4
≥8
0
 Difloxacin
≤0.5
1-2
≥4
0
 Marbofloxacin
≤1
2
≥4
Tetracyclines
P
Tetracydline
≤4
8
≥16
P
Doxycycline
Minocycline
Macrolides
P
Erythromycin
≤2
4
≥8
P
Azithromycin
P
Clorithromycin
Lincosamides
P
Clindamycin
≤0.5
1-2
≥4
P
Lincomycin
 Other
P
Trimethorprim/sulfa
≤2/38
≥4/76
P
Nitrofurantoin
≤32
64
≥128
P
 Chloramphenicol
≤8
16
≥32
P
Fluphenicol
MIC,minimum inhibitory concentration; O, oral; P, parenteral (intravenous, subcutaneous, orintramuscular); S, susceptible: I, intermediate
susceptibility: R, resistant.
Source: Used with permission from Aucoin (2007).
wells containing serial two-fold dilutions of antimicrobial
References
 drugs at concentrations achievable in tissues and urine,
Allen, T.A., et al. (l987). Microbiologic evaluation of canine
the MlC is defined as the lowest antimicrobial concen-
urine: direct microscopic examination and preservation of spec-
tration (or highest dilution) that prevents visible bacte-
imen quality for culture. I Am Vet Med Assoc 190(10): 1289-
rial growth. The MIC is usually several dilutions lower
1291.
 than the minimum bactericidal concentration of drugs.
Aucoin, D. (2007). Target: the antimicrobial reference guide to effective
In general, the antimicrobial agent is likely to achieve bac-
treatment. Port Huron, MI: North American Compendiums Inc.
tericidal concentrations within urine if a concentration
Barsanti, J.A. (2006). Genitourinary infections. In: Infectious Diseases
of the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd edition. St. Louis,
four times that of the MIC can be achieved (Table 9.3)
MO: Elsevier Saunders, p. 935-961.
(Ling 1984). Many antimicrobial drugs that are renally
 Blanco, L.J., et al. (200l). Evaluation of blood agar plates as a transport
excreted reach concentrations in urine that are 10-100
medium for aerobic bacterial urine cultures [abstract]. I Vet Iterm
 times greater than the serum concentration. Guidelines
Med 15(3): 303.
 for interpretation of antimicrobial susceptibility testing
Lees, G.E. ( 1996). Bacterial urinary tract infections. Vet Clirn North Am
SmallAnim Pract 26(2): 297-304.
is provided in Table 9.4.
Urine culture
69
Lees, G.E. and C.A. Osborne (1979). Antibacterial properties of
and E.C. Feldman, 4th edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
urine: a comparative review. I Am Arim Hosp Assoc 15: 125-
pPp. 1775-1788.
132.
Padilla, J., et al. (198l). Effects of storage time and temperature on
Ling, G.V. ( 1984). Therapeutic strategies involving antimicrobial treat-
quantitative culture of canine urine. I Am Vet Med Assoc 178(10):
ment of the canine urinary tract. I Am Vet Med Assoc 185(10):
1077-1081.
1162-1164.
 Saunders, A.B., et al. (2002). Evaluation of blood agar plates and incan-
Lulich, J.P and C.A. Osborne ( 1999). Bacterial urinary tract infections.
descent lighting for aerobic bacterial urine cultures [abstract]. I Vet
In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger
Interm Med. 16(3): 379.
10
Urinary enzyme activity for detection
of acute kidney injury
Richard Goldstein
Successful prevention, recognition, and treatment of
tion of experimental kidney injury, typically, via 24-hour
acute kidney injury (AKI) should be at the forefront of
urine collection. More recently, in the 1980s, studies were
our efforts to successfully limit eventual non-reversible
initiated in companion animal veterinary medicine to
or progressive kidney disease. Once the damage has been
assess the values of monitoring urinary enzymes in more
 propagated and is evident on routine biochemical test-
clinically relevant models of AK1. In 1985, Greco et al.
o s   J ss  a s   
assessed urinary gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
too late to intervene successfully. This chapter will focus
 activity in dogs with gentamicin-induced nephrotoxic-
 on one aspect of early detection—the excess leakage of
ity. In this study, urinary GGT increased prior to devel-
urinary enzymes and other biomarkers and their activity
 opment of azotemia and was considered a more sensi-
as measured in the urine. The enzymatic activity used
 tive and reliable method of detecting AKI induced by
as a marker for AKl belongs to enzymes that are found
gentamicin than serum creatinine concentrations or 24-
within the renal tubular cels. These enzymes are too large
hour endogenous creatinine clearance (Greco et al. 1985).
to be filtered through a normal glomerulus, and so in the
Since that time a number ofadditional studies have been
absence of profound glomerular disease, a rise in the uri-
 performed focusing on 24-hour urinary excretion and
nary activity of such enzymes is typically caused by acute
urine enzyme activity to creatinine ratios for GGT and
damage to the tubules and leakage from the tubular cells.
NAG in experimental models (Grauer et al. 1995; Rivers
Other urinary markers of AKI such as urinary electrolyte
et al. 1996) as well as naturally occurring kidney disease
concentrations, as well as urinary glucose and protein
in dogs (Sato et al. 2002a) and cats (Sato et al. 2002b).
will be discussed elsewhere in the text.
 Similarly, a recent study assessing human patients in an
 The use of urinary enzyme activity as a marker for
ICU setting showed that urinary enzymes such as GGT
AKI has been studied in humans, and rodent models
and NAG detected AKI from 12 hours to 4 days prior to
 of kidney injury since the 1960s and 1970s (Ceriotti
the development of azotemia ( Westhuyzen et al. 2003).
et al. 1970; Wright and Plummer 1974). At the same
time, studies were also performed in domestic ani-
mals mostly as models for humans. Such early studies
The practical use of urinary enzyme activity
included, among others, assessing urinary psi-glutamyl
in naturally occurring disease
transpeptidase in sheep (Shaw 1976), and N-acetyl-β-
A few things appear to be clear from the literature
glucosaminidase (NAG) in dogs (Ellis et al. 1973) as
reviewed above:
markers for AKl induced by mercuric chloride toxicity.
These studies, as well as other similar ones, showed a rise
1. Urinary enzymes, GGT, and NAG are the most com-
in the concentrations of these enzymes following induc-
s n s d so   s
urinary activity. NAG is found within the proxi-
 mal tubular lysosomes and GGT with the proximal
tubule brush border. The activity of these enzymes is
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 a sensitive method of detecting acute tubular kidney
70
injury, more sensitive than changes in glomerular
Table 10.1 Serial urine creatinine and gamma-glutamyl
filtration rate, serum biochemistry (azotemia), and
transpeptidase (GGT) concentrations from a 2 year old, castrated 
 clinical signs.
male, Irish setter after ingesting a toxic quantity of a nonsteroidal
 Changes in urinary enzyme concentrations, GGT,
 anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
and NAG, can be estimated by enzyme to creatinine
Day
1
2
3
4
ratios on spot urine samples, deeming 24-hour urine
5
collections not absolutely necessary.
 Urine creatinine
24
38
51.2
38.2
60
3. Normal or baseline values vary greatly from study to
7p/6u
study and likely from assay to assay making the deter-
Urine GGT U/L
5
12
28
13
16
mination of a healthy reference range very dificult.
Thus, the ideal method to use this tool today appears
GGT/creatinine 
0.02
0.032
0.054
0.034
0.027
U/mg
to be when a baseline value can be determined in an
individual case and then a two and threefold increase
in the GGT or NAG to creatinine ratio indicates an
early sign of acute tubular injury. This is most feasi-
In this case, the clinicians used the doubling ofthe GGT
ble when a dog or cat has either very recently been
to creatinine ratio as an early indicator of AKl and con-
exposed or will be exposed to a known renal toxin
tinued aggressive fluid therapy until the value returned
and a baseline can still be established. Examples of
to baseline. No other changes were noted in the chem-
such cases include the use of renal toxic chemother-
istry panel, complete blood count, or urinalysis during
apeutic agents, the use of aminoglycosides, a very
 the same time period.
recent overdose of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
Another excellent example for the use of this method
drug (NSAID), or the use of an NSAID in a renal
is to monitor urine GGT/creatinine or NAG/creatinine
compromised patient.
every other day or twice a week during aminoglycoside
therapy. This should be done in addition to urinalysis
(searching for changes in specific gravity, proteinuria,
The following is a case example where the use
glucosuria, and casts) and serum chemistry panels. A
of urinary enzymes was of value
 doubling of the urinary enzyme to creatinine ratio should
 be seen as a possible sign of early AKI and discontinuation
Red is a 2 year old male neutered Irish setter who was
of the aminoglycoside should be considered.
presented to the Cornell University Hospital for Animals
Emergency Service within a few hours of eating a large,
toxic amount ofa veterinaryapproved non-steroidalanti-
Conclusions
inflammatory medicine. Red had no relevant past history
 It is clear that AKI is best managed and severe kidney
and was completely nonclinical on presentation. Follow-
 injury leading to renal death or chronic kidney disease is
ing induced emesis, the decision was made to treat Red
best avoided when caught early. Insensitive methods of
with intravenous fluids as well as additional medications
to try and prevent gastrointestinal and renal toxicity asso-
ciated with an NSAID overdose. The following plan for
0.06
monitoring Red was devised:
0.05
6w,
1. Baseline and then daily serum chemistry panel, com-
0.04
plete blood count and urinalysis including urine
nine
cytology for casts and a urine GGT and creatinine
0.03
assays for the calculation of a urine GGT/creatinine.
T/Cr
2.
The plan was to continue high rates of fluids for 48
0.02
hours unless signs of AKI were identified. A two fold
GG
0.01
rise in urine GGT/creatinine ratio from baseline was
determined to be significant.
1
2
3
4
5
Results
Days
Figure 10.1 Graphic representation of serial urine creatinine
Red's urine creatinine and GGT concentrations over time
and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) concentrations from a
during his hospitalization and therapy ( Table 10.1) and
2 year old, castrated male, Irish setter after ingesting a toxic quan-
GGT/creatinine ratio in graphic form (Figure 10.1).
tity of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID).
72
2Diagnostic testing
identifying AKl such as clinical signs and azotemia are
enzyme/creatinine ratios from spot urine samples. I Vet Interr Med
insufficient for this purpose. Thus, whenever possible,
9(5): 324-327.
either following acute toxicity or during known exposure
Greco, D.S., et al. (1985). Urinary gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
activity in dogs with gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity. Arm I Vet
to a renal toxin, measuring urinary enzymes can have sub-
Res 46(1 1): 2332-2335.
stantial added value in allowing early detection of AKI.
Rivers, B.J., et al. (l996). Evaluation of urine gamma-glutamyl
Today, GGT and NAG can easily be measured in the urine
transpeptidase-to-creatinine ratio as a diagnostic tool in an experi-
by commercial laboratories and a urinary GGT or NAG to
mental model of aminoglycoside-induced acute renal failure in the
 creatinine ratio calculated. Although reference ranges are
dog. I Atm Anirm Hosp Assoc 32(4): 323-336.
Sato, R., et al. (2002a). Clinical availability of urinary N-acetyl-beta-
not available, a doubling of the ratio should lead the clin-
D-glucosaminidase index in dogs with urinary diseases. I Vet Med
ician to suspect AKI. In the future, additional biomarkers
Sci 64(4): 361-365.
 may also become available in veterinary medicine.
Sato, R., et al. (2002b). Urinary excretion of N-acetyl-beta-D-
glucosaminidase and its isoenzymes in cats with urinary disease.
I Vet Med Sci 64(4): 367-371.
References
Shaw, ED. (1976). The effect of mercuric chloride intoxication on
urinary psi-glutamyl transpeptidase excretion in the sheep. Res Vet
Ceriotti, G., et al. (1970). Human urinary alpha-glucosidase as an
Sci 20(2): 226-268.
index of kidney tubular damage. Clin Chim Acta 27(3): 415-419.
Westhuyzen, J., et al. (2003). Measurement of tubular enzymuria facil-
Ellis, B.G., et al. (1973). The effect of tubular damage by mercuric
itates early detection of acute renal impairment in the intensive care
chloride on kidney function and some urinary enzymes in the dog.
unit. Nephrol Dial Transplant 18(3): 543-551.
Chem Biol Interact 7(2): 101-113.
Wright, PJ. and D.T. Plummer. (1974). The use of urinary enzyme
Grauer, G.F, et al. (1995). Estimation of quantitative enzymuria
measurements to detect renal damage caused by nephrotoxic com-
in dogs with gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicosis using urine
pounds. Biochem Pharrmacol 23(1): 65-73.
11
Diagnosis of uroabdomen
Michael M. Fry
Uroabdomen, also known as uroperitoneum, means
and blood (Stockham and Scott 2008). This principle
presence of urine in the peritoneal cavity—that is out-
was illustrated in a study of experimentally-induced rup-
side of the urinary tract. The condition occurs most often
ture of the urinary bladder in dogs, in which in creati-
due to trauma (see Chapters 59 and 82). Recognized spe-
nine concentrations in peritoneal fluid and blood were
cific causes of uroabdomen include vehicular or other
markedly different, but urea concentrations were not
blunt trauma, urinary catheterization, traumatic palpa-
(Burrows and Bovee 1974). Measurement of potassium is
tion or manual expression of the bladder, urinary tract
also likely to be useful in cases of suspected uroabdomen.
obstruction, surgery, neoplasia, and (especially in foals)
A retrospective study in dogs (13 animals with uroab-
 parturition. Leakage may occur anywhere throughout the
domen, 8 with nonurinary peritoneal effusion) found
         
that a creatinine peritoneal fluid:blood ratio of >2:1 had
Hamilton et al. 2006); leakage from the upper urinary
100% specificity and 86% sensitivity, and a potassium
tract may result in uroretroperitoneum (Weisse et al.
peritoneal fluid:blood ratio of >1.4:1 had 100% speci-
2002; Rieser 2005). In a study of 26 cases of uroabdomen
ficity and 1o0% sensitivity, for diagnosing uroabdomen
in cats, blunt trauma was most likely to result in leakage
(Schmiedt et al. 2001). A retrospective study in cats found
from the urinary bladder, and catheterization was most
increased peritoneal fluid:serum ratios for both analytes
 likely to result in leakage from the urethra (Aumann et al.
(mean values of 2:1 and 1.9:1, respectively) in 4/5 ani-
1998). Neither ability to urinate nor a palpable urinary
mals, and decreased peritoneal fluid:serum ratios in 1/5
bladder rules out the possibility ofa patient having uroab-
animals (Aumann et al. 1998). Suggested guidelines for
domen (Aumann et al. 1998). Although uroabdomen
interpreting the results of paired testing are shown in
 often can be diagnosed on the basis of laboratory find-
Table 11.1.
ings, identification of the site ofleakage requires contrast-
Even in the absence of prior clinical suspicion of uroab-
enhanced diagnostic imaging or surgical exploration.
domen, finding of an unexplained nonseptic inflamma-
Dogs and cats with uroabdomen typically have
tory peritoneal effusion with a low protein concentration
azotemia and other serum or plasma biochemical abnor-
 should raise the possibility of uroabdomen. Urine which
malities, but definitive laboratory diagnosis of uroab-
is free in the peritoneal cavity acts as a chemical irri-
domen requires paired testing of time-matched peri-
 tant and elicits an inflammatory response, and routine
toneal fluid and serum or plasma samples. In patients
fluid analysis and cytologic examination of peritoneal
with uroabdomen, analytes that are normally excreted in
fluid typically shows a mildly increased total nucleated
urine are expected to be present in higher concentration
cell count comprised predominantly of neutrophils and
in peritoneal fluid than in plasma. The most clinically
a normal to mildly increased protein concentration. The
useful of these analytes are creatinine and potassium.
fluid is usually sterile (provided there was no urinary tract
Creatinine does not diffuse as readily as urea, and is
infection prior to leakage), but the neutrophils often have
therefore slower to equilibrate between peritoneal fluid
the harsh chemical environment (Alleman 2003).
Nephrology and Urology of Srmall Atirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
73
74
 Diagnostic testing
Table 11.1 Suggested guidelines for interpreting results of paired (time-matched) testing of peritoneal fluid and serum or plasma in
dogs and cats with suspected uroabdomen. In all cases, but particularly in the case of equivocal findings (the "Suspicious for
uroabdomen" category below), these results should be interpreted along with all of the available clinical data
 Results of paired testing
Interpretation 
Creatinine concentration of peritoneal fluid ≥ 2 × higher than
Diagnostic for uroabdomen
 reatinine concentration of serum or plasma
Creatinine concentration of peritoneal fluid < 2× higher than
Suspicious for uroabdomen—measure potassium concentration
 Ceatinine concentration of serum or plasma
AND
 Potassium concentration of peritoneal fluid > potassium
Supports diagnosis of uroabdomen (the higher the ratio, the
concentration of serum or plasma
more strongly supportive)
OR
 Potassium concentration of peritoneal fluid ≤ potassium
Does not support diagnosis of uroabdomen
concentration of serum or plasma
Creatinine concentration of peritoneal fluid ≤ ceatinine
No evidence of uroabdomen (does not exclude the possibility of 
concentration of serum or plasma
uroabdomen, but no evidence to support the diagnosis)
References
 Rieser, T.M. (2005). Urinary tract emergencies. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 35(2): 359-373.
Allerman, A.R. (2003). Abdominal, thoracic, and pericardial effusions.
Schmiedt, C., et al. (2001). Evaluation of abdominal fluid:peripheral
Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 33(1): 89-118.
blood creatinine and potassium ratios for diagnosis of uroperi-
Aumann, M., et al. (1998). Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases
toneum in dogs. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 11(4): 275-280.
(1986-1995). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34(4): 315-324.
Stockham, S.L. and M.A. Scott. (2008). Fundamentals of Veterinary
Burrows, C.F. and K.C. Bovee.( 1974). Metabolic changes due to exper-
Clirical Pathology, 2nd edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
imentally induced rupture of the canine urinary bladder. Arm I Vet
Weisse, C., et al. (2002). Traumatic rupture of the ureter: 10 cases. J
Res 35(8): 1083-1088.
Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 38(2): 188- 192.
Hamilton, M.H., et al. (2006). Traumatic bilateral ureteric rupture in
two dogs. I Small Amirm Pract 47(12): 737-740.
12
Urinary saturation testing
Joe Bartges
Urolith formation
 oxalic acid in urine do not normally precipitate to form
calcium oxalate crystals. Urine is normall supersatu-
Overview
rated with respect to calcium and oxalic acid, but energy is
Urolith formation, dissolution, and prevention involves
required to maintain this state of calcium and oxalic acid
complex physical processes. Major factors include (1)
solubility; therefore, the urine must constantly “strug-
supersaturation resulting in crystal formation, (2) effects
gle” energetically to maintain calcium and oxalic acid in
of inhibitors of crystallization and inhibitors of crystal
solution. Thus, urine is described as being metastable,
aggregation and growth, (3) crystalloid complexors, (4)
implying varying degrees of instability with respect to
effects of promoters of crystal aggregation and growth,
the potential for calcium oxalate crystals to form. In this
and (5) effects of noncrystalline matrix (Coe and Parks
metastable state, new calcium oxalate crystals will not
1988; Brown and Purich 1992; Brown et al. 1994; Bartges
precipitate, but if already present, crystals will be main-
et al. 1999).
tained and grow in size. If the concentration of calcium
and oxalic acid is increased, a threshold is eventually
Concept of urine saturation (Figure 12.1)
reached at which urine cannot hold more calcium and
oxalic acid in solution. The urine concentration at which
An important driving force behind stone formation is
this occurs is the formation point of calcium oxalate.
the saturation state of urine with calculogenic substances
Above the thermodynamic formation product, urine is
(Coe et al. 1992). When a solution such as urine is
oversaturated and unstable with respect to calcium and
saturated, it refers to the maximal amount of a substance,
oxalic acid; thus, calcium oxalate crystals will sponta-
such as calcium oxalate, that can be completed dissolved.
 neously precipitate, grow in size, and aggregate.
This point is termed the thermodynamic solubility
Medical dissolution of certain types of uroliths is
product. When calcium oxalate is present in urine at a
achieved by inducing a state of undersaturation with
concentration less than the solubility point, the urine is
respect to the calculogenic minerals. Medical prevention
undersaturated with calcium oxalate and calcium oxalate
is achieved by inducing a state of undersaturation or low
completely dissociates and dissolves. When calcium
 to mid metastability as long as there is no mechanism for
oxalate is present in urine at a concentration that is equal
heterogeneous nucleation present. Urinary supersatura-
to the solubility point, the urine is saturated with calcium
tion with calculogenic minerals represents an increased
oxalate and calcium oxalate begins to precipitate. When
risk toward urolith formation and is required for urolith
calcium oxalate is present in urine at a concentration
formation, but other factors are important.
above the solubility point, the urine is supersaturated
with calcium oxalate and calcium oxalate precipitates.
Assessment of urolith formation
Urine contains ions and proteins that interact and/or
complex with calcium and oxalic acid so as to allow them
Overview
to remain in solution. This explains why calcium and
Various factors involved with urolith formation may be
evaluated by several methods including (1) epidemiolog-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
ical studies performed at urolith centers and designed to
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
identify risk and protective factors, (2) measuring urine
75
76
  Diagnostic testing
Oversaturation
(unstable solution)
Crystals spontaneously
precipitate
(homogeneous nucleation)
Crystals aggregate and grow
Crystals do not dissolve
Thermodynamic formation product
Supersaturation
(metastable solution)
Energy for
Crystals do not spontaneously
 precipitate
precipitation
 Cr ystals precipitate on templates
(heterogeneous nucleation)
Crystals may aggregate
 Inhibitors will impede or prevent 
cr ystallizati on
Crystals do not dissolve
Thermodynamic solubility product
(S= 1;0= 0)
Energy for
dissolution
Undersaturation
(stable solution)
Crystals do not precipitate
Crystals do not aggregate or grow
Crystals dissolve
Figure 12.1 States of saturation. S represents the supersaturation ratio and o represents the relative supersaturation.
concentrations of calculogenic substances, (3) evaluat-
 gas constant and T is the absolute temperature ( Kelvin).
ing the influence of urine pH on crystal formation, and
The activity of the crystallizing salt is represented by the
(4) measuring the degree of undersaturation, supersat-
activity product (AP) for that salt where the activities of
uration, and/or oversaturation of urine with crystallo-
the ions comprising that salt are multiplied. The term
 genic substances. Determination of urinary biochemical
"activity” of a mineral is an index of the likelihood that
 parameters and urinary saturation can only be done in
the mineral will combine with other substances in urine,
 n  sn  , re r si
and is determined by multiplying the concentration of
 ease results in depletion of calculogenic compounds in
urine that alters results (Laube et al. 2003).
molecules. For example, the activity of calcium is deter-
mined by multiplying the concentration of calcium in
solution (molarity) by the activity coefficient for a dou-
Supersaturation
bly charged molecule since calcium carries a "2+" charge.
In solution chemistry, the difference in chemical poten-
The “activity” of a mineral is dependent on several fac-
tial of two states (△u) is dependent on the activities
tors including (1) the urine concentration of that mineral,
of the crystallizing salt in the supersaturated solution
(2) the urine concentrations of other substances such as
(a) and in the solution when it has come to equilib-
sodium, potassium, calcium, etc., (3) the quantity and
rium (a): △μ = RTln(a/aeq) where R is the universal
functional state of nonmineral or nonmeasured mineral
Urinary saturation testing  77
inhibitors and promoters of crystal formation, growth,
and combines the relevant ion concentrations and activ-
and aggregation, (4) urine pH, and (5) temperature of
ity coeffcients to produce the activity product (AP).
urine. Thus, α and aeq represent the AP's for the salt in
For example, the AP of calcium oxalate is calculated as
supersaturated solution and the solution at equilibrium,
the mathematical product of the activity of calcium and
respectively. Furthermore, the supersaturation ratio
activity of oxalic acid. The AP for each urolith-forming
(S) = a/aeg; therefore, △w/RT = ln(S) (Werness et al.
 compound is divided by its known thermodynamic sol-
1985). For practical purposes, S is expressed as concen-
ubility product (SP) and the resultant RSS produced.
trations (molarities) or activities (a). For example, for
RSS = ion AP of the patient's urine/ion SP
calcium oxalate:
S = APcaox = [Ca²+] × [Ox²-]
Relative supersaturation is related to the energy avail-
able for crystal nucleation and growth; however, RSS val-
APcaoxeq[Ca2] x [Ox²q]
ues are limited by the fact that the thermodynamic solu-
where "[]” represents the activities or concentrations of
bility products used for these calculations have not been
the ions, calcium (Ca²+) or oxalate (Ox²-). Usually, the
measured in the patient's urine. This is of concern because
relative supersaturation (o) is used rather than S, where
it is probable that different macromolecules, including
0 = S-1 (Finlayson and Miller 1969; Finlayson 1978;
inhibitors and promoters of crystal formation, growth
Werness et al. 1985; Brown et al. 1994; Kavanagh 2006).
and aggregation, in the patient's urine have a pronounced
 Crystallization involves nucleation, growth, and aggre-
influence on free ion concentrations. By using calcula-
gation. Nucleation may be heterogeneous (where a for-
tions measured in urine from healthy human beings, RSS
eign substance provides a nucleation catalyst for crys-
may overestimate SPs and APs of different minerals, and
 thus tend to underestimate the risk of urolith formation.
tal formation) or homogeneous (where no foreign sub-
stance is used). Supersaturation required for homoge-
Another technical problem in evaluating dogs and cats is
neous nucleation is much higher than that required for
that the computer program used to calculate RSS involves
heterogeneous nucleation. There is still a supersatura-
 the comparison of the pet's urine values to standardized
tion barrier that must be overcome before nucleation
values based on the composition of human urine.
can occur (Figure 12.1). Growth of crystals may occur
through enlargement of existing crystals by direct incor-
Activity product ratios
Activity product ratios (APR) also are designed to express
 or by aggregation of crystals. The rate of crystal growth
the degree of supersaturation of solutions with calculo-
is described by second-order kinetics: G = ko2, where G
 genic minerals. APR's are obtained by calculating the ion
is the growth rate and k is the rate constant (Kavanagh
AP in the patient's urine samples before and after equilib-
2006). Aggregation can also result in enlargement of the
rium with various seed crystals such as calcium oxalate.
crystal mass, and occurs through the net result of crys-
tals colliding and either dispersing or consolidating, with
APR = ion AP of patient's urine before incubation
the outcome being dependent on an efficiency factor.
with seed crystals
As consolidation is achieved by crystal bridges that fuse
ion AP of patient's urine after incubation with seed
the lattice structures of individual crystals, aggregation
crystals
is also dependent on supersaturation (David et al. 2001;
In determining the APR, the patient's urine is
Hounslow et al. 2001).
incubated with preformed seed crystals composed of
pure urolith-forming mineral of interest (e.g-, calcium
Relative supersaturation
oxalate). Following incubation for 48 hours with the seed
Determining the relative supersaturation (RSS) of a
crystals, the urine concentration of the same analytes are
urolith-forming substance in a patient's urine is one
measured. The postincubation concentrations ofanalytes
technique used to assess risk of urolith formation (Pak
are then used to calculate a “post-incubation" AP. Divid-
et al. 1977; Brown and Purich 1992). RSS is determined
ing the “pre-incubation” AP by the “post-incubation" AP
by measuring urine concentrations of several analytes 
 gives the APR for that patient's urine sample.
 including ammonium, calcium, chloride, citrate, hydro-
An exact measurement of supersaturation is not
gen (pH), magnesium, oxalate, phosphate, potassium,
obtained by determining APR, but the method provides
and sodium (and possibly cystine, sulfate, uric acid and
useful information about the relative increase or decrease
other compounds) in urine. These values are then entered
 of the ion AP in the patient's urine that results from seed
into a computer program (EQUIL or SUPERSAT), which
crystal growth or seed crystal dissolution. An APR less
calculates the activity coefficients for the various ions
than one represents undersaturation of urine with the
78  Diagnostic testing
mineral being evaluated An APR equal to one repre-
the urinary tract, the existence of a correct combination
sents saturation of the patient's urine sample. An APR
of supersaturation and of factors that inhibit/promote
 greater than one indicates that the patient's urine sample
the nucleation process is necessary. To what extent this
is supersaturated.
 propensity for crystallization actually relates to the risk of
APRs can be calculated for any calculogenic mineral
urolith formation also depends on factors that regulate
as long as pure seed crystals for that type of mineral are
steps leading from a crystal to a urolith. An advantage
available. Use of APR methodology will not eliminate
of BRI is the fact that all urinary components contribute
errors associated with the effect of unknown factors such
their effects in their native ratio to the determination.
as crystallization inhibitors or promoters of ion activi-
 Thus, the BRI includes an imbalance between promoters
ties; however, since the same urine sample obtained from
 and inhibitors in the individual's urine, if an imbalance
the patient is analyzed before and after equilibration with
is present; however, the BRI is a nonspecific method with
seed crystals (such as calcium oxalate), the same type of
 respect to urinary constituents as only the concentra-
error occurs in evaluation of both analyses and therefore
tion of ionized calcium is measured. Additional urinary
the errors cancel. Whereas calculation of RSS can overes-
chemistry determination may be necessary to fully eval-
 timate supersaturation, saturation, and undersaturation,
uate the metabolic status of a patient. This technique has
the APR method overestimates undersaturation, under-
not been tested in animals, and the instrument ( Urolizer,
estimates supersaturation, and correctly measures satu-
Raumedic Ag, Munchberg, Germany) is not available in
ration, provided that a sufficient amount of seed crystals
the United States.
have been used. One limitation of APR determination
is the assumption that urine has reached the SP for the
salt following 48 hours of incubation, which has been
Use of urinary saturation testing in dogs
shown to be a false assumption in some cases (Robertson 
and cats
et al. 2002). Urine may not reach true equilibrium satu-
Limited studies utilizing urine saturation testing has been
level, presumably due to presence of various inhibitors
performed in veterinary medicine, particularly in ani-
of crystal growth that slow down the approach to equi-
mals that have formed uroliths ( Table 12.1). Despite the
number of studies, very few have been performed on dogs
librium. In this instance, when the true Rss is measured
following 48 hours of seed incubation, the AP achieved
or cats that are urolith-formers and no studies exist that
at that point may be 2-3 times higher than the thermo-
 compare estimates of urinary saturation with recurrence
dynamic solubility product. The APR calculated at this
rates of uroliths. In dogs, calcium oxalate urolith forma-
point, therefore, systematically underestimates the actual
level of supersaturation since the denominator (AP/SP)
tion for calcium oxalate is greater than 10; the metastable
 is too large. The opposite may occur when the urine is
zone lies between a relative supersaturation value for cal-
undersaturated.
cium oxalate of 1 and 10-14 (Stevenson and Rutgers
2006). In cats, calcium oxalate urolith formation typ-
     so 
Bonn risk index
calcium oxalate is greater than 12; the metastable zone
A newer method for evaluating risk of calcium oxalate
lies between a relative supersaturation value for calcium
urolith formation in human beings is the use of the Bonn
oxalate of 1 and approximately 12 (Houston and Elliott
Risk Index (BR1) (Laube et al. 2000; Laube et al. 2001;
2008). Sterile struvite urolith formation in cats typically
        
occurs when urinary relative supersaturation for struvite
to a urolith-forming salt is a fundamental prerequisite
is greater than 2.5; the metastable zone lies between a rel-
 ative supersaturation value for struvite of 1 and approx-
of salt precipitation as supersaturation is the thermody-
namic driving force behind the process; however, super-
d 1a (   ) 5 
saturation alone is not sufficient to induce pathologic
 in the Table 12.1 supports these numbers, although there 
salting-out. The BRI uses the ratio calculated from the
 e ssu  e sxa 
urinary concentration ofionized calcium and the amount
for urolith formation, but as in human beings, there is an
of ammonium oxalate that is titrated to the urine in order
overlap in values between urolith-forming animals and
to induce a precipitation of calcium oxalate salts. A high
healthy, nonurolith-forming animals (Robertson et al.
BRI value indicates low risk of urolith formation (whereas
1968; Kavanagh 2006); therefore, other factors are impor-
a low RSS indicates low risk) and a low BRI indicates a
tant. Use of urinary saturation studies can provide fur-
high risk of urolith formation ( whereas a high RSS indi-
ther information on mechanisms of urolith formation,
cates high risk). BRI has been shown to correlate with
screening of animals at risk for urolith formation and
RSS (Laube et al. 200l). For crystallization to occur in
monitoring efficacy of urolith management.
Urinary saturation testing   79
Table 12.1 Summary of studies utiling relative supersaturation or activity product ratio estimates of urinary saturation in dogs and
cats. Data, when available, is presented as average (standard deviation)
Health status?
Treatment groupb
Test and resultsc
Reference
Dogs
Healthy Labrador
Maintenance dry dog food
RSSca0x = 4.60 (1.66)
(Stevenson and 
retrievers
RSSbr = 0.47 (0.23)
Markwell 2001) EQUILd
Healthy miniature
RSSca0x = 5.31 (1.62)
schnauzers
RSSbr = 1.22 (0.31)
Dogs
Healthy miniature
Adult maintenance canned diet
RSSca0x = 1.42 (0.63)
(Stevenson et al. 2000)
schnauzers, beagles,
Control diet + liquid potassium citrate
RSSmap = 2.59 (1.40)
SUPERSATe
Labrador retrievers 
Control diet + potassium citrate tablet
RSSca0x = 1.68 (0.83)
RSSmap = 3.55 (3.43)
RSSca0x = 1.24 (0.53)
RSSmap = 3.44 (2.63)
Dogs
Healthy beagles
Canned ultra-low protein, alkalinizing 
RSScaox:
一
4.02 (2.43)
(Lulich et al. 2005)
diet (0.24% DM)
RSSca0x = 2.83 (2.25)
EQUIL
Above diet + 1.2% NaCl DM
Dogs
Healthy Labrador
Maintenance dry dog food
RSSca0x = 11 (6)
(Stevenson et al. 2003)
retrievers
 Maintenance dry dog food + water
RSScaox = 9 (7)
SUPERSATe
Healthy miniature
Maintenance dry dog food + 0.05 g
RSSca0x = 9 (4)
schnauzers
NaCl/100 kcal
RSScaox = 5 (3)
Maintenance dry dog food + 0.2 g
RSSca0x = 3 (3)
NaCl/100 kcal
RSSca0x = 14 (3)
Maintenance dry dog food + 0.3 g
RSScaox = 9 (5)
NaCl/100 kca
RSSca0x = 15 (9)
Maintenance dry dog food
Maintenance dry dog food + water 
RSSca0x = 10 (6)
Maintenance dry dog food + 0.05 g
RSSca0x RSS = 6 (3)
NaCl/100 kcal)
Maintenance dry dog food + 0.2 g
NaCl/100 kcal
Maintenance dry dog food + 0.3 g
NaCl/100 kcal
Dogs
Healthy cairn terriers
Low calcium (0.18), low 0xalate (10) dry
RSScaox = 2.5 (0.5)
(Stevenson et al. 2003)
 and miniature
lap
RSSca0x = 5.2 (4)
SUPERSAT
schnauzers
Low calcium (0.18), medium oxalate
RSScaox = 4.3 (1)
(17.5) dry diet
RSSca0x = 4 (2)
Low calcium (0.18), high oxalate (25) dry
RSSca0x = 4 (2)
Moderate calcium (0.45), low oxalate
RSSca0x = 6 (5.5)
(10) dry diet
RSSca0x = 5.8 (3)
 Moderate calcium (0.45), moderate
oxalate (17.5) dry diet
High calcium (0.75), low 0xalate (10) dry
lap
High calcium (0.75), high oxalate (25) dry
diet g/100 kcal
(Continued)
80
  Diagnostic testing
Table 12.1 (Continued)
Health statusa
Treatment groupb
Test and resultsc
Reference 
sho0
Various
Stone-formers
RSSca0x = 21.4 (15.8)
(Stevenson et al. 2003)
Nonstone-formers
RSSca0x = 4.1 (2.0)
SUPERSAT
Variable diets
Dogs
Various
Stone formers——baseline
RSSca0x = 21.4 (15.8)
(Stevenson et al. 2002:
1 month
RSSca0x = 7.8 (7.1)
Stevenson et al. 2004)
12 months
RSSca0x = 5.1 (2.9)
SUPERSAT
Normal—baseline 
RSSca0x = 4.1 (2.0)
1 month
RSSca0x = 2.4 (1.4)
Baseline = variable diets
1-12 months = canned oxalate prevent
diet
Dogs
 Healthy beagles
Adult Maintenance canned diet
APRua = 0.05 (0.04)
(Bartges et al. 1995b)
Ultra-low protein, canned diet
APRnau = 0.04 (0.03)
EQUIL
APRau = 0.14 (0.07)
APRua = 0.005 (0.003)
APRnau = 0.004 (0.003)
APRau = 0.03 (0.03)
Dogs
 Healthy beagles
Ultra-low protein, canned diet with
APRua = 0.005 (0.003)
(Bartges et al. 1995c)
casein (10.4% DM)
APRnau =
 0.005 (0.003)
EQUIL
Ultra-low protein, canned diet with
APRau = 0.03 (0.009)
casein (20.8% DM)
APRua = 0.02 (0.01)
APRnau = 0.03 (0.02)
APRau = 0.13 (0.10)
Dogs
Healthy beagles
Canned diet, casein-based (10.8%
APRua = 0.007 (0.006)
(Bartges et al. 1995a)
protein DM)
APRnau = 0.015 (0.012)
EQUIL
Dry diet, egg-based (9.2% protein DM)
APRau = 0.036 (0.028)
Canned diet, chicken-based (11.1% 
APRua = 0.033 (0.026)
protein DM)
APRnau = 0.50 (0.28)
Canned diet, chicken and liver-based
APRau = 0.44 (0.33)
(10.7% protein DM)
APRua = 0.007 (0.007)
APRnau = 0.042 (0.002)
APRau = 0.052 (0.046)
APRua = 0.008 (0.006)
APRnau = 0.064 (0.075
APRau = 0.15 (0.15)
Dogs
Healthy beagles
Ultra-low protein, canned diet +
APRua = 0.01 (0.006)
(Bartges et al. 1994)
allopurinol (15 mg/kg P0 q12 h)
APRnau = 0.02 (0.013)
EQUIL
Week 4
APRau = 0.32 (0.27)
Week 8
APRxan = 0 (0)
APRua = 0.003 (0.003)
APRnau = 0.004 (0.002)
Urinary saturation testing  81
Table 12.1 (Continued)
Health statusa
Treatment groupb
Test and resultsc
Reference 
APRau = 0.03 (0.02)
APRxan = 0.26 (0.09)
APRua = 0.005 (0.003)
APRnau = 0.009 (0.004)
APRau = 0.088 (0.051)
APRxan = 0.27 (0.12)
Dogs Cats  Healthy beagles and 
Maintenance dry dog food
RSSca0x = 1.21 (0.03) S
(Robertson et al. 2002)
Labrador retrievers
Maintenance canned cat food
RSSca0x = 1.52 (0.03) E
SUPERSAT AND EQUIL
Healthy DSH cats
RSSmap = 1.48 (0.25) S
RSSmap = 6.61 (1.17) E
RSSca0x = 0.97 (0.03) S
RSSca0x = 1.14 (0.03) E
RSSmap = 1.35 (0.15) S
RSSmap = 5.74 (0.58) E
Cats
Healthy
Whiskas low pH canned
RSSmap = 0.16 (0.14)
(Markwell et al. 1999)
Waltham feline pH control canned
RSSca0x = 0.37 (0.24)
EQUIL
RSSmap = 0.58 (0.18)
RSSca0x = 0.45 (0.16)
Cats
Healthy
RC veterinary cats young adult dry
APRca0x = 1.11 (0.19)
(Devois et al. 2000)
PD feline /d dry
APRmap = 0.72 (0.28)
EQUIL
Hil's hariball control dry
APRca0x = 1.20 (0.23)
Eukanuba low pH/O dry
APRmap = 0.32 (0.06)
APRca0x = 1.21 (0.23)
APRmap = 0.66 (0.34)
APRca0x = 1.25 (0.22)
APRmap = 0.91 (0.2)
Cats
Various—stone
 Diet on which stone formed
RSSca0x = 14.3 (8.4)
(Lulich et al. 2004)
formers
Canned oxalate preventative diet
APRca0x = 3.86 (1.59)
EQUIL
RSScaox = 5.9 (1.9)
APRca0x = 2.01 (0.59)
Cats
Healthy
Adult maintenance canned diet with
RSSca0X = 4.04 (2.04)
(Xu et al. 2006)
0.4% Na
APRca0x = 6.30 (13.69)
EQUIL
Adult maintenance canned diet with 
RSSmap = 0.06 (0.04)
0.8% Na 
APRmap = 1.26 (0.51)
Adult maintenance canned diet with
RSSca0x = 2.97 (2.04)
1.2% Na
APRca0x = 4.76 (3.69)
RSSmap = 0.06 (0.04)
APRmap = 1.13 (0.51)
RSSca0x = 2.52 (2.04)
APRca0X = 4.20 (3.69)
RSSmap = 0.1 (0.04)
APRmap = 0.79 (0.51)
(Continued)
82
  Diagnostic testing
Table 12.1 (Continued)
Health statusa
Treatment groupb
Test and resultsc
Reference 
Cats
Healthy DSH
Adult maintenance, dry diet
RSScom = 3.48 (1.12)
(Hezel et al. 2007)
Diet with hydrochlorothiazide (1 mg/kg
RSScod = 1.49 (0.46)
EQUIL
PO q12 h)
RSSmap = 3.82 (2.30)
RSScom = 1.12 (0.70)
RSScod = 0.48 (0.30)
RSSmap = 1.35 (0.05)
Cats
Healthy DSH
Adult maintenance, dry diet
RSScom = 0.36 (0.33)
(Geyer et al. 2007)
Diet with prednisolone (2.2 mg/kg PO
RSScod = 0.47 (0.38)
EQUIL
q24 h)
RSSmap = 0.38 (0.32)
RSScom = 0.62 (0.42)
RSScod = 0.49 (0.40)
RSSmap = 1.59 (0.88)
Cats
Healthy DSH
Commercial adult maintenance, dry
RSSca0x = 2.96 (0.68)
(Smith et al. 1998)
foods:
RSSmap = 19.12 (5.42)
EQUIL
A
RSScaox = 5.66 (0.91)
B
RSSmap = 4.08 (1.36)
C
RSSca0x = 5.40 (0.91)
D
RSSmap = 3.22 (1.23)
E
RSSca0x = 6.52 (1.9)
F
RSSmap = 2.85 (1.43)
G
RSScaox = 2.88 (1.69)
H
RSSmap = 2.98 (2.22)
RSSca0x = 1.30 (0.52)
RSSmap = 1.63 (1.14)
RSSca0x = 3.68 (2.09)
RSSmap = 0.85 (0.69)
RSSca0x = 3.47 (1.59)
RSSmap = 12.18
RSSca0x = 2.32 (1.15)
RSSmap = 0.75 (0.37)
Cats   Healthy
Purified adult maintenance diet
pSAPcalc = 9.18 (0.83)
(Buffington et al. 1990)
Purified diet with 0.45% MgCl
pSAPeoum = 10.76 (0.65)
Hand calculated or
Purified diet with 0.45% Mg0xide
pSAPcalc = 11.40 (0.24)
EQUIL
Adult maintenance canned diet
pSAPeQUIL = 12.10 (0.24)
Adult struvite preventative canned diet
pSAPcalc = 7.80 (0.91)
pSAPEQuL = 10.21 (0.60)
pSAPcalc = 10.78 (0.38)
pSAPeou = 11.61 (0.28)
pSAPcalc = 10.11 (0.66)
pSAPeoull = 11.32 (0.38)
Urinary saturation testing  83
Table 12.1 (Continued)
Health status?
Treatment groupb
Test and resultsc
Reference 
Cats
Healthy
Dry diet with 29% protein DM corn
pSAP = 9.07 (0.34)
(Funaba et al. 1996)
gluten and fish meal
pSAP = 9.91 (0.34)
Hand calculated
Dry diet with 55% protein DM corn
gluten and fish meal
Cats
Healthy
Dry diet with 32.6% protein as meat meal
pSAP = 10.17 (0.34)
(Funaba et al. 2002)
Dry diet with 32.5% protein as corn
pSAP = 10.11 (0.34)
Hand calculated 
 gluten meal
Cats
Healthy
Adult dry diet with 39% protein DM as
pSAP = 9.27 (0.31)
(Funaba et al. 2005)
meat meal
pSAP = 9.20 (0.31)
Hand calculated
Adult dry diet with 39% protein DM as
pSAP = 9.61 (0.52)
 chicken meal 
Adult dry diet with 39% protein DM as
corn gluten meal
Cats
Healthy
Dry diet (72% protein, 7.5% fat, 14%
pSAP = 9.45 (0.38)
(Funaba et al. 2004)
NFE, 0.4% fiber DM)
pSAP = 9.04 (0.55)
Hand calculated
Dry diet (52% protein, 9% fat, 32% NFE.
pSAP = 9.29 (0.42)
0.8% fiber DM)
pSAP = 9.48 (0.39)
Dry diet (52% protein, 14% fat, 25% NFE.
pSAP = 9.05 (0.45)
3.3% fiber DM)
pSAP = 8.99 (0.39)
Diets as above, but daily intake
 normalized for protein
Dry diet (72% protein, 7.5% fat, 14%
NFE, 0.4% fiber DM)
Dry diet (52% protein, 9% fat, 32% NFE,
0.8% fiber DM)
Dry diet (52% protein, 14% fat, 25% NFE.
3.3% fiber DM)
Cats
Healthy
Adult dry diet with 29% protein DM
pSAP = 9.08 (0.68)
(Funaba et al. 2003)
Adult dry diet with 55% protein DM
pSAP = 9.71 (0.63)
Hand calculated 
Adult dry diet with 29% protein DM
pSAP = 8.81 (0.45)
Same diet with 1.5% ammonium chloride
pSAP = 9.00 (0.73)
Same diet with 0.75% sodium chloride
pSAP = 10.56 (0.66)
Cats
Healthy
Adult maintenance dry diet
pSAP = 9.71 (1.13)
(Funaba et al. 2001)
Diet with 1% D,L-methionine
pSAP = 9.46 (1.13)
Hand calculated
Diet with 2% D,L-methionine
pSAP = 10.61 (1.13)
Experimental diet with 27% protein DM
pSAP = 8.43 (3.04)
Experimental diet with 1.5% ammonium
pSAP = 9.65 (3.04)
chloride
Cats
Healthy
 Adult maintenance canned diet 
RSSmap = 5.70 (4.74)
(Buffington et al. 1997)
Diet + 0.1 mg/BWkg takushya
pSAPmap = 9.52 (0.44)
EQUIL
Diet + 0.5 mg/BWkg choreito
RSSmap = 3.47 (2.02)
pSAPmap = 9.76 (0.45)
RSSmap = 2.53 (2.56)
pSAPmap = 9.92 (0.44)
(Continued)
84
4   Diagnostic testing
Table 12.1 (Continued)
Health statusa
Treatment groupb
Test and resultsc
Reference
Cats
Healthy
Adult maintenance canned diet
pSAP = 8.5 (0.3)
(Buffington et al. 1992)
Same diet with 0.25 gm/Bwkg chorieto
pSAP = 8.9 (0.3)
Same diet with 0.5 gm/Bwkg chorieto
pSAP = 9.2 (0.6)
Same diet with 1 gm/BWkg chorieto
pSAP = 9.2 (0.6)
Same diet with 2 gm/BWkg chorieto
pSAP = 9.3 (0.4)
 Same diet with 4 gm/Bwkg chorieto
pSAP = 9.4 (0.2)
Healthy
Adult maintenance dry struvite
APRmap = 0.47 (0.31)
(Bartges et al. 1998)
preventive diet
APRca0x = 2.51 (1.15)
Adult maintenance canned struvite
APRmap = 0.68 (0.29)
preventative diet
APRca0x = 1.43 (1.27)
Adult maintenance dry high fiber diet
APRmap = 0.84 (0.49)
Adult maintenance canned high fiber diet
APRca0x = 2.21 (0.90)
APRmap = 1.98 (0.96)
APRca0x = 0.52 (0.30)
 Healthy—non-urolith-forming animals; DSH, domestic short-hair.
bNFE, nitrogen free extract.
CRSScaox, relative supersaturation for calcium xalate; APRcaox, activity product ratio for calcium oxalate; RSSmap, relative supersaturation
for struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate): APRmap, activity product ratio for struvite; RSscom, relative supersaturation for calcium
oxalate monohydrate; RSScod, relative supersaturation for calcium oxalate dihydrate; RSSbr, relative supersaturation for brushite; APRua,
activity product ratio for uric acid; APRnau, activity product ratio for sodium urate; APRau, activity product ratio for ammonium urate;
APRxan, activity product ratio for xanthine: pSAP, negative logarithm of struvite activity product where pSAP is negatively related to
struvite crystal formation.
dEQUIL, EQUIL program (various versions), Collge of Medicine, University of Florida.
eSUPERSAT, SUPERSAT program by Dr. W.G. Robertson. Values are approximate based on figure in manuscript: results were not incuded
in table in text.
References
Brown, C. and D. Purich ( 1992). Physical-chemical processes in kidney
stone formation. In: Disorders of Bone and Mineral Metabolism,
Bartges, J.W., et al. (1994). Influence of chronic allopurinol adminis-
edited by F. Coe and M. Favus. New York: Raven Press, pp. 613-
tration on urine activity product ratios of uric acid, sodium urate,
624.
ammonium urate and xanthine. I Vet Irtern Med 8: 168A.
Buffington, C.A., et al. (1992). Effect of choreito on struvite solubility
Bartges, I.W., et al. ( 1995a). Influence of four diets containing approx-
in cats. Feline Pract 20(6): 13-17.
imately 11% protein (dry weight) on uric acid, sodium urate, and
 Buffington, C.A., et al. ( 1997). Effects of choreito and takushya con-
ammonium urate urine activity product ratios of healthy beagles.
sumption on in vitro and in vivo struvite solubility in cat urine. Am
Am I Vet Res 56( 1): 60-65.
I Vet Res 58(2): 150-152.
Bartges, I.W., et al. (1995b). Diet effect on activity product ratios of
Buffington, C.A., et al. ( 1990). Effect of diet on struvite activity product
uric acid, sodium urate, and ammonium urate in urine formed by
infelineurine.AmVetRes51{12):2025-2030.
healthy beagles. Atmn I Vet Res 56(3): 329-333.
Coe, F. and J. Parks ( 1988). Nephrolithiasis: Pathogenesis and Treatment.
Bartges, J.W., et al. ( 1995c). Influence of two amounts of dietary casein
Chicago, IL: Year Book Medical Publishers Inc.
on uric acid, sodium urate, and ammonium urate urinary activity
Coe, F.L., et al. (1992). The pathogenesis and treatment of kidney
product ratios of healthy beagles. Am I Vet Res 56(7): 893-897.
stones. N Engl I Med 327(16): 1141-1152.
Bartges, I.W., et al. (1998). Comparison of struvite activity product
 David, R., et al. (200l). Developments in the understanding and mod-
ratios and relative supersaturations in urine collected from healthy
cats consuming four struvite management diets. St. Louis, MO:
solution. KONA Powder and Particle 21: 40-46.
Ralston Purina Nutrition Symposium.
Devois, C., et al. (2000). Struvite and Oxalate Activity Product Ratios
Bartges, J.W., et al. (1999). Methods for evaluating treatment of
and Crystalluria in Catsfed Acidifying Diets Capetown, South Africa:
uroliths. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 29(1): 45-57.
Urolithiasis, pp. 821-822.
 Brown, C., et al. ( 1994). EQUIL 93: a tool for experimental and clinical
Finlayson, B. ( 1978). Physiochemical aspects of urolithiasis. Kidney Int
urolithiasis. Urol Res 22: 119-126.
13: 344-360.
Urinary saturation testing  8
85
Finlayson, B. and G.H.J. Miller ( 1969). Urine ion equilibria: a numer-
Lulich, J.P, et al. (2005). Effects of dietary supplementation with
ical approach demonstrated by application to antistone therapy.
sodium chloride on urinary relative supersaturation with calcium
Ivest Urol 6(4): 428-440.
Oxalate in healthy dogs. Arm I Vet Res 66(2): 319-324.
Funaba, M., et al. (1996). Effects of a high-protein diet on mineral
Markwell, P.J., et al. (1999). A non-invasive method for assessing the
metabolism and struvite activity product in clinically normal cats.
effect of diet on urinary calcium oxalate and struvite relative super-
Arm I Vet Res 57(12): 1726- 1732.
saturation in the cat. Arim Tech 50(2): 6l-67.
Funaba, M., et al. (200l). Effect of supplermentation of dry cat food
Pak, C.Y.C., et al. {1977). Estimation of the state of saturation of
with D,L-methionine and ammonium chloride on struvite activity
brushite and calcium oxalate in urine: A comparison of three meth-
product and sediment in urine. I Vet Med Sci63(3): 337-339.
ods. I Lab Clir Med 89(4): 891-901.
Funaba, M., et al. (2002). Comparison of corn gluten meal and meat
Robertson, W.G., et al. (2002). Predicting the crystallization potential
meal as a protein source in dry foods formulated for cats. Am I Vet
of urine from cats and dogs with respect to calcium oxalate and
Res 63(9): 1247-1251.
magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite). I Nutr 132(6 Suppl
Funaba, M., et al. (2003). Effects of a high-protein diet versus dietary
2): 1637S-1641S.
supplementation with ammonium chloride on struvite crystal for-
Robertson, W.G., et al. ( 1968). Activity products in stone-forming and
mation in urine of clinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res 64(8):
non-stone forming urine. Clirn Sci 34: 579-594.
1059-1064.
Smith, B.H., et al. ( 1998). Urinary relative supersaturations of calcium
Funaba, M., et al. (2004). Evaluation of effects of dietary carbohydrate
oxalate and struvite in cats are influenced by diet. I Nutr 128(12
on formation of struvite crystals in urine and macromineral balance
Suppl): 2763S-2764S.
in clinically normal cats. A I Vet Res 65(2): 138- 142.
Stevenson, A.E. and C. Rutgers (2006). Nutritional management of
Funaba, M., et al. (2005). Evaluation of meat meal, chicken meal, and
canine urolithiasis. In: Encyclopedia of Canine Clinical Nutrition,
corn gluten meal as dietary sources of protein in dry cat food. Car
edited by P. Pibot, V. Biourge, and D.A. Elliott. Aimargues, France:
I Vet Res 69(4): 299-304.
Aniwa SAS-Royal Canin, pp. 284-315.
Geyer, N., et al. (2007). Influence of prednisolone on urinary calcium
Stevenson, A.E. and P.J. Markwell (2001). Comparison of urine com-
oxalate and struvite relative supersaturation in healthy young adult
 position of healthy Labrador retrievers and miniature schnauzers.
female domestic shorthaired cats. Vet Ther 8(4): 239-246.
Am I Vet Res 62(11): 1782-1786.
Hezel, A., et al. (2007). Influence of hydrochlorothiazide on urinary cal-
 Stevenson, A.E., et al. (2000). Effects of dietary potassium citrate sup-
cium oxalate relative supersaturation in healthy young adult female
plementation on urine pH and urinary relative supersaturation of
domestic shorthaired cats. Vet Ther 8(4): 247-254.
  i      s  x 
Hounslow, M.J., et al. (200l). A micro-mechanical model for the rate
430-435.
ofaggregation during precipitation from solution. Chem Eng Sci 56:
 Stevenson, A.E., et al. (2002). The effect of diet on calcium oxalate
2543-2552.
urinary relative supersaturation (RSS) of stone-forming (SF) and
Houston, D.M. and D.A. Elliott (2008). Nutritional management of
normal (N) dogs. I Vet Intern Med 16(3): 377.
feline lower urinary tract disorders. In: Encyclopedia ofFeline Clinica?
Stevenson, A.E., et al. (2003). Effect of dietary moisture and sodium
Nutrition, edited by P Pibot, V. Biourge, and D.A. Elliott. Aimargues,
France: Anawa SAS-Royal Canin, pp. 285-321.
saturation in healthy miniature schnauzers and Labrador retrievers.
Kavanagh, J. P. (2006). Supersaturation and renal precipitation: the
Res Vet Sci 74(2): 145- 151.
key to stone formation? Urol Res 34(2): 81-85.
Stevenson, A.E., et al. (2003). Risk factor analysis and relative supersat-
Laube, N., et al. (2000). A new approach to calculate the risk of calcium
uration as tools for identifying calcium oxalate stone-forming dogs.
   a aa a   
I Small Anim Pract 44( 11): 491-496.
274-280.
Stevenson, A.E., et al. (2003). The relative effects of supplermental
Laube, N., etal. (2001). Testing thepredictability ofthe relative urinary
dietary calcium and oxalate on urine composition and calcium
supersaturation from the Bonn-Risk-Index forcalciumoxalate stone
 i s s     u 
formation. Clin Chem Lab Med 39( 10): 966-969.
75( 1): 33-41.
Laube, N., et al. (2003). Influence of urinary stones on the composition 
 Stevenson, A.E., et al. (2004). Nutrient intake and urine composition
of a 24-hour urine sample. Clin Chem 49(2): 281-285.
in calcium oxalate stone-forming dogs: comparison with healthy
Laube, N., et al. (2004). Determination of the calcium oxalate crystal-
dogs and impact of dietary modification. Vet Ther 5(3): 218-
lization risk from urine samples: the BONN-Risk-Index in compar-
231.
ison to other risk formulas. I Urol 172(1): 355-359.
Werness, P.G., et al. ( 1985). Equil 2: a basic computer program for the
Lulich, I.P., et al. (2004). Effects of diet on urine composition of cats 
calculation of urinary saturation. J Urol 134: 1242- 1244.
with calcium oxalate urolithiasis. I Arm Arirm Hosp Assoc 4D(3):
Xu, H., et al. (2006). Effect of dietary sodium on urine characteristics
185-191.
in healthy adult cats (abstract). I Vet Intern Med 20(3): 738.
13
Blood pressure determination
Rebecca L. Stepien
"Systemic hypertension” refers to a sustained increase in
Evidence of target organ damage
blood pressure (BP) (Brown et al. 2007) and has been
Target organs most frequently affected by systemic hyper-
documented as a cause of progressive renal damage in
tension include the eyes, brain, kidneys, and heart (Brown
dogs and cats (see Chapters 48 and 68) (Mathur et al.
et al. 2007). When there is evidence of TOD, BP should
2002; Jacob et al. 2003; Finco 2004; et al. 2002). Accu-
be measured at the earliest possible occasion to confirm
rate measurement and effective management of elevated
or rule out systemic hypertension as the cause of clinical
systemic BP is a critical component in managing renal
signs. Other diagnostic testing is recommended based on
disease in dogs and cats, decreasing proteinuria, (Brown
clinical presentation ( Table 13.1). Detection of compati-
et al. 1993; Grauer et al. 2000) and prolonging survival
ble ocular or central nervous system signs in the presence
(Jepson et al. 2007; Wehner et al. 2008). Additionally, suc-
 of elevated BP measurements is considered an emergency
cessful therapy of systemic hypertension may circumvent
and therapy should begin as soon as hypertensive status
critical target organ damage (TOD) in the eyes, brain,
is detected.
kidneys, and heart (Kyles et al. 1999; Maggio et al. 2000;
Brown et al. 2007; Jepson et al. 2007).
Presence of systemic disease causally
associated with systemic hypertension
Indications for blood pressure determination
Certain systemic diseases ( Table 13.2) are known to cause
Blood pressure assessment is indicated when there is evi-
systemic hypertension in some affected dogs and cats
dence of TOD or when diseases known to be associ-
(Anderson and Fisher 1968; Cowgill and Kallet 1983;
ated with systemic hypertension are documented or sus-
Gilson et al. 1994; Ortega et al. 1996; Barthezet al. (1997);
pected. Blood pressure measurement in normal, healthy
Struble et al. 1998; Rapoport and Stepien 2001; Syme et al.
young animals is not recommended unless evidence of
2002; Syme and Elliott 2003; Brown et al. 2007). Screen-
ing BP measurements are indicated in patients with
yearly BP measurements may be useful since renal dis-
these diagnoses or in patients who are suspected to have
ease and hyperthyroidism are prevalent in elderly cats.
these diagnoses. If signs of TOD are present in patients
If elevated BP is detected in a patient without signs of
with these diagnoses, systemic hypertension is a likely
TOD, a repeat measurement occasion should be sched-
cause of the signs of TOD and BP should be measured
uled within several hours to 7 days to confirm the abnor-
immediately.
mal measurement.
 At present, renal diseases represent the most common
cause of systemic hypertension in both dogs and cats, and
allrenal patients should undergo BP screening as soon as
their renal disease is recognized. Prevalence of systemic
hypertension in chronic renal disease patients with or
       i  
9-93% (most studies report rates of 60-80%) in dogs
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
(Cowgill and Kallet 1983; Cortadellas et al. 2006) and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
20-65% in cats (Kobayashi et al. 1990; Syme et al. 2002).
86
Blood pressure determination   87
Table 13.1 Clinical signs of target organ damage and additional recommended testing
 Target organs affected 
 Associated dinical findings
Recommended diagnostic testing
Eyes
Acute blindness due to retinal detachment or
Complete fundoscopic examination (multiple
severe hyphema
examinations may be required)
Retinal hemorrhage
Assessment for coagulopathies may be indicated in
Retinal vascular narrowing or tortuosity
 patients with hyphema or retinal hemorrhage
Focal retinal transudates
Focal retinal ischemic degeneration
Partial/complete retinal detachment
Papilledema
Brain
Seizures (focal facial or grand mal)
Complete neurologic examination
"Stroke-like" intracranial neurologic deficits
Additional imaging (e.g., MRI)
 Decreased mentation
Photophobia
Nystagmus
Kidneys
Proteinuria
Serum BUN and creatinine
Microalbuminuria
Complete urinalysis
 Progressive decrease in function 
Quantitation of proteinuria/microalbuminuria
Advanced renal testing (e.g., GFR)
Heart 
LV concentric hypertrophy
Auscultation
Arrhythmia
 Thoracic radiographs
 Gallop rhythm
Echocardiography
Systolic heart murmur
Doppler echocardiography may be required to rule
Increased sensitivity to fluid loading (unexpected
out other causes of LV hypertrophy (e.g., subaortic
acute heart failure after fluid administration)
stenosis)
Epistaxis
Note: Recommended testing list is not exhaustive, additional testing may be indicated in individual patients.
BUN, blood urea nitrogen; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LV, left ventricle.
Table 13.2 Diseases causally associated with systemic hypertension in dogs and cats
Both species 
 Renal disease (acute or chronic, proteinuric, or nonproteinuric)
 Diabetes mellitus
 Pheochromocytoma
Hyperaldosteronism 
Dogs
Cats
Above plus:
Above plus:
Hyperadrenocorticism
 Hyperthyroidism
Prevalence of systemic hypertension is variable among diseases and between species
and some reports are anecdotal.
See references for more specific information. In some cases, the cause of systemic
hypertension may not be dlear (i.e., "idiopathic hypertension").
88   Diagnostic testing
 Prevalence of systemic hypertension in acute renal fail-
ure in dogs is also high (Francey and Cowgill 2004).
Some renal patients may develop systemic hypertension
after initially having had normal BP (Jacob et al. 2003),
s0 renal patients with normal initial BP values should
have BP assessed at regular intervals after their renal
diagnosis.
Methods of measuring blood pressure
Commonly available methods to assess BP in dogs and
cats include direct measurement (via arterial puncture
or arterial cannulation) or indirect (noninvasive) meth-
ods, including Doppler sphygmomanometry (DS) and
oscillometry (OSC). More recently, high-definition oscil-
lometry (HDO) has been used to measurement BP non-
invasively, but results may be not comparable to other
methods and repeatable measurements may be difficult
(a)
to obtain in cats (Jepson et al. 2005). “Standard" OSC
is recommended for clinical use until more comparative
information is available.
No matter which method is used, three rules of BP
measurement apply (1) the patient should be unsedated
but calm (5-10 minutes of acclimatization in a quiet area
is recommended before clinical BP measurement), (2)
 3-5 replicates are obtained and the mean value is used for
analysis, and (3) since diastolic BP measured by indirect
methods is somewhat unreliable, systolic BP is typically
tast
used for clinical decision-making.
(b)
Figure 13.1 (a) A disposable pressure transducer attached to a
Direct BP measurement
22-gauge, 1-inch needle for acute arterial puncture. The trans-
-  d e  d jo  
ducer, needle, and attached tubing are flushed with heparinized
rial cannulation provides a “gold standard" assessment of
saline prior to use, to eject any air bubbles. (b) An arterial pressure
blood pressure, but is more time-consuming and requires
trace from a femoral artery puncture in a dog. The pressure scale
in mmHg appears on the left. This dog's blood pressure is approx-
an increased level of clinical skill for daily use. In addition,
imately 200/100 mmHg. Syst refers t0 systolic blood pressure and
use of more peripheral arteries for puncture or cannu-
diast refers to diastolic blood pressure.
lation (e.g-, dorsal pedal artery versus proximal femoral
artery) will, due to the elastic properties of arterial walls,
deliver higher systolic and lower diastolic pressures than
and the transducer is zeroed to room air at the level of
more central arteries. Acute arterial puncture is not rec-
the sternum in the laterally recumbent patient.
 ommended in cats; if direct BP measurement is required,
For most dogs, direct arterial puncture is most eas-
a femoral arterial catheter may be inserted with use of a
ily performed with the patient gently restrained in lat-
local anesthetic.
Prior to measurement, a clinical pressure monitor or
in the femoral triangle, on the most proximal portion
measurement system with print capabilities should be
of the inner thigh. The area over the artery is clipped
calibrated according to manufacturer's instructions. A
and approximately 0.5-1 cc of local anesthetic (lidocaine
 pressure transducer is attached to the monitor with stiff
hydrochloride, 2% solution) is injected subcutaneously.
and relatively short connection tubing and the needle
After several minutes, the artery is again palpated and
(22-gauge, 1-inch needles are typically used for arterial
the needle advanced into the artery until a waveform
puncture) is attached directly to the transducer (Figure
 is detected on the monitor. A paper trace of the pres-
13.1a). The transducer, tubing, and needle are carefully
 sure waveform is printed (Figure 13.1b) and the needle is
flushed with heparinized saline to eject any air bubbles 
withdrawn with immediate firm pressure applied to the
Blood pressure determination 89
 artery at the level of the puncture to prevent hemorrhage.
Manual pressure should be maintained on the puncture
site for approximately 5 minutes with close monitoring
thereafter to avoid possible hematoma development.
Arterial catheterization may be used for BP monitor-
ing over time in patients during anesthesia or in critical
care situations. “"Over-the-needle" or cephalic catheters
are typically placed in the dorsal pedal artery in the awake
animal. The area over the palpable dorsal pedal arterial
pulse is clipped and prepped for catheter placement and
an appropriately-sized catheter (20-23-gauge based on
 patient size) is placed with a technique similar to cephalic
catheter placement. A flushed transducer/tubing appara-
tus is zeroed to room air at the level of the patient's atria
(the thoracic inlet in the sternal patient and the sternum
in the lateral patient). Once the arterial catheter is in
 place and secured, a flushed transducer/tubing apparatus
is attached and the pressure waveform is read and printed
off the patient monitor Note that the catheter must be at
the approximate level of the heart and transducer when
BP is recorded.
Figure 13.2 A Doppler sphygomomanometric technique is used
Indirect (noninvasive) BP measurement
to measure blood pressure in a sitting cat. Note that the cuff
is wrapped around the mid-level radius and the limb is gently
DS or oscillometric BP measurement systems use a
held in extension with the cuff at the level of the heart during 
 BP cuff wrapped around a forelimb, hindlimb, or tail-
measurement.
head and a manual (DS) or automated (OSC) infla-
tion/deflation cycle to detect the pressure required to
Oscillometry
occlude a peripheral artery.
Oscillometric BP devices deliver systolic, diastolic, and
mean BP values as well as heart rate. These systems are
Doppler sphygmomanometry
most reliable in cats when a tailhead cuff is used in unre-
Using DS methods to measure BP requires a BP cuff
strained sternal recumbency (Figure 13.3a), but forelimb
(premeasured and sized such that the width of the cuff is
(radial level), hindlimb (metatarsal level or proximal to
approximately 40% of the circumference of the limb or
hock in recumbent animal, Figure 13.3b), or tailhead (in
tail at the level of cuff placement), a Doppler probe with
standing or recumbent animals) cuffs may be used in
coupling gel attached to an audio amplifier, and an infla-
dogs. The cuff width is chosen similarly to the DS tech-
tion bulb with pressure dial (sphygmomanometer, Figure
nique. The cuff is positioned with the bladder of the cuff
13.2). In dogs and cats, the forelimb is the most common
 squarely over the artery and secured. The OSC machine is
 measurement site with the animal in lateral recumbency
or sitting. The cuff is placed at mid-antebrachium and
values of five replicates are used as representative values,
attached to the sphygmomanometer. The probe (with
with any obvious erroneous or outlying values discarded.
coupling gel) is held or taped in place over an artery
OSC equipment may be unable to read BP accurately
distal to the cuff (usually the palmar arterial arch) and
          
the position is adjusted until a clear pulsatile signal can
present.
be detected. The cuff is inflated to approximately 20-40
mmHg past the point at which the sound of blood flow is
Record keeping
occluded and then slowly deflated. The pressure at which
the sound signal reappears is recorded as the systolic
Each individual measurement plus the averages should
BP. As the cuff is further deflated, the audio signal will
be recorded in the patient record along with heart rate
become muffled——-this pressure may be recorded as dias-
and assessment of patient demeanor during the exam.
tolic BP, but is less reliable than the systolic BP recorded
In addition, the technique, cuff size, and cuff position
by this method.
should be recorded so that the same technique and
90
 Diagnostic testing
Cortadellas, O., et al. (2006). Systermic hypertension in dogs with leish-
maniasis: prevalence and clinical consequences. J Vet Irterm Med 20:
94 1-947.
Cowgill, L.G. and A.J. Kallet ( 1983). Recognition and management of
hypertension in the dog. In: Current Veterinary Therapy VIHl: Small
Arirmal Practice, edited by R.W. Kirk and J.D. Bonagura. Philadel-
phia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1025-1028.
Finco, D.R. (2004). Association of systermic hypertension with renal
injury in dogs with induced renal failure. I Vet Intern Med 18:
289-294.
 Francey, T. and L.D. Cowgill (2004). Hypertension in dogs with severe
acute renal failure (abstract). I Vet Interm Med 18: 418.
Gilson, S.D., et al. (1994). Pheochromocytoma in 50 dogs. I Vet Int
(a)
Med 8(3): 228-232.
Grauer, G.F, et al. (2000). Effects of enalapril versus placebo as a
treatment for canine idiopathic glomerulonephritis. J Vet Imtern
Med 14: 526-533.
Jacob, F, et al. (2003). Association between initial systolic blood
pressure and risk of developing a uremic crisis or of dying in
dogs with chronic renal failure. I Am Vet Med Assoc 222(3): 322-
329.
Jepson, R.E., et al. (2005). A comparison of CAT Doppler and oscillo-
metric Memoprint machines for non-invasive blood pressure mea-
surement in conscious cats. I Feline Med Surg 7: 147-152.
Jepson, R.E., et al. (2007). Effect of control of systolic blood pressure
on survival in cats with systemic hypertension. I Vet Interm Med 21:
402-409.
 Kobayashi, D.L., et al. ( 1990). Hypertension in cats with chronic renal
failure or hyperthyroidism. I Vet Intern Med 4: 58-62.
Kyles, A.E., et al. ( 1999). Management of hypertension controls post-
(q)
operative neurologic disorders after renal transplantation. Vet Surg
Figure 13.3 (a) A sternally recumbent cat with oscillometric blood
28: 436-44 1.
pressure measurement using a tail cuff. The cat is minimally
 Maggio, F, et al. (2000). Ocular lesions associated with systemic hyper-
tension in cats: 69 cases (1985-1998). I Am Vet Med Assoc 217:
restrained after a period of calming prior to measurement. (b)
695702.
A dog with oscillometric blood pressure assessment using a distal
Mathur, S., et al. (2002). Efects of the calcium channel antagonist
hindlimb cuff at the level of the metatarsals. The dog is relaxed
amlodipine in cats with surgically induced hypertensive renal insuf-
and minimally restrained on a comfortable surface, with the cuff
ficiency. Am I Vet Res 63(6): 833-839.
 at the level of the sternum in the laterally recumbent dog.
Ortega, T.M., et al. (1996). Systemic arterial blood pressure and urine
equipment can be used at the next measurement. This
Vet Med Assoc 209( 10): 1724- 1729.
information increases the reliability of measurements
Rapoport, G.S. and R.L. Stepien (200l). Direct arterial blood pres-
sure measurement in 54 dogs presented for systemic hypertension
and can be used as future measurements are compared
screening 1998-2001 (abstract). Proc 11th Congress, European Soci-
to measurements already recorded.
ety of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Dublin, Ireland.
Struble, A.L., et al. (1998). Systemic hypertension and proteinuria
References
in dogs with diabetes mellitus. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 213(6): 822-
825.
Anderson, L.J. and E.W. Fisher (1968). The blood pressure in canine
 Syme, H.M., et al. (2002). Prevalence of systolic hypertension in cats
interstitial nephritis. Res Vet Sci 9: 304-313.
with chronic renal failure at initial evaluation. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Barthez, P.Y., et al. (1997)). Pheochromocytoma in dogs: 61 cases
220(12): 1799-1804.
(1984-1995). I Vet Interm Med 11: 272-278.
Syme, H.M. and J. Elliott (2003). The prevalence of hypertension in
Brown, S.A., et al. ( 1993). Long-term effects of antihypertensive reg-
hyperthyroid cats at diagnosis and following treatment (abstract).
imens on renal hemodynamics and proteinuria. Kidney Int 43:
Proc 13th Congress, European Society of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
1210-1218.
Uppsala, Sweden.
Brown, S., et al. (2007). Guidelines for the identification, evaluation
Wehner, A., et al. (2008). Associations between proteinuria, systemic
 f si pe sp u usad s yo su pue
hypertension and glomerular fltration rate in dogs with renal and
Interr Med 21: 542-558.
non-renal diseases. Vet Rec 162: 141-147.
14
Renal function testing
Herve P. Lefebvre
The interpretation of tests of renal function in dogs and
Rationally established reference intervals for dogs have
cats requires specific knowledge of renal physiology (see
paradoxically not been published in a peer-reviewed jour-
Chapter 2) and information, when available, about intra-
nal. The upper limit of the reference interval for most
and inter-individual variability, analytical factors of vari-
analyzers, generally ranges from 1.3 to 1.6 mg/dL. How-
ation, and specificity/sensitivity. Glomerular function is
 ever plasma creatinine is higher in dogs with BW>25 kg
generally considered as the best indicator of renal func-
(upper limit: 1.7-1.8 mg/dL) than in dogs with BW <10
tion. Indirect tests are used for practical reasons, but
kg (upper limit: 0.9 mg/dL) (Craig et al. 2006). Basal
direct testing is more sensitive and should be encour-
plasma creatinine is higher in the cat, and also increases
aged.
slightly with body weight. The reference interval in
 domestic short-haired cats is 1.0-2.3 mg/dL (Reynolds
Testing glomerular function
et al. 2008).
An abnormally high plasma creatinine value is
Indirect tests
assumed to indicate the loss of at least 65-75% of the
Azotemia is defined as an increased plasma urea and/or
renal functional mass. However, sensitivity (or speci-
ficity) is not very high in dogs (Gleadhill, 1994; Braun
creatinine concentration. Assessment ofthe azotemic sta-
and Lefebvre, 2005). Subtle changes in renal function
tus is essential in the diagnosis, prognosis, and follow-up
 can be detected by repeating plasma creatinine mea-
of patients with chronic kidney disease or acute renal
surements over time under well-standardized conditions
injury.
(Lees, 2004). The critical difference, that is, minimal dif-
Creatinine
ference between two consecutive measurements in the
same individual which may be an increase or a decrease,
Plasma creatinine concentration is currently considered
is about 0.4 mg/dL in healthy dogs ( Jensen and Aes, 1993).
as the best indirect marker of GFR and is also used by
The inverse curvilinear relationship existing between
the International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) to stage
plasma creatinine and GFR in dogs (Finco et al. 1995)
canine and feline CKD (see Chapter 48). Creatinine is
should be taken into account for clinical interpretation
produced by degradation of creatine and creatine phos-
 phate in skeletal muscles. The normal daily input into
(Figure 14.1).
plasma is about 45 and 65 mg/kg BW in dogs and cats,
A decrease in plasma creatinine has been reported in
respectively. Creatinine is distributed in the body water,
portosystemic shunts in dogs and hyperthyroidism in
filtered by the glomeruli, not reabsorbed and not or neg-
cats. Thus, the sensitivity of plasma creatinine to detect
CKD in such patients is decreased.
ligibly secreted. The plasma half-life of creatinine is about
3 hours in healthy dogs and cats (Watson et al. 2002; Le
 Garreres et al. 2007). The major preanalytical, analytical
Urea
and physiological factors of variations are listed in Tables
Urea is the main form in which nitrogen is eliminated
14.1 and 14.2 (Braun et al. 2003).
from the body and its metabolism is presented in Figure
14.2.
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
Plasma/serum urea concentration (1 mmol/L = 6
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
mg/dL) can also be expressed as blood urea nitrogen
91
92
2 Diagnostic testing
Table 14.1 Preanalytical and analytical factors of variation of plasma/serum creatinine in dogs
Factor of variation
Comment
Specimen
Differences between serum and plasma creatinine are negligible
Stability
Creatinine is stable for up to 4 days in canine whole blood at 4°℃, and in serum/heparinized plasma at room
temperature.
Analytical techniques
Enzymatic procedures, used by veterinary analyzers, are preferred to the nonspecific Jaffé reaction because
the analytical interference is less.
Between-laboratory
Differences may exist from analyzer to analyzer, and from laboratory to laboratory. The same
variation
 analyzer/laboratory should be used to follow-up renal function
(BUN) or serum urea nitrogen (BUN (mg/dL) x 2.14 =
of GFR in dogs. No advantage of plasma cystatin C over
Plasma urea (mg/dL)). The stabilities of urea and cre-
plasma creatinine has been evidenced in dogs (Almy et al.
atinine in blood or plasma are very similar. The upper
2002).
limit for plasma urea is generally about 55-65 mg/dL
(i.e., 25-30 mg/dL for BUN). Plasma urea and creatinine
 are both similarly affected by age and meals. Plasma urea
Assessment of glomeruiar fitration rate
 is increased in renal failure but is not a good indirect
Definition, clearance concept and GFR
indicator of GFR because of its tubular re-absorption.
markers
Moreover multiple extrarenal factors of variation exist
(Figure 14.2). The sensitivity and specificity of plasma
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is considered as the best
urea in renal dysfunction diagnosis is unknown. The
indicator of overall renal function. It is defined as the
estimated critical difference for plasma urea in dogs is
volume of ultrafltrate produced by glomerular filtration
14.4 mg/dL (i.e., BUN = 6.7 mg/dL) for a mean value
per unit of time. GFR can be calculated from the uri-
of 30.0 mg/dL (i.e., BUN = 14.0 mg/dL) (Jensen and
nary/plasma clearance of appropriate markers. Clearance
Aes, 1993). Although the clinical relevance of the plasma
is a proportionality constant, describing the relation-
urea to creatinine ratio remains questionable (Finco and
ship between the rate of transfer of a substance (amount
 Duncan, 1976), it may be increased during excessive pro.
 per unit of time) and its concentration in urine and/or
tein catabolism or early prerenal azotemia, as observed
plasma.
in dogs with heart disease (Nicolle et al. 2007). Inversely
A GFR marker should satisfy the following criteria: it
it may be decreased by severe protein malnutrition.
must be freely filtered by the glomeruli, not be reabsorbed
or secreted by the renal tubule, not be metabolized or
produced by the kidney and not alter the GFR value.
Cystatin C
The marker should also be totally cleared by the kidneys
This small constitutive protein is synthesized by all nucle-
when a plasma clearance approach is used. The main GFR
ated cells and has been proposed as an indirect marker
markers in dogs and cats are presented in Table 14.3.
Table 14.2 Physiological factors of variations of plasma/serum creatinine and specific recommendations
Factor
Comment
Breed/muscle mass
A breed effect (e.g. higher plasma creatinine in Greyhound dog or Birman cat), due or not, to differences in
muscle mass, exists in dogs and cats.
Food intake
woy uaxei aq pinous sadwes pool (iael je la uose) sjeaw laje aseau Aeui auuen euseld
fasting animals.
Age
ahe aui woy sanea npe jeuou oi saseau uaui inq 'alljo sAep isy aui u saseaap auuean euseld
of 2 months up to 1 year (Wolford et al. 1988). Plasma creatinine is then relatively stable.
Hydration status
Hydration status should be checked as plasma creatinine can be moderately increased by dehydration
Physical exercise
Effect of physical exercise on serum/plasma creatinine is variable. Blood sampling in animals after strenuous
exercise should be avoided.
Renal function testing  
93
Large change inGFRbut
Clearance methods
littlechangein
creatinine
The urinary (or renal) clearance of the GFR marker is
6
(earlyrenaldisease)
equal to the amount of marker excreted in urine (the
(mL/min/k
Large change in PI-
product of the urine concentration of the marker and
creatinine but little
change in GFR
the flow of urine collected over a given period of time)
(advanced renal
divided by its average plasma concentration. The urinary
failure)
clearance of exogenous creatinine (Finco et al. 1991) is
 currently the method best documented in dogs and cats.
However, the accurate and tedious collection of urine
and the required bladder emptying by urethral catheteri-
2
10
Plasmacreatinine(mg/dL)
zation are major issues with this approach. A more practi-
cable alternative is the plasma clearance approach which
Figure 14.1 Relationship between plasma creatinine and GFR in
dogs (according to Finco et al. 1995). In early stages of CKD, the
does not require urine collection and is simply based on
repeated blood sampling (Figure 14.3).
dhange in plasma creatinine is very limited whereas the decrease in
GFR is pronounced. Inversely, in end-stage CKD, a large decrease
 in plasma creatinine (e.g., after fluid therapy) may be associated
with a minimal concomitant increase in GFR. The dashed line
Clinical use and interpretation
represents the upper limit of the reference interval (1.5 mg/dL),
GFR determination is pivotal in evaluating the severity
above which the dog is declared azotemic.
and course of renal disease. ( Table 14.4)
A decrease in GFR may be the first sign of chronic
kidney disease. Most published normal values of GFR
are between 2 and 5 mL/minute per kg in dogs and cats 
irrespective of technique or marker (Heiene and Moe,
Tubular
Endogenous
1998). A GFR value below 1.5 mL/minute per kg is gen-
reabsorption
nitrogen compounds
erally assumed to be abnormal in average-sized dogs.
breakdown
Urea
 This cut-off value would be 2.1 mL/minute per kg for
dogs with a BW<10 kg and about 1.2 mL/minute per
Ammonium
Glomerular
Kidney
kg for dogs with a BW>45 kg (Lefebvre et al. 2006). The
filtration
GFR value can only be interpreted in terms of renal func-
 tion under standardized conditions, that is, in normohy-
Urea
Plasma
drated (dehydration may decrease GFR), fasted (because
synthesis
urea
 of potential postprandial increase), and awake animals
Liver
(anesthetic or sedative agents may alter GFR) in stable
Intestine
clinical conditions. The GFR may change from hour to
Fecal
Ammonium
hour in dogs or cats with acute renal injury. GFR does
elimination
Bacteria
Alimentary
 not seem to be affected by repeated renal biopsies in dogs
nitrogen
(Groman et al. 2004).
compounds
Figure 14.2 Metabolism of urea. Urea is synthesized in the liver
from ammonia. Ammonia is produced from nitrogen (essentially
Testing tubular function
 from digestion of alimentary proteins and breakdown of endoge-
nous tissue proteins). Urea is filtered by the kidneys and excreted in
Urine specific gravity
urine, but also reabsorbed from the collecting tubule. Urea reab-
The urine concentration is evaluated from the urine spe-
 sorption increases when the urine tubular flow decreases (e.g.
cific gravity ( USG) (i.e., ratio of the weight of a given vol-
 in animals with hypovolemia or decreased renal perfusion). Urea
ume of urine to the same volume of water) measured by
is also excreted in the intestinal lumen where it is converted to
amino acids and ammonium, and consequently recyded. Plasma
refractometry. USG reflects the ability of the renal tubules
urea may increase with increased protein catabolism (e.g., star-
to concentrate or dilute urine according to the body
vation) or digestion (gastrointestinal haemorrhage, high-protein
water requirements (Watson, 1998) (Table 14.5). USG
diet), and may decrease in dogs on low-protein diet, with hep-
is generally decreased in chronic renal disease. However,
atic failure or portosystemic shunt, or when treated with anabolic
because of the large variability of USG (van Vonderen
steroids.
et al. 1997), and to reliably indicate renal dysfunction,
94
  Diagnostic testing
Table 14.3 Major markers of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) used in dogs and cats
Marker
Comment
Inulin
Urinary inulin clearance is considered as the gold standard method for GFR measurement. Plasma inulin
dlearance has also been proposed but inulin can be deared by extrarenal route. Assay is not readily
available.
Creatinine
 Creatinine is an appropriate marker for both urinary and plasma clearance approaches. Urine and plasma
assays can be easily performed and are not expensive. Medical grade creatinine formulation is not
commercially available.
lohexol
lohexol, an iodinated radiocontrast medium, offers an interesting altemative for GFR testing using plasma 
dlearance. However, the two stereoisomers, endo- and exo-iohexol, have different plasma clearances. Assay
is performed by HPLC.
Radiolabelled markers
Radiolabelled markers (e.g. 9mTc-DTPA)) have been used for GFR assessment, but require special licensing
and equipment (see Chapter 18)
abnormally low USG values must be confirmed on
 USG may also be useful to interpret results from uri-
repeated samples.
nalysis. For example, 2+ proteinuria represents a more
In acute renal injury, USG is generally increased in pre-
substantial loss in dilute urine (e.g-, USG 1.015) than
renal azotemia (>1.035 (dog) or 1.045 (cat), decreased
in concentrated urine (e.g, USG 1.060) (see Chapter 8).
in renal azotemia (USG from 1.008 to 1.028 (dog) or
Falsely elevated USG values may be induced by glucose
1.035 (cat)), and variable in postrenal azotemia.
 or proteins in the urine.
Dog fasted
for12hours
5
10
60
120
240
360
480 minutes
7blood samples
Creatinine
IVbolus
ssay
40mg/kg
20
15
120
240
360
480
Time (minutes)
GFR=Dose/area under the curve
Figure 14.3 Principle of plasma clearance test forevaluation of glomerular fitration rate (G FR). The plasma exogenous creatinine clearance
test is illustrated here. A bolus of creatinine (40 mg/kg) is injected intravenously. Blood is sampled at different times postinjection (here,
5. 10 minutes, 1. 2, 4, 6, and 8 hours). Plasma creatinine is then assayed. The area under the plasma creatinine vs time curve (AUC) is
determined by pharmacokinetic approach. The plasma clearance (i.e., the GFR estimate) is calculated by dividing the injected dose by the
AUC. (For details conceming the calculation, see Watson et al. 2002).
Renal function testing  95
Table 14.4 Indications for GFR testing
Suspected renal dysfunction which cannot be confirmed by other tests, for example, polyuria/polydipsia without azotemia, or 
Presence of asymptomatic renal lesions (e.g., evidenced by renal ultrasonography)
Presence of extrarenal disease with potential adverse effects on renal function, such as cardiovascular disease (e.g. heart failure and
systemic arterial hypertension), endocrine disease (e.g. hypothyroidism in dogs and hyperthyroid cat after treatment), or infectious
disease (e.g.. pyometra and leishmaniasis)
Dosage adjustments for drugs essentially cleared by the kidney and with a low therapeutic index
 Assessment of renal function in kidney donor
Water deprivation tests (WDT)
polyuria/polydipsia have been ruled out. They are con-
traindicated in patients with azotemia and/or dehydra-
WDT (see Chapter 42) are recommended in small animal
tion, or with identified renal dysfunction. WDT are par-
patients with polyuria/polydipsia to distinguish between
ticularly tedious and require well-trained staff.
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, psychogenic polydipsia
and central diabetes insipidus. The principle of WDT is,
that the increased plasma osmolality will increase ADH
Fractional excretion of electrolytes
secretion, and thereby the urine concentration (i.e., USG
or urine osmolality). Administration of synthetic ADH
The fractional excretion (FE) of a given electrolyte is
analogues ( vasopressin or desmopressin) should not pro-
defined as the fraction of filtered solute that is excreted
duce a further increase in urine concentration in patients
into urine. It also corresponds to the ratio (also called
with primary polydipsia. During WDT the USG does not
fractional clearance) of the renal clearance of the elec-
 increase in patients with central diabetes insipidus but,
trolyte to the GFR, which can be determined from the
 does so after vasopressin administration. No response to
urinary endogenous creatinine clearance.
vasopressin is observed in patients with primary nephro-
An alternative to clearance methods is the spot sample
genic diabetes insipidus. In secondary nephrogenic dia-
approach based on Equation 14.1:
betes insipidus, the response may be equivocal and very
Ue x Pcreat
difficult to interpret (for details, see Syme, 2007). WDT
FE：
(14.1)
should be performed only when all other causes of
Pe x Ucreat
Table 14.5 Physiological and clinical interpretation of urine specific gravity
1.013-1.029 (dog)
>1.029 (dog)
USG value
<1.008
1.008-1.012
1.013-1.034 (cat)
>1.034 (cat)
Terminology
Hyposthenuria
Isosthenuria
Hypersthenuria
 Physiological
Renal tubules can dilute 
No dilution, no
Urine is minimally
Urine is normally
interpretation
urine by active metabolic
concentration of the
concentrated by the
 concentrated by the
work
urine by the renal
tubules
tubules
tubules
Clinical interpretation
Multiple causes can
Renal dysfunction is 
See isosthenuria
Chronic kidney disease
 induce hyposthenuria:
possible, and should be
may exist as some
hyperadrenocorticism,
highly suspected in the 
animals (especially cats)
pyometra, diabetes
dehydrated and/or
 are able to maintain
insipidus, etc.
azotemic animal.
their concentrating
Renal dysfunction is
Isosthenuria may be
 ability. In young
possible in dehydrated 
observed in
animals, USG is higher
and/or azotemic
overhydration or after
 than in adults
dogs/cats
recent and copious
water intake
96
  Diagnostic testing
 Only "spot”" samples of urine and plasma are required.
Groman, R.D., et al. (2004). Effects of serial ultrasound-guided renal
Spot determinations have given inaccurate values in cats
biopsies on kidneys of healthy adolescent dogs. Vet Radiol Ultra-
and dogs. FE exhibits large inter-individual and intra-
sound 45: 62-69.
Heiene, R. and L. Moe ( 1998). Pharmacokinetic aspects of measure-
individual variability. Also, as FE values do not remain
fixed but vary as needed to maintain homeostasis, no ref-
Med12:401-412.
erence interval can be defined. FE values should always
Jensen, A.L. and H. Aes {1993). Critical difference of clinical chemical
 be interpreted in the light of plasma electrolyte concen-
 parameters in blood from dogs. Res Vet Sci 54: 10- 14.
 tration and clinical findings. FE are generally <1% for
Lees, G.E. (2004). Early diagnosis of renal disease and renal failure. Vet
sodium and <25% for potassium. FE tests have been
Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 34: 867-885.
Lefebvre, H.P., et al. (2006). GFR in the dog: breed effects. European
used to diagnose Fanconi's syndrome in dogs (see Chap-
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 16th Congress, Amsterdam,
ter 55), but their clinical relevance is generally limited
The Netherlands, September 14-16, 2006, p. 61.
(for details, see Lefebvre et al. 2008).
Le Garreres, A., et al. (2007). Disposition of plasma creatinine in non-
azotemic and moderately azotemic cats. J Feline Med Surg9: 89-96.
Lefebvre, H.P., et al. (2008). Fractional excretion tests: a critical review
References
of methods and application in domestic animals. Vet Clin Pathol.,
37: 4-20.
Almy, F.S., et al. (2002). Evaluation of cystatin C as an endogenous
 Nicolle, A.P, et al. (2007). Azotemia and glomerular fltration rate in
marker of glomerular filtration rate in dogs. I Vet Intern Med 16:
dogs with chronic valvular disease. I Vet Intern Med 21: 943-949.
45-51.
 Reynolds, B.S., et al. (200s). Deterrmination of reference intervals for
Braun, LP. and H.P. Lefebvre (2005). Early detection of renal disease
plasrma biochermical values in clinically norrmal adult domestic short-
in the canine patient. Eur I Companion Anim Pract 15: 59-64.
hair cats by use of a dry-slide biochemical analyzer. Arn I Vet Res 69:
Braun, J.P., et al. (2003). Creatinine in the dog: a review. Vet Clin Pathol
471-477.
32: 162-179.
Syme, H.M. (2007) Polyuria and polydipsia. In: BSAVA Marual of
Craig, A.J., et al. (2006). Refining the reference interval for plasma
Canine and Feline Nephrology and Uroloy, edited by J. Elliott and
creatinine in dogs: effect of age, gender, body weight, and breed.
Gregory F. Grauer, 2nd edition. Gloucester, UK: British Small Ani-
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 24th Annual
mal Veterinary Association, pp. 8-25.
Forum, Louisville, USA, May 31-June 3, 2006, p. 740.
van Vonderen, I.K., et al. ( 1997). Intra- and inter-individual variation
 Finco, D.R. and J.R. Duncan ( 1976). Evaluation ofblood urea nitrogen
 in urine osmolality and urine specific gravity in healthy pet dogs of
and serum creatinine concentrations as indicators of renal dysfunc-
various ages. I Vet Intern Med 11: 30-35.
tion: a study of lll cases and a review of related literature. I Arm Vet
Watson, A.D.J., et al. (198 1). Postprandial changes in plasma urea and
Med Assoc 168: 593-601.
creatinine concentration in dogs. Arm J Vet Res 42: 1878- 1880.
 Finco, D.R., et al. ( 199l). Exogenous creatinine clearance as a measure 
Watson, A.D. ( 1998). Urine specific gravity in practice. Aust Vet I76:
of glomerular filtration rate in dogs with reduced renal mass. Am J
392-398.
Vet Res 52: 1029-1032.
Watson, A.D.J., et al. (2002). Plasma exogenous creatinine clearance
 Finco, D.R., et al. ( 1995). Relationship between plasma creatinine and
test in dogs: comparison with other methods and proposed limited
glomerular filtration rate in dogs. I Vet Pharrmacol Ther 18: 418-
sampling strategy. I Vet Intern Med 16: 22-23.
421.
Wolford, S.T., et al. (19s8). Effct of age on serum chemistry profle,
Gleadhill, A. (1994). Evaluation of screening tests for renal insuffi-
electrophoresis and thyroid hormones in Beagle dogs two weeks to
ciency in the dog. I Small Anim Pract 35: 391-396.
one year of age. Vet Clin Pathol 17: 35-42.
15
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease
Daniel A. Feeney and Kari L. Anderson
Introduction
examination, risk analysis, serum biochemical, urine and
hematologic analyses, and survey radiographs. Follow-
Indications for urinary tract imaging
ing critical assessment of the results from these routinely
The urinary and genital tracts are in relatively close
available tests, more sophisticated (and costly) proce-
abdominopelvic proximity and share common pathways
dures such as contrast radiographic procedures, ultra-
to exit the body including the urethra in the male and the
sonography, computed tomography, and nuclear scintig-
vestibule in the female. Therefore, it must be recognized
raphy can be justified. The goal of this chapter is to foster
that diseases affecting one of the systems may well affect
a predictable and organized approach to the imaging
the others as well. This generality applies to both natu-
aspects of urinary tract disease evaluation.
rally occurring diseases such as infections or tumors as
well as iatrogenic problems such as ovariohysterectomy-
 induced invasive uterine stump granulomas affecting the
Dilemmas in urinary imaging choices
bladder or inadvertent ureteral ligation during ovario-
The integration of the likelihood of specific conditions
hysterectomy. These relationships must be considered in
(e.g-, breed-specific hereditary disorders, post surgical
the approach to diagnoses. Urinary organ clinical signs
 problems, age, and gender-adjusted disease likelihood)
range from those suggestive ofupper urinary disease (e.g-
with a complete physical examination including abdom-
polyuria and paraspinal pain) through those indicative
inal, vaginal, and rectal palpation is of paramount
of lower urinary disease (e.g-, polakiuria and dysuria)
importance. Imaging procedures have specific yields
and those associated with genital disease (e.g., vaginal
under certain circumstances. An inappropriate choice of
discharge and urethral discharge) (see Chapters 4 and
imaging procedure may at best yield no information and
41-47). The relative roles of the urogenital parenchy-
at worst may induce needless patient morbidity and/or
mal organs (i.e., kidneys, prostate gland, and ovaries) to
dlient expenditures.  In  general,  radiography-based
those of the tubular organs (i.e., ureters, bladder, urethra,
imaging procedures provide morphologic information.
uterus, and vagina) in these clinical signs must be con-
However, qualitative insight into functional problems
tinually addressed to assure that an erroneous and/or
(incontinence, relative renal function) can also be gar-
myopic clinical approach is avoided. In addition, the
embryologic origins ofthe various urogenitalorgans can-
 tion of selected procedures. Before choosing any imaging
not be forgotten. An anomaly in one system may create
procedure, a specific decision must be made about what
a clinical problem or a related anomaly in the other. The
the procedure will predictably yield compared to the costs
key to the analysis of either pathoanatomy or dysfunc-
tion between these two organ systems is to expeditiously
incurred and the morbidity induced. The most applicable
procedure may be different depending on the suspected
include or exclude organs and conditions where pos-
diagnosis. If the goal is only regional organ geometry
sible using a combination of pertinent history physical
like size, shape, location, surface character, number, or
degree/extent of organ afliction or organ opacity (e.g-)
gas, fluid, mineral and metal), retrograde contrast imag-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
 ing or ultrasound may be adequate. However, if the goal
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
is qualitative assessment of function (e.g-, relative renal
97
98
3  Diagnostic testing
function and urethral sphincter competence) or physi-
Applicable special procedures
ologic organ distension (ureters or bladder), more serial
o qderroin oaxa se qns sannpad orueup 1
Standard views
voiding urethrography may be indicated. Acknowledging
 Initial radiographic investigation of the urinary tract
that glomerular filtration and tubular modification occur
should begin with routine survey orthogonal views. The
 at the kidney, most of the urinary tract is either a storage
right lateral is the authors? preference as this recumbency
compartment or a conduit between other urinary and/or
 generally allows improved visualization of the right and
genital structures. As clinical problems are associated
left kidneys through increased separation (Feeney et al.
with leakage, obstruction, irritation, inflammation,
1982a). The ventrodorsal (VD) view is the orthogonal
infltration, displacement, or malpositioning, the chosen
view of choice and is the view used for measurement of
imaging procedure must enable the identification and
the kidneys (Figures 15.1 and 15.2).
localization of these problems. Depending on the clinical
When obtaining survey views of the urinary tract, it
circumstances, survey radiographs may be adequate
is important to include the entire urinary tract, from the
(e.g-, end-stage kidney and cystoliths). If the utilization
kidneys through the urethra, on both views. In large dogs,
of a contrast radiographic procedure is clinically justi-
this may require obtaining two lateral and VD views (of
fied, there are further considerations including: the goal
the cranial and the caudal half of the patient). The rear
of the study (e.g-, organ localization, organ distension,
limbs should be extended caudally in order to best evalu-
propulsion analysis, leakage detection, foreign body
ate the bladder and proximal urethra. In the male canine
identification, organ connections, distinguish urinary
 patient, particularly if presenting with signs referable to
from other organs/masses, etc.), the effects of iodinated
the urethra, an additional view with the rear limbs pulled
contrast medium  administered  systemically  versus
cranial to the os penis allows improved visualization of
via external orifice, the potential for air embolism
the penile urethra.
from retrograde administration of negative contrast
 Ideally, radiographs will be made prior to any inter-
medium (room air), and the risk-benefit considerations
vention such as cystocentesis or urinary catheterization.
of nonionic compared to ionic iodinated contrast 
Additionally, it is helpful to have a distended urinary blad-
media.
 der when evaluating the lower urinary tract; thus, do not
allow the patient to urinate immediately before the pro-
cedure. While the authors acknowledge that for general
abdominal imaging we recommend making radiographs
Background deliberations before urinary
of the patient without any manipulation in order to see
imaging
the patient in the natural state, an evacuated colon is
As patients with urinary disease can be nauseous, weak, in
important for optimal visualization of the urinary tract,
pain, or dehydrated as well as suffering from the numer-
 particularly when evaluating for uroliths. This may neces-
 ous side-effects of clinical urinary problems includ-
 sitate withholding food for 18-24 hours and performing
ing sepsis, electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities, and
a cleansing enema prior to the radiographic procedure. If
abdominal distension, a balance between what is opti-
 not done prior to initial examination, radiographs may
mal for imaging and what is practical and humane for
 need to be retaken after this type of patient preparation,
the patient must be determined. The following ques-
thus increasing costs and radiation exposure.
tions may facilitate decisions regarding type of procedure
and/or the risk:benefit of additional procedures: What is
Horizontai-beam views/special views
the status and demeanor of the patient (septic, coagu-
lopathic, acutely painful, fear biter)? Is sedation neces-
In general, horizontal views are not performed when
sary/indicated (balance between patient compliance and
imaging the urinary tract. However, horizontal beam
patient physiology)? Has the animal been appropriately
radiography may be useful in certain circumstances. A
 prepared for the procedure under consideration, if appli-
standing lateral view may allow for ventral migration of
cable? Are there appropriately placed personnel body
the intestines to improve visualization of the retroperi-
toneal space and kidneys. Additionally, standing lateral
Are appropriate personnel shielding devices being used
views can be useful in identifying small opaque cystic
(e.g-, aprons, gloves, eye shields, and/or thyroid shields).
calculi or sand, because the material will form layers in
REMEMBER: KEEP POTENTIAL RADLATION EXPO-
the dependent portion of the urinary bladder, thereby
SURE (including scatter as wel as primary beam) AS
increasing their opacity (Steyn and Lowry 1991; Burk
LOW AS IS REASONABLY ACHIEVABLE!!!!
and Feeney 2003).
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease 
66
R
(a)
(a)
R
(b)
Figure 15.1 Right lateral (a) and VD (b) views of the normal
paeedas Aau ae saaup yal pue lybu aul 'uawopge auue
on the right lateral view. Note that the abdomen is unprepared
(b)
(postprandial stomach and full colon).
Figure 15.2 Right lateral (a) and VD (b) views of the normal
feline abdomen. The right and left kidneys are nicely separated on
the right lateral view. Note that the abdomen is unprepared (full
colon).
100  Diagnostic testing
One special view which is quite helpful, is a view in
tative assessment of global and individual renal function
which a radiolucent paddle or wooden spoon is used to
(Feeney and Johnston 2007). The excellent visualization
apply regional compression. The compression effectively
 and assessment of the renal parenchyma and collcting
separates adjacent organs to minimize confusion due to
system is due to the fact that the iodinated contrast com-
 overlying structures (such as intestines) by displacing
pounds are excreted almost entirely by glomerular fil-
them away from the kidneys or bladder and decreases
tration, with a small percentage excreted by the liver
patient thickness (and therefore scatter radiation) which
 and small intestine. Indications for excretory urogram
both lead to improved visualization and detail. During
include (1) to visualize the size, shape, and location of
application of compression, the thickness of the area of
 a kidney not seen on survey radiographic views, (2) to
interest decreases and adjustment of technique is neces-
visualize the size, shape, and position of the portions
sary from that used to obtain the noncompression view
of the upper urinary tract not normally seen on survey
of the abdomen (Carrig and Mostosky 1976). In general,
radiographic views and (3) to obtain qualitative infor-
decreasing the mAs by 50% (Burk and Feeney 2003) or the
mation regarding renal function (Biery 1981). Numer-
kVp by 15% (Graham et al. 2007) results in an appropri-
 ous protocols for the excretory urogram have been previ-
ately exposed view in the region of interest. Compression 
 ously described (Lord et al. 1974; Ackerman 1974; Kneller
technique is easily performed, inexpensive, well tolerated
1974; Feeney et al. 1979; Biery 1981; Feeney and John-
 ston 2007). The excretory urogram can be performed
mation in selected cases (Armbrust et al. 2000). Com-
 safely in azotemic and non-azotemic patients as long as
pression can also be used with contrast procedures of
the patients are well hydrated (Thrall and Finco 1976;
the upper and lower urinary tracts (Carrig and Mostosky
Feeney and Johnston 2007). Side effects are rare, with
1976; Biery 1981). Contraindications include enlarged
the most common side effects being transient retch-
organs which could rupture (e.g., severely enlarged uterus
 ing or vomiting. Rarely, are other side effects, such as,
 or splenic mass), diaphragmatic hernia or severe respira-
anaphylactoid reaction, hypotension, contrast-induced
tory distress.
renal failure, urticaria, or bronchospasm, seen. The basic
toxicity is related to the hyperosmolality of the con-
Patient preparation
trast media. The most well-accepted contraindication
to an excretory urogram in the veterinary patient is
 s s n    e 
dehydration.
patient must be fasted for 18-24 hours and a cleans-
   om d  oos  
before the procedure. An exception is made with the
Contrast media, dose and route of
urgent/emergent patient (e.g-, a trauma patient or a
administration
patient with lower urinary tract obstruction). Survey
         
 radiographic views must always be obtained on the day
soluble iodinated contrast should be used in the patient.
of the procedure, even if radiographs were obtained pre-
-d   i    sn
viously. Survey views determine if the procedure is nec-
rations. lonic preparations are generally quite hyper-
essary, evaluate the patient in the “natural state" for com-
osmolar to blood and in general have more potential
parison with the contrast views (abnormalities on survey
views may be obscured by contrast, as with radiopaque
complications (although complications are rare). Non-
ionic preparations are closer in osmolarity to blood, and
urinary calculi), assessment of proper preparation of 
 potential complications are fewer; however, these prepa-
the patient for the study, and selection of the appro-
rations are more expensive. In our practice, we tend to use
priate radiographic technique. Heavy sedation or general
the ionic preparations in young, healthy patients and the
anesthesia is required for cystourethrogram and vagino-
 nonionic preparations in older or sick patients or patients
 gram contrast procedures. Intravenous catheter access is
with preexisting diseases such as renal disease, cardiac
required for the excretory urogram. Finally, as part of
 disease, or seizures.
routine preparation, one should collect any urine sam-
The second important factor is the determination of
ples needed prior to administering contrast which can
dose. A typical dose in our practice will range from 400
have effects on the urinalysis and culture (Feeney et al.
to 800 mg iodine/lb body weight, and we will not exceed
1980a; Ruby et al. 1983).
800 mg iodine/lb body weight in one or multiple consec-
utive doses. Some authors have recommended 330-440
Excretory urogram
mg iodine/lb body weight (Ackerman 1974; Feeney et al.
The excretory urogram is useful for defining morphology
1979; Feeney et al. 1982a) for a general dose. The low
of the upper urinary tract as well as providing a quali-
end of the dose (400 mg iodine/lb body weight) is
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   101
administered to patients with normal renal function
pression during the initial portion of the study to block
and urine concentration ability. The upper end of the
the ureters, interfere with ureteral peristalsis, and dis-
dose (800 mg iodine/lb body weight) is administered
tend the collecting renal collecting system to improve
to patients with poor renal function and/or urine con-
filling and visualization for a more accurate assessment
centration ability. Increasing the contrast dose gener-
of these structures (Kneller 1974; Carrig and Mostosky
ally allows improved visualization of the urinary tract
1976; Ackerman 1974; Biery 1981). We do not recom-
 in patients with poorer renal function. It has been sug-
 mend abdominal compression because of the variability
gested that ifthe serum creatinine is 3.5 mg/dL and rising.
that it produces and the lack of any proven efficacy to
 the intravenous urogram will not likely provide adequate
facilitate diagnosis.
visualization of the upper urinary tract (Biery 1981);
although it has been shown that the BUN should not be
Contrast cystourethrogram
used as a prognostic parameter for the quality ofthe study,
 nor should the presence of an elevated BUN alone pre-
The contrast cystourethrogram generally consists of a
clude performance of the study ( Thrall and Finco 1976).
-an ean augo ue (eoisi) rppe aujo pns
Valuable information from the excretory urogram can be
throgram) combined together to provide useful infor-
obtained in certain cases such as when the patient has
mation regarding the anatomic structures of the lower
obstructive uropathy (Thrall and Finco 1976) or when
urinary tract. The procedure is simple, quick, relatively
the renal function is static or improving (Biery 1981).
inexpensive, safe, and rewarding. A decision to perform
It must be emphasized that the clinician must know
cystourethrography can be driven by clinical signs (e.g-)
the concentration of iodine in the chosen contrast prepa-
 intermittent or chronic hematuria, dysuria, stranguria,
ration in order to determine the appropriate volume to
pollakiuria, chronic/recurrent urinary tract infections,
inject. The iodine concentration in commercially avail-
or suspected trauma/rupture of the lower urinary tract)
able products can vary significantly. For example, Conray
or by radiographic abnormalities (e.g-, abnormal posi-
400 has a concentration of 400 mg iodine/mL, whereas
tion, shape, size, or opacity of the lower urinary tract;
Conray 60 has a concentration of 282 mg iodine/mL.
nonvisualization of the bladder, particularly in a trauma
The contrast should be administered through a periph-
 patient; or evaluation of caudal abdominal masses in the
eral intravenous catheter as a bolus over several seconds.
region of or adjacent to the bladder). Numerous proto-
We recommend a short, large bore intravenous catheter.
cols for the contrast cystogram and urethrogram have
For larger patients to whom a large volume of contrast
been previously described (Ticer et al. 1980; Park 1981;
is administered, the authors recommend the placement
Johnston et al. 1982; Essman 2005; Park and Wrigley
of two intravenous catheters for simultaneous injection
2007; Pechman 2007). As stated above, the procedure
 of the contrast divided between two syringes. Contrast,
has only infrequent complications, if performed prop-
especially the ionic preparations, is very viscous and
erly. Poor catheterization techniques may lead to trauma,
injection can be relatively slow.
perforation, or infection ( Johnston et al. 1982; Johnston
et al. 1983). Catheters can become kinked or knotted
(Park and Wrigley 2007). Bladder distention itself can
Radiographic views and fiiming seguence
increase the likelihood of iatrogenic infection (Barsanti
In our practice, we use the following protocol: VD view
et al. 1981). Macroscopic hematuria is a common com-
immediately and at 5, 20, and 40 minutes; right lateral
plication seen in dogs and cats after cystourethrography
view at 5, 20, and 40 minutes. In cases of poor concentra-
(Barsanti et al. 198l; Johnston et al. 1982; Johnston et al.
tion ability or ureteral obstruction, VD and right lateral
1983). With overdistention, mural dissection of contrast
views made at 90 and 120 minutes may add useful infor-
or even bladder rupture may occur (Johnston et al. 1982;
mation. In patients with suspected ectopic ureters, we
Johnston et al. 1983). The most significant complication
obtain oblique views of the distal ureters and bladder at
reported is the development of an air embolism in dogs
10 minutes as well as at 20 minutes. It is important to
and cats during negative contrast administration (Ack-
include the entire perineal region to assess for vaginal
erman et al. 1972; Zontine and Andrews 1978). This rare
pooling or perineal staining. If available, these patients
but fatal complication can generally be avoided by utiliz-
are also imaged using digital fluoroscopy. In incontinent
ing a more soluble negative contrast agent (e.g, carbon
patients, we also recommend obtaining a postvoiding
dioxide) in patients with visible hematuria.
lateral view after the 40 minute time point. This allows
A complete contrast cystourethrogram includes a neg-
for evaluation of complete emptying of the bladder and
ative cystogram (pneumocystogram), a double contrast
for detection of pooling of contrast in the vagina. Some
    s   
 authors recommend the routine use of abdominal com-
 contrast urethrogram. In certain circumstances (e.g-, to
102
 Diagnostic testing
distinguish a stricture from poor filling) it can be helpful
the safest agent to choose (and should always be used
to perform both a retrograde as well as an antegrade (or
in patients with hematuria) as it is 20 times more solu-
voiding) urethrogram. For most diagnostic procedures,
ble in blood than room air and has the least possibility
a complete study should be obtained as we have noted
 of gas embolism. Although we have used room air in
that some lesions are only demonstrated on one of the
thousands of patients with no to little complication, our
portions of the procedure (and not always the expected 
current standard operating procedure is to choose carbon
portion). When the aim of the study is to determine posi-
dioxide as the negative contrast agent.
tion or integrity of the lower urinary tract, a complete
The volume of contrast to inject for the pneumocys-
study may not be necessary.
togram and the positive contrast cystogram can be based
The pneumocystogram is a cheap and simple means
upon the capacity of the bladder (10 mL/kg body weight 
to localize the bladder and may also have the ability to
[Park and Wrigley 2007]). However, a diseased bladder
demonstrate some radiolucent stones or masses. The
may have less distensibility, and therefore we base our
 positive contrast cystogram is also an excellent means
administered volume on several factors: the amount of
 to demonstrate bladder position and can often demon-
urine removed from the bladder at the beginning of the
strate mural lesions; particularly ones that lead to focal 
study, turgidity of the bladder upon palpation and any
nondistensible regions of the wall (e.g-, wall fibrosis or
back pressure felt during injection. A radiograph can
infiltrative neoplasia). The positive contrast cystogram
always be obtained to assess bladder distention. The aim
or urethrogram should always be chosen if the aim of the
 is to have moderate bladder distention as complete or
study is to demonstrate lack of integrity, as the demon-
severe distention of the bladder may mask mild mucosal
stration of free air in the peritoneal cavity after a pneu-
irregularities or mild increases in bladder wall thickness
mocystogram can be challenging. For the best evaluation
(Mahaffey et al. 1989).
of the mucosa, wal thickness, and luminal filling defects,
 For the double contrast cystogram, the bladder is first
the double contrast cystogram is the study of choice.
distended with negative contrast and then a small puddle
The patient should be heavily sedated or anesthetized
of positive contrast is administered. The volume is depen-
for the procedure. A urinary catheter is placed using asep-
dent upon the size of the patient. One recommendation
tic technique. We prefer to use a balloon-tip catheter in
is 0.5-1.0 mL for a cat, 1.0-3.0 mL for a dog weighing
dogs and a red rubber catheter in cats. As mentioned
less than 25 Ib, and 3.0-6.0 mL for dogs weighing more
above, any urine samples should be obtained prior to
than 25 1b (Park and Wrigley 2007). We recommend 0.75
the administration of contrast. The bladder is completely
mL for a cat or similar size dog, 1-2 mL for a small dog.
emptied prior to the start of the procedure.
2-3 mL for a medium dog, and 3-4 mL for a large dog.
It is important to make sure that administered contrast
does not provide too deep a puddle, which may mask
Contrast media, dose, and route of
certain uroliths (Weischelbaum and Feeney 1998). After
administration
administration of the contrast puddle, the patient should
Any commercially available water-soluble ionic or non-
be rotated in order to coat the entire mucosa.
ionic iodinated contrast preparation can be used for the
The retrograde urethrogram can be performed with or
positive and double contrast portion of the bladder or
without bladder distention. There may be fewer potential
urethral study. The concentration of the iodine solution
complications when performed without bladder disten-
should be approximately 20% (Park and Wrigley 2007)
tion (Barsanti et al. 1981); however, without moderate
for the positive contrast cystogram. We generally use a
distention of the urinary bladder there may not be suffi-
concentration ofapproximately 150 mg iodine/mL. A rel-
cient intraluminal pressure to ensure maximum disten-
atively high concentration of iodine (200 mg iodine/mL)
tion of the proximal portion of the urethra (Johnston
should be used for the puddle in the double contrast
et al. 1982). The recommended volume is 10-15 mL in
cystogram. An in vitro study showed that this concen-
dogs and 5-10 mL in cats. Exposure should be made while
tration was the best for detection and enumeration for
 the last couple milliter are injected (Pechman 2007); and
uroliths (Weichselbaum et al. 1999). Another in vitro
contrast should be injected with each subsequent view.
study demonstrated the ability to differentiate the com-
 No additional contrast is needed during a voiding ure-
position of various uroliths using different concentra-
throgram, although the bladder must contain positive
tions of iodine (Weichselbaum et al. 1998 [a and b]);
contrast.
however, we currently do not use this technique clinically.
For urethrography a 10-15% solution of iodine is used
(Ticer et al. 1980). Negative contrast agents include room
Radiographic views and filming sequence
air, oxygen, nitrous oxide, and carbon dioxide (ascend-
In our practice, we perform the complete study in
ing order of solubility in the blood). Carbon dioxide is
the folowing order: pneumocystogram, double contrast
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   103
cystogram, positive contrast cystogram, positive contrast
Integrative overview
urethrogram. We generally perform both a retrograde
Considerations in urinary imaging
and an antegrade (voiding) urethrogram. In general,
obtain at least orthogonal views of each portion of the
With the background issues discussed above given appro-
study. Ideally, right and left lateral and VD views (or right
priate consideration, the next step is clinically applicable
ventral-45° left dorsal oblique and left ventral-45° right
 interpretive principles. First, urinary disease should be
 dorsal oblique views) of the double contrast portion are
classified as one or more of the following: fltration fail-
obtained for more complete evaluation of the bladder
ure (generalized low GFR, functional parenchymal loss)
mucosa and wall (Scrivani et al. 1997). In the male dog.
and/or inadequate post filtration processing (renal tubu-
a right ventral-45° left dorsal oblique view is obtained
lar dysfunction, destruction, or obstruction) (Thrall and
instead of a VD view to avoid superimposition of the
Finco 1976; Barber and Finco 1979; Brace 1980; Cayw00d
 proximal and distal urethra.
et al. 1980; Senior 1980; Feeney et al. 1982 [a and b],
 Feeney and Johnston 2007; Tarr and DiBartola 1985;
Vaginography
Lulich et al. 1988; Neuwirth et al. 1993; Cuypers et al.
The vagina is usually amenable to direct palpation and
1997; Burk and Feeney 2003; Agut et al. 2004; Lyons
et al. 2004; Zatelli and D'lppolito 2004; Bryan et al.
visualization utilizing endoscopic equipment; however,
at times, contrast imaging may be the only method
2006; Westropp et al. 2006; Holloway and O'Brien 2007;
of viewing the area cranial to the vestibule. Positive
Ross et al. 2007; Valdes-Martinez et al. 2007) (Fig-
contrast vaginography is the retrograde filling of the
ures 15.3-15.5) conduit failure (renal pelvic, ureteral,
vestibule and vagina. For discussion on the urinary tract,
or urethral leakage or obstruction (Rose and Gillen-
we find that vaginography can be useful to demonstrate
water 1974; Johnston et al. 1977; Faulkner et al.
morphology in the incontinent female dog if used as
1983; Klausner and Feeney 1983), storage failure (blad-
an adjunct to the cystourethrogram or excretory uro-
der leakage, dysmotility, outflow obstruction, capac-
gram. Positive contrast vaginography has been used to
ity compromise [masses, uroliths, fibrosis, herniation]
demonstrate various abnormalities of the vagina associ-
ated with lower urinary tract signs and disease such as
vestibulovaginal stenosis (Kyles et al. 1996; Crawford and
Adams 2002), vaginalsepta (Root et al. 1995), and ectopic
ureter (Leveille and Atilola 1991). Several authors have
described the protocol of contrast vaginography (Leveillée
and Atilola 199l; Rivers and Johnston 199l; Root et al.
1995; Feeney and Johnston 2007).
Contrast media, dose, and route of
administration
Any commercially available water-soluble ionic or non-
ionic iodinated preparation can be used for the positive
contrast vaginogram. We use a final concentration of
150 mg iodine/mL. Suggested doses range from 1 (Rivers
and Johnston 1991) to 5 mL/kg body weight (Root et al.
1995). Contrast should be administered to fully distend
the vaginal vault. If more contrast is administered beyond
vaginal distention, a retrograde urethrogram will also be
obtained. Contrast is administered through a balloon-tip
catheter which is placed within the vestibule caudal to the
urethral orifice. Often, the vulva must be clamped with
atraumatic forceps in order to prevent contrast leakage
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.3 VD survey (a) and 5 minutes postinjection excretory
during the procedure.
urogram (b) views in which there is a urolith medial tothe shrunken
Radiographic views and filming sequence
and irregular left kidney. There is a partial ureteral obstruction due
to the urolith, defined to be in the proximal left ureter, but the
Lateral and VD views should be obtained with the vagina
left kidney is sufficiently small to be classified as end-stage. The
and vestibule at maximal distention. Radiographs should
yal aheis-pua :sisoubeip jeug jewou ane jalain pue Aaupy nybu
be obtained at the end of injection.
kidney with proximal left ureteral stone.
104
Diagnostic testing
R
(a)
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.5 lateral survey (a) and lateral (b) views of an excre-
tory urogram performed to clarify the functional relevance of the
retroperitoneal opacities in the cranial and caudal retroperitoneal
space seen on the survey views. There is a high-grade partial
obstruction of the left ureter at the level of the transverse plane
of L4 and additional partial obstructive effect due to the "sand"
in the left distal ureter. The right kidney and ureter are normal.
Final diagnosis: urolith-induced left ureteral partial obstruction
and hydronephrosis.
(Figures 15.6 and 15.7); urethral sphincter dysfunction)
(Figure 15.8), single/multiple urinary organ inflamma-
tion/infection (pyelonephritis, cystitis, urethritis) (Fig-
ures 15.9 and 15.10), or congenital or heritable renal
and ureteral diseases (Finco 1973; Johnston et al. 1977;
Faulkner et al. 1983; Owen 1983; Hayes 1984; Davenport
(q)
et al. 1986; Hager and Blevins 1986; Holt and Moore
Figure 15.4 Lateral (a) and VD (b) views of an excretory uro-
1995; Lees 1996; Greco 2001; Lautzenhiser and Bjorling
 gram performed because of an enlarged left kidney. There is a
2002; Eisele et al. 2005; Esterline et al. 2005; Hamil-
 pdeaadi aeaun  paunns si m sen
ton et al. 2006). The intent of this classification is to
medium indicating that the mass arose in the left renal pelvis
encompass and define the diagnostic possibilities based
and created both a mass effect in and partial outflow obstruction
 on the distribution of the abnormality within the urinary
therein. Final diagnosis: left renal pelvic tumor.
tract.
It is imperative that the shortcomings of serum bio-
chemical assessments, urinalysis (see Chapter 7), and
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   105
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 15.6 Right lateral (a) and VD (b) views of a positive contrast cystogram in a male dog presenting for painful abdomen one
day after cystocentesis. Note the leakage of contrast from the left ventral bladder wall. VD view (c) of a positive contrast retrograde
urethrogram in a male dog with retroperitoneal and perineal swelling after vehicular trauma. Note the leakage of contrast from the
membranous urethra. A right coxofemoral luxation and sacral fracture are also present.
urine culture (see Chapter 9) be clearly understood due to
accumulation in urinary bladder rupture. Acknowledg-
the functional redundancy and common excretory path-
ing that the kidneys, most of the ureteral length, as well
ways of the paired kidneys and ureters. Part of the role of
 as the distal membranous urethra are retroperitoneal, is
imaging is to localize the disease recognized using clin-
paramount. The recognition of potential urinary tract
  q   n    
 organ roles in and the contrast radiographic assessment
the upper urinary tract versus the lower urinary tract.
of body cavity fluid collections are based on this anatomic
A further role for contrast radiographic imaging is to
principle. The serial continuity of the urinary tract is
estimate the functional significance of clinical (incon-
also an important concept. In short, obstruction down-
tinence) or survey radiographic (ureterolith) observa-
 stream affects everything upstream including not only
tions (Figure 15.5). A clear understanding of anatomic
the organ's size but also its function. In short, as urinary
urinary organ abnormalities like bladder trigone mass
ureteral peristalsis becomes ineffective, renal pelvic pres-
and ureteral obstruction, their distinction from genital
 sure rises, glomerular filtration decreases and azotemia
 organ abnormalities (i.e., urinary bladder distension ver-
develops.
sus prostatomegaly), and the regional manifestations of
 In addition to localizing a disease process to a region of
suspected urinary abnormalities such as peritoneal fluid
the urinary tract, it is also important to characterize the
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 15.7 Right lateral pneumocystogram (a) and right lateral (b) and right ventro-left dorsal oblique (c) double contrast cystogram
in a 13-year-old neutered male cat presenting for recurrent lower urinary tract signs. There is a large sessile mass arising from the right
dorsal bladder wall seen as a soft tissue opacity on the pneumocystogram and a filing defect on the double contrast cystogram. Final
diagnosis: bladder tumor, presumed transitional cell carcinoma.
106 Diagnostic testing
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 15.8 Right lateral (a) and VD (b) views of the blader seen during excretory urography in a 1-year-old spayed female dog
presenting for 6-month history of incontinence. The neck of the bladder is elongated with urine in the proximal urethra (arrowhead)
demonstrating urethral sphincter incompetence. Additionally, contrast is pooling in the vagina (arrows). Right lateral (c) and VD (d) views
 of the vaginogram performed in the same patient. There is a severe stricture at the vestibulovaginal junction.
abnormality as originating outside the organ (e.g-, uter-
pelvic and ureteral width is usually less than 2-3 mm
ine stump granuloma invading the urinary bladder or 
(Feeney et al. 1979, 1982). For common murallesions, the
urinary bladder incarceration in a hernia), in the wall or
 urinary bladder wall thickness is usually approximately 1
parenchyma of the organ (e.g., tumor, hematoma, gran-
 mm (Mahaffey et al. 1984). Kidney measurements (most
uloma, fibrosis or stricture), or in the lumen of the organ
commonly, the length) are usually scaled according to
(e.g-, urolith, blood clot, matrix plug or foreign body).
 the length of the second lumbar vertebral body (L2)
For the assessment of luminal lesions, the normal renal 
(Barrett and Kneller 1972; Finco 1971; Feeney et al. 1979,
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   107
SKB
40 Minutes
(a)
(a)
82
B
SKB
40 Minutes
(b)
Figure 15.10 Right lateral (a) and right ventro-left dorsal oblique
(b) double contrast cystogram in a 6-year-old neutered male cat
presenting for multiple bouts of lowerurinary tract obstruction. The
study demonstrates multiple adhered calculi (white arrows) and
irregular cranioventral bladder wall thickening (black arrows) with
mucosal ulceration (black arrowheads) consistent with ulcerative
Cystitis. Airbubbles are also present asfilling defects on the lateral
view (white arrowheads).
(b)
Figure 15.9 Lateral (a) and VD (b) views made 40 minutes after
contrast medium for excretory urography in which a dilated left
renal pelvis with a lack of proportional dilation of the left pelvic
1982 [a and b]; Shiroma et al. 1999). For dogs, the range
is usually 2.5 to 3.5 L2 increments. For cats, the range
recesses can be seen. The right kidney is normal. Final diagnosis:
dhronic pyelonephritis, left kidney.
is between 2 and 3 L2 increments with measurements
between 2.1 and 2.4 L2 increments considered acceptable
only in middle-aged to older neutered cats.
108
 Diagnostic testing
A consistent approach and a complete imaging dataset
ter 17). In general, survey radiographs are a mainstay
improves the odds of success in urinary tract radiographic
in urinary imaging because they are readily available,
imaging. In short, any and all urinary tract procedures
cost-effective, and provide a reasonable “overview” of
the regional anatomy. For imaging relevant to qualitative
quality to assure that available information can be appro-
assessment of renal function and urethral sphincter con-
priately garnered. It is desirable to withhold food for
tinence, the excretory urogram is the most practical and
-s z1 ad n  ( e m ) so 5
predictable. To visualize the distended urethral lumen,
ing enemas prior to searching for uroliths. While this
the urethrogram, by whichever method it is executed,
is often not necessary because of the size and opacity
(retrograde or voiding) is the most utilitarian approach.
of most uroliths, one cannot predict which patients will
The ureters, bladder, and kidneys have broader appli-
have small, minimally opaque uroliths (sand-like) that
cations among other imaging procedures. For example,
if the specific focus is on the presence or absence of
judgment has to be exercised regarding the benefit to uri-
ectopic ureters, contrast-enhanced computed tomogra-
 nary imaging garnered from the enema and the loss of
 phy is quite effective and may be more accurate than
baseline information for other body systems, particularly
excretory urography (Rozear and Tidwell 2003; Sami
the alimentary tract due to the enema. In general, we rec-
et al. 2004). It is also more expensive and requires heavy
 ommend withholding food for alimentary imaging only
 sedation or general anesthesia. Ultrasound has a debat-
because of the effects of enema on small bowel appear-
able role in the diagnosis of ectopic ureters. While a
ance. The goal here is to get the most out of the survey
detailed search for the ureteral jets (urine ejected from
radiographs including any germane information about
the ureteral opening into the urinary bladder trigone) has
other parenchymal organs, the peritoneal and retroperi-
been recommended in the diagnosis of ectopic ureters
toneal spaces and the alimentary tract as well as the uri-
(Lamb and Gregory 1998), its applicability varies with
nary and genital tracts. In addition, it is important to
the information sought. Failure to identify both ureteral
ensure that the entire urinary tract is covered by the sur-
jets may raise the suspicion of ectopic ureters (assuming
vey radiographs. As mentioned above, this may require
both kidneys are present and functioning), but it does not
more than one lateral and or more than one VD view.
determine where the ureteral termination is and whether
Similarly, VD views are preferable to DV views, because
there may be multiple terminations (e.g., bladder and
the relative magnification of the kidneys compared to
urethra or vagina for the same ureter). We, therefore,
the L2 increments mentioned above were derived using
prefer excretory urography as our first-line diagnostic
VD not DV positions. The decision about patient seda-
technique in incontinent animals because it also pro-
tion is based on a composite judgment including the
vides information on urethral sphincter continence in
need for restraint to assure diagnostic quality views and
unsedated patients. Deliberate decisions must be made
patient/handler safety, as well as the need to limit need-
 on individual patients regarding the use of intravenously-
less “re-take” views which contribute to patient and per-
administered, iodinated contrast medium and the radi-
sonnel exposure. These considerations must be balanced
ation exposure for either CT or excretory urography.
against the risk to the patient and the physiologic effects
Some circumstances may favor ultrasonography. Simi-
of the drugs on potentially relevant aspects of the imag-
larly, if the specific focus is on the urinary bladder, both
ing procedure (e.g., sphincter continence, blood pressure
contrast cystography and ultrasonography provide use-
and GFR). In general, endoscopic procedures (see Chap-
ful information about the presence or absence of masses
ter 19) are limited to intraluminal urinary bladder dis-
as well as cystoliths and on wall thickness. The advan-
ease with visible mucosal abnormalities and then only in
tage of the ultrasonographic procedure is that sedation is
patients where the equipment is suitable for transurethral
 generally not necessary. However, if the urinary bladder
access and the operator skills exist to justify its consid-
is insufficiently distended, over-estimation of wall thick-
eration. By comparison, radiographic procedures, par-
ness and over or under-estimation of cystoliths and/or
ticularly positive contrast procedures, are superior for
masses can result. With the contrast cystographic proce-
intraluminal, intramural, transmural and extramural
 dure, the degree of distension is under the control of the
disease characterization and are adequate for mucosal
 person overseeing the procedure. The caveat there is over-
assessment.
distension and subsequent rupture. This is particularly
It is also important to have perspective on the relation-
ship between radiography-based urinary tract imaging
The size and shape of a urinary organ can provide
and more costly and focused imaging techniques such
some insight about the underlying abnormality. Size (and
as ultrasonographic (see Chapter 16), computed tomo-
to varying degrees the shape) of an organ or segment
 graphic (CT), and magnetic resonance scans (see Chap-
thereof is governed by several factors including muscle
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   109
tone (particularly the ureters but to some degree the uri-
of pressure, duration, infection, and autonomic func-
nary bladder), downstream or outflow resistance (such
tion (e.g-, dysautonomia) (Rose and Gillenwater 1974;
Faulkner et al. 1983; Jakovljevic et al. 1998; Neuwirth
wall pliability (such as fibrosis or cellular infiltrates), wall
et al. 1993; Burton et al. 1994; Reichle et al. 2003; Eisele
thickness or parenchymal organ mass-effect (e.g-, tumor,
et al. 2005). The urinary bladder is generally more acces-
 granuloma or abscess), upstream delivery of materials
sible for ultrasound imaging. However, unless a definable
(glomerular and tubular function), and the influence of
etiology (e.g-, trigone mass) is found, the bladder may be
drugs on everything from renal function through sphinc-
very large but not directly as a result of bladder disease
ter continence. It is imperative that radiographic inter-
 and the specific problem is not sonographically appar-
preters understand the interplay between the functional
ent. Therefore, enlarged urinary bladder can be due to
renal parenchyma and the upper as well as lower urinary
things outside the bladder including urethral obstruc-
collecting and storage systems. An increase in bladder
tion, dysynergia, neurologic disease, and even behavioral
 or ureteral pressure can cause the renal pelvis to enlarge
problems. Some insight may be gained by examining
which will eventually influence kidney size. On the other
regional structures such as disk spaces, retroperitoneal
hand, focal, multifocal or diffuse renal parenchymal pro-
lymphadenopathy, prostatic size shape and opacity,
cesses will influence both the size and the shape of the
regional bony reaction (vertebrae and pelvis), as well
kidney as well as its functional capacity to deliver urine
as the presumed course of the urethra (for suspicious
 to the collecting and storage systems.
opacities that might be urethroliths). Our first-line for
Survey   radiographs  provide  useful 
information
all but the simplest urinary bladder-related case involves
regarding renal size and shape, but this translates to
a sequence of survey radiographs (right lateral and VD),
only a modicum of information about the underly-
pneumocystogram, double contrast cystogram, positive
ing pathophysiology or pathoanatomy. It is then the
 contrast cystogram, and either voiding or retrograde pos-
purview of additional imaging procedures to provide
itive contrast urethrogram. If there is visible hematuria,
further insight. The applicable radiographic procedure
we use carbon dioxide as the negative contrast agent
is the excretory urogram (nephrographic phase) (Feeney
to limit the likelihood of fatal air embolism. Keep in
 et al. 1982, Feeney and Johnston 2007; Burk and Feeney
 mind that urethral diameter at imaging is a function of
2003). However, we prefer ultrasonography performed
the bladder pressure upstream and the infusion pressure
on multiple planes as a first-line diagnostic approach to
downstream (at the catheter, usually a balloon catheter).
problems creating renal size or shape abnormalities or
Our approach is to have the bladder palpably turgid to
for screening the kidneys for architecture or echotexture
assure reasonable filling and then perform the urethro-
change that might explain renal dysfunction. The neg-
 gram with radiographic exposures made during the ret-
rograde injection on both the lateral and VD oblique
the renal parenchyma during an excretory urogram) is
views (Burk and Feeney 2003). This limits the need for
that anything that creates a local-regional renal parenchy-
equivocation regarding ill-defined narrowings or intra-
mal architectural disruption (mass, infarct, cyst, abscess)
luminal filling defects in the urethra.
will not opacify as will functional renal parenchyma
Variances in the intraluminal appearance of urinary
(Burk and Feeney 2003; Feeney and Johnston 2007). This
aa, are ie sso o pns ae s pn
limits interpretive capacity to differentiate among these
(moveable with changes in body position) and those that
possibilities. For regional staging of renal masses (or any
are “attached" (not moveable with changes in body posi-
retroperitoneal mass), the excretory urogram is a dis-
tion) (Park 1981; Burk and Feeney 2003; Westropp et al.
 tant second to ultrasonography, computed tomography,
2006). Attached filling defects range from mucosal irreg-
 or magnetic resonance imaging. The decision regarding
ularity due to cystitis, through inflammatory polyps to
which of these procedures is applicable is based on both
sessile mucosal/mural processes that are usually urothe-
the judicious interpretation of the survey radiographs
lial origin neoplasms. Blood clots can either be free or
and the combination of cost and availability. From our
attached. In general, the more the mucosal irregular-
 perspective, ureteral and urethral size and status are best
ity and the more sessile appearing the filling defect,
imaged using the excretory urogram and the positive
the more similar to urothelial-origin cancer. Biopsy is
contrast urethrogram, respectively. Keep in mind that
however mandatory to differentiate among the various
ascending infection by some organisms limits ureteral
causes of these problems (e.g- pyogranulomatous cysti-
peristaltic capacity and may cause mild ureteral dila-
tis/urethritis versus transitional cell carcinoma). Uroliths
tion directly or compound the effects of partial down-
on occasion are attached (embedded in mucosal reac-
stream obstruction. Similarly, the degree of ureteral dila-
tion) but are usually free. Variances in recumbency dur-
tion identified must be considered as a composite result
ing radiographic views facilitates differentiation of free
110
 Diagnostic testing
versus attached intraluminal processes, particularly on
were almost always silica. Botryoidal (grape-like clusters)
double contrast cystography. The caveats are numerous,
urocystoliths were likely to be oxalates in dogs. The more
including the need for sufficient room to define mobil-
 opaque a stone is, the more likely it is a calcium-based,
ity. For instance, a urolith in the renal pelvis, ureter, or
with oxalate being the most common. Breeds commonly
urethra may not be mobile because it is lodged in a spe-
afflicted with urocystoliths include: Bichon Frise, Dalma-
cific position. Other caveats include air bubbles (usually
tian, English Bulldog, Miniature Schnauzer, Pekingese,
more smooth and symmetric than blood clots, tumor
Pug, Shih Tzu, Welsh Corgi, and West Highland Terrier.
fragments, or uroliths) and blood clots (which can be
Details of the predominate types of uroliths seen in these
 irregular like tumors or uroliths and which can gravitate
breeds is beyond the scope of this chapter, but is avail-
 to the dependent position in a double contrast “puddle"
able elsewhere. Over 90% of urocystoliths produced in
like uroliths) (Feeney et al. 1982; Burk and Feeney 2003).
female or spayed female dogs are struvite whereas males
 Typically, surface tension promotes air bubble migration
and neutered males had a greater assortment but with a
to the periphery of a contrast puddle whereas uroliths
relatively high frequency of oxalate uroliths. In addition,
and blood clots fall to the deepest part of the puddle
younger dogs are more commonly afflicted with struvite
(usually the geographic center). The renal pelvic lumen
(females), urate (males), or cystine (males) than with
shape is a relevant determinant of disease beyond the
the other stone types. By comparison, overall, oxalate
presence or absence of flling defects that may be disrup-
uroliths are slightly more common in cats than struvite,
tive (tumor) or obstructive (uroliths, urothelial-origin
       s e 
tumors). To keep it simple, when interpreting the pyelo-
in females. The exceptions to this are the penile matrix
 graphic phase of the excretory urogram, the appearance
 plugs which are predominately struvite.
of a mildly dilated intra-renal collecting system (renal
lodinated contrast media are used to promote
pelvis and pelvic recesses) must be categorized as sym-
identification of urinary t
tract problems. They
are
metrical (the pelvic recesses dilate proportionally with
usually administered  via intravenous  injection  for
the pelvis) or asymmetrical (the pelvic recesses are short-
excretory urography and retrograde catheterization for
ened and blunted in a less than proportionate distension
urethrocystography or vaginography. There are several
compared to the renal pelvis itself) dilation (Barber and
germane considerations regarding contrast medium
Finco 1979; Burk and Feeney 2003; Feeney and John-
use and misuse. First, for an excretory urogram to be
ston 2007). The former is seen with physiologic diuresis
diagnostic, there must be sufficient renal function to
and early hydronephrosis (Figure 15.5). The latter is seen
filter and concentrate the contrast medium from the
with pyelonephritis (Figure 15.9). In our hands, this is
blood. Second, the concentration of iodinated contrast
more specific for the diagnosis of pyelonephritis than
medium used for retrograde studies can have an effective
 are ultrasonographic findings although a mildly dilated
 atomic number (Zefr) similar to that of specific uroliths
rendering them invisible (Weichselbaum et al. 1998 [a
ultrasonographic finding particularly when paired with
and b]). In general, uroliths isopaque in contrast medium
a positive urine culture.
solutions approximating 23.5 mgl2/mL are most likely
One of the major goals of an imaging study that
 ammonium urate or sodium urate. Uroliths isopaque
involves uroliths (see Chapter 69), particularly cystoliths,
in contrast medium solutions between 23.5 mgl2/mL
is whether the uroliths found can be medically eliminated
and 44.4 mgl2/mL are probably magnesium ammonium
phosphate, cystine, or silica. Uroliths isopaque in
1996; Ross et al. 1999; Weichselbaum et al. 2001). In
addition, in the case of asymptomatic uroliths, medical
contain calcium (most commonly either calcium oxalate
       
monohydrate or dihydrate). Third, intravenous or
 mane. Radiographic, but not ultrasonographic appear-
intra-arterial iodinated contrast medium should not be
ance coupled with consideration of age and breed pre-
 administered to dehydrated patients, patients with a his-
disposition can facilitate this differentiation (Clark 1966;
tory of previous contrast medium reactions or patients
Weaver 1970; Brown et al. 1977; Osborne et al. 1996,
with suspected serum or urine protein disorders that
1999; Thumchai et al. 1996; Ling et al. 1998 [a and b],
might result in renal tubular dysfunction or obstruction
2003; Weichselbaum et al. 1998 [a and b], 2001; Lulich
 including diabetes-induced renal dysfunction (Feeney
et al. 1999; Ross et al. 1999; Houston et al. 2004; Cannon
et al. 1980b; Katzberg et al. 1986; Ihle and Kostolich 1991;
et al. 2007). In general, canine urocystoliths > 10 mm 
 Briguori and Marenzi 2006; Mehran et al. 2006; Benko
in any dimension were over 90% likely to be struvite.
et al. 2007). Fourth, iodinated contrast medium by virtue
Smooth, blunt-edged or faceted, and pyramidal canine
 of its osmolarity and biochemical structure can influence
urocystoliths were usually also struvite. Jackstone shapes
assessments of urine concentrating capacity, urine
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   111
sediment cytology, and urine culture results (Hurt 1960;
degenerative/developmental, anomalous, metabolic,
Narins and Chase 1971; Constantinou et al. 1974; Barry
nutritional/neoplastic,  i
infectious
(bacterial, fungal,
et al. 1978; McClennan et al. 1978; Feeney et al. 1980;
viral)/infesting
(parasitic)/inflammatory/immune-
Fischer et al. 1982; Ruby et al. 1983; Smith et al. 1983;
 mediated, and toxic/teratogenic. Judicious use of these
Dawson and Howell 1985; Shanahan et al. 1985; Andriole
options limits the likelihood of a diagnosis being missed
et al. 1989; Sewell 1996). This is usually more profound
because that etiologic possibility was not included in the
with the ionic than nonionic contrast media, but it is
gamuts.
still best to complete such assessments either before or
at least 48 hours after contrast medium administration.
Although there are numerous personalized approaches
Kidneys and upper ureter
to0 radiographic interpretation of any body system, the
Functional morphology
urinary tract is well suited to a common sense check list in
addition to the usual Roentgen Sign approach (e.g-, size,
The excretory urogram (EU) has had different names
shape, location, surface characteristics [margination],
 opacity, and function) (Burk and Feeney 2003; Feeney
 urogram (IVU). The procedure was used in human uro-
and Johnston 2007). We suggest the following questions
logic imaging before veterinary imaging so much of what
be considered to avoid over or under-interpretation. Are
happened in veterinary medicine relied on the human
 there unexpected or disproportionate regions of urinary
experience and then generally adopted the human termi-
 organ enlargement? Can the enlargement be specifically
nology. There have been differing philosophies regarding
differentiated from genital or even alimentary organ
 the use of this procedure including using intravenously-
enlargement? Are there unexplained persistent opaci-
administered, iodinated contrast medium to outline the
d  Pm sl  m   o re s
 )  n  
with opacities in the alimentary tract)? Is the material
regard to imaging the functional parenchyma (nephro-
that might be causing the distension radiographically
gram). This procedure was referred to as the IVP. As
 opaque (i.e., dystrophic tumor mineralization, some for-
contrast media became less toxic and doses (in mgl2/#
eign bodies and uroliths) and is it of sufficient size and in
- i s o psa m (im apo jo
 the appropriate location (e.g-) punctate retroperitoneal
ity (radiopacity) of the study, the opacification of the
opacities that may be ureteroliths) to create the pre-
 nephrogram became an integral part of the study (IVU).
sumed obstruction? Is there any evidence of segmental
The underlying need for adequate renal function bal-
 or regional luminal distortion/dilation or wall rigidity?
 anced against the need for even higher doses of iodinated
Is the serosal contrast good or bad in the area of the
contrast medium became a decision point regarding the
 s e ai si e uo n ssod
 applicability of the procedure in patients with significant
the area of the urinary organ and, if so, is the urinary
renal compromise. This led to the gradual adoption of
 organ displaced by, invaded by, or potentially the source
the term excretory urogram in veterinary medicine. Sim-
of the mass? Is there any free fluid in the peritoneal
ply, it was a constant reminder that this was a physiologic
or retroperitoneal cavities? Is the etiology of the uri-
 excretory procedure that depended on both glomerular
nary problem obvious? If not, what type of cost-effective
filtration and tubular concentration to produce inter-
and predictable procedures ranging from vaginoscopy
pretable results.
through contrast urinary procedures, are necessary for
In its current status, the EU is both a functional assess-
clarification?
ment as well as a morphologic procedure (Feeney et al.
To facilitate the interpretation of urinary imaging tech-
1979, 1982 [a and b], 2007; Burk and Feeney 2003).
niques, the authors advocate two approaches. The first is
The morphologic aspects are the geometry of the renal
the gamut approach (Reeder and Felson 1975) in which
 parenchyma (nephrographic morphology) and the upper
the radiographic signs are listed and specific thought is
given to what pathophysiologic or pathoanatomic causes
which includes the renal pelvis, the renal pelvic recesses,
could be associated with those findings. The findings
and the ureter. The functional aspects, although only
are then ranked in descending order of likelihood based
qualitative, include the degree and chronology of overall
 on risk modifers including clinical history age, gender
nephrographic opacification and the degree of the pyelo-
(and in the case of animals, species and breed). To foster
graphic opacification. The underlying physiology of the
 defining the possible gamuts, another approach referred
EU is a sequence of events that includes the availability of
to by the acronym DAMNIT, which is basically a list
filterable iodinated agents in the blood (plasma concen-
 of pathologic conditions that can be used to trigger
tration of the radiocontrast agent) → the timely filtration
 possible etiologies or diagnoses, is helpful. These include
 of the iodinated products from the blood (glomerular
112
 Diagnostic testing
filtration rate) → the concentration of the filtered
tion, the ureteral peristaltic capacity, and the resistance
iodinated agent in the renal tubular system (tubular
encountered at the distal end of the ureter. Therefore,
concentration) → excretion of the concentrated iodi-
 in normal dogs and cats, renal pelvic recess opacity is
nated agent into a low-resistance reservoir (renal pelvis)
> continuous evacuation of that reservoir by ureteral
pillars of opacity extending away from the renal pelvis
activity resulting in delivery of the concentrated iodi-
into the renal medulla. These pillars are normally thin-
nated agent to the urinary bladder The diagnostic quality
ner than the renal pelvis and can extend to almost the
 as well as the interpretation of the radiographic findings
cortiomedullary junction. The nonopacified linear struc-
rely on the effective and orderly nature of each of these
tures between the paired recesses are the interlobar ves-
processes (Barber and Finco 1979; Feeney et al. 1982a,
sels. In the normal dog, the pelvis recesses are best visual-
2007; Burk and Feeney 2003). For interpretive purposes,
ized in the later phases ofthe EU (e.g-, 20-40 minutes after
the nephrogram has two phases. First is the vascular
intravenous injection). In the normal cat, they are read-
nephrogram which is basically a "blush" of opacity in
ily visualized almost simultaneously with the renal pelvic
the kidney due to the effect of the unfiltered iodinated
opacification.
agent in the renal parenchymal vessels (basically a nonse-
lective angiogram). The second phase is the parenchymal
Practical radiographic observations
nephrogram which is the opacification of the kidney from
The interpretation of the renal and proximal ureteral sta-
the renal tubules (dominated by the proximal convo-
tus is fostered by the integration of the sequential phys-
luted tubule). The early nephrogram (usually 30-60 sec-
iologic processes outlined above and the knowledge of 
onds after intravenous administration of the iodinated
the pathologic possibilities defined using the DAMNIT
agent) therefore may have a modestly more cortical than
system mentioned earlier. In short, anything that inter-
 medullary opacity, but this rapidly fades to an even opac-
feres with delivery of the iodinated agent to the kid-
ity if everything is normal. The normal nephrogram is
 ney can affect the onset (delayed is abnormal), duration
 most opaque shortly after intravenous injection and pro-
(prolonged is abnormal), opacification sequence (nor-
mal initial peak opacity followed by gradual return to
on survey radiography over the ensuing 30-90 minutes
)    (o  
depending on the dose of contrast administered and the
imally opacified is abnormal) of nephrographic opaci-
renal functional capacity (Feeney et al. 1979, 1982 [a and
fication. Influential factors include the plasma concen-
b]). The pyelogram does not have specific phases, but it 
tration of the iodinated agent (proportional to dose and
 does have a varying appearance of its components. The
intravenous [versus perivascular extravasation] delivery
first component to opacify is the renal pelvis (usually 2-3
rate), the glomerular filtration rate, the tubular concen-
minutes after intravenous contrast medium administra-
trating activity (can be affected by hydration), and the
tion) followed almost immediately by the opacification
uninhibited delivery into the renal pelvis (can be affected
of the ureter. The normal ureter is an actively peristaltic
by renal pelvic pressure from downstream resistance or
structure which literally “milks" the renal pelvis. There-
obstruction). The visualization of the renal parenchymal
fore, the normal ureter is visualized in chronologically
 opacification depends on functional renal parenchyma
varying linear segments instead of just a tube connecting
 being present in the region of interest. Therefore, not
the renal pelvis with the urinary bladder. The renal pelvic
only is the overall opacity of the kidney affected by
recesses are basically extensions of the renal pelvis around
 regional physiologic factors, the intra-renal opacity can
the interlobar renal vessels. These recesses (which have
vary depending on factors such as segmental vascular
been called diverticula in earlier literature) are embry-
 occlusion (parenchymal infarct) or any space-occupying
ologic remnants of the multiple segments of paired renal
 entity that does not contain functional nephrons (e.g--
 papillae and calices which were precursors to the cur-
cysts, tumors or abscesses). Because the renal pelvis
 rent canine and feline fused renal papillae referred to as
(including the pelvic recesses) is an intermediate, low-
the renal crest. The exit of concentrated iodinated agent
resistance reservoir between the renal parenchyma and
from the renal collecting system occurs along the edge
the ureter, it is also influenced by renal physiologic capac-
of the renal crest and not into the recesses. The recesses
ity to excrete the iodinated agent (pelvic opacity), the
now simply serve as a buffer between the delivery rate of
ureteral capacity to evacuate it, and regional, intralumi-
urine to the pelvis from the nephrons and the evacua-
nal, mural, and extraluminal space-occupying entities
tion rate of the urine from the pelvis by the ureter. How
(e.g-, stones, masses, scarring, parenchymal pressure)
well and when the recesses can be recognized in dogs
(Figures 15.4 and 15.5). The third component of the
depends on the dose of iodinated agent, the renal func-
upper urinary tract is the ureter. The ureteral appearance
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   113
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 15.11 Lateral (a), VD (b), and VD oblique (c) views of an excretory urogram exposed at approximately 40 minutes after intravenous
injection of sterile iodinated contrast medium. There is a dilated left ureter with a distal termination just beyond the urinary bladder
trigone. The left renal pelvis is dilated with blunted pelvic recesses indicating pyelonephritis. Final diagnosis: left ectopic ureter with left 
pyelonephritis.
is influenced by the rate of delivery of urine to the
specifically kidney size, shape, and uniformity of nephro-
pelvis (iodinated contrast media have varying degrees of
graphic opacity (Feeney et al. 1979, 1982, 2007). This
 osmotic diuretic activity), the ureteral peristaltic capac-
 combination of morphologic descriptors encompasses
ity (affected by toxins from some bacteria), the status of
 most renal parenchymal abnormalities. At one end of the
the ureteral mural and luminal segments (e.g., regional
 spectrum are compensatory hypertrophy and infltrative
fibrosis, stones, masses), the ureteral integrity (leaks),
renal disease (including amyloidosis, glomerulonephri-
and the resistance created by the ureteral termination
 tis, and round cell neoplasia) which appear as normal to
site (Figure 15.11). The latter is normally the urinary
large smooth kidneys with uniform but varying quality
bladder trigone which can be affected by bladder stones,
of nephrographic opacity. In the middle of the spectrum
regional tumors, surgical intervention, and trauma. In
 are the focal or multifocal renal masses including pri-
the case of ectopic ureters, there may be both increased
mary or metastatic tumors (Figure 15.4), the focal or
resistance and a higher probability of ascending infec-
multifocal renal abscesses or cysts, and the dilated renal
tion depending on where the ureter actually ends (e.g--
 pelvis which appear as normal to large irregularly shaped
urethra, vagina, urethra, etc.)
kidneys with nonuniform nephrographic opacity. The
distribution of the variations in nephrographic opacity
provide clues as to which of these possibilities are more
Spectrum of disease
likely e.g- geographically central or hilar loss of nephro-
The process of interpretation of survey radiographic
-odau y pose a pue do oen
and excretory urographic techniques must be domi-
sis. At the other end of the spectrum are the chronic
nated by the inter-relationships of the upper urinary
(inflammatory or circulatory disease) (Figure 15.3) and
organs. The process that affects renal parenchyma may
the breed-associated dysplastic renal diseases. Next are
also affect the renal pelvis downstream and renal blood
the overall sequences of nephrographic opacification and
flow upstream. Interpretation must incorporate general
fade-out (Feeney et al. 1982). Circulatory and glomerular
renal physiology including the physiology of iodinated
diseases tend (on a basis relative to normal expectations)
contrast agents, the radiographic findings (defined by the
to slow the onset of peak opacity and delay the return
 geometric Roentgen signs) and the age, gender, species,
and breed-associated risk factors for upper urinary tract 
parison, acute toxic processes including acute contrast-
disease. Like any interpretive exercise, things are made
induced renal disease and acute tubular necrosis tend to
simpler if broken down into understandable compo-
have a prompt peak, but a persistence of the increased
nents. There are many goals of the EU, including to dif-
 opacity beyond that is normally expected. Finally, con-
ferentiate reversible from irreversible renal or ureteral
ditions that compromise overall renal function (e.g-)
disease as well as to determine if surgical intervention
glomerulonephritis, end-stage kidney) tend to have poor
versus medical management is appropriate. For the EU,
 these are first the nephrographic morphology including
      
114  Diagnostic testing
opacification wherein acute obstructions may have fair
and Feeney 2003, Feeney and Johnston 2007). This com-
and prompt opacification nephrographic with delayed
bination of morphologic descriptors encompass most
fading while chronic obstructions may have very delayed
renal collecting system abnormalities. At one end of the
(hours or even next day) and poor nephrographic opac-
spectrum is the diffuse dilatory disease (usually renal
ity, if they opacify at all. Readers are directed elsewhere
 pelvic or ureteral obstruction leading to hydronephrosis)
for more details (Barber and Finco 1979; Feeney et al.
in which the renal pelvis and pelvic recesses are dilated
1982, 2007; Burk and Feeney 2003).
proportionally. Depending on the severity, the overall
As mentioned above, the integrated nature of the
renal size may also be enlarged, but usually smooth. In
parenchymal (nephrographic) with the collecting and
the middle of the spectrum is pyelonephritis in which
transport (pyelographic) aspects must influence EU
the renal pelvis is mildly dilated and somewhat irreg-
interpretation. For example, a ureteral obstruction will
ular (chronic), but the pelvic recesses are blunted and
influence the nephrographic opacity (hilar opacity void
distorted (Figure 15.9). At the far end of the spectrum
<> thin rim of residual opacity), the nephrographic
are “filling defects" that involve the renal pelvic and/or
opacification timing, and the appearance of the pyelo-
ureteral lumina and either displace or obstruct the flow
 gram. As for the nephrographic morphology, the inter-
 of the iodine-laden urine. These include stones (Fig-
pretation of pyelographic abnormalities are focused on
ures 15.5 and 15.12), strictures, and regionally inva-
size, shape, and uniformity of pyelographic opacity  sive masses (including those extending from the kidney
(Thrall and Finco 1976; Barber and Finco 1979; Burk 
(a)
(b)
euuaed jeual leuoun, jo ausaid aui Aep on pawad wenon oanxa ue jo smaa () a pue (e) Aaans a zh'st ani
(nephrogram) and the degree of obstruction (pyelogram) as a result of the laminated bilateral renal pelvic stones. There is limited
opacification of any renal parenchyma around the left renal stone, but reasonable parenchymal opacification around the right renal stone.
Neither renal pelvic is dilated beyond the confines of the intrapelvic stone. Final diagnosis: bilateral renal pelvic stones with negligible
pelvic outflow obstruction but limited residual functional renal parenchyma on the left
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   115
the renal pelvic or ureteral epithelium) (Figure 15.4).
flux mechanism that limits or prevents urine from the
The distribution of the variations in pyelographic opac-
bladder going back up the ureter. As the intravesicle
ity provide clues as to which of these possibilities are
 pressure increases, the intramural portion of the distal
more likely (e.g-, geographically central voids in pyel-
ureter near the trigone collapses essentially forming a
 ographic opacity can be associated with hydronephro-
one-way valve that only allows urine to flow toward the
sis whereas eccentric filling defects may indicate tumor).
bladder and then primarily as a result of ureteral peri-
Pyelographic opacity sequences are simpler than nephro-
stalsis. There are times during canine adolescence that
graphic opacity sequences (Thrall and Finco 1976; Bar-
this antireflux mechanism is rendered somewhat ineffec-
ber and Finco 1979; Burk and Feeney 2003; Feeney and
 tive predisposing them to ascending infection (Goulden
Johnston 2007). Basically, poor renal function (from any
1968; Christie 1971; Lenaghan 1972 [a and b]; Klaus-
cause in the sequence of events defined earlier) yields
ner and Feeney 1983). Vesicoureteral reflux can result in
 poor or even absent pyelographic opacification. Partial
retrograde flow of urine up the ureter during voiding
downstream obstructions can cause delayed pyelographic
 opacification while complete downstream obstructions
dure) but can also be induced (presumed to be artifac-
tual not specifically pathologic) by manual bladder com-
iodinated agent can get to the pelvis. In general, if there
pression to the point of voiding (Klausner and Feeney
is poor nephrographic opacity, there will also be poor
1983).
pyelographic opacity. Pyelographic opacity is a func-
tion of both the dose of iodinated agent administered
Practical radiographic observations and
intravenously coupled with the filtration and concen-
spectrum of disease
tration capacity of the renal parenchyma. Poor pyelo-
graphic opacity can be seen with a normal nephrogram
Ureteral and ureterovesical abnormalities can be identi-
in polyuric states. However, usually poor pyelographic
fied and characterized relatively simply (Rose and Gillen-
opacity implies poor, often irreversible renal concentrat-
water 1974; Johnston et al. 1977; Faulkner et al. 1983;
ing capacity.
Owen 1983; Hayes 1984; Hager and Blevins 1986; Moroff
et al. 1991; Burton et al. 1994; Holt and Moore 1995;
Jakovljevic et al. 1998; Lautzenhiser and Bjorling 2002;
Distal ureter and ureterovesical junction
 Moores et al. 2002; Weisse et al. 2002; Burk and Feeney
2003; Reichle et al. 2003; Samii et al. 2004; Worth and
Functional Morphology
 The underlying renal physiology that contributes to the
Kyles et al. 2005; Hamilton et al. 2006; Feeney and John-
 opacification of the ureter has been described above. In
ston 2007). First, mild diffuse ureteral dilation is usu-
this part of the discussion we will focus on the ureter as an
ally associated with ascending infection (look for renal
entity including its role as an effective conduit for urine
pelvic signs of pyelonephritis) or partial obstruction at
from the renal pelvis to the urinary bladder. The ureter
the ureteral termination (look for ectopic ureter or small
is an urothelial-lined, muscular tube capable of rhyth-
trigone-related abnormalities [stones, tumors] ). Second,
mic longitudinally-directed peristalsis (from the kidney
severe diffuse ureteral dilation is usually associated with
toward the bladder). This peristalsis can increase in fre-
near complete obstruction at the ureteral termination
quency as a response to dilation which in the physiologic
(look for large trigone-related abnormalities [stones,
sense is increased urine volume delivery from the kid-
tumors, severe ectopic ureters]). Keep in mind that a
ney (diuretic effect). Because of its peristaltic capacity,
chronic and complete ureteral obstruction will not allow
there are segments of the normal ureter that are not vis-
urine laden with the iodinated agent to flow into the
ible at any segment in time. Therefore, visualization of
ureter (may not opacify because of already being filled
a continuously opacified ureter from the renal pelvis to
with stagnant urine). On occasion, delayed opacification
 the urinary bladder should not be expected and usually
(hours to next day) may occur. Third, segmental ureteral
indicates some abnormality (Feeney et al. 1979, 1982a).
dilation is usually a function of some downstream nar-
Normally, both ureters terminate in the dorsal aspect of
rowing (stricture, entrapment/ligation) or obstruction
the urinary bladder just proximal to the urethral out-
(stone, tumor polyp) (Figure 15.5). If urine can flow,
flow tract. Because of the three conduits entering/exiting
the ureter will dilate proximal to the site of the problem.
the urinary bladder at this region, it is referred to as
 Segmental ureteral dilation without specific obstruction
 the bladder trigone. Ureteral termination is morpholog-
can be due to developmental anomalies such as uretero-
ically characterized as a linear dissection through the
cele which is a dilation of the intramural portion of the
various bladder layers. This is the basis of the antire-
ureter in the urinary bladder wall at the trigone region.
116  Diagnostic testing
This can present as either a bladder outflow problem or
Urinary bladder
o pa sin n p d  
Anatomic considerations and functional
the proximal urethral sphincter mechanism (as well as
morphology
any possibly associated developmental urethral sphinc-
ter abnormalities). Fourth, anomalous ureteral termina-
The bladder is a holow, distensible, musculomembra-
tion (aka. ectopic ureter) (Figure 15.11) can present a
nous organ which varies in form, size, and position,
number of abnormalities including dilated ureter, termi-
depending upon the amount of urine it contains. In gen-
nation of the ureter at some point other than the blad-
eral, the bladder lies along the ventral body wall in the
der trigone (i.e., vagina, urethra, uterus), opacification
caudal abdomen or within the ventral aspect of the pelvic
of urogenital structures distal to the urethral sphinc-
canal. The bladder is arbitrarily divided into the vertex
ter without actively voiding (e.g-, vaginal opacification),
(apex), the body and the neck, which connects with the
and dilation and distortion of the renal pelvis and pelvic
urethra. The trigone is a triangular region near the blad-
recesses typical of pyelonephritis (Figure 15.9). Finally,
der neck where the apex of the trigone is at the urethral
the ureter must not leak. Ureteral leaks are usually not
 orifice and the base is indicated by a line connecting
spontaneous, instead, are due to endogenous (stone) or
the ureteral openings (Evans and Christensen 1993). The
exogenous (blunt external trauma or surgical disrup-
mucosa of the bladder consists of transitional epithelium
tion) causes. The primary suspicion for ureteral (or the
containing folds when the bladder is empty but these
very rare renal pelvic) leak is the presence of retroperi-
 mucosal folds disappear with distention. The bladder is
toneal fluid on a survey radiograph. As both a pelvic
held loosely in place by three ligaments (middle bladder 
urethral leak and a ureteral leak can cause the accumu-
lation of retroperitoneal fluid, clinical judgments must
formed by peritoneal reflections (Evans and Christensen
be made about the choice of procedure (urethrogram or 
1993). Because of the loose ligaments, the bladder can
excretory urogram). A decision is usually facilitated by
be easily displaced to the left or the right by adjacent
the circumstances surrounding the patient, such as frac-
bowel or other structures. The majority of the bladder
tured pelvis increasing the likelihood of urethral trauma.
is a peritoneal structure; the bladder neck and urethra
As the ureter is not normally visualized in its entirety
are retroperitoneal. The significance of this is that a cau-
from the renal pelvis to the bladder trigone, sequen-
 dal bladder or urethral tear will result in retroperitoneal
tial radiographic (or optimally fluoroscopic) assessment
effusion.
is necessary to check for both the repeated absence of
The bladder, along with the urethra, functions as a
 a segment of the opacified ureter as well as the insidi-
 reservoir for urine and as a conduit and excretory organ
ous increase in regional retroperitoneal opacity created
for urine expulsion (Park 1981). It must be noted that
by the leaking of urine laden with the iodinated agent
it is inappropriate to evaluate bladder function based
(Figure 15.13).
solely upon bladder size, as the degree of distention
RF
(a)
(q)
(c)
Figure 15.13 Lateral survey (a) view in which there are irregularly-shaped calcific opacities in the common renal pelvis of a horseshoe
kidney and some loss of retroperitoneal darity around the kidney. Immediate postinjection VD (b) and 40 minutes lateral (c) excretory
the kidney can be seen (primarily on the lateral view) indicative of renal pelvic or proximal ureteral leakage. Final diagnosis: horseshoe
kidney with presumed pelvic urolith-related proximal pyelographic leak.
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   117
often reflects when the patient last had an opportunity
be multiple coalescing bubbles in the wall (Park 1981).
to void; however, when the patient history is correlated
Additionally, one must differentiate changes in bladder
to the bladder size, some functional information can be
 opacity from overlying opacities (e.g., colon, smallintes-
gleaned from the radiograph (e.g., a distended bladder in
tine, nipples, prepuce, fur debris), which may necessi-
a patient straining to urinate suggests obstruction) (Burk
tate additional views, compression views, or special pro-
and Feeney 2003).
cedures. As previously mentioned, bladder size is very
dependent upon when the patient last voided, and the
Practical radiographic observations and
clinical signs must be correlated to the radiographic find-
ings or other diagnostics methods to determine clinical
spectrum of disease
significance. If the bladder extends cranial to the umbili-
The bladder is a well-defined, uniformly soft tissue
cus, this is likely pathologic and may be due to con-
structure within the caudal abdomen and varies in size
genital defects, lower urinary tract obstruction (due to
depending upon the amount of urine it contains. The
neoplasia, uroliths, blood clots or stricture), neurologic
shape of the bladder in the dog is usually oval to teardrop,
disease, or trauma (to the spine or pelvis) (Park 1981). A
but becomes more ellipsoid with distention; whereas the
small bladder is generally normal but may be secondary
feline bladder is almost always ellipsoid ( Park and Wrigley
to rupture, disease leading to lack of distensibility, or
2007). Cranially, the apex is blunt, the body is rounded,
lack of urine formation. An alteration in bladder shape
and the neck is long and gradually tapering in the female
a       s  
dog and cats, but shorter and more abruptly tapering in
nal pressure of adjacent structures) or may be abnormal
male dogs (Burk and Feeney 2003). In the dog, the blad-
(e.g-) patent urachus, urachal diverticulum, loss of tone,
der is generally located immediately cranial to the pubis
bladder spasm, bladder trauma, infltrating neoplasm)
in the female and immediately cranial to the pubis and
(Park 1981; Burk and Feeney 2003). Displacement of the
prostate in the male. In the cat, the bladder is generally
more cranial (2-3 cm) to the pubis than in the dog (Park
tures. Cranial displacement is caused by prostatomegaly,
1981) (Figures 15.1 and 15.2). When the bladder is com-
uteromegaly, or pelvic mass. Ventral displacements can
pletely empty it may be partially or wholly located in the
 be caused by colonic or rectal diseases, uteromegaly, lym-
pelvic canal. The bladder is easily identifiable because of
phadenopathy, retroperitoneal masses, or inguinal her-
nia. Caudal displacements can be caused by abdominal
tion may be compromised by insufficient abdominal fat,
masses, perineal hernias, or congenital defects (e.g-, short
inadequate bladder distention, or superimposed opac-
urethra or ectopic ureter) (Park 1981).
ities (e.g-, small intestines, colon, peritoneal effusion)
The various cystographic special procedures will elu-
(Park and Wrigley 2007).
cidate much more information regarding the bladder.
 Survey views are generally limited for evaluation of
When evaluating the cystogram, one must pay care-
bladder diseases. Interpretation should include evalua-
ful attention to shape, location, and integrity; thickness
tion for the Roentgen signs of opacity, size, shape, posi-
and regularity of the wall and mucosa; and presence or
tion, margination, and number. Any change in opacity
absence of luminal material. It can also be helpful to
is abnormal and generally easy to detect. The bladder
classify abnormalities as mucosal, mural, filling defects
should be evaluated for mineralization, which is most
and contrast projections from the normal confines of the
commonly due to uroliths, but may be due to dystrophic
bladder. Shape is generally best defined with the pos-
mineralization of the wall or of a tumor. Generally,
itive contrast cystogram; although alterations in shape
uroliths are dependent and will be within the central
can also be seen on the other portions of the study.
portion of the bladder on recumbent orthogonal views;
 The bladder should fil uniformly and have a regular
however, uroliths may be adherent and thus in an unex-
shape; abnormalities may include focal areas of rigid-
pected location. Mineral in unexpected locations (e.g-)
ity/nondistensibility (e.g-, neoplastic or inflammatory
at the bladder neck or trigone) should raise the index of
infiltrate) (Figure 15.14), regions of contrast projecting
outside the normal limit but still confined within the
dition with dystrophic mineralization. Radiolucencies in
 urinary tract (e.g- persistent urachal remnant or urachal
the bladder are due to gas (iatrogenic from catheteri-
 or other diverticulum), or extramural compressions on
 zation/cystocentesis or pathologic from emphysematous
the bladder from adjacent structures (these will be even
 cystitis). Gas in the lumen will appear as a smooth, round
 more apparent with incomplete bladder distention).
lucency in the center of the bladder shadow; whereas gas
Bladder wal changes (mural lesions) and mucosal
in the wall will be linear following the wall contour or will
changes are the most common cystographic abnormality
118
 Diagnostic testing
and are best demonstrated with the double contrast cys-
togram. The bladder wall thickness is approximately 1
mm regardless of distention (Mahaffey et al. 1984) and
the wall and mucosa should be smooth. The location
and appearance of the lesion can provide distinguishing
criteria for various diseases but final diagnosis requires
cytology or histopathology (Burk and Feeney 2003). Cys-
titis generally causes thickening and irregularity in the
cranioventral portion of the bladder (Figure 15.10); and
although the entire circumference may be thick and irreg-
ular secondary to chronic inflammation, a diffuse neo-
plastic process may also have this appearance. Polypoid
cystitis is a rare inflammatory disease which has multiple
-se aeua sss enunad no piodaod yoo
[a]
ing from a thickened cranioventral bladder wall and pro-
jecting into the lumen (Martinez et al. 2003). Neoplastic
infiltrate is generally focal and commonly presents as ses-
sile masses projecting into the lumen on both the positive
contrast and double contrast cystogram (Figure 15.7).
Mucosal ulceration is recognized as regions of mucosa
       
seen with chronic cystitis, polypoid cystitis, and neopla-
sia (more severe with epithelial neoplasia than with mes-
enchymal neoplasia) (Figure 15.10). Trauma to the wall
 can result in contrast projecting outside the normal limit
but still contained within the urinary tract (mural dissec-
tion of contrast) or contrast extravasation into the peri-
toneal or occasionally the retroperitoneal space (bladder
wall rupture) (Figure 15.6). Filling defects are caused by
anything in the lumen which alters the normal contrast
flling pattern on positive contrast or double contrast
cystography; and it is important to observe size, shape,
number, contour, position, and attachment (Park 1981).
Free luminal filling defects will remain in the contrast
puddle with positional changes. Air bubbles will show as
smooth, round filling defects at the periphery of the pud-
dle (Figure 15.10). Uroliths are generally small and irreg-
ular and remain in the most dependent portion of the
puddle, unless adhered to the bladder wall (Figure 15.10).
(b)
Blood clots may be round, wedge-shaped, or irregu-
larly shaped filling defects with smooth distinct borders,
Figure 15.14 Right lateral (a) and left ventro-right dorsal oblique
 generally larger than most uroliths, and remain in the
(b) retrograde cystourethrogram views in a 13-year-old neutered
male dog unable to urinate. The study demonstrates mural lesions 
 most dependent portion of the puddle (Burk and Feeney
in the urethra (black arrows) and bladder trigone (white arrow-
2003). Mucus causes thin, linear filling defects. Cellular
heads) secondary to transitional cell carcinoma. In addition, abnor- 
 debris presents as small, amorphous flling defects. For-
mal retrograde filling of the prostatic ducts is seen secondary to 
eign bodies (such as pellets, fragments of catheters, or
prostatic involvement (white arrows)
 migrating plant awns) are rare. Adhered luminal flling
defects will only be demonstrated with specific positions,
although contrast will often cling to the lesion and still
be visible outside the contrast puddle. For differentiation,
assess the shape, size, number, contour, base and associ-
ated wall, and mucosa. Neoplasia generally has a broad
base with an irregular mucosal surface, while polyps
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   119
 generally have a narrow stalk and a smooth mucosal sur-
Practical radiographic observations and
face (Figure 15.7). Other adhered filling defects include
spectrum of disease
uroliths, blood clots, and wall hematomas.
 Interpretation of the bladder is simplified through the
The normal urethra is not radiographically visible in
use of Roentgen sign description in combination with
either species. Survey radiography is generally limited
for evaluation of urethral diseases with the exception of
the DAMNIT scheme and gamut approach. This thought
radiopaque calculi. Radiopaque calculi may be located
process should foster a logical approach to evaluation of
the study and the generation of a list of possible diag-
anywhere along the urethra but are most commonly
lodged at the ischial arch, base of the os penis in the male
dog, urethral papilla in the female dog, and distal penile
three conditions. The clinical presentation of the case
urethra in the male cat (Burk and Feeney 2003). Rarely,
will aid in inclusion and exclusion of the list of likely pos-
is a distended or irregularly shaped proximal urethra evi-
sibilities. As previously stated, disease can be categorized
dent on survey views (urethral obstruction or neoplastic
into storage failure (i.e., bladder leakage, dysmotility, or
infiltrate). Regional tissues should be evaluated for evi-
outflow obstruction) or capacity compromise (namely,
 dence of trauma (retroperitoneal effusion) or neoplasia
masses, uroliths, fibrosis, and herniation). Refining the
 (medial iliac lymphadenopathy or lytic/proliferative ver-
classification to characterize it as extramural (regional
tebral or pelvic lesions).
masses or herniation), mural (inflammatory [cystitis,
The normal vagina is not visible on survey radio-
polypoid cystitis, emphysematous cystitis], neoplastic,
graphs. Unless quite large, lesions affecting the vagina
fibrotic, trauma/tear, atony, or diverticula) or intralu-
will not be seen on survey views.
minal (uroliths, blood clots, cellular debris, air bubbles,
The urethrogram is instrumental in defining urethral
or foreign bodies) is useful not only for narrowing the
disease. During evaluation, pay careful attention to shape,
list of possible/likely diagnoses but also for determin-
location, and integrity; thickness and regularity of the
ing what diagnostic or therapeutic approaches should be
wall and mucosa; and presence or absence of luminal
considered next.
material. As with the bladder, it can be helpful to classify
 abnormalities as mucosal, mural, filling defects, and con-
trast projections from the normal confines of the urethra.
Urethra
In male dogs, the normal urethral width varies depending
Anatomic considerations and functiona!
upon the degree of bladder distention and volume and
morphology
 pressure of injection; the male urethra may be uniform
except for slight narrowing at the pelvic brim, bladder
The urethra is a hollow organ which connects the uri-
neck, and ischial arch or may be nonuniform with a wider
nary bladder to the outside environment. It serves as a
prostatic portion (Burk and Feeney 2003). A dorsal fill-
conduit for urine and a sphincter. The male urethra in
ing defect within the prostatic portion of the urethra may
the dog consists of the prostatic, the membranous, and
the penile urethra. The prostatic portion passes through
be at the level of the colliculus seminalis. With adequate
intravesicular pressure, the normal male cat urethra has a
the prostate gland and is made up of various longitudinal
continuous and uniformly smooth luminal surface with
mucosal folds; the dorsally located urethral crest does not
some variation in the normal urethral luminal diame-
obliterate when distended (Evans and Christensen 1993).
ter; the maximum diameter of the penile urethra occurs
The male urethra in the cat consists of the membranous
at the level of the ischiatic arch, after which the diam-
and the penile urethra. The membranous urethra ends at
eter becomes progressively smaller toward the external
approximately the caudal aspect of the ischium in both
urethral orifice (Johnston et al. 1982). The urethra of
the dog and cat (Pechman 2007). The female urethra
the female dog and cat is short and wide with taper-
corresponds to that portion of the male urethra that lies
ing toward the external sphincter; the diameter varies
cranial to the prostatic utricle (Evans and Christensen
1993). The female urethra enters the genital tract just
depending upon bladder fullness and volume and pres-
sure of injection (Burk and Feeney 2003). Urethral wall
caudal to the vaginovestibular junction. The vagina is a
lesions include mucosal irregularity (neoplasia, granu-
dilatable canal, limited cranially by the fornix just ventral
lomatous urethritis) and rupture (traumatic [including
and cranial to the cervix, and terminating just cranial to
the urethral opening. Longitudinal folds allow for great
iatrogenic], tearing by calculi) (Figures 15.6c and 15.14).
Urethral narrowing can be caused by periurethral fbro-
expansion in diameter (Evans and Christensen 1993).
sis from trauma, rupture, surgery, or inflammation. This
 The vestibule is the space connecting the vagina with the
should be documented on two views or on two contrast
external genital opening and is the common opening for
injections to rule-out urethral spasm (Burk and Feeney
both the urinary and the genital tracts.
120
 Diagnostic testing
2003). Filling defects are common. Calculi tend to be
important to rule out nonurinary tract causes (such as
irregularly shaped and may distort the urethral lumen
thrombocytopenia and coagulopathy) and to determine
if large; they will generally not move in position with
that the reported color change of the urine is truly blood
contrast injection. Air bubbles are usually smooth and
in the urine and not other causes (such as myoglobinuria,
round or oval and will not distend the urethral lumen;
bilirubinuria, false hematuria [redness of urine due to
they will generally move in position with contrast injec-
food or drugs containing pigment]). The role of imaging
tion. Neoplasia can cause a filling defect; careful inspec-
is to define potential urinary morphologic abnormalities
tion will demonstrate a lesion arising from the wall with
 leading to the hematuria. This covers a broad spectrum
a broad base. Increased urethral diameter may be due to
 of disorders including cystitis/urethritis/vaginitis, pro-
chronic obstruction or congenital lesions. Another con-
 static disease (benign prostatic hypertrophy, prostatitis,
dition described in female dogs which may lead to incon-
neoplasia), feline lower urinary tract syndrome, uroliths
tinence and pelvic bladder is a congenital short urethra.
anywhere in the upper or lower urinary tract, neoplasia
The distended vagina and vestibule should be uni-
anywhere in the upper or lower urinary tract, or essen-
form with smooth mucosal margins. There is gener-
tial renal hematuria. The correlation of hematuria and
ally a mild narrowing at the vestibulovaginal junction
voiding may be helpful to locate the source of the hema-
(Rivers and Johnston 1991). When the vagina is dis-
turia (Park 198l). Hematuria at the initiation of void-
tended sufficiently, contrast will reflux into the urethra.
 ing is usually localized to the urethra; hematuria during
Vaginal wall lesions include mucosal irregularity (e.g-
the terminal portion of voiding is potentially related to
inflammation and neoplasia) and narrowing (i.e., vagi-
the prostate, prostatic urethra, or trigone; and hema-
nal stricture, inflammation, or neoplasia) (Figure 15.8).
turia present throughout the voiding process is localized
Filling defects include vaginal septum, persistent hy men,
 nn   e     
and vaginal masses. Vaginography cannot differentiate
work-up of the patient presenting for hematuria should
between inflammatory and neoplastic conditions. Con-
include a physical examination (including rectal palpa-
trast extending beyond the confines of the normal vagina
tion), urinalysis, serum chemistry analysis (e.g-, to eval-
may be due to rupture (such as after traumatic breeding),
uate for liver disease), and complete blood cell count
rectovaginal fistula, or ectopic ureter.
(particularly to evaluate for thrombocytopenia and ane-
Interpretation of urethral lesions is also simplified
mia). If the patient is young, the initial work-up may
through the use of Roentgen sign description in combi-
include only a physical examination and urinalysis. If the
nation with the DAMNIT scheme and gamut approach.
urinalysis reveals infection, treatment with repeat uri-
This thought process should foster a logical approach to
nalysis at the end of treatment would be appropriate. If
evaluation of the study and the generation of a list of
the patient is older, and the urinalysis doesn't reveal a
 possible diagnoses that it not inappropriately narrowed
cause for the hematuria or if the hematuria is chronic,
to too few of conditions. The clinical presentation of
 diagnostic imaging is recommended.
the case will aid in inclusion and exclusion of the list
The initial radiographic procedure in investigation of
of likely possibilities. As previously mentioned, urethral
hematuria is the survey radiograph looking for mineral
disease can be categorized as conduit failure (urethral
opacities such as calculi or dystrophic mineralization
leakage or obstruction), outflow obstruction (due cal-
(particularly concerning in the prostate or in an
culi, neoplasia, granulomatous urethritis or stricture),
abnormal location in the bladder for carcinoma) as well
or urethral sphincter dysfunction (incontinence, reflex
   e   
dysnergia or upper motor neuron). Refining the classifi-
and regional lymphadenopathy. Depending upon the
cation to characterize it as extramural (regional masses),
 survey radiographic findings (as well as the history,
mural (inflammatory, neoplastic, fibrotic, trauma/tear)
 physical examination, serum biochemical, hematologic,
or intraluminal (calculi, blood clots or air bubbles) is
and urinalysis data) and correlation with the clinical
useful not only for narrowing the list of possible/likely
presentation a decision about excretory urography, cys-
diagnoses but also for determining what diagnostic or
tourethrography or ultrasonography can be made. In our
therapeutic approaches should be next considered.
 practice, the next likely diagnostic step would be ultra-
Pamoi pue Aiun addn au yoq ienieaa oi auderou
urinary tract (including prostate), unless the hematuria
Integrated approach to urinary tract syndromes
has been localized to the urethra (in which case retrograde
urethrography should be pursued). Ultrasonography
Hematuria
is useful for detecting parenchymal abnormalities of
The definition of hematuria is blood in the urine. When
the kidneys and prostate, nephroliths, mural lesions
    d d  
of the bladder (e.g-, cystitis, inflammatory polyps and
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   121
neoplasia) and intraluminal lesions of the bladder (such
is negative, a retrograde urethrogram is essential to com-
as calculi and blood clots). It is important to remember
pletely evaluate the lower urinary tract. One considera-
that sonography will not adequately evaluate the entire
tion would be an imaging package that includes a positive
urethra, ureters, or vagina. If the ultrasound examination
 contrast retrograde urethrogram followed by ultrasonog-
is negative, one must consider a retrograde urethrogram
raphy of the bladder (and prostate). As always, the deter-
 in order to completely evaluate the lower urinary tract.
 mination of the choice of imaging procedure must take
The choice of imaging procedure is important to assure
that the disease is predictably detected (sensitivity) and
mation, as well as weigh the relative pros and cons of
that the disease that is not present is confidently excluded
each procedure (namely, cost, risk, availability and tech-
(specificity). In light of the fiscal realities of many clients,
nical expertise).
consideration must also be given to procedural costs. As
there is no single imaging procedure that will confidently
Polyuria
evaluate the entire urinary tract, it is important to thor-
 oughly evaluate all pertinent available information, as
Polyuria is the passage of a large volume of urine in a
well as weigh the pros and cons of each procedure (cost,
given period. The first step when confronted with the
risk, availability) before taking the next diagnostic step.
history of polyuria is to confirm. It is suggested to have
the client collect a urine sample in the home environ-
Dysuria
prior to the trip to the veterinarian; the truly polyuric
Dysuria is painful or difficult urination. This sign should
 patient will almost always have urine specific gravity
localize the lesion to the lower urinary tract. The role of
<1.012 (Feldman 2005). Next, it is important to rule out
imaging is to define any morphologic abnormalities lead-
nonurinary tract causes (e.g-, diabetes mellitus, hypera-
ing to dysuria. This covers a broad spectrum of disorders
drenocorticism, hypercalcemia, pyometra, hepatic insuf-
including inflammatory (e.g-, interstitial cystitis, feline
ficiency, iatrogenic, and rarely psychogenic polydipsia or
lower urinary tract disease, and granulomatous urethri-
 central diabetes insipidus) before determining the appro-
tis), infectious (e.g-, cystitis, urethritis, prostatitis, vagini-
 priate diagnostic approach to urinary causes of polyuria.
tis), uroliths anywhere in the lower urinary tract, neopla-
The role of imaging is to define potential urinary mor-
sia anywhere in or adjacent to the lower urinary tract,
phologic abnormalities leading to polyuria. This covers a
 or structural abnormalities of the urethra (such as fibro-
broad spectrum of disorders including numerous causes
sis and stricture). Initial work-up of the patient should
of acute or chronic renal failure, pyelonephritis, glomeru-
include physicalexamination (including rectal palpation)
lar diseases, and rarely nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
and urinalysis. If the urinalysis does not reveal a potential
Initial work-up should include a physical examination,
cause for the dysuria, or if the signs are not consistent with 
urinalysis (to confirm polyuria), serum chemistry analy-
simple infection, diagnostic imaging is recommended.
sis (to include renal causes and exclude nonrenal causes),
As with other signs referable to the urogenital tract,
and complete blood cell count (to help distinguish infec-
survey radiography is the mainstay of initialinvestigation.
tion and differentiate acute from chronic renal disease).
The survey radiographs are evaluated for mineral opaci-
Once polyuria is confirmed and nonurinary tract causes
ties such as calculi or dystrophic mineralization (partic-
are ruled out, further investigation of the urinary tract
ularly concerning in the prostate or in an abnormal loca-
can be undertaken.
tion in the bladder for carcinoma) as well as enlarged or 
The mainstay for evaluation of polyuria is the sur-
abnormally shaped urogenital organs and regional lym-
vey radiographic examination to evaluate size, shape,
phadenopathy. Urine retention or a distended bladder is
margination, and opacity of the kidneys. Of particu-
particularly suggestive of outflow obstruction. Depend-
lar importance is that if the kidneys are shrunken and
ing upon the survey radiographic findings (as well as
irregular shaped (chronic diseases including chronic
the history physical examination, serum biochemical,
pyelonephritis or renal dysplasia) or large and regu-
hematologic, and urinalysis data) and correlation with
larly or irregularly shaped (acute disease including acute
 the clinical presentation a decision about cystourethrog-
 pyelonephritis or glomerulonephritis). Also evaluate for
raphy or ultrasonography can be made. Ultrasonography
renal mineralization which can be seen with a variety
can be utilized to evaluate parenchymal changes of the
 of diseases having associated polyuria. Depending upon
prostate, murallesions of the bladder (cystitis, inflamma-
 the survey radiographic findings (as well as the history,
tory polyps, neoplasia) and intraluminal lesions (calculi).
physical examination, serum biochemical, hematologic,
As previously mentioned, sonography will not adequately
and urinalysis data) and correlation with the clinical
evaluate the entire urethra. If the ultrasound examination
presentation a decision about excretory urography or
122
 Diagnostic testing
ultrasonography, if indicated at all, can be made. While
ectopic ureter), “"dead space” (herniated, retroflexed, or
ultrasonography can be helpful in evaluating renal
atonic bladder, urethral strictures, bladder or urethral
parenchymal abnormalities and can guide fine needle
diverticula), lower male genital tract conditions includ-
or core biopsy sampling of the renal parenchyma or
 ing prostatitis, abscesses or tumors, and female genital
pelvis (generally needed for definitive diagnosis of renal
tract conditions including uterine stump granulomas,
causes of polyuria), it must be remembered that ultra-
vaginal anomalies (most commonly strictures), recur-
sonography will provide limited information regarding
 rent vaginitis, and vaginal tumors. The clinical findings
renal function. We recommend excretory urography if
 of urethral or vaginal discharge, dysuria, paraspinal pain,
the goal of the study is to determine qualitive renal func-
incontinence, azotemia, polakyuria, abdominal wall, or
tion or assess for pyelonephritis. In cases where survey
 perineal distortion (hernias) may provide insight into the 
radiographs reveal enlarged kidneys, our first recommen-
 initial choice of imaging procedure.
dation would be ultrasonography, which can be useful
The radiographic mainstay of urinary tract infection
to distinguish between infiltrative diseases (e.g., neopla-
 investigations are survey radiographs looking for opaci-
sia, FIP), polycystic kidney disease, perirenal pseudo-
cysts, acute pyelonephritis, and hydronephrosis, as well
ularly worrisome in the prostate for carcinoma) as well
 as guide sampling. A word must be said regarding the
as enlarged, obviously shrunken or distorted urogeni-
diagnostic work-up of chronic kidney disease. Imaging
 tal organs and regional lymphadenopathy. Depending
beyond the survey radiographs is likely of limited value
- au se m se shuug oderoeu aans au uo
unless assessing for chronic pyelonephritis (recommend
 tory, physical examination, serum biochemical, hema-
excretory urogram), comorbid conditions (urinary tract
tologic, and urinalysis data) and their comparison with
infection, urolithiasis, urinary obstruction) or qualitative
the clinical presentation, a decision can be made whether
renal function (excretory urogram), or presented with a
excretory urography, retrograde urethrocystography, or
patient having an acute crisis superimposed over chronic
ultrasonography should be the next approach. A word
kidney disease.
about ultrasonography is in order here even though it is
The choice of imaging procedure, if at all, is important
addressed in another segment of this text. Ultrasonog-
in cases of polyuria. One must consider the goals of the
raphy is a noninvasive tool to characterize parenchymal
study, the cost of the procedures, the risk to the patient,
lesions, particularly the kidney and the prostate gland.
the availability (including technical expertise) of the pro-
 It has been reported as a potential tool for investiga-
cedure, and the information that can be garnered from
tion of ectopic ureters (Lamb and Gregory 1998), but in
the procedure. For example, if the goal of the procedure is
to obtain biopsy samples, ultrasound is the procedure of
 terization to be acceptable. It has the advantage of not
choice; whereas if the goal of the procedure is to evaluate
requiring sedation (cystography does require it) or the
 for chronic pyelonephritis, we recommend an excretory
 xl se i rss go sn
urogram. Unfortunately, in cases of polyuria, imaging
does require them). However, it provides little functional
 n se uoeu pnl pod e sanpand
information other than the potential for identification of
underlying cause and the client must be made aware of
residual urine after voiding. It has a role in the assess-
this fact before proceeding.
ment of bladder masses and bladder wall thickening due
to cystitis, but is not applicable for urethral, ureteral,
   i    s 
Recurrent infection
most likely clinical problem is something that can be
Recurrent urinary tract infection usually implies the
confidently identified and adequately characterized by
presence of some morphologic predisposition, a nidus
ultrasound, we use it. Otherwise, we recommend excre-
of infection that is not completely cleared, a condition
 tory urography (useful for identification of pyelonephri-
of immuno-incompetence, or some metabolic or phar-
tis, small or lucent upper urinary tract stones or ectopic
macologic effect that fosters organism growth. The role
ureter, qualitative characterization of relative renal and
of imaging, usually radiographic, is to define potential
 ureteral function and integrity, physiologic [no drugs or
morphologic problems or potential sources of recurrent
lower urinary catheters] assessment of urethral sphincter-
urinary tract infections (Barber and Finco 1979; Burk
based incontinence and the identification of postvoiding
and Feeney 2003; Agut et al. 2004; Feeney and Johnston
vaginal urine pooling [which can be mistaken for sphinc-
 2007). This covers a broad spectrum of disease including
ter incontinence)], retrograde urethrocystography (use-
tumors anywhere in the upper or lower urinary tract,
ful for morphologic identification of lower urinary tract
 a m no dn  u  s
 stones not detected by survey radiography, characteriza-
upper or lower urinary tract anomalies (most commonly
tion of bladder or urethral wall or luminal abnormalities
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   123
including polyps, foreign bodies and neoplasms as well as
with ipsilateral renal pelvic dilation at ultrasonography)
any bladder, prostatic, or urethral diverticula or commu-
(Rivers et al. 1997). Double contrast cystography fol-
nicating cavitations), or retrograde vaginography (useful
lowed by positive contrast urethrography is the sequence
for characterization of vaginal stricture and other anoma-
of choice to identify and characterize survey radiograph-
lies, staging of vaginal tumors [if computed tomographic
ically occult lower urinary tract stones.
 or magnetic resonance are unavailable], and occasionally
So far, we have addressed the considerations for urolith
for odd ectopic ureter assessment).
detection and assessment of the regional physiologic
The choice of imaging procedure is important to
effects. The other aspect of radiographic evaluation is the
 ansure that disease that is present is predictably detected
prediction of predominant mineral type ( Weichselbaum
(sensitivity) and that disease that is not present is confi-
et al. 1998 [a and b], 2001). While urolith radiographic
dently excluded (specificity). These considerations must
appearance is not always correlated with mineral com-
be combined with proceduralcosts, proceduralrisks (e.g-)
 position, this assessment is complementary to both the
 systemic contrast media administration and chemical
available urolith occurrence data and the characterization
restraint), and the timely availability of nonradiographic
of the crystals in the urine sediment. Under the consider-
imaging instrumentation (e.g-, computed tomography,
 ations in the Urinary Imaging section earlier in this chap-
ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging). These
ter, some information was presented on the comparison
criteria influence our decisions particularly in the first
between the concentration of the iodinated radiographic
choice of ultrasonography versus contrast radiography.
 agent and the perceived relative opacity (including the
We do not operate on the assumption that if nothing
 potential for obscuring) uroliths. Using dilutions of≥100
is found in an ultrasound the client can automatically
mgl2/mL for retrograde double contrast cystography or
afford additional procedures and we do not assume that
because an ultrasound was done and nothing was found
to obscure stones because it will almost always be more
that this always constitutes due diligence.
 opaque than even the calcium-based stones. One should,
however, be cautious not to have the depth of contrast
medium over 5-6 mm because it can overwhelm and
Uroliths
obscure small stones. The use of the mgl2 per milliliter in
Survey radiography is the imaging mainstay for urolith
contrast solutions as a diagnostic tool to predict urolith
assessment. Implied in this assessment is the combination
mineral type is not practical. The use of surface character-
of finding the stone, predicting the predominant mineral
 istics (particularly faceted, randomly irregular, or spec-
ulated [jackstone]), size, and relative opacity have some
gical considerations), and assessing the physiologic rel-
clinical utility in the assessment of predominate mineral
 evance of the stone (e.g-, present but not obstructing.
type particularly in bladder and urethral stones. In gen-
potentially obstructive, obviously obstructive) particu-
eral, the combination of species, breed risk, gender, age,
larly in the renal pelvis, ureter, and urethra. In compli-
and radiographic appearance can provide clinically rele-
cated cases wherein the stones may be small or radiolu-
vant information to facilitate the decision to manage the
cent, upper or lower urinary tract contrast procedures
 patient medically (antibiotics and/or diet) and recheck
may be indicated, if the identification of the urolith
versus prompt surgical intervention (to remove stones
and/or the assessment of its effects on urine flow will
that won't dissolve 0r pass) (Clark 1966; Weaver 1970;
influence the management plan. The role of ultrasound
Brown et al. 1977; Osborne et al. 1996, 1999; Thumchai
for urolith detection is only one of detection and not
et al. 1996; Ling et al. 1998 [a and b], 2003; Weichselbaum
characterization (Weichselbaum et al. 2001). Therefore,
et al. 1998 [a and b], 2001; Lulich et al. 1999; Ross et al.
 only in specific circumstances is it indicated and then only
1999; Houston et al. 2004; Cannon et al. 2007). Female
 for the kidney or urinary bladder. Excretory urography
dogs are more likely to have struvite stones; male dogs are
is the procedure of choice to find survey radiographi-
more likely to have oxalate stones. Cats follow a similar,
but less predictable trend. Overall trends in stone occur-
the physiologic effect of a renal or ureteral stone unless
rence in both dogs and cats are somewhat dynamic and
there is a high probability of near complete obstruc-
 nas  sd e  
tion wherein ultrasonography is adequate. On occasion,
dietary formulation and genetic selection for phenotypic
we use ultrasound-guided positive contrast pyelography
 characteristics that are further complicated by hereditary
wherein iodinated contrast agent is injected directly into
 breed predispositions. Across both dogs and cats, uroliths
the renal pelvis and followed with radiographs to see if the
that approach or exceed the opacity of the ilial shaff
iodinated agent can pass the suspected obstruction (usu-
are more likely to be calcium-based with oxalate being
ally an ureterolith seen on survey radiography coupled
the predominate mineral type. Readers faced with this
124
 Diagnostic testing
decision are referred to other chapters in this text as well
ing is encouraged and followed immediately with sur-
as these references (Weichselbaum et al. 1998 [a and b],
vey radiographs. This facilitates the assessment of vagi-
2001).
nal pooling as the cause of presumed incontinence and
initiates the discussion of surgical vaginal alteration. If
there is evidence of dysuria, hematuria, or pollakiuria,
Incontinence
the retrograde contrast cystourethrogram is probably the
Urinary incontinence is a multifaceted condition (Banks
best choice because of its capability to detect abnormal
et al. 1991; Silverman and Long 2000; Burk and Feeney
bladder position (retroflexed bladder, herniated bladder
2003; Feeney and Johnston 2007). It can be due to hor-
and, pelvic bladder [all pelvic bladders are not directly
monal deficiencies, it can be due to morphologic abnor-
associated with incontinence, however]), urethral and/or
malities of the lower urogenital tract and it can be due to
bladder tumors. In addition, this technique enables the
neurophysiologic abnormalities of the urethral sphincter.
identification of both the compression and/or distortion
In our opinion, hormonal deficiencies should be ruled
effects of prostatic disease (most likely carcinoma, but
out first because they can be approached, at least initially,
 possibly abscess) on the prostatic portion of the urethra
with therapeutic trials instead of expensive imaging pro-
and the abnormal degree of urethroprostatic reflux (not
cedures. Assuming that the hormonal etiology was either
 specific for the type of disease, but indicative of clinically
unlikely or the intervention was ineffective, imaging pro-
relevant disease). Ultrasound then becomes an effective
cedures become very germane. The next questions to
complementary procedure for further assessment of the
be answered before choosing an imaging procedure are
prostate gland.
whether the apparent incontinence is accompanied by
 It should be apparent that every incontinence case
dysuria or hematuria and what are the relative likeli-
is not the same and that preimaging assessment should
hoods of a morphologic anomaly (e.g., ectopic ureter),
 minimize the expense and morbidity associated with pro-
sphincter-based incontinence, chronic infection, or blad-
cedures that have limited differentiating capacity for the
der/urethral/prostatic tumor as the basis for the prob-
lem? If there is any question about the role of the lower
radiography (for identification of masses [acknowledging
female genital tract (e.g-, anomaly, vaginal pooling, or
that urethral, vaginal, and bladder masses will not be dif-
 tumor), a detailed vaginoscopic examination is indicated
ferentiated by this technique], stones, lymphadenopathy)
before an imaging decision is made. The goal here would
and a detailed physical examination (including digital
be to identify vaginal anomalies that might predispose
vaginal and rectal examinations as well as a vaginoscopic
 to vaginal pooling (e.g., stricture) and which might be
examination, if applicable), cannot be over-emphasized.
 associated with other lower urinary abnormalities (e.g-)
Remember, the intent of incontinence investigation is
ectopic ureter, sphincter-based incontinence, or tumor
to cost-effectively determine if the problem is treatable
invasion).
surgically with the assumption that applicable medical
While the specific and complete diagnosis may not
 management treatment protocols have failed. In fairness
be made without imaging (including vaginography or
to the owner, if an anomaly (e.g-, vaginal stricture) with
even computed tomography) at least some assessment of 
the potential for multiple other problems (e.g- sphincter-
risk and likelihood of successful outcome can be made.
based incontinence) can be identified without an expen-
If there is no evidence of dysuria, hematuria, or pol-
sive imaging procedure, they can then decide how far they
lakiuria, the intravenous excretory urogram is probably
are willing to pursue the problem. Both the owners and
the best first imaging choice because of its capability
the attending clinician can chart a course for the patient
to detect sphincter incontinence based on the absence
based on what further diagnostic techniques will yield
of other abnormalities and the elongated appearance of
   o  si s nou   
the dysfunctional urethra (Figure 15.8a,b). The expec-
 probable case complexity, the estimated cost, and likely
tation is that iodine-laden urine will show up in places
outcome.
where it should not (outside the kidney, ureter, and blad-
der) during the procedure to constitute a morphologic
References
diagnosis of the underlying etiology. The excretory uro-
gram physiologically fils the bladder and there should
Ackerman, N. (1974). Intravenous pyelography. JAmAni Hosp Assoc
not be distal leakage in a normal bitch or dog (Feeney
10: 277-280.
et al. 1979, 1982, 2007; Burk and Feeney 2003). In female
Ackerman, N. ( 1974). Intravenous pyelography-interpretation of the
study. I Am Arim Hosp Assoc 10: 281-284.
dogs, we use an additional technique which is to pre-
Ackerman, N., et al. ( 1972). Fatal air embolism associated with pneu-
vent the bitch from urinating during the 40 minute EU
mourethrography and pneumocystography in a dog. I Am Arim
 procedure. Once the bladder is full, spontaneous void-
Hosp Assoc 160( 12): 1616- 1618.
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   125
Agut, A., et al. (2004). Left perinephric abscess associated with
Davenport, D.J., et al. ( 1986). Familial renal disease in the dog and cat.
nephrolithiasis and bladder calculi in a bitch. Vet Rec 154(18):
Cont Issues Small Anim Pract 4: 137.
562-565.
 Dawson, P. and M. Howell (1985). Misleading urine tests after using
Andriole, G.L., et al. ( 1989). Effect of low osmolar, ionic and nonionic,
contrast media. Br I Radiol 58(692): 785.
contrast media on the cytologic features of exfoliated urothelial cells.
Eisele, J.G., et al. (2005). Ectopic ureterocele in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
Urol Radiol 11(3): 133-135.
Assoc 41(5): 332-335.
Armbrust, L.J., et al. (2000). Compression radiography: an old tech-
Essman, S.C. (2005). Contrast cystography. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
nique revisited. I Am Amim Hosp Assoc 36: 537-541.
20( 1): 46-51.
Banks, S.E., et al. (1991). Urinary incontinence in a bitch caused by
Esterline, M.L., et al. (2005). Ureteral duplication in a dog. Vet Radiol
vaginoureteral fistulation. Vet Rec 128(5): 108.
Ultrasournd 46(6): 485-489.
Barber, D.L. and D.R. Finco ( 1979). Radiographic findings in induced
Evans, H.E. and G.C. Christensen (1993). The urogenital system. In:
bacterial pyelonephritis in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 175(11):
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, edited by H.E. Evans, 3rd edition.
1183-1190.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 494-558.
Barrett, R.B. and S.L. Kneller ( 1972). Feline kidney measuration. Acta
Faulkner, R.T., et al. (1983). Canine and feline ureteral ectopia. In:
Radiol (Stockh) 319(suppl): 279.
Current Veterinary Therapy VIII,edited by R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia,
Barry, I.M., et al. ( 1978). The influence of retrograde contrast medium
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1043-1048.
(n  f  Ad e s A 
Feeney, D.A., et al. (1982a). The excretory urogram: I. Techniques,
633-634.
normal radiographic appearance and misinterpretation. II. Inter-
Barsanti, IA., et al. ( 1981). Complications ofbladder distention during
pretation of abnormal findings. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 4:
retrograde urethrography. Am I Vet Res 42(5): 819-821.
233-240, 321-329.
Benko, A., et al. (2007). Canadian association of radiologists: consensus
Feeney, D.A., et al. ( 1982b). Functional aspects of the nephrogram in
guidelines for the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. Can
excretory urography: a review. Vet Radiol 23: 42.
Assoc Radiol I 58(2): 79-87.
Feeney, D.A. and G.R. Johnston (2007). The kidneys and ureters. In:
Biery, D.N. (1981). Upper urinary tract. In: Radiographic Diagnosis
Textbook of Veterinary Diagrostic Radiology, edited by D.E. Thrall.
of Abdominal Disorders in the Dog and Cat, edited by T.R. O'Brien.
St. Louis, MO: Missouri, Saunders, pp. 693-707.
Davis, CA: Covell Park Vet Company, pp. 481-542.
Feeney, D.A. and G.R. Johnston (2007). The uterus, ovaries and testes.
Brace, J.J. (1980). Perirenal cysts (pseudocysts) in the cat. In: Current
 In: Textbookof Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology, edited by D.E. Thrall.
Veterinary Therapy VIII, edited by R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB
St. Louis, MO: Missouri, Saunders, pp. 738-749.
Saunders, pp. 980-981.
Feeney, D.A., et al. ( 1980a). Effects of radiographic contrast media on
Briguori, C. and G. Marenzi (2006). Contrast-induced nephropathy:
results of urinalysis, with emphasis on alteration in specific gravity.
pharrmacological prophylaxis. Kidney Int Suppl 100: S30-S38.
IArm Vet Med Assoc 176(12): 1378-1381.
Brown, N.O., et al. (1977). Canine urolithiasis: retrospective analysis
Feeney, D.A., et al. ( 1980b). Effect of multiple excretory urograms on 
of 438 cases. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 170(4): 414-418.
Bryan, J.N., et al. (2006). Primary renal neoplasia of dogs. I Vet Imtern
Res 41(6): 960-963.
Med 20(5): 1155-1160.
Feeney, D.A., et al. ( 1979). Normal canine excretory urogram: effects
Burk, R.L. and D.A. Feeney (2003). The Abdomen. In: Small Ani-
of dose, time, and individual dog variation. Arm J Vet Res 40(11):
mal Radiology and Ultrasonography, 3rd edition, edited by Burk,
1596-1604.
R.L, and D.A. Feeney. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 249-
Feldman, E.C. (2005). Polyuria and Polydipsia. In: Textbook of Veteri-
476.
 nary Internal Medicine,6th edition.St. Louis, MO Elsevier Saunders,
Burton, C.A., et al. ( 1994). Ureteric fibroepithelial polyps in 2 dogs. I
Pp.102-105.
Small Animal Pract 35: 593.
Finco, D.R. (1973). Congenital and inherited renal disease. JAm Anim
Cannon, A.B., et al. (2007). Evaluation of trends in urolith composi-
Hosp Assoc 9: 301.
tion in cats: 5,230 cases (1985-2004). I Am Vet Med Assoc 231{4):
 Finco, D.R., et al. (1971). Radiologic estimation of kidney size in the
570-576.
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 159: 995.
Carrig, C.B. and U.V. Mostosky (1976). The use of compression in
Fischer, S., et al. ( 1982). Increased abnormal urothelial cells in voided
abdominal radiography of the dog and cat. I Am Vet Radiol Soc
urine following excretory urography. Acta Cytol 26(2): 153- 158.
17(5): 178-181.
Graham, IP., et al. (2007). Technical issues and interpretation prin-
Caywood, D.D., et al. (1980). Neoplasms of the canine and feline
ciples relating to the canine and feline abdomen. In: Textbook of
urinary tracts. In: Current Veterinary Therapy VII, edited by R.W.
Veterinary Diagrostic Radiology, edited by D.E. Thrall, 5th edition.
Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1203- 1212.
St. Louis, MO: Missouri, Saunders, pp. 626-644.
Christie, B.A. (1971). Incidence and etiology of vesicoureteral reflux
Goulden, B.E. (1968). Vesico-ureteral reflux in the dog. N Z Vet I
 in apparently normal dogs. Invest Urol9(3): 184-194.
16( 12): 167-175.
Clark, W.T. ( 1966). Urolithiasis in the dog. IV. Diagnosis. JSmall Anim
Greco, D.s. (200l). Congenital and inherited renal disease of small
Pract 7(8): 553-556.
animals. Vet Clirn North Am Small Anim Pract 31: 393.
Constantinou, C.E., et al.( 1974). Effects of radiopaque contrast media
Hager, D.A. and W.E. Blevins ( 1986). Ectopic ureter in a dog: extension 
on the dynamic characteristics of ureteral function. Urol Int 29(6):
from the kidney to the urinary bladder and to the urethra. I Arm Vet
401-413.
Med Assoc 189(3): 309-310.
Crawford, I.T. and W.M. Adams. (2002). Influence of vestibulovaginal
Hamilton, M.H., et al. (2006). Traumatic bilateral ureteric rupture in
stenosis, pelvicbladder, and recessed vulva on response to treatment
two dogs. I Small Anirm Pract 47(12): 737-740.
for clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease in dogs: 38 cases
Hayes, H.M. (1984). Breed associations of canine ectopic ureter: a
(1990- 1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 221(7): 995-999.
study of 217 female cases. I Small Armim Pract 25: 501.
Cuypers, M.D., et al. ( 1997). Renomegaly in dogs and cats: differential
Holloway, A. and R. O'Brien (2007). Perirenal effusion in dogs and
diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 19: 1019.
cats with acute renal failure. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48(6): 574-579.
126
 Diagnostic testing
Holt, P.E. and A.H. Moore (1995). Canine ureteral ectopia: an analysis
Lulich, J.P., et al. (1999). Epidemiology of canine calcium oxalate
of 175 cases and comparison of surgical treatments. Vet Rec 136( 14):
uroliths. Identifying risk factors. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim
345-349.
Pract 29(1): 113-122.
Houston, D.M., et al. (2004). Canine urolithiasis: a look at over
Lulich, IP., et al. ( 1988). Feline idiopathic polycystic kidney disease.
16 00o urolith submissions to the Canadian Veterinary Urolith
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 10: 1030- 1041.
Centre from February 1998 to April 2003. Can Vet I45(3) : 225-
Lyons, L.A., et al. (2004). Feline polycystic kidney disease mutation
230.
identified in PKD1. I Am Soc Nephrol 15( 10): 2548-2555.
Hurt, R. ( 1960). The effect of radiographic contrast media on urinal-
Mahaffey, M.B., et al. ( 1984). Simultaneous double-contrast cystogra-
ysis. Amn I Med Techmol 26: 122-124.
phy and cystometry in dogs. Vet Radiol 25(6): 254-259.
Ihle, S.L. and M. Kostolich ( 199l). Acute renal failure associated with
Mahaffey, M.B., et al. (1989). Cystography: effect of technique on
contrast medium administration in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc
diagnosis of cystitis in dogs. Vet Radiol 30(6): 261-267.
199(7): 899-901.
Martinez, I., et al. (2003). Polypoid cystitis in 17 dogs ( 1978-2001). J
Jakovljevic, S., et al. (1998). Ureteral diverticula in two dogs. [review]
Vet Irnterm Med 17(4): 499-509.
[35 refs]. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39(5): 425-429.
 Mehran, R. and E. Nikolsky ( (2006). Contrast-induced nephropathy:
 Johnston, G.R.,et al. (1982). Urethrography and cystographyin cats. I.
 definition, epidermiology, and patients at risk. Kidney Int Suppl 100:
Techniques, normal radiographic anatomy and artifacts. I1. Abnor-
S1 1-S15.
mal radiographic anatomy and complications. Comp Cont Ed Pract
McClennan, B.L., et al. (1978). The effect of water soluble contrast
Vet 4(10): 823-835, 931-946.
material on urine cytology. Acta Cytol 22(4): 230-233.
Johnston, G.R., et al. ( 1977). Familial ureteral ectopia in the dog. I Am
Moores, A.P, et al. (2002). Urinoma (para-ureteral pseudocyst) as a
Arim Hosp Assoc 13: 168.
consequence of trauma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract43(5): 213-216.
Johnston, G.R., et al. (1983). Complications of retrograde contrast
Moroff, S.D., et al. ( 1991). Infltrative ureteral disease in female dogs;
urethrography in dogs and cats. Am I Vet Res 44(7): 1248-1256.
41 cases (1980-1987). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 199: 247.
Katzberg, R.W., et al. ( 1986). Effects of contrast media on renal function
 Narins, D.J. and R.M. Chase Jr (1971). The effect of hypaque upon 
and subcellular morphology in the dog. Invest Radiol 21(1): 64-
urine cultures. I Urol 105(3): 433-435.
70.
Neuwirth, L, et al. (1993). Comparison of excretory urography
Klausner, I.S. and D.A. Feeney( 1983). Vesicoureteral reflux. In: Current
and ultrasonography for detection of experimentally induced
Veterinary Therapy VIHI, edited by R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB
pyelonephritis in dogs. Arm I Vet Res 54(5): 660-669.
Saunders, pp. 104 1-1043.
Osborne, C.A., et al. (1999). Analysis of 77000 canine uroliths. Per-
Kneller, S.K. ( 1974). Role of the excretory urogram in the diagnosis of
spectives from the Minnesota Urolith Center. Vet Clin North Am
renal and ureteral disease. Vet Clin North Am 4(4): 843-861.
Small Amim Pract 29( 1): 17-38.
Kyles, A.E., et al. (2005). Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and 
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 1996). Diagnosis, medical treatment, and prog-
ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats with ureteral calculi: 163
nosis of feline urolithiasis. [review] [42 refs]. Vet Clin North Arm
cases (1984-2002). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226(6): 932-936.
Small Anim Pract 26(3): 589-627.
Kyles, A.E., et al. (1996). Vestibulovaginal stenosis in dogs: 18 cases
Owen, R.R. ( 1983). Canine ureteralectopia. ISmallAmim Pract 14: 407.
(1987-1995). IAm Vet Med Assoc 209(11): 1889-1893.
Park, R.D. and R.H. Wrigley (2007). The urinary bladder. In: Textbook
Lamb, C.R. and S.P. Gregory ( 1998). Ultrasonographic findings in 14
of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology, edited by D.E. Thrall. St. Louis,
dogs with ectopic ureter. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39: 218-223.
MO: Missouri, Saunders, pp. 708-724.
Lautzenhiser, S.J. and D.E. Bjorling (2002). Urinary incontinence in a
Park, R.D. (198l). Radiology of the urinary bladder and urethra.
dog with an ectopic ureterocele. J Arm Armim Hosp Assoc 38( 1): 29-
In: Radiographic Diagnosis of Abdominal Disorders in the Dog and
32.
Cat, edited by T.R. O'Brien. Davis, CA: CovellPark Vet Company,
 Lees, G. (1996). Congenital renal diseases. Vet Clin North Arm Small
Pp. 543-614.
Anim Pract 26: 1379.
Pechman, R.D. (2007). The urethra. In: Textbook of Veterinary Diag-
Lenaghan, D., et al. (1972a). Long-term effect of vesicoureteral reflux
rostic Radiology, edited by D.E. Thrall. St. Louis, MO: Saunders,
on the upper urinary tract of dogs. II. with urethral obstruction. J
pp. 725-728.
Urol 107(5): 758-761.
Reeder, M.M. and B. Felson ( 1975). Gamuts in Radiology : Compreherm-
Lenaghan, D., et al. ( 1972b). Long-term effect of vesicoureteral reflux
sive Lists of Roentgen Differential Diagmosis. Cincinnati, OH: Audio-
on the upper urinary tract of dogs. I. without urinary infection. J
visual of Cincinnati.
Urol 107(5): 755-757.
Reichle, J.K., et al. (2003). Ureteral fibroepithelial polyps in four dogs.
Leveille, R. and M.A.O. Atilola ( 1991). Retrograde vaginocystography:
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44: 433.
a contrast study for evaluation ofbitches with urinary incontinence.
 Rivers, B. and G.R. Johnston ( 1991). Diagnostic imaging of the repro-
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 934(13): 934-941.
ductive organs of the bitch. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Ling, G.V., et al. (1998a). Renal calculi in dogs & cats: prevalence,
21{3): 437-466.
mineral type, breed, age, and gender interrelationships. I Vet Int
Rivers, B.J., et al. ( 1997). Ultrasonographic-guided, percutaneousante-
Med 12: 11.
grade pyelography: technique and clinical application in the dog and
Ling, G.V., et al. (1998b). Urolithiasis in dogs. I. Mineral prevalence
cat. JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 33(1): 61-68.
and interrelations of mineral composition, age, and sex. Am J Vet
Root, M.V., et al. ( 1995). Vaginal septa in dogs: 15 cases (1983-1992).
Res 59(5): 624-629.
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 206( 1): 56-58.
Ling, G.V., et al. (2003). Changes in proportion of canine urinary cal-
Rose, J.G. and J.Y. Gillenwater ( 1974). Effects of obstruction and infec-
culi composed of calcium oxalate or struvite in specimens analyzed
tion upon ureteral function. Invest Urol 1l: 471.
from 1981 through 2001. I Vet Intern Med 17(6): 817-823.
Ross, S.J., et al. (2007). A case-control study of the effects of
Lord, P.F., et al. ( 1974). Intravenous urography for evaluation of renal
nephrolithiasis in cats with chronic kidney disease. I Am Vet Med
diseases in small animals. J Am Arim Hosp Assoc 10: 139-152.
Assoc 230( 12): 1854- 1859.
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract disease   127
Ross, S.J., et al. (1999). Canine and feline nephrolithiasis. Epidemi-
Thrall, D.E. and D.R. Finco (1976). Canine excretory urography: is
ology, detection, and management. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
quality a function of BUN? I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 12(4): 446-450.
Pract 29(1): 231-250.
Thumchai, R., et al. (1996). Epizootiologic evaluation of urolithiasis
Rozear, L. and A.S. Tidwell ( 2003). Evaluation of the ureter and
in cats: 3498 cases (1982-1992). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 208(4): 547-
551.
Ticer, I.W, et al. ( 1980). Positive contrast retrograde urethrography:
155-164.
a useful procedure for evaluating urethral disorders in the dog. Vet
Ruby, A.L., et al. (1983). Effect of sodium diatrizoate on the in vitro
Radiol 21( 1): 2-11.
 growth ofthreecommon canine urinarybacterialspecies. Vet Radiol
Valdes-Martinez, A., et al. (2007). Association between renal hypoe-
24(5):222-225.
choic subcapsular thickening and lymphosarcoma in cats. Vet Radiol
Samii, V.F., et al. (2004). Digital fluoroscopic excretory urography,
Ultrasournd 48(4): 357-360.
digital fluoroscopic urethrography, helical computed tomography
Weaver, A.D. (1970). Canine urolithiasis: incidence, chemical compo-
and cystoscopy in 24 dogs with suspected ureteral ectopia. J Vet Int
sition and outcome of 100 cases. J Small Anim Pract 11(2): 93- 107.
Med 18: 271.
Weichselbaum, R.C., et al. ( 1999). Urocystolith detection: comparison
 Scrivani, P.V., et al. ( 1997). The effect of patient positioning on mural
of survey, contrast radiographic and ultrasonographic techniques in
filling defects during double contrast cystography. Vet Radiol Ultra-
an in vitro bladder phantom. vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(4): 386-400.
sound38(5): 355-359.
Weichselbaum, R.C., et al. (1998a). in vitro evaluation of contrast
Senior, D.F (1980). Parasites of the urinary tract. In: Current Veterinary
medium concentration and depth effects on the radiographic
Therapy VII, edited by R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
 appearance of specific canine urolith mineral types. Vet Radiol Ultra-
pp. 1141-1143.
sourd 39(5): 396-411.
 Sewell, A.C. ( 1996). Urinary crystals due to X-ray contrast medium.
Weichselbaum, R.C., et al. (200l). An integrated epidemiologic and
Nephron 72(3): 487-488.
radiographic algorithm for canine urocystolith mineral type predic-
 Shanahan, J.C., et al. ( 1985). Misleading urine tests after hexabrix IVU.
tion. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(4): 311-319.
Br I Radiol 58(688): 389.
Weichselbaum, R.C., et al. (l998b). Evaluation of the morpho-
 Shiroma, J.T, et al. ( 1999). Effect of reproductive status on feline renal
logic characteristics and prevalence of canine urocystoliths from
size. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(3): 242-245.
a regional urolith center. Am I Vet Res 59(4): 379-387.
Silverman, S. and C.D. Long (2000). The diagnosis of urinary incon-
Weisse, C., et al. (2002). Traumatic rupture of the ureters: 10 cases. I
tinence and abnormal urination in dogs and cats. [review] [9 refs].
Am Armim Hosp Assoc 38: 188.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30(2): 427-448.
Westropp, J.L., et al. (2006). Dried solidified blood calculi in the urinary
Smith, C., et al. (1983). Effect of X-ray contrast media on results for
tract of cats. I Vet Intern Med 20(4): 828-834.
relative density of urine. Clin Cherm 29(4): 730-731.
Worth, A.J. and S.C. Tomlin (2004). Post-traumatic paraureteral uri-
Steyn, PF and J. Lowry (199l). Postional radiography as an aid to
noma in a cat. I Small Amirm Pract45: 413.
diagnose sand-like uroliths in the urinary bladder of feline urologic
Zatelli, A. and P. D'Ippolito (2004). Bilateral perirenal abscesses in a
syndrome in cats. Feline Pract 19(5): 21-23.
domestic neutered shorthair cat. J Vet Intern Med 18(6): 902-903.
Tarr, M.J. and S.P. DiBartola ( 1985). Familial amyloidosis in Abyssinian
Zontine, W.J. and L.K. Andrews (1978). Fatal sir embolization as a
complication of pneumocystography in two cats. I Arm Vet Rad Soc
genesis of secondary amyloidosis. Lab Irnvest 52: 67a.
19(1): 8-11.
16
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract
Silke Hecht and George A. Henry
Ultrasound examination is an integral tool in the thor-
Ultrasound examination, interpretation,
ough evaluation of the urinary system. Ultrasound is a
and artifacts
noninvasive, nonpainful, and economical procedure that
 provides valuable information concerning morphology.
 Patient preparation is performed in a routine manner.
vascular status, and luminal contents usually with lit-
A complete discussion of the principles of ultrasound
tle or no sedation in most patients. Abdominal fluid,
imaging is beyond the scope of this chapter, and the
 perirenal fluid, or emaciation are not limiting factors for
reader is referred to pertinent references (Kremkau 1995,
Kremkau 2002). However, a short overview over per-
ultrasound imaging as they are for survey radiography
(see Chapter 15). Ultrasound is superior to survey radio-
tinent ultrasound artifacts is provided, since these must
graphs in detecting smaller renal parenchymal masses,
be recognized for correct interpretation of the ultrasound
findings. Acoustic shadowing, reverberation artifact, dis-
renal pelvic and ureteral dilation, renal blood flow abnor-
malities, urinary bladder masses, and differentiating solid
tal acoustic enhancement, slice thickness artifact, grating
masses from cavitations and cystic lesions.
. Ultrasound-
or side-lobe artifact, edge refraction or edge shadow-
guided interventional procedures increase the accuracy
ing artifact, mirror image artifact, and twinkle artifact
and safety of percutaneous aspirates, biopsies (see Chap-
may be encountered when investigating the urinary tract
ter 23), pyelocentesis (see Chapter 6), and antegrade pyel-
(Douglass and Kremkau 1993; Kirberger 1995; Barthez
 ography (see Chapter 6) for diagnostic and therapeutic
et al. 1997; Penninck 2002; Louvet 2006; d'Anjou 2008;
Sutherland-Smith 2008).
purposes.
 Acoustic shadowing occurs due to mineral or air inter-
Limitations of ultrasonographic evaluation of the uri-
nary tract include difficulty in imaging due to body con-
faces causing loss of echo intensity deep to the interface.
formation, overlying bowel, sonographer skill level, and
Fat within the renal hilus may occasionally cause mild
inability to provide renal functional information other
attenuation of the deep tissues and must not be confused
than blood flow. Additional limitations include inabil-
with a renal calculus. Mineral interfaces such as uroliths
ity to visualize normal ureters and inability to examine
typically cause strong distal hypoechoic to anechoic shad-
the entire length of the urethra due to intrapelvic posi-
ows. An anechoic (dark) acoustic shadow is more evident
tion. Survey radiography is often superior for localiza-
with larger uroliths and higher frequency transducers.
 tion of radiopaque uroliths in nondilated ureters and the
Air interfaces typically cause echogenic ("dirty") distal
urethra. Excretory urography or positive contrast cys-
shadows due to concurrent reverberation artifact. This
tourethrography allow visualization of the entire length
artifact may be encountered when gas is present within
of ureters and urethra, respectively, and are consid-
bladder lumen or wall. The smooth surfaces of catheters
ered superior in the evaluation of trauma-induced urine
and wires may also produce reverberation artifact when
leakage.
 perpendicular to the sound beam.
 Distal acoustic enhancement is due to passage of sound
 through an area of decreased attenuation, resulting in
higher echo intensity from tissues deep to the area com-
pared with surrounding tissues at the same depth. This
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
artifact is typically seen with fluid filled structures such
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
as cysts.
128
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   129
Slice thickness, side-lobe, and grating-lobe artifacts
(Mareschal et al. 2007). Renal volume can be calculated
may cause the appearance of echoic material within
based on ultrasonographic measurements (Nyland et al.
anechoic areas. These can give the false impression of
1989; Felkai et al. 1992); however, this is not commonly
echogenic material within the urine of the bladder or
performed. While measurements of renal size may be
other fluid-filled structures and must be recognized to
helpful in some cases especially with repeated exami-
 prevent erroneous interpretation.
nations over a period of time, small deviations from
Edge refraction artifact is due to refraction of the ultra-
 the reported ranges do not necessarily indicate clinical
 sound beam, resulting in the apparent loss of a margin. If
disease.
this artifact involves a curved fluid-filled structure (blad-
The renal cortex, medulla, collecting system, and vas-
der) surrounded by fluid (abdominal effusion) it will
culature may be observed with ultrasound imaging in
cause the impression of a defect in the bladder wall. Edge
dogs and cats (Konde et al. 1984; Walter et al. 1987a). The
shadowing is similar to edge refraction artifact but is
 cortex is the outer rim of tissue and is normally hypere-
seen associated with curved margins of structures that
choic to the more central hypoechoic medulla. The renal
cause refraction of the sound, resulting in a dark line or
 cortex is typically isoechoic to hypoechoic to the liver and
shadow in the tissues distal to the structure. Edge shad-
hypoechoic to the spleen (Churchill et al. 1999; Drost
 owing caused by arcuate vessel walls in the kidneys should
et al. 2000a; Nyland et al. 2002a). However, in some dogs
not be mistaken for small renal calculi.
and cats, the renal cortex may be hyperechoic to the liver
Mirror image artifacts occur when strongly reflective
even without clinical evidence of renal disease (Drost
interfaces reflect scattered ultrasound waves back to the
et al. 2000a; Ivancic and Mai 2008). One study found an
transducer, resulting in erroneous display of anatomic
increase in echogenicity of the renal cortex in dogs when
Structures. Although this artifact is relatively rare when
using a high frequency transducer (7.5 MHz) compared
examining the urinary tract, it may be encountered when
with a lower frequency transducer (5 MHz) (Hartzband
the colon is filled with a large amount of gas and/or feces,
et al. 1991). Increased echogenicity can be seen in cats
resulting in display of dual urinary bladder.
 due to accumulation of fatty vacuoles in the renal cortex
Twinkling artifact is a color Doppler artifact that
(Yeager and Anderson 1989). Because of these variations
occurs behind strongly reflective interfaces such as those
of normal, care must be taken not to over-interpret mild
produced by urinary tract stones or parenchymal calci-
variations of renal cortical echogenicity.
fications. It appears as a quickly fluctuating mixture of
 The medulla is divided by interlobular vessels and
Doppler signals with an associated spectrum of noisy
renal recesses of the collcting system with a single lon-
appearance and can be utilized to differentiate mineral
gitudinally oriented renal crest extending into the renal
structures from other hyperechoic material.
pelvis. The interlobar vessels are often seen as two short
parallel hyperechoic lines traversing the medulla to the
corticomedullary junction, and arcuate vessels charac-
Kidneys and ureters
terized by bright walls are seen at the level of the cor-
ticomedullary junction. Using color Doppler or power
Normal sonographic anatomy
Doppler ultrasound, interlobular vessels can be visual-
The kidneys are symmetrical in size and shape in the dog
ized extending from the corticomedullary junction into
and cat. Canine kidneys are typically more bean shaped,
the cortex (Figure 16.1). As stated earlier, edge shadow-
and the right kidney is located more cranial than the left.
 ing from these vessels should be differentiated from renal
Feline kidneys are more oval shaped and are both located
calculi or mineralization. The renal artery and vein can
in the mid abdomen.
be followed from the kidneys to the aorta and caudal
Cats have more uniform renal size with normal length
vena cava, respectively. There are usually one renal artery
reported to vary from 3.0 to 4.3 cm in length ( Walter et al.
and vein although duplicate arteries and veins have been
1987a). A study investigating feline renal size on radio-
reported (Bouma et al. 2003; Caceres 2008).
 graphs found significantly smaller kidneys in neutered
The renal pelvis is sometimes seen in normal animals,
versus intact cats (Shiroma et al. 1999), which should be
 especially after induction of diuresis, if receiving fluid
taken into consideration when examining feline patients.
therapy or if the urinary bladder is distended (Pugh et al.
The large variation in canine body weight and conforma-
1994; d'Anjou 2008). It is best evaluated on transverse
tion present a wide range of renal measurements. Normal
view and appears as a V-shaped anechoic area adjacent
values for the dog using body weight and conformation as
to the renal crest.
variables have been reported (Barr et al. 1990). A recently
The ureters exit from the center of the renal hilus and
described method using a ratio of kidney length to aor-
extend medially for a short distance, then turn caudally
tic luminal diameter gives a range in the dog of 5.5-9.1
and travel in the retroperitoneal tissues to the dorsal
130  Diagnostic testing
Figure 16.2 Mild dilation of the renal pelvis (pyelectasia) in a
dog receiving intravenous fluid therapy. The renal pelvis (arrow)
isa jeual aul ol luanele eale ploupaue padeus-a se sieadde
Figure 16.1 Sagittal color Doppler ultrasound image of the left
severe pelvic dilation, there is enlargement of the kid-
kidney in a dog. The interlobar arteries are seen traversing the
ney, with progressive thinning and ultimately complete
hypoechic medulla and branching into arcuate vessels at the
 atrophy of the renal parenchyma (Figure 16.3).
level of the corticomedullary junction. Flow signals in the medium
Mild dilation of the renal pelvis may be an incidental
echogenic renal cortex correspond to interlobular vessels
finding encountered after fluid therapy administration of
diuretics, or secondary to back pressure from a distended
wall of the bladder at the trigone. Normal ureters are
urinary bladder (Pugh et al. 1994; d'Anjou 2008). Pos-
not visible on ultrasonographic examination. However,
sible pathologic reasons include inflammatory disorders
ureteral abnormalities (wall thickening, abnormal con-
(pyelonephritis or ureteritis), increased diuresis due to
tents, ureteral dilation) increase conspicuity and allow
 renal insufficiency, congenital malformations, and early
ultrasonographic assessment. Imaging in a transverse
plane from the right or left dorsolateral abdominal wall
is best for following a visible ureter from the kidney to
the bladder. Peristaltic contractions of the ureters can be
observed in some cases.
Renal peivic and ureteral dilation
 Renal pelvic dilation is commonly seen during ultrasono-
graphic examination and—dependent on degree and
etiology—may be incidental or clinically significant. The
term “pyelectasia" is used for mild to moderate dilation
of the renal pelvis without evidence of obstruction of
the urinary outflow tract, while the term "hydronephro-
sis" is used to describe renal pelvic dilation secondary
to obstruction of renal pelvis and/or ureter (Pugh et al.
1994). Mild dilation of the renal pelvis is best observed
on transverse image and manifests as widening of the
typically thin ( <2 mm) triangular anechoic area around
Figure 16.3 Severe hydronephrosis of the right kidney in a cat
the renal crest (Figure 16.2). Moderate dilation is eas-
secondary to chronic ureteral obstruction. The renal parenchyma is
ily observed in transverse and sagittal plane. With pro-
atrophied, and the renal pelvis is severely distended with anechoic
 gressive flling, the dilated pelvis becomes more rounded
fluid. Note hyperechogenicity in the far field, consistent with distal
and the renal pelvic diverticula are clearly recognized. In
enhancement artifact.
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   131
or partial renal pelvic and/or ureteral obstruction. Mod-
erate dilation may be encountered in pyelonephritis (see
Chapter 49) or obstructive uropathy (see Chapter 70),
and severe hydronephrosis is usually indicative of renal
pelvic or ureteral obstruction (d'Anjou 2008).
Obstruction of the renal pelvis can occur at the
level of the pelvicoureteral junction (renal calculi, sed-
iment, congenital malformation, neoplasia), the ureter
(ectopia, calculi, sediment, strictures, iatrogenic, masses,
Figure 16.4 Ureteral obstruction and hydroureter in a cat. The
at the level of the trigone). Regardless of degree of renal
ureter (arrows) appears as anechoic tubular structure of approx-
pelvis dilation seen on ultrasonographic examination,
imately 3 mm diameter proximal to two ureteral calculi, which
care must be taken to thoroughly evaluate renal pelvis,
are characterized by a strongly hyperechoic interface and distal
ureters, and bladder for any indication of obstruction.
shadowing. The ureter is not visible distal to the calculi.
If findings are equivocal for obstructive hydronephrosis
recheck ultrasound, excretory urography, and antegrade
 pyelography with injection of positive contrast mate-
Congenital renal and ureteral disorders
rial into the dilated renal pelvis under ultrasound guid-
Reports on imaging findings in congenital renal (see
ance, or advanced imaging procedures should be consid-
Chapter 56) and ureteral diseases in small animals are
ered to further assess, since persistent obstruction will
scarce with the exception of ectopic ureters (see Chapter
result in irreversible damage to the renal parenchyma
58).
(Fink et al. 1980). Resistive index measurements uti-
lizing Doppler measurements are utilized in humans
 to distinguish ureteral obstruction from pyelonephri-
Congenital renal disorders
 tis, and, however, are only of limited value in the diag-
nosis of ureteral obstruction in dogs (Nyland et al.
Renal agenesis is rare but may occasionally be encoun-
1993).
tered, sometimes as incidental finding in animals with
Ureteral dilation is a relatively common finding on
 appropriate renal function. The contralateral kidney may
ultrasound and may be related to obstruction or nonob-
undergo compensatory hypertrophy and appear larger
structive disorders. Ureteral obstruction may be caused
than expected for a given animal (Diez-Prieto et al. 2001 ).
by ureteral calculi, ureteral, cystic or retroperitoneal
Major differential diagnosis for a missing kidney is previ-
mass lesions, blood clots, inflammatory products, fibro-
ous nephrectomy, which in most cases is easily ruled out
sis, or inadvertent ligation during ovariohysterectomy.
by obtaining a proper history. Other reasons for inability
Nonobstructive dilation of the ureter may be related
to identify a kidney on ultrasound include conformation
to vesicoureteral reflux, trauma, infection, or congeni-
of the patient (deep-chested dogs) and failure to achieve
tal anomalies (Felkai et al. 1995; Lamb 1998; Confer and
suffcient depth on ultrasonographic examination, kid-
Panciera 2001). Ultrasonographically, the dilated ureter
ney in abnormal position (renal ectopia, herniation), and
appears as tubular and often tortuous anechoic struc-
kidneys that are abnormally small and/or have abnormal
ture extending from the renal pelvis distally. Concurrent
architecture (renal hypoplasia/dysplasia, end-stage renal
 pyelectasia or hydronephrosis is common. Dependent
disease). Renal agenesis is often associated with ipsilat-
on underlying etiology, hydroureter can be focal or affect
 eral ureteral agenesis. Ureteral agenesis may also take the
the entire length of the ureter. Color Doppler ultrasound
form of segmental absence of the ureter or lack of the
       
lumen, resulting in ureteral obstruction (Lamb 1998).
ureter from abdominal vessels. If a dilated ureter is iden--
Renal hypoplasia is characterized by small renal size
tified, it should be traced distally to confirm or rule out
and may occur uni- or bilaterally. If only one kid-
an obstructive lesion (Figure 16.4). However, even if a
ney is affected, the other kidney may be enlarged due
lesion such as a ureteral calculus or a bladder mass at the
to compensatory hypertrophy. Renal architecture and
level of the trigone is identified, a definitive diagnosis of
 echogenicity are usually within normal limits.
complete obstruction can be difficult to achieve (Lamb
Renal dysplasia is a congenital disease, which has
1998). Recheck ultrasound or other imaging techniques
been reported in the Alaskan Malamute, Chow Chow,
such as percutaneous antegrade pyelography may be nec-
Golden Retriever, Lhasa Apso, Shi Tzu, Miniature
essary to achieve a definitive diagnosis ( Rivers et al. 1997;
Schnauzer, Soft-coated Wheaten terrier, and Standard
Adin et al. 2003; Hardie and Kyles 2004).
 Poodle (DiBartola 2000a). Ultrasonographically, both
132  Diagnostic testing
Extramural ectopic ureters completely bypass the urinary
bladder without anatomic attachment, while intramural
ectopic ureters attach on the dorsal or dorsolateral sur-
face of the urinary bladder but fail to open in the nor-
mal anatomic position at the tip of the trigone. Female
dogs are more commonly affected than male dogs, and
concurrent abnormalities of other parts of the urogeni-
tal tract are possible. A variety of techniques, including
contrast radiographic procedures, computed tomogra-
phy, ultrasonography, and cystoscopy, can be used for
the diagnosis of ectopic ureters. One study comparing
ultrasonography and contrast radiography found them
to be similarly sensitive in the detection of ectopic ureters
Figure 16.5 Renal dysplasia in a 1-year-old Boxer (presumptive)
(91%) (Lamb and Gregory 1998). Dilation of renal pelvis
Both kidneys are small (<4 cm) (left kidney seen between cursors)
and ureter are common in ureteral ectopia, allowing iden-
and diffusely hyperechoic, with loss of corticomedullary distinction
tification of the ureter and facilitating examination from
 pelvicoureteral junction to site of termination. A diag-
nosis of ectopic ureter can be made when the ureter can
kidneys appear small and often slightly irregular in shape,
be followed past the trigone to the point of termina-
the renal cortex is usually diffusely hyperechoic, and the
tion or to the entrance into the pelvic canal (Oglesby
corticomedullary distinction may be decreased (Figure
and Carter 2003). Although ultrasonography is poten-
16.5). Although these ultrasonographic changes can be
tially useful in the diagnosis of ectopic ureters, it has to
caused by other renal diseases, renal dysplasia should
be stressed that it may be difficult to visualize a ureter
strongly be considered in a young animal presented with
 that is minimally dilated, particularly if image quality is
renal insufficiency and small kidneys.
limited by use of a low-frequency transducer or patient
Renal ectopia and renal fusion are associated with fail-
factors such as obesity (Lamb 1998). Additionally, the
 ure of the fetal metanephric kidneys to appropriately
 ureterovesicular junctions are small structures that may
separate and/or migrate from their original position in
be difficult to identify, and reflux from the urethra into
the pelvic region. They may be found in a pelvic, iliac,
the bladder may be mistaken for a ureteral jet, which
or abdominal position, on the same or opposite side
may result in false-positive and false-negative diagnosis,
of the abdomen. Renal ectopia has been described in
respectively (Lamb and Gregory 1998).
cats and dogs (Lulich et al. 1987; Finco 1995), but ultra-
Ureterocele refers to dilation of the submucosal por-
sonographic reports are rare. Pelvic position of the left
tion of the distal ureter (McLoughlin et al. 1989; Stiffler
kidney as an incidental finding in a 4-year-old cat has
et al. 2002). The opening of the ureterocele may be close
been reported (Hecht et al. 2005). The kidney was small
to the normal ureterovesicular junction and may not
but had maintained normal architecture, and the ani-
produce clinical signs ("orthotopic” ureterocele). If the
mal had no laboratory evidence of renal disease. Crossed
ureterocele is located more caudally ( within bladder neck
renal ectopia with fusion was reported in a cat with
or urethra), it is referred to as “ectopic" ureterocele, which
ultrasound showing two renal crests and pelvises (All-
may be associated with incontinence or stranguria due
worth and Hoffmann 1999). Although ectopic kidneys
to obstruction of the bladder neck (McLoughlin et al.
are commonly structurally and functionally normal, the
1989; Osborne et al. 1995). Ultrasonographically, urete-
short ureter may be kinked, predisposing to obstruction
rocele appears as a rounded anechoic structure with a
and secondary hydronephrosis or pyelonephritis (Maxie
thin hyperechoic wall associated with the lumen of or
1993; Gleason et al. 1994).
impinging on the wall of the urinary bladder (Nyland
et al. 2002a; Takiguchi et al. 1997) (Figure 16.6). Con-
nection to the ipsilateral ureter may be evident in case of
Congenital ureteral disorders
concurrent ureteral dilation (Lamb 1998).
Ureteral ectopia is a congenital abnormality of the termi-
Ureteral duplication has been reported in the dog as
nal segment of one or both ureters, in which the ureteral
 a dilated tubular fluid-filled structure extending cau-
orifice is located distal to the trigone of the urinary blad-
 dally from the left kidney to a blind end lateral to the
der. Common sites of ectopically displaced ureteral ori-
bladder. The dog had associated mild hydronephrosis
fices include the bladder neck, proximal, middle, or distal 
 and hydroureter of the patent left ureter (Esterline et al.
urethra, vagina, or uterus (McLoughlin and Chew 2000).
2005).
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   133
UB
Ureterocele
Figure 16.7 End stage renal disease in a cat. The kidney (between
cursors) is small (2.3 cm length), irregular, diffusely hypere-
Figure 16.6 Ureterocele in a dog. Transverse image of the caucal
choic, with decreased corticomedullary distinction. Histopatho-
abdomen shows focal dilation of the left ureter (ureterocele), with 
logic examination revealed marked, chronic glomerulonephritis
impingement on the urinary bladder (UB). The septum between
with glomerulosclerosis, interstitial fibrosis, and tubular necrosis
ureterocele and UB is indicated by the arrow.
Small size of the kidneys due to chronic renal disease
Acquired renal disorders
is a common finding in especially older dogs and cats.
Renal disorders can be subdivided into abnormalities in
Concurrent ultrasound findings may include irregular
renal size, diffuse parenchymal abnormalities, focal or
shape of the kidneys, hyperechoic cortices, and decreased
multifocal renal parenchymal abnormalities, abnormal-
corticomedullary distinction (Figure 16.7). Dilation of
ities of the renal collecting system, and vascular abnor-
the renal pelvis due to polyuria, previous or current
 malities, which can be encountered as isolated findings
 pyelonephritis, and renal mineralization/ nephrolithia-
or in combination. Evaluation of renal size and diffuse
 sis are also commonly seen. Depending on underlying
cortical changes is diffcult. Ultrasonographic changes,
etiology and duration of the disease process, one or both
especially in acute renal disease, may be minimal; vari-
kidneys may be affected.
ations in renal size and echogenicity often hamper an
An increase in renal size may be related to a variety
unequivocal diagnosis of "abnormal"; and degenerative
 of disorders. Many diseases resulting in renomegaly on
renal changes are often encountered in older animals with
radiographs such as hydronephrosis, perinephric pseu-
maintained appropriate renal function. The ultrasonog-
 docysts, and renal mass lesions (cyst(s), abscess, granu-
rapher has to be aware of these limitations, and results
loma, focal neoplasm) are easily distinguished by means
of ultrasonographic examination have to be judged in
of ultrasonography (Cartee et al. 1980; Konde et al. 1985;
 Konde et al. 1986). Diffuse increase in renal size may
light of patient signalment, history, clinical and labora-
 tory findings, and other ultrasonographic findings that
be seen in acute inflammatory renal diseases (intersti-
might support a specific diagnosis. Recheck ultrasonog-
tial nephritis, glomerulonephritis, pyelonephritis), acute
raphy to monitor renal changes in a given patient or
toxic nephropathy metabolic nephropathy congeni-
further imaging, such as excretory urography and inter-
tal portosystemic shunts, and diffuse infiltrative neo-
ventional procedures (fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of
plastic processes (lymphoma). Concurrent echogenicity
the kidney, pyelocentesis), might be needed to achieve a
changes of the kidney and other ultrasonographic find-
definitive diagnosis.
ings may allow a presumptive diagnosis; however, fine-
needle aspiration or biopsy is often needed for a definitive
Abnormalities in renal size
diagnosis.
Although normal renal size (see Chapter 45) has been
Diffuse parenchymal abnormalities
reported for dogs and cats, the diagnosis of enlarged or
small kidneys is often subjective. Decrease in renal size
 Diffuse increase in cortical echogenicity is a common
may be seen in congenital/developmental disorders such
finding. Variations of normal, fat deposition, and ultra-
as hypoplasia or dysplasia (see above) as well as in chronic
sound machine settings (transducer frequency) may
degenerative and end-stage renal disease.
result in diffuse hyperechogenicity of the renal cortices,
134  Diagnostic testing
and the diagnosis of pathologically increased renal cor-
finding, although distinct pinpoint mineral foci may be
tical echogenicity is often difficult. Developmental dis-
observed.
eases, inflammatory diseases, toxic and metabolic dis-
 Many neoplastic diseases of the kidneys result in uni-
eases, diffuse renal mineralization (nephrocalcinosis),
or bilateral mass lesions that are easily depicted (see
and diffuse infiltrative neoplastic disorders all can result
Chapter 57). However, renal lymphosarcoma can result
in diffuse increase in renal cortical echogenicity (Walter
in diffuse increase in renal cortical echogenicity in cats,
et al. 1987b, Walter et al. 1988).
usually with concurrent increase in renal size. Typically,
Inflammatory renal diseases (interstitial nephritis,
both kidneys are affected (Gabor et al. 1998). Hypoe-
glomerulonephritis, and pyelonephritis) may result in 
choic subcapsular thickening is occasionally seen in feline
increased cortical echogenicity, often associated with a
renal lymphosarcoma and appears to be a fairly specific
decrease in corticomedullary distinction (Figure 16.7).
finding, although it has been described in other renal
Possible concurrent findings include change in renal size,
diseases such as undifferentiated malignant neoplasia,
renal pelvis dilation, and perinephric fluid accumula-
renal anaplastic carcinoma, and feline infectious peri-
tion. While renomegaly may be seen in acute inflam-
tonitis (FIP) (Valdes-Martinez et al. 2007).
mation, decreased renal size is common in animals with
Diffuse hypoechogenicity of the renal cortices is rarely
chronic nephritis. A larger degree of renal pelvis dila-
encountered. In theory, diffuse parenchymal diseases
tion would be expected for pyelonephritis than for other
such as nephritis or metabolic nephropathies might cause
inflammatory renal diseases. However, overlap between
decrease instead of increase of renal cortical echogenicity,
the categories exists, since pyelectasia may also result
but supporting evidence is not found in the Veterinary
from polyuria, intravenous fluid therapy, or back pres-
literature.
sure from a distended bladder. Mild perinephric fluid
accumulation may be noted in acute inflammatory renal
Focal parenchymal abnormalities
diseases. It is important to note that nephritis can be
Renal nodules/mass lesions
 present without observable changes, and other diseases 
such as toxic nephropathy may result in similar ultra-
 Renal nodules or masses are most commonly neoplas-
 sonographic findings.
tic in etiology. In dogs, primary renal neoplasms are
Animals with toxic nephropathies (due to ingestion of
less common than metastases to the kidneys and include
tubular cell carcinoma, transitional cell carcinoma, and
are usually presented at an acute stage (see Chapter 49).
transitional cell papilloma (Klein et al. 1988). Other less
Imaging findings are similar to acute nephritis (hypere-
common renal tumors include anaplastic carcinoma,
choic cortices, renomegaly, perinephric fluid accumula-
anaplastic sarcoma, fibroma, hemangiosarcoma, lym-
tion), and differentiation may be difficult especially if no
phoma, nephroblastoma, cystadenocarcinoma, mast cell
complete history is provided. A hyperechoic band par-
tumor, and histiocytic diseases (disseminated histiocytic
alleling the cortex within the renal medulla ("medullary
sarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma) (Lium and
rim sign") due to intratubular calcium oxalate crystal
Moe 1985; Klein et al. 1988; Ramirez et al. 2002; Cruz-
deposition has been described in dogs with ethylene gly-
Aeambulo et al. 2004; Sato and Solano 2004; Locke and
col intoxication (Adams et al. 1989; Biller et al. 1992).
Barber 2006; Knapp 2007). Most renal tumors are uni-
However, this finding may be seen in other renal diseases
lateral; however, metastases, lymphoma, mast cell dis-
  r   s  o 
ease, disseminated histiocytic sarcoma, and renal tubular
1989), leptospirosis, and chronic interstitial nephritis
 cell carcinoma can affect both kidneys. In general, renal
(Biller et al. 1992), and may even be present in canine kid-
 neoplasms manifest as masses of variable echogenicity
neys without evidence of renal dysfunction (Mantis and
(hyperechoic, isoechoic, hypoechoic, homogenous, or
Lamb 2000). A wider (0.5-1.0 cm diameter) medullary
 mixed echogenic) (Figure 16.8). Different tumor types
band ofincreased echogenicity has been described in dogs
cannot be differentiated based on their ultrasonographic
with leptospirosis (Forrest et al. 1998). The medullary
appearance (Konde et al. 1985). An unusual syndrome
rim sign is a common finding in normal cats and is
 reported in German shepherd dogs consists of uni-
 s    n
or bilateral renal cystadenocarcinomas, dermal fibrosis,
the lumen of medullary tubules (Yeager and Anderson
and uterine tumors in affected females (Lium and Moe
1989).
1985; Knapp 2007). These tumors have a cystic compo-
Nephrocalcinosis may be seen in hyperadrenocorti-
nent that can be identified by means of ultrasonogra-
cism, chronic renal disease, hypervitaminosis D, and
phy. Renal hemangiosarcoma usually has a lacy cavitary
nephrotoxicity (Kealy and McAllister 2005). Diffuse
appearance on ultrasound (Figure 16.9) and is commonly
hyperechogenicity of the kidneys is the most common
associated  with  retroperitoneal  effusion/hemorrhage
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   135
Figure 16.8 Renal mass in a 1-year-old dog. The cranial pole of
the right kidney contains a hypoechoic and relatively homogenous
mass. A similar mass was found in the left kidney (not shown).
Figure 16.10 Large renal cyst associated with the caudal pole
Fine needle aspiration yielded a diagnosis of lymphoma
of the left kidney as an incidental finding in a 9-year-old Siberian
Husky. The cyst appears as well-circumscribed round anechoic
area.
(Locke and Barber 2006). However, vascular invasion
or rupture of tumor with hemorrhage can occur with
 mass lesion and to determine the exact tumor type in
other renal tumors and is not pathognomonic for
case of neoplasia.
hemangiosarcoma.
Lymphosarcoma is the most common renal tumor
in cats (Knapp 2007). Unlike in dogs, feline renal lym-
Renal cysts and polycystic kidney disease
 phosarcoma commonly results in diffuse renal changes
 Renal cysts manifest as round to ovoid anechoic struc-
rather than focal masses.
tures with a thin hyperechoic lining. They can be single
Nonneoplastic focal renal masses such as abscesses,
or multiple, uni- or bilateral, and are usually associated
solid hematomas, or granulomas (fungal, FIP) are rare
with distal acoustic enhancement and edge shadowing
but cannot be distinguished from malignant lesions by
(Figure 16.10). Renal cysts can be completely incidental
ultrasonography alone (d'Anjou 2008). Fine-needle aspi-
or can be associated with chronic degenerative renal dis-
ration or biopsy of the kidney is needed to establish a
ease (d'Anjou 2008). With increasing size, they can result 
definitive diagnosis of a malignant versus benign renal
in distortion of the renal margin. On occasion, renal cysts
contents due to accumulation of necrotic debris. In these
instances, it may be difficult to distinguish a cyst from
a renal abscess or a cystic/cavitary renal mass such as
cystadenocarcinoma or hemangiosarcoma.
Polycystic renal disease has been reported in Per-
sian cats, Cairn Terriers, Bull terriers, and West High-
land white terriers (see Chapter 56) (DiBartola 2000a).
Affected kidneys are often enlarged and significantly dis-
torted, with numerous variable sized cysts mostly asso-
ciated with renal cortex and corticomedullary junction
(Reichle et al. 2002).
Chronic renal infarcts
Chronic infarcts are a relatively frequent finding espe-
Figure 16.9 Cavitary mass associated with the cranial pole of
cially in older animals and are usually considered inciden-
the left kidney in a 12-year-old Yorkshire Terrier. Histologic diag-
tal. They appear as sharply marginated, homogenous lin-
nosis was hemangiosarcoma. Concurrent retroperitoneal effusion
ear, or wedge-shaped hyperechoic areas associated with
(hemorrhage) is common in these tumors.
 the renal cortex perpendicular to the renal capsule, often
136  Diagnostic testing
Renal pelvis disorders
Disorders of the renal pelvis include dilation (see above)
and abnormal content.
Pyelonephritis
Infection of the renal collecting system ( pyelonephritis) is
relatively common in dogs and cats and is usually associ-
ated with urinary bladder and/or ureteral infection. The
major ultrasonographic findings in acute pyelonephritis
are renal pelvic dilatation, usually with proximal ureteral
dilatation, and a hyperechoic mucosal margin line
within the renal pelvis, proximal portion of the ureter,
LK
or both (Neuwirth et al. 1993). Other common findings
Figure 16.11 Chronic renal infarcts in a 6-year-old cat. There are
numerous well-circumscribed and homogenous linear or wedge-
hyperechoic areas within the medulla, focal hyperechoic
shaped hyperechoic areas associated with the renal cortex per-
or hypoechoic cortical lesions, and increased echogenic-
pendicular to the renal capsule (arrows). The cranial pole of the
ity of urine within the renal pelvis due to increased
kidney is blunted.
cell and protein content. In chronic pyelonephritis, the
 pelvis and diverticula can become distorted and blunted,
and additional renal parenchymal changes and/or min-
with concurrent concave indentation of the renal surface
eralization of the renal collecting system are common
(Figure 16.11) (d'Anjou 2008).
(d'Anjou 2008). One study found ultrasonography to be
82% sensitive and 100% specific for the detection of mild
to moderate pyelonephritis (Neuwirth et al. 1993). Since
Focal renal mineralization/nephrolithiasis
false-negative results are possible especially in early and
Mineral foci due to metastatic or dystrophic mineral-
mild cases, recheck ultrasound should be considered if a
ization and nephroliths are common. They appear as
clinical suspicion of pyelonephritis persists despite initial
strongly hyperechoic structures of variable size, often
negative ultrasound examination. Since renal pelvic
associated with distal shadowing (Figure 16.12). They
fluid accumulation may be observed under a variety
may or may not be of clinical significance and have to be
of circumstances other than pyelonephritis (Pugh et al.
 judged in light of clinical presentation of the patient.
1994; d'Anjou 2008), false-positive results of ultrasono-
 graphic examination are possible in our experience.
Retroperitoneal  abscess  and  regional  cellulitis  have
been reported as sequelae of pyelonephritis and appear
 as fluid-filled areas in the vicinity of the kidneys and
the urinary bladder, containing a mixture of anechoic,
hypoechoic, and hyperechoic components (Hylands
2006).
Renal pelvic luminal abnormalities
Renal calculi, inflammatory sediment, and blood clots
can be found associated with the renal collecting system,
with or without renal pelvic dilation (Felkai et al. 1995).
 Renal calculi can reach considerable size (see Chapter
Figure 16.12 Nephrolithiasis in a dog. There are three rounded
69). They are characterized by a strongly hyperechoic
interface with distal sound beam attenuation, with or
strongly hyperechoic structures associated with the kidney, at least
two of which show distal shadowing. The irregular hyperechoic
without concurrent renal pelvic dilation (Felkai et al.
area caudal to the kidney represents part of the gastrointestinal
1995) (Figure 16.12).
tract (arrow). A small cortical cyst is noted in the far field (arrow-
Inflammatory sediment as seen in pyelonephritis,
head).
and blood clots found in animals following trauma,
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   137
secondary to renal hematuria, or bleeding renal tumors
occur as mixed echogenic material within the renal pelvis,
 often associated with renal pelvic dilation.
Other renal and perirenal disorders
Renal parasites
Dioctophyma renale is a parasitic nematode of fish-eating
 mammals, which can be found in dogs (see Chapter 74)
(Low 1995). Ultrasonographic findings in a dog with two
Figure 16.14 Ureteritis in a dog with chronic urinary tract infec-
 parasites residing in the right kidney have been described
tion. The ureter (between cursors) is thickened (total thickness
(Soler et al. 2008). The affected kidney was enlarged and
0.37 cm including both walls and lumen). The lumen contains a
 deformed, and there were multiple ring-like structures in
minimal amount of urine (arrow).
the pelvis of the right kidney measuring between 5 and
10 mm in diameter. These structures had a double-layer
wall: the outer was hyperechoic and the inner hypoechoic,
Acquired ureteral disorders
containing internal echos. In the longitudinal plane, these
Ureteral calculi are a relatively common problem espe-
ring-like structures were visualized as bands, with alter-
cially in cats (see Chapter 58) (Kyles et al. 2005). They
nating hypo- and hyperechoic layers. The kidney was
may be difficult to identify on ultrasonographic evalua-
outlined by a thin hyperechoic rim.
tion alone, especially if they are small and nonobstructive,
or if overlying colonic contents hamper evaluation. When
combining radiography and ultrasonography, the sensi-
Perinephric pseudocysts
 tivity to detect ureterolithiasis in cats has been reported
to reach 90% (Kyles et al. 2005). Ultrasonographically,
Large anechoic fluid filled cystic structures are occasion-
ally seen in cats (Essman et al. 2000) and rarely in dogs
 ureteroliths appear as rounded to irregular hyperechoic
(Miles and Jergens 1992). Clinical signs are variable, but
luminal structures (Figure 16.4). Distal shadowing is seen
if the calculus is large enough and if a high frequency
renal dysfunction is common (Beck et al. 200o). These
cases are usually easily differentiated from retroperitoneal
transducer is used. Several migrating ureteroliths may
 or abdominal effusion on ultrasound due to an echogenic
be present, necessitating a detailed examination of the
capsule surrounding the anechoic fluid (Figure 16.13).
entire region of each ureter, from renal pelvis to the level
of the bladder (d'Anjou 2008). Concurrent dilation of the
 ureter proximal to the calculus and hydronephrosis sug-
 gest obstructive ureterolithiasis; however, differentiation
between partial or intermittent and complete obstruction
may be difficult.
Inflammation of the ureters (ureteritis) is seldom rec-
i s  se  a 
other portions ofthe urinary tract (Polzin and Jeraj 1980).
Infections may descend from the kidneys or ascend from
the urinary bladder. Ureteritis may result in decreased
ureteral peristalsis and functional or mechanical ureteral
obstruction (Polzin and Jeraj 1980; Crawford and Turk
1984). Ultrasonographically, fluid accumulation within
the ureters or wall thickening may occasionally be seen,
although are rare in our experience (Figure 16.14). Con-
current changes compatible with pyelonephritis and/or
cystitis may be present.
Ureteral neoplasia is very rare. Ultrasound findings
Figure 16.13 Perinephric pseudocyst in a 13-year-old cat. The
in ureteral fibroepithelial polyps have been reported
kidney is smaller than normal but otherwise of normal architecture.
in four older dogs. Findings included renal pelvis and
A well-circumscribed anechoic area with a thin hyperechoic lining
ureteral dilation proximal to the level of an intralumi-
is seen surounding the kidney.
nal mass (Reichle et al. 2003). Ureteral lymphoma has
138   Diagnostic testing
been described in a cat that appeared as a large irregular
retroperitoneal connective tissues although obstruction
hypoechoic mass (d'Anjou 2008).
to urine flow may also play a role.
Ureteral rupture is most commonly seen following
abdominal trauma. Although ultrasonography may
demonstrate signs of renal pelvic and ureteral dilation
Urinary bladder and urethra
and retroperitoneal fluid accumulation, it is considered
Normal sonographic anatomy
inferior to excretory urography due to inability to
distinguish  hemorrhage  or inflammatory
exudate
The urinary bladder is found in the caudoventral
from extravasated urine and inability to identify exact
abdomen and can vary greatly in normal size due to
site of rupture (Nyland et al. 2002a; Weisse et al.
distention with urine. An empty bladder may be difficult
2002).
to find in some cases, and mild to moderate distention
A paraureteral pseudocyst ("urinoma") is a mass
is desirable for examination of the bladder. The bladder
formed by encapsulation of extravasated urine secondary
can be located on the ventral midline or along either
to blunt trauma, surgery, or obstruction (McInerney et al.
 side of the caudal abdomen depending on the position
1977). Imaging findings in a case of a paraureteral uri-
of the patient, distention of the bladder, and colon. The
noma in a dog have been reported. The animal is pre-
colon lies dorsal or dorsolateral to the bladder and often
sented with a palpable mass in the right flank follow-
indents the bladder wall when the bladder is not fully dis-
ing ovariohysterectomy. Ultrasonographically, a sharply
tended. The bladder wall becomes thinner as the bladder
marginated anechoic mass with ipsilateral hydronephro-
distends, and wall thickness should be measured when
sis and hydroureter was detected caudal to the right kid-
the bladder is adequately distended. Normal wall thick-
ney (Tidwell et al. 1990).
 ness should be less than 2 mm in normal dogs, with
larger dogs having a slightly thicker wall than smaller
dogs (Geisse et al. 1997). Normal bladder wall thickness
Retroperitoneal fluid accumulation
varies from 1.3 to 1.7 mm in cats (Finn-Bodner 1995).
 Retroperitoneal fluid accumulation is a nonspecific find-
Wall thickness measurements of an empty bladder are sig-
ing and may be encountered in urine leakage, hem-
nificantly thicker and are not reliable. Lower frequency
orrhage, abscessation, neoplasia, and renal disorders 
 transducers show the bladder wall as a single echogenic
(Stoneham et al. 2004). While larger volumes appear
line; however, current high frequency transducers typi-
as anechoic or hypoechoic areas in the vicinity of the
cally show three distinct bladder wall layers. The normal
kidneys, smaller volumes may appear as thin anechoic
wall is seen as two echogenic layers separated by a hypoe-
or hypoechoic striations within hyperechoic retroperi-
choic layer. The trigone is not observably different than
 toneal fat. Dependent on the underlying disease process
the remainder of the bladder wall. Normal ureteral papil-
and the amount of effusion, fluid can be found unilat-
 lae may be seen in some bladders as small focal smooth
erally or bilaterally. If urine leakage due to kidney or
thickening of the dorsal wall and should not be confused
ureteral rupture is of concern, excretory urography is
with abnormal wall thickening or a bladder mass (Dou-
indicated to identify the lesion. Retroperitoneal hem-
glass 1993). Ureteral "jetting" of urine may on occasion
orrhage may be found after trauma, in animals with
be observed and helps identifying the ureteral openings
coagulopathy or due to a bleeding retroperitoneal tumor
(Figure 16.15). The position of the neck of the bladder
(renal, ureteral, adrenal). Renal and other retroperi-
varies with individual anatomy and degree of distension
toneal abscesses can rupture and result in accumulation
 of the bladder. Position of the bladder neck within the
of inflammatory exudate in the retroperitoneal space.
 pelvic canal in some dogs makes complete evaluation
Retroperitoneal neoplasms can result in effusion either 
difficult due to overlying bone and colon.
due to hemorrhage, ureteral obstruction, or interference
Normal dog and cat urine is typically anechoic.
with lymphatic drainage of the retroperitoneal space. Per-
 Echogenic debris seen in the urine may be due to crys-
inephric fluid accumulation has been described in dogs
tals, protein, cells, cellular debris, calculi, or fat droplets,
and cats with acute renal failure due to nephrotoxic-
and urinalysis is necessary for evaluation of the clinical
ity, leptospirosis, ureteral obstruction, renal lymphoma,
significance.
ureteronephrolithiasis, prostatic urethral obstruction,
The urethra extends from an ill-defined juncture with
and interstitial nephritis and ureteritis (Holloway and
the bladder neck into the pelvic canal as a hypoechoic
O'Brien 2007). Perirenal fluid developing in acute renal
tubular structure that can be viewed in transverse and
failure is thought to be an ultrafiltrate associated with
longitudinal planes. The urethra of the cat typically
tubular back-leak into the renal interstitium, which over-
extends further cranial in the abdomen. Normally, the
whelms lymphatic drainage within the perirenal and
lumen of the urethra does not contain observable fluid.
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   139
Figure 16.16 Cystic calculi and cystitis in a dog. There are sev-
eral iregular marginated uroliths with distal shadowing associ-
ated with the bladder neck. Although distension of the bladder is
Figure 16.15 Transverse color Doppler ultrasonographic image
less than usually desired for evaluation of wall thickness, severe
of the bladder in a young dog demonstrating “jetting" of urine
from both ureteral papillae.
wall thickening (7 mm) and iregularity of the mucosal surface is
consistent with cystitis.
The entire intrapelvic urethra is not usually visualized
Acquired disorders
due to overlying pelvic bone and shadowing from rectal
contents. The pelvic urethra may be observable through
 Cystitis and urethritis
 the obturator foramen in some cases. Transrectal imaging
Cystitis (see Chapter 71) is common in dogs and cats.
of the urethra can be performed but requires expensive
 In early or mild cases, the ultrasonographic examination
specialized transducers. In male dogs, the prostatic and
may be unremarkable. In chronic and more severe cases,
penile urethra may be evaluated from a perineal and/or
 diffuse thickening of the urinary bladder wall is the most
ventral approach. Although the mucosal margin of the
common finding, which is most severe in the cranioven-
urethra is best assessed by positive contrast urethrogra-
tral portion of the bladder (Leveillé 1998). Additional
phy, ultrasound offers complementary information and
findings might include echogenic urine due to presence
can be used to assess urethral thickness and echogenicity
 of inflammatory products and/or hemorrhage, mineral
(Hanson and Tidwell 1996).
sediment, or cystic calculi (Figure 16.16).
Polypoid cystitis is a rare disease of the urinary bladder
Disorders of the urinary bladder and urethra
in dogs characterized by inflammation, epithelial pro-
 liferation, and development of a polypoid to peduncu-
Congenital disorders
lated mass or masses without histopathologic evidence
Congenital disorders of the urinary bladder include
of neoplasia (Martinez et al. 2003; Takiguchi and Inaba
 patent urachus and bladder (urachal) diverticulum (see
2005). Concurrent cystic calculi are common. Most of
Chapter 80) (Confer and Panciera 2001). While patent
the masses are located cranioventrally in the bladder
urachus is uncommon in small animals, urachal divertic-
 as opposed to transitional cell carcinoma, which has a
ula are occasionally found. These occur due to incomplete
predilection for the bladder neck or trigone area. How-
closure of the bladder musculature during postpartum
ever, since bladder neoplasia cannot be excluded based on
regression of the urachus, resulting in an outpouching
ultrasonographic appearance, biopsy may be warranted
of the cranioventral aspect of the urinary bladder wall.
to establish a definitive diagnosis.
 Urine stasis in this diverticulum can occur, predisposing
Emphysematous cystitis due to infection with gas-
the animal to cystitis or urinary calculi. Ultrasonograph-
 producing bacteria such as Escherichia colior Clostridium
ically, a urachal diverticulum appears as thin-walled con-
species is most commonly seen in dogs with diabetes mel-
vex outpouching of the bladder wall at the level of the
litus but may affect other animals. Ultrasonographically,
apex, although a thick and irregular wall may be noted in
gas inclusions in the wall appear as multifocal hypere-
cases of chronic cystitis (Sutherland-Smith 2008). A case
choic areas with distal reverberation artifacts (Petite et al.
of a bladder diverticulum at the level of the trigone has 
 2006) (Figure 16.17). Care must be taken to distinguish
been reported in a 14-month-old dog with chronic recur-
these pathologic gas accumulations from intraluminal
rent urinary tract infection and emphysematous cystitis
gas introduced during cystocentesis, catheterization, or
(Lobetti and Goldin 1998).
 endoscopy. This can be accomplished by repositioning
140   Diagnostic testing
Urinary calculi may become lodged in the urethra and
result in partial or complete urethral obstruction. If the
calculus is located in the intraabdominal portion of the
urethra or in the penile urethra in male dogs, it can usually
be visualized by means of ultrasonography. Distension of
the visible portion of the urethra and failure to visu-
alize an obstructive lesion necessitates further imaging
(positive contrast urethrography), since the entire length
of urethra cannot be reliably investigated by means of
ultrasonography.
Neoplasia
 Transitional cell carcinoma is the most common bladder
tumor (see Chapter 79) (Knapp 2007). Other epithe-
lial tumors include transitional cell papillomas, squa-
mous cell carcinomas, adenocarcinomas, and undif-
Figure 16.17 Emphysematous cystitis in a 13-year-old dog with
ferentiated carcinomas. Mesenchymal tumors are less
chronic urinary tract infection. There are numerous hyperechoic
common and include fibromas, fibrosarcomas, leiomy-
foci associated with the bladder wall (arrows), which show distal
omas, leiomyosarcomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, lym-
reverberation artifacts ("dirty shadowing").
phosarcomas, hemangiomas, and hemangiosarcomas
(Confer and Panciera 2001). Cystic transitional cell car-
cinomas are usually sessile, irregularly shaped masses of
the dog; while free luminal gas will move with change
variable echogenicity (Leveillé et al. 1992). They are most
in patient position, gas within the wall will remain static
commonly located at the level of the trigone but may be
(Sutherland-Smith 2008).
found in any location. Dependent on size and location,
Urethritis is uncommon in small animals and is usually
uni- or bilateral ureteral obstruction or urethral obstruc-
associated with cystitis, prostatitis, or vaginitis (Polzin
tion may be present (Figure 16.18). Diffuse infiltration of
and Jeraj 1980). Granulomatous urethritis results in dif-
the bladder wall instead of formation of a distinct mass
fuse and irregular thickening of the urethra and may
is less common but possible (Sutherland-Smith 2008).
mimic urethral neoplasia (Moroff et al. 1991).
Calculi
Cystic calculi (see Chapter 69) are common in small
animals, and various mineral types can be encountered
(struvite, calcium oxalate, urate, cystine, silica, calcium
phosphate, and mixed) (Lulich et al. 2000; Osborne
et al. 2000). Bladder stones appear as single or multiple
strongly hyperechoic structures of variable size and shape
(Figure 16.16). Dependent on size of the calculus and
transducer frequency, distal shadowing may be present
(Weichselbaum et al. 2000). Sensitivity of ultrasono-
graphic examination for the detection of cystic calculi is
high and similar to double contrast cystography if using a
high-frequency (7.5 MHz or above) transducer. However,
if a lower frequency (5 MHz or lower) transducer is used,
false-negative results are common especially with small
stones (Weichselbaum et al. 1999). Possible concurrent
Figure 16.18 Urinary bladder mass (transitional cell carcinoma)
findings in animals with bladder stones include bladder
in an 11-year-old Shetland sheepdog. There is a large mixed
wall thickening, uroliths associated with kidneys, ureters,
echogenic mass occupying almost the entire lumen of the urinary
or urethra, and inflammatory renal changes (pyelectasia,
bladder and resulting in obstruction of the left ureter (between
hyperechogenicity of renal cortices, etc.).
cursors).
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   141
Metastases to regional lymph nodes (medial iliac lymph
4 x 4 cm mass within the pelvic canal. An extraskeletal
nodes) or vertebral bodies of the lumbar spine may be
 osteosarcoma ofthe penile urethra was described in a dog.
present at time of diagnosis, and thorough evaluation of
 which appeared as a hyperechoic mass with distal shad-
 these structures is important if bladder neoplasia is sus-
owing (Sutherland-Smith 2008). Neoplasms of struc-
pected. Smooth muscle tumors of the urinary bladder
tures bordering the urethra, such as prostate, os penis, or
have been reported as smoothly marginated hypoechoic
vagina/uterus, may involve the urethra (Mirkovic et al.
or heterogeneous masses (Heng et al. 2006; Sutherland-
2004; Suzuki et al. 2006; Winter et al. 2006), and origin
Smith 2008). Lymphoma of the urinary bladder wall
of the disease process may not be obvious in some cases.
causes masses of variable echogenicity, size, and location
 Since there is overlap in the ultrasonographic appear-
(Benigni et al. 2006). Concurrent ureteral obstruction
ance of various bladder/urethral tumors as well as
and lymphadenopathy are common, and differentiation
tumors and inflammatory conditions (polypoid cysti-
n jo se a issod ou si sd o o o
tis/granulomatous urethritis), biopsy is necessary for a
sonography. Hemangiosarcoma of the bladder has been
definitive diagnosis.
reported to appear as a large potentially cavitary mass of
mixed echogenicity in the caudal abdomen, the origin of
 Mural and luminal hemorrhage
Sutherland-Smith 2008). Fibrosarcoma of the urinary
Numerous causes of hematuria (see Chapter 46) have
-nqonu [ooy e se paieadde sop bunok e un ippe
been described in dogs and cats, including trauma,
lated thickening of the urinary bladder wall. The solid
urolithiasis, neoplasia, inflammatory disorders, parasites,
mass originated from the area of the ureteral papillae
coagulopathy, renal infarction, renal pelvic hematoma,
 and bulged into the lumen of the bladder neck (Olausson 
and vascular malformation (DiBartola 2000b). Regard-
et al. 2005). A mast cell tumor of the bladder wall has
less of the underlying cause, urine will appear more
been described as a highly vascular pedunculated mixed
echogenic than normal, and sedimentation of echogenic
echogenic mass (Sutherland-Smith 2008).
particles may be noted. Luminal blood clots are generally
Most urethral tumors are malignant epithelial tumors
hyperechoic to surrounding urine and range from thin
(transitional cell carcinoma or squamous cell car-
linear structures to large masses (Sutherland-Smith
cinoma); smooth muscle tumors are less frequently
2008). Color Doppler examination is helpful in distin-
guishing blood clots from inflammatory or neoplastic
reported (Davies and Read 1990). Transitional cell carci-
noma results in hypoechogenicity and irregular thicken-
masses. Diffuse thickening of the bladder wall secondary
ing of the urethra, with a hyperechoic line along the
to mural hemorrhage has been described in dogs with
 systemic bleeding disorders (O'Brien and Wood 1998).
epithelial surface (Hanson and Tidwell 1996) (Figure
16.19). Possible concurrent findings include abnormali-
Focal wall thickening can be encountered in case of
focal hematomas, for example, following cystocentesis.
ties of bladder and prostatic gland, hydronephrosis, and
 Since intraluminal and intramural hemorrhage are
medial iliac lymph node enlargement. A case of urethral
hemangiosarcoma has been reported in a dog (Mellanby
variable in appearance and may mimic inflammatory as
well as neoplastic conditions, recheck ultrasonographic
et al. 2004). Ultrasonographic examination revealed a
      
of hemorrhage and rule out concurrent or underlying
abnormalities.
Rupture
Although the use of contrast cystosonography has been
described as a sensitive tool for bladder rupture (see
Chapter 82), positive contrast cystography provides more
information on location of the rupture than ultrasound
(Cote et al. 2002; Nyland et al. 2002a). Similarly, ure-
thrography is considered superior to ultrasonography for
the diagnosis of urethral rupture.
Figure 16.19 Urethral mass (transitional cell carcinoma) in an
Foreign bodies
11-year-old Schnauzer. The sagittal image of the urethra (between
arrows) demonstrates mural thickening and severe mucosal irreg
While cystic foreign bodies in humans are not uncom-
ularity, with numerous variably sized urethral nodules and masses.
mon and are usually self-inflicted (Kochakarn and
142
 Diagnostic testing
Pummanagura 2008), they are very rare in animals.
investigators, since needle tract implantation of transi-
Potential causes include migration of foreign material
tional cell carcinoma has been reported to occur after
from other organs (Morshead 1983; Houston and Eagle-
 percutaneous fine-needle aspiration (Nyland et al. 2002b; 
some 1999; Wyatt et al. 1999), bullets 0r BBs (Nyland et al.
Vignoli et al. 2007).
2002a), and urinary catheter fragments after catheter
failure.
References
Adams, W.H., R.L. Toal, et al. (1989). Early renal ultrasonographic
Ultrasound-assisted interventional procedures
findings in dogs with experimentally induced ethylene glycol
nephrosis. Arm I Vet Res 50(8): 1370- 1376.
The use of ultrasound guidance has become routine
Adin, C.A., E.J. Herrgesell, et al. (2003). Antegrade pyelography for
for many interventional procedures of the urinary tract
suspected ureteral obstruction in cats: 1l cases (1995-2001). J Am
 assisting in accurate placement of devices and sample
Vet Med Assoc 222( 11): 1576- 1581.
sites. Fine-needle aspirations using 20- to 25-gauge nee-
Agut, A., M. Soler, et al. (2008). Imaging diagnosis—ultrasound-
guided ethanol sclerotherapy for a simple renal cyst. Vet Radiol
dles can usually be performed with minimal sedation
Ultrasound 49(1): 65-67.
and with minimal risk of complications (see Chapter 26).
Allworth, M.S. and K.L. Hoffmann ( 1999). Crossed renal ectopia with
-0ne ane-at oi -91 usn shaup au jo Asdoq aio
fusion in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(4): 357-360.
mated needles usually requires general anesthesia and is
Barr, F.J., M.W. Patteson, et al. ( 1989). Hypercalcemic nephropathy in
:()oe punosu nouy ia ueeadde sudeuouos saop sai
associated with a higher rate of complications (see Chap-
ter 23). Complication rates of 9% in dogs and 15% in
169-173.
Barr, FJ, PE. Holt, et al. (1990). Ultrasonographic measurements of
cats have been reported. Hemorrhage is the most com-
normal renal parameters. J Small Anim Pract 31(4): 180- 184.
mon complication ( Vaden et al. 2005). Larger needle sizes
Barthez, P.Y., R. Leveille, et al. ( 1997). Side lobes and grating lobes arti-
 provide better samples but are associated with higher risk
facts in ultrasound imaging. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(5): 387-393.
of hemorrhage (Rawlings et al. 2003). Increased risk of
Beck, J.A., C.R. Bellenger, et al. (2000). Perirenal pseudocysts in 26
cats. Aust Vet I78(3): 166-171.
complications has been observed in older dogs and dogs
Benigni, L., C.R. Lamb, et al. (2006). Lymphoma affecting the uri-
with severe azotemia (Vaden et al. 2005). No measurable
nary bladder in three dogs and a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(6):
change in renal functions was detected following renal
592-596.
biopsy in healthy cats and dogs (Drost et al. 2000b; Gro-
Biller, D.S., G.A. Bradley, et al. (1992). Renal medullary rim sign:
man et al. 2004). Neoplasia such as lymphoma in cats
ultrasonographic evidence of renal disease. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
can often be diagnosed with cytologic specimens from
33(5): 286-290.
Bouma, J.L., L.R. Aronson, et al. (2003). Use of computed tomography
fine-needle aspirations. Fine-needle aspirates of infec-
renal angiography for screening feline renal transplant donors. Vet
tious diseases may help identify the presence of organisms
Radiol Ultrasound 44(6): 636-641.
and provide culture samples. For chronic inflammatory
Caceres, A.V., A.L. Zwingenberger, et al. (2008). Characterization of
    n s  
 normal feline renal vascular anatomy with dual-phase, C.T. angiog-
necessary to obtain sufficient tissue for evaluation.
raphy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 49(4): 350-356.
Ultrasound guided cystocentesis (see Chapter 5) is
Cartee, R.E., B.A. Selcer, et al. ( 1980). Ultrasonographic diagnosis of
renal disease in small animals. I Am Vet Med Assoc 176(5): 426-
routinely performed and is especially helpful in obese
430.
 patients or for obtaining samples from mildly distended
Churchill, J.A., D.A. Feeney, et al. (1999). Effects of diet and aging
bladders. Fine-needle aspiration of a dilated renal pelvis
on renal measurements in uninephrectomized geriatric bitches. Vet
(see Chapter 6) may provide samples for evaluation
Radio Ultrasound 40(3): 233-240.
as well as means of infusing radiopaque water-soluble
Confer, A.W. and R.J. Panciera. (200 1). The urinary system. In: Thom-
son's Special Veterinary Pathology, 3rd ed, edited by M.D. McGavin,
organic iodine contrast media (antegrade pyelography)
W.W. Carlton, and J.F. Zachary. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, pp. 235-277.
for subsequent evaluation by radiography in cases where
Cote, E., M.C. Carrol, et al. (2002). Diagnosis of urinary bladder
routine excretory urography is not possible or a diagno-
rupture using ultrasound contrast cystography: in vitro model and
sis of ureteral obstruction cannot be achieved by other
two case-history reports. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43(3): 28 1-286.
Crawford, M.A.and M.A. Turk. ( 1984). Ureteral obstruction associated
means (Rivers et al. 1997; Adin et al. 2003).
with proliferative ureteritis in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 184(5):
Fine-needle aspirates of cavitary lesions such as cysts
586-588.
or abscesses may be performed to provide diagnostic
Cruz-Arambulo, R., R. Wrigley, et al. (2004). Sonographic features of
samples as well as for therapeutic purposes (Ochoa et al.
histiocytic neoplasms in the canine abdomen. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
1999; Szatmari et al. 200l; Agut et al. 2008).
45(6): 554-558.
Samples of bladder or urethral masses can be obtained
D'Anjou, M.A. (2008). Kidneys and ureters. In: Atlas of Small Anirmal
Ultrasonography, edited by D.G. Penninck and M.A. d'Anjou. Ames,
by means of traumatic catheterization ("suction biopsy")
IA: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 339-364.
 instead of percutaneous fine-needle aspiration or biopsy
Davies, I.V, and H.M. Read. ( 1990). Urethral tumours in dogs. I Small
(Lamb et al. 1996). This method is preferred by many
Anim Pract 31(3): 131-136.
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   143
DiBartola, S.P. (2000a). Familial renal disease in dogs and cats. In:
Heng, H.G., J.E. Lowry, et al. (2006). Smooth muscle neoplasia of the
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 5th ed, Vol. 2, edited by
urinary bladder wall in three dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(1):
S.J. Ettinger, and E.C. Feldman. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp.
83-86.
1698-1703.
Holloway, A. and R. O'Brien. (2007). Perirenal effusion in dogs and
 DiBartola, S.P. (200ob). Clinical approach and laboratory evaluation
cats with acute renal failure. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48(6): 574-
of renal disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 5tht
579.
ed, Vol.2, edited by S.J. Ettinger, and E.C. Feldman. Philadelphia,
Houston, D.M. and H. Eaglesome. (1999). Unusual case of foreign
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1600-1614.
body-induced struvite urolithiasis in a dog. Car Vet J40(2): 125- 126.
Diez-Prieto I., M.B. Garcia-Rodriguez, et al. (2001). Diagnosis of renal
Hylands, R. (2006). Veterinary diagnostic imaging. Retroperitoneal
agenesis in a beagle. JSmall Amirm Pract 42(12): 599-602.
Douglass,J.P. and E.W. Kremkau. ( 1993). Ultrasound cornerthe uri-
the left kidney. Car Vet I47( 10): 1033-1035.
nary bladder wall hypoechoic pseudolesion. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Ivancic, M. and W. Mai. (2008). Qualitative and quantitative compar-
34(1): 45-46.
ison of renal vs. hepatic ultrasonographic intensity in healthy dogs.
Douglass, I.P. (1993). Ultrasound corner—bladder wall mass effect
Vet Radiol Ultrasourd 49(4): 368-373.
caused by the intramural portion of the canine ureter. Vet Radiol
Kealy, IK. and H. McAllister. (2005). The abdomen. In: Diagnostic
Ultrasound 34(2): 107.
Radiology & Ultrasonography of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed, edited by
Drost, W.T., G.A. Henry, et al. (2000a). Quantification of hepatic and
J.K. Kealy and H. McAllister. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, pp.
renal cortical echogenicity in clinically normal cats. Am I Vet Res
21-172.
61(9): 1016-1020.
Kirberger, R.M. ( 1995). Imaging artifacts in diagnostic ultrasound: a
Drost, W.T., G.A. Henry, et al. (2000b). The effects of a unilateral
review. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36(4): 297-306.
ultrasound-guided renal biopsy on renal function in healthy sedated
Klein, M.K., G.L. Cockerell, et al. (1988). Canine primary renal neo-
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasoumd41(1): 57-62.
plasms: a retrospective review of 54 cases. JAm Amirm Hosp Assoc24:
Essman, S.C., W.T. Drost, et al. (2000). Imaging of a cat with perirenal
443-452.
pseudocysts. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41(4): 329-334.
Esterline, M.L., D.S. Biller, et al. (2005). Ureteral duplication in a dog.
Clinical Oncology, 4th ed, edited by S.J. Withrow and D.M. Vail. St.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46(6): 485-489.
Louis: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 649-658.
Felkai, C.S., K. Voros, et al. ( 1992). Ultrasonographic determination 
Kochakarn, W. and W. Pummanagura. (2008). Foreign bodies in the
of renal volume in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasourd 33(5): 292-296.
female urinary bladder: 20-year experience in Ramathibodi Hospi-
Felkai C., K. Voros, et al. ( 1995). Lesions of the renal pelvis and prox-
tal. Asian J Surg 31(3): 130-133.
imal ureter in various nephro-urological conditions: an ultrasono-
Konde, L.J., R.H. Wrigley, et al. ( 1984). Ultrasonographic anatomy of
graphic study. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36(5): 397-401.
the normal canine kidney. Vet Radiol 25(4): 173-178.
Finco, D.R. ( 1995). Congenital, inherited and familial renal diseases. In:
Konde, L.J., R.H. Wrigley, et al. (1985). Sonographic appearance of
Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne,
renal neoplasia in the dog. Vet Radiol 26(3): 74-81.
and D.R. Finco. Baltimore: Willams & Wilkins, p. 47l-483.
Konde, L.J., R.D. Park, et al. (1986). Comparison of radiography and
Fink, R.L., D.T. Caridis, et al. (1980). Renal impairment and its
ultrasonography in the evaluation of renal lesions in the dog. I Atm
reversibility followingvariable periods of complete ureteric obstruc-
Vet Med Assoc 188(12): 1420- 1425.
tion. Aust N ZI Surg 50(1): 77-83.
Kremkau, EW. (1995). Doppler Ultrasound—Principles and Instru-
Finn-Bodner, S.T. ( 1995). The urinary bladder. In: Practical Veterinary
ments, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Ultrasourd, edited by R.E. Cartee, B.A. Selcer, J.A. Hudson, et al.
Kremkau, FEW. (2002). Diagnostic Ultrasound—Principles and Instru-
Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, pp. 210-235.
ments, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Forrest, L.J, R.T. O'Brien, et al. ( 1998). Sonographic renal findings in
Kyles, A.E., E.M. Hardie, et al. (2005). Clinical, clinicopathologic,
20 dogs with leptospirosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39(4): 337-340.
radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats with
Gabor, L.J., R. Malik, et al. (1998). Clinical and anatomical features of
ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-2002). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226(6):
lymphosarcoma in 118 cats. Aust Vet I76(11): 725-732.
932-936.
Geisse, A.L., J.E. Lowry, et al. ( 1997). Sonographic evaluation of uri-
Lamb, C.R., N.D. Trower, et al. (1996). Ultrasound-guided catheter
nary bladder wall thickness in normal dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
biopsy of the lower urinary tract: technique and results in 12 dogs.
38(2): 132-137.
J Small Anmim Pract 37(9): 413-416.
Gleason, P.E., P.P. Kelalis, et al. ( 1994). Hydronephrosis in renal ectopia:
Lamb, C.R. and S.P. Gregory. ( 1998). Ultrasonographic findings in 14
incidence, etiology and significance. I Urol 151(6): 1660- 1661.
dogs with ectopic ureter. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39(3): 218-223.
Groman, R.P., A. Bahr, et al. (2004). Effects of serial ultrasound-guided
Lamb, C.R. ( 1998). Ultrasonography of the ureters. Vet Clin North A 
renal biopsies on kidneys of healthy adolescent dogs. Vet Radiol
Small Amim Pract 28(4): 823-848.
Ultrasound 45(1): 62-69.
Leveille, R., D.S. Biller, et al. (1992). Sonographic investigation of
Hanson, LA. and A.s. Tidwell ( 1996). Ultrasonographic appearance
transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in small animals.
 of urethral transitional cell carcinoma in ten dogs. Vet Radiol Ultra-
Vet Radiol Ultrasourd 33(2): 103-107.
sourd 37(4): 293-299.
Leveille, R. ( 1998). Ultrasonography of urinary bladder disorders. Vet
Hardie, E.M. and A.E. Kyles. (2004). Management of ureteral obstruc-
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28(4): 799-821.
tion. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34: 989-1010.
Liptak, J.M., W.S. Dernell, et al. (2004). Haemangiosarcoma of the
Hartzband, L.E., A.S. Tidwell, et al. (1991). Relative echogenicity of
urinary bladder in a dog. Aust Vet I82(4): 215-217.
the renal cortex and liver in normal dogs (abstract). Br I Radiol 64:
Lium, B. and L. Moe. (1985). Hereditary multifocal renal cystadeno-
654.
carcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in the German shepherd
Hecht, S., R.J. McCarthy, et al. (2005). What is you diagnosis? Ectopic
kidney in a cat. I Atm Vet Med Assoc 227(2): 223-224.
447-455.
144
 Diagnostic testing
Lobetti, R.G. and J.P. Goldin. (1998). Emphysematous cystitis and
cell carcinoma of the bladder, urethra, and prostate. Vet Radiol
bladder trigone diverticulum in a dog. I Small Anim Pract 39(3):
Ultrasound 43(1): 50-53.
144-147.
O'Brien, R.T. and E.F. Wood. (1998). Urinary bladder mural hemor-
Locke, J.E. and L.G. Barber. (2006). Comparative aspects and clinical
rhage associated with systemic bleeding disorders in three dogs. Vet
outcomes of canine renal hemangiosarcoma. J Vet Intern Med 20(4):
Radiol Ultrasound 39(4): 354-356.
962-967.
Ochoa, V.B., S.P. DiBartola, et al. ( 1999). Perinephric pseudocysts in
Louvet, A. (2006). Twinkling artifact in small animal color-Doppler
the cat: a retrospective study and review of the literature. I Vet Irterm
sonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(4): 384-390.
Med 13(1): 47-55.
Low, D.G. (1995). Parasites of the upper and lower urinary tract of
Olausson, A., S.M. Stieger, et al. (2005). A urinary bladder fibrosar-
dogs and cats. In: Canine and feline nephrology and urology, edited
coma in a young dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46(2): 135- 138.
by C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco. Philadelphia, PA: Williams and
Oglesby, P.A. and A. Carter. (2003). Ultrasonographic diagnosis of
Wilkins, pp. 917-921.
unilateral ectopic ureter in a Labrador dog. IS Afr Vet Assoc 74{3):
Lulich, I.P, C.A. Osborne, et al. ( 1987). Urologic disorders ofimmature
84-86.
cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Armim Pract 17(3): 663-696.
Osborne, C.A., G.R. Johnston, et al. ( 1995). Ectopic ureters and urete-
Lulich, JP., C.A. Osborne, et al. (2000). Canine lower urinary tract
roceles. In: Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by
diseases. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 5th ed, Vol.
C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, pp.
2, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman. Philadelphia, PA: WB
608-622.
Saunders, pp. 1747-1781.
Osborne, C.A., J.M. Kruger, et al. (2000). Feline lower urinary tract
 Mantis, P and C.R. Lamb. (2000). Most dogs with medullary rim sign 
diseases. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicirne, 5th ed.,
on ultrasonography have no demonstrable renal dysfunction. Vet
Vol. 2., edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman. Philadelphia, PA:
Radiol Ultrasound 41(2): 164- 166.
WB Saunders, pp. 1710-1747.
Mareschal, A., M.A. d' Anjou, et al. (2007). Ultrasonographic measure-
Penninck, D.G. (2002). Artifacts. In: Small Animal Diagmostic Ultra-
ment of kidney-to-aorta ratio as a method of estimating renal size
soumd, 2nd ed., edited by T.G. Nyland and J.S. Mattoon. Philadelphia,
in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasournd 48(5): 434-438.
PA: WB Saunders Company, pp. 19-29.
Martinez, I., J.S. Mattoon, et al. (2003). Polypoid cystitis in 17 dogs
 Petite, A., V. Busoni, et al. (2006). Radiographic and ultrasonographic
(1978-2001). I Vet Intern Med 17(4): 499-509.
findings of ermphysematous cystitis in four nondiabetic female dogs.
Maxie, M.G. (1993). The urinary system. In: Pathology of Domestic
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47( 1): 90-93.
Arirmals, 4th ed, edited by K.V.F Jubb, P.C. Kennedy and N. Palmer.
 Polzin, D.J. and K. Jeraj. ( 1980). Urethritis, cystitis, and ureteritis. Vet
San Diego: Academic Press, pp. 447-538.
Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 9(4): 661-678.
McInerney, D, A. Jones et al. (1977). Urinoma. Clin Radiol 28(3):
 Pugh, C.R., C.G. Schelling, et al. ( 1994). Iatrogenic renal pyelectasia in
345-351.
the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35( 1): 50-51.
McLoughlin, M.A., J.G. Haupman, et al. ( 1989). Canine ureteroceles:
Ramirez, S., J.P. Douglass, et al. (2002). Ultrasonographic features of
a case report and literature review. IAm Arim Hosp Assoc 25: 699-
canine abdominal malignant histiocytosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
706.
43(2): 167-170.
McLoughlin, M.A. and D.J. Chew. (2000). Diagnosis and surgical man-
Rawlings, C.A., H. Diamond, et al. (2003). Diagnostic quality of percu-
agementofectopic ureters. Clin Techt Small Anim Pract 15(1): 17-24.
Mellanby, R.J., J.C. Chantrey, et al. (2004). Urethral haemangiosarcoma
ultrasound guidance in dogs. JAtm Vet Med Assoc 223(3): 317-321.
in a boxer. JI Small Amim Pract 45(3): 154-156.
Reichle, J.K., S.P. DiBartola, et al. (2002). Renal ultrasonographic
Miles, K.G. and A.E. Jergens. ( 1992). Unilateral perinephric pseudo-
cyst of undetermined origin in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 33(5):
cats with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Vet Radiol
277-281.
Utrasound 43(4): 368-373.
Mirkovic, T.K., C.L. Shmon, et al. (2004). Urinary obstruction sec-
Reichle, LK.,R.A.Peterson,etal (2003).Ureteralfbroepithelial polyps
ondary to an ossifying fibroma of the os penis in a dog. I Am Amim
in four dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44(4): 433-437.
Hosp Assoc 40: 152- 156.
Rivers, B.J., P.A. Walter, et al. ( 1997). Ultrasonographic-guided, percu-
Moroff, S.D., B.A. Brown, et al. (199l). Infiltrative urethral disease
taneous antegrade pyelography: technique and clinical application
in female dogs: 41 cases (1980-1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 199(2):
in the dog and cat. JAm Amim Hosp Assoc 33: 61-68.
247-251.
Sato, A.F and M. Solano. (2004). Ultrasonographic findings in abdom-
Morshead, D. ( 1983). Submucosal urethral calculus secondary to fox-
inal mast cell disease: a retrospective study of 19 patients. Vet Radiol
tail awn migration in a dog. IAm Vet Med Assoc 182(1 1): 1247-1248.
Utrasound 45(1): 51-57.
Neuwirth, L., M. Mahaffey, et al. (1993). Comparison of excretory
Shiroma, J.T., J.K. Gabriel, et al. ( 1999). Effect of reproductive status
urography and ultrasonography for detection of experimentally
on feline renal size. Vet Radiol Ultrasoumd 40(3): 242-245.
induced pyelonephritis in dogs. Am I Vet Res 54(5): 660-669.
Soler, M., L. Cardoso, et al. (2008). Imaging diagnosis-dioctophyma
Nyland, T.G., B.M. Kantrowitz, et al. ( 1989). Ultrasonic determination
renale in a dog. Vet Radiot Ultrasound 49(3): 307-308.
of kidney volume in the dog. Vet Radiol 30(4): 174- 180.
Stiffler, K.S., M.A.M. Stevenson, et al. (2002). Intravesical uretero-
Nyland, T.G., P.E. Fisher, et al. (1993). Diagnosis of urinary tract
cele with concurrent renal dysfunction in a dog: a case report
obstruction in dogs using duplex Doppler ultrasonography. Vet
and proposed classification system. I Am Arirn Hosp Assoc 38: 33-
Radiol Ultrasound 34(5): 348-352.
39.
Nyland, T.G., JS. Mattoon, et al. (2002a). Urinary tract. In: Small
Stoneham, A.E., T.E. O'Toole, et al. (2004). Retroperitoneal effusion
Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound, 2nd ed, edited by T.G. Nyland and
in dogs and cats. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 14(S1): S1-S17.
I.S. Mattoon. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 158- 195.
Sutherland-Smith, J. (2008). Bladder and urethra. In: Atlas of Small
Nyland, T.G., S.T. Wallack, et al. (2002b). Needle-tract implantation
Animal Ultrasonography, edited by D.G. Penninck and M.A.
 following us-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of transitional
d'Anjou. Ames TA: Blackwell Publishing, Pp. 365-384.
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract   145
Suzuki, K., K. Nakatani, et al. (2006). Vaginal rhabdomyosarcoma in a
Walter, P.A., D.A. Feeney, et al. ( 1987b). Ultrasonographic evaluation
dog. Vet Pathol 43(2): 186-188.
of renal parenchymal diseases in dogs: 32 cases (1981-1986). I Am
Szatmari, V., Z. Osi, et al. (2001). Ultrasound-guided percutaneous
Vet Med Assoc 191(8): 999- 1007.
Walter, P.A., G.R. Johnston, et al. (1988). Applications of ultrasonog-
Assoc 218( 11): 1796- 1799, 1778-1779.
Takiguchi, M., J. Yasuda, et al. (1997). Ultrasonographic appearance
cases (1981- 1986). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 192(1): 92-98.
of orthotopic ureterocele in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(5):
Weichselbaum, R.C., D.A. Feeney, et al. ( 1999). Urocystolith detection:
398-399.
comparison of survey, contrast radiographic and ultrasonographic
Takiguchi, M. and M. Inaba. (2005). Diagnostic ultrasound of polypoid
techniques in an in vitro bladder phantom. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
cystitis in dogs. I Vet Med Sci 67(1): 57-61.
40(4): 386-400.
Tidwell, A.S., S.L. Ullman, et al. ( 1990). Urinoma (para-ureteral pseu-
Weichselbaum, R.C., D.A. Feeney, et al. (2000). Relevance of sono-
docyst) in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31(4): 203-206.
 graphic artifacts observed during in vitro characterization of uro-
Vaden, S.L., IF. Levine, et al. (2005). Renalbiopsy: a retrospective study
cystolith mineral composition. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41(5): 438-
of methods and complications in 283 dogs and 65 cats. J Vet Intern
446.
Med 19(6): 794-801.
Weisse, C., L.R. Aronson, et al. (2002). Traumatic rupture of the ureter:
Valdes-Martinez, A., R. Cianciolo, et al. (2007). Association between
10 cases. I Am Arnirm Hosp Assoc 38: 188-192.
renal hypoechoic subcapsular thickening and lymphosarcoma in
Winter, M.D., J.E. Locke, et al. (2006). Imaging diagnosis—urinary
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound48(4): 357-360.
Vignoli, M., F. Rossi, et al. (2007). Needle tract implantation after fine
Radiol Ultrasound 47(6): 597-601.
needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of transitional cell carcinoma of
Wyatt, K.M., A.M. Marchevsky, et al. ( 1999). An enterovesical foreign 
the urinary bladder and adenocarcinoma of the lung. Schweiz Arch
body in a dog. Aust Vet I77(1): 27-29.
Tierhteilkd 149(7): 314-318.
Yeager, A.E. and W.1. Anderson. ( 1989). Study of association between
Walter, P.A., G.R. Johnston, et al. ( 1987a). Renal ultrasonography in
histologic features and echogenicity of architecturaly normal cat
healthy cats. Arm I Vet Res 48(4): 600-607.
kidneys. Arm I Vet Res 50(6): 860-863.
17
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance
imaging of the urinary tract
Alexander G. MacLeod and Erik R. Wisner
The use of computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
contrast media are used to acquire images. Therefore,
resonance (MR) imaging in veterinary medicine contin-
comparable contrast radiographic procedures of the uri-
ues to increase as more specialists and general practi-
nary tract can be performed and, due to the superior con-
tioners gain direct or referral access to these technolo-
trast resolution and anatomic detail provided by CT, the
gies. Radiologists and other specialists have accordingly
specificity and sensitivity of lesion detection and diag-
developed the technical skills and knowledge necessary
nosis are often improved. Because of cost, availability
-de a i o u ss s d 
and inherent challenges to image production, such as
ate therapy and prognosis. Although initially primarily
respiratory and cardiac motion, MR imaging of the uri-
used for neuroimaging, CT and, to a lesser extent, MR
 nary tract has not been used to the same extent as CT.
  m s n oq  s u mou 
However, MR imaging also has great potential to pro-
nary tract is particularly suited to CT and MR imaging
vide functional and internal anatomic information relat-
because of its fixed anatomic position, imaging char-
 ing to the urinary tract. A distinct advantage of both
acteristics, and potential for quantitative and qualitative
 CT and MR is the consistency and reproducibility with
functional imaging due to predominantly renal excretion 
which diagnostic studies can be produced as compared
 of the commonly used CT and MR contrast agents.
 to ultrasound in which the quality of an imaging study
Ultrasound imaging (see Chapter 16) has supplanted
is highly dependent on the expertise of the individual
many but not all survey and contrast radiographic stud-
 performing the scan. CT and MR images are often easier
ies of the urinary tract (see Chapter 15). An advantage of
to interpret than ultrasound images because the relative
ultrasound over radiography is the ability to discriminate
anatomic relationships are more clearly demonstrated,
the internal architecture of parenchymal organs such as
particularly when imaging data is manipulated by refor-
 the kidneys and the luminal contents and mural charac-
matting into other anatomic planes, redefined by using
 teristics ofholow viscera, inclusive ofthe ureters, urinary
 techniques such as maximum intensity projection (MIP)
bladder, and urethra, without the need for intravenous
 display or rendered as three-dimensional anatomic rep-
or intraluminal contrast media. However, utility of ultra-
resentations. In conjunction with ultrasound, survey and
sound is limited in certain anatomic sites such as the
contrast radiography, and nuclear medicine, CT and MR
intrapelvic urethra, and it is not possible to qualitatively
increase the specificity and sensitivity for a number of
 or quantitatively assess renal function. For reasons such
urologic disorders. In our experience, CT and MR are
as these, excretory urography and retrograde urethrog-
most beneficial for refining a presumptive diagnosis and
raphy continue to be useful for diagnosis and prognosis
for surgical planning and postoperative evaluation.
and for surgical planning.
CT image generation folows the same principles as
conventional radiography in that X-rays and iodinated
Image formation and technical considerations
In almost all cases, the patient is maintained under
 general anesthesia for the imaging study to facilitate
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 positioning, minimize patient motion, and to allow for
146
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the urinary tract  147
cardiac and/or respiratory gating (MR) or forced breath-
though this may come at the expense of increased radia-
hold to eliminate respiratory motion (CT). For both CT
 tion exposure (CT) or increased acquisition time (MR) to
and MR imaging, standard imaging protocols should
 maintain adequate image quality (Bushberg et al. 2001).
generally include both pre- and postcontrast acquisi-
Most CT scanners currently being used today are heli-
tions. This is particularly important in CT imaging to dis-
cal scanners in which the imaging data is acquired with
 tinguish parenchymal or luminal mineral opacities that 
the patient moving through the CT gantry at a con-
might be evident on precontrast images from increased
stant rate as the X-ray tube rotates continuously around
density due to soft tissue or luminal contrast enhance-
the patient. Older single slice helical scanners and newer
ment.
multiple slice scanners are now in use with the latter,
providing faster scan times and better spatial resolution
of reformatted images. Within limits, the table move-
Computed tomography
 ment can be increased while maintaining a given image
 In CT imaging, the patient is placed on a moving table
 collimation thickness to increase the volume of anatomy
that passes through the CT gantry as X-rays are trans-
scanned in a single acquisition. This is particularly useful
mitted through the patient from a rotating X-ray tube
 in larger patients in which the entire urinary tract is to
to a detector array. The differential X-ray attenuation
be imaged. The relationship of table travel to X-ray tube
from multiple tube positions is collected and processed
 rotation is referred to as pitch. As pitch increases, larger
to form a cross-sectional image of the patient. Because
lengths of anatomy can be imaged with a given number
ionizing radiation is the basis for image production, radi-
 of images of fixed collimation thickness. For example,
ation safety precautions must be taken to minimize expo-
when imaging the urinary system of a larger dog, one can
sure to both the patient and personnel. As with conven-
increase either the slice thickness or the pitch to obtain
tional radiographs, because X-ray photons are used for
 images from the cranial aspect of the right kidney to the
CT image acquisition, image opacity is directly related
most caudal aspect of the urethra. On the basis of this ini-
to tissue or organ density. The light intensities of pixels
that form a digital CT image displayed on a monitor or
over a specific site to better define a specific organ or
on print film reflect the underlying tissue densities of the
structure (Figure 17.1).
anatomical structures represented on the image. Low-
CT and MR both provide improved contrast resolu-
density materials such as air and fat are often referred to
tion and internal architectural detail when compared to
as hypodense or hypoattenuating, whereas high-density
conventional radiography and fluoroscopy (Figure 17.2).
materials such as bone and contrast-enhancing soft tis-
 Additionally, sequential CT imaging of the kidneys fol-
 sues are referred to as hyperdense or hyperattenuating.
lowing the administration of iodinated contrast media
Because these terms are relative, they are typically used
(CT intravenous pyelogram, [IVP]) allows for a subjec-
to compare a given structure to a material of neutral
five or quantitative assessment of renal function (Fig-
density, such as fluid or soft tissue, or used to compare
ure 17.3). As with conventional IVP, CT image acqui-
the density of one tissue to an adjacent tissue or struc-
sitions can be timed to result in vascular, nephrogram,
ture. Conventional iodinated contrast medium is used for
 and pyelogram phases (Figure 17.4). Contrast-enhanced
contrast-enhanced CT studies and, as with conventional
CT images can also reveal or more accurately delineate
contrast radiography, results in an increase in tissue den-
changes within the renal parenchyma that result in altered
sity in those structures in which it concentrates. Although
blood flow. Qualitative assessment of renal function is
both ionic and nonionic iodinated media can be used for
 made by evaluating the rapidity and degree to which the
CT contrast enhancement, nonionic CT contrast media
kidneys contrast enhance and by evaluating the tran-
is recommended if the patient has cardiac or renal insuffi-
 sit of contrast medium through the collecting system.
ciency because it will result in less osmotic hypervolemia.
An advantage of CT over conventional IVP is that iodi-
 In addition, nonionic contrast agents have been shown
nated contrast medium concentration is linearly related
to be associated with fewer adverse reactions than ionic
to image density as measured in CT units and therefore
 agents and should be considered as part of a standard CT
 a quantitative estimation of glomeruler fltration can be
imaging protocol even in patients without identified risk
made. However, CT underestimates GFR when compared
factors.
 to plasma clearance and scintigraphy, which is thought
Certain image acquisition parameters can be mod-
to be due to the effects of anesthetic hypotension and
ified to extract more diagnostic information from the
possible effects of contrast media on nephron function
imaging examination. With both CT and MR, decreasing
(O'Dell-Anderson et al. 2006).
image collimation (decreasing “slice thickness") increases
Although the spatial resolution of CT is less than
image resolution and reduces partial volume averaging
 that of conventional radiography, the tomographic image
148   Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.1 Four-year-old spayed cat with uroabdomen. (a) 3 mm collimated transverse plane CT image acquired with the patient
in dorsal recumbency and following intravenous contrast administration. In addition to the presence of moderate free peritoneal fluid,
contrast medium is present in the urinary bladder lumen, the right ureter, and within the right caudal abdomen. (b) 1-mm collimated 
images were acquired at the level of the urinary bladder to better localize the source of urine leakage. These images show a larger
amount of contrast medium in the right caudal peritoneal cavity. Diagnosis: right ureterovesicular avulsion and uroabdomen.
improves characterization of anatomy by minimizing the
fined sequences. As the protons come back into realign-
superimposing effect of adjacent anatomic structures.
 ment, they generate their own characteristic RF signals
This, in combination with IV contrast administration,
that are in turn detected by the MR scanner. The strength
allows for the visualization of small structures such as
and character of the returning RF signals depend on the
the ureters and urethra as contrast medium accumulates
 proton concentration and the specific chemical charac-
in the collecting system (Figure 17.5). In normal ani-
teristics of the tissues from which the RF waves emanate.
mals, optimal ureteral opacification with ionic iodinated
The RF response is mapped to produce a cross-sectional
contrast medium occurs 3-60 minutes following intra-
image, which has excellent soft tissue contrast resolu-
venous contrast administration of 400-800 mg iodine/kg
 tion. The most commonly used pulse sequences result in
(Barthez et al. 1998).
T1-weighted or T2-weighted images. The characteristic
There are relatively few reports on the use of CT for
 appearance of common anatomical structures using these
diagnosis of urinary tract disorders. A specific CT pro-
 sequences is presented in Table 17.1. The light intensi-
tocol has been described for detection and characteriza-
ties of pixels that form a digital MR image displayed
tion of supernumerary renal blood vessels as a screen-
on a monitor or on print film reflect the underlying RF
ing test for feline renal donors (Bouma et al. 2003). CT
 responses of the anatomical structures represented on
has also been used to characterize hereditary multifocal
renal cystadenomas (Moe and Lium 1997) and tumors 
as hypointense, whereas light grey or white structures
such as renal carcinoma and nephroblastoma (Figure 
 are refered to as hyperintense. As with the compara-
17.6) ( Yamazoe et al. 1994). In the paper on multifocal
 ble CT terminology, these terms reflect signal intensity
renal cystadenomas, intravenously administered contrast
 relative to other structures in an image. Unlike CT, the
medium was found to increase the detection of small solid
 signal intensity of a given tissue may change depending
renal nodules (Moe and Lium 1997).
 on the specific pulse sequence used to generate the image,
and the relative intensity differences between tissues may
change or even become inverted with the use of different
Magnetic resonance imaging
sequences. The most commonly used MR contrast media
In MR imaging, the patient is placed within the core
are small molecular gadolinium agents that increase the
of the MR scanner, which generates a strong constant
signal intensity of contrast-enhancing structures on T1-
magnetic field. The hydrogen atoms within the body
weighted images. Although the patient is not exposed to
align with this magnetic field. Temporary disruption of
 ionizing radiation, the high magnetic field environment
 proton alignment is induced with a series of radiofre-
 can pose a risk to both the patient and personnel, and
 quency (RF) waves pulsed into the patient using prede-
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the urinary tract  149
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
Figure 17.2 Comparison of the kidney evaluated using four different imaging modalities. (a) image from a ventrodorsal radiograph
jo ahew! punosenn (q) passasse aq uen Aaupy aui jo Apedo anss los pue 'inojuo 'azis 'adeus aul bop e jo uawopqe aui jo
the left kidney. In addition to the previously listed characteristics, the internal architecture of the kidney, including the renal pelvis,
the pelvic recesses, and the cortico-medullary junction, can be identified. (c) Dorsal plane reformatted image of the left kidney from a
3 mm collimated contrast-enhanced CT examination. This image was obtained during the late nephrogram/early pyelogram phase. There
is differential contrast enhancement of the renal cortex and medulla. (d) Dorsal plane T2-weighted MR image of the right kidney. The
fat ishyperintense.
150Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
(心)
(c)
Figure 17.3 CT. Sequential 3 mm "cine" transverse images obtained during contrast administration in a 1-year-old female Boxer with
recurrent urinary tract infections and hematuria. No abnormalities were detected on CT urography. The patient is in sternal recumbency.
(a) Precontrast. (b) 15 s postcontrast, arterial vascular phase. There is strong enhancement of the aorta, cranial mesenteric, and left renal
artery. The dorsal and ventral branches and some interlobar arteries can be seen. There is early enhancement of the renal cortex. ()
24 s postcontrast. Early nephrogram phase. There is enhancement of the arteries, renal cortex, and renal vein. (d) 38 s postcontrast. Later
nephrogram phase. There is strong enhancement of the renal cortex, arteries, and veins, and moderate enhancement of the vena cava.
The caudal pole of the right kidney can be seen due to respiratory motion. (e) 4 m postcontrast, 7 mm transverse image. Pyelo-ureterogram
phase. There is strong contrast enhancement of the renal pelvis and both ureters, which appear as small hyperdensities on either side of 
the great vessels. Because of volume averaging, a longitudinal segment of the proximal left ureter is within the imaging plane.
Ist  peli Aeuun ayt jo bujbewi aueuosal jaubew pue Aydeibowoi paindwo
quality. With the use of respiratory gating, the excellent
soft tissue contrast resolution of MR can be employed
to characterize disorders of the kidneys and the collect-
ing system (Figure 17.7). However, if trends in human
medicine are any indication, CT willlikely continue to be
the imaging modality of choice for abdominal imaging
when compared to MR for most clinical conditions.
T1, T2, and postcontrast T1-weighted sequences in the
transverse and dorsal planes are recommended to best
define the normal anatomy and any pathology. Parame-
dian plane images may also prove useful, although in
this plane, the anatomic symmetry is lost within each
image. Excellent anatomical detail and the characteristic
signal intensities of fluid, blood, and vascular and avas-
cular tissues on different MR pulse sequences may be
used to characterize many urinary tract disorders though
biopsy is still most often required for definitive diagnosis
(Figure 17.8).
(e)
Postacquisition image processing
Figure 17.3 (Continued)
increased in quality and availability in recent years. Com-
To date, abdominal MRI has seen limited use in vet-
monly available image processing tools allow the clinician
erinary medicine (Muleya et al. 1997; Newell et al. 2000;
or technician to reformat a series of images into different
Yamada et al. 2005). This is due to the relatively high
imaging planes (multiplanar reformatting), create three-
cost and lower availability of MRI, the need for pro-
 dimensional images (surface rendering or volume ren-
longed anesthesia, advances and increased use of abdom-
dering), or create a maximum- or minimum-intensity
inal ultrasound and CT, and technical hurdles such as
 projection (MIP) in which an image is created from the
the effect of respiratory and visceral motion on image
highest or lowest CT numbers or MR intensity values
[a)
(a)
aew i asasuen paen aau aa sasse ds pue peda  so aod ale poeauaaa ttl an
acquired with the patient in dorsal reumbency. (a) Precontrast image. A faint, round hypodensity is identified in the lateral left renal
cortex. The spleen is enlarged. (b) Postcontrast image. There is enhancement of the renal cortices and filling of the renal pelvises with
contrast media. The previously identified hypodensity is now well delineated due to the cortical contrast enhancement. Although the
cyst is evident on both pre- and postcontrast images, the lesion is most conspicuous on the postcontrast CT image due to the absence of
enhancement within thin the cyst. Diagnosis: renal cortical cyst.
152  Diagnostic testing
(a)
(q)
(c)
(d)
Figure 17.5 Six-month-old female Bichon Frise with urinary incontinence. One millimeter collimated transverse CT images at the level
of the urinary bladder trigone acquired with the patient in sternal recumbency and following intravenous contrast administration. (a)
Both ureters are filled with contrast medium and are identified at the dorsal aspect of the urinary bladder. The right ureter is dilated.
There is contrast within the urinary bladder lumen. The urinary bladder wall is thickened and irregular. (b) and (c) More caudally, the
left ureter inserts normally and the right ureter tunnels through the dorsal urinary bladder and urethral wall (arrow). Contrast media is
present within the urethral lumen. (d) Maximum intensity projection (MIP) image of the pelvic canal, demonstrating the dilated right 
ureter extending caudally adjacent to the urethra. Diagnosis: right ectopic ureter.
in an “anatomical slab" of imaging data. These forms of
should be assessed. The stages of contrast enhancement
d ds e ssd s o
 in the normal kidneys on CT are shown in Figure 17.3. A
ning and can provide a more cohesive representation of
 precontrast CT examination should always be performed
a complex structure or lesion (Figures 17.5d and 17.9).
 prior to a contrast-enhanced CT study to detect tissue
mineralization or uroliths that can often be obscured
following contrast medium administration. In order to
Upper urinary tract
image the entire urinary tract, a complete abdominal
Kidneys
examination with breath hold is recommended. The right 
kidney should be well-seated in the renal fossa of the cau-
General considerations
date lobe of the liver. The left kidney should be just caudal
When evaluating the kidneys, the location, size, shape,
to the head of the spleen, and the lateral cortical aspect
() i is nss o () sp e 
 may be slightly ventral to the renal pelvis if the patient
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the urinary tract 153
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.6 Two-year-old male castrated Doberman Pinscher with hematuria, dorsal recumbency. (a) 7 mm collimated transverse plane
CT image at the level of the left kidney. There is a large, lobular, mildly heterogeneous left midabdominal mass with well-delineated
margins. The right kidney is of near-normal size but has slightly iregular margins and faint wedge-shaped cortical hyperdensities which
distort the renal contour. (b) Following intravenous contrast administration, there is nonuniform contrast enhancement of the left renal
and ureter were not identified. Diagnoses: nephroblastoma of the left kidney, right renal cortical infarcts, and pelvic dilation.
is in sternal recumbency. The renal pelves should be at
tissue density, measuring 30-40 CT Units. The hypo-
approximately the same level as the abdominal vena cava.
attenuating pelvic fat will be clearly defined forming a
Displacement of the kidneys can be due to retroperitoneal
"Y" shape on transverse plane images around the renal
or peritoneal fluid or mass effect, traumatic avulsion or
herniation, or surgical intervention.
Images reformatted (CT) or acquired (MR) in the dor-
sal plane are helpful to fully evaluate the size, shape,
and contour of both kidneys. On CT images, in the
absence of contrast enhancement, the corticomedullary
junction is not apparent, and the kidneys are of soft-
Table 17.1 Typical appearance of common anatomical
structures on T1- and T2-weighted MR images
 T1-weighted 
T2-weighted
imagea
image
Air
Fluid (urine, transudative ascites)
Dark gray
White
Fat
Light gray/w hite
Light gray
Cortical bone
Bonemarrow
Light gray
Light gray
Solid viscera (liver, spleen, kidney)
Medium gray
Variable gray
° Appearance on noncontrast enhanced T1 images. The administration
Figure 17.7T2-weighted MR image of the right kidney acquired
image whiteness) of tissues containing a high contrast concentration.
in the dorsal plane.
154  Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.8 Thirteen-year-old male castrated Bassett Hound with pelvic limb paralysis and lumbar pain. Sternal recumbency. (a) T1-
Si anns punoi aul 'as awes aui ne ahewi s panyhiam-zi (a) Aaupy aui jo xaton jesion aui ui uhew sensde aun buoisi
finding of a renal cortical cyst.
papilla and surrounding the renal vasculature and ureter.
within a mass lesion such as a neoplasia, granuloma,
Abnormal renal densities include mineralization, which or hematoma. Abnormal fluid density may be due to cyst
will be hyperaftenuating compared to adjacent renal  formation or renal pelvic dilation (hydronephrosis) or
parenchyma, and fluid accumulation, which appears 
 may result from a mass of high fluid content when intra-
 mildly hypoattenuating compared to renal parenchyma.
 parenchymal (Figure 17.10). Intravenously administered
 Abnormal mineralization may be due to dystrophic min-
contrast medium allows for more definitive identification
eralization of renal tissue, mineralization within the
of cysts and renal pelvic distortion since contrast accen-
collecting system (nephrolithiasis), or mineralization
tuates the definition between contrast-enhancing tissue
and noncontrast-enhancing fluid (Figure 17.4) (Reichle
et al. 2002).
Renal cysts
 Renal cysts may form as the result of developmental dis-
orders such as of polycystic kidney disease or may be
acquired (see Chapter 56) (Figures 17.4 and 17.8). These
cysts are most often identified in the cortex, but can be
seen in the medulla or at the corticomedullary junction.
The clinical significance of acquired cysts is unknown;
 sd  si h   
biochemical abnormalities associated with renal disease,
although they are thought to be a component of chronic
renal disease in some cases.
Figure 17.9 Adult male castrated DLH cat with acute renal failure
ahewn (din) uoaloid Asuau jewxeu aued esiop e s sl
Vascular disorders
the caudal half of the left kidney and the proximal ureter. The 
Thromboembolic insult to the kidney, or renal infarct,
kidney is enlarged and focal mineralized density is present within
is recognized in both acute and chronic stages. An acute
the proximal left ureter, which is also mildly dilated proximally.
infarct may be diffcult to identify on precontrast CT
Diagnosis: left ureterolithiasis with obstruction
images, but will appear as a discrete, wedge-shaped
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the urinary tract 155
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.10 Five-year-old female spayed DSH cat with azotemia. (a) 7 mm collimated transverse plane precontrast CT image with the
patient in sternal recumbency. There is a large volume of ascites causing abdominal distension. There is marked left-sided hydronephrosis
with only a thin layer of renal cortex remaining. An obstructing ureterolith was identified caudal to this level (not pictured). The caudal
pole of the right kidney can be seen. There is a focal mineralization evident in the right ureter. The small focal densities within the ventral
paraspinal musculature are the vertebral transverse processes and should not be mistaken for ureteral calculi or contrast medium. (b)
 2 mm postcontrast transverse CT image acquired at approximately the same level. There is mild enhancement of the right renal cortex
and no appreciable contrast enhancement of the thin left cortex. Contrast medium can be seen in the right ureter lateral to the previously
described ureterolith. Diagnosis: bilateral ureteroliths resulting in chronic obstructive hydronephrosis, degenerative disease, and reduced
renal function. Marked ascites
enhancement defect folowing contrast administration.
enhancement with an associated focal capsular contour
The shape of the kidney is often not affected by the
depression (Figure 17.6b). Multiple infarcts are often
presence of an acute infarct (Figure 17.11). Eventually,
d go s e sa s a pe p
the cortical tissue that does not reperfuse will atrophy
 mary nephropathy or secondary to systemic thromboem-
and result in a wedge-shaped area of decreased contrast
bolic disorders such as neoplasia, sepsis, or coagulopathy.
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.11 Seven-year-old female spayed Labrador Retriever with a body wallmass.(a) 5 mm collimated transverse plane precontrast
CT image at the level of the left kidney with the patient positioned in right lateral recumbency. There is subcutaneous density consistent
with edema or cellulitis. (b) Postcontrast image acquired at the same level. A wedge-shaped contrast enhancement defect is present in
the lateral cortex and medulla of the left kicdney. Note that this lesion is not recognized on the precontrast image. Diagnosis: acute renal
infarct.
156   Diagnostic testing
MR appearance of renal infarcts has not been described
Neoplasia
in the veterinary literature.
Although a presumptive diagnosis of renal neoplasia (see
Chapter 57) is often made from clinical radiographic and
Inflammatory disorders
ultrasound findings, CT and MR can be useful in deter-
mining the character and extent of renal tumors, due
Inflammatory renal disease is generally accurately char-
acterized using ultrasound, and CT and MR are not nec-
to their excellent soft tissue contrast resolution (Figure
17.6). CT and MR are most helpful in precisely delineat-
essary for diagnosis. However, pyelonephritis (see Chap-
ing primary tumor margins and local or regional exten-
ters 49 and 71) may be present in association with other
 disorders of the urinary tract and typical imaging find-
adosod no buud aadoid jo ped se uos
assessment.
ings should be recognized. The general imaging charac-
teristics of pyelonephritis include renal pelvic dilation,
blunting of diverticula, and dilation of the pelvic recesses
Degenerative disease
and ureter (Figure 17.12). These findings may also be
Imaging findings of chronic degenerative renal disease
present with obstructive disease, but in the absence of
 may include reduced size, abnormal shape, renal pelvic
an obstructive lesion, ascending pyelonephritis should
dilation, and decreased contrast enhancement due to
be suspected when there is a diffuse dilation of the col-
reduced renal blood flow (Figure 17.13).
lecting system. Additional abnormalities, such as bladder
wall thickening suggestive of cystitis or diffuse thickening
of the ureteral wall may increase the index of suspicion
Ureters
for pyelonephritis.
General considerations
CT can be used to document a wide range of ureteral dis-
orders,including obstruction and developmental malfor-
mations such as ureteral ectopia and ureteral duplication
(Esterline et al. 2005). Following intravenous contrast
administration, one can readily identify the renal pelvis,
 the ureters, and the ureterovesicular junction (Rozear and
Tidwell 2003). The normal ureter should be less than 1-2
 mm in diameter and have a relatively uniform appear-
ance throughout its length. Normal peristaltic activity,
however, may result in a segmental contrast voids in the
normal ureter. Normal dynamic segmental contractions
can be differentiated from strictures or other causes
of obstruction by reacquiring images of the region of
concern.
Ureteral obstruction
Ureteral obstruction (see Chapters 58 and 70) can
be due to intraluminal, mural, or extramural causes.
 Ureterolithiasis is most common and is often seen in cats.
Figure 17.12 Three-year-old spayed female Bernese Mountain
Ureteroliths can be seen on precontrast CT images as a
ww z 'sisAjeuun uo pasoubp uopaju! pe Aeuun e yim bog
focal mineral density in the region of the normally fluid-
collimated transverse plane postcontrast image at the level of
 dense ureter. Thinly collimated images are recommended
the ureters with the patient positioned in sternal recumbency
to best characterize ureteroliths and nephroliths as to
There is moderate left ureteral dilation consistent with ureteral
number and specific location (Figure 17.14). Although
obstruction. There is a congenital vascular anomaly in which the
ureteroliths can often be identified with conventional
caudal vena cava is positioned to the left of the aorta with the left
radiographs and ultrasound, CT is sometimes more
ureter coursing dorsal to the vena cava, resulting in extramural
compression and partial ureteral obstruction. Additional images
sensitive for lesion detection and is helpful for surgical
acquired caudal to this figure reveals contrast material in the
planning.
dlistal aspect of the left ureter, indicating persisting patency and
 In instances of acute obstruction and in most cases
urine flow within the ureter
 of chronic obstruction, the renal pelvis is dilated and
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the urinary tract 157
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.13 Seven-year-old female spayed DSH cat with chronic urinary obstruction due to a pelvic mass. (a) 7 mm collimated
transverse plane precontrast CT image with the patient in dorsal recumbency. The right kidney is large with faint mineralization in the
margin of the renal papilla. The left kidney is small (arrow). (b) Postcontrast 3 mm collimated transverse image at approximately the
left renal structures. These findings are consistent with a nonfunctional atrophic or end-stage left kidney with compensatory right renal
hypertrophy
the ureter is dilated cranial to the site of obstruction.
 apposes the bladder for more than 9 mm, a diagnosis of
 In patients with obstructive urolithiasis, the kidneys,
 ureteral intramural tunneling can be made (Samii 2005).
urinary bladder, and urethra are also fully evaluated
In normal dogs, the degree of bladder distention does
for the presence of additional uroliths. Mural causes 
not affect the location of the ureterovesicular junction
for ureteral obstruction are rare, but smooth muscle
and should therefore not affect interpretation of the loca-
or epithelial neoplasia and polyps of the ureters have
tion of ureteral termination (Rozear and Tidwell 2003).
been reported (Reichle et al. 2003). Extramural causes
Reformatting transverse images into a dorsal or sagittal
of ureteral obstruction include sarcomas, hemorrhage,
plane and using MlP projections can often best define the
 or lipomas of the retroperitoneal or intrapelvic spaces,
 path of the ureters (Figure 17.5d). Often, multiple image
which result in ureteral obstruction by mass effect or
acquisitions are necessary to fully evaluate the ureters
invasion.
when ureteral peristalsis results in segmentation of the
intraluminal ureteral contrast column.
Developmental anomalies
Contrast CT urography is used for diagnosis of ectopic
Lower urinary tract
ureters (see Chapter 58) and often proves to be superior
General considerations
for definitive diagnosis as compared to other approaches
such as excretory urography/double contrast cystogra-
 CT and MR are best utilized in lower urinary tract imag-
phy (Sami et al. 2004) and ultrasound. If thinly colli-
ing for preoperative planning to delineate masses or
 mated images are acquired, the route of the ectopic ureter 
diffuse disease involving the urethra and urinary blad-
can often be more clearly defined, particularly when the
der. The bones surrounding the pelvic canal can impede
distal aspect of the abnormal ureter courses intramu-
radiographic and sonographic imaging of the caudal uri-
rally before exiting. A 2 mm dilation of the renal pelvis
nary bladder, urethra, and prostate. CT can be used in
and 3 mm or greater dilation of the ureter is consis-
these cases to evaluate not only the relationships between
tent with hydronephrosis and hydroureter, respectively,
the soft tissues of the pelvic canal, but also the extent
and though nonspecific is routinely seen in patients with
and margins of disease and changes in the sublumbar
ureteral ectopia. A diagnosis of ectopia can be made if
lymph nodes, distal ureters, and lower urinary tract. Sub-
the ureter can be followed caudal to the ureterovesicu-
tle skeletal changes such as periosteal reaction or nondis-
lar junction. Often, the termination of the ureter can be
placed fractures may also be identified more clearly on
definitively identifed caudal to the junction. If the ureter
CT than on radiographic examination.
158 Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 17.14 Seven-year-old spayed female cat with azotemia, a smallright kidney, and enlarged left kidney. Dorsal recumbency. (a)
The left renal pelvis is moderately dilated and contains a focal mineralized density (nephrolith). The margins of the kidney are irregular,
consistent with subcapsular fluid accumulation. (b) 5 mm transverse plane image acquired 10 minutes following intravenous contrast
medium administration. There is marked enhancement of the renal corex, indicating a persistence of the nephrogram phase of the
study. There is also enhancement of the tail of the spleen seen on this image. (c) 2 mm transverse plane image acquired 20 minutes
following intravenous contrast medium administration. There is pooling of contrast medium within the dependent part of the dilated left
resulting in hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and subcapsular fluid accumulation.
The urinary bladder wall is variable in thickness
 contrast medium will distribute into the dependent part
depending on bladder distension but mural thickness 
of the urinary bladder after exiting the ureters due to
should generally be less than 1 mm and uniform in
the density of the iodinated (CT) or gadolinium (MR)
width. Regardless of the degree of bladder distension,
 agent, resulting in a stratified appearance to the bladder.
if the trigone is caudal to the pubis, a diagnosis of pelvic
 Although gadolinium agents generally produce increased
bladder should be considered (Sami et al. 2004). Nor-
signal intensity on T1-weighted images, the highly con-
mal urine density is similar to that of water having a CT
 centrated agent within the urinary bladder produces a
value approaching 0. On MR images, normal urine will
paradoxical decrease in signal intensity on postcontrast
appear dark gray or black on T1-weighted images and
 T1-weighted images. An inverted contrast medium-urine
white on T2-weighted images. Following renal filtration,
 layering in the bladder will also occasionally be seen on
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the urinary tract 159
Figure 17.15 Seven-year-old spayed female cat with renal fail-
Figure 17.16 Ten-year-old spayed female mixed breed dog with
ure. Two milimeter collimated transverse plane precontrast CT
stranguria. Seven millimeter collimated transverse plane postcon-
trast CT image of the pelvic canal with the patient positioned in
image of the urinary bladder with the patient in sternal recum-
dorsal recumbency. There is a partially mineralized, peripherally
bency. A solitary mineralized body is identified in the dependent 
urinary bladder lumen. Diagnosis: cystolithiasis.
and heterogeneously contrast enhancing soft tissue mass filling
the pelvic canal. There is bone destruction of the pubis with asso-
dated disorganized bone production. A urinary catheter is in place
CT and is thought to be due to increased urine-specific
and can be seen in cross section in the urethra as a round lucency
 gravity in the dependent urinary bladder (Sami 2005).
sand aui jo lon auog Aewud :sisoubep adunsaid (mone)
Urolithiasis
masses that would otherwise be difficult to characterize
Cystolithiasis (see Chapter 69) may be a clinically sig-
with radiography or ultrasound (Figure 17.18). The CT
nificant or incidental finding on abdominal CT exami-
 or MR examination should extend cranially to the level
nation. Mineralized bodies may be solitary or numerous
 of the origin of the iliac vessels in order to assess regional
and should be dependently located (Figure 17.15). The
lymph nodes.
urinary tract should be evaluated in its entirety to rule
out other sites of urolithiasis and possible obstruction.
Neoplasia and other mass lesions
Tumors of the urinary bladder and urethra (see Chapter
79) have been well described using ultrasound and con-
trast radiography, and these principles can be applied to
CT and MR imaging of the lower urinary tract. Tumors
arising from the bones of the pelvis or the soft tis-
sues of the pelvic canal can result in secondary urethral
obstruction or urinary bladder compression. Nonneo-
plastic mass lesions such as paraprostatic cysts or pro-
liferative callus from pelvic fractures can result in simi-
lar clinical signs. CT or MR imaging provides excellent
imaging of this area of the body and allows for thorough
preoperative planning. In these cases, passage of a uri-
Figure 17.17 Ten-year-old spayed female mixed breed dog with
nary catheter is helpful to clearly define the position and
diarhea and pollakiuria. Three millimeter transverse plane post-
path of the urethra before scanning (Figure 17.16).
 contrast CT image acquired at the level of the vestibule with the
The most common site for transitional cell carcinomas
patient in dorsal recumbency. A radiodense urinary catheter is
is the urinary bladder, but may also arise in the ureters
in place and is used to document urethral position. There is a
(Hanika and Rebar 1980), the prostate (Nyland et al.
heterogeneously contrast-enhancing soft tissue mass surrounding
2002), and the urethra (Figure 17.17) (Moroff et al. 1991 ).
the urethra. Histopathologic diagnosis: urethral transitional cell
CT and MR can be used to effectively image urethral
carcinoma.
160
 Diagnostic testing
References
Barthez, P.Y., D. Begon, et al. (1998). Effect of contrast medium dose
and image acquisition timing on ureteral opacification in the normal
dog as assessed by computed tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:
524-527.
Bouma, J.L., L.R. Aronson, et al. (2003). Use of computed tomography
renal angiography for screening feline renal transplant donors. Vet
Radiol Ultrasournd 44: 636-641.
Bushberg, I.T., J.A. Seibert, et al. (2001). The Essential Physics ofMedical
Imaging. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Esterline, M.L., D.S. Biller, et al. (2005). Ureteral duplication in a dog.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46: 485-489.
Hanika, C. and A.H. Rebar ( 1980). Ureteral transitional cell carcinoma
in the dog. Vet Pathol 17: 643-646.
Moe, L. and B. Lium ( 1997). Computed tomography of hereditary
 multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas in German shepherd dogs.
Figure 17.18 Four-year-old castrated male Doberman Pinscher
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38: 335-343.
Moroff, S.D., B.A. Brown, et al. ( 1991). Infiltrative urethral disease in
with dyschezia and stranguria. Sagittal plane maximal intensity
female dogs: 41 cases ( 1980- 1987). JAtm Vet Med Assoc 199: 247-251.
Muleya, J.S., Y. Taura, et al. (1997). Appearance of canine abdominal
plane images of the pelvic canal. A urinary catheter is in place
tumors with magnetic resonance imaging using a low field perma-
that defines the path of the urethra. A small amount of contrast
nent magnet. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38: 444-447.
medium is present in the dependent urinary bladder. The ureters
Newell, S.M., J.P. Graham, et al. (2000). Quantitative magnetic res-
are dilated and superimposed and can be seen craniodorsal to
onance imaging of the normal feline cranial abdomen. Vet Radiol
the urinary bladder. A peripherally contrast enhancing mass is
Utrasound 41: 27-34.
present surrounding the membranous and proximal penile ure-
Nyland, T.G., S.T. Wallack, et al. (2002). Needle-tract implantation
following us-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of transitional
thra. CT diagnosis: hematoma or neoplasia of the corpus caver-
nosum. Histopathologic diagnosis: lipoma with hemorrhage and
cell carcinoma of the bladder, urethra, and prostate. Vet Radiol
fibrovascular tissue.
Ultrasound 43: 50-53.
O'Dell-Anderson, K.J., R. Twardock, et al. (2006). Determination of
glomerular filtration rate in dogs using contrast-enhanced com-
puted tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47: 127-135.
Reichle, L.K., S.P. DiBartola, et al. (2002). Renal ultrasonographic
Conclusion
 and computed tomographic appearance, volume, and function of
cats with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Vet Radiol
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imag-
Ultrasound 43: 368-373.
ing offer certain advantages to contrast radiography
Reichle, J.K., R.A. Peterson II, et al. (2003). Ureteral fibroepithelial
 and ultrasound of the urinary tract. These advantages
polyps in four dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44: 433-437
Rozear, L. and A.S. Tidwell (2003). Evaluation of the ureter and
included excellent soft tissue contrast resolution and the
ureterovesicular junction using helical computed tomographic
ability to recognize and characterize small structures
such as the ureters and urethra. Tomographic imaging
155- 164.
provides an excellent visual representation of complex
 Sami, V.F. (2005). Inverted contrast medium-urine layering in the
-dod  pnns m end si e 
canine urinary bladder on computed tomography. Vet Radiol Ultra-
sound 46: 502-505.
tive planning and postoperative case management. These
Samii, V.F., M.A. McLoughlin, et al. (2004). Digital fluoroscopic excre-
sophisticated imaging modalities complement and sup-
plement imaging findings of radiography (see Chapter
puted tomography, and cystoscopy in 24 dogs with suspected
15), ultrasonography (see Chapter 16), and scintigraphy
ureteral ectopia. I Vet Itern Med 18: 271-281.
(see Chapter 18), often leading to more accurate diagno-
Yamada, K., K. Miyahara, et al. (2005). Optimizing technical conditions
for magnetic resonance imaging of the rat brain and abdomen in a
sis and staging of urinary tract disorders.
low magnetic field. Vet Radiol Ultrasourd 36: 523-527.
Yamazoe, K., F. Ohashi, et al. ( 1994). Computed tomography on renal
masses in dogs and cats. I Vet Med Sci 56: 813-816.
18
Renal scintigraphy
Gregory B. Daniel
Renal anatomy and physiology
controlled by vasoconstriction of the afferent or effer-
ent arteriole. In times of decreased blood pressure or
 Renal scintigraphy is used to evaluate renal function and
decreased RBF, the efferent arteriole will constrict, thus
renal morphology. To understand the principles of renal
increasing the pressure within the glomerulus, resulting
scintigraphy, a brief review of normal anatomy and phys-
 in an increase in GFR (Mazze 1986).
iology is in order. The kidneys are paired organs located
The kidney can be imaged by a variety of modalities.
in the retroperitoneal space that function to rid the body
-nieaa oi pasn are (sI iaideu sas) sqdenoipeu Aaaing
of waste material and to control the volume and compo-
ate renal size, shape, margination, and opacity (Feeney
sition of body fluid (Evans and Christensen 1993). The
and Johnson 2007). Administration of intravenous con-
kidneys perform these functions by fltering the plasma
trast can be used to evaluate space-occupying lesion in
and removing substances from the filtrate. The kidney
the renal cortex and subsequent contrast accumulation
can be divided into the outer cortical regional and the
within renal collecting system, allowing the visualiza-
inner medulla.
tion of the renal recess, renal pelvis, and proximal ureter.
The functional unit of the kidney is the nephron, which
 Changes in the pattern of renal-cortical opacification
is composed of a glomerular capsule that leads into the
can be used as qualitative assessment of renal function.
 proximal tubule (Evans and Christensen 1993; Thrall and
(Feeney and Johnson 2007) Ultrasound (see Chapter 16)
Ziessman 1995; Danielet al. 1999; Guyton and Hall2006).
provides morphologic information, such as renal size,
The glomerular capsule is invaginated by a spherical rete
shape, and internal architecture, even in patients with
of blood capilaries, the glomerulus. There are a mil-
poor renal function (Nyland et al. 2002). Doppler ultra-
lion or more of these functional units in a normal kid-
sound permits assessment of additional indices related to
ney (Guyton and Hall 2006). The kidney receives about
blood flow.
25% of the cardiac output ( Thrall and Ziessman 1995).
 Renal scintigraphy is a nuclear medicine procedure
The average renal plasma flow is 15 mL/min/kg of body
that is performed after intravenous injection of a radio-
weight. About 20% of this is filtered through the glomeru-
pharmaceutical. The radiopharmaceutical is a chemical
lus, but the percentage changes as a result of autoregu-
compound, that has certain biologic properties, labeled
latory mechanisms (Thrall and Ziessman 1995; Guyton
with a radionuclide ( Thrall and Ziessman 1995). By using
and Hall 2006). The remaining plasma that is not fltered
different radiopharmaceuticals, which are selectively fil-
enters the peritubular fluid and is actively secreted by the
tered or undergo tubular secretion, quantification of GFR
tubular epithelial cells into the renal tubules (Guyton and
and effective renal plasma flow (ERPF) is possible ( Thrall
Hall 2006). Autoregulatory mechanisms can maintain
and Ziessman 1995). Other radiopharmaceuticals local-
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in the face of decreased
ize in renal tubules and provide morphologic informa-
renal blood flow (RBF) or a decrease in systemic blood
tion about the kidney.
 pressure. Blood pressure within the glomerulus deter-
The radionuclide is the portion of the radiophar-
mines GFR, and the pressure within the glomerulus is
maceutical that emits a gamma ray The gamma ray is
detected by either a gamma camera, making a scinti-
graphic image, or a well detector that would quantify
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
the amount of the radionuclide in a sample of blood. The
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
161
162
 Diagnostic testing
equipment needed for detection of gamma rays is limited
 e ss   d  e  
to a selected referral centers, large equine practices, and
radiochemical impurities using thin-layer chromatogra-
various veterinary teaching hospitals. In addition, state
phy (Thrall and Ziessman 1995; Daniel 2006).
99mTc-DTPA is a vascular agent that quickly equili-
and federal offices regulate the handling of the radionu-
clide and release of the patient (Berry and Daniel 2006b ).
brates with the extracellular fluid space. 99mTc-DTPA is
In most cases, an animal injected with a radionuclide is
a small-molecular weight (492 Da)(Nilsson et al. 1997)
held overnight in a specially designated area of the hos-
compound that is permeable to the glomerular mem-
 n   s  s s 
brane. Following glomerular filtration, there is no tubular
procedure. Because of these limitations, renal scintigra-
 absorption or secretion. Uptake of 9m Tc-DTPA within
phy is not as commonly performed as radiography and
 the kidney or clearance from the plasma is directly pro-
ultrasound.
portional to GFR.
Nuclear scintigraphy is used primarily to evaluate renal
 The suitability of 99m Tc-DTPA to measure GFR varies
function (Danielet al. 1999; Twardock and Bahr 2006). A
 among animal species. If a portion of the injected dose
variety of functional indices such as GFR or ERPF mean 
 of 99mTc-DTPA becomes bound to plasma proteins, then
that renal transit time and renal clearance rates can be
 it will not be available for glomerular filtration and will
 derived from nuclear medicine procedures. This chapter
falsely decrease the measured GFR. In dogs, there is a min-
focuses on methods to measure GFR and to evaluate for
imal amount (6-7%) of protein binding of 9mTc-DTPA,
postrenal obstruction.
which does not significantly influence the measured GFR
(Krawiec et al. 1986). Protein binding can be a problem in
other species. For example, in green iguanas, nearly 50%
Measuring glomerular filtration
 of the 99m Tc-DTPA is protein bound (Greer et al. 2005).
GFR is considered the best single parameter for assess-
 In corn snakes, approximately 30% of the 99mTc-DTPA
ing renal function as it is directly proportional to the
is protein bound (Sykes et al. 2006). In these species, the
number of functional nephrons. Measurement of GFR
image quality of the kidney is poor and GFR cannot be
is based on the clearance of an indicator that does not
quantified using
g 99m Tc-DTPA.
bind to plasma proteins, does not enter red blood cells,
 Approximately 20% of the 9mTc-DTPA is normally
and is cleared from the plasma by glomerular filtra-
removed from the plasma by the kidney on each circula-
tion with no extrarenal uptake and no tubular reabsorp-
tory pass, resulting in a rapid blood clearance. In human 
tion or secretion (Peter 2004). GFR can be measured
by a variety of markers including inulin, 5'Cr-EDTA,
with 95% ofthe 9mTc-DTPA within the urine by 24hours
1251-iothalamate, and radiographic contact agents, such
(Kim et al. 1996). These values are not known in dogs
as iothalamate (Conray?) or iohexol (Omnipaque?)
 and cats, but normal clearance rates of 3-4 mL/min/kg
(Peter 2004). The radiopharmaceutical used for measur-
should produce a similar biologic clearance.
ing GFR is 9m Tc-DiethyleneTriaminePentaacetic Acid
 Clearance of 99mTc-DTPA is measured using a gamma
(99mTc-DTPA), also know 9m Tc-pentetate (Thrall and
 camera. The gamma camera is a large radiation detec-
Ziessman 1995). Today, most radiopharmacuticals are
tor which creates two-dimensional (conventional study)
 purchased from a nuclear pharmacy. The nuclear phar-
or three-dimensional (spect) images showing distribu-
macy prepares the radiopharmaceutical by injecting
tion of the radionuclide within the body (Berry and
pertechnetate (Na99mTcO4) into commercially prepared
Daniel 2006a). If properly calibrated, the gamma cam-
vials containing lyophilized chemicals in a nitrogen atmo-
 era can quantify the amount of the radionuclide in areas
sphere. Most of these commercially available kits use
of the body by drawing regions of interest (ROI) and
 stannous chloride to reduce the 99m Tc to a valance state
determining activity with these ROIs. By applying these
that will bind to the DTPA molecule. While preparing
ROI to a series of images taken sequentially over time, a
the kit, care must be taken not to introduce room air
time-activity plot can be generated.
or moisture into the reaction vial before the addition
of pertechnetate (Kowalsky 2006). Oxidation of the kit
Imaging studies
results in the formation of radiochemical impurities that
will alter distribution of radiopharmaceutical within the
Renal scintigraphy is a quick, noninvasive method to
body. Free pertechnetate localizes in the thyroid gland,
evaluate GFR. Another important advantage of renal
salivary gland, and gastric mucosa, and there would be
scintigraphy is that the individual kidney function can
prolonged blood pool activity and slower clearance by
be determined from the uptake of 9m Tc-DTPA by each
the kidney. Radiocolloid impurities concentrate within
kidney. The relative blood flow to the kidneys can be
the liver and spleen. If the radiopharmaceutical is pre-
determined by the first-pass analysis of the renogram
Renal scintigraphy  163
curve. Finally, kidney morphology can be determined
 dimensional object. When an ROI is placed over an organ 
along with patency of the renal collecting system and
in the image field, the radioactivity recorded includes the
ureters.
radioactivity within the organ plus the entire radioactiv-
ity above and below the organ. Background radioactivity
Dynamic renal scintigraphy with 99m Te-DTPA
will produce significant errors in quantification, as it can
account for as much as 50% of the total counts recorded
The only patient preparation for dynamic renal scintigra-
in an ROl. Some basic terms regarding background cor-
phy is placement of an intravenous catheter. The animal
rection are as follows. Gross counts are the total numbers
must remain motionless in lateral or dorsal recumbency
of counts that have not been corrected for background
for a minimum of 3 minutes. If needed, sedation can be
within an ROI. Net counts are the total numbers of counts
used to prevent patient movement during acquisition.
that have been corrected for background radioactivity
There is no significant effect of commonly used sedative
within an ROl. A background ROI is drawn around the
protocols on measured GFR values (Newell et al. 1997;
kidney RO1. The background region is usually 1 or 2 pix-
Winter et al. 2007). Dynamic renal scintigraphy can be
els away from the kidney RO1. The background ROI does
completed within 15-20 minutes including setup time,
not have to be a ring encircling the kidney RO1. Other
with results available in an additional 15 minutes.
methods include drawing a semicircular or rectangular
Depending on the method of analysis, it may be neces-
ROI on cranial and caudal to the kidney RO1. The mean
sary to quantify the amount of radioactivity administered
count density of the background ROl is determined and
to the animal. This is done by placing the dose of 99m Tc-
this value is subtracted from each pixel of the target ROI
DTPA (typically, 3-4 mCi or 111-148 Mbq) at a fixed
using the following formula.
distance (26 cm) above the center of the gamma camera.
The exact distance is not critical since the sensitivity of a
Net kidney counts = Gross kidney counts
 parallel hole collimator varies little with distance ( Young
BKD count
et al. 1997). The gamma camera should be fitted with a
X no. of kidney pixel
(no. of BKD pixels /
low energy all purpose (LEAP)-parallel hole collimator.
Some of the radioactivity originating within the kid-
counts per minute (cpm). Following the image acquisi-
ney will be absorbed by the soft tissues before it reaches
tion, the residual activity within the syringe and injection
the gamma camera to be recorded. Each centimeter of
d ds s sn s  pn s e
 soft tissue absorbs approximately 15% of the gamma rays
eters (Twardock et al. 1991). Correction of radioactivity
emitted by 9mTc. In dogs, the thickness of the soft tis-
decay will be necessary if the time from the pre- to postin-
sues varies considerably between a small- and large-breed
jection images was greater than 20 minutes. Radioactive
dog. To get an accurate measurement of the amount of
decay of 99mTc will be less that 5% in 20 minutes.
radioactivity originating from the canine kidney, it is
 The animal is positioned with the gamma camera cen-
necessary to correct the kidney counts for attenuation.
 tered dorsal to the kidneys. The image acquisition is con-
Because of less or more consistent thickness of soft tissue
trolled by the imaging computer and is initiated simul-
dorsal to the kidney in the cat, attenuation correction is
taneously with injection. The duration of the acquisition
not as important. The percent attenuation caused by the
may vary, but for GFR analysis the acquisition must last
overlying tissues is determined by the following equation:
for at least 3 minutes. A variety of frame rates may be
used. The most common frame rate is 1 frame every 6
 % Attenuation = e-0.153 x kidney depth (cm)
seconds. The images are stored as a 128 x 128 x 16-
The counts collected from the kidney ROl are now
digital matrix. After the dynamic acquisition, the camera
corrected for background and soft tissue attenuation and
is positioned lateral to the abdomen by moving the cam-
could be used to quantify renal function.
era head, leaving the animal in the recumbent position. A
The estimation of GFR from dynamic renal scintig-
single static image is obtained from which kidney depth is
 measured. The syringe and injection apparatus is imaged
 s        n
most commonly employed method used in veterinary
 as described above to determine residual activity.
medicine is a technique described by Gates (Gates 1982),
and later modified by Twardock et al., for use in dogs
Image analysis
and cats (Krawiec et al. 1986; Krawiec et al. 1988; Uribe
The injected dose is equal to the difference in the pre-
et al. 1992). This technique estimates GFR from a regres-
 ssaxa i e s  sd 
sion correlation that was created from a plot of percent
 cpm. ROI are drawn around both kidneys. Planar nuclear
 dose uptake of the radiopharmaceutical in the kidney to
medicine images are two-dimensional images of a three-
 inulin clearance. The percent dose uptake of 99mTc-DTPA
164
 Diagnostic testing
Table 18.1 Slope (A) and intercept (B) values used in the
Rutland-Patlakplot
regression equation for estimation of GFR in dogs and cats
 Species
A (slope)  B (intercept)
5
Dog (attenuation and BKD corrected)  0.194
0.370
2.517x+2.661
R2=0.971
Cat (BKD corrected)
0.284
0.164
e
3
is determined by dividing the attenuation corrected net 
kidney counts by the injected dose.
1
Corrected kidney count (cpm)
% dose uptake =
0.0
0.5
Pre - post syringe count (cpm)
1.0
1.5
∫P(t)dt/P(t)
 Briely, dynamic renal scintigraphy using 9mTc-DTPA
Figure 18.1 This is Patlak-Rutland plot. The y-axis is the function
was performed in normal dogs and cats before and after
of kidney activity. K(t), divided by plasma activity. P(t). The x-axis
toxin-induced renal insufficiency. Inulin clearances (the
is a plot of integral of plasma activity P(t) divided by P(t). The
 gold standard for GFR) were performed within 72 hours
slope of this graph is equal or proportional to the clearance of the 
to the 99m Tc-DTPA scans over varying time intervals,
tracer from the blood to a tissue compartment.
such as 01 minutes, 03 minutes, 1-2 minutes, etc. Lin-
ear regression analysis was used to determine which time
reasonably straight except for the early points, which are
interval gave the best correlation of percent dose uptake
 of 99mTc-DTPA to GFR as determined by inulin clear-
influenced by extrarenal activity, and late points, which
are influenced by passage of the radiopharmaceutical into
ance. This regression formula is used to predict GFR in
the lower urinary tract (Piepsz et al. 1996). The slope of
mL/min/kg from a percent dose uptake measured from
this graph is equal or proportional to the clearance of
dynamic renal scintigraphy. As in people, the percent
 the tracer from the blood to a tissue compartment (Peter
dose uptake of 9mTc-DTPA over the 1-3-minute period
1994).
correlated very closely to the inulin clearance for the
 A GFR value is expressed in terms of clearance per
dog (r > 0.94) and cat (r > 0.81) (Krawiec et al. 1986;
plasma volume (mL/min/L).
Krawiec et al. 1988; Uribe et al. 1992). Using the regres-
 Dynamic renal scintigraphy is not an absolute measure
sion formula below, an estimation of GFR can be made
of GFR (Finco 2005); however, there is strong correlation
from a calculation of the percent dose uptake in the kid-
 of GFR measurement derived from dynamic renal scintig-
ney ( Table 18.1). The formula is species-specific.
raphy to inulin clearances (Krawiec et al 1986; Guyton
and Hall 2006; Kowalsky 2006; Sykes et al 2006). Dynamic
GFR
A (% dose uptake in the kidneys) x B
renal scintigraphy is less accurate than plasma clearance
studies in determining GFR (Barthez et al. 1998). This
Another method to predict GFR from dynamic renal
is partially because of the fact that GFR measured from
scintigraphy uses compartmental analysis (Kampa et al.
dynamic renal scintigraphy is based on a relatively short
2007).
 The technique assumes a two-compartment
 model with unidirectional transfer of the 99m Tc-DTPA
sampling ofdata (1-3 minutes postinjection for the Gates
method, and 1-4 minutes for the Rutland-Patlak plot
from one compartment (plasma) to the other (kid-
method) (Krawiec et al. 1986; Uribe et al. 1992; Kampa
ney). The rate constant from the plasma to the kidney
et al. 2007). Autoregulatory mechanisms alter the GFR
is the clearance rate. This clearance rate can be solved
to accommodate changes in RBF and pressure (Guyton
using a graphical analysis technique. The graphic is a
and Hall 2006). Imaging GFR values may vary consid-
 Patlak-Rutland plot (Figure 18.1), which has as its y-
erably in an animal (Kampa et al. 2003). This is espe-
axis as the function of kidney activity, K(t), divided by
cially true in animals with a normal or near-normal renal
 reserve capacity. GFR is also influenced by nonrenal fac-
 tors, such as stress, hydration status, and dietary protein
and P(t) represents plasma counts at time (t) (Peter 1994;
 or sodium content (Greco et al. 1994; Finco and Cooper
Piepsz et al. 1996). The plasma activity is derived for an
2000; Singer 2003). Studies that measure GFR over a
ROI drawn over the leff ventricle (Kampa et al. 2006).
 longer time interval, such as 24-hour inulin clearances
The x-axis is a plot of integral of plasma activity P(t)
or 3-hour plasma clearance studies, are more likely to
divided by P(t): J P(t)dt)
/P(t)- The points plotted are
 give an accurate measurement of the animal's true GFR.
Renal scintigraphy
165
There is better accuracy in GFR measurement in animals
with renal insufficiency because these animals have no
 e o ae s  e d s
near maximum GFR.
The Gates method is based on an integral count ofrenal
activity from 1-3 minutes. This technique assumes that
the peak renal activity will occur between 3-4 minutes
following injection. If the transit time ofthe 99mTc-DTPA
molecule through the nephron is decreased, then the
0-1
1-2
2-3
S       s   
If the total renal counts from 1-3 minutes is used in the
calculation of the renal function and some of that activity
has already left the kidney before 3 minutes, the measured
GFR will be less. This was shown to be true in a study that
was performed before and after saline diuresis. In this
study, the renal mean transit time (MTT) was shortened
with diuresis and the GFR was lower (Kunze et al.
2006).
3-4
4-5
5-6
There are other factors that influence the accuracy of
GFR determination from image analysis (Kampa 2006).
(a)
 The gamma camera is a more complex instrument and
→Right kidney
factors such as field uniformly, linearity, and spatial res-
+ Left kidney
7,000
olution affect the image quantification. The patient must
*Rt BKD 1
remain motionless during the imaging procedure. Move-
6,000
*LfBKD 2
ment decreases the ability to obtain accurate quantifica-
5,000
tion of renal activity. In addition, ROl placement and
4,000
depth attenuation can lead to errors in calculation of
renal uptake (Kampa et al. 2002). Still, correlation of the
3,000
imaging GFR values to inulin clearance values are good
2,000
in animals, and the ease and speed that results can be
 obtained makes the imaging GFR technique useful.
1,000
The influence of hydration status or fluid loading can
also influence GFR quantifications from imaging stud-
2
ies ( Tabaru et al. 1993). Most imaging studies base their
Time (minutes)
measurements of GFR during the first few minutes fol-
(b)
lowing injection of the radiopharmaceutical. A change
Figure 18.2 (a) Dorsal scintigraphic images of a normal dog. The 
in arterial pressure or RBF immediately before injection
animal's position with the head to the top and the animal's right
of the radiopharmaceutical influences the clearance rate
is on the right side of the images. These are composite images
and may not represent the true steady state GFR. To get
Ceated by summing all data into 1-minute intervals. The time
is show below the images. Note the rapid increase in intensity
the best estimate of the animal's true GFR, the animal
should be well hydrated.
of kidney uptake and the rapid clearance of the soft tissues. (b)
Renogram curve created by plotting the activity within the left
and right kidney over time. Note the initial arterial peak, then the
 gradual accumulation of the radiopharmaceutical within the kid-
Interpretative principles
neys. Peak renal activity was reached around 3 minutes following
 injection followed by renal dearance.
Interpretation of dynamic renal scintigraphy involves the
analysis of serial images (Figure 18.2a), evaluation of a
renogram curve created from time-activity data obtained
This initial renal activity is seen on the renogram curve
from RO1 analysis of both the kidneys (Figure 18.2b),
d   s n s   e 
and quantitative analysis of the data. In a normal animal,
15-30 seconds following injection. The kidney uptake
the aorta and kidney will be clearly seen, following the
decreases after the initial arterial blush. The decrease in
 passage of the radiopharmaceutical through the heart
kidney activity occurs because only 20% of the 99mTc-
 and lungs.
DTPA is extracted on each circulatory pass; therefore,
166   Diagnostic testing
some of the 99mTc-DTPA passes through the glomerulus
and exits through the renal vein. In subsequent circula-
tory passes, the kidney gradually accumulates the radio-
 pharmaceutical within the nephron through glomerular
filtration. Peak renal radioactivity usually occurs between
2.5 and 3.5 minutes following injection. One study eval-
uating 8 normal dogs showed a range of 2-5.5 minutes
(Barthez et al. 1999; Barthez et al. 2000). Time to peak
renal radioactivity may be longer in poorly functioning
0-1
1-2
 kidneys or shorter if the animal is undergoing diuresis
2-3
(Kunze et al. 2006). Renal radioactivity then decreases as
rate of clearance from the kidney into the lower urinary
tract can be used to assess outflow obstruction.
Global GFR values above 3 mL/min/kg are consid-
ered normal in a dog and global GFR values above 2.5
mL/min/kg are considered normal in a cat (Daniel et al.
1999; Twardock and Bahr 2006). Animals with subclini-
34
4-5
5-6
cal renal insufficiency have global values between 1.2 and
2.5 mL/min/kg. Animals with global GFR values less than
these levels (Figure 18.3) are often azotemic
(a)
Global GFR values below 0.25 willhave such poor renal
-Right kidney
uptake that quantitative renal scintigraphy with 99mTC-
11,000 
+
Left kidney
DTPA may be difficult to perform accurately.
10,000
Rt BKD 1
9,000
Lf BKD 2
8,000
Evaluation for obstructive uropathy
7,000
6,000
The renal (MTT) of the radiopharmaceutical can be cal-
5,000
culated from the renal time-activity curve (Barthez et al.
4,000
1999). MTT can be calculated by various methods involv-
3,000
ing deconvolution of the renal time-activity curve with
2,000
the vascular time-activity curve. Deconvolution of these
1,000
curves allows creation of a renal time-activity curve that
L
2
4
5
simulates a direct arterial injection of radiopharmaceu-
Time (minutes)
tical into the renal artery. Various methods have been
(b)
described in the human and veterinary literature. The
Figure 18.3 (a) Dorsal scintigraphic images of a dog in renal
 most common method uses a matrix method for analysis.
failure. Note the activity in the kidneys is less than the animal in
MTT can be used to detect ureteral obstruction. In one
Figure 18.2. Also note the persistence of activity in the extrarenal
study, dogs were evaluated for 2-9 days after surgically
soft tissues and the lack of urinary bladder activity. (b) Renogram
induced partial ureteral obstruction (Barthez et al. 2000).
curve created by plotting the activity within the left and right kidney
There was a significant increase in renal transit times at 2
 over time. Note the initial arterial peak indicating good renal blood
and 4 days following surgery. This was accompanied by
flow; however, following the arterial blush of the kidneys, there
decrease in renal uptake in some dogs. It was concluded
 is no accumulation of the radiopharmaceutical within the kidney.
 The flat renogram curve is characteristic of an animal with poor
that MTT may be useful in evaluation of upper urinary
renal function.
tract obstruction. A definitive value for obstruction has
 not been established in dogs.
Renal scintigraphy combined with injection of a
ney. If the dynamic acquisition is terminated by 6 minutes
diuretic is considered by many to be the method of choice
following injection, the renogram curve will continue to
to assess renal function and ureteral patency (Morton
increase to the end of the study in animals with a dilated
et al. 2007). The injection of the diuretic is necessary
renal pelvis and ureter. This ureteral dilation can occur
to differentiate between a dilated nonobstructed versus
secondary to obstruction, but can also be associated with
an obstructed ureter. Without the diuretic, both of these
nonobstructive disorders such as vesicoureteral reflux,
conditions can result in a lack of clearance from the kid-
trauma, infection, or congenital anomalies.
Renal scintigraphy
167
Table 18.2 Shape and diagnostic interpretation of the clearance phase of renogram curve
 Type curve
Shape of dlearance phase of renogram curve
Diagnosis
Type 1
Spontaneous clearance of activity from the kidney prior to lasix administration
Normal
 xisel oi loud padua sey waisAs bupallon aui j! iel jeadde Aeu xisel bumollo aueieal
Type 2
 Progressive increase in renogram curve, even after lasix administration 
High grade obstruction
Type 3a
 Progressive increase in renogram curve until lasix is administered, then a rapid clearance from 
Dilated, nonobstructed
the kidney
Type 3b
Progressive increase in renogram curve until lasix is administered, then a slower than normal
 Partial obstruction
clearance from the kidney
 Diuretic renography can be performed as a part of
the effect of differing doses and plasma volumes. The
standardized curve also helps in animals with poor renal
 by the administration of 3.0 mg/kg furosemide IV at
function in which the peak renal activity will be less than
45 minutes. The length of the dynamic acquisition is
a normal functioning kidney. The renogram curves are
increased to 8 minutes. The shape of the renogram curve
normalized so that the peak renal activity has a value of
has been used to help in the diagnosis of obstructive
10,000. A linear regression is used to fit the downslope
uropathy (Table 18.2; Figure 18.4) (Morton et al. 2007).
of the renogram curve and measure the slope of the line.
The rate of renal excretion can be quantified from
An excretion Tiv/2 is derived from the slope of the fitted
the downslope of the renogram curves. It is necessary to
line. In normal dogs, the excretion Tu/2 median is 4.16
standardize the slope of the excretion phase to remove
minutes with a range 3.62-5.90 minutes (Mitchell et al.
Left kidney
Type 1
Leftkidney
Type2
10,000
10,000
000'6
9,000
8,000
8,000
SIL
7,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
6,000
4,000
5,000
3,000
Re
4,000
2,000
3,000
1,000
2,000
1,000
3
5
6
D
Time (minutes)
Time (minutes)
Rightkidney
Type3a
Rightkidney
Type3b
10,000
10,000
9,000
000'6
8,000
8,000
7,000
SIL
7,000
6,000
6,000
只
5,000
只
5,000
4,000
四
4,000
H
3,000
3,000
2,000
2,000
1,000
1,000
0
3
4
5
0
2
3
4
5
6
Z
Time(minutes)
Time (minutes)
Figure 18.4 Renogram curves from four different animals. The type 1 curve is a normal dog with no ureteral dilation or obstruction. The
type 2 curve is from a dog with ureteral calculi obstructing the left ureter. The type 3a curve is from a dog with renal pelvic calculi and
mild ureteral dilation but no obstruction. The type 3b curve is a dog with a calculi in the right ureter causing partial obstruction.
168
 Diagnostic testing
0-1
1-2
2-3
3-4
0-1
1-2
2-3
3-4
4-5
5-6
6-7
7-8
4-5
5-6
6-7
8-1
Figure 18.5 Dorsal scintigraphic images of a dog with bilateral
Figure 18.6 Dorsal scintigraphic images of a dog with bilateral
nephroliths. The animal is positioned the same as the dog in
nephroliths and right ureteral calculi. The animal is positioned the
Figures 18.2 and 18.3. The time is shown below the images. Lasix
same as the dog in Figure 18.5. The time is shown below
was injected intravenously at 4.5 minutes into the scan. Note
the images. Lasix was injected intravenously at 4.5 minutes into
the rapid decrease in renal activity after lasix injection indicating
the scan. Note the left kidney is smaller than the right. There was
a large photopenic void in the region of the right renal pelvis
 patency of the ureters.
during the initial stages of the study consistent with renal pelvic.
The radiopharmaceutical deared from the left kidney. The activity
1998; Hecht et al. 2006a). Diuretic renal scintigraphy
in the right kidney passed from the renal pelvis into the proximal
was performed in a series of 21 dogs with urolithiasis
right ureter where it was retained. This dog had an obstructed 
(Hecht et al. 2006b). In dogs with nonobstructed kidneys,
proximal right ureter.
renogram curves were type 1 or 3a (Figure 18.5).
 The excretion phase of the renogram curve was sim-
ilar to normal dogs and the excretion Tu/2 was not sig-
its distribution throughout the body and its excretion
nificantly difference. Obstructed kidneys showed a type
by the kidneys (Peter 2004). The plasma clearance curve
 of 99mTc-DTPA is described as biexponential for up to
2 curve that continued to rise after lasix administration
4 hours (Figure 18.8).
(Figure 18.6).
 This study shows diuretic renography to be a use-
The first exponential represents exchange of 9mTc-
ful tool to differentiate between obstructed and nonob-
DTPA between plasma and the extracellular fluid space.
structed urolithiasis.
 In reality, there is another compartment that represents
the extracellular fluid space but it cannot be separated
Plasma clearance studies
from the first compartment (Peter 2004). The second
GFR can also be determined by clearance of 99m Tc-DTPA
exponential is slower and represents the fractional rate
at which 99m Tc-DTPA is fltered at the glomerulus. The
from plasma (Cohen 1974). This method requires intra-
venous injection of 99m Tc-DTPA followed by collection of
plasma clearance is equal to the administered amount of
 99mTc-DTPA divided by the area under the plasma clear-
blood samples at varying time intervals following injec-
ance curve (Cohen 1974; Daniel et al. 1999). The area
tion (Heiene and Moe 1998). The in vitro counting tech-
under the plasma concentration curve can be defined by
nique is more laborious than imaging techniques (Figure
the sum of the area under these two compartments. The 
are made over a longer time and are less susceptible to
area is determined by a biexponential regression analysis
of the decreasing plasma concentration data. Using com-
normal homoeostatic regulatory changes in renal func-
 mercial software, a least-squares approximation is used to
tion (Barthez et al. 1998).
In addition, the technique can be used in all the species
determine the coefficients of the biexponential function
using the same methods and formulas (Held and Daniel
using the following formula:
1991; Matthews, Andrews et al. 1992). After a single
 intravenous injection of a radiopharmaceutical, disap-
Administered activity (dose)
GFR=
 pearance of that substance from the plasma is related to
Alaa + B/α
Renal scintigraphy
169
Figure 18.7 Step involved in a plasma clearance study. The plasma is separated by centrifugation. Aliquots of the plasma are removed
and counted in a Nal well detector.
where A and B are the y-intercept of the fast and slow
in mCi or μuCi, whereas the plasma activity is in counts
compartments, and αa and αh are the slopes of the clear-
per unit time. A standard is prepared to convert the
ance from the respective compartments.
expression of an injected dose in mCi or μCi to cpm.
 The renal clearance formulas described above require
The standard is prepared by placing a measured quantity
that the dose be expressed in the same terms as the plasma
(approximately 80 μCi) (3 MBq) of the radiopharma-
activity. The radioactivity in the injected dose is recorded
 ceutical into a 100-mL volumetric flask and expanding
the volume to exactly 100 mL. An aliquot of the standard
Plasma clearance curve
is removed and counted to determine the cpm per μCi of
 the standard, which is dependent on the effciency of the 
180,000-
well detector. The information from the standard is used
160,000
Firstco
to convert the injected dose from mCi to cpm detected
E
140,000
120,000
using the well detector.
100,000
 By using a radiopharmaceutical that is cleared exclu-
80,000
sively by glomerular fltration, such as 9mTc-DTPA, this
60,000
method can be used to determine GFR. Measurement of
40,000-
renal plasma flow is determined by clearance of a com-
20,000
pound that is nearly completely extracted from the blood
100
50
150
200
250
puric Acid (OIH) is chemically similar to paraaminohip-
Time(minutes)
puric acid (PAH), which is the gold standard for mea-
Figure 18.8 The activity within the plasma samples is plotted
surement of renal plasma (Thrall and Ziessman 1995).
and fitted with by a biexponential function. The rapid drop in
plasma activity represents redistribution in the plasma, that is,
OIH is the radiopharmaceutical of choice for evalua-
first compartment. The slower second compartment represents
tion of renal plasma flow because it has a high-first-pass
renal clearance.
extraction rate (95%). Tubular secretion accounts for
170 Diagnostic testing
80% of OlH extraction from the blood with glomeru-
lar filtration accounting for the remaining 20%. OIH
will equilibrate with the extracellular fluid space within
minutes following intravenous injection. Disappearance
 of OIH is far more rapid than 99mTc-DTPA. OIH is
commercially available in either an 1231 or 13l1 form.
tive to OIH and is now the radiopharmaceutical of
choice for measuring ERPF (Itkin et al. 1994; Meyer
et al. 1997). 99mTc-MAGs has biologic properties sim-
ilar to OIH. Elimination of 99mTc-MAGg is primarily
by tubular secretion (90%) with a small component by
glomerular fltration (10%). 9mTc-MAGs has higher
protein binding than OIH, which results in a lower
plasma clearance, 70% of OIH. Since MAG is a Tc-
Figure 18.9 Images of a normal dog obtained 3 hours following
 99 m agent, the radiopharmaceutical has better imaging
 injection of 9mTc-DMSA. The images on the top row are from left
properties than OIH.
to right (right lateral, dorsal, and left lateral images). The images
on the bottom row are from left to right (left dorsal oblique and
right dorsal oblique). Note the majority of activity is located in the
Renal morphology scintigraphy with
renal cortices. There is minimal extrarenal soft tissue or urinary
99mTc-DMSA
bladder activity
renal cortical imaging agent ( Thrall and Ziessman 1995).
images (dynamic acquisition), these studies are more
o ld  u noq d si 6
o s   u s q e on e
voluted tubules and renal cortical uptake reaches maxi-
 the kidney are acquired 2-4 hours after injection. Images 
 mum between 3 and 6 hours following radiopharmaceu-
can be repeated if there is patient movement. Normally,
tical administration (Morton et al. 2007). 9m Tc-DMSA
99mTc-DMSA uptake is uniformly distributed within the
 is largely protein bound (90%) following injection and
renal cortex (Figure 18.9) (Daniel et al. 1999).
is therefore not available for glomerular filtration. The
Typically, dorsal, lateral, and oblique views are taken
rate of extraction by the kidney tubules is slow with only
to free project as much of the renal cortex as possible.
4-5% removed from the blood with each circulatory pass.
The kidneys are clearly visualized due to the high kidney
 Delayed imaging at 2-3 hours postinjection is recom-
mended to allow adequate time for renal localization.
By 4 hours postinjection, 51.7 ± 2.5% of the radiophar-
maceutical wil be bound to the kidney in normal dogs
(Lora-Michiels et al. 2001). 99m Tc-DMSA can be used to
detect space occupying masses which displace renal tubu-
lar cells. These lesions willappear as a photopenic defects
Differential estimation of functioning tubular-renal mass
 s nd e     
of 99mTc-DMSA by the left and right kidneys (Morton
et al. 2007). It is important to note that this provides an
estimate of functioning tubular-renal mass and not renal
DTPA uptake has been seen in patients with tubulointer-
stitial renal disease. 99m Tc-DMSA has also been used to
 detect acute pyelonephritis, and is considered superior
Figure 18.10 Images of a dog with multiple metastatic lesions
to excretory urography for detection of renal scarring in
to the kidney obtained 3 hours following injection of 9mTc-DMSA.
children (Majd and Rushton 1992).
The images on the top row are from left to right (right lateral,
 99mTe-DMSA is a static imaging agent. Unlike the other
dorsal, and left lateral images. The images on the bottom row are
renal radiopharmacetical that are rapidly taken up and
from left to right (left dorsal oblique and right dorsal oblique). Note
excreted by the kidneys, 99mTc-DMSA is taken up slowly
the multiple photopenic defects in both kidneys corresponding to 
and remains in the kidney. Instead of taking a series of
the location of the metastatic lesions.
Renal scintigraphy
171
 to background ratio. Space occupying masses devoid of
Finco, D.R. and T.L. Cooper (2000). Soy protein increases glomerular
 normal tubules do not accumulate the radiopharmaceu-
filtration rate in dogs with normal or reduced renal function. / Nutr
suoil Pioo, io spion oruadonoud se readde pue len
130 (4): 745-748.
(Figure 18.10).
Gates, G.F. (1982). Glomerular filtration rate: estimation from frac-
99mTc-DMSA has been used to diagnose acute
tional renal accumulation of 99mTc-DTPA (stannous). AJR Am I
Roerntgenol 138: 565.
pyelonephritis in people (Majd and Rushton 1992).
Greco, D.S., G.E. Lees, et al. (1994). Effect of dietary sodium intake
Pyelonephritis results in multiple photopenic lesions due
on glomerular filtration rate in partially nephrectomized dogs. Am
to a combination of focal tubular cel dysfunction and
IVet Res 55 (1): 152-159.
ischemia. 99m Tc-DMSA can also be used to quantify rel-
Greer, L.L., G.B. Daniel, et al. (2005). Evaluation of the use of tech-
netium Tc 99 m diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid and technetium
ative (left versus right) functioning renal tubular mass
Tc 99 m dimercaptosuccinic acid for scintigraphic imaging of the
(Lora-Michiels et al. 2001). In a study in dogs subjected
to renal tubular damage by toxic doses of gentamicin,
Guyton, A.C. and J.E. Hall (2006). Urine formation by the kidneys: I.
 99m Tc-DMSA was able to detect disease earlier than either
Glomerular filtration, renal blood flow and their control. In: Text-
 99m Tc-DTPA or 99mTc-MAG3 (Lora-Michiels et al. 2001).
book of Medical Physiology, edited by A.C. Guyton and J.E. Hall.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, pp. 307-326.
Hecht, S., G.B. Daniel, et al. (2006a). Diuretic renal scintigraphy in
normal dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47 (6): 602-608.
References
Hecht, S., G.B. Daniel, et al. (2006b). 99mTc-DTPA diuretic renog-
raphy in dogs with urolithiasis. 14th Meeting of the Irternational
Barthez, PY., W.J. Hornof, et al. (1998). Comparison between
Veterinary Radiology Association, Vancouver BC, IVRA-ACVR.
the scintigraphic uptake and plasma clearance of Tc-99 m-
Heiene, R. and L. Moe (1998). Pharmacokinetic aspects of measure-
glomerular filtration rate in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39 (5):
Med 12: 401.
470-474.
Held, J.P. and G.B. Daniel ( 1991). Use of nonimaging nuclear medicine
Barthez, P.Y., D.D. Smeak, et al. (2000). Ureteral obstruction after
techniques to assess the effect of flunixin meglumine on effective
ureteroneocystostomy in dogs assessed by technetium Tc 99 m
renal plasma flow and effective renal blood flow in healthy horses.
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) scintigraphy. Vet Surg
Am I Vet Res 52 (10): 1619-1621.
29 (6): 499-506.
Itkin, R.J., D.R. Krawiec, et al. ( 1994). Evaluation of the single-injection
Barthez, P.Y, D.D. Smeak, et al. (1999). Effect of partial ureteral
obstruction on results of renal scintigraphy in dogs. Arm I Vet Res
for determination of effective renal plasma-flow in dogs with normal
60(11): 1383-1389.
or abnormal renal-function. Arm I Vet Res 55 (12): 1652-1659.
Barthez, P.Y., E.R. Wisner, et al. (1999). Renal transit time of Tc-99
Kampa, N. (2006). Renal scintigraphy in dogs. PhD Thesis, Depart-
m-diethylenetriaminepentacetic acid (DTPA) in normal dogs. Vet
ment of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health, Uppsala Swedish
Radiol Ultrasound 40 (6): 649-656.
University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
Berry, C.R. and G.B. Daniel (2006a). Radiation safety, personnel radi-
Kampa, N., 1. Bostrom, et al. (2003). Day-to-dayvariability in glomeru-
ation monitoring and licensing issues. In: Textbook of Veterinary
lar filtration rate in normal dogs by scintigraphic technique. I Vet
Nuclear Medicine, edited by G.B. Daniel and C.R. Berry. Harrisburg
Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 50 (1): 37-41.
PA: American College of Veterinary Radiology, pp. 121-128.
Kampa, N., P. Lord, et al. (2007). Effects of measurement of plasma
Berry, C.R. and G.B. Daniel (2006b). Radiation Detectors. In: Texr-
activity input on normalization of glomerular fltration rate to
 book of Veterinary Nuclear Medicine, edited by G.B. Daniel and C.R.
plasma volume in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48 (6): 585-593.
Berry. Harrisburg, PA: American Collge of Veterinary Radiology,
Kampa, N., U. Wennstrom, et al. (2002). Effect of region of inter-
Pp. 25-38.
est selection and uptake measurement on glomerular filtration rate
Cohen, M.L. ( 1974). Radionuclide Clearance Techniques. Sermin Nucl
measured by Tc-99 m-DTPA scintigraphy in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultra-
Med 4 (1): 23.
sound 43 (4): 383-391.
Daniel, G.B. (2006). Quality control and image artifacts. In: Text-
Kim, E.E., B.J. Barron, et al. ( 1996). Genitourinary nuclear medicine.
book of Veterinary Nuclear Medicine, edited by G.B. Daniel and C.R.
In: Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine, edited by M.P. Sandlers, R.E.
Berry. Harrisburg, PA: American College of Veterinary Medicine,
Coleman, FJ. Wacker, et al. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins,
pp. 53-78.
Pp. 1191-1208.
Daniel, G.B., S.K. Mitchell, et al. (1999). Renal nuclear medicine: a
Kowalsky, R.J. (2006). Radioactive decay, radioactivity, Tc-99 m gen-
review. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40 (6): 572-587.
erator and radiopharmaceuticals. In: Textbook of Veterinary Nuclear
 Evans, H.E. and G.C. Christensen ( 1993). The urogenital system. In:
Medicine, G.B. Daniel and C.R. Berry. Harrisburg, PA: American
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, edited by H.E. Evans and G.C. Chris-
College of Veterinary Radiology, pp. 1-24.
tensen. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 494-558.
Krawiec, D.R., R.R. Badertscher, II, et al. ( 1986). Evaluation of99mTc-
Feeney, D.A. and G.A. Johnson (2007). The kidney and ureters. In:
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid nuclear imaging for quantitative
Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology, edited by D.E. Thrall.
determination of the glomerular fltration rate of dogs. Am I Vet Res
St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 693-707.
47 (10): 2175-2179.
Finco, D.R. (2005). Measurement of glomerular filtration rate via uri-
Krawiec, D.R., A.R. Twardock, et al. ( 1988). Use of 99mTc diethylen-
nary clearance of inulin and plasma clearance of technetium Tc 99
etriaminepentacetic acid for accessment of renal function in dogs
m pentetate and exogenous creatinine in dogs. Am I Vet Res 66 (6):
with suspected renal disease. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 192 (8): 1077-
1046-1055.
1080.
172
 Diagnostic testing
Kunze, C., A. Bahr, et al. (2006). Evaluation of Tc-99 m-
Peter, A.M. (2004). The kinetic basis of glomerular filtration rate mea-
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid renal scintigram curves in nor-
surement and new concepts of indexation to body size. Eur I Nucl
mal dogs after induction of diuresis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47 (1):
Med 31: 137.
103-107.
Piepsz, A., M. Kinthaert, et al. (1996). The robustness of the
Lora-Michiels, M., K. Anzola, et al. (200l). Quantitative and qualitative
Patlak-Rutland slope for the determination of split renal function.
scintigraphic measurerment of renal function in dogs exposed to
Nucl Med Commun 17: 817.
toxic doses gentamicin. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42 (6): 53-561.
Singer, M.A. (2003). Dietary protein-induced changes in excretory
Majd, M. and H.G. Rushton (1992). Renal cortical scintigraphy in the
function: a general animal design feature. Comp Biochem Physiol B
diagnosis of acute pyelonephtitis. Semin Nucl Med 22 (2): 98.
Biochem Mol Biol 136B (4): 785-801.
Matthews, H.K., EM. Andrews, et al. ( 1992). Comparison of standard
Sykes, LM. IV, I. Schumacher, et al. (2006). Preliminary eval-
and radionuclide methods for measurement of glomerular-fltration
rate and effective renal blood-flow in fermale horses. Arm J Vet Res 53
99m technetium dimercaptosuccinic acid, and 9mtechnetium mer-
(9): 1612-1616.
captoacetyltriglycine for renal scintigraphy in corn snakes (Elaphe
Mazze, R.1. (1986). Renal physiology and the effects of anesthesia.
Guttata guttata). Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47 (2): 222-227.
In: Anesthesia, edited by R.1. Mazze. NY: Chruchill Livingston,
Tabaru, H., D.R. Finco, et al. (1993). Influence of hydration state on 
Pp. 1223-1248.
renal functions of dogs. Am I Vet Res 54 ( 10): 1758-1764.
Meyer, I., A. Westhoff, et al. ( 1997). Qualitative and quantitative renal
Thrall, JA. and H.A. Ziessman (1995). Genitourinary System. In:
function testing in the dog by means of MAG(3)-clearance mea-
Nuclear Medicine The Reguisites, edited by J.A. Thrall and H.A.
surement. Berl Murch Tierarztl Wochenschr 110 (5): 185- 189.
Ziessman. St Louis, MO: Mosby, pp. 283-320.
Mitchell, S.K., G.B. Daniel, et al. ( 1998). Diuresis renography in nor-
Twardock, A.R. and A. Bahr (2006). Renal scintigraphy. In: Textbook
mal dogs. Anrual Scientific Conference of the American College of
of Veterinary Nuclear Medicine, edited by G.B. Daniel and C.R.
Veterinary Radiology. Chicago IL: American College of Veterinary
Berry. Harrisburg, PA: American College of Veterinary Radiology,
Radiology Veterinary Radiology e Ultrasound 39: 587.
pp. 329-351.
Morton, K.A., P.B. Clarke, et al. (2007). Genitourinary. In: Diagmostic
Twardock, A.R., D.R. Krawiec, et al. ( 1991). Kidney scintigraphy. Semin
Imaging: Nuclear Medicine, edited by K.A. Morton and P.B. Clarke.
Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 6 (2): 164-169.
 Salt Lake City, UT: Amirsys, pp. 1-77.
Uribe, D., D.R. Krawiec, et al. (1992). Quantitative renal scinti-
Newell, S.M., J.C. Ko, et al. ( 1997). Effects of three sedative protocols
graphic determination of the glomerular-filtration rate in cats
with normal and abnormal kidney-function, using tc-99 m-
58 (5): 446-450.
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid. Arm I Vet Res 53 (7): 1101-1 107.
Nilsson, K., E. Evander, et al. ( 1997). Pulmonary clearance of 99mTc-
Winter, M.D., K.G. Miles, et al. (2007). Effects of sedation protocol on
DTPA and 99mTc-Ablumin in smokers. Clin Physiol 14: 183.
glomerular filtration rate in cats as determined by quantitative renal
Nyland, T.G., J.S. Mattoon, et al. (2002). Small Animal Diagnostic
scintigraphy. Annual Scientific Meeting of the American College of
Ultrasound 2nd ed. In: Urinary Tract, edited by T.G. Nyland and J.S.
Veterinary Radiology, Chicago IL.
 Matton. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,pp. 158-195.
Young, K., G.B. Daniel, et al. ( 1997). Application of the pin-hole col-
Peter, A.M. ( 1994). Editorial-Graphical analysis of dynamic data: the 
limator in small animal nuclear scintigraphy: a review. Vet Radiol
Patlak-Rutland plot. Nucl Med Commur 15: 669.
Utrasound 38 (2): 83-93.
19
Diagnostic urologic endoscopy
Julie Byron and Dennis Chew
Introduction
relevant in cases of renal hematuria when only one kid-
 ney may be involved (Figure 19.1). Other indications
Direct visualization of the lower urinary tract can be
for uroendoscopy include urinary incontinence, persis-
important for the diagnosis and treatment of many dis-
tent hematuria, recurrent urinary tract infections, mul-
ease processes. Evaluation of the urinary bladder, ureters,
tiple types of dysuria, urinary tract obstruction, vulvar
and proximal urethra is possible via surgical exploration;
or penile discharge, and urethral or bladder masses. The
however, uroendoscopy is a minimally invasive technique
 potential for breakdown and retrieval of uroliths also
that allows assessment of the lower urinary and dis-
makes uroendoscopy useful in these cases. In females,
 tal reproductive tract. In some situations, uroendoscopy
it is easy to confirm that all stones have been removed
may be valuable for the assessment of the upper uri-
following voiding urohydropulsion (Messer et al. 2005).
nary tract as in the case of unilateral renal hematuria.
Uroendoscopy allows visual evaluation of the vaginal
vestibule, vagina, entire urethra, urinary bladder, and
Equipment
ureteral openings. In some cases, the endoscope may
be passed into the ureters for luminal evaluation as
Rigid endoscope systems require a light source, camera,
video monitor, and preferably an image capture system
formed via urinary endoscopy, including biopsy, urolith
that allows for data storage onto CD or DVD. There are
retrieval or lithotripsy, and laser surgical procedures.
several manufacturers of these systems, and they are often
Uroendoscopy can be a valuable part of the diagnostic and
purchased as part of a package with the endoscopes. Some
therapeutic management of urinary tract diseases and can
incompatibilities exist between systems, so it is best to use
yield different information than that gained from other
components from the same manufacturer or verify their
imaging modalities due to magnification of the luminal
compatibility prior to purchase.
surfaces.
The best light sources for video uroendoscopy are
xenon with automatic intensity adjustment. Halogen
light sources can be used as well and are generally less
Indications
costly, but have a lower intensity and produce lower image
quality than xenon lights, especially when using smaller
Many diseases of the urinary tract lend themselves to
diameter cystoscopes. Although many rigid and flexible
cystoscopic evaluation ( Table 19.1). While it is often dif-
endoscopes have eyepieces, a camera and video system is
ficult to pass an endoscope into the ureters, it is possible
essential for proper detailed viewing and documentation
to make some evaluation of the quality of the urine pass-
of uroendoscopic studies. Cameras are generally avail-
ing from one kidney or another by observing the pulsatile
able in one- or three-chip models. The three-chip has
urine flow from the ureter openings. This is particularly
higher image quality due to 3-color capture and process-
although one-chip models are adequate for most appli-
 cations. Ideally, the camera has a focusing system and
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
     s d 
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
173
174
 Diagnostic testing
Table 19.1 Indications for uroendoscopy of the dog and cat
Hematuria
Stranguria
Pollakiuria
 Painful urination
Dysuria
 Urinary incontinence
Attenuated urine stream
 Urinary obstruction
 Recurrent urinary tract infections 
Urolithiasis
 Urinary bladder masses
Vulvar discharge
Figure 19.2 Artist's rendition of the path of view through the
 Penile discharge
Scope following rotation of the telescope while holding the camera
in the same position. 30° viewing angle demonstrated from tip of 
telescope (Drawing by Tim Vojt).
although some have foot-pedal operation. A wide range
of image capture systems are available from state-of-the-
art high definition (HD) video to those that record only
the light-source and camera connections as well as the
instrument port (Figure 19.3). Rigid endoscope systems
 still images. Since dynamic imaging is desirable in uroen-
come in a variety of diameters and lengths. For small ani-
doscopy, a system that provides capture and recording of
 both still and video clip images is preferable.
mal endoscopy, three sizes are generally recommended:
Both rigid and flexible endoscopes may be used. Rigid
4.0 mm x 30 cm for medium to large female dogs, 2.7
mm x 18 cm for small and medium female dogs, and
cystoscopes consist of three parts, the telescope, sheath,
 and bridge. These may be separate components or inte-
1.9 mm x 18 cm for female cats and male cats with a
grated by the manufacturer. The glass fiber telescope pro-
perineal urethrostomy. Additionally, a flexible or semi-
vides an angled view of 0°, 12°, 30°, or 70° from the tip of
flexible 5 fr scope may be used to examine male cats. Male
 dogs with urethras that will accommodate an 8 fr diam-
the scope. The authors prefer 30°, which allows for visu-
alization of allareas of the bladder with less manipulation
eter catheter can be examined using a flexible 7.5 fr x 45
as well as good visualization of the working field when
cm human ureteroscope or other flexible endoscope of
using instruments (Figure 19.2). The sheath contains the
similar size.
irrigation and operating channels, and the bridge has
Figure 19.3 Two commonly used rigid telescopes and operating
Figure 19.1 Renal hematuria can be detected by observing blood
sheaths are the 4.0 mm × 30 cm telescope with a separate sheath 
from either or both ureters. This dog had idiopathic renal hematuria
and bridge (shown assembled here) and the 2.7 mm x 18 cm
coming from the right ureter/kidney.
with an integrated sheath and bridge.
Diagnostic urologic endoscopy   175
ile water-based lubricant. The scope is passed into the
vaginal vestibule, and the vulvar folds are gently grasped
around the scope to allow for fluid distension of the
chamber.
Normal appearance during cystoscopy
The mucosa of the vestibule is light pink in color and
smooth (Figures 19.5a-d). The vaginal opening, sur-
rounded by a ridge of tissue, the cingulum, is seen at
the craniodorsal aspect of the vestibule. Ventral to this is
the smaller urethral opening. There may be a thin band of
Figure 19.4 The assembled 4.0 mm × 30 cm rigid cystoscope
tissue crossing the opening dorsoventrally of the vagina,
with its operating sheath and compatible grasping and biopsy
which has been called a hymenal membrane (Figures
forceps are shown.
19.6a,b). A thicker band referred to as the mesonephric
remnant is often associated with abnormalities of devel-
opment of the urethra and ureter. Most patients with
 There is a large variety of accessories and instruments 
ectopic ureter(s) have this thick band (Cannizzo et al.
available for rigid endoscopes. At least one good quality
2003). Either of these bands potentially may be a cause
biopsy forceps which fits through the operating channel is
of breeding failure. The urethral opening is often covered
required for obtaining tissue samples. In addition, stone
by a dorsal fold of tissue in the intact female dog, is often
retrieval baskets, grasping forceps, and cautery tips are
 exaggerated in size during heat, and should not be inter-
available (Figure 19.4).
preted as a mass lesion (see Figures 19.5c,d). Lateral to the
Care of uroendoscopic equipment is similar to the care
urethral opening are fossae, which may contain crypt-like
of other endoscopes. Rigid scopes are relatively durable;
areas. These can be normal findings and caution should
however, the small size of many of the instruments makes
be exercised to avoid mistaking these for ectopic ureter
them especially fragile. Caution must be exercised to pre-
openings (Figure 19.7).
vent overflexion of the instruments or excessive force
Next, the cystoscope is passed into the vagina, though
in deploying and retracting them. The very small flex-
this may be deferred to last in those with obvious dis-
ible and semiflexible endoscopes such as the 1 mm 6-
charge. The vaginal opening is encircled by a ring of
inch Semi-Flexible Micro-Endoscope (MDS Inc., Bran-
fibrous tissue called the cingulum. Beyond the cingulum,
don, FL) are also extremely fragile and need additional
the vaginal mucosa is pink with a prominent longitudinal
 protection during cleaning and sterilization.
fold running along the dorsal wall. The scope is passed
cranially until the external uterine orifice at the caudal
aspect of the cervix is reached. This has a folded appear-
Patient preparation and procedure
ance and passage of the scope beyond this point may be
difficult and is rarely performed during routine urologic
Female dog and cat
examinations (Figures 19.8a,b and 19.9).
The scope is redirected into the urethra and slowly
  o     s
 passed cranially into the bladder. The urethra also has a
seated at the caudal end of the animal and the tail is
dorsal fold and generally has smooth light pink mucosa
secured out of the operating region. The external geni-
(Figures 19.10a-c and 19.11). The length of the urethra
 may vary between normal dogs. Once the vesicourethral
 prepared. The use of sterile technique is important to
junction is reached, the bladder is drained of urine and
minimize iatrogenic contamination of the urinary tract.
debris and redistended with saline to provide a clear view.
The endoscope is either gas or liquid sterilized and ster-
 n sood pe s  r a si a
ile gloves are worn during the procedure. Sterile 0.9%
dependent aspect of the bladder, obscuring structures in
NaCl is passed through the irrigation channel to distend
 this area. Distension of the bladder is essential to get an
the anatomy and improve visualization. The endoscopist
adequate evaluation of the ureters and bladder wall; how-
assembles the scope and its components and attaches the
ever, overdistension may lead to tearing of the urothelium
light and camera cables. The irrigation and efflux lines 
 and hemorrhage. To prevent this, the bladder should be
are attached and the scope is liberally coated with ster-
 manually palpated through the abdomen by an assistant
176Diagnostic testing
(a)
(q)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 19.5 (a) and (b) The normal dog clitoris. Note the frond-like bands of tissue in the clitoral fossa. These are normal structures in
the female dog. (c) and (d) The larger dorsal opening is the vagina with the thin band of tissue around its rim, the cingulum. The ventral
opening is the external urethral meatus. The intact bitch has a flap of tissue dorsal to the extemal urethral meatus. The neutered female
dog does not have this flap of tissue. (e) and (f) The ureters in the dog are normally placed slightly proximal to the vesicourethral junction
and appear as two C-shaped openings facing each other. Normally, pulsatile urine flow can be seen from the ureters during cystoscopy.
Diagnostic urologic endoscopy 177
(a)
(b)
Figure 19.6 (a) A wide band of tissue, a mesonephric remnant, is often visualized across the vaginal opening in dogs with ectopic
ureter. (b) A thin band across the vaginal opening is often referred to as a hymenal remnant and is common in dogs but is not associated
with any lower urinary tract disease
 and distension ceased when it is slightly firm. If bleeding
line as two crescent-shaped slits in the bladder wall.
occurs, the bladder should be drained of fluid and chilled
 These two “C"-shaped structures should be facing each
saline infused to induce vasoconstriction and reduce the
 other as mirror images (Figures 19.5e,f and 19.10a). An
impact on visibility. The infusion of cold fluid may cause 
inverted V- or Y-shaped ridge may run cranially from
the patient's body temperature to drop, and this should
the openings and join at midline. Verification of their
be closely monitored especially when multiple cycles of
 patency should be made by observing the pulsatile urine
chilled fluid are infused and drained.
flow from each ureter. The cystoscope is then passed cra-
When the bladder is fully distended, the trigone is
 nially to the apex of the bladder and the entire bladder
examined. The ureters are located dorsolateral to mid-
wall is examined. The bladder mucosa is light pink with
a fine vascular pattern (Figures 19.12a,b). Occasionally
 the bladder wall will be semitransparent and abdominal
 organs may be faintly visualized from the lumen. It is
important to examine all areas of the bladder interior in
order not to miss small lesions or calculi, which may fall
to its dependent aspect. Manual palpation and manipu-
lation of the bladder through the abdomen can assist in a
full evaluation. After completion of the examination, the
efflux channel is opened and the fluid is drained from the
bladder.
Male dog and cat
 Uroendoscopy of the male is generally performed with
 a flexible endoscope. An assistant may be required to
 exteriorize the penis from the prepuce and atraumatic
 hemostats may be necessary to maintain retraction, par-
ticularly in the male cat. The endoscope is prepared and
lubricated as with the female and is introduced directly
Figure 19.7 The normal canine vestibule may have small blind-
into the external urethral orifice. Infusion of saline facil-
end fenestrations on the lateral aspects of the urethral meatus.
itates distension of the urethra ahead of the scope. It is
These are normal structures and should not be mistaken for ectopic
important not to use the scope tip itself to dilate the ure-
ureters.
thra as this can cause injury to the delicate urothelium,
178 Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
Figure 19.8 (a) The normal appearance of the vagina and cervix (arow) in a neutered female dog. (b) The vaginal canal has a dorsal
ridge of tissue that looks similar to that in the urethra
which may be interpreted as lesions. As the scope is slowly
Abnormal appearance—uroendoscopic lesions
passed from the perineal urethra into the prostatic ure-
 Several anatomic abnormalities can be observed using
thra of the dog, tiny prostatic duct openings may be noted
in the mucosa. These indentations are generally not seen
cystoscopy. The most widely recognized is the presence
of ectopic ureters (see Chapter 58). Although several
in the male cat. Examination of the trigone, ureters, and
imaging modalities have been developed for the diagno-
bladder lumen are as with the female, but may be difficult
 sis and locating of ureteral ectopia, computed tomogra-
due to the small size of the endoscope in relation to the
phy (CT) (see Chapter 17) and uroendoscopy have been
size of the bladder lumen. Care must be taken to keep the
found to be the most reliable (Samii et al. 2004). Ectopic
tip of the scope close to the bladder wall to avoid missing
ureter openings may be seen at any point from the vesi-
lesions.
courethral junction to the vestibule (Figures 19.13a-c).
Many have large openings that can accommodate the
diameter of a cystoscope. Care must be taken to differ-
entiate the urethra from these large ureters. On the basis
thra are always dorsolateral and the path to the bladder
ventral.
Within the vestibule, small white nodules may be
noted, particularly in those patients with chronic or
recurrent urinary tract infections (Figures 19.14a,b).
These are often lymphoid in nature on histopathology
and are likely secondary to the inflammatory process.
Similar nodules are sometimes seen in the urethra and
bladder. Presumptive abscesses may be noted in the wall
 e ia ,  a  an o
pallor with a hyperemic rim around the nodule (Figure
19.15). These lesions may be biopsied and cultured to
Figure 19.9 Although not necessarily a stricture, a smaller cin-
look for bacterial infection and occasionally have been
gulum may be noted in some patients. The association of small
read as lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates.
cingulum size with incidence of lower urinary tract disease has
 Mass lesions may be found within the vestibule,
been suggested but recently refuted to be of clinical relevance in
vagina, urethra, and bladder. Malignant neoplasia and
most instances.
benign or inflammatory polyps can look similar on gross
Diagnostic urologic endoscopy  179
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 19.10 The normal appearance of the female cat urethra and ureters. (a) and (b) The feline ureters are closer together than in the
dog and are more distal in the bladder neck, opening right at the vesicourethral junction. (c) The normal feline urethra in the female has
a dorsal ridge that extends to the vesicourethral junction, especially prominent when the bladder is not fully distended.
examination, so it is important to sample all abnormal 
examination, it is important to thoroughly evaluate this
tissues (see Chapters 71 and 79). Proliferative urethritis
area. Assessment of urolith size and feasibility of uro-
(see Chapter 77) can resemble transitional cell carcinoma
hydropulsion can be made at this time (Figures 19.18-
both in clinical presentation and cystoscopic appearance
19.20a,b).
(Figure 19.16a,b) (Hostutler et al. 2004) though there are
 Additional abnormalities that may be encountered
subtle cystoscopic differences (Figure 19.17a-c).
during cystoscopic examination include foreign material
Small uroliths (see Chapter 69) are sometimes found
(Figures 19.21 and 19.22), ureteroceles, urachal divertic-
on cystoscopic examination, despite the absence of ultra-
ula (Figures 19.23a-c), and the glomerulations charac-
sonographic or radiologic evidence. Since most stones
 teristic of idiopathic cystitis in cats (see Chapter 75) (Fig-
will fall to the dependent area of the bladder during
ure 19.24). Care must be taken to avoid interpretation
180 Diagnostic testing
for biopsy, remove the telescope from the sheath, and
advance a larger biopsy instrument through the sheath
to the desired area—-in this case the biopsy is done with-
 out direct visualization. Another alternative is to pass the
scope up to the mass lesion and use suction to obtain
 d o  n do se 
smallest flexible and semiflexible endoscopes do not have
instrument ports, so biopsy may be necessary using ultra-
sound or fluoroscopic guidance in male cats and small
male dogs.
 If the ureter is dilated enough to allow passage of the
a oi pe aq  s e u sii o sos 
 instrument port and urine sterilely collected.
 Several procedures may be performed to facilitate
removal of uroliths. If the stones are small enough, they
Figure 19.11 Normal appearance of the urethra in the dog.
may be retrieved using a basket instrument or flushed
from the bladder via urohydropulsion. Endoscopic eval-
of iatrogenic lesions from the uroendoscopy procedure
e n aq sis go eesd e u s
(Figure 19.25).
 dilating the urethra. Single stones may be removed using
 grabbing instruments as well. Laser or electrohydraulic
Advanced diagnostic procedures
  d   e n  
the stones into smaller pieces, which may be safely flushed
and interventions
from the bladder (Figure 19.26) (Defarges 2006, 2008;
Additional procedures may be carried out during uroen-
Grant et al. 2007; Adams et al. 2008). A final evaluation
doscopy. These should be performed after a thorough
 should be made around the bladder lumen, particularly
assessment of the urinary tract is completed due to the
of the dependent areas, to determine if all uroliths have
risk of secondary hemorrhage obscuring the view. Biopsy
been removed before completing the procedure.
of lesions is the most common using a flexible biopsy
 The use of injectable bulking agents to treat canine
instrument passed through the instrument port of the
urinary incontinence has become more widely available
scope. Unfortunately, these samples are usually quite
in the last decade (see Chapters 38 and 76). The most
small, so several biopsies should be obtained for ade-
common agent is bovine cross-linked collagen (Conti-
quate analysis. An alternative is to identify a target area
 gen, C. R. Bard, Inc. Covington, GA), although other
(a)
(b)
Figure 19.12 (a) The undistended bladder has a rough and undulating appearance, which flattens out when filled, (b).
Diagnostic urologic endoscopy
181
(a)
(q)
(c)
Figure 19.13 Ectopic ureters can take on many appearances and open at the proximal and middle (a), and distal (b) portion of the
urethra (arrows). In (b), the patient also has a band of tissue bisecting the vaginal opening. (c) Ectopic ureters can also have fenestrations
that lead to many openings along the urethra (arrows).
(a)
(b)
Figure 19.14 (a) and (b) Small nodular follides may be seen in the vestibule or urethra of patients with chronic inflammation of the
lower urinary tract.
182
 Diagnostic testing
removal of masses has been performed (Elwick et al. 2003;
Upton et al. 2006; Cerf et al. 2007). The ablation of the
wall of ectopic ureters to a more cranial position using
a neodymium or holmium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet
(YAG) laser has also been performed in both male and
female dogs (see Chapter 39) (McCarthy 2006; Berent
et al. 2007, 2008). Use of a laser in cystoscopic proce-
dures, including lithotripsy and tissue resection, requires
 cystoscopic experience and advanced training and is cur-
rently available at limited facilities around the United
States.
Figure 19.15 "Fried egg" appearance to the lesions on the blad-
Postoperative management and complications
der mucosa of a dog with chronic urinary tract infections. These
lesions may be biopsied and cultured.
Despite strict attention to sterility, the mild to moderate
trauma to the urinary tract and the proximity of the anus
may increase the likelihood of iatrogenic contamination
materials may be available such as Teflon paste. The
during uroendoscopy. It is therefore recommended to
material is injected through a needle passed through
place patients on 5-7 days of broad-spectrum antibiotics
the instrument port of the cystoscope and embedded
 after the procedure. Alternatively, patients mayhave urine
into the submucosa of the urethra near the vesicourethral
 cultures evaluated 2-5 days after the procedure.
junction. Visualization of the procedure using cystoscopy
Both dogs and cats may experience a moderate amount
is essential for adequate placement and filling of the injec-
 of discomfort and polakiuria after uroendoscopic pro-
tion sites.
cedures. Pain medication such as a nonsteroidal anti-
Urethral stricture can occur secondary to trauma,
inflammatory drug or mild opiate may be used for 2-3
 surgery, or the lodging of uroliths in the urethra. Stric-
 days. In addition, mild hematuria may occur in patients
tures can be identified by uroendoscopy and those that are
 after cystoscopy. This is generally short-lived and self-
 too proximal for surgical correction can be treated using
limiting but owners should be advised of its presence.
balloon dilation. Follow-up evaluation of the affected
 Several complications may arise during uroendoscopy.
area is important to assess the effectiveness of treatment.
 The most common complication is failure to be able
 Some surgical procedures have been described in dogs
to safely advance the cystoscope through the lumen of
using cystoscopy. Electrocautery of bleeding vessels and
 the urethra. Lodging of the endoscope in the urethra
(a)
(b)
Figure 19.16 (a) Polypoid cystitis, and (b) proliferative urethritis can grossly appear neoplastic. It is important to biopsy and perform
histopathology on such lesions to differentiate them from carcinomas.
Diagnostic urologic endoscopy
183
(a)
(q)
(c)
Figure 19.17 (a) and (b) Transitional cell carcinoma and other neoplasia can appear as a frondular mass on the bladder or urethral wall
sa peidoau e po uoasai aadonun jo ans e pe donaap ue seounie ns u is p euan aui so bupnd sse e se o
can be avoided by proper selection of scope size for :
 age, surgical repair may be necessary to correct a bladder
the patient and appropriate lubrication. The endoscope, 
tear. Rupture of the urethra can also occur, but may not
whether flexible or rigid, should never be forced prox-
require surgical intervention. Placing a urinary catheter
imally through the urethra. This can lead to urethral
for several days may be sufficient to allow for healing of
 damage or "hair-pinning” and lodging of a flexible scope
the defect. The careful selection of an appropriately-sized
 in the urethra. Gentle pressure and, especially in the case
 scope and gentle technique will minimize these risks.
of males, proper use of fluid to dilate the urethra ahead
of the scope should be sufficient to allow for passage. If
 this is not successful, a smaller diameter scope should be
Summary
used.
Perforation of the lower urinary tract is also a risk
Urologic endoscopy is gaining widespread use in the diag-
with uroendoscopy. This is particularly a risk in patients
 nosis and treatment of lower urinary tract disorders in
with a severely diseased urethral or bladder wall. The
the dog and cat. The current trend toward minimally
endoscopist must be attentive to the degree of fluid dis-
 invasive interventions in veterinary medicine is leading
tention in the bladder and release any overfilling through
to the development of numerous additional and thera-
the efflux channel. Depending on the size of the dam-
peutic applications of this procedure.
184
Diagnostic testing
Figure 19.18 Bladder calculi are usually found against the dependent aspect of the bladder wall. A thorough examination of the 
op alesa e u puno aam sauos alas asaul apaond sidossh aun bunp aessaau s adse suapuadan
Figure 19.19 Large amounts of crystalline material may also be found on the dependent aspect of the bladder as shown in this female
5o0
Diagnostic urologic endoscopy
185
(a)
(a)
Figure 19.20 Calculi may be seen in both the bladder lumen (a) and the urethra (b)
Figure 19.22 The presence of suture material can also predispose
to recurrent lower urinary tract infections and local inflammation.
This suture was a remnant from a ureteral transposition in a dog.
Figure 19.21  Calculi may form around a nidus of foreign material
 in the bladder lumen or wall. This calculus was formed by precip-
itation of struvite on suture material that was protruding into the
bladder lumen from a previous cystotomy.
186
Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 19.23 Urachal diverticula may take on many forms. (a) This ringed diverticulum appeared to be the cause of recurrent urinary
tract infections in this female Maltese dog. Resection of the bladder apex led to resolution of clinical signs and infections. (b) This dog 
has a small but deep depression at the bladder apex. (c) This shallow depression contains two smaller depressions and may have been 
responsible for this dog's lower urinary tract signs
Figure 19.25 Care must be taken on manipulation of the cys-
toscope  and  observation  of  the  urethral and bladder lumen.
Operator-induced artifacts such as this mucosal damage (arrow)
in the trigone can look like a lesion. A linear appearance suggests
 scope artifact.
Figure 19.24 Glomerulations on the bladder wall of a cat with
feline idiopathic cystitis.
Diagnostic urologic endoscopy   187
Cannizzo, K.L., M.A. McLoughlin, et al. (2003). Evaluation of
transurethral cystoscopy and excretory urography for the diagnosis
of ectopic ureters in female dogs: 25 cases (1992-2000). I Am Vet
Med Assoc 223(4): 475-48 1.
Cerf, D.J., E.C. Lindquist, et al. (2007). Ultrasound/endoscopy-guided
diode laser ablation of nonresectable distal urinary transitional cell
carcinoma in 19 female dogs. I Vet Intern Med 21(3): 600.
 Defarges, A. and M. Dunn (2006). Use of electrohydraulic shock-wave 
lithotripsy for the fragmentation of bladder calculi: a pilot study in
dogs. I Vet Irtern Med 20(3): 737.
Defarges, A. and M. Dunn (2008). Treatment of urethral and bladder
 stones in 28 dogs with electrohydraulic lithotripsy. I Vet Intern Med
22(3): 731-732.
Elwick K.E., L.D. Melendez, et al. (2003). Neodymium: Yttrium-
 aluminum-garnet (Nd: YAG) laser ablation of an obstructive ure-
thral polyp in a dog. I Atm Anirm Hosp Assoc 39(5): 506-508.
Grant, D.C., S.R. Were, et al. (2007). Holmium:YAG laser lithotripsy
for urolithiasis in dogs. I Vet Intern Med 22(3): 534-539.
Hostutler, R.A., D.J. Chew, et al. (2004). Cystoscopic appearance of
proliferative urethritis in 2 dogs before and after treatment. I Vet
Figure 19.26 Laser lithotripsy fiber aimed at a struvite stone in 
Intern Med 18(1): 113-116.
the bladder of a dog.
 McCarthy, T.C. (2006). Peer-reviewed—transurethral cystoscopy and
diode laser incision to correct an ectopic ureter. Vet Med 101(9):
558-559.
References
Messer, J.S., D.J. Chew, et al. (2005). Cystoscopy: Techniques and
clinical applications. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 20(1): 52-64.
Adams, L.G., A.C. Berent, et al. (2008). Use of laser lithotripsy for
Sami, V.F., M.A. McLoughlin, et al. (2004). Digital fluoroscopic excre-
fragmentation of uroliths in dogs: 73 cases (2005-2006). I Arm Vet
Med Assoc 232(11): 1680- 1687.
puted tomography, and cystoscopy in 24 dogs with suspected
Berent, A.C., P. Mayhew, et al. (2007). Cystoscopic-guided laser abla-
ureteral ectopia. I Vet Intern Med 18(3): 271-281.
tion of ectopic ureters in 12 dogs. I Vet Intern Med 21{3): 600.
Upton, M.L., C.H. Tangner, et al. (2006). Evaluation of carbon dioxide
Berent, A.C., P.D. Mayhew, et al. (2008). Use of cystoscopic-guided laser
 laser ablation combined with mitoxantrone and piroxicam treat-
ablation for treatment of intramural ureteral ectopia in male dogs:
ment in dogs with transitional cell carcinoma. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
four cases (2006-2007). I Am Vet Med Assoc 232(7): 1026- 1034.
228(4): 549-552.
20
Vaginoscopy
Margaret Root Kustritz
Vaginoscopy is used to identify stage of the estrous cycle
 is placement of the viewing lens on the tip of the scope.
and to facilitate intrauterine insemination in bitches, to
Scopes with no upward deflection permit good assess-
 localize source of vulvar discharge, and as a component
ment of structures directly ahead of the scope only. A 309
of a complete diagnostic work-up for persistent disease of
upward deflection permits good assessment of structures
the genitourinary tract. Use of vaginoscopy in breeding
in a wider range around the end of the scope. The opera-
 management will not be discussed.
tor may view the procedure through the eyepiece directly
Several different pieces of equipment can be used suc-
or may attach the eyepiece to an endoscopic camera. The
cessfully to perform vaginoscopy in dogs. A vaginoscope
latter is more comfortable for the operator and permits
head similar in size and length to a large otoscope cone
capture of images for the medical record.
and similarly attached to a handle that provides a light
Ifa rigid cystoscope is the instrument ofchoice,the dog
source is commercially available. Other sources describe
 should be placed under general anesthesia with appro-
use of a vaginal speculum. The author routinely uses a
priate preparation as for any anesthetic procedure. The
large otoscope cone attached to a handle with a light
 perivulvar area should be cleaned and long hair clipped
source for superficial vaginal examinations. The primary
if necessary. Vaginoscopy is not a sterile procedure but
benefit of the use of these types of equipment is their
care should be taken to minimize excessive contamina-
ready availability in most veterinary clinics. However,
tion of the site. The recumbent dog can be placed in
only the caudal portion of the vagina and vestibule can
any orientation. Dorsal recumbency may be preferred
be evaluated and concurrent dilation of the vaginal vault
as this minimizes fecal contamination of the site from
with fluid or air is not possible.
the rectum and keeps the tail out of the way (Lulich
The vagina of the normal dog varies in length, with
2006).
much of that variation associated with overall size of
 The scope is assembled and fluids attached to the irri-
the dog (Wilson 2001; Wang et al. 2006). Total vaginal
 gation port. The end of the scope should be lubricated
length in large breed dogs may be as much as 29 cm ( Wil-
with water-soluble lubricant. All instruments should be
son 2001). If the entire vagina is to be examined, equip-
introduced into the dorsal commissure of the vulva and
ment of suitable length must be purchased. Rigid cysto-
aimed toward the spine at a 45° angle. This prevents
scopes (Endoscopy Support Services, Inc., Brewster, NY,
introduction of instruments into the blind-ended ventral
or Karl Storz Veterinary Endoscopy, Goleta, CA) varying
clitoral fossa. Once the scope is in the vaginal vault, intro-
in length from 18 to 36.5 cm are commercially available
duction of isotonic fluid distends the vaginal vault. To
(see Chapter 19). Ifa single instrument is to be purchased
maintain distension, the vulvar lips should be occluded
for cystoscopy and vaginoscopy, the prudent choice may
with the fingers of the free hand. Some leakage will occur
be an instrument of intermediate diameter and length,
so there should be fluid flowing into the vagina through-
for example, a 4-mm diameter scope with 17 Fr sheath,
 out the procedure and a catch basin for overflow should
which has a total length of 32 cm. The final consideration
be placed beneath the dog.
Normal vulvar size and orientation varies tremen-
dously in female dogs. In bitches, the most common vari-
able altering vulvar size is stage of the estrous cycle, with
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals Edited by Joe Bartges and
  n n  n    
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
188
Vaginoscopy
189
vulvar lips throughout proestrus and estrus (Nishiyama
the thin vaginal epithelium of spayed or nonestrous dogs
et al. 2000).
is friable. In a small study evaluating use of vaginoscopy
The ventral commissure of the vulva may be displaced
for diagnosis of vaginitis, significant erythema ofthe vagi-
excessively cranially or buried within perivulvar folds
nal mucosa was present in 2 of 4 control dogs and 3 of 8
in some juvenile or spayed female dogs. This condi-
dogs in the study developed erythema quickly after other
tion, commonly called recessed or juvenile vulva, has
diagnostic testing (Schneider 2004).
been associated with increased incidence of perivulvar
 Concurrent vaginitis and lower urinary tract disease
 dermatitis, especially in dogs with concurrent urinary
may be present. Urinary incontinence (see Chapter 76)
incontinence (see Chapter 76) and with chronic urinary
or chronic urinary tract infection (see Chapter 71) is
tract infection (see Chapter 71) (Hammel and Bjorling
2002). In one study comparing vulvar dimensions and
(Johnson 1991; Parker 1998). Conversely, because the
orientation between dogs with and without lower uri-
vagina is not sterile and urinary tract infections usually
nary tract disease, recessed vulva was present in 68.4% of 
arise from bacteria in the distal urethra and surround-
the affected dogs and 16.7% of the control dogs (Wang
 ing area, it is not diffcult to see how inflammation and
  n  (s)    
 overgrowth of vaginal flora may contribute to urinary
rective therapy. Allowing juvenile dogs to go through an
tract disease (Olson and Mather 1978; Polzin and Jeraj
estrous cycle will not effect permanent change in vulvar 
1979). One study evaluating risk factors for urinary tract
size or orientation.
infection identified both presence of vaginitis and per-
The operator should avoid introduction of any instru-
formance of vaginoscopy as increasing risk for urinary
ments in the ventral clitoral fossa. However, if clitoral
tract infection in dogs (Freshman et al. 1989).
hypertrophy is present, the protruding clitoris may pre-
Vesicular lesions may be present in normal dogs or
vent ready introduction of equipment dorsally. Clitoral
may be evidence of canine herpesvirus infection (Poste
hypertrophy may occur secondary to irritation, includ-
and King 1971; Hill and Mare 1974; Wang et al. 2006).
ing vulvar licking secondary to urinary incontinence or
 Lymphoid follicles are nonspecific indicators of inflam-
vaginitis. Male pseudohermaphroditism is reported to be
mation and may be present in asymptomatic dogs (Figure
associated with clitoral hypertrophy in 52% of cases, and
20.1) (Wang et al. 2006).
true hermaphroditism in 100% of cases in dogs (Hare
Vaginal anatomic anomalies described in the dog
1976). Hyperadrenocorticism is another reported patho-
include strictures and septae (see Chapter 80). These are
logic cause ofclitoralhypertrophy in dogs (Roberts 1986).
readily demonstrated by vaginoscopy, with a reported
The vestibule contains the urethral papilla, which may
diagnosis percentage of 95.8% (Figure 20.2) (Root et al.
or may not be visible as a distinct hillock of tissue. In a
1995; Kyles et al. 1996). Most commonly, these are found
dog in dorsal recumbency, the urethral orifice is visible
at the VV junction, where embryologically distinct tubu-
as a round opening dorsally. The vaginal os or junction
lar structures fuse during embryologic development. Sig-
of the vestibule and vagina (VV junction) is visible as
nificance of these structures as a component of urinary
an ovoid structure ventrally. The VV junction is a slight
tract disease is equivocal. One study evaluating the ratio
narrowing, commonly called the cingulum. Cranial to
this by a variable length is a ventral tubercle that is the
caudal end of dorsal median postcervical fold, which lies
along the ceiling of the vaginal vault and restricts the
vaginal vault in size by about 2/3, giving it a crescent
shape. The size of the vaginal vault is greatly variable and
is less well associated with overall size of the dog than
is length of the vagina (Wilson 2001). The vaginal vault
 e s   s   
 dogs. Eventually, further passage of the scope cranially is
 stopped by the blind-ended fornix, ventral to which the
cervix may be visible as a rosette of vaginal folds.
Normal vaginal mucosa is smooth, shiny, and pink,
similar in appearance to oral mucous membranes. Dur-
 ing estrus (standing heat), the vaginal epithelium is thick-
ened and dehydrated, giving it a wrinkled and blanched
 appearance; this is normal. Inflammation is evidenced by
Figure 20.1 Lymphoid follidles on the vaginal mucosa of a bitch
diffuse or localized erythema of the mucosa. Be aware that
Reprinted with permission: Lulich 2006.
190
 Diagnostic testing
uterine disease. Serosanguinous vulvar discharge is nor-
mal during proestrus and estrus; hemorrhagic discharge
is associated with coagulopathy, blood parasites, or vagi-
 nal neoplasia (Johnston et al. 2001). Dogs with vaginal
neoplasia usually present for a visible mass lesion but
 may present with stranguria or pollakiuria (Manothaiu-
dom and Johnston 1991). The other mass lesion that may
be present in the vagina is vaginal prolapse; this usually
 occurs in young dogs during proestrus and is very rarely
associated with dysuria (Johnston et al. 2001).
References
Cannizzo, K.L., M.A. McLoughlin, et al. (2003). Evaluation of
transurethral cystoscopy and excretory urography for diagnosis of
ectopic ureters in female dogs: 25 cases (1992-2000). JArm Vet Med
Assoc 223: 475-48 1.
Crawford, J.T. and W.M. Adams (2002). Influence of vestibulovaginal
stenosis, pelvic bladder, and recessed vulva on response to treatment
for clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease in dogs: 38 cases
Figure 20.2 Vaginal septum in a standing bitch. Note urethral
(1990- 1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 221: 995-999.
orifice ventrally. Reprinted with permission: Root Kustritz, M.V
Davidson, A.P. (200l). Frustrating case presentations in canine theri-
(2005).TheDog Breeder's Guide to Successful Breeding and Health
Ogenology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 31: 41l1-420.
Management. St. Louis: Elsevier, p. 260.
Freshman, J.L., J.S. Reif, et al. (1989). Risk factors associated with
urinary tract infection in female dogs. Prev Vet Med 7: 59-67.
Hammel, S.P. and D.E. Bjorling (2002). Results of vulvoplasty for
treatment of recessed vulva in dogs. I Arm Arim Hosp Assoc 38:
of vaginal and vestibular sizes based on vaginography
79-83.
demonstrated a decreased response to treatment for uri-
Hare, W.C.D. ( 1976). Intersexuality in the dog. Carn Vet I 17: 7-15.
nary tract disease in dogs with a ratio of less than 0.2 and
Hill, H. and C.J. Mare ( 1974). Genital disease in dogs caused by canine
demonstrated that normal dogs had a ratio of greater
herpesvirus. An I Vet Res 35: 669-672.
Johnson, C.A. ( 199l). Diagnosis and treatment of chronic vaginitis in
than 0.35 (Crawford and Adams 2002). A subsequent
the bitch. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 21: 523-531.
study, which defined vestibular, vaginal, and vulvar mea-
Johnston, S.D., M.V. Root Kustritz, et al. (2001). Disorders of the canine
surements in clinically normal dogs, showed that normal
vagina, vestibule, and vulva. In: Canine and Feline theriogenology.
dogs may have a ratio ofless than 0.33 ( Wang et al. 2006).
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 225-242.
Circumferential vaginal strictures most likely are signif-
Kyles, A.E., S. Vaden, et al. ( 1996). Vestibulovaginal stenosis in dogs:
icant when associated with urine pooling, evidenced as
18 cases (1987-1995). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 209: 1889- 1893.
Lulich, I.P. (2006). Endoscopic vaginoscopy in the dog. Theriogenology
 positional urinary incontinence. Vaginal septae also may
66: 588-591.
Manothaiudom, K. and S.D. Johnston (1991). Clinical approach to
ties, presumably due to alterations in drainage of fluids
vaginal/vestibular masses in the bitch. Vet Clirn North Am Small
from the vagina as the septum pulls up on the vaginal
Ani Pract 21: 509-521.
Nishiyama, T., K. Narita, et al. (2000). Shrinkage in the horizontal
floor. Several studies have documented an association
dimensions of the vulva (vulvar shrinkage) as an indicator of stand-
between presence of vaginal anatomic anomalies and
ing heat in the Beagle. I Arm Armim Hosp Assoc 36: 556-560.
ectopic ureters (Cannizz0 et al 2003; Samii et al. 2004).
Olson, P.N.S. and E.C. Mather (1978). Canine vaginal and uterine
Urine pooling may be difficult to assess in the presence
bacterial flora. JAm Vet Med Assoc 172: 708-711.
of fluid distention of the vagina. If urine pooling is a con-
Parker, N.A. (1998). Clinical approach to canine vaginitis: a review.
cern, simple vaginoscopy as with a large otoscope cone on
115.
alighted handle may be attempted on the unanesthetized,
Polzin, D.J. and K. Jeraj (1979). Urethritis, cystitis and ureteritis. Vet
standing dog prior to endoscopic vaginoscopy (Davidson
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 9: 661-678.
2001). Oftentimes, urine pooling is best evidenced by a
 Poste, G.and N. King ( 1971). Isolation ofa herpesvirus from the canine
history of positional urinary incontinence.
genital tract: association with infertility, abortion, and stillbirths. Vet
Vulvar discharge may be mucoid, mucopurulent, or
Rec 88:229-233.
Roberts, S.J. (1986). Infertility and reproductive diseases in bitches and
hemorrhagic. Mucoid discharge is a nonspecific indica-
queers. Woodstock, VT: SJ Roberts, pp. 709-751.
tor of inflammation. Mucopurulent discharge may be
Root, M.V., S.D. Johnston, et al. ( 1995). Vaginal septa in dogs: 15 cases
associated with urinary tract disease, vaginal disease, or
(1983-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc 206: 56-58.
Vaginoscopy
191
Sami, V.F., M.A. McLoughlin, et al. (2004). Digital fluoroscopic excre-
Wang, K.Y., V.F. Samii, et al. (2006). Vestibular, vaginal, and urethral
tory urography, digital fluoroscopic urethrography, helical com-
relations in spayed dogs with and without lower urinary tract signs.
puted tomography, and cystoscopy in 24 dogs with suspected
I Vet Intern Med 20: 1065-1073.
ureteral ectopia. I Vet Imtern Med 18: 27l-281.
Schneider, A.L. (2004). Plausible causes of vaginitis. Honors thesis,
bitch. Vet Clin North A Small Anmim Pract 31: 291-304.
 Collge of Agriculture, University of Minnesota.
21
Urologic laparoscopy
Jacqueline Whittemore
Laparoscopy is the examination of the abdominal cavity
be tried for visualization of the left kidney but is gener-
using a rigid endoscope. It provides a way to thoroughly
ally avoided, given the risk of splenic laceration. A ven-
evaluate the abdomen without creating large incisions in
tral midline approach with the use of a rotating table
the abdominal wall. Laparoscopy is divided into diagnos-
is preferable for examination of this organ. The ventral
tic procedures, involving visualization and tissue sam-
midline approach is the preferred approach for surgical
pling, and interventional procedures.
procedures, but the technique can be hindered by exces-
Depending on the specific procedure, advantages of
 sive falciform fat deposition. The operating table may be
using a laparoscopic approach include direct visualiza-
inclined 10-15° to move abdominal contents away from
tion of organs, including surfaces that are difficult to visu-
the particular organ of interest.
alize using other techniques; magnification of tissues so
that subtle deviations from normal anatomy are visible;
separation of organs from one another for closer exami-
Laparoscopic equipment
nation; improved visualization in deep cavities; decreased
The telescope acts as the surgeon's eyes. It is a glass and
pain and disruption of tissues, primarily due to decreased
air column through which images are transmitted to a
incision size; shorter procedure times, hospitalization
camera. Telescopes come in a variety of diameters and
stays, and decreased overall cost; decreased postopera-
lengths. The most common telescope sizes for veterinary
tive infection rates; and increased sample size, sample
laparoscopy are 5 mm x 29 cm (standard) and 2.7 mm x
types, and sampling accuracy than can be obtained using
18 cm (often referred to as a pediatric scope). The tip of
other minimally invasive techniques.
the telescope may be flat, usually 0-10° of deflection,
Disadvantages of using a laparoscopic
approach
 or angled, 30-45 of deflection, for visualization around
include the expense of laparoscopic-associated equip-
corners and objects (Figure 21.1). A high-intensity-light
ment, veterinary and technical training, and equipment
source cable is used to transmit light through the tele-
maintenance; increased anesthesia time and procedural
scope to illuminate the abdomen, and a specialized cam-
complications during the initiallearning phase; diffculty
 in managing complications, particularly hemorrhage,
era is attached to the eyepiece of the telescope to capture
 images for processing and display on a monitor.
because the abdomen is closed; and increased client cost
The abdomen can be entered by either a closed tech-
compared to traditional surgery for some procedures.
nique or an open approach (Leibl et al. 2001). The
"closed" approach is used most commonly for proce-
 Patient positioning
dures performed in lateral recumbency. A Veress needle
is used to penetrate the abdominal wall and insufflate
The approach utilized is dependent on the purpose of
the abdomen with carbon dioxide before access ports
the laparoscopy. The right lateral approach is standard
are placed. This allows safe introduction of the access
A ydde deie   osed edxa 1
cannulae and facilitates separation of the organs for visu-
alization and manipulation. The Veress needle has an
inner blunt spring-loaded stylet that advances forward
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
after puncture of the abdominal wall to prevent acciden-
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
tal organ impalement. An insufflator controls the flow of
192
Urologic laparoscopy
193
Figure 21.1 A photo of light being transmitted through 0° and
30° telescopes, demonstrating the difference in area of visualiza-
tion created by deflection. Photo by Greg Hirshoren, @ 2009 The
University of Tennessee.
Figure 21.2 Access ports optimally positioned for laparoscopic-
assisted percutaneous renal biopsy using a baseball diamond
carbon dioxide into the abdomen and maintains appro-
configuration: The right kidney is at home plate (denoted by the
priate intra-abdominal pressure, usually no more than
white asterisk), with the camera located in the center (the pitcher's
10 and 12 mmHg for cats and dogs, respectively. After
mound) and instrument ports positioned on either side of the cam-
insufflation of the abdomen is complete, trocar-cannulae
era (first and third bases). Photo by Greg Hirshoren, @ 2009 The
are advanced through the abdominal wall to create access
University of Tennessee.
       
to prevent abdominal deflation once the trocars are
removed, while allowing introduction and removal of
 the camera. A variety of instruments may be introduced
equipment.
through the access ports for abdominal exploration and
 The Hasson technique is utilized for open approaches
 tissue manipulations. Commonly utilized instruments
to the abdomen (Leibl et al. 2001), specifically proce-
include blunt palpation probes, cup and punch biopsy
dures performed with the animal in dorsal recumbency.
forceps, Babcock and dissecting forceps, retractors, and
A mini-laparotomy is performed to place the first trocar,
a variety of scissors.
usually 2-3 cm caudal to the umbilicus and ideally the fal-
ciform fat. After incision of the linea alba, a hemostat or
Urologic procedures
other blunt instrument is introduced and swept circularly
to clear the insertion site of fat and confirm no tissues
Relevant organs accessible for examination during
are adhered to the linea alba. A trocar is then placed to
establish the first access port. An airtight seal is achieved
of the ureters, urinary bladder, omentum, prostate, and
by using either a positive-threaded cannula or placing a
regional lymph nodes. Urologic procedures for which
purse-string suture around the cannula opening. Once
laparoscopy may be indicated include renal biopsy peri-
the access port is in place, the abdomen is insufflated as
 toneal dialysis catheter placement and omentectomy, cys-
described above.
totomy and bladder wall biopsy, cystostomy tube place-
Access port placement is guided by the procedure to be
 in ue sdoq isod xadsh u
performed. Once the first access port has been created,
node evaluation and biopsy. As veterinary laparoscopic
the laparoscope is introduced and used to observe addi-
tional trocars entering the abdomen to minimize the risk
of iatrogenic damage. With exceptions as listed below,
three access ports are typically utilized in what is often
described as a baseball diamond configuration (Figure
Laparoscopic-assisted percutaneous
21.2). In this configuration, the camera is placed at the
renal biopsy
"pitcher's mound" with the target organ located at "home
base." By placing instruments at "frst" and "third base,”"
The use oflaparoscopic assistance for percutaneous renal
the operator is best able to manipulate organs without
biopsies improves visualization oflesions, targeted biopsy
having the instruments interfere with one another or
 of focal lesions, postprocedure hemorrhage surveillance,
194   Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
Figure 21.3 Left: Cross-section of a dog kidney ilustrating optimal placement of the percutaneous biopsy instrument tangentially in
the cortex. Right: Cross-section of a dog kidney ilustrating suboptimal placement of the percutaneous biopsy instrument through the
medulla and arcuate vessels. Photos by Robert Donnell, University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine.
   ss s   s 
 in cases of glomerular disease, tangentially through the
1983; Rawlings et al. 2003a). In one study, laparoscope-
cortex, avoiding the arcuate vessels and medulla (Figure
guided samples obtained with a 14-gauge Tru-cut style
21.3). The biopsy needle is deployed according to man-
s  in s    a
ufacturer's instructions (Figure 2l.4). Pressure may be
crush artifact, and 2.7 times as many glomeruli as sam-
applied to the biopsy site with the palpation probe to
ples from an 18-gauge needle (Rawlings et al. 2003a).
control hemorrhage from the capsule after the biopsy
Laparoscope-guided samples also had twice as many
needle is retracted.
glomeruli, less crush artifact, and better sample qual-
ity, than ultrasound-guided samples obtained using the
Peritoneal dialysis catheter placement
same-size biopsy needle. Although it has not been eval-
uated for renal biopsies specifically, the use of fully auto-
Although increased availability of veterinary hemodialy-
matic biopsy needles is discouraged given the high rate
sis is decreasing the demand for peritoneal dialysis (see
of vagotonic complications associated with liver biopsy
Chapter 30), it is still a regularly performed technique in
in cats (Proot and Rothuizen 2006).
-pu e n ausn pad aq un asdo re
line or lateral approach. A lateral approach is generally
 preferred for diffuse disease processes because it allows
better separation of the kidney from surrounding tissues,
does not require repositioning of the patient during the
procedure, and the right kidney is often less freely mov-
    po a  s  
initial insufflation and camera placement and then the
patient is rotated into lateral recumbency. While moni-
toring the site through the laparoscope, the paralumbar
area is palpated to determine the most appropriate loca-
tion, caudal to the diaphragmatic reflection, for biopsy
needle insertion. A small-skin incision is made and the
percutaneous biopsy instrument is advanced through the
abdominal wall. The kidney is isolated and stabilized
Figure 21.4 Ablunt probe is utilized to stabilize and gently rotate
using a blunt probe or fan retractor, before advancing
the right kidney, optimizing placement of the percutaneous biopsy
the biopsy instrument to sample the affected area or,
 needle in the renal cortex.
Urologic laparoscopy
195
both veterinary and human medicine. In addition to its
usefulness for management of acute renal failure, peri-
toneal dialysis can be utilized for medical management
 of acute intoxication, electrolyte derangement, pancre-
atitis, and heatstroke cases (Dzyban et al. 2000). The
benefits of peritoneal dialysis have historically been off-
set by the delay between catheter placement and safe
initiation of dialysate exchanges. Streamlined-peritoneal
dialysis catheters can be placed percutaneously using
laparoscopy (Ash 2006; Seleem and Al-Hashemy 2007).
Partial omentectomy, crucial to minimize catheter occlu-
sion rates, may also be performed with relative ease.
Finally, an abbreviated dialysate exchange may be admin-
istered through the access ports at the time oflaparoscopy.
 prior to recovery from anesthesia. Since patients with
anuric renal failure requiring peritoneal dialysis often are
significantly volume overloaded, the ability to begin vol-
ume correction at time of surgery is a significant advan-
tage. Because the exchange is performed through the
Figure 21.5 llustration of bladder isolation and retrieval using
laparoscopic cannula, there is little risk of dialysate dis-
Babcock forceps during laparoscopic-assisted cystotomy. Note the
section, with attendant cellulitis and infection, into sub-
Careful positioning of the forceps on the apex of the bladder. Image
cutaneous tissues. Finally, the decrease in incision size
reproduced with permission from Rawlings, 2003b.
allows for earlier use of the dialysis catheter for regular
exchanges.
technique has been developed to decrease procedural
Laparoscopic-assisted cystotomy
complications (Rawlings et al. 2002). The most signif-
icant benefit of laparoscopic assistance is the ability to
 There are a variety of advantages to using laparoscopic
 thoroughly evaluate the completed cystopexy to confirm
assistance for removal of cystic and urethral calculi.
appropriate alignment of the bladder and urethra and
In addition to decreasing postoperative morbidity, the
 adequate cranial traction on the bladder before the ani-
smaller size of incisions decreases potential abdominal
mal is recovered from anesthesia (Figure 21.7). In severe
contamination with urine (Rawlings et al. 2003b). For
cases of incontinence, this procedure may be coupled
this procedure, the laparoscope is placed via the Hasson
technique to guide bladder isolation and retrieval with
with cystoscopic urethral collagen injections (Barth et al.
2005). The same approach may be used for cystostomy
Babcock forceps (Figure 21.5). It is important to carefully
identify the apex of the bladder for retrieval. Malposi-
tube placement.
tioning of the Babcock forceps will artificialy compart-
mentalize the bladder, hindering thorough evaluation.
Once the bladder has been isolated, exteriorized, and the
cystotomy incision made, the laparoscope is advanced
through the cystotomy site into the bladder to guide cal-
culi retrieval (Figure 21.6). After all stones have been
retrieved, the urethra and bladder can be carefully eval-
uated, decreasing the risk of overlooking an entrapped
calculus and allowing targeted mucosal wall biopsy.
Laparoscopic-assisted incisional cystopexy
Cystopexy is performed most commonly for adjunctive
management of urethral sphincter incontinence and to
 prevent urinary bladder entrapment in perianal hernias.
Figure 21.6 llustration of laparoscope advancement into the
Appropriate positioning of the bladder and cystopexy
bladder to guide cystolith removal during laparoscopic-assisted
site is crucial to prevent postoperative micturition dis-
Cystotomy. Image reproduced with permission from Rawlings.
 orders, specifically urethral obstruction. A laparoscopic
2003b.
196
 Diagnostic testing
References
Ash, S. (2006). Chronic peritoneal dialysis catheters: challenges and
design solutions. Int I Artif Organs 29(1): 85-94.
Barth, A., I. Reichler, et al. (2005). Evaluation of long-term effects of
endoscopic injection of collagen into the urethral submucosa for
treatment of urethral sphincter incompetence in female dogs: 40
cases (1993-2000). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226( 1): 73-76.
Dzyban, L., M.A. Labato, et al. (2000). Peritoneal dialysis: a tool in
veterinary critical care. I Vet Emerg Crit Care (Sar Antonio) 10(2):
91-102.
Grauer, G., D. Twedt, et al. (1983). Evaluation of laparoscopy for
obtaining renal biopsy specimens from dogs and cats. I Am Vet Med
Assoc 183(6): 677-679.
Leibl, B.J., K. Kraft, et al. (200l). Access techniques for endoscopic
Allisn @UG 200
surgery—types of trocards, ports and cannulae—an overview.
Minim Invasive Ther Allied Technol 10( 1): 5- 10.
Figure 21.7 Illustration of appropriate bladder alignment and
 Proot, S.J.M. and J. Rothuizen (2006). High complication rate of an 
positioning during laparoscopic-assisted cystopexy. Image repro-
duced with permission from Rawlings, 2002
Intern Med 20: 1327-1333.
Rawlings, C., E. Howerth, et al. (2002). Laparoscopic-assisted
cystopexy in dogs. Am I Vet Res 63(9): 1226- 1231.
Other procedures
Rawlings, C., H. Diamond, et al. (2003a). Diagnostic quality of percu-
taneous kidney biopsy specimens obtained with laparoscopy versus
 Laparoscopy can also be used to guide prostatic biop-
ultrasound guidance in dogs. IAm Vet Med Assoc 223(3): 317-321.
sies, for prostatic omentalization, and for evaluation and
Rawlings, C., M. Mahaffey (2003b). Use of laparoscopic-assisted cys-
 biopsy of regional lymph nodes as part of cancer staging.
toscopy or removal of urinary calculi in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
222(6): 759-761.
Other procedures involving the reproductive tract for
 Seleem, M. and A. Al-Hashemy (2007). Mini-laparoscopic placerment
      o 
 tomy, ovariohysterectomy, and cryptorchidectomy.
36-40.
22
Urodynamic studies
India F. Lane
Diagnosis of urinary dysfunction is usually made based
bladder and urethral pressure (triple lumen). Multilu-
on routine clinical data, including patient history, phys-
men catheters are available in 6, 7, and 9 Fr diameters. The
  d s    
pediatric (6 Fr) size can be used even in small dogs and
nalysis (see Chapter 7), and routine imaging (see Chapter
female cats. Microtip transducer (or microtransducer)
15). However, urodynamic studies may be indicated in
    ar o s e
      d 
namic testing; these catheters have one or two small sen-
tion, usually complex or refractory cases (Oliver 1987;
sor sites mounted on the exterior surface of the catheter
Barsanti 1995). These studies require minimal technical
(Figure 22.3). Most of these products are designed for
 skill but require appropriate investment in equipment
single-use application, but can be resterilized by gas or
 and instrumentation, as well as frequent troubleshooting.
cold sterilization methods.
quality control, and cautious interpretation of results.
Despite the value of the preferred catheter type, cre-
This chapter reviews indications, techniques, and inter-
ative use of other urinary catheters also yields satisfactory
pretation of urodynamic procedures used commonly in
 results. Readily available Foley retention and polyprope-
dogs and cats ( Table 22.1).
lene catheters were used for early studies in dogs (Rosin
and Barsanti 1981; Richter and Ling 1985a; Barsanti
1995). Cystometric and uroflow studies using transab-
Instrumentation
 dominal catheters have also been reported (Moreau et al.
1983a). The author has used tom-cat catheters and infant
Specially designed urinary catheters are available for uro.
feeding tubes to assess urethral function in male cats.
dynamic procedures. The most common catheters used
The only essential fixed equipment requirement for
in small animal practice include the urethral pressure
urodynamic studies is a pressure recording system.
profile catheter and double or triple lumen urodynamic
Physiographic recorders and analog recorders were the
catheters. The urethral pressure profile catheter is a small
"workhorse” machines for years (Figure 22.4). Urody-
(6 Fr) polyvinylchloride (PVC) catheter with a single
namic machines purchased today are multichannel sys-
lumen but four opposing side holes placed around the
tems with automated software systems for recording.
circumference of the catheter (Figure 22.1). Multiple side
storage, and analysis of data (Figure 22.5). At least
holes provide a summation of urethral resistance from all
three channels are desired for quality studies. Automated
quadrants of the urethra. Double and triple lumen uro-
catheter withdrawal devices also increase the precision
dynamic catheters also have multiple side holes, but the
and feasibility of urethral profiles (Figure 22.6). The
holes are spaced at different points along the length of
most reliable and enduring manufacturer of urodynamic
the urethra (Figure 22.2). These urodynamic catheters
equipment in North America is Life-Tech International,
are preferred for multichannel urodynamics; the sepa-
based in Houston, Texas. Regular calibration and review
rate lumens are used for infusion and pressure recording
 of signal quality (sensitivity to movement and pressure
(double lumen) and for the simultaneous recording of
change) is required with old or new equipment (Schafer
et al. 2002).
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
197
198
 Diagnostic testing
Table 22.1 Overview of urodynamic studies adapted for small animals
 Procedure
 Primary application 
Other indications
Limitations 
Contraindications
Urethral pressure
Diagnosis or exclusion of
Localization of urethral
Reflects urethral function Active UTI
profile
USMI
obstruction or spasm
during storage only, results
affected by sedation,
 interindividual variability
Leak point pressure  Diagnosis of USMI with
Requires sedation or 
Active UTI; Bladder wall
stress
 anesthesia
 damage: Significant 
hematuria
Electromyography
Assessment of neurogenic  Diagnosis of 
Difficult to perform in small
disorders
detrusor-striated muscle
 animals
dyssynergia
Cystometry
Diagnosis or exclusion of
Detrusor atony, evaluation
 Sedation and 
Active UTl; Bladder wall
 detrusor instability
of bladder compliance
house-training can inhibit 
 damage: Significant 
normal detrusor reflex
hematuria
Voiding studies
Diagnosis or exclusion of
 Diagnosis of urine pooling
 Nonphysiologic position,
Contraindications to
functional or dynamic
requires sedation or
contrast media
urinary obstruction
 anesthesia
General principles
dynamic data reviewed in a vacuum is likely to lead to
misrepresentative diagnoses.
Reporting for the International Continence Society,
Urodynamic studies should be done in patients that
Schafer et al. (2002) outlined the elements of "good uro-
are free from active urinary tract infection or inflam-
dynamic practice,” including (1) the selection of appro-
  (  ) s i 
priate tests, (2) quality control for precise measurement,
performed prior to any trial pharmacologic treatments;
and (3) critical analysis of the results. He emphasized
if treatments have been initiated, they should be discon-
the formation of a clear "urodynamic question” for each
tinued at least one week (preferably 2 weeks) prior to
patient, using all available data, prior to embarking on
study. Posttreatment studies should be done at times of
invasive testing. In small animals, the lack of subjec-
peak pharmacologic action as much as possible. Urody-
tive feedback from the patient makes identification of
namic procedures can be coordinated with other lower
the core question even more important; objective uro-
urinary tract procedures in order to best utilize sedation
or anesthesia but should be performed first in sequence,
because other procedures (cystoscopy, contrast studies)
Figure 22.1 Urethral pressure profile catheter. Note the multiple
small side holes for transmission of pressure from all sides of the 
urethra (UPP-8D, Life-Tech International, Stafford, TX).
Figure 22.3 Microtransducer urodynamic catheter: pressures are
Figure 22.2 Double (or dual) lumen urodynamic catheter. One 
recorded directly from transducers mounted on the catheter (Millar
lumen can be used for fluid infusion and another for pressure 
Mikro-Tip Catheter, Photo from Millar web catalog with permis-
recording (DLC-9D, Life-Tech International, Stafford, TX)
sion).
Urodynamic studies 199
Figure 22.4 Analog pressure recording unit: this system includes
a single channel pressure recorder, a catheter withdrawal arm and
a syringe perfusion pump to accomplish most urodynamic studies.
are likely to affect results. Sedation and restraint are cho-
Figure 22.5 Desktop, multichannel system for recording and ana-
sen as indicated in the best interests of the study and the
lyzing urodynamic studies (Janus System 4 is pictured. Life-tech
patient. Most procedures are repeated two to three times
International; current systems are Janus Urolab 6 available in desk-
during the study period to ensure reliability.
top, notebook, or all in one mobile design packages).
 Assessment of outlet resistance in neurologic disorders
Urethral pressure studies
 Assessment of response to medical or surgical treat-
Indications
ments
· Excluding urethral dysfunction in incontinent dogs
 Urethral pressure profilometry ( UPP) measures the pres-
(e.g-, urine pooling, urge incontinence)
sures along the length of the urethra (Figure 22.7) (Rosin
and Barsanti 1981). In some complicated incontinence
The urethral pressure profle is also applied extensively
or urine retention patients, the UPP may be useful for
in prospective research, including assessment of pharma-
     
· Evaluation of suspected USMl refractory to traditional
devices.
medical therapies
· Evaluation of urethral function in patients with
Limitations
anatomic abnormalities (e.g-, ectopic ureter)
· Perioperative evaluation of surgical treatment of USMI
 Although the urethral pressure profle has proven effec-
(e.g-, urethral collagen injection, colposuspension)
tive in documenting or excluding the diagnosis of USMI
· Confirmation/ localization of urethral spasm
and has many applications in urologic research, the study
200
 Diagnostic testing
is limited when more complex disorders are encountered.
With the urethral pressure profile, the study is com-
pleted during a resting state, which is usually appropriate
for storage disorders such as incontinence. The study
is less likely to reflect urethral function during voiding,
urethral resistance may be observed. The other major
limitation of urethral studies is the inherent variability
in results. Measurements can be affected by level of seda-
tion or level of striated muscle activity and movement
in awake dogs. Individual variation has been observed
in dogs when studies are repeated over time, pressure,
and length. Results are also affected by age, reproductive
status (Salomon et al. 2006), and estrus cycle in intact
females (Hamaide et al. 2005).
Sedation/restraint
 Ideally, studies are conducted in awake patients. However,
tracings from awake studies can be affected by move-
ment artifact or active contraction of striated urethral or
pelvic floor muscle. Transurethral catheterization may
be difficult (and dangerous) in awake cats and small
or anatomically abnormal dogs. The choice of approach
Figure 22.6 Withdrawal arm for recording urethral pressure stud-
depends on the patient, instrumentation used, and pur-
ies. A UPP catheter (blue) is placed to illustrate how the catheter
pose of the study. For example, studies using urinary
is attached and withdrawn during a urethral pressure profile
catheters with mounted microtip transducers must be
completed under general anesthesia because the trans-
ducers are exquisitely sensitive to motion (Arnold et al.
1993). With the effects ofsedation in mind, “apples" must
by comparison to equivalent studies in normal animals.
For most institutions, studies are done in a standardized
80+
fashion in order to feel most confident in results and
to provide data suitable for research purposes. However,
standardization across institutions is stil lacking.
OH
UF
 Urethral studies can usually be performed in awake,
40
BUP
nonsedated male dogs and in female dogs whose size and
MUCP
conformation allow minimally traumatic transurethral
FPL
catheterization. Light physical restraint is required to
0
maintain the patient in relaxed lateral recumbency. Cats
10
15
20
Urethral length (cm)
and small dogs require sedation or a light plane of general
Figure 22.7 Schematic illustration of a female dog urethral pres-
anesthesia. Unfortunately, virtually all sedatives or anes-
thetics depress urethral function. The variable absorp-
sure profile; fluid is infused via a syringe or other pump (blue arrow)
while resistance to infusion is measured in cm H20 (schematic
tion rate and duration of effect for injected sedatives also
recorder represents pressure transducer) at the catheter tip (multi-
contributes to the variability of results. Xylazine, the pre-
ple white arrows). IVP intravesicular pressure; BUP, begin urethral
ferred historical agent preferred for cystometry in veteri-
pressure; MUP, maximum urethral pressure; MUCP, maximum ure-
nary patients, was also used for concurrent urethral pres-
thral pressure; FPL, functional profile length. Illustration modified
sure profiles out of convenience (Oliver and Young 1973b;
from Fischer, J.R. and I.F. Lane (2007). Incontinence and urine 
Johnson et al. 1988). However, xylazine administration
retention. In: BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Nephrology
significantly depressed urethral pressure and functional
and Urology,edited by Elliott and Grauer. Gloucester:British Small
length (Richter and Ling 1985). Intramuscular adminis-
Animal Veterinary Association, with permission
tration of medetomidine also depressed urethral pressure
Urodynamic studies  201
and was associated with increased variability of results
"( h ie ia sume) sop Aeu jo dno suo u
Currently, propofol or light inhalant anesthesia is rec-
ommended to facilitate catheterization and completion
of urodynamic studies. A slow constant rate infusion of
 propofol had minimal effect on urethral pressure in two
studies of healthy dogs (Combrisson et al. 1993; Byron
 et al. 2003). Some authors have advocated using propo-
fol infusion for urinary catheterization, then allowing the
patient to awaken to a degree that would have less impact
the profile (Goldstein and Westropp 2005). However,
the timing of the study (after withdrawal of sedation)
could still complicate interpretation if this practice is
followed.
Figure 22.8 Method for recording urethral pressure (as resistance
 Inhalant anesthetic agents may be preferred in cats and
to flow) during slow fluid infusion. On the left, a double lumen
some challenging dogs, especially if propofol infusion 
catheter is used for single side-hole recording. Ideally, the side
is cost-prohibitive. Light anesthesia using isoflurane or
hole is oriented dorsally within the urethra. The infusion tubing is
sevoflurane (end tidal concentration 1.5-2.0%) is a rea-
attached to one lumen (via the yellow port), whereas the fluid col-
sonable choice for urethral studies (Byron et al. 2003), but
umn for pressure recording is attached to the other. On the right,
often inhibits detrusor function for other urodynamic
a single lumen, four-side-hole UPP catheter is attached to a stop-
tests (Johnson et al. 1988; Cohen et al. 2009).
cock and tubing that allows simultaneous infusion and pressure
recording. In both cases, the tubing for fluid infusion is attached in
direct line with the catheter so that there is minimal interference
Procedure
to flow. Note that air bubbles, kinks, or movements in the tubing
 Patients should be free of infection and active inflamma-
will create artifacts.
tion at the time of study. Recording equipment is pre-
pared by accessing the study set-up program and zero-
ing withdrawal (Goldstein and Westropp 2005). Potential
ing transducers to atmospheric pressure ( with open fluid
technical errors affect measurements, including variable
columns placed at the level of the symphysis pubis). The
or interrupted infusion flow (pump error), air bubbles,
patient is sedated if desired, and a transurethral urethral
tubing kinks, inappropriate positioning of the catheter,
catheter is placed using aseptic technique. Ideally, a ure-
or partial occlusion of the catheter. Analysis can be com-
thral pressure profle catheter is used. For a full urethral
pleted by urodynamic software system packages or man-
profile, the catheter is advanced so that the side holes
ually (Figure 22.10). Automated software measurements
are located in the neck of the bladder to begin the study.
 are best utilized when the clinician selects key points on
A preloaded fluid column (usually thin extension tub-
 the tracing, instead of relying on selection parameters
ing) is attached to the recording transducer. Once the
designed for human patients.
fluid column is attached to the external catheter port,
low initial pressures (6-10 cm H2O) are expected if the
 internal catheter port is free within the urinary bladder.
Interpretation
If the initial pressure is significantly higher, adjustment
 Maximal urethral pressure (MUP) is compared to resting
of catheter placement or clearing the catheter with a little
urinary bladder pressure and to normal animals of the
fluid may be required to ensure there is no interference.
same species and sex (Figure 22.11). The key measure of
The UPP catheter port or one lumen of a multilumen
urethral function is the maximal urethral closure pressure
catheter is connected to a pressure transducer. Some clin-
(MUCP), which is calculated by subtracting the resting
icians choose to zero transducers at this point in order to
bladder pressure from the maximum observed urethral
simplify calculation of closure pressure. Fluid is infused
 pressure. The functional profle length (FPL or UFPL),
through a separate lumen of a multilumen catheter or
the length over which urethral pressure exceeds bladder
using a stopcock (Figure 22.8) at a low infusion rate
pressure, also reflects overallfunction. Some investigators
(2 mL/minute). Any resistance to fluid flow should be
 report other parameters derived from the profles, includ-
minimized. Pressures are recorded as the catheter is
 ing area measures (area under the curve of the functional
slowly withdrawn (usually at 0.5-1 mm/second). Alter-
profle length). A visual assessment of the curve is impor-
nately, a triple lumen catheter (Figure 22.9) can be used to
tant as well, the maximal pressure peak should be evident
record simultaneous bladder and urethral pressure dur-
in the appropriate portion of the curve. Salomon et al.
202
 Diagnostic testing
Catheterlength
Pve
High-contrast
Radiopaquemarkers
-Precision-punched
(XROpartnumber)
Figure 22.9 Schematic of a triple lumen catheter designed for simultaneous bladder and urethral pressure recording during urethral or
bladder function studies. Pura, distance between catheter tip and side hole for urethral pressure measurement; Fill, port for fluid infusion
lumen: Pves, port for lumen to remain in urinary blader: Pura/PVR, port for lumen to record urethral pressures (llustration reprinted 
from Life-Tech online catalog, with permission).
Urethral pressure profile (cm H2O)
SU
RFST
RUPMUP
FPP
pura
100
EMG 1
50
0:20
0:40
1:00
1:20
1:40
2:00
2:20
2:40
3:00
Figure 22.10 Single channel UPP tracing from a male dog with markings created using automated software (Life-Tech Janus System
4.03, Stafford, TX). Undulations reflect respiratory motion and movement during reset of catheter withdrawal. Note the blue activity
reflected in the EMG channel; in this dog, EMG was not recorded, and the heavy activity recorded here is artifact
Figure 22.11 Urethral pressure profile tracing from a sedated male cat.
Urodynamic studies  203
(2006) incorporated this point into their assessment of
compromise of urogenital host defenses (e.g-, amoxicillin 
profiles from female dogs, reporting an area measure-
for 3 days). Since urodynamic studies are usuall per-
ment for each of the cranial, middle, and caudal thirds
formed because of incontinence or urine retention, it can
of the functional profle length (in addition to a total
be argued that antimicrobials should be administered in
integrated pressure).
all cases. Regardless of antimicrobial practice, a follow-
The UPP has had considerable application in the eval-
up urine culture is recommended 5-7 days following the
uation of incontinence in small animals (see Chapter
procedure to ensure the clearance of pathogens.
76) and has been useful in the assessment of urethral
nd s  s red  ss
Electromyography
(Rosin and Barsanti 1981; Gregory 1984; Richter and Ling
Electromyography (EMG) can be used to evaluate stri-
1985; Basinger et al. 1987; Holt 1988; Basinger et al. 1989;
ated urethral musculature. Fine-wire recording elec-
Mawby et al. 1990; Sackman et al. 199l; Frenier et al.
trodes are inserted percutaneously in or near peri-
1992; Straeter-Knowlen et al. 1995; Marks et al. 1996;
urethral muscle (Sackman and Sims 1991) or mounted on
Fischer et al. 2003; Rawlings et al. 2001; Carofiglio et al.
 2006; Byron et al. 2007). High urethral pressure zones are
urinary catheters (Gregory 1984; Richter and Ling 1985;
Basinger et al. 1987) used in urodynamic procedures.
 occasionally documented in dysfunctional voiding syn-
Addition of EMG to cystometric or urethral pressure
dromes (Fillipich et al. 1989; Gookin and Bunch 1997;
studies provides some assessment of neurogenic innerva-
Lane et al. 2000). Multiple pressure spikes observed along
tion to the external urethral sphincter. In human patients,
the length of the membranous urethra have also been
EMG activity is recorded throughout flling and void-
described in dogs with functional urinary obstruction
ing studies and is utilized primarily to assess synchrony
(Lane et al. 2000). Additionally, finding a normal UPP
 of detrusor and striated urethral activity in neuropathic
in a dog with dysfunctional voiding and no evidence of
 disease. EMG activity is expected to increase gradually
obstruction has been considered supportive of a diagno-
during filling and to become silent during voiding. In vet-
sis of dyssynergia.
erinary medicine, EMG have predominantly been used to
 characterize urethral function at rest and following surgi-
Leak point pressure
cal procedures (Basinger et al. 1987, 1989; Sackman et al.
A "leak point pressure" can also be determined after mod-
1999). However, EMG during voiding has been character-
erate filling of the bladder for cystometric or other studies
 ized in cats (Sackman and Sims 1990). In cases of urinary
(Rawlings et al. 1999). In this test, the sphincter is chal-
retention, EMG could be used to assess pudendal nerve
lenged by pressure applied to the abdomen at the cranial
innervation (helping to localize neurologic lesions) and
level of the urinary bladder. Using a large blood pres-
recovery and in the assessment of dyssynergic voiding
sure cuff around the caudal abdomen, and with progres-
patterns (Lane 2000b).
 u t oti n psn  
breed dogs >20 kg), the cuff is inflated until urine leakage
Bladder function studies
is observed. Increased pressure can be applied by man-
ual compression. In normal dogs, urine leakage was not
Indications
observed until external pressure reached well over 100 cm
Cystometrography (CMG) measures the pressure within
H2O in most dogs (Rawlings et al. 1999). Measurement
the bladder as it is flled with fluid or gas (CO2)
of LPP is more commonly applied in the evaluation of
(Figure 22.12). Most studies today are completed with
incontinent women than it is in veterinary patients.
fluid media. Bladder capacity and compliance may be
estimated from calculations of infused volume and the
Complications
pressure slope during flling. In some patients, detrusor
Complications from urethral pressure studies are rare
contraction appears as a sharp steep pressure rise, accom-
and are usually related to instrumentation. Slight ure-
panied by voiding. An atonic bladder, on the other hand,
thral and vaginal irritation is common and transient.
would be expected to have an expanded capacity and fill
Microscopic hematuria is common and not usually cause
to large volumes at low pressure.
for concern. Careful aseptic technique must be followed
 In small animal patients, the CMG is most useful for
during urethral catheterization and withdrawal in order
the diagnosis or exclusion of bladder overactivity, a rare
to prevent iatrogenic urinary tract infection. Urethral
cause of ("urge") incontinence in dogs and cats. A reduc-
catheters, infusion tubing, and transducers must also be
 tion in compliance can also contribute to urine storage
sterilely prepared. Peri-procedural antimicrobials should
disorders even if overt overactivity is not documented.
be considered in animals with anatomical or functional
CMG results can also be useful in raising suspicion of
204  Diagnostic testing
cats, completed after cats were anesthetized for urinary
catheterization and allowed to recover to consciousness.
Because sedation is usually required, a number of
agents have been investigated. The optimal sedative for
cystometry provides sufficient restraint and relaxation
for both patient comfort and for obtaining quality trac-
ings. Xylazine ( with atropine) provided these benefits for
years (Oliver and Young 1973a, 1973b; Barsanti et al.
1988; Johnson et al. 1988); medetomine (Rawlings et al.
2001) and oxymorphone (with acepromazine) were also
0°
considered reasonably acceptable.
TLIII
However, xylazine significantly impacts urethral pres-
TLII
sure and has numerous adverse effects, so smoother
AI
regimens have been sought. A tailored propofol infu-
100
200
300
400
sion (0.82-1.38 mg/kg/minute) was effective for repeated
Fillvolume(mL)
studies of retrograde fill and diruesis cystometry in
Figure 22.12 Schematic illustration of cystometric study. Intrav-
dogs (Hamaide et al. 2003). Low dose propofol at
esicular pressure is recorded while the urinary bladder is slowly
0.2 mg/kg/minute was effective in providing adequate
filled by fluid infusion. TLll, slope of the filing phase; Tlll slope
restraint and preserving the detrusor reflex in a small
change just before detrusor contraction (rarely observed in small
animals): TP, threshold pressure; TV, threshold volume; MCP, max-
number of healthy cats undergoing infusion cystometry
imum contraction pressure. Illustration modified from Fischer, J.R.
(Cohen et al. 2009). In this crossover study, a few cats
and I.F. Lane (2007). Incontinence and urine retention. In: BSAVA
were also studied using isoflurane at 1.75% and 2% for
Manual of Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology. edited
restraint. Lower threshold volume measures and fewer
by Elliott and Grauer. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary
identifiable detrusor reflexes were observed (3 of 6).
Association, with permission.
bladder dysfunction, so the procedure may be indicated
Procedure
in the following kinds of patients (see Chapter 76):
If possible, the animal is allowed to void normally prior to
· Dogs with urinary incontinence refractory to tradi-
the study. Urinary catheterization is then routine, and the
bladder is completely emptied. Residual volume can be
tional medical therapies
· Juvenile dogs with congenital functional or anatomical
measured and assessed in this fashion. Ideally, a balloon
disorders
catheter is placed in the rectum in order to indirectly
record abdominal pressure (Gregory et al. 1999; Gold-
· Cats with urinary incontinence
· Dogs or cats with neurogenic disorders
stein and Westropp 2005). Once equipment and trans-
ducers are prepared, the ports of a double lumen catheter
· Dogs or cats with incomplete voiding
· Isolated cases of recurrent or chronic urinary tract
are connected to a pressure transducer line and fluid infu-
sion line, respectively. Sterile water or saline is infused at
infection
·To evaluate bladder function
1  in animals
3-20 mL/minute depending on the size of the patient.
6with
 detrusor-urethral dyssynergia
Slower rates provide results more reflective of natural
filling but are impractical in larger dogs (Barsanti 1995;
Goldstein and Westropp 2005). Infusion rates of up to
Sedation/restraint
100 mL/minute have been advocated for large dogs in
As for other urodynamic studies, cystometrographic
order to speed the study, but rapid infusion has fallen out
of favor. Filling rates of 5 and 10 mL/minute yielded
ing animals. However, most animals require sedation in 
 more representative threshold pressure measurements
order for this procedure to be performed to completion.
and less evidence of bladder wall damage than did 20
Because the procedure involves potentially uncomfort-
mL/minute in female Beagle dogs. However, these dogs
 able bladder distension, it may be inhumane to pro-
all weighed <20 kg (Hamaide et al. 2003). The pressure
ceed without sedation. However, the author has com-
within the urinary bladder is recorded during filling, cre-
pleted studies in nonsedated dogs and has observed a
ating a graph of pressure versus volume infused. Filling is
few dogs that actually fall asleep during slow bladder
 stopped when a detrusor contraction is observed or when
filling. Goldstein and Westropp (2005) described experi-
intravesicular pressure reaches 30-40 cm HzO in dogs.
ence with nonsedated cystometry in a small number of
The urinary bladder in cats appears to tolerate higher
Urodynamic studies  205
pressure challenges; mean threshold pressure was 75 cm
beagles (Lane 2000a). In a recent metanalysis, sensitiv-
HzO in one study (Cohen et al. 2009). Analysis of fill-
ity (0.55-0.82) and specificity (0.66-0.92) of the single-
ing volume, compliance, threshold volume, and pressure
 channel cystometrogram were reasonable for the diag-
can be completed either by urodynamic software system
nosis of detrusor overactivity in women (Martin et al.
packages or manually.
1996). In animals with urinary retention, the presence of
an adequate detrusor contractile peak can be used to rule
Diuresis cystometry
 out detrusor atony, whereas large filling volumes, a pro-
longed flat filling slope, and a lack of a sustained detru-
The ability to assess bladder function during natural
 sor contraction may support urinary bladder dysfunc-
filling improves the validity of results. Of course, the
tion of neurogenic or myogenic nature. However, many
time required for normal flling would increase study
normal animals will inhibit detrusor contractions dur-
time to an impractical length. Diuresis cytometry incor-
ing the cystometrogram, a feature that may be overcome
 porates the value of natural fll studies but speeds the
by repeated study (Johnson et al. 1988). The interpreta-
process using fluid and diuretic administration (Nickel
and Van Den Brom 1997). Bladder and urethral pressure
tion of an observed detrusor contraction also is limited
by the fact that its magnitude may vary and is depen-
are recorded as for retrograde fill cystometry; filling rate
dent on bladder volume at the time of contraction. Poor
 and threshold volume are determined by quantifying the
 detrusor function confirmed by urodynamic studies may
urine volume at the time of micturition, either by inter-
be neurogenic or myogenic in origin, and prognosis for
rupting micturition and withdrawing all the urine from
 recovery cannot be predicted on the basis of urodynamic
the bladder (Hamaide et al. 2003) or by using tracer iso-
measurements.
topes to calculate the volume of urine produced (Nickel
and Van Den Brom 1997). These techniques, while adding
to the cumbersome nature of the technique, have pro-
Contraindications and complications
vided additional insight into the urinary bladder contri-
As for other lower urinary tract manipulations, active
bution to urinary incontinence. In a group of dogs with
urinary tract infection should be treated prior to cys-
refractory urinary incontinence, 15/77 had urodynamic
 tometrography. Elimination of bacteriuria is especially
findings consistent with poor bladder storage function in
important when bladder distension is anticipated. Ret-
addition to poor urethral function, and another 10 dogs
rograde infusion of fluid could lead to reflux of infected
had urodynamic abnormalities of bladder function alone
 e    (i  ) 
(Nickel et al. 1999).
to ascending infection. Sterile fluid reflux can be dam-
aging to the upper urinary tract as well Juvenile ani-
Interpretation
mals may be most susceptible to fluid reflux, because the
 In normal animals, recorded intravesicular pressure is
vesicoureteral junction is not completely functional until
 low in the empty bladder and remains low during most
maturity.
of the flling phase, because the urinary bladder muscle
Cystometry should be avoided in situations where the
is highly compliant. In the CMG tracing, this phase is
urinary bladder wal is compromised, for example by
called tonus limb II ( TLII) and is measured as the flling
 recent acute overdistension (obstruction) or cystotomy.
slope (end pressure—start pressure/end volume—start
 Air cystometry should be avoided in patients with sig-
volume) (Figure 22.12). Sensation of pressure and the
nificant hematuria in order to avoid air embolism via
urge to urinate increase only when the bladder is stretched
compromised capillaries. Microscopic (and occasionally)
sufficiently to stimulate stretch receptors in the bladder
 gross hematuria are observed after cystometry in some
wall. As a threshold volume is approached, the pressure 
dogs and can be prevented by avoiding rapid or excessive
rises more rapidly (tonus limb IIl, TLII1) and leads to
bladder distension (Hamaide et al. 2005). Hematuria was
urinary bladder contraction. A normal urinary bladder
 not observed in a small group of healthy cats undergoing
 contraction should create a sustained high-pressure peak,
fluid cystometry, even when high filling pressures were
sufficient to empty the bladder (Oliver and Young 1973).
recorded (Cohen et al. 2009).
As an isolated study, the cystometrogram best iden-
tifies failure of urinary bladder storage function, char-
acterized by decreased capacity, decreased elasticity, and
Voiding studies
early involuntary detrusor contractions (Barsanti 1995).
Indications and procedures
The study has been used to characterize bladder dys-
function in dogs with ectopic ureters (Lane et al. 1995)
Urodynamic studies that include parameters of urine
and assess the effects of anticholinergic agents in healthy
flow, such as micturitional studies or uroflowmetry, are
206  Diagnostic testing
more likely to fully demonstrate the voiding phase of
ing cystourethrography with simultaneous urodynamic
micturition. Cystometry combined with uroflowmetry is
assessment should be feasible in small animal patients;
required for diagnosis of detrusor-urethral dyssynergia
however, the studies usually require general anaesthe-
in people and is necessary for accurate interpretation of
sia. Simultaneous contrast cystourethrography and cys-
bladder and urethral components of voiding disorders.
tometry was used to identify failure of urethral opening
Methods of recording urine flow include weight record-
 during induced voiding in one dog (Gookin and Bunch
 ing, electromagnetic fields, air displacement, rotating
1997).
trays, acoustic analysis, droplet dispersal analysis, and
 Ultrasound examination of the urinary bladder prior
radionuclide techniques. The measurement of urine
 to and following voiding can also be usefulin determining
flow in small animals is difficult, however, owing to the
residual volume. Crude estimates can be made by simple
difficulty of commanding urine flow, and of directing
visualization; quantitative estimates have been validated
urine flow to an appropriate flowmeter. Urine flow
(Atalan et al. 1998, 1999). Ultrasound examination of the
measurements also are affected by position, bladder
urinary bladder wall and proximal urethral anatomy is a
volume at voiding, age, and gender in people.
A
useful diagnostic tool in the evaluation ofincontinence in
disadvantage of this technique is the requirement for
women (Martin et al. 1996) but has not been investigated
transabdominal catheters. Micturition studies including
in dogs.
intravesicular pressure and urine flow measurement have
been described in dogs (Moreau et al. 1983a, 1983b).
Fluid infusion and intravesicular pressure were recorded
Conclusions
via percutaneously placed transabdominal catheters, and
urine flow was diverted into an adapted electromagnetic
Urodynamic studies provide objective and repeatable
measures of bladder and urethral function. Increased
flowmeter. The micturition study objectively identified
 outflow obstruction in one dog.
application of such studies would increase the evidence-
based nature of urologic practice. However, the cum-
diagnosed with micturitional urethral pressure proflom-
bersome nature of urodynamic procedures makes them
etry or videourodynamic studies, procedures that allow
impractical for routine veterinary practice. The many
objective or visual assessment of the bladder neck and
variable and technical details associated with urody-
 urethra during voiding. Detrusor-urethral dyssynergia
namic measurements emphasize the integration of mul-
is documented by demonstration of poor urine flow or
tiple components of urodynamic information prior to
conclusive diagnoses. Even with best practices, all urody-
increased intravesicular pressure (Blaivas and Chancellor
namic studies operate in an artificial situation that may or
may not mimic the natural state. In veterinary practice,
1996; Steele et al. 1998). The micturitional urethral pres-
sure profile is completed as a small multiport catheter
careful observation of voiding, with attention to initia-
is withdrawn during voiding. Detection of a pressure
tion, apparent abdominal straining, quality and force of
urine stream, and postvoid residual urine volume, usu-
differential (drop off) along the urethra localizes outlet
ally suffices as “applied urodynamic testing” in veterinary
obstruction. Alternatively, a static transurethral catheter
with multiple recording ports can be used to assess simul-
patients. Further investigation of unusual or refractory
 taneous bladder and multiple urethral pressures during
cases should be undertaken by urologists familiar with the
relative advantages and disadvantages of multiple lower
filling and voiding (Yamanishi et al. 1997). Interpreta-
tion is enhanced when correlated with video recordings
urinary tract tests.
of bladder and urethral events. Uroflow studies are chal-
 lenging in any species and rarely completed in small ani-
References
mal patients.
Arnold, S., D.J. Chew, et al. ( 1993). Reproducibility of urethral pressure
 s  s  i s r a  sn
imaging
microtransducer catheters. A J Vet Res 54: 1347-1351.
Atalan, G., F.J. Barr, et al. ( 1998). Assessment ofurinarybladder volume
Voiding videourography may demonstrate active out-
in dogs by use of linear ultrasonographic measurements. Arm I Vet
let obstruction and may be a useful substitute for urine
Res 59(1): 10- 15.
flow studies in veterinary patients. Postvoid images can
Atalan, G., FJ. Barr, et al. (1999). Comparison of ultrasonographic
be used to document residual urine volume although
and radiographic measurements ofbladder dimensions and volume
 it must be stressed that voiding during imaging proce-
determinations. Res Vet Sci 66(3): 175- 177.
Barsanti, J.A. ( 1995). Tests of lower urinary tract function. In: Canine
dures may not be accurate due to contrived position,
and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne and D.R.
bladder volume, and nonphysiologic filling rates. Void-
Finco. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, p. 316.
Urodynamic studies  207
Barsanti, J.A., D.R. Finco, etal. ( 1988). Effect of atropine on cystometry
Holt, P.E. (1988). Simultaneous urethral pressure profilometry: com-
and urethral pressure profilometry in the dog. Am I Vet Res 49:
parisons between continent and incontinent bitches. I Small Anim
112-114.
Pract 22: 98-104
Basinger, R.R., C.A. Rawlings, et al. (1987). Urodynamic alterations
Lane, I.F. (2000a). Use of anticholinergic agents in lower urinary tract
 after prostatectomy in dogs without clinical prostatic disease. Vet
disease. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIll, edited by J.D.
Surg 16: 405.
Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 899-902.
Basinger, R.R., C.A. Rawlings, et al. (1989). Urodynamic alterations
Lane, I.F. (200ob). Diagnosis and managerment of urine retention. Vet
Clin North Am 30: 25-57.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25: 385.
Lane, I.F, J.R. Fischer, et al. (2000). Functional urinary obstruction in
Blaivas, J. and M. Chancellor (1996). Synchronous pressure/uroflow
three dogs: urethral pressure profile results and response to alpha
and video-urodynamics. In: Atlas of Urodynarnics Baltimore, MD:
adrenergic antagonists. I Vet Intern Med 14: 43-49.
Williams and Wilkins, p. 88.
Lane, I.F, M.R. Lappin, et al. ( 1995). Evaluation of preoperative uro-
Byron, LK., P.A. March, et al. (2003). Comparison of the effect of
dynamic measurements in nine dogs with ectopic ureters. IArm Vet
 propofol and sevoflurane on the urethral pressure profile in healthy
Med Assoc 206: 1348-1357.
female dogs. Arm I Vet Res 64: 1288-1292.
Marks, S.L., I.M. Straeter-Knowlen, et al. (1996). Effects of acepro-
Byron, J.K., P.A. March, et al. (2007). Effect of phenylpropanolamine
mazine maleate and phenoxybenzamine on urethral pressure pro-
- pue ard ansd pen a u auuanssd p
files of anesthetized, healthy, sexually intact male cats. Arm J Vet Res
nence scores of incontinent female dogs. I Vet Intern Med 21: 47-
57: 1497-1500.
53.
Martin, J.L., K.S. Williams, et al. (2006). Systematic review and meta-
Carofiglio, F., A.J. Hamaide, et al. (2006) Evaluation of the urody-
 analysis of methods of diagnostic assessment for urinary inconti-
namic and hemodynamic effects of orally administered phenyl-
nence. Neurourol Urodyn 25: 674-683.
propanolamine and ephedrine in female dogs. Am J Vet Res 67:
Mawby, D.1., S.M. Meric, et al. (1990). Pharmacologic relaxation of
723-730.
the urethra in male cats: a study of the effects of phenoxybenzarmine,
Cohen, T.A., J.L. Westropp, et al. (2009). Evaluation of urodynamic
diazepam, nifedipine, and xylazine. Can I Vet Res 55: 28.
 procedures in female cats anesthetized with low and high doses of
Moreau, P.M., G.E. Lees, et al. ( 1983a). Simultaneous cystometry and
isoflurane and propofol. Arm I Vet Res 70: 290-296.
uroflowmetry (micturition study) for evaluation of the caudal part
Combrisson, H., G. Robain, et al. (1993). Comparative effects of
e   s      n o
xylazine and propofol on the urethral pressure profile of healthy
sedated with xylazine. Arm I Vet Res 44: 1774.
dogs. Arm I Vet Res 54: 1986- 1989.
Moreau, P.M., G.E. Lees, et al. ( 1983b). Simultaneous cystometry and
Fillippich, L.J., R.A. Read, et al. ( 1989). Functional urethral obstruction
uroflowmetry for evaluation of micturition in two dogs. I Am Vet
in a cat. Aust Vet Pract 19: 202.
Med Assoc 813: 1084.
Fischer, J.R., I.F Lane, et al. (2003). Urethral pressure profile and
 Nickel, R.F. and W. Van Den Brom ( 1997). Simultaneous diuresis cysto-
hemodynamic effects of phenoxybenzamine and prazosin in non-
urethrometry and multi-channel urethral pressure proflometry in
sedated male beagle dogs. Car I Vet Res 67: 30.
female dogs with refractory urinary incontinence. Arm I Vet Res 58:
Frenier, S.L., G.G. Knowlen, et al. (1992). Urethral pressure response
691-696.
Nickel, R.F., M.V. Vink-Noteboom, et al. (1999). Clinical and radio-
male cats. Arm I Vet Res 53: 1161.
 graphic fndings compared with urodynamic findings in neutered
Goldstein, R.E. and J.L. Westropp (2005). Urodynamic testing in the
female dogs with refractory urinary incontinence. Vet Rec 145:
diagnosis of small animal micturition disorders. Clin Tech Small
11-15.
Anim Pract 20: 65-72.
Oliver, J.E. and W.O.Young (1973a). Air cystometry in dogs under
Gookin, JL. and S.E. Bunch. (1997). Detrusor-striated sphincter
xylazine-induced restraint. Arm I Vet Res 34: 1433.
dyssynergia in a dog. I Vet Interr Med 10: 339.
Oliver, J.E. and W.O. Young (1973b). Evaluation of pharmacologic
Gregory, C.R. ( 1984). Electromyographic and urethral pressure pro-
 agents for restraint in cystometry in the dog and cat. Arm I Vet Res
filometry: clinical application in male cats. Vet Clin North Am (Sm
34: 665.
Anim Pract) 14: 567.
Oliver, JE. Jr. (1987). Urodynamic assessment. In: Veterinary Neu-
Gregory, S.P., P.E. Holt, et al. ( 1999). Suitability of the cranial portion
rology, edited by JE. Oliver Jr., B.E. Hoerlein, and I.G. Mayhew.
of the vagina as a site for measurement of intra-abdominal pressure
 Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, p. 180.
variations in dogs. Am I Vet Res 60: 1411-1414.
Rawlings, C.A., J.A. Barsanti, et al. (200la). Results of cystometry and
Johnson, C.A., J.M. Beermsterboer, et al. (1988). Effects of various
urethral pressure profilometry in dogs sedated with medetomidine
sedatives on air cystometry in dogs. Arm J Vet Res49: 1525.
or xylazine. Arm I Vet Res 62: 167-170.
Hamaide, A.J., I.G. Grand, et al. (2006). Urodynamic and morphologic
Rawlings, C., JA. Barsanti, et al. (200lb). Evaluation of colposuspen-
changes in the lower portion of the urogenital tract after administra-
tion of estriol alone and in combination with phenylpropanolamine
Med Assoc 219: 770-775.
in sexually intact and spayed fermale dogs. Arm I Vet Res 67: 901-
Rawlings, C.A., J.R. Coates, et al. (1999). Stress leak point pressures
908.
and urethral pressure profile tests in clinically normal female dogs.
Hamaide, A.J., I.P. Verstegen, et al. (2003). Validation and comparison
Am I Vet Res 60: 676-678.
of the use of diruesis cystometry and retrograde filling cystometry
Richter, K.P. and G.V. Ling (1985a). Clinical response and ure-
 at various infusion rates in female Beagle dogs. Am J Vet Res 64:
 thral pressure profile changes afer phenylpropanolamine in dogs
574-579.
Hamaide, A.J., J.P. Verstegen, et al. (2005). Influence of the estrous
605-611.
cycle on urodynamic and morphometric measurements ofthe lower
Richter, K.P. and G.V. Ling ( 1985b). Effects of xylazine on the urethral
portion of the urogenital tract in dogs. Am I Vet Res 66: 1075- 1083.
pressure profle of healthy dogs. Amm I Vet Res 46: 1881.
208
 Diagnostic testing
 Rosin, A.E. and J.A. Barsanti ( 1981). Diagnosis of urinary incontinence
Schafer, W., P. Abrams, et al. (2002). Good urodynamic practices:
in dogs: role of the urethral pressure profile. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 178:
uroflowmetry, filling cystometry, and pressure-flow studies. Neu-
814.
rourol Urodyn 21: 261-274.
Sackman, JE. and M.H. Sims ( 1990). Electromyographic evaluation
 Steele, G.S., M.P. Sullivan,et al. ( 1998). Urethral pressure profilometry:
of the external urethral sphincter during cystometry in male cats.
vesicourethral pressure measurements under resting and voiding
Am I Vet Res 51: 1237.
conditions. In: Practical Urodynarmics, edited by V.W. Nitti. Philadel-
Sackman, J.E. and M.H. Sims (1991). Use of fine-wire electrodes for
 phia, PA: WB Saunders, p. 108.
electromyographicevaluation of the external urethral sphincter dur-
Straeter-Knowlen, I.M., S.1. Marks, et al. (1995). Urethral pressure
ing urethral pressure profilometry in male cats. Arm I Vet Res52: 314.
response to smooth and skeletal muscle relaxants in anesthetized,
Sackman, J.E., M.H. Sims, et al. (199l). Urodynamic evaluation of
adult male cats with naturally acquired urethral obstruction. Arm I
lower urinary tract function in cats after perineal urethrostomy
Vet Res 56: 919.
with minimal and extensive dissection. Vet Surg 20: 55.
Yamanishi, T., K. Yasuda, et al. ( 1997). The nature of detrusor bladder
Salomon, J.E, M. Gouriou, et al. (2006). Experimental study of urody-
 neck dyssynergia in non-neurogenic bladder dysfunction. I Auton
namic changes after ovariectomy in 10 dogs. Vet Rec 159: 807-811.
Nerv Sys 66: 163.
23
Renal biopsy
George E. Lees and Anne Bahr
The fundamental purpose of a renal biopsy usually is
 stages by screening tests used to monitor health sta-
to obtain information that can help a clinician manage
tus. Benefits arise from this because it is in such earlier
a patient's illness more astutely than might be possible
stages that the pathologic changes associated with spe-
without the biopsy and thus to obtain the best avail-
cific renal diseases are most distinctive and treatment is
able outcome. This information can take the form of a
more likely to be effective. Additionally, a growing num-
diagnosis of a particular nephropathic illness for which
ber of veterinarians have the expertise required to manage
specific therapeutic options can be defined or refined.
complex disorders affecting the kidneys, and the number
Additionally, and usually independent of identifying a
and scope (from administration of medications to renal
specific etiopathogenic diagnosis, renal biopsy typically
replacement therapies) of effective treatments that are
yields information about the severity, activity, chronic-
 available for patients with renal diseases are increasing.
ity, and/or potential reversibility of pathologic changes
that are present, which supports clinical decision-making
Indications for renal biopsy
about prognosis and treatment (Osborne et al. 1996;
Vaden 2004; Vaden and Brown 2007).
Clinical settings in which renal biopsy may be considered
 In the past, renal biopsy has been utilized infrequently
include acute renal failure (see Chapter 49), glomeru-
by veterinarians caring for animals with kidney diseases.
lar disease manifested by proteinuria (i.e., protein-losing
This has been true for many reasons, but the most impor-
nephropathies) (see Chapter 53), and chronic renal fail-
tant contributing factors have been (1) initial detection of
ure (see Chapter 48). Our preference is to subdivide and
kidney disease only after it has reached an advanced stage,
 approach each of these categories as follows.
(2) infrequent use of the methods of pathologic exami-
nation of kidney that are required to make informative
Acute renal failure
Episodes of acute renal failure generally can be subdivided
findings with such clinical features of the illness as clin-
as acute nephritis or acute nephrosis, with the nephritis
icopathologic findings, disease course, and response to
category being marked by clinical evidence of an inflam-
treatment. In these circumstances, renal biopsy has been
matory process either at the systemic level (e.g-, fever
unable to aid the care of many patients with kidney dis-
and hematologic changes) or within the urinary tract
ease; clinicians generally have been able to make appro-
(e.g-, urinalysis findings). In acute nephritis, there often
priate clinical decisions without information derived
from a renal biopsy.
are sufficient grounds for presumptive diagnosis of some
disorder (e.g., leptospirosis) that can be managed appro-
Going forward, renal biopsy can be expected to have
priately without a biopsy. However, when there is recent
a more useful and prominent role in the management of
kidney diseases in animals. This is partly because renal
active and ongoing renal injury due to an uncertain cause,
a renal biopsy should be strongly considered. The goals of
diseases are more often being detected in their earlier
biopsy in this setting are to clarify etiopathogenesis, refine
the therapeutic plan, and assess severity and prognosis.
A second category of acute renal failure is nephrosis
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
which usually is due to some toxic and/or ischemic cause.
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
209
210  Diagnostic testing
(e.g-, ethylene glycol, other crystal-associated forms of
frequently present; however, edema or ascites is uncom-
tubular injury) can be identified on the basis of biopsy
mon.
findings. Moreover, even when a cause is identified, the
The nephritic clinical picture most often is associated
finding rarely has direct therapeutic implications (i.e., for
with glomerular diseases having a substantial compo-
administration of specific therapy, as opposed to contin-
nent of endocapillary inflammation, the most common
example of which is membranoproliferative glomeru-
lonephritis, type I, particularly during the earlier phases
sibilities when the etiopathogenic diagnosis is in doubt,
of the process of injury. The goals of biopsy in animals
but usually are mainly to assess the severity and potential
-   ii  s odu 
 reversibility of the changes that are present. This prog-
rate diagnosis, to refine the therapeutic plan, and to assess
nostic information can have a large impact on clinical
prognosis (i.e., severity and activity of the changes that
decisions about whether or not to continue ongoing care
are present). In animals with acute, rapidly worsening
that often is a difficult burden (financially and otherwise)
nephritic glomerular diseases, very aggressive therapeu-
 for everyone concerned (patient, clinician, and owners).
 tic interventions may be justified, provided that the diag-
Biopsy of animals with chronic kidney disease (CKD)
 in IRIS stage IV or late stage III usually is unrewarding
Animals  with  nephrotic  glomerulopathies exhibit
and should be avoided. Nonetheless, one potential indi-
 se t r d  
cation for biopsy in animals known to have CKD is detec-
hypoalbuminemia that can be severe but may or may
tion of an abrupt increment in magnitude of azotemia
not be associated with clinically evident edema or third-
that might be due to superimposition of a process of an
space accumulation of transudates (e.g-, ascites, pleu-
acute (i.e., potentially treatable) injury on the chronic
ral effusion). Animals with nephrotic glomerulopathies
disease. In such circumstances, the lower (milder) the
usually have totally inactive urine sediments and often
azotemia initially (i.e., before the recent increment), the
do not have azotemia, especially early in the course of
more likely the biopsy is to be informative. The more
the nephropathy. Hypertension is a variable feature of
advanced CKD becomes, the more difficult it is to dis-
nephrotic glomerulopathies.
cern signs of acute injury among the chronic changes.
 The nephrotic clinical presentation most often is asso-
Additionally, although CKD often exhibits a slow and
ciated with glomerular diseases that disrupt visceral
steady pattern of progression, some animals with CKD
epithelial cell (podocyte) function without generating
show an erratic pattern of progression characterized by
inflammation in the endocapillary compartment. The
 periods of stability that are interrupted from time to time
prototypical condition that does this is membranous
by abrupt decrements of function that do not have any
glomerulopathy. Minimal change disease is another con-
specific cause that can be identified even with a biopsy.
dition that might be considered, but this diagnosis has
been very uncommon in dogs and cats that have been
evaluated to date. Additionally, amyloidosis often pro-
Protein-losing nephropathies
Animals with protein-losing glomerular disease also may
glomerular inflammation.
be subdivided on clinical grounds into several categories,
Goals of biopsy in animals with nephrotic glomeru-
namely, nephritic or nephrotic glomerulopathies and
lopathies are to obtain an accurate diagnosis as a basis
glomerular disease characterized by persistent subclin-
for planning therapy, and to assess indicators of disease
ical renal proteinuria.
 severity and/or activity that might correlate with prog-
 Nephritic glomerulopathies are characterized by pro-
nosis or anticipated response to treatment. Animals with
teinuria that can have a wide range of magnitude but
 nephrotic glomerulopathies exhibit a wide range of stages
often is in the nephrotic range (arbitrarily defined as
of disease, and it is likely that biopsy-derived informa-
UPC > 3.5), with or without accompanying hypoalbu-
tion about the stage of disease can help to predict clinical
minemia that usually is of mild to moderate severity when
course and outcome.
 it is present, and urinalysis findings that include signs 
Animals with persistent subclinical renal proteinuria
of inflammation in the urinary tract (e.g., microscopic
(i.e., proteinuria that is not of prerenal or postrenal ori-
hematuria, mild pyuria). Most animals with nephritic
 gin and has been repeatedly documented over a period
glomerulopathies exhibit some degree of azotemia (the
of a month or more in an animal that exhibits no related
magnitude of which can range from mild to severe)
that typically also shows a rising trend in cases of acute
but it usually is of mild to moderate severity and asso-
nephritic glomerular disease. Additionally, hypertension
ciated with normal or only mildly decreased circulating
that often is severe and difficult to control medically is
albumin concentrations. These animals may or may not
Renal biopsy 211
be azotemic. Indeed, this category overlaps with CKD,
Contraindications for renal biopsy
especially in IRIS stages I and 1l, and early in stage III
(see aforementioned text). These animals are among the
Regardless of the indications for a renal biopsy, it should
 most challenging ones in which to decide whether or not
not be performed (or it should at least be delayed until
the patient's condition is stabilized) if it cannot be per-
a biopsy will be useful. It is fair to say that the higher
formed safely. The main renal biopsy complication of
the UPC and the lower (more normal or near normal)
clinical concern is life-threatening hemorrhage (Bigge
the serum creatinine concentration, the more a recom-
mendation to biopsy can be supported; however, each
  1 1  1     
ated with increased risk of this complication are small
case should be considered individually (i.e., rather than
patient size (i.e., small size of the biopsy target relative to
by applying any specific UPC or serum creatinine cut-
adjacent large vessels), especially animals that weigh less
offs). Nonetheless, in border-line cases, it makes sense to
be swayed toward biopsy by finding a lack of response
than 5 kg, as well as the presence of disordered hemosta-
sis (thrombocytopenia, prolonged bleeding time, etc.)
to or worsening trends during nonspecific interventions
(i.e., feding an appropriate diet and administering drugs
or uncontrolled hypertension. Other relative or abso-
 to block portions of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
lute contraindications to renal biopsy include infection,
 especially abscesses or localized infections that might be
system).
pierced or disseminated by the biopsy procedure, large
Whether or not the animal might benefit from admin-
renal cysts, inadequate control of patient pain or motion
istration of immunosuppressive therapy often is a key
(including breathing), and inadequate operator compe-
question that the clinician is hoping to address when
 performing renal biopsy in animals with subclinical renal
tence.
proteinuria. Criteria that can be used to answer this ques-
tion, particularly regarding when it can or will be bene-
Timing of renal biopsy
ficial, have not been developed. However, there are two
situations that occur fairly frequently in which biopsy
Animals with acute nephritis or nephrosis, as well as
those with acute nephritic glomerular disease, generally
 apy is not appropriate. One is when there is no evidence
should be biopsied as soon as they are sufficiently well
of glomerular deposition of immune complexes shown
stabilized to permit performing the procedure safely. Ani-
by either ultrastructural evaluation or immunostaining.
mals with nephrotic glomerular diseases usually do not
The second is when despite the presence of some immune
need to be biopsied as urgently as animals with nephritic
complex deposits, the predominant glomerular changes
conditions, and they sometimes need reduction of their
are those of chronic scarring (i.e., glomerulosclerosis)
fluid accumulations, especially ascites, before the biopsy
rather than of any active, ongoing process of injury that
is performed. For animals with subclinical renal protein-
might be mitigated by immunosuppressive therapy.
uria, the timing of renal biopsy is an issue that requires
clinical judgment. One should be guided first by veri-
fying that the proteinuria is persistent and then by the
Miscellaneous circumstances
magnitudes and rates of change of the proteinuria and
There are a few other circumstances in which renal biopsy
any associated azotemia. In animals with juvenile-onset
deserves consideration. One of these is when an animal
nephropathies, a renal biopsy sometimes can be obtained
exhibits a juvenile-onset nephropathy. In some cases,
in concert with anesthetic episodes or surgery performed
definitive diagnosis of the type of changes present (or
for other reasons (e.g., elective castration or ovariohys-
their likelihood to be attributable to an inherited defect)
 terectomy). Similarly, renal biopsy may be indicated dur-
is sufficiently important to justify biopsy. Although the
       si 
apy (i.e., because the more frequent types of congeni-
Renal biopsy methods
tal or inherited renal disease do not have specific treat-
ments that are effective), biopsy-derived information can
Performing a renal biopsy requires selection of a suit-
influence breeding decisions for related animals and con-
able method of approaching or locating the target kid-
tribute to a more informed prognosis than might other-
ney and choice of a device or method for retrieving the
wise be available. Yet another special circumstance occurs
tissue. Ultrasound-guided needle biopsy techniques are
when owners of dialysis-dependent animals are faced
commonly employed and generally are quite satisfac-
with difficult choices that hinge on the likelihood that
tory when the expected changes are likely to be diffusely
adequate renal function will be regained if treatment is
distributed in the renal cortex (as is the case in most
continued.
 glomerular disorders and instances of acute renal failure).
212
 Diagnostic testing
A variety of automated biopsy devices that procure satis-
observation is that when surgeons use biopsy needles
factory specimens when they are used properly are avail-
to obtain specimens of kidney during a laparotomy,.
able commercially. The size of needle used, both in terms
they often direct the devices too deeply. This problem
of its diameter and depth of penetration (i.e., length of
 is avoided when a wedge biopsy is obtained at surgery.
throw), should be appropriate for the size of the target,
Additionally, this type of biopsy is better for evaluation
which can be assessed directly when using sonographic
of renal changes that are not uniformly distributed in
guidance. When the cortex is thin either because the ani-
cortex, as often is the case in animals with juvenile-onset
mal is small or because of effects of disease, use of a
nephropathies.
short-throw needle (e.g-, 11-mm throw; 7-mm specimen
Adequate planning for a renal biopsy also requires
notch) is recommended to aid in keeping the biopsy tracts
prior procurement of the materials needed to process and
entirely within the cortex even if it is necessary to take
submit tissue samples that will be suitable for the exam-
a few more samples in order to obtain sufficient tissue
inations required to perform an appropriate evaluation.
for all intended evaluations (Groman et al. 2004). If the
For glomerular disorders and some other conditions,
samples are intact (ie., not fragmented) and are han-
light microscopic examination alone is not sufficient
dled carefully, the cores of tissue provided by 18-gauge
(Walker et al. 2004). Moreover, the specimens required
needle biopsy devices generally are quite satisfactory for
for electron microscopic examination or immunostain-
most purposes. Nonetheless, all other things being equal,
ing must be appropriately processed and placed into
larger diameter needles (e.g-, 16 ga, rather than 18 ga)
the proper fixatives and preservatives when the tis-
often yield more informative samples and are preferable
 sue specimens are first obtained. The centers that per-
when they can be used safely.
form these evaluations provide renal biopsy kits con-
Ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of kidney gener-
taining the materials and instructions needed to obtain,
ally should be performed under general anesthesia so
process, and submit satisfactory specimens to their
as to have sufficient control over patient discomfort
laboratories.
and motion, including breathing, during the procedure.
 The cortex ofthe kidney is the proper target for all renal
 There are several different combinations of patient posi-
biopsy procedures for two important reasons, the first of 
tions, scanning angles, needle directions, and aspects of
which is safety (Figure 23.1). Biopsy needle tracts that
the kidney to be the biopsy target(s) that can be used
 cross the corticomedullary junction are associated with
 successfully depending on operator preferences. Some
risk of damaging the large vessels (e.g-, arcuate arteries)
      e d n 
that are located there and thus causing both excess hem-
less mobile (i.e., it holds still better) than the left kidney;
orrhage and greater damage to the renal parenchyma as a
however, others prefer the left kidney due to its more cau-
 dal location. Some operators prefer to use a biopsy guide
attached to the scanning probe to direct the needle biopsy
device, but others prefera "free hand" technique in which
the probe and biopsy device are not connected to one
another and can be manipulated independently until the
operator is certain that the needle is positioned optimally.
Although a scan plane that includes both cortex and
medulla often makes the kidney easy to recognize, a scan
 plane that includes only cortex (within which the biopsy
tract will be confined) is recommended for renal biopsy.
After identifying the kidney, the operator should rotate
or shift the scan plane so that only cortex remains in the
plane in which the biopsy needle will be placed. When the
Correct
Incorrect
scan plane and direction of needle placement have been
identified, a small stab incision is made through the skin
Figure 23.1 Schematic ilustrations of correct and incorrect meth-
at the entry point to minimize dulling of the biopsy needle
ods of directing a needle biopsy device for renal biopsy. Note that
before it is advanced through the body wall to the kidney.
the needle should be directed such that the entire biopsy tract
Needle biopsy devices also can be used in combination
is within the renal cortex. The needle should not cross the corti-
with other aiming methods, including manual palpation
comedullary junction or enter either the renal medulla or pelvis.
(e.g-, in cats), laparoscopy, and a keyhole or fully
Reprinted by permission from Elsevier: Vaden, S.L. (2004). Renal
open celiotomy (Grauer et al. 1983; Osborne et al. 1996;
biopsy: methods and interpretation. Vet Clin North Amer: Sm Anim
Vaden 2004; Vaden and Brown 2007). However, one
Pract 34: 887-908, copyright 2004.
Renal biopsy213
(a)
(b)
Figure 23.2 Mobile cart used at Texas A&M University to aid the processing of renal biopsy specimens. The cart is readily taken to
whatever site in the hospital (e.g., surgery or ultrasound suite, etc.) where specimen collection is planned. (a) View of the cart as prepared
ads ssasse o pasn aq ue pium jo saua 'adno buube pue adossou buassip aui anon ahs-uo Asdo e buissaoid rog
content. There also is an ice bucket to keep the fixative for electron microscopy chilled, as well as a thermos containing liquid nitrogen
used to snap freeze samples for immunofluorescence microscopy after a shallow puddle of the liquid nitrogen is poured into the styrofoam
freezing box. (b) View of the cart as prepared for processing specimens off-site utiling the materials provided in renal biopsy kits that
are available from centers that perform comprehensive pathologic evaluations. The reclosable plastic bag contains appropriate fixatives
aasad e pe [aos uala lo (ael pan y ea apaeen e doso o (ea do-uaa u o]
[Michel's transport medium (vial with blue label) for immunofluorescence microscopy]. Tissue samples are placed on the glass slides for
examination and kept moist with the saline solution in the syringe. The forceps have no teeth and are suitable for delicate manipulation of
the samples. There are a sufficient number of forceps and single-edge razor blades used to separate instruments for specimens intended
for each type of fixative or preservative to prevent cross-contamination. The pipettes are used to transferfluids from the sample containers
to the surface of the glass slides and then to wash the samples off the glass slides into their respective specimen containers.
result of ischemia or infarction of the region(s) served by
the damaged vessel(s). Secondly, renal cortex is the pri-
mary tissue of interest for almost all purposes for which
biopsies of kidney are obtained. Indeed, all glomeruli
are in the cortex, and a renal biopsy for evaluation of
glomerular disease is wholly inadequate if it does not
contain an adequate sample of cortical tissue.
Visual assessment of the composition of the tissue
cores obtained to verify that they contain glomeruli
(ie., that the samples to be submitted for evaluation
d ui ds in e i (ns n e
a renal biopsy that often is overlooked (Figure 23.2). This
task is best accomplished with a low level of magnifica-
tion (10-40x), such as can be achieved with a dissect-
ing microscope, an ocular loupe, or a hand held lens,
 and good illumination. With such magnification, several
Figure 23.3 Renal biopsy specimen as seen with a dissecting
aspects of the appearance of core biopsy specimens aid
microscope. (a) Renal cortex, not the glomeruli, recognized as
differentiation of cortex from medulla (Figure 23.3). One
round red areas (wet preparation x10). (b) Renal medulla, reddish
 s n  s s n  n  s
vasculature is present by no glomeruli seen (wet preparation x 10,
 small spherical structures (or merely as spherical disrup-
tions in the surrounding pattern of tubules). However,
mission from Macmillan Publishers, Ltd: Walker, P.D., et al. (2004).
even when individual glomeruli are not recognized, the
Practice guidelines for the renal biopsy. Mod Pathol 17(12):
cortex usually can be distinguished from medulla based
1555-1563, copyright 2004.
214
 Diagnostic testing
1st
and manipulated with great care (i.e., very gently and
Cortex
2nd
core
core
without grasping them with forceps) as they are collected,
assessed, processed, and placed in appropriate fixatives or
EM
preservatives.
In general, it is best to collect at least two cortical cores
if each is >10 mm long. When the cores are shorter than
10 mm each, 3 cores usually are required. Needle biopsy
cores do not need to be cut into smaller pieces except as
LM
needed to subdivide them appropriately separate evalua-
tions (Figure 23.4); however, a portion of a wedge biopsy
specimen must be carefully cut into pieces that are no
 greater than 1-2 mm in any dimension before place-
ment in the fixative (e.g., 3% glutaraldehyde in phosphate
buffer) for electron microscopy.
References
Bigge, L.A., D.J. Brown, et al. (200l). Correlation between coagulation
profile findings and bleeding complications after ultrasound-guided
EM
biopsies: 434 cases (193- 1996). I Arm Arnirm Hosp Assoc 37: 228-233.
Medulla
Grauer, G.F, D.C. Twedt, et al. ( 1983). Evaluation of laparoscopy for
obtaining renal biopsy specimens from dogs and cats. I Am Vet Med
Figure 23.4 Diagram to illustrate division of renal biopsy cores
in the absence of a dissecting microscope for laboratories using
Assoc 183: 677-679.
Groman, R.P., A. Bahr, et al. (2004). Effects of serial ultrasound-guided
immunofluorescence. The ends from all cores are taken for elec-
renal biopsies on kidneys of healthy adolescent dogs. Vet Radiol
tron microscopy with the remainder divided for light microscopy
Utrasound 45: 62-69.
and immunofluorescence. Reprinted by permission from Macmil-
Osborne, C.A., I.W. Bartges, et al. (1996). Percutaneous needle biopsy
lan Publishers, Ltd: Walker, P.D., et al. (2004). Practice guidelines
of the kidney; indications, applications, technique, and complica-
for the renal biopsy. Mod Pathol 17(12): 1555-1563, copyright
tions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26: 1461-1504.
2004
Vaden, S.L. (2004). Renal biopsy: methods and interpretation. Vet Clir
North Am Small Anim Pract 34: 887-908.
Vaden, S.L., and C.A. Brown (2007). Renal biopsy. In: BSAVA Manual
of Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by JA. Eliott
on the general architecture of the tissue because tubules
and G.F. Grauer, 2nd Edition. Quedgeley, Gloucester, UK: British
 in cortical tissue are convoluted (i.e., they appear jum-
 Small Animal Veterinary Association, p. 167-177.
bled in an irregular pattern), whereas those in medulla are
Vaden, S.L., J.F. Levine, et al. (2005). Renal biopsy: a retrospective study
of methods and complications in 283 dogs and 65 cats. I Vet Interr
straight and arrayed in parallel with one another. Addi-
Med 19: 794-801.
tionally, the specimens should be kept moist (i.e., never
Walker, P.D., T. Cavallo, et al. (2004). Practice guidelines for the renal
 placed on dry sponges) with physiologic saline solution
biopsy. Mod Pathol 17: 1555- 1563.
24
Renal pathology
Cathy Brown
Introduction
intensely stains the distal tubules and collecting ducts
(Figure 24.1).
Evaluation of the morphologic changes occurring in the
 e  ee i nq rd a
 diseased kidney requires an appreciation of normal renal
as the distal segment, so more tubular cross-sections in
structure and function and an understanding of how the
the cortex are proximal. Proximal tubules are also distin-
kidney may respond to injury. The lesions present in renal
guished from distal tubules by their prominent brush bor-
 d   e s ss
der (Figure 24.2). While most toxins and ischemic insults
(acute or chronic) with minimal secondary changes to
affect proximal tubules, some toxins (most notably
chronic disease in which the secondary changes may
 melamine/cyanuric acid) affect distal tubules. Lesions
obscure the etiology of the initial insult. The goal of
 present within glomeruli may be focal (less than 50%
pathologic evaluation and characterization of both pri-
 of glomeruli involved) or generalized (all or almost all
mary and secondary disease processes occurring in a
 glomeruli involved). Within an affected glomerulus, the
renal biopsy is to provide the veterinary clinical nephrol-
lesion may be segmental (only part of the capillary tuft
ogist with accurate information important for treatment
affected) or global (the entire tuft involved). As most
and prognosis. Renal biopsies are most often obtained
primary glomerular diseases in dogs and cats are gener-
from animals with either clinically acute renal disease or
alized, it is possible that a diagnosis could be made based
protein-losing nephropathy. As the renal lesions caus-
on the appearance of a single glomerulus. However, as
ing these clinical diseases are occurring in the cortical
there may be variability both in the severity of the pri-
tubulointerstitium or glomeruli, the biopsy should be
mary glomerular lesion and the secondary glomerular
composed entirely or predominantly of cortical tissue.
changes, a minimum of five glomeruli should be present
While acute pyelonephritis or acute papillary necrosis
in the submitted biopsy. The number ofglomeruli present
are potential causes of acute renal disease that cannot be
ue se jodau Asdoiq aui ut paeis aq pinous Asdoiq au u
diagnosed based on examination of cortical renal tissue
indication of the adequacy of the biopsy.
alone, diagnostic methods other than renal biopsy are
 Glomeruli, tubules, the interstitium, and blood vessels 
 more appropriate for these diseases.
(arteries and arterioles) are initially evaluated in slides
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) in order to
 determine lesion distribution, severity, and the primary
Initial approach to renal biopsy evaluation
site of renal disease. The primary site of injury within
the nephron may be suspected prior to biopsy based
The normal renal cortex contains numerous tubules
on clinical data, and it is important to convey this
and scattered glomeruli within a scant interstitium.
information to the nephropathologist. Animals with
The distribution of proximal tubules versus distal
 severe proteinuria that are not azotemic will be more
tubule/collecting ducts can be readily appreciated with
likely to have lesions confined to the glomerulus, while
immunohistochemical staining for cytokeratin, which
those with increasing severity of azotemia are more likely
 to have secondary interstitial and glomerular changes.
It may be impossible to determine the primary site of
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
injury (glomerular versus tubulointerstitial) in animals
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
215
216
 Diagnostic testing
Figure 24.1 Normal renal cortex containing glomeruli (arrow-
Figure 24.2 Normal renal glomerulus stained with PASH, dog
heads) and numerous tubular profiles, dog. Distal tubular profiles
Note the dark pink staining of the tubular basement membranes,
(arrows, darkly staining with cytokeratin) are fewer in number
Bowman's capsule, the glomerular basement membrane (short
than proximal tubules, reflecting the longer length of the proximal
arrow), mesangial matrix (long arrow), and the proximal tubular
segment. Immunohistochemistry, pancytokeratin, original magni-
brush border (asterisk). The vascular pole (VP) and adjacent macula
fication 200x.
densa are also evident. PASH, original magnification 400x .
with more chronic renal disease with moderate azotemia
lar BM, which may occur as a nonspecific response to
and mild to moderate proteinuria. In addition to H&E
ischemia. This stain is also used to evaluate the quan-
stains, a battery of other stains is routinely used for
tity of mesangial matrix; mesangial matrix expansion or
evaluation of the renal biopsy. As thicker sections will
glomerulosclerosis is indicative of mesangial cell activa-
appear more cellular, have more mesangial matrix, and
tion and may be a primary or secondary response to
have thicker glomerular capillary loops, renal biopsies
-deo ar nn rns se sie es au an
-z ie pienaa pue puos non aq Pinos
 lary tuft, and is normally present as fine anastomosing
um. Thin sections are stained with periodic acid-Schiff
branches confined to the central portions of the capillary
hematoxylin (PASH) and Masson's trichrome. As listed
tuft (Figure 24.2). PASH is also used to evaluate changes
in Table 24.1, PASH stains all basement membranes (BM)
in the glomerular capillary wall in suspected cases of
and the mesangial matrix dark pink (Figure 24.2).
glomerulonephritis (BM spikes or reduplication). Alter-
 In the absence of significant interstitial pathology, the
natively, methanamine silver stains with various counter-
 BM of tubules will be touching each other; subtle tubular
stains may also be used to effectively demonstrate GBM
separation is readily appreciated with this stain. PASH
changes. Masson's trichrome stain accentuates interstitial
also demonstrates wrinkling of the tubular BM, indica-
fibrosis by staining collagen blue. Fibrosis is indicative of
tive of tubular atrophy, and thickening of the tubu-
chronic disease, and the severity of fibrosis is positively
Table 24.1 Special stains used in evaluation of renal biopsies
 Stain 
Features
Use
 PASH
Dark pink staining of BMs of glomerular capillaries,
Initial evaluation of GBM thickness, GBM spikes, GBM
Bowman's capsule, and tubules; mesangial matrix; and 
splitting, mesangial matrix expansion, highlights any
proximal tubule brush border
tubular separation or tubular atrophy, tubular injury with
loss of brush border
Masson's
Dark blue staining of interstitial collagen, lighter blue
Assessment of amount of interstitial fibrosis,
trichrome
 staining of BMs and mesangial matrix, magenta staining
demonstration of immune deposits in glomerulonephritis 
of glomerular immune deposits
Congo red
 Amyloid deposits in glomeruli, vessels, tubular BMs, or
Identification of eosinophilic deposits as amyloid
uaaa-adde Aq pauo :ahueno-pal uieis wnsia
birefringence of stained material under polarized light
Renal pathology  217
(a)
(b)
Figure 24.3 Glomerular amyloidosis, dog. (a) Nodular accumulations of red-orange homogeneous material (arrows) expand the
glomerulus, separating resident cells. Hyaline casts (asterisk), indicative of proteinuria, are present within distal tubules. Congo red. (b)
When view under polarized light, Congo red-stained deposits exhibit apple-green birefringence. Original magnification 600 x.
correlated with the degree of renal dysfunction. Intersti-
tant to renal failure during conditions that cause ischemic
tial fibrosis is a poor prognostic indicator, as it is asso-
ATN in people.
ciated with irreversible renal injury and nephron loss.
The proximal tubule is the segment of the nephron
Masson's trichrome may also be used to detect immune
 most susceptible to toxic (and ischemic) injury. This
 deposits in the glomerular capillary, which stain magenta
susceptibility of the proximal tubule is a reflection of
with this stain. Biopsies with glomerular deposits sug-
their large microvillous surface area, their normal high
gestive of amyloid should be cut at 5-8 um, stained with
absorptive and excretory function (may excrete toxins
Congo red or Standard Toluidine Blue, and viewed with
into this segment), and their high oxygen requirements.
polarized light to confirm this diagnosis (Figure 24.3).
As not all cortical tubules are proximal and because the
 Thick sections are required for sufficient binding of the 
proximal tubule may be segmentally affected, the tubular
dye for visualization of birefringence under polarized
necrosis will appear patchy in distribution, with affected
light.
tubules being adjacent to relatively normal tubules. This
"patchy” distribution of ATN will be present similarly
throughout the cortex, so the lesion should be present in
Lesions of acute intrinsic renal disease
any cortical biopsy. The histologic severity of toxic ATN
 Renal biopsy may be indicated in animals with acute
may vary from mild (often described as “"nephrosis") with
renal failure, as the lesions may suggest a cause with
sloughing of small numbers of necrotic of epithelial cells
a specific treatment and may facilitate prognostication
and brush border loss ("tubular simplification") to frank
(Vaden and Brown, 2007) The lesions of acute renal fail-
epithelial cell necrosis affecting most cells in the affected
ure typically involve the tubulointerstitium and can be
tubular segment (lily toxicosis). Depending on the disease
evaluated with light microscopy alone. Acute intrinsic
process, there may be severe functional abnormalities
renal failure in dogs and cats is most often toxic in etiol-
 despite relatively minor morphologic changes. For exam-
 Ogy, resulting in acute tubular necrosis (ATN) ( Worway,
ple, young dogs with acute septicemic leptospirosis may
2008; Behrend, 1996). In contrast, ATN causing acute
have severe azotemia and extra-renal lesions of uremia
renal failure in people is more often ischemia in nature
(uremic gastritis and pneumonitis, vascular fibrinoid
and is due to decreased renal blood flow associated with
necrosis) but only mild, potentially unrecognized lesions
hypotension/shock, blood loss, hypovolemia, or sepsis.
of renal tubular dilation due to brush border loss and mild
Although ischemia may play a contributing role in some
ATN. The cause of the mild ATN in these dogs is thought
cases of ATN in dogs and cats, particularly when there is
to be due to toxic factors released by the spirochetes
evidence of underlying chronic renal disease, it appears
(Davila de Arriga et al., 1982). Due to the acute nature
as though the canine and feline kidney are relatively resis-
of the infection, these dogs will typically not yet have
218
 Diagnostic testing
Figure 24.4 Acute tubular nephrosis, ethylene glycol toxicosis,
Figure 24.5 Acute tubular necrosis, lily toxicosis, cat. Some seg-
dog. Large numbers of pale green oxalate crystals are present
ments of the proximal tubule exhibit massive necrosis (asterisks)
within tubules (arrowheads). There is mild associated renal tubu-
while others are lined by fewer attenuated viable epithelial cells.
lar necrosis characterized by individual cell pyknosis and hypere-
There is evidence of epithelial regeneration with large nuclei
osinophilia; these necrotic cells often slough into the tubular lumen
(arrowheads) and mitotic figures (arrow) present. Note relative
(arrows). H&E, original magnification 400x.
sparing of distal tubule (DT). H&E, original magnification 400× .
positive serologic leptospira titers, and renal inflamma-
indistinct cell borders. As the cell damage progresses, this
tion is minimal or not present. Ethylene glycol toxicosis
is nuclear fragmentation or lysis, and cells slough into the
results in the deposition of large numbers of calcium
lumen. In more severely affected cats and in cats dying of
oxalate crystals in both proximal and distal tubules
lily nephrotoxicosis, the lining epithelium may be com-
(Figure 24.4).
 pletely absent in some proximal tubular cross-sections
Microscopically, there are only small numbers of
 and the lumen filled with a granular hypereosinophilic
necrotic tubular epithelial cells, and this necrosis is often
coagulum (Figure 24.5).
confined to cells in direct contact with the crystals.
Other tubules are lined by attenuated cells as the tubu-
The renal diagnosis “severe oxalate nephrosis" reflects
lar epithelium spreads to cover areas of denuded BM. The
the large numbers of crystals present and the mini-
ultrastructural finding of enlarged “megamitochrondria"
mal histologic evidence of necrosis. Calcium oxalate
in proximal tubular epithelial cells suggests that the mito-
crystals may result in tubular obstruction and cause
chondria are the cellular target in lily toxicosis.
 direct tubular damage by altering membrane structure
Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity may manifest as
and function, increasing reactive oxygen species, and
 proximal tubule brush border loss, although in higher
interfering with epithelial cell oxidative phosphorylation
doses or in conjunction with preexisting renal disease
(McMartin, 2009). The presence of large numbers of
tubular cell necrosis may occur (Maxie et al., 2007).
oxalate crystals in tubules is virtually diagnostic of ethy-
Some toxins, most notably melamine/cyanuric acid,
lene glycol toxicosis. However, small numbers of oxalates 
affect the distal rather than the proximal tubules in
(secondary oxalosis) may be observed in tubules in ani-
affected dogs and cats. A large outbreak of melamine/
mals with any renal tubular dysfunction.
cyanuric-acid associated renal failure (MARF) occurred
In contrast to the minimal histologic tubular changes
in the United States in 2007, a similar outbreak in Asia
seen with ethylene glycol toxicosis, other toxins may cause
in 2004 was retrospectively determined to be of the
acute severe ATN of the proximal tubules as observed in
same cause (Brown et al, 2007). While both MARF and
cats with lily nephrotoxicosis. Severe ATN affecting seg-
ethylene glycol toxicosis are characterized by polariz-
ments of the proximal tubule is observed in cats ingest-
able intratubular crystals, there are distinct differences
ing flowers (most toxic) or leaves of Easter lilies, Tiger
between these two crystal types. Crystals are typically
or lilies, and Asiatic hybrid lies (Figure 24.5). Affected
 more numerous in ethylene glycol toxicosis than in
cats exhibit acute renal failure with azotemia, vomit-
MARF. Oxalate crystals are predominantly in proximal
ing, and depression with evidence of proximal tubular
tubules, lighter green with a glassy appearance, often
dysfunction (glucosuria, tubular proteinuria) (Rumbeiba
 oblong in shape, and more difficult to appreciate with-
et al., 2004). Initial degenerative changes include nuclear
out polarization (Figure 24.4). In contrast, melamine/
 pyknosis, swelling and granularity of the cytoplasm, and
cyanuric acid crystals are predominantly within distal
Renal pathology  219
Acute renal injury is potentially reversible and is
dependent on cessation of the original pathologic pro-
cess and, in ATN, requires a sufficient epithelial pool
to regenerate and sufficient maintenance of function to
allow time for regeneration to occur. Tubular epithe-
lial changes such as anisokaryosis, increased cytoplasmic
basophilia (indicative of increased protein synthesis), and
increased numbers of mitotic figures are indicative of
regeneration following ATN, which is a favorable prog-
ATN such as lily, grape, or aminoglycoside nephrotoxi-
cosis, the severity of the ATN may have prognostic sig-
nificance. Secondary changes may occur following ATN
and these changes may also affect prognosis. Interstitial
fibrosis is associated with nephron loss and, as nephron
loss is permanent, is indicative of some degree of perma-
Figure 24.6 Acute distal tubular necrosis with intratubular crys-
tals, melamine/cyanuric acid toxicosis, cat. Characteristic round
nent renal dysfunction. Tubulitis may occur in ethylene
striated crystals within distal tubule. Note attenuation of the tubu-
glycol toxicosis and MARF and may exacerbate tubu-
lar epithelium and small numbers of sloughed necrotic cells. H&E.
lar injury, which may or may not be reversible. Animals
 original magnification 400 ×
with more chronic forms of MARF may have tubular
rupture; these released crystals are surrounded by gran-
tubular segments, green to blue in appearance, often
ulomatous inflammation and fibrous connective tissue.
exhibit striations, and are easily visualized histologically
These crystals would also be expected to persist longer
without polarization (Figure 24.6).
 than intratubular crystals following withdrawal of con-
Animals with MARF will often have small numbers of
 taminated pet food.
oxalate crystals (secondary oxalosis) in proximal tubules.
 Some infectious diseases may cause acute intrin-
s     si  
sic renal failure by causing acute severe tubulointersti-
ments (distal tubules and collecting ducts) dilation both
 tial nephritis. Subacute or classic leptospirosis is char-
in the presence and absence ofassociated crystals. Dilated
 acterized by severe neutrophilic to lymphoplasmacytic
distal tubules contain fewer epithelial nuclei, epithe-
tubulointerstitial nephritis and serologic evidence of lep-
lial cells are attenuated, and small numbers of necrotic
tospirosis. Embolic suppurative nephritis occurs when
cells are observed in tubular lumina. Mild anisokaryosis
bacteria localize in the kidney of bacteremic animals.
with occasional mitotic figures, indicative of tubu-
 Bacteria lodge in glomeruli and peritubular capillaries
lar epithelial regeneration, is often present. In some
and result in multiple areas of abscessation. Finally, feline
animals, there may be an associated acute tubulitis, typi-
infectious peritonitis is fairly commonly associated with
cally within the medulla, with intratubular and peritubu-
 pyogranulomatous interstitial nephritis and vasculitis.
lar neutrophils. Focal proliferation of tubular epithe-
However, methods other than renal biopsy (serology or
lial cells over the intraluminal crystals is occasionally
bacterial culture) are typically used to diagnose these dis-
observed. Renal lesions seen in animals that have been
eases. Fulminant glomerular diseases, such as glomerular
ingesting melamine/cyanuric acid for longer periods of
thrombosis, hemolytic uremic syndrome, and rapidly
time include distal tubular necrosis with characteristic
 progressive glomerulonephritis (typically with cres-
intratubular crystals, mild to moderate renal intersti-
 cents) may also result in acute renal failure. Because of
tial fibrosis, and lymphoplasmacytic inflammation. The
the severe and often irreversible nature of these diseases,
inflammation surrounding crystal-containing tubules is
diagnosis is more often made on necropsy rather than
more prominent than in acute MARF and consists of
biopsy specimens.
moderate numbers of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
macrophages, with only rare neutrophils. Larger crys-
 s    n    
Protein-losing nephropathy - normal
glomerular structure and function
chronic MARF, and crystal-containing tubules may rup-
ture. Liberated interstitial crystals are surrounded by
Renal biopsy is perhaps most commonly performed
macrophages, multinucleated giant cells, and fibrous
 on animals with evidence of protein-losing nephropa-
connective tissue. Large aggregates of crystals may be
thy. Accurate histologic evaluation of the glomerulus is
 present in the papilla, and grossly visible renoliths may
dependent upon an appreciation of the normal mor-
be observed in some animals.
phology of the glomerulus, both at the light and electron
220
 Diagnostic testing
US
a certain size to pass through, acting as an important
 size selective barrier to the passage of large uncharged
plasma macromolecules. Attached to the collagen "wire"
 are negatively charged heparin sulfate containing proteo-
so
rbc
glycans and laminin that contribute to the charge selec-
tive filtration barrier of the GBM. The filtration of smaller
Figure 24.7 Normal glomerular filtration apparatus, dog. The 
molecular weight molecules is inhibited by slit pores or
capillary vascular space, containing a red blood cell (RBC), is lined
filtration slits, which are present between the foot pro-
by a layer of fenestrated endothelial cells. The GBM is between the 
cesses of the visceral epithelial cells. The slit diaphragm is
endothelial cel and the podocyte (present in the urinary space;
now thought to be the central size-selective component
US). The slit diaphragm (sd) is the central size-selective component 
 of the filtration barrier. Nephrin has been recently identi-
of the filtration apparatus. Bar = 1 μm.
fied as a key structural component of the slit diaphragm.
Congenital defects in nephrin in people result in Con-
microscopic level, as well as the relation of structure to
genital Nephrotic Syndrome with massive proteinuria;
function. The glomerulus is a tuft of highly branched cap-
congenital nephrin defects have not been documented in
illaries that invaginate into an extension of the proximal
animals. However, nephrin synthesis may be altered in
tubule. The afferent arteriole enters the glomerulus and
 acquired glomerular diseases with proteinuria.
arborizes to form the glomerular capillary tuft, which
Proteinuria results when there is disruption of the fil-
reforms and exits as the efferent arteriole; these arteri-
tration barrier, which may be caused by the deposition
oles enter and exit at the vascular pole (Figure 24.2).
of immune complexes, complement, or amyloid; by an
The capillary loops are supported by scaffolding made
up of mesangial cells and their surrounding extracel-
composition of the glomerular BM; or by injury to the
lular mesangial matrix. The capillary tuft is draped by
 endothelial cells or podocytes. Glomerular injury may
glomerular BM and is covered by a layer of interdigitat-
also affect mesangial cells, resulting in mesangial cell
ing visceral epithelial cells (podocytes).
proliferation and/or increased production of mesangial
The function of the glomerulus is to form an ultrafl-
matrix. Diseases primarily affecting mesangial cells are
trate of plasma; a small portion of this filtrate will even-
associated with proteinuria of lesser magnitude than dis-
tually be voided as urine. Fenestrated endothelial cells
 eases affecting the filtration apparatus.
line the glomerular capillaries and restrict the passage of
 The goal of renal biopsy in glomerular diseases is
blood cells (Figure 24.7). Macromolecules with a molec-
 to accurately identify the specific changes occurring in
ular weight similar to albumin are small enough to fit 
the glomerulus in order to determine the prognosis and
 through these fenestrate or pores. However, the negatively
 potential treatment options for the identified glomeru-
charged sialoproteins that coat the endothelial cells nor-
lar disease. Glomeruli should be evaluated for cellular-
mally repel negatively charged macromolecules such as
ity, matrix increase, amyloid deposition, hyalinization,
albumin. The glomerular BM is between the endothelial
necrosis, fibrin thrombosis, crescents, protein deposits,
cells and podocytes within capillary loops, and between
adhesions, and glomerular BM changes. PASH and
mesangial cells and podocytes in other areas. It is impor-
Masson's trichrome stains, in addition to hematoxylin
tant to note that the mesangial cell is not separated from
 and eosin, should be used when evaluating glomerular
the vascular space by GBM, but is in direct communi-
morphology in diseases other than amyloidosis. In the
cation with the endothelium and subendothelial space.
 normal glomerulus stained with PASH, the thickness of
The GBM is composed primarily of nonfibrillar type IV
the capillary walls should be assessed in peripheral capil-
collagen, laminin, and heparin sulfate containing pro-
lary loops, and when cut at a right angle, the normal loops
teoglycans. Type IV collagen forms a “chicken wire"-like
will be thin, uniform, and crisp. The mesangial matrix
structure made up of heavily cross-linked triple helixes
can be seen as disconnected branches containing mesan-
of α3:α4:α5 collagen chains. This form of collagen con-
gial cells (Figure 24.2). Matrix typically surrounds one or
tains more intermolecular disulfide crosslinks than the
two mesangial cell nuclei; mesangial matrix expansion
type IV collagen present in other vascular BM, which are
is present if matrix extends to encircle more cells. More
thought to provide more structural strength to the GBM.
than three mesangial cell nuclei in close proximity are
This is particularly important as the glomerular capillary
 indicative of mesangial hyperplasia.
walls do not have the supportive fibrillar type Ill collagen
 Glomerular diseases are a leading cause of renal disease
-sad y oi pons ae n e siss o sao o
in dogs but are reported less commonly in cats. In human
sures and fluid shifts not present in other capillaries. The
beings, specific glomerular diseases are characterized by
"holes” in the chicken wire allow macromolecules below
their light microscopic, immunopathologic, and electron
Renal pathology  :
221
Table 24.2 Classification of glomerular lesions?
Morphologic
 Current status in dogs and
classification
LM findings
 EM findings 
Immuno-pathology
cats
Amyloidosis
Nodular hyalinosis of
 Mesangial and
Immune deposits
Most often diagnosed in
capillary wall, positive
 subendothelial fibrils
absent
advanced stage of disease,
Congo red staining
early stages poorly
recognized
Membranous GN
 Diffuse capillary wall
 Subepithelial immune 
 Primarily lgG
 Early cases not detected
(MGN), stage I -IV 
 thickening. normal 
deposits
with LM alone
 cellularity, magenta
deposits with trichrome.
PASH spikes
Membranoproliferative
 Increased glomerular
Deposits
Primarily IgG, C3,
Requires EM for accurate
 glomerulonephritis 
cellularity and capillary wall
subendothelial, +/-—
and other lg may
dx, specific Ig classes or
(MPGN) type I/II
thickness, magenta
mesangial and
be present
type of MPGN, described in
deposits with trichrome,
 sub-epithelial 
 dogs and rarely in cats
tram-track GBM with PASH
 deposits, mesangial
 interposition
 MPGN type II 
 As MPGN type I
Intramembranous
Deposits composed
Described in dogs with
linear dense deposits 
of C3
inherited complement
 abnormalities
Mesangioproliferative
Typically, increased
 Mesangial deposits
lgA
Difficult to dx with LM,
GN/lgA nephropathy
mesangial cellularity, other 
requires FA: not
lesions possible
documented in dogs or cats
 Focal segmental
 Segmental hypercellularity
 Deposits not present
Not typically
May be primary (suspected
glomeruloscderosis
and solidification of
present
 in dogs) or secondary to
(FSGS)
 capillary tuft affecting some
decreased renal mass
glomeruli
(common)
Minimal change
Normal histology
Foot process
 Not present 
Rarely described in dogs
disease
effacement
Glomerular
 Fibrin thrombosis,
Fibrin, endothelial 
Fibrin
Described in greyhounds.
vasculopathy (DIC,
endothelial swelling.
swelling/necrosis
Occasionally suspected in
HUS)
vasculitis
other dogs
 Hereditary nephritis
Nonspecific and varied 
Thin or
Not expected
Described in several
danges
focally/cdiffusely split 
breeds, suspected in others
GBM
a Modification of preliminary classification system developed by the WSAVA Renal Standardization Group.
microscopic features that are correlated with the clinical
to veterinary nephropathology will result in the accurate
and clinicopathologic findings. While veterinary pathol-
dassification of canine glomerular disease ( Table 24.2).
ogists have attempted to characterize glomerular diseases
Correlation of different glomerular diseases/lesions with
in dogs using a classification system similar to that used in
efficacy of different treatment modalities and patient out-
human nephropathology, they have based their diagnoses
 come should establish the importance of the renal biopsy
primarily on light microscopic findings. Relying on light
for optimal patient management.
microscopy alone often results in misdiagnoses, leading
 to errors in treatment and prognosis and loss of clinician
Lesions of protein-losing nephropathy
confidence in the utility of the renal biopsy. Adaptation of
the diagnostic approach to glomerular disease routinely
Amyloidosis is one of the most common glomerular dis-
used in human nephropathology (electron microscopy
eases in dogs, accounting for approximately one-fourth
 and immunopathology in addition to light microscopy)
of dogs with glomerular disease; cats less commonly
222
 Diagnostic testing
develop glomerular amyloidosis (Cook et al., 1996; Vaden
US
and Brown, 2009). While glomerular amyloidosis in later
stages can be diagnosed with light microscopy alone, early
stages may require ultrastructural evaluation. With the
exception of the Chinese Shar Pei, amyloid is deposited
 primarily in the glomeruli of affected dogs. Amyloid is
first deposited in mesangial areas, with eventual suben-
dothelial deposition. Because proteinuria associated with
glomerular amyloidosis may be massive, many dogs will
present with nephrotic syndrome or pulmonary throm-
boembolism (due to loss of antithrombin I1l). Chinese
Shar Pei dogs and Abyssinian cats have a familial form
of reactive amyloidosis that is characterized by glomeru-
lar and medullary amyloid deposition, with medullary
deposits typically predominating. Affected Shar Pei dogs
and Abyssinian cats are more likely to present clini-
cally with azotemia rather than proteinuria, as medullary
interstitial amyloid deposition leads to ischemia, chronic
interstitial fibrosis, papillary necrosis, and nephron loss.
 In H&E stained slides, glomerular amyloid appears
Figure 24.8 Ultrastuctural features of glomerular amyloid, dog
as eosinophilic nodular deposits that expand the
There is a nodular accumulation of amyloid fibrils (a) beneath the
mesangium and glomerular capillary walls. Interstitial
endothelium (Endo) lining the vascular space (Vs) of the glomerular
capillary. There is diffuse podocyte (epithelial cell, Epi) foot process
deposits primarily within the medulla. Dogs with
effacement, and the glomerular basement membrane (asterisks)
amyloid only in the glomerulus will typically not have
is normal. Bar = 2 μm. Electron micrograph courtesy of Ralph
interstitial fibrosis, even when azotemia is present. If
Nichols, Texas Heart Institute.
interstitial fibrosis is observed in dogs with glomerular
amyloid, medullary deposits of amyloid causing ischemia
Glomerulonephritis is an immune mediated disease
and nephron loss are also likely present. When stained
typically associated with deposition of immune com-
with Congo red and evaluated by conventional light
plexes within the glomerulus. Intact antigen-antibody
microscopy, amyloid deposits take on various shades
complexes may be circulating and passively trapped
of orange-red, depending upon the amount of amyloid
within the mesangium or subendothelial space during
and the thickness of the section (Figure 24.3a). Deposits
normal glomerular filtration. As the kidney receives 25%
stained with Congo red and evaluated by polarizing
 of the cardiac output,circulating immune complexes pass
microscopy are birefringent and have an apple green
through glomeruli at a high rate. Intraglomerular cap-
color (Figure 24.3b).
q aee ro    ae ssd ael
Early stages of renal amyloidosis may have some
and these capillaries provide a large, highly permeable
degree of proteinuria, but the amyloid deposits may
negatively charged surface area that facilitates the non-
not be detectable histologically. In these cases, electron 
 specific trapping of positively charged macromolecules.
microscopy is required for diagnosis. Amyloid deposits
These circulating preformed immune complexes are to0
occur between the capillary endothelial cells and the
large to pass through the GBM, although in some cases
GBM and within mesangial areas (Figure 24.8).
 they may dissociate, cross the GBM, and reform in situ in
If not previously verified by Congo red positivity, the
the subepithelial space. Alternatively, immune complexes
fibrils are identified as amyloid based on their morphol-
may form “in situ" when circulating antibody binds
 ogy (nonbranching fibrils of variable length) and size 
to normal glomerular antigens or to soluble antigens
(7-15 nm in diameter).
trapped within subendothelial, subepithelial, or mesan-
Rarely, fibrillary deposits that do not polarize with
gial areas. The associated immunologic and glomerular
Congo red staining are observed in glomeruli in peo-
responses to the immune deposits within these different
 pue sop ui aoan ie uq oe s pue ad
 glomerular sites results in the different forms of glomeru-
(Cavana et al., 2008). The Congo red-negative fibrillary
lonephritis.
deposits are composed of organized immunoglobulin or
While light microscopy may be highly suggestive of
extracellular matrix protein and are typically larger in
glomerulonephritis, electron microscopy is required to
diameter than amyloid fibrils.
verify the presence of deposits, to detect small deposits
Renal pathology
223
not evident by light microscopy, and to identify the loca-
tion (subendothelial, subepithelial, intramembranous,
and/or mesangial) of the deposits in the glomerulus.
Immunofluorescence, to determine the specific nature
of the immune deposits (IgG, IgA, IgM, and/or comple-
 ment), further defines the disease process.
Membranous
glomerulonephritis/membranous
VS
nephropathy (MGN/MN) is the most common cause
of the nephrotic syndrome in adult people, occurs in
10-45% of reported cases of GN in dogs, and is the
most common type of GN described in cats (Vaden and
Brown, 2009; Jaenke et al.). MGN results from the in situ
 deposition of immune complexes, most often containing
IgG and largely unidentified antigens, on the subepithe-
lial aspect of the glomerular BM. In uncomplicated cases
of MGN, glomeruli are of normal cellularity, and there
Figure 24.10 MGN, dog. Immune deposits (id) are present
may be diffuse uniform thickening of the capillary loops.
between the visceral epithelial cell (Epi) and the GBM. There is
PASH stain may demonstrate either spikes or holes in
difuse epithelial cellfoot process effacement, but minimal change
the thickened GBM (Figure 24.9).
in the GBM. Inset: Later stage MGN, dog. The GBM extends as
The changes that may be seen with light microscopy
"spikes" (arrows) around an immune deposit. These spikes may
oaa 'wm 1 = iea 6 anby u se Hsvd ym paiepaidde a
of the glomerulus to the presence of these subepithelial
micrograph courtesy of Ralph Nichols, Texas Heart Institute.
immune complexes. The subepithelial immune deposits
cause local complement activation with C5b-9-mediated
by diffuse foot process effacement and reorganization of
podocyte injury. Sublethal C5b-9 attack of podocytes
actin filaments (Figure 24.10).
causes the injured epithelial cells to produce oxygen
Podocytes have limited proliferative capability, so
radicals and proteases and causes dissociation of nephrin
 increased glomerular cellularity due to podocyte pro-
from the actin cytoskeleton. Proteinuria in MN is
liferation is not a feature of MGN. In some cases of
the result of oxidative and protease-mediated damage
 MGN, increased cellularity associated with focal segmen-
to the GBM and podocyte cytoskeletal changes disrupt-
tal glomerulosclerosis may occur; this secondary scarring
ing the normal filtration slit diaphragm (Nangaku and
is likely irreversible and is considered a negative prognos-
Couser, 2005). This injury is reflected ultrastructurally
tic indicator. Very early cases of MGN will have subep-
ithelial deposits and foot process effacement but mini-
mal changes in the GBM (stage I MGN, Figure 24.10).
After a period of time, new GBM is deposited next to
Holes
Spikes
the immune deposits, resulting in the spikes that may
be visualized with PASH staining (stage II MGN, Figure
24.10, inset). PASH stains the original and new GBM
dark pink without staining the immune deposits. With
more chronic disease, additional GBM may expand these
spikes to encircle the immune deposits (stage Ill MGN)
and this change may be seen as "holes" in the thickened
GBM with PASH (Figure 24.9). In some chronic cases
of MGN, there may be loss of immune deposits with
 empty holes present in the GBM ultrastructurally. These
four stages of MGN are well characterized in people and
have been described in dogs (Jaenke and Allen, 1986).
More advanced stages in cats and dogs have been shown
Figure 24.9 Membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN, Stage I/ll).
Gat. The GBM has well-cdefined spikes and holes, caused by
to correlate with more severe azotemia, whereas animals
increased production of GBM between (spikes) and around (holes)
with milder disease are more likely to have nephrotic
the immune deposits. The glomerulus is not hypercellular and the
syndrome. Staging of MGN will likely have prognostic
endothelial aspect of the capillary wall is smooth (arrow). PAS.
significance, as earlier stages may be more amenable to
original magnification 1,000x.
therapy.
224
 Diagnostic testing
There is no inflammatory cell participation in MGN,
 as the immune deposits are sequestered on the urinary
aspect of the GBM where they are separated from circu-
lating inflammatory cells and platelets. For this reason,
MGN is often referred to as membranous nephropa-
thy (MN) to reflect the lack of celular inflammation
within the glomerulus. Depending on the duration of
the disease and resultant changes in the GBM, changes 
 may or may not be appreciated in PASH-stained sections
so confirmation of a diagnosis of MGN is dependent
on ultrastructural demonstration of immune deposits
 in a subepithelial position. Immunofluorescent staining
of glomeruli is used to verify the presence or absence of
immune deposits and to further characterize the deposits
 in terms of their composition and distribution in the
glomerulus. Secondary changes of focal glomeruloscle-
Figure 24.11 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MP-
rosis and/or glomerular adhesions to Bowman's capsule
GN), dog. The glomerulus is globally hypercellular (long arrow)
may be present in some cases of MN; this irreversible
and the capillary walls, evaluated in peripheral loops, are thick-
glomerular scarring may be associated with a less favor-
ened (short arrows). A parietal epithelial cell is hypertrophied and
able prognosis.
contains protein droplets indicative of proteinuria. H&E, original
Membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis
 magnification 400×.
(MPGN) is probably the most common form of
glomerulonephritis in dogs, accounting for 20-60%
of cases in various studies, and is rarely reported in
 There is mesangial matrix expansion, which along
cats (Vaden and Brown, 2009; Inoue et al., 2001). The
with the increase in cellularity may lead to an accen-
term MPGN refers to the light microscopic findings of
tuated lobular appearance of the glomerular tuff. With
thickening of the peripheral capillary wall with increased
a PASH stain, splitting and reduplication of the thick-
glomerular cellularity and is caused by the presence of 
ened GBM evident. This GBM change is also referred to
immune complexes on the subendothelial aspect of the
as having a “double contour” or “tram-track" appear-
GBM (type I MPGN), with additional deposits within
ance. This GBM change is due to movement/extension
the mesangium or on the subepithelial aspect of the
of mesangial cells from the mesangial area to the suben-
GBM (type II MPGN). Type II MPGN, also called
 dothelial area of the capillary loops and is referred to
dense deposit disease, is characterized by the deposition
as mesangial interposition. The deposition of new GBM
of complement as a homogeneous dense band in the
between the interposed mesangial cell and the overly-
GBM and has only been described in dogs and pigs with
ing endothelium results in the double contour of the
 genetic deficiencies in the complement system (Jansen
GBM. Larger immune deposits may stain magenta with
et al, 1998). Type III MPGN appears to be the most
trichrome stain (Figure 24.12). Confirmation of the
 common type of MPGN in dogs and cats.
diagnosis of MPGN is dependent on demonstration of
Immune deposits in the subendothelial space are
subendothelial deposits (immune complexes) via elec-
not separated from the vascular space by GBM. In
 tron microscopy (Figure 24.13). Subendothelial immune
this location they activate complement and are readily
deposits are readily accessible to circulating inflamma-
accessible to circulating neutrophils, macrophages, and
 tory cells (particularly neutrophils) and platelets and are
platelets. These cells produce inflammatory mediators,
associated with more severe capillary wall injury and
such as cytokines, growth factors, and proteases, and
 greater activation of resident glomerular cells. Mesan-
activate the coagulant cascade resulting in severe cap-
 gial deposits injure and activate mesangial cells, causing
illary wall damage, inflammatory cell infiltration, and
 mesangial cell proliferation and increased production of
mesangioal proliferation (Nangaku and Couser, 2005).
 mesangial matrix.
 MPGN is characterized histologically by increased cel-
Crescents may be observed in some cases of MPGN
lularity of the glomerular capillary tuft with diffuse
and are indicative of more severe glomerular injury caus-
irregular thickening of glomerular capillary walls. The
ing breaks or gaps in the damaged GBM that allow the
increased glomerular cellularitiy is due primarily to
passage of fibrinogen, and later macrophages, into the
mesangial proliferation; endothelial proliferation and
urinary space (Figure 24.14). Fibrin and macrophages
sd q oe  sn  rs
 induce parietal epithelial cell and fbroblast proliferation,
(Figure 24.11).
and glomerular crescents form. Glomerular diseases with
Renal pathology 225
Figure 24.14 MPGN with serocellular crescent, dog. There is a
Figure 24.12 MPGN, dog. Globular magenta-staining immune
Cescent-shaped proliferation of cells (Cr, arrows) within Bowman's
deposits are evident within capillary loops (arrows). There is an
capsule and outside the glomerular capillary tuft. H&E, original
adhesion (synechia, s) between the capillary tuft and Bowman's
magnification 400x
capsule with hyalinosis (h). Masson's trichrome, original magnifi-
cation 1,000x
significant crescent formation are typically more severe
and have a rapidly progressive clinical course. Crescents 
are commonly seen in dogs with Lyme nephritis.
 MPGN may be of unknown cause, or secondary to a
variety of underlying systemic and infectious diseases. In
some cases of MPGN, glomeruli may be infiltrated with
monocytes or neutrophils; this inflammatory infiltrate is
characteristic of exudative or postinfectious GN. Postin-
fectious glomerulonephritis of people most commonly
occurs following a streptococcal infection but has also
been identified with other infections (e.g., staphylococ-
 cal infection). It is of interest to note that this pattern of
disease is usually caused by infections of limited dura-
tion that have often resolved prior to clinical signs of
glomerular disease.
Mesangioproliferative  glomerulonephritis (GN)
accounted for only 2-16% of glomerular lesions in dogs
of two studies (Vaden and Brown, 2009). Proteinuria
and renal failure (mild to moderate, acute or chronic)
are the expected presenting signs in affected dogs.
 Like MPGN and MGN, mesangioproliferative GN is an
immune-complex-mediated disease caused by deposi-
tion of immune complexes within the mesangial area.
Mesangial deposits injure and activate resident mesangial
 cells, causing mesangial cell proliferation and increased
production of transforming growth factor (TGF)-B
Figure 24.13 MPGN, dog. Immune deposits (id) are present on
and platelet derived growth factor (PDGF), cytokines,
the subendothelial aspect of the GBM. There is mesangial cell 
 e n  a 
interposition (long single arrow) and mesangial cell hyperplasia (n.
2005).
nuclei of 3 mesangial cells).The capillary lumen (vascular space,
 Mesangioproliferative GN is characterized histologi-
VS) is filled with swollen cell cytoplasm. Diffuse epithelial (Epi)
cally by mesangial cell hyperplasia, defined as more than
foot process effacement is present. Urinary space, Us. Bar = 2
μm. Electron micrograph courtesy of Ralph Nichols, Texas Heart
by an increase in mesangial matrix. As these changes
Institute.
are also common in animals with chronic renal disease
226  Diagnostic testing
(glomerulosclerosis), this disease must be verified with
teinuria is expected if the cause (immunologic or drug)
electron microscopy and immunofluorescence. On elec-
of the podocyte injury can be eliminated.
tron microscopy immune complexes are present primar-
Alport syndrome (hereditary nephritis) is a glomeru-
 ily within the mesangium and are mainly of the IgA class
lar disease characterized by inherited glomerular BM
(IgA nephropathy).
structural abnormalities. In people, Alport syndrome is
  (   
characterized by hematuria, progressive nephritis with
change disease derives its name from the lack of signifi-
 proteinuria, declining renal function, and, in some peo-
 cant histologic renal abnormalities on light microscopy.
ple, hearing and ocular abnormalities. Alport-like syn-
MCN accounts for 15-20% of the cases of idiopathic
dromes have been described in young Samoyeds, Dober-
nephrotic syndrome in adults and is the most common
man Pinschers, English Cocker Spaniels, Bull Terriers,
cause of the nephrotic syndrome in children. This disease
Dalmatian dogs, and mixed breed dogs (Wakamatsu
has been described rarely in the dog, which may be due
et al., 2007). These dogs have proteinuria and progres-
to its low prevalence and/or failure of detection if tissues
sive renal disease, without hematuria, hearing, or visual
are only evaluated at the light microscopic level.
abnormalities. Alport syndrome is the result of congeni-
 MCN is due to injury to podocytes, a cell type with lim-
tal defect in the molecular structure of type IV collagen,
ited potential for repair or replacement. The mechanism
which is the major structural component of the GBM.
of this injury is poorly understood, but a soluble T-cell
 Type IV collagen in the mature GBM is present predomi-
factor is suspected to be involved in most cases. People
nantly as extensively crosslinked trimers ofα3, α4, and α5
with MCN tend to be highly responsive to corticosteroids,
type IV isoforms. Mutations of the COL4A3, COL4A4,
with an expected response rate of 80-90%. Rarely, MCN
 or COL4A5 genes result in a structurally and functionally
is precipitated by a drug and will resolve once the offend-
abnormal and weakened GBM, which becomes progres-
ing drug is withdrawn. Drug-induced MCN has also been
sively thickened and split with the eventual development
observed in dogs, with rapid resolution of proteinuria
of glomerulosclerosis.
after drug withdrawal (Sum et al., 2010).
Histologic renal findings in people and dogs include
While  glomeruli are typically  entirely
normal on
 mild mesangial hypercellularity, global to segmental
light microscopy, there are characteristic ultrastructural
 glomerulosclerosis, immature glomeruli, tubular atro-
lesions. Changes are confined to the glomerular epithe-
phy, and interstitial fibrosis, with eventual evolution to
lial cells, which exhibit diffuse foot process effacement
end-stage renal disease. Although the light microscopic
 or flattening in the absence of electron-dense immune
findings in this disease are nonspecific, the ultrastructural
deposits (Figure 24.15).
changes are diagnostic. The GBM is less electron dense
Villous transformation, a nonspecific change asso-
and of variable thickness because of a complex inter-
ciated with proteinuria, is commonly observed. These
woven "basket-weave” replication of the lamina densa.
changes are reversible, and complete resolution of pro-
    d   
the epithelial aspect of the capillary wall is typically
irregular.
The glomerular changes of increased glomerular cellu-
larity and irregular thickening of the capillary loops were
initially misinterpreted as MPGN in some dog breeds
with Alport syndrome. Although MPGN is also char-
acterized by increased glomerular cellularity and thick-
ened capillary loops, MPGN is a consequence of immune
complex or complement deposition in the glomeru-
lar capillary wall. A diagnosis of MPGN is dependent
on the demonstration of these immune deposits by
electron microscopy and, for optimal characterization,
immunofluorescent techniques. Immune deposits are
not a feature of Alport syndrome. Although there is
variability in the light microscopic renal lesions among
breeds of dogs and people with Alport syndrome, the
GBM ultrastructural changes of lamellation are pathog-
Figure 24.15 Minimal change disease, dog. There is diffuse
podocyte foot process effacement (arrows) with mild podocyte
 nomonic for this disease. Therefore, a diagnosis of this
villous transformation (arrowheads). The GBM (asterisk) is normal
disease is absolutely dependent on ultrastructural exam-
and no deposits are present. Vs, vascular space. Bar = 1 μm.
 ination of the kidney.
Renal pathology 227
(a)
(a)
Figure 24.16 Glomerular hypertrophy and glomerulosclerosis, remnant kidney, dog. (a) Normal renal biopsy from a dog prior to partial
loss of renal mass. PASH, original magnification 200x. (b) Same dog following renal mass reduction. Note the marked glomerular
(s). There is also evidence of proteinuria (hyaline casts, asterisk), tubular atrophy with wrinkling of the tubular basement membranes
(short arrows), and lymphoplasmacytic interstitial inflammation. PASH, original magnification 200 x.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a
 dilation and an increase in glomerular size (glomerular
glomerular lesion that, like MCN, is thought to be due to
hypertrophy). These responses increase GFR, an obvi-
podocyte injury (Mathieson, 2007). It differs significantly
ously beneficial effect, but may also lead to further
from MCN in that the lesions in FSGS are irreversible.
glomerular injury, resulting in glomerulosclerosis and,
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) occurs as a
in some animals, progression of chronic renal disease
 primary glomerular disease in people and is the most
(Brown et al., 1997).
common cause of the nephrotic syndrome in adults. Like
The glomerulosclerosis seen in animals with chronic
MCN, FSGS associated with the nephrotic syndrome
renal disease is also seen in normal dogs and cats fol-
is also thought to be immunologically mediated and
lowing experimental reduction of renal mass by 75%
or more. Following significant experimental or natural
ment. It has been proposed that MCN and FSGS may
 nephron loss, remaining glomeruli are markedly hyper-
represent opposite ends of a single spectrum of disease:
trophied and glomerulosclerosis occurs (Figure 24.16).
reversible podocyte injury in MCN and irreversible focal
The sclerotic segments of the affected glomeruli exhibit
podocyte loss resulting in focal sclerosis in FSGS. Because
mesangial hypercellularity and mesangial expansion that
the podocyte injury in MCN is reversible, progressive loss
eventually causes solidification of peripheral capillary
of renal function is rare. As podocyte injury is more severe
loops. Although mesangial cells and endothelial cells pro-
in FSGS and potentially irreversible, progressive loss of
liferate during glomerular hypertrophy, podocyte num-
renal function may be more likely.
bers remain the same, resulting in a decrease in podocyte
While FSGS associated with the nephrotic syndrome
density. If podocytes are unable to cover the increased
is seldom recognized in nephrotic dogs and cats, sec-
glomerular surface area or if there is podocyte detach-
 ondary FSGS is an expected finding in chronic kidney
ment or death, portions of the GBM become exposed
disease and a common finding secondary to underly-
and synechiae may form. Synechia or adhesions occur
ing primary glomerular disease. Chronic kidney disease
between sclerotic portions of the capillary tuft and
is characterized by the gradual loss of nephrons with
Bowman's capsule, and secondary hyalinosis is com-
hyperfunction of the remaining nephrons. The normal
mon. With a PASH stain, hyalinosis appears as glassy
adaptive responses of the glomerulus to decreased num-
eosinophilic material in the capillary wall; this mate-
bers of functioning nephrons include an increase in single
rial is serum lipoproteins, which have leaked across
nephron filtration rate (glomerular hyperfiltration) asso-
the adhered portion of the glomerular BM. In animals
ciated with an increase in capillary pressure (glomeru-
without an underlying primary glomerular disease, the
lar hypertension) due to preferential afferent arteriole
 degree of proteinuria will be mild in FSGS occurring as a
228
 Diagnostic testing
consequence of decreased functioning renal mass and
References
there will be other evidence of renal disease.
Behrend, E.N., G.F Grauer, etal. ( 1996). Hospital-acquired acute renal
Secondary FSGS is a common glomerular lesion seen
failure in dogs: 29 cases (1983-1992). IAm Vet Med Assoc 208(4):
 in necropsy tissues, as chronic or end stage kidney dis-
537-541.
ease is a relatively common renal abnormality. On light
Brown, S.A., W.A. Crowell, et al(1997). Pathophysiology and manage-
microscopy, there will typically be other nonspecific
ment of progressive renal disease. Vet J 154: 93-109.
lesions associated with chronic renal disease, such as
Brown, C.A., K-S. Jeong K-S, et al. (2007).Outbreaks of melamine and
cyanuric acid associated renal failure (MARF) in dogs and cats in
lymphoplasmacytic interstitial inflammation, interstitial
2004 and 2007. I Vet Diag Invest 19: 525-531.
fibrosis, BM mineralization, glomerular obsolescence,
Cavana, P, M.T. Capucchio, et al. (2008). Noncongophilic fbrillry
 tubular dilation and atrophy, and collecting duct hyper-
glomerulonephritis in a cat. Vet Pathol45: 347-351.
plasia.
Cook, A.K. and L.D. Cowgill ( 1996). Clinical and pathological features
of protein-losing glomerular disease in the dog: a review of 137 cases
(1985- 1992). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32(4): 313-322.
Correlation of morphologic type of acute
Davila de Arriaga, A.J., Rocha, A.S. et al. (1982). Morpho-functional
glomerular injury with clinical presentation
patterns of kidney injury in experimental leptospirosis of the guinea
pig (L. icterohaemorrhagiae). J of Pathol 138(2): 145- 161.
Inoue, K., I. Kami-Ie, et al. (200l). Atypical membranoproliferative
clinically with either the nephrotic or the nephritic syn-
glomerulonephritis in a cat. Vet Pathol 38: 468-470.
drome, with the different morphologic types of glomeru-
Jaenke, R.S. and T.A. Allen (1986). Membranous nephropathy in the
lar disease more likely to present with primarily one or
dog.Vet Pathol23:718-733.
Jansen, I.H. Hogasen, K., et al. ( 1998). In situ complement activation in
the other syndrome (Madaio et al., 2001). The nephrotic
syndrome is characterized by marked proteinuria with
It 53(2): 33 1-349.
hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, and edema (more
Madaio, M.P. and J.T. Harrington (2001) The diagnosis of glomerular
commonly seen in people); these animals may or may not
diseases: acute glomerulonephritis and the nephrotic syndrome.
Arch Intern Med 161: 25-34.
be azotemic. Diseases expected to be associated with the
Mathieson, P.W. (2007). Minimal change nephropathy and focal
nephrotic syndrome include amyloidosis, membranous
segmental glomerulosclerosis. Sermin Immunopathol 29: 415-
nephropathy, primary focal segmental glomerulosclero-
426.
sis and minimal change disease. These diseases cause
Maxie, M.G. and S. Newman (2007). Urinary system. In: Jubb,
disruption of the normal filtration barrier but are not
Kennedy, and Palner's Pathology of Domestic Animals, edited by
M.G. Maxie, Vol. 2, Sth edition. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, pp. 425-
associated with active inflammatory cell participation
500.
and more severe glomerular injury. The nephritic syn-
McMartin, K. (2009). Are calcium oxalate crystals involved in the
drome is characterized by moderate proteinuria, active
mechanism of acute renal failure in ethylene glycol poisoning? Clirn
urine sediment (red cells or casts), azotemia, and hyper-
Toxicol 47(9): 859-869.
 tension. Diseases with more severe glomerular injury or
Nangaku, M. and W.G. Couser (2005). Mechanisms of immune-
inflammation, such as membranoproliferative glomeru-
deposit formation and the mediation of immune renal injury. Clir
Exp Nephrol9: 183-191.
lonephritis or hemolytic uremic syndrome, are more
Rumbeiha, W.K., et al. (2004). A comprehensive study of Easter lily
likely to be associated with the nephritic syndrome.
poisoning in cats. I Vet Diagn Irvest 16: 527-54 1.
While some animals with primary glomerular dis-
Sum, S.O., Hansel, P., et al. (2010). Drug-induced minimal change
ease may have features of both clinical syndromes and
nephropathy in a dog. I Vet Intern Med 24: 431-435.
so may not be easily classified, where possible distinc-
Vaden, S.L. and C.A. Brown (2007). Renal biopsy. In: Mamual of Carine
and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by I. Elliot and G. Grauer,
tion between the nephrotic and nephritic syndrome is
Chapter 12, 2nd edition. Birmingham, UK: British Small Animal
helpful in establishing initial differential diagnoses prior
Veterinary Association, pp. 167-177.
to biopsy. Using light, electron, and immunofluorescent
Vaden, S.L. and C.A. Brown (2009) Glomerular disease.In: Kirk's Cur-
microscopy, the specific type and severity of the glomeru-
rent Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited by I. Bonagura and D. Twedt,
lar disease can be determined, with the ultimate goal of 
Chapter 188, 14th edition. Saunders Elsevier Publishers, pp. 863-
868.
identifying and instituting optimal treatment strategies.
Wakamatsu, N., K. Surdyk, et al. (2007). Histologic and ultrastructural
studies of juvenile onset renal disease in four Rottweiler dogs. Vet
Endnote
Pathol 44: 96- 100.
Worwag, S. and C.E. Langston (2008). Acute intrinsic renal failure
1. WSAVA Renal Standardization Group, supported by Hills Pet Nutri-
in cats: 32 cases (1997-2004). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 232(5): 728-
tion and Bayer Animal Health)
732.
25
Biopsy of the lower urinary tract
Jody Lulich and Carl Osborne
 Differentiation of potentially reversible disease from pro-
Depending on the location and size of the lesion, addi-
 gressive irreversible disease is the single most important
tional equipment can be used to guide the biopsy forceps
factor in the management of persistent or recurrent lower
and visualize the procedure. For example, biopsy for-
urinary tract signs. Biopsy of the urinary bladder and
urethra is helpful to make this distinction in the liv-
greatly facilitates procurement of samples from the lateral
ing patient. Many options are available to obtain tissue
walls of the urinary bladder. If operators are not famil-
for microscopic evaluation ( Table 25.1). If structures to
iar with cystoscopy, ultrasound can be used to guide the
be biopsied can be palpated, they are usually accessi-
biopsy forceps (Figure 25.2).
ble for aspiration with a needle and syringe. If larger
samples are desired, minimally invasive techniques, such
Performing forceps biopsy
as transurethral catheter biopsy, have been commonly
recommended (Osborne and Lulich 1995). A practi-
Obtaining tissue samples using the endoscopy forceps
cal alternative to catheterization biopsy is use of flex-
ible endoscopy forceps to retrieve tissue samples from
is similar to methods used to obtain gastrointestinal
the lower urinary tract (Lulich et al. 2000). Obtaining
mucosal with an endoscope. Since the endoscope is not
inserted into the urethra, other methods, such as pal-
samples using endoscopy forceps has the advantage of
pation, cystoscopy, or medical imaging, are needed to
 procuring samples with minimal architectural disrup-
localize the lesion and direct the biopsy forceps.
 tion. Likewise, the procedure is as convenient as urinary
catheterization.
1. Allow the patient to void urine prior to biopsy. If
micturition is difficult due to partial or complete
Materials needed for biopsy
obstruction, urine can be removed by transurethral
catheterization or decompressive cystocentesis. An
Flexible endoscopy biopsy forceps can be obtained from
empty bladder will facilitate patient comfort and
a variety of vendors in a variety of sizes and lengths. We
cooperation.
have had the best results using forceps with a fenestrated
 2. Sedate or anesthetize the patient. To biopsy ure-
 oval or elongated cup (Figure 25.1). The fenestrated cup
thral masses, general anesthesia may not be needed.
minimizes tissue crushing. Although some prefer biopsy
However, mild tranquilization will facilitate urethral
forceps with a central spear to help anchor the biopsy cup
catheterization, will permit palpation of the urethra
to the biopsy site, in our experience the spear becomes
and bladder, and will minimize patient discomfort
dull after several uses. Once damaged, the spear no longer
and anxiety. In lieu of generalized sedation, local
anchors tissue, but inadvertently pushes the target tissue
anesthesia can be achieved by applying water solu-
away from the grasping cup. For this reason, we no longer
ble lubricants containing lidocaine or other topical
use biopsy forceps with a central spear.
anesthetics to the vaginal/prepucial mucosa and/or
urethra.' To anesthetize urethral mucosa, the same
lubricant can be diluted and injected into the ure-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
thral lumen through a catheter and applied to the
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
biopsy forceps prior to urethral insertion. It has been
229
230  Diagnostic testing
Table 25.1 Methods for biopsying the lower urinary tract
 Potential
Procedures to
Method
Principal indication
Relative limitations
 Reliability
 complications
 guide biopsy
 Exfoliative wrine 
 Inexpensive
 Small sample Size
Poor to variable
Tumor seeding via
NA
cytology
screening 
Loss of cellular and 
high false-negative
collection by
tissue architecture
rate
cystocentesis
(Nyland et al.
 Cellular autolysis
2002; Vignoli et al.
Some tissues
2007)
exfoliate poorly
 Fine needle
 Extramural masses
Small sample Size
Poor to moderate
Tumor seeding
Palpation,
 aspirate
depending on
 (Nyland et al.
ultrasonography. A
Loss of tissue
exfoliative
2002; Vignoli et al.
Franzen biopsy
architecture
tendency
2007)
 guidle facilitates
Some tissues
exfoliate poorly
transrectal
acquisition of
 proximal urethral
masses (Lulich
et al. 2000)
Transurethral
Urethral masses
 Small sample size 
Poor to moderate
Urinary tract
Palpation,
catheter aspirate
Loss of architecture
infection
ultrasonography
Urinary tract
(Lamb et al. 1996).
Some tissues
 perforation 
Fluoroscopy-
exfoliate poorly
consider catheters
Difficulty obtaining
with radiographic
samples from lateral
markers
walls urinary
bladder
Subepithelial lesions
may be inaccessible
 Transurethral
Urethral and 
 Small sample size 
Moderate to good
Urinary tract
Palpation,
 forceps pinch 
bladder vertex
Some subepithelial
infection
ultrasonography.
masses
Urinary tract
fluoroscopy,
lesions may be
inaccessible
 perforation
cystoscopy
 Grasping loops
Benign 
Usually requires
Moderate to good
 Striping the
Cystoscopy
peduculated
cystoscopy
urothelium as the
masses
 mass is pulled from
its attachment
 Surgical
 Deep intramural 
 Proximal urethral
Good
Tumor seeding
NA
lesions and small 
tumors may be 
masses that can be
 inaccessible
completely excised
our experience that most cats require general seda-
5.
 Advance the forceps until the grasping unit is near
tion to manipulate and catheterize their urethra.
the area to be biopsied. The tip of the grasping unit
 3. Identify the site for biopsy by palpation, catheteri-
can be positioned by abdominal palpation, tran-
zation, cystoscopy, and/or medical imaging.
 srectal urethral palpation, radiography, ultrasonog-
4
With the grasping unit at the end of the forceps
raphy, or cystoscopy. For most urethral lesions, the
closed, insert the flexible endoscopy forceps (not
biopsy site is easily determined during insertion and
the endoscope) into the urethra.
advancement of the forceps through the urethral
Biopsy of the lower urinary tract
231
cm
cm
(a)
(b)
Figure 25.1 Biopsy forceps vary in their length and diameter (a: 1 = 1 mm diameter and 120 cm long. 2 = 2.8 mm diameter and
155 cm length, 3 = 3 mm and 40 cm length). Obtaining samples with large biopsy cups (b) improve diagnostic potential by obtaining
samplesdeeperbelow theurothelium.
Bladderlong
fromright
(a)
(q)
Figure 25.2 Abdominal ultrasonography of a14-year-old, male-neutered, West Highland white terrier revealed an intraluminal bladder
mass attached to the right wall. To biopsy the mass, the dog was sedated and positioned in dorsal recumbency (a). Biopsy forceps was
inserted into the external urethral orifice and advanced to the bladder. Ultrasonography was used to guide the grasping end of the biopsy
forceps (arrow heads) to obtain a sample of the mass (arrow) for evaluation (b).
232
 Diagnostic testing
Bladderlong
(a)
(b)
Figure 25.3 Ultrasonography of the urinary bladder of a 10-year-old, male-neutered cocker spaniel revealed a 1.1 cm intraluminal filling
defect originating from the dorsal bladder wall(a). Following contrast urethrocystography, the tip of the biopsy forceps was inserted into
the external urethral orifice and advanced to the bladder. Fluoroscopy was used to guide the biopsy forceps and obtain a sample of the
mass for evaluation (b).
lumen; increased friction and force is often required
should then be transferred to formalin for histologic
to advance the forceps at the biopsy site. The dis-
processing.
tance of the biopsy site within the urethra can also
9.
 Impression smears for immediate cytologic evalua-
be measured by using previous radiograms to deter-
tion can be made prior to placing the sample in for-
 mine how far the forceps must be inserted into the
malin. Tissue samples are first lightly blotted on filter
urethral lumen to reach the lesion. Diffuse urothe-
 paper or dry gauze pads to remove surface blood.
lial lesions at the vertex (i.e., dome) of the bladder
Then, impressions can be made on glass slides and
can be sampled by advancing the forceps to the most
stained prior to microscopic evaluation.
 cranial portion of the bladder. Positioning the for-
10. Several samples (3-5) should be retrieved to ensure
ceps fluoroscopically, immediately following con-
complete representation of the area in question.
trast urethrocystography is also an effective method
 of positioning the biopsy instrument adjacent to
Patient care following biopsy
the lesion (Figure 25.3). When using cystoscopy,
we usually insert the biopsy forceps alongside of
Following bladder biopsy, hematuria and dysuria may be
the cystoscopy. Narrow biopsy forceps can also be
 more pronounced. In most cases, bleeding quickly stabi-
inserted through the biopsy channel of the cysto-
lizes (hours to a day) without treatment. Administration
scope; however, the samples obtained with narrow
 of antibiotics is indicated because the integrity of the
forceps are small. In some cases, the samples may be
 mucosal surface of the lower urinary tract is disrupted
nondiagnostic. Therefore, when using the smaller
by this procedure, further altering normal host defenses.
biopsy forceps (1 mm diameter), we took twice as
If possible, infections diagnosed during initial evaluation
many samples (10-15 samples compared to 3-5 with 
should be eradicated prior to biopsy. Eliminating infec-
larger forceps) to improve our diagnostic ability.
tion prior to biopsy will minimize hematuria and dysuria
6.
 After the biopsy forceps is properly positioned, open
 associated with sampling of inflamed tissues and also the
the grasping unit and slightly advance the forceps
 potential of extending the infection into the biopsy site
against the lesion.
and adjacent tissues. In the absence of prior infection,
 7. Close the grasping unit. With the grasping unit
we routinely administer antibiotics orally for the next
closed, the forceps and tissue sample are retracted
3-5 days. The need for medication to minimize pain and
from the urinary tract.
inflammation should be determined on the basis of the
 8. The biopsy sample can be removed from the forceps
underlying disease and the degree of tissue disruption
by lifting the sample from the cup of the grasp-
during procurement of the sample and the type and dose
ing unit with a 22 or 25 gauge needle. The sample
 of preanesthetic agents used.
Biopsy of the lower urinary tract  233
Limitations of forceps biopsy
pressure should allow small perforations of the bladder
wall to spontaneously heal.
 e e sr s  s
diameter of an 8 Fr catheter (2.7 mm). As a general rule,
one should be able to insert the biopsy forceps into the
Endnote
urethral lumen of most male dogs greater than 4 kilo-
 grams and into the urethral lumen of most, if not all,
1. Anestacon, Polymedica Indeustries, Divison of Alcon Labs Inc.,
female cats and dogs. The lumen of the penile urethra of
Woburn, MA 01801.
male cats is usually too narrow to accommodate insertion
 of standard flexible biopsy forceps used for endoscopy.
For male cats, consider using forceps with a shaft diame-
References
ter less that 1-1.67 mm in diameter (i.e., less than 3.5-5
Fr). Most cystoscopes cannot be inserted in the urethra of
Lamb, C.R., N.D. Trower, et al. (1996). Ultrasound-guided catheter
biopsy of the lower urinary tract: technique and results in 12 dogs.
male cats, and those scopes that fit into the urethra gen-
erally do not have a biopsy channel. Therefore, consider 
I Small Anim Pract 37: 413-416.
 Lulich, J.P., C.A. Osborne, et al. (2000). Caniine lower urinary tract
transurethral palpation or medical imaging to direct the
disorders. In: Textbook of Veterirnary Intermal Medicine, edited by
biopsy procedure.
S.J. Ettomger and E.C. Fledman, 5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB
It is possible that a thin or weakened bladder wall
Saunders Company, pp. 1749-1750.
could be perforated by this procedure. For this reason we
Nyland, T.G., S.T. Wallack, et al. (2002). Needle-tract implanatation
do not recommend biopsy of the lower urinary tract at
 following US-guided fine needle aspiration of transitional cell car-
cinomal of the bladder, urethra, and prostate. et Radiol Ultrasound
43: 50-53.
because increases in intravesicular pressure may result
Osborne, C.A. and J.P. Lulich ( 1995). Catheter and forceps biopsy of
in extravasation of urine into the abdominal cavity or
the urethra, urinary bladder, and prostate. In: Carine and Feline
retroperitoneal space. If a tissue sample proximal to a
Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco.
urinary obstruction is desired, constant bladder evacua-
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, pp. 329-332.
Vignoli, M., F. Rossi, et al. (2007). Needle tract implantation after fine
tion by indwelling urethral catheterization or antepubic
needle aspiration biopsy oftransitional cell carcinoma of the urinary
percutaneous catheterization (Stone 1992) of the urinary
bladder and adenocarcinoma of the lung. Schweiz Arch Tierheikd
bladder should be considered. Minimizing intravesicular
149(7): 314-318.
26
Cytology of the urinary tract and prostate
Michael M. Fry
The aim of this chapter is to provide a concise overview of
Limitations of urine as a cytologic sample
cytology of the urinary tract and prostate in dogs and cats,
Microscopic examination of the urine sediment is an
including indications, advantages and disadvantages of
essential component of routine urinalysis (see Chapter
cytology compared to histology sample preparation, and
7) and is a good way of detecting some types of urinary
cytologic findings typical of common lesions. Techniques
system pathology. However, urine samples submitted for
for obtaining cytologic specimens and recommended
therapies are covered elsewhere in this text (see Chap-
cytologic evaluation because of a suspicion of neoplasia
are often nondiagnostic because the neoplastic cells have
ters 16, 20, 21, 23, 25, and 78). Other sources with g00d
not exfoliated into the urine in sufficient numbers or
information about urinary tract cytology in small ani-
because the cellular morphology has deteriorated. Occa-
mals are also available (Baker and Lumsden 2000; Baker
and Lumsden 2000; Borjesson 2001; Henson 2001; Ewing
sionally, urinary tract neoplasia may be diagnosed from
examination of urine, but in general it is more productive
et al. 2008; Zinkl 2008).
to sample a suspected neoplastic lesion directly.
Indications, advantages, and disadvantages
Sample acquisition and slide preparation
The main indications for cytologic examination of uri-
Whether interpreting cytologic specimens in-house or
 organomegaly, or infltrative lesions. Advantages of cytol-
sending them to a diagnostic laboratory, it is to a prac-
ogy compared to histology include lower cost, faster
titioner's advantage to become proficient at obtaining
turnaround time, better morphologic detail, a less inva-
samples and evaluating their adequacy for diagnosis.
sive sample collction procedure, and, depending on the
Adequacy of a cytologic specimen depends on quantity
practioner's level of expertise, the option of interpreting
(cellularity or the number of cells) and quality (preserva-
samples in-house. Disadvantages of cytology compared
tion of cell structure and appropriate monolayer distri-
to histology are the greater risk of obtaining a sample
bution of the cells on the slide). The best cytologic spec-
that is not representative of the lesion and, especially, the
imens are typically of high cellularity and have mostly
lack of tissue architecture. In general, cytology is a good
intact, rather than disrupted, cells. Detailed sample col-
means of diagnosing inflammatory lesions and neoplas-
lection methods are discussed elsewhere in this text, but
tic lesions that exfoliate easily (especially round cell and
common ways of obtaining samples from the urogenital
epithelial tumors), and a less reliable means of diagnosing
tract include fine-needle aspiration, traumatic catheteri-
lesions that tend to exfoliate less readily (such as fibrotic
 zation, prostatic wash, and surgical biopsy. Regardless of
lesions and sarcomas).
the collection method and cellularity of the sample, the
keys to making good quality cytologic preparations are
minimizing trauma to cells during sampling gently cre-
ating a cell monolayer on a glass slide, rapidly air drying
the smear after it is made, proper staining, and avoiding
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
exposure of the sample to formalin or formalin fumes at
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
any point.
234
Cytology of the urinary tract and prostate  235
To create slides from aspirates, detach the aspiration
occasionally contain normal tubular epithelial cells (Fig-
needle from the syringe, draw a few milliliters of air into
ure 26.1) or glomeruli (Figure 26.2). Epithelial cells may
the syringe, and reattach the needle. Next, position the
be present individually or in clusters that retain tubu-
needle bevel down and gently express the contents onto
lar characteristics. Normal renal tubular cells have round
the slide. Slide preparation should be done with minimal
nucleiand moderate amounts of finely granular medium-
trauma to the cells, and air-dried as quickly as possible. If
blue cytoplasm. Feline renal tubular cells often contain
the sample has a fluid consistency, smears can be made
low numbers of small punctate clear vacuoles. Except for 
in the same fashion as a blood smear—that is, with the
the distal urethra, which is lined by squamous epithelium,
edge of a spreader slide, without applying any downward
the lower urinary tract is lined by transitional epithelium
pressure. For samples that do not spread easily in this
(also known as urothelium). Normal transitional epithe-
manner, an alternative is to place a clean slide face down
lial cells may be present in samples from the lower urinary
 on the one with the sample, and then draw the slides apart 
tract, singly or in clusters. These cells have fairly uniform
horizontally without applying any downward pressure.
morphology, round to polygonal in shape, with round
For samples that are too thick or chunky even to use this
nuclei and medium-blue cytoplasm. Normal prostatic
method, one may compress ("squash") the slides before
epithelial cells usually exfoliate in sheets or clusters of
drawing them apart; however, this method may crush
uniform cells with round nuclei and lightly basophilic
enough cells to render the sample uninterpretable. Of
cytoplasm.
course, other factors may also render a cytologic sample
nondiagnostic——-for example, if the tissue of interest was
Neoplastic lesions
missed or did not exfoliate readily.
The most common neoplasms of the upper urinary tract
To create slides from impression smears, the freshly
diagnosed cytologically in dogs and cats are lymphoma
cut tissue should be blotted gently to remove excess tissue
fluid. The impression smear is made by gently touching
(especially renal lymphoma in cats) and renal carcinoma
(see Chapter 57). Renallymphoma typically occurs bilat-
the tissue to the glass slide or by touching the cutaneous
erally. The neoplastic cells are usually large round cells
lesion with the glass slide. If the lesion is poorly exfolia-
q daap jo snoe s pe inu punou se y
tive, a scalpel blade can be repeatedly scraped across the
tissue and the accumulated cells along the edge of the
cytoplasm that in cats often contains low numbers of
blade can then be transferred to a glass slide for squash
small punctate clear vacuoles (Figure 26.3). As with lym-
phoma in other anatomic locations, there are frequently
prep.
many lysed cells and cytoplasmic fragments in addition
 Once a cytology smear has been prepared, it should be
to intact neoplastic cells. Carcinomas tend to produce
air dried as quickly as possible and then stained. Unlike
cells in cohesive clusters, in addition to individual cells,
biopsy samples for histologic evaluation, no chemical
and the malignant cells typically have multiple features
fixation is necessary for cytology specimens. In fact,
 of malignancy (Figures 26.4 and 26.5). Carcinomas of
it is critical that the sample not be exposed to formalin
fumes, which interfere with normal cytologic staining and
extrarenal origin may metastasize to the kidney(s). Renal
almost always make the sample uninterpretable. Staining
  s  n s  s
 mas tend to yield samples of relatively low cellularity,
is usually done with a rapid stain (e.g., Camco Stain Pak,
 in which the neoplastic cells are present individually or
Cambridge Diagnostic Products, Ft. Lauderdale, FL) in
in loose aggregates. The neoplastic cells often have taper-
the practice setting and Wright's or Wright's-Giemsa stain
 ing cytoplasmic projections and are often associated with
 in the reference laboratory setting.
pink extracellular matrix (Figure 26.6).
The most common neoplasm of the lower urinary tract
Cytologic findings
is transitional cell carcinoma (also known as urothelial
carcinoma), especially in dogs (see Chapter 79). The neo-
This section describes cytologic findings typical of nor-
plastic cells typically exfoliate in cohesive clusters and
mal tissue and common neoplastic and non-neoplastic
have prominent features of malignancy (Figure 26.7).
lesions of the urinary tract and prostate.
   n     s
are likely to have cytologic characteristics of sarcomas
Normal tissue
from other anatomic locations (Figure 26.8).
Although the intent in collcting samples for cytologic
Non-neoplastic lesions
examination from the urinary tract or prostate is usually
to obtain cells representative of a pathologic lesion, nor-
Cytology may help to characterize non-neoplastic lesions
mal cells may also be present. Aspirates of renal lesions
specific to the urinary tract, such as hyperplasia,
236
Diagnostic testing
(a)
(b)
20.0
(c)
Figure 26.1 Normal renal tubular epithelial cells, without (a) and with (b) cytoplasmic vacuoles, from a cat, and a renal tubular epithelial
structure (c) from a dog.
Figure 26.3 Aspirate from a cat with renal lymphoma. The neo-
plastic cells are large round cells with large round nudlei. There
are also many basophilic cytoplasmic fragments (sometimes called
Figure 26.2 Glomerulus (bottom) and associated tubular struc-
"lymphoglandular bodies"), a common feature of aspirates of both
ture (top) from a cat.
lymphoma lesions and non-neoplastic lymphoid tissue.
Cytology of the urinary tract and prostate  237
2ODPn
Figure 26.4 Renal carcinoma in a dog. The low magnification image shows the cohesive clusters typical of epithelial tumors. The inset 
 more clearly shows the features of malignancy, including increased variability in cell and nuclear size, increased nuclear:cytoplasmic
ratios, and irregularly condensed chromatin.
10.0μ
20.0μm
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.5 Renal carcinoma in a dog. Features of malignancy shown here indlude cellcrowding and nuclear molding (a) and karyomegaly
(b). The amorphous blue material (b) is necrotic debris.
Figure 26.6 Renal sarcoma in a cat. The specific celltype in this case was not determined. These cells have the fusiform shape, indistinct 
cell margins, tapering cytoplasmic processes, loosely aggregated arrangement, and pink extracellular material that are characteristic of 
 mesenchymal cells. Features of malignancy shown here include anisocytosis, anisokaroysis, and loose chromatin with 1 or 2 prominent
nucleoli.
238
Diagnostic testing
50.0μm
50.0μm
(a)
(b)
Figure 26.7 Transitional cell carcinoma from the urethra (a) and urinary bladder (b) in two dogs. The low magnification image shows
the high celularity and cohesive clustering typical of epithelial tumors. The high magnification images more clearly show features of
 malignancy, incuding anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, high N:C ratios, and iregularly condensed chromatin. Variably sized round granular
pink cytoplasmic inclusions are often present in these tumors, but may also be a feature of prostatic adenocarcinomas (LeBlanc et al,
2004).
dysplasia, or metaplasia of epithelial cells. Hyperpla-
inflammation is resolved. Hyperplastic prostatic epithe-
sia/dysplasia of epithelial cells (such as urothelium or
lium has a characteristic uniform “honeycomb" arrange-
prostatic epithelium) often occurs in response to inflam-
ment of polygonal cells with round nuclei and moderate
mation, and it is common to see atypical epithelial cells
amounts of lightly basophilic cytoplasm (Figure 26.9).
in samples from patients with cystitis or prostatitis (see
Squamous metaplasia of the prostate (Figure 26.10) is
Chapters 71 and 78). The morphologic changes that
 a recognized complication of estrogen excess in dogs
occur in response to inflammation are similar to those
with Sertoli cell tumors or that have been treated with
that occur with malignant transformation——for example,
exogenous estrogens (Merk et al. 1986; MacLachlan and
increased anisocytosis, nuclear:cytoplasmic ratios, and
Kennedy 2002).
cytoplasmic basophilia—so it is advisable to be conserva-
tive in interpreting these findings. Usually, the most pru-
dent approach is to repeat cytologic examination after the
100μ
Figure 26.9 Benign prostatic hyperplasia in a dog. The low mag-
nification image shows a sheet of cells of uniform morphology.
Figure 26.8 Myxosarcoma from the urinary bladder of a dog.
The inset more dearly shows the "honeycomb" arrangement of
Note the abundant magenta extracellular matrix.
the cells.
Cytology of the urinary tract and prostate 239
10.0μm
Figure 26.10 Squamous metaplasia and neutrophilic inflamma-
Figure 26.12 Renal cryptococcosis in a cat. The thick clear
tion in the prostate of a dog with a Sertoli cell tumor. The angular
capsule and occasional narrow-based budding are characteris-
shapes and turquoise cytoplasm are characteristic of squamous
tic of C. neoformans yeast forms. Slide courtesy of Dr. David F.
cells.
Edwards.
Cytology may also be useful to characterize non-
is consistent with feline infectious peritonitis in cats,
neoplastic lesions that are not unique to the urinary tract
or with fungal infection, actinomycosis/nocardiosis, or
and may be cytologically indistinguishable from similar
foreign body reactions in any species. Cystic fluid often
lesions from other anatomic locations, such as infec-
contains cholesterol crystals (Figure 26.13), which form
tions, inflammation, cysts, or hemorrhage. Infectious
 as a result of breakdown of cellular lipids. Virtually all
agents that may be detectable cytologically include, but
cytologic specimens contain some degree of sampling-
are not limited to, bacteria (Figure 26.11) and fungi (Fig-
induced blood contamination. Prior “true” hemorrhage
ure 26.12). Suppurative inflammation (predominantly
neutrophilic) (Figures 26.10 and 26.11) suggests the pos-
hemorrhage if there is evidence of erythrophagocytosis
sibility of a bacterial infection, even if organisms are not
 or the erythrocyte breakdown products hemosiderin or
detected. Pyogranulomatous inflammation (character-
hematoidin (Figure 26.14).
ized by an infiltrate of neutrophils and macrophages)
50.0μm
Figure 26.13 Fluid from a renal cyst in a dog. This image shows
Figure 26.11 Marked septic suppurative inflammation in the
 overlapping cholesterol crystals (clear rectangular forms that often
prostate of a dog. Bacterial rods are present extracellularly and
have a notch in one comer) in the center, surrounded by amor-
phagocytosed within neutrophils.
phous to granular (possibly mineralized) debris.
240
Diagnostic testing
Baker, R. and J.H. Lumsden (2000). The urinary tract—kidney, blad-
der, and urethra. In: Color Atlas of Cytology of the Dogand Cat, edited
by R. Baker and JH. Lumsden. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, Ppp. 223-
234.
Borjesson, D.L. (2001). Cytologic examination of the urinary tract. In:
Atlas of Canine and Feline Cytology, edited by R.E. Raskin and D.J.
Meyer. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,pp. 253-260.
Ewing, P.H., J.H. Meinkoth, et al. (2008). The kidneys. In: Diagmostic
Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and Cat, edited by R.L. Cowell,
R.D. Tyler, J.H. Meinkoth, and D.B. DeNicola, 3rd edition. St. Louis, 
MO: Mosby Elsevier, pp. 339-349.
Henson, K.L. (200l). Reproductive system. In: Atlas of Camine and
Feline Cytology, edited by R.E. Raskin and D.J. Meyer. Philadelphia,
 PA: WB Saunders, pp. 277-312.
LeBlanc, C.J., C.s. Roberts, et al. (2004). Firm rib mass aspirate from
a dog. Vet Clin Pathol 33(4): 253-256.
MacLachlan, N.J. and P.C. Kennedy (2002). Tumors of the genital
Figure 26.14 Cytologic evidence of prior hemorrhage. The main
systems. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals,edited by D.J. Meuten, 4th
 image shows two erythrophagocytic macrophages; the one on the
left also contains coarse granular dark green pigment consistent
edition. Ames: Iowa State Press, pp. 547-573.
Merk, F.B., M.J. Warhol, et al. (1986). Multiple phenotypes of pro-
with hemosiderin. The inset shows macrophages and hematoidin 
static glandular cells in castrated dogs after individual or com-
crystals. Inset image courtesy of Dr. Bente Flatland.
bined treatment with androgen and estrogen. Morphometric,
ultrastructural, and cytochemical distinctions. Lab Invest 54(4):
References
442-456.
 Zinkl, J.G. (200s). The male reproductive tract: prostate, testes, and
Baker, R. and J.H. Lumsden (2000). The reproductive tract—vagina,
semen. In: Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and Cat,
uterus, prostate, and testicle. In: Color AtlasofCytologyofthe Dogand
edited by R.L. Cowell, R.D. Tyler, J.H. Meinkoth, and D.B. DeNicola,
Cat, edited by R. Baker and J.H. Lumsden. St. Louis, MO: Mosby,
 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier, pp. 369-377.
Pp. 235-252.
27
Diagnosis of infectious diseases
of the urinary tract
Meryl P. Littman
Introduction
disease) and diseases that cause carrier states (so-called
"stealth pathogens") with antigenic variation, ongoing
Infectious pathogens may gain access and colonize organs
immune stimulation, and circulating immune complexes
of the urinary tract by ascending from the distal uro-
(CIC) that may deposit in glomeruli (e.g., Anaplasmosis,
genital tract, hematogenously, via direct trauma or
Babesiosis, Bartonellosis, Borreliosis (Lyme disease),
by descending from the kidneys to the lower urinary
Dirofilariasis, Ehrlichiosis, Hepatozoonosis, Leishma-
tract. Commonly, localized bacterial infection within the
niasis, Mycoplasmosis, Trypanosomiasis). Immune-
tract may damage the kidneys (pyelonephritis), ureters
mediated glomerulonephritis (IMGN) causes protein-
(ureteritis), bladder (cystitis), prostate gland (prostati-
losing nephropathy (PLN), and proteinuria may then
tis), and/or urethra (urethritis) (see Chapter 71). Less
further damage the rest of the nephron.
commonly, infections with fungal, protozoal, viral, or
 In order to diagnose infectious causes of damage to the
parasitic organisms affect these organs, possibly more
kidneys or urinary tract, integrate information from his-
 tory and physical examination (see Chapter 4), imaging
ters 72, 73, and 74).
(see Chapters 15, 16, and 17), blood and urine tests (see
 Infectious agents may cause multiorgan involvement
Chapters 7, 8, and 9), and sometimes aspirates or biopsies
 hematogenously and may target the kidneys for coloniza-
(see Chapters 23, 24, 25, and 26). Depending on clinical
tion, for example, bacterial septicemia, Leptospirosis,
signs, clinicopathologic findings, and localization of dis-
Toxoplasmosis, Brucellosis, Cryptococcosis, Aspergillo-
 ease, prioritize infectious agent suspects and determine
sis, etc. (see Chapters 49, 52, 71, 72, 73, and 74). Some
which confirmatory test(s) will be most helpful to iden-
agents cause vasculitis, which may affect the kidney,
tify the agent. Sometimes, a search for antigen is done, for
for example, infectious canine hepatitis (Adenovirus
example, by direct visualization of cytologic preparations
I), Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Rickettsia rickettsii),
 of urine sediment, blood, fine needle aspirate, or biopsy
and feline infectious peritonitis (FIP coronavirus). Also,
and by culture, ELISA agar-gel immunodiffusion, or PCR
infectious agents may cause renal damage indirectly
technology to find specific DNA of the agent. A search
by  immune-mediated mechanisms, via antigenic
for antigen in blood, urine, or tissue is best done during
q yn os jou onod ssnin Au j uons
the acute phase, before treatment is begun. Sometimes,
the presence of intact organisms in the kidney but by
a search for serum antibodies directed against the agent
deposition of immune (antigen-antibody) complexes,
is most helpful, by IFA, ELISA, IgM/IgG, immunoassay,
especially in the glomeruli of the kidneys (see Chapter
Western blot, agglutination test, etc. For some diseases,
53) (Sykes 2003). Examples implicated include chronic
animals may present during an acute phase, before sero-
active infections (e.g-, endocarditis, pyoderma, dental 
conversion takes place, in which case paired (acute and
convalescent) titers including a titer taken 2 weeks into
the illness may be necessary to make the diagnosis. Treat-
ment will depend on which agent is found as well as
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
where the infection is localized. For diseases with carrier
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
241
242
 Diagnostic testing
states, if quantitative titers are available, they should be
neutered males had higher risk of UTl; no association was
repeated 6 months post treatment to check for decline
found in relation to steroid dose, duration of treatment,
and to get a new baseline.
 or daily versus alternate day therapy.
Cats with lower urinary tract signs that have not been
Suspicion for urinary tract infection
catheterized or have a urethrostomy generally have sterile
cystitis (see Chapter 75). Feline calicivirus may localize in
Bacterial infections affecting the kidneys and urinary
the upper and lower urinary tract in cats, possibly caus-
tract are very common in small animals (see Chapter
ing clinical signs (see Chapter 73) (Kruger et al. 2007;
71); 14% of dogs have urinary tract infection (UTI)
Larson et al. 2007). Bacterial UT1 in cats is more com-
sometime in their lifetime and E. coli is the most com-
 monly seen in older cats, affecting the kidneys. Urine cul-
mon culprit (Barsanti 2006). Urinalysis and urine aerobic
tures were positive for bacterial growth in roughly 15%
culture and sensitivity are recommended (preferably by
of cats sick with a variety of illnesses, including hyperthy-
cystocentesis) for animals with signs of lower urinary
roidism (24% had positive cultures), neurologic disease
tract disease (e.g-) pollakiuria, stranguria, dysuria, hema-
(24%), neoplasia (20%), renal failure (18%), Diabetes
turia, urinary incontinence, “sawhorse” stance, prostatic
mellitus (13%), lower urinary tract disease (10%), res-
pain, or abnormal vaginal/preputial discharges; prostati-
piratory disease (9%), and gastrointestinal disease (4%)
tis cases may also need a prostatic wash done (see Chap-
(Bailiff et al. 2004). In another study, positive cultures
ter 78)); renal disease (e.g-) polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD),
were found in cats with uncontrolled hyperthyroidism
anorexia, vomiting, abnormal renal size or architecture,
(21.7%), chronic kidney disease (16.9%), Diabetes mel-
painful kidneys, or azotemia); vague or nonspecific signs
litus (13.2%), and only 4.9% of cats with lower urinary
(e.g-, anorexia, lethargy, fever, weight loss, heart mur-
tract signs (Bailiff et al. 2007). E. coli was the most com-
mur, leukocytosis, or left shift), or with diseases or med-
mon organism isolated and was found in 67% of diabetic
ications that predispose for UTI (e.g-, uroliths; neopla-
cats with UT1 (Bailiff et al. 2006) and 51% of nondia-
sia; neurologic (see below), musculoskeletal, or anatomic
betic cats (Bailiff et al. 2004) but was not isolated in cats
abnormalities associated with urine stasis, obstruction,
with only lower urinary tract signs (Bailiff et al. 2007).
 or incontinence; immunosuppressive conditions such as
 Dilute urine specific gravity, contrary to presumption,
steroid treatment (Ihrke et al. 1985), hyperadrenocorti-
was not associated with positive culture results in these
cism, or Diabetes mellitus (>40% of dogs with hyper-
cats (Bailiff et al. 2004, 2007). Increased risk for UTI was
adrenocorticism and/or Diabetes mellitus have UTls
related to the Persian breed, female sex, increasing age,
(Forrester et al. 1999)), cancer, or chemotherapy; sys-
and decreasing body weight (Bailiff et al. 2007).
temic infections such as endocarditis, dental disease,
History can give clues to determine if a bacterial uri-
pyometra, lymphadenopathy, diskospondylitis; or pre-
nary tract infection is likely acute, with recent onset of
vious instrumentation, catheterization, or surgery (e.g-
signs, or chronic, with signs for more than 2 or 3 weeks;
 perineal urethrostomy).
Spayed female dogs were found to be most at risk for
ing or rarely, a superinfection. Simple UTIs are defined as
UTl, probably due to their short urethra, followed by
occurring relatively rarely in the individual, for instance,
neutered males, intact females, and lastly, intact males
no more than one or two UTls per year in an individ-
(Barsanti 2006). Dogs having surgery for type I thora-
ual. Complicated or relapsing infections require further
columbar intervertebral disc extrusion often had UTI
 diagnostic work-up to find and treat underlying predis-
(27% of 92 dogs had positive bacterial cultures), espe-
 posing factors. Localization of the site of damage within
cially females and dogs unable to walk or voluntarily uri-
nate. The UTI was found before surgery (15% of dogs) or 
decisions concerning medications, type of antibiotic that
after surgery (12% had UTI at 2-3 days, 16% at 45 days,
can penetrate the affected organ(s), length of treatment,
and 20% at 7 days) (Stiffler et al. 2006). Decreased preva-
and prognosis. For example, chronic prostatitis requires
lence of UTI in this population was found in dogs that
lengthy treatment with an antibiotic that can breach the
had received perioperative cefazolin and in dogs whose
 prostate-blood barrier (see Chapter 78). Localization of
body temperature stayed above 35°C during anesthesia.
UTI (upper versus lower urinary tract and acute versus
Occult UTI was often found in dogs receiving long-
chronic prostatitis) is reviewed elsewhere (Bartges 2005).
term corticosteroids for chronic skin diseases (Ihrke et al.
 Urinalysis (see Chapter 7) including cytologic exam-
1985). Despite inactive microscopic sediment, 39% of 71
ination of sediment and urine cultures/sensitivity (see
dogs had positive bacterial cultures, most often growing
Chapter 9) are most helpful to confirm UT1. The
E. coli (59%). Mixed infections (in 28% of the dogs) and
leukesterase dipstick square frequently (20%) shows
recurrent infections (in 38%) were seen. Females and
false-negative results, so urinary sediment examination
Diagnosis of infectious diseases of the urinary tract   243
- o si s   s os
cultured, but if cocci were noted, only 80% of the time
 pue euaoeq inq 'n isaans enad 1oue en
was there a positive culture (Barsanti et al. 2006a). No
from vagina or prepuce may contaminate voided sam-
bacteria were seen in microscopic sediment in 8% (rods)
ples (and the absence of inflammatory cells does not rule
and 12% (cocci) positive cultures (Barsanti et al. 2006a).
out occult UT1). Among 50 normal dogs with sterile cys-
Finding proteinuria and/or glucosuria warrants doing
tocentesis samples, 26% of catheterized samples and 85%
d  o n  so s 
of voided samples grew bacteria on culture (Comer and
teinuria 77% of the time while 61% had <10 WBC/HPF
Ling 1981), so if not contraindicated, sampling by cys-
(Barsanti et al. 2006a). Diabetics with glucosuria are of
tocentesis is most preferred. Allowable numbers of WBC
-ans sqeuou uenson pue in o uod sso
in the microscopic sediment and bacteria in the quanti-
 gests a tubular reabsorptive problem that may be associ-
tative culture vary depending on how the specimen was
ated with pyelonephritis.
collected. Host defenses from ascending urogenital flora
When UTI is suspected, based on clinical signs, urinal-
(see Chapters 9 and 71) normally keep bacterial numbers
ysis, or the existence of predisposing factors, urine culture
low in the bladder. Contamination may allow growth
is recommended to identify the type and number of bac-
of 104 (dog) or 10² (cat) colony forming units (CFU)
teria present. Urine is plated on agar plates and grown
per mL of urine in a mid-stream voided or manually
in vitro. Antibiotic sensitivity testing can then be done
expressed sample, 10² (dog) or 102 (cat) CFU/mL in a
by using Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion methodology with
catheterized sample, and 10^ (dog or cat) in cystocentesis
the viewing of inhibition zones or by automated MIC
samples (Osborne 1995). Normal numbers of WBC in
(mean inhibitory concentration) testing to find which
the urine are 0-8 WBC/HPF (x450) in catheterized or
antibiotics are best to use for treatment (see Chapter 35).
mid-stream voided, and 0-3 WBC/HPF in a cystocentesis
Rarely, nonbacterial infectious agents colonize the uri-
sample (Osborne 1995). A catalase test for early detection
nary tract and can be visualized in sediment, or cultured
of UTI (Uriscreen, Savyon Diagnostic Ltd, Israel) needs
from urine or tissue specimens (see Chapters 72 and 74).
 more study in veterinary medicine. One study showed
 Clinical signs of organ involvement may suggest a search
92% sensitivity, 77% specificity, 55% positive predictive
for such agents ( Table 27.1).
ful in deciding which urine samples need cultures done
(Bellino et al. 2002).
Suspicion for infection as a trigger for
Occult UTI is fairly common in small animals. Among
glomerulonephritis
 85 asymptomatic intact male dogs, 9% had UTI; clinical
 signs of UTI were absent in 95% of dogs with hypera-
Immune-mediated damage to the urinary tract targets
 drenocorticism and/or Diabetes mellitus, which had UTI
 the renal glomeruli, causing proteinuria. Proteinuria may
(Barsanti 2006). Lack of pyuria may occur because of
be occult and may only be recognized in healthy appear-
decreased margination of WBC to the site of inflam-
ing animals during annual health screening tests includ-
mation due to hyperadrenocorticism, iatrogenic steroid
 ing testing for proteinuria by urinalysis and sulfosali-
administration, diabetes, or immunosuppressive states,
cylic acid (SSA), microalbuminuria (MA) by E.R.D. test 
and requires that urine aerobic cultures be done even
(HESKA), quantitative MA (Antech), or a urine pro-
when the urinary sediment is inactive. Anaerobic cul-
tein/creatinine ratio evaluation (see Chapter 8).
tures are generally not necessary unless emphysematous
Whenever noted, consistent and significant pro-
cystitis is seen. False-negative urine cultures may occur
teinuria without gross hematuria or an active urinary
if samples contain antibiotics, bacteriostatic radiocon-
trast dye, alcohol, or cleansing agents. Bacteriuria from
hypertension (e.g., blindness due to retinal hemorrhage
 pyelonephritis may be intermittent, and cultures of blad-
or detachment, neurologic signs due to cerebrovascular
der urine may be negative when the few bacteria are
accident; see Chapter 68), thromboembolic events (e.g-
phagocytized by WBC; therefore, pyelocentesis may be
hindleg paresis due to saddle thrombus, dyspnea due to
necessary (see Chapter 6). Urine cultures may be falsely
pulmonary embolism, pancreatitis due to portal venous
 positive if contaminated by bacteria from the skin, colon,
thrombosis), or ascites, effusion/edema (see Chapter 44),
 prepuce, or vagina. Quantitation of bacterial colonies,
even before signs of renal failure (e.g., PU/PD, vomiting)
interpreted in light of how the sample was obtained, helps
are seen. Blood tests may show hypoalbuminemia and
rule out contamination and false-positives (see afore-
hypercholesterolemia with or without azotemia. Signs
 mentioned text). Brownian motion of dust particles may
suggestive of infectious agents that may cause PLN
be mistaken for bacteriuria. If rods were noted in sed-
include other signs of immune-mediated or systemic dis-
iment, there was a 92% likelihood that rods would be
ease, for example, fever, cytopenias (anemia, leucopenia,
 Search for antibody
MAT, LA, ELISA, WB
z u goz eiaasn xa poaq sauaaa eu eaze eua opue enuad leua paposse saeasi snau sanp soe la
C6, ELISA, WB, FA,
 radioimmuno-
ELISA, FA, WB
IA fo eline
heartworm)
ELISA, FA
ELISA, FA
precipitin
FA, WB
 Diagnostic tests 
FA, LA
Elution
FA, CF
A
PCR, micro, C, IHC, FA(
PCR, micro, C, FA
Micro, IHC, PCR
C, micro, PCR
C, micro, PCR
PCR, micro, C
PCR, micro
Micro, gross
ELISA, micro
PCR, micro
Micro, PCR
PCR, micro
PCR, micro
PCR, micro
C, PCR
PCR, FA
Micro, C
C, PCR
Micro
x
x
x
X
X
X
X
 Possibly, if sepsis, endocarditis, etc.
 Other sins of illness 
 Oculo-neural
X
xxx
x
Rare
xx
Lameness 
X
x
X
xx
Rare
Kidney, abdomen 
V, M, epi-rbc
EC, fibroblasts
Kidney, neuro
Uro-genital
cell/organ
 Infected 
EC, V, T
Bladder
Heart, V
Many
Many
WBO
VWBC
RBC
Many
Many
renal injury  
Site of 
G, T
I, G?
G, T
T
G
G
Borrlia burgdorteri (lyme)
Parasitic and other diseases
Mycoplasma/ureaplasma 
Balamuthia (amoebae)
Dirofilaria (Heartworm)
Bacteria (Many spp.)
Rickettsial diseases
Dioctophyma renale
Bacterial diseases
Prototheca (algae)
Protozoal diseases
Infectious agent 
eptospira spp.
Babesia spp.
Trypanosoma
Bartonella
Anaplasma
Spirochetes
Capillaria 
Hepatozoon
Leishmania
Toxoplasma
Ehrlichia 
Brucella
RMSF
ELISA, FA, SN, CF, HAI
antibody test; G, glomerular; HAl, hemagglutination inhibitin I, infiltrative; IA, mmunoassay; IHC, immunohistochemistry: LA, latex agglutination; M, macrophages; MAT, microagglutinatin
ELISA,AGID, CF,FA,
(ap Aae) NA
AGID, ELISA, CF
ELISA, FA, WB
CF, AGID
IgM/lgG
VN
C,micro,FA ELISA, LA
C,micro,ELISA,EIA
VI,IHC, PCR 
Micro, C, ELISA
C, micro, PCR 
C, micro, PCR
X
x
x
x
See secondary
infections
Rare
Bone, lung, many 
URI, bladder 
Nasal, many
Nasal, many
Lung, many
V, many
Many
Many
LIveI
G or whole
Fungal diseases
Viral diseases
Adenovirus I
Blastomyces
Cryptococcus
Aspergillus
Coccidioides
Calicivirus
Candida  
FeLV
FIV
AP
246   Diagnostic testing
and/or thrombocytopenia),
epistaxis, petechiation,
Balamuthia mandriliaris
ecchymoses, icterus, polyarthropathy, vasculitis, uveitis,
This amoeba caused granulomatous nephritis and
chorioretinitis, meningitis, and lymphadenopathy. A
meningoencephalitis in a dog. Antigenic tests include
screening test for proteinuria should always be done
microscopic identification of trophozoite and cystic
on animals (whether asymptomatic or not) that have
forms, IHC, or PCR on affected tissues (Foreman et al.
positive test results for diseases that can cause carrier
2004).
states, such as heartworm, Lyme, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma,
Bartonella, Babesia,Brucella, Leishmania spp, etc.
Bartonellosis
Various Bartonella spp. may cause carrier states in dogs
Infectious disease examples (Table 27.1)
and cats, and as such may cause chronic immune stimu-
lation as “stealth" pathogens. Organisms may be associ-
Adenovirus !
ated with RBCs and endothelial cells. Lymphadenopathy,
See “Infectious canine hepatitis" later.
endocarditis, hepatitis, vasculitis, uveitis, polyarthropa-
thy, granulomatous disease, neurologic, and other syn-
dromes have been described (Breitschwerdt et al. 2004).
Anaplasmosis
The clinical importance of Bartonellosis in dogs and cats
is still controversial; proving causation of illness may be
See "Ehrlichiosis" later.
difficult even when evidence of exposure or carrier status
is found. One study found 10.1% and 27.2% seropreva-
Aspergillosis
lence in healthy versus sick dogs, respectively (Goodman
et al. 2005). Diagnostic tests include searching for antigen
This fungal infection generally causes nasal disease in
by PCR or 5-6 week culture of blood or tissue samples in
dogs with possible extension through the cribriform
special media for this gram-negative fastidious bacterium
plate leading to CNS signs. However, dissemination
and searching for antibody by IFA or Western blot.
may occur, especially in middle-aged female German
Shepherds (Schultz et al. 2008), to kidneys, bones, etc.
Blastomycosis
Histopathology or cytology/culture of tissue may show
fungal elements; serum antibody tests are not always
This dimorphic fungal disease may invade skin, lung,
positive.
bone, eyes, kidneys, etc. Chronic antigenic stimulation
may cause IMGN. Testing for antigen in urine or serum
was found to be more sensitive than testing for serum
Babesiosis
antibodies (Spector et al. 2008).
Canine Babesiosis may be due to several species of
Babesia, including large (B. canis and a novel unnamed
Borreliosis
Babesia species (Birkenheuer et al. 2004; Sikorski
See "Lyme nephropathy” later.
et al. 2008)) and small (B. gibsoni and a B. microti-
like/ Theileria annae species). In the United States, dogs
Brucellosis
at risk include Greyhounds (B. canis), Pit Bull Terriers
or dogs that have fought with them (B. gibsoni), and
Brucella canis may cause diskospondylitis, epidydimi-
splenectomized dogs (novel large Babesia sp.). Common
tis, orchitis, reproductive failure, and sometimes uveitis,
signs include immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, but
meningoencephalitis, lymphadenitis, etc. in dogs. Organ-
less commonly seen are acute renal failure and throm-
isms persist in the prostate and are shed in the urine for
bocytopenia syndromes, as described in Spain with a B.
months to years. Renal involvement may occur by exten-
microti-like agent (Camacho et al. 2001, 2004). Pigmen-
sion, or chronic immune stimulation may lead to IMGN
turia is mostly due to hemoglobinuria (due to intravas-
in some carrier dogs. The gram-negative rods may be
cular hemolysis) and bilirubinuria. Organisms may be
cultured from blood, semen, urine, aborted fetuses, or
missed in RBCs; blood smears of the buffy coat or
disk material, but diagnosis is usually by serum antibod-
ear sticks may be helpful. Since antibodies to different
ies identified by the rapid slide agglutination test (RSAT)
Babesia spp. may not cross-react with IFA tests for B.
or tube agglutination test (TAT), which may be con-
canis or B. gibsoni antibodies, Babesia PCR using primers
firmed with the more specific agar gel immunodiffusion
that can pick up all types of Babesia and/or Theileria-like
test (AGID). Seroconversion is slow and may take 1-3
 organisms should be used.
months (Scheftel 2003).
Diagnosis of infectious diseases of the urinary tract  247
Calicivirus
may be seen in urine or abdominal fluid; adult worms
may be seen on ultrasound or grossly in the kidney or
This viral infection usually causes upper respiratory
peritoneal cavity (see Chapter 74).
signs, but is implicated in some cases of feline cystitis
(see Chapter 73) (Kruger et al. 2007; Larson et al. 2007).
Dirofilariasis
Candidiasis
Heartworm disease may cause IMGN, possibly involving
 antigens from the endosymbiont rickettsial Wolbachia
This yeast may invade urinary organs, usually in
 spp-, which live in the heartworms, assisting their fer-
immunosuppressed animals by extension from lower
fility. Heartworm disease may cause no signs, cough
urogenitalia (Pressler et al. 2003, 2004). Diagnosis is by
or hemoptysis (dogs), emesis (cats), signs of heart fail-
visualization or culture of organisms in urine, bladder,
ure, coughing, pulmonary thromboembolic events, etc.
or rarely, renal samples (see Chapter 72).
Heartworm infestation may be diagnosed by finding
   no ss   e
Capillariasis
heartworm antigens by immunoassay with in-house tests
such as the SNAP-3Dx, SNAP-4Dx (IDEXX), or Solo Step
Lower urinary tract signs may be seen in cats and dogs
CH (HESKA) in dogs. Since the antigens tested for are
with double operculated ova in urinary sediment. Rule
from gravid female worms, animals (especially cats) with
out fecal contamination with Trichuris spp. Ova (see
 small burdens may have negative results; the Solo Step
Chapter 74).
FH (HESKA) feline heartworm test is used to detect anti-
bodies.
Coccidioidomycosis
Also known as San Joaquin Valley Fever, the fungus may
Ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis
disseminate to many organs, including kidneys, and/or
These rickettsial organisms may cause chronic carrier
may cause IMGN. Detection of the agent, antigen, or 
states with no signs of illness, or they may cause
antibodies has been recently reviewed ( Taboada 2008).
polyarthropathy, uveitis, meningitis, IMGN with PLN,
vasculitis, cytopenias (especially thrombocytopenia),
Coronavirus
gammopathy mimicking multiple myeloma, lym-
phadenopathy, etc. Cytologic examination of buffy coat
See “Feline infectious peritonitis" later.
 or blood smears' feathered edge, bone marrow aspirates,
 or joint taps may reveal white blood cells with intracyto-
plasmic morulae in granulocytes (e.g-, E. ewingii and A.
Cryptococcosis
phagocytophilum organisms) or mononuclear cells (e.g--
Usually causing nasal and/or CNS disease in cats, this
E. canis and E. chaffeensis organisms). The in-house
fungal infection sometimes colonizes the kidneys, caus-
SNAP-4Dx (IDEXX) test qualitatively tests for anti-
 ing renomegaly and renal failure. Organisms may be cul-
bodies directed against E. canis (cross-reaction detects
tured (takes 2-42 days) or directly visualized in urine or
antibodies to E. chaffeensis) and A. phagocytophilum
renal tissue specimens with methylene blue, India ink, or
(cross-reaction detects antibodies to A. platys, a platelet
gram stains. They appear similar to fat droplets but are
rickettsial infection). Whole cell ELISA and IFA tests are
all the same size and focus at the level of the sediment
available to quantitate height of titers for E. canis and
(fat droplets vary in size and float under the coverslip).
A. phagocytophilum (the latter used to be called E. equi).
 Since animals may present during an acute phase of illness
stain, which colors the agent's capsule rose-red as com-
before seroconversion has occurred, paired testing (acute
pared to the blue background. Antigens may be captured
 and convalescent) may be needed, or one titer 10-14
by latex agglutination or ELISA with monoclonal anti-
days into the illness. The SNAP tests are likely to remain
bodies (Larsson 2002).
 positive for years after treatment, because of immune
memory. Pre- and 6-month post-treatment quantitative
titers for Ehrlichia or Anaplasma may be helpful to check
Dioctophyma renale
for a decline, indicating possible clearance or decreased
The giant kidney worm of dogs and cats comes from
burden, and to get a new baseline to compare with future
eating raw fresh water fish or frogs. Hematuria, ureteral
 quantitative titers should signs recur or worsen. Older IFA
obstruction, or, if bilateral, azotemia, may result. Ova
 tests for E. canis antibodies inconsistently cross-reacted
248   Diagnostic testing
with antibodies directed against other Ehrlichia or
bone periosteal proliferation may be seen radiographi-
Anaplasma spp.
cally. Diagnosis is confirmed by muscle biopsy (PCR and
PCR testing on whole blood using primers to identify
visualization of schizonts).
 any species of Ehrlichia or Anaplasma is available and is
best done before doxycycline treatment is started, lest the
Infectious canine hepatitis (Adenovirus I)
result be negative. The SNAP test does not pick up anti-
bodies to E. ewingi, and since organisms may be missed
This virus may cause vasculitis, cytopenias, renal and
cytologically, the PCR test would help find evidence of E.
hepatic failure, but not usually icterus. Disease is now
ewingii DNA and is best done before treatment is started.
rare because vaccination is very effective. If suspected,
virus isolation, PCR, etc. are done.
During and after treatment, PCR testing became negative
in dogs that had A phagocytophilum infection (Alleman
et al. 2006). But with steroid challenge, PCR testing was
Leishmaniasis
positive again, proving lack of clearance with a 2-week
In the United States, this protozoal systemic infec-
course of doxycycline.
tion is primarily seen in Foxhounds and may
cause IMGN. Besides signs due to nephrotic syn-
FeLV/FIV
 drome/hypertension/renal failure, signs may include
Immunosuppression due to feline leukemia virus and/or
epistaxis,
dermal, ocular, musculoskeletal signs,
feline immunodeficiency virus may predispose cats to
and/or lymphadenopathy. Labwork may show pro-
teinuria, cytopenias, hypoalbuminemia, hyperglobuline-
secondary urinary tract infections. Risk also occurs for
IMGN due to CIC associated with FeLV or FIV car-
mia, and/or azotemia. Promastigotes may be seen in
rier status, secondary infections, or antigens from FeLV-
macrophages by aspirating lymph node, bone marrow,
associated neoplasia or myelodysplasia. Diagnostic tests
spleen, etc. Many tests for antigen and antibody detec-
for FeLV find soluble virus (ELISA) or cell-associated
tion exist. A new rapid in-house ELISA test is available for
serum antibodies, the SNAP Leishmania Test (IDEXX)
virus (FA) on blood or bone marrow smears and PCR
(Ferroglio et al. 2007).
or IHC on tumor or bone marrow specimens. Culture of
bone marrow may reveallatent infections. Antibody test-
ing for FeLV is rarely done. Diagnosis of renal lymphoma
Leptospirosis
usually requires renal FNA or biopsy, since affected cats
This systemic spirochetal infection usually enters the
 are often FeLV-negative. ELISA for FIV antibodies is
body via mucous membranes or damaged skin, and tar-
standard even though it cross-reacts with FIV vaccinal
 gets the kidneys hematogenously. The organisms localize
antibodies. The SNAP Feline Triple Test (IDEXX) is an
in renal tubular cells and are shed in the urine intermit-
 in-house test for FeLV and heartworm antigens and FIV
tently for months to years by carriers. Many pathogenic
antibodies.
species exist and can cause clinical signs in dogs, farm
animals, and humans, but interestingly, cats are rela-
Feline infectious peritonitis (FiP coronavirus)
of small rodents that can carry Leptospira spp. organ-
The immune-mediated vasculitis of FIP may affect kid-
isms. Leptospira spp. shed in urine can survive in a
neys, with granulomatous infltration and renomegaly.
Other organ involvement (liver, eye, CNS) may occur;
wet environment, for example, on organic material or
blood tests may show hyperglobulinemia, icterus
on biofilms of rocks in neutral or alkaline waterways.
azotemia, etc. Renal biopsy is the main way to diagnose
In the past, serovars L. canicola and L. icterohemor-
renal FIP when it occurs in the “dry form" of FIP. In
 s   s n d  
 o      ro  , s
likely due to L. pomona, L. grippotyphosa, L. bratislava,
Since FIP is caused by a mutant coronavirus and anti-
or L. autumnalis. Signs of Leptospirosis are variable
bodies cross-react with those against the common enteric
and range from occult infection to acute or chronic
coronavirus, which many cats have, titers may not be as
signs, which may include renal, hepatic, gastrointestinal,
helpful.
myalgia/arthralgia, and/or uveitis signs. Clinicopatho-
logic abnormalities may include cytopenias, leukocytosis,
azotemia, liver enzyme elevations (especially cholestatic),
Hepatozoonosis
isosthenuria, glycosuria, bilirubinuria, and active sedi-
Carriers of Hepatozoon americanum or H. canis in south-
ment with negative bacterial urine cultures.
east United States (Allen et al. 2008) may develop IMGN.
With the exception of PCR (Harkin et al. 2003),
H. americanum causes severe wasting myositis. Long
 diagnostic tests to look for Leptospira spp. antigens are
Diagnosis of infectious diseases of the urinary tract  249
 generally not helpful. The spirochetes are diffcult to iso-
painful hocks and carpi), which may be due to Lyme-
late (require special media) or visualize (require dark-
triggered immune-mediated synovitis (or coinfections
field microscopy, Giemsa or silver stains, FA, or PCR).
with Anaplasmosis) and responds to doxycycline with
Testing for antibodies is currently the main way to look
corticosteroids. At Penn, 57% of dogs with IMPA were
for exposure, but cross-reactive antibodies makes inter-
Lyme + when compared with 37% of the rest of the
 pretation difficult. Differentiating between vaccinal and
hospital population (Rondeau et al. 2005).
natural exposure antibodies may be available in the
soop + a jo qnu s inq umoun 
future with Western blot or immunoblotting (Goldstein
become sick with an immune-mediated nephropathy
2008). Cross-reaction also exists between members of
 caused by Lyme antigen-antibody complex deposition
serogroups. Contrary to previous thought, the highest 
in glomeruli (Chou et al. 2006; Goldstein 2007 and
titer may not be the infecting serovar; convalescent titers
 personal communication presented during that ACVIM
show less serogroup cross-reaction over time, allowing
2007 talk). The disease is not due to colonization of the
for better prediction of the offending serovar (Lunn
kidneys with spirochetes and few if any organisms are
2008). The microagglutination test (MAT) is the current
 actually present in the kidneys (different than Leptospiro-
"gold standard" but ELISA, IgG/IgM, and macroagglu-
sis) (Chou et al. 2006; Hutton et al. 2008). Glomeru-
tination tests are also available. Since acute illness may
lar deposits (immune complexes) in dogs with Lyme
occur before seroconversion, paired titers (acute and con-
nephropathy were found to include Lyme-specific anti-
valescent) are needed, if the dog presents during the first
bodies, for example, directed against Lyme antigens p31
10-14 days ofillness, to see seroconversion or a fourthfold
(ospA), p34 (ospB), and p83 (Chou et al. 2006; Goldstein
rise in titer. Standardization is difficult; interlaboratory
 2007). Dogs with Lyme nephropathy may or may not
results do not always agree, and the cut-off for signifi-
have had a history of lameness or past exposure to Lyme
cance is arbitrary. For instance, some would accept a titer
vaccinations (Littman 2008). The use of Lyme vaccine is
of 1:200 for a non-vaccinal serovar as a positive titer;
controversial, since increased levels of circulating Lyme-
others use 1:800 as a cut-off. For vaccinal serovars, some
specific immune complexes (Lyme-CIC) are associated
use 1:3200 while others use 1:800 as a cut-off for natural
with Lyme nephropathy and can be found in dogs after
exposure antibodies >10 weeks postvaccine. As higher
vaccination, circulating for many months (longer with
titers are used as a cut-off, specificity is gained but sen-
 bacterin than with subunit ospA vaccine, and longer in
sitivity is lost. Most agree that chronic urinary shedders
dogs that were seropositive before vaccination) (Gold-
can be serologically negative, and since shedding may be
stein and Atwater 2006; Goldstein 2007); theoretically
 intermittent, urine PCR may be negative as well.
dogs may have increased immune-complex deposition or
 sensitization if they are genetically so inclined. Asymp-
tomatic as well as sick dogs were found to have Lyme-
Lyme nephropathy
 specific CIC, but sick dogs had higher CIC than asymp-
The diagnosis of disease caused by Lyme (Borrelia
tomatic dogs (Goldstein 2006).
burgdorferi) is difficult because seropositivity is so com-
Any breed can be affected; however, Labrador and
mon in Lyme endemic areas, and the vast majority of
Golden Retrievers were found to be at high risk for Lyme
seropositive dogs remain asymptomatic, without illness
nephropathy (Dambach et al. 1997). At Penn, 85% of
 or proteinuria, even though most remain chronic carri-
Retrievers with PLN were Lyme + when compared with
ers (Littman et al. 2006). In some Lyme endemic areas,
24% ofhealthy Retrievers (there was no association found
50-90% of normal dogs are seropositive. So when sick
in German Shepherds) (Littman et al. 2006a). But even
dogs are seropositive, it is diffcult to know whether Lyme
among Lyme + Labrador Retrievers, the incidence of 
disease is causing their illness. Less than 5% of exposed
Lyme nephropathy is very low (Goldstein et al. 2007),
s   s,  s s + 
and currently, there is no way to predict which seroposi-
including anorexia, fever, and oligoarthritis, which is self-
tive dogs will be at risk. Height of antibody titer does not
limiting over a few days in experimental models and is
appear to predict illness, and many asymptomatic dogs
quickly responsive to antibiotics such as doxycycline or
have high titers (Littman et al. 2006; Levy et al. 2008).
amoxicillin in cases seen in the field. Response to doxy-
 In Europe, although a high percentage of Bernese Moun-
cycline does not prove cause, since many other infec-
tain Dogs are Lyme +, there was no association between
tious diseases that mimic Lyme disease are doxycycline-
proteinuria and seropositive status (Gerber et al. 2005).
responsive and since doxycycline has anti-inflammatory
All Lyme + dogs should be monitored for protein-
and antiarthritic properties in addition to its antimi-
uria whether they are sick with Lyme disease or not. Sick
crobial ones. Some Lyme + dogs may have immune-
s on  ssd  dd   so
mediated polyarthropathy (IMPA, often with swollen
of PLN, including nephrotic syndrome, hypertension,
250  Diagnostic testing
thromboembolic events, and/or renal failure. The diag-
nephritis (Dambach et al. 1997). Urinalysis shows pro-
nosis of Lyme nephropathy is supported by a history of
teinuria, casts, sometimes bilirubinuria, and possibly evi-
exposure to Ixodes ticks in a Lyme endemic area (95%
 dence of tubular disease (glucosuria, decreased concen-
of cases are in just 12 states, including PA, NY, NJ, MA.
tration).
CT, RI, WI, MD, MN, DE, VA, and NH) and evidence
 Sophisticated elution studies showing Lyme-specific
of antibodies directed against the organism. Transmitted
antigens or antibodies in the glomerular immune
after 2-4 days of tick attachment, the spirochetes migrate
deposits are used in research but are not readily avail-
through the tissues and do not circulate via the blood-
able for the clinician to help diagnose whether PLN is
stream. The organisms are associated with collagen and
actually due to Lyme disease or not. Imaging (radio-
fbroblasts, and are diffcult to find cytologically or cul-
graphs, ultrasound) are not helpful in differentiating
ture from blood, joint taps, biopsy, etc. Therefore, proof
Lyme nephropathy from other forms of PLN. Response
to treatment is fair to poor. Doxycycline, angiotensin-
directed against the antigens that would be present in the
converting enzyme inhibitors, antithrombotic low dose
 dog due to natural exposure (as opposed to vaccination).
of aspirin,(
omega-3 fatty acids, and modified pro-
Since vaccinal antibodies include those directed against
tein/phosphorus diet are generally used. Antihyperten-
antigens expressed by B. burgdorferi as found in the tick
 sives, antiemetics/protectants, colloid therapy, etc. are
 or in vitro, certain tests can be done on vaccinated dogs,
 added as needed. Studies with immunosuppressives and
which can differentiate for natural exposure antibodies.
plasmapheresis therapy to remove CIC need to be criti-
The most sensitive and specific test for natural exposure
cally evaluated.
antibodies is the C6 peptide test, which is included on
the SNAP-3Dx and SNAP-4Dx tests (IDEXX). These in-
Protothecosis
house tests give a qualitative positive or negative. For
quantitation of level (height) of antibodies, C6 Quant
  s    e  
(IDEXX) can be done by the reference laboratory. The
compromised animals. Dissemination to kidneys may
cause renal failure. Other signs may include diar-
in-house SNAP tests are very sensitive and may show a
positive result even when the C6 Quant is <30, which
rhea/hematochezia, lymphadenopathy, anterior uveitis,
is the level below which clinical illness would not be
dermal ulcers, and neurologic signs. Organisms may be
expected to be associated with Lyme disease. Since nor-
seen in urine sediment, aerobic urine cultures, or renal
mal dogs may have C6 Quant even higher than 600, the
histopathology (Pressler et al. 2005).
height of the C6 Quant does not prove causation.
The old tests of IFA and whole cell ELISA are not
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF)
specific for natural exposure to B. burgdorferi. They may
Dogs exposed to Rickettsi rickettsia may have no signs of
become positive due to exposure to other Borrelia spp.
illness or variable signs including fever, vasculitis, bleed-
or to Lyme vaccination. They would need to be followed
 ing, vomiting/diarrhea, acute renal failure, vestibular or
up with a Western blot test to look for specific banding
other neurologic signs, lameness, and pancreatitis. Ane-
pattern usually seen with natural infection/exposure to B.
 mia and thrombocytopenia are common; pancytopenia
burgdorferi, or preferably a C6 peptide test (SNAP or C6
may occur. Vasculitis affecting the kidney may cause pro-
Quant). Doing paired (acute and convalescent) titers are
teinuria and renal failure. Organisms invade vascular
not necessary, and IgG and IgM testing is not helpful for
endothelial cells and are not found in the blood. Dogs
Lyme disease, since illness would not be expected during
 present acutely, often before seroconversion; therefore,
early infection (with IgM+/IgG- status) based on the
paired titers (acute and convalescent) are often neces-
experimental finding that dogs did not show any illness
sary. Contrary to other rickettsial infections, there is no
until 2-5 months after exposure. Having IgM+/IgG+
known carrier state.
status does not prove recent exposure, since antigenic
variation during the chronic carrier phase can cause novel
Toxoplasmosis
 antigen exposures and new IgM antibodies to rise.
-u    x  i 
Toxoplasma gondii protozoal organisms may infiltrate the
thy, and since renal biopsies are not usually done on
kidneys and cause renomegaly and renal failure. Other
mildly affected dogs, histopathologic changes during the
 organs may be affected, including the eye, CNS, lung,
 early stages of Lyme nephropathy is not yet characterized.
liver, muscle, etc. Cats are the definitive hosts and may
Histopathologic changes on pet dogs sick with moder-
shed oocysts in the feces but sick cats do not necessarily
ate to severe Lyme nephropathy showed a combination
shed oocysts when they are ill. PCR or cytologic exami-
of IMGN, tubular necrosis/regeneration, and interstitial
Diagnosis of infectious diseases of the urinary tract  251
(tachyzoites). Antibody titers (paired) can check for both
Birkenheuer, A.J., JI. Neel, et al. (2004). Detection and molecular char-
IgM and IgG, to show active or recent infection (IgM)
acterization of a novel large Babesia species in a dog. Vet Parasitol
versus chronic carrier status (IgG).
124(3/4): 151-160.
Breitschwerdt, E.B., K.R. Blann, et al. (2004). Clinicopathological
abnormalities and treatment response in 24 dogs seroreactive to Bar-
Trypanosomiasis
tonella vinsonii (berkhoffi) antigens. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 40(2):
92-101.
This protozoal infection may mimic Leishmaniasis in
   o        
 s    od 
Spain with a Babesia rmicroti-like agent. Vet Rec 149(18): 552-555.
Camacho, A.T, E.J. Guitian, et al. (2004). Azotemia and mortality
immunohistochemistry, due to cross-reactive antibodies.
among Babesia microti-like infected dogs. I Vet Intern Med 18(2):
PCR analysis may be helpful (Nabity et al. 2006). Chagas
141-146.
disease in S. America (T. cruzi) causes myositis, heart
Cardinal, M.V., R. Reithinger, et al. (2006). Use of an immunochro-
disease, and IMGN; a new rapid dipstick test is used on
matographic dipstick test for rapid detection of Trypanosoma
canine sera (Cardinal et al. 2006).
cruzi in sera from animal reservoir hosts. I Clir Microbiol 44(8):
3005-3007.
Chou, J., A. Wunschmann, et al. (2006). Detection of Borrelia burdorferi
Ureaplasma/mycoplasma spp
DNA in tissues from dogs with presumptive Lyme borreliosis. I Amt
Vet Med Assoc 229(8): 1260- 1265.
Ureaplasma spp. are in the Mycoplasma family and are to0
Comer, K.M. and G.V. Ling (1981). Results of urinalysis and bacte-
small to be seen in the urinary sediment. They are asso-
rial culture of canine urine obtained by antepubic cystocentesis,
ciated with urogenital/reproductive problems and possi-
catheterization, and the midstream voided methods. I Arm Vet Med
Assoc 179(9): 891-895.
bly lower urinary tract signs due to colonization. Tests
Dambach, D.M., C.A. Smith, et al. ( 1997). Morphologic, immunohis-
include PCR or culture on special media. Infection with
tochemical, and ultrastructural characteristics of a distinctive renal
Ureaplasma spp may be suspected in animals with lower
lesion in dogs putatively associated with Borrelia burgdorferi infec-
urinary tract signs, active sediment (WBC), and negative
tion: 49 cases ( 1987-1992). Vet Pathol 34(2): 85-96.
bacterial cultures.
Ferroglio, E., E. Centaro et al. (2007). Evaluation of an ELISA rapid
device for the serological diagnosis of Leishrmanin infarturm infection
in dog as compared with immunofluorescence assay and Western
References
blot. Vet Parasitol 144(1-2): 162-166.
Foreman, O., J. Sykes, et al. (2004). Disseminated infection with Bala-
Allen, K.E., Y. Li, et al. (2008). Diversity of Hepatozoon species in
muthia mandrillaris in a dog. Vet Pathol41(5): 506-510.
naturally infected dogs in the southern United States. Vet Parasitol
Forrester, S.D., G.C. Troy, et al. (1999). Retrospective evaluation of
154(3/4): 220-225.
Alleman, A., R. Chandrashekar, et al. (2006). Experimental inoculation
Diabetes mellitus or both. I Vet Intern Med 13(6): 557-560.
of dogs with a human isolate (NY 18) of Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Gerber, B., S. Eichenberger, et al. (2005). Urine protein excretion of
and demonstration of persistent infection following doxycycline
healthy Bernese Mountain Dogs and other dogs with and without
therapy. I Vet Intern Med 20(3): 763.
antibodies against Borrelia burgdorferi. I Vet Intern Med 19(3): 431.
Bailiff, N., I. Westropp, et al. (2007). Comparison of urinary tract
Goldstein, R.E. and D.Z. Atwater (2006). Evaluation of serology and
 sis i  rm am sd si u s
cats with chronic kidney disease, hyperthyroidism, and Diabetes
relia burgdorferi. I Vet Intern Med 20(3): 713.
mellitus. I Vet Intern Med 21(3): 649.
Goldstein, R.E. (2007). Current understanding of Lyme nephropathy.
Bailiff, N.L., R.W. Nelson, et al. (2006). Frequency and risk factors for
Proc 25th ACVIM Foru, Seattle, WA. pp. 672-673.
urinary tract infection in cats with Diabetes mellitus. I Vet Imtern
Goldstein, R.E., A.P. Cordner, et al. (2007). Microalbuminuria and
Med 20(4): 850-855.
comparison of serologic testing for exposure to Borrelia burgdorferi
Bailiff, N., R. Nelson,et al. (2004). Prevalence ofurinary tract infections
in nonclinical Labrador and Golden Retrievers. J Vet Diagn Invest
in diabetic cats. J Vet Interm Med 18(3): 442-443.
19(3): 294-297.
Barsanti, JA. (2006). Genitourinary infections. In: Infectious Diseases
Goldstein, R.E. (2008). Advances in the diagnosis of Leptospirosis. Proc
of the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd edition. St. Louis,
26th ACVIM Forum, San Antonio, TX. pp. 622-623.
MO: W.B. Saunders Company, Elsevier, Inc, pp. 935-961.
Goodman, R.A.and E.B. Breitschwerdt (2005). Clinicopathologic find-
Barsanti, J.A., S. Sanchez, et al. (2006a). Accuracy of urinalysis in
predicting the type of infecting bacteria in urinary tract infection. J
Res 66( 12): 2060-2064.
Vet Intern Med 20(3): 738.
Harkin, K.R., Y.M. Roshto, et al. (2003). Clinical application of a
Bartges, J.W. (2005). Urinary tract infections. In: Textbook of Veteri-
 polymerase chain reaction assay for diagnosis of leptospirosis in
Mary Intermal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman,
dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 222(9): 1224-1229.
6th Edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, Elsevier, pp. 1800-
Houser G., A. Ayoob, et al. (2006). Laboratory testing for infectious
1808.
diseases of dogs and cats. In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
Bellino, C., A.M. Farca, et al. (2002). The validity of a catalase test for
edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders,
early detection of urinary tract infection (UTI) in dogs and cats. 12th
Elsevier, pp. 1139-1168.
ECVIM-CA/ESVIM Congress. Available at: http://www.vin.com/
Hutton, T.A., R.E. Goldstein, et al. (2008). Search for Borrelia burgdor-
Members/Proceedings/Proceedings. plx?CID=ecvim2002&PID=
feri in kidneys of dogs with suspected “Lyme nephritis.” I Vet Intern
pr02291&O=VIN (accessed October 15, 2010).
Med 22(4): 860-865.
252
 Diagnostic testing
Ihrke, PJ., A.L. Norton, et al. (1985). Urinary tract infection associated
Pressler, B.M. (2004). Fungal urinary tract infections. Proc 22nd
with long-term corticosteroid administration in dogs with chronic
ACVIM Forum. Available at: http://www.vin.com/Mermbers/
skin diseases. I Am Vet Med Assoc 186(1): 43-46.
Proceedings/Proceedings. plx?CID=acvim2004&PID=pr06067&O
Kruger, J.M., C.P. Pfent, et al. (2007). Feline calicivirus-associated
=VIN (accessed October 15, 2010).
urinary tract disease in specific-pathogen-free cats. J Vet Intern Med
Pressler, B.M., J.L. Gookin, et al. (2005). Urinary tract manifestations
21(3): 648-649.
of Protothecosis in dogs. I Vet Intern Med 19( 1): 115-119.
Larson, J., J.M. Kruger, et al. (2007). Epidermiology of feline calicivirus
Pressler, B.M., S.L. Vaden, et al. (2003). Candida spp. urinary
urinary tract infection in cats with idiopathic cystitis. I Vet Intern
'sy susosd sieo uaass pue sop eh u suoanun in
Med 2(3): 648.
treatment, and outcome. I Am Arirm Hosp Assoc 39(3): 263-
Larsson, C.E. (2002). Cryptococcosis. Proc WSAVA Congress.
270.
Availableat:
 http://www.vin.com/Mermbers/Proceedings/Proc
Rondeau, M.P, R.M. Walton, et al. (2005). Suppurative, nonseptic
eedings.plx?CID=wsava2002&PID=pr02548&O=VIN (accessed 
polyarthropathy in dogs. I Vet Internm Med 19(5): 654-662.
October 15, 2010).
 Scheftel, I. (2003). Brucella canis: Potential for zoonotic transmission.
Levy, S.A., T.P. O'Connor, et al. (2008). Quantitative measurement of
Compend Cont Educ 25(1l): 846-852.
 C6 antibody following antibiotic treatment of Borrelia burgdorfei
antibody-positive nonclinical dogs. Clirn Vaccine Immunol 15(1):
I 's oe  sisase os yo s n s
115-119.
VetIrterrMed22(4): 851-859.
 Littman, M.P (2008). Polyarthropathy, cytopenias, and proteinuria.
Sikorski L.E., A.J. Birkenheuer, et al. (2008). Clinical and molecular
Proc 22nd NAVC Conference, Orlando, FL. 22: 701-703.
characterization of a novel canine Babesia species. I Vet Intern Med
Littman, M.P, R.E. Goldstein, et al. (2006). ACVIM small animal
22(3): 780.
Spector, D., A.M. Legendre, et al. (2008). Antigen and antibody testing
vention. I Vet Intern Med 20(2): 422-434.
for the diagnosis of Blastomycosis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 22(4):
Littman, M.P, U. Giger, et al. (2006a). Seroprevalence of Borrelia
839-843.
burgdorferi antibodies in dogs at a veterinary teaching hospital in a
Stiffler, K.S., M.A. Stevenson, et al. (2006). Prevalence and character-
Lyme endemic area. I Vet Intern Med 20(3): 761-762.
ization of urinary tract infections in dogs with surgically treated
Lunn K.F. (2008). Limitations of MAT for the serodiagnosis of canine
type 1 thoracolumbar intervertebral disc extrusion. Vet Surg 35(4):
Leptospirosis. Proc 26th ACVIM Forum, San Antonio, TX. pp.
330-336.
615-616.
 Sykes, J. (2003). Mechanisms of renal injury by infectious agents.
Nabity, M.B., K. Barnhart, et al. (2006). An atypical case of Try-
Proc 21st ACVIM Forum. Available at: http://www.vin.com/
panosoma cruzi infection in a young English Mastif. Vet Parasitol
Members/Proceedings/Proceedings.plx?CID=acvim2003 &PID=
140(3-4): 356-361.
pr04349&O=VIN (accessed October 15, 2010).
Osborne, C.A. (1995). Three steps to effective management of bac-
Taboada, J. (2008). Systemic mycoses. In: Hardbook of Small Amirmal
terial urinary tract infections: diagnosis, diagnosis, and diagnosis.
 Practice, edited by R.V. Morgan, 5th edition. St. Louis, MO: WB
Compend Cont Educ 17(10): 1233-1248.
Saunders, Elsevier, pp. 1073-1086.
Section 3
Therapeutic techniques
28
Hemodialysis
Cathy Langston
Terminology
therapy (ERRT) is used to include intermittent and con-
tinuous hemodialysis therapies.
 Renal replacement therapies include dialysis and trans-
 plantation. Dialytic therapies include peritoneal dial-
Epidemiology
ysis (Chapter 30), an intracorporeal technique, and
extracorporeal renal replacement therapies (ERRT),
Who to dialyze and when
which include intermittent and continuous hemodialysis
(Chapter 29). The principles of intermittent and contin-
In veterinary medicine, dialysis is used most commonly
uous therapies are the same, but there are practical differ-
for acute kidney injury (Chapter 49). Dialysis is indi-
ences between the techniques, and the reader is referred
 cated for patients with anuria or oliguria, life-threatening
 to the chapter on continuous renal replacement therapy
fluid overload (i.e., pulmonary edema), or hyperkalemia
for further information.
(Chapter 62), if attempts to induce urine production are
The basic premise of ERRT involves withdrawing
unsuccessful. In human pediatric patients, fluid overload
blood from the patient, circulating it through a dia-
(>10%) is associated with a worse outcome (Gillespie
lyzer composed of a semi-permeable membrane to allow
et al. 2004; Goldstein et al. 2005). Uremic symptoms,
removal of uremic toxins, and returning the cleansed
progressive azotemia, or azotemia that does not improve
blood to the patient. By creating a continuous loop of
with standard medical therapy are indications for dial-
blood circulation, although only a portion of the blood
ysis, even if urine output is adequate or increased. In
volume is out of the patient at any given time, the entire
one human study, nonoliguric patients were referred for
blood volume is circulated through the dialyzer many
dialysis later during hospitalization compared to oliguric
times over during the course of the treatment. At the
 patients, and they suffered a worse outcome (Liangos
conclusion of the treatment, the blood in the circuit
et al. 2005). Whether initiating dialysis early in the course
is generally returned to the patient. Dialysate may be
of AKI improves outcome compared to later initiation is
circulated through the dialyzer to allow diffusive clear-
unresolved. Some studies have shown an advantage to
ance (hemodialysis), or fluid may be removed from the
early initiation, although others have not (Gettings et al.
patient to allow convective clearance (hemofiltration), or
1999; Bouman et al. 2002; Liu et al. 2006). However, these
both techniques may be used simultaneously (hemodi-
studies are all confounded by differences in defining early
afiltration). Intermittent hemodialysis relies on diffusive
versus late, only one was randomized, and cohort size was
clearance, but may include hemofltration. Continuous
generally small. In many situations, AKI is reversible, and
therapies may be diffusive, convective, or both.
because there are no studies that clearly predict which
In this chapter, the term dialysis is used to indi-
patients will need dialysis, it is possible that results of
cate peritoneal dialysis (PD), intermittent hemodialy-
studies on early versus late initiation will be biased toward
sis (IHD), and continuous renal replacement therapy
early initiation because of inclusion of patients in the
(CRRT), and the term extracorporeal renal replacement
 early group that did not need dialysis (Waikar and Bon-
ventre 2006). Despite the lack of an adequate study to
answer this question, waiting until uremic symptoms are
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
severe and patient condition has deteriorated may be dis-
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
advantageous, but the risk of early initiation in a patient
255
256  Therapeutic techniques
that may not need dialysis must be weighed against the
Table 28.1 Survival rates with intermittent hemodialysis for
 potential risks and cost of ERRT.
various etiologies of renal failure
 Dialysis is reserved until standard medical manage-
ment has been attempted. Standard medical management
Category
Survival rate
includes adequate volume expansion. Because dehydra-
Obstructive (cats)
70-75%
tion ofless than 5% cannot be clinically detected, patients
Infectious
58-86%
that appear normally hydrated but not overhydrated
Metaboli/hemodynamic
56-72%
should receive a dose of IV fluid equal to 5% of body
Other
29-56%
weight. The systemic blood pressure should be ade-
Toxic
18-35%
quate to perfuse the kidneys (>80-100 mmHg systolic
or >60-80 mmHg mean arterial pressure). The use of
diuretics is widespread in both human and veterinary
medicine despite lack of conclusive evidence of a positive
etiology, with infectious and ischemic causes faring bet-
impact on outcome (Bagshaw et al. 2008). Loop diuret-
ter than toxic causes, in general (Table 28.1) (Langston
ics, specifically furosemide, are most commonly used. If
et al. 1997; Adin and Cowgill 2000; Francey and Cowgill
2002; Fischer et al. 2004b; Pantale0 et al. 2004; Francey
loop diuretics, osmotic diuretics (i.e., mannitol), or other
diuretics fail to induce adequate urine production within
2006a). Of the nonsurviving patients, about half of those
die orare euthanatized due to extra-renal conditions (e.g-
hours, early referral for dialysis is appropriate.
 In people, hemodialysis is used primarily to treat
pancreatitis, respiratory complications). About a third of
end-stage renal disease (Stage V chronic kidney disease; 
nonsurvivors are euthanized due to failure of recovery of
Chapter 48). People may be maintained on chronic
renal function. On going uremic signs, dialysis compli-
 cations, and unknown causes account for the remaining
hemodialysis for years while waiting for a renal transplant 
(Chapter 31) or for decades if transplantation is not pos-
patient deaths. Of the surviving patients, approximately
sible. Transplantation is generally preferred over chronic
half regain normal renal function (defined by normal
 hemodialysis, as it more completely replaces renal func-
serum creatinine concentration) and half have persistent
tion, but transplantation is not readily available for dogs.
chronic kidney disease.
Chronic hemodialysis is an alternative in those cases
 A clinical scoring system for outcome prediction of
and in cats in which there are clear contraindications to
dogs with AKI receiving hemodialysis has been devel-
transplantation. The goal of chronic hemodialysis is to
oped (Chapter 49). The model uses data that is com-
maintain a satisfactory quality of life, which should take
monly available prior to instituting dialysis, although
 precedence over longevity. Chronic hemodialysis should
knowledge of the specific etiology, which is frequently
be recommended when the signs of uremia are no
not known initially, improves the accuracy of the out-
longer controlled by medical management (Chapter 41).
come prediction. Although this scoring system has not
The serum creatinine concentration is generally over
 yet been independently validated and should not be used
5 mg/dL. In some patients, the main sign of uremia is
 in the decision-making process for an individual patient,
anorexia. If few other uremic signs are present or can be
use of scoring systems wil hopefully help in determining
controlled, placement of a feeding tube prior to initiating
 appropriate candidates for dialysis (Segev et al. 2008).
dialysis may be prudent. Although patients may decom-
 pensate acutely and unpredictably, the decision to initiate
Equipment
chronic dialysis ideally should be planned in advance,
allowing scheduling of surgical placement of a perma-
Vascular access
 nent hemodialysis catheter in conjunction with feeding
Catheter design
 tube placement. Although return of a normal appetite is
expected with adequate dialysis, anorexia can be expected
An adequately functioning dialysis  catheter allows
during prolonged interdialysis intervals, when catheter
smooth and efficient treatment and patient management;
function is temporarily inadequate, or when concurrent
a poorly functioning catheter frustrates the technician,
illness is present, and use of a feeding tube during those
doctor, and patient. In veterinary medicine, catheters
 times allows better over all patient care.
are the predominant form of vascular access. Much
thought and care should go into choosing the appro-
 priate catheter, placing it, and maintaining it.
Outcome
A variety of materials can be used to make a catheter
 Overall survival of dogs and cats treated with hemodial-
that is minimally thrombogenic, flexible, and nonir-
ysis for AK1 is 41-52%, but survival is dependent on
ritating to the vessel wall. Polyurethane, polyethylene,
Hemodialysis  257
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), silicone, and carboth-
ane are suitable choices. Polyethylene is stiff and kinks
(a)
8
when bent. It can be used for temporary catheters
(b)
but is not appropriate for long-term use (Ash 2007).
Polyurethane has some rigidity at room temperature,
which assists in placement, but it becomes softer and
(c)
more flexible at body temperature. Alcohol containing
antibiotic ointments will weaken the material (Ash
(d)
2007).
 To allow simultaneous removal and return of blood, a
(e)
dialysis catheter has two lumens. Although catheters are
Figure 28.2 Common ERRT catheter configurations. (a) and (b)
placed in a central vein, the lumen that provides blood
are tunneled cuffed catheters. (c) is a nontunneled noncuffed
egress from the body is generally referred to as the *arte-
catheter ("temporary"). (d) shows catheter C rotated 90° to demon-
rial" port, and the lumen that provides blood return to
strate placement of multiple openings. (e) is a split tip catheter.
the body is termed the “venous" port. The arterial lumen
Cross-section of lumen configurations on right.
is usually shorter than the venous return lumen, to avoid
uptake of blood returning from the dialyzer (access recir-
A double D configuration provides the highest lumen
culation), which would decrease the efficiency of treat-
volume with lowest surface contacting the blood to
ment (Figure 28.1). In some situations, two single lumen
diminish shear stress, while maintaining a modest
catheters are placed to provide blood egress and return,
outer circumference (Ash 2o07). Other configurations
either in separate vessels or in the same vessel. In lumens
are commonly used, however, including round or C-
with a single opening (either at the tip or a side port),
shaped lumens (Figure 28.2) (Wentling 2004). Tempo-
 partial occlusion from thrombosis or a fibrin sheath can
rary catheters are generally designed with a tapering tip to
 decrease catheter function to the point of being unable
facilitate percutaneous placement. Permanent catheters
to provide adequate dialysis. The risk of complete occlu-
may have the tips separated, such that the intravenous
sion is lessened by having multiple ports (Figure 28.2).
portion acts like two separate catheters placed in the same
If the ports are positioned circumferentially around the
vein, whereas the external portions are bound together.
catheter, even if the vessel wall is sucked against the ports
By having separated tips, side ports can be placed cir-
on one side ofthe catheter, blood flow can continue on the
cumferentially, and the increased flexibility of the tips
opposite side. Ifthe side ports are small, blood will prefer-
and their movement with each cardiac cycle may help
entially flow through the tip, making the side ports super-
decrease fibrin sheath formation (Depner 2001). An arte-
fluous. If the side ports are large,they weaken the catheter
riovenous fistula or graft is the preferred access in people
and increase the amount of heparin that diffuses out of
receiving chronic hemodialysis. An artery is surgically
the catheter between dialysis treatments (Depner 2001).
 anastomosed toa vein with a section ofautologous vein or
synthetic graft (typically, PFTE). Within approximately a
month, endothelial cells line the graft, and the endothelial
cells of the autologous vein segment take on characteris-
(a)
tics of arterial endothelium instead of venous. The access
can be then used by percutaneous puncture of the arte-
rial and venous segments with large gauge needles at each
dialysis treatment. Between treatments, no anticoagulant
is needed because blood is continually flowing through
the graft/fistula. Because it is completely enclosed under
the skin, the infection rate is extremely low in comparison
to catheters. A model of AV fistula has been developed
(b)
for canine hemodialysis, and a brachial-cephalic access
 could be considered for dogs receiving chronic dialysis
(Adin et al. 2002).
Figure 28.1 Configuration of arterial and venous lumen catheter
tips. The tip of the "arterial" port, or intake port, is shorter than
Catheter placement and care
the "venous" port, or blood return port (1A). If the connections are
reversed (1B), there is a greater percentage of returned blood that
Temporary, nontunneled catheters can be placed in an
is immediately recirculated through the catheter.
operating room, but are frequently placed in a clean
258
 Therapeutic techniques
Table 28.2 Common ERRT catheter specifications and approximate blood flow ratesa
Max blood
Manufacturer
Type
Lumens
Fr size
Length (cm)
flow (mL/min)
 Quinton PermCath
Cuffed
2
15
45
370
Quinton PermCath
Cuffed
2
15
40
400
Quinton PermCath
Cuffed
2
15
36
410
MedComp Pediatric
Cuffed
2
8
18
120
Hohn
Cuffed
2
7
36
30
MedComp Temporary
Noncuffed
2
11.5
24
360b
Arrowc
Noncuffed
2
7
20
100
Arrow, 20 ga lumenc
Noncuffed
3
5.5
13
40
Arrow, 22 ga lumenc
Noncuffed
3
5.5
13
20
Arrow, 20 ga lumen
Noncuffed
3
5.5
8
50
Arrow, 22 ga lumenc
Noncuffed
3
5.5
8
30
Intracath through the needlec
Noncuffed
1
19ga
30.5
20
aMaximum blood flows determined in vitro using canine packed red blood cell solution (29% packed cell volume). Arterial chamber
pressure maintained at - 250 mmHg or higher. Maximum blood flow rates in vivo may be lower.
bMaximum blood flow determined in vivo.
C Not designed for dialysis.
procedure room. Caps, masks, gowns, gloves, and a large
nately, the catheter can be tunneled under the skin and
sterile drape should be used to maintain sterility dur-
exit a small incision near the vessel. Instead of dissect-
ing placement. Sedation and/or a local anesthetic may
ing to the vessel for a venotomy, a guidewire can be
be necessary depending on the patient's clinical sta-
placed into the vessel, followed by placement of a dila-
tus and demeanor. These catheters are usually placed
tor inside a sheath. The dilator is removed and replaced
 percutaneously (or through a small skin incision) with
with the catheter, and the sheath peels away, leaving the
a guidewire using the Seldinger technique. Temporary
catheter in place. An esophagostomy or gastrostomy feed-
hemodialysis catheters are intended for acute dialysis of
ing tube is frequently placed at the same time as catheter
less than a few weeks duration.
placement.
So-called permanent hemodialysis catheters have an
The largest catheter that can be placed is pre-
external cuff, generally made of Dacron. The catheter is
ferred. Flow is proportional to the catheter diameter
placed with a portion in a subcutaneous pocket, which
and inversely proportionally to catheter length. Minor
 separates the site where the catheter exits the skin from
changes in catheter diameter have very large changes in
the site where the catheter enters the vessel by several
flow, based on Poiseuille equation: Qh = k · P . D4 /(L · V),
centimeters. The Dacron cuff is positioned in this sub-
where Q is blood flow, k is a proportionality constant, P
cutaneous pocket and allows fibroblasts to adhere, thus
is the change in pressure, D is the luminal diameter, L is 
securing the catheter in place and decreasing bacterial
catheter length, and V is blood viscosity. A 19% increase
migration to the vessel. These catheters are intended for
 in diameter doubles the blood flow; a 50% increase in
use for up to two years.
the diameter of the catheter increases the flow five-fold
Cuffed, tunneled hemodialysis catheters should be
(Depner 2001). Approximate blood flow rates for vari-
placed in an operating room with full sterile technique.
 Ous catheters are presented in Table 28.2. For intermit-
Although they can be placed with sedation and a local
tent treatment, the catheter should ideally provide over
 anesthetic in humans, general anesthesia is generally used
15 mL/kg/min blood flow. Flow rates of 3-5 mL/kg/min
when placing permanent catheters in veterinary patients.
are adequate for CRRT.
A skin incision is made over the vessel, and the jugu-
With any method of placement, flow through both
 lar vein is cleared of all fascia. A separate small inci-
 lumens of the catheter should be brisk when aspirated
sion just large enough to allow placement of the catheter
with a large syringe. Fluoroscopic guidance is helpful
is made through the skin at the exit site. The tip of
to ensure that the tip of the catheter is appropriately
the catheter is placed through this incision and tun-
placed at the junction of the cranial vena cava and right
neled under the skin to exit at the skin incision over
atrium. If fluoroscopy is not used during placement, a
the vessel. A smal venotomy incision is made and the
 postprocedure radiograph to confirm accurate placement
catheter introduced into the vessel and advanced. Alter-
should be performed.
Hemodialysis 259
The ERRT catheter should be used only for ERRT
than the blood flow rate in the normal configuration,
 procedures and should be handled only by ERRT per-
the increase in flow more than offsets the decrease in
sonnel. At each ERRT treatment, the exit site should be
effciency (Carson et al. 2005). During initial IHD treat-
inspected and cleaned with antiseptic solution. When the
ments when efficiency is purposefully limited to decrease
ERRT catheter is accessed at the beginning and end of
complications, the blood lines may be reversed to create
each ERRT treatment, or at any other time, the catheter
recirculation.
ports should receive an aseptic scrub for 3-5 minutes.
Access recirculation can be measured by a variety of
The ERRT technician should wear examination gloves
techniques, all of which seek to alter the venous line
 and a mask when opening or closing the catheter. When
blood in some fashion and then detect the presence of
 not in use, the catheter is bandaged in place.
altered blood in the arterial line blood. Some alterations
Between ERRT treatments, each lumen of the catheter
include dilution with saline (detected by ultrasound or
is flled with an anticoagulant solution. Unfractionated
light transmission), change in temperature (cooling) or
heparin is currently used most commonly. A concen-
conductivity (added hypertonic saline), and hemocon-
 tration of 500-1,000 unit/mL is generally used for cats,
centration (via ultrafiltration) (Sherman and Kapoian
and 1,000-5,000 u/mL for dogs. A portion (15-20%)
2008). The indicator dilution method is the most accu-
of the instilled heparin will diffuse out of the tip of
rate method of determining access recirculation ( Tran-
the catheter (Sungur et al. 2007). An alternative lock-
sonic Systems, Inc., Ithaca, NY). Injection of a bolus of
ing solution is sodium citrate. A 4% trisodium citrate
saline in the venous line will dilute the blood, which will
solution has similar rates of catheter thrombosis, dys-
 be detected by an ultrasonic sensor placed on the venous
function, and infection compared to 5000 u/mL heparin
blood line. If there is recirculation, the blood entering the
locking solution, with fewer episodes of major systemic
arterial line will also be diluted, to a smaller degree, which
bleeding (Grudzinski et al. 2007; MacRae et al. 2008).
is measured by an arterial line ultrasonic sensor. The
Higher citrate concentrations (>30%) are also antimi-
percent of blood recirculation is then calculated by the
 (       ) 
machine. Hemoglobin monitors (i.e., Critline Ill TQA,
locking solution should be removed prior to the next
Hemametrics) can detect access recirculation by injection
use of the catheter, but with catheter malfunction, it is
of saline first in the venous line, followed by saline injec-
sometimes not possible to aspirate the locking solution.
tion in the arterial line, but are not accurate measures of
Injection of a highly concentrated (46.7%) citrate solu-
recirculation compared to ultrasonic dilution technique
tion may cause symptomatic hypocalcemia and sudden
(Lopot et al. 2003). Some dialysis machines have incor-
 death. Aspirin is routinely used in veterinary patients as
porated technology to automate measurement, utilizing
 an antiplatelet agent (0.5-2 mg/kg PO q 24 h in dogs, q
changes in dialysate in lieu of injection of a substance
48 h in cats) to decrease catheter-associated thrombosis.
 directly into the blood line, and include use of temper-
Catheter function can decrease over time if thrombosis
ature or conductivity changes. These measurements can
or stenosis occurs gradually, or it can decline abruptly.
be made repeatedly throughout the dialysis treatment.
A simple way of monitoring function at each dialysis
treatment is recording the blood speed when the pres-
Catheter complications
  n- i (dn-ad q e i u as
A gradual decline in the blood speed at a standardized
Despite the use of the least thrombogenic materials possi-
pressure predicts catheter malfunction. The arterial pres-
ble, hemodialysis catheters have a high rate of thrombosis.
sure should be maintained above -200 to -250 mmHg,
Thrombosis may be intraluminal or extraluminal. Both
because at more negative values, the pump speed indi-
 ports of the catheter should be flushed with saline or hep-
cated on the machine is likely higher than the actual blood
arinized saline after every use (approximately 10-12 cc
flow (Depner 2001).
for a large catheter, 3-6 cc for smaller gauge catheters) to
Access recirculation decreases the efficiency of treat-
prevent intraluminal thrombosis. Each port is then filled
ment by "diluting" the blood being withdrawn with blood
with the locking solution (heparin, citrate, or other).
that has just returned from the dialyzer and has a low
Systemic anticoagulation has not been shown to decrease
concentration of uremic solutes. With the extracorporeal
intraluminal thrombosis (Beathard 2001). Treatment
circuit blood lines attached in the normal configuration,
of thrombosis should be initiated as soon as detected.
recirculation is usually less than 5%, but reversing the
Delays in treatment may decrease the adequacy of dialysis
connections such that blood is withdrawn from the dis-
and may allow the thrombus to enlarge. Signs of intralu-
tal port ("venous") increases recirculation to 13-24%
 minal thrombosis include inadequate blood flow during
(Carson et al. 2005). If the blood flow rate that can be
dialysis, or an inability to aspirate the catheter. A first step
achieved in this reversed configuration is much greater
to attempt is forceful flushing of the catheter with saline.
260    Therapeutic techniques
 Dislodgement of the thrombus does not appear to cause
have thrombus formation, based on routine surveillance.
clinically relevant pulmonary thromboembolic disease
Thrombi can be detected echocardiographically in about
(Beathard 2001). If a saline flush does not restore catheter
20% of our patients within 1 week of catheter place-
flow, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) can be instilled
 ment, although catheter flow problems become apparent
in the occluded lumen (Alteplase, CathFlow, Genentech).
 around 2 weeks after catheter placement.
The lumen is aspirated after a 10 minute dwell time,
 Prophylactic administration of aspirin or warfarin
and if the thrombus is not aspirated, the dwel time is
 decreases catheter thrombosis when compared with no
prolonged to 1-2 hours, with intermittent aspiration.
treatment. Bleeding complications were more common
If the catheter can be cleared sufficiently to perform a
with warfarin, and its routine use is not recommended
 dialysis treatment, but flow remains suboptimal, tPA can
for thrombus prevention (Willms and Vercaigne 2008).
 be instilled in the catheter lumen for up to 48 hours and
If a small mural or right atrial thrombus is detected,
removed at the start of the next dialysis treatment (Lok
the recommendation for people is 6 months of systemic
et al. 2006). In our experience, tPA dwell protocols are
anticoagulation. If the thrombus is large, the catheter
successful in allowing sufficient blood flow to perform a
should be removed and systemic anticoagulation started
dialysis treatment, but the effects are short-lived, with re-
with unfractionated or low-molecular weight heparin for
 treatment or catheter replacement being necessary within 
5-7 days and warfarin for at least 1 month. If the throm-
a week.
bus is large and infected, surgical thrombectomy is rec-
Other methods of improving function of an occluded
ommended (Liangos et al. 2006). In veterinary patients,
or partially occluded catheter include mechanical disrup-
a long-standing thrombus may become covered with
tion. A guidewire can be placed in the catheter to dislodge
endothelium or fibrous tissue. Surgical removal has not
a thrombus at the tip of the catheter, but is less effective
been attempted in veterinary patients.
at dislodging thrombi that have formed at side ports.
A sheath of fibrin may form around the catheter within
Extraluminal thrombi include thrombi that form
24 hours of placement, and this form of obstruction
around the tip of the catheter and may be attached
accounts for 38-50% of catheter malfunctions in people
to the vessel wall, and thrombi in the right atrium.
(Figure 28.4) (Liangos et al. 2006). In people, tPA infu-
These thrombi may act as a ball valve, allowing infusion
sion should likely be specified here. Infusion through the
but occluding the catheter and preventing aspiration.
dialysis catheter over 2-3 hours during or after a dialysis
Thrombi in the right atrium and in the cranial vena cava
treatment may be effective in disrupting a fibrin sheath
near the heart may be imaged with echocardiography
(Lok et al. 2006).
(Figure 28.3). Risk factors for thrombosis include venous
Thrombolytic  infusion to dissolve extraluminal
stasis (from volume depletion, hypotension, immobi-
thrombi or a fibrin sheath has been used with vari-
lization, CHF), enhanced coagulability, and vessel wall
able results in veterinary patients. A technique of fbrin
trauma (Liangos et al. 2006). In our experience, over
sheath stripping involves placement of a femoral catheter
50% of patients with a catheter in place for over 3 weeks
advanced to cranial vena cava. A snare is used to encir-
cle the fibrin sheath around the dialysis catheter and
 gently remove the sheath. This technique has not been
attempted in veterinary medicine.
 Replacement of the catheter over a guidewire is a sim-
ple and effective method of treating intraluminal throm-
bosis or fibrin sheath formation. A guidewire is placed in
the dysfunctional catheter. If angiography is desired, the
catheter is partially removed, leaving the tip within the
vessel, and contrast agent is injected through the catheter.
If a fibrin sheath is detected, the old catheter is removed
and a balloon catheter inserted over the guidewire. The
balloon is inflated to disrupt the fibrin sheath. A new
catheter is placed over the guidewire, through the same
exit site and subcutaneous tunnel (if present). Disrupt-
ing the fibrin sheath with catheter replacement has better
 results than catheter replacement alone in people (Oliver
Figure 28.3 Echocardiogram of thrombus on tip of dialysis
et al. 2007).
catheter. Thrombus is visible in the right atrium (RA), trailing into
Careful attention to asepsis is necessary during the
the right ventride (RV). AO, aorta; LV, left ventride
entire procedure. If angiography is not performed,
Hemodialysis   261
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 28.4 Nonselective angiogram of fibrin sheath. (a) Dialysis catheter is visible in cranial vena cava. The distal tip of the catheter
is indicated by white arrow. (b) Catheter was partially retracted (distal tip indicated by white arrow) and contrast was injected through
the catheter. A very narrow stream of contrast is visible within the fibrin sheath, with a breach in the fibrin sheath (arrowhead) allowing
contrast to stream out of the sheath and into the surrounding cranial vena cava. (c) Contrast in and around the fibrin sheath demonstrates
partial filling of the cranial vena cava. A filling defect (black arrow) indicates a thrombus that was at the tip of the dialysis catheter.
 is a common finding in dogs receiving hemodialysis and
in the dialysis unit if needed.
 stenosis may cause a marked decrease in dialysis treat-
Central venous stenosis occurs in 27-38% of human
 ment efficiency.
patients but is frequently asymptomatic (Liangos et al.
 Infections are the most frequent serious complication
 2006). The incidence and significance of this condition in 
of catheter use in people and are discussed more thor-
veterinary patients is unknown, but facial edema, which
oughly in “Patient Management”" section later (Himmel-
can be a sign of cranial vena caval stenosis or obstruction,
 farb et al. 2005). Inadvertent catheter dislodgement is an
262
 Therapeutic techniques
infrequent complication. During each dialysis treatment,
bonate, polyamide, polyacrylonitrile and methallyl sul-
the extracorporeal tubing is securely taped to a harness
fonate (AN-69), and polyacrylonitrile polyacrylonitrile
placed on dogs or directly to the forelimb in cats so that
(PAN).
exuberant motion of the patient does not unduly stress
The ideal pore size in a dialyzer would allow easy
the sutures anchoring the catheter in place.
passage of small- to middle-sized uremic toxins while
restricting loss of albumin. Cellulosic and modified cel-
 lulosic membranes have smaller pores than synthetic
Dialyzer
membranes, which limits clearance of middle molecules.
Almost all dialyzers used today are configured with the
Synthetic membranes are thicker than cellulose-based
S     
membranes (20-55 μm versus 5-11 μm). The synthetic
Blood flows through the center of the fibers, and the
membranes have an asymmetric structure, with a dense
fibers are bathed in dialysate. This configuration pro-
blood contact surface and more open supporting struc-
vides a large surface area for diffusive clearance while
-   ((    
minimizing the volume of blood used to fll the dialyzer.
branes have limited adsorptive capacity.
The fibers are held in place by potting material (termed
During the course of dialysis, blood is exposed to the
header or footer, depending on position), and careful
 dialysis catheter, blood lines, potting material of the dia-
design helps allow blood to completely fill every fiber
 lyzer, the dialyzer membrane, and any contaminants in
equally. Blood enters at the top of the dialyzer and exits
the water or dialysate. Any of these could potentially
at the bottom. Dialysate generally enters at the bottom
cause an adverse reaction. However, the dialysis mem-
and exits at the top, in order to maintain a countercurrent
brane has the largest surface area and is the most likely
flow pattern that maximizes the concentration gradient
component to induce the strongest biologic reaction. Cel-
across the length of the dialyzer.
 lulosic materials generally induce the strongest reaction,
The most common methods of dialyzer steriliza-
although clinically significant reactions may occur with
tion are ethylene oxide gas, heat, or gamma-irradiation,
 the more biocompatible synthetic membranes.
although some membranes cannot withstand heat steril-
Exposure of blood to the dialysis membrane activates
ization (Hoenich and Ronco 2008a). All dialyzers need to
the complement cascade, which activates the coagulation
be rinsed prior to use to remove any sterilant byproducts
 cascade. In addition to causing inflammation and throm-
and microorganisms killed by the sterilization process
bosis, contact proteins activated by exposure to the dial-
(Hoenich and Ronco 2008a). In veterinary medicine,
ysis membrane convert high molecular weight kinino-
dialyzers are used for one dialysis treatment and then
 gen to kinin. The kinins, including bradykinin, increase
discarded. For people receiving chronic hemodialysis, a
vascular permeability, diminish arterial resistance, and
dialyzer may be rinsed, disinfected, and reused for up
 mediate inflammatory responses.
to 30 treatments in the same individual. Advantages of
Within 15 minutes of starting dialysis, neutrophil and
dialyzer reuse include cost savings (although the cost
platelet counts decrease as these cells become sequestered
of disinfecting offsets replacement cost) and decrease in
in the pulmonary capillaries. The effect of a bioincom-
bioincompatibility reactions (see below). Disadvantages 
patibility reaction on lymphocytes is fairly minimal.
include increased time and equipment for the disinfec-
Macrophages/monocytes play a more prominent role
tion process, risk of infection, and risk of exposure of the 
in this phenomenon. Monocytes become activated and
patient to the disinfectant.
increase production of cytokines such as interleukin-1β,
Semi-permeable membranes can be categorized as cel-
tumor necrosis factor α, and interleukin-6. Within 3 to 4
 lulosic, modified cellulosic, or synthetic. Cuprophane is
 hours, neutrophil and platelet counts return to pretreat-
an example of a cellulosic membrane. Modified cellu-
 ment values. Neutrophil and platelet aggregation in the
losic membranes, such as hemophan, have substituted
pulmonary capillaries impairs oxygen transport. Addi-
hydroxyl groups with a substance less likely to acti-
 tionally, complement components induce airway and
vate the patient's complement system (Hoenich and
Ronco 2008a). Although hemophan was the most com-
 to an increase in permeability, further decreasing oxy-
monly used dialyzer membrane in early years in vet-
 gen transport. Other clinical signs of a dialyzer reac-
erinary dialysis, synthetic membranes are used almost
tion include hypertension, hypotension, dyspnea, cough,
exclusively now. Synthetic membranes have larger pores
sneezing, wheezing, choking, rhinorrhea, conjunctival
and allow better middle molecule clearance. They are
injection, headache, muscle cramps, back pain, abdomi-
also less reactive, thus decreasing bioincompatibility
 nal pain, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, flush-
reactions. Examples of synthetic membranes include
ing, urticaria, pruritis, and death (Jaber and Pereira 2005;
polysulfone, polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), polycar-
Hoenich and Ronco 2008b).
Hemodialysis  263
Complement activation can be decreased by cooling
efficiency dialyzers have high urea clearance by virtue of
the blood, which can be achieved by setting the dialysate
 the large surface area, but they also have a larger priming
volume (Table 28.3).
Adhesion of proteins such as albumin to the dialyzer
membrane decreases the bioincompability reaction, and
Extracorporeal circuit
subsequent reuse of dialyzers reduces the reaction. Since
Extracorporeal circuit is the tubing that carries the blood
synthetic membranes are much less likely to induce sig-
nificant first use reactions, reuse is becoming less com-
from the catheter to the machine and dialyzer and returns
mon in human hemodialysis.
it to the patient. It should be made from a nonthrombo-
Clearance of a dialyzer is the volume of blood com-
genic material. The pressure in the extracorporeal circuit
pletely cleared of a certain solute during a single pass
before and after the dialyzer is routinely monitored by
through the device and is identical to the concept of
the dialysis machine, to detect any unsafe conditions,
dlearance in the kidney. Dialyzer clearance is calculated
such as a line disconnection or occlusion. Any air-blood
by measuring the concentration of the substance at the
interface creates a potential site for thrombosis. The dial-
inlet and outflow of the dialyzer, at standardized blood
ysis machine detects any air bubbles in the venous return
 segment, which triggers automatic clamping of the blood
flow (usually 200, 300, and 400 mL/min), dialysate flow
(500 mL/min), and ultrafiltration (0) rates. Clearance of
line until the situation is corrected. The volume of blood
contained in the extracorporeal circuit depends on the
urea, creatinine, phosphorus, vitamin B12, and inulin are
 specific tubing used and should be selected based on the
commonly reported, as substances of interest, or mark-
ers ofother solute clearance (i.e., vitamin B12 (MW 1355
patient's size.
Da) and inulin (MW 5200 Da) as markers of middle
molecule clearance). Clearance is reported in mL/min
Dialysate
and abbreviated Kd[solute]- Dialyzer specification data is
Dialysate is the solution that bathes the blood-filled hol-
derived from in vitro measurements, and actual perfor-
low fibers in the dialyzer. It is physiologically similar to the
 mance is generally slightly lower.
aqueous portion of plasma. A typical IHD treatment uses
The coefficient of ultrafiltration (Kup) is a measure
 150 L of water for dialysate. Contaminants in the water
of the hydraulic permeability of the membrane, or the
can diffuse into the bloodstream, and as discussed above,
water flux. It is the number of milliliters of water that can
some small volume of dialysate may enter the blood com-
be removed per hour for each 1 mmHg transmembrane
partment via back-filtration. Multiple steps are involved
 pressure (the difference in hydraulic pressure between
in purifying water used for dialysate.
the blood compartment and the dialysate compartment ).
Dialyzers with a higher Kue can remove larger volumes of 
Water quality
fluid from the patient in a given time with a lower trans-
membrane pressure. In the average veterinary dialysis
The appropriate design of a water treatment system
 patient, even dialyzers with a low Kue can remove ade-
depends on the quality of source water and may include
quate volumes of fluid to normalize patient hydration.
all or most of the following components. A filter, such as
Because of the decrease in hydrostatic pressure from the
a mixed bed multimedia filter, removes particulate mat-
top to the bottom of the blood fibers, and because of the
ter in the water. An ion exchanger absorbs cations and
increase in oncotic pressure at the bottom of the dialyzer
 anions and releases sodium and chloride in exchange.
due to ultrafiltration and the resultant hemoconcentra-
The predominant ions removed in this fashion are cal-
tion, it is possible to get back-filtration at the bottom of
 cium and magnesium. Carbon filtration adsorbs organic
the dialyzer. Back-filtration allows endotoxins or other
toxins, including chlorine and chloramines. A small filter
contaminants from the dialysate to enter the blood com-
is placed after the carbon tanks to catch small particles of
partment. Back-filtration is more likely to occur when a
carbon that became dislodged. Reverse osmosis is usually
dialyzer with a high Kup is used without ultrafiltration.
the final step in water purification. Pressure applied to the
In order to prevent this from occurring when a dialyzer
water forces it through a semi-permeable membrane that
with a high Kup is being used, a nominal rate of ultrafil-
excludes contaminants. Deionization can be used instead
tration should always be applied, with intravenous fluid
of reverse osmosis. With deionization, cations are bound
replacement if the patient does not need fluid removal.
to the resin, releasing H+, and anions are bound, releas-
High-flux dialyzers are characterized by a membrane
ing OH- . All of the pipes and materials the water contacts
with larger pore size, which possess high ultrafiltration
should be PVC, stainless steel, or glass to avoid leeching
coefficients and permits clearance of middle molecules
 of potentially toxic components (such as copper or zinc).
(Jaber and Pereira 2005; Yeun and Depner 2005). High-
There should be no dead-end loops in the system because
264    Therapeutic techniques
Table 28.3 Common dialyzers used in veterinary ERRT
 Priming
volume
 Priming
volume
dialyzer 
and 
Manufacturer/
Surface 
dialyzer
tubing
Kdurea
Kdueat
Kdphos
KdB12
KuF
 machine 
Dialyzer
Membrane 
area (m²)
(mL)
(mL)
(mL/min)  (mL/min)  (mL/min)  (mL/min)  (mL/h/mmHg)
Conventiona!
Gambro
100HGbed
Hemophan 
0.22
18
102
82
69
25
2.0
Fresenius
F3
Polysulfone 0.4
28
125
95
50
20
1.7
Fresenius
F4
Polysulfone 0.7
42
155
128
78
32
2.8
Fresenius
F5
Polysulfone 1.0
63
170
149
103
45
4.0
High-efficiency
Gambro
500HGr
Hemophan 
1.1
58
184
171
144
66
7.6
Fresenius
F8
Polysulfone 1.8
110
186
172
138
76
7.5
Medium-ffux
Fresenius
F40
Polysulfone 0.7
42
165
140
138
75
20
Fresenius
F80 M
Polysulfone 1.8
110
190
177
170
110
27
High-flux
Fresenius
F160 NR
 Polysulfone
1.5
84
194
181
178
128
45
Fresenius
F200 NR
 Polysulfone
2
112
195
191
183
148
56
Gambro
Polyflux 140 H PolyamixTM
1.4
94
193
181
174
128
60
Gambro
Polyflux 170 H PolyamixTM
1.7
115
196
186
180
137
70
Prisma CRRT sets
Gambro Prisma
M109
AN-69
0.042
3.5
45
9.7
8.1
3.6
Gambro Prisma
M60a.e
AN-69
0.6
48
90
37
30
29
25
15
Gambro Prisma
M100b.e.f
AN-69
0.9
65
107
43
33
32
35
22
Measurements performed in vitro at Qb = 200 mL/min, Qd = 500 mL/min, UF = 0, except where otherwise noted.
aQ = 100 mL/min, UF = 5 mL/min
bQb = 150 mL/min
"UF = 13 mL/min
dDiscontinued
eQd = 2 L/h (33 mL/min)
FUF = 10 mL/min
9Q = 20 ml/min, Q = 1 L/h, UF = 1 ml/min
PolyamixTM = Polyarylethersulfone, polyvinylpyrolidone, and polyamide
and Phoenix machines have specific tubing sets. The tubing volume for the neonatal set is 40 ml, and the volume for the pediatric set is 75 ml.
The volume of the dialyzer is added to this volume to determine the total extracorporeal circuit volume. With the Gambro Prisma, the tubing
 and dialyzer are one integrated set.
they increase the risk of bacterial growth. Hot and cold
bacterial contaminants or endotoxins, producing what is
water entering the system are usually blended to enhance
termed ultrapure dialysate.
function because excessively hot or cold water decreases
Water treatment systems can be sized to produce ade-
the effciency of the reverse osmosis machine. Routine
quate water for one or many dialysis machines. Self-
maintenance of the system is performed to maintain ade-
contained water treatment systems with the capacity to
quate function and to disinfect the system. In most new
  s     s
models of dialysis machines, an additional filtration step
 available and are designed to attach to the back of the
is provided by the dialysis machine, using a device similar
dialysis machine.
 to a dialyzer. Using the same principles of ultrafiltration,
Water and dialysate should routinely be tested for
dialysate entering the device is ultrafiltered, and the ultra-
chemical and bacterial contamination. Culture media
filtrate is passed to the patient dialyzer, leaving behind any
should be restricted in nutrients (i.e., tryptic soy agar)
Hemodialysis 
265
and a pour plate method is preferable to a calibrated
Clinical toxicity may occur with inadequately treated
loop method. The Association for the Advancement of
water. Municipal water treatment facilities add alu-
Medical Instrumentation (AAMl) has established stan-
minum sulfate or alum to water to clear flocculent
dards for dialysis water quality. Standard dialysis water
debris, and this aluminum must be completely removed
should have a bacterial count of less than 200 CFU/mL,
before use in dialysate. Signs of aluminum toxicity in
and prepared dialysate should have a count less than
people include neurologic signs, including personality
2,000 CFU/mL. Endotoxin levels are commonly mea-
change, decreased short-term memory, speech distur-
sured using the limulus ameobocyte lysate assay and
bance, myoclonic muscle spasm, hallucinations, seizures,
should be less than 0.25 endotoxin units/mL. Ultrapure
and dementia; bone disease (such as osteomalacia,
dialysate should have fewer than 0.1 CFU/mL bacterial
osteodystrophy); and microcytic hypochromic anemia.
count and <0.03 endotoxin units/mL. Continuous renal
Chloramines are added to water as bactericidal agents.
replacement therapies generally use prepackaged sterile
Toxic effects of chloramines are primarily hematologic,
dialysate, thus avoiding the necessity for a water treat-
including hemolysis, heinz body anemia, and methe-
ment system and associated monitoring. In addition to
moglobinemia. Fluoride is added to prevent dental dis-
bacterial contaminants, AAMI has established guidelines
ease, but overexposure to fluoride can cause osteomalacia
for acceptable levels of chemical components of water
 and osteoporosis. Copper can leech from copper pipes 
(Table 28.4).
in the water system. Signs of copper toxicosis include
 Production of cytokines in dialysis patients is related to
chills, nausea, headaches, liver damage, and hemolysis.
the endotoxin load in the dialysate and the permeability
Zinc can also leech from pipes or galvanized containers
of the dialysis membrane to endotoxin. Whether use of
and causes nausea, vomiting, fever, and anemia. Nitrates
ultrapure dialysate will decrease chronic inflammatory
are not added to water via the treatment process, but
conditions associated with dialysis has not clearly been
 may appear due to bacterial contamination or run-off
established yet (Bommer and Jaber 2006).
from fertilizers used in the area of the source water.
Nitrates cause methemoglobinemia, cyanosis, hypoten-
sion, nausea, and potentially hemolysis. Sulphates may
Table 28.4 AAMl guidelines for dialysate water
cause nausea, vomiting, or metabolic acidosis. Although
calcium and magnesium are normally found in the body,
 Allowable range (mg/L = ppm)
extremely high levels, as may occur with malfunction
Contaminant
 of the water-softening process, can cause nausea, vom-
Sodium
0-70
iting, muscular weakness, skin flushing, hypertension,
 Potassium
8-0
 or hypotension. An extremely high sodium level could
Alminum
0-0.01
occur if the ion exchanger goes through a regeneration
Calcium
0-2
cycle during the dialysis treatment (D'Haese and De Broe
Copper
0-0.1
1996; Langston 2004).
Magnesium
0-4
Selenium
0-0.09
0-0.1
 Dialysate production
Chromium
0-0.014
Lead
0-0.005
Purified water is combined with the electrolyte and buffer
Arsenic
0-0.005
solutions to create the final dialysate. With IHD, the dial-
Mercury
0-0.0002
ysis delivery machine performs this procedure, creating
Cadmium
0-0.001
dialysate at a rate of 300-800 mL/min. A highly concen-
Beryllium
0-0.0004
 trated salt solution, containing sodium, chloride, glucose,
Antimony
0-0.006
and other components as desired (potassium, calcium,
Thallium
0-0.002
magnesium) is diluted with the purified water to the
Silver
0-0.005
desired sodium concentration, based on measurement
Barium
0-0.1
of conductivity. The concentration of other components
Fluoride
0-0.2
Nitrate
will be proportional to the sodium concentration and
0-2
Sulfate
0-100
cannot be individually adjusted by the dialysis machine.
However, different salt solutions can be used, such as
Bacteriological:
 potassium-free or calcium-free solutions. Bicarbonate
● Maximum 200 CFU (colony forming unit) for RO water
is provided individually, and the concentration can be
● Maximum 2,000 CFU for dialysate
adjusted independent of the sodium concentration. An
Endotoxin: 2 EU (endotoxin units)
 alternate method of producing dialysate involves mixing
266    Therapeutic techniques
the salt and buffer solutions with water in a large bulk
ture are constantly monitored. If any unsafe or potentially
tank, where it is stored until being piped to the individual
unsafe conditions are detected in the dialysate, dialysate
dialysis machines in the unit. Every patient in the unit
flow is diverted from the dialyzer. Ifblood path conditions
would use the same dialysate composition. With contin-
are potentially compromised, the blood pump stops and
uous therapies (CRRT), dialysate is prepackaged in sterile
the blood lines are automatically clamped. On-screen
bags, similar to intravenous fluids. This has the advan-
instructions notify the operator of the specific alarm,
tage of sterility and ease of use, but the disadvantages of
which must be remedied in order to restart the treat-
large storage requirements and higher cost. Dialysate flow
ment. Despite the myriad, and in many cases, duplicate,
rates are much lower in CRRT (0-2.5 L/hour) compared
monitors installed in the machine, operator error can
to IHD (<30 L/hour).
still occur. Only personnel specifically trained to use and
troubleshoot the specific machine should be performing
ERRT treatments.
Diaiysis machine
There are several basic types of dialysis machines, also
called the dialysis delivery system. In general, machines 
Prescription
are designed to be used either for intermittent or for
Methods of clearance
continuous therapy. IHD machines can be used to pro-
vide sustained low-efficiency dialysis (SLED) treatments
Diffusion is defined as the movement of particles from
in addition to highly efficient intermittent treatments.
an area of higher concentration to an area of lower con-
CRRT machines are usually smaller and more mobile
centration. Particles in solution have kinetic energy caus-
because they do not need to produce dialysate. In the
ing movement, and smaller particles tend to have more
 past several years, "hybrid” machines have become avail-
movement than larger particles. If two identical solu-
able, which are intended to perform both intermittent
and continuous therapies. Some machines (e.g-, Frese-
substance, individual particles may cross the membrane
nius 2008 K) are adaptations of intermittent machines.
in either direction, and although the individual particle
 The NxStage machine is intended to be a portable home
 On either side of the membrane may change, there is no
hemodialysis machine for intermittent treatment, using
net change in the concentration of particles. If, however,
the concentration on one side is lower, there will be net
for use in Europe have the capability of on-line hemodial-
diffusion from the higher concentration to the lower con-
filtration, which means they can provide large volumes of
centration. Over time, the two solutions will equilibrate
 to the same concentration on both sides. The higher the
in addition to producing large volumes of dialysate.
concentration gradient between the two sides, the faster
In the United States most veterinary units perform-
the rate of diffusion. With dialytic therapies (including
ing IHD use either Gambro (Centrysystem 3 or Phoenix
extracorporeal and peritoneal), the solution on one side
models) or Fresenius machines. The Gambro machines
of the membrane is the blood, and dialysate is the solution
have a cartridge system for the extracorporeal circuit that
on the other side of the membrane. By constant replen-
includes allthe necessary tubing in one piece. The dialyzer 
ishment of the dialysate, a large concentration gradient
is separate. The snap-in cartridge simplifies machine set-
is maintained and equilibrium is never reached, so diffu-
up, but limits tubing choices. In the Fresenius machine,
sive clearance continues. Extracorporeal therapies have a
several tubing components are incorporated separately
constant dialysate flow, although the rate of dialysate flow
during machine set-up. This provides more flexibility
 generally varies dramatically between intermittent and
with tubing sizing and volumes, as well as multiple
continuous therapies. Extremely fast dialysate flow rates
choices for independent manufacturers, but lacks the
maximize diffusive clearance, and flow rates of 300-800
simplicity of the Gambro machines. Most US units per-
( o )  m   
forming CRRT use the Gambro Prisma (now discontin-
Continuous therapies in a diffusive clearance mode typi-
ued) machine. The Prisma utilizes a combined dialyzer
cally use lower dialysate flow rates (up to 40 mL/min). PD
 and extracorporeal circuit. This allows almost automated
involves instillation of a discrete volume of dialysate that
   s s n is n
is periodically removed and replaced with fresh dialysate.
options (plus a plasmapheresis cartridge option).
 During the dwell time, diffusion occurs.
The ERRT machine has many built-in sensors and
Although we are composed of approximately 60%
alarms to ensure patient safety. In addition to pressure
water and could not live without it, water can be con-
sensors and air bubble detectors mentioned above, the
sidered a “uremic toxin" that needs to be removed in the
dialysis machine monitors the waste dialysate for evi-
oliguric renal failure patient. Diuretics may be ineffective
dence of blood leak. Dialysate composition and tempera-
in this patient population, leaving ultrafiltration (UF) as
Hemodialysis   267
the only effective means of removing fluid. As opposed to
Mode and schedule
diffusion, in which a concentration gradient causes solute
movement, UF involves a hydrostatic pressure gradient
The mode and schedule recommended differs for acute
 to cause water movement. By creating negative pressure
and chronic disease. With acute kidney injury, the two
major initial considerations are the rate of clearance and
on the side opposite the blood compartment, water is
the intensity of treatment. When azotemia is severe, rapid
"pulled" out of the blood. The water removed in this fash-
clearance may induce dialysis disequilibrium syndrome.
ion is termed ultrafiltrate. With machines used today, the
One method of limiting clearance during the initial few
transmembrane pressure is automatically controlled by
dialysis treatments is a short dialysis treatment time, cou-
the dialysis machine to achieve the desired fluid removal
pled with a moderately slow blood flow rate. The tar-
 in the time specified.
get URR of 0.25-0.5 can be reached in 1.5 hours at a
Convective clearance removes solutes by removing the
blood flow rate of 3-5 mL/kg/min. Despite the low over-
water in which they are dissolved, a process that is also
all clearance, this rate can induce complications, partic-
called solute drag. Middle molecules (compounds with
ularly in severely uremic patients (BUN > 200 mg/dL)
a molecular weight of 500 to 5,000 Da) are more effi-
 or small patients. An alternative approach would be sus-
ciently cleared with convection compared to diffusion,
tained low efficiency dialysis (SLED) or CRRT. SLED is
whereas diffusion is a very efficient method of remov-
performed with an IHD machine and involves a very
ing small molecules (e.g, urea, creatinine, sodium). The
slow blood flow rate (1-3 mL/kg/min) for 6-24 hours.
term hemofiltration indicates using convective clearance
CRRT also uses a similar slow blood flow rate, markedly
for uremic toxin removal. When UF is used for net fluid
slower dialysate flow rate (O-40 mL/min for CRRT ver-
removal, convective clearance will occur. If a larger degree
sus 300-500 mL/min for IHD), and frequently relies on
of convective clearance is desired, the UF rate can be
more convective clearance than most IHD prescriptions.
 o  se on ) a s
 Despite these differences, SLED and CRRT appear to
with administration of intravenous fluids to avoid vol-
have similar outcomes (Berbece and Richardson 2006;
ume depletion.
Ghahramani et al. 2008).
 Certain substances, like cytokines, will bind to the dia-
The hemodynamic stability of the patient is another
lyzer membrane and thus can be removed from the circu-
factor that is generally included in the decision of dialysis
lation. The adsorptive capacity of the dialysis membrane
modality. CRRT and SLED are generally preferred in the
is limited, and some studies show saturation after about
hemodynamically unstable patient. Rapid fluid removal
30 minutes, making this an ineffective method of removal
(Lonneman et al. 2001). Charcoal and other hemoperfu-
in IHD treatments can cause hypotension, which is
thought to induce on going renal damage (Conger 1990).
 sion techniques are better suited for significant adsorp-
Slow or continuous fluid removal in SLED or CRRT intu-
tion.
itively is less likely to cause intermittent hypotension.
Although clinical impressions support this, there is no
Prescription components
evidence of superior hemodynamic stability in SLED or
Although the overall goal of hemodialysis is to control
CRRT compared to IHD in randomized trials ( John et al.
uremic symptoms, the specific goals of an individual
2001; Gasparovic et al. 2003; Uchino 2008).
treatment vary based on the situation. The components
Treatment intensity for acute kidney injury is an area
of a dialysis prescription include modality (i.e., inter-
of on going research. Although CRRT does not improve
mittent versus continuous), schedule (i.e., daily versus
survival rates compared to IHD, early studies suggested
alternate day), intensity (i.e., amount of blood processed,
that renal recovery was more complete with CRRT, with
 convective clearance rate, and diaysate flow rate), dialyzer
 more patients becoming dialysis independent (Mehta
type and size, dialysate composition, and UF rate.
et al. 2001; Bell et al. 2007; Uchino et al. 2007). In a
Prescribing the dialysis dose requires an ability to pre-
recently published meta-analysis, modality did not affect
dict the adequacy of treatment. The most commonly
survival or renal recovery outcomes, although a sub-
used measure of clearance in veterinary hemodialysis is
sequent study did find a lower rate of dialysis depen-
the urea reduction ratio (URR), which can be calculated
dence with CRRT compared to IHD (Bell et al. 2007;
by the formula: (pre-treatment BUN—post-treatment
Ghahramani et al. 2008). However, intermittent IHD is
BUN)/pre-treatment BUN. The most commonly used
less resource-intensive. Daily 6-8 hour treatments (6-7
measure of dialysis dose in humans is Kt/V, a dimen-
days a week) can be performed by day staff. Although
sionless unit of measurement that incorporates the dia-
 some studies have shown a survival advantage with a
lyzer clearance, time on dialysis, and volume of distri-
higher dialysis dose, results have been inconsistent, and
bution. The adequacy of dialysis is discussed more fully
 a recently published randomized trial showed no advan-
below.
tage to intensive therapy (daily IHD/daily SLED with a
268   Therapeutic techniques
Kt/V of 1.2 per treatment or CRRT with a total effluent
Table 28.5 Treatment intensity prescription guidelines
of 35 mL/kg/h) compared to less intensive therapy (alter-
(adapted from Cowgill 2008)
nate day IHD/SLED with a Kt/V of 1.2 per treatment
or CRRT with a total efluent of 20 mL/kg/h) (Ronco
ist treatment
BUN <200 mg/dL
URR < 0.5 @ no greater than 0.1 URR per
et al. 2000; Bouman et al. 2002; Schiffl et al. 2002; Saudan
hour
et al. 2006; Network 2008; Tolwani et al. 2008). During
200-300 mg/dl
URR 0.3-0.5 @ no greater than 0.1 URR per
the recovery phase of acute kidney injury, a less inten-
hour
sive schedule (4-5 hour treatments three times a week,
 decreasing to twice weekly as function improves) may be
>300 mg/dL
URR ≤ 0.3 @ no greater than 0.05-0.07 URR
per hour
adequate.
The typicalhuman patient on hemodialysis for chronic
 2nd treatment
kidney disease has traditionally been treated 3-4 hours
BUN < 200 mg/dL
URR 0.6-0.7 @ 0.01-0.15 URR per hour
three days a week. In veterinary medicine, treatment
200-300 mg/dL
URR 0.4-0.6 @ 0.10-0.12 URR per hour
>300 mg/dL
URR ≤ 0.4 URR @ no greater than 0.05-0.1
times have been longer (4 hours for cats, 5 hours for dogs)
URR per hour
to provide better clearance. Occasionally, patients with
significant residual renal clearance may be maintained on
 3rd and subsequent treatments
BUN < 150 mg/dL
URR > 0.8 @ > 0.15 URR per hour
twice weekly treatments, although this likely represents
150-300 mg/dL
URR 0.5-0.6 @ 0.10-0.15 URR per hour
the minimal recommendation that will be beneficial to
1p/bw 00E<
URR 0.5-0.6 @ < 0.1 URR per hour
the patient (Cowgill 2008).
Alternative schedules for chronic hemodialysis are
being used more frequently for human patients. Daily
URR for 882 canine hemodialysis treatments
dialysis with 1.5-2.5 hour treatments 6-7 days a week
1.2
 provides more complete control of uremia (Kjellstrand
et al. 2008). Nocturnal dialysis involves 7-10 hour treat-
ratio
ments while the patient sleeps and allows people on
0.8
chronic dialysis to maintain a more normal daytime
0.6
schedule, but this schedule is not advantageous in veteri-
nary dialysis. Home hemodialysis for chronic kidney dis-
品
0.4
ease is possible for people, with remote monitoring and
0.2
ready access to support staff via telephone (for both day-
time and nocturnal dialysis treatments), but is unlikely
to be feasible in veterinary dialysis because most patients
2
3
寸
5
6
Liters processed per kg body weight
currently have acute rather than chronic disease, and the
 support network is not established.
Figure 28.5 Treatment intensity (urea reduction ratio) as a func-
tion of amount of blood processed in dogs. Treatments with over
Guidelines for treatment intensity for 
veterinary
8 L/kg of processed blood were excluded.
 patients have been established through clinical experi-
ence (Table 28.5). After determining the desired URR,
the number of liters of blood to be processed to achieve
URR for 613 feline hemodialysis treatments
the goal are based on weight of the patient and can be esti-
1.2
mated from Figures 28.5 and 28.6. In early treatments,
a slow rate of reduction decreases complications, so a
 longer treatment duration is selected, whereas in later 
0.8
treatments, a rapid blood flow rate can achieve the treat-
0.6
  e       
..
time interval). Once the desired amount of blood to be
0.4
 processed and the duration of treatment are selected, the
average blood flow rate to achieve these goals can easily
0.2
be calculated.
Limiting factors for blood flow rate are the catheter
3
5
and the patient. Larger diameter catheters can provide
Liters of blood processed per kg body weight
much faster blood flow rates than smaller catheters ( Table
Figure 28.6 Treatment intensity (urea reduction ratio) as a func-
28.2). Minor hemolysis may occur if the pressure in the
tion of amount of blood processed in cats.
"arterial" limb of the extracorporeal circuit before the
Hemodialysis  269
Table 28.6 Recommended extracorporeal volumes for ERRT in dogs and cats (adapted from Cowgill2008)
Species
 Body weight 
Dialyzer volume
Total extracorporeal volume (mL)
 % Blood volume
Cats, dogs
<6 kg
<20 ml
<60 mL
13-40%
Cats
>6 kg
<30 mL
<70 mL
<23%
Dogs
6-12 kg
<45 mL
<90 mL
9-19%
Dogs
12-20 kg
<80 mL
100-160 ml
6-17%
Dogs
20-30 kg
<120 mL
150-200 ml
6-13%
Dogs
≥30 kg
>80 ml
150-250 ml
6-10%
blood pump is more negative than -350 mmHg ( Twar-
various practical reasons, including limited availability
dowski 2000). Of more clinical significance, prepump
of blood for daily treatments and concern about transfu-
 pressures more negative than -200 mmHg will cause the
 sion reaction due to the rapid infusion rate. With CRRT,
pump to deliver less blood flow than is indicated, causing
theoretically the same circuit can be used for 3 days,
an overestimation of the amount of dialysis delivered
potentially reducing some of the mentioned concerns.
(Daugirdas 1994). If the blood flow rate is less than
desired due to catheter flow problems, the treatment
Dialysate composition
time may need to be prolonged to achieve the desired
clearance.
The composition of dialysate is similar to the composi-
tion of plasma water. The sodium concentration can be
Dialyzer and extracorporeal circuit selection
readily adjusted to avoid large or rapid changes in the
patient. Sodium profiling is a feature of most machines
Various dialyzers are available. Differences in the mem-
that allows the dialysate sodium concentration to auto-
brane type were discussed above. The choice of dia-
matically adjust throughout the treatment to a match a
lyzer size depends on desired clearance and patient
 preset pattern. The dialysate sodium may be set slightly
size. Although pediatric hemodialysis recommendations
higher than the patient's at the start of the treatment
include limiting the total volume of the extracorporeal
and gradually decreased to normal over the course of
circuit and dialyzer to less than 10% of the infant's blood
the treatment. This profile enhances diffusion of sodium
volume, this guideline may be impractical in veterinary
into the patient early in the course of treatment when urea
dialysis ( Table 28.6) (Ellis 2008). In a standard treatment,
removal is most rapid, and helps maintain a stable patient
        it
osmolality, thus decreasing the risk of dialysis disequilib-
the first 1-3 treatments, when slower clearance is desired,
rium syndrome. The sodium concentration is lowered by
a slightly smaller dialyzer is generally recommended.
 the end of the treatment to avoid loading the patient with
When preparing for the dialysis treatment, the dialyzer
 sodium, which can enhance thirst and water retention
is flushed with saline to remove any particulate matter or
in the interdialysis interval (Stiller et al. 2001). Sodium
residual disinfectant or materials from production. This
 profling is not possible with CRRT because dialysate is
solution is discarded and refreshed with saline that will be
infused into the patient as the blood is being withdrawn,
is not necessary given the slow and continual nature of
and this volume of saline helps maintain the patient's
CRRT.
blood pressure. In small animals, if the total extracor-
 Because the dialysis machine proportions the dialysate
 poreal circuit volume represents >20% blood volume, a
 concentrate based on the sodium concentration, indi-
colloid solution is used instead of saline. Dextran 70 6%
vidual adjustments of other dialysate components are
can be diluted with an equal volume of saline, to pro-
 not possible, but can be made by using different con-
vide colloid support without risking excessive volume
centrates. Dialysate typically contains approximately 3
overload, or other colloid solutions such as Hetastarch
mEq/L of potassium, but potassium-free dialysate is
can be used. In rare situations, diluted oxyglobin can be
used for hyperkalemic patients. Several concentrations
used as a priming solution. Priming with banked blood
of dialysate calcium are available, including calcium-
is commonly performed with human pediatric patients.
free dialysate, used with some citrate anticoagulation
At the end of the treatment, the patient's blood is not
protocols (see below). Various magnesium concentra-
returned, to avoid volume overload. A blood prime is
tions are also available. Bicarbonate is incorporated sep-
not commonly used in veterinary medicine for IHD for
arately and can be adjusted independently from sodium
270   Therapeutic techniques
concentration. To combat metabolic acidosis that is com-
striction to the periphery and decreases the risk of intra-
monly present, the dialysate bicarbonate concentration
dialytic hypotension (Selby and McIntyre 2006). Because
is usuall higher than the patient's, allowing diffusion
basal temperatures of dogs and cats are higher than that
of bicarbonate from the dialysate into the patient. The
for humans, dialysate temperature settings available with
typical dialysate bicarbonate concentration used in peo-
currently used machines are typically slightly below nor-
ple (35 mEq/L) leads to panting in dogs; a slightly lower
 mal for veterinary patients.
When dialysis is used for nonrenal indications, such as
hemodialysis. If acidosis is severe, a high dialysate bicar-
removal of a toxin, hypophosphatemia can develop as a
bonate concentration may cause paradoxic CNS acidosis
result of rapid clearance of phosphorus. Although phos-
and dialysis disequilibrium syndrome.
 phorous concentration may rebound shortly after the
Although most intermittent dialysis treatments use a
dialysis treatment, there is a risk of hemolysis with severe
dialysate flow rate of 500 mL/min, the dialysate flow rate is
hypophosphatemia (serum phosphorus <l.0 mg/dL).
adjustable. With IHD, clearance depends more on blood
Addition of phosphate to the dialysate may prevent this
flow rate than on dialysate flow rate. At a slow blood
from occurring. Addition of 16 mL of a neutral sodium
flow rate and rapid dialysate flow rate, blood leaving the
 phosphate (Fleet Enema, Fleet Brand Pharmaceuticals,
dialyzer may be completely cleared of a solute. With a
C.B. Fleet Company, Inc., Lynchbrg, VA) per liter of
fast blood flow rate and the same dialysate flow rate,
dialysate concentrate produces a dialysate concentration
n e   e n  s ss  
of approximately 2 mg/dL (Cowgill 2008).
percentage of the solute is extracted. For example, at a
Ethylene glycol intoxication is efficiently treated with
blood flow rate of 20 mL/min, blood entering the dia-
hemodialysis. Fomepizole (Antizole-Vet, Jazz Pharma-
         
ceuticals, Palo Alto, CA) or ethanol should be admin-
a 0 mg/dL concentration when leaving the dialyzer. At a
istered intravenously as soon as possible to delay
blood flow rate of 200 mL/min, blood entering the dia-
 metabolism of ethylene glycol while the patient is being
lyzer with a urea concentration of 100 mg/dL may have a
 prepared for dialysis. Because ethanol is also readily dia-
30 mg/dL concentration when leaving. In the first exam-
lyzable, addition of ethanol to the dialysate can maintain
ple, 20 mL/min of blood are completely cleared of urea,
a steady state in the patient. Enough ethanol is added
whereas in the second example, 140 mL/min of blood
to create a 0.1% ethanol concentration in the dialysate
are completely cleared. Thus, despite the decrease in effi-
(Cowgill 2008).
ciency from 100% to 70% clearance in one pass, there
is an overall greater clearance with a higher blood flow
Ultrafiltration
rate. Increasing the dialysate flow rate from 500 mL/min
The desired volume of UF depends on the patient's hydra-
to 800 mL/min will increase the clearance by 5-10%, if
tion status. Some patients may be 10-25% overhydrated,
the blood flow rate is already at very high rate (>350
in the most severe cases. In severe cases, the excess fluid
mL/min). A lower dialysate flow rate (i.e., 300 mL/min)
cannot generally be removed in a single short dialysis
will modestly decrease clearance. Dialysate flow rates in
treatment because the rate of fluid removal should not
CRRT are generally between 0 and 40 mL/min. With
exceed 20 mL/kg/h, to avoid intradialytic hypotension.
CRRT, dialysate is saturated with one pass through the
Some newer machines can be set to remove fluid at vari-
dialyzer, and faster dialysate flow rates have a substantial
able rates during the dialysis treatment. An effective pro-
effect on clearance (Clark and Ronco 2001).
file involves a faster rate of fluid removal at the beginning
In most treatments, dialysate flows from the bottom
of the treatment, when the extra fluid is readily accessible
of the dialyzer to the top, while blood flows in the oppo-
site direction, to maximize the concentration gradient
in the bloodstream, and a slower rate toward the end,
to account for a slower transfer from the interstitium to
across the length of the dialyzer. By reversing the dialysate
bloodstream and thus to dialyzer as the patient nears the
connectors, dialysate can flow in a concurrent direction
optimal fluid status (Stiller et al. 2001). In IHD, with its
instead of countercurrent, thus decreasing efficiency by
high dialysate flow rate, the addition of UF for convective
about 10%, which may be indicated in the first 1-3 treat-
clearance contributes relatively little to the overall solute
ments (Yeun and Depner 2005).
clearance (Yeun and Depner 2005).
Blood leaving the dialyzer is in thermic equilibrium
with the dialysate. Higher patient temperatures promote
Single needle dialysis
vasodilation of the skin and periphery, which may cause
cardiovascular instability and intradialytic hypotension.
If only one vascular access lumen is available, either
A dialysate temperature slightly (2°C) below body tem-
because a single lumen catheter was placed or because
-sa pue oo jd p snod aid
 one lumen of a double lumen catheter is nonfunctional,
Hemodialysis  271
dialysis can be performed in what is termed single-needle
which is desirable, especially in patients at high risk for
mode. A Y-connector is attached to the single lumen so
bleeding (i.e., patients with Gl ulceration or bleeding
that both the “arterial" and "venous"” extracorporeal tub-
diathesis or after surgery). Disadvantages include an
ing segments can be attached. The venous side is auto-
increase in complexity of treatment, because the citrate
matically clamped while the blood pump draws blood
infusion rate is adjusted based on both the blood flow rate
from the arterial side into the dialyzer. Blood already
and the ionized calcium concentration of the extracor-
in the dialyzer is displaced into a reservoir placed in the
 poreal circuit, and the calcium infusion rate is adjusted
extracorporeal circuit on the venous return side (after the
based on the citrate infusion rate and the patient's ionized
dialyzer but before the clamp). The arterial side is then
calcium concentration. The dialysate should not contain
damped and the venous side is unclamped, allowing the
calcium. Although protocols have been investigated
dialyzed blood to be returned to the patient, and the cycle
using calcium-containing dialysate to avoid the need for
is repeated. Single-needle dialysis is far less efficient than
intravenous calcium administration, thrombosis in the
double needle, as less than half of the dialysis time is spent
circuit occurs more frequently (Buturovic-Ponikvar et al.
withdrawing blood. There is also a decrease in efficiency
 2008). Because citrate is metabolized by the liver, regional
due to recirculation of the returned blood in the catheter
citrate anticoagulation is contraindicated in patients
that is withdrawn on the next cycle. By maintaining a fast
with hepatic dysfunction. Metabolic alkalosis may occur
blood flow rate and a higher stroke volume (amount of
since citrate is metabolized to bicarbonate; use of a lower
blood removed in each cycle), the effect of recirculation 
dialysate bicarbonate concentration may be advisable.
is decreased, but in many situations, a fast blood flow
rate is limited by the type and condition of the functional 
formed without anticoagulation. The extracorporeal cir-
lumen of the catheter.
cuit is flushed with saline (50-150 mL) every 15-30 min-
utes to flush any fibrin strands that are starting to form.
The extra volume infused is removed by UF to avoid vol-
Anticoagulation
ume overload in the patient. Rapid blood flow rates are
Exposure of blood to the extracorporeal circuit and dia-
necessary to decrease clotting. An increase in transmem-
lyzer membrane induces coagulation, and some method
brane pressure may predict clotting; careful attention to
of eliminating or decreasing this effect is necessary. The
this parameter and narrow alarm settings are recom-
most common method of anticoagulation of the extra-
mended if performing dialysis without anticoagulation.
corporeal circuit in IHD is unfractionated heparin. An
It has been the author's clinical experience that even with
intravenous bolus of heparin (20-50 units/kg) is given
aggressive saline flushing, dialyzer and circuit clotting
at the start of the dialysis treatment, followed by a con-
limit treatment to less than 1.5 hours without anticoag-
stant infusion during the treatment. The infusion rate is
ulation in many patients.
adjusted during treatment to maintain the clotting time
 Protamine counteracts the effects of heparin and can
at about 1.6-2 times normal. Most dialysis machines can
be administered to the patient as a constant IV infu-
be programmed to discontinue the heparin infusion prior
sion to reverse the heparin anticoagulation in the patient
to the end of treatment (generally 30-60 minutes), allow-
while heparin maintains anticoagulation in the extra-
ing the clotting times to start decreasing toward normal.
 corporeal circuit. This technique of regional hepariniza-
The half-life of heparin is 40-120 minutes (Ward 2005).
tion is rarely used. Low-molecular weight heparin can
The coagulation cascade is heavily dependent on
 be used instead of unfractionated heparin in patients
calcium as a cofactor at several steps. Because citrate
at high risk of bleeding, but is not commonly used
binds calcium, it is an effective anticoagulant. Regional
 in routine patients, due to the additional expense and
citrate anticoagulation involves infusing citrate into the
inability to monitor in real time. Other anticoagulants
extracorporeal circuit as the blood is being withdrawn 
 have been investigated, including prostacyclin, recombi-
from the patient, anticoagulating only the blood in the
nant hirudin (lepirudin), danaparoid (aheparinoid), and
extracorporeal circuit. In order to avoid hypocalcemia in
 argatroban (direct thrombin inhibitor) (Pun and Kovalik
the patient, calcium is infused into the patient, preferably
2008).
through a catheter separate from the extracorporeal
Complications of anticoagulation include excessive
circuit and dialysis access. If no other venous access is
bleeding or thrombosis in the patient (discussed below)
available, calcium can be infused into the extracorporeal
or thrombosis in the catheter or extracorporeal circuit.
circuit at the point where the blood is returned to the
Thrombosis is most likely to occur in the dialyzer, which
patient. This increases the risk of thrombosis in the
decreases the surface area available for diffusive clearance
catheter, however. Regional citrate anticoagulation has
and decreases the efficiency of treatment. Thrombosis
S      
 may also occur at the air-blood interface in the arterial
272  Therapeutic techniques
 or venous drip chamber. Catastrophic coagulation of the
HCT
entire extracorporeal circuit can occur, necessitating dis-
85
33
 continuation of the treatment and preventing return of
29
the blood to the patient, but this complication is uncom-
25
mon if rapid blood flow is maintained without excessive
23
 periods of stopped flow due to catheter malfunction.
21
19
17
15
13
Intradialysis patient monitoring
11
BV%
Blood pressure disorders are common in the dialysis
patient population during and between dialysis treat-
ments. Numerous factors contribute to hypotension
during dialysis. The volume of blood in the extracor-
 poreal circuit compared to the blood volume is a major
-10
contributor in smaller patients. The smallest extracor-
-15
poreal circuit currently available for IHD is about 70 mL
(including the dialyzer volume). Removal of this volume
Figure 28.7 Change in blood volume as predicted by Critline
of blood, which may be 15-40% of the total blood vol-
Monitor. Two liters were removed via ultrafiltration during a
ume of a cat or small dog, consistently causes a decrease
3.5 hour dialysis treatment.
in blood pressure. In stable patients, the magnitude of
decrease may only be 20-30 mmHg, and most patients
have compensatory mechanisms that increase the blood
Heparin affects the intrinsic pathway, and the effects of
 pressure within 30 minutes of starting the treatment.
heparin can be monitored by ACT or by partial throm-
Some patients seem to be unable to autoregulate,
boplastin time (PTT). ACT is generally measured before
however. UF removes fluid from the intravascular
 compartment, which is then refilled from the interstitial
treatment, 30 minutes after starting or any dose adjust-
ment, and then hourly once a stable dose has been
and intracellular compartments. Rapid UF can induce
reached.
hypotension that generally responds rapidly to a tempo-
 Extracorporeal circuit ionized calcium can be mea-
rary discontinuation of UF or small boluses of crystalloid
fluid. Exposure of the blood to the dialysis membrane can
sured in lieu of ACT in patients receiving citrate anti-
coagulation. An ionized calcium concentration of less
activate the complement cascade, leading to hypotension.
than 0.25-0.40 mmol/L will provide suffcient anticoag-
 The AN69 mermbrane is particularly capable of activating
bradykinin, especially in an acidic environment. Blood
ulation.
 pressure should be monitored carefully throughout the
entire dialysis treatment. In stable patients, monitoring
 Dialysis adequacy
every 30 minutes is generally adequate.
The intravascular blood volume can be monitored
There are many ways to gauge the adequacy of dialysis
during dialysis using a continuous hemoglobin monitor
treatment. The patient's quality of life is a crude (but
(Figure 28.7). The hemoglobin content can be measured
 important) measure, but there are many other factors that
optically with a sensor placed on the blood tubing. Pre-
impact on quality of life beyond the dialysis treatment,
suming the patient is neither gaining hemoglobin (trans-
including the nature of the kidney injury, amount of
fusion) nor losing hemoglobin (bleeding), changes in the
residual renal function and comorbid conditions.
hemoglobin concentration reflect changes in plasma vol-
Uremia (Chapter 4l) involves a number of metabolic
ume from UF or fluid infusion. Monitoring the rate of
disturbances resulting from the accumulation of a vari-
decline in the intravascular volume can allow prediction
ety of substances, in addition to hormonal imbalances 
of hypotension from rapid UF before it occurs. A general
and inflammation. Commonly measured markers of
guideline is that if the blood volume decreases by more
renal function include urea, creatinine, phosphorus, and
than 10% per hour, the rate of UF should be decreased.
potassium, but these represent only a small subset of the
Some method of monitoring anticoagulation is neces-
uremic toxins. In fact, urea is not highly toxic unless
sary during hemodialysis. Activated clotting time (ACT)
 present at extremely high concentrations. Despite that,
is the most commonly used method. ACT evaluates the
urea concentrations are correlated to outcome, because
intrinsic and common pathways of coagulation, and reli-
urea is a suitable marker for other small molecular weight
able automated measurement is available at the bedside.
molecules ( <500 Da) that diffuse readily. Urea clearance
Hemodialysis  273
is not a suitable marker for middle molecular weight ure-
blood flow rate readings from the dialysis machine may
mic toxins (500-15,000 Da) or high molecular weight
vary from the actual blood flow rate. Some newer dialy-
(>15,000 Da) toxins.
sis machines incorporate ionic dialysance measurement.
Routine measurement of solutes (urea, creatinine,
Dialysance is a measure of solute mass transfer from
phosphorus, electrolytes) prior to and immediately fol-
blood to dialysate when the solute is present in both the
lowing a dialysis treatment provides a simple measure of
blood and dialysate. The collective dialysance of small
dialysis adequacy. However, these values are affected by
molecular weight ions (such as sodium) is considered
factors beyond the adequacy of dialysis treatment. For
equivalent to the dialysance of urea. For conventional sin-
example, the predialysis urea concentration may be low
gle pass hemodialysis circuits, urea dialysance becomes
due to adequate dialysis or protein malnutrition. Con-
equal to urea clearance. By programmed alterations in
versely, a high predialysis urea concentration may reflect
 dialysate conductivity (by changes in sodium concentra-
inadequate dialysis, high protein intake, dehydration, or
tion) and measurement of conductivity at the dialysate
increased catabolism. Because of vacillations in the pre-
inlet and outlet, the dialysis machine can calculate the
dialysis BUN over the week, the time-averaged urea con-
dialyzer ionic dialysance and thus the dialyzer urea clear-
centration ( TAC) has been used to provide a measure of
 ance. Repeated measurements are made throughout the
the average urea exposure over the week. It is calculated
treatment, allowing calculation of Kt for each dialysis
as the area under the urea measurement curve divided
treatment.
by time of the measurement interval (Leypoldt 2005;
The urea volume of distribution is considered to be the
Francey 2006b).
same as the total body water and is generally estimated
Accurate and consistent timing of the postdialysis
as 58% of body weight. Alterations in water balance and
blood sampling is necessary to avoid introducing error,
in lean body mass are common in patients with renal
due to the potential for significant postdialysis rebound
failure. Measurement of body water can be performed
of urea. With rapid blood and dialysate flow rates in a
with dilution techniques or bioimpedance.
short dialysis treatment, the blood compartment is read-
More thorough discussions of dialysis adequacy have
ily cleared of urea, but the intracelular compartment lags
 previously been published for human and veterinary
behind in clearance. After the end of the dialysis treat-
 ERRT (Leypoldt 2005; Yeun and Depner 2005; Francey
ment, the intracellular and blood compartments equili-
2006b).
brate, and the blood concentration rapidly (30-60 min-
utes) increases compared to the immediately postdialysis
Patient management
measurement.
 The URR is another simple marker of ERRT adequacy.
 Patients with AKI or CKD severe enough to require ERRT
It is calculated from blood urea measurements taken
are prone to a variety of concurrent conditions induced
before and immediately after dialysis. It is calculated from
by the inciting cause of the renal failure, derangement due
the formula: URR = (BUNpre - BUNpos)/BUNpre. In
 to the renal failure itself or its treatment, or preexisting
 IHD, URR can be predicted by the volume of blood pro-
comorbid conditions in some. ERRT is able to maintain
cessed through the dialyzer, presuming standard dialysate
patients with more severe renal failure for longer periods
flow and no convective clearance. If the actual URR is
 of time than medical management, which allows devel-
lower than predicted, there may be substantial clotting of
opment of some late-stage complications that are not
fibers of the dialyzer or substantial catheter recirculation.
commonly encountered in the nondialysis renal failure
The most common measure of dialysis dose in human
population. The following discussion will focus on com-
ERRT is Kt/ V, in which K is the clearance of the dialyzer,
plications unique to the ERRT population or uncommon
t is time on dialysis, and V is volume of distribution.
manifestations that are more likely to be encountered in
Various equations are based on different presumptions
the ERRT population. The reader is referred to chapters
about the urea pool and the kinetics of urea movement.
- e 1g (8t 1ide)  ue (6y iie)  uo
The simplest is single pool, in which urea is presumed to
eral discussion of common manifestations of uremia and
diffuse freely and rapidly throughout the entire volume
appropriate treatment.
of distribution. The double pool kinetic model presumes
 differential rates of urea clearance from certain regions
Neurologic system
(i.e., intracellular space).
The dialyzer clearance can be measured or estimated.
There are a number of potential disturbances of the neu-
 Urea is measured in blood entering and leaving the dia-
rologic system in the dialysis patients. Correctly differ-
lyzer, and the clearance is calculated from the formula:
 entiating the cause of the signs may allow more targeted
Kd = Qb × ((BUNin - BUNout)/BUNin). Note that the 
therapy.
274  Therapeutic techniques
Dialysis Disequilibrium Syndrome (DDS) is charac-
Aluminum toxicity can occur acutely from contam-
terized by a variety of neurologic signs, including rest-
inated dialysate source water or chronically from oral
lessness, nausea, vomiting, muscle twitching, disorienta-
aluminum-containing phosphate binders. In addition
tion, tremor, hypertension, obtundation, seizure, coma,
to hematologic toxicity, aluminum toxicity can cause
and death (Liangos et al. 2005). DDS is more likely to
 encephalopathy and neuromuscular disorders (Segev
occur in the first few dialysis treatments in patients that
et al. 2008).
are severely azotemic. Risk factors seem to include severe
 Human hemodialysis patients are more likely to suf-
azotemia, small patient size, preexisting neurologic dis-
fer from subdural hematoma than the general popula-
ease, rapid dialysis, and low dialysate sodium relative
tion, but this complication has not been noted in vet-
to the patient. The exact cause of DDS is not clearly
erinary dialysis patients (Sood et al. 2007). Other causes
defined, but interstitial cerebral edema is a feature (Chen
 of acute localizing neurologic symptoms include intrac-
et al. 2007). One theory holds that slower diffusion of
erebral hemorrhage or ischemic stroke (Murakami et al.
urea from cells of the CNS in relationship to removal of
2004).
urea from the blood compartment during dialysis leads
 Uremic polyneuropathy is a common complication
to a relative intracellular hyperosmolality. A decrease in
 of chronic kidney disease in people. Sensory symptoms
 such as paresthesia, pain, and a burning sensation usually
brain of uremic rats support this theory ( Trinh-Trang-
 precede motor symptoms, which include muscle weak-
Tan et al. 2005). However, the urea gradient between
ness and atrophy, myoclonus, and areflexia (Avram and
brain and blood is quantitatively insufficient to cause
Mittman 2008). Adequate dialysis will usually stabilize
cerebral edema (Patel et al. 2008). An alternative the-
the signs, but improvement is rare.
ory involves paradoxic CNS acidosis from rapid correc-
tion of systemic metabolic acidosis during dialysis. The
Blood pressure
Hypertension commonly occurs with acute or chronic
tulated as a contributor to DDs, but concentrations of
kidney disease (Chapter 68). Correction of overhydra-
specific brain organic osmolytes (glutamine, glutamate,
tion over the first several days of treatment may decrease
taurine, and myoinositol) do not increase with rapid dial-
the blood pressure, although many patients will need
ysis (Patel et al. 2008). Gradual correction of uremia, as
antihypertensive medications. Patients receiving long-
with CRRT or SLED, decreases the risk of DDS. A higher
 term dialysis who are prone to intradialytic hypotension
dialysate sodium concentration during periods of rapid
should not receive the antihypertensive medications on
urea removal may help decrease the incidence of DDS. In
 the morning of dialysis treatment. Intradialytic hypoten-
high-risk patients, prophylactic administration of man-
sion has many potential causes (see Intradialytic Patient
nitol (0.5 g/kg) about 30-60 minutes after the start of
Monitoring). Interdialytic hypotension may occur due
to sepsis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome,
sis or up to 48 hours afterwards and can be treated with
electrolyte and acid-base disturbances, and hypoxia
mannitol and supportive care. Some patients will recover 
(Waddell 2005).
completely, but this complication can be fatal.
Hypertension can cause neurologic signs that include
Hemostasis
lethargy, ataxia, blindness, stupor, and seizures (Brown
et al. 2005). This condition is called posterior reversible
Anticoagulation during dialysis (or between treatments)
encephalopathy syndrome in people and is characterized
and uremic bleeding tendencies contribute to the risk of
by MRI findings suggestive of cerebral edema (Servillo
hemorrhage in the dialysis patient. Clinical signs may
et al. 2007). Hypertensive encephalopathy is not caused
include obvious bleeding, such as bleeding from the
by dialysis, but many patients requiring dialysis are hyper-
catheter exit site or melena, or may be more insidious. A
tensive.
 decreasing hemoglobin concentration may not be appar-
 Uremic encephalopathy in people is characterized by
ent on continuous monitors because of the concurrent
diminished concentration, slowed and inefficient cogni-
UF. Hypotension that rapidly responds to small bolus
tive functioning, restlessness, and lowered arousallevel or
of crystalloid fluid but rapidly recurs may be an indica-
 drowsiness (Brown 2008). There are only a few reports of
tion of ongoing bleeding. An acute onset of dyspnea may
uremic encephalopathy in the veterinary literature. The
denote pulmonary hemorrhage.
author has seen a small number of patients that exhibited
The three issues to be addressed in a patient that
behavior changes (predominantly agitation and aggres-
 is actively hemorrhaging is (1) decrease ongoing loss,
sion) that resolve immediately after dialysis and return
(2) correct anemia, and (3) support affected organs.
 prior to the next dialysis treatment.
Immediate cessation of anticoagulant administration is
Hemodialysis  275
intuitive. Protamine can be given to reverse the effects
Potassium is a small molecule that is rapidly removed
of heparin, at a dose of 1 mg protamine for each 100
by dialysis. Use of a potassium-free dialysate will nor-
units of heparin to be reversed, although an overdose of
malize serum potassium. In acute dialysis, using a pre-
protamine can cause a coagulopathy. If bleeding is due to
scription of short treatments with slow blood flow for
systemic diseases associated with coagulation factor defi-
the first few treatments, the potassium level will gen-
ciency, plasma transfusion may be helpful. A major com-
erally normalize by the end of each treatment, but the
 ponent of uremic bleeding is thrombocytopathy; platelet 
 ru d s s po s o l
transfusion is unlikely to be helpful. Dialysis partially cor-
removed. After cessation of that dialysis treatment, serum
rects the platelet dysfunction (Kaw and Malhotra 2006).
 potassium levels will increase. Usually after the second or
Other treatments to prevent or treat uremic bleeding in
third dialysis treatment, the potassium rebound is less
people include erythropoietin, desmopressin, cryopre-
exaggerated. SLED or CRRT may be used for more sus-
cipitate, and conjugated estrogen (Hedges et al. 2006;
tained potassium control in the first day. EKG abnor-
Kaw and Malhotra 2006).
malities start to improve within the first 15 minutes
Blood transfusion is usually indicated for moder-
 of dialysis, even though the potassium concentration
ate to severe hemorrhage associated with clinical signs.
has not yet been corrected. It has been the author's
Although erythropoiesis stimulating agents are com-
clinical experience that treatment of hyperkalemia with
 monly necessary in most chronic hemodialysis patients, a
agents that translocate potassium intracellularly (i.e.)
significant increase in hematocrit generally takes several
insulin, dextrose, bicarbonate) within the hour or two
weeks to effect. Hemorrhage into critical areas such as
 prior to the dialysis treatment limit the total body
the lungs or CNS may cause damage that slowly resolves,
removal of potassium in a short initial dialysis treat-
but this is frequently a catastrophic fatal event.
ment. Conceptually, potassium is less available in the
bloodstream for diffusive clearance during a short treat-
Thrombosis
ment, but starts translocating out of the cells after sev-
eral hours (after the end of the treatment), potentially
Right atrial thrombosis occurs in 22% of human
 leading to symptomatic hyperkalemia in the interdialy-
hemodialysis patients who have a catheter for vascular
 sis interval. In those settings, SLED or CRRT should be
access (Bolz et al. 1995). The presence of right atrial
considered.
thrombosis is associated with a 68% chance of concur-
 In patients with chronic hyperkalemia between dial-
rent infection and 27% mortality (Negulescu et al. 2003).
ysis treatments, sodium polystyrene resin (Kayexalate,
Right atrial thrombosis detected primarily by echocar-
diography is common in veterinary patients and can
Sanofi-Aventis, Bridgewater, NJ) can be administered
orally (or by enema). Sodium is released when potas-
routinely be seen within 2 weeks of catheter placement.
sium binds the resin and potassium is trapped for
Catheter thrombosis is discussed in catheter complica-
tions section.
removal via the Gl tract. Side effects include anorexia,
nausea, vomiting, constipation, hypokalemia, hypocal-
 cemia, and hypernatremia. Drugs that will transiently
Electrolyte and acid-base disorders
decrease potassium concentrations include insulin, dex-
Hyperkalemia (Chapter 62) is usually associated with
trose, bicarbonate, and beta agonists (e.g-, albuterol)
anuria or severe oliguria. In the chronic dialysis patient,
(Allon 2005; Kogika and de Morais 2008).
however, hyperkalemia can occur in the nonoliguric
Life-threatening ventricular arrhythmia is the most
patient, but usually only when the GFR is less than
serious complication of hyperkalemia. EKG abnormali-
10% of normal (Allon 2005). Patients with acute kid-
 ties are usually not seen at potassium concentration of
ney injury are more likely to develop hyperkalemia
less than 6.5 mEq/L. The earliest EKG changes include
than those with chronic disease, because the kidney
 peaked T wave. Above 6.5 mEq/L, PR interval prolon-
can compensate by increasing the efficiency of potas-
gation and widened QRS complex may be seen. Above
sium excretion. Factors that contribute to hyperkalemia,
89 mEq/L, a sinoventricular rhythm may occur and
in addition to the limited ability of the kidney to
P waves are not apparent. Above 10 mEq/L, the classic
excrete potassium, include certain drugs [ACE inhibitors,
 sine-wave EKG pattern appears, and ventricular fbril-
potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride,
lation and asystole are imminent (Parham et al. 2006).
triamterene), prostaglandin inhibitors, heparin, nonspe-
In the author's clinical experience, acute elevations in
cific beta-blockers (propranolol), high doses of potas-
sium penicillin], aldosterone deficiency, inorganic acido-
changes, whereas patients with chronic renal disease and
sis, and high dietary intake. Commonly used renal diets
chronic hyperkalemia may sustain higher potassium con-
are supplemented with potassium.
centrations without obvious signs.
276   Therapeutic techniques
Sodium
disorders  are  commonly
encountered
red cell aplasia from antibody formation. Iron supple-
 and include both hyponatremia and hypernatremia.
 mentation is of paramount importance in obtaining an
Sodium is readily diffusible, and the sodium dialysate
adequate response, as iron losses in the dialysis patient
composition can be used to normalize patient sodium
are 3-6 times higher than in the normal patient (Schmidt
concentration.
and Besarab 2008).
Metabolic acidosis (Chapter 66) occurs due to a failure
of the kidney to excrete an adequate amount of acid and
Bone and mineral
to reabsorb bicarbonate. Dialysis corrects acidosis by two
methods. First, it removes organic and inorganic acid
Approximately 60% of ingested phosphorus is absorbed
solutes. Second, bicarbonate in the dialysate diffuses into
from the Gl tract normally, and up to 80% is absorbed in
the blood to buffer retained acids. Standard dialysate
the presence of active vitamin D. The bulk of the body's
bicarbonate concentration in veterinary medicine is 30
phosphorus (85%) is located in bones and teeth. Approx-
 mEq/L, which loads the patient with bicarbonate during
imately 14% is located in the soft tissues, 0.5% in inter-
dialysis, to delay the reoccurrence of metabolic acidosis
stitial fluid, and 0.02% is in the plasma compartment.
in the interdialysis interval.
Phosphorus (Chapter 65) that is removed during dialysis
Magnesium (Chapter 63) is a divalent cation that is
comes from the intracellular pool. The main determinant
no  s    
of phosphate removal during the first 60-90 minutes of
with renal failure, but is corrected by dialysis.
dialysis is the serum phosphate concentration. After the
 phosphate gradient between blood and the dialysate is
decreased, the slow diffusion rate of phosphate out of cells
Anemia
determines the rate of phosphate removal during dialy-
Anemia is almost a universal problem in patients on
sis. There is a large rebound effect after dialysis, with
dialysis, even those with acute kidney injury. There are
phosphate values returning to 80% of predialysis val-
several sources of blood loss, including gastrointestinal
ues. The kinetics of phosphate removal with hemodialy-
bleeding, diagnostic blood sampling, and blood loss in
sis make thrice weekly hemodialysis relatively ineffective
the dialyzer. About 5-10 mL of blood remains in the
at controling hyperphosphatemia. Phosphate removal
dialyzer after even the most complete blood rinseback
during short daily dialysis treatments (1.5-3 hours for
at the end of the treatment, and substantially more
 6 days a week) is dependent on predialysis phosphate
 blood can be lost if there is any dialyzer clotting. In
 concentration. Nocturnal dialysis (6-10 hours six nights
addition, anticoagulation necessary for (
dialysis can
a week) removes twice as much phosphate weekly as con-
increase the risk of hemorrhage. Red cell survival times
ventional thrice weekly hemodialysis. Patients on short
 are shortened with uremia. Hemolysis is unlikely
to
 daily or nocturnal dialysis have better control of phos-
occur in the blood pump segment with the gentle roller
phate despite higher phosphate intake and lower phos-
        s
phate binder doses (Kooienga 2007).
excessive negative pressure (from inadequate access flow)
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is considered a uremic
occurs. ERRT patients are unable to produce sufficient
toxin. Concentrations of PTH are elevated in patients
replacement red blood cells primarily due to lack of
with renal disease because of variety of factors, includ-
erythropoietin production. Additionally, uremic toxins
 ing hyperphosphatemia, inadequate calcitriol formation,
and inflammation inhibit erythropoiesis. Iron, vitamin
and alterations in parathyroid gland sensitivity. PTH is
 B, and other nutritional deficiencies may contribute.
 considered a middle molecule, and removal is limited
Myelofibrosis from renal osteodystrophy related to renal
 during conventional dialysis. Use of a high-flux dialyzer 
secondary hyperparathyroidism has been reported in
 and convective clearance help remove this substance.
humans. Aluminum toxicity, which can occur chroni-
lonized calcium concentration (Chapter 64) must be
cally from aluminum-containing phosphate binders and
de sd i s m e  ei
inadequate dialysate water treatment, or acutely from 
neurologic and muscular function. The ionized fraction
dialysate water contamination, can cause anemia.
of calcium is available for diffusive transfer; complexed
Treatment of anemia in dialysis patients in the acute
 or protein-bound calcium does not diffuse with dialy-
setting generally involves blood transfusion. Oxyglobin
sis. Acute hypocalcemia is suspected as a contributor to
 can be used in emergency settings. Most patients receiv-
intradialytic hypotension, because of an inability of the
ing dialysis for more than a few weeks will benefit from
vasculature to constrict in the absence of calcium. Vari-
administration of an erythropoiesis stimulating agent
ous dialysate calcium concentrations are available to suit
such as darbepoetin, although there is a risk of pure
the individual patient's needs.
Hemodialysis  277
Water balance
more than 30% of all causes of morbidity and mortality
 in human patients, with vascular access infection being
Maintaining water balance can be a significant challenge
the culprit in 73% of all bacteremias (Ponce et al. 2007).
 in patients who require dialysis. Volume overload is com-
Bacteremia occurs in human hemodialysis outpatients at
mon, as the kidneys are not able to excrete water appro-
a rate of 0.6-1.7% of patients per month, and vascular
priately, and even modest fluid administration rates may
access infections occur in 1.3-7.2% of patients per month
cause fluid accumulation in patients with anuria, olig-
(Tokars et al. 2005). Data is not available in animals,
uria, or relative oliguria. Additionally, many patients with
but appears to be similar or higher. Most infections in
acute kidney injury are hypoalbuminemic or have a vas-
human dialysis patients are catheter related (28-33% in
culitis, leading to interstitial fluid accumulation, which
one study) (Tokars et al. 2005).
d a s r ro ss s
Catheter-related infections include exit site infec-
cal examination. The traditional veterinary end-stage
tions, catheter infections, and bacteremia. Catheter
chronic kidney disease patient is polyuric with a ten-
exit site infections are characterized by erythema,
dency to develop dehydration. Most of these patients die
warmth, induration, swelling, tenderness, breakdown
or are euthanized due to uremia prior to (or at the time of)
 of skin, loculated fluid, or purulent exudates (Tokars
development of oliguria, unless maintained with dialysis.
Volume overload, frequently exacerbated by nutritional
et al. 2005).
The catheter itself can become infected. Bacteria can
support via an enteral feeding tube, is common in this 
produce a biofilm that adheres to the walls of the
 group. These patients may need some degree of UF at
catheter and protect the bacteria. Blood cultures obtained
each dialysis treatment.
through the catheter may be positive even if bacteremia
 is not present. To document bacteriemia, blood for cul-
Nutrition
ture must be obtained from a separate venipuncture
Malnutrition is a significant concern in the dialysis
site.
 Signs of catheter-related bacteremia include fever,
patient. Both enteral and parenteral feeding involves an
 obligate water load, which many patients cannot excrete.
chills, nausea, headache, hypotension, or elevated white
blood cell count. The frequency of catheter-associated
The administered water can be removed via UF, with
either intermittent or continuous therapies. Acute kid-
bacteremia in humans is 2-4 episodes per 1,000 patient
days (0.7-1.5 bacteremias per catheter year) (Himmel-
ney injury is a highly catabolic disease. Provision of ade-
quate protein can ameliorate (although not eliminate) the
farb et al. 2005). With catheter-related bacteremia, 3
 negative nitrogen balance that occurs with AKI, and pro-
weeks of an appropriate antibiotic and exchange over
a guidewire, if minimal signs are present, results in
tein restriction, a standard recommendation for patients
with chronic kidney disease, may not be appropriate for
cure in 88% of patients, whereas immediate catheter
 patients with AKI (Druml 2001).
removal with replacement after defervesence is required
Standard diets for chronic kidney disease may not be
in patients with severe septic symptoms (Beathard
appropriate for chronic dialysis patients. With each dial-
1999). One study showed that 51% of catheters could
ysis treatment, amino acids are lost into the dialysate, and
be salvaged without exchange with an antibiotic lock
the protein restriction of renal diets may be insufficient to
and 3 weeks of systemic antibiotics (Krishnasami et al.
replenish these losses. Most renal diets are potassium rich,
2002). Mupirocin or bacitracin to the catheter exit site
 may decrease catheter-related bacteremia (Sesso et al.
because hypokalemia may occur in the pre-dialysis CKD
patient, but these diets induce hyperkalemia in the dial-
1998; Johnson et al. 2002; Lok et al. 2003). Throm-
ysis patient that has extremely limited renal potassium
bosis is correlated with an increased rate of infection
excretory capability. Supplementation with carnitine and
(Shah et al. 2004).
taurine, amino acids that may be lost in the dialysate, is
The most common bacteria isolated from catheter
recommended for patients on dialysis for over a month
infections and associated bacteremia in humans is
Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase negative Staphylo-
(Fischer 2006).
cocci (Tokars et al. 2005; Katneni and Hedayati 2007).
In veterinary patients, half of positive catheter-related
Infection
cultures (including cultures of blood and/or heparin
 Infection is the second most common cause of mortality
lock obtained through the catheter and the tip of the
in human dialysis patients, accounting for 14% of deaths
catheter) are Staphylococcus spp., and gram-negative
(Evers 1995; Tokars et al. 2005; Katneni and Hedayati
 organisms comprise 32% of positive catheter-related cul-
 2007). In one study, bacterial infection is responsible for 
tures (unpublished data, Langston 2008).
278   Therapeutic techniques
Although catheter-related infections account for the
serum levels. A variety of factors affect removal of drugs
majority of infections in dialysis patients, other com-
by dialysis. Drugs with a molecular weight >500 Da are
mon sites in humans include lung (25%), urinary
poorly cleared by conventional dialysis, although clear-
tract (23%), skin and soft tissue (9%), and other
ance may be enhanced with synthetic membranes com-
or unknown sites (15%) (Tokars et al. 2005). Gram-
monly used in veterinary ERRT. Drugs that are highly
negative organisms, predominantly Klebsiella and E.
 protein or tissue bound or are highly lipid soluble are not
coli, account for the majority (77%) of positive
dialyzed to a significant degree due to the high volume of
urine cultures in veterinary dialysis patients (personal
 distribution. Drugs that are significantly cleared by dial-
observation).
ysis may require supplemental dosing after the dialysis
treatment to maintain therapeutic levels. Drug level mon-
Respiratory system
itoring is available for some drugs, but may be impractical
in many situations. Tables of recommended dose adjust-
Respiratory dysfunction can be caused by a variety of
ments in dialysis patients are available (Aronoff 2005;
mechanisms. Exposure ofblood to the dialysis membrane
Johnson 2008; Olyaei and Bennett 2008). With contin-
can activate complement, leading to temporary sludg-
uous therapies utilizing convective clearance, molecular
ing of activated neutrophils and platelets in pulmonary
size and volume of distribution become less limiting than
capillaries, impairing oxygen diffusion. Oxygen pressure
with IHD, but limited pharmacokinetic data is available
can decrease by 5-30 mmHg (Liangos et al. 2005). This
effect is most profound within 30-60 minutes of starting
(Bugge 2001). Although using specific pharmacokinetic
data to adjust dosing is preferred, some suggested guide-
the treatment, and resolves within hours. Cellulose and
lines for humans in the absence of necessary data are to
substituted cellulose membranes elicit a stronger reac-
presume CRRT is equivalent to a GFR of 10-50 mL/min
tion; more biocompatible synthetic membranes activate
(normal GFR for humans is >90 mL/min/1.73 m?) or
compliment to a lesser degree. Other causes of respi-
to increase the dose of nontoxic drugs by 30% over the
ratory impairment can be seen in the dialysis patient.
 drug dose estimated for the degree of renal failure (Bugge
tospirosis and is a potential complication of excessive
2001).
anticoagulation (Greenlee et al. 2004). Pulmonary edema
can occur as a result of volume overload in the face of
Nonrenal uses
sa d ss n e n 
Certain toxins can be removed by hemodialysis or
 permeability, similar to that observed in acute respira-
a related technique, hemoperfusion. Characteristics of
tory distress syndrome (Rabb et al. 2003). Pulmonary
substances that might be removed by dialysis are small
 thromboembolic disease is a potential complication of
molecular weight, minimal protein binding, and a small
an indwelling catheter.
volume of distribution. Hemoperfusion involves placing
 a charcoal-flled cartridge in the extracorporal circuit. As
Gastrointestinal system
blood passes through the cartridge, activated charcoal
Gastrointestinal signs, including vomiting, diarrhea, and
adsorbs the toxin. Charcoal perfusion can remove sub-
anorexia, are pervasive in the dialysis population. With
stantial amounts of substances that are protein bound. A
adequate dialysis, these signs may resolve. Aggressive
list of substances that can be removed can be found in
therapy with antiemetic drugs is frequently necessary.
Table 28.7 (Fischer et al. 2004a).
but rarely completely resolves vomiting and nausea
 Dialytic therapy can be used for other nonrenal indi-
(Ljutic et al. 2002).
cations. Isolated UF can be used for diuretic resistant
congestive heart failure. Dialysis removes cytokines and
Drug dosing
other inflammatory mediators (both proinflammatory
and anti-inflammatory) from septic patients, but there
is insuffcient evidence to support dialysis (specifically,
 dose adjustment with advanced renal failure (Chapter
CRRT) as a treatment for sepsis in the absence of acute
40). In general, the loading dose does not need to be
renal failure. Two separate systems (Molecular Adsor-
adjusted unless the volume of distribution is significantly
bants Recirculating System and Prometheus) have been
altered, as with patients with large changes in body water.
 developed to treat liver failure with an extracorporeal
Extending the dosing interval is useful for drugs with
clearance system. Commonly used dialysis machines
 a long half-life. Dose reduction while maintaining the
(intermittent and continuous) can be used for thera-
interval between doses generally leads to more constant
peutic plasmapheresis.
Hemodialysis   279
Table 28.7 Substances that can be removed by extracorporeal purification (adapted from Fisher et al. 2004: Cowgill2008)
 Substance
Conventional dialysis
High-flux
Hemoperfusion 
Alcohols
 Ethanol 
X
Ethylene glycol
X
 Methanol
X
 Analgesics/anti-inflammatory
Acetaminophen
Aspirin
X
Mesalamine (5-ASA)
X
Morphine
NSAIDs
Salicylates
X
X
Pentazocine
X
Antibacterials
Amikacin
X
Amoxicillin (most penicillins)
X
Cephalexin (most 1st generation cephalosporins)
X
Cefotetan(many2nd generation cephalosporins)
X
Cefoxitin
X
Ceftriaxone (many 3rd generation cephalosporins)
X
Chloramphenicol 
X
 Enrofloxacin
Gentamicin
X
Imipenem/cilastin
X
Kanamycin 
X
Linezolid 
X
 Nitrofurantoin
X
Ofloxacin
X
Metronidazole
X
Sulbactam
X
Sulfamethoxazole 
X
Sulfisoxazole
X
Trimethoprim
X
Vancomycin
Anticonvulsants
Gabapentin 
X
 Phenobarbital 
Phenytoin
Primidone
X
Antifungals
Dapsone
X
Fluconazole
Flucytosine
X
Antineoplastics
Busulfan
X
Carboplatin
X
Cytarabine
Cyclophosphamide
X
Fluorouracil (5-FU)
X
Ifosfamide
X
Methotrexate
X
 Mercaptopurine
X
Vincristine
十
(Continued)
280
 Therapeutic techniques
Table 28.7 (Continued)
 Substance 
Conventional dialysis
High-flux
Hemoperfusion 
 Antivirals
Acycylovir
Famciclovir
X
Valvcyclovir
+
 Zidovudine
Cardiac/vasoactive medications
 Atenolol
X
Bretylium
X
Captopril
 Enalapril
Esmolol
X
Lisinopril
X
Metoprolol
X
Mexiletine
Nitroprusside
X
 Procainamide
X
 Sotalol
X
Tocainide
X
Chelating agents
Deferoxamine
X
Ethylendiamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA)
X
Penicillamine
Immunosuppressive agents
 Azathioprine
X
 Methyl prednisone 
X
Miscellaneous medications
 Allopurinol
 Amatoxins
X
 Amitriptyline
X
X
Ascorbic acid
X
Barbiturates
Caffeine
X
Carisoprodol
X
Chloral hydrate
X
 Chlorpheniramine 
X
Diazoxide
X
Foscarnet
X
lohexol
X
lopamidol 
X
Lithium
X
 Mannitol 
X
 Metformin
十
 Minoxidil
Octreotide
 Ranitidine
Theophylline
+
Hemodialysis  281
Appendix: Extracorporeal Renal Replacement Therapy Units
United States
Animal Medical Center
Advanced Critical Care and Internal Medicine
510 E. 62nd Street
2965 Edinger Avenue
New York, NY 10065
Tustin, CA 92708
(212)838-8100 (phone)
(949)654-8950 (phone)
(212)329-8618 (hemodialysis unit)
(949)936-0079 (fax)
(212)752-2592 (fax)
 Dr. Ravi Seshardri
 Dr. Cathy Langston, cathy.langston@amcny.org
accimvet@aol.com
hemodialysis@amcny.org
www.accim.net
www.amcny.org
CRRT
IRRT
Advanced Critical Care
Califomia Animal Referral And Emergency Hospital
City of Angels Veterinary Specialty Center
301 Haley St.
9599 Jefferson Blvd
Santa Barbara, CA 93101
Culver City, CA 90232
(805)899-2273 (phone)
(310)558-6100 (phone)
(805)965-0070 (fax)
(310)558-6199 (fax)
Dr. Andrea Wells
Dr. Richard Mills
www.carehospital.org
Dr. Jon Perlis
CRRT
www.cityofangelsvets.com
CRRT
Center for Specialized Veterinary Care 
Chicago Veterinary Kidney Center
609-5 Cantiague Rock Road
1515 Bush Parkway
Westbury, NY 11590
Buffalo Grove, IL 60089
(516)420-0000 (phone)
(847)459-7535 (phone)
(516)420-0122 (fax)
(847)459-3576 (fax)
wwww.vetspecialist.com
Dr. Jerry Thornhill, ithornhill@vetspecialty.com
CRRT
www.vetspecialty.com
CRRT
Companion Animal Hemodialysis Unit
 Companion Animal Hemodialysis Unit
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
University of California Veterinary Medical Center
University of Califomia-Davis
10435 Sorrento Valley Road, Suite 101
Davis, CA 95616
San Diego, CA 92121
(530)752-1393 (phone)
(858)875-7505 (phone) or (858)875-7505 (HD unit)
(530)752-8662 (fax)
(858)875-7584 (fax)
 Dr. Larry Cowgill, Ildcowgill@ucdavis.edu
Dr. Larry Cowgill
wwww.vetmed.ucdavis.edu
Dr. Sherri Ross
IRRT
sdhemodialysis@vmth.ucdavis.edu
IRRT
Louisiana State University
Tufts University Foster Hospital for Small Animals
Veterinary Mecdical Teaching Hospital
 School of Veterinary Medicine
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
200 Westboro Road
(225)578-9600 (phone)
North Grafton, MA 01536
(225)578-9559 (fax)
(508)839-5395 or (508)839-5302 (phone)
Dr. Mark Acierno
(508)839-7951 (fax)
www.vetmed.lsu.edu
Dr. Mary Anna Labato, mary.labatoc@tufts.edu
CRRT
Dr. Linda Ross, linda.ross@tufts.edu
Vet.tufts.edu
IRRT
(Continued)
282
 Therapeutic techniques
Appendix: (Continued)
 University of Florida
Veterinary Specialists of South Florida
Veterinary Medical Center
9410 Stirling Road
2015 SW 16th Ave
Cooper City, FL 33024
Gainesville, FL 32608
(954)432-561 (phone)
(352)392-2235
(954)437-7207 (fax)
Dr. Carsten Bandt
Dr. Brian Roberts
www.vetmed.ufl.edu
info@amcc.com
IRRT
www.amccc.com
CRRT
Worldwide
 Anubi Companion Animal Hospital
Centro Nefrologico Veterinario
Strada Genova 299/A
Clinica Veterinaria Citta di Catania
10024 Moncalieri
V.le V. Veneto 313
Italy
Catania
+39 011 6813033 (phone)
Italy
+39 011 6813047 (fax)
+39 095 503924 (phone)
Dr. Claudio Brovida
+39 095 441542 (fax)
info@anubi.it
Dr. Angelo Basile, angel.basile@tiscali.it
www.anubi.it
www.nefrovet.com
IRRT
IRRT
 Hospital Veterinario Montenegro
 Manhattan Animal Hospital
Rua Pereira Reis - 191
1 FI NO 77, Sec 4, Civic Blvd
4200-477 Porto
Taipei
 Portugal
Taiwan
+351 225 089989 or 225 089639 (phone)
+886 229815203 (phone)
+351 966 291916 (fax)
+866 227735118 (fax)
Dr. Luis Montenegro
Dr. David Tan
www.hospvetmontenegro.com
IRRT
IRRT
Renal Vet Rio de Janeiro
 Renal Vet Sao Paulo
Rua Tereza Buimaraes
Rua Heitor Penteado
42Botafogo
Rio de Janerio - RJ
Sao Paulo-SP
CEP 22280-050
Brazil
Brazil
+55 11 3875 2666 (phone)
+55 21 2275 2391 or 3902 7158 (phone)
renalvet@veterinariaonline.com.br
renalvet@veterinariaonline.com.br
www.veterinariaonline.com
www.veterinariaonline.com
IRRT
IRRT
Vetsuisse Faculty University of Berne
Tierarztliche Klinik fur Kleintiere Kabels
 Small Animal Clinic
Stieg 41 D-22850
Laenggass-Strasse 128, PO Box 8466
Norderstedt
CH-3001 Berne
Germany
Switzerland
(040) 52 98 94-0 (phone)
+41 0 31 6312943 (phone)
(040) 52 98 94-55 (fax)
+41 0 31 6312275 (fax)
info@tierklinik-norderstedt.de
Dr. Thierry Francey, Thierry.francey@kkh.unibe.ch
www.tierklinik-norderstedt.de/page1.aspx?pageid = 50
www.vetdialyse.unibe.ch
IRRT
IRRT
IRRT = Intermittent Renal Replacement Therapy (Intermittent Hemodialysis)
CRRT = Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy
Other web-based resources:
www.vetcrt.net - Home page of the Veterinary CRRT Society
www.queenofthenephron.com - listing of units performing extracorporeal renal replacement therapies and/or renal transplantation
Hemodialysis  283
References
Clark, W.R. and C. Ronco (2001). Factors influencing therapy delivery
in acute dialysis. Contrib Nephrol 132: 304-312.
Adin, C.A. and L.D. Cowgill (2000). Treatment and outcome of dogs
Conger, I.D. ( 1990). Does hemodialysis delay recovery from acute renal
with leptospirosis: 36 cases (1990- 1998). J Arm Vet Med Assoc216(3):
failure? Semin Dial 3(3): 146- 148.
371-375.
Cowgill, L.D. (2008). Hemodialysis Prescriptions. New York: Advanced
Adin, C.A., C.R. Gregory, et al. (2002). Evaluation of three peripheral
Renal Therapies Symposium 2008.
 arteriovenous fistulas for hemodialysis access in dogs. Vet Surg31(5):
D'Haese, PC. and M.E. De Broe (1996). Adequacy of dialysis: trace
405-411.
elements in dialysis fluids. Nephrol Dial Trarsplant 1l(Suppl 2):
Allon, M. (2005). Disorders of potassium metabolism. In: Primer o
92-97.
Kidney Diseases, edited by A. Greenberg. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saun-
ders, pp. 110-119.
kinetic approach. In: Handbook of Dialysis, edited by I.T. Daugirdas
Aronoff, G.R. (2005). Drug dosing in chronic kidney disease. In:
 and T.S. Ing. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company, pp. 92-120.
Chronic Kidney Disease, Dialysis and Transplantation, edited by
Depner, T.A. (200l). Catheter performance. Sermin Dial 14(6):
B.J.G. Pereira, M.H. Sayegh, and P. Blake. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier
425-431.
Saunders, pp. 853-869.
Ash, S.R. (2007). Fluid mechanics and clinical sussess of central venous
failure. In: Acute Renal Failure: A Companion to Brenner and Rector's
The Kidney, edited by B.A. Molitoris and W.F. Finn. Philadelphia,
Semir Dial 20(3): 237-256.
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 465-489.
Avram, M.M. and N. Mittman (2008). Management of uremic periph-
Ellis, E.N. (2008). Infant hemodialysis. In: Handbook of Dialysis Ther-
eral neuropathy. In: Hardbook of Dialysis Therapy, edited by A.R.
apy, edited by A.R. Nissenson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA:
Nissenson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 1262-1270.
943-950.
Evers, J. ( 1995). Approach to fever in dialysis patients. Nephron 69( 1):
Bagshaw, S.M., et al. (2008). Oliguria, volume overload, and loop
110.
diuretics. Crit Care Med 36(4 Suppl.): S172-S178.
Fischer, JR. (2006). Chronic Hemodialysis and its Complications. New
Beathard, G. (1999). Management of bacteremia associated with
York: Advanced Renal Therapies Symposium 2006.
tunnelled hemodialysis catheters. I Arm Soc Nepphrol 10(5): 1045-
Fischer, J.R., V. Pantaleo, et al. (2004a). Clinical and clinicopatholog-
1049.
ical features of cats with acute ureteral obstruction managed with
Beathard, G. (2001). Catheter thrombosis. Semin Dial 14(6): 441-445.
hemodialysis between 1993 and 2004: a review of50 cases (abstract).
Swing, B.M., F Granath, et al. (2007). Continuous renal replacement
I Vet Intern Med 18(3): 418.
therapy is associated with less chronic renal failure than intermit-
Fischer, J.R., V. Pantaleo, et al. (2004b). Veterinary hemodialysis:
tent haemodialysis after acute renal failure. Intensive Care Med 33:
advances in management and technology. Vet Clin North Arm Small
773-780.
Animal Pract 34(4): 935-967.
Berbece, A.N. and R.M.A. Richardson (2006). Sustained low-efficiency
Francey, T. (2006a). Outcomes of Hermodialysis. New York: Advanced
dialysis in the ICU: cost, anticoagulation, and solute removal. Kidney
Renal Therapies Symposium.
It 70: 963-968.
Francey, T. (2006b). Dialysis Quantification and Adequacy. New York:
Bolz, K.D., G. Fjermeros, et al. (1995). Catheter malfunction and 
Advanced Renal Therapies Symposium 2006.
thrombus formation on double-lumen hemodialysis catheters: an
Francey, T. and L.D. Cowgill(2002). Use of hemodialysis for the man-
intravascular ultrasonographic study. Am I Kid Dis 25(4): 597-602.
 agement of ARF in the dog: 124 casese (1990-2001) (abstract). J Vet
Bommer, J. and B.L. Jaber (2006). Ultrapure dialysate: facts and myths.
Interrm Med 16(3): 352.
Semin Dial 19(2): 115-119.
Gasparovic, V, 1. Filipovic-Grcic, et al. (2003). Continuous
Bouman, C., H.M. Oudemans-van Straaten, et al. (2002). Effects of
   sa o a 
(IHD)—what is the procedure of choice in critically ill patients?
vival and recovery of renal functions in intenstive care patients with
Renal Failure 25(5): 855-862.
acute renal failure: a prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med
Gettings, L., H.N. Reynolds, et al. ( 1999). Outcome in post-traumatic
30(10): 2205-2211.
acute renal failure when continuous renal replacement therapy is
Brown, C.A., J.S. Munday, et al. (2005). Hypertensive encephalopathy
applied early vs. late. Intensive Care Med 25(8): 805-813.
in cats with reduced renal function. Vet Pathol42: 642-649.
Ghahramani, N., S. Shadrou, et al. (2008). A systematic review of con-
Brown, W.S. (2008). Electroencephalography in the evaluation of neu-
tinuous renal replacement therapy and intermittent hemodialysis in
rologic function. In: Handbook of Dialysis Therapy, edited by A.R.
management of patients with acute renal failure. Nephrology 13(7):
Nissenson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
570-578.
951-957.
Gillespie, R.S., K. Seidel, et al. (2004). Effect of fluid overload and dose
Bugge, J.F (200l). Pharmacokinetics and drug dosing adjustments
of replacement fluid on survival in hemofiltration. Pediatr Nephrol
during continuous venovenous hemofiltration or hemodiafiltration
19: 1394-1399.
in critically ill patients. Acta Amaesthesiol Scand 45: 929-934.
Goldstein, S.L., M.J. Somers, et al. (2005). Pediatric patients with multi-
Buturovic-Ponikvar, I., S. Cerne, et al. (2008). Regional citrate anti-
therapy. Kidrey Int 67(2): 653-658.
dialysate—a randomized trial. Int I Artif Organs 31(5): 418-424.
Greenlee, J.., C.A. Bolin, et al. (2004). Clinical and pathologic compar-
Carson, R.C., M. Kiaii, et al. (2005). Urea clearance in dysfunctional
kirschmeri serovar grippotyphosa. Am I Vet Res 65(8): 1100-1107.
access recirculation. Am I Kid Dis45: 883-890.
Grudzinski, L., P. Quinan, et al. (2007). Sodium citrate 4% locking
Chen, C.L., P.H. Lai, et al. (2007). A preliminary report ofbrain edema
solution for central venous dialysis catheters—an effective, more
in patients with uremia at first hemodialysis: evaluation by diffusion-
cost-efficient alternative to heparin. Nephrol Dial Transplant 22:
weighted MR imaging. Arm I Neuroradiol 28(1): 68-71.
471-476.
284    Therapeutic techniques
Hedges, S.J., S.B. Dehoney, et al. (2006). Evidence-based treatment
Liu, K.D., J. Himmelfarb, et al. (2006). Timing ofinitiation of dialysis in 
recommendations for uremic bleeding. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol3(3):
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Clin I Am Soc Nephrol
138-153.
1(5): 915-919.
Himmelfarb, I., L.M. Dember, et al. (2005). Vascular access. In:
Ljutic, D., D. Perkovic, et al. (2002). Comparison of ondansetron with
Chronic Kidney Disease, Dialysis, and Transplantation, edited by
B.J.G. Pereira, M.H. Sayegh, and P. Blake. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier
sea and vomiting. Kidney Blood Press Res 25( 1): 61-64.
Saunders, pp. 341-362.
Lok, C.E., K.E. Stanley, et al. (2003). Hemodialysis infection prevention
Hoenich, N.A. and C. Ronco {2008a). Selectinga dialyzer: technical and
with polysporin ointment. I Am Soc Nephrol 13(1): 169-179.
clinical considerations. In: Handbook of Dialysis Therapy, edited by
Lok, C.E., A. Thomas, et al. (2006). A patient-focused approach to
A.R. Nissenson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier,
thrombolytic use in the management of catheter malfunction. Sermin
Pp. 263-278.
Dial 19(5): 381-390.
Hoenich, N.A. and C. Ronco (200sb). Biocompatibility of dialy-
Lonneman, G., L. Sereni, et al. (2001). Pyrogen retention by highly per-
sis membranes. In: Handbook of Dialysis Therapy, edited by A.R.
meable synthetic membranes during in vitro dialysis. Artif Organs
Nissenson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier,
25{12): 951-960.
pp. 279-294.
Lopot, F, B. Nejedly, et al. (2003). Comparison of different techniques
Jaber, B.L. and B.J.G. Pereira (2005). Biocompatibility of hemodialysis
of hemodialysis vascular access flow evaluation. Int I Artif Organs
membranes. In: Chronic Kidney Disease, Dialysis, and Transplanta-
26(12): 1056-1063.
tion, edited by B.J.G. Pereira, M.H. Sayegh, and P. Blake. Philadel-
MacRae, I.M., I. Dojcinovic, et al. (2008). Citrate 4% versus heparin
phia, PA: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 363-387.
and the reduction of thrombosis study (CHARTS). Clir I Am Soc
John, S., D. Griesbach, et al. (200l). Effects of continuous haemofil-
Nephrol 3(2): 369-374.
tration vs. intermittent haermodialysis on systermic haemodynam-
Mehta, R.L., B.R. McDonald, et al. (200l). A randomized clinical trial 
ics and splanchnic regional perfusion in septic shock patients: a
of continuous versus intermittent dialysis for acute renal failure.
prospective, randomized clinical trial. Nephrol Dial Transplart 16:
Kidney Int 60: 1154-1163.
320-327.
Murakami, M., T. Hamasaki, et al. (2004). Clinical features and
Johnson, C.A. (2008). Dialysis of Drugs. Verona, Wisconsin: CKD
management of intracranial hemorrhage in patients undergoing
Insights.
maintenance dialysis therapy. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) 44: 225-
 Johnson, D.W., R. MacGinley, et al. (2002). A randomized controlled
233.
trial of topical exit site mupirocin application in patients with
 Negulescu, O., M. Coco, et al. (2003). Large atrial thrombus formation 
tunnelled, cuffed haemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial Transplarnt
associated with tunneled cuffed hemodialysis catheters. Clin Nephrol
17(10): 1802-1807.
59( 1): 40-46.
Katneni, R. and S.S. Hedayati (2007). Central venous catheter-related
 Network, V.N.A.R.F.T. (2008). Intensity of renal support in critically
ill patients with acute kidney injury. N Engl I Med 359(1): 7-20.
evidence-based management. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 3: 256-266.
Oliver, M.J., D.C. Mendelssohn, et al. (2007). Catheter patency and
 Kaw, D. and D. Malhotra (2006). Platelet dysfunction and end-stage 
function after catheter sheath disruption: a pilot study. Clin I Am
renal disease. Semin Dial 19(4): 317-322.
Soc Nephrol 2(6): 1201- 1206.
Kjellstrand, C.M., U. Bunocristiani, et al. (2008). Short daily
Olyaei, A.J. and W.M. Bennett (200s). Principles of drug usage in
haemodialysis: survival in 415 patients treated for 1006 patient-
dialysis patients. In: Handbook of Dialysis Therapy, edited by A.R.
years. Nephrol Dial Transplant 23: 3283-3289.
Nissenson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier,
Kogika, M.M. and H.A. de Morais (2008). Hyperkalemia: a quick
pp. 1089-1195.
reference. Vet Clin North Am Small Amimal Pract 38(3): 477-480.
Kooienga, L. (2007). Phosphorus balance with daily dialysis. Sermin
the management of acute uremia in cats: 119 cases (1993-2003)
Dial20(4): 342-345.
(abstract). I Vet Intern Med 18(3): 418.
Krishnasami, Z., D. Carlton, et al. (2002). Management of hemodial-
Parham, W.A., A.A. Mehdirad, et al. (2006). Hyperkalemia revisited.
ysis catheter-related bacteremia with an adjunctive antibiotic lock
Tex Heart Inst I 33: 40-47.
solution. Kidney Int 61: 1136- 1142.
 Patel, N., P. Dalal, et al. (2008). Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome: a
Langston, C.E. (2004). Water Treatment for Dialysis. New York:
narrative review. Semin Dial 21(5): 493-498.
 Advanced Renal Therapies Symposium 2004.
 Ponce, P., J. Cruz, et al. (2007). A prospective study on incidence of
Langston, C.E., L.D. Cowgill,et al. ( 1997). Applications and outcome
bacterial infections in Portuguese dialysis units. Nephron Clin Pract 
of hemodialysis in cats: a review of 29 cases. J Vet Imtern Med 11(6):
107(4): c133-C138.
348-355.
 Pun, P.H. and E.C. Kovalik (2008). Methods of hemodialysis antico-
Leypoldt, J.K. (2005). Hemodialysis adequacy. In: Chronic Kidney
agulation. In: Handbook of Dialysis Therapy, edited by A.R. Nis-
Disease, Dialysis, and Transplartation, edited by B.J.G. Pereira,
 senson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 224-
M.H. Sayegh, and P. Blake. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders,
238.
Pp. 405-428.
 Rabb, H., Z. Wang, et al. (2003). Acute renal failure leads to dysregu-
Liangos, O., A. Gul, et al. (2006). Long-term management of the tun-
lation of lung salt and water channels. Kidrey Int 63(2): 600-606.
neled venous catheter. Semin Dial 19(2): 158-164.
Ronco, C., R. Bellomo, et al. (2000). Effects of different doses in con-
Liangos, O., B.J.G. Pereira, et al. (2005). Acute complications associ-
tinuous veno-venous haemofiltration on outcomes of acute renal
ated with hemodialysis. In: Chronic Kidney Disease, Dialysis, and
failure: a prospective randomised trial. Lancet 356(9223): 26-30.
Trarsplartation, edited by B.J.G. Pereira, M.H. Sayegh, and P. Blake.
Saudan, P., M. Niederberger, et al. (2006). Adding a dialysis dose to
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 451-471.
continuous hemofiltration increases survival in patients with acute
Liangos, O., M. Rao, et al. (2005). Relationship of urine output to
renal failure. Kidney Imt 70(7): 1312-1317.
dialysis initiation and mortality in acute renal failure. Nephron Clin
Schiffl, H., S.M. Lang, et al. (2002). Daily hemodialysis and the outcome
Pract 99(2): c56-c60.
of acute renal failure. N Engl I Med 346(5): 305-310.
Hemodialysis  285
Schmidt, R.J. and A. Besarab (2008). Anemia in patients with end-
Tolwani, A.J., R.C. Campbell, et al. (2008). Standard versus high-dose
stage renal disease. In: Handbook of Dialysis Therapy, edited by
CVVHDF for ICU-related acute renal failure. I Am Soc Nephrol
A.R. Nissenson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier,
19(6): 1233-1238.
Pp. 761-770.
Trinh-Trang-Tan, M.-M., L-P. Cartron, et al. (2005). Molecular basis
Segev, G., C. Bandt, et al. (2008). Aluminum toxicity following admin-
for the disequilibrium syndrome: altered aquaporin and urea
istration of aluminum-based phosphate binders in two dogs with
transporter expression in the brain. Nephrol Dial Transplant 20:
renal failure. I Vet Irtern Med 22(6): 1432-1435.
1984-1988.
Segev, G., P.H. Kass, et al. (2008). A novel clinical scoring system for
Twardowski, Z.J. (2000). Safety of high venous and arterial line pres-
outcome prediction in dogs with acute kidney injury managed by
sures during hemodialysis. Semin Dial 13(5): 336-337.
hemodialysis. J Vet Intern Med 22(2): 301-308.
Uchino, S. (2008). Choice of therapy and renal recovery. Crit Care Med
Selby, N.M. and C.W. McIntyre (2006). A systematic review of the
36(Suppl): S238-S242.
clinical effects of reducing dialysate fluid temperature. Nephrol Dial
Uchino, S., R. Bellomo, et al. (2007). Patient and kidney survival by
Trarsplant 21: 1883-1898.
  ine m sid  ao u a siai
Servillo, G., F Bifulco, et al. (2007). Posterior reversible encephalopa-
Int I Artif Organs 30(4): 28 1-292.
thy syndrome in intensive care medicine. Imtensive Care Med 33:
Waddell, L.S. (2005). Hypotension. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
230-236.
Medicine, edited by S.J. Etinger and E.C. Feldman, Vol 1. St. Louis,
Sesso, R., D. Barbosa, et al. (1998). Staphylococcus aureus pro-
MO: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 480-483.
phylaxis in hemodialysis patients using central venous catheter:
Waikar, S.S. and I.V. Bonventre (2006). Can we rely on blood urea
effect of mupirocin ointment. I Am Soc Nephrol 9(6): 1085
nitrogen as a bomarker to determine when to initiate dialysis? (Edi-
1092.
torial). Clin I Am Soc Nephrol 1(5): 903-904.
 Shah, A., M. Murray, et al. (2004). Right atrial thrombi complicating
Ward, D.M. (2005). Anticoagulation in patients on hemodialysis. In:
use of central venous catheters in hemodialysis. Int I Artif Organs
Clinical Dialysis, edited by A.R. Nissenson and R.N. Fine. New York:
27(9): 772-778.
McGraw-Hill, pp. 127-152.
Sherman, R.A. and T. Kapoian (2008). Dialysis access recirculation. In:
Weijmer, M.C., Y.J. Debets-Ossenkopp, et al. (2002). Superior antimi-
Handbook of Dialysis Therapy, edited by A.R. Nissenson and R.N.
crobial activityoftrisodium citrate over heparin for catheter locking.
Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier,pp. 102-108.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 17: 2189-2195.
Sood, P, G.P. Sinson, et al. (2007). Subdural hematomas in chronic
Weijmer, M.C., M.A. Van Den Dorpel, et al. (2005). Randomized,
dialysis patients: significant and increasing. Clin I Am Soc Nephrol
clinical trial comparison of trisodium citrate 30% and heparin as
2(5): 956-959.
catheter-locking solution in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol
Stiller, S., E. Bonnie-Schorn, et al. (2001). A critical review of sodium
16(9): 2769-2777.
profiling for hemodialysis. Semin Dial 14(5): 337-347.
Wentling, A.G. (2004). Hemodialysis catheters: materials, design and
Sungur, M., E. Eryuksel, et al. (2007). Exit of catheter lock solu-
manufacturing. Comtrib Nephrol 142: 112-127.
tions from double lumen acute haermodialysis catheters—-an in vitro
Willms, L. and L. Vercaigne (2008). Does warfarin safely prevent clot-
study. Nephrol Dial Trarsplant 22(12): 3533-3537.
ting of hemodialysis catheters? Semin Dial 21(1): 71-77.
Tokars, J., M.J. Alter, et al. (2005). Nosocomial infections in hemodial-
Yeun, L.Y. and T.A. Depner (2005). Principles of hemodialysis. In:
ysis units. In: Chronic Kidney Disease, Dialysis and Transplantation,
Chronic Kidney Disease, Dialysis, and Transplantation, edited by
edited by B.J.G. Pereira, M.H. Sayegh, and P. Blake. Philadelphia,
B.J.G. Pereira, M.H. Sayegh, and P. Blake. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier
PA: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 429-450.
Saunders, pp. 307-340.
29
Continuous renal replacement therapy
Mark J Acierno
Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) is a
correcting electrolyte, acid-base, and fluid imbalances. In
new blood purification technique that is quickly gain-
addition, CRRT can also be used to expedite the removal
 ing acceptance for treatment patients with acute kidney
of drugs and toxins. The ability to remove a substance
 injury (see Chapter 49). As its name implies, CRRT relies
by CRRT is dependent on the size of the molecule, its
nn saou oi uoado snonoo pue enpen uo
volume of distribution, as well as its degree of protein
toxins, establish electrolyte/acid-base balance and regu-
binding (Johnson and Simons 2006). A small toxin with
late fluids. CRRT, like traditional intermittent hemodial-
a minimal volume of distribution and low protein bind-
ysis (ID) (see Chapter 28), utilizes semipermeable mem-
ing would be most amenable to filtering. The extent to
branes contained within a dialyzer to replace normal
which many drugs and toxins can be dialyzed has been
kidney function. However, unlike ID, which primarily
published (Johnson 2007). CRRT has also been used to
employs diffusion to modify blood composition, CRRT
treat humans with congestive heart failure (Clark and
employs both diffusion and convection.
Ronco 2004).
CRRT has several potential advantages over ID. Its
 continuous nature and ability to remove larger molecules
allows CRRT to more closely approximate normal kid-
ney function (Clark et al. 1994). In addition, studies have
Blood purification
demonstrated that CRRT is superior to ID for controlling
The purification of blood using a semipermeable mem-
acid-base and electrolyte balance (Bellomo et al. 1995).
brane relies on two distinct mechanisms: diffusion and
Since ID relies primarily on diffusion for blood purifi-
convection. Diffusion is the tendency for molecules in
cation, large amounts of sterile dialysate must be pro-
 e n  n       
duced onsite. This requires specialized water treatment
concentration to an area where they are in a lower con-
facilities, which adds significantly to the complexity and
centration (Clark and Ronco 2004). Changing the com-
expense of operating and maintaining the dialysis equip-
position ofcanine blood using diffusion across a semiper-
ment (Langston 2002). CRRT units utilize prepackaged
meable membrane was first demonstrated in 1914 (Abel
fluids, which significantly reduces maintenance and cost
and allows the system to be used cage-side. Studies in
et al. 1914). In this classic experiment, blood was diverted
from dog and into a glass cylinder where the blood was
human patients have shown that CRRT can be safely
used in patients weighing as little 2.3 kg (Symons et al.
divided into tube-like semipermeable membranes bathed
in solution. The blood was then returned to the patient.
2003).
By changing the composition of the fluid bathing the
semipermeable membranes, substances could be made
Indications
to diffuse in or out of the blood. This remains the basis
 of all hemodialysis.
Treatment of acute kidney injury is the most common
Convection also takes place in the semipermeable
application for CRRT. CRRT removes uremic toxins while
membranes of the dialyzer. In this process, blood is per-
fused through the dialyzer at a pressure exceeding that on
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
the opposite side of the dialyzer membrane, thereby pro-
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
286
Continuous renal replacement therapy   287
SCUF
Access
Return
Pump
Bfood
in
Fiter
Bfood
150
Efuent
Figure 29.1 Slow continuous ultrafitration (ScUF)—-a purely convective modality generates large amounts of ultrafiltrate, which is not 
replaced (Used with permission, Veterinary Learning Systems)
fluid (called ultrafiltrate) across the membrane (Golpher
Continuous veno-venous hemofiltration (CVVH)
2002). Toxins, electrolytes, and other small molecules are
(Figure 29.2) is similar to SCUF in that it is a purely
then carried out of the blood with the ultrafiltrate, which
convective modality; however, in CVVH, the ultrafiltrate
is then disposed of as “efluent." Convection is more
is replaced with a sterile balanced electrolyte solution
challenging than diffusion as it removes large amounts
(Bellomo and Ronco 2002a). This replacement fluid can
of water and electrolytes from the blood that must be
 e ssd o e e  a e 
dialyzer. Adding fluid after the dialyzer is an extremely
effective than diffusion in clearing larger molecules such
efficient way to remove uremic toxins; however, as the
as beta-macroglobulin from the bloodstream (Ronco
blood travels through the dialyzer, it becomes hemocon-
et al. 2001).
centrated, thereby increasing the risk of clotting (Hen-
 derson 1979). Adding the replacement fluid prior to the
dialysis cartridge avoids the problems of hemoconcen-
tration but is significantly less efficient (Parakininkas
Modes of operation
and Greenbaum 2004). Since approximately 25% of the
CRRT units utilize the principles of diffusion and con-
plasma volume (filtration fraction) can be safely removed
vection to produce four different filtration modalities.
and replaced after the dialyzer, we have most commonly
Slow continuous ultrafiltration (SCUF) (Figure 29.1)
employed postfilter fluid replacement. Until recently,
is a purely convective modality in which ultrafiltrate is
there were no FDA-approved replacement solutions, and
removed from the blood and not replaced (Bellomo and
CRRT dialysate solution was used (Davenport 2004a).
Ronco 2002a). This modality has been used in human
Although several approved solutions now exist, off-label
medicine to treat congestive heart failure (Clark and
 use of dialysis solution as a replacement fluid is still com-
Ronco 2004).
monly employed.
288   Therapeutic techniques
CVVH
Replacemenf
(pre- or posiflfer)
Access
Refurn
Blood
们
个
Blood
Effuenf
Figure 29.2 Continuous veno-venous hemofiltration (CvvH) is a convective modality that generates large amounts of ultrafiltrate. In
CVVH, the ultrafiltrate is replaced with a sterile balanced electrolyte solution. This replacement fluid is added before or after the dialyzer
(Used with permission, Veterinary Learning Systems).
Continuous veno-venous hemodialysis (CVVHD) is
Blood access
a diffusive therapy similar to ID (Figure 29.3) (Bellomo
To provide adequate blood flow, a dual lumen temporary
and Ronco 2002b). Unlike ID, CVVHD relies on prepack-
dialysis catheter is placed in the jugular vein using the
aged dialysate that is made possible due to relatively slow
 Seldinger technique. A 11.5 Fr. catheter is placed in very
dialysate flow rates (Davenport 2004b).
Continuous
large dogs while a 8 Fr. catheter is typically used in smaller 
veno-venous
hemodiafiltration
 dogs and cats. In the smallest patients, two single lumen
(CVVHDF) combines the diffusive aspects of CVVHD
 5 Fr. catheters can be placed in the jugulars.
and convective aspects of CVVH (Figure 29.4) (Bellomo
and Ronco 2002b). Blood flowing through the dialyzer's
semipermeable membranes are bathed in dialysis solu-
Anticoagulation
tion and exposed to elevated transmembrane pressure
 so that both diffusion and ultrafltration guides the
Despite the highly biocompatible nature of dialysis
movement of solutes. This modality offers the greatest
catheters, tubing, and dialyzers, appropriate anticoagula-
treatment flexibility (Clark and Ronco 2004).
tion is essential. Clotting of the CRRT setup necessitates
At this time, it is not clear which CRRT modality
the costly replacement of dialyzer and tubing, leads to
provides the most effective blood purification. Although
 a significant loss of patient blood, and delays access to
CVVH and CVVHDF provide a significant advantage in 
treatment. There are two drugs commonly used for anti-
the removal of middle-sized molecules, the role of these 
 coagulation: citrate and heparin.
substances in uremic toxicity remains unresolved. Nev-
Historically, constant rate infusion of heparin has been
ertheless, in most cases, we currently utilize HVVD or
the most widely employed method of anticoagulation
CVVHDF.
(Davenport 2004a). Heparin increases the activity of
Continuous renal replacement therapy 289
CVVHD
Dialysate
Access
Return
Blood
OL
Efuent
Figure 29.3 Continuous veno-venous hemodialysis (CvvHD) is a diffusive therapy in which the movement of small molecules is guided
by their relative concentration in the blood and dialysate (Used with permission, Veterinary Learning Systems).
CVVHDF
Repiacement
Dialysate
(pre-ofpostfiter)
Access
Return
Bioc
Figure 29.4 Continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) combines the diffusive aspects of CVVHD with the convective properties
 of CVvH. Difusion guides the movement of some uremic toxins and electrolytes while a difference in the transmembrane pressure causes
lead to the creation ultrafiltrate and removal of solutes (Used with permission, Veterinary Learning Systems).
290   Therapeutic techniques
Table 29.1 LSU heparin work sheet
 Start of therapy
Check ACT
In the absence of coagulopathy (ACT > 150) give 25 unit/kg heparin bolus
Record total units given
Recheck ACT. If <180, repeat bolus (maximum 3 TOTAL bolus)
Record number of boluses given
ACT at start of therapy
During hemofiltration
Start heparin infusion 20 units/kg/hour
If ACT <180 increase heparin by 1 unit/kg/hour
If ACT >220 decrease heparin by 1 unit/kg/hour
If ACT <170 bolus 10 unit/kg heparin & increase CRI
If ACT <160 bolus 15 unit/kg heparin & increase CRI
Monitor ACT q30 minutes after any change
Monitor ACT q2 hours once stable
antithrombin, a circulating protease inhibitor (Ganong
product is then normalized for volume of distribution
2001). Since the patient is systemically anticoagulated,
( V mL). Urea is approximately equally distributed in all
there is a risk of hemorrhagic complications (Daven-
body water compartments, and therefore, in CRRT, V is
port 2004a). This risk can be minimized by periodically
equal to total body water, which is estimated as 60% of
monitoring the activated clotting time (ACT) (Daven-
body weight in kilograms.
port 2004a) and adjusting the heparin dosage to maintain
Although relevant veterinary studies are lacking, evi-
the ACT between 180 and 220 seconds (Table 29.1)
 dence from the human literature suggest that Kt/V values
Calcium is an important cofactor throughout the clot-
 greater than 1.4 are associated with decreased morbid-
ting cascade and blood is unable to clot in its absence
ity and mortality (Ronco et al. 2000; Ricci et al. 2005).
(Gibney 2005). As blood enters the CRRT circuit, citrate
Values for K can be estimated before treatment starts
can be infused to chelate serum calcium. As the blood
(Kale) and then actual K calculated (Kde) ( Table 29.2).
leaves the system, calcium chloride is then infused to
For example, a 32 kg Labrador retriever suffering from
restore serum calcium to physiologic levels (Davenport
AKI secondary to heat stroke is to be started on CVVH.
2004). Citrate therapy has the advantage of providing
Blood rate (Q) will be set at 100 mL/minute and ultra-
only local anticoagulation. Nevertheless, there are sig-
filtration rate 20%. From experience, we know that the
nificant risks of systemic hypocalcemia and metabolic
 patient will receive 1320 minutes (22 hours) of therapy
alkalosis necessitating frequent calcium and acid/base
per day. From Table 29.1, we see that in CVVH K =
monitoring (Bellomo and Ronco 2002c; Gibney 2005).
ultrafiltrate rate or 20 mL/ minute. Therefore Kt/Vealc =
Because of the ease of monitoring, lower cost, and per-
(20 mL/minute * 1,320 minutes)/19,200 mL or 1.37.
sonal experience, our preference is to use heparin as an
Since this is less than our goal, we can increase the blood
anticoagulant.
flow rate, the ultrafiltration rate, or both.
Treatment adequacy
Complications
 Although the exact toxins responsible for uremia are not
In our experience, problems associated with anticoagu-
known, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is easily measured
lation are perhaps the most challenging. Despite regu-
and used as a surrogate for all low molecular weight
lar monitoring of the activated clotting time, the CRRT
substances removed by CRRT (Ricci et al. 2005). A com-
circuit eventually becomes obstructed by a clot. Con-
monly used measure ofCRRT treatment adequacy is Kt/ V
versely, some patients develop bleeding at the catheter
where K is a measurement of instantaneous urea clear-
site. Hypotension is another potential complication that
ance (removal rate/concentration) (Ricci et al. 2005).
is thought to be the result of the large amount of blood
Total solute removal per period of time is then defined as
needed to fill and maintain the CRRT circuit (50 -
the product of instantaneous clearance (K mL/minute)
84 mL). In an attempt to address this problem in smaller
and time (t minutes) receiving CRRT per day. This
 patients, neonatal dialyzers can be used, and the blood
Continuous renal replacement therapy 291
Table 29.2 Kt/V formulae
Kcalc = calculated (estimated) urea clearance
 KDEL = actual delivered urea clearance
CVVH - Post-dialyzer replacement fluid
Kcalc = Ultrafiltration rate (mL/minute)
KDEL = Ultrafiltrate urea concentration (mg/dL) *Ultrafiltration rate (mL/minute)/Predialyzer urea concentration (mg/dL)
CVVH - Pre-dialyzer replacement fluid
Kcalc = Ultrafiltration rate (mL/minute)/[1 + (Fluid replacement (mL/minute)/blood flow rate (mL/minute)] 
KDEL = Ultrafiltrate urea concentration (mg/dL) *Ultrafiltration rate (mL/minute)/Predialyzer urea concentration (mg/dL)
CVVHD
Kcalc = dialysate rate (mL/minute)
KDEL = Postdialyzer dialysate urea concentration (mg/dL) *dialysate rate (mL/minute)/prefilter blood urea level (mg/dL)
CVVHDF - Post-dialyzer replacement fluid
Kcalc = Ultrafiltration rate (mL/minute) + dialysate rate (mL/minute)
KpEL = Utrafiltrate urea concentration (mg/dL) *(Ultrafitration rate (mL/minute) + dialysate rate (m/minute)/Predialyzer
blood urea level (mg/dL)
 pathway can be primed with blood or other colloids. It is
cessful when utilized in specialized referral intuitions
important to note that stored blood products can become
with appropriately trained staff.
acidic. When blood with a low pH interacts with AN69
dialyzer membranes, bradykinins are activated (Brophy
et al. 2001). This can lead to a catastrophic cardiovascu-
References
lar event. Therefore, if blood priming is used, the blood
Abel, I., L. Rowntree, et al. ( 1914). On the removal of diffusible sub-
should be allowed to undergo diffusion or convection in
stances from the circulating blood of living animals by dialysis. J
the CRRT circuit to allow the pH to become physiologic
Pharrmacol Exp Ther 5: 275-316.
and bradykinins cleared (Brophy et al. 2001). We have
Bagshaw, S.M., A.D. Peets, et al. (2004). Dialysis disequilibrium syn-
successfully used this strategy to treat patients weighing
drome: brain death following hemodialysis for metabolic acidosis
and acute renal failure—a case report. BMC Nephrol 5: 9.
only 2.5 kg. Dialysis disequilibrium, a concern in ID, has
Bellomo, R., M. Farmer, et al. ( 1995). Severe acute renal failure: a com-
not been reported in CRRT (Bagshaw et al. 2004).
parison of acute continuous hemodiafiltration and conventional
dialytic therapy. Nephron 71: 59-64.
Bellomo, R. and C. Ronco (2002a). An introduction to continuous
Patient care
renal replacement therapy. In: Atlas of Hemofitration, edited by R.
Bellomo, I. Baldwin, C. Ronco, et al. London: WB Saunders, pp.
Planning for adequate patient care is probably the most
1-9.
overlooked aspect in providing CRRT. Once a patient
Bellomo, R. and C. Ronco (2002b). Nomenclature for continuous
is started on CRRT, there is an obligation to provide
renal replacement therapy. In: Atlas of Hemofiltratior, edited by R.
trained, competent 24 hour a day care for extended peri-
Bellomo, I. Baldwin, C. Ronco, et al. London: WB Saunders, Pp.
ods of time. This can be extremely taxing. In addition, an
11-14.
Bellomo, R. and C. Ronco (2002c). Anticoagulation during CRRT. In:
advanced knowledge of renal physiology and the mechan-
Atlas of Hemofiltration, edited by R Bellomo, I. Baldwin, C. Ronco,
ics of the CRRT unit are essential for hourly treatment
et al. London: WB Saunders, pp. 63-68.
decisions.
Brophy, P.D., T.A. Mottes, et al. (2001). AN-69 membrane reactions
are pH-dependent and preventable. Arm I Kidrey Dis 38: 173-178.
Clark, W.R., B.A. Mueller, et al. (1994). A comparison of metabolic
Conclusion
control by continuous and intermittent therapies in acute renal
failure. I Am Soc Nephrol 4: 14 13-1420.
CRRT comprises four different modalities for the treat-
Clark, W.R. and C. Ronco (2004). Continuous renal replacement tech-
ment of acute kidney injury, toxin exposure, and fluid
niques. Conerib Nephrol 144: 264-277.
overload. Its slow continuous nature and self-contained
Davenport, A. (2004a). Anticoagulation for continuous renal replace-
 design offers several advantages over traditional ID. Nev-
ment therapy. Contrib Nephrol 144: 228-238.
Davenport, A. (2004b). Replacement and dialysate fluids for patients
ertheless, the need for constant expert supervision and
with acute renal failure treated by continuous veno-venous
a skilled nursing staff should not be underestimated.
haemofiltration and/or haemodiafiltration. Contrib Nephrol 144:
Therefore, application of CRRT is likely to be most suc-
317-328.
292
 Therapeutic techniques
Ganong, W. (200l). Circulating body fluids. In: Review of Medical
Parakininkas, D. and L.A. Greenbaum (2004). Comparison of solute
Phtysiology. New York: Lange Medical Books, pp. 499-527.
 clearance in three modes of continuous renal replacement therapy.
Gibney, N. (2005). Anticoagulation 2: special techniques citrate. Proc
Pediatr Crit Care Med 5: 269-274.
Ilth Arrual International Conference on Continuous Renal Replace-
Ricci, Z., G. Salvatori, et al. (200s). In vivo validation of the adequacy
ment Therapies, San Diego, CA, pp. B30-B31.
calculator for continuous renal replacement therapies. Crit Care 9:
Golpher, T. (2002). Solute transport in CRRT. In: Atlas of Hemofiltra-
R266-R273.
tion, edited by R. Bellomo, I. Baldwin, C. Ronco, et al. London: WB
Ronco, C., R. Bellomo, et al. (2000). Effects of different doses in
Saunders, p. 15- 18.
continuous veno-venous haemofiltration on outcomes of acute
Henderson, L.W. (1979). Pre vs. post dilution hemofiltration. Clir
renal failure: a prospective randomised trial. Lancet 356: 26-
Nephrol 11: 120-124.
30.
Johnson, C. and W. Simmons (2006). Dialysis of Drugs Verona, WI:
Ronco, C., R. Bellomo, et al. (200l). Continuous renal replacement
Nephrology Pharmacy Associates.
therapy in critically ill patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 16(Suppl
 Johnson, C. (2007). Dialysis of Drugs. Verona, WI: Nephrology Phar-
5): 67-72.
macy Associates.
Symons, J.M., P.D. Brophy, et al. (2003). Continuous renal replace-
Langston, C. (2002). Hemodialysis in dogs and cats. Compendiurm 24:
rment therapy in children up to 10 kg. Am I Kidney Dis 41: 984-
540-549.
989.
30
Peritoneal dialysis
Mary Anna Labato
Dialysis is the process by which water and solutes move
Pathophysiology
between two compartments that are separated by a semi-
The peritoneal membrane is a thin translucent porous
permeable membrane. In peritoneal dialysis (PD), the
two compartments consist of blood in the peritoneal cap-
layer of tissue with numerous blood vessels. It consists of
illaries and fluid (dialysate) instiled into the peritoneal
two layers, the parietallayer that lines the inner surface of
the abdominal wall and the visceral layer that covers the
cavity. The peritoneum serves as the semi-permeable
abdominal organs ( Kelly 2004). The visceral peritoneum
membrane. The primary indication for PD in animals
is in kidney failure to correct the resulting water, solute,
accounts for about 80% of the total peritoneal surface
area (Blake and Daugirdas 200l). The space between the
and acid-base imbalances and to remove uremic toxins.
parietal and visceral peritoneum is called the peritoneal
Experimental abdominal lavage was performed as early
as the late nineteenth century; however, Putnam in 1923
cavity. It normally contains less than 10 mL of fluid but
was the first to characterize the peritoneum as a dialyzing
can accommodate several hundred milliliters to several
liters of fluid without patient discomfort (Khanna et al.
membrane in dogs (Lameire et al. 1998).
1993; Kelly 2004). This membrane is semi-permeable
PD has been used to treat acute kidney failure in
and acts as a dialyzer, permitting waste to cross (filter
humans since 1923 when Georg Ganter used PD to treat a
through) the membrane from the blood to the dialysis
patient with kidney disease. PD temporarily replaces the
kidney's excretory function by using the peritoneum as
solution in the peritoneal cavity (Figure 30.1)
 The most important function of the peritoneal mem-
the semi-permeable membrane across which unwanted
solutes are eliminated. Currently, in human medicine,
brane is to provide a protective lubricating surface for the
 abdominal organs. Mesothelial cells secrete glycosamino-
PD is used to treat both acute and chronic kidney failure
 glycans including hyaluronic acid, proteoglycans such
(Chapters 48 and 49) as well as to remove dialyzable tox-
ins such as ethylene glycol, ethanol, and barbiturates. It is
aso
decorin and biglycan, and phosphatidylcholine-
 one of the most common forms of therapy for acute kid-
Recent studies have shown that mesothelial cells play
ney injury in children (Posen and Luisello 1980; Mendoza
a role in a number of other processes, including anti-
et al. 1993; Wong et al. 1996; Passadakis and Oreopoulos
 gen presentation, control of inflammation, tissue repair,
2007). PD is also used as a treatment for uroabdomen
coagulation, and fbrinolysis (Chegini 2002; Jorres 2003).
(Chapter 11), hyperthermia, hypothermia, pancreati-
tis, fluid volume overload secondary to congestive heart
Some studies suggest that mesothelial cells can play an
failure, and to reduce life-threatening metabolic distur-
active role in fluid transport. Plasmalemmal vesicles may
bances and peritonitis (Henrich and Paganini 1992). In
mediate transport across the mesothelial cells. Mesothe-
lial cells may also affect blood flow through peritoneal
veterinary medicine, the most common indication for
PD has been acute kidney injury.
capillaries by secretion of various vasoactive substances,
including nitric oxide and endothelin ( Nagy and Jackman 
 2000). It is generally felt that the mesothelial cells do not
 represent a significant barrier to water transport.
 The anatomic structures that appear to play the most
Nephrology and UrologyofSmallAnimals.Edited by Joe Bartges and
important role in fluid and solute transport are the
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
walls of the capillaries and the extracellular matrix
293
294
Therapeutic techniques
The peritoneal transfer of solutes reflects two simul-
taneous and interrelated transport mechanisms: diffu-
sion and convection. Diffusion refers to the movement of
solute across a semi-permeable membrane in response to
differing concentrations ofthat solute on either side ofthe
membrane. The solute moves from the side with higher
to the side with lower concentration, down an electro-
chemical gradient and in accordance with basic thermo-
dynamic principles. Convection refers to the movement
of solutes swept across the membrane within the flux of
fluid that arises as a consequence of ultrafiltration. Con-
vective transport is determined by the ultrafiltration rate.
Studies of peritoneal membrane function have classically
 characterized membrane transport properties in terms of
effective membrane surface area and solute permeability,
Figure 30.1 This figure illustrates the process of difusion
fluid transfer (ultrafiltration), and peritoneal lymphatic
absorption (Alexander et al. 1999). Ultrafiltration refers
across the semi-permeable peritoneal membrane. Reprinted from
Nephrology Nursing Journal, 2004, Volume 31, Number 5, p. 448.
to the movement of water across a semi-permeable mem-
brane as a result of favorable osmotic or hydrostatic gra-
Reprinted with permission of the publisher, the American Nephrol-
ogy Nurses' Association (ANNA): East Holly Avenue, Box 56.
dients. Effective ultrafiltration can occur during PD only
Pitman, NJ 08071-0056: (856) 256-2300: FAX (856) 589-7463:
by manipulating the osmotic gradient by changing the
E-mail: ana@aj.com: web site: www.annanurse.org.
tonicity of the dialysate solution. Ultrafiltration is fre-
quently desired when performing PD in animals because
they are often over-hydrated as a result of fluid therapy.
located in the submesothelial cell connective tissue (Stelin
and Rippe 1990; Flessner 1991; Flessner et al. 2003).
Kinetics of PD
Peritoneal capillaries are composed primarily of non-
fenestrated endothelial cells supported by a basement
 Dialysis occurs during the dwell time through the process
membrane. Endothelial cells contain aquaporins, which
of diffusion. Diffusion allows solutes to cross the peri-
 are responsible for water transport. Intercellular clefts
toneal membrane from an area of higher to lower con-
between endothelial cells also play a role in solute trans-
centration. Uremic solutes and potassium diffuse from
 port (Khanna 200o). When the peritoneum is thought of
the capillary blood vessels across the membrane into the
as a dialyzer, it should be considered as six resistances in
 dialysis solution. Glucose and lactate diffuse in the oppo-
series consisting of a stagnant capillary fluid film over-
site direction.
lying the endothelium of the peritoneal capillaries, the
Peritoneal diffusion depends on the following factors:
capillary endothelium, the endothelial basement mem-
1. The concentration gradient: urea is maximal in the
brane, the interstitium, the mesothelium, and a stagnant
blood at the start of the dwell when the concentra-
fluid film overlying the peritoneal membrane.
tion in the dialysis fluid is zero. It gradually decreases
The dynamics of fluid and solute exchange across
during the course of the dwell as it is removed from
a semi-permeable membrane is the foundation of PD.
the blood.
Large molecules such as proteins pass very slowly or not
 2. The effective peritoneal surface area: depends on the
at all through the membrane. Smaller molecules such as
total peritoneal surface area and the degree of vascu-
urea, glucose, and ions (sodium and potassium) move
larity.
easily across the membrane down a concentration gra-
3.
 The fill volume: where diffusion can also be increased
dient until equilibration is reached on both sides of the
by using larger fill volumes.
membrane. Water moves across the membrane from the
4.
The molecular weight of solutes: solutes with lower
solution of lower osmolality to that of higher osmolality
molecular weight such as urea (MW 60) are more
until equilibration is reached. Normal plasma osmolality
easily transported than those with higher molecular
has been measured from 285 to 310 mOsm/L. Uremic ani-
weights such as creatinine (MW113) (Kelly 2004).
mals may have an osmolality of about 350-400 mOsm/L
(Labato 2000). Various solutes and water can be added
Convection occurs when solutes are carried along with
to or removed from plasma by altering the electrolyte
the bulk flow of water during ultrafiltration. This move-
composition and osmolality of the dialysate fluid.
 ment can occur even when the concentrations of solute
Peritoneal dialysis  295
 on either side of the semi-permeable membrane would
Table 30.1 Comparison of peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis
not promote diffusion of the solute. This effect does not
 play an important role in PD (Ross and Labato 2006).
 Peritoneal dialysis
Hemodialysis
A variety of mathematical models have been proposed
Labor-intensive
Requires high level of technological
over the years to account for movement of water and
expertise
solutes across the peritoneum. The three-pore model
Technologically simnple
 Requires expensive equipment and
appears to best describe peritoneal transport (Stelin and
Rippe 1990; Flessner 1997; Anglani et al. 2001). Large
supplies
 pores greater than 150 A in diameter allow the trans-
More efficacious in
More efficacious in altering water
 port of macromolecules. They are present in only small
removing uremic
and solute balance 
middle molecules
numbers, accounting for 5-7% of the total pore surface
area. Small pores 20-25 A in diameter allow the passage
of low molecular weight substances such as urea, creati-
nine, and glucose. It is believed that the clefts between
diffusion across the peritoneal membrane. These toxins
capillary endothelial cells function as small pores and
include ethylene glycol, ethanol, and barbiturates. In
are present in large numbers representing more than
addition to toxicities, severe metabolic disturbances such
90% of the pore surface area. Ultra-small pores 3-5 A
as hyperkalemia, resistant metabolic acidosis, hyper-
in diameter allow water only to pass. These ultra-small
 calcemia, and hepatic encephalopathy can be corrected
  se   n  s
with PD (Dyzban et al. 2000a, 2000b; Garcia-Lacaze
channels). Aquaporins are a family of transport mem-
et al. 2002; Ross and Labato 2006). PD with hypertonic
brane polypeptides that permit water transport across the
dialysate can be used to remove excess water in animals
cellular membrane in response to an osmotic gradient.
with life-threatening fluid overload that may be seen
Aquaporin 1 appears to be the channel that is involved
with congestive heart failure. There are other disorders in
in water transport across the peritoneum. The location
which peritoneal lavage using solutions and techniques
 a o  s  o e  
very similar to PD may be therapeutic. These include
understood. Aquaporin 1 molecules have been identi-
hypothermia, hyperthermia, and pancreatitis (Dyzban
fied in both peritoneal endothelium as well as peritoneal
et al. 2000a, 2000b; Ross and Labato 2006).
mesothelial cells.
Published reports of the clinical use of PD in small
animals with kidney disease are few (Kirk 1957; Jackson
Indications for PD
1964; Avellini et al. 1973; Thornhill et al. 1984; Fox
et al. 1987; Crimp et al. 1989; Beckel et al. 2005; Wojick
The primary indication for PD in animals is for the treat-
ment of acute kidney injury (Chapter 49). This includes
oliguric or anuric kidney failure, acute polyuric kidney
Table 30.2 Indications for acute peritoneal dialysis
failure with severe uremia that is not responsive to fluid
therapy, and postrenal uremia resulting from ureteral
Oliguric or anuric acute kidney injury
Chronic kidney disease associated with nonresponsive
obstruction or a rupture in the urinary collecting sys-
uremia
tem (Chapters 58, 59, 70, 77, and 82). PD is a less eff-
Postrenal failure
 cient treatment modality than hemodialysis (Chapters
 Ureteral obstruction
28 and 29) in correcting uremia and water and solute
Rupture in urine collecting system
abnormalities; however, it still has a number of thera-
Removal of dialyzable toxins
peutic advantages. The decreased efficiency may actually
Ethylene glycol
be beneficial in treating cats and small dogs in which
Ethanol
rapid fluid and electrolyte shifts can result in serious clin-
Barbiturates
ical consequences. The equipment and supplies used for 
Metabolic disorders
PD are easily obtained, and the technique for performing
Hepatic encephalopathy
PD, although labor-intensive, is not difficult ( Table 30.1).
Hyperkalemia
This actually makes PD a useful therapeutic modality for
Hypercalcemia
Severe metabolic acidosis
private practices especially those located in areas distant
Fluid overload
from intermittent or continuous dialysis facilities.
Hyperthermia caused by heatstroke
There are many other indications for the use of
Hypothermia
PD (Table 30.2). PD can be used for the treatment of
Pancreatitis
 toxicities in which the offending toxin can be removed by
296   Therapeutic technigues
et al. 2008; Cooper and Labato in press). Although most
in adults. There are a number of studies comparing PD to
 described improvements in renal function during dial-
continuous renal replacement therapies such as contin-
ysis overall survival remained poor. In an early study
uous venovenous hemofiltration, and there is still much
involving 27 dogs and cats, 24% improved and were
 debate as to which modality is superior (Phu et al. 2002; 
discharged from the hospital (Crimp et al. 1989). This
Passadakis and Oreopoulos 2007).
study included 2 cats, and neither one survived. Eleven of
PD could theoretically be used for the long-term man-
twenty-one of these animals with acute kidney injury suf-
agement of chronic kidney disease in dogs and cats. Tech-
fered from ethylene glycol intoxication, which is known
nical problems with catheter flow and complications with
to result in a mortality rate approaching 100% (Vaden
infection make chronic PD challenging and definitely
et al. 1997; Forrester et al. 2002). A recent study of
require a committed owner only a few cases have been
dogs with leptospirosis-induced kidney injury reported
a survival rate of 80% (Beckel et al. 2005). The sur-
hill et al. 1984; Carter et al. 1989; Crimp et al. 1989;
vival rate of dogs with leptospirosis treated with a stan-
Cooper and Labato in press).
dard approach of intravenous fluids and antibiotics has
been reported to be 59-85% (Harkin and Gartrell 1996;
Rentko et al. 1992; Adin and Cowgill 2000). The success
Contraindications to PD
of PD must be compared with the overall survival rate
There are few situations in which PD is absolutely
of animals with acute kidney injury treated with other
contraindicated. In humans, these include peritoneal
means because animals undergoing dialysis tradition-
adhesions that prevent fluid distribution throughout the
ally have been those with the most severe kidney failure.
peritoneal cavity and pleuroperitoneal leaks that would
In a study of 99 dogs with acute kidney injury, 43%
result in pleural effusion and respiratory compromise.
were discharged from the hospital (Vaden et al. 1997).
Adhesions are not often seen in dogs and cats. Diaphrag-
Of these, 24% were left with residual kidney dysfunction
matic or pericardiodiaphragmatic hernias are seen in
and only 19% had return to normal kidney function. In
animals and could result in respiratory or cardiac dys-
another report of 80 dogs with acute kidney injury of
function. However, there was an early report of the use
which 44% had ethylene glycol intoxication, only 20%
An   m sop om n sis sd g
survived to discharge (Forrester et al. 2002). In a recent
(Shahar and Holmberg 1985). PD is contraindicated
review of22 cats, the most common indication for PD was
in severe catabolic states in which marked hypoalbu-
acute and chronic kidney injury (7/22, 32%). Urolithiasis
accounted for 23% (5/22) of cases; 18% (4/22) of cats as
lost through the peritoneum during dialysis exchanges.
 presented with acute kidney injury due to toxicity, three
 Marked ascites, obesity, recent abdominal surgery, bowel
of which were lily intoxication and one was an unknown
distention, or abdominal masses may interfere with
toxin. Acute kidney injury was attributed to spay compli-
catheter placement or adequate volume exchanges and
cations in 14% (3/22) of cats (bilateral ureteral ligation
are relative contraindications for PD (Labato 2000)
in two animals and unknown in one animal). Three cats
were presented with acute kidney injury for unknown
reasons (Cooper and Labato in press). Ten of twenty-two
Protocol for PD
cats (45.5%) were discharged from the hospital after PD.
Catheter types and placement
The average number of days from initiation of PD to dis-
charge for these cats was 9.4 (median 7.5, range 5-19).
The key to successful PD is the catheter and its place-
The average number of days on PD in this group was 3.5
ment. An ideal catheter allows efficient inflow and out-
(median 2.5, range 0-10). One animal was discharged
flow. It is biocompatible and resists infection of both the
from the hospital with the PD catheter intact and came
peritoneum and the subcutaneous tunnel (Labato 2o00;
back daily for PD catheter flushes for 10 days in the event
Bersinas 2006; Ross and Labato 2006). There are many
that PD would be necessary again. The PD catheter in this
catheter designs available and most are modifications
cat was removed 10 days after discharge from the hospital
of a fenestrated silicone tube with Dacron (INVISTA,
after renal profiles showed that azotemia was being con-
Wichita, KS) cuffs positioned to promote fibrous
trolled with subcutaneous fluid administration (Cooper 
adhesions at the peritoneal and cutaneous exit sites
and Labato in press).
{Table 30.3)
Indications for the use of PD in human medicine are
Simple tube catheters with stylets can be placed per-
acute kidney injury in children and chronic kidney dis-
cutaneously in conscious animals using local anesthetics
ease in adults. In countries where hemodialysis is not
in an emergency situation (Dyzban et al. 2000; Bersinas
readily available, PD is also used for acute kidney injury
2006; Ross and Labato 2006). A percutaneous cystotomy
Peritoneal dialysis  297
Table 30.3 Suppliers of peritoneal dialysis catheters
Covidien/Kendal/Tyco Healthcare
15 Hampshire St.
Mansfield, MA 02048
800-962-9888
www.Kendallhq.com/healthcarecatalog.asp
www.covidien.com
A variety of peritoneal dialysis catheters
Medigroup Inc.
(division of Janin Group Inc)
505 Weston Ridge Drive
800-323-5389
www.medigroupinc.com
Ash Advantage Fluted-T Catheter
Flex-neck PD catheters
Figure 30.2 The Stamey percutaneous suprapubic catheter set
Medcomp
(Cook Mecdical, Bloomington, IN) has been used successfully for
acute short-term PD.
1499 Delp Drive
Harleyville, PA 19438
215-256-4201
timeters, then insert through the abdominal muscles in
www.medcompnet.com
the abdomen. The catheter is advanced over the trocar
 Straight and curled, one and two cuff peritoneal dialysis
until it is fully in the abdomen. Ideally, the subcutaneous
catheters
 tunnel should create a snug fit. Use a purse string suture
Cook Medical Inc.
pattern to secure the catheter.
PO Box 4195
There are a variety of straight and curled catheters with
Bloomington, IN 47402-4195
straight and flexed necks for placement for long-term use
www.cookmedical.com
(Figures 30.3 and 30.4).
 Stamey and other suprapublic PD catheters
The two catheters that have been most successful in
Smiths Medical PM, Inc.
veterinary medicine for long-term use are the fluted-T
N7W22025 Johnson Drive
catheter and the Missouri catheter (Ash 1993; Ross and
Waukeshsa, WI 53186
Labato 2006; Yerram 2007). The pediatric lengths are
888-745-6562
best used in cats and ferrets. When it is believed PD
www.surgivet.com
will be performed for longer than 24 hours, a surgi-
acute peritoneal dialysis catheter
 cally placed catheter should be utilized. Although some
catheters such as the Fluted-T and the Missouri Swan
tube catheter (Stamey percutaneous suprapubic catheter
set, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN) has been used suc-
cessfully for acute short-term PD (Figure 30.2)
The Tenckhoff catheter, developed in 1968, is a straight
soft silastic tube fenestrated at the distal end and fur-
nished with two Dacron velour cuffs that can be placed
with a trocar or a laparascope (Thornhill et al. 1980;
Gokal et al. 1998; Chada 2000; Harvey 2001). Because of
the high rate of omental entrapment, surgical omentec-
tomies are advocated when using this catheter in animals
in which more than 3 days of dialysis is anticipated. PD for
acute kidney failure should be performed for a minimum
of 48-72 hours, the duration of treatment is predicated
by the animal's condition. The patient should have the
abdomen shaved and aseptically cleaned as for a surgical
 procedure. A stab incision should be made 3-5 cm lateral 
to the umbilicus. Insert the trocar toward the pelvis and
Figure 30.3 Peritoneal dialysis catheters: straight and flexed
inguinal canal. Tunnel subcutaneously for several cen-
Swan neck curl catheters.
298
 Therapeutic techniques
Figure 30.5 The Blake surgical drain (Johnson and Johnson,
Arlington, TX) functions in a manner similar to the fluted-T catheter
and has been utilized for PD in human infants.
Figure 30.4 Peritoneal dialysis catheters: Missouri straight and
 flexed Swan neck curl catheters and fluted-T catheter.
12-24 hours postsurgical catheter placement that is ideal;
unfortunately, in most cases in veterinary medicine, we
Neck curled catheter have been designed to be placed
 do not have that luxury and exchanges need to begin
either via laparoscope or blind trocarization in human
immediately.
medicine, it is preferable to place these catheters surgi-
The catheter should be attached to a sterile closed
cally in dogs and cats. Omentectomy is necessary to pro-
vide adequate exchanges for long durations. The curled
with dry sterile dressings. The use of topical antibiotic
tip should be positioned in the inguinal area. The fluted
ointments is not recommended because of the potential
aspect of the fluted-T catheter is placed against the pari-
to cause maceration of the exit site tissues and fibrob-
etal peritoneum and oriented in a cranial to caudal plane.
 last inhibition. Minimizing catheter movement during
It is placed in a paramedian location with the long aspect
the invasion of fbroblasts into the cuffs is crucial for
 directed toward the inguinal ring. The subcutaneous tun-
minimizing exit leaks and infections. After placement
nel should be such that there is a gentle bend in the
of the dialysis catheter, the tail of the catheter tubing is
catheter that does not kink and that exits caudally and
connected to a transfer tubing set, which previously has
off midline by 3-5 cm. When a cuffed catheter is used,
been attached to and primed with a pre-warmed bag of
the cuffs should be soaked in sterile saline before place-
 dialysate. Strict sterile technique should be maintained
ment to remove air and facilitate fibroblast cuff inva-
throughout all manipulations. Connections should be
sion. The inner cuff is placed in the rectus muscle, and
 protected with povidone-iodine connection shields or
the other cuff is placed in the subcutaneous tunnel. A
chlorhexidine-soaked sponges.
tight subcutaneous tunnel with fbrous ingrowth into
the cuff decreases the incidence of dialysate leak (Labato
Delivery technique and the exchange
2000; Langston 2003 ). Although not specifically designed
procedure
for PD, the Blake surgical drain (Johnson and Johnson,
Arlington, TX) functions in a manner similar to the
Aseptic technique during delivery of dialysate is essential
fluted-T catheter and has been utilized for PD in human
to minimize the risk of peritonitis. Hands should be thor-
infants (Dyzban et al. 2000) [Figure 30.5].
oughly washed with soap or cleaned with a hand sanitizer
Initially, large volumes of dialysate should be avoided
and sterile gloves used while changing the dialysate bag
to minimize excess intra-abdominal pressure, which can
or lines, because the most common cause of peritoni-
promote leaks and retard healing of exit sites (Lane et al.
tis is contamination of the bag spike (Carter et al. 1989;
1992; Goldraich and Mariano 1993; Cowgill 1995). It is
Ross and Labato 2006). Routine use of a face mask while
recommended that one-quarter to one-half of the cal-
doing bag exchanges and catheter maintenance has been
culated prescription volume for the first 24 hours be
shown to be unnecessary as long as proper hand care
infused at the start of dialysis exchanges. This author has
is maintained (Figueiredo et al. 2000). Every line con-
found that the smaller volume leads to less fluid leakage
nection should be covered with a povidone-iodine con-
into the subcutaneous tissue. If it is possible to wait for
nection shield or chlorhexidine-soaked dressings covered
Peritoneal dialysis
299
with sterile gauze. All injection ports should be scrubbed
with chlorhexidine and alcohol before injections, and
the use of multiple-dose vials (e.g., heparin or potassium
chloride) for dialysate supplements should be avoided to
decrease the risk of introducing microorganisms.
Although dialysis can be performed with a straight-
Drain
Fill
Dwell
line transfer set, use of a closed, flush system has been
associated with lower infection rates (Maiorca and Can-
carini 1990; Maiorca et al. 1991; Rippe 2007). The closed
"y" system allows the lines to be flushed free of possible
bacterial contamination before each dialysate infusion
without opening the system to outside air (the drain,
flush, instill method).
For the first 24-48 hours after catheter placement, the
exchange volumes should be one-quarter the calculated
ideal volume to assess the degree of abdominal distention,
the effect on respiratory function, and the potential for
Figure 30.6 The drain, fill, and dwell protocol. Peritonitis is
dialysate leakage. After the first 48 hours, the dialysate
decreased by employing the Y-set and flushing of catheter line
can be infused at a dosage of 20-40 mL/kg during a 10-
prior to each fill.
minute period (Christie and Bjorling 1993; Labato 2000).
The dialysate is allowed to remain in the peritoneal cavity
for 30-40 minute dwell time and then is drained into a
collection bag by gravity during a 20-30 minute period. A
centration of 4.0-6.0 mg/dL. The animal can then be
90-100% recovery of dialysate is expected. This process is
switched to a chronic dialysis schedule. A chronic dial-
repeated continually and the dialysate formula and dwell
ysis schedule involves allowing the dialysate solution to
times are adjusted every 12-24 hours according to the
remain in the abdomen for 3-6 hours. Three to four
 animal's needs. This form of continuous exchanges or
exchanges per day are performed. The dialysate should
cycling is referred to as continuous PD (Alarabi et al.
remain in the abdomen during these extended exchange
1994).
 periods. The rate of infusion can be rapid in most cases
A Y-set tubing with a fresh dialysate bag and a drainage
without problems. If the animal shows signs of discom-
container attached to either segment is connected to the
fort during infusion, check that the solution temperature
catheter tubing or transfer set. First, a small amount of
is not too hot or too cold. Also, slow the rate of infusion.
fresh dialysate is flushed into the drainage bag, and then
The frequency of the exchanges and the dwell time
the peritoneal cavity is drained so that any contaminants
duration are adjusted for each animal's individual needs.
introduced during the connection procedures are flushed
The goal of PD for an animal with renal failure is to
 into the drainage bag and not into the peritoneal cavity
remove enough urea to maintain the BUN concentra-
(Figure 30.6).
tion at ≤70 mg/dL (Ross and Labato 2006). The amount
After drainage, the fresh dialysate is infused. This
of solute transferred across the peritoneal membrane is
 s d  r ,
determined by the concentration gradient for each solute.
decreased the incidence of peritonitis in humans on PD
 If there is a need to increase removal of large molecules 
such as creatinine, the dwell time for each exchange is
used in the straight single-spiked system (Ash et al. 1995).
extended.
The exchange procedure for severe azotemia should
Dialysis should be continued until kidney function
follow the described protocol. The dialysate should
 has normalized or is adequate to maintain the patient
remain in the abdomen for 30-40 minutes. Dialysis
without dialysis as determined by urine output and the
cycles should be repeated every 1-2 hours until the ani-
stabilization of blood values and clinical signs. Grad-
 ual reduction of the number of exchanges and having
and serum creatinine concentrations have decreased and
exchange free periods are recommended. This intermit-
volume overload has been corrected. This initial inten-
tent PD should be done during a 3-4 day period with
sive dialysis typically continues for 24-48 hours. Do not
continual reevaluation of the patient's clinical state. If
attempt to bring the BUN and creatinine concentrations
the animal receiving aggressive, well-managed continual
into the normal range. A reasonable goal is a BUN con-
PD has not improved according to biochemical parame-
centration of 60-100 mg/dL and a serum creatinine con-
 ters or uremic signs after several days, chronic PD, chronic
300   Therapeutic techniques
hemodialysis, renal transplantation, or euthanasia should
osmolar crystalloid solutions designed to pull fluid, crea-
be considered.
tinine, urea, electrolytes, and phosphates from the plasma
into the dialysate while providing diffusible buffer and
other needed compounds such as magnesium and cal-
Dialysate solutions
cium (Lane and Carter 1997).
The biocompatibility of a PD solution can be defined
Hyperosmolar dextrose-containing dialysate solutions
 as the ability of a solution formulation to permit long-
are effective for minimizing edema in over-hydrated
term dialysis without any clinically relevant changes in
patients and for enhancing ultrafiltration (removal of
the functional characteristics of the peritoneum and
water) in all patients. Hyperosmolar dextrose appears to
 is of paramount importance not only in maintaining
favor capillary vasodilation and promotes solute drag. A
the health of the membrane but also in permitting PD
1.5% dextrose dialysate is used in dehydrated or normov-
to be a successful long-term therapy. Solution compo-
olemic patients. The 2.5% and 4.25% dialysates should be
nents can affect leukocyte, mesothelial cell, endothelial
used in mildly to severely over-hydrated patients. Inter-
cell, and fibroblast function, resulting in alterations in
mittent use of a 4.25% dialysate solution may increase
cytokine, chemokine, and growth factor networks, up-
the efficiency of dialysis in all patients (Ross and Labato
regulation of pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic path-
2006). Heparin (250-1,000 U/L) should be added to the
ways, impaired peritonealhost defense, and the induction
dialysate for the first few days after catheter placement to
of carbonyl and oxidative stress (Cooker et al. 2002). Such
help prevent occlusion of the catheter by fibrin deposi-
perturbations of normal physiology have been proposed
tion. This heparin is minimally absorbed by the patient's
as causative factors contributing to changes in peritoneal
circulation and is unlikely to prolong clotting times (Lane
structure, such as peritoneal fibrosis, sclerosis, and vas-
et al. 1992; Cowgill 1995; Dzyban et al. 2000b; Sjoland
culopathy, and changes in peritoneal function including
et al. 2004; Ross and Labato 2006). The dialysate should
increased solute permeability and ultrafiltration failure
be warmed to 38°C to improve permeability of the peri-
(Cooker et al. 2002; Crawford-Bonadio and Diaz-Buxo
toneum. The dialysate line should be placed in a fluid
2004; terWee and van Ittersum 2007). The majority of
warmer to help maintain this temperature.
PD fluids used today have the composition of a lactate-
 In an emergency situation where there is no com-
buffered, balanced salt solution devoid of potassium, with
mercially prepared dialysate solution available, a suit-
glucose as the osmotic agent. Lactate is used as a buffer
able dialysate solution can be made by adding dextrose
instead of bicarbonate because bicarbonate and calcium
to lactated Ringer's solution. Osmolality should closely
may precipitate (to form calcium carbonate) during stor-
approximate that of the patient and the dextrose concen-
 age. However, with the advent of newer multi-chambered
tration should be at least 1.5%. Adding 30 mL of 50%
PD delivery systems, it is currently possible to replace 
glucose to 1 L of lactated Ringer's solution will result in
lactate with bicarbonate and to make a number of other
a 1.5% dextrose solution.
solution modifications that previously were not feasible.
Glucose is harmful to the peritoneum. The glucose
However, the high cost of a number of the newer, more
concentration of dialysate solution is high. The tissues
 n r  Poo so  os
of the peritoneal membrane are continuously exposed
(Rippe 2007). Very few of these newer solutions will be
to glucose concentrations that are clearly in the diabetic
utilized during the relatively short durations PD is uti-
range. These concentrations of glucose are toxic to the
lized in veterinary medicine.
 mesothelium. Glucose activates the polyol pathway and
The ideal solution for PD should not be unduly hyper-
the secretion of transforming growth factor-betal ( TGF-
tonic, should not impair host defenses, and should not
B1), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and
damage the peritoneal membrane. It should be sterilized
fibronectin. There are studies suggesting that glucose
in a manner that does not promote generation of glucose
is involved in the development of peritoneal fibrosis
degradation products (GDPs). Most existing glucose-
(Van Biesen et al. 1998; Vardhan et al. 2003). Glucose
based solutions are lactate-based, have low pH and high
 is likely to be involved in the development of peritoneal
tonicity, contain GDPs, and glycosylate the peritoneal
 neoangiogenesis. The clinical importance of this finding
membrane.
is that it leads to enlargement of the peritoneal vascular
 Commercially prepared dialysate solutions containing
surface area, resulting in loss of the osmotic gradient
various concentrations of dextrose are available. Dialy-
that impairs ultrafiltration. A third mechanism by which
sis for removal of solutes is generally performed using
 glucose can damage the peritoneal tissue is by inducing
1.5% dextrose. Dialysates containing 2.5% and 4.25%
nonenzymatic glycosylation of tissue proteins that leads
dextrose are used in moderate to severely over-hydrated
to the formation of advanced glycoslyation end products
patients. Dialysate solutions are buffered, slightly hyper-
(AGEs). The deposition of AGEs in the vascular wall leads
Peritoneal dialysis   301
to ultrafiltration failure (Dasgupta, 1989; Vardhan et al.
2004; Ross and Labato 2006). A 1.1% amino acid solution
2003).
is now available in many countries to supplement protein
GDPs are formed during the heat stabilization process
intake and treat or prevent malnutrition. One exchange
of dialysate solutions. GDPs consist of aldehydes such
Uous uq sey aep iad uoungos pie ouue t'I aui jo
as formaldehyde and dicarbonyl products such as gly-
to improve nitrogen balance and biochemical markers
oxal and methylglyoxal. GDPs may affect the peritoneal
for nutrition in malnourished CAPD patients (Kopple
membrane by three mechanisms. They are toxic to fibrob-
et al. 1995; McIntyre 2007; Tjiong et al. 2007).
lasts. Methylgloxal enhances the production of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). And the final mech-
Complications
anism is the GDPs trigger of the formation of AGEs at
a much faster rate than glucose (Vardhan et al. 2003).
Complications with PD are common but manageable
However, for short-term use in veterinary medicine, no
if recognized early. The most common complications
adverse effects have been recognized.
include catheter flow problems, exit site leaks, hypoal-
Ideally, the osmotic agent used in PD fluids should
buminemia, peritonitis, pleural effusion, dyspnea caused
be biocompatible, effective in inducing ultrafiltration,
by increased abdominal pressure, changes in hydration
nonabsorbable, easy to manufacture, and inexpensive.
status, and electrolyte abnormalities ( Table 30.4) (Labato
Af present, glucose, polyglucose, and amino acids are
2000; Maaz 2004; Ross and Labato 2006).
being used in commercial PD fluids. Amino acid solu-
Catheter flow obstruction by fibrin or omentum lead-
tions are not available in the US market. Polyglucose
ing to dialysis retention is common (Christie and Bjorling 
(icodextrin, Extrarenal, Baxter Healthcare Corporation,
1993; Ash 1999). In one study, 30% of dogs undergoing
Deerfield, IL) is available. Icodextrin (7.5% polyglucose)
PD developed such obstructions (Crimp et al. 1989). In a
is a mixture of high molecular weight, water-soluble glu-
review of cats treated with PD, 77% had dialysis retention
with 3/22 or 13.6% having a clogged catheter. Fifty-eight
cornstarch. Icodextrin is a glucose polymer of molec-
percent of cats with surgically placed catheters experi-
ular weight 16,8000 and osmolality of 285 mOsm. No
enced dialysate retention while 100% of those cats with
diffusion into the blood occurs and the colloid osmotic
 percutaneously placed catheters had retention problems.
 gradient and ultrafltration are maintained as the dwell
Careful catheter placement and management are impor-
proceeds. Ultrafiltration occurs by colloid osmosis via
tant preventative steps. Heparinized saline flushes of the
small pores. Minimal ultrafltration occurs via ultrapores
catheter for the first few days may decrease the occurrence
through which glucose mainly acts, and consequently
of omentum wrapping around the catheter (Dzyban et al.
there is no sodium sieving. Iso-osmolar polyglucose solu-
2000). If a clot in the catheter is suspected, a high pres-
tions achieve peritoneal ultrafiltration by colloid osmosis,
sure saline flush or the addition of 15,000 U of uroki-
allowing net ultrafltration during long dwell exchanges
nase to the catheter for 3 hours may dislodge clots (Ash
due to its slow absorption. The ultrafiltration achieved
et al. 1995). Decreasing volumes of dialysate during out-
with polyglucose after 12 hours is superior to 4.25% glu-
flow or abdominal pain on dialysate inflow are evidence
cose, particularly in patients with high peritoneal trans-
of omental entrapment. If omental entrapment occurs,
port (Admad 2008). Icodextrin is absorbed via lym-
phatics and metabolized to maltose (Vardham 2003;
Crawford-Bonadio and Diaz-Buxo 2004). No toxicity
Table 30.4 Potential complications of peritoneal dialysis
has been identified. There are a number of adverse effects
that have been noted with Icodextrin, which include ster-
Catheter related 
ile peritonitis, peritoneal mononucleosis, and antibody
Catheter obstruction
formation. In humans undergoing CAPD, Icodextrin is
Exit site and tunnel infection
utilized during the long dwell times (Moberly 2003; Mar-
Dialysate leakage
tin et al. 2003). At this time, the future role of Icodextrin
Hypoalbuminemia
Electrolyte disordlers
 in veterinary medicine remains to be seen.
Peritonitis
Bicarbonate-based solutions are being developed to
Diagnosis based on presence of at least 2 of 3 criteria
increase solution biocompatibility and thus protect the
Cloudy dialysate effluent
peritoneal membrane. Their formulation also reduces
Detection of >100 inflammatory cells/uL, or
infusion pain associated with the low acidity of most
organisms in gram stain or cultures
conventional commercial preparations. These solutions
Clinical signs of peritonitis
require use of a double chamber bag to separate bicar-
Acute pleural effusion
bonate from calcium (Crawford-Bonadio and Diaz-Buxo
302   Therapeutic techniques
problem. For this reason, it is strongly recommended that
The prevalence of peritonitis in veterinary patients on
catheters be surgically placed and an omentectomy per-
PD had previously been reported as being higher than
formed if use of the PD catheter is anticipated for longer
that reported for humans 22% versus 15% (Crimp et al.
than 48 hours.
1989; Tzandoukas 1996). Additionally, exit site infection
The most frequent complication at the author's insti-
is a troublesome problem in humans (Peng et al. 1998).
tution is dialysate leakage into the subcutaneous tissue.
In recent studies, at the author's institution, peritoni-
Sixty-two percent of cats with percutaneously placed
tis was not identified in any of the PD cases in dogs
catheters experienced subcutaneous leakage and 50% of
reviewed during a 4-year period and was reported in only
 cats with surgically placed catheters had subcutaneous
one of 22 cats (2.5%) over a 5 year period (Beckel et al.
leakage. This complication is managed by having the sur-
2005; Cooper and Labato in press). The most common
 geon closely appose the abdominal incision (simple inter-
source of peritonitis is contamination of the bag spike
rupted suture pattern only), starting the initial exchange
 or tubing by the handler, but intestinal, hematogenous,
volumes at one-quarter of the calculated infusion
 and exit site sources of infection do occur. It is impor-
 amount, and if leakage does occur, intermittently wrap-
 tant to recognize peri-catheter leaks to minimize exit site
ping the limbs to promote mobilization of the edema. If
sources on infection (Dzyban et al. 2000a). Peritonitis
at all possible, it is beneficial to wait a minimum of 12
is diagnosed when two of the following three criteria
 are recognized: (1) cloudy dialysate effluent, (2) greater
unfortunately, because the indication for PD is typically
than 1o0 inflammatory cells/uL of effluent or positive
associated with an acute process, this opportunity to wait
culture results and, (3) clinical signs of peritonitis. The
is typically not an option. Additionally, if subcutaneous
incidence of peritonitis has dramatically decreased with
leakage occurs, the dialysate solution should be changed
the use of the closed Y-system and drain first protocol.
to the lowest possible osmolality formulation available.
Because Staphylococcus spp. is the most common organ-
Acute pleural effusion is an uncommon complica-
ism cultured, cephalosporins administered systemically
tion and usually occurs early in the course of treat-
ment. A common PD complication is overhydration of
The author commonly will administer one dose of cefa-
the patient. If the patient is gaining weight, the central
zolin in one dialysate exchange daily and also administer
venous pressure is increasing, or the effluent recovered is
the antibiotic intravenously as well.
not at least 90% of the dialysate infused, the prescription
 Dialysis disequilibrium is a rare complication char-
should be changed to ultrafiltration with more concen-
acterized by dementia, seizures, or death. Dysequilib-
trated dextrose (2.5 or 4.25%) solutions.
rium may occur during early exchanges especially in
Protein losses can be clinically important with PD
patients with extreme azotemia, acidosis, hypernatremia,
(Young et al. 1987). Losses may increase dramatically
 or hyperglycemia. Rapid removal of urea and other
(50-100%) when peritonitis is present. Hypoalbumine-
small solutes apparently causes influx of water into brain
mia was the most common complication in a review of
cells and neurological dysfunction (Ross and Labato
PD cases in dogs and cats, and 41% of the animals were
2006) The reverse urea effect results from more efficient
affected (Crimp et al. 1989). In another study, 16% of
removal of urea from plasma as compared with the brain,
cats developed hypoalbuminemia (Cooper and Labato in
with development of a reverse osmotic gradient. This
 press). Hypoalbuminemia may be the result oflow dietary
intracellular accumulation of solutes such as urea favors
protein intake, gastrointestinal or renal protein loss, loss
 movement of water to the intracellular space, leading to
in the dialysate itself, uremic catabolism, and concur-
cerebral edema and an increase in intracranial pressure.
rent diseases. Usually, the animal can maintain normal
Other compounds such as idiogenic osmoles are thought
serum albumin levels if nutritional intake is adequate.
to play a role as well as paradoxical intracellular acido-
Adequate enteral nutrition may be difficult to main-
sis (Ali and Pirzada 2004). If evidence of disequilibrium
tain, given the anorexia and vomiting common in uremic
occurs, the dialysate prescription should be adjusted to
remove urea and small solutes at a slower rate (i.e., fewer
gen balance often must be utilized. Nutritional support 
exchanges or longer dwell times).
includes feeding tubes, partial or total parenteral nutri-
tion, and the technique of PD utilizing 1.1% amino acid
solutions (Kopple et al. 1995; Jones et al. 1998; Dzyban
Monitoring
et al. 2000a; terWee and van Ittersum 2007; Tjiong et al.
2007). Gastrostomy and jejunosotomy tubes are con-
Monitoring of the PD patient should include carefully
traindicated during PD because of increased risk of infec-
recording the volume of the dialysate infused and recov-
tion and abdominal wall exit site dialysate leaks.
ered during each exchange period as well as the volume
Peritoneal dialysis 303
C'uren
exchange
urrn1
Pleust not
cet halanre
xchar.geFlu
1 4)r 1.
iof lialysate
Renring
idl difference
Alus ule
Lo1 al usl
[ tulal tluid
Rwning
tal e an cach
alume ot
xlanee 04
IV
 in  lol:al
11al f
sheet inllku
[]
 Il
DralyxateDialysate
 (lune in -
spir,]
To:a]
[[ ,1.
I'lunds cu 
I luidl 
Date
Dialysat
1ime
1ime
1im:
A'lume in3 olume t
lxalancc
only
in1
[!rine o1
Fluicls in
tluid 
Fluid diF?
dliferenee
17
0
0
(
0
(
0
0
0
1)
0
10
Figure 30.7 Peritoneal dialysis flow sheet. Flow sheet used for monitoring dialysate and fluid volumes.
of urine produced and any additional fluids administered
mia, and to help correct fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base
(Figure 30.7).
imbalances until the animal's kidney function can recover
 If the patient is volume overloaded and a high osmo-
sufficiently. Conversion of the anuric or oliguric state
lality fluid is utilized, the fluid recovered from the
to a polyuric state and stabilization or improvement of
abdomen may be greater than that delivered for the
azotemia are the primary indications for discontinuation
first few exchanges. As dialysis proceeds, outflow should
of PD.
approximate or exceed inflow if the patient is ade-
 PD is a realistic option for veterinary patients with
quatelyhydrated. Iflessfluidis recovered with subsequent
acute nonresponsive kidney failure or dialyzable toxin
exchanges, the patient should be evaluated for dialysate
exposure. The protocol requires careful intraperitoneal
leakage into subcutaneous fluids or for dialysate reten-
 catheter placement and care, aggressive exchange pre-
tion. At that point, the catheter should be checked for
scriptions, and careful monitoring for complications.
evidence of obstruction to outflow.
Veterinarians should recognize that PD is an extremely
 In the acute setting, body weight and hydration sta-
effective tool in human medicine and should consider it
tus should be monitored frequently, with body weight
 as a treatment modality in an acute critical care setting.
recorded consistently on the same scale and either with or
 The future role of PD in veterinary medicine may be
without dialysate in the abdomen. Measurement of cen-
as alternative management therapy for end-stage kidney
tral venous pressure (CVP) through a jugular catheter is
failure when hemodialysis and transplantation are not
a relatively sensitive method for detecting overhydration
options. As advanced renal replacement therapy becomes
or hypovolemia and should be performed every 4 hours.
 Determination of packed cell volume (PCV) and total
protein should be performed at least twice daily. Serum
Table 30.5 Monitoring parameters for patients receiving
electrolyte concentrations and other blood chemistries
peritoneal dialysis
such as BUN, creatinine, albumin, and acid-base should
Weigh the animal twice daily before dialysate infusion
be assessed initially every 8-12 hours and then daily
Check central venous pressure (CVP) every 4-6 hours
(Table 30.5).
A number of metabolic aberrations may occur in
4.
 Record heart rate and respiratory rate every 2 hours
patients on PD, including alterations in serum sodium,
Note if there is respiratory difficulty with dialysateo
potassium, magnesium, and glucose concentrations as
infusion 
well as changes in acid-base status. Frequent monitoring
5.
Monitor body temperature every 6-8 hours
and adjustment in dialysate and supplemental parenteral
6.
Perform adequate peritoneal catheter exit site care and
fluid composition may be necessary (Burkart 2004; Ross
evaluate for exit site infection daily
7.
 Record or weigh the amount of dialysate infused and 
and Labato 2006).
recovered with each exchange
8.
Evaluate packed cell volume (PCV), total protein, serum
Conclusion
urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, electrolytes, albumin, and
venous blood gas analysis once to twice daily depending
In cases of acute kidney failure, the objectives of PD
on severity of azotemia
are to reduce azotemia, resolve the clinical signs of ure-
304    Therapeutic techniques
a more common treatment modality, we may find chronic
Beckel, N., T. O'Toole, et al. (2005). Peritoneal dialysis in the man-
ambulatory PD is the next area to emerge. In some
agement of acute renal failure in five dogs with leptospirosis. J Vet
 patients, chronic hemodialysis is not a viable option
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 15(3): 201-205.
Bersinas, A. (2006). Peritoneal Dialysis. Proceedings of Advanced Renal
because of poor vascular access, other underlying dis-
Therapies Symposium. New York, pp. 1-7.
eases, size of the animal, or unavailability of a hemodialy-
 Blake, P.G. and J.T. Daugirdas (2001). Physiology of peritoneal dial-
sis center. Continuous ambulatory PD (CAPD) may serve
 ysis. In: Handbook of Dialysis, edited by IT. Daugirdas, P.G. Blake,
as a treatment option for these patients. Cats that are not
and T.S. Ing. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins,
transplant candidates and are too small for hemodialy-
pp. 281-296.
Burkart, J. (2004). Metabolic consequences of peritoneal dialysis.
sis are ideal candidates for CAPD. The active lifestyles
Semin Dial 17(6): 498-504.
of most dogs traditionally have made PD challenging for
Carter, L.J., W.E. Wingfield, et al. (1989). Clinical experience with
them. However, with a dedicated owner, CAPD may serve
peritoneal dialysis in small animals. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
 a role in renal replacement therapy. Typically, the patient
11: 1335-1343.
is maintained in the hospital while the dialysis prescrip-
Chada, V., B.A. Warady, et al. (2000). Tenckhoff catheters prove supe-
tion is formulated, the incision heals, and the animal
rior to cook catheters in pediatric acute peritoneal dialysis. Am I
Kidney Dis 35(6): 1111-1116.
becomes accustomed to the dialysis process. Long-term
Chegini, N. (2002). Peritoneal molecular environment, adhesion for-
care at home with outpatient visits is a goal for the future.
Success will necessitate active cooperation among the
Christie, B.A. and D.E. Bjorling (1993). Kidneys. In: Textbook of Small
 owner, veterinarian, and technical staff The challenge
Animal Surgery, edited by D. Slatter, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, PA:
of maintaining a CAPD catheter will require developing
WB Saunders, pp. 1439- 1440.
Cooker, L.A., C.J. Holmes, et al. (2002). Biocompatibility of icodextrin.
and establishing excellent aseptic technique, daily ban-
Kidney Int 62: S34-S45.
dage changes, and early recognition of any signs of infec-
Cooper, R.L. and M.A. Labato (in press). Peritoneal dialysis in cats with
tion. Investigational use of intradialytic amino acid solu-
acute kidney injury: 22 cases (2001-2006). JVIM, Jan-Feb, 2011.
tion and alternatives to traditional dialysate solutions will
Cowgill, L.D. ( 1995). Application of peritoneal dialysis and hemodialy-
become areas of investigation in veterinary PD as more
sis in the management of renal failure. In: Canine and Feline Nephrol-
ogy and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne. Baltimore MD: Lea and
chronic dialysis is performed (Ross and Labato 2006).
Febiger, pp. 573.
Crawford-Bonadio, T.L. and JA. Diaz-Buxo (2004). Comparison of
References
 peritoneal dialysis solutions. Nephrol Nurs I 31(5): 500-509.
Crimp, M.S., D.J. Chew, et al. ( 1989). Peritoneal dialysis in dogs and
Adin, C.A. and L.D. Cowgill (2000). Treatment and outcome of dogs
cats: 27 cases (1976-1987). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 195: 1262-1266.
with leptospirosis: 36 cases (1990-1998). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 216:
Dasgupta, M.K. (1998). Glycosylated end-products and peritoneal
371-375.
membrane damage. Dial Transplant 27(2): 79-86.
Admad, M., T. Jeloka, et al. (2008). Icodextrin produces higher ultra-
Dzyban, L.A., M.A. Labato, et al. (2000a). CVT update: peritoneal
fltration in diabetic than in non-diabetic patients on continuous
dialysis. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII, edited by ID.
cyclic peritoneal dialysis. Int Urol Nephrol 40: 219-223.
 Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 859-861.
Alarabi, A.A., T. Petersson, et al. (1994). Continuous peritoneal
Dzyban, L.A., M.A. Labato, et al. (200ob). Peritoneal dialysis: a tool in 
dialysis in children with acute renal failure. Adv Perit Dial 10:
veterinary critical care. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 10: 91-102.
289-293.
Figueiredo, A.E., C.E. de Figueiredo, et al. (2000). Peritonitis preven-
Alexander, S.R., W.E. Harrmon, et al. (1999). Chronic dialysis in chil-
tion in CAPD: to mask or not? Perit Dial Int 20: 354-358.
dren. In: Principles and Practice of Dialysis, edited by W.L. Henrich,
 2nd edition. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, p.
basic research. I Arm Soc Nephrol 2: 122- 135.
511.
 Flessner, M.F (1997). The peritoneal dialysis system: importance of
Ali, 1.1. and N.A. Pirzada (2004). Neurologic complications associated
each component. Perit Dial Int 17: S91-S97.
with dialysis and chronic renal insufficiency. In: Principles and Prac-
Flessner, M., J. Heneoar, et al. (2003). Is the peritoneum a significant
tice of Dialysis, edited by W.L. Henrich, 3rd edition. Philadelphia,
transport barrier in peritoneal dialysis? Perit Dial Int 23: 542-549.
PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, pp. 502-512.
Forrester, S.D., N.S. McMillan, et al. (2002). Retrospective evaluation
Anglani, F, M. Forino, et al. (200l). Molecular biology of the peritoneal
of acute renal failure in dogs {abstract). I Vet Intern Med 16: 354.
membrane: in between morphology and function. Contrib Nephrol
Fox, L.E., G.F. Grauer, et al. ( 1987). Reversal of ethylene glycol-induced
131: 61-73.
nephotoxicosis in a dog. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 191: 1433- 1435.
Ash, S.R. (1999). Acute peritoneal dialysis in the treatment of ARF.
Garcia-Lacaze, M., et al. (2002). Peritoneal dialysis: not just for renal
ASN 32nd Anmual Meetirng. Miami, FL, pp. 452-475.
failure. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 24( 10): 758-771.
Ash, S.R., D.J. Carr, et al. ( 1995). Peritoneal access devices: hydraulic
Gokal, R., S. Alexander, et al. ( 1998). Peritoneal catheters and exit-site
function and biocompatibility. In: Clinical Dialysis, edited by A.
 practices toward optimum peritoneal access: 1998 update. Perit Dial
Nissenson. Stanford: Appleton and Long, pp. 212-236.
It 18: 11-33.
Ash, S.R., E.M. Janles. ( 1993). T-fluted peritoneal dialysis catheter. Adv
Goldraich, I. and M. Mariano (1993). One-step peritoneal catheter
Perit Dial 9: 223-226.
replacement in children. Adv Perit Dial 9: 325-328.
Avellini, G., G. Fruganti, et al. ( 1973). Peritoneal dialysis in the treat-
Harkin, K.R. and C.L. Gartrell ( 1996). Canine leptospirosis in New
ment of canine leptospirosis. Ati della Societa Italiana Delle Scienze
Jersey and Michigan: 17 cases ( 1990- 1995). IAm Anirm Hosp Assoc
Veterinairie 27: 377.
32: 495-501.
Peritoneal dialysis  305
Harvey, E.A. (2001). Peritoneal access in children. Perit Dial Int 21(3):
Phu, N.H., T.T. Hien, et al. (2002). Hemofiltration and peritoneal
5218-5222.
dialysis in infection-associated acute renal failure in Vietnam. N
Henrich, W.L.
L. and E.P. Paganini (1992). Dialytic support in ICU
Engl I Med 347( 121): 895-902.
nephrology. ASN short courses in the clinical practice of nephrology,
Posen, G.A. and J. Luisello (1980). Continuous equilibration peri-
Baltimore, p. 43.
toneal dialysis in the treatment of acute renal failure. Perit Dial Bull
Jackson, R.F. (1964). The use of peritoneal dialysis in the treatment of
1: 6-8.
uremia in dogs. Vet Rec 76: 1481.
Rentko, V.T., N. Clark, et al. ( 1992). Canine leptospirosis: a retrospec-
Jones, M., T. Hagen, et al. (1998). Treatment of malnutrition with
tive study of 17 cases. J Vet Intern Med 6: 235-244.
1.1% amino acid peritoneal dialysis solution: results of a multicenter
Rippe, B. (2007). Peritoneal dialysis: principles, techniques and ade-
outpatient study. Am J Kidney Dis 32: 761-769.
quacy. In: Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology, edited by I. Feehally,
Jorres, A. (2003). PD: a biological membrane and a non-biological
J. Floege, and R.J. Johnson, 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier,
fluid. Contrib Nephrol 140: 1-9.
pp. 979-990.
Kelly, K.T. (2004). How peritoneal dialysis works. Nephrol Nurs 31(5):
Ross, L.A. and M.A. Labato (2006). “Peritoneal dialysis.” In: Fluid
481-491.
Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Arnimal Practice, edited
Khanna, R., K.D. Nolph, et al. (1993). The Essentials of Peritoneal
by S.P. DiBartola, 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
Dialysis Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, p. 4.
pPp. 635-649.
Khanna R. (20oo) Peritoneal transport: Clinical implications. In
Rubin, I., Q. Jones, et al. (1983). A model of long-term peritoneal
Dialysis and Transplantation, Philadelphia, PA: WB Suanders,
dialysis in the dog. Nephron 35: 259-263.
Pp. 129-143.
 Shahar, R. and D.L. Holmberg ( 1985). Pleural dialysis in the manage-
ment of acute renal failure in two dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 187:
Assoc 131: 101-103.
952-954.
Kopple, J.D., D. Bernard, et al. (1995). Treatment of malnourished
Simmons, E.E., A.S. Lockard, et al. ( 1980). Experience with continu-
CAPD patients with an amino acid based dialysate. Kidrey Int 47:
s e j   s id e 
1216-1224.
anephric dog. Southwest Vet 33: 129-135.
Labato, M.A. (2000). Peritoneal dialysis in emergency and critical care
Sjoland, J.A., R.S. Pedersen, et al. (2004). Intraperitoneal heparin
medicine. Clin Tech Small Amim Pract 15(3): 126-135.
reduces peritoneal permeability and increases ultrafiltration in peri-
Lameire, N., W. Van Biesen, et al. ( 1998). Experimental models in peri-
toneal dialysis patients. Nephrol Dial Trarsplart 10: 1264- 1268.
Stelin, G. and B. Rippe ( 1990). A phenomenological interpretation of
Lane, I.F. and L.J. Carter ( 1997). Peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis.
the variation in dialysate volume with dwelltime in CAPD. Kidrey
In: Veterinary Emergency Medicine Secrets, edited by W. Wingfield.
Int 38(3): 465-472.
Philadelphia, PA: Hanley and Belfus, pp. 350-354.
terWee, P.M. and FJ. van Ittersum (2007). The new peritoneal dialysis
Lane, I.F, L.J. Carter, et al. (1992). Peritoneal dialysis: an update
solutions: friends only, or foes in part? Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 3(1 1):
on methods and usefulness. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Ther-
604-612.
apy XI, edited by ID. Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
Tjiong, H.L., T. Rietveld, et al. (2007). Peritoneal dialysis with solutions
pp. 865-870.
Langston, C.(2003). Advanced renal therapies: options when standard
during oral feeding. Clin I Am Soc Nephrol 2: 74-80.
treatments are not enough. Vet Mod 98: 999-1008.
Thornhill, JA., J. Hartman, et al. ( 1984). Support of an anephric dog
Maaz, D.E. (2004). Troubleshooting non-infectious peritoneal dialysis
for 54 days with ambulatory peritoneal dialysis and a newly designed
issues. Nephrol Nurs I 31(5): 521-533.
peritoneal catheter. Arn I Vet Res 45(6): 1156-1161.
Maiorca, R., E.F. Vonesh, et al. (199l). A multicenter, selection-
Thornhill, J.A., S.R. Ash, et al. (1980). Peritoneal dialysis with the
adjusted comparison of patient and technique survivals on CAPD
Purdue column disc catheter. Mim Vet 20: 27-33.
 and hemodialysis. Perit Dial Int 1l: 1l18-127.
Tzandoukas, A.H. ( 1996). Peritonitis in peritoneal dialysis patients: an
Maiorca, R. and G. Cancarini ( 1990). Experiences with the Y-system.
overview. Adv Ren Replace Ther 3(3): 232-236.
Contermp Issue Nephrol Perit Dial 22: 167-190.
Vaden, S.L., JI. Levine, et al. ( 1997). A retrospective case control of acute
Martin, J., G. Sansone, et al. (2003). Severe peritoneal mononucleosis
renal failure in 99 dogs. I Vet Intern Med 11: 58-64.
associated with icodextrin use in continuous ambulatory peritoneal
Van Biesen, W., R. Vanholder, et al. (1998). Recent developments in
dialysis. Adv Perit Dial 19: 191-194.
McIntyre, C.W. (2007). Update on peritoneal dialysis solutions. Kidney
218-231.
Int 71: 486-290.
Vardhan, A., M.M. Zweers, et al. (2003). A solutions portfolio approach
Mendoza, S.A., W.R. Griswold, et al. (1993). Acute peritoneal dialysis
in critically ill infants and children. Dial Transplant 22: 129-132.
Wong, W., E. McCall, et al. ( 1996). Acute renal failure in the paediatric
Moberly, J.B., S. Mujais, et al. (2003). Pharmacokinetis of icodextrin 
intensive care unit. N Z Med I 109: 459-461.
in peritoneal dialysis patients. Kidney Int 62: S23-S33.
Wojick, K., D. Berube, et al. (2008). Clinical technique: peritoneal
Nagy, JA. and R.W. Jackman (2000). Peritoneal membrane biology.
In: Dialysis and Transplantation. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
small mammals. I Exotic Pet Med 17(3): 181-188.
Pp. 109-128.
Yerram, P., A. Gill, et al. (2007). A 9-year survival analysis of
Passadakis, P.S. and D.G. Oreopoulos (2007). Peritoneal dialysis in
the presternal Missouri swan-neck catheter. Adv Perit Dial 23:
patients with acute renal failure. Adv Perit Dial 23: 7-16.
90-93.
Peng, S.J, C.s. Yang, et al. ( 1998). The clinical experience and natural
Young, G.A., A.M. Brownjohn, et al. (1987). Protein losses in patients
course of peritoneal catheter exit site infection among continu-
receiving continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. Nephron 45:
  i d s rd re 
196-201.
71-78.
31
Renal transplantation
Christopher A. Adin
History of renal transplantation
 of foreign protein fragments or antigens derived from
the donor tissue. This work, for which George Snell and
Vascular surgery techniques and suture materials that
Baruj Banacerraf shared the Nobel Prize for Physiology or
enabled surgeons to perform canine and feline renal
 Medicine in 1980, was performed using simple genetic
transplantation were described in experimental models
studies in mice. Later studies showed that the mouse
as early as 1902 (Ullman 2002). Unfortunately, it would
MHC complex (termed H-2) was analogous to the MHC
ss  q s n e a
region in other vertebrates. The MHC has now been
medications would allow this experimental technique to
characterized in several species and given specific names:
become a viable treatment for end-stage renal disease in
the human leukocyte antigen (HLA), dog leukocyte anti-
any species (Borel et al. 1994). Since that time, renal allo-
gen (DLA), and feline leukocyte antigen (FLA). In each
 graft transplantation has been the undisputed treatment 
species, the MHC locus one of the largest and most vari-
of choice in human beings with end-stage renal disease
able (polymorphic) regions of the genome, with up to 40
(ESRD). Renal transplantation in animals has shown sim-
histocompatibility alleles identified for each gene (Abbas
ilar benefits, although cost, availability, and lower success
et al. 1991). Inheritance of the MHC phenotype follows
rates in companion animals have caused organ transplan-
Mendelian genetic patterns, and alleles from both parents
tation to be more slowly adopted. Recent decreases in the
are expressed codominantly in the MHC phenotype of
cost of chronic drug therapy opening of new transplant
the offspring. Despite the extreme polymorphism noted
centers, and constant advances in immunosuppression
in the MHC, breeding studies showed that after 20 gen-
 have continued to improve the environment for clinical
erations of sibling matings, mice became syngeneic, with
application of renal transplantation in cats and dogs with
identical genes occurring even at the variable MHC loci
ESRD. Nonetheless, the majority of data related to clin-
(Abbas et al. 1991). Transplanted tissue from these genet-
ical renal transplantation has been obtained in human
 ically identical individuals is termed an isograft and typ-
beings and this information will be included through-
ically results in no rejection episodes. In contrast, tissue
out the chapter as a background for the current status of
that is transplanted from one outbred strain to another
veterinary renal transplantation.
is termed an allografft and will nearly always stimulate a
vigorous immune response. Later studies have described
the structure of the MHC complex, a peptide chain with
Transplantation immunology
cytoplasmic, transmembrane, and cel surface regions.
The major histocompatibility complex
There are two distinct classes of MHC (class I and class
II MHC) and the majority of the extracellular portion
 Our current concepts of transplantation immunology
of these molecules is nonvariable. The extreme polymor-
hinged upon the characterization of the major histocom-
phism of the MHC is reflected primarily in the composi-
 patibility complex (MHC), a genetically-determined,
tion of a small peptide binding region. This region binds
cell-surface protein that is involved in the recognition
to protein fragments that range from 8-20 amino acids in
length (Dallman 2001). A variety of nucleated cell types
will express the MHC I and II proteins on the cell surface,
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
306
Renal transplantation  
307
Azothioprine
IL-2
mycophenolic acid (MPA)
IL-2
Antiger
MHC
TCR
Bcell
Plasma cells Antibodies
IL-2
Mycophenolic acid (MPA)
APC
Effector
IL-2
Tcells
Antigen
Costimulation
APC
recognition
CD80/86
CD28MAb
CD3MAb
CD28
TCR
(OKT3)
Tcell
ZAP-70
PIP2
IP3
ER
Cyclophilin]
Figure 31.1 Humoral and cellular immune response to the allograft are depicted above, with specific antigen dependent and antigen-
independent (costimulation) activation of the T-cell is depicted below. Specific drug and monoclonal antibody targets are indicated in red.
Abbreviations: APC, antigen-presenting cel:T, T-cell:Th, T-helper cel IL-2,interleukin-2:IL-2, interleukin-2 messenger RNA; MHC, major
triphosphate: PIP2. phosphatidylinositol diphosphate: MAb, monodlonal antibody
These MHC proteins combine with protein fragments
including dendritic cells from the recipient, as well as on
from the cell itself to form a complex that is bound by
the vascular endothelium of the graft itself. CD4+ and
specific T-cell subtypes, depending upon the MHC class
CD8+ T-cells are activated by this interaction with the
involved (see Figure 31.1). MHC I-antigen complexes 
antigen-presenting cell, MHC complex and antigen, ini-
are bound by CD8+ T-cells, while MHC II-antigen com-
tiating a variety of intracellular signaling pathways, caus-
plexes are bound by CD-4+ T-cells (Welsh and Bunce
 ing cytokine production, expression of new cell-surface
2001). It is important to note that T-cells are not activated
proteins, and alteration in gene expression that mark the
by free or soluble antigens, only antigen that is bound to
beginning of graft rejection (Figure 31.1). In addition
the MHC protein will stimulate an immune response.
to the antigen-dependent activation provided by the T-
Studies using knockout mice with selective deletion of
cell receptor signal, complete activation of CD4+ T-cells
either MHC I or MHC II have shown that incompat-
appears to be dependent on a nonantigen-dependent
s s sd  jo s   
 interaction between the cell-surface proteins on the T-
cient to produce the rejection response (Dallman 2001).
 cell (CD28, CTLA4) and those on the antigen-presenting
 The immune response to the transplanted organ is actu-
cell (CD80, CD86) as seen in Figure 18.1. Without this
ally aided by a group of professional antigen-presenting
 process, termed “co-stimulation” the CD4+ T-cell can
cells (also known as dendritic cells) that arise from the
enter a state of anergy or inactivity, halting the immune
donor organ and rapidly migrate into the recipient's lym-
response of this cell line (Welsh and Bunce 2001).
phoid tissue where they present foreign antigen to host
Each aspect of T-cell activation has been very carefully
T-cells. MHC is also expressed by a variety of other cells,
studied, with interest in discovering specific targets for
308   Therapeutic techniques
pharmacologic intervention that would prevent T-cell
transplant immunosuppression that has been noted in
activation and allograft rejection, while preserving the
this species, as well as the susceptibility to viral infec-
function of other aspects of the immune system.
tion (Yuhki et al. 1989). On the basis of the clinical suc-
Immunosuppressive strategies using T-cell receptor anti-
cess of renal allograft transplantation between nontissue
bodies, costimulation blockade, inhibitors of intracel-
lular signaling, or cytokine production have provided
blood typing and crossmatch evaluation. Cats are typi-
effective means of prolonging allograft survival in vari-
cally blood typed, then cross-matched to three potential
ous models of transplantation (see Figure 31.1), although
 donors. Because of the prevalence of blood type A in the
 no one area of intervention can provide complete pro-
domestic short-haired cats in the United States, identi-
tection at this time.
fication of a compatible donor has proved to be simple
 unless an exotic or imported feline recipient is being con-
MHC typing
sidered.
The dog MHC has been comparatively well-studied,
There is great variability in the complexity of MHC
due to the fact that the dog is considered an excellent
 genetics in different species. The human MHC (termed
translational model for solid organ transplant studies.
the human lymphocyte antigen) has three major alle-
The use of dogs as an animal model is based on the fact
les: HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-DR, which are encoded
that the complexity of the MHC in the dog is similar to
 on chromosome 6. Each individual has one copy from
that of the human being, making the dog a very strin-
each parent, producing a total of 6 alleles (Dallman
gent model for evaluation of new immunosuppressive
2001). Within the human population, there is incredi-
regimes. Four discrete DLA genes have been identified
ble polymorphism within these HLA genes, with 50-100
in the dog (DLA-12, -88, -79, and -64) with a significant
different variants for each major antigen (Abbas et al.
degree of homology between the canine DLA and human
1991). Since family members share similar genetic mate-
HLA genes (Graumann et al. 1998; Wagner et al. 1999).
rial, the chances of a partial or complete HLA match
Of the four DLA genes, DLA-88 has the greatest degree
are high. However, on the basis of the polymorphism at
of polymorphism, with 44 alleles for this gene identified
each allele, there is a very low chance of finding a per-
 in 63 breeds (Graumann et al. 1998). The other class I
fect match in the general population. As expected, graft
MHC loci are less polymorphic, with less than 12 alle-
survival is directly proportional to the number of com-
les each (Wagner et al. 1999). However, each dog has
     o s 
 a total of eight genes (four from each parent), making
recipient pair, with the greatest graft retention occurring
the total level of genetic diversity quite high. As in the
in donor recipient matches for all 6 HLA (Cecka 1998).
human transplant recipient, tissue matching is required
 It is interesting to note that occasional transplants per-
to achieve maximal success in the dog. Genes are inher-
formed between identical twins have demonstrated that
ited in a Mendelian pattern and are expressed codomi-
histocompatibility is even more complex than described
nantly, so a genetically related donor is preferred. Because
herein, including additional proteins termed minor his-
 of genetic selection that has occurred in pure-bred dogs,
tocompatibility antigens. While minor histocompatibil-
a donor and recipient combination that arose from the
ity antigens may prove to be of some significance in
s      oe   
fine tuning of immunosuppression in the future, current
degree of tissue matching. Since it is not common to
concepts in clinical transplantation are focused on the
identify a related dog that is both suitable and available
more powerful response to MHC reactions as described
for organ donation, most of the efforts at transplantation
above.
 in dogs with naturally occurring renal disease have been
The cat MHC (also known as the FLA) has not been
 focused on achieving successful immunosuppression in
well characterized, since this species is rarely used as an
nontissue-matched renal transplant recipients. Despite
experimental model for human diseases. However, it has
the challenges in finding a tissue-matched donor, it is
 long been known that transplant immunosuppression
still recommended that clinicians perform tissue cross-
is relatively simple to achieve in the cat, and there was
 matching between canine transplant candidates and any
some suspicion that there was minimal polymorphism at
 potential donors. Using this information will allow the
the MHC loci in this species. Surprisingly, DNA restric-
 transplant team to make a more individualized plan for
tion analysis actualy showed that there was significant
immunosuppressive regime and will allow the collection
polymorphism in the cat MHC, with 24 alleles detected
of data on the prognostic significance of tissue match-
amongst 12 family groups of cats (Winkler et al. 1989).
ing in canine transplant recipients. Both canine and
However, cDNA isolated from a cat T-cell lymphoma line
feline histocompatibility testing is available through the
revealed that there is only a single heterogenous MHC 1
Immunohematology and Serology Laboratory at Michi-
locus in the cat, a finding that may explain the ease of
 gan State University ( msuhla.chm.msu.edu).
Renal transplantation   309
Immunosuppression
After entering the nucleus, the corticosteroid receptor
complexes stimulate synthesis of IrB-α, a protein that
The science of immunosuppression has blossomed over
inhibits the transcription NF-kB, essentially halting this
the past 40 years with constant refinement in protocols
important early step in the generation of cytokines that
that have the ultimate goal of preventing allograft rejec-
stimulate several aspects of the inflammatory response
tion and with minimal effect on the recipients? response
(Tizard 2004). As such, corticosteroid have both anti-
to infectious agents or neoplasia. Experience has demon-
inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects. Anti-
strated that single-agent drug protocols are less success-
inflammatory effects of corticosteroids are mediated
ful in preventing rejection and produce more side-effects
through inhibition of arachidonic acid metabolism by
when compared to combined immunosuppressive proto-
phospholipase A. Immunomodulatory effects are broad
cols using multiple drug classes. The classic combination
and have not been completely elucidated, though they
 shq ue u pde uq si i sinp go
include inhibition of both cell-mediated and humoral
the past three decades is termed “triple drug therapy"
immunity. Specific mechanisms include suppression of
and includes a glucocorticoid, a calcineurin inhibitor
IL-2, IL-6, and interferon-, inhibition of lymphocyte
and an antimetabolite. Various other nonpharmacologic
proliferation, and inhibition of monocyte migration to
means have been added in more recent years, includ-
areas of inflammation (Ray and Sehgal 1992; Palio-
ing monoclonal antibody therapies and nonmyeloabla-
gianni and Boumpas 1995; Calandra and Bucala 1997).
tive irradiation. Immunosuppressive protocols that have
Increased rate of rejection episodes occurred in a small
been reported in clinical or experimental studies in non-
trial involving substitution of a cyclooxygenase inhibitor
matched cats and dogs have paralleled efforts in human
(ibuprofen) for glucocorticoids, suggesting that it is the
beings, with selected protocols summarized in Table 31.1.
immunosuppressive rather than the anti-inflammatory
Specific drugs and immunosuppressive techniques are
 properties of these drugs that are most important in
described in more detail later.
maintenance antirejection therapy (Kreis et al. 1984).
However, the anti-inflammatory effects of glucocorti-
Glucocorticoids
 coids are believed to be of value in the treatment of acute
Corticosteroids, in combination with azathioprine, con-
rejection (Abrahamian and Cosimi 2001).
stituted the first effective immunosuppressive protocol
A variety of forms of glucocorticoids are available for
that fueled efforts in renal allograft transplantation from
 oral or parenteral administration. Traditionally, high-
the 1960s until the addition of cyclosporine in the 1980s.
dose injectable methylprednisolone is used human renal
Steroids act through a variety of complex mechanisms to
 transplant recipients during the immediate perioper-
aid in preservation of allograft function. Corticosteroids
ative period. Patients are then switched to low-dose
are absorbed into the cytoplasm where they bind with
(20 mg/day) prednisone or prednisolone for oral
intracytoplasmic receptors before entering the nucleus.
maintenance therapy. Glucocorticoid therapy causes a
Table 31.1 Selected immunosuppressive protocols and survival times using nonmatched kidney donors
 Species
Immunosuppressive protocol
Study type
Median survival
Complications
Reference 
1e
 Prednisolone
Clinical
22 months
Opportunistic infection,
Mathews 1996
Cyclosporine
Nonmatched
neoplasia
Dog
Clinical
<2 months
Thromboembolism,
Gregory 2006
Cyclosporine
Nonmatched
 opportunistic infection
Azathioprine
Dog
RADTS
Clinical
8 months
Opportunistic infection
Mathews 2000
Glucocorticoid
Cyclosporine
Azathioprine
Dog
 Myeloablative radiation
Experimental
>200 days
Mild chronic rejection.
Broaddus 2004
Donor bone marrow transplant 
Gl toxicity
Glucocorticoid
Mycofenolate
Cyclosporine
Abbreviations: RADTS, Rabbit anti-dog thymocyte serum; Gl, gastrointestinal
310   Therapeutic techniques
variety of serious side effects in human beings, rang-
suppression, and occasional hepatotoxicity. Antimetabo-
ing from avascular necrosis of bone to gastric ulcers,
lites were found to be sufficient to produce long-term
diabetes, obesity, cataracts, and pancreatitis (Shun-Shin
acceptance of allografts and are now included as part of 
et al. 1990; Isoniemi et al. 1993; Slakey et al. 1997; Morris
a combination therapy that would include a corticos-
2001). Because of the severity and frequency of compli-
teroid component and a calcineurin inhibitor, such as
cations associated with steroid therapy, steroid-sparing
 cyclosporine. Although other more potent antiprolifera-
or steroid-free protocols have been the major focus in
tive agents are now available, the low cost of azathioprine
transplantation immunology for the last 20 years (Rajab
will likely encourage the continued use of this drug for
et al. 2006; Aoun et al. 2007; Matas 2009).
many years to come (Morris 2001).
Fortunately, cats have proven to be far more toler-
-        
ant of chronic glucocorticoid therapy. Dosage and taper-
mercaptopurine and other inactive metabolites, which
ing schedule in cats has been purely empirical, with an
are excreted in the urine. Xanthine oxidase is one of
initial twice-daily dose of oral prednisolone (2.5-5 mg
the major enzymes involved in azathioprine metabolism,
every 12 hours) tapering to once daily treatment after
 and co-administration of azathioprine with allopurinol
1-3 months. Long-term therapy with 2.5-5 mg/day is
 greatly reduces the dose requirement for azathioprine.
often continued for the remainder of the post-transplant 
Azathioprine is myelotoxic in cats and must be used with
period, unless evidence of hyperglycemia and diabetes 
 great caution. Because of this risk and the relative success
occurs. In cats that develop diabetes following renal trans-
of simple two-drug immunosuppression using corticos-
plantation, steroid administration is either decreased or
teroids and cyclosporine, azathioprine is not typically
 discontinued and insulin therapy is used, as needed, to
used in feline renal transplant recipients. Nonetheless,
control the hyperglycemic state (Case et al. 2007). Dogs
azathioprine has been used at a dose of 0.3 mg/kg once
 are far less tolerant of chronic high dose steroid therapy
every 3 days, to supplement standard cyclosporine and
and are known to manifest many of the side effects seen
prednisolone therapy in cats with high risk or organ rejec-
tion due to inflammatory bowel disease (Gregory 2009).
protocols are typically pursued, with initial doses of 10
 Unlike the cat, prednisolone and cyclosporine alone do
mg/kg methylprednisolone at the time of surgery, fol-
not provide long-term survival of renal allografts in the
lowed by oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg per day (Mathews
dog. Accordingly, azathioprine has been used as part of
et al. 2000; Gregory et al. 2006). Steroid dosage is halved
a three-drug protocol in dogs receiving unmatched renal
 monthly, then discontinued after 3 months (Gregory et al.
allografts (Gregory et al. 2006). In this study, rejection was
2006).
effectively prevented in all dogs, although mortality due
 to thromboembolism and excessive immunosuppression
were extremely high.
Azathioprine
Azathioprine, a purine synthesis inhibitor, is an
Cyclosporine
antimetabolite that is relatively specific for T-cell and B-
cell proliferation. The concept of applying a purine syn-
Cyclosporine was arguably the first example of a selec-
 thesis inhibitor as a selective immunosuppressive agent 
 tive immunosuppressive agent, with the primary effects
was based on the observation that certain people with
of this drug being conveyed on the T-helper cell, a nec-
congenital defects in purine biosynthesis suffered from
essary component in the organ rejection response. The
severe T- and B-cell deficiencies and immunosuppres-
 cyclosporine polypeptide is derived from the natural fun-
sion (Allison et al. 1975). Unlike other cell lines, T- and,
dod anbun e seu pue wunioui unipooodhoi sng
to a lesser extent, B-cells rely on de-novo synthesis of
 molecular structure with two distinct protein binding
purines for DNA and RNA synthesis (Allison et al. 1977).
surfaces (Tizard 2004). In the cytoplasm, this structure
Azathioprine was produced in 1960 as a derivative of the
 antiproliferative agent 6-mercaptopurine in an effort to
intracellular receptor, and calcineurin, a serine-threonine
achieve antiproliferative effects without the toxicity noted
phosphatase that is involved in the intracellular, calcium-
after 6-MP administration (Elion et al. 1960a, 1960b).
 dependent signaling cascade (Figure 31.1). Through this
Azathioprine (Figure 31.1) was shown in experimental
action, cyclosporine effectively prevents transcription of
models to have efficacy in preventing organ rejection
through inhibiting T-cell proliferation and decreasing
 ing an essential step in the activation of the cytotoxic
production of interleukin-2 (Morris 2001; Bach 1975),
T-cell response (Figure 31.1).
Cyclosporine is available in several preparations,
vious antimetabolites. Nonetheless, azathioprine contin-
including oral liquid, oral capsules, and intravenous
ues to carry risks ofgastrointestinal toxicity, bone marrow
forms. Use of the original oil-based formulation
Renal transplantation   311
(Sandimmune?, Novartis AG) has been largely replaced
rare in both species, although excessively high drug lev-
by use of a microemulsified version of the drug (Neoral,
els (>1000 ng/mL) will cause acute vomiting, lethargy,
Novartis AG), which has been shown to have improved
and azotemia. Long-term side effects from cyclosporine
bioavailability and more predictable absorption after oral
administration include gingival hyperplasia, hypertri-
administration (Pollard et al. 2003; Acott et al. 2006).
chosis (especially around the paws), diabetes, and chronic
Generic forms ofthe drug are also available, but clinicians
 allograft nephropathy.
Cyclosporine is metabolized by hepatic glucuronida-
fied” form of cyclosporine when prescribing from an out-
tion and is therefore subject to drug interactions with
side pharmacy, as dosing is not equivalent between the
medications that alter the rate of hepatic glucuronida-
various formulations. In addition, some physicians ques-
tion. Co-administration of cimetidine, ketoconazole,
tion whether generic drugs, which have been confirmed
imipenem, and metoclopramide may increase whole
as "bioequivalent”" to Neoral? by single dose studies in
bloodlevels ofthe drug, while phenobarbitalor trimetho-
healthy volunteers, will have identical pharmacokinetics
prim sulfa may cause decreased drug levels by upregulat-
in transplant recipients (Pollard et al. 2003). While sev-
ing hepatic glucuronidation (Davidson and Plumb 2003 ).
These interactions have been manipulated in attempts to
now available for use in animals and humans, the oral
decrease drug costs in patients receiving cyclosporine,
liquid preparation (100 mg/mL) allows the most pre-
with ketoconazole being the most frequently reported
  e q   so  se 
substance (McAnulty and Lensmeyer 1999). Ketocona-
dogs and cats. Many animals will consider this drug to
zole provides not only a cost benefit by decreasing
be unpalatable, and it is recommended that the liquid is
dosage requirements for cyclosporine, but may also have
placed in an empty gelatin capsule before oral adminis-
tration (Gregory 2009).
desirable in the transplant recipient population and
Because of variability in pharmacokinetics between
allows conversion to a once a day dosing regimen in
individual animals and variability over time within indi-
some cats (McAnulty and Lensmeyer 1999). Adminis-
vidual animals, drug monitoring is performed through-
tration of ketoconazole at a dose of 10 mg/kg once daily
out the course of cyclosporine therapy. Ideally, transplant
 increased the whole blood concentrations of cyclosporine
recipients would be admitted to the hospital for mul-
1.8 fold at 12 hours and increased terminal phase elim-
tiple blood samples over a several hour period, allow-
ination half life from 10.7 to 22.2 hours in normal cats
ing determination of an “area under the curve” or AUC
(McAnulty and Lensmeyer 1999). A similar study in nor-
for cyclosporine that provides a more accurate repre-
 mal dogs showed that administration of a low therapeu-
sentation of total exposure to the drug. However, the
tic dose of ketoconazole (13.6 mg/kg per day) allowed
cost and inconvenience associated with the AUC method
for a 75% reduction in cyclosporine dose levels and an
has led to the measurement of a single cyclosporine
estimated 57.8% cost savings compared to cyclosporine
whole blood concentration at the 12-hour trough period
alone (Dahlinger et al. 1998).
(Gregory 2009). Measurement of whole blood concen-
trations (rather than plasma concentrations) using the
Tacrolimus
HPLC technique provides the most consistent results.
Samples should be obtained in an EDTA tube and
Tacrolimus (also known as FK-506) is a calcineurin
shipped according to instructions provided by the
inhibitor that prevents T-cell activation by interrupting
laboratory.
calcium-dependent signaling, similar to the actions of
Dosing in cats is typically begun at 3-4 mg/kg every
cyclosporine. However, Tacrolimus is 50-100 times more
12 hours and is then modified based on 12-hour trough
 potent than cyclosporine in T-cell inhibition, when eval-
cyclosporine blood levels. Target range for cyclosporine
uated in vitro (Bierer et al. 1993; Kulkarniet al. 2001 ). On
whole blood levels in cats range from 300-500 ng/mL
the basis of the increased potency of this drug, tacrolimus
 in the initial perioperative period and are decreased to
Ad e se oq sq un u pde uq s
250-400 ng/mL after 4-6 months. In dogs, cyclosporine
immunosuppressive agent for high risk recipients and
dose varies from 5-10 mg/kg every 12 hours and target 
-oalan uesio pios jo spouad sunp suase anosai, e se
 drug levels are based on the desired level of immunosup-
tion. In fact, Tacrolimus has replaced cyclosporine as
pression. Whole blood cyclosporine levels of 500-600
  n  ss  
ng/mL are required for initial post-transplantation
transplantation and is used in approximately 1/3 of all
immunosuppression in the dog, while lower levels may
renal allograft recipients (Kulkarni et al. 2001 ). Unfortu-
be sufficient for management of immune-mediated dis-
nately, clinical experience with application of tacrolimus
eases such as perianal fistulas (Mathews et al. 2000).
in veterinary medicine is limited and experimental
Serious side effects of cyclosporine administration are
studies suggest that anorexia, intestinal intussusceptions,
312    Therapeutic techniques
and a potentially fatal vasculitis will limit the applications
initial dosage to 5 mg/kh every 12 hours and eliminated
of this drug in dogs (Gregory 2009).
further mortality (Broaddus et al. 2006).
Antilymphocyte serum
Mycofenolate mofetil
 Mycofenolate mofetil (Cellcept, Roche) is a prodrug for
Initial efforts at drug-free immunotherapy involved the
development clinical protocols for preparation of anti-
 mycofenolic acid, a powerful immunosuppressive agent
 produced by several Penicillum species (Smak Gregoor
lymphocyte serum (ALS) for use in dogs and human
beings (Starzl et al. 1967). The protocols began simply,
et al. 2000). This drug was actually discovered as early
culturing human lymphoblasts and injecting them into
        1
horses or rabbits to produce a serum that contained a
immunosuppression until it was rediscovered in the early
1980s by researches searching for novel purine biosyn-
polyclonal mixture of antiglobulins, many of which arose
from the previous immune activity of the animal rather
thesis inhibitors (Mathew 2001). Mycofenolate mofetil
 than being specific to the human lymphocyte antigens.
Because of the importance of the T-cell in allograft rejec-
 phate dehydrogenase (IMPDH), a rate-limiting enzyme
 tion, more specific antithymocyte serum (ATS) prepara-
in the process of de-novo purine synthesis, leading to
T- and B-cell-specific immunosuppression (Figure 31.1).
tions were performed, using cadaveric human thymus
 or thymic tissue obtained during cardiac surgery on
Interestingly the immunosuppressive effects of MMF are
live donors. Even after fractionation of the IgG compo-
reversible by supplementing the patient with guanosine,
nents, only a small portion of the product is considered
the product of IMPDH (Mathew 2001).
to be specifically reactive with target human lympho-
Mycofenolate is available in oral capsules (250 or 500
cytes (Greco et al. 1983) with the remainder being unde-
 mg), oral suspension, or injectable solution. In human
sired components. Initial proof of efficacy for ATS was
beings, mycofenolate is nearly completely absorbed after 
 obtained in humans that were experiencing acute rejec-
oral ingestion and is converted to the active metabo-
tion episodes. ATS has subsequently been incorporated
lite, mycophenolic acid, or MPA. MPA is metabolized
into the induction protocol of many institutions and is
by glucuronidation into MPAG, an inactive metabolite,
which is then excreted in the bile and urine. However,
still applied today, despite the disadvantages of a poly-
clonal preparation. Commercial products are available
considerable enterohepatic circulation occurs, with con-
for use in human beings, while a few institutions prepare
version of MPAG back into the active metabolite MPA.
their own ATS (Abrahamian and Cosimi 2001). Approx-
Mean half life is 17.9 hours after oral ingestion, and the
drug is typically administered twice daily in human trans-
a cutaneous hypersensitivity reaction and chills, termed
plant recipients. Mycofenolate mofetil is not considered
a “first dose reaction”" which lessens during subsequent
potent enough to be used as a single agent for transplant 
doses. This reaction, which can also manifest as a more
immunosuppression. The most common application of 
severe anaphylactic reaction, is caused by increases in
MMF is as a substitute for azathioprine in triple drug
IL-2, IL-3, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor, and complement
regimens that include a corticosteroid and calcineurin
activation (Ferran et al. 1990).
inhibitor (Mathew 2001). In very rigorous studies of drug
 Rabbit anti-dog thymocyte serum (RADTS) has been
efficacy, MMF has been shown to reduce the risk of graft
 applied in clinical dog transplants for a number of years
rejection by 60% compared to similar protocols using
with some success (Mathews et al. 2000). RADTS is pre-
azathioprine (Halloran et al. 1997). Toxic effects are sim-
ilar to those of azathioprine, affecting the gastrointestinal
pared according to a protocol that was developed by Dr.
Karol Mathews at Guelph (Mathews et al. 1993) and is not
system or causing leukopenia through its actions on T-
commercially available at this time. A median survival of
and B-cells.
18 months was obtained in 15 dogs, using a standard
Clinical experience with mycofenolate in animals is
triple-drug therapy (cyclosporine, prednisone, and aza-
limited, although Broaddus and other reported the suc-
thioprine) supplemented with intramuscular RADTS. To
cessful use of MMF (10 mg/kg, every 12 hours) in com-
date, this study represents the most successful survival
bination with total body irradiation, cyclosporine, and
data generated in dogs with naturally occurring disease
corticosteroids in an experimental transplantation model
(Table 31.1}
using healthy dogs ( Table 31.1). Experience in this model
did suggest that MMF has the potential for significant
Monoclonal antibodies
gastrointestinal toxicity, causing death in two dogs when
administered at full dosage immediately following total
As technologies improved, monoclonal antibodies to
body irradiation. The authors subsequently decreased
T-cell antigens have been developed, allowing specific
Renal transplantation  313
targeting of T-cell subsets without the nonspecific
“mantle” port that included the cervical and mediastinal
immunoglobulins contained in polyclonal preparations
lymph nodes and an "inverted Y" port that covered the
(Figure 31.1). The first successful product, termed OKT3,
aortic iliac and pelvic lymph nodes (Kaplan 1980). Over
was directed against the CD3 protein, an essential com-
time, researchers noted that TLI was associated with a
ponent of T-cell receptor signaling. OKT3 causes nearly
decrease in number of circulating T-cells, suppression of 
total elimination of circulating T-cells by opsonization
mixed lymphocyte reactivity testing in vitro, and induc-
and complement-mediated lysis or by reticuloendothelial
tion of suppressor T-cells, but these individuals did not
uptake within minutes of IV administration (Abra-
experience a greatly increased risk of opportunistic infec-
hamian and Cosimi 2001). Clinical trials of OKT3 have
tions (Goffinet et al. 1972; Waer et al. 1984). Subsequent
shown it to be as effective as ATS and OKT3 is now the
application of TLI with concurrent donor bone mar-
treatment of choice in steroid-resistant acute rejection
row transplantation was found to induce hematopoietic
episodes. Despite the high success rate in treating refrac-
chimerism and tolerance in mouse models of organ trans-
tory rejection with OKT3, a relatively large number of
plantation (Strober et al. 1979). This exciting work has
recipients ( 10-15%) will experience a repeated rejection
been somewhat tempered by results in human clinical
episode 46 weeks after OKT3 therapy. Repeat treatment
renal transplantation, in which only a small fraction of
with OKT3 is associated with a risk of sepsis due to exces-
the transplant recipients go on to develop tolerance ( Waer
sive suppression of cell-mediated immunity, increased
2001). Widespread application of TLI and donor bone
risk of viral disease, and lymphoproliferative disorders.
marrow transplantation has also been slowed by the risks
Other potential risks of therapy include a first-dose effect
 of graft versus host disease, a rare but life-threatening
similar to that described for ATS, including chills, fever,
complication of bone marrow transplantation.
diarrhea, and respiratory difficulty ( Thistlethwaite et al.
Experimental application of TBl and donor bone mar-
1988; Abrahamian and Cosimi 2001). With the explosion
row transplantation has been performed in association
 in discovery of T-cell associated proteins, a wide array
with renal allograft transplantation in non-matched dogs
of other monoclonal antibodies are being developed for
(Broaddus et al. 2006). Although this technique was
clinical use. Two drugs that are already approved and in
highly successful in preventing rejection when combined
clinical use are basiliximab and daclizumab, monoclonal
antibodies against the IL-2 receptor that were prepared
organ-specific tolerance in this species.
by forming chimeric antibodies based on a "humanized"
mouse antibody (Abrahamian and Cosimi 2001). Since
IL2 is an essential step in activation of cytotoxic T-cells,
Selection of appropriate candidates
induction therapy with these medications have proven
Timing
to be very effective in rejection prophylaxis, decreasing
1-year rejection rate by 28% in controlled studies (Kahan
 Because of the fear of applying an expensive, invasive
et al. 1999). Because of their mechanism of action, IL2Ra
 procedure in client-owned animals, veterinarians will
 are not typically used only in prophylaxis rather than
often reserve consideration of renal transplantation until
in treatment of active rejection. Clinical application of
an animal has reached a life-threatening crisis. Unfortu-
monoclonal antibody therapy has not been described in
nately, veterinary transplant centers require several weeks
the dog or cat, and there is some question as to whether
to identify a compatible donor, to perform thorough
the humanized antibody will be reactive to canine or
screening of the transplant candidate and to assemble a
feline T-cells without some modification (Sandusky et al.
team to perform the procedure. In both human and ani-
1986). Success of applying these techniques in veterinary
mal transplant recipients, there is mounting evidence that
medicine will hinge on availability of canine and feline
early intervention will minimize the risk of perioperative
monoclonal reagents that equate to those already com-
a1 ie na zi ans d m pe s
mercially produced for experiments in mice and clinical
Anonymous 1993; Obrador and Pereira 1998; Abecassis
application in humans.
et al. 2008). Pet owners must also be given adequate time
to consider the responsibilities of caring for a transplant
 recipient prior to making a decision to perform this pro-
Irradiation
cedure. As a result, it is recommended that veterinarians
Nonmyeloablative irradiation has been applied in a vari-
offer referral to a transplant center early in the course of
ety of forms, including total lymphoid irradiation ( TLI)
 treatment; as soon as the animal begins to show the signs
 or total body irradiation ( TBl). Original application of
 of weight loss, poor appetite, or anemia that indicate the
TLI was performed as an adjunct therapy for Hodgkin's
onset of end-stage disease. In humans with chronic renal
a od omi ppnu pue shq un u sss
disease, it is recommended that a patient is referred to
314 Therapeutic technigues
a nephrologist for management when serum creatinine
Table 31.2 Diagnostic screening of renal transplant candidates
concentrations exceed 1.5 mg/dL for a woman or 2.0
mg/dL for a man (Anonymous 1993). Early referral to a
 laboratory tests
Complete blood count 
 Serum biochemistry panel
nephrologist has been to shown to improve management
Cardiovascular
 Thoracic radiographs
of hypertension and metabolic derangements. While it
Electrocardiography
has been clearly shown that pre-emptive transplantation
Echocardiography
(transplantation as an initial therapy) improves patient
Indirect blood pressure
survival and decreases morbidity, organ availability and
Infectious
FeLV/FIV test (cat)
delayed referral has limited the number of patients that
Heartworm antigen test (dog)
receive pre-emptive transplant to only 2.5% of those with
Toxoplasma IgG and IgM
chronic kidney disease (Abecassis et al. 2008). Unfortu-
Urinary
Urinalysis
nately, there have been no comparable objective criteria
Urine culture (cystocentesis)
for referral of dogs or cats with CKD. Rather, authors
Abdominal ultrasound
have focused on levels of azotemia that would preclude
 Urine protein:creatinine
transplantation due to severe uremia, indicating that ani-
Immune
Blood typing
mals with blood urea nitrogen concentrations (BUN)
Major/minor blood crossmatch to donor
Tissue histocompatibility testing (dog)
in excess of 100 mg/dL or serum creatinine concentra-
Endocrine
Thyroid evaluation
sis may require hemodialysis prior to transplantation.
Abbreviations: FeLV, feline leukemia virus: FIV, feline immuno-
Ideally, transplantation would be performed in an ani-
deficiency.
 mal with stable chronic renal disease that has just begun
to decompensate despite appropriate medical therapy.
(14%), and diabetes mellitus (11%) being the most com-
Objective guidelines for timing of surgical intervention
mon (Briggs 2001).
will require outcome analysis in a large number of cats in
 In cats, the vast majority of transplant candidates are
order to determine the appropriate time for referral.
diagnosed with chronic tubulo-interstitial nephritis, with
no known primary injury (Adin et al. 2001b). Several
Screening of candidates
animals with ethylene glycol toxicity have been treated
using renal allograft transplantation, although the acute,
Identification and screening of candidates for renal trans-
oliguric nature of this syndrome can make medical sup-
 d  q i p i si uod
port during the pre-transplant evaluation very challeng-
provider. Renal transplantation and associated immuno-
ing. Initially, clinicians questioned the wisdom of renal
suppression can pose great risk in a patient with an
allograft transplantation in cats suffering from calcium
underlying cardiovascular, neoplastic, or infectious dis-
oxalate urolithiasis, due to fears of stone formation in
ease. In addition, the involvement of a live donor in vet-
the allograft (Aronson et al. 2006). Although allograft 
erinary transplantation necessitates that only the most
urolithiasis did occur in 26% of 19 cats in one retro-
viable candidates are selected for transplantation. Thus,
 spective study, survival in this group of cats (median
 thorough systemic diagnostic evaluations are performed
to identify any comorbid diseases prior to referral. A list
Table 31.3 Diagnostic evaluation of renal transplant donors
of diagnostic evaluations for the recipient and donor are
summarized in Tables 31.2 and 31.3, with more specific
laboratory tests
Complete blood count
information on each area of interest to follow.
 Serum biochemistry panel
Infectious
FeLV/FIV test (cat)
Heartworm antigen test (dog)
Primary disease
 Toxoplasma IgG and IgM
Urinary
Renal allograft transplantation may be used to treat
Urinalysis
Urine culture
nearly all forms of chronic renal disease (Chapter 48),
Abdominal ultrasound, IVP, or CTA
presuming that the chances of recurrent primary dis-
Immune
Blood typing
ease are low and that the process of immunosuppres-
Major and minor crossmatch to donor
sion will not increase the risk of further complications.
Tissue histocompatibility testing (dog)
In human beings, renal transplantation is performed to
treat a wide variety of congenital and acquired condi-
Abbreviations: FeLV, Feline leukemia virus: FIV, Feline immunod-
tions, with glomerulomephritis (26%), reflux nephropa-
eficiency virus: Ig. immunoglobulin: IVP, intravenous pyelogram:
thy/interstitial nephritis (16%), polycystic kidney disease
CTA, computerized tomography with angiography.
Renal transplantation  315
602 days) appears to parallel that of the general
et al. 200la). Currently, cats and dogs that are candi-
transplant-population (Aronson and Drobatz 2000).
dates for renal transplantation are screened with thoracic
While the 5 year recurrence rate of glomerulonephritis
radiographs and echocardiography In animals with overt
is only 2% in human transplant recipients (Raine et al.
evidence of congestive heart failure, or subjective evi-
1992; Briggs 2001), there is no data available regarding
dence of primary hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, trans-
the use of renal allograft transplantation in dogs or cats
 plantation is not recommended. However, focal areas of
with protein losing nephropathies (Chapter 53). Typi-
hypertrophy or mild left ventricular hypertrophy are not
cally, PLN in dogs and cats are the result of systemic
considered contraindications for renal transplantation.
immune disease or hereditary conditions, and renal fail-
 It is hoped that more specific genetic tests for feline and
ure is only a secondary, end-stage complication. As such,
renal allograft transplantation is not commonly practiced
available in the future, allowing clinicians to distinguish
in the treatment of animals with glomerulonephritis or
 between primary cardiac disease and uremic cardiomy-
amyloidosis. Historical or current bacterial urinary tract
opathy that may be ameliorated by renal transplantation.
infections are common in animals that are being evalu-
ii e pue uodsu yeoe len  pne
Hypertension
treated as a relative contraindication for transplantation.
Most transplant centers will require that bacterial cul-
Post-transplant hypertension (Chapter 68) is a common
problem in human renal transplant recipients and is
plantation. Animals with an active infection are treated
 often the result of multiple factors, including activation
with antimicrobials based on culture and sensitivity test-
of the renin-angiotensin system by the retained native
ing. After confirmation of a negative bacterial culture,
kidneys, renal artery stenosis in the allograft, or drug-
animals are subjected to a cyclosporine challenge con-
related factors (Curtis 1993). Other investigators have
sisting of a 2-week period of immunosuppression using
shown that increased activation of the sympathetic ner-
microemulsified cyclosporine orally at a dose of 4 mg/kg,
vous system continues after renal transplantation, despite
twice daily. Urine samples are obtained by cystocentesis
resolution of uremia (Hausberg et al. 2002). Unlike pri-
and re-cultured at the completion of this period to verify
mary or essential hypertension, transplant-related hyper-
 that infection does not recur during immunosuppressive
tension is often treatable using simple interventions, such
drug therapy.
 as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or inter-
ventional radiologic techniques, to treat native kidney
hypertension or vascular stenoses, respectively. On the
Cardiovascular disease
basis of the potential for cardiovascular complications
Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death
and end organ damage, identification and medical man-
in human renal allograft recipients. Initially, human
agement of preoperative hypertension is indicated prior
transplant candidates with evidence of left ventricular
to scheduling transplantation surgery (Briggs 2001).
failure were declined due to expectations of a poor out-
 In veterinary transplantation, severe acute hyperten-
come after renal transplantation. Further study has con-
d s d ad    
firmed that chronic renal failure is a risk factor for cardiac
to be one of the most frustrating and common complica-
events in patients with atherosclerosis and coronary heart
tions, with a significant effect on perioperative neurologic
 disease. However, physicians are becoming increasingly
complications and mortality. One study documented that
 si   s   n e
18% of cats presenting for renal transplantation had pre-
ESRD are not related to coronary heart disease, but rather
operative hypertension, but 62% experienced acute post-
are the result of left ventricular dysfunction produced by
 operative hypertension (Kyles et al. 1999). Occurrence
chronic uremia and hypertension. Interestingly, left ven-
of postoperative hypertension was associated with an
 tricular failure secondary to uremic cardiomyopathy can
 increased risk of neurologic complications after surgery.
 Interestingly, preoperative administration of propranolol
(Zolty et al. 2008).
did not appear to prevent the occurrence of this com-
A study performed in feline renal transplant candi-
plication (Kyles et al. 1999). Preoperative hypertension
 dates at the University of California, Davis, revealed sim-
does not appear to be a good predictor for the occur-
ilar findings. Cardiac murmurs and abnormal echocar-
rence of postoperative complications in cats, and we
 diographic findings associated with the left ventricle and
 do not have any strong data to support specific ther-
septum were common in cats with chronic renal dis-
 apy aside from standard antihypertensive medications.
ease, but were not associated with an increased risk of
Typically, animals are screened using indirect arterial
congestive heart failure after renal transplantation (Adin
blood pressure measurements obtained in a controlled
316   Therapeutic techniques
environment. Animals with preoperative hypertension
FeLV virus infection folowing renal transplantation in
are treated with amlodipine at a dose of 0.05 mg/kg (0.025
a cat (Gregory et al. 1991). Screening for neoplasia in
mg/lb) orally every 12-24 hours, until the desired effect
the dog and cat population is not nearly as detailed as
is achieved.
the previously described protocols used in aged human
beings. Rather, veterinarians perform standard imaging
including 3-view thoracic radiographs and abdominal
Neoplasia
ultrasonography, while using the history and physical
Neoplasia is the number 2 cause of death in human trans-
examination to guide any further specific testing. In ani-
plant recipients, second only to cardiovascular events
 mals with active or historical malignancy, medical man-
(Wong and Chapman 2o08). A number of studies have
agement of renal disease is typically recommended, as
documented that human renal transplant recipients
 the risks of transplant related immunosuppression may
experience a 3-5-fold increase in incidence of neoplasia
 outweigh the benefits of improved renal function.
when compared to an age-matched population ( Wong
and Chapman 2008). Neoplasms may be de-novo, recur-
Infectious disease
rent, or transferred via the transplanted organ and patho-
Because of the requirement for life-long immunosup-
physiology is widely believed to be the related to chronic
pression following renal allograft transplantation, infec-
immunosuppression. Recently, a more specific analysis
tious diseases are one of the most common and serious
of the data has suggested that it may only be viral-related
sequelae in transplant recipients. In particular, transplant
tumors that occur with increased incidence in transplant
candidates with preexisting viral, bacterial, fungal, or
recipients, while epithelial neoplasms occur at a similar
 parasitic diseases have an extremely high rate of morbid-
frequency to that seen in a control population (Grulich
et al. 2007), adding more evidence to the argument that
initiated (Chapters 27, 71-74). On the basis of the data
immunosuppression is the key factor in the pathophys-
available in human transplant recipients, patients are
iology of this complication. Screening of human can-
didates for renal transplantation is largely extrapolated
routinely screened for urinary tract infections, respira-
tory infections including tuberculosis, cytomegalovirus,
from screening procedures used in the general popu-
human immunodeficiency virus, and hepatitis B and C
lation, including sigmoidoscopy to evaluate for colo-
(Browne and Kahan 1994). Sporadic case reports in the
rectal cancer, cytologic screening for cervical cancer, total
body skin evaluation by a dermatologist, mammography.
veterinary literature demonstrated that disseminated
toxoplasmosis or mycobacterial infection could also
prostate specific antigen tests, and imaging to evaluate
develop in companion animals after initiating immuno-
for intracavitary neoplasia (Wong and Chapman 2008).
 suppressive therapy, with uniformly fatal consequences
On the basis of the relationship between viral disease
(Bernsteen et al. 1999; Griffin et al. 2003; Nordquist and
and post-transplant neoplasia, viral testing is considered
Aronson 2008). A large retrospective study has recently
essential in screening human renal transplant recipients.
confirmed suspicions that infectious diseases are more
Prognosis for human transplant recipients with malig-
common than the individual case reports would suggest,
nant cancer is very poor as definitive chemotherapy is
with 47 infections being documented in 43 of 169 cats
often precluded by comorbidities that increase the risk of
(Kadar et al. 2005). Infections included bacterial (25/47),
cardiac toxicity, renal toxicity, or other drug interactions
(Wong and Chapman 2008). As a result, human beings
viral (13/47), fungal (6/47), and protozoal (3/47) eti-
ologies; overall, infection was the second most common
with active malignant neoplasia are not considered can-
cause of death in this series, comprising 14% of deaths
didates for renal transplantation.
(Kadar et al. 2005). Similar problems have occurred in
Although limited information is available for veteri-
 canine renal transplants. After overcoming problems
 with acute rejection, recent studies have shown an oppo-
 de-novo neoplasia, with an incidence of 9.5% in a popu-
site trend, with excessive immunosuppression leading to
 opportunistic infections in nearly all patients and causing
lation of 95 cats (Wooldridge et al. 2002). Lymphoma is
significant mortality in canine transplant recipients that
the most frequently identified type of neoplasia in feline
survive the perioperative period (Mathews et al. 1994;
 transplant recipients, and it is interesting to hypothesize
Gregory et al. 2006).
whether this may be related to latent viral infection as
 in the human population. Although FeLV and FIV status
Donor selection and screening
at the time of diagnosis was not reported in these cats
-noop Pip 1odau snoad e (zooz 1e 1a s8puploom)
Although renal allograft transplantation is the treatment
of choice for most human beings with ESRD, a severe
Renal transplantation  317
shortage of donor organs exists, leaving a large number of
is now given to screening for species-specific infectious
candidates to receive chronic hemodialysis therapy while
 diseases, as significant mortality has been documented in
awaiting a suitable donor organ. Previously, only a small
donors following transmission of infectious diseases to
portion of human renal transplant recipients received
the immunosuppressed organ recipient, either directly or
organs from living donors (typically, a spouse or pri-
via the transplanted tissue (Bernsteen et al. 1999; Kadar
mary relative), while the majority received organs from
et al. 2005). In addition to standard screening, some cen-
cadaveric donors through a matching system termed the
ters have adopted the use of CT angiography to specifi-
United Organ Sharing Network. Despite ongoing recruit-
cally identify anomalies in renal vasculature that may aid
ment, the number of cadaveric donor organs has stabi-
 in surgical planning or exclusion of some donors, based
lized while the number of candidates waiting for donated
   sa  s    
 organs increases with each year. To compensate for this
2003).
increasing shortfall, recruitment of living donors has
increased, and in the year 2001, the use of living donors
surpassed the use of cadaveric organs for the first time.
Renal transplantation
sd   oq  s 
Preoperative care of the recipient
screening before surgery. Patients are carefully screened
for evidence of familial renal disease, hypertension, or
The recipient is admitted to the transplant center 2-3
 other factors that may increase their risk of undergoing
days prior to the planned surgery. A preoperative check-
unilateral nephrectomy. In addition, donors are screened
list is often helpful in assuring that all aspects of patient
for infectious diseases, pyelonephritis and neoplasia, in
care are achieved. Re-evaluation ofcomplete blood count,
an effort to prevent the spread of disease to the recipient.
 serum biochemistry panel, and any remaining screening
In veterinary medicine, transplant centers lack the
  d d      
financial resources to support a cadaveric organ sharing
ral are completed at this time. Blood crossmatch to the
network Thus, all reported clinical organ transplants in
 donor is repeated, to ensure that incompatibility has not
dogs and cats have been performed using living donors.
developed as a result of previous transfusion therapy.
 Because of the simplicity of the feline MHC gene and
The donor is also crossmatched to three additional units
the relative ease of preventing allograft rejection in cats,
of whole or packed red blood cells, to allow for rapid
veterinary transplant centers have focused on the use
 therapy in the perioperative period. The transplant team
of unrelated donor cats that are obtained from research
may choose to place a multilumen jugular catheter prior
colonies. Owners of the recipient are required to sign an
to surgery, in order to allow for repeated blood sampling
agreement that the donor cat will be provided with a good
in the perioperative period.
home for the remainder of their life, regardless of the out-
Preoperative fluid therapy is planned based on the
come for the recipient. It would seem that the use of cats
results of the most recent laboratory evaluations. Most
from animal shelters would be even more desirable, but
animals will have chronic, polyuric renal failure and are
policies at many humane societies prevent the adoption
diuresed using crystalloids at a rate of 5-6 mL/kg/h until
of animals for the purpose of organ donation, even if
the time of surgery. Because ofthe frequency ofelectrolyte
the cat is destined for euthanasia. The use of cats from
disorders in renal transplant candidates, careful consider-
animal shelters also carries significant risk of transferring
ation is given to choice of a magnesium-containing fluid
infectious diseases to the immunosuppressed recipient.
and intravenous fluids are supplemented with potassium
After any potential donors are identified, blood typing
chloride, as indicated (Wooldridge and Gregory 1999).
and crossmatching with the recipient are performed to
Whole blood transfusions are administered to achieve
a packed cell volume of 30% prior to surgery (Gregory
as to the availability of any related donors, to improve
et al. 1992), with up to 73% of cats requiring transfusion
the chances of histocompatibility. If no related donors
therapy to achieve this goal (Valverde et al. 2002). Care-
are available, then identification of an unrelated donor
ful monitoring of hydration status and daily evaluation
is pursued as described for cats, attempting to identify
of body weight should be performed in an effort to avoid
an animal that is in need of adoption and would benefit
volume overload. Animals with advanced renal disease
from the provision of an excellent home. The potential
have little ability to increase urine output to compensate
 donor is then screened using physical examination, lab-
for large volumes of fluid administration and concurrent
oratory testing and imaging, to ensure that there is no
administration of blood products with large volumes
evidence of renal disease, anatomic anomalies, or infec-
of crystalloids may produce volume overload. Indirect
tious diseases that would preclude safe performance of
arterial blood pressure is evaluated after acclimatization
unilateral nephrectomy ( Table 31.3). Particular concern
 to the hospital environment. Antihypertensive therapy
318  Therapeutic techniques
with propranolol is prescribed for cats with evidence of
et al. 2002). Mannitol (0.5-1 g/kg, IV) is administered
 preoperative systemic hypertension (systolic BP >170
immediately after the release of the vascular clamps to
mmHg) to prevent end organ damage associated with
 induce diuresis after reperfusion. Perioperative anticoag-
chronic severe hypertension. Unfortunately, prophylactic
ulant therapy with standard heparin or enoxaparin have
treatment of feline renal transplant recipients with pro-
been described in dogs, based on the high rate of throm-
pranolol did not prevent episodes of malignant hyperten-
boembolic complications in a recent study (Gregory et al.
sion in the postoperative period and prophylactic ther-
2006). Interestingly, perioperative use of anticoagulants
apy does not appear to be indicated at this time (Kyles
 does not appear to be necessary in cats, as thromboem-
 et al. 1999). If cyclosporine is initiated prior to the pro-
bolism has been exceedingly rare in this species.
cedure, 12-hour trough whole blood levels are measured
after 2-4 doses, to allow adjustment in the perioperative
Donor
period (Gregory et al. 1992).
Anesthesia for the donor is performed as described
Anesthesia
above for the recipient. Pre-medication and induction
 d s   d 
Recipient
the recipient to minimize total anesthetic time in the
recipient if concurrent harvest and organ implantation
Debilitated candidates for renal transplantation are
 are planned (Gregory et al. 1992; Mathews and Gregory
affected by a number of metabolic, fluid-balance, and
1997). When cold storage techniques are used, the
nutritional abnormalities, leading to a variety of chal-
donor harvest and recipient organ implantation may be
lenges in anesthetic management. Despite these chal-
separated by 3.5-7 hours, allowing staged procedures
lenges, severe intraoperative anesthetic complications are
(McAnulty 1998). Mannitol is administered to the donor
rare, with 0% mortality in nearly all reported case series
cat approximately 20-30 minutes prior to harvest of the
(Valverde et al. 2002). Typically, cats are premedicated
 organ, to induce diuresis and aid in free radical scav-
with a combination of an anticholinergic (atropine 0.02
enging during ischemia (Gregory et al. 1992; Mathews
mg/kg or glycopyrrolate 0.005 mg/kg) and an opioid
and Gregory 1997).
(oxymorphone 0.05 mg/kg) (Valverde et al. 2002). In the
published studies describing anesthetic management of
Donor nephrectomy
veterinary transplant recipients, the vast majority of ani-
mals were induced using isoflurane and oxygen admin-
In human renal allograft transplantation, many centers
istered via a face mask, rather than with an injectable
are now offering laparoscopic or laparoscopic-assisted
product (Gregory et al. 1992; Mathews and Gregory
donor nephrectomy to minimize patient morbidity. In
1997; McAnulty 1998; Valverde et al. 2002). Cephazolin,
veterinary patients, donor nephrectomy is still performed
22 mg/kg, IV, is administered to the recipient within
through a standard ventral midline approach, with an
20 minutes of induction for antimicrobial prophylaxis.
incision extending from the xyphoid to pubis to allow
Anesthetic maintenance is achieved using isoflurane and
 for retrieval of the entire length of ureter during kidney
oxygen, with supplemental crystalloids (5-10 mL/kg/h)
harvest. Preferably, the left kidney is harvested, as this kid-
and dopamine infusion (2.5-7ug/kg/minute) titrated to
 ney has the longest renal vein segment. The abdominal
maintain systolic blood pressure >80 mmHg (Valverde
 cavity is explored to confrm normal anatomy and then
et al. 2002). Controlled ventilation was performed in 87%
the vascular pedicle to the left kidney is bluntly dissected.
of cats, with supplemental atracurium (0.25 mg/kg load-
 Intermittent topical application of lidocaine (20%) is per-
ing dose followed by 0.1 mg/kg IV) used in a small num-
formed to prevent vasospasm. If exposure of the vascular
ber of animals for intraoperative paralysis ( Valverde et al.
pedicle reveals duplication of the renal artery or a major
2002). Patient warming is performed at all times after
arborization within 5 mm of the renal pelvis, the con-
induction using a circulating warm water blanket over
tralateral kidney is examined and harvested. If bilateral
the operating table and a forced air warming device sur-
renal vascular anomalies exist, surgical techniques are
rounding the torso. Monitoring during anesthesia should
available to address the anomalies (Aguilo et al. 1991;
include ECG, indirect blood pressure, core body temper-
Singh et al. 2008), although application of these tech-
 ature, blood gas analysis, pH, and electrolytes, including
niques has not been described in reports of renal trans-
sodium, potassium, and ionized calcium. Intraoperative
plantation in dogs or cats. After confirmation of suitable
administration of sodium bicarbonate (base deficit X
vascular anatomy, the kidney is dissected free from its
0.3 x body weight in kg) and 10% calcium chloride
 retroperitoneal attachments, and the ureter is isolated
(0.2 mL/kg, IV over 20 minutes) are performed to cor-
 down to the level of the bladder, carefully preserving the
rect acidosis and hypocalcemia, respectively (Valverde 
 ureteral blood supply. When dissection is complete, the
Renal transplantation  319
renal artery and vein are ligated with suture or using
dogs (Mathews et al. 2000). Native nephrectomy may also
hemostatic clips placed close to the aorta and vena cava.
be indicated in isolated cases when expansile polycystic
The vessels are then transected distal to the ligations. The
 disease has become advanced enough to hinder exposure
renal artery is flushed immediately with either chilled
during surgery.
heparinized saline (Gregory et al. 1992) or with preserva-
tion solution if cold storage is planned (McAnulty 1998).
The renal artery is dilated with forceps and the adventi-
Vascular anastomosis
tia is trimmed from the distal 1 mm of the vessel. The
Feline renal transplantation requires a moderate level of
kidney is then immersed in chilled heparized saline or
 microsurgical skill and is typically carried out using an
 n n s st  s 
operating microscope, due to the smallvesseland ureteral
for implantation.
lumen diameters in this species. Originally, feline renal
transplantation was carried out using simple interrupted
sutures to perform an end-to-end arterial anastomosis
Allograft implantation
of the recipient external iliac artery to the donor renal
Although a number of refinements have been made to
artery (Gregory et al. 1992). The renal vein was then
the procedure of renal allograft implantation in cats
anastomosed in an end-to-side fashion with the com-
and dogs, the initial concept remains unchanged. The
mon iliac vein. This technique led to acceptable results
allograft is implanted in a heterotopic location, typi-
in the majority of recipients, although a small number
cally in the caudal abdomen. This location allows easy
of cats suffered from ischemic injury to the left pelvic
access to a vascular supply from the aorta or its termi-
limb, with neuropraxia occurring in 12% of cats and
n s o d ss u si p s r
severe ischemic necrosis requiring pelvic limb amputa-
bladder for implantation of the ureter without excessive
tion in one cat (Mathews and Gregory 1997). End-to-end
tension. As in human renal transplantation, most vet-
arterial and venous anastomoses may also be performed
erinary transplant surgeons have adopted the policy of
 using a microanastomotic device as depicted in Figure
maintaining the native kidneys to provide a mechanism
31.2 (Newell et al. 1999). This technique has the great
 of fluid elimination in the case of delayed graft function
 advantage of speed and technical simplicity when com-
 or during later episodes of acute rejection. One group
 pared to hand suturing, but retains the possibility for
has described prophylactic bilateral native nephrectomy
serious ischemic complications in the left pelvic limb.
to prevent the development of refractory hypertension in
The end-to-end anastomosis also creates some technical
Figure 31.2 An rapid and technically simple technique for vascular anastomosis in cats involves the use of an anastomotic coupling
device. Because of the configuration of the device, an end-to-end technique using the external iliac artery and common iliac vein is
required. The vessel ends are pulled through the anastomostic rings, and the vessel is pulled over the sharp pegs, everting the endothelium
at the level of the anastomosis. The device is then engaged, compressing the anastomotic rings into apposition.
320  Therapeutic techniques
Figure 31.3 An aorto-caval side-to-side vascular anastomotic technique is used for renal allograft implantation in cats and small dogs.
The caudal abdominal aorta and vena cava are exposed, and partial ocdlusion dlamps are placed between the gonadal vessels and the
caudal mesenteric arery. Separate continuous suture patterns are run for the front and back wall inset). Note that the native kidneys are
retained in most recipients.
difficulties when there is a disparity in the donor and
tostomy causing partial to complete ureteral obstruction
recipient vessel diameter. A later modification of the
for a period of 3-7 days in most animals (Mehl et al.
technique was proposed to address these concerns (Fig-
2005). Initial attempts at renal transplantation in the cat
ure 31.3), using an end-to-side anastomosis technique,
were performed using a “drop-in" technique that was
in which the donor artery and vein were anastomosed
described in human beings. This technically simple tech-
directly to the caudal abdominal aorta and vena cava,
nique involves tunneling the ureter through the bladder
respectively (Bernsteen et al. 1999). Aortocaval anas-
wall, then tacking the ureteral mucosa to the bladder
tomosis preserves the circulation to the pelvic limbs,
 mucosa with two sutures, making no efforts to achieve
without ligation of any terminal arterial branches, and
perfect mucosal apposition (Kochin et al. 1993). Unfor-
ischemic times are similar to previously described hand-
tunately, clinical application of this technique led to a
sutured anastomotic techniques.
34% incidence of postoperative ureteral obstruction due
 In large dogs, collateral circulation to the pelvic limb
to granulation tissue formation, requiring surgical revi-
has prevented any serious complications associated with
sion of the ureteral implantation site in 12 of 37 ureters
ligation of the iliac vessels and a standard iliac artery
(Mathews and Gregory 1997). On the basis of this expe-
  i s  s  
rience, the ureteral implantation technique was mod-
with an end-to-end technique. The renal vein is sutured
 ified (Figure 31.5), performing mucosal apposition of
end-to-side with the recipient common iliac vein (Figure
 the implanted ureter and bladder using an interrupted
31.4). In dogs less than 10 kg, one group has described 
 technique with 8-0 Nylon (Gregory et al. 1996). After
the application of the modified caudal aortic and caval
 switching to the mucosal apposition technique, no fur-
anastomosis technique that is used in cats (Gregory et al.
 ther ureteral revision surgeries were required (Mathews
2006). Because of the larger vessel diameter in most dogs,
 and Gregory 1997). Since this time, two alternative tech-
vascular anastomosis can be carried out using magnifying
niques have been presented for neoureterocystostomy
loupes (3.5x) rather than with an operating microscope.
in cats: an extravesicular implantation technique (Mehl
et al. 2005) and a ureteral papilla implantation technique
(Hardie et al. 2005). Both of these techniques (Figure
Ureteral implantation
  e  n d   (t
The small luminal diameter of the feline ureter has
tomy, reducing both operative morbidity and time.
made ureteral implantation one of the more challeng-
Ureteral implantation in dogs can be performed
ing aspects of renal transplantation, with neoureterocys-
 using any of the aforementioned mucosal apposition
Renal transplantation 321
Figure 31.4 An end-to-end anastomosis is performed in larger dogs, using the recipient external iliac artery. The anastomosis is
triangulated using three interrupted sutures placed at 120 degree intervals around the vessels, then the vessels are apposed using an
Aedsip oi anp 'uaa e uouuo aui pue uaa eual aui asooiseue ot pasn si anbuuat apis-o-pua snonuuo  uaned paidnuau
in vessel diameters.
 techniques. Although the larger luminal diameter of the
Nephropexy
After implantation in the caudal abdomen, the renal
problems in canine renal transplantation, neoureteros-
allograft is attached only at the vascular pedicle and
ureteral implantation sites, allowing the kidney to torse
in this species as well (Barthez et al. 2000).
on this attachment point and cause vascular occlusion
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 31.5 Ureteral implantation may be performed using either intravesicular (a) or extravesicular techniques (b) and (c). Intravesicular
neoureterocystostomy (a) requires that a large cystotomy incision is made to allow direct visualization of mucosal apposition. In
extravesicular neoureterocystostomy, the ureter is spatulated and sutured to the bladder mucosa from the exterior. A seromuscular tunnel
is then created by cdosing the incision in the bladder wall (b). Implantation of the ureter may also be simplified by resecting a patch of
bladder wallduring harvest of the donor kidney (c).
322   Therapeutic techniques
and thrombosis. Clinical reports of kidney torsion and
the immunosuppressed recipient and are warned against
vascular avulsion in several cats (Mathews and Gregory
any aggressive restraint of a fractious patient following
1997) have led to the empirical application of a vari-
surgery, which has caused avulsion of the vascular pedi-
cle in a small number of animals. Latex gloves are worn
formed by simply affixing the kidney directly to the
when treating the patient and a high level of aseptic tech-
adjacent transversus muscle and peritoneum using inter-
nique is maintained with use of the intravenous catheter
rupted, nonabsorbable sutures (Mathews and Gregory
and cleaning of the surgical sites. Analgesia is provided
1997). Alternatively, a ventrally based musculoperitoneal
with opioids as a continuous rate infusion or by inter-
flap may be elevated and sutured to the renal capsule
mittent bolus injections for 24-48 hours. Intravenous
(Bernsteen et al. 1999).
crystalloid therapy is initiated at a rate of 4-6 mL/kg/h
and is adjusted based on assessment of hydration. Urine
Enteropexy
output may be estimated by weighing absorbent pads
that are placed in the litter box and cage, although uri-
 Multiple reports have confirmed that intussusception is
nary catheterization is avoided to minimize the risk of
a frequent complication following renal allograft trans-
introducing a urinary tract infection. Bladder expression
plantation in the dog (Libro and Proto 1964; Kelly et al.
is strictly forbidden, to prevent avulsion of the vascular
1971; Du Toit et al. 1981; Finco et al. 1985; McAnulty
pedicle or ureteral implantation site. If oliguria or anuria
et al. 1989; Klinger et al. 1990; Kyles et al. 2003a). Postop-
is suspected, bladder size may be investigated using ultra-
erative intussusception is an exceedingly rare complica-
sound of the abdomen with gentle restraint. Postopera-
tion in this species, and the etiology for the increased
tive antibiotic therapy is performed using cefazolin (22
incidence seen in transplant recipients is not known,
mg/kg IV, every 6-8 hours) until oral medications are
although the administration of opioid analgesics appears
tolerated. Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid is continued orally
to significantly decrease the incidence of this complica-
for 1-2 weeks after surgery. Famotidine is administered
tion (McAnulty et al. 1989; Klinger et al. 1990). Prophy-
intravenously (0.5 mg/kg IV, every 12 hours) to prevent
lactic enteroplication has also been recommended follow-
 gastric ulceration and uremic gastritis. Feeding is initi-
ing renal transplantation in the dog (Kyles et al. 2003a).
 ated via the gastrostomy tube at 24 hours after surgery.
Postoperative intussusception has never been reported in
Caloric intake is limited to 33% of daily maintenance
feline renal transplant recipients; as a result, enteroplica-
requirements and then increased by 33% per day until full
tion is not currently performed in the cat.
maintenance requirements are being met. Daily intake
is divided into four or more feedings using a liquefied
Feeding device
diet. Initially, a renal diet is often required, but may be
 transitioned to a high caloric density recovery diet after
Renal transplant recipients are commonly
affected
by chronic nutritional deficiencies that will continue
azotemia has resolved.
throughout the perioperative period. Placement of a per-
Indirect arterial blood pressure is monitored hourly
 during the first 48 hours after surgery, with instructions
cutaneous feeding tube (esophagostomy or gastrostomy
tube) is typically performed at the time of surgery, if
to administer hydralazine (2.5 mg) subcutaneously if
the systolic blood pressure exceeds 170 mmHg. Recip-
not already present at the time of admission. Presence
 of a feeding tube facilitates maintaining caloric intake
ients are also serially examined for evidence of neuro-
logic abnormalities such as anisocoria, blindness, ataxia,
 after surgery and simultaneously provides a reliable route
for drug administration. The feeding tube is typically
obtundation, and seizures (Kyles et al. 1999). Detection
o ro   e s z u n
of neurologic abnormalities should prompt evaluation of
intake has returned to normal. After conferring with the
venous blood gas, electrolytes, osmolality, and blood glu-
- e d n   s s  
cose concentrations (Gregory et al. 1997). If no metabolic
profle silicone gastrostomy tube that will be maintained
cause for the signs is detected, mannitol may be admin-
 to improve compliance with long-term immunosuppres-
 istered (1-2 g/kg) IV, over 20 minutes.
sive drug administration.
Blood samples are obtained via the multilumen
 of blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concen-
Postoperative care
trations, packed cell volume, blood glucose and serum
 For the first 24-48 hours after surgery, the recipient is
electrolytes. Immunosuppressive therapy is performed
recovered in an intensive care unit facility with 24-hour
according to the protocol developed for the individ-
observation. Staff are carefully instructed about precau-
ual (Table 31.1) and a 12-hour trough sample for
tions with regard to transfer of infectious diseases to
 Cyclosporine analysis is obtained 24 hours after surgery
Renal transplantation  323
 rn h  s  a pd p
ing transplant immunosuppression. Veterinarians are
are between 350-500 ng/mL for cats or 500-600 ng/ml
also cautioned to avoid administration of any live virus
for dogs (Mathews et al. 1993; Mathews and Gregory
vaccines.
1997).
 Clients and veterinarians must be aware of medica-
n  ue  ps si p  jo a
going nephrectomy. Analgesia is provided using opioid
ord se ns sinp nd un si
analgesics, as for the recipient. Crystaloid therapy is typ-
bital will affect hepatic metabolism of cyclosporine via
ically performed at a rate of 4-6 mL/kg/h for 24 hours
the cytochrome P-450 pathway and may lower drug
after surgery and then discontinued when oral intake of
levels (Campana et al. 1996). On the contrary, dilti-
food and water is documented. Discharge of the donor 
azem or ketoconazole may inhibit hepatic metabolism
e ns ne sou  ie pd a e
of cyclosporine and will increase drug levels in recipi-
acclimatization of the donor to the home environment
ent (Wagner et al. 1988; Campana et al. 1996). Nephro-
before the recipient is released.
 toxic potential of aminoglycosides or trimethoprim sulfa
and concurrent use of these drugs is contraindicated
Home care
(Bennett 1986). In general, it is prudent for the refer-
Transplant recipients are discharged when azotemia has
ring veterinarian to contact the transplant coordinator
resolved and cyclosporine levels have been adequately
before administering any medication or vaccine that is
regulated to the desired therapeutic range. Total hospi-
 outside of the specified immunosuppressive regime.
 talization time ranges from 7 to 14 days, depending upon
the clinical condition of the recipient. Before discharge is
Follow-up visits
considered, the owners of the recipient are also instructed
Because of the long distances that owners travel to reach
to identify and contact a veterinary center that provides
veterinary transplant centers, the majority of follow-up is
24-hour care that is located in their local area. At the
typically performed by the local primary care veterinar-
time of discharge, clients are instructed on the measure-
ian. As a result, it is crucial this veterinarian becomes a
ment and administration of cyclosporine. The client is
well-educated and communicative member of the trans-
observed while administering the medications to reaf-
plant team. In particular, any problems must be recog-
firm compliance with medication administration after
nized early and pursued aggressively to allow rapid inter-
 discharge. Clients are also instructed on daily cleaning of
vention if needed. Follow-up visits for complete physical
the feeding tube entry site and on the preparation and
examination (including body temperature) and labora-
administration of food. Animals that experience delayed
tory evaluations occur weekly until drug levels and allo-
 graft function are supported as indicated by the level of
graft function are stabilized, then the interval between
ongoing azotemia.
visits is slowly increased to a maximum of 3 months. Vis-
its should be scheduled at a time that is 12 hours after
Precautions
the administration of cyclosporine and owners must be
reminded not to administer the medication until after
Immunosuppressive regimes used in renal transplanta-
the sample is obtained. Blood tests to be evaluated at
tion carry a number of potential hazards, including sus-
each visit will include a complete blood count, 12-hour
ceptibility to infectious diseases and specific drug inter-
trough cyclosporine level, and serum biochemistry panel.
actions. In general, owners are recommended to avoid
All results should be forwarded to the transplant center
boarding of transplant recipients in a kennel or animal
for evaluation to allow constant communication between
d s  s  
team members. Particular concern should be taken to
 such as Bordetella and Herpesvirus 1 have proven to
check the gastrostomy tube site for any evidence of oppor-
be serious or fatal complications in a number of dogs
tunistic infection; this is a frequent complication fol-
and cats (Mathews et al. 1994; Kadar et al. 2005). Cats
lowing surgery that can become life-threatening if not
must be maintained indoors to avoid bite wounds, expo-
addressed.
sure to feline leukemia or feline immunodeficiency virus,
and to ensure availability for consistent administration
Therapy for acute rejection
of immunosuppressive drugs. Animals undergoing pro-
phylactic dental cleanings should receive fluid diuresis
Acute rejection can be difficult to recognize and must
 and broad spectrum intravenous antibiotic therapy dur-
be differentiated from other causes of azotemia or
ing the anesthetic period. There is some question as to
anorexia. Common differentials include ureteral obstruc-
tion, cyclosporine toxicity, or sepsis. Acute rejection
324 Therapeutic techniques
occurs most frequently during the first 3 months follow-
Mathews and Gregory 1997; Adin et al. 2001b). Data
ing transplantation and is suspected when acute azotemia
indicate that outcomes are less successful in cats than in
occurs in coordination with sub-therapeutic levels of
human beings, with approximately 60% of cats surviv-
cyclosporine therapy. Clinical signs can be vague and
ing to 6 months (Adin et al. 2001b). Highest mortality
include inappetance, lethargy, and elevations in body
occurs in the perioperative period, and cats that survive
temperature (Mathews and Gregory 1997; Halling et al.
 past 1 year can experience long-term survival, with 42%
2004). The gold standard for confirmation of allograft
survival being maintained at 3 years after surgery (Adin
et al. 2001b). Delay in treatment may be a major contrib-
waiting for results of cyclosporine blood levels or biopsy
 utor to the decreased success seen in veterinary transplant
 reports wil incur an unacceptable delay in most cases,
and recipients are frequently treated for rejection while
 alternative to euthanasia, with cats having a mean serum
 diagnostic results are pending. Diagnostic ultrasound can 
creatinine concentration of nearly 8 mg/dL at the time of 
be helpfulin supporting a clinical diagnosis ofacute rejec-
transplantation (Adin et al. 2001b). Data are not available
tion in ruling out an obstructive etiology. However, serial
to indicate whether earlier intervention would improve
examinations of crosssectional area were the only reli-
outcome in cats.
 Causes of death included graft failure,
able indicator of rejection in cats (Halling et al. 2003).
infectious complications secondary to immunosuppres-
Serologic markers of oxidative stress were not useful as
 sion, and neoplasia. Of all factors analyzed, only recipient
indicators of acute rejection in cats (Halling et al. 2004).
 age was predictive of outcome, with increasing recipient
 Initial therapy for suspected rejection episodes involves
age having a significant negative effect on postoperative
intravenous administration of prednisolone sodium suc-
survival.
cinate, 10 mg/kg (4.5 mg/lb) every 12 hours. Clients are
The dog has been found to present the most rig-
also provided with an emergency dose of intravenous
orous challenges in clinical renal transplantation. As
cyclosporine and instructions for the referring veterinar-
noted previously, the canine MHC shows much greater
ian on administration of the drug in the event of acute
diversity when compared to that of the domestic cat,
rejection: 6.6 mg/kg (3 mg/lb) diluted in 20-100 mL 0.9%
 greatly increasing the likelihood of allograft rejection
NaCl and given over 4-6 hours, once daily until azotemia
when using non-related organ donors. After initial battles
resolves. Between 85-90% ofhuman transplant rejection
episodes are steroid responsive (Morris 2001), while the
long-term survival (> 100 days) has now been achieved in
reported response rate in cats is only 58% (Mathews and
 DLA mismatched research dogs using a variety of exper-
Gregory 1997).
imental protocols (Kyles et al. 2001; Kyles et al. 2002;
Bernsteen et al. 2003; Kyles et al. 2003b; Broaddus et al.
2006). Long-term survival has also been achieved in
Prognosis
recipients with naturally occurring disease using DLA-
To date, survival and quality of life after renal transplan-
matched related donors. Unfortunately, sibling donors
 tation has been highly variable between species. Human
 are rare and these clinical successes have not been repro-
renal allograft transplantation centers frequently report
duced using nonmatched dogs. Median survival in a
a l-year patient and kidney graft survival rate of 100%
recent clinical study using triple-drug immunosuppres-
(Aoun et al. 2007). These success rates are certainly a trib-
 sion (azathioprine, cyclosporine and prednisolone) was
ute not only to the great skills of the nephrologists and
18 days, with only 50% of dogs surviving past 2 months
surgeons that are involved in leading transplant centers,
(Gregory et al. 2006). Survival data from a second center
but also to their vast experience, with many perform-
using RADTS in addition to similar triple drug immuno-
ing 200-300 renal transplants per year. Human trans-
 suppressive regime was notably better, with a median sur-
plant centers also pool data, allowing critical comparison
vival of 8 months (Mathews et al. 2000). In both reports,
of medical versus surgical therapy in the treatment of
dogs that did survive long-term suffered from frequent
human ESRD. These analyses have clearly indicated that
 opportunistic infections, suggesting that these protocols
human renal transplant recipients have improved sur-
lead to excessive immunosuppression.
vival, better quality of life, and decreased medical costs
 in comparison to equivalent patients managed with med-
Ethics
ical therapy (Abecassis et al. 2008).
Unfortunately, available data for analysis of success in
Ethical considerations regarding renal transplantation
veterinary transplantation are limited. Most of the pub-
hinge upon the health and rights of the living kidney
lished information pertains to cats and has been derived
donor. In human beings, similar concerns have led to
from a single renal transplant center (Gregory et al. 1992;
extensive investigations of the health risks associated
Renal transplantation   325
with kidney donation. Long-term follow-up studies have
Acott, P.D., J.F. Crocker, et al. (2006). Evaluation of performance fac-
shown that unilateral nephrectomy has no significant
tors affecting two forrmulations of cyclosporine in pediatric renal
n sq   sa   a
transplant patients. Trarsplart Proc 38(9): 2835-2841.
Adin, D., W.P. Thomas, et al. (200la). Echocardiographic evaluation
Burgess et al. 1993); lifetime risk of renal failure is
of cats with chronic renal failure (abstract). I Vet Imtern Med 13(3):
extremely small in kidney donors (0.1%) and occurs at an
337A.
incidence that is similar to the general population (Hou
Adin, C.A., C.R. Gregory, et al. (200lb). Diagnostic predictors of com-
2000). There is only one report of donor follow-up per-
plications and survival after renal transplantation in cats. Vet Surg
taining to veterinary transplantation. This retrospective
30(6): 515-521.
Aguilo, I, O. Rodriguez, et al. ( 1991). Vascular anastomosis techniques
study reported normal BUN and serum creatinine con-
in renal transplants. Int Angiol 10(1): 39-43.
centrations in 15 donor cats at 2-5 years after unilateral
Allison, A.C., T. Hovi, et al. (1975). Immunological observations on
nephrectomy, and showed no evidence of mortality or
patients with lesch-nyhan syndrome, and on the role of de-novo
morbidity associated with kidney donation.
A separate consideration is that performing an elective
1179-1183.
surgery on a patient that is not a medical necessity may
Allison, A.C., T. Hovi, et al. ( 1977). The role of de novo purine synthesis
be interpreted to contradict the Hippocratic and veteri-
Anonymous. (1993). NIH consensus statement, morbidity and mor-
nary oaths. In human beings, any risks associated with
tality of dialysis. NIH Consens Statement 11(2): 1-33.
kidney donation are explained to the prospective donors
Aoun, M., P. Eschewege, et al. (2007). Very early steroid withdrawal in
 s q  sd ae go padse r, e 
simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplants. Nephrol Dial Trarsplant
argue against the ethical and legal considerations above.
22(3): 899-905.
Aronson, L.R. and K. Drobatz (2000). Hypercalcemia following renal
However, it has been debated that when a spouse, relative,
transplantation in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 217(7): 1034-1037.
or friend with appropriate histocompatibility matching
Aronson, L.R., A.E. Kyles, et al. (2006). Renal transplantation in cats
is identified, the pressures on that individual will likely
with calcium oxalate urolithiasis: 19 cases (1997-2004). I Arm Vet
create a situation in which the prospective donor cannot
Med Assoc 228(5): 743-749.
comfortably withdraw from the process. In canine and
 Bach, J.F. ( 1975). The mode of action of immunosuppressive agents.
Frort Biol41: 1-374.
feline transplantation, donors are typically obtained from
Barthez, P.Y., D.D. Smeak, et al. (2000). Ureteral obstruction after
research colonies or shelters and, after organ donation,
ureteroneocystostomy in dogs assessed by technetium TC 99 m
are provided with an excellent home. In most cases, these 
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) scintigraphy. Vet Surg
animals are being rescued from euthanasia. Nonetheless,
29(6): 499-506.
the animal organ donor does not have an ability to partic-
Bennett, W.M. (1986). Comparison of cyclosporine nephrotoxicity
ipate in the decision-making process, raising the ethical
with aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity. Clirn Nephrol 25(Suppl 1):
S126-S129.
concerns of some veterinarians. Much of the debate on
Bernsteen, L., C.R. Gregory, et al. ( 1999). Acute toxoplasmosis follow-
the ethics of donor nephrectomy has occurred in the
ing renal transplantation in three cats and a dog. IArm Vet Med Assoc
United Kingdom, where veterinary law prohibits surgical
215(8): 1123-1126.
 procedures that do not provide a demonstrable health
Bernsteen, L, C.R. Gregory, et al. (2003). Microemulsified
cyclosporine-based immunosuppression for the prevention of acute
benefit to the individual.
renalallograft rejection in unrelated dogs: preliminary experimental
Organization of an organ-harvesting network using
study. Vet Surg 32(3): 213-219.
nonliving donors is unlikely to be feasible in veterinary
Bernsteen, L., C.R. Gregory, et al. (1999). Comparison of two sur-
health care. However, the application of autogenous or
gical techniques for renal transplantation in cats. Vet Surg 28(6):
cell-based therapies, artificial organs, and other aspects
417-420.
of regenerative medicine would bypass many of these
Bierer, B.E., G. Hollander, et al. (1993). Cyclosporin A and FK506:
ethical considerations.
molecular mechanisms of immunosuppression and probes for
transplantation biology. Curr Opin Immunol5(5): 763-773.
Borel, J.F, C. Feurer, et al. ( 1994). Biological effects of cyclosporin A: a
References
new antilymphocytic agent. 1976. Agents Actions43(3-4): 179- 186.
Bouma, I.L, L.R. Aronson, et al. (2003). Use of computed tomography
Abbas, A.K., A.H. Lichtman, et al. (199l). Cellular and Molecular
renal angiography for screening feline renal transplant donors. Vet 
Imunology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Radiol Ultrasound 44(6): 636-641.
Abecassis, M., S.T. Bartlett, etal. (2008). Kidney transplantation as pri-
Briggs, I.D. (200l). The recipient of a renal transplant. In: Kidrey
mary therapy for end-stage renal disease: a national kidney founda-
Transplartatiorn: Principles and Practice, edited by PJ. Morris, 5th
tion/kidney disease outcomes quality initiative (NKF/KDOQITM)
edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 45-59.
conference. Clin I Am Soc Nephrol 3(2): 471-480.
Broaddus, K.D., D.M. Tillson, et al. (2006). Renal allograft histopathol-
Abrahamian, G.A. and A.B. Cosimi (2001). Antilymphocyte globulin
and monoclonal antibodies. In: Kidney Trarsplantation :Principles
tation. Vet Surg 35(2): 125-135.
and Practice, edited by P.J. Morris, Sth edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Browne, B.J. and B.D. Kahan (1994). Renal transplantation. Surg Clin
Saunders, pp. 289-309.
North Am 74(5): 1097-1116.
326    Therapeutic techniques
Calandra, T. and R. Bucala (1997). Macrophage migration inhibitory
Grulich, A.E., M.T. van Leeuwen, et al. (2007). Incidence of cancers in
factor (MIF): a glucocorticoid counter-regulator within the immune
people with HIV/AIDS compared with immunosuppressed trans-
system. Crit Rev Immunol 17(1): 77-88.
plant recipients: a meta-analysis. Larcet 370(958 1): 59-67.
Campana, C., M.B. Regazzi, et al. ( 1996). Clinically significant drug
Halling, K.B., G.W. Ellison, et al. (2004). Evaluation of oxidative stress
interactions with cyclosporin: an update. Clin Pharrmacokinet 30(2):
markers for the early diagnosis of allograft rejection in feline renal
14 1-179.
allotransplant recipients with normal renal function. Car I Vet Res
Case, I.B., A.E. Kyles, et al. (2007). Incidence of and risk factors for
45{10): 831-837.
diabetes mellitus in cats that have undergone renal transplantation:
Halling, K.B., J.P. Graham, et al. (2003). Sonographic and scintigraphic
187 cases (1986-2005). I Arn Vet Med Assoc 230(6): 880-884.
Evaluation of acute renal allograft rejection in cats. Vet Radiol Ultra-
Cecka, M. ( 199s). Clinical outcome of renal transplantation: factors
sound 44(6): 707-713.
influencing patient and graft survival. Surg Clin North Am 78(1):
Halloran, P., T. Mathew, et al. ( 1997). Mycophenolate mofetil in renal 
133-148.
allograft recipients: a pooled effcacy analysis of three random-
Curtis, J.J. ( 1993). Management of hypertension after transplantation.
ized, double-blind, clinical studies in prevention of rejection. The
Kidney Int Suppl 43: S45-S49.
international mycophenolate mofetil renal transplant study groups.
Dahlinger, J, C. Gregory, et al. (1998). Efect of ketoconazole on
Trarnsplar tatiorn 63( 1): 39-47.
cyclosporine dose in healthy dogs. Vet Surg 27( 1): 64-68.
Hardie, R.J., C. Schmiedt, et al. (2005). Ureteral papilla implantation
 Dallrman, M.J. (2001). Immunology of graft rejection. In: Kidney Trans-
as a technique for neoureterocystostomy in cats. Vet Surg 34(4):
plantation: Principles and Practice, edited by P.J. Morris, 5th edition.
393-398.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 9-31.
Hausberg, M., M. Kosch, et al. (2002). Sympathetic nerve activity in
Davidson, G. and D.C. Plumb (2003). Veterinary Drug Handbook,
end-stage renal disease. Circulation 106(15): 1974-1979.
Client information edition. Ames, Iowa: Distributed by Iowa State
Hou, S. (2000). Expanding the kidney donor pool: ethical and medical
Press.
considerations. Kidney Int 58(4): 1820-1836.
Du Toit, D.F, W.P. Homan, et al. ( 1981). Canine intestinal intussuscep-
 Isoniemi, H.M., I. Ahonen, et al. (1993). Long-term consequences of
tion following renal and pancreatic transplantation. Vet Rec 108(2):
different immunosuppressive regimens for renal allografts. Trans-
34-35.
plartation 55(3): 494-499.
 Elion, G.B., S. Bieber, et al. (1960a). A summary of investigations with
Kadar, E., J.E. Sykes, et al. (2005). Evaluation of the prevalence of
2-amino-6-[{ 1-methyl-4-nitro-5-imidazolyl)thio]purine
(B.W.
infections in cats after renal transplantation: 169 cases (1987-2003).
57-323) in animals. Carncer Chemother Rep 8: 36-43.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 227(6): 948-953.
Elion, G.B., S.W. Callahan, et al. ( 1960b). The metabolism of 2-amino-
Kahan, B.D., P.R. Rajagopalan, et al. (1999). Reduction of the occur-
6-[{ 1-methyl-4-nitro-5-imidazolyl)thio]purine (B.W. 57-323) in
rence of acute cellular rejection among renal allograft recipients
man. Cancer Chemother Rep 8: 47-52.
treated with basiliximab, a chimeric anti-interleukin-2-receptor
Ferran, C., M. Dy, et al. ( 1990). Reduction of morbidity and cytokine
 monoclonal antibody. United states simulect renal study group.
release in anti-CD3 MoAb-treated mice by corticosteroids. Trars-
Transplartation 67(2): 276-284.
plartation 50(4): 642-648.
Kaplan, H.S. ( 1980). Hodgkin's disease: unfolding concepts concerning
Finco, D.R., C.A. Rawlings, et al. (1985). Kidney graft survival in
its nature, management and prognosis. Cancer 45( 10): 2439-2474.
transfused and nontransfused sibling beagle dogs. Arm I Vet Res
Katz, S.M., R.H. Kerman, et al. ( 1991). Preemptive transplantation-
46( 11): 2327-2331.
an analysis ofbenefits and hazards in 85 cases. Trarnsplamtation51(2):
Goffinet, D.R., E.J. Glatstein, et al. ( 1972). Herpes zoster-varicella infec-
351-355.
tions and lymphoma. Arm Interm Med 76(2): 235-240.
Kelly, G.E., IM. Drummond, et al. (1971). Intussusception in dogs
Graumann, M.B., S.A. DeRose, et al. ( 1998). Polymorphism analysis of
following renal homograft transplantation. Aust Vet I47(12): 597-
four canine MHC class I genes. Tissue Antigens 51{4 Pt 1): 374-381.
600.
Greco, B., L. Bielory, et al. ( 1983). Antithymocyte globulin reacts with
Klinger, M., J. Cooper, et al (1990). The use of butorphanol tartrate
many normal human cell types. Blood 62(5): 1047-1054.
for the prevention of canine intussusception following renal trans-
Gregory, C.R. (2009). Immunosuppressive agents. In: Kirk's Current
plantation. I Invest Surg 3(3): 229-233.
Veterinary Therapy, edited by I.D. Bonagura and D.C. Twedt, 14th
Kochin, E.J., C.R. Gregory, et al. (1993). Evaluation of a method of
edition. Philadelphia, PA; London: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 254-259.
ureteroneocystostomy in cats. JArm Vet Med Assoc 202(2): 257-260.
Gregory, C.R., I.M. Gourley, et al. (1992). Renal transplantation for
Kreis, H., N. Chkoff, etal. ( 1984). Nonsteroid antinflammatory agents 
treatment of end-stage renal failure in cats. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
as a substitute treatment for steroids in ATGAM-treated cadaver
201(2): 285-291.
kidney recipients. Transplantation 37(2): 139- 145.
Gregory, C.R., A.E. Kyles, et al. (2006). Results of clinical renal trans-
Kulkarni, S., A. Kopelan, et al. (200l). Tacrolimus therapy in renal
 plantation in 15 dogs using triple drug immunosuppressive therapy.
transplantation. In: Kidney Transplantation: Principles and Practice,
Vet Surg 35(2): 105-112.
edited by P.J. Morris, 5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
Gregory, C.R., R.A. Lirtzman, et al. (1996). A mucosal apposition
Pp. 251-262.
Kyles, A.E., C.R. Gregory, et al. (200l). Leflunomide analog, MNA-715,
cats. Vet Surg 25(1): 13-17.
plus cyclosporine reduces renal allograft rejection in mismatched
Gregory, C.R., B.R. Madewell, et al. (1991). Feline leukermia virus-
dogs. Trarsplart Proc 33( 1-2): 368-369.
associated lymphosarcoma following renal transplantation in a cat.
Kyles, A.E., C.R. Gregory, et al. (2003a). Modified noble plication for
Transplamtation 52(6): 1097-1099.
the prevention of intestinal intussusception after renal transplanta-
Gregory, C.R., K.G. Mathews, et al. (1997). Central nervous system
tion in dogs. I Invest Surg 16(3): 161-166.
disorders after renal transplantation in cats. Vet Surg26(5): 386-392.
Kyles, A.E., C.R. Gregory, et al. (2003b). Immunosuppression with a
Griffin, A., A.L. Newton, et al. (2003). Disseminated mycobacterium
combination of the leflunomide analog, FK778, and microemulsi-
avium complex infection following renal transplantation in a cat. I
fied cyclosporine for renal transplantation in mongrel dogs. Trars-
Am Vet Med Assoc 222(8): 1097,1101, 1077-1078.
plantation 75(8): 1128-1133.
Renal transplantation   327
Kyles, A.E., C.R. Gregory, et al. (2002). An evaluation of com-
Pollard, S., B. Nashan, et al. and CONSENT: Consensus on Sub-
bined immunosuppression with MNA 715 and microemulsifed
stitution in European Transplantation. (2003). A pharmacoki-
cyclosporine on renal allograft rejection in mismatched mongrel
netic and clinical review of the potential clinical impact of using
dogs. Vet Surg 31(4): 358-366.
different formulations of cyclosporin A. Clin Ther 25(6): 1654-
Kyles, A.E., C.R. Gregory, et al. ( 1999). Management of hypertension
1669.
controls postoperative neurologic disorders after renal transplanta-
Raine, A.E., R. Margreiter, et al. ( 1992). Report on management of renal
tion in cats. Vet Surg 28(6): 436-441.
failure in europe, XX11, 1991. Nephrol Dial Trarsplant 7(Suppl. 2):
Libro, V. and M. Proto ( 1964). Observations on some cases of intestinal
7-35.
invagination in dogs operated for homoplastic transplant of the
Rajab, A., R.P. Pelletier, et al. (2006). Excellent clinical outcomes
kidneys. Osp Maggiore 59: 809-815.
 in primary kidney transplant recipients treated with steroid-free
Matas, A.J. (2009). Minimization of steroids in kidney transplantation.
maintenance immunosuppression. Clin Trarsplant 20(5): 537-
Trarspl Int22: 38-48.
546.
Mathew, T.H. (200l). Mycofenolate mofetil. In: Kidney Transplan-
Ray, A. and P.B. Sehgal ( 1992). Cytokines and their receptors: molecu-
tation: Principles and Practice, edited by P.J. Morris, 5th edition.
lar mechanism of interleukin-6 gene repression by glucocorticoids.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 263-278.
IAm Soc Nephtrol 2(12 Suppl): S214-S221.
Mathews, K.A., G.J. Gallivan, et al. ( 1993). Clinical, biochemical, and
Sandusky, G.E., P.J. Horton, et al. ( 1986). Use of monoclonal antibodies
hematologic evaluation of normal dogs after administration of rab-
 to human lymphocytes to identify lymphocyte subsets in lymph
bit anti-dog thymocyte serum. Vet Surg 22(3): 213-220.
nodes of the rhesus monkey and the dog. I Med Primatol 15(6):
Mathews, K.A., D.L. Holmberg, et al. ( 1994). Renal allograft survival 
441-451.
in outbred mongrel dogs using rabbit anti-dog thymocyte serum in 
 Shun-Shin, G.A., P. Ratcliffe, et al. (1990). The lens after renal trans-
combination with immunosuppressive drug therapy with or with-
plantation. Br I Ophthalmol 74(5): 267-271.
out donor bone marrow. Vet Surg 23(5): 347-357.
Singh, P.B., N.K. Goyal, et al. (2008). Renal transplantation using live
Mathews, K.A., D.L. Holmberg, et al. (2000). Kidney transplantation
 donors with vascular anomalies: a salvageable surgical challenge.
in dogs with naturally occurring end-stage renal disease. JAm Amim
Saudi I Kidney Dis Transpl 19(4): 554-558.
Hosp Assoc 36(4): 294-301.
Slakey, D.P, C.P Johnson, et al. (1997). Management of severe pan-
Mathews, K.G. and C.R. Gregory (1997). Renal transplants in
creatitis in renal transplant recipients. Ann Surg 225(2): 217-
cats: 66 cases (1987-1996). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 211(11): 1432-
222.
1436.
 Smak Gregoor, P.J., T. van Gelder, et al. (2000). Mycophenolate mofetil,
McAnulty, J.F and G.L. Lensmeyer ( 1999). The effects of ketoconazole
 cellcept, a new immunosuppressive drug with great potential in
 on the pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine A in cats. Vet Surg 28(6):
internal medicine. Neth I Med 57(6): 233-246.
448-455.
Starzl, T.E., T.L. Marchioro, et al. (1967). The clinical use of anti-
 McAnulty, J.F. ( 1998). Hypothermic storage of feline kidneys for trans-
lymphocyte globulin in renal homotransplantation. Transplantation
:()z ars ia 'sinou  oi dn aeeois oaia xa Inyssns uoud
5(4):Suppl: 1100-1105.
312-320.
 Strober, S., S. Slavin, et al. ( 1979). Allograft tolerance after total lym-
McAnulty, J.F. and G.L. Lensmeyer ( 1999). The effects of ketoconazole
phoid irradiation (TLI). Immunol Rev 46: 87-112.
on the pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine A in cats. Vet Surg 28(6):
Thistlethwaite, IR. Jr., J.K. Stuart, et al. (1988). Complications and 
448-455.
monitoring of OKT3 therapy. Am I Kidney Dis 11(2): 112-119.
McAnulty, JF, J.H. Southard, et al. ( 1989). Prevention of postoperative
Tizard, I.R. (2004). Veterinary Immurology: An Imtroduction, 7th edi-
intestinal intussusception by prophylactic morphine adrministration
tion. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
in dogs used for organ transplantation research. Surgery 105(4):
Ullman, E. (2002). Experimental kidney transplantation. 1902. Wiener
494-495.
Klirnische Wocherschrift 114(4): 126- 127.
Mehl, M.L., A.E. Kyles, et al. (2005). Comparison of 3 techniques for
Valverde, C.R., C.R. Gregory, et al. (2002). Anesthetic management in
ureteroneocystostomy in cats. Vet Surg 34(2): 114-119.
feline renal transplantation. Vet Amaesth Amalg 29(3): 117-125.
Morris, P.J. (200l). Azathioprine and steroids. In: Kidney Transplar-
Waer, M. (200l). Total lymphoid irradiation. In: Kidney Trarsplan-
tatior: Principles and Practice, edited by P.J. Morris, 5th edition.
tation: Principles and Practice, edited by P.J. Morris, 5th edition.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 217-226.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, Pp. 320-325.
Narkun-Burgess, D.M., C.R. Nolan, et al. (1993). Forty-five
Waer, M., K.K. Ang, et al. (1984). Influence of radiation field
     e  
and fractionation schedule of total lymphoid irradiation (TLI)
1115.
on the induction of suppressor cells and stable chimerism after
Newell, S.M., G.W. Ellison, et al. ( 1999). Scintigraphic, sonographic,
bone marrow transplantation in mice. I Immurol 132(2): 985-
and histologic evaluation of renal autotransplantation in cats. Am 
990.
Vet Res 60(6): 775-779.
Wagner, J.L., R.C. Burnett, et al. (1999). Organization of the canine
Nordquist, B.C. and L.R. Aronson (2008). Pyogranulomatous cystitis
major histocompatibility complex: current perspectives. I Hered
associated with toxoplasma gondi infection in a cat after renal
90( 1): 35-38.
transplantation. JArn Vet Med Assoc 232(7): 1010-1012.
Wagner, K., M. Henkel, et al. (1988). Interaction of calcium blockers
Obrador, G.T.and B.J. Pereira ( 1998). Early referral to the nephrologist
and cyclosporine. Trarsplant Proc 20(2 Suppl. 2): 561-568.
and timely initiation of renal replacement therapy: a paradigm shift
Welsh, K.1. and M. Bunce (200l). HLA typing, matching and cross-
in the management of patients with chronic renal failure. Am I
matching in renal transplantation. In: Kidney Transplarmtation: Pri-
Kidney Dis 31(3): 398-417.
ciples and Practice, edited by P.J. Morris, 5th edition. Philadelphia,
Paliogianni, F and D.T. Boumpas (1995). Glucocorticoids regulate
 PA: WB Saunders, pp. 135- 157.
calcineurin-dependent trans-activating pathways for interleukin-2
Winkler, C., A. Schultz, et al. (1989). Genetic characterization of FLA,
gene transcription in human T lymphocytes. Transplantation 59(9):
the cat major histocompatibility complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1333-1339.
86(3): 943-947.
328   Therapeutic techniques
Wong, G. and J.R. Chapman (2008). Cancers after renal transplanta-
Yuhki, N., G.F. Heidecker, et al. (1989). Characterization of MHC
tion. Transplant Rev 22(2): 141-149.
cDNA clones in the domestic cat: diversity and evolution of class I
Wooldridge, J.D. and C.R. Gregory ( 1999). Ionized and total serum
genes. J Immunol 142(10): 3676-3682.
magnesium concentrations in feline renal transplant recipients. Vet
Zolty, R., P.J. Hynes, et al. (2008). Severe left ventricular systolic
Surg 28( 1): 3 1-37.
dysfunction may reverse with renal transplantation: urermic car-
Wooldridge, I.D., C.R. Gregory, et al. (2002). The prevalence of malig-
diomyopathy and cardiorenal syndrome. Am J Transplant S( 1l):
nant neoplasia in feline renal-transplant recipients. Vet Surg 31(1):
2219-2224.
94-97.
32
Indwelling urinary catheters and stents
Allyson Berent
Urinary catheters and stents can be used for various
ticularly when presenting bilaterally or in animals with
purposes to divert urine throughout the entire uri-
concurrent preexisting renal insufficiency/failure. Some
nary collection system. Catheters are defined as flexi-
patients can be managed medically with supportive care
ble or rigid hollow tubes employed to drain fluids from
until a ureterolith passes, others may require surgery
 e sn  n,  sno o
to avoid permanent damage and/or hemodialysis for
are used for temporary drainage of the renal pelvis,
stabilization prior to a prolonged anesthesia for ureteral
ureter, or urinary bladder. Urinary catheters are classi-
surgery. Ureterotomies can be relatively prolonged
cally soft, comfortable, polyurethane type tubes that have
 and complicated surgeries in these debilitated patients
an open lumen, permitting temporary drainage. Stents
with an unclear outcome of residual renal function
are defined as small tubes, often expandable, inserted
(Kyles 2005, 2005; Snyder 2005). One p0ssibility is
across a blocked lumen to restore patency. Urinary
to place a nephrostomy tube percutaneously (via
i- no d n    ,
a modified Seldinger  Technique) to quickly relieve
diversion in the kidney, ureter, bladder, or urethra. Stents
the obstruction, minimize morbidity, and determine
are most often completely indwelling tubes that can be
whether adequate renal function remains prior to a
placed for various purposes, most commonly to bypass
prolonged anesthesia for ureteral surgery or a ureteral
a malignant obstruction, stricture, or embedded stone
stent placement. Hydronephrosis is most commonly
(i.e., ureterolithiasis). Stents come in different materials
due to ureteral obstructions from either ureterolithiasis,
(metal, polyurethrane, plastic, rubber, etc.), shapes, and
trigonal  neoplasia obstructing  the ureterovesicular
sizes (Weisse, 2009). This chapter will discuss various
junction (UVJ), ureteral strictures, accidental ureteral
types of catheters and stents that are currently being used
ligation, ureteral trauma, ureteral edema after ureteral
in the urinary tract of veterinary patients for various pur-
surgery pyelonephritis, etc. Nephrostomy tubes are
 poses. An anatomic organization will be used to discuss
also helpful postintervention while a surgical site is
different applications in the kidney, ureter, bladder, and
healing (postureterotomy) or in a patient awaiting
urethra.
future intervention that is not possible at the time of the
initial presentation (i.e., ureteral resection anastomosis,
ureteral stent placement, or renal transplantation). These
Kidney
tubes allow the clinician to follow ureteral patency serially
with contrast pyeloureterography and are relatively well
The most common reason for stent or catheter place-
tolerated by patients. Nephrostomy tubes can be placed
ment in the kidney is for drainage of the renal pelvis
due to hydronephrosis. This is called a nephrostomy
either percutaneously using ultrasound and/or fluoro-
scopic guidance, or surgically. The ideal catheter for this
tube. Ureteral obstructions secondary to ureterolithiasis,
procedure is a locking-loop pigtail catheter (Figure 32.1).
malignancy, strictures, or trauma can result in severe
Foley urinary catheters and red rubber catheters have
hydronephrosis and/or life-threatening azotemia, par-
 also been used historically, but have a tendency to back
out after placement with an absent locking mechanism.
In humans, nephrostomy tubes are commonly placed
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
for temporary urinary diversion for hydronephrosis
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
329
330   Therapeutic techniques
(b)
(C)
(d)
Figure 32.1 Placement of a percutaneous nephrostomy tube using a locking loop pigtail catheter in a cat. (a) 6 Fr locking loop pigtail
catheter straightened over a 0.035-inch guidewire. Notice the loose string connecting the distal hole to the most proximal hole. (b) Once
the stylette and trocar are removed from the catheter, the pigtail loop can form as the string is tightened. (c) The pigtail is locked in place
by the string being completely taught. (d) Fluoroscopy image of an 18-guage needle in the renal pelvis after contrast was infused for a
pyelogram. A 0.018-inch guidewire was advanced through the needle and coiled inside the renal pelvis.(e) The needle is removed over
the wire and the locking loop pigtail catheter is being advanced over the guidewire so that a coil is made inside the renal pelvis. (f) Once
the string is pulled, the loop is tightly formed in the renal pelvis to prevent inadvertent removal
secondary to severe pyelonephritis, ureterolithiasis, or
catheter and monitored with fluoroscopy to document
urinary malignancies. These tubes can be easily left in
it coiling in the dilated renal pelvis. We aim to get 2-3
place in humans without the concern of tube contamina-
loops in the pelvis if possible to be sure the stiff shaft of
tion, accidental removal, or excessive tube maintenance.
the guidewire is inside the kidney. Then the catheter is
This is a little different in our veterinary patients, making
removed over the wire and a locking loop pigtail catheter
complete indwelling tubes more desirable (see Ureteral
(5 Fr² or 6 Fr ) is advanced, over the appropriate sized
stenting).
wire (6 Fr over 0.035-inch; 5 Fr over 0.018-inch wire),
through the renal parenchyma and into the renal pelvis
Percutaneous nephrostomy tube placement
(Figure 32.1f). For this process, the stylette is initially
left in place to keep the catheter rigid during renal pene-
 This is usually suggested for renal pelvis dilation greater
tration, but the trocar is removed so it can be advanced
than 1 cm in diameter so that the locking loop can
easily over the guidewire. Once the tip of the catheter is in
easily form in the pelvis and prevent the tube from
the renal pelvis, as seen via fluoroscopy (Figure 32.1d,e),
backing out. Ultrasound is best used to perform a pye-
the stylette is gently removed as the catheter is simul-
locentesis using an over-the-needle venous catheter to
taneously advanced over the guidewire to form its loop
aid in a modified Seldinger technique for serial wire
(Figure 32.1e,f). Once the loop ofthe pigtail is completely
 and catheter exchanges (Figure 32.1d; dog—18 guage,
within the renal pelvis, the loop of the catheter is locked in
cat—22 guage). Once the tip of the catheter is in the
place by pulling on the string, as seen in Figure 32.1b,c,f.
renal pelvis, about 3 mL of urine is drained (pyelocente-
The catheter is then secured to the body wall using a
sis) and an equal amount of contrast (lohexoll ) material
purse-string and Chinese-finger-trap suture pattern, and
is infused into the renal pelvis (pyelogram). This allows
a urine collection system is attached to the catheter for
the renal pelvis to be seen clearly with fluoroscopy. Then
 gravity drainage (Figure 32.5b).
the stylette is gently removed from the catheter and an
angle tipped hydrophilic guidewire (Figure 32.1e Weasel
wire2 for dog, 0.035-inch wire fits through the 18 gauge
Surgical nephrostomy tube placement
catheter; for cat, the 0.018-inch wire fits through the 22
This technique described above can also be performed
 gauge catheter) is advanced through the over-the-needle
   i     
Indwelling urinary catheters and stents  331
kidney. Ideally, this is done with fluoroscopy as well, but
used in a similar manner is a 5 or 8 Fr Foley catheter or
can be done with digital palpation. As described above,
red rubber catheter in a similar manner, though these
an over-the-needle catheter can be directed through the
 do not have a locking mechanism and have a tendency
greater curvature of the kidney into the renal pelvis using
to back out after placement. The safest way to place
the modified Seldinger technique. Once urine is visual-
these tubes is over a guidewire as described above, which
ized to drain, the guidewire can be advanced and curled
would require the very tip of the catheter to be carefully
into the kidney and the catheter can be removed over the
cut to have an open-ended catheter to advance over the
wire. Next, the locking loop catheter can be advanced
wire.
over the wire as described above. Another approach is via
For catheters placed percutaneously, a seal must form
to the body wall, and this can take 24 weeks. Ifthe patient
locking loop catheter, with the trocar left in place through
is taken to surgery or the obstruction is relieved by other
the stylette, can be directly advanced through the body
interventional techniques before a seal is formed (i.e.,
wall, punctured through the greater curvature of the kid-
ureteral stenting, shockwave lithotripsy, etc), the tube
 ney, and into the renal pelvis. Then the trocar is removed
can either be removed with the site surgically repaired or
and urine is drained through the stylette to assure proper
the tube can be capped and wrapped so the pet can go
location. The loop is then advanced over the stylette and
home without the need for gravitational drainage, and
into the pelvis, and the loop is locked into place. Then the
the tube can be left in place for 2-4 weeks prior to being
kidney should be secured to the body wall with a purse
 removed (Figure 32.2). Removal ofthe nephrostomy tube
string around the tube at its insertion site and secured
 is recommended to be done under fluoroscopic guidance.
to the skin as described above. Other tubes that can be
 A sterile hypdrophilic guidewire is advanced down the
C
Figure 32.2 Removal of a locking loop nephrostomy tube in a cat that also has a double pigtail ureteral stent in place (red arrows). (a)
The locking loop pigtail catheter (6 Fr) is locked in place in the renal pelvis (large white arrows). (b) A guidewire (0.035-inch black arrow)
is advanced through the pigtail catheter (large white arrows) and the string is cut proximally to release the locking mechanism. (c) The
guidewire (back arrows) is advanced into the renal pelvis to straighten out the locking loop pigtail. Care is taken to not manipulate the
indwelling ureteral stent (small white arrows). (d) The nephrostomy tube is retracted over the guidewire until it is completely exteriorized
and the double pigtail ureteral stent (small white arrow) remains in place with one loop in the renal pelvis and the shaft going down the
ureter.
332   Therapeutic techniques
(a)
Figure 32.3 Three different types of ureteral stents/catheters. All are made of polyurethrane material. (a) A 3 Fr variable length (8-12
cmj double pigtail ureteral stent that remains indwelling. The proximal loop remains in the renal pelvis and the distal loop in the urinary
bladder. The tubing (asterisk) is a pushing catheter that is used to push the ureteral stent over the guidewire when it is straightened out
side and transverses the renal parenchyma until it reaches the renal pelvis at the proximal loop (2). The shaft of the stent sits in the ureter
(3) and the distal loop (4) remains in the urinary bladder for complete collection system drainage. (c) This catheter is an open-ended
apeihonal joj pasn Aepissep s! sul anuepinh azis pidossopua ioj yrhual aua sh buoje syiew wo I sey l (g s) jatauien (enaiain
ureteropyelography done endoscopically
tube and curled into the renal pelvis. The string is cut
 medicine, (2) a nephroureteral stent, and (3) an open-
and loosened. The tube is then withdrawn over the wire
 ended ureteral catheter? (Figure 32.3). The double pig-
with gentle traction until it is out of the animal's body.
 tail stent is completely intracorporeal and can remain in
and the wire is subsequently removed. The site can be
 place for numerous months if necessary (recommended
wrapped for a few hours thereafter. A seal should form
for <36 months but has been left in place for over
over the opening in a few hours, and the wrap can be
2 years without a problem in some cats).
removed.
The first report of ureteral stent placement was in
1967 in a human for malignant obstruction (Zimskind
1967). Since that time, nonresectable trigonal or ureteral
Ureter
tumors are treated similarly, with an indwelling dou-
Ureteral stenting has been performed for a variety of dis-
ble pigtail ureteral stent used to bypass the obstruction.
 orders in both dogs and cats. The goal of ureteral stenting
 These tumors have been shown to be more easily accessed
is four fold: (1) to divert urine from the renal pelvis into
 though a antegrade percutaneous approach, in order to
the urinary bladder to bypass a ureteral obstruction, (2)
 gain access down the ureter, which is exactly what we have
 to encourage passive ureteral dilation (for ureteral steno-
 appreciated in veterinary patients. In humans, there is a
sis/strictures or future ureteroscopy), (3) to decrease sur-
96-98% success in stent placement with this antegrade
 gical tension on the ureter after/during surgery (i.e.,
 approach (Uthappa 2005; Yossepowitch 2001). It was not
resection and anastomosis) and prevent post-operative
    yo  e  h 
leakage and edema, or (4) to aid in extracorporeal shock-
disease was published, and this was for a ureteral stric-
wave lithotripsy for large obstructive ureteroliths or
ture (Goldin 1977). Then, in 2005, a report in pediatics
nephroliths that could result in serial ureteral obstruc-
came out showing the use of ureteral stenting for passive
tions if the stones do not completely pass down the
ureteral dilation prior to ureteroscopy for ureterolithiasis
ureter, a term called Steinstrasse (Al-Awadi 1999). There
(Hubert 2005). Very few reports in dogs exist, one study
are three main types of ureteral stents/catheters: (1)
done in dogs, as a model for human disease, was per-
an indwelling double pigtail ureteral stent, which is
formed in 1997 and showed that canine ureters did have
the most common type used in veterinary and human
associated passive ureteral dilation after a stent was in
Indwelling urinary catheters and stents 333
place (Lennon 1997), but there have been few veterinary
in our veterinary patients, but initial experience would
studies (Berent et al. 2o07) or clinical cases reported in
support a similar finding.
either dogs or cats with ureteral stenting to this point. At
Ureteral stents are most often placed cystoscopically
the author's institution, over 25 dog or cat ureters have
in a retrograde manner through the ureteral orifice at
been stented for various clinical purposes.
the UVJ. They can also be placed antegrade, through
 Ureteral stents are classically used to bypass obstruc-
the renal pelvis percutaneously or surgically during a
tions from ureterolithiasis, malignant obstructive neo-
cystotomy or ureterotomy. Under general anesthesia,
plasia, trauma, and ureteral stenosis/strictures. Ater
the retrograde technique uses cystoscopy and concurrent
interventional procedures (ureteroscopy, ureteral bal-
fluoroscopy. An angle-tipped hydrophilic guidewire is
loon dilation, retrograde ureteral lithotripsy, or percuta-
advanced into the distal ureter from the UVJ. The wire
neous nephroureterolithotomy-PCNL), a ureteral stent
is advanced up the length of the ureter and curled into
can be placed to prevent temporary obstructions from
 the renal pelvis. Care is taken to bypass the obstruction
ureteral edema or spasm. Following surgical uretero-
carefully without perforating the ureter (Figure 32.4).
tomy, ureteral resection and anastomosis, or ureteral
An open-ended ureteral catheter (Figures 32.3c and
tears, a ureteral stent may allow for tension relief and
 32.4b) is then advanced over the wire under fluoroscopic
healing, prevent postoperative ureteral leaking, and pre-
 guidance, and the guidewire is removed. A retrograde
vent ureteral stricture formation while the surgical site
 contrast ureteropeylogram is performed to help identify
heals. Ureteral stenting is also ideal in patients with large
any lesions, stones, or filling defects in the ureter or renal
(>5 mm) nephroliths or ureteroliths that are undergo-
pelvis (Figure 32.4c). The wire is re-advanced through
ing extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) to aid
the catheter into the renal pelvis and the catheter is
withdrawn. An indwelling double pigtail ureteral stent,4
sage following the ESWL treatment (Block 1996; Lennon 
is placed over the guidewire under fluoroscopic guidance
1997; Adams 1999; Mustafa 2007). Ureteral stenting has
with one curl remaining in the renal pelvis in front of the
been shown to allow passive ureteral dilation in children
obstruction and the other in the urinary bladder (Figure
over 2-4 weeks to permit the passage of a ureteroscope
32.4d). The antegrade technique requires percutaneous
 or spontaneous stone passage of obstructive ureteroliths
renal access with a renal access needle* or over-the-needle
(Lennon 2005). This theory is still under investigation
catheter, as described above. This can be done with either
(b)
(c)
(d
Figure 32.4 Fluoroscopic images of a placement of a double pigtail ureteral stent in a female cat. (a) A 0.018-inch angle tipped
hydrophilic guidewire (small white arrows) is advanced up the right ureter to the level of the obstruction under endoscopic and
fluoroscopic guidance. (b) A 3 Fr open-ended ureteral catheter (black arrows) is advanced over the guidewire, and the wire is removed
for a retrograde ureteropyelogram to be performed using contrast material. This helps document the obstructed area of the ureter and
guide the catheter and stent into the renal pelvis. (c) The guidewire is re-advanced into the renal pelvis to create a curl and the stent
(arge white arrow) is pushed over the guidewire so the proximal end forms a pigtail inside the pelvis. (d) The wire is then removed and
the pigtail forms in the proximal end inside the renal pelvis (large white arrow) and the distal end inside the urinary bladder. The picture
is the upper right corner of (d) is one of the loops of the double pigtail ureteral stent prior to placement.
334  Therapeutic techniques
ultrasound or fluoroscopy. The guidewire is passed down
into the urinary bladder. This maintains a draining tract
the ureter, into the urinary bladder, and out the urethra
from the renal pelvis to the bladder, bypassing the ureter
to have through-and-through access ("flossed"). This is
temporarily, as well as allowing a seal to form to the body
ue pnu-ieuo e ng yode edai a
wall from the kidney. It usually remains in place for 2-4
ureteral obstruction when the ureteral orifice cannot
weeks after PCNL.
be identified cystoscopically or for small male dogs and
 Retrograde ureterpyelography allows for the infusion of
male cats where cystoscopy for retrograde ureteral access
contrast in a retrograde manner up the ureter, under flu-
is not possible. The stent is then placed in a retrograde
 oroscopic guidance, in order to image ureteral patency,
fashion over the wire, as described above to keep the hole
space occupying lesions, stone disease, tortuosities of
in the kidney as small as possible. These procedures can
the ureter, and ureter diameter/length for stent place-
also be done intraoperatively when surgical success is in
ment (Figure 32.4c). This is seemingly more accurate
 question, leakage is a concern, or obstructive neoplasia
than intravenous pyelography (IVP) since ureteral dis-
 is found. Indwelling drainage is an ideal, long-term, and
tension is not possible without mild pressure irrigation
safe option.
in the ureter. This procedure is also less invasive than
The nephroureteral (NU) stent is classically used for a
antegrade pyelography, eliminating the need for renal
combination of maintaining a tract into the renal pelvis,
needle access and the risk of subsequent urinary leak-
down the ureter, and into the bladder after percuta-
 age through the renal parenchyma if a ureteral obstruc-
neous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) procedures. This stent
tive lesion persists. As described above, the guidewire is
Sd n a id e h d s
advanced up the ureteral orifice via cystoscopic and fluo-
the ureter after lithotripsy from a PCNL, allowing any
roscopic guidance, and an open-ended ureteral catheter
ureteral edema to subside and residual stone fragments
(Figure 32.3c) is advanced over the wire and the wire is
to pass (Figure 32.5). In order for a seal to form from the
subsequently removed. Then contrast is injected through
kidney to the body wall after a larger sheath was placed in
the catheter for ureteral visualization. This allows sub-
the renal pelvis, the catheter must exit the body wall from
tle lesions and filling defects to be evaluated with rep-
the renal pelvis and maintain a tight seal. The catheter
etition if needed without extravisation of contrast into
forms a loop in the renal pelvis with multiple fenestra-
 the retroperitoneal space (i.e., antegrade pyeloureterog-
tions for drainage and then passes down the ureter and
 raphy) and under mild to moderate pressure allowing
[(a)
Figure 32.5 A nephroureteral stent in a 3.6 kg female spayed Yorkshire terrier placed after a percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL)
procedure. (a) Fluoroscopic image of the catheter down the ureter (white arrows) and the pigtail is curled in the urinary bladder. (b) The
external drainage of the catheter from the body wall, through the skin, and into the renal pelvis with urine being drained out of the
catheter. (c) The nephroureteral stent (see Figure 32.3b).
Indwelling urinary catheters and stents 335
[a)
C
[é]
Figure 32.6 A male neutered cat with a urethral tear that occurred during catheterization. (a) Contrast urethrogram from the distal
end of the penis showing extravasation of contrast into the subcutaneous space around the urethra at the level of the tear. (b) An 18
guage over-the-needle catheter is used to perform a cystocentesis (small white arrow), and contrast is injected through the needle to
highlight the bladder during fluoroscopy. (0) A guidewire (0.035-inch) (black arrow) is aimed through the catheter, into the bladder, and
out through the urethra in an antegrade manner gaining through-and-through access. (d) An open-ended urethral catheter (5 Fr red
ubber catheter) is advanced over the guidewire through the urethral lumen (grey arrows) into the urinary bladder and sutured in place
at the prepuce. (e) The guidewire (black arrow) is then removed from the urethral catheter (grey arrow) and curled into the bladder and
a locking loop pigtail catheter is advanced over the guidewire through the body wall for the placement of a percutaneous cystostomy
tube. (f) The wire is removed and the lock is formed (grey oval) on the locking loop pigtail catheter to secure it inside the bladder for a
percutaneous cystostomy tube.
ureteral distension. It also prevents any risk of contrast-
surgically. With the advent of urethral stents (see below),
induced nephropathy, since the contrast agent remains in
the use of cystostomy tubes has declined. Cystostomy
the renal collection system and is not injected intravas-
tubes can either be placed percutaneously or surgically.
cularly.
With the locking loop pigtail catheter (Figure 32.1),
percutaneous cystostomy tube placement has become a
relatively fast and easy technique when necessary (Figure
Bladder
32.6). As described above for nephrostomy tubes, an
[nn e ssedq oi paned uo ae san oass
18-guage over-the-needle catheter is advanced into
obstruction or "buy time” while a urethral/trigonal
the urinary bladder like a cystocentesis (paramedian),
lesion is healing. This can be secondary to malignant 
until urine is draining. The stylette is removed and the
neoplasia (trigonal, urethral, prostatic tumors), prolifer-
hydrophilic guidewire is advanced though the catheter
ative/granulomatous urethritis, urethral strictures, ure-
and into the urinary bladder. The wire is curled around
thral tears, or urethral stones that are difficult to remove
the bladder 2-3 times. This can also be done under
336  Therapeutic techniques
fluoroscopic guidance, but this is not always necessary.
ber catheters are stiff enough, but also less traumatic.
Then the locking loop catheter is advanced over the wire
Urethral tears are most commonly seen in male cats and
with the stylette still in place (and the trocar removed).
d  n i  m  s n
Once the entire loop of the catheter is well within the
or from vehicular trauma. The management of urethral
urinary bladder, the stylette is removed and the loop is
trauma has recently been reported by the use of ure-
locked. The bladder can then be easily drained and the
thral catheterization alone (Meige 2008), and this is the
catheter is secured tightly to the body wall as described
author's recommended treatment of choice if the ure-
above. This tube would need to remain in place, since
thra can be cannulated with a catheter (see Antegrade
it is not surgically pexied, for at least 2-4 weeks prior to
catheterization).
removal. Other tubes, such as latex mushroom-tipped
catheters, Foley catheters, or Low Profle tubes, can
Antegrade catheterization
be placed with either an open or laparoscopic-assisted
For animals that are either very difficult or too small
surgical technique (Smith 1995; Stiffler 2003). This
to easily catheterize (small female dogs, cats; or have a
allows for a cystopexy to be performed at the same time.
urethral tear or malignant obstruction), antegrade access
These tubes should remain in place for approximately 2
can be attempted (Figure 32.6). Under general anesthesia
weeks after placement. Cystostomy tubes are commonly
 or heavy sedation, this can be accomplished. The patient
associated with secondary infections (at least 86% in
can be placed in lateral recumbency and an area in the
one study) due to the external nature of the tube and
caudal lateral abdomen just over the bladder should be
complications with the tubes have been reported in
clipped and aseptically prepared. A cystocentesis should
as high as 49% of patients, involving inadvertent tube
be performed with an 18-gauge over-the-needle catheter
removal, eating of the tube by the patients, fistulous
directed toward the trigone of the bladder, as described
tract formation, and mushroom-tip breakage during
for the cystostomy tube above. Then 5-15 mL of urine
removal (Beck 2007). This is not ideal in circumstances
is drained from the bladder and replaced with an equal
where chemotherapy (for malignant obstructions) or
amount of contrast material. Once the stylette is removed,
immunosuppressive  t
therapy (for  immune-mediated
a hydrophilic guidewire is advanced into the bladder and
disease-proliferative urethritis) is being used.
aimed toward the bladder trigone under fluoroscopic
guidance. This can then be aimed down the urethra
Urethra
and out of the body gaining through-and-through access
from the bladder, though the urethra, and out the ure-
Urethral catheterization is typically a fairly simple and
thral orifice. Once the wire is outside the urethra, a uri-
routinely performed procedure in veterinary patients
nary catheter (open-ended; Foley, red rubber, Locking
primarily used to monitor urine output, establish urine
Loop catheter, etc.) is advanced over the wire in a retro-
grade manner, through the urethra and into the urinary
cal/functional urethral obstructions, urethral tears, or to
bladder. This is ideal for male cats with urethral tears,
provide urethral patency following urethral or urinary
bladder surgery. The most common urethral catheters
because the tear is usually longitudinal and made in a
retrograde manner. Longitudinal urethral tears will usu-
used are either Foley catheters that have a balloon tip to
 ally heal within 5-10 days without surgical intervention,
 prevent the catheter from backing out into the urethra or
and the catheter should be maintained for that length of
a red rubber catheter that is more rigid, but do not have a
time (Meige 2008).
safety mechanism for inadvertent removal like a Foley. In
male dogs, catheters are easily advanced in a retrograde
Urethral stents
 manner, up the penile urethra and into the urinary blad-
der. All catheters in the urinary system should be placed
 Urethral stents are most commonly used for the relief of
with sterile technique. In female dogs and cats, this is a
malignant urothelial obstructions in the urethra. They
little more difficult,requiring digital palpation of the ure-
d  ssiss   ed  oe 
thral papilla for catheter advancement, and sometimes
ative/granulomatous urethritis, urethral strictures, and
the use of a speculum or cystoscope/vaginoscope to aid
reflex dyssynergia, when standard medical intervention
papilla cannulization. There are various types of catheters
has failed or surgery is either declined or not indicated.
developed for male cats, and it is most important to use
Extraluminal urethral compressions secondary to neo-
an atraumatic type of catheter. Rigid catheters, like a
plasia have also been successfully stented. Urethral stents
TomCat, can result in urethral tears and are not recom-
are compressed metallic tubes that are typically of two
mended by the author. More hydrophilic soft catheters,
types: self-expanding metallic stents (SEMS)? made of
like a Slippery Sam, or small 3.5 or 5 Fr frozen red rub-
laser-cut nitinol metal and Balloon-Expanding Metallic
Indwelling urinary catheters and stents   337
BEMS
SEMS
(a)
aj
(b
(C)
(C
Figure 32.7 Metallic stents used for urethral obstructions. BEMS, balloon expandable metallic stent: (a) A BEMS is preloaded on a
percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) balloon that is guided over a guidewire before it is deployed. (b) The PTA balloon is inflated
using an insufflation device to the predetermined pressure, and the stent is then expanded to its predetermined diameter. (c) Once the
PTA balloon is deflated and removed, the stent remains in place, over the guidewire in the desired location. SEMS, self-expanding metallic
stent: (a) This stent is compressed onto a stylette and covered with a sheath to prevent premature deployment. It is advanced over a
pawaapaid shi oi dn suado juais aul pue anais aui yo paojdap uaut s! yieays aul uoneno paisap ayr ul palenis pue amapinn
diameter and length. (c) Once the stent is fully deployed, the stylette is removed over the wire and the stent remains in place.
Stents (BEMS)1 made of either stainless steel or nitinol
colon to adjust for magnification, is used for determining
metal (Figure 32.7). They are placed transurethrally
the appropriate stent size. A SEMS is chosen (approxi-
under fluoroscopic guidance, in a minimally inva-
mately 10-15% greater than the normal urethral diame-
sive manner, without necessitating surgical interven-
ter and 1 cm longer than the obstruction on both the cra-
tion. Malignant obstructions of the urethra can cause
 nial and caudal ends). The stent is deployed under fluoro-
severe discomfort, dysuria, and life-threatening azotemia.
 scopic guidance and a repeat contrast cystourethrogram
Greater than 80% of animals with transitional cell carci-
 is performed to document restored urethral patency. Self-
noma (TCC) of the urethra and/or prostatic carcinoma
expanding metallic stents come in various sizes from 612
experience dysuria and approximately 10% developing
mm diameters and 40-80 mm lengths. Because of the
complete urinary tract obstruction (Norris 1992; Knapp
longer size of these stents, which is needed for tumor
2000). Chemotherapy and radiation therapy have been
coverage, a BEMS is more commonly used when stenting
successful in slowing tumor growth but complete cure
obstruction due to strictures or very narrow obstructions.
is uncommon. When signs of obstruction occur, more
The reason for this is that strictures are often very short
aggressive therapy is indicated. Placement of cystostomy
in nature, and a BEMS is usually under 30 mm length
tubes, transurethral resections, and surgical diversion-
(15-30 mm). They also come in variable diameters rang-
ary procedures have been described, but are invasive and
ing from 3-10 mm. It is very important to only stent
 potentially associated with an undesirable outcome due
the length that is necessary in order to decrease the risk
to manual urine drainage, associated morbidity, frequent
of urinary incontinence (5-10 mm beyond the visible
urination, and infection (Norris 1992; Stiffler 2003; Lip-
obstruction).
tak 2004). Placement of metallic stents using fluoroscopic
 Metallic stents remain in place once they are deployed
guidance through a transurethral approach can be a fast,
 and are very difficult to remove. It is rare for a tumor
reliable, and safe method to establish urethral patency in
to grow through the interstices of the stent, but we have
both male and female dogs (and potentially cats) with an
seen a rare number of cases where the tumor grew behind
85-90% good to excellent palliative outcome in over 60
or in front of the stent and an additional stent was
canine cases currently performed at the author's institu-
added.
tion (Weisse 2006).
There are many uses for various urinary catheters and
A contrast cystourethrogram is performed and
stents in the urinary tract of dogs and cats, all of which can
transurethral retrograde, or antegrade, guidewire access
be placed in a minimally invasive fashion. Fluoroscopy is
across the narrowing is obtained, as described above.
recommended for the placement of most stents, though
Measurements of the normal urethral diameter and the
surgical placement has been successful for ureteral stents
length of obstruction are obtained (Figure 32.8) during a
and nephrostomy tubes without the benefit of fluo-
powerful cystourethrogram for maximal urethral disten-
roscopy. There are some people who use ultrasound alone
sion. A marker catheter, which is typically placed in the
 to place locking loop pigtail catheters in the renal pelvis
338 Therapeutic techniques
(e)
Figure 32.8 Urethral stent placement in an 8-year-old mixed breed dog with prostatic carcinoma and a urethral obstruction. (a) A marker
catheter (small black arrow) is placed in the colon in order to adjust for magnification and measure the maximal urethral diameter and
Aeun aui oui pue enuain aui dn paueape s! (mone ahm leus) amapinh y uoalas azis suais aiedoidde noj yihual aainisgo
bladder. (b) A catheter is advanced over the guidewire (large black arrow) and once the guidewire is removed, a cystourethrogram is
performed. It is important that the bladder be maximally distended prior to the urethrogram to fully appreciate the location of the bladder
trigone. (c) The urethral lumen is maximally distended behind the tumor and contrast is seen extravisating into the prostatic carcinoma
(white asterisk). The urethral obstruction is appreciated by the very narrow lumen (large white arrows) in front of and behind the prostate.
The marker catheter is used to get a maximal urethral diameter measurement (5 mm) and a stent size is chosen. It is ideal to oversize the
diameter by 10-15%. (d) The SEMS (self-expanding metallic stent) is advanced over the guidewire into the urethra (black arrowhead)
and the length of the stent is predetermined to cover approximately 5-10 mm cranial and caudal to the urethral obstruction. (e) The
stent is initially deployed from the cranial aspect until the mesh is seeded into the urethra at the bladder trigone, and the remainder is
then en-sheathed to cover the length of the obstruction. (f) The stent is fully deployed (black arrowheads). There is a small amount of
nonobstructive tumor behind the caudal end of the stent appreciated by the filling defect (black asterisk). Since this area of the urethra is
 not obstructed and is fully patent, it was elected not to stent this region to decrease the risk of urinary incontinence
and bladder, and if fluoroscopy is not available, this too
Endnotes
can be considered. The introduction to advanced uri-
1. Iohexol, 240 mg/mL, Omnipaque, GE Healthcare Inc, Princeton,
nary catheters and stents in veterinary medicine in the
NI
past 5 years has truly given our patients alternatives they
2. Weasel Wire (0.035-, 0.025-, 0.018-inch) hydrophilicangle-tipped
never had before. Avoiding invasive surgeries with exces-
guidewire, Infiniti Medical LLC, West Hollywood, CA.
sive morbidity in animals with non-resectable malignant
 3. Dawson-Meuller Drainage Catheter, 5 Fr., Cook Medical, Bloom-
cancer for ureteral or urethral obstructions is the basis
ington, IN.
for how many of these techniques were first discovered in
4. Infiniti 6 Fr. Locking loop drainage catheter, Infiniti Medical LLC,
human medicine, and the same principles apply to our
West Hollywood, CA.
 5. Vet Stent, Double pigtail Ureteral stent, Infiniti Medical LLC, West
patients.
Hollywood, CA
Indwelling urinary catheters and stents 339
 6. Nephroureteral catheter, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN.
Lennon, G.M. ( 1997). Double pigtail ureteric stent versus versus percu-
7. Open ended ureteral catheter, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN.
taneous nephrostomy: effects on stone transit and ureteric motility.
8. Disposable Trocar Needle, 18 g × 15 cm, Cook Medical, Bloom-
Eur Urol 31(1): 24-29.
ington, IN.
Liptak, J.M. (2004). Transurethral resection in the management of
 9. Vet Stent-Urethra, Infiniti Medical, West Hollywood, CA.
urethral and prostatic neoplasia in 6 dogs. Vet Surg 33: 505.
10. Balloon Expandable Metallic Stent, Infiniti Medical, West Holly-
Meige, F. (2008). Management of traumatic urethral reupture in 1l
wood, CA.
cats using primary alignment with a urethral catheter. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 21: 76-84.
References
Mustafa, M. (2007). The role of stenting in relieving loin pain fol-
lowing ureteroscopic stone therapy for persisting renal colic with
Adams, L.G. ( 1999). Electrohydraulic and extracorporeal shock-wave
hydronephrosis. Int Urol Nephrol 39( 1): 91-94.
lithotripsy. Vet Clirn North Am Small Anim Pract 29: 293-302.
Norris, A.M. (1992). Canine bladder and urethral tumors: a retrospec-
Al-Awadi, K.A. (1999). Steinstrasse: a comparison of incidence with
tive study of 115 cases (1980- 1985). I Vet Interm Med 16: 145.
and without J stenting and the effect of J stenting on subsequent
 Smith, J.D. (1995). Placement of a permanent cystostomy catheter
management. BJU Int 84: 618.
to relieve urine outflow obstruction in dogs with transitional cell
Beck, A.L. (2007). Outcome of and complications associated with tube
carcinoma. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 206: 496-499.
cystostomy in dogs and cats: 76 cases (1995-2006). J Arm Vet Med
Stiffler, K.S. (2003). Clinical use of low-profile cystostomy tubes
Assoc 230: 1184-1189.
in four dogs and a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 223(3): 325-
Berent, A., C. Weisse, et al. (2007). Ureteral stenting for benign and
329.
malignant disease in dogs and cats. Abstract presernted at Armerican
 Stone, E.A. (1988). Ureterocolonic anastomosis in ten dogs with tran-
Coege of Veterinary Surgery, 1721 October, Chicago, IL.
sitional cell carcinoma. Vet Surg 17: 147.
Block, G. (1996). Use of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for
 Snyder, D. (2005). Diagnosis and surgical management of ureteral
treatment of nephrolithiasis and ureterolithiasis in five dogs. I Am
calculi in dogs: 16 (1990-2003). New Zealand Vet Journal 53(1):
Vet Med Assoc 208(4): 531-536.
19-25.
Goldin, A.R. (1977). Percutaneous ureteral splinting. Urology 10(2):
Uthappa, M.C. (2005). Retrograde or antegrade double-pigtail stent
165-168.
placement for malignant ureteric obstruction? Clin Radiol 60:
Hubert, K.C. (2005). Passive dilation by ureteral stenting before
608-612.
yeteroscopy: eliminating the need for active dilation. I Urol 174(3):
Weisse, C. and A. Berent (2009). Interventional radiology and endo-
1079-1080.
 surgery of the urinary system. Current Veterinary Therapy, XIV.
Knapp, D.W. (2000). Naturally occurring canine transitional cell car-
Weisse, C. (2006). Evaluation of palliative stenting for managerment of
cinoma of the urinary bladder. A relevant rmodel of human invasive
malignant urethral obstructions in dogs. IArm Vet Med Assoc229(2):
bladder cancer. Urol Oncol 5: 47.
226-234.
Kyles, A. (2005). Management and outcome of cats with ureteral cal-
Yossepowitch, O. (2001). Predicting the success of retrograde stenting
culi: 153 cases (1984-2002). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226(6): 937-944.
for managing ureteral obstruction. I Urol 166: 1746-1749.
Kyles, A. (2005). Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultra-
Zimskind, P.D. (1967). Clinical use of long-term indwelling silicone
sonographic abnormalities in cats with ureteral calculi: 163 cases
rubber ureteral splints inserted cystoscopically. I Urol 97: 840-
(1984-2002). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226(6): 932-936.
844.
33
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
Larry G. Adams and Corinne K. Goldman
Lithotripsy is crushing or fragmenting uroliths by high-
lithotripsy is the preferred technique (Kahnoski et al.
energy shock waves or by laser energy. Types of lithotripsy
1986; Segura et al. 1994). Percutaneous nephrolithotomy
include extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESwL),
involves fragmentation and removal of nephroliths with
electrohydraulic lithotripsy, and laser lithotripsy (Chap-
ter 34). ESWL utilizes repeated shock-waves generated
pelvis. For large staghorn nephroliths, ESWL is not rec-
outside the body to fragment the uroliths into smaller
ommended because of the risk of ureteral obstruction
fragments that can pass spontaneously through the excre-
during passage of large amounts of nephrolith fragments.
tory system.
The relative roles of ESWL, laser lithotripsy, and
In 1980, EsWL was first used to successfully fragment
    r  
nephroliths in a human patient in Germany (Chaussy
determined in dogs and cats. Although percutaneous
et al. 1982b). In 1984, the initial clinical trial of ESWL
      
in the United States showed excellent results for treat-
 research dogs, (Donner et al. 1987) the technique has
ment of nephroliths (Lingeman et al. 1986). The wide-
 only recently been performed in dogs with sponta-
spread use of ESWL and the subsequent development of 
 neously occurring nephroliths ( Weisse et al. 2008). Laser
laser lithotripsy have changed the treatment approach to
 lithotripsy may be utilized for fragmentation and removal
uroliths in humans such that minimally invasive tech-
of lower urinary tract uroliths in dogs and cats that
 niques are utilized for approximately 99% of upper tract
 can be visualized using a rigid or flexible cystoscope
uroliths versus less than 1% treated by open surgical
   ) (    
methods (Lingeman et al. 2002).
 Grant et al. 2008). Although electrohydraulic lithotripsy
In humans,the relative roles of ESWL, laser lithotripsy
a  sa) so  d q oe 
and percutaneous nephrolithotomy have been estab-
 a ane   s ai s (
lished through prospective clinical trials (Lingeman et al.
lithotripsy because of greater efficiency and efficacy of
1987; Lingeman 1989; Lam et al. 1992; Albala et al. 2001).
laser lithotripsy compared to electrohydraulic lithotripsy
In humans, ESWL is usually the first choice for treat-
(Adams et al. 2008; Defarges and Dunn 2008; Grant et al.
ment of nephroliths and proximal ureteroliths because
2008). In veterinary medicine, ESWL is used primarily
of its high success rate and non-invasive nature (Segura
for fragmentation of nephroliths or ureteroliths in dogs
et al. 1997; Lingeman et al. 2002). Ureteroscopy with laser
and for ureteroliths in cats. The remainder of this chapter
lithotripsy is successful for removal of ureteroliths in over
will be limited to discussion of ESWL in dogs and cats.
90% of human patients and this approach is considered
the first choice for impacted distal ureteroliths (Segura
Overview of extracorporeal shock wave
et al. 1997; Grass0 et al. 1998; Denstedt et al. 2001; Bagley
lithotripsy
cutaneous nephrolithotomy with or without shock wave
ESWL treatment of nephroliths and ureteroliths results
in comminution of uroliths into smaller fragments which
are able to pass down the ureter and subsequently
be voided with the urine (Figure 33.1). We originally
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
reported the safety and efficacy ofESWL for the treatment
340
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy  341
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 33.1 Abdominal radiographs of an 8-year-old spayed female Shih tzu with bilateral nephroliths and right ureterolith before ESWL
(a) and (b). Abdominal radiographs after ESwL (c) and (d) showing fragmentation of the nephroliths and right ureterolith. All urolith
 fragments passed and were voided within one month
of canine nephrolithiasis and ureterolithiasis from our
shock wave is directed at the urolith by an integrated
first five cases (Block et al. 1996). Currently, we have
o  s ms m sop ot o p
 raphy. Shock waves are high-amplitude sound waves gen-
Dornier HM3 lithotriptor. In ESWL, shock waves are
erated by electrohydraulic, electromagnetic or piezoelec-
 generated outside the body and then reflected to con-
trical energy sources. Like ulrasound waves, shock waves
verge on a focal point which is a defined distance from
travel through media of fluid or soft tissue density until
the shock wave generator. The patient is positioned such
reaching a tissue interface at the “"hard" acoustic surface
that the urolith is placed within the focal point. The
of the urolith.
342
 Therapeutic techniques
Figure 33.2 A 7-year-old spayed female Miniature Schnauzer
positioned in the Dornier HM-3 lithotriptor for ESWL treatment of
bilateral nephroliths. Note the water level on the side of the water
bath and the biplanar fluoroscopy used for targeting the uroliths.
The initial lithotriptor used for human clinical use,
the Dornier HM3 (Dornier, Marietta, GA), relied upon
Figure 33.3 A 12-year-old spayed female Lhasa apso positioned
transmission of shock waves through a water bath
on a dry lithotriptor for ESw/L. Note the fluid-filled cushion used
medium, requiring the patient to be partially submerged
for coupling the shock wave generator to the patient below and
during treatment. This lithotriptor is still used by the
fluoroscopy unit above the patient.
authors for treatment of uroliths in dogs (Figure 33.2).
 In the Dornier HM-3, shock waves are generated by an
grated targeting system of the lithotriptor. Accurate tar-
underwater spark created by an electrohydraulic elec-
geting is essential to fragment uroliths and prevent dam-
trode. Newer lithotriptors utilize other types of shock
age to other organs. This is particularly important with
wave generators and “dry” methods, in which shock
dry lithotriptors with small intense focal spots. The lung
waves are transmitted to the patient through a fluid filled
field should be shielded from the shock wave to pre-
cushion while the patient lies on a dry treatment table
vent pulmonary contusion since lung parenchyma has
(Figure 33.3). While dry lithotriptors are easier to use
different acoustical impedance than soft tissues. Once
and more widely available, the effcacy of dry lithotrip-
ESWL therapy is initiated, the targeted urolith should
tors is lower than that of the Dornier HM-3, because
be periodically monitored to confirm that fragmentation
of smaller focal zones and in some cases, lower peak
 is occurring and that positioning is accurate. For larger
 pressure (Lingeman et al. 2002). This narrow focal zone
uroliths, several different areas of the urolith should be
limits shock wave damage to surrounding tissues, but
targeted during ESWL. Uroliths or urolith fragments may
requires precision in targeting uroliths. For either type
migrate within dilated ureters or within the urinary blad-
of lithotriptor, the hair overlying the entry point of the
der lumen, thus the patient may need to be re-positioned
 shock waves should be clipped to prevent trapping of air
during ESWL to assure complete fragmentation of all
bubbles under the hair that could attenuate the shock
uroliths.
wave at the skin surface. With dry lithotriptors, the treat-
 ment head of the lithotriptor must be carefully coupled
Mechanisms of urolith fragmentation
 to the body wall with copious amounts of ultrasonic cou-
by shock wave lithotripsy
pling gel to assure transmission of the shock waves into
the body.
Fragmentation of uroliths during ESWL occurs by
Prior to initiation of ESWL, the urolith must be accu-
mechanical stresses on the urolith produced by the shock
rately identified by fluoroscopy, ultrasonography or both.
wave itself or by collapse of cavitation bubbles on the
The patient is positioned such that the urolith is placed
surface of the urolith (Chaussy et al. 1982a, 1982b;
within the focal spot of the lithotriptor utilizing the inte-
 Lingeman et al. 2002; McAteer et al. 2005). The major
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy  343
 proposed mechanisms of urolith comminution include
this information, ESWL treatment strategies for dogs and
(1) compressive fracture, (2) spallation, and (3) cavita-
cats with upper tract uroliths should include using slower
tion (Lingeman et al. 2002).
 treatment rates and maintaining total shock wave dose
As the shock wave enters the front edge of a urolith,
delivered to an individual kidney below approximately
positive pressure waves generate compression-induced
1,500 shock waves depending on the lithotriptor utilized.
cracks or fractures that often occur along preexisting
Voltage stepping is the term used to describe ESWL
defects in the urolith. Reflection of a compressive wave at
the far surface of the urolith at the urolith-urine inter-
wave and progressively increase the voltage during treat-
face results in a reflected wave that is inverted in phase
ment as compared to the conventional approach of set-
referred to as a tensile (negative) wave. If the tensile wave
ting the lithotriptor at a constant voltage for the entire
exceeds the tensile strength of the urolith, microcracks
duration of shock wave therapy. Voltage stepping (e.g-)
within the urolith occur, and then coalesce to fragment
increasing voltage from 16 to 18 kV) results in the
the urolith near the posterior surface of the urolith. This
improved fragmentation of upper uroliths compared
 process is called spallation.
to using the same voltage (18 kV) for all shock waves
Cavitation is the process of rapid formation and col-
administered (Zhou et al. 2004; Maloney et al. 2006;
lapse of air bubbles in the fluid medium on the surface of
 Demirci et al. 2007). Patient tolerance of ESWL therapy is
uroliths. During the collapse of these air bubbles, a liquid
 also improved with voltage stepping allowing for lighter
jet or microjet occurs and accelerates to extremely high
speeds which impact on the surface of the urolith result-
Therefore, ESWL protocols for dogs and cats should
ing in surface pitting (Crum 1988; Pishchalnikov et al.
include voltage stepping by increasing the shock wave
2003; Chitnis and Cleveland 2006). Cavitation is thought
dose during ESWL.
tion of uroliths smaller than 2-3 mm. The inability of
 Based on available research and our clinical experi-
cavitation bubbles to form and collapse from lack of fluid-
ence, we have the developed treatment recommenda-
urolith interface around impacted ureteroliths may con-
tions for ESWL protocols for treatment of nephroliths,
tribute to the observed lower success rates for fragmen-
ureteroliths and urocystoliths using the Dornier HM3
lithotriptor. The approach when using other lithotrip-
(Lingeman et al. 2002).
tors should be adjusted based on relative power and safety
profile of the lithotriptor compared to the HM3 (Linge-
man et al. 2002).
Principles of extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy treatment of uroliths
Treatment of nephroliths and ureteroliths
in dogs using shock wave lithotripsy
In dogs and cats, ESWL treatments are performed under
general anesthesia to provide analgesia during the pro-
 Dogs with nephroliths should be treated with a full ther-
cedure and to facilitate accurate targeting of the uroliths.
apeutic dose of 1,400-1,500 shocks per kidney at energy
Treatment of nephroliths by ESWL may cause injury to
levels that are gradually increased from 13 to 16 kV. The
the kidney, therefore the total dose delivered to the kid-
rate of shock wave administration should be 60-90 shock
 waves per minute. The Dornier HM-3 is designed to trig-
old for inducing clinically relevant renal injury ( Webb
ger shock waves based on the patient's ECG (termed ECG
and Fitzpatrick 1985; Newman et al. 1987; Jaeger et al.
 gating) to avoid shock wave-induced arrhythmias. The
1995). Shock wave-induced renal injury occurs primar-
Dornier HM-3 can be programmed to trigger a shock
ily by formation and collapse of microscopic air bubbles
         
within the kidney tissues, especially within the blood
allowing the rate of shock wave administration to be
vessels (Williams et al. 1999; Evan et al. 2002; Sapozh-
adjusted to within the target range. As ECG gating of
nikov et al. 2002; Pishchalnikov et al. 2003). Severity
ESWL therapy is not required for dry lithotriptors, they
of the renal injury is influenced by the rate of shock
can be triggered at preset rates of 60-120 shock waves per
wave administration such that slower rates (60/minutes)
minute or faster for some models. Following the princi-
are less damaging to renal parenchyma than more rapid
ple that slower rates result in less renal injury and greater
rates (120/minutes) (Sapozhnikov et al. 2002). Further-
urolith fragmentation, we recommend slower rates of
 more, the effcacy of urolith fragmentation is improved
60-90 shock waves per minute.
by slower rates of shock wave administration compared
Treatment with sub-therapeutic shock wave doses
to faster rates (Paterson et al. 2002; Pace et al. 2005). Given
may result in lower fragmentation rates or higher
344  Therapeutic techniques
re-treatment rates, thus full therapeutic doses are recom-
ureteral stents may be placed retrograde up the ureter
mended. In most dogs with bilateral nephroliths, both
over a urologic guide wire via cystoscopy. Once the
kidneys can be safely treated during the same anesthetic
ureteral stent is no longer needed, the stent can be easily
episode. For larger bilateral nephroliths, pre-placement
extracted via cystoscopy by grasping the distal end of the
of double pig-tailed ureteral stents, minimizes the risk of
ureteral stent and providing gentle traction to withdraw
ureteral obstruction during passage of nephrolith frag-
the stent through the urethra. In dogs with large bilateral
ments through the ureters (Figure 33.4). In female dogs,
 nephroliths treated without ureteral stents, ESWL treat-
ment of the kidneys may be intentionally staggered with
treatments administered ≥4 weeks apart to minimize the
risk of bilateral ureteral obstruction during passage of
ureteral fragments.
 For dogs with ureteroliths in the mid to distal ureter,
aggressive ESWL treatment protocols are more likely to
result in successful fragmentation. Ureteroliths are more
difficult to fragment by ESWL compared to nephroliths
(Pace et al. 2000; Paterson et al. 2005). This difficulty
appears to be due to the inability of cavitation bubbles
to form and collapse on the surface of the ureterolith
(Pishchalnikov et al. 2003; Chitnis and Cleveland 2006).
ESWL treatment of the ureteroliths in the proximal
ureteral may result in the caudal pole of the kidney being
 included within the treatment focal spot while targeting
(a)
the ureterolith. If the kidney is included in the treat-
ment focal spot, the total dose targeting the nephrolith
and ureterolith should not exceed 2,000 shock waves. For
mid to distal ureteroliths in dogs, ESWL treatment should
be aggressive with doses of 2,000-3,000 shock waves at
progressively increasing voltages from 15 to 18 kV. These
higher ESWL doses can be used as long as the kidney
is not included within the treatment focal spot while
targeting the most proximal ureterolith. The maximum
number of shock waves we have safely administered to
target multiple distal ureteroliths was 4,400 shock waves
at 18-19 kV. When targeting multiple ureteroliths, it is
recommended to treat the most distal ureterolith first
and move proximally up the ureter towards the kidney.
Placement of ureteral stents is not essential for treat-
ment of ureteroliths, but there are advantages of ureteral
stents that facilitate ESWL and patient management.
Ureteral stents allow urine to bypass ureteral obstruc
tion at the site of the ureterolith and prevent addi-
tional renal damage from obstructive uropathy. Because
ureteral stents are radiopaque, they facilitate accurate tar-
geting of ureteroliths during SWL (Figure 33.4). When
treating ureteroliths using fluoroscopy without ureteral
stents, administration of intravenous contrast iodinated
agent such as iohexol may be required to delineate the
ureter and to accurately target smaller ureteroliths. Fluid
diuresis during ESWL treatment may hinder opacifica-
(b)
tion of the ureter during the excretory phase follow-
Figure 33.4 Abdominal radiographs of a 7-year-old spayed
ing intravenous iohexol administration. Ureteral stents
female miniature poodle with bilateral ureteral stents prior to
also induce passive ureteral dilation thus increasing the
ESWL treatment of bilateral nephroliths.
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy  345
(Culkin et al. 1992). This has the theoretical advantage
of allowing for greater urolith-fluid interface for cavita-
tion bubble formation and collapse to increase the effi-
ciency of urolith fragmentation. Passive dilation of the
ureter should also facilitate passage of nephrolith and
ureterolith fragments following ureteral stent removal.
Nephroliths are successfully fragmented and removed
by ESWL in approximately 85% of dogs. Approximately
30% of dogs require more than one ESWL treatment
for complete fragmentation of nephroliths. Re-treatment
rates in humans vary by type of lithotriptor and are gener-
ally higher with dry lithotriptors (Lingeman et al. 2002).
For dogs with obstructed ureteroliths, nearly 80% of
ureteroliths can be resolved by ESWL, although roughly
 50% require two or more ESWL treatments which is a
Figure 33.5 A 9-year-old neutered male mixed breed dog posi-
higher re-treatment rate than for dogs with nephroliths.
tioned in the Dornier HM-3 lithotriptor for ESWL treatment of
This is similar to observations in humans and in research
urocystoliths
models that confirm impacted ureteroliths are more dif-
ficult to fragment compared with nephroliths (Pace et al.
2000; Lingeman et al. 2002; Paterson et al. 2005). Since
much smaller treatment focal spots of most dry lithotrip-
the development of smaller flexible ureteroscopes and
tors. When using these machines, use of higher shock
laser lithotripsy, humans with ureteroliths that fail ESWL
are usually treated by ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy
location within the bladder via fluoroscopy may improve
rather than having repeated ESWL (Lingeman et al. 2002;
efficacy of this approach. If the fragments are too large
Pace et al. 200o). Ureteroscopy with laser lithotripsy of
to be removed through the urethra following an initial
ureteroliths has not been reported in dogs due to the
 ESWL session, ESWL may be repeated or a secondary
smaller ureteral diameter compared to available flexi-
 procedure such as laser lithotripsy may be required to
ble ureteroscopes. Dr. India Lane has reported successful
remove larger urocystolith fragments. For male dogs that
 ESWL treatment of ureteroliths in dogs and cats using
are too small for transurethral laser lithotripsy, ESWL fol-
  sn d m o  s 
lowed by voiding urohydropropulsion provides an attrac-
subsequently modified our approach to treatment of
tive alternative for non-invasive urolith removal.
ureteroliths (Lane 2003; Lane et al. 2005).
Treatment of nephroliths and ureteroliths in
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy of
cats using shock wave lithotripsy
urocystoliths in dogs
Preliminary research with ESWL in cats revealed that the
Although ESWL is better suited for fragmentation of
shock wave dose must be reduced in cats compared to
uroliths fixed in one location such as nephroliths or
dogs to prevent shock wave induced injury to the kid-
ureteroliths, the authors have successfully fragmented
ney. Using the Dornier HM3, shock wave doses greater
urocystoliths using ESWL. As the urocystoliths tend to
than 750 shock waves at an energy level of 13 kilovolts
move out of the focal spot of the lithotriptor, uniform
result in renal parenchyma injury and reduction in renal
fragmentation does not occur consistently. Recently, we
function. We have treated six cats with spontaneously
have changed our ESWL protocol urocystoliths to admin-
occurring calcium oxalate ureteroliths and chronic renal
ister 2,000 shocks at 18-19 kV using the Dornier HM-
failure with ESWL. Five of these cats also had concur-
3, which is higher than the typical ESWL dose for
rent nephroliths. We were only successful in ESWL treat-
nephroliths (Goldman et al. 2008). The dogs are also
ment of one of these six cats (complete resolution of
positioned in lateral recumbency for targeting of urocys-
the ureterolith). We were unsuccessful in the other five
toliths (Figure 33.5).
cats. Partial fragmentation of the nephroliths occurred
In our experience, urocystoliths can be fragmented
in two of five cats. Ineffective ESWL fragmentation of
by ESWL into fragments small enough to pass through
ureteroliths in cats may be due to intrinsic factors in
the urethra in 85% of the dogs (Goldman et al. 2008).
feline uroliths that make them less susceptible to frag-
 Results of ESWL treatment of urocystoliths using newer
mentation by shock waves (Adams et al. 2005). Another
dry lithotriptors may be significantly lower because of the
 possible explanation is that impacted ureteroliths are less
346    Therapeutic techniques
susceptible to fragmentation by ESWL compared to
 nephroliths (Paterson et al. 2005). This resistance to frag-
mentation of ureteroliths may be due to the lack of urine
around the impacted ureterolith preventing cavitation
which is thought to be important for fragmentation of
smaller uroliths (Crum 1988; Pishchalnikov et al. 2003).
Because of these poor initial results, we discontinued
ESWL treatment of cats using the Dornier HM3.
Recent reports indicate that dry lithotriptors with
- si i i s s q  sios ie r
out compromising renal function. Shock wave treat-
ment of normal cats with the Dornier MFL-50oo did
not cause significant renal injury or renal functional
problems (Labato 2001; Gonzalez et al. 2002). Cats with
(a)
ureteroliths have been successfully treated by ESWL with
dry lithotriptors using large numbers of shock waves per
ESWL session (Labato 2001; Lane 2003; Lane et al. 2005).
Therefore, dry lithotriptors may be used to attempt ESWL
therapy of ureteroliths in cats. Berent et al. have recently
reported successful retrograde ureteral stent placement
in cats with ureteroliths (Berent et al. 2007; Weisse et al.
2008). Ureteral stent placement prior to ESWL may
improve efficacy of fragmentation of ureteroliths as dis-
cussed above.
We previously demonstrated in vitro that feline cal-
cium oxalate uroliths are significantly more difficult
to fragment using ESWL than were paired canine cal-
cium oxalate uroliths (Adams et al. 2005). Shock wave
lithotripsy is unlikely to be as effective for treatment of
ter of the feline ureter requires that all fragments be fine
sand. Even with sand-like fragments, ureteral obstruc-
tion is likely to occur in some cats unless ureteral stents
are placed before ESWL. Therefore, the authors believe
that ESWL treatment of uroliths in cats should be lim-
ited to fragmentation and removal of ureteroliths by dry
lithotriptors only and that nephroliths in cats should not
be treated by ESwL until more research is available to
determine safe and effective protocols.
Complications of ESWL
We have observed several complications from ESWL
treatment. The most common complication has been
the development of transient ureteroliths that partially
(b)
obstructed the ureter in approximately 10% of dogs
Figure 33.6 Abdominal radiographs of an 8-year-old spayed
treated for nephroliths. Unlike humans, clinical signs of
female Bichon friese showing contrast accumulation in both
acute abdominal pain attributable to ureteral “colic” are
kidneys (more severe in left kidney) consistent with contrast
uncommon in dogs during passage of ureteral fragments.
nephropathy. These radiographs were obtained approximately
Acute bilateral ureteral obstruction from nephrolith frag-
24 hours after intravenous iohexol administration for targeting of
 ments may require surgery or placement of ureteral stents
a proximal ureterolith during ESw/L. Note that some of the iohexol
to relieve the obstruction. In dogs with large bilateral
was excreted via the biliary system resulting in opacifiation of the
nephroliths undergoing staggered ESWL treatment of
 gall bladder, smallintestines, and colon.
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy  347
nephroliths, any ureteral fragments that occur from treat-
also has been successful for removal of ureteroliths in a
 ment of the first kidney can be treated by ESWL during
limited number of cats. Careful patient selection and
the second ESWL session along with treatment of the
attention to detail during ESWL are important factors
 second kidney.
for determining success of ESWL therapy.
Treatment of the right kidney in small dogs by ESWL
 often results in mild asymptomatic increases in amylase
References
and lipase, suggestive of pancreatic injury. The pancreas
is probably included in the shock wave focal spot during
Adams, L.G., et al. (2005). In vitro evaluation of canine and feline
the treatment of the right kidney because of these dogs?
urolith fragility by shock wave lithotripsy. Arm J Vet Res 66:
1651-1654.
small size ( <5 kg), the large focal spot of the HM-3, and
Adams, L.G., et al. (2008). Use of laser lithotripsy for fragmentation
the proximity ofthe pancreas to the right kidney. Only 3%
of uroliths in dogs: 73 cases (2005-2006). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 232:
of dogs treated by ESWL with the HM-3 have developed
1680- 1687.
clinical acute pancreatitis following ESWL treatment of
Albala, D.M., et al. (2001). Lower pole I: a prospective randomized trial
the right kidney (Daugherty et al. 2004).
of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy and percutaneous nephros-
tolithotomy for lower pole nephrolithiasis-initial results. I Urol 166:
One dog developed a fatal ventricular arrhythmia dur
2072-2080.
ing ESWL treatment. The origin of the arrhythmia was
Bagley, D.H. (2002). Expanding role of ureteroscopy and laser
not definitively determined. This dog had mitral regurgi-
lithotripsy for treatment of proximal ureteral and intrarenal cal-
tation and left ventricular hypertrophy which may have
culi. Curr Opin Urol12: 277-280.
 contributed to the arrhythmia. Although heart and lungs
Berent, A.C., et al. (2007). Ureteral stenting for benign and malignant
disease in dogs and cats (Abstract). Vet Surg 36: E3.
are shielded from the primary shock wave to prevent pul-
Block, G., et al. ( 1996). Use of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
monary contusions, the heart might have been affected
for treatment of spontaneous nephrolithiasis and ureterolithiasis in
by secondary shock waves from reflection of the primary
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 208: 531-536.
 shock wave off the inside of the water bath and gantry.
Chaussy, C., et al. ( 1982a). Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy: New
Aspects in the Treatment of Kidney Stone Disease. Munich: Krager,
Alternatively, the arrhythmia might have been anesthetic
Pp. 1-109.
associated and unrelated to ESWL. We utilize the ECG
Chaussy, C., et al. (1982b). First clinical experience with extracorpo-
 gating feature of the Dornier HM-3 to minimize the risk
really induced destruction of kidney stones by shock waves. I Urol
of shock wave-induced arrhythmias.
127: 417-420.
One dog developed contrast nephropathy from iohexol
Chitnis, P.V. and R.O. Cleveland (2006). Quantitative measurements
given during ESWL to facilitate targeting of ureteroliths
of acoustic emissions from cavitation at the surface of a stone
in response to a lithotripter shock wave. I Acoust Soc Am 119:
(Figure 33.6). Radiographic contrast was administered to
1929-1932.
assist targeting of ureteroliths or radiolucent nephroliths
Crum, L.A. ( 1988). Cavitation microjets as a contributory mechanism
in 42 other dogs without any adverse effects. In nor-
for renal calculi disintegration in ESWL. I Urol 140: 1587-1590.
mal dogs, iohexol administration had no adverse effects
Culkin, D.J., et al. (1992). Anatomic, functional, and pathologic
when administered multiple times before, during and
390.
after ESWL (Karlsen et al. 1993).
Daugherty, M.A., et al. (2004). Acute pancreatitis in two dogs asso-
Follow-up serum chemistry profles and urinalyses did
ciated with shock wave lithotripsy (Abstract). I Vet Intern Med 18:
not reveal decreased renal function compared to pretreat-
441.
ment evaluation in most dogs. Mean serum creatinine
Defarges, A. and M. Dunn (2008). Use of electrohydraulic lithotripsy
 concentration was not significantly different before, one
in 28 dogs with bladder and urethral calculi. I Vet Interm Med 22:
1267-1273.
day after and one month after ESWL. In four dogs with
Demirci, D., et al. (2007). Comparison of conventional and step-wise
preexisting renal failure, there was a transient increase
shockwave lithotripsy in management of urinary calculi. J Endourol
in serum creatinine concentration which returned to
21: 1407-1410.
pre-treatment levels within 48 hours after ESWL. In
 Denstedt, I.D., et al. (200l). A prospective randomized controlled trial
cats treated by ESWL using the Dornier HM-3, serum
 asd os s sa s 
Urol 165: 1419-1422.
creatinine concentrations were transient increased after
 Donner, G.S., et al. ( 1987). Percutaneous nephrolithotomy in the dog:
ESWL treatment in two of six cats. One additional cat had
an experimental study. Vet Surg 16: 411-417.
marked decline in renal function after ESWL for greater
Evan, A.P., et al. (2002). Kidney damage and renal functional changes
than one month.
are minimized by waveform control that suppresses cavitation in
shock wave lithotripsy. I Urol 168: 1556-1562.
Goldman, C.K., et al. (2008). Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy
Conclusions
for the treatment of urocystoliths in dogs (Abstract). Urol Res 36:
179.
ESWL treatment is an efficacious and safe minimally
Gonzalez, A., et al. (2002). Evaluation of the safety of extracorporeal
shock-wave lithotripsy in cats (Abstract). I Vet Intern Med 16: 376.
348   Therapeutic techniques
Grant, D.C., et al. (2008). Holmium: YAG laser lithotripsy for urolithi-
McAteer, JA., et al. (2005). Ultracal-30 gypsum artificial stones for
asis in dogs. I Vet Intern Med 22: 534-539.
research on the mechanisms of stone breakage in shock wave
Grasso, M., et al. ( 1998). Retrograde ureteropyeloscopic treatment of
lithotripsy. Urol Res 33: 429-434.
 2 cm. or greater upper urinary tract and minor Staghorn calculi. J
Newman, R., et al. ( 1987). Pathologic effects of ESWL on canine renal
Urol 160: 346-351.
tissue. Urology 29: 194-200.
 Jaeger, P, et al. ( 1995). Morphological and functional changes in canine
Pace, K.T., et al. (20oo). Low success rate of repeat shock wave
kidneys following extracorporeal shock-wave treatment. Urol Int 54:
lithotripsy for ureteral stones after failed initial treatrment. I Urol
48-58.
164: 1905-1907.
Kahnoski, R.J., et al. (1986). Combined percutaneous and extracor-
Pace, K.T., et al. University of Toronto Lithotripsy Associates. (2005).
poreal shock wave lithotripsy for staghorn calculi: an alternative to
Shock wave lithotripsyat 60 or 120 shocks per minute: a randomized,
anatrophic nephrolithotomy. I Urol 135: 679-681.
double-blind trial. I Urol 174: 595-599.
Karlsen, S.J., et al. ( 1993). Does the administration of systemic radio-
Paterson, R.F, et al. (2002). Stone fragmentation during shock wave
graphic contrast media influence the acute changes in renal physi-
lithotripsy is improved by slowing the shock wave rate: studies with
a new animal model. J Urol 168: 221l-2215.
Urol 150: 219-222.
Paterson, R.F, et al. (2005). Shock wave lithotripsy of stones implanted
Labato, M.A. (200l). Managing urolithiasis in cats. Vet Med 96:
in the proximal ureter of the pig. I Urol 173: 1391-1394.
708-718.
Pishchalnikov, Y.A., et al. (2003). Cavitation bubble cluster activity in
Lam, H.S., et al. ( 1992). Staghorn calculi: analysis of treatment results
the breakage of kidney stones by lithotripter shockwaves. J Endourol
between initial percutaneous nephrostolithotomy and extracorpo-
17: 435-446.
real shock wave lithotripsy monotherapy with reference to surface
Sapozhnikov, O.A., et al. (2002). Effect of overpressure and pulse rep-
area. J Urol 147: 1219-1225.
etition frequency on cavitation in shock wave lithotripsy. I Acoust
Lane, I.E. (2003). Dry extracorporeal lithotripsy in small animals. Pro-
Soc Arm 112: 1183-1195.
ceedings 21st Annual ACVIMForum, pp.13-14.
 Segura, I.W., et al. (1994). Nephrolithiasis Clinical Guidelines Panel
Lane, I.F, et al. (2005). Lithotripsy. In: Consultations in Feline Internal
summary report on the management of staghorn calculi. The
Medicine, edited by J.R. August. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
American Urological Association Nephrolithiasis Clinical Guide-
Pp. 407-414.
lines Panel. I Urol 151: 1648-1651.
Lingeman, JE. (1989). Relative roles of extracorporeal shock wave
Segura, J.W., et al. (1997). Ureteral Stones Clinical Guidelines Panel
lithotripsy and percutaneous nephrostolithotomy. In: Shock Wave
summary report on the management of ureteral calculi. The Armer-
Lithotripsy 2, edited by I.E. Lingeman and D.M. Newman. New York:
ican Urological Association. J Urol 158: 1915- 1921.
Plenum Press, pp. 303-308.
Webb, D.R.
andJM.
Fitzpatrick(1985).
Percutaneous
Lingeman, J.E., et al. ( 1986). Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy: the
nephrolithotripsy: a functional and morphological study. J
Methodist Hospital of Indiana experience. I Urol 135: 1134-1137.
Urol 134: 587-591.
Lingeman, J.E., et al. (1987). Comparison of results and morbidity of
Weisse, C.W., et al. (2008). Potential applications of interventional
percutaneous nephrostolithotomy and extracorporeal shock wave
radiology in veterinary medicine. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 233:
lithotripsy. I Urol 138: 485-490.
1564-1574.
Lingeman, IE., et al. (2002). Surgical management of urinary lithiasis.
Williams, J.C. Jr, et al. (1999). Efect of macroscopic air bubbles on
In: Campbells Urology, edited by A.B. Retik, E.D. Vaughan Ir., and
cell lysis by shock wave lithotripsy in vitro. Ultrasound Med Biol 25:
A.J. Wein. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp.3361-3451.
473-479.
Maloney, M.E., et al. (2006). Progressive increase of lithotripter output
 Zhou, Y, et al. (2004). The effect of treatment strategy on stone com-
produces better in-vivo stone comminution. JEndourol20: 603-606.
minution efficiency in shock wave lithotripsy. I Urol 172: 349-354.
34
Intracorporeal laser lithotripsy
Jody P. Lulich, Carl A. Osborne, and Hasan Albasan
 r,     ,  
from 0.2 to 4.0 J/pulse, the frequency ranges from 5 to
tion by Stimulated Emission of Radiation". A laser is a
45 Hz, and the power output ranges from 3.0 to 100 Watts
device which transmits light of various frequencies into
(W). The power that one chooses is based on the desired
an extremely intense, small, and nearly non-divergent
 application. The Holmium: YAG laser that we use has a
beam of monochromatic radiation with all the waves in
 maximum power output of20 W with a 350-microsecond
phase. Lasers are capable of mobilizing immense heat and
pulse width.
 power when focused in close range.
The mechanism of stone fragmentation with the
Use of laser energy for intracorporeal lithotripsy is
Holmium:YAG laser is mainly photothermal, and
a relatively new concept. In 1968, investigators first
involves a thermal drilling process rather than a shock-
reported in vitro fragmentation of uroliths with a ruby
wave effect (Adams et al. 2008). Laser energy is trans-
laser. (Mulvaney and Beck 1968) However, because frag-
mitted from the energized crystal to the urolith via a
mentation of stones was associated with generation of
flexible quartz fiber. With each pulse, water at the tip of
sufficient heat that would likely damage adjacent tis-
the laser fiber is vaporized creating a vapor bubble that
sues, it could not be used to treat patients. Likewise, use
when transmitted to the urolith causes thermal decom-
of carbon dioxide laser energy was considered unsuit-
position. Rapid expansion and collapse of vaporization
able for clinical use because it could neither be delivered
bubbles shear the stone into fragments. To achieve opti-
through nontoxic fibers nor through a liquid medium.
mum results, the tip of the laser fiber should be in direct
However, in 1986, using a 504 nm pulsed dye laser,
contact with the surface of the urolith during laser acti-
researchers successfully and safely treated human patients
vation. If the tip of the laser fiber is not close to the stone
with ureteroliths (Dretler et al. 1987). The Holmium:
( <0.5-1 mm), the surrounding fluid absorbs the energy
YAG laser is one of the newest and safest lasers avail-
and the stone remains unaltered.
able for clinical lithotripsy (Razvi et al. 1996; Pierre and
Preminger 2007).
Holmium (Ho) is a rare earth element named in honor
Performing intracorporeal laser lithotripsy
of the Swedish chemist who discovered it (the Greek word
"holmia”" means Sweden). A Holmium:YAG laser is a laser
Laser lithotripsy is performed via cystoscopy in anes-
whose active medium is a crystal of yttrium, aluminum,
chosen according to operator preference, we usually place
and garnet (YAG) doped with holmium (chromium and
female dogs and cats in dorsal recumbency (Figure 34.1 ),
thulium), and whose beam falls in the near infrared
and male dogs in lateral recumbency. Once uroliths are
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum (2,100 nm).
Several commercial models of Holmium:YAG lasers for
visualized with the aid of the cystoscope, the laser fiber is
lithotripsy are available, and the pulse duration ranges
passed through the operating channel of the cystoscope
from 250 to 750 microseconds, the pulse energy ranges
(Figures 34.2-34.5). The tip of the fiber is placed in direct
contact and in a perpendicular orientation to the surface
 of the urolith. In our experience, the initial energy set-
ting to fragment stones is approximately 0.6-0.8 Joules at
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
6-8 Hertz. Energy settings can be increased as desired, but
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
levels greater than 1 Joule and 12 hertz are rarely needed
349
350
 Therapeutic techniques
Figure 34.2 Survey lateral radiograph of a 5-year-old female
spayed, Miniature Schnauzer with three urocystoliths. The radio-
graph appearance of these stones is unique in that their outer
layer is denser than their inner core. These findings are consistent 
with the diagnosis of a compound urolith.
have been reduced to pieces that will easily traverse
the urethral lumen. Voiding urohydropropulsion (Fig-
(a)
ure 34.6) is an efficient and rapid process to remove the
remaining fragments; however, in cases with large stone
burdens, we continue to remove the larger fragments via
basket retrieval to insure a successful urohydropropul-
sion at the end of the procedure. In our experience, the
urethral becomes impacted when voiding a large number
of irregular fragments even though individual fragments
minimize the number of times a clean cystoscopy field
needs to be re-established to retrieve retained urolith
fragments with the stone basket or to repeat laser applica-
tions for fragments that fail to be expelled during voiding
(b)
Figure 34.1 To perform laser lithotripsy. female patients are 
placed in dorsal recumbency. (a) An anesthetized 4-year-old cat 
with urate uroliths. The patient is draped so that only the vulva is
exposed to allow entry of the cystoscope (b).
to efficiently fragment uroliths. During lithotripsy, ster-
ile saline is continuously flushed through the working
channel of the cystoscope to wash debris from the visual
field and absorb stray laser energy.
Once uroliths have been sufficiently fragmented such
that they are small enough to pass through the urethra,
Figure 34.3 Cystoscopic view of a urocystolith in the female
fragments can be removed by a variety of methods. Ini-
Miniature Schnauzer described in Figure 34.2. Holmium: YAG laser
tially, we use a stone basket to remove the largest urolith
 energy transmitted through a 520 μm quartz fiber fractures the
fragments. This permits visual verification that uroliths
urocystolith.
Intracorporeal laser lithotripsy  3
351
Figure 34.4 Lateral double-contrast cystogram of the female
Figure 34.6 Following lithotripsy, the "V" trough is tilted to facil-
Miniature Schnauzer described in Figure 34.2. The radiograph
itate positioning of small urolith fragments into the trigone of the
was obtained following lithotripsy to fragment uroliths and void-
urinary bladder. Then, voiding urohydropropulsion is performed
ing urohydropropulsion to flush urolith fragments out of the urinary
to evacuate urolith fragments.
bladder. The lack of radiolucent filling defects in the central puddle
of contrast agent confirms the effectiveness of these procedures
Our experience to date is that most of these fragments are
to remove stones.
less than 0.2-0.5 mm in diameter. Bleeding and forma-
tion of blood clots usually resolve in 24-48 hours. At that
urohydropropulsion. Table 34.1 lists additional strate-
time, fragments retained in the bladder can be removed
gies to improve efficiency of urolith removal during laser
 by voiding urohydropropulsion or allowed to pass during
lithotripsy.
the voiding phase of micturition.
 In some patients with substantial inflammation of the
Urolith removal via laser lithotripsy may not be pos-
lower urinary tract, transurethral insertion of the cysto-
sible or ideal in all patients (Table 34.2). For example,
 scope results in extravasation of blood and subsequent
cystoscopic evaluation of the urinary tract is not possi-
clot formation during lithotripsy. If the clot entraps stone
 ble in male cats and some small male dogs because the
fragments that remain adherent to the bladder wall, com-
urethra will not permit transurethal passage of a suitable
plete evacuation of stone fragments may not be possible.
 cystoscope. In some cases urolith burden is excessively
large, such that surgical cystotomy is likely to be more
efficient and cost effective. Although we believe that laser
lithotripsy can be quickly learned, the cost of purchasing a
Holmium:YAG laser and cystoscopic equipment should
 be considered in terms of projected patient use. Addi-
 tional accessories facilitating laser lithotripsy and urolith
removal is provided in Table 34.3.
Post-lithotripsy care
 Although cystoscopic evaluation of the urinary bladder
and urethra with rigid endoscopes is sufficient for assess-
 ing complete urolith removal in female patients, the same
SPEC
degree of certainty is not achieved when using flexible
fiberoptic endoscopes in males. Visual resolution of the
fiberoptic scope is limited due to an image created from
Figure 34.5 Urolith fragments flushed from the urinary bladder
multiple individual fibers. In addition, maneuverability
of the female Miniature Schnauzer described in Figure 2. The
within the bladder is limited because the fiberoptic scope
outer layer of the urolith was composed of 100% calcium oxalate
monohydrate. The interior of the urolith was composed of 95%
only deflects in one visual plane and can only be rotated
magnesium ammonium phosphate and 5% calcium phosphate
to a limited degree. For these reasons, we recommend a
carbonate.
lateral survey radiograph and a lateral double contrast
352    Therapeutic techniques
Table 34.1 Strategies to improve lithotripsy efficiency
Strategy
Indication 
Rationale 
Procedure
 Sufficiently deep
 Lithotripsy, basket 
 Sufficient anesthesia will minimize
In addition to providing adequate
anesthetic plane
retrieval and voiding
patient discomfort, and mucosal 
administration of a moderate level
urohydropropulsion
hemorrhage and inflammation
 of inhalant anesthetics consider a
To avoid urethral spasms which
constant rate of fentanyl (10-25
reduce the functional diameter of
mcg/hour per kg)
the urethra.
Administer Propofol (1-2 mg/kg) as
 an intravenous bolus just prior to
voiding urohydropropulsion.
Clear residual urine
Uroliths in male dogs
 Reduced optical darity of urine
Using a large bore transurethral
 from the bladder prior
impedes visual inspection. The
 catheter, empty the urinary bladder
to cystoscopy
working channel of flexible
and rinse 2-3 times with saline.
cystoscopes is usually too narrow
Following the final rinse. Leave the
to rapidly empty and fill the
bladder half full.
bladder.
Use a V trough to
Uroliths in female
V trough supports the patient
 Position female dogs in dorsal
position female
dogs and female cats
during lithotripsy and voiding
recumbency.Instead of having to
patients
urohydropropulsion to remove
lifthe dog up in the air, the trough
urolith fragments from the bladder
near the head of the patient is tilted
upward while keeping the opposite
end on the trough stationary
allowing gravity to reposition
urocystoliths for voiding
urohydropropulsion.
Fluoroscopy
 Uroliths in male dogs
The optical cdarity and limited 
 Place dogs in lateral recumbency
deflectability of flexible
and center X-ray beam over the
cystoscopes impedes lithotripsy.
urinary bladder. With experience,
Fluoroscopy can improve operator
we find that fluoroscopy is rarely
orientation and urolith location.
needed.
Fragment bladder
 Bladder stones in
Stones lodged in the urethra are
Stone baskets and stone grabbers
 stones by first moving
male dogs
held in place more firmly than
are used to retrieve stones from the
 them into the urethra
Sufficient hematuria
stones in the urinary bladder.
urinary bladder and lodge them in 
to prevent 
When the laser is activated, they
the most distal portion of the
visualization and 
are less likely to be deflected out of
urethra that could accommodate
safe laser
the target zone.
their size.
 fragmentation of
Because the volume of the urethra
Voicding urohydropropulsion can
bladder stones
is small compared to the urinary
also be used to move bladder
bladder, blood can be efficiently
stones into the urethra.
cleared from the working area.
Occlude urethra
Urethroliths in male
Proximal occlusion of the urethra
Insert a gloved index finger into the
 proximal to stone
sbop
will prevent stones and stone
rectum and firmly occlude the
fragments from retuming to the
lumen of the pelvic urethra by
urinary bladder where they are
 applying digital pressure against
more difficult to retrieve and
 the ischium through the ventral wall 
fragment.
of the rectum.
Gently insert a lubricated catheter
with a distensible balloon such that
the inflatable balloon is proximal to
urethral stones. Distending the
balloon will occlude the urethra.
Intracorporeal laser lithotripsy  353
Table 34.2 Relative limitations before considering transurethral laser lithotripsy
Limitation
Rationale
 Bleeding disorders
Intravesicular hemorrhage obscures the operator's visibility to accurately aim the laser and retrieve urolith
fragments
 Small dogs
Although the urethra of most females can accommodate instruments to perform lithotripsy, the urethra of
siu Aq suon aheuew Aajes oi no uoasui adons lof moneu ooi aq Aeu by g ueui ssal shop ale
technique.
Male cats
The urethra of the male cat is too narrow to accommodate passage of cystoscopes with working channels
ead hu sie ae u agissod aq Ae Asd lase leianen iamo saqy ase io
urethrostomy because the urethral lumen is wider.
Urethral stricture
Anyssans ol pasn suaudinba paea pue sadosos jo ahessed aui apadu Aew sanpus eyan
perform transurethral laser lithotripsy. We commonly encounter urethral strictures in dogs that have
undergone urethrostomy surgery or other forms of urethral trauma.
Urinary tract infection
Urinary tract infection increases the propensity for urethral swelling and intravesicular hemorrhage during
lithotripsy.
Infusing the bladder with saline or manually compressing the bladder during voicding urohydropropulsion
may cause reflux of bacteria from the urinary bladder into the renal pelvises
Excessive hematuria
Intravesicular hemorrhage obscures the operator's visibility to accurately aim the laser and retrieve urolith
fragments
Large stone burden
Extended procedural time or additional lithotripsy procedures may be required to successfully fragment
and remove all uroliths.
Small uroliths
Uroliths ikely to pass through the urethral lumen should be managed by voiding urohydropropulsion or
basket retrieval.
Equipment Cost
Most veterinary centers purchased either the 20 watt VersaPulse PowerSuite laser sold by Lumenis Inc. or
the 30 watt Odyssey 30 manufactured by Convergent Laser Technologies. Costs range from $40,000 t0
$60,000.
cystogram to assess the lower urinary tract following
 and based on the degree of urothelial trauma associated
lithotripsy.
with uroliths and their removal. The need to continue
 Inspection of the urethra with either type ofcystoscope
medication to relieve discomfort is based on duration of
is sufficient to recognize residual urethroliths. Nonethe-
clinical signs referable to urinary tract pain.
less, consider a positive contrast urethrogram in cases of
considerable urethral trauma or suspected urethral per-
Safety of intracorporeal laser lithotripsy
foration.
We routinely provide antimicrobics (e.g-, penicillins,
Bladder and urethral perforation, urethral swelling
 potentiated penicillins, or flouroquinolones) for approx-
hematuria, and leukocyturia have been reported in
imately 4 days to minimize development of iatrogenic
urinary tract infection associated with insertion of the
(Adams et al. 2008; Grant et al. 2008; Lulich et al.
cystoscope through the urethra. The need, dose, and
2008) In one patient, iatrogenic perforation of the uri-
duration of prophylactic antimicrobic therapy maybe
nary tract resolved following transurethral catheteriza-
better determined by the number and magnitude of
tion for 3-7 days. Urethral obstruction due to urethral
patient and procedural risk factors that are encountered
swelling also resolved following a few days of
during lithotripsy. Do not forget that the duration and
transurethral catheterization. In a similar manner, hema-
selection of antimicrobics is best determined by results
turia and inflammation abated by the third day following
of follow-up monitoring.
urolith removal. These results indicate that complications
We also administer medication to minimize urinary
are short-lived, and most resolve spontaneously or with
discomfort (e.g-, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
 medical management. Table 34.4 lists potential compli-
or opioids); duration of therapy is variable (e.g-, 1-4 days)
cations and strategies to minimize their development.
354    Therapeutic techniques
Table 34.3 Accessories facilitating laser lithotripsy and urolith retrieval
Accessory
Use
Additional information
Source
Biopsy port
Use to prevent backflow of fluid 
Many types are available. Some are
 Check-Flow adapter
sealers and 
around laser fibers and other
provided with devices such as stone
(050885)-Cook
adapters
instruments being inserted
retrieval baskets.
Tuohy-Borst Adapter (TBA-6)
 through the working channel of 
Cook
cystoscopes.
Urolok Il Adapter (730-140)
Boston Scientific
Ceramic scissors
Cut off the fractured and frayed
Laser fibers can be reconditioned
Ceramic Scissors (C-124)
end of the laser fiber before each
and used repeatedly.
Kyocera Scribe Pen-Lumenis
use.
Inspection scope
 Use the inspection scope to
To prevent laser misfiring inspect 
Inspection Scope-Lumenis
 evaluate laser fiber integrity prior 
laser fibers prior to each use.
 to fiber sterilization and
connection to the laser.
Laser safety
 Protective eyewear is needed
Laser lithotripsy is relatively safe.
Lumenis Inc.
goggles
during laser operation
However, if the laser is accidentally
Numerous vendors
fired when the tip is not contained
within the urinary system, stray
laser energy can damage the retina
and other tissues in its firing path.
Routine corrective lenses will not
protect eyes from Holmium: YAG
laser energy.
Laser ureteral
Insert laser fiber into catheter so
The catheter prevents the sharp end 
Laser Ureteral Catheter
catheter
the tip of the fiber is not
 of the laser fiber from damaging the
(022402) Cook
 exposed. Insert both into the
biopsy channel of flexible 
cystoscope. Before firing the
endoscopes.
laser, advance the end of the
Catheters also minimize fraying the
laser fiber out the other end of
end of the laser fiber as it is passed 
 the protective catheter.
through the biopsy channel of
cystoscopes.
Lithotripsy fibers
Flexible quartz laser fibers
Laser fibers are available in a
Laser Fibers (RBLF-200, 365)
 transmit laser energy to the
variety of diameters (e.g., 200, 365
Laser Peripherals
surface of the stone.
 550 microns) to accommodate the
SlimLine 200IM, 365TM, and
biopsy channel of any cystoscope.
550TM. Lumenis
Energy delivered to fragment stones
ScopeSafe holmium laser
does not vary with fiber diameter;
fibers, Optical Integrity
however, smaller fibers can be
more expensive.
Narrow diameter
In male dogs, used to prevent 
Urethroliths are more efficiently
ClearView Silicon Foley
balloon catheters
urethroliths and urethrolith
 fragmented because their
Catheter, SurgiVet
 fragments from migrating 
movement out of the laser field is
Many sizes and vendors
proximally out of the laser field.
limited due to the minimal volume
The balloon at the end of the 
 of the urethral lumen.
catheter is positioned in the 
urethra proximal to the stone
prior to its inflation.
Single action 
Attach tubing to flush/biopsy
The narrow flush/biopsy channel of 
Single Action Pumping 
pumping system
 port of flexible endoscope to
flexible endoscopes minimizes
System, Boston Scientific
and tubing
facilitate administration of
adequate flow of flushing solutions.
flushing solution.
This device overcomes this
impediment.
Intracorporeal laser lithotripsy  355
Table 34.3 (Continued)
Accessory
Use
Additional information
Source
Stone grasping
In male dogs, some stones can
In general, stone grasping forceps
forceps
 be retrieved and repositioned in
permit easier stone disengagement 
 the urethra to facilitate
than stone retrieval baskets.
lithotripsy.
Stone retrieval
To reposition urocystoliths for
Stone retrieval baskets are available
NCirde? Nitinol Tipless Stone
basket
fragmentation in the urethra and 
in a variety of sizes and types.
Extractors, Cook Urological.
retrieve stone fragments
Tip-less baskets are preferred
Halo Nitinol Tipless Stone
following lithotripsy
because they can retrieve smaller
Basket, Sacred Heart Medical.
fragments.
Many retrieval baskets are
marketed for single use, but can be
sterilized and reused.
Stripper for laser
Strip approximately 5 mm of 
Laser fibers can be reconditioned 
Microstrp precision stripper
fiber
plastic coating from the end of
 and used repeatedly.
(Ms1-15 S-18-FS) Slimline
laser fibers before each use
 A different gauge stripper is used
for each different fiber diameter.
Ureteral access
A human ureteral access sheath
Lithotripsy is often associated with
Fexor (FUS-095035) Cook
sheath
is placed in the urethra of male
repeated insertion and 
dogs to facilitate cdean and rapid
repositioning of the endoscope.
access to the urinary bladder.
The access sheath allows dean
A guide wire is used to failitate
reinsertions without exteriorizing 
placement of the access sheath.
the penis of male dogs.
The sheath protects the urethra
from damage during
instrumentation and stone retrieval.
"V" Trough
"y" shaped form padding
 The trough also facilitates patient 
facilitates positioning female
repositioning during voiding
 patients in dorsal recumbency.
urohydropropulsion to evacuate
stone fragments. Instead of lifting 
the patient, the trough is tilted such
that the head is elevated to position
stone fragments in the urethral
outflow tract.
Efficacy of intracorporeal laser lithotripsy
dure to complete urolith removal. On average, it took
 23 minutes longer to manage urinary stones by lithotripsy
Three studies designed to evaluate the efficacy of the
 compared to cystotomy. However patients undergoing
Holmium:YAG laser in dogs with spontaneous uroliths
lithotripsy were discharged from the hospital approxi-
report a complete urolith removal rate of approximately
mately 12 hours sooner. In another report of 23 dogs
82% to 84% [6-8]. In all three studies, complete urolith
undergoing laser lithotripsy, 84% were discharged the
removal was achieved in 100% of dogs with urethroliths.
same day (Grant et al. 2008).
In dogs with urocystoliths, complete urolith removal rate
 The incorporation of laser lithotripsy epitomizes a
was higher in females (83-96%) than in males (68-81%).
paradigm shift in the way uroliths are managed in
A case-controlled, retrospective study compared
dogs and cats. With a 10o% success rate in the man-
66 dogs whose uroliths were removed with laser
agement of urethroliths in dogs, laser lithotripsy abol-
lithotripsy to 66 dogs of similar stone burden whose
ishes the need to perform disfiguring urethrotomy and
uroliths were removed surgically. (Bevan et al. 2008)
urethrostomy surgeries to correct urethral obstruction.
 Both were equally successful; for every eight procedures,
Because laser lithotripsy is minimally invasive, patients
approximately one case required an additional proce-
recover rapidly without the need for restricted activity
356    Therapeutic techniques
Table 34.4 Potential complications when performing transurethral laser lithotripsy
Complication
Occurrence
 Avoidance
Bladder rupture
Rare
Bladder perforation is possible during excessive or forced over-distension with fluid, or from
direct trauma via careless advancement of cystoscopes and laser fibers. Monitoring bladder
fullness and cystoscope position will minimize iatrogenic trauma even in bladders with
preexisting weakness.
Bladder perforation can also occur when incorporating voiding urohydropropulsion to
remove urolith fragments. Keeping the size and volume of urolith fragments to a minimum.
Insuring adequate anesthesia to promote complete urethral relaxation will minimize
excessive intravesical pressure during manual compression. If the integrity of the bladder
wall is questionable, remove urolith fragments with a stone retrieval basket.
Cyanide production
Rare
Thermal decomposition of uric acid to cyanide can occur during lithotripsy. However, our
attempts to detect cyanide in the effluence during lithotripsy of uroliths composed of
purines have been unsuccessful. Nonetheless, continuous irrigation of saline and frequent
evacuation of the urinary bladder during lithotripsy is recommended to prevent cyanide
from potentially accumulating to harmful concentrations.
Mucosal hemorrhage
Common
Hemorrhage obscures working visibility. In addition to strategies recommended to minimize
urethral swelling, use lower laser power settings (0.6 J and 6 watts) to minimize urolith
ricocheting during urolith fragmentation
Mucosal perforation
Rare
eu paaap si iaua ase a n sneaq aen si od jeson
microsecond pulses and is quickly dispersed in fluid surrounding the tip of the laser fiber.
Being careful that the laser is activated only when the fiber is in contact with the surface of
the stone will avoid urothelial perforation.
Retention of small
Common
Urolith fragments approximately 0.5 mm or less in diameter can become trapped in blood
urolith fragments
e se aaias Aew siuawbeny 'passed jou jl wngauoin papnuap oi paupene pue wouy bunzoo
nidus for future uroliths. Voiding urohydropropulsion 24 hours or longer following
lithotripsy is often sufficient to completely evacuate the bladder. In some cases these
minute fragments will spontaneously pass during routine urine voiding
Urethral obstruction
Variable
Complete obstruction is rare because irregular shaped fragments are unlikely to form an
occlusive seal within the urethral lumen. However, urethral obstruction may occur when
large numbers fragments are voided through the urethra simultaneously. If this occurs, use
the laser to break up the fragment conglomeration and reduce fragment size. If anticipated,
remove a portion of the fragments with a stone basket prior to voiding urohydropropulsion.
Also see urethral swelling below.
Urethral swelling
Common
Urethral swelling impedes evacuation of uroliths and increases the likelihood of urethral
obstruction. The degree of swelling is proportional to the frequency with which cystoscopes
are passed and urolith fragments removed through the urethral lumen. To minimize this
complication, pass well-lubricated scopes gently, select scopes with smaller working
diameter than the urethra, fragment stones into smaller fragments before removal, and
correct infection prior to lithotripsy. Also consider using a urethral access sheath to protect
the urethra. If urethral obstruction is eminent, consider a short period (24 hours) of
continuous transurethral catheterization until swelling subsides.
or devices or ointments to prevent premature suture or
closer to completing our mission of making the surgical
staple removal. Based on our experience, we recommend
removal of uroliths a treatment of historical interest.
that during the initial learning phase, clinicians select
female patients because uroliths are easy to target, or dogs
References
with urethroliths because of the short procedure time and
Adams, L.G., et al. (2008). Use of laser lithotripsy for fragmentation
extremely high success rate for complete urolith removal.
of uroliths in dogs: 73 cases (2005-2006). I Am Vet Med Assoc 232:
Removal of urethroliths by lithotripsy brings us one step
1680-1687.
Intracorporeal laser lithotripsy 357
Bevan, J., et al. (2008). Laser lithotripsy and cystotomy are equally
Lulich, J.P., et al. (2008). Efficacy and safety of laser lithotripsy to man-
effective for management of canine urocystoliths and urethroliths.
IVet Intern Med 22: 732
I Vet Intern Med 22: 732.
Chan, K.F., et al. ( 1999). Holmium: YAG laser lithotripsy: a dominant
          
photothermal ablative mechanism with chemical decomposition of
I Urol 99: 112
urinary calculia. Lasers Surg Med 25: 22-37.
Pierre, S. and G.M. Prerminger (2007). Holmium laser for stone
 Dretler, S.P., et al. ( 1987). Pulsed dye laser fragmentation of ureteral 
management. World I Urol 25: 235-239.
calculi: initial clinical experience. I Urol 137: 386-389.
 Razvi, H.A., et al. ( 1996). Intracorporeal lithotripsy with the holmium:
Grant, D.C., et al. (2008). Holmium: YAG Laser Lithotripsy for urolithi-
YAG laser. J Urol 156: 912-914.
asis in dogs. I Vet Irtern Med 22: 534-539.
35
Canine retroqrade urohydropropulsion
Carl A. Osborne, Jody P. Lulich, and David J. Polzin
Overview
Summary of major steps for retrograde
urohydropropulsion
Urocystoliths are commonly voided into the urethra of
male dogs where they often become lodged adjacent to
1. Verify and localize the urethroliths with the aid of
the caudal aspect of the os penis. On occasion, we have
appropriate imaging procedure(s).
encountered urethroliths in female dogs. If uroliths cause
2.
Decompress the urinary bladder by cystocentesis.
persistent complete obstruction of the urethral lumen,
Save representative aliquots of pretreatment urine for
 post-renal azotemia will result. If treatment is not pro-
urinalysis and urine culture.
vided, death willoccur within two to four days. Therefore,
 3. Lubricate the urethral lumen to facilitate retropropul-
safe and cost-effective techniques to restore urine outflow
sion of urethroliths.
are needed. Refer to the chapter on lithotripsy for details
 4.  Develop an anesthetic plan based on the overall status
of use of this technique to remove urethroliths.
 of each patient.
Once uroliths become lodged in the urethra of male
5.
 Perform retrograde urohydropropulsion.
  a   a si ii   
6.
 Minimize catheter-induced trauma to various com-
removed by the technique of voiding urohydropropul-
ponents of the urinary tract, and use the appropri-
sion. However, in our experience, urethral patency can,
ate technique to minimize iatrogenic urinary tract
with few exceptions, be restored by flushing urethroliths
infection.
-n  q u  a o 
 7. Consider an appropriate technique to manage the
dropropulsion (Piermattei and Osborne 1971; Osborne
urocystoliths.
and Lees 1995; Osborne et al. 1995; Osborne and Polzin
1999). The efficacy of this technique is related to dilation
of a portion of the urethra containing urethroliths with
Equipment
fluid under pressure. However, to be consistently suc-
cessful, one must be familiar with all aspects of the tech-
Either rigid or flexible urethral catheters may be used.
nique. In our experience, unfamiliarity with the details of
The advantage of using a flexible urethral catheter is that
this technique is often associated with failure to remove
it permits placement of the top of the plunger (aka a
all of the urethroliths. In this chapter, we emphasize
piston) on the table so that the barrel of the syringe can be
aspects of the technique that are frequently overlooked
 pushed down on the plunger (Figure 35.1). Advancing the
by collagues who have consulted with us when they
syringe barrel over the plunger allows greater pressure to
were unsuccessful in restoring urethral patency with this
be generated within the isolated segment of the urethral
procedure. Appropriate care must be taken to minimize
lumen containing the uroliths compared to conventional
trauma and pain to various components of the urinary
use of the syringe.
tract, and iatrogenic urinary tract infection.
 Large capacity syringes, 22-gauge hypodermic needles,
and intravenous extension sets will facilitate atraumatic
cystocentesis. The length of the 22-gauge needle should
be adequate to easily reach a point mid-way between the
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
bladder vertex and the junction of the urethra and the
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
bladder neck. Depending on the size of the patient, and
358
Canine retrograde urohydropropulsion  359
Correct
Incorrect
Figure 35.3 Schematic drawing illustrating correct and incorrect
sites of insertion of a needle into the bladder for the purpose
of decompressing the overdistended lumen. The needle should be
Figure 35.1 Photograph illustrating correct use of a flexible ure-
inserted in the ventral or ventrolateral surface of the wall cranial to
thral catheterto increase pressure generated with syringe plunger.
the junction of the bladder neck with the urethra. This will permit 
Arrow heads point to digital pressure applied to junction of
removal of a large volume of urine and decompression of the
catheter with syringe and digital pressure applied to external ure-
lumen without need for reinsertion of the needle into the bladder.
thralorifice. Large arrow pointsto barrel of syringe being advanced
ower syringe plunger.
mixture be prepared by connecting the tips of two large-
capacity syringes using a three-way valve. One syringe
the distance of the ventral bladder wall from the ventral
can be partially filled by aseptically removing the syringe
abdominal wall, 1.5-inch hypodermic or 3-inch spinal
plunger and adding an appropriate quantity of sterilized
needles may be selected (Figures 35.2 and 35.3).
lubricant (such as K-Y Jelly). The other syringe should be
 partially filled with sterilized saline solution. After clos-
valve, a flexible urethral catheter, sterilized aqueous lubri-
 ing the outflow port, injection of these solutions back
 cant, and sterilized isotonic saline (or its equivalent) will
and forth between the syringes will result in a sterilized
be needed to inject a lubricant around the uroliths (Fig-
solution of reduced viscosity that can be readily injected
ures 35.4 and 35.5). We recommend that the lubricant
through a urethral catheter.
Figure 35.2 Components used for decompressive cystocente-
sis: Large capacity syringe: Flexible intravenous tubing. 22-gauge
Figure 35.4 Photograph illustrating placement of viscous steril-
needle.
ized aqueous K-Y Jelly into the barrel of a large-capacity syringe.
360  Therapeutic techniques
ubricant
(a)
(b)
Lubricantand
saline mixed
(c)
(d)
Figure 35.5 Photographs illustrating technique for mixing sterilized aqueous lubricant with physiologic saline solution in two syringes
connected by a three-way valve. (a) Sterile lubricant is contained in syringe on left and sterile physiologic saline solution is contained
in syringe on right: (b) the physiologic saline solution is injected into the syringe containing the sterile lubricant: (c) The saline-lubricant
mixture is then injected back into the empty syringe: (d) The process is continued until the lubricant and saline are mixed.
Selection of syringe size for urohydropropulsion may
volume contained in 6- or 12-milliter syringes is insuff-
substantially affect the volume and pressure of saline in
cient to prime the system. Since the 60 mL syringe would
the system. Application of the Law of LaPlace to fluid
likely contain enough saline to fill the lumens of the
 mechanics indicates that the pressure of a liquid (or gas)
 catheter and urethra, but would be incapable of gen-
within a cylinder is inversely proportional to the radius
-       s  s 
of the cylinder. Therefore, a 60 milliliter syringe would
 tem, while the 12-milliter syringe would likely generate
decrease the pressure that could be created in the system
enough pressure, but contain an insufficient volume of
compared to the pressure that could be created with a
saline to distend the urethra and fill the lumen of the
smaller capacity syringe (i.e., 35 mL or 20 mL capac-
 catheter, the 20 or 35 mL syringe system is the compro-
ity syringe). Using this logic, use of a 6- or 12-milliliter
 mise likely to be most effective. Compared to the larger
syringe could potentially generate more pressure than
and smaller syringes, they have the capacity to generate 
a 20- or 35-milliliter syringe provided sufficient saline
sufficient pressure and contain an adequate volume of
was available to fill the lumen of the catheter and to fill
liquid to propel urethroliths back into the bladder lumen
and distend the urethra fluid under pressure. Although
(Figure 35.6).
adequate pressure may be generated, for most dogs, the
Canine retrograde urohydropropulsion  361
Toolarge
over-distension of the bladder, decompressive cystocen-
tesis should generally be performed prior to urohy-
5056
dropropulsion.
Some benefits of performing decompressive cystocen-
tesis prior to performing retrograde urohydropropulsion
are: (1) an uncontaminated representative urine sample
suitable for analysis and culture is obtained; (2) decom-
pression of an overdistended urinary bladder by remov-
 ing most (but not all) of the urine provides a mecha-
nism to temporarily ameliorate discomfort and contin-
ued adverse effects of obstructive urethropathy (irrespec-
tive of cause); and (3) decompression of an overdistended
urinary bladder and proximal urethra may decrease resis-
 tance to retrograde movement of urethroliths into the
bladder lumen. Failure to decompress an overdistended
Too small
urinary bladder prior to retrograde urohydropulsion may
Figure 35.6 Various syringe sizes illustrating application of the
result in impaired ability to flush urethroliths into the uri-
Law of LaPlace, which states that pressure is inversely proportional
nary bladder ( Table 35.1). If excessive pressure is created
to radius; therefore, syringes with a smaller radius require a higher
 in the overdistended bladder lumen, it will rupture.
pressure.
The potential risks of performing decompressive cys-
tocentesis are that: (1) it may result in extravasation of
urine into the bladder wall and/or peritoneal cavity, and
Steps for retrograde urohydropropulsion
(2) it may injure the bladder wall or surrounding struc-
Step 1. Verification and localization of
tures. Although these complications could be severe in
urethroliths
patients with a devitalized bladder wall, in our experi-
   a e  s  
Perform appropriate diagnostic procedures tolocalize the
than the rule provided that the majority, but not all,
sites of urethrolith(s), and evaluate their number, size,
of the urine is removed from the bladder before initi-
radiodensity, and surface characteristics. Since uroliths
ating urohydopropulsion. Intraperitoneal extravasation
rarely form in the urethra, but migrate from the blad-
of a small quantity of urine through the pathway cre-
der lumen into the urethra be sure to include the uri-
ated by 22-gauge hypodermic needle is usually of lit-
nary bladder in the evaluation. Palpation of the posterior
tle consequence. The potential of trauma to the blad-
urethra (including palpation of the urethra per rectum)
od a z aq  ss ee pe n
technique.
should be performed to establish the site(s) and cause(s)
n iau no sme, ue  pou e m
of outflow obstruction. Ultrasonography may be of value
mendation regarding decompressive cystocentesis. Clin-
in evaluation of the urinary bladder. If the urethroliths
ical judgment is required regarding its use in each patient.
become lodged in an unusual or unexpected location in
However, it is preferable to decompress the urinary blad-
context of the caudal aspect of the os penis, use con-
 der by cystocentesis (saving an aliquot for appropriate
trast urethrography to rule out mural and/or extramural
diagnostic tests) prior to performing retrograde uro-
urethral lesions that are contributing to outflow obstruc-
  on  () d n 
tion. If the patient has signs of systemic illness, or if the
 integrity of the bladder wall, and (2) in which immedi-
history sugests prolonged outflow obstruction, pretreat-
ate over-distension of the bladder lumen, which predis-
ment urine and blood samples should be obtained to
 poses to loss of urine into the bladder wall and peritoneal
assess renal function, and systemic fluid, electrolyte, and
cavity, is prevented by serially performed decompressive
acid-base status.
cystocentesis.
Step 2. Decompressive cystocentesis
Technique of decompressive cystocentesis
Benefits versus risks
(Figures 35.2 and 35.3)
If obstruction to urine outflow has already resulted
We recommend that a 22-gauge needle be attached to
in over-distension of the bladder lumen, it should be
a flexible intravenous extension set which in turn is
 decompressed by cystocentesis. To prevent iatrogenic
 attached to a large-capacity syringe. After the needle is
362    Therapeutic techniques
Table 35.1 Preventable causes of failure of retrograde urohydropropulsion
I. Technique factors:
A. Failure to lubricate uroliths
B. Inadequate pressure/insufficient urethral dilation.
1. Catheter size too small
 2. Syringe size too small or too large
3. Saline volume too small.
 4. Insufficient pressure applied to syringe plunger.
5. Lack of complete digital occlusion of urethra.
C. Resistance to retrograde flushing caused by overdistended bladder.
D. Lack of coordination between individuals performing technique.
E. Inadequate pharmacologic control of patient discomfort.
F. Premature discontinuation of procedure before stones returned to bladder lumen.
Il. Patient factors:
 A. Discomfort resulting movement and impaired ability to properly restrain patient
B.Rough surface of uroliths (silica; calcium oxalate dihydrate) impairing attempts to move them into the bladder lumen.
C. Narrowing of urethral lumen (inflammatory swelling: strictures) proximal to site of urethroliths
inserted into the bladder lumen, one individual should
tion) to one part of aqueous lubricant should be injected
 digitally immobilize the urinary bladder containing the
through a catheter into the urethral lumen adjacent to the
tip of the 22-gauge needle, while another aspirates urine
uroliths (Figures 35.4 and 35.5). This maneuver helps to
from the bladder lumen through the flexible intravenous 
lubricate the surface of the urolith(s) and the urethral
tubing into a large-capacity syringe. Gentle agitation of
 mucosa, which is often inflamed and swollen.
the distended bladder in an up-and-down motion prior to
 There may be some risk associated with injecting aque-
cystocentesis may disperse particulate matter or crystals
ous lubricants into the urinary tract of patients known to
throughout the urine, and thus facilitate their aspiration
have tears in the wall of the urethra or urinary blad-
into the collection system.
der. Aqueous lubricants have been implicated in the
The bladder should be emptied as completely as is
formation of periurethral granulomas in human beings
consistent with the atraumatic technique. Attempts to
(Read et al. 1961) and rabbits (Blaine 1947). However,
completely evacuate all urine from the bladder lumen
to date, we have not recognized this problem following
is contra-indicated since this mistake predisposes the
use of this technique in hundreds dogs with obstructive
   e  n   g
urethroliths.
underlying tissues with the sharp point of the needle.
Depending on the size of the dog, we typically allow about
Step 4. Restraint and anesthesia
15-20 mL of urine to remain in the bladder lumen.
Some form of sedation or general anesthesia is required
 In the event patency of the urethra is not established
 before the bladder fills with urine and fluid is used
for most patients. Pharmacologic agents dependent on
to back-flush the urethra, decompressive cystocentesis
renal metabolism or excretion for inactivation and elim-
ination from the body should be avoided. If an uncoop-
should be repeated before over-distension of the bladder
erative patient is an anesthetic risk because of a uremic
lumen recurs. On occasion, we have used serial decom-
crisis, topical application of lidocaine gel to the urethral
pressive cystocentesis over a span of several days because
of problems in restoring urethral patency.
mucosa in combination with parenteral administration
of a low dose of analgesic may provide adequate patient
restraint.
Step 3. Lubrication of urethroliths (Figures
General anesthesia should be used if uroliths cannot be
35.4 and 35.5)
removed from the urethra of non-anesthetized patients
Failure to properly lubricate the urethroliths prior to ret-
by urohydropropulsion. Inadequate pharmacologic con-
rograde urohydropulsion may result in inability to flush
trol of patient discomfort may result in failure to flush the
them into the urinary bladder ( Table 35.1).
urethroliths into the bladder lumen ( Table 35.1). Appro-
A liberal quantity of a mixture of one to three parts
 priate precautions should be used for patients in renal
of sterilized physiologic saline solution (or a comparable
failure since they are more sensitive to general anesthesia
 -nos s pie se rns  oos ed
than normal patients.
Canine retrograde urohydropropulsion  363
A combination of intramuscularly administered oxy-
morphone (0.1-0.2 mg/kg) followed by slow intravenous 
administration of propofol (an ultra-short acting anes-
thetic) with dose titration to effect has been an excellent
choice. Propofol is highly protein bound; it is rapidly
conjugated in the liver to inactive metabolites. However,
Symphysispelvis
neither sedation nor anesthesia produced by propofol is
associated with complete relief of pain. Therefore, propo-
fol should be combined with oxymorphone. To avoid
apnea, propofol should be slowly administered by the
intravenous route. In addition, because propofol admin-
istration may be associated with depressant cardiovas-
cular and respiratory effects (especially arterial hypoten-
sion), it is imperative that hydration of the patient be
Figure 35.8 Schematic drawing illustrating sudden release of
adequate prior to anesthesia If necessary, propofol anes-
digital pressure at the pelvic urethra and subsequent movement
 of fluid propelling the urethrolith toward the bladder lumen.
thesia may be prolonged by frequent incremental intra-
venous injections, or by constant intravenous infusion
of low doses. Once urethral patency has been restored,
dure: (Osborne and Polzin 1986; Osborne and Lees
the effects of oxymorphone can be antagonized with nal-
1995)
buphine HCl (0.03-0.1 mg/kg IV) if continued analgesia
is desired, or naloxone (0.002-0.02 mg/kg IV) if respira-
1.
 Inject a liberal quantity of a mixture of sterilized
tory depression is of greater concern.
saline solution and aqueous lubricant through a flex-
Inhalant anesthetics may also be considered to anes-
ible catheter into the urethral lumen adjacent to the
thetize the patient if the drugs are not dependent on the
uroliths.
kidneys for inactivation and excretion from the body.
Step 5. Technique of retrograde
urohydropropulsion (Figures 35.7-35.10)
Step 5A procedure for male dogs (Figures
35.7 and 35.8)
ar
To remove uroliths from male dogs by retrograde uro-
hydropropulsion, we recommend the following proce-
b
Symphysispelv
(G)
Figure 35.9 Schematic illustration of urohydropropulsion in a
female dog with a solitary urethrolith using a conventional urinary
catheter. (a) Urolith originating from the bladder has obstructed
Figure 35.7 Retrograde urohydropropulsion of urethrolith in a
the urethra. (b) Small portion of the urethral lumen distal to the ure-
male dog. Dilation of the urethral lumen is achieved by injecting
padde ainssaid jenbip Aq papnpo ats e ot ewixoid pue yoi
fluid with considerable pressure. Digital pressure applied to the
through the vaginal wall has been expanded by injecting saline
external urethral orifice and the pelvic urethra has created a closed
solution through the catheter. (c) The urolith has been forced back
system.
into the bladder lumen, eliminating obstruction to urine outflow.
364 Therapeutic techniques
urethral orifice. However, caution must be exercised
not to rupture the urinary bladder by over-distending
the lumen with the flushing solution. Therefore, the
size of the bladder should be monitored at appropri-
ate intervals by abdominal palpation. If and when it
becomes full, decompressive cystocentesis should be
?
repeated.
5. At this point, the lumen of all portions of the isolated
urethra, except that located in the ventral groove of
the os penis, will be markedly dilated (Figure 35.7).
Dilation of the lumen of the segment of the urethra
located in the ventral groove of the os penis is limited
to that caused by stretching of the ventral portion of
the urethral wall.
Figure 35.10 Schematic illustration of urohydropropulsion utiliz-
6. Next, digital pressure applied to the pelvic urethra
ing a Swan-Ganz balloon catheter. Inflation of the balloon with
(but not the penile urethra) should be rapidly released
air helps to prevent reflux of saline solution out of the external
(Figure 35.8). Pressure should be maintained in the
urethral orifice.
urethral lumen by continuing to inject saline by push-
ing the syringe barrel over the syringe plunger after
the assistant has released digital pressure applied
2. Next, an assistant should insert a lubricated gloved
through the rectal wall. This step requires coordi-
index finger into the rectum. Firmly occlude the
nation between the two individuals performing the
lumen of the pelvic urethra by applying digital pres-
technique ( Table 35.1). When properly coordinated,
sure against the ischium through the ventral wall of
this step will propel the saline mixture and the ure-
the rectum (Figure 35.7).
throliths toward (or into) the bladder lumen (Figure
 3. A flexible catheter with an attached 20-35 mL syringe
35.8). Often, especially in cases where the uroliths
flled with sterilized saline should then be inserted
have recently passed into the urethra, as the digi-
into the lumen of the penile urethra via the external
urethral orifice and advanced to the site of the ure-
is released, the urethroliths are easily flushed into
throliths. The penile urethra should be compressed
the bladder lumen during the first attempt. How-
around the shaft of the catheter by firm digital pres-
ever, in some situations, the uroliths do not move, or
sure. As a result of steps 5A-2 and 5A-3, a portion of
only move a short distance, before the pressure in the
the urethra from the external urethral orifice to the
urethral lumen has dissipated. If this occurs it may
 bony pelvis becomes a closed system. Failure to prop-
be necessary to repeat the procedure several times
erly occlude the pelvic and/or the distal-most portion
before all the uroliths reach the bladder lumen). The
urethral lumen will result in impaired ability to flush
position of the urolith(s) may be monitored either by
the urethroliths into the urinary bladder ( Table 35.1;
means of palpation of the perineal and pelvic urethra,
Figure 35.7).
with the aid of a catheter carefully advanced through,
4. Saline should be injected into the urethra until a
and/or by means of radiography. If it is necessary to
marked increase in the diameter of the pelvic ure-
repeat the technique, accumulation of large amounts
thra is perceived by the assistant. Confirmation that
of saline and urine in the lumen of the bladder will
the urethra has been markedly distended is impor-
necessitate repeating decompressive cystocentesis.
tant because distention of the urethra to its maxi-
mum capacity must be achieved before a sufficient
5B Female dogs (Figures 35.9 and 35.10)
degree of pressure can be created within the urethral
 Uroliths lodged in the urethra of female dogs may also be
lumen to advance the uroliths. Failure to create suf-
returned to the urinary bladder by following a modified
ficient pressure in the urethral lumen often results
procedure of retrograde urohydropropulsion. (Osborne
 in inability to flush the urethroliths into the urinary
bladder (Table 35.1). The likelihood of rupture of
et al. 1983)
the urethral lumen as a result of intraluminal pres-
1. Inject a liberal quantity of a mixture of sterilized
sure generated by this technique is remote since the
saline solution and aqueous lubricant through a flex-
path of least resistance for fluid is through the ure-
ible catheter into the urethral lumen adjacent to the
thra into the bladder lumen and/or out the external
uroliths (Figure 35.9). Do not remove the catheter
Canine retrograde urohydropropulsion   365
from the urethra. With a gloved index finger in the
the lower genitourinary tract, appropriate antimicrobial
rectum or (if the patient is large enough) in the
 therapy should be considered. Remember to obtain pre-
vagina, firmly occlude the lumen of the distal end
 treatment urine samples for urinalysis and bacterial urine
of the urethra containing the catheter (Figure 35.9).
culture.
This creates a closed system between the occluding
 If, folowing restoration of urethral patency, the deci-
urolith and the site of digital compression of the
 sion to use an indwelling transurethral catheter is being
urethra.
considered, the likelihood of inducing an iatrogenic bac-
2. After lubrication of the urolith(s), inject saline
terial infection must be considered. Ascending migration
solution through a catheter to distend the isolated
of bacteria through the lumen of the catheter may be
portion of the urethral lumen to its maximum. Dila-
d  s   p   
tion of the urethra combined with pressure generated
vent reflux of urine from the collection receptacle back
by the intraluminal saline solution usually propels
into the urinary tract (Osborne and Lees 1995). However,
the urolith(s) into the bladder lumen. Gentle digi-
bacteria may gain access to the bladder lumen by migrat-
tal manipulation of the urolith through the rectal or
ing through the space between the outside surface of the
vaginal wall may aid in moving it toward the bladder.
indwelling transurethral catheter and the surface of the
3. Movement of a large urolith lodged in the neck
urethral mucosa. The question is not whether urinary
of the bladder and proximal portion of the ure-
        
thra may require digital manipulation of the urolith
infection will occur.
 per abdomen by an assistant while saline solution is
Never forcefully advance the catheter through the
injected through the catheter.
lumen of the urethra! Trauma to the urethral wall is
4.  If intraurethral pressure rapidly dissipates because of
the usual consequence of use of excessive force, and may
reflux of saline solution through the external urethral
result in acute inflammatory swelling followed by forma-
and ai ead i esu aq  n 
tion of irreversible strictures. Over-insertion of excessive
several times before the uroliths reach the urinary
lengths of catheter should also be avoided to minimize
bladder. The position of the urolith(s) may be mon-
trauma to the bladder, and/or to prevent the catheter
itored by digital palpation, attempts to advance the
from becoming knotted or entangled within the bladder
catheter, radiography, and/or ultrasonography.
and/or urethral lumens.
 5. If difficulty is encountered in occluding the external
At one time, a common method used to attempt move
urethral orifice around the catheter, a 4-7 Fr balloon
urethroliths that occluded the urethra was pushing them
catheter (i.e., a flow directed angiographic catheter
 back into the bladder with a catheter. However, this tech-
or a small pediatric Foley catheter) may be used
nique is not currently recommended because it is asso-
(Figure 35.10). Inflation of the balloon after it has
ciated with: (1) a high risk of urethral trauma (abrasion,
been inserted into the distal urethra combined with
contusion, laceration, or puncture); (2) inflammatory
firm digital pressure may be effective in minimizing
constriction of the urethral lumen at the site where the
reflux of saline solution through the external urethral
catheter was forced past the urolith; (3) a high risk of
orifice.
secondary urinary tract infection; and; (4) a high rate of
failure. If advancement of a catheter beyond a urethrolith
cannot be achieved without excessive trauma to the
Step 6. Minimize catheter-induced trauma
to the urinary tract, and iatrogenic urinary
urethra, it should be abandoned in favor of other non-
surgical or surgical methods. If the urolith can be moved
tract infection
easily by inserting a catheter into the urethral lumen,
To minimize catheter-associated infection, catheters,
our experience has been that it also can be moved readily
lubricants, irrigating solutions, specula, and other instru-
by retrograde urohydropulsion with far less chance of
ments should be sterilized. However, because the distal
iatrogenic trauma.
portion of the urethra normally contains a commen-
sal population of bacteria, it is impossible to aseptically
References
catheterize the patient. (Osborne and Lees 1995)
The need for prophylactic antibacterial therapy follow-
Blaine, G. (1947). Experimental observations on absorbable alginale
ing retrograde urohydropropulsion must be determined
products in surgery. Amm Surg 125: 1022-1114.
 on the basis of the status of the patient and retrospec-
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 1983). Nonsurgical removal of uroliths from the
tive evaluation of technique. If it is probable that the dog
urethra of female dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 182: 47-50.
Osborne, C.A. and D.J. Polzin (1986). Nonsurgical management of
has ongoing UTl, or if restoration of urethral patency
canine obstructive urolithopathy. Vet Clin North Arm 16: 333-
is associated with substantial trauma and/ or trauma to
347.
366 Therapeutic technigues
Osborne, C.A. and G.E. Lees ( 1995). Bacterial infections of the canine 
Piermattei, D.L. and C.A. Osborne (1971). Nonsurgical removal of
and feline urinary tract. In: Canine and Feline Nephrology and
calculi from the urethra of male dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 159:
Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco. Baltimore, MD:
1755-1757.
Williams and Wilkins, pp. 759-797.
Read, R.J., et al. ( 196l). Granulomas induced by surgical lubricating
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 1999). Canine retrograde urohydropropulsion.
jelly. I Clin Pathol 36: 41-48.
Lessons from 25 years experience. Vet Clin North Am 29: 267-281.
36
Feline urethral obstruction
Carl A. Osborne, Jody P. Lulich, and David J. Polzin
Overview-diagnostics
contrast radiology, ultrasonography, and/or endoscopy
to determine if the cause of urethral obstruction is intra-
 Before considering various aspects of treatment designed
luminal, mural, and/or extramural. If irreversible mural
for urethral obstruction, the fact that obstructive ure-
 or extramural disorders are responsible for persistent or
thropathy can be caused by one or more intra-luminal,
frequently recurrent urethral obstruction, surgical man-
mural, or extramural abnormalities, located at one or
agement may be required. Let us consider each of these
more sites, should be considered (Table 36.1). Why is
 steps in greater detail.
this important? Because, techniques designed to elim-
STEP 1. Gentle Massage ofthe penis between the thumb
inate plugs or stones that are obstructing the urethral
and fingers may help to dislodge matrix-crystalline plugs
lumen would likely have little or no effect on correct-
located in the distal urethra. If necessary, the penis may
ing obstructive lesions located within the urethral wall
be manipulated while it is retracted within the pre-
or periurethral tissue. Therefore, inability to restore ure-
puce. Although this step is often ineffective, its simplic-
thral patency by decompressive cystocentesis followed by
ity and occasional success make it worth trying prior to
flushing the urethral lumen should arouse one's suspi-
consideration of decompressive cystocentesis and ure-
cion that mural or periurethral lesions are causing out-
thral catheterization. Massage may disrupt plug material
flow obstruction in addition to, or instead of, a firmly
packed into the penile urethra to such a degree that subse-
lodged urethral plug or urethrolith.
quent attempts to induce micturition by gentle palpation
of the urinary bladder may result in the plug being voided
Correcting intraluminal urethral obstructions
(Figure 36.1).
STEP 2. Inability of a cat to void urine spontaneously
Following selection of a method of patient restraint
indicates that increasing intraurethral pressure by digi-
designed to minimize adverse drug reactions and iatro-
tally compressing +the urinary bladder is unlikely to be
 genic trauma to the lower urinary tract, we recommend a
effective. However, if this technique is utilized following
urethral massage (Bardelli et al. 1999), suffcient intra-
crystalline plugs or uroliths obstructing the urethral
luminal pressure may be generated to dislodge fragments
lumen (Osborne et al. 1995). In order of priority they
of urethral precipitates. Caveat-Caution must be used to
are: (1) massage of distal urethra followed by step (2),
prevent iatrogenic damage to the urinary bladder.
an attempt to induce voiding by gentle palpation of the
STEP 3. In general, decompressive cystocentesis
urinary bladder (Figure 36.1). If steps 1 and 2 are unsuc-
should be performed if steps 1 and 2 are ineffective in
cessful, proceed to step (3), decompressive cystocentesis
re-establishing urethral patency (Table 36.2, Figures
(Figures 36.2-36.4),followed by step (4) urethral flushing
36.2-36.4). The benefits of performing decompressive
(Figures 36.5-36.7).
cystocentesis prior to flushing the urethral lumen via
 Sometime's we use combinations of steps 1 to 4. If steps
a catheter are: (1) a urine sample suitable for analysis
1 to 4 are unsuccessful, the next step is use of appropriate
and culture may be obtained; (2) decompression of an
overdistended urinary bladder by removing most (but
not all) of the urine provides a mechanism to tem-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
 porarily halt the continued adverse effects of obstructive
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
367
368  Therapeutic techniques
Table 36.1 Diagnostic rule-outs for urethral obstruction in male cats
Primary causes
latrogenic causes
 Perpetuating causes
Intraluminal
Intraluminal
Tissue damage
Urethral plugs (matrix and/or crystals)
 Increased production of inflammatory reactants 
Reverse flushing solutions
red blood cells, white cell, fibrin, etc.
Urethroliths
Sloughed tissue
 Catheter-induced trauma
Tissue sloughed from urinary bladder
 Catheter-induced foreign body
and/or urethra
reaction
Catheter-induced infection
Mural or Extramural
Mural
Postsurgical dysfunction
Strictures
Inflammatory swelling
Strictures
Urethral neoplasms
Muscular spasm
Prostate neoplasms
Reflex dyssnergia
Reflex cdyssnergia
Strictures
Anomalies
Combinations
Combinations
Combinations
back-pressure irrespective of cause; (3) the magnitude of
The potential risks of performing decompressive
 pain caused by overdistension of the bladder and urethra
cystocentesis are that: (1) it may result in extravasation
may be reduced; (4) decompression of an overdistended
of urine into the bladder wall and/or peritoneal cavity,
urinary bladder and proximal urethra may facilitate
(2) it may injure the bladder wall or surrounding
repulsion of a urethral plug or urolith into the bladder
structures, and (3) on rare occasions cystocentesis has
lumen; and (5) the gross and microscopic character
been associated with sudden collapse in cats. Although
of aspirated urine may provide valuable clues about
a cause and effect relationship has not been established,
the nature of the obstructive disorder (intra-luminal
stimulation of the vagus has been implicated. Acute
precipitates of matrix and crystalline material versus
 over-distension of the bladder has been associated with
mural or extraluminal compression (Figure 36.4). Urine
bradycardia in two humans (Koch et al. 2001). In another
case report, enhancement of baroreceptor heart-rate
cates that the patient is at risk of obstruction following
subsequent flushing of the urethral lumen (Figure 36.4).
Figure 36.2 A 22-gauge needle has been attached to one end of
a flexible intravenous extension set (small arrow), and a three-way
valve (large arrow). A large capacity syringe has been attached to
Figure 36.1 Photograph of the external urethral orifice (big
the other end of the 3-way valve. The intravenous extension set
arrow) of an obstructed 3-year-old male cat after digital manipu-
allows one individual to immobilize the 22-gauge needle inserted
lation of the distal portion of the urethra and then manual com-
into the bladder lumen while the movement associated with aspi-
pression of the urinary bladder. Fragments of a matrix-crystalline
rating urine into the syringe is unlikely to cause unwanted move-
plug (small arrows) are visible on the microscope slide.
ment of the sharp tip of the needle in the bladder lumen.
Feline urethral obstruction 369
Figure 36.5 llustration of flushing of a male cat's urethra con-
taining a matrix-crystalline plug. Ater insertion of a Minnesota
olive-tipped catheter, a large quantity of saline is injected the
urethral lumen and allowed to reflux out of the distal urethra.
Correct
Incorrect
if it does not contain pathogens. The potential of trauma
Figure 36.3 Correct and incorrect sites of insertion of a 22-guage
to the bladder and adjacent structures can be minimized
needle into the urinary bladder for the purpose of removing large
by proper technique. In context of minimizing acute
quantities of urine. The needle should be inserted in the ventral
collapse, sedating frightened patients to minimize hyper-
or ventro-lateral surface of the wall cranial to the junction of the
tension, and trying to avoid creating excessive pressure
bladder neck with the urethra.The corect position permits removal
 caused by overdistending the bladder lumen with fluid
 of a large volume of urine and decompression ofthe lumen without
used to flush the urethra should be considered.
 need for reinsertion of the needle into the bladder
We do not advocate an “always or never” recommen-
 dation regarding decompressive cystocentesis. Clinical
sensitivity occurred following distension of the urinary
judgment is required regarding its use in each patient.
bladder in patients with essential hypertension. (Bardelli 
However, it is preferable to decompress the urinary blad-
et al. 1999) In our experience, these events have been the
 der by cystocentesis, saving an aliquot of urine for appro-
rare exception rather than the rule. A key point is the
priate diagnostic tests, prior to flushing the urethral
importance of preventing overdistension of the bladder
by repeating serial cystocentesis until adequate urine out-
flow is restored. Loss of a small quantity of urine into the
peritoneal cavity has been of little consequence, especially
Figure 36.6 Photograph of matrix and crystals on the surface
of a stainless steel table-top after flushing the urethral lumen as
described in Figure 36.5.
Figure 36.7 Schematic illustration of reverse flushing a male
cat's urethral lumen obstructed by a matrix-crystalline plug. After
Figure 36.4 Photograph of insoluble material (arrow) in urine
insertion of the Minnesota Olive-Tipped Urethral Catheter (thin
aspirated by cystocentesis from the urinary bladder of an
long white arrow), digital pressure is used to seal the distal portion
obstructed male cat. This type of abnormality is a risk factor for
of the penile urethra around the olive-tip (fat short white arrows).
recurrence of obstruction and should be considered in the recom-
Then, saline is injected into the urethral lumen with the objective
mendation for therapy with an indwelling transurethral catheter.
of flushing the plug into the bladder lumen.
370  Therapeutic techniques
Table 36.2 Technique of decompressive cystocentesis
1.  Attach a 22-gauge needle to one end of a flexible intravenous extension set, and attach to a three-way valve and large capacity
syringe (35-60 mL) to the other end. Use of a large capacity syringe minimizes unnecessary manipulation, and therefore reduces
the likelihood of trauma to the bladder wall. The intravenous extension set willallow one individual to immobilize the 22-gauge
needle inserted into the bladder lumen while another person aspirates urine into the syringe (Figure 36.1).
2. The 22-gauge needle should be inserted through the ventral or ventrolateral wall of the bladder to minimize trauma to the ureters
and adjacent major abdominal vessels (Figure 36.2). The needle should be inserted midway between the vertex of the bladder
surface and the junction of the bladder with the urethra. This wil permit removal of urine and decompression of the bladder
lumen. If the needle is placed in or adjacent to the vertex of the bladder, it may not remain within the lumen as the bladder
shrinks in size.
 3. Excessive digital pressure should not be applied to the bladder wall while the needle is in its lumen lest urine be forced around
the needle into the peritoneal cavity. Caution should also be taken to prevent laceration of the bladder as a result of movement of
the needle. The bladder should be emptied as completely as is consistent with atraumatic technique. Attempts to remove all the 
urine from the bladder lumen is undesirable as the sharp point of the needle may than damage the bladder wall. Allow 15-20 mL
of urine to remain in the bladder.
4. In the event patency of the urethra is not established before the bladder refils with urine or solutions used to flush the urethra.
decompressive cystocentesis should be repeated. On occasion we have used serial cystocentesis over a span of several days
because of problems of restoring urethral patency.
 5.The need for prophylactic antibacterial therapy following cystocentesis must be determined on the basis of the status of the
patient and retrospective evaluation of technique. If subsequent restoration of urethral patency requires intermittent or ind welling
catheterization, preventative antimicrobial therapy should be considered after the catheter is removed. Remember to obtain
pre-treatment samples for urinalysis and bacterial culture.
lumen in patients: (1) likely to have adequate integrity
of the bladder wall, and (2) in which immediate overdis-
by use of catheters and reverse flushing should arouse
tension of the bladder lumen is not allowed to recur
a high index of suspicion that the underlying cause is
(Osborne et al. 1996).
 not a urethral plug (Table 36.1). In the interim, appro-
STEP 4. Flushing the urethral lumen with sterilized
priate diagnostic procedures should be considered. Over-
solutions following urethral catheterization may dislodge
 ad  a u p  jo us
urethral plugs and uroliths (Table 36.3). However, it is
serial decompressive cystocentesis. We do not recom-
emphasized that urethral obstruction may be caused by
mend surgical intervention as a short term solution for
a combination of intra-luminal precipitates (uroliths or
correction of obstructive urethropathy in uremic cats
matrix-crystalline urethral plugs), swelling of the ure-
unless no reasonable alternative exists.
36.1).
 Reverse flushing solutions should be selected thought-
Immediate considerations following restoration
fully since accumulation and absorption of large quan-
 of urethral patency
tities of acid or anesthetic solutions from an inflamed
urinary bladder may cause systemic toxicity. In addi-
After urine flow has been established by nonsurgical tech-
tion, they may damage the coating of glycosaminogly-
niques, most of the urine should be removed from the
cans (GAGS) that lines the surface of the urothelium.
bladder lumen. However, removing all the urine from
Glycosaminoglycans normally minimize adherence of
the bladder lumen is unnecessary and inadvisable since
crystals and microbes to the urethral mucosa (Osborne
 trauma associated with such efforts may aggravate the
et al. 1996). Adherence of crystals to the urothelium is
 severity of bladder lesions. Manual compression may be
most likely to occur if acidic solutions are used in an
used provided it does not require substantial pressure to
attempt to dissolve struvite crystals. Pending results of
induce voiding. Manual compression of the bladder is not
further studies, we prefer physiological saline or lactated
necessarily the procedure of choice if an overdistended
Ringer's solution because they are readily available, ster-
bladder has been recently decompressed by cystocente-
ilized, nontoxic, nonirritating, and economical. We do
 sis, since it may result in extravasation of urine into the
not recommend buffered acetic acid (so-called Walpole's
 bladder wall or peritoneal cavity. Alternative meth-
solution).
ods include intermittent transurethral catheterization,
Feline urethral obstruction  371
Table 36.3 General guidelines for transurethral flushing of obstructed male cats (Figures 36.1-36.7)
1.Protect the patient from iatrogenic complications associated with catheterization of the urethra (especially trauma, and urinary
tract infection with bacteria).
 2. Strive to use meticulous aseptic "feather-touch" technique.
3. Use only sterile catheters.
4.（
Cleanse the penis and prepuce with warm water prior to catheterization
 5. Select the shortest Minnesota olive-tipped feline urethral catheter? for initial catheterization of the urethra, and attach it to a
flexible IV connection set and 35-60 ml syringe.
6.
Coat the olive tip with sterile aqueous lubricant
7.F
axis of the urethra is approximately parallel to the vertebral column.
8.Carefully advance the catheter to the site of obstruction. If necessary, replace the short olive tipped Minnesota needle with a
longer one. Record the site of suspected obstruction, since this information may be of value when considering use of muscle
relaxants, and/or when considering urethral surgery to prevent recurrent obstruction. CAUTIoN: Never use excessive force when
advancing the catheter
9. Next, flush a large quantity of physiological saline or lactated Ringer's solution (as much as several hundred ml) into the urethral
lumen, and allow it to reflux out the external urethral orifice. When possible, the catheter may be advanced toward the bladder.
As a result of this maneuver, the obstructed urethral plugs may be gradually dislodged and flushed around the catheter and out
of the urethral lumen. Application of steady but gentle digital pressure to the bladder wall after the urethra has been flushed
with physiological saline or lactated Ringer's solution may result in expulsion of a urethral plug or urolith from the urethral
lumen. Excessive pressure should not be used because it may result in: (1) trauma to the bladder, (2) reflux of potentially
infected urine into the ureters and renal pelvis, and/or (3) rupture of the bladder wall.
10.If the technique outlined in step 9 is unsuccessful, it may be necessary to attempt repulsion of suspected urethral plugs or
uroliths back into the bladder lumen by occluding the distal end of the urethra around the olive tip of the catheter before
dilute the urethral lumen. Excessive force should not be used. Failure to decompress an overdistended urinary bladder may
evaluation.
11.． On occasion, it is advantageous to allow the reverse flushing solution to soften the obstructing urethral plugs (this technique is
ineffective for most uroliths) before attempting to propel them back into the bladder. Allowing the lapse of several hours
between attempts to remove firmly lodged plugs by reverse flushing has been effective.
a Minnesota feline olive-tipped urethral catheters are available from EJAY International, Inc, P. O. Box 1835, Glendora, California
91740
and/or cystocentesis. Each of these procedures has ben-
warrant use of antimicrobial agents, they should be given
efits and risks that must be considered in light of
orally or parenterally to maximize their effectiveness.
the status of the urinary bladder and urethral of each
The size of the urinary bladder should be periodi-
 patient.
cally evaluated following restoration of adequate ure-
aun paiendse 1o papioa jo aoueeadde ssoa aul J
thral patency to ensure that urethral obstruction has not
suggests that obstruction with intra-luminal debris is
recurred and/or that the detrusor muscle is not hypo-
likely to recur, removal of this material with saline or lac-
tonic. Micturition induced by gentle digital compres-
tated Ringer's solution flushes of the bladder lumen may
sion of the bladder may facilitate evaluation of urethral
be of value. Particulate material that has accumulated in
patency.
the dependent portion of the bladder may be dispersed
Although glucocorticoid therapy has been advocated
throughout the bladder lumen by digitally moving the
to minimize inflammatory swelling of the urethra, we do
bladder in an up-and-down fashion, which may in turn
 not recommend glucocorticoids in this situation. Why
facilitate aspiration of crystals, inflammatory reactants,
 not? Because glucocorticoids may aggravate the severity
 and blood clots into the catheter and syringe.
of uremia by inducing protein catabolism via gluconeo-
Local instillation of antimicrobial agents into the blad-
 genesis and because they may predispose the patient to
 der lumen in an attempt to prevent or treat urinary tract 
nosocomial bacterial UTl.
infection is of unproved value. Unless the bladder wall is
 Following relief of urethral obstruction, a transi-
hypotonic or atonic, the antimicrobial agent is likely to be
tory obligatory post-obstructive diuresis may develop.
voided soon after instillation. In case the circumstances
 Even though cats with post-obstructive polyuria may
372  Therapeutic technigues
Table 36.4 Guidelines to reduce risk of catheter-induced bacterial UTI
1.Urinary catheterization should only be performed by personnel properly trained and experienced with use of proper aseptic,
atraumatic techniques.
 2.  Select indwelling urethral catheters constructed of materials least likely to cause irritation and inflammation of the adjacent
mucosa.
3.
Thoroughly cleanse the extemal genitalia, and insert the catheter using aseptic technique.
4.
 Avoid overinsertion of catheters to minimize damage to the mucosa of the urinary bladder.
5. Avoid open catheters; maintain a dlosed system.
6.
 Avoid prolonged use of indwelling catheters.
7.
Prevent retrograde flow of urine from the collection receptacle by positioning it below the level of the patient.
pasn s waisas , uado, ue j! Aepadsa uoezuaiauies buampui buunp sisain Aessanauun bupnpu pioae oi al g
9. Avoid giving prophylactic antimicrobial drugs in attempt to prevent UTI unless the duration of catheterization is less than 2-3
days. Even when indwelling catheters are used for a short period, waiting until the catheter is removed before treating with
antimicrobics may be the best strategy.
10.Unless there are specific indications for treatment with corticosteroids where benefits dlearly outweigh risks, they should not be
given to patients with indwelling catheters. Usually, the risk of UTI outweighs the potential benefit of reducing catheter-induced
inflammation with corticosteroids.
11.
 During longer duration use of indwelling catheters, avoid administration of antibiotics unless evidence of UTI associated with
morbidity is deteted. Although antibiotics may decrease the frequency and delay the onset of UTl, there is high risk of
promoting development of infections with one or more bacteria that are resistant to multiple antimicrobial drugs.
12. Perform urinalyses every 24-48 hours for evidence of infection. Perform culture of urine with susceptibity testsif infection is
suspected.
If catheter-induced infection develops and remains asymptomatic, treat the infection after removal of the catheter.
14. Remove the catheter as soon as feasible. At the time of catheter removal perform urinalysis, quantitative urine culture, and
antimicrobial susceptibility tests.
15. If UTI is confirmed after the catheter is removed, initiate therapy with an appropriate antimicrobial drug and continue giving for
at least 10-14 days.
e is 'shnp oi sadansns uaap aaey suahoyied au j pue 'sno saads peapeq auo ueui aio y uoauil al
the bacteria most likely to be virulent. Then select the drug most likely to eliminate the remaining pathogens.
17. Remove and, if appropriate, replace indwelling catheters that are contaminated.
consume some water, the amount is often insufficient to
Catheter-induced nosocomial urinary tract UTls are
maintain proper fluid balance. Therefore, supplementing
common, especially in cats with preexisting disease of the
water intake by parenteral administration of rehydrating
lower tract, Why? Because catheters interfere with host
or maintenance fluids is often advisable.
 defenses, that normally prevent ascending migration of
bacterial pathogens through the urethral lumen. Even
Risks associated with indwelling transurethral
when closed catheter systems are used, catheters allow
bacteria to ascend the urethral lumen via the interface
catheters
between the catheter and the mucosal surface. Bacte-
We do not recommend routine use of indwelling
ria may also adhere to the surface of urinary catheters
transurethlral catheters in all cats following relief of ure-
and initiate growth of biofilms composed of bacteria,
 thral obstruction because the catheters may induce fur-
bacterial glycocalicies, Tamm-Horsfall protein, and stru-
vite crystals. These biofilms may shield bacteria from
cosaminoglycan (GAG) coating of the urothelium as a
antimicrobial drugs resulting in treatment failures. ( Nikel
result of indwelling transurethral catheters may promote
et al. 1985; Osborne et al. 2000) Ascending bacterial
adherence of microbes to the underlying mucosal epithe-
UTI has the potential to cause significant morbidity
lial cells and the submucosal tissues resulting in bacterial
 including pyelonephritis, renal failure, and septicemia.
urinary tract infection. Disruption of the GAG coating
Therefore, unnecessary use of urinary catheters should
may also result in adherence of crystals to the urothelium,
be avoided. Factors to consider in the prevention and
facilitating recurrence of obstruction by allowing crystals
treatment of catheter-induced infections are summarized
to grow and/or aggregate.
in Table 36.4.
Feline urethral obstruction 373
Using indwelling transurethral catheters
(e.g, excessive salivation, abdominal cramping, vomiting
and/or diarrhea).
The likelihood of whether or not a cat will voluntarily
Since bethanachol can also increase urethral resistance
resume adequate voiding following restoration of ure-
 by its nicotinic effects on urethral smooth muscle located
S (a) uoenea (1) Aq passsse aq e uied le
in the proximal urethra, this undesirable action may be
the stream of sufficient caliber and force that it could
 given with phenoxybenzamine. Phenoxybenzamine is an
drill a hole in a snow bank?), (2) the abundance of mate-
alpha adrenergic antagonist which facilitates relaxation
rial in urine with the potential to occlude the urethral
of smooth muscle in the proximal urethra (oral dose =
lumen, and (3) the adequacy of detrusor tone immedi-
0.25 mg/kg every 12 hours). Alternatively, an indwelling
ately following relief of urethral obstruction. Indwelling
transurethral catheters may be indicated following relief
bladder lumen may be utilized. Logic indicates that
of urethral obstruction to: (1) facilitate measurement
periodic voiding induced by manual compression of the
of the rate of urine formation during intensive care of
urinary bladder may also be considered, provided this
critically uremic cats, (2) promote recovery of detru-
technique does not enhance detruser muscle atony by
()   Ad   q  o
increasing intraluminal pressure.
minimize recurrence of urethral obstruction caused by
If an indwelling transurethral catheter is utilized to
  u s  no sd 
minimize accumulation of urine within the bladder, the
patients. However, indwelling transurethral catheters are
previously described precautions designed to prevent
often unnecessary if: (1) the cat has a good urine stream
catheter-induced injury and infection should be consid-
during the voiding phase of micturiton, (2) a func-
ered. In addition to orally administered antimicrobial
tional detrusor muscle, and (3) urine does not con-
 agents, irrigation of the bladder lumen with antimicro-
 tain particulate matter that could reobstruct the urethral
 bial solutions may be considered, provided a sufficient
lumen.
quantity of the bacteriocidal agent remains in the blad-
When use of indwelling transurethral catheters is
der long enough to have a beneficial effect. Only steril-
deemed to be beneficial, several precautions will mini-
ized solutions should be injected in a volume sufficient
mize catheter-induced complications (Table 36.4).
to allow contact with all portions of the bladder mucosa.
Dysfunctional urinary bladder following relief
Persistent urethral outflow resistance
of urethral obstruction
Following restoration of urethral patency (as confirmed
Severe and/or prolonged distension of the urinary blad-
by transurethral catheterization, induced voiding, or con-
der caused by obstruction to urine outflow may cause
 trast radiography), impaired flow of urine through the
impaired capacity of the detrusor muscle to contract
urethra may persist. This may be related to one or more
normally during the voiding phase of micturition. The
 primary, predisposing, or perpetuating causes (Table
underlying cause is thought to be related to disruption
36.1). One cause is inflammatory swelling induced by
of specialized portions of bladder smooth muscle cells
trauma during attempts to remove plugs or stones from
(so-called tight junctions) that normally transmit neu-
the urethra. This problem can be expected to resolve
rogenic impulses from smooth muscle pace-maker cells.
within a few days provided there is no persistent peri-
In this situation, the cat has impaired ability to com-
urethral extravasation of urine.
pletely empty the bladder. However, voiding can usually
Another possibility is a spasm of smooth or skele-
be induced by manual compression applied through the
tal muscles surrounding the urethra. However, the fre-
abdominal wall.
quency with which this type of abnormality occurs and
Once urethral patency has been reestablished, ther-
its responsiveness to smooth and skeletal relaxants have
apy designed to maintain relatively low pressure within
not been extensively characterized. On the basis oflogic,
the bladder lumen may be associated with restoration
one would predict that striated muscle relaxants would
of adequate detrusor function. One therapeutic option
be helpful for cats with obstructions localized to the post-
prostatic urethra. However, at this time, this hypothesis
thomimetic (muscarinic) agent. This drug may enhance
has not been evaluated. On the basis of current evidence,
detrusor contractility. A recommended empirical oral
routine use of smooth and skeletal relaxants in cats fol-
dosage for cats is 1.25-2.5 mg given every 8 hours. If
lowing urethral obstruction is not warranted.
the desired effect does not occur within a few days, the
Other potential causes ofimpaired voiding through the
dose may be increased incrementally up to 5-7.5 mg
urethra include reflex dyssynergia, intra-luminal accu-
every 8 hours, provided harmful side effects do not occur
mulations of sloughed tissue, inflammatory cells, blood
374 Therapeutic techniques
clots, and/or recurrence of matrix-crystalline urethral
cats, death will occur within 3-6 days. Damage to the
plugs. Urethral strictures may cause persistent outflow
mucosal surface of the urinary bladder may shorten sur-
 resistance in patients with recurrent urethral obstruc-
vival time. Despite the potentially catastrophic outcome
 tion. Urethral strictures usually occur as a sequela to:
of urethral obstruction, the biochemical consequences of
(1) catheter trauma induced at the time of treatment
this disorder are potentially reversible provided appro-
 of urethral plugs or urethroliths, (2) use of indwelling
 priate supportive and symptomatic parenteral therapy
 transurethral catheters, especially those constructed of
is given. In severe cases, supportive therapy to min-
material that stimulates a foreign body response, and
imize hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia,
(3) self-trauma (Nikel et al. 1985; Osborne et al. 1996).
 and extracellular fluid depletion should be given a very
    s   
high priority.
 proper patient restraint during urethral catheterization,
avoiding use of indwelling transurethral catheters when
References
possible, and use of restraint devices to minimize self-
Bardelli, M., et al. ( 1999). Baroreceptor heart-rate sensitivity enhance-
 trauma. If urethral strictures predispose to persistent
ment after urinary bladder distension in essential hypertensives.
clinical signs, corrective surgery should be considered,
Urol Res 27: 153-156.
but not before the lower urinary tract has been evaluated
Koch, A.J., et al. (200l). Severe bradyarrhythmia in a patient with
by appropriate imaging studies.
Alzheimer's disease and a patient with cerebral ischemia, both
induced by acute distension of the bladder. Int I Clin Pract 55:
323-325.
Nikel, J.C., et al. (1985). Electron microscopic study of an infected
Managing post-renal uremia
Foley catheter. Car I Surg 54: 50.
Osborne, C.A., et al. (1995). Disorders of the feline lower urinary
An in-depth discussion of post-renal uremia caused by
tract.: Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A.
urethral obstruction is beyond the scope of this chap-
Osborne and D.R. Finco. Philadelphia, PA: Williams and Wilkens,
ter. Briefly, obstructive urethropathy (Chapter 70) that
pp. 625-680.
 persists longer than about 24 hours usually results in
Osborne, C.A., et al. (1996). Medical management of feline urethral
obstruction. Vet Clin North Atm 26: 483.
post-renal azotemia. This occurs because back-pressure
Osborne, C.A., et al. (2000). Feline lower urinary tract diseases. In:
induced by obstruction of outflow impairs glomerular
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and
filtration, renal blood flow, and tubular function. After
E.C. Feldman, Volume 2, 5th edition. Philaelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
obstruction of the urethra of otherwise untreated normal
pp. 1710-1747.
37
Voiding urohydropropulsion
Jody P. Lulich and Carl A. Osborne
Historically, most uroliths in the urinary bladder
face projections are more likely to adhere to the urethral
were either medically dissolved or surgically removed;
mucosa.
however, 15 years ago at the University of Min-
 In our series of clinical cases, diameters of the largest
nesota, we developed an innovative technique to
uroliths expelled from urinary bladders were (1) 7 mm
remove urocystoliths, called voiding urohydropropulsion
from a 7.4-kg female dog, (2) 5 mm from a 9.0-kg male
(Table 37.1).
dog, (3) 5 mm from a 4.6-kg female cat, and (4) 1 mm
 By taking advantage of the effect of gravity on urolith
from a 6.6-kg male cat (Lulich et al. 1993). In male
position in the urinary bladder and dilation of the ure-
cats, uroliths greater than 1 mm in diameter may be
thral lumen during the voiding phase of micturition, this
voided through the urethra modified by perineal ure-
simple technique allowed uroliths to be rapidly flushed
throstomy. As a guideline, smooth urocystoliths less than
out ofthe urinary tract. A limitation of this technique is its
 q pao q n o  u  
ineffectiveness to manage uroliths larger than the diame-
urohydropropulsion in dogs weighing more than 16
ter of the urethral lumen; however, with the introduction
18 pounds.
of lithotripsy to fragment urocystoliths this hurdle has
been overcome. As a result, voiding urohydropropulsion
remains an integral component of minimaly invasive
Volume of urine of fluid in the urinary
urolith management of all urocystoliths regardless of size.
bladder to effectively perform
What follows are answers to clinically relevant questions
 that we believe are most important to effectively perform
voiding urohydropropulsion
voiding urohydropropulsion in dogs and cats.
Successful voiding urohydropropulsion requires that uri-
 nary bladders be maximally distended with urine or ster-
ile isotonic solutions such as lactated Ringer's solution or
Uroliths that can be retrieved by voiding
normal saline solution. Maximal luminal distension facil-
urohydropropulsion
itates rapid and forceful digital compression of the blad-
The relationship between the size, shape, and surface
 der and thus enhances the intraluminal pressure needed
contour of urocystoliths and the luminal diameter of the
to propel the stones through the urethra. For most dogs,
urethra is an important factor in the selection of patients
we fill the bladder lumen with saline injected through an
for voiding urohydropropulsion. Logically, uroliths larger
8-Fr flexible rubber transurethral catheter. We determine
than the smallest diameter of any portion of the distended
the degree of bladder distension by abdominal palpa-
urethral lumen cannot pass. Compared to uroliths with
tion. Sometimes, fluid leaks through the urethra after the
an irregular contour, smooth uroliths pass more easily
catheter is removed. When this occurs, it may be helpful
through the urethra. This may be related, at least in
to occlude the distal urethral orifice by digital compres-
 part, to the fact that uroliths with sharp or irregular sur-
sion.
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
375
376  Therapeutic techniques
Table 37.1 Performing voiding urohydropropulsion
1. Anesthetize the patient
The type of anesthesia selected may vary based on the likelihood of success and gender of
the patient. Consider reversible short-acting anesthetics (e.g., propofol) for patients with
very small uroliths that are easily removed. Patients likely to go to surgery/lithotripsy should
be placed under inhalation anesthesia
2. Attach a three-way stopcock to
The 3-way stopcock facilitates control of the volume of fluid entering the bladder and
the end of the urinary catheter
containment of fluid once the bladder is filled.
 3. Fill the urinary bladder
Sterile physiologic solutions (LRS, normal saline) are injected through a transurethral
catheter to distend the bladder. If fluid is expelled prematurely around the catheter prior to
adequate bladder filing. the vulva and/or urethra can be gently ocduded using your thumb
and first finger. Placement of additional fluid may not be needed
4. Position the patient such that
Repositioning the patient allows uroliths to accumulate at the neck of the bladder
the spine is approximately vertical
facilitating their expulsion. Anatomically, the urethra does not become vertical until the
caudal spine is 20-25° anterior of vertical, but this may not be clinically important
5. Agitate the bladder
Agitating the urinary bladder left and right is performed to collect uroliths in the trigone and
to dislodge uroliths loosely adhered to the bladder mucosa.
6. Express the urinary bladder
Apply steady digital pressure to the urinary bladder to induce micturition. Once voiding
begins,thebladder ismore vigorouslycompressed.Compresstheurinarybladder orsally
and cranially (toward the back and head of the patient). Movement of the urinary bladder
caudally toward the pelvic canal may cause the urethra to kink preventing maximal urethral
dilation preventing the passage of stones.
7. Repeat steps 2 through 6
The bladder is flushed repeatedly until no uroliths are expelled.
8. Medical imaging
Radiography provides an accurate method of assessing successful expulsion of uroliths. To
enhance detection of remaining small uroliths consider double-contrast cystography (only
the lateral view is needed).
Effectiveness of voiding urohydropropulsion
Optimal anesthesia for voiding
with a urethrolith
urohydropropulsion
Voiding urohydropropulsion is not likely to be effec-
Anesthesia is not necessary to perform voiding uroby-
tive in patients with uroliths lodged in the urethra at
dropropulsion in all patients. For most patients, how-
the time of diagnosis. Uroliths obstructing the urethral
ever, we recommend anesthesia to facilitate positioning
lumen have usually been subjected to considerable pres-
 of the patient as well as filling, localization, palpation,
sure during attempts by the patient to void. Therefore,
 and compression of the urinary bladder. When anesthet-
attempts to induce voiding of a fluid-flled urinary blad- ics are used, we recommend agents that provide anal-
der via abdominal palpation are unlikely to create addi-
 gesia and muscle relaxation. In our experience, voiding
tional pressure sufficient to move the obstruction. In 
urohydropropulsion is easiest and safest to perform in
addition, if complete urethral obstruction and bladder 
 patients receiving inhalation anesthetics (isoflurane or
overdistension are associated with underlying disease that
halothane). We generally include a narcotic as one of the
has weakened the bladder wall, digital pressure applied to
preanesthetic drugs to minimize pain. For small urocys-
the bladder could result in bladder rupture. For patients
toliths unlikely to induce any urethral discomfort, we typ-
with uroliths lodged in the urethra, we recommend laser
ically use a combination of intramuscularly administered
lithotripsy to fragment the urolith (see Chapter 34). If
morphone (1 mg/kg) and acepromazine (0.1 mg/kg) fol-
lithotripsy is not available, uroliths should be returned
lowed by intravenously administered propofol titrated to
to the urinary bladder by retrograde urohydropropul-
effect instead of inhalant anesthetics. For cases that are
sion (see Chapter 35) (Osborne et al. 1999) and dissolved
likely to be difficult, we give a small amount of propofol
medically (see Chapter 69), if possible, or removed by
just prior to voiding to insure urethral relaxation. In some
cystotomy (see Chapter 83).
dogs, we have used propofol as the sole anesthetic agent.
Voiding urohydropropulsion  377
Propofol-induced anesthesia is easily titrated, and recov-
Once uroliths have been returned to the urinary blad-
ery is rapid and smooth (Robinson et al. 1995). Drugs to
der, determining the need for their surgical removal
minimize pain following the procedure are usually not
requires knowledge ofthe likelihood that uroliths may re-
needed, but are provided based on the degree of difficulty
obstruct the urethra, of the degree of patient discomfort,
and the need for repeated voiding to remove stones.
 and of urolith composition. Laser lithotripsy or surgery
should be considered if repeat re-obstruction follows suc-
Voiding urohydropropulsion in male dogs
cessful retrograde urohydropropulsion. When surgery is
 necessary, we recommend that uroliths be removed by
 The success of voiding urohydropropulsion is not depen-
 cystotomy rather than by urethrotomy, because urethral
dent on whether patients are male or female but on
strictures are likely sequelae to urethrotomies.
whether uroliths are of suffciently small size to pass
Uroliths amenable to medical dissolution that remain
through the urethral lumen. As the diameter of the ure-
in the bladder can be dissolved using medical protocols.
thra in male dogs appears to be smaller than that in
Asymptomatic uroliths, not amenable to dissolution that
female dogs of comparable weight and because the os
remain in the bladder, usually do not require treatment
penis in male dogs restricts expansion of the urethral
until they become clinically active.
shop  o pioa  uno sn e n
compared to male dogs of similar size. For example, we
Complications of voiding urohydropropulsion
reported that the largest urolith removed from a 9-kg
male dog was 5 mm in diameter, whereas the largest
If patients are carefully selected and a good technique
urolith removed from a 7.4-kg female dog was 7 mm in
is used, voiding urohydropropulsion is a safe procedure.
diameter.
Visible hematuria is the most common complication of
voiding urohydropropulsion, but it resolves in most dogs
Performing voiding urohydropropulsion in
within several hours (Lulich et al. 1993). If patients with
large dogs
uroliths have concomitant urinary tract infection, we rec-
 ommend treatment with antimicrobial drugs for several
To facilitate vertical positioning of large dogs for voiding
days prior to performing voiding urohydropropulsion.
urohydropropulsion, we use examination tables designed
Urethral obstruction with uroliths can occur if voiding
to tilt. The patient is positioned in lateral recumbency
urohydropropulsion is performed in dogs with uroliths
while the urinary bladder is being filled. The patient is
too large to pass through all segments of the urethral
then placed on its back. With one person supporting
lumen. When this occurs, uroliths are easily flushed back
the forelimbs and another person supporting the rear
 into the urinary bladder by retrograde urohydropropul-
limbs, the table is tilted approximately 559 from hori-
 sion. If uroliths cannot be medically dissolved, lithotripsy
zontal. Once voiding has been completed, the table is
or cystotomy may be needed to prevent re-obstruction.
returned to a horizontal position, and the patient can
Filling the urinary bladder by means of transurethral
rest in lateral recumbency.
catheterization is a risk for urinary tract infection; how-
ever, we have not observed bacterial urinary tract infec-
Strategy when uroliths become lodged in
tion in any of our patients in association with voiding uro-
hydropropulsion. This may result from the fact that we
urethra during voiding urohydropropulsion
provided prophylactic antimicrobic agents for 3-5 days
If uroliths are too large to easily pass through the ure-
following urethral catheter placement. Likewise, because
        
uroliths are a risk factor for urinary tract infection, it is
during voiding urohydropropulsion. For most patients,
logical to assume that urolith removal restores the nor-
when this occurs, uroliths are easily flushed back into
 mal host defenses necessary to prevent bacterial invasion
 the urinary bladder by retrograde hydropropulsion (see
of the urinary tract.
Chapter 35). If the urinary bladder is overdistended with
 In performing voiding urohydropropulsion for 15
the fluid, however, retrograde urohydropropulsion may
 years in over 400 dogs, surgery was needed three times
be difficult. The excessive intravesicular pressure that is
to repair a ruptured urinary bladder. This occurred
created as the bladder is filled with fluid to perform void-
in a female dog with a recent urethral obstruction.
ing urohydropropulsion forces uroliths to move distally
After 24 hours of dysuria, this dog passed the urolith
along the urethra. Therefore, successful retrograde uro-
that completely obstructed the urethra. Voiding urohy-
hydropropulsion of uroliths may first require that the
 dropropulsion was then attempted to remove the remain-
ing uroliths. During the procedure, another urolith
378   Therapeutic techniques
obstructed the urethra; manual compression of an
urethral lumen. This is the optimum time to quickly
inflamed bladder wall contributed to bladder rupture.
Uroliths were surgically removed, the bladder wall was
dropropulsion. Therefore, we recommend radio-graphic
repaired, and the patient made a satisfactory recovery. In
imaging of the urinary tract every 3-6 month following
the other two cases, the depth of anesthesia was not suffi-
cystotomy even if patients do not have urinary tract signs.
cient to relax the urethra. When the bladder was manually
If patients are re-evaluated only when clinical signs asso-
expressed, the bladders ruptured at the apex.
ciated with uroliths are recognized, the uroliths are often
too large to pass through the urethra by that time.
Performing voiding urohydropropulsion for
uroliths not removed during surgery
Learning to perform voiding
urohydropropulsion
Voiding urohydropropulsion performed within days to
weeks of cystotomy is not recommended. Within this
To help minimize the anxiety associated with a new tech-
period, it is unlikely that the surgical incision site in the
nique, consider performing voiding urohydropropulsion
bladder wall has regained sufficient integrity to accom-
in a dog that you have scheduled for cystotomy. For your
modate the intravesicular pressures created during void-
first attempt, select a patient that in all probability is likely
ing urohydropropulsion. Consider laser or shock wave
 to have a successful outcome. We recommend a medium-
lithotripsy, or cystotomy to remove residual uroliths. In
sized female dog with relatively smooth uroliths equal to
some cases we have be able to retrieve small uroliths using
 or less than 5 mm in diameter. Sedate the patient as if
a stone basket.
 a cystotomy is going to be performed; however, first try
Two months after cystotomy, we removed small
voiding urohydropropulsion. If difficulty is encountered
uroliths by voiding urohydropropulsion in a Dalmatian
in catheterizing the urethra or if all the urocystoliths can-
with recurrent urate uroliths. Double-contrast cystog-
 not be voided, the patient is already prepared for surgery.
raphy following voiding urohydropropulsion confirmed
Even if the urinary bladder ruptures, which is not likely
that the integrity of the bladder wall was not disrupted.
dad si sned au pasn s anuuan sadod sl f
Likewise, excessive hemorrhage did not occur following
for surgery. We also consider lithotripsy or surgical back-
the procedure.
up for cases in which voiding urohydropropulsion is less
likely to be effective. Preparing for such events mini-
Role of voiding urohydropropulsion with
 mizes veterinarian and owner anxiety about performing
recurrent urolithiasis
this unique minimally invasive procedure.
Voiding urohydropropulsion is an effective nonsurgical
method for managing recurrent urocystoliths. Voiding
urohydropropulsion has been especially useful in man-
References
aging uroliths for which preventive therapy was not possi-
 ble and when owner compliance with preventive therapy
Lulich, LP., et al. (1993). Nonsurgical removal of uroliths in dogs
and cats by voiding urohydropropulsion. I Am Vet Med Assoc 203:
was less than adequate to prevent recurrence. Likewise,
660-663.
 management of highly recurrent uroliths such as those
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 1999). Canine retrograde urohydropropulsion:
composed of calcium oxalate can be improved by this
lessons from 25 years of experience. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
technique.
Pract 29(1): 267-28 1.
Robinson, E.P., et al. (1995). Propofol: a new sedative-hypnotic anes-
Successful management of recurrent urocystoliths by
thetic agent. In: Current Veterinary Therapy XII Small Animal Prac-
voiding urohydropropulsion requires urolith detection
tice, edited by I.D. Bonagura and R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB
when they are still small enough to pass through the
Saunders, pp. 77-80.
38
Urethral bulking for urinary incontinence
Joe Bartges
Urinary incontinence is a common problem, especially in
 with urinary incontinence. It has a large particle size and
older spayed female dogs with urethral sphincter mecha-
chronic loss of material does not occur, it does not provide
nism incompetency (Chapter 76). Medical therapy using
more durability than collagen (Chrouser et al. 2004) and
estrogen or phenylpropanolamine alone or in combina-
has been associated with urethral prolapse (Ghoniem and
   so   n   
Khater 2006). Ethylene vinyl ( Tegress, Bard Urological,
to or become unresponsive to medical therapy with time.
Covington, GA) was approved by the FDA in 2004 andhas
 For these dogs, surgical techniques, such as culposuspen-
asuccess rate of43% at approximately 4 years; (Kuhn et al.
sion, can be performed; however, success is limited and
2008), however, there are serious complications associ-
complication rate can be high. A less invasive technique,
ated with its use in some women (Erekson et al. 2007;
urethral bulking, has been used in women and female
Hurtado et al. 2007). Polydimethylsiloxane (Macroplas-
dogs.
tique, Uroplasty, Inc., Minnetonka, MN) has been shown
 It has been thought that injection of bulking agents
to be more effective than collagen in a prospective ran-
into the urethral submucosa creates artificial urethral
domized controlled clinical trial in women with a success
cushions improving urethral closure (coaptation) and
rate of 61% at one year versus 48% success rate at a year
restoring continence. It appears that injection therapy
with collagen (Ghoniem et al. 2009). It was concluded
functions as a central filler volume that increases the
that polydimethylsiloxane is a safe, efficacious, minimally
length of muscle fibers and closure power of the ure-
invasive, injectable silicone material for treating urinary
thral sphincter (Klarskov and Lose 2008). The urethral
incontinence. Porcine dermal implant (Permacol, Covi-
sphincter consists of muscle fibers, collagen, vessels, and
 dien, Dublin, Ireland) appears to have a higher urody-
nerves, with a central component compressing the lumen
namic success rate than polydimethylsiloxane in women
(Schafer 2001). Increasing the central filler volume aug-
with stress urinary incontinence for up to 6 months;
ments the sarcomere length of muscle fibers, strengthen-
however, longer term studies have not been performed
ing muscle power up to a sarcomere length of 2.2 μm.
(Bano et al. 2005). Women receiving calcium hydroxya-
There are many substances that have been evaluated
patite (Coaptite, Boston Scientific Corporation, Narick,
and used for urethral bulking, but collagen has been
MA) injections had better outcomes after a single treat-
used predominantly in human and veterinary medicine.
 ment with a lower volume of injected material when
Teflon was used for several years, but is nolonger available
compared with patients treated with collagen (Mayer
for use due to poor long-term outcome and to migration
et al. 2007). Urethral granulomatous reaction and ure-
from injection site with subsequent granuloma forma-
thral prolapse have been reported with its use (Palma
tion in human beings (Mittleman and Marraccini 1983;
et al. 2006; Ko et al. 2007; Lai et al. 2008). A multi-center
Arnold et al. 1989; Kilholma et al. 1993).
study concluded that non-animal stabilized hyaluronic
Carbon-coated zirconium oxide beads (Durasphere,
acid/dextranomer copolymer (Zuidex, Q-Med, Uppsala,
Boston Scientific Corporation, Narick, MA)
Sweden) delivered by an Implacer device was an effective
approved by the FDA in 1999 for treatment of women
treatment for women with stress urinary incontinence
(van Kerrebroeck et al. 2004).
Collagen (Contigen, Bard Urological, Covington, GA)
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
has been used the most for urethral bulking in human
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
379
380 Therapeutic technigues
medicine and is the only reported compound used for
Proximalurethra
urethral bulking in dogs. Collagen is a biocompatible
biomaterial with diverse formulations based on its bio-
chemical, biological, and physical properties (DeLustro
        
of collagen; however, the availability, versatility, and bio-
compatibility of dermal collagens have led to their dom-
inance as the primary source. Bovine dermal collagen
to the development of highly purified injectable fibrillar
1987). Glutaraldehyde cross-linked collagen is composed
of >95% type I collagen with the remainder being type
Figure 38.1 Proximal urethra viewed cystoscopically in an 8-
Ill collgen. These biomaterials are highly compatible
year-old spayed female,bordercollie withmedicallyunresponsive
urinary incontinence. The dog is positioned in dorsal recumbency:
with and incorporated into the host's connective tis-
therefore, the dorsal urethra is located at the bottom of the pho-
sue encouraging fibroblast infltration, new host colla-
tograph.
gen deposition, and neovascularization. Glutaraldehyde
cross-linking results in fibrillar collagen with resistance to
collagenase and enhanced persistence at the site of injec-
bevel of the needle tip. Polydimethylsiloxane and non-
tion. Furthermore, cross-linking prevents rapid shrink-
animal, stabilized hyaluronic acid/dextranomer require
age of the injected volume (syneresis); therefore, injec-
a special device for injection. Prior to insertion, the
tion of large volumes is not required and the injected
 needle is loaded with bulking compound by attaching
cross-linked collagen fibrillar structure is stabilized and
the syringe containing the compound to the needle and
maintained. For this reason, glutaraldehyde cross-linked
slowly injecting until it is observed in the needle tip.
bovine collagen has been used for treatment of urinary
Urethral bulking agent is injected submucosally in
incontinence in human beings (Shortliffe et al. 1989; Eck-
three locations; at approximately the 2, 6, and 10 o'clock
ford and Abrams 1991; Herschorn et al. 1992; Kieswet-
positions. I usually inject in two locations; at the 6 and
ter et al. 1992; Appell 1994; Ben-Chaim et al. 1995;
12 o'clock positions (Figures 38.2 and 38.3).
Moore et al. 1995; Nataluk et al. 1995; Bartholomew
 In women, injections are usually performed at the 3
 and Grimaldi 1996; Faerber 1996; Tschopp et al. 1999;
and 9 o'clock positions. The needle is inserted with visu-
Kassouf et al. 200l; Lang et al. 2002; Martins et al.
alization at the selected site so that the bevel of the needle
2007; Sakamoto et al. 2007; Appell 2008; Isom-Batz and
is completely inserted submucosally. The bulking agent
Zimmern 2009).
is injected until a bleb is visualized that approaches mid-
 Dogs are placed under general anesthesia and posi-
line of the urethral lumen. The amount injected depends
tioned in dorsal recumbency. Peri-vulvar fur is clipped
and the area prepared with scrub. A 2.7-mm rigid
Injection
cystoscope is introduced through the vulva and into
needle
the urethra. Diagnostic cystoscopy can be performed
(Chapter 19).
For urethral bulking injection, the ureteral orifices, the
trigone, and proximal urethra are identified. The cysto-
scope is withdrawn to the level of the proximal urethra
just distal to the trigone, approximately 1-1.5 cm caudal
 to the urinary bladder neck (Figure 38.1).
During the procedure, sterile fluid is infused at a rate
that is equal to the fluid drainage through the cystoscope
side port so that the urethral lumen remains dilated facil-
itating visualization of the urethral lumen. The injection
Submucosal
collagen
needle with or without the protective sheath, depend-
ing on the diameter of the operating port channel, is 
Figure 38.2 Injection needle inserted submucosally with injected
inserted through the operating port. The coating of the
collagen, which appears white and glistening. Same dog as in
injection needle has a green stripe on the same side as the
Figure 38.1.
Urethral bulking for urinary incontinence  3
381
Injection
ing effect. If cystoscopy cannot be performed, laparotomy
needle
and cystotomy can be undertaken for collagen injection.
(Barth et al. 2005)
 Once the procedure is completed, the dog is recovered.
Many dogs can be returned to their owner the same day
depending on recovery from anesthesia. Some patients
may not be able to urinate following the procedure and
may require placement of an indwelling urethral catheter
for 1-2 days. When successful, dogs are usually conti-
 nent within 2-3 days of performing the procedure. Drug
therapy can be discontinued at that time. I usually do
Submucosal
Submucosal
collagen
collagen
a single dosage of intravenously-administered ampicillin
Figure 38.3 Second injection of collagen with needle inserted
(22 mg/kg) at time oftermination ofthe procedure. A uri-
submucosally. Same dog as in Figures 38.1 and 38.2.
nalysis and, if necessary, an aerobic bacteriological urine
culture is performed approximately 7 days following the
procedure.
on the size of the dog and the visualization of the size
 In the only study published on collagen injection in
of the bleb. Once the volume has been administered, the
dogs (Barth et al. 2005), continence was achieved in 27 of
injection is stopped, and the needle held in place for 60
40 dogs for 1-64 months with a mean of 17 months. In
aaau u cdn pas, o punoduoo an moe oi spuooas
10 dogs, collagen injection improved the urinary incon-
is removed and one or more additional sites are injected
tinence and they received additional medical treatment.
 in a similar fashion. The procedure is considered com-
Of these, 6 dogs regained continence for a period of 9-47
plete when the urethral lumen is closed by deposits when
months (mean, 23 months) and 4 dogs had improvement
viewing cystoscopically (Figure 38.4). (Arnold et al. 1996;
for 25-78 months (mean, 43 months). In 3 dogs, the col-
Barth et al. 2005)
lagen injection had no effect. In 16 dogs that were ini-
 It is imperative that the cystoscope not be inserted
tially continent after treatment, there was deterioration
across the injection sites into the more proximal urethra
after 1-25 months (mean, 8 months); 12 dogs were then
or bladder as this will result in diffusion of the injected
treated medically. Of these, 11 were continent for 2-64
collagen into the submucosal tissue and a decreased bulk-
months (mean, 27 months) and 1 dog had improvement
of incontinence for 29 months. In 2 dogs, incontinence
reoccurred 2 and 12 months after the medical treatment
was started. For the remaining 4 dogs, 2 owners refused
any further treatment and accepted the urinary incon-
 m s  pu su g ue h a u
 again with collagen. Collagen injections can be repeated
when necessary and there is no limit on how often or
when re-treatment may be performed.
Complications occur infrequently and are usually
Urethral
minor in nature including hematuria, dysuria, and pain.
lumen
Urethral obstruction has occurred in women; however,
this has not been observed to occur in dogs injected with
collagen. (Barth et al. 2005)
Urethral bulking is a viable treatment for dogs with
urinary incontinence that are no longer responsive to
medical therapy.
References
Appell, R.A. (1994). Collagen injection therapy for urinary inconti-
Figure 38.4 Appearance of proximal urethra after completion of
nence. Urol Clin North Am 21(1): 177-182.
collagen injection. Compare the luminal diameter with that seen
Appell, R.A. (2008). Transurethral collagen denaturation for women
in Figure 38.1. Same dog as in Figures 38.1-38.3.
with stress urinary incontinence. Curr Urol Rep 9(5): 373-379.
382
 Therapeutic techniques
Arnold, S., et al. ( 1989). Treatment of urinary incontinence in dogs
Kieswetter, H., et al. (1992). Endoscopic implantation of collagen
by endoscopic injection of Teflon. I Am Vet Med Assoc 195( 10):
(GAX) for the treatment of urinary incontinence. Br I Urol 69(1):
1369-1374.
22-25.
Arnold, S., et al. ( 1996). Treatment of urinary incontinence in bitches
Kilholma, P.J., et al. (1993). Complications of Teflon injection for
stress urinary incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn 12(2): 131-137.
Small Anmim Pract 37(4): 163- 168.
Klarskov, N. and G. Lose (2008). Urethral injection therapy: what is
Bano, F, et al. (2005). Comparison between porcine dermal implant
the mechanism of action? Neurourol Urodyn 27(8): 789-792.
(Permacol) and silicone injection ( Macroplastique) for urodynamic
stress incontinence. Int Urogynecol I Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 16(2):
after distal urethrectomy. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct
147-150; discussion 150.
18(12): 1511-1513.
Barth, A., et al. (2005). Evaluation of long-term effects of endo-
Kuhn, A., et al. (2008). Long-term results and patients' satisfaction
scopic injection of collagen into the urethral submucosa for treat-
after transurethral ethylene vinyl alcohol (Tegress) injections: a
ment of urethral sphincter incormpetence in female dogs: 40 cases
two-centre study. Int Urogynecol I Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 19(4): 503-
(1993-2000). I Am Vet Med Assoc 226(1): 73-76.
507.
Bartholomew, B. and T. Grimaldi ( 1996). Collagen injection therapy
Lai, H.H., et al. (2008). Large urethral prolapse formation after calcium
for type III stress urinary incontinence. Aorn J64(1): 75-83, 85-86.
hydroxylapatite (Coaptite) injection. Imt Urogynecol I Pelvic Floor
Ben-Chaim, J., et al. (1995). Submucosal bladder neck injections of
Dysfunct 19(9): 1315- 1317.
glutaraldehyde cross-linked bovine collagen for the treatment of
Lang, I., et al. (2002). Clinical study on collagen and stress urinary
urinary incontinence in patients with the exstrophy/epispadias com-
incontinence. Clin Exp Obstet Gymecol 29(3): 180- 182.
plex. I Urol 154(2 Pt 2): 862-864.
Martins, S.B., et al. (2007). Clinical and urodynamic evaluation in
Chrouser, K.L., et al. (2004). Carbon coated zirconium beads in beta-
women with stress urinary incontinence treated by periurethral
glucan gel and bovine glutaraldehyde cross-linked collagen injec-
collagen injection. Int Braz I Urol 33(5): 695-702; discussion 702-
tions for intrinsic sphincter deficiency: continence and satisfaction
703.
after extended followup. I Urol 171(3): 1152-1155.
Mayer, R.D., et al. (2007). Multicenter prospective randomized 52-
DeLustro, F., et al. (1986). A comparative study of the biologic and
week trial of calcium hydroxylapatite versus bovine dermal collagen
immunologic response to medical devices derived from dermal col-
for treatment of stress urinary incontinence. Urology 69(5): 876-
lagen. I Biomed Mater Res 20(1): 109-120.
880.
DeLustro, F., et al. (1987). Reaction to injectable collagen: results in
Mittleman, R.E. and J.V. Marraccini (1983). Pulmonary Teflon gran-
animal models and clinical use. Plast Reconstr Surg 79(4): 581-594.
 ulomas following periurethral Teflon injection for urinary inconti-
DeLustro, F, et al. ( 199l). The biochemistry, biology, and immunology
nence [letter]. Arch Pathol Lab Med 107(1l): 61l-612.
of injectable collagens: Contigen TM Bard collagen implant in
Moore, K.N., et al. (1995). Periurethral implantation of glutaralde-
treatment of urinary incontinence. Pediatr Surg Int 6: 245-251.
 Eckford, S.D. and P. Abrams ( 199l). Para-urethral collagen implanta-
stress incontinence: quantitative outcome measures. Br I Urol75(3):
tion for female stress incontinence. Br I Urol 68(6): 586-589.
359-363.
Erekson, E.A., et al. (2007). Ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer erosions
Nataluk, E.A., et al. ( 1995). Collagen injections for treatment ofurinary
after use as a urethral bulking agent. Obstet Gynecol 109(2 Pt2):
incontinence secondary to intrinsic sphincter deficiency. I Endourol
490-492.
9(5): 403-406.
Palma, P.C., et al. (2006). Massive prolapse of the urethral mucosa
following periurethralinjectionofcalciumhydroxylapatite forstress
512-514.
Ghoniem, G., et al. (2009). Cross-linked polydimethylsiloxane injec-
670-671.
tion for female stress urinary incontinence: results of a multicenter,
Sakamoto, K., et al. (2007). Long-term subjective continence status
randomized, controlled, single-blind study. I Urol 181( 1): 204-210.
and use of alternative treatments by women with stress urinary
Ghoniem, G.M. and U. Khater (2006). Urethral prolapse after dura-
sphere injection. Int Urogynecol I Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 17(3):
431-433.
297-298.
 Schafer, W. (200l). Some biomechanical aspects of continence func-
Herschorn, S., et al. (1992). Early experience with intraurethral colla-
tion. Scand I Urol Nephrol Suppl (207): 44-60; discussion 35: 106-
gen injections for urinary incontinence. J Urol 148(6): 1797-1800.
125.
Hurtado, E., et al. (2007). The safety and efficacy of ethylene vinyl
 Shortliffe, L.M., et al. ( 1989). Treatment of urinary incontinence by the
alcohol copolymer as an intra-urethralbulking agent in women with
periurethral implantation of glutaraldehyde cross-linked collagen. J
intrinsic urethral deficiency. Int Urogynecol I Pelvic Floor Dysfunct
Urol 141(3): 538-541.
18(8): 869-873.
Tschopp, P.J, et al. ( 1999). Collagen injections for urinary stress incon-
Isom-Batz, G. and P.E. Zimmern (2009). Collagen injection for female
 tinence in a small urban urology practice: time to failure analysis of
urinary incontinence after urethral or periurethral surgery. I Urol
99 cases. I Urol 162(3 Pt 1): 779-782; discussion 782-783.
181(2): 701-704.
van Kerrebroeck, P., et al. (2004). Efficacy and safety of a novel system
Kassouf, W., et al. (2001). Collagen injection for treatment of urinary
(NASHA/Dx copolymer using the Implacer device) for treatment of
incontinence in children. I Urol 165(5): 1666- 1668.
stress urinary incontinence. Urology 64(2): 276-281.
39
Laser ablation of ectopic ureter
Joseph W. Bartges
Ectopic ureter is a congenital condition in which one or
frequencies into an extremely intense, small, and nearly
both ureters insert at a point outside of the trigone of
non-divergent beam of monochromatic radiation with
the urinary bladder (Chapter 58). They may be unilateral 
all waves in phase. Lasers mobilize immense heat and
 or bilateral and intramural or extramural. Intramural
ureters enter the bladder trigone in the normal posi-
first described by McCarthy in 2006 (McCarthy 2006)
tion, fail to open into the bladder lumen, tunnel beyond
using a diode laser; however, a Holmium:YAG laser fiber
the normal ureteral orifice position, and exit distally at
is used most frequently. A Holmium:YAG laser is a laser
variable locations within the urogenital tract. Extramu-
whose active medium is a crystal of yttrium, aluminum,
ral ureters bypass the bladder and insert directly into the
and garnet (YAG) doped with holmium (chromium and
urethra, vagina, or ductus deferens (Cannizzo et al. 2003;
 thulium), and whose beam falls in the near infrared por-
Sami et al. 2004; Sutherland-Smith et al. 2004a).
tion of the electromagnetic spectrum (2,100 nm)
Traditional treatment for ureteral ectopia includes:
The patient is anesthetized and placed in dorsal recum-
neoureterostomy with ligation of the distal ureteric tun-
bency if a female and in lateral recumbency if a male. The
 nel, neoureterostomy with urethral-trigonal reconstruc-
cystoscope is inserted into the urethra and the normal
tion, and neoureterocystostomy (McLaughlin and Chew
and ectopic ureters identified. A guide wire or catheter
2000; Sutherland-Smith et al. 2004b; Mayhew et al. 2006).
is placed into the ectopic ureter along side of the cysto-
Persistent postsurgical incontinence rate is reported to
      e   
range from 42% to 78% in dogs (McLaughlin and Chew
 Holmium:YAG, is inserted through the operating chan-
2000; Mayhew et al. 2006). Urinary incontinence (Chap-
nel of the cystoscope and used to transect the free wall of
ter 76) is caused most commonly by concurrent ure-
the ectopic ureters until the opening is as close as possi-
 thral sphincter mechanism incompetency, but can also
ble to the normal anatomic location (Figures 39.1-39.5).
 be caused by re-cannulization of the distal ureteral seg-
 Performing the procedure with fluoroscopy availability
ment, recurrent urinary tract infections, or a hypoplastic
is preferred as this allows retrograde contrast urethro-
bladder.
 cystography and ureteropyelography to be performed
Transurethral laser ablation of ectopic ureters can be
(Berent et al. 2008).
performed on intramural ectopic ureters to correct the
 The benefits of this procedure are elimination of the
condition. It can only be performed on patients with
need for invasive abdominal surgery, shorter recovery
intramural ectopic ureters because the abdominal cavity
time, elimination of the possibility of recannulization of
would be entered if the procedure were to be used on a
the distal ureter segment, and the procedure is somewhat
patient with an extramural ureter. The procedure utilizes
less expensive than surgical correction. In one report of11
a flexible (Berent et al. 2008) or rigid endoscope (Chap-
 dogs that had intramural ectopic ureters corrected by this
ter 19) and a flexible laser fiber (Chapter 34). A laser (an
method, 8/11 (72.7%) of dogs were completely continent
acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission
three months after the procedure without other surgical
of Radiation) is a device which transmits light of various
or medical intervention (Berent and Mayhew 2007). In
 another report of 4 male dogs with ectopic ureter, all dogs
were continent immediately following the procedure and
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
remained continent (Berent et al. 2008).
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
383
384
 Therapeutic techniques
Laserfiber
Urethral
lumen
Urinary
bladder
lumen
Right
ectopic
Redrubber
ureteral
catheterin
lumen
ectopicureteral
lumen
Figure 39.4 Cystoscopic view of laser ablation of the medial wall
Figure 39.1 Cystoscopic view (2.7 mm, 30-degree rigid cysto-
of the right intra-mural ectopic ureter in dog described in Figure
 scope) of a right intra-mural ectopic ureter in an 8-month old,
39.1. The red rubber catheter is present in the lumen of the ectopic
spayed female, terrier cross.
ureter in order to protect the urethral wall. The Holmium:YAG laser
fiber is visualized exiting the operating channel of the cystoscope.
Urethral
lumen
Redrubber
catheterin
Urinarybladder
ectopicureteral
lumen
lumen
Figure 39.2 Cystoscopic view of dog described in Figure 39.1. A
5-Fr red rubber catheter has been inserted into the lumen of the
right intra-mural ectopic ureter.
Right
ectopic
ureteralorifice
Figure 39.5 Cystoscopic view of dog described in Figure 39.1
following laser ablation of a right intra-mural ectopic ureter. The
 medial wall of the ectopic ureter has been ablated to the level of
the trigone.
Redrubber
catheterin
ectopicureter
atvesicoureteraljunction
Figure 39.3 Cystoscopic view of dog described in Figure 39.1.
The 5-Fr red rubber catheter extends through the lumen of the right 
intra-mural ectopic ureter and is visualized entering the ureteral
 orifice at the level of the trigone.
Laser ablation of ectopic ureter 385
References
McLaughlin, R. Jr. and C.W. Miller (1991). Urinary incontinence after
surgical repair of ureteral ectopia in dogs. Vet Surg 20(2): 100-
Berent, A. and P. Mayhew (2007). Cystoscopic-guided laser ablation of
103.
intramural ureteral ectopia in 12 Dogs. I Vet Int Med 21: 600.
McLaughlin, M.A. and D.J. Chew (2000). Diagnosis and surgical man-
Berent, A.C., et al. (2008). Use of cystoscopic-guided laser ablation for
agement of ectopic ureters. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 15: 17-
     a   n 
20.
(2006-2007). I Am Vet Med Assoc 232(7): 1026-1034.
Sami, V.F, et al. (2004). Digital fluoroscopic excretory urography,
Cannizzo, K.L., et al. (2003). Evaluation of transurethral cystoscopy
digital fluoroscopic urethrography, helical computed tomography,
and excretory urography for diagnosis of ectopic ureters in female
and cystoscopy in 24 dogs with suspected ureteral ectopia. J Vet
dogs: 25 Cases (1992-2000). I Am Vet Med Assoc 223(4): 475-481.
Interm Med 18(3): 271-281.
Mayhew, P.D., et al. (2006). Comparison of two surgical techniques 
 Sutherland-Smith, I., et al. (2004a). Ectopic ureters and ureteroceoles
for management of intramural ureteral ectopia in dogs: 36 cases
in dogs: presentation, cause, and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ
(1994-2004). I Am Vet Med Assoc 229(3): 389-393.
Vet 26(4): 303-310.
McCarthy, T. (2006). Endoscopy brief: transurethral cystoscopy and
 Sutherland-Smith, I., et al. (2004b). Ectopic ureters and ureteroce-
diode laser incision to correct an ectopic ureter. Veterinary Medicine
oles in dogs: treatment. Compend Contin Educ Vet 26(4): 311-
101(9): 558-559.
314.
40
Drug therapy with renal failure
Joe Bartges and Tomas Martin-Jimenez
Many drugs are primarily excreted in urine as unchanged
IV), the drug must be absorbed. After absorption (or IV
and pharmacologically active drugs and/or as active
administration), drugs distribute throughout the body
metabolites. With renal insufficiency, such drugs accu-
and are metabolize (activation or inactivation) and elim-
mulate in the body; therefore, changes in renal func-
 inated (via non-renal and renal routes). These processes
tion alters disposition of drugs and dosage regimens
influence the plasma concentration for a drug and the
require modification. Renal insuffciency may influence
response observed (Ritschel and Kearns 1999).
drug pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and toxic-
The dosing regimen for a drug is based on the dose
ity by reduced renal clearance resulting in accumulation
administered and the interval between administrations
of parent drug and/or metabolites, altered rate of bio-
(Boothe 2005). The dose of a drug required to achieve a
transformation, decreased protein binding, altered vol-
desired plasma concentration is determined by the max-
ume of distribution, altered electrolyte status, altered
imal plasma concentration and the volume of distribu-
drug disposition and/or activity secondary to acid-base of
 tion for that drug. The dose of drug must be increased or
fluid-balance abnormalities, reduced activity of antimi-
 decreased proportionately with changes in the volume of
crobial agents secondary to reduced excretion or dilution
distribution to achieve the same desired plasma concen-
with polyuria, and enhanced drug activity or toxicity
tration. The volume of distribution of a drug is the sole
due to synergistic interaction with uremic complications
determinant of the plasma concentration after IV admin-
(Lefebvre et al. 1996; Ritschel and Kearns 1999; Riviere
istration for drugs that do not accumulate (i.e., dosing
1999). Renal insufficiency not only affects mean clearance
interval is suffciently long so that each dose is essentially
of a drug, but increases individual pharmacodynamics
eliminated before administration of the next dose). For
variability.
drugs that do accumulate, the initial dose must also take
into account how much of the drug may accumulate;
this is dependent on the elimination half-life (defined as
Pharmacological actions of drugs
the time required to reduce the plasma concentration by
one-half through various elimination processes) of the
Drugs are administered to induce a desired response for a
 drug in relation to the dosing interval.
suffciently long period of time without inducing adverse
The dosing interval for a drug is determined by the
events. Pharmacologic action is related to the plasma con-
time it takes for maximal plasma concentration to drop
centration ofthe drug. Determinants of plasma drug con-
to a point below which the desired response no longer
centration include liberation, absorption, distribution,
occurs. This time depends on how much fluctuation
metabolism, elimination, and response (Figure 40.1).
in plasma drug concentration occurs during the dos-
Liberation of the drug is the first step in determining
ing interval and its rate of elimination. The longer the
elimination of a drug, the longer the time interval can
administered by all routes except IV. Following admin-
be between doses. Decreasing the dosing interval is of
istration and liberation (except for drugs administered
no benefit for drugs with a long half-life. In contrast,
increasing a dosing interval may be dangerous for drugs
with a short half-life (Hardin et al. 1994). Adding an
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
additional dose (i.e., shortening the dosing interval)
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
386
Drug therapy with renal failure  387
 Storage sites
Target organs
Administration
Distribution
(intravenous)
Plasma
Elimination
Freedrug
(nonrenal 
↑
and renal)
Liberation and
Protein-bound drug
 absorption
Metabolites
Administration
Administration
(subcutaneous,
(oral)
intramu scular,
Enterohepatic
intraperitoneal)
circulation 
Metabolism
Figure 40.1 Determinants of plasma drug concentration. Modified from Boothe (2005) and Ritschel and Keams (1999)
is more effective than doubling the dose. Some drugs
 observed blood concentration), its activity and disposi-
remain effective despite dosing intervals that are longer
tion may be altered with uremia because protein-binding
than elimination rates due a post-administration killing
may be decreased.
effect of certain antimicrobial agents, tissue accumula-
 Protein-losing nephropathy results in hypoalbumine-
tion, active metabolites especially those whose metabo-
mia and may progress to uremia. Decreased protein bind-
lites take longer to eliminate than the parent compound,
ing of drugs in uremia is greater than can be accounted
and drugs that destroy targets that must be re-synthesized
for by hypoalbuminemia in this situation (Rambausek
before the effect resolves.
and Ritz 1985). More likely, a conformational change
For drugs with long elimination half-lives, dosing
 and/or competition for binding sites occur with albumin
 due to uremic toxins, including free fatty acids, amino
ations, the dosing interval is shorter than the elimination
acids, and small dialyzable organic acids. The result of
half-life, and with each subsequent dose some of the pre-
increased free drug concentration in blood is an increase
viously administered drug will remain in the body. The
in the volume of distribution, which means that with
amount of drug remaining depends on how much shorter
an increase in concentration of drug in blood there is an
the dosing interval is compared with the half-life. In this
increase in free drug concentration in blood. Subsequent
situation, the drug begins to accumulate with multiple
 biotransformation of the drug may be altered, although
 doses. Eventually, a steady-state is reached for the drug
 there are differences in biotransformation among species
such that the amount of drug administered with each
depending on differences in hepatic metabolism.
 dose equals the amount eliminated during the dosing
With renal failure, there may be a decrease in clearance
interval. The amount that a drug accumulates as steady
of the drug if it is primarily cleared by glomerular filtra-
state is reached depends on the difference between drug
tion, although tubular secretory mechanisms may com-
elimination half-life and dosing interval.
pensate. The elimination of a drug from the body can
be thought of in terms of elimination by renal and non-
renal routes. Depending on whether a drug is eliminated
Effects of renal failure on pharmacologic effects
by renal or non-renal routes or a combination of the two,
Renal failure may alter pharmacological effects of drugs
retention of the drug with a subsequent increase in blood
in many ways. The concentration of a free drug in plasma
 concentrations may occur. Ifthe non-renal elimination of
influences the pharmacological effect of that drug. The
 drug is minimal or unchanged in renal insufficiency, then 
degree of protein binding and its alteration with renal
the overall elimination of the drug would be decreased
insufficiency may affect a drug's disposition and activity.
in renal failure due to decreased renal elimination. This
If a drug is normally greater than 90% protein bound and
may result in drug toxicity.
has a small volume of distribution (volume of distribu-
Patients in renal insufficiency have various alterations
tion is defined as the volume in which the amount of drug
in fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance that may influ-
would need to be uniformly distributed to produce the
ence drug choice and dosage regimen. For example,
388  Therapeutic technigues
sodium ampicillin contains 3 mEq of sodium per gram
nou)
Renal < Nonrenal
and administration could result in sodium imbalances.
Administration of antacids or laxatives could result in
f-life
magnesium imbalances. Compounds that function as
 Elimination Half-
non-reabsorbable anions in the distal tubule, such as
Renal > Nonrenal
penicillin, may compete with and cause urinary loss of
hydrogen and potassium ions. Metabolic acidosis associ-
Renal >> Nonrenal
ated with renal insufficiency may influence dissociation
 of a drug thereby increasing its free form concentration.
0
20
40
Polyuria from renal failure or administration of diuretics
60
80
100
 Golmerular fitration rate (% of normal)
may decrease antimicrobial agent concentrations in urine
and renal parenchyma to sub-therapeutic levels. Con-
Figure 40.2 Relationship between elimination half-life and renal
versely, dehydration is associated with decreased renal
function (glomerular filtration rate). The three drugs depicted
 perfusion and glomerular fltration rate that can alter
depend on renal elimination to varying degrees and are related to
drug elimination (Miyazaki et al. 1990).
 non renal elimination. Modified from Riviere (1999).
Drug toxicity may be potentiated if the drug's action is
synergistic with uremic complications. Uremia is associ-
is unaffected relatively until glomerular filtration rate is
30-40% of normal. This is the basis for recommendation
ated with coagulopathy and administration of drugs that
that dose adjustment in renal failure is only necessary
affect platelet function or coagulation may result in hem-
orrhage. Uremia is also associated with gastrointestinal
after two-thirds to three-quarters of renal function is lost;
and neurological complications, and these clinical signs
in other words, azotemic renal failure. Another approach
may be exacerbated by drugs with similar adverse reac-
to relate elimination half-life and glomerular filtration
tions. Altered blood-brain barrier may increase blood
for drugs eliminated primarily by kidneys is through the
concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid. Uremic gastroen-
use of dose fraction where the fraction of dose adminis-
teritis may alter gastrointestinal motility and absorption
tered is based on the degree of abnormal renal function
of substances; decreased absorption may be markedly
divided by normal renal function (abnormal glomerular
impaired with gastrointestinal edema associated with
filtration rate / normal glomerular fltration rate).
hypoalbuminemia.
Because glomerular filtration is not measured directly in
 Caution should be exercised in patients with renal
most patients although it can, (Miyamoto 2001; Bexfield
o    n  
et al. 2008) glomerular filtration rate is estimated by the
inverse of the serum or plasma creatinine concentration;
 a u  si  n s
uated in dogs and cats with renal failure, and while ther-
however, this is only a rough guideline.
apeutic monitoring of drugs in patients with renal failure
is ideal, it is difficult to implement.
Calculation of modified dosage regimens with
renal failure
Drug dosage regimens with renal failure
Calculated dosage regimens with renal failure will be
Total body clearance (elimination) of a drug can be
modified by relating the proportion of decrease in renal
function to normal renal function. This method assumes
divided into non renal and renal routes. During renal
that a standard loading dose is administered; drug
failure, predicting drug disposition is based on the
absorption, distribution, protein binding, non-renal
assumption that renal clearance is directly correlated
elimination, and tissue sensitivity are unchanged; cre-
to glomerular filtration rate. This assumes the intact
atinine clearance is directly correlated to drug clearance;
nephron hypothesis holds and that a relative glomerulo-
tubular balance is present. With these assumptions, renal
and renal function is relatively constant over time. When
 constructing modifed dosage regimens for patients with
clearance is linearly related to glomerular filtration rate
renal failure, both the dose and dosage interval must be
whether the drug is cleared by glomerular filtration or
modified to achieve a plasma drug concentration-time
tubular mechanisms. More practical clinically is to relate
profle that is similar to a normal situation.
elimination half-life to glomerular filtration rate, which
when plotted gives a hyperbolic curve (Figure 40.2). If a
Constant-interval, dose-reduction method
drug is eliminated primarily by non renal routes, elimina-
tion half-life remains relatively constant with renal failure
Assuming a safe and effective dosage regimen for a drug
because the drug's elimination is influenced minimally by
has been determined in a patient with normal renal
renal elimination. If the drug is excreted renally, clearance
function, the normal dosage regimen may be adjusted
Drug therapy with renal failure  389
according to the dose fraction. One method is to use
than elimination rates (i.e., concentration-dependent
constant-interval, dose-reduction. With this method, the
bactericidal activity of flouroquinolones) (Lefebvre et al.
dose is reduced by a factor of the dose fraction, but the
1998).
dose interval is not changed. In other words, dose admin-
istered with renal failure = dose administered with health
Implementing dose-reduction methods in
multiplied by the dose fraction; the time interval between
patients with renal failure
administered doses is unchanged. This method is used
with drugs that have a low therapeutic index.
The therapeutic goal of drug administration is to main-
tain a steady-state plasma concentration of the drug.
When repeated doses of a drug are administered, accu-
Constant-dose, intervai-extension method
mulation occurs until steady-state is achieved; this takes
 The second method is termed constant-dose, interval-
approximately four to five half-lives. The prolonged elim-
extension. With this method, the dosage interval is
ination present in patients with azotemic renal failure
extended by the inverse of the dose fraction, but the
causes excessive delays in attaining steady state; there-
administered dose is unchanged. In other words, dosage
fore, an appropriate loading dose should be adminis-
interval time with renal failure = dosage interval time
tered so that therapeutic concentrations of the drug
with health divided by the dose fraction; the administered
can be attained immediately. If the constant-interval,
dose is unchanged. This method is used with drugs whose
dose-reduction method is used, give the usual dose ini-
activity persists despite dosing intervals that are longer
tially, followed by the calculated reduced dose. If the
Table 40.1 Suggested dosage regimen adjustments with renal failure (Lefebvre 2002)
Drugs
Comments
 Antimicrobial Agents
Aminoglycosides
Contraindicated because of nephrotoxicity, but can be used cautiously especially with
monitoring of plasma concentrations.
 Penicilins
Accumulation, but high therapeutic index: therefore, dosages generally are not changed.
For dicloxacillin and oxacillin, no change. For others, when GFR<0.5 mL/kg/min, divide 
the dose by 2 or multiply the dosage interval by 2.
Cephalosporins
Potentially nephrotoxic (especially cephaloridine)
Sulfonamidles
Apparently, slightly nephrotoxic in the dog. Dosage regimen adjustment is recommended:
for sulfisoxazole, multiply the dosage interval by 2-3 when GFR<1 mL/kg/min.
Tetracyclines
Extensive accumulation, potentially nephrotoxic, exacerbation of azotemia,
contraindicated except doxycycline, which is eliminated primarily by non-renal routes.
Fluoroquinolones
No dosage regimen adjusted required for marbofloxacin in dogs.
Lincosamides and macrolides
uAwepup pue upAwouAa lo, panbal paisnlpe uawjbai ahesop on
Metronidazole
No dosage regimen adjusted required
 Anti-lnflammatory Drugs
NSAIDs
Nephrotoxic risk. No accumulation observed with tolfenamic acid.
Corticosteroids
Worsens azotemia
 Cardiovascular Drugs
Digitalis glycosides
Accumulation of digoxin, but not digitoxin
ACE inhibitors
Enalapril and captopril are extensively cleared by the kidney in dogs. Minimal risk of
toxicity with benazepril because of non-renal elimination.
 Antiarrhythmic drugs
 Hepatic elimination, but active metabolites are deared renally and the therapeutic index
is low.
Diuretics
Decreased elimination and diuretic response for furosemide. Furosemide potentiates
aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity.
Anesthetics
Barbiturates
Adverse renal hemodynamic effects and potential increase in sensitivity of the central
nervous system.
Ketamine
Reduced risk of adverse effects in renal failure
Gas anesthetics
Isoflurane preferred to halothane and methoxyflurane.
390
 Therapeutic technigues
 Normal renal function 
similar to those seen in healthy patients; however,
 Standard dosage regimen
there are prolonged periods of potentially sub-
JC
therapeutic plasma concentrations. This method is
preferred for drugs whose toxicity correlates to high
ice
trough rather than peak concentrations (i.e., amino-
Constant-dose,
 interval extension
 glycosides) (Riviere et al. 1985).
drug
The constant-interval, dose-reduction method pro-
duces peak plasma concentrations that are lower and
trough concentrations are greater in renal failure
Constant-interval,
patients when compared with healthy patients. There
dose-reduction
are no periods of sub-therapeutic concentrations.
· Careful clinical monitoring for toxic and pharmaco-
logic effect is important
Time
· Whenever possible, selecta drug that is biotransformed
Figure 40.3 Plasma drug concentration-time curves of an orally
by the liver or excreted by non renal routes (e.g-)
 administered drug to a patient with normal renal function (thin
benazepril versus enalapril) (Lefebvre et al. 1999)
line), a patient with 20% of renal function where the drug dosing
regimen was altered using the constant-interval, dose-reduction
References
method (thick line), and a patient with 20% of renal function
where the drug dosing regimen was altered using the constant-
Bexfield, N.H., et al. (2008). Glomerular filtration rate estimated by
dose, interval-extension method (thick, dashed line).
3-sample plasma clearance of iohexol in ll8 healthy dogs. I Vet
Intern Med 22( 1): 66-73.
Boothe, D.M. (2005). Principles of drug therapy. In: Textbook of Vet-
constant-dose, interval-extension method is used, give
erinary Imtermal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman,
the initial two doses as would be administered to a healthy
6th edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 492-498.
animal at the normal time interval before extending the
Hardin, T.C., et al. (1994). Comparison of ampicillin-sulbactam and
interval dosing time (Riviere 1999).
ticarcillin-clavulanic acid in patients with chronic renal failure:
effects of differential pharmacokinetics on serum bactericidal activ-
ity. Pharmacotherapy 14(2): 147-152.
Selecting the appropriate dosage adjustment
Lefebvre, H.P. (2002). Dosage Regimen Adjustment in Renal Failure:
Why, When and How. Grenada: World Small Animal Veterinary
method (Table 40.1) (Riviere 1999).
Association Congress.
Lefebvre, H.P, et al. (1996). Drugprescription in renal-impaired dogs.
· Do not use drugs unless definite therapeutic indica-
Rev Med Vet 147: 757-782.
tions are present.
Lefebvre, H.P., et al. ( 1999). Effects of renal impairment on the dispo-
· Ifthe dosage regimens ofa drug in renalfailure has been 
sition of orally administered enalapril, benazepril, and their active
determined by clinical pharmacokinetic studies, this
metabolites. I Vet Intern Med 13( 1): 21-27.
should be followed rather than estimating a modified
Lefebvre, H.P., et al. ( 1998). Efect of experimental renal impairment
 dosage regimen.
on disposition of marbofloxacin and its metabolites in the dog. I Vet
Pharmacol Ther 21(6): 453-461.
· If an assay procedure for a drug is available, periodic
Miyamoto, K. (200l). Clinical application of plasma clearance of
measurement of blood concentrations of the drug can
iohexol on feline patients. I Feline Med Surg 3(3): 143- 147.
be performed.
Miyazaki, H., et al. (1990). The pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
· In a situation in which a drug has not been studied but
namics of furosermide in anesthetized dogs with normal and exper-
some information on its characteristics are available,
imentally decreased renal function. Nippon Juigaku Zasshi 52(2):
it is possible to estimate an appropriate dose in renal
265-273.
Rambausek, M. and E. Ritz (1985). Digitalis in chronic renal insuff-
failure
ciency. Blood Purif3( 1-3): 4-14.
· All estimated modified dosage regimens are approx-
Ritschel, W.A. and G.L. Kearns ( 1999). Handbook of Basic Pharma-
imations because it is impossible to duplicate a nor-
cokinetics, 5th edition. Washington, DC: American Pharmaceutical
mal plasma drug concentration-time profle in a
Association.
patient in renal failure (Figure 40.3).
Riviere, J.E. (1999). Comparative Pharrmacokinetics: Principles, Tech-
Miques, and Applications. Ames, IA: Iowa State Press.
The constant-dose, interval-extension method pro-
Riviere, J.E., et al. (1985). Decreased fractional renal excretion of gen-
duces peak and trough plasma concentrations
tamicin in subtotal nephrectomized dogs. I Pharmacol Exp Ther
234(1): 90-93.
Section 4
Clinical syndromes
41
Azotemia and uremia
Sheri J. Ross
In 1840, Piorry and L'Heritier introduced the term ure-
diversity and severity of clinical signs that constitute the
mia, literally “urine in the blood", based on their hypoth-
uremic syndrome.
esis that clinical signs of kidney failure were the result
Before a uremic retention solute may be further classi-
of reabsorption of urine into the blood stream (Richet
fied as a uremic toxin, it must fulfll five criteria proposed
1988). We now know that uremia develops when distur-
by Massry in 1977. These criteria are: (1) the compound
bances in tubular and endocrine functions of the kidney
should be chemically identified and accurate quantita-
cause retention of toxic metabolites, changes in the vol-
tive analysis in biologic fluids should be possible; (2)
ume and composition of the body fluids, and an excess
total body and plasma concentrations of the compound
or deficiency of various hormones (Bergstrom and Furst
should be higher in uremic than in non-uremic patients;
1978). The many compounds that accumulate in blood
(3) there should be a relationship between the level of
and tissues of patients with compromised renal func-
the compound and one or more of the manifestations
tion are referred to as uremic retention solutes. If one
of uremia; (4) a reduction in the level of the compound
of these retained solutes affects a biochemical or phys-
must result in amelioration of the clinical manifestation,
iologic function, it is called a uremic toxin. In addition
(5) administration ofthe compound to otherwise normal
to retention of solutes, dysregulation of endocrine and
patients at a comparable dose should produce the related
metabolic functions may also lead to uremic toxicity.
clinical manifestation (Massry 1977).
Although most commonly associated with chronic kid-
A comprehensive review of the literature in 2003 by
ney disease (CKD), uremia may also be the sequela of
the European Uremic Toxin Work Group identified 90
severe acute kidney injury (AKI) and obstruction or rup-
known uremic retention solutes ( Vanholder et al. 2003a).
ture of the urinary tract. Regardless of cause, accumula-
In the six years since, over 25 additional retention solutes
tion of uremic toxins may affect function of every organ
have been identified and the number continues to grow
system in the body engendering a myriad of clinical signs
(Vanholder et al. 2008). Despite the rapidly increasing
collectively referred to as the uremic syndrome.
number of identified uremic retention solutes, very few
Although the association between clinical deteriora-
 may actually be classified as uremic toxins. This is due
tion and uremia has been long recognized, our under-
o p i  d u  on 
standing of the specific contributing toxins remains
the individual solutes. Additionally, elevated blood con-
incomplete. Initially, a single yet unidentified retained
centrations of uremic retention solutes likely occur not
solute was thought to account for all of the clinical signs
only due to impaired renal excretion, but may also result
associated with uremia. This single molecule concept was
from impaired degradation and/or increased synthesis.
later replaced by the hypothesis that each clinical mani-
The increased survival of patients associated with the
festation of uremia has a single, causative, uremic toxin.
advent of hemodialysis almost 60 years ago, substanti-
 The current belief is that each metabolic function may
ated the theory that much of the uremic syndrome is due
be altered in different ways by one or more uremic tox-
to small molecular weight, water-soluble compounds.
ins. This theory better explains the variability in both the
Although these molecules were efficiently removed with
conventional hemodialysis, it was soon recognized that
 hemodialysis was not true renal replacement therapy, in
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
that an adequate dialysis did not completely eliminate a
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
393
394  Clinical syndromes
host of clinical signs that did resolve with renal trans-
Table 41.1 Classification of some major uremic retention solutes
plantation. This new clinical disorder was termed the
"residual syndrome.” Although some components of the
Solute
Group
residual syndrome have been attributed to the deleteri-
Free water-soluble low-molecular-weight solutes
ous effects of hemodialysis, the majority of the clinical
ADMA (asymmetrical dimethylarginine)
Guanidines
signs have been ascribed to persistent uremic toxins that
B-lipoprotein
Peptides
are not efficiently removed during dialysis due to large
Creatinine
Guanidines
size, protein binding or volume of distribution (Depner
Guanidine
Guanidines
2001; Meyer and Hostetter 2008).
Hypoxanthine 
Purines
Malondialdehyde
Methylguanidine
Guanidines
Classification of uremic retention solutes
Osteoprotegerin (OPG)
The differential behavior of uremic retention solutes dur-
Oxalate
ing dialysis is the basis for the most commonly used clas-
SDMA (symmetric dimethylarginine)
 Guanidines
Urea
sification scheme. In general, solutes are categorized into
three major groups; (1) small water-soluble compounds,
Uric acid
Purines
Xanthine
Purines
(2) protein-bound compounds, and (3) larger middle
molecules ( Table 41.1).
Middle molecules
The low molecular weight, water-soluble compounds
 Adrenomedullin
 Peptides
 have been most extensively studied. This group gener-
 Atrial natriuretic peptide
 Peptides
ally includes compounds with a molecular weight less
B2-microglobulin
Peptides
than 500 Da that are easily removed by dialysis; this trait
Complement factor D
Cystatin C
 Peptides
has facilitated their identification and characterization.
Degranulation inhibiting protein I
Peptides
Quantitatively, urea is the most important retained solute
 Endothelin
 Peptides
 in patients with kidney disease. Due to high serum con-
 Hyaluronic acid
 Peptides
centrations and ease of measurement, urea is often used
Interleukin 1-β
Cytokines
as a surrogate low molecular weight uremic toxin, even
Interleukin-6
Cytokines
though the compound itself is not intrinsically toxic.
Leptin
 Peptides
Most of the direct toxic effects of urea have only been
 Parathyroid hormone
 Peptides
proven in vitro at high concentrations. In a classic study
 Retinol binding protein
 Peptides
by Johnson et al., urea, sufficient to maintain blood urea
Tumor necrosis factor-α
Cytokines
>200 mg/dl, was added to the dialysate of a cohort of
Protein-bound solutes
patients. No adverse clinical effects were noted during
 Furan propionic acid
the 3-month study period ( Johnson et al. 1972). Despite
ppe sunddH 
Hippurates
the apparent lack of toxicity of the compound itself,
Homocysteine
blood urea concentrations correlate quite well with clini-
Indole-3 acetic acid
Indoles
cal signs of uremia. Although greater than 50 low molec-
Indoxyl sulfate (IS)
Indoles
ular weight, water-soluble, uremic retention solutes have
N-carboxymethyllysine
 Advanced glycation
end products
been identified, only a few are known to exert biological
effects.
 P-cresol
 Phenols
A substantial number of retained uremic retention
Pentosidine
 Advanced glycation
solutes are protein bound, and are thus not readily
end products
 removed by dialysis. Most of the solutes in this group
 Phenol
 Phenols
are low molecular weight, but some are larger (e.g-, lep-
Quinolinic acid
Indoles
tin). Classic examples of compounds from this group
Spermidine
Polyamines
include phenols, indoles, and homocysteine. The protein
bound uremic retention solutes have been the focus of
a great deal of research since many of these solutes have
et al. 2003). The healthy kidney can clear many of these
significant biologic effects. Decreased serum albumin has
protein-bound solutes by active tubular secretion; this
recently been shown to increase the free fraction, and thus
 process cannot be duplicated by currently available renal
toxicity, of many solutes within this group (DeSmet et al.
replacement techniques. Therefore, despite their known
2001). This relationship may contribute to the poor clini-
toxic effects, the removal of the protein-bound uremic
cal outcomes of patients with hypoproteinemia (DeSmet
retention solutes remains inadequate.
Azotemia and uremia 395
The term middle molecules has been assigned to the
Table 41.2 Common clinical manifestations associated with
 group of uremic retention solutes with molecular weights
uremia
>500 Da. Babb and Scribner first suggested the mid-
dle molecule hypothesis in the late 1970s to explain the
Gastrointestinal system
persistence of certain clinical signs in patients receiving
Anorexia
increasing doses of dialysis (Babb 1981). Their hypothe-
Gastrointestinal ulcers
Halitosis ("uremic breath")
sis attributes clinical illness to the retention of molecules,
Nausea, vomiting
normally cleared by the glomerulus, that are not cleared
Oral ulceration/stomatitis/glossitis (Figure 41.1)
by the limited permeability of the dialysis membranes.
 Pancreatitis
Due to the technical limitations of the day, Babb et al
Hematological system
were not able to identify which compounds were caus-
Coagulopathy
ing the clinical illness. Current analytical techniques have
 Granulocyte and lymphocyte dysfunction 
facilitated the identification of many middle molecules,
 Hypoproliferative anemia
some of which have been associated with inflamma-
Lymphopenia
tion, malnutrition, and immune dysfunction. These
Neutrophilia
Platelet dysfunction
three clinical problems are common in uremic patients
Cardiopulmonary system
and each contributes significantly to morbidity and
Cardiomyopathy
mortality.
Hypertension
 The prototype middle molecule is β2-microglobulin;
 Pericarditis
 other members of this group include the advanced glyca-
 Pleuritis
tion end products (AGEs), the advanced oxidation pro-
 Uremic pneumonitis/Pulmonary edema
tein products (AOPPs), and many complement proteins
Skeletal system
and cytokines. Since the size of middle molecules pre-
Amyloidosis (β2-microglobulin)
cludes their removal by conventional dialysis techniques,
Defective calcitriol metabolism
increasing the pore size of the dialyzer membrane may
Osteodystrophy
facilitate their removal. The removal of middle molecules
Osteoporosis
may also be enhanced by shifting from hemodialysis
Neuromuscular system
to hemofiltration or hemodiafiltration.
Whilst the
Depression
Fatigue
chief method of solute removal in hemodialysis is
Muscle twitching
simple diffusion which relies entirely on concentration
Muscle weakness
gradients, hemofltration and hemodiafltration utilize
 Peripheral polyneuropathy
convective solute removal. These modalities utilize
 Pruritis
convection, whereby solutes are carried across the
Uremic encephalopathy
dialyzer membrane in response to a transmembrane
Immunological system
pressure gradient (a process known as solvent drag).
 Inadequate antibody formation
Recent studies have shown that the mean predialysis
Stimulation of inflammation (baseline)
 serum β2 microglobulin level over time is predictive
Susceptibility to cancer
of all-cause mortality, independent of the chronicity
 Susceptibility to infection
 of dialysis and residual kidney function (Cheung
Endocrinology
2006).
 Dyslipidemia, hypertriglyceridemia
Peripheral insulin resistance and glucose intolerance
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Clinical manifestations of uremia
Miscellaneous
Hypothermia
The clinical manifestations of uremia are diverse. The
 Increased protein-muscle catabolism
literature describes more than 75 clinical symptoms
Thirst
attributed to uremia, resulting from disturbances in all
Weight loss
organ systems of the body. Some of the most common
clinical manifestations of uremia observed in veterinary
patients are listed in Table 4l.2. The number and sever-
ity of clinical signs vary from patient to patient, and are
AKI or post-renal causes, usually results in more severe
partially dependent on the magnitude of the reduction
clinical signs than gradual-onset uremia from progressive
in functioning renal mass, and the rapidity with which
CKD. Patients with CKD typically do not exhibit clini-
renal function is lost. Rapid-onset uremia, resulting from
 cally significant symptoms of uremia until they reach
396  Clinical syndromes
insulin results in an overall decrease in tissue glucose
utilization.
 Impaired glucose metabolism and insulin resistance
are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular
complications and death in non-diabetic human CKD
patients. Insulin resistance has also been associated with
reduced lipoprotein lipase activity resulting in hyper-
triglyceridemia. Peripheral insulin resistance may con-
tribute to malnutrition in patients with CKD, since
insulin deficiency stimulates the breakdown of muscle
tissue and activates a common proteolytic pathway via
the ubiquitin-proteasome system.
Oxidative stress
Figure 41.1 Necrosis and sloughing of the anterior portion of the
Traditionally, the term oxidative stress describes the
tongue in a severely uremic dog.
imbalance between generation of oxidants and antiox-
idant defense. In the context of uremia, the term implies
an imbalance in favor of pro-oxidants, which leads to
stage 3, although some patients may have mild clinical
the oxidation of macromolecules and to tissue damage.
signs with stage 2 CKD (Chapter 48).
Several studies have demonstrated increased in oxida-
Commonly reported clinical manifestations of ure-
tive stress in patients with CKD (Daschner et al. 1996).
mia include gastrointestinal signs, anemia, coagulaopa-
In human medicine, oxidative stress plays a pivotal role
thy, acidosis, hyperkalemia, calcium and phosphorous
in the pathogenesis of vascular injury, thus contribut-
derangements, endocrine abnormalities, malnutrition,
ing to cardiovascular related morbidity and mortality
and cardiovascular complications. For detailed descrip-
(Beckeer et al. 1997). Cardiovascular disease does not
tions of the pathophysiology and management of these
contribute significantly to the clinical course of most vet-
uremic manifestations, the reader is directed to the chap-
erinary patients with CKD, probably due to the shorter 
ters on CKD (Chapter 48) and AKI (Chapter 49) (Table
duration of clinical disease.
41.2 and Figure 41.1).
Oxidants in the plasma are not readily detectable, since
they are highly reactive compounds that generally have
half-lives of only a few seconds. However, markers of
Metabolic effects of uremia
oxidative stress, such as lipid, carbohydrate, and protein
oxidation products, have been detected in the plasma
Carbohydrate metabolism
and tissues of uremic patients. Many studies have found
Uremia is typically associated with impaired glucose
a positive correlation between increased plasma levels of
metabolism and a mild increase in serum glucose lev-
oxidative stress markers and cardiovascular end-points
els. Although resistance to insulin at the tissue level is
 in human CKD patients (Busch et al. 2004; Deschamps-
the predominant cause of impaired glucose metabolism,
Latscha et al. 2005).
alterations in insulin degradation and insulin secretion
Since there is mounting evidence that oxidative stress
may also contribute to this (Adrogue 1992; Mak and
increases long before the onset of end stage kidney dis-
DeFronzo 1992; Alvestrand 1997). The healthy kidney
ease, antioxidant therapeutic strategies may rationally be
plays an important role in the metabolism of insulin
employed early as in the course of CKD. Proposed thera-
(Rabkin 1972; Adrogue 1992; Mak and DeFronzo 1992).
peutic antioxidants include enzymes such as superoxide
Insulin has a molecular weight of 6,0o0 and is freely fil-
dismutase, as well as vitamins E and C. High-dose vita-
tered at the glomerulus. Once filtered into the tubular
 min E has been shown to decrease atherosclerosis in rats
lumen, insulin enters proximal tubular cells by carrier-
with CKD, although the same effect has not yet been
documented in humans.
somes where it is metabolized to amino acids (Rabkin
1972). Due to decreased renal clearance, plasma insulin
Inflammation
concentrations are often mildly to moderately increased
in patients with CKD. Despite this increase in insulin
Chronic inflammation in patients with CKD is being rec-
levels, significant peripheral resistance to the action of
ognized as a significant predictor of morbidity, mortality.
Azotemia and uremia 397
and progression of renal disease. Recent evidence suggests
renal excretion. Several methods utilizing GFR have been
that persistent inflammation (and oxidative stress) starts
 developed for human patients to tailor drug dosages to
 in the early stages of CKD and increases in severity as the
the degree of renal dysfunction. However, GFR mea-
patient becomes uremic (Sela et al. 2005). Low-grade,
chronic inflammation, characterized by increased serum
tice since they are time-consuming and can be labor-
levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and pro-inflammatory
intensive. We thus often rely on serum creatinine to
cytokines (e.g-, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a and (IL)-
provide an estimate of renal function on which to base
6), contribute significantly to cachexia and cardiovascu-
therapeutic decisions. The residual renal function and
lar disease in human patients with CKD (Stenvinkel et al.
metabolic condition of the uremic patient must be care-
1999). High serum concentrations of CRP and low serum
 e p e e n d m a
concentrations of albumin are independent risk factors
to the treatment regimen. Likewise, interactions between
for mortality in human CKD patients (Menon et al.
different medications, as well as the metabolic pathways
2005), but IL-6 seems to be the inflammatory marker that
must also be considered, since the excretory capacities of
best predicts outcome (Honda et al. 2005). Although the
the uremic patient may be easily overwhelmed.
underlying cause(s) of this chronic inflammation has not
been fully elucidated, the main contributors are believed
to be increased serum concentrations of uremic toxins,
Management of uremia
comorbid diseases, increased serum cytokines, oxidative
Extracorporeal removal of uremic toxins
stress, malnutrition, and increased incidence of infec-
tion. One obvious management strategy to minimize sys-
The standard of care for management of the uremic syn-
temic inflammation in CKD patients is identification and
drome in humans consists of hemodialysis (Chapters 28
treatment of any infections. Additionally, various anti-
and 29), peritoneal dialysis (Chapter 30), or renal trans-
inflammatory nutritional and pharmacological therapies
plantation (Chapter 31). As noted above, removal of ure-
have been recommended.
by diffusion across the dialysis membrane, thereby limit-
ing removal to compounds that are less than 500 daltons
Uremia and drug metabolism
and less than 90% protein bound (i.e., the small water-
The physiologic changes associated with uremia may
 soluble compounds) (Vanholder et al. 2003b). The use
have a profound effect on the absorption, distribution,
of large-pored dialysis membranes to perform high-flux
 metabolism, and excretion of drugs and their metabo-
dialysis decreases the importance of molecular mass in
lites (Chapter 40). Indeed, it is quite common for ure-
determining removal during extracorporeal circulation.
mia to decrease the gastrointestinal absorption of orally
During high-flux dialysis, the treatment time, flow rates,
administered drugs. In one of the first studies to demon-
 d p d    
strate this phenomenon, the gastrointestinal absorption
of the uremic toxin are more important determinants of
of d-xylose was shown to be reduced by 30% in dialysis-
dlearance (Schaedeli and Uehlinger 1998). As a conse-
dependent human patients (Craig et al. 1983). Drug
quence, many more of the so-called middle molecules
   e      
are removed during high-flux dialysis than during
pH. Increased plasma concentrations of urea combine
conventional hemodialysis (Hakim et al. 1996; Gotch
with gastric urease, resulting in the formation of ammo-
1998).
nia, which buffers gastric acid. Therefore, the efficacy
Protein-bound uremic toxins are poorly removed by
     d   
 both conventional andhigh-flux hemodialysis, and many
patients with CKD, since they rely on the release of phos-
strategies have been used to increase the removal of pro-
phorous during the acid hydrolysis of proteins in the
tein bound solutes. Increasing the pore size of the dia-
stomach (Maton and Burton 1999). In addition to alter-
lyzer while using albumin-enriched dialysate has shown
 ations in drug absorption, uremic patients often have
limited success. Likewise, adsorptive techniques using
reduced serum protein binding of many drugs, due to a
either charcoal or polymer based sorbets have been used
decrease in serum albumin concentration and decreased
(Dhondt et al. 2000).
binding affinity of the remaining serum albumin ( Boobis
As with conventional hemodialysis, solute removal
1977; McNamara et al. 1981).
by peritoneal dialysis is most effective for smaller, non-
The rate of elimination of drugs excreted by the kid-
 protein bound compounds. However, higher-molecular-
neys is proportional to the glomerular filtration rate
weight compounds may be somewhat more effectively
(GFR). Ideally, the clinician knows the patient's GFR
removed by peritoneal dialysis because of active secre-
prior to administering any medication that relies on
tion into peritoneal lymphatic fluid.
398  Clinical syndromes
Non-dialytic treatment of uremia
lar calcium level, activation/inhibition of transcription
factors, and generation of reactive oxygen species. Iden-
Although dialysis and/or renal transplantation is the stan-
tification of these common pathways and a more detailed
dard of care for human patients with advanced uremia,
understanding of the pathophysiologic effects of the indi-
the associated costs and availability limit their use in
vidual uremic toxins are needed to develop more targeted
developing nations. Similar financial and geographical
 pharmacologic inhibitors.
constraints are encountered in the treatment of ure-
The uremic syndrome is characterized by alterations in
mic patients in veterinary medicine. Therefore, therapies
many biochemical and physiologic processes attributable
designed to prevent or delay the need for dialysis and/or
 to declining renal function. Despite recent advances, our
renal transplantation will have significant economic and
knowledge of the nature and biologic behavior ofindivid-
clinical benefit for both human and veterinary medicine.
ual uremic retention solutes is incomplete. Extracorpo-
Traditionally, non-dialytic management of uremic
real renal replacement therapy has been the mainstay of
patients has been symptomatic, with a goal of ame-
treatment for uremic human patients, but cost and avail-
lioration of clinical signs. Recently, the emphasis has
ability have limited its use in veterinary medicine. Many
evolved toward developing therapies that mitigate the
clinical manifestations of uremia by interfering
of the non-dialyzable, large and/or protein-bound ure-
with
mic toxins have been associated with significant toxicity,
the generation, absorption, or mechanism of action of
making them targets for therapeutic intervention. Thera-
known uremic toxins. Many uremic toxins are absorbed
peutic options currently under investigation include oral
from the intestinal tract, and may even be produced
sorbents and/or probiotics to modify the absorption of
by intestinal flora. The ingestion of sorbents that bind
many uremic toxins from the intestinal tract, and phar-
specific solutes thus preventing their systemic absorption
macologic intervention to inhibit the effects of the uremic
is a commonly used therapeutic modality. For example,
toxins. Hopefully, one or more of these new therapies will
enteral aluminum hydroxide is often used to minimize
develop into a readily available and cost-effective man-
the absorption of ingested phosphorous. A non-selective
agement option for uremia, resulting in improved qual-
oral sorbent composed of a high-purity multiporous
ity and quantity of life for both human and veterinary
spherical activated carbon has been shown to decrease
the serum concentrations of indoxyl sulfate and p-
patients.
cresol (Niwa et al. 1992, 1993; Takahashi et al. 2005).
Although this approach has theoretical applications
References
for uremia management, most often large quantities of 
Adrogue, H.J. ( 1992). Glucose homeostasis and the kidney. Kidrey Imt
the sorbents must be ingested, rendering clinical use
42: 1266.
challenging.
Alvestrand, A. (1997). Carbohydrate and insulin metabolisrm in renal
The gastrointestinal tract can also be used to mitigate
failure. Kidney Int 52(Suppl 62): S48.
uremia via the ingestion of live bacteria (probiotics) that
Babb, A.L., et al. (1981). The middle molecule hypothesis in perspec-
either naturally, or via genetic engineering, catabolize
tive. Am I Kidney Dis 1: 46-50.
Beckeer, B.M., et al. (1997). Reassessing the cardiac risk profile in
uremic solutes. Many of the previous logistical prob-
lems involved with administration (e.g- protecting the
dant stress and other non-traditional cardiac risk factors. I Am Soc
bacteria so that it survives gastric passage) have recently
Nephrol 8: 475-486.
been resolved, greatly improving the therapeutic value
Bergstrom, J. and P. Furst ( 1978). Uremic toxins. Kidney Int S(Suppl):
S9-S12.
of probiotics (Chow 2002). Several studies have demon-
Boobis, S.W. (1977). Alteration of plasma albumin in relation to
strated the safety and efficacy of probiotic therapy in an
decreased drug binding in uremia. Clin Pharmacol Ther22: 147-153.
experimental setting (Hida et al. 1996; Taki et al. 2005;
 Busch, M., etal. (2004). Potential cardiovascular risk factors in chronic
Ranganathan et al. 2006), and a randomized controlled
kidney disease: AGEs, total homocysteine and metabolites, and the
clinical trial assessing probiotic therapy in dogs with nat-
C-reactive protein. Kidney Int 66(1): 338-334.
urally occurring stage 3 and 4 CKD is ongoing.
Cheung, A.K., et al. (2006). Serum beta-2 microglobulin levels predict
mortality in dialysis patients: results of the HEMO study. I Am Soc
Recent efforts have focused on finding ways to neutral-
Nephrol. 17(2): 546-55.
ize the toxic effects of uremic retention solutes prior to
Chow, J. (2002). Probiotic and prebiotics: a brief overview. I Ren Nutr
the appearance of clinical signs. Some uremic toxins have
12(2): 76-86.
 a preferential action on only one or a few systems. How-
Craig, R.M., et al. (1983). Kinetic analysis of d-xylose absorption in
ever, the majority of the uremic toxins studied to date
normal subjects and in patients with chronic renal failure. J Lab Clir
Med 101: 496-506.
have effects on multiple systems, most likely resulting
 Daschner, M., et al. ( 1996). Influence of dialysis on plasma lipid per-
from interference with common cellular activities such
oxidation products and antioxidant levels. Kidrey Int 50: 1268-
as changes in receptor activity, alterations of intracellu-
1272.
Azotemia and uremia 3
399
De Smet, R., et al. (200l). A decrease of serum albumin increases the
Meyer, T.W. and T.H. Hostetter (2008). Uremia. N Engl I Med 357(13):
free concentration of p-cresol and its toxicity (abstract). Imt I Arrif
1316-1325.
Organs 24(8): 544.
Niwa, T., et al. (1992). Suppressed serum and urine levels of indoxyl
De Smet, R., et al. (2003). Toxicity of free p-cresol: a prospective and
 sulfate by oral sorbent in experimental uremic rats. Am I Nephrol
cross-sectional analysis. Clin Chtem 49: 470-478.
12: 201-206.
Depner, T.A. (2001). Uremic toxicity: urea and beyond. Semin Dial
Niwa, T., et al. (1993). Suppressive effect of an oral sorbent on the
14(4): 246-251.
accumulation of p-cresol in the serum of experimental uremic rats.
Deschamps-Latscha, B., et al. (2005). Advanced oxidation protein
Nephron 65: 82-87.
 products as risk factors for atherosclerotic cardiovascular events
Rabkin, R., et al. (1972).
 Glomerular filtration and proxi-
in nondiabetic predialysis patients. Arn I Kidney Dis 45( 1): 39-47.
mal tubular absorption of insulin 125 1. Am J Physiol 223:
Dhondt, A., et al. (2000). The removal of uremic toxins. Kidney Int
1093.
58(suppl 76): S47-S59.
Ranganathan, N., et al. (2006). In vitro and in vivo assessment of 
Gotch, F.A. (1998). The current place of urea kinetic modelling with
 intraintestinal bacteriotherapy in chronic kidney disease. ASAIO J
respect to different dialysis modalities. Nephrol Dial Trarsplant
52( 1): 70-79.
13(Suppl 6): 10-14.
Richet, G. (1988). Early history of uremia. Kidney Int 33: 1013-
Hakim, R.M., et al. ( 1996). Effect of the dialysis membrane on mortality
1015.
 of chronic hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int 50: 566-570.
 Schaedeli, F and D.E. Uehlinger (1998). Urea kinetics and dialysis
Hida, M., et al. ( 1996). Inhibition ofthe accumulation of uremic toxins
treatment time predict vancomycin elimination during high-flux
in the blood and their precursors in the feces after oral administra-
hemodialysis. Clin Pharmacol Ther 63: 26-38.
tion of Lebenin, a lactic acid bacteria preparation, to uremic patients
Sela, S., et al. (2005). Primed peripheral polymorphonuclear leukocyte:
undergoing hemodialysis. Nephron 74: 349-355.
a culprit underlying chronic low grade inflammation and systemic
Honda, H., et al. (2005). Serum albumin, C-reactive protein,
oxidative stress in chronic kidney disease. I Arm Soc Nephrol 16:
interleukin-6 and feutin-A as predictors of malnutrition, cardiovas-
243 1-2438.
cular disease, and mortality in patients with end-stage renal disease.
 Stenvinkel, P., et al. ( 1999). Strong association between malnutrition,
Am I Kidmey Dis 47: 139- 148.
 inflammation, and atherosclerosis in chronic renal failure. Kidney
Johnson, W.J., et al. ( 1972). Effects of urea loading in patients with far
Int 55: 1899-1911.
advanced renal failure. Mayo Clin Proc 47: 21-29.
Takahashi, N., et al. (2005). Therapeutic effects of long-term admin-
 Mak, R.H. and R.A. DeFronzo ( 1992). Glucose and insulin metabolism
istration of an oral adsorbent in patients with chronic renal failure:
in uremia. Nephron 61: 377.
two-year study. Int I Urol 12(1): 7-11
Massry, S.G. ( 1977). Is parathyroid hormone a uremic toxin? Nephron
Taki, K., et al. (2005). Beneficial effects of Bifidobacteria in a gastrore-
19: 125-130.
Maton, P.N. and M.E. Burton (1999). Antacids revisited: a review
patients. I Ren Nutr 15(1): 77-80.
of their clinical pharmacology and recommended therapeutic use.
Vanholder, R., et al. (2003a). Review on uremic toxins: classifica-
Drugs 57: 855-870.
tions, concentration and interindividual variability. Kidrey Int 63:
McNamara, P.J., et al. ( 1981). Endogenous accumulation products and
1934-1943.
serum protein binding in uremia. I Lab Clin Med 98: 730-740.
Vanholder, R., et al. (2003b). Survival of hemodialysis patients and
Menon, V., et al. (2005). C-reactive protein and albumin as predictors
uremic toxin removal. Artif Organs 27: 218-223.
of all-cause an cardiovascular mortality in chronic kidney disease.
Vanholder, R., et al. (2008). A bench to bedside view of uremic toxins.
Kidney Irt 68: 766-772.
I Am Soc Nephrol 19: 863-870.
Polyuria and polydipsia
Katherine James
Definition and recognition of a clinical problem
magnitude of this variability should not be underesti-
   o    
Polyuria refers to formation and voiding of excessive
dogs, individuals had a tenfold variability in insensible
urine volume and polydipsia to excessive voluntary intake
losses due to evaporative respiratory water loss, depend-
of water or other liquids. Polyuria is usually accompa-
nied by increased frequency of voiding, but it is solely
etly compared to running in circles and barking in their
the increase in volume that defines polyuria. Thus, when
cages (O'Conner and Potts 1969). The myriad of differ-
clients report an increased frequency of urination, it is
ent environments, diets, and activities of pets results in
important to refine that observation to whether the med-
significant variability in required water intake.
ical problem is polyuria or pollakiuria (see Chapter 47)
There is significant variability in species-typical behav-
because they require different diagnostic approaches.
ior of dogs and cats. Although healthy cats do not drink
    s nd  in   s
much water beyond what is in their diets and the resul-
other, polydipsia or polyuria; however, the two almost
tant species-typical urine-specific gravity (USG) is con-
invariably present together. Water loss must match water
sidered to be above 1.030-1.040, there are exceptions.
intake to maintain body fluid osmolality within a nar-
Some healthy cats choose to drink more because they
row range that is rapidly and tightly regulated (James
enjoy running water from a faucet or fountain. They may
and Lunn 2007). Thus, it is clinically appropriate to
even enjoy the social interaction of having the owner turn
consider them together as a single medical problem,
 on the faucet and interact with them while they drink.
polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD). It is possible for polydip-
For clinicians, water intake is best assessed as
sia to exist without polyuria when excessive non-urinary
appropriate or not appropriate based on that ani-
fluid losses exist, such as with diarrhea or respiratory
 mal's environment, diet, and activities. An alternative
 losses in panting dogs; but such situations are recognized
approach to use to measure water intake is to place
easily and rarely persist.
 PU/PD on the problem list if the owner reports increased
 Polyuria is defined as daily urine volume in excess of
water intake or urine output compared to their normal
50 mL/kg (Feldman and Nelson 2004). Polydipsia is
observations and a substantiating low USG is present.
defined as fluid intake exceeding 100 mL/kg per day
It is the author's observation that USGs of <l.025
(Feldman and Nelson 2004). For clinicians, these numer-
are sufficiently low to corroborate an owner report of
ical definitions are rarely useful and it is not necessary for
PU/PD. Clinically, we employ USG as a surrogate test
clients to measure their pet's water intake as a means to
for urine volume. It is quite unusual to have a low
determine if PU/PD is present. Normal water intake can
USG and low urine volume as this requires ingestion
be variable, particularly in dogs. In part, this is because
of a low-solute (low protein, low salt) diet (James and
Lunn 2007). Thus, for clinical patients, it is sufficient
ing on environmental temperature and their activities.
to assume a low USG is associated with a high urine
Further, water content and intake from diet varies. The
volume. When the solute content of urine is increased by
solutes not normally present, for example, glucose, urine
volume may be higher than the USG typically reflects.
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
The magnitude of this effect is generally insufficient to
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
400
Polyuria and polydipsia  401
lead to a false conclusion that a patient is not PU/PD
 s e  n ss i ee
due to higher USG. Also under such circumstances the
production of concentrated urine if drinking water is
 USG may be higher than expected; the hypothesis being
not readily available. It is inappropriate to produce dilute
this reflects glomerulotubular imbalance.
urine and a urinary concentrating defect exists.
n d    sd s
The range of USG considered typical for dogs is deter-
 the day; however, with primary polydipsia some animals
mined by clinical experience and is influenced by the wide
will drink more at certain times of day. Thus USG mea-
surements from different times of day may be required
people in that some individuals simply enjoy drinking
before a client complaint of PU/PD can be entirely
 more than do others. In addition, dogs have a strong
dismissed.
 thirst response and will not delay water intake if it is
 Detection of a low USG in a patient when the owner
available. Thus, it is the opinion of the author that the
has not observed an increased urine volume or water
typical range for canine USG is 1.010-1.040. When a USG
intake also warrants assessment. In some animals, low
above 1.040 is detected persistently, it raises concern for
USG represents an appropriate renal response to the
inadequate water intake and may reflect a client with-
 individual drinking relatively more than the average dog
holding water from a pet they perceive as having PU/PD,
or cat. In other animals, it may be a sign of a medical
when in fact it does not.
problem. Determination of USG from samples obtained
 USGs less than 1.010 in dogs can be appropriate; dogs
early in the morning, before the patient drinks, can be
that engage in water-based games may have USGs as low
helpful in determining if PU/PD is likely to be behav-
as 1.ooo. However such animals are at the limit of renal
ioral or a sign of a medical problem warranting further
diluting ability and are at significant risk of clinically
investigation. Most animals that drink for enjoyment do
important hyponatremia. Generally patients with hypos-
not do so overnight. Therefore, first morning urine is
thenuria require assessment for behaviors that promote
expected to be the most concentrated of the day. If the
high water intake. If none are found, medical evaluation
USG is sufficiently high, then PU/PD need not be pur-
for PU/PD is warranted.
sued because that demonstrates the kidney can concen-
The species-typical anticipated range of USG pro-
trate urine appropriately. Although collecting the urine
 duced by healthy cats is different. Clinical experience
indicates that healthy cats on a dry diet usually have a
has woken is essential, it is neither necessary nor desir-
 USG greater than 1.040, and cats on canned diets have
able to restrict water access overnight for this assessment.
USGs of 1.030 or greater. Apart from individual cats that
Some patients with PU/PD have a large volume obligate
enjoy drinking from a water fountain or a running faucet,
polyuria and will dehydrate rapidly when water is with-
most cats do not drink in excess of their needs. Therefore,
held. When the USG is repeatedly low on two or three
typical range for feline USG is expected to be 1.040-1.055
first morning samples, PU/PD should be pursued even if
for cats on dry food, with a somewhat decreased lower
the client has not noticed it.
limit for cats fed canned food exclusively. Evaluation for
behaviors by an individual cat that promotes higher water
 intake is warranted when USGs less than 1.030-1.040 are
Interpretation of USG
detected depending on diet.
 The terms normal and abnormal are not applicable in
True ranges for isosthenuria, hyposthenuria, and
assessment of USG. For the clinician assessing results of
 hypersthenuria in an individual animal are defined by
a urinalysis (UA), it is much more helpful to consider
the individual's plasma osmolality. As this varies, so will
whether the USG is appropriate or inappropriate. If a
the range of urine osmolalities corresponding to isos-
patient drinks water in excess of what is required to
thenuria, hyposthenuria, or hypersthenuria. Values of
compensate for normal daily losses, it is appropriate
cited USG typically used to describe these ranges corre-
for the kidney to excrete extra water as dilute urine.
spond to USG values that are observed in normal animals
Common examples are a dog that ingests water while
producing urine that is isosthenuric, hyposthenuric, or
playing in a swimming pool or a cat that drinks water
hypersthenuric with respect to plasma. This distinction
from a faucet whenever it is turned on. Production
becomes important in animals with an abnormally high
of dilute urine by these animals after water ingestion
 or low plasma osmolality.
 reflects a normal physiological response. Even extreme
hyposthenuria can be appropriate as the normal diluting
Causes of PU/PD
function of the kidney maintains water balance in the
face of an increased water load.
The ability of the kidney to concentrate urine has three
 In contrast, if an animal is placed in a hot environment
basic requirements (1) presence of ADH, (2) ability of the
and pants for thermoregulation with resultant insensible
renal tubules to respond to ADH, and (3) maintenance of
402   Clinical syndromes
high osmolarity of renal medullary interstitial fluid. ADH
when regulatory processes that maintain the ideal [Na+]
binds to vasopressin (V2) receptors in the distal renal
are not challenged.
tubule, which activates intracellular second messenger
Table 42.1 provides a list of known and reported causes
systems, leading to insertion of water channels (termed
of PU/PD in dogs and cats (Lunn and James 2007). The
aquaporin-2) into the apical membrane of the epithelial
mechanism underlying the PU/PD is also listed, if it is
cells (Cohen and Post 2002). This allows water to flow
known.
along the osmotic gradient between the distal convoluted
tubule/collecting duct lumen and the hypertonic renal
Primary polydipsia
medulla. Basic understanding of these normal processes
Primary polydipsia may be medical or behavioral. It may
allows a classification of causes of PU/PD according to
be a manifestation of hepatic encephalopathy, (Grauer
underlying pathophysiology.
Mechanisms leading to PU/PD can be divided into pri-
cism (Lunn and James 2007), or gastrointestinal disease
(Henderson and Elwood 2003). A rare form of primary
polyuria with compensatory polydipsia. Disorders lead-
polydipsia is described in humans resulting from a lesion
ing to primary polyuria can be further subdivided into
 in the thirst center, but this has not been described in dogs
those associated with reduced or absent ADH synthesis
 and cats (Feldman and Nelson 2004). Behavioral pri-
or release, failure of the renal tubule to respond to ADH,
 mary polydipsia represents a range from normal behavior
or reduction in the osmotic gradient between the filtrate
to an overt psychological problem termed “pyschogenic
in the distal convoluted tubule and renal medullary inter-
polydipsia." There are few documented cases in the lit-
stitium. There are a small number of clinical syndromes
erature, but most clinicians associate this problem with
capable of causing simultaneous primary polyuria and
active dogs that have insufficient stimulation or exer-
 primary polydipsia.
cise, or with pets in stressful environments (Feldman and
 It is often difficult to distinguish between primary
Nelson 2004). It is a matter of clinical judgment whether
polydipsia and primary polyuria. Water deprivation
the drinking behavior is within the realm of acceptable
testing (WDT) cannot be accomplished safely because
variability among dogs or should be labeled as compul-
patients with primary polyuria require polydipsia to pre-
sive and warranting behavior modification.
vent hypernatremia. Thus, depriving water to a patient
with primary polyuria can have no outcome other than
Primary polyuria: Reduced or absent ADH
harm to the patient.
synthesis or release
Evaluation of serum sodium concentration ([Na+ ]) in
some cases provides an impression which of the two is
Reduced or absent ADH synthesis or secretion is termed
 more likely. A patient with primary polydipsia may have a
 central diabetes insipidus (CDI). ADH deficiency may be
subnormal or low-normal [Na+], whereas [Na+] may be
partial or complete, resulting in partial or complete CD1.
high or high-normal in patients with primary polyuria.
Causes include head trauma (Rogers et al. 1977; Smith
Use of serum sodium values cannot make a definitive
and Elwood 2004; Aroch et al. 2005), neoplasia (Harb
distinction because low or low-normal [Na+] may also
et al. 1996), or congenital defects (Ramsey et al. 1999).
result from combination of hypovolemia and ongoing
Many cases are idiopathic (Court and Watson 1983; Harb
water intake (James and Lunn 2007). A classic example
 et al. 1996). Patients with complete CDl are profoundly
is the dog with hypoadrenocorticism that has a primary
 PU/PD, producing hyposthenuric urine. CDI patients
polyuria, hypovolemia from excess urinary sodium loss,
 n     e  os 
yet a high ADH and intact thirst despite low [Na+ ]. Find-
 deprived of water and cannot meet urinary losses for
ing a low or low-normal [Na+] in a patient assessed as
as short a time as two hours, hypernatremia develops.
 having a normal ECF volume suggests a primary polydip-
Onset is often acute. Partial CDI results in less severe
sia and prioritizes subsequent diagnostic testing. Further,
PU/PD and USG can be isosthenuric.
od d siss  - o  
and serves as a warning that the patient should not be
Primary polyuria: Failure of renal tubules to
subjected to water restriction. In many PU/PD patients,
respond to ADH
the [Na+ ] will be mid-range normal. This can occur when
Primary (congenital) nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus (1°ND1)
associated with hepatic encephalopathy, but may also be
This results from a defect in cellular mechanisms that
polyuric due to low BUN and loss of renal medullary
allow renal tubules to respond to ADH. Patients with
hypertonicity. It also occurs with mild cases of PU/PD
1°NDl are unable to concentrate their urine despite
Polyuria and polydipsia   403
Table 42.1 Causes of polyuria and polydipsia, classification, and underlying mechanism
Cause
Classification 
Mechanism(s)
 Pyelonephritis
Primary polyuria: 20 NDI E
Bacterial endotoxin reduces tubular sensitivity to ADH (Lunn and James 2007)
Damaged countercurrent mechanism (Feldman and Nelson 2004)
Pyometra
 Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Bacterial endotoxin reduces tubular sensitivity to ADH (Lunn and James 2007)
Liver failure
 Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Loss of medullary hypertonicity (Rogers et al. 1977)
 Primary polydipsia
Impaired hormone metabolism (Rogers et al. 1977)
Psychogenic (Rogers et al. 1977)
Portosystemic shunt
Primary polyuria: 20 NDI 
Loss of medullary hypertonicity (Deppe et al. 1999)
 Primary polydipsia
(6661 (e ia adda0) 839 paseaiou
Psychogenic (Grauer and Pitts 1987)
Hyperadrenocorticism
Primary polyuria: CDI
Impaired release of ADH (Feldman and Nelson 2004)
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Impaired tubule response to ADH (Cohen and Post 2002)
Primary polydlipsia
Psychogenic (Nichols 2000)
Hypoadrenocorticism
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Loss of medullary hypertonicity
Hyperthyroidism
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Loss of medullary hypertonicity (Feldman and Nelson 2004)
Psychogenic (Feldman and Nelson 2004)
Acromegaly
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI (
 Osmotic diuresis due to diabetes mellitus (Peterson et al. 1988)
Primary polyuria: CDI
Interference with action of ADH? (Schwedes 1999)
Partial CDl? (Schwedes 1999)
Pheochromocytoma
 Primary polyuria: 20 NDI
Excessive catecholamines (Feldman and Nelson 2004)
Primary
Primary polyuria: CDI
Impaired release of ADH (Rijnberk et al. 2001)
hyperaldosteronism
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Impaired tubule response to ADH (Rijnberk et al. 2001)
Hypercalcemia
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Interferes with action of ADH on renal tubule (Cohen and Post 2002)
Hypokalemia
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Down-regulation of aquaporin-2 (Cohen and Post 2002)
Loss of medullary hypertonicity
Hyponatremia
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Loss of medullary hypertonicity (Tyler et al. 1987)
Diabetes mellitus
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Osmotic diuresis
 Primary renal glycosuria
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Osmotic diuresis
Fanconi syndrome and 
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Osmotic diuresis
other tubulopathies
 Chronic renal failure
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Osmotic diuresis
 Polyuric acute renal failure
 Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Osmotic diuresis
Postobstructive diuresis
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Osmotic diuresis
Down-regulation of aquaporin-2 (Cohen and Post 2002)
Chronic partial ureteral
 Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Down-regulation of aquaporin-2 (Cohen and Post 2002)
obstruction
Renal medullary solute
Primary polyuria: 20 NDI
Decreased renal medullary tonicity with loss of osmotic gradient
washout
Leiomyosarcoma
Primary polyuria: 2° NDI
Impaired tubule response to ADH (Cohen and Post 1999, 2003)
 Polycythemia
Primary polyuria: CDI
Impaired release of ADH (vanVonderen et al. 1997)
 Primary polyuria: 2 NDI
Action of atrial natriuretic peptide (vanVonderen et al. 1997)
Leptospirosis
Primary polyuria?
CRF, 2°NDI?
Splenomegaly
 Primary polydlipsia?
Psychogenic? (Couto 2003)
Primary nephrogenic
Primary polyuria: 10 NDI
 Congenital inability of nephron to respond to ADH
diabetes insipidus
(Continued)
404  Clinical syndromes
Table 42.1 (Continued)
Cause
Classification
Mechanism(s)
 Primary polydipsia
Primary polydlipsia
Psychogenic polydipsia (Henderson et al. 2003)
Hepatic encephalopathy (Rogers et al. 1977)
Hyperthyroidism (Feldman and Nelson 2004)
Gastrointestinal disease (Smith and Elwood 2004)
Central diabetes insipidus (CDI)
 Primary polyuria: CDI
Antidiuretic hormone deficiency (partial or complete)
Diet, drugs, and toxins
Various
Several mechanisms
Source: From Lunn and James 2007
Abbreviations: NDl = nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. ADH = antidiuretic hormone. GFR = glomerular filtration rate. CDl = central
diabetes insipidus. CRF = chronic renal failure
adequate blood levels of ADH. Two forms of congenital
database for PU/PD. In addition to complete blood cell
1"NDl have been described in humans, but there are
counts (CBC), chemistry with electrolytes, and UA, all
very few case reports in dogs or cats (Hoppe and
cats and dogs presenting with PU/PD should have a urine
Karlstam 2000; Cohen and Post 2002; Feldman and
culture. For dogs, leptospirosis titers are also included.
Nelson 2004).
The most common causes of PU/PD in dogs are
chronic renal failure (CRF), hyperadrenocorticism, and
Secondary (acquired) nephrogenic diabetes
diabetes mellitus (DM). The most common causes in
insipidus (2°NDI)
cats are CRF, hyperthyroidism, and DM. CD1, 1°ND1,
and psychogenic polydipsia are uncommon.
It should be apparent from Table 42.1 that this category
 PU/PD is in and of itself not particularly detrimental,
encompasses the vast majority of causes of PU/PD in
but some of underling medical syndromes that manifest
dogs and cats. Diseases that lead to loss of renal medullary
 as PU/PD are. Focus initially on ruling out underlying
hypertonicity or osmotic diuresis also cause a 2°NDl, as
clinical syndromes or diseases with morbidity and mor-
loss of the normal concentration gradient interferes with
tality. Most of those diseases, including DM, hypercal-
effects of ADH. Secondary NDI leads to impaired ability
cemia, hypokalemia, and renal failure, are detected with
to concentrate urine in the face of water deprivation and
a minimum database. Pyelonephritis and leptospirosis
impaired response to exogenous ADH.
are two diseases that may not be revealed by a mini-
mum database as some patients have PU/PD only without
Renal medullary solute washout
organ failure; therefore, they should be tested for. Those
Loss of renal medullary solutes (particularly sodium and
PU/PD patients with normal problem-specific database
urea) leads to reduced medullary hypertonicity, which
in which the underlying cause of PU/PD is not detected
impairs ability of the nephron to produce concentrated
are then evaluated at a slower pace, often necessitated by
urine. Renal medullary solute washout is rarely a primary
client constraints.
cause of PU/PD; the exception being use of very low
solute diets. More commonly, it is secondary to prolonged
Signalment and history
diuresis accompanying marked PU/PD including fluid
therapy and diuretic use. For this reason, using abrupt
The species, age, breed, and sex of the patient may guide
WDT as a means to rule in primary polydipsia is rarely
initial formulation of a list of differential diagnoses. For
fruitful. Most patients eating appropriate diets replete in
example, pyometra is usually a disease of intact females.
salt and protein recover from medullary solute washout
The patient history may reveal changes that suggest
rapidly and gradual onset WDTs are better for ruling in
specific causes for PU/PD. For example, a dog with HAC
 primary polydipsia.
may be polyphagic and lethargic. A careful history of
the patient's urinary habits should be obtained in order
to confirm the problem is PU/PD and not pollakiuria
Diagnostic approach to PU/PD
or inappropriate urination. Polyuric animals may show
Although the list of causes of PU/PD in Table 42.1 is long,
nocturia or may urinate inappropriately in the house.
 uueiqo Aq ino panu no ul panu aq ueo sasneo Au
Previously continent pets with a predisposition to
a minimum database and performing additional sim-
incontinence may develop it associated with increased
ple diagnostic tests. This is termed the problem specific
urine volume. It is essential to obtain a complete
Polyuria and polydipsia  405
medication and diet history in a patient exhibiting
CRF as the sole cause of PU/PD. In the latter condi-
PU/PD. Medications associated with PU/PD include
tion, urine is usually isosthenuric; however, a patient
 glucocorticoids, anticonvulsants, and diuretics. High salt
with mild or moderate CRF retains the ability to dilute
diets may cause PU/PD. Numerous cases of what appears
urine and is able to produce hyposthenuric urine if addi-
to be a diet-related tubular disease, which may or may not
tional conditions causing PU/PD are present ( James and
cause PU/PD, have been reported in multiple countries
Lunn 2007). For example, a young animal with congeni-
associated with food ingredients from Asia, particularly
tal renal disease may have CRF and 1°NDI and produce
chicken jerky treats. Urinary tract infection is not a
hyposthenuric urine (Hoppe and Karlstam 2000).
cause for PU/PD unless it is present in the kidneys.
 Do not disregard the role of renal disease in patients
Bacterial cystitis does not appear to cause any defect in
with hyposthenuria lacking overt renal failure, as some
the renal concentrating ability. It could be hypothesized
diseases that inhibit concentrating ability lead to renal
that discomfort of lower urinary tract inflammation
failure if not diagnosed and treated. Examples include
inq eisdipapod paonu-ssns Aeud e on pel Pino
 pyelonephritis, leptospirosis, hypokalemia, or hypercal-
such an occurrence has not been reported in veterinary
cemia. While persistent isosthenuria is most suggestive
literature. A positive urine culture in a patient presenting
of CRF, intermittent isosthenuria can occur with many
for PU/PD warrants further diagnostic assessment for
causes of PU/PD. A random urine SG of >1.030 means
 presence of pyelonephritis.
that an obligate polyuria is unlikely to be present because
the kidney is capable of producing concentrated urine.
Finally, when interpreting USG it is important to con-
Working from a complete problem list
sider medical interventions that interfere with the kid-
When the cause of PU/PD is not immediately evident
ney's ability to respond to disorders of fluid balance.
from the problem specific database, the remainder of
Examples include fluid therapy, diuretics, or feeding of
the evaluation is often considerably more complicated.
markedly protein-restricted diets.
Thus, pursue other problems and do not focus solely on 
the PU/PD problem. Other problems may be additional
CBC and serum chemistry profile
 manifestations of the same underlying disease yet have
fewer differential diagnoses and thus lead to a diagnosis
These tests may reveal evidence of infection or inflamma-
more efficiently. It is important to generate a complete
tion, liver disease, endocrinopathies, hypercalcemia, and
problem list for all patients with PU/PD.
renal failure. Abnormalities on CBC and serum chemistry
A complete physical examination (see Chapter 4) may
profile may allow many differential diagnoses for PU/PD
yield findings suggestive of underlying causes of PU/PD.
to be ruled in or ruled out without further testing. How-
Examples include coat and skin changes, pot-bellied
ever, subtle changes or values that are technically within
appearance, and hepatomegaly with HAC. Thyroid nod-
normal ranges may provide diagnostic clues suggesting a
ules or masses may be detected in patients with hyperthy-
direction for further investigation. Examples include low
roidism. Enlarged lymph nodes or anal gland mass may
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), low-normal albumin and
suggest presence of neoplasia, which can lead to hyper-
low MCV in liver failure, high-normal BUN and crea-
calcemia. Renal pain suggests obstruction or infection.
 tinine suggesting early or mild CRF, mild polycythemia
and thrombocytosis in HAC, and low-normal [Na+] with
Urinalysis
high-normal [K+] in hypoadrenocorticism. Ensure that
serum chemistry profiles are complete with the inclusion
The urinalysis (see Chapter 7) should include physical
of electrolytes as valuable diagnostic clues can be missed
description, pH, USG, sediment examination, and tests
if only partial or abbreviated panels are evaluated. When
for presence of hemoglobin, protein, glucose, ketones,
 chemistry or CBC values are "borderline” or unexpected,
and bilirubin. The USG can be helpful in the ranking as
tests should be repeated to verify findings. For example,
to likelihood of differential diagnoses for PU/PD. How-
serum total calcium that is slightly above normal ref-
ever, for many of the conditions that cause PU/PD, the
erence range should never be ignored. If it persists, an
USG may range between hyposthenuria, isosthenuria,
ionized calcium is obtained.
and minimally concentrated, depending on the patient's
hydration status, and residual urine concentrating abil-
Urine cuiture
ity. Marked hyposthenuria occurs most likely with DI
 and psychogenic polydipsia; however, hyposthenuria can 
This is an essential early step in evaluation of PU/PD.
occur with HAC, hypercalcemia, and pyometra (exam-
Bacterial or fungal pyelonephritis can cause a 2"NDI
ples of secondary nephrogenic Dl), and rarely acute renal
resulting in PU/PD that may be associated with hypos-
failure. Detection of hyposthenuria argues against stable
thenuria (Grauer and Nichols 1985; Newman et al. 2003).
406  Clinical syndromes
Many causes of PU/PD, such as CRF, HAC, or DM, can
2007). If there is clinical suspicion of HAC from signal-
predispose to urinary tract infection. If pyelonephritis
ment, history, clinical signs, serum chemistry, UA, and
is suspected but initial urine culture is negative, fur-
CBC results, a normal ACTH stimulation test should be
ther tests are indicated, including repeated urine cultures
followed by a low dose dexamethasone suppression test.
(see Chapter 9), abdominal ultrasonography (see Chap-
ACTH stimulation testing is used to rule out hypoad-
ter 16), ultrasound-guided aspiration of the renal pelvis
renocorticism and should be included early in the work-
(see Chapter 6), excretory urography (see Chapter 15),
up for any canine patient with even low-normal [Na+]
and possibly a trial course of antibiotics. With dilute urine
or high normal [K+]. Electrolyte abnormalities are late-
the number of inflammatory cells may be low and UTI
 developing manifestations of hypoadrenocorticism and
may be present despite a lack of detectable pyruia. Simi-
 the disease must be suspected while electrolytes are within
larly the absence of microscopically detectable bacteriuria
reference range as long as the trend is in the appropriate
should never be used to rule out UTI.
direction.
Leptospirosis serology or polymerase chain
Bile acids
reaction (PCR)
Both acquired liver failure and congenital portosystemic
Early or mild infection can lead to PU/PD without
shunts (Rogers et al. 1977; Grauer and Pitts 1987) can
azotemia (Harkin and Gartrell 1996; Harkin et al. 2003).
be associated with PU/PD. Many patients with these dis-
The mechanism is not known, but as the organisms pref-
 orders will have other appropriate historical or clinical
erentially localize in the kidney, this could be a form of
findings, or provide clues on a serum chemistry panel
NDI or a manifestation of early CRF. Leptospirosis may
(low BUN, low albumin, and low cholesterol), but this is
be diagnosed by finding a single high (>1:800) micro-
 not true in all cases. Fasting and post-prandial bile acids
scopic agglutination test (MAT) titer, by demonstrating a
are indicated in work-up of PU/PD. Bile acids should
fourfold rise in MAT titer, or by a PCR test on urine (see
be prioritized early in the evaluation for patients with a
Chapter 27) (Harkin et al. 2003; Langston and Heuter
low BUN:creatinine ratio; although for particularly high
2003). As delaying diagnosis of leptospirosis could be
urine volume PU/PD, low BUN:creatinine ratios may
harmful and as this is a zoonotic disease, early testing is
occur with diuresis.
leptospirosis has been reported.
Imaging studies
 Imaging studies are recommended when the history,
Thyroid hormone assay
physical examination, and diagnostic tests discussed
Aue jo uonaa u Aea pd a Pnous s
above have not identified the cause of PU/PD. Thoracic
middle-aged or older cat with PU/PD. A total T4 can
 and abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultrasonog-
be obtained initially. If this is normal, yet other clinical
 raphy can be used to screen for neoplasia. Contrast stud-
       
Jo nsnd u pieui aq ae audenouosen o s
tial, further testing is indicated, with repeated total T4,
 specific differential diagnoses: examples include excre-
free T4 or nuclear scintigraphy. Hyperthyroidism in dogs
tory urography for pyelonephritis, ultrasonography to
 is uncommon and usually associated with a palpable thy-
rule out “stump” pyometra, and adrenal ultrasound eval-
roid mass (Peterson et al. 1989), but simply ruled out
uation in suspected HAC or pheochromocytoma. Brain
with a serum total T4. latrogenic hyperthyroidism from
imaging may be indicated if CDI is suspected or diag-
nosed in an older dog (Court and Watson 1983). Abdom-
on supplementation.
inal ultrasonography, portography, or rectal scintigraphy
are indicated if portosystemic shunt is suspected.
Adrenal function testing
 The adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation
Assessment of glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
test is a useful first-line test of adrenal function in canine
It is possible for a patient to have CRF without demon-
ud-end go t punoe nou dd
strating azotemia because loss of approximately 66% of
and 40% of adrenal-dependent HAC cases will have
functional renal mass results in loss of concentrating abil-
normal ACTH stimulation test results, (Behrend and
ity, but more than 75% of functional renal mass must
Kemppainen 2001) this test is sensitive for diagnosis of
be lost before azotemia develops. This is more likely to
hypoadrenocorticism and is the only adrenal function
occur in dogs because cats maintain enough concentrat-
test that will identify iatrogenic HAC (James and Lunn
ing ability despite progressive loss of GFR that PU/PD is
Polyuria and polydipsia   407
not noted clinically. Once CRF progresses in a cat to the
fied. Details of the test will not be presented here, but can
point of causing detectable PU/PD, azotemia is present,
be obtained from many historical references (Feldman
and there is no indication to perform a GFR study. In
and Nelson 2004). The purpose of the WDT is to deter-
contrast, it is not unusual to evaluate a dog for PU/PD
mine if an animal can produce a concentrated urine in
and detect only isosthenuria without elevated BUN and
response to water deprivation. This depends on release of
creatinine. A GFR measurement should be considered in
endogenous ADH and ability of the kidneys to respond to
a dog that repeatedly and consistently has isosthenuria or
ADH. If the patient does not produce concentrated urine,
minimally concentrated urine, for which no other expla-
the final part of the WDT involves assessing response to
nation is found, particularly when the BUN and creati-
administration of exogenous ADH. The WDT should
nine are not at the low end of the reference range. GFR
only be considered when the differential diagnoses for
may be assessed by iohexol clearance, exogenous creati-
PU/PD have been definitively narrowed down to CDI
nine clearance, or nuclear scintigraphy (see Chapter 14)
(partial or complete), primary NDI, and primary poly-
(Krawiec et al. 1986; Finco et al. 2001; Watson et al. 2002).
dipsia. All causes of 2°NDI should be fully investigated
 before a WDT is considered. Although simple in prin-
Ruling in primary polydipsia
ciple, in practice, there are several challenges involved
 in performing the WDT correctly, and results are often
In some patients, primary polydipsia can be diagnosed
difcult to interpret. This test can also be dangerous if
by obtaining serial USGs and demonstrating production
 performed incorrectly or if patient selection is inappro-
of concentrated urine on at least some occasions (van
priate.
Vonderen et al. 1999, 2004). This finding rules out pri-
Although it may seem obvious, it is important to
 mary polyuria as the cause of PU/PD and confirms that
the patient is capable of normal urine concentrating abil-
majority of cases of PU/PD in dogs and cats are due to
ity. As primary polydipsia can be a behavioral problem,
HAC, CRF, DM, and hyperthyroidism. CDI, psychogenic
increased USG may also be noted when the patient's envi-
polydipsia, and primary NDl are uncommon. A diagnos-
ronment is changed, for example, during hospitalization
tic plan for any problem should start with tests that are
with free access to water.
simple, inexpensive, safe, and easy to interpret. A WDT
-d d n  n  ss s  
can be expensive, difficult to perform and interpret, and
dipsia, gradual water deprivation can be used in patients
even dangerous. Most cases of PU/PD are due to some
for whom a clinical cause for primary polydipsia has been
form of 2°ND1. This includes HAC, hypoadrenocorti-
made. This includes a normal problem-specific database
 cism, hypercalcemia, CRF liver failure, pyelonephritis,
for PU/PD, evaluation to satisfactory explanation of con-
 and pyometra. A WDT in these patients would lead to a
current problems such as hypoalbuminemia or elevated
diagnosis of NDI and the clinician would still then have
liver enzymes, and a serum [Na+] that is not high or
to test for all the potential acquired causes of NDl. It
high-normal.
makes more sense to rule them out first. An animal with
The client should first measure the patient's water con-
 pyelonephritis, CRF, hypoadrenocorticism or leptospiro-
     s o  
 sis could potentially decompensate during WDT. Many
intake. The water ration at home can then be decreased
causes of2°NDlare harmful if not detected and managed.
by 5% per day, while keeping food consumption and
 Examples include pyelonephritis, hypoadrenocorticism,
activity level constant. The patient should be examined
 leptospirosis, hypercalcemia, hyperthyroidism, and CRF.
daily, and body weight, USG, BUN, and [Na+] deter-
mined. The test should be discontinued if the patient
Early detection of these diseases may improve survival
and prognosis. In contrast, delaying diagnosis of psy-
shows any clinical signs of illness, loses 5% or more of
body weight, or develops elevated BUN or [Na+ ]. If USG
 provided there is constant access to water.
increases to 1.030 or greater, diagnosis of primary poly-
Some WDT protocols recommend measuring urine
dipsia is confirmed. It must be stressed that this approach
        
should only be considered when other common causes
deprived but has obligate polyuria a free water deficit
of PU/PD have been ruled out, when the client is able
occurs leading to elevated serum osmolality. This means
to closely monitor the pet, and when the veterinarian is
 that isosthenuria in that patient at that time will be associ-
 prepared to examine the animal daily.
ated with higher urine osmolality. Thus, measuring urine
and serum osmolality can be helpful in a WDT when it
Classic WDT
 po u nnq u np si n ien sieade
With careful patient selection, the WDT can be a useful
urine is still isosthenuric for that patient because the
tool, but in the opinion of this author, its use is rarely justi-
 patient's serum is hyperosmolar. Classic WDT can be
408  Clinical syndromes
used to rule in partial CDl; however, most work-ups for
Addition of salt or water to the diet can achieve a diure-
PU/PD can be safely aborted before this stage as most
sis and increase urine volume. Addition of salt increases
clients will be comfortable with an assurance that serious
thirst and water intake through associated drinking. The
causes have been eliminated.
 problem with adding salt is that it may decrease palatabil-
ity and promote nausea particularly in patients that have
Aiternatives to WDT
potassium citrate, also a salt, added to the diet for pre-
As an alternative to the WDT, CDl can be diag-
vention of certain types of urolithiasis. In some patients,
nosed through use of a DDAVP response trial (Nichols
high dietary sodium may worsen hypertension or fluid
2000). DDAVP (1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin)
retention.
is desmopressin, a synthetic analogue of ADH. The
Creating a water diuresis increases urine volume. Soup
DDAVP response trial should only be performed when
is effective for increasing urine volume in many dogs. Pre-
causes of 2°NDIhave been ruled out and when the patient
n   e   e    e 
can be closely observed. Prior to starting the trial, the
in water such that the fat in the meat creates a highly
pet owner should measure daily water intake for 2-3
palatable soup base. Most of the meat can then be dis-
days to establish a baseline. The intranasal preparation of
DDAVP is then given into the conjunctival sac (1-4 drops
An appropriate kibble is then added. This intervention
twice daily for 5-7 days) and the patient monitored for
does not unbalance the diet and preparation time for
reduction in water intake or increase in USG. This is a
clients is short such that it can be used as a daily dietary
logical approach because if CDl is ultimately diagnosed
intervention to provide a high water meal.
it is treated by DDAVP administration (Nichols 2000).
For some dogs and most cats, liquid-based treats can
If patient signalment, history, or [Na+] suggest primary
be used to increase water intake. Recommendations for
 polydipsia, a DDAVP response trial is not recommended
cats include water in which tuna is packaged, half and
due to potential risk of inducing water intoxication.
half (or commercially available lactose-free milk made
for cats), and meat-based broths.
Interpretation of the DDAVP response trial
Many cats prefer running water to still water. Thus,
1. Patients with CDI would be expected to show a dra-
addition of regularly cleaned fountains is indicated for
cats to increase urine volume. Cats that may have been
matic reduction in water intake, usually of greater
discouraged from drinking from sink faucets should be
than 50%.
encouraged. For some dogs and cats, the taste of the water
2. Patients with HAC can show a variety of responses
does seem to make a difference and some will drink more
to DDAVP therapy, which can lead to mistakes in
when offered certain brands of bottled water.
diagnosis. These authors and others (Nichols 2000;
For dogs, clicker training to drink on command is also
James and Lunn 2007) have noted that some dogs
a viable option. It requires an investment in learning the
with HAC are able to concentrate their urine in
training technique by the client, but once learned, it has
response to water deprivation, suggesting that poly-
many other uses.
dipsia may be psychogenic: these patients may not
 Overallsuccess ofthese interventions depends on qual-
produce concentrated urine during a DDAVP trial.
ity of monitoring so that clients and clinicians can get reg-
Poor response to DDAVP in a patient with HAC may
ular feedback on what is effective and what is not because
also be attributed to 2°NDl associated with gluco-
the rapidity with which the kidney adjusts urine concen-
corticoid excess (Grauer and Nichols 1985). Other
tration to match intake. To this end, clients can obtain
patients with HAC may show a partial response to
refractometers for use at home. Inexpensive models are
 DDAVP suggesting diagnosis of partial CD1 (Hen-
available and allow the client to collect information from
derson and Elwood 2003).
 all different times in the day. In this way, further changes
 3. Failure to concentrate urine in response to a DDAVP
are precisely made in the management plan. If a urolithi-
trial will occur in both 1°NDI and 2°NDl. The former
 asis patient has dilute urine whenever measured from
is a rare condition only likely in very young animals.
10 AM to midnight and yet has concentrated urine at
In a mature dog or cat-acquired causes of NDI are
3 AM, this pinpoints when in the day we need to make
likely and must be investigated.
further progress to increase urine volume.
Creating PU/PD
It is often desirable for clinicians to create PU/PD as an
References
element of a prevention plan for urolithiasis patients.
Aroch, I., et al. (2005). Central diabetes insipidus in 5 cats: clinical
There are several ways that it is accomplished using diet,
presentation, diagnosis and oral desmopressin therapy. IFeline Med
behavior modification, and diuretics.
Surg 7(6): 333-339.
Polyuria and polydipsia   409
Behrend, E.N. and R.J. Kemppainen (200l). Diagnosis of canine
Langston, C.E. and K.J. Heuter (2003). Leptospirosis: a re-emerging
hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 31(5):
zoonotic disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33(4):
985-1001.
791-807.
Cohen, M. and G.S. Post ( 1999). Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in a
Lunn, K.F. and K.M. James (2007). Norrmal and abnormal water bal-
dog with intestinal leiomyosarcoma. I Am Vet Med Assoc 215(12):
 ance: polyuria and polydipsia. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet29(10):
1818-1820.
612-624.
Cohen, M. and G.S. Post (2002). Water transport in the kidney and
Mulnix, J.A., et al. ( 1976). Evaluation of a modified water-deprivation
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. I Vet Itern Med 16(5): 510-517.
test for diagnosis of polyuric disorders in dogs. IArm Vet Med Assoc
Cohen, M., et al. (2003). Gastrointestinal leiomyosarcoma in 14 dogs.
169( 12): 1327-1330.
J Vet Intern Med 17(1): 107-110.
Newman, S.J., et al. (2003). Cryptococcal pyelonephritis in a dog. IAm
Court, M.H. and A.D. Watson (1983). Idiopathic neurogenic diabetes
Vet Med Assoc 222(2): 180- 183.
insipidus in a cat. Aust Vet J60(8): 245-247.
Nichols, R. (2000). Clinical use of the vasopressin analogue DDAVP for
Couto, C.G. (2003). Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. In: Small
the diagnosis and treatment of diabetes insipidus. In: Kirks'Current
Amimal Intermal Medicine, edited by R.W. Nelson and C.G. Couto,
Veterinary Therapy XI, edited by J.D. Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA:
3rd edition. pp. 1200-1209.
WB Saunders, pp. 325-326.
 Deppe, T.A., et al. ( 1999). Glomerular filtration rate and renal volume
O'Conner, W.J. and D.J. Potts ( 1969). The external water exchanges of
in dogs with congenital portosystermic vascular anomalies before
normal laboratory dogs. Q I Exp Physiol 54: 244-265.
 e      a e 
Peterson, M.E., et al. ( 1988). Acromegaly in 14 cats. I Vet Intern Med
Feldman, E.C. and R.W. Nelson (2004). Carine and Feline Endocrinol-
4{4): 192-201.
ogy and Reproduction. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders.
 Peterson, M.E., et al. ( 1989). Radioactive iodine treatment of a func-
 Finco, D.R., et al. (200l). Relationship between plasma iohexol clear-
tional thyroid carcinoma producing hyperthyroidism in a dog. I Vet
ance and urinary exogenous creatinine clearance in dogs. I Vet Interm
Interm Med 3( 1): 20-25.
Med 15(4): 386-373.
Ramsey, I.K., et al. (1999). Concurrent central diabetes insipidus and
Grauer, G.F and C.E.R. Nichols (1985). Ascites, renal abnormalities,
 panhypopituitarism in a German shepherd dog. I Small Anim Pract
and electrolyte and acid-base disorders associated with liver disease.
40(6): 271-274.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 15(1): 197-214.
Rijnberk, A., et al. (200l). Aldosteronoma in a dog with polyuria
Grauer, G.F. and R.P. Pitts ( 1987). Primary polydipsia in three dogs
as the leading symptom. Lomest Arim Endocrinol 20: 227-
with portosystemic shunts. I Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 23(2): 197-200.
240.
Harb, EH., et al. ( 1996). Central diabetes insipidus in dogs: 20 cases
 Rogers, W.A., et al. ( 1977). Partial deficiency of antidiuretic hormone
(1986-1995). I Am Vet Med Assoc 209(11): 1884-1888.
in a cat. I Asm Vet Med Assoc 170(5): 545-547.
Harkin, K.R. and C.L. Gartrell (1996). Canine leptospirosis in New
 Schwedes, C.s. (1999). Transient diabetes insipidus in a dog with
Jersey and Michigan: 17 cases (1990-1995). I Am Amim Hosp Assoc
32: 495-501.
Smith, J.R. and C.M. Elwood (2004). Traumatic partial hypopitu-
Harkin, K.R., et al. (2003). Clinical application of polymerase chain
itarism in a cat. I Small Amim Pract 45(8): 405-409.
reaction assay for diagnosis of leptospirosis in dogs. IArm Vet Med
Tyler, R.D., et al. (1987). Renal concentrating ability in dehydrated
Assoc 222(9): 1224- 1229.
hyponatremic dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 191(9): 1095- 1100.
Henderson, S.M. and C.M. Elwood (2003). A potential causal asso-
van Vonderen, I.K., et al. ( 1997). Polyuria and polydipsia and disturbed
ciation between gastrointestinal disease and primary polydipsia in
vasopressin release in 2 dogs with secondary polycythemia. J Vet
three dogs. I Small Anirm Pract 44(6): 280-284.
Interm Med 15(5): 300-303.
Hoppe, A. and E. Karlstam (2000). Renal dysplasia in boxers and
van Vonderen, I.K., et al. ( 1999). Disturbed vasopressin release in 4
Finnish harriers. I Small Anin Pract 41(9): 422-426.
dogs with so-called primary polydipsia. I Vet Intern Med 13(5):
 James, K.M. and K.F. Lunn (2007). Normal and abnormal water bal-
419-425.
ance: hyponatremia and hypernatremia. Compend Cont Educ Pract
van Vonderen, I.K., et al. (2004). Vasopressin response to osmotic
Vet 29(10): 589-609.
 stimulation in 18 young dogs with polyuria and polydipsia. J Vet
Krawiec,
D.R.,
et
al.
(1986).
Evaluation
of
66
Interm Med 18(6): 800-806.
diethylenetriaminepentaaceticacid nuclearimaging for quantitative
Watson, A.D.J., et al. (2002). Plasma exogenous creatinine clearance
determination of the glomerular filtration rate of dogs. Arm I Vet
Res47(10): 2175-2179.
sampling strategy. I Vet Irtern Med 16(1): 22-33.
43
Proteinuria and microalbuminuria
Hattie Syme and Jonathon Elliott
When proteinuria is severe, it can result directly in clin-
demonstrated in experimental studies, that increases in
ical signs. This is discussed in Chapter 44 on nephrotic
glomerular hydrostatic pressure increase the amount of
syndrome and in the chapters dedicated to inherited (see 
protein that traverses this barrier. Dogs and cats subjected
Chapter 56) and acquired (see Chapter 53) glomeru-
lar diseases. It is recognised increasingly that protein-
lar capillary pressure and a corresponding increase in
uria of lesser magnitude is also of clinical importance
proteinuria (Brown et al. 1990; Brown and Brown 1995).
due to its prognostic significance. We focus on sub-
 Dogs and cats with systemic hypertension also tend to
nephrotic proteinuria quantified by either measurement
be more proteinuric than those that are normotensive,
of urine protein-creatinine ratio (UPC) or documenta-
(Jacob et al. 2005; Syme et al. 2006) and this is pre-
tion of microalbuminuria.
sumed to be caused, at least in part, by transmission of
increased systemic arterial pressure to glomerular capil-
laries. However, an alternative explanation for this associ-
Origin of proteinuria
have glomerular disease than patients with normotensive
Renal proteinuria may result from glomerular or tubu.
 chronic kidney disease and thus are more proteinuric. It 
lar pathology or a combination of the two. The normal
is proposed that glomerular proteinuria may also occur
glomerulus restricts filtration of most proteins on basis
in animals with systemic illness as a result of generalised
of size, and, to a lesser extent, charge. Thus, in a patient
endothelial cell dysfunction.
with normal renal function, very few protein molecules
Tubular disease may also result in proteinuria although
of a size equal to or greater than albumin ( approximately
this is typically of lesser magnitude than in patients with
69 kDa) appear in urine. Proteins smaller than albumin
 glomerular disease. In the healthy, normally functioning
do traverse the glomerular barrier to a certain extent
kidney, small amounts of protein, particularly those of
and some very small proteins will cross the barrier rel-
 low molecular weight but also including small amounts
atively freely. The glomerular basement membrane and
 of albumin, traverse the glomerular barrier into the pri-
slit-diaphragm formed between the interdigitating foot
 mary glomerular fltrate and are subsequently taken up
processes of the podocytes provide most of the size and
into tubular epithelial cells for processing. Within the
charge selective permeability of the glomerular capil-
 proximal tubule, two multi-ligand receptors, megalin and
lary wall. The endothelial cells, basement membrane,
cubulin, are responsible for endocytotic uptake of a large
and podocyte foot processes interact with each other
variety of peptides and proteins including albumin. Pro-
to produce a structurally robust and functionally effec-
teinuria resulting from specific defects in these tubular
tive glomerular filter. It follows that loss of integrity of
 transport mechanisms has been reported in humans but
 any of these structures, either directly or as a result of
 is rare. Reduced tubular reabsorption of protein may
more generalised glomerular injury, is likely to result 
occur more commonly due to decrease in the number
in proteinuria and it may be severe. It has also been
of functioning tubules and increased filtered load per
functioning nephron (resulting from adaptive hyperfil-
 tration) in patients with chronic kidney disease.
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
410
Proteinuria and microalbuminuria  411
Prognostic significance of proteinuria
effectively control blood pressure in hypertensive dogs
whereas in cats amlodipine is very effective at reducing
 Proteinuria has been demonstrated to be of prognostic
blood pressure. In hypertensive cats, proteinuria mea-
significance in both dogs (Jacob et al. 2005) and cats
sured either before or after introducing anti-hypertensive
(Kuwahara et al. 2006; Syme et al. 2006; King et al. 2007)
therapy is predictive of survival (Jepson et al. 2007)
with chronic kidney disease; with patients that are more
(Table 43.1).
proteinuric, in general, having shorter survival times.
This holds true even for proteinuria at sub-nephrotic
levels with a demonstrable difference in survival with a
Pathogenesis of renal injury
cut-off point for UPC as low as 0.2 in cats and 1.0 in
dogs.
 Proteinuria may have prognostic significance for many
Hypertensive cats and dogs tend to be more protein-
different reasons and these are not mutually exclu-
uric than their normotensive counterparts even when
sive. Dogs and cats with proteinuria are more likely
severity of azotemia is comparable, although, there is a
to have glomerular disease and that tends to be more
 great deal of individual variability ( Jacob et al. 2005; Syme
rapidly progressive than tubular disease. As discussed
et al. 2006). However, diagnosis of hypertension or how
above, proteinuria may serve as a marker for glomeru-
well blood pressure is controlled after the instigation of
lar hypertension, generalised endothelial dysfunction,
anti-hypertensive therapy, does not appear to predict the
or1
loss of functioning tubules, any of which may
survival of cats (Syme et al. 2006; Jepson et al. 2007). This
be linked to increased rate of progression of kidney
 is in contrast to the findings in dogs with chronic kidney
 disease through proteinuria-independent mechanisms.
disease where hypertension is predictive of reduced sur-
 Nonetheless, numerous experimental studies provide
vival times (Jacob et al. 2005). The difference between
evidence that proteinuria might also play a direct role
results in these two species may be due to failure to
 in mediating ongoing renal injury.
Table 43.1 Survival of dogs and cats with proteinuria
 Number reaching 
95% Confidence
Time to end-point
UPC
end-point/Number in group
Relative risk
 interval 
(days)
 Feline studies
 Syme et al. (2006)4. patients indluded 29 normal, 65 normotensive azotaemic, 15 hypertensive non-azotaemic, and 27 hypertensive
azotemic cats
End point was death due to any cause or euthanasia
<0.2
17/62
462
0.2-0.4
18/38
2.0
1.0-4.0
0.036
128
≥0.4
26/36
4.7
2.5-8.7
<0.001
98
King et al. (2007), patients all had azotaemic CKD. Known hypertensive patients were excluded
 End point was the need for parenteral fluid administration or euthanasia or dleath due to renal failure 
<0.2
NR
NR
0.2-0.4
NR
2.2
0.86-5.6
0.10
NR
≥0.4
NR
4.9
2.3-10.6
<0.001
NR
Jepson et al. 2007), all patients were hypertensive, 78 were azotemic, 57 non-azotemic
 End point was death due to any cause or euthanasia
<0.2
21/36
490
0.2-0.4
24/34
2.2
1.1-4.2
0.018
313
≥0.4
33/48
2.9
1.6-5.4
0.001
162
Canine studies
Jacob et al. (2005), all patients were azotemic, 7 dogs were also hypertensive at enrollment onto the study
 End point was death due to any cause or euthanasia
<1.0
12/20
524
≥1.0
20/25
2.9
1.4-6.2
0.004
248
NR-not reported.
412   Clinical syndromes
Table 43.2 Conditions associated with proteinuria and/or microalbuminuria in dogs and cats
Dogs
Cats
Renal disease
Renal disease
Glucocorticoid therapy (Waters et al. 1997; Schellenberg et al. 2008)
Systemic hypertension (Syme et al. 2006)
Hyperadrenocorticism (Ortega et al. 1996: Hurley and Vaden 1998)
Hyperthyroidism (Syme and Elliott 2001)
Neoplastic disease (whittemore et al. 2006)
Lower urinary tract disease (Whittemore et al. 2006)
Lower urinary tract disease (Mardell and Sparkes 2006:
Whittemore et al. 2007)
Health status (diseased versus healthy) (whittemore et al. 2006)
Health status (diseased versus healthy) (Mardell and
Sparkes 2006: Whittemore et al. 2007)
Urinary proteins may elicit pro-inflammatory and
use of proteinuria, and often more specifically microal-
 pro-fibrotic effects that contribute directly to tubuloin-
buminuria, as a screening test for at-risk patients in the
terstitial damage. Proteinuria may mediate this injury
 general population. This approach has limitations, how-
through activation of transcription factors such as NF-xB
d on  si i nd i e  e  
dict significance of a positive screening test (Mardell and
fibrotic genes (reviewed by Abbate et al. 2006). Protein-
Sparkes 2006). Proteinuria or microalbuminuria may be
uria is also associated with transdifferentiation of tubular
detected when any number ofrenalor extra-renal diseases
epithelia cells into myofibroblasts, which is believed to be
occur (see Table 43.2). Positive test results are more com-
a crucial step in fibrosis of the kidney. This is mediated,
mon with advancing age, presumably due to an increase
at least in part, by actions of transforming growth factor
in the prevalence of systemic diseases (Whittemore et al.
beta (TGF-β) (Yang and Liu 2001). TGF-β also promotes
2006, 2007). When dogs or cats are known to be at risk
synthesis of extracellular matrix and is a key promoter
for development of glomerular disease, results of these
of fibrosis (Okuda et al. 1990). Other reported media-
screening tests may be more meaningfully interpreted,
tors of renal damage in response to proteinuria include,
allowing detection of disease at an early stage (Vaden
the vasoconstrictive peptide endothelin-1 and molecules
et al. 2001; Grauer et al. 2002; Lees et al. 2002).
that attract monocytes/macrophages such as monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and RANTES. The
Treatment of proteinuria
mechanisms by which proteinuria leads to renal injury are
multifactorial and involve complex interactions between
If proteinuria is directly injurious to the kidney, then
 numerous pathways of cellular damage.
interventions to reduce proteinuria should be associ-
Whether proteins such as albumin are directly respon-
ated with delayed progression of renal disease. This has
sible for mediating renal injury is controversial, although
resulted in recommendations that reduction in protein-
albumin has been shown to have direct effects in some
uria be used as a primary therapeutic end-point. It is
cell culture models. It has been argued that it may not
important to recognize, however, that if proteinuria is
be directly toxic to tubular epithelial cells but that it
 simply a marker for some other injurious process (e.g.)
 is the molecules that bind to it, such as free fatty acids,
glomerular hypertension or increased tubular process-
that perpetrate injury ( Thomas et al. 2002). Alternatively,
 ing) and therapeutic interventions ameliorate that pro-
injury could be mediated by other molecules that are of
cess, a survival benefit may still be evident, even if this is
a similar size or smaller than albumin and so are able
not directly mediated by reduction in proteinuria.
 to traverse the glomerular barrier in settings where pro-
A number of studies have been performed in human
teinuria occurs; circulating cytokines and growth factors
patients with chronic kidney disease that indicate
may reach tubular cells by this route as may various com-
treatment with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
 ponents of complement (Nangaku et al. 2002).
inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB) may
be superior to treatment with other anti-hypertensive
 Proteinuria and albuminuria as
agents, and that this is due to greater reduction in uri-
nary protein excretion that occurs with these drugs (Mas-
predictive markers
chio et al. 1996; Agodoa et al. 2001). The ACE-inhibitor
The association of proteinuria with progression of renal
disease and reduced survival has led to an interest in the 
 lary pressure in cats with experimentally reduced renal
Proteinuria and microalbuminuria  413
mass (Brown et al. 2001). The anti-proteinuric effect of
teinuria and slow renal disease progression in a canine
benazepril has been demonstrated in clinical cases of nat-
remnant kidney model although the level of supplemen-
urally occurring chronic kidney disease (King et al. 2006;
tation used in these studies was marked (Brown et al.
Mizutani et al. 2006). As might be expected, reduction in
1998).
proteinuria is greatest in those patients that are most pro-
teinuric before treatment ( King et al. 2006; Mizutani et al.
References
2006). Unfortunately, despite the demonstrated efficacy
 of ACE-inhibitors in reducing proteinuria, demonstra-
Abbate, M., et al. (2006). How does proteinuria cause progressive renal
ble benefit in terms of increased survival times (King
damage? I Am Soc Nephrol 17: 2974-2984.
Agodoa, L.Y., et al. (200l). Effect of ramipril vs amlodipine on renal
et al. 2006), or reduction in the number of cats with an
increase in the severity of azotaemia over a follow-up
trial. JAMA 285: 2719-2728.
period of 6 months (Mizutani et al. 2006), could not be
Brown, S.A., Brown, C.A. ( 1995). Single-nephron adaptations to par-
demonstrated, although favorable trends were evident in
tial renal ablation in cats. Arm I Physiol 269: R1002-1008.
both studies. These results are disappointing. It is possi-
Brown, S.A., et al. (1990). Single-nephron adaptations to partial
ble that clear benefit to ACE-inhibitor therapy could be
renal ablation in the dog. Am I Physiol Renal Physiol 258: F495-
503.
demonstrated by carefully selecting the population that
Brown, S.A., et al. ( 1998). Beneficial effects of chronic administration
was studied to include only cats that were grossly protein-
[en ym saop un spioe aey penesunaiod e-[eaol lria go
uric, had mild azotaemia at the study outset and allowing
insufficiency. I Lab Clin Med 131: 447-455.
for a prolonged period of follow-up. However, if this were
Brown, S.A., etal. (2001). Effects ofthe angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitor benazepril in cats with induced renal insuffciency. Am I
the case, it would not be representative of many cats with
Vet Res 62: 375-383.
chronic kidney disease.
Brown, S.A., et al. (2003). Evaluation of the effects of inhibition of
The ACE-inhibitor enalapril has been used in a
 m s u dea m aa n 
placebo-controlled study of dogs with biopsy confirmed
chronic renal insuffciency. Am I Vet Res 64: 321-327.
glomerulonephritis. Dogs treated with enalapril had a
Grauer, G.F, et al. (200o). Effects of enalapril versus placebo as a
treatrment for canine idiopathic glomerulonephritis. J Vet Interr
reduction in proteinuria compared with those receiving
Med 14: 526-533.
a placebo and progression of renal disease was slowed
Grauer, G.F., et al. (2002). Development of microalbuminuria in dogs
(Grauer et al. 2000). Although clinical studies have not
with heartworm disease I Vet Interr Med 16: 352.
been performed in dogs with less severe proteinuria, dogs
Hurley, K.J., Vaden, S.L. (1998). Evaluation of urine protein content
subjected to sub-total nephrectomy and treated with
enalapril did show a tendency to a reduction in pro-
Med Assoc 212: 369-373.
Jacob, F, et al. (2005). Evaluation of the association between ini-
teinuria compared to control dogs, and a reduction in
tial proteinuria and morbidity rate or death in dogs with natu-
 glomerular and tubulointerstitial lesions when the study
rally occurring chronic renal failure. IArm Vet Med Assoc 226: 393-
was terminated after 6 months of treatment (Brown et al.
400.
Jepson, R.E., et al. (2007). Effect of control of systolic blood pressure
2003).
 On survival in cats with systemic hypertension. I Vet Irtern Med 21:
There are concerns that treatment of hypertension
with calcium-channel blockers, such as amlodipine, may
402-409.
King, I.N., et al. (2006). Tolerability and effcacy of benazepril in cats
exacerbate glomerular hypertension and proteinuria due
with chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med 20: 1054-1064.
to afferent arteriolar vasodilation. However, in stud-
King, I.N., et al. (2007). Prognostic factors in cats with chronic kidney
ies of cats with naturally occurring hypertension, pro-
disease. I Vet Intern Med 21: 906-916.
Kuwahara, Y., et al. (2006). Association of laboratory data and death
teinuria was actually reduced when cats were treated
within one month in cats with chronic renal failure. I Small Anim
with amlodipine (Jepson et al. 2007). This was pre-
Pract 47: 446-450.
sumably due to marked reduction in systemic blood
Lees, G.E., et al. (2002). Persistent albuminuria precedes onset of overt
pressure that occurred when treatment was imple-
proteinuria in male dogs with X-Linked hereditary nephropathy. /
mented. In dogs, where reduction in blood pressure
Vet Irtern Med 16: 353.
in response to amlodipine treatment is more modest,
Mardell, E.J., Sparkes, A.H. (2006). Evaluation of a commercial in-
house test kit for the semi-quantitative assessrment of microalbu-
worsening of proteinuria may be a more realistic con-
minuria in cats. I Feline Med Surg 8: 269-278.
cern, but no data exist to substantiate or refute this
Maschio, G., et al. ( 1996). Effect of the angiotensin-converting-enzyme
 possibility.
inhibitor benazepril on the progression of chronic renal insuf-
ficiency. The Angiotensin-Converting-Enzyme Inhibition in Pro-
excretion include, endothelin receptor antagonists, use of
   I i      s
945.
calcium channel blockers with selectivity for the efferent
Mizutani, H., et al. (2006). Evaluation of the clinical effcacy of
arteriole, and dietary therapies. Eicosapentaenoic acid
benazepril in the treatment of chronic renal insuffciency in cats.
supplementation has been demonstrated to reduce pro-
I Vet Intern Med 20: 1074-1079.
414    Clinical syndromes
 Nangaku, M., et al. (2002). C6 mediates chronic progression of tubu-
Thomas, M.E., et al. (2002). Fatty acids exacerbate tubulointerstitial
lointerstitial damage in rats with remnant kidneys. JAm Soc Nephrol
injury in protein-overload proteinuria. Arm I Physiol Renal Physiol
13: 928-936.
283: F640-F647.
Okuda, S., et al. ( 1990). Elevated expression of transforming growth
Vaden, S.L., et al. (2001). Longitudinal study of microalbuminuria in
factor-beta and proteoglycan production in experimental glomeru-
soft-coated wheaten terriers. I Vet Interr Med 15: 300.
lonephritis. Possible role in expansion of the mesangial extracellular
Waters, C.B., et al. (1997). Effects of glucocorticoid therapy on urine
matrix. I Clirn Ivest 86: 453-462.
protein-to-creatinine ratios and renal morphology in dogs. J Vet
Ortega, T.M., et al. ( 1996). Systemic arterial blood pressure and urine
Intern Med 11: 172-177.
Whittemore, J.C., et al. (2006). Evaluation of the association between
Vet Med Assoc 209: 1724- 1729.
 microalbuminuria and the urine albumin-creatinine ratio and sys-
Schellenberg, S., et al. (2008). The effects of hydrocortisone on systemic
temic disease in dogs. JArm Vet Med Assoc 229: 958-963.
arterial blood pressure and urinary protein excretion in dogs. I Vet
Whittemore, J.C., et al. (2007). Association of microalbuminuria and
Interm Med 22: 273-281.
 the urine alburmin-to-creatinine ratio with systermic disease in cats.
Syme, H.M., Elliott, I. (2001). Evaluation of proteinuria in hyperthy-
I Am Vet Med Assoc 230: 1165- 1169.
roid cats. I Vet Interm Med 15: 299.
da i u si  o  (oo)   " 
Syme, H.M., et al. (2006). Survival of cats with naturally occurring
 to myofibroblast transition and its implications in renal interstitial
chronic renal failure is related to severity of proteinuria. I Vet Irtern
fibrosis. Arm I Pathol 159: 1465-1475.
Med 20: 528-535.
44
Nephrotic syndrome
Barrak Pressler
Nephrotic syndrome is an uncommon to rare com-
syndrome is more likely in cats than in dogs at time of
plication of protein-losing nephropathies in dogs and
diagnosis of glomerular disease, most likely due to the
cats. It refers to the concurrent presence of protein-
high prevalence of membranous glomerulopathy with
uria, hypoalbuminemia, extravascular accumulation of
massive proteinuria in cats with glomerular disease ( Nash
fluid, and hyperlipidemia, and when present is pathog-
et al. 1979).
nomonic for glomerular disease. Evidence in people and
Nephrotic syndrome in people is more likely in
laboratory models of glomerular disease have questioned
 patients with glomerular diseases associated with large
whether these disparate clinicopathologic findings are
amounts of urine albumin loss (Olson 2006). Adults with
all direct consequences of massive urinary albumin loss,
 primary glomerular diseases and nephrotic syndrome
or whether instead they are distinct manifestations of
are most likely to have membranous glomerulopathy,
one or more unidentified disease processes. Patients with
 followed by minimal change disease and focal segmen-
hypoalbuminemia, proteinuria, and hyperlipidemia but
tal glomerulosclerosis. Secondary glomerular diseases,
no third-spacing of fluid are occasionally referred to
 including amyloidosis and diabetic glomerulosclerosis,
as having “incomplete” or “incipient” nephrotic syn-
increase in prevalence in geriatric nephrotic syndrome
drome. However, because nephrotic syndrome by defini-
patients. Pediatric patients with nephrotic syndrome
tion requires the presence of edema, and many patients 
are most commonly diagnosed with minimal change
with severe hypoalbuminemia will not develop extravas-
disease. Case series of glomerular disease in dogs and
cular fluid accumulation, this author does not favor these
 s  s d aa si
terms.
be more common in dogs and cats with membra-
nous glomerulopathy or dogs with amyloidosis; how-
ever, in a recent large retrospective study of dogs with
Epidemiology
nephrotic syndrome, no association was found with
 the membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, mem-
Relative prevalence and causes of nephrotic syndrome in
branous glomerulopathy, or amyloidosis (Nash et al.
dogs or cats with glomerular disease are unknown. Ret-
1979; Jaenke and Allen 1986; Center et al. 1987; Cook and
rospective studies of dogs with glomerular disease have
Cowgill 1996; Klosterman et al. In press). Therefore, pres-
reported that 5.8-37.5% of these patients are diagnosed
ence of nephrotic syndrome should not increase clinical
with nephrotic syndrome at the time of initial presenta-
 suspicion of any glomerular disease histologic subtype,
tion to referral institutions (DiBartola et al. 1980; Jaenke
including secondary causes of glomerular disease such as
and Allen 1986; Center et al. 1987; Cook and Cowgill
drugs, infectious agents, or immune-mediated diseases
1996). However, true prevalence of this complication is
(Stone et al. 1994; Koutinas et al. 1999; Vasilopulos et al.
d     i s s
2005). This author has treated nephrotic syndrome in
with nephrotic syndrome are more likely to be referred
dogs with membranous glomerulopathy, membranopro-
than those with asymptomatic proteinuria. Nephrotic
liferative glomerulonephritis, or amyloidosis, and in cats
with membranous glomerulopathy or membranoprolif-
erative glomerulonephritis.
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
415
416  Clinical syndromes
Figure 44.2 Pulmonary arerial thromboembolism (arrow) in a
5-year-old, castrated male Doberman pinscher with nephrotic syn-
drome that developed dyspnea acutely and was euthanized.
Figure 44.1 Pitting edema in a dog with nephrotic syndrome.
This 9-year-old Weimaraner was evaluated for severe hypoalbu.
minemia, and was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome. Although
no ascites was present, severe pitting edema was noted along the
ventral thorax and abdomen. The three depressions on the ventral
of thrombosis found in 35% and 20% of nephrotic syn-
thorax are pitting areas where digital pressure had been placed
drome patients, respectively (Llach 1985; Abrass 1997).
while positioning the dog in lateral recumbency.
This increased incidence may be due to vascular stasis
and/or reduced rate of blood flow due to hypovolemia
and reduced activity levels in affected patients. Throm-
boemboli may form in either the arterial or venous
Clinical presentation
systems in people, although emboli of the renal, pul-
Patients with nephrotic syndrome are referred most com-
monary, and deep veins are most common (Llach 1985;
monly for abdominal distention secondary to ascites, and
Abrass 1997). Limited retrospective studies in dogs with
in order to be clinically apparent the volume of accumu-
glomerular disease suggest that risk ofthromboembolism
lated abdominal fluid is usually large. However, it is not
is not linearly associated with severity of proteinuria, and
uncommon for patients who are diagnosed with protein-
relationship to nephrotic syndrome in particular has not
losing nephropathies in the absence of overt ascites to
been examined (Cook and Cowgill 1996). Sites of throm-
 have some degree of sub-clinical abdominal fluid accu-
bosis reported by others or encountered by this author
mulation evident when diagnostic imaging is performed.
include the splenic, hepatic, intestinal and other mesen-
Many patients also have pitting subcutaneous edema,
teric veins, pulmonary vasculature (Figure 44.2), and the
 particularly in the extremities and ventral abdomen, tho-
renal and adrenal artery and vein (Figure 44.3) (Stone
rax, and neck (Figure 44.1). Fluid less commonly accu-
et al. 1994; Cook and Cowgill 1996; Ritt et al. 1997).
mulates in the pleural and pericardial spaces, but dyspnea
Although people with nephrotic syndrome are at
or tamponade are very rare. Fluid is usually a pure tran-
increased risk of coronary artery disease, secondary
sudate (total nucleated cell count less than 1,0o0 cells/ul;
infections, and acute renal failure, these have not been
total protein concentration less than 1.0 g/dL). Finding
recognized as occurring more frequently in veterinary
an increased cel count or protein concentration should
 patients with nephrotic syndrome versus those with
 likely increase clinical suspicion that an extra-renal dis-
asymptomatic proteinuria. Coronary artery disease risk
ease has resulted in peritoneal effusion and concurrent
correlates with severity of lipid dysregulation in people
secondary glomerular disease.
(Buemi et al. 2005). Pneumococcal sepsis or peritonitis
All patients with proteinuria are at increased risk of
d  s s    
thromboembolic complications due to urinary loss of
 likely because of the frequent use of immunosuppressive
anticoagulant proteins, increased synthesis of procoagu-
drugs, urinary loss of immunoglobulins, a generalized
lant factors, and generalized platelet activation (Olson
dysregulation of the immune system, and increased risk
2006; Singhal and Brimble 2006). However, human
of cutaneous infections due to fragility of edematous
patients with nephrotic syndrome are at increased risk
 skin (Soeiro et al. 2004). Risk factors in human nephrotic
of thromboembolism as compared to those with asymp-
 syndrome patients for development of acute renal failure
tomatic proteinuria, with renal vein or extra-renal sites 
 include chronic hypovolemia, sepsis, thromboembolic
Nephrotic syndrome  417
were likewise mildly to severely increased in both patient
 groups (Klosterman et al. In press). Previous studies like-
wise have reported that dogs with serum albumin con-
 centrations less than 1.5 g/dL or urine protein:creatinine
ratios greater than 10.0 are not consistently reported to
have third-spacing of fluid ( Jaenke and Allen 1986; Cen-
ter et al. 1987; Cook and Cowgill 1996). Loss of larger
 serum proteins, particularly globulins, is rarely sufficient
to result in hypoglobulinemia in dogs or cats (DiBartola
et al. 1980; Jaenke and Allen 1986; Center 1987; Cook
and Cowgill 1996; Olson 2006).
Extravascular fluid accumulation
Figure 44.3 Aortic thromboembolism in a dog with nephrotic
Hypoalbuminemia is necessary for third-spacing of fluid
syndrome. This dog was evaluated for acute renal failure. An
to occur, but the pathogenesis of extravascular fluid accu-
aortic thromboembolism (arrow) was diagnosed via abdominal
mulation is more complex than simply due to the asso-
ultrasonography, with suspected bilateral partial occlusion of the
ciated drop in plasma oncotic pressure. Under home-
renal arteries. Note that the kidneys are normal in size but the
ostatic conditions, the sum of Starling's forces favors
ym shop un buuy uowwon e 'lejnbau Anybgs ae saeuns
net movement of fluid out of the proximal capillaries,
glomerular disease. The dog is in left lateral recumbency with the
head to the right of the image. LK, left kidney: RK, right kidney
tal capillaries and the lymphatic circulation. Hypoalbu-
 minemia results in a decrease in plasma oncotic pressure
disease, and increased risk of tubular necrosis due to
 and thus initially favors greater net outward flow of fluid.
reduced protein binding of nephrotoxic drugs.
 However, albumin rapidly equilibrates between the vas-
cular and interstitial spaces, and a given reduction in
plasma albumin concentration should result in a near-
Pathophysiology
identical decrease in interstitial albumin concentration
Nephrotic syndrome may be solely due to massive urinary
(Koomans 2003). Additionally, rodents and dogs with
loss of albumin and other proteins, with third spacing of
severe, induced hypoalbuminemia fail to develop edema
following fluid challenge despite a significant reduction
consequences of decreased plasma oncotic pressure. Con-
 in plasma oncotic pressure ( Joles et al. 1988; Doucet et al.
versely, growing evidence in people and animal models
2007).
suggests that these latter components of nephrotic syn-
Several hypotheses exist as to the metabolic derange-
drome may only be partially related to hypoalbuminemia,
ments which are responsible for edema formation
 and instead may result from independent pathologic pro-
 in patients with nephrotic syndrome. The “underfill"
hypothesis argues that the initial decrease in plasma
cesses that occur concurrently with glomerular damage.
oncotic pressure results in up-regulation of the renin-
 angiotensin-aldosterone system due to the initial increase
Proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia
in fluid extravasation and secondary decrease in circulat-
Hypoalbuminemia in patients with nephrotic syndrome
ing blood volume (Rodriguez-Iturbe et al. 2002; Olson
is a direct consequence of proteinuria. In people,
2006). Increased sodium retention therefore maintains
"nephrotic range” proteinuria refers to urine protein
near-normal intravascular hydrostatic pressure which is
loss greater than 3 g/24 hours/1.73 m? (in adults), and
not matched by an increase in interstitial hydrostatic
identifies patients at increased risk for development of
 pressure, and edema forms. In people, this hypothesis
nephrotic syndrome (Orth and Ritz 1998). Authors of
is not favored in most cases of nephrotic syndrome,
at least one large retrospective study of nephrotic syn-
as the hypovolemia and hypotension which would be
drome in dogs were unable to establish serum albumin
expected in this theory are rare; however, underfll
concentrations or urine protein:creatinine ratio values
leading to nephrotic syndrome may be more likely in
that were associated with increased risk of edema for-
 pediatric patients. Alternatively, the “overfil" hypothesis
mation; dogs with glomerular disease without nephrotic
 sad p p du d e ssod
syndrome frequently had serum albumin concentrations
quate sodium excretion (Rodriguez-Iturbe et al. 2002;
as low as those with nephrotic syndrome, and UPC values
Olson 2006). Indeed, human patients diagnosed with
418   Clinical syndromes
 protein-losing nephropathies prior to onset of nephrotic
low-, and intermediate-density lipoprotein cholesterol,
syndrome are often sodium avid despite being nor-
serum triglycerides, and chylomicrons, most of which
moalbuminemic (Doucet et al. 2007). Sodium avid-
are inversely proportional to the severity of hypoalbu-
 ity secondarily results in increased intravascular vol-
minemia (Delvin et al. 2003; Kronenberg et al. 2005).
ume, a rise in hydrostatic pressure, and ultimately fluid
A significant correlation between serum cholesterol and
extravasation. Hypertension would be expected in these
albumin has not been found in dogs with glomerular
patients, and this indeed occurs in human adults and
disease in general, but patients with nephrotic syndrome
many veterinary patients with glomerular disease with
have not been specifically studied (Center et al. 1987;
or without nephrotic syndrome. This unidentified tubu-
Cook and Cowgill 1996).
  sd       
 Increases in cholesterol and triglycerides are due to
syndrome, as albumin directly stimulates the proximal
both up-regulated activity of enzymes in their synthesis
tubular sodium/hydrogen exchanger, many patients with
pathways as well as reduced catabolism (Delvin et al.
nephrotic syndrome demonstrate up-regulation of the
2003; Kronenberg 2005). 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl
basolateral Na/K-ATPase transporter, and progressive
coenzyme A (HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting
tubulointerstitial disease secondary to proteinuria may
enzyme in synthesis of cholesterol) activity is increased in
non-specifically result in sodium retention (Doucet et al.
patients with nephrotic syndrome; activity of this enzyme
2007).
is also increased in animal models with hereditary anal-
Finally, some evidence suggests that an unidenti-
buminemia, arguing that hypercholesterolemia may be
fied “permeability factor,” such as an autoantibody or
a direct consequence of hypoalbuminemia (Vaziri and
cytokine, may directly alter vascular and glomerular
Liang 1995; Liang and Vaziri 2003; Kronenberg 2005).
permeability and be the proximate cause of edema in
In addition, culture of hepatic cells in hypoalbumine-
nephrotic syndrome (van den Berg and Weening 2004).
 mic medium results in increased transcription of genes
Immunosuppressive therapy in people, particularly using
that contribute to nephrotic syndrome-associated dys-
lipidemia, but not when oncotic pressure is normal-
significantly reduces edema formation with a dispro-
ized either via addition of albumin or dextrans, a non-
 portionately milder reduction in proteinuria, as does
albumin high-oncotic pressure molecule ( Yamauchi et al.
plasmapheresis (Artero et al. 1994; Dantal et al. 1998;
1992). Reduced catabolism of serum lipids occurs due
Bussemaker et al. 2001; van den Berg and Weening
to decreased hepatic LDL and HDL receptor protein
2004). Relative percentage of various peripheral circu-
concentrations, preventing reverse cholesterol transport
lating T-cell subsets and types and amounts of cytokines
(Delvin et al. 2003; Kronenberg 2005). LDL and VLDL
produced vary in patients with nephrotic syndrome at
receptors are downregulated in a number of tissues in
the time of diagnosis versus time of remission, arguing
patients with nephrotic syndrome, also preventing cellu-
lar uptake of lipids. Catabolism may be also be decreased
(Van den Berg and Weening 2004). Plasma from human
due to qualitative differences in lipoprotein concentra-
 patients with some forms of glomerular disease induces
tions within VLDL molecules; reduced VLDL concentra-
proteinuria in rats following intraperitoneal injection,
and increases permeability of isolated glomeruli (Sharma
 the VLDL receptor, results in impaired VLDL uptake by
et al. 1999 and Sharma et al. 2002). These studies are, of
 cells and therefore reduced lipolysis of triglyceride-rich
course, complicated by the necessary assumption that 
lipoproteins.
all nephrotic syndromes have the same etiopathogene-
Finally, although HDL cholesterol concentrations are
sis; likewise, veterinarians should be cautious in assum-
usually unremarkable in human patients with nephrotic
 ing that nephrotic syndrome in veterinary patients has a
syndrome, there is nevertheless a disturbed maturation
similar pathogenesis as in people. No studies on immune
 from lipid-poor to lipid-rich HDL particles and a qual-
dysregulation in dogs or cats with nephrotic syndrome
itative shift in lipid-rich to lipid-poor HDL molecules
have been performed to date.
(Kronenberg 2005). This is a consequence of uri-
nary loss of lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT),
the enzyme responsible for esterification of cholesterol
Hyperlipidemia
within HDL particles (Vaziri et al. 2001).
Although cholesterol is the only lipid routinely measured
in most dogs and cats with nephrotic syndrome, human
Treatment
patients and animal models have both quantitative and
qualitative abnormalities in serum lipoprotein profles.
As with non-nephrotic syndrome-associated glomeru-
These include an increase in serum total, very low-,
lar diseases, diagnostic approach and therapy should
Nephrotic syndrome 419
most importantly focus on identifying and treating any
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis (Doucet et al. 2007).
extra-renal causes of disease and maximally reducing
In these cases spironolactone, an aldosterone antagonist,
proteinuria. Renal-formulated diets are likely impor-
 may be more, effective and minimizes the likelihood of
tant in minimizing fluid accumulation because of their
electrolyte abnormalities. Patients that require chronic
reduced sodium content, and ACE-inhibitors decrease
 diuretic therapy may respond better to spironolactone
water and sodium retention by inhibition of the renin-
monotherapy or a sub-maximal dose of furosemide in
angiotensin-aldosterone axis and increase plasma oncotic
conjunction with standard dosing of spironolactone.
pressure by reducing proteinuria via decreased intra-
Intravenous fluid therapy in patients with nephrotic
glomerular hydrostatic pressure. For a complete review
syndrome is occasionally required when hypovolemia is
of anti-proteinuric therapy and other adjunctive thera-
 present or acute renal failure is suspected. Low-sodium
pies recommended for treatment of glomerular disease
isotonic crystalloids or synthetic colloids (which are
regardless of the presence of nephrotic syndrome, see 
  ( os o i  ss
Chapter Xxx.
 appropriate. Hypoalbuminemic patients have metabolic
Removal of fluid is recommended only when patients
alkalosis, and thus 0.9% or 0.45% sodium chloride is
are in obvious discomfort or presence of fluid may be
 more appropriate than alternative buffered solutions.
 life-threatening. Indications for abdominocentesis gen-
Although in theory a low-sodium fluid should reduce the
erally include dyspnea due to impaired contraction of
likelihood of iatrogenic “overfill,” patients with nephrotic
the diaphragm during inspiration, reduced appetite, or
syndrome are sufficiently sodium avid that decreasing the
markedly decreased activity levels. A less common indi-
rate of fluid administration is likely more critical to avoid
cation for removal of ascites in dogs and cats is severe
overhydration and worsening fluid extravasation than
hypertension, which anecdotally may be aggravated by
the sodium concentration.
large volumes of ascites. Removal of large volumes of
Anticoagulant therapy in people and veterinary
fluid should be avoided as this may cause further up-
 patients with glomerular disease is usually initiated once
regulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis due
serum albumin decreases below 2.0-2.5 g/dL or urine
to hypovolemia following increased extravasation of fluid
   h    ss 
to replace the removed fluid. In addition, although the 
and Brimble 2006; Charlesworth et al. 2008). Aspirin
ascites in patients with nephrotic syndrome is usually
is used most commonly in dogs and cats in order to
a pure transudate, removal of even the small quanti-
minimize spontaneous platelet aggregation. Although
ties of albumin within this fluid may further aggravate
warfarin and heparin are also regularly used in peo-
nephrotic syndrome. Repeated removal of fluid and sec-
 ple with documented thromboembolic disease, there is
 ondary intravascular underfilling and acidosis may result
minimal to no experience with these drugs in veteri-
in hyponatremia and hyperkalemia. Pleural or pericardial
nary patients with nephrotic syndrome. If therapy with
fluid of sufficient volume to result in noticeable physi-
either drug is begun, therapeutic monitoring should be
cal examination abnormalities (such as muffled heart of
intense, as severe hypoproteinemia lowers the recom-
lung sounds or tachypnea) should be removed before
mended starting doses and therapeutic margins for both
 they progress to life-threatening volumes.
drugs. Prognosis in people with existing thromboem-
Diuretic therapy is usually initiated in veterinary
boli is not improved by fbrinolysis, and there are no
patients with nephrotic syndrome and clinical signs
good protocols in place for dogs or cats with this com-
severe enough to merit fluid removal. As discussed above,
plication (Singhal and Brimble 2006; Charlesworth et al.
the “overfil" hypothesis argues that a primary sodium
2008).
hyperavidity defect is partially responsible for devel-
Due to the association between hyperlipidemia and
opment of nephrotic syndrome, and therefore diuretic
coronary artery occlusion by atherosclerotic plaques in
therapy may be independently indicated regardless of
 people with nephrotic syndrome, treatment with HMG-
whether or not fluid accumulation is severe. The most
CoA reductase inhibitors (i.e., “statins") is oftentimes
commonly used first-line diuretic is furosemide. The dose
recommended (Buemi et al. 2005; Charlesworth et al.
should be adjusted to minimize fluid accumulation until
2008). Other less-effective lipid-lowering treatments may
anti-proteinuric or disease-specific therapy is sufficient
include ACE-inhibitors and diets with increased omega-
to minimize albumin loss; the goal should not be to com-
3:omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid ratios ( Buemi et al.
pletely stop fluid extravasation, as the diuretic doses typ-
2005). Fortunately, there are no documented conse-
ically required for this outcome lead to hypovolemia and
quences directly attributed to hyperlipidemia in dogs
electrolyte abnormalities. In addition, human patients
or cats with nephrotic syndrome. As a result, other
with nephrotic syndrome may be resistant to the loop
than non-specific therapy with a commercial renal-
diuretics, presumptively through a maximally activated
formulated that includes an appropriately modified
420
 Clinical syndromes
 polyunsaturated fatty acid ratio, no specific lipid-
Center, S., et al. ( 1987). Clinicopathologic, renal immunofluorescent,
 lowering drugs are recommended.
cases (1975- 1985). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 190( 1): 81-90.
Charlesworth, I., et al. (2008). Adult nephrotic syndrome: non-specific
with immunosuppressive drugs, as the
most 
com-
strategies for treatment. Nephrology (Carlton) 13(1): 45-50.
mon underlying diseases (membranous glomerulopathy
Cook, A. and L. Cowgil (1996). Clinical and pathological features of
and minimal change disease) are frequently steroid-
protein-losing glomerular disease in the dog: a review of 137 cases
responsive (Hodson et al. 2005). Unfortunately, pred-
(1985- 1992). I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 32(4): 313-322.
nisone or cyclosporine in dogs with glomerular dis-
Dantal, J, et al. (1998). Antihuman immunoglobulin affinity
 ease in general have only provided evidence of worsened
 immunoadsorption strongly decreases proteinuria in patients with
relapsing nephrotic syndrome. I Am Soc Nephrol9(9): 1709- 1715.
or at best unaltered prognosis (Center et al. 1987; Vaden
Delvin, E., et al. (2003). Dyslipidemia in pediatric nephrotic syndrome:
et al. 1995; Waters et al. 1997). Anecdotally, some patients
causes revisited. Clin Biochem 36(2): 95- 101.
with nephrotic syndrome, particularly when secondary
DiBartola, S., et al. (l980). Urinary protein excretion and
to Lyme-associated nephritis or membranous glomeru-
immunopathologic findings in dogs with glomerular disease. I Am
lopathy, have responded to immunosuppressive thera-
Vet Med Assoc 177( 1): 73-77.
Doucet, A., et al. (2007). Molecular mechanism of edema formation
 pies. Due to the risks associated with these therapies they
in nephrotic syndrome: therapeutic implications. Pediatr Nephrol
are only recommended following biopsy-determined
22(12): 1983-1990.
glomerular disease subtype, comprehensive extra-renal
Hodson, E., et al. (2005). Evidence-based management of steroid-
screening for concurrent diseases, and ideally, consulta-
sensitive nephrotic syndrome. Pediatr Nephrol 20(11): 1523-1530.
tion with a veterinary nephrologist.
Jaenke, R. and T. Allen ( 1986). Membranous nephropathy in the dog.
Vet Pathol 23(6): 718-733.
Joles, J., et al. (1988). Hypoproteinemia and recovery from edema in
dogs. Arm I Phtysiol 254(6 Pt 2): F887-F894.
Prognosis
Klosterman, E., et al. Comparison of signalment, clinicopathologic
findings, histologic diagnosis, and prognosis in dogs with glomeru-
The only retrospective study of dogs with nephrotic syn-
lar disease with or without nephrotic syndrome. I Vet Intern Med,
drome demonstrated shorter median survival time fol-
 in press.
Koomans, H. (2003). Pathophysiology of oedema in idiopathic
lowing initial evaluation when compared to dogs with
nephrotic syndrome. Nephrol Dial Transplant 18(Suppl 6): vi30-
non-nephrotic glomerular disease. Median survival of
vi32.
 nephrotic dogs was approximately 13 days after first eval-
Koutinas, A., et al. (1999). Clinical considerations on canine vis-
uation at one of eight referral institutions, whereas dogs
ceral leishmaniasis in Greece: a retrospective study of 158 cases
with glomerular disease but without nephrotic syndrome
(1989-1996). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35(5): 376-383.
survived a median of 105 days. When dogs were strati-
Kronenberg, F (2005). Dyslipidemia and nephrotic syndrome: recent
advances. I Ren Nutr 15(2): 195-203.
fied based on absence or presence of azotemia (defined
Liang, K. and N. Vaziri (2003). HMG-CoA reductase, cholesterol
 as a serum creatinine concentration greater than 1.5
7alpha-hydroxylase, LCAT, ACAT, LDL receptor, and SRB-1 in
mg/dl) this difference in survival was only significant
hereditary analbuminemia. Kidney Int 64(1): 192-198.
in non-azotemic dogs, implying that the negative effect
Llach, F. ( 1985). Hypercoagulability, renal vein thrombosis, and other
 of azotemia on survival affects prognosis to a far greater
 thrombotic complications of nephrotic syndrome. Kidney Int 28(3):
429-439.
degree than the negative effect of nephrotic syndrome
 Nash, A., et al. ( 1979). Membranous nephropathy in the cat: a clinical
alone (Klosterman et al. In press). Similar studies have not
and pathological study. Vet Rec 105(4): 71-77.
been performed in cats, but clinical experience suggests
Olson, JI. (2006). The nephrotic syndrome and minimal change disease.
that, as with dogs, the presence of nephrotic syndrome is
In: Heptimstalls Pathology of the Kidney, edited by J. Charles Jennette
et al. Philadelphia PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, pp. 125-
a negative prognostic indicator.
154.
Orth, S. and E. Ritz (1998). The nephrotic syndrome. N Engl I Med
338(17): 1202-1211.
References
Ritt, M., et al. (1997). Nephrotic syndrome resulting in thromboem-
Abrass, C. (1997). Clinical spectrum and complications of the
IAm Anim Hosp Assoc 33(5): 385-391.
nephrotic syndrome. I Investig Med 45(4): 143- 153.
Rodriguez-Iturbe, B., et al. (2002). Interstitial inflammation, sodium
Artero, M., et al. {1994). Plasmapheresis reduces proteinuria and
retention, and the pathogenesis of nephrotic edema: a unifying
serum capacity to injure glomeruli in patients with recurrent focal
hypothesis. Kidney Int 62(4): 1379- 1384.
glomerulosclerosis. Am I Kidney Dis 23(4): 574-58 1.
Sharma, M., et al. ( 1999). The FSGS factor: enrichment and in vivo
Buemi, M., et al. (2005). Statins in nephrotic syndrome: a new weapon
effect of activity from focal segmental glomerulosclerosis plasma.
against tissue injury. Med Res Rev 25(6): 587-609.
I Atm Soc Nephrol 10(3): 552-561.
Bussemaker, E., et al. (200l). Tryptophan immunoadsorption strongly
Sharma, M., et al. (2002). Proteinuria after injection of human
reduces proteinuria in recurrent nephrotic syndrorme. Nephrol Dial
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis factor. Trarsplartation 73(3):
Transplamt 16(6): 1270- 1272.
366-372.
Nephrotic syndrome  421
 Singhal, R. and K.S. Brimble (2006). Thromboembolic complications
Vasilopulos, R., et al. (2005). Nephrotic syndrome associated with
in the nephrotic syndrome: pathophysiology and clinical manage-
administration of sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim in a Doberman.
ment. Thtromb Res 118(3): 397-407.
I Small Amirm Pract 46(5): 232-236.
Soeiro, E., et al. (2004). Influence of nephrotic state on the infec-
Vaziri, N., et al. (200l). Acquired lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase
tious profile in childhood idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Revista
deficiency in nephrotic syndrome. Arm I Physiol Renal Physiol 280(5):
do Hospital das Clinicas Faculdade Medicina Sao Paulo 59(5): 273-
F823-F828.
278.
Vaziri, N. and K. Liang (1995). Hepatic HMG-CoA reductase gene
Stone, M., et al. ( 1994). Lupus-type anticoagulant in a dog with hemol-
 expression during the course of puromycin-induced nephrosis. Kid-
ysis and thrombosis. I Vet Intern Med 8(1): 57-61.
ney Int 48(6): 1979-1985.
Vaden, S., et al. ( 1995). The effects of cyclosporine versus standard care
Waters, C., et al. (1997). Effects of glucocorticoid therapy on urine
in dogs with naturally occurring glomerulonephritis. I Vet Intern
protein-to-creatinine ratios and renal morphology in dogs. I Vet
Med 9(4): 259-266.
Interm Med 11(3): 172-177.
van den Berg, I. and J. Weening (2004). Role of the immune system in
Yamauchi, A., et al. (1992). Oncotic pressure regulates gene transcrip-
the pathogenesis of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Clin Sci (Lon-
tions of albumin and apolipoprotein B in cultured rat hepatoma
don) 107(2): 125-136.
cells. Am I Physiol 263(2 Pt 1): C397-C404.
45
Abnormal renal palpation
Claudia Kirk and Joe Bartges
Abdominal palpation is an important part of a com-
Unilateral renomegaly is pathologic when the other
plete physical examination, and palpation of the kid-
kidney is functional. Bilateral renomegaly is common
neys should be performed when clinical signs of urinary
with portovascular anomalies, acromegaly, and bilateral
cellular infltration. Infiltration of renal tissue usually
shaped" organs that lie retroperitoneally ventral to sub-
occurs with inflammatory or neoplastic cells (Figures
lumbar musculature. The right kidney lies cranial to the
45.2-45.4).
left kidney and is recessed in the renal notch of the liver
and medial to the last rib and abdominal wall. The left
Decreased size
 Reduction in renal size usually reflects chronic disease or
and is caudal to the spleen, caudal to the last rib, and
medial to the abdominal wall. In dogs, the left kidney can
developmental problems and can be unilateral or bilat-
eral. Chronic renal disease is the most common cause of
be palpated normally while the right kidney is palpable
reduced renal size (Figure 45.5).
uncommonly. Relative to body weight, feline kidneys are
larger than canine kidneys and all aspects of both kidneys
are readily palpable and moveable.
Alteration in shape
When normal renal morphology is altered, it is usually
Many diseases alter renal shape including renal dysplasia,
be secondary to physiological processes. Major palpable
horseshoe kidney, perinephric pseudocysts, renal neopla-
sia (Figure 45.3), subcapsular hematomas, or polycystic
abnormalities include change in size, either enlargement
kidney disease (Figure 45.6).
(renomegaly) or decrease or a change in shape. Other
changes may include change in consistency, less or more
than two kidneys, position different than normal, and
Alteration in consistency
pain. Changes may be unilateral or bilateral.
Palpation of kidneys may reveal a change in consistency
including softness due to fluid (such as cystic disease,
Alteration in size
subcapsular blood or fluid accumulation, or a cystic
 tumor) or degeneration or firmness due to infiltration by
Increased size (renomegaly)
neoplastic or inflammatory cells or fibrosis. Perinephric
Renomegaly may be due to pathological or physiological
 pseudocysts and polycystic kidney disease have a fluctu-
 processes. Renal compensatory hypertrophy occurs when
ant consistency.
sd o o s  du si  
Examples where compensatory hypertrophy may occur
Alteration in number
include unilateral nephrectomy, renal agenesis or dyspla-
sia (Figure 45.1), or infarction of one kidney.
The most common cause of alteration in number of
kidneys is congenital disease. Decreased number may
occur with renal agenesis or fusion (horseshoe kidney)
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 Renal duplication has been reported to occur in Beagles
422
Abnormal renal palpation  423
Figure 45.1 Left unilateral renal hypoplasia with compensatory
hypertrophy of the right kidney in a cat. Photograph courtesy of Dr.
Aeaaa jo aalon Ahonoigouend jo suawedag bienn uaum
Figure 45.4 Appearance of a nephroblastoma at surgery in a
Medicine, The University of Tennessee.
dog.
Figure 45.2 Renal involvement with feline infectious peritonitis.
Figure 45.5 Kidneys from a 20-year-old, Siamese cat with chronic
Photograph courtesy of Dr. Linden Craig, Department of Pathobiol-
renal failure
ogy. College of Veterinary Medicine, The University of Tennessee.
Figure 45.6 Feline polycystic kidney disease.
Figure 45.3 Renal lymphoma in an aged cat. Photograph cour-
tesy of Dr. Linden Craig, Department of Pathobiology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, The University of Tennessee.
424  Clinical syndromes
LK
會
Figure 45.7 lateral survey abdominal radiograph of an 8-
year-old, castrated male domestic shorthaired cat, with bilateral
Figure 45.8 Kidneys from dog with leptospirosis. Photograph
nephroliths (large arrows), small left kidney (LK), right ureterolith
courtesy of Dr. Linden Craig. Department of Pathobiology. College
(small arrow), and enlarged right kidney (RK) due to hydronephro-
of Veterinary Medicine, The University of Tennessee.
sis secondary to ureteral obstruction.
and English bull terriers. Renal agenesis may be uni-
Pain
  ( i   
Renal pain occurs with distention of the renal capsule
Acquired reduction in renal number is usually due to
surgical removal (nephrectomy).
due to cellular infiltration, infection, or fluid accumula-
tion, or to trauma. Examples include ureteral obstruc-
tion with hydronephrosis (Figure 45.7), infections such
Alteration in position
as leptospirosis (Figure 45.8), pyelonephritis, or feline
Alteration in renal position may be due to develop-
infectious peritonitis (Figure 45.2), acute toxicities such
mental problems (such as renal ectopia) or to acquired
as ethylene glycol, neoplastic infiltration (Figures 45.3
and 45.4)
conditions (such as displacement by intra-abdominal
organomegaly or adipose tissue accumulation or surgical
transposition).
46
Discolored urine
Joe Bartges
Normal urine
urine color in dogs and cats is red, brown, or black,
which may be caused by hematuria, hemoglobinuria,
Normal urine is typically transparent and yellow or
 myoglobinuria, and bilirubinuria.
amber upon visual inspection. Primarily, two pigments
impart yellow coloration: urochrome and urobilin.
Pale yellow urine
Urochrome is a sulfur-containing oxidation product
of colorless urochromogen. Urobilin is a degradation
Urine that is pale yellow or clear in appearance may be
product of hemoglobin. Because the 24-hour urinary
normal or may be indicative of a polyuric state. Urine
excretion of urochrome is relatively constant, highly con-
 may be appropriately dilute if it is associated with recent
centrated urine is amber in color, whereas dilute urine
consumption or administration of fluids, consumption
may be transparent or light yellow in color. The intensity
of a diet containing low quantities of protein or high
of the color is in part related to volume of urine collected
quantities of sodium chloride, glucocorticoid excess, or
and concentration of urine produced; therefore, it should
administration of diuretics. Urine is considered to be
be interpreted in the context of the urine specific gravity.
inappropriately concentrated if it is dilute in presence of
Caution must be exercised not to over-interpret signifi-
 dehydration. Diseases associated with persistently dilute
cance of urine color as part of a complete urinalysis. Sig-
urine include diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, hyper-
nificant disease may exist when urine is normal in color.
adrenocorticism, hypoadrenocorticism, hypercalcemia,
Abnormal urine color may be caused by presence of sev-
 hyperthyroidism, and renal failure. If urine is pale yellow
eral endogenous or exogenous pigments. Although the
or clear, urine specific gravity is often less than 1.015. A
abnormal color indicates a problem, it provides relatively
simple test to determine whether polyuria is persistent,
nonspecific information. Causes of abnormal coloration
is to determine the urine specific gravity of a sample col-
should be investigated  with appropriate laboratory
lected in the morning. Other tests should include serum
tests and examination of urine sediment. Detection of
biochemical analysis and a complete urinalysis, and pos-
abnormal urine color should prompt questions related
sibly measurement of serum thyroxine concentration,
to diet, administration of medication, environment,
 adrenal function testing, or monitoring urine specific
and collection technique. Knowledge of urine color
 gravity after several days of vasopressin administration.
may also be important in interpreting colorimetric test
results because it may induce interference.
Red, brown, or black urine
Presence of red, brown, or black urine suggests blood,
Discolored urine
hemoglobin, myoglobin, or bilirubin. A positive occult
Urine color that is anything other than yellow or amber
blood reaction is obtained when urine contains any of
is abnormal. There are many potential causes of discol-
these substances. Discoloration of urine may also result
ored urine (see Table 46.1). The most common abnormal
in false-positive reactions on other urine dipstick test
 pads. Analysis of urine sediment reveals presence of red
blood cells if discoloration is due to hematuria. If no
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
red blood cells are present on microscopic examination
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
of urine sediment, hemoglobin, myoglobin, or bilirubin
425
426
 Clinical syndromes
Table 46.1 Potential causes of discolored urine
Urine color
Causes
Urine color
Causes
Yellow or amber
Urochromes
Yellow-brown or green-brown
Bile pigments
Urobilin
Deep yellow
Highly concentrated urine
Brown to black (brown or 
Melanin
Quinacrinea
red-brown when viewed in
 Methemoglobin 
Nitrofurantoina
bright light in thin layer)
Myoglobin
 Phenacetin?
Bile pigments
 Riboflavin (large quantities)a
Thymola
 Phenolsulfonphthalein (acidic urine)a
Phenolic compoundsa
Nitrofurantoina
Nitritesa
Naphthalene?
 Chlorinated hydrocarbonsa
Aniline dyesa
Homogentisic acida
Blue
Methylene blue
Colorless
Very dilute urine (diuretics,
 Indigo carmine and indigo blue dye?
diabetes mellitus, diabetes
Indicansa
insipidus, glucocorticoid 
 Pseudomonas infection?
excess, fluid therapy.
Water-soluble chlorophylla
overhydration)
 Rhubarba
Toluidine bluea
Triamterene?
Amitriptylinea
Anthraquinone?
Blue food dyea
Green
Methylene blue
Milky white
Lipid 
Dithiazanine
Pyuria
 Urate crystalluria
Crystals
Indigo bluea
 Evan's bluea
 Bilirubin 
Biliverdin
Riboflavin?
Thymola
Phenola
Triamterene?
Amitriptylinea
Anthraquinone?
Green food dye?
Red, pink, red-brown,
Hematuria
Brown
 Methemoglobin
red-orange, or orange
Hemoglobinuria
Melanin
Myoglobinuria
Sulfasalazine?
 Porphyrinuria
Nitrofurantoin?
Congo red
 Phenacetin?
Phenolsulfonphthalein (following
Naphthalene?
alkalinization)
Sulfonamidesa
Neoprontosil
Bismutha
Mercurya
Warfarin (orange)a
 Food pigments (rhubarb, beets,
Feces (rectal-urinary fistula)
blackberries)a
Fava beans?
Rhubarba
Discolored urine   427
Table 46.1 (Continued)
 Urine color
Causes
Urine color
Causes
Carbon tetrachloridea
Sorbitola
 Phenazopyridine
Metronidazolea
 Phenothiazinea
Methocarbamola
Diphenylhydantoina
 Anthracin catharticsa
Bromsulphalein (following alkalinization)
Clofaziminea
Chronic heavy metal poisoning (lead, mercury)a
Primaquinea
Rifampina
Chloroquinea
Emodina
Furazolidone?
 Phenindione?
Copper toxicity
Eosin?
 Rifabutina
 Acetazolamidea
Red food dyea
 Orange-yellow
Highly concentrated urine
Excess urobilin
 Bilirubin
Phenazopyridine
 Sulfasalazinea
Fluorescein sodium?
 Flutamidea
Quinacrinea
 Phenacetina
2,4-da
Acetazolamidea
 Orange food dyea
aOnly observed in human beings.
should be suspected. Examination of plasma color may
Milky white urine
aid in differentiating these. If discolored urine is due
Milky white colored urine may be due to presence of
to myoglobin, plasma will be clear because myoglobin
white blood cells (pyuria), lipid, or crystals. The more
in plasma is not bound significantly to a carrying pro-
concentrated the urine sample is, the more opaque it may
tein, which results in filtration and excretion. If plasma
appear. Presence of pyuria secondary to a bacterial uri-
is pink, it is suggestive of hemoglobin. If plasma is yel-
low, it is suggestive of bilirubin; serum bilirubin con-
nary tract infection is the most common cause of milky
 centration should also be increased. A positive occult
white urine; however, pyuria may occur due to inflam-
blood test may also occur if red blood cells present in
mation without an infection. Lipiduria may be observed
in healthy animals, but is frequently observed in cats
urine lyse. Myoglobinuria is indicative of muscle damage;
 affected with hepatic lipidosis. Crystalluria if heavy and
serum creatine kinase activity is often increased in this
present in a concentrated urine sample may also result
setting. Hemoglobinemia is indicative of intravascular
in milky white urine color. Microscopic examination of
hemolysis resulting from immune-mediated, parasite-
urine sediment will aid in differentiation of these causes.
mediated, or drug-mediated destruction of red blood
cells. Hyperbilirubinemia results from liver disease, post-
hepatic obstruction, or hemolysis.
4
Clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease
Joe Bartges
Diseases of the lower urinary tract including the prostate
Pollakiuria
or vagina have characteristic clinical signs that are usually,
Pollakiuria is excessively frequent urination usually asso-
ciated with passage of small volume. Often, it is associated
Osborne 1995; Ling 1995; Watson 2007; van Dongen and
with inflammatory conditions, but may be associated
L'eplattenier 2009). Oftentimes, multiple clinical signs
with decreased urine storage capacity.
 are present and indicate further evaluation of the patient
(Table 47.1).
Decreased size of urine stream
 Decreased size of urine stream is associated with partial
Alteration in volume or frequency of urination
urethral obstruction due to scar tissue, masses involving
the urethra or impinging on the urethra, urethroliths,
Polyuria/polydipsia
prostatic disease, or urethral spasm.
Polyuria/polydipsia is not typically associated with lowet
 aed a s q   
Urinary obstruction (anuresis)
disease or extra-renal disease influencing urine concen-
Dogs and cats with urethral obstruction attempt to uri-
tration and/or water intake (see Chapter 42). They may
 se sir as  sed oi e ae iq 
be associated with lower urinary tract signs such as
36). It must be differentiated from attempts at defeca-
incontinence or periuria, and if associated with bacterial
tion (constipation or colitis). Most often, it is due to a
 pyelonephritis may be associated with recurrent bacterial
mechanical obstruction (e.g-, uroliths or neoplasia), but
cystitis.
may be due to functional causes (e.g., reflex dyssynergia).
Inappropriate urination (periuria)
Dysuria
Dysuria is diffcult urination often associated with pain.
Periuria refers to inappropriate urination (literally, uri-
 Painful urination by dogs and cats is not always easy to
nating around). It occurs with inability to retain urine
 due to irritation and inflammation or to behavioral con-
discern.
ditions.
Stranguria
Incontinence
Stranguria refers to slow and painful urination and can
Urinary incontinence (enuresis) refers to involuntary uri-
be associated with partial urinary outflow obstruction
nation (see Chapter 76). This usually occurs when the
or inflammation of the lower urogenital tract. Causes of
animal is relaxed or asleep due to loss of conscious con-
stranguria are the same as those for dysuria.
trol of urination. While awake, urination occurs nor-
mally. There are neurogenic and non-neurogenic causes
of urinary incontinence; the most common cause is ure-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
thral sphincter mechanism incompetency that occurs in
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
spayed female dogs. Female dogs and cats that leak urine
428
Clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease   429
Table 47.1 Problem-oriented rule-outs for diseases of the lower urinary tract and prostate
D
Degenerative
Benign prostatic hypertrophy
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetency
A
Anatomic
Congenital malformations of bladder or urethra
Congenital or acquired urethral stricture
Ectopic ureter
Detrusor atony
 Urinary bladder or urethral spasm
Prostatic cysts
M
Metabolic
Urolithiasis
N
Neoplastic
 Urinary bladder, urethra, or prostate - commonly transitional cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma 
B
Behavioral
Inflammatory
 Urinary bladder polyps
Lymphoplasmacytic cystitis or urethritis
Eosinophilic cystitis
Infectious
Bacterial or fungal cystitis or prostatitis
 Prostatic abscessation
Idiopathic
Feline idiopathic cystitis
latrogenic
Complications associated with Cystocentesis, catheterization, endoscopy. or surgery
Trauma
 Blunt or penetrating trauma
7
Toxic
Certain drugs or environmental exposure - e.g., cCyclophosphamide-induced sterile cystitis
when sitting but awake may have urethral sphincter dys-
verted by excreted peptidase, cauxin, to the pheromone
function; however, this implies there is urine pooling in
 3-mercapto-3-methylbutan-1-ol that imparts a pungent 
the caudal vagina.
odor to urine. A change in urine odor may occur with
infection, hematuria, certain drugs (e.g-, amoxicillin),
and certain foods (e.g-, asparagus).
Alteration in urine consistency
Discolored urine
Crystalluria or small uroliths in urine
Presence of red blood cells in urine (hematuria) is associ-
Microscopic crystaluria may indicate presence of or
ated with lower urinary tract disease, but may also occur
 propensity to form uroliths, but may be normal and does
with upper urinary tract disease (e.g-, nephrolithiasis)
not predict future urolith formation (see Chapter 7).
or disorders of coagulation (e.g-, acquired or congenital
Crystalluria by itself does not cause lower urinary tract
coagulation factor deficiency). When hematuria occurs
disease. Additionally, crystalluria must be interpreted in
due to lower urinary tract disease, usually other clinical
light of urine sample collection and processing. Cooling
signs of lower urinary tract disease are present. Hema-
   i n o   
turia occuring in the absence of clinical signs of lower
eration temperature promotes in vitro crystal formation
urinary tract disease usually localizes the disease to the
and may be merely an artifact. If crystalluria is a concern,
-no jo siapnosip oiss o no pon Areun addn
then urine should be collected and evaluated within a
lation. Dogs with prostatic disease may have hematuria
 couple of hours of collction. Passage of sand or small 
without additional signs of lower urinary tract disease.
uroliths is abnormal, and should be collected and sub-
 Urine may differ from normal yellow color with polyuric
mitted for quantitative analysis. The animal should be
 states (clear to light yellow), lipid or crystals (white), pig-
evaluated further for additional uroliths in all parts of
menturia (red, brown, or black), or blue-green (certain
 the urinary tract by imaging studies.
bacterial infections) (see Chapters 7 and 46).
Other clinical findings that may be associated
Malodorous urine
with lower urinary tract disease
 Urine normallyhas an ammonia odor that is more intense
Abdominal fluid
with concentrated urine. Additionally, cats, especially
males, excrete felinine ((R)-2-amino-3-(4-hydroxy-2-
Abdominal effusion should be characterized as tran-
methylbutan-2-ylthio)propanoic acid), which is con-
sudate, exudate, or modified transudate; however,
430  Clinical syndromes
        s
or coxofemoral joints. Occasionally, it may be related to
the urinary tract. For example, urinary bladder rupture
 prostatic or intra-pelvic urethral disease.
secondary to urethral obstruction or trauma is associated
with uroabdomen (see Chapter 11).
Painful defecation
 Pain during defecation is usually caused by disease of the
Excessive licking of prepuce or vuiva
rectum, anus, peri-anal area, bony pelvis, caudal lumbar
Excessive licking of the prepuce or vulva may occur with
vertebrae, lumbosacral area, or coxofemoral joints. It may
many diseases of the lower urinary tract especially the
occur with prostatic disease especially with inflamma-
very distal part, but may also occur habitually. Excessive
tion secondary to inflammation. Passage of ribbon-like
licking may cause irritation that is irritating, resulting in
 stools is observed with narrowing of the descending colon
continued licking and a vicious cycle of cause and effect.
and may occur with prostatomegaly especially if prostatic
neoplasia is present and has metastasized to iliac lymph
Blood dripping from prepuce or vulva
nodes resulting in dorsal and ventral compression of the
colon.
The appearance of drops of blood or blood fluid
from the prepuce or vulva suggests that the source is
Painful or abnormal gait of rear limbs
distal to the bladder. This occurs most commonly with
prostatic disease (male dogs) or with estrous (females),
Painful or abnormal gait in rear limbs is associated usually
but may occur with diseases of the distal urethra, penis,
with musculoskeletal or neurological disease, especially
 prepuce, or vagina.
lumbosacral disease or coxofemoral or stifle arthritis. It
may occur with lower urinary tract disease such as pro-
Prostatomegaly
static or urinary bladder neoplasia that has metastasized
to iliac lymph nodes or caudal lumbar vertebrae or with
 In intact male dogs, prostatomegaly most often occurs
iliac lymphadenopathy due to extension of infection or 
due to benign prostatic hypertrophy and/or bacterial pro-
inflammation from the urinary bladder or prostate.
statitis (see Chapter 78). In this situation, the prostate is
Fever
acute bacterial prostatitis is present. With asymmet-
ric prostatomegaly, prostatic cysts, or neoplasia may be
Diseases ofthe lower urinary tract are uncommonly asso-
present. Prostatomegaly in male dogs castrated at least six
ciated with fever; however, it may be present with infec-
months prior to examination nearly always have prostatic
tion (prostatitis or pyelonephritis with cystitis).
neoplasia with or without associated bacterial infection.
References
Pus dripping from prepuce or vuiva
Bartges, J.W. and C.A. Osborne (1995). Clinical algorithms and data
Pus dripping from the prepuce usually occurs from bal-
bases for urinary tract disorders. In: Canine and Feline Urology and
Nephrology, edited by C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco. Philadelphia,
anoposthitis, but may be observed with prostatitis. Pus
PA: Lea & Febiger, pp. 68-99.
exuding from the vulva occurs most commonly in prepu-
Ling, G.V. (1995). Lower Urinary Tract Diseases of Dogs and Cats.
beral female dogs due to puppy vaginitis. In adult female
St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
dogs or cats, purulent vaginal discharge may indicate
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 1972). Canine and Feline Urology. Philadelphia,
infectious vaginitis or pyometra.
PA: WB: Saunders.
van Dongen, A.M. and H.F. L'eplattenier (2009). Kidneys and urinary
tract. In: Medical History and Physical Examination in Companion
Painful rectal examination
Animals, edited by A. Rijnberk and F.J. Van Sluijs. Edinburgh: Saun-
ders Elsevier, pp. 101-107.
Pain during digital examination of the rectum is usually
Watson, A.D.J. (2007). Dysuria and haematuria. In: BSAVA Marual of
caused by disease of the rectum, anus, peri-anal area,
Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by J. Elliott and
bony pelvis, caudal lumbar vertebrae, lumbosacral area,
G.F Grauer. Gloucester: BSAVA, pp. 1-7.
Section 5
Upper urinary tract disorders
48
Chronic kidney disease
David J. Polzin
Characteristics of chronic kidney disease
It is not necessary for the disease process responsible
for initiating CKD to persist, for this progressive loss
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is the most commonly
of renal function to occur. In some patients, this pattern
recognized form of kidney disease in dogs and cats. It is
follows an almost linear decline in renal function, while in
defined as any structural and/or functional abnormality
others the pattern is characterized by a period of relatively
of one or both kidneys that has been continuously present
stable renal function followed by a precipitous decline in
for three months or longer. Kidneys of dogs and cats with
CKD are typically characterized by a permanent reduc-
of stable renal function and precipitous declines before
tion in the number of functioning nephrons. Although
succumbing to CKD. However, there are exceptions to
renal structure and function do not consistently parallel
this progressive pattern, particularly among cats. Some
one another, primary kidney diseases usually display evi-
cats have stable renal function for years and may die of
dence of both structural and functional derangements.
other diseases before their CKD becomes terminal.
The rare exceptions to this generality would include
Since the progression of CKD is often relatively slow,
patients that have relatively limited structural lesions
patients with CKD often survive for many months to
(e.g., renal cysts or a nephrolith) with essentially nor-
years with a good quality of life. Although as yet no
mal overall renal function or patients with specific renal
treatment can correct existing irreversible kidney lesions
tubular disorders (e.g-, renal glucosuria) with essentially
of CKD, the clinical and biochemical consequences of
normal renal structure. In general, the clinical impact 
reduced kidney function can often be ameliorated by
of CKD on the patient reflects the extent of reduction
 supportive and symptomatic therapy. In addition, the
in renal function rather than the impact of structural
spontaneously progressive course of CKD may be slowed
lesions.
by therapeutic intervention.
In most instances, CKD is an irreversible and typi-
Although frequently considered a disease of older ani-
cally progressive disease. Once a patient is diagnosed with
 mals, CKD occurs with varying frequency in dogs and
CKD, the condition can usually be expected to be a life-
cats of all ages. One estimate of the incidence of CKD in
long condition, even with treatment. However, in some
the general population of dogs and cats is 0.5-1.5% of
 patients CKD may be complicated by concurrent prerenal
dogs and 1-3% of cats (Brown et al. 2007a). Although
and postrenal components or active kidney diseases that
a somewhat higher prevalence of CKD occurs in young
may be reversible (e.g- pyelonephritis or acute-on-CKD).
 dogs due to the occurrence of congenital renal disease,
After correcting reversible primary diseases and/or prere-
the greatest prevalence is in geriatric dogs. At the Univer-
nal or postrenal components ofrenal dysfunction, further
sity of Minnesota Veterinary Medical Center, in excess of
improvement in kidney function should not be expected
10% of dogs and 30% of cats over 15 years of age have a
because compensatory and adaptive changes designed to
diagnosis of CKD. One retrospective study reported that
sustain kidney function have largely already occurred.
  S aS  M   S J 
 In most patients, a slow but inexorable progressive
animals ranged in age from 9 months to 22 years (DiBar-
decline in kidney function typically follows diagnosis.
tola et al. 1987). In a study on age distribution of kidney
disease in cats based on data submitted from 1980 to
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
1990 to the Veterinary Medical Data Base at Purdue
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
433
434  Upper urinary tract disorders
University, 37% of cats with the diagnosis of "renal fail-
Pathophysiology of CKD
ure" were less than ten years old, 31% ofcats were between
the ages of 10 and 15, and 32% of cats were older than
Consequences of nephron loss
15 years of age (Lulich et al. 1992). Similarly, in a study
Kidney function typically declines progressively over
 of cats with CKD reported in 1998, the mean age was
months to years in dogs and cats with naturally occurring
12.6 years with a range of 1-26 years (Elliot and Barber
CKD (Elliot and Barber 1998; Jacob et al. 2002). Typi-
1998). Mean age among 45 control cats in this study was
cally, the decline in kidney function occurs in association
10.0 years. During the year 1990, the prevalence of kid-
with a progressive decline in the number of functioning
ney disease was reportedly 16 cases for every 1,000 cats
nephrons. At least initially, reduction in kidney function
of all ages, 77 cases per 1,000 cats over age 10 years, and
is presumed to be a consequence of the patient's primary
153 per 1,000 among cats older than 15 years (DiBartola
kidney disease. However, studies in several species sug-
et al. 1987). Maine Coon, Abyssinian, Siamese, Russian
gest that loss of a critical mass of functional renal tissue
Blue, and Burmese cats were disproportionately reported
invariably leads to failure of the remaining nephrons,
as affected.
suggesting that CKD may progress through mechanisms
independent of the initiating cause (Brenner et al. 1982;
Pathophysiology of CKD
Hostetter et al. 200la; Rennke and Denker 2007). Regard-
less of where renal injury begins, if it persists, the kidneys
The loss of kidney function that occurs in CKD typically
will gradually self-destruct through a final common path-
is characterized by a progressive decline in the number 
way involving interstitial nephritis and fibrosis (Harris
of surviving nephrons. This decline in the number of
s, P si sd s ( on 1
progression of CKD."
the result of the patient's primary kidney disease. How-
 Spontaneous progression of CKD in rodent models is
ever, once the number of surviving nephrons declines
 characterized by progressive azotemia, proteinuria, arte-
below some critical mass, surviving nephrons continue
rial hypertension, and, eventually, death due to uremia.
to be damaged and lost even if the primary kidney dis-
Renal lesions observed in this process include focal seg-
ease is no longer active. This ongoing loss of nephrons
mental glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial lesions,
that occurs subsequent to the decline in the number of
including tubular dilation and interstitial inflammation 
surviving nephrons is called “spontaneous progression
and fibrosis (Hostetter et al. 200la). Results of several
of CKD" Spontaneous progression of CKD occurs as a
studies suggest that the findings obtained in rodents are
consequence, at least in part, of the adaptive processes 
likely to be applicable to dogs and cats (Polzin et al. 1988;
that mitigate the decline in renal function that accompa-
Adams et al. 1994, 1992). Surgical reduction of renal
 nies loss of nephrons. Thus, the renal adaptive responses 
mass in dogs and cats results in proteinuria, glomeru-
to the loss of nephrons, while advantageous in the short-
lopathy, and tubulointerstitial renal lesions. While these
term because it helps to sustain overall renal function, is
findings are consistent with observations in rats, reduc-
deleterious in the long-term because it leads to additional
ing renal mass by 7/8 or less does not consistently result
nephron loss and a progressive decline in renal function.
in a progressive decline in renal function in dogs or cats.
The kidneys adapt to loss of nephrons by recruitment
However, progressive decline in renal function has been
of the surviving nephrons to recoup much of the function
reported to occur in dogs when renal mass is reduced by
lost. Overall renal function is the sum of the function of
15/16 (Finco et al. 1992). The renal lesions observed in
the individual nephrons. In terms of glomerular filtration
 these experimental studies are similar to lesions described
rate (GFR), the kidneys′ total GFR is the sum of the GFR
in humans, dogs, and cats with spontaneous progres-
of each individual nephron, called the single nephron
 sive nephropathies of diverse origins. Lesions observed
GFR or SNGFR. In this way, the kidneys are able to adapt
 in spontaneous diseases typically include focal and seg-
to CKD by minimizing the functional losses associated
mental glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial lesions
with structural loss. However, there are consequences or 
characterized by fibrosis and a sterile inflammatory infil-
"trade-offs" to be paid for these adaptations. One trade-
trate. The preponderance of clinical and experimental
off from the perspective of the nephrologist is that in
evidence suggests that in dogs and cats with stages 2 and
many cases functional deterioration in CKD lags well
3 CKD, progression of renal disease may result, at least in
behind structural injury, thus confounding early diag-
 part, from factors unrelated to the activity of the inciting
nosis of CKD. More ominous, however, is that the sur-
disease.
viving nephrons function at a much higher level which
It appears that progression of CKD occurs, at least
ultimately contributes to their demise, thus leading to
in part, as a consequence of the adaptive processes that
spontaneous progression of CKD.
Chronic kidney disease  435
mitigate the decline in renal function accompanying
the surviving nephrons to autoregulate is lost, thereby
loss of nephrons. Thus, the renal adaptive responses to
transmitting systemic arterial pressure to the glomerulus
the loss of nephrons, while advantageous in the short-
(Brown et al. 1995). Preferential vasodilation of the affer-
term because they help sustain total renal function, is
ent arteriole results in (1) elevation in intraglomerular
deleterious in the long-term because it leads to addi-
tional loss of nephron and a progressive decline in renal
mission of systemic arterial pressure to the glomeru-
function.
lus (intraglomerular hypertension), (2) marked increase
The kidneys adapt to loss of nephrons by recruitment
in effective renal plasma flow (glomerular hyperperfu-
of the surviving nephrons to recoup much of the function
sion), and (3) increased production of glomerular filtrate
lost. Overall renal function is the sum of the function
(glomerular hyperfltration). These increases in pressure,
of the individual nephrons. In terms of GFR, the kid-
flow, and filtration may be exacerbated by elevations in
neys? total GFR is the sum of the GFR of each individual
systemic arterial pressure.
 nephron, called the single nephron GFR or SNGFR. In
Intraglomerular
 hypertension, with 
1consequent
this way, the kidneys are able to adapt to CKD by min-
glomerular hyperfiltration, occurs as a compensatory
imizing the functional losses associated with structural
event designed to maintain the total GFR as nephrons
loss. However, there are consequences or "trade-offs" to
are lost to disease. In primary glomerulopathies, intra-
be paid for these adaptations. One trade-ofrom the per-
 glomerular hypertension may also occur as a compen-
spective of the nephrologist is that in many cases func-
 o d  o o  s
tional deterioration in CKD lags well behind structural
glomerular capillary wall to small solutes and water. In
injury, thus confounding early diagnosis of CKD. More
this setting, the fall in GFR is minimized by elevating
ominous, however, is that the surviving nephrons func-
intraglomerular pressure (Rennke and Denker 2007).
tion at a much higher level which ultimately contributes
Persistent elevations in intraglomerular pressure appear
 to their demise, thus leading to spontaneous progression 
to be deleterious over time.
of CKD.
Glomerular hypertrophy and intraglomerular hyper-
One proposed model of the final common pathway
tension promote cell injury and the glomerular structural
leading to progression of CKD involves six sequential
and functional derangements associated with progres-
steps (Harris and Neilson 2006). In the first step, per-
sion of CKD. There is evidence that (1) epithelial cell
sistent glomerular injury leads to local hypertension in
injury is a major factor in hyaline accumulation within
the glomerular tufts, increased SNGFR, and protein-
the glomerular capillary wall, (2) mesangial dysfunction
uria. In the second step, proteinuria accompanied by
results in matrix accumulation and microaneurysm for-
increased local production of angiotensin Il facilitates
mation, and (3) endothelial cell injury leads to thrombo-
a downstream cytokine bath that induces accumula-
sis (Rennke and Denker 2007).
tion of interstitial mononuclear cells. Step three begins
Glomerular  hypertension  and  hyperperfusion  are
with the appearance of interstitial neutrophils, but is
associated with an increase in the volume and surface
rapidly replaced by a nephritogenic immune response
area of the glomerular tuft. Expansion in surface area of
d s  e s  
the glomerulus accompanying the enhanced glomerular
ducing interstitial nephritis. In step four, inflammation
volume occurs without a corresponding increase in the
affects the tubular epithelia inducing disaggregation of
number of terminal visceral glomerular epithelial cells
cells from basement membranes and adjacent sister cells.
(podocytes) covering the glomeruli. As the glomerulus
In addition, epithelial-mesenchymal transition occurs
 enlarges and the filtration surface expands, hypertro-
where tubular epithelial cells transform into fibroblasts.
phy, but not hyperplasia of the podocytes occurs. The
In step five, fibroblasts lay down a collagenous matrix,
resulting reduction in glomerular podocyte cell density
disrupting vasa recti and surviving tubules. In the sixth
likely contributes to the glomerular injury and protein-
and final stage, an acellular scar results from cells being
uria that accompanies loss of renal mass. Podocytes con-
trapped away from local survival factors that provided a
tribute importantly to the integrity of the glomerular
supportive microenvironment.
filtration barrier through a complex series of interdig-
itating cell foot processes between adjacent podocytes
connected by structures called "slit diaphragms." The slit
Glomerular hypertension
diaphragms are part of the small pore system of filtration
The increase in SNGFR that occurs as nephrons are lost,
 that is a major component of the resistance to filtration
results largely from a marked reduction in glomerular
of water and limits trafficking of macromolecules includ-
arteriolar resistance with greater vasodilation of the affer-
 ing albumin across the capillary wall. As expansion of
ent arteriole. As renal mass is reduced, the ability of
the filtration surface exceeds the ability of hypertrophied
436  Upper urinary tract disorders
podocytes to maintain the integrity of all interdigitating
Role of angiotensin ll and aldosterone
foot processes and filtration slit diaphragms, focal and
segmental areas of epithelial simplification (effacement
Angiotensin Il is an important mediator of intraglomeru-
lar capillary pressure because it selectively increases effer-
or “fusion" of foot processes) and focal loss and denuda-
ent arteriolar vasoconstriction. Although angiotensin
tion of epithelial cells occur leading to local increases
type 1 receptors are present on both afferent and efferent
in flow of ultrafiltrate and increased convection of albu-
arterioles, afferent vasoconstriction is mitigated selec-
min. Proteinuria occurs only in nephrons with damaged
 o  s  si o  
podocytes and represents the earliest sign of renal hemo-
 prostaglandins (Harris and Neilson 2006). Preferential
dynamic injury. The consequence of loss of podocyte
vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole under the influ-
structural integrity is loss of glomerular hydraulic con-
ence of angiotensin ll increases glomerular capillary
 ductivity, proteinuria and, ultimately, focal and segmen-
hypertension, thus promoting renal injury.
tal glomerulosclerosis.
In addition to its hemodynamic effects on the
Portions of glomeruli denuded by loss of podocytes
glomerulus, angiotensin Il impairs glomerular size-
allow increased flux of water, small solutes and some
selectivity and has been shown to induce proteinuria
macromolecules across the capillary wall (hyperfiltra-
 tion). Increased glomerular capillary pressure combined
in absence of any structural glomerular damage (Harris
and Neilson 2006). In addition, angiotensin 11 induces
with decreased hydraulic conductivity facilitates accu-
  od se  s 
mulation of large macromolecules in the subendothelial
space since they are too large to pass the glomerular base-
increasing intracellular calcium levels in podocytes.
Glomerular expression of cytokines and chemokines
 ment membrane. Accumulation of this amorphous hya-
can be directly stimulated by angiotensin II (Harris and
line material narrows glomerular capillary lumens exac-
Neilson 2006). Further, activation of the local renin-
erbated by expansion of mesangial matrix and infiltrating
 angiotensin system, as well release of proinflammatory
cells due to influx of macromolecules into the mesangial
 and profibrotic factors may result from shear stress to
areas.
endothelial cells and mechanical stress to mesangial cells
Segmental and sometimes nodular sclerosis may
develop subsequent to microaneurysm formation in
and podocytes.
Aldosterone increases renal vascular resistance and
glomerular capillaries. Microaneurysms may develop as
glomerular capillary pressure and may complement the
a consequence of increases in glomerular capillary diam-
detrimental activity of angiotensin I (Harris and Neilson
eter and intraglomerular pressure leading to increased
2006). In addition, there are many potential mechanisms
tension exerted on the glomerular capillary walls. These
by which aldosterone may mediate fibrosis, collage
microaneurysms usually thrombose as a consequence of 
formation, and an inflammatory response including
exposure of platelets to mesangial components; a local
increased expression of proinflammatory molecules,
inflammatory response develops folowing thrombosis.
stimulation of TGF-B synthesis, generation of reactive 
Segmental and nodular sclerosis follows as these lesions
organize and capillaries collapse trapping cellular debris.
and others (Epstein 2004).
Local generation of cytokines and growth factors and
influx of macrophages stimulate mesangial matrix over-
Proteinuria and tubulointerstitial disease
production leading to expansion of the mesangium, fur-
ther promoting glomerulosclerosis.
Proteinuria is a strong, independent risk factor for pro-
Endothelial dysfunction appears to promote devel-
 gression to end-stage CKD in humans (Iseki et al. 2003).
opment of thrombi in glomerular capillaries, although
It has also been shown to be related to progression of 
the mechanism is not completely understood. Increased
renal disease in dogs and cats (Finco et al. 1999; Jacob
 shear stress from intraglomerular hypertension may
et al. 2005; Syme et al. 2006). It is unclear whether pro-
cause endothelial cells to lose their thromboresistance
 teinuria itself contributes to progressive renal injury or is
leading to platelet adhesion.
 just a marker of the process leading to progression.
The relative contribution of each of these factors to
 Proteinuria may promote progressive renal injury
development of glomerulosclerosis is unknown. How-
in several ways. Some proposed mechanisms include
ever, these processes are associated with progressive
 mesangial toxicity,tubular overload and hyperplasia, tox-
injury to and further loss of nephrons. This loss of
icity from specific proteins such as transferrin/iron, and
nephrons and the associated progression of CKD occurs
induction of pro-inflammatory molecules such as mono-
independent of the underlying disease processes respon-
cyte chemoattractant protein-1. Excessive proteinuria
sible for the initial renal injury.
 may injure renal tubules via toxic or receptor-mediated
Chronic kidney disease   437
pathways or via an overload of lysosomal degradative
Hyperparathyroidism in CKD is multifactorial in ori-
mechanisms. Abnormally filtered proteins accumulate
gin. Recent studies have suggested that fibroblast growth
in the renal proximal tubular lumens where, after
factor-23 (FGF-23) may be involved in its origin (Gutier-
endocytosis into proximal tubular cells, they contribute
rez et al. 2005). Phosphorous retention occurs as GFR
to renal tubulointerstitial injury through a complex
declines in early renal failure and is intimately related to
cascade of intracellular events. These events include
development of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
up-regulation of vasoactive and inflammatory genes
Fibroblast growth factor-23 is a phosphaturic hormone
such as the endothelin-1 (ET-1) gene, the monocyte
that mitigates phosphorus retention early in the course of
chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1) gene which encodes
activity, thus potentially contributing to decreased cal-
and T-lymphocyte recruitment, and the RANTES
citriol levels (Gutierrez et al. 2005). The decline in cal-
(regulated on activation, normal T-cell expressed and
citriol levels is one of the earliest identifiable changes
secreted) that encodes for a chemotactic molecule for
that occurs in the development of renal secondary hyper-
monocytes and memory T-cells (Pisoni and Remuzzi
parathyroidism.
2001). Formed in excessive amounts, these molecules
A relative deficiency of calcitriol has been described
are secreted toward the basolateral side of tubular
in dogs with CKD, although absolute values were within
cells and incite an inflammatory reaction within the
the normal range (Gerber et al. 2003). Relative or abso-
interstitium. In addition, complement components
lute deficiency of calcitriol is believed to play a pivotal role
escaping through glomerular capillary walls may initiate
in development of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
d pn on pno sidi s nu s
Calcitriol, the most active form of vitamin D, is formed by
may also be liberated during resorption. Inflammatory
1α-hydroxylation of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol in renal
 or chemotactic properties of these lipids may promote
tubular cells. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) promotes
tubulointerstitial disease. Finally, inspissation of filtered
renal 1α-hydroxylase activity and formation of calcitriol.
 proteins due to tubular reabsorption of water in the distal
 In turn, calcitriol limits PTH synthesis by feedback inhi-
nephron may lead to formation of casts that obstruct
bition. Phosphorus retention and FGF-23 inhibit renal
nephrons.
lα-hydroxylase activity. Early in the course of CKD,
In humans, conditions that are associated with rel-
these inhibitory effects on renal tubular lα-hydroxylase
atively selective albuminuria rarely induce significant
activity limit calcitriol production. As calcitriol nor-
tubulointerstitial injury, even when the quantity of pro-
mally inhibits PTH synthesis, reduced calcitriol syn-
teinuria is great. In contrast, glomerular injury associated
thesis promotes renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
with nonselective proteinuria (a combination of larger
Initially, the resultant hyperparathyroidism increases
and small albumin-sized molecules) incites substantial
lα-hydroxylase activity despite continued phosphorous
tubulointerstitial injury (Harris and Neilson 2006). This
retention, thereby restoring calcitriol production toward
finding suggests that fltered moieties other than or in
normal. However, normalization of calcitriol production
addition to albumin may induce tubular injury and dys-
function.
sis." As CKD progresses, loss of viable renal tubular cells
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism
ultimately limits renal calcitriol synthetic capacity and
calcitriol levels subsequently remain low. Deficiency of
Incidence and pathophysiology
calcitriol leads to skeletal resistance to the action of PTH
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism develops early in
 and elevates the set-point for calcium-induced suppres-
the course of CKD, so it may be present in many dogs and
sion of PTH secretion. Skeletal resistance to PTH limits
cats at the time of initial diagnosis of CKD. The overall
skeletal release of calcium, while elevating the set-point
  es  n 
 for PTH secretion allowing hyperparathyroidism to per-
cats was reported to be 84% in one study (Barber and
Elliot 1998). Hyperparathyroidism was present in all cats
are normal or elevated (Nagode et al. 1996).
      -, 
Recent evidence suggests that phosphorous retention
with only biochemical evidence of CKD. It may be present
may also play a primary role in directly promoting hyper-
 in patients with normal serum calcium and phosphorus
 parathyroidism. Phosphorous has been shown to stim-
concentrations (Nagode et al. 1996). In general, plasma
ulate PTH secretion in parathyroid cultures (Almaden
PTH levels increase as serum creatinine concentration
et al. 1996). Further, phosphorous restriction in dogs
increases (Nagode et al. 1996).
and humans with CKD has been shown to decrease
438  Upper urinary tract disorders
 PTH secretion without changing serum calcitriol levels
manifestations of severe renal osteodystrophy include,
(Lopez-Hilker et al. 1990; Combe and Aparicio 1994).
cystic bone lesions, bone pain, and growth retardation.
In untreated human patients with mild to moderate
Although excessive levels of PTH affect bones and kid-
CKD (serum creatinine concentration ≤ 3.0 mg/dL),
neys, it may also affect the function of other organs and
serum phosphorus concentrations correlated directly
tissues, including brain, heart, smooth muscles, lungs,
with PTH, independent of serum calcium and 1,25-
erythrocytes, lymphocytes, pancreas, adrenal glands, and
dihydroxyvitamin D levels (Kates et al. 1997). Interest-
testes as well (Bro and Olgaard 1997). Toxicity of PTH
ingly, this correlation was present despite the fact that
o j a puua yn pea aq o siade
 most patients had serum phosphorous concentrations
cium into cells with PTH or PTH2 membrane receptors.
within the normal range. Importantly, overt hyperphos-
Sustained PTH-mediated calcium entry leads to inhibi-
phatemia may not be a prerequisite for phosphorous to
tion of mitochondrial oxidation and production of ATP.
have an effect on PTH secretion (Kates et al. 1997; Barber
Extrusion of calcium from cells is reduced because of
and Elliot 1998). Ithas been suggested that high phospho-
the impairment in ATP production and disruption of the
sodium-calcium exchanger. Persistently increased basal
phosphorous metabolism causing increased parathyroid
cytosolic calcium levels promote cellular dysfunction and
cell phosphorous concentration. In vitro studies have
death (Nagode et al. 1996).
suggested that parathyroid glands exposed to elevated
 Potential non-skeletal clinical consequences of hyper-
phosphorous levels respond by increasing PTH secretion 
 parathyroidism include mental dulness and lethargy.
(Almaden et al. 1996). Reduced calcitriol levels may have
weakness, anorexia, and an increased incidence 
of
 a permissive effect and/or an additional direct effect on 
infections due to immunodeficiency (Nagode et al.
 PTH secretion in this setting (Kates et al. 1997).
1996). Hyperparathyroid-induced cellular dysfunction
In more advanced CKD, the presence of uremic toxins
may lead to carbohydrate intolerance, platelet dysfunc-
 appears to prevent the inhibition of parathyroid cell pro-
tion, impaired cardiac and skeletal muscle function
liferation induced by calcitriol (Canalejo et al. 2003). At
(due to impaired mitochondrial energy metabolism and
this point, only serum calcium concentration correlates
myofiber mineralization), inhibition of erythropoiesis,
with serum PTH activity (Kates et al. 1997). Impaired
altered red cell osmotic resistance, altered B cell prolifer-
intestinal absorption of calcium due to low serum cal-
ation, synaptosome and T-cell dysfunction, and defects
citriol levels likely plays an important role in hyper-
in fatty acid metabolism (Nagode et al. 1996; Vanholder,
parathyroidism in these advanced CKD patients. Blood
1998). Excess PTH levels may also promote nephrocalci-
ionized calcium concentrations are often reduced in cats
 nosis and consequent progressive loss of renal function.
with CKD; in one study, over 50% of cats with advanced
 Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism may be asso-
end-stage CKD were hypocalcemic (Barber and Elliot
ciated with substantial enlargement of the parathyroid
1998). lonized calcium concentration has been reported
glands. This finding may be of clinical importance in
to range from low to high in dogs with CKD (Schenck
cats because of frequent coincident hyperthyroidism that
and Chew, 2003).
may be suggested by the presence of a thyroid nodule
palpable in the cervical region. In a recent report, hyper-
plastic parathyroid glands were palpable as paratracheal
masses in 1l of 80 cats with spontaneous CKD (Elliot and
Clinical consequences
Barber 1998). Care should be taken to confirm hyperthy-
Although renal secondary  hyperparathyroidism and
roidism prior to treatment as both hyperparathyroidism
renal osteodystrophy, are well-documented effects of
and hyperthyroidism can lead to paratracheal masses.
CKD, clinical signs associated with renal osteodystro-
phy are uncommon in dogs and cats. In dogs, it most
often occurs in immature patients, presumably because
Causes of CKD
metabolically active growing bone is more susceptible
Conceptual model for development of CKD
to the adverse effects of hyperparathyroidism. For unex-
plained reasons, bones of the skull and mandible may be
A conceptual model for the course of CKD has been
the most severely affected and may become so demineral-
proposed which includes initiation and progression of 
ized that the teeth become moveable and fibrous changes 
CKD (Stevens and Levey 2005). It begins with antecedent
are obvious, particularly in the maxilla. Marked prolifer-
conditions (i.e., risk factors for renal disease), followed by
ation of connective tissue associated with the maxilla may
stages of kidney damage and decreased GFR, ultimately
cause distortion of the face. Jaw fractures can occur but
leading to kidney failure and renal death. Antecedent
are uncommon. Other possible but uncommon clinical
conditions or susceptibility factors are conditions that
Chronic kidney disease  439
put patients at increased risk to develop kidney damage.
ment directed toward an etiologic cause is thought likely
These factors are not well understood in dogs and cats.
to result in the most desirable clinical outcome, recog-
 Presumably, factors such as older age, preexisting renal
nition of the many potential causes of CKD is impor-
impairment (e.g-, reduced numbers of nephrons at birth),
tant. Early detection and confirmation of many of these
and as yet undefined genetic factors may predispose to
disorders is challenging and requires careful screening
renal injury. Recognizing such factors would potentially
 of patients with a judicious application of appropriate
be of great value in preventing development of kidney
diagnostic tools as indicated, including kidney function
damage and the later stages of CKD.
tests, urinalysis, imaging of the urinary system, serologic
Initiating factors which directly lead to kidney dam-
 screening for predisposing diseases, urine cultures, and
age may include a diversity of factors such as immune-
renal biopsy.
mediated diseases, systemic infections, urinary tract
CKD may be initiated by a variety of different
infections, nephrolithiasis, urinary tract obstruction,
 acquired, familial, or congenital, diseases. In a study of
drug or other nephrotoxicity, systemic and glomeru-
biopsy findings in 37 dogs with primary renal azotemia,
lar hypertension, chronic hypoperfusion, developmental
chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis was observed in
disorders, amyloidosis, and others. The relative contri-
58%, glomerulonephropathy occurred in 28%, and
bution of these factors to the overall incidence of CKD in
amyloidosis was observed in 6% (Minkus et al. 1994).
dogs and cats has not been well established, partly because
In cats, tubulointerstitial nephritis was observed in
the underlying causes of CKD are often not recognized.
70%, glomerulonephropathy occurred in 15%, and
However, individuals with recognized susceptibility fac-
lymphoma was observed in 11%, and amyloidosis
tors or initiation factors for CKD should be tested for kid-
occurred in 2%. Unfortunately, the initiating cause(s) of
ney injury on an ongoing basis (i.e., screening efforts).
CKD often cannot be identified at the time of diagnosis.
Ideally, diagnosis and treatment of CKD would com-
The initiating causes of diseases thought to originate
mence during this phase of CKD. Treatments should be
in the tubulointerstitium have been especially elusive.
 directed toward the primary disease process, managing
Glomerulonephropathies have been linked to a variety of
comorbid conditions and slowing progression of CKD.
neoplastic, metabolic, and infectious and noninfectious
 In patients with kidney damage, progression factors
inflammatory processes (see Chapters 26, 52, and 53)
cause worsening of kidney damage and thereby promote
(Cook and Cowgill 1996).
or accelerate a progressive decline in GFR. In dogs and
 Several systemic causes for CKD have been proposed.
cats these factors may include higher levels of protein-
Among the more intriguing proposals is that vaccines
uria, elevated phosphorous concentrations and possi-
may play a role in development of the tubulointersti-
bly higher blood pressure. Kidney disease may progress 
tial renal disease so often recognized in cats with CKD.
because of the initial damage or as a result of pathways
Subcutaneous administration of feline herpesvirus 1,
independent of the initial damage (i.e., spontaneous pro-
calicivirus, and panleukopenia virus vaccines grown on
gression). Efforts should be made to assess the rate of
Crandell Rees feline kidney (CRFK) cells to kittens have
 progression of CKD and attempt intervention to slow
been shown to induce production of anti-feline renal
progression.
     s n so 
The patient enters end stage kidney disease or kidney
ther, immunologic sensitization of cats against CRFK
failure at the point where symptomatic and supportive
lysates has been shown to induce an acute lymphocytic-
care becomes the focus of management. In humans with
      
end-stage kidney failure, this is the stage where replace-
While these observations prompt serious questions as
ment by dialysis and transplantation are initiated (see
to whether repeated administration of feline vaccines
Chapters 27-30). Options for successful management of 
 grown in CRFK cell cultures may play a role in devel-
canine and feline patients with end-stage kidney failure
 opment of the tubulointerstitial CKD in cats, it remains 
are seriously limited and uremic death or euthanasia may
to be demonstrated that the antibodies and acute lesions
become inevitable. As such, delaying or preventing pro-
reported so far will in fact progress to CKD. Nonetheless,
gression to this stage is a priority in the management of
the potential for vaccines playing a role in initiating kid-
all dogs and cats with CKD.
ney damage can not yet be excluded, and the incidence
 of CKD in older cats is substantial. As a consequence,
a recommendation to consider monitoring kidney func-
Pursuit of the causes for CKD
tion in geriatric cats for evidence of kidney damage may
It appears plausible that early recognition of kidney dis-
be warranted.
ease will provide an opportunity to treat the primary dis-
 It has also been suggested that periodontal disease may
eases underlying CKD. Because early detection and treat-
be linked to microscopic renal lesions in dogs, but a
440  Upper urinary tract disorders
cause and effect relationship has yet to be confirmed
tification of a specific cause and/or localization of the ini-
(DeBowes et al. 1996). In a fashion similar to the asso-
tial lesion to glomeruli, tubules, interstitium, or vessels.
ciation reported in humans with HIV, feline immunod-
With time, however, destructive changes of varying sever-
eficiency virus (FIV) has been linked to renal disease in
ity (atrophy, inflammation, fibrosis, and mineralization
cats (Thomas et al. 1993; Poli et al. 1995). However, few
of diseased nephrons), superimposed on compensatory
cats with CKD are FIV positive, thus raising doubt as to
and adaptive morphologic and functional adaptations of
the overall contribution of FeLV-associated nephritis to
remaining partially and totally viable nephrons, provide
CKD.
a functional and morphologic similarity to the findings
While early recognition of CKD is a critical step in
associated with these diseases.
recognizing the primary diseases responsible for CKD,
 Despite the irreversibility of generalized renal lesions
early diagnosis is the exception rather than the rule. Most
associated with CKD, it is important to formulate diag-
 patients with CKD are diagnosed relatively late in the
nostic plans to try to identify the underlying cause and
course of their disease and the primary cause of CKD is
to determine if it is still active. Although specific therapy
typically not identified. Diffculty in detecting the inciting
 directed at eliminating or controling the primary cause
cause of CKD is associated with three phenomena related
will usually not substantially alter existing renal lesions,
to the evolution of progressive renal diseases. First, var-
 it is important in context of minimizing further nephron
ious components of nephrons (glomeruli, peritubular
 damage. Renal diseases potentially amenable to spe-
capillaries, tubules, and interstitial tissue) are function-
cific therapy include bacterial pyelonephritis, obstructive
ally interdependent. Second, the functional and morpho-
uropathy, nephrolithiasis, renal lymphoma (particularly
logic responses of tissues comprising the kidneys to dif-
 in cats), hypercalcemic nephropathy perinephric psue-
ferent etiologic agents are limited in number. Third, after
docysts, and some glomerulopathies.
Acute onset of non-urinary disorders, especially those
one month of age, new nephrons cannot be formed to
that promote substantial fluid losses or interfere with
replace others irreversibly destroyed by disease. Progres-
compensatory polydipsia, may precipitate a uremic crisis
sive irreversible lesions initially localized to one portion of
in patients with compensated CKD (so-called “acute-on-
 the nephron are eventually responsible for development
chronic"). However, if acute decompensation of CKD has
of lesions in the remaining but initially unaffected por-
been caused by reversible factors, correction of them will
tions of nephrons. For example, progressive lesions (such
often result in recompensation of the CKD.
as amyloid or immune complex disease) confined initially
to glomeruli will subsequently decrease peritubular cap-
illary perfusion. Reduced peritubular capillary perfusion
Clinical signs of CKD
will in turn result in tubular epithelial cell atrophy, degen-
Early clinical signs of CKD
eration, and necrosis. There is also evidence that tubular
epithelial cells may also be damaged as a consequence of 
Among the first clinical signs to be noticed by owners
proteinuria. As described previously, proteinuria dam-
of pets with CKD are polyuria, polydipsia, progressive
ages tubules by release of cytokines and chemokines that
weight loss, muscle wasting, and a decline in appetite
 promote inflammation and fibrosis. Ultimately nephron 
that sometimes manifests as selectivity in appetite. Of
destruction initiated by glomerular proteinuria will sim-
 these signs, those most likely to prompt consideration
ulate repair by substitution of functioning nephrons with
of CKD are polyuria and polydipsia. Polydipsia may be
nonfunctional connective tissue.
recognized by owners who find that the water bowls must
Similarly generalized progressive interstitial disease
be filled more often or that pets may seek more water
initially caused by bacteria eventually destroys tubules
from new or unusual sources. Some dogs will begin to
and glomeruli and stimulates inflammation and fibrosis.
exhibit urinary incontinence with the onset of polyuria
Thus, irrespective of the initiating cause, replacement of
due to increased filling of the bladder. Another common
the majority of the damaged nephrons with collagenous
  s  n n si  a 
connective tissue results in overall reduction in kidney
clear or less yellow. In cats, polyuria is often recognized
size and impaired renal function.
    a i Sade x l  
 Because of the structural and functional interdepen-
more litter “clumps" present.
dence of various components of nephrons, differenti-
While these signs are often among the first signs that
ation of different progressive renal diseases that have
 owners recognize, they actually occur only after a sub-
reached an advance stage is often difficult. Functional
stantialloss of renal function has already occurred. Loss of
and structural changes prominent during earlier phases
urine concentrating ability, and the subsequent polyuria
of progressive generalized renal diseases may permit iden-
 and polydipsia, usually occurs only after a 75% or greater
Chronic kidney disease  441
decline in renal function. Thus, while these signs date the
ammonia and other retained toxins in saliva may also
onset of the clinical phase of CKD, they may not reflect
contribute to anorexia.
the actual onset of the disease.
In one study of cats with spontaneous CKD, dysphagia
 In some diseases, clinical signs specific to the primary
and oral discomfort was observed in 7.7% of uremic cats
disease may present before the onset of clinical signs that
and 38.5% of cats with end-stage CKD (Elliot and Barber
result from the loss of renal function. For example, poly-
1998). Periodontal disease was observed in 30.8% of ure-
cystic kidney disease or renal neoplasia may be recognized
mic and 34.6% of end-stage CKD cats in the same study.
 by owners or veterinarians as a mass or masses within the
Halitosis was reported in 7.7% of cats in both groups.
abdomen. Nephroliths associated with ureteroliths may
Moderate to severe CKD may result in uremic stomatitis
be recognized as abdominal pain, vomiting or licking at
characterized by oral ulcerations (particularly located on
the flank. Pyelonephritis may be recognized as pollaki-
the buccal mucosa and tongue), brownish discoloration
uria, foul-smelling and/or cloudy urine, polyuria, poly-
of the dorsal surface of the tongue, necrosis and slough-
dipsia, nausea, anorexia, or pyrexia. Glomerular diseases
ing of the anterior portion of the tongue (associated with
may be recognized by edema. Congenital or familial renal
fibrinoid necrosis and arteritis; Figure 48.1), and urinif-
failure may be recognized as impaired growth, polyuria
erous breath. The mucous membranes may also become
and difficult house training.
dry (xerostomia). Degradation of urea to ammonia by
 bacterial urease may contribute to many of these signs.
Clinical signs of advanced CKD
Poor oral hygiene and dental disease may exacerbate the
onset and severity of uremic stomatitis.
As renal function continues to decline, the clinical signs
Vomiting is a frequent, but inconsistent finding in
of the polysystemic clinical syndrome known as uremia
uremia resulting from the effects of as yet unidentified
(see Chapter 39) dominate the clinical presentation of
uremic toxins on the medullary emetic chemoreceptor
the patient. Uremia is the clinical syndrome that results
trigger zone and from uremic gastroenteritis. The sever-
from loss of kidney functions. Impaired renal glomerular,
ity of vomiting correlates variably with the magnitude
tubular and endocrine functions lead to retention of toxic
 of azotemia. Because uremic gastritis may be ulcerative,
metabolites, changes in the volume and composition of
hematemesis may occur. Although vomiting has gener-
body fluids, and excess or deficiency of various hormones.
 ally been thought to be a more frequent complaint among
Presumably, the clinical signs of uremia reflect the sum
uremic dogs, vomiting reportedly occurs in about one-
effect of these derangements on organ systems through-
quarter to one-third of uremic cats (Elliot and Barber
out the body. The most prominent clinical signs of ure-
1998). Vomiting may impair compensatory polydipsia
mia are related to the gastrointestinal tract (described
 enhancing the risk of dehydration and exacerbating pre-
below). Other clinical findings may include weight loss,
renal azotemia and clinical signs of uremia.
muscle wasting, hypothermia, lethargy weakness, muscle
In dogs, uremic gastropathy is characterized micro-
tremors, uremic pericarditis and pneumonitis, hyperten-
scopically by mineralization of the mucosa and of sub-
sion, altered behavior or neuropathies (uremic or hyper-
mucosal blood vessels, edema, vasculopathy, and glan-
tensive encephalopathy), renal osteodystrophy, anemia,
dular atrophy (Peters et al. 2005). Gastric mineralization
 and a hemorrhagic diathesis.
appears to be related to the calcium-phosphate prod-
uct. In addition, elevated gastrin levels have been impli-
Gastrointestinal signs in CKD
cated in development of uremic gastropathy. Gastrin, a
Gastrointestinal manifestations remain among the most
hormone that induces gastric acid secretion directly by
prominent and vexing clinical signs of uremia. Decreased
stimulating receptors located on gastric parietal cells as
appetite and weight loss are non-specific findings that
well as by increasing histamine release from mast cells in
often precede other gastrointestinal signs of uremia. The
the gastric mucosa, is normally excreted by the kidneys
appetite may be selective for certain foods and wax and
and elevated blood levels may develop as kidney func-
wane throughout the day. The decline in appetite appears
 tion declines. Indeed, elevated blood gastrin levels have
to be multifactorial in origin. Studies using a rodent
been documented in cats with spontaneous CKD (Gold-
a un eoiey ooanoue, ue ie paisans seu ipo
 stein et al. 1998). Elevated gastrin levels may promote
 plasma of uremic patients that can suppress appetite
 gastric hyperacidity and possible gastric irritation and
(Anderstam et al. 1996). This factor appears to be middle
ulceration. Enhanced histamine release may also promote
molecule in size and may be a peptide. Elevated serum
 gastrointestinal ulceration and ischemic necrosis of the
leptin concentrations have also been implicated as a fac-
mucosa through a vascular mechanism characterized by
tor contributing to anorexia (Wolf et al. 2002). Nausea
small venule and capillary dilatation, increased endothe-
and altered taste sensation due to increased levels of urea,
lial permeability, and intravascular thrombosis (Lemarié
442   Upper urinary tract disorders
et al. 1995). However, gastric hyperacidity has not been
compounds, including urea and creatinine. Retention of
documented in uremic dogs or cats, and mucosal necro-
some of these metabolic wastes may be further aggra-
sis and ulceration appear to be uncommon findings in
vated by catabolism of body tissues and extrarenal
uremic gastropathy in dogs (Peters et al. 2005). Lesions of
factors that promote renal hypoperfusion. Since these
uremic gastropathy have not been described in cats. Ure-
compounds are derived almost entirely from protein
mic gastropathy and its associated clinical signs appear
 degradation, their production may increase when dietary
to be more common in dogs than cats.
 protein increases.
Uremic enterocolitis, manifest as diarrhea, may occur
While BUN is present in higher concentrations than
in dogs and cats with severe uremia, but it is typically less
dramatic and less common than uremic gastritis. In one
thought to be relatively nontoxic. Regardless of whether
study, diarrhea was not reported by owners of 80 cats with
urea per se is toxic, BUN concentrations nonetheless tend
spontaneous CKD (Elliot and Barber 1998). However,
 to correlate reasonably well with clinical signs of uremia.
when present, uremic enterocolitis is often hemorrhagic.
Therefore, BUN is often viewed as a surrogate marker of 
Considerable gastrointestinal hemorrhage may initially
retained "“uremic toxins." Urea is synthesized using nitro-
 gen derived from amino acid catabolism. It may then be
ally complicate uremic enterocolitis. In contrast, con-
excreted by the kidneys, retained in body water, or metab-
stipation is a relatively common complication of CKD,
 olized to ammonia and amino acids plus carbon dioxide
particularly in cats. However, it appears to be primarily
by bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract. Ammonia pro-
a manifestation of dehydration rather than gastrointesti-
duced in the gastrointestinal tract is recycled to urea in the
nal dysfunction. It may also occur as a complication of
liver yielding no net loss of nitrogen or urea. The concept
 intestinal phosphate binding agents.
of “trapping” nitrogenous wastes in the gut by enhanc-
ing anabolic microbial uptake of intestinal ammonia and
urea with subsequent excretion from the body via the
Laboratory abnormalities in CKD
feces is currently being examined as a possible means of
Multiple hematological and biochemical abnormalities
using the gastrointestinal tract to eliminate nitrogenous
may be found in patients with CKD (Table 48.1). These
waste products.
abnormalities vary greatly in their clinical significance
 In addition to increasing protein intake and declin-
to the patient. A complete picture of the patient's clinical
ing renal function, BUN concentrations may also be
condition is best achieved by a complete evaluation of the
increased by gastrointestinal hemorrhage, enhanced pro-
hematological and biochemical condition of the patient.
tein catabolism, decreasing urine volumes (due to pre-
renal factors such as dehydration), and certain drugs
(e.g-) glucocorticoids). Urea nitrogen concentrations may
Azotemia
 decline with portosystemic shunts, hepatic failure, and
low protein diets. It is important to interpret changes
Azotemia is defined as an excess of urea, creatinine,
in BUN in the clinical context of the patient. While a
and other non-protein nitrogenous compounds in the
reduced BUN may be accompanied by improved clini-
blood (see Chapter 39). Since urea nitrogen, creati-
cal signs in some clinical settings (e.g-, feeding a reduced
nine, and many other non-protein nitrogenous com-
 protein diet), reduced BUN concentration may in other
 pounds are excreted largely by glomerular filtration, a
settings be an undesirable finding. For example, it may
decline in glomerular filtration leads to accumulation
also indicate protein calorie malnutrition due to inad-
 of a wide variety of non-protein nitrogen-containing
equate protein intake as a consequence of improperly
formulated diets or failure of the patient to consume
Table 48.1  Principal laboratory abnormalities in chronic kidney
adequate amounts of food. Because many extrarenal fac-
disease
tors influence BUN concentration, creatinine is preferred
to evaluate kidney function because it is a more reliable
Azotemia
measure of GFR.
Hyperphosphatemia
Hypokalemia and hyperkalemia
Metabolic acidosis
Hyperphosphatemia
Hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia
Hyperphosphatemia is common in patients with
Hypermagnesemia
Anemia (normocytic, normochromic)
azotemic CKD, but unexpected in patients with non-
Hypoalbuminemia
azotemic renal disease. In general, serum phosphorus
concentrations parallel BUN concentrations in patients
Chronic kidney disease 443
with CKD. Nonetheless, derangements in body phospho-
proton-secreting organs, such as the stomach and kid-
rus metabolism begin very early in the course of CKD.
neys, in which basolateral bicarbonate secretion results in
The kidneys play a central role in phosphorus
 metabolism because phosphorus excretion occurs pri-
phate (brushite) precipitation (Brushinsky 2005). How-
marily via the kidneys. Phosphorus is freely filtered by
ever, myocardium, lung, and liver are also commonly
the glomerulus and reabsorbed in the renal tubules. Thus,
mineralized in patients with CKD.
phosphorus excretion is the net of glomerular filtration
Increasing calcium X phosphorous product was found
less tubular reabsorption of phosphorus. If dietary phos-
to have a mortality risk trend similar to that seen for phos-
phorus intake remains constant, a decline in glomerular
phate (Block et al. 1998). The risk of mortality associated
filtration rate will lead to phosphorus retention and ulti-
mately hyperphosphatemia. However, during the early
elevated PTH levels, which alone appeared to have only
stages of CKD, serum phosphorus concentrations remain
a weak association with mortality. However, the statis-
well regulated because of a compensatory decrease in
tical association between PTH and mortality may have
renal tubular phosphorous reabsorption. Renal tubular
been impaired by use of multiple methods for PTH assay
adaptation occurs as a consequence of the phosphaturic
in the patients studied. Analysis of calcium revealed no
effects of FGF-23 and PTH. Renal excretion of phos-
correlation with relative risk of death.
 phorous is enhanced by reducing the tubular transport
maximum for phosphorous reabsorption in the proxi-
Metabolic acidosis
mal tubule via the adenyl cyclase system. However, when
glomerular filtration rates decline below about 20% of
The kidneys eliminate acid by recapturing fltered bicar-
 normal, this adaptive effect reaches its limit and hyper-
  n s  s  
phosphatemia ensues.
as titratable acids (primarily phosphate) or ammonium.
The primary consequences of phosphorus retention
Since essentially all filtered bicarbonate is successfully
and hyperphosphatemia are progression of CKD, renal
reclaimed and the quantity of phosphate available for uri-
secondary hyperparathyroidism, and the associated renal
nary buffering is limited to the quantity that is excreted,
osteodystrophy. Hyperphosphatemia per se does not
the only option for increasing renal acid excretion is
appear to cause any clinical signs. As described previ-
increasing renal ammoniagenesis. The kidneys generate
ously, elevated serum phosphorus concentrations have
ammonia via metabolism of glutamine to glutamate and
been shown to be directly linked to increased mortal-
alpha-ketoglutarate in the renal tubules. However, the
ity in humans, cats, and dogs with CKD (Finco et al.
number of functioning renal tubules becomes limited
1992; Block et al. 1998; King et al. 2007; Boyd et al.
as CKD progresses. As a consequence, metabolic acidosis
 2008). Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism and renal
develops in CKD primarily because the ability to increase
ions, is limited by loss of functional renal mass. Decreased
tively limited. Young dogs seem to be at increased risk for
medullary recycling of ammonia due to structural renal
 developing clinical signs of renal osteodystrophy, primar-
 damage may also contribute to impaired ammonium
ily of the bones of the skull. The result is deformation of
excretion.
the skull and mandible, sometimes associated with sub-
Retention of phosphorous and organic acid (uric acid,
Pde aq s ae nan, n a id res
hippuric acid, and lactic acid) in CKD promotes an
to some dogs that develop fibrous skeletal changes in
increase in the anion gap. However, hyperchloremic aci-
the mandible. However, most adult dogs either do not
dosis (normal anion gap), high anion gap or mixed
survive sufficiently long or do not have sufficient eleva-
hyperchloremic-high anion gap acidoses may all occur
tions in PTH to develop clinical signs associated with
 in patients with CKD. Hyperchloremic acidosis is more
renal osteodystrophy, even though skeletal lesions can be
likely in less severely azotemic patients. Hyperchloremic
 demonstrated histologically in many dogs and cats with
acidosis also occurs in patients with renal tubular acidosis
CKD.
(RTA). Fanconi syndrome in Basenji dogs is an example
Hyperphosphatemia combined with even a normal
of a CKD characterized by impaired ability to reabsorb
plasma calcium concentration can produce an elevated
Z adi no dexod snqni dxd au aq aeuoq
calcium-phosphate product (Ca X PO4 in units of
RTA—see Chapter 54).
mg/dL). When the calcium-phosphate product exceeds
Metabolic acidosis is a common manifestation of
approximately 70, calcium phosphate tends to precipi-
advanced CKD, but is relatively uncommon among cats
tate in blood vessels, joints, and soft tissues. This process,
with less severe CKD (IRIS CKD stages II and II1) (Elliot
called metastatic calcification, is especially prominent in
et al. 2003a). A cross-sectional study of 59 cats with CKD
444  Upper urinary tract disorders
revealed that a blood pH below 7.27 was found in 10 of
Acidosis poses a particularly vexing problem for CKD
19 cats with severe azotemia, 3 of 20 cats with moder-
 patients consuming protein-restricted diets. Dietary pro-
ate azotemia, and none of 20 cats with mild azotemia. A
tein requirements appear to be similar for normal
subsequent longitudinal study indicated that metabolic
humans and humans with CKD unless uremic acido-
acidosis usually developed late in the course of CKD and
sis is present. When acid-base status is normal, adaptive
is more likely a consequence of advanced CKD than the
reductions in skeletal muscle protein degradation pro-
cause of progression to the advanced stages ofCKD (Elliot
tect patients consuming low-protein diets from losses in
lean body mass. Metabolic acidosis blocks the metabolic
prognostic factor in cats with CKD (King et al. 2007;
responses to dietary protein restriction in two ways (1)
Boyd et al. 2008).
it stimulates irreversible degradation of the essential,
Chronic metabolic acidosis may promote a variety of
branched chain amino acids and (2) it stimulates degra-
 adverse clinical effects including anorexia, nausea, vom-
dation of protein in muscle (Mitch 1997). Thus, acidosis
iting, lethargy weakness, muscle wasting, weight loss,
 may limit the ability of patients to adapt to dietary protein
and malnutrition. Alkalization therapy is often of value
restriction. Metabolic acidosis also suppresses albumin
in reversing these signs. In addition, chronic metabolic
synthesis in humans and may reduce the concentration
acidosis may increase urinary calcium excretion and pro-
of serum albumin. These findings have yet to be been
 mote progressive bone demineralization. Studies on the
 confirmed in dogs and cats.
effects of dietary acidification in cats have revealed that
chronic metabolic acidosis can cause negative calcium
Calcium disorders
balance and bone demineralization or negative potas-
sium balance which may in turn promote hypokalemia
Classically, serum calcium levels have been described as
renal dysfunction, and taurine depletion (Fettman et al.
declining in patients with CKD. However, serum total cal-
1992).
cium concentration is the sum of serum protein-bound
 Chronic metabolic acidosis may impair adaptation to
calcium, ionized calcium and complexed calcium, and the
 protein restriction and promote protein malnutrition
concentrations of total, ionized, complexed, and protein-
in patients with CKD. Protein catabolism is increased
bound calcium vary widely in dogs and cats with CKD
in patients with acidosis to provide a source of nitro-
(Schenck and Chew, 2003). lonized hypercalcemia was
      
reportedly found in 6% and ionized hypocalcemia in 26%
the substrate for renal ammoniagenesis (Mitch 1997).
of 80 cats with spontaneous CKD (Barber et al. 1998).
 The combined effects of reduced protein synthesis due
Further, mean blood ionized calcium concentration was
to uremia and accelerated proteolysis due to acidosis
significantly lower in CKD cats in this study than in nor-
 promote elevations in blood urea nitrogen, increased
mal control cats, and over half of the cats with advanced
(stage IV) CKD were hypocalcemic when evaluated using
of uremic acidosis. Altered branched chain amino acid
ionized calcium measurements. However, when these
 metabolism appears to be involved. Chronic metabolic
same 80 cats were evaluated using total serum calcium
acidosis increases the activity of muscle branched chain
concentrations, hypercalcemia was found in 21% of the
 keto acid dehydrogenase, the rate-limiting enzyme in
cats, while hypocalcemia was detected in only 8%. Clearly,
branched chain amino acid catabolism. This is impor-
serum total calcium concentrations do not reliably reflect
         
ionized calcium concentrations in cats with CKD.
ing in protein synthesis and play a role in regulation of
Similar discrepancies have been observed in dogs with
protein turnover. Alkalization therapy effectively reverses
 CKD (Kruger et al. 1996; Schenck and Chew, 2003). While
metabolic acidosis is known to influence the relative ratio
 lation that changes in intracellular pH accompanying
of ionized to bound calcium, metabolic acidosis does not
acidosis lead to alterations in gene transcription which
 increase the activity of the cytosolic, ATP- and ubiquitin-
total calcium concentrations in dogs with CKD (Kogika
dependent protein degradation pathway. Severe chronic
et al. 2006). Elevated serum total calcium concentrations
metabolic acidosis has the potential to induce a cycle of
in patients with CKD occurs predominantly as a conse-
 progressive protein malnutrition and metabolic acidosis.
quence of increased complexing of calcium to retained
Excessive protein catabolism may lead to protein malnu-
 organic and inorganic anions such as citrate, phosphate,
trition despite adequate dietary intake. This process may
 or sulfate (Schenck and Chew, 2003).
then accelerate breakdown of endogenous cationic and
Hypercalcemia of CKD should be carefully discrim-
sulfur-containing amino acids, thus promoting further
 inated from hypercalcemic nephropathy or renal dam-
acidosis.
age induced by ionized hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia
Chronic kidney disease  445
due to malignancy or hypervitaminosis D is most often
ness, and anorexia. These signs can be ameliorated by
linked to hypercalcemic nephropathy. Both of these con-
correcting anemia by hormone replacement. While the
ditions may elevate the calcium X phosphorus product
hematocrit may become quite low in patients with CKD,
leading to renal mineralization, inflammation, and fibro-
 compensatory mechanisms such as increased levels of 2,3
sis. Primary hyperparathyroidism is typically character-
DPG, lowered peripheral vascular resistance, and an ele-
ized by hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia. Because
vated cardiac output (in the absence of previous cardiac
disease) help maintain tissue oxygenation.
 condition, it appears less likely to induce hypercalcemic
The primary mechanism underlying anemia of CKD is
nephropathy. One way of discriminating the cause-effect
inadequate renal production of the hormone erythropoi-
relationship between hypercalcemia and kidney disease
is to determine the patient's blood ionized calcium con-
in renal peritubular fibroblast-like type-1 interstitial cells
centration. Only ionized hypercalcemia promotes kidney
(Weidemann and Johnson 2009). EPO stimulates red
 injury. However, true ionized hypercalcemia and hyper-
blood cell production in the bone marrow by enhanc-
calcemic renal damage may occur in patients with CKD
ing survival of certain erythrocyte progenitor cells. Defi-
as a consequence of excessive dosages of calcitriol or
ciency of EPO in CKD results from a reduction in the
calcium-containing intestinal phosphate-binding agents,
overall number of peritubular interstitial cells available
 Or, rarely, in patients with severe renal hyperparathy-
to produce the hormone. Organs other than the kidneys
roidism with marked hyperplasia of the parathyroid
 appear to have the capability to produce EPO. Although
glands. We have also observed small increases in ion-
the kidneys produce approximately 90% of systemic EPO
ized calcium concentrations in dogs and cats with early to
in adults, around 10% of circulating EPO is of nonrenal
moderate CKD that are not receiving calcitriol or calcium
origin. In addition to the kidneys, EPO mRNA expres-
therapy and do not have advanced hyperparathyroidism.
sion has been found in the liver, brain, spleen, lung, and
The mechanism of ionized hypercalcemia in these ani-
testis, although the levels of expression are low in lung
mals is unclear.
and spleen. The reason why alternate sources of EPO such
as liver and brain cannot compensate for the impairment
Hypermagnesemia
in renal EPO production has not been resolved. Cur-
 The kidneys are responsible for magnesium excretion.
rent research is directed at identifying novel means of
enhancing endogenous nonrenal production of EPO as a
Therefore, hypermagnesemia is common in azotemic
treatment for anemia of CKD.
CKD (Barber et al. 1998). Protein binding of magnesium
is usually normal, while complexed magnesium is usu-
Although EPO deficiency is the principal cause for
anemia in CKD, the anemia is multifactorial in origin
ally increased and ionized magnesium may be increased,
and may be exacerbated by concurrent illness and poor
normal or decreased in patients with CKD. Although the
homeostatic mechanisms involved in the control of mag-
nutrition. Experimental and clinical evidence exists for
a supporting role for shortened red cell life span, nutri-
        n 
tional abnormalities, and erythropoietic inhibitor sub-
the bone, gut, and kidney.
stances in uremic plasma, blood loss, and myelofibrosis.
Anemic CKD patients have a relative rather than abso-
Hypoproliferative anemia
lute EPO deficiency in that plasma levels typically exceed
As renal function declines in patients with CKD, a nor-
the normal range, but are low relative to the severity of
mochromic, normocytic hypoproliferative anemia typi-
anemia (King et al. 1992). Anemic CKD cats have been
cally develops. Typically, the severity of anemia is roughly
 reported to have plasma EPO concentrations similar to
proportional to the loss of kidney function. Examination
normal cats (Cook and Lathrop 1994).
of the bone marrow of patients with CKD usually reveals
 Other clinically important causes for anemia in dogs
hypoplasia of the erythroid precursors with little or no
 and cats with CKD are iron deficiency and chronic gas-
 interference with normal leukopoiesis and megakaryocy-
trointestinal blood loss. In most patients, iron deficiency
topoiesis. Spiculed and deformed red cells (burr cells or
 can only be detected by measuring serum iron, staining
echinocytes) may be observed in the peripheral blood.
The factors responsible for formation of these burr cells
response to iron supplementation. Chronic gastrointesti-
is not known, but their prevalence does not appear to
nal hemorrhage may occur even in the absence of charac-
correlate with the severity of CKD.
teristic color changes in the feces. It can be suspected on
The clinical signs of anemia contribute importantly
the basis of a hematocrit level that is unexpectedly low
to the clinical effects of CKD and include pallor of the
 relative to the magnitude of renal dysfunction, and an
mucous membranes, fatigue, listlessness, lethargy, weak-
elevation in the serum urea nitrogen to serum creatinine
446  Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 48.2 Comorbid conditions in CKD
Findings suggesting kidney disease may also be found
by physical examination or from the medical history.
Hyperthyroidlism (cats)
 For example, abnormal renal size or shape on physical
Urinary tract infections
examination suggests kidney disease, while the medical
Nephroliths and ureteroliths
history may reveal early signs consistent with kidney dis-
Hypertension
ease. Markers of kidney disease should be viewed as hints
Cardiac disease
-ind aq Pinous pue suasaid aq Aeu aseasip Aaup ie
Degenerative joint disease
Dental and oral diseases
sued diagnostically; they do not necessarily confirm the
 presence of kidney disease.
In most patients, diagnosing kidney disease requires
consideration of multiple pieces of evidence to develop
ratio. Diagnosis is usually confirmed by improvement in
a confirmed diagnosis. Table 48.4 provides a summary
anemia following therapy with famotidine and sucralfate.
of diagnostics required in initial evaluation of a patient
with suspected kidney disease.
Diagnosis of CKD
Interpretation of serum creatinine
concentration
 provide an accurate prognosis, the diagnostic evaluation
Serum creatinine is a relatively insensitive estimate of
should achieve six goals. These goals are to (1) confirm the
glomerular filtration rate until a substantial reduction in
 presence of kidney disease, (2) differentiate acute from
 overall kidney function has already occurred. It requires
chronic disease, (3) stage CKD, (4) identify clinical, bio-
about a 75% reduction in GFR before serum creatinine
chemical, and hematological complications of CKD, (5)
values consistently exceed the upper limit of normal for
determine the primary renal diagnosis (i.e., type and/or
many laboratories. The insensitivity of serum creatinine
cause of kidney disease), and (6) identify the presence
results from at least two important factors. The first is
of any comorbid conditions that may be present in the
the innate relationship between GFR and serum creati-
patient ( Table 48.2).
nine and the second is that factors other than intrinsic
 ss e o ds   s 
renal disease can cause serum creatinine concentration
"markers" of kidney disease or a reduction in kidney
to increase.
function. Markers of kidney disease may be recognized
 The relationship between serum creatinine and GFR
from hematologic or serum biochemical evaluations, uri-
is such that every time the GFR declines by half, the
nalysis or imaging or pathology studies (Table 48.3).
serum creatinine concentration doubles. For example, if
Table 48.3 Markers of kidney damage
Blood markersa
Urine markers 
Azotemia
Impaired urine concentration
Hyperphosphatemia
Impaired urine dilution
Hypoalbuminemia
Proteinuria
Hyperkalemia
Cylinduria
Hypokalemia
Hematuria
Metabolic acidosis
Pyuria
Hypocalcemia
Inappropriate urine pH 
Hypercalcemia
Inappropriate urine glucose
Hypoproliferative anemia
Cystinuria
Imaging markers—abnormalities in kidney:
Increased or decreased kidney size
Renal mineralization, nephroliths, or ureteroliths
Abnormal renal shape
Absence of a kidney
Abnormal renal echo texture by ultrasonography
aMarkers must be confirmed to be of renal origin to be evidence of kidney damage.
Chronic kidney disease   447
Table 48.4 Initial diagnostic database for patients with CKD
from the physical examination (distension of the urinary
bladder, inability to detect an intact bladder, inability to
Medical history
void normally) and medical history (anuria, stranguria,
 Physical examination
 and dysuria). However, when urinary obstruction occurs
Arterial blood pressure
 above the urinary bladder, imaging studies may be nec-
Renal function tests
essary to detect the problem.
Serum creatinine concentration
 In most patients, the difficulty is in differentiating pre-
Serum urea nitrogen concentration
 Estimation of GFR by plasma disappearance of exogenous
renal and intrinsic renal azotemia. In most instances, this
substances (optional)
decision will be based on examination of the urine con-
centration. As a consequence, serum creatinine concen-
Urinalysis (including urine sediment)
Measurement of proteinuria
tration must always be interpreted in light of knowledge
Urine protein: creatinine ratio
of the concurrent urine concentration. Most commonly,
 prerenal causes for azotemia reflect reduced perfusion of
Species-specific test for albuminuria (optional)
 the kidneys. When systemic conditions lead to hypoper-
Aerobic urine culture (prefer by cystocentesis)
Serum electrolytes: Serum sodium, potassium, chloride,
fusion of the kidneys, the normal physiologic response is
calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus concentrations
for the kidneys to produce concentrated urine in order
to preserve salt and water. As a consequence, prerenal
Measurement of acid-base status
Serum bicarbonate or total CO2 concentration
 azotemia should be associated with relatively concen-
 Blood gas analysis (optional)
 trated urine. In dogs, the urine specific gravity should
Serum albumin and globulin concentrations
exceed 1.030, while in cats the urine specific gravity
Survey abdominal radiographs
should exceed 1.035-1.040. If the urine specific gravity
Abdominal ultrasound
is below these cut-off points, intrinsic renal azotemia is
Renal biopsy if proteinuric (optional)
likely. Of course, if there is another disease process caus-
ing impaired urine concentration, this rule-of-thumb
may be inaccurate. Therefore, it is important to con-
 sider whether the clinical picture suggests the possibility
a dog has a baseline creatinine of 0.5 mg/dL and its GFR
of an alternate explanation for dilute urine. It should
declines by 50%, the serum creatinine only increases to
 also be remembered that very dilute urine (less than
1.0 mg/dL, still well within the normal range. If a further
about 1.006-1.007) suggests urine-diluting capacity is
reduction of 50% in GFR occurs (to 25% of the original
intact and should be interpreted as evidence of adequate
GFR), the creatinine will rise to 2.0 mg/dL where it might
intrinsic renal function. In instances where urine concen-
begin to be recognized as elevated. A further decline of
 tration is not available for comparison (e.g-, the patient
50% in GFR (to 12.5% of normal) and the creatinine
has received fluid therapy), prerenal azotemia may be
increases to 4.0 mg/dL. As can be seen by this example,
established on the basis of response to treatment.
the slope of the rise in serum creatinine concentration
While a single measure of serum creatinine concen-
becomes much more acute after a substantial loss of GFR
tration may correlate poorly with GFR, serial evalua-
has already occurred, but the slope is flat over most of the
tion of serum creatinine concentrations within the same
range of GFR. It follows that the wider the normal range 
 individual can be quite sensitive in detecting progressive
is for serum creatinine concentration, the less sensitive
changes in GFR. As a consequence, serially evaluating
it is for intrinsic kidney disease. However, if the range
serum creatinine concentrations at regular intervals in
becomes too narrow, serum creatinine willlose specificity
patients suspected as being at risk for CKD may increase
because other factors may influence the creatinine value
the sensitivity of this test.
including body muscle mass, breed of dog, and other
factors. This conundrum is intrinsic to the nature of
Differentiating acute from CKD
serum creatinine and limits its utility in diagnosis of early
CKD.
It is important to differentiate acute and CKD from one
 In addition to intrinsic kidney disease, prerenal and
 another because management and the short- and long-
postrenal factors may cause serum creatinine concentra-
term consequences of acute and CKD are potentially
tion to increase. As a consequence, whenever serum crea-
very different. The term “chronic" in the clinical con-
tinine is elevated, it is necessary to sift out prerenal, intrin-
text of CKD means that kidney disease has been present
sic renal and postrenal azotemia with the recognition that
long enough that the resulting condition is usually an
they may occur together in the same patient. In most
irreversible and often progressive loss of kidney func-
instances, postrenal contributions are clinically obvious
tion. In contrast, acute kidney disease (or acute kidney
448  Upper urinary tract disorders
injury) implies that the loss of kidney function is of recent
Table 48.5 Stages of chronic kidney disease in dogs and cats
onset and has the potential for reversibility of the renal
injury.
 Serum creatinine values (mg/d L/μmol/L)
 Recovery of kidney function following injury to the
Stage
Dogs
Cats
kidneys may reflect reversibility of the primary renal
injury and/or compensatory adaptations that allow sur-
Stage 1
<1.4/<125
<1.6/<140
viving nephrons to increase their function (described
 Stage 2
1.4-2.0/125-179
1.6-2.8/140-249
above in the section on response to loss of nephrons).
Stage 3
2.1-5.0/180-439
2.9-5.0/250-439
In patients with CKD, adaptive compensatory enhance-
 Stage 4
>5.0/>440
>5.0/>440
ments in kidney function have already become fully
engaged, so further improvement in intrinsic kidney
function should not be expected (although correction of 
ing chronicity are hypoproliferative anemia and greater
 prerenal and postrenal conditions may lead to improve-
magnitude of hyperphosphatemia.
ment in renal function). Since it typically takes approxi-
mately 3 months or longer for these compensatory adap-
tations to completely evolve, it is reasonable to consider
Staging CKD
kidney disease that has been present for approximately
 The International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) has pro-
 3 months or longer to define CKD.
posed a 4-tier system for staging CKD in dogs and cats
In most patients, the duration of CKD may be esti-
based on their renal function, proteinuria, and blood
mated from the medical history or inferred from physical
pressure (Tables 48.5-48.7). Staging CKD in this fash-
examination findings or renal structural changes identi-
ion facilitates application of appropriate clinical practice
- oed pen no sns t yno pg
guidelines for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. This
ence of clinical signs such as weight loss, polyuria, poly-
- pe    ne q  
dipsia, decreased appetite and others for approximately
     s 
three months or longer provides substantial evidence of 
Although the specific values used to categorize patients
chronicity. Physical examination findings of poor nutri-
with CKD into these stages are based largely on observa-
tional status and hair coat quality are more typical of
tional data, staging is nonetheless useful for establishing
chronic as opposed to acute kidney disease. Small kid-
prognosis and managing patients with CKD.
neys provide strong support of CKD because irreversible
The stage of CKD is based on the level of kidney
loss of nephrons is usually associated with replacement
function as measured by the patient's serum creati-
 by fibrosis. Physical examination may provide a clue as to
nine concentration. As described above, serum creati-
kidney size, but reduced kidney size confirmed by imag-
nine remains the most commonly used estimate of GFR
ing studies confirms the diagnosis of CKD. Although
in dogs, cats, and humans. However, the limited speci-
uncommon, radiographic evidence of renal osteodystro-
ficity and sensitivity of serum creatinine concentration as
 phy confirms the presence of CKD because of the time
an estimate of GFR can lead to misclassification. There-
required for such lesions to develop.
fore, staging should be based on a minimum of two
Laboratory findings are typically less reliable in con-
serum creatinine values obtained when the patient is
firming chronicity of kidney disease. However, when
fasted and well hydrated. Creatinine values should ide-
available, documented persistence of abnormalities in
 ally be determined over several weeks to assess stability
kidney function such as persistently elevated serum cre-
of CKD.
atinine concentrations or proteinuria over three or more
 months is conclusive support for diagnosis ofCKD. While
Table 48.6 Classification of proteinuria by urine
the magnitude of increase in serum creatinine or urea
protein:creatinine ratio?
nitrogen concentrations is not useful for differentiat-
 ing acute from CKD, the relationship between clinical
Urine protein:Creatinine ratio
signs and magnitude of renal dysfunction may be helpful.
At any given level of azotemia, patients with acute kid-
Classiciation
Dogs
Cats
ney failure are likely to show more severe clinical signs
Proteinuric (P)
>0.5
>0.4
because of the rapidity of increase in azotemia as well
 Borderline proteinuric (BP)
0.2-0.5
0.2-0.4
as the lack of time to adapt to the azotemic environ-
 Non-proteinuric (NP)
<0.2
<0.2
ment. Dogs or cats that have marked azotemia but have
only mild clinical signs are likely to have CKD. Other
? Based on ACVIM consensus statement on proteinuria (Lees et al.
laboratory findings that may provide evidence support-
2005).
Chronic kidney disease  449
Table 48.7 IRISa blood pressure stages for dogs and cats
may change due to the natural course of their disease or
 in response to therapy.
Arterial pressure (AP)
As with proteinuria, arterial pressure should be deter-
 Systolic blood pressure
mined several times, over several weeks, to establish the
Diastolic blood
blood pressure classification. Consult Chapter 12 for
(mmHg)
pressure (mmHg)
additional information on determining blood pressure.
Stage 0
<150
<95
Stage I
150-159
95-99
Management of CKD
Stage Il
160-179
100-119
Stage IlI
≥180
≥120
A clinical action plan should be developed for each
patient based on their diagnosis, stage of CKD, existing
aIRIS: International Renal Interest Society (www.iris-kidney.com).
complications and comorbid conditions, and risk factors
for progression of their kidney. In general, treatment of 
CKD includes (1) specific therapy, (2) prevention and
The patient's overall clinical status should be con-
treatment of complications of decreased kidney function
sidered when interpreting serum creatinine concen-
("conservative medical management"), (3) management 
trations and other laboratory tests and when plan-
of comorbid conditions, and (4) therapy designed to slow
ning patient management. Inter-laboratory variations,
loss of kidney function.
 patient-specific characteristics (e.g., breed, age, gender,
It is only possible to provide specific therapy for kid-
body condition, and lean body mass), and transient pre-
ney disease when a specific diagnosis of the responsible
renal and postrenal events may influence serum creati-
 underlying disease(s) has been identified. This is one of
nine values. Reduced muscle mass is a common mani-
the reasons why a thorough diagnostic evaluation must
festation of advanced CKD and may result in a substan-
 be performed prior to initiating therapy. Specific therapy
tial reduction in serum creatinine concentration relative
is directed at the etiopathogenic processes responsible
to true GFR, particularly in cats. In addition, published
for the patient's primary renal disease. Because the renal
reference ranges for serum creatinine are often broad.
lesions of CKD are irreversible, they usually cannot be
Therefore, using the staging system described here, some
 completely reversed or eliminated by specific therapy.
 patients classified as having mild renal azotemia (stage 2)
 Nonetheless, progression of renal lesions may be slowed
 may have serum creatinine values within published ref-
or stopped by therapy designed to eliminate active renal
 erence ranges. To avoid misdiagnosis, it is important that
 diseases. Specific therapies are described in the chapters 
evidence of CKD beyond the serum creatinine value be
of this text on the various types of primary kidney disease.
sought. In addition, recent evidence suggests that some
Unfortunately, a primary renal diagnosis amenable to
breeds of dogs may normally have higher normal values
specific therapy is not identified for many patients. In
for serum creatinine. In general, larger body size may be
such instances, the primary thrust oftherapy is directed at
the clinical and biochemical complications of decreased
in dogs (see Chapter 13).
kidney function. Conservative medical management of
According to the IRIS classification system, the stage
CKD consists of supportive and symptomatic therapy
of CKD is further qualified by the magnitude of protein-
designed to correct deficits and excesses in fluid, elec-
uria, as measured by the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio
trolyte, acid-base, endocrine, and nutritional balance
(UPC), and arterial blood pressure. Before performing
thereby minimizing the clinical and pathophysiologic
a UPC, a urinalysis and urine culture should be per-
consequences of reduced renal function. Conservative
formed to rule-out hemorrhage, inflation or infection as
medical management also includes therapy designed to
the cause for an increased UPC value. The urine sediment
limit the progressive loss of renal function.
should be determined to be inactive before performing
The goals of conservative medical management of
the UPC (Lees et al. 2005). Unless the UPC is markedly
 patients with CKD are to ameliorate clinical signs of ure-
elevated or less than 0.2, it is recommended that protein-
mia, minimize disturbances associated with excesses or
   d     
losses of electrolytes, vitamins, and minerals, support 
UPC 2-3 times over at least 2 weeks. The average of these
adequate nutrition by supplying daily protein, calorie,
determinations should be used to classify the patient as
and mineral requirements, and modify progression of
non-proteinuric; borderline proteinuric or proteinuric
 CKD. In order to optimally meet these goals, treatment 
(Table 48.6). Patients with borderline proteinuria should
recommendations must be individualized to patients
be re-evaluated after two months to reassess their clas-
needs based on their unique clinical and laboratory find-
sification. In some patients, classification of proteinuria
ing. Because CKD is progressive and dynamic, serial
450  Upper urinary tract disorders
clinical and laboratory assessment of the patient, and
vival time for dogs consuming the renal diet was 594 days
modification of the therapy in response to changes in
compared to 188 days for dogs consuming the mainte-
the patient's condition, is an integral part of conservative
nance diet. Owners of dogs fed the renal diet reported
 medical management. It is also essential that the response
significantly higher quality of life scores for their dogs
to treatment be monitored to make sure that the treat-
than owners of dogs consuming the maintenance diet.
 ments successfully achieve their goals.
The renoprotective effects of the renal diet appeared be
associated, at least in part, with reduction in the rate
Nutritional therapy
 progression of CKD.
In a masked, controlled clinical trial, 22 cats were ran-
Diet therapy was among the earliest treatments used
domized to a manufactured renal diet and 23 cats were
in managing CKD in dogs and cats. The approach to
diet therapy has changed greatly over the decades, but
et al. 2006). Cats in this study were mid-IRIS CKD stage
nonetheless, diet therapy remains a mainstay in the man-
II through stage Ill CKD with serum creatinine concen-
agement of canine and feline CKD. At one time, reduc-
trations ranging from 2.0 mg/dL to 4.5 mg/dL, or. The
ing dietary protein content was central to the dietary
risks of uremic crises and renal deaths were significantly
approach to treating CKD; however, it is now recognized
reduced when the renal diet was fed. Among the 22 cats
        s
fed the renal diet, there were no uremic crises or renal
important and effective. As a consequence, substituting
deaths and only 3 deaths due to non-renal causes over the
maintenance or senior diets that are lower in protein con-
two years of study. By contrast, among the 23 cats con-
tent than the pet's usual diet is not a satisfactory substitute
suming the maintenance diet, 6 developed uremic crises,
for feeding diets specifically formulated for dogs and cats
 5 died of renal causes and 5 died of non-renal causes.
with CKD. Diets specifically designed for dogs and cats
 Two additional trials, a non-randomized study and a
with CKD are modified from typical maintenance diets
retrospective study, further support the effectiveness of
in several ways including reduced protein, phosphorus,
renal diets in cats with CKD (Elliot and Barber 1998;
and sodium content, increased B-vitamin content, caloric
 Plantinga et al. 2005). In the non-randomized clinical
density and soluble fiber, a neutral effect on acid-base
trial, a manufactured renal diet was compared to no
balance, supplementation of omega-3-polyunsaturated
diet change (Elliot and Barber 1998). Cats that would
fatty acids and the addition of antioxidants. In addition,
not accept the renal diet, either due to pet or owner
feline renal diets are typically supplemented with addi-
issues, continued to eat their regular diet. Therefore, this
tional potassium. Of these diet modifications, only phos-
study was neither randomized nor blinded, but nonethe-
phate, omega-3 PUFA, antioxidants, and protein have
less yielded results strongly indicating that the renal diet
been examined individually for effectiveness.
was associated with a significant improvement in sur-
vival. Cats fed the renal diet (mean survival time = 633
Renal diets
days) survived substantiallylonger than cats that ate their
 The effectiveness of diet therapy in minimizing uremic
regular diet (mean survival time = 264 days). Serum
episodes and mortality in dogs and cats with naturally
urea nitrogen, and phosphorus concentrations and PTH
occurring stages 2 and 3 CKD has been established in
activities were lower in cats consuming the renal diet.
double-masked, randomized, controlled clinical trials 
The second study was a retrospective study performed
(Jacob et al. 2002; Ross et al. 2006). These studies com-
in 31 first-opinion veterinary practices in The Nether-
pared a renal diet to a prototypical maintenance diet.
lands. Survival times for cats fed one or more of 7 feline
The renal diets were characterized by reduced quantities
renal diets were compared to cats not fed a renal diet
of protein, phosphorus, and sodium compared to the
(Plantinga et al. 2005). The median survival time for cats
 maintenance diet, and were supplemented with omega-3
fed a renal diet was 16 months compared to 7 months for
PUFA.
 cats consuming a standard diet.
In dogs, the risk of developing a uremic crisis was
 All clinical studies performed to date clearly support
an hunsuo sop ng s nexdde Aq pnan
 recommending renal diets for dogs with IRIS CKD stages
renal diet, as compared to dogs consumingan adult main-
III and IV and cats with IRIS CKD stages II through
 tenance diet. The median symptom-free interval in dogs
IV. Renal diets are not currently recommended in IRIS
fed the renal diet was 615 days compared to 252 days in
CKD stage II dogs because they have not been critically
 dogs consuming the maintenance diet. Further, the risk
 evaluated in this population. However, any patient with
of death irrespective of the cause was reduced by 66%
IRIS CKD stage II that persistently has serum phospho-
and the risk of death due to renal causes was reduced
rus values exceeding 4.5 mg/dL may benefit from dietary
by 69% for dogs consuming the renal diet. Median sur-
therapy to reduce the serum phosphorus concentration
Chronic kidney disease  451
(see the section below on serum phosphorus guidelines).
retained non-protein nitrogenous waste products and
Further, renal diets appear to reduce the magnitude of
 typically correlates better with clinical signs than serum
 proteinuria in proteinuric dogs and are advocated for all
creatinine concentration. Blood urea nitrogen can also be
dogs with proteinuric kidney disease (Burkholder, 2004;
used as a crude measure of dietary compliance; while it
Lees et al. 2005). All of these studies were not designed
declines as dietary protein intake is reduced, inadequate
to selectively determine the benefits of modifying indi-
food consumption may also be associated with reduced
vidual dietary components, but rather report the results
BUN concentrations.
 ln uo sns m io i, e jo
 Later, based on studies in rats, dietary protein was
 components have been reported in dogs and cats with
proposed as a major cause for development and progres-
induced CKD, the potential interactions between com-
sion of CKD in humans (Brenner, 1982). This associa-
ponents have not been examined, nor have the results
tion formed the basis of the "hyperfiltration theory” of
 of these studies on individual dietary components been
 progressive renal disease which sought to link excessive
confirmed in patients with spontaneous CKD.
protein restriction to glomerular hyperperfusion, hyper-
 It is important to evaluate the nutritional response to
filtration, proteinuria and a progressive structural and
diet therapy. Body weight, body condition score, food
function decline in the kidneys. Based on this theory,
intake (calorie intake), serum albumin concentration,
several studies have attempted to examine the role of
 packed cell volume and quality of life should be moni-
protein intake on progression of CKD in dogs and cats.
tored. The primary goal is to assure adequate food intake,
The concept of reducing dietary protein intake in CKD
stable body weight, and a body condition score at or
patients in the absence of clinical signs of uremia has
near 5/9. If the patient is not meeting nutritional goals,
been questioned. Instead, it has been argued that limit-
the patient should be evaluated for uremic complica-
 ing protein intake in these patients is justified on the basis
tions, dehydration, and progression of CKD, metabolic
of slowing progression of CKD. This suggestion derives
acidosis, anemia, electrolyte abnormalities, UTl, and
from studies in rats indicating that dietary protein restric-
 non-urinary tract diseases. In addition, feeding practices
 tion limits glomerular hyperfiltration and hypertension
 should be examined to rule out management errors in
and slows the spontaneous decline in kidney function
feeding.
that follows reduction in kidney mass (Hostetter et al.
that protein restriction may slow progression of CKD,
Specific dietary components
albeit this effect may be small (Levey et al. 1999). A recent
As described above, renal diets differ from manufactured
study of very low-protein diet therapy of CKD in humans
maintenance diets in several fundamental ways. While the
indicated that it was ineffective in slowing progression of
therapeutic value of specific dietary components has not
kidney disease and increased the risk of death (Menon
been well studied in clinical trials, there have been mul-
et al. 2009). Multiple studies have failed to confirm a ben-
tiple studies performed in dogs and cats with induced
eficial role for protein restriction in limiting progression
kidney disease. Dietary components that have received
of CKD in dogs or cats. When not excessive, limiting pro-
the greatest attention include protein, phosphorus, lipids
tein intake does not appear to have any adverse effects.
and antioxidants. The principal focus of these studies has
It may be easier to initiate treatment with renal diets
been on the renoprotective effects of the dietary modifi-
before the onset of clinical signs of uremia. In addition,
cations.
as renal disease progresses, protein restriction may delay
The initial interest in protein restriction in CKD was
 onset of clinical signs of uremia. While a role for protein
based on the now well-accepted association between
restriction in slowing progression of canine and feline
dietary protein intake, retention of non-nitrogenous
CKD has not been entirely excluded, available evidence
waste products of protein catabolism, and development
of clinical signs of uremia. It is generally believed that
restriction in patients with stage 2 CKD. However, stud-
waste products of protein catabolism contribute to at
 sh a  nd   a 
least some of the clinical signs of uremia (see Chapter
normal kidneys do not appear to lead to CKD (Polzin,
41). The ideal quantity of protein to feed dogs and cats
unpublished data; Churchill, unpublished data).
with CKD remains unresolved; however, there is a gen-
eral consensus of opinion, that limiting dietary protein
Diet phosphorus
intake for the purpose of ameliorating clinical signs of
uremia is indicated for dogs and cats with IRIS CKD
Phosphorus restriction is one of the core characteristics
stages 3 and 4. While not generally regarded as an impor-
 of renal diets. As protein is a major source of phosphorus,
tant uremic toxin, BUN is a surrogate marker for these
phosphorus restricted diets are usually protein restricted
452   Upper urinary tract disorders
as well. Phosphorus content is restricted in order to limit
provide antioxidant effects, or limit intrarenal calcifica-
phosphorus retention, hyperphosphatemia, renal sec-
tion (Brown 2008).
ondary hyperparathyroidism, and progression of renal
Preliminary findings suggest that effects of dietary sup-
disease. While phosphorus retention and hyperphos-
plementation with antioxidants in the form of vitamin E,
phatemia are unlikely to directly cause clinical signs,
carotenoids, and lutein may be similar to omega-3 PUFA
they may promote increased levels of FGF-23, renal sec-
 in slowing progression of induced CKD in dogs. Further,
ondary hyperparathyroidism, reduced levels of calcitriol,
the combination of omega-3 PUFA (omega-6:omega-3
and renal mineralization, some or all of which may con-
ratio of 5:1) with antioxidants appeared to be more effec-
 tribute to progression of CKD. It is still unclear whether
tive than either omega-3 PUFA or antioxidants alone
the salutary effects of phosphate restriction is mediated
(Brown 2008).
via changes in renal hemodynamics, via reduced renal
Taken together, these findings justify a recommenda-
 mineralization, or changes of cellular calcium/phosphate
 e a s   
concentrations, respectively, or via other factors (Ritz
and antioxidants as appropriate for at least dogs with
et al. 2005). Several lines of evidence have linked phos-
CKD for the purpose of slowing progression of CKD.
phorus restriction and control of serum phosphorus con-
While the ideal quantity of omega-3 PUFA to supplement
centrations to slowing the progression of CKD. In studies 
 and the optimum ratio of omega-3 to omega-6 PUFA for
 performed in dogs with induced CKD, dietary phospho-
 renal diets has yet to be conclusively established, one
rus restriction improved survival and slowed the decline
-o:g-eo ue 1o b 0t d vnd e-ehao go na
in renal function characteristic of CKD (Finco et al.
3 ratio of 5:1 may be reasonable. The dietary content of
1992). In studies performed in cats with induced CKD,
 omega-3 PUFA should be considered when establishing
dietary phosphorus restriction limited renal mineraliza-
 an appropriate supplemental dosage for omega-3 PUFA.
tion. Two recent clinical studies in cats with spontaneous
Studies on the effects of omega-3 PUFA and antioxi-
CKD have linked increased serum phosphorus concen-
dants have not been reported for cats; however, a retro-
trations to decreased survival (King et al. 2007; Boyd et al.
spective study on the effects of several renal diets did find
2008). Taken together, these observations suggest phos-
that survival was greatest among cats fed the diet contain-
o   e sn n sn
ing the highest omega-3 PUFA content (Plantinga et al.
supporting the renoprotective effects of diet therapy of
2005). Unfortunately, this study was retrospective and it
CKD.
is not possible to accurately assess the effects of dietary
 omega-3 PUFA levels from this data.
Omega-3 PUFA and antioxidants
Meeting nutritional needs
In dogs with induced CKD, dietary omega-3 PUFA
supplementation has been shown to be renoprotec-
tive. Dietary supplements rich in omega-3 PUFA reduce
tion to be a premier indicator of their pet's quality of
the concentrations of 2-series prostaglandins (PG) and
life. When pets are ill, owners may be happy when their
increase the synthesis of 3-series PG (e-g-, PGE3), which
 pet shows any interest in food. However, it is inappro-
are believed to be less inflammatory (Bagga, 2003). Com-
 priate to accept the pet's consumption of “some" food
pared to dogs fed diets high in saturated fats or omega-6
 as a goal of therapy. Malnutrition resulting from inad-
PUFA, dogs consuming a diet supplemented with omega-
equate attention to nutrition is a major cause for mor-
3 PUFA had lower mortality, better renal function, fewer 
bidity and mortality in dogs and cats with IRIS CKD
renal lesions, less proteinuria, and lower cholesterol lev-
 stages 3 and 4. Specific nutritional goals for maintain-
els (Brown et al. 1998). In dogs fed the omega-3 PUFA
 ing body weight and body condition score should be set
diet, renal function actually increased and remained
 at the outset of nutritional therapy. Many dogs and cats
above baseline over 20 months of study. Glomeruloscle-
with CKD have body condition scores below 4/9. Opti-
rosis, tubulointerstitial fbrosis, and interstitial inflam-
mally patients should consume sufficient calories from
 matory cell infiltrates were diminished among dogs
s uoo oq e u on i doidn u
fed the omega-3 PUFA diet. The renoprotective effects
of 4 to 5/9. It is particularly important to assure suf-
observed with dietary omega-3 PUFA enhancement
ficient calorie intake for patients with body condition
included their tendency to reduce hypercholesterolemia,
scores of 3/9 or lower or when patients fail to consume
suppress inflammation and coagulation (by interfering
adequate calories to maintain a stable, appropriate body
with the production of proinflammatory, procoagulant
weight. Factors promoting weight loss and malnutrition
prostanoids, thromboxanes, and/or leukotrienes), lower
include anorexia, nausea, vomiting and the subsequent
blood pressure, favorably influence renal hemodynamics,
reduction in nutrient intake, hormonal and metabolic
Chronic kidney disease  453
derangements, and catabolic factors related to uremia,
sucralfate. Of these treatments, H2 blockers are most
particularly acidosis. Failure to adequately address ure-
commonly employed and few adverse effects have been
mic gastroenteritis, uremic stomatitis and dental health
attributed to their use. The most commonly used H2
can promote anorexia. Metabolic acidosis can impair
blockers include famotidine and ranitidine. However,
adaptation to limited protein diets, thereby promoting
their efficacy remains unproven. The lack of evidence
 protein catabolism and malnutrition.
of gastric hyperacidity in dogs and cats with CKD raises
It is appropriate to consider placing a feeding tube
 concern regarding their effectiveness.
when patients fail to spontaneously consume adequate
Antiemetics are typically added when anorexia, nau-
food. Feeding via a gastrostomy or an esophagostomy
 sea or vomiting persist despite the use of an H2 blocker.
tube is a simple and effective way to provide an ade-
 The antiemetics most commonly used in patients with
quate intake of calories and water. In addition, feeding
CKD include metoclopramide, 5-HT3 receptor antago-
tubes simplify drug administration. Based on this line of
nists such as ondansetron HCl or dolasetron mesylate,
reasoning, use of feeding tubes has been recommended
and the neurokinin (NK,) receptor antagonist maro-
for CKD patients. Although there is only weak evidence
 pitant citrate. Questions have been raised concerning
supporting the effectiveness of feeding tubes in achiev-
the appropriateness of using metoclopramide in patients
ing nutritional goals of dogs and cats with CKD, there
with CKD because metoclopramide, a dopamine antag-
is no proven effective alternative to this intervention. It
onist, has been shown to reduce renal blood flow in
is important to emphasize to pet owners that the goal of
humans (Israel et al. 1986). Studies in uremic humans
placing feeding tubes is to improve nutrition and thus
have shown the 5-HT receptor antagonist ondansetron
improve the quality of life for the patient, not just to keep
to be twice as effective as metoclopramide in reducing the
the patient alive.
clinical signs of uremic nausea and vomiting (Perkovic
et al. 2002). Maropitant may also be more effective than
metoclopramide because it may suppress both the vomit-
Managing gastrointestinal signs of uremia
ing center and the chemoreceptor trigger zone. Sucralfate
Gastrointestinal  complications of CKD,  including
 is added when gastrointestinal ulcerations and hemor-
reduced appetite with reduced food intake, nausea, vom-
rhage are suspected.
iting, uremic stomatitis and halitosis, gastrointestinal
hemorrhage, diarrhea, and hemorrhagic colitis, are not
Treatment of phosphorus retention
uncommon in dogs and cats with IRIS CKD stages 3
and hyperphosphatemia
 and 4. Treatment for these gastrointestinal signs is largely
Clinical importance on managing serum
 symptomatic. As described above, reducing dietary pro-
 tein intake may be beneficial in ameliorating many of the
phosphorus concentrations
 gastrointestinal signs of uremia. Although a link between
The kidneys play a pivotal role in regulating phosphorus
the products of protein metabolism/catabolism and clini-
balance because they are the primary route of phospho-
cal signs of uremia is clear, the precise “toxins" causing the
rus excretion. Renal phosphorus excretion is the net of
clinical signs remain unknown. Nonetheless, improve-
glomerular filtration less tubular reabsorption of phos-
ment in clinical signs often correlates with a reduction in
phorus. If dietary phosphorus intake remains constant, a
 BUN as protein intake is reduced. Thus, the presence of
decline in glomerular filtration rate willlead to phospho-
 gastrointestinal complications of CKD signs is sufficient
rus retention and ultimately hyperphosphatemia. How-
justification to warrant limiting protein intake.
ever, during the early stages of CKD, serum phospho-
Oral rinses with dilute (0.1%) chlorhexidine have been
rus concentrations typically remain within the normal
recommended for uremic stomatitis, but the effectiveness
range because of a compensatory decrease in phospho-
of such therapy has yet to be established. Good dental
rous reabsorption in the surviving nephrons. This renal
hygiene including dental scaling ( when possible) may be
tubular adaptation is a consequence of the phosphaturic
helpful in minimizing oral lesions. Patient undergoing
effects of FGF-23 and PTH. Renal excretion of phos-
anesthesia for dental cleaning should be pre-loaded with
 phorous is enhanced by reducing the tubular transport 
fluids and the depth of anesthesia with particular empha-
maximum for phosphorous reabsorption in the proximal
sis on maintaining acceptable blood pressure and tissue
tubule via the adenyl cyclase system. When glomerular
perfusion is essential in these patients.
filtration rates decline below about 20% of normal, this
Management of anorexia, nausea, and vomiting
adaptive effect reaches its limit and hyperphosphatemia
typically includes (1) limiting gastric acidity using H2
 ensues. However, before hyperphosphatemia develops,
blockers, (2) suppressing nausea and vomiting using
the trade-off for maintaining serum phosphorus within
 antiemetics, and (3) providing mucosal protection using 
 normal limits is persistent elevations in FGF-23 and PTH.
454  Upper urinary tract disorders
Further, substantial phosphorus retention occurs in tis-
Methods of limiting hyperphosphatemia and
sues before serum phosphorus levels exceed the upper
phosphorus retention
limit of normal. These trade-offs may have serious con-
Impaired renal perfusion (prerenal azotemia) promotes
sequences including progressive loss of renal function
increased serum phosphorus concentrations, so the first
and impaired production of calcitriol.
The most important clinical consequence of phospho-
step in correcting hyperphosphatemia is to assure that
the patient is well hydrated. Minimizing long-term
rus retention and hyperphosphatemia is progression of
phosphorus retention and hyperphosphatemia may be
CKD. Elevated serum phosphorus concentrations have
accomplished by limiting dietary phosphorus intake, oral
been shown to be predictive of increased mortality in
administration of agents that bind phosphorus within the
humans, cats, and dogs with CKD (Finco et al. 1992;
lumen of the intestines, or a combination of these meth-
Block et al. 1998; King et al. 2007; Boyd et al. 2008). In
 dogs with induced CKD, consuming a diet high in phos-
 ods. The usual approach is to start with diet therapy, and
ue Adenan iip jn siuse supuq snooudsoud ppe
phorus has been shown to be associated with increased
fails to bring the serum phosphorous concentration into
mortality (Brown, 1991; Finco et al. 1992). In cats, hyper-
the target range.
phosphatemia has been found to predict shorter survival
Intervention to manage serum phosphorus concen-
(King et al. 2007; Boyd et al. 2008). In humans with
tration is indicated for dogs and cats with IRIS CKD
CKD, the adjusted relative risk of mortality has been
stages 2-4 when serum phosphorus concentration rises
shown to progressively increase as serum phosphorous
above the therapeutic target concentration. The goal of
concentrations increase (Block et al. 1998). However, in
therapy is to reduce serum phosphorus concentrations
this study, the mortality risk associated with hyperphos-
 into the recommended therapeutic range. Ideally, serum
phatemia appeared to be independent of elevated PTH
phosphorus concentration should be maintained within
levels, which alone appeared to have only a weak asso-
the target range of 3.5-4.5 mg/dL in IRIS CKD stage Il,
ciation with mortality. Further, in humans with mild to
3.5-5.0 mg/dL in IRIS CKD stage IIl, and 3.5-6.0 mg/dL
moderate CKD plasma fibroblast growth factor 23 con-
in CKD stage IV. These targets were established based on
centrations, an early measure of phosphorus retention
expert opinion and have not been evaluated in clinical tri-
has been shown to predict progression of CKD (Fliser
als (Elliot et al. 2006). They are often below the upper lim-
et al. 2007).
 Hyperphosphatemia may be associated with an ele-
its of many established laboratory normal ranges because
the stated goal is to limit phosphorus retention even
vated calcium-phosphate product (Ca X PO4 in units of
before the onset of overt hyperphosphatemia.
mg/dL) even when serum calcium concentration remains
 Simply reducing serum phosphorus concentration
within normal limits, thus increasing the risk of mineral-
 into the normal range may fail to normalize serum PTH
ization of blood vessels, joints, and soft tissues. This pro-
levels (Nagode et al. 1996; Barber et al. 1999). However,
cess, called metastatic calcification, is especially promi-
current available evidence suggests that limiting phos-
nent in proton-secreting organs, such as the stomach
phorus retention and minimizing hyperphosphatemia is
and kidneys, in which basolateral bicarbonate secre-
ing development of the skeletal lesions of renal osteodys-
hydrogen phosphate (brushite) precipitation (Brushin-
 trophy, it has yet to be established whether normalization
sky, 2005). However, myocardium, lung, and liver may
 of PTH levels is an important therapeutic goal in dogs
also be mineralized in patients with CKD.
and cats with CKD.
Without treatment, phosphorus retention, and subse-
quently hyperphosphatemia and renal secondary hyper-
 parathyroidism, occur early in the course of renal fail-
Dietary phosphorus restriction
ure (in most dogs and cats with IRIS CKD stages 2-4)
(Nagode et al. 1996; Ritz et al. 2005; Brown et al. 2007b).
Serum phosphorus concentrations result from the net
Although hyperphosphatemia has been linked to pruri-
balance between dietary intake and renal excretion of
tus, conjunctivitis, renal osteodystrophy, and soft-tissue
phosphorus. Therefore, maintaining serum phosphorus
concentrations within the normal range as renal function
 not been conclusively linked to any clinical signs in
declines requires modification of phosphorus intake. In
dogs and cats with CKD. Rather, minimizing phosphorus
theory, optimum control of hyperphosphatemia would
 retention and hyperphosphatemia is an important ther-
,  ssod e au aa pe 
  d   sd   i
 proportion" to the decrease in glomerular filtration rate.
appears to slow progression of CKD and prolong survival
However, there is a limit to the extent to which dietary
(Finco et al. 1992; Barber et al. 1999).
phosphorus can be reduced. Nonetheless, the first step in
Chronic kidney disease  455
managing phosphorus balance in dogs and cats with CKD
tered with every meal. Administering the binders away
is to initiate diet therapy with a phosphorus-restricted
from meal time markedly reduces their effectiveness. In
diet when serum phosphorus concentrations exceed the
addition, calcium-based phosphate-binding agents that
 target concentration for the patient's IRIs CKD stage.
are given between meals function primarily as calcium
Manufactured renal diets are substantially reduced in
supplements rather than as a phosphate binder.
 phosphorus content and are often successful in achieving
Phosphate binders typically release constituents in
serum phosphorus targets into CKD stage 3. Typical com-
the process of binding phosphorus. For example,
mercial dog foods contain approximately 1-2% phospho-
aluminum-based phosphorus binders release aluminum,
rus on a dry matter basis and provide about 2.7 mg/kcal
calcium-based phosphorus binders release calcium,
or more phosphorus. Modified protein diets designed
lanthanum-based phosphorus binders release lanthanum
for dogs with CKD may contain as little as 0.13-0.28%
and sevelamer (Renagel) may release hydrochloric acid
phosphorus on a dry matter basis and provide about
and nitrogen compounds. Because some of these sub-
0.3-0.5 mg/kcal of phosphorus. Typical commercial cat
stances may lead to toxicity, caution is advised when
foods contain from 1 to 4% phosphorus on a dry matter
administering these agents at dosages above the recom-
basis and provide about 2.9 mg/kcal or more phosphorus.
 mended dose range.
Modified protein diets designed for cats with CKD may
The most commonly used intestinal phosphate bind-
contain as little as 0.5% phosphorous on a dry matter
 ing agents in dogs and cats contain aluminum as hydrox-
basis and provide about 0.9 mg/kcal of phosphorus.
ide, oxide or carbonate salts. Because of concern about
Approximately 4-6 weeks after imitating dietary phos-
 aluminum toxicity in humans, aluminum-containing
phorus restriction, the serum phosphorus concentration
binding agents are becoming more difficult to obtain.
should be reassessed to determine whether the treatment
Although aluminum-containing binding agents usu-
target has been met. Serum phosphorus levels typically
ally appear to be well tolerated and safe in dogs and
decline gradually as phosphorus leaches out of mul-
cats, aluminum toxicity has been reported in dogs with
tiple tissues in the body. Thus, the overall efficacy of
advanced CKD treated with high doses of aluminum-
dietary phosphorus restriction in reducing serum phos-
containing phosphate binding agents (Segev et al. 2008).
phorus concentrations may not occur until the patient
The presenting signs in these dogs were severe neu-
has been consuming the phosphorus-restricted diet for
romuscular in nature and were localized as a cerebral
several weeks. In a study in cats with CKD, the effect
and peripheral neuropathy and junctionopathy. Clini-
 of restricting dietary phosphorus intake was apparent
cal signs included decreased menace response, weakness,
after 28-49 days (Barber et al. 1999). Samples obtained
and ataxia, absence of patellar reflexes, decreased pelvic
for determinations of serum phosphorus concentration
limb withdrawal, obtundation, tetraparesis, and lateral
should be collected after a 12-hour fast to avoid post-
recumbency. Microcytosis was also noted in these dogs
prandial hyperphosphatemia. Sample hemolysis should
and may be potentially useful in early detection of alu-
be avoided because red blood cells contain substantial
 minum toxicity in dogs. Chelation therapy was necessary
quantities of phosphorus. If after 4-8 weeks, diet therapy
 to correct aluminum toxicity in these dogs.
alone fails to maintain the serum phosphorus concen-
 In order to minimize the risk of inducing aluminum
trations below the target value, addition of an intestinal
toxicity, alternate drugs that do not contain aluminum
phosphate binding agent should be considered to reduce
may be used or added to the aluminum-based phos-
serum phosphorus concentration below the target con-
phorus binding agents. These products include calcium
centration.
carbonate, calcium acetate, sevalemer hydrochloride,
or lanthanum carbonate. Sucralfate, a complex polya-
luminum hydroxide salt of sulfate used primarily for
Intestinal phosphorus binding agents
treatment of gastrointestinal ulcerations may also be
Intestinal phosphate binding agents induce formation
effective in binding phosphorus within the intestine.
 of nonabsorbable salts of phosphorus within the lumen
Experience with these drugs in dogs and cats are limited,
 of the gastrointestinal tract. The goal of such therapy
but hypercalcemia may be a problem with the calcium-
is to bind phosphorus contained in the diet, thus effec-
based products, particularly when administered with
tively lowering the absorbable phosphorus content of
calcitriol or between meals. The newest product, lan-
the ingested food. Because the target of such therapy is
 thanum carbonate and other salts of lanthanum appear 
diet phosphorus, it is essential that phosphate binding
to be quite effective and are associated with minimal side-
agents be given at or about meal time. If the patient is
effects. Lanthanum is reportedly minimally absorbed
fed more than one daily, the total daily dose of the phos-
from the intestinal tract, thus may be of reduced toxicity
phate binder should be divided and a portion adminis-
risk compared to aluminum salts. Lanthanum salts and
456  Upper urinary tract disorders
sevalemer hydrochloride are substantially more expen-
abdomen for evidence of radiodense tablets that have
sive than calcium or aluminum salts at the time of this
failed to dissolve.
writing-
While the dosage of lanthanum carbonate has not been
 Dosing of phosphorus binders is “to effect" which
 reported for dogs and cats, a reasonable starting dose
means that the dose is adjusted to assure that the serum
would be about 30 mg/kg/day divided with meals. Since
phosphorus target is achieved (see above). Therapy is
it is thought that lanthanum largely remains within the
usually begun at a dose at the lower end of the recom-
 lumen of the gut and is not absorbed, increasing dosage
mended dose range and adjusted upward as needed every
to achieve the therapeutic target seems to be a reasonable
46 weeks until the therapeutic target is reached. Differ-
goal. Until more information on use of these products
ent types of phosphate binding agents (i.e., aluminum-
in dogs and cats with CKD become available, substan-
based, calcium-based, lanthanum-based, or sevalemer)
tial increases in dosage should probably be avoided. In
may be combined in order to minimize the risk of over-
Europe, lanthanum carbonate is available in a flavored
dosage or toxicity. If dosage substantially exceeds the
liquid form intended for cats with CKD.
dosage range recommended for the binding agent, it is
Like lanthanum-based binders, the therapeutic advan-
best to add a different phosphorus binding agent rather 
tage of sevelamer hydrochloride (Renagel Tablets and
than risk inducing toxicity.
Capsules, Genzyme Corp.) is that it does not promote
Aluminum-containing intestinal phosphorus binding
 hypercalcemia or absorption of aluminum. However, it is
agents include aluminum hydroxide, aluminum carbon-
 more expensive than older phosphorus binding agents. In
 ate, and aluminum oxide. The recommended dose range
addition, concerns have been raised over its potential for
for these compounds is 30-100 mg/kg/day. They are
 inducing vitamin-K deficiency and hemorrhage. In pre-
available over-the-counter in liquid, tablet, or capsule
clinical studies in rats and dogs, sevalemer hydrochloride
forms from most pharmacies as antacid preparations. In
reduced vitamin D, E, K, and folic acid levels when given
humans, capsules and tablets are less effective than liq-
at doses of 6-100 times the recommended human dose.
uids, but liquid preparations may be quite unpalatable
 In clinical trials in humans, there has been no evidence of
to some dogs and cats. Chemical formulations of alu-
reduction in serum levels of vitamins in patients receiv-
minum hydroxide (USP) have also been used in powder
ing vitamin supplements. There is scant information on
form. This approach has the advantage of being relatively
the safety, effectiveness or dosage of sevalemer in dogs
free from taste or texture that might adversely affect the
and cats. On the basis of extrapolating the recommended
 patient's appetite.
dosage from humans, an initial dose of 30-135 mg/kg/day
 Calcium-based phosphorus-binding agents include
divided and given with meals may be considered. Because
calcium acetate, calcium carbonate, or calcium citrate.
the contents of Renagel expand in water, the manufac-
Because calcium-based products may promote clini-
turer recommends that tablets and capsules should be
cally significant hypercalcemia, it is recommended that 
swallowed intact and should not be crushed, chewed,
serum calcium concentrations be monitored intermit-
broken into pieces, or taken apart prior to administra-
tion. Sevelamer reportedly lowers total and low-density
be used in hypercalcemic patients. When indicated, they
lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations and elevated high-
may be used between meals as a source of additional
density lipoprotein cholesterollevels in humans (Akizawa
dietary calcium. As mentioned above, reduced dosages
et al. 2003).
of calcium carbonate and calcium acetate may be used
concurrent with aluminum-based binding agents to limit
Calcitriol therapy
risks ofboth hypercalcemia and aluminum toxicity. How-
Rationale for calcitriol therapy
ever, calcium citrate may promote absorption of alu-
minum and should therefore not be used in concert with
Patients with CKD typically have reduced levels of cal-
aluminum-based binding agents. Calcium acetate is the
citriol. Calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D), the most
 most effective calcium-based phosphorus-binding agent
active metabolite of vitamin D, results from hydroxyla-
as well as the agent least likely to induce hypercalcemia
tion of 25 hydroxycholecalciferol in the kidneys. As kid-
because it releases the least amount of calcium compared
ney function declines in patients with CKD, phosphate
to the amount of phosphorus it binds (Yudd and Llach
retention, increased levels of fibroblast growth factor-
2000). Doses from 60 to 90 mg/kg/day have been rec-
23, and hyperphosphatemia impair renal lα-hydroxylase
 ommended for calcium acetate and 90 to 150 mg/kg/day
activity, thus reducing production of calcitriol (Kazama
for calcium carbonate. Some calcium carbonate prepa-
et al. 2005). To some degree, this functional decline in
rations may not be effective because they fail to dissolve
      
well in the gastrointestinal tract; this may be investigated
phosphorus intake. However, as CKD progresses reduced
renal mass further limits the number of cells available to
Chronic kidney disease 457
undertake the hydroxylation of 25-hydroxyvitamin D
dation for or against use of calcitriol in cats with CKD
resulting in calcitriol deficiency (Gutierrez et al. 2005).
cannot be made at this time.
Calcitriol enhances intestinal calcium and phosphorus
Prior to initiating calcitriol therapy, serum phosphorus
uptake, inhibits PTH synthesis and release, and activates
 should be managed to achieve treatment targets described
receptors on many cells in the body. Calcitriol is very
previously. In addition, ionized calcium levels should
effective in reducing PTH levels in dogs and cats with
be confirmed to be within or below the normal range.
CKD (Nagode et al. 1996). Although PTH has been pro-
Since calcitriol may increase intestinal absorption of both
posed as a potential uremic toxin responsible for many
phosphorus and calcium, it is recommended to monitor
constitutional signs or uremia, the clinical benefits of
serum phosphorus and ionized calcium concentrations
 reducing PTH levels remains unclear. It has been sug-
     s
(    n d i 
and ionized hypercalcemia. If serum albumin concen-
be brighter and more alert and interactive with owners,
trations are within normal limits, total serum calcium
(2) show an improvement in appetite, (3) be more phys-
 may cautiously be used to monitor for hypercalcemia,
ically active than before treatment, and (4) have longer
but any increase in serum calcium concentration should
life-spans (Nagode et al. 1996). Further, these authors
be evaluated by measuring ionized calcium. Total serum
provide pathophysiological support for the purported
      sa 
benefits of calcitriol therapy through referenced studies
cium levels in dogs with CKD (Schenck and Chew, 2003).
from multiple species. In contrast, Finco and colleagues,
It is unclear whether renoliths containing calcium con-
 using parathyroidectomy combined with an experimen-
 stitute a relative contraindication to calcitriol therapy.
tal model of CKD, concluded that increased PTH levels
Calcitriol should initially be provided at a dose of
 m ju - su  A yu c-
in dogs (Finco et al. 1997). However; this study was not
necessary to achieve the desired effect of reduced renal
designed to directly address the effectiveness of calcitriol
mortality. Because it enhances intestinal absorption of
therapy in managing clinical signs of dogs and cats with
CKD.
with meals; administration of calcitriol in the evening on
 A masked, randomized, controlled clinical trial per-
an empty stomach reduces the risk of inducing hypercal-
formed at the University of Minnesota Veterinary Med-
cemia. Available dose forms are designed for humans and
ical Center confirmed the value of calcitriol in reduc-
contain relatively very large doses of calcitriol. A com-
ing mortality in dogs with IRIS CKD stages III and IV
 pounding pharmacy is necessary to prepare formulations
(Polzin, unpublished data). The survival benefit appeared
in appropriate dosages for use in dogs and cats. Over-
to result from reduced progression of CKD. These find-
dosage of calcitriol is potentially dangerous and should
ings are consistent with results of recent studies in human
be avoided due to the induction of hypercalcemia with
patients with CKD which confirmed a similar survival
possible renal injury (hypercalcemic nephropathy).
benefit of calcitriol therapy (Cheng and Coyne 2007;
Early detection of hypercalcemia, should it occur, is
Shoben et al. 2008). Further, studies in humans have
important to limit the extent of renal injury. However,
shown that calcitriol deficiency may predict shorter sur-
the onset of hypercalcemia after initiation of vitamin D
vival in humans with CKD (Ravani, 2009). However,
therapy is unpredictable (i.e., it may occur after days to
a randomized clinical trial performed in cats revealed
 months of treatment). Therefore, continued monitoring
equivocal benefits for calcitriol in altering the course of
of serum calcium, phosphorus, and creatinine concen-
CKD (Polzin, unpublished data). Neither the dog nor
trations are necessary to detect hypercalcemia, hyper-
cat study could confirm nor refute the proposed clini-
phosphatemia, or deteriorating renal function before
cal benefits of calcitriol therapy beyond enhanced sur-
irreversible renal damage ensues. Serum creatinine, phos-
vival in dogs. Possible mechanisms by which calcitriol
phorus and ionized calcium concentrations should be
 may influence progression of CKD include systemic acti-
 measured 2, 5, and 8 weeks after initiating therapy to
vation of vitamin D receptors, downregulation of the
assure appropriate dosing, stable renal function and the
renin angiotensin system, and reducing podocyte loss
absence of hyperphosphatemia and hypercalcemia. Use
associated with glomerular hypertrophy (Andress 2006;
 of calcium-containing phosphorus binding agents, par-
Freundlich et al. 2008; Porsti 2008).
 ticularly calcium carbonate, and other oral calcium sup-
plements predispose to hypercalcemia in patients receiv-
 ing calcitriol. If serum phosphorus and ionized calcium
Guidelines for using calcitriol
concentrations are well controlled after 8 weeks of cal-
 r  s     
citriol therapy, serum creatinine, phosphorus, and ion-
 stages II and IV and possibly IRIS CKD stage II to slow
ized calcium concentrations should ideally be monitored
 progressive deterioration in renal function. A recommen-
every 1-2 months throughout calcitriol therapy. The
458  Upper urinary tract disorders
product of serum calcium and phosphorus concentra-
acid stress resulting from such factors as diarrhea,
tions (in mg/dL) should not exceed 60; the goal is to
 dehydration, or respiratory acidosis, (4) limiting skeletal 
attain values between 42 and 52 (Kates et al. 1997)
damage (demineralization and inhibited skeletal growth)
Calcitriol's rapid onset (about 1 day) and short dura-
resulting from bone buffering, and (5) rectifying adverse
tion of action (half-life less than 1 day) permits rapid con-
effects of severe acidosis on the cardiovascular system
trol of unwanted hypercalcemia. If hypercalcemia devel-
(impaired myocardial contractility and enhanced veno-
ops, it is advisable to stop treatment completely rather
constriction) (Mitch 1997; Adrogue and Madias 1998).
than reduce the dose. Therapy may be re-instituted with
 In addition, evidence in rodents suggest that limiting
 a reduced dosage or altered dosing strategy when serum
metabolic acidosis may slow down the progression of
calcium concentration returns to normal and serum
CKD (Nath 1998; Wesson and Simoni 2009).
phosphorus concentration returns to target concentra-
Studies in rodents with reduced renal mass have shown
tion. When calcitriol therapy is associated with hyper-
 that consuming an acid-inducing diet may promote pro-
calcemia, the daily dose may be doubled and given every
gressive renal injury (Nath 1998; Wesson and Simoni
other day (Hostutler et al. 2006). This approach is thought
Aq Panuedonne si Anju euai aaissaod su (o0g
to be less likely to induce hypercalcemia because the effect
increased renal cortical H+ content, and may occur in
of calcitriol on intestinal calcium absorption is related to
this model even when the increased acid load does not
the duration of exposure of intestinal cells to calcitriol.
alter systemic acid-base measurements. Administration
Pulse therapy has been advocated to control renal
 of alkali has been shown to correct the progressive decline
secondary hyperparathyroidism when plasma PTH con-
 in renal function. A possible mechanism underlying pro-
centration is markedly elevated or when standard ther-
 gressive renal injury in this model is that increased renal
apy with calcitriol fails to normalize plasma PTH levels
(Nagode et al. 1996). In this approach, patients are given
acid load may activate the alternative complement path-
20 ng/kg of calcitriol twice per week in the evening on an
way, leading to tubulointerstitial injury (Nath 1998).
However, the applicability of this model to canine and
than 1-2 months to suppress resistant hyperparathy-
feline renal diseases is unclear. When cats with induced
roidism. If successful, calcitriol may then be given at the
renal disease were fed an acidifying diet, evidence of pro-
standard daily dose.
 gressive renal disease was not apparent (James, unpub-
  yo ss n
lished data).
been suggested as one of the possible justifications for cal-
In a study in cats with naturally occurring CKD,
citriol therapy, the value of monitoring serum PTH activ-
metabolic acidosis reportedly occurred in less than 10%
ity during calcitriol therapy is unclear because the clini-
Jo 0s pauoeodde inq  e pue z saeis um sieo jo
cal benefits of suppressing hyperparathyroidism remain
cats with overt signs of uremia (Eliot and Barber 1998).
unproven. In the Minnesota canine study that confirmed
 Based on these findings, it appears that only a minority
 a survival benefit arising from therapy with calcitriol,
of cats with clinically stable IRIS CKD stages 2 and 3 are
dosage of calcitriol was increased up to 5 ng/kg/day to
likely to require routine alkalinization therapy. However,
lower PTH values into the normal range, unless hyper-
 the decision to intervene with alkalinization therapy
calcemia ensued. If hypercalcemia developed, the dosage
of calcitriol was reduced. On the basis of this schema for
patient's acid-base status. Unfortunately, no evidence-
establishing a dosage for calcitriol, the mean calcitriol
based intervention threshold for treating metabolic
dosage used in this clinical trial was 1.9 ng/kg/day.
acidosis is available for dogs and cats. In studies
performed at the University of Minnesota we have been
unable to demonstrate adverse clinical effects of mild to
Treating metabolic acidosis
moderate chronic metabolic acidosis in cats with induced
Minimizing metabolic acidosis by the administration
CKD ( James, unpublished data). In absence of clear clin-
 of alkali and/or feeding diets that do not produce an
ical evidence, we recommend considering alkalinization
acid effect may play an important role in management
therapy when blood gas analysis confirms plasma bicar-
of patients with CKD. Minimizing renal acidosis may
bonate values remain below 15 mmol/L in well hydrated
benefit patients with CKD in several ways, including
dogs and cats with CKD. However, for patients with
(1) ameliorating signs of uremic acidosis, including
metabolic acidosis associated with a blood pH below 7.10,
anorexia, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness,
more immediate parenteral intervention with sodium
and weight loss, (2) minimizing the catabolic effects
bicarbonate should be considered to increase the blood
of metabolic acidosis on protein metabolism,
(3)
pH above 7.20 (Sabatini and Kurtzman 2009). Low serum
enhancing the patient's capacity to adapt to additional
 or plasma total CO2 values obtained by autoanalyzer
Chronic kidney disease  459
 s o    or sn
issue in cats with IRIS CKD stage 4 because the marked
because falsely low total CO2 readings may occur when
reduction in GFR is more likely to promote potassium
blood collection tubes are not fully flled or are exposed
 retention and hyperkalemia. Estimates of the prevalence
to air while awaiting analysis (James et al. 1997).
of hypokalemia in IRIS CKD stages 2 and 3 cats are
Treatment options for alkalinization therapy include
in the range of 20-30% (DiBartola et al. 1987; Lulich
feding a pH-neutral renal diet and/or oral administra-
et al. 1992; Elliot and Barber 1998). Since potassium
tion of sodium bicarbonate or potassium citrate. Most
leaves the cells as hypokalemia develops, total body potas-
renal diets are neutral to slightly alkalinizing in effect and
sium depletion is likely to be at least as common as
 are an appropriate first step in mitigating metabolic aci-
hypokalemia (Theisen et al. 1997). The mechanisms
dosis. When several weeks of diet therapy alone fails to
underlying development of hypokalemia in cats with
 ameliorate the metabolic acidosis, alkalinization therapy
CKD remain unclear, but inadequate potassium intake,
should be considered. In general, alkali should be admin-
increased urinary loss, and enhanced activation of the
istered as several smaller doses over the day rather than a
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system due to dietary salt
single large daily dose in order to minimize fluctuations
restriction may play a role (Buranakarl et al. 2004).
in blood pH.
While increasing the potassium content of renal diets
Sodium bicarbonate is the most commonly used
has reduced the incidence of overt clinical signs of
alkalinizing agent for patients with metabolic acidosis.
 hypokalemia, hypokalemia remains a common labora-
Because the effects of gastric acid on oral sodium bicar-
tory finding in cats with CKD. In addition, the antihy-
bonate are unpredictable, the dosage should be individu-
alized for each patient. Unfortunately, many dogs and cats
in cats with CKD (Henik et al. 1997).
find sodium bicarbonate powder distasteful when admin-
Hypokalemia and potassium depletion may affect the
istered in food or water. A more acceptable solution is to
kidneys or muscles of cats with CKD. Diets low in
administer alkali in tablet form. Sodium bicarbonate is
 potassium and high in acid content have been impli-
available as 5 and 10 grain tablets.
cated in impairing renal function and promoting devel-
Potassium citrate may offer the advantage, especially in
 opment of lymphoplasmacytic tubulointerstitial lesions
cats, of allowing for the simultaneous treatment of both
in cats (Dow et al. 1987; Dow et al. 1990; DiBartola
hypokalemia and acidosis with a single drug. Metabolic
et al. 1993; Adams et al. 1994; Theisen et al. 1997).
acidosis when accompanied by potassium depletion or
Potassium depletion may result in reduced renal blood
magnesium depletion may respond poorly to alkali ther-
flow and GFR as a consequence of angiotensin II and
 apy alone. However, in that potassium doses required
thromboxane-mediated renal vasoconstriction. In addi-
for adequate correction of hypokalemia may exceed the
tion, hypokalemia may promote polyuria by impairing
citrate dose required to correct acidosis, the response to
renal responsiveness to antidiuretic hormone, and by
therapy should be monitored to avoid excessive alkalin-
stimulating the brain thirst centers through increased lev-
ization. Starting doses of 40-60 mg/kg every 8-12 hours
els of angiotensin Il. Hypokalemic polymyopathy, char-
are recommended.
acterized by generalized muscle weakness and cervical
The response to alkalinization therapy should be deter-
ventroflexion, is a well-recognized, although increasingly
mined by performing blood gas analysis 10-14 days after
less common complication of CKD in cats.
initiating therapy Ideally, blood should be collected just
While there is a consensus of opinion that cats with
prior to administration of the drug. Plasma bicarbonate
hypokalemia should receive potassium supplementation,
 or blood gas analysis should be used to assess response
the value of “prophylactic” potassium supplementation
to treatment 2-4 weeks after initiating therapy. Therapy
in normokalemic cats yet to be established. Higher potas-
should be adjusted to maintain serum bicarbonate levels
sium diets combined with oral potassium supplementa-
ideally between 18 and 25 in dogs and 15 and 22 in cats.
tion has been advocated for cats with CKD in order to
A suggested initial dose of sodium bicarbonate is 8-12
 prevent or treat hypokalemia and the renal and muscu-
mg/kg body weight given every 8-12 hours. Urine pH is
lar consequences of potassium depletion. While potas-
an unreliable means of assessing the need for or response
sium supplementation is unlikely to be medically harm-
to treatment and is not recommended for this purpose.
ful to polyuric, normokalemic cats, administration of
-anq essun ue ssou e un lno u
den on both the cat and the cat owner. Potassium sup-
Treating potassium disorders
       s
Although rare in dogs, potassium depletion and
 CKD stage 4, particularly in cats receiving angiotensin-
hypokalemia are relatively common in cats with IRIS
converting enzyme inhibitors or other drugs that may
CKD stages 2 and 3. Hypokalemia becomes less of an
promote hyperkalemia.
460  Upper urinary tract disorders
In general, oral replacement is the safest and preferred
However, this study was limited by the small number
route for administering potassium. Parenteral therapy
of cats enrolled. In addition, median muscle potassium
 is generally reserved for patients requiring emergency
 content did increase in the potassium supplemented cats
reversal of hypokalemia or for patients that cannot or
from 328 to 402 mEq/kg, a value close to the value of
will not accept oral therapy. Up to 30 mEq/L of potas-
424 mEq/L established for normal cat muscle. While the
sium chloride may be added to fluids to be administered
value of providing supplemental potassium to cats with
subcutaneously.
normal serum potassium concentrations has not been
Gluconate or citrate salts of potassium may be used
established, it is clear that muscle potassium and proba-
for oral supplementation. However, potassium chloride
bly total body potassium stores are likely to be reduced in
is not recommended because of its lack of palatabil-
cats with CKD. On the basis of current data, neither a rec-
ity and acidifying nature. Potassium gluconate may be
 ommendation for nor against routine supplementation
administered orally as tablets, flavored gel, or in a palat-
 of potassium can be supported.
able powder form (Tumil-K, Daniels Pharmaceuticals,
Hypokalemia may be more likely to develop when
Inc.). Depending on the size of the cat and severity of
 diets that are acidifying and restricted in magnesium con-
hypokalemia, potassium gluconate is usually provided at
tent are fed. Therefore, they should generally be avoided
a dose of 2-6 mEq per cat per day. Acidosis is a major
 in cats with CKD. In addition, intensive fluid therapy
risk factor for development of hypokalemia and therefore
 during uremic crises, particularly with potassium defi-
acid-base status should be determined and normalized
cient fluids, may promote hypokalemia in cats or dogs
 that were not previously hypokalemic. Therefore, serum
rate solution (Polycitra?-K Syrup, Baker Norton) is an
potassium concentrations should be monitored during
excellent alternative that has the advantage of providing
fluid therapy and maintenance fluids should be supple-
simultaneous alkalinization therapy. Potassium citrate is
 mented with potassium chloride to prevent iatrogenic
initially given at a dose of 40-60 mg/kg/day divided into
 hypokalemia (concentrations of 13-20 mEq/L are appro-
2 or 3 doses. If muscle weakness is present, it usually
 priate for maintenance fluids). Care should be taken to
resolves within 1-5 days after initiating parenteral or oral
assure that potassium is not administered intravenously
at a rate exceeding 0.5 mEq/kg/hour.
should be adjusted based on the clinical response of
the patient and serum potassium determinations. Serum
Maintaining hydration
 potassium concentration should initially be monitored
every 7-14 days and the dosage adjusted accordingly to
Fluid balance in patients with polyuria is maintained
establish the final maintenance dosage. In patients with
by compensatory polydipsia. If water consumption is
insufficient to compensate for polyuria, dehydration will
itor serum potassium concentrations every 24-48 hours
result. Dehydration is a relatively common complica-
during the initial phase of therapy. It is unclear whether
tion of CKD and in patients with clinical evidence of
all cats require long-term potassium supplementation;
dehydration, intervention to correct and prevent dehy-
however, preliminary evidence suggests that such therapy
 dration is indicated. Cats with CKD appear to be particu-
may be required by at least some older cats with CKD.
larly susceptible to chronic dehydration, perhaps because
Prophylactic supplementation of low oral daily doses
the magnitude of compensatory polydipsia is inadequate.
of potassium (2 mEq/day) has been recommended for
However, lack of adequate access to good quality drinking
cats with CKD (Dow and Fettman 1992). This recom-
water, certain environmental conditions and intercurrent
Paandun pah se aui uo paseq aq oi sieadde uoepu
illnesses that limit fluid intake or promote fluid losses
hypothesis that in some cats with CKD, hypokalemia and
(e.g- pyrexia, vomiting, or diarrhea) may also promote
potassium depletion might promote a self-perpetuating
dehydration.
cycle of declining renal function, metabolic acidosis, and
 Chronic dehydration may promote decreased appetite,
continuing potassium losses. It is proposed that sup-
lethargy, weakness, constipation, and prerenal azotemia,
 plementation may stabilize renal function before potas-
and predispose to acute kidney injury. Additional loss of
sium depletion exacerbates the disease. However, results
-uod e si Aunju Aaup anoe oi anp uououny Aaup
of a recent clinical trial suggested that in cats that ini-
tially important cause for progression of CKD. Owners
tially had normal serum potassium concentrations but
 of pets with CKD should be warned that fluid losses
 depleted muscle potassium pools, daily supplementation
due to vomiting or diarrhea that might not present a
for 6 months with 4 mEq of potassium gluconate was not
threat to an animal with normal kidneys, could lead to a
demonstrably superior to providing sodium gluconate in 
 deterioration in kidney function or precipitate uremic
restoring muscle potassium stores ( Theisen et al. 1997).
crisis in a patient with CKD.
Chronic kidney disease   461
The goal of therapy is to correct and prevent dehydra-
in both species have identified the presence of proteinuria
tion and its clinical effects. Acute correction of fluid needs
as an indicator of increased mortality ( Jacob et al. 2005;
may be administered intravenously or subcutaneously,
 Syme et al. 2006). Studies in humans have consistently
depending of the severity of dehydration and specific
found that reduction in proteinuria is associated with a
needs of the individual patient. Long-term administra-
slowing of the progression of CKD (Abbate et al. 2006).
tion of subcutaneous fluid therapy may be considered
However, evidence that reducing proteinuria slows pro-
for patients with signs consistent with chronic or recur-
gression of CKD in dogs and cats is scant (Grodecki et al.
rent dehydration. The principal benefits of subcutaneous
1997; Grauer et al. 2000; King et al. 2006). Nonetheless,
e pue aade paaod nu ader Pi
 current standards of care suggest that dogs and cats in
and reduced constipation. The decision to recommend
IRIS CKD stages 2, 3, and 4 with urine protein:creatinine
administration of subcutaneous fluids should be made
ratios greater than 0.5 and 0.4, respectively, and dogs and
on a case-by-case basis. Not every patient with CKD
        
requires or will benefit from fluid therapy. While a sub-
 greater than 2.0 should be treated for proteinuria (Lees 
et al. 2005).
 Standard management for proteinuria in dogs and cats
require fluid therapy. The owner's comfort with home
with CKD has been to initiate therapy with a renal diet
administration of subcutaneous fluids should also be
and administer an ACEl with the therapeutic goal of 
considered. While inexpensive, administration of fluids
reducing the urine protein:creatinine ratio at least in half
subcutaneously at home does require time and may cause
or, ideally, into the normal range. Dosage for the ACE
stress on the owner-pet relationship. Inappropriate fluid
inhibitors enalapril and benazepril in dogs and cats with
administration also has the potential to promote hyper-
CKD is 0.25-0.5 mg/kg given orally every 12-24 hours
 natremia, hypokalemia, hypertension and fluid overload.
(Plumb 2008). Benazepril has been advocated preferen-
For long-term administration, a balanced electrolyte 
tially over enalapril because benazepril's biliary excretion
solution (e.g-, lactated Ringer's solution) is administered
may compensate somewhat for reduced renal clearance
subcutaneously every one to three days as needed. The
in patients with CKD.
volume to be administered depends upon patient size
 In proteinuric humans, therapy of proteinuria may be
with a typical cat receiving about 75-100 mL per dose. If
 enhanced by addition of angiotensin II receptor block-
the clinical response of the patient is suboptimal, the dose
ers and/or anti-aldosterone drugs such as eplerenone or
may cautiously be increased. However, it is possible to
spironolactone to ACEI therapy (Campbell et al. 2003;
induce fluid overload patients with excessive administra-
 Remuzzi et al. 2005; Sato et al. 2005). Angiotensin recep-
tion of fluids. In addition, sodium-containing fluids used
tor blockers and ACEI differ in the mechanism by which
for subcutaneous therapy do not provide electrolyte-free
they inhibit angiotensin I1. The ACEI block conversion
water. A more physiologically appropriate approach is to
of angiotensin I to angiotensin II. However, angiotensin
provide water via a feeding tube. This approach may also
I1 formation is not completely inhibited because it can
be easier for clients. Because the bulk of evidence suggests
also be generated by a non-ACE-dependent pathway such
excessive sodium intake may be harmful to the kidneys,
as by the enzyme chymase. Also, because bradykinin is
recommendations for long-term sodium administration
normally degraded by ACE, ACEI therapy is associated
in any form should be carefully considered (Weir and
with elevated bradykinin levels. Bradykinin is a vasodila-
Fink 2005). Further, excessive salt intake may reduce the
  s    e n
effectiveness of antihypertensive therapy.
nitric oxide production. Angiotensin receptor antago-
 Response to long-term subcutaneous fluid therapy
nists block the type 1 receptor, but leave type 2 recep-
should be monitored by serially assessing hydration sta-
tor effects unopposed, which appears to be important
tus, clinical signs, and renal function. If a detectable
in vasodilation. In rats with nephropathy, angiotensin I1
improvement in clinical signs and or renal function does
antagonism has been reported to normalize proteinuria,
not accompany fluid therapy, the need for long-term
 eliminate inflammatory cell infltration, and ameliorate
therapy should be re-assessed.
glomerular and tubular structural changes (Remuzzi
et al. 2002). A combination of an angiotensin recep-
 tor antagonist and ACEI has been suggested as a way
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
(ACEl) and managing proteinuria in patients
to maximize blockade of the renin-angiotensin system
by affecting both the bioavailability of angiotensin I1
With CKD
and also by affecting its activity at the receptor level
Proteinuria is recognized as an important factor promot-
(Hilgers and Mann 2002). Each type of drug has been
ing progression of CKD in dogs and cats. Clinical studies
shown to be effective in reducing proteinuria and slowing
462   Upper urinary tract disorders
progression of renal disease. However, in experimen-
renal, ocular, neurological and cardiac complications.
tal models and clinical models in humans, combination
The importance of hypertension in patients with kidney
therapy has proven more effective than either drug alone
disease is that preexisting CKD increases the vulnerability
(Campbell et al. 2003). In humans, there does not appear 
of the kidneys to hypertensive injury (Bidani and Grif-
to be an increase in toxicity or adverse events with com-
fin 2004). Elevated blood pressure has been reported to
bination therapy (Rosenberg 2003). Whether combina-
be an independent risk factor for progression of CKD in 
tion therapy is safe, effective, and provides a therapeu-
dogs; although proteinuria was not included in the statis-
sieo pue shop iog pauanap aq oi spaau sreueape on
tical model used to confirm this association ( Jacob et al.
with CKD. However, the angiotensin II receptor blocker
 2003). In general, proteinuria appears to increase the risk
losartan is not metabolized to the active metabolite and
 of adverse outcomes associated with arterial hyperten-
therefore has little activity in dogs (Papich 2007). It is not
sion (Syme et al. 2006; Jepson et al. 2007).
known whether the same is true of irbesartan, but rec-
While reduction in blood pressure reduces the risk
ommended dosages for irbesartan are much higher than
 of hypertensive organ injury in hypertensive humans,
 those recommended for humans, suggesting a potential
firm evidence that lowering blood pressure will prevent
problem with conversion of this drug as well.
or ameliorate the renal and extrarenal complications of
Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system limits both
arterial hypertension in dogs is lacking. However, the
 angiotensin II and aldosterone while retarding progres-
clinical benefit of limiting arterial blood pressure has
sion of renal disease. Recent studies have implicated
been demonstrated in cats. Subcutaneous administra-
aldosterone as an important pathogenic factor in this
tion of the antihypertensive drug hydralazine reduced
process (Epstein 2001; Hostetter et al. 2001b). Selec-
 the prevalence of seizures developing as a consequence
tive blockade of aldosterone, independent of renin-
of hypertension following renal transplantation in cats
angiotensin blockade, reduces proteinuria and glomeru-
(Kyles et al. 1999). Further, in an induced model of hyper-
lar lesions in rats with experimental kidney disease.
tensive renal kidney disease, only 2 of 10 cats receiving
Where blockade of the renin-angiotensin system ame-
the antihypertensive agent amlodipine developed evi-
liorates proteinuria and glomerular injury, selective
 dence of hypertensive retinal lesions compared to 7 of 10
reinfusion of aldosterone restores proteinuria and
cats that received placeboes (Mathur et al. 2002). Higher
glomerular lesions despite continued blockade of the
blood pressure is associated with increased proteinuria in
dogs, cats and humans with CKD, and, since proteinuria
independent pathogenic role for aldosterone as a medi-
-osse sn inu dean aassaid aod oi seade
ator of progressive renal disease. Aldosterone appears to
tion may provide a valid justification for lowering blood
 promote progressive renal injury through both hemody-
pressure.
namic effects and direct cellular actions (Epstein 2001). It 
appears to have fibrogenic properties in the kidneys, per-
Indications for treatment
haps in part by promoting production of the profibrotic
 Unless there is evidence for hypertension-related organ
studies have shown that the aldosterone-receptor antago-
 injury (e.g., retinal lesions or neurological signs) or the
nist eplerenone may attenuate proteinuria and renal dam-
systolic blood pressure is greater than 200 mmHg, the
age, independent of its effect on blood pressure. While
 decision to initiate anti-hypertensive therapy should gen-
ACEI initially causes an acute reduction in aldosterone
erally not be considered an emergency. Before initiating
concentration, this effect is not sustained. It has been
therapy for arterial hypertension, the elevation in blood
proposed that use of aldosterone-receptor antagonists in
 pressure should be confirmed on the basis of at least
addition to ACEl will have additional benefits toward
three distinct determinations of blood pressure, ideally
 protecting the kidneys (Epstein 2001). However, the role
collected over several days to several weeks. Every effort
 of this form of therapy has yet to be established in dogs
should be made to minimize the risk that measured eleva-
and cats.
Consult Chapter 42 entitled “Proteinuria" for addi-
effect, rather than a sustained elevation in blood pressure
tional information on management of proteinuria in
(Belew et al. 1999). Consult Chapter 13 for information
 dogs and cats with CKD.
on how to obtain accurate blood pressure measurements.
Patients with IRIS CKD stage 24 having arterial
Managing hypertension in patients with CKD
blood pressures persistently exceeding 160/100 (arte-
-ienl n paiapisuoo a Pinous (1 seis annssaid ie
Rationale for treatment
 ment because available evidence suggests that their con-
Arterial hypertension is a relatively common complica-
current azotemic CKD may place them at increased
 pau aaq se ue si pe sop  a go uo
 risk for sustaining additional renal injury or developing
Chronic kidney disease  463
complications associated with elevated blood pressure
should largely be managed according to their effective-
(Stiles et al. 1994; Kyles et al. 1999; Mathur et al. 2002;
ness in reducing proteinuria. It is unclear whether they
Jacob et al. 2003; Lees et al. 2005; Brown et al. 2007b). In
 should routinely be included in management of hyper-
 patients with IRIS CKD stage Iand blood pressure values
tension in non-proteinuric cats. Dosage for the ACE
persistently exceeding 180/120 mmHg (arterial pressure
inhibitors enalapril and benazepril in dogs and cats with
stage Ill), antihypertensive therapy should be considered
CKD is 0.25-0.5 mg/kg given orally every 12-24 hours
(Brown et al. 2007b).
(Plumb 2008). Benazepril has been advocated preferen-
tially over enalapril because benazepril's biliary excretion
 may compensate somewhat for reduced renal clearance
General goals and guidelines for treatment of
in patients with CKD. Additionally, use of vasodilators
elevated blood pressure in patients with CKD
in management of hypertension may result in reflex acti-
 The optimum endpoint for antihypertensive therapy has
vation of the renin angiotensin system. Minimizing the
not been established for dogs and cats with CKD. In the
effects of an activated renin angiotensin system using
absence of such information, treatment for arterialhyper-
 agents such as ACE inhibitors or anti-aldosterone drugs
tension should be initiated cautiously with the goal of
such as spironolactone may be useful in promoting effec-
reducing blood pressure to at least below 150/95 mmHg.
tiveness of vasodilator therapy.
Except in patients with acute, severe ocular or neurolog-
Amlodipine, a dihydropyridine calcium channel
ical lesions, rapid reduction in blood pressure may not
blocker, preferentially vasodilates preglomerular renal
be not necessary. Satisfactory blood pressure control is
arterioles which theoretically could increase glomeru-
 often achieved quickly in cats; however, it may take weeks
lar hypertension. However, CCB have additional reno-
to months to achieve satisfactory blood pressure control
   nd   d 
in dogs.
limiting renal growth, by reducing mesangial entrap-
ACEI such as enalapril and benazepril, and the calcium
ment of macromolecules, and by attenuating the mito-
channel blocker amlodipine are the mainstays of antihy-
genic effects of diverse cytokines and growth factors (e.g-)
pertensive therapy in dogs and cats. These drugs may have
platelet-derived growth factor and platelet-activating fac-
unique renoprotective benefits and are therefore appro-
   s n    
    so  
inhibit proliferation of mesangial cells. However, clini-
patients.
cal trials in humans have provided conflicting results as
Activation of the renin-angiotensin system and
to the renoprotective effect of CCB beyond their anti-
impaired renal autoregulation are characteristic of most
 hypertensive effects. In addition, studies on amlodipine
 generalized renal diseases. In this setting, activation of the
administered to normal dogs suggests that it may activate
renin-angiotensin system is associated with preferential
the renin-angiotensin system (Atkins et al. 2007). Con-
vasoconstriction of the postglomerular arterioles. While
trolled studies on the renoprotective effects of amlodip-
this enhances GFR, it also promotes intraglomerular
ine in dogs and cats have not been published. However,
 hypertension and hyperperfusion as well as proteinuria.
clinical experience indicates that they are effective antihy-
 Further, exposure of glomerular capillaries to increases
 pertensive agents in dogs and cats with CKD. However,
in systemic arterial blood pressure can exacerbate these
 in contrast to observations in other species, amlodip-
adverse effects of activation of the renin-angiotensin sys-
tem. While ACEl generally produce a relatively limited
with CKD, presumably due to the profound reduction
reduction in blood pressure in dogs and cats (Brown et al.
 in blood pressure that typically accompanies their use in
2001, 2003), they are renoprotective by virtue of reducing
cats (Jepson et al. 2007).
 intraglomerular pressure and proteinuria and by limiting
 Amlodipine is the antihypertensive of choice for most
the profibrotic actions of angiotensin ll on the kidneys.
cats with CKD because it is usually highly effective, has
The ACEl enalapril has been reported to reduce sever-
few side-effects, and has a relative rapid onset. Dosage
ity of renal lesions that develop in dogs with surgically
for cats less than 5 kg is 0.625 mg/day and 1.25 mg/day
reduced renal mass (Brown et al. 2003). Further, in dogs
for cats greater than 5 kg. These dosages may be dou-
with a form of hereditary nephritis, a glomerulopathy,
bled (or given twice daily) if further reduction in blood
enalapril significantly reduced proteinuria and increased
pressure is required. Amlodipine typically reduces sys-
survival (Grodecki et al. 1997). In a group of dogs with
tolic blood pressure by about 30-50 mmHg within the
diverse glomerulopathies, enalapril significantly reduced
first 1-2 months of therapy in cats with CKD (Elliot et al.
proteinuria (Grauer et al. 2000).
2001; Mathur et al. 2002).
ACEI should probably always be included in the treat-
Managing hypertension in dogs is more challenging
ment of hypertension in dogs with CKD and dogs and
than in cats. Dogs typically require two or more drugs
cats with proteinuria. In proteinuric patients, their dosing
for adequate control of hypertension. In most instances,
464   Upper urinary tract disorders
combination therapy is initiated with an ACEl (dosage
tic course with histamine H2-receptor antagonists and
above) and amlodipine. The starting dosage for amlodip-
sucralfate. Improvement in hematocrit and reduction in
ine is 0.1-0.2 mg/kg given once daily. Dosage may be
increased as needed up to 0.6 mg/kg daily (once per day or
testinal blood loss as a contributor to the patient's anemia.
divided q 12 hours). If this combination fails to maintain
Iron deficiency is relatively common in dogs and cats
the systolic blood pressure below 150 mmHg, adding a
with CKD. In a recent study, the serum iron concentra-
third drug to this combination may be considered. While
tions of 3 of 6 CKD dogs and 3 of 7 CKD cats were below
 there is no uniform consensus as to which drug or drugs
the reference range; transferrin saturations were less than
to use next, a variety of options exist (consult the chap-
20% (Cowgill et al. 1998). Whether this is related pri-
ter of this text entitled "Hypertension"). Hydralazine has
marily to inadequate intake and absorption of iron or
 been effective in some dogs in this setting.
increased losses of iron due to gastrointestinal blood loss
Upon initiating antihypertensive therapy, blood pres-
is unclear. Unfortunately, iron status can be difficult to
sure should generally be measured every 1-2 weeks to
assess in dogs and cats. Serum iron levels can be used
assess response to therapy and to determine if dosage
to screen for both iron deficiency and anemia of chronic
adjustments may be needed. Upon reaching the ther-
 inflammatory disease as contributing factors in the diag-
apeutic endpoint, blood pressure should be monitored
nostic evaluation of anemia.
at least every three months to assess continued response
Administration of iron may be appropriate for iron
and compliance with treatment recommendations. Mon-
deficiency and when administering EPO to enhance red
itoring also minimizes the risk that hypotension will
blood cell production. Ferrous sulfate may be admin-
occur; however, hypotension is an uncommon compli-
istered orally or iron dextran may be administered by
cation of therapy for arterial hypertension. Clinical signs
intramuscular injection. While parenteral administra-
of hypotension in dogs and cats may include somno-
tion of iron may be associated with a small risk of ana-
lence, lethargy, weakness, and decreased responsiveness
 phylaxis, shunting of iron to reticuloendothelial storage,
to commands or stimulation. Impaired renal blood flow
 and iron overload, it is likely the most effective way to
and prerenal azotemia may also develop. Development of
rapidly restore iron levels when beginning EPO ther-
these signs in a patient receiving antihypertensive therapy
 apy. Although serum iron levels and transferrin satu-
should prompt evaluation of arterial blood pressure.
ration should be monitored to adjust therapy starting
Consult Chapter 68, “Hypertension" for additional
doses of iron sulfate of 50-100 mg/day for cats and
information on management of arterial hypertension.
100-300 mg/day for dogs have been recommended. Oral
Managing Anemia in CKD
nal upset and diarrhea, so small divided doses may be 
General guidelines for minimizing anemia
preferable.
In addition to iron deficiency, other nutritional abnor-
of CKD
malities may promote anemia. Protein malnutrition, and
Multiple factors may contribute to development of ane-
-o pue pie oue eseld u suq juepune s
mia in CKD, including iatrogenic and spontaneous blood
mone concentrations, is known to cause suboptimal ery-
loss, poor nutrition, reduced red blood cellifespan, and
thropoiesis and anemia. Similar changes occur in human
inadequate renal production of EPO. Optimum thera-
 patients and may reflect mild protein/calorie malnutri-
peutic response results from addressing all of the factors
tion commonly present in advanced CKD. Although they
that contribute to the patient's anemia.
have not been examined in dogs and cats, deficiencies
Chronic low-grade gastrointestinal blood loss can pro-
in riboflavin (vitamin B2), cobalamin (vitamin B12),
mote moderate to severe anemia in patients with CKD
folate, niacin or pyridoxine (vitamin B6) might theoret-
 that otherwise may have sufficient endogenous EPO pro-
ically induce nutritional anemia. Vitamin status cannot
duction to maintain their hematocrit values at a higher
be easily determined in dogs and cats; however, defi-
value. These patients may have overt gastrointestinal
ciencies should be suspected in patients with persistent
signs or melena, but they are not consistently present.
anorexia, protein/calorie malnutrition or gastrointesti-
The decline in hematocrit is typically much more rapid
nal malabsorption. In addition, some drugs may predis-
than with other causes for anemia of CKD. Iron defi-
pose the patient to nutritional anemia even when dietary
ciency and an elevation in BUN/creatinine ratio above
intake is normal. For example, therapy with trimetho-
what is expected in context of the patient's diet may pro-
 prim or methotrexate may interfere with cellular folate
vide indirect evidence of occult gastrointestinal blood
 metabolism. Hypersegmentation of the polymorphonu-
loss. Confirming gastrointestinal hemorrhage is often
clear leukocytes may provide a clinical indication of vita-
min B12 or folate deficiency.
Chronic kidney disease  465
Nutritional deficiencies can be minimized through
fer of infectious agents, and decreased life span of trans-
timely initiation of proper diet modifications and, if nec-
fused.
essary, use of dietary supplements. In addition to min-
imizing renal anemia, preventing protein/calorie mal-
Hormone replacement therapy
nutrition may reduce morbidity. B vitamins, folate, and
niacin can be provided as an oral supplement often with
The most effective means of correcting anemia of CKD is
iron. Evidence of a therapeutic benefit in dogs and cats 
hormone replacement therapy. However, a major obsta-
with CKD has not been demonstrated.
dle to EPO replacement therapy in dogs and cats has
Patients with CKD may have shortened red blood cell
been the development of anti-EPO antibodies. These
life span. Proposed mechanisms for this mild hemolytic
antibodies develop because recombinant human ery-
tendency include a malfunctioning of the membrane
thropoietin (rHuEPO) differs structurally from canine
 Na+—K+—ATPase pump and impaired regeneration of
and feline EPOs. Development of anti-EPO antibodies
reduced glutathione needed to prevent hemoglobin oxi-
renders administered rHuEPO ineffective and, with con-
dation. Cat hemoglobin appears to be especially prone to
tinued administration of the hormone, may render the
oxidative stress as evidenced by the frequent observation
of Heinz bodies in their red blood cells. Cats with large
ineffective leaving the patient markedly anemic and often
numbers of Heinz bodies tend to be more anemic. Drugs
transfusion-dependent. Because of this significant draw-
and foods (e.g-, onions, propylene glycol, methylene blue,
back, the recommendation to use rHuEPO is usually
sulfonamides) that promote formation of Heinz bodies
reserved for patients with advanced CKD that require
should be avoided in uremic pets whenever possible.
correction of anemia to maintain a satisfactory quality
The  hyperphosphatemia commonly observed
1n
of life. Premature initiation of EPO therapy with subse-
 patients with CKD may have a favorable effect in oxygen 
 quent development of anti-EPO antibodies may deprive
transport because the associated increase in intracellu-
the patient of the clinical benefits of this therapy when
lar red cell phosphorus increases red cell 2,3 DPG levels.
clinical signs of anemia eventually do develop and EPO
 Increased 2,3 DPG levels promote a rightward shift in
 can be of greatest clinical benefit. Thus, EPO therapy is
the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, thereby improv-
usually not recommended untilhematocrit values decline
ing tissue oxygenation and decreasing the stimulus for
below about 20% to 22% and clinical signs attributable
EPO synthesis.
 to anemia are present.
With the intent of preventing and correcting anemia
Anabolic steroids
associated with development of anti-EPO antibody for-
 Anabolic steroids were at one time the mainstay of ther-
mation, recombinant canine and feline EPO have been
 evaluated. Therapy with recombinant canine EPO was
 apy for anemia associated with CKD. Controlled safety
effective in correcting anemia of CKD in dogs without
 and efficacy studies in dogs and cats are lacking, and clin-
the apparent risk of antibody formation; however, it was
ical experience with anabolic steroids has generally been
ineffective in correcting the red cell aplasia that resulted
seen as disappointing as a treatment for anemia of CKD.
from anti-EPO antibodies directed against rHuEPO
Empirically, anabolic steroids appear to produce a small
(Randolph et al. 2004a). Unfortunately, therapy with
increase in hematocrit in some patients. However, in one
the feline recombinant EPO product evaluated was also
study in humans on dialysis, results approaching those
achieved with EPO replacement therapy were reported
associated with development of anti-EPO antibodies
(Randolph et al. 2004). Neither canine nor feline recom-
with the anabolic steroid nandrolone decanoate in older
binant EPO is currently available commercially.
male patients with CKD ( Teruel et al. 1996).
Recombinant EPO products usually correct the ane-
mia of CKD and ameliorate the clinical signs associated
Blood transfusion
with the anemia. A dose-dependent increase in hemat-
 For patients with CKD, blood transfusions are primar-
ocrit usually follows administration of rHuEPO (Cowgill
ily indicated when there is a need for rapid correction
et al. 1998). Correction of hematocrit to low normal typ-
of anemia or when no other treatment option is avail-
ically takes approximately 2-8 weeks depending on the
able. In selected patients, repeated transfusions have been
 starting hematocrit and dose given. As anemia resolves,
used for long-term maintenance of hematocrit; however,
 most dogs and cats have increases in appetite, body
 transfusion-related complications are common among
weight, energy level and sociability (Cowgill et al. 1998).
these patients. In general, limited availability and expense
In human CKD patients, partial correction yields sub-
of blood products, increased risk of transfusion reactions
 stantial improvement in quality of life and correction of
with multiple transfusions, immunosuppression, trans-
most anemia-related symptoms (Paoletti and Cannella
466  Upper urinary tract disorders
2006). While the optimum therapeutic target hematocrit
of 3,000 IU EPO, would receive 3,000 IU EPO × 1 μg
has not been established for dogs and cats with CKD,
-  a a o  g1 = d  oo
a reasonable cost-effective target would be to target the
tion. Thus, the induction dosage for DPO in most dogs
lower end of the normal range.
and cats is approximately 1.5 μg/kg weekly Once the tar-
EPO products currently used in dogs and cats include
get hematocrit is achieved (treatment targets for EPO and
rHuEPO and darbepoetin (DPO). DPO has the advan-
DPO are the same), the frequency of administration of
 DPO may be decreased to every other week The dosage
longer than EPO so it may be administered weekly rather
thereafter should be adjusted to maintain the target
 than 3 times weekly. While it has also been suggested that
hematocrit either by adjusting frequency of administra-
 the structural modifications responsible for the longer
tion, dosage or both in a fashion similar to that described
duration may reduce the likelihood of anti-EPO anti-
for EPO. Empirical evidence suggests that dogs and cats
body formation, no evidence is available to confirm or
with CKD respond to DPO in a fashion similar to EPO.
deny this.
Individuals may differ in their response to EPO ther-
Induction therapy with EPO is begun with a dosage
apy. The basis for individual differences in response to
 0f 50-150 units/kg subcutaneously three times weekly,
EPO therapy is not fully understood. Several causes of
with most dogs and cats receiving 100 units/kg admin-
blunted response or failure to resolve renal anemia with
istered three times weekly. Higher doses may acceler-
EPO therapy have been identified including functional or
ate the response to therapy, while lower doses may slow
absolute iron deficiency, anti-EPO antibody formation,
the response. Thus, when anemia is severe (hematocrit
 ongoing gastrointestinal blood loss or hemolysis, concur-
<14%) but not requiring transfusion, daily therapy with
rent inflammatory or malignant disease, and aluminum
-axa i a    d q   o
 overload. Owner errors related to drug storage, handling,
dite response. In contrast, when hypertension is present,
or administration may account for some instances of
a dosage of 50 units/kg three times per week may be con-
 poor response to EPO therapy. The demand for iron asso-
sidered, as too rapid an increase in hematocrit is thought
ciated with stimulated erythropoiesis is high, and human
 to promote hypertension.
patients without preexisting iron overload will exhaust
During induction therapy, hematocrit should be mon-
iron storage during EPO therapy. The same appears true
itored weekly or biweekly until the target hematocrit of
of dogs and cats. Iron supplementation is therefore rec-
approximately 30-35% for cats and 37-42% for dogs is
ommended for all patients receiving EPO therapy. At a
achieved (Cowgill et al. 1998). When a hematocrit at
minimum, an intramuscular injection of iron dextran
the low end of the target range is reached, the dosing
(50-300 mg) should be provided at the time EPO or
interval may be decreased to twice weekly. Many ani-
DPO are initiated.
mals require 50-100 units/kg two to three times weekly
A variety of mostly minor adverse effects related to
to maintain their hematocrit in the target range; how-
 EPO therapy in dogs and cats may include systemic
ever, the dose and dosing interval required to maintain
hypertension, seizures, local reactions at the injection
individual patients in the normal range is highly vari-
site, and development of antibodies directed at EPO
able. Ongoing monitoring of hematocrit will be neces-
(Cowgill et al. 1998). Seizures have been observed in
sary to allow adjustments in dose and dosing interval.
human, canine, and feline patients being treated with
Animals requiring more than 150 units/kg three times
EPO that have no prior history of seizure a disor-
weekly should be evaluated for EPO resistance. Due to
der (Cowgill et al. 1998). In dogs and cats, they have
the lag time between dosage adjustment and effect on
been reported in the setting of moderate to severe
hematocrit, patience must be exercised so as not to adjust
azotemia. Although hypertension, anemia, and uremic
the dose too frequently. Frequent dose adjustments will
encephalopathy may be contributory, in humans, seizures
result in rapid, unpredictable changes in hematocrit and
are thought to be related to compensatory adaptations to
 an inability to find a stable dosing regimen. In general,
increases in red blood cell mass. Seizures are not thought
 dosage should not be changed any more often than once
to be directly related to EPO. Allergic reactions includ-
 monthly. Avoiding iatrogenic polycythemia is especially
ing cutaneous or mucocutaneous reactions or cellulitis
important.
sometimes with fever and arthralgia were uncommonly
DPO is supplied in μg rather than units; 1 μg DPO =
observed in both dogs and cats early in the course of EPO
 200 units of EPO. It is administered at a dosage equivalent 
therapy (Cowgill et al. 1998). Lesions generally resolved
(  i d d e )  
within a few days and some did not recur when therapy
but the dosing interval is extended three-fold. For exam-
was reinstated.
ple, a 10 kg dog that would receive 1,000 IU EPO (100
As described previously, the most important com-
U/kg EPO) three times weekly for a total weekly dose
plication associated with use of hormone replacement
Chronic kidney disease   467
therapy is refractory anemia and hypoplasia of the ery-
tein binding, and hepatic biotransformation of drugs
throid bone marrow associated with formation of neu-
may be altered. The sum effect of these changes is that
 tralizing anti-EPO antibodies (Cowgill et al. 1998). The
for many drugs normally excreted by the kidneys, there
severity of anemia may be worse than before initiation of
is a tendency for drugs to accumulate in patients with
EPO treatment, suggesting that the anti-EPO antibodies
reduced kidney function. Excessive drug accumulation
may interfere with both administered and endogenous
 promotes an increased rate of adverse drug reactions and
EPO. The EPO protein appears unpredictably immuno-
nephrotoxicity If drugs requiring renal excretion must be
genic in many, affecting some but not all dogs and cats,
administered to patients with impaired kidney function,
with antibody titers developing at variable times from
dosage regimens should be adjusted to compensate for
several weeks to months after onset of therapy. Typi-
 decreased organ function. However, dosage adjustments 
cally, antibody titers will decline with cessation of ther-
may not be appropriate for drugs that are administered to
apy, but persistent administration of EPO despite forma-
a physiologic endpoint or effect such as antihypertensive
tion of antibodies may result in persistence of antibodies.
agents.
A test for anti-EPO antibodies is not currently avail-
Patients with preexisting CKD may also be predisposed
able. However, failure of an increase in EPO or DPO
to nephrotoxicity. For this reason, nephrotoxic drugs
dosage to increase hematocrit in absence of an iden-
and drugs requiring renal excretion should generally be
tifiable cause for treatment failure, (described above)
avoided in patients with kidney disease. Where possible,
strongly suggests development of anti-EPO antibody for-
less nephrotoxic drugs should be chosen. If nephrotoxic
 mation. Demonstrating an increase in the bone marrow
drugs are unavoidable, therapeutic drug monitoring or
myeloid/erythroid ratio provides further support that
serial evaluation of renal function is essential.
 EPO resistance results from antibody formation. If anti-
So-called “complementary medications" (sometimes
EPO antibody formation is suspected, EPO or DPO ther-
called herbal medicines, naturopathic remedies, and phy-
apy should be terminated immediately. After therapy is
tomedicines) should be used with caution in patients
stopped and antibody titers decline, suppressed erythro-
with CKD. Their potential for interactions with pre-
poiesis may be reversible and pre-treatment levels of ery-
scribed medications or simple adverse consequences in
thropoiesis may be attained.
 patients with reduced kidney function should be consid-
While regulation of RBC production is the principal
ered. Herbal products to be avoided in patients with renal
function of EPO in the hematopoietic system, a growing
dysfunction include aristolochic acid, barberry, buchu,
body of evidence indicates that the therapeutic benefits
 Chinese herbal drugs, juniper, licorice, and noni juice
of rHuEPO could extend far beyond correction of ane-
(Kappel and Piera 2002).
mia (Bahlmann and Fliser 2009). Studies have also iden-
tified a tissue-protective effect of rHuEPO that prevents
Patient follow-up and monitoring
ischemia-induced tissue damage in several organ systems
including the kidneys. This tissue-protective action of
In order to successfully individualize treatment to meet
rHuEPO is not the result of improved tissue oxygenation
the specifc, and often changing, needs of the patient,
associated with of anemia correction. The ultimate clini-
 regular monitoring of patients is an essential component 
cal therapeutic applications, if any, of these findings have
of the treatment plan. Treatment goals should be clearly
 yet to be determined.
recorded and compared to regular measurement of the
patient's progress. Evaluations every 2-4 weeks are sug-
gested until the initial response to therapy can be estab-
Medication review and dose modification
lished. In general, patients in IRIS CKD stages II and IV
Current medications should be reviewed at each clinic
should thereafter be evaluated about every 2-4 months.
visit (Board 2002). It should be confirmed that current
Patients in IRIS CKD stages I and II generally require less
 frequent monitoring, typically about every 4-6 months
tions, dosages are correct for the level of renal function,
once they have been established to have stable renal func-
and do not pose a risk of drug interaction. Also con-
 tion. Patients with progressive CKD, proteinuria or arte-
sider whether the owner is being asked to administer an
rial hypertension generally require more frequent mon-
excessive number of medications, because this can affect
itoring. In addition, the frequency of evaluation may
compliance and the owner's perception of quality of life.
vary depending on severity of renal dysfunction, com-
As the kidneys are responsible for elimination of many
drugs from the body, renal drug clearance may be reduced
 and response to treatment. Patients receiving therapy
as renal function declines causing the half-life of the
with EPO or calcitriol require frequent monitoring life-
drug to be prolonged. In addition, distribution, pro-
long. A typical monitoring visit would include at least a
468  Upper urinary tract disorders
medical history with medication review, physical exam-
Brenner B.M., et al. ( 1982). Dietary protein intake and the progressive
ination, body weight and nutritional assessment, hema-
nature of kidney disease: the role of hemodynamically mediated
tocrit, chemistry profle, urinalysis, and blood pressure.
sclerosis in ageing, renal ablation, and intrinsic renal disease. N Eng?
Depending on the patient and results of the urinalysis,
IMed 307: 652-659.
the urine protein:creatinine ratio and a urine culture may
 Bro, S. and K. Olgaard (1997). Effects of excess PTH on nonclassical
also be included. Additional specific recommendations
target organs. Am I Kidney Dis 30: 606-620.
for monitoring are described in the various treatment
Brown, S.A., et al. ( 1991). Beneficial effects of dietary mineral restric-
tion in dogs with marked reduction of functional renal mass. I Am
sections.
Soc Nephrol 1: 1169- 1179.
Brown, S.A. (2008). Oxidative stress and chronic kidney disease. Vet
References
Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 38: 157-166.
Brown, S.A. (2007a). In: BSAVA Marual ofCanirne and Feline Nephrol-
Abbate, M., et al. (2006). How does proteinuria cause progressive renal
ogy and Urology, edited by I. Elliott and G.F Grauer, 2nd edition.
damage? I Arm Soc Nephrol 17: 2974-2984.
Gloucester, England: British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Adams, L.,et al. ( 1994). Infuence of dietary protein/calorie intake on
pp. 223-230.
renal morphology and function in cats with 5/6 nephrectomy. Lab
Brown, S.A., et al. (2007b). Guidelines for the identification, evalua-
Irvest 70: 347-357.
tion, and management of systemic hypertension in dogs and cats. J
Adams, L., et al. ( 1992). Correlation of urine protein/creatinine ratio
Vet Interr Med 21: 542-558.
and twenty-four-hour urinary protein excretion in normal cats and
Brown, S.A., et al. (2003). Evaluation of the effects of inhibition of
cats with surgically induced chronic renal failure. I Vet Intern Med
angiotensin converting enzyme with enalapril in dogs with induced
6: 36-40.
chronic renal insufficiency. Arm I Vet Res 64: 321-327.
Adrogue, H. and N. Madias (1998). Management of life-threatening
 Brown, S.A., et al. ( 1998). Beneficial effects of chronic administration
acid-base disorders. N Engl I Med 338: 26-34.
of dietary omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in dogs with renal
Akizawa, T., et al. (2003). New strategies for treatment of secondary
insufficiency. I Lab Clin Med 131: 447-455.
hyperparathyroidism. Arn I Kidney Dis 41: S100-S103.
Brown, S.A.,et al. (2001). Effects of the angiotensin converting enzyme
Almaden, Y., et al. (1996). Direct effect of phosphorus on PTH secre-
inhibitor benazepril in cats with induced renal insufficiency. Arm I
tion from whole rat parathyroid glands in vitro. I Bone Miner Res
Vet Res 62: 375-383.
11: 970-976.
Brown, S.A., et al. (1995). Impaired renal autoregulatory ability
Anderstam, B., et al. ( 1996). Middle-sized molecule fractions isolated
in dogs with reduced renal mass. I Arm Soc Nephrol 5: 1768-
 from uremic ultrafiltrate and normal urine inhibit ingestive behav-
1774.
ior in the rat. I Am Soc Nephrol 7: 2453-2460.
 Brushinsky, D. (2005). Disorders of calcium and phosphorus home-
Andress, D.L. (2006). Vitamin D in chronic kidney disease: a systemic
ostasis. In: Primer on Kidney Diseases, edited by A. Greenberg, 4th
role for selective vitamin receptor activation. Kidney Int 69: 33-43.
edition. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 120-130.
Atkins, C.E., et al. (2007). The effect of amlodipine and the com-
Buranakarl, C., et al. (2004). Effects of dietary sodium chloride intake
bination of amlodipine and enalapril on the renin-angiotensin-
on renal function and blood pressure in cats with normal and
aldosterone system in the dog. I Vet Pharmacol Ther 30: 394-400.
reduced renal function. Am I Vet Res 65: 620-627.
Bagga, D., et al. (2003). Differential effects of prostaglandin derived
 Burkholder, W.J.,et al. (2004). Diet modulates proteinuria in heterozy-
frorm omega-6 and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on COX-
gous female dogs with X-linked hereditary nephropathy. I Vet Intert
2 expression and IL-6 secretion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:
Med 18: 165175.
1751-1756.
Campbell, R., et al. (2003). Effects of combined ACE inhibitor
 Bahlmann, EH. and D. Fliser (2009). Erythropoietin and renoprotec-
and angiotensin Il antagonist treatment in human chronic
tion. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 18: 15-20.
nephropathies. Kidney Int 63: 1094-1103.
 Barber, P, et al. ( 1999). Effect of dietary phosphate restriction on renal
Canalejo, A., et al. (2003). Effects of uremic ultrafiltrate on the reg-
secondary hyperparathyroidism in the cat. I Small Amim Pract 40:
ulation of the parathyroid cell cycle by calcitriol. Kidney Int 63:
62-70.
732-737.
 Barber, P. and J. Elliot (1998). Feline chronic renal failure: calcium
Cheng, S. and D. Coyne (2007). Vitamin D and outcomes in chronic
homeostasis in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and 1995. J Small
kidney disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 16: 77-82.
Anim Pract 39: 108-116.
Combe, C. and M. Aparicio ( 1994). Phosphorus and protein restriction 
Belew, A., et al. (1999). Evaluation of the white-coat effect in cats. J Vet
and parathyroid function in chronic renal failure. Kidney Int 46:
Imterm Med 13: 134-142.
1381-1386.
 Bidani, A.K. and K.A. Griffin (2004). Pathophysiology of hypertensive
Cook, A. and L. Cowgill (1996). Clinical and pathological features of
renal damage. Implications for therapy. Hypertension 44: 595-601.
protein-losing glomerular disease in the dog: a review of 137 cases
Block, G., et al. ( 1998). Association of serum phosphorus and calcium
(1985- 1992). IAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 32: 313-322.
X phosphate product with mortality risk in chronic hemodialysis
Cook, S.and C. Lathrop ( 1994). Serum erythropoietin concentrations
patients: a national study. Arm I Kidney Dis 31: 607-617.
measured by radioimmunoassay in normal, polycythemic, and ane-
Board, NKFKDOQIA. (2002). Clinical practice guidelines for chronic
mic dogs and cats. I Vet Intern Med 8: 18-25.
kidney disease: evaluation, classification, and stratification. Part 4.
Cowgill, L., et al. ( 1998). Use of recombinant humans erythropoietin
Definition and classification of stages of chronic renal failure. Arm 
for management of anemia in dogs and cats with renal failure. JAm
Kidney Dis 39: S46-S75.
Vet Med Assoc 212: 521-528.
Boyd, L.M., et al. (2008). Survival in cats with naturally occurring
DeBowes, L., et al. (1996). Association of periodontal disease and
chronic kidney disease (2000-2002). J Vet Intern Med 22: 1111-
histologic lesions in multiple organs from 45 dog. I Vet Dent 13:
1117.
57-60.
Chronic kidney disease   469
DiBartola, S., et al. (1993). Development of chronic renal disease in
Harris, R.C. and E.G. Neilson (2006). Toward a unified theory of renal
cats fed a commercial diet. JAm Vet Med Assoc 202: 744-751.
progression. Anmu Rev Med 57: 365-380.
 DiBartola, S., et al. ( 1987). Clinicopathologic findings associated with
Henik, R., et al. (1997). Treatment of systermic hypertension in cats
with amlodipine besylate. I Am Arirm Hosp Assoc 33: 226-234.
Assoc 190: 1196- 1202.
Hilgers, K. and J. Mann (2002). ACE inhibitors versus ATl receptor
Dow, S. and M. Fettman ( 1992). Renal disease in cats: the potassium
antagonists in patients with chronic renal disease. JAm Soc Nephrol
connection. In: Current Veterinary Therapy XI, edited by R. Kirk.
13: 1100-1108.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 820-822.
Hostetter, T., et al. (200la). Hyperfiltration in remnant nephrons: a
Dow, S., et al. (1990). Effects of dietary acidification and potassium
 potentially adverse response to renal ablation. J Am Soc Nephurol 12:
depletion on acid-base balance, mineral metabolism and renal func-
1315-1325.
tion in adult cats. I Nutr 120: 569-578.
Hostetter, T., et al. (200lb). Aldosterone in renal disease. Curr Opin
Dow, S., et al. (1987). Potassium depletion in cats: renal and dietary
Nephrol Hypertens 10: 105-110.
influences. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 191: 1569- 1575.
Hostutler, R.A., et al. (2006). Comparison of the effects of daily and
Elliot, J. et al. (2006). Symposium on Phosphatemia Maragement in the
Treatment of Chronic Kidney Disease. Louisville, KY: Vetoquinol.
ionized calcium concentrations in normal cats and cats with chronic
Elliott, J., et al. (2003a). Assessment of acid-base status of cats with
renal failure. I Vet Interm Med 20: 1307-13 13.
naturally occurring chronic renal failure. I Small Anim Pract 44:
Iseki, K., etal. (2003). Proteinuria and the risk of developing end-stage
65-70.
renal disease. Kidney Int 63: 1468-1474.
Elliott, J., et al. (2003b). Acid-base balance of cats with chronic renal
 Israel, R., et al. (1986). Metoclopramide decreases renal plasma flow.
failure: effect of deterioration in renal function. I Small Ani Pract
Clin Pharmacol Ther 39: 261-264.
44: 261-268.
 Jacob, F, et al. (2005). Evaluation of the association between ini-
Elliot, J, et al. (200l). Feline hypertension: clinical findings and
tial proteinuria and morbidity rate or death in dogs with natu-
rally occurring chronic renal failure. IArm Vet Med Assoc 226: 393-
Pract 42: 122-129.
400.
Elliot, J. and P. Barber (1998). Feline chronic renal failure: clinical
Jacob, F., et al. (2003). Association between initial systolic blood pres-
findings in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and 1995. JSmall Anim
sure and risk of developing a uremic crisis or of dying in dogs with
Pract39: 78-85.
chronic renal failure. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 222: 322-329.
Epstein, M. (2004). Aldosterone as a determinant of progressive
Jacob, F, et al. (2002). Clinical evaluation of dietary modification for
renal dysfunction: a paradigm shift. Nephrol Self Assess Prograrn
treatrment of spontaneous chronic renal failure in dogs. I Am Vet
3: 285-295.
Med Assoc 220(8): 1163-1170.
Epstein, M. (2001). Aldosterone as a mediator of progressive renal
James, K., et al. (1997). Serum total carbon dioxide concentrations
 disease: pathogenic and clinical implications. Am J Kid Dis 37: 677-
in canine and feline blood: the effect of underfilling blood tubes
688.
 and comparisons with blood gas analysis as an estimate of plasma
Fliser, D., et al. (2007). Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) predicts
bicarbonate. Am I Vet Res 58: 343-347.
progression of chronic kidney disease: the mild to moderate kidney
Jepson, R.E., et al. (2007). Effect of control of systolic blood pressure
disease (MMKD) study. I Am Soc Nephrol 18: 2601-2608.
Finco, D., et al. ( 1999). Progression of chronic renal disease in the dog.
402-409.
I Vet Intern Med 13: 516-528.
Kappel, J. and C. Piera (2002). Safe drug prescribing for patients with
 Finco, D., et al. ( 1997). Effects of parathyroidectomy on induced renal
renal insufficiency. Car I Med 166: 473-477.
failure in dogs. Arm I Vet Res 58: 188-195.
Kates, D., et al. ( 1997). Evidence that serum phosphate is independently
Finco, D., et al. (1992). Effects of dietary phosphorus and protein in
associated with serum PTH in patients with chronic renal failure.
dogs with chronic renal failure. Arm I Vet Res 53: 2264-2271.
Am I Kidney Dis 30: 809-813.
Fettman, M., et al. (1992). Effect of dietary phosphoric acid supple-
Kazama, J.J., et al. (2005). Role of circulating fibroblast growth factor 23
mentation on acid-base balance and mineral and bone metabolism
in the development of secondary hyperparathyroidism. Ther Apher
in adult cats. Arm I Vet Res 53: 2125-2135.
Dial 9: 328-330.
Freundlich, M., et al. (2008). Suppression of renin-angiotensin gene
King, I.N., et al. (2006). Tolerability and effcacy of benazepril in cats
expression in the kidney by paracalcitol. Kidney Int 74: 1394-1402.
with chronic kidney disease. I Vet Intern Med 20: 1054-1064.
Gerber, B., et al. (2003). Serum concentrations of l,25-
King, J.N., et al. (2007). Prognostic factors in cats with chronic kidney
dihydroxycholecalciferol and 25-hydroxycholecalciferol in clinically
disease. I Vet Intern Med 21: 906-916.
normal dogs and dogs with acute and chronic renal failure. Arm I Vet
King, L., et al. (1992). Anemia of chronic renal failure in dogs. J Vet
Res 64: 1161-1166.
Interm Med 6: 264-270.
Goldstein, R., et al. (1998). Gastrin concentrations in plasma of cats
Kogika, M.M., et al. (2006). Serum ionized calcium in dogs with
with chronic renal failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc 213: 826-828.
chronic renal failure and metabolic acidosis. Vet Clin Pathol 35:
Grauer, G., et al. (2000). Effects of enalapril versus placebo as a treat-
441-445.
ment for canine idiopathic glomerulonephritis. I Vet Intern Med 14:
Kruger, J., et al. ( 1996). Hypercalcemia and renal failure. Vet Clin North
526-533.
A 26: 1417-1445.
Grodecki, K.M., et al. ( 1997). Treatment of X-linked hereditary nephri-
Kyles, A., et al. ( 1999). Management of hypertension controls postop-
tis in Samoyed dogs with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
erative neurological disorders after renal transplantation in cats. Vet
inhibitor. I Comp Pathol 117: 209-225.
Surg 28: 436-441.
Gutierrez, O., et al. (2005). Fibroblast growth factor-23 mitigates
Lappin, M.R., et al. (2005). Investigation of the induction of antibodies
hyperphosphatemia but accelerates calcitriol deficiency in chronic
against Crandell-Rees feline kidney cell lysates and feline renal cell
kidney disease. I Arm Soc Nephrol 16: 2205-2215.
lysates after parenteral administration of vaccines against feline viral
470  Upper urinary tract disorders
rhinotracheitis, calicivirus, and panleukopenia in cats. Am I Vet Res
Randolph, JE., et al. (2004). Expression, bioactivity, and clinical
66: 506-511.
assessment of recormbinant feline erythropoietin. Am I Vet Res 65:
Lappin, M.R.,et al. (2006). Interstitial nephritis in cats inoculated with
1355-1366.
crandell rees feline kidney cell lysates. IFeline Med Surg 8: 353-356.
Randolph, J.E., et al. (2004a). Clinical effcacy and safety of recom-
Lees, G.E., et al. (2005). Assessment and management of proteinuria
s sais ssso y  to si pue sop 
animal). I Vet Intern Med 19: 377-385.
red cell aplasia. I vet Interm Med 18: 81-91.
Lemarie, R., et al. (1995). Mast cell tumors: clinical management.
Ravani, P.,et al. (2009). Vitamin Dlevel and patient outcome in chronic
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 17: 1085-1101.
kidney disease. Kidney Int 75: 88-95.
Levey, A., et al. ( 1999). Dietary protein restriction and the progression
Remuzzi, G., et al. (2005). The role of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
of chronic renal disease: what have all the resuts of the MDRD study
system in the progression of chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int
shown? I Am Soc Nephrol 10: 2426-2439.
68(Suppl 99): S57-S65.
Lopez-Hilker, S., et al. (1990). Phosphorus restriction reverses hyper-
Remuzzi, A., et al. (2002). Effect of angiotensin II antagonism on the
regression of kidney disease in the rat. Kidney Int 62: 885-894.
calcitriol. Am J Physiol 259: F432-F437.
Rennke, H.G. and B.M. (2007). Reral Pathophysiology: The Essen-
Lulich, I, et al. (1992). Feline renal failure: questions, answers, ques-
tials 2nd edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams &
tions. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 14: 127-153.
Wilkins.
Menon, V., et al. (2009). Effect of a very-low protein diet on outcomes:
Ritz, E., et al. (2005). Role of calcium-phosphorus disorders in the
long-term follow-up of the modification of diet in renal disease
 progression of renal failure. Kidney Int 68 (Suppl 99): S66-S70.
(MDRD) study. Am I Kidney Dis 53: 208-217.
Rosenberg, M. (2003). Chronic kidney disease: progression. Nephrol
Mathur, S., et al. (2002). Effects of the calcium channel antagonist
Self Assess Program 2: 89-103.
amlodipine in cats with surgically induced hypertensive renal insuf-
 Ross, S.J., et al. (2006). Clinical evaluation of dietary modification for
ficiency. Am I Vet Res 63: 833-839.
treatment of spontaneous chronic kidney disease in cats. I Arn Vet
Minkus, G., et al. ( 1994). Evaluation of renal biopsies in cats and dogs
Med Assoc 229: 949-957.
- histopathology in comparison with clinical data. I Small Anim
 Sabatini, S. and N.A. Kurtzman (2009). Bicarbonate therapy in severe
Pract 35: 465-472.
metabolic acidosis. I Arm Soc Nephrol 20: 692-695.
 Mitch, W. ( 1997). Mechanisms causing loss of lean body mass in kidney
 Sato, A., et al. (2005). Antiproteinuric effects of mineralcorticoid recep-
disease. Am I Clin Nutr 67: 359-366.
 tor blockade in patients with chronic renal disease. Am J Hypertens
Nagode, L., et al. (1996). Benefits of calcitriol therapy and serum
18: 44-49.
phosphorus control in dogs and cats with chronic renal failure: both
 Segev, G., et al. (2008). Aluminum toxicity following administration
of aluminum-based phosphate binders in 2 dogs with renal failure.
Clirn North Am 26: 1293-1330.
I Vet Imtern Med 22: 1432-1435.
Nath, K. ( 1998). The tubulointerstitium in progressive renal disease.
Schenck, P.A. and D.J. Chew (2003). Determination of calcium frac-
Kidney Irt 54: 992-994.
tionation in dogs with chronic renal failure. Arm I Vet Res 64:
Paoletti, E. and G. Cannella (2006). Update on erythropoietin treat-
1181-1184.
ment: should hemoglobin be normalized in patients with chronic
Shoben, A.B, et al. (2008). Association of oral calcitriol with
kidney disease? I Arm Soc Nephrol 17: S74-S77.
improved survivalin nondialyzed CKD. IArm Soc Nephrol 19: 1613-
Papich, M.G. (2007). Saunders Handbook of Veterinary Drugs, 2nd
1619.
edition. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, pp. 379-380.
Stevens, L.A. and A.S. Levey (2005). Chronic kidney disease: stag-
Perkovic, L.D., et al. (2002). Comparison of ondansetron with meto-
ing and principles of management. In: Priner on Kidrey Diseases
clopramide in the symptomatic relief of uremia-induced nausea and
edited by A. Greenberg, 4th edition. San Diego, CA: Acadermic Press,
vomiting. Kidney Blood Press Res 25: 61-64.
pp. 455-463.
Peters, R.M., et al. (2005). Histopathologic features of canine uremic
Stiles, J, et al. (1994). The prevelance of retinopathy in cats with
gastropathy: a retrospective study. I Vet Intern Med 19: 315-320.
systemic hypertension and chronic renal failure or hyperthyroidism.
 Pisoni, R. and G. Remuzzi (200l). Pathophysiology and management
I Am Amirn Hosp Assoc 30: 564-572.
of progressive chronic renal failure. In: Primer on Kidney Diseases,
Syme, H.M., et al. (2006). Survival of cats with naturally occurring
edited by A. Greenberg, 3rd edition. San Diego, CA: National Kidney
chronic renal failure is related to severity of proteinuria. I Vet Irterr
Foundation, pp. 385-396.
Med 20: 528-535.
 Plantinga, E.A., et al. (2005). Retrospective study of the survival of cats
Teruel, J., et al. (1996). Androgen versus erythropoietin for the treat-
with acquired chronic renal insufficiency offered different commer-
cial diets. Vet Rec 157: 185-187.
Soc Nephrol 7: 140- 144.
Plumb, D.C. (2008). Plumb's Veterimary Drug Handbook, 6th edition.
Theisen, S., et al. (1997). Muscle potassium content and potassium
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 130- 131
gluconate supplementation in normokalemic cats with naturally
Poli, A., et al. (1995). Renal involvement in feline immunodeficiency
occurring chronic renal failure. I Vet Irtern Med 11: 212-217.
virus infection: p24 antigen detection, virus isolation, and PCR
Thomas, J., et al. (1993). Association of renal disease indicators with
analysis. Vet Immumol Immuropathol46: 13-20.
feline immunodeficiency virus infection. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 29:
Polzin, D., et al. (1988). Development of renal lesions in dogs after
320-326.
11/12 reduction of renal mass: influence of dietary protein intake.
Vanholder, R. ( 1998). The uremic syndrome. In: Primer on Kidney Dis-
Lab Irvest 58: 172-183.
eases, edited by A. Greenberg, 2nd edition. San Diego, CA: Academic
Porsti, I.H. (2008). Expanding targets of vitamin D receptor activation:
Press, Pp. 403-407.
downregulation of several RAS components in the kidney. Kidney
Weidemann, A. and R.S. Johnson (2009). Nonrenal regulation of EPO
Int74: 1371-1373.
synthesis. Kidrey It 75: 682-688.
Chronic kidney disease  471
Weir, M. and JI.C. Fink (2005). Salt intake and progression of chronic
Wolf, G., et al. (2002). Leptin and renal disease. Am J Kidney Dis 39:
kidney disease: an overlooked modifiable exposure? A commentary.
1-11.
Am I Kidmey Dis 45: 176- 188.
Yudd, M. and F. Llach (200o). Current medical management
Wesson, D.E. and J. Simoni (2009). Increased tissue acid mediates
of secondary hyperparathyroidism. Arm I Med Sci 320: 100-
 a progressive decline in glomerular filtration rate of animals with
106.
reduced nephron mass. Kidrey Int 75: 929-935.
Acute kidney insufficiency
Larry D. Cowgill and Cathy Langston
Introduction
a seemingly acute uremia with similar clinical features.
Currently there are no discrete markers to define or
Acute kidney disease represents a spectrum of disease
stage the conditions that represent AKl, although some
associated with a sudden onset of renal parenchymal
urine biomarkers are showing promise (Bonventre 2007;
injury most typically characterized by generalized fail-
Bagshaw and Gibney 2008; Coca et al. 2008; Ferguson
ure of the kidneys to meet the excretory, metabolic, and
et al. 2008; Vaidya et al. 2008). There also is no formal cat-
endocrine demands of the body, that is, acute renal fail-
egorization of the spectrum of the functional deficiencies 
ure. Acute renal failure (ARF) is associated with rapid
to standardize its classification, severity, stage, clinical
hemodynamic, filtration, tubulointerstitial, or outflow
course, response to therapy, or prognosis for recovery
injury to the kidneys and subsequent accumulation of
(Kellum et al. 2002; Mehta and Chertow 2003; Bagshaw
metabolic toxins (uremia toxins) and dysregulation of
and Gibney 2008).
fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance. ARF reflects only
Precise definitions for AKl have not been established
a subset of patients with the highest morbidity and mor-
in veterinary medicine. A myriad of definitions have
 s ()   e, n  
been proposed in both human medicine and veterinary
adopted in human medicine to better reflect the broad
   rs  s 
spectrum of acute diseases of the kidney and to rein-
filtration rate (GFR), azotemia, or urine production to
force the concept that AKI encompasses a continuum
provide objective criteria for the diagnosis (Mehta and
of functional and parenchymal damage (Kellum et al.
Chertow 2003; Cowgill and Francey 2005; Langston
2007b; Himmelfarb et al. 2008). These conditions may
2010). To emphasize the concept that AKI represents
be imperceptible clinically at early stages and culminate
a continuum of renal injury, staging schemes recently
with patients requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT)
 s  sd q  psod uaq s
(Bellomo et al. 2004; Kellum et al. 2007b; Mehta et al.
extent and duration of renal injury and the potential for
2007; Kellum 2008).
recovery. One staging system is categorized progressively
The clinical presentation of AKI includes prerenal
into Risk, Injury, Failure, Loss, and ESKD (RIFLE)
and postrenal conditions which may be independent or
(Bellomo et al. 2004; Hoste et al. 2006; Hoste and Kellum
combined with intrinsic renal injury depending on the
2007; Kellum 2008). A second slightly more restricted
functional origin, extent, and duration of the conditions
staging system emerged as an expert consensus from the
 inciting the disease. Animal patients most often are recog-
Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN) in an attempt to
nized with an acute uremia which must be differentiated
reproducibly identify early AKl and classify its course
subsequently into its prerenal, intrinsic renal parenchy-
with regard to prognosis and appropriate diagnostic and
therapeutic interventions (Mehta et al. 2007; Molitoris
evaluation, management, and staging. AKl conceptually
et al. 2007). There is considerable overlap between
is a disease affecting intrinsically normal kidneys, but
both systems, and criteria for each staging category are
events predisposing to AKI frequently are superimposed
based ostensibly on insensitive markers of renal injury
on preexisting chronic kidney disease (CKD) to produce
including abrupt changes in GFR, serum creatinine,
urine output, and duration of signs. Preliminary
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
validation of these staging concepts to predict morbidity
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
472
Acute kidney insufficiency   473
and outcome have been encouraging; however, the
AKI Stage I defines animals with historical, clinical,
criteria which define these staging schemes are rarely
laboratory (biomarker, glucosuria, cylinduria, inflam-
applicable in animal patients in which the abruptness
 matory sediment, microalbuminuria, etc.), or imaging
of the disease and the magnitude of changes in GFR,
evidence of AKI that are non-azotemic and/or whose
azotemia, or urine production are rarely known or quan-
clinical presentation is readily fluid volume-responsive.
titated (Hoste and Kellum 2007; Kellum 2008). To date,
 Stage I also includes animals with progressive (hourly
no formal staging system has been established for AKI in
or daily) increases in serum creatinine within the non
animals to stratify or characterize the severity of the renal
azotemic range (or laboratory reference range). Pre-
impairment as has been established recently for CKD
 sumptive guidelines could include a 0.3 mg/dL increase
oz te ia uiziod) suenq ut Iv pue sieo pue shop u!
in serum creatinine within a 48 hour interval. AKl Stage
Hoste et al. 2006; Hoste and Kellum 2006; IRIS 2006;
II defines animals with documented AKI characterized
Uchino et al. 2006; Lopes et al. 2008; Cruz et al. 2009;
by mild azotemia in addition to other historical, bio-
Elliott and Watson 2009). The International Renal Inter-
chemical, or anatomic characteristics of AKl. This would
est Society (IRIS) staging system for CKD was developed
include animals that have an increase from their baseline
as a consensus scheme to promote the more uniform
serum creatinine associated with preexisting CKD. AKI
characterization and recognition of CKD in animals
Stages Ill, IV, and V define animals with documented
with the goal to better understand its pathophysiology
AKI and progressively greater degrees of parenchymal
 and to facilitate its evaluation and rational management.
damage and functional failure (uremia). Each stage of
It seems tenable to adapt this same schematic approach
AKI is further substaged on the basis of current urine
to classify and stratify the severity of AKI in dogs and cat.
 production as oligoanuric (O) or non-oliguric (NO) and
Unlike the IRIS staging for CKD, the staging of AKI would
on the requirement for RRT. The inclusion of substag-
not imply the kidney disease is stable or at steady-state.
ing by urine production is based on the importance of
On the contrary, the “stage" represents a moment in the
the interrelationship of urine production to the patho-
course ofthe disease and is predicted to change as the con-
logical or functional contributions to the renal injury
dition worsens or improves or transitions to CKD. Table
 and its influence on the clinical presentation, therapeutic
49.1 outlines an arbitrary staging scheme for AKI in dogs
 options, and outcome of AKl. Substaging on the require-
and cats based on serum creatinine, urine formation,
ment for RRT is established on the need to correct life-
and requirement for RRT which is intended to facilitate
threatening iatrogenic or clinical consequences of AKI
classification, functional stratification, and therapeutic
including severe azotemia, hyperkalemia, acid-base dis-
decision making. This scheme should be considered as
orders, overhydration, oliguria, or anuria, or the need to
preliminary and remains subject to consensus revision
eliminate nephrotoxins. The requirement for RRT could
and modification as appropriate biomarkers are validated
occur at any of the proposed stages. Substaging on the
 to provide greater specificity and sensitivity to the staging
requirement for RRT has similar clinical, therapeutic,
of AKI.
and prognostic implications as for urine production to
Table 49.1 Proposed staging system for acute kidney injury in dogs and cats
 AKI stage?
Serum creatinine (mg/d L)
Clinical description
Stage l
<1.6
 bNon azotemic AKI or volume-responsive AKI
cHistorical, clinical, laboratory, or imaging evidence of renal injury
dProgressive non azotemic increase in serum creatinine: ≥0.3 mg/dL within
48hours
Stage II
1.6-2.5
Mild AKl: Historical, clinical, laboratory, or imaging evidence of AKI and mild
static or progressive azotemia
Stage III 
2.6-5.0
Moderate to severe AKI: Documented AKI and increasing severities of azotemia
and functional renal failure
Stage IV
10.0
Stage V
>10.0
? Each stage of AKl is further substaged on the basis of current urine production as oligoanuric (O) or non oliguric (NO) and on the
requirement for renal replacement therapy (RRT): (see text)
474  Upper urinary tract disorders
categorize the severity of the renal injury as well as its
egory of AKI is currently termed volume-responsive
influence on outcome.
AKI (Kellum 2007). Hemodynamic failure is a coordi-
AKI is associated with a rapid (hours to days) and
nated neural and humoral response of the kidneys to
progressive increase in serum urea nitrogen (BUN),
imposed hemodynamic deficiencies, hypotension, and
creatinine and phosphate, and variable hyperkalemia,
hypovolemia to preferentially preserve perfusion to vital
metabolic acidosis, and urine formation (Cowgill and
 organs like the heart and brain. At the onset of these
Francey 2005; Grauer 2009; Langston 2010). The pro-
hemodynamic deficiencies, GFR decreases, and renal
 gression of azotemia may not be recognized in animals
salt and water conservation and urine concentration
 presented late in the course of the disease or in those
increase through activation of the sympathetic ner-
without serial blood chemistry determinations. Oliguria
vous system, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
and anuria are characteristic features of severe forms of
(RAAS), and the release of antidiuretic hormone. Con-
AKI, but this classic presentation is unpredictable. Nono-
 sequently, nitrogenous excretory products are retained
liguric forms of AKI are common and must be differen-
producing azotemia, and urine formation is reduced
tiated from the azotemia and polyuria associated with
promoting oliguria (Himmelfarb et al. 2008; Kellum
CKD. In contrast to CKD, AKI is potentially reversible in
2008). Although these hemodynamic-induced manifes-
its earliest stages before the development of renal failure.
It may also be reversible at advanced stages if the animal
renal hypoperfusion, they are, by themselves, rarely of
survives the life-threatening consequences of AKl, the
just physiologic significance in patients who are being
 predisposing conditions resolve, and the imposed renal
evaluated or hospitalized for AKI.
injury repairs. There are intervention points and degrees
Severe hypotension (mean arterial blood pressure
of severity where specific and supportive therapy may
<80 mmHg) falls below the autoregulatory capacity for
alter the natural behavior of the disease. If, however, these
 glomerular fltration, and GFR decreases in proportion to
 intervention opportunities are missed or the injury is to0
the hypotension (Badr and 1chikawa 1988). Azotemia and
severe, the pathological damage is likely to progress, and
  s e    
 the injury becomes less capable of morphologic and func-
 dynamic failure but may be masked by underlying con-
tional repair. With delays to initiate therapy or failure to
ditions (e.g., CKD, adrenal insufficiency hepatic insuff-
 provide appropriate supportive therapy at these critical
ciency, hypercalcemia, and diuretic administration) that
 points, the outcome may be irreversible renal damage or
impair renal solute reabsorption and concentrating abil-
death of the animal.
ity. Hemodynamically-mediated azotemia may develop
with mild degrees of hypotension in animals with preex-
isting heart failure or CKD when renal function is main-
Etiology of AKl
tained by activated autoregulatory mechanisms through
The etiology of AKI is multifactorial according to the
the RAAS to preserve basal filtration pressure. Simi-
origin, extent, and duration of the conditions that incite
larly, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
the injury or alter renal function. Singular or a combina-
 and angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
tion of hemodynamic (prerenal) disturbances, intrinsic
 may induce hemodynamic failure by decompensating
 parenchymal injury, and postrenal disorders contribute
 glomerular function in animals whose filtration is depen-
to the structural and/or functional derangements of AKI.
dent on prostaglandin or angiotensin II-mediated regula-
The traditional categorical contributors (prerenal, intrin-
tion of glomerular vasculature (Hirsch 2007). Azotemia
sic renal, postrenal) to AKI are neither discrete nor clin-
may develop also in conditions of volume overload in
ically definable. It is also important to recognize that
which renal perfusion is compromised by poor car-
the etiologies of AKI vary geographically and between
diac output (congestive heart failure), decreased effective
species, and their relative prevalence changes over time.
intravascular volume (nephritic syndrome) or excessive
Hemodynamic failure (prerenal azotemia) is a func-
vascular resistance and reduced renal perfusion pressure
tional decline in glomerular filtration resulting from
(sepsis, hepatic failure) (Himmelfarb et al. 2008).
deficiencies in renal blood flow, perfusion pressure,
Clinical conditions causing direct structural injury to
or excessive vasoconstriction of the renal vasculature.
the vasculature, glomeruli, tubular epithelium, or inter-
 Hemodynamic failure is a common cause of early stages
stitium of the kidney can cause the entire spectrum of
 of AKI (See above), but it can coexist with other causes
AKI. Intrinsic structural injury to the kidney generally
of excretory failure and more severe stages of AKl. It
 promotes more severe AKI and will not be reversed com-
is not associated with structural damage to the kidney
pletely by restoration of fluid volume or hemodynamic
and is reversible with timely correction of the under-
deficiencies. Renal injury can develop as a continuation
lying hemodynamic or volume deficiencies. This cat-
 of functional hemodynamic deficiencies, overt ischemic
Acute kidney insufficiency   475
 suxon 1o shnap snouaoxa di annsodxa 1o siuaaa
hypotension, or hypoperfusion have been sustained or
directly target the kidney. Intrinsic renal diseases or sys-
increased in severity to induce ischemic damage to the
temic diseases with secondary renal manifestations also
kidney that cannot be reversed readily with volume
promote AKI (Table 49.2). The hemodynamic insults
restoration. Renal ischemia also develops with thrombo-
that promote intrinsic renal injury are identical to those
sis of renal arteries and veins, disseminated intravascular
promoting hemodynamic failure; but the hypovolemia,
 coagulation, incompatible blood transfusions, or septic
thrombi. Vasculitis, pancreatitis, hypoproteinemia, heat
Table 49.2 Causes of acute kidney injury in dogs and cats
stroke, and gastric torsion pose a high risk for devel-
opment of hemodynamically-mediated ischemic injury
Hemodynamic causes
(Lane et al. 1994; Behrend et al. 1996; Vaden et al. 1997;
Hypovolemia
Cowgill and Francey 2005; Langston 2010). Age, sep-
Hypotension
sis, gender, breed, preexisting renal disease, dehydration,
Shock (hypovolemic, hemorrhagic, hypotensive, septic)
electrolyte abnormalities, and poor tissue perfusion may
Decreased cardiac output (congestive heart failure,
impose additional risks of AKI ( Vaden et al. 1997; Grauer
arhythmias, cardiac arrest, cardiac tamponade)
1998; Leblanc et al. 2005; Grauer 2009).
Deep anesthesia/extensive surgery
Hemodynamically-mediated  causes
account for
Trauma (renal avulsion)
 sd    Jo  e
Hyperthermia/hypothermia
2004). Hemodynamically-mediated AKI is reported vari-
Extensive cutaneous burns
Transfusion reaction
ably but appears to be less common in animals. In a large
Hyperviscosity/polycythemia
series of reported cases with severe uremia (all receiv-
Adrenal insufficiency
ing RRT), hemodynamic etiologies represented less than
NSAIDs
10% of identified causes in dogs (Segev et al. 2008b).
Diuretic abuse
In dogs with a broader spectrum of AKl, the incidence
Primary renal diseases
was greater than 30% (Vaden et al. 1997). In cats, hemo-
Large vessels:
dynamic causes were recognized in only 13% of cases
Renal vessel thrombosis or stenosis, DIC
(Worwag and Langston 2008). This difference in inci-
Glomeruli and small vessels:
dence between animals and people may reflect inade-
Hemolytic uremic syndrome, Alabama rot
quate capture of volume responsive AKI that weren't cat-
Immune-mediated (acute glomerulonephritis, systemic
egorized as AKI in animal studies.
lupus erythematosus, vasculitis)
AKI is frequently caused by exposure to exogenous
Tubules:
Heme pigmenturia—crush syndrome, oxalate nephrosis
or endogenous toxins. Nephrotoxins include environ-
mental chemicals, pharmaceutical agents, and biotox-
Ischemia
Toxins: Endogenous toxins, exogenous toxins, drugs
ins that produce direct sublethal injury, apoptosis, or
necrosis of the tubular epithelium. Some nephrotox-
Interstitium:
Infectious (pyelonephritis, leptospirosis, borreliosis,
ins incite interstitial inflammation or tubular obstruc-
infectious canine hepatitis)
 tion by intraluminal precipitation ( Taber and Mueller
Neoplasia (lymphoma) renal transplant rejection
2006; Clarkson et al. 2008; Pannu and Nadim 2008;
Outflow obstruction
Rumbeiha and Murphy 2009). Alternatively, nephrotox
Ureteral obstruction
ins may decrease renal perfusion leading to ischemic cell
Urethral obstruction
injury and death. Similarly, many pharmaceuticals used
Uroabdomen
routinely in clinical practice have potential nephrotoxi-
 Systemic diseases with renal manifestations
city if dosed excessively or administered to animals with
Infectious: feline infectious peritonitis, babesiosis,
 overt risks for AKI (e.g., hypotension, advanced age,
leishmaniasis, bacterial endocarditis 
hypovolemia, sepsis, concomitant drug therapy, renal
Systemic inflammatoryresponse syndrome, sepsis, multiple
insufficiency). Nephrotoxins may react directly with api-
organ failure
cal, basolateral or subcellular membranes of tubular cells
Pancreatitis
 to alter their permeability, disrupt their protein makeup,
Hepatorenal syndrome
or activate phospholipases. They may promote free radi-
Malignant hypertension
cal generation, interfere with lysosome function, activate
SLE
cellular endonucleases and proteinases, interference with
 Peritonitis
 oxidative phosphorylation, and shut down energy depen-
Vasculitis
Hypercalcemia
dent cellular processes (Taber and Mueller 2006; Pannu
and Nadim 2008). Nephrotoxins are diverse chemically,
476  Upper urinary tract disorders
but are most commonly associated with organic com-
arterial vasoconstriction. The altered membrane perme-
pounds and solvents, antimicrobials, vasoactive drugs,
ability increases cellular metabolism and promotes oxy-
plant toxins, miscellaneous therapeutics, or dietary adul-
 gen deprivation leading to cellular necrosis. The toxicity
terants (Table 49.3) (Vaden et al. 1997; Dobson and Kell
of amphotericin B is potentiated by the dose and dura-
2008; Segev et al. 2008b; Worwag and Langston 2008)
tion of therapy preexisting renal disease, sodium deple-
Ethylene glycol intoxication is one of the most com-
tion, hypovolemia, and concomitant use of nephrotoxic
mon causes of AKI and the second most common intox-
drugs (Taber and Mueller 2006). Its toxicity is lessened
ication recognized in companion animals (Grauer and
by sodium loading, ECF volume expansion prior to drug
Lane 1995; Grauer and Lane 1995; Vaden et al. 1997;
 administration, and administration of liposome encap-
Thrall et al. 1998; Segev et al. 2008b; Worwag and
sulated formulations (Greene 2006; Taber and Mueller
Langston 2008; Grauer 2009; Rumbeiha and Murphy
2006).
 2009). Automobile antifreeze is the usual source of expo-
NSAIDs have become a mainstay therapy for animals
sure, but a history ofexposure to antifreeze is often denied
with chronic pain or inflammation due to the availability
and alternative sources ofethylene glycol exposure should
 of efficacious veterinary products, convenient adminis-
be considered. Glycoaldehyde, glyoxylic acid, glycolate,
 tration, and marketing claims of safety. Consequently,
and oxalic acid, the major metabolites of ethylene glycol,
 NSAIDs-induced AKI has increased in incidence in dogs
promote the specific nephrotoxicity, so timely recogni-
 and cats that have multiple predispositions for AKl as well
tion and decontamination of ethylene glycol from the
as in animals with unsupervised consumption of toxic
patient is important to prevent or minimize the renal
amounts of palatable preparations. NSAIDs either non-
injury (Thrall et al. 1998; Cowgill and Francey 2005;
selectively or selectively inhibit renal cyclooxygenases
Rumbeiha and Murphy 2009).
 which mediate production of prostaglandins to maintain
 Aminoglycoside antimicrobials (neomycin, gentam-
afferent arteriolar blood flow and GFR during states of
icin, tobramycin, amikacin, netilmicin, and strepto-
hypoperfusion (Palevsky 2004; Cheng and Harris 2005;
mycin) are polycations with low protein-binding capacity
Harris 2006; Taber and Mueller 2006). Prostaglandins
and are freely filtered at the glomerulus. They demon-
are of little physiologic or regulatory significance dur-
 strate hierarchical nephrotoxicity (as above) according
ing euvolemic states, but prostaglandin synthesis (via
to the number of cationic groups and ability to be
cyclooxygenase up-regulation) is increased when renal
transported across the cell (Kaloyanides 1984; Kaloy-
blood flow is compromised (dehydration, hypovolemia,
anides 1997; Pannu and Nadim 2008). Aminoglycosides
 congestive heart failure, dietary salt restriction, surgery,
interact with the negatively charged phospholipids on
or diuretic use) and when renal water and solute reab-
the brush border membrane of the proximal tubule
sorption is regulated by heightened renin, angiotensin I1,
and concentrate in proximal epithelium by pinocytosis
 vasopressin, and catecholamine-mediated events (Cheng
(Molitoris et al. 1993; Pannu and Nadim 2008). Once
and Harris 2005; Harris 2006; Taber and Mueller 2006).
internalized, aminoglycosides accumulate in subcellu-
The regionally generated vasodilatory prostaglandins,
lar organelles and disrupt cytosolic, mitochondrial, and
 PGE2 and PGl2, antagonize the increased vascular resis-
lysosomal function to promote cell death (Molitoris et al.
tance induced by angiotensin ll, norepinephrine, vaso-
1993; Ward et al. 2005; Pannu and Nadim 2008). Amino-
 pressin, and endothelin and preserve renal blood flow
glycosides also induce free radical injury and alter the
and glomerular filtration during these hemodynamic
ultrafiltration coefficient of glomerular capillaries to fur-
stresses (Taber and Mueller 2006). By disrupting these
ther decrease GFR. The nephrotoxicity of aminoglyco-
effects, NSAIDs administration shifts the circulatory bal-
sides is enhanced by reabsorption and concentration in
ance, predisposing the renal vasculature to unopposed
the proximal tubule, high peak serum concentrations,
vasoconstriction which constitutes an adverse effect.
prolonged cumulative dosing, preexisting kidney dis-
Prostaglandins also participate in counterregulatory con-
ease, advanced age, volume depletion, renal ischemia, or
trol of salt and water reabsorption and renin synthesis
concurrent exposure to other nephrotoxins ( Taber and
(Palevsky 2004; Cheng and Harris 2005; Harris 2006;
Mueller 2006; Clarkson et al. 2008; Pannu and Nadim
Taber and Mueller 2006). NSAID inhibition of these
2008). Extracellular fluid (ECF) volume expansion prior
prostaglandin effects increase vascular tone and promote
to aminoglycoside administration and once-daily dos-
antinatriuretic, antireninemic, and antidiuretic effects.
ing reduces drug accumulation in the renal cortex and
The principal renal toxicity associated with NSAID
decreases nephrotoxicity (Pannu and Nadim 2008).
use and overdosage in animals is renal ischemia and
Amphotericin B is a polyene antibiotic that disrupts
the integrity of cell membranes and increases their per-
dynamic effects. An allergic tubulointerstitial nephri-
meability. It also reduces renal blood flow and GFR due to
 tis and a syndrome of proteinuria with hypertension
Acute kidney insufficiency  477
Table 49.3 Nephrotoxins and mechanism of nephrotoxicity
Class of agent
Examples
 Antimicrobials
Aminoglycosides (ATN, AIN), aztreonam (AIN), bacitracin (ATN), carbapenems
(AIN), cephalosporins (AIN), colistin (ATN), penicillins (AIN), polymixin (ATN),
quinolones (AIN), rifampin(AIN), sulfonamides (AIN, Cry), tetracyclines (AIN,
Fanconi, vancomycin (AIN, ATN),
Antiprotozoals
Dapsone (AIN), pentamidine (ATN), sulfadiazine (AIN, Cry). thiacetarsamide,
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (AIN, Cry)
 Antifungals
Amphotericin B (ATN, HD)
Antivirals
Acycovir (Cry. ATN), foscarnet (Cry. ATN), indivir (Cry). cidofovir (ATN)
Chemotherapeutics
Azathioprine (AIN), cis- or carboplatin (ATN), cytosine arabinoside (AIN),
doxorubicin, gemcitabine (Vasc), ifosfamide (ATN), methotrexate (Cry), mitomycin
(Vasc), oxaliplatin (ATN), pentostatin (ATN), anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
(bevacizumab and others)
Immunosuppressives
Cyclosporine (HD, ATN, CIN, Vas), interleukin (IL) 2, rapamycin (Vasc), tacrolimus
(HD, ATN, CIN, Vasc)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
All (HD, AIN, GN)
Angiotensin-convering enzyme inhibitors.
All (HD, GN), captopril (also AIN)
angiotensin receptor antagonists
Diuretics
All (HD), furosemide (AIN), thiazides (AIN), triamterene (Cry), acetazolamide (AIN)
Diagnostic agents
Radiocontract agents (ATN, HD, Osm), gadolinium (high dose), oral sodium
phosphate solution
Miscellaneous therapeutics
Acetaminophen (AIN), allopurinol (nephrolithiasis, AIN), carbamazepine (AIN,
ATN), cimetidine (AIN), clopidogrel (vasc), deferoxamine, dextran (Osm), dopamine
(HD), e-aminocaproic acid, epinephrine (HD), hydralazine (GN), hydroxyethyl starch
(Osm), IVIg (Osm), lipid lowering agents (AIN), lithium, mannitol (Osm, HD)
methoxyflurane, methyldopa (AIN), pamidronated (GN), penicillamine (GN),
phenobarbitol (AIN), phenytoin (AIN), phosphorus-containing urinary acidifiers.
propanolol (HD), propylthiouracil (GN), proton-pump inhibitors (AIN),
quinine/quinidine (Vasc), vitamin D3 analogs (psoriasis medications), warfarin 
(AIN), zoledronate
Heavy metals
Antimony, arsenic (ATN), bismuth salts, cadmium, chromium, copper, gold (GN),
lead, mercury (HD), nickel, silver, thallium, uranium 
Organic compounds
Carbon tetrachloride and other chlorinated hydrocarbons, chloroform, ethylene
glycol (ATN), herbicides, pesticides, solvents
Miscellaneous toxins
Bee venom (ATN), disphosphonates, gallium nitrate, lilies, germanium, grapes and
raisins, melamine cyanurate (Cry), mushrooms, silicon, snake venom (HD), sodium 
fluoride, superphosphate fertilizer, vitamin D3-containing rodenticides (HD)
Endogenous toxins
Hemoglobin, myoglobin 
Illicit drugs
Amphetamines?, cocainea (HD), heroin?, barbiturates?, phencyclidinea aAKI from
rhabdomyolysis
Alternative products
Herbal: Akebia sp, Aristolchic acid (fibrosis), Ephedra sp (ma huang), Cape aloes,
Taxus celebica, Uno degatta, Glycyrrhiza sp. Datura sp
Adulterants: mefenamic acid, dichromate, cadmium, phenylbutazone
Source: Compiled from (Cowgill and Francey 2005: Taber and Mueller 2006: Langston and Boyd 2007: Evenepoel 2009: Perazella 2009;
Rumbeiha and Murphy 2009: Langston 2010).
Abbreviations: ATN, acute tubular necrosis; AIN, acute interstitial nephritis; HD, hemodynamic; GN, glomerular: Cry, obstructive nephropa-
thy (crystal formation); ON, osmotic nephrosis; Vas, Vascular; CIN, chronic interstitial nephritis.
478  Upper urinary tract disorders
and  hyporeninemic-hypoaldosteroneism  have 
been
et al. 2004). Any environmental exposure to lily plants
described in humans (Harris 2006; Taber and Mueller
should raise suspicion of intoxication as consumption
2006; Pannu and Nadim 2008). The nephrotoxicity of
of even small segments of the leaves or especially the
NSAIDs is exacerbated in animals with congestive heart
flowers can prove fatal. The toxicity is reproducible with
failure, nephrotic syndrome, AKI or CKD, hypertension,
a water-soluble extract from the leaves and flowers, but
cirrhosis, and anesthesia in which blood volume is com-
the precise identity of the toxin remains uncharacterized
promised and renal vascular tone is increased. Despite
(Rumbeiha et al. 2004).
early claims of lessened nephrotoxicity for the COX-2
Q oi pnou sy aam susiei pue sad go us
selective NSAIDs, these agents have similar renal toxicity
associated with AKI in 1999 (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2001).
in susceptible patients and should be used with simi-
Vomiting is a common feature that occurs within hours
lar precautions to the non-selective or COX-1 selective
of ingestion (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2001; Campbell and
inhibitors.
Bates 2003; Penny et al. 2003; Mazzaferro et al. 2004;
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and
Eubig et al. 2005; Stanley and Langston 2008). Undigested
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) blunt angiotensin
 grapes or raisins may be seen in the vomitus or in diar-
II-mediated vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole
rheal contents. Azotemia develops in some dogs within
resulting in decreased efferent arteriolar resistance,
24 hours. Hypercalcemia was present in 63% of dogs in
glomerular capillary pressure, and GFR (Lefebvre et al.
 One series (Eubig et al. 2005). Proximal tubular degener-
2007; Pannu and Nadim 2008). Azotemia and acute
ation and necrosis were noted on renal histopathology.
decompensation of underlying kidney disease are seen
with intracellular pigment noted in 6 of 10 cases. The
in dogs and cats following ACE inhibitor administration.
chemical composition of the pigment is undetermined
 n       s 
(Morrow et al. 2005). Approximately 50% of dogs that
able and typically occurs in animals with existing CKD
developed azotemia survived, of which 65% had com-
or hemodynamic predispositions (e.g-, sodium deple-
plete resolution of azotemia (Eubig et al. 2005). Not all
tion, congestive heart failure, and diuretic use) when the
 grape or raisin ingestion leads to clinical signs, and the
maintenance of basal GFR is dependent on angiotensin
amount of ingestion leading to intoxication is reported
II-mediated vasoconstriction (Atkins et al. 2002; Lefebvre 
variably. The toxic principle causing the tubular degen-
et al. 2006; Lefebvre et al. 2007).
 eration also is unknown.
Toxicity associated with ingestion of plant material
 Over the past decade the most significant new cause
has become an important cause of nephrotoxicity in
-dau Aq Pas sem sieo pue sop qoq ui v jo
 dogs and cats over the past 10 years. Both lily poisoning
toxic and obstructive injury resulting from ingestion of
aq 0i ieadde shop un Aixoi usieiadeo pue sieo u!
 pet foods manufactured with sourced ingredients from
immerging etiologies for AKI (Brady and Janovitz 2000; 
China that were adulterated with melamine and cyanuric
Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2001; Langston 2002; Mazzaferro
acid (Cianciolo et al. 2008; Dobson et al. 2008; Yhee et al.
et al. 2004; Rumbeiha et al. 2004; Eubig et al. 2005;
2009). Two widespread incidences involving thousands
Morrow et al. 2005; Berg et al. 2007). AKI associated with
of animals have been documented in Asia in 2003 and
lily ingestion has been documented for decades but was
2004 and North America in 2007 (Brown et al. 2007;
not specifically identified as a common etiology for AKI 
Thompson et al. 2008; Osborne et al. 2009; Yhee et al.
in cats in published reviews prior to 2o00 (Grauer and
2009). The underlying cause of these disasters was ulti-
Lane 1995; Langston et al. 1997; Brady and Janovitz 2000;
 mately unraveled through a remarkable epidemiologic
Cowgill and Elliott 2000). More recently, lily poisoning
 process following massive recalls of suspected pet foods
has become a prominent etiology for cats presenting with
following both outbreaks (Brown et al. 2007; Puschner
acute azotemia (Brady and Janovitz 2000; Langston 2002;
et al. 2007; Cianciolo et al. 2008; Dobson et al. 2008; Yhee
Rumbeiha et al. 2004; Berg et al. 2007). Essentially all
et al. 2009). In 2008, widespread outbreaks of urolithiasis
species of the genus Lillium including Easter lilies, Tiger
and renal death were also reported affecting greater than
lies, Asiatic hybrid lilies, Japanese lilies, and Stargazer 
50,000 children exposed to powdered formula or milk
lilies and the genus Hemerocallis including Day lily,
powder from China adulterated with melamine (Bhalla
Orange day lily, Red lily, and Western lily are nephrotoxic
et al. 2009; Hau et al. 2009). Melamine is an organic
to cats (Hadley et al. 2003; Means 2007; Hovda 2010).
base derived from urea which is used commercially in
Lily poisoning causes a very acute onset of anorexia,
the manufacture of plastic products and as a fertilizer
depression, vomiting, polydipsia, marked azotemia,
and severe uremic signs associated with extensive toxic
Melamine and a variety of similar triazine compounds,
necrosis of the proximal tubular epithelium and pancreas
 including cyanuric acid, are nonprotein nitrogen chem-
(Brady and Janovitz 2000; Langston 2002; Rumbeiha
icals with no known nutritional value. They have been
Acute kidney insufficiency  479
nefariously added as adulterants to sourced ingredients of
(Anonymous 2007; FDA 2008; Lau 2009). Ingestion
manufactured pet foods and human foods to falsely bol-
of these treats led to an acquired form of Fanconi
ster the measured or apparent nitrogen content (Burns
syndrome, including glucosuria with normoglycemia,
2007; Hau et al. 2009).
aminoaciduria, cylindiuria, hypokalemia, metabolic aci-
Individually, melamine and cyanuric acid have min-
 dosis, and frequently azotemia. Gastrointestinal signs
imal acute in vivo renal toxicity in cats and dogs when
(vomiting and anorexia) and elevated liver enzymes were
ingested up to 1% of the diet or in vitro cytotoxicity
   s    
at even very high concentrations (Puschner et al. 2007;
monly affected. Most dogs recover, although permanent
Dobson et al. 2008). In combination, these chemicals
 renal damage or death is possible. After recognition of
interact to form a melamine-cyanurate complex which
the problem and voluntary recall of the suspected prod-
is highly ordered and ostensibly insoluble in acidic
ucts, the number of cases seems to have declined (Lau
urine, predisposing to crystal deposition and urolith
2009). Acquired Fanconi syndrome also has been associ-
formation throughout the kidney (Puschner et al. 2007;
 ated with copper storage hepatopathy. (Appleman et al.
Dobson et al. 2008; Thompson et al. 2008; Hau et al.
2008; Hill et al. 2008b)
2009; Osborne et al. 2009). When coingested in the
Acquired infectious, immune-mediated, neoplastic, or
diet, clinical signs of depression, anorexia, vomiting.
degenerative diseases expressed primarily in the kidney
polydipsia, polyuria, and azotemia are seen acutely in
may cause intrinsic renal failure ( Table 49.2). If fulmi-
experimental cats consuming diets containing 0.2%
nating and extensive, they produce AKI that must be
melamine and cyanuric acid or with ingestion of as little
differentiated from ischemic or nephrotoxic etiologies.
as 32 mg/kg body weight of each substance (Puschner
Leptospirosis is a worldwide zoonotic disease that
et al. 2007; Cianciolo et al. 2008). Similar signs and
affects many organ systems in infected dogs. It has been
clinical courses are seen in dogs and cats exposed natu-
 reported to occur rarely in domestic cats (Carlos et al.
rally to food contaminated to a similar extent (Puschner
1971; Bryson and Ellis 1976; Dickeson and Love 1993;
et al. 2007; Hau et al. 2009). Natural exposure causes
Agunloye and Nash 1996; Mylonakis et al. 2005). Renal,
variable and progressive azotemia and most dogs and
hepatic, pulmonary, vascular, and hematologic manifes-
cats die of acute uremia (Burns 2007; Yhee et al. 2009).
tations are common; and involvement of any of these
The majority of exposed animals develop characteristic
 organ systems in isolation or combination should prompt
fan-shaped, refractile, birefringent crystals distributed
suspicion ofleptospirosis (Rentko et al. 1992; Harkin and
throughout the cortex, medulla, and pelvis of the kidney
Gartrell 1996; Birnbaum et al. 1998; Adin and Cowgill
and in urine. Green-yellowish uroliths are an additional
2000; Ward 2002; Ward 2002; Ward et al. 2002; Boutilier
distinguishing feature that can cause outflow obstruction
et al. 2003; Greenlee et al. 2005; Geisen et al. 2007).
at the renal pelvis, ureter or urethra (Cocchi et al. 2009;
The disease is caused by pathogenic strains of a gram-
Hau et al. 2009; Osborne et al. 2009; Yhee et al. 2009).
negative motile spirochete from the genomospecies,
The melamine-cyanurate complex also causes dose
Leptospira (Greene et al. 2006; Levett 2001; Guerra 2009).
dependent necrosis of the distal tubular epithelium by
Identification of causative organisms in the clinical set-
undefined effects (Brown et al. 2007; Puschner et al. 2007;
ting has become confused as there is transition of the
Yhee et al. 2009).
taxonomy from the clinically familiar phenotypic classi-
Melamine-cyanuric acid intoxication promotes AKI
fication of species, serogroups, and serovars based pri-
(and CKD) in both dogs and cats; however, the preva-
 marily on pathogenicity, culture, and serology to a geno-
lence of disease and demonstrated mortality has been
typic classification of genomospecies based on DNA
disproportionate between the reported outbreaks in Asia
identification (Greene et al. 2006; Levett 2001). Unfor-
and North America for undetermined reasons ( Yhee et al.
tunately, the molecular methods for genotypic classifica-
2009) (Cowgill, personal observations, 2008). The nearly
tion of leptospires are not routine, necessitating contin-
instantaneous and continuous reporting of the initial and
ued clinical application of serological classification. Both
subsequently observed cases throughout North Amer-
the presence of leptospirosis as well as the prevalence
ica by informal listserves and internet communication is
of pathogenic serovars in dogs maintains tremendous
 likely responsible in part for the rapid recognition of the
 geographic variability. The most commonly reported
2007 outbreak as well as its relative containment in scope
serovars in dogs over the past 10 years in the United
compared to the 2003-2004 outbreaks in Asia.
States included autumnalis, grippotyphosa, bratislava,
Another recently recognized food-related nephrotox-
and pomona (Adin and Cowgill 2000; Boutilier et al.
icity in dogs is thought to be associated with consump-
2003; Goldstein et al. 2006; Moore et al. 2006; Stokes et al.
tion of chicken jerky treats imported from China or
2007). The prevalence ofleptospirosis has recognized sea-
 a vegetarian dental chew treat distributed in Australia
sonality. It is most typically diagnosed from July through
480  Upper urinary tract disorders
December in the Northern Hemisphere and from
or shock (Greene et al. 2006). In subacute to chronic
January through June in the Southern Hemisphere, cor-
stages of the disease, additional signs can include con-
responding to warm and wet weather conditions that are
junctivitis, uveitis, rhinitis, meningitis, as well as hepatic
favorable for persistence of the organism in the environ-
and renal dysfunction (Adin and Cowgill 2000; Langston 
ment (Greene et al. 2006; Rentko et al. 1992; Harkin and
and Heuter 2003; Greenlee et al. 2004; Greenlee et al.
Gartrell 1996; Birnbaum et al. 1998; Adin and Cowgill
2005; Goldstein et al. 2006; Geisen et al. 2007; Mastrorilli
2000; Levett 2001; Ward 2002; Ward 2002; Ward et al.
et al. 2007; Guerra 2009). The onset of clinical signs can
2002; Goldstein et al. 2006; Miller et al. 2007).
vary depending on host susceptibility and the infecting
Leptospiral organisms colonize renal tubules of main-
serovar.
tenance hosts and are excreted in the urine to estab-
 In most studies, the infecting serovar did not deter-
lish a reservoir in the environment. Incidental hosts, like
mine the spectrum of clinical signs or outcome for
the dog, are exposed to the organism by direct contact
survival. In a single study, dogs naturally infected
with urine, by indirect exposure to urine-contaminated
with serovar pomona were more likely to demon-
water or soil, or by contact with infected blood or tis-
strate vomiting, thrombocytopenia, worse azotemia, and
sues (Levett 2001; Guerra 2009). The organism gains
greater mortality than dogs infected with other serovars
access to the blood stream through mucous membranes
(Goldstein et al. 2006; Geisen et al. 2007).
or abraded skin. Once they have penetrated, leptospires
Bacterial infection of the kidney (nephritis,
attach to endothelial cells promoting vascular damage,
 pyelonephritis) is caused either by ascending infec-
vasculitis, vascular leakage and hemorrhage, inflamma-
tion from the lower urogenital tract or by hematoge-
tion, and dysregulation ofthe coagulation system (Guerra
nous distribution to the kidneys. Acute pyelonephri-
2009). Leptospires circulating in renal capillaries migrate
tis is a bacterial or fungal infection causing patchy
into the interstitium and subsequently invade the tubu-
 or diffuse interstitial inflammation and tubular epithe-
lar epithelial cells. The organism can be detected within
lial necrosis. The most common infecting organism
tubular epithelium or the tubular lumen by silver stain-
is E.coli, but other major isolates include Staph. spp.,
Proteus, Strep. spp., Enterococcus spp., Klebsiella spp.
2002). Subcellular injury from putative leptospiral tox-
and Pseudomonas (Barsanti et al. 1994; Norris et al.
ins causes hepatic dysfunction without major histologic
2000; Barsanti 2006; Labato 2009). Host factors that
lesions (Greene et al. 2006). The incubation period is
increase the risk for pyelonephritis include structural
approximately 7 days to the onset of early signs which
and anatomic abnormalities of the urinary tract, instru-
include fever, stiffness, myalgia, vomiting, dehydration,
mentation (e.g., catheterization) of the urinary tract, dis-
pulmonary fluid exudation or hemorrhage (Figure 49.1),
 orders of micturition, impaired immune defenses (e.g-)
(a)
(b)
Figure 49.1 Uremic lung ventral dorsal (left) and lateral (right) thoracic radiographs of a dog with progressing AKl (Stage IV, 0, RRT)
secondary to leptospirosis (16-fold increase in MAT titer @ >1:3200 to L. pomona). The radiographic features include diffuse, patchy.
heavy, and nodular pulmonary infiltrates with a predominate peribronchial distribution and air brochograms
Acute kidney insufficiency   481
diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, and immuno-
or cystostomy tube. Rupture of the urinary system also
suppressive drug therapy) (Langston and Boyd 2007;
causes azotemia that rapidly reverses if managed by
Tolkoff-Rubin et al. 2009). Fungal pyelonephritis is less
correction or urinary diversion (i.e., urethral catheter to
common and may be identified by the presence of yeast
bypass the rupture, peritoneal drain, or surgical repair).
or hyphae in the urine, fungal culture, or fungal serol-
Ureteral obstruction may cause acute severe azotemia,
 ogy (Day and Holt 1994; Starkey and McLoughlin 1996; 
and currently it is the most common etiology of AKI in
Newman et al. 2003; Pressler et al. 2003; Coldrick et al.
cats treated with hemodialysis. The incidence of ureteral
2007).
calculi in cats has increased over the past decade, and the
AKI associated with significant proteinuria can occur
majority (98%) of these calculi are composed of calcium
from a variety of causes. Proteinuria may be renal in ori-
oxalate (Kyles et al. 2005; Kyles and Westropp 2009).
gin (i.e., acute tubular injury, or glomerular disease) or
Other causes of ureteral obstruction include dried solid-
from concurrent lower urinary tract infection or inflam-
ified blood clots, pyelonephritis debris, and stricture for-
 mation. Chronic glomerular disease is commonly diag-
mation ( Westropp et al. 2006; Kyles and Westropp 2009).
de  e re o si  ao s
e  i a doap on ene e 
in later stages, but acute glomerular disease with renal
obstruction, obstruction of a solitary kidney, or unilateral
failure can occur with several infectious or inflamma-
ureteral obstruction and a contralateral nonfunctional
tory diseases. Borrelia burgdorferi has been associated
kidney (either from preexisting chronic disease or acute
with a syndrome of glomerular proteinuria and ARF that
concurrent disease such as pyelonephritis).
is often fatal within 1-2 weeks (Dambach et al. 1997;
Littman 2003; Hutton et al. 2008). Although Borrelia
organisms have not been definitively identified in the
Pathophysiology of AKl
kidney, an antibody-antigen immune reaction may be
Phases of AKi
involved in the pathogenesis (Hutton et al. 2008). The
cause of cutaneous and glomerular vasculopathy in Grey-
AKI can be categorized into four pathophysiologic
hounds ("Alabama Rot") is unknown; the renal lesions
phases: the initiation phase, the extension phase, the
are similar to hemolytic-uremic syndrome in humans
maintenance phase, and recovery. The initiation phase
which is caused by shiga-toxin producing strains of E. coli
begins with the renal insult (e.g., ischemic, nephrotoxic,
(Cowan et al. 1997). Acute infection with Ehrlichia canis
obstructive) and continues until there is a definable
can cause proteinuria and minimal change glomerulopa-
 change in renal function such as decreased urine out-
thy (Codner et al. 1992; Cohn 2003). A severe acute
put or azotemia. The length of time necessary to develop
glomerulonephritis can be seen in dogs with Leishma-
a recognizable clinical change is variable and depends on
niasis, a protozoan infection transmitted by bites of the
the nature and severity of the insult (Finn 2001). During
this phase, early intervention has the greatest potential
ease involves multiple organs such as spleen, liver, lymph
to alter the progression and severity of the renal injury,
nodes, bone marrow, kidneys, and skin (Lopez-Pena et al.
2009). Moderate to severe proteinuria and glomerular
biomarkers are too insensitive to reveal the injury or to
lesions are encountered commonly, although tubular and
 prompt intervention.
interstitial lesions may also be seen (Zaragoza et al. 2003;
Next is the extension phase, during which the injury is
Zatelli et al. 2003). Death from renal failure is a common 
perpetuated by inducible events associated with contin-
outcome (Zatelli et al. 2003).
 ued hypoxia or inflammatory responses that propagate
Obstruction or diversion of urine flow can lead to
damage to the kidney in concert with or independently of
acute azotemia. Urinary obstruction decreases GFR by
 the initiating insult (Figure 49.2 and 49.3) (Sutton et al.
a combination of neurohumoral events and increased
2002). Cortical (proximal tubules) and outer medullary
back-pressure in the kidney. An increase in intratubular
(pars recta, medullary thick ascending limb of Henle's
pressure from the obstruction disrupts the balance
loop) structures are predisposed to toxic and ischemic
of hydrostatic and oncotic pressures that determine
 damage because they receive 90% of renal blood flow, are 
glomerular ultrafiltration leading to the decrease in GFR.
highly metabolic, and have high energy requirements.
The azotemia usually resolves promptly after reestab-
 Intrarenal vasoconstriction and capillary obstruction,
lishing urine flow, but temporary or permanent renal
hypoperfusion, and hypoxia in the extension phase
damage may develop if repair is delayed. Common causes
 decrease ATP concentration in sensitive epithelia, impair 
of urethral obstruction include urolithiasis, mucus plugs,
Na+K+ ATPase activity, and trigger cellular swelling
blood clots, neoplasia, or stricture and may be treated on
 and apoptotic and necrotic cell death (Padanilam 2003).
an emergency basis by placement of a urethral catheter
Less severely affected epithelial cells undergo loss of the
482
 Upper urinary tract disorders
Normal tubular epithelial cells
injured by an ischemic event
suffer cytoskeleton damage
and lose their polarity.
The brush border is lost,
cells undergo necrosis or
apoptosis, and cells detach
from the basement
membrane, contributing to
B
luminal debris that causes
cast formation
Surviving epithelial cells de-
differentiate, proliferate,
and migrate. ‘Renal and
bone marrow derived
hematopoietic stem cells
may contribute cels to the
repair process.
Local and bone marrow
D
derived mesenehymal stem
cells produce growth factors
that aid renal repair.
Cells re-differentiate and re-
establish normal polarity.
Adhesion Molecule
NaKATPage
Figure 49.2 (Left) Schematic representation of the progressive pathophysiologic events affecting renal tubular epithelial cells during
ischemic acute kidney injury. (Right) Renal histopathological in a dog with acute kidney injury of undetermined cause in various stages 
of injury and repair demonstrating each category of events portrayed in the schematic illustration (PAs, magnification 40 x).
brush border at the apical cell surface, loss of cellular
 heralded by an increase in urine output that is accom-
 polarization, and cellular detachment from the basement
panied variably by a decrease in urine sodium concen-
membrane (Racusen 200l; Padanilam 2003). These
tration. In these animals, sodium losses may be extreme
sublethal cellular injuries may trigger intrinsic pathways
causing profound volume depletion which can delay or
to initiate necrotic or apoptotic cell death or intrinsic
interrupt renal recovery or even cause additional renal
cellular protections may block these programmed events 
injury (Finn 200l; Cowgill and Francey 2005; Liu and
and spare the cell. Intervention during this phase may
Brakeman 2008; Langston 2010). In nonoliguric animals,
or may not be successful depending on the extent of
a change in urine output may not be a useful indica-
epithelial damage, cellular targets for the intervention,
tor of recovery. Instead, decreases in BUN, creatinine,
 and the timing of the pathologic events.
 or urea appearance as predictors of improved renal clear-
The third phase is the maintenance phase, which gen-
ance, or increases in urine concentration and decreases in
erally lasts from 1 to 3 weeks but varies greatly in duration
sodium excretion, as evidence of improved tubular func-
(Finn 2001; Clarkson et al. 2008). Urine output during
tion, mark the recovery phase. Regeneration and repair
this phase can be increased or decreased, and the urine
of the renal damage may take weeks to months.
resembles the glomerular ultrafiltrate with little mod-
 ification by tubular processes. In this phase, a critical
 amount of parenchymal damage has occurred which may
Celluiar mechanisms of ischemic AK!
not be reversible.
Cellular damage involves three forms of injury: sublethal
The fourth phase, the recovery phase, is the interval
damage, apoptosis, and necrosis (Padanilam 2003; Liu
in which the renal parenchymal damage is being repaired
and Brakeman 2008). Although AKI is commonly called
(Figure 49.2). In oliguric or anuric animals, this phase is
acute tubular necrosis, necrosis is not the prominent
Acute kidney insufficiency  483
Normal endothelial cells produce
vasodilatory (PGE, PGL, NO) and
vasoconstrictive (endothelin,
prostanoids, ATIl) substances
Intrarenal vasoconstriction may be
caused by imbalance of endothelin and
lack of NO
Energy deprivation damages the
endothelial cell cytoskeleton and cells
swell. Endothelium-erythrocyte
 interactions lead to RBC sludging.
Damage to endothelial cells leads to
increased permeability
Cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion
 molecules draw leukocytes into area,
which further the inflammation and
sludging.
Figure 49.3 Schematic representation of the responses of renal vascular endothelial cells to ischemic acute kidney injury: see text for
detailed discussion.
histologic feature (Racusen 2001; Padanilam 2003). A
microvasculature in this region during the initiation and
patchy distribution of tubular foci with degenerative and
extension phases of AKI (Padanilam 2003; Clarkson et al.
apoptotic, and less commonly necrotic, damage occurs
 2008). The vulnerability of different nephron segments
throughout the kidney with minimal interstitial inflam-
    s   s
matory infiltrates (Racusen 2001). Proximal tubular cells
some segments to undergo necrotic cell death, others to
at the corticomedullary junction and outer medulla and
undergo apoptosis, and still others to be only sublethally
are most severely affected by ischemia and hypoxia. These
injured. A variety of disorders of celular metabolism
   e  a  s e e sg
contribute to the mechanisms promoting irreversible
energy requirements and the marginal perfusion of the
cell death or sublethal epithelial and endothelial damage.
484
 Upper urinary tract disorders
are not due entirely to preservation of cytosolic calcium.
N= 4 dogs
al
They improved renal hemodynamics and stabilized cell
membranes. Other factors that contribute to ischemic
damage on a cellular basis are reperfusion injury, oxi-
of
ICF volume
dant injury, intracellular acidosis, phospholipase activa-
%}
ECF volume
tion, and protease activation (Racusen 2001; Padanilam
lume
2003; Devarajan 2006; Clarkson et al. 2008; Garwood
-10
2009).
Blood volume
 Ischemia leads to an inflammatory response in the
-15
kidney by three mechanisms: ATP depletion, increased
U
30
60
90
120
150
180
　210
¥240
Time (minutes)
hypoxia inducible factor (HIF), and increased reactive
 Oxygen molecule species ( Bonventre and Weinberg 2003; 
Figure 49.4 Effects of furosemide on changes in fluid volume in
Bonventre and Zuk 2004; Furuichi et al. 2009). Deple-
normal dogs. Mean changes (% of baseline) in blood volume (red).
tion of ATP during renal ischemia causes mitochon-
extracellular fluid volume (ECF volume, blue), and intracellular fluid
 drial damage and a resultant increase in production of
volume (ICF volume, magenta) in response to intravenous admin-
 inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species (Fig-
istration of furosemide at 4 mg/kg (time, 0) to 4 clinically normal
dogs. Change in blood volume was measured b optically every
ure 49.2) (Segerer et al. 2000; Bonventre and Zuk 2004;
20 seconds by an in-line hematocrit monitor, and ECF and ICF vol-
Clarkson et al. 2008; Andreoli 2009). These cytokines
umes were determined every 5-10 seconds with multifrequency
induce chemokines which attract macrophages, poly-
bioimpedance spectroscopy. Blood volume is affected dispropor-
morphonuclear leukocytes, and T lymphocyte cells. In a
tionately and most severely by the diuretic response during the
positive feedback loop, the recruited inflammatory cells
4 hours of observation.
 then generate more cytokines and reactive oxygen species,
exacerbating the inflammatory response and causing fur-
Under conditions of oxygen deprivation, ATP is depleted
ther tissue injury to both tubular epithelial cells and the
leading to an energy deficit in the cell and disruption of
vascular endothelium (Heinzelmann et al. 1999; Nath
ATP mediated processes. Prolonged ischemia and deple-
and Norby 2000; Bonventre and Zuk 2004; Grigoryev
tion of ATP will cause relocation of membrane-associated
et al. 2008; Garw0od 2009).
proteins and transporters, alterations in cellular polarity,
 Ischemic vascular endothelial cells express a variety
perturbations in cytosolic composition, and mitochon-
 of adhesion molecules including intercellular adhesion
drial damage further impairing the ability to regenerate
molecule-1 (ICAM-1), P-selectin, and E-selectin. These
ATP (Bonventre 2003; Devarajan 2006; Bonventre 2007;
events lead to adhesion of leukocytes and platelets to
Kosieradzki and Rowinski 2008). Decreased activity of
the endothelium, which further diminishes flow in the
Na+K+ ATPase dissipates the Na+ and K+ concentration 
peritubular capillaries and promotes further ischemia
gradients across the cell. The accumulation of cytosolic
and hypoxia in the oxygen deprived and metaboli-
Na+ and water causes cellular swelling which
can
cally sensitive regions of the outer medulla. Disrup-
 initiate necrotic cell death (Padanilam 2003). Swelling 
tion of endothelial integrity may also account for fibrin
of the tubular epithelium and vascular endothelium
deposits in the renal microvasculature (Devarajan 2006;
causes tubular obstruction and vascular congestion,
Devarajan 2009). Endothelium-erythrocyte interactions
respectively (Figure 49.3 and 49.4). These events
lead to sludging of red blood cells in peritubular capillar-
compromise tubular fluid flow and reperfusion of the
ies, further limiting the delivery of oxygen to the tubules
Oxygen-sensitive parenchyma (Bonventre and Weinberg
(Mason et al. 1987; Hellberg et al. 1991; Yamamoto et al.
2003; Goligorsky et al. 2004; Versteilen et al. 2004; Tumlin
2002; Clarkson et al. 2008).
2009).
 Normal cells have poised apoptotic machinery which
The role of increased cytosolic free calcium in the cel-
is disengaged by regulatory survival factors. If no survival 
lular events of AKl is multifactorial. Cytosolic calcium
factors are present due to cellular injury, apoptosis is trig-
concentration increases substantially in energy depleted
 gered to promote cell death (Liu and Brakeman 2008). In
states because ofimpaired activity of intracellular calcium
response to ischemia, hypoxic renal tubular cells upreg-
transporters (Finn 2001). This promotes mitochondria
ulate HIF genes in addition to other cell survival gene
uptake of calcium, leading to mitochondrial swelling and
targets to oppose apoptotic damage. Failure of the up-
uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation. Calcium chan-
regulation of HIF is associated with lethal cellular dam-
nel blockers, especially diltiazem and verapamil, amelio-
 age (apoptotic cell death). Erythropoietin (EPO) is one
of the transcriptional gene targets of stabilized HIF which
ent (Finn 2001). The effects of calcium channel blockers
is responsible in part for its anti-apoptotic effects. It is
Acute kidney insufficiency  485
 therefore possible that therapeutic intervention with HIF
tubule also operates in a quasi-oxygen deprived setting
or EPO can ameliorate apoptotic damage to the tubular
and has a variable workload dependent on GFR, prox-
epithelium and protect the kidney against ischemic injury
imal tubule solute reabsorption, and distal delivery of
(Gong et al. 2004; Patel et al. 2004; Sharples et al. 2004;
 solute. The disproportionate ischemic damage to tubular
Clarkson et al. 2008; Hill et al. 2008a; Rosen and Stillman
segments in the outer medulla including the pars recta
2008; Weidemann et al. 2008; Lee et al. 2009).
and the mTAL and distal tubule reflects this regional
Tubular epithelial dysfunction and endothelial dys-
 imbalance of oxygen delivery and oxygen demand dur-
function both contribute to the reduction in GFR
ing ischemia.
and renal blood flow associated with ischemic renal
 The actin cytoskeleton plays an important role in
injury. Under normal circumstances, tubular produc-
 renal cell function and cytoskeletal injury during energy
tion of prostaglandins (such as prostacyclin) mediates
depletion and is an important and consistent feature of
vasodilatation of the afferent arteriole, which decreases
 ischemic AK1 (Racusen 2001; Devarajan 2006). The nor-
renal vascular resistance and helps maintain renal blood
mal reabsorption and unidirectional transport of sodium
flow (Andreoli 2009). In addition tubular generation
 depends on cell polarity. With ATP depletion, disruption
of angiotensin Il  increases efferent arteriolar resis-
of actin cytoskeleton impairs the fence function of junc-
tance to maintain intraglomerular pressure and ultra-
tional complexes which normally prevent migration of
filtration. (Andreoli 2009) Renal vascular endothelial
 certain membrane-imbedded structures including solute
cells release a variety of counter-regulatory vasoactive
transporters and pumps and integrins (molecules that
products including vasodilatory factors (nitric oxide,
 mediate cell-cell and cell-basement membrane adhe-
prostaglandin E2, and prostacyclin) and vasoconstrictive
sion). This membrane disorientation results in loss of
factors (endothelin, prostanoids, and components of the
polarity of epithelial cells in the proximal tubule which
renin-angiotensin system) capable of overriding the nor-
may be reversible with reestablishment of the cytoskele-
mal regulation of vascular tone. The increased vascular
ton. Sodium/potassium ATPase pumps remain func-
resistance, characteristic of AKl, may be due to an imbal-
tional but are redistributed from basolateral to apical
ance in these opposing factors to favor vasoconstriction
membrane disrupting transepithelial solute and sodium
(Garw0od 2009).B
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase
reabsorption from the tubular lumen.
(eNOS) function is decreased with hypoxic/ischemic
The structural integrity of the microvilli of the proxi-
 renal damage reducing nitric oxide-mediated vasodi-
 mal tubular brush border is disrupted by damage to the
lation and facilitating vasoconstriction. In contrast,
actin core bundle. This causes sloughing of the microvilli
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) is increased. iNOS
 generates reactive oxygen and nitrogen molecules that
 der in more distal segments. The actin cytoskeleton also
may participate in toxic damage to the tubules (Golig-
 plays an important role to limit paracellular reabsorp-
orsky et al. 2002; Goligorsky et al. 2004; Andreoli 2009).
tion at the junction complexes between epithelial cells.
Some agents, such as endothelin, angiotensin-ll, and
Ischemic injury to the cytoskeleton increases permeabil-
adenosine, have diverse effects promoting cortical vaso-
ity of tight junctions permitting back-leakage of glomeru-
constriction and vasodilation in the medullary micro-
lar fltrate which contributes to the oliguria. Disrupted
circulation, depending on the type and density of their
cell-substrate attachment from damage to the cytoskele-
vascular receptors (Ruschitzka et al. 1999; Wilhelm et al.
ton and integrins leads to denudement of cells from
1999; Conger 2001; Sutton et al. 2002).
basement membrane (Figure 49.2). This allows more
Changes in vasomotor tone of the vasculature impact
back-leakage of glomerular filtrate, loss of tight junc-
 Oxygen delivery to regional tubular segments. The proxi-
tion complex function, sloughing of cells into the tubu-
 mal tubule has a constant workload and constant energy
lar lumen, and necrotic cell death. Adhesion of detached
and oxygen requirement is normally supplied with a
renal epithelial cells to sublethally injured cells still
high pO2 content (Brezis and Rosen 1995). Damage
attached to basement membrane causes aggregation of
to the proximal tubule is related to decreased oxygen
 detached cells within the lumen, causing cast formation
delivery rather than increased metabolic demand. The
and tubular obstruction (Devarajan 2006).
 outer medulla normally exists in a state of chronic oxy-
In addition to the fall in GFR, the ability of the kidney
 gen deprivation, despite the high metabolic demands and
 to concentrate urine diminishes during ischemic AKI due
energy expenditure ofthis region due to the activity of the
to loss of aquaporin water channels and dissipation of the
 u sd se u sd ssI +t ros
medullary solute gradient. Treatment with EPO or alpha-
segment) of the proximal tubule and medulary ascend-
melanocyte stimulating hormone has been shown to help
ing thick loop of Henle (mTAL) (Brezis and Rosen 1995;
 normalize aquaporin expression (Kwon et al. 1999; Gong 
Lameire et al. 2005; Clarkson et al. 2008). The distal
et al. 2004).
486  Upper urinary tract disorders
Pathophysiology of nephrotoxic AK!
 lar organic anion or cation transport mechanisms which
leads to their cellular accumulation.
The kidney is predisposed to nephrotoxic damage
 Some drugs including antineoplastics, immunother-
because its rich blood supply enhances delivery of toxins
apeutics, and antiplatelet agents induce a thrombotic
for filtration and exposure to the tubular epithelium.
microangiopathy causing embolic ischemia in the kid-
 si  ni   e 
ney (Medina et al. 2001; Dlott et al. 2004; Zakarija and
xenobiotics (i.e., ethylene glycol) and in the process may
 Bennett 2005). Intratubular obstruction from solute pre-
transform a relatively harmless parent compound into
cipitation or crystal formation may occur with acyclovir,
a toxic metabolite (Clarkson et al. 2008). Nephrotoxic
sulfonamides, methotrexate, indinavir, triamterene, and
acute injury can be mediated via altered renal hemody-
melamine/cyanuric acid (Perazella 1999; Cianciolo et al.
namics, allergic interstitial inflammation, direct tubular
2008). Single nephron glomerular filtration is impaired
epithelial toxicity, vascular injury, intratubular obstruc-
in the obstructed tubules causing cumulative filtration
tion, or osmotic nephrosis. The toxicity of many sub-
failure of the entire kidney. The intraluminal compound
stances is increased in the presence of borderline or overt
may secondarily induce localized toxicity to the tubular
renal ischemia (Clarkson et al. 2008; Evenepoel 2009).
epithelium (i.e., calcium oxalate and melamine-cyanuric
NSAIDs inhibit prostaglandin mediated dilation of the
acid). Osmotic nephrosis occurs when a hyperoncotic
afferent arteriole and cause a functional increase in renal
substance is transported into the proximal tubule cells
vascular resistance and decrease in renal blood flow and
by pinocytosis and induces severe cellular swelling. It
GFR. In contrast, ACE inhibitors and angiotensin recep-
ns o psdxa sr u pon q s
tor antagonists alter renal hemodynamics primarily by
mannitol, intravenous immunoglobulin, radiocontrast
promoting efferent arteriolar vasodilation, decreased
agents, dextran, and hydroxyethyl starch (Markowitz and
glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure and GFR. Cal-
Perazella 2005; Evenepoel 2009).
cineurin inhibitors (e.g-, cyclosporine) cause afferent
arteriolar constriction through a vasoconstrictive imbal-
Renal recovery
ance of prostaglandin E2 (vasodilation) and thrombox-
ane A2 (vasoconstriction) mediated vascular resistances
Renal recovery depends on the normalization of sub-
(Olyaei et al. 2001). Radiocontrast agents are postu-
lethally injured cells with realignment of polarity, migra-
lated to cause AKI by a combination of vasoconstriction
tion of viable cells to gaps on the basement membrane,
and direct tubular toxicity due to generation of reac-
removal of necrotic cells and intratubular casts, and
tive oxygen species (Solomon 1998; Heyman and Rosen 
regeneration of renal cells and repopulation of the tubu-
2003; Heyman et al. 2008). Hypercalcemia and ampho-
lar epithelium (Racusen 200l; Clarkson et al. 2008).
tericin causes vasoconstriction (Deray 2002; Schenck
Why some cells escape lethal damage from apoptosis
et al. 2006). Acute allergic interstitial nephritis is an
  n   q  i sis 
idiosyncratic, hapten-mediated allergic reaction to a wide
shock proteins in addition to up-regulation of other
variety of drugs that is typically not dose related. Mecha-
cellular protections (Kelly 2005; Riordan et al. 2005;
nisms include production of antibodies that cross-reacts
 Devarajan 2009). Dedifferentiation of surviving renal
with intrinsic ligands in the kidney or deposition of
tubular epithelial cells that subsequently proliferate and
antibody-antigen complexes in the renal interstitium
migrate to the denuded areas of the basement mem-
(Michel and Kelly 1998). Acute interstitial nephritis is
brane is the main method of renal repair (Bonventre
rarely recognized in veterinary patients (Hadrick et al.
2003; Duffield et al. 2005; Clarkson et al. 2008; Devara-
1996).
jan 2009). These “recovery cells" express vimentin, which
        
is normally found in undifferentiated mesenchymal cells
nephrotoxin or the formation of reactive oxygen species is
but not differentiated kidney cells, and proliferating cell 
the major mechanism of nephrotoxic injuries (Nath and
nuclear antigen, a marker of mitogenic activity (Liu and
Norby 2000; Rumbeiha and Murphy 2009). Intracellular
Brakeman 2008; Devarajan 2009).
concentrations of the toxic substance determine toxic-
 These intrinsic surviving cells are crucial to tubular
ity. Small, poorly protein bound toxins such as amino-
regeneration, but undifferentiated stem cells may also
glycosides or ethylene glycol are freely filtered at the
participate in tubular regeneration. Renal progenitor
glomerulus and are typically eliminated in the urine.
 stem cells potentially reside in the renal papillae and can
The proximal tubular reabsorption of toxins or drugs
 migrate, proliferate, differentiate, and contribute to renal
by the brush border leads to their intracellular accu-
repair (Oliver et al. 2004; Clarkson et al. 2008). Bone
mulation. The proximal tubule also actively secretes
marrow-derived hematopoietic stem cells have been
 many protein-bound substances via various transcellu-
shown to migrate from the bone marrow and differentiate
Acute kidney insufficiency  487
into renal tubular cells, but their exact role in renal recov-
ness. It is rare to capture the onset of AKI in animals prior
ery is uncertain (Kale et al. 2003; Lin et al. 2003; Clarkson
to development of overt azotemia unless a progressive
et al. 2008). Infusion of mesenchymal stem cells can
increase in serum creatinine or decrease in urine output
provide renoprotection (Lange et al. 2005). However, the
develops in a hospital setting. Signs consistent with AKI
effects may be related to beneficial paracrine effects (i.e.
include: listlessness, depression, anorexia, vomiting, diar-
production of survival or growth factors) rather than
rhea, and weakness. Less commonly, seizures, syncope,
direct contribution to the repopulation of new epithelial
bradycardia, ataxia, and dyspnea may be reported. Thor-
cells (Krause and Cantley 2005; Togel et al. 2005; Lin
ough questioning of owners may reveal relevant exposure
 2006; Liu and Brakeman 2008). Epidermal growth factor,
to nephrotoxic chemicals or plants, new environments,
insulin-like growth factor-1, α-melanocyte stimulating
ill animals, traumatic events, recent surgery, diagnostic
hormone, EPO, hepatocyte growth factor, bone mor-
testing, newly prescribed medications, supplements and
phogenetic protein-7, and transforming growth factor-β
diets, or blood loss ( Table 49.2). Owners should be ques-
play undefined roles in renal recovery and are under
tioned about the use of holistic and herbal therapies that
active investigation as interventions to treat AKI.
may contain nephrotoxic substances. Oliguria or anuria
Instead of regeneration of the tubular epithelium and
are seminal features of some stages of AKl, but a his-
renal recovery, the pathologic events can progress to
tory of normal or increased urine production does not
interstitial fibrosis, the prominent feature of the tran-
exclude its diagnosis. Historical weight loss, polyuria,
sition to CKD. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β
polydipsia, nocturia or isosthenuria, or laboratory evi-
and platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) are known
 dence of preexisting azotemia suggests underlying CKD.
to induce fibrosis in a variety of organs including the
 It is common for animals with asymptomatic stages of
kidney. Tubular epithelial cells, fibroblasts, and infltrat-
CKD to decompensate suddenly, following subtle insults
 ing inflammatory cells provide rich sources of TGF-βand
including fever, concomitant disease, vomiting, diarrhea,
PDGF (Furuichi et al. 2009).
congestive heart failure, hypovolemia, hypotension, and
drug administration, resulting in an uremic crisis that
appears acute in onset and course.
Diagnosis of AKl
The clinical presentation of AKI is influenced by the
Physical examination
underlying etiology and severity of the renal injury, the
 duration of the disorder, previous therapy, and comorbid
Physical examination provides an important window to
 diseases predisposing or complicating the renal injury.
the localization, extent, and cause of AKl. Due to the sud-
 The spectrum of clinical signs ranges from inapparent 
den onset of the disease, most animals have good body
to profound. The diagnosis is generally founded on the
 composition and coat condition. Poor body composition
finding of progressive azotemia, alterations of urine com-
should raise suspicion for decompensation of preexist-
position, and altered renal imaging. As currently con-
ing kidney disease (acute-on-chronic kidney disease). In
ceived, AKI spans a spectrum of conventional syndromes
the absence of hemorrhage or hemolysis, mucous mem-
including (1) hemodynamic failure (prerenal azotemia),
brane color is pink in contrast to animals with CKD
(2) hemodynamic failure complicating CKD, (3) acute
or acute-on-chronic disease who may have pale mucous
(parenchymal or intrinsic) renal failure, (4) hemody-
membranes. Dehydration is common at first presenta-
namic failure complicating ARF, (5) acute exacerbation
tion and may manifest as prolonged capillary refill time,
 dry mucous membranes, decreased skin turgor, sunken
of CKD, and (6) postrenal azotemia. Each of these dis-
 parate azotemic conditions may appear quite similar and
eyes, tachycardia, poor pulse quality, and hypotension.
must be further differentiated on the basis of a com-
Animals who have received parenteral fluid therapy are
prehensive clinical assessment which includes: past and
often overhydrated with characteristic wet mucous mem-
present history of the illness, physical examination, lab-
branes, serous nasal discharge, increased skin turgor
oratory testing, diagnostic imaging, histopathology, and
 and weight, peripheral edema, tachypnea, dyspnea, muf-
 special diagnostic testing.
fled heart sounds, hypertension, chemosis, and ascites.
Measurement of arterial blood pressure is essential in
History
every animal with AKI to determine if hypotension that
demands immediate attention is a cause or contributor
AKI is characterized by a sudden onset of azotemia or ill-
 to the onset of kidney injury.
ness ofless than a week's duration; however, animals with
Depression, hypothermia, oral ulceration, “uremic
acute uremia secondary to underlying urinary or systemic
breath", bile-stained fur, scleral injection, cutaneous
diseases may have a longer duration of documented ill-
bruising, discoloration or necrosis of the tongue,
488  Upper urinary tract disorders
tachycardia or bradycardia, tachypnea, muscle fascicu-
nal hemorrhage). Dehydration and hemoconcentration
lations, and seizures are consistent findings in animals
will overestimate actual RBC mass, and overhydration
with advanced stages of AKI. These signs become more
and excessive fluid administration cause hemodilution
profound as the severity of azotemia and stage of AKI
which underestimates RBC mass (Chew 2000). An ane-
increases. Hypothermia that is inversely proportional to
mia that is non-regenerative suggests underlying CKD,
the degree of azotemia is an expected finding in animals
but patients with AKI that are anemic may not have evi-
with BUN concentrations greater than 100 mg/dL (Ash
dence of regeneration due to the lag time (3-5 days)
1991). A normal or slightly elevated body temperature is
for reticulocytes to appear in the circulation after acute
 inappropriate for azotemic animals and should be con-
blood loss. Erythropoietic response may be blunted from
sidered a fever, prompting evaluation for an underlying
the AKl or coexisting inflammatory conditions (Eckardt
infectious or inflammatory condition.
2002; Liang0s et al. 2003; Hoste and De Waele 2005).
Asymmetric kidneys (either enlarged or small) are
consistent features of ureteral obstruction in cats. Bilater-
Serum chemistry profile
ally enlarged, frm, slightly resilient, and/or painful kid-
 neys may be indicative of acute nephritis or nephrosis or
Progressive (and often subtle) azotemia is the hallmark of
bilateral ureteral obstruction. Enlarged kidneys must be
AKI, but the progressive component is observed incon-
 differentiated from neoplasia, amyloidosis, perinephric
 sistently in animals because of variations in the stage
 pseudocysts, or polycystic kidney disease.
and chronicity of disease at presentation. Serum crea-
The size of the urinary bladder varies depending on
tinine increases proportionally with the severity of the
urine production and the integrity of the outflow tract.
renal injury or completeness of urinary outflow obstruc-
An undetectable urinary bladder may indicate oliguria
 tion. Reductions in lean body mass, creatinine gener-
or anuria from severe AKl, bilateral ureteral obstruc-
ation, and overhydration can lower the serum creati-
tion, or rupture of the bladder. An enlarged, firm, and
nine concentration and over estimate true renal func-
painful bladder is indicative of lower urinary outflow
tion (Braun et al. 2003; Laroute et al. 2005; Le Garreres
obstruction.
et al. 2007). There is a curvilinear inverse relationship
 AKI often occurs in animals with comorbid condi-
between serum creatinine and GFR (Finco 1995; Braun
 tions that contribute to the presenting clinical signs and
et al. 2003). Incremental changes in serum creatinine are
may over shadow the characteristic signs of AKl. Lame-
small in AKI Stage I and II despite significant changes in
ness, icterus, fever, discolored urine, back or flank pain,
GFR (Lees 2004). Notwithstanding the insensitivity and
petechiae, dyspnea, edema, and dysuria are associated
limitations of serum creatinine as a biomarker of kidney
with some etiologies of AKI.
injury, it currently stands as the best, most time-tested,
and most familiar clinical marker of AKl. BUN concen-
Laboratory assessment
tration increases with decreases in renal function, but
unlike creatinine, urea is influenced by numerous extra
The initial laboratory assessment should include a com-
renal factors which make its concentration less specific as
plete blood count, comprehensive biochemical profle
 a marker of kidney damage.
(serum creatinine, urea, phosphate, calcium, bicarbon-
Urea appearance, the net rate of urea accumulation in
ate, sodium, potassium, chloride, glucose, albumin, glob-
the body from its generation, distribution and removal,
ulin, hepatic transaminases, and bilirubin), complete
od snousaopua pue snousoxa Aq paoungu s
urinalysis, urine protein/creatinine ratio, and urine cul-
metabolism, hepatic function, hydration status, urine
ture. The laboratory features of AKl change rapidly and
 production, and diuretic therapy in addition to its resid-
selected chemistries should be evaluated daily to iden-
ual renal clearance (Depner 2005; Israni and Kasiske
tify new clinical problems, reassess the stage of AKl, and
direct therapy.
2008). These global influences on serum urea concen-
tration make it a useful predictor of the overall clinical
severity of the uremic state (renal function, catabolism,
Complete blood count
nutritional adequacy). Urea also functions as a surrogate
The complete blood count may reflect abnormalities
marker for the production and removal of a variety of
caused by primary or comorbid conditions which have
low molecular weight nitrogenous uremia toxins which
diagnostic relevance, but the findings are rarely specific
contribute to uremia (Depner 2001).
to AKl. Typically, the complete blood count reveals nor-
 AKI produces characteristic perturbations in serum
mal red cell parameters (RBC count, hematocrit or PCV,
phosphate, calcium, electrolytes, and bicarbonate as the
hemoglobin concentration) unless influenced by con-
stage of the disease increases; however, for compara-
current hydration or acute blood loss (e.g-) gastrointesti-
ble degrees of azotemia the changes are usually more
Acute kidney insufficiency  489
profound than seen with CKD. Over 75% of dogs and
The urine sediment examination may demonstrate red
cats with AKl are hyperphosphatemic at presentation
blood cells, white blood cell, casts, crystals, yeast, fungi,
(Vaden et al. 1997; Worwag and Langston 2008). Total
 or bacteria that identify the etiology of the uremia and
serum calcium concentrations are below the reference
 should be performed routinely on freshly obtained urine.
range in 25% of dogs with AKl, but the proportion with
Urinary casts are formed within the tubular lumen and
hypocalcemia increases to 50% in animals with acute
are indicative of tubular injury. Urinary casts are classified
ethylene glycol intoxication (Thrall et al. 1984; Vaden
according to their material content and state of matura-
et al. 1997). Signs of hypocalcemia (i.e., muscle fascic-
tion (or decomposition) as: hyaline, epithelial, granular,
ulation, and tetany) rarely develop or require treatment
fatty, waxy, or red or white blood cell. Granular and hya-
with calcium. Total calcium is a poor predictor of ion-
line casts document active renal pathology with epithe-
ized calcium in dogs with CKD, and approximately 1/3 of
lial cell shedding or necrosis and protein (glomerular)
dogs with CKD have ionized hypocalcemia (Schenck and
leakage, respectively. Casts are detected in approximately
Chew 2005; Kogika et al. 2006). Reports of ionized cal-
30% of dogs with AKI, but their absence does not exclude
cium concentrations are not available for dogs and cats
the diagnosis of acute parenchymal injury ( Vaden et al.
with AKI.
1997). A variety of crystals are found in the urine sed-
Serum potassium concentration varies with the stage
iment of dogs and cats, and most urinary crystals can
and etiology of the disease, the extent of vomiting, and
be identified in clinically normal animals. Heavy calcium
fluid and diuretic administration. Serum potassium is
oxalate crystalluria is highly suggestive of ethylene gly-
typically increased (between 5.5 and 9.0 mEq/L) in pro-
col intoxication, calcium oxalate urolithiasis, or oxalate
portion to the stage of AKl, and tends to be higher in
nephrosis in cats. (Grauer et al. 1984; Thrall et al. 1984;
animals with anuric AKl or urinary outflow obstruction
Gregory et al. 1993; Osborne et al. 1995; Thrall et al.
compared to those with nonoliguric AKl. Serum bicar-
1998; Cianciolo et al. 2008; Langston et al. 2008) Green-
  e  a  
brown globular crystals have been recognized in animals'
bonate deficit increases with increasing stages of AK1.
exposure to melamine and cyanuric acid (Cianciolo et al.
Profuse vomiting, dehydration, or previous bicarbon-
2008).
ate administration may cause metabolic alkalosis that is
 The tubular epithelial enzymes, gamma-glutamyl
atypical for the severity of disease.
transpeptidase
(GGT)
and
N-acetyl-beta-D-
glucosaminidase (NAG), have been measured in
canine urine to predict cellular leakage and early tubular
injury or necrosis (Grauer et al. 1995; Rivers et al.
Urine evaluation
1996; Palacio et al. 1997; Clemo 1998; Heiene et al.
A complete urinalysis should be performed on every
2001; Brunker et al. 2009). Of these, NAG appears to
patient at initial presentation. Both renal concentrat-
 be more sensitive and specific for epithelial injury and
ing and diluting capabilities become impaired in the
early recognition of renal damage, but neither has been
early phases of intrinsic AKl, and urine specific gravity
adopted widely in veterinary or human diagnostics.
becomes "fixed" in the range between 1.008 and 1.018.
Newer and more specific biomarkers, including urine
A urine specific gravity >1.030 for dogs or >1.035 for
kidney injury molecule (KIM)-1, interleukin-18, and
cats in the presence of azotemia indicates hemodynamic
neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin (NGAL) are
(prerenal) failure (Osborne et al. 1995). A urine spe-
under evaluation and may prove to be of more diagnostic
cific gravity between 1.012-1.029 (dogs) or 1.012-1.034
utility (Bonventre 2008; Coca et al. 2008; Waikar and
(cats) associated with azotemia is consistent with a hemo-
Bonventre 2008; Haase et al. 2009; Vaidya et al. 2009).
insufficiency or an underlying urine concentrating defect.
Renal imaging
Glucosuria in the absence of hyperglycemia is an impor-
tant sign of proximal tubular dysfunction. It predicts 
Radiography and ultrasonography are highly comple-
tubular necrosis and is a useful discriminator between
mentary imaging modalities, and both are indicated in
intrinsic AKI and other types of acute or chronic uremia
the evaluation of AKl. Ultrasonography provides greater
(Vaden et al. 1997). Qualitative (dipstick) proteinuria is
delineation of renal structure, intrarenal architecture,
detected in most uremic animals but has little discrimina-
parenchymal consistency, and outflow integrity than sur-
tory importance (Vaden et al. 1997). Overt proteinuria
vey radiography. Ultrasonic imaging facilitates percuta-
associated with a urine protein:creatinine ratio greater
neous needle aspiration and biopsy procedures for col-
than six alerts to the possibility of a primary glomerular
lection of specimens for cytology, culture, biochemical
injury.
analysis, and histopathology (Borjesson 2003). Duplex
490  Upper urinary tract disorders
Doppler ultrasonography can be used to verify regional
with extensive pathologic changes recover if supported
blood flow in the kidney and to predict changes in vas-
with renal replacement therapies for suficient time to
cular impedance which may correspond to stages in the
allow regeneration and repair of the kidneys to proceed
pathogenesis or repair of renal injury or outflow obstruc-
fully.
tion (Rivers et al. 1997; Rivers et al. 1997; Choi et al. 2003;
Novellas et al. 2007). Ultrasographic imaging can provide
Other diagnostic tests
immediate confirmation of ureteral obstruction or pre-
existing renal disease.
 Differentiating hemodynamic causes or contributions
 For the diagnosis of ureteral obstruction in cats, good
from intrinsic renal causes of azotemia is important.
quality survey radiographs may be more sensitive and
Clinical signs of dehydration or hypotension, increased
predictive than ultrasonography by revealing discrete
urine specific gravity, or partial or complete resolution of
radiodensities in the retroperitoneal space and should be
azotemia following restoration of fluid balance and blood
performed in all cats with unexplained AK1. In 20-30%
 pressure indicates hemodynamic causes or component of
of cats with ureteral obstruction, no calcific material is
the azotemia. A BUN/creatinine ratio >20 also suggests
identified with either ultrasound or survey radiographs
a hemodynamic component, but this is neither a sensi-
(Kyles et al. 2005). For these circumstances and for cases
tive nor specific sign and can result from gastrointesti-
with multiple sites of obstruction or stenosis, antegrade
nal hemorrhage or hypercatabolism. Avid sodium reab-
pyelography or computed tomography with contrast can
 sorption and a urinary fractional excretion of sodium
be used to define the indication and location for surgi-
less than 1% can distinguish animals with hemodynamic
cal intervention. Antegrade pyelography combines ultra-
azotemia and functional oliguria from those with intrin-
sound or fluoroscopic-guided pyelocentesis and ante-
sic azotemia in which fractional sodium excretion (FENa)
grade injection of positive radiographic contrast media
usually is greater than 1%. This distinction is discussed
into the renal pelvis and ureter to delineate the size
consistently in the human literature, but it has limited
and patency of the ureter. Antegrade pyelograpy reliably
e  s   rod a
confirms the presence, degree and location of ureteral
or utilized in veterinary diagnostics. Urinary fractional
obstructions (Rivers et al. 1997; Adin et al. 2003). Com-
excretion of urea is better at discriminating hemody-
 puted tomography with contrast is less invasive than ante-
namic from intrinsic AKI than FENa when diuretics have
 grade pyelography and is potentially superior at confirm-
been used, but it has not been evaluated in dogs or cats
ing mineralized uroliths and the differential patency of
(Anderson and Barry 2004; Bagshaw et al. 2007c; Pepin
the ureters. This is especially useful for cats with bilat-
et al. 2007; Clarkson et al. 2008; Diskin et al. 2008; Fahimi
 eral ureteroliths or multiple sites of obstruction along a
et al. 2009; Macedo and Mehta 2009).
ureter which antegrade pyelography would fail to doc-
 Serologic testing for leptospirosis should be performed
ument. Other imaging modalities including excretory
on all dogs evaluated for AKI without a confirmed etiol-
urography, renal scintigraphy, and magnetic resonance
 Ogy. A suspicion ofleptospirosis is heightened by the pres-
imaging may have indications in selected patients but are
ence of leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, increased liver
not used routinely for AKl.
transaminases, and hyperbilirubinemia. Serologic evalu-
ation should be broad-based and include titers to serovars
Renal pathology
canicola, icterohemorrhagiae, pomona, bratislava, grip-
potyphosa, autumnalis, and hardjo. Additional testing
 Percutaneous or laparoscopic needle biopsy techniques 
can be performed in both dogs and cats with sedation
cific serogroups as the distribution of infecting serovars
or light anesthesia (Osborne et al. 1996; Rawlings et al.
changes with time and differs regionally throughout the
2003; Vaden et al. 2005). However, routine kidney biopsy
world (Birnbaum et al. 1998; Adin and Cowgill 2000;
of patients presenting with AKI is likely unjustified to
Ward 2002; Ward 2002; Ward et al. 2002; Boutilier et al.
establish a diagnosis. Renal biopsy should be considered
2003; Harkin et al. 2003; Goldstein et al. 2006; Moore
if the definitive cause, extent, and chronicity of the renal
et al. 2006; Stokes et al. 2007; Zwijnenberg et al. 2008).
injury cannot be established with noninvasive diagnos-
tic methods (described above) or if therapeutic or life-
ral infection from previous or vaccinal exposure have
ending decisions are predicated on this information. The
not been established. Moreover, the recent introduction
short-term reversibility and long-term outcome of AKI
 of multivalent vaccines makes interpretation of serologic
may not, however, be predictable on the basis of morpho-
results more difficult. A microscopic agglutination titer
logic findings at the outset of the disease. Many animals
(MAT) > 1:100 indicates positive serology and a two-fold
Acute kidney insufficiency   491
to four-fold or greater change (increase or decrease) in
Given the limitations of current diagnostic methods,
consensus guidelines for a diagnosis of an active lep-
active infection (Greene et al. 2006; Heath and Johnson
tospirosis could include (1) a single elevated MAT titer
1994; Levett 2001; Goldstein et al. 2006). Ambiguity in
 >1:800 to vaccinal serogroups accompanied by clinical
the diagnosis arises when only a single titer is available
signs consistent with leptopsirosis; (2) a single MAT titer
for evaluation. Previous retrospective studies arbitrar-
≥1:400 for non-vaccinal serogroups; (3) evidence of sero-
ily established single titers of >1:800->1:3200 to non-
conversion in paired acute and convalescent sera; (4) a
vaccinal serogroups as criteria for a positive diagnosis of
four-fold or greater change in MAT titer (increase or
active leptospirosis in dogs (Rentko et al. 1992; Harkin
decrease) in paired serologic sampling; (5) positive cul-
and Gartrell 1996; Birnbaum et al. 1998; Goldstein et al.
ture for Leptospira organisms, (6) positive direct fluores-
2006; Moore et al. 2006; Geisen et al. 2007). However,
cent antibody reaction on infected tissue or urine; and
laboratory variation, differences in humoral responses,
(7) presence of typical clinical signs of leptospirosis fol-
immunologic response to individual serovars, vaccina-
e oe eoe i sse  
tion, background (asymptomatic) exposure, and time of
(Adin and Cowgill 2000; Goldstein et al. 2006; Geisen
sampling post exposure make strict serologic criteria dif-
et al. 2007). The utility, availability, sensitivity, and speci-
ficult to assign.
ficity of PCR-based diagnostic testing may provide an
Vaccination with serovars icterohemorrhagiae and
additional approach in the future.
canicola can produce titers to those serogroups greater
      
than 1:1250 (Kerr and Marshall 1974). Vaccination
sumptively by a history of possible or definitive exposure
d u esoudoddn ue suood sieas 
 and presence of typical clinical signs. Presumptive diag-
01 00t:1 pue euouod dnonooiss oi 0ze:1 oi dn sio
 serogroup grippotyphosa. Interestingly, current vaccines
and osmolal gap, profound metabolic acidosis, increased
 can cause very high titers (1:12,800) to the serogroup
anion gap, hypocalcemia, the presence of calcium oxalate
 crystalluria, and characteristic sonographic appearance
in the vaccine (Barr et al. 2005). High vaccinal titers
of the kidneys (Grauer et al. 1984; Thrall et al. 1984;
 dissipate rapidly and should be below suggested cut-
Thrall et al. 1998). Cageside tests are available to test for
off criteria within several months of vaccination (Barr
 ethylene glycol in blood but they lack adequate sensitivity
et al. 2005). Surveys of non selected and asymptomatic
and specificity and should be combined with appropri-
 r d r a e p s
   )     
 not been vaccinated who had positive serology to lep-
Confirmation of the diagnosis, the degree of intoxica-
tospirosis serogroups indicating background population
tion, and response to decontamination therapy is best
exposure (Harkin et al. 2003; Stokes et al. 2007; Zwij-
performed by chemical analysis of gastric fluid, serum,
nenberg et al. 2008). Shedding of leptospiral DNA has
or urine for the presence of ethylene glycol or its toxic
been recognized using sensitive polymerase chain reac-
metabolites by commercial laboratories. Toxic concen-
tion assays in seronegative dogs who were either symp-
 trations of ethylene glycol and glycolic acid may persist
tomatic or asymptomatic (Harkin et al. 2003; Harkin
for days in oliguria or anuria animals despite therapy with
et al. 2003). These observations suggested some dogs
alcoholor 4-methylpyrazole (Cowgilland Langston 1996;
have delayed seroconversion or fail to seroconvert despite
Cowgill and Francey 2005). Samples should be obtained
being actively infected, and some serovars appear to
prior to administration of products containing propylene
 induce a strong and persistent serologic response despite
glycol to avoid false-positive results.
the absence of active infection (Greenlee et al. 2004).
Testing for other nephrotoxins is generally based on
The infecting leptospiral organism is generally regarded
knowledge of potential exposure or specific clinical signs.
to be the same as the serogroup producing the highest
The most appropriate samples to collect depend on the
MAT titer. This distinction is problematic as there is con--
suspected toxin. In general, whole blood in EDTA (lead,
arsenic), serum (trace elements, drugs, ethylene glycol),
 s      ss
d) s s o (s s s) 
not correspond to the infecting serovars or the highest
cides, plants, metals, feed-associated toxicants) can be
titer which persists in the subacute or convalescent phase
 collected antemortem. Kidney and liver tissue (wrapped 
of the disease due to cross reactivity among serogroups.
in plastic; if suspected organic toxin - wrap in aluminum
 In some cases, paradoxical reactions produce the highest
foil) can be collected postmortem for pesticides (liver) or
titer to organisms to which the animal had never been
metals (liver, kidney). All samples except blood should
exposed (Levett 2001; Barr et al. 2005).
be submitted frozen (Galey 1992).
492  Upper urinary tract disorders
Clinical consequences of AKI 
ical assessments (Mathews 2006). Most causes of AKI
cause reductions of fluid intake and/or excessive fluid
AKI produces a variable admixture of clinical signs that
losses through vomiting, diarrhea, or polyuria leading to
change in spectrum and intensity with the stage, dura-
 dehydration, hypovolemia and hypotension at initial pre-
tion, etiology, and course of the disease. In the earliest
sentation (Grauer 1998). Dehydration and hypovolemia
 stages of AKl, clinical signs are likely to be few and non
exacerbate the azotemia by superimposing hemodynamic
 specific, whereas at advanced stages they are multisys-
contributions to the underlying uremia and predisposing
temic and life-threatening. Azotemia; fluid, electrolyte,
the kidneys to additional ischemic injury and decreased
and acid-base imbalances; metabolic and endocrine dis-
urine output (Sutton et al. 2002; Bonventre and Weinberg 
turbances; and nutritional deficiencies contribute to the
2003). In contrast, overhydration and hypervolemia are
expression of advanced AKl. In animals with predispos-
common complications ofhospitalization and aggressive
ing or comorbid medical conditions or multiple organ
fluid management (Cowgill and Francey 2005). Hyper-
dysfunctions, it may be difficult to distinguish if the clin-
volemia imposes a risk of pulmonary and peripheral
ical problems relate specifically to the renal dysfunction
edema, pleural effusion, systemic hypertension, and con-
or to the coexisting conditions. Nearly all clinical conse-
gestive heart failure (Figure 49.4).
quences of AKI (e.g-, vomiting, hyperkalemia, metabolic
 Many clinical parameters are at the clinician's dis-
acidosis, bleeding) become more profound as the stage
posal to assess the initial and ongoing fluid status of
 of disease worsens. If the observed clinical or laboratory
uremic animals including: body weight, heart rate, pulse
signs are inappropriate for the stage of AKl, other pre-
character, capillary refill time, mucous membrane wet-
 disposing or comorbid conditions are likely contributing
ness, chest auscultation, skin turgor, tear production,
to the clinical appearance. Although common clinical
serous nasal discharge, blood pressure, central venous
threads exist for all stages, AKI represents multiple clini-
 pressure, plasma proteins and hematocrit. Technologies
cally distinct syndromes predicated on the etiology, sever-
including multifrequency bioimpedance spectroscopy
ity, and functional integrity of the kidneys and urinary
outflow system.
and sequentially static or real-time changes in ECF vol-
ume, intracelular fluid volume, and total body water
Alterations in body fluid volume-dehydration
and hypervolemia
(Figure 49.5) (Elliott et al. 2002; Elliott et al. 2002; Cowgill
2004; Cowgill and Francey 2006).
Alterations of fluid balance are common and signifi-
cant therapeutic targets for all stages of AKl. Both the
 Inadequate urine production
state of hydration (the overall loss or gain of fluid) and
volemia (the relative volume of the vasculature) must
Oliguria and anuria are life-threatening features of
be estimated at presentation and reassessed at regular
AKI. Oliguria often is defined as urine production
intervals to direct the therapeutic plan. Under most cir-
of less than 0.27 mL/kg/hour (<6.5 mL/kg/day),
cumstances, fluid balance is judged on the basis of clin-
whereas anuria constitutes essentially no urine formation
100
80-
Systolic BP
60
>180 mmHg
160-179 mmHg
150-159 mmHg
40
<150mmHg
nu
Hypotensive
1
20
1
4
5
6
8
9
10
Hospitalization day
Figure 49.5 Distribution of systolic blood pressures in dogs with acute kidney injury during the first 10 days of hospitalization and
management. There is a dramatic redistribution of blood pressure during hospitalization and a marked rise in the prevalence of dogs
with severely increased pressure (>180 mmHg) from 35% at admission to 76% on day 10. (Courtesy, Dr. Thierry Francey.)
Acute kidney insufficiency  493
(<0.08 mL/kg/hour) (Cowgill and Francey 2005). An
mic pericarditis, but it is seldom recognized or of clini-
assessment of bladder size and urethral patency should
cal significance (Madewell and Norrdin 1975; Berg and
be performed to determine if the oliguria or anuria is
Wingfield 1984; Rush et al. 1990; Davidson et al. 2008;
secondary to post renal causes. Oliguria induced from
Nelson and Ware 2009).
hemodynamic failure should be volume-responsive and
Hypertension was present in approximately 80% of
resolve with restoration of systemic blood pressure and
dogs presented to the Veterinary Medical Teaching Hos-
ECF volume. Approximately 30-60% of animals with
pital of University of California for hemodialysis for AKI.
parenchymal AKl have oliguria or anuria at initial pre-
Overhydration was present in 65% of these dogs at the
sentation ( Vaden et al. 1997; Francey and Cowgill 2004;
 time of initial blood pressure measurement (Francey and
Cowgill and Francey 2005). Solute retention, overhy-
 Cowgill 2004). Target organs most at risk for hyperten-
dration, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis quickly
sive damage are the kidneys, heart, eyes, and brain. Man-
become life-threatening if the oliguria or anuria is not
ifestations include progressive renal injury, acute blind-
corrected. Administration of all enteral and parenteral
ness, hyphema, retinal hemorrhage, retinal detachment,
fluids, blood products, and maintenance fluids become
left ventricular hypertrophy, myocardial ischemia, hyper-
problematic or contraindicated in oliguric or anuric ani-
 tensive encephalopathy (intermittent confusion, depres-
mals despite an ongoing need for these therapies. Fluid
sion and collapse), dementia, and cerebrovascular hem-
 overload, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and pul-
 orrhage causing seizures, coma and death (Brown et al.
 monary edema become risks for aggressive fluid therapy
2005; Stepien and Henik 2009). Systemic hypertension
in oliguric animals. The conversion from an oliguric to a
is exacerbated iatrogenically during the management
 nonoliguric state becomes a therapeutic goal to facilitate
of AKl and must be closely monitored and prevented
(Figure 49.4).
with improvement in GFR or the prognosis for recovery
(Shilliday et al. 1997; Nolan and Anderson 1998; Vijayan
Puimonary complications
and Miller 1998; Finn 2001; Mehta et al. 2002; De Vriese
2003).
Respiratory  complications  include  pleural  effusion,
pulmonary
 edema, aspiration pneumonia,
uremic
 pneumonitis, pulmonary artery thromboembolism and
Cardiovascular complications
pulmonary hemorrhage (Rivers and Johnston 1996;
Cardiovascular disorders develop from the underlying
Baumann and Fluckiger 2001; Greenlee et al. 2005). In
cause of the AKl, the uremia per se, or as a result of
 a retrospective review, respiratory disease was present in
certain therapies. Abnormalities in myocardial contrac-
1/3 of dogs with AKI Stage IV, RRT and AKI Stage V, RRT
tility and excitability may be triggered or worsened by
hypervolemia, acidosis, hyperkalemia, and uremic tox-
complications increased during hospitalization to affect
ins. Bradycardia, supraventricular or ventricular pre-
half of the dogs ( Thierry Francey, personal observations,
mature contractions, and paroxysmal ventricular tachy-
 2004). In humans with AKl, 55-86% had respiratory
cardia are common electrocardiographic abnormalities.
failure, and respiratory involvement was a significant risk
Cardiac arrest is a complication of severe hyperkalemia
factor for death (Mehta et al. 2002; Bouchard and Mehta
or the collective metabolic, acid-base, and electrolyte dis-
 2009). There are four predispositions to pulmonary
turbances of acute uremia. Some normokalemic animals
edema in AKl: volume overload (cardiogenic edema), left
develop bradycardia (heart rates <80/minutes) which is
ventricular dysfunction (cardiogenic edema), increased
presumed to be secondary to increased vagal tone asso-
pulmonary  capillary  permeability  (noncardiogenic
ciated with uremic gastroenteritis. An acute episode of
edema), and acute lung injury (noncardiogenic edema
vomiting will promote further vagal stimulation, wors-
with inflammation) (Faubel 2008). Fluid overload is
ening bradycardia, and cardiac arrest. The condition is
the most common contributor to overt pulmonary
prevented with anticholingeric drugs, which should be
edema (and pleural effusion) in animals with AKl, but
 given prophylactically to uremic animals that are vom-
interstitial edema develops even in the absence of an
iting and demonstrate bradycardia (Cowgill and Elliott
acute gain in body water (Kramer et al. 1999; Klein et al.
2000). Congestive heart failure is an attendant risk of
2008; Scheel et al. 2008; Bouchard and Mehta 2009).
uremia or its fluid management. Volume overload may
Dysregulation of lung salt and water transporters and
increased levels of interleukin-6 contribute to increased
tricular dilation, pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, or
lung permeability (Rabb et al. 2003; Klein et al. 2008;
pericardial effusion and tamponade. Animals with severe
Scheel et al. 2008). Interstitial pulmonary edema can
AKI rarely develop pericardial effusion secondary to ure-
be identified on thoracic radiographs as a manifestation
494  Upper urinary tract disorders
of uremia. A condition known as “uremic lung” is a
Hostetter 2008; Raff et al. 2008; Vanholder et al. 2008;
well established complication of acute uremia of varied
Lacerda et al. 2010). Electroencephalogram findings gen-
etiologies. It is often mistaken for pulmonary edema
erally are abnormal by the time AKI is diagnosed and
from fluid overload, but, distinct from volume overload,
worsen as the severity of uremia progresses. (Brouns and
it develops from increased vascular permeability in
De Deyn 2004; Arieff 2008) Neurologic signs are more
the lung, leakage of albumin (and possibly RBCs) into
severe and progress more rapidly in AKI compared to
the interstitium, erythrocyte sludging in pulmonary
CKD (Brouns and De Deyn 2004; Arieff 2008). The cause
capillaries, and interstitial edema and inflammation as
of uremic encephalopathy is undetermined but is likely
distant-organ casualty of acute uremia (Figure 49.1)
multifactorial. The response to dialysis suggests that ure-
(Scheel et al. 2008). The pathological events in the
mic encephalopathy is caused or influenced by retained
lung are evident within hours of the initiation of AKI.
uremic solutes, but no singular solute or pathogenesis has
  s    
been shown to account for the disorder (Brouns and De
events activating severity-dependent proinflamma-
Deyn 2004). Recent experimental studies in mice with
tory and proapoptotic processes in the kidney which
ischemic AKl revealed wide spread cellular inflamma-
invoke sequential and analogous transcriptional and
tion, increased soluble proinflammatory mediators, dis-
inflammatory events in the lung (Hassoun et al. 2007;
ruption of the blood-brain barrier, and decreased loco-
Grigoryev et al. 2008; Scheel et al. 2008). The pulmonary
 motor activity. These findings suggested that the func-
changes are mediated by interleukin-6 and facilitated
tional abnormalities of uremic encephalopathy have, in
by up-regulation of local chemokines induced by the
part, an inflammatory foundation as seen in other distant
transcriptional activity (Hoke et al. 2007; Grigoryev
 organ damage (Liu et al. 2008). Parathyroid hormone has
et al. 2008; Klein et al. 2008; Scheel et al. 2008). The
pathogenesis of uremic lung serves as an example of the
logic disorders in human patients with primary hyper-
emerging concept of “distant organ damage" Presump-
 parathyroidism and by improvement of neurologic signs 
in human patients with CKD after parathyroidectomy
and exuberant inflammatory response propagated in
(Arieff 2008). Parathyroid hormone facilitates entry of
the kidney by AKI is transferred to distant organs (lung.
calcium into cells, and the increase in brain calcium con-
brain, gut) that are recruited incidentally to contribute to
 tent may contribute to the neurologic signs (Brouns and
the multisystemic inflammatory manifestations of AKl
De Deyn 2004; Arieff2008). Other central nervous system
(Hassoun et al. 2007; Grigoryev et al. 2008; Scheel et al.
disorders associated with uremia include cerebrovascular
2008). Clinically, uremic lung is recognized in animals
disease (e.g-, ischemia, and hemorrhage), central pontine
with severe AKl analogous to the severity-dependent
myelinolysis (from rapid correction of hyponatremia),
changes seen in experimental settings, and it is frequently
and movement disorders (characterized by multifocal
associated with leptospirosis and lily intoxication (Fig-
action-induced jerks) (Brouns and De Deyn 2004).
ure 49.1) Pulmonary hemorrhage contributes to the
A progressive peripheral polyneuropathy, indistin-
 pulmonary pattern seen in dogs with leptospirosis which
 guishable from other metabolic polyneuropathies (i.e.)
 may represent a more severe variation of uremic lung
diabetes mellitus), can occur with CKD, but it rarely
(Baumann and Fluckiger 2001; Niwattayakul et al. 2002;
 develops acutely or subacutely with acute uremic pre-
Dolhnikoff et al. 2007; Andrade et al. 2008; Dall'Antonia
sentations. (Brouns and De Deyn 2004; Arieff 2008)
et al. 2008; Gouveia et al. 2008).
Aluminum toxicity from aluminum containing phos-
phate binders or dialysis water contamination can cause
diffuse encephalopathic signs or neuromuscular disor-
Neurologic disorders
ders including profound weakness (Alfrey 1993; Segev
The brain is one of several distant organs that become
et al. 2008a). Drugs including H2-receptor blockers (i.e.,
dysfunctional or damaged by AKl. The encephalopa-
famotidine) and metoclopramide can induce CNS dys-
thy noted in animals with acute uremia may be due
function in uremic animals when given at conventional
to uremia per se, hypertension, fluid or electrolyte dis-
doses. These findings reinforce the need to modify the
turbance, dialysis, transplant rejection, drug toxicity, or
dosage or frequency of administered medications that
induced inflammatory responses. Clinical signs of ure-
undergo renal excretion.
 mic encephalopathy include: dullness, lethargy, impaired
mentation, altered behavior, confusion, stupor, coma,
Electrolyte and acid base disturbances
fatigue, sleep disturbances, anorexia, nausea, myoclonus,
 tremors, cramps, and seizures (Wolf 1980; Vanholder
Electrolyte imbalances occur frequently and are often the
et al. 2003a; Vanholder et al. 2003b; Brouns and De
earliest life-threatening complications for animals with
Deyn 2004; Arieff 2008; Clarkson et al. 2008; Meyer and
AK1. Hyperkalemia is the most problematic electrolyte
Acute kidney insufficiency  495
abnormality and develops from the reduced renal clear-
of the PR interval, absence of the P-wave, widening
ance of potassium or imposed therapies. Over 90% of
 of the QRS complex, and ST segment depression. As
ingested potassium is excreted by the kidneys, with the
the serum potassium concentrations exceed 8.0 mEq/L,
remaining 10% excreted in feces. Potassium excretion is
 potentially fatal arrhythmias associated with idioven-
impaired if there is diminished sodium and water deliv-
tricular complexes, ventricular escape beats, paroxysmal
ery to the distal nephron, which can occur in the presence
ventricular tachycardia, sine wave QRS complexes, heart
of diminished renal blood flow or glomerular filtration
block and ventricular fibrillation or asystole prevail
or inadequate tubular fluid flow. Potassium excretion is
(Schaefer and Wolford 2005; Parham et al. 2006; Mount
also impaired if aldosterone concentration is decreased
and Zandi-Nejad 2008). Although these ECG changes
(e.g-, NSAIDs, ACEi, ARB) or in the presence of aldos-
are well described, many animals with hyperkalemia will
terone resistance (e.g-, spironolactone). Diuretics that
 have normal ECG findings or other electrocardiographic
block sodium channels (i.e., triamterene, amiloride) can
abnormalities (Parham et al. 2006; Tag and Day 2008).
also decrease renal excretion of potassium (Schaefer and
 Neuromuscular abnormalities associated with hyper-
Wolford 2005; DiBartola and de Morais 2006). Hyper-
kalemia include paresthesia, hyporeflexia, weakness,
kalemia develops from transcellular shifts of potassium
ascending flaccid paralysis and respiratory failure
from the intracellular compartment, where the concen-
(Schaefer and Wolford 2005; DiBartola and de Morais
tration is normally high, to the extracellular compart-
2006; Mount and Zandi-Nejad 2008).
ment, where potassium concentration is normally low.
Dysnatremias are less common and generally repre-
These changes occur with insulin deficiency, transcellu-
sent disturbances in water metabolism. Administration
lar fluid shifts, acidemia, crush injuries or other causes
of maintenance or sodium free fluids for volume restora-
of cellular lysis, acidosis, hypertonicity, and certain drugs
tion or maintenance requirements may cause iatro-
(e.g-, beta-blockers, digitalis, succinylcholine). Metabolic
genic hyponatremia. Hyponatremia is associated with
acidosis from mineral acids (i.e., NH4 +Cl- or H+Cl-)
excessive losses of sodium in vomitus, stool, or urine
causes hyperkalemia, but organic metabolic acidosis is
 associated with pancreatitis-induced vomiting, adrenal
not associated with hyperkalemia (Schaefer and Wolford
insufficiency, renal salt wasting, or diuretic administra-
2005; DiBartola and de Morais 2006; Mount and Zandi-
tion. Transient hyponatremia may be seen following the
Nejad 2008). Hyperkalemia may occur from increased
administration of mannitol or synthetic colloid solutions
potassium intake in conjunction with potassium supple-
as a result of free water shifts from the cellular to the
mentation, potassium penicillin, or enteral or parenteral
extracellular space. Excessive free water loads can also
 oo o e s ons 
be supplied with enteral administration of nutritional
tola and de Morais 2006; Mount and Zandi-Nejad 2008;
 supplements to animals with limited excretory capacity.
Segev et al. 2010).
Hypernatremia usually indicates excessive free water loss
The major adverse effects of hyperkalemia stem from
from heat prostration or diabetes insipidus. In hospital-
reduction of the transmembrane potassium gradient and
ized animals, it is a common complication of replace-
changes in cell membrane excitability, increased rest-
ment crystalloid fluid administration without provision
ing membrane potential, and persistent depolarization
for insensible free water losses. Also commonly, hyperna-
of resting membrane potential (Schaefer and Wolford
 tremia is an iatrogenic complication of excessive admin-
2005; Parham et al. 2006; Mount and Zandi-Nejad 2008).
istration of sodium bicarbonate or hypertonic saline.
Peripheral conducting and contractile cells are the most
The kidneys are the major site for the regulation of
significantly impacted by these changes producing gener-
acid-base homeostasis and development of metabolic
alized muscular weakness, reduced cardiac contractility,
acidosis proportional to the stage of AKl is predictable.
disturbed cardiac conduction, cardiac arrhythmias, and
Metabolic acidosis develops from the ongoing or
neurologic abnormalities (Schaefer and Wolford 2005;
excessive production of non volatile metabolic acids,
DiBartola and de Morais 2006; Parham et al. 2006; Mount
the impaired filtration of the acid load, and decreased
and Zandi-Nejad 2008).
reabsorption of bicarbonate and generation of ammonia
The electrocardiographic abnormalities of the hyper-
to facilitate net acid excretion (Rose 2001; DiBartola
kalemia commence at serum potassium concentrations
2006; de Morais et al. 2008; Dubose 2008). The severity
 greater than 6.5 mEq/L but are influenced further by the
of the acidosis is influenced by concurrent acid loads
rate of rise of serum potassium and co-existent hypona-
accompanying diabetic ketoacidosis, lactic acidosis
tremia, hypocalcemia, and acidemia. Sequential abnor-
(decreased tissue perfusion), or ethylene glycol or sal-
malities with moderate hyperkalemia (serum potassium
icylate intoxication (DiBartola 2006). Severe metabolic
concentration 6.5-8.0 mEq/L) include bradycardia,
acidosis produces tachypnea, decreased cardiac con-
heightening and peaking of the T-wave, diminution
tractility, decreased arterial blood pressure, decreased
in the P-wave and R-wave amplitudes, prolongation
hepatic and renal blood flow, decreased myocardial
496  Upper urinary tract disorders
contractility, cardiac arrhythmias, peripheral arterial
tant cause of esophagitis and aspiration pneumonia
vasodilation and venous vasoconstriction (DiBartola
(Vaden et al. 1997; Langston 2002; Cowgill and Francey
2006). It contributes to the depression, lethargy, stupor
2005).
or coma seen in AKI (DiBartola 2006). Metabolic
 Uremic bleeding manifests as purpura, petechia,
acidosis induces insulin resistance and increases amino
ecchymosis, bruising, bleeding from gum margins and
acid oxidation and protein catabolism which contribute
venipuncture sites, epistaxis, and gastrointestinal blood
to the azotemia and protein-energy wasting
(see
loss. The gastrointestinal blood loss can be occult or overt 
below).
and contribute to anemia. Impaired platelet-platelet and
Metabolic alkalosis occurs in animals with ECF vol-
 platelet-vessel wall interaction induced by uremia toxins
ume contraction, intractable vomiting, or those receiv-
are the major cause of uremic bleeding (Hedges et al.
ing sodium bicarbonate and may predominate other
2007; Galbusera et al. 2009). Other hematologic mani-
metabolic disturbances. A respiratory component (aci-
dosis or alkalosis) may be mixed with the metabolic
tion, blood loss, shortened RBC life span, and impaired
acid-base disturbance in animals with concurrent pul-
immunity (Vanholder et al. 2003a; Vanholder et al. 2003b;
 monary edema or hemorrhage, pleural effusion, pneu-
Clarkson et al. 2008; Meyer and Hostetter 2008; Raff et al.
monia, aspiration pneumonia, hyperventilation, or pul-
2008; Vanholder et al. 2008).
monary thromboemboli. The respiratory component of
In addition to these major morbidities, "uremia tox-
these disturbances will only be evident on blood gas
ins" cause or contribute to endocrine, metabolic, and
analysis (DiBartola 2006).
other manifestations of the uremia (Cowgill and Francey
 2005; Meyer and Hostetter 2008). Reduced resting energy
Uremic Intoxications
expenditure leads to hypothermia, which is most pro-
nounced in animals with severe uremia where body tem-
A myriad of ill-defined “uremic toxins" of diverse molec-
 perature may approach 96°F or lower (Ash 1991; Meyer
ular size and chemical classification accumulate in ure-
and Hostetter 2008). Hypothermia resolves with correc-
mic animals due to excretory failure of the kidneys or
tion of the azotemia by dialysis predicting the cause to
altered metabolism (Vanholder et al. 2003a; Vanholder
be a low molecular weight solute. A normal tempera-
et al. 2003b; Yavuz et al. 2005). Collectively,“uremic tox-
ture in animals with moderate azotemia (BUN >100
 ins" contribute towards many of the classical complica-
mg/dL) suggests the presence of fever and an under-
tions of acute uremia in direct proportion to the severity
lying infectious or inflammatory process. Other man-
of the azotemia and stage of AKl. Many uremic intoxica-
ifestations of uremia described in people include pru-
tions and their attributable signs can be ameliorated by
ritis, hiccups, serositis, diminution in taste and smell,
 renal replacement therapies including hemodialysis pre-
oxidant stress, inflammation, and insulin resistance
dicting they are of reasonably small molecular size (i.e.,
(Vanholder et al. 2003a; Clarkson et al. 2008; Meyer
<1500 D)
and Hostetter 2008; Raff et al. 2008; Vanholder et al.
Gastrointestinal disorders include: anorexia, nausea,
2008).
vomiting, fetid breath, stomatitis, oral ulcerations, necro-
sis of the tip and lateral margins of the tongue, gas-
Nutritional complications
tritis, gastrointestinal ulcers, hematemesis, gastrointesti-
nal bleeding, enterocolitis, diarrhea, intussusception, and
Protein-energy wasting constitutes the loss of lean body
ileus (Krawiec 1996; Antoniades et al. 2006). Gastritis
mass and fat reserves and is common in both humans and
and gastric ulceration exacerbates the anorexia, nau-
animals with AKl. It contributes to many of the comor-
sea and vomiting associated with acute uremia. Gastric
bidities of AKI including: impaired immune function,
lesions are often associated with hypergastrinemia from
increased susceptibility to infection, delayed wound heal-
increased gastrin secretion or its reduced renal clearance
ing, decreased strength, poor quality of life, and mortal-
(Goldstein et al. 1998). Hypersecretion of gastric acid and
ity (Fouque et al. 2008; Fiaccadori and Cremaschi 2009).
direct damage by uremia toxins to the gastric mucosa,
 The imposed catabolism associated with multiple organ
submucosal, and vasculature contribute further to the
dysfunction exacerbates the hyperkalemia, hyperphos-
gastritis (Goldstein et al. 1998). Esophagitis develops
 phatemia, acidosis and azotemia, increases morbidity
secondary to gastric reflux from severe and persistent
and mortality, and negatively influences the outcome of
vomiting and as a complication of esophageal feeding
AKI (Mitch 1993; Druml 1998; Chan 2004; Fouque et al.
tubes. Acute pancreatitis is recognized more commonly
2008; Fiaccadori and Cremaschi 2009). Anorexia, nau-
as an etiology as well as a complication of AKI, and the
sea and vomiting, comorbid catabolic illnesses, uremic
associated severe and protracted vomiting is an impor-
toxins, oxidative stress, inflammation, and endocrine
Acute kidney insufficiency   497
abnormalities including insulin resistance and hyper-
three or more of the categories are fulflled, a diagnosis
parathyroidism contribute cumulatively to the nutri-
 of protein-energy wasting can be ascribed to the AKI and
tional inadequacies (Fouque et al. 2008; Fiaccadori and
nutritional support is essential (Fouque et al. 2008).
Cremaschi 2009). Metabolic acidosis is a major stimu-
lus for breakdown of muscle protein in acute uremia
 and increases the ongoing catabolism ( Mitch 1981; Mitch 
Medical management of AKl
et al. 1989).
 Management strategies for AKI in animals are designed to
An accurate assessment of the nutritional status of
 correct documented or predicted clinical consequences
uremic animals is necessary to guide nutritional therapy
of the presenting or evolving stages of AKl. Therapeu-
(Delaney et al. 2006). Currently, there are no clinically
tic recommendations are based on historical convention
applicable tools with appropriate sensitivity and speci-
in animal patients, recommendations extrapolated from
ficity to precisely define nutritional status and ongoing
human therapeutics, and results of experimental animal
 protein-energy wasting (Delaney et al. 2006; Fiaccadori
 models of AKI (Chew 2000; Cowgill and Francey 2005;
and Cremaschi 2009). A recent consensus has estab-
Jo et al. 2007; Clarkson et al. 2008; Langston 2010). Med-
lished four categorical abnormalities for human patients
ical approaches have changed very little over the past
to define protein-energy wasting associated with AKI that
20 years; nor have outcomes changed for specific etiolo-
appear applicable in animals. The categorical diagnosis
 gies and stages of AK1 (Vaden et al. 1997; Cowgill 2004; 
of protein-energy wasting includes (1) biochemical crite-
Cowgill and Francey 2005; Segev et al. 2008b). Renal
ria including hypoalbuminemia or hypocholesterolemia,
 replacement therapies have provided the most signifi-
(2) reduced body weight or fat mass, (3) decreased mus-
dle mass, and (4) low protein or energy intake (Fouque
improvement in outcomes may only follow wider avail-
et al. 2008).
ability of these therapies in veterinary practice. Medi-
 Serum albumin has been shown to be a strong out-
 s   a    
ment of AKI in animals that are highly predisposed and
humans and animals (Iseki et al. 1993; Mastrorilli et al.
at high risk for renal injury. For animals with established
2007; Fouque et al. 2008; Segev et al. 2008b; Worwag
 AKI, therapy is directed to eliminate initiating or ongo-
and Langston 2008; Kovesdy et al. 2009). Low or decreas-
 ing renal insults and to ameliorate identified circulatory,
 ing serum albumin is highly correlated with mortality
biochemical, metabolic, and clinical abnormalities asso-
ciated with the renal injury.
dictive for protein-energy wasting which includes both
The pathophysiologic mechanisms that mediate AKI
nutritional inadequacy as well as inflammatory induced
have been characterized in great detail in recent years
wasting (Fouque et al. 2008). Change in body weight,
(see Pathogenesis of AKl, above). Cellular energetics,
seemingly the simplest means to document nutritional
vascular congestion, cytosolic calcium, oxidant stress,
status and wasting, can be flawed by increases in hydra-
necrosis, apoptosis, nitric oxide, epithelial cytoskeleton,
tion which mask significant losses of fat stores or lean
q ae s  pe sod mo
body mass (categories 2 and 3, above). Body condition
a few participants recognized to participate in its patho-
scoring has proven to be a useful index to assess nutri-
genesis (Kellum 2008). Novel therapies have emerged
tional status, and sequential changes in the body condi-
from scientifically crafted experimental models of AKI
tion score can serve as an integrated surrogate for changes
for each of these specific pathophysiologic events. Yet,
in body fat mass or lean mass (Laflamme 1997; Son et al.
despite the promise of these targeted therapies, none have
1998). A body condition score below "ideal" is a predic-
become established in clinical therapeutics. This is to be
tor of protein-energy wasting in dogs or cats with AKI.
expected for a disease process with diverse and multi-
Bioelectrical impedance analysis is a safe, noninvasive,
factorial predispositions, etiologies, and stages. Conse-
and reproducible method to quantitate changes in total
quently, specific approaches to the management of AKI
body water, ECF volume, body cell mass and fat free mass
remain supportive for the predicted and documented
which may have future application for serial assessment
clinical consequences.
of body composition in uremic animals (Elliott et al.
2002; Elliott et al. 2002; Chanchairujira and Mehta 2005 ).
Prevention of acute renal injury
(Cowgill, personal observation, 2005) Dietary protein
-o e a   a   a 
The highest therapeutic priority for AKI is to intervene
hensive dietary history and feeding practices. Partial or
 complete anorexia can be associated with protein-energy
sitions to renal injury. Preexisting kidney disease,
advanced age, dehydration, hypovolemia, hypotension,
498  Upper urinary tract disorders
sepsis, fever, prolonged anesthesia/surgery, trauma,
et al. 2008c; Lameire et al. 2008; Lameire et al. 2008;
systemic disease, use of vasoactive or nephrotoxic drugs,
Townsend and Bagshaw 2008; Venkataraman 2008).
high environmental temperatures, and nephrolithiasis
Mild to moderate ECF volume expansion with saline or 
are predisposing risks (Grauer 1996; Lameire et al.
balanced electrolyte fluids is beneficial before the admin-
2008; Lameire et al. 2008; Murrary and Palevsky 2009;
istration of known nephrotoxic drugs (aminoglycosides,
Langston 2010). Risk factors are cumulative and impose
cis-platinum, amphotericin B), anesthesia, or surgical
additive potential for kidney injury. When any of these
intervention. Mannitol administered (see details, below)
conditions coexist with ongoing or projected therapy
 prior to exposure to hemodynamic or nephrotoxic insults
that has the potential to injure the kidney, exposure
will promote urine formation and a natriuresis. It has
      e 
shown efficacy to prevent the induction of AKI in only
or eliminated, ECF volume and renal hemodynamics
limited clinical settings in human patients (crush injury,
must be preserved, and adequate urine flow and solute
renal transplantation, and surgery) and has little generic
excretion should be maintained. Specifically, dehydra-
indication (Duke 1999; Venkataram and Kellum 2001;
tion, hypovolemia, hypotension, hypertension, systemic
Kellum et al. 2008b). Recently, the use of colloidal starch
infections, thrombosis, and environmental nephrotoxins
solutions for hemodynamic stabilization have been crit-
(e.g-, antifreeze, contaminated food, and nephrotoxic
icized and shown in certain settings to contribute to AKI
plants) should be avoided. Nephrotoxic or vasoactive
(Lameire et al. 2008; Townsend and Bagshaw 2008). The
drugs should be discontinued or their dosage should be
 preventative use of other therapies has consistently failed
modified to nontoxic levels. Dehydration, ECF volume
depletion, hypovolemia, and decreased renal perfusion
with crystalloid fluids (Lameire et al. 1995; Kellum 1997;
represent some of the most formidable predispositions
 Duke 1999; Lameire and Vanholder 2001; Gambaro
for AK1 (Bellomo et al. 2005; Lameire et al. 2005; Lameire
et al. 2002; Lameire et al. 2002; Bellomo et al. 2005;
et al. 2008; Lameire et al. 2008; Venkataraman 2008).
Himmelfarb et al. 2008; Kellum et al. 2008a).
 Hemodynamic adequacy must be established, and recog-
nized fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances must be
Conventional management of established AK!
corrected in the course of emergent or ongoing medical
care. Induced vomiting, gastric lavage, administration
As for prevention of AKl, conventional strategies for the
 of activated charcoal and cathartics, and provision of
management of existing AKI involve elimination of iden-
specific antidotes should be instituted following expo-
tified causes of the renal injury and goal-directed sup-
sure to nephrotoxins. Extracorporeal therapies including
portive therapy specific to the life-threatening and mor-
hemodialysis, hemoperfusion, and therapeutic plasma
bid consequences of acute uremia. In many cases the
 exchange may be indicated to promote elimination of
inciting event has passed or cannot be identified at ini-
specific nephrotoxins once renal exposure is established
 tial presentation. In circumstances where the etiology
(Cowgill and Francey 2005; Shalkham et al. 2006; Smith
persists, every effort should be made to eliminate contin-
and Chang 2008).
ued exposure. The administration of nephrotoxic drugs
To date, the best overall protection from events that
should be discontinued or modified to safe dosages. Sys-
 promote AKI is the establishment and maintenance
temic infections (e.g., Leptospirosis) should be aggres-
 of normal hydration, intravascular volume, systemic
sively treated with appropriate antimicrobial therapy, and
hemodynamics, and adequate urine formation. In usual
hemodynamic deficiencies must be resolved rapidly to
clinical settings, there are few opportunities to intervene
 promote euvolemia, normotension, and adequate renal
with preventative strategies. However, when animals
 perfusion. The goals of conventional therapy are to cor-
diagnostic or therapeutic procedures (e.g., radiocontrast
 alleviate abnormalities in body fluid volume and compo-
 imaging, anesthesia, or surgery) or prescribed potentially
sition. Concurrent goals are to promote urine formation
renal compromising drugs (e.g-, aminoglycosides, ACE
and correct biochemical abnormalities and manifesta-
inhibitors, NSAIDs, Amphotericin B, diuretics, or anti-
tions of uremia until compensatory adaptations to the
thyroid drugs), proactive attention to hydration status
renal damage have occurred (Bellomo et al. 2005; Lameire
and systemic hemodynamics is warranted. Correction
et al. 2005; Kellum et al. 2008a; Mehta et al. 2008; Pinsky
of existing fluid deficits and administration of saline or
et al. 2008). Animals with AKI Stages I and II may regain
balanced replacement fluids throughout and following
 adequate renal function within 2-5 days, forestalling life-
renal compromising procedures is the best insurance to
threatening azotemia and electrolyte disorders and need
prevent or moderate the severity of AKl (Bellomo et al.
 only short-term support. Those with higher stages of AKI
2005; Licari et al. 2007; Himmelfarb et al. 2008; Kellum
may require weeks of supportive care before the onset
Acute kidney insufficiency  499
of renal repair. Animals with severe kidney failure, AKI
or
slower administration over an hour, the same
 Stage IV or V, may die within 5-10 days despite appro-
replacement volume expands the intravascular and ECF
 priate conventional management unless supported with
 compartments by approximately 20% (Silverstein et al.
RRT for an indefinite time. This disparity between the
2005). Aggressive fluid replacement must be tempered
window of survival with conventional supportive ther-
in animals with oliguria, sepsis, or cardiovascular disease
 apy and the extended time required to repair severe acute
to prevent fluid overload, circulatory congestion, and
renal injury underlies, in part, the poor prognosis and
incipient heart failure. There is clear evidence in human
outcomes associated with severe stages of AKI.
patients with AKl that over aggressive or excessive
fluid resuscitation is associated with worse morbidity,
Alterations in systemic hemodynamics and
mortality, and poorer outcomes (Bagshaw et al. 2008;
body fluid volume
Kellum et al. 2008a; Townsend and Bagshaw 2008;
Bouchard and Mehta 2009; Bouchard and Mehta 2009;
Deficiencies in body fluid volumes are classic causes and
Bouchard et al. 2009). Serial monitoring of central
consequences of AKl, and fluid therapy remains the foun-
 venous pressure (CVP) can facilitate safe and efficient
dation of medical management (Bellomo et al. 2005;
fluid administration to these animals. An increase in
Cowgill and Francey 2005; Licari et al. 2007; Himmelfarb
CVP of 5-7 cm H2O above baseline or an absolute CVP
et al. 2008; Lameire et al. 2008; Townsend and Bagshaw
 greater than 10 cm H2O may indicate an excessive rate
2008; Langston 2010). The fluid prescription must be
or volume of fluid administration and warrants slowing
goal-directed to correct the specific alterations in fluid
or discontinuing further fluid delivery. However, there
volume and composition, to restore systemic and renal
 are suggestions that CVP and other ventricular preload
 hemodynamic adequacy, and to promote urine forma-
      n
tion. Replacement fluids should mimic the composition
cardiovascular and hemodynamic function and thus
of fluid losses and be formulated to restore depleted
 potentiate fluid accumulation ( Townsend and Bagshaw
fluid compartments. Priority is given to restoration of
2008). It is important to assess and monitor fluid balance
intravascular and interstitial volume in the extracellular
of the patient frequently and judiciously resist overhy-
compartment, normalization of arterial blood pressure
dration. Five percent dextrose in water or maintenance
and renal perfusion, and balancing ongoing fluid losses.
formulations (including 0.45% saline/2.5% dextrose
 Dehydration, depletion of the ECF volume, and hypo-
 solutions) are not appropriate or effective formulations
to replace ECF volume deficits and should be reserved for
tion due to nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Occasionally,
insensible or maintenance fluid requirement later in the
hemorrhage is the prevailing disorder. In the absence of
course of treatment (Cowgill and Francey 2005; Kellum
hypovolemic shock or cardiovascular compromise, these
et al. 2008a). The volume status of the animal should be
fluid deficits should be corrected with normal saline or
re-evaluated once the estimated deficit has been replaced
balanced crystalloids administered intravenously within
to insure the therapeutic goals for restoration of hydra-
the first 2-4 hours of presentation (Licari et al. 2007;
tion and blood pressure were achieved. Additional fluid
Kellum et al. 2008a). The initial replacement volume is
may be administered cautiously if the initially estimated
calculated from clinical estimates of dehydration accord-
 deficit was insufficient to restore hydration or promote
ing to the formula:
normotension and urine formation.
Fluid deficits associated with profound hypovolemia
Volume replacement (mL) = [body weight (kg)]
x[estimated deficit (%)] × 1000
and hypotension or severe blood loss must be replaced
rapidly with crystalloid solutions up to or greater than 90
The estimated deficit is a value between 5 and 15%
mL/kg in dogs and up to 60 mL/kg in cats (Day and Bate-
determined from history, physical examination, blood
 man 2006; Langston 2008). Perhaps more appropriately,
pressure and laboratory information or computed from
synthetic colloid solutions targeted for blood volume
known deviations from historical or ideal dry (non
 expansion or a combination of balanced crystalloid and
volume expanded) weight. A 5% deficit may not be clin-
 colloid solutions should be administered when oxygen
ically apparent and can be replaced routinely to assure
 carrying capacity is less critical than volume restoration.
adequate hydration and to provide a mild fluid challenge
Hydroxyethyl starch (hetastarch) is recommended at
to animals with oliguria and volume-responsive azotemia
10-20 mL/kg in dogs and 10-15 mL/kg in cats as a rapid
(Himmelfarb 2009). Bolus replacement of an estimated
or incremented intravenous bolus infusion. Dextran-70
8% deficit with crystalloid fluids increases blood volume
 or Hetastarch administered at 20 mL/kg to normal dogs
   (s o) n
will expand blood volume immediately following bolus
With subsequent distribution out of the vasculature
Aq     1  s
500  Upper urinary tract disorders
60 minutes post administration (Silverstein et al. 2005).
(saline, balanced electrolyte solutions) for maintenance
Recent evidence suggests high molecular weight starch
fluid requirements will become depleted of free water
solutions may promote renal injury and low molecular
and develop hypernatremia within 2-3 days. The sever-
weight solutions are more appropriate for septic AKI
ity of the hypernatremia is amplified in animals with
(Licari et al. 2007; Murray and Palevsky 2009). Fluid
 appreciable urinary free water losses during the diuretic
replacement for hypotensive shock should be admin-
 phase of AKI, during post obstructive diuresis, or subse-
istered aggressively (but not excessively) until blood
quent to administration of osmotic diuretics like man-
pressure and vascular volume have stabilized. Synthetic
nitol. Modifications to the daily free water requirement
colloid solutions provide no restoration of extravascular
 of maintenance fluids should be determined according
volume necessitating concurrent administration of saline
to changes in serum sodium concentration during the
or balanced crystalloid solutions to replace interstitial
course of management. The free water deficit or excess
volume. Hemorrhagic hypotension may require admin-
can be estimated according to the formula:
istration of compatible whole blood, packed red blood
Free
Water
deficit (+volume,mL)
orexcess
cells, or synthetic hemoglobin products (Oxyglobin,
(-volume, mL) = [body wt (kg)] x [(measured serum
BioPure, Cambridge, MA) (Belgrave et al. 2002; Driessen
Na-145)/145] x 1000, where 145 represents a normal
et al. 2003; Driessen et al. 2006; Weingart and Kohn
serum sodium concentration of 145 mmol/L (DiBartola
2008). Synthetic hemoglobin preparations may be suit-
2006). A positive volume reflects a free water deficit which
able to restore systemic hemodynamic parameters and
should be provided to replete the deficiency and correct
tissue oxygen debt when blood products are not available
the hypernatremia. A negative volume predicts a free
(Belgrave et al. 2002; Driessen et al. 2003).
water excess which should be subtracted from the stan-
The onset or an increase in urine production of
 dard insensible requirement until the excess is eliminated
 greater than 0.5 mL/kg/hour with fluid volume replace-
and the hyponatremia is resolved.
ment predicts a significant volume-responsive (prerenal)
The urinary component of the sensible maintenance
contribution to the oliguria and azotemia (Himmelfarb
fluid requirement will be negligible in oliguric and anuric
2009). Failure to induce a significant diuresis after vol-
animals and should not be prescribed at a standard rate
ume replacement indicates either the initial fluid deficit
used for animals with normal urine production. Uri-
was underestimated or the parenchymal damage is severe
nary losses should be measured or accurately estimated
and volume-unresponsive. An additional 3-5% volume
in nonoliguric animals to prevent under evaluation of
expansion (30-50 mL/kg) may be attempted in an effort
the urine replacement volume. Nonoliguric animals in
to induce a diuresis, taking care to promote only mild
the diuretic phase of AKI or following relief of a postre-
volume expansion without overhydration.
 nal obstruction may produce 5-30 mL/kg/hour of urine
After the fluid deficits have been corrected, subse-
which will not be matched using standard estimates of
quently administered fluid must reflect the maintenance
 normal urine production.
requirements and ongoing losses. Maintenance fluid
Supplementation of potassium in replacement or
 requirements are composed of insensible (free water)
maintenance fluids must be prescribed on an individ-
losses comprising primarily obligatory respiratory losses
ual case basis. Fluids containing supplemental potas-
 and sensible losses including urinary losses and ongo-
 sium are generally contraindicated in oliguric animals
ing electrolyte-containing losses from vomiting, diar-
 or during initial fluid replacement. If the supplemental
rhea, wound drainage, and bleeding. Maintenance fluids
load of potassium has no effective elimination route, it
must reflect both the volume of all ongoing outputs as
will quickly promote hyperkalemia. Excessive loads of
well as their composition. Failure to replace the oblig-
 potassium can be provided inadvertently with use of
atory free water losses is a common therapeutic error.
Maintenance fluid should be composed of 5% dextrose
plemental concentrations of potassium greater than 5--
in water to replace insensible free water losses (15-20 mL/
10 mEq/L. In contrast, animals in the diuretic phase of
kg/day) and balanced electrolyte solutions to replace
AKI may excrete exaggerated amounts of potassium and
 measured or estimated urine, gastrointestinal, and other
require supplementation to prevent potassium wasting.
sensible losses. Commercial maintenance formulations
Potassium supplementation should always be provided
can be supplied if the sensible losses are proportionate to
cautiously to uremic animals and only with daily moni-
those of normal animals at 25-40 mL/kg/day. However,
toring of serum potassium concentrations.
the sensible losses of animals with AKI rarely approxi-
All fluids must be administered cautiously to olig-
mate those of normal animals, and usually it is better to
uric and anuric animals. Hypervolemia is a common
 prescribe the sensible and insensible requirements inde-
complication of aggressive fluid administration or inat-
pendently. Animals provided only replacement solutions
 tentive monitoring of fluid balance. Animals with AKI
Acute kidney insufficiency  
501
     
of an effective diuresis has potential to improve fluid and
hospitalization at primary or specialty referral hospi-
electrolyte imbalances, promote clearance of endogenous
tals (Figure 49.4). If initial administration of the esti-
 and exogenous toxins, and facilitate delivery of adjunctive
mated fluid deficit and additional mild volume expan-
therapies (Karajala et al. 2009). Theoretically, the diuresis
sion fail to induce an effective diuresis within the first
augments intratubular fluid flow and removal of lumi-
612 hours of therapy, it must be presumed the animal
nal debris, necrotic epithelial remnants, and obstructions
has volume-unresponsive AK1. Further fluid loading will
 promoting and extending the tubular injury.
not be beneficial and predisposes life-threatening over-
Oliguric stages of AKI generally are associated with less
hydration (Cowgill and Francey 2005).
favorable outcomes than non-oliguric conditions. The
Progressive increases in body weight, tachypnea,
desire to promote a diuresis has solidified the empirical
increased breath sounds, increased skin turgor, chemosis,
use of diuretics (mannitol and furosemide) and renal
serous nasal discharge, peripheral or pulmonary edema,
vasodilators (dopamine and fenoldopam) when fluid
circulatory congestion, ascites, and systemic hyperten-
therapy alone was ineffective (Kellum 1997; Kellum 1997;
sion are predictive of overhydration in animals receiving
Kellum and Decker 2001; Labato 2001; Lameire and Van-
fluids. Oral mucous membrane wetness does not reflect
holder 2001; Gambaro et al. 2002; Cowgill and Francey
hydration status in uremic animals due to decreased sali-
2005). More recently, the validity of these empirical
vary secretion (xerostomia). Reliance on this sign often
 practices has been disputed, and the routine use of these
causes an erroneous underestimation of the true hydra-
medications in moderate to severe forms of acquired
tion status and inappropriate administration of addi-
AKI in human beings and animals is losing credibility.
tional fluid to overhydrated animals.
 The basis for this reversal of position is the accumulating
Fluid overload may be impossible to correct in animals
 s  n   e  
with oliguric stages of AKl. Consequently, and contrary
associated with diuretic and vasoactive drug use in clin-
 to a nearly universal clinical temptation, al fluid delivery
ical practice (Kellum 1997; Kellum 1997; Kellum 1998;
should be curtailed or discontinued at the first evidence
Dishart and Kellum 2000; Kellum and Decker 2001;
 of overhydration. If the fluid burden cannot be corrected
 Lameire and Vanholder 2001; Venkataram and Kellum
with diuretic administration, there are no conventional
2001; Gambaro et al. 2002; Lameire et al. 2002; Bagshaw
therapeutic options to resolve it. The consequences of
et al. 2007; Bagshaw et al. 2007; Jo et al. 2007; Bagshaw
the circulatory overload (systemic hypertension, periph-
et al. 2008; Townsend and Bagshaw 2008; Karajala et al.
eral and pulmonary edema, plural effusion, congestive
2009; Lameire et al. 2009). If delayed beyond a few hours
heart failure, and ascites) must be managed support-
from the initiation phase of the renal insult, the efficacy
ively. Fluid ultrafiltration with hemodialysis or peritoneal
 of pharmacologic agents to alter the course, morphology,
dialysis is the only alternative for life-threatening overhy-
or outcome of AK1 becomes negligible (Kellum 1997;
dration. Ultrafiltration can reestablish the animal's ideal
Shilliday et al. 1997; Kellum and J 200l; Lameire and
dry weight or facilitate delivery of fluid-intense treat-
Vanholder 2001; Gambaro et al. 2002; Jo et al. 2007).
ments like parenteral nutrition that would exceed the
 Nevertheless, pharmacologic treatments to promote a
animal's excretory capacity (Cowgill and Francey 2005).
diuresis continue to dominate the practice pattern for
The rate and volume of fluid removal with hemodialysis
acute oliguric renal failure in both human and animal
is contingent upon the hemodynamic stability of the ani-
 patients. Their risks and contraindications are considered
mal. Slow rates of ultrafiltration at 5-10 mL/kg/hour are 
   e  n  s q o
readily tolerated. Increased rates of fluid removal up to
of other complications attending the AKI (Bagshaw et al.
20 mL/kg/hour can be prescribed with caution for ani-
2007). Their use should never supplant judicious fluid
 mals that are markedly overhydrated.
and hemodynamic support, nor should they be provided
as a rescue for excessive fluid administration. In estab-
lished AKl, potential benefits to an individual animal
Inadequate urine production
 include (1) conversion from an oliguric or anuric to a
The conversion of anuric or oliguric stages of AKI to a
nonoliguric state, (2) disclosure of less severe renal injury,
non-oliguric state is been an important early goal for the
(3) better regulation of fluid and electrolyte balance, and
medical management of AKI (Venkataram and Kellum
(4) opportunity to provide parenteral nutrition.
2001; Cowgill and Francey 2005; Townsend and Bagshaw
2008; Karajala et al. 2009). The priority to establish a
Mannitol
diuresis is less critical for patients managed with RRT
where the consequences of inadequate urine production
Hypertonic mannitol (an osmotic diuretic) is used
can be corrected during the dialysis sessions. Induction
commonly for the prevention and management of
502   Upper urinary tract disorders
oliguric forms of AKl. Putative therapeutic effects
similar practice pattern is evident in veterinary medicine.
include expansion of ECF volume; decreased vascular
The use of loop diuretics, like furosemide, have evolved
resistance; increased RBF and GFR; reduced hypoxic
from early experimental studies in animals and nonran-
cellular swelling; prevention of vascular congestion and
domized and uncontrolled clinical trials in humans doc-
erythrocyte aggregation; increased solute excretion,
umenting improvements in urine formation (Lindner
osmotic tubular fluid flow and dispersion of tubular
et al. 1979; Townsend and Bagshaw 2008). When coupled
debris; and scavenging of toxic free-radicals (Behnia et al.
with the perception and limited evidence that nonolig-
1996; Better et al. 1997; Finn 200l; Lameire and Van-
uric patients have a better prognosis than those who are
holder 2001; Venkataram and Kellum 2001; Gambaro
oliguric, loop diuretics have become a staple in the man-
et al. 2002; McClellan et al. 2006; Karajala et al. 2009). The
agement of AKl.
   n sd    o 
Furosemide is a potent natriuretic agent which
considerably less than the use of other diuretics (Bagshaw
inhibits active sodium and chloride reabsorption at the
et al. 2007c). In most clinical settings, mannitol is unlikely
Na+ K+2Cl- cotransporter in the luminal membrane of
 to have therapeutic efficacy in the prevention or outcome
the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. In addition
of AKl (Venkataram and Kellum 200l; Kellum et al.
to promoting increased urine formation, furosemide is
2008b). It also imposes potential adverse effects including
a modest vasodilator and can increase renal blood flow
fluid overload, hyperosmolality, increased renal oxygen
by PGE2-mediated events. It has the potential to decrease
consumption, volume depletion and hypernatremia
 tubular oxygen consumption and energy requirements in
(Lameire et al. 2009; Redfors et al. 2009).
 Oxygen sensitive tubular segments (Finn 2001; Lameire
Despite the absence of evidence-based justification for
and Vanholder 200l; Venkataram and Kellum 2001;
the use of mannitol in oliguric AKl, it has gained empiri-
Gambaro et al. 2002; Abbott and Kovacic 2008; Townsend
cal recommendation when fluid therapy alone has failed
and Bagshaw 2008). Despite these effects and despite their
to promote urine formation (Cowgill and Elliott 2000;
 potential to increase urine formation, the administration
Elliott and Cowgill 2000; Labato 2001; Grauer 2009).
of loop diuretics to human patients in the clinical phases
Conventional practice patterns are to administer man-
of AKI has yet to demonstrate any significant benefit in
nitol (20-25% solution) at 0.25-1.0 g/kg to fluid replete
patient outcomes including mortality, duration of hos-
animals as a slow intravenous bolus. If an effective diure-
pitalization, or requirement for RRT (Mehta et al. 2002;
sis results within 30-60 minutes, a maintenance infu-
Uchino et al. 2004; Bagshaw et al. 2007; Townsend and
 sion at 1.0-2.0 mg/kg/minute or intermittent boluses of
Bagshaw 2008; Lameire et al. 2009).
0.25-0.5 g/kg IV every 4-6 hours can be continued to
 In veterinary medicine, there are no observational,
 promote the diuresis as required. If an adequate diuresis
 prospective, or randomized trials addressing the bene-
is not established by 60 minutes, an additional 0.25-0.5
fits and/or efficacy of loop diuretics in established AKl.
gm/kg intravenous bolus can be repeated cautiously,
Moreover, here is a dearth of antidotal experience or
but further administration is contraindicated due to the
opinion to justify the current practice pattern for olig-
risks of ECF volume expansion, hemodilution, hyperv-
uric animals. Recent studies in normal cats, demon-
olemia, and mannitol toxicity (Grauer 1995; Grauer and
strated furosemide combined with dopamine induced a
Lane 1995; Visweswaran et al. 1997; Cowgill and Elliott
 pronounced increase in urine production and fractional
2000; Elliott and Cowgill 2000; Langston 2010). Man-
sodium excretion but no significant effect on renal blood
nitol should not be given to animals with severe fluid
 flow and GFR compared to fluid therapy alone. Moreover,
overload, pulmonary edema, or congestive heart failure.
there was a trend for furosemide-dopamine administra-
The more established the onset of the uremia, the lower
tion to decrease GFR compared to fluid therapy or fluid
the expectation mannitol therapy will promote a diuresis
therapy and mannitol (McClellan et al. 2006). It is not
or favorably influence the course of the disease.
 possible to extrapolate these observations to animals with
AKl, but they confirm observations in human patients
with AKl in which furosemide alone or combined with
Loop diuretics
dopamine promotes only inconsistent improvement in
Loop diuretics are used nearly universally as a prac-
urine formation.
tice pattern in human patients with oliguric or anuric
 Furosemide has potential for adverse effects when
AKl, also without established evidence of their efficacy
given to oliguric animals. If effective at establishing a
 or benefit to improve outcome with few clinical excep-
diuresis, furosemide can decrease effective blood volume
tions (Mehta et al. 2002; Uchino et al. 2004; Bagshaw
(Figure 49.5) and cardiac output and activate the renin-
et al. 2007; Kellum et al. 2007a; Uchino et al. 2007;
angiotensin system which can adversely alter cortico-
Townsend and Bagshaw 2008; Karajala et al. 2009). A
medullary blood flow. It disrupts tubuloglomerular
Acute kidney insufficiency  503
feedback mechanisms and can compromise the tenuous
tubular effects inhibit sodium reabsorption along the
perfusion and oxygen balance in the medulla and pro-
nephron. DA1-like “renal responses" occur at doses of
 mote additional injury (Karajala et al. 2009). Furosemide
'ny/a c pue go uaamiaq auedop
induced urine production may mislead the clinician
DA2-like receptors on postganglionic sympathetic
about the functional status of the kidney and divert atten-
nerves inhibit norepinephrine-mediated effects of sym-
tion from fundamental therapeutic needs or delay initia-
pathetic stimulation leading to  vasodilatation and
tion of supportive RRT. Current experience and evidence
reduced sympathetic tone and increased PGE2 produc-
would challenge the rational use of furosemide or other
tion. Activation of DA2-like receptors facilitates the
loop diuretic to prevent or benefit the course of AKI or
intrarenal DAl-mediated vascular effects and may have
to improve outcomes for animals with oliguric forms of
direct inhibitory effects on sodium reabsorption on renal
the disease.
tubular cells. DA2-like receptors are activated at doses
 Furosemide effectively increases urine output in some
between 2 and 3 μg/kg/minute, overlapping the effects of
  e a     s
the DA1-like receptors.
ficial to manage overhydration and to facilitate delivery
Activation of B-1 adrenergic receptors occurs at
of large-volume therapies like parenteral nutrition. The
conversion from an oliguric to a nonoliguric state may
 At this dosage, dopamine has positive inotropic effects on
facilitate some aspects of patient management; however,
the heart which promotes increased cardiac output and
furosemide therapy should not be regarded as a "backup"
 perfusion to the kidney and increased urine formation
 or “bailout” for overaggressive or inattentive fluid man-
(Furukawa et al. 2002; Tobata et al. 2004; Sigrist 2007).
agement resulting in volume overload. When prescribed
At doses higher than 10 μg/kg/minute, dopamine acti-
vates α-adrenergic receptors. The intrarenal effects at this
2-4 mg/kg IV with appropriate monitoring of fluid bal-
dosage range include vasoconstriction, increased vascular
ance and blood pressure. Ifan adequate diuresis of greater
 resistance, decreased GFR, increased sodium reabsorp-
than 1 mL/kg/hour is not achieved within 30 minutes, the
tion, and decreased urine formation, which are contrary
initial dose can be repeated. If a diuresis is achieved, the
to therapeutic goals in AKI (Furukawa et al. 2002; Tobata
dosage can be repeated every 6-8 hours or given as a
et al. 2004; Sigrist 2007).
constant rate infusion at 0.25-1.0 mg/kg/hour to extend
Studies in anesthetized and conscious cats document
the diuresis as required. Fluid balance must be moni-
a different spectrum and sensitivity of dopaminergic
tored carefully to prevent volume contraction which may
effects (Wassermann et al. 1980; Clark et al. 1991b;
further impair renal function. (Figure 49.5) There is no
Flournoy et al. 2003; Simmons et al. 2006). Low-dose
indication for the use of furosemide or loop diuretics in
 dopamine infusion (up to 3 μg/kg/minute) caused no sig-
animals with nonoliguric AKI except to manage overhy-
 nificant changes in mean arterial blood pressure, heart
dration, hyperkalemia, or toxin elimination.
rate, urine output, or sodium excretion (Wassermann
et al. 1980; Clark et al. 1991b). Only at doses greater than
10 μg /kg/minute did dopamine infusion result in dose-
Dopamine agonists
dependent increases in urine output and sodium excre-
Dopamine is a catecholamine with multiple physiologic,
tion; however, the diuretic response was associated with
receptor specific, and dose dependent actions in the kid-
variable decreases in GFR, renal vasoconstriction, and
ney with the potential to induce a diuresis in dogs with
inconsistent changes in mean arterial blood pressure and
AKI (Venkataram and Kellum 2001; Sigrist 2007). The
renal blood flow which would be contraindicated in AKI.
 major physiologic actions of dopamine affect the renal
These findings are most consistent with effects induced
vasculature to alter renal vascular resistance, renal blood
by stimulation of α-adrenergic receptors by the higher
flow and distribution, and GFR and modulate sodium
dopamine doses (Clark et al. 1991b). These differences
     e   
in the actions of dopamine in cats make the therapeu-
1985; Schaer et al. 1985; Furukawa et al. 2002; Tobata
tic administration of dopamine to stimulate a diuresis
et al. 2004; Sigrist 2007). The pharmacologic effects of
 and natriuresis in oliguric cats conceptually inappropri-
dopamine are dose dependent and differentially medi-
 ate and potentially detrimental to renal recovery.
ated through dopaminergic (DA1-like and DA2-like) and
Recently, DAl-like receptors with a high affinity
adrenergic receptors. In dogs, DAl-like mediated vas-
to fenoldopam, a pure DAl agonist, were identifed
cular responses promote pre-glomerular vasodilation,
in the kidney cortex of cats (Flournoy et al. 2003).
decreased renal vascular resistance, and increased renal
Fenoldopam administration to conscious cats also has
blood flow (Fink et al. 1985; Schaer et al. 1985; Furukawa
been shown to promote a delayed DAl-mediated diure-
et al. 2002; Tobata et al. 2004; Sigrist 2007). DA1-like
sis and naturiuresis with variable and inconsistent effects
504  Upper urinary tract disorders
on GFR (Clark et al. 1991a; Clark et al. 1991b; Simmons
and the use of diuretics and vasoactive drugs should be
et al. 2006). Low dosage administration of fenoldopam
reserved to facilitate management of excessive fluid bur-
(<2 μg/kg/minute) or selective DA-1 receptor agonist
dens and hyperkalemia. If oliguria or anuria persists fol-
(YM435) to anesthetized dogs shows similar effects to
lowing fluid resuscitation, therapeutic efforts should be
promote increases in renal blood flow, diuresis and natri-
directed to starting renal replacement therapies.
uresis with variable and dose dependent influences on
systemic hemodynamics and GFR (Yatsu et al. 1997a;
Management of electrolyte and acid
Yatsu et al. 1997b; Yatsu et al. 1997c; Halpenny et al.
base disorders
2001; Murray et al. 2003). Administration of fenoldopam
 or selective DA-1 receptor agonists to experimental dogs
Hyperkalemia
subjected to endotoxic shock, renal ischemia, angiotensin
Hyperkalemia is a common and life-threatening elec-
I1, Amphotericin B, and other vasoconstricting stimuli
trolyte complication of AKl. The severity of the hyper-
have shown significant acute increases in renal blood
kalemia and the impending or persisting cardiac and
flow, urine formation, sodium excretion, and improved
neuromuscular disturbances predicate the therapeutic
glomerular filtration (Fink et al. 1985; Nichols et al. 1992;
approach. Hyperkalemia is more prevalent and gener-
Yatsu et al. 1997c; Yatsu et al. 1998).
ally more severe in oliguric and anuric animals and is
Administration of dopaminergic drugs is not without
usually proportional to the stage of AKl. Therapy is pri-
risk. At a range of doses, dopamine can cause renal vaso-
oritized according to the severity to (1) antagonize the
constriction, ventricular tachyarrhythmias, medullary
 increased resting potential in the heart, (2) redistribute
hypoxia, and potential for myocardial, intestinal and
 potassium from the extracellular to the intracellular fluid
renal ischemia. Fenoldopam can promote decreased sys-
compartment, and (3) remove the potassium load from
temic vascular resistance and hypotension. The narrow
the body.
therapeutic margin and overlap in dosage effects, variable
 Severe hyperkalemia ( > 8 mEq/L) is associated with life
and uncertain elimination kinetics in AKl, and the vari-
threatening cardiac arrhythmias and conduction distur-
able sensitivity and binding affinities for catecholamines
bances that are accentuated by how quickly the hyper-
in uremic animals make their use risky (Venkataram and
kalemia developed and the degree of hyponatremia,
Kellum 200l; Sigrist 2007).
hypocalcemia and acidosis. For immediate resolution of
these signs, calcium gluconate (10% solution) is admin-
istered at 0.5-1.0 mL/kg as a slow intravenous bolus to
Effect of diuretic use on outcome
effect to increase the threshold potential for cardiac exci-
Despite the early observational and experimental bene-
tation and correct the bradycardia and ECG abnormal-
fits ascribed to diuretic agents and dopaminergic drugs
 ities (Ahmed and Weisberg 2001; Cowgill and Francey
in oliguric forms of AKl that have fostered the general-
2005; DiBartola and de Morais 2006; Putcha and Allon
ized use of these agents using urine output as a surrogate
2007; Schaer 2008; Willard 2008). Calcium chloride is not
for outcome, there has been little documented benefit
recommended due to its potency, acidifying tendency,
  ni   e t s nn 
and irritation if injected extravascularly. Rapid injection
tality, or requirement for RRT ( Venkataram and Kellum 
of calcium solutions may cause hypotension and car-
        
diac arrhythmias; therefore, arterial blood pressure and
mation and for pressor control. Consensus opinion in
 an electrocardiogram should be monitored during treat-
human medicine states the use of diuretics or vasoactive
 ment. The infusion should be halted temporarily if S-T
-npxa paseq sq Pinous av jo juaea aui u sin
segment elevation, Q-T interval shortening, progressive
sively on the need for fluid management and they have
bradycardia, or hypotension is observed. The effects of
no rational indication for the treatment of AKl per se
calcium infusion are rapid in onset but of short duration
(Venkataram and Kellum 2001; Mehta et al. 2002; Uchino
(approximately 30-60 minutes). Calcium administration
 does not lower the serum potassium concentration or
and Bagshaw 2008; Karajala et al. 2009 ). Outcomes anal-
resolve the excessive potassium burden. It provides a
finite, life-saving reprieve until longer-lasting therapies 
naturally acquired AKl to confirm or refute a benefit
 to control the hyperkalemia can be initiated.
for the use of diuretics and vasoactive drugs. It is likely
Serum potassium concentrations can be lowered in
that the timing of the renal insult and injury will never
animals with non life-threatening hyperkalemia or fol-
be optimal for interventional strategies in the majority of
lowing treatment with calcium salts by increasing the
animals. Until conclusive evidence is available, fluid ther-
renal or extrarenal clearance of potassium or by the intra-
 apy remains the most effcacious therapeutic approach
cellular translocation of potassium. Mild and moderate
Acute kidney insufficiency  
505
hyperkalemia ( <7.0 mEq/L) may resolve spontaneously
or hypercapnia and may exacerbate overhydration and
with the induction of a diuresis. All potassium containing
hypertonicity. Sodium bicarbonate administration can
fluid used to support the diuresis should be replaced with
lower serum calcium concentrations and must be used
solutions devoid of potassium. The renal elimination of
cautiously in animals with preexisting hypocalcemia.
potassium can be increased with furosemide adminis-
Compelling studies in experimental dogs with induced
tration at 1-2 mg/kg IV each 6-12 hours in non oliguric
hyperkalemia demonstrated hypertonic sodium chlo-
and fluid replete animals with mild hyperkalemia. Serum
ride administration to be equally effective as sodium
potassium and fluid balance should be monitored closely
bicarbonate administration to reduce serum potassium
 to prevent dehydration and to insure the hyperkalemia is
concentration and alleviate the cardiac conduction
controlled.
disturbances (Kaplan et al. 1997; Kaplan et al. 2000).
If a diuresis cannot be established or serum potassium
The effects of bicarbonate and glucose/insulin are more
cannot be controlled with fluid and furosemide admin-
 sustained than calcium gluconate but must be repeated as
istration, other measures should be instituted to lower
clinical circumstances dictate until the potassium load is
serum potassium. Regular insulin at 0.25-1.0 units/kg IV
alleviated.
in combination with intravenous dextrose at 1-2 gm/unit
Beta-2 adrenergic stimulation facilitates potassium
of administered insulin is used for the rapid correction of
influx into cells and has been exploited to treat hyper-
hyperkalemia (Ahmed and Weisberg 2001; Cowgill and
kalemia (Ahmed and Weisberg 2001; Putcha and Allon
Francey 2005; DiBartola and de Morais 2006; Putcha and
2007; Mount and Zandi-Nejad 2008). Albuterol and
Allon 2007; Schaer 2008; Willard 2008; Langston 2010).
 terbutaline have been used for the management of hyper-
 Insulin activates Na+K+-ATPase activity promoting the
kalemia in human patients but experience in animals with
direct cellular uptake of potassium which is uninfluenced
AKI is lacking.
by other drugs and clinical conditions. Hypoglycemia
Mild hyperkalemia (<6.0 mEq/L) is rarely problem-
is the most common side effect and the blood glucose
atic but should be monitored at 8-12 hours intervals.
concentration should be monitored closely to adjust the
 Mild hyperkalemia generally resolves with initial (potas-
concurrent dextrose administration. Hypertonic (20%)
sium free) replacement fluids alone or with furosemide
dextrose can be administered singularly at 0.5-1.5 gm/kg
and/or bicarbonate administration. For long-term con-
intravenously if the hyperkalemia is not severe. Glucose
trol in refractory cases, sodium polystyrene sulfonate
stimulates insulin release which secondarily increases the
resin (Kayexalate) may be given orally at 2 g/kg in 3-4
uptake of potassium into the cells.
divided doses suspended in water or 20% sorbitol to
The administration of sodium bicarbonate to lower
prevent constipation. This resin exchanges sodium for
 serum potassium had been accepted widely in the past,
potassium across intestinal mucosa promoting intestinal
but recently its benefit has undergone reconsideration.
potassium clearance. Exchange resins are variably effec-
 The influence of alterations of acid-base on changes in 
tive for sustained control of low grade hyperkalemia,
serum potassium may be affected considerably by the
but have little indication for the management of life-
duration of the hyperkalemia and the clinical conditions
threatening hyperkalemia. The administration of Kayex-
predisposing the disturbance (Ahmed and Weisberg
alate is facilitated by use of an esophageal feeding tube,
2001; Putcha and Allon 2007). Sodium bicarbonate
but its acceptability is influenced by side-effects includ-
has shown anecdotal benefits to alleviate the cardiac
 ing nausea, constipation, gastrointestinal ulceration and
conduction disturbances and lower serum potassium in
necrosis.
animals with AKI in the authors? experience, but there is
If conventional therapy fails to provide an immediate
little immediate efficacy to bicarbonate administration
 or lasting resolution for the hyperkalemia, peritoneal or
 on serum potassium in human patients with end-stage
hemodialysis are indicated as the only alternative thera-
renal disease (Gutierrez et al. 1991; Blumberg et al. 1992;
pies. For all degrees of hyperkalemia associated with AKI,
Allon and Shanklin 1996; Kaplan et al. 1997; Ahmed and
the most effective and persisting treatment is hemodial-
Weisberg 2001; Putcha and Allon 2007). Under condi-
ysis which achieves whole body clearance of the excessive
tions in which the metabolic acidosis associated with AKI
 potassium load. Serum potassium concentration is gen-
warrants correction, sodium bicarbonate can be given
erally normalized by the end of the dialysis session but
 to correct an existing bicarbonate deficit. Bicarbonate
undergoes a variable rebound after dialysis influenced
administration increases extracellular pH which translo-
by its compartmentalization and transference form the
cates potassium into cells in exchange for hydrogen ions
 intracellular compartment. Life-threatening cardiac con-
(Cowgill and Francey 2005; DiBartola and de Morais
duction disturbances and ECG abnormalities improve
2006; Schaer 2008). Sodium bicarbonate administration
dramatically within minutes of starting hemodialy-
is contraindicated in animals with metabolic alkalosis
sis without perceptible changes in peripheral blood
506  Upper urinary tract disorders
potassium concentrations (Cowgill and Francey 2005;
acidosis warrants treatment with intravenous sodium
DiBartola and de Morais 2006). It is plausible the
bicarbonate. The initial goal of bicarbonate replacement
markedly reduced potassium concentration, blood pH,
is to ameliorate, not necessarily resolve, the metabolic aci-
or sodium concentration returning from the dialyzer via
dosis. Serum pH should be corrected to approximately
the dialysis catheter to the patient's right atrium provides
7.2 and serum bicarbonate to 14-16 mEq/L to stabilize
sufficient alteration to coronary circulation to stabilize
 cardiac conduction and contractility and serum potas-
the myocardium and correct the ECG abnormalities.
sium. The initial bicarbonate replacement dose (mEq)
Potassium laden fluids and parenteral nutrition solu-
= [body weight (kg) × 0.3 x bicarbonate deficit],
tions with high potassium concentrations can promote
where 0.3 represents the early volume of distribution
hyperkalemia and must be avoided. Similarly, commer-
for bicarbonate, and the bicarbonate deficit is the desired
cial diets high in potassium can cause hyperkalemia.
bicarbonate—measured bicarbonate. One-half the cal-
An appropriate diet for hyperkalemic patients may
culated replacement is administered intravenously over
require formulation by a veterinary nutritionist (Segev
30 minutes, and the remainder is provided with intra-
et al. 2010). Drugs including potassium-sparing diuretics,
venous fluids during the following 2-4 hours, if arterial
ACE inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, and β-2
- 7    1 on   s H
blocking drugs may promote hyperkalemia and should
lowing initial distribution (30-60 minutes) of the first
be used cautiously.
dosage (Cowgill and Francey 2005; DiBartola 2006; de
Morais et al. 2008; Langston 2008; Langston 2010). Full
Hypokalemia
equilibration of the initial bicarbonate dose requires
 2-4 hours, but most uremic animals have an ongoing
Hypokalemia can develop at all stages of AKI if renal
requirement for sodium bicarbonate of approximately
potassium losses exceed exogenous inputs. The use of
 diuretics, inadequate dietary potassium intake, vomit-
80-90 mg/kg/day to offset production of metabolic acids.
Serum bicarbonate (blood gases and electrolytes) should
 ing and diarrhea, and post obstructive diuresis may con-
be reassessed following the estimated initial replacement
tribute to the development ofhypokalemia. Hypokalemia
and at least daily to determine if the deficit is replete or
 sis d nnq e eo e nn s
be noted if the serum potassium concentration is less than
bonate administration can promote metabolic alkalo-
2.5 mEq/L. Muscle weakness, fatigue, vomiting, anorexia,
sis, ECF fluid volume overload, pulmonary edema and
gastrointestinal ileus, and cardiac dysrhythmias may be
hypertension. Serum potassium and ionized calcium
seen in affected animals (Schaer 2008; Willard 2008).
concentrations may fall with over-correction of the
Ventroflexion of the neck is commonly observed in cats.
acidemia causing secondary hypoventilation, hypercap-
Oral potassium supplementation at 1-3 mEq/kg/day is
nia, shift in oxy-hemoglobin dissociation, reduced tis-
given to animals that are able to eat or being fed through
 sue oxygen delivery, and paradoxical cerebral acidosis
 a feeding tube. Even in animals that require parenteral
(DiBartola 2006).
 supplementation, serum potassium is rarely less than
 The therapeutic goal for bicarbonate replacement is
2.0 mEq/L, and increasing the potassium concentration
the maintenance of serum bicarbonate between 18 and
of maintenance solutions to 20-30 mEq/L is usually suf-
20 mEq/L. Ongoing bicarbonate requirements can be
ficient to restore normokalemia. Potassium supplemen-
supplied with sodium bicarbonate administered per os
tation of maintenance solutions should be prescribed
 cautiously in uremic animals with normal serum potas-
or via a feeding tube at 30-40 mg/kg every 12 hours to
achieve this goal once the animal tolerates oral medica-
sium concentrations, and serum potassium should be
tion. Alternately, potassium citrate (75 mg/kg per os each
evaluated frequently to avoid hyperkalemia.
12 hours) can be used if potassium supplementation is
needed concurrently. Each citrate molecule is converted
Acid-base imbalances
 into three bicarbonate molecules in the liver. The dosage
Acid-base disorders are common in animals with AKl.
 of the alkalinizing drug is adjusted as necessary according
They are often mixed and must be treated on the basis of
to subsequent bicarbonate measurements to maintain the
measured serum bicarbonate concentrations and blood
therapeutic goal.
 gas analysis. Metabolic acidosis is the most consistent
Mild to moderate metabolic alkalosis (serum bicar-
acid-base disturbance. Mild to moderate metabolic aci-
bonate between 25 and 35 mEq/L) usually resolves with
dosis (serum bicarbonate >15 mEq/L) will often resolve
administration of normal saline or balanced electrolyte
following fluid replacement with re-establishment of tis-
solutions to correct ECF volume and chloride deficits
sue perfusion and the onset of a diuresis. More severe
 and with the onset of diuresis. Persistent vomiting must
be controlled with antiemetics (see below) to prevent
Acute kidney insufficiency  507
ongoing metabolic alkalosis. RRT with intermittent or
iting of purely central origins in the absence of gastri-
continuous modalities can correct either metabolic aci-
tis (Table 49.4). They reduce gastric acid production
dosis or metabolic alkalosis within the first day of ther-
by blocking the histamine receptor on gastric parietal
apy (Cowgill and Francey 2006; Ronco and Ricci 2008).
Long-term control of metabolic acid-base disorders by
 promote gastric ulcers formation. H2-receptor antago-
 RRT is required until the kidneys are able to regulate
nists undergo 50-70% renal elimination, and their dose
acid-base metabolism. The rate and degree of correction
should be reduced in proportion to the degree excretory
is predicated on the frequency and duration of dialy-
failure to prevent CNS mediated side-effects. Omepra-
sis, the dialysis modality, and the dialysate bicarbonate
 zole is a potent inhibitor of gastric acid secretion, and
prescription.
acts by irreversible inactivation of H+/K+ -ATPase activ-
Respiratory acid-base disorders may predominate or
ity preventing secretion of hydrogen ions into the stom-
contribute to the acid-base profile of animals with con-
ach (Washabau and Elie 1995; Abelo et al. 2002; Bersenas
current pulmonary complications (see Clinical Conse-
et al. 2005). Omeprazole reduces acid secretion in the
quences, above). Management of the respiratory com-
 dog for up to 24 hours. Pantaprazole is an injectable
 ponents of the acid-base disorders requires correction
 proton-pump blocker that can be used in animals unable
of the underlying pulmonary and/or plural disease and
to tolerate oral omeprazole.
appropriate regulation of ventilation and oxygenation.
 Sucralfate and prostaglandin analogues may be used
 n oe  pou si n o
to manage gastric erosion, ulceration and hemorrhage.
the acidemia of respiratory origin.
Sucralfate is a basic aluminum salt of sucrose octasulfate
which binds tightly to exposed protein in gastric ulcers to
Uremia intoxications
form a protective barrier to the ulcerogenic and inflam-
matory effects of gastric acid, pepsin, bile, or pancreatic
 Retained solutes normally removed by the kidneys con-
secretions. Sucralfate also stimulates mucus and bicar-
  e r  sa   n 
bonate secretion and mucosal prostaglandin production
cleared from the body by restoration of excretory func-
with the potential to improve microvascular integrity
tion, intensive fluid diuresis, or renal replacement ther-
and mucosal blood flow. Sucralfate is also useful for the
apies to resolve the signs attributable to these “uremic
 management of esophagitis associated with gastric reflux
intoxication". Immediate recovery of excretory function
and irritation from esophageal feeding tubes. The effi-
is possible only with volume-responsive and obstructive
 cacy of sucralfate may be limited until active vomiting
forms of AK1. In advanced stages of AKI, the symptoma-
 is controlled with concurrent antiemetic therapy. Miso-
tology of the uremia increases with advancing stage, and
 prostol is a synthetic PGE1 analogue that stimulates the
mucus and bicarbonate content of the mucosal barrier.
 manifestations until the injury is repaired.
It increases epithelial cell renewal, maintains mucosal
blood flow, and stabilizes tissue lysozymes. Misoprostol
Oral and gastrointestinal
also reduces gastric acid secretion by binding to an E-
Oral hygiene, uremic stomatitis, and oral ulceration can
receptor on the basolateral aspect of parietal cells. Med-
 r      
ical therapy for vomiting and the gastrointestinal com-
with solutions or gels containing 0.1-0.2% chlorhexi-
plications of AKI are usually continued for 2-3 weeks
dine every 8-12 hours. This therapy reduces the bacterial
but may need extension in animals with severe gastritis
contamination of the oral cavity, helps prevent and heal
following some etiologies, that is, antifreeze ingestion or
oral ulcers, and relieves the discomfort associated with
with severe uremia.
the stomatitis and lingual necrosis.
Centrally acting antiemetics should be usedif vomiting
Antiemetic therapy is required to manage the
cannot be controlled by local treatments for the gastritis
fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances, nutritional
(Table 49.4). Metoclopramide is a D2-dopaminergic
requirements, and the discomfort associated with pro-
antagonist that directly suppresses the chemoreceptor
tracted nausea and vomiting. All oral fluids, medica-
 trigger zone ( Washabau and Elie 1995; Brown and Otto
tions, and food should be withheld initially until vomit-
2008; Willard 2009). It also has prokinetic effects on
ing has been ameliorated at least partially with antiemetic
the stomach to promote gastric emptying which is often
therapy. H2-receptor antagonists such as ranitidine and
delayed in uremic animals. Metoclopramide can be
famotidine are used commonly for the management of
provided by either oral or parenteral routes and is most
gastritis, vomiting, gastric erosion, gastric ulceration,
effective when administered as a constant intravenous
and esophagitis which often accompany uremia. These
infusion (Table 6). Metoclopramide is excreted by the
kidneys and the dosage needs modification in animals
508  Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 49.4 Drugs used for treating gastrointestinal manifestations of uremia
Indication
Mechanism
Drug
Dose-dog
Dose-cat
Comments
Stomatitis or oral
 Bacteriocidal agent
Chlorhexidine
ulceration
 Esophagitis, gastritis,
Hz -receptor antagonist 
Famotidine
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO,
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO,
 gastric ulceration/
(Pepcid Merck
IM, IV q 12-24
SQ q 24 hours
hemorrhage
Sharp Dohme)
hours
 Ranidtidine
0.5-2.0 mg/kg PO,
0.5-2.5 mg/kg PO,
Zantac Glaxo)
IV q 8-12 hours
SQ, IM, IV q 12
hours
Cimetidine
5-10 mg/kg P0, IM,
5-10 mg/kg P0, IM,
(Tagamet Smith
IV q 4-6 hours 
IV (slow) q6-8
Kline)
hours
 Proton pump blocker
 Omeprazole
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q
0.7 mg/kg PO q 24
 Do not open
(Prilosec Merck
24 hours
hours
capsules
Sharp Dohme)
 Panteprazole
0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV
0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV
(Protoxix Wyeth)
(over 15 minutes) q
(over 15 minutes) q
24 hours
24 hours
Cytoprotective agent
 Sucralfate
0.5-1.0 g P0 q 6-8
0.25-0.5 g PO q
Give 30 minutes
(Carafate? Marion)
hours
8-12 hours
 prior to antacid
 Prevention of NSAID
PGE analogue
Misoprostol
1-3 mcg/kg PO q
Gl toxicity
(Cytotec Searle)
6-12 hours
 Antiemetic——CRTZ,
α-adrenergic,
Chlorpromazine
0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM,
0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM,
emetic center
D2-dopaminergic,
(Thorazine? Smith
SQ q 6-8 hours
SQ q8 hours
H, -histaminergic, 
Kline!
M -cholinergic
antagonists
 Prochlorperazine
0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM,
(Compazine? Smith
SQ q 8-12 hours
Kline)
 Acepromazine
0.01-0.05 mg/kg
(PromAce@ Fort
IM, SQ q 8-12 hours 
Dodge)
Antiemetic——CRTZ,
 5-HT; receptor
 Ondansetron
0.1 mg/kg PO q
 peripheral vagal
antagonist
(Zofran Glaxo
12-24 hours
nerve
Wellcome)
0.1-0.3 mg/kg IV q
0.1 mg/kg PO q 6-8
8-12 hours
hours, 0.1-0.3 mg/kg
IVq 6-8 hours
Dolasetron
0.5 mg/kg PO, SQ,
0.5 mg/kg PO, SQ,
(Anzemet Hoechst
IV q 24 hours
IVq 24 hours
Marion Russef!
Antiemetic—emetic 
 Neurokinin receptor
Maropitant
2 mg/kg PO for 2
0.5 mg/kg SQ q 24
 center, peripheral 
antagonist
(Cerenia Pfizer)
days or 1 mg/kg SQ
hours for 5 days
vagal nerve
q 24 hours for 5
sAep
 Antiemetic, prokinetic
 D2-dopaminergic
 Metoclopramide
0.1-0.5 mg/kg PO,
agent
 antagonist,
(Reglan? Robins)
IM, SQ q 6-8 hours
 5-HTs-serotonergic
antagonist
0.01-0.02
0.2-0.4 mg/kg SQ q
mg/kg/hour CRI
6-8 hours or 0.01-0.02
mg/kg/hour CRI
Prokinetic agent
 5-HT4 receptor agonist,
Cisapride?
0.1-0.5 mg/kg PO q
2.5-5 mg/cat PO q
5-HT/5-HT2 receptor
(Propulsid Jansen
8-12 hours
8-12 hours
 antagonist
Pharmceutica Inc!
Acute kidney insufficiency  509
with severe uremia. Phenothiazine derivative antiemetics
sampling, blood product incompatibilities, or in animals
(chlorpromazine, prochloroperazine, :
 acepromazine)
 started on RRT. Darbepoetin (AranespTM, Amgen, Thou-
antagonise α2-adrenergic receptors at the CRTZ and the
sand Oaks, Ca) should be used preferentially to EPOGEN
emetic center. They are effective antiemetics in uremic
due to its reduced likelihood to induce anit-r-HuEPO
animals but are prone to sedative and hypotensive
antibodies. EPO replacement therapy is divided into an
side-effects. They should be considered for animals
initiation phase to activate erythropoiesis and a mainte-
with intractable vomiting in whom the adverse effects
nance phase to perpetuate the response. The treatment
 can be accepted. The 5-hydroxytryptamine serotonergic
target is a hematocrit of 37-45% for dogs and 30-40%
antimetic, ondansetron, has central antiemetic effects at
for cats. The initial recommended dose for darbopoetin
both the CRTZ and emetic center. It is highly effective
is 0.45 mcg/kg body weight administered SC once weekly.
for chemotherapy-induced vomiting and has shown
As the hematocrit reaches the bottom of the respective
efficacy for vomiting in animals with AKl. Maropitant
target range,the dosing interval is decreased to once every
is a newly developed class of antiemetic that is gaining
2 weeks. As the hematocrit approaches the upper target
favor in uremic animals. Maropitant is a highly specific
value, the dosage interval is reduced further to once every
neurokinin receptor antagonist that blocks the actions of
3 weeks to prevent polycythemia. The dosage schedule is
substance P in the emetic center preventing neurotrans-
modified as required every 1-3 weeks to maintain the
mission of central or peripheral efferent emetic signals
hematocrit within the target range.
(de la Puente-Redondo et al. 2007; Sedlacek et al. 2008).
The maintenance dosage to sustain the hematocrit
 Maropitant has shown excellent efficacy to prevent acute
within the target range must be established according
s jo ns peoq e a pni u
 to the responses of individual animals by frequent mon-
including uremia (de la Puente-Redondo et al. 2007;
itoring of the hematocrit and adjustment of the dosage
Sedlacek et al. 2008). Although only recently approved
interval. Generally, 0.25-0.5 mcg/kg of darbepoetin sub-
for use in dogs, Maropitant has generally replaced the use
cutaneously every 2-3 weeks is sufficient. EPO replace-
of other antiemetics for severe and protracted vomiting
 ment therapy is discontinued when renal function is
 in both dogs and cats with AKI
recovered sufficiently to maintain erythropoiesis. Ani-
 mals with partial recovery of renal function that develop
CKD may require EPO replacement indefinitely. Pro-
Hematologic and immune disorders
 gressive decreases in hematocrit, red blood cell count,
Uremic bleeding intensifies with the stage of AKI and
and hemoglobin concentration secondary to develop-
can be life-threatening if associated with CNS or pul-
 ment of anti-r-HuEPO antibodies are the most prob-
monary hemorrhage (Sohal et al. 2006; Brophy et al.
lematic complications of darbepoetin administration in
2007). More commonly uremia is associated with gas-
animals. Aplastic anemia has been recognized in a limited
trointestinal hemorrhage and anemia or bleeding subse-
number of dogs and cats treated with darbepoetin, but
quent to invasive procedures, that is, percutaneous renal 
the incidence is considerably less than recognized with
biopsies (Sohal et al. 2006). Uremic bleeding improves
EPOGEN.
with resolution of the azotemia following intensive diure-
sis or dialysis (Boccardo et al. 2004; Galbusera et al. 2009).
Impaired immunity
Transfusion of packed red blood cells is indicated for ani-
mals with active bleeding which may reduce the bleeding
 Uremic animals have increased susceptibility to infec-
time through effects on some platelet functions (Livio
tion due to accumulation of uremia toxins which impair
et al. 1982; Galbusera et al. 2009). Transfusion of platelet
immunity and cellular host defenses (Haag-Weber and
rich plasma does not improve platelet function or reduce
Horl 1993; Horl 200l; Raff et al. 2008; Vanholder et al.
bleeding time because the function of the transfused cells
2008). The deficiencies in host defenses are compounded
is altered upon exposure to uremic plasma. Desmopressin
by widespread breaches of mucosal integrity associated
administration may be warranted in uremic animals with
with gastrointestinal ulceration, intravenous and bladder
 prolonged bleeding times and active bleeding or prior to
catheterization, parenteral medications and nutrition,
 performing invasive procedures (Galbusera et al. 2009).
and intervention with hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis,
The effects are seen within an hour of administration and
and immunosuppressive drugs (Haag-Weber and Horl
may persist for 4-8 hours (Galbusera et al. 2009).
1993; Clarkson et al. 2008). Primary sites of infection
EPO replacement therapy is indicated for animals with
include the urinary tract, catheter-sites, and the respira-
anemia due to acute-on-chronic AKI or hemorrhage or 
tory tract. Infection may be difficult to identify as ure-
those expected to develop anemia due to a protracted
mia dampens the febrile response. Strict asepsis during
recovery period, ongoing hemorrhage or excessive blood
catheter placement and meticulous catheter-site care are
510  Upper urinary tract disorders
mandatory, and the length of time for catheterizations
currently recommended over entirely parenteral delivery
should be minimized. If infection is suspected, blood,
to support enterocyte viability and the mucosal barrier
urine, and catheter tip cultures should be obtained and
functions of the gut (Marks 1998). As a departure from
broad spectrum antibiotic therapy instituted while await-
historical practice, enteral nutrition is also recommended
ing qbacterial identification. Prophylactic use of antibi-
in animals in which vomiting has not been resolved
 otics may foster development of bacterial resistance and
completely.
superinfections and should be prescribed with caution.
 The optimal nutritional regime for dogs and cats with
AKI has not been defined, but a high energy and mod-
Respiratory disorders
erated protein, potassium and phosphate formulation
as prescribed for CKD is logical and historically advo-
Patients with respiratory compromise may require ther-
 cated. Sufficient energy must be supplied to prevent
apies to improve oxygenation. Treatment of the prox-
catabolism of endogenous protein to spare lean body
imate cause of respiratory dysfunction is the first line
mass and to minimize the azotemia. Animals that have
of defense, but this is not always possible. Pleural effu-
been anorexic for as little as three days are already mal-
sion (especially in cats) is a common consequence of
 nourished and should be provided nutritional support.
volume overload and is most directly controlled by tho-
 The resting energy requirement provides an approxima-
racocentesis. Correction of volume overload, by fluid
tion of the energy requirement for animals with AKI and
restriction, diuretic administration, or ultrafiltration via
can be estimated from the following formulae:
dialysis (hemo or peritoneal), is necessary if hydrostatic
[RER (kcal/day) = 70(wt kg)0.75 or RER (kcal/day) =
pulmonary edema is present. Cardiac medications may
70 + (30 × wt kg)], where, RER is the resting energy
be indicated if cardiogenic pulmonary edema is present 
requirement; Wtkg is the body weight in kilograms
from left ventricular dysfunction. Treatment of noncar-
 diogenic edema (i.e., adult respiratory distress syndrome,
(Marks 1998; Delaney et al. 2006). The RER is only
an approximation of the animal's actual energy needs
 and uremic lung) is based on controlling the underlying
and requires adjustment as clinical and catabolic con-
uremic state, which may require aggressive dialytic ther-
ditions change or if body mass falls progressively. Car-
apy. Pulmonary hemorrhage, commonly associated with
bohydrates and fats provide the non protein sources of
leptospirosis infection (Figure 49.1), may not respond to
energy required in the diet. Commercial therapeutic renal
any therapy, but restriction of anticoagulation in the set-
diets, liquid enteral formulations, parenteral solutions
ting of extracorporeal RRT (i.e., hemodialysis or continu-
designed for the management of renal failure, or diets
ous renal replacement therapy (CRRT)) seems prudent to
avoid exacerbating the bleeding. Bacterial and aspiration
 per os or through a feeding tube. Most dietary formula-
tions contain a relatively high fat content to maximize the
d ns   e 
energy density and should be fed cautiously to minimize
 should be treated additionally with aggressive antiemetic
development of pancreatitis to which animals with AKI
therapy.
are predisposed.
In conjunction with specific therapy supportive respi-
ratory care may be needed, including oxygen supplemen-
Controlled reduction of non essential protein in the
nutritional formulation is required to minimize urea
tation through an oxygen enriched environment, nasal
appearance while avoiding protein malnutrition. The
 Oxygen, or mechanical ventilation.
optimal protein requirement for animals with AKl is
not known and is likely influenced by coexisting clin-
Nutritional management
ical conditions, the stage of AKl, and the requirement
The goals of nutritional therapy are to meet the energy
for RRT (Chan 2004; Fiaccadori and Cremaschi 2009;
and nutrient requirements of the animal, correct protein-
Valencia et al. 2009). Consequently, the minimum pro-
energy wasting, alleviate the azotemia, minimize distur-
tein requirements for normal dogs [1.25-1.75 g/kg/day;
bances in fluid, electrolyte, vitamin, mineral, and acid
8-10% protein on a metabolizable energy basis] and cats
base balance, and aid renal regeneration and repair. It is
[3.8-4.4 g/kg/day; 20-25% protein on a metabolizable
clearly established that enteral or parenteral nutritional
energy basis] are generally applied to animals with AKI
support should be instituted at the earliest opportu-
u  sa jo a s ne  1 
-ns e lsm -d loo qd n 
be necessary or desired in animals with AKI Stage II
 port renal regeneration and repair (Druml 2001; Druml
 a ssd nd l    
2001; Fiaccadori and Cremaschi 2009). Enteral therapy or
appropriate. Protein delivery can also be increased if the
combined enteral and parenteral delivery of nutrition is
 animal is treated with dialysis to prevent development
Acute kidney insufficiency   511
of excessive azotemia. Phosphorus, sodium, potassium,
and Fliser 2009; Bussolati et al. 2009; Nigwekar et al. 2009;
and magnesium intake should be minimized to prevent
Schrier 2009).
accumulation of these minerals and electrolytes; how-
ever, intakes must be modified according to the clini-
Renal replacement therapy
cal and biochemical dictates of the animal. Commercial
 therapeutic renal diets may promote hyperkalemia and
RRT  comprises modern extracorporeal  techniques
hyponatremia when fed to dogs with AKI Stage Ill or
including intermittent hemodialysis and CRRT and peri-
 greater which should be monitored (Segev et al. 2010).
  sn  s   
Delivery of adequate nutrition is constrained by inap-
therapies have been reviewed extensively (Fischer et al.
petence of the animal, the gastrointestinal manifestations
2004; Cowgill and Francey 2006; Ross and Labato 2006;
of the uremia, and obtundation. Oral or enteral feed-
Acierno and Maeckelbergh 2008). and elsewhere in this
ing may not be possible or recommended in the initial
  S   1   (
management of AKI due to gastritis, pancreatitis, uncon-
 progressed from clinically obscure to mainstream and
trolled vomiting, or mental status. Peripheral or central
has now become the advanced standard for the manage-
 parenteral nutrition is indicated for these animals to pro-
ment of uremia in animals. Despite the expanding inter-
vide interim nutritional support (Druml 2001, Delaney
est and development of extracorporeal therapies, their
et al. 2006; Campbell et al. 2006). Peripheral parenteral
availability remains regional and limited. AKI is the most
nutrition is formulated with isotonic solutions admin-
 common indication for RRT in dogs and cats (Cowgill
istered through a peripheral vein. However, complete
and Langston 1996; Langston et al. 1997; Cowgill and
nutritional requirements cannot be met by this tech-
Elliott 2000; Langston 2002; Fischer et al. 2004; Cowgill
nique, and it should be used only as an adjunct to oral or
and Francey 2006; Ross and Labato 2006; Acierno and
enteral feeding or to supply partial nutritional support
 Maeckelbergh 2008; Langston 2008). Without some form
not in excess of five days. Central parenteral nutrition is
 of replacement therapy, animals who fail to respond to
formulated to provide all essential nutrients for indefinite
medical therapies are destined to die from complications
 periods but requires central venous administration due
of the uremia, precluding regeneration or repair of the
to the hypertonicity of the nutrient solutions (Campbell
renal injury.
et al. 2006; Delaney et al. 2006).
The incontrovertible indications for RRT include
Enteral tube feeding is the preferred route of nutri-
severe volume overload, hyperkalemia, severe electrolyte
tional support and is recommended in animals whose
and acid-base disturbances, anuria, toxin removal, and
 gastrointestinal health will tolerate feeding but fail to
overt uremia. What remains equivocal is the timing to ini-
meet nutritional goals voluntarily (Marks 1998; Delaney
tiate RRT and the appropriate modality to institute (Fis-
et al. 2006). Esophageal feeding tubes are the most effec-
cher et al. 2004; Cowgill and Francey 2006; Palevsky 2008;
tive and safe enteral feeding device and are generally pre-
Rauf et al. 2008; Ricci and Ronco 2008; Uchino 2008;
ferred over nasoesophageal or percutaneous gastrostomy
Fieghen et al. 2009). The regional accessibility and cost of
tubes. Esophageal feeding tubes can be placed quickly
RRT forecast that animals generally will access these ther-
under short general anesthesia and facilitate either short-
 apies at alate stage of disease when more practical medical
term or indefinite feeding for dogs or cats with AKI (Fis-
 therapies have been exhausted and failed. Belaboring
cher et al. 2004). Caloric and protein goals can be achieved
ineffective conventional therapies often delays referral
to a dialysis center and the timely initiation of RRT. As
uid enteral preparations, or individually formulated diets
 d se n      n
for the management of uremia. The clinical benefits of 
 development of overt uremia associated with AKI Stage
enteral or parenteral nutritional support cannot be over
 IV and Stage V. Delay in therapy leads to greater uremic
emphasized, but it may not be possible to supply the vol-
symptomology, morbidity, and recruitment of additional
ume load required for the nutritional goals in oliguric
 organ dysfunction. RRT should be considered an imme-
animals without dialysis to alleviate overhydration.
diate therapeutic requirement when the clinical conse-
quences of the azotemia, inadequate urine production,
and the fluid, the electrolytes, and acid-base disturbances
 cannot be managed with medical therapy alone. Oliguric
Other therapies
 or anuric animals at any stage of AKI in which an efective
Some new therapies including naturetic peptides (ANP
diuresis cannot be maintained with initial replacement
and BNP), EPO, and stem cell therapy are under investi-
fluids and diuretics should be transferred immediately
gation, but their benefit remains to be proven (Bahlmann
 to an experienced referral center where RRT can be
512
 Upper urinary tract disorders
performed. Delays imposed by prolonged and ineffective
the outset of medical management can recover renal func-
medical therapy result in deterioration of the animal's
tion if supported with hemodialysis beyond the 4-week
 condition and further predisposition to life-threatening
benchmark Animals with toxic insults usually have more
azotemia, hypervolemia, hyperkalemia, and metabolic
protracted recovery times than animals with infectious,
acidosis.
hemodynamic, or obstructive causes of AKI (Fischer et al.
These guidelines are made on empirical foundations
2004; Cowgill and Francey 2006). In some instances com-
 and clinical experience as no comparisons of early vs
plete or adequate partial recovery of renal function may
late timing to RRT have been reported for animals. They
require 2-6 months of RRT. This revised understand-
are consistent with observational comparisons of early vs
ing of the reversibility of AKl has made it impossible to
late initiation of RRT in human patients with AKl, but
accurately predict outcome at initial presentation or dur-
currently there are no evidence-based recommendations
ing the early course of management. Pet owners must
on timing supported by outcomes assessments ( Palevsky
gamble and balance against the time and expense of
2008; Fieghen et al. 2009). There are no specific con-
RRT that the outcome will be favorable. There are no
traindications to starting RRT in animals at milder but
validated biomarkers of recovery to forecast individual
 s od e e I Jo ss sd
outcomes, but it is often possible to document improve-
circumvent the overt morbidity of uremia and aggressive
ment in renal function from simple kinetic assessments
medical therapy.
 of urea or creatinine during the course of dialysis to help
Intermittent hemodialysis has increased efficiency and
 gauge the prospects for recovery (Figure 49.6). Recently,
reduced labor intensity compared to both peritoneal
 a sensitive and specific scoring system was devised to
dialysis and CRRT. It is also a more established extra-
 quantitate the severity and to help predict outcome for
corporeal modality than CRRT in animals (Cowgill and
recovery of dogs with AKI at presentation for hemodial-
Langston 1996; Langston et al. 1997; Langston 2002; Fis-
ysis (Segev et al. 2008b). These predictive tools require
cher et al. 2004; Cowgill and Francey 2006; Ross and
further prospective validation but may also facilitate out-
Labato 2006; Acierno and Maeckelbergh 2008). I1n appro-
come prediction in animals with AKI who do not require
 priately trained and experienced hands, each is capa-
hemodialysis.
ble of resolving the life-threatening and morbid conse-
quences of acute uremia (Ricci and Ronco 2008; Ronco
and Ricci 2008; Uchino 2008; Fieghen et al. 2009). Inter-
100
mittent hemodialysis techniques have been adapted to
90
changeinsiope
embrace some of the physiologic and therapeutic attrac-
80
tion of slow solute and fluid removal and greater hemo-
70
dynamic stability attached to CRRT. Conversely, CRRT
60
techniques have evolved to balance the labor intensive-
50
ness and expense associated with continuous manage-
ment (Fischer et al. 2004; Cowgill and Francey 2006;
40
Cruz et al. 2008; Ricci and Ronco 2008; Ronco and Ricci
Uurt
30
2008). Continuous modalities are often provided over
Serl
20
the initial 48-72 hours of RRT. Beyond this time, the
10
vast majority of animals with AKI will require additional
10
20
30
40
dialytic support until renal function returns. The equip-
ment designed for continuous therapy may not be able to
Time (days)
provide the kinetic efficiency required for alternate day
Figure 49.6 Changes in serum urea nitrogen (BUN) during and
or outpatient management. The regional center provid-
between hemodialysis sessions in a dog with AKI (Stage Ill, O, RRT)
ing CRRT may not be equipped to provide the transition
secondary to ethylene glycol intoxication. BUN drops dramatically
 to intermittent therapy, necessitating referral to another
during the hemodialysis session then increases during the inter-
dialysis interval before the next treatment. The decrease in SUN
regional center providing hemodialysis.
during the hemodialysis session reflects the increased "intermit-
Failure to recover renal function following 2-4 weeks
tent" dearance of urea by the hemodialyzer. Recovery of residual
 of conventional medical management has been used as
renal function is identified by the progressive decrease in the pre-
a benchmark to predict irreversible from reversible renal
dialysis SUN on subsequent days (dashed line), and the change
      r  s ui a
in slope of the increase in SUN in the interdialysis interval (A
ommendations for euthanasia. However, these criteria
and B, dotted lines). The change in slope represents a decrease
required redefinition with the availability of hemodialy-
eain ,snonuuos, buseapu! ym paleposse anueieadde eain u!
sis. Many animals with seemingly irreversible disease at
clearance by the injured kidneys.
Acute kidney insufficiency   513
Prognosis and outcome of AKI
in two studies of dogs with leptospirosis. It is notable,
however, that azotemia influenced the prognosis only
The prognosis for recovery from acute uremia depends
in dogs treated with conventional therapy, but not in
on the underlying cause, extent of the renal injury, the
dogs treated with hemodialysis in which the azotemia
presence of comorbid diseases, degree of multiple organ
  s 6 e     u
involvement, and the availability of diagnostic and ther-
1997; Vaden et al. 1997; Adin and Cowgill 2000; For-
apeutic services. The survival rate of AKI in people is
rester et al. 2002; Pantaleo et al. 2004; Mastrorilli et al.
about 50% (Ympa et al. 2005). Survival rates for AKI
2007; Miller et al. 2007; Worwag and Langston 2008).
in dogs and cats are highly variable, but range from
Azotemia in part may be a marker of the severity of
 20-60% in most large studies that include multiple eti-
renal damage, but all studies evaluated BUN and serum
ologies (Behrend et al. 1996; Langston et al. 1997; Vaden
creatinine at presentation, and thus part of the azotemia
et al. 1997; Forrester et al. 2002; Francey and Cowgill
may include the rapidly reversible hemodynamic compo-
2002; Pantaleo et al. 2004; Worwag and Langston 2008).
nent. Further, the severity of azotemia does not provide
When evaluated by etiology, some general differences in
an indication of the reversibility of the underlying renal
outcomes become apparent ( Table 49.5). Survival rates of
 disease, so it is not surprising that etiology appears to
 patients with AKI from a nephrotoxic cause are generally
play more of a role in predicting outcome than degree
lower, whereas survival rates for infectious diseases and
of azotemia. Urine volume was predictive in two studies,
 obstructive etiologies are generally more favorable. Dogs
but not in a third (Behrend et al. 1996; Forrester et al.
with leptospirosis infected with serogroup pomona suf-
2002; Worwag and Langston 2008). An elevated anion
fered a worse prognosis for survival than infections with
 gap, hypoalbuminemia, proteinuria, and metabolic aci-
other serogroups. In a study of 20 dogs infected with var-
dosis were predictive in two studies but not universally.
ious serogroups, mortality was correlated to increased
(Behrend et al. 1996; Vaden et al. 1997; Forrester et al.
cardiac troponin, and the ratio of C-reactive protein to
2002; Mastrorilli et al. 2007; Miller et al. 2007; Worwag
 o d    
and Langston 2008) Other parameters that were predic-
individually), which may prove to be useful for predicting
five of survival in isolated studies but not confirmed in
outcome for recovery (Mastrorilli et al. 2007). Mortality
 others include hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and
was increased in dogs with icterus in one study (Miller
hyperkalemia (Behrend et al. 1996; Vaden et al. 1997;
et al. 2007).
Worwag and Langston 2008).
 No single parameter has been shown to be consis-
 Renal recovery may take up to 6 months, and long-
tently prognostic. The degree of azotemia was not pre-
term dialytic support during the recovery phase can
dictive of survival in most studies, but was predictive in
improve survival rates. A clinical scoring system for out-
one study of dogs with AKI from various etiologies and
come prediction of dogs with AKI receiving hemodialysis
Table 49.5 Survival rates for dogs and cats with AKI treated with conventional therapy or dialysis (Rentko et al. 1992: Behrend et al.
1996: Harkin and Gartrel1996: Langston et al. 1997: Vaden et al. 1997: Adin and Cowgill 2000: Forrester et al. 2002: Francey and
Cowgill 2002: Langston 2002: Fischer et al. 2004: Pantale0 et al. 2004; Rollings et al. 2004; Beckel et al. 2005: Eubig et al. 2005; Kyles
et al. 2005: Francey 2006: Goldstein et al. 2006; Berg et al. 2007: Geisen et al.2007; Mastorelli et al. 2007: Miller et al. 2007: Worwag
and Langston 2008: Dorval and Boysen 2009)
sho0
Cats
Category
Conventional (%)
Dialysis (%)
Conventional (%)
Dialysis (%)
Combined causesa
20-44
33-41
54
25-100
Infectious
70
58-100
Leptospirosis
52-82
76-86
43
18
69
0-35
Ethylene glycol
8-0
12-20
44
Lily
75
33
Obstructive
75
70
Otherb
25-37
56
55
29-72
? Data from series of AKI from various causes.
blIndudes hemodynamic, ischemic, metabolic, and undetermined causes.
514  Upper urinary tract disorders
  r a s    s
Alfrey, A.C. (1993). Aluminum Neurotoxicity. In: Dialysis Therapy
 mining appropriate candidates for dialysis (Segev et al.
edited by A.R. Nissenson and R.N. Fine. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley
2008b). As the variables used for predicting outcome in
& Belfus,p. 275-277.
Allon, M. and N. Shanklin ( 1996). Effect ofbicarbonate administration
dogs managed with hemodialysis are common to those
on plasma potassiurm in dialysis patients: interactions with insulin
with less severe AKl, similar predictive scoring systems
and albuterol. Arm I Kidney Dis 28(4): 508-514.
may facilitate outcome prediction in other populations
Anderson, R.J. and D.W. Barry (2004). Clinical and laboratory diag-
of animals with AKI (Segev et al. 2008b). Studies assess-
nosis of acute renal failure. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 18(1):
ing survival in animals treated with conventional ther-
1-20.
 apy cannot be compared to those managed with renal
Andrade, L., et al. (2008). Leptospiral nephropathy. Semin Nephrol
28(4): 383-394.
replacement therapies. There are often large disparities
Andreoli, S.P. (2009). Acute kidney injury in children. Pediatr Nephrol
in the severity of the renal injury for animals managed
24: 253-263.
with these respective approaches, and the window for
Anonomous (2007). Jerky treats from China could be causing illness
survival is finite for animals treated conventionally and
in pets. I Am Vet Med Assoc 231(8): 1183.
indefinite for animals treated with RRT. Severity scor-
Antoniades, D.Z., et al. (2006). Ulcerative uremic stomatitis associated
with untreated chronic renal failure: report of a case and review of
ing and staging of AKl will likely provide more precise
the literature. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
understanding of outcomes of AK1.
101(5): 608-613.
Surviving patients tend to have a longer duration
Applerman, E.H., et al. (2008). Transient acquired Fanconi syndrome
of hospitalization compared to non-survivors (Behrend
et al. 1996; Vaden et al. 1997; Worwag and Langston
Med 22(4): 1038-1042.
Arieff, A.1. (200s). Neurologic aspects of kidney disease. In: Brenmer 
2008).
Rectors The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner, Volume 2. Philadelphia,
Incomplete resolution of azotemia and progression
PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 1757-1783.
to CKD occurs in approximately 50% of animals that
Ash, S.R. (199l). An explanation for uremic hypothermia. Imt I Artif
survive the initial AK1 (Vaden et al. 1997; Kyles et al.
Orgas 14(2): 67-69.
2005; Worwag and Langston 2008). However, some stud-
Atkins, C.E., et al. (2002). Effects of long-term administration of
enalapril on clinical indicators of renal function in dogs with com-
ies have found much better renal outcomes (Adin and
pensated mitral regurgitation. I Am Vet Med Assoc 221(5): 654-
Cowgill 2000; Dorval and Boysen 2009). These divergent
658.
 observations regarding the residual renal function may
Badr, K.F. and I. Ichikawa (1988). Prerenal failure: a deleterious shift
reflect the underlying causes of the AKI or the therapeutic
from renal compensation to decompensation. N Engl J Med 319:
approaches employed to support survival. Patients dis-
623-629.
Bagshaw, S.M., et al. (2008). Oliguria, volume overload, and loop
charged with normal renal parameters tend to maintain
diuretics. Crit Care Med 36(4(Suppl): S172-S178.
normal BUN and serum creatinine concentrations when
Bagshaw, S.M., et al. (2007a). Loop diuretics in the management of
 monitored long-term.
acute renal failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care
Resusc 9(1): 60-68.
Bagshaw, S.M., et al. (2007b). Diuretics in the management of acute
References
kidney injury: a multinational survey. Contrib Nephrol 156: 236-
249.
Abbott, L.M. and J. Kovacic (2008). The pharmacologic spectrum of
Bagshaw, S.M. and R.T.N. Gibney (2008). Conventional markers of
furosemide. I Vet Ermerg Crit Care 18(1): 26-39.
kidney function. Crit Care Med 36(Suppl): S152-S158.
Abelo, A., et al. (2002). Gastric acid secretion in the dog: a mechanism-
Bagshaw, S.M., et al. (2007c). A systematic review of urinary findings
based pharmacodynamic model for histamine stimulation and irre-
in experimental septic acute renal failure. Crit Care Med 35(6):
versible inhibition by omeprazole. I Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn
1592-1598.
29(4): 365-382.
 Bahlmann, F.H. and D. Fliser (2009). Erythropoietin and renoprotec-
Acierno, M.J. and V. Maeckelbergh (2008). Continuous renal replace-
tion. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 18( 1): 15-20.
ment therapy. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 30(5): 264-280.
Barr, S.C., et al. (2005). Serologic responses of dogs given a com-
Acierno, M.J., et al. (2008). Preliminary validation of a point-of-care
ethylene glycol test for cats. I Vet Ermerg Crit Care 18(5): 477-479.
Leptospira kirschneri serovar grippotyphosa. Arm I Vet Res 66( 10):
Adin, C.A. and L.D. Cowgill (2000). Treatment and outcome of dogs
1780-1784.
with leptospirosis: 36 cases ( 1990- 1998). IArm Vet Med Assoc216{3):
Barsanti, JA. (2006). Genitourinary infections. In: Infectious Diseases
371-375.
of the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Adin, C.A., et al. (2003). Antegrade pyelography for suspected ureteral
Elsevier, pp. 935-961.
obstruction in cats: 1l cases (1995-200l). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Barsanti, J.A., et al. (1994). Disease of the lower urinary tract. In:
222(11): 1576-1581.
The Cat: Diseases and Clinical Management, edited by R.G. Sherd-
Agunloye, C.A. and A.S. Nash (1996). Investigation of possible lep-
ing, Volume 2. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, Pp. 1769-
tospiral infection in cats in Scotland. J Small Armirm Pract 37(3):
1823.
126-129.
 Baumann, D. and M. Fluckiger (2001). Radiographic findings in the
Ahmed, JI and L.S. Weisberg (2001). Hyperkalemia in dialysis patients.
thorax of dogs with leptospiral infection. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Semin Dial 14(5): 348-356.
42(4): 305-307.
Acute kidney insufficiency  515
Beckel, N.F., et al. (2005). Peritoneal dialysis in the management of
Brady, M.A. and E.B. Janovitz (2000). Nephrotoxicosis in a cat follow-
ing ingestion of Asiatic hybrid lily (Liliurm sp.). J Vet Diagn Invest
15(3): 201-205.
12: 566-568.
Behnia, R., et al. ( 1996). Effects of hyperosmotic mannitol infusion on
Braun, J.P., et al. (2003). Creatinine in the dog: a review. Vet Clin Pathol
hemodynamics of dog kidney. Anesth Analg 82(5): 902-908.
32(4): 162-179.
Behrend, E., et al. ( 1996). Hospital-acquired acute renal failure in dogs:
Brezis, M.L. and S. Rosen (1995). Hypoxia of the renal medulla - its
29 cases (1983-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc 208(4): 537-541.
implications for disease. N Engl I Med 332( 10): 647-655.
Belgrave, R.L., et al. (2002). Effects of a polymerized ultrapurified
Brophy, D.F, et al. (2007). The effect of uremia on platelet contrac-
bovine hemoglobin blood substitute administered to ponies with
tile force, clot elastic modulus and bleeding time in hemodialysis
normovolemic anemia. I Vet Intern Med 16(4): 396-403.
patients. Thtromb Res 119(6): 723-729.
Bellomo, R., et al. (2005). Management of early acute renal failure:
Brouns, R. and PP. De Deyn (2004). Neurological complications in
focus on post-injury prevention. Curr Opin Crit Care 1l: 542-
renal failure: a review. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 107: 1-16.
547.
Brown, A.J. and C.M. Otto (2008). Fluid therapy in vomiting
Bellomo, R., et al. (2004). Acute renal failure - definition, outcome
and diarrhea. Vet Clir North Am Small Amim Pract 38(3): 653-
measures, animal models, fluid therapy and information technol-
675.
ogy needs: the Second International Consensus Conference of the
Brown, C.A., et al. (2007). Outbreaks of renal failure associated with
Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care 8: R204-
melamine and cyanuric acid in dogs and cats in 2004 and 2007. I
R212.
Vet Diagn Invest 19(5): 525-531.
Berg, R.1., et al. (2007). Resolution of acute kidney injury in a cat
Brown, C.A., et al. (2005). Hypertensive encephalopathy in cats with
after lily (Lilium lancifolium) intoxication. I Vet Intern Med 21{4):
reduced renal function. Vet Pathol42: 642-649.
857-859.
Brunker, ID., et al. (2009). Indices of urine N-acetyl-beta-D-
Berg, R.J. and W. Wingfield ( 1984). Pericardial effusion in the dog: a
glucosaminidase and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase activities in
review of 42 cases. J Am Arim Hosp Assoc 20: 721-730.
clinically normal adult dogs. Arm I Vet Res 70(2): 297-301.
Bersenas, A.M.E., et al. (2005). Effects of ranitidine, famotidine, pan-
Bryson, D.G. and W.A. Ellis ( 1976). Leptospirosis in a British domestic
toprazole, and omeprazole on intragastric pH in dogs. Arm I Vet Res
cat. I Small Anim Pract 17(7): 459-465.
66(3): 425-431.
Burns, K. (2007). Events leading to the major recall of pet foods. J Am
Better, O.S., et al. (1997). Mannitol therapy revisited (1940-1997).
Vet Med Assoc 230(11): 1600- 1620.
Kidney Imt 51: 866-894.
Bussolati, B., et al. (2009). Contribution of stem cells to kidney repair.
Bhalla, V., et al. (2009). Melamine nephrotoxicity: an emerging epi-
Curr Stem Cell Res Ther 4( 1): 2-8.
demic in an era of globalization. Kidney Imt 75(8): 774-779.
Campbell, A. and N. Bates (2003). Raisin poisoning in dogs. Vet Rec
Birnbaum, N., et al. ( 1998). Naturally acquried leptospirosis in 36 dogs:
152: 376.
serological and clinicopathological features. J Ssmall Amirm Pract 39:
Campbell, S.J., et al. (2006). Central and peripheral parenteral nutri-
231-236.
tion. Waltham Focus 16(3): 1-10.
Blumberg, A., et al. ( 1992). Effect of prolonged bicarbonate admin-
Carlos, E.R., et al. ( 1971). Leptospirosis in the Philippines: feline stud-
istration on plasma potassium in terminal renal failure. Kidney It
ies. Am I Vet Res 32(9): 1455- 1456.
41(2): 369-374.
Chan, L.N. (2004). Nutritional support in acute renal failure. Curr
Boccardo, P, et al. (2004). Platelet dysfunction in renal failure. Sermin
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 7(2): 207-212.
Thromb Hemost 30(5): 579-589.
Chanchairujira, T. and R.L. Mehta (2005). Bioimpedance and its appli-
Bonventre, J.V. (2003). Dedifferentiation and proliferation of surviving
cation. Saudi I Kidney Dis Transpl 16( 1): 6-16.
epithelial cells in acute renal failure. I Arm Soc Nephrol 14: S55-S61.
Cheng, H.F. and R.C. Harris (2005). Renal effects of non-steroidal
Bonventre, J.V. (2007). Diagnosis of acute kidney injury: from classic
anti-inflammatory drugs and selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors.
 parameters to new biomarkers. Contrib Nephrol 156: 213-219.
Curr Pharm Des 11: 1795- 1804.
Bonventre, J.V. (2008). Kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1): a specific
Chew, D.J. (2000). Fluid therapy during intrinsic renal failure. In:
and sensitive biomarker of kidney injury. Scand J Clir Lab Irvest
Fluid Therapy in Small Animal Practice, edited by S.P. DiBartola.
Suppl 241: 78-83.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 410-427.
Bonventre, I.V. and J.M. Weinberg (2003). Recent advances in the
Choi, H., et al. (2003). Effect ofintravenous mannitol upon the resistive
pathophysiology of ischemic acute renal failure. I Am Soc Nephrol
index in complete unilateral renal obstruction in dogs. I Vet Interr
14: 2199-2210.
Med 17(2): 158-162.
Bonventre, J.V. and A. Zuk (2004). Ischemic acute renal failure: an
Cianciolo, R.E., et al. (2008). Clinicopathologic, histologic, and toxi-
inflammatory disease? Kidrey Int 66(2): 480-485.
- po iad o pasoxa auau sieo o ui suu ooon
Borjesson, D.L. (2003). Renal cytology. Vet Clir North Am Small Amim
taminated with melamine and cyanuric acid. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
Pract 33(1): 119-134.
233(5): 729-737.
Bouchard, J. and R.L. Mehta (2009a). Fluid accumulation and acute
Clark, K.L., et al. (199la). Efects of dopamine DAl-receptor block-
kidney injury: consequence or cause. Curr Opin Crit Care 15(6):
ade and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition on the renal
509-513.
actions of fenoldopam in the anaesthetized dog. I Hypertens 9(12):
Bouchard, J. and R.L. Mehta (2009b). Volume management in contin-
1143-1150.
uous renal replacement therapy. Semin Dial 22(2): 146- 150.
Bouchard, J., et al. (2009). Fluid accumulation, survival and recovery
ate dopamine-induced diuresis in the anesthetized cat? I Cardiovasc
of kidney function in criticaly ill patients with acute kidney injury.
Pharmacol 17(2): 267-276.
Kidney Irnt 76(4): 422-427.
Clarkson, M.R., et al. (2008). Acute kidney injury. In: Brenner  Rec-
Boutilier, P., et al. (2003). Leptospirosis in dogs: a serologic survey and
tor's The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner, Volume 1. Philadelphia,
case series 1996 to 2001. Vet Ther 4(4): 387-396.
PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 943-986.
516  Upper urinary tract disorders
Clemo, FA. (1998). Urinary enzyme evaluation of nephrotoxicity in
 Depner, T.A. (200l). Uremic toxicity: urea and beyond. Semin Dial
the dog. Toxicol Pathol 26( 1): 29-32.
14(4): 246-251.
Coca, S.G., et al. (2008). Biomarkers for the diagnosis and risk stratiff-
cation of acute kidney injury: a systematic review. Kidney Int 73(9):
tical points for the nephrologist in training. Hemodial Int 9(3):
1008-1016.
24 1-254.
Cocchi, M., et al. (2009). Renal failure in dogs in Italy associated with
Deray, G. (2002). Amphotericin B nephrotoxicity. I Antirmicrob
melamine-contaminated pet food. Vet Rec 164(13): 407-408.
Chermother 49(Suppl S1): 37-41.
Codner, E.C., et al. ( 1992). Investigation of glomerular lesions in dogs
 Devarajan, P. (2006). Update on mechanisms of ischemic acute kidney
injury. I Am Soc Nephrol 17: 1503- 1520.
Vet Res 53(12): 2286-2291.
Devarajan, P. (2009). Pathophysiology of pediatric acute kidney injury.
Cohn, L.A. (2003). Ehrlichiosis and related infections. Vet Clim North
In: Critical Care Nephrology, edited by C. Ronco, R. Bellomo,
Am Small Amim Pract 33: 863-884.
and JA. Kellum. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 1581-
Coldrick, O., et al. (2007). Fungal pyelonephritis due
to
1588.
Cladophialophora bantiana in a cat. Vet Rec 161(21): 724-727.
 DiBartola, S.P. (2006a). Disorders of sodium and water: hypernatremia
Conger, J.D. (200l). Vascular alterations in acute renal failure: roles in
and hyponatrermia. In: Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders
initiation and maintenance. In: Acute Renal Failure: A Companion
in Small Anial Practice, edited by S.P DiBartola. St. Louis, MO:
to Brenner  Rector's The Kidney, edited by B.A. Molitoris and W.F.
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 47-79.
Finn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 13-29.
DiBartola, S.P. (2006b). Metabolic acid-base disorders. In: Fluid, Elec-
Cowan, L.A., et al. ( 1997). Clinical and clinicopathologic abnormalities
trolyte.and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, edited by
in greyhounds with cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy:
S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 251-282.
18 cases (1992-1994). IAm Vet Med Assoc 210(6): 789-793.
DiBartola, S.P. and H.A. de Morais (2006). Disorders of potassium:
Cowgill, L. and D. Elliott (2000). Acute renal failure. In: Textbook
hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. In: Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C.
Disorders in Small Amimal Practice, edited by S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis,
Feldman, Volume 2. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1615- 1633.
MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 91-121.
Cowgill, L.D. (2004). Dialysis Tools and Toys. Advanced Renal Thera-
Dickeson, D. and D.N. Love ( 1993). A serological survey of dogs, cats
 pies Symposium, New York, NY: Animal Medical Center.
and horses in south-eastern Australia for leptospiral antibodies. Aust
Cowgill, L.D. and T. Francey (2005). Acute uremia. In: Textbook of Vet-
Vet I 70(10): 389-390.
erinary Irtermal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman,
 Dishart, M.K. and J.A. Kellum (2000). An evaluation of pharmacologi-
Volume 2. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 1731-1751.
 cal strategies for the prevention and treatment of acute renal failure.
Cowgill, L.D. and T. Francey (2006). Hemodialysis. In: Fluid, Elec-
Drugs 59(1): 79-91.
trolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, edited by
Diskin, C.J., et al. (200s). The evolution of the fractional excretion of
S.P. DiBartola. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 650-677.
Cowgill, L.D. and C.E. Langston (1996). Role of hemodialysis in the
869-870; author reply 871.
management of dogs and cats with renal failure. Vet Clin North Am
Dlott, I.S., et al. (2004). Drug-induced thrombotic thrombocytopenic
Small Anim Pract 26(6): 1347-1378.
purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome: a concise review. Ther Apher
Cruz, D., et al. (2008). The future of extracorporeal support. Crit Care
Dial 8(2): 102-111.
Med 36(Suppl): S243-S252.
Dobson, P.D. and D.B. Kell (2008). Carrier-mediated cellular uptake
Cruz, D., et al. (2009). Clinical review: RIFLE and AKIN - time for
 of pharmaceutical drugs: an exception or the rule? Nat Rev Drug
reappraisal. Crit Care 13: 211-219.
Discov 7: 205-220.
Dall'Antonia, M., et al. (2008). Leptospirosis pulmonary haemorrhage:
Dobson, R.L., et al. (2008). Identification and characterization of tox-
a diagnostic challenge. Emerg Med I25(1): 51-52.
icity of contaminants in pet food leading to an outbreak of renal
Dambach, D.M., et al. ( 1997). Morphologic, immunohistochemical,
toxicity in cats and dogs. Toxicol Sci 106(1): 251-262.
and ultrastructural characterization of a distinctive renal lesion in
Dolhnikoff, M., et al. (2007). Pathology and pathophysiology of pul-
 dogs putatively associated with Borrelia burgdorferi infection: 49
monary manifestations in leptospirosis. Braz I Infect Dis 11(1):
cases (1987-1992). Vet Pathol 34(2): 85-96.
142- 148.
 Davidson, B.J., et al. (2008). Disease association and clinical assessment
 Dorval, P. and S.R. Boysen (2009). Management of acute renal failure
of feline pericardial effusion. I Am Armim Hosp Assoc 44( 1): 5-9.
in cats using peritoneal dialysis: a retrospective study of six cases
Day, M.J. and P.E. Holt ( 1994). Unilateral fungal pyelonephritis in a
(2003-2007). IFeline Med Surg 11(2): 107-115.
dog. Vet Pathol 31(2): 250-252.
Driessen, B., et al. (2003). Arterial oxygenation and oxygen deliv-
Day, T.K. and S. Bateman (2006). Shock syndromes. In: Fluid, Elec-
ery after hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier infusion in canine
trolyte,and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, edited by
hypovolemic shock: a dose-response study. Crit Care Med 31(6):
S.P. DiBartola. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 540-564.
1771-1779.
de la Puente-Redondo, V.A., et al. (2007). The anti-emetic effcacy of
Driessen, B., et al. (2006). Effects of isovolemic resuscitation
maropitant (Cerenia) in the treatrment of ongoing emesis caused by
a wide range of underlying clinical aetiologies in canine patients in
Europe. I Small Anim Pract 48(2): 93-98.
a canine model of hemorrhagic shock: a comparison with 6% het-
de Morais, H.A., et al. (2008). Metabolic acid-base disorders in the crit-
astarch solution and shed blood. Vet Anaesth Analg 33(6): 368-380.
ical care unit. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 38(3): 559-574.
Druml, W. ( 1998). Protein metabolism in acute renal failure. Miner
 De Vriese, A.S. (2003). Prevention and treatment of acute renal failure
Electrolyte Metab 24(1): 47-54.
in sepsis. I Arm Soc Nephtrol 14: 792-805.
Druml, W. (200la). Nutritional managerment of acute renal failure.
Delaney, S.J., et al. (2006). Critical care nutrition of dogs. In: Ency-
Arm I Kidney Dis 37(1, Suppl 2): S89-S94.
clopedia of Canine ClinicalNutritin, edited by P. Pibot, V.Biurge,
Druml, W. (2001b). Nutritional support in patients with acute renal
and D. Elliott. Aimargues, France: Aniwa SAS, pp. 426-450.
failure. In: Acute Renal Failure: A Companion to Brenrer and Rector's
Acute kidney insufficiency   517
The Kidney, edited by B.A. Molitoris and W.F Finn. Philadelphia,
Flournoy, W.S., et al. (2003). Pharmacologic identification of putative
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 465-489.
 D1 dopamine receptors in feline kidneys. I Vet Pharmacol Therap
Dubose, T.D. Jr. (2008). Disorders of acid-base balance. In: Brermer and
26: 283-290.
Rector's The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner, Volume 1. Philadelphia,
Forrester, S.D., et al. (2002). Retrospective evaluation of acute renal
PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 505-546.
failure in dogs. I Vet Intern Med 16(3): 354.
Duffield, J.S., etal. (2005). Restoration of tubular epithelial cells during
Fouque, D., et al. (2008). A proposed nomenclature and diagnostic cri-
repair of the postischermic kidney occurs independently of bone
teria for protein-energy wasting in acute and chronic kidney disease.
marrow-derived stem cells. J Clir Invest 115(7): 1743-1755.
Kidney Int 73(4): 391-398.
Duke, G.J. (1999). Renal protective agents: a review. Crit Care Resusc
Francey, T. (2006). Outcome of Dogs and Cats Treated with Hemodialy-
1(3): 265-275.
sis. Advanced Renal Therapies Symposium, New York, NY: Animal
Eckardt, K. (2002). Anaermia of critical illness - implication for under-
Medical Center.
standing and treating rHuEPO resistance. Nephrol Dial Trarsplant
Francey, T. and L.D. Cowgill (2002). Use of hemodialysis for the man-
17(Suppl 5): 48-55.
agement of ARF in the dog: 124 cases (1990-2001) (abstract). I Vet
Elliott, D.A., et al. (2002a). Evaluation of multifrequency bioelectrical
Interm Med 16(3): 352.
irmpedance analysis for the assessrment of extracellular and totalbody
Francey, T. and L.D. Cowgill (2004). Hypertension in dogs with severe
water in healthy cats. I Nutr 132(6 Suppl 2): 1757S- 1759S.
acute renal failure (abstract). I Vet Intern Med 18(3): 418.
Elliott, D.A., et al. (2002b). Extracellular water and total body water
Furuichi, K., et al. (2009). Chemokine/chemokine receptor-mediated
estimated by multifrequency bioelectrical impedance analysis in
inflammation regulates pathologic changes from acutekidneyinjury
healthy cats: a cross-validation study. J Nutr 132(6 Suppl 2):
to chronic kidney disease. Clin Exp Nephrol 13: 9- 14.
1760S-1762S.
Furukawa, S., et al. (2002). Effects of dopamine infusion on cardiac
Elliott, D.A. and L.D. Cowgill (2000). Acute renal failure. In: Cur-
 and renal blood flows in dogs. I Vet Med Sci64(1): 4l-44.
rent Veterinary Therapy XII Small Animal Practice, edited by I.D.
Galbusera, M., et al. (2009). Treatment of bleeding in dialysis patients.
Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 173-178.
Semin Dial 22(3): 279-286.
 Elliott, J. and A.D.J. Watson (2009). Chronic kidney disease: staging
Galey, F.D. ( 1992). Effective use of an analytical laboratory for toxicol-
and management. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited
Ogy problems. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI: SmallAnimal
by J.D. Bonagura and D.C. Twedt. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier,
Practice, edited by R.W. Kirk and J.D. Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA:
Pp. 883-892.
WB Saunders, pp. 168-172.
Eubig, P.A., et al. (2005). Acute renal failure in dogs after the inges-
Gambaro, G., et al. (2002). Diuretics and dopamine for the prevention
tion of grapes or raisins: a retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs
(1992-2002). I Vet Interm Med 19: 663-674.
15(3): 213-219.
Evenepoel, P. (2009). Toxic acute renal failure. In: Critical Care Nephrol-
Garwood, S. (2009). Ischemic acute renal failure. In: Critical Care
 ogy, edited by C. Ronco, R. Bellomo, and J.A. Kellum. Philadelphia,
Nephrology, edited by C. Ronco, R. Bellomo, and JA. Kellum.
PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 168-171.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 157-162.
Fahimi, D., et al. (2009). Comparison between fractional excretions
Geisen, V., et al. (2007). Canine leptospirosis infections - clinical signs
of urea and sodium in children with acute kidney injury. Pediatr
and outcome with different suspected Leptospira serogroups {42
Nephrol 24(12): 2409-2412.
cases).J Small Anirm Pract48:324-328.
Faubel, S. (2008). Pulmonary complications after acute kidney injury.
Goldstein, R.E., et al. (2006). Influence of infecting serogroup of clin-
Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 15(3): 284-296.
 t p  s i s  ss yo s l
FDA. (2008). Caution in feeding chicken jerky to dogs. Available at:
494.
http://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm048178
Goldstein, R.E., et al. (1998). Gastrin concentrations in plasma of
.htrm (accessed December 17, 2009).
cats with chronic renal failure. I Am Vet Med Assoc 213(6): 826-
Ferguson, M.A., et al. (2008). Biomarkers of nephrotoxic acute kidney
828.
injury. Toxicology 245: 182-193.
Goligorsky, M.S., et al. (2002). Nitric oxide in acute renal failure: NOS
Fiaccadori, E. and E. Cremaschi (2009). Nutritional assessment and
versus NOS. Kidney Int 61: 855-861.
support in acute kidney injury. Curr Opin Crit Care 15(6): 474-480.
Goligorsky, M.S., et al. (2004). NO bioavailability, endothelial dys-
Fieghen, H., et al. (2009). Renal replacement therapy for acute kidney
osdoed ousis mau  ne pue u
injury. Nephron Clin Pract 112(4): c222-c229.
Sermin Nephrol 24(4): 316-323.
Finco, D.R. (1995). Evaluation of renal functions. In: Canime and Feline
Gong, H., et al. (2004). EPO and a-MSH prevent ischemia/reperfusion-
Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco.
induced down-regulation of AQPs and sodium transporters in rat
Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, pp. 216-229.
kidney. Kidney Int 66: 683-695.
Fink, M.P., et al. (1985). Low-dose dopamine preserves renal blood
Gouveia, E.L., et al. (2008). Leptospirosis-associated severe pulmonary
flow in endotoxin shocked dogs treated with ibuprofen. I Surg Res
hemorrhagic syndrome, Salvador, Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis 14(3):
38(6): 582-591.
505-508.
Finn, W.F. (2001). Recovery from acute renal failure. In: Acute Renal
Grauer, G. ( 1998). Fluid therapy in acute and chronic renal failure. Vet
Failure: A Companion to Brenner  Rector's The Kidney, edited
Clin North Am Small Amimal Pract 28(3): 609-622.
by B.A. Molitoris and W.F. Finn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
Grauer, G.F. (1995). Prevention of hospital-acquired acute renal fail-
Pp. 425-450.
ro ai  a x ai aa r a a
Fischer, J.R., et al. (2004a). Clinical and clinicopathological features
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,pp. 943-945.
of cats with acute ureteral obstruction managed with hemodialysis
Grauer, G.F (1996). Prevention of acute renal failure. Vet Clin North
between 1993 and 2004: a review of 50 cases (abstract).
Am Small Amim Pract 26: 1447-1459.
Fischer, J.R., et al. (2004b). Veterinary hemodialysis: advances in man-
Grauer, G.F (2009). Acute renal failure and chronic kidney disease.
agement and technology. Vet Clin North Am Small Animal Pract
In: Small Amimal Intermal Medicine, edited by R.W. Nelson and C.G.
34(4): 935-967.
Couto. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier, pp. 645-659.
518  Upper urinary tract disorders
Grauer, G.F, et al. (1995). Estimation of quantitative enzymuria
Harris, R.C. (2006). COX-2 and the kidney. I Cardiovasc Pharmacol
in dogs with gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicosis using urine
47(Suppl 1): S37-S42.
enzyme/creatinine ratios from spot urine samples. I Vet Intern Med
Hassoun, H.T., et al. (2007). Ischemic acute kidney injury induces
9(5): 324-327.
a distant organ functional and genomic response distinguishable
Grauer, G.F and 1.F. Lane (1995a). Acute renal failure. In: Textbook
from bilateral nephrectomy. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol293( 1): F30-
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C.
F40.
Feldman. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1720-1733.
Hau, A.K., et al. (2009). Melamine toxicity and the kidney. I Am Soc
Grauer, G.F and 1.F. Lane (1995b). Acute renal failure: ischemic and
Nephrol 20(2): 245-250.
chemical nephrosis. In: Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology,
Heath, S.E. and R. Johnson ( 1994). Leptospirosis. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
editded byC.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco. Philadelphia, PA: Williams
205(11): 1518-1523.
& Willkins, pp. 44 1-459.
Hedges, S.J.,et al. (2007). Evidence-based treatment recommendations
Grauer, G.F, et al. (1984). Early clinicopathologic findings in dogs
for uremic bleeding. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 3(3): 138- 153.
ingesting ethylene glycol. Am J Vet Res 45(11): 2299-2303.
Heiene, R., et al. (200l). Calculation of urinary enzyme excretion,
Greene, C.E. (2006). Antifungal chemotherapy. In: Infectious Diseases
ofthe Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
70(2): 129-137.
Elsevier,pp. 542-550.
Heinzelmann, M., et al. (1999). Neutrophils and renal failure. Am I
Greene, C.E., et al. (2006). Leptospirosis. In: Infectious Diseases of
Kid Dis 34(2): 384-399.
the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Hellberg, PO.A., et al. ( 1991). Red cell trapping and postischemic renal
Elsevier, pp. 402-417.
blood flow. Differences between the cortex, outer and inner medulla.
Greenlee, J.J., et al. (2005). Experimental canine leptospirosis caused
Kidney Int 40: 625-631.
by Leptospira interrogans serovars pomona and bratislava. Arm I Vet
Heyman, S.N. and S. Rosen (2003). Dye-induced nephropathy. Semir
Res 66( 10): 1816-1822.
Nephrol 23(5): 477-485.
Greenlee, J.J., et al. (2004). Clinical and pathologic comparison ofacute
Heyman, S.N., et al. (2008). Renal parenchymalhypoxia, hypoxia adap-
tation, and the pathogenesis ofradiocontrast nephropathy. Clin I Am
serovar grippotyphosa. Am I Vet Res 65(8): 1100- 1107.
Soc Nephrol 3: 288-296.
Gregory, C.R., et al. (1993). Oxalate nephrosis and renal sclerosis after
Hill, P., et al. (2008a). Inhibition of hypoxia inducible factor hydrox-
renal transplantation in a cat. Vet Surg 22(3): 221-224.
 ylases protects against renal ischemia-reperfusion injury. I Arm Soc
Grigoryev, D.N., et al. (2008). The local and systemic inflammatory
Nephrol 19: 39-46.
transcriptome after acute kidney injury. I Arm Soc Nephrol 19(3):
Hill, T.L., et al. (200sb). Concurrent hepatic copper toxicosis and
547-558.
Fanconi's syndrome in a dog. I Vet Irtern Med 22( 1): 219-222.
Guerra, M.A. (2009). Leptospirosis. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 234(4):
Himmelfarb, J. (2009). Acute kidney injury in the elderly: problems 
472-478.
and prospects. Semir Nephrol 29(6): 658-664.
Gutierrez, R, et al. ( 1991). Effect of hypertonic versus isotonic sodium
Himmelfarb, J, et al. (2008). Evaluation and initial management of
bicarbonate on plasma potassium concentration in patients with
acute kidney injury. Clirn I Arm Soc Nephrol 3: 962-967.
end-stage renal disease. Miner Electrolyte Metab 17(5): 297-302.
Hirsch, S. (2007). Prerenal success in chronic kidney disease. Arm I Med
Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., et al. (2001). Renal failure associated with inges-
120: 754-759.
tion of grapes or raisins in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 218(10):
Hoke, T.S.,et al. (2007). Acute renal failure after bilateral nephrectomy
1555-1556.
is associated with cytokine-mediated pulmonary injury. I Arm Soc
Haag-Weber, M. and W.H. Horl (1993). Uremia and infection: mech-
Nephrol 18( 1): 155- 164.
anisms of impaired cellular host defense. Nephron 63(2): 125- 13 1.
Horl, W.H. (2001). Neutrophil function in renal failure. Adv Nephrol
Haase, M., et al. (2009). Accuracy of neutrophil gelatinase-associated
Necker Hosp 31: 173- 192.
lipocalin (NGAL) in diagnosis and prognosis in acute kidney injury:
Hoste, E.A. and J.A. Kellum (2007). Incidence, classification, and out-
       
comes of acute kidney injury. Contrib Nephrol 156: 32-38.
1012-1024.
Hoste, E.A.J., et al. (2006). RIFLE criteria for acute kidney injury are
Hadley, R., et al. (2003). A retrospective study of day lily toxicosis in
associated with hospital mortality in critically ill patients: a cohort
cats. Vet Hum Toxicol45(1): 38-39.
analysis. Crit Care 10: R73.
Hadrick, M.K., et al. (1996). Acute tubulointerstitial nephritis with
Hoste, E.A.J. and J.J. De Waele (2005). Physiologic consequences of
eosinophiluria in a dog. I Vet Intern Med 10(1): 45-47.
acute renal failure on the critically ill. Crit Care Clin 21(2): 251-260.
Halpenny, M., et al. (2001). Effects of prophylactic fenoldopam infu-
Hoste, E.A.J. and J.A. Kellum (2006). RIFLE criteria provide robust
sion on renal blood flow and renal tubular function during acute
assessment of kidney dysfunction and correlate with hospital mor-
hypovolemia in anesthetized dogs. Crit Care Med 29(4): 855-
tality. Crit Care Med 34(7): 2016-2017.
860.
Hovda, L.R. (2010). Plant toxicities. In: Textbook of Veterinary Imternal
Harkin, K.R. and C.L. Gartrell (1996). Canine leptospirosis in New
Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman,Volume 1. St.
Jersey and Michigan: 17 cases (1990-1995). I Am Arnirm Hosp Assoc
Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 56l-565.
32: 495-501.
Hutton, T.A., et al. (2008). Search for Borrelia burgdorferi in kidneys
Harkin, K.R., et al. (2003a). Clinical application ofa polymerase chain
reaction assay for diagnosis of leptospirosis in dogs. I Arm Vet Med
860-865.
Assoc 222(9): 1224-1229.
IRIS. (2006). International Renal Interest Society. Available
Harkin, K.R., et al. (2003b). Comparison of polymerase chain reaction
at: http://www.iris-kidney.com/index.shtml (accessed January 7,
assay, bacteriologic culture, and serologic testing in assessment of
2010).
prevalence of urinary shedding of leptospires in dogs. I Am Vet Med
 Iseki, K., et al. ( 1993). Serum albumin is a strong predictor of death in
Assoc 222(9): 1230-1233.
chronic dialysis patients. Kidney Imt 44(1): 1 15-119.
Acute kidney insufficiency   519
Israni, A.K. and B.L. Kasiske (2008). Laboratory assessment of kid-
Kramer, A.A., et al. (1999). Renal ischemia/reperfusion leads to
ney disease: clearance, urinalysis, and kidney biopsy. In: Brermer 
macrophage-mediated increase in pulmonary vascular permeabil-
Rector's The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner, Volume 1. Philadelphia,
ity. Kidney Int 55(6): 2362-2367.
PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 724-756.
Krause, D.S. and L.G. Cantley (2005). Bone marrow plasticity revis-
Jo, S.K., et al. (2007). Pharrmacologic treatment of acute kidney injury:
ited: protection or differentiation in the kidney tubule? I Clin Imvest
why drugs haven't worked and what is on the horizon. Clin I Am Soc
115(7): 1705-1708.
Nephrol 2(2): 356-365.
Krawiec, D.R. ( 1996). Managing Gastrointestinal complications of ure-
Kale, S., et al. (2003). Bone marrow stem cells contribute to repair of
mia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26(6): 1287-1292.
the ischemically injured renal tubule. J Clin Invest 112: 42-49.
Kwon, T.-H., et al. (1999). Reduced abundance of aquaporins in rats
Kaloyanides, G. ( 1984). Renal pharmacology of aminoglycoside antibi-
with bilateral ischemia-induced acute renal failure: prevention by
otics. Contrib Nephrol42: 148- 167.
a-MSH. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 277: 413-427.
Kaloyanides, G. (1997). Antibiotic and immunosuppression-related
Kyles, A.E., et al. (2005). Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and
renal failure. In: Diseases of the Kidney, edited by R.W. Schrier
ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats with ureteral calculi: 163
and C. Gottschalk. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company,
cases (1984-2002). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226(6): 932-936.
pp. 1115-1151.
Kyles, A.E. and J.L. Westropp (2009). Management of feline
Kaplan, L.L., et al. (1997). Alkalinization is ineffective for severe
ureteroliths. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited by
hyperkalemia in nonnephrectomized dogs. Hyperkalemia Research
 J.D. Bonagura and D.C. Twedt. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier,
Group. Acad Emerg Med 4(2): 93-99.
pp. 931-936.
Kaplan, JL., et al. (200o). Hypertonic saline treatment of severe
Labato, M.A. (200l). Strategies for management of acute renal failure.
hyperkalemia in nonnephrectomized dogs. Acad Emerg Med 7(9):
Vet Clin North Am Small Amimal Pract 31(6): 1265-1287.
965-973.
Labato, M.A. (2009). Uncomplicated urinary tract infection. In: Kirk's 
Karajala, V., et al. (2009). Diuretics in acute kidney injury. Minerva
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited by J.D. Bonagura and D.C.
Anestesiol 75(5): 251-257.
Twedt. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 918-921.
Kellum, J., et al. (2007a). Acute renal failure. Am Fam Physician 76(3):
Lacerda, G., et al. (2010). Neurologic presentations of renal diseases.
418-422.
Neurol Clin 28(1): 45-59.
Kellum, J.A. (1997a). Diuretics in acute renal failure: protective or
Laflamme, D.P. (1997). Development and validation of a body condi-
deleterious. Blood Purif15(4-6): 319-322.
tion score system for dogs. Carmine Pract 22: 10-15.
 Kellum, J.A. ( 1997b). The use of diuretics and dopamine in acute renal
Lameire, N., et al. (2008a). The prevention of acute kidney injury: an
failure: a systematic review of the evidence. Crit Care 1(2): 53-59.
in-depth narrative review Part l: volume resuscitation and avoid-
Kellum, JA. (1998). Use of diuretics in the acute care setting. Kidney
ance of drug-and nephrotoxin-induced AKI. NDT Plus 1: 392-
Int Suppl 66: S67-S70.
402.
Kellum, J.A. (2007). Prerenal azotermia: still a useful concept? Crit Care
Lameire, N., et al. (2009). The prevention of acute kidney injury: an
Med 35(6): 1630-1631.
in-depth narrative review: Part 2: drugs in the prevention of acute
Kellum, J.A. (2008). Acute kidney injury. Crit Care Med 36(Suppl):
kidney injury. NDT Plus 2: 1-10.
S141-S145.
Lameire, N., et al. (2005). Acute renal failure. Lancet 365: 417-430.
Kellum, I.A., et al. (2007b). The concept of acute kidney injury and the
Lameire, N., et al. (2008b). Acute kidney injury. Lancet 372(9653):
RIFLE criteria. Contrib Nephrol 156: 10- 16.
1863-1865.
Kellum, J.A., et al. (2008a). Fluids for the prevention and management 
Lameire, N. and R. Vanholder (2001). Pathophysiologic features and
of acute kidney injury. Int I Artif Organs 31(2).
prevention of human and experimental acute tubular necrosis. JAm
Kellum, J.A. and J.M. Decker (2001). Use of dopamine in acute renal
Soc Nephrol 12: S20-S32.
failure: a meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 29(8): 1526- 1531.
Lameire, N., et al. (2002). Loop diuretics for patients with acute renal
Kellum, J.A., et al. (200sb). Acute renal failure. Clin Evid (Online).
failure: helpful or harmful? JAm Med Assoc 288(20): 2599-2601.
Kellum, IA., et al. (2002). Developing a consensus classification system
Lameire, N., et al. ( 1995). Prevention of clinical acute tubular necrosis
for acute renal failure. Curr Opin Crit Care 8: 509-514.
with drug therapy. Nephrol Dial Trarsplart 10( 1l): 1992-2000.
Kellum, J.A., et al. (2008c). Fluid management in acute kidney injury.
Lane, I.F., et al. (1994). Acute renal failure. Part I. risk factors, preven-
Int I Artif Organs 31(2): 94-95.]
tion, and strategies for protection. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
Kelly, K.J. (2005). Heat shock (stress response) proteins and renal
16( 1): 15-18, 20-23, 26-29.
ischemia/reperfusion injury. Contrib Nephrol 148: 86- 106.
Lange, C., et al. (2005). Administered mesenchymal stem cells enhance
Kerr, D.D. and V. Marshall ( 1974). Protection against the renal carrier
recovery from ischermia/reperfusion-induced acute renal failure in
state by a canine leptospirosis vaccine. Vet Med Small Arirm Cli
rats. Kidney Int 68: 1613-1617.
69(9): 1157-1160.
Langston, C.E. (2002a). Acute renal failure caused by lily ingestion in
Klein, C.L., et al. (2008). Interleukin-6 mediates lung injury following
six cats. IArm Vet Med Assoc 220( 1): 49-52.
Langston, C.E. (2002b). Hemodialysis in dogs and cats. Compend Com-
74(7): 901-909.
tin Educ Pract Vet 24(7): 540-549.
Kogika, M.M., et al. (2006). Serum ionized calcium in dogs with
Langston, C.E. (2008). Managing fluid and electrolyte disorders in
chronic renal failure and metabolic acidosis. Vet Clin Pathol 35:
renal failure. Vet Clin North Am Small Animal Pract 38(3): 677-
441-445.
697.
Kosieradzki, M. and W. Rowinski (2008). Ischemia/reperfusion injury
Langston, C.E. (2010). Acute uremia. In: Textbook of Veterinary Inter-
in kidney transplantation: mechanisms and prevention. Trarsplant
nal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman, Volume 2.
Proc 40(10): 3279-3288.
 Philadephia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 1969-1984.
Kovesdy, C.P., et al. (2009). Outcome predictability of biomark-
Langston, C.E. and L.M. Boyd (2007). Diseases of the kidney. In: Hand-
ers of protein-energy wasting and inflammation in moderate and
book of Small Anirmal Practice, edited by R.V. Morgan. Philadelphia,
advanced chronic kidney disease. Am I Clin Nutr 90(2): 407-414.
PA: Elsevier, pp. 500-527.
520  Upper urinary tract disorders
Langston, C.E., et al. ( 1997). Applicationsand outcomeofhemodialysis
Mason, J., etal. ( 1987). The contribution of vascular obstruction to the
in cats: a review of 29 cases. J Vet Intern Med 11(6): 348-355.
functional defect that follows renal ischemia. Kidney Int 31: 65-71.
Langston, C.E., et al. (2008). Diagnosis of Urolithiasis. Compend Contin
Mastrorilli, C., et al. (2007). Clinicopathologic features and outcome
Educ Pract Vet 30(8): 447-455.
predictors of leptospira interrogans Australis serogroup infection in
Langston, C.E. and K.J. Heuter (2003). Leptospirosis: a re-emerging
dogs: a retrospective study of 20 cases (2001-2004). JVet Intern Med
zoonotic disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33: 791-
21(1): 3-10.
807.
Mathews, K.A. (2006). Monitoring fluid therapy and complications of
Laroute, V., et al. (2005). Quantitative evaluation of renal function in
fluid therapy. In: Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small
healthy Beagle puppies and mature dogs. Res Vet Sci 79(2): 161-
Animal Practice, edited by S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO: Saunders 
167.
Elsevier, pp. 377-391.
Lau, E. (2009). Virbac Recalls Veggiedent Chews in Australia. Available
Mazzaferro, E.M., et al. (2004). Acute renal failure associated with
at: http://news.vin.com/VINNews.aspx?articleId = 13071 (accessed
raisin or grape ingestion in 4 dogs. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 14(3):
Decermber 17, 2009).
203-212.
Le Garreres, A., et al. (2007). Disposition of plasma creatinine in non-
 McClellan, L.M., et al. (2006). Effects of administration of fluids and
azotaemic and moderately azotaemic cats. I Feline Med Surg 9(2):
diuretics on glomerular filtration rate, renal blood flow, and urine
89-96.
output in healthy awake cats. Arn I Vet Res 67: 715-722.
Leblanc, M., et al. (2005). Risk factors for acute renal failure: inherent
Means, C. (2007). Lily toxicosis. In: Clinical Veterinary Advisor Dogs
and modifiable risks. Curr Opin Crit Care 11: 533-536.
and Cats, edited by E. Cote. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier,
Lee, D.W., et al. (2009). Post-treatment effects of erythropoietin and
pp.638-639.
nordihydroguaiaretic acid on recovery from cisplatin-induced acute
Medina, P.J., et al. (200l). Drug-associated thrombotic thrombocy-
renal failure in the rat. I Korean Med Sci 24(Suppl 1): S170-S175.
topenic purpura-hemolytic uremic syndrome. Curr Opin Hematol
Lees, G.E. (2004). Early diagnosis of renal disease and renal failure. Vet
8: 286-293.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34(4): 867-886.
 Mehta, R.L.,et al. (2008). Pharmacologic approaches for volume excess
Lefebvre, H.P., et al. (2007). Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
in acute kidney injury (AKI). Int I Artif Organs 31(2): 127-144.
in veterinary medicine. Curr Pharm Des 13: 1347-1361.
 Mehta, R.L. and G. Chertow (2003). Acute renal failure definitions and
Lefebvre, H.P., et al. (2006). Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
classification: time for change? I Arm Soc Nephrol 14: 2178-2187.
 parameters of ramipril and ramiprilat in healthy dogs and dogs with
Mehta, R.L., et al. (2007). Acute kidney injury network: report of an
reduced glomerular filtration rate. I Vet Intern Med 20: 499-507.
initiative to improve outcomes in acute kidney injury. Crit Care
Levett, P.N. (2001). Leptospirosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 14(2): 296-326.
11(2): R31.
Liangos, O., et al. (2003). Anemia in acute renal failure: role for
Mehta, R.L., et al. (2002a). Refining predictive models in critically ill
patients with acute renal failure. I Am Soc Nephrol 13(5): 1350-
Licari, E., et al. (2007). Fluid resuscitation and the septic kidney: the
1357.
evidence. Contrib Nephrol 156: 167-177.
Mehta, R.L., et al. (2002b). Diuretics, mortality, and nonrecovery
Lin, F. (2006). Stem cells in kidney regeneration following acute renal
of renal function in acute renal failure. I Arm Med Assoc 288(20):
injury. Pediatr Res 59(4 Pt 2): 74R-78R.
2547-2553.
Lin, F, et al. (2003). Hematopoietic stem cels contribute to the regen-
Meyer, T.W. and T.H. Hostetter (2008). Pathophysiology of uremia.
eration of renal tubules after renal ischemia-reperfusion injury in
In: Brenner  Rector's The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner, Volume
mice. I Am Soc Nephrol 14: 1188-1199.
2. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 1681-1696.
 Lindner, A., et al. ( 1979). Synergism of dopamine plus furosemide in 
Michel, D.M. and C.J. Kelly (1998). Acute interstitial nephritis. I Am
 preventing acute renal failure in the dog. Kidney Int16(2): 158-166.
Soc Nephrol 9(3): 506-5 15.
Littman, M.P. (2003). Canine borreliosis. Vet Clin North Am Small
Miller, R.1., et al. (2007). Clinical and epidemiological features of
Anim Pract 33: 827-862.
canine leptospirosis in North Queensland. Aust Vet I 85( 1): 13-19.
Liu, K.D. and P.R. Brakeman (2008). Renal repair and recovery. Crit
Mitch, W.E. ( 1981). Amino acid release from the hindquarter and urea
Care Med 36(Suppl): S187-S192.
appearance in acute uremia. Arm I Physiol 241(6): E415-E419.
Liu, M., et al. (2008). Acute kidney injury leads to inflammation and
Mitch, W.E. (1993). Nutritional influences on changes in kidney
functional changes in the brain. J Arm Soc Nephrol 19(7): 1360- 1370.
growth and function and the responses to kidney diseases. Semin
Livio, M., et al. ( 1982). Uraemic bleeding: role of anaemia and benefi-
Nephrol 13(5): 503-507.
cial effect of red cell transfusions. Lancet 2(8306): 1013-1015
Mitch, W.E., et al. (1989). Protein and amino acid metabolism in
Lopes, JA., et al. (2008). Acute kidney injury in intensive care unit
uremia: influence of metabolic acidosis. Kidney Int Suppl 27: S205-
patients: a comparison between the RIFLE and the acute kidney
S207.
injury network classifications. Crit Care 12: R110-R117.
Molitoris, B.A., et al. (2007). Improving outcomes of acute kidney
Lopez-Pena, M., et al. (2009). Visceral leishmaniasis with
cardiac
injury report of an initiative. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 3(8): 439-442.
involvement in a dog: a case report. Acta Vet Scand 51: 20.
Molitoris, B.A., et al. ( 1993). Mechanism of ischemia-enhanced amino-
Macedo, E. and R.L. Mehta (2009). Prerenal failure: from old concepts
glycoside binding and uptake by proximal tubule cells. An I Physiol
to new paradigms. Curr Opin Crit Care 15(6): 467-473.
264(5 Pt2): F907-F916.
Madewell, B.R. and R.W. Norrdin (1975). Renal failure associated
Moore, G., et al. (2006). Canine leptospirosis, United States,
with pericardial effusion in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 167( 12):
2002-2004. Emerg Infect Dis 12(3): 501-503.
1091-1093.
Morrow, C.M.K., et al. (2005). Canine renal pathology associated with
Markowitz, G.S. and M.A. Perazella (2005). Drug-induced renal fail-
grape or raisin ingestion: 10 cases. I Vet Diagn Invest 17: 23-231.
ure: a focus on tubulointerstitial disease. Clin Chirm Acta 351: 31-47.
Mount, D.B. and K. Zandi-Nejad (2008). Disorders of potassium bal-
Marks, S.L. ( 1998). The principles and practical application of enteral
ance. In: Brenner  Rector's The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner,
nutrition. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 28(3): 677-708.
Volume 1. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 547-587.
Acute kidney insufficiency  
521
Murrary, P.T. and P.M. Palevsky (2009). Acute kidney injury and crit-
Patel, N.S.A., et al. (2004). Pretreatment with EPO reduces the injury
ical care nephrology. Nephrol Self Assess Program 8(3): 173-226.
and dysfunction caused by ischemia/reperfusion in the mouse kid-
Murray, C., et al. (2003). Effects of fenoldopam on renal blood flow and
ney in vivo. Kidney Int 66: 983-989.
its function in a canine model of rhabdormyolysis. Eur I Amaesthesiol
20: 711-718.
Pepin, M.-N., et al. (2007). Diagnostic performance of fractional excre-
Murray, P.T. and P.M. Palevsky (2009). Acute kidney injury and critical
tion of urea and fractional excretion of sodium in the evaluation of
care nephrology. Nephrol Self Assess Program S(3): 173-226.
patients with acute kidney injury with or without diuretic treatment.
Mylonakis, M.E., et al. (2005). Leptospiral seroepidermiology in a feline
Am J Kidney Dis 50(4): 566-573.
hospital population in Greece. Vet Rec 156(19): 615-616.
Perazella, M.A. (1999). Crystal-induced acute renal failure. Am I Med
 Nath, K.A. and S.M. Norby (2000). Reactive oxygen species and acute
106: 459-465.
renal failure. Arm I Med 109: 655-678.
Pinsky, M., et al. (2008). Fluid and volume monitoring. Int I Artif
Nelson, O.L. and W.A. Ware (2009). Pericardial effusion. In: Kirk's
Orgarns 31(2): 111-126.
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited by J.D. Bonagura and D.C.
Polzin, D.J., et al. (2005). Chronic kidney disease. In: Textbook of Vet-
Twedt. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 825-83 1.
erinary Intermal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feld-
man, Volume II. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, Pp. 1756-
Vet Med Assoc 222(2): 180- 183, 174.
1785.
Nichols, A.J., et al. (1992). Efect of fenoldopam on the acute and
 Presser, B.M., et al. (2003). Candida spp. urinary tract infections in 13
dogs and seven cats: predisposing factors, treatment, and outcome.
Pharmacol Exp Ther 260(1): 269-274.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39(3): 263-270.
Nigwekar, S.U.,et al. (2009). Atrial natriuretic peptide for management
Puschner, B., et al. (2007). Assessment of melamine and cyanuric acid
of acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cli
toxicity in cats. I Vet Diagn Irvest 19(6): 616-624.
I Am Soc Nephrol 4(2): 261-272.
Putcha, N. and M. Allon (2007). Management of hyperkalemia in 
Niwattayakul, K., et al. (2002). Hypotension, renal failure, and pul-
dialysis patients. Semin Dial 20(5): 431-439.
monary complications in leptospirosis. Ren Fail 24(3): 297-305.
Rabb, H., et al. (2003). Acute renal failure leads to dysregulation of
Nolan, C.R. and R.J. Anderson ( 1998). Hospital-acquired acute renal
lung salt and water channels. Kidrey Int 63(2): 600-606.
failure. I Am Soc Nephrol 9(4): 710-718.
Racusen, L.C. (200l). The morphologic basis of acute renal failure.
Norris, C.R., et al. (2000). Recurrent and persistent urinary tract infec-
In: Acute Renal Failure: A Companion to Brernner  Rector's The
tions in dogs: 383 cases (1969-1995). IArm Anim Hosp Assoc 36:
Kidney, edited by B.A. Molitoris and W.F. Finn. Philadelphia, PA:
484-492.
WB Saunders, pp. l-12.
Novellas, R., et al. (2007). Doppler ultrasonographic estimation of
Raff, A.C., et al. (2008). New insights into uremic toxicity. Curr Opin
renal and ocular resistive and pulsatility indices in normal dogs and
Nephrol Hypertens 17(6): 560-565.
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48(1): 69-73.
Rauf, A.A., et al. (2008). Intermittent hemodialysis versus continuous
Oliver, J.A., et al. (2004). The renal papilla is a niche for adult kidney
renal replacerment therapy for acute renal failure in the intensive
stem cells. J Clir Irvest 114(6): 796-804.
care unit: an observational outcomes analysis. J Imtersive Care Med
Olyaei, A.J., et al. (2001). Nephrotoxicity of immunosuppressive drugs:
23(3): 195-203.
new insight and preventive strategies. Curr Opin Crit Care 7:
Rawlings, C.A., et al. (2003). Use of laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy
384-389.
for removal of urinary calculi in dogs. IAm Vet Med Assoc 222(6):
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 1996). Percutaneous needle biopsy of the kidney.
759-761.
Indications, applications, technique, and complications. Vet Clin
Redfors, B., et al. (2009). Efects of mannitol alone and mannitol
North Am Small Ani Pract 26(6): 1461- 1504.
plus furosemide on renal oxygen consumption, blood flow and
Osborne, C.A., et al. (2009). Melamine and cyanuric acid-induced
glomerular filtration after cardiac surgery. Imtensive Care Med 35( 1):
crystalluria, uroliths, and nephrotoxicity in dogs and cats. Vet Clir
115-122.
North Am Small Anim Pract 39( 1): 1-14.
Rentko, V.T., et al. (1992). Canine leptospirosis: a retrospective study
Osborne, C.A., et al. (1995). A clinician's analysis of urinalysis. In:
of 17 cases. I Vet Imterr Med 6: 235244.
Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne
Ricci, Z. and C. Ronco (2008). Dose and effciency of renal replacement
and D.R. Finco. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, pp. 136-205.
therapy: continuous renal replacement therapy versus intermittent
Padanilam, B.J. (2003). Cell death induced by acute renal injury: a
hemodialysis versus slow extended daily dialysis. Crit Care Med
perspective on the contributions of apoptosis and necrosis. Am J
36(Suppl): S229-S237.
Physiol Renal Physiol 284(4): F608-F627.
Riordan, M., et al. (2005). HSP70 binding modulates detachment of
 Palacio, J., et al. (1997). Enzymuria as an index of renal damage in
Na-K-ATPase following energy deprivation in renal epithelial cells.
canine leishmaniasis. Vet Rec 140( 18): 477-480.
AM I Physiol Renal Physiol 288: F1236-F1242.
Palevsky, P.M. (2004). Acute renal failure. Nephrol Self Assess Prograrn
 Rivers, B.J. and G.R. Johnston ( 1996). Diagnostic imaging strategies
3(5): 239-277.
in small animal nephrology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
26(6): 1505- 1517.
therapy in acute kidney injury. Crit Care Med 36(Suppl): S224-S228.
Rivers, B.J., et al. (1996). Evaluation of urine gamma-glutamyl
Pannu, N. and M.K. Nadim (2008). An overview of drug-induced acute
kidney injury. Crit Care Med 36(Suppl): S216-S223.
mental model of aminoglycoside-induced acute renal failure in the
Pantaleo, V., et al. (2004). Application of hemodialysis for the man-
dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32(4): 323-336.
agerment of acute uremia in cats: 119 cases (1993-2003) (abstract).
Rivers, B.J.,et al. ( 1997a). Duplex Doppler estimation of resistive index
IVetInterr Med18(3): 418.
 in arcuate arteries of sedated, normal female dogs: implications for
Parham, W.A., et al. (2006). Hyperkalemia revisited. Tex Heart Inst I
use in the diagnosis of renal failure. IAm Anim Hosp Assoc 33( 1):
33:40-47.
69-76.
522
 Upper urinary tract disorders
Rivers, B.J., et al. (1997b). Ultrasonographic-guided, percutaneous
Segev, G., et al. (2008b). A novel clinical scoring system for outcome
antegrade pyelography: technique and clinical application in the
dog and cat. I Am Amim Hosp Assoc 33(1): 61-68.
ysis. I Vet Intern Med 22(2): 301-308.
Rivers, B.J., et al. (1997c). Duplex Doppler estimation of intrarenal
Shalkham, A.S., et al. (2006). The availability and use of charcoal
pourcelot resistive index in dogs and cats with renal disease. J Vet
hemoperfusion in the treatment of poisoned patients. Arm J Kidney
Intern Med 11(4): 250-260.
Dis 48(2): 239-241.
Rollings, C.E., et al. (2004). Use of hemodialysis in uremic and non-
Sharples, E.J., et al. (2004). Erythropoietin protects the kidney against
uremic dogs with ethylene glycol toxicity (abstract). I Vet Intern Med
18(3): 416.
Soc Nephrol 15: 2115-2124.
Ronco, C. and Z. Ricci (2008). Renal replacement therapies: physio-
Shilliday, I.R., et al. (1997). Loop diuretics in the management of
logical review. Intensive Care Med 34: 2139-2146.
acute renal failure: a prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
Rose, B.D. (200l). Metabolic acidosis. In: Clirnical Physiology of Acid-
randomized study. Nephrol Dial Transplant 12: 2592-2596.
Base and Electrolyte Disorders, edited by B.D. Rose and T.W. Post.
Sigrist, N.E. (2007). Use of dopamine in acute renal failure. J Vet Emerg
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, pp. 578-646.
Crit Care 17(2): 117-126.
Rosen, S.and 1.E. Stillman (200s). Acute tubular necrosis is a syndrome
 Silverstein, D.C., et al. (2005). Assessment of changes in blood volume
of physiologic and pathologic dissociation. I Arm Soc Nephrol 19:
in response to resuscitative fluid administration in dogs. I Vet Emerg
871-875.
Crit Care 15(3): 185-192.
Ross, L.R. and M.A. Labato (2006). Peritoneal dialysis. In: Fluid, Elec-
Simmons, J.P., et al. (2006). Diuretic effects of fenoldopam in healthy
trolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, edited by
cats. I Vet Ermerg Crit Care 16(2): 96-103.
S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 635-649.
Smith, LP and 1.J. Chang (2008). Extracorporeal treatment of poi-
Rumbeiha, W.K., et al. (2004). A comprehensive study of Easter lily
soning. In: Brenner  Rector's The Kidrey, edited by B.M. Brenner,
poisoning in cats. I Vet Diagr Invest 16: 527-541.
Volume 2. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 2081-2100.
Rumbeiha, W.K. and M.J. Murphy (2009). Nephrotoxicants. In: Kirk's
Sohal, A.S., et al. (2006). Uremicbleeding: pathophysiologyand clinical
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited by I.D. Bonagura and D.C.
risk factors. Thtrormb Res 118(3): 417-422.
Twedt. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 159- 164.
Solomon, R. (1998). Contrast-medium-induced acute renal failure.
Ruschitzka, F, et al. (1999). Endothelial dysfunction in acute renal
Kidney Int 53: 230-242.
Son, H.R., et al. ( 1998). Comparison of dual-energy x-ray absorptiom-
10: 953-962.
etry and measurement of total body water content by deuterium
Rush, J.E., et al. (1990). Pericardial disease in the cat: a retrospective
oxide dilution for estimating body composition in dogs. Am J Vet
evaluation of 66 cases. I Am Arirm Hosp Assoc 26: 39-46.
Res 59(5): 529-532.
Schaefer, T.J. and R.W. Wolford (2005). Disorders of potassium. Emerg
 Stanley, S.W. and C.E. Langston (2008). Hemodialysis in a dog with
Med Clirn North Am 23: 723-747.
acute renal failure from currant toxicity. Car Vet I 49: 63-66.
Schaer, G.L., et al. (1985). Norepinephrine alone versus nore-
Starkey, R.J. and M.A. McLoughlin (1996). Treatment of renal
pinephrine plus low-dose dopamine: enhanced renal blood flow
aspergillosis in a dog using nephrostomy tubes. I Vet Intern Med
with combination pressor therapy. Crit Care Med 13(6): 492-
10(5): 336-338.
496.
Stepien, R.L. and R.A. Henik (2009). Systemic hypertension. In: Kirk's
 Schaer, M. (2008). Therapeutic approach to electrolyte emergencies.
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited by J.D. Bonagura and D.C.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38(3): 513-533.
Twedt. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 713-717.
 e  is    () e na "fd as
Stokes, JE., et al. (2007). Prevalence of serum antibodies against six
condition. Kidney Int 74(7): 849-851.
Leptospira serovars in healthy dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 230( 1l):
Schenck, P.A. and D.J. Chew (2005). Prediction of serum ionized cal-
1657-1664.
cium concentration by use of serum total calcium concentration in 
Sutton, T.A., et al. (2002). Microvascular endothelial injury and
dogs. A I Vet Res 66: 1330-1336.
dysfunction during ischemic acute renal failure. Kidney Int 62:
Schenck, P.A., et al. (2006). Disorders of calcium: hypercalcemia and
1539-1549.
hypocalcemia. IN: Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in
Taber, S.S. and B.A. Mueller (2006). Drug-associated renal dysfunc-
Small Amimal Practice, edited by S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO: Saun-
tion. Crit Care Clin 22: 357-374.
ders Elsevier, pp. 122-194.
Tag, T.L. and T.K. Day (2008). Electrocardiographic assessment of
Schrier, R.W. (2009). AKI: fluid overload and mortality. Nat Rev
hyperkalemia in dogs and cats. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 18(1): 61-67.
Nephrol 5(9): 485.
Thompson, M.E., et al. (2008). Characterization of melamine-
Sedlacek, H.S., et al. (2008). Comparative efficacy of maropitant and
containing and calcium oxalate crystals in three dogs with suspected
-daad io ae aq nu sisa uad u sp pas
pet food-induced nephrotoxicosis. Vet Pathol45(3): 417-426.
erally acting emetogens in dogs. I Vet Pharmacol Ther 31(6): 533-
Thrall, M.A., et al. ( 1998). Advances in therapy for antifreeze poison-
537.
ing. Calif Vet 52(6): 18-22.
 Segerer, S., et al. (2000). Chemokines, chemokine receptors, and renal
Thrall, M.A., et al. ( 1984). Clinicopathologic findings in dogs and cats
disease: from basic science to pathophysiologic and therapeutic
with ethylene glycol intoxication. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 184(1): 37-4 1.
studies. I Am Soc Nephrol 11: 152-176.
Tobata, D., et al. (2004). Effects of dopamine, dobutamine, amrinone
Segev, G., et al. (2008a). Aluminum toxicity following administra-
and milrinone on regional blood flow in isoflurane anesthetized
dogs. I Vet Med Sci66(9): 1097-1105.
failure. I Vet Interm Med 22(6): 1432-1435.
Togel, F, et al. (2005). Administered mesenchymal stem cells pro-
Segev, G., et al. (2010). Correction of hyperkalemia in dogs with
tect against ischemic acute renal failure through differentiation-
independent mechanisms. AM J Physiol Renal Physiol289: F3 1-F42.
diets by a potassium-reduced home prepared diet. I Vet Intern Med.
Tolkoff-Rubin, N.E., et al. (2009). Urinary tract infection, pyelonephri-
(in press.)
tis, and reflux nephropathy. In: Brenner  Rector's The Kidney, edited
Acute kidney insufficiency  
523
 by B.M. Brenner, Volume 1. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
Ward, M.P., et al. (2002). Prevalence of and risk factors for leptospirosis
1203-1238.
among dogs in the United States and Canada: 677 cases ( 1970- 1998).
Townsend, D.R. and S.M. Bagshaw (2008). New insights on intra-
I Am Vet Med Assoc 220(1): 53-58.
venous fluids, diuretics, and acute kidney injury. Nephron Clin Pract
Washabau, R.J. and M.S. Elie ( 1995). Antiemetic therapy In: Kirks Cur-
109: 206-216.
rent Veterinary Therapy XII, edited by LD. Bonagura. Philadelphia,
Tumlin, J.A. (2009). Impaired blood flow in acute kidney injury: patho-
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 679-685.
Wassermann, K., et al. ( 1980). Dopamine-induced diuresis in the cat
Curr Opin Crit Care 15(6): 514-519.
without changes in renal hemodynamics. Nauryn Schmiedebergs
Uchino, S. (2008). Choice of therapy and renal recovery. Crit Care Med
Arch Pharmacol312(1): 77-83.
36(Suppl): S238-S242.
Weidemann, A., et al. (2008). HIF activation protects from acute kidney
Uchino, S., et al. (2006). An assessment of the RIFLE criteria for
injury. I Am Soc Nephrol 19: 486-494.
acute renal failure in hospitalized patients. Crit Care Med 34(7):
Weingart, C. and B. Kohn (2008). Clinical use of a haemoglobin-based
1913-1917.
oxygen carrying solution (Oxyglobin) in 48 cats (2002-2006). J
Uchino, S., et al. (2007). Patient and kidney survival by dialysis modal-
Feline Med Surg 10(5): 431-438.
Westropp, J.L., et al. (2006). Dried solidified blood calculi in the urinary
30(4): 281-292.
tract of cats. J Vet Irntern Med 20: 828-834.
Uchino, S., et al. (2004). Diuretics and mortality in acute renal failure.
Wild, C.J., et al. (2002). An improved immunohistochemical diagnostic
Crit Care Med 32(8): 1669-1677.
technique for canine leptospirosis using antileptospiral antibodies
Vaden, S.L., et al. (1997). A retrospective case-control of acute renal
on renal tissue. I Vet Diagn Irvest 14: 20-24.
failure in 99 dogs. I Vet Intern Med 11(2): 58-64.
Wilhelm, S.M., et al. ( 1999). Endothelin up-regulation and localization
Vaden, S.L., et al. (2005). Renal biopsy: a retrospective studyof methods
following renalischemia and reperfusion. Kidney Int 55: 101 1-1018.
  n  i so o   5  so 
Willard, M. (2008). Therapeutic approach to chronic electrolyte dis-
794-801.
orders. Vet Clin North Am Small Arnim Pract 38(3): 535-54 1, x.
Vaidya, V.S., et al. (2008). Biomarkers of acute kidney injury. Armu Re v
Willard, M.D. (2009). Digestive system disorders: general therapeu-
Pharmacol Toxicol48: 463-493.
tic principles. In: Small Amimal Irtermal Medicine, edited by R.W.
Vaidya, V.S., et al. (2009). A rapid urine test for early detection of
Nelson and C.G. Couto. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier,pp. 395-4 13.
kidney injury. Kidmey Imt 76( 1): 108-114.
Wolf, A.M. (1980). Canine uremic encephalopathy. IAm Anim Hosp
Valencia, E., et al. (2009). Nutrition therapy for acute renal failure:
Assoc 16: 735-738.
 a new approach based on risk, injury, failure, loss and end-stage
Worwag, S. and C.E. Langston (2008). Feline acute intrinsic renal
kidney’ classification (RIFLE). Curr Opin Clirn Nutr Metab Care
failure: 32 cats (1997-2004). I Am Vet Med Assoc 232(5): 728-732.
12(3): 241-244.
Vanholder, R., et al. (2003a). Review on uremic toxins: classifica-
tion, concentration, and interindividual variability. Kidney Int 63:
Fl150-F1115.
1934-1943.
Yatsu, T., et al. (1997a). Renal effect of YM435, a new dopamine
Vanholder, R., et al. (2003b). New insights in uremic toxins. Kidney
D1 receptor agonist, in anesthetized dogs. Eur I Pharmacol 322( 1):
Int 63(Suppl 84): S6-S10.
45-53.
Vanholder, R., et al. (2008). What is new in urermic toxicity? Pediatr
Yatsu, T., et al. (1998). Effect of YM435, a dopamine DAl receptor
Nephrol 23(8): 1211-1221.
 agonist, in a canine model of ischemic acute renal failure. Gen Phar-
Venkataram, R. and J.A. Kellum (2001). The role of diuretic agents
macol 31(5): 803-807.
in the management of acute renal failure. Contrib Nephrol (132):
Yatsu, T., et al. ( 1997b). Pharmacological and pharmacokinetic char-
158-170.
acteristics of YM435, a novel doparmine DAl-receptor agonist, in
Venkataraman, R. (2008). Can we prevent acute kidney injury? Crit
anaesthetized dogs. I Pharm Pharmacol49(9): 892-896.
Care Med 36(Suppl): S166-S171.
Yatsu, T., et al. (1997c). Dopamine DAl receptor agonist activity
Versteilen, A.M.G., et al. (2004). Molecular mechanims of acute renal
of YM435 in the canine renal vasculature. Gen Pharmacol 29(2):
failure following ischemia/reperfusion. Int I Arif Organs 27(12):
229-232.
1019-1029.
Yavuz, A., et al. (2005). Uremic toxins: a new focus on an old subject.
Vijayan, A. and S.B. Miller (1998). Acute renal failure: prevention and
Semin Dial 18(3): 203-211.
nondialytic therapy. Semin Nephrol 18(5): 523-532.
Yhee, J.Y., et al. (2009). Retrospective study of melamine/cyanuric
Visweswaran, P., et al. (1997). Mannitol-induced acute renal failure. I
acid-induced renal failure in dogs in Korea between 2003 and 2004.
Am Soc Nephrol 8(6): 1028- 1033.
Vet Pathol 46(2): 348-354.
Waikar, S.S. and J.V. Bonventre (2008). Biomarkers for the diag-
Ympa, Y.P, et al. (2005). Has mortality from acute renal failure
nosis of acute kidney injury. Nephron Clin Pract 109(4): c192-
decreased? A systematic review of the literature. Arm I Med 118(8):
c197.
827-832.
Ward, D.T, et al. (2005). Aminoglycosides induce acute cell signaling
Zakarija, A. and C.L. Bennett (2005). Drug-induced thrombotic
and chronic cell death in renal cells that express the calcium-sensing
microangiopathy. Semin Thromb Hemost 31(6): 681-690.
receptor. I Am Soc Nephrol 16: 1236-1244.
Zaragoza, C., et al. (2003). SDS-PAGE and Western blot of urinary
Ward, M.P. (2002a). Clustering of reported cases of leptospirosis
proteins in dogs with leishmaniasis. Vet Res 34(2): 137-151.
among dogs in the United States and Canada. Prev Vet Med 56(3):
Zatelli, A., et al. (2003). Glomerular lesions in dogs infected with
215-226.
Leishmania organisms. Am I Vet Res 64(5): 558-561.
Ward, M.P. (2002b). Seasonality of canine leptospirosis in the United
Zwijnenberg, R.J.G., et al. (2008). Cross-sectional study of canine lep-
 States and Canada and its association with rainfall. Prev Vet Med 56:
tospirosis in animal shelter populations in mainland Australia. Aust
203-213.
Vet I 86(8): 317-323.
50
Prognosis of acute renal failure
Gilad Segev
Accumulation of uremic toxins, due to acute kidney
As the ability of the kidney to recover is highly depen-
injury (AKI), may lead to a variety of clinical signs
dent on the inciting cause, different etiologies convey
 and clinicopathological abnormalities, some of which
different prognoses. While some are associated with
are life-threatening. Multiple factors determine the out-
reversible injury and favorable outcome, others have been
come and long term prognosis of canine and feline AKl.
 linked to irreversible damage and poor outcome. Lim-
These include the reversibility of the injury ( which mostly
ited number of studies has investigated the association of
 depends on its severity and the underlying cause), comor-
 specific AKI etiologies with their outcome (Table 50.1).
bid disorders, concurrent complications, and the medical
 Selected and common etiologies are discussed below.
management available. Occasionally, the kidney has the
 Leptospirosis is associated with reversible injury and
potential to recover; however, severe uremia may lead to
high survival rates, even when the injury is severe enough
death before recovery can occur. Medical management
 to necessitate dialytic intervention (Adin and Cowgill
provides only a narrow window of opportunity for the
2000; Segev et al. 2008). In a recent study, only 3/56
kidney to recover, although in some cases recovery may
dogs diagnosed with leptospirosis and managed with
take even months. Dialysis can expand this window to an
 hemodialysis died or were euthanized due to lack of
unlimited period, in the absence of fatal complications
 renal improvement (Segev et al. 2008). Pyelonephritis is
or financial constraints. Thus, the availability of thera-
 another etiology that is associated with a favorable out-
 peutic options should be considered in the assessment of
come as the damage is usually reversible and the under-
the prognosis.
lying cause can be eliminated (Langston et al. 1997).
The overall mortality in dogs with AKI was 44% and
 The prognosis of nephrotoxicity, a common etiology of
41% of dogs managed medically or with hemodialysis,
AKI in companion animals, is highly dependent on the
respectively, (Vaden et al. 1997; Francey and Cowgill
toxin. Ischemic injury (e.g., NSAID, ACE inhibitors) is
2002) and 44% and 52-60% of cats managed medically
usually reversible, while direct renal damage (e.g., ethy-
 or with hemodialysis, respectively (Langston et al. 1997;
lene glycol) is often irreversible. Ethylene glycol intoxica-
Pantaleo et al. 2004; Worwag and Langston 2004). The
tion, for example, has a poor outcome even when dial-
long-term outcome of patients with AKI mostly depends
ysis is employed (Adin and Cowgill 2000; Francey and
 on the degree of reversibility. In one study, 55% of
Cowgill 2002; Pantaleo et al. 2004; Worwag and Langston
AKI survivors sustained chronic kidney disease (CKD)
 2004). Grapes and raisin intoxication, a recently recog-
(Vaden et al. 1997). Euthanasia is a factor that influ-
nized cause of canine AKl, may result in proximal renal
tubule degeneration and necrosis (Eubig et al. 2005; Mor-
Euthanized animals with no significant attempt for inter-
row et al. 2005). Recovery occurs in approximately half of
vention may be reported as non survivals; therefore, the
the patients and is typically complete (Eubig et al. 2005).
reported mortality rates may be an overestimation for
Lily toxicity is a severe often irreversible intoxication in
 aggressively managed patients.
cats resulting in a high mortality rate and CKD in sur-
vivors; yet, complete clinical recovery has been described
(Berg et al. 2007).
AKI is also a potential complication of hospitalized
Nephrology and Urology of Small Arnirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
S        
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
524
Prognosis of acute renal failure   525
Table 50.1 Association of different etiologies and survival in dogs and cats with acute kidney injury
Etiology
Survival (%)
Comments
Infectious
Leptospirosis
56-85 (Brown et al. 1996: Harkin and Gartrell
In most studies, survival rate is approximately
1996: Adin and Cowgill 2000; Goldstein et al.
 80%. The infecting serovar may influence the
2006: Mastrorilli et al. 2007)
survival
Pyelonephritis
Cats, 57-100 (Langston et al. 1997: Pantaleo
For cats managed with hemodialysis
et al. 2004)
Toxicosis
Ethylene glycol
Dogs, 5-20 (Connally et al. 1996; Vaden et al.
After AKl has been established. 20% survival
1997: Francey and Cowgill 2002: Rollings et al.
rate in dogs and 31% in cats were reported for
2004)
patients managed with hemodialysis
Cats, 4-31 (Thrall et al. 1984; Pantale0 et al.
2004)
Lily toxicity
0-50 (Langston 2002: Hadly et al. 2003:
Typically, survivors sustain CKD, but clinical
 Pantale0 et al. 2004)
recovery has been documented (Berg et al.
2007)
 Grapes and raisins 
50-75 (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2001; Campbell and 
 The basement membrane remains intact
Bates 2003: Eubig et al. 2005)
(Morrow et al. 2005)
Gentamicin
20 (Brown et al. 1985)
In human patients, gentamicin toxicity is often
reversible but recovery may be prolonged. In 
the referenced study 7/8 non-survivors were
euthanized
Other
Hospital acquired renal failure  Dogs, 38 (Behrend et al. 1996)
Older patients were more prone to develop AKI
and less likely to survive
Metabolic and hemodynamic
Dogs, 56 (Francey and Cowgill 2002)
For dogs and cats managed with hemodialysis
Cats, 72 (Pantale0 et al. 2004)
Ureteral obstruction
Cats, 70-75 (Fischer et al. 2004; Kyles et al. 2005)
 The majority of the survivors sustain CKD
Table 50.2 Risk factors for mortality in dogs with AKl
Risk factor
↑Age (Behrend et al. 1996)
↓Body weight (Fischer et al. 2004)
Anemia (Vaden et al. 1997: Segev et al. 2008)
Lymphopenia (Segev et al. 2008)
↑Serum creatinine (Vaden et al. 1997: Segev et al. 2008)
Hyperphosphatemia (Behrend et al. 1996: Segev et al. 2008)
Hypocalcemia (Vaden et al. 1997: Segev et al. 2008)
Increased anion gap (Behrend et al. 1996; Segev et al. 2008)
Hypoalbuminemia (Segev et al. 2008)
↓Urine production (Behrend et al. 1996; Segev et al. 2008)
Respiratory involvement (Segev et al. 2008)
Neurological involvement (Segev et al. 2008)
Presence of DlCa (Vaden et al. 1997: Segev et al. 2008)
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Risk factors above were identified in a univariate analysis based on 
retrospective studies of AKI of various etiologies.
526  Upper urinary tract disorders
Range
Variables
Weighting factor
Body weight (kg)
>36
27.2-36.0
≤27.1
1.00
1.61
2.73
Red blood cells (106cells/μL)
>4.93
3.54-4.93
≤3.53
1.00
1.51
3.61
Lymphocyte count (cells/μL)
>1000
509-999
≤509
1.00
1.69
3.44
Creatinine (mg/d L)
≤13.2
>13.2
1.00
2.26
 Phosphorous (mg/dL)
≤18.2
18.2
1.00
3.13
lonized calcium (mmol/L)
>1.1
0.87-1.1
≤0.86
1.00
1.99
4.16
 Anion gap (mmol/L)
≤18.2
>18.2
1.00
2.74
Albumin (g/dL)
>1.9
≤1.9
1.00
2.52
Alanine aminotransferase (U/L)
<210
>210
1.00
-2.43
Urine production (mL/kg/hour)
>1.31
0.1-1.31
0
1.00
1.44
5.55
Respiratory system involvement
No
Yes
1.00
2.48
Neurological involvement
No
Yes
1.00
3.76
DICa
No
Yes
1.00
2.3
When leptospirosis and EG status are known, the final predictive score is adjusted as follows:
leptospirosis, -8.46: EG, +2.47: neither, + 1.00
Cutoff points for models
Diagnosis is unknown
 Diagnosis is known
Cutoff
 Sensitivity
 Specificity
Sensitivity
Specificity
18.44
52
98
13.39
56
97
19.68
73
88
17.01
67
92
20.51
81
85
19.92
83
90
21.96
88
73
22.49
90
75
26.29
96
34
24.31
96
70
The clinical value of each individual patient should be compared to the ranges of each variable to assign a weighting factor for the
variable. All weighting factors should be summed to a final predictive score. When leptospirosis and EG status are known, an adjustment 
to the final score is made. The final score is compared to the diferent cutoff points to predict survival. Dogs with a predictive score below 
the cutoff point are expected to survive with the corresponding sensitivities and specificities.
aDisseminated intravascular coagulation. Optimal cutoff points are bolded.
Prognosis of acute renal failure 527
failure, survival rate was only 38% (Behrend et al.
Brown, C.A., et al. ( 1996). Leptospira interrogans serovar grippoty-
1996). Old dogs were more likely to develop AKI and
phosa infection in dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 209: 1265-1267.
less likely to survive (Behrend et al. 1996). In cats,
Brown, S.A., et al. ( 1985). Gentamicin-associated acute renal failure in
the dog. I Atm Vet Med Assoc 186: 686-690.
ureteral obstruction has become a common cause for
Campbell, A. and N. Bates (2003). Raisin poisoning in dogs. Vet Rec
acute uremia. Survival rates with aggressive medical and
152: 376.
 o 1 )    
Connally, H.E., et al. (1996). Safety and efficacy of 4-methylpyrazole
vivors sustain CKD (Fischer et al. 2004; Kyles et al.
for treatment of suspected or confirmed ethylene glycolintoxication
in dogs: 107 cases (1983-1995). IAtm Vet Med Assoc 209: 1880-
2005).
Although etiology is a major determinant of the prog-
1883.
Eubig, PA., et al. (2005). Acute renal failure in dogs after the inges-
nosis, it is often unknown at presentation and remains
tion of grapes or raisins: a retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs
unknown throughout the disease course, thus frequently
(1992-2002). I Vet Interm Med 19: 663-674.
Fischer, J.R., et al. (2004). Clinical and clinicopathological features
(see Chapter 23) and histopathology may disclose the
of cats with acute ureteral obstruction managed with hemodialysis
underlying etiology, assess the kidney injury severity, and
between 1993 and 2004: a review of 50 cases. J Vet Interr Med 18:
777.
the basement membrane integrity. The latter has a crucial
 Francey, T. and L.D. Cowgill (2002). Use of hemodialysis for the treat-
role in the recovery potential of the kidney (Oliver 1953;
Vracko 1974).
I Vet Intern Med 16: 352.
Based on a limited number of large-scale retrospec-
Goldstein, R.E., et al. (2006) Influence of infecting serogroup on clin-
tive studies of dogs and cats with AKI of various etiolo-
ical features of leptospirosis in dogs. I Vet Interm Med 20: 489-494.
Gwaltney-Brant, S., et al. (2001). Renal failure associated with ingestion
gies, several risk factors for mortality have been identi-
of grapes or raisins in dogs. IArm Vet Med Assoc 218: 1555-1556.
fied, mainly in dogs; however, those were not consistent
Hadley, R.M., et al. (2003). A retrospective study of daylily toxicosis in 
throughout the studies ( Table 50.2).
cats. Vet Hum Toxicol 45: 38-39.
Persistent anuria/oliguria is the most consistent risk
Harkin, K.R. and C.L. Gartrell (1996). Canine leptospirosis in New
factor among studies of AKI in dogs and cats and is
Jersey and Michigan: 17 cases (1990-1995). IAm Amim Hosp Assoc
considered a major negative prognostic indicator. The
32: 495-501.
Kyles, A.E., et al. (2005). Managerment and outcome of cats with
presence or absence of risk factors may aid in the over-
ureteral calculi: 153 cases {1984-2002). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226:
all assessment, but cannot be translated into an accurate
937-944.
prognosis. Since the 1980s, scoring systems have evolved
Langston, C.E., et al. ( 1997). Applicationsandoutcome of hemodialysis
in the human literature to assess disease severity and to
in cats: a review of 29 cases. J Vet Intern Med 11: 348-355.
forecast outcomes, mostly in emergency and critically
Langston, C.E. (2002). Acute renal failure caused by lily ingestion in
six cats. IAm Vet Med Assoc 220: 49-52, 36.
ill patients. Recently, scoring systems were developed to
Mastrorilli, C., et al. (2007). Clinicopathologic features and outcome
aid in outcome prediction for canine AKI managed with
 predictors of Leptospira interrogans Australis serogroup infection
hemodialysis (Segev et al. 2008). These can also be used
in dogs: a retrospective study of 20 cases (2001-2004). J Vet Inter
as an objective tool to assess the severity of the renal
Med 21: 3-10.
Morrow, C.M., et al. (2005). Canine renal pathology associated with
injury. Few models were developed with a high sensi-
tivity, specificity and correct classification ( Table 50.3).
grape or raisin ingestion: 10 cases. J Vet Diag Irvest 17: 223-231.
Oliver, J. (1953). Correlations of structure and function and mecha-
Yet, these models need to be prospectively validated in an
nisms of recovery in acute tubular necrosis. Arm I Med 15: 535-557.
independent cohort before their true accuracy and use-
Pantaleo, V., et al. (2004). Application of hemodialysis for the man-
fulness can be determined. In addition, caution should
be exerted when applying such models to individual
Med 18: 418.
Rollings, C.E., et al. (2004). Use of hemodialysis in uremic and non-
 patients. Scoring systems should not replace proper clin-
uremic dogs with ethylene glycol toxicity. I Vet Intern Med 18: 416.
 ical assessment nor should they serve as a sole prognostic
 Segev, G., et al. (2008). A novel clinical scoring system for outcome pre-
tool.
diction in dogs with acute kidney injury managed by hemodialysis.
I Vet Intern Med 22: 301-308.
References
Thrall, M.A., et al. ( 1984). Clinicopathologic findings in dogs and cats
with ethylene glycol intoxication. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 184: 37-41.
Adin, C.A. and L.D. Cowgill(2000). Treatment and outcome of dogs
Vaden, S.L., et al. (1997). A retrospective case-control of acute renal
with leptospirosis: 36 cases (1990-1998). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 216:
failure in 99 dogs. I Vet Interm Med 11: 58-64.
371-375.
Vracko, R. ( 1974). Basal lamina scaffold-anatomy and significance for
Behrend, E.N., et al. (1996). Hospital-acquired acute renal failure in
maintenance of orderly tissue structure. Am J Pathol 77: 314-346.
dogs: 29 cases (1983- 1992). JAm Vet Med Assoc 208: 537-541.
Worwag, S. and C.E. Langston (2004). Retrospective, acute renal failure
Berg, R.1., et al. (2007). Resolution of acute kidney injury in a cat after
in cats: 25 cases (1997-2002). I Vet Imtern Med 18: 416.
lily (Liliurm lancifolium) intoxication. I Vet Intern Med 21: 857-859.
51
Prognosis of renal failure-chronic
David J. Polzin
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is typically a progres-
When applied to CKD, prognosis does not generally
sive and fatal disease. As described elsewhere, in most
imply the likelihood of return of adequate kidney func-
patients, progression of CKD is thought to occur largely
tion' since CKD is irreversible. Short-term prognosis
as an adverse consequence or “trade-off" of renal adap-
refers to the probability that the patient will achieve a
tations to the loss of renal function rather than progres-
satisfactory quality of life with therapy over the subse-
sion of the disease process that initiated the kidney dis-
quent weeks to months. Long-term prognosis refers to
ease. Although progress has been made in understanding
the probability that a satisfactory quality of life can be
and managing many of the processes that lead to pro-
achieved over many months to years, thus implying an
gression of CKD, most dogs and cats with IRIs CKD
 extended period of survival.
stage Il and higher will progress to end-stage renal failure
A host of factors influence prognosis of CKD, both
regardless of the inciting cause. Dogs with CKD usu-
 favorably and unfavorably ( Table 51.1). Included among
ally have progressive loss of kidney function and die of
 these factors are the quality of medical care provided
complications of kidney disease within months to a year
 to the patient and the level of owner's commitment.
or two of diagnosis. In contrast, cats with CKD have a
 Because the estimate of prognosis often influences the
more unpredictable disease course and may survive sub-
 owner's decisions about treatment options in complying
stantially longer than dogs. It has been observed that
 with recommendations for management of the patient,
some cats have extended periods of stable renal function
the prognosis provided can influence patient outcome. A
lasting months to years. It is not uncommon for these
comprehensive evaluation of the patient is the best way
cats to appear to suddenly decompensate after extended
 to establish a reasonably accurate prognosis.
periods of seemingly stable renal function (Elliott and 
 Factors to be considered in establishing meaningful
Barber 1998; Elliott et al. 2003; Ross et al. 2006). The
prognoses for patients with CKD include (1) severity
reason for these species-related differences is not com-
 of intrinsic renal functional impairment, (2) probability
pletely understood; however, the renal lesions typically
of improving renal function (reversibility, primarily of
observed in cats appear to differ considerably from those
prerenal, postrenal, and recently acquired primary renal
observed in dogs. Proteinuric kidney disease associated
conditions), (3) rate of progression of renal dysfunction
with glomerular lesions is more common in dogs, while
with or without therapy (4) severity and duration of
the lesions observed in cats' with CKD are most often pri-
clinical signs and complications of uremia, (5) the nature
marily tubulointerstitial lesions with limited proteinuria
of the primary renal disease, and (6) age of the patient.
(Syme et al. 2006). As a generality, glomerular diseases in
In addition, the magnitude of proteinuria and possibly
humans tend to be more progressive compared to tubu-
 s     de d po
lointerstitial disease. Thus one factor that may explain
 may influence prognosis ( Jacob et al. 2003, 2005; Syme
the more aggressive course of CKD in dogs is the greater
et al.2006).
incidence of proteinuric glomerulopathies.
Severity of uremic signs is often a relatively good pre-
dictor of short-term prognosis. Patients with stable CKD
with minimal or no clinical signs of uremia usually have
a good short-term prognosis. However, it is difficult to
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals Edited by Joe Bartges and
 provide an accurate prognosis for untreated patients with
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
528
Prognosis of renal failure-chronic  529
Table 51.1 Factors influencing prognosis in CKD
I1, IIl, and IV at the time of diagnosis were 1,151 days
(range 2-3,107), 778 days (range 22-2,100), and 103 days
Clinical signs
(range 1-1,920), respectively. These survival times dif-
Response to therapy
fered significantly (p<0.001) by IRIS stage. However, as
 Rate of progression of CKD
shown by the wide range of survival times in each group,
Cause of kidney disease
survival time cannot be accurately determined for an
IRIS stage
individual cat based solely on IRIS stage, but nonethe-
Magnitude of Proteinuria
less the IRIS stage is predictive of the general trend for
Serum phosphorus concentration
Blood pressure (dogs)
 survival. Serum phosphorus concentration was the only
other factor found to be related to prognosis in this study
(Boyd et al. 2008). Phosphorus retention and hyperphos-
  d      
severe clinical signs of uremia because it has yet to be
but also are related to the magnitude of renal dysfunction
established whether renal function and clinical signs can
(see Chapter 48).
be improved by treatment. Uremic crisis often occurs
 In a recent clinical trial in dogs with spontaneous CKD,
in patients with CKD as a consequence of superimposed
 mean serum creatinine concentration did not appear to
acute renal failure or prerenalor postrenal conditions (so-
influence survival when dogs were fed a renal diet ( Jacob
called acute-on-chronic uremic crisis). Although CKD is
et al. 2002). However, the majority of dogs in this study
 an irreversible condition, improvement of renal function
were CKD stage Il. It is possible that the patient's IRIS
 may be possible when uremia results from the sum effects
stage may be more predictive of outcome than variations
of CKD and a potentially reversible cause of azotemia. If
in serum creatinine values within a stage of CKD. Median
treatment results in improved renal function and ame-
survival for 21 dogs with a mean serum creatinine con-
liorates clinical signs of uremia, the short-term prognosis
centration of 3.3 mg/dL was 615 days. Median survival
may substantially improve.
Severity of renal dysfunction as determined by serum
atinine values between 2.0 and 3.1 mg/dL was also 615
creatinine concentration or measurement of glomeru-
days. However, among 17 dogs fed a maintenance diet in
lar filtration rate (GFR) provides a less accurate means
this study, median survival for dogs with a mean serum
of assessing short-term prognosis than does the clini-
creatinine of 3.7 mg/dL was 252 days, while survival for
cal condition of the patient. The relationship between
the subpopulation with serum creatinine values between
magnitude of renal dysfunction and clinical signs of ure-
2.0 and 3.1 mg/dL was 461 days. Thus, other factors, such
 mia may be highly variable and unpredictable. In addi-
as therapeutic intervention, may substantially influence
tion, these renal function tests reflect the sum effect of
survival. The impact of therapeutic intervention should
renal, prerenal, and postrenal events and cannot estab-
be considered when providing prognosis estimates.
lish reversibility of renal impairment. Therefore, short-
Studies in dogs, cats, and humans have confirmed that
term prognosis should not be established on the basis
 proteinuria is a negative prognostic indicator in patients 
 of a single measurement of renal function. Changes in
with CKD (Jacob et al. 2005; Abbate et al. 2006; Syme et al.
renal function that occur in response to treatment pro-
2006; King et al. 2007). The adverse effect of proteinuria
vide greater insight into reversibility of renal functional
increases as the magnitude of proteinuria increases. The
impairment and thus prognosis.
 greater the amount of protein excreted in urine, the more
Assessment of the severity of renal dysfunction is
negative the prognosis. In a recent clinical trial, protein-
typically more useful in establishing long-term prog-
uria was shown to be a risk factor for uremia and death in
noses. In general, severe, irreversible renal dysfunction
dogs with CKD (Jacob et al. 2005). In this study, the risk
is associated with shorter long-term survival and, often,
of death associated with CKD increased by 60% for each
a lower quality of life. Higher serum creatinine values
unit of urine protein-to-creatinine ratio above 1.o. Even
were reported to be associated with a greater risk of
smal increases in proteinuria above the normal urine
death within one month of diagnosis in cats with CKD;
protein-to-creatinine ratio of 0.2 appear to be associated
however, no specific value of serum creatinine concen-
with increased risk of mortality in cats with CKD. In
 tration reliably predicts survival (Kuwahara et al. 2006).
another study, elevated protein-to-creatinine ratios were
 In a recent retrospective study of 733 feline patients with
found to be significantly associated with increased risk
CKD and serum creatinine values greater than 2.3 mg/dL,
of mortality within the first month following initial eval-
IRIS stage of CKD at the time of initial diagnosis was
uation (King et al. 2o07). While the current dominant
found to be strongly predictive of survival duration ( Boyd
view is that proteinuria infers a more negative prognosis
 et al. 2008). Median survival times for cats in IRIS stages
because it promotes renal injury and thus progression
530  Upper urinary tract disorders
d  i        
Boyd, L.M., et al. (2008). Survival in cats with naturally occurring
uria may only be a marker linked to progression of CKD
chronic kidney disease (200-2002). I Vet Intern Med 22: 1111-1117.
(Abbate et al. 2006). Based on studies in humans and
Elliot, I. and P. Barber (1998). Feline chronic renal failure: clinical
 rodents, therapeutic amelioration of proteinuria using
findings in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and 1995. J Small Anim
Pract 39: 78-85.
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors may slow pro-
Elliott, I., et al. (2003). Acid-base balance of cats with chronic renal
 gression of CKD, thus improving prognosis (Abbate et al.
failure: effect of deterioration in renal function. J Small Anim Pract
2006).
44: 261-268.
 Systemic hypertension has been linked to progression
El-Nahas, A. and N. Tamimi ( 1999). The progression of chronic renal
failure: a harmful quartet. Q I Med92: 421-424.
of CKD in humans for decades (El-Nahas and Tamimi
Jacob, F, et al. (2002). Clinical evaluation of dietary modification for
1999). Higher systolic blood pressure at the time of diag-
treatment of spontaneous chronic renal failure in dogs. I Am Vet
nosis is reportedly associated with increased risk of ure-
Med Assoc 220: 1163-1170.
mic crises and death in dogs with CKD (Jacob et al.
 Jacob, F, et al. (2003). Association between initial systolic blood pres-
2003). In cats, elevated blood pressure does not appear
sure and risk of developing a uremic crisis or of dying in dogs with
 to be an independent risk factor for progression of CKD;
chronic renal failure. IArm Vet Med Assoc 222: 322-329.
Jacob, F, et al. (2005). Evaluation of the association between initial
any adverse effect of elevated blood pressure is likely
attributable to proteinuria (Jepson et al. 2007).
occurring chronic renal failure. I Am Vet Med Assoc 226: 393-400.
Jepson, R.E., et al. (2007). Effect of control of systolic blood pressure
on survival in cats with systemic hypertension. J Vet Internm Med 21:
Endnote
402-409.
King, I.N., et al. (2007). Prognostic factors in cats with chronic kidney
1. Adequate kidney function in this context means suffcient kid-
disease. I Vet Interr Med 21: 906-916.
ney function to prevent retention of waste products in blood (i.e.,
Kuwahara, Y., et al. (2006). Association of laboratory data and death
azotermia) and maintain normal fluid and electrolyte homeostasis.
within one month in cats with chronic renal failure. I Small Anirm
Pract 47: 446-450.
Ross, S.J., et al. (2006). Clinical evaluation of dietary modifcation for
treatment of spontaneous chronic kidney disease in cats. I Am Vet
References
Med Assoc 229: 949-957.
Syme, H.M., et al. (2006). Survival of cats with naturally occurring
Abbate, M.,et al.(2006). How does proteinuria cause progressive renal
chronic renal failure is related to severity of proteinuria. I Vet Irterr
damage? I Arm Soc Nephrol 17: 2974-2984.
Med 20: 528-535.
52
Renal manifestations of systemic disease
Linda Ross
Primary renal disease and renal failure are common
as diffuse interstitial inflammation with infiltration pri-
causes of morbidity and mortality in dogs and cats. How-
marily of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and less frequently
ever, renal dysfunction or pathology may also be the result
neutrophils; mild scattered renal tubular necrosis; and
 of systemic disease. The signs and laboratory abnormali-
interstitial edema (Figure 52.1). In chronic cases, the pre-
ties associated with renal disease may be the initial reason
dominant change is interstitial fibrosis with mild, scat-
for presentation, or renal disease may be recognized dur-
tered inflammation (Greene et al. 2006; Prescott 2007).
ing a diagnostic workup for seemingly unrelated clinical
signs or laboratory abnormalities. It is important for the
Borreliosis
clinician to recognize these systemic diseases in order
Borrelia burgdorferris a spirochete bacterium that infects
 to institute appropriate therapy and give an accurate
 animals via the bite ofan infected tick. In contrast to many
prognosis.
other infections, clinical disease occurs not directly as the
result of infection, but rather from the host's immune
Infectious diseases
response to the organism (Greene and Straubinger 2006),
 Renal pathology has been reported as the result of a vari-
and this pathogenesis likely applies to the associated
renal disease as well. Acute, rapidly progressive renal
ety of infectious diseases in animals. Associated clinical
failure in 49 dogs has been described in a retrospective
or laboratory abnormalities may be uncommon, such as
granulomatous renal lesions with blastomycosis, cryp-
study and attributed to infection with Borrelia (Dambach
tococcosis, and aspergillosis. In other infections, renal
et al. 1997). Forty-three of these dogs had membra-
disease or failure is a common or predominant feature of
noproliferative glomerulonephritis, five had membra-
nous glomerulonephritis, and one had amyloidosis. Most
clinical disease; these are discussed below ( Table 52.1).
dogs also had renal tubular necrosis, and all had inter-
stitial lymphoplasmocytic inflammation. Labrador and
Leptospirosis
Golden retriever dogs were at increased risk.
Leptospirosis is caused by infection with bacterial spiro-
chetes of the species Leptospira interrogans (see Chapters
Rocky mountain spotted fever
27 and 49). There are a number of different serovars of
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF) is caused by
leptospirosis that may infect dogs. In the United States,
infection with the rickesttsial bacteria Rickettsia rickettsii.
the most common infecting serovars are L. grippotyphosa
 Fever and generalized necrotizing vasculitis are responsi-
and pomona (Ross et al. 2000). Laboratory abnormalities
ble for most of the clinical signs. While acute renal failure
in dogs with leptospirosis can include mild to moderate
is common in people with RMSF, it is less common in
thrombocytopenia, azotemia, isosthenuria, proteinuria,
dogs, although vascular lesions are seen in the kidneys
and glucosuria. The urine sediment frequently contains
(Greene and Breitschwerdt 2006).
erythrocytes, leukocytes, and granular casts. Histopatho-
 logic changes in acute leptospirosis have been described
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection
 Cats infected with feline infectious immunodeficiency
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
virus have an increased risk of chronic renal disease,
531
532
 Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 52.1 Infectious diseases associated with renal disease
Leptospirosis
Borreliosis
Rocky mountain spotted fever
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection
Feline infectious peritonitis
Feline leukemia virus infection
Leishmaniasis
Babesiosis
Hepatozoonosis
Sepsis
Figure 52.2 Multifocal pyogranulomas in the kidney of a cat with
azotemia, and proteinuria (Levy et al. 2000). Renal
feline infectious peritonitis.
 lesions include thickened Bowman's membrane, segmen-
tal to diffuse glomerulosclerosis, amyloidosis, micro-
scopic tubular dilatation and cytoplasmic vacuolization,
(Addie and Jarrett 2006). Cats with FIP usually present
mononuclear tubulointerstitial inflammation, and inter-
for signs of systemic illness, including fever, weight loss,
stitial fibrosis (Poli et al. 1993; Poli et al. 1995; Levy et al.
and lethargy. However, if renal lesions are extensive, the
2000).
cat may present for signs of renal disease such as poly-
dipsia, polyuria, and vomiting.
Feline infectious peritonitis
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is caused by a coron-
Feline feukemia virus infection
avirus. The non-effusive form of FIP is associated with
Cats infected with the feline leukemia virus are at
upnou 'sueo su u suoish snoionunod
increased risk for developing a variety of immune-
the kidneys (Figure 52.2). The kidneys may be grossly
mediated(
 disorders, including glomerulonephritis.
 enlarged and irregular. Histologically, multiple pyogran-
(Anderson and Jarrett 1971). Those with glomeru-
lonephritis have been reported to have higher circulating
lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils are seen
viral (antigen) loads than those without renal lesions
(Poli et al. 1995).
Leishmaniasis
The protozoan genus Leishmania includes numerous
species that infect dogs and rarely cats. Infection in
dogs results in a chronic systemic disease characterized
by both cutaneous (exfoliative and ulcerative dermati-
tis) and visceral lesions. Renal involvment is common.
Clinical and laboratory abnormalities include renal pain,
polydipsia/polyuria, and azotemia (Nieto et al. 1992; Cia-
ramella et al. 1997). Proteinuria and hematuria occur in
"(007 1e 1a 11 661 1e 1a 01) s0 1 1s
Mesangial, membranous, membranoproliferative, and
focal segmental glomerulonephritis have been described
in infected dogs (Zatelli et al. 2003).
Babesiosis
Several species of Babesia are known to infect dogs. The
clinical presentation of infected dogs varies from subclin-
Figure 52.1 Warthin-Starry silver stain of a renal tubule showing
ical to peracute, and is somewhat dependent upon the
numerous leptospires in the lumen.
 o e n o) ss 
Renal manifestations of systemic disease  533
1/3 of dogs in Spain infected with a Babesia microti-like
tal studies, and the degree to which the same changes
organism (tentatively identified as identical to Theile-
occur in clinical disease in humans or animals is not
ria annae) were azotemic at the time of diagnosis, and
known. The most commonly accepted mechanism is
azotemia was the main cause of death in infected dogs
ischemic acute tubular necrosis (Schrier et al. 2004; Klen-
(Camacho et al. 2004). Acute renal failure appears to
zak and Himmelfarb 2005). Sepsis does not always result
be less common in dogs infected with other species of
in hypotension. Hyperdynamic septic shock has been
 Babesia. While many dogs with babesiosis have an ele-
associated with increased renal blood flow, but may also
vated blood urea nitrogen concentration, it has been 
result in acute renal failure. Apoptosis of renal tubular
shown not to be due to renal dysfunction, but more likely
cells, rather than necrosis, may be the mechanism for
catabolism of lysed red blood cells (de Scally et al. 2006).
renal injury in these situations. Various cytokines, endo-
However, dogs infected with Babesia canis that had renal
toxin, as well as short periods of ischemia have all been
involvement had a fivefold greater risk of dying than those
shown to lead to apoptosis of renal tubular cells (Wan
with other organ damage. It has been suggested that the
2003; Guo 2004; Wang 2005).
renal failure seen in dogs with severe babesiosis represents
a manifestation of the systemic inflammatory response
Endocrine disorders
syndrome (SIRS) and multiple organ dysfunction syn-
drome (MODS) (Welzl et al. 2001). Membranoprolif-
 Polyuria and polydipsia are common manifestations
erative glomerulonephritis has been described in dogs
of several endocrine disorders (see Chapter 42 on
infected with Babesia gibsoni (Wozniak et al. 1997).
polyuria/polydipsia). However, renal pathology and
alterations in renal function also occur as the result of
Hepatozoonosis
 some endocrinopathies ( Table 52.2).
Hepatozoonosis in dogs is caused by infection with the
protozoan Hepatozoon canisin South America, Africa, the
Hyperadrenocorticism
Mediterranean countries, and some Asian countries, and
Glomerulonephritis and proteinuria occur in many dogs
by Hepatozoon americanum in the United States. H. canis
with hyperadrenocorticism. In a clinical study of 41
is most often associated with clinical disease in dogs with
dogs with glomerulonephritis, an association was found
high levels of parasitemia. While clinical signs of renal dis-
between glomerular lesions and a history of excess
ease are not a common part of the clinical presentation,
endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids (Center et al.
glomerulonephritis, interstitial nephritis, and multifocal
1987). An experimental study demonstrated that clin-
necrosis have been described (Baneth and Weigler 1997).
ically normal dogs developed glomerular lesions and
In contrast, infection with H. americanum usually causes
severe illness characterized primarily by fever, muscle
of prednisone for 42 days (Waters et al. 1997). In one
 pain and atrophy, and hyperesthesia. Renal involvement 
study, the urine protein:creatinine ratio (UPC) was ele-
is common, and reported lesions include multifocal pyo-
vated above normal (1.0) in 46% of dogs with untreated
 granulomatous inflammation with glomerulonephritis,
lymphoplasmacytic interstitial nephritis, and mesangio-
± 1.69) and in 63% of dogs with untreated adrenal
 proliferative glomerulonephritis. Renal amyloidosis may
tumors (mean 2.7 ± 2.8). The amount of proteinuria
also occur in conjunction with systemic amyloidosis.
was associated with the degree of elevation in arterial
The renal lesions are associated with clinically significant
blood pressure. Renal histopathology was performed on
proteinuria, and may contribute to hypoalbuminemia
seven dogs in this study, of which five had glomeru-
(Macintire et al. 2006).
losclerosis and two had glomerulonephritis. UPC ratios
decreased significantly in seven dogs after adequate con-
trol of hyperodrenocorticism, but not in eight dogs
Sepsis
The term “sepsis" is now considered to represent not just
Table 52.2 Endocrine disorders associated with renal disease or
 generalized bacterial infection, but the systemic inflam-
 matory response to that infection and subsequent multi-
dysfunction
ple organ dysfunction (Barton 2005). In humans, acute
Hyperadrenocorticism
renal failure occurs in up to 51% of patients with sepsis,
Hypoadrenocorticism
and is associated with increased mortality (Schrier et al.
Diabetes mellitus
2004). Most of the data on the pathogenesis of sepsis-
Hyperthyroidism
associated acute renal failure is derived from experimen-
534  Upper urinary tract disorders
in which treatment was not successful in controlling
Table 52.3 Miscellaneous disorders associated with renal
cortisollevels (Ortega 1996). In another study, UPC ratios
disease
were found to be elevated (>1.0, range 1.06-4.16) in 1
of 16 (44%) of dogs with untreated pituitary-dependent
Dirofilariasis
Immune-mediated disorders
hyperadrenocorticism. UPC ratios were not significantly
different in dogs before or 2 weeks after adequate adrenal
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Polyarteritis nodosa
suppression with mitotane (Hurley and Vaden, 1998).
Pancreatitis
The mechanism of proteinuria (see Chapters 8 and 43)
Pyometra
and the pathogenesis of glomerular lesions associated
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
with hyperadrenocorticism are not completely under-
Neoplasia
stood. Glucocorticoid-induced systemic and glomerular
hypertension likely plays a role, and may lead to glomeru-
losclerosis (Ortega 1996).
Miscellaneous disorders associated with renal
disease (Table 52.3)
Hypoadrenocorticism
Dirofilariasis
Azotemia is commonly found in dogs and cats with
Glomerular pathology has been described in dogs
untreated hypoadrenocorticism. Decreased renal per-
infected with Dirofilaria immitis (Klei et al. 1974; Casey
fusion secondary to the lack of glucocorticoids and
and Splitter 1975; Abramowsky et al. 1981; Aikawa et al.
hypovolemia from mineralocorticoid-induced natriure-
1981; Grauer et al. 1987; Grauer et al. 1989; Nakagaki
sis causes this pre-renal azotemia. Correction of fluid
abnormalities and appropriate mineralo- and gluco-
et al. 1990; Paes-de-Almeida 2003), although clinically
significant decreases in renal function are uncommon
corticoid administration results in rapid resolution of
(Dalton et al. 1971; Osborne et al. 1981). Membranopro-
azotemia.
liferative glomerulonephritis is the most common lesion
(Aikawa et al. 1981; Grauer et al. 1987; Nakagaki et al.
Diabetes mellitus
1990) but membranous glomerulonephritis (Casey and
Splitter 1975) has also been reported. The pathogene-
Diabetic nephropathy, characterized by thickening of the
sis of the glomerulopathy has been reported to be in
glomerular and tubular basement membranes, glomeru-
situ formation in the glomerular basement membrane
lar mesangial expansion (diffuse glomerulosclerosis),
of immune complexes to antigens from adult Dirofilaria
interstitial expansion by extracellular matrix material,
immitis worms (Aikawa et al. 1981; Grauer et al. 1987;
and proteinuria, is a common and serious late complica-
Grauer et al. 1989).
tion of diabetes mellitus in people (Parving et al. 2008).
Similar glomerular lesions have been reported in dogs
Pancreatitis
with diabetes mellitus, (Steffes et al. 1982; Jeraj et al. 1984)
as has proteinuria (Kirsch and Reusch 1993). However,
Acute pancreatitis, especially in dogs, is frequently associ-
clinical renal disease associated with these pathophys-
ated with azotemia. In mild or early stages of pancreatitis,
iologic abnormalities appears to be rare. This may be
the azotemia is primarily pre-renal as the result of hypo-
because the length of time necessary for clinically sig-
volemia. However, more severe pancreatitis can result
nificant renal disease to develop (12-20 years in people)
in SIRS and MODS, of which acute renal failure is one
exceeds the lifespan of dogs (Mufiana 1995).
manifestation (Ruaux 2000; Whittemore et al. 2005).
Pyometra
Hyperthyroidism
Renal dysfunction is common in dogs, (De Schepper
Elevated circulating levels of thyroid hormone can
et al. 1987; Stone et al. 1988), and to a lesser extent
increase renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate
in cats (Kenney et al. 1987), with pyometra. Polydip-
(Adams et al. 1997a). This effect can artifactually “mask"
sia and polyuria occur as the result of decreased urine
renal dysfunction, an effect seen most commonly in geri-
concentrating ability, which is believed to be a form of
atric cats with hyperthyroidism. Treatment that restores
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus secondary to endotoxin
euthyroidism may result in decreased renal blood flow
(Asheim 1965). Azotemia has been reported in 15-37%
and glomerular filtration rate, “unmasking" or worsen-
of dogs (Stone et al. 1988) and 12% of cats (Kenney
ing preexisting azotemia (Adams et al. 1997b).
 et al. 1987) with pyometra; enzymuria and urine casts
Renal manifestations of systemic disease !
535
may be seen (De Schepper et al. 1987; Heine 2001).
Although some studies have described membranoprolif-
1964; Asheim 1965; Slauson 1979; Johnston 2001), other
studies have found mild interstitial nephritis and tubu-
lar atrophy without significant glomerular lesions (Stone
et al. 1988; Heiene et al. 2001; Heiene et al. 2004; Heiene
2007). In most cases, renal dysfunction is transient, and
resolves following ovariohysterectomy or medical treat-
ment of the pyometra (Heiene 2007).
Immune-mediated disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Figure 52.3 Fibrin thrombi occluding dilated glomerular capillar-
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an immune-
ies in a dog with disseminated intravascular coagulation
mediated disease in which deposition of antigen-
antibody complexes containing antibodies against a vari-
and multiple organ failure (Figure 52.3) (Fox et al. 2005).
ety of cellular antigens results in inflammation and tissue
Acute renal failure is one of the most devastating com-
damage. Renal involvement is common, and has been
plications of DIC.
reported in approximately 55% of dogs and 40% of cats
with SLE (Stone 2005). Glomerular lesions, character-
Neoplasia
ized as membranous or membranoproliferative glomeru-
lonephritis in dogs (Lewis 1972; Slauson and Lewis 1979)
Neoplasia has been associated with glomerulonephritis
and membranous glomerulonephritis in cats (Werner
in dogs and cats (Murray and Wright 1974; Glick et al.
et al. 1984; Thompson 1994) have been described (see
1978; Jeraj et al. 1985; Center et al. 1987). The actual inci-
Chapter 53). Protein-losing nephropathy and azotemia
 dence is unknown; one study reported 40% of dogs with
may be a minor or predominant component of the over-
e     s
all clinical manifestation of SLE.
1974), while another found that 69% of dogs with masto-
 cytosis had glomerulitis (Hottendorf and Nielsen 1968).
Polyarteritis nodosa
Polyarteritis nodosa (periarteritis nodosa, panarteritis
References
nodosa) is a rare disorder characterized by general-
Abramowsky, C.R., et al. (198l). Dirofilaria immitus: 5.
ized necrotizing vasculitis affecting primarily small and
Immunopathology of filarial nephropathy in dogs. Arm I Pathol 104:
medium-sized muscular arteries ( Thompson 1994; Fox
1-12.
et al. 2005). The pathogenesis ofthis disorder is unknown,
Adams, W.H., et al. (1997a). Investigation of the effects of hyperthy-
although it is believed to be immune-mediated. The vas-
roidism on renal function in the cat. Car I Vet Res 61: 53-56.
cular damage results in thrombosis, vascular occlusion,
Adams, W.H., et al. (1997b). Changes in renal function in cats follow-
ing treatment of hyperthyroidism using 1311. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
and ischemic damage to various tissues, including the
38(3): 231-238.
kidneys. Reported renal lesions include fibrinoid necro-
Addie, D.D. and O. Jarrett (2006). Feline coronavirus infections. In:
sis of the tunica media of renal arterioles with infiltration
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd
by neutrophils and mononuclear cells, resulting in par-
edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 88-102.
Aikawa, M., et al. (1981). Dirofilariasis. IV. Glomerulonephropathy
tial or complete occlusion of the vessel, thrombosis, and
induced by Dirofilaria irmmitis infection. Am I Trop Med Hyg 30( 1):
associated infarction. Azotemia may occur as the result of
84-91.
these lesions (Lucke 1968; Campbell et al. 1972; Thomp-
Anderson, L.J. and W.EH. Jarrett (197l). Membranous glomeru-
son 1994). Fibrinoid necrosis has also been reported in
lonephritis associated with leukemia in cats. Res Vet Sci 12: 179-
glomeruli (Curtis 1979).
180.
Asheim, A. (1965). Pathogenesis of renal damage and polydipsia in
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
dogs with pyometra. I Am Vet Med Assoc 147(7): 736-745.
Baneth, G. and B. Weigler ( 1997). Retrospective case-control study of
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DlC) is a disor-
hepatozoonosis in dogs in Israel. J Vet Irtern Med 11: 365-370.
Barton, L. (2005). Sepsis and the systemic inflammatory response
der in which microvascular thrombi are associated with
syndrome. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by
consumption of platelets and clotting factors, resulting
S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman, 6th edition.St. Louis, MO: Saunders
in simultaneous hemorrhage and thrombosis, ischemia,
Elsevier, pp. 452-454.
536  Upper urinary tract disorders
Camacho, A.T., et al. (2004). Azotemia and mortality among Babesia
Hurley, K.J. and S. L. Vaden ( 1998). Evaluation of urine protein content
microti-like infected dogs. I Vet Intern Med 18(2): 141-146.
in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. I Am Vet
Campbell, L.H., et al. (1972). Ocular and other manifestations of
Med Assoc 212(3): 369-373.
periarteritis nodosa in a cat. JAm Vet Med Assoc 161(10): 1122-1126.
Jeraj, K., et al. ( 1984). Immunofluorescence studies on renal basement
Casey, H.W. and G.A. Splitter ( 1975). Membranous glomerulonephri-
tis in dogs infected with Dirofilaria imrmitus. Vet Pathol 12(2):
1162-1165.
11l-117.
Jeraj, K.P., et al. ( 1985). Immune complex glomerulonephritis in a cat
Center, S.H., et al. (1987). Clinicopathologic, renal immunofluores-
with renal lymphosarcoma. Vet Pathol 22(3): 287-290.
cent, and light microscopic features of glomerulonephritis in the
Johnston, S.D., etal. (200l). Disorders of the canine uterus and uterine
dog: 41 cases (1975- 1985). I Am Vet Med Assoc 190: 81-90.
tubes (Oviducts). In: Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadel-
Ciaramella, P., et al. (1997). A retrospective clinical study of canine
phia, PA: WB Saunders, pp 206-224.
leishrmaniasis in 150 dogs naturally infected with L. infantum. Vet
Kenney, K.J., et al. (1987). Pyometra in cats: 183 cases (1979-1984). I
Rec 141: 539-543.
Arn Vet Med Assoc 191(9): 1130- 1132.
Curtis, R. (1979). Polyarteritis in a cat. Vet Rec 105: 354.
Kirsch, M. and C. Reusch (1993). Urine characteristics in dogs with
Dalton, G.O., et al. (197l). Effect of Dirofilaria immitus on renal
diabetes mellitus. Is there a diabetic nephropathy in the dog? Tierzrztl
function in the dog. Arm I Vet Res 32(12): 2087-2089.
Prax 21(4): 345-348.
Dambach, D.M., et al. ( 1997). Morphologic, immunohistochemical,
Klei, T.R., et al.(1974). Ultrastructural glomerular changes associated
and ultrastructural characterization of a distinctive renal lesion in
with filariasis. Arm I Trop Med Hyg 23(4): 608-618.
dogs putatively associated with Borrelia burgdorferi infection: 49
 Klenzak, J. and J. Himmelfarb (2005). Sepsis and the kidney. Crit Care
cases (1987-1992). Vet Pathol 34: 85-96.
Clin 21:211-222
de Scally, M.P, et al. (2006). The elevated serum urea:creatinine ratio
Levy, J.K. (2000). Feline immunodeficiency virus. In: Current Veteri-
in canine babesiosis in South Africa is not of renal origin. IS Afr Vet
ary Therapy XIl, edited by ID. Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Assoc 77(4): 175- 178.
Saunders, pp 284-288.
De Schepper, I., et al. (1987). Renal injury in dogs with pyometra.
Lewis, R.M. ( 1972). Canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Am I Pathol
Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 112(Suppl 1): 124S- 126S.
69: 537-540.
Fox, PR., et al. (2005). Peripheral vascular disease. In: Text-
Lucke, V.M. (1968). Renal polyarteritis nodosa in the cat. Vet Rec 82:
book of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.J. Etinger and
622-624.
E.C. Feldman, 6th edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier,
Macintire, D.K., et al. (2006). Hepatozoon Americarmum infection. In:
pp. 1145-1165.
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd
Glick, A.D., et al. ( 1978). Characterization of feline glomerulonephritis
edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 705-711.
associated with viral-induced hematopoietic neoplasms. Am I Pathol
 Mufana, K.R. (1995). Long-term complications of diabetes mellitus,
92: 321-327.
Grauer, G.F., et al. ( 1987). Clinicopathologic and histologic evaluation
Small Anmim Pract 25(3): 715-730.
of Dirofilaria immitus-induced nephropathy in dog. Am J Trop Med
Murray, M. and N.G. Wright ( 1974). A morphologic study of canine
Hyg 37(3): 588-596.
glomerulonephritis. Lab Invest 30(2): 213-221.
Grauer, G.F., et al. ( 1989). Experimental Dirofilaria immitis-associated
Nakagaki, K., et al. ( 1990). Histopathological and immunopatholog-
glomerulonephritis induced in part by in situ formation of immune
ical evaluation of filarial glomerulonephritis in Dirofilaria immitis
complexes in the glomerular capillary wall. I Parasitol 75(4):
infected dogs. Ipn J Exp Med 60(4): 179-186.
585-593.
Nieto, C.G., et al. ( 1992). Pathological changes in kidneys of dogs with
Greene, C.E. and E.B. Breitschwerdt (2006). Rocky Mountain spotted
natural Leishmania infection. Vet Parasitol45: 33-47.
fever, murine typhuslike disease, rickettsialpox, typhus, and Q fever.
Obel, A.L., et al. (1964). Light and electron microscopical studies
In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd
of the renal lesions in dogs with pyometra. Acta Vet Scand 5:
edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 232-245.
146-178.
Greene, C.E. and R.K. Straubinger (2006). Borreliosis. In: Infectious
Ortega, T.M., et al. ( 1996). Systemic arterial blood pressure and urine
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd edition. St.
protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. I Am
Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 417-435.
Vet Med Assoc 209( 10): 1724-1729.
Greene, C.E., et al. (2006). Leptospirosis. In: Infetious Diseases of the
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 198l). Renal manifestations of canine dirofilari-
Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO:
asis. In: Proceedings ofthe Heartworm Symposium '80, edited by G.F.
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 402-417.
Otto. Edwardsville, KS: Veterinary Medicine Publishing Company,
Guo, R., et al. (2004). Acute renal failure in endotoxemia is dependent
Pp. 67-92.
on caspase activation. I Arm Soc Nephrol 15( 12): 3093-3 102.
Paes-de-Almeida, E.C., et al. (2003). Kidney ultrastructural lesions in
Heiene, R., et al. (200l). Calculation of urinary enzyme excretion,
dogs experimentally infected with Dirofilaria immitis (Leidy, 1856).
with renal structure and function in dogs with pyometra. Res Vet Sci
Vet Parasitol 113(2): 157-168.
70(2): 129-137.
Parving, H.H., et al. (2008). Diabetic nephropathy. In: The Kidrey,
Heiene, R., et al. (2004). Vasopressin secretion in response to osmotic
edited by B.M. Brenner, 8th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders
stimulation and effects of desmopressin on urinary concentrating
Elsevier, pp. 1265- 1298.
capacity in dogs with pyometra. Am I Vet Res 65(4): 404-408.
Poli, A., et al. (l993). Renal involverment in feline immuno-
Heiene, R., et al. (2007). Renal histomorphologyin dogs with pyometra
 deficiency virus infection: a clinicopathologic study. Nephron 64:
Jo suis on adsa yim aono uan si ue sop loo p
282-288.
kidney disease. Acta Vet Scand 49( 1): 13.
 Poli, A., et al. ( 1995). Renal involvement in feline immunodeficiency
Hottendorf, G.H. and S.W. Nielsen (1968). Pathologic report of 29
virus infection: p24 antigen detection, virus isolation and PCR anal-
necropsies on dogs with mastocytoma. Vet Pathol5: 102-121.
ysis. Vet Immurol Immumopathol 46: 13-20.
Renal manifestations of systemic disease !
537
Prescott, J.F. (2007). Leptospirosis. In: Pathology of Dormestic Amirmals,
Thompson, J.P. ( 1994). Disorders of the immune system. In: The Cat:
edited by M.G. Maxie, 5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Else-
Diseases and Clinical Managemert, edited by R.G. Sherding, 2nd
vier, pp. 481-490.
edition. New York: Churchill Livingstone, pp. 647-670.
Ross, L.A. and V. Rentko (2000). Canine leptospirosis: Update. In:
Wan, L., et al. (2003). The pathogenesis of septic acute renal failure.
Curr Opin Crit Care 9: 496-502.
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 308-310.
Wang, W., et al. (2005). Endotoxemic acute renal failure is attenu-
Ruaux, C.G. (2000). Pathophysiology of organ failure in severe acute
ated in caspase-1 -deficient mice. Arm I Physiol Renal Physiol 288(5):
pancreatitis in dogs. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet22(16): 531-542.
F997-1004.
Schrier, R.W. and W. Wang (2004). Acute renal failure and sepsis.
Waters, C.B., et al. (1997). Effects of glucocorticoid therapy on urine
N Engl I Med 351(2): 159- 169.
protein-to-creatinine ratios and renal morphology in dogs. I Vet
Slauson, D.O. and R.M. Lewis (1979). Comparative pathology of
Interm Med 11(3): 172- 177.
glomerulonephritis in animals. Vet Pathol 16: 135- 164.
Welzl, C., et al. (200 1). Systemic inflammatory response syndrome and
 Steffes, M.W., et al. ( 1982). Diabetic nephropathy in the uninephrec-
mutiple-organ damage/dysfunction in complicated canine babesio-
sis. IS Afr Vet Assoc 72(3): 158- 162.
721-724.
Werner, L.L. and N.T. Gorman (1984). Immune-mediated disorders 
Stone, E.A., et al. (1988). Renal dysfunction in dogs with pyometra.
of cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 14: 1039-1064.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 193(4): 457-464.
Whittemore, J.C. and V.L. Campbell (2005). Canine and feline pan-
Stone, M. (2005). Systemic lupus erythematosus. In: Textbook of Vet-
creatitis. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 27(10): 766-776.
erimary Imtermal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman,
Wozniak, E.J., et al. ( 1997). Clinical, anatomic, and immunopathologic
 6th edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 1952-1957.
 characterization of Babesia gibsoni infection in the domestic dog
Taboada, J. and R. Lobetti (2006). Babesiosis. In: Infectious Diseases of
(Canis familiaris). I Parasitol 83(4): 692-699.
the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO:
Zatelli, A., et al. (2003). Glomerular lesions in dogs infected with
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 722-736.
Leishmaria organisms. Arm I Vet Res 64(5): 558-561.
53
Glomerular disease
Shelly L. Vaden and Gregory F. Grauer
Etiology and prevalence
MPGN, proliferative glomerulonephritis) or due to dam-
age by systemic factors affecting the glomerulus (e.g-
 Glomerular diseases are a leading cause of renal disease
amyloidosis, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, mini-
o ss q on dde iq sop i   
 mal change disease). Many of the glomerular diseases that
in cats (MacDougall et al. 1986). The true prevalence of
occur in dogs and cats are believed to develop secondary
glomerular disease in dogs or cats remains unknown.
to a systemic neoplastic, infectious, or noninfectious-
However, the incidence of glomerular lesions in ran-
inflammatory (NIN) disease process (Tables 53.3 and
 domly selected dogs with and without evidence of renal
53.4). Infectious diseases may be the most common
disease is as high as 43-90% (Muller-Peddinghaus and
underlying diseases for dogs and cats with glomerular
Trautwein 1977; Rouse and Lewis 1975). Glomerular dis-
d p ie soqo aq lou a sseas NN  sse
so aq oireadde inq ae Aue o shop ui dolaaap ueo sasea
sentation because it is either resolved or it is occult. In a
common in middle-aged to older dogs. The average age
recent retrospective study of 106 dogs with GN, 43% had
of375 dogs with a variety of glomerular diseases reported
no identifiable concurrent disease or disorder and 19%
in 5 studies was 8.3 years (Murray and Wright 1974; Mac-
had neoplasia (Cook and Cowgill 1996). Because occult
 Dougall et al. 1986; Center et al. 1987; Cook and Cowgill
 diseases may become overt months after initial presenta-
1996; Vilafranca et al. 1994). Males and females were
 tion, continued observation and scrutiny are necessary.
equally represented.
While dogs and cats with glomerular-range protein-
uria can be classified as having a glomerular disease, a
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
renal biopsy (see Chapter 23) is needed to determine the
Accounting for 20-60% of cases in various studies,
specific disease (Chapter 240) that is present ( Table 53.1).
MPGN is probably the most common form of glomeru-
The three most common forms of glomerular disease
lonephritis (GN) in dogs but is rare in cats (MacDougall
in dogs are membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
et al. 1986; Koeman et al. 1987). The mean age of dogs
(MPGN), membranous nephropathy (MN), and amy-
with MPGN was 10.5 years with males and females
loidosis whereas MN is the most common glomerular
equally affected (Vilafranca et al. 1994). MPGN has been
disease in cats. The recent movement to improve the
 identified as a familial disease in Bernese mountain dogs.
evaluation of renal biopsy specimens will eventually help
A unique rapidly progressive form of MPGN, which is
clarify the specific glomerular diseases in dogs and cats as
accompanied by tubular necrosis and interstitial inflam-
well as differences in clinical findings that may be present
 mation and is often fatal, has been reported in association
among the different diseases.
with Borrelia burgdorferi in dogs. Although an underlying
disease may not be identified during patient evaluation,
eral breeds of dog (Table 53.2). Acquired glomeru-
  s d d N  ss 
lar injury is the result of damage sustained following
NIN process.
immune complex formation or deposition (e.g., MN,
Membranous nephropathy
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
Although the mean age of dogs with MN, from 4 studies,
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
was 8 years, there was a considerable range (1-14 years)
538
Glomerular disease   539
Table 53.1 Glomerular diseases in dogs
Table 53.3 Diseases reported in association with glomerular
diseases in dogs
Amyloidosis
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Systemic disease (glomerular disease)
Glomerulonephritis
Neoplastic
Crescentic (rare)
Leukemia (G)
Membranoproliferative 
Lymphosarcoma (A, G)
Type I (mesangiocapillary) - most common
Mastocytosis (G)
Type Il(dense deposit disease) - rare, if at all
Primary erythrocytosis (MCD?)
Proliferative (mesangial and endocapillary)
Systemic histiocytosis (G)
IgA nephropathy
Other neoplasms (A, G, MN)
Glomerulosclerosis
Infectious
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Bacterial: Borreliosis (MPGN)
Hereditary nephritis
Bartonellosis (G)
Lupus nephritis
Brucellosis (G)
Membranous Nephropathy
Endocarditis (G)
Minimal change glomerulopathy
Pyelonephritis (A)
Pyometra (A, G)
aMembranous nephropathy is the most common glomerular dis-
Pyoderma (A, G)
ease in cats: other forms of glomerular disease appear to be
Other chronic bacterial infections (A, G)
uncommon in cats.
Protozoal: Babesiosis (MPGN)
Hepatozoonosis (G)
Leishmaniasis (A, MPGN, MN, P-E, and M)
(Lewis 1976; Muller-Peddinghaus and Trautwein 1977;
Trypanosomiasis (G)
Wright et al.; Jaenke and Allen, 1986; Vilafranca et al.
Rickettsial: Ehrlichiosis (G)
1994). The mean age of affected cats was only 3.6 years
Viral: Canine adenovirus type 1 (P-M)
(range 1-7 years). MN appears to be more common
Parasitic: Dirofilariasis (A, MPGN, MN)
in males than in female (males: females: dogs, 1.75:1,
Fungal: Blastomycosis (A)
cats 6:1).
Coccidiomycosis (A, G)
 Non-lnfectious Inflammatory
Chronic dermatitis (A, G)
Proliferative glomerulonephritis
Inflammatory bowel disease (G)
Proliferative GN, due to endocapillary or mesangial pro-
Pancreatitis (A, G)
liferation, accounted for only 2-16% of the glomeru-
Periodontal disease (A, G)
lar lesions in dogs of two studies (Koeman et al. 1987;
Polyarthritis (A, G)
Systemic lupus erythematosis (A, MPGN, MN, P-E, and M)
Vilafranca et al. 1994). The mean age of affected dogs
Other immune-mediated diseases (G)
Miscellaneous
Table 53.2 Breeds of dogs with familial glomerulopathies
Corticosteroid excess (G)
Trimethoprim-sulfa (G)
Beagles, amyloidosis, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
Hyperlipidemia (?)
Chronic insulin infusion (A)
Bernese mountain dog, mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
Bull terrier, hereditary nephritis
Congenital C3 deficiency (MPGN)
sudau Aepaiay rus Aepadsal laueds lao
Cyclic hematopoiesis in grey collies (A)
Dalmatian, hereditary nephritis
Idiopathic (A, G, MPGN, MN, MCD, P-E, or M)
Doberman pinscher, glomerulosclerosis, cystic glomerular
atrophy
A, amyloidosis: G, glomerulonephritis, uncharacterized; MPGN,
membranoproliferative (mesangiocapillary)  glomerulonephritis:
English foxhound, amyloidosis
MN, membranous nephropathy: MCD, minimal change disease;
Greyhound, glomerular vasculopathy and necrosis
P. proliferative (E, endocapillary or M, mesangial).
Newfoundland, glomerulosclerosis
Pembroke Welsh corgi, cystic glomerular atrophy
Rottweiler, atrophic glomerulopathy
was between 7 and 9 years. IgA nephropathy is a form of
Samoyed, hereditary nephritis (rare)
 Shar Pei, amyloiclosis
 mesangioproliferative GN that probably occurs rarely in
 dogs. In one study, dogs with enteric or hepatic diseases
 Soft-coated wheaten terrier, proliferative and sclerosing
had the highest incidence of IgA deposition (Miyauchi
glomerulonephritis
et al. 1992).
540  Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 53.4 Diseases reported in association with glomerular
an autosomal dominant form. An X-linked dominant
diseases in cats
form of HN has been described in Samoyeds and mixed
breed dogs; carrier females may have mild disease. The
Systemic disease (Glomerular disease)
report in the Samoyeds is of a single kindred; the disease
Neoplastic
is not common in this breed.
Leukemia (MN)
Lymphosarcoma (MN)
Mastocytosis (G)
Glomerulosclerosis
 Other neoplasms (G)
Glomerulosclerosis often develops as an end-stage lesion
Infectious
in response to glomerular injury or decreased function-
Bacterial
 ing nephron mass. The incidence of glomerulosclerosis
Chronic bacterial infections (G)
Mycoplasmal polyarthritis (G)
increases with age, although the percent of glomeruli
Viral
expected to be sclerotic in dogs grouped by advancing age
Feline immunodeficiency virus (G)
has not been characterized. Glomerulosclerosis is a com-
Feline infectious peritonitis (MN)
mon finding in diabetic nephropathy of people. Although
Feline leukemia virus (G, MN)
glomerulosclerosis and proteinuria can develop in dogs
Noninfectious inflammatory
with diabetes mellitus, the clinical relevance of this is
Pancreatitis (G)
unknown. Glomerulosclerosis can also develop following
Cholangiohepatitis (G)
hypertensive renal damage. Focal segmental glomeru-
Chronic progressive polyarthritis (G)
losclerosis (FSGS) is a specific glomerular disease that
Systemic lupus erythematosus (MN)
 has been identifed, but poorly characterized, in dogs. In
Other immune-mediated diseases (G)
people, this disease is considered to be a very diffcult cat-
Miscellaneous
egory of glomerular disease to diagnose pathologically.
Acromegaly (?)
This disease is most likely under-diagnosed in dogs and
Mercury toxicity (MN)
Idiopathic (MN)
may be mischaracterized as MPGN. FSGS was the diag-
nosis rendered in 10% of dogs with glomerular disease in
G, glomerulonephritis, uncharacterized: MN, membranous
one study ( Vilafranca et al. 1994). Males and females were
 nephropathy.
equally represented and the average age was 8.5 years.
Amyloidosis
Clinical signs
Amyloidosis accounts for approximately one-fourth of
The clinical signs associated with glomerular disease vary
dogs with glomerular disease; glomerular amyloidosis is
considerably, depending on the severity of proteinuria
uncommon in cats. With the exception of the Chinese
and the presence or absence of renal failure. Many animals
Shar Pei, amyloid is deposited primarily in the glomeruli
with glomerular disease are asymptomatic, with protein-
of affected dogs. Reactive amyloidosis is the most com-
uria detected during routine health screening. Alterna-
mon form of amyloidosis in dogs and cats, and older
tively, animals may manifest specific signs related to an
animals are more commonly affected. Females appear to
underlying NIN process. Signs of glomerular disease may
be affected more often than males. Beagles, English Fox-
be non-specific (e.g., weight loss, lethargy) or consistent
hounds, collies and Walker hounds may be at increased
with chronic kidney disease or uremia (polyuria, polydip-
risk for amyloidosis, which may be familial in Beagles
sia, anorexia, vomiting, and malodorous breath). Acute
and English Foxhounds (see Chapter 54).
kidney injury is a less common presentation for dogs and
cats with glomerular disease.
Hereditary nephritis
 Physical examination is often unremarkable in dogs
Hereditary nephritis (HN) refers to a diverse group of
and cats with glomerular disease. Non-specific evidence
inherited glomerular diseases that are the result of a
of systemic disease (e.g- poor body condition or poor
 genetic mutation or deletion in basement membrane col-
hair coat) may be present. Dogs with advanced renal fail-
lagen (type IV). The presence of defective collagen leads
ure may have oral ulcerations, pale mucous membranes,
to premature deterioration of the glomerular basement
or dehydration. Evidence of a predisposing NIN disease
membrane and progressive glomerular disease and renal
 may be detected during physical examination. The kid-
failure. HN has been reported in several breeds of dogs.
 neys of affected animals are variable in size. Animals with
An autosomal recessive form occurs in English cocker
chronic kidney disease often have small, firm, and irreg-
spaniels, whereas bull terriers and Dalmatians develop
ularly shaped kidneys while those with milder disease
Glomerular disease !
541
often have normal-sized kidneys and occasionally have
cholesterol, very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), and
enlarged kidneys. Cats with MN may have enlarged kid-
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol occur in peo-
neys early in the disease process.
 ple but have not been as thoroughly studied in dogs
As in people, it is likely that the specific glomerular dis-
(Wheeler et al. 1989).
eases in dogs will differ with respect to the expected clin-
Although somewhat controversial in dogs, there is
ical signs and associated NIN processes but this has not
mounting evidence to support that proteinuria induces
been fully studied. Persistent proteinuria may lead to the
tubular damage leading to progressive nephron loss in
development of nephrotic syndrome (i.e., proteinuria,
 people and rodents. The reports that proteinuria was
hypoalbuminuria, hypercholesterolemia, and fluid reten-
associated with a greater risk of uremic crisis or death in
tion) in some dogs and cats (see Chapter 44). Because
dogs with chronic kidney disease and a shortened sur-
amyloidosis and membranous nephropathy are common
vival in cats with chronic kidney disease may offer indi-
glomerular diseases that may result in heavy magnitude of
rect evidence that this occurs in dogs and cats ( Jacob et al.
proteinuria, these should be considered the top differen-
2005; Syme et al. 2006). Potential mechanisms of tubu-
tials for a dog that presents with the nephrotic syndrome.
lointerstitial damage associated with proteinuria include
When urinary protein losses are severe, decreases of
excessive lysosomal processing leading to activation of
plasma oncotic pressure allow for transudation of fluid
nuclear factor k β resulting in secretion of cytokines and
into the interstitial space. The resultant decrease in effec-
growth factors (e.g-, transforming GF β1, platelet derived
tive plasma volume leads to increased renin-angiotensin-
GF, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, endothelin-
aldosterone activity and retention of water and sodium
1), tubular obstruction with hyaline casts, absorption
 and worsening of edema. Primary sodium retention may
 of transferrin, complement, and lipoproteins leading to
also be involved in the retention of fluid in some patients.
Once the serum albumin concentrations are below 1.5
differentiation of tubular cells to myoepithelial cells that
g/dL, fluid retention may occur which is usually mani-
 can produce collagen and promote fibrosis (Harris et al.
fested as abdominal enlargement consistent with ascites
1996; Johnson 1997; Remuzzi 1995; Tang et al. 1999).
or peripheral edema.
Thromboembolic disease has been reported in 5-14%
Diagnosis
of dogs with glomerular disease (Center et al. 1987;
DiBartola et al. 1989; Cook and Cowgill 1996). Severe
Persistent proteinuria is the hallmark of glomerular dis-
protein losses increase the risk of thromboembolic dis-
ease (see Chapters 8 and 43). The magnitude of pro-
ease. The pathogenesis of the hypercoagulable state
teinuria can range from very low-grade (e.g-, microal-
is multifactorial; hyperfibrinogenemia, excess urinary
buminuria) to heavy, as occurs in nephrotic syndrome.
losses of antithrombin Ill, and thrombocytosis accompa-
Glomerular disease should be suspected as the cause
 nied by increased platelet adhesion and aggregation are
      n 
contributory factors (Green and Kabel 1982; Green et al.
uria have been excluded (i.e., prerenal, postrenal, and
1985). Pulmonary thromboembolism is most common,
functional-, tubular-, or interstitial-renal) and the urine
resulting in dyspnea and hypoxia. Emboli can lodge in
protein:creatinine ratio (UPC) is > 2.0 (Lees et al. 2005).
other arteries (e.g-, mesenteric, renal, liac, brachial, coro-
The first step in the diagnostic evaluation of dogs
nary, splenic) or the portal vein resulting in a variety of
and cats with persistent proteinuria should be a thor-
accompanying signs.
ough evaluation for underlying NIN diseases. This should
Systemic hypertension may occur in up to 80% of
include a thorough physical examination; diseases of the
 dogs with glomerular disease (Cowgill 1991). Hyperten-
oral cavity and skin should not be overlooked as potential
sive damage to the kidneys, central nervous system, eyes,
 underlying diseases. Aspiration cytology should be eval-
or heart may induce a variety of other clinical signs but
uated on all cutaneous and subcutaneous masses that
 also exacerbation of proteinuria and progressive renal
 are present. Serologic testing for regional infectious dis-
injury (see Chapter 68). A combination of activation of
  o s  s s  sa
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and decreased
formed (see Chapter 27). During radiographic or ultra-
renal production of vasodilators, coupled with increased
 sonographic evaluation ofthe abdomen, attention should
responsiveness to normal vasopressor mechanisms is
also be given to other organs in search of another disease
probably involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension
proces. Thoracic radiographs should also be evaluated
in animals with glomerular disease.
in middle- to advanced-aged dogs.
Hypercholesterolemia was reported in 79% of dogs
Renal biopsy (see Chapter 23) provides a definitive
with GN and 86% of dogs with amyloidosis (Center et al.
 diagnosis of glomerular disease but may not be needed
1987; DiBartola et al. 1989). Increases in total plasma
if treatment of a potential underlying disease leads to
542  Upper urinary tract disorders
resolution of the proteinuria or if end-stage renal dis-
larity. Proliferative GN is an immune-complex mediated
ease is already present. When evaluated appropriately,
disease and deposits can be identified in the mesangium,
 or subepithelial in the capillary walls.
information about the type and severity of lesions in
dogs and cats with glomerular disease (see Chapter 24).
Amyloidosis
 In fact, obtaining an accurate histologic diagnosis may be
 one of the more important factors in successful manage-
Amyloid is first deposited in mesangial areas, with
eventual  subendothelial deposition.  In  hematoxylin
ment of the dog or cat with glomerular disease. Clinical
and eosin-stained slides, glomerular amyloid appears
 decisions regarding diagnosis, therapy, and prognosis can
be made from the information obtained through renal
as eosinophilic nodular deposits that expand the
biopsy. Appropriate evaluation of a renal biopsy speci-
mesangium and glomerular capillary walls. Interstitial
men from a dog or cat with glomerular disease includes
light microscopy with special stains and, in most cases,
lar deposits throughout the medulla. When stained
electron and immunofluorescent microscopy.
with Congo red and evaluated by conventional light
microscopy, amyloid deposits take on various shades of
red, depending upon the amount of amyloid and the
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
thickness of the section. Deposits stained with Congo red
MPGN is characterized by the light-microscopic find.
and evaluated by polarizing microscopy are birefringent
ings of thickening of the glomerular capillary walls
and have an apple green color (see Chapter 54).
and increased glomerular cellularity. The most common
form, type I MPGN, is caused by the presence of immune
Hereditary nephritis
complexes on the subendothelial aspect of the glomerular
Electron microscopy is required to make the diagnosis
basement membrane. Type II MPGN, also called dense
of HN. Prior to electron micrographic studies of English
deposit disease, is characterized by intramembranous
cocker spaniels, the renal lesions were described as renal
dense deposits. This is not associated with infectious dis-
cortical hypoplasia, or membranoproliferative or scle-
ease and is probably uncommon in dogs.
rosing GN. The ultrastructural lesions consist of mul-
tilaminar splitting and fragmentation of the glomeru-
Membranous nephropathy
lar basement membrane, often with intramembranous
MN results from immune deposits on the subepithe-
electron-dense deposits.
lial aspect of the glomerular basement membrane. The
capillary loops are thickened and spikes may be evident
Glomerulosclerosis
with periodic acid-Schiff hematoxylin stain as the base-
FSGS is diagnosed in the proteinuric patient that has seg-
ment membrane begins to extend between and engulf
mental glomerulosclerosis in a glomerulus that is other-
the deposits. Membranous nephropathy has four ultra-
wise normal, without other glomerular lesions present
structural stages that correlate with temporal evolution
to explain the sclerosis. In a biopsy specimen from a
 of the disease and clinical presentation in dogs, cats and
 patient with FSGS, it would be expected that some of the
 people. Deposition of immune complexes, progressive
glomeruli would be normal and some show segmental
engulfment of the complexes by the glomerular basement
sclerotic lesions. The sclerotic lesions show solidification
membrane, and eventual resolution of the complexes
of tuft segments and are composed of collapsed capil-
characterize these stages. More advanced stages in cats
lary basement membranes, increased collagenous matrix,
and dogs have been shown to correlate with more severe
and few viable cells. Some of the affected segments
azotemia, whereas animals with milder disease were more
- a Ps r sso   a 
likely to have nephrotic syndrome. In cats, stages III and
tive in unaffected areas; however, nonspecific trapping of
 IV MN may be associated with a poorer prognosis (Nash
immunoglobulins and C3 can occur in sclerotic areas.
et al. 1979).
Proliferative glomerulonephritis
Treatment
Mesangial proliferative GN is characterized by mesangial
Even though glomerular disease is a major cause
cell hyperplasia, defined as 4 or more cells per mesangial
of chronic kidney disease in the dog, its treatment
area. This is often accompanied by an increase in mesan-
n      
gial matrix. Endocapillary proliferative GN occurs when
medicine than has the treatment of chronic kidney
there is a proliferation of glomerular endothelial cells and
disease. Inasmuch as systemic disease usually initiates
 s       
the glomerular injury, primary treatment objectives
Glomerular disease   543
Table 53.5 Treatment guidelines for GN
1. Identify and correct any underlying disease processesa
 2. Immunosuppressive treatment
3. Hemodynamic/antiproteinuric treatment (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors)a
4. Antiplatelet-hypercoagulability treatment: Aspirin 0.5 mg/kg every 12-24 hoursa
 5. Supportive care
a. Dietary: sodium reduced, high quality-low quantity protein, with n-3 fatty acid supplementationa
b. Hypertension:
Dietary sodium reduction
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition (e.g., enalapril 0.5 mg/kg every 12-24 hours)a
C. Edema/ascites:
Dietary sodium reduction
Cage rest
Furosemide 1-2 mg/kg as needed if necessary-caution: volume contraction and reduced GFR may result
 Paracentesis for patients with tense ascites and/or respiratory distress
Plasma transfusions
a Denotes those treatments thought to be most important.
include (1) identification and elimination of causative or
erythematosus). As in human, beings it is also possible
associated antigens and (2) reduction of the glomerular 
that there are specific subtypes of canine glomerular dis-
response to injury ( Table 53.5).
ease (e.g-, minimal change glomerulopathy) that will be
Elimination of the source of antigenic stimulation
 shown to be steroid responsive as they are appropriately
is the treatment of choice for glomerular disease. For
identified and treated.
example, proteinuria associated with diroflariasis in dogs
 If an underlying or concurrent disease process cannot
 often improves or resolves after successful treatment of
be identified and treated, or if immunosuppressive
parasitic infection (Grauer et al. 1989). Unfortunately,
 treatment is deemed inappropriate, treatment may
elimination of the antigen source often is not possible
be aimed at decreasing glomerular injury. Increased
because the antigen source or underlying disease may
urinary excretion of thromboxane has been detected in
not be identified or may be impossible to eliminate (e.g-)
 dogs with experimentally induced GN (Longhofer et al.
certain neoplasias).
1991; Grauer et al. 1992a). Thromboxane is thought to
 Based on results in human beings, immunosuppres-
arise primarily from platelets that are attracted to the
glomerulus in immune complex disease. Furthermore,
 Despite widespread use of immunosuppressive agents,
platelet survival is decreased in several types of GN
there has only been one controlled clinical trial in veteri-
in human patients, and platelet depletion attenuates
nary medicine assessing the effects of immunosuppres-
GN (Clark et al. 1976). These findings suggest that
sive treatment. In this study, cyclosporine treatment was
platelets and thromboxane have an important role in the
found to be of no benefit in reducing proteinuria asso-
 pathogenesis of GN, particularly MPGN. Thromboxane
ciated with idiopathic GN in dogs (Vaden et al. 1995).
synthetase inhibitors decreased proteinuria, glomerular
 The association between hyperadrenocorticism or long-
cell  proliferation, neutrophil infiltration, and fibrin
term exogenous corticosteroid administration and GN
deposition in dogs with experimental GN (Longhofer
and thromboembolism in the dog as well as the lack of
et al. 1991; Grauer et al. 1992a). In the absence of specific
consistent therapeutic response to corticosteroids raise
thromboxane synthetase inhibitors, aspirin may be a
questions about use of corticosteroids in dogs with GN. In
    )  
dosage is probably important if nonspecific cyclooxy-
GN, treatment with corticosteroids may have been detri-
 genase inhibitors such as aspirin are used to decrease
mental, leading to azotemia and worsening of proteinuria
 glomerular inflammation and platelet aggregation. An
(Center et al. 1987). Similarly, prednisone increased the
extremely low dosage of aspirin (0.5 mg/kg orally once
UPC from 1.5 to 5.6 in carrier female dogs with X-linked
a day) may selectively inhibit platelet cyclooxygenase
hereditary nephropathy (Lees et al. 2002). Consequently,
without preventing the beneficial effects of prostacyclin
routine use of corticosteroids to treat GN in dogs is
formation (e.g-, vasodilatation, inhibition of platelet
not recommended. Treatment with corticosteroids would
aggregation). Low-dose aspirin is easily administered
be indicated, however, if the underlying disease process
 on an outpatient basis and does not require extensive
were known to be steroid-responsive (e.g-, systemic lupus
 monitoring, as does coumadin treatment. Because
544  Upper urinary tract disorders
fibrin accumulation within the glomerulus is a frequent
the antiproteinuric and renal protective effects of ACEI in
and irreversible consequence of GN, antiplatelet or
people may be, in part, associated with improved lipopro-
anticoagulant treatment may serve a dual purpose.
tein metabolism (Keilani et al. 1993). Decreased produc-
Evidence is accumulating in dogs with glomerular
tion of angiotensin and aldosterone may also result in
 disease indicating that angiotensin-converting enzyme
decreased renal fibrosis (Epstein 2001). Finally, adminis-
inhibitors (ACEls) not only reduce proteinuria but
 tration of ACEI in dogs slows glomerular mesangial cell
also slow disease progression. In dogs with unilateral
growth and proliferation that can alter the permeability
nephrectomy and experimentally induced diabetes mel-
of the glomerular capillary wall and lead to glomeru-
litus, ACEl administration reduced glomerular transcap-
losclerosis (Brown et al. 1993).
illary hydraulic pressure and glomerular cell hypertrophy
Supportive therapy is important in the management
as well as proteinuria (Brown et al. 1993). In another
of dogs with glomerular disease and should be aimed at
study, ACEI treatment of Samoyed dogs with X-linked
alleviating systemic hypertension, decreasing edema or
hereditary nephritis decreased proteinuria, improved
ascites, and reducing the tendency for thromboembolism
renal excretory function, decreased glomerular basement
 to occur. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors are
d s d  s n
recommended as the first line of defense for protein-
with control dogs (Grodecki et al. 1997). A double-
uric, hypertensive dogs. In those cases where systemic
blinded, multicenter, prospective clinical trial assessed
hypertension is refractory to ACEI treatment, a calcium
the effects of enalapril (EN) versus standard care in dogs
channel blocker should be added to the antihypertensive
with naturally occurring, idiopathic glomerular disease
regimen.
(Grauer et al. 2000). Twenty-nine adult dogs with MN
Dietary sodium reduction should be the primary treat-
(16) or MPGN (13) were identified for study. Dogs were
ment consideration for animal patients with edema or
randomly assigned to receive either EN (0.5 mg/kg PO
ascites. Paracentesis and diuretics should be reserved for
12-24hours) (n =16) or placebo (n = 14) for six months
those dogs with respiratory distress or abdominal dis-
(one dog was treated first with the placebo and then with
comfort. Overzealous use of diuretics may cause dehy-
 EN). All dogs were treated with low-dose aspirin (0.5-5
dration and acute renal decompensation. Plasma trans-
mg/kg PO 12-24 hours) and fed Hills k/d diet. After
fusions will provide only temporary benefit. In the past,
six months of treatment, the change in UPC from base-
line was different between groups with the EN treatment
to offset the effects of proteinuria and reduce edema and
 group having significantly reduced UPCs. When data was
ascites; however, recent studies in proteinuric heterozy-
adjusted for changes in GFR (UPC X serum creatinine)
a similar significant reduction was noted. The change in
that, reduced dietary protein is associated with reduced
systolic blood pressure after six months of treatment was
proteinuria (Burkholder et al. 2004). N-3 fatty acid sup-
also significantly different between groups. Response to
 plementation may also be beneficial: in dogs with surgi-
treatment was categorized as (a) improvement (>50%
 cally reduced remnant kidneys, dietary supplementation
reduction in UPC with stable serum creatinine), (b) no
with fish oil reduced proteinuria, intraglomerular pres-
 progression (<50% reduction in UPC with stable serum
sures, and glomerular lesion and maintained glomerular
n i s o <) oissad () e (a
filtration rate (Brown et al. 1998).
and/or serum creatinine or euthanasia due to renal fail-
Prevention
the EN treated dogs compared with the placebo treated
dogs (Grauer et al. 2000).
It is unlikely that all glomerular diseases can be prevented.
Treatment with ACEI probably decreases proteinuria
However, because most glomerular diseases in dogs and
and preserves renal function associated with glomeru-
cats occur secondary to a NIN process, it is likely that early
lar disease by several mechanisms. In dogs, administra-
detection and effective treatment of the NIN process can
reduce, or in some cases, eliminate, glomerular damage.
resistance, which results in, decreased glomerular tran-
scapillary hydraulic pressure and decreased proteinuria
Prognosis
(Brown et al. 1993). In rats, administration of EN pre-
vents the loss of glomerular heparan sulfate that can occur
The prognosis for dogs with glomerular disease is vari-
with glomerular disease (Reddi et al. 1991). Administra-
able and best based on a combination of the severity of
tion of ACEl also is thought to attenuate proteinuria by
dysfunction (i.e., the magnitude of proteinuria and pres-
decreasing the size of glomerular capillary endothelial
ence or absence of azotemia), the presence or absence
cell pores in people ( Wiegmann et al. 1992). In addition,
of hypertension or thromboembolism, the response to
Glomerular disease   545
therapy, and the assessment of renal histology. Clinical
Brown, S.A., et al. (1993). Long-term effects of antihypertensive reg-
experience suggests the disease is progressive in many
imens on renal hemodynamics and proteinuria. Kidrey Int 43:
cases, although the rate of progression is highly variable.
1210-1218.
Brown, S.A., et al. (1998). Beneficial effects of chronic adrministra-
In some animals, progression may be slow enough that
tion of dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in dogs with renal
they can lead relatively normal lives.
insufficiency. J Lab Clin Med 131: 447-455.
As is the case in people, it is likely that the natural
Burkholder, W.J., et al. (2004). Diet modulates proteinuria in heterozy-
progression of disease in dogs and cats will vary among
gous female dogs with x-linked hereditary nephropathy. I Vet Interm
the different types of glomerular disease. Well-controlled,
Med 18: 165 175.
 prospective clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of addi-
Center, S.A., et al. (1987). Clinicopathologic, renal immunofluores-
cent, and light microscopic features of GN in the dog: 4l cases
tional treatment regimes (e.g-, aldosterone antagonists
(1975- 1985). I Am Vet Med Assoc 190: 81-90.
 and angiotensin receptor blockers; immunosuppressive
Clark, W.F, et al. (1976). The platelet as a mediator of tissue damage
treatment of specific histologic subtypes of glomerular
in immune complex GN. Clir Nephrol 6: 287-289.
disease) will undoubtedly provide valuable information
Cook, A.K. and Cowgill, L.D. ( 1996). Clinical and pathologic features
and increase our ability to treat this disease. A major
of protein-losing glomerular disease in the dog: A review of 137
cases. I Am Armim Hosp Assoc 32: 3 13-322.
factor confounding interpretation of treatment efficacy
Cowgill, L.D. ( 1991). Clinical significance, diagnosis and management
studies is the variable biologic behavior of different types
of systemic hypertension in dogs and cats. In: Maraging Renal Dis-
of glomerular disease. In human patients, for example,
ease and Hypertersion. Hill's Pet Products and Harmon Smith Inc,
 Sio od e  ND  N 
Pp. 35-44.
compared with MN (Bohle et al. 1992). Until results of
DiBartola, S.P., et al. (1989). Clinicopathologic findings in dogs with
 such trials become available, if an underlying disease pro-
renal amyloidosis: 59 cases (1976-1986). I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:
358-364.
cess cannot be identified and corrected, ACEIs, early renal
Epstein, M. (200l). Aldosterone as a mediator of progressive renal
failure diets, and low-dose aspirin are recommended.
disease: pathogenic and clinical implications. Arm I Kidrey Dis 37:
677-688.
Grauer, G.F., et al. ( 1989). Experimental Dirofilaria irmmitis-associated
Controversies
GN induced in part by in situ formation of immune complexes in
the glomerular capillary wall. I Parasitol 75: 585-593.
Despite widespread use of immunosuppressive agents in
Grauer, G.F, et al. (l992a). Effects of a thromboxane synthetase
 people with glomerular disease and an increasing fre-
inhibitor on established immune complex GN in dogs. Arm J Vet
Res 53: 808-813.
quency of use in dogs with glomerular disease, there has
Grauer, G.F, et al. (1992b). Comparison of the effects of low-dose
not been a controlled study supporting the efficacy of
aspirin and specific thromboxane synthetase inhibition on whole
Ba I wy saop Aeau ui uoaiss dia uaae naeid po
There is evidence that corticosteroids can exacerbate pro-
Res 53: 1631-1635.
Grauer, G.F., et al. (2000). Effects of enalapril vs placebo as a treat-
teinuria. However, definitive statements about the use of
ment for canine idiopathic glomerulonephritis. I Vet Internm Med 14:
corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive drugs can-
526-533.
not be made until results of controlled studies of these
Green, R.A. and Kabel, A.L. (1982). Hypercoagulable state in three
agents in the specific glomerular diseases are available.
dogs with nephrotic syndrome: role of acquired antithrombin III
 The relationship between proteinuria and progressive
deficiency. I Am Vet Med Assoc 181: 914-917.
nephron loss in dogs is controversial. In dogs with chronic
Green, R.A., et al. ( 1985). Hypoalburminermia-related platelet hyper-
kidney disease, heavy proteinuria, as defined as UPC >1,
sensitivity in two dogs with nephrotic syndrome. I Am Vet Med Assoc
186: 485-488.
was associated with greater risk of uremic crisis and death
Grodecki, K.M., et al. ( 1997). Treatment of X-linked hereditary nephri-
(Jacob et al. 2005). Likewise, cats with chronic kidney dis-
tis in Samoyed dogs with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
ease and a UPC of >0.4 had a shortened survival time
inhibitor. I Comp Path 117: 209-225.
(Syme et al. 2006). These studies provide indirect evi-
Harris, K.P., et al. ( 1996). Proteinuria: a mediator of interstitial fibrosis?
Contrib Nephrol 118: 173-179.
dence that proteinuria is associated with progression of
Jacob, F., et al. (2005). Evaluation of the association between initial
renal damage. Although one can then presume that heavy
proteinuria and morbidity rate or death in dogs with naturally
and persistent proteinuria associated with glomerular
occurring chronic renal failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc 226: 393-400.
diseases may also be associated with tubular damage and
Jaenke, R.S. and Allen, T.A. (1986). Membranous nephropathy in the
 progressive renal failure, this has not been proven in the
dog. Vet Pathol 23: 718-733.
dog as it has in people and rodents.
Johnson, R.J. ( 1997). Cytokines, growth factors and renal injury: where
do we go now? Kidney Int 52: S2-S6.
Keilani, T., et al. ( 1993). Improvement of lipid abnormalities associ-
References
ated with proteinuria using fosinopril, an angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor. Arm Irterm Med 118: 246-254.
Bohle, A., et al. (1992). The long-term prognosis of the primary
Koeman, J.P, et al. ( 1987). Proteinuria in the dog: a pathomorpholog-
glomerulonephritides. Path Res Pract 188: 908-924.
ical study of 51 proteinuric dogs. Res Vet Sci 43: 367-378.
546  Upper urinary tract disorders
Lees, G.E., et al. (2002). Glomerular proteinuria is rapidlybut reversibly
Reddi, A.S., et al. ( 1991). Enalapril improves albuminuria by prevent-
 n  d n  n
ing glomerular loss of heparan sulfate in diabetic rats. Biochem Med
gous (carrier) female dogs with x-linked hereditary nephropathy
Metab Biol45: 119-131.
(abstract). I Vet Intern Med 16: 352.
Remuzzi, G. (1995). Abnormal protein traffic through the glomerular
Lees, G.E., et al. (2005). Assessment and managerment of proteinuria
barrier induces proximal tubular cell dysfunction and causes renal
in dogs and cats: 2004 ACVIM Forum consensus statement (small
injury. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 4: 339-342.
animal). I Vet Intern Med 19: 377-385.
Rouse, B.T. and Lewis R.J. ( 1975). Canine glomerulonephritis: preva-
Lewis, R.J. (1976). Canine glomerulonephritis: results from a micro-
lence in dogs submitted at random for euthanasia. Can J Comp Med
scopic evaluation of fty cases. Can Vet I 17: 17l-176.
39: 365-370.
Longhofer, S.L., et al. (l99l). Effects of a thromboxane synthetase
Syme, H.M., et al. (2006). Survival of cats with naturally occurring
inhibitor on immune complex GN. Arm J Vet Res 52: 480-
chronic renal failure is related to severity of proteinuria. I Vet Intern
487.
Med 20: 528-535.
MacDougall, D.F, et al. (1986). Canine chronic renal disease: preva-
Tang, S., et al. ( 1999). Apical proteins stimulate complement synthe-
lence and types of GN in the dog. Kidrey Int 29: 1144-1151.
sis by cultured human proximal tubular epithelial cells. I Am Soc
Miyauchi, Y., et al. ( 1992). Glomerulopathy with IgA deposition in the
Nephrol 10: 69-76.
dog. I Vet Med Sci 54: 969-975.
Vaden, S.L.,et al. ( 1995). The effects of cyclosporin versus standard care
 Muller-Peddinghaus, R. and Trautwein, G. ( 1977). Spontaneous GN in
in dogs with naturally occurring glomerulonephritis. J Vet Inter
dogs 1. Classification and Immunopathology. Vet Pathol 14: 1- 13.
Med 9: 259-266.
Murray, M. and Wright, N.G. ( 1974). A Morphologic study of canine
Vilafranca, M., et al. (1994). Histological and immunohistological
glomerulonephritis. Lab Invest 30: 213-221.
classification of canine glomerular disease. I Vet Med 41: 599-610.
 Nash, A.S., et al. ( 1979). Membranous nephropathy in the cat: a clinical
Wheeler, D.C., et al. ( 1989). Hyperlipidemia in nephrotic syndrome.
and pathological study. Vet Rec 105: 71-77.
Atm I Nephrol 9: S78-S84.
54
Amyloidosis
Joe Bartges and Jonathan Wall
Amyloidosis refers to a heterogeneous group of clinical
Etiopathogenesis
disorders caused by extracellular deposition of insolu-
ble abnormal amyloid fbrils derived from aggregation
The pathogenesis of amyloid relies principally on the mis-
folding of the various amyloid fibril precursor proteins.
of misfolded, normally soluble, protein (DiBartola 1995;
 As a result ofhigh concentration of precursor proteins or
Nishiet al. 2008). Amyloid precursor proteins comprise a
 group of structurally and functionally diverse molecules;
due to the introduction of destabilizing amino acid sub-
however, when incorporated into the fibril they adopt
stitutions, the precursor protein adopts a non-native pro-
a characteristic beta-pleated sheet structural conforma-
amyloid conformation which is an absolute requirement
for fibril formation. All amyloid fibrils share a common
tion. More than 25 different proteins form amyloid fibrils
core structure in which the subunit proteins are arranged
in vivo. Although the fibrils share a common structural
in a stack of, often twisted, anti-parallel, beta-pleated
configuration they are associated with clinically distinct
 conditions. It is the nature of the amyloid precursor pro-
sheets aligned with their long axes perpendicular to the
fibril long axis. Proteins that form amyloid transiently
tein that defines the disease, and dictates organ distri-
 populate partly unfolded intermediate molecular states
bution of the pathology (Table 54.1). There is no clin-
that expose the beta-sheet domain, enabling them to
ical or pathological evidence of disease in absence of
 interact with similar molecules in a highly ordered fash-
such deposits. In local amyloidosis, amyloid is restricted
to a particular organ or tissue. In systemic amyloido-
ion. Propagation of the resulting low molecular weight
 aggregates into mature amyloid fibrils is a thermody-
sis, deposits are present in any or all viscera, connective
tissue, and vascular walls. Amyloidosis can be sponta-
namically favorable, auto-catalytic process that relies on
asustained supply of the fibril precursor protein. In many
neous or arise as a complication of a preexisting disease
cases, the precursor proteins isolated from tissue amy-
that produces either an inherently amyloidogenic abnor-
loid deposits are truncated indicating that partial prote-
mal protein or greatly increased amounts of potentially
amyloidogenic normal protein. Hereditary amyloidosis
olytic cleavage has occurred. It remains unclear whether
this occurs before, during, or after formation of amy-
is caused by mutations in genes that result in the produc-
loid fibrils; however, loss of the C-terminal domain of
tion of structurally destabilized proteins. These mutant
proteins exhibit a greater propensity for unfolding rela-
the immunoglobulin light chain protein renders it highly
fibrillogenic (Wall et al. 1999).
tive to their wild-type counterpart, which renders them
Amyloid deposits accumulate in the extracellular
amyloidogenic (Pepys 2006). Amyloid deposition occurs
space, progressively disrupting normal tissue architec-
with Alzheimer's disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus,
but unlike amyloidosis it is not established that amyloid
ture, and consequently impairing organ function. They
can also produce space-occupying effects at microscopic
causes these diseases.
and macroscopic levels. Although amyloid is inert in that
it does not stimulate a local or systemic inflammatory
 response, deposits may exert cytotoxic effects and possi-
bly promote apoptosis. The rate of amyloid accumulation
has a major impact on organ function, which can be pre-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
served for long periods in the presence of a heavy but sta-
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 ble amyloid load. This may reflect adaptation to gradual
547
548  Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 54.1 Partial list of human amyloid precursor proteins and their disease
Acquired (A) or 
 Systemic (S) or
Amyloid
 Precursor protein
hereditary (H)
localized (L)
Disorder and tissue involvement
AL
Immunoglobulin light chain
A
S and L forms 
Primary AL and myeloma-associated
AA
(Apo)serum amyloid protein A
A, H
S
Secondary or reactive amyloidosis
ATTR
Tranthyretin
A, H
 Familial or senile systemic 
AApoAl
Apolipoprotein Al
A, H
S and L forms
Familial systemic and localized aortic and meniscus
AβM
β2-microglobulin
A
S (L?)
Hemodialysis-associated (and joints?)
AIAPP
Islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin)
A
Islets of Langerhans and insulinomas
Aβ
Aβ protein precursor (Aβ PP)
A, H
L
Alzheimer's disease and aging 
APrP
 Prion protein
A
L
Spongiform encephalopathies
Source: Adapted from Westermark et al. (2007).
amyloid accumulation or may relate to toxic properties
and fibronectin at positions 28 (YIGSD) and 38 (RGN),
of newly formed amyloid material.
respectively (amino acid numbering according to Figure
Although many different amyloidogenic proteins have
54.1; Kisilevsky and Tam 2002). Due to amino acid sub-
been described in human medicine, renal amyloidosis in
stitutions the laminin-binding site in mouse, cat, and dog
dogs and cats is typically associated with systemic AA
sAA is more degenerate, but the fibronectin-reactive site
amyloidosis. The fibrils are composed of an N-terminal
remains conserved.
The amino acid sequence of sAA in amyloid iso-
loid A protein (sAA). There are four human sAA genes,
lated from a domestic cat with amyloidosis differed by
five in mice, and atleast three genes in cats.
Human
 3 amino acids from AA amyloid occurring in Abyssinian
sAA1.1, 1.2, 3, and 4 are located on chromosome 11
 cats (underlined residues in Figure 54.1). (Johnson et al.
and in the mouse they are located on chromosome 7.
1989) This suggested that the low incidence of AA
Of the human genes, sAA4 is expressed constitutively,
observed in short-haired domestic cats, as compared to
whereas sAAl.1 and 1.2 are acute phase reactants.
In
the Abyssinian and Siamese breeds, may be due to struc-
human beings and mice sAAl.1 is the major component
tural changes in the protein resulting from these 3 amino
of amyloid deposits, in mice it is the only isoform that
 acid substitutions.
forms amyloid. In mice, the AA protein extracted from
 Human sAA protein contains 104 amino acids and
amyloid contains 76 amino acids and has a molecular
has a molecular weight of ~12 kd, mouse, cat and dog
weight of 8.4 kd. In humans there is considerable hetero-
     o   sd 
 geneity in the fragmentation pattern of sAA in the amy-
 share considerable sequence identity to the human form
loid deposits in which peptides ranging from 45 amino
(Figure 54.1). sAA is one of several acute-phase pro-
acids to almost full length have been identified. The sAA
teins synthesized by the liver in response to cytokine
protein found in cats and dogs differs from that in mice
(IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α) production by macrophages in
and human beings, in that, it contains an 8 amino acid
response to tissue injury. (Benson 1982; DiBartola 1995;
insertion between positions 66 and 67 (protein sequence
Ceron et al. 2005; Bayramli and Ulutas 2008; Tamamoto
numbering; Figure 54.1) (Kluve-Beckerman et al. 1989).
et al. 2008) Serum amyloid A protein is released
Human sAA contains possible binding sites for laminin
from hepatocytes and binds to high-density lipoproteins
”
11
21
31
41
51
MOUSE
.GFFSFVHEAF
QGAGDMWRAY
TDMKEANWKN SDKYFHARGN
YDAAQRGPGG VWAAEKISDG
HUMAN RSFFSFLGEAF
DGARDMWRAY
SDMREANYIG SDKYFHARGN
YDAAKRGPGG
VWAAEAISDA
DOG
.QWYSFVSEAA
QGAWDMLRAY
 SDMREANYKN SDKYFHARGN
YDAAQRGPGG AWAAKVISDA
CAT
.EWYSFLGEAA QGAWDMWRAY
 SDMREANYIG ADKYFHARGN YDAARRGPGG
VWAAKVISDA
61
71
81
91
101
MOUSE REAFQE
FFGR
GHEDTIADQE
ANRHGRSGKD
 PNYYRPPGLP DKY
HUMAN RENIQR
FFGH
GAEDSLADQA
ANEWGRSGKD
 PNHF RPAGLP
EKY
DOG
RENSQRITDLLRFGDSGH
GAEDSKADQA ANEWGRSGKD
） PNHFRPAGLP DKY
CAT
Figure 54.1 Comparison of sAA protein amino acid sequences. The 8 amino acid insert in the cat and dog sAA protein is shown in
italics. Amino acids that differ between the short-haired domestic cat and the Abyssinian and Siamese breeds are shown in bold.
Amyloidosis
549
Acute
phase
Binding to receptor
SAA
onmacrophage
O
Hepatocyte
HDL
AP-HDL
Binding to
extracellularmatrix
Fibril growth from
full-length sAA
AP-HDL binds laminin or
sAA is C-terminally cleaved.
 heparan sulfate
Fibrils form in vivo then appear on
cell surface
Figure 54.2 AA amyloidogenesis. Schematic representation of the formation of AA amyloid fibrils from hepatocyte-derived sAA protein
sAA produced in the liver in response to pro-inflammatory cytokines enters the circulation and is rapidly bound by high-density lipoprotein
(HDL3) displacing apolipopratin Al, to from acute-phase HDL (AP-HDL). AP-HDL can bind saturable receptors on the surface of macrophages
where it is rapidly internalized into the endosome/lysomomal pathway. At low pH and in the presence of proteolytic enzymes, the HDL
particle disassociates and the sAA is C-terminally truncated yielding amyloidogenic fragments which aggregate into fibrils within the
cell. The fibrils eventually become extracellular and catalyze the formation of more amyloid. Altermatively, AP-HDL can bind to laminin
or heparan sulfate proteoglycan molecules in the extracellular matrix of e.g. fibroblasts, which results in loss of the HDL particde and an
increase in beta-sheet structure of the sAA. In this case full length sAA may form fibrils and act as a seed for further sequestration of sAA
molecules.
displacing apolipoproteins A-1, A-1I, or C, and circulates
ing factor, remains unknown; however, pure synthetic
as a complex with high-density lipoproteins (Figure 54.2)
amyloid fibrils possess amyloid enhancing capabilities
(Benditt et al. 1982). Normal serum concentration of
(Johan et al. 1998) and it is highly likely that extracts of
‘Tp/ Io Aexodde si uiod v Pioue ns
amyloid-laden tissues contain small fragments of fibrils
but its concentration can increase 100- to 1,000-fold
that can act as a nidus for the propagation of the pathol-
 s t      ss 
ogy (Lundmark et al. 2002). In vitro, when synthetic sAA
an inflammatory stimulus, peaks at 12-18 hours, and
apolipoprotein is added to macrophages in culture fib-
decreases to baseline by 36-48 hours if the stimulus is
rils develop which possess the birefringent properties of
removed; when inflammation persists, sAA protein con-
 amyloid when stained with Congo red. In the presence of
centrations remain elevated (Benson et al. 1977). Serum
amyloid enhancing factor fibril formation is accelerated
   p  e s   Po
and much more extensive (Kluve-Beckerman et al. 2002).
tissues.
This model system was used to demonstrate that sAA
The formation and deposition of AA amyloid has
traffics through the endosome-lysosome compartments
been shown to involve both cellular and extracellular
and is incompletely catabolized by proteases resulting in
components (Figure 54.2). In mice, the deposition of
the formation of a truncated amyloid-forming protein.
experimentally induced AA occurs initially in the peri-
Fibrils form in intracellular compartments initially but
follicular region of the spleen implicating an early role
then appear on the surface of the cells where they may act
for macrophages. Indeed, transfer of monocytes from a
 as amyloid enhancing factor and catalyze the progression 
 mouse with amyloid to a suitably primed mouse in acute
of amyloid formation (Figure 54.2).
 phase resulted in a rapid induction in amyloid deposition
 In addition to the importance of macrophages, extra-
(Sponarova et al. 2008). The ability to seed AA amyloid
cellular matrix components, notably heparan sulfate
in vivo is well established. Almost 30 years ago, it was
(HS) proteoglycans are intimately involved in the forma-
shown that the soluble extract of a spleen containing
tion of AA. Transgenic mice that lack significant amounts
AA amyloid, when injected IV, accelerated the deposi-
of tissue HS due to over-expression of heparanase do
tion of AA in a primed mouse (Axelrad et al. 1982).
not develop AA amyloid (Li et al. 2005). Furthermore,
The precise nature of this, so-called amyloid enhanc-
 preventing the interaction of the sAA with HS in vitro or
550  Upper urinary tract disorders
in vivo reduces the deposition of AA amyloid (Kisilevsky
1989a; Johnson et al. 1989; DiBartola et al. 1990; Loeven
et al. 2004). These observations led to the development
1994; Clements et al. 1995; Van Der Linde-Sipman et al.
and evaluation in mice and human beings, of anti-
1997; Dubuis et al. 1998; Niewold et al. 1999; van Rossum
amyloid therapeutics that inhibit the interaction of sAA
et al. 2004; Flatland et al. 2007), however, it has been
with HS glycosaminoglycans.
described in other breeds of dogs secondary to Ehrlichio-
Amyloid is a complex matrix that includes, in addition 
sis (Luckschander et al. 2003), Hepatozoonosis (Macin-
to fibrils, many other molecules including serum amyloid
tire et al. 1997), Borreliosis (Dambach et al. 1997), mon-
 P component (SAP), glycosaminoglycans, apolipopro-
oclonal gammopathy (Brown 1996), polyarteritis in juve-
teins, and fibronectin. Amyloid P component is identical
nile Beagles (Snyder et al. 1995), polyarthritis in an Akita
 to and derived from the normal circulating plasma pro-
(DiBartola 1995), Leishmania (Poliet al. 1991), dermato-
tein, serum amyloid P component, a member of the pen-
myositis in a collie (Hargis et al. 1989), systemic lupus
 traxin protein family that includes C-reactive protein.
in a miniature Schnauzer (Grindem and Johnson 1984),
Serum amyloid P consists of 5 identical subunits, each
cyclic hematopoiesis (Machado et al. 1978), and in related
with a molecular mass of approximately 25 kd, which are
 Beagles (Hargis et al. 1981; Bowles and Mosier 1992; Rha
 non-covalently associated in a pentameric disk-like ring.
et al. 2000), walker hounds (DiBartola et al. 1989b), and
All amyloid deposits, irrespective of the nature of the
Foxhounds (Mason and Day 1996), and in other breeds of
precursor protein, contain significant amounts of SAP,
 cats including a European breed (Cavana et al. 2008), and
which binds to the deposits in a calcium-dependent man-
Siamese (Godfrey and Day 1998; Niewold et al. 1999).
ner. Although not a proteinase inhibitor, its binding to
 Most dogs and cats diagnosed with renal amyloidosis
amyloid fibrils in vitro protects them against proteolysis.
are older. Mean age of affected dogs was 9 years (Slauson
In contrast to its normal rapid clearance from plasma,
et al. 1970; DiBartola et al. 1989b) with a range of 1-15
serum amyloid P persists for prolonged periods within
years; 91% were older than 5 years in a study of 44 cases.
amyloid deposits. The deposition of AA in mice is not
(Slauson et al. 1970) Mean age of affected cats is 7 years
dependent on the presence of SAP as knockout mice
with range of 1-17 years; 65% are older than 5 years
lacking the SAP protein still develop the pathology; how-
(Lucke and Hunt 1965; Nakamatsu et al. 1966; Clark and
ever, ultrastructural studies of the fibrils indicated that
Seawright 1969; Crowell et al. 1972; Saegusa et al. 1979;
they are morphologically different from those formed in
Hartigan et al. 1980).
vivo in the presence of SAP (Inoue et al. 2005).
Like SAP, glycosaminglycans are ubiquitously associ-
Diagnosis
ated with amyloid deposits regardless ofthe chemical type
 of amyloid. As described above, they can sequester pre-
In dogs and cats, renal amyloidosis usually results in pro-
cursor proteins, mediate processing and folding of amy-
gressive renal disease and associated clinical signs and
laboratory changes. Although renal amyloidosis is usu-
 and facilitate polymerization and deposition of amy-
ally a result of AA amyloidosis, most dogs and cats do
loid fibrils (Shirahama 1989; Ohashi et al. 2002; Yam-
not have a history or evidence of a predisposing chronic
aguchi et al. 2003; Relini et al. 2008). Fibronectin binds
inflammatory cause (DiBartola 1995). Clinical signs of
to macrophages and serum amyloid A protein and may
affected animals include anorexia, lethargy, weight loss,
 promote amyloidogenesis (Connolly et al. 1988; Wester-
polyuria/polydipsia, vomiting, and occasionally diar-
mark et al. 1991; Takahashi et al. 2002).
rhea; nephrotic syndrome may be present. Thromboem-
The pathogenesis of AA amyloidosis is not completely
bolic disease and associated clinical signs (i.e., dyspnea
understood; however, the role of macrophages and HS
with pulmonary thromboembolism, hindlimb paresis
proteoglycans is undeniable. AA amyloid is the most
 with iliac or femoral artery thromboembolism, etc.) may
common amyloid in the animal kingdom, and due to
occur in as many as 40% of dogs, but occurs uncommonly
its potential transmissibility via a rudimentary seed-
in cats (Slauson and Gribble 1971). Physical examina-
 ing mechanism, it represents a severe condition in both
 tion findings are variable and usually related to pres-
domestic and wild animal populations.
ence of associated chronic renal failure, uremia, and/or
nephrotic syndrome. Shar pei dogs may have an associ-
 ated fever and hock swelling that precedes manifestation
Amyloidosis in dogs and cats
of renal amyloidosis.
Laboratory results
are consistent with protein-
and cats, and is a familial disease in the Shar pei dog
losing nephropathy (hypoalbuminemia, proteinuria,
and Abyssinian cat; (Chew et al. 1982; Boyce et al. 1984;
and possibly hypercholesterolemia) and renal failure
DiBartola et al. 1985; DiBartola et al. 1986; DiBartola et al.
(non-regenerative, normocytic, normochromic anemia,
Amyloidosis 
551
Figure 54.3 Cut surface of canine kidney stained with Lugol's
iodine demonstrating amyloid deposition in glomeruli (pinpoint
(a)
areas in cortex) and medullary insterstitium (streaking in medulla).
azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, metabolic acidosis, and
hypocalcemia associated with hypoproteinemia). Cats 
are less likely to have large amount of proteinuria as
amyloidosis is more likely to affect the renal medulla
than the glomerulus. In addition to proteinuria, some
animals have glucosuria with euglycemia and cylindruria
(DiBartola 1995). Some animals may have a bacterial
urinary tract infection. Imaging often reveals small kid-
neys in cats and variably-sized kidneys in dogs. Systemic
arterial hypertension is often present with glomerular
amyloidosis.
Diagnosis of renal amyloidosis is based on demon-
stration of amyloid deposition in kidneys. When Lugol's
(b)
iodine is applied to the cut surface of a kidney affected
with amyloidosis, amyloid appears as bluish-black mate-
Figure 54.5 Detection of AA amyloid in a dog. (a) Immunohisto-
rial (Figure 54.3). On microscopic examination of renal
chemical visualization of AA protein in amyloid using a mouse anti-
tissue, amyloid appears as bluish infiltration with hema-
AA monodlonal antibody. (b) Congo red stain of same glomerulus
demonstrating apple green birefringence of amyloid coincident
toxylin and eosin (Figure 54.4). Evaluation of sections
with the immunohistochemical stain
stained with Congo red before and after permanganate
 oxidation allows a presumptive diagnosis of AA amy-
green and birefringent when stained with Congo red and
viewed under polarized light (Figure 54.5), and AA amy-
loid loses its Congo red affinity after permanganate oxi-
dation (van Rijswijk and van Heusden 1979). An ancillary
method, the Shtrasburg method, has been shown to con-
firm AA amyloidosis in dogs and cats as well(Shtrasburg
et al. 2005). In dogs other than Shar pei dogs, amyloi-
dosis is primarily a glomerular disease and can be diag-
nosed by a renal cortical biopsy. Early in the course of
the disease, deposits are observed in the vascular pole
of the glomerulus, in the glomerular capillary wall, and
in the mesangium. When medullary amyloidosis occurs
with glomerular involvement in Abyssinian and other
Figure 54.4 Hematoxylin and eosin-stained glomerulus demon-
domestic cats, renal cortical biopsies are negative for
strating amyloid (blue staining. circle) in a dog.
amyloidosis. Medullary amyloidosis without glomerular
552   Upper urinary tract disorders
involvement occurs in at least 25% of Abyssinian cats and
References
33% of Shar pei dogs (DiBartola 1995). Renal papillary
 necrosis may be present and occurs from interference
Axelrad M.A., et al. (l982). Further characterization of amyloid-
enhancing factor. Lab Invest 47(2): 139- 146.
of blood flow by medullary amyloid deposits. Chronic
Bayramli, G. and B. Ulutas (2008). Acute phase protein response in
tubule-interstitial disease indicative of chronic renal dis-
 dogs with experimentally induced gastric mucosal injury. Vet Clit
 ease is often present. Other organs may be affected with
Pathol 37(3): 312-316.
amyloid deposition, but are not usually impaired func-
Benditt, E.P, et al. ( 1982). SAA, an apoprotein of HDL: its structure
tionally.
and function. Amn N Y Acad Sci 389: 183-189.
Benson, M.D. (1982). In vitro synthesis of the acute phase reactant
SAA by hepatocytes. Arm N Y Acad Sci 389: 116- 120.
Benson, M.D. and E. Kleiner ( 1980). Synthesis and secretion of serum
Treatment
amyloid protein A (SAA) by hepatocytes in mice treated with casein.
Immo124(2):495499.
Identify and treat any underlying inflammatory or neo-
Benson, M.D., et al. (1977). Kinetics of serum amyloid protein A in
plastic condition predisposing to amyloidosis. Treatment
casein-induced murine amyloidosis. I Clin Invest 59(3): 412-417.
Bowles, M.H. and D.A. Mosier ( 1992). Renal amyloidosis in a family
of acute or chronic renal failure should be instituted, if
of beagles. I Am Vet Med Assoc 201(4): 569-574.
present. In Shar pei dogs with “fever-hock syndrome"”,
Boyce, J.T, et al. ( 1984). Familial renal amyloidosis in Abyssinian cats.
analgesics to control the arthropathy and pyrexia is war-
Vet Pathol 21(1): 33-38.
ranted. There is currently no specific treatment for AA
Brandwein, S.R., et al. (1985). Effect of colchicine on experimental
amyloidosis, and prognosis is considered poor.
amyloidosis in two CBA/I mouse models. Chronic inflammatory
stimulation and administration of amyloid-enhancing factor during
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) may be beneficial because
acute inflammation. Lab Irvest 52(3): 319-325.
it may reduce concentrations of precursor serum amy-
 Brown, G. (1996). A monoclonal gammopathy-induced canine renal
 loid A protein or by reducing interstitial inflammation
amyloidosis. Car Vet I 37(2): 105.
and fibrosis (DiBartola 1995). Side-effects of DMSO
Cavana, P, et al. (2008). Noncongophilic fibrillary glomerulonephritis
 treatment include nausea and a garlic-like odor. Intra-
in a cat. Vet Pathol45(3): 347-351.
venous DMSO can lead to transient hemoglobinuria due
Ceron, J.J., et al. (2005). Acute phase proteins in dogs and cats: current
knowledge and future perspectives. Vet Clin Pathol 34(2): 85-99.
Chew, D.J., et al. ( 1982). Renal amyloidosis in related Abyssinian cats.
bosis, and when administered chronically can cause lens
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 181(2): 139- 142.
opacities (DiBartola 1995). When administered subcu-
Clark, L. and A.A. Seawright ( 1969). Generalised amyloidosis in seven
taneously, dilute DMSO 1:4 with sterile water. Success
cats. Pathol Vet 6(2): 117-134.
of DMSO administration is controversial and only a
Clements, C.A., et al. (1995). Splenic vein thrombosis resulting in
few reports exist of improvement with DMSO therapy
acute anermia: an unusual manifestation of nephrotic syndrome in
a Chinese Shar Pei with reactive amyloidosis. JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc
(Gruys et al. 1981; Spyridakis et al. 1986; DiBartola 1995).
31(5): 41 1-415.
Colchicine may be beneficial in patients with amyloido-
Connolly, K.M., et al. (1988). Elevation of plasma fibronectin and
sis before progression to renal failure. Colchicine impairs
 serum amyloid P in autoimmune NZB, B/W, and MRL/lpr mice.
release of serum amyloid A protein from hepatocytes by
Exp Mol Pathol49(3): 388-394.
Crowell, W.A., et al.(1972). Generalized amyloidosis in a cat. J Am Vet
binding to microtubules and preventing secretion and
Med Assoc 161( 10): 1127-1133.
may interfere with amyloid enhancing factor production
Dambach, D.M., et al. ( 1997). Morphologic, immunohistochemical,
(Benson and Kleiner 1980; Brandwein et al. 1985; Zemer
and ultrastructural characterization of a distinctive renal lesion in
et al. 1986). It is thought that colchicine treatment will
dogs putatively associated with Borrelia burgdorferi infection: 49
not reverse amyloid deposition; however, cases in human
cases (1987-1992). Vet Pathol 34(2): 85-96.
medicine do exist (Livneh et al. 1993; Kagan et al. 1999).
Dermber, L.M., et al. (2007). Eprodisate for the treatment of renal
disease in AA amyloidosis. N Engl I Med 356(23): 2349-2360.
  m sq   s 
DiBartola, S.P. (l995). Renal amyloidosis. In: Carine and Feline
loidosis (often associated with rheumatoid arthritis)
Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco.
include IL-1 receptor antagonism (Moser et al. 2009),
Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, pp. 400-415.
anti-inflammatory drugs (Stankovic and Grateau 2008;
 DiBartola, S.P., et al. ( 1985). Isolation and characterization of amyloid 
 Potysova et al. 2009), TNF-alpha blockers (Gottenberg
 protein AA in the Abyssinian cat. Lab Invest 52(5): 485-489.
DiBartola, S.P, et al. ( 1986). Tissue distribution of amyloid deposits
et al. 2003; Mpofu et al. 2003; Drewe et al. 2004; Ravin-
in Abyssinian cats with familial amyloidosis. I Comp Pathol 96(4):
          
387-398.
eprodisate (a compound that interferes with interactions
DiBartola, S.P., et al. (l989a). Serum amyloid A protein concentra-
 between amyloidogenic proteins and glycosaminogly-
tion measured by radial immunodiffusion in Abyssinian and non-
cans) (Dember et al. 2007), and chlorambucil (Tan et al.
Abyssinian cats. Armn I Vet Res 50(8): 1414- 1417.
DiBartola, S.P., et al. ( 1989b). Clinicopathologic findings in dogs with
1995). Whether these treatments would be effective in
renal amyloidosis: 59 cases ( 1976- 1986). IArm Vet Med Assoc 195(3):
veterinary medicine is unknown.
358-364.
Amyloidosis
553
DiBartola, S.P., et al. (1990). Familial renal amyloidosis in Chinese
Lucke, V.M. and V.M. Hunt ( 1965). Interstitial nephropathy and pap-
Shar Pei dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 197(4): 483-487.
illary necrosis in the domestic cat. I Pathol Bacteriol 89: 723-728.
Drewe, E., et al. (2004). Treatment of renal amyloidosis with etanercept
Luckschander, N., et al. (2003). Renal amyloidosis caused by Ehrlichia
canis. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 145( 10): 482-485.
Rheurmatology (Oxford) 43( 11): 1405- 1408.
Lundmark, K., et al. (2002) Transmissibility of systemic amyloido-
Dubuis, J.C., et al. ( 1998). Two cases of renal amyloidosis in the shar
sis by a prion-like mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 99(10):
pei. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 140(4): 156-160.
6979-6984. Erratum in: (2003) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 100(6):
Flatland, B., et al. (2007). Liver aspirate from a Shar Pei dog. Vet Clir
3543.
Pathol 36( 1): 105-108.
Machado, E.A., et al. (1978). The cyclic hematopoietic dog: a model
Godfrey, D.R. and M.J. Day (1998). Generalised amyloidosis in two
for spontaneous secondary amyloidosis. A morphologic study. Arm
 Siamese cats: spontaneous liver haemorrhage and chronic renal fail-
I Pathol 92(1): 23-34.
ure. I Small Amim Pract 39(9): 442-447.
Macintire, D.K., et al. (1997). Hepatozoonosis in dogs: 22 cases
Gottenberg, J.E.,et al. (2003). Anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha therapy
(1989- 1994). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 210(7): 916-922.
in fifteen patients with AA amyloidosis secondary to inflammatory
Manenti, L., et al. (200s). Eprodisate in amyloid A amyloidosis: a
arthritides: a followup report of tolerability and efficacy. Arthritis
novel therapeutic approach? Expert Opin Pharmacother9(12): 2175
Rheum 48(7): 2019-2024.
2180.
Grindem, C.B. and K.H. Johnson (1984). Amyloidosis in a case of
Mason, N.J. and M.J. Day ( 1996). Renal amyloidosis in related English
foxhounds. J Small Anirm Pract 37(6): 255-260.
573.
Moser, C., et al. (2009). Successful treatment of familial Mediter-
Gruys, E., et al. ( 1981). Dubious effect of dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO)
ranean fever with Anakinra and outcome after renal transplantation.
therapy on amyloid deposits and amyloidosis. Vet Res Commun 5( 1):
Nephrol Dial Transplant 24(2): 676-678.
21-32.
Mpofu, S., et al. (2003). Cytostatic therapy for AA amyloidosis compli-
Hargis, A.M., et al. ( 1989). Severe secondary amyloidosis in a dog with
dermatomyositis. I Comp Pathol 100(4): 427-433.
362-366.
Hargis, A.M., et al. ( 198 1). Relationship of hypothyroidism to diabetes
Nakamatsu, M., et al. (1966). Case of generalized amyloidosis in the
mellitus, renal amyloidosis, and thrombosis in purebred beagles.
cat. Nippon Juigaku Zasshi 28(5): 259-265.
Am I Vet Res42(6): 1077-1081.
Niewold, T.A., et al. ( 1999). Familial amyloidosis in cats: Siamese and
Hartigan, P.J., et al. (1980). Generalized amyloidosis in the domestic
Abyssinian AA proteins differ in primary sequence and pattern of
cat. Ir Vet I34: 1-4.
deposition. Amyloid 6(3): 205-209.
 Inoue S., et al. (2005) Formation of experimental murine AA amyloid
Nishi, S., et al. (2008). New advances in renal amyloidosis. Clin Exp
fibrils in SAP-deficient mice: high resolution ultrastructural study.
Nephrol 12(2): 93-101.
Amyloid 12(3): 157-163.
Ohashi, K., et al. (2002). Affinity binding of glycosaminoglycans with
Johan K., et al. ( 1998) Acceleration of amyloid protein A amyloidosis
beta(2)-microglobulin. Nephron 90(2): 158- 168.
by amyloid-like synthetic fibrils. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 95(5):
Pepys, M.B. (2006). Ayloidosis. Annu Rev Med 57: 223-241.
2558-2563.
Poli, A., et al. (199l). Renal involvement in canine leishmani-
Johnson, K.H., et al. ( 1989). Amino acid sequence variations in protein
asis. A light-microscopic, immunohistochemical and electron-
AA of cats with high and low incidences of AA amyloidosis. Comp
microscopic study. Nephron 57(4): 444-452.
Biochem Physiol B 94(4): 765-768.
Potysova, Z., et al. (2009). Renal AA amyloidosis: survey of epidemi-
Kagan, A., et al. (1999). Reversal of nephrotic syndrome due to AA
 ologic and laboratory data from one nephrology centre. Int Urol
- n i-i  sid d  sin
Nephrol 41(4): 941-945.
ment. Case report and review of the literature. Nephron 82(4): 348-
353.
 nd e  s sh n i e  n
Kisilevsky, R. and S.P. Tam (2002) Acute phase serum amyloid A,
rheurmatoid arthritis treated with TNF-alpha blockade. Rheuma-
cholesterol metabolism, and cardiovascular disease. Pediatr Pathol
tology (Oxford) 43(5): 669-672.
Mol Med 21(3): 291-305.
Relini, A., et al. (2008). Heparin strongly enhances the formation
Kisilevsky, R., et al. (2004) Inhibition of amyloid A amyloidogenesis
of beta2-microglobulin amyloid fibrils in the presence of type I
in vivo and in tissue culture by 4-deoxy analogues of peracetylated
collagen. / Biol Chem 283(8): 4912-4920.
2-acetamido-2-deoxy-alpha- and beta-d-glucose: implications for
Rha, J.Y., et al. (2000). Familial glomerulonephropathy in a litter of
the treatment of various amyloidoses. Arm I Pathol 164(6): 2127-
beagles. I Am Vet Med Assoc 216(1): 46-50, 32.
2137
 Saegusa, S., et al. ( 1979). Concurrent feline immune-complex nephri-
Kluve-Beckerman, B., et al. (1989). Primary structures of dog and
tis. Tubular antigen-positive and renal amyloidosis. Arch Pathol Lab
cat amyloid A proteins: comparison to human AA. Comp Biochem
Med 103(9): 475-478.
Physiol B 94(1): 175- 183.
Shirahama, T. (1989). Proteoglycans in amyloidogenesis. Neurobiol
Kluve-Beckerman B., et al. (2002) A pulse-chase study trackingthe con-
Aging 10(5): 508-510; discussion 510-512.
version of macrophage-endocytosed serum amyloid A into extra-
Shtrasburg, S., et al. (2005). An ancillary tool for the diagnosis of
cellular amyloid. Arthritis Rheum. 46(7): 1905-1913
 amyloid A amyloidosis in a variety of domestic and wild animals.
Li, J.P, et al. (2005) In vivo fragmentation of heparan sulfate by hep-
Vet Pathol 42(2): 132- 139.
 aranase overexpression renders mice resistant to amyloid protein A
Sauson, D.O. and D.H. Gribble (1971). Thrombosis complicating
amyloidosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 102(18): 6473-6477.
renal amyloidosis in dogs. Vet Pathol 8(4): 352-363.
Livneh, A., et al. (1993). Colchicine in the treatment of AA and AL
Slauson, D.O., et al. ( 1970). A clinicopathological study of renal amy-
amyloidosis. Semin Arthritis Rheum 23(3): 206-214.
loidosis in dogs. I Comp Pathol 80(2): 335-343.
Loeven, K.O. (1994). Hepatic amyloidosis in two Chinese Shar Pei
Smith, G.R., et al. (2004). Etanercept treatment of renal amyloidosis
dogs. IAm Vet Med Assoc 204(8): 1212-1216.
complicating rheumatoid arthritis. Intern Med I34(9- 10): 570-572.
554  Upper urinary tract disorders
Snyder, P.W., et al. (1995). Pathologic features of naturally occurring
van Rijswijk, M.H. and C.W. van Heusden ( 1979). The potassium per-
juvenile polyarteritis in beagle dogs. Vet Pathol 32(4): 337-345.
 manganate method. A reliable method for differentiating amyloid
Sponarova, I., et al. (2008) AA-amyloidosis can be transferred by
 AA from other forms of amyloid in routine laboratory practice. Am
peripheral blood monocytes. PLoS ONE 3(1): e3308.
I Pathol97(1): 43-58.
Spyridakis, L., et al. (1986). Amyloidosis in a dog: treatment with
van Rossum, M., et al. (2004). Analysis of cDNA sequences of feline
dimethylsulfoxide. I Am Vet Med Assoc 189(6): 690-691.
SAAs. Amyloid 11( 1): 38-43.
Stankovic, K. and G. Grateau (2008). Amyloidosis AA. Nephrol Ther
      (h  na  
4(4): 281-287.
light chains: correlation with fibrillogenicity. Biochemistry 38(42):
Takahashi, N., et al. (2002). Establishrment ofa first-order kinetic model
14101-14108.
of light chain-associated amyloid fibril extension in vitro. Biochim
Westermark, G.T., et al. ( 1991). Fibronectin and basement membrane
Biophys Acta 1601(1): 110- 120.
components in renal amyloid deposits in patients with primary and
Tamamoto, T., et al. (2008). Verification of measurement of the feline
secondary amyloidosis. Clin Exp Immunol 86( 1): 150- 156.
serum amyloid A (SAA) concentration by human SAA turbidimetric
Westermark, P., et al. (2007). A primer of amyloid nomenclature.
immunoassay and its clinical application. I Vet Med Sci 70(11):
Amyloid 14(3): 179- 183.
1247-1252.
Yamaguchi, I., et al. (2003). Glycosaminoglycan and proteoglycan
Tan, S.Y., et al. (1995). Treatment of amyloidosis. Arm I Kidney Dis
inhibit the depolymerization of beta2-microglobulin amyloid fibrils
26(2): 267-285.
in vitro. Kidney Int 64(3): 1080-1088.
Van Der Linde-Sipman, J.S., et al. ( 1997). Generalized AA-amyloidosis
Zemer, D., et al. (1986). Colchicine in the prevention and treatment
in Siamese and Oriental cats. Vet Immumol Immuropathol56(1-2):
of the amyloidosis of familial Mediterranean fever. N Engl I Med
1-10.
314(16): 1001-1005.
55
Disorders of renal tubules
Joe Bartges
Normal physiology
Isolated tubular disorders
The nephron, the functional unit of the kidney, consists
Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism
of a glomerular capillary network, a proximal convoluted
Glucosuria
tubule, the loop of Henle, a distal convoluted tubule, and
a collecting duct. While renal function is often thought
 Glucosuria associated with euglycemia
of in terms of azotemia, a reflection of glomerular func-
Glucosuria with normal blood glucose concentrations is
tion, tubular function is responsible for the final com-
termed renal glucosuria. Renal glucosuria is uncommon,
position of urine through reabsorption and secretion of
compounds (e.g-, electrolytes, water). It is also involved
but has been reported in Scottish terriers, mixed breed
dogs, as a familial disorder in Norwegian elkhounds,
 in metabolism of hormones (e.g-, erythropoietin, renin),
and in dogs with congenital renal disease such as Lhasa
and in maintaining systemic acid-base balance.
Apso/Shit Tzus. Renal glucosuria occurring with nor-
Tubulopathies can be classified as either isolated or
complex defects, and as congenital or acquired (Bartges
mal renal function (primary renal glucosuria) in human
 s u a ip  e ii np si sn
1999). They may involve alteration in carbohydrate,
border membrane or in the transtubular reabsorptive
nitrogen, electrolyte, mineral, fluid, and acid-based
 process for glucose. Two forms of this disorder have
metabolism. There are several underlying principles of
been described. Type A variant represents a reduction
tubulopathies: (Chesney and Novello 1995) (1) Tubu-
 in both the renal threshold for glucose and maximal
lar disorders involve an abnormality of transport
rate of glucose reabsorption ( Tmglucose). Type B gluco-
function. (2) Clinical and biochemical abnormalities
suria patients have a low renal threshold for glucose but
reflect the site of tubular function. (3) Inherited tubular
a normal Tmglucose. Dogs with primary glucosuria have
disorders involve loss of a transport protein or an
error of metabolism. (4) Diseases that perturb energy
polydipsia and polyuria due to osmotic diuresis induced
by glucosuria. Glucosuria may predispose to bacterial or
production or structural integrity of tubular cells result
in complex disorders. (5) Therapeutic principles are
fungal urinary tract infections; therefore, signs of lower
urinary tract disease may be present. However, dogs with
simple and involve replacement of the substance lost
 renal glucosuria may also be asymptomatic. Diagnosis of
in urine or avoidance of the toxic substance. (6) Dose
renal glucosuria is based on documentation of persistent
of replacement therapy relates to the altered site. If the
glucosuria without ketonuria and euglycemia; a normal
altered site is responsible for bulk reabsorption, larger
serum fructosamine concentration may aid in confirm-
replacement doses will be required than at a site with
ing historical persistent euglycemia ( Thoresen and Bredal
less reclamation of a lost compound.
1999). There is no specific treatment. Hypoglycemia
Nephrology and Urology of Srmall Atnirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
555
556  Upper urinary tract disorders
does not occur, and restriction of dietary carbohydrate
Cystinuria
does not alter urinary glucose excretion. Appropriate
Cystinuria is an inborn error of metabolism characterized
antimicrobial therapy is indicated in animals that develop
by increased urinary excretion of cystine, which predis-
urinary tract infections.
poses to cystine urolith formation. Normally, circulating
cystine is filtered freely at the glomerulus, and 99-100%
Glucosuria associated with hyperglycemia
is actively reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. Decreased
Any condition resulting in hyperglycemia may result in
tubular reabsorption of cystine and, in some cases, other
glucosuria if glomerular filtration of glucose exceeds
amino acids (lysine, glycine, ornithine, arginine) has been
Tmglucose. The Tmglucose is exceeded when blood glu-
observed in dogs with cystine uroliths (McNamara et al.
cose concentrations exceed 180-220 mg/dL in dogs and
1989; Hoppe et al. 1993). Aminoaciduria is associated
260-310 mg/dL in cats. Hyperglycemia and glucosuria
with low or normal plasma levels of affected amino acids.
may occur with diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis, hyper-
Some affected dogs have a net secretion of cystine (Bovee
adrenocorticism, central nervous system lesions (vari-
and Segal 1984). Decreased tubular reabsorption of cys-
able), pheochromocytoma, and hyperprogesteronemia,
dsun uq e on np q e susk pue au
or with administration of glucose containing solutions,
 defect. Jejunal mucosal uptake of cystine is not appar-
glucocorticoids (rarely), adrenocorticotropic hormone,
ently reduced (Holtzapple et al. 1969).
glucagon, progestational compounds, epinephrine, mor-
 Many breeds of dogs have been reported to develop
phine, and phenothiazines.
cystine uroliths, but English bulldogs, Newfoundlands,
-deu aas) pasodsipand aq oi ieadde spunusuoep pue
Pentosuria
ter 69) (Case et al. 1992; Lulich et al. 1995; Ling et al.
 Pentosuria occurs in human beings because ofoverflow of
1998; Henthorn et al. 2000). Data contained in pub-
lished pedigrees from inbred lines of dachshunds, basset
pentoses (5 carbon cyclic sugars) from blood into urine
hounds, and rottweilers suggest a sex-lined or autosomal
(Chesney and Novello 1995). Pentosuria has not been
recessive pattern of inheritance (Wallerstrom et al. 1992).
 described in dogs or cats either because it does not exist
Although cystine uroliths have been reported primarily
ae sds isn pieuardui asepixo ason sneoaq 1o
 in male dogs, they have been reported in female dogs
 used and so pentosuria is missed.
also (Case et al. 1992; Lulich et al. 1995). Cystine uroliths
appear to primarily affect young to middle-aged dogs
Disorders of nitrogen metabolism
(Case et al. 1992; Bartges et al. 1994).
Aminoaciduria
Cystine uroliths have also been identified in cats
(DiBartola et al. 1991; Osborne et al. 1996). In one cat,
Amino acids are reabsorbed in the proximal tubule by
renal excretion of cystine, ornithine, lysine, and arginine
several major shared transport systems: cyclic and neu-
were increased (DiBartola et al. 1991). Little information
tral amino acids and glycine, dibasic amino acids, dicar-
is available concerning cystinuria and cystine urolithiasis
boxylic amino acids, and beta-amino acids. Greater than
95% of filtered amino acids are reabsorbed by the prox-
in cats.
Not all cystinuric dogs form uroliths; therefore, cystin-
imal tubule. Aminoaciduria occurs due to one of several
different defects. First, plasma concentration of an amino
tine urolith formation. Uroliths form, in part, because
acid may be increased as a result of a metabolic defect,
the solubility of cystine decreases in acidic urine, but it
which increases the quantity filtered at the glomerulus.
becomes more soluble in alkaline urine.
If tubular reabsorptive capacity for that amino acid is
Treatment for cystine uroliths includes use of a low-
exceeded, overload aminoaciduria occurs. Second, there
protein diet, alkalinization therapy, and thiol-containing
could be a defect in the proximal tubule brush border
drugs such as 2-mercaptopropionylglycine (see Chap-
amino acid transport system. Because the amino acid
ter 69) (Osborne et al. 1999; Hoppe and Denneberg
transport systems found in the proximal tubule are in
2001). Because cystine is an amino acid, consump-
some cases the same as those in the intestine, trans-
tion of a low-protein diet is associated with less cys-
 port defects may be found simultaneously in both tis-
tine intake and excretion. Cystine is more soluble at
sues. Third, the proximal tubule cell may take up the
a urine pH > 7.0; therefore, urinary alkalinization is
amino acid but fail to metabolize it or fail to return it
of benefit in the dissolution and prevention of cystine
into the blood because of a defect in basolateral mem-
uroliths (Barbey et al. 2000). Most low-protein diets are
brane transport. Lastly, aminoaciduria could arise from
formulated to induce alkaluria. Thiol-containing drugs,
 a more generalized defect, as in toxic nephropathies and
such as D-penicillamine (15 mg/kg PO q12 hours) and
Fanconi syndrome.
Disorders of renal tubules 557
2-mercaptopropionylglycine (15-20 mg/kg PO q12
excrete more than 400-600 mg of uric acid in their urine
hours), decrease urinary cystine excretion by a thiol
per day (Sorenson and Ling 1993).
disulfide exchange reaction resulting in compounds
Studies of the fate of uric acid in Dalmatians
that are more soluble than cystine (Lulich et al.
have revealed unique hepatic and renal pathways of
-ossp 1og psn q Ae snp uuiuo-nt (5661
metabolism. Of these two metabolic sites, reciprocal allo-
lution and prevention of cystine uroliths. Use of 2-
 genic renal and hepatic transplantations between Dal-
mercaptopropionylglycine (20 mg/kg PO q12 hours) was
matians and non-Dalmatians indicate that the hepatic
associated with preventing recurrence of cystine uroliths
mechanism is quantitatively the most significant. The
in 86% of dogs treated over a 14-year period (Hoppe and
liver of Dalmatians does not completely oxidize available
 Denneberg 2001). Interestingly, in this study, urinary cys-
tine levels decreased in dogs >5 years of age (Hoppe and
tion of uricase. Compared to non-Dalmatians, Dalma-
Denneberg 2001).
fians convert uric acid to allantoin at a reduced rate. It
Hypercarnitinuria
branes are partially impermeable to uric acid (Giesecke
and Tiemeyer 1984).
Carnitine is a nonessential sulfur-containing amino acid.
Although carnitine is reabsorbed in the proximal renal
The proximal renal tubules of Dalmatians reabsorb
less uric acid than non-Dalmatians; a small amount is
tubule similar to other amino acids, it is less than that
secreted by the distal tubules (Roch-Ramel and Peters
for other mammals (approximately 75% reabsorption in
dogs compared with > 90% in other mammals). Dilated
1978). In nonDalmatian dogs, 98-100% ofthe uric acid in
glomerular filtrate is reabsorbed by the proximal tubules
cardiomyopathy has been associated with systemic car-
and returned to the liver for further metabolism.
nitine deficiency (Keene et al. 1991). Recently, hypercar-
The definitive mechanism of urate urolith formation
in which dilated cardiomyopathy developed (Sanderson
in Dalmatian dogs remains unknown. Increased uric acid
 et al. 2001). Hypercarnitinuria likely represents a prox-
excretion is a risk factor rather than a primary cause.
While all Dalmatians excrete relatively high quantities
imal renal tubular transport defect. Treatment for car-
of uric acid in their urine, apparently, only a small per-
nitine deficiency includes feeding a diet with adequate
 or increased carnitine content, or supplementation with
centage form urate uroliths. At one time, it was thought
L-Carnitine.
that urolith forming Dalmatians did not excrete greater
quantities of uric acid in their urine than nonurolith
Other aminoacidurias
forming Dalmatians. However, recent studies indicate
that insensitive methods of measurement of urine uric
Other aminoacidurias have been observed to occur in
acid concentration were responsible for this conclusion.
human beings, but they have not been described in dogs
When steps are taken to ensure that urine uric acid
or cats.
remains in solution, differences in urine uric acid con-
centrations between nonurolith forming Dalmatians and
Uric aciduria
urolith forming Dalmatians may be expected.
Uric acid is one of several biodegradation products of
Urate uroliths can be dissolved by feeding a low purine
purine nucleotide metabolism. In most dogs and cats,
containing diet and administering a xanthine oxidase
allantoin is the major metabolic end product; it is the
 inhibitor, allopurinol (15 mg/kg PO q12 hours) (see
most soluble of the purine metabolic products excreted
Chapter 69) (Bartges et al. 1994a; Bartges et al. 1995;
in urine (Bartges et al. 1992). However, in some breeds
Bartges et al. 1999). Allopurinol impairs the conversion
of dogs, such as Dalmatian coach hounds and English
of xanthine to uric acid resulting in decreased concentra-
bulldogs, uric acid is the major purine metabolite that is
tions of uric acid in blood and urine. However, increased
excreted in urine (Bartges et al. 1994b). The ability of Dal-
concentrations of xanthine in blood and urine may result
matians to oxidize uric acid to allantoin is intermediate
in xanthine urolith formation.
between human beings and most non-Dalmatians dogs.
Human beings have a serum uric acid concentration of
Xanthinuria
3-7 mg/dL, and excrete approximately 500-700 mg of
a- ss      e 
Xanthine is a product of purine metabolism and is
dogs have a serum uric acid concentration of less than
converted to uric acid by the enzyme, xanthine oxidase
0.5 mg/dL, and excrete 10-60 mg of uric acid in their
(Bartges et al. 1992). Hereditary xanthinuria is a rarely
urine per day. Dalmatians have a serum uric acid con-
recognized disorder of human beings characterized by a
centration that is 2-4 times that of non-Dalmatians, and
deficiency of xanthine oxidase. As a consequence,
558  Upper urinary tract disorders
abnormal quantities of xanthine are excreted in urine
human beings (Chesney and Novello 1995); however,
as a major end product of purine metabolism. Because
in animals, hyperphosphaturia usuall occurs as part of
xanthine is the least soluble purine naturally excreted in
a complex tubulopathy.
urine, xanthinuria may be associated with urolith for-
mation. In dogs, xanthinuria is usually associated with
Magnesium
allopurinol administration. However, we have observed
 Renal tubular Mg2+ wasting has been observed in some
xanthine uroliths in a dog that did not receive allop-
human beings with hypomagnesemia. Tetany, weakness,
urinol (unpublished data, Allen et al. 1998), and natu-
nausea, and hypocalcemia because of impaired PTH
rally occurring xanthine uroliths have been reported in
secretion and action may occur. Treatment with amino-
three Cavalier King Charles spaniels (Kidder and Chivers
glycoside or cisplatin can cause renal Mg2+ and K+
1968; Kucera et al. 1997; van Zuilen et al. 1997) and a
wasting, leading to hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia.
Dachshund (see Chapter 69) (Flegel et al. 1998). Natu-
rally occurring xanthine uroliths have also been observed
Treatment of hypomagnesemia consists of oral supple-
to occur in cats (Osborne et al. 1996; White et al. 1997;
mentation with magnesium salts; magnesium oxide is
Tsuchida et al. 2o07). The mechanism(s) responsible
tolerated best (see Chapter 63).
for hyperxanthinuria and xanthine urolith formation in
 these animals are not known, but hyperxanthinemia was
Sodium and potassium
present.
Hyperaldosteronism
Disorders of mineral and electrolyte
Increased aldosterone production and secretion stimu-
lates tubular reabsorption of Na+ and excretion of K+ and
metabolism
H+,resulting in hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis (see
Calcium
Chapters 61 and 62). Hyperaldosteronism may occur as a
result of an adrenal tumor or hyperplasia (primary aldos-
Hypercalciuria may have several causes, and increases
teronism, Conn's syndrome), hyper-reninism due to a
risk of calcium stone formation particularly calcium
 tumor of the juxtaglomerular apparatus or renovascular
oxalate (see Chapter 69). Hypercalciuria may occur due
hypertension, from Bartter's syndrome (characterized by
to hypercalcemia, decreased renal tubular reabsorption of
hyper-reninemia, metabolic acidosis, increased secretion
calcium (renal leak hypercalciuria), increased mobiliza-
 of vasodilatory prostaglandins, and normal systemic
tion of calcium from bone (resorptive hypercalciuria),
- sooxa o o nssd po le
or increased intestinal absorption of calcium (absorp-
corticoid administration. Hyperaldosteronism has been
tive hypercalciuria). Absorptive hypercalciuria may be
differentiated from renal leak hypercalciuria by mea-
observed in dogs, (Breitschwerdt et al. 1983; Rijnberk
et al. 2001a; Johnson et al. 2006) and in cats (Ahn 1994;
suring 24-hour urinary calcium excretion during a fed
 and fasted state. Calcium excretion decreases during
Flood et al. 1999; MacKay et al. 1999; Rijnberk et al.
food deprivation in dogs with absorptive hypercalci-
2001b; Ash et al. 2005; DeClue et al. 2005; Gunn-Moore
2005; Rose et al. 2007). Treatment involves removal of
uria, but not in dogs with renal leak hypercalciuria. It
the tumor if possible, K+ supplementation, and admin-
is thought that Miniature Schnauzers, and perhaps other
istration of K+ sparing diuretics (spironolactone or
breeds, that form calcium oxalate uroliths have absorptive
triamterene).
hypercalciuria (Lulich et al. 1991). Treatment involves
dietary modification to minimize urinary calcium excre-
 tion including sodium restriction, protein restriction,
Hypoaldosteronism
and alkalinization. Hydrochlorothiazide has also been 
Hypoaldosteronism due to decreased aldosterone pro-
shown to decrease urinary calcium excretion in healthy
duction or decreased responsiveness to aldosterone has
dogs (Lulich and Osborne 1992) and dogs that have
been observed in human beings (see Chapters 6l and
formed calcium oxalate uroliths (Lulich et al. 2001) and
 62). Hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis occur; hyper-
urinary saturation for calcium oxalate in healthy cats,
tension may be present. This occurs primarily as part of
(Hezel et al. 2007) but its long-term safety and efficacy in
 generalized hypoadrenocorticism; however, it has been
dogs and cats that have formed calcium oxalate uroliths
is unknown (Lulich et al. 1995).
nism (Lobetti 1998).
Phosphorous
 Renal tubular potassium secretion defect
Phosphate transport disorders resulting in hyperphos-
Children with this syndrome have decreased renal tubu-
phaturia and skeletal disease have been identified in
 lar secretion of K+, metabolic acidosis, short stature,
Disorders of renal tubules 559
urinary tract infections, calcium oxalate urolithiasis, and
1973; Breitschwerdt et al. 1981; Court and Watson 1983;
hypertension and weakness. The primary defect appears
 Takemura 1998; Greco 2001). Affected animals present
 to be decreased secretion of K+ with secondary impair-
at a young age for severe polyuria and polydipsia. Urine
ment of proximal tubule bicarbonate (HCOs-) reab-
is hyposthenuric (urine specific gravity 1.o01-1.005;
sorption. Chlorothiazide administration, HCOs— sup-
urine osmolality less than 200 mOsm/kg), and does not
plementation, and dietary Na+ restriction are used to
 increase above isosthenuric range during water depriva-
treat this disorder.
tion. Animals do not respond to exogenous ADH. Treat-
ment consists of massive amounts of water or dietary Na+
Disorders of vitamin metabolism
restriction and use of thiazide diuretics (chlorothiazide,
10-20 mg/lb q12 hours) or hydrochlorothiazide (1-2
Methylmalonic  aciduria  associated with vitamin
mg/lb q12 hours) (DiBartola 1995). Thiazide diuretic
B12 deficiency
administration results in mild dehydration, enhanced
Methylmalonic aciduria has been observed in Giant
proximal renal tubular reabsorption of Na+, decreased
Schnauzers, (Fyfe et al. 1991) two juvenile Border Col-
delivery of tubular fluid to the distal nephron, and
lies, (Morgan and McConnell 1999; Battersby et al. 2005)
reduced urine output. Thiazides have been reported to
a juvenile Beagle, (Fordyce et al. 2000), and a juvenile
-o m siop un o-oz Aq sndnno sun ana
Labrador retriever (Podell et al. 1996) with intestinal
 tal nD1. Inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis (ibuprofen,
malabsorption of vitamin B12 (cobalamin). Vitamin B12
indomethacin, or aspirin) have been reported to reduce
deficiency occurs because of absent intrinsic factor-B12
urine volume, increase urine osmolality, and reduce
receptors in the ileum. The trait appears to be autosomal
delivery of solute to the distal tubule in human beings.
recessive in nature. Affected puppies exhibit inappetence
Reduction of dietary Na+ and protein may reduce the
and failure to thrive between 6 and 12 weeks of age. Mega-
amount of solute that must be excreted in urine, and
 loblastic anemia occurs. Treatment involves parenteral
may further reduce obligatory water loss and polyuria.
administration of vitamin B12.
Central diabetes insipidus
Malonic aciduria
Central diabetes insipidus occurs when there is a decrease
A family of Maltese dogs with malonic aciduria but
or lack of ADH production or release. This can occur
 not methylmalonic aciduria has been described (O'Brien
from decreased production by the hypothalamus (Green
et al. 1999). Dogs presented at 3 years of age with episodes
and Farrow 1974; Rogers et al. 1977; Feldman 1979;
 of seizures and stupor with hypoglycemia, acidosis, and
Browley 1980; Edwards et al. 1983; Post et al. 1989;
ketonuria.
Harb et al. 1996; Ramsey et al. 1999), destruction
of the hypothalamus or pituitary gland, where it is
stored in vesicles and released (Barr 1985; Davenport
Disorders of water metabolism
et al. 1986; Ferguson and Biery 1988; Authement et al.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
1989; Goossens et al. 1995; Schwedes 1999; Smith
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (nDl) is the term used
and Elwood 2004; Aroch et al. 2005; Campbell and
to describe any disorder in which there is a structural or
Bredhauer 2005; Hanson et al. 2005; Mellanby et al.
functional defect in the ability of the kidneys to respond
2005; Campbell and Bredhauer 2008; Nielsen et al.
2008). Urine is hyposthenuric (urine-specific gravity
to antidiuretic hormones (ADH) (see Chapter 42). Antid-
iuretic hormones induce increased water permeability in
1.001-1.005; urine osmolality less than 200 mOsm/kg),
the distal tubule and collecting ducts by binding to a
and does not increase above isosthenuric range during
water deprivation. Animals respond to exogenous ADH.
peritubular membrane receptor, resulting in activation
of specific adenylate cyclases to form cyclic AMP. This
Treatment consists of providing ADH (1-4 drops of
compound leads to phosphorylation of other proteins
intranasal formulation in conjunctival sac q12-24 hours;
that alter microtubular structures and permit augmented
2-5 mcg of intranasal formulation SQ q12-24 hours; 0.1
water permeability. Numerous drugs (e.g-, furosemide,
available at all times.
glucocorticoids, methoxyflurane), toxins (e.g-, E. coli
endotoxin), and conditions (e.g, hypokalemia, hypercal-
cemia, medullary cystic disease, interstitial nephritis, bac-
Disorders of acid-base metabolism
terial pyelonephritis, fungal pyelonephritis, cancer) can
Renal tubular acidosis
result in nDl (Cohen and Post 1999; Newman et al. 2003).
Congential nDI is a rare disorder associated with a
Renal tubular acidosis is a rare group of disorders that
 deficiency of ADH receptors in the distal nephron (Lage
lead to metabolic acidosis (see Chapter 66). There are
560  Upper urinary tract disorders
two types described: decreased HCOs— reabsorption
H+. Dissociated H+ is probably secreted into the lumen
(proximal renal tubular acidosis, pRTA, type II), and
of the loop ofHenle or collecting duct, converting luminal
defective acid excretion (distal renal tubular acidosis,
HCO— remaining after proximal HCO3— reabsorption
dRTA, type I). Distal RTA associated with development
to H2CO. Accumulated medullary NHs diffuses to areas
of hyperkalemia resulting from hypoaldosteronism or
with a low NH; concentration, including the medullary
aldosterone resistance has been termed Type IV RTA, but
collecting tubules. Here, NHs passively diffuses into the
 represents a type of dRTA.
lumen, where it serves as a proton acceptor to form NH +
The kidney maintains normal systemic acid-base bal-
again. The NH + is lipid insoluble; therefore it cannot
diffuse out of the lumen ("ion trapping"), and is secreted
Processes that are crucial in maintaining acid-base bal-
in urine. Binding of H+ by NHs in the distal tubular
ance includes proximal reclamation of filtered HCO3,
 lumen is crucial to maintain a favorable gradient for H+
 proximal synthesis and medullary recycling of ammo-
secretion and to a lesser extent NHs diffusion. Urinary
nium ion (NH4+), and distal secretion of hydrogen ion
NH4+ excretion in healthy adult beagles consuming var-
(H+). Distal H+ secretion occurs in the outer medullary
ious diets was 0.45-4.0 mmol/kg per 24 hours, (Bartges
and cortical collecting ducts and the inner medullary col-
 et al. 1996) and in 8 healthy cats fed 4 struvite manage-
lecting duct. For each secreted H+, a "new" HCO3- ion is
ment diets, it was 2.0-40 mmol/kg (Bartges et al. 1998).
 transferred to the circulation via a Cl-/HCOs- exchanger 
This ability to alter NH4+ excretion allows the kidney to
across the basolateral membrane. The most important 
increase acid excretion (NAE).
transporter for apical secretion of H+ is believed to be an
Not all of NH + produced by the kidney is excreted in
electrogenic H+-ATPase pump. Once secreted into the 
 the urine. In steady state conditions, approximately 50%
tubular lumen, passive back diffusion of H+ does not
are shunted to renal veins. The role of disturbances in
occur under physiological conditions (Smulders et al.
shunting of NH4+ in the development of renal tubular
1996).
acidosis has not been evaluated.
Free H+ can be excreted in urine only to a limited
 Urinary loss of HCO- is the final component of the
degree. They are bound either to filtered buffers to be
NAE equation. Bicarbonate excretion in healthy adult
excreted as titratable acid or to NH to form NH +. Net
beagles consuming various diets was 0.07-0.25 mmol/kg
 acid excretion (NAE) by the kidney is given by the equa-
 s 155 9661 1 1 ) s1  1d
tion:
HCOs- can be a source of decreased NAE even when
the mechanisms discussed are fully intact. Normally
NAE = (titratable acid + NHf) - urinary loss of HCO3
85-90% of filtered HCOs- is reabsorbed in the prox-
In this equation, the contribution of buffer-bound H+
imal renal tubule secondary to glutamine metabolism.
excretion is referred to as titratable acid because it is
Another 2-5% is reabsorbed in the loop of Henle. "New"
HCOs- is added to blood in the process of distal H+
urine pH of a 24-hour urine sample to 7.40. The most
secretion.
important buffer is phosphate. Titratable acid in healthy
  o o     1 
Distal renal tubular acidosis
hours depending on diet consumed (Bartges et al. 1996).
The NH4+ is generated primarily in the proximal renal
In dRTA, urine cannot be maximally acidified because of 
tubular cells from metabolism of glutamine. This results 
impaired H+ secretion (and thus HCO3  generation) in
in formation of NH + and alpha-ketoglutarate. Alpha-
collecting ducts, and urine pH is typically >6.0 despite
ketoglutarate can be further metabolized for production
moderately to markedly decreased plasma HCO; - con-
of HCO3, which is transported to extracellular fluid.
centration (Polzin et al. 1986; Watson et al. 1986). Uri-
Ammonia is secreted into the tubular lumen, presumably
nary tract infection by urease-producing bacteria must
by substituting for H+ on an internal binding site of the
be ruled out before the diagnosis of dRTA can be made.
apical membrane Na+/H+ exchanger. Greater than 50%
Nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, bone demineraliza-
of NH + is subsequently reabsorbed in the thick ascend-
tion, and urinary potassium wasting with hypokalemia
occur uncommonly. When plasma HCO3— concentra-
- NH4+-2Cl- cotransport and voltage-driven diffusion.
tion is increased to normal by supplementation, uri-
 This process is referred to as medullary recycling. Active
nary fractional excretion of HCO- 
becomes normal
reabsorption of NH4 + in the thick ascending limb pro-
(<5%).
vides a single effect for countercurrent multiplication of
Four mechanisms are potentially involved in the
NH4 + in the renal medulla. Depending on the pH in the
pathogenesis of dRTA: a defective or partially absent pro-
renal interstitium, NH4 + partly dissociates into NHs and
ton pump (secretory defect), an unfavorable electrical
Disorders of renal tubules  561
gradient for H+ secretion ( voltage defect), back diffusion
of pRTA results not only from proximal HCO3- loss, but
of H+ (permeability defect), and insufficient supply of
also from decreased NH4+ excretion, caused by either
NHg to the distal nephron (NHg defect) (Smulders et al.
decreased proximal NH4+ synthesis or excessive NH4+
1996). Type IV dRTA is associated with hyperkalemia
shunting to renal veins (Smulders et al. 1996).
and is due to aldosterone deficiency, aldosterone resis-
Other abnormalities of proximal tubular function
tance, or use of aldosterone antagonists such as spirono-
 may accompany impaired HCO3 — reabsorption in pRTA
lactone. It probably represents a combination of a rate-
 including defects in glucose, phosphate, Na+, K+, uric
limited secretory defect, caused by the absence of the
acid, and amino acid reabsorption. This condition of
direct stimulation by aldosterone of H+ -ATPase and, less
 proximal tubular defects is known as Fanconi syndrome.
importantly, a voltage defect resulting from decreased
Serum K+ concentration is usually normal at time of
distal Na+ reabsorption. Hyperkalemia further adds to
diagnosis, but alkalitherapy may precipitate hypokalemia
these mechanisms by its deleterious effects on NH4+
  ed m enaae 
production and transport. In type IV dRTA, the abil-
ing distal delivery of Na+ and HCO3-
ity to lower urinary pH is usually maintained. The term
Diagnosis of pRTA is made by finding a urine pH
incomplete dRTA is used for disorders of distal acidifica-
<6.0 and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, but a urine
tion that become symptomatic only under conditions of
pH >6.0 and increased urinary fractional excretion of
an increased acid load. The "incompleteness" of acidifi-
HCO- (>15%) after plasma HCO;- concentration has
cation may simply be less severe, or increased ammonia-
been increased to normal by alkali administration. Cor-
 genesis may occur to compensate for decreased distal H+
rection of metabolic acidosis by alkali therapy is more
secretion.
difficult in pRTA than in dRTA because of the marked
Diagnosis of dRTA may be made by an ammonium
bicarbonaturia that occurs when plasma HCO3— con-
chloride challenge test during which urine pH is moni-
centration is increased to normal. Sodium bicarbonate
  u e pe q l Hd e sn p
dosages in excess of 11 mEq/kg per day may be required
6hours after oral administration of 110 mg/kg of ammo-
to correct plasma HCO , and such therapy may result
nium chloride. Normal dogs can reduce their urine pH to
in hypokalemia. Potassium citrate may be a preferred
5.0 and cats to 5.5. The amount of HCOs- supplemen-
source of alkali. One 540-mg tablet of potassium citrate
tation required to correct metabolic acidosis in human
will provide 5 mEq of K+ and 1.7 mEq of citrate, and
beings with dRTA is variable, but is usually less than that
its metabolism will yield 5 mEq of HCO3- (DiBartola
required in pRTA. Alkali supplementation usually ranges
1995).
from 1-5 mEq/kg per day. A combination of K+ and
Renal tubular acidosis is rare in dogs and cats. Both
Na+ citrate may be preferred over HCO- as the alkali
pRTA and dRTA have been observed occasionally. Dis-
supplement.
tal RTA has been reported in cats and a dog with
pyelonephritis caused by E. coli (Watson et al. 1986;
Jamieson and Chandler 2001). Clinical signs included
Proximal renal tubular acidosis
polyuria, polydipsia, anorexia, lethargy, enlarged kid-
Proximal RTA results from a disturbance in proximal
neys, and isosthenuria. Distal RTA and hepatic lipido-
reclamation of filtered HCO3- (Jamieson and Chandler
sis were reported in another cat without bacterial UTI
2001; Hostutler et al. 2004). Urinary fractional excre-
(Brown et al. 1986). It may also occur as a consequence
tion of HCO3- is usually >15% when plasma HCO3
of ischemia-induced acute renal failure (Winaver et al.
concentration is increased to normal with supplementa-
1986). Clinical features of proximal and distal RTA are
tion. Bicarbonaturia is absent and urine pH is appropri-
characterized in Table 55.1.
ately low when metabolic acidosis is present and plasma
HCO— concentration is decreased because distal acid-
ifying ability is functional. When plasma HCO3— con-
Complex tubular disorders
centration is decreased, the filtered load of HCO3- is
Fanconi syndrome
reduced, and almost all of the filtered HCO- is reab-
sorbed in the distal tubules, despite the presence of the
Urinary hyperexcretion of amino acids, phosphate, glu-
proximal tubule defect. Thus, pRTA can be viewed as
cose, HCOs, Ca²+, K+, and other ions, and proteins
a “self-limiting" disorder in which plasma HCO3- sta-
of molecular weights under 50,000 daltons, in con-
bilizes at a lower than normal concentration after the
junction with RTA and ADH-resistant polyuria, defines
fltered load falls sufficiently that distal HCO;- reab-
the complex tubulopathy termed Fanconi syndrome
sorption can maintain plasma HCO- at a new but
(Chesney and Novello 1995). There are inherited and
lower steady-state concentration. The metabolic acidosis
acquired forms of Fanconi syndrome. The pathogenesis
562   Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 55.1 Clinical features of proximal and distal renal tubular acidosis
Proximal RTA
Distal RTA
Hypercalciuria
Yes
Yes
Hyperphosphaturia
Yes
Yes
Urinary citrate
Normal
Decreased
Bone disease
Less severe
More severe
Nephrocalcinosis
No
Possible
Nephrolithiasis
Not usually
Yes
Hypokalemia
Mild
Mild to severe
Potassium wasting
Worsened by alkali therapy
Improved by alkali therapy
Alkali required for treatment
>11 mEq/kg per day
<4 mEq/kg per day
Other defects of proximal tubular function?
Yes
No
Reduction in plasma HCO3
Moderate
Variable (can be severe)
Fractional excretion of HCO3— with normal plasma HCO3— concentration 
>15%
<15%
Urine pH during academia
<6.0
>6.0
Urine pH after ammonium chloride
<6.0
>6.0
Source: (DiBartola 1995)
Decreased reabsorption of sodium, potassium, phosphate, uric acid, glucose, and amino acids.
of the syndrome regardless of its cause involves one of two
col toxicosis (Settles and Schmidt 1994), in dogs experi-
basic mechanisms. The first is that renal tubular mem-
mentally given 4-pentenoate (Boulanger et al. 1993), or 
branes become leaky, allowing less efficient reabsorption
 maleic acid (Pouliot et al. 1992), in dogs with copper
of solutes. The second hypothesis suggests that the intra-
hepatopathy (Appleman et al. 2008; Hill et al. 2008), and
cellular metabolism of renal tubule cells fail to produce
in a dog with suspected pyelonephritis (Jamieson and
Chandler 2001). Imidocarb treatment of dogs experi-
could be “"toxic"” and alter renal tubular metabolism, such
mentally infected with Babesia canis resulted in vacuolar-
 as heavy metals (e.g., lead, copper, mercury, organomer-
hydropic degeneration, necrosis, and detachment of renal 
curials, Lysol, and maleic acid) and drugs (e.g- gentam-
tubular epithelial cells from the basement membrane
icin, cephalosporins, outdated tetracycline, cisplatin, and
in some dogs, which could result in Fanconi syndrome
salicylate) could impair transport processes. Fanconi syn-
(Mathe et al., 2007).
drome may also occur with malignancies (e.g., multiple
 Dogs with Fanconi syndrome have abnormal frac-
myeloma), monoclonal gammopathies, hyperparathy-
tional reabsorption of many solutes (Bovee 1984). Reab-
roidism, K+ depletion, amyloidosis, nephrotic syndrome,
sorption of glucose, phosphate, and amino acids is abnor-
vitamin D deficiency, interstitial nephritis associated with
mal in all affected dogs. Aminoaciduria is generalized in
antitubular basement membrane antibodies, or as a com-
most dogs, but occasionally is limited to cystinuria with
plication of renal transplantation.
minor defects in reabsorption of methionine, glycine, and
Fanconi syndrome occurs as a familial disease in
some dibasic amino acids. Many dogs also have variably
Basenji dogs. It is estimated that 10-30% of Basenji
severe reabsorptive defects for HCO3, Na+, K+, and
dogs in the United States are affected (Noonan and Kay
uric acid. Defective reabsorption of Na+ and phosphate
1990). Other dogs that have been reported with idio-
in Basenji dogs is manifested at approximately 3 years
pathic Fanconi syndrome include Border Terriers (Dar-
of age, and defective reabsorption of glucose and amino
rigrand Haag et al. 1996), Norwegian elkhounds (Finco
acids is apparent at approximately 4 years of age (Bovee
1976), a Whippet (Mackenzie and Van Den Broek 1982),
1984). The renal tubulardisorder in affected Basenji dogs
a Yorkshire terrier (McEwan and Macartney 1987), a
may be due to a metabolic or membrane defect affect-
Sheltie (Bovee et al. 1979), a mixed breed dog (Padrid
ing sodium movement or to increased back leak or to
1988), a Labrador retriever (Hostutler et al. 2004), and
cell-to-lumen flux of amino acids. Isolated brush bor-
a Greyhound (Abraham et al. 2006). Fanconi syndrome
der vesicles from affected Basenji dogs showed decreased
also has been reported in a dog with gentamicin-induced
sodium-dependent glucose uptake but no decrease in
acute renal failure (Brown 1986), in a dog with primary
cystine uptake (McNamara et al. 1989). Defective uri-
hypoparathyroidism with concurrent hypovitaminosis D
nary concentrating ability in dogs with Fanconi syn-
(Freeman et al. 1994), in a dog with possible ethylene gly-
 drome represents a form of nDl. This defect may precede
Disorders of renal tubules  563
Table 55.2 Summary of the Gonto protocol for dogs with idiopathic Fanconi syndrome
1.
 Ensure that fresh water is freely available at all times.
2.
 Feed any high-quality, dry dog food; at least once a week, feed a high-protein, canned, mammal-based (e.g., beef or
lamb) dog food (for dogs with renal failure, feed a low-protein dry or canned diet).
 3. Acdminister a vitamin-mineral supplementa for cdogs.
a.
 For dogs without clinical signs, administer 1/2 tablet, P0, every 12 hours
b.
For dogs with clinical signs, administer 1 tablet, PO, every 12 hours (a higher dosage may be needed in dogs with
hypokalemia or hypocalcemia).
(anley leual ym shop u asn jou op) shop io, qluawalddns snuoydsoud pue 'q ujuea wnpien e laisuwpy t
a.
 For dogs without clinical signs, administer 1/2 tablet, P0, every 12 hours.
b.
m shop so, pauasoan si ahesop ayau e) sinoy it Aaaa 'od 'lagen I laisiuupe suis jeiup ym shop io
persistent loss of muscle mass and any signs of myalgia after correction of blood gas and serum biochemical
abnormalities).
 5. In dogs with polyuria and polydipsia, acminister a multi-vitamin/mineral supplement for human beings.
a. Administer 1 tablet, PO, every 7 days.
b. For dogs with renal failure, administer 1 tablet, PO, every 48 hours.
6. Administer an amino acid supplement.d
a.
 For dogs without clinical signs, administer 1 tablet (or equivalent amount of powder), PO, every 7 days.
b.F
For dogs with severe muscle wasting. poor hair coat, or skin problems, increase dosage to as high as 1 tablet, PO,
every 48 hours.
C.
 For dogs with renal failure, do not exceed 1/2 tablet, P0, every 24 hours.
 7.  Administer intact sodium bicarbonate tablets on the basis of venous blood gas findings (venous blood pH and PvCO2)
a. The initial dosage should be determined on the basis of venous blood pH and PvCO2 (see Table 55.3).
b. The daily dosage should be divided and administered, PO, every 12 hours.
C. Dosage modifications should be based on the results of follow-up venous blood gas analyses
 8.   Administer potassium supplementsef on the basis of serum potassium concentration in dogs with persistent hypokalemia
(monitor serum potassium concentration weekly until concentration stabilizes at target concentration).
a.F
 For dogs with serum potassium concentration between 1.5 and 2.0 mEq/L, administer 15 mEq. PO, every 12 hours
b.F
 For dogs with serum potassium concentration between 2.1 and 2.75 mEq/L, administer 10 mEq, P0, every 12 hours
C.F
 For dogs with serum potassium concentration between 2.76 and 3.75 mEq/L, administer 5 mEq, P0, every 12 hours
Initial treatment guidelines are for dogs weighing between 10 and 12.5 kg (22 and 27 Ib). Dosages should be adjusted for
dogs substantially larger or smaller than this. Follow-up serum biochemical testing and venous blood gas analyses should be
performed 8-10 weeks after initiation of treatment, 6 months later, and annually thereafter if the dog's condition remains
stable. In dogs with renal failure, follow-up serum biochemical testing. venous blood gas analyses, and physical
examinations should be performed more frequently.
Source: (http://www.voyuz.net/voyuz.net/Fanconi_Protocol.html)
a Pet Tab Plus, Pfizer Animal Health, Exton, Pa.
bPet Cal, Pfizer Animal Health, Exton, Pa.
CCentrum, Wyeth, Madison, NJ.
dAmino Fuel, Twinlab, Hauppauge, NY.
eTumil-K, King Animal Health, Bristol, Tenn
fUrocit-K, Mission Pharmacal, San Antonio, Tex.
development of glucosuria. Glomerular filtration rate is
can occur with longstanding disease, and may contribute
normal in some affected dogs and reduced in others.
to muscular weakness in some dogs. Azotemia and hyper-
Clinical findings include polyuria, polydipsia, weight
phosphatemia are observed in dogs with advanced disease
loss, poor haircoat, dehydration, and muscular weakness.
 and renal failure. Renal clearance studies to identify reab-
The disease usually is identifiable in adult dogs when
 sorptive defects for electrolytes and amino acids are nec-
there is glucosuria and low urine specific gravity with
 essary to differentiate Fanconi syndrome from primary
a normal blood glucose concentration. Proteinuria usu-
 renal glucosuria. Growth disturbances, metabolic bone
ally is mild. Metabolic acidosis is variable in severity and
 disease, and nephrocalcinosis are observed in affected
hyperchloremic in nature, as expected with decreased
sop u paaso uaq nou sa inq sud u
 proximal tubular reabsorption of HCO3-. Hypokalemia
 with Fanconi syndrome. Hyperchromatic karyomegaly
564  Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 55.3 Abbreviated table for calculating recommended initial daily dose of sodium bicarbonate in dogs with idiopathic Fanconi
syndrome
Venous blood pH
PvCO2 (mmHg)
7.40
7.35
7.30
7.25
7.20
7.10
7.00
6.90
6.80
6.70
6.60
6.50
20
9,072
9,072
10,368
10,368
11,664
14,256
15,552
16,848
18.144
18.144
19.440
20,736
30
7.776
7.776
9,072
9,072
10,368
12,960
14,256
15,552
16,848
16,848
18.144
19.440
32
6,480
6,480
7.776
7.776
9,072
11.664
12,960
14,256
14,256
15,552
16,848
18,144
34
6.480
6,480
6.480
6.480
7.776
9,072
10,368
11,664
12,960
14,256
15,552
16,848
36
5,184
5,184
6,480
6,480
7.776
9,072
10,368
11,664
11,664
12,960
14,256
15,552
38
5,184
5,184
5,184
5,184
6,480
7.776
9,072
10,368
10,368
11,664
12,960
14,256
40
3,888
3,888
3,888
3,888
5,184
6,480
7.776
9,072
9,072
10,368
11,664
12,960
42
2.592
2,592
2,592
2,592
3,888
5.184
6,480
7.776
7.776
9,072
10,368
11,664
44
1,296
1,296
1,296
1,296
2,592
3,888
5,184
6,480
6,480
7.776
9,072
10,368
Recommended daily dose of sodium bicarbonate is given in milligrams; the daily dose should be divided and given P0 every 12 hours.
Source: (http://www.voyuz.net/voyuz.net/Fanconi_Protocol.html).
of renal tubular cells is a distinctive renallesion in affected
 In one study, 57 of 58 dogs with Fanconi syndrome
Basenji dogs, but its significance is unknown.
were managed using this protocol and median survival
Progression of the disease in affected Basenji dogs is
time was 5.25 years; renal failure occurred in 12 of 29 dogs
variable, although one study reported no shortening of
(41%) that were dead at the time of the study (Yearley
expected life span (Yearley et al. 2004). Development of
et al. 2004).
the Fanconi syndrome in other breeds appears to progress 
fairly quickly although spontaneous remission has been
References
reported to occur ( Jamieson and Chandler 2001; Hostut-
ler et al. 2004). Some dogs develop chronic renal failure
Abraham, L.A., et al. (2006). Transient renal tubulopathy in a racing
within a few months of diagnosis, and others remain sta-
Greyhound. Aust Vet I 84(11): 398-401.
 ble for several years. Rapid progression and death may
Ahn, A. ( 1994). Hyperaldosteronism in cats. Semin Vet Med Surg Small
Anin 9(3): 153-157.
result from acute renal failure and papillary necrosis or
Appleman, E.H., et al. (200s). Transient acquired Fanconi syndrome
acute pyelonephritis.
Treatment of dogs with Fanconi syndrome is lim-
Med 22(4): 1038-1042.
ited to control of metabolic acidosis, replacement of
Aroch, I., et al. (2005). Central diabetes insipidus in five cats: clinical
presentation, diagnosis and oral desmopressin therapy. IFeline Med
substances lost in urine, appropriate antibiotic therapy
Surg 7(6): 333-339.
for urinary tract infections, and conservative medical
Ash, R.A., et al. (2005). Primary hyperaldosteronism in the cat: a series
management of chronic renal failure. It may be difficult
of 13 cases. I Feline Med Surg 7(3): 173-182.
to control acidosis even with high doses of alkali therapy.
Authement, J.M., et al. ( 1989). Transient, traumatically induced, cen-
This is a consequence of the marked bicarbonaturia
tral diabetes insipidus in a dog. IArm Vet Med Assoc 194(5): 683-685.
Barbey, F, et al. (2000). Medical treatment of cystinuria: critical reap-
that occurs whenever plasma HCO3-
concentration
praisal of long-term results. I Urol 163(5): 1419- 1423.
is increased with replacement to within the normal
 Barr, S.C. (1985). Pituitary tumour causing multiple endocrinopathies
plasma range. Potassium citrate therapy provides both
in a dog. Aust Vet J 62(4): 127-129.
alkalinization and K+ supplementation. The dlinician
Bartges, I.W. (1999). Disorders of renal tubules. In: Textbook of Vet-
erinary Internal Medicine, edited by E.C.Feldman and S.J. Ettinger.
should strive to maintain a serum HCOs— concentra-
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 96-99.
tion or total carbon dioxide concentration above 12
Bartges, J.W., et al. ( 1992). Canine xanthine uroliths: risk factor man-
mEq/L, and a serum K+ concentration of 4-6 mEq/L.
agement. In: Current Veterinary Therapy XI, edited by R.W. Kirk and
Supplementation with vitamins, minerals, and amino
J.D. Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 900-905.
 acids has been recommended in addition to aggres-
Bartges, J.W., (1994a). Ar Algorithmic Approach to Canine Urate
sive bicarbonate therapy (so-called Gonto Protocol;
Uroliths. 12th Annual Veterinary Medical Forum of the American
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine, San Francisco, Omnipress.
http:// www.voyuz.net/voyuz.net/Fanconi_ Protocol.html);
Bartges, J.W., et al. (1994b). Prevalence of cystine and urate uroliths
however, no studies exist that validate the effectiveness
in bulldogs and urate uroliths in Dalmatians. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
or safety of this protocol ( Tables 55.2 and 55.3).
204(12): 1914-1918.
Disorders of renal tubules  565
Bartges, J.W., et al. (1995). Influence of allopurinol and two diets on
 DeClue, A.E., et al. (2005). Hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogestero-
24-hour urinary excretions of uric acid, xanthine, and ammonia by
nism in a cat with an adrenal cortical carcinoma. I Vet Irtern Med
healthy dogs. Am I Vet Res 56(5): 595-599.
19(3): 355-358.
Bartges, J.W., et al. (1996). Influence of four diets on uric acid
DiBartola, S.P. (1995). Renal tubular disorders. In: Textbook of Vet-
metabolisrm and endogenous acid production in healthy Beagles.
erinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feld-
Am I Vet Res 57(3): 324-328.
man, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, Pp. 180l-
Bartges, J.W., et al. (1998). Comparison of Struvite Activity Product
1804.
Ratios and Relative Supersaurations in Urine Collected from Healthy
DiBartola, S.P, et al. (199l). Cystinuria in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Cats Consuming Four Struvite Management Diets. Ralston Purina
198(1): 102-104.
Nutrition Symposium, St. Louis, MO.
 Edwards, D.F, et al. ( 1983). Hypernatremic, hypertonic dehydration
Bartges, I.W., et al. ( 1999). Canine urate urolithiasis. Etiopathogenesis,
 in a dog with diabetes insipidus and gastric dilation-volvulus. J Am
diagnosis, and management. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 
Vet Med Assoc 182(9): 973-977.
29(1): 161-191, xi-xi.
Feldman, E.C. (1979). Central diabetes insipidus in a dog. Mod Vet
Battersby, I.A., et al. (2005). Hyperarmmonaermic encephalopathy sec-
Pract 60(8): 615-619.
ondary to selective cobalamin deficiency in a juvenile Border collie.
Ferguson, D.C. and D.N. Biery (1988). Diabetes insipidus and hyper-
I Small Anirm Pract 46(7): 339-344.
 adrenocorticism associated with high plasma adrenocorticotropin
Boulanger, Y, et al. (1993). Heterogeneous metabolism and toxicity
concentration and a hypothalamic/pituitary mass in a dog. I Arm Vet
of4-pentenoate along the dog nephron. Ren Physiol Biochem 16(4):
Med Assoc 193(7): 835-839.
182-202.
 Finco, D.R. ( 1976). Familial renal disease in Norwegian elkhound dogs:
Bovee, K.C. (1984). Genetic and metabolic diseases of the kidney. In:
physiologic and biochemical examinations. Arm I Vet Res 37: 87-91.
Carine Nephrology, edited by K.C. Bovee. Philadelphia, PA: Harwal 
 Flegel, T., et al. (1998). Xanthine urolithiasis in a dachshund. Vet Rec
Publishing Company, pp. 339-354.
143( 15): 420-423.
Bovee, K.C., et al. (1979). Characterization of renal defects in dogs 
Flood, S.M., et al. (1999). Primary hyperaldosteronism in two cats. I
with a syndrome similar to the Fanconi syndrome in man. IAm Vet
Am Armim Hosp Assoc 35(5): 41 1-416.
Med Assoc 174(10): 1094- 1099.
 Fordyce, H.H., et al. (2000). Persistent cobalamin deficiency causing
Bovee, K.C. and S. Segal (1984). Renal tubule reabsorption of amino
failure to thrive in a juvenile beagle. I Small Anim Pract 41(9):
acids after lysine loading of cystinuric dogs. Metabolism 33(7):
407-410.
602-607.
Freeman, L.M., et al. ( 1994). Fanconi's syndrome in a dog with primary
Breitschwerdt, E.B., et al. ( 1981). Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in
hypoparathyroidism. J Vet Intern Med 8(5): 349-354.
three dogs. IArm Vet Med Assoc 179(3): 235-238.
Fyfe, JI.C.,( 1991). Inherited selective intestinal cobalamin malabsorp-
Breitschwerdt, E.B., et al. ( 1983). Multiple endocrine abnormalities in
tion and cobalamin deficiency in dogs. Pediatr Res 29( 1): 24-31.
Basenji dogs with renal tubular dysfunction. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
Giesecke, D. and W. Tiemeyer ( 1984). Defect of uric acid uptake in
182( 12): 1348-1353.
Dalmatian dog liver. Experientia 40: 1415- 1416.
Browley, J. ( 19s0). Diabetes insipidus in a dog. Mod Vet Pract 61(11):
Goossens, M.M., et al. (1995). Central diabetes insipidus in a dog
934-936.
with a pro-opiomelanocortin-producing pituitary tumor not caus-
Brown, S.A. (1986). Fanconi syndrome and acute renal failure associ-
ing hyperadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med 9(5): 361-365.
ated with gentamicin therapy in a dog. I Arm Amirm Hosp Assoc 22:
Greco, D.S. (200l). Diagnosis and treatment of juvenile endocrine
635.
disorders in puppies and kittens. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Brown, S.A., et al. (1986). Distal renal tubular acidosis and hepatic
Pract 31(2): 401-409, vii.
lipidosis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189(10): 1350- 1352.
Green, R.A. and C.S. Farrow ( 1974). Diabetes insipidus in a cat. JAm 
Campbell, F.E. and B. Bredhauer (2005). Trauma-induced central dia-
Vet Med Assoc 164(5): 524-526.
betes insipidus in a cat. Aust Vet J 83( 12): 732-735.
Gunn-Moore, D. (2005). Feline endocrinopathies. Vet Clin North Am 
Campbell, FE. and B. Bredhauer (2008). Trauma-induced central dia-
Small Amim Pract 35(1): 171-210, vii.
betes insipidus in a cat. Aust Vet J 86(3): 102-105.
Hanson, L.M., et al. (2005). Efficacy of transsphenoidal hypophysec-
Case, L.C., et al. (1992). Cystine-containing urinary calculi in
dogs: 102 cases (1981-1989). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 201(1): 129-
corticism. I Vet Intern Med 19(5): 687-694.
133.
Harb, M.F, et al. ( 1996). Central diabetes insipidus in dogs: 20 cases
Chesney, R.W. and A.C. Novello ( 1995). Defects of renal tubular trans-
(1986-1995). I Am Vet Med Assoc 209(11): 1884-1888.
port. In: Textbook of Nephrology, edited by S.G. Massry and R.J.
Henthorn, P.S., et al. (2000). Canine cystinuria: polymorphism in the
Glassock, 1st edition. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, pp. 513-
canine SLC3Al gene and identification of a nonsense mutation in
529.
cystinuric Newfoundland dogs. Hum Genet 107(4): 295-303.
Cohen, M. and G.S. Post (1999). Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in a
Hezel, A., et al. (2007). Influence of hydrochlorothiazide on urinary cal-
dog with intestinal leiomyosarcoma. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 215(12):
cium oxalate relative supersaturation in healthy young adult female
1818-1820, 1806.
domestic shorthaired cats. Vet Ther 8(4): 247-254.
Court, M.H. and A.D. Watson (1983). Idiopathic neurogenic diabetes
Hill, T.L., et al. (2008). Concurrent hepatic copper toxicosis and Fan-
insipidus in a cat. Aust Vet J60(8): 245-247.
coni's syndrome in a dog. I Vet Imtern Med 22(1): 219-222.
Darrigrand Haag, R.A., et al. (1996). Congenital Fanconi syndrome
Holtzapple, P.G., et al. (1969). Amino acid uptake by kidney and
associated with renal dysplasia in 2 Border Terriers. I Vet Irnterm Med
jejunal tissue from dogs with cystine stones. Science 166: 1525-
10(6): 412-419.
1527.
Davenport, D.J, et al. (1986). Diabetes insipidus associated with
Hoppe, A. and T. Denneberg, (2001). Cystinuria in the dog: clinical
metastatic pancreaticcarcinoma in a dog. IAm Vet Med Assoc189(2):
studies during 14 years of medical treatment. I Vet Intern Med 15(4):
204-205.
361-367.
566  Upper urinary tract disorders
Hoppe, A., et al. (1993). Urinary excretion of amino acids in normal
O'Brien, D.P., et al. ( 1999). Malonic aciduria in Maltese dogs: normal
and cystinuric dogs. Br Vet I 149(3): 253-268.
methylmalonic acid concentrations and malonyl-CoA decarboxy-
Hostutler, R.A., et al. (2004). Transient proximal renal tubular acido-
lase activity in fibroblasts. I Imherit Metab Dis 22(8): 883-890.
sis and Fanconi syndrome in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 224( 10):
Osborne, C.A., et al. ( 1996). Diagnosis, medical treatment, and prog-
1611-1614, 1605.
nosis of feline urolithiasis. Vet Clir North Am Small Anim Pract
Jamieson, PM. and M.L. Chandler., (200l). Transient renal tubu-
26(3): 589-627.
h        
Osborne, C.A., et al. (1999). Canine cystine urolithiasis. Cause, detec-
549.
tion, treatment, and prevention. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract
29(1): 193-211, xii.
concurrent lymphoma. I Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 53(9):
Padrid, P. ( 1988). Fanconi syndrome in a mixed breed dog. Moder
467-470.
Vet Pract 69: 162-165.
Keene, B.W., et al. ( 1991). Myocardial L-carnitine deficiency in a family
Podell, M., et al. (1996). Methylmalonic and malonic aciduria in a
of dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy. I Armer Vet Med Assoc 198(4):
dog with progressive encephalomyelopathy. Metab Brain Dis 11(3):
647-650.
239247.
Kidder, D.E. and P.R. Chivers (1968). Xanthine calculi in a dog. Vet
Polzin, D.J., et al. (1986). Canine distal renal tubular acidosis and
Rec 83: 228-229.
urolithiasis. Vet Clinm North Am Small Anim Pract 16(2): 241-250.
Kucera, I., et al. (1997). Bilateral xanthine nephrolithiasis in a dog. I
Post, K., et al. (1989). Congenital central diabetes insipidus in two
Small Anim Pract38(7): 302-305.
sibling Afghan hound pups. JArm Vet Med Assoc 194(8): 1086- 1088.
Lage, A.L. ( 1973). Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in a dog. I Arm Vet
Pouliot, JF., et al. ( 1992). Brush border membrane proteins in experi-
Med Assoc 163(3): 251-253.
mental Fanconi's syndrome induced by 4-pentenoate and maleate.
Ling, G.V., et al (199s). Urolithiasis in dogs. I: Breed prevalence, and
Can I Physiol Pharmacol 70(9): 1247-1253.
interrelations of breed, sex, age, and mineral composition. Arm I Vet
Ramsey, I.K., et al. (1999). Concurrent central diabetes insipidus and
Res 59(5): 630-642.
 panhypopituitarism in a German shepherd dog. I Small Anim Pract
Lobetti, R.G. ( 1998). Hypereninaemic hypoaldosteronism in a dog. I
40(6): 271-274.
S Afr Vet Assoc 69( 1): 33-35.
Rijnberk, A., et al. (200la). Aldosteronoma in a dog with polyuria as
Lulich, JP. and C.A. Osborne {1992). Effects of chlorothiazide on
the leading symptom. Lomest Anirm Endocrinol 20(3): 227-240.
urinary excretion of calcium in clinically normal dogs. Am I Vet Res
Rijnberk, A., et al. (200 1b). Hyperaldosteronism in a cat with metas-
53( 12): 2328-2332.
tasised adrenocortical tumour. Vet Q 23( 1): 38-43.
Lulich, J.P, et al. (199l). Evaluation of urine and serum metabolites
Roch-Ramel, F and G. Peters ( 1978). Urinary excretion of uric acid in
in miniature schnauzers with calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Arm J Vet
nonhuman mammalian species. In: Uric acid, Handbook of Experi-
Res 52( 10): 1583-1590.
mertal Pharmacology, edited by W.N. Kelley and 1.M. Weiner, Vol-
Lulich, IP., et al. (1995). Canine lower urinary tract disorders. In:
ume 51. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 21l-255.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.J. Etinger and
Rogers, W.A., et al. ( 1977). Partial deficiency of antidiuretic hormone
E.C. Feldman, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp.
in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 170(5): 545-547.
1833-1861.
Rose, S.A., et al. (2007). Adrenalectomy and caval thrombectomy in a
Lulich, J.P., et al. (200l). Effects of hydrochlorothiazide and diet in
cat with primary hyperaldosteronism. I Am Amirm Hosp Assoc43(4):
dogs with calcium oxalate urolithiasis. JAm Vet Med Assoc 218( 10):
209-214.
1583-1586.
 Sanderson, S.L., et al. (200l). Evaluation of urinary carnitine and
MacKay, A.D., et al. ( 1999). Successful surgical treatment of a cat with
taurine excretion in 5 cystinuric dogs with carnitine and taurine
primary aldosteronism. I Feline Med Surg 1(2): 117-122.
deficiency. I Vet Intern Med 15(2): 94-100.
Mackenzie, C.P. and A. Van Den Broek ( 1982). The Fanconi syndrome
Schwedes, C.s. (1999). Transient diabetes insipidus in a dog with
in a Whippet. I Small Anim Pract 23: 469-474.
acromegaly. J Small Anirm Pract 40(8): 392-396.
Mathe, A., et al. (2007). Histological and ultrastructural studies of
 Settles, E.L. and D. Schmidt (1994). Fanconi syndrome in a Labrador
renal lesions in Babesia canis infected dogs treated with imidocarb.
retriever. I Vet Intern Med 8(6): 390-393.
Acta Vet Hung 55(4): 511-523.
Smith, IR. and C.M. Elwood (2004). Traumatic partial hypopitu-
McEwan, N.A. and L. Macartney (1987). Fanconi's syndrome in a
itarism in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 45(8): 405-409.
Yorkshire terrier. J Small Anim Pract 28: 737-742.
 Smulders, Y.M., et al. ( 1996). Renal tubular acidosis: pathophysiology
McNamara, P.D., et al. ( 1989). Cystinuria in dogs: comparison of the
and diagnosis. Arch Interm Med 156: 1629-1636.
cystinuric component of the Fanconi syndrome in Basenji dogs to
Sorenson, J.L. and G.V. Ling (1993). Metabolic and genetic aspects
isolated cystinuria. Metabolism 38( 1): 8- 15.
of urate urolithiasis in Dalmatians. I Am Vet Med Assoc 203(6):
 Mellanby, R.J., et al. (2005). Secondary hypothyroidism following head
857-862.
trauma in a cat. I Feline Med Surg 7(2): 135-139.
Takemura, N. (1998). Successful long-term treatment of congenital
Morgan, L.W. and J. McConnell ( 1999). Cobalamin deficiency asso-
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in a dog. I Small Anim Pract 39( 12):
ciated with erythroblastic anemia and methylmalonic aciduria in a
592-594.
border collie. I Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 35(5): 392-395.
Thoresen, S.1. and W.P. Bredal (1999). Serum fructosamine measure-
Newman, S.J., et al. (2003). Cryptococcal pyelonephritis in a dog. I Am
Vet Med Assoc 222(2): 180- 183, 174.
Vet Sci 67(3): 267-271.
Nielsen, L., et al. (2008). Central diabetes insipidus associated with
Tsuchida, S., et al. (2007). Xanthine urolithiasis in a cat: a case report
primary focal B cell lymphoma in a dog. Vet Rec 162(4): 124-126.
and evaluation of a candidate gene for xanthine dehydrogenase. J
Noonan, C.H. and J.M. Kay ( 1990). Prevalence and geographic distri-
Feline Med Surg 9(6): 503-508.
bution of Fanconi syndrome in Basenjis in the United States. I Am
van Zuilen, C.D., et al. ( 1997). Xanthinuria in a family ofCavalier King
Vet Med Assoc 197(3): 345-349.
Charles spaniels. Vet Q 19(4): 172-174.
Disorders of renal tubules  567
Wallerstrom, B.1., et al. ( 1992). Cystine calculi in the dog: an epidemi-
Winaver, J, et al. {1986). Impaired renal acidification follow-
ological retrospective study. I Small Armim Pract 33: 78-84.
ing acute renal ischemia in the dog. Kidney Int 30(6): 906-
Watson, A.D., et al. ( 1986). Distal renal tubular acidosis in a cat with 
913.
pyelonephritis. Vet Rec 119(3): 65-8.
Yearley, J.H., et al. (2004). Survival time, lifespan, and quality of life in
White, R.N., et al. ( 1997). Naturally occurring xanthine urolithiasis in 
dogs with idiopathic Fanconi syndrome. IArm Vet Med Assoc225(3):
a domestic shorthair cat. J Small Anim Pract 38(7): 299-301.
377-383.
56
Congenital kidney diseases
George E. Lees
Introduction
accelerating rapidly because of advancing technology and
 increasing availability of genetic information regarding
Congenital kidney diseases are, by definition, present
these species.
at birth. Inherited disorders are congenital in any case
 Most familial renal diseases are progressive and ulti-
(the gene abnormality is present at birth), even when the
mately fatal, but the rate of progression often varies
structural and functional consequences of the defect only
considerably among individuals with the same disorder.
occur later in life. However, congenital conditions are
Therapeutic efforts generally are focused on combating
not necessarily inherited. This is because normal organ
complications (e.g-, hypertension, urinary tract infec-
 development can be disrupted during gestation and the
tion) as they arise and using conventional strategies for
early neonatal period in a variety of ways that are not
the medical management of chronic renal failure to min-
due to any genetic abnormality. Nevertheless, the most
imize disease progression and uremia.
important congenital kidney diseases are conditions that
are known to be genetic or are suspected to be inherited
because of a familial or breed-associated pattern of dis-
 Clinical findings
ease occurrence. This information is important mainly
due to the health implications for related animals and
Chronic renal failure is the clinical syndrome produced
impact on breeding decisions.
by most ofthe congenital kidney diseases that require vet-
 Hereditary renal diseases have been recognized in sev-
erinary care, and it often develops while the animals are
eral breeds or kindreds of dogs and cats (Lees 1996;
adolescents or young adults. In dogs with renal dysplasia
DiBartola 2005), and more examples of such conditions
and some primary glomerulopathies, onset of renal fail-
are likely to be identified as kidney diseases having a famil-
ure usually occurs at 3 months to 3 years of age, with peak
ial pattern of occurrence are investigated thoroughly. The
occurrence at about 1 year of age. However, many famil-
number and diversity of familial renal diseases that have
ial nephropathies often produce renal failure later in life.
been described in dogs are greater than those described
 For polycystic kidney disease, some primary glomeru-
in cats, but polycystic kidney disease in cats is likely the
lopathies, amyloidosis, and glomerulonephritis, onset of
single most common inherited nephropathy that occurs
renal failure is often at 3-7 years of age, depending on the
in these two companion animal species worldwide. The
condition.
 Reduced appetite or anorexia, stunted growth or 
plasia, primary glomerulopathies, polycystic kidney dis-
weight loss, polyuria and polydipsia, and vomiting are
ease, amyloidosis, glomerulonephritis, and a miscellany
the most common clinical signs reported by the own-
of other diseases that are notable for occurrence in a par-
ers of dogs and cats with renal failure due to a famil-
ticular breed ( Table 56.1). The specific pathogenesis and
ial nephropathy. Other signs that are often reported
underlying gene defect have been determined for only
include poor hair coat, halitosis, and diarrhea. Hema-
a few of these diseases; however, progress in this field is
turia, dysuria, and abdominal pain are the clinical signs
associated with renal telangiectasia in Pembroke Welsh
Corgi dogs, and hematuria also occurs in German Shep-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
herd dogs with multifocal renal cystadenocarcinoma (see
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Chapters 57 and 79).
568
Congenital kidney diseases  569
Table 56.1 Familial nephropathies in dogs and catslisted
dogs that develop renal failure before 6 months of age.
within disease categories by breeds reported to be affected and
The kidneys of animals, especially cats, with polycystic
giving the mode of inheritance, if known
kidney disease are often palpably enlarged. Otherwise,
 the kidneys usually are normal or reduced in size. Dogs
Dogs
with severe renal dysplasia often have especially small
 Renal dysplasia
kidneys.
Lhasa Apso
 Laboratory testing most often reveals the expected
Shih Tzu
abnormalities associated with chronic renal failure,
Standard Poodle
Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier
namely impaired urine concentrating ability, azotemia,
Chow Chow
hyperphosphatemia, and nonregenerative anemia. These
Alaskan Malamute
findings usually reflect the severity of the animal's renal
Miniature Schnauzer
failure independent of its cause. Urinalysis findings, how-
Dutch Kooiker (Dutch Decoy) Dog
ever, frequently help discriminate among the common
Primary glomerulopathies
 causes of juvenile or familial nephropathy. Dogs with pri-
Samoyed kindred and Navasota kindred (X-linked)
 mary glomerulopathies and familial glomerulonephritis
English Cocker Spaniel (autosomal recessive)
consistently have persistent renal proteinuria (see Chap-
Bull Terrier (autosomal dominant)
ters 8 and 53) that emerges early in the course of disease
Dalmatian (autosomal dominant)
m sho (  ) n o si ai e
Doberman Pinscher
renal dysplasia and dogs and cats with polycystic kidney
Bullmastiff 
 disease usually exhibit lttle or no proteinuria, while pro-
Newfoundland
Rottweiler
  s   n  si 
Pembroke Welsh Corgi
extent of glomerular involvement in dogs and cats with
Beagle
familial amyloidosis. Renal glucosuria is a consistent fea-
Polycystic kidney disease
ture of the Fanconi syndrome in Basenji dogs but is occa-
Bull Terrier (autosomal dominant)
sionally observed in dogs with renal dysplasia or primary
Carin Terrier and West Highland White Terrier (autosomal
glomerulopathies. Hematuria is the cardinal feature of
recessive)
telangiectasia in Pembroke Welsh Corgi dogs, which may
Amyloidosis
develop anemia due to blood loss in the urine. Bacterial
Shar Pei
urinary tract infection also sometimes develops as a sec-
 English Foxhound
ondary complication in dogs and cats with juvenile or
Beagle
familial nephropathies.
Immune-mediated glomerulonephritis
Diagnostic renal imaging is most helpful for animals
Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier
Bemese Mountain Dog (autosomal recessive, suspected)
with polycystic kidney disease in which a definitive diag-
nosis can be made by finding multiple cysts distributed in
Brittany Spaniel (autosomal recessive)
both kidneys using ultrasonography. In dogs with renal
Miscellaneous
Boxer - reflux nephropathy with segmental hypoplasia
dysplasia, ultrasound can demonstrate abnormal size,
shape and sonic architecture ofthekidneys, but it cannot
Basenji - Fanconi syndrome
German Shepherd - multifocal cystadenocarcinoma
distinguish renal dysplasia from other possible causes of
(autosomal dominant)
 small, fibrotic end-stage kidneys in affected dogs.
 Pembroke Welsh Corgi- telangiectasia
Cats
Diagnosis
 Polycystic kidney disease
Persian (autosomal dominant)
For specific nephropathies known or suspected to be
Amyloidosis
inherited in particular breeds, diagnosis of the condition
Abyssinian (autosomal dominant with incomplete
generally rests on recognition of the expected clinical
penetrance, suspected)
features, exclusion of other conditions that might pro-
Siamese and Oriental
 duce similar signs, and ultimately upon identification of
characteristic renal lesions. The exclusion of other dis-
orders (especially those that are potentially treatable) is
Physical examination findings often include thin body
 an important step because a variety of acquired diseases
condition, dehydration, mucous membrane pallor, ure-
may occur in the same breeds and age-groups of animals
mic breath odor, and oral ulceration. Fibrous osteodys-
that might have familial nephropathies. Careful inter-
trophy or rubber jaw is occasionally observed, mainly in
 pretation of the results obtained from a thorough clinical
570  Upper urinary tract disorders
investigation (i.e., history, physical examination, blood
Secondary changes that are commonly observed include,
pressure determination, complete urinalysis, urine cul-
compensatory hypertrophy and hyperplasia of glomeru-
ture, and appropriate diagnostic imaging) is often ade-
lar tufts and tubules, interstitial fibrosis, tubulointersti-
quate for presumptive diagnosis of familial nephropathy.
tial nephritis, pyelonephritis, dystrophic mineralization,
Even when the diagnosis remains uncertain, however,
 cystic glomerular atrophy, microcystic tubules, retention 
cysts, and glomerular lipidosis.
guide the animal's medical care. Nonetheless, definitive
 Renal dysplasia is most extensively reported and pre-
diagnosis of many familial nephropathies ultimately rests
shop nzi uus pue osdy eseu u leuey q oi pans
upon detection of characteristic lesions in kidney spec-
(O'Brien et al. 1982; Picut and Lewis 1987b). Other
imens obtained at necropsy or by biopsy (see Chapters
23 and 24). Light microscopic examinations are sufficient
renal dysplasia occurs in a familial pattern include the
for many disorders, but especially for glomerular diseases,
Soft-Coated Wheaton Terrier (Eriksen and Grondalen
transmission electron microscopic and immunopatho-
1984; Nash et al. 1984), Standard Poodle (DiBartola et al.
logic studies are often needed as well. Prior planning is
1983), Alaskan Malamute (Vilafranca and Ferrer 1994),
generally needed to assure that specimens that will be
Golden Retriever (Kerlin and Van Winkle 1995; de Morais
suitable for these specialized evaluations are obtained
et al. 1996), Chow Chow (Brown et al. 1990), Miniature
when the tissue is collected because special materials and
Schnauzer (Morton et al. 1990), and the Dutch Kooiker
procedures are required. Centers that perform such stud-
(Dutch Decoy) Dog (Schulze et al. 1998). Additionally,
ies should be contacted for guidance.
juvenile nephropathies with microscopic features of renal
In breeds or families known to be at risk for cer-
dysplasia have been reported in one or more unrelated
tain familial nephropathies, apparently healthy animals
dogs of so many different breeds that it seems likely that
can be screened with tests to enable early identification
the disorder occurs at least sporadically in all breeds.
of affected individuals. The foremost examples of such
The causes and pathogenesis of canine renal dysplasia
screening are the use of ultrasonography to identify poly-
are unknown. Renal dysplasia is widely accepted to be
cystic kidney disease and urinalyses to detect persistent
the same disease entity in both Lhasa Apso and Shih Tzu
renal proteinuria in animals that are at risk for glomerular
dogs, but whether the other familial or sporadic forms
disorders.
of renal dysplasia are fundamentally the same disease or
When a juvenile nephropathy is identified, questions
different diseases having similar adverse effects on devel-
about inheritance of the condition frequently arise. For
opment of the kidneys in affected dogs is uncertain. To
 date, evidence documenting the validity of genetic test-
diagnosed is known to be inherited, genetic counseling
ing for renal dysplasia has not been published for any
can be provided. In most other circumstances, heritabil-
breed.
ity of the condition remains unknown unless or until
studies of related animals show a familial pattern of dis-
Primary glomerulopathies
ease occurrence.
A number of primary glomerulopathies, including sev-
eral of the most well characterized inherited renal dis-
Specific disorders
eases of dogs, have been described. Conditions in which
Renal dysplasia
an abnormality of the type IV collagen in the glomerular
basement membrane (GBM) is known or suspected to
Renal dysplasia is defined as disorganized development of
cause the disease lead this category. All basement mem-
renal parenchyma that is due to abnormal differentiation.
branes contain collagen IV, but in the GBM, a special
For definitive diagnosis of this category of conditions,
collagen network containing the α3, α4, and α5 chains
microscopic observation of structures in the kidney that
 of type IV collagen is crucial for long-term mainte-
nance of normal structure and function of the glomeru-
mal is required. The presence of immature glomeruli and
lar capillary wall. When this α3-α4-α5(IV) network is
tubules usually within radial bands adjacent to more nor-
not formed properly, distinctive ultrastructural changes
mally developed tissue (i.e., asynchronous differentiation
that can be identified only by transmission electron
of nephrons) is the most consistent feature (Picut and
microscopy develop in the GBM and initiate progres-
Lewis 1987b). Other findings indicative of renal dyspla-
sive renal disease leading to chronic renal failure. These
sia include persistent immature mesenchyme, persistent
conditions are analogous to the nephropathy that occurs
in human Alport syndrome, which is a genetically and
S  (   )  
clinically heterogeneous group of diseases because the
Congenital kidney diseases !
571
functional integrity of the GBM α3-α4-α5(IV) network
taining of kidneys from affected dogs shows absence of
can be disrupted in diverse ways. In dogs, as in people,
the normal α3-α4-α5(IV) network in their GBM, but
mode of inheritance can be X-linked, autosomal reces-
 seq u ssd s S  J ss
sive, or autosomal dominant.
branes (including the GBM) where they are co-expressed
X-linked hereditary nephropathies caused by muta-
with α6 chains (Lees et al. 1998b). Except that males
tions in the gene (COL4A5) encoding the α5(IV) col-
 and females are affected equally, the inherited nephropa-
lagen chain have been described in two canine families
   se s   n 
logically similar to the X-linked disorders. Persistent
In the Samoyed kindred, which was described first, a sin-
proteinuria develops at 5-8 months of age, and renal
gle nucleotide substitution in exon 35 (of 51) converts
a glycine codon to a stop codon (Zheng et al. 1994). In
death from renal failure at 10-27 months of age (Lees
the Navasota kindred, a 10-bp deletion in exon 9 creates a
et al. 1998a, 1998b). Definitive diagnosis of the condition
frame-shift and a stop codon in exon 10 (Cox et al. 2003).
 once depended on transmission electron microscopy to
Thus, although unique within each kindred, both muta-
 demonstrate the characteristic multilaminar splitting and
tions cause COL4A5 to encode truncated α5 chains inca-
thickening of the GBM, or immunostaining to demon-
pable of combining with α3 and α4 chains to form α3-α4-
strate the distinctively abnormal pattern of type IV col-
α5 heterotrimers, which are required for assembly of the
lagen α-chain expression in renal basement membranes.
normal collagen IV network in the GBM. Consequently,
However, a genetic test for the mutated COL4A4 allele is
the molecular, pathologic and clinicalexpressions of renal
 currently available commercially worldwide and proper
disease in both kindreds are similar. In affected males,
use of this test should eradicate this disease in the English
GBM expression of collagen IV α5 chains, as well as that 
Cocker Spaniel breed in the near future (Davidson et al.
of α3 and α4 chains is totally absent as indicated by
2007).
immunostaining with chain-specific antibodies (Harvey
 Autosomal dominant inherited glomerulopathies have
et al. 1998; Lees et al. 1999). Focal GBM splitting can
been described in Bull Terriers and Dalmatians, mainly
be detected by electron microscopy beginning at about
from Australia (Robinson et al. 1989; Hood et al. 1991,
one month of age (Harvey et al. 1998). These changes 
1995, 2000, 2002a, 2002b). The nephropathy in Bull
 subsequently progress in extent and severity, eventually
Terriers has been studied more than the one in Dal-
producing the global and severe GBM thickening and
matians, but the two conditions are reported to have
multilaminar splitting that is the characteristic structural
similar clinical and pathologic features. These disorders
feature of this nephropathy. Persistent proteinuria, which
are characterized by ultrastructural abnormalities in the
is the first clinical manifestation of the disease, begins
       e 
 at 3-6 months of age, and renal function subsequently
tron microscopy (Hood et al. 1995, 2000, 2002b). The
 e   issd s
GBM changes are similar to those that characterize the
6-9 months of age and death from renal failure by 9-15
X-linked and autosomal recessive conditions described
months of age (Jansen et al. 1987; Lees et al. 1999).
 above. In contrast, however, immunostaining of kidney
The light microscopic features of the nephropathy are
from affected Bull Terriers and Dalmatians shows a nor-
nonspecific, having the morphologic features of a mem-
mal pattern of type IV collagen α-chain expression in
branoproliferative glomerulonephropathy accompanied
their basement membranes (Hood et al. 2000, 2002b).
by secondary changes in the tubulointerstitium. Carrier
These findings are consistent with possible existence of
females have mosaic expression of the α3-α4-α5(IV) net-
a functionally defective α3-α4-α5 network due to muta-
work in their GBM. They develop persistent proteinuria
tions in COL4A3 or COL4A4, such as have been reported
at about the same age as their affected brothers, but their
in the rare human forms of Alport syndrome that have
 nephropathy rarely progresses to renal failure until they
autosomal dominant inheritance. However, gene defects
are older than 5 years of age (Baumal et al. 1991).
that cause these nephropathies in Bull Terriers and Dal-
An autosomal recessive hereditary glomerulopathy
matians have not been identified, and a few autosomal
that is due to a mutation in the COL4A4 gene occurs
dominant human diseases with some features resembling
in English Cocker Spaniels (Lees et al. 1997; Davidson
Alport syndrome are caused by mutations in other genes
et al. 2007). In this breed, a single nucleotide substi-
(MYH9, LMX1). Clinical expression of canine autoso-
tution (A to T) in exon 3 (of 47) in COL4A4 creates
mal dominant glomerulopathy is somewhat variable. All
  d     
affected dogs have proteinuria (defined as UPC ≥ 0.3 by
of α4 chains. Without α4 chains, α3 and α5 chains are
the investigators who studied these disorders), but the
unable to form α3-α4-α5 heterotrimers, as required for
onset of renal failure occurs at 11 months to 8 years
the normal collagen IV network in the GBM. Immunos-
 of age in Bull Terriers (Robinson et al. 1989) and at
572   Upper urinary tract disorders
 8 months to 7 years of age in Dalmatians (Hood et al.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease also
2002b). As is the case for the glomerulopathies described
has been described in Bull Terriers, mainly in Australia
above, progression of these nephropathies to renal failure
(Burrows et al. 1994; O'Leary et al. 1999). Affected dogs
is associated with extensive secondary tubulointerstitial
 are identified by ultrasonography when multiple (≥ 3)
changes (Hood et al. 2002a, 2002b).
cysts distributed in both kidneys are detected in dogs
Other breeds in which a renal disease having the clin-
with a family history of the disease. The gene muta-
icopathologic features of a primary glomerulopathy has
tion that causes this disease has not been identified
 been described in related dogs include the Doberman
(O'Leary et al. 2003), but dogs at risk for the disease
Pinscher ( Wilcock and Patterson 1979; Chew et al. 1983;
Picut and Lewis 1987a), Bullmastiff (Casal et al. 2004),
to minimize production of additional affected animals
Beagle (Rha et al. 2000), Rottweiller (Cook et al. 1993;
(O'Leary et al. 1999). Bull Terriers with polycystic kid-
Wakamatsu et al. 2007), Pembroke Welsh Corgi (McKay
ney disease that develop renal failure do so as adults, and
et al. 2004), and Newfoundland (Koeman et al. 1994).
 hepatic cysts have not been described in affected dogs.
The causes and pathogenesis of these conditions are
However, some Bull Terriers have renal lesions consistent
uncertain, although the glomerular lesions sometimes
with concurrent existence of both polycystic kidney dis-
have been examined at the ultrastructural as well as light
ease and the hereditary GBM nephropathy (O'Leary et al.
microscopic levels.
2002).
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney and liver dis-
ease has been described in the Carin Terrier and the West
Polycystic kidney disease
Highland White Terrier (McKenna and Carpenter 1980;
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease is preva-
 McAloose et al. 1998). Affected puppies become clinically
 lent in Persian and Persian-cross cats, affecting approxi-
ill before two months of age and have marked enlarge-
mately 38% of Persian cats worldwide (Beck and Lavelle
ment of their livers and kidneys caused by the presence
2001; Barrs et al. 200l; Cannon et al. 2001; Barthez et al.
 of numerous cysts in both organs.
2003). Recently, a single mutation in the feline PKD1
 gene has been incriminated as the cause of this disorder
Amyloidosis
in many if not all affected cats (Lyons et al. 2004). A stop
mutation caused by a single nucleotide transversion in
Familial forms of reactive systemic amyloidosis with
exon 29 (of 46) was found in the heterozygous state in
 predilection for renal involvement occur in both dogs
each of 48 affected cats (41 Persians and one cat each of
and cats (see Chapter 54). In dogs, familial renal amyloi-
seven other breeds) from the United States. Because the
dosis has been described in Shar Peis most often (DiBar-
mutation is likely to be identical by descent within the
tola et al. 1990; Rivas et al. 1993), but also in Bea-
breed, a DNA test is now possible to identify Persian and
gles (Bowles and Mosier 1992) and English Foxhounds
Persian-cross cats that have, or will develop, polycystic
(Mason and Day 1996). In cats, this condition occurs
kidney disease, although the expectation that this sin-
mainly in Abyssinians (Chew et al. 1982; Boyce et al.
gle mutation causes the disease worldwide remains to be
1984; DiBartola et al. 1986), but also has been reported
verified by further studies. In affected cats, multiple cysts
 in the Siamese and Oriental (a color variant of Siamese)
form in both kidneys and occasionally in the liver. Renal
breeds (Zuber 1993; Godfrey and Day 1998).
cysts arise from tubules and occur in both the cortex and
In Shar Pei dogs, familial amyloidosis usually causes
medulla (Eaton et al. 1997). They form early in life and
  ( ) 9      
 gradually become more numerous and larger in size as the
age (DiBartola et al. 1990). Some dogs have a history
cat ages. Detection of multiple cysts distributed in both
 of previous episodes of high fever and joint swelling.
kidneys using ultrasonography is diagnostic. Cysts some-
 snooue aq  sop d ru un ass st pe
times can be detected in kittens as young as 6-8 weeks
familial Mediterranean fever in humans (May et al. 1992;
 of age; however, because the number and size of cysts
Rivas et al. 1992). Some evidence suggests that amy-
increase with time, sensitivity of ultrasound as a diag-
loidosis in Shar Pei dogs is inherited in an autosomal
nostic test for polycystic kidney disease increased from
recessive fashion (Rivas et al. 1993). Affected Shar Peis
75% at 16 weeks of age to 91% at 36 weeks of age in one
invariably have moderate to severe medullary interstitial
study (Biller et al. 1996). Cyst growth eventually causes
amyloid deposits, but only two-thirds have glomerular
renomegaly, which can be an incidental finding during
 deposits. Proteinuria and other elements of the nephrotic
physical examination of seemingly healthy cats, and renal
syndrome, which reflect the severity of glomerular
failure ensues later in adult life (at 3-10, average 7, years 
involvement, occur in some dogs. Amyloid frequently
of age).
  s   n  oe 
Congenital kidney diseases  573
deposition in the liver may cause hepatomegaly, jaundice,
et al. 2000). By light microscopy, renal lesions are those
or hepatic rupture (Loeven 1994a, 1994b).
of a membranous to membranoproliferative glomeru-
In Abyssinian cats, familial amyloidosis probably is
lonephritis progressing to glomerular sclerosis accom-
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable
 panied by periglomerular fibrosis and secondary tubu-
penetrance (DiBartola 2005). Renal amyloid deposits first
lointerstitial changes. Evidence of mesangial deposition
appear between 9 and 24 months of age mainly in the
of immunoglobulin A (IgA), IgM, and complement
medullary interstitium. Glomerular deposits are usually
has been found in glomeruli of affected dogs using
mild but occasionally can be severe, so proteinuria is
immunofluorescent labeling and electron microscopy
a variable feature of renal amyloidosis in cats. Affected
(Afrouzian et al. 2001).
cats usually develop chronic renal failure at 1-5 (average,
 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis also has
3) years of age, but cats with mild deposits can live to
been described in 2- to 7-year-old Bernese Mountain
be much older. Additionally, cats with severe medullary
Dogs (Minkus et al. 1994; Reusch et al. 1994). Pedigree
involvement sometimes develop papillary necrosis. Amy-
analysis suggested autosomal recessive inheritance of the
loid deposits are often also found in other organs, but in
disorder. Laboratory findings were those of renal failure
Abyssinian cats, extra-renal amyloid deposition usually
accompanied by marked proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia,
is of little clinical consequence. In Siamese and Orien-
and hypercholesterolemia. Glomerular ultrastructural
tal cats with familial amyloidosis, however, severe amy-
lesions resembled those of human membranoprolif-
loid deposition occurs predominantly in the liver and
erative glomerulonephritis type I with electron-dense
mainly causes intra-abdominal hemorrhage from hepatic
immune deposits mainly in subendothelial locations
rupture (Zuber 1993; Godfrey and Day 1998). Nonethe-
and reduplication of the GBM. Immunolabeling consis-
less, amyloid deposition also occurs in the kidneys and
tently demonstrated glomerular IgM and complement
leads to renal failure in some affected cats. Amino acid
deposition, with labeling for IgA or IgG detected only
sequences of amyloid AA proteins isolated from Siamese
occasionally. Most of the affected dogs had high serum
cats are slightly different from those of AA proteins from
titers against Borrelia burgdorferi, but the organism could
Abyssinian cats, possibly accounting for the difference in
 not be detected immunohistochemically in the tissues
predominant site of amyloid deposition between the two
of affected dogs. 
 Membranoproliferative glomeru-
breeds (Niewold et al. 1999).
lonephritis also has been reported in Brittany Spaniels
with a genetically determined deficiency of the third
component of complement (Cork et al. 1991).
Immune-mediated glomerulonephritis
A familial disorder that causes protein-losing enteropa-
Miscellaneous conditions
thy, protein-losing nephropathy, or both has been
described in Soft-Coated Wheaten Terriers (Littman et al.
 The clinical and pathologic features of kidney disease in
2000). Although pathogenesis of the disorder is incom-
young (≤5 years of age) Boxer dogs have been described
pletely understood, evidence suggests that food hyper-
in reports from the United Kingdom and Norway (Chan-
sensitivity and altered intestinal permeability develop
dler et al. 2007; Kolbjornsen et al. 2008). Clinically,
first and that immune complex glomerulonephritis
the condition is characterized by the usual features of
develops subsequently (Vaden et al. 2000a, 2000b). The
chronic renal failure; namely, impaired urine concen-
mode of inheritance has not been defined, but the dis-
trating ability, azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, and ane-
order is common among Soft-Coated Wheaten Terri-
mia. Most dogs also exhibit mild to moderate protein-
ers, particularly in the United States where the condi-
uria, and diagnostic imaging often reveals small, irreg-
tion is estimated to affect as many as 10-15% of the
ularly shaped kidneys with hyperechoic cortices and
dogs of this breed. Females are affected slightly more
decreased corticomedullary differentiation. The condi-
often than males, and the average age when renal dis-
tion occurs in both sexes, but affected dogs are more
ease is diagnosed in affected dogs is 6 years of age.
often females than males. Of note, urinary incontinence is
Clinical signs associated with the nephropathy include
reported in about half of affected dogs (including in both
polyuria, polydipsia, vomiting, and weight loss. Labo-
females and males), and bacterial urinary tract infections
ratory findings include proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia,
are found in nearly one-third of affected dogs (Chan-
and hypercholesterolemia, often associated with abnor-
dler et al. 2007). Detailed histologic evaluation of kid-
malities attributable to renal failure (azotemia, hyper-
 neys from 7 young Boxers with end-stage kidney disease
phosphatemia, and non-regenerative anemia). The dis-
revealed a distinctive pattern of changes that was inter-
ease is complicated by thromboembolism in about 12%
preted to be most likely the result of chronic atrophic
of cases, and hypertension occurs occasionally (Littman
574  Upper urinary tract disorders
reflux (i.e., reflux nephropathy) and segmental renal
 Pembroke Welsh Corgis with telangiectasia have
hypoplasia attributable to the occurrence of some reflux-
episodes of gross hematuria beginning at 2-8 years of age
 mediated injury to the kidney during development of the
(Moore and Thornton 1983). Signs of abdominal distress
organ (i.e., during gestation and up to 3 weeks of age)
 or dysuria may occur as well. Several months often elapse
(Kolbjornsen et al. 2008).
between episodes, but urinary bleeding can be sufficiently
An inherited form of Fanconi syndrome, which is
severe to cause anemia or formation of blood clots in the
caused by generalized impairment of the reabsorptive
urine. Affected dogs may develop nephrocalcinosis or
functions of proximal renal tubules and results in exces-
calculi, and hydronephrosis may develop if a calculus or
sive urinary losses of multiple solutes and water, occurs in
blood clot obstructs the ureter.
Basenjis (see Chapter 55) (Bovee et al. 1979; Noonan and
Kay 1990). Most affected dogs are 4-7 years of age when
onset of the disease occurs, but substantial diversity in
References
the spectrum and severity of reabsorptive defects exists
among affected dogs. Polyuria, polydipsia, renal gluco-
Afrouzian, M., et al. (200l). Immune complex mediated proliferative
and sclerosing glomerulonephritis in Soft Coated Wheaten Terri-
suria, mild proteinuria, and aminoaciduria are consistent
ers (SCWT): Is this an animal model of IgA nephropathy or IgM
findings. Some dogs maintain normal serum biochem-
mesangial nephropathy? (abstract). I Arm Soc Nephrol 12: 670A.
ical profles, but others may develop various derange-
Barrs, V.R., et al. (200l). Prevalence of autosomal dorminant polycystic
ments, most notably hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
kidney disease in Persian cats and related-breeds in Sydney and
Brisbane. Aust Vet I79: 257-259.
or hypokalemia. Treatment generally is focused on mini-
Barthez, P.Y., et al. (2003). Prevalence of polycystic kidney disease
mizing the systemic effects of urinary losses of important
in Persian and Persian related cats in France. I Feline Med Surg 5:
345-347.
dde isre e ssndsa ie dod s
Baurmal, R., et al. (199l). Renal disease in carrier female dogs with
 to bicarbonate treatment as well as routine supplemen-
 X-linked hereditary nephritis; implications for female patients with
this disease. Am I Pathol 139: 751-764.
tation of amino acids, vitamins, and minerals has been
Beck, C. and R.B. Lavelle (200l). Feline polycystic kidney disease in
 promulgated (Gonto et al. 2003) and is widely used but
 Persian and other cats: a prospective study using ultrasonography.
 has not been directly compared with any other manage-
Aust Vet I 79: 181-184.
 ment protocol. Some affected dogs develop renal failure,
Biller, D.S., et al. ( 1996). Inheritance of polycystic kidney disease in
but a recent study found that the expected lifespan for
Persian cats. I Hered 87: 1-5.
Bovee, K.C., et al. (1979). Characterization of renal defects in dogs
affected dogs was similar to that for unaffected dogs and
with a syndrome similar to the Fanconi syndrome in man. JArm Vet
that affected dogs generally had a good or excellent qual-
Med Assoc 174: 1094- 1099.
ity of life as judged by their owners ( Yearley et al. 2004).
Bowles, M.H. and D.A. Mosier ( 1992). Renal amyloidosis in a family
Notably, most of the dogs in the study were managed
of beagles. I Atn Vet Med Assoc 201: 569-574.
using the aggressive protocol. In addition, owner toler-
Boyce, J.T., et al. ( 1984). Familial renal amyloidosis in Abyssinian cats.
ance of polydipsia and polyuria is likely to be an impor-
Vet Pathol 21: 33-38.
Brown, C.A., et al. (l990). Suspected familial renal disease in chow
tant factor that influences life expectancy of dogs with
chows. I Am Vet Med Assoc 196: 1279- 1284.
Fanconi syndrome. Sporadic cases of persistent Fanconi
Burrows, A.K., et al. ( 1994). Familial polycystic kidney disease in bull
syndrome also have been described in dogs of a number
terriers. I Small Amim Pract 35: 364-369.
of other breeds, but evidence of familial occurrence of
Cannon, M.J., et al. (2001). Prevalence of polycystic kidney disease in
the condition in breeds other than the Basenji has not
 Persian cats in the United Kingdom. Vet Rec 149: 409-411.
Casal, M.L., et al. (2004). Familial glomerulonephropathy in the Bull-
been reported.
mastiff. Vet Pathol41: 319-332.
Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinoma and
Chandler, M.L., et al. (2007). Juvenile nephropathy in 37 boxer dogs.
 nodular dermatofibrosis is a canine cancer syndrome
I Small Anim Pract 48: 690-694.
originally described in German Shepherd dogs (see
Chew, D.J., et al. ( 1982). Renal amyloidosis in related Abyssinian cats.
Chapters 57 and 79). The condition is inherited as an
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 181: 139-142.
autosomal dominant trait, and a mutation in the canine
Chew, D.J., et al. ( 1983). Juvenile renal disease in Doberman Pinscher
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 182: 481-485.
BHD gene recently has been incriminated as the cause
Cook, S.M., et al. (1993). Renal failure attributable to atrophic
of the disorder (Lingaas et al. 2003). The disease is char-
glomerulopathy in four related Rottweilers. I Am Vet Med Assoc
acterized by development of bilateral, multifocal tumors
202: 107-109.
in the kidneys, numerous firm nodules in the skin and
Cork, L.C., et al. (199l). Membranoproliferative glomerulonephri-
subcutis, and uterine leiomyomas. Afected dogs usually
tis in dogs with a genetically determined deficiency of the third
component of complement. Clin Immunol Immuropathol 60: 455-
are diagnosed at 5-11 (average, 8) years of age when they
470.
are examined because of the skin lesions or a variety of
Cox, M.L., et al. (2003). Genetic cause of X-linked Alport syndrome
nonspecific signs (Moe and Lium 1997).
in a family of domestic dogs. Mamm Genome 14: 396-403.
Congenital kidney diseases   575
Davidson, A.G., et al. (2007). Genetic cause of autosomal recessive
Lees, G.E., et al. ( 1998b). A model of autosomal recessive Alport syn-
Med 21: 394-401.
Lees, G.E., et al. ( 1999). New form of X-linked dominant hereditary
de Morais, H.S., et al. (1996). Juvenile renal disease in golden retrievers:
nephritis in dogs. Am I Vet Res 60: 373-383.
12 cases (1984-1994). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 209: 792-797.
Lingaas, F, et al. (2003). A mutation in the canine BHD gene is asso-
DiBartola, S.P. (2005). Familial renal disease in dogs and cats. In:
  e  r  n
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.1. Ettinger,
nodular dermatofibrosis in the German Shepherd dog. Hum Mol
and E.C. Feldman, 6th edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
Genet 12: 3043-3053.
Pp. 1819-1824.
Littman, M.P., et al. (2000). Familial protein-losing enteropathy and
DiBartola, S.P, et al. (1983). Juvenile renal disease in related Standard
Poodles. I Am Vet Med Assoc 183: 693-696.
cases (1983- 1997). I Vet Irntern Med 14: 68-80.
DiBartola, S.P, et al. (1986). Tissue distribution of amyloid deposits
Loeven, K.O. (1994a). Hepatic amyloidosis in two Chinese Shar Pei
in Abyssinian cats with familial amyloidosis. I Comp Pathol 96:
dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 204: 1212-1216.
387-398.
Loeven, K.O. ( 1994b). Spontaneous hepatic rupture secondary to amy-
 DiBartola, S.P., et al. (1990). Familial renal amyloidosis in Chinese shar
loidosis in a Chinese Shar Pei. I Am Amirm Hosp Assoc 30: 577-579.
pei dogs. I A Vet Med Assoc 197: 483-487.
Lyons, L.A., et al. (2004). Feline polycystic kidney disease mutation
Eaton, K.A., et al. ( 1997). Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney dis-
identified in PKD1. J Atm Soc Nephrol 15: 2548-2555.
ease in Persian and Persian-cross cats. Vet Pathol 34: 117-126.
Mason, N.J. and M.J. Day ( 1996). Renal amyloidosis in related English
Eriksen, K. and J. Grondalen (1984). Familial renal disease in soft-
foxhounds. I Small Amim Pract 37: 255-260.
coated Wheaten terriers. J Small Amirm Pract 25: 489-500.
Godfrey, D.R. and M.J. Day ( 1998). Generalised amyloidosis in two
report. Vet Rec 131: 586-587.
 Siamese cats: spontaneous liver hemorrhage and chronic renal fail-
McAloose, D., et al. ( 1998). Polycystic kidney and liver disease in two
ure. I Small Anim Pract 39: 442-447.
related West Highland White Terrier litters. Vet Pathol 35: 77-81.
Gonto, S. (2003). Fanconi Disease Managerment Protocol for Veteri-
McKay, L.W., et al. (2004). Juvenile nephropathy in two related Pem-
Mariars. Available at: www.basenjicompanions.org/health/images/
broke Welsh corgi puppies. I Small Amirm Pract 45: 568-571.
Protocol2003.html (accessed October 24, 2008).
McKenna, S.C. and J.L. Carpenter (1980). Polycystic disease of the
Harvey, S.J, et al. ( 1998). Role of distinct type IV collagen networks in
kidney and liver in the Cairn Terrier. Vet Pathol 17: 436-442.
glomerular development and function. Kidney Int 54: 1857-1866.
Minkus, G., et al. (1994). Familial nephropathy in Bernese mountain
Hood, J.C., et al. (199l). Proteinuria as an indicator of early renal
dogs. Vet Pathol 31: 421-428.
disease in Bull terriers with hereditary nephritis. I Small Armim Pract
Moe, L. and B. Lium (1997). Hereditary multifocal renal cystadeno-
32: 241-248.
carcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in 5l German shepherd
Hood, J.C., et al. ( 1995). Bull terrier hereditary nephritis: a model for
dogs. I Small Amim Pract 38: 498-505.
autosomal dominant Alport syndrome. Kidrey Irt 47: 758-765.
Moore, FM. and G.W. Thornton (1983). Telangiectasia of Pembroke 
Hood, J.C., et al. (2000). Ultrastructural appearance of renaland other
Welsh Corgi dogs. Vet Pathol 20: 203-208.
baserment membranes in the Bull terrier model of autosomal dom-
Morton, L.D., et al. (l990). Juvenile renal disease in miniature
inant hereditary nephritis. Am I Kidney Dis 36: 378-391.
schnauzer dogs. Vet Pathol 27: 455-458.
Hood, J.C., et al. (2002a). Correlation of histopathological features and
Nash, A.S., et al. (1984). Progressive renal disease in soft-coated
 renal impairment in autosomal dominant Alport syndrome in Bull
terriers. Nephrol Dial Transpl 17: 1897-1908.
25: 479-487.
Hood, I.C., et al. (2002b). A novel model ofautosomal dominant Alport
Niewold, T.A., et al. ( 1999). Familial amyloidosis in cats: Siamese and
syndrome in Dalmatian dogs. Nephrol Dial Transpl 17: 2094-2098.
Abyssinian AA proteins differ in primary sequence and pattern of
Jansen, B., et al. (1984). Animal model of human disease: hereditary
deposition. Amyloid. 6: 205-209.
nephritis in Samoyed dogs. Am I Pathol 116: 175-178.
Noonan, C.H.B. and J.M. Kay ( 1990). Prevalence and geographic dis-
 Jansen, B., et al. ( 1987). Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy: serial,
tribution of Fanconi syndrome in Basenjis in the United States. J
 clinicaland laboratory (urine, serum biochemistryand hematology)
Am Vet Med Assoc 197: 345-349.
studies. Car I Vet Res 51: 387-393.
O'Brien, T.D., et al. ( 1982). Clinicopathologic manifestations of pro-
Kerlin, R.L. and T.J. Van Winkle (1995). Renal dysplasia in golden
retrievers. Vet Pathol 32: 327-329.
Med Assoc 180: 658-664.
Koeman, J.P., et al. ( 1994). Proteinuria associated with glomeruloscle-
OLeary, C.A., et al. ( 1999). Polycystic kidney disease in Bull Terriers:
rosis and glomerular collagen formation in three Newfoundland
an autosomal dominant inherited disorder. Aust Vet I77: 361-366.
dog littermates. Vet Pathol 31: 188- 193.
O'Leary, C.A., et al. (2002). Renal pathology of polycystic kidney dis-
Kolbjornsen, O., et al. (2008). End-stage kidney disease probably due to
 ease and concurrent hereditary nephritis in Bull Terriers. Aust Vet J
reffux nephropathy witht segmental hypoplasia (Ask-Upmark kidney)
80: 353-361.
in young Boxer dogs in Norway. A retrospective study. Vet Pathol
O'Leary, C.A., et al. (2003). No disease-associated mutations found
45: 467-474.
Lees, G.E. (1996). Congenital renal diseases. Vet Clin N Am-Small 26:
1 in Bull Terriers with polycystic kidney disease. Anirm Genet 34:
1379-1399.
358-361.
Lees, G.E., et al. ( 1997). Glomerular ultrastructural findings similar to
Picut, C.A. and R.M. Lewis ( 1987a). Juvenile renal disease in the Dober-
hereditary nephritis in 4 English cocker spaniels. I Vet Intern Med
man Pinscher: ultrastructural changes of the glomerular basement
11: 80-85.
membrane. I Comp Pathol97: 587-596.
Lees, G.E., et al. (1998a). Early diagnosis of familial nephropathy in
Picut, C.A. and R.M. Lewis (1987b). Microscopic features of canine
English cocker spaniels. JArm Amirm Hosp Assoc 34: 189-195.
renal dysplasia. Vet Pathol24: 156-163.
576  Upper urinary tract disorders
Reusch, C., et al. (1994). A new familial glomerulonephropathy in
protein-losing enteropathy, protein-losing nephropathy, or both.
Bernese mountain dogs. Vet Rec 134: 41l-415.
A J Vet Res 61: 518-524.
Rha, J.Y., et al. (2000). Familial glomerulonephropathy in a litter of
Vilafranca, M. and L. Ferrer (1994). Juvenile nephropathy in Alaskan
beagles. I Am Vet Med Assoc 216: 46-50.
Malamute littermates. Vet Pathol 31: 375-377.
Rivas, A.L., et al. (1992). A canine febrile disorder associated with
Wakamatsu, N., et al. (2007). Histologic and ultrastructural studies of
elevated interleukin-6. Clin Immurol Immumopathol 64: 36-45.
juvenile onset renal disease in four Rottweiler dogs. Vet Pathol 44:
Rivas, A.L., et al. (1993). Inheritance of renal amyloidosis in Chinese
96-100.
Shar-pei dogs. I Hered 84: 438-442.
Wilcock, B.P. and J.M. Patterson (1979). Familial glomerulonephritis
Robinson, W.F, et al. (1989). Chronic renal disease in bull terriers.
in Doberman pinscher dogs. Car Vet I 20: 244-249.
Aust Vet I66: 193-195.
Yearley, J.H., et al. (2004). Survival time, lifespan, and quality of life
Schulze, C., et al. ( 1998). Renal dysplasia in three young adult Dutch
in dogs with idiopathic Fanconi syndrome. JAtm Vet Med Assoc 225:
kooiker dogs. Vet Q 20: 146-148.
377-383.
Vaden, S.L., et al. (2000a). Food hypersensitivity reactions in Soff 
Zheng, K., et al. (1994). Canine X chromosome-linked hereditary
      
 nephritis: a genetic model for hurman X-linked hereditary nephri-
testing, dietary provocation, and fecal immunoglobulin E. I Vet
alpha 5 chain of collagen type IV. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A91: 3989-
Intern Med 14: 60-67.
3993.
Vaden, S.L., et al. (2000b). Evaluation of intestinal permeability and
Zuber, R.M. (1993). Systemic amyloidosis in Oriental and Siamese
gluten sensitivity in Soft-Coated Wheaten Terriers with familial
cats. Aust Vet Pract 23: 66-70.
57
Renal neoplasia
Carolyn Henry
Etiology and prevalence
FeLV (Mooney 1987). Dogs and cats with renal neo-
plasia are usually geriatric with the exceptions of FeLV-
Renal tumors may either be primary tumors or metastatic
associated renal lymphoma and the aforementioned
lesions from other primary sites. Of the metastatic renal
canine renal nephroblastoma (Bryan 2006). A male pre-
tumors, lymphoma is one that may also present as a pri-
dominance has been reported for renal carcinomas in
mary renal tumor, without evidence of lymphoma else-
dogs, but this is not consistent across the literature (Hayes
where in the body. As such, lymphoma will be included
1977; Klein 1988; Frimberger 1995; Meuten 2002). A male
in the discussion of primary renal tumors that fol-
 gender predisposition is also reported for al renal tumor
lows. Non-lymphoma primary renal neoplasia may be of
types in cats, but small numbers of overall cases limit
mesothelial (sarcoma), epithelial (carcinoma), or mixed
the ability to adequately assess this (Henry 1999; Meuten
embryonal (nephroblastoma) origin. A list of reported
2002; Sapierzynski 2006). The suspected male predisposi-
canine and feline renal tumors is shown in Table 57.1. Of
tion to renal cancer in dogs and cats is consistent with the
these, carcinomas are the most common primary renal
(  d e d  
tumors in dogs, accounting for approximately 60% of all
Linehan 2005).
cases. Sarcomas and nephroblastomas are less common,
 Renal tumors may be unilateral or bilateral, although
accounting for 34% and 6% of primary canine renal
  nsn si si n e e
tumors, respectively, in one case series (Bryan 2006).
1987). In a review of 82 dogs with non-lymphoma pri-
In a report of 19 cats with primary non-lymphoma
mary renal tumors, only carcinomas occurred bilater-
renal neoplasia, carcinomas were overwhelmingly rep-
ally (Bryan 2006). Bilateral renal oncocytoma has been
resented with only one sarcoma, one nephroblastoma,
reported in a greyhound (Buergelt 2000). One other
and one adenoma (Henry 1999). Renal non-lymphoma
unique renal tumor that occurs bilaterally is the renal
neoplasia is relatively rare, accounting for less than 2% of
 cystadenocarcinoma associated with nodular dermatofi-
all canine neoplasms (Baskin 1977; Sapierzynski 2006).
brosis in German Shepherd dogs. (Moe 1997; Jonasdot-
Non-lymphoma primary neoplasia of the feline kidney
tir 20o0) A mutation in the Birt-Hogg-Dube gene has
is even less common, accounting for approximately 0.5%
been shown to be responsible for this syndrome. (Lin-
(  1 ) ss   g
 gaas 2003) No other breed predispositions have been
Overall, renal cell cancer is considered 4.5 times more
identified.
likely in dogs than in cats (Meuten 2002). Older animals
are most often affected, although nephroblastomas have
been reported in young dogs and cats (Caywood 1980;
Clinical signs
Frimberger 1995). This is analogous to the juvenile onset
of Wilms' tumor in people.
 In the early stage of disease, non-lymphoma primary
The cause of most primary renal neoplasia is unknown,
renal tumors typically cause few clinical signs. Renal
although feline renal lymphoma may be associated with
lymphoma may, on the other hand, be associated with
 e e a n n ss o ss 
tadenocarcinoma of German Shepherd dogs may be
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
first suspected due to presence of nodular skin lesions.
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 Some of the clinical signs reported for dogs and cats
577
578  Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 57.1 Reported canine and feline primary renal tumors?
Epithelial
Mesenchymal 
Others
 Renal carcinoma
Spindle cell sarcoma
Lymphoma
Transitional cell carcinoma (Militerno 2003)
Osteosarcoma (Munday 2004)
Nephroblastoma
Transitional cell papilloma
Hemangiosarcoma (0hler 1994: Locke 2006)
Giant cell tumor (Haziroglu 2005)
Tubular adenocarcinoma
Hemangioma (Peterson 1981: Eddlestone 1999)
Oncocytoma (Dempster 2000:
Buergelt 2000)
Tubular and papillary adenocarcinoma
Renal sarcoma
Renal adenocarcinoma
Leiomyosarcoma (Sato 2003)
Leiomyoma (Laluha 2006)
Sarcomatoid renal adenocarcinoma (Britt 1985)
 Malignant fibrous histiocytoma
Renal tubular carcinoma
Fibroleiomyosarcoma
Renal papillary carcinoma
Fibroma
Clear cell renal carcinoma
 Mixed mesenchymal tumor
Papillary cystadenocarcinoma
Angiomyolipoma (Wang 2001)
Renal Adenoma
*Reported in Klein (1988), Henry (1999), or Bryan (2006) unless otherwise noted.
with primary renal tumors are listed in Table 57.2.
ated with a secondary bacterial infection or due to the
Typical presenting complaints for symptomatic patients
primary tumor (Frimberger 1995).
 include lethargy, hematuria, palpable renomegaly, inap-
petance and weight loss (Klein 1988; Henry 1999; Bryan
2006). In advanced cases, patients may present in cri-
Diagnosis
sis, with acute collapse, hemoabdomen, ascites, or severe
 renal failure. Dogs with primary renal hemangiosar-
Renal neoplasia is most often detected via radiographic or
coma (HSA) may present with hemoabdomen, but this
ultrasound imaging of the abdomen. Of these two meth-
Occurs less frequently than with HSA of other visceral
ods, ultrasound is a more sensitive method of detection
sites (Locke 2006). Overall, the course of renal HSA
and permits evaluation of the renal architecture. Contrast
appears to be more insidious than that of HSA affect-
radiographs (intravenous pyelogram) may improve the
ing other visceral sites, with a 60-day median duration
 likelihood of detecting renal neoplasia, compared to plain
of nonspecific clinical signs prior to diagnosis (Locke
film radiographs (Klein 1988; Bryan 2006). Advanced
2006). Dogs and cats with paraneoplastic polycythemia
imaging with computed tomography or magnetic res-
-ou ym nsd a no oe  
 onance imaging may be used to better define the size
ical signs including convulsions and seizures (Faissler
and extent of primary renal tumors and to facilitate sur-
1998; Henry 1999).
gical planning. See Table 57.3 for suggested diagnostic
Physical examination of affected patients may reveal
examinations. The Veterinary Bladder Tumor Antigen
pale mucous membranes, renomegaly, abdominal dis-
test (V-BTA, Alidex Inc., Redmond, WA) may have appli-
tension with a fluid wave, and flank pain. The latter is
cation for detecting intraluminal carcinomas of the kid-
reportedly more common with renal sarcomas (Bryan
ney, although its use in this capacity is largely untested
 2006). Hemogram abnormalities tend to be non-specific,
(Henry 2003).
with the exception of polycythemia. However, most
Although lymphoma may arise primarily within the
affected animals present with anemia, rather than with
kidney, metastasis to or from other sites must be ruled
polycythemia (Klein 1988; Henry 1999; Bryan 2006).
out. In both feline and canine renal lymphoma, a ten-
Serum biochemical analysis also tends to reveal non-
dency for metastasis to the central nervous system is
specific abnormalities. Fewer than 25% of affected dogs
reported (Mooney 1987; Batchelor 2006). Carcinomas
have serum biochemical changes (Bryan 2006). It has
can arise from the transitional urothelial lining or from
 been reported that hypoalbuminemia is less common in
the renal epithelium, resulting in simple carcinomas or
dogs with renal sarcoma than with renal carcinoma or
adenocarcinomas with tubular or papillary differentia-
nephroblastoma (Bryan 2006). Proteinuria, hematuria,
tion. Clear cell renal carcinomas are characterized by
and pyuria may be detected on urinalysis, either associ-
Renal neoplasia !
579
Table 57.2 Characteristics of dogs with primary renal tumors
The metastatic rate for canine renal carcinomas has
been reported to be as high as 48% at diagnosis, with 69%.
Bryan (2006)
Klein (1988)
ofall dogshaving metastastic disease at death ( Klein 1988;
 Bryan 2006). Sarcomas may arise from any of the mes-
Carcinomas
60%
85%
Sarcomas
34%
11%
enchymal cell populations within the kidney, and have
 Nephroblastomas
6%
4%
a reported metastatic rate of 88% in dogs (Bryan 2006).
MST carcinoma
16 months
8 months
 The biologic behavior of canine nephroblastoma tends
MST sarcoma
9 months
NR
to be similar to that of carcinomas and sarcomas and the
MST nephroblastoma
6 months
NR
-dy (oz u)  si n oise poda
 Thoracic metastasis at diagnosis
16%
48%
mately two-thirds of all cats affected with primary renal
Metastasis at death
77%
85%
8.1 years
9.1 years
neoplasia develop metastasis, with the exception of tran-
 Mean age at diagnosis
Bilateral disease
32.4%
sitional cell carcinoma, for which the metastatic rate
4%
Necropsied
appears to be much higher (Henry 1999). Metastatic dis-
Clinical signs
 ease was identified in all 8 cats with renal TCC reported
Hematuria
32%
26%
in the two largest feline renal tumor case series to date.
 Palpable abdominal mass
20%
41%
(Carpenter 1987; Henry 1999) Benign renal tumors
Inappetance 
27%
50%
 including hemangioma, adenoma, fibroma, and leiomy-
Pain
7%
15%
oma are occasionally reported in both species (Klein
Weight loss
20%
39%
1988; Mott 1996; Henry 1999). However, it is not uncom-
Hemogram abnormalities
 Anemia
%88
26%
mon for difficulty to arise in differentiating between
Leukocytosis
20%
11%
 benign (adenoma) and malignant (carcinoma) epithe-
Polycythemia
4.5%
2%
lial lesions on the basis of histological examination
Serum biochemical abnormalities
(Carpenter 1987; Henry 1999). Likewise, misdiagnosis of
 Elevated alkaline phosphatase
22%
15%
feline renal lymphoma as carcinoma has been reported in
 Elevated BUN
22%
26%
%6
two case series (Carpenter 1987; Henry 1999). As such,
Elevated creatinine
20%
19%
it has been advised that a second opinion be routinely
 Decreased albumin
NR
Urinalysis abnormalities
Hematuria 
57%
33% gro5s
plasia is reported (Henry 1999).
50%
microscopic
Treatment
 Pyuria
53%
NR
Proteinuria
48%
61%
 Therapy goals when treating primary renal neoplasia are
Isosthenuria
36%
NR
dependent upon tumor type, location, and associated
MST, median survival time.
clinical signs and paraneoplastic syndromes. Acute ther-
Source: Adapted with permission from Henry and Higginbotham Small
 apy is often focused on stabilizing the patient prior to
Animal Clinical Oncology, 2009, Elsevier.
surgery by restoring blood volume, raising or lowering
the hematocrit to a safe level, and minimizing azotemia.
Surgical resection is the only therapy that has a demon-
content (Meuten 2002). These tumors tend to be a variant
strated survival benefit for primary non-lymphoma renal
of simple or solid carcinoma.
tumors in dogs to date (Bryan 2006). Goals of surgery
Various paraneoplastic syndromes including fever,
 may include removal of the mass to halt hemorrhage,
hypertrophic osteopathy, leukocytosis, polycythemia,
eliminate tumor cells in the body, and alleviate clinical
hepatopathy, and hypoglycemia have been reported to
 signs and paraneoplastic syndromes. It is important to
occur with primary renal neoplasia (Lappin 1988; Henry
verify a lack of neoplastic disease in and adequate func-
1999; Peeters 2001; Zini 2003; Battaglia 2005; Chiang
tion of the remaining kidney if complete nephrectomy
2006; Grillo 2007). Polycythemia may occur secondary to
is recommended. Furthermore, ligation of the renal vein
tumor production of erythropoietin, or because tumor-
 and removal of the entire ureter with the kidney is advised
induced renal hypoxia causes the remaining normal
 to minimize potential seeding or hematogenous spread
tissue to over-produce erythropoietin (Peterson 1981).
of cancer cells (Fossum 2007). At the time of surgery, it
Hypertrophic osteopathy may occur both with primary
 is imperative that the opposite ureter be identified, so
 nonmetastatic renal neoplasia and with renal malignancy
as to ensure that it is not unintentionally transected in
that has metastasized to the thoracic cavity (Brodey 1958;
the course of removing a large neoplasm (Fossum 2007).
Lucke 1976; Cayw0od 1980; Peeters 2001).
 e peu Ans oun so od auo u
580  Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 57.3 Diagnostic Evaluation of Primary Renal Tumors
Diagnostic Evaluation of Primary Renal Tumors
Test
Indications and/or results suggestive of renal neoplasia
CBC
Anemia, polycythemia
Chemistry profile
Azotemia, hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, elevated alkaline phosphatase
Urinalysis
Proteinuria, hematuria, pyuria, isosthenuria
 Thoracic radliographs
Metastatic disease
 Abdominal radiographs
Mid to dorsal abdominal mass, renomegaly, peritoneal effusion, retroperitoneal efusion
Abdominal ultrasound
Renal mass, metastatic disease (all organs possible)
Fine needle aspirate
May help differentiate carcinoma, sarcoma, lymphoma
Needle biopsy
May yield definitive diagnosis
Echocardiograma
Rule out heart-based mass if hemangiosarcoma
V-BTAa
May be positive in renal TCC
Renal scintigraphya
Confirm adequate renal function
Source: Adapted with permission from Henry and Higginbotham Small Animal Clinical Oncology. 2009, Elsevier.
?Additional/auxiliary tests.
survival time of 16 months compared to one month for
not been adequately evaluated in dogs or cats (Linehan
those not treated surgically (Bryan 2006). Survival times
2005).
 Cyclooxygenase-2 expression has been demonstrated
undergoing surgical resection of primary renal neoplasia
 in two of three canine renal carcinomas in one report.
(Lucke 1976; Bryan 2006).
(Khan 2001). However, a prospective evaluation of the
Paraneoplastic syndromes often resolve within days to
efficacy of COX-2 inhibitors against renal carcinomas
weeks of complete tumor excision. This is true not only
in dogs has not been done. The risk of impairing renal
function with these agents would need to be weighed
trophic osteopathy when it is due to a nonmetastatic renal
 against the likelihood of inducing tumor remission.
mass (Cayw0od 1980; Lappin 1988; Peeters 2001; Seaman 
2003).
Prognosis
The only renal tumor for which chemotherapy is
demonstrated to be of benefit is lymphoma (Mooney
 Information regarding reported median survival times
1987; Batchelor 2006). The use of cytosine arabinoside as
of dogs with various renal malignancies can be found in
part of the chemotherapy protocol in dogs and cats with
Table 57.2.
renal lymphoma is advocated in an effort to penetrate
The prognosis for dogs with renal HSA is affected by
the CNS, given the likelihood of CNS metastasis associ-
whether or not hemoperitoneum is present at the time
ated with renal lymphoma in both species (Mooney 1987;
of diagnosis. While the median survival time for 14 dogs
Batchelor 2006). For non-lymphoma renal neoplasia, no
with hemangiosarcoma in one report was 278 days with
chemotherapy provides a demonstrated survival benefit
 a 1-year survival rate of 29%, those that presented with
(Bryan 2006).
 hemoperitoneum (n = 2) had a median survival time of
Prospective evaluation of protocols incorporating
only 62 days. Overall, the prognosis for renal HSA in dogs
antimetabolites (i.e., gemcitabine and 5-FU), as are used
appears to be better than that seen with cardiac or splenic
in people with renal cancer, has not yet been reported in
HSA. This may be due, in part, to the low metastatic
the veterinary literature (Linehan 2005). In one report of
rate at initial diagnosis (Locke 2006). There are too few
a dog with a surgically excised nephroblastoma, adjuvant
vincristine and doxorubicin chemotherapy was admin-
assessment of prognosis. Survival times in the dog have
istered (Seaman 2003). The dog was free of disease at
ranged from weeks to greater than two years, depending
the time of the report, more than 25 months after diag
upon tumor stage and histopathology. The most favor-
nosis. However, one can only speculate as to the impact
able prognosis is afforded in cases with Stage I (confined
 of adjuvant chemotherapy in this case. Immunotherapy.
to the kidney without disruption of the renal capsule
 another standard of care in human renal carcinomas, has
or involvement of the renal sinus) disease that can be
Renal neoplasia  !
581
completely excised. Most reports of dogs treated for renal
Haziroglu, R. (2005). Osteoclast-like giant cell tumor arising from the
lymphoma indicate a poor outcome, with survival times
kidney in a dog. Acta Veterinaria Hungarica 53(2): 225-230.
of two months orless (Nelson 1983; Lascelles 2003; Snead
Henry, C.J. ( 1999). Primary renal tumors in cats: 19 cases ( 1992- 1998).
I Feline Med Surg 1(3): 165-170.
2005). However, there is one report of longer term sur-
Henry, C.J. (2003). Evaluation of a bladder tumor antigen test as a
vival (346 days) for a dog with bilateral renal lymphoma
screening test for transitional cell carcinoma of the lower urinary
 treated with vincristine, cyclophosphamide, cytosine ara-
tract in dogs. Arm I Vet Res 64(8): 1017-1020.
binoside, and prednisolone (Batchelor 2006).
Jonasdottir, T.J. (2000). Genetic mapping of a naturally occurring
Case outcome data for cats with primary renal malig-
nancy is scant in veterinary literature, but survival beyond
97(8): 4132-4137.
Khan, K.N.M. (200l). Expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in canine renal
one year is rarely reported. Cats with renal lymphoma
cell carcinoma. Vet Pathol 38(1): 116-119.
have a wide range of survival times from days to more
Klein, M.K. (19ss). Canine primary renal neoplasms: a retrospective
than six years (Mooney 1987). Low tumor stage and neg-
review of 54 cases. I Arm Armirm Hosp Assoc 24(4): 443-452.
ative FeLV status are prognostic for better outcome with
Laluha, P. (2006). Leiomyoma of a kidney in a dog: a rare diagnosis.
renal lymphoma.
Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 148(6): 303-307.
Lappin, M.R. (1988). Hematuria and extreme neutrophilic leukocy-
tosis in a dog with renal tubular carcinoma. I Am Vet Med Assoc
References
192(9): 1289-1292.
Lascelles, B.D.X. (2003). Surgical treatment of right-sided renal lym-
Baskin, G.B. ( 1977). Primary renal tumors ofthe dog. Vet Pathol14(6):
phoma with invasion of the caudal vena cava. J Small Arim Pract
591-605.
44(3): 135- 138.
Batchelor, D.J. (2006). Long-term survival after combination
Linehan, W.M. (2005). Cancer of the kidney. In: Cancer Principles and
Practice of Oncology, edited by V.T. DeVita, Ir., S. Hellman, and S.A.
N Z Vet I 54(3): 147-150.
Rosenberg, 7th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and
Battaglia, L. (2005). Hypoglycaemia as a paraneoplastic syndrome
Wilkins, pp. 1139-1168.
 associated with renal adenocarcinoma in a dog. Vet Res Commun
Lingaas, F. (2003). A mutation in the canine BHD gene is associated
29: 671-675.
with hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinoma and nodular
Britt, J.O. (1985). Sarcomatoid renal adenocarcinoma in a cat. Vet
dermatofibrosis in the German Shepherd dog. Hum Mol Gen 12(23):
Pathol 22(5): 514-515.
3043-3053.
Locke, JE. (2006). Comparative aspects and clinical outcomes of
monary metastasis arising from a renal adenocarcinoma. I Arm Vet
canine renal hemangiosarcoma. I Vet Intern Med 20(4): 962-
Med Assoc 132(6): 232-237.
967.
Bryan, J.N. (2006). Primary renal neoplasia of dogs: a retrospective
Lucke, V.M. (1976). Renal carcinoma in the dog. Vet Pathol 13(4):
review of 82 cases. I Vet Intern Med 20(5): 1155- 1160.
264-276.
Buergelt, C.D. (2000). Bilateral renal oncocytoma in a Greyhound dog.
Meuten, D.J. (2002). Tumors of the urinary system. In: Turmors in
Vet Path 37(2): 188-192.
Domestic Amimals, edited by D.J. Meuten.Ames, IA: Iowa State Press,
Carpenter, J.L. (1987). Tumors and tumor-like lesions. In: Disease of
Pp. 509-546.
the Cat—Medicine and Surgery, edited by J. Holzworth, I st edition.
Militerno, G. (2003). Transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis in
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 406-596.
two dogs. I Vet Med A 50: 457-459.
Caywood, D.D. (1980). Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy associated
Moe, L. ( 1997). Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinoma and
with an atypical nephrolastoma in a dog. I Am Arin Hosp Assoc
nodular dermatofibrosis in 5l German shepherd dogs. I Small Anin
16(6): 855-865.
Pract 38(11): 498-505.
Chiang, Y-C. (2006). Hypertrophic osteopathy associated with dissem-
Mooney, S.C. (1987). Renal lymphoma in cats: 28 cases (1977-1984).
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 191(11): 1473- 1477.
Vet Med Sci 69(2): 209-212.
Mott, J.C. ( 1996). Nephron sparing by partial median nephrectomy
Dermpster, A.G. (2000). The histology and growth kinetics of canine
for treatment of renal hemangioma in a dog. IAm Vet Med Assoc
renal oncocytoma. J Comp Pathol 123(4): 294-298.
208(8): 1274-1276.
Eddlestone, S. ( 1999). Renal haemangioma in a dog. ISmall Anim Pract
Munday, J.S. (2004). Renal osteosarcoma in a dog. I Small Amirm Pract
40(3): 132-135.
45(12): 618-622.
Faissler, D. (1998). Convulsions in relation to polycythemia: litera-
ture review and case description. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 140(3):
thropoietin production in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 182(12):
101-109.
1396-1397
Fossum, T.W. (2007). Surgery of the kidney and ureter. In: Small
Ohler, C. ( 1994). Transient hemi-inattention in a dog with metastatic
Arirmal Surgery, edited by T.W. Fossum, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO:
renal hemangiosarcoma. J Am Arim Hosp Assoc 30: 207.
Mosby, Inc.,p. 635-662.
Peeters, D. (200l). Resolution of paraneoplastic leukocytosis and
Frimberger, A.E. (1995). Treatment of nephroblastoma in a juvenile
 hypertrophic osteopathy after resection of a renal transitional cell
dog. I Atm Vet Med Assoc 207(5): 596-598.
carcinoma producing granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
Grillo, T.P. (2007). Hypertrophic osteopathy associated with renal
factor in a young Bull Terrier. J Vet Intern Med 15(4): 407-
pelvis transitional cell carcinoma in a dog. Car Vet I 48: 745-
411.
747.
 Peterson, M.E. ( 1981). Inappropriate erythropoietin production from
Hayes, H.M. Jr. ( 1977). Epidemiological features of canine renal neo-
a renal carcinoma in a dog with polycythemia. IAm Vet Med Assoc
plasms. Carncer Res 37(8pt1): 2553-2556.
179( 10): 995-996.
582   Upper urinary tract disorders
 Sapierzynski, R. (2006). Tumors of the urinary and genital systems in
caemia and uvieitis in an English springer spaniel. Vet Comp Oncol
dogs and cats. Part I. Neoplasms of the kidney, urinary bladder and
3(3): 139- 144.
urethra. Zycie Weterynaryjne 81(11): 739-743.
Wang, FI. (2001). Unilateral concurrence of pyelocaliceal diverticula
Sato, T. (2003). Leiomyosarcoma of the kidney in a dog. I Vet Med A
and intracapsular angiomyolipoma in the kidney of a cat. I Vet Diag
Physiol Pathol Clirn Med 50( 7): 366-369.
Imvest 13(2): 167-169.
 Seaman, R.L. (2003). Treatment of renal nephroblastoma in an adult
Zini, E. (2003). Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma with osteogenic
dog. IAm Amirm Hosp Assoc 39( 1): 76-79.
differentiation and paraneoplastic hepatopathy in a dog, possi-
Snead, E.C. (2005). A case of bilateral renal lymphosarcoma with
bly related to human Stauffer's syndrome. J Comp Pathol 129(4):
303-307.
58
Diseases of the ureter
Gilad Segev
Anatomy
voiding pressure is transmitted to the renal pelvis. Reflux
also predisposes to lower urinary tract infection (UTI)
 The ureters are fibromuscular ducts carrying urine from
by urine recontamination and thus should be evaluated
the kidney to the urinary bladder (UB) by peristaltic
in cases of refractory UT1.
activity transmitted from one muscle cell to the next
Diagnosis is based on various imaging techniques,
(Osborne and Fletcher 1995). The ureters originate in the
using iodine-based contrast material infused into the UB.
renal pelves and travel retroperitonealy along the aorta
Radiographs are taken when the bladder is maximally
and vena cava, towards the UB. Near the pelvis, they join
distended, during voiding or after manual compression.
the lateral ligament of the bladder and insert into the dor-
Results should be interpreted with caution as reflux may
solateral aspect of the UB. The ureters cross the bladder
occur in normal patients, depending on the type and
wall obliquely and open into its neck in the trigon.
depth of anesthesia and degree of bladder distention and
 compression (Christie 1973). Alternatively, reflux can be
Vesicoureteral reflux
       os 
 observing ureteral urine flow into the UB after dye was
Vesicoureteral reflux is a retrograde urine movement
cleared from the bladder.
from the UB to the ureters. It occurs when intraves-
 In young animals, treatment is not always indicated as
icular pressure increases above intra-ureteral pressure.
the disorder is often self limiting. UTls should be treated
Normally, as the UB fills, the intravesicular pressure com-
aggressively to prevent pyelonephritis, and urine should
presses the ureters, due to their oblique course through
remain sterile as long as reflux is present. In adults, diag-
the bladder wall, thus preventing reflux (vesicoureteral
nostics are warranted to identify underlying ureteral or
valve). The length and diameter of the ureteral submu-
UB causes to facilitate therapy.
cosal portion, its peristaltics, ureteral-UB pressure gra-
dient, and detrusor muscle integrity are all factors that
influence the vesicoureteral valve function. Vesicoureteral
Ureterocele
reflux is common in young animals and probably results
from undeveloped ureterovesicular junction; however, it
Ureterocele is a cystic dilatation of the intravesicular
is often transient as the length of the ureteral submucosal
sub-mucosal portion of the distal ureter ( Tanagho 1972;
 portion increases during maturation (Christie 1973).
McLoughlin and Bjorling 2003). Ureterocele is classified
Vesicoureteral reflux was documented in 10% of clini-
as orthotopic (simple), when it is entirely intravesicular,
cally normal adults dogs, more commonly in females,
 or ectopic. Ureteroceles, mostly congenital, were reported
and was usually bilateral (Christie 1973). Reflux may be
du ssno a s e e pe s  n
 primary, or secondary to obstruction, ectopic ureters,
(McLoughlin et al. 1989; Stiffler et al. 2002; Eisele et al.
infection, neuropathies, neoplasia, or iatrogenic ureteral
2005). It has also been reported as a complication of
or vesicular lesions. It may lead to renal damage if the
ectopic ureter correction in a dog (Martin et al. 1985).
refluxed urine is contaminated or in severe cases when
Like ectopic ureters, ureterocele is often concurrently
present with other congenital abnormalities (McLough-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
lin and Bjorling 2003). Clinical signs include abdom-
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
inal pain, lower urinary tract signs, and incontinence
583
584   Upper urinary tract disorders
(when ectopic). Complications associated with uretero-
 diagnostic and therapeutic aids as well as unique surgical
cele include UTl, ureteral obstruction (ipsilateral, con-
skills.
 tralateral or both), urethral obstruction, and secondary
The pathophysiology of naturally occurring UO is
renal damage. Clinical signs are more likely in ectopic
 not well documented. Most cats with UO present for
compared to orthotopic ureterocele; however, both can
medical care with advanced disease and both kidneys
be asymptomatic.
affected, although unilateral ureteroliths are more com-
Diagnosis is based on imaging techniques using ultra-
monly identified. (Kyles et al. 2005a) The severe azotemia
sonography, CT, uroendoscopy, and contrast radiogra-
present in most of these cats attests for a compromised
phy, which can also demonstrate ureterocele patency
contralateral kidney. The mechanical obstruction is
(Lamb 1998; McLoughlin and Bjorling 2003). Uretero-
aggravated by secondary local inflammation and spasm.
xa u uis eu erqo, e se uo eadde a s
Local ureteral damage (e.g-, rupture and stricture) is a
urography or as a vesicular negative filling defect if the
 potential complication of UO, but increased intraureteral
ipsilateral kidney function is impaired. Ultrasonograph-
hydraulic pressure and decreased renal blood flow are
ically, simple ureterocele is a rounded thin-walled intrav-
 more common consequences. The increased hydraulic
esicular hypoechoic structure. Ureteral communication
 pressure translates to increased pressure within renal
can be demonstrated if the ureter is dilated (Lamb 1998).
tubules and Bowman's space and when high enough,
 Treatment aims include elimination of clinical signs,
 may stop glomerular filtration altogether. Ifthe contralat-
preservation of renal function, and prevention of vesi-
eral renal function is preserved, clinical signs if present,
coureteral reflux. Various surgical procedures have been
 are pain-related, and often overlooked, thus the episode
described, including ureteronephrectomy, transurethral
 may go unnoticed. If the obstruction is dynamic, it may
endoscopic incision, ureterocele omentalization, uretero-
resolve spontaneously. The degree and chronicity of UO
are major factors determining the fate of the obstructed
Welsh 2006). Surgery must be individualized to the
kidney. Prolonged and complete UO will result in renal
patient and is usually associated with a favorable outcome
fibrosis and/or hydronephrotic atrophy, however, if the
with complete elimination of clinical signs and improve-
obstruction resolves, these changes may not occur or
 ment of hydronephrosis. If reflux is present, ureterone0-
may be incomplete. Thus, the affected kidney may have
cystostomy should be considered.
residual or normal function. Recurrent UO may lead to
 progressive renal damage.
Ureteral obstruction
If a complete UO does not resolve, renal fibrosis of the
Ureteral obstruction (UO) may lead to a rapid build up
contralateral kidney occur. The end result is one small
of uremic toxins and progressive renal damage. The pres-
Aau -aau a,au se suo ue Aaup
ence of azotemia depends on the contralateral kidney
 syndrome" Typically, patients are free of uremic signs
function, the number of affected ureters, and the obstruc-
at this steady state unless ureteral rupture has occurred,
tion severity. Although mostly acquired, congenital UO
but may present pain related signs. Acute uremia man-
has been reported both in dogs and cats. UO can be clas-
ifests following obstruction of the hypertrophic kidney.
sified as intraluminal, intramural, and extramural. It can
Its severity depends on the degree of UO and the residual
also be classified as acute or chronic, static or dynamic,
 contralateral kidney function. If one ureter is completely
partial or complete, and by its location. Intraluminal
obstructed, the severity ofazotemia reflects the contralat-
obstruction is the most common cause for UO in dogs
 eral kidney function.
and cats. It is usually caused by ureteral calculi; however,
The clinical manifestation of UO can be acute or
blood clots and inflammatory debris may also obstruct
chronic and may result from uremia or from pain due
the ureter, particularly in cats. Intramural UO can result 
to direct ureteral stimulation at the obstruction site and
from a stricture, neoplasia (primary or metastasis), urete-
stretch of the collecting system and the renal capsule.
rocele, fibroepithelial polyps, and proliferative ureteritis.
 Clinical signs are often nonspecific and include decreased
Extramural UO results from retroperitoneal space occu-
appetite, lethargy, vomiting, hematuria and pain (Kyles
 pying lesions, inadvertent ureteral ligation, or UB pathol-
et al. 2005a; Snyder et al. 2005). Interestingly, many
 ogy. The incidence of feline UO has increased dramat-
azotemic cats with UO present a considerably better clin-
ically over the recent years and is a common etiology
ical demeanor compared to cats with similar levels of
 of acute uremia in cats (Kyles et al. 2005a). It typically
azotemia of other causes. Oliguria and anuria may be
results from ureteroliths, which are almost exclusively
present; however, their absence does not rule out com-
composed of calcium oxalate (Kyles et al. 2005a). UO is a
  d q   e on ln i
challenging disorder often requiring highly sophisticated
 contralateral kidney, even if the latter does not contribute
Diseases of the ureter 585
substantially to overall GFR. Abdominal palpation may
reveal abdominal pain (more common in dogs) and
asymmetric kidneys, which is highly suggestive of UO.
Typically, in cats with UO one kidney is small and irreg-
ular while the other is enlarged, frm and painful.
Common laboratory abnormalities of cats with
ureteroliths included normocytic normochromic ane-
mia (~50%), az0temia (80%), and hyperkalemia (35%)
(Kyles et al. 2005a), whereas in dogs leukocytosis (50%)
and azotemia (56%) are common (Snyder et al. 2005).
Recent renal function data prior to the obstruction is
extremely useful in azotemic patients when assessing the
potential function of the obstructed kidney and the like-
lihood for successful outcome once ureteral patency has
been restored. The relative contribution of each kidney
and overall GFR are vital information that can guide
therapy; however, these are difficult to assess as long as
the obstruction is present. Urinalysis and urine sediment
examination may demonstrate RBC, WBC, casts, crys-
tals, and bacteria. Fifty percent of dogs and 8% of cats
with ureteroliths have positive urine culture (Kyles et al.
2005a; Snyder et al. 2005). Only 6.5% of cats presented
calcium oxalate crystaluria (Kyles et al. 2005a).
The diagnosis of UO is based on the history, clin-
ical and clinicopathological signs and is confirmed by
imaging techniques, often used in conjunction. The aim
is to identify an obstruction and to assess the sever-
ity of secondary renal damage. Survey radiographs may
demonstrate ureteroliths, as most are radio-opaque, with
a reported sensitivity of ~80% (Kyles et al. 2005a; Snyder
et al. 2005). Radiographs are extremely useful to follow
ureteroliths' location and to determine if the obstruc-
Figure 58.1 Ventrodorsal projection of ultrasonographic guided
antegrade pyelography in a cat with ureteral obstruction. Note
tion is static or dynamic. Ultrasounography is a readily
the dilated and tortuous ureter and the abrupt termination of the
available non-invasive and useful tool to detect UO and
contrast enhancement in the distal part of the ureter, indicating
to assess renal geometry and architecture. It had 77%
the presence of an obstruction.
and 100% sensitivity of detecting ureteroliths in cats
and dogs, respectively (Kyles et al. 2005a; Snyder et al.
uadp-oiiado pue sudina Aiaa st ll nnq (o
showed 90% sensitivity in identifying feline ureteroliths,
 Typically, a shadowing hyperechoic structure consistent
emphasizing the importance of combining these tools.
with an ureterolith is identified with a proximally tor-
Intravenous urography can be used, but enhancement
turous and dilated ureter. Hydronephrosis and dilata-
along the collecting system may not be suffcient due
tion of the collecting system may take days to develop,
to decreased GFR (Lamb 1998). Alternatively, antegrade
thus, their absence should not rule out UO. Dilatation
 pyelography can be utilized if sufficient pelvic dilation
progresses from proximally to distally, but may not nec-
is present (Figure 58.1) (Adin et al. 2003). Contrast CT
essarily reach the level of the obstruction. In cats with
is less invasive than antegrade pyelography and its high
UO, typically one small kidney with chronic changes is
sensitivity allows use of a small contrast material amount,
 observed while the other is enlarged with varying degree
thereby decreasing potential nephrotoxicity.
of hydronephrosis. Evaluation of chronic ipsilateral renal
 Management of UO can be medical or surgical. The
structural changes is essential, because if the obstructed
type and urgency of therapeutic intervention is deter-
kidney presents advanced chronic changes or marked
mined by the nature of UO (i.e., static versus dynamic),
hydronephrosis and marked parencymal loss the prog-
its location, severity of uremia, presence of renal infec-
nosis for renal function recovery once UO is relieved is
tion, and the risks associated with each procedure. When
poor. Combination of radiography and ultrasonography
pain is the sole clinical manifestation, dynamic UO can
586  Upper urinary tract disorders
be treated with analgesia and close monitoring to assure
2005b). Ureterotomy is usually performed with intralu-
 antegrade ureterolith movement. In human patients, dis-
minal proximal obstructions. Ureterotomy or uretero-
tal ureteral ureteroliths <5 mm in diameter will resolve
neocystostomy are performed with distal obstructions.
spontaneously in up to 98% of the patients (Segura et al.
The selected type of surgical procedure often depends on
1997); however, such guidelines do not exist in veteri-
the surgeon's preference, as some perceive ureteroneo-
nary medicine. In uremic patients, therapy is first aimed
cystostomy technically easier and with a lower compli-
at patient stabilization, and only secondarily at obstruc-
cation rate. Ureteronephrectomy is considered when the
tion relief. Theoretically, fluid therapy will increase the
 obstruction cannot be eliminated or bypassed (e.g-) prox-
hydraulic pressure on intraluminal obstructions and may
imal stricture, neoplasia) and with severe renal infection
promote antegrade movement; however, it should be
or damage (e.g-, renal abscess). When an objective assess-
ment of the relative contribution of each kidney to the
overall GFR is not available, extreme caution should be
of diuretics; however, this is not supported by evidence-
exercised prior to nephrectomy. Presence of azotemia is
based medicine. Other therapies, like glucagon, anti
evidence of significant impairment of the contralateral
inflammatory drugs and ureteral muscle dilators, used in 
kidney; therefore, even minor contribution of each kid-
human patients, have not been evaluated extensively in
ney may be crucial for a favorable outcome. As patients
dogs and cats. Extracorporeal wave lithotripsy has been
may develop future obstructions in the contralateral col-
successfully used in dogs to fragment ureteroliths, but
lecting system, the decision to perform nephrectomy.
the feline kidney is more sensitive to shock wave-induced
even in non-azotemic patients, should be cautiously
injury. In severely azotemic patients, hemodialysis will
considered. Thus, renal function (even partial) should
be preserved whenever possible. Kidney transplantation
and will enable a longer period for dynamic intraluminal
should also be considered when other surgical and med-
obstructions to spontaneously resolve. The risk for irre-
ical options have been exhausted. The risk of calculi for-
versible renal damage during this period, which depends
mation in the allograft should be considered. In 5/19 cats
on the degree and duration of the obstruction, should
that underwent transplantation, calculi were observed in
be considered. Studies assessing the renal response to
the allograft, 120-665 days after surgery; (Aronson et al.
feline UO are lacking. In dogs, complete ligation of the
2006); nevertheless, renal transplantation is considered a
ureter for 4, 14, and 40 days resulted in 100%, 46%, and
viable option for feline UO.
minimal renal function recovery, respectively, whereas
 The overall prognosis for non-azotemic patients is
partial ureteral ligation for 14, 28, and 60 days resulted in
 good (Kyles et al. 2005b; Snyder et al. 2005). One month
100%, 31%, and 8%, repectively ( Vaughan and Gillenwa-
survival rate for cats with UO was 75% (Kyles et al.
ter 1971; Fink et al. 1980; Leahy et al. 1989). The period
2005b). For these, survival rates at 6, 12, and 24 months
in which medical management can be attempted safely is
were 91%, 92%, 88%, and 72%, 66%, 66% when managed
yet to be determined; however, based on the limited avail-
surgically and medically, respectively (Kyles et al. 2005b).
able information, irreversible damage takes at least sev-
These results attest for the need for surgical intervention
eral days to occur even when the obstruction is complete.
whenever indicated. Over half of the cats are expected to
Surgical intervention should be considered in cases
sustain CKD, and therefore, should be closely monitored.
of static UO (e.g-, static ureterolith, stricture,
or
Moreover, the recurrence rate of UO in cats is as high as
neoplasia), ureteral rupture and urine extravagation,
40%, either ipsilaterally or contralaterally, with a median
severe infection of the obstructed kidney, and uncon-
recurrence period of 12.5 months.
trolled uremic signs or pain. Surgical options include
Ureteral injury and paraureteral urinoma
nephrectomy, ureteral resection and anastamosis, and
kidney transplantation (Kyles et al. 2005b). The type of
Ureteral injury can result from direct or indirect trauma,
surgery depends on the obstruction location, the sur-
ureterolithiasis, and surgical iatrogenic. Urinary tract
geon's preference and the likelihood of regaining renal
trauma mostly does not involve the ureters which are
function. Nephrostomy tubes can be placed either surgi-
relatively protected by their location and flexibility. Nev-
cally or percutaneously ultrasound-guided. These can be
ertheless motor vehicle trauma is an important cause
used in azotemic patients prior to surgery to restore GFR
of urinary tract injuries and was the major cause for
and urine drainage or in conjunction with medical man-
traumatic ureteral rupture (complete avulsions or par-
agement to allow a longer follow-up period for dynamic
tial tears) in a study of 10 animals (Weisse et al. 2002).
UOs. Complications are common and include urine leak-
Based on the small number of described cases, it is dif-
age, poor drainage, and tube dislodgment (Kyles et al.
   e    
Diseases of the ureter!
587
ureter is more prone to injury, as has been suggested
secondary to trauma, surgery, neoplasia, obstruction, and
 in humans. Nevertheless, injuries have been described
ureterolithiasis ( Yeh et al. 1981; Schultze Kool et al. 1984;
in both ureters at the ureteropelvic junction, midureter,
Tidwell et al. 1990; Moores et al. 2002; Worth and Tom-
and the ureterovesicular portion (Weisse et al. 2002).
lin 2004). They may cause UO, thus hydronephrosis and
Ureteral injury has been reported as a complication of
hydroureter may occur (Moores et al. 2002). The clini-
abdominal surgeries, mostly ovariohysterectomy, due to
 cal signs are typically non specific and diagnosis is often
inadvertently incorporating the ureter in the ligature of
delayed. Abdominal mass may be palpated if the uri-
 the ovarian pedicle or cervical stump.
noma is large. Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrates
A ruptured ureter will result in retroperitoneal or
a hypoechoic mass and potentially dilatation of the col-
peritoneal space urine accumulation depending on the
lecting system and hydronephrosis. Analysis of aspirated
rupture location and retroperitoneal integrity. Prolonged
fluid may confirm the presence of urine. If renal func-
contact with urine will induce chemical peritonitis, and
 tion is adequate contrast abdominal radiography or CT
if infected, septic peritonitis as well. Urine may also be
may demonstrate dilatation of the collecting system and
confined locally (see Urinoma). Patients often have a
 potential ureteral-urinoma communication. Based on
history of trauma or recent surgery. Clinical signs may
human experience, most obstructive urinomas can be
resemble those of uremic patients, but are often related
successfully treated by ultrasound guided percutaneously
to concurrent injuries. In one study, only 2/10 patients
drainage that relieve the obstruction, even if temporarily.
 presented signs related to the ureteral injury (e.g-, anuria
 Urinomas can be surgically resected thus alleviating an
dysuria, hematuria) (Weisse et al. 2002). Thus, diagno-
sis is challenging and often delayed beyond the day of
ureteronephrectomy is preformed (Moores et al. 2002).
presentation.
Hematuria, is neither sensitive nor specific (Sel-
Ectopic ureter
cer 1982; Weisse et al. 2002). Radiography may reveal
increased retroperitoneal space density and widening.
The ureter normally enters the dorsolateral caudal sur-
Retroperitoneal fluids should be confirmed as urine
face of the bladder and empties into the trigone after
before a diagnosis of ureteral rupture can be made. Con-
a short intramural course. Ectopic ureter results from
trast studies (radiography or CT) can aid in the diagno-
termination of one or both ureters at a site other than
sis and demonstrate the urine extravagation site, thus,
the trigone as a result of an embryologic abnormality of
facilitating surgical and medical managenet (Lamb 1998;
the ureteral bud of the mesonephric duct. The degree of
Weisse et al. 2002). Dilatation of the ipsilateral ureter and
deviation of the ureteral bud from the normal position
kidney may also be present ( Thornhill and Cechner 1981;
 determines the location of the ectopic opening.
Selcer 1982). Ultrasonography may reveal retroperitoneal
Vertebrates have one of three distinct excretory organs:
fluids, hydroureter, and hydronephrosis (Lamb 1998).
the pronephros, mesonephros, or metanephros. Mam-
Initial treatment should concentrate on patient sta-
a i da r   
bilization prior to surgical intervention. Concurrent
 ing development, the pronephros, mesonephros, and
injuries, shock, hyperkalemia and other complications
 a po sd pe nss ree sod
should not be overlooked. Partial tears may heal spon-
present in the developing embryo. In mammals, only the
taneously (Bjorling and Christie 1993). Surgical inter-
duct of the pronephros is retained as the mesonephric
vention, if needed, may include ureteral reanastomo-
duct. The mesonephros is active in fetuses, but becomes
sis, ureteroneocystostomy, stenting across the defect, and
vestigial in females and the mesonephric duct becomes
ureteronephrectomy (Weisse et al. 2002). The choice of
the ductus deferens in males. The metanephric duct
surgery depends on the location of the avulsion or tear.
becomes the ureter and is derived from the distal
Post operative complications include dehiscence, urine
mesonephric duct bud that lies close to the cloaca. The
extravasations and formation of stricture, fistula and uri-
mesonephric and metanephric ducts share a common
noma. Animals that are successfully stabilized initially
excretory duct and opening when the bladder forms. The
and do not develop acute renal failure have good out-
metanephric duct grows towards the metanephros, which
come with surgical management ( Weisse et al. 2002).
forms the kidney. As the bladder develops, the common
Urinoma is a potential complication of ureteral injury.
 duct is absorbed and the mesonephric and metanephric
It is also referred to as para-ureteral uriniferous pseudo-
ducts acquire individual openings. As development con-
cyst or paraureteral pseudocyst. The extravagated urine
 tinues,the mesonephric ducts displace caudally and open
stimulates a fibrous reaction, forming a capsule devoid
on a prominence on the dorsal urethral wall while the
of internal epithelial lining (pseudocyst) that engulfs the
 ureteral openings are in the bladder (Sutherland-Smith
urine. Urinoma has been reported in both dogs and cats,
et al. 2004).
588  Upper urinary tract disorders
Ectopic ureters may be unilateral or bilateral and
intramural or extramural. An extramural ectopic ureter
bypasses insertion at the trigone and inserts distally in
the urethra, vagina, or vestibule in females, or ductus
deferens in males. An intramural ectopic ureter inserts at
the trigone, but tunnels in the urethral wall to open dis-
tally. Variations of the intramural ectopic ureter include
ureteral troughs, double ureteral openings, multiple fen-
estrated openings, and two intramural ureters opening in
a single orifice (Stone and Mason 1990). Ectopic ureters
may be associated with other congenital defects of the
urogenital tract including agenesis, hypoplasia, or irregu-
lar shape of the kidneys; hydroureter; ureterocele; urachal
remnants, pelvic bladder; vulvovaginal strictures; and
 persistent hymen (Mason et al 1990, McLoughlin and
Chew2000)
Figure 58.2 Excretory urogram and contrast cystogram demon-
Young female dogs (median age of 10 months) are
strating an extramural right ectopic ureter. The radiolucent defect
most commonly diagnosed with ectopic ureter; bilateral
 in the bladder is the distal end of a foley catheter.
intramural ectopic ureters occur most commonly (Holt
and Moore 1995; McLoughlin and Chew 2000). Males
with ectopic ureter present later, with a median age of 24
phy with vesicoureteral reflux, fluoroscopy, or contrast-
months (Holt and Moore 1995), or they may be undi-
enhanced computerized tomography may be used to
agnosed because they remain continent presumably due
diagnose ectopic ureter; however, urethrocystoscopy is
to the urethral length and external urethral sphincter.
more reliable especially when combined with other imag-
 Breeds reported to be at greater risk for ectopic ureter
ing modalities (Figure 58.3) (McLoughlin and Chew
include the Siberian husky, Labrador retriever, Golden
2000). Dilation of the ectopic ureter is often, but not
retriever, Newfoundland, English bulldog, West High-
always, present.
land white terrier, fox terrier, Skye terrier, and miniature
While medical management may help control urinary
and toy poodles (McLoughlin and Chew 2000). A genetic
incontinence, surgical correction or laser ablation is the
basis may exist, but is unproven in most cases. Cats are
preferred treatment. An extramural ectopic ureter is lig-
rarely diagnosed with ectopic ureter.
ated at the distal end of the ureter at its attachment and re-
Intermittent or continuous urinary incontinence since
implanted into the urinary bladder between the apex and
 birth or weaning is the most frequently reported clini-
the trigone (neoureterocystostomy). The bladder wall or
cal sign in patients with ectopic ureter; however, most
urine from the renal pelvis should be collected at the
 dogs void normally. Physical examination findings are
often unremarkable, with the exception of moist or urine-
stained hair in the perivulvar or preputial region. Urine
scalding may cause secondary dermatitis, and owners
may report frequent licking of the vulval or preputial
area. Some dogs have vulvovaginitis, a vulvovaginal stric-
Left ectopic
ture, or a persistent hymen that can be detected digitally
ureteral lumen
or with vaginoscopy. Dogs often have a history of bacte-
rial urinary tract infections, which have been reported to
occur in 64% of patients (Stone and Mason 1990). Some
cologic management of urethral sphincter mechanism
Urethral lumen
 incompetence.
 Survey radiography should be performed to assess size,
shape, and location of kidneys and bladder. Excretory
urography combined with pneumocystography (Fig-
ure 58.2) (McLoughlin and Chew 2000), abdominal
Figure 58.3 Cystoscopic image of an intramuralleft ectopic ureter 
ultrasonography (Lamb 1998), contrast urethrocystogra-
 in a 1.5 year old, female intact, Siberian Husky.
Diseases of the ureter  
589
time of surgery and cultured because of the common
Fink, R.L., et al. ( 1980). Renal impairment and its reversibility follow-
 occurrence of bacterial urinary tract infections.
ing variable periods of complete ureteric obstruction. Aust N Z J
Traditionally, intramural ectopic ureter is treated
Surg 50(1): 77-83.
Holt, P.E. and A.H. Moore ( 1995) Canine ureteral ectopia: an analysis
by ligation of the distal submucosal ureteral segment
 of 175 cases and comparison of surgical treatments. Vet Rec 136:
and creating a new ureteral opening in the trigone
345-349.
 of the urinary bladder (neoureterostomy and urethral-
Kyles, A.E., et al. (2005a). Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic,
trigonal reconstruction); however, incontinence persists
and ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats with ureteral cal-
commonly (44-67%) (McLaughlin and Miller 1991;
culi: 163 cases (1984-2002). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226(6): 932-
936.
McLoughlin and Chew 2000) because the intramural
Kyles, A.E., et al. (2005b). Management and outcome of cats with
 segment of ureter disrupts the functional anatomy of
ureteral calculi: 153 cases (1984-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 226(6):
the internal urethral sphincter mechanism (McLough-
937-944.
lin and Chew 2o0o). In some of these cases medical
Lamb, C.R. ( 1998). Ultrasonography of the ureters. Vet Clin North Am
treatment with drugs such as phenylpropanolamine or
Small Amim Pract 28(4): 823-848.
ephedrine sulfate may resolve or improve the inconti-
Leahy, A.L., et al. ( 1989). Renal injury and recovery in partial ureteric
obstruction. I Urol 142( 1): 199-203.
nence. Transurethral laser ablation may also be used to
Martin, R.A., et al. ( 1985). Bilateral ectopic ureters in a male dog. JAm
correct intramuralectopic ureter (see Chapter 39). A rigid
Anim Hosp Assoc 21: 80-84.
(in females) or flexible (in males) endoscope is inserted
Mason, L.K. et al. (1990) Surgery of ectopic ureters: pre- and post-
retrograde into the urethra; diagnostic urethrocystosopy
operative radiographic morphology. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 26:
is performed. A guide wire or catheter is inserted into the
73.
McCarthy, T. (September 1, 2006) Endoscopy brief transurethral cys-
lumen of the ectopic ureter in order to protect the ure-
toscopy and diode laser incision to correct an ectopic ureter. Veteri-
thral wall. A laser fiber, diode (McCarthy 2006) or prefer-
nary Medicine Online 101(9): 558.
ably Holmium:YAG (Berent and Mayhew 2007; Berent et
McLaughlin, R. and C.W. Miller (1991) Urinary incontinence after
al 2008), is inserted through the operating channel of
 surgical repair of ureteral ectopia in dogs. Vet Surg 20: 100-103.
the cystoscope and used to transect the free wall of the
McLoughlin, M.A. and D.E. Bjorling (2003). Ureters. In: Text Book of
 Small Animal Surgery, edited by D. Slatter, Volume 2. Philadelphia,
ectopic ureter until the opening is as close as possible to
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1619-1628.
 the normal anatomical location at the trigone. Following
McLoughlin, M.A. and D.J. Chew (2000) Diagnosis and surgical man-
the procedure, dogs are more likely to be continent than
agement of ectopic ureters. Clin Tech Small Anin Pract 15: 17-
with surgical correction (Berent and Mayhew 2007).
24.
 In patients where the kidney cannot be spared due to
McLoughlin, M.A., et al. ( 1989). Canine ureteroceles: a case report and
 hydronephrosis or pyelonephritis, nephroureterectomy
literature review. JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 25: 699-706.
Moores, A.P, et al. (2002). Urinoma (para-ureteral pseudocyst) as a
can be performed.
consequence of trauma in a cat. J Small Anirm Pract 43(5): 213-
216.
Osborne, C.A. and T.F. Fletcher ( 1995). Applied anatomy of the uri-
References
nary system with clincopathologic correlation. In: Canine and Feline
Nephrology and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco.
Adin, C.A., et al. (2003). Antegrade pyelography for suspected ureteral
New York: Williams & Wilkins, pp. 3-28.
obstruction in cats: ll cases (1995-2001). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Schultze Kool, L.J., et al. (l984). Retroperitoneal reabsorption of
222( 11): 1576-1581.
Aronson, L.R., et al. (2006). Renal transplantation in cats with cal-
625-626.
cium oxalate urolithiasis: 19 cases (1997-2004). I Arm Vet Med Assoc
Segura, L.W., et al. (1997). Ureteral Stones Clinical Guidelines Panel
228(5):743-749
 summary report on the management of ureteral calculi. The Amer-
Berent, A.C. and P.D. Mayhew (2007) Cystoscopic-guided laser
ican Urological Association. J Urol 158(5): 1915-1921.
ablation of intramural ureteral ectopia in ll dogs (7 female,
Selcer, B.A. ( 1982). Urinary tracttrauma associated with pelvic trauma.
4 males). American College of Veterinary Surgeons: Scientific
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18: 785.
Abstracts, 3.
Snyder, D.M., et al. (2005). Diagnosis and surgical management of
Berent, A.C., et al. (2008) Use of cystoscopic-guided laser abla-
ureteral calculi in dogs: 16 cases (1990-2003). N Z Vet I 53(1):
19-25.
four cases (2006-2007). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 232: 1026
Stiffler, K.S., et al. (2002). Intravesical ureterocele with concurrent
1034.
renal dysfunction in a dog: a case report and proposed classification
Bjorling, D.E. and B.A. Christie (1993). Ureters. In: Text Book of Small
system. IAm Arir Hosp Assoc 38(1): 33-39.
Anirmal Surgery, edited byD. Slatter. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
 Stone, E.A. and L.K. Mason ( 1990) Surgery of ectopic ureters: types,
pp. 1443-1450.
method of correction, and postoperative results. I Am Anim Hosp
Christie, B.A.( 1973). Vesicoureteral reflux in dogs. JAm Vet Med Assoc
Assoc 26: 81-88.
162(9): 772-775.
Sutherland-Smith, J., et al. (2004). Ectopic ureters and ureteroceles
Eisele, J.G., etal. (2005). Ectopic ureterocele in a cat. JAm Anim Hosp
in dogs: presentation, cause, and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ
Assoc 41(5): 332-335.
Pract Vet 26: 303-310.
590  Upper urinary tract disorders
Tanagho, E.A. (1972). Anatomy and management of ureteroceles. J
Vaughan, E.D., Jr and J.Y. Gillenwater( 1971). Recoveryfollowing com-
Urol 107(5): 729-736.
plete chronic unilateral ureteral occlusion: functional, radiographic
Tattersall, J.A. and E. Welsh (2006). Ectopic ureterocele in a male dog:
and pathologic alterations. I Urol 106( 1): 27-35.
Weisse, C., et al. (2002). Traumatic rupture of the ureter: 10 cases.
Assoc 42(5): 395-400.
IAm Anim Hosp Assoc 38(2): 188- 192.
Thornhill, J.A. and P.E. Cechner (198l). Traumatic injuries to the
Worth, A.J. and S.C. Tomlin (2004). Post-traumatic paraureteral uri-
kidney, ureter, bladder, and urethra. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim
noma in a cat. I Small Amim Pract 45(8): 413-416.
Pract 11(1): 157-69.
Yeh, E.L., et al. (l98l). Ultrasound and radionuclide studies of
Tidwell, A.S., et al. (1990). Urinoma, (para ureteral pseudocyst) in a
urinary extravasation with hydronephrosis. J Urol 125(5): 728-
dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31: 203-206.
730.
59
Renal trauma
Patricia Sura
Renal trauma is diagnosed uncommonly in veterinary
 ciation for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) Organ Injury
medicine (Thornhill and Cechner 1981; McLoughlin
 Scaling Committee was subsequently appointed to create
2000), but is likely to receive wider attention with the
a severity score by which renal injuries could be com-
 increasing availability of advanced diagnostic imaging
pared for the purpose of clinical research (Moore et al.
modalities. In humans, renal injuries represent the most
1989, 1995). The criteria for each score are detailed in
common injuries to the urinary tract (McAninch 2000),
Table 59.1. This information has been validated, and
occurring in approximately 10% of abdominal trauma
correlates well with the need for surgical repair, need
cases (Shariat et al. 2007). In a study of 100 consec-
for nephrectomy, and increased morbidity and mortality
utive dogs with blunt pelvic trauma, 39 had concur-
with increasing grades (Santucci et al. 200l; Kuan et al.
rent urinary tract trauma (Selcer 1982). Superficial cor-
 2006; Shariat et al. 2007). Predictive value of the grading
tical lacerations, contusions, and other minor injuries
system, along with the presence or absence of a perire-
represent 85% of all renal trauma cases (McAninch
 nal hematoma and the need for a blood transfusion, was
2000). These injuries are likely to go unnoticed in most
correct when used in an algorithm to determine whether
veterinary patients.
surgery was required in 95% of patients (Santucci et al.
Anatomic location may be responsible for the pro-
2001).
tection afforded the kidneys from traumatic injury. The
 Thornhill and Cechner similarly divided veterinary
kidneys are sheltered by the ribs, spine, and thick epaxial
renal injury into five descriptive categories (Thornhill
musculature. They also have a degree of mobility per-
and Cechner 1981). Bruising and ecchymosis is the
most common, and typically resolves spontaneously. A
absorption of force and additional defense against dam-
 hematoma arises when accumulation of blood occurs
 age ( Thornhill and Cechner 1981; McLoughlin 2000).
between the capsule and surrounding tissue. This accu-
The most common causes of renal injury in humans
 mulation of fluid may resorb, or result in a persistent
and animals are blunt trauma, falls from heights, and
 cyst or abscess ( Thornhill and Cechner 1981; McLough-
 penetrating wounds ( Thornhil and Cechner 1981; San-
lin 2000). Surgical drainage may be required in these
tucci et al. 2004). Blunt trauma can either damage the
cases. A fissure is an incomplete tear of the parenchyma
kidney directly or lead to stretch injury and pedicle avul-
extending through the capsule, resulting in a perinephric
sion. Similarly, rapid deceleration from a fall can lead
hematoma. In contrast, a laceration involves disruption
to pedicle injuries (Santucci et al. 2004). Injury occurs
of the retroperitoneum, resulting in blood and/or urine
whenever the stress applied to the organ exceeds its ability
extravasation into the peritoneal space. Finally, rupture
to compensate and the chance of renal trauma increases
of the vascular pedicle may occur ( Thornhill and Cechner
with increasing impact velocity (Santucci et al. 2004).
1981). This may result in death due to massive hemor-
Human renal injuries are classified as minor renal
rhage (McLoughlin 2000).
trauma (85%), major renal trauma (15%), and vascu-
Clinical signs attributable to renal damage range from
lar injury (1%) (McAninch 2000). The American Asso-
mild hematuria to an acute abdomen. Hemoperitoneum
and uroperitoneum are also possible. Rapid loss of
blood can contribute to hypovolemic shock and exsan-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
 guination, although mild to moderate parenchymal and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
591
592
 Upper urinary tract disorders
Table 59.1 American Association for the Surgery of Trauma grading scale for renal injuries
Gradea
Type
Description
Contusion
Microscopic or gross hematuria; urologic studies normal
Hematoma
 Subcapsular, nonexpanding without parenchymal laceration
Hematoma
 Nonexpanding perirenal hematoma confined to renal retroperitoneum
Laceration
Laceration
 >1.0 cm parenchymal depth of renal cortex without collecting system rupture or urinary extravasation
IV
Laceration
Parenchymal laceration extending through renal cortex, medulla, and collecting system
Vascular
Main renal artery or vein injury with continued hemorrhage
V
Laceration
Completely shattered kidney
Vascular
Avulsion of renal hilum, which devascularizes kidney
Source: With permission, Moore et al. (1989)
*Advance one grade for bilateral injuries up to grade Ill.
capsular bleeding is more common. In humans, 80-85%
modality can be used to confirm urinary extravasa-
 of renal hemorrhage resolves spontaneously (McAninch
tion, renal contusions, depth of lacerations, and pedi-
2000). In addition, 76-87% of urine extravasation cases
cle injuries (Alsikafi and Rosenstein 2006). Its primary
resolve without intervention (Santucci et al. 2004). While
function is to determine whether surgical intervention is
lacerations of the renal pelvis rarely respond to con-
necessary (Santucci et al. 2004). The use of intravenous
servative management (Master and McAninch 2006),
contrast material can provide a three-dimensional excre-
AAST grade IV and V renal lacerations with urine
 tory urogram when evaluated with CT. This has replaced
extravasation can heal remarkably well. In a study of 34
intravenous pyelogram as the most widely used examina-
human patients with unilateral renal extravasation due to
tion for renal trauma in people (Al-Qudah and Santucci
trauma, three (9%) required ureteral stenting to resolve
2006; Alsikafi and Rosenstein 2006).
the urine leakage, while the remaining 91% healed with-
In veterinary patients, the use of CT is limited by the
out further intervention (Alsikafi et al. 2006). Similarly
need for general anesthesia, limitation of scanners to
in children, selective medical management of renal injury
secondary and tertiary referral centers, slow scan speed
results in a 5-11% operation rate (Buckley and McAn-
of non-helical machines, and expense (Herold et al.
inch 2006). Ureteral stents or percutaneous nephrostomy
2008). The trauma patient is typically stabilized, and
tubes (Alsikafi and Rosenstein 2006) may be used as min-
 surgery planned if there are penetrating wounds to the
imally invasive adjuncts to allow conservative healing of
abdomen, additional surgical injuries present, or if intra-
the kidney. In a report of uroperitoneum in 26 cats, only
abdominal hemorrhage is uncontrollable (Herold et al.
one cat had evidence of renal trauma and uroretroperi-
2008). Widely available diagnostics, such as plain radio-
toneum necessitating nephrectomy (Aumann et al.
 graphy, intravenous urography and abdominal ultra-
1998).
 sonography are more typically employed.
Hematuria in trauma patients suggests urinary tract
 In the hemodynamically stable animal, abdominal
injury. However, the degree of hematuria does not cor-
relate with the amount of damage present (McAninch
nostic step. Loss of detail may be noted in the retroperi-
2000; Santucci et al. 2004; Alsikafi and Rosenstein 2006)
toneal space, as well as loss of renal margination,
 unless additional parameters are used in the evaluation.
and space-occupying masses consistent with hematomas
For example, in adult trauma patients with hematuria
(Figure 59.1). Loss of retroperitoneal detail is a rela-
and systolic blood pressure <90, the chance of major
m siop oon jo ans e u uuy oyads-uou ai
renal injury is 62 times higher (12.5%) than if the blood
pelvic trauma, 26 dogs had loss of retroperitoneal detail,
pressure is >90 (0.2%) (Santucci et al. 2004).
with 43.5% (17) of those animals having concurrent uri-
 Both veterinary and human trauma patients are typ-
nary tract trauma (Selcer 1982). Excretory urography is
ically triaged into hemodynamically stable and unstable
indicated in these cases (Thornhill and Cechner 1981).
 groups, with treatment and further diagnostics planned
 Major causes of non-visualization of the kidney during
accordingly. The best imaging modality to evaluate
excretory urography include pedicle avulsion, thrombo-
the hemodynamically stable human kidney is contrast
sis, vascular spasm, and absence of the kidney (McAn-
enhanced computed tomography (McAninch 2000; San-
inch 2000). Excretory urography also is integral in doc-
tucci et al. 2004; Alsikafi and Rosenstein 2006). This
umenting leakage of urine from the collecting system
Renal trauma  593
the human medical field, it has virtually eliminated diag-
nostic peritoneal lavage for the evaluation of the blunt
trauma patient (Ollerton et al. 2006; Helling et al. 2007),
 au sd ss ss  
surgery, further imaging, or simple observation. Speci-
ficity of this technique in the diagnosis of hemoperi-
toneum is 90-100% (Hoffman et al. 2009). FAST is not
without limitations, in that parenchymal injuries, hol-
low viscus perforation, and retroperitoneal injuries may
be missed with this technique. Renal injuries in people
are 3.7 times more likely to be missed with FAST, but con-
firmed with ancillary testing such as CT or exploratory
laparotomy (Hoffman et al. 2009). Veterinary applica-
tion of this technique has been reported, with operators
of various skill levels able to detect free abdominal fluid
Figure 59.1 Lateral radiograph with decreased serosal detail in
(Boysen et al. 2004). The use of this modality also allows
the retroperitoneal area with a large mass causing ventral displace-
focused abdominocentesis to collect fluid for analysis.
ment of the colon and small intestines, and cranial displacement
The blood supply to the canine kidneys is approxi-
of the stomach. This is consistent with a large renal hematoma,
mately 25% of total cardiac output (Brown 2003). Hem-
or shattered kidney with hemorrhage. There is also a displaced
orrhage and rapid death is therefore possible from pedicle
fracture of the fourth lumbar vertebra. Myelography confirmed
spinal cord transection, and a necropsy was not performed. With
damage or severe lacerations to the parenchyma. Stabi-
permission, Federica Morandi, DVM, MS, DACVR, DECVDI
lization should consist of crystalloid and colloid support,
with intense monitoring of hemodynamic parameters.
(Figure 59.2). Abdominal ultrasonography may also be
indicative of continued hemorrhage, and exploratory
employed to evaluate renal parenchymal architecture.
celiotomy is warranted. Absolute indications for surgery
 Perhaps the most common use of ultrasonography in
 in humans are persistent, life-threatening blood loss, an
the trauma patient is the Focused Abdominal Sonogra-
expansile or pulsating renal hematoma, and renal pedicle
phy for Trauma (FAST) technique. FAST has been used
avulsion (Santucci et al. 2004; Buckley and McAninch
in both adult and pediatric patients to assess severity of
2006).
blunt trauma (Soudack et al. 2004; Helling et al. 2007). In
A recent review of the management of hemoperi-
 toneum in dogs recommended fluid resuscitation with
  d se  n n so  ss
mmHg, with low normal resuscitation endpoints (Herold
et al. 2008). This is performed to avoid clot disruption
and rebleeding from a sudden increase in systolic pressure
(Herold et al. 2008). In people, aggressive resuscitation is
associated with an increased incidence of intraabdom-
inal hemorrhage, compartment syndrome, and death
      (   )
that isotonic crystalloids provide the most rapid increase
in blood volume following infusion that rapidly declines
 due to redistribution. In contrast, colloid solutions pro-
vide a sustainable increase in blood volume, albeit at a
lower magnitude (Silverstein et al. 2005). A combination
of fluid types should be employed, with the goal of main-
taining renal perfusion without creating an acute increase
in systolic pressure.
Figure 59.2 Lateral image of an excretory urogram depicting
Similarly, if a compression bandage is applied, sudden
urine extravasation from the caudal pole of the left kidney, con-
release of the abdominal counterpressure may release the
sistent with a laceration involving the collection system. Note the
tamponade effect and lead to immediate death (Herold
well-demarcated renal pelvis and continuity of the ureter. With
et al. 2008). Vital parameters should be monitored every 5
permisson, University of Tennessee Department of Radiology.
minutes as pressure is released, and fluids administered as
594  Upper urinary tract disorders
needed and compression reapplied if indicated (Vinayak
tem, reapproximation of parenchymal edges, use of an
and Krahwinkel 2004).
omental interposition flap, and providing a retroperi-
 In general, vascular injuries of the kidney are rare.
toneal drain (Master and McAninch 2006). Closed-
In humans, the renal artery is most commonly affected
 suction drains are not appropriate, as they may increase
(60%), followed by the renal vein (30%) and combined
 leakage from the collecting system.
injuries (10%) (Master and McAninch 2006). Suspect
 Trauma is the most common etiology leading to partial
vascular injury is evaluated with an immediate arteri-
nephrectomy in humans (Master and McAninch 2006).
ogram and computed tomography (McAninch 2000), or
The pelvis and diverticula are closed, and the intra-
 intraoperative one-shot intravenous pyelogram in unsta-
 ble patients submitted to emergency celiotomy (Santucci
may be covered with capsule, transversus abdominis
et al. 2004). With this technique, a volume of contrast
muscle, omentum, or a serosal patch (Master and McAn-
material is administered with fluoroscopic visualization
inch 2006). In humans, 30% of a single functioning kid-
in the operating room to evaluate renal perfusion, as
ney is necessary to avoid dialysis (Master and McAninch
well as to demonstrate some degree of contralateral kid-
2006). Partial nephrectomy has been described in the vet-
ney function. As salvage rates following vascular injury
erinary literature, and adheres to the same principles as
are reported to be 25-35% at best, nephrectomy is often
in humans (Rawlings et al. 2003).
pursued (Master and McAninch 2006). Confirmation of
Sequelae to renal damage include urinoma, renal
renal function has been described in the veterinary lit-
abscess, hydronephrosis, renal vascular hypertension,
erature with cystotomy and visualization of the ureteral
and arteriovenous
fistulae formation in humans
 openings for urine production (Herold et al. 2008).
(McAninch 2000; Buckley and McAninch 2006). Delayed
Due to the potential for exsanguination from renal
hemorrhage, planned vascular control is used in the
tion and release of pressure from the offending vessel.
human field whenever celiotomy is planned for a hemor-
Urinomas occur in 1-7% of trauma patients, and can
rhaging kidney. Occlusion times of <30 minutes (Mas-
present as confined or free fluid (Al-Qudah and San-
ter and McAninch 2006) are employed. In the dog, the
tucci 2006). The condition may be asymptomatic, but
aorta can be compressed digitally at the level of the celiac
fluid can dissect along fascial planes, causing flank pain
 a      a
and edema. Many resorb uneventfully, but percutaneous
use of atraumatic means (Rumel tourniquets or vascu-
 drainage or ureteral stents may be necessary for complete
lar clamps) to temporarily address the continuing hem-
resolution (Al-Qudah and Santucci 2006). Of 34 conser-
orrhage and allow definitive repair (Burch et al. 1954;
vatively managed people with renal lacerations, a single
Herold et al. 2008). Canine renal vessels can be occluded
patient developed a urinoma. Other complications, such
for 30 minutes (Herold et al. 2008), and blood can be col-
as hypertension or delayed hemorrhage did not occur
lected in a sterile container for autotransfusion if desired,
(Alsikafi et al. 2006). The incidence of renal abscess
 provided that the presence of urine and gastrointestinal
due to contamination of the urinoma increases in fre-
contents has been excluded (Vinayak and Krahwinkel
quency with coincident injury, metabolic disease states,
2004; Herold et al. 2008).
and immunosuppression (Al-Qudah and Santucci 2006).
There is associated organ injury in 61-100% of renal
 Urinomas have been reported in two cats, both of
trauma cases (Al-Qudah and Santucci 2006), with a high
which were paraureteral and treated with nephrectomy
association of injuries necessitating operation in con-
(Moores et al. 2002; Worth and Tomlin 2004). Other
junction with AAST grade IV-V renal trauma in people
interesting case reports have shown right kidney her-
(Buckley and McAninch 2006). Reconstructed human
niation through diaphragmatic defects in cats (Marolf
kidneys function at 2/3 normal on average (Master and
2002, Katic 2007), as well as a nephrocutaneous fistula
McAninch 2006), and preservation of some renal func-
secondary to blunt trauma in a dog (Lobetti and Irvine-
tion is possible in the majority of repaired renal lacer-
Smith 2006). Penetrating injuries have also been demon-
ations (Santucci et al. 2004). Extrapolation is required,
strated (Borthwick 1971; Lipson et al. 1972; Dorn and
as this data is not available for companion animals, but
Stoloff 1975).
renorrhaphy may be of benefit in the absence of pedicle
While hypertension can be induced in canine kid-
injury to retain some degree of renal function, especially
neys following sudden reduction in functioning mass
in animals with preexisting renal compromise.
(Finco 2004), post-traumatic pressure elevations have
Surgical principles of renorrhaphy include exposure of
 not been reported. In contrast, hypertension occurs in
the entire kidney using vascular occlusion, sharp debride-
human renal trauma patients from renin overproduc-
ment of non-viable parenchyma, maintenance of accu-
tion, either due to arterial stenosis or occlusion, pressure
rate hemostasis, watertight closure of the collecting sys-
 on the kidney or AV fistulae (Al-Qudah and Santucci
Renal trauma
595
2006). Prevalence of this phenomena has been reported
Hoffman, L., et al. (2009). Clinical predictors of injuries not identified
in one study of 17,410 people as 0.57 per 1,000 (Chedid
by focused abdominal sonogram for trauma (FAST) examinations.
et al. 2006).
I Emerg Med 36(3): 271-279.
Katic, N., et al. (2007). Traumatic diaphragmatic rupture in a cat with
 In conclusion, the diagnosis of renal trauma in vet-
partial kidney displacement into the thorax. I Small Anirm Pract
erinary patients is rare. Extrapolation of the human lit-
48(12): 705-708.
Kuan, J.K., et al. (2006). American Association for the Surgery of
managed conservatively, with close attention to patient
Trauma organ injury scale for kidney injuries predicts nephrectomy,
status dictating the need and timing for surgery. If the
dialysis and death in patients with blunt injury and nephrectomy
for penetrating injuries. I Traurma 60(2): 351-356.
 principles of renorrhaphy are strictly followed, mainte-
Lipson, M.P., et al. ( 1972). Bullet lodged in kidney of a dog. I Am Vet
nance of some renal function may be anticipated, which
Med Assoc 161(3): 293.
could be of most significance in patients with preexisting
Lobetti, R.G. and G.S. Irvine-Srmith (2006). Nephro-cutaneous fistula
 renal compromise. Nephrectomy is warranted in cases of
in a dog. I S Afr Vet Assoc 77( 1): 40-41.
 expanding, pulsatile renal hematomas, and renal pedicle
Marolf, A., et al. (2002). Radiographic diagnosis - right kidney herni-
avulsion.
ation in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43(3): 237-240.
Master, V.A. and J.W. McAninch (2006). Operative management of
References
renal injuries: parenchymal and vascular. Urol Clin North Am 33( 1):
21-32.
McAninch, I.W. (2000). Injuries to the genitourinary tract. In: Smith's
Al-Qudah, H.S. and R.A. Santucci (2006). Complications of renal
General Urology, edited by E.A. Tanagho and J.W. McAninch, 15th
trauma. Urol Clin North Am 33( 1): 41-54.
edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Alsikafi, N.F and D.1. Rosenstein (2006). Staging, evaluation and non-
McLoughlin, M.A. (2000). Surgical emergencies of the urinary tract.
operative management of renal injuries. Urol Clin North Am 33( 1):
Vet Clir N Am-Small Anim Pract 30(3): 581-601.
13-20.
Moore, E.E., et al. (1989). Organ injury scaling: spleen, liver, and
Alsikafi, N.F, et al. (2006). Nonoperative management outcomes of
kidney. I Trauma 29( 12): 1664-1666.
isolated urinary extravasation following renal lacerations due to
Moore, E.E., et al. (1995). Organ injury scaling. Surg Clin North Am
external trauma. /I Urol 176(6): 2494-2497.
Aumann, M., et al. (1998). Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases
75(2): 293-303.
Moores, A.P., et al. (2002). Urinoma (para-ureteral pseudocyst) as a
(1986- 1995). I Am Arnirm Hosp Assoc 34(4): 315-324.
consequence of trauma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 43(5): 213-216.
Balogh, Z., et al. (2003). Supranormal trauma resuscitation causes
Ollerton, J.E., et al. (2006). Prospective study to evaluate the influence
more cases ofabdominal compartment syndrome. Arch Surg138(6):
637-643
Borthwick, R. (1971). Foreign body in a cat's kidney. I Small Anin
Rawlings, C.A., et al. (2003). Kidneys. In: Textbook of Small Animal
Surgery, edited by D.Slatter, 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA:Elsevier
Pract 12(11): 623-627.
Science.
Boysen, S.R., et al. (2004). Evaluation of a focused assessment with
Santucci, R.A., et al. (200l). Validation of the American Association
a au y aes ias nu ueo jo Aain aui o
dogs involved in motor vehicle accidents. JAm Vet Med Assoc 225(8):
I Trauma 50(2): 195-200.
1198- 1204.
Santucci, R.A., et al. (2004). Consensus on genitourinary trauma. BJU
Brown, M.A. (2003). Physiology of the urinary tract. In: Textbook of
SmallAnima Surgery,editedbyD.latter,rdedition.Philadelphia,
Int 93(7): 937-954.
 Selcer, B.A.( 1982). Urinary tracttrauma associated with pelvic trauma.
PA: Elsevier Science.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18(5): 785-793.
Buckley, J.C. and J.W. McAninch (2006). The diagnosis, management,
Shariat, S.F., et al. (2007). Evidence-based validation of the predictive
and outcomes of pediatric renal injuries. Urol Clin North Am 33( 1):
value of the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma kidney
33-40.
injury scale. I Trauma 62(4): 933-939.
Burch, B.H., et al. (1954). Temporary aortic occlusion in abdominal
Silverstein, D.C., et al. (2005). Assessment of changes in blood volume
surgery. Surgery 35(5): 684-689.
in response to resuscitative fluid administration in dogs. I Vet Emerg
Chedid, A., et al. (2006). Blunt renal trauma-induced hyperten-
Crit Car 15(3): 185-192.
sion: prevalence, presentation and outcome. Am I Hyperters 19(5):
Soudack, M., et al. (2004). Experience with focused abdominal sonog-
500-504.
Dorn, A.S. and D. Stoloff (1975). Renal foreign body in a dog. I Am
Vet Med Assoc 167(8): 755-756.
32(2): 53-61.
Thornhill, J.A. and PE. Cechner (198l). Traumatic injuries to the
Finco, D.R. (2004). Association of systermic hypertension with renal
kidney, ureter, bladder and urethra. Vet Clin N Am-Small Anim
injury in dogs with induced renal failure. I Vet Intern Med 18(3):
Pract 11(1): 157-169.
289-294.
Vinayak, A. and D.J. Krahwinkel (2004). Managing blunt-trauma
Helling, T.S., et al. (2007). The utility of focused abdominal ultra-
induced hemoperitoneum in dogs and cats. Comp Cornt Educ Pract
sound in blunt abdominal trauma: a reappraisal. Am I Surg 194(6):
Vet 26(4): 276-291.
728-733.
Worth, A.J. and S.C. Tomlin (2004). Post-traumatic paraureteral uri-
Herold, L.V, et al. (2008). Clinical evaluation and management of
noma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract45(8): 413-416.
hemoperitoneum in dogs. I Vet Emerg Crit Car 18( 1): 40-53.
60
Renal and ureteral surgery
Karen Tobias
Compared with surgery of the lower urinary tract, renal
ureter may persist. If local adventitia is lost, however,
and ureteral surgeries are often referred to specialty prac-
ureters may devascularize and 50% of affected ureters
tices because of potential risk for severe intraoperative
a e   s sd a )
and postoperative complications. Some procedures, such
The ureteral wall can regenerate completely when one-
       
fourth of the diameter is present (Borkowski et al. 1979).
ever, preoperative and postoperative care can be chal-
With intraluminal stenting, re-epithelialization of a par-
lenging in patients with significant renal dysfunction or
tially intact ureter is complete in 4-10 days. A fibrous
systemic illness.
bridge forms between the smooth muscle edges and
eventually contracts to pull the smooth muscle together
(Bellah 1989). The mural layer is completely regenerated
Healing of the upper urinary tract
in 4-6 weeks, although the regenerated muscular tissue is
Healing of renal parenchyma is affected by the amount
irregular and has fewer nerve fibers than normal ureteral
 of vascular damage or necrosis present. When vascular
 musculature. When ureters are completely transected, the
smooth muscle contracts and the mucosa retracts into a
repair renal parenchymal wounds. With parenchymal
 cuf With splinting alone, the gap between transected
ischemia from compression, electrocoagulation, or vas-
ureteral ends is healed by development of a connective
cular transection, inflammation, and infarction occur,
tissue tube that strictures after stent removal, resulting
delaying wound healing (Bellah 1989). Intraparenchymal
in ureteral obstruction (Huffman et al. 1956). Complete
hemorrhage increases the amount of fibrosis and renal
ureteral transections therefore require primary mucosa-
 damage, resulting in obliteration of local nephrons and
to-mucosa repair. Because urine delays wound healing.
dilation and obstruction of renal tubules in the area of the
stimulates fibrosis, and increases the risk of stricture, a
hematoma (Gerlaugh et al. 1960; Stone et al. 2002). Use
leak-proof seal is ideal (Bellah 1989). Use of a continuous
 of transparenchymal horizontal mattress sutures to stem
 pattern for ureteral anastomosis provides a water-tight
hemorrhage, however, will cause parenchymal necrosis,
closure, results in smoother mucosal apposition, and is
fibrosis, scarring, and atrophy (Gahring et al. 1977). Heal-
rapid; however, it may cause stricture because of a purse-
ing is more rapid when intraparenchymal vessels are indi-
string effect. Therefore, ureteroureteral or ureterocystic
vidually ligated.
anastomosis is usually performed with an interrupted
 Ureteral healing depends on the extent of damage and
pattern (Bellah 1989; Mehl et al. 2005). Fine monofl-
 presence of urine leakage. Ureters that are crushed for
ament synthetic absorbable suture on a taper needle
is most often used for ureteral repairs. Full-thickness
up to 60 minutes will temporarily stenose at the site of
injury (Brodsky et al. 1977). As long as local adventitia
sutures are completely covered by uroepithelium within
remains intact, renal function returns to normal within
3 weeks. Ureteral peristalsis is diminished for 1-3 weeks
3 months and radiographic evidence of ureteral steno-
(     
sis resolves, although local aneurismal dilation of the
Complete ureteral obstruction can result in permanent
renal damage, depending on the duration of the obstruc-
tion (Chapter 70). In healthy dogs, renal function will
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
normalize if ureteral patency is restored within 7 days
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
596
Renal and ureteral surgery  
597
after obstruction. Complete obstruction for more than
Abdominal radiographs (Chapter 15) and renal ultra-
4 weeks results in total loss of function of the affected
sound (Chapter 16) are performed in most affected ani-
kidney (Wilson 1977). Placement of a catheter stent or 
mals to evaluate renal and ureteral structure, identify uri-
nephrostomy tube for urinary diversion has been rec-
nary calculi, examine organs for primary or metastatic
ommended to maintain renal function and prevent the
neoplasia, and obtain fluid or tissue samples. Bilateral
deleterious effects of urine extravasation (Chapter 32).
renal involvement has been reported in 4-32% of dogs
Ureteral catheter stents that divert urine from ureteral
with primary renal tumors, primarily with neoplasia
repair sites may improve ureteral regeneration and reduce
of renal tubular cell origin (Klein et al. 1988; Bryan
 scar tissue formation. Large catheters, however, delay re-
et al. 2006). Abdominal metastases are noted in 54%
epithelialization, inhibit peristalsis, incite fbrous tissue
of dogs with primary renal tumors, with the liver and
reaction, and increase the risk of infection and stric-
ipsilateral adrenal gland most commonly affected (Klein
ture. Therefore, routine stenting of ureters is not recom-
et al. 1988). In cats with primary renal tumors, 36%
 mended. If urine diversion is required, a nephrostomy
have metastases to the abdominal cavity, including liver,
tube or periureteral drain can be placed (Bellah 1989).
 adrenal gland, peritoneum, and mesentery (Henry et al.
Nephrostomy tubes are also associated with a high com-
1999). Abdominal ultrasound and radiographs should be
plication rate (Kyles et al. 2005).
 In most animals with extensive ureteral damage,
 mals with ureteral calculi, since calculi may shift spon-
nephroureterectomy is recommended, unless the con-
   d g   e  
tralateral kidney is dysfunctional. A variety of techniques
2006).
 have been used for ureteral reconstruction, including
Thoracic radiographs should be performed in any ani-
bladder flaps and tubes, intestinal conduits, free mucosal 
mal in which neoplasia is suspected. Pulmonary metas-
grafts, and replacement with synthetic materials. Of
 -a1  s   1u  s
these, reconstruction with a full thickness pedicle bladder
dogs with primary renal tumors at the time of diagno-
flap, such as a Baori flap, provides the best success.
sis; 77% have metastatic disease at the time of death
(Klein et al. 1988; Bryan et al. 2006). In cats with
nonlymphomatous primary renal tumors, pulmonary
Perioperative management
 o  d  ae ss
Surgery is recommended for patients with complete
et al. 1999). Thoracic radiographs are also recom-
mended in patients who are dyspneic or have under-
inephric abscesses or cysts, unilateral renal neoplasia,
 gone trauma. Hydrothorax and urothorax have been
severe ureteral or renal trauma, or congenital ureteral
reported with perirenal cysts and diaphragmatic renal
anomalies causing systemic illness or incontinence. Diag-
herniation, respectively (Rishniw et al. 1998; Stork et al.
nostic tests, preoperative supportive care, and prognosis
2003).
depend on the underlying condition.
Renal function should be evaluated by contrast stud-
  n) s  ( ) 
larly if unilateral nephroureterectomy is being consid-
Diagnostic tests
ered (Lanz and Waldron 2o00). Systemic administration
In general, complete blood count, biochemistry and
of contrast medium may exacerbate renal injury and
coagulation panels, urinalysis (Chapter 7), urine culture
result in hypotension or anaphylactic shock (Feeney et al.
(Chapter 9), and blood pressure measurements (Chap-
 1980). In patients with decreased renal function, diagno-
 Bunapun ieue Aue u paoad sq Pinous (el 1al
sis and localization of ureteral obstructions can be made
D< ssd    d  d
mmHg is considered abnormal (Vaden et al. 2005). Risk
of intra- or postoperative hemorrhage is increased in
trast material results in nondiagnostic studies in 28% of
patients with azotemia, hypertension, or thrombocy-
cats (Adin et al. 2003).
 topenia (Bigge et al. 2001). Buccal mucosal bleeding time 
 In patients with suspected ectopic ureters, cystoscopy
is recommended in patients with uremia, which impairs
(Chapter 19) is more accurate when compared to contrast
 platelet adhesion and aggregation (Bigge et al. 2001). A
radiography (Cannizzo et al. 2003). Cystoscopy permits
cross-match should be performed in any animal with
coagulopathy or anemia or in which excessive bleeding is
 ization of multiple ureteral fenestrations, troughs, and
expected. Coagulation panels were reportedly abnormal
concurrent vestibular abnormalities. Additionally, many
in 39.8% of dogs and 51.9% of cats tested before renal
ectopic ureters can be corrected noninvasively with tran-
biopsy (Vaden et al. 2005).
scystoscopic laser ablation.
598  Upper urinary tract disorders
Preoperative care
When possible, uremia, blood pressure abnormali-
ties, anemia, coagulopathies, and electrolyte imbal-
ances should be corrected before anesthesia. Patients
with hypoproteinemia will require oncotic support. An
indwelling urinary catheter is placed to monitor urine
 production before and after surgery. Patients with ery-
throcytosis secondary to renal neoplasia may require
phlebotomy (removal of 10-20 mL/kg of blood) and
intravenous fluids to normalize packed cell volume 
and decrease the risk of intraoperative hemorrhage
and postoperative thromboembolism (Nitsche 2004).
Because complication rates are high after renal and
Figure 60.1 Ureteral and urethral obstruction from a large blood
ureteral surgery, medical management of nephric or
dlot in the bladder.
ureteral calculi is usually attempted before considering
surgery. Surgery is recommended for animals with com-
plete obstruction, worsening azotemia, or unresponsive
 gesia can be delivered by intermittent intravenous injec-
pyelonephritis (Kyles et al. 2005).
tions or a constant rate infusion of opioids. Animals
Maintenance of renal perfusion under anesthesia is
 should be monitored for anemia, oliguria or anuria,
critical; therefore, pre- and intraoperative hypotension
or evidence of urinary tract obstruction, and physi-
should be corrected or prevented. Drugs that cause
cal activity should be severely restricted for at least 24
hypotension (e.g-, acepromazine) or neprhotoxicity (e.g-)
hours. Depending on the surgery and the patient's con-
aminoglycosides and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
dition, early postoperative follow-up may include serial
 drugs) should be avoided. Animals with renal dysfunc-
red blood cell and platelet counts and biochemistry pan-
 tion are often premedicated with an anticholinergic drug
els, blood pressure measurement, quantization of urine
and opioids and induced with intravenous propofol or
 output, and reassessment of ureteral structure and func-
an inhalant anesthetic delivered by mask. Anesthesia is
 tion with ultrasonography or excretory urography.
maintained with isoflurane or sevoflurane, and blood
pressure and urine output should be monitored dur-
ing the procedure. Dopamine or dobutamine may be
Surgery of the kidneys
required intraoperatively in hypotensive animals. Epidu-
Renal biopsy
ral administration can reduce intraoperative anesthetic
Introduction
analgesia.
Renal biopsies (Chapter 23) are primarily performed in
The abdomen should be prepped from midthorax to
animals with renal neoplasia (Chapter 57) or diseases
pubis. If the incision is to be extended to the pubis or the
of the renal cortex, such as protein-losing glomerulopa-
urethra catheterized, the clip and prep should include the
thy (Chapter 53). They may also be recommended for
perivulvar or peripreputial region. Wide lateral preps are
patients with nephrotic syndrome without signs of sys-
performed in patients that may require feeding tube or
temic disease or acute, progressive renal failure (Chapter
nephrostomy tube placement.
Besides standard surgical instruments and suction,
49), for which the cause cannot be determined by less
invasive means (Vaden et al. 2005). Because of the risk of
fine needle holders, scissors, and thumb forceps should
complications, renal biopsies should only be performed
be available. For small ureters, 6-0 to 8-0 monofilament
when results are likely to alter patient management by
suture on a taper needle may be required. Magnification
 providing an accurate diagnosis or facilitating prognos-
(ocular loupes or an operating microscope) is critical for
ureteral surgery.
tication (Vaden 2004). They are not necessary in patients
with chronic or end stage renal disease or when own-
ers are unwilling to pursue further therapy. Contraindi-
cations for renal biopsy include uncontrolled coagu-
Postoperative care
lopathy or hypertension, large or multiple renal cysts
Intravenous fluids are continued after surgery to main-
 or abscesses, extensive pyeloneophritis, ureteral obstruc-
tain renal perfusion and prevent blood clot formation 
tion, and severe hydronephrosis (Rawlings et al. 2003;
within the urinary tract (Figure 60.1). Postoperative anal-
Vaden 2004, 2005).
Renal and ureteral surgery  
599
In healthy adolescent dogs, serial renal biopsies with
18-gauge automatic biopsy needles do not significantly
affect glomerular filtration rate (Groman et al. 2004).
 A minimum of 5-10 glomeruli are needed for diag-
nosis of renal disease. A surgical approach is five times
more likely to provide good-quality samples that only
contain renal cortex because it allows adequate patient
immobilization, complete visualization of the kidneys,
and improved control of needle penetration and post-
biopsy hemorrhage ( Vaden et al. 2005). In animals with
glomerular disease, samples should be of sufficient size
so that portions can be submitted in formalin for light
microscopy, in glutaraldelhyde or other appropriate fixa-
tives for electron microscopy, and frozen for immunoflu-
Figure 60.2 Insert the biopsy instrument parallel to the outer
orescence (Vaden 2004).
surface of the kidney so that it remains within the renal cortex.
 Tissues may be obtained by parenchymal incision, or 
o do ue yn ns asdo au e 
to the level of the external gliding channel. Angle the
laparoscopic approach. There is no difference in sample
needle so that it will travel within the outer fourth of
quality obtained by percutaneous or laparoscopic needle
the kidney (Figure 60.2). Keeping the instrument and
biopsy (Rawlings et al. 2003; Vaden et al. 2005). Dis-
kidney immobile, press on the end of the needle guide
posable spring-loaded biopsy instruments are preferred
with your thumb to insert it into the renal cortex, then
over manually operated devices because they are eas-
 trigger the firing mechanism with your thumb to sever
ier to control and therefore more likely to provide good
 the parenchyma with the external channel. Remove the
quality samples limited to the cortex (Vaden 2004). Nee-
instrument from the kidney, and apply digital pressure
dle sizes of 14- to 18-gauge have been recommended by
to the resultant hole to control hemorrhage. If desired,
various authors. In one study, samples obtained with
take a second sample from a separate site or from the
14-gauge double-spring-activated biopsy needles pro-
 same site, angling in a different direction. If the biopsy
vided excellent quality specimens with large numbers of
site continues to bleed, close the capsule or overlying
 glomeruli, while samples obtained with 18-gauge biopsy
peritoneum with a simple interrupted or cruciate suture
needles often had few glomeruli and were crushed or
of 3-0 or 4-0 monoflament absorbable material on a
fragmented (Rawlings et al. 2003). In another study, sam-
taper needle. To expose the sampled tissue, spring-load
ples obtained with 16-gauge or 18-gauge needles were
the needle guide, then extend the needle guide from the
more likely to contain only cortex and less likely to con-
external channel. Using a syringe and needle, spray the
tain medulla compared with samples obtained using a
guide with a stream of sterile saline to gently dislodge
14-gauge instrument ( Vaden et al. 2005). Poor sampling
 the sample into a container.
techniques or insufficient sample size may result in incor-
rect diagnosis (Zatelli et al. 2003).
 Laparoscopic approach
Techniques
Prep and drape the ventral and lateral abdominal sur-
faces. With the animal in dorsal recumbency, insert the
Semi-automatic needle biopsy technique
primary trocar cannula (10 or 12 mm) on the midline,
Select a new 14- or 16-gauge biopsy needle with a 1.7-2.0
 3 cm caudal to the umbilicus, using an open technique.
crm distal channel. Spring load the needle guide by pulling
Place traction sutures on both sides of the linea alba to
back on the handle. With some instruments, the needle
maintain a tight seal around the trocar cannula. With
 guide can be retracted either 1 or 2 cm into the external
an insuflator, distend the peritoneal cavity with carbon
gliding cannula. Depth of biopsy should be based on renal
 dioxide. Insert the laparoscope through the cannula and
size and biopsy location. For generalized renal disease,
attach the camera and light source. Place a second tro-
select a biopsy site that will include only renal cortex, for
car cannula (5 mm) paramedian and caudal to the first
example, across the cranial or caudal pole or longitudi-
cannula. Insert laparoscopic forceps through the 5 mm
nally along the outer, convex surface of the kidney. Grasp
 cannula to manipulate the viscera. Roll the dog slightly
the kidney with one hand to elevate it from the paralum-
laterally to improve exposure of the kidney of inter-
bar fossa. If necessary, free it from its peritoneal attach-
 est. Stabilize the kidney with the laparoscopic forceps,
ments. Insert the tip of the guide into the parenchyma
then palpate the abdominal wall near the kidney. Make
600  Upper urinary tract disorders
a small skin incision in the abdominal wall and insert a
16-cm long biopsy needle through the incision into the
abdomen, visualizing the insertion with the laparosope.
 Position the biopsy needle tangential to the surface of the
kidney and activate the spring mechanism. Examine the
site for bleeding (Rawlings et al. 2003) (Chapter 21).
Although the kidney can be approached through a
 paracostal incision, a ventral midline celiotomy is more
commonly performed. Elevate the kidney from the
paralumbar fossa. Free the kidney from its peritoneal and
sublumbar attachments if it is covered in fat or cannot
Figure 60.4 Take wide shallow bites of parenchyma and capsule
be easily retracted from the abdomen, or if a focal lesion
to dlose the biopsy site.
is present or the renal arteries are to be occluded with a
tourniquet or vascular clamp. If an assistant is available,
sule or along one edge with fine thumb forceps, being
the renal arteries are palpated and digitally occluded
careful not to crush the tissues.
between thumb and forefinger. If no assistant is available,
 If a skin punch biopsy is used, insert it through the
reflect thekidney ventromedially; identify the renalartery
capsule and into the parenchyma with a gentle twisting
and occlude it with a vascular clamp or Rumel tourniquet.
motion. Angle the biopsy punch as you withdraw it from
The renal parenchyma will soften 30-60 seconds after
the biopsy site to remove the sample. If the sample is not
arterial occlusion. Place a laparotomy pad dorsolateral to
completely detached, use fine scissors to sever parenchy-
the kidney to keep it elevated. Limit continuous occlusion
mal attachments. In some cases, the sample will remain
time to 20 minutes.
in the punch and can be removed by inserting saline or a
A sample can be obtained with a 4 mm skin punch
stylet through the opposite end of the instrument.
biopsy or scalpel blade. With a no. 11 or 15 scalpel blade,
Close the defect with simple interrupted or cruciate
make a crescent-shaped incision 5-10 mm long and about
sutures of 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable monofilament material
 5 mm deep into the renal cortex. The kidney will bleed
on a taper needle. Take wide bites, including parenchyma
readily at this time; if the artery is properly occluded,
lateral to the incision (Figure 60.4). Follow the curve of
hemorrhage will be dark and flow continuously. If the
the needle as you pass it through the tissues and do not
artery is not occluded, hemorrhage will be bright red and
lift up when passing the needle or tying the suture, as this
pulsating. Connect the two ends of the incision with a
will cut through the tissues and increase hemorrhage.
straight cut, angling inward to sever remaining parenchy-
mal attachments (Figure 60.3). Remove the sample by
elevating it with the blade or gently lifting it by the cap-
Complications
Complications are reported in 1-21.7% of animals
undergoing surgical renal biopsies; rates are similar for
wedge and needle techniques (Vaden et al. 2005). Com-
plications are more likely to occur in animals with throm-
bocytopenia or prolonged clotting times (Bigge et al.
2001; Vaden et al. 2005). Other factors associated with
complications include serum creatinine >5 mg/dL and
patient age >4 years or weight less than 5 kg (Vaden
2004). Major complications are seen in 8.9% of ani-
mals, with severe hemorrhage being the most com-
mon. Uncontrolled systemic hypertension or adminis-
tration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs within
the previous 5 days may increase the risk of hemorrhage
(Vaden 2004). Other complications include hematuria,
Figure 60.3 Make a semicircular incision in the renal
hydronephrosis secondary to renal pelvis or ureteral
parenchyma, then transect the biopsy specimen with a straight 
 obstruction by blood clots, renal infarction, damage
cut, angling inward.
to renal vasculature, intrarenal arteriovenous fistula
Renal and ureteral surgery 
601
formation, infection, cyst or intrarenal hematoma for-
mal gap. Tissue adhesive will not adhere if applied too
mation, and renal fibrosis (Bigge et al. 2001; Vaden 2004,
thickly or if the wound is bleeding vigorously. The
2005). Microscopic hematuria is expected in 20-70% of
 adhesive dries within 60 seconds and induces histologic
dogs and cats and generally resolves within 48-72 hours.
changes similar to suture (Tate et al. 2006; Tobias et al.
Macroscopic hematuria is reported in 1-4% and usually
2007).
resolves within 24 hours. Small perirenalhematomas may
be seen in 10% of dogs and 17% of cats. Linear infarcts
Nephrotomy
and parenchymal fibrosis and atrophy are common after
Introduction
biopsy, and retention cysts may develop along needle
tracts. Effect on renal function is minimal in healthy ani-
The most common indication for nephrotomy is removal
mals (Vaden 2004, 2005). Death is reported in ≤3% of
of renal calculi (Chapter 69). Because of potential com-
animals (Vaden 2004).
plications, however, renal calculus removal is usually only
 performed in animals that have significant morbidity
Repair of renal lacerations
 from infection, progressive renal dysfunction, or obstruc-
 tion and that do not improve with medical management
Introduction
(Ross et al. 1999; Ross et al. 2007). Previous studies
Capsular closure, with or without inclusion of superfi-
 reported temporary postoperative decreases in glomeru-
cial parenchyma, is used to control hemorrhage in ani-
lar filtration rate of 15-50% in normal dogs within 4
mals with renal lacerations or incisions (Chapter 59).
 weeks after undergoing nephrotomy; however, renal per-
 To reduce parenchymal engorgement and improve cap-
fusion in these dogs may have been affected by anesthetic
sular apposition, the renal artery should be occluded
protocol and intraoperative hypotension (Gahring et al.
digitally or with an atraumatic clamp before attempt-
1977; Fitzpatrick et al. 1980; Stone et al. 2002). Addition-
 ing repair. Bleeding from iatrogenic or traumatic renal
ally, extensive compression of parenchyma with mattress
lacerations that persists after placement of capsular
sutures during nephrotomy closure can decrease perfu-
or superficial parenchymal sutures may be controlled
sion (Gahring et al. 1977). Infusion of mannitol dur-
with sterile biodegradeable cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive.
 ing total renal ischemia may reduce cell swelling and
Sterile copolymer blends of ethyl and methoxypropyl
deterioration of renal function (Stone et al. 2002). With
cyanoacrylate are hydrolyzed and absorbed by the tissues
within 60-90 days of application ( Tobias et al. 2007). In
nique, unilateral nephrotomy has minimal effect on renal
 patients with extensive trauma, nephroureterectomy may
function in normal cats (Bolliger 2005). Effect in animals
be required.
with preexisting renal dysfunction is unknown. Since
 nephrolithiasis is not associated with increased rates of
Suture closure
mortality or disease progression in cats with mild or
moderate chronic renal disease, medical management is
Once the parenchyma begins to soften after renal artery
recommended when renal function is stable (Ross et al.
occlusion, appose the renal capsule with a simple inter-
2007).
 rupted, cruciate, mattress, or continuous paftern, using
Nephrotomy can be performed with a bisectional or
3-0 or 4-0 absorbable monoflament suture on a taper
intersegmental technique. In the bisectional technique,
 needle. Although interrupted sutures take longer to place,
the kidney is divided along its longitudinal midline; thus,
they are usually more reliable in animals with thin cap-
 intraparenchymal vessels that cross the midline are sev-
sules. Because the capsule tears easily, a superficial bite of
 parenchyma can be included with each suture. As with
is divided along the vascular boundary between the two
renal biopsy closure, follow the curve of the needle and
halves of the kidney, leaving major parenchymal vessels
do not lift up when taking tissue bites or tying knots.
 intact. In normal dogs, bisectional nephrotomy results 
Apply digital pressure for 5 minutes to control continued
in significantly greater intrarenal hemorrhage, cortical
hemorrhage (Bjorling and Petersen et al. 1990).
 infarction, and cortical inflammation 8 days after surgery
than intersegmental nephrotomy however, neither tech-
Cyanoacrylate capsular closure
nique decreases renal function (King 1974; Stone et al.
As with the suture technique, temporarily occlude the
2002). In normal cats, bisectional nephrotomy with blunt
renal arteries and, once the parenchyma becomes soff,
 parenchymal separation and no intraparenchymal vascu-
hold the capsule edges in apposition with manual com-
lar ligation has no significant effect on glomerular filtra-
 pression. Apply a thin layer of tissue adhesive over the lac-
fion rate, as long as hemorrhage and vascular disruption
eration; do not allow the adhesive to enter the parenchy-
 are minimal (King et al. 2006). Obstructive patterns may
602  Upper urinary tract disorders
be seen on scintigraphy 48 hours after nephrotomy but
usually resolve within 7 days.
Some authors recommend performing nephrotomies
4-6 weeks apart in animals with bilateral disease (Ross
et al. 1999; Lanz and Waldron et al. 2000). The deci-
sion to perform bilateral versus unilateral staged nephro-
tomy depends on the patient's renal function, degree of
obstruction, presence of severe pyelonephritis, and over-
all condition of the animal (Ross et al. 1999). If staged
procedures are performed, renal function should be re-
evaluated before performing the second surgery. Some
authors recommend operating on the least affected kid-
 ney first since they feel it is less likely to be affected
by anesthesia and surgery. Complete obstruction to
urine outflow in patients with a concomitant uri-
nary tract infection is a surgical emergency because of
the risk of sepsis and acute renal failure (Ross et al.
1999).
Technique
 Bisectional nephrotomy
Elevate the kidney from the paralumbar fossa and free
it from its sublumbar attachments with sharp and blunt
 dissection. Often, the peritoneal attachments can be torn 
digitally. Small vessel from the peritoneum or sublum-
APanas
bar attachments may penetrate the renal capsule and
will bleed when torn. Control hemorrhage with digital
Figure 60.5 Nephrotomy (from Lanz and Waldron, 2000)
pressure or careful bipolar electrocautery. Occlude the
renal artery(ies) with atraumatic vascular forceps, rumel
grade through a ventral cystotomy and gently flush to
tourniquet, or an assistant's fingers. Limit renal ischemic
ensure patency. Close the nephrotomy site with 4-0 or
time to 20 minutes (Figure 60.5). If possible, occlude only
5-0 monofilament absorbable suture in a continuous or
the renal artery so that the renal parenchyma drains and
interrupted pattern, with suture bites placed through the
becomes more pliable. Place a moistened laparotomy pad
renal capsule and a small amount of cortex (Lanz and
dorsolateral to the kidney to keep it elevated during the
Waldron et al. 2000; Stone et al. 2002). Release the vas-
procedure.
cular occlusion and examine the kidney for hemorrhage.
 Incise the renal capsule longitudinally along the mid-
Additional simple interrupted sutures are added when
line of the convex surface of the kidney with a no.10 or
there is active hemorrhage; replacement of the bulldog
no. 15 scalpel blade. Extend the incision over two-thirds
clamp may be required to close the capsule if hemor-
of the kidney's length. Separate the renal parenchyma
rhage is significant (Lanz and Waldron 2000; King et al.
bluntly to the level of the pelvis with hemostatic forceps
2006). Hemorrhage can also be reduced with direct pres-
 or the blunt end of a scalpel handle. Double ligate any
sure or by tacking omentum over the site (King et al.
blood vessels encountered during bisection with 4-0 or
2006). In some animals, bisectional nephrotomy can be
5-0 absorbable suture material before transection.
closed by direct digitalapposition and compression of the
Once the renal pelvis is exposed, remove calculi with
bisected renal parenchyma. Press the two halves together,
forceps and submit for culture and quantitative analy-
then release the renal artery clamp. Maintain manual
sis. Obtain a culture of the renal pelvis as well. Exam-
compression until hemostasis is achieved (Gahring et al.
ine the pelvis for additional calculi, particularly within
1977).
the recesses of the major calices. With a syringe, small
catheter, or lacrimal cannula, flush the renal pelvis thor-
Intersegmental nephrotomy
oughly with warm saline to remove any remaining min-
eral aggregates, clots, or debris. If desired, catheterize
As with bisectional nephrotomy, elevate the kidney and
 the ureter antegrade through the renal pelvis or retro-
free it from its peritoneal and sublumbar attachments.
Renal and ureteral surgery 
603
 Reflect the kidney ventromedially to expose its dorsal
tomy tubes are associated with a high rate of postop-
surface, and dissect the fat gently away from the renal
erative complications, routine placement after ureteral
pelvis to expose the dorsal and ventral branches of the
surgery is not recommended.
renal artery. To determine the intersegmental boundary
of vascular perfusion, place a vascular clamp on the dor-
Technique
sal branch of the renal artery, then administer 5 mL of
indigo carmine into a peripheral vein. The portion of
Clip, prep, and drape the ventral and lateral surfaces of
the kidney supplied by the ventral branch of the renal
the abdomen. Through a midline abdominal incision,
artery will be outlined by the dye. As with bisectional
 perforate the peritoneum and abdominal musculature of
nephrotomy, temporarily occlude the renal arteries.
the lateral abdominal wall near the kidney on the affected
Incise the renal capsule along the intersegmental plane,
side, then incise the skin over the forceps. Insert a wire
and bluntly separate the renal parenchyma (Stone et al.
stylet into a 5 or 8 Fr catheter (e.g-, red rubber or Foley).
2002).
Pass the catheter through the abdominal wall incision
into the abdomen, guiding it in with the forceps. Insert
Complications
the catheter and stylet through the renal capsule and
 cortex and advance them into the renal pelvis. Holding
 Intrarenal hemorrhage is usually marked 1 day after
the tube stable, remove the stylet carefully so that the
nephrotomy. Persistent hemorrhage and vascular dis-
catheter is retained in the renal pelvis.
ruption may cause permanent parenchymal damage
 If a proximal ureterotomy has been performed, a
(Stone et al. 2002; King et al. 2006). Other potential
 20-gauge over-the-needle intravenous catheter can be
complications include perirenal hemorrhage, persistent
advanced retrograde through the ureterotomy and renal
microscopic hematuria, and hydronephrosis secondary
 pelvis and exited out through the renal cortex. Tie alength
to blood clot obstruction (Stone et al. 2002; Bolliger et al.
of suture material to a 5 Fr red rubber or Foley catheter
2005; King et al. 2006). Perirenal hemorrhage may occur
and pass the suture through the over-the-needle catheter.
if sutures pull through the capsule and superficial cortex
Gradually withdraw the over-the-needle catheter and
or if the parenchyma is not apposed sufficiently during
suture from the ureterotomy site, pulling the red rub-
the procedure. Postoperative urine leakage may occur in
ber or Foley catheter gently through the renal cortex
animals with hydronephrosis (Lanz and Waldron 2000).
and pelvis and into the ureter. Cut the suture and gently
Renal pelvis hyperechogenicity secondary to mineraliza-
retract the nephrostomy tube into the renal pelvis before
tion is reported in 67% of cats after nephrotomy, and
securing the tube to the renal capsule and closing the
renal pelvis dilation is reported in 50%, although renal
ureterotomy.
function may not be affected by either of these conditions
To secure the tube, place a purse string suture of 4-0
(Bolliger et al. 2005). Although some authors recommend
absorbable monoflament through the capsule around
the catheter and tighten gently. With two finger trap
(Lanz and Waldron 2o00), reports of renal torsion have
 sutures, secure the catheter to the kidney capsule and
not been found in the literature.
 then to the abdominal wall musculature. Tack the kidney
to the body wall with mattress sutures of 4-0 absorbable
Nephrostomy tube
monoflament, incorporating a small amount of renal
cortex with each suture. With a fingertrap pattern,
Introduction
secure the nephrostomy catheter externally to the exter-
A nephrostomy tube provides temporary urine diver-
nal abdominal musculature by taking deep bites through
sion from the renal pelvis and out the abdominal wall
 the skin and underlying muscle. Attach the catheter to a
(Chapter 32). Nephrostomy tubes are primarily used
closed urinary collection system.
 -se um Ans n un sd 
After the abdomen is closed, cover the exit wound with
motic leakage or obstructive swelling is expected (Bjor-
a sterile dressing to minimize risk of ascending infection.
ling and Petersen 1990). They have also been placed
A restraint device (e.g-, Elizabethan collar or side bars)
in animals that require stabilization before definitive
 should be placed on the animal to prevent premature
surgery for ureteral obstruction (Nwadike et al. 2000)
removal. When the tube is no longer needed, the external
and for intrapelvic infusion of antimicrobials (Starkey
finger trap sutures are removed; if a Foley catheter was
used, the balloon is deflated, and the tube is removed
 or pig-tail nephrostomy tubes and Foley or red rubber 
with gentle continuous traction. The wound should seal
catheters. Kits are available for nonsurgical percutaneous
within 2-3 days, unless the ureter is still obstructed
insertion under ultrasound guidance. Because nephros-
(Bjorling and Petersen 1990).
604  Upper urinary tract disorders
Complications
Complications are seen in 46% of cats undergoing
nephrostomy tube placement for ureteral obstruction
and include uroperitoneum (25%), poor drainage, and
dislodgement (Kyles et al. 2005). In cats undergoing
ureteral surgery, mortality rates are higher for those
that receive emergency nephrostomy tubes or dialysis
catheters. Risk of dislodgement can be reduced by secur-
ing the catheter to the abdominal musculature instead of
the skin alone. Leakage can be detected radiographically
by injecting 1 mL of water soluble iodinated contrast
material through the nephrostomy tube.
C
Pyelolithtomy
Introduction
Because damage to renal function is less likely, pyelolitho-
tomy is preferred over nephrotomy for removal of calculi
of the renal pelvis and proximal ureter, particularly when
口
the renal pelvis is dilated (Chapters 58 and 69). With
this technique, renal parenchyma is left intact, reducing
the risk of intraparenchymal hematoma formation, and
occlusion of the renal arteries is not required. Pyelolitho-
 tomy is difficult to perform when the renal pelvis is nor-
 mal in size (Greenwood and Rawlings 1981).
Technique
Figure 60.6 Pyelolithotomy (from Lanz and Waldron, 2000).
Using blunt and sharp dissection, free the kidney from
its sublumbar attachments and isolate it with moistened
laparotomy pads. Reflect the kidney medially to expose
with 5-0 or 6-0 absorbable synthetic suture in a simple
its dorsal surface. Gently dissect overlying tissues from
continuous pattern.
the renal pelvis, taking care not to damage branches of
the renal vessels. With a no. 15 or no. 64 beaver blade,
Complications
incise the renal pelvis and proximal ureter longitudi-
nally (Figure 60.6). Extend the incision with fine scis-
 Leakage of urine may occur from the incision site if
ureteral obstruction is present. Damage to renal vessels 
sors as needed. Remove large calculi with forceps and
dislodge small calculi by flushing with a syringe with a
during dissection could further exacerbate renal dysfunc-
catheter tip or attached lacrimal cannula. Submit the cal-
tion.
culi for culture and quantitative analysis and obtain a
fluid sample from the renal pelvis for culture. Flush the
Perinephric cyst extirpation or omentalization
renal pelvis and proximal ureter gently and thoroughly
Introduction
with sterile saline to remove any debris or clots. If pos-
sible, catheterize the ureter antegrade and flush gently
A subcapsular perinephric pseudocyst is a serous fluid
with sterile saline or perform a ventral cystotomy and
collection within a fibrous sac around one or both of the
catheterize and flush ureters retrograde to expel remain-
kidneys (Figure 60.7) (Chapter 56). The fbrous sac is
ing calculi and verify ureteral patency (Greenwood and
 often attached to the renal hilus or poles. Because per-
Rawlings 1981). If available, a small arthoscope can be
inserted through the incision to examine the renal pelvis
 not true cysts. Extravasated fluid may accumulate under
and proximal ureter for residual calculi. Alternatively,
or outside of the renal capsule; fluid is usually a tran-
suture can be passed antegrade down the ureter to ver-
sudate (Ochoa et al. 1999). Perinephric pseudocysts are
ify patency Close the renal pelvis and proximal ureter
 na ) s go    
Renal and ureteral surgery 
605
the free end of the caudal omental fold into the remaining
sac and tack it to the capsule remnants with interrupted,
absorbable sutures (Hill and Odesnik et al. 2000; Inns
2007). If needed, extend the omentum by transecting
its dorsal attachments near the greater curvature of the
stomach, using cautery and ligation for hemostasis. For
animals with bilateral pseudocysts, each corner of the
extended omental sheet can then be advanced into the
cyst cavity and tacked in place.
Complications
Although pseudocysts themselves are usually sterile, cats
Figure 60.7 Renal cyst.
      
 infections (Ochoa et al. 1999). Because perinephric pseu-
docysts are usually found in older cats with chronic
1999; Beck et al. 2000; Hill and Odesnik 2000; Inns 1997).
renal failure, declining renal function is expected since
 Treatment may include ultrasound-guided drainage, cap-
pseudocyst resection does not prevent progression of
sulectomy, or nephroureterectomy (Ochoa et al. 1999). 1f
renal disease. Ascites may develop in up to 25% of cats
fluid reoccurs after ultrasound-guided drainage, surgical
after surgery (Beck et al. 2000). If it does not gradually
removal of the capsule may be required. Survival times
diminish or is compromising the patient, an echocardio-
in cats treated with capsulectomy are longer than those
gram and blood pressure measurements should be per-
that undergo unilateral nephrectomy (Beck et al. 2000). If
formed to determine whether cardiovascular dysfunction
the perinephric cyst becomes abscessed, nephroureterec-
is present. Remnants of pseudocystic lining may continue
tomy is usually recommended unless function of the con-
to effuse after resection, and nephroureterectomy may be
tralateral kidney is reduced. In that case, the abscess is
required to resolve the effusion (Rishniw et al. 1998).
surgically drained and omentalized.
Partial nephrectomy
Technique
Introduction
Perform a ventral midline celiotomy and exploratory
laparotomy. Identify the pseudocyst and, with metzen-
Partial nephrectomy has been recommended for animals
 with renal pole trauma in which persistent hemorrhage
baum scissors, dissect the lining away from the retroperi-
 ns  s  s  p
toneal fascia. Open and drain the cyst (Figure 60.8) and
collect fluid for cytology, biochemical analysis, and cul-
sure. In most instances, surgeons will perform a com-
 plete nephroureterectomy unless the contralateral kidney
ture. Resect the majority of the cyst wall, leaving at least
is also diseased.
1 cm of capsular tissue along the renal attachment. Avoid
dissection around the renal hilus (Beck et al. 2000). Insert
Technique
Free the kidney from its peritoneal and sublumbar attach-
ments with a combination of sharp and blunt dissec-
tion, and reflect it ventrally and medially to expose the
renal vessels. Temporarily occlude the renal artery with
an atraumatic vascular clamp, Rumel tourniquet, or an
assistant's fingers, limiting continuous occlusion time to
20 minutes. Remove damaged, friable tissue with sharp
transection, using a blade or scissors; leave the capsule
intact, if possible. Remove renal artery occlusion tem-
porarily to identify any intraparenchymal vessels that
can be ligated, then reapply. Leave renal pelvis defects
open, as with nephrotomy, and appose the overlying
parenchyma, or close pelvis defects with 4-0 to 6-0
Figure 60.8 Incise the capsule of the cyst and suction out the
monofilament, rapidly absorbable suture in a continu-
contents.
 ous pattern (Bellah 1989; Bjorling and Petersen 1990).
606  Upper urinary tract disorders
If the renal capsule is present, appose it with 3-0 or
ter 57), abscess, renal or ureteral trauma (Chapter 59),
4-0 absorbable monoflament material in a continuous
ectopic ureter (Chapter 58), acquired ureterovaginal fis-
 or interrupted pattern, taking superficial bites of renal
 tula after ovariohysterectomy, benign idiopathic renal
parenchyma as needed. If the capsule is not intact, com-
hemorrhage, or irreversible loss of function or severe
press thick bleeding parenchymal tissue with multiple
 pyelonephritis in animals with ureteral calculi (Chap-
 overlapping fullthickness mattress sutures of 2-0 or 3-0
ter 58) (Holt et al. 1987; Bjorling and Petersen 1990;
absorbable monoflament. Tighten the sutures firmly to
Lamb 1994; Lautzenhiser and Bjorling 2002; Weisse et al.
appose and compress the parenchyma along the trau-
2002; Snyder et al. 2004; Bryan et al. 2006). Animals
matized edge, then sharply transect the tissues beyond
that undergo nephroureterectomy for ectopic ureters or
these sutures. Cover the exposed parenchyma with omen-
ureteroceles also require ligation or resection of the distal
 tum, peritoneum, a seromuscular patch, or intestinal
ectopic tissue to reduce postoperative incontinence.
serosa (serosal patch), suturing it to the remaining cap-
 Structure and function of the contralateral kidney
sule (Bjorling et al. 1990). If desired, place one or two
should be evaluated in all patients before consider-
transabdominal continuous suction drains near the kid-
 ing nephrectomy. Unilateral nephroureterectomy is con-
 traindicated in patients with bilateral renal disease, unless
s e    a   ss
the kidney to be removed is expected to cause severe
if no leakage is detective.
morbidity, such as with advanced pyelonephritis or
abscess.
Complications
 During surgery, renalarteries and veins in animals with
hydronephrotic or nonfunctional kidneys may be diffi-
Renal dysfunction may progress in animals with severe
cult to detect. Extensive revascularization may be present,
renal trauma. Other potential complications include
however, in neoplastic kidneys, requiring ligation of mul-
urine leakage and ureteral obstruction. Excretory urog-
tiple peritoneal and sublumbar vessels.
raphy can be performed several days after surgery to
 After unilateral nephrectomy, the remaining kidney
evaluate renal function and urine flow. In normal ani-
increases 10-15% in size because of cellular hypertro-
mals undergoing partial nephrectomy, use of peritoneal
phy and, in young dogs, celular hyperplasia. The rate
flaps to close capsular defects results in more renal atro-
of increase is rapid for the first 2-3 months, and then
phy than primary capsular apposition (Murphy and Best
 gradually slows. (Churchill et al. 1999) Compensatory
1957).
hypertrophy is greatest in animals nephrectomized at
<12 months of age ( Urie et al. 2007). Creatinine increases
Nephrectomy
slightly in normal dogs 2.5 years after unilateral nephrec-
Introduction
tomy (Urie et al. 2007).
Indications for nephroureterectomy include unilateral
Technique
 (      
 Perform a midline celiotomy, starting at the xiphoid and
extending caudally to the level of the bladder trigone.
Expose the left or right kidney by medial retraction of
the mesocolon or mesoduodenum, respectively. Free the
kidney from its peritoneal and sublumbar attachments
with sharp and blunt dissection or electrocautery (Figure
60.10). Often, a peritoneal incision can be extended by
digital traction with index fingers. Ligate, hemoclip, or
cauterize any peritoneal vessels that extend to the kidney
(Figure 60.11). Reflect the kidney toward midline and
expose the renal artery and vein near the aorta and cau-
dal vena cava (Figure 60.12). Paired renal arteries may
be present, particularly on the left side in the dog, while
cats may have multiple renal veins. In intact animals that
are not undergoing gonadectomy, expose the renal vessels
between the hilus and any gonadal vessel tributaries. Sep-
Figure 60.9 Renal carcinoma in a boxer dog. Note omental adhe-
arate the renal artery and vein, and triple ligate each, then
sions and extesive vascularity of the renal capsule.
transect the vessels between the two lateral most sutures.
Renal and ureteral surgery
607
Figure 60.10 Divide the peritoneal attachments with blunt or
Figure 60.12 Identify the renal arteries and veins. In this dog.
sharp dissection or cautery.
two renal arteries were present.
For added security, transfix vessels ≥4 mm in diameter.
tomy in dogs with primary renal neoplasia is 16 months
With sharp and blunt dissection, expose and elevate the
(range, 0-70 months) (Bryan et al. 2006). Dogs with renal
ureter from the retroperitoneal space and follow it to its
hemangiosarcoma and hemoperitoneum have median
termination (Figure 60.13). Ligate the ureter near its ter-
survival of 62 days (Locke and Barber 2006). Postopera-
mination with absorbable monoflament suture before
tive chemotherapy does not significantly increase survival
transecting cranial to the ligature.
time (Bryan et al. 2006).
Complications
Surgery of the ureters
Although complications from the procedure itself are
Ureteral catheterization
uncommon, animals may suffer morbidity from pro-
Introduction
gression of renal dysfunction or metastatic disease after
nephrectomy. Other potential complications include
 Ureters are most commonly catheterized to verify patency
 postoperative hemorrhage or, rarely, development of
in animals with ureteral calculi or to maintain patency
arteriovenous fistula from mass ligation of the renal
during bladder or ureteral reconstruction (Greenwood
 artery and vein. Median survival after unilateral nephrec-
and Rawlings 1981; Snyder et al. 2004). In animals with
Figure 60.11 Large peritoneal vessels that have revascularized
Figure 60.13 Follow the ureter to the bladder, and ligate and
the renal parenchyma should be occluded with ligatures or staples.
transect it cdose to its termination.
608  Upper urinary tract disorders
Figure 60.14 Idiopathic renal hematuria. A large dot extruded
Figure 60.15 Midureteral calculus in a cat.
from the ureteral opening.
magnification. It is most frequently recommended for
idiopathic renal hematuria (Figure 60.14), ureters are
removal of calculi within the proximal third of the ureter,
catheterized to collect samples from individual kidneys
particularly when they are adhered to mucosa (Chapter
for microscopic analysis and culture (Holt et al. 1987).
58) (Lanz and Waldron 2000; Hardie and Kyles 2004;
Normal cat ureters are usually too small to catheterize.
Snyder et al. 2004).
Technique
Technique
After performing a caudal midline celiotomy and
After performing a  ventral midline incision and
exploratory, isolate the bladder with moistened laparo-
exploratory laparotomy, identify the location of the
tomy pads. Place a stay suture at the apex of the bladder to
ureteral calculus by palpation and visual inspection (Fig-
maintain traction. Perform a ventral midline cystotomy
ure 60.15). Elevate the ureter from the paralumbar space,
to expose the ureteral openings entering the dorsum of
taking care to preserve the blood supply. Gently dis-
the bladder at the trigone. Suction the lumen gently to
sect periureteral fat from over the calculus. Using ocular
remove urine. Do not wipe bladder mucosa with sponges 
 magnification, make a longitudinal or transverse incision
and avoid contact of mucosa with the suction tip, since
through the dilated portion of the ureter just proximal to
mucosal swelling can easily interfere with visualization
the calculus, or directly over the calculus, with a #11, #15,
of the ureteral openings. Insert a 3.5 or 5 Fr red rubber
or #64 blade (Figure 60.16) (Bellah 1989; Lanz and Wal-
catheter or close ended tomcat catheter cranially (about
dron 2000; Hardie and Kyles 2004). Collect fluid from
5-10 mm) until resistance is felt at the S-bend of the
the ureterotomy side for culture and sensitivity. Extend
ureter. Elevate the catheter and direct the tip dorsally and
the ureterotomy with a blade or fine scissors as needed.
caudally until it passes through the S-bend, then advance
Avoid retrograde displacement of the calculus during
the catheter cranially into the ureter. Palpate the vesi-
couretal junction and ureters dorsally to confirm place-
ment. In animals with idiopathic renal hematuria, attach
urine samples.
Complications
Aggressive catheterization may cause obstruction from
swelling. Ureteroliths may be inadvertently flushed into
 the renal pelvis.
Ureterotomy
Introduction
Ureterotomy is a technically demanding procedure that
Figure 60.16 Ureteral calculi are extruded through a longitudinal
requires advanced training, specialized instruments, and
ureterotomy.
Renal and ureteral surgery   609
ureteral manipulation (Dalby et al. 2006). Remove the
ureters and remove any periureteral adipose tissue from
calculus with fine forceps, and flush the ureteral ends
the distal ends. Make a 3-4 mm longitudinal incision on
with warm saline delivered through a lacrimal cannula.
 opposite sides of each ureteral end to spatulate the tis-
In dogs, perform a cystotomy, place a retrograde ureteral
sue and increase the circumference of the anastomotic
catheter, and flush the ureter to verify patency. Alterna-
site. Place the spatulated ends opposite to one another,
tively, insert a small arthroscope into the ureteral ends
making sure that the ureters have not twisted. Appose
to check for residual calculi. In cats with small ureters,
the ends with full-thickness, simple, interrupted sutures
of 6-0 to 8-0 absorbable monoflament material, placing
into the bladder or retrograde from the bladder to check
the apical sutures first. Return the ureter to the sublumbar
patency. Submit the stone for quantitative analysis. Close
space and cover with omentum if desired. If postopera-
the ureterotomy site with full thickness simple contin-
tive obstruction is a concern, place a nephrostomy tube
eqnosqe 0-o on 0-s jo saiins paidnaiun no snon
to temporarily divert urine for 2-7 days until swelling
material. Although longitudinal incisions can be closed
resolves and the mucosa is healed.
 transversely to increase ureteral diameter, this technique
is unnecessary in dilated ureters and may cause obstruc-
Complications
tion of small ureters. If the ureteral mucosa or muscula-
 Ureteral obstruction from swelling or stricture is the most
ture is damaged extensively from the calculus, perform
a ureteral resection and anastomosis (Lanz and Waldron
likely complication. Urine leakage or use of a ureteral
2000).
 stent will increase the risk of stricture formation.
Complications
Ureteroneocystostomy
 Potential complications include leakage, dehiscence,
Introduction
stricture, continued or progressive renal dysfunction, and
Transection of the ureter with reimplantation into the
recurrence of calculi (Snyder et al. 2004). In cats with
bladder is called ureteroneocystostomy.  Indications
ureteral calculi repaired by ureterotomy or ureteroneo-
for ureteroneocystostomy  include renal  transplanta-
cystostomy, surgical complications were reported in 31%
tion (Chapter 31); reconstruction of ectopic, rup-
and perioperative mortality rate was 18% (Kyles et al.
tured, avulsed, strictured, or inadvertently ligated ureters
(Chapter 58); removal of ureteral calculi (Chapter 59); or
ureterotomy; most of these cats required a second surgery
resection of distal ureteral tumors (Chapter 57) (Lanz and
to revise the ureterotomy closure (Kyles et al. 2005). Per-
Waldron 2000; McLoughlin and Chew 2000; Nwadike
 sistent obstruction is noted in 3% of cats undergoing
et al. 2000; Weisse et al. 2002; Reichle et al. 2003; Hardie
ureterotomy for calculus removal.
and Kyles 2004; Steffey et al. 2004). Because the kid-
neys can be easily mobilized in many animals, ureteral
Ureteral resection and anastomosis
Introduction
cm of the proximal ureter remain. Animals with exten-
As with ureterotomy, ureteral resection and anastomo-
sive ureteral resection will require renal descensus and
 nephropexy to reduce anastomotic tension.
sis is technically challenging. It is therefore performed
uncommonly and use is usually limited to lesions of the 
 with ectopic ureter should extend caudal to the pubis
proximal ureter. Indications may include ureteral stric-
 and include the perivulvar tissues in female dogs. During
ture or damage from trauma or calculi (Chapters 58 and
 surgery, catheters that are passed antegrade through the
59).
ectopic distal ureteral segment may inadvertently exit
Technique
from the vulva.
 Ureteroneocystostomy is most commonly performed
 Perform a ventral midline celiotomy to expose the blad-
using an intravesicular approach, except in cats under-
der, kidney, and ureter. Gently elevate the ureter from its
 going renal transplantation. In normal cats, creatinine
 sublumbar location, leaving as much periureteral tissue
 concentrations and renal pelvis diameter tended to
as possible to maintain blood supply. If desired, place
 return to normal more quickly after undergoing inter-
-d an u  ns o9 no o-s jo ss s
rupted extravesicular anastomosis (Mehl et al. 2005).
ureteral tissues adjacent to the proposed sites of tran-
 In dogs with ectopic ureters, extravesicular reimplanta-
section, leaving the maximum ureteral length to reduce
tion resulted in more complications than intravesicular
anastomotic tension. Under magnification, transect the
 anastomosis (Holt and Moore 1995). Use of a simple
610  Upper urinary tract disorders
continuous pattern  for extravesicular
anastomosis
increases postoperative mortality (Mehl et al. 2005).
Ureters can be reimplanted at any location proximal to
the trigone; short ureters are usually transplanted at the
apex of the bladder to reduce anastomotic tension.
Some authors recommend formation of a short
oblique submucosal tunnel (3:1 tunnel length to ureteral
orifice diameter) during intravesicular ureteral implan-
tation. In normal dogs, formation of a short oblique
submucosal tunnel results in less fibrosis and ureteral
dilation than a transverse pull through technique; how-
ever, vesicoureteral reflux is not seen in normal dogs with
either technique (Waldron 1987).
If ectopic ureters or ureteroceles are present, the distal
Figure 60.18 Stay suture through the ureteral end
anomalous segment of the ureter must also be removed
or ligated to reduce postoperative incontinence. Extra-
mural ectopic ureters are ligated and transected as close
closed primarily. Orthotopic ureteroceles, which occur
to their termination as possible (Figure 60.17). The dis
within the bladder lumen, can be partially resected and
tal segment of an intramural ectopic ureter can be lig-
left open, as long as the ipsilateral ureteral stoma is in a
ated from an extraluminal approach or dissected free
normal position (McLoughlin and Chew 2000; Tattersall
via an intravesicular approach (see below). Resection of 
and Welsh 2006).
the intramural ectopic ureteral segment does not signifi-
cantly improve outcome as compared with ligation of the
Technique: intravesicular
ectopic remnant (Mayhew et al. 2006). Ureteroceles that
ureteroneocystostomy
occur external to the bladder ("ectopic") are resected and
Perform a midline celiotomy, exposing the bladder and
trigone. Extend the incision to the xiphoid for exami-
nation of the proximal ureter or kidney or to perform
a renal descensus. Place a stay suture in the apex of the
bladder for retraction to expose the proximal urethra.
Place a second stay suture in the ureter 3-5 mm proximal
to the proposed transection site before severing the ureter
B
(Figure 60.18). If an intramural ectopic ureter is present,
temporarily catheterize the distal ureteral segment. In all
other animals, ligate the distal ureteral segment with 3-0
absorbable monoflament suture as close to its termina-
tion as possible.
Gently isolate the proximal ureteral end from sur-
rounding fascia, sparing its arterial blood supply. Perform
a ventral midline cystotomy. To facilitate manipulation
of the tissues, place stay sutures intermittently along the
incised edges of the bladder. If desired, excise a 4-5 mm
ellipse of bladder mucosa at the proposed site of uretero-
neocystostomy. Insert a fine-tipped mosquito hemostatic
forceps from the lumen through the bladder wall. Grasp
the ureteral stay suture with the forceps and pull the ureter
through the bladder wall and into the bladder lumen
(Figures 60.19 and 60.20). Verify that the ureter has not
been twisted during placement. Remove any periureteral
fat from around the distal end of the ureter and tran-
sect the ureteral tissue containing the stay suture. Using
Figure 60.17 Ureteral reimplantation for repair of ectopic ureter
tenotomy or iris scissors, incise the ventral wall of the ter-
(from Mcloughlin and Chew, 2000).
 minal ureteral end longitudinally for 2-5 mm to enlarge
Renal and ureteral surgery
611
Figure 60.21 Cat with bilateral calculi of the proximal one-third 
of the ureter. Both ureters have been pulled through the bladder
Figure 60.19 Insert a fine-tipped hemostat from the bladder
wall to the level of the calculi.
lumen through the bladder wall and grasp the stay suture.
the opening (Figures 60.21 and 60.22). Appose ureteral
mucosa to bladder mucosa with 5-8 simple interrupted
sutures of 4-0 to 8-0 absorbable monofilament material
 on a taper needle, placing the first two sutures at the cra-
nial and caudal ends of the new ureteral ostium (Figure
60.23) (Lanz and Waldron 2000; McLoughlin and Chew
2000). If possible, insert a red rubber catheter through
the new ureteral opening and feed it several centimeters
 antegrade into the ureter. Place one or two simple inter-
 rupted sutures externally between the bladder serosa and
ureteral muscle to further secure the ureter to the bladder
(Figure 60.24).
 If an ectopic ureteral segment is present, preplace
several encircling sutures of 3-0 or 4-0 nonabsorbable
Figure 60.22 In this cat from Figure 60.21, the ureters were
or slowly absorbable monofilament material around
opened to the level of the calculi and the obstructions were
the catheterized distal ectopic ureteral segment, starting
removed. Handle only periurethral tissue with forceps.
and ending needle penetration externally on the serosal
Figure 60.23 Neoureterostomy. The ureteral end was spatulated
Figure 60.20 Pull the ureter into the bladder. In this dog. the 
and sewn to bladder mucosa with interrupted sutures of fine
bladder wall is everted to expose mucosa.
absorbable monofilament.
612  Upper urinary tract disorders
Figure 60.25 Cystonephropexy. In this cat, all but 2 cm of the
 proximal ureter were resected.
Figure 60.24 Two interrupted sutures were placed to secure the
ureteral serosa to the bladder serosa.
toward the bladder. Secure the caudal renal pole to the
bladder (nephrocystopexy) with mattress sutures of 4-0
surface of the bladder. Remove the catheter and tie the
absorbable monofilament, taking bites of capsule and a
 sutures firmly to occlude the remaining ectopic intra-
small amount of renal cortex and including the bladder
mural segment (Lanz and Waldron 2000; Taney et al.
2003).
submucosa (Figure 60.25).
Alternatively, incise the peritoneum over the ipsilateral
Close the bladder with 3-0 or 4-0 monofilament
 psoas muscle near the mobilized kidney. Pull the bladder
suture in a simple continuous or inverting pattern. If
desired, leave the retrograde ureteral catheter in place
cranial and tack it to the psoas muscle ("psoas hitch”" or
cystopexy) with 3-0 absorbable or nonabsorbable mate-
during closure of the cranial extent of the bladder to
rial. Pull the kidney caudally and tack it to the transver-
ensure ureteral patency; remove the catheter before com-
sus abdominus and internal abdominal oblique muscles
pleting the closure.
("nephropexy"), using mattress sutures of4-0 absorbable
monofilament (Nwadike et al. 2000; Hardie and Kyles
Technique: extravesicular
2004).
ureteroneocystostomy
Make a 1 cm long, partial thickness incision through
Complications
the apex of the bladder to expose the mucosa. Incise the
distal end of the ureter longitudinally to spatulate the
Complications included hydroureter or hydronephrosis
end. Make an incision through the bladder mucosa the
from temporary or permanent obstruction and uroab-
same length as the spatulated ureter. Using 6-0 to 8-0
domen from dehiscence or necrosis. Renal pelvic dila-
monofilament material on a taper needle, place a simple
tion, based on ultrasonography, is expected after uretero-
neocystostomy because of postoperative swelling (Mehl
interrupted suture between the bladder and ureteral
et al. 2005). In normal dogs diagnosed with iatro-
mucosa at the cranial and caudal ends of the incision.
genic partial obstruction, based on results of scintigra-
Insert a polypropylene suture into the ureteral lumen to
 ensure patency after the first two sutures are tied; remove
phy, renal function gradually recovers 1-2 weeks after
ureteroneocystostomy (Barthez et al. 2000). Hydroureter 
this stenting suture before tying the final anastomotic
suture. Appose the remaining cystic and ureteral mucosa
and hydronephrosis may occur with complete or partial
along each side of the ureteroneocystostomy with a sim-
obstruction of the ureter secondary to swelling, blood
 ple interrupted pattern (Mehl et al. 2005). Partially close
clots, or stricture formation. Hydroureter from edema
the seromuscular bladder incision with 5-0 monofila-
or tissue trauma usually resolves in 46 weeks. If ureters
ment suture material, taking care not to obstruct the
are dilated before surgery, hydroureter will most likely
be permanent. Of cats undergoing ureteroneocystostomy
ureter (Hardie and Kyles 2004).
required surgical revision and 15% developed uroab-
Technique: renal descensus
domen because of distal ureteral necrosis or avulsion
Mobilize the kidney by incising its peritoneal and fas-
from the bladder (Kyles et al. 2005). In dogs with extrav-
cial attachments. Pull the kidney caudally and medially
 esicular reimplantation and anastomosis of the ectopic
Renal and ureteral surgery  613
ureter, 8% required nephroureterectomy because of per-
sistent hydronephrosis (Holt and Moore 1995).
 In dogs with ectopic ureters, urinary incontinence per-
sists in 44-67% (Lanz and Waldron 2000; Mcloughlin and 
Chew 2000). In cats with ectopic ureters, 92% are con-
tinent after ureteral transplantation and ligation of the
distal ureteral segment (Holt and Gibbs 1992).
Neoureterostomy
Introduction
Intramural ectopic ureters (Chapter 58), which are the
most common type of ectopic ureter, insert externally
Figure 60.26 Urethral opening (arrow) of an intramural ectopic
on the bladder at the normal site but continue to travel
ureter.
as submucosal tunnels or mucosal troughs through the
 trigone region. Submucosal ectopic segments may open
at one or more sites along the urethra distal to the trigone
extent of the intramural portion of the ureter. Catheter-
or at the vestibule or vagina. In animals with intramural
ize the ureter antegrade and retrograde with two red
ectopic ureters, a new ureteral opening ("neoureteros-
rubber catheters. Suture the ureteral mucosa to the blad-
tomy") can be made by incising through the bladder
der mucosa with 4-0 to 6-0 absorbable monofilament
mucosa into the ureter and apposing the mucosa of the
material in a simple interrupted pattern. Preplace several
two structures. Some authors recommend removal of any
sutures of 3-0 or 4-0 nonabsorbable material around
distal ectopic segments or troughs to improve urethral
the catheterized ectopic segment, with needle penetra-
sphincter (McLoughlin and Chew 2000). Others prefer
tion starting and ending externally on the serosal surface
ligation of the distal ectopic segment. With the advent
of the bladder. Remove the catheter and tie the sutures
of cystoscopic-assisted laser ablation of distal intramural
firmly (Lanz and Waldron 2000; Taney et al. 2003). Close
segments, surgical approach to this condition is becom-
the bladder routinely.
ing less common.
Neoureterostomy with bladder neck reconstruction
Technique
Perform a ventral midline cystotomy and extend the inci-
If the ectopic distal ureteral segment is to be removed,
sion through the ventral urethra to expose the ectopic
prep and drape female dogs to include the perivulvar
 opening (Figure 60.26). Catheterize the ureter retro-
region. Perform a ventral midline celiotomy, extending
grade through the ectopic opening with a red rubber
the incision caudally so that the bladder trigone can be
tube (Figure 60.27). If the distal ureteral orifice cannot be
visualized. Isolate the bladder and urethra with moist-
identified, make an incision through the urethral mucosa
ened sterile laparotomy pads. If necessary, place a stay
suture in the apex of the bladder and retract it manu-
ally or secure it to Balfour retractors to facilitate bladder
exposure.
Neoureterostomy with ligation of the ectopic segment
Perform a ventral midline cystotomy from the apex
through the trigone. Examine and palpate the bladder to
identify the intramural portion of the ureter. The ureter
 may appear as a small swelling and should feel like a tubu-
lar structure within the bladder submucosa. If the ureter
is not evident, compress the urethra digitally to obstruct
and dilate the ureter so that it can be palpated more easily.
With a no. 15 scalpel blade or no. 64 beaver blade, make
a 4-5 mm longitudinal incision through the dorsal blad-
Figure 60.27 A3 Fr red rubber catheter has been advanced from
der mucosa into the ureteral lumen at the cranial most
the ectopic opening retrograde into the intramural ectopic ureter.
614  Upper urinary tract disorders
Complications
 The most common complication of ectopic ureter repair
is continued incontinence. In one study of dogs with
ectopic ureters, 71% of dogs that underwent distal
ureteral segment resection and bladder neck reconstruc-
tion and 50% that underwent distal segment ligation
continued to have urinary incontinence. Recurrent uri-
nary tract infections were reported in 15% and 29% of
the resection and ligation groups, respectively (Mayhew
et al. 2006). Causes of continued incontinence include
sphincter mechanism incompetence, hypoplastic glad-
 der, or recanalization ofthe ligated distal ureteral segment
(Holt and Moore 1995; Mayhew et al. 2006). Culposus-
Figure 60.28 Final appearance after resection and closure of the
pension performed at the time of ectopic ureter repair
intramural ectopic segment and neoureterostomy.
may improve continence (Mouatt and Watt 2007).
Hydronephrosis and hydroureter may develop tem-
porarily because of postoperative edema and inflamma-
tion. Stranguria is common after bladder neck recon-
into the lumen of the distal ectopic submucosal ureter
struction, and 14% of dogs will develop dysuria. Some
and catheterize the ectopic ureter retrograde from that
animals may require temporary urethral catheterization
point. With the catheter in place, dissect the ectopic ureter
from the surrounding tissues with fine scissors, beginning
until postoperative swelling resolves (McLoughlin and
Chew 2000). Stricture formation is rare but may occur
distally. Include mucosa, submucosa, and some mus-
 several weeks to months after surgery (Taney et al. 2003).
cularis in the resection. Be careful to leave the dorsal
urethral seromuscular layer intact. Continue dissection
Bladder flap reconstruction of the ureter
 s e j n  sd s 
just cranial to the trigone. Close the resulting urethral
Introduction
and bladder defect with 4-0 or 5-0 synthetic absorbable
When ureteral length is extremely short because of
monofilament suture in a continuous or interrupted pat-
trauma or extensive resection, the ureter can be recon-
tern; include underlying submucosa in urethral sutures
structed by formation of a full thickness tube using a
(McLoughlin and Chew 2000). Ifhemorrhage is excessive
pedicle flap from the bladder. The flap can be devel-
 during dissection, alternate dissection and closure as you
oped from a vascular portion of the dorsolateral or ven-
continue proximally.
tral bladder wall and will provide several centimeters of
Transect the ureteral remnant 0.5 cm from where it
additional length. Renal descensus should be performed
passes transmurally through the bladder, then suture
prior to flap development to determine the length of flap
the ureteral mucosa of the new ureteral opening to the
required to reach the proximal ureteral segment. Width
bladder mucosa with interrupted sutures of 5-0 or 6-0
of the flap should be based on bladder size but should
absorbable monofilament (Figure 60.28). If a uterocele
is present, partially resect the wall and close any urethral
be a minimum of 3 cm, depending on bladder thickness,
 to provide a tube 5-6 mm in diameter. Nephrocystopexy
openings. If a ureteral trough is present, resect it and
reconstruct the bladder as with submucosal tunnels.
after ureteral anastomosis to reduce anastomotic tension.
If postoperative catheterization is desired, catheterize
 the bladder and urethra in female dogs before bladder
Technique
and urethral closure by passing a red rubber catheter
through the bladder lumen and into the urethra ante-
Develop a single pedicle flap, based at the apex of the
grade. Exit it out the vulva, and attach it to a balloon-
bladder, along the ventral or dorsolateral surface of the
tipped catheter with suture. Withdraw the red rubber
bladder, incorporating a major vessel if possible. The
catheter from the bladder lumen, guiding the balloon-
flap should be widest at its base to preserve blood sup-
tipped catheter through the urethra and into the bladder.
ply. Length should be sufficient so that no tension will
Detach the red rubber catheter and discard it, then inflate
be present on the ureterovesicular anastomotic site after
the balloon-tipped catheter. Close the bladder and ure-
renal descensus. Place a stay suture in the end of the
thra with 4-0 absorbable monoflament suture in a sim-
 proximal ureteral segment. Pass a fine-tipped mosquito
ple continuous or interrupted pattern.
hemostat full thickness through the cranial end of the
Renal and ureteral surgery  615
bladder flap, starting from the mucosa surface. Grasp the
Bolliger, C., R. Walshaw, et al. (2005). Evaluation of the effects of
stay suture with the forceps and pull the ureter through
nephrotomy on renal function in clinically normal cats. Am I Vet
the flap. Perform a ureteroneocystostomy as described
Res 66: 1400-1407.
Borkowski, A., K. Piechna, et al. (1979). Regeneration of the ureter
above. Catheterize the new ureteral stoma and begin blad-
and the renal pelvis in dogs from transversely transected and anas-
der closure by apposing the flap from side to side with
tomosed strips of the ureteral wall. Eur Urol 5: 352-358.
40 absorbable monoflament suture, starting cranially
Brodsky, S.L., P.D. Ziminskind, et al. (1977). Effects of crush and
near the ureteroneocystostomy. Once the closure extends
devascularizing injuries to the proximal ureter: an experimental
at least 1 cm caudal to the new ureteral stoma, remove the
study. Imvest Urol 14: 361-365.
ureteral catheter. If desired, place a larger diameter red
Bryan, I.N., C.J. Henry, et al. (2006). Primary renal neoplasia of dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 20: 1155-1160.
rubber catheter into the cranial end of the bladder tube
Cannizzo, K.L., M.A. McLoughlin, et al. (2003). Evaluation of
and lay it along the length of the flap during closure; this
transurethral cystoscopy and excretory urography for diagnosis of
will help to maintain bladder tube diameter as the tissues
ectopic ureters in female dogs: 25 cases ( 1992-2000). JAm Vet Med
are apposed. Once tube closure is complete beyond the
Assoc 223: 475-481.
Churchill, JA., D.A. Feeney, et al. (199). Effects of diet and aging
base of the flap, remove the catheter and close the rest
on renal measurements in uninephrectomized geriatric bitches. Vet
of the bladder incision. If not yet performed, reduce ten-
Radiol Ultrasound 40: 233-240.
sion on the site with a nephrocystopexy, or sublumbar
Dalby, A.M., L.G. Adams, et al. (2006). Spontaneous retrograde move-
nephropexy and cystopexy (psoas hitch).
ment of ureteroliths in two dogs and five cats. I Arn Vet Med Assoc
229: 1118-1121.
Feeney, D.A., C.A. Osbourne, et al. (19s0). Effect of multiple excretory
Complications
urograms on glomerular filtration of normal dogs: a preliminary
report. An I Vet Res 41: 960-963.
 Stenosis may occur at the ureteroneocystostomy (Gar-
Fitzpatrick, J.M., M.S. Sleight, et al. (1980). Intrarenal access: effects
diner et al. 1990). Vesicoureteral reflux may cause recur-
on renal function and morphology. Br I Urol52: 409-414.
rent infection.
Gahring, D.R., D.T. Crowe, et al. ( 1977). Comparative renal function
studies of nephrotomy closure with and without sutures in dogs.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 171: 537-541.
Ureterocolonic anastomosis
Gardiner, R.A., G.A. Mills, et al. (l990). Evaluation of a bladder
advancement extension graft technique. Br I Urol 66: 606-612.
Considered a salvage procedure, ureterocolonic anasto-
Gerlaugh, R.L., W.E. DeMuth, et al. (1960). The healing of renal
 mosis has been performed in animals with urinary blad-
wounds. II. Surgical repair of contusions and lacerations. I Urol
 der or proximal urethral neoplasia. In normal dogs, urete-
83: 529-534.
rocolonic anastomosis maintains urinary continence
Greenwood, K.M. and C.A. Rawlings (198l). Removal of canine renal
calculi by pyelolithotomy. Vet Surg 10: 12-21.
but is fraught with complications, including azotemia,
Groman, R.P, A. Bahr, et al. (2004). Effects of serial ultrasound-guided
metabolic acidosis, hyperammonemia, neurologic dis-
renal biopsies on kidneys of healthy adolescent dogs. Vet Radiol
ease, decreased glomerular filtration rate, ascending
Ultrasound 45: 62-69.
infection, and death. The procedure is therefore not rec-
Hardie, E.M. and A.E. Kyles (2004). Management of ureteral obstruc-
ommended (Stone et al. 1988).
tion. Vet Clin North Am Small Amirm Pract 34: 989-1010.
Henry, C.J., S.E. Turnquist, et al. ( 1999). Primary renal tumors in cats:
19 cases (1992-1998). I Feline Med Surg 1: 165-170.
References
Hill, T.P. and B.J. Odesnik (200o). Omentalisation of perinephric pseu-
docysts in a cat. I Small Amirm Pract 41: 115-118.
Adin, C.A., E.J. Herrgesell, et al. (2003). Antegrade pyelography for
Holt, P.E. and C. Gibbs (1992). Congenital urinary incontinence in 
suspected ureteral obstruction in cats: 1l cases {1995-200l). I Am
cats: a review of 19 cases. Vet Rec 120: 437-442.
Vet Med Assoc 222: 1576- 1581.
Holt, PE., V.M. Lucke, et al. ( 1987). Idiopathic renal haemorrhage in
Barthez, P.Y., D.D. Smeak, et al. (2000). Ureteral obstruction after
the dog. I Small Ami Pract 28: 253-263.
ureteroneocystostomy in dogs assessed by technetium Tc 99 m
Holt, PE. and A.H. Moore ( 1995). Canine ureteral ectopia: an analysis
diethylenetramine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) scintigraphy. Vet Surg
of 175 cases and comparison of surgical treatments. Vet Rec 136:
29: 499-506.
345-349.
  d  )  a   i 
Huffman, W.L., J.F. McCorkle, et al. (1956). Ureteral regenera-
cats. Aust Vet I78: 166-171.
tion following experimental segmental resection. J Urol 75: 796-
Bellah, IR. (1989). Wound healing in the urinary tract. Sern Vet Med
800.
Surg Small Amirm 4: 294-303
 Inns, I.H. (1997). Treatment of perinephric pseudocysts by omental
Bigge, L.A., D.J. Brown, et al. (200l). Correlation between coagulation
drainage. Aust Vet Pract 27: 174-177.
profle findings and bleeding complications after ultrasound-guided
King, M.D., D.R. Waldron, et al. (2006). Effect of nephrotomy on
biopsies 434 cases (1993-1996). I Atm Arnirn Hosp Assoc 37: 228-
 renal function and morphology in normal cats. Vet Surg 35: 749-
233.
758.
Bjorling, D.E.and S.W. Petersen ( 1990). Surgical techniques for urinary
King, W.W. ( 1974). Renalwound healing. Histologicand histochemical
tract diversion and salvage in small animals. Compend Contin Educ
sequences in the repair of intersegmental nephrotomies. Imv Urol11:
278-285.
616  Upper urinary tract disorders
Klein, M.K., G.C. Campbell, et al. ( 1988). Canine primary renal neo-
Ross, S.J., C.A. Osborne, et al. ( 1999). Canineand feline nephrolithiasis.
plasms: a retrospective review of 54 cases. JArm Ani Hosp Assoc 24:
Epidemiology, detection, and management. Vet Clin North Am Small
443-452.
Anim Pract 29: 231-250.
Kyles, A.E., E.M. Hardie, et al. (2005). Management and outcome of
Snyder, D.M., M.A. Steffey, et al. (2004). Diagnosis and surgical man-
cats with ureteral calculi: 153 cases ( 1984-2002). IArm Vet Med Assoc
agement of ureteral calculi in dogs: 16 cases (1990-2003). NZ Vet J
226: 937-944.
53: 19-25.
Lamb, C.R. (1994). Acquired ureterovaginal fistula secondary to
Starkey, R.J. and M.A. McLoughlin (1996). Treatment of renal
aspergillosis in a dog using nephrostomy tubes. I Vet Irtern Med
nephropyelocentesis and antegrade ureterography. Vet Radiol Ultra-
10: 336-338.
soumd 35: 201-203.
Steffey, M., K.M. Rassnick, et al. (2004). Ureteral mast celtumor in a
Lanz, O.1. and D.R. Waldron (2000). Renal and ureteral surgery in
dog. I Atm Anirm Hosp Assoc 40: 82-85.
dogs. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 15: 1-10.
Stone, E.A., J.L. Robertson, et al. (2002). The effect of nephrotomy on
Lautzenhiser, S.J. and D.E. Bjorling (2002). Urinary incontinence in a
renal function and morphology in dogs. Vet Surg 31: 391-397.
dog with an ectopic ureterocele. I Am Armim Hosp Assoc 38: 29-32.
Stone, E.A., M.C. Walter, et al. ( 1988). Ureterocolonic anastomosis in
Locke, JE. and L.G. Barber (2006). Comparative aspects and clinical
clinically normal dogs. I Vet Res49: 1147-1153.
outcomes of canine renal hemangiosarcoma. J Vet Interr Med 20:
Stork, C.K., A.J. Hamaide, et al. (2003). Hemiurothorax following
962-967.
diaphragmatic hernia and kidney prolapse in a cat. I Feline Med
Mayhew, P.D., K.C.L. Lee, et al. (2006). Comparison of two surgical
Surg 5: 91-96.
techniques for management of intramural ureteral ectopia in dogs:
Taney, K.G., K.W. Moore, et al. (2003). Bilateral ectopic ureters in
36 cases (1994-2004). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 229: 389-393.
a male dog with unilateral renal agenesis. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 6:
McLoughlin, M.A. and D.J. Chew (2000). Diagnosis and surgical man-
817-820.
agement of ectopic ureters. Clin Tech Small Anirm Pract 15: 17-24.
Tate, P., B. Anneaux, et al. (2006). Evaluation of Tissumend II Sterile
Mehl, M.L., A.E. Kyles, et al. (2005). Comparison of three ureteroneo-
as a multipurpose absorbable tissue adhesive. Int I Appl Res Vet Med
cystostomy techniques in cats. Vet Surg 34: 114-119.
4: 74-85.
Mouatt, J.G. and P.R. Watt (2007). Ectopic ureter repair and colposus-
pension in seven bitches. Aust Vet Pract 31: 160- 167.
a case report and review of surgical management. IArm Amim Hosp
Murphy, J.J. and R. Best (1957). Healing of renal wounds. 1. Partial
Assoc 42: 395-400.
nephrectomy. I Urol 78: 504-510.
Tobias, K.M. (2007). Devices: Tissumend II sterile absorbable tissue
Nitsche, E.K. (2004). Erythrocytosis in dogs and cats: diagnosis and
adhesive. Clinician's Brief 5: 47-48.
management. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 26: 104-119.
Urie, B.K., D.M. Tillson, et al. (2007). Evaluation of clinical status, renal
Nwadike, B.S., et al. (2000). Use of bilateral temporary nephrostomy
function, and hematopoietic variables after unilateral nephrectomy
in canine kidney donors. IArm Vet Med Assoc 230: 1653-1656.
a cat. IArm Vet Med Assoc 217: 1862-1865.
Vaden, S.L. (2004). Renal biopsy: methods and interpretation. Vet Clin
Ochoa, V.B., S.P. DiBartola, et al. (1999). Perinephric pseudocysts in
Small Anim 34: 887-908.
the cat: a retrospective study and review of the literature. I Vet Intern
Vaden, S.L., J.F. Levine, et al. (2005). Renalbiopsy: a retrospective study
Med 13: 47-55.
of methods and complications in 283 dogs and 65 cats. J Vet Intern
Rawlings, C.A., H. Diamond, et al. (2003). Diagnostic quality of percu-
Med 19: 794-801.
taneous kidney biopsy specimens obtained with laparoscopy versus
Waldron, D.R., C.S. Hedlund, et al. (1987). Ureteroneocystostomy: a
ultrasound guidance in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223: 317-321.
comparison of the subrmucosal tunnel and transverse pul through
Reichle, LK., R.A. Person, et al. (2003). Ureteral fbroepithelial polyps
techniques. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23: 285-290.
in four dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44: 433-437.
Weisse, C., L.R. Aronson, et al. (2002). Traumatic rupture of the ureter:
Rishniw, M., I. Weidman, et al. (1998). Hydrothorax secondary to a
10 cases. I Arm Armim Hosp Assoc 38: 188-192.
perinephric pseudocyst in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39: 193-196.
Wilson, D.R. ( 1977). Renal function during and following obstruction.
Ross, S.J., C.A. Osborne, et al. (2007). A case-control study of the
Anmu Rev Med 28: 329-339.
effects of nephrolithiasis in cats with chronic kidney disease. I Am
Zatelli, A., U. Bonfanti, et al. (2003). Echo-assisted percutaneous renal
Vet Med Assoc 230: 1854- 1859.
biopsy in dogs. A retrospective study of 229 cases. Vet J166: 257-264.
Section 6
Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
61
Sodium disorders
David J. Polzin
Physiology of salt and water balance
cation of the ECF and is largely restricted to the ECF, the
total body content of sodium (an amount, not a concen-
The plasma sodium concentration is the ratio of plasma
tration) determines the ECF volume.
sodium to plasma water. Changes in the quantity of
 The volume of the ECF is regulated by monitoring the
sodium or water could theoretically alter the sodium con-
"effective circulating volume" of the body and retaining
centration, but most often disorders of plasma sodium
or excreting sodium to maintain the appropriate vol-
reflect changes in water balance. The reason for this is that
ume. Sodium is not regulated to achieve sodium con-
sodium and water are regulated largely independently to
centration, only volume, and there is no necessary cor-
achieve different goals. As a consequence, the sodium
relation between the plasma sodium concentration and
concentration typically informs us more about the water
the ECF volume. “Effective circulating volume" refers to
content of the body than the sodium content.
that part of the ECF that is in the arterial system and
Sodium is the principal cation in the extracellular
is effectively perfusing tissues (Rose 2001). It is essen-
fluid space (ECF). It remains in the extracellular space,
tially an unmeasurable entity that reflects tissue perfu-
and largely outside of the intracellular fluid space (ICF),
sion. The body measures effective circulating volume
because sodium is actively pumped from the ICF to the
as the pressure perfusing arterial baroreceptors in the
ECF in exchange for potassium ions by the Na-K-ATPase
carotid sinus, atria, and glomerular afferent arterioles.
pump. The net effect of this is to maintain high concen-
When the baroreceptors detect an excess in ECF vol-
tration of sodium within the ECF and low concentrations
ume, they signal the kidneys to excrete sodium, whereas
in the ICF, whereas potassium exists in high concentra-
detection of volume contraction results in renal sodium
tions within cells and low concentrations in the ECF. A
retention (Chapter 2). This signaling system involves the
slow ongoing leak of sodium into cells and potassium out
of cells occurs, but the sodium-potassium pump main-
 atrial natriuretic peptide, pressure natriuresis, and antid-
 tains separation of these two ions into their appropriate
iuretic hormone. Since water follows sodium, excretion
fluid spaces.
of sodium contracts the ECF and retention of sodium
 In contrast to sodium and potassium, water freely
expands the ECF. For the most part, sodium retention
moves to osmotic equilibrium across cell membranes
and contraction occurs in a largely isotonic fashion.
between the ICF and ECF. Because water moves freely
 In contrast, plasma sodium concentration is measured
between ICF and ECF the osmolality of both compart-
 by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus that affect water
ments is always the same, and the relative distribution
intake (via thirst) and water excretion by the kidneys (via
of water between the ICF and ECF is determined by the
antidiuretic hormone—ADH). Water intake and water
relative number of osmotically active particles in each
 loss result in decreased and increased plasma osmolal-
compartment. Sodium ions and their associated anions
ity, respectively. Since plasma sodium contributes the
constitute the bulk of osmotically active particles nor-
bulk of plasma osmolality, plasma sodium concentration
 mally found in the ECF. Because sodium is the principal
changes in parallel with plasma osmolality. The body
responds to a water load by suppressing ADH secre-
 tion, which decreases water reabsorption in the collecting
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
tubules, thus facilitating the excretion of electrolyte-free
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
619
620 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
water. Dehydration promotes secretion of ADH, which
pseudohyponatremia with an elevated effective plasma
leads to insertion of aquaporin 2 channels within the
osmolality. Hyperglycemia draws water osmotically out
epithelium of the collecting tubules, thus facilitating
of the ICF due to the osmotic effect of increased con-
reabsorption of water and excretion of concentrated
centrations of glucose in the ECF. Mannitol and admin-
urine. In this fashion, plasma osmolality is held within
istration of intravenous immune globulins may produce
narrow limits with variation of as little as 1-2% in plasma
the same effect (Rose 2001). Pseudohyponatremia with a
osmolality initiating mechanisms that bring the plasma
normal effective plasma osmolality may occur with severe
osmolality back to normal. However, in rare instances,
hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia. However, this error
ADH release can be stimulated by marked volume con-
 only occurs when plasma sodium concentration is mea-
traction of the ECF. In this setting, the need to maintain
 sured using a flame photometer; it does not occur when
ECF volume to perfuse tissues over rides the usual control
the plasma sodium concentration is determined by ion
mechanisms based on osmolality (Chapter 42).
selective electrode unless the plasma sample is diluted.
The total body content of sodium determines the ECF
The clinical importance of recognizing that true
volume, whereas plasma osmolality and plasma sodium
hyponatremia  (hypoosmotic hyponatremia) usually
concentration reflect the ICF volume. In one construct,
regulation of plasma osmolality is a means of monitoring
swelling of the brain can lead to serious neurological
and regulating cell volume. Intracellular osmoles are pri-
 compression injury because the brain is enclosed within
marily composed of potassium salts of macromolecular
a finite space. Acute hyponatremia is likely to result in
ions that are restricted to the ICF. Since water moves to
brain swelling that, when severe, can lead to permanent 
equilibrium and intracellular osmoles are largely fixed,
neurological deficits or death. It has been suggested that
reduction in plasma osmolality means water will move
 a clinically significant acute shift in water requires about
into cells (cells swell), while increased osmolality means
a 30-35 mOsm/L or more gradient between the plasma
water will move out of cells (cells shrink). Because there
 and brain tissue (Rose 2001). This represents a change in
are roughly twice as many particles in the ICF as in the
 plasma sodium of approximately 15-18 meq/L (osmolal-
ECF, the ICF volume is approximately twice the size of the
ity includes the sum of sodium ions and their associated
ECF. Movement of water in and out of cells with changes
 anions). Neurological signs are most likely to develop
in osmolality is largely responsible for the clinical conse-
s u Ta ozI moq sup nos sed u
 quences of hyponatremia and hypernatremia.
and 130 meq/L in cats (de Morais 2008). However, the
rate of decline in osmolality may be as or more important
Hyponatremia
than the actual plasma concentration.
The brain can adapt to cell swelling in chronic hypona-
Hyponatremia indicates an increase in water relative to
tremia by moving solutes out of cells, thus reducing
sodium and is recognized as a serum sodium concentra-
cell osmolality. Solutes removed from brain cells, called
tion below the normal range for a given laboratory (typ-
osmolytes, include sodium and potassium ions as well
ically about <140 mmol/L in dogs and <149 mmol/L
 as organic solutes such as myoinositol and the amino
in cats). True hyponatremia is usually associated with
acids glutamine, glutamate, and taurine. Removal of
 a decrease in plasma osmolality. Two components are
these solutes occurs over 1-3 days. Restoration of these
necessary for hyponatremia to develop: (1) a source of
 solutes back into the brain cells as hyponatremia is cor-
electrolyte-free water (EFW) and (2) ADH to prevent
rected similarly takes several days to accomplish. This
excretion of water. The most important defense against 
 adaptation allows brain cells to maintain normal cell vol-
development of hyponatremia is renal excretion of EFW.
 ume during hyponatremia, but places the cells at risk of
 Thus, hyponatremia almost always indicates a defect in
 cell contraction should hyponatremia be corrected too
water excretion.
quickly.
Hyponatremia implies cell swelling as a consequence
The single most important decision to make in man-
of a net movement of water into cells to achieve osmotic
 aging a patient with hyponatremia is to determine if
equilibrium. Exceptions to this rule include loss of certain
the patient has acute or chronic hyponatremia. Acute
potassium salts from the ICF or pseudohyponatremia
hyponatremia is hyponatremia that has developed within
(Halperin and Goldstein 1999). Loss of potassium salts
the preceding 48 hours. The major risk associated with
from the ICF constitutes a reduction in total intracellu-
 hyponatremia is brain swelling. It is important to accu-
lar solute, which leads to movement of water out of cells.
rately determine that the patient definitely has acute
Pseudohyponatremia is a decrease in plasma sodium that
 hyponatremia because it can be safely corrected rapidly,
occurs in association with a normal or increased effec-
thus reducing the potential for persisting brain injury.
tive plasma osmolality.^ Hyperglycemia is an example of
However, as mentioned above, if the hyponatremia is
Sodium disorders  621
corrected too quickly and the patient actually has chronic
Table 61.1 Factors promoting antidiuretic hormone 
hyponatremia, osmotic demyelination syndrome? (ODS)
(vasopressin) release or activity
may occur (see below). As a consequence, it is essential
that the diagnosis of acute hyponatremia be definitively
 Physiologic stimuli
based on a demonstrated normal plasma sodium concen-
Low "effective" circulating volume
 tration no longer than 48 hours preceding the discovery
 Pain
Nausea
of hyponatremia.
Vomiting
The ODS is a symmetrical demyelination commonly
Anxiety
involving the base of the pons typically observed after
Absence of a physiologic stimulus
therapy for hyponatremia, particularly if the hypona-
Drugs that stimulate or augment ADH release
 tremia is corrected too rapidly (Halperin and Goldstein
Nicotine and Morphine (increase central ADH release)
1999). Poor nutrition and hypokalemia are risk factors
Some chemotherapeutic drugs (by causing nausea)
for development of ODS, probably because they delay
Drugs that promote actions of ADH
restoration of intercellular osmolytes. Clinical signs of
Oral hypoglycemics (e.g.. chlorpropamide)
   as s si u q iim e 
Caffeine
lethargy, weakness, ataxia, confusion, agitation, coma,
 NSAIDs, aspirin
and spastic or flaccid quadriparesis that develops days to
Drugs that simulate ADH
DDAVP
a week after therapy. Diagnosis of ODS may be confirmed
Oxytocin
by MRI scanning. There is no known treatment.
Endocrine causes:
Adrenal insufficiency
Acute hyponatremia
Hypothyroidism
Vasopressin-producing neoplasms
When hyponatremia can be confirmed to have been
Vasopressin-producing granulomas
 present for less than 48 hours, hyponatremia is consid-
CNS or lung lesions (reset osmostat)
ered to be acute. Remember that acute discovery of a
Certain metabolic lesions (porphyria)
chronic condition does not make it an acute condition.
Hyponatremia requires a source of water and the pres-
ence of ADH to prevent its excretion. Because the source
for ADH in acute hyponatremia is usually obvious ( Table
below) or when thiazide diuretics are administered to a
61.1), the principal diagnostic concern is to identify the
patient with edema (diuretic causes salt loss, but ADH
source of electrolyte-free water. The principal risk to the
prevents excretion of water).
patient is a rise in intracranial pressure and herniation
Acute hyponatremia that is mild (plasma sodium con-
of the brain secondary to brain swelling. The therapeutic
centration has declined less than ~15 meq/L) and not
principal is to rapidly correct the hyponatremia before it
associated with clinical signs can generally be managed by
 can cause brain injury.
limiting the source of water. Water intake should be con-
Possible sources for water in patients with acute
trolled until the cause for increased ADH abates. How-
hyponatremia include administration of dextrose 5% in
ever, if acute hyponatremia is associated with clinical
water, hypotonic saline, ingested water (including water-
 signs, more aggressive therapy is indicated and hypona-
based enteral feeding supplements), water added to food
tremia should be corrected quickly. Hypertonic saline
for tube-feeding, and desalination of administered saline
may be administered until the neurological signs abate
solutions. Desalination of administered saline solutions
or plasma sodium concentration is close to 135 meq/L
may occur when an excessive quantity of saline solution
(Halperin and Goldstein 1999). When calculating the
(e.g-, normal saline) is administered intravenously to a
amount of sodium to administer, assume that the vol-
patient, leading to overhydration and volume expansion.
ume behaves as if the sodium is distributed throughout
The physiologic response to overhydration is for the kid-
total body water:
neys to excrete sodium. Normally, water would follow
sodium into the urine; however, if ADH is present due to
Dosage of sodium = (△Na+) x TBW
any of the conditions listed in Table 61.1, water may be
retained as the sodium is excreted. The net effect would
Where (△Na+) is the desired increase in plasma sodium
be to excrete the sodium load and retain water, thus
and TBW is total body water (~60% of body weight).
producing hyponatremia. Desalination may also occur
Hypertonic saline is recommended rather than iso-
when isotonic saline is administered to a patient with the
tonic saline because isotonic saline may be desalinated by
syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH—see
 the patient, thus worsening the hyponatremia.
622 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
Table 61.2 Causes for hypo-osmotic hyponatremia
a consequence of volume contraction. In this setting,
volume contraction may result from renal or non renal
Primary sodium loss
causes. When losses are of non-renal origin, urine sodium
Non-renal (gastrointestinal, edematous states, skin)
is usually low; however, reduced volume resulting from
Renal (renal failure, diuretics)
renal losses, gastric vomiting, or low aldosterone activ-
Low aldosterone activity
ity are likely to be associated with higher urine sodium
Primary water gain
excretion.
Low cortisol levels
Hypoalbuminemia
From a diagnostic standpoint, the amount of water
Heart failure
taken in relative to the rate of excretion of EFW is an
Hypothyroidism
important factor in development of hyponatremia. It can
SIADH
be assessed by performing a tonicity balance: [Water In]
 Primary polydipsia
> [EFW Out] = Hyponatremia. It is important to rec-
 ognize that production of “concentrated” urine does not
 necessarily mean that sodium is being excreted. Itis nec-
Chronic hyponatremia
essary to measure urine sodium to determine whether it
is being retained or excreted. Low urine sodium is usually
When hyponatremia has been present for more than
 a good clinical marker for reduced effective circulating
48 hours or is of undetermined duration, hyponatremia
volume. The composition of urine must be compared to
is considered to be chronic. Again, hyponatremia requires
fluid/sodium intake to ascertain tonicity balance.
a source of water and the presence of ADH to prevent its
When hyponatremia results from a gain in body water,
excretion. The principal diagnostic concern with chronic
hyponatremia is to identify why ADH is present ( Table
tive” circulating volume may be normal or low. Con-
61.1). Hypo-osmotic hyponatremia may result from los-
ditions that may be associated with normal ECF vol-
 ing sodium or from gaining water ( Table 61.2). The prin-
ume, but decreased “effective” circulating volume include
cipal risk to the patient is overaggressive therapy that
low cortisol levels, hypoalbuminemia, heart failure, and
lowers plasma sodium concentration too quickly, thus
hypothyroidism. However, when “effective” circulating
promoting ODS. The therapeutic principle is to slowly
volume is normal, SIADH is the likely diagnosis.
correct the hyponatremia to avoid inducing ODS.
 SIADH is present when decreased effective circulating
In seeking a reason for ADH to be present, the first
volume is not low and ADH release is not under the usual
step is usually to establish whether the ECF is decreased.
physiological control in a patient with hyponatremia.
Determination of the patient's fluid status should be
It can be produced by a variety of disorders includ-
determined on the basis of the physical examination;
ing neurologic disorders, drugs, pulmonary disease,
it cannot be determined from the plasma sodium con-
postoperative, severe nausea, ectopic ADH production
centration. Hyponatremia can occur in patients who are
(usually a neoplasm), or exogenous administration of
volume contracted, volume expanded, or have a normal
ADH. SIADH is characterized by the folowing fea-
fluid volume. Patients who are volume contracted likely
tures: (1) hyponatremia and hypoosmolality; (2) urine
 develop hyponatremia as a result of sodium loss. Hypo-
    si  
volemia may be detected as dry mucous membranes,
100 mOsm/L); (3) a urine sodium concentration that
increased skin turgor, tachycardia, increased hemat-
is not low despite hyponatremia (usually greater than
ocrit and total solids, and concentrated urine. Patients
~40 meq/L in humans, unless the patient is volume
who have a normal to expanded ECF likely develop
depleted for some other reason); (4) normovolemia; (5)
hyponatremia as a consequence of gaining water. Hyper-
normal renal, adrenal, and thyroid function; and (6)
volemia may be detected as gelatinous subcutaneous tis-
normal acid-base and potassium balance (Rose 2001).
sues, serous nasal discharge, chemosis, venous distension,
Hyponatremia in patients with SIADH usually corrects
peripheral edema, ascites, or pulmonary edema. How-
with water restriction. The underlying cause for SIADH
ever, since electrolyte-free water distributes throughout
should be sought so that therapy for the primary disease
the total body water, the expansion of the ECF may be
may be provided.
subclinical or very mild.
 Treatment of chronic hyponatremia involves raising
Sodium loss leading to ECF contraction usually occurs
the plasma sodium concentration at a safe rate and treat-
in an isotonic fashion. Hyponatremia then develops
ing the underlying condition. The hyponatremia should
d n h   si ss i  s
be corrected slowly at a rate unlikely to induce ODs. Ide-
by electrolyte-free water (EFW). The EFW is retained
ally, plasma sodium concentration should increase by no
despite hyponatremia because ADH release occurs as
more than 8 meq/L/day. If the patient has moderate to
Sodium disorders 623
severe malnutrition or hypokalemia, correction should
Table 61.3 Causes of hypernatremia
be made more slowly. However, if the patient has severe
neurological signs (e.g., seizure or coma) thought to be a
Pure water deficit
consequence of hyponatremia itself, consider providing
Loss of electrolyte-fre water without access with
sufficient hypertonic sodium chloride solution to ame-
 inadequate water consumption
liorate the clinical signs (up to about 5 meq/L). This
Diabetes insipidus
Fever
dosage of sodium is considered to be part of the increase
allowable for the first day of therapy. The amount given
High environmental temperature
Dysfunctional thirst mechanism
 over the 24-hour period appears more important than
Primary hypodipsia
the rate of administration.
Adipsia/hypodipsia with neurologic diseases
 For patients with chronic hyponatremia resulting from
Hypotonic fluid loss
sodium loss, the sodium deficit should be calculated
Extrarenal loss
:Se
Gastrointestinal
Cutaneous
Na+ deficit = TBW x Na+ deficit per liter
Renal loss
 Third spacing (lesslikely)
Where TBW is total body water (~60% of body weight),
Gain in sodium
 Salt poisoning
and the sodium deficit is the difference between the cur-
Hypertonic fluid administration
rent plasma sodium concentration and the target sodium
Hyperaldosteronism
concentration. Total body sodium is used in this calcula-
Hyperadrenocorticism (less likely)
tion because osmolality is the same in both the ECF and
 Generation of intracellular osmoles
the ICF. The major indication for administering sodium
Seizures
chloride is to correct the volume deficit. This is usually
Severe exertion
done using normal saline. However, be aware that as the
ECF volume deficit is corrected, the stimulus for ADH
release may dissipate and water may be rapidly excreted
causing arapid reduction in plasma sodium. Ifthis should
in cats). It may result from loss of EFW, loss of hypo-
happen, one option is to limit water diuresis by adminis-
 tonic fluids, or ingestion or administration of excessive
tration of ADH until the electrolyte and fluid deficits can
quantities of sodium. Loss of EFW without the ability to
be slowly and safely corrected.
replace water is by far the most common cause for severe
Chronic hyponatremia resulting from water surplus
hypernatremia in dogs and cats. Thirst is the primary
may consist of (1) restricting water intake, (2) promot-
defense against development of hypernatremia. It is such
ing water loss independent of ADH, and (3) reducing
a powerful urge that hypernatremia will not develop if
ADH levels. Water loss independent of ADH may be
the thirst mechanism is intact and access to water is pro-
promoted by administering diuretics and replacing elec-
vided. Thirst is initiated when plasma sodium increases
trolytes (e.g-, normal saline), but not water. Some causes
 as little as 2 meq/L (Halperin and Goldstein 1999).
for ADH release may be correctable, including: cor-
Successful management of hypernatremia requires
recting volume depletion, providing colloid support for
recognition and treatment of the underlying disease
hypoalbuminemia, replacing hormones that are deficient
(Table 61.3). Assessment of the ECF volume provides
(glucocorticoids, thyroid hormone), improve myocardial
 guidance as to the origin of hypernatremia. With pure
function, and withdraw drugs promoting ADH effects.
water loss (EFW), the patient is hypovolemic, but because
In addition, ADH receptor antagonists (vapatans) can be
the reduction in volume is distributed throughout the
used to selectively enhance renal EFW excretion; however,
 o e au e  sd 
their safety, efficacy, and role in managing hyponatremia
mildly dehydrated even with substantial loss of body
have not been established in dogs and cats (Francis and
water. In contrast, loss of hypotonic fluid (e.g., some gas-
Tang 2004).
trointestinal or urinary losses) typically results in overt
signs of volume contraction or dehydration. In both of
these instances, body weight will decrease. In the unusual
Hypernatremia
instance where hypernatremia results from ingestion of
Hypernatremia reflects a relative increase in sodium com-
excess sodium, recognition of an expanded ECF readily
pared to water and is recognized as a serum sodium con-
reveals the origin of the hypernatremia. Body weight typ-
centration above the normal range for a given laboratory
ically increases in such patients. Transient hypernatremia
(typically about > 150 mmol/L in dogs and > 160 mmol/L
 may occur in association with severe exertion or seizures
624 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
where metabolic generation of intracellular hyperosmo-
in water depending on the condition of the patient. Con-
lality may draw water from the ECF. In this setting, no
tinuing water loss should be mitigated if at all possible
change in body water or body weight occurs.
(e.g, by administration of ADH for diabetes insipidus).
 In the majority of hypernatremic patients, the ICF is
However, the water deficit does not account for any isos-
contracted and patients are at risk of developing CNS
  n     P 
hemorrhage subsequent to brain shrinkage. This is most
fluid losses. The volume deficit that is present in addition
likely to occur when hypernatremia is acute or severe
to the water deficit may be replaced with isotonic fluid
(Halperin and Goldstein 1999). As mentioned above,
with due consideration as to how this will affect plasma
significant changes in cell volume begin to occur with a
sodium concentration. With severe hypernatremia, it
 gradient in excess of about 35 mOsm/L between the ECF
may be necessary to provide fluid volume resuscitation
 and ICF. Clinical signs may include anorexia, lethargy
using a solution similar to the patient's sodium con-
vomiting, muscular weakness, behavioral changes, dis-
centration to avoid unintentionally rapid reduction in
orientation, ataxia, seizures, coma, and death.
plasma sodium. Volume restoration of the ECF should
With chronic hypernatremia, brain cells generate
be rapid if the patient is hypotensive. It may be necessary
intracellular osmoles, which limit the movement of water
to measure ins and outs to assure that the net anticipated
out of the cells. This effect is essentially the opposite of
administration of free water is actually what the patient
what occurs in hyponatremia in which the cell content of
is receiving. The changes in plasma sodium should be
sodium, potassium, and organic solutes (glutamine, glu-
carefully monitored during therapy.
tamate and inositol) is increased. As with hyponatremia,
 generation and elimination of these osmolytes requires
Endnotes
several days. The clinical impact ofthis process is that cor-
rection of chronic hypernatremia must be done slowly to
1. Osmolalty of the ECF may be estimated by the formula: Calculated
 prevent brain swelling.
Posm = {2 × plasma Na) + {[glucose] /18) + {[BUN]/2.8).
 2. Note that osmolality here refers to measured osmolality, not calcu-
Current recommendation is to reduce the plasma
lated osmolality.
sodium concentration slowly unless the patient is symp-
 3. ODS is sometimes called *pontine myelinosis."
tomatic for hypernatremia. Generally, plasma sodium
 should not be reduced more quickly than 12 meq/L/day.
When the patient is hypernatremic due to loss of water,
References
the water deficit can be calculated by the formula:
de Morais, H. and S.P. DiBartola (2008). Hyponatrermia: a quick ref-
Water Deficit = TBW x Lean Body Weight
erence. Vet Clin Small Animal 38: 491-495.
Francis, G.S. and W.H.W. Tang (2004). Vasopressin receptor antago-
x{(patient's plasma[Na+]/normal plasma [Na+]) - 1}
nists. JAMA 291: 2017-2018.
Total body water may be reduced by the estimated vol-
Halperin, M.L. and M.B. Goldstein (1999). Fluid, electrolyte, and
acid-base physiology. In: A Problerm-Based Approach, 3rd ed.
ume depletion. When hypernatremia is due to loss of
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
EFW alone, the water deficit is all that is required. It may
Rose, B.D. (2001). Clinical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte Dis-
be provided either orally or intravenously as 5% dextrose
orders, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Potassium disorders
Andrea J. Sotirakopoulos and Sheri J. Ross
Normal potassium balance
feces (Giebisch 1998). Extracellular potassium concen-
tration may rise abruptly with increases in potassium
Hypo- and hyperkalemia are among the most commonly
intake as well as with processes or disease states that
recognized electrolyte abnormalities in both human
cause internal redistribution (Giebisch 1998). While the
and veterinary hospitalized patients. The significant
kidney is essential to chronic maintenance of total body
morbidity and mortality associated with both hypo- and
potassium, more immediate control relies on a shift of
hyperkalemia underscore the need for prompt recog-
nition and treatment. Potassium is the most abundant
partments (Giebisch 1998).
cation in the body; normal extracellular fluid (ECF)
potassium concentration is approximately 4 mEq/L and
Internal distribution of potassium
the normal intracellular fluid (ICF) potassium concen-
tration is approximately 140 mEq/L. Most of total body
 Redistribution of potassium between intracelular and
 n n ( ) s
extracelluar fluid compartments provides protection
cells, with muscle containing 60-70% (DiBartola and de
 from rapid changes in extracellular potassium concentra-
Morais 2006). Only a small percentage (2%) of total body
tion (Guyton and Hall 2006). This internal distribution
potassium is found in the extracellular compartment
of potassium is regulated by several factors including:
(Stanton and Giebisch 1992; Rose and Post 2001b).
serum concentrations of insulin and catecholamines, the
This differential distribution of potassium is the major
 presence of alkalosis or acidosis, cellular damage, and
 determinant of the resting cell membrane potential. The
plasma tonicity (Giebisch 1998; Rose and Post 200la).
resting membrane potential is maintained by the sodium-
Insulin and catecholamines (mainly epinephrine) pro-
 s sss xi q sod po i 
pump located within the plasma membrane of cells. This
skeletal muscle and liver (Vite and Gfeller 1994; Rose
xa aq se a  e s dd
and Post 2001b). Following a meal, rising serum con-
three sodium ions (moving them out of the cell) for two
centrations of glucose and potassium stimulate release
 potassium ions (into the cell) (Clausen and Everts 1989).
of insulin and catecholamines. Epinephrine stimulated
Small changes in distribution of potassium within
B2-adrenergic receptors and insulin increase activity of
the body may dramatically affect the resting membrane
the Na+ , K+ -ATPase pump, increasing cellular potassium
potential of nerve and muscle cells, including myocar-
uptake (Brown 1986).
dial cells, with potentially fatal consequences. Control
The acid-base status of a patient may dramatically
of potassium homeostasis is tightly regulated to match
affect distribution of potassium between ICF and ECF.
daily excretion with dietary intake. Regulation of total
This interaction is complex and the magnitude of tran-
body potassium relies predominantly on the kidney. Over
scellular potassium shifts varies with both the severity
90% of potassium excretion occurs through urine (Rose
and the underlying cause of the acid-base disturbance.
and Post 2001b), with the remaining 10% excreted in
sium from the ECF to the ICF (Vite and Gfeller 1994),
while metabolic acidosis causes a shift in the opposite
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
direction, resulting in loss of potassium from the cells
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
(Vite and Gfeller 1994; Giebisch and Wagner 2007).
625
626 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
e oe   sd   
and passive diffusion through potassium channels on
 internal distribution of potassium. Serum hyperosmo-
luminal membranes. The basolateral Na+, K+-ATPase
lality results in diffusion of intracellular water to extra-
pump shifts potassium into the cell while moving
cellular compartments. This movement of water from
sodium out of the cell into the interstitium (Giebisch
cells creates solvent drag causing a net loss of potassium
1998; Guyton and Hall 2006). Passive diffusion allows
from cells. In contrast, serum hypoosmolality results in
 potassium to move from inside the celinto tubular fluid.
net movement of water into cells, resulting in a decreased
The Na+, K+-ATPase pump creates the electrochemical
ECF potassium concentration.
gradient (high intracellular potassium concentration)
facilitating secretion of potassium into the lumen via
Regulation of potassium by the kidney
passive diffusion (Guyton and Hall 2006). Concentration
of potassium in the extracellular fluid is a critical factor
Potassium transport along the nephron
in regulation of potassium secretion. Rising potassium
The kidneys are responsible for over 90% of total body
concentration in the ECF results in increased potassium
 potassium excretion and are critical in the maintenance
secretion through increases in Na+, K+-ATPase pump
of both short- and long-term potassium balance. Given
activity, passive diffusion, and secretion of aldosterone
their pivotal role in potassium balance, the kidneys must
(Guyton and Hall 2006).
Flow rate in the distal tubules also affects potassium
sd  e   d s
Primary determinants of potassium excretion by the kid-
secretion in that increases in tubular flow rate reduce
 intra-tubular potassium concentration, promoting fur-
ney are rates of (1) potassium filtration, (2) renal tubular
ther potassium secretion (DiBartola and de Morais 2006).
potassium reabsorption, and (3) renal tubular potassium
secretion (Guyton and Hall 2006). Within the nephron,
Increases in distal tubular flow may be associated with
approximately 66% of freely filtered potassium is reab-
diuretic therapy, increased sodium intake, and volume
sorbed along the proximal tubule. This reabsorption is
expansion. (Guyton and Hall 2006).
mostly passive and driven by the positive tubule electri-
Secretion of potassium is also influenced by the
cal potential and paracellular solvent drag (Giebisch and
amount of sodium and poorly reabsorbed anions deliv-
Wagner 2007).
ered to the distal nephron. Sodium is usually reabsorbed,
Along the descending limb of the loop of Henle, a
which increases the negativity of the luminal fluid and
small amount of potassium is secreted into the tubule
promotes diffusion of potassium out of cells. Likewise,
poorly absorbed anions increase tubular negativity and
lumen from the medullary interstitium. Along the thick
ascending limb of the loop of Henle, there is signifi-
 promote potassium secretion.
cant potassium reabsorption via the Na+, K+ - 2Cl-
Potassium deficiency is associated with increased activ-
ity and expression of H+,K+-ATPase pumps on the
co-transporter. The summation of these events typically
 results in net reabsorption of potassium within the loop
luminal membrane of α-intercalated cells of the col-
of Henle.
lecting tubules. These cells promote reabsorption of
The distal nephron (late distal tubule and cortical col-
 potassium from the tubular lumen (Guyton and Hall
lecting duct) is the most important site for net regulation
2006). Although important in management of mild
of potassium excretion. Typically, dietary intake creates
hypokalemia, this response may be easily overwhelmed
 an excess of total body potassium resulting in net secre-
if potassium deficiency is severe or prolonged.
tion into the tubule. However, potassium secretion may
 decrease or change to net reabsorption in states of potas-
Control of potassium secretion: aldosterone
sium deficiency.
Aldosterone is primarily responsible for hormonal
control of renal potassium excretion. Aldosterone is
Potassium secretion in the distal nephron
produced and secreted from zona glomerulosa cells of
Potassium secretion in the distal nephron is determined
the adrenal cortex in response to many factors, includ-
by the concentration gradient of potassium between
ing increases in serum potassium concentration and
tubular cels and tubular lumen, tubular flow rate, and
angiotensin Il (produced in response to volume deple-
 transmembrane potential difference across the luminal
tion). A potent feedback system is responsible for detect-
membrane (DiBartola and de Morais 2006). Principal
ing an increase in ECF potassium concentration, which
cells located in the late distal and cortical collecting
 in turn stimulates aldosterone secretion. The resulting
tubules are responsible for secretion of potassium.
decrease in ECF potassium concentration ultimately
Secretion of potassium into the tubular lumen requires
reduces the amount of aldosterone secreted (Guyton and
both Na+, K+-ATPase pumps on basolateral membranes
Hall 2006).
Potassium disorders  627
There are three major mechanisms by which aldos-
Table 62.1 Causes of hypokalemia
terone affects potassium regulation in the distal nephron.
The first mechanism is by increasing intracellular potas-
Decreased potassium intake
sium content by stimulating Nat, K+-ATPase pump
Severe malnutrition
activity. This increases the magnitude of the potas-
latrogenic (inadequate supplementation of parenteral fluids)
sium concentration gradient across the apical membrane,
Altered transcellular potassium distribution
resulting in an increased rate of potassium secretion into
Increased endogenous or exogenous insulin
 the luminal fluid. The second mechanism is by increasing
Catecholamine excess (stress, albuterol toxicity)
 permeability of potassium channels in the apical mem-
Metabolic alkalosis
brane, which increases the amount of potassium that
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (Burmese cats)
may be excreted in a given time. The third mechanism
Increased potassium excretion
is by increasing the rate of sodium uptake across the
Non-renal Excretion
apical membrane. The resulting increase in the negativ-
Vomiting
ity of luminal fluid promotes the secretion of potassium
Diarrhea
(Giebisch and Wagner 2007)-
Bentonite clay ingestion (cats-rare)
Renal Excretion
Diuretics (loop and thiazide)
Hypokalemia
Post-obstructive diuresis
Osmotic diuresis (uncontrolled diabetes)
Hypokalemia is defined as a serum potassium con-
Primary aldosteronism
centration below 3.6 mmol/L. Decreased serum potas-
Hyperadrenocorticism or exogenous glucocorticoids
sium may cause hyperpolarization of cell membranes,
Renal tubular acidosis (Types 1 and 2)
 thereby inhibiting the generation of action potentials by
Hypomagnesemia
excitatory cells such as myocytes and neurons. Conse-
quently, the predominant clinical signs associated with
hypokalemia result from decreased nerve and mus-
Decreased intake/iatrogenic hypokalemia
cle function. Polyuria and polydipsia occur commonly
and result from a decrease in renal responsiveness to
Decreased potassium intake is rarely the primary cause of
the action of ADH. In general, clinical signs depend
hypokalemia in dogs and cats unless they are fed an atypi-
on severity of hypokalemia, with mild hypokalemia
cal diet or have a chronic illness with prolonged anorexia
(3-3.5 mmol/L) often being asymptomatic. Moderate
(DiBartola and de Morais 2006). latrogenic dilutional
by generalized muscle weakness and lethargy, while
receiving parenteral fluids with inadequate potassium
severe hypokalemia (<2.5 mmol/L) may be accompa-
 supplementation to meet maintenance requirements.
nied by significant muscle weakness and potentially
 o o sd    s si s
even rhabdomyolysis. In cats, particularly those with
receive timely nutritional support.
chronic kidney disease, ventroflexion of the neck may be
observed secondary to cervical muscle weakness. Extreme
Translocation of potassium from ECF to ICF
hypokalemia may cause ascending paralysis, culminating
in respiratory failure and death.
Translocation of potassium from ECF to ICF may tem-
Although uncommon, cardiac arrythmias may be
 porarily decrease plasma potassium concentration with-
 observed due to delayed ventricular repolarization, espe-
out altering total body potassium. In small animals,
this redistribution has been reported with exogenous
cially in patients with preexisting heart disease. Electro-
administration or endogenous release of insulin, cate-
inconsistently observed, but include prolongation of QT
cholamine release, metabolic alkalosis, albuterol toxicity,
intervals, ST segment deviations, and decrease in ampli-
 and hypokalemic periodic paralysis (a hereditary disor-
tude of T waves.
der of Burmese cats). An increase in serum insulin con-
centration stimulates Na+ , K+ -ATPase pump activity and
enhances cellular uptake of potassium (Ahee and Crowe
Causes of hypokalemia
2000). Likewise, catecholamines may decrease serum
Hypokalemia may result from decreased potassium
dnd ss-+ + a s Aq isso
intake, translocation of potassium from ECF to ICF
 predominantly in skeletal muscle cels. Catecholamine
and/or increased gastrointestinal or renal losses of potas-
release may increase during periods of stress associ-
sium (DiBartola and de Morais 2006) (Table 62.1).
ated with illness and hospitalization, contributing to
628 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
hypokalemia. Metabolic alkalosis worsens hypokalemia
from chronic inappetance. Other conditions associated
due to movement of potassium into ICF in response
with significant urinary potassium losses include posto-
to translocation of hydrogen ions out of the cell in
bstructive diuresis following resolution of feline urethral
an attempt to maintain the cellular electrical gradient
obstruction (Bartges et al. 1996) and distal renal tubular
(Langston 2008).
acidosis (Soriano 2002; Dibartola and de Morais 2006).
Albuterol is a β2-adrenergic agonist commonly used as
A thorough medication history is important in
a bronchodilator. Overdoses of albuterol may cause sig-
all cases of hypokalemia as many medications pro-
nificant hypokalemia and dysrhythmias ( Vite and Gfeller
mote hypokalemia. Certain diurectics, particularly
1994; McCown et al. 2008). Albuterol has been used in
furosemide, thiazide diuretics, and mannitol, can induce
humans to treat hyperkalemia associated with renal dis-
hypokalemia. Furosemide, a "loop diuretic," decreases
ease (Murdock et al. 1991), hyperkalaemic familial peri-
reabsorption of sodium and chloride and increases excre-
odic paralysis (Wang and Clausen 1976), and refractory
tion of potassium in the distal renal tubule (Plumb
hyperkalemia in hemodialysis patients (Allon et al. 1989;
2008). Exogenous mineralocorticoids such as fludrocor-
Allon and Copkney 1990).
 tisone and DOCP cause a marked increase in potassium
Hypokalemic polymyopathy has been reported in
secretion in the distal nephron by mimicking effects of
Burmese cats between 2 and 12 months of age. This syn-
aldosterone. Very high doses of glucocorticoids or severe
drome is characterized by recurrent episodes marked by
untreated Cushing's disease may produce some min-
hypokalemia, stiff gait, muscle weakness, ventroflexion
of the neck, and increases in creatinine kinase concen-
 dominantly due to increased filtration and the resulting
tration (Blaxter 1986; Mason 1988). Neither decreased
increase in sodium delivery to the distal nephron.
potassium intake nor increased renal potassium excre-
 Primary hyperaldosteronism is caused by excessive
tion appear to be responsible for the pathogenesis of
aldosterone secretion from bilateral adrenal hyperpla-
hypokalemia. A sudden and dramatic translocation of
sia or an adrenal tumor; unilateral adrenal adenoma (or
potassium from the ECF to the ICF seems to occur
carcinoma), or in some cases, bilateral adrenal adeno-
(Dickinson and LeCouteur 2004). Although the molec-
mas (Flood et al. 1999; Feldman and Nelson 2004a).
ular basis for this polymyopathy in Burmese kittens has
 In patients with primary hyperaldosteronism, there is
 not been fully elucidated, a genetic basis similar to muta-
 a marked increase in sodium reabsorption and potas-
tions in voltage-dependent ion channels seen in humans
sium secretion by the distal nephron. The marked
with hypokalemic periodic paralysis is suspected. (Elbaz
-is ssio  xa issod Aen u 
et al. 1995; Vite 2002).
nificant hypokalemia. These patients often present with
volume-dependent hypertension, metabolic alkalosis,
and marked hypokalemia.
Increased loss of potassium
Magnesium deficiency is often found concurrently
Typically, only a small amount of potassium is excreted
with hypokalemia and may significantly inhibit thera-
in the feces; however, clinically significant losses of potas-
peutic response to potassium supplementation. Com-
sium may occur with protracted diarrhea. In dogs with
bined magnesium and potassium deficiency may be
intestinal obstruction, hypokalemia may be attributed to
observed in patients receiving loop or thiazide diuretics,
the loss of potassium through vomiting and fluid seques-
 Or potentially nephrotoxic drugs such as aminoglycoside
tration (Brown and Otto 2008). A modest amount of
 antibiotics, amphotericin B, or cisplatin. The mechanism
 potassium may also be lost in vomitus of animals suffer-
of potassium loss secondary to magnesium deficiency is
ing from prolonged vomiting.
not entirely understood, but is believed to be associated
 Although direct potassium losses from vomiting and
with a decrease in magnesium-dependent inhibition of 
 diarrhea tend to be small, the ensuing volume depletion
renal outer medullary potassium (ROMK) channels in
and metabolic alkalosis result in significant renal loss of
the distal nephron. ROMK channels are responsible for
potassium. Hypovolemia stimulates aldosterone release,
the basal secretion of potassium in the distal tubule and
thereby increasing sodium reabsorption and potassium
cortical collecting ducts (Huang and Kuo 2007). Mea-
excretion by principal cells of the collecting duct (Brown
surement of serum magnesium and correction of hypo-
and Otto 2008). Metabolic alkalosis increases the amount
 magnesemia should be considered in patients with refrac-
 of sodium bicarbonate delivered to the distal nephron,
tory hypokalemia (Kobrin and Goldfarb 1990).
further enhancing secretion of potassium.
Hypokalemia has been reported in approximately
Management of hypokalemia
20-30% of cats with CKD (DiBartola et al. 1987; Elliot
and Barber 1998) and is likely due to a combination of
The initial approach to the management of hypokalemia
increased renal loses from polyuria and decreased intake
is the identification and correction, if possible, of the
Potassium disorders 629
underlying disease process or contributing factors that
plements. Although potassium chloride and potassium
resulted in the hypokalemia. A detailed history may help
bicarbonate are available as oral formulations, they are
to identify possible etiologies (e.g., diuretic use). Thera-
associated with anorexia and vomiting and most pets find
peutic goals are to correct the potassium deficit and to
 them unpalatable. Cats with hypokalemia and ongoing
minimize ongoing losses. It is imperative to recognize
potassium loss secondary to CKD may be managed ini-
that correlation between serum potassium concentra-
tially with oral potassium gluconate at 5-10 mEq/day
tions and total potassium deficit are poor. For exam-
divided into 2-3 doses. Once the potassium deficit has
ple, initial serum potassium levels in patients with dia-
been replaced, the dose may be decreased to 2-4 mEq/day
betic ketoacidosis may significantly underestimate total
for maintenance (Langston 2008).
body potassium deficit. In this clinical scenario, serum
potassium concentrations are artificially increased due to
Hyperkalemia
potassium translocation out of cells in response to insulin
deficiency and metabolic acidosis. Given the inherent dif-
Hyperkalemia is defined as serum potassium concentra-
ficulties in accurately predicting the amount of potassium
 tion greater than 5.0 mmol/L and can be classified as mild
(5.0-6.0 mmol/L), moderate (6.0-8.0 mmol/L), or severe
toring of serum potassium concentration is essential
(>8.0 mmol/L) (Cowgill and Francey 2005). Clinical
Initial
 management   of  moderate
to
severe
consequences of hyperkalemia are dependent upon the
hypokalemia usually requires  parenteral  adminis-
magnitude of increase in serum potassium and the rate at
tration of potassium, typically potassium chloride (or
which the increase occurs. As with hypokalemia, clinical
potassium phosphate) as an additive to 0.9% sodium
signs associated with hyperkalemia are generally related
chloride. Guidelines defining the amount of potassium
to impaired neuromuscular function. Elevated ECF con-
chloride to add to parenteral fluids based on serum
 centrations of potassium decrease the electronegativity
potassium concentration are provided in Table 62.2. To
of the cellular membrane potential, leading to a partial
minimize the occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias, the
depolarization of the cell. Initially, this change increases
rate of potassium administration should not exceed 0.5
the excitability of the cell membrane, which explains the
mmol/kg/hr (DiBartola and de Morais 2001). Potassium
hyperesthesia and muscle twitching often observed in
chloride may also cause pain and potentially phlebitis if
animals with moderate to severe hyperkalemia. With
administered at concentrations exceeding 40 mmol/L via
 persistent hyperkalemia, cell membrane excitability is
peripheral veins or greater than 60 mmol/L via central
impaired due to delayed repolarization, leading to muscle
veins.
weakness, paralysis, and impaired cardiac function.
Oral potassium supplementation is preferable to par-
Cardiotoxicity is the most clinically significant sequela
enteral supplementation for correction of mild to mod-
of hyperkalemia, although the onset and severity does
erate hypokalemia and for control of ongoing potassium
not seem to correlate well with serum potassium concen-
losses. Oral supplementation is safer than parenteral
trations. Electrocardiographic (ECG) changes associated
administration and is less likely to result in iatrogenic
with hyperkalemia are documented in dogs and cats, and
hyperkalemia. Potassium gluconate and potassium cit-
 d     ns 
rate are the most commonly used oral potassium sup-
exceed 6.5-7.0 mmol/L (Ettinger et al. 1974; Tag and Day
2008). Initial ECG changes include increased amplitude
Table 62.2 Guidelines for intravenous potassium
("tenting") of T waves, shortening of QT intervals, and
supplementation in dogs and cats
flattening of P waves. Progression of hyperkalemia leads
 to prolongation of PR intervals and widening of the QRS
 Serum potassium
Maximum fluid
complexes. Severe hyperkalemia dramaticaly decreases
concentration 
mEq KCl to add
 infusion ratea
size of P waves due to diminishing conduction within the
(mEq/L)
to 1 L fluid 
(mL/kg/hr)
atria. Eventually, atrial conduction stops, P waves dis-
<2.0
appear, and significant bradycardia develops. As cardiac
80
6
2.12.5
60
8
conduction continues to decrease, the QRS complex pro-
2.6-3.0
40
12
gressively widens and eventually merges with the T wave
3.1-3.5
28
18
to form a sine wave, a harbinger of impending cardiac
3.6-5.0
20
25
arrest (DiBartola and de Morais 2006) (Figure 62.1).
Source: Greene, R.W. and R.C. Scott (1975). Lower urinary tract
Causes of hyperkalemia
disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by
S.J. Ettinger. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, p. 1572.
Although the following discussion addresses causes of
aDo not exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/h
  n   ni s 
630 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
0.16-150Hz
(a)
(b)
Figure 62.1 Electrocardiographic evidence of atrial standstillin a dog (a) and cat (b) with severe hyperkalemia. Progressive hyperkalemia
may result in characteristic changes in the electrocardiogram (ECG); indluding tall, peaked T waves, and progressive flattening of the p
wave as conduction through the artria is impaired. Eventually, conduction thought the atria ceases, resulting in atrial standstill (depicted
above). Ventricular fibrilltion may occur at any time during this progression. (ECGs courtesy of Drs. Sarah Miller and Joao Orvalho).
 parenteral fluids has also been associated with hyper-
 than one contributing risk factor Mechanistically, hyper-
kalemia. Inadequate mixing after addition of potassium
 kalemia may result from increased potassium intake,
 chloride to a 1 L fluid bag could result in up to a 1,000-
translocation of potassium from ICF to ECF, and/or
fold difference between maximum and minimum con-
decreased excretion ( Table 62.3).
centrations of potassium chloride in the fluid outflow
(Thompson 1980).
Increased intake
Impaired distribution of potassium between
Increased oral intake of potassium is unlikely to result
the intracellular and extracellular spaces
in significant hyperkalemia unless the patient has a con-
current defect in potassium excretion. Iatrogenic hyper-
Conditions causing a net shift of potassium from the
kalemia resulting from overzealous potassium supple-
intracellular space to the extracellular space may also
mentation of intravenous fluids occurs more commonly.
 result in hyperkalemia. This net shift occurs when
Inadequate dispersion of potassium chloride added to
 potassium is prevented from entering cells or in situations
Potassium disorders 631
Table 62.3 Causes of hyperkalemia
tation in order to avoid dramatic hypokalemia.
Increased potassium intake
An elevation in plasma osmolality may lead to
Potassium supplements (enteral or parenteral)
 increased serum potassium concentrations. Increased
Certain herbal supplements (e.g., noni juice, alfalfa,
extracellular osmolality results in diffusion of water out
dandelion)
of the cells. This movement of water carries potassium
Stored packed red blood cells
via a process known as solvent drag. Loss of intracel-
Penicillin G potassium (1.7 mEq/106U)
  s e e ss a n
Altered transcelular potassium distribution
 potassium concentration, facilitating the movement of
Metabolic acidosis (mineral > organic acidosis)
 potassium out of the cell through channels in the cell
Insulin deficiency
membrane.
Hyperosmolality (diabetic ketoacidosis)
Massive tissue damage (rhabdomyolysis, burns, trauma)
Acute metabolic acidosis
Decreased potassium excretion
Chronic kidney disease, stage 4
It is generally accepted that acidosis promotes hyper-
Acute kidney injury
   sd   
Decreased effective circulating volume (e.g., congestive heart
extracellular compartments in exchange for intracellu-
failure)
lar buffering of hydrogen ions. However, the effects of
Mineralocorticoid deficiency
metabolic acidosis on transcellular shifts of potassium
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
are variable and depend on the cause and duration of
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism (type IV renal tubular
the acidosis. A predictable increase in serum potassium
acidosis)
concentration seems to only be associated with inorganic
Pseudohypoaldosteronism
acidosis (e.g., HCl and NH Cl). Diabetic ketoacidosis
Medications that impair K+ excretion
and lactic acidosis, two of the most common causes of
K+-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride)
organic (nonmineral) metabolic acidosis, are not asso-
Trimethoprim, pentamidine
ciated with significant increases in serum potassium,
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin
although a number of other factors related to the primary
receptor blockers
disease process could promote hyperkalemia. The mech-
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
anism(s) of this differing effect of mineral and organic
Heparin
acidemias on transmembrane movement of potassium
Cyclosporin, tacrolimus
appears to be related to the movement of organic
Pseudohyperkalemia
anions into the cells without creating a gradient for
Hemolysis (especially in Akitas)
hydrogen ions, thus obviating the efflux of intracellular
Thrombocytosis
potassium.
Increased potassium release from cells
Hyperkalemia resulting from intracellular potassium
where there is translocation/release of potassium from
release may accompany any process, resulting in cell
cells. Independently, these mechanisms do not usually
injury or death. Tissue damage, such as that seen with
result in significant hyperkalemia, but they may certainly
burns, rhabdomyolysis, snake and spider bites, and
exacerbate hyperkalemia from other causes.
trauma, causes release of intracellular potassium from
 Both insulin and β2-adrenergic agonists stimulate cel-
damaged cells (Gennari 2002). Except for cases with
lular uptake of potassium and are potent determinants of
massive tissue destruction, the resulting hyperkalemia
transcellular potassium balance (Mandal 1997). Insulin
is not usually life-threatening; however, clinically signifi-
deficiency and/or β2-adrenergic blockade impair cellu-
 cant hyperkalemia may occur in patients with concurrent
lar uptake of potassium, resulting in increased serum
kidney disease or other factors interfering with normal
potassium concentrations. In diabetic patients (insulin
potassium excretion.
deficiency) this hyperkalemia is rarely recognized since
Although rare, acute tumor lysis syndrome may
hyperglycemia-driven osmotic diuresis causes overall
occur following treatment of certain malignancies with
 potassium depletion. In these instances, serum potassium
chemotherapy or radiation therapy and is charac-
levels are misleading since they may underestimate total
terized by severe hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia,
body deficit of potassium. Treatment of diabetic ketoaci-
hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, and acute kidney injury.
dosis (with insulin and intravenous fluid therapy) may
 Following chemotherapy administration, synchronized
632 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
cell death releases a significant amount of potassium
erbates hyperkalemia by shifting potassium extracellu-
and phosphate. Acute kidney injury, which may develop
larly (Malik et al. 1990).
as a consequence of hyperuricemia, may exacerbate the
hyperkalemia (Calia et al. 1996; Vickery and Thamm
Medications
2007).
Hyperkalemia has been associated with the use of
Decreased renal potassium excretion
several medications, and this effect may be exacer-
bated in patients with concurrent kidney disease and
Normally, the kidneys are able to increase excretion
in patients who receive an oral or parenteral potas-
of potassium as serum potassium concentration rises.
sium load. Many medications can directly or indirectly
Therefore, sustained hyperkalemia is almost always asso-
interfere with production of aldosterone, while other
ciated with some impairment of renal potassium elimina-
medications block effects of aldosterone at the recep-
tion. Effective renal excretion of potassium is dependent
tor. Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
on sufficient delivery of sodium and water to the distal
 decrease angiotensin II production, thereby decreasing
nephron, aldosterone, and on a functional lower urinary
aldosterone levels (Palmer 2004). Angiotensin recep-
tract. Thus, hyperkalemia may occur when one of these
tor blockers increase potassium concentration but seem
mechanisms is impaired due to kidney disease, decreased
to have a slightly decreased propensity for this when
renal perfusion, a decrease in aldosterone, or urinary tract
compared with ACE inhibitors. Nonsteroidal anti-
rent or obstruction.
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may contribute to hyper-
Hyperkalemia is usually not a significant problem in
kalemia by indirectly decreasing aldosterone produc-
chronic kidney disease until renal function has declined
tion. Prostaglandin inhibitors such as NSAIDs decrease
to less than 10% of normal. However, certain medications
renin production, which decreases production of aldos-
- i     aissa p
terone. Cyclosporin and tacrolimus have been asso-
kalemia at earlier stages. Hyperkalemia is the most com-
ciated with hyperkalemia via direct inhibition of the
mon electrolyte abnormality encountered in anuric acute
    
effects on selective potassium and chloride channels in
and mortality in these patients.
the distal tubule. When used in high doses, trimethoprim
may also cause hyperkalemia by blocking sodium chan-
Hypoaldosteronism
nels in the distal tubules, reducing sodium reabsorption
and potassium excretion (Rubin et al. 1998). Although
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) is commonly
most diuretics increase urinary potassium excretion,
associated with hyperkalemia due to a primary decrease
causing hypokalemia, potassium-sparing diuretics such
in aldosterone production. Greater than 85% of adreno-
cortical cells must be lost before significant hyperkalemia
as spironolactone predispose to hyperkalemia. Spirono-
develops (Feldman and Nelson 2004b). Hyporeninemic
lactone inhibits the effect of aldosterone by competitive
hypoaldosteronism (type IV renal tubular acidosis) is an
inhibition of intracellular aldosterone receptors in the
collecting duct. This decreases Na+, K+-ATPase activity
important cause of hyperkalemia in human patients as it
 is often associated with diabetic nephropathy. Although
and limits potassium excretion.
this syndrome appears to be rare in veterinary medicine,
Miscellaneous
it may be under-recognized as diagnostic tests are not
readily available.
Hyperkalemia has been documented in several cases
Primary gastrointestinal disease in dogs resulting from
 of pleural and peritoneal effusion (Zenger 1992; Bisset
whipworm (trichuriasis) or salmonellosis has been asso-
et al. 2001; Thompson and Carr 2002). Hyperkalemia
ciated with clinical signs and electrolyte abnormalities
can occur when there is third-space loss into body cav-
very similar to those seen with hypoadrenocorticism
ities and may be a result of an acquired defect in renal
(DiBartola 1985). In these cases, significant sodium and
secretion of potassium. In these cases, relative hypov-
bicarbonate-rich fluid are lost from the gastrointesti-
olemia and decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
nal tract, leading to an increase in thirst and subse-
lead to decrease in water and sodium delivery to the
quently to a dilutional hyponatremia. With continued
distal tubules, and to decreased secretion of potassium
losses of fluid and bicarbonate from the gastrointesti-
(Thompson and Carr 2002).
 nal tract, metabolic acidosis and hypovolemia develop.
Hyponatremia and hypovolemia significantly decrease
Urinary tract rent/obstruction
the amount of water and sodium in the distal tubule,
leading to a marked decrease in potassium excretion
A common cause of severe hyperkalemia in veterinary
(Graves et al. 1994). In addition, metabolic acidosis exac-
medicine is urinary tract obstruction. In cats with acute
Potassium disorders 633
urethral obstruction, life-threatening hyperkalemia may
patient has significant ECG changes, immediate inter-
develop in under 48 hours. Once the obstruction has
vention is required. Once any immediate danger has been
been relieved and the patient receives appropriate fluid
addressed, management ofhyperkalemia centers on diag-
therapy, hyperkalemia usually resolves rapidly. Acute
nosing and correcting underlying cause(s).
ureteral obstruction (AUO) in cats is often associated
In most cases, mild hyperkalemia (serum potassium
with significant hyperkalemia and azotemia. Though cal-
concentration <6.0 mEq/L) rarely requires emergency
cium oxalate stones are usually the cause of feline AUO,
treatment and resolves following replacement of any
nonmineralized obstructions (e.g-, inspissated blood,
fluid deficits with potassium-free fluids such as normal
sloughed renal tissue, ureteral strictures, etc.) are iden-
saline. Fluid therapy results in hemodilution and causes
 ( )   e  n 
an increase in both GFR and renal potassium excretion
these cats, usually one ureter becomes obstructed and
from improved renal blood flow (Cowgill and Francey
results in clinically subtle or silent disease. The associated
2005). If volume replacement and diuresis do not ade-
kidney atrophies while the contralateral kidney hypertro-
quately reduce potassium, further medical management
 phies, and laboratory values remain relatively unchanged
 is indicated. Aggressive management of hyperkalemia
until the hypertrophied kidney becomes obstructed,
should not be dictated by a specific serum potassium
resulting in severe, acute, often life-threatening ure-
concentration, but rather clinical and ECG findings and
mia and hyperkalemia. Often, the patient presents with
the rapidity with which the hyperkalemia developed.
life-threatening hyperkalemia, necessitating hemodial-
In general, severe hyperkalemia (>8 mmol/L) is asso-
ysis for stabilization prior to attempted surgical cor-
ciated with cardiac conduction disturbances necessitat-
rection. Leakage of urine from the lower urinary tract
ing immediate intervention. The urgent management of
(ureteral tear, ruptured bladder, etc.) may also result
hyperkalemia is usually based on one or more of the fol-
in significant postrenal azotemia and hyperkalemia. As
lowing approaches: opposing direct toxic effects of potas-
with cases of urethral obstruction, hyperkalemia usually
sium on cellular membranes, promoting cellular uptake
resolves rapidly once the underlying problem has been
of potassium, and/or removing potassium from the body.
corrected.
The individual patient's response to therapies discussed
below may vary, thus frequent measurements of serum
Pseudohyperkalemia/spurious hyperkalemia
 potassium levels are recommended ( Table 62.4).
Pseudohyperkalemia or false elevations in measured
serum potassium concentration may occur for several
Antagonism of cardiac effects: calcium
reasons. Generally, pseudohyperkalemia is attributed to
Intravenous calcium is the most rapid and effective way
potassium movement/leakage from cells during or after
to antagonize myocardial toxic effects of hyperkalemia.
a blood draw (Rose and Post 2001b). Mechanical trauma
Calcium  directly  antagonizes  hyperkalemia-induced
during blood draw is the most common cause, espe-
depolarization of the resting membrane potential by
cially in Akitas since they have high erythrocyte potas-
returning the membrane excitability toward normal. The
sium content relative to their plasma and to that of other
membrane-stabilizing effect of calcium is independent of
dogs (Degen 1987). Pseudohyperkalemia may also be
serum calcium concentration and has no direct effect on
observed in patients with marked elevations in platelet
 serum potassium concentration (Carvalhana et al. 2006).
counts. Factitious hyperkalemia was documented in a
This protective effect is produced rapidly (within a few
(In/000009<) siso1ooquo1q1 um s3op s1 Jo dno13
minutes), but the duration of action is short lived and
(Reimann et al. 1989). Serum potassium concentrations
lasts approximately 25-40 minutes. Calcium is usually
were higher than plasma concentrations in normal dogs
administered as calcium gluconate available as a 10%
and dogs with thrombocytosis due to release of potas-
solution. Initial dose for dogs and cats is 0.5-1.0 mL/
sium from platelets during clotting. In those dogs with
kg intravenously over 15-20 minutes (Cowgill and
thrombocytosis, the serum-plasma potassium difference
Francey 2005). More rapid administration may cause
was increased when the time between blood collection
worsening of bradycardia and potentiate ventricular
and separation of serum or plasma from cells was pro-
arrhythmias. Continuous ECG and blood pressure mon-
longed (Reimann et al. 1989).
itoring should be performed throughout the infusion.
Use of calcium chloride solutions is not recommended
Management of hyperkalemia
since they are acidifying and may cause significant
 tissue irritation with extravasation (Cowgill and Francey
The initial step in the management of hyperkalemia
2005). Because calcium gluconate has no direct effects
is to determine if the hyperkalemia is life threaten-
 on serum potassium concentration, it should be used
ing and necessitates emergency management. If the
for its cardiotoxic protective effects alone to give the
634 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
Table 62.4 Therapeutic options for the management of hyperkalemia?
Intervention
Change in serum [K+]
Onset
Duration
Emergency management of severe hyperkalemia
Correct dehydration
Decrease—dilutional
Immediate
 20-30 min
Use K+ free fluids (0.9% NaCl)
Sodium bicarbonate (if acidosis present)
Decrease—translocation
10 min
1-2 h
Sufficient to correct acidosis
If bicarbonate status unknown, 1-2 mEq/kg IV
Dextrose ± Insulin
Decrease-
—translocation
10-20 min
2-3 h
1-2 m/kg of 50% dlextrose (diluted to 25%) IV OR
Regular insulin 0.5-1.0 U/kg + 1-2 g dextrose/unit insulin
Calcium gluconate
None
Immediate 
15-30 min
 0.5-1.0 mL/kg of 10% calcium gluconate IV over 10 min
Loop diuretics
Decrease—excretion
1h
Permanent
 Only effective if non-oliguric
Furosemide 2-4 mg/kg
hydrochlorothiazide 2-4 mg/kg
 Socdium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate?)
Variable
4-6 h
 Permanent
 Oral 2 g/kg in suspension (20 g in 100 mL of 20% sorbitol)
Retention enema (50 g in 100 mL tap water)
Dialytic management 
Variable
10-15 min
Permanent
Long-term management of hyperkalemia
Dietary K+ restriction
Discontinue medications that promote hyperkalemia
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
Angiotensin receptor blockers
 Potassium sparing diuretics
β-blockers
NSAIDS
Increase K+ excretion
Loop or thiazide diuretics if normal renal function
Fludrocortisone if hypoaldosterone present
Chronic sodium polystyrene sulfonate therapy
aTherapy is tailored to the individual patient.
clinician sufficient time to institute other therapies that
tered at 1-2 mEq/kg intravenously over 15-20 minutes.
will actually decrease serum potassium concentrations
Beneficial effects usually begin within 10 minutes and
and to diagnose the underlying disorder.
may persist for 1-2 hours (Clark and Brown 1995). If
preexisting hypocalcemia is present (especially common
Redistribution of K+ into cells
in patients with ethylene glycol intoxication) sodium
bicarbonate must be given cautiously as it may lower
Sodium bicarbonate
ionized blood calcium concentration and precipitate a
In cases of severe hyperkalemia, a temporary reduction
hypocalcemic crisis. Sodium bicarbonate should not be
 in serum potassium concentration may be achieved by
used in animals that are overhydrated, hypernatremic,
administering medications promoting cellular uptake of
have metabolic alkalosis, or have respiratory compromise 
potassium. Sodium bicarbonate increases extracellular
(impaired ability to exhale carbon dioxide).
pH and is associated with translocation of extracellu-
lar potassium into cells in exchange for hydrogen ions
Insulin and glucose
(Gennari 2002). Ideally, the dosage of sodium bicarbon-
ate should be based on the calculated bicarbonate deficit;
Infusions of regular insulin and glucose stimulate the
 however, if measured serum bicarbonate concentrations
Nat, K+-ATPase pump, shifting potassium from ECF
are unavailable, sodium bicarbonate may be adminis-
to ICF in exchange for sodium and decreasing serum
Potassium disorders 635
potassium concentration (Clark and Francey 1995; Ahee
orally or by enema. Suggested dose is 2 g/kg divided
and Crowe 200o). Administration of glucose alone will
imo) donnos oz u uoisuadsns e se sasop t-e oiu
stimulate release of endogenous insulin and reduce serum
and Francey 2005). This translates into rather large vol-
potassium. Typically, 1-2 mL/kg of 50% dextrose is
umes that may complicate administration, especially in
diluted and given intravenously. Treatment with insulin
a noncooperative patient that does not have a enteral
and glucose may cause a greater reduction in potassium,
feeding tube. Despite addition of sorbitol, constipation
but the patient's serum glucose must be carefully mon-
 remains a significant side effect. The propensity for con-
itored, since resultant hypoglycemia is quite common.
stipation is increased with concurrent administration of
The typical treatment protocol is 0.5-1.0 U/kg of regular
 aluminum hydroxide. SPS is not appropriate for treat-
insulin with 2 g of dextrose for each unit of insulin admin-
ment of acute severe hyperkalemia because of the delay
istered. The potassium-lowering effect of insulin/glucose
in onset of action (Alfonzo et al. 2006).
combination occurs as early as 10 minutes after admin-
istration and may persist for up to 6 hours (Allon 1996).
Dialysis
Catecholamines
Removal of potassium by hemodialysis or other renal
replacement therapies is the most effective and rapid
As with insulin, catecholamines increase activity of the
method of removing potassium from the body. Dialy-
 Na+, K+-ATPase pump promoting cellular uptake of
sis should be considered in severe or refractory cases
 potassium. The hypokalemiac effects are additive to those
of hyperkalemia, particularly when underlying kidney
of insulin and independent of other factors such as pH
disease is suspected. Conventional hemodialysis lowers
and aldosterone. Administration of a β2-agonist, (such
serum potassium concentrations more rapidly than peri-
as albuterol) via a metered-dose inhaler is often used
toneal dialysis or continuous renal replacement therapies.
The amount of potassium removed is determined by the
kalemia. β2-agonists are not recommended as monother-
 concentration of potassium in the dialysate, duration of
apy because their efficacy may be unpredictable, particu-
dialysis treatment, volume of blood dialyzed, character-
larly in patients with concurrent kidney disease ( Halperin
istics of the dialyzer, and amount of ultrafiltration per-
and Kamel 1998).
formed (Blumberg et al. 1997).
Removal of potassium
 The treatment strategies discussed above are temporary
Long-term management of hyperkalemia
and do not result in reduction of total body stores of
Long-term management of hyperkalemia requires that
potassium. Therefore, once the patient has been stabi-
the underlying cause be identified and corrected. In some
lized, treatment is focused on removal of potassium from
patients, the underlying cause may be obvious, such as the
the body to ensure that significant hyperkalemia does not
inability to excrete potassium observed with feline ure-
recur.
thral obstructions. However, some animals may have sev-
eral contributing factors and it is important to carefully
Diuretics/diuresis
consider all potential risk factors for hyperkalemia when
Loop and thiazide diuretics are useful in treatment of
 prescribing medications and making dietary recommen-
chronic hyperkalemia, since they increase sodium and
dations. For example, animals with kidney disease and/or
urine flow in the distal tubules thereby promoting kali-
heart disease may be on ACE inhibitors, in which case
uresis (Carvalhana et al. 2006). A similar effect may be
high potassium diets and other medications that pre-
obtained in hospitalized patients with parenteral fluid
dispose to hyperkalemia (e.g., NSAIDs or spironolac-
administration. Although this is an effective strategy for
tone) should be avoided or used only with careful mon-
elimination of potassium, use of diuretics/diuresis is lim-
itoring. Important strategies for long-term management
ited by the patient's kidney function and ability to main-
of hyperkalemia include avoiding medications that may
tain adequate hydration and electrolyte balance.
predispose to hyperkalemia, carefully monitoring dietary
potassium intake, and optimizing potassium excretion by
Cation exchange resins
both the kidneys and gastrointestinal tract.
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) resin (Kayxalate? )is
a cation exchange resin that exchanges sodium for potas-
References
 sium. The majority of the resin's adsorption of potas-
Ahee, P. and A.V. Crowe (2000). The managerment of hyperkalaermia
sium occurs in the colon, thus SPS may be administered
in the emergency department. I Accid Emerg Med 17(3): 188-191.
636 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
Alfonzo, A., C. Isles, et al. (2006). Potassium disorders—clinical spec-
Ettinger, P.O., T.J. Regan, et al. (1974). Hyperkalemia, cardiac con-
trum and emergency management. Resuscitation 70( 1): 10-25.
duction and the electrocardiogram. Am Heart J S8(3): 360-
 Allon, M. ( 1996). Effect ofbicarbonateadminstration on plasma potas-
369.
sium in dialysis patients: interactions with insulin and albuterol. Am
Feldman, E.C. and R.W. Nelson (2004a). Hyperadrenocorticism in
J Kidney Dis 28: 508-514.
cats (Cushing's syndrome). In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and
Allon, M. and C. Copkney (1990). Albuterol and insulin for treat-
 Reproduction, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 358-
ment of hyperkalemia in hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int 38(5):
393.
869-872.
Feldman, E.C. and R.W. Nelson (2004b). Hypoadrenocorticism
Allon, M., R. Dunlay, et al. (1989). Nebulized albuterol for acute
(Addison's Disease). In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and
hyperkalemia in patients on hemodialysis. Arm Imtern Med 110(6):
Reproduction, 3rd edition. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 394-
426-429.
439.
Bartges, I., D.R. Finco, et al. (1996). Pathophysiology of urethral
Fischer, J.R. (2006). Acute ureteral obstruction. In: Consultations in
obstruction. Vet Clin North Am Small Anin Pract 26(2): 255-264.
Feline Imtermal Medicine, edited by R. John, Vol. 5. St. Louis: Elsevier-
Bissett Sally, A., M. Lamb, et al. (200l). Hyponatremia and hyper-
Saunders, pp. 379-386.
kalemia associated with peritoneal effusion in four cats. I Arm Vet
Flood, S.M., JF. Randolph, et al. ( 1999). Primary hyperaldosteroinism
Med Assoc 218( 10): 1590- 1592.
in two cats. JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 35(5): 41l1-416.
Blaxter, A., P. Lievesley, et al. (1986). Periodic muscle weakness in 
Gennari, J.F (2002). Disorders of potassium homeostasis hypokalemia
Burmese kittens. Vet Rec 118(22): 619-620.
and hyperkalemia. Crit Care Clirn 18(2): 273-288.
Blumberg, A., H. Roser, et al. ( 1997). Plasma potassium in patients with
Giebisch, G. ( 1998). Renal potassium transport: mechanisms and reg-
terminal renal failure during and after haemodialysis; relationship
ulation. Arm I Physiol 274(5): 817-833.
with dialytic potassium removal and total body potassium. Nephrol
 Giebisch, G. and R.C. Wagner (2007). Renal and extrarenal regulation
Dial Transplamt 12: 1629-1634.
of potassium. Kidrey Int 72: 397-410.
Brown, A.J. and C.M. Otto (2008). Fluid therapy in vomiting and
Graves, T.K., W.D. Schall, et al. (1994). Basal and ACTH-stimulated
diarrhea. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 38(3): 653-675.
plasma aldosterone concentrations are normal or increased in
Brown, R.S. (1986). Extrarenal potassium homeostasis. Kidney Int
dogs with trichuriasis-associated pseudohypoadrenocorticism. J Vet
30( 1): 116.
Interr Med 8(4): 287-289.
Calia, C., A.E. Hohenhaus, et al. ( 1996). Acute tumor lyisis syndrome
Guyton, A.C. and J.E. Hall (2006). Textbook of Medical Physiology,
in a cat with lymphoma. I Vet Intern Med 10(6): 409-411.
 1l th edition. Philidelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders.
Carvalhana, V, L. Burry, et al. (2006). Management of severe hyper-
Halperin, M.L. and K.S. Kamel (1998). Potassium. Lancet 352:
kalermia without hemodialysis: case report and literature review. J
135-140.
Crit Care 21(4): 316-321.
Huang, C.L. and E. Kuo (2007). Mechanism of hypokalemia in mag-
Clark, B. and R.s. Brown (1995). Potassium homeostasis and hyper-
nesium deficiency. I Arm Soc Nephrol 18: 2649-2652.
kalemic syndromes. Endocrinol Metab Clirn North Am 24(3):
Kobrin, S.M. and S. Goldfarb (1990). Magnesium deficiency. Semin
573-591.
Nephrol 10(6): 525-535.
Clausen, T. and M.E. Everts (1989). Regulation of the Na,K-pump in
Langston, C. (2008). Managing fluid and electrolyte disorders in
skeletal muscle. Kidney Int 35( 1): 1-13.
renal failure. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 38(3): 677-
Cowgill, L.D. and T. Francey (2005). Acute uremia. In: Textbook of Vet-
697.
erinary Intermal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman,
Malik, R., G.B. Hunt, et al. ( 1990). Severe whipworm infection in the
 6th edition. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 1731-1751.
dog. I Small Amim Pract 31(4): 185-188.
Degen, M. ( 1987). Pseudohyperkalermia in Akitas. IArn Vet Med Assoc
 Mandal, A. ( 1997). Hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. Med Clin Northt
190(5): 54 1-543.
An 81(3): 611-639.
 DiBartola, S.P. ( 1985). Clinicopathologic findings resembling hypoa-
Mason, K. ( 1988). A hereditary disease in Burmese cats manifested as
drenocorticism in dogs with primary gastrointestinal disease. J Am
an episodic weakness with head nodding and neck ventroflexion.
Vet Med Assoc 187( 1): 60-63.
I Am Amirm Hosp Assoc 24: 147151.
DiBartola, S.P. (200l). Management of hypokalaemia and hyper-
McCown, J.L., E.S. Lechner, et al. (2008). Suspected albuterol toxicosis
kalaemia. IFeline Med Surg 3: 181-183.
in a dog. IAm Vet Med Assoc 232(8): 1168-1171.
 DiBartola, S.P. and H.A. de Morais (2006). Disorders of potassium:
Murdock, I.A., R. Dos Anjos, et al. ( 199 1). Treatment of hyperkalaemia
hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. In: Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base
with intravenous Salbutamol. Arch Dis Child 66(4): 527-528.
Disorders in Small Amirmal Practice, edited by S.P. DiBartola, 3rd
 Palmer, B.F. (2004). Managing hyperkalemia caused by inhibitors
edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 9l-121.
DiBartola, S.P, H.C. Rutgers, et al. (1987). Clinicopathologic findings
585-592.
associated with chronic renal disease in cats: 74 cases (1973-1984).
Plumb, D.C. (2008). Veterinary Drug Handbook, 6th edition. Ames IA:
I Am Vet Med Assoc 190(9): 1196- 1202.
Blackwell Publishing, pp. 413-415.
Dickinson, PJ. and R.A. LeCouteur (2004). Feline neuromuscular dis-
Reimann, K.A., G.G. Knowlen, et al. ( 1989). Factitious hyperkalemia
orders. Vet Clir North Am Small Amim Pract 34(6): 1307-1359.
in dogs with thrombocytosis. I Vet Intern Med 3( 1): 47-52.
Elbaz, A., I. Vale-Santos, et al. (1995). Hypokalermic periodic
Rose, B.D. and T.W. Post (200la). Hypovolemic states. In: Clinical
paralysis and the dihydropyridine receptor (CACNLIA3): geno-
Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders, edited by B.D.
type/phenotype correlations for two predominant mutations and
 Rose and T.W. Post, 5th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 415-
evidence for the absence of a founder effect in 16 Caucasian fami-
446.
lies. Am I Hum Genet 56(2): 374-380.
Rose, B.D. and T.W. Post (2001b). Introduction to disorders of potas-
Elliot, I. and P.J. Barber. (1998). Feline chronic renal failure: clinical
sium balance. In: Clinical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte
findings in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and 1995. I Small Ani
Disorders, edited by B.D. Rose and T.W. Post, Sth edition. New York:
Pract 39(2): 78-85.
McGraw-Hill, pp. 822-835.
Potassium disorders 637
Rubin, S.I., et al. (199s). Trimethoprim-induced exacerbation of
Vickery, K.R. and D.H. Thamm (2007). Successful treatment of acute
hyperkalemia in a dog with hypoadrenocorticism. I Vet Intern Med
tumor lysis syndrome in a Dog with multicentric lymphoma. J Vet
12(3): 186- 188.
Interm Med 21(6): 1401-1404.
Soriano, LR. (2002). Renal tubular acidosis: the clinical entity. I Am
Vite, C.H. (2002). Myotonia and disorders of altered muscle cell
Soc Nephrol 13(8): 2160-2170.
membrane excitability. Vet Clir North Am Small Amirm Pract 32( 1):
 Stanton, B.A. and G. Giebisch ( 1992). Renal potassium transport. Arm
169-187.
Phsyiol Soc 8( 19): 813-874.
Vite, C.H. and R.W. Gfeller ( 1994). Suspected Albuterol intoxication 
Tag, T.L. and T.K. Day (2008). Electrocariographic assessment of
in a Dog. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 4(1): 7-13.
hyperkalemia in dogs and cats. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 18(1): 61-67.
Wang, P and T. Clausen ( 1976). Treatment of attacks in hyperkalaemic
Thompson, M.D. and A.P. Carr (2002). Hyponatremia and hyper-
familial periodic paralysis by inhalation of salbutamol. Lancet 301:
kalemia associated with chylous pleural and peritoneal effusion in a
221-223.
cat. Can Vet I 43(8): 610-613.
Thompson, W.L. ( 1980). Incomplete mixing of drugs in intravenous
lous pleural effusion in a dog. I Am Anin Hosp Assoc 28(5): 41l-
infusions. Crit Care Med 8( 11): 603-607.
413.
63
Magnesium disorders
Elizabeth Rozanski
Magnesium is classically considered "the forgotten ion" in
clinical practice due to relative inability to measure total
 practice and has more potential importance as a research
body magnesium status, its primary role as an intra-
tool (Bebchunk et al. 2000). Most publications to date
cellular cation, and its less frequently highlighted role
 have looked primarily at total magnesium in sick dogs
in normal physiology. Approximately 99% of total body
and cats. As point of care testing has increased in avail-
magnesium is found intracellularly and similar to the
ability, ionized magnesium values are commonly avail-
more widely appreciated cation, calcium (Ca++ ), serum
able, specifically though the Nova Critical Care Xpress
magnesium is found in three fractions: protein-bound,
(Waltham, MA), which is very popular in veterinary
complexed with anions (e.g-, phosphate, bicarbonate),
emergency and critical care medicine settings (Gilroy
and ionized that is the active form (Schenck 2005a). As
et al. 2005).
with calcium, magnesium balance is regulated carefully
Despite challenges with interpretation, low and high
by intestinal absorption, renal reabsorption/secretion,
magnesium levels have been associated with a variety
and exchange with bone. Magnesium has multiple roles
of conditions in people and companion animals. Nor-
in the normal animal (Khanna et al. 1998; Toll et al.
 mal ranges for ionized and serum magnesium in dogs is
2002). It serves as a co-factor of ATP production and
reported as 1.03-1.36 mg/dL and 1.61-2.51 mg/dL and
catalyzes numerous other reactions, including regulation
1.05-1.42 mg/dL and 1.70-2.99 mg/dL in cats. To convert
of intracellular calcium. Magnesium is absorbed from
to mmol/L, mg/dL is divided by 2.433, giving normal ion-
the gastrointestinal tract, primarily the small bowel, and
ized magnesium values of 0.43-0.56 mmol/L in dogs and
excessive magnesium is excreted by the kidneys.
0.43-0.58 mmol/L in cats. Conditions associated with
high and low values are shown in Table 63.1.
Measurement
Hypermagnesemia
The focus of this chapter is on disease in small animals
that have been associated with alterations in magnesium
Magnesium excesses are typically cleared by the kidney,
status, as well as a brief discussion on those conditions in
thus increases in magnesium are most common in dis-
 people who have been ascribed to raised or lowered mag-
eases that result in decreased glomerular fltration rate
nesium levels. Any discussion of abnormalities in mag-
(GFR), such as renal failure. Increased magnesium lev-
  o  s s 
els may result from iatrogenic magnesium overdosage,
The simplest method is total serum levels, which may
either by incorrect calculation or through use of large
be obtained from most routine chemistry analyzers; how-
doses of antacids (e.g., Mylanta and Maalox ) or some
ever, similar to ionized calcium, ionized magnesium lev-
cathartics. There are multiple case reports of children and
els may more accurately reflect actual biologically active
elderly people with profound symptomatic hypermagne-
level. Magnesium values have also been assayed from tis-
semia associated with excessive cathartic usage, and a sin-
 gle report of an apparent mechanical mixer malfunction
resulting in severe signs mimicking sepsis in two infants
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
receiving total parenteral nutrition ( TPN) (Qurechi and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Melanokos 1996; Ali Am Walentik et al. 2003). One
638
Magnesium disorders  639
Table 63.1 Common conditions associated with alterations in
anesthetic protocols and surgical procedures, although
magnesium levels
 changes were not clinically relevant as values remained
within normal range (Brainard et al. 2007).
Raised magnesium levels
Excessive dietary magnesium, although not necessar-
Renal failure
 ily serum levels, have been associated with the formation
Reduction in glomerular filtration rate (independent of
 of magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite) uroliths
renal failure)
latrogenic or inadvertent
and resulted in creation of magnesium-restricted diets
for dissolution and prevention of struvite urolithiasis
Lowered magnesium levels
Gastrointestinal losses
(Chapter 69) (Houston et al. 2004). Effects of these
Protein-losing enteropathy
 magnesium-restricted diets were evaluated in a group
Renal loss
of cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; however, no
Endocrine disorders
apparent effect was detected, despite the role of magne-
Sepsis
sium in some forms of cardiac disease (Freeman et al.
 Eclampsia (milk fever) in dogs
1997).
Re-feeding syndrome
 Clinical signs of spontaneous hypermagnesemia are
Large volume resuscitation with Mg2+ free fluids
usually silent in pets with renal disease being more
 Massive transfusion
clearly apparent in those animals with marked over
Other electrolytes disorders
dosage (Jackson and Drobatz 2004; Cortes and Moses
2007). Signs of magnesium elevation include depression,
weakness, flaccid paralysis, and diminished reflexes
report of a dog and a cat receiving iatrogenic magne-
(Cortes and Moses 2007). Hypotension is associated
sium overdosage described severe clinical signs includ-
with decreased systemic vascular resistance due to mag-
ing hypotension and bradycardia in both (Jackson and
nesium's effect on calcium channels. EKG changes will
Drobatz 2004). These patients had ionized magnesium
 Occur predictably at increasing levels of magnesium, with
levels of 7-9 times normal range, which would be con-
 initial signs including a mild tachycardia, progressing
sistent with a severe overdosage. Iatrogenic overdosage is
to a bradycardia associated with QRS prolongation and
potentially more common as the therapeutic dose (see
 an increased P-Q interval. Untreated, severe hypermag-
section on hypomagnesemia) is typically published in
nesemia will result in ventricular fibrillation or asystole
 u se u s p id n nd b
 and subsequent death (Qurechi and Melanokos 1996).
  ym nou sid no ain ad psl ae sin
Treatment of hypermagnesemia depends upon the
confusing (Jackson and Drobatz 2004). All calculations
severity of elevation and clinical signs. Any supple-
for magnesium infusions should be made carefully.
mental magnesium should obviously be discontinued.
 In people, combination of an angiotensin-converting
Some crystalloid fluids continue magnesium, notably
enzyme inhibitor (ACEi) and spironolactone may result
Normosol-R, Normosol-M, Plasma-lyte? 148 and
 in clinically important hypermagnesemia. However, in
 Plasma-lyte? 56. Lactated Ringer's solution and 0.9%
o iu ym s  s u s e
saline do not contain magnesium (Cortes and Moses
mitral valve disease, while treatment with a combination
2007). Loop diuretics (e.g., furosemide) may be useful 
 s   s  ds   o
as would a saline-based diuresis. In an acute setting.
serum magnesium levels, it was not clinically important
intravenous calcium gluconate at 50-150 mg/kg slowly
(Thomason et al. 2007). This supports that the simulta-
will antagonize effects of magnesium toxicity. In people,
neous use of these medications in dogs with congestive
use of dialysis has been described, but this has not been
heart failure is unlikely to result in clinical hypermagne-
 reported in veterinary medicine (Qurechiand Melanokos
semia and may be used together.
1996; Kraft et al. 2005). Chronic mild hypermagnesemia
Increases in ionized magnesium concentration were
 that accompanies chronic renal failure (Chapter 48) may
reported in 35% of dogs in one recent study on 76 dogs
be well tolerated and not require a specific therapy.
with hypoadrenocorticism (Adler et al. 2007). These
increases were not statistically associated with the cre-
Hypomagnesemia
atinine or with venous pH, suggesting that neither aci-
dosis nor azotemia was the cause. It was postulated that
Hypomagnesemia is considered a more common distur-
decreased aldosterone action might have played a role in
bance than hypermagnesemia with reports of up to 50%
elevated ionized Mg2+ concentrations (Adler et al. 2007).
Surgery and anesthesia have been documented to
dogs and cats support that a similar number of compan-
result in a mild increase in ionized Mg?+ after a variety of
 ion animal patients may be affected (Khanna et al. 1998;
640 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
Toll et al. 2002). Hypomagnesemia is most often a result
ketoacidosis had lower ionized magnesium concentra-
of increased renal loss, decreased intestinal absorption,
tions, but again the significance of this is unclear (Norris
redistribution, or a combination of two or more of these.
et al. 1999). A similar study in dogs with naturally occur-
 Furthermore, other aspects of illness may magnify pre-
 ring diabetes mellitus was unable to document differ-
existing hypomagnesemia, such as sepsis, blood trans-
ences in ionized magnesium between dogs with diabetes
fusions (in association with citrate), or extensive fluid
 mellitus, healthy dogs, and dogs with diabetic ketoacido-
o d d e a u  us 
sis (Fincham et al. 2004).
magnesaemia is associated with certain type of pasture
Cavalier King Charles spaniels (CKCS), which have
 grazing and may result in a potentially fatal syndrome
a high incidence of mitral valve prolapse (MVP), were
termed grass tetany; this is not a problem in nonrumi-
found to have low magnesium levels in one study, while
nant species (Martens and Schweigel 2000).
another study identified seemingly two groups of CKCS,
Clinical signs of mild hypomagnesemia may be hard to
 one with low platelets with normal aggregation and low
 appreciate or distinguish from illness in general. Severely
magnesium and another group with normal platelet
affected animals may have profound weakness or neu-
rological signs or arrhythmias. Cardiac arrhythmias are
 e no i ss  s r
associated with hypomagnesemia in people and are occa-
are affected. MVP in people is known to be associated
sionally postulated to occur in dogs. One case report in
with hypomagnesemia, although the significance of this
a dog with hypercalcemia of malignancy due to an anal
finding remains unclear in both people and spaniels
sac adenocarcinoma, which had been treated preopera-
(Pedersen and Mow 1998; Olsen et al. 2001).
tively with pamidronate, calcitonin, and saline, developed
 Lactation results in loss of magnesium, although this
severe arrhythmia under anesthesia thought in part to be
is rarely detected as significant in the healthy mother.
 associated with resultant severe hypomagnesemia ( Kadar
One article evaluating 27 bitches with eclampsia identi-
 et al. 2004). Perhaps the most important aspect of hypo-
fied hypomagnesemia in 12 (44%) affected bitches, with
magnesemia is the accompanying other metabolic and
the conclusion that low magnesium levels are common
electrolytes disturbances, such as hypokalemia, hypocal-
and supplementation may be warranted in moderately to
cemia, or hyponatremia. Hypokalemia in particular is
severely eclampsic dogs (Aroch et al. 1999).
 often observed in conjunction with hypomagnesemia,
 Refeeding syndrome is a unique but uncommon cause
and in diabetic patients in particular, it may be very
of magnesium depletion. After reintroduction of nutri-
hard to correct hypokalemia without also addressing
ents, specifically carbohydrates, there is an obligatory
 surge in insulin release, resulting in conversion from a
even very high rates of supplementation without corre-
catabolic to an anabolic state, thus increasing cellular
sponding correction of the magnesium deficiency. One
requirements for phosphorus, potassium, and magne-
abstract, presented at the ACVIM Forum in 2005, doc-
umented that dogs and cats with hypoparathyroidism
tion. This can be magnified by preexisting magnesium
appeared to have either "subnormal or marginal circulat-
 depletion due to lack of dietary intake. One case report
 described severe refeeding syndrome, including hypo-
 to decrease the cell membrane receptor sensitivity to ion-
 magnesemia in cat that was inadvertently locked in a
ized calcium and potentially negatively affect parathyroid
 garage for 49 days (Armitage-Chan et al. 2006).
hormone production (Schenck 2005b). Finally, another
 Treatment of hypomagnesemia should be based upon
report described clinical signs associated with hypocal-
clinical judgment. Patients with other electrolyte distur-
cemia and hypomagnesemia in five Yorkshire terriers
bances, specifically hypokalemia or hypocalcemia should
 or terrier-mixes, associated with a severe protein-losing
be treated as should any animal with other clinical signs of
enteropathy (Kimmel et al. 2000). Thus, magnesium sta-
weakness. Magnesium may be supplemented as outlined
 tus should be closely assessed in any patient with either
in Table 63.2.
hypokalemia or hypocalcemia and supplementation con-
 In human medicine, supplemental intravenous mag-
sidered.
nesium is widely used for a variety of indications,
Endocrine disorders may be also associated with low
including pre-term labor, asthma, cardiovascular disease,
magnesium levels. Hyperthyroidism in cats has been
and/or arrhythmia, brain injury/stroke, and as an adju-
associated with a linear decline in ionized magnesium lev-
vant anesthetic agent (Touyz 2004; Gupta et al. 2006).
els. The significance of this finding is currently unclear,
 s   s    s 
but certainly cats affected with severe hyperthyroidism
monly reported. One study did conclude that addition of
should be considered at risk for hypomagnesemia (Gilroy
magnesium sulphate was dose-sparing for thiopental and
et al. 2006). Cats with diabetes mellitus and diabetic
halothane in healthy dogs while another study reported
Magnesium disorders  641
Table 63.2 Guidelines for actively supplementing magnesium
Freeman, L.M., D.J. Brown, et al. (1997). Magnesium status and the
effect of magnesium supplementation in feline hypertrophic car-
Recallthat some fluid types e.g. Normosol and 
diomyopathy. Carn I Vet Res 61: 227-231.
 Plasma-lyte?) contain magnesium 
Gilroy, C.V., S.A. Burton, et al. (2005). Validation of the NOVA CRT8
for the measurerment of ionized magnesium in feline serum. Vet Clin
Intravenous supplementation using magnesium sulfate
Path 34: 124-131.
The following doses are equivalent:
Gilroy, C.V., B.S. Horney, et al. (2006). Evaluation of ionized and total
0.75-1 meq/kg per day
serum magnesium concentrations in hyperthyroid cats. Can I Vet
0.03-0.04 meq/kg/h
Res 70: 137-142.
Gupta, K., V. Vohra, et al. (2006). The role of magnesium as an adjuvant
0.0005-0.0006 meq/kg/min
during general anesthesia. Anaesthesia 61: 1058- 1063.
Be vigilant against inadvertent overdosage
Houston, D.M., N.E. Rinkardt, et al. (2004). Evaluation of the efficacy
Magnesium sulfate is supplied most commonly as a 50%
of a commercial diet in the dissolution of feline struvite bladder
solution with a concentration of 4 meq/mL
uroliths. Vet Ther 5: 187-201.
Jackson, C.B. and K.J. Drobatz (2004). Iatrogenic magnesiurm over-
Alternatively, magnesium chloride is also available in a 20%
dosage: 2 case reports. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical
solution with 2 meq/L
Care 14: 115-123.
Kadar, E., JE. Rush, et al. (2004). Electrolyte disturbances and car-
diac arrhythmias in a dog following pamidronate, calcitonin and
furosermide administration for hypercalcemia of malignancy. I Am
 an apparent response to magnesium therapy in a dog
Armim Hosp Assoc 40: 75-81.
Khanna, C., E.M. Lund, et al.(1998). Hypomagnesemia in 188 dogs:
with torsades des pointes (Baty et al. 1994; Anagnostou
a hospital population-based prevalence study. I Vet Intern Med 12:
et al. 2008). The ultimate role of magnesium therapy in
304-309.
companion animal remains to be determined, but the
Kimmel, S.E., L.S. Waddell, et al. (2000). Hypomagnesemia and
 preponderance of evidence suggests that this role will be
expanding.
shire terriers: five cases {1992-1998). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 217:
703-706.
Kraft, M.D., I.F. Braiche, et al. (2005). Treatment of electrolyte disor-
References
ders in adult patients in the intensive care unit. Am I Health-Syst
Pharm 62: 1663- 1682.
Adler, J.A., K.J. Drobatz, et al. (2007). Abnormalities of serum elec-
 Martens, H. and M. Schweigel (2000). Pathophysiology of grass tetany
andother hypomagnesemias. Implications for clinical management.
Interm Med 21: 1168-1173.
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 16: 339-368.
Ali Am Walentik, C., G.J. Mantych, et al. (2003). Iatrogenic acute
Norris, C.R., R.W. Nelson, et al. (1999). Serum total and ionized mag-
hypermagnesesemia after total parenteral nutrition infusion mim-
nesium concentrations and urinary fractional excretion of magne-
icking septic shock syndrome: two case reports. Pediatrics 112:
sium in cats with diabetes mellitus and diabetic ketoacidosis. I Am
e70-e72.
Vet Med Assoc 215: 1455- 1459.
Anagnostou, T.L., 1. Savvas, et al. (2008). Thiopental and halothane
Olsen, L.H., A.T. Kristensen, et al. (2001). Increased platelet aggrega-
dose-sparing effects of magnesium sulphate in dogs. Vet Araestht
tion response in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels with mitral valve
Aralg 35: 93-99.
prolapse. I Vet Interm Med 15: 209-216.
Armitage-Chan, E.A., T.E. O'Toole, et al. (2006). Management of pro-
 Pedersen, H.D. and T. Mow ( 1998). Hypomagnesemia and mitral valve
longed food deprivations, hypothermia and re-feeding syndrome in 
 prolapse in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. Zentralbl Veterirnarrmed
a cat. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 16: S34-S41.
A 45: 607-614.
Aroch, I., H. Srebro, et al. (1999). Serum electrolyte concentrations in
Qurechi, T. and T.K. Melanokos ( 1996). Acute hypermagnesemia after
bitches with eclampsia. Vet Record 145: 318-320.
laxative use.Ann Emerg Med 28: 552-555.
Baty, C., D.C. Sweet, et al. (1994). Torsades de pointes-like polymor-
 Schenck, P.A. (2005a). Fractionation of canine serum magnesium. Vet
phic ventricular tachycardia in a dog. I Vet Intern Med 8: 439-
Clir Path 34: 137-139.
442.
Schenck, P.A. (2005b). Serum Ionized Magnesium Concentrations in
Bebchunk, T.N., I.G. Hauptman, et al. (2000). Intracellular magnesium
Dogs and Cats with Hypoparathyroidism. ACVIM 2005 Abstract.
concentrations in dogs with gastric dilatation-volvulus. Am J Vet Res
Available at: www.vin.com (accessed May 19, 2008).
61: 1415-1417.
Thomason, J.D., J.E. Rockwell, et al. (2007). Influence of combined
Brainard, B.M., V.L. Campbell, et al. (2007). The effects of surgery
 angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and spironolactone on
and anesthesia on blood magnesium and calcium concentrations in 
serum K+, Mg2+,and Na+ concentrations in small dogs with degen-
canine and feline patients. Vet Anaesth Analg 34: 89-98.
erative mitral valve disease. I Vet Cardiol 9: 103-108.
Cortes, Y.E. and L. Moses (2007). Magnesium disturbances in critically
Toll,J., H. Erb, et al. (2002). Prevalence and incidence of serum mag-
ill patients. Comp Con Ed Pract Vet 29: 420-427.
nesium abnormalities in hospitalized cats. J Vet Interr Med 16:
Fincham, S.C., K.J. Drobatz, et al. (2004). Evaluation of plasma-ionized
217-221.
  s m s e   
Touyz, R.M. (2004). Magnesium in clinical medicine. Front Biosci 9:
retrospective study. I Vet Inten Med 18: 612-617.
1278- 1293.
64
Calcium disorders
John M. Kruger and Carl A. Osborne
Hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia are frequent disor-
of hypercalcemic cats with classifiable disease (Table
ders of calcium metabolism in dogs and cats. In one
64.1) (Chew and Carothers 1989; Elliot et al. 1991;
study, abnormal concentrations of total calcium were
Uehlinger et al. 1998; Savary et al. 2000; Bolliger
 et al. 2002). Malignancy-associated hypercalcemia may
 ples submitted for biochemical determinations (Chew
 be the result of (1) tumor-derived circulating factors,
and Meuten 1982). Since precise control of extracellular
which stimulate generalized osteoclastic bone resorption
calcium concentration is essential to maintain home-
(so-called humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy), (2)
ostasis, perturbations in calcium concentration can pro-
tumor-induced local osteolysis, or (3) humoral and local
foundly disrupt cellular and organ function, resulting in
pathogenic factors acting independently or in combina-
severe renal, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and neuro-
tion (Rosol and Capen 1992; Lucas et al. 2007).
logic dysfunction (Rosol et al. 1995).
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy results from
enhanced osteoclastic bone resorption mediated by a sys-
temically acting tumor-derived peptide that resembles
Causes of hypercalcemia
parathyroid hormone (PTH) in both structure and phys-
Overview
et al. 1981; Meuten et al. 1983; Weir et al. 1988a,
Hypercalcemia may result from a number of remark-
1988b; Rosol and Capen 1992; Rosol et al. 1992; Bolliger
ably diverse causes and pathophysiologic mechanisms
et al. 2002). Like PTH, PTH-related protein (PTHrp)
(Tables 64.1 and 64.2). Basic pathophysiologic factors
enhances osteoclastic bone resorption, promotes distal
that, alone or in combination, may contribute to hyper-
renal tubular calcium reabsorption, inhibits proximal
calcemia include increased bone resorption, increased
tubule phosphorus reabsorption, and stimulates renal 25-
intestinal calcium absorption, mobilization of calcium
hydroxyvitamin D-1-alpha-hydroxylase activity (Rosol
from mineralized tissues, enhanced renal tubular cal-
 and Capen 1992). Observations in hypercalcemic dogs
cium resorption, decreased bone accretion, increased cal-
with T-cell lymphoma and anal sac apocrine cell adeno-
cium retention due to diminished glomerular filtration,
carcinoma and cats with lymphoma, bronchogenic carci-
increased protein binding of calcium, or increased cal-
id iee sns eoeo n snoes pue eou
cium complexing with plasma anions (such as citrate and
is the primary mediator ofhypercalcemia associated with
phosphorus). Laboratory error may also cause fictitious
these neoplasms (Meuten et al. 1981; Meuten et al. 1983;
hypercalcemia.
Weir et al. 1988a, 1988b; Rosol and Capen 1992; Rosol
et al 1992; Lucas et al. 2007). However, tumor produc-
Hypercalcemia of malignancy
tion of prostaglandins, cytokines, and calcitriol may have
pathogenic roles in some forms of humoral hypercal-
Nonparathyroid neoplasms, especially lymphomas,
cemia of malignancy (Rosol and Capen 1992; Rosol et al.
account for 40-65% of hypercalcemic dogs and 10-30%
1992).
 Hypercalcemia of malignancy also may result from
tumor-induced local osteolysis. Primary or metastatic
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
skeletal neoplasms may resorb bone directly or, more
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
642
Calcium disorders  643
Table 64.1 Causes of hypercalcemia in dogs
Table 64.2 Causes of hypercalcemia in cats
Common
Common
 Some malignant neoplasms
 Chronic renal failure 
Lymphosarcoma
Idliopathic
Anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma
Some malignant neoplasms
Hypoadrenocorticism
Lymphosarcoma
Chronic renal failure
Squamous cell carcinoma
 Primary hyperparathyroidism (adenoma, adenocarcinoma.
Uncommon, sporadic, or rare
hyperplasia)
Hyperproteinemia
Uncommon, sporadic, or rare
Hyperthyroidism
Acute renal failure (diuresis phase; e.g., rhabdomyolysis
Hypervitaminosis D
 gentamicin, raisins/grapes)
 Antipsoriasis creams containing calcitriene
 Blood transfusion
latrogenic (administration of calcitriol, or other vitamin D
Hemoconcentration
preparations)
Hyperadrenocorticism (resolution phase)
Plants (Cestrum diumum)
Hyperproteinemia
Rodenticide intoxication (cholecalciferol)
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hypervitaminosis D
Hypothermia
Infectious/lnflammatory
Antipsoriasis creams containing calcitriene
latrogenic (administration of calcitriol or other vitamin D
Bacterial (nocardia, actinomyces)
 Chronic pancreatitis
preparations)
Feline infectious peritonitis
Rodenticide intoxication (cholecalciferol)
Fungal (blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis)
Hypothermia
Injection site granuloma
Idiopathic
Toxoplasmosis
Infectious/Inflammatory
Laboratory error (lipemia, hemolysis)
Bacterial (neonatal septicemia, septic osteomyelitis
Liver disease (lipidosis, biliary hyperplasia/fibrosis)
endometritis)
 Obstructive uropathy
Chronic nodular panniculitis
 Other neoplasms
Fungal (blastomycosis, histoplasmosis,
Carcinomas (skin, lung, thyroid, kidney, undifferentiated)
coccidioidomycosis)
Leukemia
Granulomatous dermatitis
Metastatic bone neoplasms (squamous cell carcinoma)
Granulomatous lymphadenitis
Multiple myeloma
Schistosomiasis
Myelodysplasia
Laboratory eror (lipemia, hemolysis)
Myelofibrosis
Mammary hyperplasia
Myeloproliferative disease
 Other neoplasms
Sarcomas (bone, undifferentiated)
 Acanthomatous ameloblastoma
Primary hyperparathyroidism (adenoma, adenocarcinoma,
Carcinomas (skin, lung, nose, stomach, liver, pancreas,
hyperplasia)
mammary gland, thyroid, adrenal medulla, testis,
 owaries, undifferentiated)
Hepatoblastoma
likely, stimulate osteoclastic bone resorption via tumor
Leukemia
Malignant histocytosis
secretion of prostaglandins or other cytokines (Rosol and
 Malignant melanoma
Capen 1992; Lucas et al. 2007). Although tumor-induced
 Metastatic bone neoplasms
local osteolysis is a common cause of hypercalcemia in
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
humans, it is infrequently recognized as a cause of hyper-
Multiple myeloma
calcemia in dogs and cats (MacEwen and Siegel 1977;
Myeloproliferative disease
Chew and Carothers 1989; Elliot et al. 1991).
Sarcomas (muscle, bone, adipose tissue, undifferentiated)
Seminoma
Hypoadrenocorticism
Thymoma
Hypoadrenocorticism may also be associated with hyper-
calcemia in dogs (Table 64.1) (Chew and Meuten 1982;
Elliot et al. 1991; Uehlinger et al. 1998). Increased total
644 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
calcium has been reported to occur in approximately
Activation of parathyroid cell calcium-sensing receptors
28-45% of dogs with spontaneous hypoadrenocorticism
(CSR) and vitamin D receptors (VDR) normally sup-
(Willard et al. 1982; Peterson et al. 1996; Uehlinger
 press PTH synthesis and secretion and parathyroid tissue
et al. 1998; Feldman and Nelson 2004a). Hypercal-
proliferation (Chen and Goodman 2004; Dusso et al.
cemia has rarely been reported in cats with spontaneous
2005). In some cases of humans with advanced CRF, the
hypoadrenocorticism; however, hypercalcemia has been
combined effects of hyperphosphatemia, decreased cal-
observed in 25% of bilaterally adrenalectomized cats
citriollevels, and decreased expression of CSRs and VDRs
(Baumann and Kurland 1929; Peterson et al. 1989; Savary
promote autonomous polyclonal, oligoclonal, or mon-
et al. 2000; Smith et al. 2002). The cause(s) of hypercal-
oclonal parathyroid gland expansion and autonomous
hypersecretion of PTH (Parfitt 1997; Llach and Velasquez
torial. It may be attributable to one or a combination
Forereo 2001; Grzela et al. 2006; Lauter and Arnold 2008).
of the following: (1) increased calcium retention due
PTH-mediated increases in osteoclastic bone resorption
to diminished glomerular filtration, (2) enhanced renal
and resultant increases in ionized and total calcium con-
calcium reabsorption secondary to volume contraction,
centrations in the face of hyperphosphatemia substan-
(3) hemoconcentration, acidosis, increased protein bind-
tially increase the risk of nephrocalcinosis. Increased
ing of calcium, (4) increased calcium complexing with
complexing of calcium with anions, hemoconcentration,
plasma anions (such as citric acid and phosphorus), and
 and acidosis may also contribute to the pathogenesis of
(5) increased bone resorption (Walser et al. 1963; Muls
hypercalcemia of CRF, especially in patients with eleva-
et al. 1982; Montoli et al. 1992; Diamond and Thorn-
tions in total calcium without concurrent increases of
ley 1994; Adler et al. 1985). Plasma concentrations of
ionized calcium concentrations.
protein-bound and complexed calcium were elevated in
hypercalcemic adrenalectomized dogs, whereas plasma
Primary hyperparathyroidism
ionized calcium concentrations were usually within nor-
Primary hyperparathyroidism is characterized by exces-
mal range (Walser et al. 1963). However, increased ion-
sive uncontrolled production of PTH by hyperplastic or
ized calcium concentrations have been observed in some
neoplastic parathyroid glands and is an uncommon cause
dogs and cats with hypoadrenocorticism (Walser et al.
ofhypercalcemia in dogs and cats ( Table 64.1) (Elliot et al.
1963; Smith et al. 2002; Adler et al. 1985).
1991; Savary et al. 2000; Feldman and Nelson 2004a).
Solitary functional adenomas of the parathyroid gland
Chronic renal failure
have been the most commonly recognized cause of pri-
Chronic renal failure (CRF) in humans, dogs, and cats
 Nelson 2004a). Excess PTH enhances osteoclastic bone
is commonly associated with renal secondary hyper-
resorption, promotes renal tubular calcium reabsorption
parathyroidism that is characterized  by normal to
and phosphorus excretion, and stimulates 1-alpha-
decreased calcium concentrations, hyperphosphatemia,
hydroxylase conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D; to cal-
increased plasma concentrations of PTH, decreased
citriol. Calcitriol increases intestinal calcium and phos-
plasma concentrations of calcitriol and phosphatonin
phorus absorption and further enhances PTH-mediated
(fibroblast growth factor 23), and parathyroid hyperpla-
sia (Chapter 48) (Polzin et al. 2005; Moe and Sprague
osteoclastic bone resorption. In nonazotemic patients,
the net effect of excess PTH is increased serum total and
2008). However, a paradoxical irreversible form of hyper-
ionized calcium concentrations with normal to decreased
calcemia (so-called tertiary hyperparathyroidism) may be
serum phosphorus concentrations (Weir et al. 1986;
encountered in patients with long-standing renal sec-
Feldman and Nelson 2004a).
 ondary hyperparathyroidism. Increased serum total cal-
cium concentrations have been observed in 14-22% of
Hypervitaminosis D
dogs and 10-21% of cats with CRF (DiBartola et al.
1987; Chew and Nagode 1990; Lulich et al. 1992; Bar-
Hypervitaminosis D is an uncommon cause of hyper-
ber and Elliot 1998; Gerber et al. 2003; Schenck and
calcemia in dogs and cats. It is usually associated with
Chew 2005). Increased ionized calcium concentrations
excess dietary or therapeutic vitamin D supplementation
have been observed in 6-9% of dogs and in 6% of cats
for treatment of hypoparathyroidism, or from acciden-
with CRF (Chew and Nagode 1990; Barber and Elliot
tal ingestion of cholecalciferol-containing rodenticides
1998; Schenck and Chew 2005).
 or human antipsoriasis creams containing the calcitriol
 Autonomous hypersecretion of PTH by the parathy-
analogue calcipotriene (calcipotriol) (Berger and Feld-
roid gland apparently plays a central role in the patho-
man 1987; Gunther et al. 1988; Hare et al. 2000; Schenck
 genesis of tertiary hyperparathyroidism (Parfitt 1997).
et al. 2006). Cholecalciferol undergoes rapid unregulated
Calcium disorders 645
hepatic hydroxylation to form 25-hydroxyvitamin D3
 genesis of idiopathic hypercalcemia are needed (McClain
(Dusso et al. 2005). Although 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
et al. 1999; Midkiff et al. 2000). Idiopathic hypercalcemia
has minimal biologic activity at physiologic concentra-
has been uncommonly encountered in dogs (Elliot et al.
tions, high plasma concentrations are capable of exert-
1991; Uehlinger et al. 1998).
ing direct effects on target tissues (Dzanis and Kallfelz
1988). Because active metabolites of vitamin D stimulate
Miscellaneous causes of hypercalcemia
intestinal calcium and phosphorus transport, mobilize
calcium from bone, and promote renal tubular reabsorp-
Hypercalcemia occasionally has been associated with a
tion of calcium and phosphorus, excess vitamin D results
number of additional pathologic and nonpathologic dis-
in hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and dystrophic
orders of dogs and cats (Tables 64.1 and 64.2). These
causes represent a diverse group of disorders for which
calcification of soft tissue (Spangler et al. 1979; Gunther
   s rnd p
et al. 1988; Rumbeiha et al. 1999, 2000; Duss0 et al. 2005).
 cemia have yet to be defined.
Infectious and inflammatory disorders
Consequences of hypercalcemia
Hypercalcemia has been infrequently associated with
chronic infections or inflammatory disorders in dogs
The severity of clinical signs will be influenced by the rate
and cats, including fungal, bacterial, viral, and parasitic
of increase in serum calcium concentration, the magni-
infections and granulomatous dermatitis, panniculitis,
tude and duration of hypercalcemia, and the nature of the
and lymphadenitis (Tables 64.1 and 64.2). However, the
underlying disease. Of the many organ systems affected
reported prevalence of blastomycosis-associated hyper-
by hypercalcemia, the kidneys are particularly suscepti-
calcemia varies from 4-14% of affected dogs and up to
ble. Hypercalcemia-induced alterations in renal function 
25% of affected cats (Dow et al. 1986; Arceneaux et al.
and morphology are linked to many (if not all) of the clin-
1998; Gilor et al. 2006; Crews et al. 2007). Studies in
ical manifestations observed in hypercalcemic patients.
humans have revealed that inappropriate endogenous
overproduction of calcitriol by activated macrophages is
Aterations in renal function
involved in the pathogenesis of hypercalcemia of chronic
Impaired urine concentrating ability leading to polyuria
granulomatous disease (Sharma 20o0). An increased
and compensatory polydipsia is an early clinical mani-
serum calcitriol concentration has been observed in a
festation of hypercalcemia in dogs. Urine specific grav-
dog with granulomatous lymphadenitis (Mellanby et al.
ity values of hypercalcemic patients are consistently less
2006). However, concentrations of vitamin D metabolites
than 1.030 and usually less than 1.020 (Kruger et al.
 apparently have not been reported in hypercalcemic dogs
1996). Although polyuria is less commonly recognized
or cats with blastomycosis or other chronic inflammatory
 in hypercalcemic cats compared to hypercalcemic dogs,
disorders.
approximately 66% of cats with primary hyperparathy-
roidism had urine specific gravities of less than 1.020
ldiopathic hypercalcemia
(Kallet et al. 199l; Marquez et al. 1995; Savary et al.
Idiopathic disease is one of the most common causes of
 2000; Feldman and Nelson 2004a). A principal cause of
hypercalcemia in cats (Savary et al. 2000). They may
hypercalcemia-induced polyuria appears to be the kid-
develop a condition characterized by mildly to mod-
ney's inability to respond to the antidiuretic hormone
erately increased total calcium, moderately to severely
 arginine-vasopressin (AVP), resulting in an acquired
increased ionized calcium; normophosphatemia, low to
form of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. AVP-elicited
normal concentrations of PTH, nondetectable PTHrp,
 translocation ofaquaporin-2 (APQ2) water channels into
and normal concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D and
the apical membranes of collecting duct cells is the final
calcitriol; and normal parathyroid gland morphology
rate-limiting step necessary for increased water reabsorp-
(McClain et al. 1999; Midkiff et al. 2000; Schenck et al.
tion by the renal tubules (Nejsum 2005). Studies in rodent
2004). It has been reported in male and female cats of all
models have demonstrated that hypercalcemia is consis-
ages. Longhaired cats may be disproportionally affected
tently associated with decreased collecting duct water
(Midkiff et al. 2000; Schenck et al. 2004). Urolithia-
permeability and urine osmolality, increased urine pro-
  o  s ( ) 
 duction and water intake, and decreased AQP2 protein
15-35% of cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia (Midkiff
 expression and apical membrane localization (Levi et al.
et al. 2000; Schenck et al. 2004). Although the majority of
1983; Earm et al. 1998; Sands et al. 1998; Wang et al.
affected cats consumed acidifying diets, controlled stud--
 2002, 2004). It has been proposed that these effects are
ies evaluating whether diet is a risk factor in the patho-
mediated by calcium-induced activation of CSR on the
646 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
apical surfaces of collecting duct cells and subsequent
Alterations in renal morphology
reduction in intracellular cAMP concentrations, activa-
Gross renal morphologic changes are evident with
tion of protein kinase C, stabilization of cell cytoskeleton,
chronic or severe hypercalcemia. Kidneys may be nor-
and decreased AQP2 expression and trafficking (Sands
et al. 1997; Procino et al. 2004). Diminished collecting
mal to large in size, pale in color, speckled or mottled
 in appearance, and may have a finely granular or pitted
surface texture (Barr et al. 1989). Gross evidence of renal
reduced medullary tonicity and disruption of medullary
mineralization may be observed as a distinctive white
osmotic gradients. Reduced medullary solute accumula-
 gritty band located adjacent to the cortical medullary
tion is likely related to decreased sodium reabsorption
junction (Kruger et al. 1996).
resulting from calcium-sensor receptor-mediated down-
Microscopic changes associated with acute or mild
regulation of major renal sodium transporters in the thick
hypercalcemia are characterized by variable calcifica-
ascending limbs of the loops of Henle (Levi et al. 1983;
tion, degeneration, and necrosis of tubular epithelium
Jesus Ferreira et al. 1998; Wang et al. 2004). Concur-
as well as formation of obstructing intertubular casts in
rent increases in renal medullary blood flow and subse-
the ascending loops of Henle, distal tubules, and col-
 quent medullary washout likely are additional contribut-
lecting ducts (Epstein et al. 1959; Carone et al. 1960;
ing factors in disruption of medullary osmotic gradients
Spangler et al. 1979). Calcification of renal parenchyma is
(Brunette et al. 1974). Impaired ability to maximally
 mild and randomly distributed, affecting primarily tubu-
concentrate urine may be further compounded by renal
 lar epithelium and their basement membranes (Kruger
parenchymal injury due to hypercalcemia-induced cal-
et al. 1996). With severe or chronic hypercalcemia, the
cification of tubular epithelium, interstitial tissues, and
extent of tubular degeneration, necrosis, and obstruc-
blood vessels (Kruger et al. 1996).
tion as well as renal parenchymal calcification is pro-
Elevations in serum calcium are frequently accompa-
portionately greater. Renal calcification is widespread,
nied by variable reductions in GFR and variable increases
involving cortical and medullary tubular epithelium and
in serum urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concentra-
basement membranes, interstitial tissues, periglomerular
tions (Weller and Hoffman 1992; Kruger et al. 1996).
capillary basement membranes, blood vessel walls, and
Reductions in GFR and azotemia may result from pre-
Bowman's capsule (Carone et al. 1960; Spangler et al.
renal factors, intrinsic renal factors, or combinations
1979; Weller et al. 1982; Barr et al. 1989; Kruger et al.
of both. Hypercalcemia may directly alter renal hemo-
1996). Nephrocalcinosis may be concurrently associated
dynamics and glomerular filtration. Studies in several
with fibrosis and infltration of interstitial tissues with
species have demonstrated that moderate to severe hyper-
mononuclear cells. Glomerular lesions are usually char-
calcemia consistently reduced GFR and renal blood flow
 acterized by mild degeneration.
as a result of renal vasoconstriction and a decrease in the
glomerular ultrafiltration coefficient (Epstein et al. 1959;
Chomdej et al. 1977; Humes et al. 1978; Levi et al. 1983;
Urolithiasis
Zawada et al. 1986; Wang et al. 2004). Renal hemody-
Hypercalciuria predisposes patients to formation of
 namic changes associated with hypercalcemia are poten-
uroliths composed of calcium phosphate or calcium
tially reversible; correction of hypercalcemia results in
oxalate (Chapter 69) (Klausner et al. 1986; Lulich et al.
rapid restoration of GFR (Lins 1978; Sutton and Dirks
2004). In one series of 168 dogs, calcium-containing
1 986). However, if hypercalcemia is persistent and severe,
uroliths were reported in 32% of patients with primary
sustained renal vasoconstriction and nephrocalcinosis
 hyperparathyroidism (Feldman and Nelson 2004a). Sim-
may lead to progressive intrinsic renal tubular injury and
ilarly, calcium oxalate urolithiasis has been occasion-
 intrinsic primary renal failure. In this case, the reversibil-
ally reported in cats with primary hyperparathyroidism
ity of intra-renal azotemia ultimately depends on the
(Marquez et al. 1995). Although urolithiasis is rarely rec-
degree of renal tubular cell and tubular basement mem-
ognized in association with other hypercalcemic disor-
brane damage (Osborne et al. 1969).
ders in dogs, radiopaque uroliths were identified in 35%
Other renal tubular defects associated with hypercal-
of 20 cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia (Midkiff et al.
cemic disorders in humans include metabolic acidosis;
2000).
metabolic alkalosis; hypercalciuria; aminoaciduria; glu-
cosuria; and renal sodium, potassium, magnesium, and
Urinary tract infections
phosphorus wasting (Sutton and Dirks 1986). In general,
renal tubular defects have not been well characterized in
Bacterial urinary tract infections (Chapter 71) have
 hypercalcemic disorders of dogs and cats (Kruger et al.
-d ym sop Jo e exde u panasqo u
1996).
 mary hyperparathyroidism (Feldman and Nelson 2004a).
Calcium disorders 647
Several hypercalcemia-induced abnormalities of the uri-
 the history, physical examination findings, and results of
nary tract, including renal insufficiency, formation of
hematologic, biochemical, endocrinologic, radiographic,
 dilute urine, and concurrent urolithiasis, represent risk
ultrasonic, and histocytologic evaluations. Using the
factors for bacterial urinary tract infections in dogs with
combined results of these routine evaluations, most dis-
primary hyperparathyroidism (Osborne et al. 1979).
ease processes that cause hypercalcemia in dogs and
cats can be identified or at least localized to a specific
anatomic region or organ system. Patients in whom
Diagnostic considerations for hypercalcemia
a cause for hypercalcemia is not obvious from ini-
tial evaluations currently pose a diagnostic challenge.
Depending on the reference laboratory, hypercalcemia is
    sd s  so
defined as a fasting total calcium concentration of greater
using results of assays for ionized calcium and calcium
than 12.0 mg/dL (3.8 mmol/L) in dogs and 11.0 mg/dL
regulating hormones, including serum intact molecule
(2.75 mmol/L) in cats or an ionized calcium concentra-
immunoreactive PTH, serum intact molecule or N-
tion greater than 6.0 mg/dL (1.5 mmol/L) in dogs and
terminal immunoreactive PTHrP, 25-hydroxyvitamin
5.7 mg/dL (1.4 mmol/L) in cats (Schenck et al. 2006).
 D, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin Ds (Table 64.3) (Kruger
Since total calcium concentrations may not be directly
et al. 1996; Schenck et al. 2006).
 proportional to ionized calcium concentration, ionized
calcium determinations should be included in diagnos-
tic evaluations whenever possible as they provide useful
information for differentiating causes of hypercalcemia
Treatment strategies for hypercalcemia
in dogs and cats (Schenck and Chew 2002, 2005; Lulich
Initiation of therapy directed toward the specific cause
et al. 2004).
is the only consistently effective means of elimination
 Identification of the cause or causes of hypercalcemia
or long-term control of hypercalcemia. However, symp-
in dogs and cats and subsequent formulation of spe-
tomatic and supportive therapy is often required in
cific therapeutic plans depend on careful assessment of
patients with acute severe hypercalcemia. Symptomatic
Table 64.3 Laboratory abnormalities characteristic of common causes of hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia in dogs and cats
Intact
25-0H
1,25(OH)2 SUN or 
Na+/K+
Cause
TCa
iCa
PO4
iPTH 
PTHrP
Vit D
Vit D
SCr
Ratio
HYPERCALCEMIA
 Hypercalcemia of malignancy
个
N,↓t
↑.N
N
↓.N.↑
Nt
N
 Hypoadrenocorticism
N.↑
N.1
N'↑
N
N
↑
↑
 Chronic renal failure (tertiary
个
个
N
↑'N
↑'N
N**
hyperparathyroidism)
Vitamin D intoxication
↑
N.↑
个
N
N.↑
Nt
N
(cholecalciferol)
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
↑
+↑'N
N.↑
N
N
N.↑
Nt
 Feline idiopathic
N.↑
↑'N
N
↓.N,↑
↓.N,↑
Nt
N
7
HYPOCALCEMIA
 Hypoalbuminemia
个
↑'N
N
N.↑
N
N,↑
N
N
Chronic renal failure (secondary
N,↑.↓
↑'N
↑.N
个
N
↑'N
↑'N
**N
hyperparathyroidism)
Obstructive uropathy
↑'N
↑'N
↑
N.↑
N
N
Unk
↑
↑
Eclampsia
个
↑
↑
↑.N
N
N
↑'N
N
N
Ethylene glycol toxicity
个
个
↑.N
N
N
N,↑
Nt
N
 Primary hypoparathyroidism
↑.N
N'↑
N
N
↑'N
N
N
Key: TCa = serum total calcium: iCa
 = serum ionized calcium: PO4 = serum inorganic phosphorous: Intact iPTH = Intact molecule
immunoreactive parathyroid hormone: PTHrP = immunoreactive parathyroid hormone related peptide; 25-OH Vit D = 25-hycroxyvitamin 
wnas = +y :wnipos wnas = +en :aujujean wnas = ins :uabonu ean poog = Nns :a ujwena Axoipayp sz'l = ( la ?(ho)sz't :o
potassium; N = normal; Unk = unknown.
tValues may be increased with reductions in GFR.
**Values may be decreased in oliguric renal failure.
648 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
and supportive therapies temporarily reduce elevated
cocorticoids inhibit osteoclast-mediated bone resorp-
serum calcium concentrations and often ameliorate car-
tion, decrease intestinal calcium absorption, and pro-
diac, neurologic, and renal toxicity. Short-term control 
mote renal calcium excretion (Collins et al. 1963; Kim
of hypercalcemia provides additional time for formula-
et al. 2007). In addition, glucocorticoids may be directly
tion and initiation of specific diagnostic and therapeutic
cytotoxic to steroid-sensitive neoplasms. Glucocorticoid
 plans. Premature, overzealous, or inappropriate symp-
responsive causes of hypercalcemia have been reported to
tomatic therapy, however, may interfere with identifi-
 include lymphoma, multiple myeloma, thymoma, hyper-
cation of specific causes and possibly expose patients
vitaminosis D, granulomatous disease, hypoadrenocorti-
 to needless treatments with potentially life-threatening
cism, and feline idiopathic hypercalcemia (Schenck et al.
complications. The speed with which symptomatic ther-
2006). Because glucocorticoids may substantially alter
apy is initiated and the specific therapeutic agents are
lymphoid morphology and may exacerbate infection-
used depends on (1) pathogenesis; (2) duration, magni-
induced granulomatous disease, a definitive diagnosis
tude, and rate progression of hypercalcemia; (3) severity
should be established before glucocorticoid administra-
 of associated clinical signs; (4) concomitant metabolic,
tion.
endocrine, hematologic, cardiovascular, or renal abnor-
The naturaly occurring polypeptide hormone calci-
malities; (5) risk of progressive end-organ injury due to
tonin inhibits osteoclast-mediated bone resorption and
 persistent hypercalcemia; and (6) availability of appro-
 enhances urinary calcium excretion (Cochran et al.
 priate laboratory tests to monitor patient response in a
1970). Calcitonin is used in human patients because of
timely fashion.
the rapid onset of action, high degree of efficacy, and
Regardless of the severity of hypercalcemia, extracel-
few contraindications or adverse effects ( Wisneski 1990).
 lular fluid volume expansion is an essential component 
However, the effects of the hormone are transient, with
of the therapeutic regimen. Because sodium-dependent
most patients becoming refractory to the drug in 2-4
co-transport of calcium in proximal tubules accounts
days. Nevertheless, calcitonin seems to provide invalu-
for approximately 70% of renal calcium reabsorption,
able short-term adjunctive therapy in patients with severe
restoration of extracellular fluid volume decreases prox-
hypercalcemia, especially when combined with a bispho-
imal tubular sodium reabsorption and effectively pro-
sphonate (Sekine and Takami 1998). Experience with cal-
motes renal calcium excretion (Sutton and Dirks 1986).
d p q  sd   
 Dehydration should be corrected immediately by vig-
ily to dogs with severe hypervitaminosis D (Table 64.4)
orous replacement therapy with 0.9% sodium chloride
 (  1  1   )
solution or other types of electrolyte solutions suited
-  an     o s
to patient needs (Table 64.4). Excessive fluid adminis-
calcemia associated with granulomatous disease in a cat
tration should be avoided in patients with pathologic
(Mealey et al. 1999).
oliguria, hypertension, congestive heart failure, or other 
 Bisphosphonates are synthetic pyrophosphate ana-
edematous disorders, and in patients with preexisting
       
hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia.
(Fan 2007). These agents are potent inhibitors of
Patients with moderate to severe or rapidly progress-
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption that act by dis-
ing hypercalcemia often require additional therapy to
rupting osteoclast intracellular metabolism and by pro-
 promote further renal calcium excretion (Table 64.4).
 moting osteoclast apoptosis. Bisphosphonates have been
Furosemide and other loop diuretics promote renal
used to manage a variety of hypercalcemic disorders
calcium excretion and enhance the calciuric effects of
in humans, dogs, and cats (wellington and Goa 2003;
Schenck et al. 2006; Fan 2007). Newer second- and third-
thick ascending limb of the loops of Henle (Ong et al.
 generation aminobisphosphonates, such as pamidronate,
1974; Adin et al. 2003). Because use of diuretics
61n1
ibandronate, and zoledronate, are more effective and are
volume-contracted patients exacerbates hypercalcemia
associated with fewer adverse effects than earlier bisphos-
by accelerating fluid and electrolyte losses, correction
phonates (Wellington and Goa 2003; Fan 2007). Because
of fluid and electrolyte deficits are essential prerequi-
of poor oral absorption, bisphosphonates are most effec-
sites to furosemide therapy. Unlike furosemide, thiazide
tive when administered parenterally (Fan 2007). In vet-
 diuretics and the potassium-sparing diuretic amiloride
erinary patients, intravenous pamidronate has been used
may decrease renal excretion of calcium and are there-
for management ofhypercalcemia associated with malig-
fore contraindicated (Costanzo 1985).
nancy, cholecalciferol and calcipotriene toxicity, feline
 In patients with severe or rapidly progressing hyper-
nocardiosis, and feline idiopathic hypercalcemia ( Table
calcemia associated with increased bone resorption,
64.4) (Rumbeiha et al. 1999, 2000; Pesillo et al. 2002;
agents that inhibit bone resorption are indicated. Glu-
Kadar et al. 2004; Fan et al. 2005; Hostutler et al. 2005).
Calcium disorders 649
Table 64.4 Therapeutic agents for symptomatic management of hypercalcemia
Therapeutic
 Dosage and route
 Onset of 
agent
 of administration
action?
Indications
Contraindications
 Possible adverse effects
0.9% sodium
Hydration deficit 
Rapid
Mild to severe hypercalcemia
 Congestive heart
Volume overload,
chloride or
plus 40-60 mL/kg
failure, generalized
hypokalemia,
other fluid that
IV infusion over
edema,
hypomagnesemia,
best suits
24 h
hypertension 
hypernatremia
 patient needs
Furosemide
2-4 mg/kg IV, SC
Immediate
Moderate to severe
Dehydration,
Volume depletion,
q 8-12 h; or 0.66
hypercalcemia
hypovolemia
hypokalemia,
 mg/kg bolus
hypomagnesemia,
followed by CRl of
hypochloremic alkalosis,
0.66 mg/kg/h
hypercalciuria
 Prednisolone
1-2.2 mg/kg
Rapid to
Moderate to severe
Infectious disease,
 Generalized catabolism,
PO,SC, IV q 12 h
delayed
hypercalcemia due to
pancreatitis,
immunosuppression,
 steroid-responsive
hepatic
pancreatitis,
 malignancy.
insufficiency, renal
gastrointestinal
hypervitaminosis D,
failure, ulcerative
ulceration, hepatopathy.
granulomatous disease,
colitis
myopathy, osteoporosis,
hypoadrenocorticism, feline
others
 idiopathic hypercalcemia
Calcitonin
4-7 IU/kg SC q
Rapid
Mild to severe hypercalcemia
Hypersensitivity to
Vomiting
6-8 h 
when other therapy is
calcitonin
ineffective or contraindicated
Pamidronate
1-2 mg/kg IV
Rapid to
Moderate to severe
Hypersensitivity to
Vomiting, cardiac
 infusion over 2 h 
delayed
hypercalcemia due to
bisphosphonates
arrhythmia, renal failure.
q21-28 days
malignancy,
hypocalcemia,
hypervitaminosis D.
hypophosphatemia,
 granulomatous disease,
hypomagnesemia
feline idiopathic
hypercalcemia when other
therapy is ineffective or 
 contraindicated
Sodium
1 mEq/kg IV every
Immediate
 Life-threatening 
Alkalosis,
Alkalosis, hypokalemia,
bicarbonate
10 to 15 min:
hypercalcemic crisis
congestive heart
paradoxical CSF acidosis,
 maximum total
failure
hypernatremia, ECF
dlose of 4 mEq/kg
hyperosmolality.
intracranial hemorhage,
coma, cardiac
dysrhythmias
 Sodium EDTA
25-75 mg/kg/h
Immediate
Life-threatening
 Renal failure
Acute renal failure,
hypercalcemic crisis
hypocalcemia
 Peritoneal
Low calcium or
Rapid
Moderate to severe
Recent abdominal
Peritonitis
dialysis
calcium-free
hypercalcemia with
surgery, PKD.
dialysate IP
 concurrent oliguric or anuric
abdominal
renal failure
neoplasia
Hemodialysis
Low calcium or
Rapid
Moderate to severe
Few
Hypotension,
calcium-free
hypercalcemia with
hemorrhage, seizures,
dialysate
 concurrent oliguric or anuric
thromboembolism, sepsis
renal failure
Key: CRl, constant rate infusion: CSF, cerebral spinal fluid: ECF, extracellular fluid: PKD. polycystic kidney disease: ND, not determined;:
D5w,5%dextroseinwater.
 Approximate time to beneficial therapeutic efect; maximum effect may occur later: immediate = <2 hours; rapid = 3-12 hours: delayed
=>24 hours.
650 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
In a series of 7 dogs and 2 cats with hypercalcemia due
Frazao 2003). By altering receptor conformation, cinacal-
to a variety of causes, pamidronate infusion resulted in
cet enhances receptor sensitivity to extracellular calcium
a 15-64% decrease in serum total calcium concentra-
ions and thus inhibits PTH synthesis and secretion by
tion that persisted for 11 days to 9 weeks (median 8.5
 parathyroid cells. The ability of cinacalcet to lower plasma
weeks) (Hostutler et al. 2005). Interestingly, pamidronate
PTH levels without exacerbating phosphate retention or
increasing serum calcium concentrations has resulted
roidism in hypercalcemic human patients with end-
 in the use of this agent to successfully treat primary,
 stage renal disease ( Torregrosa et al. 2003). However, use
secondary, and tertiary hyperparathyroidism and func-
 of aminobisphosphonates for management of hypercal-
tional parathyroid carcinomas in humans (Withrich
cemia in dogs and cats with end-stage renal disease has
 et al. 2007). Human recombinant osteoprotegerin is a
not been reported. Although veterinary experience with
novel investigational bone antiresorptive agent that func-
other aminobisphosphonates is limited, in humans, zole-
tions as a decoy receptor for ligands that normally bind
dronate has the advantages of increased potency, shorter
to receptors on osteoclasts and their precursors to pro-
infusion time, more rapid response, and longer duration
mote osteoclast differentiation, activation, and survival.
of action compared to pamidronate ( Wellington and Goa
In rodent models, the speed and duration of reversal
2003; Fan et al. 2005).
of humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy was signifi-
Therapeutic agents that alter the relative concentra-
cantly greater with osteoprotegerin than with high-dose
tion of ionized calcium or promote extrarenal calcium
 (   )   
excretion are usually reserved for emergency short-term
therapeutic agents that have been used for control of
management of hypercalcemic crises (i.e., severe hyper-
hypercalcemia include mithramycin (plicamycin), gal-
calcemia resulting in life-threatening cardiac dysfunction
lium nitrate, and intravenous phosphate. However, use of
and/or neurologic dysfunction). In this situation, imme-
these agents in human and veterinary medicine is limited
diate attempts should be made to reduce plasma ion-
or no longer recommended due to cost, adverse effects,
ized calcium with intravenous sodium bicarbonate or
 or diffculty of administration (Kruger et al. 1996; Lucas
sodium EDTA (Table 64.4) (Kruger et al. 1996; Schenck
et al. 2007; Pollak et al. 2008).
et al. 2006). Both agents rapidly reduce plasma cal-
cium concentration, but have short durations of effect
Causes of hypocalcemia
( <2 hours) (Parfitt and Kleerekoper 1980; Meuten 1984;
Chew et al. 1989). Because sodium bicarbonate and
Overview
sodium EDTA may be associated with significant adverse
Hypocalcemia may result from a number of diverse
effects, patients treated with these agents should be con-
causes and is commonly observed with urinary tract dis-
tinuously monitored and should be switched to less haz-
orders (e.g-, acute and CRF, nephrotic syndrome, and
ardous forms of therapy as quickly as possible. Peritoneal
urethral obstruction (Table 64.5). However, hypocal-
(Chapter 30), pleural, or hemodialysis (Chapter 28) with
cemia per se rarely induces significant functional or
low calcium dialysates are potentially useful for symp-
structural abnormalities of the urinary system. A notable
tomatic therapy of a hypercalcemic crisis, especially if
exception to this generalization is CRF. Basic pathophys-
concomitant renal failure has limited other therapeutic
iologic factors that, alone or in combination, may con-
options (Heyburn et al. 1980; Cowgill 1995).
tribute to hypocalcemia include decreased protein bind-
 Recently developed pharmaceutical agents that have
ing of calcium, decreased bone resorption, decreased
potential roles in symptomatic treatment of hypercal-
intestinal calcium absorption, enhanced urinary calcium
cemia in dogs and cats include somatostatin congeners,
excretion, increased bone accretion, or increased calcium
nonhypercalcemic calcitriol analogues, calcimimetics,
precipitation with plasma anions (such as citric acid,
 and osteoclast antiresorptive agents. Somatostatin cogen-
phosphorous, or oxalic acid).
ers (e.g., lanreotide and octreotide) and noncalcemic
calcitriol analogs (e.g-) paricalcitol and doxercalciferol)
Hypoalbuminemia
 are two classes of agents that may be useful for symp-
tomatic treatment of dogs with hypercalcemia caused
Hypoalbuminemia accounts for over half of patients
 s  sd  
with hypocalcemia and is frequently encountered in
excessive bone resorption by inhibiting tumor produc-
tion of PTHrp (Anthony et al. 1995; Yu et al. 1995).
that are frequently associated with severe proteinuria
Cinacalcet is a type II calcimimetic agent that functions
resulting in hypoalbuminemia and associated manifes-
as an allosteric modulator of the calcium-sensing recep-
tations (e.g-, nephrotic syndrome; Chapters 44 and 53)
tor on the surface of the parathyroid cell (Urefia and
(Chew and Meuten 1982). Reductions in serum albumin
Calcium disorders  651
Table 64.5 Causes of hypocalcemia in dog and cats
concentrations decrease the protein-bound fraction of
circulating calcium, resulting in mild decreases in serum
Common
total calcium concentrations. Since ionized calcium con-
Acute pancreatitis
centrations are usually unaffected, hypocalcemia due to
Acute renal failure
hypoalbuminemia is rarely associated with clinical signs.
Chronic renal failure (secondary renal hyperparathyroidism)
Hypoalbuminemia
Chronic renal failure
Idiopathic
 Obstructive uropathy
CRF is a common cause ofhypocalcemia in dogs (Chapter
Puerperal tetany (eclampsia)
48) (Chew and Meuten 1982). Decreases in total calcium
Uncommon, sporadic, or rare
have been observed in 10-23% of dogs and 8-15% of
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
cats with CRF; whereas ionized hypocalcemia has been
Diabetes mellitus
observed in 29-56% of affected dogs and 10-26% of
Gastrointestinal disease (e.g., gastroenteritis, gastric torsion)
affected cats (DiBartola et al. 1987; Chew and Nagode
Ethylene glycol
1990; Lulich et al. 1992; Barber and Elliot 1998; Schenck
Hemorrhage
and Chew 2002, 2005; Gerber et al. 2003; Schenck et al.
 Hyperthyroidism
 2006). Hypocalcemia is often a consequence of multiple
Hypoadrenocorticism
 biochemical and endocrinologic disturbances associated
Hypomagnesemia
with advancing CRF (Chapter 48). In early stages of
Hypoparathyroidism
 CRF, serum calcium and phosphorus concentrations are
 Atrophy (hypercalcemia-induced)
Canine distemper virus
usually within normal ranges as a result of compensatory
Idiopathic (parathyroiditis)
alterations in the metabolism and regulation of calcitriol,
Infarction
PTH, and phosphatonins (Polzin et al. 2005; Moe and
Postoperative (e.g., thyroidectomy, neck surgery)
Sprague 2008). As renal function deteriorates, however,
Hypovitaminosis D (rickets)
the effects of phosphorus retention and diminished renal
latrogenic
calcitriol synthesis predominate and overt hypocalcemia
Acute rapid calcium-free fluid administration
may develop due to increased calcium-phosphate com-
 Bisphosphonate administration
plexing, reduced calcitriol-mediated intestinal calcium
Blood or plasma transfusion (citrate anticoagulated blood
absorption, and increased skeletal resistance to the cal-
products)
cemic actions of PTH. The combination of low calcitriol,
Calcitonin administration
 hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and elevated phos-
Enrofloxacin administration
phatonin concentrations collectively serve to stimulate
Mithramycin ad ministration
Phosphate administration (oral or intravenous)
excess PTH secretion and progression of renal sec-
Phosphate-containing enemas
ondary hyperparathyroidism. Excess PTH may promote
Sodium bicarbonate infusion 
nephrocalcinosis and consequent progressive loss of renal
Infectious/inflammatory (e.g., peritonitis, pyometra)
function (Nagode et al. 1996).
Intestinal malabsorption (e.g., intestinal lymphangiectasia,
protein losing enteropathy)
Acute renal failure
Laboratory error
EDTA contamination
Hypocalcemia may be observed in some dogs and cats
Gadolinium-based angiographic contrast agents
with acute intrinsic renal failure (Chapter 49) (Vaden
Sample mishandling
et al. 1997; Worwag and Langston 2008). In one study,
Liver disease
 decreased total calcium was observed in approximately
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
25% of 99 dogs with acute renal failure, and hypocal-
Rhabdomyolysis
cemia was associated with a diminished likelihood of
 Renal transplantation 
survival (Vaden et al. 1997). In patients with acute renal
 Snake envenomation (Vipera xanthina palestinae)
failure, hypocalcemia may be the direct result of the pri-
Soft tissue trauma
mary disease process (e.g-, ethylene glycol intoxication,
Tumor lysis syndrome
acute pancreatitis, or glomerulonephropathy/nephrotic
syndrome) and/or the consequence of acute hyperphos-
phatemia resulting from abrupt severe deterioration
of renal function. Hypocalcemia has been observed in
approximately 50% of dogs and cats with ethylene gly-
col intoxication (Thrall et al. 1984; Connally et al. 1996).
652 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
After ingestion, ethylene glycol is rapidly metabolized
disorders. Clinical signs are often not evident until total
to glycoaldehyde, glycolate, glyoxalate, and finally oxalic
calcium concentrations fall below 6-7 mg/dL and ionized
acid (Parry and Wallach 1974). The formation of calcium
calcium concentrations of 0.7-0.8 mm/L (Feldman and
oxalate monohydrate (and to a lesser degree calcium
Nelson 2004b). When present, signs of hypocalcemia are
oxalate dihydrate) results in hypocalcemia. Hypocal-
predominantly neurologic and neuromuscular (seizures,
cemia may be evident prior to the development of
tetany, muscle tremors, fasciculations, and cramping.
azotemia as a result of initial complexing with oxalates,
lameness, stiff gait, ataxia), but may also include signs
but it is more commonly associated with later stages of 
related to the cardiovascular (bradycardia, tachycardia,
intoxication when acute intrinsic renal failure develops as
hypotension), gastrointestinal (anorexia, vomiting, diar-
a result of renal proximal tubular degeneration, necrosis,
rhea, weight loss), respiratory (panting), ophthalmic
and intraluminal deposition of calcium oxalate crystals
(cataracts), and urinary (polyuria and polydipsia) sys-
(Kersting and Nielsen 1966; Thrall et al. 1984; Grauer
tems (Feldman and Nelson 2004b; Schenck et al. 2006).
et al. 1987; Connally et al. 1996). Hypocalcemia at this
- e no su  i s si s r
Diagnostic considerations for hypocalcemia
phatemia and subsequent increased calcium complex-
 ing, inhibition of the calcemic effects of PTH, impaired
 Depending on the reference laboratory, hypocalcemia is
calcitriol synthesis, and diminished intestinal calcium
 defined as a fasting total calcium concentration of less
absorption (Herbert et al. 1966; Tanaka and DeLuca 1973;
than 8.0 mg/dL (2.0 mmol/L) in dogs and 7.0 mg/dL (1.75
Bover et al. 1999; Pollak et al. 2008).
mmol/L) in cats or an ionized calcium concentration of
less than 5.0 mg/dL (1.25 mmol/L) in dogs and 4.5 mg/dL
Urethral obstruction
(1.1 mmol/L) in cats (Schenck et al. 2006). Identifica-
 Urethral obstruction is a common life-threatening con-
tion of the cause or causes of hypocalcemia in dogs and
cats and subsequent formulation of specific therapeutic
dition in cats and dogs that is often associated with
    nsss    s
azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia, and acido-
physical examination findings, and results of hemato-
sis (Chapters 70 and 77). Decreases in total and ionized
logic, biochemical, endocrinologic, radiographic, ultra-
calcium have been observed in cats with experimentally
sonic, and histocytologic evaluations. Using the com-
induced and naturally occurring urethral obstruction. In
bined results of these routine evaluations, most disease
studies of naturally occurring disease, ionized hypocal-
processes that cause hypocalcemia in dogs and cats can be
cemia was detected in 34-74% ofobstructed cats, whereas
identified. Patients in which a cause for hypocalcemia is
decreases in totalcalcium concentrations were detectedin
not obvious from initialevaluations can often be differen-
only 20-27% of affected cats (Drobatz and Hughes 1997;
tiated using results of assays for calcium-regulating hor-
Lee and Drobatz 2003; Drobatz et al. 2005). Although
 mones, including ionized calcium, serum intact molecule
significant decreases in ionized calcium were observed
immunoreactive PTH, 25-hydroxyvitamin D3, and 1,25-
in dogs with experimentally induced bilateral ureteral
dihydroxyvitamin D; (Table 64.3) (Schenck et al. 2006).
obstruction, calcium disturbances have yet to be fully
 obstruction (Tuma and Mallette 1983). Hypocalcemia in 
Treatment strategies for hypocalcemia
obstructed cats is rarely associated with clinical signs.
Treatment of hypocalcemia depends on the magnitude
However, hypocalcemia may contribute to cardiac and
and rate of decline in serum calcium, the nature and
neurologic dysfunction in severely affected cats. Studies
severity of clinical signs, and the likelihood of progres-
of cats with obstructive uropathy suggest that the mecha-
sive decreases in calcium concentrations. In general, ther-
nism of obstruction-induced hypocalcemia is not related
apeutic goals should be designed to raise serum cal-
to decreased PTH secretion or hypomagnesemia (Dro-
 cium concentrations suffciently to alleviate clinical signs,
batz and Hughes 1997; Drobatz et al. 2005). Most likely,
while avoiding the risks of overzealous treatment. Nor-
it involves the effects of acute hyperphosphatemia.
malization of calcium concentrations into standard ref-
erence ranges is neither necessary nor desirable because
Consequences of hypocalcemia
excessive treatment may delay functional recovery of
Clinical manifestations of hypocalcemia are similar
atrophied parathyroid glands and may increase the
regardless of cause; however, the severity of signs may
risk of hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, soft-tissue
vary considerably depending on the magnitude, rate of
 mineralization, and urolithiasis. Animals with hypocal-
decline, and duration of ionized hypocalcemia, and the 
 cemia due to hypoalbuminemia will not require specific
presence of other concomitant electrolyte or acid-base
therapy, assuming that ionized calcium concentrations
Calcium disorders 653
are normal. Emergency treatment of severe hypocal-
Barber, PJ. and J. Elliot (1998). Feline chronic renal failure: calcium
cemia or hypocalcemia associated with severe clinical
homeostasis in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and 1995. I Small
signs (e.g., seizures, tetany, cardiac dysfunction) entails
Anirm Prac 39: 108-116.
Barr, F.J., M.W. Patteson, et al. ( 1989). Hypercalcemic nephropathy in
 parenteral 10% calcium gluconate administered intra-
three dogs: sonographic appearance. Vet Radiol 30: 169-173.
venously slowly over 10-20 minutes to effect at a dose
Baumann, E.J. and S. Kurland (1929). Changes in the inorganic con-
of 0.5-1.5 mL/kg (Schenck et al. 2006). The initial bolus
stituents of blood in suprarenalectomized cats and rabbits. I Biol
can be followed by a continuous IV infusion of calcium
Chem 71: 281-302.
until oral medications provide control of serum calcium
Berger, B. and E.C. Feldman ( 1987). Primary hyperparathyroidism in
 concentrations. Although uncommon, our experiences
dogs: 21 cases ( 1976-1986). IArm Vet Med Assoc 191: 350-356.
Bolliger, A.P., P.A. Graham, et al. (2002). Detection of parathyroid
and those of others suggest that subcutaneous adminis-
tration of diluted preparations of calcium gluconate may
malignancy. Vet Clin Pathol 31: 3-8.
be associated with severe dermatologic reactions in dogs
Bover, I., A. Jara, et al. (1999). Dynamics of skeletal resistance to
and cats (Ruopp 2001; Schaer et al. 2001; Schenck et al.
2006).
phosphorous. Bone 25: 279-285.
Brunette, M.G., I. Vary, et al. ( 1974). Hyposthenuria in hypercalcemia:
Long-term management of chronic hypocalcemic dis-
the possible role of intrarenal blood flow redistribution. Pfiugers
orders depends on the underlying cause. Treatment of
Arch 350: 9-23.
overt hypocalcemia associated with CRF entails con-
Carone, FA., FH. Epstein, et al. (1960). The effects upon the kidney of
 trol of hyperphosphatemia, administration of calcitriol
transient hypercalcemia induced by parathyroid extract. Am I Path
(2.5 to 5.0 ng/kg q24 h), and cautious use of oral cal-
30: 77-103.
Chen, R.A. and W.G. Goodman (2004). Role of calcium-sensing recep-
cium supplementation (Chapter 48) (Polzin et al. 2009).
Because calcitriol may promote hypercalcemia, serum
F1005-F1011.
total and ionized calcium, phosphorous, and PTH con-
Chew, D.J. and M. Carothers (1989). Hypercalcemia. Vet Clir North
centrations should be monitored closely in patients with
Am Small Amim Prac 19: 265-287.
Chew, D.J., M. Leonard, et al. (1989). Effect of sodium bicarbonate
CRF receiving calcitriol therapy. Long-term manage-
 ment of hypocalcemia caused by primary hypoparathy-
infusions on ionized calcium and total calcium in serum of clinically
normal cats. Arm I Vet Res 50: 145-150.
roidism consists of oral administration of vitamin D
Chew, D.J. and D.J. Meuten (1982). Disorders of calcium and phos-
 preparations (e.g-, ergocalciferol, dihydrotachysterol, or
phorus. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Prac 12: 41l-438.
calcitriol)  and calcium supplementation.
Once vita-
Chew, D.J. and L.A. Nagode (1990). Renal secondary hyperparathy-
min D compounds reach their maximal effect, calcium
roidism. In: Proceedings of the 4th Annual Meeting of the Society for
Comparative Endocrinology, pp. 17-26.
 supplements can often be discontinued (Feldman and
Chomdej, P, P.D. Bell, et al. (l977). Renal hemodynamic and
Nelson 2004b). Hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, nephro-
autoregulatory responses to acute hypercalcemia. Arn I Physiol 232:
calcinosis, and renal insuffciency are potential compli-
F490-F497.
cations of long-term therapy for primary hyperparathy-
Cochran, M., M. Peacock, et al. (1970). Renal effects of calcitonin. Br
roidism (Kruger et al. 1996). Recent human studies have
Med I1: 135- 137.
shown that synthetic human recombinant PTH main-
Collins, E.J., E.R. Garrett, et al. (1963). Effect of adrenal steroids on
radio-calcium metabolism in dogs. Metabolism 11: 716-726.
tains serum calcium concentrations without concur-
Connally, H.E., M.A. Thrall, et al. (1996). Safety and efficacy of 4-
rent hypercalciuria (Winer et al. 2003). However, the
methylpyrazole for treatment of suspected or confirrmed ethylene
safety and effcacy of human recombinant PTH for long-
glycol intoxication in dogs: 107 cases (1983-1995). J Arm Vet Med
term management of hypoparathyroidism has not been
Assoc 209: 1880- 1883.
evaluated in dogs and cats.
Costanzo, L.S. ( 1985). Localization of diuretic action in microperfused
rat distal tubules: Ca and Na transport. Arm J Physiol248: F527-F535.
Cowgill, L.D. ( 1995). Application of peritoneal dialysis and hemodialy-
sis in the management of renal failure. In: Canine and Feline Nephrol-
References
ogy and Urology, edited by D.R. Finco and C.A. Osborne, 2nd edition.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, pp. 573-596.
Adin, D.B., A.W. Taylor, et al. (2003). Intermittent bolus ingestion ver-
Crews, L.J, L.C. Sharkey, et al. (2007). Evaluation of total and ionized
sus continuous infusion of furosemide in normal adult greyhound
calcium status in dogs with blastomycosis: 38 cases (1997-2006). J
dogs. I Vet Intern Med 17: 632-636.
Am Vet Med Assoc 231: 1545- 1549.
Adler, A.J., N. Feran, et al. (1985). Effect of inorganic phosphate on
Diamond, T. and S. Thornley ( 1994). Addisonian crisis and hypercal-
serum ionized calcium concentration in vitro: a reassessment of the
cemia. Aust NZ I Med 24: 316.
"trade-off hypothesis.” Kidrey Int 28: 932-935.
DiBartola, S.P, H.E. Rutgers, et al. (1987). Clinicopathologic findings
Anthony, L.B., M.E. May, et al. ( 1995). Case report: lanreotide in the
associated with chronic renal disease in cats: 74 cases (1973-1984).
management of hypercalcemia of malignancy. Am I Med Sci 309:
I Am Vet Med Assoc 190: 1196- 1202.
312.
Dougherty, S.A., S.A. Center,et al. ( 1990). Salmon calcitonin as adjunct
Arceneaux, K.A., J. Taboada, et al. ( 1998). Blastomycosis in dogs: 115
treatment for vitamin D toxicosis in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 196:
cases (1989-1995). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 213: 658-664.
1269-1272.
654 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
Dow, S.W., A.M. Legendre, et al. (1986). Hypercalcermia associated
Humes, H.D., IL. Troy, et al. (l978). Influence of calcium on the
with blastomycosis in dogs. JAm Vet Med Assoc 188: 706-709.
determinants of glomerular ultrafiltration. I Clin Irvest 61: 32-40.
 Drobatz, K.J. and D. Hughes ( 1997). Concentrations of ionized calcium
Jesus Ferreira, M.C., C. Helies-Toussaint, et al. ( 1998). Co-expression
in plasma of cats with urethral obstruction. JArm Vet Med Assoc 211:
of a Ca2+-inhibitable adenyl cyclase and of a Ca2+ -sensing receptor
1392-1395.
in the cortical thick ascending limb cell of the rat kidney. I Biol Chem
 Drobatz, K.J., C. Ward, et al. (2005). Serum concentrations of parathy-
273: 15192-15202.
roid hormone and 25-OH vitamin D3 in cats with urethral obstruc-
Kadar, E., J.E. Rush, et al. (2004). Electrolyte disturbances and car-
tion. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 15: 170-184.
diac arrhythmias in a dog following pamidronate, calcitonin, and
Dusso, A.S., A.J. Brown, et al. (2005). Vitamin D. Am J Physiol Renal
furosermide administration for hypercalcemia of malignancy. I Am
Physiol 289: F8-F28.
Anirm Hosp Assoc 40: 75-81.
 Dzanis, D.A. and F.A. Kallfelz ( 1988). Recent knowledge of vitamin D
Kallet, A.J., K.P. Richter, et al. ( 1991). Primary hyperparathyroidism in
toxicity in dogs. Proc Am Coll Vet Irtern Med Forum 6: 289-291.
cats: seven cases (1984- 1989). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 199: 1767-1711.
Earm, J.-H., B.M. Christensen, et al. (1998). Decreased aquaporin-2
Kersting, E.J. and S.W. Nielsen (1966). Experimental ethylene glycol
     td ae p s
poisoning in the dog. Arm I Vet Res 27: 574-582.
lecting ducts of polyuric hypercalcemic rats. I Am Soc Nephrol 9:
Kim, H.-J., H. Zhao, et al. (2007). Glucocorticoids and the osteoclast.
2181-2193.
Ann NY Acad Sci 1116: 335-339.
Elliot, J., I.M. Dobson, et al. ( 1991). Hypercalcemia in the dog: a study
Klausner, J.S., FR. Fernandez, et al. (1986). Canine primary hyper-
of 40 cases. J Small Amirm Prac 32: 564-571.
 parathyroidism and its association with urolithiasis. Vet Clin North
Epstein, F.H., D. Beck, et al. (1959). Changes in renal concentrating
Arm Small Amim Prac 16: 227-239.
Kruger, J.M., C.A. Osborne, et al. (1996). Hypecalcermia and renal
1221.
failure: etiology, pathophysisology, diagnosis, and treatment. Vet
 Fan, T.M. (2007). The role of bisphosphonates in the management of
Clin North Am Small Anim Prac 26: 1417-1445.
patients that have cancer. Vet Clin North Arm Small Anim Prac 37:
Lauter, K.B. and A. Arnold (200s). Mutational analysis of CDKN1B, a
1091-1110.
candidate tumor-suppressor gene, in refractory secondary/tertiary
Fan, T.M., L.-P. de Lorimier, et al. (2005). Evaluation of intravenous
hyperparathyroidism. Kidney Int 73: 1137-1140.
 pamidronate administration in 33 cancer-bearing dogs with pri-
Lee, J.A. and K.J. Drobatz (2003). Characterization of the clinical char-
mary or secondary bone involvement. I Vet Irterr Med 19: 74-80.
acteristics, electrolyte, acid-base, and renal parameters in male cats
Feldman, E.C. and R.W. Nelson (2004a). Hypercalcemia and pri-
with urethral obstruction. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 13: 277-233.
mary hyperparathyroidism. In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology
Levi, M., M.A. Ellis, et al. ( 1983). Control of renal hemodynamics and
and Reproduction, 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
glomerular filtration rate in chronic hypercalcemia. I Clin Irvest 71:
Pp. 661-715.
1624-1632.
 Feldman, E.C. and R.W. Nelson (2004b). Hypocalcemia and pri-
Lins, L.E. ( 1978). Reversible renal failure caused by hypercalcermia.
mary hypoparathyroidism. In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology
Acta Med Scand 203: 309-314.
and Reproductior, 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
Llach, F. and F Velasquez Forereo (200l). Secondary hyperparathy-
Pp. 716-742.
roidism in chronic renal failure: pathogenic and clinical aspects. Am
Garlock, S.M., M.E. Matz, et al. ( 1991). Vitamin D rodenticide toxicity
J Kidney Dis 38(supple 5): S20-S33.
in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 27: 356-360.
Lucas, P., H. Lascote, et al. (2007). Treating paraneoplastic hypercal-
Gerber, B., M. Hassig, et al. (2003). Serum concentrations of 1,25-
cemia in dogs and cats. Vet Med 102: 314-331.
dihydroxycholecalciferol and 25-hydroxycholecalciferol in clinically
Lulich, J.P., C.A. Osborne, et al. (2004). Effects of diet on urine com-
normal dogs and dogs with acute and chronic renal failure. Arm J Vet
position of cats with calcium oxalate urolithiasis. JAm Anim Hosp
Res 64: 1161-1166.
Assoc 40: 185-191.
Gilor, C., T.K. Graves, et al. (2006). Clinical aspects of natural infection
Lulich, J.P., C.A. Osborne, et al. (1992). Feline renal failure: questions,
with blastomycoses dermatitidis in acts: 8 cases (1991-2005). J Am
answers, questions. Compend Contin Edu Prac Vet 14: 127-152.
Vet Med Assoc 229: 96-99.
 MacEwen, E.G. and S.D. Siegel ( 1977). Hypercalcemia: a paraneoplas-
Grauer, G.F, M.A.H. Thrall, et al. ( 1987). Comparison of the effects of
tic disease. Vet Clir North Am Small Anim Prac 7: 187-194.
ethanol and 4-methylpyrzole on the pharmacokinetics and toxicity
Marquez, G.A., IS. Klausner, et al. ( 1995). Calcium oxalate urolithiasis
of ethylene glycol in the dog. Toxicol Lett 35: 307-314.
in a cat with a functional parathyroid adenocarcinoma. IAm Vet Med
Grzela, T., W. Chudzinski, et al. (2006). The calcium-sensing receptor
Assoc 206: 817-819.
and vitamin D receptor expression in tertiary hyperparathyroidism.
McClain, H.M., IA. Barsanti, et al. ( 1999). Hypercalcemia and calcium
Int I Mol Med 17: 779-783.
oxalate urolithiasis in cats: a report of fine cases. J Arm Anirm Hosp
Gunther, R., L.J. Felice, et al. (1988). Toxicity of a vitamin Ds rodenti-
Assoc 35: 297-301.
cide to dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 193: 21l-214.
Mealey, K.L., M.D. Willard, et al. (1999). Hypercalcermia associated
Hare, W.R., C.E. Dobbs, et al. (2000). Calcipotriene poisoning in dogs.
with granulomatous disease in a cat. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 215:
Vet Med 95: 770-778.
959-962.
Herbert, L.A., J. Lenmann Jr, et al. (1966). Studies of the mechanism
Mellanby, R.J., P. Mellor, et al. (2006). Hypercalcemia associated with
by which phosphate infusion lowers serum calcium concentration.
granulomatous lymphadenitis and elevated 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin
J Clin Invest 45: 1886-1894.
D concentration in a dog. I Small Amim Prac 47: 207-212.
Heyburn, P.J., P.L. Shelby, et al. ( 1980). Peritoneal dialysis in the man-
Meuten, D.J. (1984). Hypercalcemia. Vet Clir North Arm Small Anin
agement of severe hypercalcemia. Br Med I 280: 525-526.
Prac 14: 891-910.
Hostutler, R.A., D.J. Chew, et al. (2005). Uses and effectiveness of
Meuten, D.J., B.J. Cooper, et al. ( 1981). Hypercalcemia associated with
pamidronate disodium for treatment of dogs and cats with hyper-
[ a  s e n  p e 
calcemia. I Vet Irntern Med 19: 29-33.
sac. Vet Pathol18: 454-471.
Calcium disorders  
655
Meuten, D.J., G.J. Kociba, et al. ( 1983). Hypercalcemia in dogs with
Rosol, T.J. and C.C. Capen ( 1992). Biology of disease: mechanisms of
lymphosarcoma: biochemical, ultrastructural and histomorphome-
cancer-induced hypercalcemia. Lab Irvest 67: 680-702.
tric investigations. Lab Irvest 40: 553-562.
Rosol, T.J, D.J. Chew, et al. (1995). Pathophysiology of calcium
Midkiff, A.M., D.J. Chew, et al. (2000). Idiopathic hypercalcemia in
metabolism. Vet Clin Pathol 24: 49-63.
cats. I Vet Intern Med 14: 619-626.
Rosol, T.J., L.A. Nagode, et al. (1992). Parathyroid hormone (PTH)-
Moe, S.M. and S.M. Sprague (2008). Mineral bone disorders in chronic
related protein, PTH, and l,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in dogs
kidney disease. In: The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner and S.A.
Levine, 8th edition. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier,
1164.
pp. 1784-1813.
Rumbeiha, W.K., S.F. Fitzgerald, et al. (2000). Use of pamidronate
Montoli, A., G. Colussi, et al. (1992). Hypercalcemia in Addison's
disodium to reduce cholecalciferol-induced toxicosis in dogs. Am 
n i    d  on 
Vet Res 61: 9-13.
Med 232: 535-540.
Rumbeiha, W.K., J.M. Kruger, et al. (1999). Use of pamidronate to
Morony, S., K. Warmington, et al. (2005). The inhibition of RANKL
reverse vitamin D3-induced toxicosis in dogs. Am I Vet Res 60:
1092-1097.
compared with bisphosphonates in two models of humoral hyper-
 Ruopp, I.L. (2001). Primary hypoparathyroidism in a cat complicated
calcemia if malignancy. Endocrinology 146: 3235-3243.
 by suspect iatrogenic calcinosis cutis. I Amer Arirn Hosp Assoc 27:
Muls, E., R. Bouillon, et al. (1982). Etiology of hypercalcemia in a
370-373.
patient with Addison's disease. Calcif Tissue Int 34: 523-526.
Sands, J.M., FX. Flores, et al. (1998). Vasopressin-elicited water and
Nagode, L., D. Chew, et al. (1996). Benefits of calcitriol therapy and
 urea permeabilities are altered in IMCD in hypercalcemic rats. Am
serum phosphorus control in dogs and cats with chronic renal fail-
I Physiol 274: F978-F985.
ure: both are essential to prevent or suppress toxic hyperparathy-
Sands, J.M., M. Naruse, et al. (1997). Apical extracellular cal-
roidism. Vet Clirn North Am Small Anmim Prac 26: 1293-1330.
cium/polyvalent cation-sensing receptor regulates vasopressin-
Nejsum, L.N. (2005). The renal plumbing system: aquaporin water
elicited water permeability in rat kidney inner medulary collecting
channels. Cell Mol Life Sci 62: 1692-1706.
duct. I Clin Irvest 99: 1399- 1405.
Ong, S.C., R.J. Shalhoub, et al. ( 1974). Effect of furosemide on experi-
Savary, K.C.M., G.S. Price, et al. (2000). Hypercalcemia in cats: a
mental hypercalcemia in dogs. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 145: 227-233.
retrospective study of 71 cases (1991-1997). J Vet Intern Med 14:
Osborne, C.A., JS. Klausner, et al. (1979). Urinary tract infections:
184-189.
normal and abnormal host defense mechanisms. Vet Clin North Am
Schaer, M., P.E. Ginn, et al. (2001). Severe calcinosis cutis associated
Small Anim Prac 9: 587-609.
with treatment of hypoparathyroidism in a dog. I Arm Arim Hosp
Osborne, C.A., D.G. Low, et al. (1969). Reversible versus irreversible
Assoc 27: 364-369.
renal disease in the dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 155: 2062-2078.
 Schenck, P.A. and D.J. Chew (2002). Diagnostic discordance of total
Osborne, C.A. and J.B. Stevens ( 1973). Pseudohyperparathyroidism in 
calcium and adjusted total calcium in predicting ionized calcium
the Dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 162: 125-135.
concentration in cats with chronic renal failure and other diseases.
Parftt, A.M. (1997). The hyperparathyroidism ofchronic renal failure:
In: Proceedings of the 10th Congress of the International Society of
a disorder of growth. Kidney Int 52: 3-9.
Animal Clinical Biochemistry, Gainesville, FL.
Parfitt, A.M. and M. Kleerekoper ( 1980). Clinical disorders of calcium,
 Schenck, P.A. and D.J. Chew (2005). Prediction of serum ionized cal-
phosphorous and magnesium metabolism. In: Clirnical Disorders of
Fluid and Electrolyte Metabolism, edited by M.H. Maxwell and C.R.
An I Vet Res 66: 1330-1336.
Kleeman. New York: McGraw-Hill,p. 947-1151.
Schenck, P.A., D.J. Chew, et al. (2006). Disorders of calcium: hyper-
Parry, M.F and R. Wallach (1974). Ethylene glycol poisoning. Arm I
calcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base
Med 57: 143-150.
Disorders in Small Animal Practice, edited by S.P. Dibartola, 3rd
Pesillo, S.A., S.A. Khan, et al. (2002). Calcipotriene toxicosis in a dog
edition. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 122-194.
successfully treated with pamidronate disodium. J Vet Emerg Crit
Schenck, P.A., D.J. Chew, et al. (2004). Calcium metabolic hormones 
Care 12: 177-181.
in feline idiopathic hypercalcemia. I Vet Intern Med 18: 442.
Peterson, M.E., D.S. Greco, et al. ( 1989). Primary hypoadrenocorticism
Sekine, M. and H. Takami (1998). Combination of calcitonin and
in ten cats. I Vet Intern Med 3: 55-58.
Peterson, M.E., P.P. Kintzner, et al. (1996). Pretreatment clinical and
Orncol Rep 5: 197-199.
laboratory findings in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism: 225 cases
Sharma, O.P. (2000). Hypercalcemia in granulomatous disorders: a
(1979-1993). I Am Vet Med Assoc 208: 85-91.
clinical review. Curr Opin Pulm Med 6: 442-447.
Pollak, M.R., A.S.L. Yu, et al. (2008). Disorders of calcium, magnesium,
Smith, S.A., L.C. Freeman, et al. (2002). Hypercalcemia due to iatro-
and phosphate balance. In: The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner and
genic secondary hypoadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus in a cat.
 S.A. Levine, 8th edition. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier,
I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 38: 41-44.
pp. 588-611.
Spangler, W.L., et al. ( 1979). Vitamin-D intoxication and the patho-
Polzin, D.J., C.A. Osborne, et al. (2005). Chronic kidney disease. In:
 genesis of vitamin D nephropathy in the dog. Arm I Vet Res 40:
Textbookof Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited S.J. Ettinger and E.C.
73-83.
Feldman, 6th edition. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 1756-1785.
 Sutton, R.A.L. and J.H. Dirks (1986). Calcium and magnesium: renal
Polzin, D.J., S. Ross, et al. (2009). Calcitriol. In: Kirk's Current Therapy
handling and disorders of metabolism. In: The Kidney, edited by
XIV, edited by J.D. Bonagura and D.C. Twedt. St. Louis: Saunders 
B.M. Brenner and EC. Rector, 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Elsevier, pp. 892-895.
Saunders, pp. 551-618.
Procino, G., M. Carmosino, et al. (2004). Extracellular calcium antag-
Tanaka, Y. and H.F. DeLuca ( 1973). The control of25-hydroxyvitatmin
D metabolism by inorganic phosphorous. Arch Biochem Biophys 154:
cells. Kidney Int 66: 2245-2255.
566-574.
656 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
Thrall, M.A., G.F. Grauer, et al. (1984). Clinicipathologic findings in 
Weir, E.C., R.W. Norrdin, et al. (19ssb). Humoral hypercalcemia
dogs and cats with ethylene glycol intoxication. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
184: 37-41.
608.
Torregrosa, J.-V., A. Moreno, et al. (2003). Usefulness of pamidronate
Weller, R.E. and W.E. Hoffman (1992). Renal function in dogs with 
lymphosarcoma and associated hypercalcemia. J Small Arirm Prac
hemodialysis. Kidney Int 63(suppl. 85): S88-S90.
33: 61-66.
Tuma, S.N. and L.E. Mallette ( 1983). Hypercalcemia after nephrectomy
Weller, R.E., C.A. Holmberg, et al. (1982). Canine lymphosarcoma
in the dog: role of the kidneys and parathyroid glands. J Lab Clin
and hypercalcemia: clinical laboratory and pathologic evaluation of
Med 102: 213-219.
twenty-four cases. I Small Anirm Prac 23: 649-658.
Uehlinger, P, T. Glaus, et al. (1998). Hypercalcemia
in
Wellington, K. and K.L. Goa (2003). Zoledronic acid: a review of its
dogs—retrospective study of 46 cases. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 140:
use in the management of bone metastases and hypercalcemia of
188-197.
malignancy. Drugs 63: 417-437.
Urena, P. and J.M. Frazao (2003). Calcimimetic agents: review and
Willard, M.D., W.D.Schall, et al. ( 1982).Canine hypoadrenocorticism:
perspectives. Kidney Int 63(suppl. 85): S91-S96.
report of 37 cases and review of 39 previously reported cases. J Am
Vaden, S.L., I. Levine, et al. (1997). A retrospective case-control of
Vet Med Assoc 180: 59-62.
acute renal failure in 99 dogs. I Vet Intern Med 11: 58-64.
Winer, K.K., C.W. Ko, et al. (2003). Long-term treatment of
Walser, M., B.H.B. Robinson, et al. (1963). The hypercalcemia of
hypoparathyroidism: a randomized controlled study comparing
adrenal insufficiency. I Clin Irvest 42: 456-465.
 parathyroid hormone-{l-34) versus calcitriol and calcium. I Cli
Wang, W., C. Li, et al. (2002). AQP3, p-AQP2, and AQP2 expression
Endocrinol Metab 88: 4214-4220.
is reduced in polyuric rats with hypercalcemia: prevention with
Wisneski, L.A. ( 1990). Salmon calcitonin in the acute managerment of
CAMP-PDE inhibitors. Am J Renal Physiol 283: F1313-F1325.
hypercalcemia. Calcif Tissue Int 46: S26-S30.
Wang, W., C. Li, etal. (2004). Reduced expression of renal Na+ trans-
Worwag, S. and C.E. Langston (2008). Acute intrinsic renal failure in
porters in rats with PTH-induced hypercalcemia. Arm I Renal Physiol
cats: 32 cases (1997-2004). I Atmn Vet Med Assoc 232: 728-732.
286: F534-F545.
Wuthrich, R.P., D. Martin, et al. (2007). The role of calcimimetics
Weir, E.C., W.J. Burtis, et al. {1988a). Isolation of 16,000-Dalton
in the treatment if hyperthyroidism. Euro I Clin Invest 37: 915-
 parathyroid hormone-like proteins from two animal tumors caus-
922.
ing humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy. Endocrinology 123:
Yu, J., V. Papavasiliou, et al. ( 1995). Vitamin D analogs: new therapeutic
2744-2751.
agents for the treatment of squamous cancer and its associated
Weir, E.C., R.W. Norrdin, et al. ( 1986). Primary hyperparathyroidism
hypercalcemia. Anticarcer Drugs 6: 101-108.
in a dog: biochemical, bone histomorphometric, and pathologic
 Zawada, E.T., et al. (1986). Systemic and renal vascular responses to
findings. IAm Vet Assoc 189: 1471-1474.
dietary calcium and vitamin D. Hypertension 8: 975-982.
Phosphorus disorders
David. J Polzin
 Phosphorus is critical for many physiologic functions,
The freely circulating inorganic fraction is the portion
including skeletal development, mineral metabolism, cell
measured and reported by clinical laboratories. In the
membrane phospholipid content and function, cell sig-
ECF at a pH of 7.4, phosphate anions occur primarily in
naling, platelet aggregation, and energy transfer through
two forms: the divalent or alkaline form, monohydrogen
mitochondrial function (Moe and Sprague 2008). Phos-
phosphate (HPO42-), and the monovalent or acid form,
phate also plays an important role as a urinary buffer,
dihydrogen phosphate (H2PO4-). At blood pH 7.4, the
facilitating excretion of hydrogen ions and as an intra-
ratio of [HPO42-]:[H2PO4-] is 4:1, yielding an average
cellular buffer minimizing shifts in internal acid-base
valence of 1.8 for phosphate in the ECF. The balance
status.
between the various forms of orthophosphate (an inor-
  un s  u se snrss
  q  si (d go  s
Approximately 85% of body phosphorus occurs in the
set of equilibrium equations:
form of hydroxyapatite [(Ca)o(PO4)(OH)2] in bone,
HsPO4 >H2PO↓-+H+ <> HPO²-+H+ <> PO3++ H+
while 14% is found intracellularly in soft tissues and
pKa 2.0
pKa 6.8
pKa 12.4
only 1% is contained within extracellular fluid (ECF)
(Costanzo 2006; DiBartola and Willard 2006; Moe and
The normal ranges for serum phosphorus concentra-
Sprague 2008). Phosphate is the principal intracellular
tion are 2.5-5.5. mg/dL in dogs and 2.5-6.0 mg/dL in
anion where it occurs largely in organic forms, but it
cats (Bates 2008). Serum phosphorus concentrations are
can be readily converted to the inorganic form. Within
slightly greater than plasma concentrations due to release
cells it occurs with lipids (phospholipids), as part of the
of phosphorus from platelets and other cells during clot-
lipid bilayer of the cell membrane, with nucleic acids in
ting (Schropp and Kovacic 2007). Values are typically
DNA and RNA, as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
 greater in young animals compared to adults and may be
diphosphate (ADP), providing the energy currency of
influenced by dietary phosphorus intake. The effect of age
cells, and as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP),
is less pronounced in cats compared to dogs ( Jacobs et al.
an intracellular second messenger for many polypeptide
 2000). Serum levels of phosphorus are not as tightly reg-
hormones. Translocation into and out of ECF from the
ulated as serum calcium, and they may vary by as much
intracellular fluid (ICF) space occurs and can rapidly
as 50% over the course of a day. Because dietary intake
 affect ECF concentrations.
 of phosphorus is the principal cause for the variation in
In the ECF, 70% of phosphorous is organic (largely
serum phosphorus concentrations, serum phosphorus
phosphate contained within phospholipids) and 30% is
should be measured after at least a 12-hour fast.
in the inorganic form. Approximately 15% of the inor-
 ganic portion is protein-bound with the remaining 85%
either complexed to sodium, calcium, or magnesium or
Phosphorus balance
freely circulating as various forms of phosphate anions.
Three organs are involved in phosphorus homeostasis:
the intestines, the kidneys, and the skeleton. The principal
 hormones responsible for modulating serum phosphorus
Nephrology and Urology of Srmall Atirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
roid hormone (PTH). However, more recently, there is
657
658 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
evidence for a role of circulating factors known as phos-
phorus intake is usually balanced by renal excretion of an
phatonins in regulation of serum phosphorus concen-
equal amount of phosphorus in urine. PTH and FGF23
trations (Moe and Sprague 2008). Phosphatonins are
are the major hormonal regulators of renal phosphorus
hormones that regulate phosphorus excretion. Three
excretion, while dietary intake of phosphorus is the major
phosphatonins  identified  include  secreted  frizzled-
nonhormonal regulator.
related protein 4 (FRP4), matrix extracellular phospho-
Phosphate not bound to protein (about 85%) is
glycoprotein, and fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23).
freely filtered across glomerular capillaries. Approxi-
An important role has recently been recognized for
mately 80-90% of filtered phosphorus is then reabsorbed,
FGF23 in chronic kidney disease (CKD).
largely by the proximal renal tubules, which is the pri-
Daily phosphorus balance is primarily determined
 mary site of regulated renal reabsorption of phosphorus.
by the relationship between dietary intake and renal
Additional phosphate reabsorption may occur in the dis-
excretion of phosphorus. Because phosphorus is pri-
tal tubules. Regulated phosphorus reabsorption involves
marily located in the ICF space, plasma levels may
the sodium-phosphate cotransporter Npt2b (Moe and
poorly reflect total body phosphorus. For example, in 
Sprague 2008). The Npt2b rests in the terminal web and
CKD, total body phosphorus retention precedes devel-
can be rapidly moved to the brush border in the luminal
opment of hyperphosphatemia. Principal factors influ-
 membrane of the proximal tubule cells in the presence
encing plasma levels include dietary intake, regulatory
of acute or chronic phosphorus depletion. The cotrans-
-      s
 porter is withdrawn from the brush border and catab-
23), PTH, and 1,25(OH)2 cholecalciferol, ECF volume,
 sd  u o n ssd e e po
and renal function (Schropp and Kovacic 2007; Moe
 PTH. This transport process is saturable and exhibits a
and Sprague 2008). Phosphorus may enter or exit the
transport maximum (Tm). Factors increasing phospho-
exchangeable pool by movement into and out of the skele-
 rus excretion are primarily increased plasma phosphorus
tal pool of phosphorus under the influence of PTH and
and PTH. PTH regulates reabsorption of phosphorus
1,25(OH)2 cholecalciferol.
in the proximal tubules by inhibiting its cotransporter,
thereby lowering the Tm for phosphate reabsorption.
Intestinal handling of phosphorus
Thus, PTH is phosphaturic; however, hypophosphaturia
 that occurs with phosphorus depletion will override the
Phosphorus is a common constituent of canine and feline
ands pue ao) Hd Aq panpun euneudsoqdadau
diets, originating primarily from meat, poulry, fish, and
2008).
bone as well as from supplements added to diets. Typi-
 cal canine and feline maintenance diets contain approxi-
Excretion of 10-15% of the total filtered load is a high
 percentage when compared to other electrolytes such
mately 0.8-1.6% phosphorus on a dry matter basis with
as sodium, chloride, or bicarbonate. However, this rela-
calcium to phosphorus ratio of 1.2 to 2:1. This reflects a
tively large fractional excretion is physiologically impor-
daily intake ranging from 0.5 to 3.0 g of phosphorus per 
 tant because unreabsorbed phosphate serves as a urinary
day (DiBartola and Willard 2006).
buffer for hydrogen ion (Moe and Sprague 2008).
Intestinal absorption of phosphorus is largely pas-
sive, although a small portion is actively regulated. Pas-
sive phosphorus-concentration-dependent  absorption
Hyperphosphatemia
occurs in the jejunum and ileum. Duodenal absorp-
Hyperphosphatemia is defined as a serum phosphorus
tion is regulated by 1,25(OH)2 cholecalciferol via a
concentration exceeding 5.5 mg/dL in adult dogs or
sodium-dependent active transport mechanism. Intesti-
6.0 mg/dL in adult cats.l Small to moderate increases
nal adsorption of phosphorus is hindered by complex
above these values may be normal in puppies (up to
formation within the lumen of the intestine; calcium,
10.8 mg/dL in puppies) and kittens less than 1 year of age
aluminum, and lanthanum will form insoluble com-
(DiBartola and Willard 2006). Because red blood cells
plexes with phosphorus that will hinder its absorption.
contain abundant amounts of phosphorus, hemolysis
In patients with reduced kidney function, phosphorus
should be excluded as a possible cause for hyperphos-
absorption continues and complexing of intestinal phos-
 phorus to prevent absorption is used to advantage to limit 
by impaired renal excretion, increased phosphorus load,
 hyperphosphatemia in these patients.
or a shift of phosphorus from tissues into the ECF.
Hyperphosphatemia itself does not appear to cause
Renal handling of phosphorus
any clinical signs. The clinical consequences of hyper-
 The kidneys are largely responsible for day-to-day regu-
lation of serum phosphorus concentration. Daily phos-
 associated hypocalcemia (tetany, seizures, and decreased
Phosphorus disorders 659
cardiac contractility). Generally, as serum phospho-
tations is exceeded, typically when GFR is reduced to
rus increases, serum calcium declines. In this setting.
about 20% or less of normal. In contrast, there is inad-
hypocalcemia results from multiple causes including
equate time for these adaptations to completely develop
 decreased 1,25(OH)2 cholecalciferol synthesis leading to
in acute renal failure (ARF). As a consequence, hyper-
decreased intestinal absorption of calcium, and deposi-
phosphatemia occurs earlier in the course of ARF, and
tion of calcium phosphorus complexes in tissues. Tissues
the magnitude of hyperphosphatemia is greater relative
most likely to be mineralized include previously injured
to reduction in GFR. Urinary obstruction and uroab-
tissues and proton-secreting organs such as the stomach
domen are also associated with hyperphosphatemia due
and kidneys. Ectopic calcification of tissues is most likely
to impaired or ineffective renal excretion.
to occur when the calcium x phosphorus product (both
Several endocrine disorders may also be associated
expressed as mg/dL) exceeds 55 (Moe and Sprague 2008).
with hyperphosphatemia due to reduced phosphorus
Hyperphosphatemia in patients with CKD facilitates sec-
excretion. Hyperphosphatemia develops in hypoparathy-
 ondary hyperparathyroidism and renal osteodystrophy
roidism, but the associated hypocalcemia is of greater
(Chapter 48).
clinical importance. Since PTH promotes renal phospho-
rus excretion, lack of PTH (or resistance to its action)
Causes of hyperphosphatemia
results in hyperphosphatemia. Thyroxine and growth
hormone increase renal tubular reabsorption of phos-
The principal causes for hyperphosphatemia are listed in
phorus. Hyperphosphatemia was observed in 21% of
Table 65.1. By far, the most common cause for hyperphos-
131 hyperthyroid cats in one study, and mild hyperphos-
phatemia is impaired renal excretion of phosphorus in
phatemia has been reported in some acromegalic cats and
patients with impaired kidney function. When glomeru-
 dogs (Peterson et al. 1983; Peterson 1988; DiBartola and
lar filtration rate (GFR) declines, positive phosphorus
Willard 2006).
balance ensues as a consequence of impaired renal phos-
Excess gastrointestinal intake of phosphorus in any
phorus excretion. However, in CKD, the initial decline
form may promote hyperphosphatemia (Table 64.1).
in GFR and phosphorus retention are associated with
Excess vitamin D promotes hyperphosphatemia by
release of FGF-23 and suppression of 1,25(OH)2 chole-
increasing intestinal absorption of phosphorus as well
calciferol synthesis and later PTH release, which all pro-
as calcium. In addition, administration of phosphorus-
-dosqean enqni reuau hunpan q enieudsoqd aio
containing enemas should be avoided in patients with
tion of phosphorus (Gutierrez et al. 2005). Because of
reduced kidney function because of the risk of absorp-
 tion of large quantities of phosphorus from the gut.
phosphatemia does not occur until later in the course
During chemotherapy of rapidly lysing cells, such as
 of CKD when the capacity of these compensatory adap-
those of lymphomas, a marked increase in phosphorus
release from cells can exceed renal excretory capacity.
Table 65.1 Principal causes of hyperphosphatemia
The ensuing hyperphosphatemia may be accompanied
by hyperkalemia and can lead to hypocalcemia. In addi-
Reduced renal phosphorus excretion
tion, phosphorus can also be released from cells during
Acute kidney failure
acute rhabdomyolysis, crush injuries, or tissue infarction.
Chronic kidney disease
Uroabdomen
Concurrent impairment of renal function can markedly
enhance the magnitude of hyperphosphatemia resulting
Urinary obstruction
Hypoparathyroidism
from any of these causes.
Acromegaly
Hyperthyroidism
Treatment of hyperphosphatemia
Exogenous intake of phosphorus
Intravenous administration of phosphorus-containing
Treatment of hyperphosphatemia should be directed at
solutions
the underlying cause. Renal function should be optimized
Ingestion of phosphate enemas
by correcting any prerenal or postrenal conditions. If
Vitamin D intoxication (cholecalciferol rodenticides,
renal function is adequate, phosphaturia should be pro-
calcipotriene)
Cell injury
moted. ECF volume expansion with saline reduces renal
tubular phosphorus reabsorption; increasing urine pH
Tumor cell lysis
with sodium bicarbonate may also promote this effect.
Tissue trauma
Rhabdomyolysis
Reducing dietary phosphorus and providing intestinal
Hemolysis
phosphate binders are useful in reducing hyperphos-
 phatemia in patients with CKD, although the reductions
660 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
in serum phosphorus concentrations occur gradually
Table 65.2 Principal causes of hypophosphatemia
over weeks to months. In patients with severe impairment
of kidney function, dialysis is the most effective means
Enhanced renal excretion of phosphorus
of acutely reducing hyperphosphatemia. Management of
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Renal tubular disorders (e.g., Fanconi syndrome)
hyperphosphatemia in patients with CKD is discussed in
Eclampsia
Chapter 48.
Translocation of phosphorus into cells
Treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis
Hypophosphatemia
Insulin administration
Total parenteral nutrition 
Since only about 1% of body phosphorus is in the ECF,
Refeeding
hypophosphatemia may or may not reflect a decrease in
Hypothermia
total body phosphorus content. In general, the adverse
Respiratory alkalosis
effects of hypophosphatemia are more severe when
Decreased intake of phosphorus
total body phosphate depletion accompanies hypophos-
Dietary deficiency
Gastrointestinal disorders
phatemia. Clinical effects ofhypophosphatemia are most
apparent in the hematologic, neuromuscular, cardio-
Vitamin D deficiency
 Phosphate binders
vascular, and skeletal systems (DiBartola and Willard
2006; Moe and Sprague 2008). When serum phospho-
rus declines to about 1.0 mg/dL or less, hemolysis may
result, most likely the consequence of reduced red blood
with mesenchymal tumors that produce FGF-23 or FRP4
cell ATP levels promoting increased erythrocyte fragility.
(Moe and Sprague 2008).
This effect is most commonly seen during therapy for
The origin of hypophosphatemia in patients with dia-
diabetic ketoacidosis. In addition, platelets may have
reduced function and thrombocytopenia may occur.
ticularly those with ketoacidosis, may be phosphorus
Neuromuscular signs may include weakness and pain
depleted as a consequence of increased urinary losses
associated with rhabdomyolysis and anorexia, nausea,
and inadequate dietary intake. In this setting, insulin
or vomiting due to intestinal ileus. Respiratory paral-
administration, which promotes movement of phospho-
rus from the ECF intracellularly, may be associated with
 phatemic humans. Metabolic encephalopathy character-
marked hypophosphatemia. Refeeding and total par-
ized by coma, seizure, confusion, and irritability may also
enteral nutrition after poor intake or starvation may stim-
develop. A reversible impairment of cardiac contractil-
ulate tissue growth with translocation of phosphorus into
ity may occur. Skeletal demineralization may develop as
cells. Akalosis, particularly prolonged respiratory alkalo-
a consequence of long-term derangements in PTH and
sis, can promote intracellular shift of phosphorus because
calcitriol levels.
of the associated intracellular acidosis.
Hypophosphatemia may also result from decreased
Causes of hypophosphatemia
phosphorus intake or impaired phosphorus absorption
(malabsorption, phosphate binders). In addition, vita-
Hypophosphatemia may result from increased urinary
min D deficiency may impair phosphorus absorption
loss, decreased intake or translocation of phosphorus
and release from bone, leading to hypophosphatemia.
from the ECF into cells (Table 65.2). Increased urinary
loss of phosphorus most often occurs in association with
Treatment of hypophosphatemia
increased levels of PTH or renal tubular defects that
impair phosphorus reabsorption. Primary hyperparathy-
Treatment of hypophosphatemia is best directed at cor-
roidism is associated with a trend toward reduced serum
recting the underlying disorder or nutritional deficiency.
phosphate concentrations, although overt hypophos-
When hypophosphatemia can be anticipated, monitoring
phatemia is inconsistently present. Clinical effects of
and prophylactic administration of supplemental phos-
hyperparathyroidism are primarily attributable to hyper-
phorus should be considered. Development of severe
calcemia, not hypophosphatemia. In Fanconi syndrome,
hypophosphatemia usually indicates underlying total
hypophosphatemia results from defective renal tubular
body phosphorus depletion.
phosphorus reabsorption. In eclampsia, hypocalcemia
stimulates PTH release, thereby promoting phosphaturia
 patients with clinical signs and those likely to develop
and hypophosphatemia. In humans, hypophosphatemia
clinical consequences (e.g-, hypophosphatemia-associa-
due to phosphaturia has been reported in association
ted hemolysis with therapy for diabetic ketoacidosis).
Phosphorus disorders  661
In such individuals, intravenous administration of
rus supplementation in the form of skim or low-fat milk
phosphorus is usually indicated. However, intravenous
or phosphorus-containing buffered laxative.
phosphorus administration must be used with caution
because it may promote hypocalcemia, tetany, renal
Endnote
failure, or metastatic calcification, especially when
the calcium phosphorus product exceeds 55 mg2/dL2
1. Normal ranges for serum phosphorus vary from laboratory to
(DiBartole and Willard 2006; Moe and Sprague 2008).
laboratory.
Because the reduction in urinary phosphorus excretion
 that develops in hypophosphatemia may persist during
References
therapy,
hyperphosphatemia
may
developduring
replacement therapy. To minimize these potential com-
Bates, JA. (2008). Phosphorus: as quick reference. Vet Clin Northt
plications, phosphorus should be administered in small
America, SmallAmimal38: 471-475.
Costanzo, L.S. (2006). Physiology. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, Pp.
amounts (0.01-0.06 mmol/kg/h) by constant rate infu-
282-283.
sion over hours to days with repeated monitoring of the
DiBartola, S.P. and M.D. Willard (2006). Disorders of phospho-
patient's response and serum phosphorus concentrations
(every 6-8 hours). Because administered phosphorus
trolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, edited by
rapidly translocates into the intracellular space, predict-
S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, pp. 195-209.
Gutierrez, O., T. Isakova, et al. (2005). Fibroblast growth factor-23
ing the total dose requirement for phosphorus is not
reliable. The goal is to raise serum phosphorus concentra-
in chronic kidney disease. I Am Soc Nephrol 16: 2205-2215.
tion to 2.0 mg/dL or greater. Depending on the patient's
Jacobs, R.M., JH. Lumsden et al. (2000). Canine and feline refer-
electrolyte needs, phosphorus may be administered as
ence values. In: Current Veterinary Therapy XIlI, Edited by J.D.
sodium phosphate or potassium phosphate. In cats under
Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, p. 1213.
Moe, S.M. and S.M. Sprague (2008). Mineral bone disorders in chronic
treatment  for diabetic ketoacidosis with hypophos-
kidney disease. In: The Kidney, edited by B.M. Brenner, 8th edition.
phatemia and hypokalemia, a common practice is to
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1784-1813.
manage developing hypophosphatemia by providing
Peterson, M.E. (1988). Endocrine disorders in cats: four emerging
50-75% of the patient's potassium needs as potassium
diseases. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 19: 1353-1362.
chloride with the remainder as potassium phosphate.
Peterson, M.E., PP Kintzer, et al. (1983). Feline hyperthyroidism:
pretreatment clinical and laboratory evaluation of 13l cases. I Am
If the serum phosphorus is greater than 1.5 mg/dL and
Vet Med Assoc 183: 103-110.
unlikely to decline further, treatment is usually unneces-
Schropp, D.M. and J. Kovacic (2007). Phosphorus and phosphate
sary. However, if the patient is likely to be whole body
metabolism in veterinary patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 17:
phosphorus depleted, consider providing oral phospho-
127-134.
66
Metabolic acid-base disorders
Marie E. Kerl
Metabolic acid-base abnormalities occur commonly in
Carbon dioxide is a volatile acid that can combine
small animal patients presented for a wide variety of
with water in the presence of carbonic anhydrase to form
conditions. Determining the appropriate therapeutic
carbonic acid (HzCOs). Although carbonic acid can be
response depends upon the clinician's ability to cor-
formed in the absence of carbonic anhydrase, the reaction
rectly diagnose the acid-base disorder and to under-
proceeds exceedingly slowly (DiBartola 2006a). Carbonic
 stand appropriate treatment. This chapter will review
anhydrase is present in abundance in the body, especially
normal blood gas physiology as well as the pathophysi-
in red blood cells and renal tubular cells. Carbon dioxide
ology and diagnosis of blood gas disorders, with a focus
is routinely formed at consistent amounts during normal
on metabolic blood gas abnormalities.
carbohydrate and fat metabolism and is excreted via the
Acid-base disorders are caused by changes in hydrogen
lungs during alveolar ventilation. The two sources of acid
ion concentration in circulation. The main organ systems
(H+ and CO2) are interrelated, as is shown in the carbonic
that control the acid-base balance include the liver, lungs,
acid equation:
and kidneys. Hydrogen ions are nonvolatile acids pro-
duced by normal metabolism and are renally excreted.
H+ +HCO < - > H2CO < - > H2O +CO2
An acid consists of a hydrogen ion (H+) donor and a
Any cell containing carbonic anhydrase is capable of this
 d a o d  se m (-) 
reaction, and the chemical reaction can shift either direc-
solution, acids dissociate into H+ (acid) and A-. Acidosis
tion, depending on the availability of substrate (Rose 
occurs with a gain of hydrogen ions in solution, whereas
alkalosis occurs with a reduction of hydrogen ions Rose
1994a, Rose 1994d).
1994a; DiBartola 2006a). Acid production comes from
By definition, pH is the negative log of the hydro-
gen ion concentration. An acid gain results in a decrease
three principal sources on a daily basis: production of
 in blood pH (acidemia), whereas an acid loss results in
carbon dioxide (CO2), production of organic acids such
an increased pH (alkalemia). Because of the logarith-
as lactate and ketones, and production of inorganic
 acids (sulfate and phosphate), which are bio-products
mic nature of the equation, larger changes in H+ con-
centration are required to decrease the pH by similar
 of dietary protein and amino acid metabolism (Morris
units than are required to increase the pH in alkalosis
and Low 2008). The liver is responsible for acid pro-
duction through carbohydrate and lipid oxidation (CO2
(Morris and Low 2008). Acid can be gained systemically
from reduced renal elimination of a metabolically pro-
produced), dietary protein and amino acid metabolism
duced compound, or from ingestion of an exogenous
producing sulfate, phosphate, and ammonia, and pro-
acid source. Changes in CO2 influence the H+ concen-
duction of lactate and ketones (Morris and Low 2008). A
small amount of base is also lost each day in the gastroin-
tration, as evidenced by the carbonic acid equation. As
CO2 is eliminated by increasing alveolar ventilation, car-
testinal tract, which effectively increases the acid load in
bonic acid dissociates to form more CO2, and H+ and
the body (DiBartola 2006a).
bicarbonate (HCOs-) combine in turn to form more
carbonic acid. This effectively lowers the H+ concen-
tration and increases pH. Conversely, as CO2 increases
Nephrology and Urology of Small Arrirmais. Edited by Joe Bartges and
from ventilation impairment, pH decreases. Acid-base
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
disorders that are caused primarily by changes in alveolar
662
Metabolic acid-base disorders  
663
ventilation include primary respiratory acidosis and res-
malities involves inspection of the pH, HCO3, and
piratory alkalosis. Discussion of primary respiratory
CO2 values of a blood gas analysis as they are related
acid-base disorders is beyond the scope of this chap-
via the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation (pH = 6.1 x
ter. The reader is referred to several excellent references
log {HCO3-/0.03PCO2}) and supplementing with cal-
on this subject (Rose 1994e, Rose 1994f; Johnson and
culation of the anion gap to further characterize
Autran de Morias 2006).
metabolic acidosis (Rose 1994a; Morris and Low 2008).
 Buffers act to bind H+ to prevent large fluctuations
Another model, the physiochemical approach, (Stew-
 in pH. A variety of buffer systems exist in the body,
including nonbicarbonate buffers (proteins and phos-
electroneutrality, conservation of mass, and dissocia-
phates) and HCO3, which is the primary extracellular
tion of electrolytes to better quantify the source of an
buffer. Bicarbonate is an effective buffer because it exists
acid-base disturbance and identify the causative mech-
in relatively large concentrations compared with other
anisms (Stewart 1981). This approach relies on deter-
buffers, and it participates in the carbonic acid equation
mining three factors: the strong ion difference (sodium,
to produce CO2 gas, which can be eliminated through
potassium, calcium, magnesium, chloride, and lactate),
ventilation. The HCO3- buffer system, therefore, is con-
the PCO2, and total weak acid concentration (albumin,
sidered an open system that can continue to buffer as
phosphates) (Stewart 1981). Since HCO3- is a depen-
long as the respiratory system is functional. In disease
dent variable, it is not considered in calculations of this
states causing HCO3 - to be lost excessively from the uri-
method. The reader is referred to several excellent ref-
 nary or gastrointestinal system, CO2 and HzO combine
erences for further explanation of this method of calcu-
 to form carbonic acid, which dissociates to increase H+
lating acid-base abnormalities (de Morias 2006; Kellum
and cause acidemia (Rose 1994d). Under normal func-
and Kellum 2007).
tion, the kidneys provide a consistent source of bicar-
According to the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation,
bonate through reabsorption of filtered bicarbonate and
pH can be characterized by changes in HCO- and
regeneration of bicarbonate in the renal tubular cells.
 partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2). Because a
The proximal tubule reabsorbs 90-95% of the filtered
predictable change in HCO3— occurs with gain or loss
bicarbonate load, and the remaining tubular segments
of H+ ions, HCO— can be used to correctly identify
reabsorb the remaining 10-15% (DiBartola 2006b). Acid
acid-base abnormalities arising from metabolic disor-
that is gained on a daily basis through normal metabolic
ders. In metabolic acidosis, an H+ increase shifts the
function is renally excreted through several mechanisms.
carbonic acid equation to result in a decrease in HCO3 ;
Filtered H+ ions combine with bicarbonate in the tubules
 in metabolic alkalosis, an H+ decrease has the opposite
to become HzO and CO2 via the carbonic acid equation.
effect on HCO-. This equation can also be used to pre-
The CO2 produced by this mechanism is absorbed across
 dict how compensatory mechanisms engage to lessen the
the luminal membrane and participates in the carbonic
    e e   
acid equation intracellularly to produce HCO3, which
 develops, the respiratory system is stimulated to increase
is then absorbed at the basolateral membrane. Hydrogen
the respiratory rate to eliminate CO2 from the lungs and
is also excreted via titration with filtered sodium phos-
create respiratory alkalosis. Likewise, with a primary res-
phate in exchange for sodium, or through production of
piratory disorder, the opposite metabolic disorder is gen-
ammonium ions in the tubular lumen utilizing ammo-
erated. The respiratory system provides rapid compen-
nia from tubular excretion, filtration, or local produc-
sation, changing within minutes of onset of a metabolic
tion from glutamate metabolism within the tubular cells.
disorder. Metabolic compensation occurs more slowly,
All of these mechanisms result in tubular cell produc-
becoming maximally effective within days. With either
tion of bicarbonate, which is then absorbed via the renal
 system, compensatory mechanisms should slow down as
interstitium. Tubular cell HCO3- reabsorption depends
the pH approaches a normal range, and compensation
upon appropriate concentrations of sodium and chlo-
should never completely normalize the pH (DiBartola
 ride ions, which participate in ion exchange to maintain
2006a).
electroneutrality, and a functional sodium-potassium
Base excess, which is expressed in milliequivalents per
ATPase pump to sustain an appropriate electrochemi-
liter (mEq/L), is the amount of base above or below the
cal gradient within the cels. The deficiency of any of
 normal buffer base, a value calculated by taking into
these ions can perpetuate an acid-base disorder (DiBar-
tola 2006a).
acute changes in PCO2. The general rule of thumb is that
Various models have been developed to diagnose
the HCO3 — concentration rises about 1-2 mEq/L for each
acid-base abnormalities and to determine contribut-
acute 10 mmHg increase in PaCO2 above 40 mmHg to
ing factors. A traditional approach to acid-base abnor-
a maximum increase of 4 mEq/L and that the HCO3
664 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
concentration falls 1-2 mEq for each acute 10 mmHg
2003a; Elliott et al. 2003b; Lee and Drobatz 2003; de
decrease in PaCO2 below 40, to a maximum decrease of
Morais et al. 2008). Tissue hypoxia causes an increased
6 mEq/L (Malley 1990). Some authors refer to a negative
AG metabolic acidosis from lactic acidosis; however, there
base excess as a base deficit.
are likely other anions produced as well. In people and
 By convention, a simple acid-base disorder is limited
animals with various causes of AG metabolic acidosis, a
 to the primary disorder and the appropriate compen-
number of Kreb's cycle intermediaries have been identi-
satory response. A mixed disorder is one in which at least
fied, which include isocitrate, succinate, a-ketoglutarate,
two separate abnormalities occur simultaneously. The
and malate, as well as D-lactate, which is not measured
reader is referred to Chapter 67 for a discussion of mixed
on handheld lactate monitors (Forni et al. 2006). There
acid-base disorders. Normal values at sea level for venous
appears to be prognostic significance of elevations in
blood gas interpretation are pH, 7.35-7.45; PCO2, 40-45
some of these unmeasured anions for people affected
mmHg and HCO3, 19-24 mEq/L. Base excess normally
       
should be -5-5 mEq/L (Kerl 2005a). An animal with
Lactate measurement has become commonly available
metabolic acidosis has a pH below normal and a HCO3
 in veterinary practice through the use of handheld lac-
below normal, while an animal with metabolic alkalosis
tate monitors, which measure L-lactate ( Karagiannis et al.
has a pH above normal and an elevated HCO3-.
2006). Older classification schemes identified lactic aci-
Metabolic acidosis results from the failure of normal
dosis as being associated either with diseases character-
systems, which compensate for acid-base abnormalities,
ized by impaired tissue oxygen delivery or with diseases
 Occurring either through acid gain or failure of bicarbon-
not causing tissue hypoxia; however, even in hypoxic dis-
ate buffering. The quantity of acid can increase from a
eases, lactate concentrations are most likely elevated from
gain of H+ through ingestion of an acid into the body,
other causes (de Morais et al. 2008). If the source of pro-
increased production of an endogenous acid, or failure to
 duction of lactic acid resolves with appropriate resusci-
eliminate an acid load by the renal tubular cells. Metabolic
tative therapy, the lactate will be metabolized into bicar-
acidosis can also be caused by a loss of HCO- buffer-
bonate and metabolic acidosis will resolve (Karagiannis
ing ability. Differentiating these two causes of metabolic
et al. 2006). If the underlying disease cannot be resolved
acidosis is important for both diagnosis of the under-
and the lactic acidosis persists, the prognosis is poor (de
lying disorder and for determining correct therapeutic
Morais et al. 2008). D-lactic acidosis has been identified
intervention.
in certain animals with congenital or acquired metabolic
Dissociation of acid into the H+ ion and the corre-
defects that cause failure of normal lactate metabolism
sponding anion occurs in circulation. When acid accu-
by mitochondrial oxidative function (Packer et al. 2005;
mulates, HCO- combines with H+ to buffer the acid
Kelmer et al. 2007). These metabolic defects result in
load, while the anion remains in solution. Because elec-
a severe AG acidosis. Handheld lactate monitors would
  s    s
not identify the lactate in these animals since they only
following acid dissociation, some other circulating anion
measure L-lactate (Karagiannis et al. 2006).
  si ()    s
Metabolic acidosis characterized by a normal AG is
tem that is usefulin the classification of disorders causing
caused by loss of bicarbonate buffers or a failure to
metabolic acidosis. AG represents the difference between
excrete H+ ions, with a corresponding increase in chlo-
the four cations and anions commonly measured on a
ride to maintain electroneutrality (Kerl 2005a). This is
serum biochemical profle. The equation is stated:
often referred to as a hyperchloremic metabolic acido-
sis; however, that name can be somewhat misleading
AG = (Na+ + K+) - (Cl-+ HCO)
since hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis can sometimes
Although ranges for AG can vary somewhat based
be identified in the face of serum chloride that is within
upon the reference ranges of electrolytes for various lab-
a laboratory reference range (DiBartola 2006b). Evalu-
oratories, a reference value of 16 ± 4 is typical (Kerl
ating the proportion of sodium to chloride can be help-
2005a). When metabolic acidosis exists with an increased
ful to identify an animal with hyperchloremic metabolic
AG, there has usually been a gain of an endogenous or
acidosis. A difference of 30-40 milliequivalents (mEq)
exogenous organic acid. Causes of AG metabolic acidosis,
normally exists when measured serum chloride is sub-
which are commonly encountered in small animal prac-
tracted from measured serum sodium. If the difference
tice, include ethylene glycol intoxication (glycolate and
is less than 30 mEq/L, there is an excess of chloride in
 other metabolites of ethylene glycol), uremia ( phosphates
proportion to sodium, which is consistent with rela-
and sulfates), tissue hypoxia (lactate), diabetic ketoaci-
tive hyperchloremia (DiBartola 2006b). Hyperchloremic
dosis (ketone bodies), salicylate intoxication, and other
metabolic acidosis occurs less commonly than increased
unusual intoxications (e.g-, drugs, alcohol) (Elliott et al.
AG metabolic acidosis and is caused by renal tubular
Metabolic acid-base disorders  665
acidosis or by severe diarrhea and resultant loss of
Treatment should be aimed at correcting the underly-
intestinal bicarbonate (Riordan and Schaer 2005). latro-
ing disorder. This might involve improving tissue perfu-
 genic hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis can also occur
 sion with appropriate resuscitative measures, eliminating
with administration of an alkali-free chloride contain-
 ingested toxin or correcting metabolic, renal, or gastroin-
ing crystalloid solution, such as 0.9% sodium chloride
testinal disease (Kerl 2005a; DiBartola 2006a; de Morais
(0.9% NaCl) for intravenous volume replacement (Rose
et al. 2008; Kovacic 2008). With severe metabolic aci-
1994b).
dosis (pH of <7.15 and HCO <12 mEq/L), intra-
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is classified as proximalor
venous sodium bicarbonate may be administered judi-
distal based upon the area of defect (Riordan and Schaer
ciously according to the following formula, which can be
2005). Proximal RTA is characterized by a failure of bicar-
used to calculate bicarbonate deficit:
bonate absorption in the proximal tubular segments. This
disorder causes an elevated urine fractional excretion of
Bicarbonate dose = (0.3) (Body weight [kg])
HCO- when serum HCO3- is normal. Proximal RTA
(Base deficit)
results in a self-limiting acidosis since the more distal
tubular segments can absorb bicarbonate as the filtered
Half of this dose should be administered slowly intra-
bicarbonate load falls with systemic metabolic acidosis,
venously for more than 6 hours, and the acid-base status
thus limiting the acidosis (Kerl 2005b). Proximal RTA is
should be re-evaluated prior to continuation of therapy.
most commonly identified as a feature of proximal tubu-
Rapid correction of metabolic acidosis can cause a num-
lar defects resembling Fanconi's syndrome. Other tubular
ber of undesired side effects, including hyperosmolarity,
 defects seen commonly with Fanconi's syndrome include
 hypernatremia, and hypokalemia. Hypocalcemic tetany
failure of absorption of glucose, phosphate, sodium,
may be caused by shifting of calcium from the ionized
potassium, uric acid, and amino acids. Fanconi's syn-
to the protein-bound form after bicarbonate adminis-
drome had been described most commonly in basenji
tration (Kerl 2005a). Paradoxical central nervous system
dogs and is observed sporadically in other breeds. Dis-
(CNS) acidosis occurs when CO2 generated following
tal RTA is characterized by a failure to acidify the urine
bicarbonate administration crosses the blood-brain bar-
due to the loss of hydrogen excretory capacity of the dis-
rier and takes part in the carbonic acid equation, essen-
tal tubule (Kerl 2005b). The hallmark of distal RTA is a
tially fueling acid production in the CNs. latrogenic
urine pH greater than 6.0 despite moderate to marked
metabolic alkalosis can also occur after administration
systemic acidosis. Presence of a urinary tract infection
of bicarbonate.
with urease-producing bacteria should be ruled out prior
Metabolic alkalosis is most commonly caused by loss
to diagnosing distal RTA since these bacterial infections
of chloride in excess of extracellular fluid volume, which
will increase urine pH. Causes of distal RTA reported
typically occurs as a result of upper gastrointestinal (G1)
in the literature include pyelonephritis, amphotericin B,
fluid loss or sequestration (Rose 1994c). Other causes
and administration ofoutdated tetracycline (Riordan and
 of chloride wasting include diuretic administration.
Schaer 2005). Further information on renal tubular and
       
congenital diseases can be found in Chapters 55 and 56.
ous administration of sodium bicarbonate or another
Abnormalities  associated  with metabolic acidosis
organic anion or by hyperaldosteronism (aka., Conn's
include lethargy mental dullness or obtundation,
syndrome), which causes sodium retention in excess of
decreased cardiac output, decreased blood pressure, and
chloride (Rose 1994c). The most common clinical prob-
decreased hepatic and renal blood flow (Rose 1994b; Kerl
lem associated with metabolic alkalosis in small animal
2005a; Packer et al. 2005; DiBartola 2006a; Kelmer et al.
practice is gastric outflow obstruction (Boag et al. 2005).
2007; Kovacic 2008). In a clinical setting, it is challenging
Cats with severe hypokalemia can develop metabolic
to tell whether clinical signs are caused by the acidemia
alkalosis due to gastric hypomotility and pooling of gas-
or the underlying cause of the acid-base disorder or both
tric fluid, effectively causing a "third-spacing” of chloride
(Kerl 2005a). For animals presenting with acute illness
without obvious or frequent vomiting. This third-spacing
or decompensation of a chronic illness, treatment should
of chloride-rich secretions willlead to metabolic alkalosis
be directed at the underlying disease, and treatment of
when extracellular fluid depletion occurs.
the metabolic acidosis may be included in the overall
 During gastric outflow obstruction, appropriate renal
treatment plan. Unless the patient has some impairment
compensation prevents an acid-base disorder until extra-
of normal ventilatory ability, compensatory mechanisms
cellular fluid volume depletion occurs secondary to the
cause an increase in the respiratory rate, which allows
vomiting. In addition to the chloride deficit, aldos-
the animal to eliminate CO2 generated by carbonic acid
 terone is released with hypovolemia, increasing renal
formation, mitigating acidosis (DiBartola 2006a).
uptake of sodium. Normally, sodium is reabsorbed with
666 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
bicarbonate or chloride or is exchanged for potassium.
DiBartola, S.P. (2006a). Introduction to acid-base disorders. In: Fluid,
Because gastric fluid has high chloride and potassium
Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, edited
concentrations, animals with gastric outflow obstruction
by S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders.
DiBartola, S.P. (2006b). Metabolic acid-base disorders. In: Fluid, Elec-
become systemically depleted of these electrolytes so that
trolyte and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, edited by
renal reabsorption ofsodium can only occur with concur-
S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders.
rent bicarbonate uptake (Kerl 2005a; DiBartola 2006b;
Dondorp, A.M., T.T.H. Chau, et al. (2004). Unidentified acids of strong
de Morais et al. 2008). When chloride depletion and
 prognostic significance in severe malaria (see comment). Crit Care
extracellular volume depletion initiate metabolic alka-
Med 32(8): 1683-1688.
Elliott, I., H.M. Syme, et al. (2003). Acid-base balance of cats with
losis, replacement of the chloride deficit will correct the
chronic renal failure: effect of deterioration in renal function. J
acid-base disorder. Rarely, chloride-resistant metabolic
Small Anmim Pract 44(6): 261-268.
alkalosis occurs in small animals. Causes of chloride-
Elliott, J., H.M. Syme, et al. (2003). Assessrment of acid-base status
resistant alkalosis include primary hyperaldosteronism
of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure. I Small Anim
 in which an aldosterone-secreting tumor releases aldos-
Pract 44{2): 65-70.
terone autonomously. This causes excessive wasting of
Forni, L.G., W. McKinnon, et al. (2006). Unmeasured anions in
metabolic acidosis: unravelling the rmystery. Crit Care (London, Eng-
distal tubular H+ and potassium. Hyperadrenocorti-
land) 10(4): 220.
cism in people with adrenal tumors is associated with
Johnson, R.A. and H. Autran de Morias (2006). Respiratory acid-
chloride-resistant alkalosis; however, metabolic alkalosis
base disorders. In: Fluid, Eelctrolyte and Acid Base Disorders in
 m so n  o e s
Small Animal Practice, edited by S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO:
ticism (DiBartola 2006b).
WB Saunders.
Karagiannis, M.H., A.N. Reniker, et al. (2006). Lactate measurerment
Clinical signs of metabolic alkalosis are dictated by the
as an indicator of perfusion. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 28(4):
underlying disorder generating the acid-base abnormal-
287-298.
ity. Muscle twitching and seizures have been reported
Kellum, J.A. and J.A. Kellum (2007). Disorders of acid-base balance.
in animals with metabolic alkalosis (DiBartola 2006b).
Crit Care Med 35( 11): 2630-2636.
Signs associated with concurrent potassium deple-
Kelmer, E., G.D. Shelton, et al. (2007). Organic acidemia in a young cat
associated with cobalamin deficiency. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 17(3):
tion may include weakness, cardiac arrhythmias, renal
299-304.
dysfunction, and gastrointestinal motility disturbances
Kerl, M.E. (2005a). Acid-base, oximetry, and blood gas emergencies.
(DiBartola 2006b).
In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, edited by S.J. Ettinger
Treatment of metabolic alkalosis is directed at resolv-
and E.C. Feldman. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier.
Kerl, M.E. (2005b). Renal tubular diseases. In: Textbook of Veteirnary
ing the underlying cause. Intravenous 0.9% sodium chlo-
ride is the fluid of choice to replace volume deficits and
Intermal Medicine, edited byS.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier.
normalize chloride concentrations since these patients
Kovacic, J.P. (2008). Acid-base disturbances. In: Small Amimal Critical
are often chloride-depleted. Fluids should not contain
Care Medicine, edited by D.C. Silverstein and K. Hopper. St. Louis,
buffer (e.g., not lactated Ringer's solution) (Kerl 2005a).
MO: Suanders Elsevier.
Pyloric outflow obstruction is often addressed surgically,
 Lee, J.A. and K.J. Drobatz (2003). Characterization of the clinical char-
or by removal of an obstructing foreign body. In ani-
acteristics, electrolytes, acid-base, and renal parameters in male
cats with urethral obstruction. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 13(4): 227-
mals with profuse vomiting unassociated with obstruc-
233.
tion, drug therapy to minimize gastric hydrochloric acid
 Malley, W.J. ( 1990). Hypoxia: assessment and intervention. In: Clirical
(HCl) excretion may be warranted (e.g-, famotidine,
Blood Gases: Application and Noninvasive Alternatives, edited by
 omeprazole). Because animals with metabolic alkalo-
W.J. Malley. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
sis often have concurrent hypokalemia, cautious intra-
Morris, C.G. and J. Low (2008). Metabolic acidosis in the critically
ill: part 1. Classification and pathophysiology. Anaesthesia 63(3):
venous potassium chloride supplementation is often
294-301.
indicated (Kerl 2005a).
Packer, R.A., L.A. Cohn, et al. (2005). D-lactic acidosis secondary to
         d 
106-110.
References
Riordan, L. and M. Schaer (2005). Renal tubular acidosis. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 22(7): 513-528.
Boag, A.K., R.J. Coe, et al. (2005). Acid-base and electrolyte abnormal-
Rose, B.D. (1994a). Acid-base physiology. In: Clinical Physiology of
ities in dogs with gastrointestinal foreign bodies. I Vet Interr Med
Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders, edited by B.D. Rose. New York:
19(6): 816-821.
McGraw-Hill.
de Morias, H.A. (2006). Strong ion approach to acid-base disorders.In:
Rose, B.D. ( 1994b). Metabolic acidosis. In: Clinical Physiology of Acid-
Fluid, Electrolyte,and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice
Base and Electrolyte Disorders, edited by B.D. Rose. New York:
edited by S.P. DiBartola. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier.
McGraw-Hill.
de Morais, H.A., J.F. Bach, et al. (2008). Metabolic acid-base disorders
Rose, B.D. ( 1994c). Metabolic alkalosis. In: Clinical Physiology of Acid-
in the critical care unit. Vet Clin N Am——Small Animal Pract 38(3):
Base and Eelctrolyte Disorders, edited by B.D. Rose. New York:
559-574.
McGraw-Hill.
Metabolic acid-base disorders 667
Rose, B.D. ( 1994d). Regulation of acid-base balance. In: Clinical Phys-
Rose, B.D. (1994f). Respiratory alkalosis. In: Clirical Physiology of
iology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders, edited by B.D. Rose.
Acid-Base and Electolyte Disorders, edited by B.D. Rose. New York:
New York: McGraw-Hill.
McGraw-Hill.
Rose, B.D. (1994e). Respiratory acidosis. In: Clirical Physiology of
Stewart, PA. (198l). How to Understand Acid-Base: A Quanti-
Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders, edited by B.D. Rose. New York:
tative Acid-Base Primer for Biology and Medicine. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Elsevier.
Mixed acid-base disorders
Mark J. Acierno
Mixed acid-base disorders arise when two or more
paralysis, are also known to cause acid-base imbalances.
primary acid-base disturbances (metabolic acidosis,
Lastly, suspicion of toxin exposures, such as ethylene gly-
metabolic alkalosis, respiratory acidosis, and respira-
col, ethanol, and salicylate acid (aspirin), is a clear indi-
tory alkalosis) occur simultaneously in the same patient.
 cation for the clinician to perform a blood gas analysis.
Although mixed acid-base disorders are often thought of
 In order for blood gas analysis to be useful, the results
as difficult to understand, nothing could be further from
 must be accurate. Although some handheld point-of-care
the truth. A brief review of nomenclature, physiology,
analyzers have been shown to provide reliable results in
and the development of systematic approach to critically
 companion animals ( Verwaerde et al. 2002), other unval-
ill patients ( Table 67.1) is all that is required to correctly
idated systems are sometimes used. These units may or
identify and treat affected patients.
may not be accurate in cats and dogs. Errors can also
 Correct use of terminology is essential when evaluating
be introduced in the processing of samples and in the
acid-base disturbances. Acidosis, acidemia, alkalosis, and
 transcription of results. Care must be taken when blood
alkalemia are terms that are sometimes used incorrectly.
samples are collected or stored in anticoagulation tubes
Acidosis refers to the physiologic proces that leads to
as a significant decreases in CO2 and bicarbonate will
the accumulation of acid in the blood (Rose and Post
occur if the proportion of blood to sodium heparin is
200la). The resulting decrease in pH is called acidemia
incorrect (Bloom et al. 1985). In the absence of cage-side
(Rose and Post 200la). Thus, diabetic ketoacdosis is the
testing, failing to immediately separate red blood cells
physiologic process that results in an acidemia. Alkalosis
 from plasma can artificially increase Pco2 measurements,
refers to physiologic processes that increase serum alkali
while exposing serum to room air can have the opposite
(Rose and Post 200la). The resulting increase in pH is
effect (Gambino and Schreiber 1966). Within living sys-
called alkalemia.
tems, pH, Pco2, and bicarbonate are in equilibrium and
Surprisingly, the first step in assessing a patient's
 adhere to the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. There-
acid-base status is to obtain a thorough history and phys-
fore, we can use this formula to verify the "believability”
ical examination. Often, the clinician will find evidence of
of the results:
a possible acid-base disorder before the first laboratory
 tests are submitted. A history that is compatible with
pH = 6.1 + log([HCO]/0.03 * Pco2)
renal failure, diabetes mellitus, Fanconi's syndrome, or
(Rose and Post 2001b; Breen 2001)
another condition associated with a primary acid-base
 After determining the need for blood gas analysis and
disorder should prompt the submission of a blood gas
verifying the results, the next step is to identify any pri-
analysis. When history is unhelpful, compatible condi-
mary acid-base disorder. The primary disorder can be
tions, such as diabetes, are often detected on routine lab-
oratory tests. Many conditions that present emergently
determined by evaluating serum bicarbonate in relation
to pH (Figure 67.1) (Kraut and Madias 2001).
such as heat stroke, congestive heart failure, and laryngeal
Decreased serum bicarbonate can occur with either a
metabolic acidosis or as the compensatory response to
respiratory alkalosis; however, decreases in serum bicar-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
bonate and pH can only occur if the primary disorder is a
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
metabolic acidosis (Kraut and Madias 2001). Decreased
668
Mixed acid-base disorders  669
Table 67.1 Steps in determining the presence of a mixed acid-base imbalance
1. Does the patient have a condition associated with acid/base disturbance
a. Perform blood-gas
b. Verify results
 2. Identify primary disturbance
a. If pH is abnormal, at least one acid-base disturbance exists
b. If pH is normal and Pco2 or bicarbonate are abnormal, then a mixed disorder exists
 3. Calculate expected compensation
a. If not appropriate, mixed acid-base disorder exists or insufficient time for compensation to occur 
b. Appropriate compensation does not rule-out mixed acid-base disorder
4. Calculate AG
 a. High gap confirms existence of metabolic acidosis
i. Normal gap does not disprove a metabolic acidosis
b. Limits differentials
5. Determine Cl-/Na+ ratio
a. Is strong ionic difference contributing to a mixed metabolic disorder?
6. Use clinical information, AG, and Cl-/Na+ ratio to evaluate for mixed metabolic disorders
serum bicarbonate accompanied by an increased pH is
Table 67.2 Examples of mixed acid-base disturbances
indicative of a respiratory alkalosis. An increase in serum
bicarbonate can occur with either a metabolic alkalo-
Neutralizing effect on pH 
sis or as the compensatory response to respiratory aci-
Respiratory alkalosis and metabolic acidosis
dosis. Increases in both bicarbonate and pH indicate
Septic shock (Goodwin and Schaer 1989)
a metabolic alkalosis, while increased bicarbonate with
Heat stroke (Schall 1980)
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (Muir 1982)
a decreased pH are suggestive of a respiratory acidosis
Liver disease (Comelius and Rawlings 1981)
(Kraut and Madias 2001 )
Salicylate toxicity (0ehme 1986)
 Once the presence ofa primary acid-base disorder has
Mixed metabolic acidosis and hypochloremic alkalosis
been established, the next step is to determine if there are
(de Morais and Leiswitz 2005)
one or more additional disturbances ( Table 67.2). In the
 Renal failure with vomiting
presence of simple acid-base disorder, bicarbonate and
Lactic acidosis with vomiting
 Pco2 always move in the same direction. When bicarbon-
DKA with vomiting
 ate and pco2 move in different directions, more than one
Bicarbonate administration (Robinson and Hardy 1988)
disorder must be present (Kraut and Madias 2001).
Additive effect on pH
While acid-base disorders that result in a pH out of
Respiratory acidosis and metabolic acidosis
the normal range and incongruent movement of bicar-
Cardiopulmonary arrest (Lippert et al. 1988)
bonate and pco2 produce obvious indicators of a mixed
Pulmonary edema (Ware and Bonagura 1986)
acid-base disorder, many others are more subtle and dif-
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (Muir 1982)
ficult to detect. For example, one might assume that a
Respiratory alkalosis metabolic alkalosis
pH in the physiologic range eliminates the possibility of
Heart failure and diuretic use (Adams and Polzin 1989)
an acid-base disorder; however, mixed acid-base distur-
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (Adams and Polzin 1989)
bance can have either an additive effect or a neutralizing
Canine Babesiosis (Leisewitz et al. 2001)
effect on pH. Two simultaneous conditions that move pH
Sepsis associated with Parvovirus
Mixed metabolic disorders
in the same direction, such as respiratory and metabolic
Hyperchloremic and high AG metabolic acidosis
acidosis, will generate a pH that is lower than either
Renal failure (de Morais and Leiswitz 2005)
condition individually. However, two counterbalancing
Resolving DKA (de Morais and Leiswitz 2005)
conditions, such as respiratory alkalosis and metabolic
Severe Babesiosis (8. canis rossi) (Leisewitz et al. 2001)
acidosis can produce a pH that is high, low, or in the nor-
Mixed high anion gap metobolic acisosis
mal range. The presence of an abnormal HCO3 , Pco2,
Renal failure with DKA (de Morais and Leiswitz 2005)
or movement of these two parameters in opposite direc-
DKA with lactic acidosis (de Morais and Leiswitz 2005)
tions in the presence of a pH that falls in the normal range
is an important indication that the patient has a mixed
670 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
acid-base disorder in which neither disorder is domi-
greatest effect (Ganong 2007b). An increase in H+ con-
nant. In these cases, the primary acid-base disturbance
centration increases ventilation, and the magnitude of
can be determined using the rules above if we assume
response is directly proportionate to the increase. There-
that a pH that is toward the alkaline part of the normal
 fore, metabolic acidosis stimulates respiration, causing a
range is increased and a pH toward the acidic part of the
decrease in Pco2 and a commensurate reduction in H+.
normal range is low.
 Metabolic alkalosis, with its decreased H+ concentration,
Other mixed acid-base disorders will masquerade as
suppresses ventilation, increasing Pco2, and causes a rise
simple acid-base disturbances resulting in an abnormal
in H+ concentration.
 pH with apparently appropriate changes in bicarbonate
 Respiratory compensation is the name given to the
and pco2. In these cases, careful evaluation of the nor-
mechanism by which changes in blood H+ concentra-
mal pulmonary and renal compensatory mechanisms
tions affects pulmonary ventilation. Although a critical
will reveal that secondary acid-base disturbances are
part of the acid-base system, the respiratory compensa-
lurking.
tion capacity is limited and cannot fully correct blood
pH.
Physiology of pH buffering and
Although they lack the immediate impact of respira-
tory compensation, the kidneys also play an important
pulmonary/renal compensation
role in the regulation of blood bicarbonate and H+ con-
Cellular machinery is exquisitely sensitive to H+ con-
centrations. In the renal tubule, bicarbonate is reabsorbed
centration, and therefore, maintaining blood pH in a
 in exchange for H+ ions, and the rate is proportionate
narrow range is essential for life. There are three inter-
 to arterial Pco2 (Ganong 2007d). During respiratory aci-
related physiologic systems that work to resist blood pH
dosis, Pco2 is high, and therefore, renal H+ excretion
changes: buffers, the respiratory system, and the kidneys.
and bicarbonate resorption are enhanced. This compen-
 A buffer is a pair of molecules, an acid and its conjugate
satory mechanism provides additional buffering capacity.
base, which can resist changes in the pH of a solution by
In respiratory alkalosis, low Pco2 inhibits H+ excretion
releasing H+ ions when pH increases (becomes more
and bicarbonate resorption, allowing blood bicarbon-
alkaline) and binding H+ ions when pH decreases (more
ate levels to decrease. This compensatory mechanism
acidic) (Ganong 2007a). The blood buffering system is
helps prevent large pH changes associated with acid-base
the first line of defense in maintaining a stable pH. While
abnormalities; however, this system is relatively slow and
plasma proteins, phosphates, and hemoglobin all play a
unable to respond in acute conditions.
role in blood buffering, it is the carbonic acid/bicarbonate
Calculating the expected compensatory response asso-
system that is of paramount importance (Rose and Post
ciated with each of the simple acid-base disturbances is
2001a; Guyton and Hall 2006).
important in detecting the presence of a mixed acid-base 
If we examine the reaction below, we see that bicarbon-
imbalances and determining the secondary disorder.
ate, which is produced by the kidneys, binds with free H+
Mixed acid-base disorders are often uncovered when a
to form carbonic acid. If more H+ ions are added to the
 compensatory response is greater or less than would nor-
blood, more carbonic acid is formed and the equation is
mally be expected (Table 67.3). It should be noted that
driven to the left. In the presence of carbonic anhydrase,
while renal and pulmonary compensation in acid-base
CO2 and water are formed. The lungs expel the CO2 and
 disturbances have been documented in humans and dogs
H+ ion is removed from the body (Ganong 2007c)
(de Morais and DiBartola 1991), studies suggest that cats
may not be capable of the same compensatory responses 
CO2 + H2O  H2CO  H+ + HCO
(Ching et al. 1989; Lemieux et al. 1990). Therefore, the
When looking at this formula in the context of the
following formulas for calculating compensation should
body, it becomes apparent that if the amount of CO2 in
 not be applied to cats.
the body is decreased, as can occur with increased pul-
 Metabolic acidosis can be the result of renal or gas-
monary ventilation, the equation is driven to the left.
trointestinal loss of bicarbonate, failure of renal acid
Thus, more H+ combines with bicarbonate to form car-
secretion, metabolic synthesis of organic acids (ketones,
bonic acid, which then dissociates into water and CO2.
lactate), or ingestion of toxins and is the most common
The result is an increase in blood pH. On the other hand,
acid-base disorder detected in cats and dogs (Cornelius
if pulmonary ventilation is impaired, the clearance H+ is
and Rawlings 1981). Biochemicalchanges associated with
slowed and the pH of the blood falls.
metabolic acidosis include a decreased pH, decreased
Although regulation of respiration is influenced by
bicarbonate, and a compensatory decrease in Pco2. Once
 Pco2 and H+ receptors in the carotid and aortic bod-
maximal respiratory compensation has occurred, which
ies, it is H+ receptors in the medulla that exert the
can take up to 12 hours, the Pco2 can be expected to
Mixed acid-base disorders  671
Table 67.3 Expected compensatory responses in simple acid/base disorders
 Disturbance
Metabolic change
Compensation
Metabolic acidosis
Each 1 mEq/L ↓ HCO3-
Pco2 ↓ by 0.7 mmHg
Metabolic alkalosis
Each 1 mEq/L ↑ HCO3-
Pco2 ↑ by 0.7 mmHg
Resp. acidosis——acute
Each 1 mmHg ↑ Pco2
HCO3- ↑ by 0.15 mEq/L
Resp. acidosis—chronic
Each 1 mmHg ↑ Pco2
HCO3- ↑ by 0.35 mEq/L
Resp. alkalosis—acute
 Each 1 mmHg ↓ Pco2
HCO3-↓ by 0.25 mEq/L
Resp. alkalosis—chronic
Each 1 mmHg ↓ Pco2
HCO3-↓by 0.55 mEq/L
 decrease approximately by 0.7 mmHg for each 1.0 mEq/L
value, then a concurrent respiratory acidosis should be
decrease in bicarbonate (de Morais and DiBartola 1991).
suspected.
The following formula can be used to determine the
 Respiratory acidosis, caused by an increase in CO2,
expected Pco2.
is the result of hypoventilation (Ganong 2001) and
 Expected Pco2 = normal Pco2 - [(normal HCO
divided into two phases: acute respiratory acidosis and
chronic respiratory acidosis. The acute phase, which
- measured HCOs) * 0.7]
occurs within 15 minutes, has minimal effect on serum
In humans, the maximal amount of compensation
 bicarbonate and is largely the result of non-bicarbonate
that can occur is 10 mmHg (Kraut and Madias 2001),
buffers (de Morais and DiBartola 2000). The chronic
although this value has not been determined in dogs.
 phase takes up to 5 days and involves a renal compen-
Patients with a metabolic acidosis and sufficient time for
satory increase in serum bicarbonate. In the acute phase,
compensation should have a measured Pco2 within 2
serum bicarbonate increases just 0.15 mEq/L for each 1
mmHg of the expected value (Adams and Polzin 1989).
mmHg increase in Pco2. Chronically, serum bicarbonate
If measured Pco2 is less, a concurrent respiratory alkalo-
 can be expected to increase 0.35 mEq/L for each 1 mmHg
sis should be suspected. If measured Pco2 is more than
increase in Pco2 (de Morais and DiBartola 1991). The fol-
2 mmHg above the expected Pco2, then a concurrent
lowing formulas can be used to determine the expected
respiratory acidosis should be suspected.
bicarbonate in both chronic and acute respiratory
Metabolic alkalosis is characterized by increase in
acidosis:
serum bicarbonate concentration, which occurs as a con-
 Acute: Expected HCO; = normal HCO3
sequence of a loss of H+ from the body or a gain in
bicarbonate. Examples include vomiting, hyperadreno-
+ (measured Pco2 - normal Pco2 * 0.15)
 corticism, and iatrogenic administration of alkalinizing
Chronic: Expected HCO, = normal HCO3
agents. Biochemical changes associated with metabolic
+ (measured Pco2 - normal Pco2 * 0.35)
alkalosis include an increased pH, an increased HCO3,
and a compensatory increase in Pco2- Once maximal res-
When measured bicarbonate varies by more than 2
piratory compensation has occurred, which can take up
 mEq/L from the expected, a mixed acid-base disorder
   a   o    
should be suspected. Decreased bicarbonate measure-
approximately 0.7 mmHg for each 1.0 mEq/L increase in 
 ments are associated with a concurrent metabolic aci-
bicarbonate (Borkan et al. 1987; de Morais and DiBartola
dosis, while increases are associated with a concurrent
1991). The following formula can be used to determine
metabolic alkalosis.
the compensated Pco2:
Respiratory alkalosis is the result of hyperventilation
Expected Pco2 = normal Pco2 + [(measured HCO3
and can be the result ofhypoxemia, pulmonary disease, or
stimulation of the central respiratory center. Biochemical
normal HCO) * 0.7]
changes include an increased pH, a decreased Pco2, and a
The degree that Pco2 can increase is limited since
serum bicarbonate that decreases over time. Respiratory
hypoxemia  will eventually  stimulate
ventilation. In
alkalosis is divided into two phases: acute and chronic.
humans, Pco2 will only correct to 55 mmHg ( Weinberger
In the acute phase, the kidneys have had little time to
et al. 1989). Patients with a metabolic alkalosis and suf-
react and serum bicarbonate decreases 0.25 mEq/L for
ficient time for compensation should have a measured
each 1 mmHg decrease in Pco2 (de Morais and DiBar-
Pco2 within 2 mmHg of the expected value. If measured
 tola 1991). The chronic phase takes up to 5 days and renal
 Pco2 is less, a concurrent respiratory alkalosis is likely. If
compensatory mechanisms decrease serum bicarbonate
measured Pco2 is more than 2 mmHg above the expected
0.55 mEq/L for each 1 mmHg decrease in Pco2 (Adams
672 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
and Polzin 1989; de Morais and DiBartola 1991). The fol-
Since the total unmeasured anions exceed the unmea-
lowing formulas can be used to determine the expected
sured cations, the anion gap is positive. Normal values for
bicarbonate in both chronic and acute respiratory alka-
the dog have been reported in the range of 12-25 mEq/L
losis:
(Polzin et al. 1982). Values for cats are likely to be similar.
Many substances in the body such as cationic amino
Acute: Expected HCO, = normal HCO3
acids and ammonium chloride are metabolized in the
- [(normal Pco2 - measured Pco2 * 0.25)]
liver to hydrochloric acid (HCL). When the H+ is titrated
by bicarbonate, Cl- remains and there is no change in the
Chronic: Expected HCO, = normal HCO
measured anions (HCO3 — and Cl-). Therefore, the anion
 [(normal Pco2 - measured Pco2 * 0.55)]
 gap is unaffected. In cases of acidosis caused by renal or
gastrointestinalloss of bicarbonate, the associated cation,
When measured bicarbonate varies by more than 2
sodium, is also lost, resulting in no change in the anion
mEq/L from the expected, a concurrent mixed acid-base
gap. Over-production of organic acids (Emmett 2006),
disorder should be suspected; however, it may be possible
toxins or the loss of renal H+ excreting ability as is seen in
that equilibration has not yet occurred. Decreased bicar-
chronic renal failure (Kraut and Kurtz 2005) are usually
bonate measurements are associated with a concurrent 
 associated with increases in the anion gap. Some find the
metabolic acidosis while increases are associated with a
mnemonic "KIL-U" an easy way to remember the causes
concurrent metabolic alkalosis.
of elevations in the ion gap: ketones, ingestion (ethylene
Mixed acid-base disorders involving two diseases that
glycol, ethanol, salicylates), lactate, uremia.
both cause a metabolic acidosis can be difficult to detect.
The utility of the anion gap is threefold. First, although
 Bicarbonate, pH, Pco2,and metabolic compensation may
the presence of a normal anion gap does not eliminate
seem consistent with a simple disorder. In most cases,
the possibility of a metabolic acidosis, finding an increase
these mixed disorders are diagnosed by the clinician using
establishes its presence. Secondly, since only a limited
information obtained on the history, physical examina-
number of conditions result in an increased anion gap,
tion, and blood work. For example, a patient may have
its calculation is useful in limiting the differential diagno-
diabetic ketoacidosis, resulting in dehydration, decreased
sis (Kraut and Madias 2007). Lastly, the finding of a high
perfusion, and secondary lactic acidosis. In this example,
 anion gap in a patient with disease not normally associ-
a combination of routine blood work, urine analysis, and
ated with this finding (e.g., renal tubular acidosis) directs
an inexpensive lactate meter would provide the clinician
the clinician to look for another cause of the metabolic
with sufficient information to diagnosis the two condi-
acidosis.
tions. Other secondary conditions may be more difficult
Caution must be exercised when applying the anion
to detect. Therefore, in all cases in which a metabolic
gap to patients with hypoalbuminemia or hypoproteine-
acidosis has been diagnosed, a combination of the anion
mia as albumin and serum proteins contribute signifi-
 gap and Na+:Cl ratio should be performed.
cantly to the unmeasured anions (Hatherill et al. 2002;
Kraut and Madias 2007). It has been estimated that a 1
g/dL decrease in serum albumin or protein concentration
Anion gap
results in a 4.1 mEq/L or 2.5 mEq/L respective reductions
Strictly speaking, there is no "anion gap"; total serum
in the anion gap (Constable and Stampfli 2005). There-
anions must equal serum cations, otherwise charges
 fore, the following adjusted anion gap formulas can be
would not balance. Determining actual ion concentra-
used in patients with hypoalbuminemia and hypopro-
tion would require measuring all serum cations (cationic
teinemia.
proteins, calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium) and
AGalb = AG + 4.1 * (3.77 - [alb])
all serum anions (anionic proteins, bicarbonate, chloride
phosphate, sulfate and organic ions). In reality, sodium
AGprotein = AG + 2.5 * (6.7 - [TP])
and potassium are the only cations, and chloride and
bicarbonate the only anions routinely measured. There-
Chloride/sodium ratio
fore, if we replace the unmeasured anions with UA and
unmeasured cations with UC, we would have the follow-
In the Stewart model of acid-base balance, pH is deter-
ing equations:
mined by Pco2, weak acids (e.g- protein), and the
strong ionic difference. Chloride is the most important
Na+ + K+ + UC = CI- + HCO + UA
strong anion, while sodium is the primary strong cation.
Or
As the strong ion difference falls (e.g., Cl- increases),
(Na+ +K+) -(CI + HCO) = UA - UC
 pH becomes increasingly acidic, while increases in the
Mixed acid-base disorders  673
Table 67.4 Cl-/Na+ ratio
treating one disorder without addressing the other can
have catastrophic effects (Adrogue 2006). Patients with
CI-/Na+ ratio 
 Normal AG
Increased AG
 disorders that have an additive effect on pH may require
more intensive and aggressive intervention. The treat-
Decreased
Hyperchloremic acidosis
Hyperchloremic
ment of individual primary acid-base disorders is dis-
metabolic acidosis
Hypochloremic alkalosis
Hypochloremic
cussed in Chapter 66.
Increased
metabolic alkalosis
Conclusion
 strong ionic difference (e.g., Cl- decreases) causes blood
 The clinician can use the systematic approach presented
to become alkalotic. The contribution of electrolytes
 in this chapter to determine if a patient has a mixed
to acid-base balance can be estimated by the chlo-
acid-base disorder (Figure 67.1); however, no simple set
ride/sodium ratio (Durward et al. 2001; Fletcher and
of heuristics can determine the cause of the imbalance.
Dhrampal 2003). While references ranges have not been
Ultimately, it is the patient's history, physical examina-
established for companion animals, it has been suggested
tion, and blood work that provide the underlying causes
So ui oso pue shop u 8ho ueqn 1aie sna ie
of the mixed acid-base disturbance. Once these causes
are associated with hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis,
have been elucidated, a treatment plan can be formu-
while values less than 0.72 in dogs and 0.74 in cats are
lated that takes into account potential side effects.
associated with hypochloremic alkalosis ( Table 67.4) (de
 Morais and Leiswitz 2005). This information can be help-
References
 ful when mixed metabolic disturbances are suspected
(Table 67.2).
Adams, L. and D. Polzin ( 1989). Mixed acid base disorders. Vet Clin N
Am Small Amim Pract 19: 307-326.
Adrogue, H.J. (2006). Mixed acid-base disturbances. I Nephrol
19(Suppl 9): S97-S103.
Treatment
Bloom, S.A., V.J. Canzanello, et al. (1985). Spurious assessment of
The most important aspects in formulating a treatment
acid-base status due to dilutional effect of heparin. Arm I Med 79:
528-530.
plan are to evaluate the current pH, understand the
Borkan, S., T.E. Northrup, et al. (1987). Renal response to metabolic
underlying disturbances, and anticipate the effect of any
alkalosis induced by isovolemic hemofiltration in the dog. Kidney
treatments. In the case of counterbalancing disorders,
It32:322-328.
Determineneed forbloodgas
(1)History
(2) Physical
(3) Blood work
Perform blood gas
and validate results
Determineprimarydisturbance
HCO2LoW
HCO2High
HCO
High
High
Metabolic
Respiratory
Metabolic
Respiratory
acidosis
alkalosis
alkalosis
acidosis
Possible mixed metabolic disorder
·Patient history/physical
·Anion gap
Determine if secondary
·Cl-/Naratio
disturbance exists
If Pco>expected-resp.acid
f HCO>expected-met. alk
I Pco>expected -resp.acid
If HCO>expected-met.alk
If Pco<expected-resp.alk
If HCO<expected-met.acid
If Pco<expected-resp.alk
If HCO<expected-met.acid
Figure 67.1 Flowchart for determining the presence of a mixed acid-base disorder.
674 Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders
Breen, PH. (200l). Arterial blood gas and pH analysis. Clinical
Guyton, A.C. and J.E. Hall (2006). Regulation of acid-base balance.
approach and interpretation. Anesthesiol Clin N Arm 19: 885-
In: Textbook of Medical Physiology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
906.
Pp.383-401.
Ching, S.V., M.J. Fettman, et al. ( 1989). The effect of chronic dietary
Hatherill, M., Z. Waggie,et al. (2002). Correction of the anion gap for
acidification using ammonium chloride on acid-base and mineral
albumin in order to detect occult tissue anions in shock. Arch Dis
metabolism in the adult cat. I Nutr 119: 902-915.
Child 87: 526-529.
Constable, PD. and H.R. Stampfli (2005). Experimental determination
Kraut, JA. and I. Kurtz (2005). Metabolic acidosis of CKD: diagnosis,
of net protein charge and A(tot) and K(a) of nonvolatile buffers in
clinical characteristics, and treatment. Arm J Kidney Dis 45: 978-993.
canine plasma. I Vet Intern Med 19: 507-514.
Kraut, J.A. and N.E. Madias (2001). Approach to patients with acid-
Cornelius, L.M. and C.A. Rawlings ( 1981). Arterial blood gas and acid-
base disorders. Respir Care 46: 392-403.
base values in dogs with various diseases and signs of disease. I Atm
Kraut, J.A. and N.E. Madias (2007). Serum anion gap: its uses and
Vet Med Assoc 178: 992-995.
limitations in clinical medicine. Clin I Arm Soc Nephrol 2: 162- 174.
de Morais, H. and S. DiBartola (2000). Respiratory acid-base disorders.
Leisewitz, A.L., L.S. Jacobson, et al. (200l). The mixed acid-base dis-
In: Fluid Ther Small Amin Pract, edited by S. DiBartola. Philadelphia,
turbances of severe canine babesiosis. I Vet Interr Med 15: 445-452.
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 241-250.
Lemieux, G., C. Lemieux, et al. (1990). Metabolic characteristics of
de Morais, H. and S. DiBartola (1991). Ventilatory and metabolic
cat kidney: failure to adapt to metabolic acidosis. Am I Physiol 259:
compensation in dogs with acid-base disturbances. J Vet Emerg Crit
R277-R281.
Care 1: 39-49.
Lippert, A.C., A.T. Evans, et al. (19s8). The effect of resuscitation
de Morais, H.A. and A.L. Leiswitz (2005). Mixed acid base disorders. In:
technique and pre-arrest state of oxygenation on blood-gas values
Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice,
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in dogs. Vet Surg17: 283-290.
edited by S. DiBartola. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 296-
Muir, W.W. (1982). Acid-base and electrolyte disturbances in dogs
309.
with gastric dilatation-volvulus. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 181: 229-231.
 Durward, A., S. Skellett,et al. (200l). The value of the chloride: sodium
Oehme, F. (1986). Aspirin and acetaminophen. In: Current Veteri-
ratio in differentiating the aetiology of metabolic acidosis. Intersive
Mary Therapy IX, edited by R. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
Care Med 27: 828-835.
Pp. 188-190.
Emmett, M. (2006). Anion-gap interpretation: the old and the new.
 Polzin, D., J. Stevens, et al. ( 1982). Clinical evaluation of the anion gap
Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 2: 4-5.
 in evaluation of acid-base disorders in dogs. Compend Contin Educ
 Fletcher, S. and A. Dhrampal (2003). Acid-base balance and arterial
Pract Vet 4: 102.
blood gas analysis. Surgery 21: 61-65.
 Robinson, E.P. and R.M. Hardy (1988). Clinical signs, diagnosis, and
Gambino, S.R. and H. Schreiber (1966). The measurement of CO2 con-
treatment of alkalermia in dogs: 20 cases ( 1982-1984). I Arm Vet Med
tent with the autoanalyzer. A comparison with 3 standard methods
Assoc 192: 943-949.
and a description of a new method (alkalinization) for preventing
Rose, B.D. and T.W. Post (200la). Acid base physiology. In: Clir-
loss of CO2 from open cups. Am I Clin Pathol45: 406-411.
ical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders. New York:
Ganong, W. (2001). Regulation of extracellular fluid compositiona and
McGraw-Hill, pp. 299-324.
volume. In: Review of Medical Phtysiology. New York: Lange Medical
Rose, B.D. and T.W. Post (200lb). Regulation of acid-base balance. In:
Books, pp. 704-713.
Clinical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders. New York:
Ganong, W. (2007a). The general and celular basis of medical physiol-
McGraw-Hill, pp. 325-371.
Ogy. In: Review of Medical Physiology, edited by W. Ganong. Boston,
Schall, W. (19s0). Heat stroke. In: Currect Veterinary Therapy VII,
MA: McGraw-Hill, pp. 1I-50.
edited by R. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 195-197.
Ganong, W. (2007b). Regulation of respiration. In: Review of Medical
Verwaerde, P., C. Malet, et al. (2002). The accuracy of the i-STAT
Physiology. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill, pp. 671-680.
portable analyser for measuring blood gases and pH in whole-blood
Ganong, W. (2007c). Regulation of extracellular fluid compositiona
samples from dogs. Res Vet Sci 73: 71-75.
and volume. In: Review of Medical Physiology. New York: Lange
Ware, W. and J. Bonagura (1986). Pulmonary edema. In: Carine and
Medical Books, pp. 704-713.
Feline Cardiology, edited by P. Fox. New York: Churchill Livingstone,
Ganong, W. (2007d). Regulation of Acid-Base.
Pp. 205-217.
Goodwin, J.K. and M. Schaer (1989). Septic shock. Vet Clin N Am
Weinberger, S.E., R.M. Schwartzstein, et al. (1989). Hypercapnia. N
Small Amim Pract 19: 1239-1258.
Engl I Med 321: 1223-1231.
Section 7
Systemic arterial hypertension
68
Systemic arterial hypertension
Scott Brown
The term systemic hypertension is held to be synonymous
Isolated systolic or diastolic hypertension refers to
with sustained elevations of blood pressure (BP) and can
occurrence of an elevated value for only systolic or only
generally be categorized into one of three types (Brown
diastolic pressure. Such a finding may be artifactually
et al. 2007; Elliott and Watson 2009). White-coat hyper-
produced by under- or over-estimation of the peak or
tension is an elevation of BP caused by anxiety during the
trough of the BP curve by an indirect device. The pres-
measurement process. Secondary hypertension is high BP
ence of such an artifact should be considered whenever
concurrent with a clinical disease or condition known to
a very small (<20 mmHg) or large (>60 mmHg) pulse
cause hypertension or that is associated with adminis-
pressure is reported by an indirect device. True isolated
tration of a therapeutic agent (e.g- parenteral fluids or
hypertension of either type may represent white-coat,
drugs with vasoconstrictive or positive inotropic effects)
secondary, or idiopathic hypertension
that is known or suspected to cause an elevation of BP.
Secondary hypertension may be associated with chronic
kidney disease (CKD), hyperthyroidism, hyperadreno-
Target-organ damage (TOD)
corticism, diabetes mellitus, acute uremia, hyperaldos-
Systemic hypertension  is problematic only because
teronism, pheochromocytoma, and hypothyroidism. In
chronically sustained elevations of BP produce injury to
cats, systemic hypertension is most commonly associated
tissues; the rationale for treatment of hypertension is to
with CKD and hyperthyroidism, where prevalence rates
minimize or prevent this injury, which occurs in the kid-
approach 20-25% (Syme et al. 2002; Brown et al. 2007;
ney, eyes, brain, or cardiovascular system. Damage that
ciated with clinically important secondary hypertension.
results from the presence of sustained high BP is com-
monly referred to as end-organ or target-organ damage
A diagnosis of idiopathic hypertension is established
(TOD), and the presence of TOD is generally a strong
when reliable BP measurements demonstrate a sus-
 indication favoring antihypertensive therapy.
tained BP elevation concurrent with normal hematol-
In the kidney, TOD is generally manifest as an
ogy, biochemical panel, and urinalysis. While secondary
enhanced rate of decline of renal function, mortality,
and/or proteinuria ( Table 68.1) (Jacob et al. 2003; Brown
dogs and cats, idiopathic hypertension is more common
et al. 2007; Syme et al. 2006; Jepson et al. 2007; Elliott
than previously thought, accounting for approximately
and Watson 2009).
18-20% of cases in cats (Maggio et al. 2000; Elliott et al.
Magnitude of proteinuria should be assessed by mea-
2001). It is likely many of these animals have Stage I
surement of urine protein/creatinine ratio or quantita-
CKD, but this remains to be established. See Chapter 48
five assessment of albuminuria as proteinuria is directly
for explanation of the staging system for CKD proposed
related to degree of elevation of BP and inversely related
by the International Renal Interest Society (IRIS).
to efficacy of antihypertensive therapy in cats (Mathur
et al. 2002; Jepson et al. 2007). Proteinuria is also related
to degree of elevation of BP and to rate of decline of
GFR in dogs (Finco 2004). Hypertension may be present
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
 in any stage of renal disease, as serum creatinine is not
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
directly related to BP.
677
678   Systemic arterial hypertension
Table 68.1 Evidence of target organ damage (ToD) from systemic hypertension
Tissue
 Hypertensive injury (TOD)
Clinical findings indicative of TOD
Diagnostic test(s) to identify TOD
Eye
Retinopathy
 Acute onset of blindness
Ophthalmic examination
Retinal detachment
Intraocular hemorrhage 
 Retinal vessel tortuosity or perivascular edema
Brain 
Encephalopathy
Centrally localizing neurological signs (brain)
 Neurological exam
Magnetic resonance imaging or CT scan
Kidney
 Progression of chronic
Serial increases in serum creatinine
Serum creatinine and BUN
kidney disease
concentration (decreases in GFR)
 Urinalysis with quantitative assessment
 Proteinuria
of proteinuria
GFR measurement
Heart and 
Left ventricular hypertrophy
 Left ventricular hypertrophy
Auscultation
vessels
Cardiac failure
Gallop rhythm
Thoracic radiography
Arrhythmias
Cardiac ultrasound
Systolic murmur
Electrocardiogram
 Evidence of cardiac failure
Hemorhage (e.g.. epistaxis, stroke)
 Ocular lesions are observed in many cats and dogs
vival time (Chetboul et al. 2003), effective antihyperten-
with hypertension, and while prevalence rates for ocular
sive therapy may reduce prevalence of LVH in affected
injury vary, it has been reported to be as high as 100%
cats (Snyder et al. 2001). Cardiac failure and other seri-
000 1e 1a 018 5661 1e 1 ss 8861 e 1 )
ous complications are infrequent but may occur. Animals
Elliott et al. 200l). The syndrome is commonly termed
with previously undiagnosed hypertension may unex-
hypertensive retinopathy and/or choroidopathy, and reti-
pectedly develop signs of congestive heart failure after
nal detachment is the most commonly observed finding
receiving fluid therapy. Epistaxis, presumably due to
(Table 68.1). Acute onset of blindness from complete,
hypertension-induced vascular abnormalities, has been
bilateral exudative retinal detachment may be a present-
associated with systemic hypertension.
ing complaint in both species. Effective antihypertensive
treatment can lead to retinal reattachment, but restora-
tion of vision generally occurs in a minority of patients
Selection of patients to screen for
(Maggio et al. 2000).
presence of hypertension
Hypertensive encephalopathy (Bagley 2003) has been
reported in dogs (Jacob et al. 2003) and cats (Littman
There are two clear indications for evaluating BP in a
1994; Kyles et al. 1999; Maggio et al. 2000). Neurological
patient. First, BP should be measured in patients with
signs have been reported to occur in nearly 1/2 of hyper-
clinical abnormalities consistent with TOD. A second
tensive cats (Littman 1994). This syndrome, in its early
indication for measurement of BP is presence of dis-
phases, is responsive to antihypertensive therapy (Brown
eases or conditions casually associated with secondary
et al. 2005). Observed clinical signs include lethargy,
hypertension as well as those being treated with pharma-
seizures, acute onset of altered mentation, altered behav-
cological agents that may elevate BP. A thorough physi-
ior, disorientation, balance disturbances such as vestibu-
 cal examination, including funduscopic evaluation, car-
lar signs, head tilt, nystagmus, and focal neurological
diac auscultation, and neurologic examination, should
defects due to stroke-associated ischemia. Other CNS
concurrently be performed in these at-risk populations
abnormalities, including hemorrhage and infarction are
to assess for TOD. While the positive relation between
 also observed in dogs and cats.
advancing age and prevalence of systemic hypertension is
 Cardiac changes present in hypertensive animals may
not as clear in animals as it is in people, conditions caus-
include systolic murmurs and cardiac gallops and left
ing secondary hypertension are often more frequently
   )   
observed in geriatric pets and it is prudent to routinely
Although LVH may not be a risk factor for reduced sur-
screen animals for the presence of these conditions (e.g-)
Systemic arterial hypertension  679
CKD and hyperthyroidism). At this time, there is no clear
rationale for excluding values, the final (mean) result, and
rationale for routine BP screening in animals that do not
interpretation of the result by the veterinarian should be
meet either of these criteria. In these patients, it would
noted.
be expected that a higher proportion of elevated values
are due to white-coat hypertension. If such screening is
 done, it should only be performed in older animals (e.g-
Treatment
≥8 years of age) and results should be interpreted with an
The initial assessment of a patient suspected to have sys-
appreciation of the importance of excluding white-coat
temic hypertension should include recognizing condi-
hypertension.
tions that may be contributing to an elevation of BP,
identifying and characterizing TOD, and determining if
Measurement of systemic arterial BP
there are any seemingly unrelated concurrent conditions
that may complicate antihypertensive therapy. Because
Diagnosis and management of hypertension in clini-
hypertension is often a silent, slowly progressive condi-
cal patients should be based upon measurement of the
tion requiring vigilance and lifelong therapy, it is impor-
patient's BP (Chapter 13). While it is critical for the vet-
tant to be absolutely certain about the diagnosis: a high
erinarian to fully appreciate the subtleties of BP mea-
BP measurement may represent idiopathic, secondary,
surement, it is generally preferred to have these measure-
or white-coat hypertension. Decisions to use antihyper-
ments obtained by a skilled animal health technician who
 has been suitably trained. Acquiring expertise in the use
clinically available information and a decision to treat,
of indirect BP measurement devices requires hours of
which may effectively mandate lifelong drug therapy and
training; experienced operators enhance the reliability of
 warrants periodic, judicious re-evaluation.
indirect measurement.
The BP may be affected by stress or anxiety associated
Use of BP staging to assess risk for future TOD
with the measurement process (Brown et al. 2007). It is
important for the measurement room to be quiet and that
For treatment decisions, BP is categorized into stages
5-10 minutes to be provided for the patient to acclimate
on the basis of risk of developing subsequent TOD
to the room to reduce the likelihood of white-coat-effect
(Table 68.2).
While there are interbreed differences in BP in dogs
hypertension (Belew et al. 1999). Many causes of mea-
surement error will lead to an erroneously high value
and perhaps in cats, only the difference (20 mmHg higher
values for each category) for Sight Hounds mandates sep-
for BP. However, the minute-to-minute variability of BP
inconsistency of BP measuring devices, technical errors,
arate categorization at this time (Cox et al. 1976; Bodey
 transient dehydration, and parasympathetic overactivity
and Michell 1996). It is anticipated that publication of
all could lead to a falsely low value for BP.
data in specific breeds of dogs and cats may justify further
The choice of device depends upon operator experi-
modification of this recommendation in the future.
ence and preference. The cuff width should be 30-40%
In people, any reduction of BP that does not pro-
of the circumference at the chosen measurement site
duce overt hypotension lowers the risk of TOD. Admit-
 tedly, this latter finding remains to be confirmed in dogs
(Brown et al. 2007). Measurements may be taken on
the antebrachium, brachium, tarsus, or tail. The posi-
and cats, but the ACVIM Hypertension Consensus Panel
tion of the patient and cuff should be one that is well
tolerated with the cuff at, or close to, the level of the right
Table 68.2 Staging of blood pressure (BP: mmHg) in dogs and
atrium. At least five consecutive, consistent indirect val-
cats based on risk for future target-organ damage?
ues should be obtained, the highest and lowest values dis-
carded, and the remaining values averaged to produce the
 Risk of future target
 Systolic
Diastolic
 organ damage
BP stage
obtained, preferably separated by at least 24 hours, and
<150
<95
None or minimal
N
these should always be accompanied by a thorough search
150-159
66-56
Low
L
for TOD and identification of conditions that may cause
160-179
100-119
Moderate
M
secondary hypertension.
≥180
≥120
High
H
A standard form for recording results of the BP mea-
surement should be developed. The animal position and
aWhere reliable measurements (see text) lead to different cate-
attitude, cuff size and site, and cuff site circumference
 gories based on separate consideration of the patient's systolic
(cm) should be carefully considered (ideally, these would
and diastolic BP, the patient's BP stage should be taken as the
also be noted in the animal record). All values obtained,
higher risk.
680  Systemic arterial hypertension
(Brown et al. 2007) and IRIS (Elliott and Watson 2009)
tion as noted above would be a patient in which rapidly
recommend that BP be categorized on the basis of risk of
progressive TOD, such as hypertensive retinopathy or
future TOD.
encephalopathy, is already present. Animals in stage H
A BP below 150/95 mmHg, Stage N, should be inter-
with secondary or idiopathic hypertension are candi-
preted as presenting minimal or no risk for TOD and
 dates to receive antihypertensive therapy and appropri-
antihypertensive therapy is not recommended. This level
 ate, disease-specific management of any conditions that
of BP also represents the treatment goal for antihyper-
might be causing secondary hypertension.
tensive therapy.
Antihypertensive therapy
Decision to institute treatment
As hypertension in dogs and cats is most often secondary
A decision to institute antihypertensive therapy should be
(≥80% based on current data), antihypertensive drug
based on reliable measurements of BP and proper staging.
therapy by itself is often not sufficient. Initial consid-
There are two exceptions: (1) patients with TOD consis-
erations should always include management of condi-
tent with hypertension that may rapidly progress (i.e.,
tions likely to be causing secondary hypertension and
hypertensive retinopathy or encephalopathy) and (2) use
treatment of TOD. Where possible, these considerations
of antihypertensive agents for another purpose, such as 
 should be addressed with specific, targeted diagnostic
to reduce proteinuria in cats or dogs with CKD. In the 
 and therapeutic regimens. Effective management of a
first scenario, at least one reliable measurement should be
 condition causing secondary hypertension wil lead to
obtained and withdrawal of medications should be con-
complete or partial resolution of the high BP in some,
sidered after the initial crisis is resolved. In the second, it
but not all, cases. Hypertension may remain or even
is preferred but not required to measure BP.
worsen despite effective treatment of the primary condi-
Some changes, such as LVH or hypertensive
tion (Ortega et al. 1996; Goy-Thollot et al. 2002; Brown
encephalopathy, may partially or wholly resolve with
et al. 2007).
therapy. Antihypertensive therapy may reduce the inci-
 Antihypertensive therapy must be individualized to
dence or delay the development of other abnormalities,
the patient and its concurrent conditions. Regardless
such as hypertensive encephalopathy or choroidopathy.
of the initial level of BP, the goal of therapy should be
Antihypertensive therapy may slow disease progression
 to maximally reduce the risk of TOD (Stage N: SBP
in animals afflicted with CKD (Grauer et al. 2000; Brown
< 150 and DBP < 95 mmHg). Certainly, a minimal
et al. 2003). Most animals in this category particularly
 goal of therapy is to achieve a reduction in stage of risk
those with TOD or secondary hypertension, are candi-
for TOD. Except in hypertensive crises (see below), this
dates for antihypertensive therapy. Others without TOD,
 should be achieved with a gradual, persistent reduction
 particularly those with BP at the lower end of this range or
of BP.
those in which white-coat hypertension cannot be ruled
 Although frequently recommended as an initial step
out as the sole cause of the elevated BP, are generally not
 in the pharmacological management of high BP, dietary
treated.
salt restriction is controversial ( Turner et al. 1990; Hansen
Some surveys of normal dogs and cats have reported
et al. 1992; Greco et al. 1994; Buranakarl et al. 2004; Kirk
values within or near the range of BP that comprise stage
 et al. 2006), and available evidence suggests significant
L. Further, it is likely that some animals in this cate-
sodium restriction alone generally does not reduce BP
gory are exhibiting white-coat hypertension. The general
 and in fact activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
consensus is that there is currently a paucity of data to
 axis (Buranakarl et al. 2004) and may actually elevate BP
support intervention when BP < 160/100 mmHg-
in certain settings (Hansen et al. 1992; Greco et al. 1994).
The rationale for treatment of patients in stage M is to
On the other hand, high salt intake may produce adverse
limit future TOD, particularly in those animals with pre-
existent TOD or secondary hypertension. While there is
larly in animals with CKD. Until more data are available,
 no general agreement, animals in stage M with idiopathic
the selection of appropriate diet should be based on other
hypertension and no TOD are often not treated.
patient-specific factors, such as underlying or concurrent
The rationale for treatment of patients with a high risk
diseases and palatability.
of TOD, stage H, is to limit the degree of TOD. While only
Once a decision is made to treat an animal with high
extreme technical error or dramatic white-coat hyper-
BP, therapeutic intervention will almost always include a
tension could produce such an elevated value for BP in
 pharmacological agent. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
a normal dog or cat, at least two measurement sessions
inhibitors (ACEl) and calcium channel blockers (CCB)
should still be made to confirm the BP. The sole excep-
 are the most widely used antihypertensive agents in
Systemic arterial hypertension   681
Table 68.3 Oral agents for routine antihypertensive therapy
Class
Drug (examples of trade name)
 Usual oral dosage
 Angiotensin converting
Benazepril (Lotensin: Fortekor)
D: 0.5 mg/kg q 12-24 h 
enzyme inhibitor
C: 0.5 mg/kg q 12 h
Enalapril (Vasotec; Enacard)
D: 0.5 mg/kg q 12-24 h 
C: 0.5 mg/kg q 24 h
Calcium channel blocker
Amlodipine (Norvasc)
D/C: 0.1-0.25 mg/kg q 24 h (up to 0.5 mg/kg in cats)
αblocker
Prazosin (Minipress)
D: 0.5-2 mg/kg q 8-12 h
C: 0.25-0.5 mg/cat q 24 h
Phenoxybenazime (Dibenzyline)
D: 0.25 mg/kg q 8-12 hr or 0.5 mg/kg q 24 h
C: 2.5 mg per cat q 8-12 hr or 0.5 mg/cat q 24 h
Acepromazine (PromAce)
D/C: 0.5-2 mg/kg q8 h
Direct vasodilator
Hydralazine (Apresoline)
D: 0.5-2 mg/kg q 12 h
(start at low end of range)
C: 2.5 mg/cat q 12-24 h
 Aldosterone antagonist
Spironolactone (Aldactone)
D/C: 1.0-2.0 mg/kg q 12 h
β Blocker
Propranolol (Inderal)
D: 0.2-1.0 mg/kg q 8 h (titrate to effect)
C: 2.5-5 mg/cat q 8 h
Atenolol (Tenormin)
D: 0.25-1.0 mg/kg q 12 h
C: 6.25-12.5 mg/cat q 12 h
Thiazide diuretic
Hydrochlorothiazide (HydroDiuril)
D/C: 2-4 mg/kg q 12-24 h
Loop diuretic
Furosemide (Lasix)
D/C: 1-4 mg/kg q 8-24 h
D, dog: C, cat.
veterinary medicine. These agents produce renal vasodi-
 excision of adrenal tumors in animals with hypertension
lation, which may be useful in hypertensive veterinary
associated with hyperaldosteronism.
patients as they commonly have compromised kidney
 Client communication is important aspect of antihy-
function.
 pertensive therapy. Before instituting therapy, the owner
Initial therapy is often ACEI in dogs and CCB in cats.
should appreciate that the goal of antihypertensive ther-
The starting dose should be near the lower end of the
apy is to prevent future adverse events, will not directly
recommended range ( Table 68.3).
improve their pet's health, may be lifelong, and will
There is little rationale for starting at a lower dosage.
require frequent re-evaluations.
 If an antihypertensive agent of choice is only partially
effective, the usual approach is to consider increasing the
Monitoring antihypertensive therapy
dosage or adding an additional drug. While not ideal,
many veterinary patients with significant hypertension
 In general, hypertension is not an emergency, and 3-4
 will require more than one agent. Combination therapy
weeks should be allowed between dosage adjustments.
with ACEI and CCB at the lower end of the dosage range
There has been some concern about acute exacerba-
may be useful in cats where there is some evidence for a
tion of azotemia with ACEl, though this is an unusual
beneficial effect of ACEI in CKD (King et al. 2006) and
complication and modest increases in serum creatinine
an established antihypertensive efficacy for CCB (Elliott
 concentration (<0.5 mg/dL) may occur and are gener-
et al. 2001). Further, certain disease conditions may be
ally tolerable. Nonetheless, a patient should be evalu-
best addressed with the addition of specific classes of
ated 3-14 days following any change in antihypertensive
agents to a CCB and/or ACEl, such as beta-blockers
therapy. In unstable patients and those with IRIS stage
for hypertension-associated hyperthyroidism or alpha-
IIl or IV CKD, this recheck should be conducted in a
and beta-blockers or surgical excision for pheochromo-
 shorter timeframe, perhaps 3-7 days. Patients deemed to
cytomas, and aldosterone receptor blockers or surgical
 be hypertensive emergencies (see below) and hospitalized
682   Systemic arterial hypertension
patients, particularly those receiving fluid therapy or
Emergency treatment of hypertensive crises
pharmacological  agents  with cardiovascular effects,
Hypertension generally damages tissues by a slow, insid-
should be assessed daily. The purpose of these short-
ious process and is rarely an urgent situation. However,
term assessment is to determine if there are any unex-
pected (e.g-, new or worsening TOD) or adverse (e.g-
marked worsening of azotemia or systemic hypotension)
nent abnormalities without rapid lowering of BP (i.e.
findings. A BP < 120/60 mmHg combined with clinical
hypertensive neurological and/or ocular injury) if the
findings of weakness, syncope, and/or marked tachycar-
degree of BP elevation places the patient in the moder-
dia indicates systemic hypotension and therapy should
ate or high risk category (i.e., systolic BP > 160 mmHg)
be adjusted accordingly.
(Elliott et al. 200l; Jacob et al. 2003). Animals with sys-
Re-evaluation at 1-4 month intervals depending on
tolic BP of 140-159 mmHg that exhibit otherwise unex-
stability (more frequent if BP or other conditions are
unstable) and level of elevation (more frequent if BP
plained ocular or neurological damage that is potentially
attributable to hypertensive, a short-term (3-7 day) trial
-a dn-moh eoe si ( nt < s
 of antihypertensive therapy can be cautiously employed.
uations, which are employed to assess efficacy of ther-
A decision to use antihypertensive therapy should be
apy and make adjustments if appropriate, should include
accompanied by identification and management of con-
measurement of BP, serum creatinine concentration, uri-
ditions that may complicate therapy, generally by causing
nalysis with quantitative assessment of proteinuria, fun-
secondary hypertension.
duscopic examination, and other specific assessments
If a decision is made to treat an animal with high
depending on the individual circumstances (e.g., TOD,
BP, therapeutic intervention will generally be with a par-
causes of secondary hypertension, and concurrent con-
enteral agent such as hydralazine or an oral calcium chan-
nel blocker (Table 68.4) (Elliott et al. 2001 ).
antihypertensive effcacy is the effect of therapy on the
If parenteral medications are used, continuous BP
 magnitude of proteinuria (Syme et al. 2006), and a ben-
monitoring by arterial catheterization is recommended.
efit is predicted if the antihypertensive regimen used is
Many clinicians prefer oral CCB, particularly in cats,
 antiproteinuric (e.g-, reduces urine protein/creatinine by
because they generally decrease BP in severely hyperten-
>50%). The frequency and nature of re-evaluations will
sive animals, regardless of primary disease. Amlodipine,
vary depending on the BP risk stage, stability of BP,
for example, generally reduces BP by 25-50 mmHg in
other aspects of the health of the patient, and frequency
 of dosage adjustment to antihypertensive therapy. Since
hypertensive cats within 4 hours of oral administration
and poses limited risk of causing hypotension. If an oral
signs of progression of TOD can be subtle, BP should be
CCB is used, it may be appropriate to send the animal
closely monitored over time in patients receiving antihy.
home to reduce stress associated with hospitalization and
pertensive therapy, even when hypertension is seemingly
re-evaluate in 24-72 hours.
well-controlled.
Table 68.4 Agents for managing hypertensive crises (emergency therapy)
Class
 Drug (examples of trade name)
Usual dosage and route of administration
Angiotensin-converting
Enalaprilat (Vasotec IV)
0.2 mg/kg IV, repeated q1-2 h as needed (D/C)
 enzyme inhibitor
Beta blocker
Esmolol (Brevibloc)
50-75 μg/kg/min IV by constant rate infusion (D)
Calcium channel blocker?
Amlodipine (Norvasc)
0.25-0.5 mg/kg orally q24 h (D/C)
Direct vasodilator?
Hydralazine (Apresoline)
0.2 mg/kg IV or IM, repeated q2 h as needed (D/C)
Direct vasodilator
Nitroprusside (Nipride, Nitropress)
1 μg/kg/min IV by constant rate infusion, with incremental
increases of 1 μg/kg/min every 5 min, up to 10 μg/kg/min (D)
Mixed adrenergic blocker
Labetalol (Trandate)
0.25 mg/kg IV over 2 min, repeated up to a total dose of
(primarily beta)
3.75 mg/kg in first hour followed by constant rate infusion of
25 μg/kg/min (D)
D, dog: C, cat.
a Most frequently employed agents
Systemic arterial hypertension 
683
References
Jacob, F, D.J. Polzin, et al. (2003). Association between initial systolic
blood pressure and risk of developing a uremic crisis or of dying
Bagley, R.S. (2003). The brain as a target organ. In: Essential Facts of
in dogs with chronic renal failure. I Am Vet Med Assoc 222: 322-
Blood Pressure in Dogs and Cats, edited by B. Egner, A. Carr, and S.
329.
 Brown. Babenhausen, Germany: Vet Verlag, Ppp. 129-139.
Jepson, R.E., J. Elliott, et al. (2007). Effect of control of systolic blood
Belew, A.M., T. Barlett, etal. ( 1999). Evaluation of the white-coat effect
pressure on survival in cats with systemic hypertension. I Vet Intern
in cats. I Vet Intern Med 13: 134-142.
Med 21: 402-409.
Bodey, A.R. and A.R. Michell ( 1996). Epidemiological study of blood 
King, J.N., D.A. Gunn-Moore, et al. (2006). Tolerability and efficacy of
pressure in domestic dogs. I Small Amim Pract 37: 116-125.
benazepril in cats with chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med 20:
Brown, C.A., I.S. Munday, et al. (2005). Hypertensive encephalopathy
1054-1064.
in cats with reduced renal function. Vet Pathol42: 642-649.
Kirk, C.A., D.E. Jewell, et al. (2006). Effects of sodium chloride on
Brown, S., C. Atkins, et al. (2007). Guidelines for the identification,
selected parameters in cats. Vet Ther 7: 333-346.
evaluation, and management of systemic hypertension in dogs and
Kyles, A.E., C.R. Gregory, et al. ( 1999). Management of hypertension
cats. J Vet Intern Med 21: 542-558.
controls postoperative neurologic disorders after renal transplanta-
Brown, S.A., D.R. Finco, et al. (2003). Evaluation of the effects of
tion in cats. Vet Surg 28: 436-441.
Lesser, M., P.R. Fox, et al. (1992). Assessment of hypertension in 40
with induced chronic renal insufficiency. Am I Vet Res 64: 321-327.
Buranakarl, C., S. Mathur, et al. (2004). Effects of dietary sodium
manometry. J Small Amim Prac 33: 55-58.
chloride intake on renal function and blood pressure in cats with
normal and reduced renal function. Am I Vet Res 65: 620-627.
I Vet Intern Med 8: 79-86.
Chetboul, V., H.P. Lefebvre, et al. (2003). Spontaneous feline hyper-
Littrman, M.P., J.L. Robertson, et al. (1988). Spontaneous systermic
tension: clinical and echocardiographic abnormalities, and survival
hypertension in dogs: five cases (1981-1983). I Arm Vet Med Assoc
rate. I Vet Interm Med 17: 89-95.
193: 486-494.
Cox, R.H., L.H. Peterson, et al. ( 1976). Comparison of arterial hemo-
 Maggio, F, T.C. DeFrancesco, et al. (2000). Ocular lesions associated
dynamics in the mongrel dog and the racing greyhound. Arm I Physiol
with systemic hypertension in cats: 69 cases (1985-1998). I Arm Vet
230: 211-218.
Med Assoc 217: 695-702.
 Elliott, J., PJ. Barber, et al. (2001). Feline hypertension: clinical findings
Mathur, S., H. Syme, et al. (2002). Effects of the calcium channel
and response to antihypertensive treatment in 30 cases. I Small Amim
antagonist amlodipine in cats with surgically induced hypertensive
Pract 42: 122-129.
renal insufficiency. Am I Vet Res 63: 833-839.
 Elliott, J. and A.D.J. Watson (2009). Chronic kidney disease: staging
Ortega, T.M., E.C. Feldman, et al. ( 1996). Systemic arterial blood pres-
and management. In: Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited by
J.D. Bonagura and D.C. Twedt. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
corticism. IAm Vet Med Assoc 209: 1724-1729.
Pp.883-892.
 Snyder, P.S., D. Sadek, et al. (200l). Effect of amlodipine on echocar-
Finco, D.R. (2004). Association of systemic hypertension with renal
 diographic variables in cats with systemic hypertension. I Vet Intern
injury in dogs with induced renal failure. I Vet Int Med 18: 289-294.
Med 15: 52-56.
Goy-Thollot, I., D. Pechereau, et al. (2002). Investigation of the role of
 Stiles, J., D.J. Polzin, et al. ( 1994). The prevalence of retinopathy in cats
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. I Small Anim Pract 43:
roidism. I Atm Amirm Hosp Assoc 30: 564-572.
489-492.
Syme, H.M., P.J. Barer, et al. (2002). Prevalence of systolic hypertension
Grauer, G., D. Greco, et al. (2000). Effects of enalapril treatment versus
in cats with chronic renal failure at initial evaluation. I Am Vet Med
placebo as a treatment for canine idiopathic glomerulonephritis. J
Assoc 220: 1799- 1804.
Vet Intern Med 14: 526-533.
Syme, H.M., P.J. Markwell, et al. (2006). Survival of cats with naturally
Greco, D.S., G.E. Lees, et al. ( 1994). Effects of dietary sodium intake
occurring chronic renal failure is related to severity of proteinuria.
IVet Int Med 20: 528-535.
Am I Vet Res 55: 160- 165.
Turner, J.L., I.D. Brogdon, et al. ( 1990). Idiopathic hypertension in a cat
Hansen, B., S.P. DiBartola, et al. ( 1992). Clinical and metabolic findings
in dogs with chronic renal failure fed two diets. Arm I Vet Res 53:
diet. I Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 26: 647-651.
326-334.
Section 8
Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
69
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis.
treatment, and prevention
Jody P. Lulich, Carl A. Osborne, and Hasan Albasan
Urolithiasis is a general term referring to causes and
not justify therapy. On the other hand, detection of some
effects of stones anywhere in the urinary tract. Urolithia-
types of abnormal crystals or aggregates of crystals com-
sis should not be viewed conceptually as a single disease
monly observed in healthy individuals may be of diag-
with a single cause but rather as sequelae of multiple inter-
nostic, prognostic, and therapeutic significance (Lulich
acting underlying abnormalities. Thus, the syndrome of
and Osborne 2009). For example, ammonium urate crys-
urolithiasis may be defined as the occurrence of familial,
talluria may be indicative of portovascular disorders or
congenital, and acquired pathophysiological factors that,
 primary hepatic disease.
in combination, progressively increase the risk of precip-
 A macroscopic urolith is primarily composed of one or
itation of excretory metabolites in urine to form stones
 more crystallized biogenic minerals in combination with
(i.e., uroliths).
relatively small quantities of organic matrix. Although
one mineral usually predominates, composition of many
uroliths is mixed. Combinations of minerals may be
Anatomy of a stone
unevenly mixed throughout the urolith or they may be
deposited in layers (laminations). Each urolith may con-
The term urolith is derived from the Greek word uro
tain a nidus, stone, shell, and surface crystals (Figure
meaning urine and lith meaning stone. Unlike the gas-
69.1). The Minnesota Urolith Center uses the following
trointestinal tract, solids that form in the urinary tract are
abnormal because the urinary system is designed to dis-
terminology when reporting the results of urolith anal-
ysis (Lulich and Osborne 2009). We define the nidus or
pose ofthe body's wastes in the form ofaliquid. Under less
nucleus of a urolith as an area of obvious initiation of
than optimal conditions, some wastes, especially miner-
urolith growth. The term stone refers to the major body
als, precipitate out of solution to form crystals. If these
of the urolith. The term shell designates a layer of pre-
cipitated material that completely surrounds the body of
they may grow and aggregate to form stones.
the stone. The term surface crystals is used to describe
A crystal that forms within the urinary system
an incomplete covering of the outermost surface of the
may be viewed as a microlith; however, crystalluria
urolith. In our studies, a urolith without a nidus or shell
(microlithura) is not synonymous with formation of
of different composition, which contains 7o% or more
macroliths (uroliths) and the clinical signs associated
 of one type of mineral, is identified by that mineral.
with them. Nor is crystalluria irrefutable evidence of a
A urolith with less than 70% of one mineral is identi-
stone-forming tendency. In fact, crystalluria occurring
fied as a “mixed" urolith. A urolith with a nidus of one
in individuals with anatomically and functionally normal
composition with one or more surrounding layers of dif-
urinary tracts is often harmless and clinically unimpor-
ferent mineral composition from the nidus is called a
tant. Identification of crystals in such individuals does
"compound" urolith (Figure 69.1).
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
687
 688  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Table 69.1 Comparing the ability survey radiography and
ultrasonography to reveal urolith features
Stone
Shell
Survey
Nidus
Urolith feature
radiography
Ultrasonography
Radio-opacity
++++
Variations in Radio-opacity
+++
Shape
+++
+
Surface contour
+++
Diameter 
+十+
+++
Number
+ t +++
+to ++
Location
Surface
Kidney
+++
+++
crystals
Ureter
+++
+
Bladder
+++
++++
Figure 69.1 Anatomy of a compound urate stone with a nidus
Urethra
+++
×
composed of struvite and a shell of calcium oxalate monohydrate.
Urolith diagnosis
density, and shape. In our experience survey radiography
Uroliths represent one of the most common causes for
provides the most useful information for radio-opaque
lower urinary tract signs of disease (dysuria, inappropri-
stones and the double contrast cystogram for radiolu-
ate urination, hematuria, and pollakiuria). In contrast,
cent stones. Ultrasonography is a very sensitive method
clinicalsigns associated with upper tract uroliths are often
of detection, but does not provide sufficient information
silent, but should always be included in diagnostic dif-
when urolith characteristics (size, shape, radio-opacity,
ferential lists for dogs and cats with kidney disease and
number, etc.) are needed to select appropriate therapy
persistent hematuria without signs of lower urinary tract
(Table 69.1).
disease.
Knowledge of urolith composition is important
 Medical imaging is the cornerstone of urolith detec-
because contemporary methods of management are pri-
tion (Chapters 15, 16, and 17). The primary objective
 marily based on knowing this information. Several types
 in performing radiographic or ultrasonographic evalua-
of uroliths are commonly recognized in cats and dogs
tion is to verify urolith presence, location, number, size,
(Figures 69.2 and 69.3).
100%
Struvite
90%
CaOx
80%
CaPO4
Purine
70%
Matrix
60%
Other
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
81828384858687888990919293949596979899000102030405060708
Year
Figure 69.2 Changes in the prevalence of uroliths in cats between 1981 and 2009 (n = 106,194 submissions).
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 689
100%
Struvite
%06
CaOx
80%
CaPO4
Purine
70%
Cystine
60%
Silica
Compour
50%
Mixed
40%
Matrix
30%
20%
10%
0%
81828384858687888990919293949596979899000102030405060708
Years
Figure 69.3 Changes in the prevalence of uroliths in dogs between 1981 and 2009 (n = 393,688 submissions).
When predicting mineral composition of uroliths,
with uroliths. For example, in one study of 30 cases
many factors are used (Tables 69.2-69.4) prior to deter-
of struvite urocystoliths in cats, struvite crystals were
 mination by quantitative mineral analysis.
only detected in 17 patients (Osborne et al. 1990). Pre-
Although many use crystal identification as the pri-
 dicting mineral composition from survey radiographs
mary method of predicting composition, crystalluria is
offers many advantages because multiple pieces of infor-
not a consistent feature of urinalysis in dogs and cats
mation (e.g., radio-opacity, uniformity of radio-opacity,
Table 69.2
Mineral type
Predictors
 Urine pH 
 Crystal appearance 
 Urine culture
 Serum abnormalities
Magnesium
Neutral to alkaline
Four- to six-sided colorless
Urease-producing
None
ammonium 
prisms
bacteria
phosphate 
(Staphylococcus,
Proteus,
Enterococcus,
Mycoplasma)
Calcium oxalate
Acid to neutral
Dihydrate salt, colorless
Negative
Occasional
envelope, or octahedral
hypercalcemia
shape; salt; small,
 monohydrate salt-spindles or
dumbbell shape
Urate
 Acid to neutral
Yellow-brown amorphous
Negative
Low-urea nitrogen and
 shapes or sphericals
 serum albumin in dogs
(ammonium urate)
with hepatic shunts
Calcium
Alkaline to neutral
 Amorphous, or long thin
Negative
Occasional
phosphate
(brushite forms in acidic
 prisms
hypercalcemia
urine)
Cystine
 Acid to neutral
Flat colorless, hexagonal
Negative
None
plates
Silica
Acid to neutral
None observed
Negative
None
069
Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Table 69.3 Predicting mineral composition of canine uroliths based on radiographic appearance
 Radiographic opacity
 Approximate
 Mineral
 compared to soft tissue
 Surface contour
Shape
 Usual number
size
CaOx
+++to ++++
Smooth
Commonly round
20
2-7mm
monohy-
drate
CaOx
+++to ++++
Rough
Rosette
>5, few large
1-15 mm
dihydrate
single
 Sterile MAP
++ to +++
Irregular, few smooth
Round to ovoid
1 to 3
 5-15 mm
Infection
+ to +++
 Smooth to slightly
 Round to faceted 
>4to many
4 to >20 mm
MAP
rough
 or pryamidal
Urate
-to++
Smooth
Round to oval
Few or too
1-15 mm
numerous to
count
CaP
+++to ++++
Smooth
 Round to cuboidal
Many, some few
2-6 mm
Cystine
+++-
Smooth to bosselated
Round
Many to few
2-10 mm
Silica
++ to ++++
Smooth
 Radiating spokes
One or many
2-10 mm
 Xanthine
-to+
Smooth
Round to ovoid
Few to many
1-4 mm
CaOx, calcium oxalate: CaP, calcium phosphate: MAP, magnesium ammonium phosphate.
Table 69.4 Predicting mineral composition of feline uroliths based on radiographic appearance
 Radiographic opacity
Approximate
 Mineral 
compared to soft tissue
 Surface contour
 Shape
 Usual number
size
CaOx
+++to ++++
Smooth, but
Commonly round,
>5
1-5 mm
monohy-
occasionally
but also rosette
drate
bosselated
CaOx
+++to ++++
 Rough to smooth 
Rosettes
>3
1-7 mm
dihydrate
Sterile MAP
++ to +++
 Slightly rough
Round or discoid
Usually. 1-3,
3-10 mm
occassionally.
many
Infection
+to +++
Smooth to slightly
 Round to faceted
Few to many
2 to >7 mm
MAP
rough
Urate
-to ++
Smooth
Round to ovoid 
Usually. 1, but up
2-10 mm
to 5
CaP
+++to ++++
Rough
Too rare to
Too rare to
1-4 mm
comment
comment
Cystine
- to +++
Rough
Round
 Many, but some
1-4 mm
with few
Silica
++ to ++++
Too rare to
Too rare to
Too rare to
1-4 mm
comment 
comment
comment
 Xanthine
-to+
Smooth
Round to ovoid
1-3
1-5 mm
CaOx, calcium oxalate; CaP, calcium phosphate: MAP, magnesium ammonium phosphate.
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 691
shape, and surface contour) are processed from a sin-
than the dilated proximal urethral lumen can become
gle test (Tables 69.3 and 69.4). Although ultrasonog-
lodged in the urethra. Uroliths associated with com-
raphy is gaining in popularity as a sensitive and safe
plete and persistent obstruction affecting both kidneys
method to detect uroliths, the information obtained
results in uremia. Complete obstruction to urine out-
should be considered complementary to survey radiol-
flow associated with UTl may result in rapid destruction
 ogy instead of a replacement. Small uroliths can also be
of renal parenchyma and septicemia. If treatment is not
retrieved from the urinary bladder for analysis without
provided, death can be expected to occur within 2-4
surgical intervention (Table 69.5) (Lulich and Osborne
days.
1992). Urolith dissolution and prevention protocols
devised on the basis of their quantitative mineral anal-
ysis typically provide the most consistent therapeutic
Urolith management
results.
Managing urolith removal
For decades, treatment of patients with uroliths has been
Clinical consequences of uroliths
the province of the surgeon; however, within the past
 Uroliths may spontaneously pass through various parts
10 years, a variety of nonsurgical protocols have been
of the urinary tract, spontaneously dissolve, continue to
developed to eradicate uroliths from the urinary tract
grow, or become inactive (no growth occurs). Not all
(Table 69.5). The type of management selected will vary
persistent uroliths are associated with clinical signs. In
with the characteristics of the urolith (composition, size,
our experience, most inactive uroliths are not associ-
contour, and location), the effects of the urolith on the
ated with urinary tract infection (UTl). Nonetheless, if
patient, and the veterinarian's familiarity with available
uroliths remain in the urinary tract, dysuria, UTl, partial
procedures ( Tables 69.5-69.13).
or total urinary obstruction, and polyp formation are
 potential sequelae.
Managing urethral obstruction
UTI is common in dogs with urolithiasis. In most
instances, UTl is the cause of struvite urolith formation
 Once uroliths become lodged in the urethra, it is unlikely
in dogs and precedes stone formation. Once infection-
e  no  q o a 
induced struvite uroliths have formed, infected stones
voiding hydropropulsion. (Lulich et al. 1993) However,
may contribute to the persistence and spread of infection
lithotripsy can be used to break the urethrolith into
to other portions of the urinary tract. In turn, presence
fragments small enough to pass through the urethra
     1     s
(Bevan and Lulich 2008; Lulich and Osborne 2009). To
contributing to increased risk of UT1 include traumatic
avoid urethral surgery when lithotripsy is not available,
disruption of the mucosal lining of the urinary bladder,
flushing urethroliths back into the bladder lumen by
incomplete urine voiding, and sequestration of microor-
retrograde urohydropropulsion can, with a few excep-
 ganisms in stones. Infections with urease-producing bac-
tions, restore urethral patency (Osborne et al. 1999). The
teria can result in deposition of magnesium ammonium
efficacy of this technique is dependent on dilating the
phosphate on the surface of other urolith types, con-
 portion of the urethral lumen containing urethroliths
founding diagnostic and management efforts to resolve
with fluid under pressure. To be consistently successful,
the initial lithogenic events that are ultimately responsi-
one must be familiar with all aspects of the technique
ble for disease.
(Table 69.13).
Polyp formation has been documented in several cases
 of dogs with urocystoliths. The events promoting polyp
Managing ureteral obstruction
formation are unknown; however, it is logical to assume
that chronic irritation to the urinary bladder mucosa
Upper tract uroliths pose unique management problems
and bacterial infection contributes to mucosal hyper-
in part because most are composed of calcium oxalate
plasia. Although, polyps have been routinely managed
(Kyles et al. 2005; Lekcharoensuk et al. 2005). Medi-
surgically, inflammatory polyps have also spontaneously
 o s d   s 
regressed following eradication of uroliths and urinary
oxalate uroliths have not yet been developed. Difficulty
infection.
 in managing ureteroliths is magnified in cats because
Small uroliths located in the urinary bladder com-
ureteral surgery is associated with significant risks, espe-
monly pass into the urethra during the voiding phase
cially irreparable damage to the ureters and kidneys
of micturition. Uroliths whose diameter is slightly larger
(Kyles et al. 2005). For these reasons, we recommend
692
 Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Table 69.5 Methods of urolith removal
Method
 Suitable application
Considerations
Least
 Spontaneous voiding
Small(<3-5mm), asymptomatic
 Patients with uroliths larger than the urethral lumen may
invasive
urocystoliths with a relatively
develop urethral obstruction
slow growth rate (i.e., calcium
Concomitant UTI should be eradicated 
oxalate, calcium phosphate, uric
acid) in female patients 
 Medical dissolution
Sterile struvite (Table 69.6),
Sterile struvite and allopurinol-induced xanthine uroliths
infection-induced struvite (Table
dissolve within weeks
69.7), allopurinol-induced
Large infection-induced struvite stones may take 2-3 months to
 xanthine (Table 69.8), uric acid
dissolve
(Table 69.9), and cystine (Table
 Stones in kidney require longer dissolution time than stones in
69.10) stones are amenable to
the bladder
medication dissolution.
Urethral obstruction is uncommon during dissolution of struvite
stones for the following reasons: (1) Struvite uroliths commonly
occur in females. (2) The wvide urethra of females is less likely to
obstruction. (3) Bacteria infection promoting dysuria, which may
promote urolith movement into the urethral, is easily controlled 
with appropriate antimicobic administration.
Most
Catheter retrieval
To retrieve small urocystoliths (<3
 Can be performed without anesthesia
invasive
(Table 69.11)
mm) for quantitative mineral
analysis
Voiding
To evacuate small to moderate
Not suitable for male cats unless they have a perineal
urohydropropulsion
size (<5-7 mm) urocystoliths of
urethrostomy
(VUH-Table 69.12)
any composition
Not suitable for patients with a urethral obstruction
Not ideal for patients that have recently undergone bladder
surgery
Eradicate urinary infection prior to performing VUH.
Stone basket retrieval
Urocystoliths smaller than (<5-7
Performed during cystoscopy
mm) the distended diameter of
the urethra
 Urolith evacuators
 Small urocystoliths or urolith
 Most evacuators are designed to fit only the sheath of human
fragments following lithotripsy in
cystoscopes.
large female dogs
Can remove urolith fragments in large dogs too heavy to lift for
voiding urohydropropulsion
Intracorporeal
Urocystoliths in female dogs and 
Performed during cystoscopy
lithotripsy
cGats and urethroliths in male dogs.
The flexibility of probes for laser lithotripsy permit fragmentation
of urocystoliths in male dogs
The urethra of the male cat will rarely accommodate cystoscopy
equipment to perform lithotripsy
Large hard uroliths (calcium oxalate monohydrate) in male dogs
Extracorporeal shock
 Ureteroliths and nephroliths in
 Uroliths in the renal pelvis are easier to fragment than
wave lithotripsy
sbop
ureteroliths
(ESWL)
The ability to perform ESwL without damaging feline kidney is
 controversial-newer generation lithotriptors may prove safer 
Most
Laparoscopic assisted
Urocystoliths in dogs
 Requires training in cystoscopy and laparoscopic surgery
invasive
cystotomy
Cystotomy!
Urocystoliths or uroliths lodged in  Consider retrograde urohydropropulsion of urethroliths prior to
urethrotomy/
the urethra
urethrotomy or urethrostomy
urethrostomy
Cystotomy—failure to remove all uroliths in 15-20% of cases
Ureterotomy/
Clinically active ureteroliths
High degree of surgical skill required when performed on cats
ureteroneocystotomy/
Surgery performed on dilated ureters has been associated with
ureteroneoureterotomy
 greater success than normal-sized ureters
Pyelotomy!
 Nephroliths or ureteroliths flushed
 Some reduction in kidney function should be anticipated
nephrotomy
into the kidney
following surgery
Difficult to locate some stones in renal pelvis
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 693
Table 69.6 Dissolution of sterile struvite uroliths
Diagnostic plan
1. Perform appropriate diagnostic studies, including urinalysis (e.g. pH > 6.5, MAP crystalluria), diagnostic radiography (marginal
to obvious radio-opaque urolith), and urine culture (infection-induced struvite uroliths are commonly caused by Staphyloccal species
of bacteria), supporting the diagnosis of sterile MAP uroliths.
 2. Determine mineral composition of voided or retrieved uroliths. If unavailable, predict mineral composition by evaluating clinical
data (Tables 69.2-69.4).
Therapeutic plan
1. Consider mechanical removal (Table 69.5) if uroliths obstructing urine flow cannot be dislodged or if patients with a high risk of
urine outflow obstruction cannot be monitored.
2. Initiate therapy with a diet designed to dissolve magnesium ammonium phosphate uroliths (e.g. Hills Prescription diet s/d). No
(expected dissolution time = 3 to 5 weeks).
 Plan to monitor effiacy of therapy
1. Evaluate serial urinalyses. Urine pH should be acidic, urine specific gravity should be low (< 1.015 in dog and < 1.035 in cat
(lower if using the canned fod), and struvite crystalluria should be absent.
2. Continue calculolytic diet therapy for at least 1 month after survey radiographic disappearance of uroliths. The rationale is to
provide therapy of adequate duration to dissolve small uroliths that cannot be detected by survey radiography (uroliths < 3 mm in
diameter).
 3. If uroliths increase in size during dietary management or do not begin to decrease in size after approximately 2-4 weeks of
appropriate medical management, altemative methods of removal should be considered. Difficulty in inducing complete dissolution
of uroliths by creating urine that is undersaturated with calculogenic crystalloids should prompt consideration that (1) the wrong
nucleus of the urolith is of a different mineral composition than other portions of the urolith, or (3) the owner or the patient is not
complying with medical recommendations
Table 69.7 Recommendations for medical dissolution infection-induced struvite uroliths
Diagnostic plan
1. Perform appropriate diagnostic studies, including urinalysis (e.g., pH > 6.5, MAP crystalluria), diagnostic radiography
(radio-opaque urolith), and urine culture; infection induced struvite uroliths are commonly caused by Staphylococcal species of
bacteria).
 2. Determine mineral composition of voided or retrieved uroliths. If unavailable, predict mineral composition by evaluating clinical
data (Tables 69.2-69.4).
Therapeutic plan
1. Consider mechanical removal (Table 69.5) if uroliths obstructing urine flow cannot be dislodged or if patients with a high risk of
urine outflow obstruction cannot be monitored.
2. Eradicate urinary tract infection with appropriate antibiotics
Maintain antimicrobial therapy at the full dose during dissolution of uroliths and for approximately 1 month after dissolution
(expected dissolution time = 2-3 months).
3. Initiate therapy with a diet designed to dissolve struvite uroliths (e.g..Hills Prescription diet s/d). Other food, supplements, or
treats should not be fed. Continue dietary therapy for approximately 1 month after radiographic confirmation dissolution.
 Plan to monitor efficacy of therapy
1. Evaluate serial urinalyses. Urine pH should be acidic, urine specific gravity should be low (< 1.015 in dog and < 1.035 in cat
(lower if using the canned food), and MAP crystalluria should be absent.
2. Perform urine cultures to determine whether bacteria have been eradicated.
3. Perform radiography monthly to assess urolith number, size, and position.
4. If uroliths increase in size during therapy or do not begin to decrease in size after approximately 4-8 weeks of appropriate
complete dissolution of uroliths by creating urine that is undersaturated with the calculogenic crystalloids should prompt
consideration that (1) the wrong mineral component was diagnosed, (2) the nidus of the urolith is of different mineral composition
 than outer portions of the urolith, or (3) the owner or the patient is not complying with medlical recommendations, and (4) there is a
persistent urinary tract infection.
Table 69.8 Recommendations for medical dissolution of allopurinol-induced xanthine uroliths
Diagnostic plan
1. Perform appropriate diagnostic studies, including urinalysis (e.g., amorphous crystalluria), diagnostic radiography (marginally
uensuupe louundoe jo Aosy e pue(Aydenbouosen jopue Aydenbouanois iseuo bunbal yon anbedo-oe
supporting the diagnosis of xanthine uroliths.
2. If possible, verify mineral composition of voided or retrieved uroliths (Table 69.11).
Therapeutic plan
urine outflow obstruction cannot be monitored
2. Discontinue allopurinol administration
3. Initiate therapy with a calculolytic diet with low quantities of purines that promotes urine alkalization (e.g.,. Prescription Diet
Canine canned u/d for dogs or diets to manage patients with liver or kidney failure in cats). Other food or mineral supplements
should not be fed.
 Plan to monitor efficacy of therapy
1. Evaluate serial urinalyses. Urine pH should be alkaline, urine specific gravity should be low (<1.015 in dog and <1.035 in cat
(lower if using the canned food), and crystalluria should be absent.
 2. Perform radiography monthly to assess urolith number, size, and position (expected dissolution time = 1-2 months). If uroliths
grow during medical management or do not begin to dissolve in 4 weeks, alternative methods for urolith removal should be
considered (Table 69.5)
 managing cats with renal failure and ureteroliths by ini-
 In concept, surgical removal of uroliths that obstruct
tially using noninvasive medical protocols designed to
a ureter should decrease the magnitude of renal dysfunc-
restore fluid volume, correct electrolyte and acid-base 
 tion. However, determining when the benefits of ureteral
 imbalances associated with uremia, and promote migra-
 surgery outweigh, the risks is often difficult. The tim-
tion of ureterolith into the urinary bladder.
ing of surgical intervention depends on the severity and
Table 69.9 Recommendations for medical dissolution of urate uroliths in dogs
Diagnostic plan
1. Perform appropriate diagnostic studies, including urinalysis (amorphous crystalluria) and diagnostic radiography (marginally
radio-opaque urolith ogten requiring contrast cystourethrography or ultasonography). supporting the diagnosis of urate uroliths. In
liver size). Decreased liver function is uncommonly associated with urate uroliths in cats.
 2. Determine mineral composition of voided or retrieved uroliths (Table 69.11). If unavailable, predict mineral composition by
evaluating dinical data (Tables 69.2-69.4).
Therapeutic plan
1. Consider mechanical removal (Table 69.5) if uroliths obstructing urine flow cannot be dislodged or if patients with a high risk of
urine outflow obstruction cannot be monitored
predictable). Other food supplements should not be fed to the patient
(suaed sjualoze u! panbai aq m asopiassal e) Od y Zl b bybu sl jo ahesop eie jouundoe ym Adeayi aieul '
 4. If necessary, administer potassum citrate or sodium bicarbonate orally in order to eliminate aciduria. Strive for a urine pH of 7 or
higher.
Plan to monitor efficacy of therapy
 2. Evaluate serial urinalyses. Urine pH should be greater than 7, specific gravity should be less than 1.020, and urate crystals should
be absent.
3. Perform serial radiography at monthly intervals to evaluate reductions in urolith number a size.
 4. Continue calculolytic diet and allopurinol for approximately 1 month after disappearance of uroliths as detected by medical
imaging.
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 695
Table 69.10 Recommendations for medical dissolution of cystine uroliths
Diagnostic plan
Aeubiewj Aydeihopen pjsouhep pue (euneisan aus) sisAieuun bupnpu 'sapnis psoubep aeudoidde woad 
suon aus jo sisoubep e buoddns (Aydeihouosenn no Aydenbouainois iseuon buunbai yon anbedo-oe
 2. Determine mineral composition of voided or retrieved uroliths (Table 69.11). If unavailable, predict mineral composition by
evaluating clinical data (Tables 69.2-69.4).
Therapeutic plan
 1. Consider mechanical removal (Table 69.5) if uroliths obstructing urine flow cannot be dislodged or if patients with a high risk of
urine outflow obstruction cannot be monitored.
 2. Initiate therapy with calculolytic diet (e.g. Prescription Diet Canine canned u/d). Other food or mineral supplements should not
be fed.
 3. Initiate therapy with N-(2-mecrcaptopropionyl)-glycine (2-MPG), approximately 15 mg/kg q I2 h PO. Other Thiol-containing drugs
(D-penicillamine, captopril, and bucillamine) are available to augment cystine dissolution; however, because of their unproven 
efficacy or increased toxicity, they require more careful monitoring.
 4. If necessary, administer potassium citrate orally (75 mg/kg q I2 h) to induce alkaluria. Titrate dose to achieve a pH of 7 or slightly
 greater.
Plan to monitor efficacy of therapy (4-6 week intervals)
 1. Try to minimize follow-up studies that require urinary catheterization, but if they are required, give appropriate
peri-catheterization antimicrobial agents to prevent iatrogenic catheter-induced UTI.
 2. Evaluate serial urinalyses. Urine pH should be greater than 7, specific gravity should be less than 1.020, and crystals should be
absent.
3. Perform serial radiography at monthly intervals to evaluate reductions in urolith number a size.
4. Contin calculolyticdit, MPG, and alkalinizing therapyforaproximate mnthafdisappearancef urolthase
by radiography.
Table 69.11 Catheter retrieval of uroliths
1. Sedation
For most dogs, sedation is unnecessary: however, sterile lubricant with topical anesthetics
(e.g., lidocaine) can improve patient comfort. Transurethral catheterization of most cats
requires sedation.
2. Catheter selection
Select the largest catheter that can be easily inserted into the urethra. We commonly use
aui seui os in ayioos si din jeis aui shop ui alaixal siaiauie ahel o g g 'aaiss
catheter is open at the end.
 3. Measure catheter insertion length
Determine the length of catheter that must be inserted so that the open end reaches the
trigone. This distance is easily determined by measuring urethral length from a radiograph.
 4. Place catheter transurethrally
The well lubricated, sterile catheter from #2 above is advanced through the urethra into the
bladder lumen, and the patient is placed in lateral recumbency
5. Fill the urinary bladder
If the urinary bladder is not distended with urine, it should be moderately distended with
sterile physiologic solutions (e.g., LRS, normal saline)
 6. Agitate the bladder while
While aspirating fluid from the bladder through the catheter into a syringe, vigorously and
removing fluid
repeatedly agitate the bladder. The bladder is agitated by placing your hand (palm up)
between the patient (in the area of the bladder) and table. Repeatedly flex and extend your
fingers to move the animal's abdomen (i.e., urinary bladder) up and down. This maneuver will
disperse uroliths throughout fluid in the bladder lumen. Small uroliths in the vicinity of the
catheter tip are easily aspirated into the catheter along with the fluid.
7. Repeat steps 5 and 6
It may be necessary to repeat this sequence of steps several times before a sufficient quantity
of uroliths are retrieved. Difficulty in aspirating fluid may be caused by poor catheter position
(position catheter tip in trigone of bladder) or occlusion of the catheter lumen with uroliths
to remove uroliths occurs when the bladder is almost empty. Therefore, we instill no more than
60 ml of saline, and use a 60 ml syringe to remove bladder contents (i.e., stones).
696  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Table 69.12 Performing voiding urohydropropulsion
 1. Anesthetize the patient
The type of anesthesia selected may vary based on the likelihood of success and gender of the
patient. Consider reversible short acting anesthetics for patients with very small uroliths that 
are easily removed. Patients likely to go to surgery/lithotripsy should be placed under
inhalation anesthesia. Immediately prior to voiding, consider injecting a short-acting drug like
 propofol to insure urethral relaxation: it is very helpful in male dogs.
2. Attach a 3-way stopcock to the
The three-way stopcock facilitates control of the volume of fluid entering the bladder and
end of the urinary catheter
containment of fluid once the bladder is filled.
 3. Fill the urinary bladder and
Sterile physiologic solutions (LRs, normal saline) are injected through a transurethral catheter
remove the catheter
to distend the bladder. If fluid is expelled prematurely around the catheter prior to adequate
bladder filling. the vulva and/or urethra can be gently occuded using your thumb and first
finger. Placement of additional fluid may not be needed.
4. Position the patient such that the 
 Repositioning the patient allows uroliths to accumulate at the neck of the bladder, facilitating
spine is approximately vertical
 their expulsion. Anatomically, the urethra does not become vertical until the caudal spine is
20-25 degrees anterior of vertical, but this may not be clinically important.
5. Agitate the bladder
Agitating the urinary bladder left and right is performed to dislodge uroliths loosely adhered to
the bladder mucosa.
6. Express the urinary bladder
Apply steady digital pressure to the urinary bladder to induce micturition. Compress the
urinary bladder dorsally and cranially (toward the back and head of the patient). Movement of
 the urinary bladder caudally toward the pelvic canal may cause the urethra to kink, preventing
maximal urethral dilation. Once voiding begins, the bladder is more vigorously compressed
7. Repeat steps 2-6
The bladder is flushed repeatedly until no uroliths are expelled.
8. Medical imaging
Radiography provides an appropriate method of assessing successful expulsion of uroliths. To
enhance detection of remaining small uroliths, consider double-contrast cystography (only the
lateral view is needed).
rate of progression of renal dysfunction, the potential
functional, or (4) surgeons are unfamiliar with appropri-
for reversing renal dysfunction, the potential for urolith
ate surgical techniques.
migration through the ureter, the presence of infection
 or uncontrollable pain, and risks associated with surgery
of the ureters. If a urolith obstructs a ureter in a patient
Urolith prevention
with previously compensated renal failure and causes
Prevention of recurrent uroliths reduces the need for
an abrupt decline in renal function associated with life-
repeat surgery and is therefore cost effective. In general,
threatening hyperkalemia and/or acidemia that cannot
 preventative strategies are designed to eliminate or con-
be controlled by peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis, sur-
trol the underlying causes of various types of uroliths.
gical intervention should be considered.
When causes cannot be identified or corrected, preven-
Although placement of nephrostomy tubes to bypass
obstructed ureters may be considered as a method of tem-
tors associated with calculogenesis. These strategies com
porarily improving renal function, maintaining nephros-
monly include dietary and pharmacologic considerations
tomy tube position, seal, and patency for longer than 24
(Figures 69.4-69.10).
hours is often technically difficult (Nwadike et al. 2000;
Hardie and Kyles 2004). In addition to severe unrespon-
 sive azotemia, if infection and pain cannot be appro-
Selection of an appropriate diet to
 priately managed, surgical ureterolith removal should
prevent caicium oxalate urolith recurrence
is challenging
be considered. Because of the high risk of irreparable
ureteral damage associated with ureterotomy, surgical
Results of experimental and clinical investigations have
removal of ureterolith removal is not recommended if
demonstrated the importance of dietary modifications
(1) ureteroliths are migrating through the ureter, (2)
in medical protocols to prevent urolith recurrence. How-
azotemia is resolving, (3) the associated kidney is non-
ever, selecting an appropriate diet to prevent CaOx
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 697
Table 69.13 Retrograde urohydropropulsion
1. Decompress urinary bladder
Urethroliths cannot be safely flushed back into a bladder overdistended with urine. To empty
the bladder, use a 22g, 1.5-inch needle attached to IV extension tubing, three-way stopcock,
and large volume syringe to remove urine. By using the intravenous extension tubing and
3-way stopcock, the urinary bladder willnot have to be repunctured after emptying a full
syringe of urine. Excessive digital pressure should not be applied to the bladder wall while the
needle is in its lumen lest urine be forced around the needle into the peritoneal cavity.
of the needle may then damage the bladder wall. We recommend that 10-15 ml of urine
remain in the bladder.
 2. Lubricate around the urethroliths
 Fill one 12 ml syringe with 5 mL of saline and another 12 ml syringe with 5mls of sterile
water-soluble lubricant. Attach these two syringes with a 3-way stopcock. Mix the contents of
both syringes by emptying one syringe into the other several times. After inserting a urethral
catheter, inject 3-8 mL of mixture to lubricate around uroliths. This step is not always
necessary.
 3. Insert catheter
 Insert a lubricated large bore flexible catheter. The tip of the catheter should remain distal to
urethroliths.
 4. Occlude pelvic urethra
Insert a gloved index finger into the rectum and occlude the urethral lumen by compressing
the urethra against the floor or side of the bony pelvis.
 5. Occlude distal urethra
With a moistened gauze sponge, occude the distal urethra by compressing the distal tip of
 penis around the catheter
6. Forcefully flush fluid through
Fill a large syringe (20-35 mL) with sterile isotonic solution (e.g., saline, LRS, etc.). The normal
catheter
bladder holds approximately 1.5-2.5 ml per kg of the patient's weight. With the syringe
attached to the catheter, turn it upside down, and place the top of the plunger against the
tabletop. Hold the syringe by the barrel and forcefully push it down over the plunger with the
goal of dilating the urethral lumen with saline.
 7. Relieve occlusion of pelvic
 Once the urethra becomes dilated, digital pressure applied to the pelvic urethra (but not the
urethra
penile urethra) should be rapidly released.
8. Continue Flushing
Continue flushing fluid through the catheter and urethral lumen to propel urethroliths into the
urinary bladder. Use caution not to over-distend the bladder lumen with saline. If the
technique is repeated, accumulation of saline in the bladder lumen necessitates repeating
decompressive cystocentesis.
9. Medical Imaging
Radiography provides an appropriate method of assessing whether or not all of the uroliths
have been flushed into the bladder lumen. Transurethral catheterization is not a reliable
method of verifying that all uroliths have been flushed out of the urethra.
uroliths is challenging because (1) the exact mechanisms
events, it is accepted that initial crystal formation and
underlying calcium oxalate urolith formation are not
subsequent crystal growth are at least partly a reflection
completely understood, (2) results of epidemiological
of urine supersaturation (Chapter 12). However, unlike
studies do not always match physiology response of diet
other stone types, the urinary concentrations of calculo-
characteristics, and (3) diet efficacy has not been eval-
genic minerals may not be the predominant driving force
uated using clinically relevant endpoints. The following
for CaOx urolith formation. For example, 68 proteins
sections highlight each of these concerns.
were recently identified in matrix of CaOx uroliths from
humans (Canales et al. 2008). We have identified over
30 proteins in CaOx uroliths from dogs (unpublished
Mechanisms underlying calcium
results). The functional relationship of some of these pro-
oxalate urolith formation are not
teins is unknown and be present because they inadver-
completely understood
tently become enveloped in stones as they form. Nonethe-
Although formation of CaOx uroliths is associated with
less, several proteins (e.g-, osteopontin, nephrocalcin,
a complex and incompletely understood sequence of
Tamm-Horsfall, bikunin, and αl-antitripsin) are known
698
Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Medical:
· Metabolic risk factors promoting alkalemia (hypoxemia, chronic diuretic use, administration of
antacids, chronic vomiting, and hyperaldosteronism) and subsequent alkaluria are rarely
encountered. Sterile Struvite stones are commonly reported in cats and in English and
 American Cocker spaniel dogs.
· Reduction for some risk factors for Struvite urolith formation, including formation of acidic
urine, may increase risk for calcium oxalate urolith formation.
Dietary:
 Diets restricted in phosphorus and magnesium that promote formation of acid urine (i.e., pH≤
 6.3), minimize formation of sterile Struvite uroliths.
 High moisture foods (i.e., canned formulations) are more effective because increased water
consumption is associated with decreased urine concentrations of calculogenic minerals.
Pharmacological:
 Consider methionine or ammonium chloride to acidify the urine of patients consuming
nonacidifying diets.
Prolonged systemic over-acidification may result in metabolic acidosis, hypercalciuria,
hypokalemia, and demineralization of bone.
Repeat baseline data:
urinalysis
medical imaging
+
▼
pH≤6.5
Struvite
Calcium
Urolith
USG <1.020 to 1.030
crystalluria
oxalate
No or few crystals
crystalluria
▼
 Repeat urinalysis
Verify persistent,in
Verify
Verify
monthly, then
vivo crystalluria by
persistent, in
urolith
every 3 to 6
reevaluating an
vivo
composition
months.
appropriately
crystalluria by
(Tables
 Repeat urinalysis
collected (in
reevaluating an
69.2-69.4).
and medical 
hospital) fresh urine 
appropriately
 Select
imaging if signs
pazleue adues
collected (in
urolith
consistent with
within 2 hours.
hospital) fresh
management
uroliths
· If USG >1.020 to
urine sample
(Table 69.5).
(urinating in
1.030, consider
house, hematuria,
canned diets or
within 2 hours.
dysuria, etc.)
 adding water to food.
If USG >1.020
recur.
· If urine pH> 6.5,
to 1.030
consider diets that
consider
 promote excretion of
canned diet or
acidic urine or use of
adding water
urinary acidifiers.
to food.
Figure 69.4 Strategies to prevent sterile struvite urolith recurrence.
 to influence crystal nucleation, growth, and aggregation.
Results of epidemiological studies do
In experimentally induced hyperoxaluria, intratubular
not always match physiology response of
CaOx crystalluria was detected in ostoeopontin and
diet characteristics
Tamm-Horsfallknockout mice, but did not occur in wild-
Few studies have evaluated the risk of dietary ingredi-
type controls (Mo et al. 2007). These findings indicate
ents on CaOx urolith formation. In these studies, the
the importance of other substances besides the concen-
most influential dietary attributes have been urine acid-
trations of minerals in urine in the generation of CaOx
ifying potential and the quantities of calcium, protein,
uroliths.
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 699
Medical:
● Eradication and prevention of urease-producing bacteria is essential to prevent urolith
recurrence.
● If possible, correct structural (e.g., polypoid cystitis, congenital and acquired
anomalies, perivulvar dermatitis, etc.) and functional (e.g., hyperadrenocortisim,
diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, etc.) defects in host defenses predisposing to
urinary tract infection.
● Avoid impairment of host defenses (e.g., corticosteroid administration, urinary
catheterization, etc.).
Dietary:
 Diets restricted in phosphorus and magnesium that promote formation of acid urine
may be helpful, but cannot be used as a substitute for good control of infection.
Pharmacological:
 Antimicrobic selection should be based on culture and susceptibility results.
Repeat baseline data:
urine culture
urinalysis
medical imaging
 Negative culture
Positive culture
Calcium
Urolith
oxalate
crystalluria
 Repeat culture
 Identify and eradicate
monthly, then every
treatabie risk factors (e.g.
Verify urolith
3 to 6 months
recurrent uroliths).
composition
 Repeat culture with
 Initiate antimicrobic
(Tables
si gns of emerging
 therapy based on
69.2-69.4).
infection (licking
susceptibility results.
· Select urolith
vulva, urinating in
Consider long-term (4 to 6
management
house, dysuria,
weeks) antimicrobics.
(Table 69.5).
hematuria, etc.).
Verify antimicrobic
effectiveness (culture
urine during therapy).
Verify persistent, in vivo
 Once infection is
crystalluria by reevaluating
eradicated, consider low-
 an appropriately collected
dose (1/3 to 1/2 daily
(in hospital) fresh urine
dose), long-term (9 to 12
 Negative culture
sample analyzed within 2
 months) antimicrobics and
hours.
 monitor with periodic
● If persistent and in breeds 
(bimonthly) urine
 that are at increased risk for
No recurrence
cultures.
CaOx uroliths, consider
discontinuation of diets that
promote formation of acidic
urine.
Figure 69.5 Strategies to prevent infection-induced struvite urolith recurrence.
700
 Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Medical:
· Canine breeds other than Dalmatians and Bulldogs commonly have portovascular
anomalies. In these dogs, treatment of liver disease should complement treatment of
uroliths.
· Impaired liver function is uncommonly documented in cats with urate uroliths.
Dietary:
Provide reduced-protein (i.e., consistent with low purine) diets (Prescription diet u/d, 1/d,
d/d-egg) that promote diuresis and excretion of alkaline urine.
 High moisture foods (i.e., canned formulations) are more effective because increased
water consumption is associated with decreased urine concentrations of calculogenic
minerals.
Pharmacological:
 If dietary therapy alone is ineffective, consider long-term therapy with allopurinol (5 to 10
mg/kg/day). Higher doses of allopurinol, especially when given with higher protein
foods, increase the risk of xanthine urolith formation.
Consider potassium citrate if urine pH is not consistently ≥ 7.
Repeat baseline data:
urinalysis
medical imaging
pH>7
Urate
Struvite
Urolith
USG <1.020 to 1.030
crystalluria
crystalluria
No or few crystals
 Repeat urinalysis
Verify persistent, in
Verify
Verify
monthly, then
vivo crystalluria by
 persistent, in
urolith
every 3 to 6
reevaluating an
vivo
composition
months.
appropriately
crystalluria.
(Tables
 Repeat medical
collected (in hospital)
· In dogs, if not 
69.2-69.4).
imaging every 3 to
 pazieue Xlawn pue
associated with
Select
6 months (urolith
(within 30 minutes)
urease UTI,
urolith
recurrence is
fresh urine sample.
crystalluria is
management
common).
· If USG >1.020 to
clinically
(Table 69.5).
 Repeat urinalysis
1.030, consider
insignificant.
and medical
canned diets or adding
· In cats,
suBis j Burbeut
water to food.
consider
consistent with
· If urine pH <7,
canned food or
uroliths (urinating
consider diets that
adding water
in house,
 promote excretion of
to food to
stranguria,
alkaline urine or use
reduce the
hematuria, etc.)
 of urinary alkalinizers
concentration
recur.
(e.g-, potassium
of calculogenic
citrate).
minerals.
Figure 69.6 Strategies to prevent urate urolith recurrence.
and sodium (Table 69.14) (Lekcharoensuk et al. 2002a,
Diet efficacy has not been evaluated using
2002b). Of the many dietary attributes evaluated, only
clinically relevant endpoints
two are consistently corroborated by results of experi-
Ideally, studies to prevent CaOx urolith formation should
mental studies; diets formulated to promote more acidic
  jo s e  sp u d 
urine and diets with low moisture content (i.e., kibble)
cium oxalate stones. In addition, investigators and clients
increase the risk of CaOx formation. Therefore, canned
 diets designed to promote formation of neutral or alka-
 e s  on e   o
assigned the therapeutic food and the control food.
line urine should be considered to minimize CaOx urolith
Moreover, studies should reliable endpoints of urolith
recurrence.
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 701
Medical:
● Hypercalcemia is uncommon, if detected, its cause should investigated and controlled.
 Hypercalciuria, a risk factor of CaOx urolithiasis has been associated with
hyperadrenocorticism, exogenous glucocorticoid administration, and metabolic acidosis.
Dietary:
Avoid calcium supplements and foods containing high quantities of oxalate (e.g.:
chocolate, peanuts, etc.)
 Provide reduced-protein diets (Prescription diet w/d, g/d) that promote diuresis and
formation of alkaline urine.
 High moisture foods (i.e., canned formulations) are more effective because increased
water consumption is associated with decreased urine concentrations of calculogenic
minerals.
Pharmacological:
 Consider potassium citrate if urine pH is not consistently less than 7.
Consider vitamin B6 (2 to 4 mg q 24 to 48 hours) in patients consuming primarily human
food or diets of insufficient B6 content.
 Consider thiazide diuretics (hydrochlorothizide 2 mg/kg q12 hours) in dogs with highly
recurrent disease
Repeat baseline data:
urinalysis
medical imaging
pH 6.5 to 7.5
CaOx
Struvite
Urolith
USG <1.020 to 1.030
crystalluria
crystalluria
 No or few crystals
· Repeat urinalysis
Verify persistent, in-
Verify
Verify
monthly, then
vivo crystalluria by
 persistent, in
urolith
every 3 to 6
reevaluating an
vivo
composition
months.
appropriately
crystalluria.
(Tables
· Repeat medical
collected (in hospital)
In dogs, if not 
69.2-69.4).
imaging every 3 to
fresh urine sample
associated with
+ Select
6 months (urolith
analyzed within 2
urease UTI,
urolith
recurrence is
hours.
crystalluria is
management
common).
· If USG >1.020 to
clinically
(Table 69.5).
Repeat urinalysis
1.030, consider
unimportant.
 and medical
 canned diets or adding
In cats,
imaging if signs
water to food.
consistent with
If urine pH <7,
uroliths (urinating
consider diets that
 adding water
in house,
promote formation of
to food to
stran guria,
alkaline urine or use
reduce the
hematuria, etc.)
of urinary alkalinizes
concentration
recur.
(e.g., potassium
of calculogenic
citrate)
minerals.
Figure 69.7 Strategies to prevent calcium oxalate urolith recurrence.
recurrence (i.e., medical imaging). We are not aware
New modalities to manage calcium
of any published studies meeting these basic criteria.
oxalate prevention
So, how can veterinarians make recommendations? The
Bisphosphonates to reduce urinary calcium excretion
two most commonly prescribed diets to prevent CaOx
urolith recurrence in dogs are Prescription Diet u/d?
 Bisphosphonates are synthetic inorganic pyrophosphates
that have a high affinity for binding divalent ions such as
(Table 69.15)?
calcium. They are important pharmacologically because
702
 Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Medical:
· Hypercalcemia is not uncommon, if detected (ionized Ca), its cause should investigated
and corrected.
● Hypercalciuria, a risk factor of CaP urolithiasis has been associated with
hyperadrenocorticism, exogenous glucoc orticoid administration, and metabolic acidosis.
Dietary:
+
Avoid calcium supplerments and vitamin D.
+
 Provide diets (prescription diet w/d) that promote diuresis and formation of alkaline
urine.
High moisture foods (i.e., canned formul ations) are more effective because increased
water consumption is associated with decreased urine concentrations of calculogenic
minerals.
Pharmacological:
Consider potassium citrate if urine pH is not consistently less than 7.
Consider bisphosphonates (see New modalities to look for in the future).
Repeat baseline data:
urinalysis
medical imaging
pH 6.5 to 7.5
CaP
Struvite
Urolith
USG <1.020 to 1.030
crystalluria
crystalluria
No or few crystals
Repeat urinalysis
Verify persistent, in-
Verify
Verify
monthly, then
vivo crystalluria by
persistent, in
urolith
every 3 to 6
reevaluating an
vivo
composition
months.
appropriately
crystalluria.
(Tables
+ Repeat medical
collected (in hospital)
+ In dogs, if not
69.2-69.4).
imaging every 3 to
fresh urine sample
associated with
+ Select
6 months (urolith
analyzed within 2
urease UTI,
urolith
recurrence is
hours.
crystalluria is
management
common if
+ If USG >1.020 to
clinically
(Table 69.5).
underlying cause
1.030, consider
unimpor tant.
persists).
canned diets or adding
+ In cats,
● Repeat urinalysis
water to food.
consider
and medical
+ If urine pH <7,
imaging if signs
consider diets that
adding water
consistent with
promote formation of
to food to
uroliths (urinating
alkaline urine or use
reduce the
in house,
 of urinary alkalinizes
concentration
stranguria,
(e.g., potassium
of calculogenic
hematuria, etc.)
citrate).
minerals
Figure 69.8 Strategies to prevent calcium phosphate urolith recurrence. With the exception of Brushite, calcium phosphates tend to
be less soluble in alkaline urine. Whether patients will benefit from less-acid urine is unknown because acidification enhances urine
calcium excretion. Calcium phosphate carbonate stones usually result from infections with bacteria elaborating urease. Therefore, calcium
carbonate is a common component of struvite stones. Manage similar to infection-induced struvite stones by encouraging appropriate
antimicrobic use and control of UTI and avoid dietary therapy promoting formation of acidic urine.
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 703
Medical:
● Investigate if active or inactive components of medications and vitamin/mineral
 supplements contain silica. If so, select an altermative without silica.
● In humans, silica uroliths have been associated with antacid (magnesium trisilicate) use.
Dietary:
● Investigate if foods contain whole grains (e.g., certain natural diets; diets containing 
substantial corn gluten feed (not com gluten meal) or soybean hulls are suspect), and
eliminate.
 Investigate and eliminate pica of grasses, woody plants, and dirt.
 High moisture foods (i.e., canned formulations) are more effective because increased
water consumption is associated with decreased urine concentrations of calculogenic
minerals.
 Provide high quality foods containing higher quantities of animal protein and lower
quantities of vegetable food stuffs.
We do not recommend sodium-induced diuresis because CaOx is sometimes associated
with silica, and sodium promotes calcium excretion.
Repeat baseline data:
urinalysis
medical imaging
USG <1.020
pH ≥6.5
Urolith
Identifiable silica crystals have not
been observed
 Repeat urinalysis monthly, then every 3 to
Verify
6 months.
urolith
● If urine is persistently acidic (pH<6),
composition
consider potassium citrate to approach a
(Tables
more neutral urine pH.
69.2-69.4).
Repeat medical imaging every 4-6 months
Select
(urolith recurrence is variable).
urolith
Repeat urinalysis and medical imaging
management
when signs consistent with uroliths 
(Table 69.5).
(urinating in house, stranguria, hematuria,
etc.) recur.
Figure 69.9 Strategies to prevent silica urolith recurrence.
these compounds stabilize bone minimizing calcium
mizing its intestinal absorption and subsequent urinary
release in blood (Hostutleer et al. 2005) and excretion
excretion.
in urine (Basok et al. 2008) and are water soluble and
renally excreted to bind calcium in urine.
Preventing compound uroliths
Compound uroliths comprised approximately 8% of the
 Probiotics to reduce urinary oxalate excretion
uroliths submitted to the Minnesota Urolith Center (Fig-
Oxalobacter formigenes is an obligate anaerobic bac-
ure 69.3). Compound uroliths form because factors ini-
terium that resides in the intestine of most vertebrates
tially promoting precipitation of one type of mineral
and relies exclusively on the metabolism of oxalate as
its sole source of energy. Human patients adminis-
of a different mineral. Because risk factors that predis-
tered Oxalobacter formigenes, as enteric coated capsules
 pose to precipitation of different minerals in compound
 reduced their urinary oxalate levels by 39-92% (Hoppe
uroliths are often complex, designing effective medical
et al. 2006). Other intestinal bacteria (e.g-, Lactobacil-
protocols to manage them can be a unique challenge.
lus acidophilus) also metabolize intestinal oxalate mini-
In the absence of clinical evidence to the contrary, we
704  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Medical:
+ Urine nitroprusside test is a screening test for cystinuria.
● Genetic tests in Newfoundlands and Labrador retrievers are available to confirm genetic
error in metabolism (Medical Genetics laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania).
Dietary:
 Provide reduced-protein diets that promote diuresis and formation of alkaline urine.
High-moisture foods (i.e., canned formulations) are more effective because increased
water consumption is associated with decreased urine concentrations of calculogenic
minerals.
Pharmacological:
If diet alone is ineffective, consider n-(2-mercaptoropionyl)-glycine (i.e., 2-MPG, also
+
called ThiolaTM) at 10 to 30 mg/kg per day to maintain a urine cystine concentration below
200 mg/L
 Consider potassium citrate if urine pH is not consistently ≥ 7.
Repeat baseline data:
urinalysis
medical imaging
Desired goals:
Cystine
pH ≥7
Urolith
crystalluria
USG <1.020
No or few cystine crystals
 Repeat urinalysis
Verify persistent, in vivo
Verify
monthly, then every
crystalluria by reevaluating an
urolith
3 to 6 months.
appropriately collcted (in
composition
Repeat medical
hospital) fresh urine sample
(Tables
imaging every 3 to 6
analyzed within 2 hours.
69.2-69.4).
months (urolith
+ If USG >1.020, consider canned 
+ Select
recurrence is
 diets or adding water to food.
urolith
common).
+ If urine pH <7, consider diets that
management
● Repeat urinalysis and
promote formation of alkaline
(Table 69.5).
 medical imaging if
urine or use of urinary alkalinizes
signs consistent with
(e.g., potassium citrate).
uroliths (urinating in
· Initiate or increase the dose of
house, stranguria,
 medications that bind cysteine in
hematuria, etc.)
urine (e.g., Thiola).
recur.
Figure 69.10 Strategies to prevent cystine urolith recurrence.
recommend prevention protocols principally designed
found in the outer layers. Because excessive concentra-
to minimize recurrence of minerals that comprised the
tion of minerals in urine is a prerequisite for urolith
nucleus, rather than the outer layers (Lulich and Osborne
formation, it follows that increased water intake would
2000).
logically lead to reduction in urine concentration of
Logic suggests that the initial core (i.e., nidus) con-
all lithogenic minerals, irrespective of their location
tributed to the formation of outer layers. Therefore,
 or type and thus minimize recurrence. Formation of
minimizing risk factors for precipitation of minerals
large volumes of less concentrated urine also decreases
found in the core minimize precipitation of minerals
the risk of urolithiasis by increasing the frequency of
Canine and feline urolithiasis: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 705
Table 69.14 Evaluation of dietary risk factors for calcium oxalate formation in dogs
 Dietary component
Epidemiologic result
Comments
Conclusion
 Urine acidifying
Diets promoting urine pH
Acidic urine was also the most
To reduce calcium oxalate,
potential
values less than 6.6 had the
important risk factor for calcium
urolith recurrence select diets
highest association with
oxalate urolith formation in cats (Kirk
promoting alkalosis and urine
calcium oxalate formation in
1995: Lekcharoensuk 2001). Urine pH
 pH values greater than 6.5.
dogs consuming dry
values greater than 6.5 were
formulations of food
associated with decreased risk. This is
(Lekcharoensuk 2002)
physiologically plausible because in
dogs alkalosis reduced urine calcium
excretion (Marone 1983).
Protein
Lower protein diets (1.9-5.8
Epidemiological studies do not
Until experimental studies
g/100 kcal) were associated
demonstrate cause and effect but
evaluating different protein
with increased risk. Higher
 associations to investigate further. In
contents are performed in dogs
protein diets (>6.25 g/100
contrast to the studies by
with calcium oxalate stones, we
kcal were associated with
Lekarchoensuk and colleagues,
recommend that protein be
fewer stones. Lekcharoensuk
hypercalciuia from increased animal
 minimized to prevent calcium
2002)
protein consumption (>77 g/day)
 oxalate recurrence. The exact
increased the risk of calcium oxalate
quantity has not been
stones in man compared to the lowest
determined.
intake (<50 g/day) (Curhan 1993).
 Several mechanisms are responsible
for the hypercalciuria: (1) dietary
protein increases glomerular filtration
and thus the filtered load of calcium,
(2) decreased renal fractional
reabsorption of calcium is attributed to
protein's acid load or due to the
hyperinsulinemic effects of protein.
Calcium
Ironically, epidemiologic
In an experimental study in dogs, diets 
To reduce urolith recurence
studies indicate that diets with 
with the lowest calcium (1.8 mg/kcal)
diets should have lower
lower quantities of calcium
and oxalate (0.1 mg/kcal) were
quantities of calcium and 
(<2.2 mg/kcal) are a risk factor
associated with the lowest relative 
oxalate
for urolith formation
supersaturation (RSS) for CaOx
(Stevenson 2003). Diets with high
calcium (7.5 mg/kcal) and low oxalate
resulted in the highest CaOx RSS.
micturition and thus the frequency that crystals would
tion. In this situation, we recommend that emphasis be
be voided.
placed on minimizing recurrence of CaOx uroliths, since
The most common compound urolith identified at
CaOx was the nidus and cannot be dissolved medically. In
the Minnesota Urolith Center contains a nidus of CaOx
contrast, struvite uroliths can often be dissolved by med-
and outer layers of struvite. Unlike uroliths predomi-
ical protocols. For uroliths containing a core of CaOx
nantly composed of CaOx, which occur more often in
surrounded by a shell of infection-induced struvite, it
males, the majority of compound uroliths with a cal-
is logical to assume that the initial episode of CaOx
cium oxalate core and outer layers of struvite occurred
uroliths predisposed the patient to infection-induced
more commonly in female dogs. The paradox in man-
struvite uroliths. Therefore, preventative management
aging patients forming uroliths with CaOx and struvite
should include efforts to eradicate or control recurrent
is that attempts to minimize risk factors for struvite for-
UTI's. Our preventative therapy would be identical even
mation (such as reducing urine pH, magnesium, and
if the location of the minerals were reversed, a struvite
phosphorus) increase the risk for CaOx urolith forma-
nidus with outer layers of calcium oxalate.
706  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Table 69.15 Comparing the dietary characteristic of diets commonly used to prevent CaOx urolith recurrence 
Prescription diet u/d 
Urinary S0 14
Canned
Dry
Canned
Dry
Protein g/100 kcal
2.9
2.6
3.7
4.0
Fat g/100 kcal
5.8
4.7
5.9
4.0
Carbohydrate g/100 kcal
12.2
14.5
7.9
13.0
Calcium g/100 kcal
0.076
0.077
0.2
0.19
Phosphorus g/100 kcal
0.038
0.035
0.17
0.15
Sodium g/100 kcal
0.061
0.052
0.29
0.33
Potassium g/100 kcal
0.098
0.125
0.16
0.23
Magnesium g/100 kcal
0.011
0.011
0.012
0.016
Urine pH
7.1-7.7
5.5-6.0
 Urine Ca mmol/L
1.22 ± 0.18a
1.29 ± 0.90b
Urine Ox mmol/L
0.744 ± 0.014a
0.91 ± 0.78b
CaOx RSS
ND
7.76 ± 7.1b
Zop a uand yn  paf aam sha sisen anelex wne ym shop pauou g u paad sem Apns se
weeks at which time 24-hour urine samples were collected in metabolism cages. This study was performed at the University of Minnesota
(Lulich, J.P., et al. (2001). J Am Vet Med Ass0c 218: 1583-1586).
bThis study was performed in 13 client-owned dogs with calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Dogs were fed the urolith prevention diet for 1
month before daily voluntarily voided urine was collected by owners. This study was performed by the Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition
(Stevenson, A.E., et. al. (2004). Vet Therapeut 5: 218-231).
References
Lulich, I.P, C.A. Osborne, et al. (2008). Effcacy and Safety of Laser
Lithotripsy to Rermove Urocystoliths and Urethroliths in Dogs: 100
Basok EK, A. Basaran, et al. (2008). Are new-generation bisphospho-
Consecutive Cases. Accepted for publication JAVMA.
nates effective for the inhibition of calcium oxalate stone formation
Lulich, J.P, C.A. Osborne (1992). Catheter-assisted retrieval of uro-
in a rat model? Urologia Intermationalis 81: 325-329.
cystoliths from dogs and cats. Am I Vet Med Assoc 201: 1ll-
Bevan, L.M. and J.P Lulich (2008). Comparison of Laser Lithotripsy and
113.
Cystotomy for the Management of Canine Urolithiasis. Accepted for
Lulich, IP. and C.A. Osborne (2000). Compound uroliths: treat-
 publication in JAVMA.
ment and prevention. In: Current Veterinary Therapy, edited by
Canales, B.K., L. Anderson, et al. (2008). I Endourol 22: 1l6l-1168.
ID. Bonagura. Vol. 13. Philadelphia PA: WB Saunders, Pp. 874-
Hardie, E.M. and A.E. Kyles (2004). Management of ureteral obstruc-
877.
tion. Vet Clin North America 34: 989-1010.
Lulich, J.P. and C.A. Osborne (2009). Changing paradigms in the
Hoppe, B., B. Beck, et al. (2006). Oxalobacter formigenes: a potential
diagnosis of urolithiasis. Vet Clin North Am, Small Anim Pract 39:
tool for the treatment of primary hyperoxaluria type l. Kidney Int
79-91.
70: 1305-1311.
Lulich, LP., C.A. Osborne, et al. (1993). Nonsurgical removal of uro-
Hostutleer, R.A., D.J. Chew, et al. (2005). Uses and effectivnessof
cystoliths by voiding urohydropropulsion. Arm J Vet Med Assoc 203:
pamidronate disodium for treatment of dogs and cats with hyper-
660-663.
calcemia. I Vet Interm Med 19: 29-33.
Mo, L., L. Liaw, et al. (2007). Renal calcinosis and stone formation
Kyles, A.E., E.M. Hardie, et al. (2005). Managerment and outcome
in mice lacking osteopontin, tamm-horsfall protein, or both. Am I
of cats with ureteral calculi: 153 cases (1984-2002). JAVMA 226:
Physiol 293: F1935-F1943.
937-944.
Nwadike, B.S., L.P. Wilson, et al. (2000). Use of temporary nephroso-
Lekcharoensuk, C., C.A. Osborne, et al. (2005). Evaluation of trends in
 tomy catheters for emergency treatment of bilateral ureter transec-
 the frequency of calcium oxalate uroliths in the upper urinary tract
tion in a cat. IAm Vet Med Assoc 217: 1862-1865.
of cats. I Am Armim Hosp Assoc 41: 39-46.
Osborne, C.A., I.P. Lulich, et.al. ( 1990). Medical dissolution of feline
Lekcharoensuk, C., C.A. Osborne, et al. (2002a). Associations between
struvite urocystoliths. JAVMA 196: 1053-1063
dietary factors in canned foods and formation of calcium oxalate
Osborne, C.A., J.P. Lulich, et al. (1999). Canine retrograde urohy-
uroliths in dogs. Am I Vet Res 63: 163-169.
dropropulsion: 25 years of experience. Vet Clirn N Am: Small Anim
Lekcharoensuk, C., C.A. Osborne, et al. (2002b) Associations between
Pract (Editors: C.A. Osborne, JP. Lulich, Bartges) 29(1): 267-
dry dietary factors and canine calcium oxalate uroliths. Arm I Vet Res
281.
63: 330-337.
70
Pathophysiology of urinary obstruction
Joe Bartges
Obstructive uropathy refers to abnormalities in structure
there is a period during which renal blood flow increases
or function of the urinary tract caused by impairment
because of decreased afferent arteriolar resistance medi-
of normal flow of urine, resulting in local and systemic
ated by release of vasodilatory prostaglandins (Allen and
effects (Klahr and Harris 1992; Bartges and Finco 1996).
Vaughan 1978). During this hyperemic phase, glomerular
Impairment of flow through the ureter or urethra due 
filtration rate is decreased, but afferent arteriolar dilation
to physical obstruction results in characteristic clinical
increases intraglomerular pressure to counter increased
signs.
pressure in Bowman's space (Yarger and Schocken 1980;
Klahr and Harris 1992). After 24 hours, glomerular
filtration rate decreases further due to two major vaso-
Pathophysiology
constricting agents, thromboxane A2 and angiotensin
Il, and possibly due to decreased endothelium-derived
Acute urethral obstruction mimics ureteral obstruction
relaxing factor (Klahr 1991; Klahr and Harris 1992).
in many aspects, including pathophysiological changes
Thromboxane A2 is produced by infiltrating cells (blood
that occur in kidneys. Acute urethral obstruction may be
monocytes and T lymphocytes) and possibly mesangial
 induced and maintained by different causes, affecting the
cells (Harris and Schreiner 1989; Yanagisawa and
urethra at one or more sites. Irrespective of cause(s) of
Morrissey 1990). During the obstructive period,
urethral obstruction, predictable clinical and biochem-
angiotensin II may decrease glomerular filtration rate
ical abnormalities develop. Obstruction to urine flow
via mesangial cell contraction and may decrease the
results in increased pressure in the bladder and ure-
glomerular ultrafltration coefficient. Although infusion
thra proximal to site(s) of obstruction. Local pressure
 of angiotensin Il into normal animals increases net
 due to uroliths or matrix-crystaline plugs damage ure-
filtration pressure presumably because of greater efferent
thral mucosa. As intravesical pressure increases, dam-
arteriolar constriction, blockage of angiotensin II for-
age occurs to urothelium and detrusor muscle. Nerves
mation after relief of obstruction increases glomerular
located in the bladder wall also are damaged, and inflam-
fltration rate (Yarger and Schocken 1980). This increase
matory cells infiltrate. As back pressure persists and
 increases, ureters and kidneys are affected.
ing surface area because angiotensin II causes mesangial
Most studies in animals have involved unilateral
cell contraction and subsequently reduces total glomeru-
or bilateral ureteral obstruction rather than urethral
lar capillary area available for fltration (Ausiello and
obstruction (Klahr 1991; Klahr and Harris 1992); how-
Kreisberg 1980). Vasodilatory prostaglandins, such as
ever, pathophysiologic changes associated with persistent
prostaglandin E2 and prostacyclin, which are produced
 in increased amounts by the obstructed kidney, may
obstruction induced in these models. With urethral
 prevent further decrements in glomerular fltration rate
obstruction, ureteral pressure increases, and this is trans-
by antagonizing vasoconstrictive effects of thromboxane
 mitted to Bowman's space. As ureteral pressure increases,
A2 and/or angiotensin I1.
Leukocytes influx shortly after onset of acute ureteral
obstruction (Schreiner and Unanue 1984). Leukocytes
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
form distinctive rings around tubular cells particularly
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
707
708   Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
in distal tubules (Schreiner and Harris 1988). Normal
Impaired concentrating ability may be due to increased
kidneys have a small number of resident macrophages
medullary blood flow and washout of medullary hyper-
in the renal cortex, mainly in glomeruli (Schreiner and
 tonic gradient and impaired response of medullary col-
 Unanue 1984); however, normal medulla is completely
lecting ducts to antidiuretic hormone; atrial natriuretic
devoid of resident leukocytes. In obstruction, mononu-
peptide may also play a role. Thus, the concentrating
clear cells, primarily macrophages, are present in the
 defect in obstructive uropathy is presumably the result
medulla to the same extent as the cortex. This leukocyte
of decreased removal of solute from the thick ascend-
invasion is associated with a relative depletion of resident
ing limb of the loop of Henle, decreased total number
 macrophages from glomeruli. The second most abundant
of juxtamedullary nephrons, washout of solutes from
 leukocyte is T-lymphocytes of the cytotoxic suppresser
the medulla due to increased medullary blood flow,
cell subclass. After relief of obstruction, macrophage and
 and decreased hydro-osmotic response of the cortical
T-lymphocyte infiltrate decreases over days. Neutrophils
collecting duct to antidiuretic hormone (Saphasan and
are not normally present in the infiltrate.
Sorrasuchart 1984).
Decreased  glomerular  filtration  rate 
andrenal
Normal acid-base status is maintained by a combina-
 blood flow result in azotemia and hyperphosphatemia.
tion of tubular reabsorption of filtered bicarbonate and
Although brief periods of obstruction result in minimal
excretion of hydrogen ion with ammonia and buffers
damage to kidneys, prolonged periods of obstruction are
primarily phosphates. Renal excretion of hydrogen ions
harmful. Recovery of glomerular fltration rate follow-
effectively regenerates bicarbonate lost via the gastroin-
ing relief of obstruction decreases as time of obstruction
testinal tract or urinary tract or through respiratory
increases.
buffering of metabolic acids. With urethral obstruction,
The degree and nature of tubular effects and their
retention of metabolic acids, consumption of bicarbonate
recovery depends on degree and duration of obstruc-
to stabilize plasma and compartmental pH, generation
tion. With complete outflow obstruction, anuria ensues,
of lactate associated with hypovolemia and hypoxia, and
resulting in potential for marked abnormalities in water,
decreased conservation of bicarbonate in obstructive and
electrolyte, and acid-base balance. The major sites of
postobstructive periods result in metabolic acidemia.
abnormal function are located in the distal nephron.
Acidemia has significant direct and indirect effects.
Tubular abnormalities include a concentrating defect,
Direct effects include decreased myocardial contractility,
altered reabsorption of solutes and water, and impaired
stroke volume, and cardiac output; excitable membrane
excretion of hydrogen and potassium. Once obstruc-
alterations leading to dysrhythmias; central nervous
tion is relieved, renal function may reflect programmed
system depression; and dysfunction of metabolic path-
 homeostatic responses or aberrant consequences of renal
ways. Indirect effects include alterations in transcellular
 injury. Sodium, potassium, phosphate, magnesium, and
potassium distribution, plasma protein binding, ioniza-
proton retention occur during obstruction; normal renal
tion of pharmacologic agents, oxygen transport, tissue
response is to enhance urinary excretion by increasing
catabolism, and increased parasympathetic activity.
fractional excretion ofretained substances. Water balance
Acutely following relief of obstruction of more than
24 hours' duration, dogs have impaired distal tubular
Tubular damage during obstruction may compromise
proton excretion (Thirakomen and Koslov 1976). Dogs
renal tubular function once obstruction is reversed
with long-term ureteral obstruction studied after recov-
Water reabsorption is impaired with obstruction. In
 ery were able to both acidify and alkalinize urine after
fact, polyuria may exacerbate pressure associated with
 ammonium chloride and bicarbonate loading suggesting
obstruction. Following relief of obstruction, an impaired
partial recovery of proton secretory function (Kerr
d       
1956).
bstructive diuresis has been used to describe profuse
 Fractional excretion of potassium increases after relief
polyuria that sometimes occurs after relief of obstruc-
of obstruction. Although initially this may be interpreted
tion. Initial diuresis with relief of obstruction may be
 as a homeostatic response to hyperkalemia, some animals
attributed partially to homeostatic efforts for resolution
develop hypokalemia during the postobstructive period.
of positive water and electrolyte balance and to diure-
This observation indicates that there is impairment
sis associated with renal excretion of urea and other
 of normal homeostatic mechanisms. Increased urinary
solutes. A defect in water homeostasis may persist because
potassium excretion may be caused by increased delivery
dehydrated patients cannot conserve water once obstruc-
 of sodium to the distal tubule, where sodium-potassium
tion is removed (Finco and Cornelius 1977). Renal abil-
exchange occurs during sodium reabsorption. Medullary
ity to concentrate urine is impaired markedly, whereas
collecting duct may be the major site of the defect in
ability to dilute urine is affected to a lesser degree.
potassium homeostasis.
Pathophysiology of urinary obstruction   709
Pathology
Ausiello, D.A., JI. Kreisberg, et al. (1980). Contraction of cultured
rat gomerular cells of apparent mesangial origin after stimulation
 Urethral swelling, hemorrhage, and epithelial denuda-
with angiotensin II and arginine vasopressin. J Clin Invest 65: 754
tion may be present at the site of and proximal to the
760.
obstruction. The urinary bladder may be distended,
Bartges, L.W., D.R. Finco, et al. (1996). Pathophysiology of urethral
hemorrhagic, and the epithelium denuded. Also, the
obstruction. Vet Clirn North Am Small Anim Pract 26(2): 255-
264.
urinary bladder wall may be thickened due to edema.
Finco, D.R. and L.M. Cornelius (1977). Characterization and treat-
Light microscopic examination of urinary bladders from
ment of water, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances of induced
dogs with experimental urethral obstruction of 10 hours?
urethral obstruction in the cat. Am I Vet Res 38(6): 823-830.
duration showed focal to diffuse submucosal hemor-
Harris, K.P., G.F. Schreiner, et al. (1989). Effect of leukocyte depletion
 on the function of the postobstructed kidney in the rat. Kidney Int
rhages, perivascular inflammatory infiltration, necro-
sis of urothelium, and fbrosis of the lamina propria
36(2): 210-215.
Kerr, W.S. ( 1956). Effects of complete ureteral obstruction in dogs on
(Tammela and Auto-Harmainen 1991). Axonal degen-
kidney function. Arm I Physiol 184: 521-526.
eration and edema of Schwann cells were found by elec-
Klahr, S. (1991). New insights into the consequences and mecha-
tron microscopy. Although disruption of tight junctions
between detrusor muscle cells is thought to occur, this
Am I Kidney Dis 18(6): 689-699.
Klahr, S. (1991). Pathophysiology of obstructive nephropathy: a 1991
has not been a consistent finding in experimental mod-
update. Semirn Nephrol 11(2): 156- 168.
els. It is possible that bladder distention leads to reduced
Klahr, S. and K.P. Harris ( 1992). Obstuctive uropathy. In: The Kidney,
blood flow, which results in hypoxia, disturbances in
edited by D.W. Seldin and G.G. Giebisch. New York: Raven Press.
energy metabolism, disturbances in activity of Na-K-
 Morsing, P. and A.E. Persson ( 199l). Tubuloglomerular feedback in
ATPase membrane pumps, and injury to nerves located
obstructive uropathy. Kidney Imt Suppl 32(4): S1 10-S1 14.
 in the bladder wall (Seki and Karim 1992). These changes
 Saphasan, S. and S. Sorrasuchart (1984). Factors inducing post-
obstructive diuresis in rats. Nephron 38: 125-133.
result in transient or permanent dysfunction of the blad-
Schreiner, G., K.P.G. Harris, et al. ( 1988). The immunological aspects 
der. Rupture of the urinary bladder may occur with pro-
of acute ureteral obstruction: immune cell infiltrate in the kidney.
longed urethral obstruction, particularly if the disease
Kidney Irt 34: 487-493.
 process is present in the urinary bladder before acute
 Schreiner, G. and E.R. Unanue (1984). Origin of the rat mesangial
phagocyte and its expression of the leukocyte common antigen. Lab
urethral obstruction.
Invest 51: 515-523.
Mild hydroureter and hydronephrosis may or may not
Seki, N., O.M. Karim, et al. (1992). The effect of experimental ure-
be noted with acute lower urinary tract obstruction. If the
thral obstruction and its reversal on changes in passive electrical
 patient lives for a sufficient period, urethral obstruction
properties of detrusor muscle. J Urol 148(6): 1957-1961.
may lead to progressive loss of renal parenchyma. Histo-
Tammela, T., H. Auto-Harmainen, et al. ( 199l). Effect of prolonged
logically, glomeruli are preserved more readily than tubu-
experimental distention on the function and ultrastructure of the
canine urinary bladder. Arn Chrurgiae Gynaecolgiae S0: 30l-306.
lar elements, leading to a preponderance of glomeruli in
Thirakomen, K., N. Koslov, et al. ( 1976). Renal hydrogen ion excretion
residual cortical tissue. Fibrosis and cellular infltration
after release of unilateral ureteral obstruction. Am I Physiol 231:
 also occur (Morsing and Persson 1991).
1233-1239.
Yanagisawa, H., I. Morrissey, et al. (1990). Role of angiotensin II in
eicosanoid production in isolated glomeruli from rats with bilateral
References
ureteral obstruction. Arm J Physiol 258: F85-F93.
Yarger, W.E., D.D. Schocken, et al. (1980). Obstructive nephropa-
Allen, J.T., E.D. Vaughan, et al. (1978). The effect of indomethicin on
thy in the rat: possible roles for the renin-angiotensin system,
renal blood flow and ureteral pressure in unilateral ureteral obstruc-
prostaglandins, and thromboxanes in postobstructive renal func-
tion in awake dogs. Invest Urol 15: 324-327.
tion. J Clir Irvest 65: 400-412.
71
Urinary tract infection-bacterial
David Senior
Etiology
Host defense mechanisms
Urinary tract infection (UTl) can induce urethritis, pro-
Host defense mechanisms purported to be important in
 statitis (in intact male dogs), cystitis, and pyelonephri-
protection against UTI are shown in Table 71.2.
tis, and all of the urinary tract is at risk of colonization
once UTI is established. Most UTI is caused by bacte-
Normal micturition
ria emanating from the gastrointestinal tract crossing the
Diseases that impair the frequency or volume of
perineum and colonizing the external genitalia prior to
micturition, or that permit residual urine to remain in
retrograde invasion of the urethra and bladder against
 the flow of urine. A lesser number of lower UTis go
 the urinary bladder following micturition, predispose to
infection. Urethral stricture secondary to fibrosis, hyper-
on to further ascend with colonization of the ureters
and kidneys. Hematogenous renal infection, for exam-
trophy, and tumors may interfere with normal urine out-
flow and provide sites for microbial colonization. Incom-
ple, from bacterial endocarditis, can induce septic infarcts
plete bladder emptying secondary to spinal lesions and
 and pyelonephritis although this is relatively uncommon.
acquired or congenital atonic bladder predispose to UT1.
 In normal animals, the urinary tract proximal to the
mid-urethra is a sterile environment and it remains resis-
tant to infection even though it communicates directly
Anatomical structures
with the external genitalia, an environment with a resi-
A high-pressure zone in the urethra of female dogs
dent bacterial flora.
may inhibit retrograde migration of bacteria toward
Development of UTI depends upon the balance
the bladder. Symmetrical peristaltic contractions of the
between infectious agents and host resistance. Although
urethra identified in male dogs may have a similar effect.
UTI can occur when a very virulent organism invades
The oblique passage of the ureters through the bladder
a normal urinary tract, many times UT1 develops when
wall prevents vesicoureteral reflux when intravesicular
there is a disturbance of anatomical or functional host
pressure is high, for example, during voiding. Vulval
resistance factors that normally prevent microbial inva-
 involution is often associated with recurrent UTI (Figure 
sion. Common bacteria involved in UTl are shown in
71.1). Congenital anomalies such as ectopic ureter
Table 71.1.
bypass the normal anatomical defenses usually are
associated with UT1.
Pathogenesis
Mucosal defense barriers
Development of UTI depends on a balance between vir-
A thin surface layer of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) on the
ulent bacteria that tend to ascend the urinary tract and
uroepithelium prevents bacterial attachment. Ovariec-
natural host defenses that tend to keep them out.
        se 
to impaired GAG production (Parsons 1982). Normal
epithelial exfoliation of cells with bacteria attached may
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
hamper bacterial colonization (Sobel and Kaye 1984).
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Urethral catheterization, passage of uroliths, neoplasia,
710
Urinary tract infection—-bacterial   711
Table 71.1 Bacterial isolates in canine UTI
 Per cent of total isolates
a
b
E. coli
37.8
67
20.1
Staphylococcus spp.
14.5
21
9.6
Proteus mirabilis
12.4
3
15.4
Streptococcus spp.
10.7
6
10.6
Klebsiella pneumoniae
8.1
0
3.4
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
3.4
0
6.9
Enterobacter spp.
2.6
3.3
Number of isolates:
1,400
40
187
aLing, G.V. et al. (1980a). Vet Clin North Am 9: 617-630.
bKivisto, A.K. et al. (1997). J Sm Anim Pract 18: 707-712
cWooley, R.E. et al. (1976). Mod Vet Pract 57: 535-538.
and chemical irritation (e.g., cyclophosphamide) can dis-
Figure 71.1 Vulval involution in a young female dog with recur-
rent urinary tract infection (Copyright David F. Senior BVSc.
rupt the normal mucosal barrier.
Louisiana State University, by permission).
Antimicrobial properties of urine
urine associated with corticosteroid administration may
Concentrated urine inhibits bacterial growth because of
 predispose to infection. A high incidence (39%) of UTI
high concentrations of urea. Other organic acids derived
has been reported in dogs with skin disease treated with
from the diet also may inhibit bacterial growth. Dilute
corticosteroids (Ihrke et al. 1985). Urine contains a sig-
nificant quantity of IgG and IgA, which may contribute
Table 71.2 Local host defenses of the urinary tract
to host defenses because bacteria coated by antibodies are
less able to attach to the uroepithelium (Ling et al. 1985).
Normal micturition
Adequate urine flow
Frequent voiding
Bacterial virulence
 Complete voiding
 Only a small proportion of the gastrointestinal flora can
Anatomic structures
induce UT1 (Parsons 1986). Motility, the ability to adhere
 Urethral high pressure zone
to uroepithelial cells and efficient delivery of bacterial tox-
Surface characteristics of urethral urothelium
 ins to the mucosal wall may all be important virulence
 Urethral peristalsis
factors. Bacterial adherence is mediated by a variety of
Prostatic antibacterial fraction 
 specific molecular configurations on or projecting from
Length of urethra
Ureterovesical flap valves and ureteral peristalsis
the surface of bacteria binding to receptors located on the
Mucosal defense barriers
uroepithelial cell wall (Senior et al. 1992). Bacterial urease
 Antibody production
production is an important virulence trait because ure-
 Surface glycosaminoglycan layer
ase causes devitalization of uroepitheial cells and smooth
Intrinsic mucosal antimicrobial properties
muscle paralysis, both of which facilitate bacterial inva-
Bacterial interference
sion and persistence. Bacterial colicins inhibit the growth
Exfoliation of cells
 of other species of bacteria around them, which may be
Antimicrobial properties of urine 
important in overcoming the protective effect of the nor-
Extremes (high or low) of urine pH
mal flora of the external genitalia. Virulent bacteria pro-
Hyperosmolality
duce aerophagin, hemolysins, and other substances that
High concentration of urea
are capable of causing cell lysis with subsequent increased
Organic acids
access to iron, an essential bacterial growth requirement.
Renal defenses
Glomerular mesangial cells?
The consequences of UTI are variable. In many cases,
Extensive blood supply and large blood flow
the signs of lower urinary tract inflammation are obvious
and the condition responds readily to treatment. Chronic
712   Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
UTl can persist undetected for a prolonged period in a
commensal-like relationship with the host animal caus-
ing few if any detrimental effects. However, possible
 consequences of persistent UTI include struvite urolithi-
 asis, chronic prostatitis, prostatic abscess formation, dis-
cospondylitis, and ascending renal infection with scar-
ring progressive loss of renal function, and chronic renal
failure. Whether an infection will be benign or injurious
cannot be predicted, so all cases of UTI should be treated
vigorously.
Clinical signs
Typical signs of acute UTl are those oflower urinary tract
inflammation. Animals with chronic UTl and animals
with concurrent UTI and hyperadrenocorticism tend to
be clinically silent.
When a UTI causes clinical signs, owners notice
urgency, hematuria, dysuria, pollakiuria, and stranguria.
Passage of urine can elicit a vocal pain response.
Stranguria may continue after the bladder is empty. In
u issd iede aeu   n a
Figure 71.2 Radiographic appearance of bladder uroliths in a
toward the end of urination. Urinary incontinence may
dog exhibiting signs of lowerurinary tractinflammation (Copyright 
develop. If the animal urinates in the house, hematuria
David F. Senior BVSc., Louisiana State University. by permission).
and an ammonia-like odor to the urine may be noticed.
When inflammation is confined to the urethra and
external genitalia, the pain associated with urination can
Method of collection alters interpretation of urinalysis
cause some animals to retain urine and not empty the
and bacterial culture results. Urine samples for urinaly-
 bladder properly.
sis and culture are best obtained by cystocentesis; voided
On physical examination, the patient may exhibit sen-
samples are not suitable for this purpose. Collection of
sitivity to bladder palpation. If inflammation is severe,
urine by cystocentesis can be facilitated with ultrasound
the bladder is usually small and the bladder wall may
 guidance. Although catheterization can be used to collect
be thickened. Fever is seldom observed in lower UTI
unless the inflammation is extreme. Chronic UTl can
cause the bladder to become thickened due to edema,
mucosal hyperplasia, and fbrosis. In animals with acute
 pyelonephritis, palpation of the kidneys can elicit a pain
response.
Diagnosis
 Differential diagnoses of lower urinary tract inflamma-
tion include UTl, urolithiasis (Figure 71.2), and lower
urinary tract neoplasia (Figure 71.3). However, neopla-
sia is rare in dogs under 7 years of age. Urolithiasis and
neoplasia are frequently accompanied by UT1.
The diagnosis of UTI is often made on clinical history
and physical examination alone. Initial antimicrobial
medications are prescribed on the basis of probable
cause and past success. Urinalysis (Figure 71.4), urine
Figure 71.3 Raciographic appearance of transitional cell carci-
culture, and antimicrobial sensitivity testing is recom-
noma of the bladder in a dog exhibiting signs of lower urinary
mended, particularly if previous treatment has been
tract inflammation (Copyright David F. Senior BVSc., Louisiana
unsuccessful.
State University, by permission).
Urinary tract infection—-bacterial   713
abnormally high numbers of white blood cells and bac-
teria may not reliably rule out UTI if the urine specific
 gravity is low because of the dilution effect.
 Bacterial culture should be performed as soon as pos-
sible after sample collection and certainly no longer than
4 hours. With cystocentesis samples, any bacterial growth
is consideredsignificant, but with catheterization, greater 
 a n nsd  s  d s s 
sidered significant. The most common bacterial isolates
from canine UTl are shown in Table 71.1.
Antimicrobial sensitivity tests
Figure 71.4 Typical inflammatory reaction seen in the urine sed-
iment from a dog with acute bacterial cystitis. Red blood cells and
Antimicrobial sensitivity tests on uropathogens are best
"a luas 'd piea uadoni aeuoand san poog a
performed using the minimum inhibitory concentration
Louisiana State University, by permission).
(MIC) method. Antimicrobial penetration into infected
tissue of the bladder and urethra is dependent on the
urine for urinalysis and culture, results obtained by cys-
 concentration of antimicrobial in urine, not plasma. The
 tocentesis are much easier to interpret (Comer and Ling
mean urinary concentration (MUC) achieved with stan-
1981). Further, catheterization introduces bacteria into
dard dose regimens has been determined for most of the
the urinary tract and traumatizes the urethral uroepithe-
antimicrobial agents used to treat UTl. If an antimicro-
lium.
bial reaches an MUC of at least four times the in vitro
Typically with urinalysis of patients with UTl, the dip-
MIC, treatment with that drug has a high chance of ther-
stick indicates increased proteinuria and hematuria and
apeutic success (Ling et al. 1984). Antimicrobial agents
increased white blood cells, red blood cells, bacteria, and
that cannot achieve four times the MIC are usually not
epithelial cells are observed in the urine sediment. With
effective. The MUC in dogs of commonly used antimicro-
 pyelonephritis, white blood cell casts and granular casts
bials when given at usual recommended doses is shown
 may be observed, but this is an inconsistent finding.
in Table 71.3. This data allows selection of appropriate
When pyuria is observed in the urine sediment in the
drugs to treat UTI once MIC values for the isolated bac-
absence of bacteriuria, urine culture should still be per-
teria are known.
formed because positive cultures can be grown even when
 Recommended doses, dosing frequency, route of
bacteria are not obvious on urine sediment. Absence of
administration, and mean urinary concentration found
Table 71.3 Dosage and mean urinary concentration of the drugs commonly used to treat UTla (Ling and Ruby 1983: Ling and
Conzelman 1980b, 1980c, 1981; Rohrich et al. 1983; Sigel et al. 1981)
Agent
Dose
Route 
Mean urine concentration (± SD) μg/mL
MIC μg/mL
Ampicillin
25 mg/kg tid
P.0.
309 (± 55)
77
Amoxicillin
11 mg/kg tid 
P.0.
202 (±93)
50
Enrofloxacin
2.5 mg/kg bid 
P.0.
40
10
Tetracycline
15 mg/kg tid
P.0.
138 (± 65)
35
Chloramphenicol
33 mg/kg tid
P.0.
124 (± 40)
31
Cephalexin
18 mg/kg tid 
P.0.
500 (?)
125
Sulfisoxazole
 22 mg/kg tid 
P.0.
1.466 (± 832)
366
Nitrofurantoin
 5 mg/kg tid 
P.0.
100 (?)
25
Trimethoprim-Sulfa
12 mg/kg bid 
P.0.
246 (± 150)
62
 2.2 mg/kg bid 
55 (± 19)
14
Kanamycin
6 mg/kg bid
S.Q.
530 (± 151)
132
Gentamicin
1.5 mg/kg tid
S.Q.
107 (±33)
27
 Amikacin
5 mg/kg tid
S.Q.
342 (± 143)
85
Tobramycin
1 mg/kg tid
S.Q.
145 (± 86)
36
a Source: Data courtesy of Dr. Gerald V. Ling. University of Calfornia, Davis.
714  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
If cocci are observed in the urine sediment (Staphylo-
coccus intermedius, Streptococcus spp-, and Enterococcus
spp.) or the urine is very alkaline and small rods in pairs
are evident in the urine sediment (Proteus mirabilis),
over 90% will be sensitive to ampicillin or amoxicillin. S.
intermedius and Proteus mirabilis produce β-lactamase,
so amoxicillin combined with the β-lactamase inhibitor
clavulanic acid may be preferable. Both S. intermedius
and Proteus mirabilis are powerful urease producers so
If rods are observed in the sediment of non-alkaline
urine, the sensitivity of these bacteria is not predictable
d q  s    
Figure 71.5 Radiographic appearance of pyelonephritis on intra-
Antimicrobial sensitivity of E. coli, Klebsiella spp., and
venous pyelography. The diverticula of the renal collection sys-
Enterobacter spp. are not predictable so sensitivity tests
tem are thickened and distorted (Copyright David F. Senior BVSc.
Louisiana State University, by permission).
(Table 71.3). Fluoroquinolones are usually the best choice
for Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections combining effi-
in normal dogs is shown in Table 71.3. Note that dogs
cacy with low renal toxicity.
passing dilute urine may not achieve these levels.
The Kirby-Bauer disc-diffusion antimicrobial sensitiv-
Duration of treatment
ity test is based on antimicrobial concentrations achiev-
able in plasma and tissue and is therefore applicable when
Treatment of UTl of the lower urinary tract should be
 prostatic and renal involvement is suspected.
1999). Treatment for 30 days is usually recommended
for patients where prostatic or renal involvement is sus-
Localization of infection
pected.
With effective treatment, bacteria should not be
ficult. The presence of dilute urine, white blood cell casts 
detectable in the urine sediment by 3-5 days after initia-
in the urine sediment, irregular appearing diverticula and
tion of treatment. Urine culture performed 10 days after
dilation of the renal pelvis on IVP, increased echogenic-
cessation of treatment can document successful treat-
ity of the renal pelvis on ultrasound, and peripheral
 ment or persistent or recurrent UT1.
leukocytosis are inconsistent indicators of renal infection.
 In advanced chronic pyelonephritis, the kidneys appear
Special considerations
small and irregular, and the diverticula have irregular
borders (Figure 71.5). Morphologic changes to the kid-
ney on imaging do not prove that active renal infection is
tration in the urine. Exceptions to this are the fluoro-
 present at the time of the study. Bacterial culture on urine
quinolones and potentiated sulfas, which can be given
sampled directly from the renal pelvis by nephropyelo-
twice daily.
centesis can confirm renal involvement.
 Provided antimicrobial sensitivity tests indicate that a
Upper UTI should always be considered a possibility,
drug is likely to be successful, adjunct treatment to acidify
the urine is not necessary
urinalysis and urine culture after treatment should be
 Intact male dogs with UTI must always be treated
performed routinely. In intact male dogs with UTI,
assuming that the prostate is colonized. Antimicrobial
approximately 90% have concurrent colonization of the
 d od  srq  nor s
prostate.
       
fluid in the canine prostate gland is acidic (pH 6.4)
Treatment
and antimicrobial agents penetrate the prostate from
plasma, not from urine. Appropriate weak bases
Choice of antimicrobial
and/or lipid soluble antimicrobials include the fluoro-
Several bacteria commonly isolated from UTl in dogs and
 quinolones (broad spectrum weak bases) (Dorfman et
cats have predictable antimicrobial sensitivity provided
 al. 1995), trimethoprim (a weak base), and doxycycline
they have not undergone recent antimicrobial treatment.
and chloramphenicol (lipid soluble). Penicillins and
Urinary tract infection—-bacterial   715
cephalosporins penetrate the prostate poorly and are
Prevention
inappropriate. Failure to clear infection from the
prostate gland in a male dog with UTI sets the stage for
When an animal suffers frequent recurrences of UTI
despite adequate treatment and in the absence of
recolonization by the same organism, establishment of
detectable or correctable anatomic and functional dis-
chronic prostatitis, and formation of a prostatic abscess.
Although renal involvement in UTI is difficult to diag-
turbances, long-term management with antimicrobial
agents may prevent additional recurrences. Patients
nose, the standard treatment regimen should be adjusted
should undergo initial treatment with an antimicrobial
if pyelonephritis is suspected. Antimicrobial agents dif-
based on sensitivity results for 14 or 30 days, as required.
fuse into renal tissue from plasma not from concentrated
Administration of an antimicrobial is then continued at
urine, so to be effective, drugs must achieve a plasma con-
 30-50% of the usual total daily dose given as a single
centration of four times MIC. In addition, treatment for
 dose at night before bedtime immediately after the ani-
30 days is warranted to ensure elimination of infection.
mal voids. Treatment should be given for 6 months.
The long-term antimicrobial should be the same one
used to treat the infection based on the last sensitivity
Treatment failure
test. Follow-up urine culture and sensitivity tests should
Failure of an antimicrobial agent to sterilize the urine
be performed on a monthly basis to ensure that the
should alert the clinician to one or more of the following
patient remains free of infection. Resistant fecal and
possibilities:
vaginal bacteria do not tend to develop with these
low-dose regimens.
The
orally
administered
urinary
antiseptic
1.
 Inappropriate drug, dose, or duration of therapy.
methenamine
mandalate has been suggested  for
Owner compliance is important in this respect.
 prevention of UTI in patients with recurrent UTI. To
2. Failure of the antimicrobial agent to reach sufficient
be effective, this drug requires the formation of very
concentrations in urine despite appropriate drug
acidic urine, which is difficult to achieve in dogs beyond
administration. Intestinal malabsorption, impaired
5 days. The efficacy of orally administered cranberry
renal concentrating capacity, and development of
extract (available in capsule form), to prevent UTI in
antimicrobial resistance should be considered.
 dogs, remains undocumented.
3.
 The presence of a nidus of infection that is capa-
For follow-up urinalysis and bacterial culture, urine
ble of recolonizing the urinary tract once antimicro-
should always be collected by cystocentesis and never by
bial therapy is withdrawn. Pyelonephritis, prostatitis,
 catheterization. Catheterization predisposes animals to
 neoplasia, persistent urachal remnant, and urolithia-
ascending infection.
sis should be considered.
4.
 The presence of anatomical or functional abnormali-
Prognosis
ties of the urinary tract that lower resistance to bacte-
rial colonization. Many defects may be undetectable
The prognosis for successful treatment is good in
by available clinical diagnostic methods.
patients that do not have major underlying predisposing
causes that cannot be eliminated. For example, animals
with unresectable bladder tumors are often prone to
When UTI recurs after apparently effective treatment
reinfection.
has been given for a reasonable period of time, underlying
predisposing conditions should be sought. The external
Caution
genitalia of female dogs should be examined for vulval
There is no evidence that canine and feline uropathogens
involution. Urine retention after voiding should be deter-
mined by catheterization or ultrasound. In male dogs,
are transferable across species and can cause UTl in
prostatic involvement can be determined by ultrasonic
humans. However, there is considerable evidence that
examination with cytology and culture of prostatic aspi-
treating a pet with an antimicrobial induces a change in
 the fecal flora of humans sharing the same household.
rates. Imaging studies including ultrasound, plain, and
 contrast radiographic studies including IVP, double con-
The acquired resistance may be due to plasmid-mediated
trast cystography and retrograde and voiding urethrogra-
transfer of resistance from animal fecal flora to the fecal
 phy, CT, and MRI combined with cystoscopy can rule out
flora of closelyassociated humans (Schon et al. 1972; Levy
the presence of identifiable anatomical defects. Correc-
et al. 1976). Patients with long-term refractory UT1 with
 tion of anatomical and functional defects and underlying
minimal clinical signs and no evidence of renal involve-
conditions often prevents recurrence of infection.
ment may best be left untreated.
716   Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
References
Ling, G.V., G.M. Conzelman Jr, et al. ( 198l). Urine concentrations of
gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin, and kanamycin after subcuta-
Biertuempfel, P.H., G.V. Ling, et al. (1981). Urinary tract infection
neous administration to healthy adult dogs. Am I Vet Res. 42( 10):
resulting from catheterization in healthy adult dogs. I Arm Vet Med
1792-1794.
Assoc 178(9): 989-991.
Ling, G.V., PJ. Rohrich, et al. (1984). Canine urinary tract infections:
Comer, K.M. and G.V. Ling (1981). Results of urinalysis and bacte-
a comparison of in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility test results and
rial culture of canine urine obtained by antepubic cystocentesis,
response to oral therapy with armpicillin or with trimethoprim-sulfa.
catheterization, and the midstream voided methods. I Am Vet Med
I Am Vet Med Assoc 185(3): 277-281.
Assoc 179(9): 891-895.
Ling, G.V., I.M. Cullen, et al. ( 1985). Relationship of upper and lower
 Dorfman, M., J. Barsanti, et al. (1995). Enrofloxacin concentrations in
urinary tract infection and bacterial invasion of uroepithelium to
dogs with normal prostate and dogs with chronic bacterial prostati-
antibody-coated bacteria test results in female dogs. Am I Vet Res
tis. Am I Vet Res 56(3): 386-390.
46(2): 499-504.
Ihrke, PJ., A.L. Norton, et al. ( 1985). Urinary tract infection associated
 Naber, K.G. ( 1999). Short-term therapy of acute uncomplicated cysti-
with long-term corticosteroid administration in dogs with chronic
tis. Curr Opin Urol9( 1): 57-64.
skin diseases. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 186(1): 43-46.
Parsons, C.L. ( 1982). Prevention of urinary tract infection bythe exoge-
Levy, S.B., G.B. FitzGerald, et al. (1976). Changes in intestinal flora of
 nous glycosaminoglycan sodium pentosanpolysulfate. J Urol 127(1):
farm personnel after introduction of a tetracycline-supplemented
167-169.
feed on a farm. N Engl I Med 295( 11): 583-588.
 Parsons, C.L. ( 1986). Pathogenesis of urinary tract infections. Bacterial
 Ling, G.V. ( 1980). Treatment of urinary tract infections. Vet Clin North
adherence, bladder defense mechanisms. Urol Clirn North Am 13(4):
Am Small Anim Pract 9(4): 795-804.
563-568.
Ling, G.V. ( 1984). Therapeutic strategies involving antimicrobial treat-
Rohrich, P.J., G.V. Ling, et al. ( 1983). In vitro susceptibilities of canine
ment of the canine urinary tract. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 185(10):
urinary bacteria to selected antimicrobial agents. JArm Vet Med Assoc
1162-1164.
183(8): 863-867.
Ling, G.V. and A.L. Ruby (1983). Cephalexin for oral treatment of
Schon, E., V. Wagner, et al. ( 1972). Resistance of bacteria isolated from
canine urinary tract infection caused by Klebsiella pneurmoniae.
subjects with occupational chlortetracycline exposure. Rev Czech
I Am Vet Med Assoc 182(12): 1346-1347.
Med 1972 18(1): 1-12.
Ling, G.V., E.L. Biberstein, et al. ( 1980a). Bacterial pathogens associated
Senior, D.F., P. deMan, et al. (1992). Serotype, hemolysin produc-
with urinary tract infections. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
tion, and adherence characteristics of strains of Escherichia coli
9(4): 617-630.
causing urinary tract infection in dogs. Arm J Vet Res 53(4): 494-
Ling, G.V., G.M. Conzelman Jr, et al. ( 1980b). Urine concentrations of
498.
chloramphenicol, tetracycline, and sulfisoxazole after oral adminis-
 Sigel, C.W., G.V. Ling, et al. (198l). Pharmacokinetics of trimetho-
tration to healthy adult dogs. Arm I Vet Res 41(6): 950-952.
 prim and sulfadiazine in the dog: urine concentrations after oral
Ling, G.V., G.M. Conzelman Jr, et al. ( 1980c). Urine concentrations of
administration. Am I Vet Res 42(6): 996- 1001.
five penicillins following oral administration to normal adult dogs.
Sobel, J.D. and D. Kaye (1984). Host factors in the pathogenesis of
Arm I Vet Res 41(7): 1123- 1125.
uwrinary tract infections. Am I Med 76(5A): 122-130.
72
Fungal urinary tract infection
Barrak Pressler
Fungal urinary tract infections are a rare cause of lower
 diduria presumptively occurs in dogs and cats following
urinary tract disease in dogs and cats. Funguria may
ascending infection to the lower urinary tract. Candida
spp. are isolated from less than 1% of dogs and cats with
presumptively due to ascending infection) or secondary
 urinary tract infections, and less than 2% of dogs with
(systemic infections resulting in shedding of organisms
recurrent or resistant infections ( Wooley and Blue 1976;
into the urine) infections. Organisms of the genus Can-
Norris 2000; Ling 2001). The majority of infections in
dida are most commonly identifed. Regardless of the
dogs, cats, and people are due to C. albicans, but several
infecting species, fungal urinary tract infections often are
other species have been reported ( Table 72.1) (Occhipinti
challenging to treat because of the strong apparent asso-
1994; Lundstrom and Sobel 2001; Pressler 2003; Jin and
ciation with concurrent immunosuppressive diseases or
Lin 2005; Kauffman 2005).
breaches in local immunity that oftentimes cannot be
Although bacterial urinary tract infections may occur
completely resolved.
in the absence of predisposing factors, in human and vet-
associated with breaches in local lower urinary tract
defenses or systemic immunocompromise (Occhipinti
Candida sp. urinary tract infections
1994; Lundstrom and Sobel 2001; Wise 2001; Pressler
Epidemiology
2003; Jin and Lin 2005; Kauffman 2005). Nosocomial
 infections in patients with indwelling urinary catheters
Candida spp. are normal inhabitants of the genital
are the most common cause of candiduria in peo-
 mucosa, upper respiratory tract, and gastrointestinal
ple; approximately 10-15% of hospital-acquired urinary
tract in people, dogs, and cats (Hazen and Howell 2007;
tract infections are due to Candida spp., versus less
Suchodolski 2008). Over 150 species have been described
than 1% of out-patient populations (Lundstrom and
within the Candida genus (which now includes the his-
Sobel 2001; Colodner 2008). Diabetes mellitus, recent
toric genus Torulopsis), with C. albicans and C. parapsillo-
 antibiotic, chemotherapeutic, or steroid administration,
sis being the most common species isolated from normal
female gender, and lower urinary tract disease are also
dogs (Hazen and Howell 2007; Suchodolski 2008). Can-
highly associated with infection in people (Gubbins 1999;
dida spp. are yeast, as they reproduce by budding and are
Lundstrom and Sobel 2001; Kauffman 2005). Antibiotics
capable of fermenting carbohydrates; however, this is a
 that have anti-anaerobe spectra of activity may particu-
morphologic rather than a true taxonomic classification.
larly predispose to gastrointestinal candidal overgrowth,
 Yeasts most commonly have a budding, ovate appearance,
and thus candiduria (Kennedy and Volz 1985). Recent
but they will also occasionally appear filamentous, par-
 surgery, concurrent bacterial urinary tract infection, and
ticularly in biofilms that form on mucosal and catheter 
intravenous catheterization may also be independent pre-
surfaces or when tissue invasion has occurred (Bizerra
dictors of infection (Gubbins 1999; Lundstrom and Sobel
2008). As with bacterial urinary tract infection, can-
2001; Kauffman 2005).
 Many of the risk factors associated with Candida spp.
urinary tract infections in people appear to be associated
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
with candiduria in dogs and cats as well (Pressler 2003;
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
717
718   Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Table 72.1 Species of fungi reported to cause primary urinary
Clinical presentation and diagnosis
tract infections in dogs or cats
There are no historical or physical examination find-
ings that allow differentiation of candiduria from other
Aspergillus spp.
A. fumigatus (Kirpatrick 1982)
causes of lower urinary tract disease. Dogs and cats with
A. niduians (Adamama-Moraitou 2001)
candiduria may demonstrate typical signs of lower uri-
Candida spp.
nary tract disease (i.e., dysuria, pollakiuria, micro-, or
C. albicans (Fulton and Walker 1992: Brain 1993: Forward
macroscopic hematuria) or be asymptomatic (Pressler
2002; Kano 2002: Pressler 2003: Jin and Lin 2005)
2003; Jin and Lin 2005). On rare occasions, flocculent,
C. glabrata (Tan and Lim 1977: Presser 2003: Toll 2003:
white or yellow material may be grossly visible in urine
Jin and Lin 2005)
from veterinary patients with candiduria. When this is
C. guilliermondi (in and Lin 2005)
observed, clinical suspicion for heavy biofilm formation
C. krusei (Presser 2003; Jin and Lin 2005)
or bezoar formation is increased. In the author's expe-
C. parapsilosis (Kano 2002: Pressler 2003)
rience, patients with diabetes mellitus are more likely
C. rugosa (Pressler 2003)
to have clinically silent infections, further stressing the
C. tropicalis (Pressler 2003: Jin and Lin 2005: 0zawa
2005)
need for routine urine cultures (Chapter 9) in patients
Cryptococcus neoformans (Day and Holt 1994: Newman
with this disease. Likewise, dogs and cats with histori-
 2003: Jin and Lin 2005: Chapman and Kirk 2008)
 cally diagnosed but unsuccessfully treated Candida spp.
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa (Jin and Lin 2005)
urinary tract infections are often asymptomatic as well.
Trichosporone beigeli (Presser 2003)
The most common reason Candida spp. urinary tract
infections are first suspected is due to visualization of fun-
gal elements on urine sediment examination. Although
cutaneous Candida spp. are usually budding, organisms
shed in urine may be budding or filamentous in appear-
Jin and Lin 2005). Although systematic comparisons
ance, reflecting shedding from the biofilm that often
adheres to the bladder mucosa (Bizerra 2008). Finding
between animals with candiduria versus bacterialurinary
fungal elements on routine urinalysis usually suggests
tract infections have not been performed, patients with
that growth of Candida spp. is heavy. Alternatively, in
urinary tract stomata, diabetes mellitus, or lower uri-
patients where sediment examinations are performed to
nary tract neoplasms such as transitional cell carcinoma
monitor for recurrence or response to therapy (i.e., times
appear to be predisposed to infection (Pressler 2003; Jin
when number of organisms is expected to be low), urine
and Lin 2005). Approximately 17% of reported cases of
cytospin preparations and/or modified Wright's stain-
 candidal urinary tract infections have been in dogs or
ing of sediment may improve detection. Special stains of
   s   sis
urine sediment such as Calcofluor white or lactophenol
betes mellitus (Brain 1993; Forward 2002; Pressler 2003;
Toll 2003; Jin and Lin 2005). However, the author's expe-
cotton blue are also occasionally used by clinical pathol-
 ogy or microbiology laboratories when fungal elements
rience suggests that this is an underestimate of the true
are suspected (Figure 72.1).
association between these two diseases, and as many as
 Identification of fungal elements should always be fol-
30-40% of patients with Candida spp. urinary tract infec-
lowed by urine culture to determine the infecting species.
tion are diabetic. Although in-hospital urinary catheteri-
 In some cases, the identification of Candida spp. first
zation has not been reported in any cases of isolated can-
occurs by routine aerobic urine culture even though
diduria, one dog with systemic candidiasis and diabetes
there was no clinical suspicion of funguria. Fortunately,
mellitus developed infection following prolonged ure-
Candida spp. readily grow on blood agar plates within
thral catheterization (Heseltine 2003). In addition, many
48 hours, and thus even when a specific fungal cul-
reported cases in dogs or cats have had concurrent lower
ture is not requested, most microbiology laboratories
urinary tract disease, with permanent stoma formation
will identify candidal urinary tract infections. In those
(urethrostomy or cystotomy tube placement) reported
-d aq   padss si ei m ssi
in approximately 40% of cases when the two largest
ously documented, a yeast or fungal culture should be
veterinary retrospective studies are combined (Pressler 
requested. These cultures are performed on both blood
2003; Jin and Lin 2005). As expected, a variety of antibi-
and Sabouraud's media for 5-7 (yeast cultures) or 14
otics, steroids, and chemotherapeutic agents have been
(fungal cultures) days, at both 37°C and ambient tem-
commonly administered to affected animals within one
perature.Sabouraud's media is not a better substrate than
month of diagnosis of Candida spp. infections (Pressler
blood agar for fungal organism growth but is required for
2003; Jin and Lin 2005).
Fungal urinary tract infection   719
(a)
(b)
Figure 72.1 Candida aibicans within urine sediment from a 5-year-old female spayed Labrador retriever being treated for multicentric
lymphoma and acute-onset hematuria. Both budding (a) and filamentous (b) fungal elements are visible.
morphologic identification of genus and species based on
didal pyelonephritis, but this has not been investigated
growth characteristics. When fungal elements were not
in dogs or cats (Tokunaga 1995; Hui 2004).
identified on initial urinalysis and the finding of can-
diduria on urine culture is unexpected, a second urine
culture may be merited, particularly if the first sample
Treatment
was obtained via urinary catheter or mid-stream catch,
 Treatment of candiuria in people is recommended
or by cystocentesis in a patient with significant cutaneous
in all symptomatic patients, patients with systemic
disease. In the author's experience, dogs and cats may, in
 immunosuppressive diseases (and who are thus at risk
very rare circumstances, have transient candiduria.
 of developing systemic candidiasis), and patients with
Several other diagnostic tests have been used in exper-
 noncorrectable risk factors. Patients with asymptomatic
infections and no identifiable risk factors are initially
more rapid methods for diagnosis of candiduria than
recultured prior to treatment in order to confirm that
standard fungal urine cultures. Candida spp-specific
candiduria is not transient; likewise, treatment is delayed
polymerase chain reaction of urine samples has been
in asymptomatic patients with correctable risk factors
reported in dogs and people; however, the ease of
(such as indwelling urinary catheters) until these factors
diagnosis by conventional diagnostic methods and the
are removed and infection is found to persist. Unfortu-
expense and specialized equipment required for PCR
 nately, because the most common risk factors in dogs
thus far makes this modality unappealing for routine
and cats are not easily corrected (e.g-, diabetes mellitus,
use (Muncan and Wise 1996; Kano 2002; Ozawa 2005).
 permanent urinary tract stomata, and urinary tract neo-
In theory, PCR would be most useful in dogs and cats
plasia), withholding treatment in small animal veterinary
as a complement to culture in those cases where con-
 patients is not recommended at this time. Ineffective
firmation of successful treatment prior to cessation of
treatment may lead to candidal pyelonephritis and/or
antifungal therapy is desired. Serologic testing for C.
fungemia.
albicans mannan protein antigen and antibodies has
Treatment of primary candiduria requires adequate
also been investigated in people. Unfortunately, corre-
excretion of active drug or metabolites into the urine. Of
lation between the presence of antimannan antibodies
the antifungal agents widely used in veterinary medicine,
and candiduria is extremely low, likely due to the ubiq-
only fluconazole and amphotericin B are excreted in sig-
uitous nature of the organism and the high likelihood
nificant amounts in active form by this route in people.
of previous exposure; the presence of circulating antigen
Fluconazole is currently recommended as first-line ther-
in people is significantly associated with Candida spp.
apy in people, dogs, and cats because it can be admin-
 pyelonephritis, but not with candidal cystitis ( Warnock
( )  s  e s e a s
1976; Tokunaga 1993). Limited investigations of urine D-
(Malani and Kauffman 2007). The majority of C. albicans
/L-arabinitol ratios in people suggest that this test is both
isolates are sensitive to fluconazole, and thus routine anti-
sensitive and specific for detection of candiduria or can-
fungal sensitivity testing of this species does not appear
720  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Table 72.2 Proposed treatment algorithm for fungal urinary tract infections
1. Identify and aggressively correct any concurrent breaks in local immunity or causes of systemic immunosuppression
 2. Identify genus and species of infecting organism via urine fungal culture
a. If C. albicans:
i. Fluconazole, 5-10 mg/kg P0 q12 h for 4-6 weeks
i. Repeat urine sediment examination and urine culture at 2-3 week intervals to confirm resolution of infection
ii. Repeat urine sediment examination and urine culture 1 and 2 months after stopping therapy
b. If non-C. albicans:
 i. Perform sensitivity testing of isolate against antifungal drugs to guide initial therapy
li. Consider penetration of drugs into urine when selecting therapy
:apisuon pue husat Aasuas hnp jehune seada uoaju aaosan oi sley alozeuong y suawean leui l '
a. Intravesicular infusion of 1% clotrimazole (dogs: cats with permanent urinary tract stomata)
b. Intravesicular infusion of amphotericin B (cats or dogs)
C. Intravenous or subcutaneous amphotericin B (cats or dogs that have failed intravesicular therapy)
d. Fluconazole at maximally recommended dose with addition of terbinafine (cats or dogs whose owners decline other
treatment options)
e. Benign neglect and regular monitoring for disease progressior
necessary at the time of first diagnosis. However, other
( ) sod   s s 
Candida spp-, particularly C. glabrata and C. krusei, are 
have also been reported for treatment of candiduria in
 more likely to be resistant to fluconazole, and sensitivity
 people (Leu and Huang 1995; Fisher 2003). This author
testing at first diagnosis is recommended to guide dose
knows of successful treatment with multiple doses of
of fluconazole (as the MIC and break point may suggest 
amphotericin B in one dog with recurrent candiduria
that higher doses could be effective), or to determine if
an alternative drug should be used (Rex 1995; Maenza
cat. Subcutaneous amphotericin B protocols have been
1996; Malani and Kauffman 2007).
reported for treatment of systemic cryptococcosis in dogs
Infections should always be considered "complicated"
 and cats and could potentially be used to treat candiduria
because of the association between candiduria and local
 as well (Malik 1996). Of other available antifungal drugs,
or systemic immune system compromise. As such, treat-
oral itraconazole or ketoconazole do not result in high
ment should be continued for a minimum of 4-6 weeks,
concentrations of active drug within urine. Nevertheless,
with urine sediment examinations and/or cultures per-
in one retrospective study, a small number of patients
formed at 2-3 week intervals to confirm treatment effi-
 had successful resolution of candiduria with these drugs
(Pressler 2003). How well predisposing factors had been
with fluconazole is unknown, but in the author's experi-
ence, it is approximately 50%; this is lower than reported
is unknown. Newer parenteral triazole drugs (e.g-)
success rates in people, likely because predisposing fac-
 posaconazole, voriconazole) are not excreted into urine
 tors in veterinary patients are more difficult to control or
 in active form and have not been used to treat candiduria
resolve.
to the author's knowledge; the same is true of terbinafine,
On the basis of personal experience and efficacy of
    s     
alternative treatment options in people, the author's cur-
not excreted into urine in active form (Humbert 1995;
rent treatment algorithm for animals with primary fun-
Barchiesi 1997; Malani and Kauffman 2007). Persistent or
gal urinary tract infections is presented in Table 72.2.
invasive candidal urinary tract infections in people have
For those patients who have persistent candidal urinary
been treated with echinocandins (i.e., caspofungin, mica-
tract infections despite appropriate fluconazole therapy
fungin) despite poor urinary excretion of active drug, but
or who have recurrent infections, sensitivity testing ofiso-
the pharmacologic profles, safety, and efficacy of these
 drugs in dogs or cats are unknown (Grooters and Taboada
 options have been reported by others and/or attempted
2003; Bennett 2006; Lagrotteria 2007; Sobel 2007). It has
by this author with varying degrees of success; none have 
Isn e aq a ee aun i psns u
been directly compared to fluconazole or each other to
adjunctive therapy for candiduria in dogs and cats, as
determine relative efficacy. Intravenous amphotericin B
 Candida spp. growth is inhibited at higher pH in vitro.
is primarily used for treatment of systemic candidiasis,
 s n dde u s e s
Fungal urinary tract infection   721
infection in dogs and cats with alkalinization, and unfor-
clotrimazole is supplied in polyethylene glycol, it is highly
tunately, without concurrent dietary therapy, high doses
viscous and very difficult to infuse through small diam-
of sodium bicarbonate are oftentimes required to reach
eter urinary catheters. As a result, administration of
target pH. Urine alkalinization is no longer favored in
intravesicular clotrimazole in male cats has proven to
people in candiduria, and as a result this author does not
be impractical in most cases (unless a larger catheter can
 manipulate urine pH as part of his standard protocol.
be inserted through a perineal urethrostomy site).
Intravesicular infusion of antifungal drugs has also
 Despite these various treatment options, approxi-
been described. Advantages of this modality include
mately 25% of dogs and cats with candiduria appear
direct instillation of large volumes of high concentra-
 s s e d  o
tion drugs, the ability to use drugs where safety (i.e.,
least two different treatment modalities. In these patients,
amphotericin B) would be limited by preexisting renal
the author only reattempts treatment when clinical
disease, and no need for owner administration of oral
signs recur, there is suspicion of ascending infection,
medications. Disadvantages include the need for repeat
or increased growth of Candida spp. is noted dur-
evaluations by veterinarians to perform drug instilation,
 ing periodic urine sediment examination. Studies are
difficulties associated with urinary catheterization (par-
still required to determine whether this benign neglect
ticularly in cats and female dogs), and risk of iatrogenic
 approach is appropriate, and whether it can be attempted
infection or bladder rupture. In people, the efficacy of
 in all asymptomatic animals and not just those who have
 intravesicular amphotericin B for long-term resolution of
failed traditional therapy.
candiduria is equal to that of oral fluconazole, although
amphotericin B may result in more rapid resolution of
Noncandidal primary urinary tract infections
infection; nevertheless, because of the low power of these
comparative studies and the difficulties associated with
Although much rarer than Candida spp., other fungal
treatment, intravesicular drug administration is falling
organisms may also cause primary urinary tract infec-
out of favor in people (Fan-Havard 1995; Leu and Huang
tions in dogs or cats ( Table 72.1). Unfortunately, too few
cases have been reported to determine if predisposing
One cat with candiduria and a perineal urethrostomy
factors, disease course, or optimal treatment differ from
treated by this author with a single dose of intravesicular
candiduria. In general, infection should be confirmed via
amphotericin B failed to resolve candidal infection.
a second urine culture, patients with confirmed infec-
Alternatively, in dogs and cats, two case reports
tions should be evaluated for local or systemic causes of
describe intravesicular infusion of 1% clotrimazole either
transurethrally or via needle and syringe using ultra-
guria should be determined. Precise species identification
sound guidance (Forward 2002; Toll 2003). In addition,
of the infecting organism should always be performed.
 p     s  s
 Of the common systemic mycoses, Aspergillus spp (Kir-
diduria using a modified 1% clotrimazole protocol ( Table
patrick 1982; Adamama-Moraitou 2001) and Cryptococ-
72.3). With a minimum of three infusions, the observed
cus neoformans (Newman 2003; Chapman and Kirk 2008)
success rate for resolution of infection in patients who
rarely may cause primary infection ofthe lower and upper
have failed fluconazole is approximately 50%. Success-
 urinary tract in both dogs and cats. Despite these reports,
 pue sop u Ai ao a oi sieadde uonosan ig
if either agent is isolated from urine, clinicians should ini-
nonobese animals. As previously discussed, resolution is
tially assume infection is systemic and determine other
likely correlated with successful identification and treat-
 organ involvement before opting for oral fluconazole or
 ment of predisposing factors. Unfortunately, because 1%
localized intravesicular therapy.
Table 72.3 Intravesicular 1% clotrimazole protocol for treatment of fluconazole-resistant fungal urinary tract infections in dogs and cats
1. Catheterize and empty the bladder. Balloon catheters are preferred in dogs as they prevent premature voiding of drug in
nonanesthetized patients; most cats will retain the infused drug if not allowed access to a litter box.
2. Infuse 7.5-10 mL/kg of 1% clotrimazole solution; volume should be determined by bladder palpation during infusion.
3. Infused fluid should be retained for a minimum of 15-30 minutes.
4. Repeat infusion q7 days for three treatments.
 5. Repeat fungal urine culture 7 days after third treatment to determine whether additional infusions or alternative therapy should
be considered
 6. Oral fluconazole therapy should be continued throughout the infusion protocol
722   Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Susceptibility testing against various antifungal drugs
is recommended for all non-Candida spp. urinary tract
infections, as these atypical organisms are more likely to
be resistant to one or more azole drugs. If organisms are
resistant to fluconazole, then oral therapy with an alter-
native agent in conjunction with intravesicular infusion
of clotrimazole or amphotericin B should likely be con-
sidered. Patients that fail this second line of therapy likely
require intravenous or subcutaneous amphotericin B or
 newer antifungal agents.
Secondary funguria
Although rarer than primary urinary tract infections,
Candida spp. and other typically nonpathogenic fungi
Figure 72.2 Blastomycoses (arrow), neutrophils, and epithelial
may occasionally cause systemic infections in both dogs
cells on microscopic examination of unstained urine sediment
and cats. In most cases, the primary source of entry is
(Magnification x200).
unknown. Animals with systemic infection frequently
have organisms identified on urine sediment examina-
the sensitivity of this test with urine sediment examina-
tion or culture, and fungal hyphae within granulomata
tion and fungal urine culture in dogs with confirmed
may be seen on histopathologic examination of kidneys
systemic blastomycosis, and in all cases, urine cultures
(Gerding 1994; Clercx 1996; Heseltine 2003; Kuwamura
and sediment examinations failed to reveal organisms,
2006). Systemic clinical signs (e.g-, fever) or hematologic
whereas the antigen titer was supportive of infection
or serum biochemical abnormalities in an animal with
(unpublished data). Therefore, although identification of
funguria should increase the suspicion of systemic infec-
Blastomyces derrmatitidis organisms within urine is con-
tions.
sidered diagnostic for systemic infection, urine examina-
The kidneys are a common site of involvement in
tion other than for the antigen test is not recommended
dogs with systemic aspergillosis, and thus fungal hyphae
are commonly identified in urine by routine sediment
infection.
examination or culture (Wood 1978; Kabay 1985; Jang
Although localized nasal infection in cats is the most
1986; Kahler 1990; Dallman 1992; Robinson 2000).
commonly encountered form of Cryptococcus neofor-
Cats with systemic Aspergillus spp. infection may also
mans infection, systemic infections are uncommonly
encountered in cats and rarely in dogs. Identification of
1987). Because of the higher frequency of systemic ver-
organisms within urine has been reported in cats with
An siop u sisoadse pen Aen Aed sns
 apparent localized nasal infection or those with obvious
aspergillosis should always prompt additional diagnos-
systemic involvement; however, systematic investigation
tic testing to ensure that other organs are not involved.
of the frequency of urine shedding has not been
Systemic infections are usually treated with itraconazole
performed (Gerds-Grogan and Dayrell-Hart 1997). Cats
and/or amphotericin B. Although the most commonly
 often have incidental lipiduria, and cryptococcal organ-
 d od  i n se 
isms may be difficult to differentiate from fat globules on
the urine, this is not a concern because urinary shedding
routine, unstained urine sediment examination. Crypto-
 in these cases is due to primary renal infection.
coccal organisms are more uniform in size and found on
Dogs with systemic blastomycosis will on rare occa-
a single focal plane as opposed to fat globules, which float
sions also have organisms visible on routine urinalysis or
throughout the sediment preparation and vary in size.
 concentrated urine sediment examination (Figure 72.2).
Modified Wright's staining of suspected organisms also
Identification of Blastomyces derrmatitidis within urine
reveals internal structure that fat globules lack.
sediment may be more likely in intact male dogs with
prostatic infection.
Anecdotally, presence of intact organisms within urine
References
 Occurs almost exclusively in intact male dog with prostatic
Adamama-Moraitou, K., C.G. Paitaki, et al. (2001). Aspergillus species
involvement. The blastomycosis serum or urine antigen
cystitis in a cat. I Feline Med Surg 3( 1): 31-34.
test detects a surface antigen common to several fungal
Barchiesi, F, L. Fanconi Di Francesco, et al. ( 1997). In vitro activities
organisms rather than intact organisms. I have compared
of terbinafine in combination with fluconazole and itraconazole
Fungal urinary tract infection   723
against isolates of Candida albicans with reduced susceptibility to
urinary tract infections in elderly patients. Clir Infect Dis 22( 1):
azoles. Antimicrobial Agents Chemother41(8): 1812-1814.
30-35.
Bennett, J. (2006). Echinocandins for candidemia in adults without
Jang, S., T.E. Dorr, et al. (1986). Aspergillus deflectus infection in four
neutropenia. New Engl I Med 355(11): 1154-1159.
dogs. I Med Vet Mycol 24(2): 95-104.
Bizerra, F, C.V. Nakamura, et al. (2008). Characteristics of biofilm
Jin, Y. and D. Lin (2005). Fungal urinary tract infections in the dog
forrmation by Candida tropicalis and antifungal resistance. FEMS
and cat: a retrospective study (2001-2004). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Yeast Res 8(3): 442-450.
41(6): 373-381.
Brain, P. (1993). Urinary tract candidiasis in a diabetic dog. Aust Vet
Kabay, M., W.F Robinson, et al. ( 1985). The pathology of disseminated
Pract 23: 88-91.
Aspergillus terreus infection in dogs. Vet Pathol 22(6): 540-547.
Chapman, T. and S. Kirk (2008). An isolated cryptococcal urinary tract
Kahler, JL, M.W. Leach, et al. (1990). Disseminated aspergillosis
infection in a cat. JAm Amirm Hosp Assoc 44(5): 262-265.
attributable to Aspergillus deflectus in a springer spaniel. I Am Vet
Clercx, C., K. McEntee, et al. ( 1996). Bronchopulmonary and dissem-
Med Assoc 197(7): 871-874.
inated granulomatous disease associated with Aspergillus fumigatus
Kano, R., Y. Hattori, et al. (2002). Detection and identification of the
and Candida species infection in a golden retriever. JAm Anim Hosp
Candida species by 25 S ribosomal DNA analysis in the urine of
Assoc 32(2): 139- 145.
candidal cystitis. I Vet Med Sci64(2): 115-117.
Colodner, R., Y. Nuri, et al. (2008). Community-acquired and hospital-
Kauffman, C. (2005). Candiduria. Clin Infect Dis 41(Suppl 6):
 acquired candiduria comparison of prevalence and clinical charac-
S371-S376.
teristics. Eur I Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 27(4): 301-305.
Kennedy, M. and P. Volz ( 1985). Effect of various antibiotics on gas-
Dallman, M., T.L. Dew, et al. (1992). Disseminated aspergillosis in a
trointestinal colonization and dissemination by Candida albicans.
dog with diskospondylitis and neurologic deficits. I Am Vet Med
Sabouraudia: I Med Vet Mycol 23(4): 265-273.
Assoc 200(4): 511-513.
Kirpatrick, R. (1982). Mycotic cystitis in a male cat. Comp Cont Educ
 Day, M. and P. Holt (1994). Unilateral fungal pyelonephritis in a dog.
Small Amim Pract 77(9): 1365-1371.
Vet Pathol 31(2): 250-252.
Kuwamura, M., M. Ide, et al. (2006). Systemic candidiasis in a dog,
Drew, R., R.R. Arthur, et al. (2005). Is it time to abandon the
developing spondylitis. I Vet Med Sci68(10): 1117-1119.
use of amphotericin B bladder irrigation? Clin Infect Dis 40(10):
Lagrotteria, D., C. Rotstein, et al. (2007). Treatment of candiduria
1465-1470.
with micafungin: a case series. Can Infect Dis Med Microbiol 18(2):
Fan-Havard, P., C. O'Donovan, et al. (1995). Oral fluconazole versus
149-150.
amphotericin B bladder irrigation for treatment of candidal fun-
Leu, H.-S. and C.-T. Huang (1995). Clearance of funguria with short-
guria. Clin Infect Dis21(4): 960-965.
course antifungal regimens: a prospective, randomized, controlled
Fisher, J., K. Woeltje, et al. (2003). Efficacy ofa single intravenous dose
study. Clin Infect Dis 20(5): 1152-1157.
of amphotericin B for Candida urinary tract infections: further
Ling, G., C.R. Norris, et al. (2001). Interrelations of organism preva-
favorable experience. Clin Microbiol Infect 9( 10): 1024- 1027.
lence, specimen collection method, and host age, sex, and breed
Forward, Z., A.M. Legendre, et al. (2002). Use of intermittent bladder
among 8,354 canine urinary tract infections (1969-1995). J Vet Int
infusion with clotrimazole for treatment of candiduria in a dog. I
Med 15(4): 341-347.
Am Vet Med Assoc 220( 10): 1496- 1498.
Lundstrom, T. and J. Sobel (200l). Nosocomial candiduria: a review.
Fulton, R., Jr. and R. Walker (1992). Candida albicans urocystitis in a
Clin Infect Dis 32(11): 1602-1607.
cat. IAm Vet Med Assoc 200(4): 524-526.
Maenza, I., I.C. Keruly, et al. (1996). Risk factors for fluconazole-
Gerding, P., L.D. Morton, et al. ( 1994). Ocular and disseminated can-
 n r n s 
didiasis in an immunosuppressed cat. JAm Vet Med Assoc 204(10):
patients. I Infect Dis 173( 1): 219-225.
1635-1638.
 Malani, A. and C. Kauffman (2007). Candida urinary tract infections:
Gerds-Grogan, S. and B. Dayrell-Hart (1997). Feline cryptococco-
treatment options. Exp Rev Anti-Infect Ther 5(2): 277-284.
sis: a retrospective evaluation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33(2): 118-
Malik, R., A.J. Craig, et al. (1996). Combination chemotherapy of
122.
canine and feline cryptococcosis using subcutaneously administered
Grooters, A. and J. Taboada (2003). Update on antifungal therapy. Vet
amphotericin B. Aus Vet I 73(4): 124-128.
Clin North Am: Small Amim Pract 33(4): 749-758.
Muncan, P. and G. Wise (1996). Early identification of candiduria
Gubbins, P., S.A. McConnell, et al. (199). Current management of
funguria. Am I Health—System Pharm 56( 19): 1929-1935.
154-156.
Hazen, K. and S. Howell (2007). Candida, Cryptococus, and other
Newman, S., C.E. Langston, et al. (2003). Cryptococcal pyelonephritis
yeasts of medical importance. In: Manual of Clinical Microbiology,
in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 222(2): 180- 183.
edited by P.R. Murray, 9th edition. Washington, DC: ASM Press.
Norris, C., B.J. Williams, et al. (2000). Recurrent and persistent urinary
Heseltine, J., D.L. Panciera, et al. (2003). Systemic candidiasis in a dog.
tract infections in dogs: 383 cases (1969-1995). JAm Anim Hosp
IAm Vet Med Assoc 223(6): 821-824.
Assoc 36(6): 484-492.
Hui, M., S.W. Cheung, et al. (2004). Development and application of
Occhipinti, D., P.O. Gubbins, et al. ( 1994). Frequency, pathogenicity
a rapid diagnostic method for invasive Candidiasis by the detection
and microbiologic outcome of non-Candida albicans candiduria.
of D-/L-arabinitol using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry.
Eur I Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 13(6): 459-467.
Diagrnos Microbiol Infect Dis 49(2): 117-123.
Ossent, P. ( 1987). Systemic aspergillosis and mucormycosis in 23 cats.
Humbert, H., M.D. Cabiac, et al. (1995). Pharmacokinetics of
Veterinary Record 120(14): 330-333.
terbinafine and of its five main metabolites in plasma and urine,
Ozawa, H., K. Okabayashi, et al. (2005). Rapid identification of Car-
following a single oral dose in healthy subjects. Biopharm Drug
Dispos 16(8): 685-694.
Pressler, B., S.L. Vaden, et al. (2003). Candida spp. urinary tract infec-
Jacobs, L., E.A. Skidmore, et al. (1996). Oral fluconazole compared
tions in 13 dogs and seven cats: predisposing factors, treatment, and
with bladder irrigation with amphotericin B for treatment of fungal
outcome. IAm Arim Hosp Assoc 39(3): 263-270.
724  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Rex, J, M.G. Rinaldi, et al. {l995). Resistance of Candida
Tokunaga, S., M. Ohkawa, et al. (1995). D-arabinitol versus mannan 
 species to fuconazole. Antimicrob Agents and Chemother 39(1):
antigen and candidal protein antigen as a serum marker for Candida
1-8.
pyelonephritis. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 14(2): 118-121.
Robinson, W., M. Connole, et al. (2000). Systermic mycosis due to
Toll, J., C.M. Ashe, et al. (2003). Intravesicular administration of clotri-
Aspergillus deflectus in a dog. Aus Vet I78(9): 600-602.
mazole for treatrment of candiduria in a cat with diabetes mellitus.
 Sobel, J. (2007). Caspofungin in the treatment of symptomatic can-
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 223(8): 1156- 1158.
diduria. Clirn Infect Dis 44(5): e46-e49.
Trinh, T., J. Simonian, et al. (1995). Continuous versus intermittent
Suchodolski, J., E.K. Morris, et al. (2008). Prevalence and identi-
bladder irrigation of amphotericin B for the treatment of candiduria.
fication of fungal DNA in the small intestine of healthy dogs
I Urol 154(6): 2032-2034.
and dogs with chronic enteropathies. Vet Microbiol 132( 3-4):
Warnock, D., D.C. Speller, et al. ( 1976). Serological diagnosis of infec-
379-388.
tion of the urinary tract by yeasts. I Clin Pathol 29(9): 836-840.
Tan, R.J. and E.W. Lim (1977). Isolation of Torulopsis glabrata from a
urine specimen ofa Labrador bitch with urolithiasis. Br Vet J 133(3):
drum. Exp Opin Pharmacother 2(8): 121l-1226.
324-325.
Wood, G.L., D.C. Hirsh, et al. ( 1978). Disseminated aspergillosis in a
Tokunaga, S., M. Ohkawa, etal. ( 1993). Diagnostic value of determina-
dog. I Arn Vet Med Assoc 172(6): 704-707.
 tion of serum mannan concentrations in patients with candiduria.
Wooley, R. and J.L. Blue (1976). Bacterial isolations from canine and
Eur I Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 12(7): 542-545.
feline urine. Mod Vet Pract 57(7): 535-538.
73
Viruses and urinary tract disease
John M. Kruger, Carl A. Osborne, Annabel G. Wise.
Brian A. Scansen, and Roger K. Maes
 For over a century, physicians have recognized a relation-
Upper urinary tract disorders
ship between viral infections and urinary tract disease
(Henoch 1884). Virus-induced disorders of the urinary
Renal injury may be the direct result of virus-induced
cytopathic effects on renal vascular, glomerular, tubu-
system, especially those involving the kidneys, are now
lar, and/or interstitial tissues, the secondary consequence
increasingly identified as major causes of morbidity and
of systemic infection and immune-mediated injury, or
mortality in humans (Berns and Cohen 2007). Similarly,
the result of both processes (Alpers and Kowalewska
rapid advances in detection and localization of viruses in
 2007; Faulhaber and Nelson 2007). Clinical manifesta-
tissues and urine with contemporary molecular biologic
tions of viral upper UTls will be similar to other infec-
methods have fostered a renewed interest in viral urinary
 tious and noninfectious causes of renal injury and may
 tract infections (UTI) in companion animals.
As with all infectious diseases, clinical manifestations
include varying combinations and degrees of proteinuria,
of viral UTls are the cumulative result of the ability of
hematuria, isosthenuria, and azotemia. A number of viral
agents have been associated with human kidney diseases
(Table 73.1). Likewise, several viruses have been associ-
host function and, conversely, the host's ability to resist or
curtail infection (Murphy et al. 1999a). Because the viru-
ated with canine and feline kidney disorders ( Table 73.1 ).
lence of a specific pathogen and the resistance of a given 
 Despite strong temporal associations between some viral
host may vary considerably, viral UTls may be asymp-
 infections and renal disease, a cause-and-effect relation-
tomatic or may be associated with substantial morbidity
ship and specific mechanisms of renal injury have not
been established in all cases.
and mortality. In general, viral pathogens may cause dis-
ease by (1) inducing cell injury or death, (2) altering
Canine adenovirus
cellular functions, (3) suppressing immune responses,
-od os-un no ors s () 
Canine adenovirus type 1 (CAV-1) is the cause of infec-
logic immune responses. It is noteworthy that virus-
tious canine hepatitis and is serologically and genetically
associated autoimmune diseases may occur in the absence
 distinct from canine adenovirus type 2 (CAV-2) ( Wright
of detectable viruses as a result of persistent nonreplicat-
1976). CAV-1 is associated with systemic viremia, hep-
ing viral components, virus-induced alterations in anti-
atitis, glomerulonephropathy, interstitial nephritis, and
 genic profles of infected cells, or induction of antiviral
viruria, whereas CAV-2 is largely confined to the respi-
antibodies capable of cross-reacting with self-proteins
ratory tract (Benetka et al. 2006). It is noteworthy that
(Schattner and Rager-Zisman 1990).
modified live CAV-1 vaccine strains may localize in renal
tubular epithelium and have been associated with mild
subclinical interstitial nephritis and persistent viruria
(Appel et al. 1973). However, cross-reacting CAV-2 vac-
cine strains rarely, if ever, produce renal disease (Curtis
et al. 1978).
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
After primary replication, CAV-1 rapidly disseminates
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
to multiple tissues and body fluids. In the acute phase,
725
726  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Table 73.1 Viruses associated with urinary tract disease
Host species
Virus
Associated conditions?
References
Human
Adenovirus types 11. 21
Hemorrhagic cystitis (children)
Mufson and Belshe 1976
Coxsackievirus
Interstitial nephritis
Burch and Colcolough 1969
 Glomerulonephritis
Cytomegalovirus
Interstitial nephritisb
Platt et al. 1985: Spach et al. 1993
Hemorrhagic cystitisb
Echovirus type 9
Glomerulonephritis
Yuceoglu et al. 1966
Epstein-Barr virus
Interstitial nephritis
Joh et al. 1998: Krishnan et al. 1999
Glomerulonephritis
Renal leiomyomab
Erythrovirus B19
Hematuriab
 Christensen et al. 2001
Cystitisb
Glomerulonephritisb
Hantavirus
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
Miettinen et al. 2006
Glomerulonephrititis
Hepatitis virus types B, C
Glomerulonephritis
Johnson and Couser 1990; Johnson et al.
Interstitial nephritis
1994
Herpes simplex
Interstitial nephritisb
Silbert et al. 1990; McClanahan et al.
 Hemorrhagic cystitis
1994
Herpes varicella-zoster
Hemorhagic cystitis
Meyer et al. 1959: Rossetti et al. 1996
Glomerulonephritis
HIV
Collapsing focal glomerulosclerosis
Elem et al. 1991: D'Agati and Appel 1997
Interstitial nephritis
Glomerulonephritis
Hemorrhagic cystitis
Influenza A
Hemorrhagic cystitis
Wilson and Smith 1972: Khakpour and
Glomerulonephritis
Nik-Alchtar 1977
Paramyxovirus (mumps)
Nephritis
Utz et al. 1964; Hughes et al. 1966
Hematuria
Polyomavirus BK
Tubulointerstitial nephritisb
Drachenberg et al. 2005
Ureteritisb
Hemorhagic cystitisb
Canine
Canine adenovirus 1
Glomerulonephritis
Wright 1976
Interstitial nephritis
Viruria
Canine herpesvirus
Hemorrhagic nephritisc
Carmichael 1970: Huxsoll and Hemelt
Viruria
1970
Canine distemper
Urothelial swelling
Coffin and Liu 1957
(paramyxovirus) virus
Vruria
 Feline
 Bovine herpesvirus-4
Hemorhagic cystitis
Fabricant 1977
Feline calicivirus
Hemorrhagic cystitis
Rich et al. 1971; Rice et al. 2002
Vruria
Feline immunodeficiency
Glomerulosclerosis
Poli et al. 1993: Poli et al. 1995
virus
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
Amyloidosis
Feline foamy virus
Hemorrhagic cystitis
German et al. 2008
Glomerulonephritis
Feline infectious peritonitis virus
Pyogranulomatous nephritis
Hayashi et al. 1982: Kipar et al. 2005
Interstitial nephritis
 Glomerulonephritis 
Feline leukemia virus
Membranous glomerulonephritis
Francis et al. 1980; Jakowski et al. 1980
Interstitial nephritis 
aCause-and-effect relationships have not been established in all ases.
bDisorder observed primarily in immunocompromised hosts.
cDisorder observed in neonatal puppies infected at less than 2 weeks of age.
Viruses and urinary tract disease   727
the virus replicates in hepatocytes, vascular endothe-
tubular necrosis, interstitial nephritis, proteinuria, and
lium, lymphoid tissues, and circulating mononuclear
hematuria (Carmichael et al. 1965; Wright and Cornwell 
cells and is associated with acute necrohemorrhagic hep-
1968; Yamamura et al. 1992). The pathogenesis of
atitis and generalized perivascular hemorrhage ( Wright
 CHV-induced nephropathy involves direct virus-induced
et al. 1973). Coincidental viral replication in glomeru-
cytolytic injury to the endothelium and smooth muscle of
lar capillary endothelial and mesangial cells results in a
renal arteries, the renal tubular epithelium, and the con-
concurrent virus-induced glomerulonephropathy char-
nective tissues of the interstitium (Carmichael et al. 1965;
acterized by endothelial and mesangial cell degenera-
Hashimoto et al. 1982; Yamamura et al. 1992; Schulze
tion and necrosis, disruption of visceral epithelial cells,
and Baumgartner 1998). Renal infection is accompanied
proximal tubular epithelium degeneration, and protein-
  re  snd    
uria (Wright et al. 1973; Wright and Cornwell 1983).
(Huxsoll and Hemelt 1970). In dogs surviving acute
As virus neutralizing antibody titers rise at approxi-
 infection, CHV is shed in nasal, oropharyngeal, and gen-
mately 7-10 days post infection, subsequent mesangial
itourinary secretions, and in feces for up to 2 weeks post-
and subendothelial deposition of circulating virus-
 infection, the extent and duration of virus shedding in
antibody immune complexes induces a membranopro-
 urine has not been determined (Karpas et al. 1968; Appel
et al. 1969). After an appropriate host immune response,
and Cornwell 1983). By 10-14 days post infection, CAV-1
virus shedding ceases and CHV establishes lifelong latent
localizes in renal tubular epithelium where it is associated
infections of local ganglionic neurons and lymphoid tis-
with focal interstitial nephritis, transient proteinuria, and
sues, including lumbosacral ganglia, the celiac plexus,
 a persistent viruria that may last for 6-9 months (Baker
and hypogastric lymph nodes (Burr et al. 1996; Schulze
and Baumgartner 1998; Miyoshi et al. 1999). Reactivation
tion, lesions of glomerulonephritis and intersitial nephri-
of latent CHV infections and subsequent genitourinary
-uou aq oi ieadde inq juapiaa s aie sisouqy pue s
shedding of virus may be induced by stressful situations
progressive (Wright et al. 1981). Unlike the relationship
or by administration of systemic corticosteroids or other
of CAV-1 with chronic liver disease, however, persistent 
immunosuppressive agents (Okuda et al. 1993). How-
CAV-1 infection has not, as of yet, been associated with
ever, the role of latent or recrudescent CHV infections in
chronic progressive renal disease in dogs.
the development or progression of renal disease has not
been determined.
Canine herpesvirus
Canine herpesvirus (CHV) is a member of the alpha
Feline coronavirus
herpesvirus subfamily that causes severe, usually fatal,
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a systemic, pro-
 generalized systemic infections in seronegative neona-
gressive, and ultimately fatal immunopathologic dis-
ease caused by a highly pathogenic feline coronavirus
competent dogs exposed after 2 weeks of age develop
strain derived from a mutation of the more common
 only mild or inapparent upper respiratory tract or geni-
and less pathogenic enteric strain of feline coronavirus
tal infections (Carmichael et al. 1965; Wright and Corn-
(Hartmann 2005). The disease principally affects young
well 1968; Appel et al. 1969; Carmichael 1970). Neonatal
         5 
 puppies less than 2 weeks of age are uniquely predisposed
Renal injury is common and is the direct result necrotiz-
to CHV systemic infections because of their lower body
 ing pyogranulomatous vasculititis/nephritis associated
temperature, inability to mount a febrile response, and
with perivascular localization of activated coronavirus-
poorly developed immune systems (Carmichael 1970;
infected
1  monocyte/macrophages and  coronavirus-
Huxsoll and Hemelt 1970). The hallmarks of generalized
specific immune complexes (Jacobse-Geels et al. 1982;
systemic infections in affected puppies are disseminated
Kipar et al. 2005). In addition, glomerulonephritis with
 focal necrosis and hemorrhage in multiple organs, espe-
or without concurrent vasculitis has been observed in cats
cially in the kidney, liver, lung, and spleen (Carmichael
with FIP. In one study of 85 naturally occurring cases of
 et al. 1965; Wright and Cornwell 1968). Grossly, kidneys
FIP, 71% of affected cats had light microscopic lesions
 are mottled in appearance due to multiple subcapsu-
 of membranous, mesangioproliferative, or membra-
lar cortical hemorrhages associated with wedge-shaped
 noproliferative glomerulonephritis (Hayashi et al. 1982).
hemorrhagic lesions radiating outward from the medulla
 Identification of viral antigen-antibody complexes and
(Carmichael et al. 1965). Characteristic light microscopic
complement in glomeruli of affected cats is consistent
renal lesions include fibrinoid necrosis of interlobu-
with immune-mediated glomerulonephritis occurring
lar arteries, hemorrhage, glomerular degeneration, renal
secondarily to systemic FIP infection.
728  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Feline immunodeficiency virus
tial nephritis, proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, and renal
failure in chronically infected cats with or without con-
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is a member of
current lymphosarcoma or other myeloproliferative dis-
the lentivirus subfamily of retroviruses that is similar to
eases (Cotter et al. 1975; Francis et al. 1980; Jakowski
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in structure, bio-
et al. 1980). Glomerulonephropathy was observed in
logical properties, and clinical manifestations of infec-
25-37% of necropsy specimens obtained from cats living
tion (Bendinelli et al. 1995). Renal abnormalities have
in households with large populations of FeLV-infected
been reported in 8-24% of naturally infected FIV-positive
cats (Francis et al. 1980; Jakowski et al. 1980). However, a
cats from Japan, the United Kingdom, Australia, and
substantially lower prevalence of glomerulonephropathy
New Zealand (Hopper et al. 1989; Ishida et al. 1989;
Thomas et al. 1993). In studies of cats from a single
positive cats from the general population (Reinacher
endemically infected household in Italy, azotemia was
and Theilen 1987; Weijer and Daams 1976). In contrast
observed in 50% and proteinuria in 95% of 21 FIV-
to lentiviruses, FeLV-associated renal disease appears to
positive cats (Poliet al. 1993; Poliet al. 1995). Abnormali-
occur secondarily to systemic infection and immune-
ties observed in naturally or experimentally infected FIV-
mediated mechanisms of glomerular injury. Dysregula-
positive cats include varying combinations and degrees
tion of the immune system in chronically viremic cats
of clinical signs consistent with renal failure, uremia
is believed to induce formation of circulating immune
and the nephrotic syndrome, and laboratory findings of
complexes composed of viral antigens ( whole virions, or
azotemia, hypoalbuminemia, and proteinuria ( Thomas
solubilized proteins gp70, p27, or p15E) and antibodies
et al. 1993; Poli et al. 1993; Poli et al. 1995; Hofmann-
that are deposited in glomeruli (Hardy 1982).
Lehmann et al. 1997; Levy 2000). Renallesions commonly
observed in FIV-infected cats include mesangial thick-
ening, segmental to diffuse glomerulosclerosis, tubular
Feline foamy (syncytium-forming) virus
degeneration and/or necrosis, and interstitial mononu-
Feline foamy virus (FFV), formerly known as feline
clear cell infiltrates; less common lesions include mesan-
syncytium-forming virus, is a member of the spumavirus
gial cell proliferation, glomerular or interstitial amyloid
subfamily of retroviruses (Greene 2006). FFV infection
deposition, interstitial fibrosis, and microcystic tubular
is widespread in domestic and feral cat populations
dilation (Matsumara et al. 1993; Poli et al. 1993; Dua et al.
and is generally considered to be nonpathogenic. In a
1994; Bendinelli et al. 1995; Poli et al. 1995; Levy 2000).
recent study, however, experimental FFV infection of
HIV-associated nephropathy affects 3-10% of HIV-
SPF cats was associated with persistent viremia, anti-FFV
infected human patients and is clinically manifested
IgG production, and microscopic lesions of mild
by proteinuria and rapidly progressive renal failure
glomerulonephritis characterized by increased cellularity
(D'Agati and Appel 1997). Characteristic renal lesions
of glomerular tufts and adhesions between the glomeru-
lar tuft and Bowman's capsule (German et al. 2008). Addi-
podocyte hypertrophy and hyperplasia, tubular degen-
tional investigations are required to further characterize
eration, microcystic tubular dilation, and interstitial
the pathologic features of FFV-induced renal disease in
inflammation and fibrosis (D'Agati and Appel 1997;
cats.
Alpers and Kowalewska 2007). Recent studies suggest that
HIV-associated nephropathy is a direct consequence of
renal infection rather than a secondary consequence of
Lower urinary tract disorders
systemic infection (Alpers and Kowalewska 2007). Sim-
Viruses have long been implicated as causative agents in
ilar light microscopic lesions and detection of anti-FIV
the etiopathogenesis of some forms of naturally occur-
IgG, infectious FIV, proviral DNA, and viral RNA in renal
ring feline idiopathic cystitis (Chapter 75) (Fabricant
tissues of FIV-infected cats suggest that FIV-associated
1977; Kruger et al. 1996). This hypothesis was sup-
nephropathy may also involve direct viral injury to renal
 ss e e po uo   p
tissues (Poli et al. 1993; Poli et al. 1995). However, proof 
bovine herpesvirus type 4), retroviruses (aka FFV), and
of this hypothesis requires further study.
a calicivirus (aka feline calicivirus; FCV) from urine and
tissues obtained from cats affected with lower urinary
tract disease (Kruger et al. 1990). Similarly, a number
Feline leukemia virus
of viral agents including adenoviruses, erythrovirus, her-
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is a member of the oncor-
 pes viruses, HIV, influenza, and polyomavirus have been
navirus subfamily of retroviruses that has been associ-
associated with hemorrhagic cystitis and other lower uri-
ated with membranous glomerulonephropathy, intersti-
nary tract symptoms in humans (Table 73.1) (Sutcliffe
Viruses and urinary tract disease   729
et al. 2007). As of yet, viruses have not been implicated
(designated FCV-U1 and FCV-U2) from urine obtained
as causative agents in the pathogenesis of canine lower
from cats with idiopathic cystitis (Rice et al. 2002).
urinary tract disorders.
Subsequent development of a FCV p30 gene-based
Clinical manifestations of viral lower UTls are often
real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reac-
indistinguishable from other infectious and noninfec-
tion (RT-PCR) assay optimized for feline urine allowed
tious urinary tract diseases. Although the light micro-
for large-scale epidemiologic and experimental studies
scopic features of acute viral UTIs have not been
investigating the causative role of FCV in idiopathic cys-
well characterized, urinary bladder lesions in cats with
titis (Scansen et al. 2004, 2005). In a study characterizing
calicivirus-induced UTl consisted of urinary bladder
lower urinary tract disease induced by FCV infection in
mucosal petechial hemorrhages, urothelial ulceration,
specific-pathogen free (SPF) cats, FCV was detected by
and submucosal edema and mononuclear inflammation
RT-PCR in urinary tract tissues from cats infected with
(Kruger et al. 2007). These morphologic features are
       
not unlike those observed in the urinary bladders of a
2007). Immunohistochemical staining confirmed local-
limited number of cats with nonobstructive idiopathic
ization of FCV antigens to the bladder urothelium. Light
cystitis (Lavelle et al. 2000; Reche and Hagiwara 2001;
 microscopy revealed that urinary bladder lesions were
Specht et al. 2003). We emphasize, however, that these
more severe and seen more frequently in cats infected
lesions can also be associated with any inflammatory
with the urinary strain, whereas oral/respiratory tract
process and are not pathognomonic for a diagnosis of
lesions tended to be more severe and seen more fre-
viral UTI.
quently in cats infected with the respiratory strain. In
a study investigating the prevalence of FCV urinary tract
infection and FCV antibodies in cats with and without
Feline calicivirus
idiopathic cystitis (Larson et al. 2007), FCV RNA were
Isolation of a feline calicivirus (FCV) from a Manx cat
detected by RT-PCR with similar frequency (approxi-
with spontaneous urethral obstruction in 1969, and sub-
mately 6%) in urine from cats with idiopathic cystitis
sequent experimental induction of obstructive uropathy
 and cats with FCV-induced upper respiratory tract dis-
in conventionally reared cats by urinary bladder inocula-
ease; viral nucleic acids were not detected in urine from
tion supported a pathogenic role for FCV in some forms
 asymptomatic vaccinated control cats. Mean FCV neu-
of feline lower urinary tract disease (Rich and Fabricant
tralizing antibody titers for cats with idiopathic cystitis
1969; Rich et al. 1971). However, other investigators were
unable to isolate FCV from urine obtained from cats with
significantly higher than the mean titer of asymptomatic
 natural forms offeline lower urinary tract disease ( Kruger
vaccinated control cats. These observations confirmed
et al. 1990). While these findings raised questions about
 FCV viruria in cats with and without respiratory signs
the causative role of FCV, the inability to detect FCV may
 and suggested increased exposure to FCV in cats with
have been confounded by improper selection of cases
idiopathic cystitis.
(i.e., improper inclusion and exclusion criteria were used
Recent studies have identified the components of the
to select cats for study), the innately virucidal nature of
functional receptor for FCV and include the junctional
feline urine, and use of insensitive or inappropriate virus
adhesion molecule 1 (JAM-1) and alpha 2,6-linked sialic
detection methods (Scansen et al. 2004; Scansen et al.
acid (Makino et al. 2006; Stuart and Brown 2007).
2005).
 JAM-1 specifically localizes to the tight junctions of
Over the past two decades, there has been increas-
epithelial and endothelial cells and is involved in the
 ing evidence that FCV may have a causative role in the
regulation of tight junction integrity and permeability,
pathogenesis in at least some cases of feline idiopathic
as well as leukocyte-endothelial cell interactions (Ebnet
cystitis (Kruger et al. 1996; Rice et al. 2002; Kruger
et al. 2004). Sialic acids are negatively charged sugar
et al. 2007; Larson et al. 2007). In the 1980s, trans-
molecules usually located at the ends of oligosaccharides
mission electron microscopic examination of urethral
attached to glycoproteins, glycolipids, and proteoglycans
matrix-crystalline plugs obtained from male cats with
on the cell surface (Stuart and Brown 2007). It is likely
urethral obstruction revealed virus-like particles, simi-
that JAM-1 and sialic acid serve as serotype-independent
Aooudnou pue (uu oe-sz Arneuxodde) azis ui el
tissue receptor components capable of mediating virus
to caliciviruses (Kruger et al. 1996). These calicivirus-
attachment, infection, and intracellular signaling (Barton
like particles were observed in 38% of 92 urethral plugs
et al. 2001; Makino et al. 2006; Stuart and Brown 2007).
obtained from male cats with urethral obstructive idio-
Since urothelial cell tight junctions and GAG layer are
pathic cystitis. In the late 1990s, an improved virus isola-
integral components of the urothelial barrier, it is plau-
tion technique enabled isolation of two new FCV strains
sible that FCV attachment, infection, and induction of
730  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
cellular injury or death may alter the structural and/or
tract diseases. Since clinical signs, clinical laboratory
functional integrity of the urothelium. Subsequent expo-
data, and microscopic examination of tissues stained
sure of bladder wall tissues to urine constituents could
for routine light microscopy cannot reliably distinguish
result in sensory afferent nerve stimulation, mast cell acti-
virus-induced disease from other urinary tract disor-
vation, and/or induction of immune-mediated or neu-
ders, diagnosis of viral UTI should encompass specialized
sampling, cultivation, and identification techniques suit-
2005; Sant et al. 2007). Further studies are necessary to
able for each individual uropathogen. Exclusion of other
define the causative role of FCV in the pathogenesis of
known causes of upper or lower urinary tract disease
feline idiopathic cystitis.
should precede attempts to establish a diagnosis of viral
UT1. Generally, diagnostic criteria for viral infections
Gamma herpesvirus (bovine herpesvirus-4)
include (1) isolation and identification of viral agents;
(2) direct demonstration of virus particles, viral anti-
In 1969, a cell-associated herpesvirus was isolated from
gens, or viral nucleic acids in tissues or body fluids; and/or
pooled kidney organ explants from a litter of normal
(3) detection and quantitation of specific viral antibodies
kittens, a kitten with upper respiratory disease, and a kit-
(Murphy et al. 1999b).
ten with concurrent upper respiratory disease and ure-
Virus isolation has historically been the diagnostic
thral obstruction (Fabricant et al. 197l; Fabricant and
"gold standard" for diagnosis of viral UTI. However, virus
Gillespie 1974). Subsequent antigenic and genomic anal-
isolation is time-consuming, expensive, and requires
 yses indicated that this herpesvirus was related to a group
viable virus in the specimen and absence of substances
of gamma herpesviruses collectively referred to as bovine
that are toxic to cell culture or that inhibit viral replica-
herpesvirus-4 (BHV-4) (Kruger et al. 1989). There is
tion. Molecular diagnostic methods, such as PCR or RT-
considerable evidence that BHV-4 can induce long-term
PCR, circumvent many of the difficulties associated with
viral UTls in cats in a laboratory setting (Fabricant 1977;
 conventional virus isolation methods and are increas-
Kruger et al. 1990) and that BHV-4 infection is endemic
ingly being used for rapid detection of many viral agents
in the feline population (Kruger et al. 2000). However,
(Murphy et al. 1999b). For example, a FCV p30 gene-
reproducible evidence that gamma herpesviruses cause
based RT-PCR assay was found to be comparable to virus
naturally occurring symptomatic feline lower urinary
isolation in sensitivity and diagnostic range for detection
 tract disease is lacking.
of caliciviruses in urine and offered the advantages of
reduced sample size, faster throughput, and better quan-
Feline foamy (syncytium-forming) virus
titation (Scansen et al. 2004).
In contrast to other viruses, FFV has been isolated from
Although PCR-based diagnostic assays are sensitive
urine, urinary-tract tissues, and other tissues obtained
 and rapid methods for virus detection, it is also recog-
from a large number of cats with lower urinary tract
nized that urine is a particularly difficult substrate for
disease (Kruger et al. 1990). Additionally, FFV antibod-
amplification of nucleic acids (Scansen et al. 2005). In
ies have been detected in serum samples obtained from
 particular, RT-PCR assays are at risk for false-negative
cats with naturally occurring lower urinary tract disease
results due to RNA degradation by endogenous or exoge-
(Shroyer and Shalaby 1978). FFV antibodies have also
nous RNases and/or the presence of endogenous RT-PCR
been detected in a large number of clinically normal cats
inhibitors (Ballagi-Pordany and Belak 1996). In one study
(Pedersen et al. 1980). The relative ease and frequency
 of routine submissions to a veterinary diagnostic labo-
with which FFV has been isolated from cats with lower
 ratory, either partial or complete inhibition of RT-PCR
urinary tract signs and the prevalence of FFV antibod-
was detected in approximately 20% of samples analyzed
ies suggests a possible role in the pathogenesis of urinary
(Kleiboeker 2003). Preparation of nucleic acids for assay
tract disorders. However, it is difficult to assess the relative
becomes a critical step that serves not only to concentrate
importance of FFV on the basis of available experimental
and purify nucleic acids, but also to eliminate endoge-
 and clinical evidence. Further investigations are neces-
    s o  so
sary to determine the role, if any, of FFV virus in feline 
acids (e.g-, RNases) and to remove or inactivate PCR
lower urinary tract disorders.
inhibitors. Studies on human and feline urine specimens
indicate that the nucleic acid preparation method sig-
Diagnosis of viral UTI
nificantly influences the ability of PCR-based assays to
 detect viruses in urine and other complex biological spec-
Identification and localization of viruses within the uri-
imens and emphasize the need to optimize methods of
is oi d rs u si n 
nucleic acid preparation for each viral assay and sample
 a cause-and-effect relationship of viruses with urinary
substrate (Demmler et al. 1988; Khan et al. 1991;
Viruses and urinary tract disease   731
Behzadbehbahani et al. 1997; Echavarria et al. 1998;
Bendinelli, M., M. Pistello, et al. (1995). Feline immunodeficiency
Biel et al. 2000; Scansen et al. 2005). In addition,
virus: an interesting model for AIDS studies and an important cat
incorporating an internal amplification control into
pathogen. Clin Microbiol Rev 8: 87-112.
Benetka, V., H. Weissenbock, et al. (2006). Canine adenovirus type
the RT-PCR reaction allows for rapid detection of
2 infection in four puppies with neurological signs. Vet Rec 158:
false-negative results caused by RT-PCR inhibitors
91-94.
and substantially increases the diagnostic reliability
Berns, J.S. and A.H. Cohen (2007). Viruses and disease of the kidney.
of RT-PCR assays (Ballagi-Pordany and Belak 1996;
Clin I Am Soc Nephrol 2: S1.
Kleiboeker 2003).
Biel, S.S., T.K. Held, et al. (2000). Rapid quantification and differentia-
tion of human polyomavirus DNA in undiluted urine from patients
after bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Microbiol 38: 3689-
Treatment of viral UTI
3695.
 Birder, L.A. (2005). More than just a barrier: urothelium as a drug
The most effective treatment of viral UTls lies in their pre-
target for urinary bladder pain. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 289:
vention through use of appropriate immunization strate-
F489-F495.
Burch, G.E. and H.L. Colcolough (1969). Progressive coxsackie viral
gies and husbandry practices. Although interest in antivi-
pancarditis and nephritis. Annal Intern Med71: 963-970.
ral chemotherapeutics and biologic agents has grown
Burr, P.D., M.E.M. Campbell, et al. ( 1996). Detection of canine her-
considerably in recent years, antiviral agents available for
pesvirus l in a wide range of tissues using the polymerase chain
clinical use are relatively few in number and are accompa-
reaction. Vet Microbiol 53: 227-237.
nied by only limited information regarding their safety
Carmichael, L.E., R.A. Squire, et al. (1965). Clinical and pathologic
features of a fatal viral disease of newborn pups. Am I Vet Res 26:
and efficacy (Hartmann 2006). One exception is FCV.
803-814.
Parenteral administration of FCV-specific antiviral phos-
Carmichael, L.E. ( 1970). Herpesvirus canis: aspects of pathogenesis
and immune response. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 156: 1714-1724.
ited calicivirus replication, increased survival, decreased
Christensen, L.S., T.V. Madsen, et al. (200l). Persistent erythrovirus
virus shedding, and hastened clinical recovery in kittens
B19 urinary tract infection in an HIV-positive patient. Clin Micro
exposed to a severe virulent strain of FCV (Smith et al.
Infect 7: 507-509.
Coffin, D.L. and C. Liu (1957). Studies on canine distermper infection
2008). Similarly, administration of anti-FCV mouse-cat
by means of fluorescein-labeled antibody. Virol 3: 132-145.
chimeric monoclonal antibodies substantially reduced
Cotter, S.M., W.D. Hardy, et al. (1975). Association of feline leukemia
clinical signs in cats exposed to virulent FCV (Umehashi
virus with lymphosarcoma and other disorders in the cat. I Arm Vet
et al. 2002). However, antiviral agents have not been eval-
med Assoc 166: 449-454.
uated in cats with presumed FCV-induced lower urinary
Curtis, R., J.E. Jemmett, et al. ( 1978). The pathogenicity of an atten-
uated strain of canine adenovirus type 2 (CAV-2). Vet Rec 103:
tract disease. In the absence of safe and effective antiviral
380-381.
agents, management of suspected virus-induced urinary
D'Agati, V. and G.B. Appel (1997). HIV infection and the kidney.
tract disease in dogs and cats is limited to supportive and
I Am Soc Nephrol8: 138-152.
 symptomatic care to alleviate clinical signs and minimize
Demmler, G.J., G.J. Buffone, et al. (1988). Detection of
 sequelae of infection.
reaction DNA amplification. J Infect Dis 158: 1177-1184.
Drachenberg, C.B., H.H. Hirsch, et al. (2005). Polyomavirus disease
References
in renal transplantation. Review of pathological findings and diag-
nostic methods. Hum Pathol 36: 1245-1255.
Alpers, C.E. and J. Kowalewska (2007). Emerging paradigms in the
Dua, N., G. Reubel, et al. (1994). An experimental study of primary
renal pathology of viral diseases. Clin I Am Soc Nephrol 2: S6
feline immunodeficiency virus infection in cats and a historical
S12.
comparison to acute simian and human immunodeficiency virus
Appel, M., S.1. Bistner, et al. (1973). Pathogenicity of low-virulence
diseases. Vet Immumol Immuropath 43: 337355.
strains of two canine adenoviruse types. Am J Vet Res 34: 543-
Ebnet, K., A. Suzuki, et al. (2004). Junctional adhesion molecules
550.
{JAMs): more molecules with dual functions? I Cell Sci 117: 19-29.
Appel, M.J.G, M. Menegus, et al. (1969). Pathogenesis of canine
Echavarria, M., M. Forman, et al. (1998). PCR method for detection
 of adenovirus in urine of healthy and human immunodeficiency
Arm I Vet Res 30: 2067-2073.
virus-infected individuals. J Clin Microbiol 36: 3323-3326.
Baker, J.A., H.E. Jensen, et al. (1954). Canine infectious hepatitis—fox 
Elbadawi, A. ( 1997). Interstitial cystitis: a critique of current concepts
encephalitis. I Am Vet Med Assoc 124: 214-216.
Ballagi-Pordany, A. and S. Belak ( 1996). The use of mimics as internal
Urology 49(Suppl. 5A): 14-40.
standards to avoid false negatives in diagnostic PCR. Mol Cell Probes
Elem, B., PS. Patil, et al. (1991). Haematuria frequency syndrome in
10: 159-164.
patients with positive HIV serology: observations in Zambia. Brit I
Barton, E.S., J.C. Forrest, et al. (200l). Junction adhesion molecule is
Urol 67: 146-149.
a receptor for reovirus. Cell 104: 441-451.
Fabricant, C.G. and J.H. Gillespie (1974). Identification and charac-
Behzadbehbahani, A., P.E. Klapper, et al. (1997). Detection of BK
terization of a second feline herpesvirus. Infect Irmmum 9: 460-466.
virus in urine by polymerase chain reaction: a comparison of DNA
Fabricant, C.G., J.M. King, et al. (1971). Isolation of a virus from a
extraction methods. I Virol Methods 67: 161-166.
female cat with urolithiasis. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 158: 200-201.
732
 Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Fabricant, C.G. ( 1977). Herpesvirus-induced urolithiasis in specific-
Khan, G., H.O. Kangro, et al. ( 199l). Inhibitory effects of urine on the
pathogen-free male cats. A J Vet Res 38: 1837-1842.
 polymerase chain reaction for cytomegalovirus DNA. J Clin Pathol
 Faulhaber, I.R. and P.J. Nelson (2007). Virus-induced cellular immune
44: 360-365.
mechanisms of injury to the kidney. Clin I Arn Soc Nephrol 2: S2-S5.
Kipar, A., H. May, et al. (2005). Morphologic features and development
Francis, D.P., M. Essex, et al. ( 1980). Increased risk for lymphoma and
 of granulomatous vasculitis in feline infectious peritonitis. Vet Pathol
glomerulonephritis in a closed population of cats exposed to feline
42:321-330.
leukemia virus. Am I Epidemiol 111: 337-346.
Kleiboeker, S.B.(2003). Applications of competitive RNA in diagnostic
German, A.C., D.A. Harbour, et al. (2008). Is feline foamy virus really
reverse transcription-PCR. I Clin Microbiol41: 2055-2061.
pathogenic. Vet Immumol Immumopath 123: 114118.
Krishnan, R., I.A. Freeman, et al. ( 1999). Epstein-Barr virus induced
Greene, C.E. (2006). Feline foamy (syncytium-forming) virus infec-
renal leimyoma. I Urol 161: 212.
tion. In: Infectious Diseasesof the Dogand Cat, edited by C.E. Greene,
Kruger, J.M. and C.A. Osborne (1990). The role of viruses in feline
3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 154-155.
lower urinary tract disease. I Vet It Med 4: 71-78.
    o )   
Kruger, J.M., C.A. Osborne, et al. ( 1990). Herpesvirus induced urinary
leukemia virus. Springer Semin Immumopathol 5: 75- 106.
tract infection in SPF cats given methylprednisolone. Arm I Vet Res
Hartmann, K.(2006). Antiviral and immunomodulary chemotherapy.
51: 878-885.
In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, edited by C.E. Greene,
Kruger, IM, C.A. Osborne, et al. (1996). Viral infections of the feline
3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 11-25.
urinary tract. Vet Clin North Am Small Anin Prac 26: 281-296.
Hartmann, K. (2005). Feline infectious peritonitis. Vet Clin North Am
Kruger, J.M., C.A. Osborne, et al. ( 1989). Genetic and serologic analysis
Small Anirm 35: 39-79.
of feline cell-associated herpesvirus infection of the urinary tract in
Hashimoto, A., K. Hirai, et al. (1982). Experimental transplacental
 
infection of pregnant dogs with canine herpesvirus. Arm I Vet Res
Kruger, J.M., C.P. Pfent, et al. (2007). Feline calicivirus-induce urinary
43: 844-850.
tract disease in specific-pathogen-free cats. J Vet Irtern Med 21: 684.
Hayashi, T., T. Ishida, et al. (1982). Glomerulonephritis with feline
Kruger, J.M., PJ. Venta, et al. (2000). Prevalence of bovine herpesvirus
infectious peritonitis. Ipr I Vet Sci 44: 909-916.
Henoch, E. (1884). Nephritis nach varicellen. Berl Klin Wschr 21: 17.
14: 593-597.
Hofmann-Lehmann, R., E. Holznagel, et al. (1997). Parameters of
Larson, J., J.M. Kruger, et al. (2007). Epidemiology of feline calicivirus
disease progression in long-term experimental feline retrovirus
urinary tract infection in cats with idiopathic cystitis. I Vet Interm
(feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukemia virus) infec-
Med 21: 684.
tions: hematology, clinical chemistry, and lymphocyte subsets. Cli
Lavelle, J.P, S.A. Meyers, et al. (2000). Urothelial pathophysiological
Diag Lab Irmmumol 4: 33-42.
changes in feline interstitial cystitis; a human model. Am I Physiol
Hopper, C.D., A.H. Sparkes, et al. (1989). Clinincal and laboratory
Renal Physiol 278: F540-F553.
findings in cats infected with feline immunodeficiency virus. Vet
Levy, J.K. 2000. Feline immunodeficiency virus. In: Current Veteri-
Rec 125: 341-436.
ary Therapy XIl, edited by J.D. Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Hughes, W.T., A.J. Steigman, et al. ( 1966). Some implications of fatal
Saunders, pp. 284-288.
Makino, A., M. Shimojima, et al. (2006). Junctional adhesion molecule
Huxsoll, D.L. and 1.E. Hemelt ( 1970). Clinical observations of canine
1 is a functional receptor for feline calicivirus. J Virol 80: 4482-4490.
herpesvirus. I Am Vet Med Assoc 156: 1706- 1713.
Matsumara, S., T. Ishida, et al. ( 1993). Pathologic features of acquired
Ishida, T., T. Washizu, et al. (1989). Feline immunodeficiency virus
immunodeficiency-like syndrome in cats experimentally infected
infection in cats of Japan. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 194: 221-225.
with feline immunodeficiency virus. I Vet Med Sci 55: 387-394.
Jacobse-Geels, H.E.L., M.R. Daha, et al. (1982). Antibody, immune
McClanahan, C., M.M. Grimes, et al. (1994). Hemorrhagic cystitis
complexes, and complement activity fluctuates in kittens with exper-
associated with herpes simplex virus. I Uro1 151: 152- 153.
imentally induced feline infectious peritonitis. Am J Vet Res 43:
Meyer, R., H.P. Brown,et al. ( 1959). Herpes zoster involving the urinary
666-670.
bladder. N Engl I Med 260: 1062-1065.
Jakowski, R.M., Essex, M. et al. (1980). Membranous glomeru-
Miettinen, M.H., S.M. Makela, et al. (2006). Ten-year prognosis of
lonephritis in a household cluster of cats persistently viremic
Puumala hantavirus-induced acute interstitial nephrititis. Kidney
with feline leukemia virus. In: Feline Leukermia Virus, edited by
I1t 69: 2043-2048.
W.D. Jr. Hardy, W. Essex, and A.J. McClelland. Amsterdam: Elsevier 
Miyoshi, M., Y. Ishii, et al. (1999). Detection of canine herpesvirus
North Holland Inc., p. 14 l- 149.
 DNA in the ganglionic neurons and the lymph node lymphocytes 
Joh, K., Y. Kanetsuna, et al. ( 1998). Epstein-Barr virus genome-positive
of latently infected dogs. I Vet Med Sci61: 375-379.
tubulointerstitial nephritis associated with immune complex-
Mufson, M.A. and R.B. Belshe ( 1976). A review of adenoviruses in the
mediated glomerulonephritis in chronic active EB virus infection.
etiology of acute hemorrhagic cystitis. J Uro1 115: 191-194.
Virchows Archt 432: 567-573.
Murphy, F.A., E.P.1. Gibbs, et al. (1999a). Determinants of viral viru-
Johnson, R.J. and W.G. Couser ( 1990). Hepatitis B infection and renal
lence and host resistance/susceptibility. In: Veterinary Virology, 3rd
disease: clinical, immunopathogenetic and therapeutic considera-
edition. New York: Academic Press, pp. 1ll-125.
tions. Kidney Int 37: 663-676.
Murphy, FA., E.P.1. Gibbs, et al. ( 1999b). Laboratory diagnosis of viral
Johnson, R.J., R. Willson, et al. ( 1994). Renalmanifestations of hepatitis
disease. In: Veterinary Virology, 3rd edition. New York: Academic
C virus infection. Kidney Int 46: 1255-1263.
Press, pp. 193-224.
Karpas, A., FG. Garcia, et al. (1968). Experimental production of
Okuda, Y., A. Hashimoto, et al. (1993). Repeated canine herpesvirus
canine tracheobronchititis (kennel cough) with canine herpesvirus
(CHV) reactivation in dogs by an immunosuppressive drug. Cornell
isolated from naturally infected dogs. Arn I Vet Res 29: 1251-1257.
Vet 83: 291-302.
Khakpour, M. and B. Nik-Alchtar ( 1977). Epidemics of hemorrhagic
Pedersen, N.C., R.R. Pool, et al. (1980). Feline chronic progressive
cystitis due to influenza A virus. Postgrad Med J53: 251-253.
polyarthritis. Am J Vet Res 41: 522-535.
Viruses and urinary tract disease   733
Platt, J.L., R.K. Sibley, et al. (1985). Interstitial nephritis associated
Smith, A.W., P.L. Iversen, et al. (2008). Virus-specific antiviral treat-
with cytomegalovirus infection. Kid Int 28: 550-552.
ment for controlling severe and fatal outbreaks of feline calicivirus
Poli, A., F. Abramo, et al. {l995). Renal involvement in feline
infection. Am I Vet Res 69: 23-32.
immunodeficiency virus infection: p24 antigen detection, virus
Spach, D.H., LE. Bauwens, et al. (1993). Cytomegalovirus-induced
isolation and PCR analysis. Vet Immurol Immunopathol 46:
hemorrhagic cystitis following bone marrow transplantation. Clin
13-20.
Infect Dis 16: 142- 144.
 Poli, A., F. Abramo, et al. ( 1993). Renal involverment in feline immun-
Specht, A.J., L.M. Kruger, et al. (2003). Light microscopic features of
odeficiency virus infection: a clinicopathologic study. Nephron 64:
feline idiopathic cystitis. I Vet Intern Med 17: 436.
282-288.
Stuart, A.D. and T.D.K. Brown (2007). α2,6-Linked sialic acid acts as
Reche-Jr, A. and M.K. Hagiwara (200l). Histopathology and mor-
a receptor for feline calicivirus. I Gen Virol 88: 177- 186.
phometry of urinary bladder of cats with idiopathic lower urinary
Sutcliffe, S., S. Rohrmann, et al. (2007). Viral infections and lower
tract disease. Ciencia Rural 31: 1045-1049.
urinary tract symptoms in the third national health and nutrition
Reinacher, M. and G. Theilen. ( 1987). Frequency and significance of
examination survey. I Urol 178: 218l-2185.
feline leukemia virus infection in necropsied cats. Am J Vet Res 48:
Thomas, J.B., W.F. Robinson, et al. (1993). Association of renal disease
939-945.
indicators with feline immunodeficiency infection. JAm Anim Hosp
Rice, C.C., J.M. Kruger, et al. (2002). Genetic characterization of 2
Assoc 29: 320-326.
novel feline caliciviruses isolated from cats with idiopathic lower
Umehashi, M., T. Imamura, et al. (2002). Post-exposure treatment of
urinary tract disease. I Vet Intern Med 16: 293-302.
cats with mouse-cat chimeric antibodies against feline herpesvirus
Rich, L.J. and C.G. Fabricant ( 1969). Urethral obstruction in male cats:
type l and feline calicivirus. I Vet Med Sci64: 1017-1021.
transmission studies. Car I Comp Med 33: 164-165.
Utz, J.P, V.N. Houk, et al. (1964). Clinical and laboratory studies of
Rich, L.J., C.G. Fabricant, et al. (1971). Virus induced urolithiasis in 
mumps. N Eng I Med 270: 1283-1286.
male cats. Cormell Vet 61: 542-553.
Weijer, K. and J.H. Daams (1976). The presence of leukaemia (lym-
Rohrbach, B.W., A.M. Legendre, et al. (200l). Epidemiology of
phosacoma) and feline leukaermia virus (FeLV) in cats in The Nether-
feline infectious peritonitis among cats examined at veterinary
lands. I Small Anmim Prac 17: 649-659.
medical teaching hospitals. I Am Vet Med Assoc 218: 1lll-
Wilson, C.B. and R.C. Smith ( 1972). Goodpasture's syndrome associ-
1115.
ated with influenza A2 virus infection. Arm Imtern Med 76: 91-94.
Rossetti, A., M. Tonz, et al. (1996). Acute glomerulonephritis with
Wright, N.G. (1976). Canine adenovirus: its role in renal and ocular
Zoster. Pediatr Infect Dis I 15: 643-644.
disease: a review. I Small Anim Pract 17: 25-33.
Sant, G.R., K. Kempuraj, et al. (2007). The mast cell in interstitial
Wright, N.G. and H.J.C. Cornwell ( 1968). Experimental herpes virus
infections in young puppies. Res Vet Sci 9: 295-299.
(suppl. 4A): 34-40.
Wright, N.G. and H.J.C. Cornwell ( 1983). Experimental canine ade-
Scansen, B.A., IM. Kruger, et al. (2005). In vitro comparison of RNA
novirus glomerulonephritis: histological, immunofluorescence and
 preparations methods for detection of feline calicivirus in urine
ultrastructural features of the early glomerular changes. Br I Exp
of cats by use of a reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
Path 64: 312-319.
assay. A I Vet Res 66: 915-920.
Wright, N.G., W.1. Morrison, et al. (1974). Mesangial localization of
Scansen, B.A., A.G. Wise, et al. (2004). Evaluation of a p30 gene-based
immune complexes in experimental canine adenovirus glomeru-
real-time reverse transcriptase PCR assay for detection of feline
lonephritis. Br I Exp Path 55: 458-465.
calicivirus. I Vet Irternal Med 18: 135- 138.
Wright, N.G., A.S. Nash, et al. (1981). Experimental canine aden-
 Schattner, A. and B. Rager-Zisman ( 1990). Virus induced autoimmu-
ovirus glomerulonephritis: persistence of glomerular lesions after
nity. Rev Infect Dis 12: 204-222.
oral challenge. Br I Exp Patht 62: 183-189.
Schulze, C. and W. Baumgartner (1998). Nested polymerase chain
Wright, N.G., H. Thompson, et al. ( 1973). Ultrastructure of the kid-
reaction and in situ hybridization for diagnosis of canine herpesvirus
ney and urinary excretion of renal antigens in experimental canine
infection in puppies. Vet Pathol 35: 209-217.
adenovirus infection. Res Vet Sci 14: 376-380.
Shroyer, E.L. and M.R. Shalaby (1978). Isolation of feline syncytia-
Yamamura, T, Y. Minato, et al. (1992). Electron microscopy of renal
forming virus from oropharyngeal swab samples and buffy coat
arterial lesions in a pup infected with canine herpesvirus. Jap I Vet
cells. Arn I Vet Res 39: 555-560.
Sci 54: 779-780.
Silbert, P.L., L.R. Matz, et al. ( 1990). Herpes simplex virus interstitial
Yuceoglu, A.M., S. Berkovich, et al. (1966). Acute glomerulonephritis
nephritis in a renal allograft. Clin Nephrol 33: 264-268.
associated with Echo virus type 9 infection. I Pediatr 69: 603-609.
74
Nematodes of the upper and lower urinary tract
of dogs and cats
Carl A. Osborne, Jody P. Lulich, and Hasan Albasan
Parasitologists have classified literally thousands of
reach sexual maturity at a site in the body, which will
nematodes. The name "Nematoda" is derived from a
allow them to propagate.
Greek term and is translated into English as “"thread-like
With expansive suburbanization, wild intermediate
Ones"” (nema, “thread") and (-ode, “like").
and paratenic hosts are living closer to man and domestic
 Parasitism is characterized by an intimate relation-
 animals. Therefore, understanding of parasitic life cycles
ship between two different species in which one (the
and host responses is essential to minimize risks of infec-
parasite) uses the other (the host) as an environment
tions of man and domestic animals.
from which it can derive life-sustaining nourishment.
Life cycles of parasites may be classified as direct or
indirect. Direct life cycles do not require an interme-
Dioctophyma renale
diate host. The definitive host is defined as the species in
which the parasite reaches sexual maturity and produces
Taxonomy
progeny. Parasites with indirect life cycles such as Dioc-
Of the nematodes known to affect domestic animals and
tophyma renale require one or more intermediate hosts
humans, few can rival the size and appearance of the giant
to complete its life cycle. Morphological and physiolog-
kidney worm. The etymology of the Greek name “diocto-
ical changes occur in the immature stage of the parasite
phyma" is “di”" = two; “octa” = 8; “phyma” = tubercles.
while it lives in the intermediate host. Some life cycles
It is based on the taxonomy of the cranial portion of this
are associated with paratenic hosts (aka transport hosts).
parasite (Karmanova 1968; Soulsby 1982).
The term “paratenic" describes an intermediate host that
 Although adult female D. renale are one of the largest
is not needed for the development of the parasite, but
nematodes observed to infect domestic mammals, it
serves to maintain the parasite's life cycle. Parasites do
apparently is not the largest nematode reported by oth-
not develop while living in paratenic hosts. Typically,
ers (Soulsby 1982; Bowman 1999). Review of the English
the parasite does not feed on the paratenic host. Rather,
literature indicates that the largest nematode species
the definitive host feeds on the paratenic host after the
reported is Placentonema gigantisima. This nematode
paratenic host has fed on the intermediate host contain-
was discovered parasitizing the placenta of a Sperm
ing the immature stage of the parasite. In this way, the
Whale (Physeter catodon) (Gubanov 1951). It was 8.5 m
paratenic host “transports" the underdeveloped parasite
in length with a diameter of 0.3 mm and contained
 to the definitive host where it may resume growth toward
32 ovaries.
sexual maturity. Terminal hosts (aka accidental hosts and
 In dogs, adult female D. renale are significantly larger
dead-end hosts) are those in which the parasite does not
than males, reaching up to 100 cm in length and 1.2 cm
in width (Karmanova 1968). In contrast, males are only
20-40 cm in length and 6 mm in width. In smaller hosts
such as mink, adult females are smaller, reaching up to
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
60 cm in length (Maxie 1999; Mech and Tracy 2001). The
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
larvae of D. renale range in length from 6 to 10 mm and
734
Nematodes of the upper and lower urinary tract of dogs and cats 735
briculus spp. (aka blackworms and mudworms) are phy-
logenically related to the earthworm (Karmanova 1968).
Adult L. variegates are approximately 10 cm in length and
1.5 mm in diameter. They can be readily found in Europe,
North America, and South America. They often inhabit
shallow water of the edges of ponds, lakes, and marshes
where they feed on decaying vegetation and microor-
 ganisms. L. variegates may also inhabit silt-sediments in
deeper water. Any mammal that drinks water contain-
ing infected annelids has the potential of ingesting the
大
infective third stage of D. renale.
Epidemiology
Figure 74.1 Dioctophyma renale ova (50x = original magnifi-
Dioctophyma renale is cosmopolitan in distribution
cation; unstained).
(Karmanova 1968; Mace 1976a; Osbome et al. 1969).
Cases of D. renale have been encountered in virtually
every part ofthe world with a temperate climate. In North
in width from 0.1 to 0.2 mm. They are thread-like in
America, cases have been frequently encountered in
appearance and are yellow to rust colored.
Mississippi, Louisiana, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan,
Adult male and female D. renale are typically blood
and the centraland eastern provinces ofCanada (Osbome
(or vermillion) red in color when they are alive, but
et al. 1969; Mech and Tracy 2001 ). The giant kidney worm
become brownish black after they die and degenerate.
has been reported in many species of animals, includ-
The term vermillion is derived from the Latin term
ing dogs, mink, coyotes, jackals, raccoons, foxes, wolves,
"vermin" meaning worm. The characteristic red color
maned-wolves, beech martens, pine martens, otters, and
may be associated with a hemoglobin-like blood pigment
weasels (Karmanova 1968; Osbome et al. 1969; Soulsby
(erythrocruorin?).
1982). Isolated infections of seals, horses, and cows have
The eggs are lemon-shaped and constant in size. They
been documented (Karmanova 1968; Soulsby 1982; Acha
typically have a light tan or rust color with deep pits in
their shells except at the poles that contain opercula. Eggs
and Szyfres 1989; Mech and Tracy 2001; Hoffman et al.
2004). Humans are accidental hosts; there have been
of D. renale measure 71-84 μm by 45-52 μm. Adult males
"believe it or not” case reports of adult D. renale pass-
have fleshy bell-shaped copulatory bursa that "dock” with
ing through the urethra of women (Karmanova 1968).
the vulva of adult females located in the anterior portion
Because of the aquatic portion of its life cycle, water is an
essential element of the habitat of D. renale. Therefore,
 s uo oat exde anod o p
it is not surprising that semiaquatic fish-eating mam-
its lifetime (Figure 74.1).
 mals are the most common definitive hosts of D. renale.
The eggs may remain viable for up to 5 years. Desicca-
d s  s i s s o   
tion and freezing temperatures are lethal to infective eggs
asite. Mink are the most commonly infected mustelids
of D. renale (Karmanova 1968). Although the lifespan of
and appear to be the principal definitive host in North
 D. renale apparently has not been determined experimen-
America (Mace and Anderson 1975; Mace 1976b). Up to
tally, there are estimates that some naturally occurring
50% of wild mink have been reported to be infected in
infections have lasted for 3-5 years (Karmanova 1968).
some areas (Mech and Tracy 2001).
D. renale have a cuticle with three or more main
outer layers consisting of collagen and other substances
Life cycle
(Karmanova 1968). The outer layers are noncellular and
are secreted by the epidermis. The cuticle apparently pro-
To complete the life cycle, both male and female parasites
tects these nematodes as they invade various tissues of
must be located in the same kidney of the host and the
mammals. Longitudinal muscles obliquely arranged in
urinary tract must be patent. Fertile eggs are passed with
urine voided by the host (Figure 74.2).
sure is high, muscle contraction causes their body to flex
They embryonate in water and after 1-7 months pro-
rather than flatten. Contraction of these muscles allows
duce first-stage larvae (Maxie 1999). The rate of their
the parasite to move by thrashing back and forth.
 development is dependent on temperature of the water.
Free-living annelids (Lumbriculus variegatus)
are
 The optimal temperature required for eggs to embry-
essential intermediate hosts (Karmanova 1968). Lum-
 onate is between 25 and 30°C (Soulsby 1982). The eggs
736  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
required for infective larvae to become mature gravid
females in the definitive host is 3.5-6 months. The entire
life cycle requires approximately two years (Karmanova
1968; Mace and Anderson 1975; Soulsby 1982).
On occasion, D. renale have been encountered in the
urinary bladder and/or ureter (Osbome et al. 1969; Nak-
agawa et al. 2007). The highest number of adults found
in one dog is 34 (Monteiro et al. 2002).
The protein-rich fluid that surrounds adult worms in
the renal pelves is almost entirely ofhost origin and likely
is a rich source of nutrients that are absorbed across
the body wall. We measured the urine protein/creatinine
ratio of fluid surrounding a gravid adult female D. renale
 in the hydronephrotic right kidney of an adult dog and
RENALE
OVA
640X100
compared it to the UP/UC ratio of urine contained in the
Figure 74.2 Dioctophyma renale ova (640× = original magnifi-
urinary bladder. The UP/UC ratio of the renal fluid was
cation. Scanning electron micrograph).
301; the UP/UC ratio of urine aspirated from the bladder
was 0.27. Other nematodes, such as the muscle dwelling
hatch only after being swallowed by the intermediate host,
Trichinella spiralis, also feed via transcuticular uptake of
Lumbriculus variegatus. Contrary to earlier reports, this
nutrients.
annelid apparently is the only intermediate host required
to complete the life cycle (Karmanova 1968). A period
Pathophysiology
of more than 100 days in L. variegatus is required for
Kidney
the second and third (infective) stage of the parasite to
develop. The definitive host becomes infected by ingest-
Adult parasites have attained substantial size by the
ing the infective larvae in annelids.
time they penetrate the kidney. The exact mechanisms
Paratenic hosts may also become a part of the life cycle.
involved with gaining access to the renal pelvis have not
In the United States, frogs (Rana clirmitans) northern
been reported. D. renale adults greater in length than
 black bulheads (Ictalurus nebulosus) are paratenic hosts
renal dwelling adults have been found in the peritoneal
(Maxie 1999; Mech and Tracy 2001). In other countries,
cavity without any evidence of kidney penetration. Large
 ( asd     ss 
adult parasites removed from the peritoneal cavity of one
been reported as paratenic hosts (Hoffman et al. 2004).
 dog and transplanted to the same location in another dog
Larvae encyst in the liver, mesentery, stomach wall, or
have successfully penetrated the kidney of the recipient
abdominal muscles of paratenic hosts.
(Karmanova 1968). Entry of the parasite into the kidney
The definitive host becomes infected either by ingest-
probably results from the effects enzymes released by the
ing raw fish, frogs, other paratenic hosts, or by ingesting L.
 parasite. Potent collagenases, hyaluronidases, and cys-
variegates (Karmanova 1968; Mace and Anderson 1975).
teine proteases released by nematodes can easily digest
After being swallowed by the definitive host, the infec-
 host tissues. Glands containing these enzymes may be
tive larvae penetrate the walls of the stomach or intestines
located adjacent to the esophagus. Some infective lar-
and migrate to the submucosa. Then, after approximately
vae of nematodes also excrete large quantities of amines.
5-7 days, they migrate to the liver and remain there for
Amines are strongly alkaline and very toxic. The parasite-
about 50 days. Migration to the right kidney and invasion
 derived amines may help infective larvae to penetrate
of the renal pelvis follows (Karmanova 1968).
tissue (Karmanova 1968).
D. renale have been found more frequently in the right
Contrary to reports in the literature, available evidence
kidney than in the left (Karmanova 1968; Mace 1976a,
 does not support the theory that adult D. renale slowly
1976b; Soulsby 1982). The predilection for the right kid-
devour the renal tissue of the host, reducing it to a hollow
ney has been attributed to the close anatomic relation-
sack. The buccal cavity of the parasite is not used for the
ship of the right kidney to the duodenum. According to
ingestion of intact renal tissues; solid particles have not
some investigators, adult D. renale are found in the left
been detected in the esophagus of D. renale. Although
renal pelvis when they penetrate the stomach at the
the exact mechanism(s) of destruction is not known for
 greater curvature. Finding encysted D. renale around the
sure, it is apparent that obstruction caused by the grow-
liver is associated larval penetration at the lesser curva-
ture of the stomach (Kommers et al. 1999). The time
 pyonephrosis) play a major role (Figures 74.3-74.5).
Nematodes of the upper and lower urinary tract of dogs and cats 737
Figure 74.5 Photograph of the hydronephrotic right kidney with
hemorrhagic modified transudate in the renal pelvis.
renal pelvis (Figure 74.6). The urothelium lining the renal
pelvis is often hyperplastic in some areas and ulcerated
in other areas.
 In mink and dogs, bone has been reported in asso-
Figure 74.3 Photograph of the right kicdney of a spayed female
14-month Golden retriever. The parasites have distorted the sur-
ciation with heteroplastic urothlelium (Osbome et al.
face contour of the kidney.
1969). The formation of mineralized bone is not unique
to D. renale (Huggins 1931; Gruhn and Fisher 1960; Hall
et al. 1972). Ostogenesis is likely related to the ability of
Light microscopic examination of sections of kid-
some cells (such as transitional epithelium) to respond to
neys from dogs with unilateral renal infection reveal
growth factors such as bone morphogenic proteins. We
changes typical of advanced hydronephrosis (i.e., oblit-
have detected bone in hydronephrotic kidneys of cats that
eration of the majority of renal tubules surrounded by
were not parasitized (Hall et al. 1972). Usually, only one
chronic inflammatory tissue and persistence of the struc-
kidney is affected with D. renale. The host maintains ade-
tural architecture of many glomeruli). Ova of D. renale
quate renal function due to compensatory hypertrophy
may be observed in the renal parenchyma adjacent to the
and hyperplasia of the remaining kidney. If both kidneys
are parasitized, or if one kidney is parasitized and the
 opposite kidney has substantial comorbid dysfunction,
varying stages of renal failure and uremia may occur.
Figure 74.6 Photomicrograph of a section of a hydronephrotic
Figure 74.4 Photograph of an adult female and an adult male D.
right kidney of a dog. Numerous ova are present in the scarred
renale in the dilated renal pelvis of the right kidney.
renal tissue adjacent to hyperplastic urothelium.
738   Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Peritoneal cavity
have been reported in skin nodules of humans (Acha
and Szyfres 1989). They have also been reported as large
In dogs, viable parasites located in the abdominal cav-
abdominal masses simulating neoplasms in man (Sun
ity or between lobes of the liver have frequently been
et al. 1986).
reported as an incidental finding during ovariohysterec-
tomies (Karmanova 1968). It is possible that, under cer-
Clinical signs
tain conditions, the adult worms may remain in the peri-
The feeding of L. variegatus infected with D. renale to
of a kidney. In a few cases, worms have been found in the
dogs typically induces vomiting due to effects of the par-
 peritoneal cavity while lesions indicative of partial kidney
asite on the gastric mucosa (Karmanova 1968). Ingestion
penetration by the parasite were present. However, adults
 os  ss s  s  go
and eggs of the parasite have been found in the peritoneal
vomiting. Microscopic examination of sections of stom-
cavity without any detectable evidence of kidney pene-
ach wall obtained from vomiting dogs infected with D.
tration by the parasites (Karmanova 1968; Maxie 1999).
renale revealed submucosal hemorrhage adjacent to lar-
Copulation of D. renale occurs in the kidney, and it has
vae (Karmanova 1968). Ferrets experimentally infected
been suggested that mating can also occur in the peri-
with D. renale via the ingestion of fish tissue containing
toneal cavity. It is also possible that, after mating with
the third stage of D. renale also vomited as a result of
females in the renal pelvis, male parasites exit the kidney
exposure to the parasite.
into the peritoneal cavity (Karmanova 1968; Mace and
If only one kidney has been invaded with D. renale and
Anderson 1975).
the opposite kidney is normal, signs attributable to D.
 Eggs that are released by female worms pass through
renale infestation are often absent. Hematuria observed
 the urinary tract and are thought to provoke inflamma-
by owners may be the first indication of an abnormality.
tion in the mucosa of the ureter and the bladder. The
Palpation of the abdomen may reveal an enlarged and/or
presence of eggs in the peritoneal cavity can also trig-
misshaped hydronephrotic kidney.
 ger the development of chronic peritonitis. Examination
If both kidneys are parasitized, clinical signs
of the abdominal viscera from dogs with D. renale in
attributable to renal failure or uremia may occur. How-
the peritoneal cavity revealed hemorrhage, granuloma-
ever, the host will die before extensive hydronephrosis of
tous inflammation, and fibrosis frequently involving the
both kidneys has time to develop. The degree of renal
omentum, the surface of the liver, and less frequently
dysfunction is influenced by (1) the number of parasites
the surface of the spleen (Karmanova 1968; Maxie 1999).
in the kidney, (2) the duration of infection, (3) the num-
In our experience, viable adult males (but not females)
ber of kidneys parasitized, and (4) and the presence of
have been found in the peritoneal cavity of dogs with-
comorbid renal diseases.
 out an associated inflammatory response. This suggests
that females and/or their eggs stimulate a greater host 
Laboratory findings
inflammatory response than males.
Ascites may occur in dogs with D. renale in the peri-
When a gravid female worm is present in one or both kid-
toneal cavity. The fluid detected in the abdominal cav-
neys that have a patent track to the exterior, microscopic
ity is usually hemorrhagic. The quantity of ascitic fluid
examination of urine voided by the host usually reveals
reported to be removed from dogs infected with D. renale
ova of D. renale (Ehrenford and Snodgrass 1955; Acha
ranged from approximately 20 mL to 3.2 L (Karmanova
and Szyfres 1989). Pyuria, hematuria, and proteinuria
1968).
with or without eggs are indicative of an inflammatory
response. Renal function tests may reveal results typical
of chronic renal failure when both kidneys are parasitized
Other sites
 or when one only kidney contains parasites and the con-
tralateral kidney is diseased.
Adults and larvae of D. renale have been encountered
in organs and tissues other than the kidneys, liver, and
Other tests
peritoneal cavity. D. renale has been reported in the uri-
nary bladder, urethra, ureters, uterus, ovaries, mammary
Radiography may reveal an enlarged hydronephrotic kid-
glands, stomach, abdominal wall, and thoracic cavity of
ney. If intravenous urography is performed, it may be
dogs and other animals (Osbome et al. 1969). In terminal
characterized by inability of the parasitized kidney to
hosts (e.g., humans) D. renale has been reported in the
excrete the contrast agent. Ultrasonography may reveal
subcutaneous tissue (Beaver and Theis 1979). Immature
that the affected kidney is hydronephrotic and contains
worms believed to be the infective third stage of D. renale
excessive fluid (Soler et al. 2008). Ultrasound may also
Nematodes of the upper and lower urinary tract of dogs and cats  739
capable of sustaining homeostasis. In patients with par-
KIDNE
asites in both kidneys, nephrotomy and removal of the
 parasites may be indicated if sufficient functional tissue
remains in both kidneys to maintain a reasonable quality
oflife. Unfortunately, by the time D. renale affecting both
kidneys is recognized, the patients often have moderate
to severe irreversible renal failure. Parasites that are inci-
dental findings in the peritoneal cavity during celiotomy
may be removed without further morbidity.
Pharmacologic treatment of adults and/or infective
larvae discovered in any species has been virtually nonex-
istent. Review of the literature resulted in finding a
report of a 44-year-old man with recurrent lumbar pain
attributed to D. renale (Ignjatovic et al. 2003). According
Figure 74.7 Transverse sonograph of the right kidney of a dog
to the report, the patient had consumed undercooked
illustrating characteristic hyperechoic and hypoechoic pattern of
fish or several months. The physicians stated that treat-
D. renale 
ment consisting of two regimens of ivermectin resulted
in a cure.
reveal characteristic hypoechoic loops associated with
one or more of these parasites in the renal pelvis. Trans-
verse plane sonographs of the affected kidney may reveal
Prevention
a thin hyperechoic rim that contains multiple circular
Dogs and cats should not be fed raw fish or fish viscera,
structures of uniform diameter (Figure 74.7).
especially in areas where D. renale is known to exist.
The outer layers of these structures are hyperechoic;
Likewise, they should not be given access to lake or pond
the inner portions are hypoechoic. In the longitudinal
water likely to contain infective stages of D. renale.
plane, the structures appear as elongated hyperechoic
Although it is thought that infection with D. renale
bands alternating with elongated hypoechoic bands. If
 confers some protection against challenge exposure to
viable parasites are in the peritoneal cavity, sonography
the parasite, this empirical observation has not been doc-
 may reveal hyperechoic curvilinear bands in the region of
umented by appropriate studies. However, less than 20%
the right caudal lobe of the liver and/or the cranial pole
of the larvae that were orally administered to commer-
of the right kidney. Serially performed sonographs may
 cially reared mustelids were successful in reaching the
reveal movement of the parasite(s) from one location to
kidneys (Mace and Anderson 1975).
another. CT and MRI scans may also be used to detect
D. renale in the renal pelvis of one or both kidneys, in
 the peritioneal cavity, or in varying positions between the
Capillaria plica, Capillaria felis-cati
lobes of the liver.
Taxonomy
Diagnosis
The genus Capillaria contains many species that collec-
tively parasitize all vertebrate classes (Butterworth and
If the gravid female parasite is located in the pelvis of a
Beverly-Burton 1980). However, descriptions of the tax-
kidney that has a patent ureter, characteristic ova may
onomy of the genus Capillaria and various species of
be found by microscopic examination of urine sediment 
this genus are a mess. In 1819, Rudolphi first described
(Figures 74.1 and 74.2). When the worms are free in the
nematodes found in the urinary bladder of wolves as Tri-
peritoneal cavity, the diagnosis is usually made by ultra-
chosoma plica,and this name was adoptedby the scientific
community. Sometime later, the name “Capillaria" was
exploratory celiotomy. Parasites are often found between
adopted. In 1951, Enzie reported Capillaria felis-cati from
lobes of the liver.
the urinary bladder ofa domestic cat (Enzie 1951). How-
ever, Enzie's description of C. felis-cati was apparently
based on the description of Freitus and Leent in 1936
Treatment
(Butterworth and Beverly-Burton 1980). To add to the
Nephrectomy is usually the treatment of choice when
 confusion, in 1982, the genus Pearsonema was adopted
 only one kidney is affected and the opposite kidney is
by some investigators instead of Capillaria (Moravec
740  Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Epidemiology
Capillaria plica is widely distributed throughout the
world. It has been found in the urinary bladder, and less
frequently in the ureters and renal pelves, of dogs, foxes,
coyotes, raccoons, martens, mink badgers, otters, bob-
cats, skunks, weasels, and wolves. Capillaria felis-cati is
found less commonly in the urinary bladder of cats. The
two species of Capillaria have similar biologic properties
and life cycles (Butterworth and Beverly-Burton 1980;
Waddell 1968a; Moravec 1982).
 Several species of wild animals appear to be the pri-
mary host. For example, 48% of 320 British wild red foxes
were infected with C. plica (Beresford-Jones 1961). This
Figure 74.8 Photomicrograph of gravid Capllaria plica in the
 parasite was also reported in 64% of 70 raccoons in west-
urine sediment of a dog (75x = original magnification.
ern Kentucky (Cole and Shoop 1987). Although endemic
Unstained). Courtesy of Dr. David Senior, Louisiana State Uni-
infection rates as high as 59 and 72% have been reported
versity.
in breeding kennels (Senior et al. 1980), infections with
these parasites occur too infrequently in domestic dogs
1982; Waddell 1968a). Now, the genus names Capillaria
and cats housed indoors for these species to maintain the
and Pearsonerma are used interchangeably. One of the
life cycle.
problems in attempting to categorize species of these
 parasites to the genus Capillaria or to another new genus
is that they all appear to be morphologically similar. In
this chapter, we have used the name Capillaria and not
Pearsonema as the genus name.
Capillaria aerophilia inhabits tissue (i.e., it is histo-
Life cycle
zoic), whereas C. plica and C. felis-cati are lumen dwellers
(i.e., they are coelozic). In contrast to D. renale, adult
Although a direct life cycle has been proposed, there is
C. plica and C. felis-cati are small, fragile, thread-like
strong evidence that earthworms are essential hosts for
yellowish parasites (Figure 74.8). Males are generally
C. plica and C. felis-cati (Senior et al. 1980). According to
16-53 mm long, whereas females are 17-53 mm long
 the indirect life-cycle scenario, eggs containing a single
(Butterworth and Beverly-Burton 1980; Moravec 1982;
cell are voided in the urine. First-stage larvae develop in
Georgi and Georgi 1990)
      a 
The eggs have bipolar plugs, are colorless, and have a
further unless they are ingested by an earthworm ( Lum-
slightly pitted shell (Figure 74.9). They measure 63-68
bricus terrestris). The definitive host becomes infected by
by 24-27 μm (Butterworth and Beverly-Burton 1980;
eating earthworms that have first-stage larvae in their
Georgi and Georgi 1990).
tissues. Infected larvae gain access to the lumen of the
bladder via the circulatory system. Eggs first appear in
the urine of the definitive host about 2 months after
ingestion of infective larvae.
 Direct transmission by feeding embryonated eggs to
foxes failed to result infection, but ingestion of earth-
worms completed the life cycle (Beresford-Jones 1961).
Ingestion of embryonated eggs by beagle puppies failed
to cause infection, whereas ingestion of earthworms
collected from yards of a kennel caused patent infection
61-68 days later (Senior et al. 1980). Eggs were not
found in the urine voided by pups less than 8 months of
age. Dogs selected for this study did not find earthworms
palatable. Therefore, the investigators concluded that the
dogs ingested therm inadvertently or during grooming
Figure 74.9 Capillaria plica ovum (160x = original magnifica-
(Senior et al. 1980). Wild foxes and raccoons are more
tion. Unstained).
likely to eat earthworms than are domestic dogs and cats.
Nematodes of the upper and lower urinary tract of dogs and cats   741
Pathophysiology
2. Prolonged treatment with albendazole was effective
in 85% of dogs infected with C. plica. The urine was
Adult worms weave the anterior portion of their bodies
 negative for eggs 30 days after initiation of treatment.
into the mucosa of the urinary bladder and at times into
Oral doses of 50 mg/kg of albendazole were given
the mucosa of the ureters and renal pelvis. The macro-
twice daily for up to 30 days (Senior et al. 1980).
scopic appearance of the kidney's renal pelves, ureters,
       
urinary bladder, and urethra may be normal (Senior et al.
twice per day) has been reported as the treatment of
1980). However, light microscopy revealed submucosal
 choice for human intestinal capillariasis (Bair et al.
edema of the urinary bladder in the vicinity of adult
2004).
(661 1 1 1 061 1  11) s
Desquamation of urothelial cells in the vicinity of the
Because evidence indicates that in the absence of rein-
parasite also occurred. The submucosa contained dilated
fection, urinary capillariasis may be self-limiting, isola-
capillaries with margination of neutrophils along vessel
tion of dog and cats from earthworms should be suffi-
walls. Focal areas of lymphocytes and plasma cells in the
cient to eliminate a Capillaria bladder infection in less
superficial mucosa were observed. There were relatively
than 90 days (Waddell 1968a).
few eosinophils.
Clinical signs
Prevention
 Most dogs and cats with urinary capillariasis are asymp-
Dogs and cats must be prevented from ingesting earth-
tomatic; some become pollakiuric, polydipsic, and peri-
worms. Kennels and kennel yards should be surfaced
uric (Waddell 1968a).
with a material that prevents access of dogs (and cats) to
earthworms.
Laboratory findings
Urinalysis may reveal results (hematuria, proteinuria,
References
and pyuria) typical of inflammation. Numerous clumps
Acha, P.N.and B.Szyfres ( 1989). Zoonosis y Enfermedades Transmisibles
of transitional epithelial cells have also been observed
in urine sediment (Senior et al. 1980). C. plica eggs are
Comunes al Hombre y a los Animales, 2nd edition. Washington DC:
Oranzacion Panamericano de la Salud, pp. 806-809.
usually easy to identify, although at times they are dif-
Bair, M.J, K.P. Hwang, et al. (2004). Clinical features of human
ficult to find. Twenty-four-hour egg counts from eight
intestinal capillariasis in Taiwan. World I Gastroermterol 10: 2391-
 infected dogs yielded mean counts ranging from approx-
2393.
imately 600-25,000 (Senior et al. 1980). Egg counts from
Beaver, P.C. and J.H. Theis ( 1979). Diooctophymatid larval nematode
in a subcutaneous nodule from man in California. Am I Trop Med
three infected dogs housed in cages for 84 days gradually
Hyg 28: 206-212.
diminished until eggs were undetectable. These obser-
Beresford-Jones, W.P. ( 196l). Observations on the helminths of British
vations were interpreted to indicate that infections with
wild red foxes. Vet Rec 73: 882-883.
Capillaria species were self-limiting.
Bowman, D.W., ed. (1999). Bowman Georgis? Parasitology for Veteri-
Mariars. Philadelpha, PA: WB Saunders.
Diagnosis
Butterworth, E.W. and M. Beverly-Burton ( 1980). The taxonomy of
-  s s    si si 
tematic Parsitology 1: 211-236.
Cole, R.A. and W.L. Shoop ( 1987). Helminths of the raccoon (Procyon
scopic examination of urine sediment (Harris Lloyd
lotor) in western Kentucky. I Parasitol 73: 762-768.
1981). Inability to detect parasite ova is not definitive
 Ehrenford, F.A. and T.B. Snodgrass ( 1955). Incidence of canine diocto-
evidence that the dog or cat is not infected. (e.g-, absence
phymiasis (giant kidney worm infection) with a summary of cases
of evidence is not always reliable evidence of absence).
in North America. JAVMA 126: 415-417.
Enzie, F.D. (195l). Do whipworms occur in domestic cats in North
Treatment
America. JAVMA 119: 210-213.
Georgi, I.R. and M.E. Georgi ( 1990). Parasitology for Veterinarians, 8th
 Urinary capillariasis is most often asymptomatic and may
edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 206 p.
be selflimiting. Suggested treatments include ( Waddell
Gillespie, D. (1983). Successful treatment of canine Capillaria plica
1968b; Senior et al. 1980; Harris Lloyd 1981; Gillespie
cystitis. Vet Med/Small Amim Clin 78: 681.
Gruhn, J. and E.R. Fisher (1960). Heterotopic ossification and dys-
1983; Kirkpatrick and Nelson 1987)
trophic calcification in infarcted rat kidney. Arch Path 69: 90-
100.
1. Several dogs appear to have been cured by single doses
Gubanov, N.M. (l95l). Giant nematoda from the placenta of
of ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg, administered by subcuta-
Cetacea, Placentonerma gigantissima. Proc USSR Acad Sci 77: 1123-
neous injection.
1125.
742
 Upper and lower urinary tract disorders
Hall, M.S., C.A. Osborne, et al. ( 1972). Hydronephrosis with hetero-
Mech, L.D. and S.P Tracy (2001). Prevalence of giant kidney worm
plastic bone formation in a cat. JAVMA 160: 857-860.
(Dioctophyma renale) in wild mink (Mustela vison) in Minnesota.
Harris Lloyd, F ( 1981). Feline bladderworm. Vet Med/Small Anim Clir
Am Mid Nat 145: 206-209.
76: 844.
Monteiro, S.G., E.S.V. Sallis, et al. (2002). Infeccao natural por trinta e
Hoffman, V., T.J. Nolan, et al. (2004). First report of the giant kidney
quatro helmintos da especie Dioctophyma renale (Goeze, 1782) erm
worm (Dioctophyme renale) in a harbor seal (Phoca vitulina). I
um cao. Revista da Faculdade de Zootecnia, Veterinaria e Agronomia
Parasitol 90: 659-660.
Uruguaiara 9: 29-32.
Huggins, C.B. ( 1931). Formation ofbone under the influence of epithe-
Moravec, F. (1982). Proposal for a new systematic arrangerment of
lium of the urinary tract. Arch Surg 22: 377-408.
nematodes of the family Capillaridae. Folia Parasitol 29: 119-
Ignjatovic, I., I. Stojkovic, et al. (2003). Infestation of the human kidney
132.
with Dioctophyma renale. Urol Int 70: 70-73.
 Nakagawa, T.L.D.R., A.P.F Rodrigues, et al. (2007). Giant kidney worm
Karmanova, E.M. ( 1968). Biological peculiarities of nematodes of the
(Dioctophyma renale) infections in dogs from Northern Parana,
order dioctophymidia. In: Dioctophymidia of Animals and Man and
Brazil. Vet Parasit 145: 366-370.
Diseases Caused by Them. Fundamentals of Nematology, Vol. 20.
Osbome, C.A., J.B. Stevens, et al. ( 1969). Dioctophyma renale in the
 Moscow: Nauka Publishers, pp. 24-121.
dog. JAVMA 155: 605-620.
Kirkpatrick, C.E. and G.R. Nelson (1987). Ivermectin treatment of
Senior, D.F., G.B. Solomon, et al. ( 1980). Capillaria plica infections in
urinary capillariasis in a dog. JAVMA 191: 701-702.
dogs. JAVMA 176: 901-905.
Kommers, D.G., M.R. Slha, et al. (1999). Dioctofimose em caes: 16
Soler, M., L. Cardoso, et al. (2008). Imaging diagnosis—Dioctophyma
casos. Ciercia Rural 29: 517-522.
renale in a dog. Vet Rad Ultrasound 49: 307-308.
Soulsby, E.J.L. ( 1982). Helminths, Arthropods, and Protozoa of Domes-
worm, Dioctophyma renale (Goeze, 1782) (Nermatoda: Dioctophy-
ticated Animals, 7th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger,
matoidea). Car I Zoo 53: 1552-1568.
Pp. 343-344.
Mace, T.F. (1976a). Bibliography of giant kidney worm Dioctophyma
Sun, T., A. Turnbull, et al. (1986). Giant kidney worm (Dioctophyma
renale. Wild Dis 69: 1-36.
renale) infection mimicking retroperitoneal neoplasm. Am I Surg
Mace, T.F ( 1976b) Lesions in mink (Mustela vision)infected with giant
Pathol 10: 508-512.
kidney worm. I Wildt Dis 12: 88-92.
Waddell, A.H. ( 1968a). Further observations on Capillaria feliscati in
Maxie, M.G. ( 1999). The Kidney, 4th edition, Vol. 2. In: The Pathology
the cat. Australian Vet I44: 33-34.
of Domestic Amirmals, edited by K.V.F. Jubb, PC. Kennedy, and N.
Waddell, A.H. (1968b). Anthelmintic treament for Capillaria feliscati
Palmer. San Diego: Acadermic Press, pp. 447-538.
in the cat. Vet Rec 82: 598.
Section 9
Lower urinary tract disorders
75
Feline idiopathic cystitis
Jodi L. Westropp
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD) is an inclusive
in male cats with no difference reported between intact
term used to describe any disorder affecting the urinary
 and castrated males (Hostutler et al. 2005). In reported
bladder or urethra of cats. Signs of LUTD in cats include
studies, excessive body weight, decreased activity, multi-
variable combinations of pollakiuria, stranguria, peri-
ple cat households, and indoor housing have been asso-
uria, dysuria, and hematuria. These lower urinary tract
ciated with increased risk for FlC (Buffington 2002).
-sip rened suo Aue nog oyoads pou ane (inT) suis
ease; they can be seen in cats that have cystic calculi, bac-
terial urinary tract infections, neoplasia, or other mass
Pathophysiology
lesions in the bladder. Overall, FLUTD has been reported
in 4.6% of cats seen in private practices in the United
Histopathology
States; a slightly higher prevalence was reported from
 Universities (F and Roudebush 2007). In approximately
There are two forms of FIC, the nonulcerative and ulcer-
2/3 of younger to middle-aged cats that present with
ative form. Cats with FIC almost always present with
the nonulcerative form; however, the “classic Hunner's
these clinic signs, no definitive diagnosis can be made;
ulcers" have been described rarely in cats (Clasper 1990).
therefore, this syndrome is called feline idiopathic cysti-
tis (FIC) (Westropp and Buffington 2004). A synonym
It is possible that the etiopathogenesis of these two forms
for this disease is idiopathic feline lower urinary tract
of FIC are different. In humans with IC, those with
Hunner's ulcers have more mononuclear cellular infil-
disease (iFLUTD). Occasionally, clinicians will refer to
this disease as interstitial cystitis (IC), because it is very
trates in the perineural and perivascular areas of the
 bladder and can show urolthelial spongiosis and detach-
similar to a disease that occurs in human beings. For con-
 ment (Peeker and Fall 2002). The nonulcerative subtype
sistency in this chapter, the term FlC will be used to refer
lacks the inflammatory ceular infiltrates. It has been
to this idiopathic syndrome.
shown in research on the bladder of cats with chronic FIC
include an intact or damaged urothelium with sumbmu-
Signalment
cosal edema, dilation of submucosal blood vessels with
 FICis generally seen in younger and middle-aged cats and
marginated neutrophils, submucosal hemorrhage, and
is uncommonly diagnosed in cats greater than 10 years
sometimes increased mast cell density (Buffington et al.
of age. Although it is reported in most studies that
1997b). Histopathologic abnormalities are usually not
FIC occurs equally in both genders (Buffington et al.
 specific for FIC. In an abstract, bladder histopathology
1997a; Jones et al. 1997; Willeberg 1984), in one study, a
in cats with FIC and urolithiasis was evaluated and a
 difference in the degree of lymphphocyte and mast cell
male predisposition was suggested (Cameron et al. 2004).
Although FIC can be obstructive or nonobstructive in its
 infltration as well as neovascularization was not shown,
presentation, urethral obstruction is far more common
suggesting that these lesions are not pathognomonic for
FIC (Specht et al. 2004). On the basis of the author's
 experience, no correlation between histology (and even 
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
cats.
745
746
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Biadder abnormalities
(NE) to urinary bladder (UB) strips induces the release
of nitric oxide from UB epithelium. Application of cap-
Because cats with this disease present primarily for LUTS,
saicin results in the release of nitric oxide from epithelium
d a s s    e
as well as nervous tissue in the UB. In light of reports
on the bladder. It has been shown in studies evaluat-
that nitric oxide may increase urothelial permeability
ing bladder permeability that there are marked increases
(Jezernik et al. 2003; Oter et al. 2004), it is suggested
in permeability after hydrodistention (Lavelle et al. 2000)
by these results that some of the sympathetically medi-
and increased bladder permeability to sodium salicylate
 ated alterations in permeability may be mediated by NE
in cats with FIC (Gao et al. 1994). These findings may
via this mechanism.
be mediated via the sympathetic nervous system. It has
 In humans presenting with LUTS, urodynamics are
also been reported that cats with FIC excrete decreased
often performed to rule out diseases, such as overac-
amounts of both total urinary glycosaminoglycan
tive bladder that could account for the clinical signs.
(Buffington et al. 1996) (GAG) and a specific GAG
Although these studies are not routinely performed in
(GP-51) (Press et al. 1995). GAG and GP-51 contribute
feline patients, in a recent publication, these procedures
to the surface mucus covering the urothelium and that
have been described and normal parameters have been
is believed to inhibit bacterial adherence and urothelial
established in a small group of healthy cats (Cohen et al.
injury from the noxious constituents of the urine.
2009). It has been shown in preliminary research evaluat-
It has been suggested that urothelial cells exhibit 
“neuronal-like” properties and activation by a variety of
ing urodyanmics in cats with FIC that there is no evidence
of overactive bladder but occasional findings of decreased
stimuli can evoke the release of various transmitters such
compliance have been noted (unpublished data).
 as ATP and nitric oxide (Figure 75.1) (Birder 2006).
The urothelial cells themselves can be targets of these
mediators and potentiate this inflammation. The bladder
Systemic abnormalities
afferent neurons in cats with FIC exhibit an increased
Signs of FIC can wax and wane and appear to be exac-
    n s  
erbated by stressful circumstances. A significant increase
pared to unaffected cats (Sculptoreanu et al. 2005).
Sympathoneural-epithelialinteractions appear to play an
in tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) IR has been identified in
the locus coeruleus (LC) (Reche and Buffington 1998) as
important role in permeability. Birder et al. (Birder et al.
well as in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothala-
2002) have shown that application of norepinephrine
mus in cats with FIC (Welk and Buffington 2003). TH
is the rate-limiting enzyme of catecholamine synthesis.
Urothelium
Bladder distention stimulates neuronal activity in the
Distension 
Capsaicin
LC, and the LC (Barrington's nucleus) is the origin of the
descending excitatory pathway to the bladder (de Groat 
et al. 1993). Moreover, chronic stress can increase TH
activity in the LC (Sands et al. 2000), with accompany-
 ing increases in autonomic outflow (Goldstein 1995). The
SP
ATP
LC contains the largest number of noradrenergic neurons
ATP; NO;
and is the most important source of NE in the feline (and
PG
human) central nervous system. It is involved in such
global brain functions as vigilance, arousal, and analge-
sia and appears to mediate visceral responses to stress
Smooth muscle
(Valentino et al. 1999). The increased THIR observed in
the LC of cats with FIC may provide a clue to the obser-
vation that clinical symptoms of FIC in cats and IC in
humans follow a waxing and waning course and can be
Figure 75.1 Schematic depicting possible interactions between
aggravated by environmental stressors (Buffington and
bladder afferents, urothelial cells, and smooth muscdle in the uri-
Pacak 2001; Wesselmann 2001; Westropp et al. 2006).
nary bladder. Stimulation of receptors/channels on urothelial cells
 In addition to increased LC activity, cats with FIC also
(e.g., ATP, distention, TRPV1) can release mediators (nitric oxide,
NO: ATP: prostaglandin, PG) and target bladder nerves, altering
have increased plasma NE concentrations (Buffington
afferent excitability. In turn, urothelial cells may be targets for
and Pacak 2001; Westropp et al. 2006). During stress-
transmitters released from bladder nerves. Pathology can damage
ful situations, elevated plasma and CSF catecholamine
urothelial cells, resulting in altered urothelial cells and neural func-
concentrations and their metabolites were found in
FIC cats as compared to healthy cats. When evaluating
Feline idiopathic cystitis  747
catecholamine concentrations (CCE) in cats with FIC, we
ACTH
found that plasma DOPA, NE, and DHPG concentrations
stimulation
20 
were significantly increased in FIC cats at all times dur-
p=0.0004
ing a moderate stress protocol (p < 0.05) as compared to
p=0.0007
healthy cats. Furthermore, as the healthy cats acclimated
... Normal n=12
to the stress, their plasma catecholamine concentrations
10
p=0.5
decreased, whereas in cats with FIC, even higher concen-
trations of plasma NE, epinephrine, and their metabolites
FICn=23
were demonstrated ( Westropp et al. 2006). The marked
increment in (DOPA) suggests the possibility of a stress-
0
30
60
induced increase in activity of TH, the rate-limiting step
Time
in CCE synthesis. In contrast, no effects on urine corti-
sol:creatinine were identified, suggesting an uncoupling
Figure 75.2 Mean serum cortisol response ± SD to 125 μg
 of these two stress parameters.
synthetic ACTH administered intramuscularly was significantly less
in cats with FIC than in healthy cats (w2-way repeated measure
Enhanced stimulus-induced local NE release from the
ANOVA p < 0.05). Tukey-Kramer post hoc tests were used to
bladder (Buffngton et al. 2002) could lead to a func-
compare groups at each time point.
tional desensitization of the central alpha-2 adrenocep-
tors (α2-AR) in cats with FIC (Westropp et al. 2007). In
the brainstem (particularly the area of the LC), α-2 ago-
electrical field stimulation studies of bladder strips from
nists inhibit NE release, whereas in the spinal cord, they
FIC cats that atipamezole, an α2-AR antagonist, did not
 inhibit transmission of nociceptive input to the brain
alter the relaxing effect of NE, further suggesting that
(Stevens and Brenner 1996). To further test this hypoth-
α2-ARs are downregulated in this disease (Buffington
esis, we evaluated the functional sensitivity of the α2-AR
et al. 2002).
in cats with FlC by evaluating their response to the selec-
 In addition to the sympathetic nervous system, abnor-
tive α2-AR agonist, medetomidine. These studies were
malities  in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
carried out under the same stress protocol we used to
(HPA) have also been observed in cats with FIC. After
measure [CCE]. If the post-synaptic α2-ARs are normal,
a high dose (125 ug) of synthetic ACTH was adminis-
one would expect a decrease in heart rate and increase
 tered, cats with FIC had significantly decreased serum
in pupil size after medetomidine administration. The
 cortisol responses as compared to healthy cats (Figure
decline in HR following medetomidine administration
75.2) (Westropp et al. 2003).
was significantly greater in healthy cats as compared to
 Although no obvious histological abnormalities were
cats with FIC, although this difference was attenuated by
identified, the areas consisting of the zonae fasciculata
day 35 (p = 0.05, Table 75.1).
and reticularis were significantly smaller in sections of
The increase in pupil diameter following medetomi-
glands from cats with FIC than in glands from healthy
dine administration was significantly greater in healthy
cats. Therefore, it appears that while the sympathoneural
cats as compared to FIC cats. We did not see any signif-
system is fully activated in this disorder, the HPA axis
icant differences in post synaptic α2-AR function when
is not.
evaluating sedation (Westropp 2005). It was revealed by
Viruses and FiC
Table 75.1 Percent change in heart rate (HR) 10 minutes after
20 μg/kg of medetomidine was administered intramuscularly to
The role of viruses has been and continues to be eval-
cats on days 1, 3, 8, and 35. Healthy cats had a significantly
uated in cats that present with FIC (Fabricant et al.
 greater decrease in HR after the alpha-2 agonist, medetomidine,
1971; Kruger et al. 1991). Investigation of viruses as a
was administered on all days compared to cats with feline
causative agent of LUTS began in the 1960s. Virus-like
idiopathic cystitis (FIC), except on day 35 (p = 0.05)
 particles (suspected to be calicivirus) were identified in
the matrix of urethral plugs from some male cats with
 Percent change in HR after 
FIC
Healthy
urinary obstruction (Osborne et al. 1996). The isola-
 medetomidine administration
(mean ± SD)
(mean ± SD)
tion of feline calicivirus, bovine herpesvirus 4 (strain
FeCAHV), and feline syncytia-forming virus from cats
Day 1
23%±15%*
34%± 10%
with naturally occurring LUTS has also been reported
Day 3
15% ± 14%*
37% ± 12%
Day 8
24% ± 9%*
32% ± 13%
(Kruger and Osborne 1990). Most recently, in the 40 cats
Day 35
20% ± 10%
26% ± 16%
that were evaluated, Rice et al. (2002) documented feline
caliciviruses (FCVs) from 1 female cat with FIC and one
748  Lower urinary tract disorders
male cat with obstructive FIC. These viruses (FCV-U1
THP coalesces with the crystals, white blood cells, and
and FCV-U2, respectively) were genetically distinct from
red blood cells, this coalescence can be surrounded by
other known vaccine and field strains of FCV (Rice et al.
amorphous material and then obstruct the urethra.
2002). In a published abstract, urinary shedding of the
In a small unpublished study, we found no evidence
feline calcivirus was found in cats with FIC and suggests
of THP in urethral plugs obtained from obstructed cats.
increased exposure to the feline calicivirus in FIC cats as
However, the eletrophoretic pattern of the plugs resem-
compared to asymptomatic controls (Larson et al. 2007).
bled that of albumin and its degradation products, sug-
The same group of researchers also inoculated specific
 gesting that the plug resulted from precipitated serum
pathogen-free cats with the urinary and respiratory FCV
 proteins. We hypothesize that vasodilatation and leakage
strains and found that both strains induced a similar
 of plasma proteins from the suburothelial capillary plexus
 a s d    s
("bladder weeping") and secondary urethritis, which can
 any, relationship viruses play in the etiopathogenesis in
be seen cystoscopically in cats with FIC, may trap crys-
FIC remains unknown at this time (Kruger et al. 2007).
tals within the lumen of the male cat urethra, resulting
in obstruction. It is likely that oozing of plasma pro-
Obstructive FIC with urethral plugs
teins into urine during active inflammation increases the
urinary pH that contributes to the precipitation of stru-
Urethral plugs are the most common cause of obstruc-
vite crystals that participate in urethral plug formation.
tion in male cats. In one series from the 1980s (Kruger
Although conventional wisdom indicates that urethral
et al. 1991), urethral plugs were the cause of obstruc-
plugs form in the urethra, cystoscopic examination of
tion in 60% of the cats, no cause was found in 30% of
the bladder has shown what appear to be plugs in the
the cats, urolithiasis alone was documented in only 10%
bladder. It is interesting that the mineral components of
of the cases, and urolithiasis with bacterial urinary tract
urethral plugs continue to be predominantly composed
infection was observed in 2% of the cases. Occasionally,
 of struvite despite the apparent increase in the frequency
stricture and rarely neoplasia or a foreign body can cause
of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. This may be due to the
the obstruction. Struvite urethroliths were the sole type
narrow range of “metabolic supersaturation" of struvite
reported in cats from the 1980s, but we have reported
in urine. These, and other hypotheses, are not mutually
calcium oxalate urethroliths at the Gerald V. Ling Uri-
exclusive, and plugs may form by different mechanisms
nary Stone Analysis Laboratory (Cannon et al. 2007).
 depending on a variety of factors present at any particular
It is the author's impression that urethral obstruction
instance.
due to calcium oxalate urethroliths is more common in
 For information on proper management of cats with
veterinary practice today than what has been previously
urethral obstruction, refer to Chapters 36 and 77.
reported in the literature. Furthermore, if calcium oxalate
stones are noted in the urethra or bladder, they can be
 present in the upper urinary tract as well. On the basis of
Summary
the examination of obstructed male cats with a urethro-
The pathophysiology ofFIClikely involves complex inter-
scope, idiopathic causes of obstruction also appear more
actions between a number of body systems. Abnormali-
common today.
ties are not just localized to the bladder, but are present in
It is unlikely for the urethra of female cats to become
the nervous, endocrine, and even cardiovascular systems
obstructed, but male cats have a narrow penile ure-
(rush et al. 2002). It remains to be determined how these
thral lumen and are predisposed to obstruction with a
systems communicate and manifest as FIC in some cats
urolith or urethral plug. The cause of the matrix for-
but not in others. Environmental and behavioral stres-
mation in urethral plugs is currently unknown and is
sors may also be associated with FIC. In order to better
probably the outcome of several mechanisms. Many ure-
treat their patients, it is important for clinicians to under-
thral plugs are composed of struvite with a proteinaceous
stand that this syndrome is not just a "bladder disease"
matrix (Kruger et al. 1991), and this composition has not
amenable to simple dietary or drug therapies.
appeared to change over time. The cause(s) of urethral
plugs is still unknown, but Osborne et al. have hypoth-
esized that the concomitant occurrence of urinary tract
Approach to the patient
infections and crystalluria may lead to the formation of
Diagnostics
matrix-crystalline plugs that obstruct various portions
of the urethra, especially in male cats (Osborne et al.
Because some 2/3 of cats with LUTS have FIC, and it
1992). They hypothesized that Tamm-Horsfal mucopro-
appears that approximately 85% (Barsanti et al. 1982)
tein (THP) is contained within urethral plugs. Once the
 of cats with FIC resolve their clinical signs in 2-3 days
Feline idiopathic cystitis   749
without treatment, it is debatable whether any diagnos-
concentrated, and if isosthenuria is present, diagnostics
tics should be performed for a young cat with its first
should be considered to evaluate the cat for underlying
episode of LUTS. The basic tests are listed below and the
 polyuric disorders.
clinician must decide based on the cat's signalment, his-
As mentioned above, most cats that present with
tory, and clinical signs, which tests will yield the most
FLUTD are idiopathic and bacterial urinary tract infec-
benefit for each individual patient.
tions are uncommon in younger, otherwise healthy cats.
Less than 2% of young ( <10 years of age) cats have been
Radiography and other imaging studies
reported to have a true bacterial cystitis (Kruger et al.
1991; Buffington et al. 1997), and in another study, it
Because FIC is a diagnosis of exclusion, diagnostics
was reported that 4.9% of cats presenting at a referral
should be performed to rule out other causes of LUTS
institution for LUTS had bacterial cystitis. However, a
mentioned above. Urolithiasis can occur in approxi-
   s  ( d  
mately 12-15% (Buffington et al. 1997a) of cats with
tured positive by cystocentesis in a study evaluating cats
LUTS and an abdominal radiograph (Chapter 15) that
from Norway (Eggertsdottir et al. 2007). Bacterial urinary
includes the entire urinary tract should be performed. In
those cats with recurrent episodes, a contrast cystogram
tract infections also occur more often in cats that have
had a perineal urethrostomy, repeated catheterizations,
and urethrogram (Chapter 15) can be helpful to bet-
or have a concurrent disorder such as diabetes mellitus,
ter evaluate for the presence of nonradiopaque calculi
chronic kidney disease, or hyperthyroidism (Bailiff et al.
and other lesions such as mass lesions, blood clots, and
2006; Mayer-Roenne et al. 2007). Quantitative urine cul-
strictures. Contrast studies of the bladder and urethra in
ture (Chapter 9) should be performed in all cats with
cats with FIC are usually unremarkable, though diffuse
recurrent (>2) episodes, previous urethral obstructions,
or asymmetrical thickening of the bladder wall is seen
or catheterizations, as well in cats that have concurrent
in about 15% of cases (Scrivani et al. 1997). In severe
medical conditions.
cases, extravasation of contrast material can be seen in
the bladder wall. Contrast studies are especially indicated
in elderly cats (>10 years of age) where FIC is not as
Other diagnostics
likely. A contrast cystourethrogram is also beneficial for
Cystoscopy (Chapter 19) is available at many referral
cases of obstructive FIC that do not respond to routine
institutions and can be used to evaluate cats that have
 medical care and is necessary prior to performing a per-
had repeated bouts of obstructive and nonobstructive
ineal urethrostomy in male cats. The clinician must be
FIC. Cats are placed under general anesthesia, and in
certain that no abnormalities are noted in the proximal
females (and sometimes in males that have had a perineal
urethra; if abnormalities are present, a perineal urethros-
urethrostomy), a rigid cystocscope (e.g-, 25°, 2.8 mm
 tomy would be contraindicated. When performing any
(8.5 Fr) with 1.2 mm (3.6 Fr) biopsy channel Figure
urinary contrast study, it is important that the descend-
75.3) can be introduced into the urethra and bladder
with constant fluid insufflation to approximately 80 cm
entire urethra can be easily visualized.
H2O.
An abdominal ultrasound (Chapter 16) should also be
Care should be taken so as not to overdistend the blad-
 considered for cats that present for multiple episodes of
der and cause trauma to the lower urinary tract. Cys-
FIC. It is a minimally invasive diagnostic that allows visu-
toscopy in female cats usually provides excellent visual-
alization of the bladder for abnormalities such as blood
ization of the urethra and bladder mucosa; small calculi,
clots, polyps, neoplasia, and nonradioopaque stones such
as cystine or ammonium urate. While ultrasound is a very
useful diagnostic tool for this purpose, it is not the ideal
diagnostic tool to evaluate the urethra. Radiography with
or without contrast should always be performed to eval-
uate for stones or urethral plugs in that area.
Urinalysis and urine culture
Figure 75.3 A typical rigid and flexible cystoscope that can be
A complete urinalysis (Chapter 7) should be performed at
used for uroendoscopy in female and male cats, respectively. The
least once in cats that present with LUTS. Findings in cats
flexible scope for male cats does provide good visualization of
with FIC are not specific and can include hematuria, and
the urethra, but due to the small size, it is not ideal for imaging
crystalluria, and even small amounts (5-10 WBC/hpf)
the bladder. A contrast cystogram can be helpful as an adjunct
 of pyuria. The urine specific gravity is oftentimes very
diagnostic if needed.
750  Lower urinary tract disorders
the cat's clinical signs to a minimum and increasing the
disease-free interval.
Treatment options for the acute episode
Antibiotics are rarely indicated for most cats that present
for FLUTD and unless a cat has a documented bacte-
rial urinary tract infection, empiric use of antibiotics is
 not warranted in cats with FIC. When a cat is diagnosed
Figure 75.4 A typical rigid and flexible cystoscope that can be
with FIC, analgesic therapy seems appropriate for the
used for uroendoscopy in female and male cats respectively. The
acute management of the disease. Providing analgesia
flexible scope for male cats does provide good visualization of
the urethra, but due to the smallsize, it is not ideal for imaging
or a fentanyl patch can be used depending on the sever-
the bladder. A contrast cystogram can be helpful as an adjunct
ity of the pain. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
diagnostic if needed
such as carprofen or meticam can also be used. However,
this class of drugs should be used cautiously in obstruc-
a diverticulum, and masses can also be easily seen. Fur-
tive FIC; the urethra should be patent and the azotemia
thermore, if lesions are found, a small biopsy sample
can be obtained through the scope. If one is having dif-
for approximately 3-5 days, and if clinical signs have not
ficulty introducing the cystoscope through the urethra,
significantly improved or resolved, further diagnostics
the anesthesia depth should be reevaluated. A 1.1 mm
should be performed. If the clinician is working with a
flexible urethroscope is available for male cats, although
 case that has chronic FIC, analgesics can be dispensed for
due to the small size no operating channel for biopsies is
the cat with instructions for the owner to medicate the
possible (Figure 75.4).
cat if clinical signs develop and then contact the veteri-
This scope provides adequate visualization of the male
narian. Oftentimes, this treatment will be successful and
 cat urethra to evaluate for urethra plugs, strictures, ure-
the cat will not need to be evaluated at the veterinary
thral calculi, and foreign bodies. This scope does not pro-
hospital. If the clinician chooses to manage some cats in
vide sufficient visualization of the bladder to recommend
this manner, they must be confident that other differen-
its use on a routine basis; the author usually combines
tials for FLUTD have been excluded and the cat has FIC.
this test with a contrast cystogram in male cats.
 Breaking the chronic-pain-inflammation cycle may be
important in the management of at least some cats with
severe FIC.
Treatment of FIC
Muitimodal environmental modifications
FIC can have a variable outcome. Clinical signs resolve
(MEMO)
spontaneously in as many as 85% of cats within 2-3 days,
with or without treatment (Barsanti et al. 1982; Kruger
On the basis of previous findings where catecholamines
decreased after environemental modifications  in
Roudebush 2007). As many as 50% of these cats willhave
  a  (o d) o s
another episode within 12 months and 39% recurred in a
 used to alter the cat's environment in hopes of reducing
more recent study of cats consuming dry food (Markwell 
 stress and decreasing the severity of the episodes and
et al. 1999). It is not yet possible to predict which cats with
lengthening the intervals between the FIC episodes.
FIC will relapse; some cats have multiple recurrences,
while clinical signs never resolve in a small population of
with FIC implementing MEMO as the sole management
severely affected cats. In the author's experience, the most
 strategy (Buffngton et al. 2006). In an observational
important consideration for a successful outcome is good
study, we evaluated 46 client-owned indoor-housed
communication with the owner. Oftentimes, after per-
cats with FIC. In addition to their usual care, clients
forming diagnostics on the cat and concluding that the
were offered recommendations for MEMO based on
disease is idiopathic, an appointment can be scheduled
a detailed environmental history. Cases were followed
with only the owners present to thoroughly review the
for ten months by client contact to determine the effect
disease process, discuss short- and long-term treatment
 of MEMO on LUTS and other signs. Significant (p <
options, and be certain the owners have an understand-
0.05) reductions in LUTS, fearfulness, nervousness, signs
ing of this disease in their cat. No cure is currently avail-
referable to the respiratory tract, and a trend (p < 0.1)
able for FIC, and treatment options are aimed at keeping
 toward reduced aggressive behaviors were identified.
Feline idiopathic cystitis   751
These results suggest that MEMO is a promising
discussed at an appointment with only the owner present.
adjunctive therapy for indoor-housed cats with FIC.
Considerations when tailoring a protocol should include
the owner's commitment and attachment to the cat, the
with client education and MEMO seems beneficial in
ability of the owner to implement the changes, and the
many cats with FIC. Establishing a technician-based pro-
 cost of the changes suggested. For further suggestions as
 gram where a staff member follows these patients as
well as a good client resource, the reader is referred to the
often as necessary to be sure their cat's problems are
following website: www.indoorcat.org.
explained thoroughly and that the clients gain enough
understanding of the disease process to feel comfortable
Dietary therapy
with managing their cat's disease can also be of great
benefit. MEMO therapy involves obtaining a thorough
 Some dietary modifications may reduce the risk of recur-
environmental history including, but not limited to, the
rence of clinical signs in affected cats. Efforts to acidify
following topics:
the urine using dry foods have no demonstrated value in
treatment of cats with FIC. There is no known benefit
1.1
 Number of cats in the household
to acidifying the urine or restricting magnesium in cats
a. Is inter-cat conflict an issue?
with FIC. No available evidence supports the idea that
2.1
 Number of other pets
struvite crystalluria causes any damage to the underly-
3.
Number of family members
Size and type of the household dwelling
ing urothelium or worsens clinical signs of FIC. Struvite
4.
 5. Number of litter pans in the house
crystals can be incorporated in urethral plugs in obstruc-
five FIC, and it seems prudent to recommend a higher
a. How often are the cleaned?
b. How often are they changed?
moisture diet initially for all cats with this form of the
disease. Increasing water intake may be beneficial for
c. Location in the house?
d. Type of litter used?
cats with FIC, and consumption of a canned food is one
way to accomplish this. It has been reported that LUTS
e. Depth of litter preferred by the cat?
recurred in only 11% of affected cats during one year
6. Feeding
 of feeding the canned formulation of a dietary product.
a. Type of food (including brand, canned versus
Recurrence occurred in 39% of cats fed the dry formula-
(A1p
b. Location of bowls?
tion of the same food, suggesting that both constancy and
consistency (i.e., increased water intake) may be impor-
c. Food preferences?
tant, but the reasons for this effect remain to be deter-
d. Is competition for food present in the household?
mined (Markwell et al. 1999). Increasing water intake
7.Play/rest activity
 will decrease the urine specific gravity and potentially
a. Preferred toys?
decrease the concentration of noxious substances within
b. Space in house available for play?
the urine. Currently, only one commercial diet is mar-
c. Indoor/outdoor status?
d. Preferred type of play?
keted for FIC, but at this time no studies exist as to the
efficacy of this diet in clinical cats.
e. Resting/hiding areas preferred?
Unfortunately, many cats will not readily consume a
f. Number of beds for the cat(s)?
canned diet. It is not recommended to change a diet
8. Changes in household: This area includes topics such
until the cat is home and feeling well so as not to induce
as construction, additions or subtractions to the
 home, and changes in the owner's lifestyle and regular
a learned aversion to the recommended diet. The cat's
regular food should still be provided and the preferred
routine.
diet be placed next to the usual feeding bowl. If the cat eats
 These questions should be answered for every cat in
the new diet readily, the old food can simply be removed
the household. After the questionnaire has been discussed
over the next day or two. If the cat doesn't eat the new diet
with the owner, a tailored MEMO therapeutic plan can
after an hour, the food should be removed until the next
be designed for each individual cat. Addressing only one
feeding and another attempt made at that time point,
or possibly two of the above categories at a time is rec-
always providing fresh food for each new feeding. Once
ommended so as not to overwhelm the cat or the client
the new diet becomes familiar to the cat, it should start
with significant household changes. Because every
cat
eating it readily. At that time, a decrease in the amount
seems to respond to their environment differently, no
(about 25%) of the old diet can be done each day until
one recommendation can be made, but rather an indi-
the change is complete. If necessary, small quantities of
vidual plan is designed for each cat and owner. If more
the cat's favorite food such as meat or fish juice can be
time is needed with the individual client, this plan can be
mixed with the new preferred food to increase the cat's
752
 Lower urinary tract disorders
interest in the diet. Meal feeding is generally an easier way
neurons in the spinal trigeminal nucleus (Fromm et al.
to provide a change in a cat's diet and may provide more
1991). The author usually begins at the low end of the
interaction with the owner and the cat which could be
dose and recommends the medication be administered
beneficial as well.
in the evening. The dosage can be slowly increased until
the desired effects are achieved. If a favorable response is
Pheromones
not achieved with this drug, it should be tapered slowly,
over several weeks, and then discontinued. Side effects
Pheromones are fatty acids that seem to transmit highly
can include lethargy, weight gain, and urine retention
 specific information between animals of the same
because of the anticholinergic effects of this drug.
 species. Although the exact mechanisms of action are
Clomipramine (Clomicalm?, veterinary label; and
unknown, pheromones reportedly induce changes in
Anafrani?, human label) is also a tertiary amine like
     s  n 
amitriptyline, but has more selectivity for blocking the
the emotional state of the animal (Pageat and Gaultier
2003). Feliway? (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL),
reuptake of 5-HT. This drug has been shown to signifi-
cantly decrease the number of episodes of urine spraying
a synthetic analogue of this naturally occurring feline
 in cats (King et al. 2004). In that study, the initial dose
facial pheromone, was developed in an effort to decrease
used was 0.25-0.5 mg/kg orally once daily. Clomipramine
anxiety-related behaviors of cats. Treatment with this
has less anticholinergic properties as compared to
pheromone has been reported to reduce the amount of
amitriptylline; however, sedation is still a common side
anxiety experienced by cats in unfamiliar circumstances,
effect of this drug as well. Clomirpramine, in con-
a response that may be helpful to these patients and their
junction with environmental modification, has also
owners. Although a statistically significant difference was
 not found when Feliway? was compared to a placebo
been described to successfully decrease anxiety related
in cats with FIC, cats that had Feliway? used in the
and obsessive compulsive disorders in cats (Seksel and
Lindeman 1998). The author has prescribed this in recur-
environment exhibited a trend for fewer bouts of cystitis
 rent cases of FIC with anecdotal improvements in some
and reduced negative behavioral traits (Gunn-Moore
patients. Other drugs such as fuoxetine (Prozac?) has
and Cameron 2004). Increased grooming and food
been reported to help cats with inappropriate urinations
intake in hospitalized cats (Griffith et al. 2000) also has
been reported with the use of this pheromone. Feliway
with variable success rates (Pryor et al. 2001). Fluoxetine
was used to help decrease the rate of urine marking after
is available in two forms. A spray can be used where the
environmental alterations such as litter box hygiene and
cat is urinating inappropriately as well as in cat carriers
e u paoeId aq ueo osn ou y "odsue o od
appropriate cleaning strategies.
 As mentioned earlier, cats with FIC have decreased uri-
designated room that is modified to reduce stress and
nary GAG excretion. A defective GAG layer or damaged
provide environmental enrichment for the cat. The
s og e roo o p si sn
urothelium could permit hydrogen, calcium, potassium
ions, or other constituents of urine to come into con-
feet and last for approximately 1 month.
tact with sensory neurons innervating the urothelium.
 Because of this theory, GAG replacers such as pentosan
Pharmacologic therapy
polysulfate (Elmiron? ) have been used to treat cats with
Drug therapy with the tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
FIC. In a placebo controlled study in which the effec-
may be helpful in chronic forms of FIC when MEMO,
tiveness of oral glucosamine for the management of cats
dietary, and phermonotherapy have not been successful
with FIC was evaluated, no significant differences were
to help manage clinical signs. Amitriptyline (Elavil?),
found between the two groups (Gunn-Moore and Shenoy
and probably all TCA drugs, should not be used in
2004). However, the authors of this study did report
the acute management of FIC (Kraijer et al. 2003) and
a significant placebo effect, where both groups of cats
may increase the risk of recurrence (Kruger et al. 2003).
improved significantly over the course of the study. One
Amitriptyline, has been reported in uncontrolled trials
 theory was that more positive interaction occurred with
to successfully decrease clinical signs of severe, recur-
the cat, thereby decreasing stress.
rent FIC (Chew et al. 1998). It was shown in this series
 of cats with severe FIC that the clinical signs of some
Conclusion
cats were reduced during amitriptyline treatment dur-
ing a 12-month period. Amitriptyline (2.5-10 mg per cat
FIC is a complex disease process that is not fully under-
SID) may provide analgesia by inhibition of NE reuptake
 stood at this time. The clinician and client must under-
at noradrenergic nerve terminals (Anderson 2001) and
stand that this disease is not limited to abnormalities
possibly due to inhibition of a wide range of nociceptive
related solely to the bladder. Because FlC can be a chronic,
Feline idiopathic cystitis   753
frustrating disease, excellent client communication in
Fabricant, C.G., JM. King, et al. (1971). Isolation of a virus from a
conjunction with MEMO therapy, analgesics, and pos-
female cat with urolithiasis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 158: 200-201.
      d  
 Forrester, D.S. and P. Roudebush (2007). Evidence-based management
of feline lower urinary tract disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
treating acute and chronic cases.
Pract 37: 533-558.
Fromm, G.H., M. Nakata, et al. ( 1991). Differential action of amitripty-
References
line on neurons in the trigeminal nucleus. Neurology41: 1932-1936.
Gao, X., C.A. Buffington, et al. (1994). Effect of interstitial cystitis on
American Journal of Veterinary Research (in press).
drug absorption from urinary bladder. I Pharmacol Exp Ther 271:
Anderson, P. (200l). Amitriptyline. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
818-823.
433-437.
Goldstein, D.S. (1995). Catecholarmines and Cardiovascular Disease.
Bailiff, N.L., R.W. Nelson, et al. (2006). Frequency and risk factors for
New York: Oxford.
urinary tract infection in cats with diabetes mellitus. I Vet Imtern
Griffth, C.A., E.S. Steigerwald, et al. (2000). Effects ofa synthetic facial
Med 20: 850-855.
pheromone on behavior of cats. JA Vet Med Assoc217: 1154-1156.
Barsanti, I.A., D.R. Finco, et al. (1982). Feline urologic syndrome: fur-
Gunn-Moore, D.A. and M.E. Cameron (2004). A pilot study using
ther investigation into therapy. J Am Amim Hosp Assoc 18: 387-390.
synthetic feline facial pheromone for the management of feline idio-
Birder, L.A. (2006). Urinary bladder urothelium: molecular sen-
pathic cystitis. J Feline Med Surg6: 133-138.
sors of chemical/thermal/mechanical stimuli. Vascul Pharmacol 45:
Gunn-Moore, D.A. and C.M. Shenoy (2004). Oral glucosamine and
221-226.
the management of feline idiopathic cystitis. I Feline Med Surg 6:
Birder, L.A., M.L. Nealen, et al. (2002). Beta-adrenoceptor agonists
219-225.
stimulate endothelial nitric oxide synthase in rat urinary bladder
Hostutler, R.A., D.J. Chew, et al. (2005). Recent concepts in feline
urothelial cells. J Neurosci 22: 8063-8070.
lower urinary tract disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 35:
Buffington, C.A. (2002). External and internal influences on disease
147-170.
risk in cats. I Asm Vet Med Assoc 220: 994-1002.
Jezernik, K., R. Romih, et al. (2003). Immunohistochemical detection
Buffington, C.A. and K. Pacak (2001). Increased plasma nore-
of apoptosis, proliferation and inducible nitric oxide synthase in rat
pinephrine concentration in cats with interstitial cystitis. I Urol 165:
urothelium damaged by cyclophosphamide treatment. Cell Biol Int
2051-2054.
27: 863-869.
Buffington, C.A., J.L. Blaisdell, et al. (1996). Decreased urine gly-
Jones, B., R.L. Sanson, etal. ( 1997). Elucidating the risk factors of feline
cosarminoglycan excretion in cats with interstitial cystitis. J Urol
urologic syndrome. N Z Vet I 45: 100-108.
155: 1801-1804.
King, J.N., J. Steffan, et al. (2004). Determination of the dosage of
Buffngton, C.A., D.J. Chew, et al. (1997a). Clinical evaluation of cats
clomipramine for the treatment of urine spraying in cats. I Arn Vet
with nonobstructive urinary tract diseases. JAm Vet Med Assoc 210:
Med Assoc 225: 881-887.
46-50.
Kraijer, M., J. Fink-Gremmels, et al. (2003). The short-term clinical
Buffngton, C.A.T., D.J. Chew, et al. ( 1997b). Animal model of human
efficacy of amitriptyline in the management of idiopathic feline
disease—feline interstitial cystitis. Comp Pathol Bull 29: 3.
lower urinary tract disease: a controlled clinical study. I Feline Med
Buffington, C.A., B. Teng, et al. (2002). Norepinephrine content and
Surg 5: 191-196.
adrenoceptor function in the bladder of cats with feline interstitial
Kruger, I.M., and C.A. Osborne ( 1990). The role of viruses in feline
cystitis. J Urol 167: 1876-1880.
lower urinary tract disease. I Vet Intern Med 4: 7l-78.
 Buffington, C.A., IL. Westropp, et al. (2006). Clinical evaluation of
Kruger, LM., C.A. Osborne, et al. (1991). Clinical evaluation of cats
 multimodal environmental modification (MEMO) in the manage-
with lower urinary tract disease. I Am Vet Med Assoc 199: 21l-216.
ment of cats with idiopathic cystitis. I Feline Med Surg 8: 261-
Kruger, L.M., Conway, T.S.et al. (2003). Randomized controlled trial
268.
of the efficacy of short-term amitriptyline administration for treat-
Cameron, M.E., R.A. Casey, et al. (2004). A study of environmental
ment of acute, nonobstructive, idiopathic lower urinary tract disease
and behavioural factors that may be associated with feline idiopathic
in cats. IArm Vet Med Assoc 222: 749-758.
cystitis. J Small Anim Pract 45: 144-147.
Kruger, LM., C.P. Pfent, et al. (2007). Feline Calicivirus-Induced
Cannon, A.B., L.L. Westropp, et al. (2007). Evaluation of trends in
Urinary Tract Disease in Specific-Pathogen-Free Cats. Seattle, WA:
urolith composition in cats: 5,230 cases ( 1985-2004). I Am Vet Med
ACVIM, pp. 648-649.
Assoc 231: 570-576.
Larson, I., J.M. Kruger, et al. (2007). Epidermiology of Feline Calicivirus 
Chew, D.J., C.A. Buffington, et al. ( 1998). Amitriptyline treatment for
Urinary Tract Infection in Cats with Idiopathic Cystitis. Seattle, WA:
severe recurrent idiopathic cystitis in cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 213:
ACVIM, 648 p
1282-1286.
Lavelle, J.P., S.A. Meyers, et al. (2000). Urothelial pathophysiological
Clasper, M. (1990). A case of interstitial cystitis and Hunner's ulcer in
 changes in feline interstitial cystitis: a human model. Arm I Physiol
a domestic shorthaired cat. N Z Vet I38: 158-160.
Renal Physiol 278: F540-F553.
Cohen, T.A., J.L. Westropp, et al. (2009). Evaluation of urodynamic
Markwell, PJ, C.A. Buffington, et al. (1999). Clinical evaluation of
procedures in female cats anesthetized with isoflurane or propofol.
commercially available urinary acidification diets in the manage-
Am I Vet Res 70(2): 290-296.
ment of idiopathic cystitis in cats. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 214: 361-
de Groat, W.C., A.M. Booth, et al. ( 1993). Neurophysiology of mic-
365.
turition and its modification in animal models of human disease.
Mayer-Roenne, B., R.E. Goldstein, et al. (2007). Urinary tract infec-
In: Nervous Control of the Urogenital System, edited by C.A. Maggi.
 tions in cats with hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus and chronic
Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Acadermic, pp. 227-290.
kidney disease. I Feline Med Surg9: 124-132.
Eggertsdottir, A.V., H.S. Lund, et al. (2007). Bacteriuria in cats with
Osborne, C.A., J.P. Kruger, et al. ( 1992). Feline matrix-crystalline ure-
feline lower urinary tract disease: a clinical study of 134 cases in
thral plugs-a unifying hypothesis of causes. I Small Airn Pract 33:
Norway. I Feline Med Surg9: 458-465.
172-177.
754  Lower urinary tract disorders
Osborne, C.A., J.P. Lulich, et al. ( 1996). Feline urolithiasis: etiology and
Seksel, K. and M.J. Lindeman (1998). Use of clomipramine in the
pathophysiology. Vet Clin North Am Smal Anim Pract 26: 217-232.
treatrment of anxiety-related and obsessive-compulsive disorders in
Oter, S., A. Korkmaz, et al. (2004). Inducible nitric oxide synthase
cats. Aust Vet J76: 317-321.
inhibition in cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis in
Specht, A., J.J. Kruger, et al. (2004). Histochermical and Immunohis-
rats. Urol Res 32: 185-189.
tochermical Light Microscopic Features of Chronic Feline Idiopathic
Pageat, P. and E. Gaultier (2003). Current research in canine and
Aystitis. Minneapolis, MN: ACVIM, p. 416.
feline pheromones. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 33: 187-211.
 Stevens, C.W. and G.M. Brenner (1996). Spinal administration of
 Peeker, R. and M. Fall (2002). Toward a precise definition of intersti-
adrenergic agents produces analgesia in amphibians. Eur I Phar-
tial cystitis: further evidence of differences in classic and nonulcer
macol 316: 205-210.
disease. I Urol 167: 2470-2472.
Valentino, R.J., R.R. Miselis, et al. ( 1999). Pontine regulation of pelvic
Press, S.M., R. Moldwin, et al. ( 1995). Decreased expression of GP-51
viscera: pharmacological target for pelvic visceral dysfunctions.
glycosaminoglycan in cats afflicted with feline interstitial cystitis.
Trends Pharmacol Sci 20: 253-260.
I Urol 153: 288A.
Welk, K.A. and C.A. Buffington (2003). Effect of interstitial cystitis
Pryor, P.A., B.L. Hart, et al. (200l). Effects of a selective serotonin
 on central neuropeptide in receptor immunoreactivity in cats. In:
reuptake inhibitor on urine spraying behavior in cats. I Am Vet Med
Department of Human Anatomy. Columbus: The Ohio State Uni-
Assoc 219: 1557-1561.
versity.
 Reche, A.J. and C.A. Buffington ( 1998). Increased tyrosine hydroxylase
Wesselmann, U. (200l). Interstitial cystitis: a chronic visceral pain
immunoreactivity in the locus coeruleus of cats with interstitial
syndrome. Urology 57: 102.
cystitis. I Urol 159: 1045.
Westropp, I.L. (2005). Evaluation of the sympathetic nervous system 
Rice, C.C., J.M. Kruger, et al. (2002). Genetic characterization of 2
and hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis in cats with interstitial cys-
novel feline caliciviruses isolated from cats with idiopathic lower
titis. In: Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences. Columbus: The
urinary tract disease. J Vet Intern Med 16: 293-302.
Ohio State University, p. 166.
Rush, I., L.M. Freeman, et al. (2002). Population and survival char-
Westropp,IL., and C.A. Buffington (2004). Feline idiopathic cystitis:
acterisitics of cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 260 cases
current understanding of pathophysiology and management. Vet
(1990-1999). JAVMA 220: 202-207.
Clin N Am Small Arim 34: 1043.
Sands, S.A., R. Strong, et al. (2000). Effects of acute restraint stress on
Westropp, J.L., K. Welk, et al. (2003). Small adrenal glands in cats with
tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA expression in locus coeruleus of Wistar
feline interstitial cystitis. I Urol 170(6): 2494-2497.
and Wistar-Kyoto rats. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 75: 1-7.
Westropp, J.L., P.H. Kass, et al. (2006). Evaluation of the effects of stress
 Scrivani, P.V., D.J. Chew, et al. ( 1997). Results of retrograde urethrogra-
in cats with idiopathic cystitis. Am I Vet Res 67: 73 1-736.
phy in cats with idiopathic, nonobstructive lower urinary tract dis-
Westropp, J.L., C.A. Buffington, et al. (2007). In vivo evaluation of the
ease and their association with pathogenesis: 53 cases ( 1993- 1995).
alpha-2 adrenoceptors in cats with idiopathic cystitis. Am J Vet Res
JAVMA 211: 741-748.
68(2): 203-207.
Sculptoreanu, A., W.C. de Groat, et al. (2005). Abnormal excitability in
Willeberg, P. (1984). Epidemiology of naturally occurring feline uro-
logic syndrome. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 14: 455-
cystitis. Exp Neurol 193: 437-443.
469.
76
Micturition disorders
Julie Fischer and India F. Lane
Urinary incontinence
The urine storage phase of micturition occurs chiefly
under sympathetic (adrenergic) nervous control (Figure
Introduction
76.2).
Normal micturition consists of a urine storage phase,
 The hypogastric nerve (arising from spinal segments
when the bladder slowly fills and relaxes while the ure-
Li-4 in the dog, L2-s in the cat) stimulates detrusor beta
thra remains closed, and a urine voiding phase, when the
receptors, inducing smooth muscular relaxation and per-
bladder contracts and urine is expelled through a relaxed
mitting filing under low pressure. In contrast, sympa-
urethra. Appropriate urine storage and voiding depend
thetic stimulation of alpha-1 receptors of the bladder
on intricate and coordinated interaction of the nervous
neck and urethral smooth muscle (IUS) induces smooth
system, urinary bladder, and urethra. Disorders of urine
muscle contraction, closing the outlet and maintain-
storage usually manifest clinically as urinary incontinence,
ing continence. Sympathetic input also modulates and
while disorders of voiding usually manifest as urine reten-
 minimizes parasympathetic-mediated contraction of the
tion.
detrusor muscle, but some basal tone and low-intensity
rhythmic activity does continue in the bladder during the
storage phase. The pudendal nerve (arising from spinal
Neurophysiology of micturition
segments Si-3) supplies voluntary input to the striated
urethral musculature (EUS). During the storage phase,
Key anatomic components of the lower urinary tract
this input stimulates nicotinic cholinergic receptors in the
(LUT) include (1) detrusor muscle, the smooth muscle
 EUS, causing contracture and additional closure of the
that forms the body and neck of the bladder; (2) the inter-
 outlet when needed (e.g., during coughing or sneezing;
nal urethral sphincter (IUS) that is composed of smooth
 to temporarily override an inappropriately timed urge to
muscle of the urethrovesicular junction; (3) the exter-
void).
nal urethral sphincter (EUS) that includes striated muscle
Afferent information is transmitted from the blad-
encircling portions of the urethra distal to the IUS (the
der by the pelvic (filling sensation, need to void) and
position of the EUS varies somewhat by species and sex);
hypogastric (pain, overdistension) nerves, and from the
and (4) the ureterovesicular junction, normally located
 bladder neck and urethra by the pudendal nerve. Mes-
proximal to the IUS, at the junction of the bladder body
sages regarding flling and contraction appear to flow
and neck. The urethral closure mechanism consisting of
through A-delta fibers, whereas C fibers transmit nox-
the bladder neck and smooth and striated urethral mus-
ious stimuli. Signaling properties of the urothelium, and
culature is often termed the “"outflow tract” or “outlet"
asuburothelial neural plexus most prominent in the blad-
(Figure 76.1).
der neck, also communicate sensory information locally,
Urothelial and suburothelial cell layers also contribute
putatively by releasing ATP (Ferguson 1997). Collectively,
 to neural control of micturition and to urinary response
the urothelium, subendothelial myofibroblasts, smooth
to irritating local mechanical or chemical stimuli.
muscle fibers, and associated afferent nerves represent
the “stretch receptors" of the LUT.
As bladder filling progresses, information from these
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
  eed     ssd i 
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
755
756  Lower urinary tract disorders
Ureterovesicularjunction
Intermal urethral sphincter(smoothmuscle)
Extemalurethral sphincter(striated muscle)
Urinarybladder
Urethra
Outflow tract(outlet)
Figure 76.1 Basic anatomy of the lower urinary tract. (a) Urinary bladder, (b) ureterovesicular junction, (c) intemal urethral sphincter
(smooth muscle), (d) extemal urethral sphincter (striated musdle), (e) outflow tract (outlet), and (f) urethra.
hypothalamus and pontine micturtion centers. At a crit-
rons and interconnections preserve the “on-off" switch-
ical bladder volume, neurologic gates switch to maxi-
ing mechanism needed for coordinated bladder and out-
mize voiding capacity; however, voluntary (prefrontal
let activity, both during storage and voiding phases. Fig-
and frontal cortex) release of inhibition is required for
ure 76.3 provides a schematic representation ofthe inner-
 urethral relaxation and initiation of voiding.
vation of the LUT.
The urine voiding phase of micturition occurs chiefly
 For more information, excellent reviews of applicable
under parasympathetic (cholinergic) control. The pelvic
neurophysiology can be found in the references (Lane
nerve (arising from spinal segments S-3) stimulates mus-
2000a; Fowler et al. 2008).
carinic cholinergic receptors in the detrusor, causing con-
 traction, which raises the intravesicular pressure. Simul-
 taneously, sympathetic input to the outlet is inhibited at
Urinary incontinence
the level of the micturition center in the pons, allow-
Urinary incontinence is defined as involuntary passage
ing IUS and EUS relaxation. When intravesicular pres-
of urine through the urethra. Incontinence is most com-
sure exceeds outlet closure pressure, urine voiding occurs.
mon in female dogs, but is also clinically recognized in
After complete voiding, the system is “"reset” for the filling
male dogs and in cats. Urinary incontinence represents
stage to begin again. Numerous spinal andlocal interneu-
derangement in structure or function of one or more
components of the storage mechanism: (1) anatomical
abnormality of ureteral termination or urinary bladder
 or urethral development, (2) failure of the urinary blad-
der to suffciently accommodate urine, or (3) failure of
suffciently functional urethral closure. Bladder and ure-
thral dysfunction can be muscular (functional) or neu-
rogenic in origin. Additionally, paradoxical or overflow
incontinence is occasionally observed in animals with
urine retention, when urinary bladder volume and pres-
sure simply exceed outlet resistance, and spillover occurs.
This section focuses on functional disorders of the blad-
der and urethra.
Figure 76.2 The urine storage phase of micturition. Sympathetic
input to the beta receptors in the bladder stimulates detrusor relax
ation: sympathetic input to the alpha receptors in the IUS stimu-
lates smooth muscle contraction. Voluntary input to the nicotinic
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence
cholinergic EUs receptors stimulates striated muscle contraction.
Epidemiology
During the storage phase, outlet resistance must exceed intraves-
icular pressure to maintain continence. β, beta receptor; α, alpha
A weak urethral outlet mechanism is the most common
receptor; Ach-n, nicotinic cholinergic receptor.
cause of urinary incontinence in dogs ( Table 76.1) and is
Micturition disorders   757
Cerebrum
Cerebellum
Spinal cord
Pons
Caudal mesenteric
 ganglion 
Hypogastric
nerve
Pelvic
Pudendal
nerve
nerve
Figure 76.3 Schematic representation of central nervous system input to the lower urinary tract. Sympathetic input is supplied to the
bladder and proximal urethra via the hypogastric nerve (grey): parasympathetic input is supplied via the afferent pelvic nerve (dark red)
and sensation of stretch is relayed to higher centers via the afferent pelvic nerve (dark red). The afferent (dark red) and efferent (blue)
branches of the pudendal nerve relay somatic input to and from the extemal urethral sphincter. Voiding is coordinated in the micturition
center of the pons, with input from cerebrocortical centers.
termed urethral incompetence or urethral sphincter mech-
Pathophysiology
anism incompetence.
Although underlying causes of urethral incompetence
Young to middle-aged spayed female dogs are most
are not known, multiple factors such as aging, decreased
often affected, usually developing incontinence within
responsiveness of urethral receptors, abnormal urethral
3 years of ovariohysterectomy. Incidence of spay-related
or bladder neck position, obesity, and vestibulovaginal
incontinence or reproductive hormone responsive incon-
anomalies may contribute. Decreased urethral closure
  s  ds  po    
highest in large breed dogs ( Thrusfield 1985; Arnold et al.
pressure (Arnold et al. 1989) and subtle anatomical dif-
1989). Neutered males may be affected.
ferences (Holt 1985a) have been documented in inconti-
nent female dogs when compared to continent females.
 Urinary incontinence is particularly common in cer-
However, decreases in urethral pressure and changes in
   pano si inq sop go sn 
 profle shape are also seen in healthy, continent dogs after 
breed dogs as well. German shepherd dogs, Doberman
        
pinschers, Labrador retrievers, old English sheepdogs,
 s0 a combination of factors likely influences the develop-
English springer spaniels, boxers, roftweilers, weimer-
ment of overt incontinence in spayed dogs.
aners, and Irish setters are overrepresented. Over 15%
Because of the strong association with spaying, veteri-
of Doberman owners reported urinary incontinence in
narians and pet owners are keenly interested in whether
a survey investigating causes of morbidity and mortal-
the timing of neutering influences development of uri-
ity in the Netherlands (Bacon et al. 2002; Mandigers
et al. 2006). Incontinence is notoriously difficult to con-
nary incontinence later in life. In a long-term (median
2 years) follow-up of early age and traditional age gon-
trol in this (and a few other) affected breeds. Doberman
odectomy dogs, there was a very low incidence of uri-
pinschers (27%) and boxers (16%) were the most com-
 nary incontinence, which was not different between the
mon breed evaluated in Nickel et al's (1999) 77 refrac-
Jo dno1 131el uonu e u1 "(1o0z am0H) sdno 0m1
tory incontinence cases; Dobermans comprised 10 and
 dogs, incidence of urinary incontinence requiring treat-
17% of dogs in two large series of colposuspension cases
(Holt 1990; Marchevsky et al. 1999). The English springer
ment increased on a continuous scale with decreasing
 age at ovariectomy. Dogs ovariectomized younger than 3
spaniel, Labrador retriever, and German shepherd dog
breeds were overrepresented in 100 dogs undergoing ure-
months of age have a substantially increased risk of clini-
cally significant incontinence (projected cumulative risk
thropexy (White 2001).
758  Lower urinary tract disorders
Table 76.1 Characteristics of common disorders causing urinary incontinence
 Disorder
Characteristics
Diagnostic methods 
Acquired urethral sphincter mechanism
Medium to large-breed adult dogs, usually
 Response to treatment
incompetence (reproductive hormone
female
Urethral pressure profile
responsive or "spay" incontinence)
 Prior ovariohysterectomy
Intermittent urine leakage
Resting urinary incontinence
Otherwise normal
Urinary bladder storage dysfunction
Intermittent urinary incontinence
Response to treatment
 (detrusor instability, urge incontinence,
Pollakiuria
Cystometrography
overactive bladder)
Cystourethrography
May be associated with excitement or activity
Ectopic ureter
Affected since birth
Contrast radiography!
 Often continuous urine leakage
computed tomography
Urethrocystoscopy
Vaginourethrography
Surgical exploration
Congenital urethral incompetence or
Severe or continuous urine leakage
Cystourethrography
hypoplasia
Juvenile animal
Urethral pressure profile
Wide or short urethra in some cases
Ectopic ureter not demonstrated
Vaginal abnormality or urine pooling
 Urine leakage at rest or when rising
Vaginal examination and
Urine leakage following voiding
vaginoscopy
Recurrent or persistent vaginitis
Vaginourethrography
Vestibulovaginal stenosis/septum on digital
examination
Prostatic disease (male dogs)
Intact or neutered
 Abdominal radiographs
Other signs of prostatic disease or concurrent
Ultrasonography
dysuria
Contrast urethrography
Hind limb weakness/stiff, stilted gait
Prostatic brushing.
aspirate, or biopsy
FeLV-associated urinary incontinence (cats)
Intermittent urine leakage
FeLV test
Anisocoria
Table modified from Fischer and Lane (2007)
 of 12.9% in the first 6 years of life) when compared with
ing in dogs. When bladder and urethral segments from
dogs ovariectomized after 3 months of age (projected
intact and neutered dogs were examined, both neutered
cumulative risk of 5% in the first 6 years of life) (Spain
male and neutered female dogs had a significantly higher
et al. 2004). The optimal time for ovariohysterectomy
-      o yo s
is still debatable; there was no significant difference in
mals. Neutered females also had higher percentage of col-
relative risk for dogs neutered prior to versus after their
lagen in the proximal urethra than did neutered males.
first heat in a population of over 8o0 dogs reviewed in
The authors speculated that excessive collagen deposi-
the United Kingdom ( Thrusfield et al. 1998). In another
tion displacing or overwhelming muscular volume in the
 population study, there was a lower incidence of urinary
bladder and urethra could affect closure function (Pon-
 incontinence in dogs spayed before the first heat than in
glowhapan et al. 2008). Indeed, in another study, strips
previous reports of dogs spayed after the first heat. How-
of urinary bladder smooth muscle from neutered males
ever, the severity of incontinence appeared to be greater
and females were less responsive than those from intact
when it did occur in the former (earlier spay) group
 dogs (Coit 2008). Investigations of plasma and tissue con-
(Stocklin-Gautschi et al. 2001).
centrations of reproductive hormone receptors continue
Recently, investigators have pinpointed structural and
to both help elucidate and cloud the understanding of
immunohistochemical changes associated with neuter-
urinary incontinence in spayed dogs ( Welle et al. 2006).
Micturition disorders   759
Urinary bladder dysfunction
Neurological evaluation
Incontinence also results when the urinary bladder can-
 In addition to the general physical examination, care-
not store urine adequately (detrusor instability, overac-
ful neurological assessment is indicated. Neurological
tive bladder, bladder hypoaccomodation). The definition 
 si  s   o n
of bladder overactivity includes the finding of involun-
 accompanied by other deficits. Mental alertness, pro-
tary bladder contractions at low bladder volumes, which
 prioception, and gait are assessed broadly, with more
is rarely documented in small animals. Despite the lack
specific attention devoted to anal tone, tail tone, and per-
of documentation of classic diagnostic findings, blad-
 ineal sensation. Genitoanal reflexes are elicited by gen-
der storage dysfunction may be more common than the
tly squeezing the base of the penis or the vulvar folds.
literature suggests. Nickel et al. (1999) examined urody-
An observable contraction ("wink") of the anal sphinc-
namic studies in 77 incontinent dogs refractory to med-
ical treatments and found that 15 dogs had urodynamic
(including sacral cord function) is intact (Figure 76.2).
findings consistent with poor bladder storage function
 Deep palpation of the spine is indicated to detect pain
in addition to poor urethral function, and another 10
or hyperesthesia, since disruption of any portion of the
dogs had urodynamic abnormalities of bladder func-
 spinal cord can interrupt normal micturition reflexes. If
tion alone. These dynamic findings appear to be con-
 any indication of neurogenic incontinence is detected, the
sistent with increased collagen deposition in the blad-
diagnostic approach shifts to comprehensive assessment
ders of spayed female dogs, as described earlier in this
of brain and spinal cord.
chapter.
Additionally, bladder storage function has been sus-
Rectal/vaginal examination
 pected in juvenile dogs and cats with congenital incon-
tinence, especially those with ectopic ureters, or grossly
Applying dorsal pressure during digital rectal examina-
tion may elicit subtle lumbosacral pain. Prostatic dis-
hypoplastic bladders, or urethras. Reduced capacity and
 poor accommodation ofurine (low compliance) was doc-
orders, urethral masses or stones, perineal hernias, and
umented by cystometry in four of nine dogs with ectopic
  dn id e o i s se 
rectal palpation. In female dogs, the urethra and urethral
ureters in one study (Lane et al. 1995).
orifice are palpable on digital vaginal examination. Vagi-
nal strictures or bands, particularly those occurring distal
to the urethral orifice, may contribute to urine pooling or
Diagnostic approach to urinary incontinence
may occur concurrent with developmental abnormalities
History and urinary bladder size
of the genitourinary tract, such as urethral incompetence
or ectopic ureter.
The first step in diagnosis is to determine whether the
 problem is primarily with storing or with voiding urine
Urinalysis and urine culture
(Table 76.2).
 Disorders of storage are characterized by involun-
A urinalysis and urine culture should be performed to
identify infection or inflammation of the LUT. Urine spe-
tary leakage of small amounts of urine with a small
to normal urinary bladder size; a distended bladder
cific gravity is a useful indicator of urine concentrating
should prompt an investigation for causes of urinary
ability, and if the urine is poorly concentrated, evalua-
retention. Continuous leakage of urine is sometimes
tion of additional samples or investigation into polyuric
reported with anatomical disorders or with severe ure-
disorders is indicated.
thral incompetence. Affected animals usually appear
healthy and void urine normally otherwise. The urinary
Additional diagnostic investigation (if needed)
bladder will be normal in size; the bladder may be easily
In dogs that are otherwise healthy, neurologically normal,
expressed in relaxed dogs with severe urethral incompe-
and free of urinary tract inflammation, urethral incom-
tence. The pattern of incontinence may offer clues as to
petence is the most likely diagnosis. A favorable response
the cause. Most dogs with urethral incompetence leak
to pharmacologic treatments that increase urethral resis-
urine while resting or sleeping. Dogs with bladder dys-
tance should confirm the diagnosis.
 e (  s  o) 
likely to involuntarily void small amounts with activity or
Imaging
to exhibit pollakiuria in addition to incontinence. Severe
or continuous incontinence is suggestive of anatomical
Further evaluation of the urogenital tract is justified in
abnormalities.
certain cases. Although radiographic imaging is of little
760  Lower urinary tract disorders
Table 76.2 Problem-specific historical questions and physical examination guidelines for patients with urinary
 incontinence or urinary retention
History (incontinence)
● When does leakage occur? Nocturnally/when resting or recumbent? Continuously? With excitation? Upon rising?
● How old was the patient when the problem began? In relation to neutering surgery?
● Is the leakage worsening, constant, or improving?
● Is the pet able to void normally?
●Is the pet conscious of the dribbling?
● Is the problem worse with a full bladder?
● Is urine volume increased in general?
● Are LUT signs present (pollakiuria, strangiuria, hematuria)?
●Any systemic signs of illness?
● What is estimated water consumption?
● Any history of prior urinary tract problems?
● Any recent abdominal, pelvic or urogenital surgery, or trauma
History (urinary retention)
● How old was the patient when the problem began? In relation to neutering surgery?
● Any previous medical problems?
● What is estimated water consumption?
● Any history of prior urogenital disorders (e.g., urinary tract infections, urolithiasis, urethral obstructions)?
● Any systemic signs of ilness?
● Any previous back surgery or trauma?
● Any recent abdominal, pelvic, or urogenital surgery, or trauma?
● How frequent are voiding attempts?
● Is any urine passed during voiding attempts?
Physical examination
● Is the bladder large or small?
● Is it firm or soft?
● Are the urethra and prostate/vagina normal on palpation?
● Is perineal/preputial urine staining/scald present?
● Is the neurologic examination normal?
o Mentation and cranial nerves
o Conscious proprioception, spinal reflexes, tail and anal tone, perineal reflexes, bulbourethral/vulvar reflex
 Pupillary light reflexes
● Is bladder expressible?
 Observed voiding
● Can the patient initiate and maintain a normal urine stream?
●What is the residual urine volume following voiding attempts?
Table modified from Fischer and Lane (2007).
use in the diagnosis of functional urethral incompetence,
Although abdominal ultrasonography is useful for
imaging should be pursued for incontinence (1) in male
imaging of kidneys, bladder, and reproductive organs,
dogs or juvenile ( <1 year) animals, (2) that closely follows
visualization of urethra and vaginal conformation are
 ovariohysterectomy or other surgical procedure, (3) that
not always possible. In order to fully evaluate the urinary
is continuous or occurs in abnormal anatomic sites (e.g-)
tract, survey radiography, excretory urography, cys-
urine leakage per rectum), or (4) that is accompanied
 tourethrography, or vaginourethrography may be chosen
by recurrent urinary tract infection, recurrent vaginitis,
depending on the features of the individual patient.
hematuria, crystalluria, or azotemia. Imaging is also rec-
Usually, an excretory urogram in combination with
ommended whenever surgical correction of incontinence
contrast cystourethrography or  vaginourethrography
 is being considered, in order to rule out lesions or con-
current abnormalities that might affect surgical approach
contrast media is another excellent tool for delineating
or outcome (Arnold 1992).
urologic structures.
Micturition disorders   761
Cystoscopy
estrogen treatments is improved by using a "loading"
phase, followed by a frequency of administration tailored
Direct  visualization  of urogenital structures by
to the individual patient and drug ( Table 76.3).
vaginoscopy or cystoscopy is now considered essential in
 A prolonged residual effect of estrogen administra-
refractory cases (Chapter 19). Visualization of the vagina
tion can be seen in some dogs after a period of suc-
allows identification of strictures, bands, and evidence of
 cessful treatment, especially when DES or stilbesterol are
urine pooling. In experienced hands, cystoscopic exami-
employed. Administration can be stopped on a trial basis
nation is a very sensitive tool for identification of ectopic
and restarted when incontinence returns (usually weeks
ureteral terminations and also may be considered for
to months).
further evaluation of suspected urethral or bladder neck
Estrogens can also be used concurrently with phenyl-
lesions.
 propanolamine (PPA) and are theorized to be synergistic
when combined therapy is used. In a small number of
Functional studies—urodynamic procedures
healthy Beagle dogs, however, urethral closure pressures
More sophisticated functional studies can be pursued in
increased after 7 days of estriol administration and did
complex scenarios or for patients that do not respond to
not increase further after addition of PPA to the treat-
appropriate trial therapy (Chapter 22). Although tech-
ment regimen (Hamaide et al. 2006). Estrogens are often
niques vary, the studies basically offer a glimpse at the
log sistue eure aenn nou op ieqn shop ioy uaso
closure (or resistance) function of the urethra and the
storage (compliance, capacity) and contractile function
 alone, and for clients who prefer the less frequent dosing
of the urinary bladder. The urethral pressure profle is
regimen.
 measured by recording intraurethral pressure along the
Veterinary practitioners have the most experience with
length of the urethra and documents the closure pressure
 DES or stilbesterol; treatment with these agents improves
of the urethral outlet. The cystometrograrm is a recording
continence in 60-80% of treated dogs. Veterinarians in
of pressures within the urinary bladder as the bladder is
North America have less experience with other estrogen
flled with air, gas, or fluid medium. The filling slope and
compounds, but recent studies confirm acceptable levels
capacity of fluid infused can be used to estimate bladder 
of effectiveness in female dogs. Response to estriol
 jo (a = u) dn s e u ps s5m
contractions can be documented. Both procedures are
adult, spayed female dogs treated by practitioners in the
most useful when evaluating dogs or cats with refrac-
Netherlands, Belgium, France, and Germany (Mandigers
tory incontinence or multiple anatomical and functional
and Nell 2001). In an open-label trial, the dogs were
abnormalities (Chapter 22).
given 2 mg estriol per day for a week, then the dose was
reduced at weekly intervals to the minimal effective dose
(typically 0.5-2.0 mg/dog given daily or every other day).
Pharmacologic management of urinary
Veterinarians classified 61% of the dogs as continent and
incontinence
22% improved at day 42 of treatment, whereas owners
Management of decreased urethral resistance
10 poog, e pue ee ui asuodsau ,quaoxa, ue paodan
"adequate” response in 49%. Twelve dogs exhibited signs
Estrogen
of estrus at the initial estriol dose, which resolved in all
Reproductive hormones are reasonably effective in
but one dog after dose reduction. No adverse hematologic
    n  n
effects were observed at day 42 in this study (Mandigers
petence. Estrogens such as diethylstilbesterol (DES),
 and Nell 2001). Dosing estriol every 2-3 days is supported
stilbesterol, estriol, and conjugated estrogens (Pre-
by pharmacokinetic studies, in which plasma concentra-
marin) improve urethral resistance by increasing alpha-
tions of the drug disappeared by 48 hours following the
  e sssdsa n n
last dose (Hoeijmakers et al. 2003). Response to natural,
urethral vascularity and other mucosal epithelial char-
conjugated estrogen (similar to Premarin) has been
acteristics. Estrogen compounds are specifically useful in
described in nine incontinent large breed dogs followed
spayed females. While many estrogen products are readily
in a prospective manner. All dogs responded well to
available as hormone replacement treatment for women,
 estrogen administration; daily administration was con-
the most reliable veterinary product, diethylstilbesterol
tinued until two weeks of continence had been obtained.
(DES), is no longer commercially available due to the
In seven of nine dogs in which dose information was
human health risks associated with the drug. DES is
 reported, maintenance dosages ranged from 0.625 to 1.25
available from many veterinary compounding agencies;
 mg per dog, administered PO every 12-72 hours. In the
quality depends on the source. The effectiveness of most
remaining two dogs, administration every 4-7 days was
762
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Table 76.3 Pharmacologic agents useful in the management of urinary incontinence
Possible adverse
 Agent
Classification
 Recommended dosage
effects 
Contraindications or comments
 Diethylstilbesterol*
Reproductive
Dogs: 0.1-1.0 mg/dog PO q 24 h forE
Estrus
Males
(DES), stilbesterol*
hormone
5-7 days, then weekly or as needed 
 Behavior change
Cats
Myelosuppression
Pregnancy
Pyometra in intact
female
Stilbesterol*
Reproductive
Dogs: 0.04-0.06 mg/dog P0 q 24 h 
As with DES
As with DES
(alternate regimen)
hormone
for 7 days, reduced weekly to
0.01-0.02 mg/dog per day
Premarin*
Conjugated
Dogs: 0.02 mg/kg P0 q 24 h for 5-7
As with DES
As with DES
estrogen
days, then q 2-4 days or as needed 
Estriol*
Reproductive
Dogs: 0.5-1.0 mg/dog P0 q 24 h for
As with DES
As with DES
hormone
 5-7 days, then q 2-3 days as
needed
Estriol* (alternate
Reproductive
Dogs: 2.0 mg/dog P0 q 24 h for 7
As with DES
As with DES
regimen)
hormone
days, then reduce daily dose by 0.5
mg each week to establish minimal
effective daily dose; then try every
 other day administration.
Testosterone
Reproductive
Dogs: 2.2 mg/kg IM q 4-8 weeks
Behavior change
Cardiac, renal, or hepatic
cypionate
hormone
Perianal adenoma
disease
Perineal hernias 
Prostatic disorders
Aggression
Testosterone
Reproductive
Dogs: 2.2 mg/kg IM q 2-3 days
As for testosterone
As for testosterone cypionate
propionate
hormone
 cypionate
 Phenylpropanolamine
 Indirect alpha
Dogs: 1.5 mg/kg P0 q 8-12 hrs, or
Anxiety
Some cardiac disease
(PPA)
agonist
12.5-75 mg PO q 8-12 h
 Aggression
Hypertension
Anorexia
± anxiety disorders
Hypertension
Tachycardia
Ephedrine
Alpha agonist 
 Dogs: 1.2 mg/kg P0 q 8 h
As with PPA
As with PPA
Pseudoephedrine
Alpha agonist
Dogs: 0.2-0.4 mg/kg (practically.
As with PP
As with PPA
15-60 mg total dose per dog) PO
q8-12 h
Imipramine
Antimuscarinic, Dogs: 5-15 mg P0 q 12 h
Sedation
Seizure disorders
alpha/beta
Dry mouth
Use of other anticholinergic or
agonist 
Urinary retention
CNS depressants, glaucoma, Gl
Gl upset
obstruction, renal or hepatic
disease, cardiac arrythmias
Oxybutynin
Antimuscarinic (
Cats and small dogs: 0.5-1.25 mg
As for imipramine 
Glaucoma, Gl obstruction,
total per dose
renal or hepatic disease,
Larger dogs: 2.5-3.75 mg total per
 cardiac arrythmias,
dose
hypertension
 Dicydomine
 Antimuscarinic Dogs: 5-10 mg/dog P0 q 8 h
As for imipramine
 As for oxybutynin
Depot leuprolide
GnRH analog
Dogs: 11.25 mg/dog
 May be redosed as needed
May be used in combination 
with alpha agonists
Depot cdeslorelin 
GnRH analog
Dogs: 5-10 mg/dog
May be redosed as needed
As for leuprolide
Table modified from Fischer and Lane (2007).
Micturition disorders   763
effective. No hematologic effects of estrogen were
ably reflects the variable and intermittent nature of uri-
observed in treated dogs for up to 49 months (Angioletti
nary incontinence in dogs; however, further study may be
et al. 2004).
  e a s   
 Possible adverse effects of estrogens include signs of
leakage during clinical trials. Owner observations dif-
estrus, hair loss, behavioral changes, and bone mar-
fered from urodynamic findings in another study, where
row suppression. Chronic, daily estriolum treatment
some owners reported good improvement after pseu-
was implicated in stump pyometra in an Irish Set-
doephedrine treatment without evidence of increase in
ter (Schotanus et al. 2008). Estrogenic side effects are
cosure measures (Byron et al. 2007). In this group of
most common during the loading dose of estriol and
9 female dogs, improvement in continence score, max-
with higher doses of DES. Bone marrow suppression is
imal urethral closure pressure, and functional area of
e  ss e   s  
the UPP was observed after PPA (1.5 mg/kg q 8 hours)
administration (Byron et al. 2007). In another random-
 potentially fataladverse effect. Estradiolcypionate (ECP),
ized, double-blinded study, female dogs responded well
 a repository preparation, should never be used for uri-
to 1.5 mg/kg q 12 hours; 21 of 24 dogs were continent
nary incontinence in dogs because of the higher risk
   ) i   
of bone marrow suppression. Estrogen administration
While most resources recommend administration of
should be avoided in male dogs due to resulting pro-
PPA two or three times per day for best effect, the dose
is adjusted to the minimal amount needed to achieve
breed predilection for immune-mediated disease, since
continence. As with reproductive hormones, it is usu-
estrogens are immunostimulatory. Estrogens are not very
ally beneficial to start with the optimal dose until con-
effective and poorly tolerated in cats, often inducing
tinence is achieved. However, a recent investigation in
estrus-like behavior.
 healthy intact Beagles challenges this assumption. Dogs
were treated with PPA at once-, twice-, or three times
 daily intervals. Urodynamic changes (increased urethral
Alpha-adrenergic agents
pressure) were similar for all dosing frequencies, lead-
Sympathomimetic drugs with alpha agonist effects,
ing the authors to recommend once daily treatment for
including PPA, phenylephrine, and pseudoephedrine,
incontinent dogs (Carofiglio et al. 2006). Desensitiza-
have been extremely effective in improving or control-
tion of receptors was suspected with TID administra-
ling urinary incontinence. Excellent responses have been
tion. Responses in intact Beagles may not parallel those
observed in most dogs treated with PPA, with 90% or
 in incontinent spayed dogs; however, reduced frequency
greater responding in small studies (Richter and Ling
of administration may be effective in some dogs and
1985). Scott et al. (2002) reported results of PPA admin-
may prevent development of tolerance during long-term
istration in a prospective, blinded, placebo-controlled
treatment.
study of 50 incontinent adult female dogs at various clin-
Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are alternative alpha
ics in the United Kingdom that had been ovariohysterec-
agonists with similar effects on urethral function. Their
tomized at least 6 months prior to the study. Dogs were
clinical use increases during periods when PPA is dif-
treated with either PPA (1 mg/kg q 8 hours in a syrup
ficult to obtain. Nendick and Clark (1987) described
pseudoephedrine (15-30 mg q 8-24 hours) as totally
reported frequency of unconscious urination and vol-
effective in 14/17 (82.4%) dogs in a retrospective study.
ume of urine loss were compared between the treated
Arnold found good results with ephedrine (1-2 mg/kg
and control dogs at day 7 and 28 of treatment. By day 7,
q 12 hours) in 28 of 38 (74%) female dogs, with some
55% PPA treated dogs were reported to have no uncon-
improvement noted in 37 of the 38 (Arnold 1992). How-
scious urination as opposed to 26% of the dogs receiving
ever, in a series of nine female dogs studied in a crossover
placebo. By day 28, the percentage of continent PPA dogs
design, dogs exhibited significantly better improvement
rose to 85.7% while the number of continent placebo-
in continence and urodynamic variables during treat-
treated dogs rose to 33.3%. Side effects were not signifi-
ment with PPA than with pseudoephedrine (Byron et al.
cantly different between the two groups; however, occur-
2007). Clinical improvement was observed in only 6
rences of diarrhea and vomiting were reported in both
 of the 9 dogs during pseudoephedrine administration.
 groups. Gastrointestinal side effects are uncommon with
 Differences in response between the drugs may vary
PPA, but may be more likely with this formulation of the
 based on relative indirect and direct alpha-adrenergic
drug. While this study demonstrated a significantly bet-
activities of each; PPA appears to possess some direct
ter response to PPA than placebo, the placebo effect was 
activity while pseudoephedrine acts solely by indirect
unexpectedly high (Scott et al. 2002). This finding prob-
actions.
764  Lower urinary tract disorders
Adverse effects of alpha agonists include restless-
leuprolide, buserelin, and deslorelin, GnRH analogs that
ness, tachycardia, anorexia, gastrointestinal side effects,
suppress sex hormone release. In theory, chronically
 aggression, and other behavioral changes. Adverse effects 
unsuppressed FSH and LH release (due to lack of nega-
are usually dose-dependent and may vary among prod-
tive feedback) in ovariectomized dogs may contribute to
ucts. On the basis of human experience, the degree of 
urinary incontinence. Administration of GnRH analogs
adverse effects, cardiac effects, and development of tol-
 paradoxically results in reduced FSH and LH over time.
erance have been expected to be higher with ephedrine
 In Reichler's series, the drugs appeared useful in 12 of
compounds than with PPA. This expectation was con-
13 dogs with refractory incontinence, either alone or in
firmed in the dogs studied by Byron et al; 5 of 9
 combination with alpha agonists. In a more recent trial,
dogs (56%) exhibited adverse behavioral effects includ-
 9 of 23 incontinent dogs treated with long-acting leupro-
ing decreased appetite, increased panting, and lethargy.
lide were continent for prolonged periods (70-575 days);
another 10 of the dogs had partial response. These 23
tial complication, significant changes in blood pressure
dogs, however, also responded to PPA, with 92% overall
reduction in urine leakage (Reichler et al. 2006). The
tinent dogs treated with PPA (Richter and Ling 1985;
only urodynamic parameter that changed after depot
Byron et al. 2007). However, one older dog with bor-
leuprolide injection was cystometric threshold volume
derline hypertension developed anesthesia-induced ven-
(an indicator of capacity and accommodation) (Reichler
      s l
et al. 2006). There were no apparent adverse effects of
pseudoephedrine (Byron et al. 2007). Mild but signifi-
GnRH treatment reported in this study, but long-term
 cant increases in diastolic blood pressure were observed
use of these drugs in dogs has not been evaluated. GnRH
in healthy Beagles at 7 or 14 days after administration
analogs may prove to be a valuable long-acting treatment
of PPA or ephedrine. Significant increases in systolic
that would alleviate the need for daily or weekly medi-
arterial pressure, to measurements above 220 mmHg,
cation; however, availability and cost of GnRH analogs
were observed in three healthy dogs treated with PPA
limit their use in the United States.
twice daily in this study (Carofiglio et al. 2006). Caution
is certainly advisable in high-risk patients; alpha ago-
 nists should not be administered in known hypertensive
Antimuscarinic (anticholinergic) agents
patients.
Like DES, PPA has been removed from commercial
Other pharmacologic agents that may be useful in
 production for humans, but is produced by veterinary
unusual or refractory incontinence cases include anti-
compounding pharmacies under an FDA compassionate
cholinergic (antimuscarinic) agents that enhance blad-
 use provision. Over-the-counter pseudoephedrine prod-
der storage. Anticholinergic agents are quite effective for
ucts are now semi-controlled by pharmacies in order to
detrusor instability (overactive bladder or urge inconti-
limit availability of the compound for methamphetamine
nence) in which involuntary detrusor contractions occur,
production. Although PPA has been studied most often,
d      s
all alpha agonists have a similar mechanism of action and
also possess antispasmodic or analgesic activity, which
approximate dose range (1.5 mg/kg PO q8-24 hours) for
facilitates response. True detrusor instability is rare in
the treatment of urethral incompetence. While most dogs
animals; oxybutynin and emepronium bromide have
will usually become continent or improve dramatically
    ss s i  
with either estrogen or alpha agonist administration, the
Barsanti 1987).
two drugs can also be combined for synergistic effect in 
 Antimuscarinic agents can be considered on a trial
the same patient. Combination treatment allows estro-
basis in refractory incontinence, either alone or in com-
p ee ro sdn n a ed, on u
bination with alpha agonists or reproductive hormones.
treatment. Starting doses are the same as for each drug
Without urodynamic documentation of poor bladder
when usedindividually, but the dose of both products can
storage function or detrusor instability, trial treatment
often be reduced slightly over time if the combination is
 can be considered in animals in which urge incontinence
effective.
appears likely. These dogs or cats usually leak urine when
active, either when walking, jumping, or moving; urine
GnRH analogs
dribbling may appear behavioral since posturing may
occur. Oxybutynin is most commonly recommended,
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogs have
and the author has limited experience using the new
recently been applied to the treatment of urinary incon-
 anticholineric, tolteridine. Other agents, including amit-
tinence. Reichler et al. (2003) reported experience with
ryptiline, imipramine, flavoxate, and dicyclomine, also
Micturition disorders   765
have anticholinergic effects. Imipramine and amitrypti-
 reported series 53-68% of dogs became continent after
line, tricyclic antidepressants, may improve urine storage
one or two injections. Most of the other dogs exhib-
by several mechanisms, including anticholinergic, alpha-
 ited significant improvement after injection and with the
adrenergic and beta-adrenergic effects. Imipramine has
 postinjection addition of PPA treatment (Arnold et al.
not proven very effective in clinical application, however.
1996; Barth et al. 2005; Byron et al. 2005). Mean duration
Clients may be familiar with the heavily marketed prod-
of continence has been reported as 12 (Byron et al. 2005)
uct, tolterodine (Detrol, Pharmacia, & Upjohn), for over-
to 17 months (Barth et al. 2005); excellent responses of
active bladder in human patients. This antimuscarinic
greater than 30 months duration have been observed
agent is touted for once-daily administration and reduced
(Arnold). Transient adverse effects, including stranguria,
 side effects when compared with other available agents.
hematuria, vaginitis, and urine retention, are possible.
There are no published reports of the drug's use in small
Repeated injection can be done when effectiveness wanes.
animals at this time. Side effects of antimuscarinic agents
include dry mouth, blurred vision, urine retention, and
Surgical methods
 gastrointestinal upset, and significantly limit tolerance of
Colposuspension is the most commonly described sur-
the drugs in people, but these compounds appear well
 gical procedure for incontinent female dogs (Chapter
tolerated by dogs. Ptyalism and gastrointestinal symp-
82). In this procedure, the vagina is fixed to the ventral
toms are possible in dogs and usually are remedied by
abdominal wall via sutures through the prepubic ten-
dose reduction.
 don, entrapping the urethra in a compressed and slightly
cranial position (Gregory and Holt 1994). Other simi-
Agents with combined activities
lar procedures fix the outer layers of the urethra (ure-
Duloxetine, a serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake
thropexy), the prostate (Holt et al. 2005), or the deferent
inhibitor, may improve striated muscle resistance as well
ducts (males) to the ventral abdominal wall. Initial results
as bladder capacity and has proven useful in women with
 with these procedures have been promising, achieving
stress incontinence (Norton et al. 2002; Van Kerrebroeck
short-term continence in 50-75% of patients (Holt 1990;
et al. 2004). The agent works by inhibition of serotonin 
Rawlings et al. 2001; White 2001). However, long-term
and norepinephrine reuptake at the presynaptic neu-
continence is more elusive with this technique (Massat
rons in the sacral spinal cord (Onuf's nucleus). In cats
et al. 1993; Rawlings et al. 2001). In all of these groups,
with experimentally induced irritated urinary bladder, a
 PPA or other medical treatments were often necessary to
five-fold increase in bladder capacity and an eight-fold
 augment the response to surgery. With advances in endo-
increase in urethral EMG activity were observed after
scopic injection techniques and in patient selection for
duloxetine administration (Karl and Katofiase 1995). In
women, a dose of 20-40 mg twice daily is effective in
today.
reducing incontinence by over 50% (Jost and Marsalek
2005) and is effective in women with severe clinical signs
Vulvoplasty
(Van Kerrebroeck et al. 2004). The most common adverse
effect in women was nausea, which can be minimized by
Some incontinent dogs also have vaginal, vestibular, or
vulvar conformational abnormalities. Many exhibit other
slow-dose escalation (Norton et al. 2002; Oelke et al.
LUT signs, including recurrent urinary tract and vaginal
2006). Experience is limited in small animals, where
infections. Although it is not entirely clear how these con-
smooth muscle is the predominant contributor to ure-
formational problems contribute to incontinence, urine
thral sphincter incompetence, but the drug could be use-
retention in the vestibule and vagina may lead to urine
ful as adjunct treatment in some cases.
pooling, episodic leakage, and recurrent urinary tract
infection. Urine pooling is strongly suspected if urine
Endoscopic and surgical management of
 dribbling occurs after voiding in female dogs. Vulvoplasty
urinary incontinence
may improve urine drainage, decreasing vaginal irrita-
Bulking agents, including cod-liver oil, Teflon, extracel-
tion and decreasing urine leakage related to urine pool-
lular matrix, and collagen products, have been used to
ing (Crawford and Adams 2002; Hammel and Bjorling
boost tissue resistance or size in the urethra and other
2002). In a group of dogs with vestibulovaginal strictures
tissues. Glutaraldehyde cross-linked bovine collagen cur-
reviewed by Hammel and Bjorling, 19 dogs had refractory
rently is preferred for periurethral application in humans
urinary incontinence as part oftheir clinical presentation.
and dogs and does not migrate into other tissues. Colla-
 Incontinence resolved with vulvoplasty alone in 6 dogs,
gen injection has been most commonly applied in female
 and an additional 9 had improved response to PPA after
dogs refractory to PPA administration (Chapter 37). In
 surgery. The procedure appears to be a useful adjunct
766
 Lower urinary tract disorders
lead to replacement of smooth muscle with noncontrac-
tile fibrous tissue, leading to a noncompliant bladder
with diminished contractility. Usually, however, detru-
sor fibrosis produces clinical signs associated with blad-
der noncompliance: decreased urine storage capacity and
increased voiding frequency.
Ach-
Neurogenic
Most voiding disorders due to inadequate detrusor con-
Figure 76.4 The urine voiding phase of micturition. Parasym-
traction occur secondary to neurologic disease, most
pathetic stimulation of muscarinic cholinergic receptors causes
often spinal cord disease. Though lesions of the cerebral
contraction of the detrusor muscle. Parasympathetic inhibition of 
cortex or cerebellum have the potential to disrupt initia-
sympathetic input to the IUS, and voluntary inhibition of EUS con-
tion or modulation of voiding, brain disease is more likely
traction causes passive relaxation of the outflow tract and causes
to cause clinical signs associated with storage dysfunction
intravesicular pressure to exceed outlet pressure, permitting urine
rather than with voiding dysfunction. Spinal cord lesions
voiding. Ach-m, muscarinic cholinergic receptor.
resulting in upper motor neuron or lower motor neu-
ron clinical signs frequently also disrupt normal voiding
in the management of some dogs with urinary inconti-
function. See Figure 76.3 for a schematic representation
 nence. Concurrent urethral incompetence, however, still
of the innervation of the LUT.
may require medical treatment.
Lower motor neuron disorders
 Disruptions of the sacral spinal cord segments (cord seg-
Urinary retention
ments S1-S3, located caudal to vertebra L5) or bilaterally
 During the storage phase of micturition, contraction
of the pelvic nerve or pelvic plexus can result in vary-
of the bladder outlet combined with relaxation of the
ing degrees of detrusor atony and EUS hyporeflexia. On
detrusor muscle permit low-pressure filling of the blad-
 physical examination, patients with lower motor neuron
der with urine (Figure 76.2). Transition to the voiding
 disorders usually exhibit diminished or absent perineal
phase entails relaxation of the bladder neck and proximal
reflexes and have distended bladders that are frequently
urethra, with simultaneous contraction of the detrusor
easily expressible. Overflow incontinence is often seen
(Figure 76.4).
when the bladder is full. Because the IUS derives inner-
Though the process of urine voiding may seem sim-
vation from the hypogastric nerve, IUS tone may be pre-
 ple and straightforward, coordinated and complete void-
served in the presence of sacral lesions and can become
ing requires complex interaction among the components
fixed over time. Common causes of lower motor neu-
of the LUT, and the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and
ron disorders include cauda equina syndrome, sacroiliac
somatic nervous systems.
luxation, intervertebral disk disease, sacrococcygeal sep-
aration or fracture ("tail-pull" injury), congenital mal-
Etiologies of urinary retention
formation (e.g., in Manx cats), and neoplasia. Treatment
for complete neurogenic detrusor atony and sphincter
Incomplete voiding and consequent urinary retention
areflexia is generally unsuccessful, unless the underlying
result from inadequate urethral relaxation, inadequate
cause is correctable.
detrusor contraction, or both. Etiologies and mecha-
 Parasympathomimetic agents such as bethanechol
nisms of urinary retention are discussed below, and Table
76.4 presents characteristics of common causative disor-
may be administered to help increase strength of detru-
ders.
sor contraction if partial innervation and function are
 present, but are ineffective and need not be administered
if pelvic nerve function is absent. Patients can be man-
Inadequate detrusor contraction
aged at home with scrupulous bladder and nursing care,
Atony of the detrusor may be primary (neurogenic)
including aseptic urethral catheterization (preferred for
  () s   
male dogs) or manual bladder expression (for female
increased outlet resistance, whether mechanical or func-
dogs and cats) 3-4 times daily and frequent perineal
tional. Rarely, structural or mechanical detrusor abnor-
cleaning to prevent urine scald. Patients should be mon-
malities can cause functional failure. Chronic inflam-
itored routinely for UTl and treated when infection is
mation or infection of the bladder wall can, over time,
documented.
Micturition disorders   767
Table 76.4 Characteristics of common disorders causing urinary retention
Disorder
Characteristics
 Diagnostics
Neurogenic causes
Lesions of sacral spinal cord 
Distended, flaccid urinary bladder
Neurologic examination
(lower motor neuron)
Bladder easily expressed
Imaging (any or all of: radiograpy. myelography.
Depressed genitoanal reflexes 
epidurography, computed tomography.
± Lumbosacral pain
magnetic resonance imaging)
Overflow incontinence possible 
Lesions of suprasacral spinal 
Distended, firm urinary bladder
Neurologic examination
cord (upper motor neuron)
Bladder not easily expressed
Imaging (any or all of: radiograpy. myelography.
Incomplete voiding possible
epidurography, computed tomography.
Gait and proprioceptive deficits
magnetic resonance imaging)
 Detrusor-urethral dyssynergia
Distended urinary bladder (may be firm or
Observation, measurement of residual urine
atonic)
volume
Bladder not easily expressed
 Urethral pressure profilometry ±
Incomplete voiding possible; stream may be
cystometrography
initiated but not maintained
Response to alpha antagonists 
Patient is otherwise normal 
Primary detrusor atony
Distended bladder
 Observation, measurement of residual urine
Weak or absent urine stream
volume
 Other signs of dysautonomia damage to
Response to treatment
hypogastric nerve
Cystometrography
Dysautonomia testing
Non-neurogenic causes
Anatomic urethral obstruction
Difficult urethral catheterization
Urethral catheterization
Dysuria and stranguria ± hematuria
Radiography/contrast cystourethrography
Caused by uroliths, neoplasia, blood cdots,
Ultrasonography
urethral plugs (cats)
 Functional urinary obstruction
Distended bladder, difficult to express
Exclusion of anatomic or neurogenic causes
Easy urethral catheterization
 Response to treatment with alpha antagonists
Voiding may be initiated, then interrupted
Urethral pressure profile
Usually male dogs and cats
Idiopathic or caused by urethral iritation or
previous obstruction
Rarely and transiently occurs following
abdominal, pelvic, or pelvic limb surgery
Primary detrusor atony
Distended bladder
 Observation, measurement of residual urine
Weak or absent urine stream
volume
Caused by overdistension from any cause of
Response to treatment
obstruction, muscle weakness, drugs
Cystometrography
Medications (e.g., opioids,
Easy urethral catheterization
Medication history
anticholinergics/
Variable presentation otherwise
Exclusion of anatomic or functional obstruction
antispasmodics, tricyclic
Response to withdrawal of medication
antidepressants, calcium 
channel blockers)
Table modified from Fischer and Lane (2007).
Dysautonomia
(autonomic) nervous systems, caused by chromatolytic
 degeneration of neurons in the autonomic ganglia.
Primary dysautonomia is a rare, idiopathic, neurodegen-
Dysautonomia has been recognized in dogs and cats
erative disorder of the sympathetic and parasympathetic
worldwide, as well as in horses and rabbits. In cats,
768  Lower urinary tract disorders
dysautonomia has chiefly been reported in the United
indwelling or intermittent urethral catheterization suf-
Kingdom and Scandinavia, but a recent retrospective
fices for management. Although parasympathomimetic
described nine dysautonomic cats from Kansas and
agents may help improve the quality of detrusor contrac-
Missouri (Kidder 2008). In dogs, the large majority of
tions, these prokinetic agents must not be given with-
reported cases have come from Kansas and Missouri
out first definitively establishing a low-resistance out-
(Longshore 1996; Harkin 2002).
flow conduit, either with indwelling catheterization, by
Voiding dysfunction characterized by overflow incon-
removal of an anatomic obstruction, or with pharma-
tinence from bladder atony and urethral sphincter are-
cologic agents that relax the urethral outlet (in the case
flexia may be the chief presenting complaint in the
of functional obstruction). Urethral relaxants alone are
dysautonomic patient, but other signs of autonomic dys-
usually not sufficient to produce adequate urine flow
function (e.g-, dilated, nonresponsive pupils; xerostomia;
in the initial stages of recovery, so indwelling catheteriza-
nictitans prolapse; absent anal sphincter tone; regurgi-
 tion is recommended during early management. Progno-
tation and/or vomiting) are usually discovered in the
sis depends on the cause and reversibility of underlying
 patient history or on physical examination. Results of
conditions, but is generally good for recovery of detrusor
specific clinical and pharmacologic testing (described
function in acute cases. Chronicity diminishes the odds
in Harkin 2002; Kidder 2008) confirm an antemortem
 of full functional return.
diagnosis with a high degree of certainty. Dysautono-
mia most often produces polysystemic pathology with
Pharmacologic causes of urinary retention
clinically devastating results; management is generally
unrewarding if the gastrointestinal tract is affected (e.g-
Pharmacologic agents often contribute to urinary
retention in humans, especially in conjunction with
ileus, megaesophagus). If signs are largely confined to the
anesthesia, pain, or bladder overdistension. Urinary
      
retention has been reported in dogs following systemic
possible with parasympathomimetic agents and bladder
administration of agents from several classes of phar-
expression or intermittent catheterization.
macological agents, including tricyclic antidepressants,
Myogenic
anticholinergic agents, opioids, and calcium channel
blockers; intrathecal administration of morphine has also
Detrusor atony from overdistension
been implicated in cases of urinary retention (Richelson
1983; Drake et al. 1998; Herperger 1998; Kona-Boun
Sustained overdistension from any cause can contribute
2003). Urinary effects of these agents are usually tran-
to loss of detrusor function. Detrusor smooth muscle
sient, but urinary catheterization may be required until
fibers coordinate contraction via tight junctions, and
normal voiding function resumes.
excessive and/or prolonged stretch separates these tight
junctions, disrupting neuromuscular transmission and
resulting in weak, uncoordinated, or absent contractile
Inappropriate outlet resistance
effort (Kato et al. 1990; Ling 1995). Cats and dogs with
Anatomic/mechanical obstruction
 ia  os  n 
 presented for stranguria, anuria, or overflow inconti-
Mechanical disruption of bladder outflow occurs com-
nence and usually have large, flaccid bladders on phys-
 monly in dogs and cats, due most frequently to urolithi-
ical examination (Animals with very acute obstruction
asis, obstructive feline idiopathic cystitis, or neoplasia
usually have turgid, painful bladders; Chapter 77). The
and may certainly interfere with normal voiding. Gen-
bladder will stay distended after voiding attempts, which
erally, though, these types of LUT diseases cause uri-
are generally partial or weak. Perineal reflexes remain
 nary obstruction, prior to development of bladder atony
intact but detrusor contraction is diminished or absent.
(Chapter 77).
For such patients, maintenance of an indwelling urinary
catheter (for 72 hours up to 14 days) with a closed col-
Myogenic
lection system may be required to re-establish tight junc-
Functional urinary obstruction
tions and permit detrusor function to return. Chronic
atony and urine distension may be more subtle in pre-
The term “functional obstruction” describes a condition
sentation.
in which amplified sympathetic nervous input increases
Hospitalization, recumbency, orthopedic surgery, or 
urethral sphincter tone, thus inappropriately raising out-
other painful conditions that preclude normal postur-
let pressure and restricting or precluding urine flow dur-
ing or voiding may lead to urinary retention. Reten-
ing voiding attempts. Functional obstruction may some-
tion is generally transient in these cases; short-term
 times have a neurogenic component to its pathology or
Micturition disorders   769
may result from direct irritation of the urethra. Anxiety
the period of indwelling catheterization. Diazepam
produced by ineffectual voiding attempts may then fur-
(injectable), acepromazine, and amitriptyline are sev-
ther increase sympathetic stimulus. Functional obstruc-
eral options. These medications may reduce stress and
tion due to spasm of the urethral musculature occurs
straining, thus decreasing sympathetic input to the
commonly in cats following urethral instrumentation for
LUT.
relief of mechanical obstruction.
Management of functional obstruction includes treat-
Neurogenic
ment or prevention of bladder atony from overdisten-
sion with indwelling urethral catheterization if necessary
Upper motor neuron disorders
and possible, while simultaneously decreasing IUS and/or
 Upper motor neuron lesions result from spinal cord
 EUS resistance as discussed in the section on upper motor 
lesions between the sacral segments and the pontine
neuron disorders (Lane et al. 2000). Anxiolytic therapy
micturition center and cause reflex detrusor contrac-
may be helpful to decrease stress and consequently sym-
tion simultaneous with uninhibited sphincter contrac-
pathetic input to the LUT; commonly used anxiolytic
tion. Patients with upper motor neuron disorders often
 medications are included in Table 76.5.
have overt paresis or paralysis of the hind limbs and
Prognosis is variable, but is favorable in cases of acute
usually cannot urinate voluntarily. On physical exam-
urethral irritation (e.g-, cats with urethral spasm posto-
ination, the bladder is usually distended, turgid, and
bstruction).
difficult or impossible to express early in the disease
Functional obstruction folowing relief of a mechani-
course. Manual bladder expression should be undertaken
cal obstruction in cats happens frequently, and thus mer-
 carefully, because aggressive attempts at expression can
its specific discussion. Though many of these cats have
result in bladder rupture and because repeated expression
just had an indwelling urinary catheter removed, resolu-
may interfere with detrusor muscle recovery. Intermittent
tion of the functional component of the obstruction may
require replacement of an indwelling urinary catheter for
ferred, particularly in male dogs, to reduce risk of bladder
a variable period of time (usually 1-3 additional days).
 trauma and ensure complete emptying.
Although no evidence-based measures exist to prevent
After days to weeks, local spinal reflexes may resume
the development of urethrospasm, the following sugges-
and allow for some voiding activity. Involuntary bladder
tions may reduce the risk of functional obstruction due to
 emptying is typically initiated when threshold capacity
urethral irritation and/or inflammation, following relief
 is reached; this phenomenon is termed an automatic or
of mechanical urethral obstruction (Fischer 2003).
reflex bladder. When automatic bladder activity occurs,
 management with manual expression may be possible,
· Leave only soft, nonirritating catheters in the ure-
since stimulation of detrusor contraction now should
thra. Less irritating catheter types include silicone,
result in sphincter relaxation and enable partial to com-
Teflon, and soft infant feeding-tubes. Polypropylene
plete emptying. Automatic (or reflex) bladder function is
catheters (tom-cat catheters) cause irritation when left
rarely seen in dogs, however, and is usually partial when it
in contact with the urethral mucosa. They are also the
does occur, so pharmacologic assistance is usually neces-
catheters most likely to cause bladder trauma when left
sary. Urethral smooth muscle relaxants, such as the alpha-
indwelling.
antagonists (e.g- prazosin, tamsulosin) and skeletal
· Consider the use of urethral relaxant medication dur-
muscle relaxants (e.g-, baclofen, diazepam, dantrolene),
ing and after the period of catheterization. Prazosin is
 may facilitate complete bladder emptying by relaxing
a safe and effective urethral smooth muscle relaxant
the IUS and EUS, respectively. Residual urine volume
 in cats; diazepam and dantrolene relax skeletal muscle
o  ss o d p  o
(see Table 76.1).
therapy.
· Consider the one-time use of a nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory such as ketoprofen at the time of
Detrusor-urethral dyssynergia
catheterization. This may be contraindicated in ani-
mals with renal azotemia.
In veterinary literature, detrusor-urethral dyssynergia has
· Ensure patency of the indwelling catheter at all times.
been classified as either a neurogenic or a myogenic dis-
The bladder should be empty when the catheter is in
order, because it may be caused by a partial lesion of
place, and urine output and bladder size should be
the reticulospinal tract, a lesion cranial to the caudal
monitored to ensure this.
 mesenteric ganglion, or idiopathic in origin. In human
· Consider the use of anxiolytic and/or mildly tran-
patients, the term usually implies neurogenic dyssyner-
quilizing medication during and immediately after
 gia, documented by specific neurologic and urodynamic
770  Lower urinary tract disorders
Table 76.5 Formulary of agents useful in the management of urinary retention
Contraindications or
Category/agent 
Mechanism
 Recommended dosage
Possible adverse effects
comments
Urethral relaxants
Acepromazine
Skeletal muscle
Up to 0.1 mg/kg IV q 
Hypotension
Hypovolemia
relaxation via
12-24 h (doses as low
 Sedation
Cardiac disease
neuroleptic effect,
as 0.02 mg/kg IV may be 
 Exacerbation of seizure
 Seizure disorder
smooth muscle 
effective)
disorder
relaxation via
1.1-2.2 mg/kg PO q
Disinhibition
alpha-antagonism
12-24 h
Baclofen
Skeletal muscle 
Dog: 1-2 mg/kg PO q
Weakness
relaxation
8h
Gl upset
Cat: not recommended
Pruritus
Bethanechol
Parasympathomimetic
Dogs: 5-25 mg PO q 8 h 
 Ptyalism
Outlet obstruction or high
Cats: 1.25-5 mg PO q
Vomiting
outlet resistance
8h
Diarrhea 
Gl obstruction
Atropine is antidotal
Cisapride
Prokinetic, may
Dogs 0.5 mg/kg P0 q 8 h
Diarrhea
Gl obstruction
 enhance acetylcholine
Cats: 1.25-5 mg/cat PO
Possible abdominal pain
Reduce dose with hepatic
release
q 8-12 h
insufficiency
 Dantrolene
Skeletal muscle
Dog: 1-5 mg/kg PO q
Weakness
Cardiac disease
 relaxation via direct
8-12 h
Sedation
effects
Cat: 0.5-2.0 mg/kg PO q
Gl upset
8h
A1p1x0101edaH
1.0 mg/kg IV
Diazepam
Skeletal muscle
Dog: 2-10 mg/dog P0 q
Sedation
Pregnancy
relaxation via central
8h
Paradoxic excitation
Hepatic disease
effects
Cat: 1-2.5 mg/cat PO q
Idiopathic hepatic necrosis
(benzodiazepine)
8 h or prn
(with PO use in cats only)
Polyphagia
Phenoxybenzamine 
 Smooth musdle
Dog: 0.25 mg/kg P0 q
Hypotension
 Cardiac disease
relaxation via
8-12 h or 2.5-20
Tachycardia
Hypovolemia
nonspecific
mg/dog P0 q 8-12 h
Gl upset
Glaucoma
alpha-antagonism
Cat:1.25-7.5 mg/cat PO
 Renal failure
q 8-12 h
Diabetes mellitus (type II)
 Prazosin
Smooth musdle
Dog: 1 mg/15 kg P0 q
Hypotension 
Cardiac disease
relaxation via α1
8-12 h
Mild sedation
Renal failure
antagonism
Cat: 0.25-0.5 mg/cat PO
 Ptyalism
q 12-24 h
Terazosin
Smooth musdle
Dog: 0.5-5.0 mg/dog q
Hypotension 
Cardiac disease
relaxation via α1
12-24 h
Mild sedation 
Renal failure 
 antagonism
Cat: not determined
Ptyalism 
Tamsulosin
Smooth musdle
Dog
Hypotension with overdose
Do not use in cats
relaxation via selective
α1A antagonism
Anxiolytic agents
 Acepromazine
See above
See above
See above
See above
 Alprazolam
Centrally acting
Cat: 0.125-0.25 mg/cat
As for diazepam, except
May be a good alternative
 anxiolytic
PO q 12 h
idiopathic hepatic necrosis
to diazepam if oral therapy
benzodiazepine
has not been documented.
is needed
(continued)
Micturition disorders   771
Table 76.5 continued
Contraindications or 
 Category/agent
Mechanism 
 Recommended dosage
Possible adverse effects
comments
Amitriptyline
Tricyclic
Cat: 1-2 mg/kg per day
Sedation
Do not use if bladder atony
antidepressant,
PO or
Neutropenia,
is suspected. Use cautiously
anxiolytic, alpha
 2.5-10 mg/cat per day
thrombocytopenia
and discontinue if worseing
 antagonist,
PO
Urinary retention
of urinary retention is
antihistimine,
Weight gain
suspected.
analgesic,
anticholinergic
Diazapam
See above
See above
See above
See above
Table modified from Fischer and Lane (2007).
criteria. A dyssynergic state results when initiation of
Specific historical questions related to urinary retention
detrusor contraction is accompanied by simultaneous
are listed in Table 76.2. Most animals with urinary reten-
contraction of the urethral musculature (either the IUS,
tion have a distended bladder that is readily palpable on
the EUS, or both), resulting in the urinary bladder con-
physical examination, and some will have historical or
tracting against markedly increased outlet pressure. Idio-
physical examination evidence of overflow incontinence.
pathic dyssynergia, also considered a “functional ure-
Digital rectal examination should include identification
thral obstruction,” is most commonly a disorder of male
and careful palpation of the urethra (lying on ventral
dogs and may be exacerbated by excitation or exertion
midline), the prostatic region, and possibly the trigone
(psychological, physical, or sexual), probably because of
of the bladder (in a very small dog). Use of the free hand
increased sympathetic input. Dyssynergic dogs will often
on the caudal abdomen to tip the bladder back into the
initiate a urine stream that then is quickly attenuated and
pelvis will assist with palpation of the prostatic region
 may repeat such behavior several times before abandon-
and possibly the trigone. A digital vaginal examination
ing attempts to void. Residual urine volume is greater
should be performed in female dogs, and the urethral ori-
than 10 mL.
fice should be identified. The region of the urethral orifice
 Documentation of dyssynergia is diffcult in clinical
and ventral vaginal wall should be carefully palpated for
practice, because it requires simultaneous electromyo-
 thickening or irregularity. Critical assessment of neuro-
 graphic assessment of detrusor and sphincter muscle
logic status, particularly of the hind limb reflexes and
activity during voiding. A clinical diagnosis can be
reflexes testing the sacral arc (e.g- perineal, bulbospon-
made based on the signalment, physical examination
giosus/vulvar), is specifically indicated in patients with
findings, voiding pattern, and exclusion of mechanical
urinary retention.
obstruction. Urethral pressure proflometry may con-
Observation of voiding behavior also is a key compo-
firm increased outlet resistance and can help localize the
nent of the initial assessment. Particular attention should
region of abnormal resistance to the IUs, EUS, or both
be given to the patient's ability to initiate and maintain
(Lane et al. 2000). Management of dyssynergia centers on
a urine stream. Patients with anatomic obstruction typ-
decreasing IUS and/or EUS resistance (as discussed in the
ically strain and produce little to no urine. Functionally
section on upper motor neuron disorders) and restoring
obstructed animals may initiate a normal stream that is
detrusor function if necessary.
 quickly attenuated or may posture to urinate for long
 periods of time without straining. Animals with blad-
The diagnostic approach to urinary retention
der atony may slowly initiate a weak stream that can be
augmented with manual abdominal compression. Some
Patient history and physical examination
animals with more chronic atony will not attempt to
The diagnostic approach to urinary retention is designed
void at all. Normal voiding results in an empty or nearly
to (1) rule out neurological and obstructive disorders, (2)
empty urinary bladder. If the bladder is easily palpable
assess the status of the urinary bladder contractile force
following voiding, manual expression should be gently
and urethral outlet resistance, and (3) investigate pos-
attempted to assess contractile responsiveness and out-
sible underlying etiologies. For urinary retention as for
let resistance. Inability to manually express a distended
other micturition disorders, meticulous questioning and
bladder increases the likelihood ofanatomic or functional
thoughtful observations provide the basis for diagnosis.
outlet obstruction.
772  Lower urinary tract disorders
After observing voiding attempts, residual volume is
ative contrast, following the iodine-based positive con-
quantified or estimated. Postvoiding bladder size can be
trast, provides better evaluation of the bladder wall and
estimated by palpation, radiography, or ultrasonogra-
trigone.
phy (Atalan et al. 1999). Urethral catheterization enables
 Ultrasound is an excellent modality for evaluation of
detection of mechanical urethral obstruction and permits
the trigone, proximal urethra, and prostate or prostatic
acute bladder drainage as well as quantification of resid-
 region, but the pubic bone precludes evaluation of the full
ual urine volume. In healthy animals, resistance to the
length of the urethra. Moderate distension of the bladder
 passage of a urethral catheter is encountered at the ure-
with urine or saline aids ultrasonographic assessment,
 thral flexure in male cats and the distal os penis and pelvic
 particularly of the bladder wall.
brim of male dogs. Urethral catheters may easily pass by
 Urethrocystoscopy permits direct visualization and
small uroliths, by some intraluminal soft tissue lesions,
biopsy of urethral obstructions and has proven valu-
 and through regions of extraluminal urethral compres-
able for detection of lesions that do not manifest with
sion; ability to catheterize the urethra does not fully rule
 conventional imaging studies. Advanced imaging of the
 out anatomic obstruction. Normal residual urine volume
spinal cord (e.g-, myelography/epidurography, computed
in dogs is 0.1-3.4 mL/kg (median 0.2 mL/kg) (Atalan
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging) may be nec-
et al. 1999). Serial measurement of residual urine volume
essary to confirm or localize subtle neurological lesions.
 provides objective assessment of response to therapy.
Urodynamic assessment
Clinicopathologic assessment
 Urethral pressure proflometry and cystometrography are
In general, urinary retention is not associated with any
specialized urodynamic assessment methods of urinary
abnormalities on the biochemistry profle or the CBC.
bladder and resting urethral function. The availability of
The urinalysis may show a variety of changes either asso-
these procedures is limited to a handful of university and
ciated with the underlying disease (e.g-, neoplastic tran-
specialty hospitals, and their sensitivity for diagnosing
sitional cells in a dog with obstructive trigonal transi-
dynamic disorders (e.g-, detrusor-urethral dyssynergia)
tional cell carcinoma) or consequent to the fact of urinary
is limited in small animals. Fortunately, functional stud-
retention itself (e.g-, discoloration, increased number of
ies are rarely required for diagnosis and management
sloughed epithelial cells). Bacterial urinary tract infection
of urinary retention. The principles and applications of
occurs commonly in dogs and cats with urinary reten-
tion, since complete voiding is an important host defense
discussed in Chapter 22.
against bladder colonization. The postrenal azotemia and
 hyperkalemia frequently seen with mechanical urethral
Management of urinary retention
and ureteral obstruction are not generally seen with uri-
nary retention.
Bladder management
Regardless of the cause or extent of detrusor hypofunc-
Imaging
tion, preventing bladder overdistension and preventing
The possibility of mechanical urethral obstruction must
urinary retention are critical to patient management.
be evaluated during the initial assessment of any animal
 Bladder overdistension interferes with functional detru-
with urinary retention; this is chiefly performed through
sor recovery (Kato et al. 1990; Bross et al. 1999), and
urethral catheterization and imaging. Plain radiographs
urinary retention predisposes to bacterial UTl. In cats
will rule out most obstructive stone disease when the 
 and in female dogs, maintenance of a soft indwelling uri-
uroliths are radio-opaque (e.g-, calcium oxalate, struvite).
 nary catheter attached to a closed collection system is
Plain radiographs should also be scrutinized for the pres-
 strongly recommended if the bladder has been overdis-
ence of soft-tissue masses (e.g-, enlarged prostate), which
 tended and/or detrusor injury is suspected (e.g, with
could contribute to mechanical obstruction, and spinal
 pets with acute mechanical urethral obstruction). For
changes (e.g-, intervertebral disk disease, bony neoplasia),
 male dogs, clean, intermittent urethral catheterization (q
which could signal or explain a neurogenic component
4-8 hours as needed to keep the bladder from becoming
 to the urinary retention.
large) is a straightforward and preferred method of blad-
Retrograde cystourethrography using iodine-based
 der care, since it carries a lower risk of inducing ascend-
contrast will help demonstrate radiolucent stones as well
 ing UTI than does an indwelling urinary catheter. Man-
as small stones near the os penis. Filling defects in the
ual bladder expression rarely results in complete bladder
-u yo susd  sns aeu e  
emptying, may traumatize the bladder wall (especially
cent stones or of intraluminal masses. Use of air as neg-
in pets with increased outlet resistance), and may cause
Micturition disorders   773
retrograde reflux of urine into the renal pelvis, resulting in
used in humans for the treatment of detrusor atony, and
mechanical upper urinary tract damage and/or ascending
 cisapride has been recommended for this use in dogs;
pyelonephritis. For cats and female dogs, manual expres-
though yet unproven, they may theoretically be effective
 sion may be necessary for chronic bladder management
 in augmenting response to bethanechol in unresponsive
since repeated catheterization is clinically impracticaland
patients (Coates 2004).
not feasible for owners; use of smooth and/or skeletal
muscle relaxants to decrease outlet resistance is particu-
larly important in these pets to minimize adverse effects
Management of inappropriate outlet
of manual expression.
resistance
Urinary tract infection ( UTl) can be both a predispos-
ing factor to (less commonly) and a sequela of ( very com-
Anatomic obstructions and underlying neurologic
monly) urinary retention. Urine obtained via cystocente-
lesions must be corrected directly when possible. For
sis should be submitted for bacterial culture and sensitiv-
 neurogenic and functional disorders, however, outlet
ity and persistent UTI should be treated with an appro-
 resistance can be reduced by pharmacologic therapy to
 priate antimicrobial, preferably after catheterization is
enhance voiding. Nonselective α and selective α, adren-
no longer required. Treatment with systemic antibiotics
 ergic antagonists block sympathetic receptors in the α-
 concomitant with indwelling urinary catheterization can 
innervated urinary smooth muscle fibers and result in
predispose to resistant bacterial infection. Simple bac-
IUS and bladder neck relaxation, with a resultant decrease
terial cystitis can be treated following the initial phase
in outlet resistance ( Poirier 1988; Hashimoto et al. 1992;
of management and preferably after normal voiding
Brune 1996; Steers 1996). Veterinarians have tradition-
resumes. Immediate antimicrobial therapy is indicated in
ally used phenoxybenzamine, a nonselective, irreversible,
the face of clinical or clinicopathological evidence of sys-
or slowly reversible α-antagonist, to decrease outlet resis-
temic bacterial infection (fever, elevated white blood cell
tance in small animals (Poirier 1988; Breslin 1993; Steers
count, malaise, etc.). Periodic reculture of cystocentesis-
1996), but prazosin, an α-selective antagonist, is a
 sampled urine is warranted as long as abnormal voiding
potent, effective, and economical alternative to phenoxy-
patterns persist.
benzamine and has rendered its use obsolete (Lepor 1990;
Breslin 1993; Fischer 2003).
 Because of its α selectivity, use of prazosin in small
Management of detrusor hypofunction
animals may carry a lower incidence of side effects than
Bethanechol is a parasympathomimetic, direct choliner-
use of phenoxybenzamine, as has been demonstrated in
gic drug that theoretically stimulates or augments smooth
humans ( Jonler et al. 1994). The most common side effect
muscle contraction. In cases of detrusor hypofunction,
of prazosin use in humans is postural hypotension, par-
bethanechol has traditionally been used to help restore
ticularly during initial dosing (Carruthers 1994; Jonler
and enhance detrusor contraction, though for this drug
et al 1994); intravenous prazosin dropped systolic and
to be effective the detrusor and pelvic nerves must be
 mean blood pressures to a greater degree than phenoxy-
at least partially intact (Steers 1996). The oral form of
bethanechol is relatively poorly absorbed, and the sub-
oral prazosin doses that cause urethral relaxation often
cutaneous form should be used quite cautiously and
 causes measurable blood pressure decreases in dogs and
in small doses (Lees and Moreau 1984). Given subcu-
cats, clinical signs of hypotension are rare. Ideally, blood
taneously bethanechol can, at therapeutic doses, cause
vomiting, salivation, and diarrhea, and if overdosed can
zosin; the drug should be avoided in critically ill patients
cause cholinergic crisis resulting in cardiovascular col-
until volume depletion and hypotension are corrected.
lapse, bronchoconstriction, and death (Ling 1995). The
 Prazosin capsules are available in 1, 2, and 5 mg sizes,
parenteral form should therefore be used extremely cau-
and dogs can receive 1 mg/15 kg body weight PO q 8-12
tiously (if at all, for urinary applications) and at the lowest
hours (Fischer and Lane 2007). Cats can receive 0.25-0.5
effective dose. Bethanechol should never be given intra-
mg per cat q 8-12 hours, so capsules must be divided
muscularly or intravenously. In cases of adverse reac-
(Lane 2000). If hypotension or depression occurs, the
tion, atropine is antidotal. Neither oral nor subcuta-
 dose should be reduced or the administration frequency
neous bethanechol should be used alone in the face of
decreased. Administration of half the target prazosin dose
increased outlet resistance; smooth and/or skeletal mus-
for the first 24-48 hours of therapy may reduce the chance
dle relaxant therapy should be started first so the blad-
 of a postural hypotensive episode, though this type of
der is not contracting against a closed door, of sorts.
adverse effect occurs very infrequently in euvolemic ani-
Both cisapride and beta-blocking medications have been
mals (Carruthers 1994; Jonler et al. 1994; Steers 1996).
774 Lower urinary tract disorders
Tamsulosin is a newer antagonist that exhibits strong
in this species. Empirically, alprazolam, another benzodi-
selectivity for the α receptors in the urinary tract (αA)
azepine, appears to cause urethral relaxation in cats and
over the vascular α receptors (αiB). This selectivity
also has anxiolytic/tranquilizing effects (Overall 1997),
results in the capacity for greater efficacy as a ure-
 offering a promising alternative to diazepam when an
thral smooth muscle relaxant with minimized risk of
 oral benzodiazepine is needed for a feline patient. Metho-
m s jo   e s e 
carbamol, a centrally acting muscle relaxant, also causes 
used in dogs (Ohtake et al. 2006; Sato et al. 2007). The
generalized muscle relaxation through unknown mech-
metabolism of tamsulosin is not precisely and consis-
anisms (possibly via generalized sedative effect) and is
tently described, and some sources suggest that glu-
 most often used for pets with metaldehyde poisoning or
curonidation may be involved; because of this, tamsulosin
intervertebral disk disease. Though methocarbamol has
cannot currently be recommended for use in cats. Silo-
not been specifically investigated for use in decreasing
dosin is another commercially available α-antagonist 
urethral outlet resistance, if other agents are not readily
that shows even greater α1A receptor selectivity in canine
available or are contraindicated in a particular patient,
tissues than does tamsulosin and may prove to be a use-
it may be a reasonable choice. All skeletal muscle relax-
ful therapy, but veterinary clinical data and experience
ants mentioned here can cause sedation, which may be
with silodosin are lacking at this point ( Tatemichi et al.
profound at higher doses.
2006). In experimental studies in dogs, doses of 1-100
 Duration of urethral relaxant therapy depends in part
mcg/kg IV and PO have been used to evaluate tamsu-
 on the cause of increased outlet resistance. For example,
losin's effect on urethral pressure and arterial blood pres-
a cat with urethrospasm and functional obstruction fol-
sure (Sudoh et al. 1996; Witte e al. 2002; Ohtake et al.
lowing the relief of an anatomical obstruction may only
2006). Oral tamsulosin doses of 1-10 mcg/kg produced
require a few days of urethral relaxants; the drug can
dose-dependent blockade of phenylephrine-induced ure-
then be gradually tapered and discontinued. Conversely,
thral pressure increase in a clinically effective range ( Witte
a dog with idiopathic functional urethral obstruction
et al. 2002); this author (JRF) has used 10 mcg/kg PO q
may well require lifelong therapy to maintain adequate
day in dogs with presumptive urethral-sphincter dyssyn-
voiding function. For many pets with increased outlet
ergia with good clinical effect and without adverse effects.
resistance due to spinal cord injury, urethral relaxants can
 Some clinicians use smooth muscle antispasmodic agents
be tapered and eventually discontinued as the pet's neu-
(e.g-) propantheline, oxybutynin) in a similar fashion to
rologic function returns. Administration is usually con-
relax both bladder and urethra, but the urethral effects
tinued for several days after effective voiding is observed.
may be quite weak.
 Skeletal muscle fibers (EUS) are arranged in specific
portions of the urethra. Some dogs, and especially cats,
with dysfunctional voiding will require additional relax-
Summary
ation of this striated muscle in order to sufficiently
relax the urethral outlet. We commonly use diazepam
The clinical sign of urinary incontinence indicates
for this purpose (Mawby 1990), though acepromazine,
 derangement of the normal physical and/or physiolog-
dantrolene, and aminopropazine can also serve as skele-
ical parameters governing the storage phase of micturi-
tal muscle relaxants (Moreau and Lappin 1989; Marks
tion; animals leak urine due to inappropriately decreased
1993; Streater-Knowlen et al. 1995; Steers 1996). Baclofen
outlet closure pressure, a noncompliant or overactive
may be considered in dogs only. Acepromazine effec-
bladder, and/or anatomic abnormality that undermines
tively reduces smooth and striated muscle tone after sin-
normal continence mechanisms. The clinical sign of
gle doses; however, continued dosing may lead to sig-
urinary retention indicates derangement of the normal
nificant sedation or hypotension. Dantrolene, baclofen,
 physical and/or physiological parameters governing the
and aminopropazine are not commonly used in veteri-
voiding phase of micturition; animals retain urine due
 nary medicine but are mentioned here for complete-
to inappropriately increased outlet pressure, inappro-
 ness. Skeletal muscle relaxants may be a more impor-
 priately decreased detrusor contraction during voiding.
tant component of urethral relaxant therapy for cats
and/or mechanical obstruction to urine outflow. Opti-
than for dogs because of the higher relative propor-
mal management hinges on identification of the abnor-
tion of skeletal muscle in the feline urethra compared
 mal neurological and/or muscular activity, thus permit-
to the canine urethra (Cullen 1983). Oral diazepam
ting targeted therapies. Prognosis depends on etiology
administration can cause idiosyncratic hepatic necro-
 severity, and duration of the derangement, but urinary
sis in cats; oral administration of diazepam, particularly
incontinence and urinary retention can be resolved or
long-term administration, should be done with caution
adequately treated in many veterinary patients.
Micturition disorders   775
References
Cullen, W.C, T.F. Fletcher, et al. (1983). Morphometry of the female
feline urethra. I Urol 129: 190.
Abdel-Azim, M., M. Sullivan, et al. ( 1991). Disorders of bladder func-
de Groat, W.C. (2008). Neuroanatomy and neurophysiology: inner-
tion in spinal cord disease. Neur Clin 9: 727.
vation of the lower urinary tract. In: Female Urology, edited by R.
Adin, C.A., J.P. Farese, et al. (2004). Urodynamic effects of a percu-
Shlomo and R. Larissa. Philadelphia: Saunders.
taneously controlled static hydraulic urethral sphincter in canine
Drake, M.J, P.M. Nixon, et al. (1998 Jul). Drug-induced bladder and
cadavers. Arm I Vet Res 65: 283-288.
urinary disorders. Incidence, prevention and management. Drug
Angioletti, A.,I. DeFrancesco, et al. (2004). Urinary incontinence after
Saf 19( 1): 45-55.
 spaying in thebitch: incidence and oestrogen-therapy. Vet Res Comm
Espineira, M.M.D.,
，FW. Viehoff, et al. (1998). Idiopathic
28: 153-155.
detrusor-urethral dyssynergia in dogs: a retrospective analysis of
Arnold, S. ( 1992). Relationship of incontinence to neutering. In: Cur-
22 cases. J Small Anim Pract 39: 264-270.
rent Veterinary Therapy XI: Small Animal Practice, edited by R.W.
Ferguson, D.R., 1. Kennedy, et al. (1997). ATP is released from rabbit
Kirk. Phildelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders, pp. 875-877.
urinary bladder cells by hydrostatic pressure changes—a possible
Arnold, S., P. Arnold, et al. (1989). Incontinentia urinae bei der kas-
sensory mechanism? I Physiol 505: 503-511.
trierten Huendin: Haeufigkeit und Rassedisposition. Schweiz Arch
Fischer, JR. and 1.F Lane (2003). Medical treatment of voiding dys-
Tierheilkd 131: 259-263.
function in dogs and cats. Vet Med 98( 1): 67-73.
Arnold, S., M. Hubler, et al. ( 1996). Treatment of urinary incontinence
Fischer, LR., I.F. Lane, et al. (2003). Urethral pressure profle and
in bitches by endoscopic injection of glutaraldehyde cross-linked
hemodynamic effects of phenoxybenzamine and prazosin in non-
collagen. I Small Arim Pract 37: 163-168.
sedated male beagle dogs. Car I Vet Res 67: 30-38.
Atalan, G., FJ. Barr, et al. (1999). Frequency of urination and ultra-
Fischer, IR. and 1.F Lane (2007). Incontinence and urinary retention.
sonographic estimation of residual urine in normal and dysuric
In: BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology,
dogs. Res Vet Sci 68: 295-299.
edited by J. Elliott and G. Grauer, 2nd edition. p. 26-40.
Bacon, N.J., O. Oni, et al. (2002). Treatment of urethral sphincter
Fowler, C.J., D. Griffiths, et al. (2008). The neural control of micturi-
tion. Nat Rev Neurosci 9: 453-466.
formulation of phenylpropanolamine hydrochloride. Vet Rec 151:
Gregory, S.P and P.E. Holt ( 1994). The immediate effect of colposus-
373.
-se u sd ansd en psss pue su uo usd
Barth, A., I.M. Reichler, et al. (2005). Evaluation of long-term effects
thetized incontinent bitches. Vet Surg 23: 330.
of endoscopic injection of collagen into the urethral submucosa for
Hamaide, A.J., J.G. Grand, et al. (2006). Urodynamic and morphologic
treatment of urethral sphincter incompetence in female dogs: 40
changes in the lower portion of the urogenital tract after administra-
cases (1993-2000). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226, 73.
tion of estriol alone and in combination with phenylpropanolamine
Breslin, D., D.W. Fields, et al. (1993). Medical management of benign 
in sexually intact and spayed female dogs. Arm I Vet Res 67:
prostatic hyperplasia: a canine model comparing the in vivo efficacy
901-908.
of αj adrenergic antagonists in the prostate. I Urol 149: 395.
Hammel, S.P, D.E. Bjorling (2002). Results of vulvoplasty for treat-
Bross, S., S. Schumacher, et al. ( 1999). Effects of acute urinary bladder
ment of recessed vulva in dogs. JArm Arnirm Hosp Assoc 38: 79-83.
 overdistension on bladder response during sacral neurostimulation.
Hashimoto, S., S. Kigashi, et al. ( 1992). Neurogenic responses of ure-
EurUrol36,354-359.
thra isolated from the dog. Eur I Pharmacol 213(1l): 117.
Brune, M.E., S.P. Katwala, et al. (1996). Effects of selective and non-
Hoeijmakers, M., B. Janszen, et al. (2003). Pharmacokinetics of oestriol
selective α }-adrenoreceptors on intraurethral and arterial pressures
after repeated oral administration to dogs. Res Vet Sci 75: 55-59.
in intact conscious dogs. Pharmacology 53: 356.
Holt, P.E. ( 1984). Efficacy of emepronium bromide in the treatment
Burgherr, T., I. Reichler, et al. (2007). Effcacy, tolerance and accept-
 of physiological incontinence in the bitch. Vet Rec 114: 355f.
ability of Incontex in spayed bitches with urinary incontinence [ Ger-
Holt, P.E. ( 1985a). Importance of urethral length, bladder neck posi-
man]. Schweiz Arch Tierheikd 149: 307-313.
tion and vestibulovaginal stenosis in sphincter mechanism incom-
Byron, J.B., D.J. Chew, et al. (2005). Transurethral collagen implanta-
 petence in the incontinent bitch. Res Vet Sci 39: 364-372.
tion for treatment of canine urinary incontinence. ACVIM Forum,
Holt, P.E. (1985b). Urinary incontinence in the bitch due to sphincter
Abstract 120.
-  s   ad d 
Byron, J.K., P.A. March, et al. (2007). Effect of phenylpropanolamine
spective analysis of sixty cases. J Small Armim Pract 26: 181-190.
and pseudoephedrine on the urethral pressure profile and conti-
Holt, P.E. (1990). Long-term evaluation of colposuspension in the
nence scores of incontinent female dogs. I Vet Irtern Med 21: 47-53.
treatment of urinary incontinence due to incompetence of the ure-
Carofiglio, F., A.J. Hamaide, et al. (2006). Evaluation of the urody-
thral sphincter mechanism in the bitch. Vet Rec 127: 537-542.
namic and hemodynamic effects of orally administered phenyl-
Holt, P.E. and S.P. Gregory ( 1991). Can urethral pressure profilometry
propanolamine and ephedrine in female dogs. Arm I Vet Res 67:
predict the response to colposuspension in the bitch. Vet Rec 128:
723-730.
281-282.
Carruthers, S.G. (1994). Adverse effects of al-adrenergic blocking
Holt, P.E., R.J. Coe, et al. (2005). Prostatopexy as a treatment for
drugs. Drug Safety 11( 1): 12-20.
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence in rmale dogs. I Ssmall
Coates, J. (2004). Neurogenic micturition disorders. ACVIM Forum,
Anim Pract 46: 567-570.
 Minneapolis.
Hosgood, G. Urethral disease and obstructive uropathy. In: Dis-
Coit, V.A., I.F Gibson, et al. (2008). Neutering affects urinary bladder
ease Mechanisms in Small Animal Surgery, edited by M.J. Bojrab.
function by different mechanisms in male and female dogs. Eur I
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 528 p.
Pharmacol 14: 153-158.
Howe, L.M., M.R. Slater, et al. (2001). Long-term outcome ofgonadec-
Crawford, I.T. and W.M. Adams (2002). Influence of vestibulobaginal
tomy performed at an early age or traditional age in dogs. IArm Vet
stenosis, pelvicbladder, and recessedvulva on response to treatment
Med Assoc 218: 217.
for clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease in dogs: 38 cases
Jonler, M., M. Riehmann, et al. ( 1994). Benign prostatic hyperplasia.
(1990-1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 221: 995-999.
Current pharmacologic treatment. Drugs47(1): 66-81.
776
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Jost, W.J. and P. Marsalek (2005). Duloxetine in the treatment of stress 
Nendick, P.A. and W.T. Clark (1987). Medical therapy of urinary
urinary incontinence. Ther Clin Risk Mgmt 1: 259-264.
incontinence in ovariectomized bitches: a comparison of the effec-
Karl, K.B. and M.A. Katofiase (1995). Effects of duloxetine, a com-
tiveness of diethylstilbestrol and pseudoephedrine. Aus Vet I 64:
bined serotonin and norepinephrinae reuptake inhibitor, on central
117-118.
neural control of lower urinary tract function in the chloralose-
Nickel, R.F, M.V. Vink-Noteboom, et al. (1999). Clinical and radio-
anesthetized female cat. I Pharmacol Exp Ther 274: 1014-1024.
Kato, K., A.J. Wein, et al. (1990). Short-term functional effects of
fermale dogs with refractory urinary incontinence. Vet Rec 145:
bladder outlet obstruction in the cat. I Urol 143(5): 1020- 1025.
11-15.
Kobayashi, S., M. Endou, et al. (2003). The sympathomimetic actions 
Norton, P.A., N.R. Zinner, et al. (2002). Duloxetine versus placebo in
of l-ephedrine and d-pseudoephedrine: direct receptor activation
the treatment of stress urinary incontinence. Am J Obstet Gyrecol
187: 40-48.
 Lane, I.E. (2000a). Diagnosis and management of urinary retention.
O'Brien, D.P. ( 1990). Disorders of the urogenital system. Serm Vet Med
Vet Clin N Am Small Anim Pract 30: 25-57.
Surg (Small Anim) 5: 57-66.
Lane, I.F. (200ob). Urinary obstruction and functional urinary reten-
Oelke, M., J.P. Roovers, et al. (2006 May). Safety and tolerability
tion.In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine:Diseases ofthe Dog
 of duloxetine in women with stress urinary incontinence. BJOG
and Cat, edited by S. Ettinger and E. Feldman, Vol. 1. Philadelphia:
113(Suppl 1): 22-26.
WB Saunders, pp. 93-96.
Ohtake, A., S. Sato, et al. (2006). Effects of tamsulosin on resting
Lane, I.F (2000c). Use of anticholinergic agents in lower urinary tract
urethral pressure and arterial blood pressure in anaesthetized female
disease. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII, edited by J.D.
dogs. I Pharm Pharmacol58(3): 345-350.
Bonagura. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, pp. 899-902.
Oliver, JE., Lorenz, M.D.et al. (1997). Disorders of micturition. In:
Lane, I.F. (2003). Treating urinary incontinence. Vet Med 98( 1): 58f.
Handbook of Veterinary Neurology, edited by I. Oliver, 3rd edition.
Lane, I.F, M.R. Lappin, et al. (1995). Evaluation of preoperative uro-
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 73 p.
dynamic measurements in nine dogs with ectopic ureters. J Arm Vet
Overall, K.L. (1997). Clinical Behavioral Medicine for Small Animals.
Med Assoc 206, 1348-1357.
St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, Inc., 239 p.
Lane, I.F, J.R. Fischer, et al. (200o). Functional urethral obstruction
Poirier, M., I.P. Riffaud, et al. ( 1988). Effects of five alpha-blockers on
in 3 dogs: clinical and urethral pressure profile findings. I Vet Inter
 the hypogastric nerve stimulation of the canine lower urinary tract.
Med 14( 1), 43-49.
I Urol140: 165.
Lappin, M.R. and J.A. Barsanti ( 1987). Urinary incontinence secondary
Ponglowhapan, S., D.B. Church, et al. (2008). Differences in the pro-
to idiopathic detrusor instability: cystormetrographic diagnosis and
 portion of collagen and muscle in the canine lower urinarytractwith
pharmacologic managerment in two dogs and a cat. I Arm Vet Med
regard to gonadal status and gender. Theriogenology 70: 1516-1524.
Assoc 191, 1439f.
 Rawlings, C., JA. Barsanti, et al. (200l). Evaluation of colposuspension 
Lees, G.E. and P.M. Moreau (1984). Management of hypotonic and
for treatment of incontinence in spayed female dogs. I Am Vet Med
atonic bladders in cats. Vet Clin North Am (Small Anim Pract) 14,
Assoc 219, 770-775.
64 1.
Reichler, I.M, M. Hubler, et al. (2003). The effect of GnRH analogs
Lepor, H. ( 1990). Role of alpha adrenergic blockers in the treatment
on urinary incontinence after ablation of the ovaries in dogs. The-
of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate 3(Suppl): 66.
riogenology 60: 1207-1216.
Ling, G.V. (1995). Lower Urinary Tract Diseases of Gogs and Cats:
Reichler, I.M., E. Pfeiffer, et al. (2004). Changes in plasma
Diagnosis, Medical Management, Prevention. St. Louis: Mosby-Year
 gonadotropin concentrations and urethral closure pressure in the
Book, Inc.
bitch during the 12 months following ovariectomy. Theriogenology
Mandigers, P.J.J. and T. Nell (2001). Treatment ofbitches with acquired
62: 1391-1402.
urinary incontinence with oestriol. Vet Rec 149: 765-767.
Reichler, I.M., E. Hung, et al. (2005). FSH and LH plasma levels in
Mandigers, P.J.J., T. Senders, et al. (2006). Morbidity and mortality in
bitches with differences in risk for urinary incontinence. Theri-
928 dobermanns born in the Netherlands between 1993 and 1999.
ogenology 63:2164.
Vet Rec 158: 226-229.
Reichler, I.M., W. Jochle, et al. (2006). Effect of a long acting GnRH
Marchevsky, A.M., G.A. Edwards, et al. (1999). Colposuspension in
analogue or placebo on plasma LH/FSH, urethral pressure profiles
60 bitches with incompetence of the urethral sphincter mechanism.
and clinical signs of urinary incontinence due to Sphincter mecha-
Aus Vet Pract 29: 2-7.
nism incompetence in bitches. Theriogenology 66(5): 1227-1236.
Marks, S.L., I.M. Straeter, et al. (1993). The effects of phenoxyben-
Richelson, E. ( 1983 Jan). Antimuscarinic and other receptor-blocking
zamine and acepromazine maleate on urethral pressure profles of
 properties of antidepressants. Mayo Clin Proc 58( 1): 40-46.
anesthetized healthy male cats [abstract]. I Vet Int Med 7: 122.
Richter, K.P. and G.V. Ling (1985). Clinical response and urethral
Massat, B.J., C.R. Gregory, et al. ( 1993). Cystourethropexy to correct 
pressure profile changes after phenylpropanolamine in dogs with
refractory urinary incontinence due to urethral sphincter mecha-
primary sphincter incompetence. IAm Vet Med Assoc 187: 605-611.
nism incompetence: preliminary results in ten bitches. Vet Surg 22,
 Sato, S., A. Ohtake, et al. (2007). Relationship between the functional
260-268.
effect of tamsulosin and its concentration in lower urinary tract
Mawby, D.1., S.M. Meric, et al. ( 1990). Pharmacologic relaxation of the
tissues of dogs. Biol Pharm Bull 30: 8l-486.
urethra in male cats: A study of the effects of phenoxybenzamine,
Schotanus, B.A., J. deGier, et al. (2008). Estrolium treatment in the
diazepam, nifedipine, and xylazine. Carn I Vet Res 55: 28.
bitch: a risk for uterine infection? Reprod Domest Anim 43: 176- 180.
Moreau, P.M. ( 1982). Neurogenic disorders of micturition in the dog
Scott, L., F. Leddy, et al. (2002). Evaluation of phenylpropanolamine
and cat. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet 4: 12.
 in the treatment of urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence in
Moreau, P.M. and M.R. Lappin ( 1989). Pharmacologic management
the bitch. J Small Amim Pract 43, 493-496.
of urinary incontinence. In: Current Veterinary Therapy X: Small
Spain, C.V., L.M. Scarlett, et al. (2004 Feb 1). Long-term risks and
Anirmal Practice, edited by R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
benefits of early-age gonadectomy in dogs. I A Vet Med Assoc
1214 p.
224(3): 380-387.
Micturition disorders  777
Steers, W.D., D.M. Barret, et al. ( 1996). Voiding function and dysfunc-
Van Kerrebroeck, P., P. Abrams, et al. (2004). Duloxetine versus
tion: Diagnosis, classification, management. In: Adult and Pediatric
     i   o
Urology, edited by Gillenwater, 3rd edition. St. Louis: Mosby, 1220 p.
with stress urinary incontinence. B I Obstet Gynaecol 111:
 Stocklin-Gautschi, H.M., I.M. Reichler, et al. (2001). The relationship
249-257.
of urinary incontinence to early spaying in bitches. I Repro Fert 57:
Welle, M.M., I.M. Riechler, et al. (2006). Immunohistochemical local-
233-236.
ization and quantitative assessment of GnRH-, FSH-, And LH-
Streater-Knowlen, I.M., S.L. Marks, et al. (1995). Urethral pressure
receptor mRNA expression in canine skin: a powerful tool to study
response to smooth and skeletal muscle relaxants in anesthetized,
the pathogenesis of side effects after spaying. Histochem Cell Biol
adult male cats with naturally acquired urethral obstruction. Arm J
126: 527-535.
Vet Res 56: 919.
White, R.N. (2001). Urethropexy for the management of urethral
Sudoh, K., H. Tanaka, et al. (l996). Effect of tamsulosin, a novel
 sphincter mechanism incompetence in the bitch. ISmall Amim Pract
alpha l-adrenoceptor antagonist, on urethral pressure profile in
42, 481-486.
anaesthetized dogs. I Auton Pharrmacol 16(3): 147-154.
White, R.A. and C.J. Pomeroy ( 1989). Phenylpropanolamine: an alpha-
Tatemichi, S., Y. Tomiyama, et al. (2006). Uroselectivity in male dogs of
 adrenergic agent for the management of urinary incontinence in the
 Silodosin (KMD-3213): a novel drug for the obstructive component
bitch associated with urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence.
ofbenign prostatic hyperplasia. Neurol Urodynam 25: 792-799.
Vet Rec 125, 478-480.
Thrusfield, M.V. (1985). Association between urinary incontinence
Witte, D.G., M.E. Brune, et al. (2002). Modeling of relationships
and spaying bitches. Vet Rec 116: 695.
between pharmacokinetics and blockade of agonist-induced ele-
Thrusfield, M.V., P.E. Holt, et al. ( 1998 Dec). Acquired urinary incon-
vation of intraurethral pressure and mean arterial pressure in con-
tinence in bitches: its incidence and relationship to neutering prac-
scious dogs treated with alpha( l)-adrenoceptor antagonists. I Phar-
tices. I Small Anim Pract 39(12): 559-566.
macol Exp Ther 300(2): 495-504.
77
Urethral diseases
Joe Bartges
 Urethral disease occurs commonly in dogs and cats, often 
defects, moderate urethral defects can be treated with a
in association with diseases of the urinary bladder. Clin-
two-layer closure, and major defects with excision of the
ical signs of urethral disease are associated with signs of
external genitalia and urethrostomy (Vahlensieck 1973;
lower urinary tract disease (e.g- pollakiuria, stranguria,
Rawlings 1984; Burger et al. 1992; Pavletic 2007; Galanty
periuria, hematuria, etc.) or to obstruction of urine flow.
et al. 2008).
Physical examination should include palpation of the
perineal region and rectal examination as the pelvic ure-
thra is palpable through the rectal wall running dorsal to
Urethrorectal fistula
the pelvic bones. Common diseases affecting the urethra
Urethrorectal fistula occurs because of failure of separa-
 in dogs and cats include urethral obstruction and uri-
tion ofthe fetal cloaca into the anterior urethrovesical seg-
nary incontinence due to urethral sphincter mechanism
ment and posterior rectal segment by the urorectal sep-
incompetency.
tum resulting in a permanent communication between
urethra and rectum. It has also been described as an
acquired disease due to prostatic abscessation in a dog
Hypospadias
(Agut et al. 2006). Clinical signs are related to abnor-
mal micturition occurring typically after weaning. Urine
Hypospadias is a congenital anomaly of the external gen-
is observed to pass from the rectum, and cystitis, per-
italia in which there is fusion failure of the urogenital
ineal dermatitis, hematuria, infection-induced struvite
folds and incomplete development of the penile urethra
(Figure 77.1) (Galanty et al. 2008).
urolithiasis, and diarrhea may occur (Miller 1980). Diag-
nosis is made by direct visualization or contrast studies
Iypes include glandular, penile, scrotal, perineal, and
anal according to site of the urethral opening. It can
verifying the communication. Treatment involves sur-
be classified as mild, moderate, or severe. In severe cases,
gical correction of the congenital defect (Whitney and
Schrader 1988). With acquired urethrorectal fistula, con-
lesions such as underdevelopment or absence of the penis,
servative therapy utilizing an indwelling urinary catheter,
failure of fusion of the scrotum, and failure of the urethra
 antibiotics, and omentalization of the prostatic abscess
to close in the perinealarea may be seen. Other abnormal-
has been described (Agut et al. 2006).
ities associated with hypospadias include retained testi-
cles, kidney agenesis, bone or anorectal defects, umbil-
ical hernia, hydrocephalus, and urinary incontinence
Urethritis
and ascending urinary tract infections (McFarland and
Deniz 1961; Ader and Hobson 1978; Hayes and Wilson
Urethritis refers to inflammation of the urethra. Inflam-
1986). Chromosome analysis can be used to differentiate
mation may be primary in nature or secondary to other
hypospadias from true hermaphroditism (Cassata et al.
diseases, including trauma, urolithiasis (Figure 77.2), or
2008). No corrective surgery is indicated with minimal
neoplasia (Figure 77.3) (Polzin and Jeraj 1980; Olausson
et al. 2005).
Oftentimes, urethritis occurs with cystitis usually bac-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
terial in dogs or idiopathic in cats. Inflammation occurs
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
due to breakdown of urothelial lining and may result in
778
Urethral diseases 779
Figure 77.3 Cystoscopic view of urethral transitional cell carci-
 noma (arrow) in a 10-year-old, spayed female, mixed breed dog.
associated with chronic bacterial infection (Moroff et al.
 1991). Clinical signs are consistent with lower urinary
tract disease. Diagnosis is made by rectal palpation of
the urethra, by contrast urethrography (Figure 77.4) or
cystoscopy (Figure 77.5).
 Biopsy of the urethra confirms the inflammatory
Figure 77.1 Hypospadias (large arrow) in a 5-month-old, intact 
nature. Treatment for urethritis includes antimicro-
male, English bulldog. Small arrows identify testicles.
bial therapy for the bacterial infection, and, possibly,
anti-inflammatory therapy if granulomatous urethritis
ulceration and erosion. Proliferative urethritis may occur
is present. Anti-inflammatory therapy with prednisone
secondary to chronic bacterial infection or immune-
(1 mg/kg PO q 24 hours), cyclophosphamide (2.2 mg/kg
 mediated disease. Granulomatous (lymphoplasmacytic)
         b o
urethritis is characterized by epithelial hyperplasia and
infltration with lymphocytes and plasma cells and is
Figure 77.4 Lateral abdominal contrast vaginourethrocystogra-
Figure 77.2 Lateral survey abdominal radiograph of a 4-year-
phy in a 4-year-old, spayed female, Chow-cross with granulo-
old, intact male, English bulldog with urethral obstruction due to 
matous (lymphoplasmacytic) urethritis. V, vagina: U, urethra: B,
a cystine urolith (arrow); urocystoliths are also present.
bladder.
780  Lower urinary tract disorders
neoplasia may occur (Chapter 79). Transitional cell
carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma occur most
commonly, but other tumor types have been described
(Tarvin et al. 1978; Szymanski et al. 1984; Batamuzi and
Kristensen 1996; Caney et al. 1998; Davis and Holt 2003;
Liptak et al. 2004; Mirkovic et al. 2004; Olausson et al.
2005; Takagi et al. 2005; Tucker and Smith 2008). Diagn0-
sis is made by rectal palpation of the urethra, by contrast
urethrography, or cystoscopy. Treatment involves surgical
removal or laser ablation, if possible, and/or chemother-
apy (Chapter 79); insertion of a urethral stent to relieve
obstruction may also be done (Chapter 32) (Latal et al.
Urethral trauma
Figure 77.5 Cystoscopic view of granulomatous (lymphoplasma-
 Urethral trauma may occur from blunt or penetrating
cytic) urethritis (arrow) in a 6-year-old, spayed female, Irish setter
injuries, especially from traumatic urinary catheteriza-
secondary to chronic bacterial cystitis due to Escherichia coli.
tion (Figure 77.6) (Jones et al. 1981; Bjorling 1984; Hay
and Rosin 1997; Anderson et al. 2006).
(0.3 mg/kg PO q 24 hours) may be tried. For prolifera-
Blunt trauma due to vehicular trauma may cause ure-
tive urethritis, anti-inflammatory therapy as described or
thral trauma due to pubic or os penis fractures. latrogenic
immunosuppressive therapy (azathioprine at 2 mg/kg PO
q 24-48 hours or prednisone at 2 mg/kg PO q 24 hours)
trauma may occur with urinary catheterization especially
when using a stiff polypropylene catheter. Clinical signs
with concurrent antimicrobial therapy is recommended.
 relate to the lower urinary tract. Additionally, urine may
If urethral obstruction is present, a cystostomy catheter
collect subcutaneously or intra-abdominally. Hematuria
(Chapter 32) may be required until regression of inflam-
may be the only clinical sign. Diagnosis is made by con-
matory infltration and urethral obstruction (Salinardi
 trast urethrography or cystoscopy. Treatment includes
et al. 2003).
placement of an indwelling urinary catheter (Meige et al.
2008) and surgical correction or urinary diversion (Hay
Urethral prolapse
and Rosin 1997; Boothe 2000; Anderson et al. 2006).
 Urethral prolapse occurs when the distal urethra pro-
Urethrostomy may be necessary if the urethra is not sal-
trudes through the urethral orifice of the penis. It appears
vageable.
as a red or purple mass at the tip of the penis and occurs
  s q s   
in other breeds (Kirsch et al. 2002; Ragni 2007). Clin-
ical signs may not be present, or the dog may lick at
the prepuce, have stranguria, or have bleeding from the
prepuce. Diagnosis of urethral prolapse is made by visu-
alization; it must be differentiated from neoplasia. If the
prolapse is not causing problems, then treatment may not
 manually reduce the prolapsed tissue; applying hyper-
tonic saline may facilitate the attempt. A loose purse-
string suture is then placed; however, recurrences are
treatment of choice (Chapter 83) (Kirsch et al. 2002).
Neoplasia
Figure 77.6 Lateral retrograde contrast urethrocystogram of a
3-year-old, castrated male, domestic shorthaired cat with urethral
Primary neoplasia of the urethra is uncommon in dogs
trauma and leakage of contrast (arrow) from catheterization to
and cats; however, extension of bladder or prostatic
relieve a urethral obstruction.
Urethral diseases  781
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetency
(urinary incontinence)
 Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetency is the most
common cause of urinary incontinence in dogs occurring
 primarily in spayed female dogs (Chapters 76). Dogs typ-
ically present several years after ovariohysterectomy and
clinical signs include unconsciously leaving a puddle of
urine where the dog lays. While awake, urination is nor-
 mal and incontinence is not present. Bacterial urinary
tract infection occurs commonly with urinary inconti-
nence and is not associated typically with active urine
sediment, although it is associated with worsening of uri-
nary incontinence. Medical treatment involves adminis-
tration of estrogenic or alpha-agonist agents alone or in
 combination. In dogs that are medically unresponsive,
surgical techniques and urethral bulking agents are avail-
able (Chapter 38 and 83).
Urethral obstruction
 Obstructive uropathy refers to abnormalities in structure
d  p n   g  
of normal flow of urine, and the resulting local and sys-
temic effects of that impairment (Klahr and Harris 1992;
Bartges et al. 1996). Impairment of flow through the
urethra either due to physical obstruction (Figures 77.2,
77.8-77.10) or due to detrusor or urethral dysfunction
Figure 77.7 Urethral stricture at site of previous perineal ure-
results in characteristic clinical signs.
throstomy in a 3-year-old, castrated male, domestic shorthaired
Although there are many causes of urethral obstruc-
cat.
tion, urolithiasis is the most common cause in dogs
and crystalline-matrix urethral plugs, and uroliths are
the most common in cats and will be addressed in this
chapter.
Urethral stricture
Urethral stricture usually occurs secondary to ure-
thral trauma, especially urinary catheterization in cats
(Figure 77.6) (Corgozinho et al. 2007; Meige et al. 2008),
or surgery (Figure 77.7) (Osborne et al. 1996; Phillips
and Holt 2006).
Clinically, dogs and cats with urethral strictures have
hematuria and stranguria or are unable to urinate. There
is often ahistory ofa traumatic or surgicalevent, although
urethral stricture may occur secondary to a neoplastic
process such as a transitional cell carcinoma. Diagno-
sis is made by visualization if the stricture is at the site
of a previous urethrostomy procedure, by contrast ure-
s s s o no 
correction, dilation of the strictured area, or insertion of
Figure 77.8 Lateral survey abdominal radiograph of a 7-year-old,
a urethral stent (Latal et al. 1994; Smeak 2000; Bennett
castrated male, domestic shorthaired cat with urethral obstruction
et al. 2005; Phillips and Holt 2006; Corg0zinho et al. 2007;
due to calcium oxalate uroliths. B, urinary bladder; RK, right kidney:
Wood et al. 2007).
LK, left kidney.
782
 Lower urinary tract disorders
and halitosis may be present. The tip of the penis may
be dark purple and swollen. One or more uroliths may
be palpated in the urethra. Rectal examination should be
Bladde
performed, when possible, to rule out a pelvic ure-
thral urolith or obstruction from neoplasia or prostatic
disease.
Blood samples for complete blood cell counts and
serum biochemical analysis and a urine sample for anal-
ysis and possible culture should be collected. Cystocen-
tesis may be performed successfully even with urethral
obstruction if care is taken to insert the hypodermic nee-
dle gently and angling the tip towards the trigone while
stabilizing the urinary bladder. When the patient is sta-
Figure 77.9 Abdominal ultrasound image of cat described in Fig-
ble, survey abdominal radiography should be performed.
ure 77.8. The bladder is distended and the wall appears thickened.
Additional imaging such as ultrasonography, contrast
The proximal urethra is dilated.
urethrocystography, or urethrocystoscopy may be con-
sidered.
Clinical signs
Signs of obstructive uropathy vary considerably depend-
Clinical consequences
ing on degree of urine outflow impairment, duration of
Clinical consequences of urethral obstruction are often,
disease, and presence of secondary bacterial infection.
but not always, associated with signs of uremia. Partial
Patients with urethral obstruction may or may not have
or early outflow obstruction may not impair renal func-
preceding signs of lower urinary disease. They may only
 tion sufficiently to cause uremia; however, clinical signs
exhibit clinical signs localized to the lower urinary tract,
such as dysuria, hematuria, pollakiuria, inability to pass
thral obstruction. As functional renal mass decreases or as
urine, or pain, or they may exhibit polysystemic signs
intravesical, ureteral, and renal pressure increases, urine
of uremia, such as vomiting, anorexia, and depression.
concentrating ability is lost. Increased tubular volume
Owners may mistake animals with urethral obstruction
 of urine and increased tubular pressure occur, resulting
 as being constipated or having abdominal or back pain.
in azotemia and uremia. Early detection and removal
Physical examination may reveal a physiologically
of obstruction results in prompt disappearance of signs
normal-appearing animal or they may be depressed, in
of uremia, although renal abnormalities may persist for
shock, or unconscious. A large painful bladder may be
a longer time. Also, urethral obstruction may lead to
palpable. Bradycardia, hypothermia, pale mucous mem-
detrusor atony or urethral injury. Urethral and bladder
branes with prolonged capillary refill time, hyperpnoea,
mucosal damage, urinary tract infection, and urethral or
bladder rupture may also occur.
Treatment
Emergency stabilization
Priorities of treating a patient with urethral obstruction
depend on degree of obstruction and systemic responses
to the obstruction. If the animal is extremely depressed,
 Oxygen should be administered, intravenous catheter
placed, and blood and urine samples obtained. Fluid ther-
isrd uo pseq ieu m pnu aa us ade
status of the patient. Estimate degree of dehydration and
administer an isotonic replacement electrolyte solution
over 6-12 hours if minimally dehydrated, over 4 hours
Figure 77.10 lateral survey abdominal radiograph of a 9-year-
if moderately dehydrated, and over 1-2 hours if shock
old, castrated male, domestic shorthaired cat with calcium oxalate
is present. Rate of fluid therapy should be assessed and
urethroliths causing obstruction, A, cystolith, B, and nephro-
adjusted based on response to therapy including heart
liths, C.
rate, electrocardiogram, respiratory rate, and thoracic
Urethral diseases   783
auscultation. If bradyarrhythmia is present due to hyper-
kalemia, it should be treated aggressively.
Hyperkalemia
Clinical and experimental studies have shown that
 obstructive uropathy alters sodium, potassium, magne.
sium, phosphorous, and calcium metabolism (Finco and
Cornelius 1977; Burrows and Bovee 1978). Hyperkalemia
is caused by acidemia, decreased renal excretion of potas-
sium, and tissue catabolism. Alterations in P-R interval,
S-T segment, and T waves on electrocardiograms are
associated frequently with hyperkalemia. Dysrhythmias
 may also occur including third-degree heart block and
Figure 77.11 22 gauge, 11/2-inch hypodermic needle attached
ventricular arrhythmias. Varying degrees of neuromus-
cular weakness and flaccid paralysis occur as a result of
quantities of urine from the bladder by cystocentesis
impaired impulse transmission. Serum concentration of
potassium approaching 10 mEq/L may be associated with
bradycardia and cardiac arrest.
35 and 36). If the patient is severely depressed or uncon-
 Immediate life-threatening arrhythmias due to hyper-
scious, relieving the urethral obstruction may be possible
without sedation or anesthesia. Many protocols are avail-
kalemia should be treated first. Treatment can include
 able to facilitate relief of urethral obstruction, including
calcium gluconate (50-100 mg/kg IV over 2-3 minutes,
monitor ECG) to counteract effect of hyperkalemia at the
morphine (0.1-0.3 mg/kg IM), butorphanol (0.2-0.4 mg/
kg IV or IM), propofol (2-4 mg/kg IV), short-acting
sino-atrial node, or measures to decrease serum potas-
sium concentration (bicarbonate (1-2 mEq/kg IV)), 10%
barbiturate (5 mg/kg IV), isoflurane anesthesia adminis-
tered by mask, and ketamine (2.5-5.0 mg/kg IV) mixed
dextrose infusion (4-10 mL/kg IV), insulin (0.1-0.25 IU/
kg IV q 2-4 hours), or dextrose and insulin infusion
with diazepam (0.125-0.25 mg/kg IV) or midazaolam
(0.5 IU/kg regular insulin + 4 mL of 50% dextrose/IU of
(0.125-0.25 mg/kg IV or IM) or acepromazaine (0.05-
insulin IV).
0.1 mg/kg IV).
 Cystocentesis should be performed using a 22-gauge,
1′/2-inch hypodermic needle or a 22-gauge over-the-
Fluids
needle catheter attached to an IV extension set and three-
 Dehydration should be addressed immediately; intra-
way stopcock (Figure 77.11) in order to decompress the
urinary bladder and to collect diagnostic samples.
best. Rate of hydration depends on degree of shock
 Stabilize the hypodermic needle or catheter in order
present, but should be completed within 6-12 hours 
to avoid further damage to the urinary bladder and
unless heart disease is present.
uroabdomen. Urethral catheterization should be per-
formed as soon as possible (Chapters 35 and 36). In male
Metabolic acidosis
 cats, a urethral crystalline-matrix plug may be dislodged
Metabolic acidosis is present in acute urethral obstruc-
by massaging the distal penis between the thumb and
forefinger and applying gentle pressure to the bladder
tion; however, usually it is not severe enough (pH < 7.0)
(Figure 77.12).
to warrant specific treatment.
If the obstruction is not relieved, retrograde
hydropropulsion should be performed (Chapter 35).
Hypocalcemia
lonized hypocalcemia may occur in cats with urethral
(Chapter 34) (Davidson et al. 2004; Adams et al. 2008;
obstruction and exacerbates the effects of hyperkalemia;
Defarges and Dunn 2008; Lulich et al. 2009).
it is treated with calcium gluconate if needed (Lee and
Drobatz 2003).
Indwelling urinary catheter
Decision for placing an indwelling urinary catheter is
Relieving urethral obstruction
dependent upon ease or difficulty that the urethral
Following stabilization, the patient is sedated or anes-
obstruction was relieved, stream of urine obtained after
thetized, and urethral obstruction is relieved (Chapters
relieving urethral obstruction, presence of a large amount
784
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Female dogs and cats
Occasionally, female dogs and cats present with urethral
obstruction due to urolithiasis. They are managed as
described previously. Urethroliths are often palpable on
rectal examination and may be retropulsed into the uri-
nary bladder using a combination of urethral catheteri-
zation and flushing and digital moving of the urolith per
rectum.
Complications
Bacterial infection
Figure 77.12 Urethral plug (small arrow) dislodged from a 5-
Bacterial infection may be a complication of obstruc-
year-old, castrated male, domestic shorthaired cat by massaging
tive uropathy. Infection may be present before onset of
the penile urethra (large arrow) and applying gentle pressure on
acute urethral obstruction or be introduced as a conse-
the urinary bladder.
quence of procedures used to relieve obstruction. Alka-
 line urine associated with infection by urease-producing
of crystalline and/or gelatinous debris in urine after
microorganisms may predispose to struvite crystalluria
copious flushing of the urinary bladder, degree of bladder
and urolithiasis or to struvite-matrix plug formation.
overdistention and likelihood of detrusor atony, degree
Infection is difficult to eradicate while urinary stasis
of systemic illness of the patient, and cause of urethral
exists. Signs of lower urinary tract infection may persist
obstruction. A closed system is used with an indwelling
after urethral obstruction is relieved. Outflow obstruc-
urinary catheter (Figure 77.13).
tion predisposes the upper tract to ascending bacterial
infection due to vesicoureteral reflux.
spasm secondary to the catheter (Straeter-Knowlen et al.
1995; Fischer et al. 2003). Depending on cause of ure-
Micturition dysfunction
thral obstruction, definitive treatment and appropriate
After prolonged retention of urine, patients may have
preventative measures should be undertaken (Osborne
difficulty emptying their bladders. This may be due to
et al. 1996). Antibiotics should not be administered while
decreased bladder elasticity, damage to nerves in the blad-
an indwelling urinary catheter is present. Although con-
der wall, damage to contractile elements in the bladder
comitant administration of antibiotics decreases inci-
wall, or to urethral edema or inflammation, resulting in
dence of bacterial urinary tract infections, when infec-
urethral spasm ( Tammela et al. 1991). Detrusor atony or
tions occur they exhibit a higher degree of antimicrobial
urethral swelling or spasm may be transient or may persist
resistance (Barsanti et al. 1985). In one study of induced
for an unpredictable period depending on the underlying
sterile cystitis in cats with indwelling urinary catheters,
 disease and the amount of irreversible damage caused by
some cats receiving amoxicillin developed bacterial cys-
urethral obstruction and may impact on survival. Goal
titis and at necropsy had positive bacterial cultures from
of treatment is to restore normal bladder and urethral
kidneys (Barsanti et al. 1992).
function.
Postobstructive diuresis
 Relief of urethral obstruction is accompanied by alter-
ations in ability to modulate water and sodium balance.
This postobstructive diuresis can affect hydration sta-
tus and electrolyte balance. Degree of diuresis can be
very profound and may require prolonged intravenous or
Figure 77.13 Closed system indwelling urinary catheter in a 6-
subcutaneous administration of large amounts of fluids.
year-old, castrated male, domestic shorthaired cat following relief
Measuring urine output and body weight after relieving
of a urethral obstruction due to a presumed crystalline-matrix
urethral obstruction aids in determining necessary fluid
urethral plug.
therapy to maintain hydration.
Urethral diseases   785
Intrinsic renal failure
References
Although postrenal azotemia occurs more commonly
Adams, L.G., A.C. Berent, et al. (2008). Use of laser lithotripsy for
 than renal azotemia with urethral obstruction, primary
fragmentation of uroliths in dogs: 73 cases (2005-2006). J Am Vet
renal failure may occur. Many factors lead to renal fail-
Med Assoc 232(11): 1680- 1687.
Ader, P.L. and H.P. Hobson (1978). Hypospadia: a review of the vet-
ure including loss of renal parenchyma due to sustained
increased intrarenal pressure, cytokine production by
Hosp Assoc 14: 721-727.
infiltrating leukocytes into renal parenchyma, electrolyte
Agut, A., X. Lucas, et al. (2006). A urethrorectal fistula due to prostatic
imbalances, fibrosis of damaged renal parenchyma, and
 abscess associated with urolithiasis in a dog. Reprod Dormest Arim
renal ischemia due to dehydration associated with ure-
41(3): 247-250.
Anderson, R.B., L.R. Aronson, et al. (2006). Prognostic factors for
thral obstruction and postobstructive diuresis (Saphasan
successful outcome following urethral rupture in dogs and cats. J
and Sorrasuchart 1984). Treatment of urethral obstruc-
Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 42(2): 136-146.
tion should be directed at correcting imbalances in home-
Barsanti, J.A., J. Blue, et al. (1985). Urinary tract infection due to
 ostasis due to urethral obstruction.
indwelling bladder catheters in dogs and cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc
187(4): 384-388.
Barsanti, J.A., E.B. Shotts, et al. (1992). Effect of therapy on suscepti-
Death
bility to urinary tract infection in male cats with indwelling urethral
Obstructive uropathy that persists for more than 24 hours
catheters. I Vet Interm Med 6(2): 64-70.
Bartges, J.W., D.R. Finco, et al. (1996). Pathophysiology of urethral
usually results in postrenal uremia. This occurs because
obstruction. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26(2): 255-
increased back pressure induced by obstruction to out-
264.
flow impairs glomerular filtration, renal blood flow, and
Bass, M., I. Howard, et al. (2005). Retrospective study of indications for
tubular function (Kerr 1956). After obstruction of the
and outcome of perineal urethrostomy in cats. I Small Amim Pract
urethra of normal cats, death occurred in 3-6 days
46(5): 227-231.
Batamuzi, E.K. and F. Kristensen (1996). Urinary tract infection: the
(Finco and Cornelius 1977). Death may be a result of
role of canine transmissible venereal tumour. I Small Amim Pract
cardiopulmonary failure associated with fluid and elec-
37(6): 276-279.
trolyte imbalances, particularly potassium, or develop-
Bennett, S.L., G.E. Edwards, et al. (2005). Balloon dilation ofa urethral
ment of acute oliguric/anuric renal failure. Damage to
stricture in a dog. Aust Vet I83(9): 552-554.
the mucosal surface of the urinary bladder and presence
Bjorling, D.E. ( 1984). Traumatic injuries of the urogenital system. Vet
Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 14( 1): 61-76.
 of bacterial urinary tract infection shorten survival times.
Boothe, H.W. (2000). Managing traumatic urethral injuries. Clin Tech
Small Anim Pract 15(1): 35-39.
Prognosis
Burger, R.A., S.C. Muller, et al. (1992). The buccal mucosal graft
Prognosis for animals with urethral obstruction is depen-
662-664.
dent upon the cause of the obstruction, ease of reliev-
Burrows, C.F. and K.C. Bovee ( 1978). Characterization and treatment
 ing obstruction, and success of preventative therapy. In
of acid-base and renal defects due to urethral obstruction in cats. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 172(7): 801-805.
one study of 45 male cats with urethral obstruction, re-
Caney, S.M., P.E. Holt, et al. ( 1998). Prostatic carcinoma in two cats. J
obstruction due to uroliths or crystalline-matrix plugs
Small Anirm Pract 39(3): 140- 143.
occurred in approximately 1/3, clinical signs recurred in
Cassata, R., A. Iannuzzi, et al. (2008). Clinical, cytogenetic and molec-
approximately 1/2, and euthanasia was performed in 1/5
ular evaluation in a dog with bilateral cryptorchidism and hypospa-
(Gerber et al. 2008).
dias. Cytogenet Genome Res 12D( 1-2): 140-143.
Corgozinho, K.B., H.J. de Souza, et al. (2007). Catheter-induced ure-
If obstruction cannot be relieved, is recurrent despite
thral trauma in cats with urethral obstruction. J Feline Med Surg
appropriate treatment, or if penile trauma occurs during
9(6): 48 1-486.
attempted relief of urethral obstruction (Figure 77.5),
Davidson, E.B., J.W. Ritchey, et al. (2004). Laser lithotripsy for treat-
 surgical urinary diversion (scrotal urethrostomy or per-
ment of canine uroliths. Vet Surg 33( 1): 56-61.
ineal urethrostomy) should be considered (Chapter 83)
Davis, G.J. and D. Holt (2003). Two chondrosarcomas in the ure-
(Smeak 2000; Corgozinho et al. 2007). Complications of
thra of a German shepherd dog. I Small Amim Pract 44(4): 169-
171.
scrotal urethrostomy in dogs are typically hemorrhage at
Defarges, A. and M. Dunn (2008). Use of electrohydraulic lithotripsy
time of surgery or stricture at the site, whereas perineal
in 28 dogs with bladder and urethral calculi. J Vet Interm Med 22(6):
urethrostomy in cats may be associated with stricture
1267-1273.
formation, urine leakage, and recurrent bacterial uri-
Elwick, K.E., L.D. Melendez, et al. (2003). Neodymiurm: Ytrium-
nary tract infection (Scavelli 1989; Newton and Smeak
aluminum-Garnet (Nd:YAG) laser ablation of an obstructive ure-
thral polyp in a dog. I Am Arirm Hosp Assoc 39(5): 506-508.
1996; Bass et al. 2005; Corgozinho et al. 2007). For ure-
Finco, D.R. and L.M. Cornelius (1977). Characterization and treat-
thral obstruction due to neoplasia, urethral stents or cys-
ment of water, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances of induced
tostomy catheters may be used (Salinardi et al. 2003).
urethral obstruction in the cat. A J Vet Res 38(6): 823-830.
786   Lower urinary tract disorders
Fischer, JR., I.F. Lane, et al. (2003). Urethral pressure profile and
Osborne, C.A., J.M. Kruger, et al. (1996). Medical management of
  d p ad  s o
feline urethral obstruction. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
sedated male beagle dogs. Can I Vet Res 67(1): 30-38.
26(3): 483-498.
Galanty, M., P. Jurka, et al. (2008). Surgical treatment of hypospadias.
Pavletic, M.M. (2007). Reconstruction of the urethra by use of an
 Gerber, B., S. Eichenberger, et al. (2008). Guarded long-term prognosis
Med Assoc 231(1): 71-73.
in male cats with urethral obstruction. I Feline Med Surg 10(1):
Phillips, H. and D.E. Holt (2006). Surgical revision of the urethral
16-23.
stoma following perineal urethrostomy in ll cats (1998-2004).
Hay, C.W. and E. Rosin ( 1997). Repair of an intrapelvic urethral tear
I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 42(3): 218-222.
in a bitch caused by iatrogenic trauma. Vet Rec 140(2): 48-49.
Polzin, D.J. and K. Jeraj (1980). Urethritis, cystitis, and ureteritis. Vet
Hayes, H.M., Jr. and G.P. Wilson (1986). Hospital incidence of
Clin North Am Small Amim Pract 9(4): 661-678.
hypospadias in dogs in North America. Vet Rec 118(22): 605-607.
Ragni, R.A. (2007). Urethral prolapse in three male Yorkshire terriers.
Jones, G.H., W.T. Testerrman, et al. (198l). Ruptured urethra caused
I Small Anim Pract 48(3): 180.
by trauma in a dog. Vet Med Small Amim Clin 76(5): 672-673.
Rawlings, C.A. (1984). Correction of congenital defects of the uro-
Kerr, W.S. (1956). Effects of complete ureteral obstruction in dogs on 
genital system. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 14(1):
kidney function. Am I Physiol 184: 521-526.
49-60.
Kirsch, J.A., J.G. Hauptman, et al. (2002). A urethropexy technique for
Salinardi, B.J., S.L. Marks, et al. (2003). The use of a low-profile cys-
surgical treatment of urethral prolapse in the male dog. IArm Anim
tostomy tube to relieve urethral obstruction in a dog. I Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 38(4): 381-384.
Hosp Assoc 39(4): 403-405.
Klahr, S. and K.P. Harris ( 1992). Obstuctive uropathy. In: The Kidney,
Saphasan, S. and S. Sorrasuchart (1984). Factors inducing post-
edited by D.W. Seldin and G.G. Giebisch. New York: Raven Press.
obstructive diuresis in rats. Nephron 38: 125-133.
Latal, D., J. Mraz, et al. ( 1994). Nitinol urethral stents: long-term results
 Scavell, T.D. ( 1989). Complications associated with perineal urethros-
in dogs. Urol Res 22(5): 295-300.
tomy in the cat. Probl Vet Med 1( 1): 1ll-119.
Lee, J.A. and K.J. Drobatz (2003). Characterization of the clinical char-
Smeak, D.D. (2000). Urethrotomy and urethrostomy in the dog. Cli
acteristics, electrolytes, acid-base, and renal parameters in male cats
Tech Small Amim Pract 15(1): 25-34.
with urethral obstruction. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 13(4): 227-233.
Straeter-Knowlen, I.M., S.L. Marks, et al. (1995). Urethral pressure
Liptak, J.M., S.P. Brutscher, et al. (2004). Transurethral resection in the
Suns ia sop g u eisedoau oisod pue ieuan yo suau
adult male cats with naturally acquired urethral obstruction. Am J
33(5): 505-516.
Vet Res 56(7): 919-923.
Lulich, J.P, L.G. Adams, et al. (2009). Changing paradigms in the
 Szymanski, C., R. Boyce, et al. ( 1984). Transitional cell carcinoma of
treatment of uroliths by lithotripsy. Vet Clin North Am Small Amim
the urethra metastatic to the eyes in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Pract 39(1): 143-160.
185(9): 1003-1004.
McFarland, L.Z. and E. Deniz (196l). Unilateral renal agenesis with
Takagi, S., T. Kadosawa, et al. (2005). Urethral transitional cell carci-
ipsilateral cryptorchidism and perineal hypospadias in a dog. I Arm
noma in a cat. I Small Anirm Pract 46(10): 504-506.
Vet Med Assoc 139: 1099-1100.
Tammela, T, H. Auto-Harmainen, et al. (199l). Effect of prolonged
Meige, F., S. Sarrau, et al. (2008). Managerment of traumatic urethral
experimental distention on the function and ultrastructure of the
rupture in ll cats using primary alignment with a urethral catheter.
canine urinary bladder. Arm Chrurgiae Gymaecolgiae 80: 30l-306.
Vet Comp Orthop Traurmatol 21( 1): 76-84.
Tarvin, G., A. Patnaik, et al. (1978). Primary urethral tumors in dogs.
Miller, C.F ( 1980). Urethrorectal fistula with concurrent urolithiasis
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 172(8): 931-933.
in a dog. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 75(1): 73-76.
Tucker, A.R. and J.R. Smith (2008). Prostatic squamous metaplasia in
Mirkovic, T.K., C.L. Shmon, et al. (2004). Urinary obstruction sec-
a cat with interstitial cell neoplasia in a retained testis. Vet Pathol
ondary to an ossifying fibroma of the os penis in a dog. I Am Amirm
45(6): 905-909.
Hosp Assoc 40(2): 152-156.
Vahlensieck, W. (1973). Hypospadias-repair with histoacrylic tissue
Moroff, S.D., B.A. Brown, et al. (199l). Infiltrative urethral disease
adhesive and without indwelling catheter drainage. Urol Res 1(1):
in fermale dogs: 41 cases (1980-1987). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 199(2):
2-5.
247-251.
Weisse, C., A. Berent, et al. (2006). Evaluation of palliative stenting for
Newton, J.D. and D.D. Smeak (1996). Simple continuous closure of
management of malignant urethral obstructions in dogs. IAm Vet
canine scrotal urethrostomy: results in 20 cases. I Am Amim Hosp
Med Assoc 229(2): 226-234.
Assoc 32(6): 53 1-534.
Whitney, W.O. and L.A. Schrader (1988). Urethrorectal fistulectomy
Olausson, A., S.M. Stieger, et al. (2005). A urinary bladder fibrosar-
in a dog, using a perineal approach. I Am Vet Med Assoc 193(5):
coma in a young dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46(2): 135-138.
568-569.
Osborne, C.A., D.D. Caywood, et al. (1996). Feline perineal urethros-
Wood, M.W., S. Vaden, et al. (2007). Cystoscopic-guided balloon dila-
tomy: a potential cause of feline lower urinary tract disease. Vet Cli
tion of a urethral stricture in a female dog. Car Vet I 48(7): 731-
North Am Small Anim Pract 26(3): 535-549.
733.
78
Prostatic disease
Margaret Root Kustritz
Applied anatomy and physiology
 Prostate disease is common in aged, intact male dogs
and can occur in castrated males. Overall prevalence of
The prostate is the only accessory sex organ of male dogs.
prostate disease in dogs in one study was reported as
Male cats have a prostate and bulbourethral glands. Dis-
75.6% in 500 dogs aged 1-21 years of age (Mukaratirwa
eases of the accessory sex organs of male cats are very
and Chitura 2007). Conditions that will be discussed
uncommon and will not be discussed.
are benign prostatic hypertrophy/hyperplasia (BPH),
The prostate encircles the neck of the urinary bladder.
prostatitis/prostatic abscesses, paraprostatic cysts, and
 Prostatic fluid empties into the prostatic urethra via a
prostatic neoplasia.
number of small duct openings, the seminis colliculus.
Histologically, the prostate is made up of two major lobes
Diagnostic testing for prostatic disease
with a fibrous median raphe. The large lobes are made
up of lobules of secretory tissue separated by bands of
Physical examination
nondistensible connective tissue. There is little smooth
 Rectal examination (Chapter 4) is part of examination
muscle tissue in the canine prostate.
 of all male dogs with clinical signs of lower urinary tract
The prostate increases in size and vascularity with
 disease. The prostate is palpable at the cranial aspect of
 increasing age in intact dogs. This is a normal phe-
the pubis; however, when enlarged, it may be located
nomenon and is not necessarily always associated with
more cranially. By pushing dorsally and caudally on the
disease.
 caudal abdomen with the other hand, the prostate may
 Androgens are primary effectors of prostate growth
be pushed to the cranial aspect of the pubis and may
and function (Shidaifat et al. 2007a). Testosterone is con-
be palpable via rectal examination. When enlarged, the
verted to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) via the enzyme 5-
 prostate may be identified by abdominal palpation.
alpha-reductase. DHT has a higher binding affinity than
 testosterone and less readily dissociates from receptors,
Imaging of the prostate
thereby exerting a greater effect than native testosterone
(Grino et al. 1990). Castration causes discernible pro-
In healthy intact male dogs, the prostate should be less
static atrophy within days, with a 50% reduction in size
 than 70% of the distance between the sacral promontory
by 3 weeks and a 70% reduction in size by 9 weeks after
and cranial aspect of the pubis on lateral survey abdom-
surgery (Barsanti 1997).
inal radiography (Chapter 15). It should be round and
Prostatic fluid secretion is constitutive in intact male
smooth. A triangular-shaped fat pad is present between
dogs, with volume of fluid produced not associated with
the cranioventral aspect ofthe prostate and the caudoven-
frequency of breeding (Johnston et al. 2000). Prostatic
tral aspect of the urinary bladder ( Johnston and Feeney
fluid flows into the urinary bladder and into the urethra,
1986). Ultrasonographically (Chapter 16), the prostate
creating the mucoid mass called smegma at the preputial
in a healthy intact male dog is round and smooth and
 orifice that is commonly seen in intact male dogs.
has a diffuse inhomogeneous echotexture. Contrast may
reflux into the prostate gland of a healthy intact male dog
on retrograde contrast urethrocystography (Chapter 15);
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
 the prostatic urethral mucosa should be smooth and may
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
be narrowed.
787
788  Lower urinary tract disorders
Cytologic examination of prostatic fluid and
be submitted for bacteriological culture (Chapter 9) and
tissue
cytology (Chapter 26).
Urinalysis and urine culture
Prostatic massage
A complete urinalysis (Chapter 7) should be performed
Prostatic massage is an alternative technique for col-
on all male dogs with signs of lower urinary tract dis-
lecting prostatic fluid from dogs where semen cannot
ease. Microscopic examination of urine sediment may
be collected due to pain, inexperience, or temperament
reveal hematuria, pyuria, or occasionally neoplastic cells.
(Barsanti 1995). In cases of suspected prostatic neoplasia
Aerobic bacteriologic culture of urine should also be
with invasion of the prostatic urethra, specimens from
 performed (Chapter 9).
prostatic massage are more likely to contain neoplastic
cells than an ejaculate (Barsanti and Finco 1984). After
Ejaculate
the dog is allowed to urinate, he is placed in lateral recum-
Manual ejaculation is the most common method of
the urinary bladder (Chapter 5). The bladder is emptied
semen collection used in dogs. Collect canine semen in
 and the residual urine submitted for urinalysis (Chap-
a comfortable, quiet environment with nonslip flooring.
ter 7) and aerobic bacterial urine culture (Chapter 9)
Most male dogs will ejaculate in the absence of a teaser
if not previously performed. Flush the bladder several
bitch; however, use of a teaser bitch facilitates collection.
times with sterile fluid. Retract the urinary catheter to
eun a no uoenela issan  nud ae ii so
a position just distal to the prostate as determined by
to ejaculate. Semen should be collected using a latex artif-
rectal palpation. The prostate is massaged per rectum or
ical vagina attached to a sterile, graduated plastic cen-
 per abdomen or both for 1-2 minutes. Inject 5-10 mL of
trifuge tube because this best simulates natural service
sterile 0.9% saline slowly through the catheter while man-
and the copulatory lock. The narrow end of the collect-
ually occluding the urethral orifice around the catheter to
ing cone is pulled over the sterile centrifuge tube. The top
 prevent reflux. Gently aspirate through the catheter while
of the latex-collecting cone is folded over to form a final
advancing the catheter into the urinary bladder in order
length such that the tip of the erect penis will be just above
to collect epithelial cells from the prostatic and proximal
 the centrifuge tube, minimizing contact of the ejaculate
urethra and the fluid that was injected into the urinary
with the latex cone but not permitting the tip of the penis
bladder. The fluid is submitted for cytologic examination
to be traumatized by the collecting tube. A small amount
(Chapter 26) and for culture (Chapter 9).
of water-soluble lubricant is placed around the top fold
of the collecting cone, which facilitates removal later. Do
Fine-needle aspiration
not allow lubricant to come in contact with the ejaculate.
If a teaser bitch is used, two people should be present: one
In cases where the prostate can be identified by abdominal
to hold the teaser bitch and the other for the male. The
palpation or using ultrasonographic guidance (Chapter
handler of the bitch should kneel in front of her and keep
16), fine-needle aspiration of prostate tissue can be per-
her standing. The male dog is allowed to sniff at the bitch's
formed using a 22-gauge, 1 1/2-inch hypodermic nee-
hindquarters, and he may be allowed to mount her. Brisk
dle and 6-12 mL syringe. Sedation rarely is necessary.
and enthusiastic massage of the bulbous glandis through
 The sample aspirated into the needle and/or syringe hub
the prepuce of the male will also elicit erection. As soon as
is then expelled onto microscopic slides and cytologic
erection occurs, the hand manipulating the prepuce can
examination performed (Chapter 26). Care must be taken
be used to move the prepuce proximal to the bulbus glan-
with cystic disease or abscessation as rupture of the cyst
dis while the other hand introduces the collcting cone
 or abscess may occur.
with attached centrifuge tube over the engorging penis.
 Ideally, the collecting cone is passed to just proximal to
Biopsy
the bulbus glandis and a tight grip maintained at the
Traumatic catheterization or brush biopsy
area. Application of circumferential pressure proximal to
the bulbus glandis simulates the pressure of the vulvar
In cases where involvement of the prostatic urethra is
lips during the copulatory lock, and the pressure of the
suspected, a traumatic urinary catheter biopsy or ure-
latex cone around the erect penis simulates intravaginal
thral brush technique can be combined with prostatic
pressure. The male will thrust vigorously for several min-
massage (Barsanti 1995). Prostatic massage is performed
utes, ejaculating the presperm and sperm-rich fractions
 as described previously except that after placing the uri-
of semen, on average 21 seconds after beginning manual 
 nary catheter in the prostatic urethra using guidance by
stimulation (Johnston et al. 2001). Collected semen may
 rectal palpation, the urinary catheter is moved rapidly
Prostatic disease  789
back and forth while applying negative pressure with a
Clinical signs
syringe and pushing ventrally on the prostate per rec-
Many animals with BPH identified by rectal palpation
tum. Negative pressure is maintained as the catheter is
or imaging of the prostate have no associated clini-
then advanced into the urinary bladder for retrieval of
infused sterile fluid. Alternatively, urinary catheter biopsy
cal signs. The most common clinical sign reported is
dripping of bloody fluid from the urethra unassoci-
can be performed independently of prostatic massage.
ated with urination (Krawiec and Heflin 1992; Read and
Place approximately 6 mL of sterile physiologic saline in
 Bryden 1995). This occurs because of development of
a 12 mL syringe attached to the urinary catheter. The
 intraparenchymal cysts and increasing vascularity of the
catheter is inserted into the urethra and guided to the
 prostate with increasing size (Barsanti 1997). The pro-
level of the prostatic urethra by rectal palpation. Inject
static fluid secreted is blood-tinged and so more visible
45 mL of the sterile saline through the catheter and
 move the catheter briskly back and forth while applying
to the owner than the normal clear prostatic fluid that
commonly runs through the postprostatic urethra.
negative pressure on the syringe. Fluid can be submitted
A common clinical sign of BPH in men is dysuria
for cytological examination (Chapter 26) and pieces of
or perceived inability to completely empty the bladder
tissue can be submitted for histopathologic examination.
during micturition. This is caused by contraction of
smooth muscle around the prostatic urethra decreas-
Endoscopic and fluoroscopic biopsy of
ing urine outflow. This is an uncommon presenting
prostatic urethra
complaint in dogs because of the relative paucity of
 In cases where prostatic urethral involvement is sus-
smooth muscle within the canine prostate. However,
 pected, biopsy of the invading cancer through and in the
because dogs do not exhibit signs of BPH with minimal
uroepithelium can be obtained using endoscopy (Chap-
 prostatomegaly, clinical presentation for signs referable
ter 19) or fluoroscopic guidance (Chapter 25). Biopsy
to increased size of the prostate is more common in dogs
than in men. These signs include rectal tenesmus and
samples are examined histopathologically.
defecation of ribbon-shaped stools (Krawiec and Heflin
1992).
Tru-cut biopsy
 Urinary tract signs are associated with BPH in 27%
 Using ultrasonographic guidance, a Tru-cut biopsy sam-
of cases, with hematuria that most commonly described
ple may be obtained (Chapter 16). Sedation of the patient
(Krawiec and Heflin 1992). Systemic signs of disease are
 is recommended prior to sampling.
uncommon in dogs with uncomplicated BPH.
Surgical biopsy
Diagnosis
Tru-cut or excisional biopsy of the prostate can be
Complete blood count (CBC) and chemistry profle
results are within normal limits in dogs with uncom-
ter 83).
plicated BPH (Read and Bryden 1995). Hematuria is
present on urinalysis. BPH most often is a rule-out diag-
Prostatic diseases
nosis, after unsuccessful investigation for prostatitis or
prostatic abscesses in intact or castrated males, and pro-
Benign prostatic hypertrophy
static neoplasia in castrated or intact males. Significant
prostatomegaly is present. Often, this can be identified
Signalment
by rectal palpation. In dogs with a pelvic prostate, the
BPH consists of both hypertrophy and hyperplasia of
secretory and connective tissues in the prostate. The con-
rical mass. The prostate encircles the bladder neck and
dition occurs spontaneously only in dogs and men. This
since the urinary bladder is freely movable from the pelvis
is an age-related change and is not recognized to be pre-
into the abdomen, as the prostate increases in size with
neoplastic in dogs. There is histologic evidence of BPH in
age, it may pull the urinary bladder forward and fall
16% of dogs by 2 years of age, with 50% having BPH by
into the abdomen. If the prostate cannot be felt rectally
45 years of age (Berry et al. 1986). No breed predispo-
or abdominally, you may try wheelbarrowing the dog
sition has been reported; be aware that normal Scottish
n o q s   os   s o dns
Terriers have a prostate that is four times larger than that
 pelvis, or try pushing abdominal contents caudally with
of other dogs with similar body weight (O'Shea 1962).
 your free hand toward the gloved finger in the rectum.
BPH does not occur in castrated males.
Digital rectal examination of the prostate as a diagnostic
790
 Lower urinary tract disorders
specific esterase, has not been demonstrated to be
clinically useful in dogs for diagnosis of prostate disease
(Bell et al. 1995).
Treatment
The most effective treatment for BPH in dogs is castration
(Rhodes 1996). After castration, secretory epithelial cells
die and basal cells lose the capacity to differentiate into
secretory cells (Shidaifat et al. 2004). Clinical signs of
BPH resolve within 4 weeks (Read and Bryden 1995). No
 medical therapy has been demonstrated to be as effective
as castration.
 Medical therapies used historically involved use of
estrogens or progestogens. Estrogen, either oral or
injectable, is associated with squamous metaplasia of
prostatic epithelium and subsequent increased predis-
position to prostatitis (Merk et al. 1986). Progestogens,
Figure 78.1 Ejaculated prostatic fluid from dog with prostate
disease.
either oral (megestrol acetate 0.50 mg/kg once daily for
48 weeks) or injectable (medroxyprogesterone acetate 
test has high specificity (75%) but low sensitivity (53%)
3 mg/kg subcutaneous every 10 months), have been
(Mukaratirwa and Chitura 2007).
demonstrated to resolve clinical signs of BPH without
In dogs with BPH, the prostate is symmetrically
negatively impacting semen quality in dogs (Bamberg-
enlarged and nonpainful. Prostatic fluid varies in color
Thalen and Linde-Forsberg 1993; Olson 1984). Side
effects of progestogen therapy include increased appetite
from tan to red (Figure 78.1). Prostatic fluid or tis-
-o, s s  u re s 
and possible hypothyroidism or diabetes mellitus
(Bamberg-Thalen and Linde-Forsberg 1993).
statitis"). Abdominal ultrasonography reveals diffuse
prostatomegaly with a homogeneous parenchyma (Fig-
The preferred medical therapy is use of the 5-alpha
ure 78.2). Very small cysts may be seen, scattered diffusely
reductase inhibitor, f
finasteride (lguer-Ouada and
Verstegen 1997; Sirinarumitr et al. 2001). Because
throughout the parenchyma.
this drug inhibits transformation of testosterone to
In human medicine, assessment of various secretory
dihydrotestosterone but does not inhibit testosterone
proteins in serum, most notably prostate specific antigen
secretion, it decreases prostate size without affecting
(PSA), is used to diagnose prostate disease. Measurement
of secretory proteins, including PSA and canine prostate
libido or spermatogenesis. The drug may be more effec-
tive in dogs with greater prostatomegaly (Jia et al. 2006).
The recommended dose regimen is 5 mg once daily per
os in dogs up to 50 kg of body weight for up to 4 months.
ROSTATETRAN
Most dogs show significant reduction in prostatomegaly
and clinical signs within 2-4 weeks after institution of
therapy. No side effects have been reported (Iguer-Ouada
and Verstegen 1997; Sirinarumitr et al. 2001; Sirinarumitr
et al. 2002). Prostate enlargement will recur after the drug
is withdrawn. Therapy with finasteride is recommended
to control clinical signs of disease as a stopgap to permit
the owners to achieve what they need to with that dog
before castration is performed. This may include
showing the dog in conformation, breeding to specific
bitches, or semen collection for cryopreservation.
 Experimental therapies for BPH described in dogs
as research subjects for human medicine that are not
Figure 78.2 Ultrasonogram of canine prostate in dog with benign
yet available clinically in veterinary medicine include
prostatic hypertrophy/hyperplasia (BPH).
intraprostatic injection of botulinum toxin and thermal
Prostatic disease  791
ablation via ultrasound (Chuang et al. 2006; Liu et al.
Diagnosis
2006; Sasaki et al. 2006).
Results of routine bloodwork are not well correlated with
presence of disease in dogs with prostatitis (Barsanti et al.
Prevention
1983). Similarly, cytology of ejaculated prostatic fluid is
 Prostatomegaly is a normal consequence of age in dogs
not well correlated with culture results and should not
left intact. Dogs with no clinical signs of disease need not
be used to determine whether or not cultures should be
performed (Barsanti et al. 1983; Root Kustritz et al. 2005).
aged, intact males may benefit from regular evaluation 
 Ejaculated prostatic fluid is not sterile as it accumu-
for prostatitis by culture of prostatic fluid or tissue as
 lates microorganisms from the distal urethra. However,
described below. Herbal therapy with saw palmetto is
collection of prostatic fluid by manual ejaculation is a
not a useful preventative therapy in dogs (Barsanti et al.
noninvasive procedure and may be preferred in experi-
2000). Castration is a highly effective therapy for clin-
enced, intact male dogs. All cultures should be quantita-
ical signs of BPH and a highly effective technique for
prevention.
 organism is significant. Fluid and cells can be collected
by prostatic massage. In this technique, the sedated dog
Prostatitis/prostatic abscesses
 is placed in lateral recumbency and a urinary catheter
passed. The urinary bladder is emptied and flushed with
Signalment
saline. The catheter is pulled back into the area of the
Prostatitis is diffuse infection with associated inflamma-
prostatic urethra and a gloved finger in the rectum used
tion of the prostate gland. Prostatic abscesses are accu-
to massage the prostate, showering cell and fluid into
 mulations of purulent fluid within a cystic space in a
the prostatic urethra from where it is aspirated via the
persistently infected prostate. The prostate is constantly
 catheter. Finally, ultrasound can be used to guide col-
lection of a fine-needle aspirate (FNA) sample directly
flora in the distal urethra. Inherent protective mecha-
 from prostate tissue. Because there is no normal flora in
nisms include retrograde flow of prostatic fluid and urine,
the prostatic urethra or prostate tissue, any positive cul-
the tight prostatic capsule, presence of local immune fac-
ture from these samples is considered significant. Culture
tors including IgA and antibacterial proteins, and persis-
results from ejaculated prostatic fluid were positively cor-
 tent contractile activity emptying prostatic acini (Dorf-
related with culture results from tissue collected by FNA
man and Barsanti 1995; Barsanti 1997; Shafik et al. 2006).
in 80% of cases in one study (Barsanti et al. 1983).
Development of prostatitis implies some underlying
 In general, diagnostic findings by FNA are concordant
problem in the prostate leading to a breakdown of these
 d n  s a si 
 protective mechanisms. Any dog with prostatitis should
ease 75% of the time (Powe et al. 2004). FNA usually does
be evaluated for underlying BPH or prostatic neoplasia.
not require sedation.
Bacterial prostatitis due to aerobic organisms is most
Clinical signs
common, with E.coli, Staphylococcus sp-, Klebsiella sp-,
i s  s  ds  p
Clinical presentation of dogs with prostatitis varies with
as causative (Krawiec and Heflin 1992). Brucella canis
duration of disease. Chronic prostatitis often is associated
has been demonstrated experimentally as a cause of pro-
with the clinical presentation of the underlying disease
statitis in dogs (Dorfman and Barsanti 1995). Anaerobic
(see BPH and prostatic neoplasia). Acute prostatitis is
organisms have been identified in some cases of canine
associated with demonstration of a pain response when
 prostatitis (Soki et al. 2002). Fungal prostatitis also is
the prostate is palpated and is more likely to be associated
 reported, most commonly secondary to systemic blasto-
with systemic signs of disease including fever, lethargy,
 mycosis (Barsanti and Finco 1979; Krawiec and Hefin
abdominal pain, and dyschezia (Krawiec and Heflin 1992;
1992).
Dorfman and Barsanti 1995; Kawakami et al. 2006). Uri-
Abdominal ultrasonography reveals findings associ-
nary tract signs associated with prostate infection include
ated with underlying disease (see BPH and prostatic
dysuria, urethral discharge, and hematuria (Krawiec and
neoplasia). Prostatic inflammation is associated with
Heflin 1992; Dorfman and Barsanti 1995; Kawakami et al.
increased mottling of the parenchyma. This is a non-
2006). Dogs with a prostatic abscess may present with vir-
specific finding on ultrasonography; culture should
tually no clinical signs of disease or with rupture into the
be performed for definitive diagnosis of prostatitis.
peritoneal cavity, with acute abdomen and signs of septic
Prostatic abscesses will be apparent as large, circular
shock.
792
 Lower urinary tract disorders
in prostatic tissue (Martiarena and Llorente 1993; Dorf-
man et al. 1995; Albarellos et al. 2006)
Historically, many publications stressed necessity of
PROSTATE
 measurement of prostatic fluid pH to determine which
BLADDER
antibiotics would ionize and remain in tissue. However,
it has been demonstrated that pH of prostatic fluid does
not differ when comparing normal dogs to those with
acute or chronic prostatitis (Barsanti et al. 1983; Threlfall
and Chew 1999). Fluoroquinolones are zwitterions, ion-
izing at multiple pHs, and it has been demonstrated that
enrofloxacin moves into the prostate equally well when
prostatitis (Dorfman et al. 1995).
 Initial antibiotic therapy should be instituted for 4-6
weeks. Owners should be made aware that long-term
SAGLT
use of trimethoprim-sulfa combinations may be associ-
ated with side effects including keratoconjunctivitis sicca,
Figure 78.3 Ultrasonogram of canine prostate in dog with pro-
hypothyroidism, and folic acid anemia (Rubin 1990;
static abscess (A).
Torres et al. 1996). Repeat culture of prostatic fluid or tis-
sue should be performed 1 week after antibiotic therapy
is completed and, if clear, repeated again one month later.
hypo- to anechoic areas within the prostatic parenchyma
If the underlying cause of prostatitis is not addressed (for
(Figure 78.3).
example, castrating the dog to control BPH), evaluation
Prostatic abscesses historically were treated surgically,
Treatment
with marsupialization or omentalization of the abscess
Appropriate antibiotic therapy should be based on cul-
cavity (Freitag et al. 2007). These procedures require
ture and sensitivity. Culture of ejaculated prostatic fluid
 great surgical expertise and are associated with significant
correctly permits diagnosis of prostatitis in about 60%
side effects. More recently, ultrasound guided aspiration
of cases (Ling et al. 1983). Culture of prostatic tissue is
 of abscesses has been described, with good long-term
reported to be 25% more accurate than culture of pro-
success. The regimen includes initial ultrasound-guided
static fluid (Barsanti et al. 1983). Although one may be
drainage with rechecks every 1-6 weeks and repeated
hesitant to consider collecting a FNA sample from poten-
 drainage if necessary, and supportive antibiotic therapy
tially infected tissue, there are no reports in the literature
and castration (Boland et al. 2003). In a study describing
ofadverse effects after collection of FNA samples from the
eight dogs with prostatic absceses, the median number
prostate with ultrasound guidance in dogs (Root Kustritz
 of drainage procedures was two, clinical signs resolved in
2006).
all dogs and no side effects were noted, and there was no
In dogs with acute prostatitis, there is significant dis-
recurrence ofdisease within the follow-up period of up to
ruption of the prostatic capsule, meaning that almost
5 months (Boland et al. 2003). Another study described
any antibiotic can penetrate prostatic tissue. In dogs with
ultrasound-guided drainage of prostatic abscesses and
chronic prostatitis, only those antibiotics that are highly
subsequent filling of the abscess cavity with tea tree oil
lipid soluble, not highly protein-bound, and ionize at the
 in six dogs; 67% of those dogs required two treatments,
pH of prostatic tissue will penetrate and remain within
with complete resolution of clinical signs in all dogs by 6
the prostate (Dorfman and Barsanti 1995). Fibromus-
weeks after initial diagnosis (Kawakami et al. 2006).
cular stroma separating the lobules within the canine
 prostate restrict flow of drugs within the tissue ( Wientjes
Prevention
et al. 2005). Antibiotics that meet the appropriate criteria
include fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim-sulfa combina-
 Because prostatic infection occurs secondary to some
tions, and chloramphenicol. Because chloramphenicol is
 other prostate disease, preventative strategies must be
not routinely stocked in veterinary clinics, the former 
 associated with prevention of those conditions, for exam-
two classes of drug are most routinely used. Among fluo-
  sa sad    s  
roquinolones, enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin have been
It has been well demonstrated that castration hastens
 demonstrated to reach significantly high concentrations
 resolution and prevents recurrence of prostatitis in dogs
Prostatic disease  793
(Cowan et al. 1991). Prevention of prostatitis by periodic
Treatment
empirical therapy with antibiotics has not been described
 Surgical excision is the preferred therapy. Surgery may
and is not recommended so as not to promote develop-
be difficult if the cyst is large or has adhered to adjacent
ment of resistant bacteria.
organs (White et al. 1987). Urinary incontinence is an
occasional postoperative complication, reported in 9%
Paraprostatic cysts
of dogs in one small study (White et al. 1987).
Signalment
Prostatic neoplasia
Paraprostatic cysts are fluid-filled masses most com-
Signalment
monly arising craniolateral or caudal to the prostate. They
are hypothesized to be remnants of the embryonic Wolf-
Prostatic neoplasia in dogs usually is primary, with malig-
fian ducts (Girard and Despots 1995; Lisciandro 1995).
nant adenocarcinoma by far the most common tumor
 Large and giant breed dogs appear to be over-represented.
type identified. Incidence of prostatic adenocarcinoma
is 0.2-0.6% in dogs (Obradovich et al. 1987; Teske et al.
2002). Benign primary neoplasia of the prostate has not
Clinical signs
been reported in dogs. Secondary tumors that may local-
Clinical appearance of disease is not apparent until para-
ize in the prostate include transitional cell carcinoma,
 prostatic cysts are very large and impinge on neighboring
hemangiosarcoma, squamous-cell carcinoma, and lym-
structures. Clinical signs may include rectal tenesmus and
phosarcoma (Barsanti 1997; Winter et al. 2006; Bryan
lethargy, with up to 45% of dogs presenting with systemic
et al. 2007).
signs of illness (Stowater and Lamb 1989; Krawiec and
Prostatic neoplasia with or without overlying prostati-
Heflin 1992). Urinary tract signs associated with parapro-
tis is the only prostate disease seen in castrated dogs.
static cysts occur in 26% of cases and include stranguria
Several studies have demonstrated a 2-4 times increased
and bloody urethral discharge (Stowater and Lamb 1989;
risk for development of prostatic neoplasia in castrated
Krawiec and Heflin 1992).
 dogs compared to those left intact (Bell et al. 1991; Teske
et al. 2002; Sorenmo et al. 2003; Bryan et al. 2007). Among
castrated dogs, Beagles, Bouvier des Flandres, Doberman
Diagnosis
Pinschers, English Springer Spaniels, German Shorthair
Abdominal ultrasonography is the preferred technique
Pointers, Scottish Terriers, Shetland Sheepdogs, and West
for identification of paraprostatic cysts and for identifi-
Highland White Terriers are reported to be at increased
risk (Teske et al. 2002; Bryan et al. 2007). Cause-and-
der. The cysts are visible as large anechoic structures that
effects have not been identified. Length of time from cas-
may be septate (Stowater and Lamb 1989) (Figure 78.4).
e ae si eiseldou isd o sisu oi uon
Because these masses usually do not directly communi-
hormone changes identified after castration do not favor
cate with the prostatic parenchyma, prostate diagnostics
angiogenesis (Teske et al. 2002; Shidaifat et al. 2007b).
    )   
Prostatic neoplasia in dogs is not androgen-dependent
(Obradovich et al. 1987; Gallardo et al. 2007). Tumor
behavior may be influenced by alterations in estrogen
PROSTATE
ZHWOZ
and progesterone receptors in neoplastic tissue compared
GeneralA
to normal prostatic tissue or by oxidative stress (Aydin
G2idB
et al. 2006; Griec0 et al. 2006; Gallardo et al. 2007). Any
9dB
castrated dog with prostatomegaly should be considered
to have prostatic neoplasia until proven otherwise.
Clinical signs
Prostatic adenocarcinoma most often has metastasized
prior to diagnosis. Clinical signs may be referable to the
prostate or to sites of metastasis and include anorexia,
weight loss, dyschezia, and abdominal pain (Krawiec and
Dist=4.15
Heflin 1992; Winter et al. 2006; Shidaifat et al. 2007b).
Figure 78.4 Ultrasonongram of canine prostate with associated
Most common sites of metastasis are the liver, lungs,
cysts (C).
regional lymph nodes, vertebrae, spleen, colon or rectum,
794  Lower urinary tract disorders
with significant decrease in quality of life due to develop-
ment of urinary incontinence (Basinger et al. 1989; Gold-
schmid and Bellenger 1991). Prostatectomy using a laser,
 one-time injection of interleukin-2 and ongoing therapy
with meloxicam has been demonstrated in one study to be
associated with less postoperative urinary incontinence
(L'Eplattenier et al. 2006). Adjunctive therapies, includ-
ing chemotherapy and intraoperative radiation therapy.
are not well described and may not address metastatic
 disease. Palliative therapy with anti-inflammatory agents
has been described; in one study, it was demonstrated
that dogs treated with a COX-2 inhibitor had decreased
esis and had a significantly longer median survival time
(Sorenmo et al. 2004). One recommended palliative ther-
Figure 78.5 Ultrasonogram of canine prostate in dog with pro-
apy is piroxicam (0.3 mg/kg per os once daily).
 Dogs with urethral obstruction due to prostatic neo-
static adenocarcinoma.
plasia at present have few therapeutic options. Percuta-
neous drainage of the urinary bladder is obviously not
urethra, urinary bladder, and kidneys (Bell et al. 1991).
a viable long-term solution. Human products that may
Urinary tract signs may include stranguria, hematuria,
be of benefit but are not yet clinically readily available in
and persistent urinary bladder distension (Krawiec and
veterinary medicine include button-type urinary fistulas
Heflin 1992; Winter et al. 2006).
that attach the urinary bladder wall to the body wall and
urethral stents (Yoon et al. 2006).
Diagnosis
Systemic disease may be evidenced by changes on com-
Prevention
plete blood count including leukocytosis due to neu-
Exact cause-and-effect relationship between castration
trophilia with a left shift, increased alkaline phosphatase
and occurrence of prostatic neoplasia is not described.
(ALP) on chemistry profle, and pyuria and hematuria
Although prostatic neoplasia is a high morbidity and
on urinalysis (Bell et al. 1991). Assessment for metastases
mortality disorder, it is of low incidence. The decision
by radiography should be performed but owners must be
regarding whether or not to castrate a dog as a means
made aware that in 40% of cases with metastases to the
of prevention against development against prostatic neo-
lungs, they will not be visible on radiographs (Bell et al.
plasia when aged must be made on a case-by-case basis.
1991).
 Because prognosis in cases with prostatic adenocar-
References
cinoma is grave, definitive diagnosis is of paramount
importance. Abdominal ultrasonography may reveal 
Albarellos, G.A., L. Montoya, et al. (2006). Ciprofloxacin and nor-
floxacin pharmacokinetics and prostatic fluid penetration in dogs
 the scattered hypoechogenicity of mineralization and a
after multiple oral dosing. Vet I 172: 334-339.
whorled appearance of the parenchyma (Figure 78.5)
Aydin, A., Z. Arsova-Sarafinovska, et al. (2006). Oxidative stress and
(Bell et al. 1991). However, these are nonspecific signs.
Collection of a FNA or biopsy sample via ultrasound
prostatic hyperplasia. Clin Biochem 39: 176-179.
 guidance is strongly recommended. Studies have demon-
Bamberg-Thalen, B. and C. Linde-Forsberg (1993). Treatment of
strated that FNA permits accurate diagnosis of prostatic
acetate. I Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 29: 221-226.
neoplasia in 80% of cases and biopsy in 79-90% of cases
Barsanti, JA. (1995). Collection and analysis of prostatic fluid and
(Bell et al. 1991; Nickel and Teske 1992). Biopsy requires
tissue. In: Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology, edited by
sedation of the patient and is most commonly performed
C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins,
using a triggered core biopsy instrument ( Tru-Cut, Tra-
Pp. 122-135.
venol Laboratories Inc., Deerfield IL).
Barsanti, IA.( 1997). Diseases of the prostate gland. Proceedings, Soci-
ety for Theriogenology, Montreal Canada, pp. 72-80.
Barsanti, JA. and D.R. Finco (1979). Canine bacterial prostatitis. Vet
Treatment
Clin North Am 9: 679-700.
Barsanti, JA. and D.R. Finco (1984). Evaluation of techniques for
There is no reported cure for prostatic adenocarcinoma
diagnosis of canine prostatic diseases. I Am Vet Med Assoc 185:
in dogs. Total or subtotal prostatectomy is associated
198-200.
Prostatic disease  795
Barsanti, JA., K.W. Prasse, et al. (1983). Evaluation of various tech-
Johnston, S.D., K. Kamolpatana, et al. (2000). Prostatic disorders in
niques for diagnosis of chronic bacterial prostatitis in the dog. I Am
the dog. Anim Repro Sci60-61: 405-415.
Vet Med Assoc 183: 219-224.
Johnston, S.D., M.V. Root Kustritz, et al. (200l). Semen collection,
Barsanti, J.A., D.R. Finco, et al. (2000). Effects of an extract of Serenod
evaluation, and preservation. In: Canine and Feline Theriogenol-
repens on dogs with hyperplasia of the prostate gland. Arn J Vet Res
ogy, edited by S.D. Johnston, M.V. Root Kustritz, and P.N.S. Olson.
61: 880-885.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 289-306.
Basinger, R.R., C.A. Rawlings, et al. (1989). Urodynamic alterations
Kawakami, E., M. Washizu, et al. (2006). Treatment of prostatic
associated with clinical prostatic diseases and prostatic surgery in
abscesses by aspiration of purulent matter and injection with tea
23 dogs. I A Arim Hosp Assoc 25: 385-392.
tree oil into the cavities of dogs. I Vet Med Sci 68: 1215- 1217.
Bell, EW., JS. Klausner, et al. ( 1991). Clinical and pathologic features
Krawiec, D.R. and D. Heflin. ( 1992). Study of prostatic disease in dogs:
of prostatic adenocarcinoma in sexually intact and castrated dogs:
177 cases (1981-1986). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 200: 1119-1122.
31 cases (1970-1987). I Am Vet Med Assoc 199: 1623-1630.
I'Eplattenier, H.F., S.A. VanNimwegen, et al. (2006). Partial prosta-
Bell, FW., LS. Klausner, et al. ( 1995). Evaluation of serum and serminal
tectomy using Nd:YAG laser for management of canine prostatic
plasma markers in the diagnosis of canine prostate disorders. J Vet
carcinoma. Vet Surg 35: 406-411.
It Med 9: 149-153.
Ling, G.V., I.E. Branam, et al. ( 1983). Canine prostatic fluid: techniques
Berry,S.J,J.D.Strandberg, et al.( 1986). Development of caninebenign 
of collection, quantitative bacterial culture, and interpretation of
prostatic hyperplasia with age. Prostate 9: 363-373.
results. JArm Vet Med Assoc 183: 201-206.
Boland, L.E., R.J. Hardie, et al. (2003). Ultrasound-guided percuta-
Lisciandro, G.R. ( 1995). What is your diagnosis? (Paraprostitic cyst in
neous drainage as the primary treatment for prostatic abscesses and
a dog). I Am Vet Med Assoc 206: 17l-172.
cysts in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39: 151-159.
Liu, I.B., D.A. Merton, et al. (2006). Contrast-enhanced ultrasound for
Bryan, I.N., M.R. Keeler, et al. (2007). A population study of neuter-
ing status as a risk factor for canine prostate cancer. Prostate 67:
176: 1654-1660.
1174-1181.
Marquez Black, G., G.V. Ling, et al. (1998). Prevalence of prostatic
Chuang, Y.C., C.H. Tu, et al. (2006). Intraprostatic injection of
cysts in adult, large breed dogs. IArm Anirn Hosp Assoc 34: 17-180.
botulinum toxin type-A relieves bladder outlet obstruction in
Martiarena, B.M. and P. Llorente (1993). Ciprofloxacin as antibiotic
human and induces prostate apoptosis in dogs. BMC Urol 6: 12.
treatment in bacterial prostatitis. Rev Med Vet Bueros Aires 74:
Cowan, L.A., J.A. Barsanti, etal. ( 1991). Effects of castration on chronic
130-136.
bacterial prostatitis in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 199: 346-350.
Merk, F.B., M.J. Warhol, et al. ( 1986). Multiple phenotypes of glan-
Dorfman, M., I. Barsanti, et al. ( 1995). Enrofloxacin concentrations in
dular cells in castrated dogs after individual or combined treatment
dogs with normal prostate and dogs with chronic bacterial prostati-
with androgen and estrogen. Morphometric, ultrastructural, and
tis. Am I Vet Res 56: 386-390.
cytochemical distinctions. Lab Invest 54: 442-456.
Dorfman, M. and J.A. Barsanti (1995). CVT update: treatment of
Mukaratirwa, S. and T. Chitura (2007). Canine subclinical prostatic
canine bacterial prostatitis. In: Current Veterinary Therapy XII,
disease: histological prevalence and validity of digital rectal exami-
edited by J.D. Bonagura and R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB
nation as a screening test. ISo Afr Vet Assoc 78: 66-68.
Saunders, pp. 1029-1032.
Nickel, R.F and E. Teske (1992). Diagnosis of canine prostatic carci-
Freitag, T., R.M. Jerram, et al. (2007). Surgical management ofcommon
noma. Tidjschrift Voor Diergeneeskunde 117 (Suppl 1): 32S.
canine prostatic conditions. Comp Cont Ed 29: 656-673.
O'Shea, J.D. (1962). Studies on the canine prostate gland. 1. Factors
Gallardo, F, T. Mogas, et al. (2007). Expression of androgen, oestrogen
influencing its size and weight. J Cormp Path 72: 321-331.
 alpha and beta, and progesterone receptors in the canine prostate:
Obradovich, J., R. Walshaw, et al. (1987). The influence of castration 
differences between normal, inflamed, hyperplastic and neoplastic
on the development of prostatic carcinoma in the dog: 43 cases
glands. I Comp Path 136: 1-8.
(1978-1985). I Vet Int Med 1: 183-187.
Girard, C. and J. Despots ( 1995). Mineralized paraprostatic cyst in a
Olson, P.N. (1984). Disorders of the canine prostate gland. Proceed-
dog. Can Vet I36: 573-574.
ings, Society for Theriogenology, Denver, CO, pp. 46-59.
Goldschmid, S.E. and C.R. Bellenger (1991). Urinary incontinence
Powe, JI.R., P.J. Canfield, et al. (2004). Evaluation of the cytologic diag-
after prostatectomy in dogs. Vet Surg 20: 253-256.
nosis of canine prostatic disorders. Vet Clin Pathol 33: 150-154.
Grieco, V., E. Riccardi, et al. (2006). The distribution of oestrogen
Read, R.A. and S. Bryden (1995). Urethral bleeding as a presenting
as aadsa e op au u eisdadau oisd uujo ui
demonstrated immunohistochemically. I Comp Path 135: 11-16.
(1979- 1993). I Am Armim Hosp Assoc 31: 261-267.
Grino, P.B., J.E. Griffin, et al. (1990). Testosterone at high concen-
 Rhodes, L. (1996). The role of dihydrotestosterone in prostate phys-
 s r   a m si s
iology: comparisons among rats, dogs and primates. Proceedings,
dihydrotestosterone. Endocrinology 126: 1165-1172.
Society for Theriogenology, Kansas City, MO, pp. 124 135.
Iguer-Ouada, M., and J.P. Verstegen (1997). Effct of finasteride
Root Kustritz, M.V. (2006). Collection of tissue and culture samples
(Proscar MSD) on seminal composition, prostate function and fer-
from the canine reproductive tract. Theriogenology 66: 567-574.
tility in male dogs. I Rep Fert 51: 139- 149.
Root Kustritz, M.V., S.D. Johnston, et al. (2005). Relationship between
Jia, G., I.T. Heverhagen, et al. (2006). Pharmacokinetic parameters
inflammatory cytology of canine seminal fluid and significant aero-
 as a potential predictor of response to pharmacotherapy in benign
 bic bacterial, anaerobic bacterial or mycoplasma cultures of canine
seminal fluid: 95 cases (1987-2000). Theriogenology 64: 1333-1339.
enhanced MRI. Mag Res Imaging 24: 721-725.
 Rubin, S.1. ( 190). Managing dogs with bacterial prostatic disease. Vet
Johnston, G.R. and D.A. Feeney ( 1986). Radiographic evaluation of the
Med 85: 387-394.
urinary tract in dogs and cats. In: Contemporary Issues in Small Ani-
Sasaki, K., T. Azuma, et al. (2006). Chronic effect of transrectal split-
mal Practice (Nephrology and Urology), edited by E.B. Breitschwerdt.
focus ultrasound ablation on canine prostatic tissue. I Vet Med Sci
New York: Churchill Livingstone, pp. 203-273.
68: 839-845.
796
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Shafik, A., A.A. Shafik, et al. (2006). Contractile activity of the prostate
cyclooxygenase inhibitors in canine prostatic carcinoma. Vet Comp
at ejaculation: an electrophysiologic study. Urol 67: 793-796.
Oncol 2: 13-23.
Shidaifat, F, M. Daradka, et al. (2004). Effect of androgen ablation on
Stowater, J.L. and C.R. Lamb (1989). Ultrasonographic features of
prostatic cell differentiation in dogs. Endo Res 30: 327-334.
paraprostatic cysts in nine dogs. Vet Rad 30: 232-239.
Shidaifat, F., B. Al-Trad, et al. (2007a). Testosterone effect on immature
Teske, E., E.C. Naan, et al. (2002). Canine prostatic carcinoma: epi-
prostate gland development associated with suppression of trans-
demiological evidence of an increased risk in castrated dogs. Mol
forming growth factor-beta. Life Sci 80: 829-834.
Cell Endo 197: 251-255.
Shidaifat, F, M. Gharaibeh, et al. (2007b). Effect of castration on
Threlfall, W.R. and D.J. Chew (1999). Diagnosis and treatment of
extracellular matrix remodeling and angiogenesis of the prostate
canine bacterial prostatitis. Comp Cont Ed 21: 73-88.
gland.Endo I54: 521-529.
Torres, S.M.F., P.J. McKeever, et al. ( 1996). Hypothyroidism in a dog
Sirinarumitr, K., S.D. Johnston, et al. (200l). Efects of finasteride on
size of the prostate gland and semen quality in dogs with benign
105-108.
prostatic hypertrophy. IAn Vet Med Assoc 218: 1275-1280.
White, R.A.S., M.E. Herrtage, et al. (1987). The diagnosis and man-
Sirinarumitr, K., T. Sirinarumitr, et al. (2002). Finasteride-induced
Small Anim Prac 28: 551-574.
hypertrophy. Am I Vet Res 63: 495-498.
Wientjes, M.G., J.H. Zheng, et al. (2005). Intraprostatic chemother-
 Soki, J., E. Fodor, et al. (2002). Isolation and characterization of an
apy: distribution and transport mechanisms. Clin Cancer Res 11:
4204-4211.
in a dog. Vet Micro 84: 187-190.
Winter, M.D., J.E. Locke, et al. (2006). Imaging diagnosis—urinary
Sorenmo, K.U., M. Goldschmidt, et al. (2003). Immunohistochemical
characterization of canine prostatic carcinoma and correlation with
Rad Ultrasound 47: 597-601.
castration status and castration time. Vet Comp Oncol 1: 48-56.
Yoon, C.J., H.Y. Song, et al. (2006). Covered retrievable prostatic ure-
Sorenmo, K.U., M.H. Goldschmidt, et al. (2004). Evaluation of
thral stents: feasibility study in a canine model. I Vasc Interv Radiol
cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygenase-2 expression and the effect of
17: 1813-1819.
79
Neoplasia of the lower urinary tract
Jeffrey Phillips
Urinary system tumors include benign and malignant
Golden Retrievers are under-represented (Hayes 1976;
neoplasia of the kidney, bladder, urethra, and tumors
Norris et al. 1992; Sapierzynski et al. 2007). Several
that arise from accessory sexual glands in the male. Tradi-
 reports suggest a gender predilection for these tumors
tionally, these neoplasms have been treated with surgery
in female dogs (Strafuss and Dean 1975; Hayes 1976);
only with prognosis dependent on tumor type, clinical 
 however, more recent reports fail to identify a gender
stage, location, and surgical resectability. Unfortunately,
preference (Norris et al. 1992; Sapierzynski et al. 2007).
in both human and veterinary oncology, effective sur-
No breed or gender predilections have been described for 
gical treatment of these tumors, especially those of the
 development of feline lower urinary tract tumors.
lower urinary system, can be quite difficult because of
The majority of canine lower urinary tract tumors are
anatomic constraints. Thus, for nonresectable tumors,
-s  noe (  n
incompletely resected tumors, or tumors associated with
enchymal variants have been reported. Histologic tumor
significant metastatic risk, adjuvant treatments such as
types seen in cats and dogs include transitional cell carci-
chemotherapy are important modalities. Addition of
noma (approximately 90% of cases), squamous cell carci-
such treatments has provided modest improvements in
 noma (approximately 1%), adeno- and undifferentiated
survival and in some cases significant palliative benefits.
carcinoma (approximately 1%), and a variety of mes-
enchymal tumors (approximately 7%) (Meuten 2002).
pe shop u pdau aaq auo aau sada r u
Tumors of the urinary bladder and urethra
 include fibroma and leiomyoma.
 Secondary neoplasms involving the bladder have also
Tumors of the urinary bladder and urethra are uncom-
been reported in cats and dogs. The most common
-o  e jo  ng oe sop un uo
secondary tumors involving the bladder are extensions
plasms (Osborne et al. 1968). One retrospective study
of prostatic and urethral tumors although differentia-
evaluated medical records from 13 veterinary universities
tion from a primary bladder origin with urethral exten-
from 1964 to 1975 and identified only 114 cases of pri-
sion is difficult. Other secondary bladder tumors include
 mary canine bladder malignancy (Hayes 1976). In cats,
metastatic lesions from mesenchymal and, more com-
tumors of the lower urinary tract system are seen less
monly, epithelial tumors. Lymphoma involving primar-
frequently and are uniformly malignant (Osborne et al.
ily the urinary bladder has also been reported in cats
1968; Sapierzynski et al. 2007).
and dogs although this comprises less than 1/3 of all
Signalment for dogs and cats is predictable with the
secondary neoplasms of the bladder (Meuten 2002).
majority of patients middle-aged to older. Breed predis-
 s   s n ss s a
position for development of canine bladder tumors has
consist of lower urinary tract symptoms such as hema-
been described in the Airedale terrier, Scottish terrier,
turia, pollakiuria, or dysuria (88%) and less frequently
Westhighland white terrier, Beagle, and Sheltie being sig-
 polyuria, polydipsia, and incontinence (Norris et al.
nificantly over-represented while German Shepherds and
1992). Nonlower urinary tract signs include lameness
 due to bony metastases, abdominal pain, and lethargy
(Norris et al. 1992). In cats, lower urinary tract symptoms
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
include hematuria (76%), stranguria (40%), pollakiuria
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
797
798  Lower urinary tract disorders
(35%), urinary tract obstruction (14%), and inappropri-
been identified in cats. Female dogs were thought to be
ate urination (14%) (Wilson et al. 2007).
at increased risk for the development of these tumors
Hematologic findings in dogs with primary bladder
historically, although more recent studies have failed to
tumors include neutrophilia (20%) and anemia (8%).
support this. In cats, no gender bias has been identified.
Serum chemistry abnormalities include elevated liver
There are several proposed mechanisms that underlie
enzyme activity (45%), azotemia (13%), and hypercal-
 development of canine bladder tumors. The high preva-
cemia (5%) (Norris et al. 1992). In cats, no consistent
lence of these tumors in select breeds suggests a genetic
hematologic changes have been described; however, at 
basis at least in some breeds. Ongoing research at the
1 pdau uaq sau sieo jo os oi dn uosad
 National Cancer Institute is trying to identify a genetic
be azotemic (Wilson et al. 2007). Urinalysis results are
variant associated with tumor development in these select
typically abnormal in both dogs (93%) and cats (80%)
breeds. Environmental factors have also been shown to
with > 50% of all patients exhibiting active urinary tract
be associated with canine bladder tumor development. In
infections (Norris et al. 1992; Wilson et al. 2007). Parane-
 one study, topical insecticide exposure increased risk by
 oplastic syndromes seen in patients with bladder tumors
up to 3.5/year (Glickman et al. 1989) although another
include hypercalcemia, hypertrophic osteopathy, hyper-
study failed to identify a similar increased risk within
estrogenism, cachexia, immune-mediated thrombocy-
Scottish terriers (Raghavan et al. 2004). A study examin-
topenia and/or anemia, and polycythemia (Caywood 
 ing risk associated with herbicide exposure and bladder
et al. 1980; Norris et al. 1992). Further information on
 tumor formation (in Scottish terriers) noted increased
each of the specific subtypes of primary lower urinary
risk (odds ratio, 4.42) in exposed dogs. Furthermore, this
tract tumors is presented in the following sections.
risk was increased (odds ratio, 7.19) for dogs exposed to
both herbicides and insectides (Glickman et al. 2004).
Epithelial tumors of the lower urinary tract
Other genetic and/or environmental factors that may be
associated with increased risk of bladder tumor forma-
The majority of epithelial neoplasms of the lower urinary
tion include obesity, cyclophosphamide usage, and expo-
tract are considered malignant; however, benign condi-
sure to aromatic amines (Glickman et al. 1989); however,
od pa pe ssi pioaod se yns su
current veterinary literature fails to document these asso-
have also been described (Martinez et al. 2003; Patrick
ciations. To date, no risk factors have been identified in
et al. 2006). These benign conditions are characterized by
the cat.
inflammation, epithelial proliferation, and development
Histology of canine and feline urothelial tumors is
of polypoid masses. Importantly, there is no evidence
divided based on local growth pattern into flat lesions
that these represent preneoplastic lesions (Martinez et al.
and papillary neoplasms (which project into the lumen)
2003). Because these lesions are generally classified as
(Table 79.1; Patrick et al. 2006).
inflammatory rather than neoplastic lesions, only malig-
Flat lesions are considered reactive, dysplastic, carci-
nant epithelial neoplasms will be discussed.
noma in situ, or overtly neoplastic and likely comprise
<20% of lesions (Knapp et al. 2000a). Only overtly ne0-
Transitional cell carcinoma
plastic lesions are truly invasive and there is some dis-
Transitional cell carcinoma is the most common tumor
agreement on their prevalence (Meuten 2002; Patrick
of the lower urinary tract in cats and dogs accounting for
et al. 2006). Papillary lesions comprise infiltrating (90%)
>90% of cases (Norris et al. 1992). Other tumor types 
and noninfiltrating (10%) variants (Knapp et al. 2000a).
include squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and
Noninfltrating variants are uncommon and relatively
undifferentiated carcinoma. Because there are no unique
low-grade malignancies, while infiltrative variants (flat
clinical features associated with the different epithelial
 malignancies, only transitional cell carcinoma is pre-
 and of high-grade malignancy.
sented. Transitional cell carcinoma is locally invasive and
 Flat and papillary noninfiltrating lesions are locally
has a moderate metastatic rate with >50% of dogs and
extensive but do not invade the bladder wall stroma and
> 20% of cats exhibiting evidence of metastases at time
are unlikely to metastasize. While these are tradition-
of death (Norris et al. 1992; Wilson et al. 2007). Affected
ally considered either benign proliferations or low-grade
dogs and cats are middle-aged to older with a median
malignancies, progression to more aggressive types com-
 age of onset of 10 years in dogs and 15 years in cats.
 monly occurs, especial among patients with carcinoma
In dogs, there is a well-recognized breed predilection
 in situ. Infiltrating lesions of papillary and nonpapillary
with Shelties, Scottish terriers, and Westhighland white
forms are highly invasive locally and typically involve the
 terriers (amongst other breeds) being significantly over-
 lamina propria and/or the muscularis propria (Patrick
represented (Norris et al. 1992). No breed preference has 
 et al. 2006). Typical location of lesions (regardless of
Neoplasia of the lower urinary tract  799
Table 79.1 Histologic variants and malignant potential of canine urothelial tumors (Meuten 2002: Patrick et al. 2006)
 Type of lesion 
 Growth pattern
Malignant potential 
Flat (nonpapillary)
Dysplatic, reactive, etc.
Confined to mucosa
None
Carcinoma in situ
Confined to mucosa
May progress to overtly malignant
Infiltrative
Involve mucosa and deeper layers
Highly malignant 
 Papillary (luminal growth)
 Papilloma
Confined to mucosa
None
Noninfiltrative
Involve mucosa ± substantia propria
Metastases unlikely, may progress to
more aggressive types
Infiltrative 
Most common variant that involves
Highly malignant
mucosa and deeper layers
histology) in cats and dogs is fairly predictable. The
 preferred method of diagnosis and successfully identifies
majority of canine patients develop tumors in the region
30-50% of affected dogs (Chapters 7 and 26) (Norris
of the trigone with up to 50% of male patients having
et al. 1992). “Traumatic" urethral catheterization and/or
prostatic involvement (Figure 79.1) (Hayes 1976).
prostatic/urethral washes can also be useful, diagnosing
In cats, more than half of patients develop tumors in
up to 90% of affected dogs (Norris et al. 1992). Percu-
the ventral aspect of the bladder (Wilson et al. 2007).
taneous transabdominal aspiration cytology of bladder
Regardless of primary tumor location, many cats and
tumors, however, should be avoided due to risk (albeit
dogs have or will develop other intravesicular disease
low-risk of approximately 1-3%) of needle-tract tumor
sites. Furthermore, there is some support to the concept
implantation (Nyland et al. 2002; Vignoli et al. 2007).
 of “field cancerization" when assessing local extent of
Cystoscopic evaluation and tumor biopsy can be helpful
these tumors. This concept implies that the entire urothe-
 in dogs with early-stage flat and/or noninfiltrating lesions
 lial mucosa has been exposed to some inciting source of
(Chapter 19).
 preneoplastic changes and is thus at risk of transforming
A noninvasive screening test that has proven useful in
 into overtly neoplastic mucosa. While the true inciting
select cases is the veterinary bladder tumor antigen test.
source is unknown, this concept can be used to explain
This test is a rapid latex agglutination dipstick test that
the multifocal growth patterns of most tumors (Figure
detects the presence of "bladder tumor analytes" (Billet
79.2).
et al. 2002). While the sensitivity of this test is quite high
With respect to systemic behavior, invasive lesions have
for detection of bladder tumors (85-90%), specificity is
1e pue sop jo os 0 dn ym sen eisen q
B sou  o  a  
least 20% of cats exhibiting metastatic disease at the
urinary tract disease (35-41%) (Billet et al. 2002; Henry
time of death (Norris et al. 1992; Wilson et al. 2007).
et al. 2003a). Because of low specificity, the test is most
Common metastatic sites in dogs include lungs (51%),
suited to rule out the presence of lower urinary tract
sublumbar lymph nodes (48%), urethra and prostate
neoplasia. In this setting, the negative predictive value
(50%), and bony sites (10%) (Norris et al. 1992; Wilson
can be as high as 99% (Henry et al. 2003a). Results of all
et al. 2007). Staging tests recommended for patients
clinical staging diagnostics are used to determine WHO
with bladder tumors include complete blood cell counts,
tumor stage ( Table 79.2).
serum chemistry, urinalysis, urine culture, abdominal
ultrasonography, and thoracic and abdominal radiogra-
Treatment options
phy. Ancillary tests include double-contrast cystography,
cystoscopy, urine sediment analysis, and tumor biopsy
Treatment of choice for any solid tumor of the bladder is
(Figure 79.3).
surgical resection. This approach is complicated in vet-
A presumptive diagnosis of transitional cell carci-
erinary patients by two factors; the majority of clinical
noma can be obtained through a combination of signal-
patients present with extensive (nonresectable, stage III)
ment, imaging results, and cytologic or histologic tumor
disease, and the concept of “field cancerization” leads
analysis. Cytologic diagnosis can be accomplished with
to high recurrence rates (up to 70% in humans). Those
urine sediment, traumatic catheterization, or percuta-
neous needle aspiration. Urine sediment analysis is the
haps Il) are potential candidates for local therapies. Local
800
 Lower urinary tract disorders
(a)
Bladder
lumen
(b)
(c)
Aeided aou showni jo uoenol jeuonn jeidi humous eoupen lin leuosuen auuen e jo aheui punosen (e) lee aunbi
 infitrative growth (arrow). (b) Ultrasound image of a canine transitional cell carcinoma illustrating multifocal growth pattern (nonpapillary
infiltrative). (c) Ultrasound image of a feline transitional cell carcinoma located in the ventral portion of the bladder (arrows)
therapeutic options include mucosal resection, photo-
cable for humans, where more than 75% will present with
dynamic therapy, laser ablation, radiation therapy, and
early-stage disease, most veterinary patients have invasive
partial or complete cystectomy. The typical patients with
tumors that cannot be resected using these techniques.
advanced local and/or systemic disease are candidates for
Photodynamic therapy and carbon dioxide laser ablation
palliative techniques such as chemotherapy (systemic and
have similar indications as mucosal resection and thus
intravesicular), NSAIDs, cystotomy tube placement, and
have only been used on an experimental basis in canine
urethral dissection or stent placement (Chapter 32).
patients (Nseyo et al. 1993; Upton et al. 2006).
Mucosal resection is a transurethral technique useful
Several reports have described use of radiation
only for small and noninfiltrative lesions. This technique
therapy for the treatment of canine bladder tumors
entails endoscopic visualization of the affected region fol-
lowed by either electrosurgical or laser resection of the
 -     
lesion (Chapters 19 and 39). While this approach is appli-
 and multidose (fractionated) protocols have been used.
Neoplasia of the lower urinary tract  801
is less than 20% and efficacy for improving survival is
unknown.
 Surgical methods for treatment of bladder tumors
include both partial and complete cystectomies. Unfor-
tunately, the majority of veterinary patients will not
be appropriate candidates for these methods due to
     s  
trigonal region. While the trigonal location of most
canine tumors is not amenable to partial resections, other
locations in patients with early stage disease may be con-
sidered. In a series of ll canine patients, partial cys-
tectomies (±chemotherapy) encompassing 40 and 70%
of the bladder was performed (Stone et al. 1996). Local
Pue shop a ui paiadsns ao panuanp sem aouannn
 median overall survival was 12 months.
Techniques for complete cystectomy and ureteral
diversion have also been described. These include subto-
Figure 79.2 Cystoscopic image of a transitional cell carcinoma of
 tal cystectomies with uretero-colonic anastomosis, regen-
the bladder.
nal submucosa, and other (nonpublished) methods to
Toxicities ranged from minimal (hematuria, pollakiuria,
(Pope et al. 1997; Stone et al. 1988). The uterero-colonic
colitis) to severe signs, such as secondary tumor for-
diversion approach, while successful in eliminating all
mation (rhabdomyosarcoma), bladder fibrosis, urethral
 gross tumor, is associated with severe metabolic com-
stenosis, colonic perforation, and ureter stenosis. While
 plications such as hyperammonemia, metabolic acidosis,
toxicity increased with dosage, there was no clear rela-
and azotemia. In one series of ten dogs treated with this
approach, median survival was <2 months and 6/10 dogs
side effects. Newer approaches have attempted to min-
died with evidence of metastatic disease (Stone et al.
imize toxicity while maximizing tumor dosage. These
1988).
methods involve techniques to maintain constant blad-
s s e d o e sn
der (and thus tumor) position along with intertreat-
intestinal submucosal grafts as a scaffold to allow bladder
ment target repositioning with CT guidance to maximize
 augmentation and regeneration. These grafts have been
tumor and minimize normal tissue dosage (Murphy et al.
shown to allow for successful regeneration of 40-60% of
 2008). Overall, clinical responses with radiation therapy
the bladder in a period of 8-12 weeks following subtotal
Figure 79.3 Double contrast cystogram demonstrating trigonal region filing defect (arrows) in an 8 year old SF Mixed breed dog with
 transitional cell carcinoma.
802
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Table 79.2 Clinical stages (TNM) of canine and feline bladder tumors (Owen 1980)
T: Primary tumor
Tis: Carcinoma in situ
T2: Tumour invading the bladder wall, with induration
TO: No evidence of tumour
T3: Tumour invading neighboring structures
T1 : Superficial papillary tumour
N: Regional lymph nodes (RLN)
NO: No evidence of RLN involvement
N2: RLN and juxta RLN involved
N1: RLN involved
M: Distant metastasis
M0: No evidence of distant metastasis
M1: Distant metastasis detected
TNM roups
Clinical stage
T1 or T2, N0, M0
T1 or T2, N1, M0
T1 or T2, N2 or N3, M0: T3 or T4, any N, M0
Any TN, M1
IV
cystectomy (Kropp et al. 1996). Morbidity associated with
toms in dogs with bladder tumors. In addition to
this approach is low in healthy dogs; however, in tumor-
effective analgesics, NSAIDs (cyclo-oxygenase (COX)
bearing dogs (with incomplete resections), the graft can
inhibitors) appear to have antitumor properties with
serve as a scaffold for tumor regrowth. No case series
bladder tumors. On the basis of immunohistochemi-
have described outcome associated with this or any other
cal studies, a high percentage (up to 100%) of canine
surgical approaches for subtotal cystectomy. While the
transitional cell carcinomas have been shown to aber-
more aggressive techniques are interesting, they are per-
rantly express COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes (Knottenbelt
haps more applicable to cats who occasionally present
 et al. 2006), making them attractive targets for therapy.
with resectable tumors; the overwhelming number of
Several studies have examined antitumor activity of the
 s (eas)  ri  ssad si
NSAID, piroxicam (0.3 mg/kg per day in dogs), and
 are thus not candidates for curative approaches.
[e pa ddeu) pou uq aau t-at jo siei asuodsa
 Clinical symptoms seen in patients with advanced dis-
1994; Mohammed et al. 2002). More recently, investi-
ease include pollakiuria, hematuria, urethral obstruction,
gators have examined usage of combination protocols
and pain. Fortunately, there are a variety of approaches
involving piroxicam and cytotoxic chemotherapeutics
that can successfully address these symptoms. Histori-
such as mitoxantrone and cisplatin (Henry et al. 2003b;
cally, chemotherapy is the most widely used treatment
Mohammed et al. 2003). Combinations are well tolerated
for palliative therapy and has included doxorubicin,
with dose-limiting toxicities of azotemia and myelosup
cyclophosphamide, carboplatin, cisplatin, taxol, mito-
 pression. Evidence from these studies suggests a synergis-
mycin C, mitoxantrone, and gemcitabine (Moore et al.
tic combination with response rates of 33-75%. Further-
1990; Helfand et al. 1994; Chun et al. 1996; Chun et al.
more, there is atleast initial evidence suggesting a survival
1997; Knapp et al. 2000a; Henry et al. 2003b; Kosarek
benefit for dogs treated with combination of piroxicam
et al. 2005). In many instances, these drugs have been
 and chemotherapy.
 used in intravenous systemic protocols and for intrav-
Other methods that have been described for pallia-
esicular treatments. Of these agents, only intravenous
tion of bladder tumors directly address management of
cisplatin therapy has documented activity as a single
urine outflow obstruction and include permanent cys-
agent with response rates up to 25% noted (Moore
tostomy catheter placement, urethral stent placement,
et al. 1990; Chun et al. 1996; Knapp et al. 2000a, 2000b;
and urethral dissection (Chapter 32). Permanent cys-
Mohammed et al. 2003). Objective responses, however,
  po oo sso n  s 
 may not be appropriate measurement endpoints in pallia-
relieve urine outflow obstructions (Figure 79.4).
tive medicine. Amelioration of symptoms and improved
Complications are minimal with the most frequent
quality of life measures are probably more important in
being urinary tract infection (Smith et al. 1995). Pallia-
palliative medicine but are difficult to objectively measure
tive stenting involves placement of expandable metallic
in veterinary patients.
stents in obstructed urethral segments. These are gener-
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are
ally placed under fluoroscopic guidance and are associ-
the most commonly used agent for palliation of symp-
ated with slightly higher complication rates compared to
Neoplasia of the lower urinary tract 803
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 79.4 (a-d): Surgical placement of a low-profile cystotomy tube in a dog with urethral obstruction secondary to transitional cell 
Carcinoma of the blader and urethra. (Photographs courtesy of Dr. Karen Tobias.)
cystostomy tube placement, including recurrent obstruc-
and 261 days for cats (Rocha et al. 2000; Wilson et al.
tion, urethral tear, and recurrent infections ( Weisse et al.
 2007). Objective responses and survival duration may
2006). Urethral dissection techniques involve surgically
 not be the most appropriate measure of success in treated
removing neoplastic tissue from the luminal aspect of the
patients, especially in the palliative setting. Amelioration
urethral obstruction (via electrocautery loops and other
of symptoms is probably the most important measure
methods). One case series described outcome associated
and can be achieved in up to 75% of patients treated
with this technique and suggested relatively high com-
with combinations of chemotherapy and piroxicam for
plication rates, especially in female dogs (Liptak et al.
a median duration of 194 days (Henry et al. 2003b).
2004).
Finally, prognostic factors associated with improved out-
 come in dogs include gender (spayed females Median
Prognosis
Survival Time (MST) = 358 days versus neutered males 
Overall prognosis for dogs and cats diagnosed with
MST = 145 days) and chemotherapy protocol (anthra-
 cycline plus platinum MST = 358 days versus platinum
bladder tumors is guarded. In select canine and feline
 alone MST = 132 days). No prognostic factors have been 
   s  s a  s
identified in cats.
sidered. Median survival for dogs treated with partial
   )  1   
Mesenchymal tumors of the lower
however, most patients have advanced disease and are
urinary tract
candidates for palliative therapy only. Reported median
      r
Mesenchymal bladder tumors are uncommon and
shop ro ek I nexdde oi sp zt o su
account for approximately 10% of cases (Strafuss and
804  Lower urinary tract disorders
Dean 1975). In dogs, benign variants include leiomyoma
enchymal tissue within the bladder (Chapter 80). Rhab-
and fibroma and malignant variants include leiomyosar-
domyosarcomas grow by local invasion into the bladder
coma, fibrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and rarely
wall with extension into the luminal aspect. Gross appear-
hemangiosarcoma. In cats, only smooth muscle variants
ance of the luminal growths often resemble grape-like
(leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma) have been described.
bunches; giving rise to the term "botyroid" tumors. In
Affected patients are typically middle-aged with no gen-
addition to being locally invasive, rhabdomyosarcomas
der or breed predilection. Clinical symptoms include
appear to have moderate to high metastatic rates based
hematuria (>90% of cases), pollakiuria, and dysuria
on case reports, although similar to other mesenchymal
(Epslin 1987).
 tumors the true metastatic rate is unknown (Stamps and
Harris 1968; Halliwell and Ackerman 1974; Pletcher and
Fibroma and fibrosarcoma
Dalton 198l; Kim et al. 1996; Kuwamura et al. 1998;
Takiguchi et al. 2002; Bae et al. 2007).
Fibromas and fibrosarcomas are the most common
Affected patients are young with all reported dogs
benign and malignant mesenchymal tumors of the canine
being <2 years old at time of diagnosis. Older reports
 bladder. Tumors occur in various sites within the blad-
suggested a breed predilection among Basset Hounds and
der while originating from the bladder wall. Fibromas
Saint Bernards; however, reports over the last 10 years
expand between the muscle layers while fibrosarcomas
have failed to support this and describe a wide variety of
invade between these tissues and can protrude into the
breeds. A strong gender preference does appear to exist
lumen. In addition to being locally invasive, fibrosar-
with females being affected more than twice as often
comas have been reported to metastasize, although the
as males. Common clinical signs include hematuria and
overall metastatic rate is unknown (Olausson et al. 2005).
hypertrophic osteopathy. A presumptive diagnosis can
Standard staging diagnostics are recommended as dis-
often be made based on signalment, clinical signs, and
cussed for epithelial tumors. Following complete staging,
imaging results.
treatment of choice in appropriate patients is surgical
 Staging diagnostics include standard recommenda-
resection. Patients with advanced disease either locally or
tions described for other lower urinary tract tumors.
 systemically can be treated with palliative chemotherapy
Following complete staging treatment options include
 agents such as doxorubicin, although benefit is unknown.
either surgical resection or palliative therapy. Because
 Prognosis for dogs with benign tumors is excellent. In one
of the anatomic localization within the urethra, surgical
case series of 51 dogs with fibromas treated surgically,
resection is often not feasible; however, successful resec-
46 dogs had a complete resolution of symptoms with no
tion has been described for tumors within the bladder
reported tumor recurrence (Epslin 1987). Prognosis for
itself (Takiguchi et al. 2002). Because of the presumed
dogs with fibrosarcomas is unknown due to paucity of
 moderate-high metastatic rate, chemotherapy is indi-
reported cases.
cated following surgery with doxorubicin being a rea-
sonable choice. Recommendations for paliative therapy
Leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma
are identical to those described for other bladder tumors
Smooth muscle tumors of the urinary bladder are rare
with the goal of alleviating symptoms; however, no infor-
but have been described in cats and dogs (Burk et al.
mation is available regarding efficacy of these palliative
1975; Strafuss and Dean 1975; Heng et al. 2006). As
approaches. Prognosis for dogs with rhabdomyosarco-
mas of the urinary bladder is unknown. No information
with other mesenchymal tumors, smooth muscle tumors
involve primarily the bladder wall but can protrude into
is available regarding the treatment of these tumors in
 the lumen. Metastases have also been reported in dogs
cats.
with leiomyosarcomas, but are thought to be rare. Stag-
Secondary tumors of the lower urinary tract
ing diagnostics and treatment options are identical to
 those described for fibromas and fbrosarcomas. Prog-
Unlike secondary renal tumors, secondary or metastatic
nosis for dogs and cats with smooth muscle tumors is
tumors to the bladder and urethra occur uncommonly.
unknown.
The most common secondary tumors include lymphoma
Hunons o suuo soun go uisuxa pu
Rhabdomyosarcoma
organs such as the prostate, uterus, and rectum.
Rhabdomyosarcomas are uncommon but have been
Lymphoma of the lower urinary tract
reported in dogs and rarely in cats (Osborne et al. 1968;
Strafuss and Dean 1975). They arise from skeletal mus-
Primary lymphoma involving the urinary bladder and/or
cle of the urethra and fundus or undifferentiated mes-
prostate has been described, but in general most cases
Neoplasia of the lower urinary tract 805
 represent part of a more generalized lymphoma (Struble
ratios of up to 2.12 reported (Teske et al. 2002b; Bryan
et al. 1997; van Noort 1997; Maiolino and DeVico 2000;
et al. 2007).
Benigni et al. 2006; Winter et al. 2006). On the basis of the
Prostatic carcinomas are locally invasive and highly
few reported cases and in the author's experience, there is
metastatic. Metastatic rates as high as 80% have been
no specific age, gender, or signalment that is predisposed
reported and commonly involve pelvic and sublumbar
to have lower urinary tract involvement with lymphoma.
lymph nodes and neighboring bone (Cornellet al. 2000).
Patients typically present symptomatic from systemic
In general, metastatic sites include bone (22%), lymph
involvement or typical lower urinary tract signs with
nodes (50%), lungs (50%), and other sites (40%) (Cor-
obstruction being most common. A presumptive diagno-
nell et al. 2000). Clinical signs are often referable to the
 sis can be made based on systemic involvement, imaging
urinary tract and include hematuria, stranguria, dysuria,
findings, and urine sediment analysis for neoplastic cells.
and incontinence. Tenesmus due to prostatic enlarge-
 In general, fine-needle aspiration should be avoided due
   sd po  oi d i    n
to risk of bladder rupture; also, without a priori knowl-
2000). Other signs include pain due to bony involvement
edge of diagnosis (carcinoma versus sarcoma versus lym-
(36%) and signs of systemic disease such as weight loss
   s  s    
and anorexia (42%).
tumor implantation that is associated with solid tumors.
Recommended staging diagnostics are similar to those
Complete staging diagnostics are recommended to
described for bladder tumors while being careful to fully
fully evaluate extent of disease including complete
 evaluate for bony metastatic lesions. A presumptive diag-
bloodwork, urinalysis, thoracic and abdominal imag-
nosis of prostatic carcinoma is made based on signalment,
 ing, ±bone marrow analysis, and peripheral lymph node
 imaging results, and cytologic evaluation of tumor sam-
aspirate. Following complete staging, traditional multia-
ples. Cytologic samples can be obtained from urine sedi-
 gent doxorubicin-based protocols are the standard treat-
ment, traumatic catheter washes, or occasionally through
ment regimen. If urinary obstruction is present, a ure-
fine needle aspiration (acknowledging the risk of nee-
thral catheter can be placed for palliation while pursuing
 dle track tumor implantation). Cytologic differentiation
therapy. On the basis of the author's experience and
between different histologies, however, is difficult.
reported cases in the literature, prognosis for dogs with
Following complete staging, treatment options for
lymphoma involving the urinary bladder is guarded. The
dogs with prostatic carcinoma include surgery, radiation,
longest reported survival was 6 months in a dog treated
 photodynamic therapy, and chemotherapy. Hormone
with a multiagent protocol (Benigni et al. 2006).
antagonists, such as the antiandrogens used to treat
humans, have not been shown to be effective. Surgical
options that have been described include total prosta-
Prostatic tumors
quency ablation, and Nd:YAG laser prostatectomy
Prostatic carcinoma
(Cromeens et al. 1993; Vlasin et al. 2006; Liu et al.
Prostatic tumors (excluding transitional cell carcinoma)
 Ps ae se s s 
are uncommon in dogs, with a prevalence of less than
sd a n  e si o sd 
0.6% in necropsy studies, and virtually nonexistent in cats
Urinary incontinence is the most common complication
(Chapter 78) (Weaver 1981). Tumor histology is equally
of these procedures and is seen most often following total
split between adenocarcinomas arising from glandu-
lar epithelium and mixed tumors including glandular
cessful at removing gross tumor and palliating symptoms,
and urothelial components (Cornell et al. 2000; Bryan 
there has been no documented survival benefit.
et al. 2007). Regardless of histology most canine prostate
Radiation therapy has been utilized for intraoperative
tumors do not express androgen receptors. Mesenchymal
 treatment and standard teletherapy treatment of canine
tumor histologies are rare and will not be discussed.
prostatic carcinoma. Only one case series describes out-
Average age of onset for dogs affected by prostatic car-
(ah H) a  s ng 
cinoma is 10 years with a median body weight of 20.5 kg
 In this report, ten dogs were treated with intraoper-
(Cornell et al. 2000). Initial evidence suggests there may
ative radiotherapy. Total intraoperative dosage ranged
be an increased risk for prostatic carcinoma in certain 
between 15 and 30 Gray (Gy), with one dog receiv-
breeds including Doberman pinschers, Shetland sheep-
ing an additional 40 Gy postoperatively. While objective
dogs, Scottish terriers, Beagles, German shorthaired
e e (  a s ia 
pointers, Airedale terriers, and Norwegian elkhounds
to be no significant survival benefit in treated dogs
(Bryan et al. 2007). Several papers also describe increased
(MST = 114 days). Incidence of side effects from a stan-
risk of tumor development in neutered males, with risk
dard course of radiotherapy is also high and includes
806   Lower urinary tract disorders
effects such as colitis (56%), cystitis (30%), and colonic
efforts are needed to explore roles of PDT, chemother-
perforation (18%) (Anderson et al. 2002). Because of the
apy, and NSAIDs in dogs with prostatic cancer.
incidence of side effects and lack of discernible benefit,
palliative use of radiotherapy is questionable.
Summary
 Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is another local ther-
 apeutic modality that utilizes a photochemical reaction
Tumors of the lower urinary tract account for >95% of 
to kill cancer cells. This modality has been widely used
all tumors in the urinary system, with the urinary blad-
to treat superficial epithelial malignancies in human and
 der being the most common site. Of the urinary bladder
veterinary medicine. With respect to prostatic carcinoma,
malignancies, 80-90% arise from the urothelium while
two reports have described this therapy as a sole modal-
10-20% originate from other epithelial and mesenchy-
ity or as an adjuvant to surgical resection. As an adjuvant
 mal tissues. Treatment of choice for these tumors is sur-
to surgical resection (subcapsular prostatectomy), PDT
gical resection but is hindered by anatomic localization
was not successful at resolving signs or controlling the
(trigonal) and in some cases advanced tumor stage. Novel
tumor. This approach resulted in a median survival of
 surgical approaches have been described; however, fur-
 so  9 go d e  s 1 
ther studies are needed to clarify their role. Thus, the pri-
et al. 2007). As a sole modality, a single dog has been
 mary treatment modality has become palliative therapy
described in the literature (Lucroy et al. 2003). Following
with combinations of chemotherapy and NSAIDs. These
treatment, this dog had an immediate resolution of lower
urinary tract signs and had stable disease for a period of 
 rating tumor-related symptoms but have questionable
34 weeks. These disparate results suggest further stud-
survival benefit.
ies are warranted to fully evaluate the role of PDT in
treatment of prostatic carcinoma.
References
Traditionally, cytotoxic chemotherapy has been con-
sidered inactive for treatment of prostatic cancer in dogs
Anderson, C., E. McNiel, et al. (2002). Late complications of pelvic
irradiation in 16 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43(2): 187-192.
and humans (LeRoy and Northrup 2008). Drugs that
Bae, I., Y. Kim, et al. (2007). Genitourinary rhabdomyosarcoma
 sd    a  a
with systemic metastases in a young dog. Vet Pathol 44(4): 518-
include taxanes, anthracyclines, and platinum drugs. On
520.
the basis of current literature, taxanes appear to be the
Benigni, L., C. Lamb, et al. (2006). Lymphoma affecting the uri-
most efficacious (Savarese et al. 2001). Unfortunately,
nary bladder in three dogs and a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(6):
592-596.
there are no case series in dogs that have evaluated use of
Billet,J., A. Moore,et al. (2002). Evaluation ofa bladder tumor antigen
chemotherapy for treatment of prostatic tumors. NSAIDs
test for the diagnosis of lower urinary tract malignancies in dogs.
 have been suggested as palliative agents for dogs with pro-
Att I Vet Res 63(3): 370-373.
static carcinoma (Sorenmo et al. 2004). In one study eval-
Bryan, J, M. Keeer, et al. (2007). A population study of neutering
uating the use of "NSAIDs" (piroxicam or carprofen), a
status as a risk factor for canine prostate cancer. Prostate 67( ll):
significant survival benefit was noted for dogs receiving
1174-1181.
Burk, R., E. Meierhenry, et al. ( 1975). Leiomyosarcoma of the urinary
 NSAIDs versus those who did not (6.9 months versus
bladder in a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 167(8): 749-751.
0.7 months, p < 0.0001) (Sorenmo et al. 2004). These
Caywood, D., C. Osborne, et al. (1980). Neoplasms of the canine and
feline urinary tracts. In: Current Veterinary Therapy VIl. Philadel-
therapy as sole agents and in combinations are warranted.
phia, PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1203-1212.
Chun, R., D. Knapp, et al. (1996). Cisplatin treatment of transitional
Combination protocols using NSAIDs and other modal-
cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in dogs: 18 cases. I Arm Vet
ities have not been described.
Med Assoc 209(9): 1588- 1591.
Chun, R., D. Knapp, et al. ( 1997). Phase I clinical trial of carboplatin
in canine transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder. J Vet
Prognosis
Intern Med 11(5): 279-283.
 Prognosis for dogs with prostatic carcinoma is guarded
Cornell, K., D. Bostwick, et al. (2000). Clinical and pathologic aspects
of spontaneous canine prostate carcinoma: a retrospective analysis
 to grave. Reported median survival ranges from 2 to
of 76 cases. Prostate 45(2): 173-183.
6 months; survivals for >1 year are extremely rare. The
Cromeens, D., D. Johnson, et al. (1993). Transurethral canine
majority of patients (60-80%) present with advanced
prostatectomy with the ND:YAG laser. J Invest Surg 6(1): 97-
local disease and overt gross metastatic disease. Local
103.
DeLuca, A., P. Johnstone, et al. (1994). Tolerance of the bladder to
intraoperative radiation in a canine model: a five-year follow-up.
plicated by the invasive nature of the tumor and high
Int I Rad Oncol Biol Phys 30(2): 339-345.
 complication rates. Systemic therapy to treat and/or pre-
Epslin, D. ( 1987). Urinary bladder fibromas in dogs: 51 cases. JAm Vet
vent metastatic spread has no proven efficacy. Further
Med Assoc 190(4): 440-444.
Neoplasia of the lower urinary tract 807
Glickman, L., F. Schofer, et al. (1989). Epidemiologic study of insec-
        
ticide exposures, obesity, and risk of bladder cancer in household
lymphoma of the urinary bladder in a dog. Vet Pathol 37(2):
dogs. I Toxicol Environ Health 28(4): 407-414.
184-186.
Glickman, L., M. Raghavan, et al. (2004). Herbicide exposure and the
Martinez, I., J. Mattoon, et al. (2003). Polypoid cystitis in 17 dogs
risk of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in Scottish
{1978-2001). I Vet Intern Med 17(4): 499-509.
Terriers. I Am Vet Med Assoc 224(8): 1290- 1297.
Meuten, D. (2002). Tumors of the urinary system. In: Tumors in Dormes-
Halliwell, W. and N. Ackerman (1974). Botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma
tic Amirmals, Chapter 10, 4th edition. Ames, IA: Iowa State Press,
 of the urinarybladder and hypertrophic osteoarthropathyin a young
Pp. 509-546.
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 165(10): 911-913.
Mohammed, S., P. Bennett, et al. (2002). Effects of the cyclooxygenase
Hayes, H. ( 1976). Canine bladder cancer: epidemiologic features. Arm
inhibitor, piroxicam, on tumor response, apoptosis, and angiogen-
I Epidemiol 104(6): 673-677.
esis in a canine model of human invasive urinary bladder cancer.
Helfand, S., T. Hamilton,et al. ( 1994). Comparison of three treatments
Can Res 62(2): 356-358.
for transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder in the dog. I Arm Anin
Mohammed, S., B. Craig, et al. (2003). Effects of the cyclooxygenase
Hosp Assoc 30: 270-275.
 inhibitor, piroxicam, in combination with chemotherapy on tumor
Heng, H., J. Lowry, et al. (2006). Smooth muscle neoplasia of the
response, apoptosis, and angiogenesis in a canine model of human
invasive urinary bladder cancer. Mol Can Ther 2(2): 183-188.
83-86.
Moore, A., A. Cardona, et al. (1990). Cisplatin for the treatment of
Henry, C., I. Tyler, et al. (2003a). Evaluation ofabladder tumor antigen
transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder or urethra. A
test as a screening test for transitional cell carcinoma of the lower
retrospective study of 15 dogs. I Vet Intern Med 4(3): 148- 152.
urinary tract in dogs. Am J Vet Res 64(8): 1017-1020.
Moore, A.S., G.H. Theilen, et al. ( 1991). Preclinical study of sequential
Henry, C., D. McCaw, et al. (2003b). Clinical evaluation of mitox-
tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 2 in the treatment of sponta-
 antrone and piroxicam ina canine model of human invasive urinary
neous canine neoplasms. Car Res 51(1): 233-238.
bladder carcinoma. Clin Can Res9(2): 906-911.
Murphy, S., A. Gutierrez, et al. (2008). Laparoscopically implanted
Kim, D., E. Hodgin, et al. ( 1996). Juvenile rhabdomyosarcomas in two
tissue expander radiotherapy in canine transitional cell carcinoma.
dogs. Vet Pathol 33(4): 447-450.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 49(4): 400-405.
 Knapp, D., R. Richardson, et al. ( 1994). Piroxicam therapy in 34 dogs
Norris, A., E. Laing, et al. ( 1992). Canine bladder and urethral tumors:
with transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder. I Vet Interr
a retrospective study of 115 cases (1980-1985). I Vet Intern Med
Med 8(4): 273-278.
6(3): 145-153.
Knapp, D., N. Glickman, et al. (2000a). Naturally occuring canine
Nseyo, U., R. Whalen, et al. (1993). Canine bladder response to red
transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder. Urol Oncol 5:
and green light whole bladder photodynamic therapy. Urology41(4):
47-59.
392-396.
Knapp, D., N. Glickman, et al. (200ob). Cisplatin versus cisplatin 
Nyland, T., S. Wallack, et al. (2002). Needle-tract implantation fol-
combined with piroxicam in a canine model of human invasive
lowing us-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of transitional cell
urinary bladder cancer. Car Chemother Pharmacol 46(3): 221-
carcinoma of the bladder, urethra, and prostate. Vet Radiol Ultra-
226.
soumd 43(1): 50-53.
Knottenbelt, C., D. Mellor, et al. (2006). Cohort study of COX-1 and 
Olausson, A., S. Stieger, et al. (2005). A urinary bladder fibrosarcoma
COX-2 expression in canine rectal and bladder tumors. JSmall Amim
in a young dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46(2): 135- 138.
Pract 47(4): 196-200.
Osborne, C., D. Low, et al. ( 1968). Neoplasms of the canine and feline 
Kosarek, C., W. Kisseberth, et al. (2005). Clinical evaluation of gem-
urinary bladder: incidence, etiologic factors, occurrence, and patho-
logical features. Arm I Vet Res 29: 204 1-2055.
Intern Med 19(1): 81-86.
Owen, L.N. ( 1980). TNM Classification of Tumors in Domestic Animals,
Kropp, B., M. Rippy, et al. (1996). Regenerative urinary bladder
 Ist edition. Geneva: World Health Organization.
augmentation using small intestinal submucosal: urodynamic and
Patrick, D., S. Fitzgerald, et al. (2006). Classification of canine uri-
nary bladder urothelial tumours based on the World Health Orga-
tions. I Urol 155(6): 2098-2104.
nization/International Society of Urological Pathology consensus
Kuwamura, M., H. Yoshida, et al. (1998). Urinary bladder rhab-
classification. I Comp Pathol 135(4): 190-199.
domyosarcoma (sarcoma botryoides) in a young Newfoundland
Pletcher, J. and L. Dalton (1981). Botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma in the
dog. I Vet Med Sci 60(5): 619-621.
urinary bladder of a dog. Vet Pathol 18(5): 695-697.
I'eplattenier, H., B. Klem, et al. (2007). Preliminary results of intraop-
Poirier, V., L. Forrest, et al. (2004). Piroxicam, mitoxantrone, and
erative photodynamic therapy with 5-aminolevulinic acid in dogs
coarse fraction radiotherapy for the treatrment of transitional cell
with prostate carcinoma. Vet I 178: 202-207.
carcinoma of the bladder in 10 dogs: a pilot study. JAm Anirm Hosp
 LeRoy, B. and N. Northrup (2008). Prostate cancer in dogs: compara-
Assoc 40(2): 131-136.
tive and clinical aspects. Vet J 180: 149-162.
Pope, I., M. Davis, et al. ( 1997). The ontogeny of canine smallintestinal
Liptak, J., S. Brutscher, et al. (2004). Transurethral resection in the
submucosal regenerated bladder. J Urol 158(3 Pt 2): 1105- 11 10.
management of urethral and prostatic neoplasia in 6 dogs. Vet Surg
Raghavan, M., D. Knapp, et al. (2004). Topical flea and tick pesticides
33(5): 505-516.
and the risk of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in
Liu, I, G. Wansaicheong, et al. (2008). Canine prostate: contrast-
Scottish Terriers. JAm Vet Med Assoc 225(3): 389-394.
enhanced US-guided radiofrequency ablation with
urethral
Rocha, T., G. Mauldin, et al. (2000). Prognostic factors in dogs with
and neurovascular cooling-initial experience. Radiology 247(3):
urinary bladder carcinoma. I Vet Intern Med 14(5): 486-490.
717-725.
Sapierzynski, R., E. Malicka, et al. (2007). Tumors of the urogenital
Lucroy, M., M. Bowles, et al. (2003). Photodynamic therapy for pro-
static carcinoma in a dog. IVet Intern Med 17(2): 235-237.
Vet Sci 10(2): 97-103.
808
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Savarese, D., S. Halabi, et al. (200l). Phase II study of doxetaxel,
Turrel, JI. (1987). Intraoperative radiotherapy of carcinoma of the
estramustine, and low-dose hydrocortisone in men with hormone-
prostate gland in ten dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 190(1): 48-52.
refractory prostate cancer: a final report of CALGB 9780. Cancer
Upton, M., C. Tangner, et al.(2006). Evaluation of carbon dioxide laser
and Leukermia Group B. I Clin Oncol 19(9): 2509-2516.
ablation combined with mitoxantrone and piroxicam treatment in
Smith, J., E. Stone, et al. ( 1995). Placement of a permanent cystostomy
dogs with transitional cell carcinoma. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 228(4):
catheter to relieve urine outflow obstruction in dogs with transi-
549-552.
tional cell carcinoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206(4): 496-499.
van Noort, R. ( 1997). 4 unusual cases of malignant lymphoma in the
Sorenmo, K., M. Goldschmidt, et al. (2004). Evaluation (
of
dog and cat. Tijdschrift voor diergeneeskunde 122(18): 502-505.
cyclooxygenase-l and cyclooxygenase-2 expresion and the effect of
Vignoli, M., F Rossi, et al. (2007). Needle-tract implantation after
fine-needle aspiration biopsy of transitional cell carcinoma of the
Oncol 2(1): 13-23.
urinary bladder and adenocarcinoma of the lung. Schweizer Archiv
Stamps, P. and D. Harris ( 1968). Botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma of the
fur Tierheilkunde 149(7): 314-318.
urinary bladder of a dog. IAm Vet Med Assoc 153(8): 1064- 1068.
Vlasin, M., P. Rauser, et al. (2006). Subtotal intracapsular prostatec-
Stone, E., S. Withrow, et al. (1988). Ureterocolonic anastomosis in ten
tomy as a useful treatment for advanced-stage prostatic malignan-
dogs with transitional cell carcinoma. Vet Surg 17(3): 147-153.
cies. J Small Amim Pract 47(9): 512-516.
Stone, E., T. George, et al. ( 1996). Partial cystectomy for urinarybladder
Weaver, A. ( 198l). Fifteen cases of prostatic carcinoma in the dog. Vet
neoplasia: surgical technique and outcome in ll dogs. I Small Amim
Rec 109(4): 71-75.
Pract 37(10): 480-485.
Weisse, C., A. Berent, et al. (2006). Evaluation of palliative stenting for
Strafuss, A. and Dean, M. (1975). Neoplasms of the canine urinary
 management of malignant urethral obstructions in dogs. I Arm Vet
bladder. I Am Vet Med Assoc 166(12): 1161-1163.
Med Assoc 229(2): 226-234.
Struble, A., G. Lawson, et al. ( 1997). Urethral obstruction in a dog: an
Wilson, H., R. Chun, et al. (2007). Clinical signs, treatments, and
unusual presentation of T-cell lymphoma. I Arm Amirm Hosp Assoc
33(5): 423-426.
bladder: 20 cases ( 1990-2004). JArm Vet Med Assoc 231(1): 101- 106.
Takiguchi, M., T. Watanabe, et al. (2002). Rhabdomyosarcoma (botry-
Winter, M., J. Locke, et al. (2006). Imaging diagnosis—urinary
oid sarcoma) of the urinary bladder in a Maltese. Small Amirm Pract
obstruction secondary to prostatic lymphoma in a young dog. Vet
43(6): 269-271.
Radiol Ultrasound 47(6): 597-601.
Teske, E., E. Naan, et al. (2002b). Canine prostate carcinoma: epidemi-
Withrow, S., E. Gillette, et al. (1989). Intraoperative irradiation of
ological evidence of an increased risk in castrated dogs. Mol Cell
16 spontaneously ocurring canine neoplasms. Vet Surg 18(1):
Endocrinol 197(1-2): 251-255.
7-11.
80
Congenital diseases of the lower urinary tract
Joe Bartges and John M. Kruger
Urinary tract disorders occurring in young animals may
the mesonephric ducts contribute to formation of the
result from heritable (genetic) or acquired processes that
vagina.
affect differentiation and growth of the developing uri-
Although the mesonephros and metanephros produce
nary tract. Formation of the urinary system depends on
urine, maintenance of fetal homeostasis is primarily the
sequential and coordinated development and interaction
responsibility of the placenta. Varying quantities of urine
of multiple embryonic tissues (Noden and deLahunta
formed by the fetal kidneys pass from the developing
1985; Kruger et al. 1995). Over 400 regulatory genes
urinary bladder through the urachus to the placenta,
are believed to be involved in the embryogenesis of
where unwanted waste products are absorbed by the
the urinary system (Glassberg 2002; Haraguchi et al.
maternal circulation and subsequently excreted in the
2007; Schedl 2007). The urinary bladder and urethra are
 mother's urine (Noden and deLahunta 1985). Fetal urine
formed by subdivision of the cloaca, the caudal portion of
also passes through the urethra into the amniotic cavity
the embryonic hindgut. Formation of the urorectal sep-
where urine forms one of the major constituents of amni-
tum divides the cloaca into the rectum positioned dor-
otic fluid. Normal patterns of urine storage and bladder
sally and the urogenital sinus positioned ventrally. The
 emptying are evident during the latter part of gestation in
urogenital sinus communicates caudally with the amni-
human and ovine fetuses. Most newborn puppies and kit-
otic cavity via the urogenital orifice and cranially with
tens void urine shortly after birth; however, micturition
the allantois (a portion of the placenta) via the urachus
is rarely observed in most neonates because of maternal
and allantoic stalk. The urinary bladder eventually devel-
hygiene and caring of the neonate.
ops from the proximal urachus and the cranial portion
of the urogenital sinus. The caudal portion of the uro-
 genital sinus differentiates into the urethra; the remain-
Urinary bladder
der of the urachus narrows and closes functionally by
birth. With embryonic development, the mesonephric
Urinary bladder agenesis and hypoplasia
ducts and embryonic ureters (ureteral buds) establish
Complete agenesis of the urinary bladder is rare, but has
separate openings in the caudal portion of the urogen-
ital sinus. Initially, the ureteral orifice is located caudal
been reported in a 4-month-old, female, mixed breed
dog with urinary incontinence (Pearson et al. 1965).
to the opening of the mesonephric duct, but as the uri-
Hypoplasia has been reported in dogs and cats and often
nary bladder develops, positions of the embryonic ureter
associated with ectopic ureters (Holt and Gibbs 1992;
and the mesonephric ducts are transposed so that the
Holt and Moore 1995; Agut et al. 2002). Embryonic
ureter opens cranially in the neck of the bladder and the
maldevelopment may result in a hypoplastic bladder;
mesonephric duct opens in the cranial urethra. In male
however, disruption of urinary bladder function may
dogs and cat, the mesonephric ducts differentiate into
be associated with potentially reversible reduction in
 components of the male reproductive system. In females,
bladder capacity (Schmaelzle et al. 1969). Small bladder
 capacity associated with ectopic ureters may contribute
to urinary incontinence even with surgical correction,
Nephrology and Urology of Srmall Atnirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
 but bladder capacity may increase over time (Archibald
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
and Owen 1974; Holt and Moore 1995).
809
810
 Lower urinary tract disorders
2005). This is a rare disorder being reported in an 8-
month-old, female, English bulldog with urinary incon-
tinence and pyelonephritis (Hobson and Ader 1979).
Treatment involves managing-associated conditions and
reconstructive surgery (Shimada et al. 2002).
Urinary bladder herniation
Exteriorization of the urinary bladder through an
inguinal hernia has been described in a two-year-old
cat (Zulauf et al. 2007). Clinical signs included chronic
lower urinary tract signs and a soft mass was palpated in
the region. Radiography revealed the urinary bladder to
Figure 80.1 Lateral abdominal radiograph of an excretory uro-
be extraabdominal. Treatment consisted of repositioning
of the urinary bladder in the abdominal cavity with an
is present bilaterally. The dog had urinary incontinence and recur-
incisional cystopexy and partial closure of the enlarged
rent bacterial urinary tract infections. RK, right kidney: LK, left 
inguinal canals.
kidney: Trigone, trigone of bladder located in pelvic canal.
Urachal anomalies
Peivic bladder
Urachal anomalies occur commonly in dogs and cats.
Pelvic bladder refers to urinary bladders that have a blunt-
The urachus is a fetal connection allowing urine to pass
shaped trigone, which is located in an intrapelvic loca-
between the developing urinary bladder and the placenta.
tion associated with a shortened urethra (Figure 80.1)
It undergoes complete atrophy and is nonfunctional at
(Adams and DiBartola 1983). The role of pelvic bladder
birth. If it fails to completely atrophy, macroscopic or
with urinary incontinence is controversial and dogs with
microscopic remnants may remain and result in persis-
pelvic bladder may be continent (Adams and DiBartola
tent urachal patency or formation of urachal cysts or
1983; Mahaffey et al. 1984; Johnston et al. 1986). Nor-
diverticula (Osborne et al. 1987; Bartges 2000).
mally, the trigone tapers and connects to the urethra
A persistent urachus occurs when the urachal canal
 in an intraabdominal location. The degree of distention
remains functionally patent between the urinary bladder
of the bladder affects location of the trigone; therefore,
and the umbilicus (Figure 80.2). It is characterized by
the bladder should be adequately distended during con-
 inappropriate urine loss through the umbilicus (Osborne 
 trast urethrocystography before diagnosing pelvic blad-
et al. 1966; Greene and Bohning 1971; Pearson and Gibbs
der (Chapter 15). Pelvic bladder has also been associ-
1971; Cornell 2000; Laverty and Salisbury 2002). A patent
ated with urinary tract infection (Adams and DiBar-
urachus is often accompanied by omphalitis, ventral der-
tola 1983). Although some dogs with pelvic bladders are
matitis, and urinary tract infections. Rarely, uroabdomen
continent, other dogs with pelvic bladders have refrac-
may occur when a persistent urachus terminates in the
tory urinary incontinence without any other identifiable
 abdominal cavity (Hanson 1972). A urachal cyst may
cause (Chapter 76) (Adams and DiBartola 1983; Lane and
develop if the urachal epithelium in an isolated segment
Lappin 1995). A diagnosis of pelvic bladder is established
of a persistent urachus continues to secrete fluid (Figure
by contrast radiography. If pelvic bladder is associated
80.3; Archibald and Owen 1974; Osborne et al. 1987).
with urinary incontinence, pharmacologic management 
A vesicourachal diverticulum occurs when a portion
with estrogens and/or alpha-adrenergic agonists should
of the urachus located at the bladder vertex fails to close,
be tried prior to more invasive interventions. If urinary
resulting in a blind diverticulum that protrudes from
n   n  si 
the bladder apex (Figure 80.4). Vesicorachal diverticula
bulking with collagen or surgery (urethropexy or col-
 may be microscopic or macroscopic. Microscopic vesi-
   s)    (
White 2001; Barth et al. 2005).
transitional epithelium that may persist at the bladder
vertex from the level of the submucosal to the subserosa
(Osborne et al. 1987). Approximately 40% of bladders
Exstrophy
from 80 cats had microscopic diverticula in one study
 Exstrophy refers to eversion of the urinary bladder, and
(Wilson et al. 1983). Usually, microscopic diverticula
often the intestines and external genitalia, due to absence
 are insignificant clinically; however, they may become
of a portion of the ventral abdominal wall (Caione et al.
macroscopic when acquired bladder and/or urethral
Congenital diseases of the lower urinary tract  811
Figure 80.2 Lateral contrast cystogram in an immature dog with
Figure 80.4 Lateral double contrast cystogram showing a urachal
a patent urachus (arrows).
diverticulum (arow) in a 3-year-old, castrated male, domestic
shorthair cat with idiopathic cystitis.
diseases develop (e.g., urinary tract infections, urolithi-
outflow obstruction and develop before or shortly after
asis, or idiopathic cystitis) (Lulich et al. 1989; Osborne
birth. These diverticula increase risk of bacterial urinary
et al. 1989; Scheepens and L'Eplattenier 2005). A micro-
tract infection and associated clinical signs of lower uri-
scopic diverticulum may “open” due to inflammation
nary tract disease (Gotthelf 1981).
and/or increased intraluminal pressure from an acquired
Vesicorachal diverticula may be visualized by contrast
 disease. Many of these macroscopic diverticula disappear
urethrocystography, ultrasonography,  or cystoscopy.
within 2-3 weeks following treatment of the acquired
Treatment of vesicourachal diverticula depends on their
disease and resolution of clinical signs (Osborne et al.
size and association with clinical disease. Many macro-
1987; Osborne et al. 1989). Congenital macroscopic vesi-
scopic diverticula associated with active lower urinary
corachal diverticula are thought to be caused by urine
tract disease regress with successful treatment of the
acquired disease; therefore, documentation of regression
of diverticulum following treatment is important (Lulich
et al. 1989; Osborne et al. 1989). If the diverticulum does
not resolve and recurrent disease occurs, then divertic-
   )  q  
Scheepens and L'Eplattenier 2005).
Urinary bladder duplication
 Complete and partial urinary bladder duplication with
and without concurrent urethral duplication has been
reported in dogs (Hoskins et al. 1982). Urinary blad-
 der duplication may result from any alteration of nor-
mal development of the cloaca or its subdivision into
the urogenital sinus and rectum (Abrahamson 1961).
 Clinical signs develop early in life and include lower uri-
nary tract signs, incontinence, and distended abdomen.
 Diagnosis is made by physical examination and imaging
studies. Treatment involves surgical correction; however,
success depends on degree of malformation and presence
of additional congenital anomalies.
Colovesical fistuia and uterine-bladder
communication
Figure 80.3 Lateral contrast cystogram demonstrating a urachal
Rarely, the urinary bladder may communicate with the
cyst (larger arrow) and urachal diverticulum (smaller arrow).
colon or uterine horn (van Schouwenburg and Louw
812
 Lower urinary tract disorders
breed dogs younger than 18 months, but can occur in
other dogs (Osborne et al. 1968; Stamps and Harris 1968;
Roszel 1972; Kelly 1973; Halliwell and Ackerman 1974;
 Pletcher and Dalton 1981; Stone et al. 1996 ; Takiguchi
et al. 2002; Madarame et al. 2003; Bae et al. 2007). Botry-
oid rhabdomyosarcomas are embryonic mesenchymal
tumors arising from pleuripotent stem cells originating
from primitive urogenital ridge remnants. They are infl-
trating tumors arising from the trigone and projecting
 into the bladder lumen as botryoid (resembling a cluster
(a)
of grapes) masses (Kelly 1973). Clinical signs are consis-
tent with lower urinary tract disease and the tumor may
result in urinary outflow obstruction and hypertrophic
osteoarthropathy (Kelly 1973; Halliwell and Ackerman
1974). Treatment includes surgery with or without addi-
tional chemotherapy (doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide,
and vincristine sulfate) (Van Vechten et al. 1990; Senior
et al. 1993). Metastases to local tissues (lymph nodes,
 mesentery omentum, prostate) and distant organs (lung,
(b)
liver, kidney, spleen) have been described with this tumor
Figure 80.5 (a) Lateral abdominal radiograph of a kitten showing
(Stamps and Harris 1968; Takiguchi et al. 2002; Bae et al.
three radiodense uroliths. (b) The uroliths were composed of stru-
2007).
vite that formed secondary to a infection with a urease-producing
microbial organism (Staphylococcus spp.)
Urocystolithiasis
1982; Lawler and Monti 1984; Lulich et al. 1987). Clinical
 Urocystolithiasis has been described in immature dogs
signs included urinary incontinence, lower urinary tract
and cats (Chapter 69). Most commonly, struvite sec-
signs, and urinary tract infection. Treatment is limited to
ondary to infection with a urease-producing microbial
surgical correction.
 organism and urate secondary to congenital hepatic dis-
ease 0ccur (Figures 80.5 and 80.6; Kruger et al. 1995).
Although certain breeds of dogs are prone to formation
Primary urinary bladder neoplasia
of metabolic uroliths, for example, Dalmatians and urate,
Urinary bladder neoplasia of immature dogs and cats
and English bulldogs and urate or cystine, uroliths do not
are rare (Chapter 79) (Caywood et al. 1980). Botryoid
typically form in immature animals despite the metabolic
rhabdomyosarcoma has been observed to occur in large
abnormality relative to other breeds.
(a)
(b)
Figure 80.6 (a) Lateral double contrast cystogram of a 1-year-old, castrated male, Pomeranian showing urocystoliths (arrow) composed
of ammonium urate that formed secondary to a congenital extrahepatic portovascular anomaly. (b) Lateral contrast portography of the
dog described in (a) showing a single extrahepatic portovascular anomaly (arrow).
Congenital diseases of the lower urinary tract 813
Urethra
Urethral aplasia and hypoplasia
 Urethral aplasia is a rare congenital anomaly character-
ized by complete absence of a patent urethra. Incon-
tinence occurs associated with ectopic location of the
ureters (Chapter 58; Pearson and Gibbs 1971; Bargai
and Bark 1982). Urethral hypoplasia described in imma-
ture female cats is associated with juvenile-onset urinary
incontinence (Holt and Gibbs 1992; Baines et al. 1999).
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and imaging studies.
 Radiographic features include urethral shortening and
vaginal aplasia. Urethral hypoplasia may be associated
with other congenital anomalies and bacterial urinary
tract infection. Surgical reconstruction of the bladder
neck may improve or resolve clinical signs.
Epispadias and hypospadias
Epispadias refers to congenital defects in the dorsal aspect
of the distal urethra, and hypospadias refers to anomalous
ventral malposition of the urethral meatus (Hayes and
Wilson 1986). Epispadias has been associated with exstro-
phy of the urinary bladder in an 8-month-old, female,
English bulldog (Hobson and Ader 1979). Hypospadias
occurs more commonly and usually in male dogs; Boston
terriers and Dalmatians have been described as having
an increased risk (Figure 80.7; Hayes and Wilson 1986;
Cassata et al. 2008). It has been described in a Himalayan
Figure 80.7 Perineal hypospadias (larger arrow) in a 6-month-
cat (King and Johnson 2000). In affected male dogs, an
old, male English bulldog. Smaller arrows designate position of
abnormal ventral urethral meatus may be located any-
the testicles.
where along the shaft of the penis, scrotum, or perineum.
It is usually associated with malformation of the prepuce
often associated with urinary incontinence (Holt et al.
and penis (Ader and Hobson 1978; Grieco et al. 2008).
1983). Pseudohermaphrodites have gonads of one sex
Hypospadias has been described in female dogs in associ-
and external genitalia resembling those of the opposite
ated with concurrent disorders of intersexuality. Embry-
sex (Jackson 1980). It occurs in both sexes as a result
 onically, hypospadias results from incomplete fusion of
of simultaneous development of Mullerian duct deriva-
the urogenital fold. Affected dogs present at various ages
fives (oviduct, uterus, and portions of the vagina) and
masculinization of the urogenital sinus. The phenotypic
incontinence, peri-urethral dermatitis, or bacterial uri-
appearance of the animal depends on the degree of mas-
nary tract infection (Ader and Hobson 1978). Diagnosis
culinization of the urogenital sinus. Incontinence devel-
is often based on physical examination. The presence of
ops early in life and may be accompanied by signs oflower
-u eins spad shop  u sad so u
urinary tract disease due to a bacterial urinary tract infec-
tion in most cases. Scrotal or perineal urethrostomy com-
tion. Urinary incontinence likely results from retention
bined with castration and removal of vestigial prepucial
of urine in anomalous communications between the ure-
and penile tissues may be of cosmetic value. Shortening
thra and the genital tract and subsequent passive leakage
of the penis, amputation, and urethral reconstruction has
(Jackson et al. 1978). Diagnosis is based on clinical signs
also been described (Rawlings 1984; Lefebvre and Lussier
and imaging studies. Urinary incontinence may resolve
2005; Pavletic 2007; Galanty et al. 2008).
with surgical correction (Holt et al. 1983).
Urethrogenital malformations
Urethral duplication
Urethrogenital malformations associated with diseases
Urethral duplication  is an uncommon congenital
 of intersexuality, especially pseudohermaphroditism is
anomaly only described in immature dogs (Wolff and
814  Lower urinary tract disorders
Radecky 1973; Johnston et al. 1989; Longhofer et al 1991;
Tobias and Barbee 1995; Duffey et al. 1998). Because of
the close association between embryonic development
of the urogenital and gastrointestinal system, urethral
duplication is almost always accompanied by other dupli-
cation anomalies. These anomalies result from abnor-
mal sagittal midline division and subsequent parallel
development of the embryonic hindgut, cloaca, rec-
 tum, or urogenital sinus (Abrahamson 1961). Associated
anomalies accompanying urethral duplication depends
on stage at which dysmorphogenesis occurs. Examina-
tion of affected animals may reveal anatomic abnormal-
ities, urinary incontinence, or clinical signs associated
with secondary bacterial urinary tract infection. Diag-
nosis is based on physical examination, imaging stud-
ies, and exploratory surgery. Urethral duplication may in
some cases be amenable to surgical extirpation of the
duplicated structure; however, surgical reconstruction
has rarely been attempted with extensive duplication.
Figure 80.8 Urethral prolapse in a 2-year-old, intact male, English
bulldog.
Ectopic urethra
Ectopic urethra is characterized by abnormal position
of the external urethral orifice. Embryonically, ure-
nation. Additional signs may include diarrhea, perineal
thral ectopia results from anomalous morphogenesis of
dermatitis, and signs associated with secondary bacterial
the urogenital sinus, paramesonephric ducts (Mullerian
urinary tract infections. Fistulas have been associated
ducts), or mesonephric ducts (Noden and deLahunta
with infection-induced struvite urolithiasis (Miller 1980;
1985). Clinical signs depend on the site of the termina-
Osuna et al. 1989; Agut et al. 2006). Diagnosis is based
tion of the abnormal urethra and other concurrent uro-
 on clinical signs and imaging studies. Treatment involves
 genital anomalies. Lifelong urinary incontinence was the
 surgical correction or surgical urinary diversion. In one
predominant clinical feature in a 2l-month-old female
 dog with a urethrorectal fistula secondary to a prostatic
English bulldog with unilateral ureteral ectopia and an
 abscess, conservative therapy using an indwelling urinary
ectopic urethra terminating in the distal vagina (Osborne
catheter, low residue diet, and antibiotics was successful
and Hanlon 1967). In contrast, a 2-month-old, female,
(Agut et al. 2006).
 domestic shorthair cat with ectopic urethra terminating
in the ventral rectum did not have urinary incontinence,
but did void urine through the anus (Lulich et al. 1987).
Urethral prolapse
Prolapse of the urethral mucosal lining through the exter-
Urethrorectal, urethrovaginal, and
nal urethral orifice occurs primarily in male dogs under
urethroperineal fistula and urethra!
5 years of age (Figure 80.8; Ragni 2007). English bulldogs
diverticula
and Boston terriers appear to have a predilection (Sini-
 Fistulas connecting the urethral lumen with the large
baldi and Green 1973; Osborne and Sanderson 1995;
bowel, vagina, and perineal region have been described
Kirsch et al. 2002). Urethral prolapse may not be associ-
in dogs and cats (Gray 1968; Osborne et al. 1975; Miller
ated with clinical signs or owners may only notice a red
1980; Whitney and Schrader 1988; Osuna et al. 1989;
n hunp sud s jo d sl ie ss, adand o
Tobias and Barbee 1995; Foster et al. 1999; Lautzen-
however, it may be associated with dripping of blood,
hiser and Bjorling 2002; Agut et al. 2006). Fistula may
licking of the prepuce or penis, or signs of lower urinary
be congenital or may be acquired due to traumatic
tract disease. Diagnosis is based on physical examination.
inflammatory, or neoplastic processes (Osborne 1977).
If urethral prolapse is associated with no to minimal clin-
pe n  pe  on ede sop 
 ical signs, treatment may not be necessary (Osborne and
English bulldogs appear to have a predilection for ure-
 Sanderson 1995). If associated with clinical signs, manual
throrectal fistula (Osborne 1977). Clinical signs are due 
 reduction if small or surgical correction if large may be
to abnormal passage of urine from the fistula during uri-
 done (Sinibaldi and Green 1973; Kirsch et al. 2002).
Congenital diseases of the lower urinary tract 815
Urethral stricture and hypoplasia
Agut, A., M.J. Fernandez del Palacio, et al. (2002). Unilateral renal
agenesis associated with additional congenital abnormalities of the
Presumed congenital urethral strictures and hypoplasia
urinary tract in a Pekingese bitch. I Small Amim Pract 43(1): 32
have been described in young dogs and cats (Breitschw-
35.
erdt et al. 1982; Holt 1990; 1993). Clinical signs relate
Agut, A., X. Lucas, et al. (2006). A urethrorectal fistula due to prostatic
to partial or complete urethral obstruction. Systemic
 abscess associated with urolithiasis in a dog. Reprod Dormest Anim
signs, bladder distention or rupture, overflow inconti-
41(3): 247-250.
Archibald, J. and R.R. Owen (1974). Urinary system. In: Carine
nence, secondary bacterial urinary tract infection, and
Surgery, edited by J. Archibald. Santa Barbara, CA: American Vet-
hydronephrosis occurs secondary to the urinary out-
erinary Publications, pp. 627-701.
flow obstruction. Urinary incontinence and bilateral
Bae, I.H., Y. Kim, et al. (2007). Genitourinary rhabdomyosarcoma with
hydroureter and hydronephrosis were observed in an
systemic metastasis in a young dog. Vet Pathol44(4): 518-520.
Baines, S.J., A.J. Speakman, et al. ( 1999). Genitourinary dysplasia in a
8-month-old, male, German shepherd with congenital
cat. I Small Anim Pract 40(6): 286-290.
mid-urethral stricture (Breitschwerdt et al. 1982). Treat-
Baines, S.J., S. Rennie, et al. (2001). Prepubic urethrostomy: a long-
ment involves surgery. If the stricture occurs in the
term study in 16 cats. Vet Surg 30(2): 107-113.
extrapelvic urethra, urethrostomy may be performed;
Bargai, U. and H. Bark ( 1982). Multiple congenital urinary tract abnor-
if it occurs in the intrapelvic or intraabdominal ure-
malities in a bitch: a case history report. Veterinary Radiology e
 thra, then urethral resection and anastomosis or pre-
Ultrasound 23( 1): 10- 12.
Bartges, I.W. (2000). Diseases of the urinary bladder. In: Saunders
 pubic urethrostomy may be indicated (Baines et al. 2001; 
Marual of Small Animal Practice, edited by S.J. Birchard and R.G.
Bernarde and Viguier 2004). Dilation of the urethral
 Sherding. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pp.943-957.
stricture may also be attempted with balloon or bougien-
Barth, A., I.M. Reichler, et al. (2005). Evaluation of long-term effects
 age catheters. In cats, urinary incontinence secondary to
of endoscopic injection of collagen into the urethral submucosa for
urethral hypoplasia may be treated surgically with vari-
treatrment of urethral sphincter incompetence in female dogs: 40
cases (1993-2000). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 226(1): 73-76.
able success (Holt 1993).
Berent, A.C., P.D. Mayhew, et al. (2008). Use of cystoscopic-guided laser
ablation for treatment of intramural ureteral ectopia in male dogs:
Urethroliths
four cases (2006-2007). JArm Vet Med Assoc 232(7): 1026-1034.
Bernarde, A. and E. Viguier (2004). Transpelvic urethrostomy in 1l
 Urethroliths represent passage of urocystoliths and may
cats using an ischial ostectomy. Vet Surg 33(3): 246-252.
or may not cause clinical signs of urethral obstruction
Breitschwerdt, E.B., N.B. Olivier, et al. ( 1982). Bilateral hydronephro-
sis and hydroureter in a dog associated with congenital urethral
(Chapter 69).
stricture. I Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 18: 799-803.
Caione, P., N. Capozza, et al. (2005). Anterior perineal reconstruction
in exstrophy-epispadias complex. Eur Urol 47(6): 872-877; discus-
Congenital urinary incontinence
sion 877-878.
 Many congenital disorders are associated with congenital
Cassata, R., A. Iannuzzi, et al. (2008). Clinical, cytogenetic and molec-
ular evaluation in a dog with bilateral cryptorchidism and hypospa-
urinary incontinence (Chapter 76). In addition to those
dias. Cytogenet Genome Res 120( 1-2): 140-143.
 described in the preceding sections, spinal dysraphism
Caywood, D.D., C.A. Osborne, et al. (1980). Neoplasia of the canine
is associated with urinary and fecal incontinence. Spinal
and feline urinary tracts. In: Current Veterinary Therapy VII, edited
dysraphism refers to cleft-like malformations of the spine
by R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, pPp. 1203-1212.
and spinal cord resulting from incomplete closure of the
Cornell, K.K. (2000). Cystotomy, partial cystectomy, and tube cys-
neural tube. Congenital urethral sphincter mechanism
tostomy. Clin Tech Small Amirm Pract 15(1): 11-16.
Duffey, M.H., M.D. Barnhart, et al. ( 1998). Incomplete urethral dupli-
incompetency has been described in dogs and cats asso-
cation with cyst formation in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 213(9):
ciated with urethral hypoplasia (Holt 1993); however,
1287-1289, 1279.
ectopic ureter is most commonly associated with juve-
Foster, S.F, G.B. Hunt, et al. ( 1999). Congenital urethral anomaly in a
nile urinary incontinence (McLoughlin and Chew 2000;
kitten. I Feline Med Surg 1(1): 61-64.
Silverman and Long 2000; Berent et al. 2008).
Galanty, M., P. Jurka, et al. (2008). Surgical treatment of hypospadias.
Glassberg, K.1. (2002). Normal and abnormal development of the
References
2339-2351.
Abrahamson, J. ( 1961). Double bladder and related anomalies: clinical 
Gotthelf, L.N. ( 198 1). Persistent urinary tract infection and urolithiasis
and embryological aspects and a case report. Br I Urol 33: 195-214.
in a cat with a urachal diverticulum. Vet Med Small Amim Clin76(12):
Adams, W.M. and S.P. DiBartola (1983). Radiographic and clinical
1745- 1747.
features of pelvic bladder in the dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 182(11):
Gray, L.A. ( 1968). Urethrovaginal fistulas. Am I Obstet Gynecol101( 1):
1212-1217.
28-36.
Ader, L. and H.P. Hobson (1978). Hypospadias: a review of the vet-
Greene, R.W. and R.H. Bohning, Ir. ( 1971). Patent persistent urachus
erinary literature and a report of three cases in the dog. I Am Amim
associated with urolithiasis in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 158(4):
Hosp Assoc 14: 721-727.
489-491.
816
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Grieco, V., E. Riccardi, et al. (2008). Evidence of testicular dysgenesis
Lobetti, R.G. and J.P. Goldin ( 1998). Emphysematous cystitis and blad-
syndrome in the dog. Theriogenology 70( 1): 53-60.
der trigone diverticulum in a dog. I Small A nirm Pract 39(3): 144- 147.
Halliwell, W.H. and N. Ackerman (1974). Botryoid rhabdomyosar-
Longhofer, S.L., R.K. Jackson, et al. ( 1991). Hindgut and bladder dupli-
coma of the urinary bladder and hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in
cation in a dog. IAm Vet Med Assoc 64: 520-523.
a young dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 165( 10): 911-913.
Lulich, J.P., C.A. Osborne, et al. ( 1987). Urologic disorders of immature
Hanson, J.S. (1972). Patent urachus in a cat. Vet Med Small Amim Clin
cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 17(3): 663-696.
67: 379-381.
Lulich, J.P., C.A. Osborne, et al. (1989). Non-surgical correction of
Haraguchi, R., JI. Motoyama, et al. (2007). Molecular analysis of coor-
infection-induced struvite uroliths and a vesicourachal diverticulum
 dinated bladder and urogenital organ formation by hedgehog sig-
in an immature dog. I Small Armim Pract 30: 613-617.
nalling. Development 134: 525-533.
Madarame, H., A. Ito, et al. (2003). Urinary bladder rhabdomyosar-
Hayes, H.M., Jr. and G.P. Wilson (1986). Hospital incidence of
coma (Botryoid Rhabdomyosarcoma) in a labrador retriever dog. I
hypospadias in dogs in North America. Vet Rec 118(22): 605-607.
Toxicol Pathol 16: 279-281.
Hobson, H.P and P.L. Ader ( 1979). Exstrophy of the bladder in a dog.
Mahaffey, M.B., J.A. Barsanti, etal. ( 1984). Pelvicbladder in dogs with-
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15: 103-107.
out urinary incontinence. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 184(12): 1477-1479.
Holt, P.E. (1990). Urinary incontinence in dogs and cats. Vet Rec
McLoughlin, M.A. and D.J. Chew (2000). Diagnosis and surgical man-
127(14): 347-350.
agement ofectopic ureters. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 15(1): 17-24.
 Holt, P.E. (1993). Surgical management of congenital urethral sphinc-
Miller, C.F. (19s0). Urethrorectal fistula with concurrent urolithiasis
ter mechanism incompetence in eight female cats and a bitch. Vet
in a dog. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 75(1): 73-76.
Surg 22(2): 98-104.
 Noden, D.A. and A. deLahunta (1985). The Embryology of Domestic
Holt, P.E. and C. Gibbs (1992). Congenital urinary incontinence in 
Animals. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
cats: a review of 19 cases. Vet Rec 130(20): 437-442.
Osborne, C.A. (1977). Urethrorectal fistulas. In: Current Veterinary
Holt, P.E., S.E. Long, et al. (1983). Disorders of urination associated
Therapy VI, edited by R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
with canine intersexuality. I Small Amirm Pract 24: 475-487.
pp. 985-986.
Holt, P.E. and A.H. Moore (1995). Canine ureteral ectopia: an analysis
Osborne, C.A. and G.F. Hanlon (1967). Canine congenital ureteral
of 175 cases and comparison of surgical treatments. Vet Rec 136( 14):
ectopia: case report and review of literature. I Am Amirm Hosp Assoc
345-349.
3: 111-122.
Hoskins, J.D., Y.Z. Abdelbaki, et al. ( 1982). Urinarybladder duplication
Osborne, C.A. and S.L. Sanderson (1995). Medical management of
in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 181(6): 603-604.
urethral prolapse in male dogs. In: Current Veterinary Therapy
 Jackson, D.A. (1980). Pseudohermaphroditism. In: Current Veterinary
XIl, edited by J.D. Bonagura and R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Therapy VII, edited by R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
Saunders, pp. 1027-1029.
Pp. 1241-1243.
Osborne, C.A., J.D. Rhoades, et al. (1966). Patent urachus in the dog.
Jackson, D.A., C.A. Osborne, et al. (1978). Nonneurogenic urinary
IAm Amirm Hosp Assoc 2: 245-250.
incontinence in a canine female pseudohermaphrodite. I Am Vet
Osborne, C.A., D.G. Low, et al. (1968). Neoplasms of the canine and
Med Assoc 172(8): 926-930.
feline urinary bladder: incidence, etiologic factors, occurrence and
Johnston, G.R., C.A. Osborne, et al. ( 1986). Efects of urinary bladder
pathologic features. Am I Vet Res 29(10): 2041-2055.
distention on location of the urinary bladder and urethra of healthy
Osborne, C.A., M.H. Engen, et al. (1975). Congenital urethrorectal
dogs and cats. Arn I Vet Res 47(2): 404-415.
fistula in two dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 166( 10): 999- 1002.
Johnston, S.D., N.C. Bailie, et al. (1989). Diphallia in a mixed-breed 
Osborne, C.A., G.R. Johnston, et al. (1987). Etiopathogenesis and
dog with multiple anomalies. Theriogenology 31: 1253- 1260.
biological behavior of feline vesicourachal diverticula. Don't just do
Kelly, D.F. ( 1973). Rhabdomyosarcoma of the urianry bladder in dogs.
something—stand there. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 17(3):
Vet Pathol 10: 375-384.
697-733.
King, G.J. and E.H. Johnson (2000). Hypospadias in a Himalayan cat.
Osborne, C.A., R.A. Kroll, et al. ( 1989). Medical management of vesi-
J Small Amim Pract41(1l): 508-510.
courachal diverticula in 15 cats with lower urinary tract disease. J
Kirsch, JA., JIG. Hauptman, et al. (2002). A urethropexy technique for
Small Anmim Pract 30( 11): 608-612.
surgical treatment of urethral prolapse in the male dog. IAm Anim
Osuna, D.., E.A. Stone, et al. (1989). A urethrorectal fistula with
Hosp Assoc 38(4): 381-384.
concurrent urolithiasis in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25: 35-39.
Kruger, L.M., C.A. Osborne, et al. (1995). Inherited and congenital
Pavletic, M.M. (2007). Reconstruction of the urethra by use of an
disease of the lower urinary tract. In: Canine and Feline Nephrology
 ut i seedsodau um op e u de piadia paan ssa
and Urology, edited by C.A. Osborne and D.R. Finco. Baltimore,
Med Assoc 231( 1): 71-73.
MD: Williams & Wilkins, pp. 681-692.
Pearson, H. and C. Gibbs (1971). Urinary tract abnormalities in the
 Lane, I.F and M.R. Lappin ( 1995). Urinary incontinence and congen-
dog. I Small Amim Pract 12(2): 67-84.
ital urogenital anomalies in small animals. In: Current Veterinary
 Pearson, H., C. Gibbs, et al. ( 1965). Some abnormalities of the canine
Therapy XI, edited by J.D. Bonagura and R.W. Kirk. Philadelphia,
urinary tract. Vet Rec 77: 775-780.
PA: WB Saunders, pp. 1022-1026.
 Pletcher, J.M. and L. Dalton (198l). Botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma in
Lautzenhiser, S.J. and D.E. Bjorling (2002). Urinary incontinence in a
the urinary bladder of a dog. Vet Pathol 18(5): 695-697.
dog with an ectopic ureterocele. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 38( 1): 29-32.
 Ragni, R.A. (2007). Urethral prolapse in three male Yorkshire terriers.
 Laverty, P.H. and S.K. Salisbury (2002). Surgical management of true
I Small Amim Pract 48(3): 180.
patent urachus in a cat. J Small Amim Pract 43(5): 227-229.
Rawlings, C.A. ( 1984). Correction of congenital defects of the urogen-
 Lawler, D.V. and K.L. Monti ( 1984). Morbidity and mortality in neona-
ital system. Vet Clin North Am Small Ani Pract 14(1): 49-60.
tal kittens. Arm I Vet Res 45: 1455- 1459.
Rawlings, C., IA. Barsanti, et al. (2001). Evaluation of colposuspension
Lefebvre, R. and B. Lussier (2005). A clinical case of hypospadias in a
for treatment of incontinence in spayed female dogs. I Arm Vet Med
dog. Can Vet J46(11): 1022-1025.
Assoc 219(6): 770-775.
Congenital diseases of the lower urinary tract  817
Roszel, I.F. ( 1972). Cytology of urine from dogs with botryoid sarcoma
Takiguchi, M., T. Watanabe, et al. (2002). Rhabdomyosarcoma (botry-
of the bladder. Acta Cytol 16(5): 443-446.
oid sarcoma) of the urinary bladder in a Maltese. J Ssmall Amim Pract
 Schedl, A. (2007). Renal abnormalities and their developmental origin.
43(6): 269-271.
Nat Rev Ge 8: 791-802.
Tobias, K.S. and D. Barbee (1995). Abnormal micturition and
 Scheepens, E.T. and H. L'Eplattenier (2005). Acquired urinary bladder
recurrent cystitis associated with multiple congenital anomalies of
diverticulum in a dog. I Small Amim Pract 46(12): 578-581.
the urinary tract in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 207(2): 191-193.
Schmaelzle, I.F., A.S. Cass, et al. ( 1969). Effect of disuse and restoration 
van Schouwenburg, S.J. and G.J. Louw (1982). A case of dysuria as a
 of function on vesical capacity. I Urol 101(5): 700-705.
result of a communication between the urinary bladder and corpus
Senior, D.F, D.T. Lawrence, et al. (1993). Successful treatment of
uteri in a Cairn Terrier. I S Afr Vet Assoc 53(1): 65-66.
boytroid rhabdomyosarcoma in the bladder of a dog. I Arm Anim
Van Vechten, M., M.H. Goldschmidt, et al. ( 1990). Embryonal rhab-
Hosp Assoc 29: 386-390.
domyosarcoma of the urinary bladder in dogs. Compend Contirn
Shimada, K., F. Matsumoto, et al. (2002). Surgical management of
Educ Vet 12: 783-793.
urinary incontinence in children with anatomical bladder-outlet
      r  
anomalies. Int I Urol 9( 10): 561-566.
sphincter mechanism incompetence in the bitch. J Small Armim Pract
Silverman, S. and C.D. Long (2000). The diagnosis of urinary inconti-
42( 10): 48 1-486.
nence and abnormal urination in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am
Whitney, W.O. and L.A. Schrader (1988). Urethrorectal fistulectomy
Small Amim Pract 30(2): 427-448.
in a dog, using a perineal approach. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193(5):
Sinibaldi, K.R. and R.W. Green ( 1973). Surgical correction of prolapse
568-569.
of the male urethra in three English bulldogs. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc
Wilson, G.P., L.S. Dill, et al. ( 1983). The relationship of urachal defects
9: 450-453.
in the feline urinary bladder to feline urological syndrome. Proc 7th
Stamps, P. and D.L. Harris (1968). Botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma of
Kal Kan Symposium, Vernon, CA.
the urinary bladder of a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 153(8): 1064-
Wolf, A. and M. Radecky ( 1973). Anomaly in a poodle puppy. Vet
1068.
Med Small Anim Clir 68: 732-733.
Stone, E.A., T.F. George, et al. ( 1996). Partial cystectomy for urinary
Zulauf, D., K. Voss, et al. (2007). Herniation of the urinary bladder
bladder neoplasia: surgical technique and outcome in ll dogs. I
through a congenitally enlarged inguinal canal in a cat. Schweiz Arch
Small Anim Pract 37(10): 480-485.
Tierheilkd 149( 12): 559-562.
Inappropriate urination
Elizabeth A. Shull
Prevalence and etiology
1996b; Salman et al. 2000). Inappropriate urination
may involve either depositing urine outside the litter-
 Inappropriate urination is a frequent client behavioral
box for the purpose of elimination or depositing urine
complaint concerning both dogs and cats that are
for the purpose of scent marking. It is possible for a
presented to veterinary behaviorists (Landsberg 1991;
cat to exhibit both inappropriate micturition and spray-
Denenberg et al. 2005) and a major reason for relinquish-
ing. A variety of household surfaces may either be uri-
ment of pets to animal shelters. In a multicenter study
nated or sprayed upon, resulting in objectionable odors,
 at 12 animal shelters, dogs and cats urinating inappro-
stains, and contamination of surfaces, which can lead
priately at least once a week were, respectively, 2-4 and
to exclusion or removal of the cat from the house-
 2-6 times more likely to be relinquished than were pets
hold, or even euthanasia unless the behavior can be
      
improved.
(Patronek et al. 1996a, 1996b; New et al. 2000).
 Urinating out of the litterbox for urine elimination will
The three major causes of inappropriate urination
 be referred to as inappropriate micturition, and deposit-
-n sndde reoq are sino pue sp u
ing urine for scent marking will be referred to as spraying.
 tion, scent marking, and medically related inappropriate
 Inappropriate micturition accounts for over half of
urination.
the cases of inappropriate urination in cats (Bamberger
Despite owner's interpretations to the contrary, nei-
 and Houpt 2006). Behavioral inappropriate micturition
ther dogs nor cats urine mark or inappropriately urinate
is primarily due to an aversion to something associated
out of spite; to conclude, this is counterproductive to iden-
with the litter or litterbox or due to an attraction or
tifying the actual cause(s) and to resolving the problem.
preference for something outside the litterbox (Borchelt
Because the dissimilarities and idiosyncrasies of the
and Voith 1996; Neilson 2003, 2004).
diagnosis, management, and prognosis of inappropriate
Cats can have an aversion to the litter, the litterbox,
urination in the two species are greater than their simi-
 and/or the location of the litterbox. Inadequate clean-
larities, each will be discussed separately.
ing is a common cause of litter aversion. Different cats
 have different requirements for litter hygiene. Fastidious
cats may seek alternative surfaces when the litter is even
 Prevalence and etiology of inappropriate
slightly dirty. In addition to an inadequately maintained
urination in cats
litterbox, the texture and fragrance of the litter, the pres-
ence or absence of a litter deodorizer, the depth of litter
 Inappropriate urination is the most common of all behav-
in the box, or previous negative experiences, such as pain
ior problems in cats (Hart and Hart 1985; Landsberg
or fear, associated with the litter are also possible causes
1991; Borchelt and Voith 1996; Salman et al. 2000;
 of litter aversion.
Denenberg et al. 2005) and is a major reason that cats
Litterbox aversion may be related to the type of box
are relinquished to animal shelters (Patronek et al.
(open, covered, self-cleaning), inadequate size of the box,
location of the box (high traffc, isolated, poor accessibil-
ity, or vulnerability e.g-, surprise attacks by other cats),
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals. Edited by Joe Bartges and
presence or absence of a litter liner, type or scent of the
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
818
Inappropriate urination 819
agent used to clean the box, and previous negative litter-
and may facilitate temporal spacing of cats within their
box experiences.
home range. Nonbreeding free-living intact males spray
an average of 12 times an hour and breeding males spray
son or another pet while in the box or that have experi-
 unux e oi dn anoq ue sa z jo aaeae u
 enced painful elimination in the litterbox can avoid using
of 62 times an hour. Free-living intact female cats may
if. Cats that have had lower urinary tract disease may
 spray 6 times per hour ( Turner and Bateson 1988; Houpt
2005).
(Neilson 2003), presumably due to a conditioned associ-
The likelihood that a household cat will spray is influ-
ation of the litterbox with pain.
 enced by the cat's sex and sexual status. Intact males spray
Alternatively, cats may seek other surfaces and loca-
most frequently, followed by neutered males, then intact
tions for urination, either because they have a primary
females and spayed females. Male cats living in the same
individual preference for a particular surface or because
household with female cats are more likely to spray than
they have come to associate a particular type of surface or
male cats not living with female cats; female cats in estrus
a certain location with the act of urinating (Borchelt and
 e sn snsu  as in  an e
Voith 1996). This is not surprising given that free-ranging
 greater the number of cats in the household the greater
cats have an infinite choice oflocations and surfaces from
the probability that spraying will occur in the household.
which to choose, while household cats are expected to use
When there were ten or more cats living in a household,
the litterbox, the litter, and the location that is selected
the probability of spraying in the household was 100%
by the care-giver.
(Jemmette and Skeritt 1979).
 Separation anxiety and other fears or anxieties may
Sexual, territorial, or conflict situations, often involv-
result in inappropriate micturition, which may or may
ing other cats, and heightened levels of arousal, and anxi-
 ety are associated with an increased incidence of spraying.
Medical abnormalities are important causes of inap-
Spraying can also be triggered by environmental factors
propriate micturition as number of systemic and urinary
such as residual urine odors, unfamiliar odors, or the
disorders may lead to changes in micturition. Metabolic,
 presence of unfamiliar animals or people. Outside intrud-
endocrine, and renal diseases may cause inappropriate
ing cats may stimulate spraying around doors, windows,
micturition due to polyuria, pollakiuria, or other mecha-
air vents, electrical receptacles, and fireplaces by the inside
nisms. Neurological, musculoskeletal, and lower urinary
cat(s).
tract abnormalities may be responsible for inappropri-
ate micturition as a result of pain, decreased mobility,
weakness, decreased control, or decreased awareness, for
Clinical signs and diagnosis of inappropriate
example, cognitive dysfunction.
urination in cats
Lower urinary tract disease, especially feline idiopathic
cystitis (FIC), is of special interest because of the inter-
A medical history, physical examination, and baseline
relationships between stress and FIC. On the one hand,
laboratory evaluation should be included in the diagnos-
cats suffering from FIC frequently urinate outside the
tic work-up of cats with inappropriate urination, even
litterbox and therefore may be presented for inappropri-
if the history is not necessarily suggestive of a medical
ate urination. On the other hand, stress associated with
cause. Additional laboratory tests, radiographs, and other
factors in the cat's behavioral and environmental man-
 imaging procedures may be necessary depending on the
 agement has been shown to play a role in the development
 initial findings (see chapter on “Diagnostic Testing” in
of FIC ( Westropp and Buffington 2004; Houstuler et al.
this text).
2005) (see chapter on FIC in this text).
Once medical etiologies are excluded, the diagnosis of
Spraying is a normal communication behavior that is
behavioral inappropriate urination is based on a careful,
objectionable inside the home. The scent of the urine
detailed behavioral history. A client-completed question-
and the posture assumed by the cat during spraying pro-
naire and a simple diagram of the home's floor plan, indi-
vide an olfactory and a visual communication signals,
cating the locations of doors, windows, food, water, litter
respectively.
boxes, perches/resting sites, and the sites of inappropriate
Contrary to popular belief, spraying does not function
to repel other cats from a resident cat's territory. Rather, it
propriate micturition and spraying and in beginning to
provides information about the individual that is spray-
elucidate their causes.
ing, such as its sex, reproductive status, and the length of
 Inappropriate  micturition is  discriminated from
 time since it was at that location. Consequently, spraying
 spraying based on the cat's posture, the surface (hori-
 may serve as an advertisement for breeding individuals
 zontal or vertical) on which the urine is deposited, the
820
 Lower urinary tract disorders
volume of urine that is deposited, and by considering the
monitoring requires time, expense, and some technical
context in which the urine is deposited.
ability, and the presence of the equipment may interfere
Behavioral-inappropriate micturition involves depo-
with the cat's behavior. If the behavior only occurs spo-
siting urine, while in a squatting posture on to a
radically and not at a consistent location, the behavior
horizontal surface outside the litterbox for the purpose
may be difficult to capture on video.
of urine elimination. The typical micturition behavioral
 Fluorescein dye may be systematically administered to
sequence involves digging a hole, urinating in the hole,
each cat to increase the fluorescence of the treated cat's
turning, sniffing, then earth-raking over the hole, and
urine (Hart and Leedy 1982). All urine fluoresces under
perhaps sniffing and earth-raking some more. Many
UV light, but the urine of cats treated with fluorescein
deviations from the typical sequence are possible. The
fluoresces more brightly for 24 hours. The fluorescein
deviations may reflect normal variation in behavior, but
(50 mg of fluorescein per cat) may be administered orally
in cats with inappropriate micturition, the deviations
in a capsule or may be administered subcutaneously
may provide clues to the cause of the problem. For
(0.3 mL of 10% Fluorescite Injection per cat). The oral
example, cats that dig or earth-rake very little or not at
fluorescein can be prepared by a compounding pharma-
all and cats that spray while in the litterbox may have an
cist or can be made by inserting 9 fluorescein ophthalmic
aversion to the litter or the litterbox. Others that “earth-
strips into a gelatin capsule that is then administered
rake” on surfaces other than the litter, for example the
orally to the cat (Hart 1982). New urine spots should
sides of the box, the bath tub beside the box, or a throw
be checked with a portable, handheld, battery-powered
rug close to the box, may have or may be developing a
UV light to determine the degree of fluorescence in order
 preference for or an association with other surfaces with
to incriminate or exonerate the fluorescein-treated cat.
urination.
Cats with behavioral inappropriate micturition may
method is that is works most effectively in an alkaline
also exhibit inappropriate defecation, but do not nec-
urine, thereby restricting its use only to cats with alkaline
essarily do so. Cats with inappropriate micturition may
urine (Houpt 2005; Horwitz and Nielson 2007).
urinate out of the litterbox all of the time or only part of
 Establishing a functional diagnosis of inappropriate
the time.
micturition helps identify the contributing factors and
s e sso  io e s 
is determined through a comprehensive history and
amount of urine onto a vertical surface at a height that
 descriptions of the cat's behavior in and around the
is conducive for olfactory investigation of the urine. In
litterbox and at the inappropriate location.
typical spraying, the cat is in a standing posture, the tail
Litter/litterbox aversion is suggested by any of the fol-
is held erect and quivered, and the hindquarters are held
 lowing behaviors: approaching the box hesitantly, perch-
high. It is possible for a cat to exhibit only the visual
ing on the edge of the box, not scratching in the litter,
signal of a spraying posture without expressing urine.
spraying while in the litterbox, urinating outside the box,
 Spraying may also be done in a squatting posture ( Turner
running away from the box, and paw shaking or vocaliz-
 and Bateson 1988), but is less common than erect spray-
ing upon exiting the box.
ing. Urine is often sprayed on established marking posts
 A surface preference is suggested when a cat predomi-
and/or sites or objects that have social or conflict signif-
 nantly selects a particular type of surface for inappropri-
icance, for example, a cat that is motivated to go out-
 ate micturition.
side but is blocked from doing so may spray near exit
 A location preference is suggested when the cat pre-
doors.
dominantly selects one room or region of a room when
In multiple-cat households, behavioral and environ-
it urinates outside the litterbox.
mental manipulations may be necessary to identify which
 Inappropriate micturition due to separation anxiety
cat(s) is(are) responsible. Several methods have been
 is suspected when the elimination occurs in the owner's
 e  (i    
absence. Urinating on the owner's bed is a common man-
 cat house is responsible for inappropriate micturition
 ifestation of separation anxiety (Schwarz 2003). Cats may
 or spraying, and each has advantages and limitations
 not exhibit inappropriate micturition for many hours fol-
(Neilson 2003).
lowing separation from the owner, as opposed to within
 Systematic isolation of the cats may help; however, it
the first 30 minutes of departures, which is often the case
may also change the behavior through changing the social
in dogs.
relationships among the cats or by preventing the cat's
 Inappropriate micturition due to other fears or anxi-
access to urination sites.
eties is suggested when inappropriate micturition occurs
Video recording has the advantage of potentially iden-
in association with stimuli or circumstances to which
tifying the responsible cat(s) with certainty; however, the
the cat exhibits fear or anxiety, for example, aggression
Inappropriate urination  821
between cats or the presence of a visitor of whom the cat
However, cats can have unique preferences and provid-
is fearful.
ing a smorgasbord of litter choices may be necessary to
Spraying is diagnosed by either observing the cat in a
identify the type of litter most appealing to an individual
 spraying posture or observing urine on vertical surfaces.
cat.
Infrequently, urine may be sprayed by a cat in a squat-
Trimming hair between footpads, under the tail, and
ting posture, which can make the distinction between
 in the perineal region of longhaired cats helps prevent
spraying and inappropriate micturition somewhat more
litter and stool from attaching to the hair, which may be
difficult; however, even when a cat squat-sprays, its tail
uncomfortable and result in the cat avoiding litter.
quivers and it makes treading movements with its back
It is sometimes helpful to reinforce the cat's use of the
 legs. In contrast to the behavior sequence when voiding,
litterbox by offering it a very palatable treat immediately
a spraying cat does not sniff or earthrake the site after
 after the litterbox is used. Care must be taken not to
 depositing urine ( Turner and Bateson 1988).
disturb the cat, while it is actually using the box or to
be intrusive in any way, as this would only reinforce the
cat's aversion to the litter. The treat should be offered
Treatment of inappropriate micturition
only after the cat has taken a couple of steps away from
Enticing the cat to consistently use a litterbox involves
the box. With some cats, the opportunity to play with a
changing the features and the maintenance of the lit-
toy or catnip may be more rewarding than a food treat.
ter and litterbox to accommodate the cat's behavioral
This method does not always achieve the desired results;
 needs and preferences, while concurrently modifying the
one of the author's patients that was highly motivated by
behavioral and environmental management of the cat to
food treats, learned to enter and exit the litterbox, and
make the inappropriate sites of inappropriate micturition
then approach the owner and solicit the treat.
less attractive and/or less accessible.
The number of litterboxes in the household should
Because inadequate cleaning of the litterbox is a com-
equal the number of cats plus one. Boxes should be dis-
mon reason for inappropriate elimination, scooping the
persed throughout the home and be easily accessible.
litter at least once daily and, even more often for cats that
Locations where the cat may be startled by household
 are fastidious, is recommended. Litterboxes containing
 activities or other pets should be avoided.
traditional litter should be emptied, and washed with
Larger litterboxes (22 x 15 x 6.5 in) tend to be used
fragrance-free soap and hot water at least once a week.
more than identical smaller litterboxes (14 × 10 x 3.3
Litterboxes containing clumpable litter should be com-
in) (Neilson 2009). Clinical experience suggests that the
pletely emptied and washed every two weeks.
litterbox should be large enough to allow the cat to enter,
The odor of excreta and its breakdown products is pre-
turn around, and fully stand without contacting the box.
sumably aversive to cats. One study demonstrated that a
Large plastic storage boxes rather than commercial litter-
 boxes best accommodate large and overweight cats.
odors increased the use of the litterbox and decreased
Open boxes are recommended because odors are less
the frequency of inappropriate elimination (Cottam and
likely to be retained than in covered boxes and because
Dodman 2007). Other investigations have shown that lit-
 Owners may scoop more often when the excreta is visible.
ter with activated carbon for odor control is used more
When there is an aversion to the litterbox or the loca-
frequently than both identical litter without activated
tion of the litterbox, providing additional boxes at alter-
carbon and another brand of litter that contains sodium
native locations or providing a different type of box may
bicarbonate for odor control (Neilson 2009).
be necessary. If the cat has acquired a fear or aversion of
Litter with no fragrance is frequently recommended,
litterboxes in general, it may be necessary to desensitize
although results of studies have conflicting results (Hor-
the cat to litterboxes. This can be done by replacing the
witz 1997; Sung and Crowell-Davis 2006). A recent
 box with a tray and rewarding the cat for using the tray.
pilot study of scent preferences in cats demonstrated
When the cat accepts using the tray and uses it consis-
that cats in the study avoided floral and citrus scents
tently for at least 2 weeks, it can be replaced with a shallow
(Neilson 2007). Based on this, litters with either flo-
 box. This process can be continued, gradually returning
ral or citrus fragrances are not recommended. In fact,
to a litterbox with sides of adequate height to prevent
clinical experience has shown that placement of citrus-
litter from being scattered during digging.
scented air fresheners at inappropriate urination sites has
For inappropriate micturition due to a substrate
been beneficial in deterring cats from returning to those
 preference, for example carpet, the treatment strategy
sites.
involves providing the preferred substrate in the litter-
 In general, cats prefer clumpable, finely grained litter
box and/or making the inappropriate surface outside of
more than coarse, non-clumpable litter (Borchelt 1991).
the litterbox less attractive.
822
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Methods of modifying the litterbox to provide the cat's
Table 81.1 Guidelines for preventing elimination problems in
substrate preference are limited only by one's imagina-
cats
tion and ingenuity. Some commonly used modifications
include, placing carpet remnants on the floor of the lit-
 A. Litter box location
terbox or attaching strips of carpet to the interior upright
Easily accessible
sides ofthe litterbox with double-sided sticky tape for cats
Quiet and away from traffic, but not isolated
that are attracted to carpet, placing disposable diapers in
Away from food and water
the bottom of the litterbox for cats that are attracted to
Accommodate physical limitations and personality
soft, plush substrates, and for cats that prefer smooth
B. Litter
surfaces, litter can temporarily be left out of the box.
Scoop at least once a day
Once the modified box is being consistently used, litter
 Change traditional liter once a week 
can be gradually reintroduced and the alternate substrate
Change scoopableliter every two weeks
 gradually replaced or withdrawn.
Finely granular (clumpable, scoopable) usually preferred
Offer smorgasbord to determine cat's preference
To make the substrate outside the litterbox less acces-
sible or less attractive, it can be covered with other sub-
C. Type of box
strates that have a different or even aversive texture such as
 Open preferred most often
painter's plastic drop cloth, plastic carpet runner turned
Size accommodation, sweater storage box for larger cats
upside down with the hard nubs facing upward, alu-
D. Minimum of one box for each cat
minum foil, and double-sided sticky tape among many
E. Avoid fear and pain in box
other possibilities. Alternatively, the significance of the
F. Never scold or punish for inappropriate elimination
region can be changed by placing food and water bowls
G. Prevent other animals and people from disturbing cat in
over the area, or an odor that is unattractive to cats, such
litter box
as strong floral or citrus scents may be placed in the area.
H. NEvER place or force into box associated with scolding!
For a location preference, the litterbox may temporar-
I. Softly praise and occasionally reinforce with treat for use of
ily be placed at the preferred location until the cat re-
litter box
establishes use of the box, then the litterbox may be grad-
J. Make any and alliterbox changes gradually
ually moved to a more acceptable location. Alternatively,
the cat's access to the location may be physically blocked,
or the location may be made less attractive in the same
renewed by a fresh application of the odor eliminator.
manner as described above for making a preferred sub-
Ammonia-based cleaners should be avoided.
strate less attractive.
Multimodal  environmental  modification  (MEMO;
If the inappropriate micturition is due to fear, anxi-
Buffington et al. 2
2006) should be included in the
ety, or intercat conflict, those behavioral issues must be
treatment as well as the prevention of inappropriate
addressed in order to get the cat back in the litterbox.
micturition in cats with FIC as a contributing factor
Changes in behavioral and environmental management
(Chapter 75).
to minimize the cat's exposure to a fearful-eliciting stim-
 Punishment is never helpful. Scolding, punishing, or
ulus, desensitization and counterconditioning to reduce
rubbing the cat's nose in its mess, then putting it in the
the cat's response to the fear stimulus and in some
litterbox is especially detrimental and increases the like-
 instances antianxiety medication may be necessary (See
lihood that the cat will permanently avoid the litterbox
Table 81.1). A discussion of the diagnosis and manage-
in the future.
asn au pue sond uoisse ue aixue jo su
 Many cases of inappropriate micturition could be
of behavior-modifying drugs in cats is beyond the scope
avoided by adherence to basic principles for managing
of this chapter, and the reader is referred to a number of
litterboxes and guidelines for preventing the develop-
excellent references including but not limited to Voith and
 ment of behavioral inappropriate micturition are given
Borchelt (1996), Beaver (2003), Landsberg et al. (2003),
in Table 81.2.
Simpson and Papich (2003), Houpt (2005), and Horwitz
and Neilson (2007) for a more complete treatment of
 these topics. It is important to note that no drugs have
Treatment of spraying
been approved for the treatment of behavioral problems
 The internal/endogenous motivational factors and the
in cats.
social and environmental triggers must be identified in 
 Sites of inappropriate micturition should be treated
order to develop a specific treatment plan for spraying.
with an effective enzymatic odor eliminator and repeat
Neutering decreases spraying in 90% of intact males
applications should be done until urine odor is not
and 95% of intact females, and is an absolute requisite
Inappropriate urination 823
Table 81.2 Guidelines for house-training
● Provide constant supervision when the dog is loose and observe for signals (restlessness, sniffing, circling, etc.) that it is preparing
to eliminate. Take outside to a designated area. Pair a cue work with elimination; later the cue can be used to trigger eliminations.
· Use "umbilical cord" method of tethering the dog to a person to prevent the dog from wandering away and eliminating.
● Take dog out at least every 1 to 2 hours when awake. Puppies younger than 3-4 months of age urinate frequently when they are
awake.
● Encouraged the dog to eliminate in various locations in the yard and on walks to avoid elimination from becoming contextualized
to one location
· Eating, drinking, playing, and awakening stimulate elimination. Walk puppies within one minute or even less, and juveniles and
adults within 5 minutes of these activities.
● Confine when supervision is not possible. This utilizes a dog's natural tendency to keep its "nest" clean. For puppies and small
dogs, a crate is adequate for confinement no more than 2 or 3 hours. For longer periods and for larger dogs, a X pen wil provide
become a difficult and arduous task if the inhibition of soiling the nest is lost.
●  Praise and sometimes provide a small treat for eliminating at an appropriate location
●Go outside with the dog during house-training. Putting the dog outside, but not going with it to assure it eliminated and to praise it
for appropriate elimination often leads to house-training failure.
·Feed meals on a regular schedule to regulate eliminations.
·Scolding and correction are only helpful if the dog is observed eliminating. The intensity of the correction should only be enough to
interupt the elimination behavior, then the dog should be taken outside, allowed to calm down, and encouraged to finish
eliminating at a correct location. Harsh scolding or punishment will teach the dog to avoid eliminating in the owner's presence
Aeoi s! ssaw sh! ui asou sh bugqnu no buom pip l teym ino buujod pue jods aui oi bop aun buyei Aq pej aui jae bupions
ineffective and only confuses the dog.
· Block the dog's access to a preferred location or substrate, until a consistent habit of eliminating in the correct location has been
established.
●When elimination occurs inside urine should be soaked up with an absorbent cloth, and feces should be picked up as soon as
possible, then the area thoroughly cleaned with plain soap and water. If the elimination occurred on a carpeted area or upholstered
objet, an enzymatic odor eliminator should be applied afer the area has dried from the deaning. For urination sites, reapplication
for successfully treating spraying in intact cats, although
 ment of inter-cat aggression is beyond the scope of this
 it may not completely eliminate the problem. There may
chapter and the reader is referred to other texts for a more
be a delay of several weeks to a few months in reduction
 complete discussion.
of spraying after neutering.
 Environmental enrichment provides inside cats with
For cats that are already neutered and/or cats in which
more choices and a degree of control of their environ-
neutering is not adequately successful, the cat's expo-
 ment, as well as segregating resources in order to limit
sure to identified triggering stimuli can be minimized
 competition and congregation of cats around resources.
and/or the cats response to those factors reduced using
There should be several sites of food, water, resting
 desensitization methods. Triggers from outside cats may
perches, hiding boxes, climbing structures, and increased
be reduced by blocking the inside cat's view of the out-
 access to vertical space throughout the living space. Cog-
side and by discouraging the presence of outside cats
nitive enrichment can be achieved through play and inter-
by removing attractants such as outside food and water,
action with the owners that occurs regularly and pre-
bird feeders, etc., and employing repellents such as The
 dictably and through activities, such as clicker training,
Scarecrow , a motion-activated water sprinkler.
and foraging games.
In multi-cat households, reducing the number of cats
 Urine odor should be removed by the application of an
may also decrease the incidence of spraying; however, this
 enzymatic urine odor eliminator. When areas have been
is often an unacceptable solution to many owners. Alter-
repeatedly sprayed and become saturated with urine it
natively, minimizing the distress some cats experience
 may not be possible to get rid of the odor unless the
as a result of being in a multicat household by employ-
objects are removed from the home.
 ing environmental and cognitive enrichment techniques
 The cat's access to spraying posts may be blocked or
and, if indicated, addressing inter-cat aggression between
the site made less attractive by placing aversive scents, for
specific cats are often beneficial. The diagnosis and treat-
example floral potpourri or citrus scent in the vicinity or
824  Lower urinary tract disorders
 changing the significance from a spraying post to a feed-
 orders, for example separation anxiety and noise pho-
ing or play station. Alternatively, the cat may be encour-
bia, which also usually involve both inappropriate uri-
s a  s    ns  
nation and defecation, submissive urination, excite-
by providing cat combs (Mr. Spats, Cat-a-Combs)
 ment/greeting urination, and inappropriate urination
Levine) or scratching posts. Feliway (a synthetic facial
due to underlying medical disorders.
pheromone), may have the dual benefit of inducing a cat
 Incomplete house-training is a very common cause
to mark by facial rubbing rather than spraying and may
of house-soiling. In one retrospective study at a veteri-
also function to help reduce anxiety.
nary teaching hospital of 105 dogs diagnosed with house-
One study (Pryor year) demonstrated that cleaning
soiling, 84% were diagnosed with incomplete house-
urine marks with an enzymatic odor neutralizer and
training. Dogs that are incompletely house-trained
improved management oflitterboxes, that is adding more
 deposit urine and/or stool at inappropriate locations
boxes, and increasing the frequency of litterbox cleaning
within the home for the purpose of ridding the body
decreased the frequency of spraying.
of waste. Incomplete house-training is especially typical
In the author's experience, anti-anxiety medication is
-uol e oiun uni Aew nn inq shop Sunok pue saiddnd jo
frequently the first treatment that is considered by many
veterinarians and that owners request for urine marking.
 properly addressed in a timely manner, before the dog
Anti-anxiety medication is in fact beneficial in some cases
develops elimination preferences and habits.
of urine marking to reduce the spraying cat's arousal level
 Urine marking is a normal behavior that is an impor-
and response to triggering stimuli; however, it should be
tant mode of communication in dogs. Chemical or olfac-
used as an adjunctive treatment to changes in the cat's
tory communication is thought to be more important for
environmental and behavioral management.
 domestic dogs than are visual signals (Serpell). Dogs can
 Before a behavioral drug is prescribed, a thorough
identify species, sex, and even individuals from urine
knowledge of its actions, side-efect profle, and drug
odors (Houpt 2005) and also use urine to indicate home
interactions should be understood, and the cat should
ranges and territories. Estrus females advertise by urine
have routine laboratory work performed. Owners must
marking and the pheromone in estrus female urine aids
a  paaondde uaaq aaeu snp ou iel pau aq
males in locating and identifying estrus females. Conse-
 FDA for treatment of spraying or any behavior problems
quently, urine marking often occurs in territorial, sexual,
in cats.
and conflict situations.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic
Intact males, and estrus females mark most frequently;
antianxiety medications are the currently preferred medi-
however, other intact females, and neutered males and
cations based on their efficacy and how they are tolerated.
females may also urine mark. Urine marking typically
develops between one and two years of age; however, in
 ate micturition and spraying are given in Table 81.2.
d e ig pusd iu siop jo ot ‘odau auo
The reader is encouraged to consult other references
of urine marking began exhibiting urine marking at 3
for more complete discussion of behavioral drugs and
months of age (Voith and Borchelt 1996). Dogs may
their use in cats.
urine mark inside the home despite being otherwise well
Punishment is counterproductive and only increases
house-trained.
the cat's anxiety, which has the potential of increasing
 Dogs with separation anxiety and noise phobias may
spraying.
response. Anxiety disorders are the second most common
reason that dogs are presented for behavior problems,
Prevalence and etiology of inappropriate
sss
anxiety and noise phobia are often well house-trained
urination in dogs
except when they are anxious. The inappropriate elimi-
House-soiling, in general, is reported to be either the most
common or one of the most common reasons that dogs
preted by owners as spiteful behavior for being left home
  n  s s   
alone when in fact it is a reflection of the physiological
Scarlett 2003), and it is one of the top four reasons that
arousal that accompanies the dog's anxiety.
 dogs are presented to veterinary behaviorists Bamberger
Submissive urination is manifested by submissive dogs
and Houpt 2006).
in response to perceived threats or dominance signals
The major causes of inappropriate urination in dogs
from other dogs or from humans. It is normal in puppies
include incomplete house-training, which involves both
and is most common in female and excessively submissive
urination and defecation, urine marking, anxiety dis-
dogs.
Inappropriate urination 825
Excitement/greeting urination is urination that occurs
voiding. Marking is unrelated to the length of time
when the dog is very excited, oftentimes by owners
since the dog has had an opportunity to go outside to
 returning home and when greeting new individuals. Sim-
eliminate.
ilar to submissive urination, this occurs most frequently
in young dogs and female dogs.
Female urine marking
Any systemic or urinary disorder, which results in pol-
 lakiuria, polyuria, or dysuria, may present as inappropri-
Submissive urination is voiding of a relatively small
ate urination. Additionally, disorders that interfere with
amount of urine by a dog in a submissive posture (low-
the dog's mobility (musculoskeletal or neurological dis-
ered head and neck, ears back, averted gaze, and low
orders, systemic weakness, and painful conditions), or
to crouched body posture, or rolling over on its side to
voluntary control or cognitive awareness of micturition
expose its inguinal area) in the context of the dog perceiv-
 may result inappropriate urination (Chapter 47).
ing a threat or having a dominance signal directed toward
it. Submissive urination has a communication function
 ofinhibiting aggression from the challenging/threatening
Clinical signs
 dog. People may trigger this behavior in submissive dogs
Incomplete house-training usually involves both urina-
by approaching, or leaning over them, speaking loudly
tion and defecation and is related to normal patterns of
to, staring at, picking up, scolding, or punishing the dog.
elimination. The character and the volume of urine and
i- n n no si n   s
stool are normal and the eliminations occur in associa-
Excitement/greeting urination is voiding of a small
tion with eating, drinking, and other predictable patterns
amount of urine while standing, walking, or jumping in
of activity. The occurrence of inappropriate elimination
the context of being very excited. This seems to occur
due to incomplete house-training is typically correlated
most when the dog is excitedly greeting owners on their
to the length of time since the dog had access to an
 return from an absence. It is most common in puppies 
appropriate site for eliminating. The longer the length
and young females. Excitement/greeting urination is not
 of time since the dog has had access to an appropriate
 related to inadequate house-training.
 outside location for eliminating, the greater the likeli-
Medically related inappropriate urination is suggested
hood that it will eliminate inside. House-soiling due to
by loss of house-training in a previously well-trained dog.
incomplete house-training may occur whether or not
 There is often a change in the frequency of elimination,
the owner is home, and it is not associated with fear
the character and/or volume ofthe urine that is deposited,
        
or evidence of loss of control of eliminations. Weakness,
marking, and submissive and excitement/greeting uri-
discomfort, or other symptoms of illness may also be
nation. The dog may have a substrate and/or location
evident.
 preferences within the home, always returning to a spe-
cific area or always seeking certain surfaces on which to
Diagnosis
eliminate.
Anxiety disorders may result in inappropriate elimina-
 An accurate behavioral diagnosis of the type of inap-
tion, often both urination and defecation, when the dog
 propriate urination is necessary for successful treatment.
is experiencing fear or anxiety. Dogs with separation anx-
The diagnosis is based on the age and sex of the dog.
iety and noise phobias are frequently well house-trained
a description of the inappropriate urination, and the
 at other times. In addition to the inappropriate urina-
circumstances in which it occurs. The possibility of an
tion, these dogs typically also exhibit other symptoms of
underlying medical problem must also be considered and
anxiety, including frantic/panicked attitude, destructive
ruled out before a strictly behavioral diagnosis is made.
behavior, excessive vocalization, and evidence of auto-
A medical history, physical examination, baseline labo-
nomic arousal, that is panting, salivating, and trem-
ratory evaluation, including a CBC, serum chemistries,
bling. Urine marking typically involves raised-leg uri-
urinalysis, and possibly a urine culture and sensitivity
nation onto a vertical surface, although there are many
will often be necessary in the evaluation of inappropriate
variations of urine-marking postures in male dogs in
urination.
response to arousing social stimuli such as female dogs
 Depending on the history and initial physical exami-
in estrus, unfamiliar dogs, strange odors, human vis-
nation and results of the baseline laboratory tests, other
itors, and even anxiety (Landsberg 1991). There may
medical tests may be indicated. If the use of behavioral
be established marking posts that are regularly marked.
medication is being considered in the therapeutic plan,
The volume of urine is usually smaller than the vol-
baseline laboratory testing should be done, even if a con-
ume that is deposited when emptying the bladder for
tributing medical disorder is not suspected.
826   Lower urinary tract disorders
Treatment
too harsh, the dog will just learn to not mark in the
owner's presence, and the dog may become fearful of
The ideal treatment for incomplete house-training is pre-
the person.
vention. House-training is based on the principle that dogs
· DAP? synthetic dog appeasing pheromone may be
learn where to eliminate rather than where NOT to elim-
helpful in some dogs to decrease anxiety and subse-
inate. Never giving a dog an opportunity to eliminate
quently decrease the dog's arousal level in response to
in the house is the best method of training it to only
 triggering stimuli.
urinate outside. When a new puppy or dog is brought
into the household, a house-training program should
scribed as an adjunctive treatment to the changes in
be instituted as soon as the dog arrives. A successful
house-training program consists of taking the dog to an
behavioral and environmental management and the
behavioral modification training (see Appendix).
appropriate location for elimination on a regular sched-
ule, positive reinforcement for eliminating at an accept-
Submissive urination
able location, constant supervision when the dog is loose
in the house, and confinement when supervision is not
 Inappropriate management of this type of elimination in
possible.
 puppies and adults frequently makes it worse. In general,
Inappropriate urination due to anxiety is treated by
the adult dog with this disorder is excessively submissive.
 managing the underlying anxiety. However, when a dog
eliminates inappropriately as a result of being anxious, it
may lose its inhibitions for eliminating inside and may
 resolve with maturity.
secondarily learn to associate locations within the house
·The behavior should be ignored! The dog should not be
punished or “reassured?" Punishment will elicit more
with eliminating. If this happens, in addition to treat-
 ing the anxiety disorder, remedial house-training will be
submission and consequently more urination. Reas-
surance by petting or talking to the dog while it is
required.
urinating submissive will reinforce the behavior.
Urine marking
· Avoid threatening and dominance gestures.
· Instead of making direct eye contact, look at the dog
· Neuter intact dogs. Castration results in improvement
with an averted gaze.
in 70% of intact male dogs, and spaying will resolve
· Squat down beside the dog rather leaning over it.
heat-related urine marking in female dogs. The decline
· Petting the dog on the side or under the chin is less
 in urine marking may be delayed for several weeks to
threatening than petting on the top of the head or
several months following neutering.
the back.
· If possible, either identify and remove arousing stimuli
· Use a quiet tone of voice and avoid speaking loudly.
 or minimize the dog's exposure to the stimuli; if that
· Desensitization to triggers of submissive behavior
is not possible, institute supervision and confinement,
may be necessary if management changes are not
as with incomplete house-training. If there are only
adequate.
one or two stimuli that elicit the marking, for example
· In difficult cases, anti-anxiety medication may be pre-
strangers coming to the home, desensitization training
scribed to decrease the dog anxiety.
may be beneficial in decreasing the dog's arousal to the
triggering stimuli.
If the behavior doesn't spontaneously resolve with matu-
· If the dog only marks at one or two marking posts, the
rity or respond to behavior modification changes in man-
significance of those sites may be changed by turning
agement, the possibility of weak urethral tone or control
them into water and feeding stations.
should be considered. Medications that increase urethral
· Clean and apply an enzymatic urine odor eliminator to
tone may be prescribed in those instances.
the marked surfaces, to remove odor cues in the urine
that may trigger additional marking.
Excitement/greeting urination
· Dog belly bands for male dogs, available as many dif-
Greeting is a very important part of dog's social behav-
ferent commercial brands, or easily made, will absorb
ior and should not be eliminated. However, the greeting
urine when it is expressed and prevent it from hitting
routine can be changed to reduce the consequences of the
surfaces and may even inhibit a dog from marking
while it is being worn.
excitement/greeting urination.
· Startling or scolding the dog when caught in the act
· Make inside greetings low-key and calm.
 may interrupt the behavior, but will probably not pre-
·fpossible, instead of greeting the dog inside the house,
vent the dog from marking again. If the correction is
call the dog outside and greet there. The excitement and
Inappropriate urination 827
exuberance of the greeting can be redirected to running
Denenberg, S., G.M. Landsberg, et al. (2005). A comparison of cases
and playing.
referred to behviorists in three different countries. In: Current Issues
· As with submissive urination, excitement/greeting uri-
and Research in Veterinary Behavioral Medicine, edited by D. Mills,
E. Levine, et al. Lafayette: Purdue University, pp. 56-62.
 nation often resolves with maturity, if it does not spe-
Hart, B.L. and M. Leedy ( 1982). Identification of source of urine stains
cific desensitization training, may be necessary and
in multi-cat households. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 180: 77-78.
the possibility of inadequate urethral tone or control
Hart, B., et al. (2006). Canine and Feline Behavioral Therapy, 2nd
should be considered.
 edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
·Anti-anxiety medication or medication to increase ure-
 Horwitz, D.F ( 1997). Behavioral and environmental factors associated
with elimination behavior problems in cats: a retrospective study.
thral tone may be considered in cases that do not resolve
Appl Anim Behav Sci 52: 129-137.
or respond to behavioral methods.
Horwitz, D.F. and J.C. Neilson (2007). Canine and Feline Behavior.
· Scolding and punishment is not helpful.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, p. 508.
Houpt, K.A. (2005). Lomestic Animal Behavior for Veterinariars and
Animal Scientists, 4th edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, Pp.
Prognosis
24-27.
Houstuler, R.A., D.F. Chew, et al. (2005). Recent concepts in feline
shop u sqod aedodde e n sisoud s
lower urinary tract disease. Vet Clin Small Anirm 35: 147-170.
is good as long as the correct diagnosis is determined and
Jemmette, J.E. and G. Skeritt ( 1979). Poster display, Annual Meeting of
appropriate treatment is implemented. The longer the
the American Veterinary Medical Association. Cited in D.C. Turner
 duration of inappropriate urination, the more diffcult it
and P. Bateson. 1988. The Domestic Cat: Tthe Biology of its Behaviour.
will be to completely resolve it.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 187.
House-training will be most successful when appro-
Landsberg, G.M. (1991). The distribution of canine behavior cases at
three behavior referral practices. Vet Med 86: 101l-1018.
priate measures are used and the problem is addressed
 Neilson, J.C. (2003). Feline house-soiling: elimination and marking
before long-standing habits and preferences have been
behaviors. Vet Clin N Am: Small Amim Pract 33(2): 287-301.
established. Urine marking significantly improves with
 Neilson, J.C. (2004). Thinking outside the box. I Feline Med Surg 6:
neutering in the majority of dogs. Submissive and excite-
5-11.
 ment/greeting urination generally spontaneously resolve
Neilson, J.C. (2007). Scent preferences in the domestic cat. In: Proc 6th
International Veterinary Behavior Meeting and the European College
as maturity is reached and the object of treatment is
of Veterinary Behavioural Medicine —Companion Anirmals European
to find a method of managing the urination until the
Society of Veterinary Clinical Ethology.
dog matures. Those cases that do not resolve with matu-
Neilson, I.C. (2009). The latest scoop on litter. Vet Med 104: 140-144.
 rity are challenging and may require additional medi-
New, J.C., M.D. Salman, et al. (2000). Shelter relinquishment: charac-
cal evaluation. Inappropriate elimination due to anxi-
teristics of shelter-relinquished animals and their owners compared
with animals and their owners in U.S. pet-owning households. J
ety disorders is more problematic, because, permanently
Appl Anim Welfare Sci 3(3): 179-201.
resolving separation anxiety and noise phobia is unlikely,
Patronek, G.J., L.T. Glickman, et al. (1996a). Risk factors for relin-
 and the inappropriate elimination associated with those
quishment of dogs to an animal shelter. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 209:
disorders can be expected to persist until the anxiety is
572-581.
 adequately managed.
Patronek, G.J., L.T. Glickman, et al. (1996b). Risk factors for relin-
quishrment of cats to an animal shelter. I Am Vet Med Assoc 209:
582-588.
References
Salman, M.D., J.G. New Jr, et al. (1998). Hurman and animal fac-
tors related to relinquishment of dogs and cats in 12 selected ani-
Bamberger, M. and K. Houpt (2006). Signalment factors, comorbidity
mal shelters in the United States. I Appl Amim Welfare Sci 1{3):
and trends in behavioral diagnosis in cats 736 cases (1991-2001). J
207-226.
Am Vet Med Assoc 229( 10): 1602- 1606.
Salman, M.D., J.M. Hutchinson, et al. (2000). Behavioral reasons for
Borchelt, P.L. ( 1991). Cat elimination problerms, edited by A.R. Marder
relinquishment of dogs and cats to 12 shelters. JAppl Anirm Welfare
and V.L. Voith. Vet Clin North Am: SmallAmim Pract 21(2): 247-256.
Sci 3(2): 93-106.
Borchelt, P.L. and V.L. Voith ( 1996). Elimination behavior problems in
   s  s x s ()  zr
cats. In: Readings in Companion Animal Behavior, edited by Victoria
Am Vet Med Assoc 222( 11): 1526- 153 1.
L. Voith and Peter L. Borchelt. Trenton: Veterinary Learning Systems
Sung, W. and S.L. Crowell-Davis (2006). Elimination behavior patterns
Co., Inc, pp. 179-190.
of domestic cats (Felis catus) with and without elimination behavior
Buffngton, C.A.T., JI.L. Westropp, et al. (2006). Clinical evaluation of
problems. Arn I Vet Res 67(9): 1500- 1504.
multimodal environmental modification (MEMO) in management
Turner, D.C. and P. Bateson ( 1988). The Dormestic Cat: The Biology of
of cats with idiopathic cystitis. I Feline Med Surg 8: 261-268.
its Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cottam, N. and N. Dodman (2007). Effect of an odor eliminator on
Westropp,IL. and C.A.T. Buffington (2004). Feline idiopathic systitis:
feline litterbox behavior. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 9:
current understanding of pahtophysiology and management. Vet
44-50.
Clin Small Anmim 34: 1043- 1055.
Lower urinary tract trauma
Patricia Sura
Lower urinary tract trauma is frequently recognized in
peritoneal leakage indicates ureteral, urinary bladder,
veterinary patients and is the most common cause of
or proximal urethral trauma (Gannon and Moses
uroperitoneum in cats, dogs, and humans (Aumann et al.
2002). Urine extravasation into the subcutaneous tissues
1998; Gannon and Moses 2002; Rieser 2005). It is esti-
presents as bruised, edematous, painful, necrotic areas
mated that 10% of adult humans with external trauma
of dependent skin (Holt 1989; Rieser 2005). Extensive
sustain urinary tract injury (Tezval et al. 2007). The
areas of skin loss have been reported, requiring advanced
majority of specific information regarding lower urinary
reconstructive procedures for closure (Holt 1989).
tract injuries in companion animals exists as isolated
While blunt and penetrating trauma can lead to
case reports or small case series; therefore, true inci-
urinary tract rupture, iatrogenic damage via urethral
 dence rates and absolute treatment recommendations
 catheterization, cystocentesis, bladder expression, and
and prognoses are not available. Of 600 consecutive dogs
cystoscopic injury cannot be overlooked (Hay and Rosin 
injured in motor vehicle accidents, 2.5% had urinary tract
1997; McLoughlin 2000; Gannon and Moses 2002). Pres-
trauma (Kolata and Johnston 1975). Additionally, a study
ence of sterile urine in the abdomen results in chemical
of 100 consecutive dogs sustaining pelvic fractures found
 peritonitis, while infected urine may lead to systemic sep-
 that 39% had urinary tract injury detected with contrast
sis (McLoughlin 2000; Rieser 2005).
radiography. The incidence of injury did not correlate
 Clinical signs associated with uroperitoneum include
with the severity of fracture (Selcer 1982).
pain on abdominal palpation, dehydration, ballotment
Multiple organ injury is common with abdominal
of a fluid wave, hematuria, dysuria, progressive depres-
trauma (Selcer 1982; Weisse et al. 2002). In a study of
sion, hypothermia, and other signs of external trauma
1,000 consecutive veterinary trauma patients evaluated
(Burrows 1974; Pechman 1982; Gannon and Moses
s    s  e 1e
2002). Delayed signs are those of uremia and peri-
 abdominal injury (Kolata et al. 1974). On presentation of
tonitis and may be nonspecific or suggestive of other
the acute trauma patient, stabilization of life-threatening
 organ systems. In 26 cats with uroperitoneum, the most 
injuries is of paramount importance. Evidence of urinary
common historical complaints other than anuria were
-doap pue euun snedde aq iou Aeu Ainju ioenl
vomiting and lethargy (Aumann 1998). Vomiting may
ment of clinical signs can be protracted (Bjorling 1984;
o   d s   g
McLoughlin 2000; Rieser 2005). In the 100 dogs with
severe azotemia (Burrows 1974). Presence or absence of
pelvic fractures, 1/3 of those with urinary tract injury
hematuria, ability to void voluntarily, and presence of a
were clinically silent (Selcer 1982).
 palpable bladder do not predict urinary tract integrity
 Urine can collect in the peritoneum, retroperitoneum,
(Burrows 1974; Rieser 2005).
and subcutaneous dependent tissues (McLoughlin 2000).
Often, animals with uroabdomen present with sig-
Retroperitoneal fluid accumulates due to damage to
nificant metabolic compromise due to latency in clin-
the kidneys, proximal ureter, or distal urethra, while
ical signs following urinary leakage (Bjorling 1984;
McLoughlin 2000; Rieser 2005); therefore, medical
stabilization is required before reparative  interven-
 tion is attempted. Common clinicopathological changes
Nephrology and Urology of Small Anirmals Edited by Joe Bartges and
with uroperitoneum are azotemia, hyperkalemia,
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
828
Lower urinary tract trauma 
829
hypernatremia, hyperphosphatemia, and metabolic aci-
Less ideal is placement of multiple Penrose drains covered
dosis (Gannon and Moses 2002; Rieser 2005). Intravascu-
with sterile bandage.
lar volume loss and collapse occurs due to third spacing
Peritoneal catheter placement also permits dialysis and
  i    d    
treatment ofhypothermia (Dzyban 2000). Median as well
the hyperosmolar urine (Burrows 1974; Rawlings 1976;
as paramedian catheter placement has been described
Gannon and Moses 2002; Rieser 2005).
(Dzyban 2000; McLoughlin 2000). The catheter is placed
Early stabilization includes administration of intra-
using a trocar or manual entry through a small stab inci-
venous crystalloids and colloids to address systemic shock
sion. The catheter is secured, bandaged, and attached to
and initiation of peritoneal drainage (McLoughlin 2000;
a sterile collection system. Dialysis fluid is usually com-
Gannon and Moses 2002). Treatment for severe hyper-
prised of a dextrose solution, which can be heparinized to
kalemia may be required especially if bradycardia or elec-
prevent catheter occlusion with clots (Carter 1989; Crisp
 trocardiographic abnormalities are noted.
1989; Dzyban 2000). The dialysate is instilled at 38-42°C
Delay in diagnosis of urinary tract trauma increases
depending on heat requirements with a 30-40 minute
mortality rate. Death occurs 47-90 hours after exper-
dwell time. Most of the fluid should be retrieved and the
     
time to next instillation of dialysate tailored on an indi-
although in traumatic cases, mortality is typically
vidual case basis. Complications of peritoneal dialysis
from associated sustained injuries (Aumann 1989).
include catheter obstruction, peritonitis, hypoalbumine-
Abdominocentesis is necessary to definitively diagnose a
mia, overhydration, and electrolyte disturbances (Carter
uroabdomen. Routine paracentesis can be employed, but
1989; Crisp 1989; Dzyban 2000).
large volumes of fluid are necessary for a diagnostic sam-
When considering dialysis for patients with severe
ple (5-25 mL/kg) (Crowe 1976; Kolata 1976). Diagnostic
d   n    
peritoneal lavage may also be used, in which 20 mL/kg
dextrose solutions (1.5%) are used to minimize loss of
 of sterile isotonic saline is infused into the abdomen and
free water, which is contraindicated in dehydrated ani-
retrieved. This technique can detect 0.8-4.4 mL/kg of free
mals (Carter 1989). As many of these animals are pre-
abdominal fluid (Crowe 1976; Kolata 1976; Saxon 1994),
sented after sustaining blunt trauma, extreme caution
but cannot detect retroperitoneal fluid (Saxon 1994). The
 and close monitoring of the patient is essential, as a pre-
focused assessment for abdominal trauma (FAST) tech-
viously unsuspected diaphragmatic defect may become
nique may also be useful, which allows for ultrasono-
apparent (Carter 1989; Dzyban 2000). I1n a study of dogs
 graphic localization of small amounts of free fluid and
 in renal failure, peritoneal dialysis significantly lowered
directed centesis (Helling 2007).
blood urea nitrogen concentration in 19/25 dogs and
Small molecules such as urea nitrogen diffuse readily
creatinine concentration in 20/25 dogs (Crisp 1989). In
across the peritoneum and equilibrate rapidly (Gannon
this study, hypoalbuminemia occurred in 11/25 (41%),
and Moses 2002). Comparison of the larger creatinine
obstruction in 8/25 (30%), and peritonitis in 6/25 (22%)
molecule and potassium concentrations in centesis fluid
(Crisp 1989).
compared with serum yields a definitive diagnosis (Chap-
Following rehydration and stabilization, perform
ter 11). In dogs, a fluid to serum creatinine concentration
radiographic contrast studies to localize the site of leak-
ratio of greater than 2:1 and a fluid to serum potassium
age (McLoughlin 2000). Survey thoracic and abdomi-
concentration ratio greater than 1.4:1 are predictive of
nal radiography are obtained in all cases of trauma to
uroperitoneum (Schmiedt 2001). In cats, mean fluid to
 evaluate diaphragmatic integrity, identify pneumotho-
serum creatinine concentration ratio of 2:1 and mean
rax, hemothorax, and pulmonary contusions, and perti-
fluid to serum potassium concentration ratio of 1.9:1 are
 nent fractures. Radiographic evidence of urinary tract
predictive of uroabdomen (Aumann 1998).
trauma includes loss of abdominal or retroperitoneal
 Urinary drainage and diversion is essential in treating
detail, lack of a distinct urinary bladder, and displace-
urinary tract trauma. If a urinary catheter can be passed,
ment or nonvisualization of a kidney (Pechman 1982).
it should be left indwelling within the urinary bladder.
Prolonged uroabdomen can lead to marked fluid accu-
If catheterization is impossible, drainage can be achieved
mulation, ileus, abdominal adhesions, and peritonitis
via cystocentesis, cystostomy tube placement, or urinary
(Burrows 1974).
bladder marsupialization (Chapter 32; Bjorling 1984).
 The most reliable noninvasive means of detecting uri-
 Cystostomy and marsupialization require general anes-
nary tract trauma is via contrast radiography (Chap-
thesia; intermittent cystocentesis may be preferred in the
ter 15; Pechman 1982; McLoughlin 2000). Urethral tears
severely compromised animal. To address urine accumu-
 and bladder rupture can be visualized by urethrocystog-
lation in the peritoneal cavity, a peritoneal catheter can
raphy, although complete filling of the urinary bladder
be placed to lavage and evacuate it (McLoughlin 2000).
is required to demonstrate small defects (McLoughlin
830  Lower urinary tract disorders
2000). In a study of experimental urinary tract rup-
animals in which both ureters have been affected, either
ture in 14 dogs, contrast cystography diagnosed 100%
to aid in the resuscitative effort or to manage postopera-
of cases (Burrows 1974). Similarly, positive contrast ure-
tive drainage (Kyles 1998; Nwadike 2000). These can be
 throcystography delineated all cases of urinary bladder
and urethral trauma in dogs with pelvic fractures (Selcer
guidance or surgically.
1982).
Surgical  intervention  S
should be performed as
Excretory urography is used to evaluate kidneys and
soon as possible following diagnosis and stabilization
ureters, which are generally not easily assessed by survey
(Thornhill 1981; Brandes 2004). Ureteronephrectomy,
radiography (Chapter 15; Feeney et al. 1982). Intravenous
ureterostomy, or ureteroneocystostomy can be consid-
administration of contrast material may cause acute sys-
  e  a  sq s a  
temic hypotension and collapse, as well as acute renal
injury (Chapter 61; Weisse 2002; Mehl 2003; Hamilton
failure; therefore, it is not recommended in dehydrated
2006).
or azotemic patients (Feeney et al. 1982; McLoughlin
With primary ureteral repair, the ureter must be
2000; Gannon and Moses 2002). As contrast media can
repaired without tension, with an adequate blood sup-
alter urine specific gravity, this should be assessed prior
 ply and without accumulation of urine at the anasto-
to contrast study (Feeney et al. 1982). The kidneys are
motic site (Thornhill 1981; Bellah 1989). As watertight
best demonstrated immediately and 5 minutes postinjec-
 anastomoses are rarely performed, urinary diversion is
tion. The renal pelves are identified at 10 and 20 minutes
recommended (Caywood 1986). A ureteral catheter or
postinjection and the ureters at 5, 10, and 20 minutes
nephrostomy tube may be used as a stent (Chapter 32).
(Feeney 1979).
 Ureteroscopy and ureteral stenting has been described in
dogs and cats and is expected to receive wider attention
Ureteral injury
as interventional techniques become increasingly avail-
able (Berent 2008; Weisse 2008). Typically, hydroureter
Ureteric injury is relatively rare due to their posi-
and hydronephrosis are noted following ureteral tran-
tion beneath thick epaxial musculature and their rela-
section. Marked improvement in these qualities was
tive mobility in the retroperitoneal space (Palmer 1999;
 noted 10 weeks after repair in one dog (Chambers
Brandes 2004). Approximately 25% of ureteral injuries
1987).
in humans are from blunt or penetrating trauma ( Tezval
 In humans, iatrogenic ureteral injuries occur in
2007). Blunt trauma can lead to ureteric injury from
0.5-1% of abdominal and pelvic surgery patients and
rapid deceleration or hyperextension (Brandes 2004).
 are the leading cause of ureteral damage (Selzman 1996;
Penetrating trauma, such as gunshot wounds, knife
Brandes 2004). Unfortunately, iatrogenic ureteral dam-
wounds, and dog fight wounds in companion animals,
age also occurs during routine surgical procedures in
may result in ureteral injury. Penetrating injury is respon-
sible for 75-96% of traumatic ureteral injuries in humans
tion and transection have occurred during ovariohys-
(DiGiacomo 2001), and exploratory celiotomy is war-
terecomy (Okkens 1981; Tidwell 1990; Nwadike 2000;
ranted in animals with penetrating abdominal wounds
Mehl 2003). Ovariectomy may lessen this risk as distal
(Fullington 1997; Davidson 1998).
ligation is not performed (van Goethem 2006). In dogs,
 Excretory urography remains the imaging modality
65% of renal filtration is achievable if ligation is relieved
of choice to assess ureters (Chapter 15). In a study of
within the first week of ureteral obstruction. This drops
10 animals with ureteric rupture, excretory urography
to 46% after 14 days of ligation ( Wilson 1977). The canine
demonstrated ureteralleakage in all cases. Unfortunately,
 ureter has been subjected experimentally to crush injury,
the extent of damage (partial versus complete transec-
which causes focal devascularization. Crush injuries have
tion) could not be determined (Weisse 2002). In human
ue sain og oi dn luse nan aui oi ndde q
 trauma centers, excretory urography can be unreliable,
result in a fulminate periureteral scar. Function resolves
as can contrast computed tomography. Surgical explo-
by 12 weeks postinjury (Brodsky 1977).
ration is considered an acceptable means for evaluat-
 Post-traumatic complications from ureteral damage
ing the ureters for trauma (DiGiacomo 200l; Brandes
include urinomas or periureteral pseudocysts, which
2004).
represent urine encased in fibrous tissue (Chapter 59).
Ureteric rupture, both unilateral and bilateral, has
These have been described in companion animals and
been described as a result of trauma in companion ani-
are amenable to resection and drainage (Tidwell 1990;
mals (Weisse 2002; Hamilton 2006). In addition to uri-
Moores 2002; Worth 2004). In addition, ureteral stric-
nary diversion procedures discussed previously, nephros-
ture and fistulation has been described (Rawlings 1976;
tomy catheters (Chapter 32) have been used to stabilize
Palmer 1999; Brandes 2004).
Lower urinary tract trauma 
831
Urinary bladder rupture
An indwelling urinary catheter is placed and main-
tained with a sterile collection system (Chapters 32 and
Of 600 dogs injured in motor vehicle accidents, nine
36). It is essential that the catheter is not placed through
had confirmed urinary bladder trauma (Kolata 1975).
the rent into the abdominal cavity as this will pre-
Urinary bladder rupture is the most common traumatic
vent mucosal apposition and healing. After 3-5 days
urinary injury in dogs and cats (Thornhill 1981). It is
 of catheterization, a contrast cystourethrogram is per-
more common in male dogs due to less urethral compli-
formed. If urinary leakage is still present, catheteriza-
ance and dilation in response to increased intravesicular
tion may be continued. An abdominal drainage catheter
pressure ( Thornhill 1981).
may also be used in conjunction with urethral catheter.
Eighty percent of urinary bladder perforations in peo-
      
ple are associated with pelvic fractures (Tezval 2007).
ceased, the catheters are removed and the animal is mon-
Mechanisms for rupture include direct penetration by
itored for voluntary urination. All catheters should be
fracture fragments or sudden increase in intravesicu-
submitted for bacterial culture at time of removal, as the
lar pressure (Selcer 1982). Between 1966-1971, ruptured
odds ratio for development of a urinary tract infection
urinary bladder was confirmed in 26 dogs and 14 cats at
increases approximately 27% for each day of catheteriza-
one institution; 84.6% were due to trauma and 46.2% had
tion (Bubenik 2007).
associated pelvic fractures (Burrows 1974). Urinary blad-
Should urine leakage persist despite appropriate man-
der rupture has been reported in 1/119 cats and 3/132 cats
 agement or should patient status decline during medi-
with high-rise syndrome (Whitney 1987; Vnuk 2003).
cal therapy, surgical correction is indicated. A midline
Undifferentiated abdominal injury has been reported in
celiotomy is performed, the defect in the bladder wall is
12/81 dogs injured by this same mechanism (Gordon 
located, debrided, and closed with fine absorbable suture.
1993).
Care is taken to ensure continued patency of the ureteral
 In clinical and experimental studies of urinary bladder
 openings (Bjorling 1984).
rupture, the earliest clinical sign noted is abdominal ten-
derness and pain. After approximately 12 hours, vomiting
commences and increases in frequency. Progressive dehy-
Urethral tears
dration and uremia eventually culminates in death with-
In addition to blunt trauma (Jones 1981; Goldman
in 72 hours (Chapter 71; Meynard 1961; Burrows 1974).
1989), urethral rupture may also occur from bite
Urinary bladder rupture is confirmed with radio-
wounds, gunshot wounds, and fractures of the os penis
graphic contrast studies, as described previously.
(Thornhill 1981). In a study of 20 dogs and 29 cats
Ultrasound-assisted  contrast cystography,  in  which
with urethral rupture, presence of multiple concurrent
microbubbled saline is injected into the bladder and
injuries was the only factor statistically associated with
observed to migrate into the tissues around the bladder,
 a poor outcome. Laboratory findings, timing and type
has also been described (Cote 2002).
 of surgical correction, and timing and type of urinary
Opinion has changed regarding surgical management
diversion had no apparent effect on outcome (Anderson
of urinary bladder rupture. Initially, speed was consid-
 2006). In this study, the most common cause of urethral
ered of optimum concern due to rapid deterioration of
trauma in dogs was automobile collision, with 12 of
 patient status (Meynard 1961). As early and active stabi-
14 sustaining concurrent pelvic fractures (Anderson
lization has been proven to improve mortality rates, the
2006). In cats, iatrogenic trauma during catheterization
concept of conservative management of urinary bladder
attempts was the most common cause of urethral
ruptures has emerged. In a study of experimental uri-
rupture (Anderson 2006).
nary bladder perforation, three dogs survived without
 latrogenic urethral damage is common in cats and
any adjunctive therapy (Burrows 1974). Current princi-
dogs. Catheter-induced damage from therapy for feline
ples of medical management of urinary bladder rupture
lower urinary tract disease is a major etiology for
include lack of an underlying cause for rupture, lack of
urethrostomy in cats (Aumann 1998; Anderson 2006;
hypotonicity of the bladder, no evidence of devitalization,
Corgozinho 2007; Meige 2008). Urethral entrapment
no urosepsis, and no other reason for celiotomy ( Osborne
1996). Should conservative management be chosen, care-
dog (Messmer 2001), as well as presumed impingement
 ful observation is necessary. Nonsurgical management
by bilateral triple pelvic osteotomy (Dudley 2004). The
of traumatically ruptured urinary bladder has also been
author has observed a kitten with a complete urethral
 reported in children, resulting in a shorter hospital stay
transection secondary to ovariohysterectomy. Urethral
and equivalent outcome to those surgically managed
injury has also been described in cats with pelvic
(Osman 2005).
trauma (Fearnside 2003). Another means of reported
832
 Lower urinary tract disorders
iatrogenic urethral trauma is inadvertent prostatectomy
cases of complete urethral transection (Layton 1987).
and urethral transection during cryptorchidectomy or
When urinary diversion techniques in cases of urethral
perineal hernia surgery (Bellah et al. 1989; Schulz 1996;
resection and anastomosis in dogs were compared, no
Sereda 2002).
outcome difference was noted between a urethral catheter
 Contrast cystourethrography (Chapter 15) is the imag-
only, cystostomy tube only, or both (Cooley 1999).
 ing modality of choice to evaluate urethral disruption.
 Infection rates following permanent urethrostomy can
The normal luminal diameter in an animal can vary with
approach 53% (Corgozinho 2007). In a study of 59 cats
amount of contrast material as wel as the pressure at
that had undergone perineal urethrostomy, there was a
which it is administered. This high-yield procedure can
 25% complication rate within the first month of surgery,
clinically demonstrate urethral transaction, urethral lac-
including stricture formation, urinary tract infection,
eration and bladder rupture, and urethral stricture ( Ticer
and perineal urine leakage (Bass 2005). Complications
1980).
from urethrostomy include stricture formation, urine
Principles of urethral trauma management include
leakage into the subcutaneous space, chronic urinary
accurate patient assessment and stabilization, urinary
tract infection, perineal hernia, and possible inconti-
diversion, and conservative management or definitive
nence (Bass 2005; Phillips 2006). In cats with perineal
repair (Chapter 83; Boothe 2000). If a urinary catheter
urethrostomy, complete dissection to the level of the
is placed, it is secured in position with suture. A con-
bulbourethral glands prevents stricture formation. In
a study of failed urethrostomies, 8/ll cats with stric-
location of urine leakage.
ture formation had evidence of incomplete dissection
 Since urinary diversion favors wound healing, cys-
and improper surgical technique (Phillips 2006). Other
tostomy tubes can be used either for preoperative sta-
bilization or postoperative diversion (Caywood 1986;
 sition of the mucosa to the skin, resulting in scarring
Williams 1991; Beck 2007). Following placement in
and self-mutilation (Bilbrey 1991; Phillips 2006). A study
10 dogs and 1 cat, micturition returned to normal after
evaluating long-term outcome of scrotal urethrostomies
tube removal with leakage from the stoma expected for up
in dogs found a 15% infection rate (Bilbrey 1991). Treat-
to 4 days while granulation occurs ( Williams 1991). Com-
ment is directed via culture and sensitivity results.
mon complications of tube cystostomy include urinary
tract infection, inadvertent tube removal, and stomal
References
infection or inflammation ( Williams 1991; Beck 2007).
 As with urinary bladder rupture, conservative man-
Anderson, R.B., L.R. Aronson, et al. (2006). Prognostic factors for
successful outcome following urethral rupture in dogs and cats. J
 agement of urethral tears is possible. Urethral healing
Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 42(2): 136- 146.
relies on mucosal continuity and lack of significant urine
Aumann, M., L.T. Worth,et al. ( 1998). Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases
extravasation (Bellah 1989). A small, persistent strip of
(1986-1995). IAm Anim Hosp Assoc 34(4): 315-324.
mucosa is all that is necessary to allow urethral healing,
Bass, M., J. Howard, et al. (2005). Retrospective study of indications for
 generally without stricture formation (Robertson 1984;
and outcome of perineal urethrostomy in cats. I Small Anin Pract
Waldron 1985; Bellah 1989). Primary alignment has been 
46(5): 227-231.
Beck, A.L., J.M. Grierson, et al. (2007). Outcome of and complica-
described in 10 cats in which a urinary catheter was used
tions associated with tube cystostomy in dogs and cats: 76 cases
to span the ruptured area for 5-14 days. A 100% suc-
(1995-2006). I Am Vet Med Assoc 230(8): 1184-1189.
cess rate for urethral healing was reported, with a single
Bellah, J.R. (1989). Wound healing in the urinary tract. Serm Vet Med
case of urethral stricture (Meige 2008). An appropriate-
Surg (Small Anim) 4(4): 294-303.
Bellah, J.R., C.P. Spencer, et al. ( 1989). Hemiprostatic urethral avulsion
sized catheter approximates the urethral diameter with-
during cryptorchid orchiectomy in a dog. I Am Anirn Hosp Assoc
out exerting outward pressure as this may slow wound
25(5): 553-556.
healing.
Berent, A. (2008). Ureteral interventions: a minimally invasive appro-
If a retrograde catheter cannot be passed, a laparotomy
ach to diagnosis and treatment of ureteral disease. Proceedings of
 may be useful to pass a urinary catheter from inside the
the 26th Annual ACVIM Forum, June 4-7, San Antonio, TX.
 bladder through the urethra. A second urinary catheter
Bilbrey, S.A., S.J. Birchard, et al. (1991). Scrotal urethrostomy: a ret-
rospective review of 38 dogs (1973 through 1988). IAm Amirm Hosp
can then be attached to the end of the first and pulled into
Assoc 27(5): 560-564.
the bladder (Rawlings 1976; Fearnside 2003; Meige 2008).
Bjorling, D.E. ( 1984). Traumatic injuries of the urogenital system. Vet
Urethral tears and transections can be surgically man-
Clin N Am: Small Amirm Pract 14( 1): 61-76.
Boothe, H.W. (2000). Managing traumatic urethralinjuries. Clin Tech
Small Anim Pract 15( 1): 35-39.
of the ruptured area through performance of a urethros-
Brandes, S., M. Coburn, et al. (2004). Consensus on genitourinary
 tomy. A degree of stricture occurs whether primary repair
-auapiaa e inun saain jo juaueuu pue sisoueip ene
or conservative management over a catheter is chosen in
based analysis. BJU Int 94(3): 277-289.
Lower urinary tract trauma 
833
Brodsky, S.L., P.D. Zimskind, et al. ( 1977). Effects of crush and devas-
Goldman, A.L. and S.L. Beckman (1989). Traumatic urethral avulsion
cularizing injuries to the proximal ureter: an experimental study.
at the preputial fornix in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 194( 1): 88-90.
Invest Urol 14(5): 361-365.
Gordon, L.E., C. Thacher, et al. (1993). High-rise syndrome in dogs:
Bubenik, L.J., G.L. Hosgood, et al. (2007). Frequency of urinary tract
8l cases (1985-1991). I Am Vet Med Assoc 202(1): 118-122.
infection in catheterized dogs and comparison of bacterial culture
Hamilton, M.H., T.R. Sissener, et al. (2006). Traumatic bilateral
and susceptibility testing results for catheterized and noncatheter-
ureteric rupture in two dogs. I Small Anirm Pract 47( 12): 737-740.
ized dogs with urinary tract infections. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 231(6):
Hay, C.W. and E. Rosin (1997). Repair of an intrapelvic urethral tear
893-899.
in a bitch caused by iatrogenic trauma. Vet Rec 140(2): 48-49.
Burrows, C.F. and K.C. Bovee ( 1974). Metabolic changes due to exper-
Helling, T.S., I. Wilson, et al. (2007). The utility of focused abdominal
imentally induced rupture of the canine urinary bladder. Am I Vet
ultrasound in blunt abdominal trauma: a reappraisal. Am J Surg
Res 35(8): 1083-1088.
194(6): 728-733.
Carter, L.J., W.E. Wingfield, et al. (1989). Clinical experience with
Holt, P.E. (1989). Hindlimb skin loss associated with urethral rupture
peritoneal dialysis in small animals. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
in two cats. I Small Anim Pract 30(7): 406-409.
11(11): 1335-1343.
 Jones, G.H., W.T. Testerman, et al. (1981). Ruptured urethra caused
Caywood, D.D. and C.A. Osborne ( 1986). Surgical removal of canine
by trauma in a dog. Vet Med Small Amim Clin 76(5): 672-673.
uroliths. Vet Clin N Am: Small Anim Pract 16(2): 389-407.
Kolata, R.J, N.H. Kraut, et al. ( 1974). Patterns of trauma in urban dogs
Chambers, I.N., B.A. Selcer, et al. (1987). Recovery from severe
and cats: a study of 1,000 cases. JArm Vet Med Assoc 164(5): 499-502.
hydroureter and hydronephrosis after ureteral anastormosis in a dog.
Kolata, R.J. and D.E. Johnston ( 1975). Motor vehicle accidents in urban
IAm Vet Med Assoc 191( 12): 1589- 1592.
dogs: a study of 600 cases. IArm Vet Med Assoc 167( 10): 938-941.
Cooley, A.J., D.R. Waldron, et al. (1999). The effects of indwelling
Kolata, R.J. (1976). Diagnostic peritoneal paracentesis and lavage:
transurethral catheterization and tube cystotomy on urethral anas-
experimental and clinical evaluations in the dog. I Am Vet Med
tomoses in dogs. I Am Amim Hosp Assoc 35(4): 341-347.
Assoc 168(8): 697-699.
Corgozinho, K.B., H.J.M. de Souza, et al. (2007). Catheter-induced
Kyles, A.E., E.A. Stone, et al. ( 1998). Diagnosis and surgical manage-
urethral trauma in cats with urethral obstruction. JFeline Med Surg
ment of obstructive ureteral calculi in cats: 1l cases (1993-1996.
9(6): 481-486.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 213(8): 1150-1156.
Cote, E., M.C. Carroll, et al. (2002). Diagnosis of urinary bladder
Layton, C.E., H.R. Ferguson, et al. ( 1987). Intrapelvic urethral anasto-
rupture using ultrasound contrast cystography: in vitro model and
mosis: a comparison of three techniques. Vet Surg 16(2): 175- 182.
two case-history reports. Vet Radiol Ultrasourd 43(3): 281-286.
McLoughlin, M.A. (2000). Surgical ermergencies of the urinary tract.
Crisp, M.S., D.J. Chew, et al. (1989). Peritoneal dialysis in dogs and
Vet Clir N Am: Small Anim Pract 30(3): 58 1-602.
cats: 27 cases (1976-1987). I Am Vet Med Assoc 195(9): 1262-
Mehl, M.L. and A.E. Kyles (2003). Ureteroureterostomy after proxi-
1266.
mal ureteric injury during an ovariohysterectomy in a dog. Vet Rec
Crowe, D.T. and S.W. Crane ( 1976). Diagnosticabdominal paracentesis
153( 15): 469-470.
and lavage in the evaluation of abdominal injuries in dogs and cats:
Meige, F., S. Sarrau, et al. (2008). Management of traumatic urethral
clinical and experimental investigations. JAm Vet Med Assoc 168(8):
rupture in ll cats using primary alignment with a urethral catheter.
700-705.
Vet Comp Orthopaed Traurmatol 21( 1): 76-84.
Davidson, E.B. (1998). Managing bite wounds in dogs and cats—part
Messmer, M., U. Rytz, et al. (200l). Urethral entrapment following
1. Compend Contin Educ Small Anin Pract 20(7): 811-820.
pelvic fracture fixation in a dog. I Small Anim Pract 42(7): 341-344.
DiGiacomo, I.C., H. Frankel, et al. (2001). Preoperative radiographic
Meynard, J.A. ( 196l). Traumatic rupture of the bladder in the dog—a
staging for ureteral injuries is not warranted in patients undergoing
clinical study of nine cases. I Small Ani Pract 2(1-4): 131-134.
celiotomy for trauma. Am Surg 67( 10): 969-973.
Moores, A.P, A.M.D. Bell, et al. (2002). Urinoma (para-ureteral pseu-
Dudley, R.M. and B.E. Wilkens (2004). Urethral obstruction as a com-
docyst) as a consequence of trauma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
plication ofstagedbilateraltriple pelvic osteotomy. Am Anim Hosp
43(5): 213-216.
Assoc 41(5): 162-164.
Nwadike, B.S., L.P. Wilson, et al. (2000). Use of bilateral temporary
Dzyban, L.A., M.A. Labato, et al. (2000). Peritoneal dialysis: a tool in
nephrostomy catheters for ermergency treatment of bilateral ureter
veterinary critical care. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 10(2): 91-106.
transaction in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 217(12): 1862-1865.
Fearnside, S.M., R.D. Eaton-Wells, et al. (2003). Surgical management
Okkens, A.C., I. van de Gaag, et al. (1981). Urological complica-
of urethral injury following pelvic trauma in three cats. Aus Vet Pract
tions following ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Tijdschrift voor Dier-
33(1): 2-7.
geneeskunde 106(23): 1189-1198.
Feeney, D.A., D.E. Thrall, et al. (1979). Normal canine excretory uro-
Osborne, C.A., S.L. Sanderson, et al. (1996). Medical management of
 gram: effects of dose,time and individual dog variation. Am I Vet
iatrogenic rents in the wall of the feline urinary bladder. Vet Clin N
Res40(11): 1596-1604.
Am: Small Amim Pract 26(3): 551-562.
Feeney, D.A., D.L. Barber, et al. ( 1982). The excretory urogram: part
Osman, Y., N. El-Tabey, et al. (2005). Nonoperative treatrment of iso-
 I. Techniques, normal radiographic appearance, and misinterpreta-
lated posttraumatic intraperitoneal bladder rupture in children—is
tion. Compend Cont Educ Small Anim Pract 4(3): 233-240.
it justified? I Urol 173(3): 955-957.
Feeney, D.A., D.L. Barber, et al. ( 1982). The excretory urogram: part I1.
Palmer, L.S., R.R. Rosenbaum, et al. (1999). Penetrating ureteral
Interpretation of abnormal findings. Compend Contin Educ Small
trauma at an urban trauma center: l0 year experience. Urology
Anim Pract 4(4): 321-329.
54( 1): 34-36.
Fullington, R.J. and C.M. Otto (1997). Characteristics and manage-
Pechman, R.D. (1982). Urinary trauma in dogs and cats: a review.
ment of gunshot wounds in dogs and cats: 84 cases (1986-1995).
IAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 18(1): 33-40.
IAm Vet Med Assoc 210(5): 658-662.
Phillips, H. D.E. Holt (2006). Surgical revision of the urethral stoma
Gannon, K.M. and L. Moses (2002). Uroabdomen in dogs and cats.
following perineal urethrostomy in 1l cats:( 1998-2004). JArm Anim
Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 24(8): 604-612.
Hosp Assoc 42(3): 218-222.
834   Lower urinary tract disorders
Rawlings, C.A. and W.E. Wingfield ( 1976). Urethral reconstruction in
Ticer, J.W., C.P. Spencer, et al. (1980). Positive contrast retrograde
dogs and cats. IAm Amirn Hosp Assoc 12(6): 850-860.
urethrography: a useful procedure for evaluating urethral disorders
Rieser, T.M. (2005). Urinary tract emergencies. Vet Clin N Am: Small
in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 21( 1): 2-11.
Arnim Pract 35(2): 359-373.
Tidwell, A.S., S.L. Ullrman, et al. ( 1990). Urinoma (para-ureteral pseu-
Robertson, J.J. and M.J. Bojrab (1984). Subtotal intracapsular prosta-
docyst) in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31(4): 203-206.
tectomy results in normal dogs. Vet Surg 13( 1): 6-10.
Van Goethem, B., A. Schaefers-Okkens, etal. (2006). Making a rational
Saxon, W.D. (1994). The acute abdomen. Vet Clin N Am: Small Anim
Pract 24(6): 1207-1224.
a discussion of the benefits of either technique. Vet Surg 35(2):
Schmiedt, C., K.M. Tobias, et al. (200l). Evaluation of abdominal fluid:
136-143.
 peripheral blood creatinine and potassium ratios for diagnosis of
Vnuk, D., B. Pirkic, et al. (2003). Feline high-rise syndrome: 119 cases
uroperitoneum in dogs. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 11(4): 275-280.
(1998-2001). IFeline Med Surg 6(5): 305-312.
 Schulz, K.S., D.R. Waldron, et al. ( 1996). Inadvertent prostatectomy as
Waldron, D.R., C.S. Hedlund, et al. (1985). The canine urethra: a
a complication of cryptorchidectomy in four dogs. JAm Anirm Hosp
i   u  s  i o 
Assoc 32(3): 211-214.
213-217.
Selcer, B.A. ( 1982). Urinary tract trauma associated with pelvic trauma.
Weisse, C., L.R. Aronson, et al. (2002). Traumatic rupture ofthe ureter:
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19(5): 785-793.
10 cases. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 38(2): 188-192.
Selzman, A.A. and J.P. Spirnak (1996). Iatrogenic ureteral injuries:
Weisse, C., A.C. Berent, et al. (2008). Potential applications of inter-
a 20 year experience in treating 165 injuries. I Urol 155(3): 878-
881.
233(10): 1564-1574.
Sereda, C., D. Fowler, et al. (2002). Iatrogenic proximal urethral
Whitney, W.O. and C.J. Mehlhaff (1987). High-rise syndrome in cats.
obstruction after inadvertent prostatectomy during bilateral per-
JAm Vet Med Assoc 191(11): 1399-1403.
ineal herniorrhaphy in a dog. Can Vet J43(4): 288-290.
Williams, I.M. and R.A.S. White ( 1991). Tube cystostomy in the dog
Tezval, H., M. Tezval, et al. (2007). Urinary tract injuries in patients
and cat. I Small Amim Pract 32( 12): 598-602.
with multiple trauma. World I Urol 25(2): 177-184.
Wilson, D.R. ( 1977). Renal function during and following obstruction.
Thornhill, J.A. and P.E. Cechner (198l). Traumatic injuries to the
Ann Rev Med 28: 329-339.
kidney, ureter, bladder and urethra. Vet Clin N Am: Small Anim
Worth, A.J. and S.C. Tomlin (2004). Post-traumatic paraureteral uri-
Pract 11(1): 157-169.
noma in a cat. I Small Anirm Pract 45(8): 413-416.
83
Surgery of the lower urinary tract
Karen Tobias
Because of rich blood supply and rapid rate of healing.
Primary repair is therefore required with complete ure-
the bladder and distal urethra respond well to surgical
thral transection (Bellah 1989).
procedures, as long as a proper technique is used. Lower
Urethral injuries heal best when urine is diverted
urinary tract procedures such as cystotomy and urethros-
from tears or surgical sites (Bellah 1989). Urethral
 tomy are commonly performed by general practitioners.
mucosa can seal wounds as early as 3 days after injury.
Patients requiring urethral anastomosis and other more
Periurethral urine leakage delays wound healing and
advanced techniques are usually referred to an experi-
increases periurethral fibrosis, particularly if the urine
enced surgeon.
is infected. Excessive fibrosis from urine leakage can lead
to urethral stricture. Urine diversion can be performed
with transurethral catheters or cystostomy tubes. Either
Healing of the lower urinary tract
method will decrease the risk of stricture compared to
primary anastomosis alone. Risk of urethral stricture for-
Like other organs, healing of the bladder occurs in stages.
mation is increased with tension on the anastomosis or
Initially, the margins of a bladder incision are held in
use of oversized urethral catheters (Bellah 1989).
apposition by the applied suture material and, subse-
quently, a fibrin seal. Gradually, fibrous tissue ingrowth
strengthens the wound. Collagen synthesis peaks by day
Perioperative management
Aa ti Aep un saseo Aiiden usu pue sop u s
Lower urinary tract surgery may be required in patients
14-21 days after surgery, the bladder has regained 100%
with cystic or urethral trauma (Chapters 82), obstruc-
of its original strength. Sutures that penetrate the bladder
tion (Chapter 77), or neoplasia (Chapter 79). Lower uri-
lumen are covered by mucosa 3-4 days after surgery. By
 nary tract procedures may also be recommended when
 one month, a denuded bladder will be completely reep-
animals have not responded to medical management or
ithelialized with mucosa from the urethra, ureters, and
when additional samples are needed for culture (Chapter
any uninjured bladder remnant (Bellah 1989)
9 and 71) or histopathology.
Healing of the urethra is dependent on urethral con-
tinuity and local urine extravasation (Bellah 1989). If
Diagnostic tests
a strip of urethra remains intact and urine is diverted
from the site, the urethral mucosa can seal the wound
In general, most patients with lower urinary tract disease
 in 1 week. Regeneration of the remaining urethral layers
are evaluated for hematologic and biochemical abnor-
depends on the location of the defect; for instance, cor-
malities before surgery. Obstructed patients (Chapters
 pus spongiosum may regenerate within a month. If the
70) may be severely hyperkalemic, which can lead to
urethra is completely transected, the mucosal ends will
bradycardia and predispose the animal to arrhythmias.
retract. Fibrous tissue flls the intervening gap, produc-
Azotemia from obstruction or renal dysfunction may
ing a scar that eventually obstructs the urethral lumen.
interfere with platelet function, increasing the risk of
 intraoperative and postoperative hemorrhage (Mische
 and Schulze 2004). A buccal mucosal bleeding time can
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
be performed to assess platelet function in azotemic ani-
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
mals with thrombocytopenia. If possible, urine should be
835
836  Lower urinary tract disorders
obtained by cystocentesis for analysis and culture (Chap-
<  s   
ter 7 and 9). If a large prostatic cyst or absces is sus-
minutes is expected. Therapeutic antibiotics should be
 pected, urine samples should be obtained under ultra-
administered if infection is present at any site in the
sound guidance or by urethral catheterization to reduce
body. First-generation cephalosporins provide broad-
the risk of cyst or abscess rupture. Patients with lower uri-
 spectrum coverage for common urinary tract pathogens.
nary tract trauma, obstruction, or neoplasia or prostatic
If needed, culture samples should be obtained before
disorders usually undergo plain or contrast abdominal
 antibiotic therapy is initiated.
radiography or ultrasonography to diagnose the under-
lying condition and determine the extent of disease.
Surgical principles
Thoracic radiographs should be performed in patients
with suspected neoplasia or that have suffered vehicular
When lower urinary tract surgeries are performed
trauma. Patients with urinary trauma should be evalu-
through an abdominal approach, the incision usually
ated for other injuries such as fractures or abdominal her-
extends along the caudal abdominal midline. In male
nias. If free fluid is noted within the abdomen, a sample
dogs, the prepuce should be clipped and flushed with
should be obtained for cytology and culture. If uroperi-
antiseptic solution during the prep. The prepuce should
toneum is suspected, potassium or creatinine concentra-
  n      
tions of abdominal fluid and peripheral blood should be
tive retrograde urethral catheterization. The skin incision
compared (Chapter 11). With uroperitoneum, creatinine
will deviate around the base of the prepuce, resulting in
concentrations of abdominal fluid will be at least twice
transection the ipsilateral preputial muscle. This muscle
serum concentrations, and abdominal fluid potassium
should be reapposed at the time of subcutaneous closure.
concentrations will be at least 1.9 and 1.4 times that of
Branches of the external pudendal artery and vein should
serum in cats and dogs, respectively (Aumann et al. 1998;
be ligated along the prepuce before they are transected.
Schmiedt et al. 2001).
The proximal urethra can often be reached through a
caudal abdominal incision. Approach to the midportion
of the urethra may require pelvic osteotomy or ostectomy.
Preoperative care
Pelvic ostectomy can be partial or complete. If a complete
Azotemia, dehydration, and severe electrolyte distur-
ostectomy is performed, bone removal should be limited
bances should be corrected if possible before surgery.
to the pelvic symphysis and the medial portions of the
Patients with packed cell volume <25% should be cross-
pubis and ischium so that the obturator nerves are not
 matched for a red cell transfusion. Urinary tract obstruc-
damaged as they pass through the obturator foramina.
tions should be relieved by retrograde urethral catheteri-
The osseous gap can be closed by reapposing the elevated
zation. If a catheter cannot be passed, the bladder should
 margins of the adductor muscles over the midline.
be drained by percutaneous cystocentesis every 4-6 hours
For abdominal procedures, the bladder, prostate, or
until the patient is considered stable for surgery. In ani-
urethra should be isolated with moistened laparotomy
mals with uroabdomen that are unstable, a multifenes-
sponges to reduce contamination. Suction should be
trated abdominocentesis catheter can be placed into the
 available to remove urine, blood, and exudate from surgi-
 peritoneal cavity and connected to a closed collection sys-
cal sites. The suction tip should be kept away from mucosa
tem. The abdomen can be drained for 6-12 hours while
 to reduce tissue damage. Forceps and gauze sponges can
the patient receives fluids and supportive care.
also traumatize bladder and urethral mucosa and should
Patients with urinary tract trauma and obstruction are
therefore be used gently and judiciously. Many surgeons
 painful and should receive appropriate analgesics. Nar-
manipulate urinary tract tissues with stay sutures to avoid
cotics, such as hydromorphone or buprenorphine, can be
excessive handling. Because of hemorrhage and tissue
administered by intermittent intravenous bolus or, in the
retraction, urethral mucosa can be difficult to identify
case of fentanyl, as a continuous rate infusion. Epidural
 during surgery. Surgical loupes or 1.0x reading glasses 
administration of analgesics provides excellent intraop-
may improve visualization. Fine-tipped needle holders
 s   d dd e 
(e.g., Derf), atraumatic thumb forceps (e.g., Debakey),
ing lower urinary tract procedures. Epidural morphine
and iris scissors are helpful for urethral surgeries.
should be used with caution since it may cause bladder
A variety of suture materials have been evaluated for
atony and urine retention (Herperger 1998).
use in the urinary tract. Because the bladder and urethra
Bladder and urethral surgeries are classified as clean-
heal rapidly, absorbable suture is recommended. Polygly-
contaminated if urinary spillage is controlled and con-
colic acid, polyglactin 910, glycomer 631, poliglecaprone
taminated if infected urine spills from the site. Prophy-
25, polyglyconate, and polydioxanone all provide suffi-
lactic antibiotics are recommended for animals in which
cient strength for closure. Compared with polyglactin
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 837
910, polyglycolic acid suture loses tensile strength more
of contamination in the event that antegrade urethral
quickly in alkaline or neutral urine. Sutures are covered
 catheterization is required during surgery.
rapidly by mucosa in most animals; therefore, exposure
 of the material to urine is limited. Monoflament sutures
Technique
are often used because of reduced drag. Taper or taper-cut
Make a caudal midline abdominal incision. Place Balfour
needles are preferred to reduce the tissue trauma. Sutures
retractors to improve visualization. Isolate the bladder
should incorporate the submucosal layer of the bladder
with moistened laparotomy pads. If desired, place full
or urethra to provide sufficient holding strength.
thickness stay sutures at the apex or along the ventrolat-
 Iflower urinary tract surgery is performed to biopsy or
eral aspects of the bladder to provide retraction. Make
remove cystic or urethral neoplasia, instruments, gloves,
a stab incision into the bladder and remove any resid-
and drapes should be changed before abdominal closure
ual urine with a Poole suction tip. Extend the bladder
to reduce the risk of tumor seeding (Gilson and Stone
incision as needed with Metzenbaum or Mayo dissecting
1990; Cornell 2000).
scissors. Obtain a piece of the incision margin for cul-
ture or biopsy. If inflammatory polyps are present, clamp
Postoperative care
the base of the polyps with hemostats for several min-
utes, then transect the polypoid tissue above the hemostat
Hemorrhage is expected after bladder and urethral
(Lipscombe 2003). Alternatively, transect the base of the
surgery. Because blood clots can obstruct the lower uri-
polyp with a laser or cautery but do not damage the
nary tract, most animals are kept on intravenous fluids
bladder submucosa. Remove any calculi with forceps or a
for 12-36 hours. Analgesics will be required for several
 bladder spoon. Avoid traumatizing the ureteral openings
days. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be
 and bladder mucosa. Catheterize the urethra retrograde
avoided in patients with renal dysfunction. In patients
in male dogs or antegrade in cats or female dogs to ver-
with infection, duration of antibiotic therapy depends
ify patency. Appose bladder incisions with 3-0 or 4-0
on the underlying condition. Animals with recurrent uri-
 absorbable monoflament material (e.g-, poliglecaprone
nary tract infections may require several weeks of antibi-
25 or glycomer 631). Close thick bladder walls or trigonal
otic treatment. Urine cultures should be reassessed 1 week
 incisions with a simple continuous or interrupted appo-
 after therapeutic antibiotics are discontinued.
sitional pattern. Close thin bladders with a single or dou-
ble layer continuous, appositional, or inverting pattern
Surgery of the bladder
(Figure 83.1). If contamination occurs, lavage the peri-
toneal cavity with sterile saline before abdominal wall
Cystotomy
closure.
Introduction
Complications
Indications for cystotomy include removal of cystic cal-
Hematuria and pollakiuria usually persist for several days
culi, polyps, or foreign bodies; intraluminal mass biopsy;
ureteral reconstruction; or antegrade urethral catheteri-
 obstruction secondary to calculi, blood clots, swelling.
zation. Incisions are usually made over the apex or ventral
midline of the bladder to avoid damaging the ureteral
openings. Ventral cystotomy improves exposure to the
trigone and does not increase the risk of postopera-
tive adhesions (Crowe 1986). Two layer appositional or
inverting closures are stronger than single layer inter-
 rupted appositional patterns immediately after place-
ment; however, no difference in strength is seen 3 or
rupture after 24 hours usually occurs at sites other than
the incision line (Radasch et al. 1990).
recumbency. Male cats can be positioned with their rear
legs pulled cranially to expose the preputial area. In
this position, a perineal urethrostomy can be performed
Figure 83.1 Using stay sutures to manipulate the bladder, close
simultaneously as needed. In female dogs and cats, the
the cystotomy with a simple continuous pattern of absorbable
perivulvar region should be prepped to reduce the risk
monofilament.
838
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Figure 83.2 Patent urachus in a cat. The skin was incised around
Figure 83.3 Leiomyosarcoma of the bladder apex in a dog. The
the fistula during the initial surgical approach and was excised
ureters (within the surgeon's hands) were identified and spared
during partial cystectomy.
during resection.
 Animals with bladder rupture may require partial cys-
or mass regrowth, and uroabdomen from bladder rup-
tectomy to remove devitalized tissue (Cornell 2000). If
ture or incisional leakage. In animals with cystic calculi,
 postoperative radiographs are recommended to confirm
viability of the incision line or remaining bladder wall is
questionable, the bladder can be reinforced with omen-
removal of all stones (Cornell 2000).
tum (Figures 83.4 and 83.5) or sutured to loops of small
intestines (“serosal patch") (Pozzi et al. 2006). In animals
Partial cystectomy
with questionable bladder viability or extensive resection,
Introduction
a cystostomy tube or Foley catheter is left in place for 3-5
days to maintain decompression while the bladder heals.
 Indications for partial cystectomy include removal of
cystic neoplasia, granulomas, and urachal diverticulum
(Figure 83.2) or devitalized or traumatized tissue. Resec-
Technique
tion may also be required if the bladder adheres to other
 abdominal structures that require excision because of
Isolate the bladder with moistened laparotomy pads. If
neoplasia or infection. Dogs and cats can tolerate exten-
the bladder is ruptured, place stay sutures in the healthy
sive resection of the bladder wall. After 75% resection,
tissue and debride nonviable tissue with Metzenbaum or
the remaining bladder regenerates through a combina-
Mayo scissors. If the bladder is intact, place two or more
tion of epithelial proliferation, fibrous tissue synthesis
stay sutures in healthy bladder tissue several centimeter
and remodeling, hypertrophy, and expansion. Addition-
from the proposed resection site. If a tumor is present,
ally, a limited amount of smooth muscle may regenerate.
 Expansion of the bladder remnant relies on stretching
from retained urine. Good function is expected within 3
months after subtotal cystectomy (Bellah 1989).
When tumors are present, resection with 2 cm mar-
gins of healthy tissue is recommended, since neoplastic
tissue often extends beyond the visible mass (Stone et al.
1996). Partial cystectomy is therefore usually limited to
lesions of the cranial two-thirds of the bladder (Figure
83.3), since most owners will not tolerate incontinence
resulting from trigonal resection. Transitional cell car-
cinomas exfoliate easily and the abdominal cavity and
body wall must be protected from inadvertent seeding
of tumor cells during surgery (Gilson and Stone 1990).
Total cystectomy with ureterocolonic anastomosis is not
recommended for treatment of cystic neoplasia because
 of severe physiologic side effects and morbidity.
Figure 83.4 Rupture bladder with devitalized wall.
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 839
 der atony. Options for diversion include transurethral
 catheters or cystostomy tubes (Chapter 32). Cystostomy
tubes are most frequently placed in animals with ure-
 thral or trigonal neoplasia, bladder dysfunction (e.g.)
spinal cord trauma or detrussor atony), or urinary tract
rupture (Beck etal. 2007). Types of cystostomy tubes
include Foley, mushroom tip, and low profile catheters.
Tube sizes are based on the size of the animal and the
bladder and range from 8-24 Fr. Low profle tubes are
  e  a   s
difficult to accidently dislodge. They can be inserted sur-
gically or used as a replacement tube for preexisting Foley
or mushroom-tipped cystostomy catheters. For patients
with preexisting tubes, the Foley or mushroom tipped
 catheter is pulled 2-4 weeks after placement. The low
Figure 83.5 Appearance of bladder in Figure 83.3 several months
profle tube is inserted immediately through the same
after blad der repair and omentalization.
stoma, using a stylet to straighten the mushroom tip
during passage within the fistula. Appropriate position-
palpate the bladder to identify the tumor location. Make
 ing can be confirmed by contrast radiography.
  q  i e   
Although percutaneous placement has been described,
gin of the palpable mass. Suction urine from the bladder
before extending the incision. Extend the resection to
midline abdominal incision is performed, and the tube is
include tissues up to 2 cm from the visible tumor base.
inserted through a separate incision in the ventrolateral
If the ureters are included in the resection, perform a
abdominal wall and into the ventral midbody of the blad-
ureteroneocystostomy (Chapter 60). Close the incision
der. The bladder is then secured (pexied) to the body wall
with 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable monofilament material (e.g-)
to decrease the risk of urine leakage into the abdomen. To
poliglecaprone 25 or glycomer 631). If minimal bladder
facilitate placement, the bladder can be partially pexied
tissue has been resected, appose the wound edges with a
 to the abdominal wall before inserting a low profle tube
single or double layer appositional or inverting pattern.
(Figure 83.6).
If the bladder is thick, the resection includes a portion 
Tubes can be removed percutaneously in healthy ani-
of the trigone, or a large amount of bladder has been
mals as early as 7 days after surgical placement. Tubes
removed, close the incision with a single layer continu-
-dnsoun ym sd u u un   Pinou
 ous appositional pattern. If needed, drape the omentum
pression, delayed wound healing, or leakage of urine
over the bladder and tack it at several sites to the bladder
around the tube. Once the tube is removed, the stoma will
wall with interrupted sutures of absorbable material.
usually close within 3 days unless the urethra or trigone
is obstructed.
Complications
If a large portion of the bladder has been resected, ani-
mals will be pollakiuric for weeks to months after the
surgery until the bladder regenerates. Ureteral or urethral
are used near the ureteral openings or urethra, respec-
tively (Crowe 1986; Pozzi etal. 2006). If the bladder is
devitalized, urine may leak from the bladder wall as
the bladder stretches. Severely traumatized bladders may
 temporarily lose contractile function.
Cystostomy tube placement
Introduction
Figure 83.6 Low profile tube cystostomy. The bladder lateral to
Urine diversion may be necessary in patients with ure-
the purse string suture is pexied to the body wall dorsal to the
thral or cystic injury, resection, or obstruction or blad-
 Cystostomy tube before the tube is inserted into the bladder.
840  Lower urinary tract disorders
Technique
If possible, wedge biopsy of the prostate should be lim-
ited to the ventrolateral or lateral surfaces of the gland.
 Isolate the bladder with moistened laparotomy pads. If
 The hypogastric and pelvic nerves are closely associated
a Foley catheter is used, test the balloon for leaks. Force
with the prostatic vessels dorsal and dorsolateral to the
a hemostat from the peritoneal surface outward through
prostate gland. The urethra, which passes along the mid-
the abdominal musculature of the ventrolateral body
line through the gland just dorsal to its center, can be
wall parallel to the level of the bladder. Incise the skin
avoided more easily if a urethral catheter is left in place
over the forceps to expose the tips. Grasp the tube end
during the procedure.
with the forceps and pull it into the peritoneal cavity.
Place a purse string suture of 2-0 or 3-0 monofilament
Technique
absorbable material in the ventral midbody of the blad-
der, penetrating the submucosa with each suture bite.
Approach the prostate through a caudal midline abdom-
Make a stab incision through the bladder wall within the
inal incision. If the prostate is small, place stay sutures
purse string suture. Suction out any urine. Flatten the
in the bladder apex and retract the bladder cranially to
expose the gland. Ifthe prostate gland is diffusely affected,
tube into the bladder. Tighten the purse string to appose
use a scalpel blade to take a wedge biopsy of the ventro-
the bladder wall around the tube and tie the suture with-
lateral aspect of the gland. Remove the tissue sample by
out necrosing the enclosed tissue. Place a towel clamp
 transecting the base with the blade; if thumb forceps must 
on the edge of the abdominal wall and evert the incision
be used to grasp the sample, handle only the capsule.
edge to expose the peritoneum. Place 4 or 5 interrupted
Appose the incised edges with interrupted, mattress, or
mattress sutures between the bladder and abdominal wall
cruciate sutures of 3-0 absorbable monoflament mate-
around the tube, starting with the dorsal most sutures.
rial. Include capsule and parenchyma in each bite. If the
Use monofilament absorbable suture and include blad-
 prostate is focally affected, obtain biopsies in a similar
der submucosa in each bite. Secure the tube to the skin
fashion, avoiding large vessels, or use a Tru-cut or other
with a finger trap or other pattern and close the abdomen
needle biopsy instrument to obtain multiple samples.
routinely.
Complications
Complications
Excessive traction on the prostate or dorsal dissection
Urinary tract infections are expected in most animals that
could result in urinary incontinence. Major complica-
have cystostomy tubes. Urine should be cultured after
tions such as significant hemorrhage or urine leakage are
tube removal. Major complications include inadvertent
uncommon when appropriate technique is used.
tube removal (16%), uroperitoneum, tube breakage, and
obstruction. Minor complications include stomal irrita-
Prostatic omentalization
tion and urine leakage around the tube. Complications
Introduction
are not correlated with species, age, body weight, or tube
type (Beck et al. 2007).
Prostatic cysts or abscesses that do not respond to cas-
tration, percutaneous drainage, and appropriate medical
Surgery of the prostate
management are usually treated by omentalization (Bray
et al. 1997; White and Williams 1995). Insertion of the
Prostatic biopsy
Introduction
improve delivery of antimicrobials, white blood cells, and
angiogenic factors. The omentum also serves as a physio-
Prostatic disease may result in recurrent urinary tract
logic drain. Because abscesses are suctioned and flushed
infections, dysuria, or stranguria. Tentative diagnosis of
during the procedure, omentalization does not increase
 the underlying condition is usually based on digital rec-
the risk of sepsis or peritonitis (Freitag et al. 2007).
 tal examination; results of digital imaging; and cytology
 Prostatic cysts and abscesses are approached through
and culture of ejaculate, prostatic washes, or aspirates.
a caudal midline incision. A urinary catheter can be left
Unfortunately, percutaneous prostatic aspirates and nee-
in place during surgery to facilitate urethral identifica-
-p ron sds sunnsu d  ssdoq 
tion during surgery. The cyst or abscess wall should be
nosis in 50-75% of dogs (Barsanti et al. 1980; Powe et al.
  e  a   
bladder and urethral innervation and blood supply. After
the cavity is drained, samples are obtained for biopsy
undergoing laparotomy for other reasons.
 and culture, and the cavity is omentalized. In most dogs,
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 841
Figure 83.7 Stay sutures in the prostatic cyst.
Figure 83.8 If desired, the majority of the cyst or abscess wall
can be resected before omentalization. The urethra should be
catheterized during resection.
omentum easily reaches the cyst cavity. Occasionally, the
omentum must be transected along its dorsal attachment
to lengthen the pedicle. If peritonitis is present, contin-
tinence may be secondary to cystitis, continued prostatic
uous suction drainage of the abdominal cavity may be
enlargement, or neurologic damage from excessive dis-
required. The dog should be castrated at the end of the
section or traction during surgery (Freitag et al. 2007).
 procedure if it is intact.
Subtotal prostatectomy
Technique
Isolate the prostate with moistened laparotomy pads. If
Introduction
necessary place stay sutures in the bladder or prostate
Prostatectomy has been recommended for treatment of
capsule and retract them cranially to improve prostatic
advanced prostatic neoplasia in dogs without evidence
exposure (Figure 83.7). Make a 1-2 cm incision in the
of metastases. Total prostatectomy, however, is likely to
ventrolateral surface of the cyst or abscess wall and insert
result in severe complications, including urinary incon-
a Poole suction tip into the incision. Suction the cav-
 finence, uroperitoneum, urethral stenosis, hemorrhage,
ity and then extend the incision with scissors. Insert an
and death. Compared to total prostatectomy, subto-
 index finger into the cavity and digitally break down any
tal prostatectomy significantly decreases postoperative
septa within the site. With Metzenbaum or Mayo scissors,
resect a portion of the incised wall for culture and histo-
logic evaluation (Figure 83.8). Flush the cavity with sterile
saline and then remove the laparotomy pads. Insert the
free edge of the omentum into the cavity (Figure 83.9).
Tack the omentum to the edges of the prostate incision
with interrupted sutures of 3-0 absorbable monofilament
(e.g-, poliglecaprone 25 or glycomer 631). If the cavity
extends around the urethra, make a second ventrolat-
eral incision on the opposite side of the prostate. Insert
omentum into the site and tack in place. If an abscess
is present, change gloves and instruments. If peritoneal
contamination has occurred, flush the abdomen before
closure.
Complications
Vomiting or urine retention is reported in 7% of dogs
Figure 83.9 Ometalization of the cystic cavity. A Carmalt forceps
after recovery. Up to 20% of dogs may have transient uri-
has been inserted through the cyst and the omentum is pulled into
 nary incontinence after prostatic omentalization. Incon-
the cavity and tacked in place.
842
 Lower urinary tract disorders
complication rates and increases lifespan by over 400%
 Proximal urethral tears can be exposed through a cau-
(Vlasin et al. 2006).
dal midline abdominal incision. The bladder is retracted
cranially to improve exposure. Urethral tears within the
Technique
pelvic canal may require pubic osteotomy or ostectomy.
Pubic osteotomy alone will expose the cranial half of
Place a urinary catheter to facilitate urethral identif-
the intrapelvic urethra. Adductor muscular attachments
cation during the procedure. Make a caudal midline
are left in place along the caudal edge of the pubis to
abdominal incision. Place umbilical tape ribbons around
improve blood supply and stability. If possible, a por-
the urethra proximal and distal to the prostate to provide
tion of the prepubic tendon can also be left attached to
retraction and improve exposure. Incise the ventral pro-
the pubic flap. The bone flap is reflected ventrally and
static sulcus with electrocautery. Remove about 85% of
'annbau si ansodxa aapim e JI Xians bunp Aepne
the parecnchyma within both lobes with the cautery pre-
       
serving the dorsal prostatic capsule and at least 2 mm of
underlying prostatic tissue. If the prostatic urethra is pen--
ischial osteotomy, muscular attachments are left in place
etrated, leave at least the dorsal half of the urethra intact.
along one lateral margin of the bone flap, and the flap
Appose the remaining prostatic capsule and parenchyma
 is reflected laterally along these attachments. To facili-
ventrally with simple interrupted or continuous sutures
tate closure of osteotomies, holes can be drilled in the
of monofilament absorbable material. Leave the urethral
pubis and ischium before osteotomy to facilitate repair.
catheter in place for 3-5 days.
The prepubic tendon can be secured to the bone frag-
ment through additional drill holes or reapposed along
Complications
 its midline and sutured caudally to the adductors.
 Pubic ostectomy can be performed with rongeurs. The
Complications that result in death or euthanasia of the
cranial half of the pubis can be removed to expose the
patients are noted in 18% of dogs undergoing subtotal
urethra immediately caudal to the prostate and trigone.
prostatectomy (Vlasin etal. 2006). These may include
 If more extensive exposure is required, the entire pubic
shock, uncontrollable hemorrhage, or irresolvable dam-
and ischial symphysis can be removed (Figure 83.10) to
age to the prostatic urethra. Minor complications such
produce a gap that is 2-3 cm wide, depending on the
as transient dysuria or dyschezia and occasional urine
size of the animal. A portion of the cranial (acetabular)
 leakage may be seen in some dogs. Mean postoperative
branch of the pubis medial to the iliopubic eminence
survival is 112 days, with some dogs living up to 7 months
should be left intact with the attached prepubic tendons.
after the procedure (Vlasin et al. 2006).
Urethral anastomosis
Introduction
Urethral tears and lacerations are usually secondary to
trauma, urethral catheterization, or calculi (Anderson
et al. 2006). The urethra can also be inadvertently dam-
aged during surgery. If a strip of the urethral wall remains
intact, most patients can be treated with urinary diversion
by cystostomy tube or urethral catheterization. If the ure-
thra is completed transected, primary repair is required.
 Urethral resection and anastomosis is occasionally per-
formed to resolve strictures or remove tumors. In male
dogs undergoing intrapelvic urethral resection and anas-
tomosis, there was no significant difference in urethral
healing in those that had an indwelling urethral catheter,
cystostomy tube, or a combination of both after surgery
(Cooley et al. 1999). Urinary diversion should be main-
tained for a minimum of 3-5 days, depending on the
health of the urethral tissues and the amount of ten-
sion on the anastomosis. Urine should be cultured after
Figure 83.10 Traumatic separation of the urethra in a cat. The
catheters are removed.
midurethral tear (arrow) was exposed through a pubic ostectomy.
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 843
through the bladder, remove the catheter and close the
stab incision with interrupted sutures of 3-0 absorbable
monoflament, or place a cystostomy tube through the
site to divert urine. Flush the abdomen and pelvic canal
before closure.
Complications
Urinary tract infections are common when urethral or
cystostomy catheters are left in place for several days
(Cooley et al. 1999). Urethral stricture is likely to occur
if urine is not diverted from the repair site (Layton et al.
1987). The urethra can also be narrowed by fibrous tissue
adhesions at symphysiotomy or symphysiectomy sites.
Subcutaneous, scrotal, or hind limb edema may occur
Figure 83.11 Resection and anastomosis of a urethral stricture
if lymphatic or venous drainage is affected. Urine leak-
antegrade and retrograde to identify the ends of the urethra. A
 age may occur with tension or vascular injury along the
Canial pubic ostectomy was performed to improve exposure.
 anastomosis, particularly ifurine diversion is inadequate.
During closure, the prepubic tendon and adductors are
Prescrotal urethrotomy
apposed along the midline, and the tendon is sutured
Introduction
caudally to the cranial edge of the adductors.
Under general anesthesia, most urethral calculi can be
retropulsed into the urinary bladder. Those that can-
Technique
 not be shifted are usually lodged within the urethra at
Expose the urethra through a midline caudal abdomi-
the caudal end of the os penis. Many of these calculi
nal incision. Perform a pelvic osteotomy or ostectomy as
become embedded within the mucosa and are not eas-
needed to increase exposure. Advance a distal urethral
ily removed, even through a urethrotomy. In these dogs,
catheter (preferably, a Foley catheter) retrograde to the
scrotal urethrostomy is usually performed. In a few dogs,
level of the transection. If the proximal urethral end can-
the calculus can be dislodged through a prescrotal ure-
not be identified, make a stab incision into the bladder
thral incision. Prescrotal urethrotomies are usually closed
and insert another urinary catheter antegrade into the
primarily to reduce postoperative hemorrhage. Urethral
 proximal urethral segment (Figure 83.11). Limit dissec-
incisions that are left open to heal by second intention
tion around the urethra to minimize the risk of neuro-
will bleed for 3-14 days, particularly when animals are
 genic or vascular trauma to the urethra and bladder. If
excited (Waldron et al. 1985; Weber et al. 1985).
resection is required, place stay sutures of 3-0 monofil-
ament through the proximal and distal segments of the
Technique
urethra abaxial to the proposed sites of transection. If a
stricture is present, transect the urethral segments close to
Make a 2-3 cm ventral midline incision through skin
the stricture. If a tumor is present, take 1-2 cm margins,
and subcutis, centering the incision over the obstruction.
if possible, but leave sufficient urethral length to provide
Excise the retractor penis muscle or elevate and retract
a tension-free anastomosis. If the urethra is ruptured
it laterally. Stabilize the penile body between thumb and
or traumatized, resect any unhealthy tissue from the ure-
forefingers and, with a small blade, incise through ure-
 thralends. Advance the distal urethral catheter retrograde
thra on midline over the calculus (Figure 83.12). Extend
into the bladder so that it bridges the urethral gap. Iden-
the incision as needed with fine scissors. Remove the
tify the urethral mucosa, which will normally retract into
calculus with forceps. Advance a urethral catheter retro-
the urethral lumen. Wear magnification glasses or loupes
 grade through the penile urethra to verify all calculi have
to improve visualization. Place 6-8 interrupted sutures of
been removed. Leave the urethral catheter in place dur-
4-0 or 5-0 absorbable monofilament suture (e.g- poligle-
ing urethrotomy closure. Close the urethrotomy with 5-0
caprone 25 or glycomer 631). Include mucosa and sub-
 absorbable monoflament suture (e.g-) poliglecaprone 25
mucosa in each bite. If desired, preplace all sutures before
 or glycomer 631) in a simple continuous pattern. Close
tying. Remove any stay sutures. If a catheter was placed
 the subcutaneous tissues and skin routinely.
844
 Lower urinary tract disorders
and Smeak 1996). Mucocutaneous anastomosis can be
performed with rapidly absorbable sutures; these sutures
will slough from the site after several weeks and therefore
 do not need to be removed. If cystic calculi are present
and the distal urethra is obstructed, scrotal urethrostomy
and cystotomy are performed simultaneously. The ure-
thra is catheterized retrograde through the urethrostomy
to permit urethral and cystic lavage. Calculi distal to the
urethrostomy site can be left in place. Dogs should wear
Elizabethan collars or side bars for at least a week after
the surgery to prevent self-trauma.
Technique
Figure 83.12 Prescrotal urethrotomy. The subcutaneous tissues
and retractor penis muscle have been elevated and lateralized to
If the dog has previously been castrated, incise the skin of
expose the urethra, which usually has a pale blue or purple color.
 the scrotal remnant. If the dog is intact, perform a scrotal
ablation and castration. Gently dissect the subcutaneous
fat to expose the penile body. Elevate and excise or retract
Complications
the retractor penis muscle. If possible, pass a urethra
 Dogs may hemorrhage during urination or excitement;
catheter retrograde into the perineal urethra. Identify the
sedation may reduce bleeding. Complications are rare
urethra: it may look like a large blue vein in some dogs
e pase  a  ae snss r
(Figure 83.13). With a no. 11 or 15 blade, make a small
ately. Narrowing of the urethral lumen may occur at the
incision on the urethra midline. Extend the incision with
site, particularly if urine leaks subcutaneously. If urine
iris scissors until it is 2-3 cm in length, centering the
leakage is suspected based on peri-incisional bruising or
incision over the curve of the penile body between the
cellulitis, a urethral catheter should be left in place for
 perineum and os penis. Control hemorrhage with digital
3-5 days to divert urine. If cellulitis occurs, the skin and
 pressure. Identify the urethral mucosa, which usually
subcutaneous sutures can be removed to permit drainage
retracts away from the incised edge. Use magnifying
and the site is left to heal by second intention.
glasses or loupes to facilitate visualization. Along one side
of the incision, appose the skin to the urethral mucosa
Scrotal urethrostomy in dogs
with a simple continuous pattern of 4-0 monoflament
Introduction
Scrotal urethrostomy is most commonly performed in
dogs with irresolvable distal urethral obstruction or
recurrent cystic and urethral calculi. Compared with the
perineal urethra, the scrotal urethra is wide, distensible,
and superficial, making it the preferred site for permanent
urethrostomy. Scrotal urethrostomy also reduces the risk
of urine scald of the inner thighs or perineum. In dogs
with distal penile trauma or tumors, a penile amputation
can be performed concurrently.
In intact dogs, a scrotal ablation is performed to
remove the testicles and expose the underlying penile
body. In unobstructed dogs, the urethra can be catheter-
ized during surgery to facilitate identification. Scrotal
urethrostomies are centered over the curve of the penile
body where it changes direction from vertical to horizon-
tal. Although the urethra is superficial at this point, hem-
orrhage from the corpus spongiosum surrounding the
urethra is expected during surgery. Postoperative hem-
orrhage can be reduced by apposing the urethral mucosa
Figure 83.13 In the scrotal region, the urethra (arrow) may have
to the skin with a simple continuous pattern (Newton
the appearance of a large vein.
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 845
 bency or in a perineal position, with the rear legs hanging
 over the end of a padded table. Dorsal recumbency per-
mits simultaneous cystotomy if cystic calculi are present.
The perineum is clipped and prepped, and a purse string
suture is placed in the anus to reduce intraoperative con-
tamination. The tail is pulled dorsally and cranially; if the
cat is placed in dorsal recumbency, the rear legs are also
pulled cranially.
 During surgery, the penile body must be completely
freed from its ventral and ventrolateral ischial attach-
ments to reduce the risk of stricture (Phillips and Holt
2006). Dorsal and lateral dissection is limited to pre-
vent damage to local innervation. The urethra should
be opened to the level of the bulbourethral glands to
ensure that stomal size is adequate. Stomal size should
Figure 83.14 Scrotal urethrostomy. Urethral mucosa has been
be large enough to permit insertion of a 6 or 8 Fr red
sutured to skin with a simple continuous pattern of 4-0 poligle-
rubber catheter or a Kelly or Halsted hemostatic forceps
caprone 25.
to the level of the box locks. In cats that require proxi-
mal perineal urethrostomy, the ischial symphysis can be
absorbable suture (e.g- poliglecaprone 25 or glycomer
removed with rongeurs to improve penile body expo-
631) on a taper or taper-cut needle (Figure 83.14). Space 
sure and decrease tension on the surgery site (Bernarde
suture bites 2-4 mm apart and tighten the suture so
and Viquier 2004). To reduce postoperative hemorrhage
that the tissues are apposed but not compressed. Tie
and subcutaneous urine leakage, the urethral mucosa is
off the suture once the first side is completed. Appose
apposed to the skin with a simple continuous pattern
the opposite side similarly. If needed, place a simple
(Agrodnia et al. 2004). Magnification may be necessary
a po xade au asodde oi ans ssain no pandn
to visualize the mucosal edge, which usually retracts 1 or
skin and urethralincisions caudally. Close any remaining
more mm from the cut edge of the urethra.
subcutaneous and skin defects routinely
Cats with proximal perineal urethrostomies or preop-
erative urethral trauma from catheterization or calculi
Complications
 may require urine diversion for 1-3 days with a Foley
catheter to prevent subcutaneous urine leakage. Cats
Hemorrhage with urination is expected for several days
should wear Elizabethan collars for at least a week after
after surgery. Persistent or severe hemorrhage and dehis-
the procedure to prevent self-mutilation. Suture removal
cence are uncommon when the urethrocutaneous appo-
is usually not required when mucocutaneous apposition
sition is performed with a continuous pattern, suture
is performed with rapidly absorbable suture material.
bites include mucosa, and postoperative self-mutilation
is prevented. Intermittent urine scald has been reported
Technique
s   s  s   
continuous closure (Newton and Smeak 1996). Dogs
Make an elliptical incision through the skin and subcutis
may develop recurrence of clinical signs because of calcu-
around the prepuce. If the cat is intact, castrate it through
lus formation and urinary tract infections (Bilbrey et al.
ascrotal incision or scrotal ablation. Wipe the penile body
1991).
toward the ischium with a dry gauze sponge to remove
any remaining subcutaneous attachments. With the tip
Perineal urethrostomy in cats
of an index finger, palpate the ventral penile ligament
between the penile body and ischial symphysis. Transect
Introduction
the ligament with Metzenbaum scissors (Figure 83.15).
 In cats, surgical widening of the distal urethra increases
With an index finger, gently disrupt additional ventral
the risk of urinary tract infections (Bass etal. 2005).
midline attachments. Identify the ischiocavernosus and
Resolvable urethral obstructions are therefore usually
ischiourethralis muscles. Transect the muscles at their
managed medically. For cats that have recurrent or irre-
ischial attachments with Metzenbaum or Mayo scissors
solvable obstruction or irreparable distal urethral injury,
(Figure 83.16). With digital palpation, verify that ven-
perineal urethrostomy is recommended. Perineal ure-
tral and ventral lateral attachments of the penile body
throstomy can be performed with the cat in dorsal recum-
have been severed from the ischium. If present, resect
846
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Figure 83.17 Suture mucosa to skin with a continuous pattern.
Figure 83.15 Perineal urethrostomy, perineal position. The ven-
tral penile ligament has been transected with scissors. The mus-
and 3 mm apart and take mucosal bites that include less
cular attachments to the ischium are visible near the tips of the
than one-third of the urethral diameter. End the first con-
hemostat.
tinuous pattern near the distal urethra. Ligate and tran-
sect the distal penile body before apposing the mucosa
the retractor penis muscle from the dorsal urethra. With
and skin on the opposite side. Close any remaining skin
Mayo scissors, cut open the prepuce dorsally to expose
defects.
the penile tip. Insert one blade of an iris scissors into the
urethral opening and incise the urethra on its dorsal mid-
Complications
line (the side closest to the anus) to the level of the bul-
Hemorrhage or subcutaneous urine leakage (Figure
bourethral glands. Verify that the urethral stoma is ade-
83.18) may occur if gaps are present along the muco-
quate by inserting a 6 or 8 Fr red rubber catheter or Kelly
cutaneous suture line or the mucosa was not included in
or Halsted forceps to its box locks. Suture the urethral
suture bites. Hemorrhage is more likely to occur with uri-
mucosa to the skin with 4-0 or 5-0 monoflament rapidly
nation or excitation; cats may require sedation for several
absorbable suture on a taper or taper-cut needle. Preplace
days after the surgery. Urine may also leak subcutaneously
interrupted sutures between the skin and mucosa at the
if preoperative urethral catheterization was traumatic or
10 o'clock, 12 o'clock, and 2 o'clock positions. Place a
postoperative swelling is significant. Occasionally, cats
slightly open hemostat in the urethral lumen to facilitate
will be unable to urinate after the procedure, despite
passage of the 12 o'clock suture. Include mucosa in each
an adequate stomal size. Functional obstruction occurs
bite. Tie the sutures and cut the ends short. Anastomose
the remaining mucosa to the skin along one side with a
simple continuous pattern (Figure 83.17). Space bites 2
Figure 83.18 Because urethral mucosa was not apposed to skin,
Figure 83.16 Perineal urethrostomy, dorsal recumbancy. Tran-
this cat developed subcutaneous urine leakage, azotemia, hyper-
sect the muscles near their ischial attachments.
kalemia, and skin bruising and necrosis and bruising.
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 847
of the healthy urethra with 3-0 monofilament suture.
Transect the urethra immediately cranial to the suture
and insert a red rubber catheter into the new opening.
Incise the ventral surface of the transected urethral end to
make a 1 cm spatulated opening. If large inguinal fat pads
 or skin folds are present, resect them before proceeding
to urethrocutaneous anastomosis. Exteriorize the ure-
thra through the caudal end of the celiotomy incision.
Alternatively, place a stay suture in the end of the ure-
thra, temporarily remove the urinary catheter, and pull
the urethra through a separate abdominal incision 2-3
cm lateral to midline. Close the linea routinely without
kinking the urethra. Place one or two interrupted sutures
Figure 83.19 Stricture repair, dorsal recumbancy. Urethrostomy
between the urethral wall and the external rectus sheath
stenosis resulted from inadequate dissection of the muscular ischial
to reduce tension. Include submucosa in the suture bites
attachments (arrowheads) and insufficient ostium size. Arrow indi-
but do not occlude the lumen. To form the stoma, place
cates penile body.
interrupted sutures cranially and caudally between the
urethral mucosa and the skin. Use absorbable or nonab-
more commonly with proximal perineal urethrostomy or
sorbable monoflament on a taper or taper-cut needle.
excessive swelling; the skin along the proximal urethrocu-
Complete the urethrocutaneous anastomosis with sim-
taneous anastomosis inverts into the lumen of the urethra
 ple interrupted sutures or a simple continuous pattern on
and acts as a one-way valve. These cats will require urine
 each side of the new stoma. Remove the urethral catheter
diversion with a Foley catheter for 1-3 days until the
and close subcutaneous tissues and skin routinely.
swelling resolves and the mucosa has sealed. Strictures
        
Complications
caused by inadequate dissection (Figure 83.19) (Phillips
Skin irritation and necrosis from urine scald or leakage is
and Holt 2006). Bacterial cystitis occurs as a late compli-
cation of perineal urethrostomy in 17-40% ofcats with an
noted in 44% of cats undergoing prepubic urethrostomy.
underlying uropathy; therefore, periodic urinalysis and
Urinary incontinence is reported in 38% (Baines et al.
2001). Stricture or dehiscence may occur with urine leak-
culture are recommended (Bass et al. 2005; Corgozinho
age, excessive tension, or postoperative self-mutilation.
et al. 2007).
 Prepubic urethrostomy can predispose animals to recur-
rent bacterial cystitis.
Prepubic urethrostomy
Introduction
Urethral prolapse repair
Indications for prepubic urethrostomy include urethral
Introduction
neoplasia, stricture, and extensive trauma (Baines et al.
2001; Risselada etal. 2006). Prepubic urethrostomy is
Urethral prolapse is an uncommon condition that is
considered a salvage procedure because of the high rate
 of postoperative complications and should be avoided if 
Proposed etiologies include urethritis, cystitis, preputial
possible.
inflammation, or sexual activity (Kirsch etal. 2002;
protruding from the penile tip (Figure 83.20), particu-
Technique
larly with urination or excitation. Because of environ-
Make a caudal midline incision, extending the incision
mental exposure and excessive trauma, affected dogs
over the pubis. Retract the bladder cranially with stay
may have significant hemorrhage. Surgical treatments
sutures. Identify the urethra and gently dissect the dis-
include urethral resection and anastomosis, urethropexy,
tal portion of the exposed urethra from the surrounding
 or penile amputation and scrotal urethrostomy. Affected
periurethral fat. Avoid traumatizing the nerves and ves-
dogs should be castrated to reduce sexual activity, and
sels dorsally. If further exposure is required, perform a
underlying conditions such as balanoposthitis or cysti-
 tis should be treated. Activity, grooming, and excitement
Place a moistened umbilical tape around the distal extent
edoisod snau o ns ie pi aq isnu
of the urethra to elevate it. Ligate the most distal portion
hemorrhage and recurrence.
848
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Figure 83.20 Urethral prolapse in a dog.
Figure 83.22 Final appearance after urethral prolapse resection.
Technique
at the level of the os penis and out the urethral lumen;
 Retract the prepuce with a Penrose drain to expose the
use the groove director to control the needle passage in
penile body. To perform a urethral resection and anas-
the urethra and direct it out of the lumen (Figure 83.23).
tomosis, pass a lubricated red rubber catheter into the
Reverse the needle and pass it through the urethrallumen
urethra. With fine scissors, incise the urethral perpen-
and out the penile body about 5 mm distal to the initial
suture bite. Tie the suture snuggly without crushing the
dicular to the edge of the prolapse to the level of the
tissue. Place 1-3 additional sutures, spacing them evenly
 penile tip, then incise one-third of the circumference of
around the penile body (Figure 83.24). Pass a red rubber
the prolapsed tissue along the penile tip. Anastomose the
transected urethral mucosa to the penile mucosa with
catheter to verify that the urethra is patent.
 a simple continuous pattern using 4-0 or 5-0 monofla-
ment absorbable suture (e.g- poliglecaprone 25 or gly-
Complications
comer 631) on a taper or taper-cut needle. Place bites
Hemorrhage may occur for up to 7 days after urethral
about 2 mm apart. Using a cut-and-sew technique, con-
 prolapse resection and anastomosis. Swelling is expected
tinue the urethral prolapse transection, and anastomosis
with both techniques and can be reduced by preventing
circumferentially (Figure 83.21) until the anastomosis is
self-trauma and administering sedatives. Recurrence can
complete (Figure 83.22).
be a problem after resection and anastomosis, particu-
To perform a urethropexy (Kirsch et al. 2002), insert a
larly if the dog was not castrated, the underlying etiology
 groove director into the urethral lumen and reduce the
 o u s  e  n  5
urethral prolapse. Use 2-0 or 3-0 absorbable monofila-
aged after surgery. Urethropexy has been used success-
 ment suture on a taper or taper-cut needle for the pexy.
fully in dogs with recurrence (Kirsch et al. 2002). If the
Pass the needle full thickness through the penile wall
Figure 83.23 Using a groove director to guide the needle, pass
Figure 83.21 Suture the penile and urethral mucosa together
suture from the external surface of the penis into the urethral
with a continuous pattern.
lumen, then reverse the needle and pass it back out of the penis.
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 849
and after penile amputation, transection of cavernous
fissues can be performed with a carbon dioxide laser.
Alternatively, bleeding can be controlled intraoperatively
 with a penile tourniquet. Sedation and Elizabethan col-
ns e ppu e ssa rq is o s
to reduce postoperative complication.
Technique
To perform a partial penile amputation, retract or incise
the prepuce to expose the penis. Place a Penrose drain
 or Rumel tourniquet around the base of the glans. Insert
a urethral catheter and tighten the drain or tourniquet
Figure 83.24 Urethropexy suture in place.
to provide hemostasis. Incise the dorsal penile body at
a 45° angle down to the os penis or urethra. Incise the
ventral penile body similarly, leaving the urethra intact. If
condition persists, penile amputation and scrotal ure-
 needed, elevate the urethra from the groove in the os penis
throstomy are recommended.
and remove the distal end of the os penis with rongeurs.
 Dissect the penile tissue from the urethra, leaving at least
Penile amputation in dogs
3 mm of urethral length beyond the transected cavernous
Introduction
fissue, and remove the penile tissue. Close the penile
 Indications for penile amputation include penile or
 3-0 or4-0 absorbable monofilament (e.g- poliglecaprone
preputial neoplasia, hypospadias, irresolvable paraphi-
25 or glycomer 631) medially and laterally. Spatulate the
mosis or priapism, recurrent urethral prolapse, penile
 urethra and suture the urethral mucosa to the penile body
necrosis, or severe trauma (Papazoglou and Kazakos
with interrupted sutures at three sites, spacing the bites
2002). If a small amount of the penile tip is affected,
evenly. Use 4-0 or 5-0 absorbable monofilament suture.
a partial amputation (Figure 83.25) can be performed
Complete the urethral apposition with an interrupted or
with anastomosis of the urethral mucosa to the remain-
continuous suture pattern (Figure 83.26).
 is sud a jo us se e  oq ud 
 To perform a subtotal penile amputation and preputial
removed, the urethra can be anastomosed to the preputial
urethrostomy (Pavletic and O'Bell 2007), incise through
mucosa (Pavletic and O'Bell 2007). Preputial urethros-
the central third of the prepuce along the ventral mid-
tomy has been recommended to reduce the risk of urine
line. This will expose the penis and preputial cavity.
scald associated with scrotal urethrostomy. If the entire
 If possible, catheterize the urethra before proceeding.
glans penis must be removed, a scrotal urethrostomy is
Incise the penis to the level of the urethra with a carbon
 performed concurrently. To reduce hemorrhage during
dioxide laser. Alternatively, place a tourniquet around the
penile body and transect the penile tissue to the level of
seu leyain yo uood y uoeindue auad jened s'sa ann
been dissected from the remaining penile tissue. In this dog, the
Figure 83.26 Final appearance after partial penile amputation
prepuce was incised to improve exposure.
and before preputial dosure.
850  Lower urinary tract disorders
the urethra with a blade. If possible, leave at least 3 mm
tinent 2 months after colposuspension. One year after
of urethra beyond the transected cavernous tissue. If not
surgery, only 14% were continent, while 33% were con-
already in place, insert a urethral catheter. Spatulate the
sidered greatly improved by their owners. When medical
urethral end and suture it to adjacent preputial mucosa
management was added, 38% of dogs were completely
with 4-0 monofilament absorbable suture. To reduce ten-
continent and 43% were greatly improved 1 year after
sion during anastomosis, make a 2 cm releasing incision
surgery.
cranial to the prepuce. Once the anastomosis is com-
Transpelvic sling will increase pressure on the mid-
plete, remove the urethral catheter. If desired, insert a
pelvic urethra, increasing urethral resistance (Nikel et al.
Foley catheter through the original preputial opening
1998). A synthetic material such as polyester ribbon is
and into the preputial urethrostomy site to temporar-
placed around the midportion of the pelvic urethra and
ily divert urine. Close the remaining preputial mucosa
exited from the obturator foramina. The ribbon is tight-
with 4-0 monoflament in a simple interrupted or simple
ened to compress the urethra and secured to itself ven-
continuous pattern. Close the subcutis and skin of the
 tral to the pubis. Long-term continence is reported in
 prepuce and releasing incision routinely.
46% of dogs that undergo sling urethroplasty alone and
To amputate the entire penis ("phallectomy"), make
 54% of dogs that undergo sling urethroplasty and colpo-
 suspension, simultaneously (Nikel et al. 1998). Some of
preputial and dorsal penile vessels. Perform a scrotal
 the incontinent dogs improved with additional medical
urethrostomy as previously described. Ligate the penile
 management.
body cranial to the scrotal urethrostomy site with encir-
 Urethropexy relocates the bladder neck into an intra-
cling and transfixing sutures. Transect the penis cranial
abdominal position and locally increases resistance by
to the ligatures. Appose the tunica albuguinea over the
 altering the shape of the urethra. In one study (White
transected penile end with 3-0 absorbable monofilament
2001), the ventral urethral wall was pexied to the abdom-
suture in a continuous or interrupted pattern. Close the
inal wall just cranial to the pubic brim. Continence was
subcutaneous tissues and skin routinely.
noted in 73 of 100 dogs 1 year after surgery. Of those
available for follow-up longer than 3 years, 48% remained
Complications
continent. Eight of 100 dogs showed initial improvement
and then gradually relapsed. Six of these dogs underwent
Potential complications include hemorrhage, swelling, or
infection. Animals undergoing partial penile amputation
a second urethropexy and four of these were continent
more than 1 year later. In another study (Massat 1993),
could develop urethral obstruction if improper technique
 mattress sutures were placed between the lateral walls
is used.
of the urethra and trigone and the ventral abdominal
wall musculature ("cystourethropexy"). Continence was
Surgical treatments for urinary incontinence
achieved in 90% of dogs immediately after surgery; how-
ever, 80% of dogs were incontinent within 5 months.
Introduction
Sphincter mechanism incontinence is uncommon in
A variety of methods have been proposed to reduce or
 male dogs. Ductus deferens and prostatic pexy have been
correct urinary incontinence. Some methods alter blad-
used to relocate the bladder neck into the abdomen. Pexy
der position or lengthen the urethra, while others increase
 of the ductus deferens to the abdominal wall resulted in
urethral resistance. Outcomes of these procedures are
 long-term continence in 43% of male dogs and improve-
variable, depending on the underlying cause of incon-
ment in 43% (Weber etal. 1997). Prostatopexy to the
tinence and, in some instances, the experience of the
 prepubic tendon resulted in complete continence in 11%
surgeon. Deterioration of continence may occur over
 and improvement in 44% (Holt et al. 2005).
 time as sphincter function decreases or the surgical repair
 Dogs with recessed or infantile vulvas (Figure 83.27)
stretches or breaks down.
 may develop urinary incontinence from recurrent vagini-
Colposuspension increases urethral pressure and repo-
tis, cystitis, and urine pooling. Clinical signs caused by
sitions the bladder neck into the abdomen. In one study
skin-fold obstruction of the external genital opening will
(Marchevsky et al. 1999), outcome was excellent in 68%
resolve with vulvoplasty (Lightner et al. 2001). Dogs that
and 32% of dogs with acquired and congenital sphinc-
have concurrent vestibulovaginal stenosis will require
ter mechanism incompetence, respectively. Most of the
vaginectomy or resection and anastomosis to resolve
remaining dogs were continent or improved immediately
clinical signs (Crawford and Adams 2002). In dogs with
after colposuspension; however, continence deteriorated
 perivulvar dermatitis, surgery should be delayed while
in these dogs 1-1l months after surgery. In another study
the dermatitis is treated with appropriate topical and sys-
 temic therapy If incontinence persists after surgery, the
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 851
ity. With the bladder retracted cranially, pass the suture
through the muscularis of the ventral urethral wall. Pass
the suture out of the prepubic tendon on the opposite site.
Secure the suture with hemostats. Place a second suture
35 mm cranial to the first. Remove the bladder stay
suture. Tighten each urethropexy suture; this will simul-
taneously appose the caudal midline abdominal incision
(White 2001). Close the remaining abdomen routinely.
Vulvoplasty
Clip and prep the perineum and place a purse string
suture in the anus. Place the dog in a perineal posi-
tion over the padded end of a raised table with the tail
Figure 83.27 Recessed vulva causing chronic recurrent vaginitis,
pulled cranially. Grasp the entire width of the redun-
dant vulvar fold with Allis tissue forceps and crush it
Cystitis, and incontinence.
along its base at several sites. This will provide a guide for
resection. Make a horseshoe-shaped incision around the
dog should be evaluated for other etiologies (Hammel 
vulva along the outer row of crush marks. The incision
and Bjorling 2002).
should start and end at the level of the ventral vulvar
commissure on each side. It will be closer to the vulva
Techniques
ventrally and ventrolaterally and farther from the vulva
dorsally. To determine how much tissue to remove, pull
Colposuspension
the ventral edge of the skin incision upward so that it
Prep the caudal abdomen to include perivulvar and
overlaps the dorsal edge of the skin incision. The remain-
vestibular regions. Expose the bladder through a mid-
ing inner row of crush marks should not overlap with
 line caudal abdominal incision. Retract the bladder cra-
the dorsal skin edge, since the skin retracts after cut-
nially to expose the bladder neck. Identify the vagina;
ting. Make a second horseshoe-shaped incision, using the
if desired, insert closed Carmalt forceps through the
inner crush marks as a guide. Bluntly and sharply dissect
vestibule into the vagina to facilitate identification. With
subcutaneous tissue attachments to excise the redundant
Babcock or Allis tissue forceps or stay sutures, grasp the
skin (Figure 83.28). Appose the skin edges at 10 o'clock,
vaginal wall as far caudally as possible on either side of the
12 o'clock, and 2 o'clock with simple interrupted skin
urethra. Remove the Carmalt forceps and discard them
sutures. Check the skin position before tightening each
 from the surgical area to prevent contamination. Pre-
suture to make sure that the vulva is appropriately posi-
place two full-thickness mattress sutures of 0 monofl-
tioned and the incision line will not have gaps or dog ears.
ament nonabsorbable material through the vaginal wall
and pubic tendon on each side of the urethra. Catheter-
ize the urethra, or lay a urinary catheter of appropriate
diameter alongside the proximal urethra and tighten the
sutures. Check the urethra to verify that it is not strangu-
lated between the pubis and vagina. Close the abdomen
routinely.
Urethropexy
 Perform a caudal midline celiotomy, extending the inci-
sion to the pubic brim. Place a stay suture in the bladder
and retract it cranially. Identify the urethra by palpa-
tion. Bluntly dissect the overlying tissues to expose the
ventral aspect of the urethra at the level of the cranial
pubic brim. Just cranial to the pubic brim, pass a 2-0 or
O polypropylene suture 1 cm lateral to the incised edge of 
the prepubic tendon and into the caudal abdominal cav-
Figure 83.28 Skin resection for correction of recessed vulva.
852
 Lower urinary tract disorders
Add absorbable, buried interrupted sutures to appose the
Crawford, J.T. and W.M. Adams (2002). Influence of vestibulovaginal
subcutis if desired. Complete the skin closure.
stenosis, pelvic bladder, and recessed vulva on response to treatment
for clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease in dogs:38 cases
(1990- 1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 221: 995-999.
Complications
Crowe, D.T. ( 1986). Ventral versus dorsal cystotomy: an experimental
investigation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22: 382-386.
Postoperative complications of colposuspension, ure-
Freitag, T., R.M. Jerram, etal. (2007). Surgical managerment of com-
mon canine prostatic conditions. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
stranguria, urethral obstruction, or persistent or recur-
29: 656-672.
rent incontinence. Transpelvic slings have been associated
Gilson, S.D. and E.A. Stone ( 1990). Surgically induced tumor seeding
in eight dogs and two cats. IArm Vet Med Assoc 196: 1811-1815.
with fistula formation (Nikel et al. 1998). Animals with
Hammel, S.P. and D.E. Bjorling (2002). Results of vulvoplasty for
obstruction may require urethral catheterization for up
treatrment of recessed vulva in dogs. I Arm Arirm Hosp Assoc 38:
to 5 days after surgery until swelling resolves. If incon-
79-83.
tinence persists or reoccurs, the animals should be eval-
Herperger, L.J. (1998). Postoperative urinary retention in a dog fol-
uated for cystitis or other etiologies. Medical manage-
lowing morphine with bupivicaine epidural analgesia. Can Vet J39:
650-652.
Holt, P.E., R.J. Coe, et al. (2005). Prostatopexy as a treatment of urethral
attempted (Chapter 76) before considering surgical revi-
sphincter mechanism incompetence in male dogs. I Small Anim
sion. Swelling is common after vulvoplasty, and some
Pract 46: 567-570.
 animals may have bruising or pain for several days after
Kirsch, J.A., J.G. Hauptman, et al. (2002). A urethropexy technique for
the surgery.
surgical treatment of urethral prolapse in the male dog. I Am Arim
Hosp Assoc 38: 381-384.
Layton, C.E., H.R. Ferguson, et al. ( 1987). Intrapelvic urethral anasto-
References
mosis. A comparison of three techniques. Vet Surg 16: 175- 182.
Lightner, B.A., M.A. McLoughlin, etal. (200l). Episioplasty for
Agrodnia, M.D., J.G. Hauptman, et al. (2004). A simple continuous
the treatment of perivulvar dermatitis or recurrent urinary tract
infections in dogs with excessive perivulvar skin folds: 3l cases
cat: 18 cases (2000-2002). I Am Amim Hosp Assoc 40: 479-483.
{1983-2000). IArm Vet Med Assoc 219: 1577-1581.
Anderson, R.B., L.R. Aronson, etal. (2006). Prognostic factors for
successful outcome following urethral rupture in dogs and cats. J
Bladder surgery. In Pract 25: 597-605.
Arm Arirm Hosp Assoc 42: 136- 146.
"Z shop ui po Arun samo al go Arans (to) A 'quoosd
Aumann, M., L.T. Worth, etal. ( 1998). Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases
Urethral surgery. In Pract 26: 13-19.
{1986-1995). JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 34: 315-324.
Marchevsky, A.M., G.A. Edwards, etal. (1999). Colposuspension in
Baines, S.J., S. Rennie, etal. (200l). Prepubic urethrostomy: a long-
60 bitches with incompetence of the urethral sphincter mechanism.
term study in 16 cats. Vet Surg 30: 107-113.
Aust Vet Pract 29: 2-8.
Barsanti, J.A., E.B. Shotts, et al. ( 1980). Evaluation of diagnostic tech-
Mische, R. and U. Schulze (2004). Studies on platelet aggregation using
niques for canine prostatic diseases. J Arn Vet Med Assoc 177:
the Born method in normal and uraemic dogs. Vet J168: 270-275.
160-163.
 Newton, J. and D. Smeak ( 1996). Simple continuous closure of canine
Bass, M., I. Howard, et al. (2005). Retrospective study of indications for
scrotal urethrostomy: results in 20 cases. I Am Armirm Hosp Assoc 32:
and outcome of perineal urethrostomy in cats. J Small Anim Pract
53 1-534.
46: 227-23 1.
Nikel, R.F., U. Wiegand, etal. (1998). Evaluation of a transpelvic
Beck, A.L., LM. Grierson, etal. (2007). Outcome of and complica-
sling procedure with and without colposuspension for treatment of
tions associated with tube cystostomy in dogs and cats: 76 cases
female dogs with refractory urethral sphincter mechanism incom-
(1995-2006). I Am Vet Med Assoc 230: 1184-1189.
petence. Vet Surg 27: 94-104.
Bellah, JR. (1989). Wound healing in the urinary tract. Semin Vet Med
Papazoglou, L.G. and G.M. Kazakos (2002). Surgical conditions of
Surg Small Amim 4: 294-303.
the canine penis and prepuce. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 24:
Bernarde, A. and E. Viguier (2004). Transpelvic urethrostomy in 11
204-218.
cats using an ischial ostectomy. Vet Surg 33: 246-252.
 Pavletic, M.M. and S.A. O'Bell (2007). Subtotal penile amputation and
Bilbrey, S.A., S.J. Birchard, etal. ( 199l). Scrotal urethrostomy: a ret-
preputial urethrostomy in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 230: 375-377.
rospective review of 38 dogs ( 1973 through 1988). IArm Amirm Hosp
Phillips, H. and D.E. Holt (2006). Surgical revision of the urethral
Assoc 27: 561-564.
stoma following perineal urethrostomy in ll cats: (1998-2004). J
Bray, J.P., R.A.S. White, et al. (1997). Partial resection and omentaliza-
Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 42: 218-222.
Powe, L.R., P.J. Caqnfield, etal. (2004). Evaluation of the cytologic
in dogs. Vet Surg 26: 202-209.
diagnosis of canine prostatic disorders. Vet Clir Path 33: 150-
Cooley, A.J., D.R. Waldron, etal. (1999). The effects of indwelling
154.
transurethral catheterization and tube cystostomy on urethral anas-
 Pozzi, A., D.D. Smeak, etal. (2006). Colonic seromuscular augmen-
tomosis in dogs. I Am Arnirn Hosp Assoc 35: 341-347.
Corgozinho, K.B., H.J.M. De Souza, etal. (2007). Catheter-induced
bladder necrosis caused by bladder torsion in a dog. I Am Vet Med
urethral trauma in cats with urethral obstruction. J Feline Med Surg
Assoc 229: 235-239.
9: 481-486.
Radasch, R.M., D.F. Merkley, etal. ( 1991). Cystotomy closure. A com-
Cornell, K.K. (2000). Cystotomy, partial cystectomy, and tube cys-
parison of the strength of appositional and inverting suture patterns.
tostomy. Clin Tech Small Amirm Pract 15: 1l- 16.
Vet Sturg 20: 283-288.
Surgery of the lower urinary tract 853
Rawlings, C., J.A. Barsanti, etal. (2001). Evaluation of colposuspension
Waldron, D.R., C.S. Hedlund, etal. (1985). The canine urethra.A
for treatment of incontinence in spayed female dogs. I Am Vet Med
comparison of first and second intention healing. Vet Surg 14: 213-
Assoc 219: 770-775.
217.
Risselada, M., H. Rooster, etal. (2006). A prepubic urethrostomy in
Weber, W.J., H.W. Boothe, etal. (1985). Comparison of the healing
a bitch after resection of the vagina and distal part of the urethra.
of prescrotal urethrotomy incisions in the dog: sutured versus non-
Vlaams Diergeneeskundig Tijd 75: 35-40.
sutured. Am I Vet Res 46: 1309-1325.
Schmiedt, C., K.M. Tobias, et al. (200l). Evaluation of abdominal fluid:
Weber, U.T, S. Arnold, et al. (1997). Surgical treatment of male dogs
peripheral blood creatinine and potassium ratios for diagnosis of
with urinary incontinence due to urethral sphincter mechanism
uroperitoneum in dogs. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 11: 275-280.
incompetence. Vet Surg 26: 51-56.
Stone, E.A., T.F George, etal. (1996). Partial cystectomy for urinary
White, R.A.S. and J.M. Williams ( 1995). Intracapsular prostatic omen-
bladder neoplasia: surgical technique and outcome in ll dogs. I
talization: a new technique for management of prostatic abscesses
Small Anim Pract 37: 480-485.
in dogs. Vet Surg 24: 390-395.
Vlasin, M., P. Rauser, etal. (2006). Subtotal intracapsular prostatec-
      r  
 -u isod is-anuae ron nun iasn e se d
sphincter mechanism incompetence in the bitch. J Small Armim Pract
cies. I Small Amim Pract 47: 512-516.
42: 48 1-486.
Section 10
Urinary disorders of avian and exotic
companion animals
84
Avian and exotic companion animals
Cheryl B. Greenacre
Avian urology
for that matter, and exotic animal formularies should be
consulted prior to prescribing any drug.
Overview
Avian species in this text will refer to commonly seen
Anatomy and physiology
pet exotic birds, including parrots, canaries, and finches.
Paired kidneys lay in a depression (Figure 84.1) of the
There are over 8,000 species of birds and the order
fused synsacrum in birds, essentially surrounding the
Psittaciformes (parrots) alone consists of over 350 species
avian kidneys by bone on three sides.
and subspecies that are as diverse as a parakeet at 30 g and
Since spinal nerves of the lumbar and sacral plexus
a blue and gold macaw at 1,000 g. Differences between
course through the kidney in birds, swelling of the kidney
the species not only includes size, but also country and
 can cause pressure on these nerves and subsequent paresis
climate of origin, and physiology. Some parrots are from
and lameness (Figure 84.2; King and McLelleand 1984).
rain forest climates and some are from desert (xerophilic)
The avian kidneys generally have three (parrots) or two
climates. It is known that some species within an order
(canaries and finches) divisions: the cranial, middle, and
can metabolize drugs differently than other birds within
caudal. The divisions are areas of the kidney and are not
the same order. For example, macaws often regurgitate on
separate lobes. The external iliac vein courses ventrally
"regular” avian doses of trimethoprim-sulfa, and African
between the cranial and middle divisions. Birds lack a
, o assdp d nq uo sied ar
diaphragm; therefore, ascites may cause a bird to present
ular" avian doses of itraconazole. Recently it has been
with dyspnea.
shown that Old World Gyps Vultures are extremely sensi-
Urine and urates from each kidney travel through a
tive to the nonsteroidalanti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
ureter to the urodeum, an area of the vestibule-like cloaca
diclofenac compared to turkey vultures, with develop-
that is an endpoint of the urologic, reproductive, and gas-
ment of visceral gout, renal necrosis, and death a few days
trointestinal systems. This unique arrangement allows
after exposure to relatively small doses of diclofenac. The
urine to pass retrograde from the cloaca into the colon
median lethal dose in Gyps Vultures is 0.1-0.2 mg/kg,
for further resorption of fluid. In dehydrated birds, up
which is low enough to allow exposure to lethal doses
to 15% of urine water can be reabsorbed by the colon
by ingesting tissues of cattle given diclofenac just prior to
(Lumeij 1994). Renal output can decrease from the aver-
death, whereas turkey vultures receiving doses of up to 25
age 100-200 mL/kg/day down to 25 mL/kg/day during
mg/kg had no ill effects recognized either clinically or his-
dehydaration (Lumeij 1994).
tologically (Rattner et al. 2008). Recent pharmacokinetic
Birds possess both mammalian and reptilian type
studies showed meloxicam, another NSAID, to be safe
nephrons. Mammalian-type nephrons possess a rela-
for use in several species of Gyps Vultures (Naidoo et al.
tively short loop of Henle and reside within the medulla
2008). Basically, there is no generic bird, or generic parrot
and produce urine that is hypertonic to plasma, but
 not as concentrated as mammalian urine. Reptilian-type
nephrons are the most numerous in birds, do not possess
a loop of Henle, reside within the relatively large cor-
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
tex of the kidney, and produce uric acid (Lumeij 1994).
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Uric acid is synthesized in the liver and 90% excreted
857
858
Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
via tubular secretion from the reptilian-type nephrons.
Uric acid production is independent of urine flow rate,
and therefore independent of tubular water resorption
(Lumeij 1994). Uric acid and its salts, urates, are a non-
soluble form of nitrogenous waste that allows develop-
ment within an egg. The embryo can develop next to its
own nitrogenous waste in the presence of a limited water
 supply within the egg (King and McLelland 1984).
 Birds possess a renal portal system regulated by a con-
ical valve in the common iliac vein. When this valve is
RK
LK
closed, under stimulation by acetylcholine, blood flows 
toward the liver, essentially acting as an artery by supply-
LO
ing blood to the renal tubules. When this valve is open,
under inhibition by adrenalin as in times of exercise or
escape, blood can be shunted from the caudal half of the
body away from kidney tissues and directly to the cau-
dal vena cava (King and McLelland 1984; Lumeij 1994).
The importance of this mechanism is to realize that sub-
stances injected into the caudal half of the body may go
LUH
directly to the kidneys before going through the general
circulation, causing damage to renal tissue. Intramus-
cular injections, especially with potentially renal toxic
medications, should be given in the pectoral muscles in
birds.
Diagnostic tests
Determining plasma or serum uric acid concentration is
Figure 84.1 Paired kidneys (RK right kidney: LK, left kidney) lay
the most widely used method for determining the pres-
in a depression of the fused synsacrum of a female psittacine
ence of renal disease in birds. Uric acid levels greater 
bird. The left ovary (LO) with opaque follidles is between the
than 10 mg/dL are generally considered elevated for most
cranial divisions of both kidneys. The left uterine horn (LUH) is
seen coursing ventral to the left kidney. Note the pale color of the
species, but refer to species-specific reference ranges on 
cranial, middle, and the cranial part of the caudal divisions of this
individual cases. Hyperuricemia is a good indicator of
kidney. Also note the right external iliac vein coursing between
renal disease; however, normal uric acid concentrations
 the right cranial and middle divisions of the kidney.
do not necessarily rule-out renal disease, and a profound
hyperuricemia can be present postprandially in healthy
raptors.
neprocalcinosis, ureteral stones, or severe gout. In
psittacine birds, a rim of air, part of the abdominal
air sac, should be visualized dorsal to the kidneys on a
 properly aligned lateral view, and its absence may signify
pathologic swelling of the kidneys. An excretory urogram
  go   u   
and ureter versus the other, and renal scintigraphy has
been performed to evaluate glomerular filtration rate in
birds. A 15-minute dynamic study was performed using
99mTc-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) to
assess renal function in birds given a toxic dose of gen-
Figure 84.2 Budgerigar exhibiting right leg paresis secondary to
tamycin (Marshall et al. 2003). Ultrasound of the kidneys 
a renal carcinoma creating pressure on the nerves of the lumbar
in birds is not practical because of interference from the
plexus.
 air in the air sacs surrounding the kidneys.
Avian and exotic companion animals 859
The most common “next step" in attempting to defini-
Common diseases
tively diagnose renal disease in a bird is to perform an
Bacterial nephritis
through the abdominalor caudalthoracic air sac. Courses
 s  s a
are offered through national and regional conferences
during sepsis or can ascend from the cloaca causing a
 to train veterinarians in this technique that is common
bacterial nephritis. Younger birds are more susceptible.
practice in exotic animal medicine. The kidneys can be
The following bacteria have been associated with nephri-
directly visualized and a 3.5 or 5 Fr biopsy forceps can be
tis in birds: Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Listeria, E.
used to obtain samples for histopathologic examination
coli, Klebsiella, Salmonella, Yersinia, Proteus, Citrobac-
and culture.
ter, Edwardsiella, Enterobacter, Morganella, Providencia,
Cloacoscopy using a rigid endoscope with a flush port
Serratia, Pasteurella, and Mycobacteria (Lumeij 1994).
can be used to visualize urine and urates exiting the
A CBC profle including uric acid, a urinalysis, radio-
ureteral papillae and entering the urodeum. The best
 graph, fecal Gram's stain and culture, ± biopsy and cul-
visualization is achieved when the cloaca has been flushed
ture of the kidney are commonly employed to aggres-
 clean and is filled with fluid by digitally preventing fluid
sively workup renal disease. In cases of an ascending
from escaping the vent during cloacoscopy.
infection from the cloaca, a fecal Gram's stain showing
 Urinalysis in birds is limited to evaluating specific grav-
more than 10% Gram-negative organisms in a psittacine
ity and for the presence of casts because of the inherent
bird is suggestive of enteritis, and a fecal culture may
fecal and urate contamination. Wax paper can be used
be a noninvasive method of diagnosing the causative
 to obtain a minimally contaminated specimen. The pres-
 organism. A broad spectrum, bactericidal antibiotic such
ence of casts is strongly suggestive of renal disease. Pro-
as enrofloxacin, trimethoprim-sulfa (not macaws), or
teinuria, and glucosuria without hyperglycemia, can also
    n sn 
be present with renal disease. The specific gravity should
tenance of 50 mL/kg/day, plus more for any losses, via the
be approximately 1.005-1.020 g/mL (Pollack et al. 2005).
SC, IV, or intraosseous route for several days, is usually
 Porphyrinuria in Amazon parrots has been associated
necessary.
with lead toxicosis. Oftentimes, a bird is stressed when
visiting the veterinary hospital causing an evacuation of
Polyomavirus
the cloaca before colonic resorption of fluid has occurred,
giving the appearance of polyuria and or diarrhea. Green
 Polyomavirus is a fatal disease of young birds, but it can
urates, called biliverdinuria, are indicative of liver disease
also affect adult birds. There is a licensed vaccine (Psit-
in birds (Figure 84.3).
timmune) available by Biomune (Lenexa, KS) to prevent
Birds are unable to produce bilirubin due to the lack
the disease. Many aviary birds are subclinically affected
of biliverdin reductase.
and are a constant source of infection in the aviary and
a particular danger for young birds, therefore all birds
should be vaccinated. The virus is nonenveloped and
 therefore can remain viable in the environment for pos-
sibly years. Transmission of polyomavirus is through
exposure to excretion and secretions, especially urine.
Acute disease occurs in young birds with an approximate
mortality rate of 27-41%, and includes 12-48 hours of
 depression, anorexia, delayed crop emptying, regurgita-
tion, diarrhea, dehydration, SQ hemorrhage, dyspnea,
and polyuria (Ritchie 1995). The SQ hemorrhages are
 most easily seen over the crop, carpi, or cranium. Typ-
ically, during an acute outbreak, approximately 30% of
birds between 28 and 48 days of age die within a 6-week
period (Ritchie 1995). Chronic disease is associated with
weight loss, intermittent anorexia, polyuria, renal failure,
 and poor feather growth, as well as signs of immunosup-
 pression, such as secondary bacterial or fungal infections.
It seems the chronic disease occurs in immunosuppressed
Figure 84.3 Biliverdinuria, or green urates, in a bird dropping are
adults that cannot overcome the clinical signs of infec-
indicative of renal disease.
 tion. There is no treatment for the disease. The prognosis
860   Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
is grave if clinical signs are present in a young bird. Disin-
fection of the environment is imperative and includes the
use of a synthetic phenol, sodium hypohlorite (bleach),
stabilized chlorine dioxide, or 70% ethanol. A PCR test
          
the efficacy of the disinfection process. A PCR test can be
used to evaluate tissues or feces for the virus.
Parasitic infections
Parasitic infections involving the urinary tract are not
 common in pet birds, although renal coccidiosis in geese
due to Eirmeria truncata is well known, and adult trema-
todes ( Tanaisia bragai) in chickens, turkeys, and pigeons
have been described in the collecting ducts (Lumeij 1994).
Fungal infections
Although aspergillosis infection with Aspergillus flavus
or A. funigatus most commonly affects the caudal tho-
racic air sacs, the tracheal bifurcation or the sinuses,
the infection can sometimes spread through the thin air
sacs to a nearby kidney. One such aspergillosis infection
spread not only to the kidney but also to the nerves of
1992). Immunosuppression, hypovitaminosis A, or mas-
sive exposure to fungal organisms is usually the inciting
Figure 84.4 Visceral gout (uric acid deposition) in the pericardial
cause. Aspergillosis is more common in African Grey par-
sac (arrow) of a bird.
 rots, macaws, and raptors. A suggestive diagnosis is based
on a heterophilic and monocytic leukocytosis, elevated
Gout
enzymes (AST, LDH, CK) suggesting tissue destruc-
tion, an elevated aspergillus antigen and/or body, an ele-
Gout is defined as uric acid deposition in tissues. Birds
vated galactomannan level (through University of Miami
 commonly present with renal, visceral, or articular gout
 Pathology Laboratory), plasma electrophoresis pattern
 due to hyperuricemia secondary to renal disease of vari-
suggestive of infection, and radiographs suggesting gran-
 ous causes, including dehydration (Figure 84.4).
ulomatous masses in the air sacs. A definitive diagno-
 A sample of the white material can be examined under
sis is based on direct visualization with endoscopy and
the microscope and appears as round crystals. Allop-
histopathologic examination and fungal culture of biopsy
urinol has been used in some parrot species to success-
samples. An aspergilloma, or fungal ball, can be present
fully decrease blood uric acid levels, but a study in red-
in severe cases. Treatement consists of antifungals such as
tailed hawks showed allopurinol-caused hyperuricemia
the conazoles, including ketaconazole, itraconazole, and
(Lumeij and Redig 1992). A postprandial hyperuricemia
fluconazole. Itraconazole is the best, but should not be
is common and normal in hawks and should not be con-
used in African grey parrots (or used at very low doses).
fused with renal disease, so recheck levels after fasting.
Also, amphotericin-B is good, but can only be given IV,
Allopurinol inhibits xanthine oxidase, the enzyme that
or through nebulization, and it is quickly renal-toxic.
forms xanthine, which in turn forms uric acid (Lumeij
Months of treatment are necessary, so diagnose early and
1994). Gout is painful; therefore, an analgesic should be
treat for a month past resolution of clinical signs. Also,
administered. Most NSAIDs are renally excreted and can
correct any underlying cause of immunosupression or
cause further renal damage; therefore, some clinicians
overexposure. Again, fluid therapy is beneficial initially
use tramadol, but its use in psittacine birds has not yet
for several days.
been studied. Large pockets of uric acid, usually found on
Avian and exotic companion animals 861
the dorsal surface of the tarsometatarsus, can be lanced
and drained, but be ready for more hemorrhage than
expected since the overlying tissues are inflamed. Again,
fluid therapy is given to reestablish hydration.
Hypervitaminosis D
Hypervitaminosis D can cause gout. Inappropriate diets
are the usual cause, for example, a blue and gold macaw
neonate was hand-fed dog food causing hypervitaminosis
D, leading to articular gout involving both carpi and
metstarsi, visceral gout, and death. Renal calcinosis has
(a)
been associated with hypervitaminosis D.
Renal calcinosis
 Renal calcinosis can be seen radiographically in clinically
normal African grey parrots and is considered an inci-
 dental finding, but in other species has been associated
with hypervitaminosis D.
Urolithiasis
 Ureteroliths secondary to severe dehydration and their
surgical removal have been described (Figures 84.5a
and b).
Cloacoliths secondary to poor emptying of the cloaca
 due to papillomatous lesions has also been seen (Figure
84.6).
Toxins
Aminoglycosides can cause renal tubular necrosis and are
not recommended for use in birds. Heavy metals, afla-
toxins, and salty food also can cause acute renal failure in
birds. Lead and zinc toxicosis is common in pet birds and
clinical signs include neurological signs, regurgitation,
and depression. Amazon parrots can present with por-
 phyrinuria. Diagnosis is based on visualizing heavy metal
(b)
particles on radiographs or documenting elevated blood
Figure 84.5 (a, b) Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs of an
lead or serum zinc levels. The University of Louisiana
adult umbrella cockatoo with multiple ureteroliths (arrows).
Toxicology Laboratory has a graphite furnace to evaluate
lead and zinc levels using just 0.1 mL of blood or serum.
nasal salt gland to secrete a 5% salt solution so they can
Treatment for lead or zinc toxicosis in birds is Ca EDTA
drink sea water (3% salt).
(30 mg/kg IM q12h x 5 d) or dimercaptosuccinic acid
(DMSA at 30 mg/kg PO q12h x 30 d), or both. Again,
Neoplasia
fluid therapy is beneficial, as is supportive care for the
liver with lactulose (Duphulac 1 mL/kg PO q24h). Afla-
Common tumors of the urogenital system of pet birds
toxicosis is more hepatotoxic than renal toxic; therefore,
include nephroblastoma, adenocarcinoma, carcinoma,
besides fluid therapy, supportive care is aimed toward
and adenomas (Latimer 1994; Reavill 2004). Renal car-
the liver. Salt toxicosis can lead to urate impaction of the
q  ad ina so ae s
ureters and neurological signs. Elevated plasma sodium
 greater than 5 years of age with a 3-week to 6-month dis-
levels with a history of salt intake, and concurrent neuro-
 ease course. Common presenting signs include coelomic
logical signs, is highly suggestive. Sea birds have a special
enlargement, weight loss, vomiting or regurgitation, and
862
Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
approximately in the caudal third of the body, extend-
ing 10-15% of the body length (Holz 2006). The kidneys
have the shape of a stack of coins that has fallen over in an
 overlapping fashion, representing the 25-30 lobules that
typically constitute a snake kidney. Snakes do not possess
a urinary bladder, therefore urine and urates pass from
the ureters into the urodeum, a portion of the cloaca,
much the way it occurs in birds.
Most lizards possess a urinary bladder, and iguanas
possess a urethra that extends from the bladder to the
urodeum. The urine travels from the kidneys through
the ureter to the urodeum, where it can be become con-
taminated with feces and bacteria and then is retropulsed
Figure 84.6 Three dloacoliths removed from the cloaca of an
into the bladder and colon. The paired kidneys in lizards
Amazon parrot. A cloacal papillomatous mass (arrow) was causing
are generally located within the pelvic canal and base of
physical obstruction at the vent and accumulation of urates.
the tail, and because of this location, severe renalmegaly
can lead to constipation (Figure 84.7).
unilateral leg lameness caused by pressure on the nerves
It is possible in large iguanas to perform a digital rectal
of the lumbar plexus. Most tumors occur in the cranial
examination through the cloaca. The kidneys should not
division and do not seem to impair function. Metastasis is
rare. A radiograph often confirms a mass in the coelomic
cavity. There is no treatment and surgical attempts result
in massive hemorrhage.
Reptile urology
Overview
There are over 7,000 species of reptiles. There are four
orders: Squamata (including the snakes and lizards),
Rhynchocephala (the tuataras), Testudines (including the
turtles and tortoises), and Crocodilia (the crocodiles).
species and vary not only in size, but also country and
climate of origin, and physiology. It is known that some
species of reptiles can metabolize drugs differently than
others. For example, tortoises die after administration of
esized that tortoises have GABA receptors peripherally
 or that the ivermectin passes the blood-brain barrier.
 Death is usually due to paralysis of respiratory muscles.
RK
Therefore, it must be taken into account that there is no
 generic reptile and exotic animal formularies that should
be consulted prior to prescribing any drug.
Anatomy and physiology
The urinary anatomy of reptiles is quite diverse and
this text will include a brief description of snakes, tur-
tles/tortoises, and lizards. For a more detailed descrip-
tion, the reader is directed to Dr. Mader's book for
Figure 84.7 Necropy of an iguana with severe renalmegaly (RK.
species-specific descriptions with color plates (Holz
right kidney;: LK, left kidney) and secondary constipation. Note how
2006). The elongated body of snakes makes for elon-
the enlarged kidneys obstruct the pelvic canal inhibiting defeca-
 gated kidneys with the right cranial to the left, located
tion.
Avian and exotic companion animals 863
extend much past the pelvic canal into the celomic cav-
until after renal failure has occurred. If phlebotomy is
ity, nor should they be visible cranial to the pelvic canal
contaminated by urates, say if the sample was acquired
radiographically. Cloacal palpation can also be used in
from a tail vein with urates on the skin, then very high,
large lizards to evaluate kidney size and shape. Intraoper-
    sa e   
atively, do not confuse the bilateral lobe-shaped fat pads
times, in iguanas, the best initial indicator of possible
for kidneys or uterine horns.
renal disease is hyperphosphotemia. A phosphorus level
Turtles and tortoises also possess paired kidneys, but
 greater than 5 mg/dL should stimulate further diagnostic
they are located in the dorsal caudal celomic cavity just
tests. An excellent source of published species-specific
ventral to the carapace. Turtles and tortoises also possess
reference values exists in Dr. Carpenter's Exotic Ani-
a urinary bladder and urethra, and ureters that connect
mal Formulary (Diethelm 2005). Commonly, elevated
to the neck of the bladder, but the urinary bladder may
enzymes (AST, LDH, CK), suggesting tissue destruction,
be divided into three sections, a main bladder and two
are present.
accessory bladders (Holz 2006).
Radiography may be helpful in cases of renalmegaly,
The reptilian nephron does not possess aloop of Henle;
neprocalcinosis, ureteral stones, or severe gout. Normal-
therefore, reptile urine is not hypertonic. The major form
sized iguana kidneys are not visible past the pelvic inlet on
of nitrogenous waste in reptiles is uric acid bound to
either the ventrodorsal or the lateral view. In all reptiles,
protein and sodium or potassium to form a suspension
the lateral view should be taken with a horizontal beam
called urates. The urine is retropulsed from the cloaca
for better visualization. Oftentimes with renalmegaly,
to the colon for further water resorption and further
especially in iguanas, constipation is seen radiographi-
precipitation of uric acid (Holz 2006). Reptiles with a
cally, due to physical obstruction by the kidney in the
urinary bladder also retropulse urine from the cloaca to
pelvic canal. Intravenous injection of 800-1,000 mg/kg
the colon for further resorption, but the bladder resorbs
of iohexol, an aqueous-iodinated contrast medium, and
some water as well and acidifies the urine to precipitate
taking serial radiographs at 0, 0.5, 2, 5, 15, 30, and 60
uric acid (Holz 2006). Reptiles also can take in fluid from
 n    n sd s
the environment through the cloaca and into the colon;
ing the kidneys and evaluating function of the kidneys
therefore, an enema of physiologic saline is an excellent
or ureters (Hernandez-Divers and Innis 2006). If the
method of providing fluids to a reptile. Never use castile
contrast medium is injected in the cranial half of the
soap enemas in reptiles. Besides SC, IV, intraosseous, and
body, then essentially an excretory urogram is obtained,
via enema, fluids can also be given intracoelomically. Tilt-
but if the contrast medium is injected into the tail vein,
ing the reptile so the celomic contents fall away from the
then, because of the renal portal system, an outline of the
 side of needle penetration usually prevents puncturing
kidney may be visible. Renal scintigraphy has been per-
 of an internal organ (Hernandez-Divers and Innis 2006;
formed to evaluate glomerular filtration rate in iguanas
Sykes and Greenacre 2006). Usually, no more than 3% of
(Greer et al. 2005). Ultrasound of the kidneys is helpful
body weight in fluids is given at one time to a reptile.
 oad oi pasn aq uo pue skus pue seuni 
Reptiles possess a renal portal system similar to that
ultrasound guided biopsy.
described in birds. For years, the general rule was to inject
The most common "next step" in attempting to defini-
all drugs in the cranial half of the body to avoid undiluted
d    e n s s s i
drug exposure to the kidneys, but recent studies in red-
an exploratory endoscopy with a rigid endoscope placed
eared sliders and carpet pythons show this rule may be
into the caudal aspect of the coelomic cavity. Some-
unfounded. If using amikacin, a potentially nephrotoxic
times, mild insufflation is necessary to adequately visu-
drug, it is stil recommended that it be given in the cranial
alize and access structures. Courses are offered through
 e on  o e q n o 
national and regional conferences to train veterinarians
animal and/or give concurrently with fluids.
in this technique that is common practice in exotic ani-
mal medicine. The kidneys can be directly visualized and
s  n s q o d    o  
Diagnostic tests
for histopathologic examination and culture.
Acute renal failure presents as acute depression, anorexia,
Urinalysis in reptiles is limited to evaluating for the
decreased to no fecal/urinary output, and usually a het-
presence of casts and evaluating for large numbers of
erophilic, azurophilic leukocytosis. Chronic renal failure
leucocytes, erythrocytes, epithelial cells, or a monomor-
 presents with depression, anorexia, severe weight loss,
phic population of bacteria. Small numbers of a mixed
and usually a regenerative anemia.
 population of bacteria is expected, even if a cytocentesis is
Although uric acid is the major nitrogenous waste in
done in a species with a urinary bladder, because of fecal
reptiles, blood uric acid levels do not seem to increase
contamination that occurs in the urodeum. Proteinuria,
864 Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
glucosuria, and blood are not normal findings and are
encourages renal calcinosis. If after several days of inten-
suggestive of renal disease, although blood could have
Aq bupuodsau jou si euenai ue Xdeiau Pinu AI aais
arisen from anywhere in the gastrointestinal, urinary, or
lower uric acid or lower phosphorus levels, then euthana-
reproductive tracts. Protozoan parasites can be found in
 sia is recommended. Some dedicated iguana owners have
reptile, especially tortoise, urine.
given oral fluids, calcium, and phosphorus binders daily
for years to manage chronic renal disease, but eventu-
ally their iguanas succumb to multiple organ dysfunction
Common diseases
with ascites.
Glomerulonephrosis
Gout
The most common renal disease seen in captive reptiles
is glomerulonephrosis and tubulonephrosis of iguanas.
Gout is the deposition of uric acid in tissues. Common
The most common inciting cause is a diet high in animal
factors that contribute to gout in reptiles include
proteins at any stage of life. Even a young iguana fed ani-
dehydration, misuse of aminoglycoside antibiotics, renal
mal protein can develop glomerulonephrosis later in life.
disease of any kind but especially tubular disease, and
The iguana presents with signs of chronic renal disease,
high protein diets in herbivorous reptiles (Mader 2006a).
including severe weight loss, anorexia, depression, and
 Diagnosis is based on demonstrating uric acid crystals
lack of fecal or urine production. Usually, renomegaly is
from a white mass in tissues usually found near a joint.
snd aq a saaup es saleis pua un nnq iedied
Treatment is aimed at decreasing blood uric acid levels,
Oftentimes, iguanas present after several weeks of clinical
decreasing inflammation and managing the pain. Allop-
signs, and there is little, if any, renal function remaining;
urinol, colchicine, fluid therapy to reestablish hydration,
therefore, this disease generall has a poor prognosis.
NSAIDs, and opiates can be given, but relay to the client
Hyperuricemia is usually present, but not always, and
 that many dosages are empirical in reptile medicine.
 s   n   
Prognosis is poor unless caught early and treated
present. Sometimes, the phosphorus level is higher than
aggressively.
the calcium level in the blood, a calcium:phosphorus
inversion, sometimes leading to concurrent renal calci-
Urinary calculi
nosis. Concurrent gout is also seen. Oftentimes the ion-
ized calcium is also low, below 1.3 mg/dL. Fluid therapy,
 Urinary calculi are usually composed of uric acid and
preferably intravenous, is paramount. Some veterinari-
 are commonly diagnosed in lizards and tortoises (Figure
ans administer oral calcium and oral phosphorus binders
84.8).
(to bind dietary phosphorus in the gastrointestinal tract
 Renal calculi have not been described in reptiles. A
only, not blood), but these treatments are controversial
common theme is chronic dehydration form either a
S  s s s    
dry environment or lack of access to adequate amounts
supplementation in the presence of hyperphosphatemia
 of water, but a diet high in protein or oxalates (found
TC
(a)
(b)
Figure 84.8 (a) A very large cystic calculi, C, composed of 100% uric acid removed from an iguana is placed next to the iguana
immediately postoperatively. Note the prominent pelvic bones consistent with emaciation. The iguana was being administered fluids via
 an intraosseous catheter (IC) placed in the right femur. (b) Close up of cystic calculicut in half showing the laminar appearance.
Avian and exotic companion animals 865
the plastron, or a prefemoral celiotomy is used to access
the bladder in tortoises.
Prolapsed tissue
Any tissue protruding from the vent must be identified
prior to correction and possibilities include penis (turtles
and tortoises), hemipenes (snakes and lizards), bladder
in those species with a bladder, cloaca, or distal intestinal
tract. A hemipene everts on either side of the vent during
copulation or excitation, but should return to its inverted
position in the anal gland momentarily. Penile prolapse is
most common in turtles and tortoises and can be replaced
and secured at the vent with stay sutures for a few weeks,
 e s e a   as ee 
not needed for urination.
Neoplasia
Figure 84.9 Ventrodorsal radiograph of an iguana with a cystic
The most common tumors of the urological system
calculus, C. Analysis showed it was 100% uric acid.
of reptiles include renal adenocarcinoma, mostly of
snakes, renal tubular adenoma of snakes and iguanas,
I (aoz spe) panssns uq ose se (ruds 
and nephroblastomas. Renal adenocarcinomas are the
reptiles should have access to a large, shallow pan of fresh
most common and present most commonly in colubrid
 snakes such as the king snake, and present with a large,
water. A common history in iguanas with urinary calculi
 unilateral mass. Metastasis is rare and a nephrectomy
is an owner that was told years previously to just spray the
may be useful in treatment (Garner et al. 2004).
leaves with water and not offer a bowl of water. Urinary
calculi can usually be palpated just cranial to the pelvis
and tilting a tortoise side to side may facilitate palpation
Rabbit urology
(or eggs can be palpated in this way as well). Radiographs
are very helpful in demonstrating the urinary calculi,
 Anatomy and physiology
which are oftentimes very large (Figure 84.9).
 The anatomy of a rabbit kidney is very similar to a cat
Surgical removal is recommended (Figure 84.10).
kidney. The kidneys are easily palpable once the rab-
A paramedian incision is used in lizards to avoid the
bit relaxes and are more ventral and free-floating than
ventral abdominal vein. A plastronotomy, a bone flap in
one would expect. Obese rabbits can have a very large
retroperitoneal fat pad that can cause the kidneys to be
almost ventral on radiographs or during palpation. Like
horses, rabbits excrete calcium carbonate in the urine,
giving it a cloudy appearance. Normal daily water intake
Urine output is approximately 130 mL/kg/day. The color
of rabbit urine may vary greatly and is influenced by diet
and stress. Urine can be cloudy or clear and range in color
from pale yellow to orange-red. Red urine in rabbits may
not necessarily be hematuria but the more common, and
normal, porphyrinuria pigments (Figure 84.11).
A urine dipstick is an easy method to differentiate por-
phyrinuria from hematuria. Possibilities for hematuria
include cystic calculi, blood of renal origin, or in female
Figure 84.10 Cystic calculus being removed surgically from an
rabbits, of uterine origin, such as with cystic endome-
iguana. Sometimes, the calculi can have an irregular surface as in
trial hyperplasia and/or uterine adenocarcinoma. Rabbit
this case.
urine has an average pH of 8.2, which can easily lead to
866   Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
Figure 84.12 Lateral radiograph of rabbit with a significant
alo (moue) jappejq Aeuun ayi u ,abpnis, lo ,' pues, jo junoue
appropriately. "sand" is multiple, small calcium carbonate stones
creating a toothpaste-like consistency to the urine. Also note in
this obese rabbit, the large retroperitoneal fat pad displacing the
Figure 84.11 Porphyrinuria, a reddish-orange urine commonly
kidneys ventrally.
seen in rabbits has discolored the white towel placed in the cage
bottom. No blood was present in this rabbit's urine.
in the bladder called “sludge” because of its consistency.
Ultrasound, excretory urogram, intravenous pyelogra-
urine scalding of thin inguinal skin in incontinent rab-
phy, and other diagnostic modalities would be similar to
bits.
a cat.
Diagnostic tests
Common diseases
Blood urea  nitrogen(
(published  reference r
range
13-29 mg/dL) and creatinine (published reference range
Lower urinary tract disease
0.5-2.5) are used to evaluate for evidence of renal disease
This condition is lumped to together as cystitis, urine
(Mader 2004). Increases in BUN and creatinine are not
"sludging,” and incontinence because it is a common
expected to increase until 50-70% of nephrons are lost 
presentation (Figure 84.12).
(Jenkins 2008).
The cause of these symptoms is unknown, but anec-
Urinalysis is a useful tool and may be obtained by free
 dotally, there are some common factors such as a high-
catch, manual expression, catheterization, or cystocen-
calcium diet (as found with alfalfa hay and alfalfa hay-
 tesis. Care must be taken to avoid the large cecum of
based pellets), inactivity, obesity, large skin folds, and
rabbits during cystocentesis by inserting the needle quite
chronic lumbosacral subluxation. Most rabbits have a
caudally. The published reference range for urine specific
concurrent disease condition, including bacterial cystitis,
gravity is 1.003-1.036, with an average of 1.015 (Mader
infection with Encephalitozooan cuniculi, cystic endome-
2004; Jenkins 2008). Small amounts of protein may be
trialhyperplasia, cysticcalculi, uterine/ovarian adenocar-
found in the urine of young, healthy rabbits and even nor-
 cinoma, or spinal disease. Therefore, any rabbit present-
mal adults can have trace levels of protein (Mader 2004;
 ing with inappropriate urination, dysuria, depression,
Jenkins 2008). Although glucose is not normally found in
 hunched posture, teeth grinding, perineal scalding, or
rabbit urine, rabbits easily develop a stress hyperglycemia
 polyuria/polydipsia should have the following tests: CBC,
that may spill over into the urine. Spontaneous diabetes
chemistry profle, urinalysis, urine culture, radiograph,
mellitus has been described in New Zealand white rabbits,
± contrast radiography, ultrasound, and E. cuniculi
but is not commonly seen. Many calcium carbonate crys-
titer. First, treat any underlying disease (Harcourt-Brown 
tals are expected in rabbit urine. The fractional excretion 
2002), That is aggressive early treatment with a broad-
of calcium in urine of most mammals is 2%, whereas in
 spectrum, bactericidal antibiotic that rabbits tolerate,
a rabbit, it can reach 60% (Pare and Paul-Murphy 2004;
such as enrofloxacin or trimethoprim-sulfa. If the culture
Jenkins 2008). Same as other mammals, casts, epithelial
shows no evidence of a bacterial cystitis and no dermatitis
cells, and bacteria should not be present in urine, and red
is present, then antibiotics can be discontinued. If cystitis
and white blood cells should only be seen occasionally.
 is present, the usual bacterial culprit is Pseudormonas spp.
Radiographically, rabbits are similar to cats, except the
 or E. coli (Pare and Paul-Murphy 2004). Fluid therapy to
kidneys can occur more ventrally and it is a common
 reestablish hydration, analgesics, ± flushing the bladder
incidental finding to visualize some calcium carbonate
 of sludge under anesthesia may be necessary. Long-term
Avian and exotic companion animals 867
treatment can focus on changing the diet to a timothy
hay based pelet, timothy hay, and green leafy vegetables.
Diligent and frequent cleaning, and flushing and minimal
 application of zinc oxide ointment is necessary to treat
concurrent urine scald. If the rabbit is suspected of hav-
ing encephalitozooanosis, then albendazole at 30 mg/kg
PO daily for 30 days or more may be necessary.
Urinary calculi
Calculi can occur in the kidney, ureter, bladder, or ure-
thra commonly in rabbits. Renal calculi often take on a
"staghorn" appearance. The composition is almost always
calcium carbonate and the cause is usually high dietary
Figure 84.13 Urinary bladder everted through the urethra in a
calcium. Other processes that can contribute to stone
young rabbit.
formation include neurological disease from E. cuni-
culi or spinal disease, obesity, and rarely, cystitis. Radio-
graphs are usually confirmatory since calcium carbon-
subclinical  renal   calcinosis  (author's unpublished
ate is radio-opaque. If large cystic calculi are present,
research). Urinary signs are treated as described above
then surgical removal is best. Small calculi can pass,
 for lower urinary tract disease.
especially in female rabbits. Some urethral calculi can
be retropulsed back into the bladder and then a cysto-
Neoplasia
tomy performed. Ureteral calculi that are not moving and
are causing obstruction need to be removed surgically.
Benign embryonal nephroma is the third most frequent
tumor of rabbits and is usually an incidental finding at
Renal calculi are difficult and risky to remove surgically
because they often have a staghorn shape. A nephrec-
 necropsy. Any age rabbit can be affected. Renal carcino-
 s   d  n
mas are rarely reported.
the rabbit is the animal model of choice for lithotripsy
research, and many reports of lithotripsy and the new
Bladder eversion
laser ithotripsy technique have been described, but no
Urinary bladder eversion secondary to stretching of tis-
clinical use has yet been recorded (Zorcher et al. 1999).
There is a concern for collateral tissue damage.
sues after parturition in young does has been recorded
(Figure 84.13).
The bladder everts through the urethra. Surgical repair
Encephalitozoonosis
is possible. Ectopic urinary bladder,through a rent in the
Encephalitozooan cuniculi is a coccidian parasite that is
 abdominal wall, has been seen in a rabbit (Figure 84.14).
spread via the doe's urine to her offspring usually in the
first few days of the kit's life. Most rabbits have been
exposed and have an antibody titer, but rarely show any
Ferret urology
clinical signs. Pitted kidneys are a common incidental
Anatomy and physiology
finding at necropsy. Old age or immunosuppression can
sometimes cause clinical signs to surface, such as neu-
The anatomy and physiology of the urinary system is
rological signs including torticollis, hind limb paresis
much the same as a dog. The kidneys are very easy to
 or paralysis, and incontinence. Sometimes, ocular signs
 palpate. The male has a prostate, an os penis, and a bend
alone are present as a phacoclastic uveitis that looks like
in the urethra very similar to a dog. The os penis is
a granuloma in the anterior chamber of the eye, but
 curved into a hook at the end and extends beyond the
the lesion is originating from the lens capsule. An anti-
penis distally (Figure 84.15).
body titer can be run at Sound Diagnostics (in the state
The urethral opening is not distinct, but a flap of
of Washington) but the titer is not indicative of infec-
tissue, and can be found ventrally where the penile
tion (meaning a higher or rising titer does not suggest
tissue ends. Typically, a 3.5 Fr red rubber catheter is
active disease). The treatment in humans with E. intesti-
used for urethral catheterization and a video demon-
nalis is with albendazole, and the same is true for rab-
strating the technique is available at the following
bits at 30 mg/kg PO q24h long-term; usually 30 days
website (Greenacre 1999): http:// www.vet.uga.edu/vpp/
past clinical resolution. More frequent dosing resulted in
ivcvm/1999/index.php.
868  Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
(a)
(c)
(q)
(d)
(e)
Figure 84.14 (a-e) Survey radiographs (a and b), excretory urogram (c and d), and contrast urethrogram (e) of a female rabbit with an 
ectopic bladder, B.
Avian and exotic companion animals 869
Figure 84.15 Normal ferret penis exposed from the sheath. The
dark color of the penile tissue is normal. The os penis is curved
into a hook at the end and extends beyond the penis distally.
Diagnostic tests
Figure 84.16 Urine removed from a male ferret through a 3.5 Fr
urethral catheter containing proteinaceous debris (arrow) due to
Diagnostic tests are very similar to those done in dogs and
prostatitis secondary to adrenal disease.
cats, including CBC, chemistry profle, urinalysis, radio-
 graphy, contrast radiography, ultrasound, and culture.
 A 25-gauge needle is recommended for cystocente-
sis due to the relatively thin wall of the bladder. The
small struvite calculi from the rise in pH due to bacterial
- e uo inq 'sz-s'g au si an  jo Hd
cystitis (Figure 84.16).
quality meat-based diet, the pH can be 6.0 (Gamble and
The usual initial course of action is to administer an
 Morrisey 2005). Ferrets generally only produce on aver-
 opiate pain reliever such as butorphanol, anesthetize the
age about 26 mL of urine daily. Water intake is approxi-
ferret with isoflurane, relieve some of the pressure on
mately 75-100 mL daily (Fox 1998).
the bladder, obtain a urine sample for urinalysis and cul-
ture by performing a cystocentesis, and obtain blood for
Common diseases
a CBC, chemistry profle, and adrenal hormone panel.
While the ferret is under anesthesia, place a urethral
Adrenal gland disease leading to prostatic
disease
catheter. An ultrasound of the abdomen including the
adrenalglands, and bladder and prostate can be done dur-
The most common disease of middle age to older ferrets
ing the initial anesthetic episode or later when the ferret is
is adrenal gland disease. Adrenal gland adenocarcinoma
better stabilized. The prostate is normally approximately
is the most common manifestation, followed by adrenal
 10 mm wide and the adrenal glands are generally 3 x
gland adenoma or hyperplasia. The cause is most likely
5 mm (Figure 84.17).
due to spaying or neutering a ferret of any age, which
Fluids to re-establish hydration are administered as
stimulates metaplasia of undifferentiated gonadal cells
well as antibiotics. The adrenal gland disease must be
left over embrylogically in the adrenal capsule (Quesen-
addressed soon by either hormonal treatment (leuprolide
berry and Rosenthal 2004). The most common clini-
acetate, melatonin implants, or deslorelin) or surgery, or
cal sign is a bilateral symmetrical alopecia, and females
both, to resolve the underlying stimulus to the prostate. If
commonly present with vulvar enlargement. Less com-
"sand" or multiple small calculi cannot be flushed from
monly, males develop prostatic hyperplasia, cysts, and
the urethra, a perineal urethrostomy can be done to allow
abscesses with a concurrent urinary tract infection and
urine exit before the narrow areas of the bend or tip of
small urethral or cystic calculi. Clinical signs then also
the urethra (Figure 84.18).
include stranguria and dysuria. Prostatic enlargement is
 Long-term antibiotics based on urine culture are
due to elevation of the hormones estradiol, testosterone,
needed to resolve the probable concomitant bacterial
17-B-hydroxyprogesterone produced by the neoplastic
cystitis. Within several days of removing the neoplastic
adrenal cortex from an adrenal gland tumor. Urethral
adrenal gland, the prostatic cysts begin to resolve. Cysts
blockages are commonly due to sloughed proteinaceous
 can sometimes be larger than the bladder itself (Figures 
 debris from squamous metaplasia of prostatic tissue and
84.19 and 84.20).
870
Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 84.17 (a-c) Lateral survey abdominal radiograph (a) and ultrasound images of an adult, male ferret with cystic (large arrow) and 
urethral (small arrow) calculi (b), and an abnormal prostate (P) (c) secondary to adrenal disease.
Figure 84.18 Ferret post-perineal urethrostomy. The surgery was
done to allow ease of urine flow at a point before the narrowing
Figure 84.19 Bladder (B) and prostatic cyst (PC) outlined with
is pue ahpns snoeuaiaid ym saal e ui euan au jo
contrast media after IV injection in a ferret. Prostatic cysts can be
 urethral calculi obstruction secondary to adrenal disease.
as large as, or larger than, the bladder.
Avian and exotic companion animals  871
Prostatic cyst
Urinary
bladder
-biy ui se paay awes jo ydeibonoud aalenadoeul oz'ta aunb
ure 84.19 showing the size of the prostatic cyst (left) in comparison
to the bladder (right).
Cysts can be drained with a 25-gauge needle. Some
sources recommend flushing and marsupializing large
abcesses with omentum, but in this author's experience,
Figure 84.21 Struvite cystic calculi removed from an adult ferret.
it is best to leave the abcesses unopened and treat with
The vegetable-based, dry dog food diet the ferret was eating was
long-term antibiotics rather than risk peritonitis, no mat-
a contributory factor.
ter how carefully the surgery is performed (Ludwig and
Aiken 2004).
Cyst resection or nephrectomy is limited to very large
 cysts causing significant pathology.
Urolithiasis
Other than underlying adrenal disease, the other cause
Neoplasia
 of urinary calculi in ferrets is a diet of vegetable pro-
tein origin. Ferrets have a higher protein and fat require-
Renal adenocarcinoma has been described in one ferret
ment than cats. Recommended levels in ferrets for dietary
protein are 30-40%, and fat are 20-30%. Ferrets lack a
quent metastasis to the lumber spine several months after
(       
nephrectomy (Figure 84.23; Volgenaeu et al. 1998).
tract; in fact, it is half the length of a cat's. The GI tran-
Transitional cell carcinoma has also been described
sit time in ferrets is 3-4 hours. Vegetable-based protein
 in the bladder of ferrets. Hematuria is the presenting
diets increase urine pH, leading to struvite stone forma-
complaint. Contrast radiography or ultrasonography is
tion (Figure 84.21; Fox et al. 1998; Pollack 2004).
used to diagnose this disease.
Clinical signs include stranguria and dysuria. The
usual course of action is to administer an opiate pain
Guinea pig urology
reliever such as butorphanol, anesthetize the ferret with
isoflurane, relieve some of the pressure on the bladder
Anatomy and physiology
 and obtain a urine sample for urinalysis and culture by
performing a cystocentesis, and obtain blood for a CBC,
Male guinea pigs have an os penis.
chemistry profle, and adrenal hormone panel (just in
case there is adrenal disease without alopecia). Flushing
Diagnostic tests
can be performed to remove small calculi, or a cystotomy
 Guinea pigs have alkaline urine with many crystals. The
can be performed to remove large cystic calculi. Long-
urine is think and cloudy and white to pale yellow.
term appropriate antibiotics are usually needed for the
probably concurrent cystitis, and a change in diet to a
ferret appropriate meat-based chow is mandatory.
Common diseases
Urolithiasis
Renal cysts
 Urolithiasis is very common in guinea pigs, especially
Small or large, usually multiple, renal cysts are common
females greater than three years of age. The cause is
in ferrets with a reported incidence of 10-15% of ferrets
unknown, but researchers at the University of California,
 at necropsy (Figure 84.22; Pollack 2004).
Davis, have collected data from multiple institutions and
872  Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
(a)
(b)
Figure 84.22 Ultrasonagraphic images of a ferret with bilateral polycystic renal disease (a, right kidney: b, left kidney)
will report their findings soon. Calculi can be renal,
Chinchilla urology
ureteral, cyctic, or urethral (Figure 84.24).
Anatomy and physiology
Calculi composition is typically calcium carbonate,
 but calcium oxalate has also been documented. Generally,
 Female chinchillas have a large urinary papillae (has also
affected guinea pigs present with depression, anorexia,
been called urethral cone or clitoris) that can easily be
and dysuria with occasional hematuria. The workup and
mistaken for a penis. Males can be distinguished from
treatment is the same as for urolithiasis in rabbits, except
females by the greater distance between the anus and the
ureteral papilla.
2004).
Common diseases
Chronic interstitial nephritis (CIN)
Urolithiasis
 CIN is a common incidental finding at necropsy in guinea
Urolithiasis has been described in chinchillas, but it is not
pigs greater than 3 years of age (O'Rourke 2004). It can
common. Most involve male chinchillas with calcium car-
occur secondary to the very common chronic staphylo-
bonate calculi, but there is a report of six adult females
coccal pododermatitis creating a chronic renal amyloi-
spontaneously developing calcium oxalate urolithiasis
dosis.
with no known exposure to toxins (Donnelley 2004a).
The workup and treatment is the same as for urolithiasis
in rabbits.
Renal coccidiosis
The coccidian parasite Klossiella cobayae can be found
Rat urology
in the epithelial cells lining the renal tubules in guinea
Anatomy and physiology
pigs (Harkness et al. 2002; O'Rourke 2004). There are
no clinical sings unless there is a heavy infestation, then
- ad an jo t c-i exde and sie
the surface of the kidney is irregular with gray mottling
hour period with a pH range of 6-7.8 depending on strain
(Harkness et al. 2002).
 and gender (Kohn and Clifford 2002; Bihun 2004).
Avian and exotic companion animals 873
Hydronephrotic
kidney
(a)
(q)
RK
(c)
Figure 84.23 (a-c) - Right renal pelvis of a hydronephrotic kidney removed from a ferret with renal adenocarcinoma. Ventrodorsal and
Diagnostic tests
monly in males than females (Kohn and Clifford 2002;
The specific gravity of rat urine is 1.022-1.050 (Bihun 
Donnelley 2004b). A progressively worsening proteinuria
is the most common finding. Feeding a low-protein diet
2004).
and reducing any excess weight is the only method to
manage this disease.
Common diseases
Chronic progressive nephrosis
Mouse urology
The most common renal disease in rats is their most com-
Anatomy and physiology
mon age-related disease, chronic progressive nephrosis
(CPN). It is usually an incidental finding at necropsy, but
the disease occurs earlier, more severely, and more com-
  e g a  e  d o
874  Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
surface per gram of tissue compared to rats. Therefore,
the urine of mice is very concentrated ( Jacoby et al. 2002).
Diagnostic tests
The specific gravity of mouse urine is approximately
Common diseases
R
Urethral obstruction
Urethral obstruction is very common in male mice
(a)
1.5-2.5 years of age secondary to bacterial infection of
the preputial gland or bulbourethral gland by Staphylo-
coccus spp. or Pasteurella spp., respectively (Donnelley
 2004b). Males will commonly mutilate their penis with
this disease. Treatment consists of topical and parenteral
antibiotics.
Hamster urology
Anatomy and physiology
Hamsters produce approximately 5.1-8.4 mL of urine
 per 24-hour period with a pH range of approximately 8.5
(Kohn and Clifford 2002; Bihun 2004).
Diagnostic tests
The specific gravity of mouse urine is approximately
1.060 (Bihun 2004). Hamsters will commonly urinate
when restrained, so be prepared to catch a voided sample
by holding them over a clean stainless steel table.
Common diseases
No urinary-specific diseases are common in hamsters
 other than diabetes is common in dwarf hamsters and
the most common method of appreciating this disease is
to document a glucosuria.
Sugar glider urology
(b)
Anatomy and common disease
Figure 84.24 (a) Lateral and (b) ventrodorsal radiograph of an
 adult, male guinea pig with renal, ureteral, cystic, and urethral 
Sugar gliders are a marsupial and like most marsupi-
calculi composed of calcium carbonate.
als, males have a forked penis. They commonly present
for self-mutilation of the penis. The forked portion of
the penis can be amputed without disturbance of urine
and Clifford 2002; Bihun 2004). The glomeruli of mice
flow since they urinate from the base of the forked area.
 are relatively small at 74 μm in diameter compared to rat
Castration may help this condition since reproductive
glomeruli, which are almost twice as large, but the mouse
frustration is thought to be the cause (Ness and Booth
has 4.8 times more glomeruli with twice the filtering
2004).
Avian and exotic companion animals 875
References
King, A.S. and J. McLelland (1984). Urology. In: Birds—Their Struc-
ture and Function, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, PA: Bailliere Tindall,
Bihun, C. (2004). Basic anatomy, physiology, husbandry, and clini-
Pp. 175-186.
cal techniques. In: Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents—Clinical Medicine
Kohn, D.F. and C.B. Clifford (2002). Biology and diseases of rats. In:
and Surgery, edited by K.E. Quesenberry and J.W. Carpenter, 2nd
Laboratory Amirmal Medicine, edited by I.G. Fox, L.C. Anderson, FM.
edition. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, pp. 286-298.
Loew, and F.W. Quimby, 2nd edition. San Diego: Academic Press,
Diethelm, G. (2005). Reptiles. In: Exotic Aninal Forrmulary, edited
pp. 121-165.
by J.W. Carpenter, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, pp. 55-
Latimer, K.S. (1994). Oncology. In: Avian Medicine: Principles and
134.
Application, edited byB.W. Ritchie, G.J. Harrison, and L.R. Harrison.
Donnelley, T.M. (2004a). Disease problems of chinchillas. In: Ferrets,
Lake Worth: Wingers Publishing, pp. 640-672.
Rabbits, and Rodents—Clinical Medicine and Surgery, edited by K.E.
Ludwig, L. and S. Aiken (2004). Soft tissue surgery. In: Ferrets, Rabbits,
Quesenberry and J.W. Carpenter, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: WB
and Rodents—Clinical Medicine and Surgery, edited by K.E. Quesen-
Saunders, pp. 255-265.
berry and J.W. Carpenter, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders,
 Donnelley, T.M. (2004b). Disease problems of small rodents. In: Fer-
Pp. 121-134.
rets, Rabbits, and Rodents—Clinical Medicine and Surgery, edited by
Lumeij, IT. (1994). Nephrology. In: Avian Medicine: Principles and
K.E. Quesenberry and JI.W. Carpenter, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO:
Application, editedbyB.W. Ritchie, G.J. Harrison,and L.R. Harrison.
WB Saunders, pp. 299-315.
Lake Worth: Wingers Publishing, Pp. 538-555.
Fox, J.G. ( 1998). Normal clinical parameters. In: Biology and Diseases of
Lumeij, J.T. and P.T. Redig (1992). Hyperuricemia and visceral gout
the Ferret, edited by J.G. Fox, 2nd edition. Baltimore, MD: Williams
induced by allopurinol in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis).
 and wilkens, pp. 183-210.
Fox, J.G., R.C. Pearson, et al. (1998). Diseases of the genitouri-
Geselschaft e. V, Munich.
nary system. In: Biology and Diseases of the Ferret, edited by
Mader, D.R. (2004). Basic approach to veterinary care. In: Ferrets,
J.G. Fox, 2nd edition. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkens, pp. 247-
Rabbits, and Rodents—Clinical Medicine and Surgery, edited by K.E.
272.
Quesenberry, J.W. Carpenter, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: WB Saun-
Gamble, C. and J.K. Morrisey (2005). Ferrets. In: Exotic Animal Formu -
ders, pp. 147-154.
lary, edited by J.W. Carpenter, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier,
Mader, D.R. (2006a). Gout. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by
Pp. 447-478.
D.R. Mader, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, pp. 793-800.
Garner, M.M., S.M. Hernandez-Divers, et al. (2004). Reptile neoplasia:
Mader, D.R. (2006b). Calculi urinary. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery,
 a retrospective study of case submissions to a specialty diagnostic
edited by D.R. Mader, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, pp. 763-
service. Vet Clirn N Arm 7(3): pp. 653-671.
771.
Greenacre, C.B., K.S. Latimer, et al. (1992). Leg paresis in a black palm 
Marshall, K.L., L.E. Craig, et al. (2003). Quantitative renal scintigraphy
       ) 
in domestic pigeons (Colurmba livia domestica) exposed to toxic
126.
doses of gentamycin. Arm I Vet Res 64(4): 453-462.
Greenacre, C.B. (1999). Technique for urethral catheterization of
Naidoo, V., K. Wolter, et al. (2008). The pharmacokinetics of meloxi-
the male domestic ferret (Mustela putorius furo). Website Pro-
cam in cultures. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 31(2): 128-134.
ceedings of the International Virtual Conferences in Veterinary
Ness, R.D. and R. Booth (2004). Sugar gliders. In: Ferrets, Rabbits, and
Medicine, Diseases of Exotic Animals and Wildlife. Available at:
Rodents—Clinical Medicine and Surgery,edited by K.E.Quesenberry
h ttp://www.vet.uga.edu/vpp/ivcvm/1999/index.php.
and J.W. Carpenter, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders,
Greer, L.L., G.B. Daniel, et al. (2005). Evaluation of the use of tech-
pp.330-338.
netium Tc 99m diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid and Tc 99m
O'Rourke, D.P. (2004). Disease problems of guinea pigs. In: Ferrets,
dimercaptosuccinic acid for scintographic imaging of the kidneys 
Rabbits, and Rodents—Clinical Medicine and Surgery, edited by K.E.
in green iguanas (Iguana iguana). Am I Vet Res 66: 87-92.
Quesenberry and J.W. Carpenter, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: WB
Harcourt-Brown, F (2002). Urogenital diseases. In: Textbook of Rab-
Saunders, pp. 245-254.
bit Medicine, edited by F. Harcourt-Brown. Oxford: Butterworth-
Pare, J.A.and J. Paul-Murphy(2004). Disorders of the reproductive and
Heinemann, pp. 335-351.
urinary systems. In: Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents—Clinical Medicine
Harkness, J.E., K.A. Murray, et al. (2002). Biology and diseases of
and Surgery, edited by K.E. Quesenberry and J.W. Carpenter, 2nd
guinea pigs. In: Laboratory Amirmal Medicine, edited by J.G. Fox, L.C.
edition. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, pp. 183-193.
Anderson, EM. Loew, and FW. Quimby, 2nd edition. San Diego:
Pollack, C.G. (2004). Urogenital diseases. In: Ferrets, Rabbits, and
Academic Press, pp. 203-246.
Rodents—Clinical Medicine and Surgery, edited by K.E. Quesenberry
Hernandez-Divers, S.J. and C.J. Innis (2006). Renal disease in reptiles:
 and J.W. Carpenter, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, pp.
diagnosis and clinical treatment. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery,
41-49.
edited by D.R. Mader, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, pp. 878-
Pollack, C., J.W. Carpenter, et al. (2005). Birds. In: Exotic Amirmal
892.
Forrmulary, edited by I.W. Carpenter, 3rd edition. St. Louis, MO:
Holz, P. (2006). Renal anatomy and physiology. In: Reptile Medicine
Elsevier, pp. 135-346.
and Surgery, edited by D.R. Mader, 2nd edition. St. Louis, MO:
Quesenberry, K.E. and K.L. Rosenthal (2004). Endocrine diseases. In:
Elsevier, pp. 135-144.
Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents—Clinical Medicine and Surgery, edited
Jacoby, R.O., et al. (2002). Biology and Diseases of Mice. In: Laboratory
by K.E. Quesenberry and J.W. Carpenter, 2nd edition. St. Louis,
Animal Medicine, edited by IG. Fox, L.C. Anderson, EM. Loew, and
MO: WB Saunders, pp. 79-90.
F.W. Quimby, 2nd edition. San Diego: Academic Press, pp. 35-
Rattner, B.A., M.A. Whitehead, et al. (2008). Apparent tolerance
120.
of turkey vultures (Cathartes aura) to the non-steroidal anti-
Jenkins, J.R. (2008). Rabbit diagnostic testing. I Exot Pet Med 17(1):
inflammatory drug diclofenac. Environ Toxicol Chem, 2008, May
4-15.
13:1 (Epub ahead of print).
876   Urinary disorders of avian and exotic companion animals
Reavill, D.R. (2004). Tumors of pet birds. Vet Clin N Am—Exotic Anim
Volgenaeu, T, C.B. Greenacre, et al. (1998). Challenging cases in
Pract 7(3): 537-560.
internal medicine: what's your diagnosis? Vet Med 9(93): 797-
Ritchie, B.W. (1995). Papoviviridae. In: Avian Viruses—Function and
804.
Control, edited by B.W. Ritchie. Lake Worth: Winger's, pp. 127-
Zorcher, T., J. Hochberger, et al. ( 1999). In vitro study concerning the
170.
efficiency of the frequency-doubled double-pulse Neodymium:YAG
 Sykes, I.M. and C.B. Greenacre. (2006). Techniques for drug delivery
laser (FREDDY) for lithotripsy of calculi in the urinary tract. Lasers 
in reptiles and amphibians. I Exot Pet Med 15(3): 210-217.
Surg Med 25( 1): 38-42.
Section 11
Counseling clients
85
Counseling clients
Elizabeth Strand
This chapter is designed to provide helpful and prac-
 empowered in the veterinary-client-patient relationship
tical information for counseling clients who are car-
(https://www.healthcarecomm.org/bahcp/).
ing for animals with acute and chronic urinary and
kidney diseases. It will review basic and more com-
Reflective listening
plex client communication skills and issues. Basic skills
The ability to accurately repeat back what clients are say-
include open-ended and close-ended questions, reflec-
tive listening, empathy, nonjudgmental attitude, and
ing and feeling (reflective listening) helps clients trust
 that the veterinarian is seeing and considering their per-
nonanxious presence. More complex skills that build on
the basic skills include seeking informed consent and
spective in medical care recommendations for their pet.
 This important communication skill also helps clients
treatment decision-making, gaining medical compliance,
discussing and negotiating money, and discussing and
to clarify what they are meaning to say by allowing
implementing the euthanasia process. The content for
them to know what the veterinarian has heard from
their statements. Additionally, if a client is experienc-
this chapter is largely based on Bayer Animal Health
ing high emotion, reflective listening can significantly
Communication  Project Veterinary  Communication
 Modules (https:// www.healthcarecomm.org/bahcp/).
 decrease the emotion because clients know the veteri-
narian is aware and respects their emotional experience,
alleviating the client of the effort to “convince” the vet-
Open- and close-ended questions
erinarian how they are feeling. This form of reflective
listening begins to focus on the skil of exhibiting empa-
Open-ended questions are questions that cannot be
thy (https:// www.healthcarecomm.org/bahcp/).
-as io Aiois e anbau inq ou, io ,sah, ym paiamsue 
eral consecutive details and opinions from clients. For
Empathy
instance, "Why do you think Frances was vomiting?" is
an open-ended question that allows the client to tell a
Expressing empathy gives the message to clients that
story. A close-ended question requires a yes, a no, a spe-
 the veterinarian has care, concern, understanding, and
cific quantity, or a choice. “"How many times did Francis
respect for them as human beings. Empathy is exhib-
vomit last night?" is an example of a close-ended ques-
ited by using feeling words to restate clients’ stories and
tion.
concerns. For instance, "I can see you are very sad hear-
Many veterinarians interrupt clients after only a few
e u a  au ui si  i s
seconds of listening to the patient history. This behav-
be expressed by exhibiting empathic nonverbal behavior
ior cannot only disrupt the rapport with clients but
such as nodding the head, making eye contact, sitting at
also cause the veterinarian to miss important details of
the same level as clients, and matching the volume and
the history that are salient to the case. Clients who ask
pace of their speech.
questions of the veterinarian after being allowed to fully
share what they see as important to the visit feel more
Nonjudgmental attitude
Nephrology and Urology of Small Animals. Edited by Ioe Bartges and
Along with empathy is the ability to help clients feel that
David J. Polzin. @ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
the veterinarian accepts them. Clients who are afraid that
879
880
 Counseling clients
the veterinarian is judging their feelings, thoughts about
clients and veterinarians where information is exchanged
or behaviors with their pets are less likely to tell the truth
and shared understanding is achieved. Some clients like
or feel trust with their veterinarian. If a veterinarian is
for veterinarians to make decisions for the care of the ani-
feeling judgmental toward a client (which is normal and
mal, that is "Whatever you think, Doc." However, clients 
expected at times during a veterinary career), it can be
 are increasingly informed about the medical options for
useful for the veterinarian pose to him or herself the
their animals and want to feel they are the experts for
following question, "What must be true in the way this
their own animal's care.
client views the world that would cause him or her to
Describing and writing, in simple concrete terms, the
behave in this way?" Reflecting on this question can help
scope of all treatment options from the least expensive
the veterinarian re-establish positive feelings and more
   n  n   s  
understanding for a challenging client. Expressing non-
invasive is an initial step in obtaining informed con-
judgmental statements such as, "1 can understand why
sent. Next is inquiring what the client feels and thinks
you feel that way,” or "It is OK to have trouble deciding
regarding these options and if the client has any ques-
what to do. Making these decisions can be very hard,” is
tions. Through a dialogue in which the veterinarian uses
reflective listening, empathic and nonjudgmental state·
(https:// www.healthcarecomm.org/bahcp/).
ments, and a nonanxious presence, the client may come
-   s on n nn so n 1 
fort zone of care. The veterinarian may then suggest that
Nonanxious presence
the client talk it over with loved ones who will influence
the decision. If the client is socially isolated, offering a
Nonanxious presence (NAP) is a veterinarian's abil-
ity to remain internally calm, flexible, and appropri-
mental health counselor for the client to connect with
 ately responsive during moment-to-moment interper-
to discuss treatment options can be helpful. If there is
sonal interactions. This is especially important during
disparity between family members about what level of
care is desired, it is best to talk with both parties at the
tense moments in veterinarian-client relations. NAP
same time or at the very least get agreement about who
also refers to the ability to disagree agreeably. These
two aspects of NAP are extremely helpful in obtain-
has ultimate decision-making responsibility and converse
directly with that individual.
ing informed consent and in counseling clients around
Set a time for the client to inform the veterinarian
difficult treatment decisions, financial choices, and the
which treatment option is preferred. If the same client
euthanasia decision process. Clients very often become
questions are repeated many times, it may be an indicator
emotional facing urinary and kidney diseases in their ani-
that there is something missing or misunderstood in the
mals, and it is important for the veterinarian to be both
veterinary-client relationship. For instance, clients may
 o e  e a  q 
be afraid to tell the veterinarian the truth about what they
by not becoming as or more emotional than the client.
would like to do because of a fear of being judged by the
Additionally, if a client desires something for his or her
veterinarian. In this case use an open-ended question like
animal that is against the veterinarian's judgment, it is
"What is the hardest thing about this decision for you?
important that the veterinarian be able to disagree with
(https:// www.healthcarecomm.org/bahcp/).
the client in a way that respects and supports the rapport 
between them—disagreeing in agreeable and respect-
ful ways. Developing NAP is a lifelong practice that is
Gaining medical adherence
directed toward developing precise control over one's
Adherence is the degree to which a client's behavior cor-
emotional, cognitive, and physiological responses in the
veterinary-client relationship. The strategies that pro-
responds with agreed on recommendations from the
veterinarian. Gaining adherence to the veterinary rec-
mote NAP are emotional self-awareness, reflective and
 ommendations for medical care involves (a) having a
logical thinking habits, and the ability to engage the phys-
veterinary-client relationship that encompasses feelings
iological relaxation response as needed (Strand 2006).
 of trust, care, credibility, and concern; (b) having recom-
mendations that are understandable by the client; and (c)
Informed consent and treatment
follow through from the veterinary team.
decision-making
 Developing a good client-veterinarian relationship
with trust and credibility occurs through reflective lis-
Informed consent is more than a fine print form clients
tening, exhibiting empathy, tailoring treatment to unique
sign when they come to seek care for their animals. True
needs of the client, and acknowledging when there may
informed consent demands an ongoing dialogue between 
be a problem in the client-veterinarian relationship. If
Counseling clients  881
a problem arises, the veterinarian needs to ask an open-
 In acute situations, being clear with clients about prog-
ended question such as, "You seem concerned. Is there
nosis and helping them connect with other people in
 anything that doesn't make sense or feels wrong about
their lives to support them in making the decision, or a
this to you?
 counselor if supportive individuals do not exist, is very
After recommendations, the veterinarian needs to
important. In chronic cases where the animal may have a
assess client understanding and confidence. For instance,
slow decline, it is helpful for the client to write down qual-
"What do you understand the course of treatment will
ity oflife parameters for the animal and the client. Record
look like at home?" To assess clients feelings of confi-
these in the medical record as well so when these param-
 dence, treatment scaling questions are useful. "On a scale
eters are broken, the veterinarian can remind clients of
of 1-10 with 10 being the most confident and 1 being the
 their decisions when emotions were not so high. Lastly,
least, how confident are you that you can give this medica-
if a client is not responding to suggestions that it may
tion as prescribed?" or ". . .that this treatment will work."
be time to euthanize the animal, assess what the client's
This helps the veterinarian know what worries or prob-
opinions and past experiences are regarding euthanasia.
lems there may be in obtaining the best adherence to the
There may be a fear that is driving their resistance or
treatment protocol so these problems can be addressed
 there may be religious reasons.
(https:// www.healthcarecomm.org/bahcp/).
If the client and veterinarian agree that the animal must
be euthanized, it is very important that this be handled in
Considering and discussing money
ways that promote clients' emotional healing. Facilitating
this means assessing clients’ desires about the euthanasia
 Generally, neither clients nor veterinarians like or find
process and doing the best to meet them. There is a wide
it comfortable to discuss money. This dislike can cause
degree of needs, feelings, and thoughts that are consid-
many problems in the veterinary-client relationship.
ered “normal" for clients preparing for the euthanasia
process. Some clients really just want to say goodbye and
the bill if finances have not been discussed and agreed
have the veterinarian euthanize, some clients want to be
upon. On the other hand, veterinarians may give away
present during the process, and some clients want to
treatment and feel taken advantage of, which is unwise
 spend time with the body. It is normal for some clients
and will eventually contribute to veterinarian burn out.
to want the veterinarian to dispose of the body, others
The reason it is diffcult to discuss money in the
want the body cremated, others want to bury the ani-
veterinary-client relationship is because both clients
mal's body themselves, and some clients even want the
and veterinarians make assumptions about each other's
body to be preserved in some way. Some clients want to
behavior regarding decision-making involving money.
have some form of a religious ceremony before, during, or
The assumptions can lead to misunderstanding, which
 after the euthanasia (https:// www.healthcarecomm.org/
can eventually lead to conflict in the relationship. Costs
bahcp/).
of treatment must be discussed at each decision point in
For more information and training in client communi-
the veterinary-client interaction. Each treatment option
cation and counseling skills, contact Bayer Animal Health
may have both short-term and long-term costs associ-
 Communication Project. Another source for client coun-
ated with it, which should be estimated for clients so
seling consultation is Veterinary Social Work, University
they can make informed decisions. These costs must
of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine (865-755-
be described to the client and become an integral
 8839, http:// www.utk. vet.edu).
part of the informed consent and treatment decision-
making process. The nonjudgmental attitude and NAP
 skills are particularly important in discussing money
References
(https:/ / www.healthcarecomm.org/bahcp/).
Institute for Healthcare Communication (2008). Bayer Animal
Health Communication Project, New Haven, CT. Available at:
The euthanasia decision and process
h ttps://www.healthcarecomm.org/bahcp/.
Strand, E.B. (2006). Nonanxious presence: a key attribute of the suc-
For some clients deciding to euthanize their animal is
cessful veterinarian. I Vet Med Educ 33(1): 65-70.
impossible. For others, it is simple although very painful.
Appendix: Physiology of the lower
urogenital tract
Thomas F. Fletcher and Christina E. Clarkson
The urinary bladder and pelvic urethra have a common
such extensive brain involvement, the phrase “micturi-
embryonic origin and operate as a functional unit to store
tion reflex” is misleading and inappropriate.
and void urine. The unit consists of three components
arranged in series: detrusor smooth muscle, smooth mus-
Bladder compliance and wall tension
cle sphincter (internal urethral sphincter), and striated
The normal urinary bladder exhibits high compliance. It
muscle sphincter (urethralis muscle; external urethral
sphincter).
is able to undergo large volume increases with only minor
elevations in intravesical pressure over a wide range of
The detrusor muscle, smooth muscle of the apex and
body of the urinary bladder, acts to expel urine when con-
filling. Bladder compliance is a consequence of wall ten-
tracted by parasympathetic innervation via pelvic nerves
sion interacting with viscoelastic properties of the blad-
der wall. Tension, initially taken up by elastic elements, is
(Figure A.1).The smooth muscle sphincter, located in the
bladder neck and proximal urethra, provides involuntary
transferred to viscous elements that elongate and thereby
 tonic resistance when contracted by sympathetic inner-
moderate the tension. The wall is reshaped as tension
vation via hypogastric nerves. (Sympathetic innervation
stretches lumen epithelium and wal connective tissue;
also inhibits detrusor activity.) The striated urethralis
 the latter rearranges muscle fascicles and elongates indi-
muscle, located distally in the pelvic urethra and inner-
vidual myocytes. At some point, viscoelastic accommo-
dation and thus bladder compliance approaches a limit.
bladder pressure and is employed for voluntary conti-
Thereafter, wall tension and intravesical pressure rapidly
rise with additional flling (Figure A.2).
nence (Fletcher et al. 2008).
 Each of the three components has a distinct peripheral
According to physics (Law of Laplace), lumen pressure
innervation and all are controlled by the central nervous
(P) is related to wall tension (T) and container radius
system, so they work synergistically to store and void
(R) such that P = f * T / R, where f = 2 for a sphere
urine. The forebrain is responsible for deciding when uri-
(balloon/basketball) but is unknown for the bladder (and
nation is appropriate. The pons has micturition and con-
ignored in this discussion). Stored urine volume exerts
tinence centers. Sphincter resistance is effected by spinal
a pressure (force/area) on the bladder wall that tends to
reflexes.
expand the wall. The expansive internal pressure (P) is
Normal micturition is a voluntary act. It entails coor-
 opposed by wall tension ( T) at each bladder volume (R)
dinated actions of detrusor and sphincter musculature
(Zinner et al. 1977).
to produce virtually complete emptying of the urinary
During voiding, the detrusor must generate sufficient
 bladder at appropriate times. ( Voluntary urination can
lumen pressure (P) to overcome sphincter resistance.
also be emotionally motivated, e.g., marking territory,
Because of the P = T / R relationship, a bladder con-
dispensing pheromones. In such cases, complete blad-
taining a larger volume (R) will require a higher wall
 der emptying is not a goal and would be a disadvan-
tension ( T) to generate the necessary intravesical pres-
tage.)
sure ( P). In other words, wall tension is at a mechanical
 In neonatal kittens (<4 weeks), a micturition reflex
disadvantage in regard to generating lumen pressure as
the bladder expands. This is so because detrusor fascicles
can be triggered by licking the perineum. Later in life,
urination becomes subject to brain coordination and
shift from an encircling orientation toward a tangential
 one as the bladder enlarges.
voluntary control (Blok and Holstege 2001). In view of
883
884 Appendix: Physiology of the lower urogenital tract
Bladder filling
Canine lower urinary tract
Ureter
Urine enters the renal pelvis continuously but exits
the ureter periodically, as peristaltic waves propel urine
boluses into the bladder. Urine drains into the renal
 Female
pelvis from papillary ducts that open onto the renal
Smooth
Urethralis
medullary surface. Accumulated urine stretches smooth
Detrusor muscle
muscle
muscle
sphincter
muscle pacemaker cells in the wall of the renal pelvis,
triggering them to fire action potentials that result in
Ureter :
Ductus
deferens
increased intracellular [Ca2+ ].
Urethralis muscle
Via gap junctions, increased intracellular [Ca2+]
spreads among smooth muscle cells of the renal pelvis
Male
and ureter. This leads to a peristaltic wave of smooth
Detrusor muscle
muscle contraction that forces a bolus of urine along the
Smooth muscle sphincter
ureter and into the bladder. Bladder filling requires suf-
ficient peristaltic force to open the terminal intramural
Figure A.1 Drawing of the three functional components of the
canine lower urinary tract. The detrusor, which expels urine, the
smooth muscle sphincter, and striated muscle sphincter (urethralis
wall tension to preclude urine reflux into the ureter.
muscle) are arranged in series.
Urinary continence
Urinary continence, the ability to store urine without
Urine flow normally improves as a greatly distended
leakage, requires that outlet resistance exceed intraves-
detrusor recovers mechanical advantage during voiding.
ical pressure. Initially, when bladder volume and pres-
Decreased urine flow that persists is a sign of excess ure-
sure are low, passive viscoelastic resistance offered by
thral resistance. The detrusor responds to elevated outlet
 the urethral wall provides adequate resistance to main-
resistance by contracting more slowly (Nitti and Kim
tain closure (Figure A.3). Passive resistance is enhanced
2001).
by mucosal enfolding and by elastic fibers and stratum
The T = P * R relationship applies more or less to
 spongiosum within the submucosa.
the urethra (and ureter) as well as the bladder. To ensure
 In quadrupeds, passive resistance is augmented when
continence, a timely sphincter reflex must generate suf-
urine weight pulls the bladder cranially into the abdomen
ficient wall tension (T) to combat the effects of both P
away from the urethra, which is simultaneously elon-
and R when a bolus of urine enters the urethra.
gated. (Squatting to urinate shifts urine weight caudally
against the urethral opening.) In bipeds (humans), urine
weight is continuously impacting the urethra and conti-
nence demands more active resistance and more contin-
20
uous support than is the case for quadrupeds (Schmidt
Cystometrogram
2001).
As bladder volume approaches half-full, continued
cm
continence requires spinal sympathetic reflexes that con-
10
tract the smooth muscle sphincter and inhibit sponta-
neous contractions ofthe detrusor ( Vaughan and Satchell
1992). These reflexes involve bladder afferent axons that
run through the pelvic nerve to sacral spinal segments
and efferent axons that come from lumbar spinal seg-
25
50
75
100
Volume (mL)
ments and travel though hypogastric nerves to reach the
bladder and urethra.
Figure A.2 Drawing of a normal cystometrogram (intravesical
To halt urine leakage when the tonic smooth muscle
pressure vs bladder volume plot during urine storage). Follow-
sphincter is breached during abrupt increases in intrav-
ing an initial pressure rise, the plateau of relatively low pres-
sure despite the considerable increase in bladder volume reflects
esical pressure, the striated urethral sphincter (urethralis
bladder compliance. As wallaccommodation approaches its limit,
muscle) contracts in a spinal reflex triggered by urine flow
wall tension greatly increases and consequently lumen pressure 
into the urethra. Afferent axons run through the puden-
abruptly rises.
dal nerve to enter the sacral spinal cord; efferent axons
Appendix: Physiology of the lower urogenital tract  885
Continence schema
Low
Passive viscoelastic urethral resistance
volume
viscoelastic properties of:
and
—epithelium
—wall connective tissue
pressure
elastic fibers
-muscle fascicle arrangement
stratum spongiosum
myocytelength
Volume
Sympathetic spinal reflexes:
+ Tonic contraction of smooth muscle sphincter
 near
 * Sympathetic inhibition of detrusor
half-full
(triggered by mechanoreceptors in bladder wall)
 Somatic spinal reflex: urethralis muscle contraction
Sudden
Quick contraction of striated urethral sphincter
increased
(triggered by urine flow into the urethra)
pressure
Also, levator ani muscle contracts along with abdominal wall mm.
Voluntry contraction of urethralis muscle
Voluntary
Conscious decision by the forebrain
continence
(in response to a sense of bladder fullness,
 or to abruptly stop urine flow when desired)
Figure A.3 Continence schema. Continence involves different mechanisms depending on pressure conditions within the urinary bladder.
also run through the pudendal nerve. The urethralis mus-
interneurons generate continence-related spinal reflexes;
cle, which has relatively fast twitch muscle fibers (Bowen
they also produce feeble contractions of the detrusor. The
et al. 1976), is also used for voluntary continence, includ-
 projection neurons relay wall tension status to the brain.
ing retrograde closure during abrupt cessation of urine
In the forebrain, a sense of bladder awareness/
flow. Finally, the urethralis muscle contracts during male
fullness/urgency is detected along with cognitive inter-
ejaculation.
pretation of surroundings and consideration of emo-
Continence is also facilitated by striated muscles com-
tional status as it relates to urination. All of these percep-
prising the pelvic diaphragm. The levator ani muscle
tions are factored into a decision either to inhibit or to
S   d   i 
initiate micturition. The latter involves onset of behavior
cles of the abdominal wall contract and cause increased
that facilitates micturition (movement, posture, abdom-
 intra-abdominal pressure during running, jumping, etc.
inal press) and instructions to the midbrain and pons
Pelvic diaphragm muscles are innervated by axons from
(Figure A.4).
the sacral part of the lumbosacral plexus. (In bipedal
The pons switches from continence to micturition by
 humans, in contrast to quadrupeds, the pelvic diaphragm
deactivating a pontine continence center and activat-
is horizontally oriented, and it continuously supports
 ing a pontine micturition center (Holstege et al. 1986).
the bladder and urethra, contributing tonically to conti-
 Descending tracts from the pontine micturition cen-
nence.)
ter inhibit neurons to smooth and striated sphincters
and excite parasympathetic preganglionic neurons to the
detrusor.
Micturition
Following voluntary relaxation of the striated sphinc-
As volume expands, there is an increase in afferent nerve
 ter, detrusor contraction boosts wall tension and intrav-
s s  a  
esical pressure within the closed bladder. The detrusor
to bladder wall tension. When spontaneous detrusor
pulls open the bladder neck and intravesical pressure
contractions occur, afferent activity is further increased.
forces urine into the relaxed bladder neck and urethra.
The afferent axons travel through the pelvic plexus and
 Eventually, wall tension and mechanoreceptor activity
pelvic nerve to enter the sacral spinal cord. There they
 decline along with bladder volume, but brain facilita-
 synapse on interneurons and on projection neurons. The
tion sustains detrusor contraction until the bladder is
886  Appendix: Physiology of the lower urogenital tract
Micturition schema
Association cerebral cortex
(cognitive interpretation of situations)
Bladder afferents
Limbic system
(mechanoreceptors)
(emotional behavior)
awareness
mating
-fullness
Forebrain
defending
·urgency
[Medial frontal cortex]
-attacking
-etc.
To pee or not to pee !
That is the question.
Yes
(Midbrain)
OK to pee
Micturition
Pons
Continence
center
center
Excite detrusor &
Spinal cord
Excite striated
inhibit sphincters
sphincter
Figure A.4 Micturition schema. Micturition is a voluntary act initiated by the forebrain. Efective implementation involves pontine
descending tracts to spinal cord neurons. The net effect is detrusor excitation and sphincter inhibition.
virtually empty (except when urination is motivated by
is characterized as a multiunit, phasic type of smooth
a need to mark territory or dispense pheromones rather
muscle (Andersson and Arner 2o04). Bladder neck and
than empty the bladder).
urethral smooth muscles appear similar in nature to the
 Spinal lesions that damage descending tracts from
detrusor.
the pons impair normal micturition by diminish-
Detrusor
 myocytes have resting transmembrane
ing sustained detrusor contraction and by producing
potentials that range from 35 to 70 mV (Turner 2001).
 detrusor-sphincter dyssynergy (failure to inhibit sphinc-
 Depolarization increases the frequency of spontaneous
ter spinal reflexes during detrusor contraction). Dyssyn-
action potentials in myocytes, while hyperpolarization
ergy impedes attempts to manually empty the bladder
has the opposite effect. The rising phase of the myocyte
 in paraplegic patients and chronically results in detrusor
 action potential (AP) is due to Ca2+ influx through volt-
hypertrophy and predisposition to cystitis (Amarenco
 age gated ion channels; the AP fallis driven by K+ efflux.
et al. 2001).
The Ca2+ influx associated with an AP leads to additional
Ca2+ release from sarcoplasmic reticulum. The combined
u os se l edo pse
Smooth muscle properties
 contraction viaa complex series of events involving Ca2+-
On a phasic-tonic
(contraction rate) axis and
calmodulin formation, myosin-ll phosphorylation, and
a unitary-multiunit (innervation dependency) axis,
myosin-actin interaction.
smooth muscles across the body exhibit a continuum of
values. Smooth muscle of the ureter is regarded as unitary
Neurotransmitters and receptors
because only a few pacemaker muscle cells in the renal
pelvis are innervated and excitation spreads among indi-
Somatic efferent neurons release acetycholine (ACh) at
vidual myocytes by gap junctions. In contrast, detrusor
neuromuscular synapses in striated muscles. Autonomic
 contraction is innervation dependent; cell to cell coupling
 preganglionic neurons also release ACh at synapses with
is limited to small collections of muscle cells. Also, the
postganglionic neurons. In both cases, ACh targets nico-
contraction rate for bladder smooth muscle is relatively
tinic ion channel receptors that generate depolarization
fast among smooth muscles. Thus, the detrusor muscle
via enhanced cation permeability.
Appendix: Physiology of the lower urogenital tract  887
Neurotransmitters
Effect
Neurotransmitter
Receptor
Mechanism
Detrusor
Acetycholine
M3
Muscarinic
Gg-IPs-[Ca2+]
contraction
Detrusor
Norepinephrine
β3
Gg-cAMP
relaxation
Adrenergic
-K+ efflux
Smooth muscle
Norepinephrine
X1
sphincter
Adrenergic
Gg-IP3-[Ca²+]
contraction
Striated
sphincter
Acetycholine
Nicotinic
 Cation channels
contraction
Aiso.
Norepinephrine can block parasympathetic transmission in ganglia;
 ATP co-released with Ach can produce detrusor contraction.
Figure A.5 Table of neurotransmitters and myocyte receptors for the lower urinary tract. Acetylcholine elicits smooth and striated muscle
 Postganglionic neurons release  neurotransmitters
glia supplying the bladder. Within the detrusor, nore-
 from synaptic vesicles contained within preterminal and
pinephrine binds to Bs adrenergic receptors that are
terminal varicosities (swellings) along axonal terminal
linked to Gs proteins that elevate levels of the second
branches. The neurotransmitters diffuse variable dis-
messenger cAMP (Andersson and Arner 2004). (Depend-
tances to bind with receptors on myocytes, generat-
ing on species, β2 adrenergic receptors linked to G; pro-
ing either excitatory or inhibitory junction potentials.
teins may be chiefly responsible for detrusor relaxation.)
Excitatory potentials lead to myocyte APs and contrac-
The other mechanism for producing detrusor relaxation
tion. Inhibitory potentials produce hyperpolarization
involves norepinephrine binding to α2 receptors on post-
and myocyte relaxation. Myocyte receptors are gener-
ganglionic neurons in pelvic and vesical ganglia. The
ally associated with G proteins and second messengers
 effect is inhibition of parasympathetic synaptic trans-
(metabotropic) (Figure A.5).
mission in the ganglia (Janig and McLachlan 1987).
 Detrusor contraction is produced by ACh released
Norepinephrine released by sympathetic postgan-
from  postganglionic  parasympathetic
axons.
ACh
glionic axons in the bladder neck and proximal urethra
increases AP frequency in myocytes. Contraction is medi-
 produces contraction of the smooth muscle sphincter.
 ated mainly through M muscarinic receptors. The recep-
The norepinephrine binds to α adrenergic receptors
tors are linked to Gq proteins that generate IP: second
linked to Gq proteins that generate IP3 second messen-
messengers which drive Ca2+ release from sarcoplasmic
gers, which drive Ca2+ release from sarcoplasmic reticu-
reticulum (Andersson and Arner 2004). The elevated
lum. The elevated [Ca2+] initiates the myocyte contrac-
[Ca2+ ] initiates the myocyte contraction process.
tion.
In cats and rodents, it has been shown that some
detrusor contraction results from ATP co-released with
Role of the pelvic urethra in ejaculation
ACh from postganglionic parasympathetic axons ( Turner
2001). The ATP neurotransmitter leads to Ca2+ influx
In addition to its urinary function, the male urethra con-
through an ionotropic purinergic receptor (P2x).
veys ejaculate. Urination requires a low resistance tube
Detrusor relaxation results  from norepinephrine
able to accommodate a large volume propelled by low
released by sympathetic postganglionic axons either
 pressure. In contrast, ejaculation involves a small volume
within the bladder or within parasympathetic gan-
accelerated to considerable velocity by abrupt episodes of
888  Appendix: Physiology of the lower urogenital tract
high pressure. Thus ejaculation requires a small urethral
References
lumen with stiff walls and rapid contraction of the thick
striated musculature surrounding the urethra.
Amarenco, G., S.S. Ismael, et al. (200l). The dyssynergic sphincter. In:
The Urinary Sphincter, edited by J. Corcos and E. Schick. New York:
 Parasympathetic-induced erection includes engorge-
Marcel Dekker, Inc, pp. 223-230.
ment of the stratum spongiosum within the submucosa
Andersson, K.E. and A. Arner (2004). Urinary bladder contraction
of the postprostatic urethra as well as engorgement of the
corpus spongiosum penis that immediately surrounds
935-986.
the penile urethra and forms the bulb of the penis. These
Blok, B.F.M. and G. Holstege (200l). The neural control of micturi-
tion and urinary continence. In: The Urinary Sphincter, edited
vascular changes reduce lumen size and make the urethral
by J. Corcos and E. Schick. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc,
wall more rigid.
pp. 89-99.
Sympathetic innervation initiates ejaculation (Janig
Bowen, J.M., G.W. Timm, et al. (1976). Some contractile and electro-
and McLachlan 1987). Peristaltic waves in the ductus def-
physiological properties of the periurethral striated muscle of the
erens convey spermatozoa into the lumen of the prostatic
cat. Irvest Urol 13: 327-330.
Cullen, W.C., T.F. Fletcher, et al. (198l). Histology of the canine ure-
urethra. Prostatic secretion and contraction of smooth
thra. II. Morphometry of the male pelvic urethra. Anat Rec 199:
muscle surrounding prostate lobules adds prostatic secre-
187-195.
tion to the ejaculate. The smooth muscle sphincter situ-
Fletcher, T.F, J. Lulich, et al. (2008). Lower Urinary Tract Web Site:
ated in the bladder neck and proximal urethra contract to
http://vanat.cvm.umn.edu/lut/.
Holstege, G., D. Griffths, et al. (1986). Anatomical and physiolog-
preclude ejaculation into the urinary bladder and mini-
ical observations on supraspinal control of bladder and urethral
mize urine contamination of the ejaculate.
sphincter muscles in the cat. I Comp Neur 250: 449-461.
Somatic innervation completes ejaculation. Inner-
Janig W. and E.M. McLachlan (1987). Organization of Lumbar Spinal
vated by the pudendal nerve, both the urethralis muscle
Outflow to distal colon and pelvic organs. Physiol Rev 67(4):
and the bulbospongiosus muscle are engaged in pro-
1332-1404.
pelling ejaculate along the urethra.
Nitti, V.W. and Y.H. Kim. (200l). Multichannel urodynamic and
 Based on anatomical evidence, the prostatic urethra
videourodynamic testing. In: The Urinary Sphincter, edited by J.
Corcos and E. Schick. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc, pp. 31l-
 has a passive, elastic role during ejaculation (Cullen et al.
334.
1981). Except at its cranial extent, smooth muscle does
Schmidt, R.A. (200l). The pelvic floor: lessons from out past. In: The
not encircle the prostatic urethral submucosa, which is
Urinary Sphincter, edited by J. Corcos and E. Schick. New York:
rich in elastic fibers (Cullen et al. 1981).
Marcel Deker, Inc, pp. 43-70.
 The wall of the urethral lumen is passively stretched
Turner, W.H. (2001). Physiology of the smooth muscles of the bladder
and urethra. In: The Urinary Sphincter, edited by I. Corcos and E.
when sperm and prostatic fluid are added under pressure,
Schick. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc, pp. 43-70.
the ejaculate being temporarily trapped by contractions
Vaughan, C.W. and Satchell P.M. ( 1992). Role of sympathetic innerva-
of the smooth muscle sphincter cranially and the ure-
tion in the feline continence process under natural flling conditions.
thralis muscle caudally.
I Neurophysiol 68(5): 1842-1849.
An ejaculation event would be initiated by relaxation
Zinner, N.R., R.C. Ritter, et al (1977). The physical basis of some
 of the urethralis muscle, allowing ejaculate to enter the
urodynamic measurements. I Urol 117: 682-689.
postprostatic urethra, followed by urethralis muscle peri-
stalsis to propel the ejaculate bolus.
Acid-base homeostasis, kidneys and, 14
phases of AKI, 481-482, 482f
bacterial nephritis, 859
Acid-base metabolic disorders, 506-507,
renal recovery, 486-487
common diseases, 859-862
559-561. See also Fluid, electrolyte,
prognosis and outcome, 513-514, 513t
diagnostic tests, 858-859, 859f
and acid-base disorders
pulmonary complications, 493-494
fungal infections, 860
distal renal tubular acidosis, 560-561
Acute renal failure
gout, 860-861,860f
proximal renal tubular acidosis, 561,
hypocalcemia, 651-652
hypervitaminosis D, 861
562t
Acute tubular necrosis, 218f -219f
neoplasia, 861-862
 renal tubular acidosis, 559-560
Acute tubular nephrosis, 218f
 parasitic infections, 860
Acidosis, 668
Adenovirus, 725,727
 polyomavirus, 859-860
Acquired renal disorders
Adenovirus I, 246
renal calcinosis, 861
ultrasound,133-138
ADH (antidiuretic hormone, vasopressin),
toxins, 861
Acquired ureteral disorders
619-624
urolithiasis, 861, 861f -862f
ultrasound, 137-138, 137f
factors promoting release or activity.
chinchilla urology, 872
Acute kidney injury (AKI), 472-514
621t
ferret urology, 867, 869, 871
cardiovascular complications, 493
Agar disk,63f-64f,64-65
 adrenal gland disease leading to
clinical consequences, 492-497, 492f
AKI. See Acute kidney injury (AKI)
 prostatic disease, 869,
dehydration, 492
Aldosterone, 626-627
869f -871f, 871
hypovolermia,492
Aminoaciduria, 556
anatomy and physiology, 867, 869f
inadequate urine production, 492-493
Amyloidosis,539,542,547-552,572-573
common diseases, 869, 871
diagnosis, 487-491
diagnosis, 550-552, 551f
diagnostic tests, 869
history, 487
dogs and cats, 217f, 550
neoplasia, 871, 873f
laboratory assessment, 488-491
etiopathogenesis, 547-550, 548f-549f
renal cysts, 871, 872f
 physical examination, 487-488
overview, 547, 548t
urolithiasis, 871, 871f
electrolyte and acid base disturbances,
treatment,552
guinea pig urology 871-872, 874f
494-496
Anaplasmosis, 246-248
hamster urology, 874
 nutritional complications, 496-497
Anemia
mouse urology 873-874
uremic intoxications, 496
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 464-467
rabbit urology, 865-867
etiology 474-476,475t, 477t, 478-481,
hemodialysis, 276
 anatomy and physiology, 865-866,
480f
 Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
866f
 medical management, 497-512
and managing proteinuria
bladder eversion, 867, 867f -868f
 alterations in systemic hemodynamics 
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 461-462
common diseases, 866-867
and body fluid volume, 499-501
Anion gap, 672
diagnostic tests, 866
conventional management of
Antegrade catheterization
encephalitozoonosis, 867
established AKI, 498-499
urethra, 336
lower urinary tract disease, 866-867,
 electrolyte and acid base disorders,
Antegrade pyelography, 44, 44f
866f
504-507, 509-510
Anticoagulation
neoplasia, 867
 inadequate urine production, 501-
continuous renal replacement therapy,
urinary calculi, 867
504
288,290,290
rat urology, 872-873
 investigative therapies, 511
hemodialysis, 271-272
reptile urology, 862-865
nutritional management, 510-511
 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH, vasopressin),
anatomy and physiology, 862-863,
overview,497,508t
619-624
862f
prevention of acute renal injury.
factors promoting release or activity.
common diseases, 864-865
497-498
621t
diagnostic tests, 863-864
renal replacement therapy, 511-512,
Antilymphocyte serum, 312
glomerulonephrosis, 864
512f
Artifacts, ultrasound, 128-129
gout, 864
neurologic disorders, 494
Aspergillosis, 246
neoplasia, 865
overview, 472-474, 473t
 Avian and exotic companion animals,
prolapsed tissue, 865
pathophysiology, 481-487
857-874
urinary calculi, 864-865, 864f -865f
cellular mechanisms of ischemic AKI,
avian urology 857-862
sugar glider urology 874
482-485, 483f -484f
anatomy and physiology, 857-858,
Azathioprine for immunosuppression,
nephrotoxic AKI, 486
858f
310
889
890
Index
Azotemia and uremia, 393-398
diuresis cystometry, 205
Canine. See also Dogs
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 442
indications, 203-204, 204f
Canine adenovirus, 725, 727
classification of uremic retention solutes,
 interpretration, 205
Canine herpesvirus, 727
394-395,394
procedure, 204-205
Canine retrograde urohydropropulsion,
clinical manifestations, 395-396, 395t,
sedation/restraint, 204
358-365
396f
 indwelling urinary catheters and stents,
equipment,358-360,359f-361f
management of uremia, 397-398
335-336,335f
overview,358
extracorporeal removal or uremic
surgery, 837-840
step 1: verification and localization of
toxins, 397
cystostomy tube placement, 839-840,
urethroliths, 360
non-dialytic treatment, 398
839f
step 2: decompressive cystocentesis,
metabolic effects of uremia, 396-397
cystotony, 837-838,837f
359f,360-362
carbohydrate metabolism, 396
 partial cystectomy, 838-839,
step 3: lubrication of urethroliths,
inflammation, 396-397
838f-839f
359f-360f,362,362t
oxidative stress, 396
 Bladder flap reconstruction of ureter,
step 4: restraint and anesthesia, 362-363
uremia and drug metabolism, 397
614-615
step 6: minimize catheter-induced
overview, 393-394
Blastomycosis,246
trauma and iatrogenic UTI, 365
Blood in urine, 51
 step 5A: technique in male dogs.
Babesiosis, 246, 532-533
Blood pressure determination, 86-90
363-364,363f
 Bacterial nephritis
direct measurement, 88-89, 88f
step 5B: technique in female dogs.
birds, 859
indications, 86,88
363f-364f,364-365
 Bacterial urinary tract infection. See
 evidence of target organ damage, 86,
Canine urinary catheters, 31
Urinary tract infection, bacterial
87t
Capillaria plica, Capillaria felis-cati,
Balamuthia mandrillaris, 246
 presence of systemic disease causally
739-741
Bartonellosis, 246
associated with systemic
clinical signs, 741
Benign prostatic hyperplasia, 238f
hypertension, 86, 87t, 88
diagnosis, 741
Benign prostatic hypertrophy, 789-791
 indirect (noninvasive) measurement, 89
epidemiology. 740
clinical signs, 789
 Doppler sphygmomanometry, 89, 89f
laboratory findings, 741
diagnosis, 789-790,790f
oscillometry, 89, 90f
life cycle, 740
prevention, 791
overview, 86
pathophysiology 741
signalment,789
record keeping, 89-90
prevention, 741
treatment, 790-791
Blood pressure management with
taxonomy, 739-740,740f
 Bilirubin, 51
hemodialysis, 274
Capillariasis, 247
Biliverdinuria, 859, 859f
Bonn risk index, 78
Casts in urine, 56, 56f
Biopsy
Borreliosis, 246, 531
Catecholamines, 635
lower urinary tract, 229-233
Brown urine,425,427
Catheters
limitations of forceps biopsy, 233
Brucellosis, 246
canine,31
materials, 229, 231f
feline, 31-32
overview,229,230t
Calcitrol therapy in chronic kidney disease
hemodialysis
patient care following biopsy, 232
(CKD), 456-458
complications, 259-262,260f-261f
 performing forceps biopsy, 229-230.
Calcium disorders, 642-653
design, 256-257, 257f
232,232f
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 444-445
placement and care, 257-259, 258t
prostate,787-788,840
hypercalcemia, 642-650
peritoneal dialysis
renal, 209-214,598-601,599f-600f
causes, 642-645,643t
types and placement, 296-298,
contraindications, 211
consequences, 645-647
297f-298f,297t
indications, 209-211
diagnostic considerations, 647, 647t
urodynamic procedures, 197, 198f,
acute renal failure, 209-210
treatment, 647-648, 649t, 650
202f
protein-losing nephropathies,
hypocalcemia, 647t, 650-653
Cats. See also Feline entries
210-211
causes, 650-652, 651t
inappropriate urination
methods, 211-214,212f -214f
 consequences, 652
clinical signs and diagnosis, 819-821
overview, 209
treatment,652-653
prevalence and etiology 815-824
timing, 211
overview, 642
treatment of spraying,822-824
Birds. See Avian and exotic companion
Calcivirus, 247
treatment, 821-822,822t-823t
animals
Calculi, 140,184f-185f
treatment of spraying, 822-824
 Bisectional nephrotomy, 602
Candida spp. urinary tract infections,
Central diabetes insipidus, 559
Black urine,425,427
717-721
Chinchilla urology, 872
Bladder
 clinical presentation and diagnosis,
Chloride/sodium ratio, 672-673, 673t
eversion, in rabbits, 867, 867f -868f
718-719,719f
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), 433-468
function studies, 203-205
epidemiology, 717-718,718t
causes, 438-440
 contraindications and complications,
treatment,719-721,720t-721t
conceptual model, 438-439
205
Candidiasis, 247
pursuit of,439-440
Index 891
characteristics, 433-434
duplication, 813-814
Contrast cystourethrogram, 101-103
clinical signs, 440-442
ectopic urethra, 814
contrast media, dose, and route of
advanced, 441
epispadias and hypospadias, 813,
administration, 102
early, 440-441
813f
radiographic views and flming
gastrointestinal,441-442
prolapse, 814, 814f
sequence,102-103
diagnosis,446-448,446t-447t
stricture and hypoplasia, 815
Coronavirus, 247
differentiating acute from, 447-448
urethrogenital malformations, 813
Counseling clients, 879-881
serum creatinine, 446-447
urethroliths, 815
empathy, 879
laboratory abnormalities, 442-446,
urethrorectal, urethrovaginal, and
euthanasia,881
442t
urethroperineal fistula and
 gaining medical adherence,880-881
azotemia, 442
urethral diverticula, 814
informed consent and treatment
calcium disorders, 444-445
urinary bladder, 809-812
decision-making, 880
 hypermagnesemia, 445
agenesis and hypoplasia, 809
money, considering and discussing,
hyperphosphatemia, 442-443
colovesical fistula and uterine-bladder
881
hypoproliferative anemia, 445-446
communication, 811-812
 nonanxious presence, 880
metabolic acidosis, 443-444
duplication, 811
nonjudgmental attitude, 879-880
 management, 449-467
exstrophy,810
open-and close-ended questions, 879
anemia,464-467
herniation, 810
overview,879
angiotensin converting enzyme
pelvic bladder, 810, 810f
reflective listening、879
 inhibitors and managing
 primary urinary bladder neoplasia,
Cretinine,91, 94f, 94t
proteinuria, 461-462
812
CRRT. See Continuous renal replacement
calcitrol therapy, 456-458
urachal anomalies, 810-811, 811f
therapy (CRRT)
hypertension, 462-464
urocystolithiasis, 812, 812f
Cryptococcosis, 239f, 247
 maintaining hydration, 460-461
Congenital kidney diseases, 568-574
Crystalluria or small uroliths in urine,
metabolic acidosis, 458-459
clinical fndings, 568-569
54f-55f, 55,429
nutritional therapy 450-453
diagnosis, 569-570
CT (computed tomography) of urinary
 phosphorus retention and
overview, 568, 569t
tract. See Urinary tract, CT and MRI
hyperphosphatemia, 453-456
specific disorders, 570-574
potassium disorders, 459-460
anmyloidosis, 572-573
CT intravenous pyelogram (IVP), 147
medication review and dose
immune-mediated
CVVH (continuous veno-venous
modification, 467
gomerulonephritis, 573
hemofltration),287,288f
pathophysiology, 434-438
miscellaneous conditions, 573-574
CVVHD (continuous veno-venous
 consequences of nephron loss,
polycystic kidney disease, 572
hemodialysis), 288, 289f
434-437
primary glomerulopathies, 570-572
CVVHDF (continuous veno-venous
 renal secondary hyperparathyroidism,
renal dysplasia, 570
hemodiafiltration), 288, 289f
437-438
Congenital renal disorders
Cyclosporine for immunosuppression,
 patient follow-up and monitoring.
ultrasound,131-132,132f
310-311
467-468
 Congenital ureteral disorders
Cystatin C, 92
potassium disorders, 459-460
ultrasound, 132-133, 133f
 Cystectomy, partial
staging,448-449,448t-449t
 Congenital urinary incontinence, 815
bladder surgery, 838-839, 838f -839f
Chronic renal failure, 644
urethra, 815
Cystinuria, 556-557
hypocalcemia, 651
 Continuous renal replacement therapy
Cystitis, 139-140
Chronic renal infarcts
(CRRT), 255, 286-291
Cystocentesis, 39-41, 63t
ultrasound, 135-136,136f
anticoagulation, 288,290, 290t
contraindications, 39-40 
CKD. See Chronic kidney disease
blood access, 288
equipment, 40
Close-ended questions, in counseling
blood purification, 286-287
 postcystocentesis considerations, 41
clients, 879
complications, 290-291
precystocentesis considerations, 40
Coccidioidomycosis, 247
indications, 286
site, 40
Collecting tubule, 7
modes of operation, 287-288,
techniques, 40-41,40f
Colovesical fistula and uterine-bladder
287f-289f
Cystopexy, laparoscopic-assisted incisional,
communication, 811-812
overview, 286,291
195,196f
Computed tomography (CT) of urinary
patient care,291
Cystotomy
tract. See Urinary tract, CT and MRI
treatment adequacy, 290, 291t
bladder surgery, 837-838, 837f
of
Continuous veno-venous
laparoscopic-assisted, 195, 195f
 Congenital diseases of the lower urinary
hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF), 288,
Cytology of urinary tract and prostate,
tract, 809-815
289f
234-240,787
overview, 809
Continuous veno-venous hemodialysis
advantages, 234
urethra, 813-815
(CVVHD),288,289f
disadvantages, 234
aplasia and hypoplasia, 813
Continuous veno-venous hemofltration
fndings, 235, 238-239
congenital urinary incontinence, 815
(CVVH), 287, 288f
neoplastic lesions,235,236f-238f
892
Index
Cytology of urinary tract and prostate,
diagnosis, 825
Ethylene glycol toxicity, 134, 218-219, 270,
(cont.)
female urine marking, 825
293, 295-296, 314
non-neoplastic lesions, 235, 238-239,
 prevalence and etiology, 824-827
Euthanasia, discussing with clients, 881
238f-240f
prognosis, 827
Excitement/greeting urination, 826-827
normal tissue, 235, 236f
treatment, 826-827
Excretory urogram, 100-101, 111-112,
indications, 234
Dopamine agonists
593f
limitations of urine as a cytologic
acute urinary injury (UTI), 503
contrast media, dose, and route of
sample, 234
Doppler sphygmomanometry, 89, 89f
administration, 100-101
overview, 234
Duplication
 radiographic views and flming
 sample acquisition and slide
urethra, 813-814
sequence, 101
preparation, 234-235
urinary bladder, 811
 Exotic companion animals. See Avian and
Dysautonomia, 767-768
exotic companion animals
DAMNIT (pathologic conditions
Dysuria,428
 Extracorporeal renal replacement therapy
acronym), 111-112, 119-120
radiographic imaging, 121
(ERRT), 255
Diabetes mellitus, 534
Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy
 Diagnostic testing
Ectopic ureter, 181f, 587-589, 588f,610f
(ESWL),340-347
Dialysate, 263-266, 265t, 269-270
urinary incontinence, 758t
complications, 346-347, 346f
peritoneal dialysis, 300-301
Ectopic urethra, 814
 mechanisms of urolith fragmentation,
 Dialysis. See also Hemodialysis, Peritoneal
Ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis, 247-248
342-343
dialysis
Eicosanoids, renal, 15, 17
overview, 340-342,341f-342f,347
machine, 266
Electrohydraulic lithotripsy, 340
 treatment principles, 343-346
removal of potassium in hyperkalemia,
Electrolyte disorders. See Fluid, electrolyte,
nephroliths and ureteroliths in cats,
635
 and acid-base disorders
345-346
 Dialyzer and extracorporeal circuit,
Electromyography, 203
 nephroliths and ureteroliths in dogs.
262-263,269, 269t
Empathy in counseling clients, 879
343-345, 344f
DIC (disseminated intravascular
Encephalitozoonosis in rabbits, 867
urocystoliths in dogs, 345, 345f
coagulation), 535, 535f
Endocrine disorders, renal manifestations 
Dicotophyma renale, 137
of, 533-534, 533t
Fanconi syndrome, 561-564, 563t-564t
 Diffuse parenchymal abnormalities
diabetes mellitus, 534
Feline calicivirus (FCV),729-730
ultrasound, 133-134
hyperadrenocorticism, 533-534
Feline coronavirus, 727
Dioctophyma renale,247,734-739
hyperthyroidism, 534
Feline foamy (syncytium-forming) virus,
clinical signs, 738
hypoadrenocorticism, 534
728,730
diagnosis, 739
Endocrine functions, renal, 15-17
Feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC), 745-753
epidemiology. 735
Endoscopy, urologic, 173-187
approach to patient, 748-750
life cycle, 735-736,736f
 abnormal appearance, uroendoscopic
diagnostics,748-750,749f-750f
pathophysiology 736-738,737f
lesions,178-180
overview,745,752-753
prevention,739
advanced diagnostic procedures and
pathophysiology 745-748
taxonomy,734-735、735f
interventions, 180, 180f, 182
bladder abnormalities, 746, 746f
tests, 738-739
equipment, 173-175,174f-175f
histopathology, 745
treatment,739
indications, 173,174f,174t
obstructive FIC with urethral plugs,
Diroflariasis, 247, 534
overview, 173,183
748
Discolored urine, 425-427, 429
 patient preparation and procedure,
systemic abnormalities, 746-747,
causes, 426t-427t
175-178
milky white urine, 427
female dog and cat, 175, 176f -180f,
viruses and FIC, 747-748
normal urine, 425
177
signalment, 745
 pale yellow urine, 425
male dog and cat, 177-178,
treatment,750-752
red, brown, or black urine, 425, 427
181f-186f
dietary therapy, 751-752
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
 postoperative management and
multimodal environmental
(DIC),535,535
complications, 182-183
modifications (MEMO), 750-751
Distal ureter and ureterovesical junction
End-stage renal disease (ESRD), 306
 options for the acute episode, 750
 radiographic imaging in urinary tract
Epispadias and hypospadias, 813, 813f
pharmacologic therapy 752
disease, 115-116
Epithelial cells in urine, 53f , 55
pheromones, 752
functional morphology, 115
Epithelial tumors in lower urinary tract,
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), 248,
 practical radiographic observations
798-803
728
and spectrum of disease, 115-116,
ERRT' (extracorporeal renal replacement 
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection,
116f
therapy), 255
531-532
Diuresis cystometry, 205
Erythrocytes in urine, 52f, 53
 Feline inappropriate urination
Dogs. See also Canine entries
Erythropoietin, 15
dinical signs and diagnosis, 819-821
inappropriate urination
ESWL. See Extracorporeal shock-wave
 prevalence and etiology 815-824
clinical signs, 825
lithotripsy
treatment of spraying, 822-824
Index 893
treatment,821-822,822t-823t
metabolic acid-base disorders. See
membranous nephropathy, 538-539
treatment of spraying, 822-824
Metabolic acid-base disorders
proliferative glomerulonephritis, 539
Feline infectious peritonitis, 248, 423f,
mixed acid-base disorders. See Mixed
 prevention, 544
532,532f
acid-base disorders
prognosis, 544-545
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 248, 532,
phorphorus disorders. See Phosphorus
treatment,542-544,543t
728
disorders
Glomerular filtration, 10, 11t, 220f
 Feline lower urinary tract disease
 potassium disorders. See Potassium
renal scintigraphy, 162
(FLUTD), 745
disorders
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), 92-93
Feline urethral obstruction, 367-374
 proximal renal tubular acidosis, 561,
clearance concept, 92
correcting intraluminal urethral
562t
clearance methods, 93, 94f
obstructions, 367-370, 368f -369f,
renal tubular acidosis, 559-560
 clinical use and interpretation, 93
370t-371t
sodium disorders. See Sodium disorders
indications, 95t
 dysfunctional urinary bladder following
 Focal parenchymal abnormalities
markers, 92, 94t
relief of urethral obstruction, 373
ultrasound, 134-136
Glomerular function, 91-93
immediate considerations after restoring
 Focal renal mineralization
creatinine, 91,92t, 93f
urethral patency, 370-372
ultrasound, 136
cystatin C, 92
overview, 367,368t
 Foley catheter, 37
indirect tests, 91-92
 persistent urethral outflow resistance,
Followers, 32
urea, 91-92, 93f
373-374
Forceps biopsy, 229-230,232,232f,
Glomerular hypertension, 435-436
 post-renal uremia, managing, 374
233
Glomerulonephrosis in reptiles, 864
risks associated with indwelling
Fungal urinary tract infection, 717-722
Glomerulosclerosis, 540, 542
transurethral catheters, 372,372t
birds, 860
Glucocorticoids for immunosuppression,
using indwelling transurethral catheters,
Candida spp. urinary tract infections,
309-310
373
717-721
Glucose, 51
Feline urinary catheters, 31-32
clinical presentation and diagnosis,
Glucose degradation products (GDPs), 301
FeLV (feline leukemia virus), 248, 532, 728
718-719, 719f
Glucosuria, 555-556
Female cats
epidemiology, 717-718,718t
Gout
transurethral catheterization, 38
treatment,719-721,720t721t
birds, 860-861,860f
Female dogs
le1n Aieuun Areud lepipuesuou
reptiles, 864
transurethral catheterization, 35-38,
infections, 721-722
Guinea pig urology 871-872, 874f
36f-37f
overview, 717
Female urethra, anatomy of, 19-20,
scondary funguria, 722, 722f
Hamster urology 874
19f-20f
Funguria,722,722f
Hasson technique, 193
Female urine marking in dogs, 825
Furosemide
HDO (high-defnition oscillometry), 88
Ferret urology, 867, 869, 871
 acute urinary injury (UTI), 502-503
Hematuria
adrenal gland disease leading to prostatic
endoscopy, 174
disease, 869,869f -871f, 871
Gait of rear limbs, painful or abnormal
radiographic imaging, 120-121
anatomy and physiology, 867, 869f
lower urinary tract disease, 430
Hemodialysis, 255-282
common diseases, 869, 871
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT),
adequacy of, 272-273
diagnostic tests, 869
70-72,71f,71t
anticoagulation, 271-272
neoplasia, 871, 873f
Gamma herpesvirus (bovine herpesvirus
drug dosing, 278
renal cysts, 871, 872f
type 4), 730
epidemiology, 255-256
wrolithiasis, 871,871f
Gates method, 164-165
equipment,256-266
Fibroma, bladder, 804
GDPs (glucose degradation products), 301
catheter complications, 259-262,
Fibrosarcoma, bladder, 804
Glomerular disease, 221t, 538-545
260f-261f
FIC. See Feline idiopathic cystitis
dlinical signs, 540-541
catheter design, 256-257, 257f
Filiforms, 32
controversies, 545
 catheter placement and care, 257-259,
FIV (feline immunodeficiency virus), 248,
diagnosis, 541-542
258t
728
amyloidosis,542
dialysate, 263-266, 265t
Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders,
glomerulosclerosis, 542
dialysis machine, 266
506-507, 559-561
hereditary nephritis, 542
dialyzer, 262-263, 264t
acute kidney insufficiency (AKI),
membranoproliferative
extracorporeal circuit, 263
494-496, 504-507, 509-510
glomerulonephritis, 542
intradialysis patient monitoring, 272,
nutritional complications, 496-497
membranous nephropathy, 542
272f
uremic intoxications, 496
proliferative glomerulonephritis, 542
nonrenal uses, 278, 279t280t
calcium disorders. See Calcium disorders
etiology and prevalence, 538-540,
outcome,256,256t
 distal renal tubular acidosis, 560-561
539t540t
 patient management, 273-278
hemodialysis, 275-276
amyloidosis, 539
anemia,276
 magnesium disorders. See Magnesium
glomerulosclerosis, 540
blood pressure, 274
disorders
hereditary nephritis, 539
bone and mineral, 276
894 Index
Hemodialysis (cont.)
Hyperthyroidism, 534
surgical nephrostomy tube placement,
electrolyte and acid-base disorders,
Hypervitaminosis D, 644-645
330-332
275-276
birds, 861
overview, 329
gastrointestinal system, 278
Hypoadrenocorticism, 534, 643-644
risks associated with, 372, 372t
hemostasis, 274-275
Hypoalbuminemia, 650-651
ureter, 332-335
infection, 277-278
Hypoaldosteronism, 558
urethra, 336-338
neurologic system, 273-274
Hypocalcemia, 647t, 650-653,783
antegrade catheterization, 336
nutrition,277
causes, 650-652, 651t
urethral stents, 336-338, 337f -338f
respiratory system, 278
consequences, 652
Infection
thrombosis, 275
treatment,652-653
hemodialysis, 277-278
water balance, 277
Hypokalemia, 627-629, 630f
 Infectious diseases, renal manifestations of,
prescription,266-271
causes,627-628,627t, 631t
531-533
dialysate composition, 269-270
management, 506, 628-629, 629t
babesiosis, 532-533
dialyzer and extracorporeal circuit 
Hypomagnesemia, 639-641, 641t
borreliosis, 531
selection, 269, 269t
Hyponatremia, 620-623
feline immunodeficiency virus infection,
methods of clearance, 266-267
acute,621,621t
531-532
mode and schedule, 267-269, 268f,
chronic,622-623,622t
feline infectious peritonitis,532,532f
268t
Hypophosphatemia, 660-661
feline leukemia virus infection, 532
 single-needle dialysis, 270-271
causes, 660, 660t
hepatozoonosis, 533
ultrafiltration, 270
treatment, 660-661
leishmaniasis, 532
terminology, 255
Hypoproliferative anemia
leptospirosis, 531, 532f
units, 281-282
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 445-446
overview, 531, 532t
Hemostasis
Hypospadias,778,779f, 813,813f
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF),
hemodialysis, 274-275
531
Hepatozoonosis, 533
Iguanas, 864-865,864f-865f
 Infectious diseases, urinary tract, diagnosis
 Hereditary nephritis, 539, 542
 Immune-mediated disorders
of, 241-251
Herniation, urinary bladder, 810
glomerulonephritis, 573
adenovirus I, 246
Herpesvirus, 727
renal manifestations, 535
anaplasmosis, 246
High-definition oscillometry (HDO), 88
 polyarteritis nodosa, 535
aspergillosis, 246
Historical information and physical
 systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
babesiosis, 246
examination, 25-27
535
Balamuthia mandrillaris, 246
additional diagnostic testing, 27
 Immunosuppression in renal
bartonellosis, 246
history and signalment, 25-26
transplantation,309-313,309t
blastomycosis, 246
overview, 25
antilymphocyte serum, 312
borreliosis, 246
physical examination, 26-27
azathioprine, 310
brucellosis, 246
kidney and ureters, 26
cyclosporine, 310-311
calcivirus, 247
urethra,26-27
glucocorticoids, 309-310
candidiasis,247
urinary bladder, 26
irradiation, 313
capillariasis, 247
Horizontal-beam views, 98, 100
monoclonal antibodies, 312-313
coccidioidomycosis, 247
Hyperadrenocorticism, 533-534
mycofenolate mofetil, 312
coronavirus, 247
Hyperaldosteronism, 558
tacrolimus, 311-312
cryptococcosis, 247
Hypercalcemia, 642-650
 Inappropriate urination, 428, 815-827
Dioctophyma renale,247
causes, 642-645,643t
overview,815
diroflariasis, 247
consequences, 645-647
prevalence and etiology in cats, 815-824
ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis, 247-248
diagnostic considerations, 647, 647t
clinical signs and diagnosis, 819-821
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP
treatment, 647-648,649t, 650
treatment,821-822,822t-823t
coronavirus), 248
Hypercarnitinuria, 557
treatment of spraying, 822-824
FeLV/FIV, 248
Hyperkalemia, 629-635, 783
 prevalence and etiology in dogs, 824-827
hepatozoonosis, 248
causes, 629-633
clinical signs, 825
infectious canine hepatitis (adenovirus
management, 504-506, 633-635, 634t
diagnosis, 825
I1), 248
Hypermagnesemia, 638-639
female urine marking, 825
leishmaniasis, 248
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 445
prognosis, 827
leptospirosis, 248-249
Hypernatremia, 623-624, 623t
treatment, 826-827
Lyme nephropathy, 249-250
Hyperphosphatemia, 658-660
 Incontinence. See Urinary incontinence
overview,241-242,244t-245t
causes, 659, 659t
 Indwelling urinary catheters and stents,
protothecosis, 250
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 442-443
329-338
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF),
treatment, 659-660
bladder, 335-336, 335f
250
Hypertension
kidney, 329-332
suspicion for infection as trigger for
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 462-464
 percutaneous nephrostomy tube
glomerulonephritis,243,246
Hypertensive crisis, 682, 682t
placement, 330, 330f-334f
suspicion for UTI, 242-243, 244t-245t
Index 895
toxoplasmosis, 250-251
renal contribution to acid-base
alteration in urine consistency, 429
trypanosomiasis, 251
homeostasis, 14
crystalluria or small uroliths in urine,
Ureaplasma/Mycoplasma spp., 251
renal eicosanoids, 15, 17
429
 Informed consent and treatment 
renal endocrine functions, 15-17
discolored urine, 429
decision-making, 880
renal homeostatic functions, 16f, 16t,
malodorous urine, 429
 International Renal Interest Society (IRIS),
17
 alteration in volume or frequency of
91
renal innervation, 17
urination, 428-429
Intersegmental nephrotomy, 602-603
 renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
decreased size of urine stream, 428
Intracorporeal laser lithotripsy, 349-356
system, 15
dsysuria, 428
efficacy, 355-356
tubular reabsorption, 11, 11t-13t,
inappropriate urination (periuria),
overview, 349
13-14
428
 post-lithotripsy care, 351,353
water reabsorption, 14-15
incontinence,428-429
procedure, 349-351,350f-351f,
radiographic imaging, 111-115
pollakiuria, 428
352t-355t
functional morphology, 111-112
polyuria/polydipsia, 428
safety, 353, 356t
practical radiographic observations,
stranguria,428
Intravenous pyelogram (IVP), 111, 147
112-113,113f
urinary obstruction (anuresis), 428
Intravenous urogram (IVU), 111
spectrumof disease,113-115, 114f
associated fndings, 429-430
Inulin, 94t
Kidney disease, chronic. See Chronic
abdominal fluid,429-430
Iohexol, 94t, 162
kidney disease (CKD)
 blood dripping from prepuce or vulva,
 IRIS (International Renal Interest Society),
 Kidney diseases, congenital. See Congenital 
430
91
kidney diseases
excessive licking of prepuce or vulva,
Kidney injury, acute. See Acute kidney
430
injury
fever, 430
Ketones, 51
painful defecation, 430
Kidney
Laparoscopy, urologic, 192-196
painful or abnormal gait of rear limbs.
anatomy of, 3-8
 cystopexy, laparoscopic-assisted
430
gross anatomy, 3-5、4f
incisional, 195, 196f
painful rectal examination, 430
kidney topography and surface
 cystotomy, laparoscopic-assisted, 195,
prostatomegaly, 430
features,3
195f
pus dripping from prepuce or vulva,
 renal cortex and medlla, 3
equipment,192-193,193f
430
renal pelvis and proximal ureter,
miscellaneous procedures, 196
overview, 428, 429t
3-4
overview, 192
Lower urinary tract disorders
renal vessels, 4-5,4f
 patient positioning, 192
congenital diseases. See Congenital
 microscopic renal anatomy, 5-8
 percutaneous renal biopsy
diseases of the lower urinary tract
collecting duct system, 7-8
laparoscopic-assisted, 193-194
feline idiopathic cystitis. See Feline
 juxtaglomerular apparatus, 8, 8f
peritoneal dialysis catheter placement,
idiopathic cystitis
 nephron. See Nephron, anatomy of
194-195
inappropriate urination. See
renal interstitium, lymphatics, and
procedures, 193,194f
Inappropriate urination
nerves, 8
Laser ablation of ectopic ureter, 383-384
infection. See Urinary tract infection,
CT and MRI of, 152-156
Laser lithotripsy, 340
 bacterial; Urinary tract infection,
degenerative disease, 156, 157f
Leiomyoma, bladder, 804
fungal; Viruses and urinary tract
general considerations, 152-154, 155f
 Leiomyosarcoma, bladder, 804
disease
inflammatory disorders, 156, 156f
Leishmaniasis, 248, 532
lower urinary tract trauma. See Lower
neoplasia, 153f, 156
Leptospirosis,248-249,424f,531,
urinary tract trauma
renal cysts, 154
532f
micturition disorders. See Micturition
vascular disorders, 154-156, 155f
Leukocytes in urine, 52,52f, 53,55
disorders
 indwelling urinary catheters and stents,
Lipid in urine, 56, 57f
 nematodes. See Nematodes of the upper
329-332
Lithotripsy, 180, 182,187f, 340
and lower urinary tract
 percutaneous nephrostomy tube
Loop diuretics
neoplasia. See Neoplasia, lower urinary
placement, 330, 330f -334f
acute urinary injury (UTI), 502-503
tract
surgical nephrostomy tube placement,
Lower urinary tract, biopsy of, 229-
obstruction. See Urinary obstruction
330-332
233
prostatic disease. See Prostatic disease
physical examination, 26
limitations of forceps biopsy, 233
rabbits, 866-867, 866f
physiology of, 10-17
materials, 229, 231f
surgery. See Surgery of the lower urinary
erythropoietin,15
overview, 229, 230t
tract
 glomerular filtration, 10, 11t
 patient care following biopsy 232
urethral diseases. See Urethra, diseases of
homeostatic role, 10
performing forceps biopsy, 229-230,
urolithiasis. See Urolithiasis
 mechanisms controlling renal blood
232,232f
viruses and urinary tract disease,
flow and glomerular filtration, 11
 Lower urinary tract disease, clinical signs
728-730
renal blood flow, 10
of, 428-430
fline calicivirus (FCV), 729-730
896
Index
Lower urinary tract disorders (cont.)
Metabolic acid-base disorders, 662-666
Mycofenolate mofetil, for
feline foamy (syncytium-forming)
Metabolic acidosis, 670-671
immunosuppression, 312
virus, 730
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 443-444,
Myxosarcoma, 238f
 gamma herpesvirus (bovine
458-459
herpesvirus type 4), 730
Metabolic alkalosis, 671
N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase (NAG), 70-72
Lower urinary tract trauma, 828-832
 Methylmalonic aciduria associated with
 Nematodes. See Nematodes of the upper
wreteral injury, 830
vitamin B12 deficiency, 559
and lower urinary tract
urethral tears, 831-832
MHC (major histocompatibility complex),
 Nematodes of the upper and lower urinary
urinary bladder rupture, 831
306-308,307
tract, 734-741
Lower urogenital tract, anatomy of,
 Microalbuminuria and proteinuria,
Capillaria plica, Capillaria felis-cati,
18-22
410-413
739-741
female urethra, 19-20, 19f -20f
overview, 410
 clinical signs, 741
innervation, 21-22, 22f
pathogenesis of renal injury, 411-412,
diagnosis, 741
male canine pelvic urethra, 20f, 21
412t
epidemiology, 740
male feline pelvic urethra, 20, 20f
as predictive markers, 412
laboratory fndings, 741
overview,18
proteinuria
life cycle, 740
urinary bladder, 18-19, 19f
origin, 410
pathophysiology. 741
Lyme nephropathy,249-250
 prognostic significance, 411, 411t
prevention,741
Lymphoma, lower urinary tract,
treatment, 412-413
taxonomy, 739-740,740f
804-805
Micturition disorders, 755-774
Dioctophyma renale, 734-739
overview,774
clinical signs, 738
Magnesium disorders, 638-641
urinary incontinence, 755-766
diagnosis, 739
hypermagnesemia, 638-639
diagnostic approach,759-761,760t
epidemiology, 735
hypomagnesemia, 639-641, 641t
 endoscopic and surgical management,
life cycle, 735-736,736f
measurement, 638, 639t
765-766
pathophysiology, 736-738, 737f
overview, 638
neurophysiology of micturition,
prevention, 739
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of
755-756, 756f-757f
taxonomy,734-735、735f
urinary tract. See Urinary tract, CT'
pharmacologic management, 761,
tests, 738-739
and MRI of
762t,763-765
treatment,739
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC),
urethral sphincter mechanism 
overview,734
306-308,307
incompetence, 756-759, 758t
Neoplasia
Male cats
urinary retention, 766-769, 766f,
birds, 861-862
transurethral catheterization, 38, 38f
771-774
cytology of urinary tract and prostate,
Male dogs
diagnostic approach, 771-772
235,236f-238f
transurethral catheterization, 34-35,
etiology 766-771,767t, 770t-771t
ferrets, 871,873f
35f
management,772-774
kidneys, 535
Malodorous urine, 47,429
Middle molecules, 395
CT' and MRI of, 153f, 156
Malonic aciduria, 559
Milky white urine, 427
lower urinary tract, 797-806
Mannitol
 Minimal change nephropathy (MCN), 225,
epithelial tumors, 798-803
acute urinary injury (UTI), 501-502
226f
transitional cell carcinoma,
Manual compression, 63t
 Mixed acid-base disorders, 668-673
798-803,799t, 800f-801f, 802t,
MCN (minimal change nephropathy), 225,
anion gap,672
803f
226f
chloride/sodium ratio, 672-673,
mesenchymal tumors of lower urinary
 Medical adherence
673t
tract, 803-804
counseling clients, 880-881
examples, 669t
overview, 797,806
Medulla, 3
overview, 668,669t, 673,673f
prostatic tumors, 793-794, 794f,
 Melamine/cyanuric-acid associated renal
physiology of pH buffering and
805-806
failure (MARF), 218-219,219f
 pulmonary/renal compensation,
prostatic carcinoma, 805-806
 Membranoproliferative
670-672,671t
secondary tumors, 804-805
gomerulonephritis (MPGN), 224,
treatment, 673
lymphoma, 804-805
224f-225f,542
 Money, considering and discussing, 881
urinary bladder and urethra tumors,
Membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN),
 Monoclonal antibodies
140-141,159,780,797-798,812
223-224,223f
immunosuppression, 312-313
rabbits, 867
Membranous nephropathy, 538-539,
 Mouse urology 873-874
reptiles, 865
542
 MPGN (membranoproliferative
Neoureterostomy, 613-614, 613f -614f
MEMO (multimodal environmental 
glomerulonephritis),224,224f -225f,
Nepatozoonosis, 248
modifications)
542
Nephrectomy, 606-607, 606f -607f
feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC), 750-751
 Multimodal environmental modifications
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 559
Mesenchymal tumors of lower urinary
(MEMO)
 Nephrolithiasis
tract, 803-804
feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC), 750-751
ultrasound, 136, 136f
Index 897
Nephroliths and ureteroliths
Patlak-Rutland plot, 164, 164f
Pollakiuria, 25,159f, 428
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
PD. See Peritoneal dialysis
Polyarteritis nodosa, 535
cats, 345-346
Pelvic bladder, 810, 810f
Polycystic kidney disease, 423f, 572
dogs, 343-345, 344f
Pelvic urethra
ultrasound,135
 Nephron
male canine, 20f,21
Polyomavirus, birds, 859-860
 potassium secretion in distal portion,
male feline, 20, 20f
 Polyuria and polydipsia, 25, 400-408, 428
626
Penile amputation in dogs, 849-850, 849f
causes, 401-402, 403t-404t, 404
potassium transport along, 626
Pentosuria, 556
primary polydipsia, 402
Nephron, anatomy of
 Percutaneous nephrostomy tube
 primary polyuria, 402,404
overview, 5
placement, 330, 330f -334f
definitions, 400
renal corpuscle, 5-6, 5f
 Perineal urethrostomy in cats, 845-847,
diagnostic approach, 404-408
renal "flter," 6
846f -847f
adrenal function testing, 406
tubular components, 6-7,6f
 Perinephric cyst extirpation or
bile acids, 406
collecting tubule, 7
omentalization, 604-605, 605f
CBC and serum chemistry profile,
loop of Henle, 7
 Perinephric pseudocysts
405
 proximal convoluted tubule, 6-7
ultrasound,137,137f
dlassic WDT, 407-408
Nephropyelocentesis, 43-44, 44f
Peritoneal dialysis (PD), 293-304
creating PU/PD, 408
Nephrostomy tube,329-331, 330f 1331f,
complications, 301-302,301t
GFR assessment, 406-407
603-604
contraindications, 296
imaging studies,406
Nephrotic syndrome, 415-420
indications, 295-296, 295t
leptospirosis serology or polymerase
 clinical presentation, 416-417,
kinetics, 294-295
chain reaction (PCR), 406
416f -417f
monitoring,302-303,303f,303t
ruling in primary polydipsia, 407
overview, 293,303-304
signalment and history,404-405
overview, 415
pathophysiology, 293-294, 294f
thyroid hormone assay, 406
pathophysiology,417-418
protocol, 296-301
wrinalysis,405
 extravascular fluid accumulation,
catheter types and placement,
urine culture, 405-406
417-418
296-298,297f-298f,297t
WDT alternatives, 408
hyperlipidemia, 418
 delivery technique and exchange
working from a complete problerm
 proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia,
procedure, 298-300, 299f
list, 405
417
dialysate solutions, 300-301
interpretion of USG, 401
prognosis, 420
Periuria, 428
radiographic imaging, 121-122
treatment, 418-420
pH, 51, 670-672, 671t
recognition of a clinical problem,
Nephrotomy, 601-603, 602f
Pheromones
400-401
Nitrite,52
feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC), 752
Potassium disorders, 625-635
Non-neoplastic lesions
 Phosphorus disorders, 657-661
chronic kidney disease (CKD),
 cytology of urinary tract and prostate,
hyperphosphatemia,453-456,658-660
459-460
235,238-239,238f-240f
causes, 659, 659t
hyperkalemia, 629-635
Normal urine, 425
treatment, 659-660
causes, 629-633
 Nuclear scintigraphy. See Renal
hypophosphatemia, 660-661
management, 633-635,634t
scintigraphy
causes, 660,660t
hypokalemia, 627-629, 630f
Nutrition
treatment, 660-661
causes,627-628,627t, 631t
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 450-453
overview, 657
management, 628-629, 629t
hemodialysis, 277
phosphorus balance, 657-658
normal potassium balance, 625-627
 intestinal handling of phosphorus,
internal distribution of potassium,
Obstruction. See Urinary obstruction
658
625-626
Odor, urine,47,429
renal handling ofphosphorus, 658
potassium regulation by kidney,
Open-and close-ended questions, in
 Physical examination and historical
626-627
counseling clients, 879
information, 25-27
Prepubic urethrostomy, 847
Organisms in urine,52f -53f, 55,55f
additional diagnostic testing, 27
Prescrotal urethrotomy, 843-844, 844f
Oscillometry, 89, 90f
history and signalment, 25-26
Primary glomerulopathies, 570-572
overview, 25
Primary hyperparathyroidism, 644
 Painful defecation
 physical examination, 26-27
 Proliferative glomerulonephritis, 539, 542
 lower urinary tract disease, 430
kidney and ureters, 26
Prostate
 Pale yellow urine, 425
urethra, 26-27
cytology of. See Cytology of urinary tract
Pancreatitis, 534
urinary bladder, 26
and prostate
Paraprostatic cysts, 793, 793f
Physiology, kidneys. See Kidney.
surgery, 840-842
Parasites
physiology of
prostatic biopsy, 840
birds, 860
 Plasma clearance studies
 prostatic omentalization, 840-841,
ultrasound, 137
 renal scintigraphy, 168-170, 169f
841f
Partial nephrectomy, 605-606
 Pneumocystogram, 102
subtotal prostatectomy, 841-842
898
Index
Prostatic disease, 787-794
bladder eversion, 867, 867f -868f
recurrent infection, 122-123
 applied anatomy and physiology, 787
common diseases, 866-867
uroliths, 123-124
 benign prostatic hypertrophy, 789-791
diagnostic tests, 866
vaginography, 103
clinical signs, 789
encephalitozoonosis, 867
contrast media, dose, and route of
diagnosis, 789-790,790f
lower urinary tract disease, 866-867,
administration, 103
prevention, 791
866f
radiographic views and flming
signalment,789
neoplasia, 867
sequence,103
treatment, 790-791
urinary calculi, 867
Rat urology 872-873
diagnostic testing, 787-789
Radiographic imaging in urinary tract
Recurrent infection
biopsy, 787-788
disease, 97-124
radiographic imaging, 122-123
cytologic examination of prostatic
background deliberations before urinary
Red urine,425,427
fluid and tissue, 787
imaging, 98
Reflective listening to clients, 879
imaging,787
 contrast cystourethrogram, 101-103
 Relative supersaturation, 77
physical examination, 787
contrast media, dose, and route of
Renal agenesis, 131
paraprostatic cysts, 793, 793f
administration, 102
 Renal anatomy and physiology
prostatic neoplasia, 793-794,794f,
 radiographic views and flming
renal scintigraphy, 161-162
805-806
sequence,102-103
 Renal and ureteral surgery, 596-615
prostatitis/prostatic abscesses,
dilemmas in urinary imaging choices,
healing of upper urinary tract,
791-793
97-98
596-597
clinical signs, 791
distal ureter and ureterovesical junction,
kidney surgery, 598-607
diagnosis,791-792,792f
115-116
nephrectomy, 606-607,606f -607f
prevention,792-793
functional morphology, 115
nephrostomy tube, 603-604
signalment, 791
 practical radiographic observations
nephrotomy, 601-603,602f
treatment,792
and spectrum of disease, 115-116,
 partial nephrectomy, 605-606
urinary incontinence, 758t
116f
 perinephric cyst extirpation or
Prostatomegaly, 430
excretory urogram, 100-101
omentalization, 604-605, 605f
Protein content of urine, 51-52
contrast media, dose, and route of
pyelolithotomy, 604, 604f
Proteinuria, 410-413
administration, 100-101
renal biopsy, 598-601, 599f -600f
nephrotic syndrome, 417
radiographic views and flming
 renal laceration repair, 601
overview,410
sequence,101
overview, 596
pathogenesis of renal injury, 411-412,
horizontal-beam views/special views, 98,
perioperative management, 597-598
412t
100
diagnostic tests, 597
prognostic significance, 411,411t
indications, 97
postoperative care, 598, 598f
treatment, 412-413
integrative overview, 103-111,
preoperative care, 598
Protothecosis, 250
103f-107
wreteral surgery, 607-615
Proximal convoluted tubule, 6-7
kidneys and upper ureter, 111-115
 bladder flap reconstruction of ureter,
Proximal ureter and kidney, anatomy of,
functional morphology, 111-112
614-615
3-8
 practical radiographic observations,
neoureterostomy, 613-614,
gross anatomy,3-5,4f
112-113,113f
613f-614f
kidney topography and surface
spectrum of disease, 113-115,
wreteral catheterization, 607-608,
features, 3
114f
608f
renal cortex and medlla, 3
overview, 97-98
ureteral resection and anastomosis,
 renal pelvis and proximal ureter, 3-4
 patient preparation, 100
609
renal vessels, 4-5, 4f
standard views, 98, 99f
ureteroneocystostomy, 609-613,
microscopic renal anatomy, 5-8
urethra, 119-120
610f-612f
collecting duct system, 7-8
 anatomic considerations and
ureterotomy, 608-609, 608f
juxtaglomerular apparatus, 8, 8f
functional morphology, 119
 Renal biopsy, 209-214
nephron. See Nephron, anatomy of
 practical radiographic observations
contraindications, 211
renal interstitium, lymphatics, and
and spectrum of disease, 119-120
indications, 209-211
nerves, 8
urinary bladder, 116-119
acute renal failure, 209-210
 Pseudohyperkalemia, 633
 anatomic considerations and
 protein-losing nephropathies,
Pyelolithotomy, 604, 604f
functional morphology 116-117
210-211
Pyelonephritis
 practical radiographic observations
methods, 211-214, 212f-214f
ultrasound, 136
and spectrum of disease, 117-119,
overview, 209
Pyometra, 534-535
118f
percutaneous, 193-194
renal manifestations, 534-535
urinary tract syndromes, 120-124
timing, 211
dysuria, 121
 Renal calcinosis
Rabbit urology, 865-867
hematuria, 120-121
birds, 861
anatomy and physiology, 865-866,
incontinence, 124
Renal corpuscle, 5-6, 5f
866f
polyuria,121-122
Renal cortex, 3, 216f
Index 899
Renal cysts
leishmaniasis, 532
vascular anastomosis, 319-320,
CT' and MRI of, 154
leptospirosis, 531,532f
319f-321f
ferrets, 871, 872f
overview, 531,532t
anesthesia, 318
ultrasound, 135,135f
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
donor, 318
Renal disorders, congenital
(RMSF),531
recipient, 318
ultrasound,131-132,132f
neoplasia, 535
donor nephrectomy 318-319
Renal dysplasia, 131-132, 570
pancreatitis, 534
ethics, 324-325
Renal ectopia, 132
pyometra, 534-535
follow-up visits, 323
Renal failure
sepsis,533
history of, 306
acute, 524-527,651-652
Renal neoplasia, 535, 577-581
home care, 323
chronic,528-530,644,651
clinical signs, 577-578, 579t
immunosuppression, 309-313, 309t
drug therapy with, 386-390, 388f, 389t,
diagnosis, 578-579, 580t
antilymphocyte serum, 312
390f
etiology and prevalence, 577, 578t
azathioprine,310
overview,386
prognosis, 580-581
cyclosporine,310-311
 pharmacological actions of drugs,
treatment, 579-580
glucocorticoids,309-310
386-388, 387f
 Renal nodules/mass lesions
irradiation, 313
Renal function testing, 91-96
ultrasound, 134-135,135f
monoclonal antibodies, 312-313
 glomerular filtration rate (GFR),
Renal palpation, abnormal, 422-424
mycofenolate mofetil, 312
92-93
consistency aleration, 422
tacrolimus, 311-312
clearance concept, 92
number of kidneys, alteration in, 422,
precautions, 323
clearance methods, 93, 94f
424
preoperative care, 317-318
 clinical use and interpretation, 93
overview, 422
prognosis,324
 indications, 95t
pain,424、424f
rejection,therapy for, 323-324
markers, 92,94t
 position alteration, 424
selection of appropriate candidates,
glomerular function, 91-93
shape alteration, 422, 423f
313-317
creatinine, 91, 92t, 93f
size alteration, 422
donor selection and screening, 314t,
cystatin C, 92
decreased, 422, 423f
316-317
indirect tests, 91-92
increased (renomegaly), 422, 423f
screening of candidates, 314-316,
urea, 91-92, 93f
 Renal parasites, 137
314t
overview, 91
Renal pathology, 215-228
tining, 313-314
tubular function, 93-96
Renal pelvis, 3-4, 130-131, 130f-131f,
transplantation immunology, 306-308
fractional excretion of electrolytes,
136-137
major histocompatibility complex 
95-96
 Renal replacement therapy
(MHC), 306-308, 307f
urinary specific gravity, 93-94, 95t
acute kidney insufficiency (AKI),
Renal trauma, 591-595
water deprivation tests (WDTs), 95
511-512, 512f
Renal tubules, disorders of, 555-564
Renal fusion, 132
Renal scintigraphy, 161-171
acid-base metabolic disorders, 559-561
Renal hypoplasia, 131
 dynamic renal scintigraphy with
distal renal tubular acidosis, 560-561
Renal lymphoma, 423f
99mT'c-DTPA, 163-166
 proximal renal tubular acidosis, 561,
Renal manifestations of systemic disease,
image analysis, 163-165, 164f, 164t
562t
531-535
interpretative principles, 165-166,
renal tubular acidosis, 559-560
diroflariasis, 534
165f -166f
complex tubular disorders, 561-564
 disseminated intravascular coagulation
glomerular filtration, measuring, 162
Fanconi syndrome, 561-564,
(DIC),535,535f
obstructive uropathy evaluation,
563t-564t
endocrine disorders, 533-534, 533t
166-168, 167f-168f, 167t
isolated tubular disorders, 555-561
diabetes mellitus, 534
plasma clearance studies, 168-170, 169f
aminoaciduria, 556
hyperadrenocorticism, 533-534
renal anatomy and physiology, 161-162
cystinuria, 556-557
hyperthyroidism, 534
renal morphology scintigraphy with
glucosuria, 555-556
hypoadrenocorticism, 534
99mT'c-DMSA,170-171,170f
hypercarnitinuria, 557
immune-mediated disorders, 535
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism,
pentosuria, 556
 polyarteritis nodosa, 535
437-438
uric aciduria, 557
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
 Renal size abnormalities
xanthinuria, 557-558
535
ultrasound, 133
mineral and electrolyte metabolism
infectious diseases, 531-533
 Renal solute and water handling, 12t-13t
disorders, 558-559
babesiosis, 532-533
Renal transplantation, 306-325
calcium, 558
borreliosis, 531
allograft implantation, 319-322
hyperaldosteronism, 558
feline immunodeficiency virus
enteropexy, 322
hypoaldosteronism, 558
infection, 531-532
feeding device, 322
magnesium, 558
feline infectious peritonitis, 532,532f
nephropexy, 321-322
malonic aciduria, 559
feline leukemia virus infection, 532
postoperative care, 322-323
methylmalonic aciduria associated
hepatozoonosis, 533
ureteral implantation, 320-321, 321f
with vitamin B12 deficiency, 559
900
Index
Renal tubules, disorders of (cont.)
physiology of salt and water balance,
Systemic hypertension, 86
phosphorus, 558
619-620
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 535
renal tubular pottassium secretion
Specific gravity, urine, 50-51, 50f
defect, 558-559
Spermatozoa in urine, 56, 57f
Table-top urine samples, 30
normal physiology 555
Spraying,757,819-824
Tacrolimus for immunosuppression,
water metabolism disorders, 559
Stains used with renal biopsies, 216t
311-312
central diabetes insipidus, 559
 Stranguria, 428
Thrombosis
 nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 559
Submissive urination, 826
hemodialysis, 275
Renal vessels, 4-5, 4f
Sugar glider urology, 874
Tbrtoises,863
 Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 15
Supersaturation, 76-77
Toxins
Renomegaly, 422, 423f
Surgery of the lower urinary tract, 835-852
birds, 861
Reproductive hormone responsive
bladder surgery, 837-840
Toxoplasmosis, 250-251
 incontinence, 757
cystostomy tube placement, 839-840,
Transitional cell carcinoma, 798
Reptile urology, 862-865
839f
lower urinary tract, 798-803, 799t,
anatomy and physiology, 862-863, 862f
cystotomy, 837-838, 837f
800f-801f, 802t, 803f
common diseases, 864-865
partial cystectomy, 838-839,
Transplantation, renal. See Renal
diagnostic tests, 863-864
838f-839f
transplantation
 glomerulonephrosis, 864
healing of the lower urinary tract, 835
Transurethral catheterization, 30-39
gout, 864
overview, 835
axioms, 33
neoplasia, 865
 penile amputation in dogs, 849-850,
 care of urinary catheters, 32
prolapsed tissue, 865
849f
catheter composition, 31
urinary calculi, 864-865,864f -865f
 perineal urethrostomy in cats, 845-847,
catheter size, 31
 Respiratory acidosis, 671
846f-847f
catheter types, 31-32, 31f
Respiratory alkalosis, 671-672
 perioperative management, 835-837
complications, 32-33
Retrograde ureterpyelography, 334
diagnostic tests, 835-836
female cats, 38
Retroperitoneal fluid accumulation
postoperative care, 837
female dogs, 35-38,36f -37f
ultrasound, 138
preoperative care, 836
indications, 30t, 38-39
Rhabdomysarcoma, 804
surgical principles, 836-837
male cats, 38, 38f
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF),
prepubic urethrostomy, 847
male dogs, 34-35, 35f
250, 531
prescrotal urethrotomy, 843-844, 844f
techniques,33-39
prostate surgery, 840-842
Trypanosomiasis, 251
Scrotal urethrostomy in dogs, 844-845,
 prostatic biopsy, 840
Tubular function, kidney, 93-96
844f-845f
 prostatic omentalization, 840-841,
fractional excretion of electrolytes, 95-96
SCUF (slow continuous ultrafiltration),
841f
urinary specifc gravity, 93-94, 95t
287,287f
subtotal prostatectomy, 841-842
water deprivation tests (WDTs), 95
Secondary hypertension, 677
scrotal urethrostomy in dogs, 844-845,
Tubular necrosis, acute, 218f -219f
Sediment evaluation, urine, 52-57
844f -845f
Tubular nephrosis, acute, 218f
casts, 56, 56f
urethral anastomosis, 842-843,
Tubular reabsorption, 11,11t13t, 1314
crystals, 54f- 55f, 55
842f-843f
Turtles, 863
debris, 56, 56f-57f
urethral prolapse repair, 847-849,
epithelial cells, 53f, 55
848f -849f
Ultrafltration, 270
erythrocytes, 52f,53
urinary incontinence, 850-852, 851f
Ultrasonography
leukocytes, 52f, 53, 55
complications, 852
urinary tract. See Urinary tract,
lipid, 56, 57f
techniques, 851-852, 851f
ultrasonography of
organisms,52f-53f,55,55f
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
Upper urinary tract disorders
spermatozoa, 56,57f
(SIADH), 621-622
acute kidney insufficiency. See Acute
 Semi-automatic needle biopsy, 599
 Systemic arterial hypertension, 677-682
kidney injury
Sepsis, renal manifestations of, 533
measurement, 679
amyloidosis. See Amyloidosis
 SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate ADH
overview, 677
chronic kidney disease. See Chronic
secretion),621-622
selection of patients to screen for
kidney disease
Single-needle dialysis, 270-271
hypertension, 678-679
 congenital kidney diseases. See
 SLE (systemic lupus erythematosus), 535
target-organ damage (T'OD), 677-678,
Congenital kidney diseases
Slow continuous ultrafiltration (SCUF),
678t
glomerular disease. See Glomerular
287, 287f
treatment, 679-682
disease
Sodium bicarbonate, 634
antihypertensive therapy, 680-682,
 Infection. See Urinary tract infection,
Sodium disorders, 619-624
681t
 bacterial; Urinary tract infection,
hypernatremia, 623-624, 623t
decision to institute treatment, 680
fungal; viruses and urinary tract
hyponatremia, 620-623
hypertensive crisis, 682, 682t
disease
acute,621,621t
uUse of BP staging to assessrisk for
 nematodes. See Nematodes of the upper
chronic,622-623,622t
future TOD, 679-680, 679t
and lower urinary tract
Index 901
renal and ureteral surgery. See Renal and
practical radiographic observations,
Urethral prolapse repair, 847-849,
wreteral surgery
112-113,113f
848f -849f
renal failure. See Renal failure 
spectrum of disease, 113-115, 114f
Urethral sphincter mechanism
renal manifestations of systemic disease.
Ureteritis, 137
incompetence,756-759, 758t
 See Renal manifestations of systemic
Ureterocele, 132, 583-584
Urethral tears, 831-832
disease
Ureteroneocystostomy, 609-613,
Urethritis,140,778-780,779f -780f
renal neoplasia. See Renal neoplasia
610f-612f
Urethrogenital malformations, 813
renal trauma. See Renal trauma
Ureterotomy, 608-609, 608f
Urethroliths, 815
 renal tubule disorders. See Renal tubules,
Urethra
Urethrorectal, urethrovaginal, and
disorders of
 congenital diseases of 813-815
urethroperineal fistula and urethral
ureter, diseases of. See Ureter, diseases of
aplasia and hypoplasia, 813
diverticula,814
urinary obstruction. See Urinary
congenital urinary incontinence, 815
Urethrorectal fistula, 778
obstruction
duplication, 813-814
Uric aciduria, 557
urolithiasis. See Urolithiasis
ectopic urethra, 814
Urinalysis,46-57,242-243
viruses and urinary tract disease. See
epispadias and hypospadias, 813, 813f
biochemistry, 50-52, 50f
Viruses and urinary tract disease
prolapse, 814,814f
bilirubin, 51
Urachal anomalies, 810-811, 811f
stricture and hypoplasia, 815
blood, 51
Urea, 91
urethrogenital malformations, 813
glucose, 51
Ureaplasma/Mycoplasma spp., 251
urethroliths, 815
ketones, 51
Uremia and azotemia, 393-398
urethrorectal, urethrovaginal, and
leukocytes, 52
 classification of uremic retention solutes,
urethroperineal fistula and
nitrite,52
394-395,394t
urethral diverticula, 814
pH, 51
clinical manifestations, 395-396, 395t,
diseases of, 778-785
protein, 51-52
396f
hypospadias, 778, 779f
specific gravity, 51
management of uremia, 397-398
neoplasia, 780
urobilinogen, 52
 extracorporeal removal or uremic
overview,778
components,47,48t, 49f
toxins, 397
urethral obstruction, 781-785,
gross appearance and odor, 47
 non-dialytic treatment, 398
781f-784f
in-house versus send-out testing, 46,
metabolic effects of uremia, 396-397
urethral prolapse, 780
47t-48t
carbohydrate metabolism, 396
urethral sphincter mechanism
overview, 46
inflammation, 396-397
incompetency (urinary
preanalytical patient variables, 47
 oxidative stress, 396
incontinence) 781
 preanalytical sample variables, 46-47
uremia and drug metabolism, 397
urethral stricture, 780f -781f, 781
sediment evaluation, 52-57
overview, 393-394
urethral trauma, 780, 780f
casts, 56, 56f
Ureter
urethritis,778-780,779f-780f
crystals, 54f - 55f, 55
calculi, 137
urethrorectal fistula, 778
debris, 56, 56f -57f
CT' of, 156-157
 indwelling urinary catheters and stents,
epithelial cells, 53f,55
 developmental anomalies, 157
336-338
erythrocytes, 52f, 53
 general considerations, 156
 antegrade catheterization,336
leukocytes, 52f, 53,55
ureteral obstruction, 156-157,158f
wrethral stents, 336-338,337f-338f
lipid, 56, 57f
diseases of, 583-589
physical examination, 26-27
organisms, 52f-53f, 55、55f
anatomy, 583
radiographic imaging, 119-120
spermatozoa, 56,57f
ectopic ureter, 587-589,588f
anatomic considerations and
specific gravity, 50, 50f
ultrasound, 132-133, 133f, 137-138,
functional morphology, 119
Urinary bladder, 809-812
137f
 practical radiographic observations
 agenesis and hypoplasia, 809
ureteral injury and paraureteral
and spectrum of disease, 119-120
anatomy, 18-19,19f
urinoma, 586-587
tumors, 797-798
congenital diseases of 809-812
ureteral obstruction, 584-586, 585f
Urethral anastomosis, 842-843,
agenesis and hypoplasia, 809
ureterocele,583-584
842f-843f
colovesical fistula and uterine-bladder
vesicoureteral reflux, 583
 Urethral bulking for urinary incontinence,
communication, 811-812
duplication, 132
379-381
duplication, 811
ectopia,132
Urethral pressure studies, 199-203
exstrophy, 810
indwelling urinary catheters and stents,
 complications, 203
herniation, 810
332-335
electromyography, 203
pelvic bladder, 810, 810f
injury, 586-587, 830
indications, 199, 200f
 primary urinary bladder neoplasia.
obstruction, 584-586, 585f
interpretation, 201, 202f, 203
812
surgery. See Renal and ureteral surgery
leak point pressure, 203
urachal anomalies, 810-811, 811f
upper, radiographic imaging of.
limitations, 199-200
urocystolithiasis, 812, 812f
111-115
procedure,201,201f-202f
physical examination, 26
functional morphology 111-112
sdation/restraint, 200-201
radiographic imaging, 116-119
902
Index
Urinary bladder (cont.)
 postacquisition image processing.
clinical signs, 712
 anatomic considerations and
151-152, 154f
diagnosis,712-714,712f -713f
functional morphology, 116-117
upper urinary tract, 152-157
antimicrobial sensitivity tests,
 practical radiographic observations
kidneys. See Kidney, CT and MRI of
713-714、713t
and spectrum of disease, 117-119,
ureters, 156-157
localization of infection, 714, 714f
118f
Urinary tract, cytology of. See Cytology of
etiology 710, 711t
rupture, 831
urinary tract and prostate
pathogenesis, 710-712
tumors,797-798
Urinary tract, ultrasonography of, 128-142
bacterial virulence, 711-712
ultrasound, 138-142
artifacts, 128-129
host defense mechanisms, 710, 711f,
 Urinary calculi
examination,128-129
711t
rabbits, 867
interpretation, 128-129
mucosal defense barriers, 710-711
reptiles, 864-865, 864f-865f
kidneys and ureters, 129-138
prevention, 715
Urinary catheters
acquired renal disorders, 133-138
prognosis,715
canine, 31
acquired ureteral disorders, 137-138,
treatment,714-715
care of, 32
137f
antimicrobial choice, 714
composition,31
chronic renal infarcts, 135-136, 136f
duration, 714
size,31
congenital renal disorders, 131-132,
failure of, 715
types, 31-32,31f
132f
special considerations, 714-715
Urinary incontinence, 428-429, 755-766,
congenital ureteral disorders, 132-133,
Urinary tract infection, fungal, 717-722
850-852,851f
133f
Candida spp. urinary tract infections,
complications, 852
 diffuse parenchymal abnormalities,
717-721
diagnostic approach, 759-761,760t
133-134
clinical presentation and diagnosis,
'uaaseueu esiins pue idossopua
focal parenchymal abnormalities,
718-719,719f
765-766
134-136
epidemiology 717-718,718t
neurophysiology of micturition,
focal renal mineralization, 136
treatment, 719-721,720t-721t
755-756,756f-757f
nephrolithiasis, 136, 136f
noncandidalprimary urinary tract
 pharmacologic managerment, 761, 762t,
 normal sonographic anatomy.
infections, 721-722
763-765
129-130,130f
overview, 717
radiographic imaging, 124
 perinephric pseudocysts, 137, 137f
secondary funguria, 722,722f
techniques, 851-852, 851f
 polycystic kidney disease, 135
Urinary tract infections, diagnosis of,
urethral sphincter mechanism
pyelonephritis, 136
241-251
incompetence, 756-759, 758t
renal cysts, 135, 135f
adenovirus I, 246
Urinary obstruction, 428, 707-709
renal nodules/mass lesions, 134-135,
anaplasmosis, 246
overview,707
135f
aspergillosis, 246
pathology, 709
renal parasites, 137
babesiosis, 246
pathophysiology, 707-708
renal pelvic and ureteral dilation,
Balamuthia mandrillaris,246
Urinary retention, 766-769, 766f,
130-131,130f-131f
bartonellosis, 246
771-774
renal pelvic luminal abnormalities,
blastomycosis, 246
diagnostic approach, 771-772
136-137
borreliosis, 246
etiology,766-771,767t,770t-771t
renal pelvis disorders, 136-137
brucellosis, 246
management,772-774
 renal size abnormalities, 133
calcivirus, 247
Urinary saturation testing, 75-84
retroperitoneal fluid accumulation,
candidiasis, 247
assessment of urolith formation, 75-78
138
capillariasis, 247
activity product ratios, 77-78
overview, 128
coccidioidomycosis, 247
Bonn risk index, 78
 ultrasound-assisted interventional
coronavirus, 247
 relative supersaturation, 77
procedures, 142
cryptococcosis,247
supersaturation, 76-77
urinary bladder and urethra, 138-142
Dioctophyma renale,247
dogs and cats, 78, 79t-84t
acquired disorders, 139-142
dirofilariasis, 247
overview,75、76f
calculi, 139f, 140
ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis, 247-248
Urinary tract, CT' and MRI of, 146-160
congenital disorders, 139
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP
CT, 147-148, 148f -153f
cystitis, 139,139f-140f
coronavirus), 248
image formation and technical
foreign bodies, 141-142
FeLV/FIV, 248
considerations, 146-147
mural and luminal hemorrhage, 141
hepatozoonosis, 248
lower urinary tract, 157-160
neoplasia, 140-141,140f-141f
 infectious canine hepatitis (adenovirus
general considerations, 157-159
normal sonographic anatomy.
I1),248
neoplasia and other mass lesions, 159,
138-139,139f
leishmaniasis, 248
159f-160f
rupture, 141
leptospirosis, 248-249
urolithiasis, 159, 159f
urethritis, 139-140
Lyme nephropathy, 249-250
MRI, 148, 151, 153f-154f, 153t
Urinary tract infection, bacterial, 710-715
overview,241-242,244t-245t
overview, 146, 160
caution, 715
protothecosis, 250
Index 903
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF),
case example, 71,71f, 71t
step 5A: tecnique in male dogs, 363-364,
250
naturally occurring disease, 70-71
363f
suspicion for infection as trigger for
Urine marking, 826
step 5B: technique in female dogs,
glomerulonephritis, 243,246
Urine protein and microalbuminuria,
363f-364f,364-365
suspicion for UTI, 242-243, 244t-
58-60,59t-60t
Urohydropropulsion, voiding, 375-378
245t
microalbuminuria, 59-60
anesthesia, 376-377
toxoplasmosis, 250-251
qualitative proteinuria, 58-59
complications, 377-378
trypanosomiasis, 251
quantitative proteinuria, 58
effectiveness with a urethrolith, 376
I rdds usedosnusndoa
Urinoma, 137
large dogs, 377
Urination, inappropriate. See
Uroabdomen, diagnosis of, 73-74, 74t
learning to perform, 378
 Inappropriate urination
Urobilinogen, 52
male dogs, 377
Urine, discolored, 425-427
Urocystolithiasis, 812, 812f
overview, 375, 376t
causes, 426t-427t
Urocystoliths
 performing for uroliths not removed
milky white urine, 427
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
during surgery, 378
normal urine, 425
dogs, 345,345f
recurrent urolithiasis, 378
pale yellow urine, 425
Urodynamic studies, 197-206
strategy when uroliths become lodged in
red, brown, or black urine, 425, 427
bladder function studies, 203-205
urethra during procedure, 377
Urine collection, 28-41
contraindications and complications,
uroliths that can be retrieved, 375
collection containers, 28
205
volume of urine in urinary bladder
collection techniques, 28-29
diuresis cystometry, 205
necessary to perform, 375
cystocentesis, 39-41
indications, 203-204, 204f
Urolithiasis, 646, 687-706
contraindications, 39-40
interpretration, 205
anatomy of a stone, 687, 688f
equipment,40
procedure, 204-205
birds, 861, 861f -862f
postcystocentesis considerations, 41
sedation/restraint, 204
clinical consequences, 691
 precystocentesis considerations, 40
electromyography, 203
diagnosis, 688-689, 688f -689f,
site, 40
general principles, 197-199
688t-690t, 691
techniques, 40-41,40f
instrumentation, 197,198f -200f
ferrets, 871,871f
manual compression of urinary bladder,
overview, 197, 198t, 206
management, 691, 696
29-30, 29f
wrethral pressure studies, 199-203
urethral obstruction, 691, 696
normal voiding, 29
complications, 203
urolith removal, 691, 692t-697t
overview, 28
electromyography, 203
mineral composition, 688-689,
samples for quantitative versus
indications, 199, 200f
688f-689f, 689t-690t, 691
qualitative analysis, 41
interpretation, 201,202f,203
overview, 687
table-top urine samples, 30
leak point pressure, 203
prevention, 696-698, 698f-704f,
transurethral catheterization, 30-39
limitations, 199-200
700-701,703-705
axioms, 33
procedure,201,201f-202f
diet to prevent calcium oxalate urolith
care of urinary catheters, 32
sedation/restraint,200-201
recurrence, 696-698, 700-701,
catheter composition, 31
voiding studies, 205-206
703,705t-706t
catheter size, 31
imaging, 206
 preventing compound uroliths,
 catheter types, 31-32, 31f
indications and procedures, 205-206
703-705
complications, 32-33
Uroendoscopy. See Endoscopy, urologic
radiographic imaging, 123-124
female cats, 38
Urogram, excretory, 100-101, 111-112,
Urologic endoscopy. See Endoscopy.
female dogs, 35-38, 36f-37f
593f
urologic
indications, 30t, 38-39
contrast media, dose, and route of
Urologic laparoscopy. See Laparoscopy
male cats, 38, 38f
administration, 100-101
urologic
male dogs, 34-35, 35f
radiographic views and flming
Uroperitoneum, 73
techniques, 33-39
sequence,101
Urine culture, 62-68, 243
Urohydropropulsion, retrograde, canine,
Aude1gouseA
antimicrobial susceptibility testing,
358-365
radiographic imaging in urinary tract
64-65, 68
equipment, 358-360, 359f-361f
disease, 103
Agar disk diffusion technique, 64-65
overview, 358
contrast media, dose, and route of
antimicrobial dilution technique, 65,
 step 1: verification and localization of
administration, 103
65t-68t, 68
urethroliths, 360
radiographic views and flming
description, 62-64, 63f -64f
 step 2: decompressive cystocentesis,
sequence,103
overview,62, 63t
359f,360-362
Vaginoscopy, 188-190, 189f -190f
qualitative, 64, 64t
step 3: lubrication of urethroliths,
Vascular disorders
quantitative, 63t, 64
359f-360f,362,362t
kidneys, CT and MRI of, 154-156, 155f
urine collection, 62
step 4: restraint and anesthesia, 362-363
Vasopressin, 619-624
Urine enzyme activity for detection of
 step 6: minimize catheter-induced
factors promoting release or activity.
acute kidney injury, 70-72
trauma and iatrogenic UTI, 365
621t
904 Index
Vesicoureteral reflux, 583
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV),
 recurrent urolithiasis, 378
Viruses and urinary tract disease, 725-731
728
strategy when uroliths become
diagnosis, 730-731
feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 728
 lodged in urethra during 
lower urinary tract disorders, 728-730
Voiding studies, 205-206
procedure, 377
feline calicivirus (FCV), 729-730
imaging, 206
uroliths that can be retrieved, 375
feline foamy (syncytium-forming)
indications and procedures,
volume of urine in urinary bladder
virus, 730
205-206
necessary to perform, 375
 gamma herpesvirus (bovine
Voiding urohydropropulsion,
herpesvirus type 4), 730
375-378
Water balance
overview, 725
anesthesia, 376-377
hemodialysis, 277
treatment,731
complications, 377-378
Water metabolism disorders, 559
upper urinary tract disorders, 725, 726t,
effectiveness with a urethrolith, 376
central diabetes insipidus, 559
727-728
large dogs, 377
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus,
canine adenovirus, 725, 727
learning to perform, 378
559
canine herpesvirus, 727
male dogs, 377
Water reabsorption, renal, 14-15
feline coronavirus, 727
overview, 375, 376t
White-coat hypertension, 677
feline foamy (syncytium-forming)
performing for uroliths not removed
virus,728
8Ze X1aaims guunp
Xanthinuria, 557-558