Arthropod-borne
Infectious Diseases
of the Dog and Cat
SusanE.Shaw
Michael J. Day
MANSON
PUBLISHING
Arthropod-borne
Infectious
Diseases
of the Dog and Cat
Susan E Shaw
BVSc(Hons) MSc DipACVIM DipECVIM FACVSc MRCVS
 Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Dermatology and Applied Immunology
School of Clinical Veterinary Science
University of Bristol
Langford, Bristol, UK
Michael J Day
BSc BVMS(Hons) PhD DiplECVP FASM FRCPath FRCVS
 Professor of Veterinary Pathology
School of Clinical Veterinary Science
University of Bristol
Langford, Bristol, UK
Manson Publishing/The Veterinary Press
Dedication
To all colleagues and students who have as much enthusiasm
for this subject as I do (SES}
To Lara, Christopher and Natalie (MJD)
Copyright @ 2005 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 1-84076-057-5
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means without the written permission of the
copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 (as
amended), or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the
Copyright Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP, UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to
 criminal prosecution and civil claims for da mages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
 Ema il: manson@mansonpublishing.com
Website: www.ma ns onpublishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
Project manager: Paul Bennett
Copy-editor: Peter Beynon
Designer: Replika Press Pvt Ltd, India
Colour reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
 Printed by Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
Contents
Preface
7
Contributors
Abbreviations
Introduction
Susan Shaw and Michael Day
1 Arthropod vectors of infectious disease: biology and control
1
Richard Wall and Kieren Pitts
2 The role of wildlife and wildlife reservoirs in the maintenance of
arthropod-borne infections
23
Kevin Bown and Malcolm Bennett
 3 Interaction of the host immune system with arthropods and
 arthropod-borne infectious agents
30
Michael Day
4 Laboratory diagnosis of arthropod-transmitted infections
41
Martin Kenny
5 Filarial infections
51
Luca Ferasin and David Knight
6 Babesiosis and cytauxzoonosis
63
 Peter Irwin
Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
7 Hepatozoonosis
78
Gad Baneth and Nancy Vincent-Johnson
8 Leishmaniosis
89
Gad Baneth, Michael Day, Xavier Roura and Susan Shaw
9 Borreliosis
100
K Emil Hovius
10 Bartonellosis
110
Richard Birtles
11 Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
120
Shimon Harrus, Trevor Waner, Anneli Bjoersdorf and Susan Shaw
12 Rickettsial infections
134
Craig Greene
13 0ther arthropod-borne infections of dogs and cats
138
Susan Shaw
Appendix
143
Further reading
144
Index
150
Preface
The study of arthropod-borne infectious disease in
·To provide more detailed information in the same text
companion animals is developing rapidly. For example,
on the expanding array of diagnostic techniques
new species and subspecies of Babesia affecting dogs and
routinely available to veterinary surgeons dealing with
um suaq si yooq sui se pazuaioiuo suaq aie sies
these diseases (Chapter 4). Arthropod-transmitted
In addition, it is highly likely that the role of arthropods
diseases provide a real diagnostic challenge. Many tests
in the transmission of other important canine and feline
are available for the same disease, using different
diseases will be confirmed. This is particularly the case
technologies and with differing sensitivities and
with the haemoplasmas ipreviously Haemobartonella
specificities. Tests for exposure to infection, such as
species) of dogs and cats, where investigation of
antibody-based serology, provide different information
transmission by Ctenocephalides felis {the cat flea) is the
from those designed to identify active infection (PCR-
subject of current intensive research.
based methods). Both sets of information may be
With this background, we set out to produce a text
useful in difficult cases and Chapter 4 has been written
that would collct together the important information
to enable veterinary practitioners to better understand
related to the arthropod-borne infectious diseases of
the laboratory basis for the results they receive.
companion animals. Our objectives in producing this 
book were:
Arthropod-Borne Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat
To provide veterinary surgeons with comprehensive
is a project that has arisen from the clinical, laboratory
information on clinical presentation, pathogenesis,
diagnostic and research interests of the editors in this
 diagnosis, treatment, control and zoonotic implications of
rapidly developing field of veterinary medicine. Over a
the major arthropod-transmitted diseases of dogs and cats
number of years we have met and collaborated with many
(Chapters 5 to 13).
veterinarians and scientists active in this field who have
· To provide additional information in the same text on
become valued colleagues and friends. Many of these have
relevant aspects of the biology of the arthropod vectors
contributed the chapters, illustrations or data that form
 and their wildife host species. It is hoped this will
this book. To these contributors we are exceedingly
encourage greater understanding of the challenges
grateful for your excellent reviews and prompt responses
required in controlling these infections as well as an
to questions or proofreading. Your enthusiasm and
appreciation of the biological complexities involved in
Jo ixal e aonpoud oi sn padpay sey indul oyuaos snouoi
their maintenance (Chapters 1 and 2).
which we can all be proud.
 To provide additional information in the same text on
We must also acknowledge the superb support from
the immunological interactions between arthropod-
Manson Publishing for this project. The book was born
borne pathogens, their vectors and the companion
from early discussions with Jill Northcott and we are
animal hosts {Chapter 3). Immune-mediated disease is
grateful for her support and gentle cajoling throughout.
a hallmark of infection with this specific group of
 Michael Manson has been characteristically supportive and
pathogens, and it is hoped that Chapter 3 will provide
it has been a pleasure to work with him. We are very pleased
veterinary surgeons with a basis for understanding and
to be able to thank the production team headed by Paul
interpreting the clinical and laboratory evidence for
 Bennett, and the expert and detailed copyediting provided
this in cases with suspected arthropod-borne disease.
by Peter Beynon. The hand-drawn sketches produced by
In addition, appreciation of this complex interaction
individual contributors have been expertly rendered into a
provides a platform for understanding both the
uniform style by Cactus Design and Illustration.
difficulties involved in the development of traditional
We hope this book will prove an informative and
vaccines for this group of infections and
the
 practical resource to practising veterinarians who deal
 development of novel immunomodulatory approaches 
with this fascinating group of diseases.
to treatment.
Susan Shaw and Michael Day
Contributors
Gad Baneth DVM PhD DiplECVCP
K Emil Hovius DVM MSc PhD
School of Veterinary Medicine
Companion Animal Hospital *t Heike
Hebrew University
Veldhoven, The Netherlands
Rehovot, Israel
Peter J Irwin BVetMed PhD FACVSc MRCVS
Anneli Bjoersdorff DVM PhD
School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences
 Department of Clinical Microbiology
Murdoch University
Kalmar County Hospital
Murdoch, Western Australia
Kalmar, Sweden
Martin J Kenny BSc PhD
Malcolm Bennett BVSc PhD FRCPath MRCVS
 School of Clinical Veterinary Science
 Department of Veterinary Pathology
University of Bristol
University of Liverpool
 Langford, United Kingdom
Neston, United Kingdom
 David Harmon Knight DVM DipACVIM(Cardiology) (decd)
Richard J Birtles BSc(Hons) PhD
Veterinary Hospital
Centre for Comparative Infectious Diseases
University of Pennsylvania
 University of Liverpool
Philadelphia, United States of America
 Neston, United Kingdom
Kieren Pitts BSc MSc PhD
Kevin Bown BSc(Hons) MRes PhD
 School of Biological Sciences
 Department of Veterinary Pathology
 University of Bristol
 University of Liverpool 
 Bristol, United Kingdom
Neston, United Kingdom
Xavier Roura DVM PhD DipECVIM-CA
Michael J Day BSc BVMS(Hons) PhD DiplECVP FASM
 Servei de Medicina Interna
FRCPath FRCVS
Hospital Clinic Veterinari
 School of Clinical Veterinary Science
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona
 University of Bristol
 Bellaterra, Spain.
 Langford, United Kingdom
Susan E Shaw BVSc( Hons) MSc DipACVIM DipECVIM
Luca Ferasin DVM PhD CertVC DipECVIM-CA
FACVSc MRCVS
(Cardiology) MRCVS
 School of Clinical Veterinary Science 
School of Clinical Veterinary Science
University of Bristol
University of Bristol
Langford, United Kingdom
 Langford, United Kingdom
Nancy A Vincent-Johnson DVM MS DipACVIM DipACVPM
Craig E Greene DVM MS DipACVIMf Internal Medicine
Lieutenant Colonel, U.S. Army Veterinary Corps
and Neurology)
Commander, National Capital District Veterinary Command
Department of Infectious Disease
Fort Belvoir, United States of America
 College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
Richard Wall BSc MBA PhD
Athens, United States of America
 School of Biological Sciences
University of Bristol
Shimon Harrus DVM PhD DiplECVCP
 Bristol, United Kingdom
School of Veterinary Medicine
Hebrew University
Trevor Waner BVSc PhD DipECLAM
 Rehovot, Israel
Israel Institute for Biological Research
Ness Ziona, Israel
6
Abbreviations
ACA
acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans 
PAMPs
pathogen-associated molecular patterns
AIDS
acquired immune deficiency syndrome
PBL
 peripheral blood lymphocytes 
ALP
alkaline phosphatase
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
ALT
alanine aminotransferase
PCV
packed cell volume
AMP
adenosine monophosphate
PDGF
platelet-derived growth factor
ANA
antinuclear antibody
PFGE
pulsed field gel electrophoresis
APC
 antigen presenting cell
PLN
protein losing nephropathy
APTT
activated partial thromboplastin time
PT
prothrombin time
ARDS
 adult respiratory distress syndrome
PTE
pulmonary thromboembolism
ATII
 antithrombin III
RAPD
random amplification of polymorphic DNA
BSK
Barbour-Stoenner-Kelly {medium)
RH
relative humidity
CFUs
colony forming units
RIM
rapid immunomigration
CK
creatine kinase
RMSF
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever
CME
 ca nine monocytic ehrlichiosis
RNA
ribonucleic acid
CNS
 central nervous system
Ro
reproductive rate
CSD
cat scratch disease
 SDS-PAGE sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel
DEC
diethylcarbamazine citrate
electrophoresis
DIC
disseminated intravascular coagulation
SFG
 spotted fever group
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
SGE
salivary gland extract
DTH
 delayed type hypersensitivity
SPF
specific pathogen-free
EM
erythema migrans
TBEV
tick-borne encephalitis virus
ERIC
enterobacterial repetitive intergenic
TCP
trimethoprim-sulphadiazine, clindamycin and
consensus
pyrimethamine (therapy)
FAT
fluorescent antibody test
Th
T helper (cell)
FDP
fibrin degradation products
TP
total protein
FeLV
feline leukaemia virus
WHO
World Health Organization
FIV
 feline immunodeficiency virus
WNV
West Nile virus
FML
fucose mannose ligand
WS
Warthin-Starry (stain)
GGT
 gamma glutamyl transferase
ZVL
 zoonotic visceral leishmaniosis
gP
glycoprotein
HAI
Hepatazoon americanum infection
HCI
Hepatazoon canis infection
HGE
human granulocytic ehrlichiosis
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HME
human monocytic ehrlichiosis
HWD
heartworm disease
IFA
immunofluorescent assay
IFAT
indirect fluorescent antibody test
Ig
immunoglobulin {IgA, IgG, etc)
kDa
kilodaltons
LPS
lipopolysaccharide
MHC
major histocompatability complex
Micro-IF
microimmunofluorescence (test)
MLST
multilocus sequence typing
MPGM
membra noproliferative glomerulonephritis
NSAID
 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
OspA/B/C
 outer surface protein A/B/C
PACAP
 pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating
polypeptide
7
This page intentionally left blank
Introduction
Susan Shaw and Michael Day
The arthropod-borne infectious diseases that are the
Table 1 Profile of an emerging human pathogen.
subject of this book have received much attention in both
human and veterinary medicine in recent years. This
interest is part of a more general focus on infectious
The most likely emergent human pathogen would be
disease, and the realization that the pattern and prevalence
+An RNA virus.
of infection, either locally or globally, change over time.
● Zoonotic, with a broad reservoir-host range.
There are several reasons why these changes occur:
● Vector transmitted, especially by biting flies that feed 
on multiple host species.
 Emergence of new diseases caused by novel pathogens
● Able to use a cell receptor that is conserved across 
that appear following adaptation of existing pathogenic
host species.
organisms and, less commonly, by genetic mutation.
● Potentially transmissible between humans (such
Epidemiological analysis has defined the likely 'profile'
transmission is currently rare).
of emerging human pathogens and suggested that
· Found in areas undergoing ecological, demographic
 or social change.
viruses are more likely to be considered emergent
pathogens than bacteria, protozoa or fungi. Moreover,
(After Woolhouse MEJ (2002) Frenos in Microbiology
vector-transmitted pathogens are more likely to be
10. S3-57)
regarded as emergent than those transmitted by direct
or environmental contact ( Table 1).
 Emergence of a disease in a new geographical area. Until
1999, West Nile virus had never been documented in the
western hemisphere, although it was well established in
Some infectious diseases may appear to be emerging
the human, bird and vertebrate populations of Europe,
simply because the pathogen involved has been recently
Africa, western Asia and the Middle East. Since its first
recognized and characterized. Technical improvements
appearance in the eastern USA, West Nile virus has
 and wider availability of sensitive diagnostic methodology,
become established in the bird and mosquito
such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis, have
populations of most of the USA. The factors involved in
enabled identification of pathogens that are not amenable
the introduction of West Nile virus into North America
to traditional methods of diagnosis such as microbial
are incompletely understood. The viral genotype is most
culture. Linked to this, greater recognition of such
closely related to those found in the Middle East, and its
infections by improved training of diagnosticians, and the
introduction from this area by infected humans, vectors
 specific interests of researchers, is likely to play a role.
 and/or birds has been suggested.
All of the general principles involved in the emergence
 Re-emergence of a previously controlled disease. A
of infectious diseases mentioned above are important in
combination of decreased resources, political and social
 the mounting significance of arthropod-borne infections in
factors and complacency has led to the re-emergence of
companion animals. Indeed, the increasing requests for
vector-transmitted diseases in the last ten years.
information  about  these infections from  veterinary
Decreased control of vector populations resulting from
surgeons now required to deal with them for the first time,
the   withdrawal  of  dichlorodiphenyltrichlorethane
was the major impetus for the production of this book.
(DDT) for environmental reasons has compromised the
However, there are specific factors that have been or may
control of mosquito populations and thus of malaria.
be implicated in the geographical spread of arthropod-
 Breakdown in public health infrastructure in developing
borne infections of companion animals. They will be
countries has compromised vaccination programmes for
discussed in greater detail in the chapters that follow, but
diseases such as yellow fever. In addition, the increasing
 are introduced here.
Of perhaps greatest significance in the emergence of
infection in areas endemic for vector-borne diseases has
companion animal arthropod-transmitted infections is
pue sisousia  aqndasns pseau u pnns
increased movement of dogs and cats over long distances
its emergence as a major global zoonosis. Increased
and through different bioclimatic zones. The introduction
travel, global travel, urbanization and population
and establishment of Ehrlichia canis and Babesia gibsoni
density are all playing a role in disease re-emergence.
in certain areas of the USA has been related to the
9
10
 Arthropod-borne Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat
relocation of infected military dogs. Dogs tra velling from
endemnicity is a real one. The well-documented effect of
northern European countries to Mediterranean areas for
climate change means that environments that were
vacations with their owners have been incriminated in the
traditionally unsuited for the maintenance of particular
esta blishment of E. canis infection and the vector of this
arthropod vectors may become so in the near future.
pathogen, Rhipicephalus sanguineus, in Germany.
Additionally, within existing endemic areas, climatic
Frequency and ease of canine travel is also implicated in
change may lead to enhancement or extended periods of
the relatively rapid dissemination of Leishmania infantum
transmission of vector-borne disease. The recent northerly
infection in foxhounds from foci in the eastern USA
 spread of tick-borne encephalitis in Scandinavia has been
The traditional  barrier  of（
 companion animal
directly related to the effect of increased temperatures on
quarantine is being phased out between many countries
tick distribution and survival.
and, within Europe, simplification of requirements for pet 
The increasing need for arable/pasture land and
animal movement across borders is one part of the
housing has led to increased contact of both humans and
current political move towards greater integration. In the
 companion animals with vectors and wildlife reservoirs of
UK, abolition of quarantine for animals entering from
arthropod-borne infections. Dogs in particular are
numerous other countries has resulted in diseases
commonly involved with sporting and leisure activities in
previously considered exotic to the country 
te.g-
environments conducive to arthropod exposure. A recent
monocytic 
ehrlichiosis, l
babesiosis) being seen  by
 study examining the effect of clearing forest for housing.
veterinary practitioners for the first time in non-
developments showed that where relatively small areas of
quarantined animals.
forest (under two hectares) were left, the density of small
The introduction of infected animals into non-endemic
rodent species and the ticks that feed on them increases
areas may be associated with the development of non-
 dramatically. This effect is secondary to the loss of larger
traditional modes of transmission. In both Australia and
predator species within the small forest plots. A similar
the USA, transmission of B. gibsoni by biting has been
effect has been suggested for mosquito populations within
incriminated in the sudden appearance of infection in dog
cleared Amazonian rainforest.
breeds used for fighting. In the UK, alternative arthropod
Although not a *natural' means of increased prevalence
vectors may be involved in the transmission of Leishmania
of arthropod-borne infectious disease, it is clear that a
ul shop palaaenn-uou ot panodu paoajur wo wuunju?
number of the infectious agents described within this book
the absence of the usual sandfly vectors. Finally, as in
are potential candidates for spread via bioterrorism. There
humans, the spread of infection through blood
has been much discussion within the veterinary profession
transfusions by-passing the vector can occur, particularly
 of the likely role of veterinary surgeons in identifying
where no exposure history is available for donors.
possible outbreaks of infection that may be spread to the
The threat of increased geographical extension of these
animal and human population in this manner.
diseases and  the establishment of new areas of
Arthropod vectors
0i
infectious
 disease:
biology
I and contro
Richard Wall and Kieren Pitts
INTRODUCTION
cats, since they may transmit a range of viral, bacterial
The blood-feeding behaviour of a wide range of 
 and protozoan pathogens. A second family of ticks, the
arthropods makes them important vectors of infectious
Argasidae (the soft ticks), are parasites primarily of birds,
disease in cats and dogs. This chapter discusses the
bats and reptiles and will not be discussed here.
biology of the haematophagous arthropods most relevant
The major tick species known to be of importance in
to transmission of disease in companion animals.
transmitting disease to dogs and cats are summarized in
Table 2. The brown dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus is
one of the most widely distributed species of ticks found
TICKS
worldwide. Its primary host is the dog, and all life-cycle
Ticks are obligate, blood-feeding ectoparasites, closely
 stages may feed on this host. They often infest kennels
related to mites. They form a relatively small order of
and domestic premises, where feeding activity may occur
only about 800 species in the subclass Acari. However,
 all year round. Throughout much of northern Europe and
they are one of the most important groups of arthropod
Asia, the most common species of tick infesting dogs and
disease vectors. A single family of ticks, the Ixodidae
cats is the sheep tick, Ixodes ricinus. It is commonly found
(known as the hard ticks), and in particular species of
in pastures and mixed woodland, where the larval and
Rhipicephalus, Ixodes and Dermacentor, are of
nymphal stages feed primarily on small mammals and
paramount importance as vectors of disease for dogs and
ground-nesting birds and the adult stages on deer or
Table 2 Main tick species known to transmit pathogens to dogs and cats.
Family
 Subfamily
Genera
Key species
Distribution
lxodidae 
lxodinae (Prostriata)
lxodes
I ricinus (sheep, deer tick).
Europe
f. hexagonus (hedgehog tick)
Europe and north-west Africa
1. scaputaris (black-legged tick)
Eastern North America 
f. pacificus (Western black-legged tick)
Western North America 
f. persulcatus (Taiga tick)
Northeastern Europe and 
northern Asia
 Rhipicephalinae
 Dermacentor
D. variabilis (American dog tick)
North America
(Metastriata)
D. andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick)
North America
D. reticulatus
Europe
 Rhipicephalinae
Rhipicephalus
R. sanguineus (brown dog tick)
Worldwide
(Metastriata)
Haemaphysalinae
Haemaphysalis
H. leachi
Southern Africa
(Metastriata)
H. bispinosa
Middle East, Africa, Asia
H. tongicornis
Middle East, Africa, Asia.
Oceania
Amblyomminae
Amblyomma
A. americanum (lone star tick)
North America 
(Metastriata)
A. maculatum (Gulf coast tick)
North America
A. variegatum (tropical bont tick)
Africa
11
12
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
1 Adult male hard tick, Ixodes ricinus, in dorsal view. Ixodid
ticks are relatively large, ranging between 2 and 20 mm in
length. The body of the unfed tick is divided into only two
sections: the anterior gnathosoma, which bears the mouthparts.
(the chelicerae, hypostome and palps), and a posterior
idiosoma, which bears the legs. Ticks do not possess antennae
and when eyes are present they are simple and are located 
 dorsally at the sides of the scutum. (Reproduced from Savory
TH (1935) The Arachnida. Edward Arnold & Co., London)
 2 ixodes species. Adult female removed from a dog.
 3 ixodes species. Higher power magnification of the
 gnathosoma of an ixodes species nymph removed from
the coat of a dog.
domestic livestock. Its range is believed to be increasing
Morphology
with warmer wetter winters, and feeding on dogs and cats 
[xodid ticks are relatively large (2-20 mm in length)
may occur over extended periods of the year. The
(1-3). The mouthparts are composed of a pair of four-
hedgehog tick, I. bexagonus, is widely distributed
 segmented palps (simple sensory organs), which aid host
throughout Europe in peri-urban environments, and in
location. Between the palps lies a pair of heavily
north-west Africa. In Europe, I. bexagonus may be the
sclerotized, segmented appendages called chelicerae,
tick most commonly found on cats. Dermacentor species 
housed in cheliceral sheaths. At the end of each chelicera
are also frequently encountered in North America and
are a number of tooth-like digits. The chelicerae are
 southern and central Europe. Dogs are the preferred hosts
capable of moving back and forth and the tooth-like
of adult D. variabilis (American dog tick) while larvae
digits are used to cut and pierce the skin of the host
and nymphs feed largely on small rodents. Adults are
animal during feeding. Below the chelicerae is the median
most abundant from late spring to early summer but in
hypostome, which emerges from the base of the palps (the
some areas may persist until autumn.
basis capituli) and extends anteriorly and ventrally. The
Arthropod vectors of infectious disease: biology and control  13
hypostome does not move but is armed with rows of
Life cycle
backwardly directed, ventral teeth. The hypostome is
The life cycle of ixodid ticks involves four stages: egg, six-
thrust into the hole cut by the chelicerae and the teeth are
legged larva, eight-legged nymph and eight-legged adult
used to attach the tick securely to its host. As the
(4). During passage through these stages the larvae,
hypostome is inserted, the palps are spread flat onto the
 nymphs and adults take a number of blood meals. Tick
surface of the host's skin.
parasitism probably evolved through close association
During feeding, hard ticks may remain attached to
with nest-dwelling (nidiculous) hosts until mechanisms
their host for several days. For ticks with long
developed that allowed them to remain permanently on
mouthparts, attachment by the chelicerae and hypostome
their host or to locate and relocate hosts at intervals in the
is sufficient to anchor the tick in place. However, for ticks
open environment.
with short mouthparts, attachment is maintained during
Most, though not all, non-nidiculous hard ticks adopt
feeding by salivary secretions that harden around the
 a 'sit and wait' strategy rather than actively searching for
mouthparts and effectively cement the tick in place.
hosts. To obtain a blood meal, they climb to the tips of
Female ticks can increase in size substantially when
vegetation, usually to a height appropriate for their host.
they engorge during feeding. Some of the larger species of
This behaviour is described as *questing'. Ticks identify a
Amblyomma can increase from just under 10 mm to over
potential host via chemoreceptors on the tarsi of their first
25 mm in length and increase from about 0.04 g to over
pair of legs, using cues such as carbon dioxide and other
4 g in weight during feeding. The dorsal surface of male
semiochemicals emitted by the host. Following contact,
hard ticks is covered by a hardened protective shield
they transfer to the host and move over the skin surface
(scutum); this is greatly reduced in females. As a result,
to find their preferred attachment sites.
males are not able to engorge to the same degree as
 For most ixodid ticks, living in an environment where
females and may take more frequent smaller meals.
there is a relatively plentiful supply of host animals and in
4 The three-host feeding strategy of an ixodid 
tick. On finding a suitable host, usually a small
 mammal or bird, the larvae of ixodid ticks begin to 
 feed. Blood feeding typically takes between four 
 and six days. On completion of feeding, the
Nymph
Fully fed 
adult drops
larvae drop to the ground where they moult to
moults to
to the
 become nymphs. Ater another interval, the
adult
ground
nymphs begin to quest for a second host and,
Host 3
after feeding, drop to the ground and moult to
Oviposition
 become adults. Finally, after a further interval, 
adults begin to quest and females mate and 
 engorge on their final host. After the final blood 
meal, adult females drop to the ground where 
Fully fed 
Eggs hatch
they lay large batches of several thousand eggs
nymph
 over a period of days or weeks. Adult males may
drops to
remain unattached on the host animal and
the ground
 attempt to mate with as many females as
possible.
Nymphs
Host 2
Host 1
Larvae feed
feed
Fully fed 
larva drops
to the
Larva moults to nymph
 ground 
14
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
habitats where conditions are suitable for good survival
FLEAS
during the off-host phase, a three-host life cycle has been
Fleas (order Siphonaptera) are small, wingless, obligate,
adopted (4). For example, the deer tick Ixodes scapularis
blood-feeding insects. The order is relatively small, with
is a vector of the spirochaetes of Borrelia burgdorferi in
about 2,500 described species. On cats and dogs,
 North America. Larval I. scapularis become infected after
Ctenocephalides felis and Ctenocephalides canis are the
feeding on small rodents, particularly the white-footed
two species of major importance worldwide. However, in
mouse. Bacteria are then transmitted from larval to
most 
 geographical areas, even on dogs, C. felis
nymphal and adult stages (trans-stadial transmission).
 predominates.
The preferred host for adult ticks is the white-tailed deer.
Therefore, Lyme borreliosis is generally confined to
 Morphology and life cycle
locations where the vector tick, the disease reservoir {the
Adult feas are highly modified for an ectoparasitic life
white-footed mouse) and the preferred host {the white-
and are structurally very different from most other insects
tailed deer) are abundant.
(5). In contrast to lice or ticks, the flea body is laterally
For the relatively small number of ixodid ticks fabout
compressed. Adults are wingless and usually between
S0 species) that inhabit areas where hosts are scarce and
1 mm and 6 mm in length, with females being larger than
lengthy seasonal periods of unfavourable climate occur
males. The mouthparts are modified for piercing, with a
(e.g. Rhipicephalus bursa or Dermacentor albipictus),
salivary canal for injecting saliva into the wound and a
two- and one-host feeding strategies have evolved,
food canal along which blood is drawn. Both sexes are
respectively.
blood feeders.
For many non-nidiculous ticks, the ancestral nest-
At 24°C (75.2*F) and 78% relative humidity (RH), and
dwelling habit is reflected in their selective environmental
with a plentiful food supply, under most household
requirements, particularly for high relative humidity. For
conditions, C. felis will complete its developmental cycle
example, I. ricinus begins to quest when temperatures rise
above a critical threshold of about 7"C {44.6°F) but
requires a humidity above 80% to survive and feed. These
environmental constraints restrict feeding activity to
relatively short periods of the year during spring and
autumn. Outside these periods, ticks remain quiescent,
sheltering within the vegetation. Clearly, since tick
 densities and geographical and temporal activity ranges
are strongly determined by microclimate, these may be
greatly extended by climate change, particularly mild wet
winters.
Vectorial potential
Almost all the ticks of importance as vectors of disease in
cats and dogs are three-host species, and it is this
movement between different types of vertebrate hosts,
and the fact that they are not strictly host-specific in their
feeding preferences, that make ticks such important
 disease vectors. Wild animals are particularly important
as reservoirs of pathogens through a wild animal/
tick/domestic animal cycle of contact (see Chapter 2).
Several other factors contribute to the vectorial capacity
of ticks. These include: secure attachment to their host;
lengthy feeding periods allowing large numbers of
pathogens to be ingested and transmitted; high rates of
reproduction; and the transmission of pathogens between
tick life cycle-stages {trans-stadial transmission) and
 5 Adult male Ctenocephalides canis. The body colour may
between generations via the egg (transovarial trans-
vary from light brown to black. The body is divided into head,
thorax and abdomen, which are armed with spines that are
directed backward. The head is high, narrow and cuneate.
anticoagulants  and other active  compounds
that
Eyes are absent in some species of nest flea but if present,
modulate host cutaneous immunity and inflammation,
they are usually simple and found on the head in front of the
while enhancing vasodilation in order to bring more
 antennae. The shape of the abdomen may be used to
blood to the feeding site {see Chapter 3). The salivary
distinguish the sexes. In female fleas, both ventral and dorsal
fluid is the principal avenue for disease transmission in
surfaces are rounded. In the male flea the dorsal surface is
the hard ticks.
relatively flatter and the ventral surface greatly curved.
Arthropod vectors of infectious disease: biology and control  15
in 3-5 weeks {6). However, under adverse conditions this
objects in close proximity induce adult cat fleas to jump.
can be extended to as long as 190 days. The eggs cannot
Once on their host, C. felis adults feed almost
withstand major variations in temperature and will not
immediately and tend to become permanent residents.
survive below 50% RH. At 70% RH and 35°C (95°F),
Within 36 hours of adult emergence, most females will
50% of C. felis eggs hatch within 1.5 days. At 70% RH
have found hosts and mated. Egg laying begins
and 15°℃ (s9°F), it takes six days for 50% of eggs to
24-48 hours after the first blood meal.
hatch. The duration of the three larval stages is about one
week at 24°C (75.2°F) and 75% RH, but in unfavourable
Vectorial potential
conditions the larval cycle can take up to 200 days.
Fleas feed by piercing the skin of the host and inserting
Larvae will only survive at temperatures between 13°C
the tip of the labrum-epipharynx to extract capillary
(55.4"F) and 35°C (95°F) and mortality is high below
blood.
A female flea consumes an average
of
 50% RH. The duration of the pupal stage is about 8-9
14 microlitres of blood per day. Fleas are vectors of a
days at 24°C (75.2°F) and 78% RH.
range of viruses and bacteria and pathogen transmission
When fully developed, adults emerge from the pupal
is enhanced by their promiscuous feeding habits. Most
cuticle but may remain within the cocoon for up to
species of flea are host-preferential rather than host-
12 months at low temperatures. Emergence may be
specific and will try to feed on any available animal. For
extremely rapid under optimal conditions and is triggered
example, C. felis has been found on over fifty different
by mechanical pressure, changes in light, vibrations,
host species. Other factors that contribute to the potential
elevated carbon dioxide and heat. As adult fleas generally
of C. felis as a vector include transovarial transmission of
do not actively search for hosts and hosts may only return
 some pathogens (Rickettsia species) and the transmission
to the lair or bedding at infrequent intervals, the ability to
 of pathogens such as Bartonella henselae through adult
remain within the cocoon for extended periods is
flea faeces {see Chapters 10 and 12)
essential. The air currents created by warm, mobile
6 Life cycle of a typical flea. (A) Adult. Wwithin
 24-48 hours of the first blood meal, adult 
females begin to oviposit. The eggs may be
deposited on the host but will fall to the ground
within a few hours. Timing of oviposition may
 contribute to the concentration of flea eggs at
the resting sites used by the host. In the
laboratory an adult female C. felis can
produce an average of about 30 eggs per day
ower a life of about 50-100 days. However on
a cat or dog, the average life span is
substantially less than this. (B) Egg. Flea eggs
are about 0.5 mm in length, pearly white and 
oval. (C) Larva. Flea larvae are white and
maggot-like with a distinct brownish head and 
 they are covered with short hairs. Larvae grow
 in length from about 1.5 mm on hatching to
4-10 mm when fully grown. They have limited
 powers of movement (probably less than
20 cm before pupation) and are negatively
phototactic and positively geotactic. In the
domestic environment this behaviour often 
takes them to the base of carpets. Outdoors,
they move into shaded areas under bushes,
trees and leaves. Adult flea faeces are the primary food source for all three larval stages. (D) Pupa. When fully developed, the
mature third-stage larva spins a thin, silk cocoon within which the larva pupates. Fragments of detritus, soil and dust adhere to
the cocoon, giving it some degree of camouflage and protection from insecticides. (After Seguy E (1944) Insectes Ectoparasifes:
Mallophages, Anopioures, Siphonapferes. Lechevalier Paris)
16
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
MOSQUITOES
saep inoy aunbau alleoidii saoinbson yuem Apoq pue
The mosquitoes, family Culicidae, are a diverse family of
to digest a blood meal and produce eggs. Oviposition
true flies (Diptera), containing over 3,000 species. The
begins as soon as a suitable site is located. Adult
family occurs worldwide from the Tropics to the Arctic
mosquitoes are strong fliers, anopheline species in
and is divided into three subfamilies: Anophelinae,
particular.
Culicinae and Toxorhynchitinae. There are more than
2,500 species of Culicinae, of which the main genera are
Vectorial potential
Aedes, containing over 900 species, and Culex, with
When mosquitoes feed, both the mandibles and the
nearly 7s0 species.
maxillae puncture the skin. Saliva passes down the
 salivary canal in the hypopharynx while blood passes up
Morphology and life cycle
the food canal formed by the elongated labrum.
Mosquitoes are small, slender flies, 2-10 mm in length
Mosquitoes act as vectors for a range of viral, nematode
(7). Anopheline and culicine mosquitoes can be readily
and protozoan pathogens. Mosquito vectors can be
differentiated   on  morphological 
and behavioural
relatively long lived and may overwinter, allowing
characteristics (8).
pathogen survival from one season to another. When
 Mosquitoes lay their eggs on the surface of water on
 competent mosquitoes feed on the blood of a viraemic
damp ground, usually at night. They often deposit more
 vertebrate host, virions are ingested with the blood meal
than 200 eggs per oviposition. The larvae of all species are
 and enter the midgut epithelial cells, within which they
 aquatic and they occur in a wide variety of habitats such
replicate. After spreading to the haemocoele, they then
as the edge of permanent pools, puddles, flooded tree-
 disperse to a variety of tissues, particularly the salivary
holes or even temporary water-filled containers.
gands, fat bodies, ovaries and nerves. 
 Salivary
Mosquito larvae require between three and 20 days to
transmission of the virus occurs when the infected
pass through four stadia. The final larval stage moults to
mosquito next feeds on an appropriate host. In some
become a pupa and this stage may last between one and
mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of viruses also
seven days. Mating normally occurs within 24 hours of
occurs. Mosquitoes are also vectors of the canine
 emergence and is completed in flight. Mosquitoes feed on 
heartworm Dirofilaria immitis (see Chapter S).
nectar and plant juices, but females need a blood meal to
Different mosquito species have different blood
develop their ovaries and must feed between each egg
feeding preferences; some will feed only on certain hosts
batch. Longevity is highly variable and species-specific,
while others are less discriminating and will feed on a
 but on average, females live for 2-3 weeks, while the male
variety of hosts depending on their relative abundance.
lifespan is shorter.
Culex quinquefasciatus, for example, frequently feed on
 Mosquitoes are nocturnal or crepuscular feeders, with
dogs but less frequently on cats. This host species
 a wide host range. Host location is achieved using a range
preference might explain why dogs are more commonly
of olfactory and visual cues, orientation to wind direction
infected with heartworm than cats.
7 Adult male mosquito, Aedes aegypti. Adult mosquitoes have
scales on the wing veins and margins and adult females
 possess an elongated proboscis, which is used in blood feeding.
 Male mosquitoes have plumose antennae, whereas those of
females have fewer, shorter hairs. (Reproduced from Snodgrass
RE (1935) Principles of Insect Morphology. McGraw Hill Book
Company, New York)
Arthropod vectors of infectious disease: biology and control  17
Anopheline
Culicine
0080
 8 Key life cycle features distinguishing anopheline and culicine mosquitoes. (A) Adults. Living 
anopheline adults can readily be distinguished from culicines, such as Aedes and Culex, when 
resting on a flat surface. On landing, anopheline mosquitoes rest with the proboscis, head,
thorax and abdomen in one straight line at an angle to the surface. The culicine adult rests with
its body angled and its abdomen directed towards the surface. The palps of female anopheline
mosquitoes are as long and straight as the proboscis, whereas in female culicine mosquitoes
the palps are usually only about one-quarter of the length of the proboscis. The abdomen of
Anopheles bears hairs but not scales. (B) Eggs. The eggs of anopheline mosquitoes possess
characteristic lateral floats that maintain their orientation in the water and prevent them from 
sinking. Most species of Aedes lay their eggs on moist substrates, where they await adequate
water to stimulate hatching. Curex form batches of eggs into a raft on the water surface.
(C) Larvae. Anopheline larvae lie parallel to the water surface and breathe through a pair of
spiracles at the posterior end of the abdomen. In contrast, culicine larvae hang suspended 
from the water surface by a prominent posterior breathing siphon, with spiracles at its tip. Curex
 Anopheline larvae collect particles from the air-water interface. (D) Pupae. Mosquito pupae
usually remain at the water surface but when disturbed they can be highly mobile. They do not 
from the pupal case and crawl from the water to harden their cuticle and inflate their wings.
18
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
SANDFLIES
Vectorial potential
The Psychodidae is large family of true flies (Diptera)
When blood feeding, the toothed mandibles cut the skin
containing over 600 species. Within this family, the
while the maxillae hold the mouthparts in place in the
subfamily Phlebotominae includes biting species known
wound. Blood is sucked from a subcutaneous pool and up
as sandflies. They are widely distributed in the Tropics,
a food canal formed by the labium above and the
Subtropics and around the Mediterranean. There are two
hypopharynx below. The salivary duct is formed by the
genera of Phlebotominae of veterinary importance: in the
under side of the hypopharynx. Blood feeding is limited to
Old World, Phlebotomus, and in the New World,
areas of exposed, less densely haired areas of skin, such as
Lutzomyia. Sandflies transmit the important zoonotic
the ears, eyelids, nose, feet and tail. The feeding activity of
protozoal infection leishmaniosis in dogs and cats.
most species occurs during dusk or even darkness,
although some will bite during daylight. Most sandflies
Morphology and life cycle
have a broad host range.
Phlebotomine sandflies are narrow bodied and up to five
 Sandflies are important as vectors of canine and feline
mm in length (9). They breed in humid, terrestrial
leishmaniosis (see Chapter 8). Leishmania amastigotes are
habitats. Females lay 50-100 eggs per eg batch in small
ingested with a blood meal when sandfies feed on an
cracks or holes in damp ground, leaf litter and around the
infected host, and they develop extracellularly in the mid-
roots of forest trees. The larvae pass through four stadia
and hindgut. After three days, they transform into
before pupation and they feed on organic debris ffaeces
promasigotes and migrate into the foregut, where
and decaying plant material). The life cycle is slow and
multiplication occurs.
Infective
 promastigotes  are
takes at least 7-10 weeks, with many Palaearctic species
regurgitated from the mouthparts, foregut and midgut
having only two generations per year. Adult sandflies feed
into the dermis of a new host during feeding. This process
on nectar, sap, honeydew and fruit juices and live for
is assisted by blockage of the foregut caused by
2-6 weeks. Only adult females are blood feeders. Adults
congregated parasites, which prevents the fly from feeding
often accumulate in refugia where the microclimate is
effectively, thus ensuring repeated feeding attempts on
suitable for breeding (e.g. rodent burrows and caves),
multiple hosts. Infection is assisted by the presence 
of
with females blood feeding on the mammals in close
vasodilatory enzymes and immunomodulatory chemicals
vicinity. They have very limited powers of flight, moving
in the fly saliva (see Chapter 3).
in characteristic short hops, and have a range of perhaps
only 100-200 metres.
9 Adult female sandfly, Phfebofomus papatasi.
 Phlebotomines are densely hairy in
appearance, with large black eyes and long
legs. The wings are narrow, long, hairy and 
held erect over the thorax when at rest. The
antennae are long, 16-segmented, filamentous 
and covered in fine setae. The thorax is
strongly humped. The larvae are elongate.
legless and up to five mm in length, with a
distinct head carrying eyespots and toothed 
mandibles. (Reproduced from Smart JA (1943)
Handbook for the ldentincation of Insects of
 Medicar importance. British Museum (Natural
History), London}
Arthropod vectors of infectious disease: biology and control
¥19
TABANID AND MUSCID FLIES
Both sexes of S. calcitrans are persistent and strong
The Tabanidae and Muscidae are large and important
fliers and are active by day. Female adults are 5-7 mm in
families of true flies {Diptera). Most species of veterinary
length. The body is usually grey, with seven circular black
importance belong to one of three genera: Tabanus fhorse
spots on its abdomen and four dark longitudinal stripes on
flies, greenheads), Chrysops (deer flies) and Haematopota
its thorax. Stable flies have piercing and sucking
{clegs). The family Muscidae contains several species
mouthparts, with short maxillary palps, and both sexes
(Musca domestica, M. sorbens, M. autumnalis and M.
are
 blood feeders. After multiple blood meals, adult
vetustissima) that may be important mechanical vectors
females lay eggs in wet straw, garden debris, old stable
of disease and some that are also blood feeding
bedding or manure. Eggs hatch in 5-10 days, depending
(Haematobia irritans). The family also includes the stable
 on temperature. The cream-coloured, saprophagous larvae
fly Stomoxys calcitrans, which is of importance as a biting
pass through three stadia and then pupariate. The life cycle
fly of many mammalian hosts, including dogs. The stable
length varies from 3-7 weeks, depending on temperature.
fly is now found worldwide, after being introduced into
North America from Europe during the 1700s. Stomoxys
Vectorial potential
niger and S. sitiens may replace S. calcitrans as important
Tabanid mouthparts are short and strong for slashing.
blood feeding pests in Afrotropical and Oriental regions.
rasping and sponging. They are important mechanical
vectors of several viral, bacterial, protozoan
and
Morphology and life cycles
nematode pathogens. When a female tabanid feeds, saliva
All the Tabanidae are large robust flies (10). The adults
containing an anticoagulant is pumped into the wound,
are strong fliers and are usually diurnal. Both sexes feed
before blood is sucked up into the food canal. When
on nectar and, in most species, females are also blood
feeding ceases, the labia of the mouthparts trap a small
feeders on a wide range of hosts. The tabanids are painful
quantity of blood. Pathogens in this blood may be
and persistent biters.
protected for an hour or more and successfully
1aye yiey pue 5assew aa1el u Piel ane saa Piueqe1
transmitted to a new host at the next meal. Mechanical
4-7 days. The first-stage larvae move to mud or wet soil
transmission is made more likely by the painful nature of
and quickly moult. The larvae of Chrysops may feed on
tabanid bites. Biting flies are more likely to be dislodged
decaying vegetable debris, while those of Haematopota
by the host before blood feeding is complete and they will
and Tabarus are carnivorous; therefore, the latter species
attempt to feed again rapidly, increasing the chance of live
are often found at relatively low population densities.
pathogen transmission.
Most larvae require periods of several months to several
Stable flies also inflict frequent, painful bites and
years to complete development, during which time they
remain on their hosts only when feeding. They will
pass through six and 13 stadia. Pupation takes place close
Occasionally follow potential hosts for considerable
to, or within, dryer soil and requires 2-3 weeks. The life
distances and will follow them indoors. Stable flies are
cycle length varies from 10-42 weeks. Most temperate
known mechanically to transmit a number of viral
species have only a single generation per year and adults
pathogens and are also suspected of transmitting bacteria,
live for 2-4 weeks.
protozoa and nematodes.
10 A tabanid, Tabanus lafipes. The body is
 10 
 generally dark in colour although this can be
variable, ranging from dull brown to black or
grey Some species may even be brilliant
yellow, green or metallic blue. However, the
body also usually carries a pattern of stripes
 or pale patches and the thorax and abdomen
are covered with fine hairs. (Reproduced from 
Castellani A and Chalmers AJ (1919) Manual
of Tropicat Medicine. 3rd edn. Bailliere, Tindall
and Cox, London)
20
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
TRUE BUGS
containing an anticoagulant passes down the salivary
The order Hemiptera, known as the true bugs, includes
canal while blood is pumped up the food canal. Feeding
roughly 90,000 insect species. They all have piercing and
may take between three and 30 minutes. After engorging,
sucking mouthparts and two pairs of wings. Most of the
the rostrum is removed from the host and the bug
species feed only on plant juices. However, species of the
defecates, after which it crawls away to find shelter If the
family Ruduviidae are of medical and  veterinary
bug feeds on a host infected with Trypanosoma cruzi,
significance as all species can transmit the protozoan
 amastigotes or trypomastigotes may be ingested. In the
Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas'
disease (see Chapter 13).
trypomastigotes develop in its hindgut. The next time the
bug feeds, metacyclic trypomastigotes are voided in its
Morphology and life cycle
faeces and are rubbed or scratched into the bite wound or
Adult bugs are secretive, hiding in cracks and crevices in
mucous membranes of the eye, nose or mouth. The
 buildings and natural habitats. Eggs are laid in groups or
interval between feeding and defecation is critical in
loosely on a substrate and they hatch within 10-30 days.
determining the effectiveness of disease transmission.
There are usually five stadia before the insects reach
maturity, the nymphs being similar in appearance to
adults but not possessing wings and being capable of
CONTROL
moulting to the next stage after only one blood meal (11).
When dealing with arthropod-transmitted infections,
Depending on temperature, the life cycle may be
 prevention of arthropod attack is desirable as even low
completed in 3-6 months but usually requires 1-2 years.
levels of biting may be sufficient to result in transmission.
However, chemicals used for this purpose, particularly
Vectorial potential
Feeding is initiated by chemical and physical cues. Carbon
res ult in effects on non-target organisms and selection for
dioxide causes increased activity and heat will stimulate
resistance. Therefore, the choice of product requires
probing. When probing is initiated, the rostrum is swung
 detailed consideration of the vector species in question, its
forward and the mandibular stylets are used to cut
behaviour and biology, the mechanism and kinetics of
through the skin and then anchor the mouthparts. The
transmission of infection and the level of infectious
maxillary stylets probe for a blood vessel and saliva
challenge.
 11 
11 A cone-nosed bug, Triafoma megistus, in dorsal view.
Triatomine bugs are generally between 20 and 30 mm in
length. Most species are dark in colour but are often
characteristically marked along the abdomen, pronotum or 
at the base of the wings with contrasting splashes of yellow.
orange or red. They possess an elongated head with large
eyes and four-segmented antennae. The segmented
rostrum is formed by the labium, which encloses the stylet-
ike mouthparts, composed by the modified maxillae and 
mandibles used to pierce the skin of the host. when the
bug is not feeding the rostrum is folded back under the
head. An adult bug can take up to three times its own
weight in blood. They feed roughly every 5-10 days.
although they can survive prolonged periods without blood.
(Reproduced from Castellan, A and Chalmers AJ (1919)
Manual of Tropical Medicine. 3rd edn. Bailliere, Tindall and 
Cox, London}
Arthropod vectors of infectious disease: biology and control  21
 Over the past ten years, the problems associated with
Hea control
direct treatment of the environment have encouraged
For optimal control of flea-transmitted infections, the
increased development of products for topical or systemic
adults already infesting dogs and cats should be killed
administration to small companion animals. These
immediately and reinfestation from the environment
include a number of newer generation insecticidal and
prevented. A wide range of products is available (Table
acaricidal chemicals such as fipronil, imidacloprid,
3). Many of the new chemicals with excellent long-acting
nitenpyram and selemectin, as well as reformulations of
flea adulticidal activity also have contact ovicidal and/or
existing compounds such as amitraz and the pyrethroids
larvicidal activity. In addition, combination with insect
permethrin and deltamethrin. Many of the newer
growth regulators (chitin synthesis inhibitors, juvenile
products are highly arthropod specific, resulting in
hormone analogues) applied directly to the animal not
increased mammalian safety. In addition, they have
only increases ovicidal and/or larvicidal activity but also
prolonged residual activity, thus decreasing the frequency
delivers it effectively to the sleeping areas most likely to be
of administration. Products combining ectoparasiticides 
infested, without unnecessarily contaminating the
with insect development inhibitors such as methoprene
environment. Insect growth regulators do not kill adult
and lufenuron are now available for on-animal
use.
fleas and are not suitable by themselves for controlling
Formulations for on-animal use are varied, although
flea-transmitted diseases, unless used in a completely
many of the newer drugs are “spot-on' preparations.
 closed environment. Frequent vacuuming can help to
Others include sprays, dips, collars, shampoos, foams and
reduce environmental infestation and pet bedding should
powders, as well as oral preparations. Environmental
be washed at high temperatures.
treatments suitable for domestic premises include tradi-
tional insecticides forganophosphates, carbamates, pyre-
Hy control
thrins) either alone or in combination with insect growth
The most effective method to prevent fly bites and
regulators, and biological control using nematodes.
transmission of infection is to ensure that pets avoid areas
Although there are several management strategies
of high fly density and are kept indoors when fly activity
available for control of arthropods on dogs and cats,
is highest. Flies spend a limited time on their hosts and are
control of arthropod vectors in wildlife reservoirs still
difficult to control using insecticides unless these have
remains a major challenge.
rapid killing or repellent activity. Permethrin and
deltamethrin are the only insecticides with sufficient
Tick control
repellent activity and rapidity of action to make them
Animals should be inspected for ticks daily, particularly
 suitable for the control of sandfly biting in dogs (Table 3).
during the spring and summer. On cats and dogs, the
Neither insecticide is suita ble for cats.
majority of adult ticks attach to the front of the body,
The environmental use of residual  insecticides is
particularly the ears, face, neck and interdigital areas.
difficult for insects that do not have readily identified
U saioads yoi ueamiaq uoeuea aq Aeu auui taamo
breeding or resting sites. Ta banid and many muscid larvae
this respect. Larvae and nymphs may also be found along
are generally inaccessible to insecticides. Most adult insect
the dorsum. Attached ticks should be removed from cats
vectors are relatively strong fliers and can move several
and dogs using purpose-designed tick-removing tools.
miles from where they developed as larvae. Hence,
Jerking, twisting or crushing ticks during removal should
 successful control of larvae in one site may not result in
be avoided. They should not be handled without gloves
 significant reductions in adult fly numbers, biting activity
and, once removed, should be disposed of carefully.
 or disease transmission. In some countries, public control
Where practicable, contact between pets and known
 agencies are responsible for controlling mosquito and
areas of high tick density should be limited at times of
other vector numbers. In areas where mosquito and other
year when tick activity is known to be high. There are
fly
 populations
aré
 problematic,
the
domestic
several acaricides developed for use on dogs and cats
pe moum ysa au aq pd aq aew aa
( Table 3, overleaf), and those that kill or repel ticks before
 door screens, draining standing water or treating it with
or soon after they attach are particularly valuable.
chemical  insecticides or  the microbial  insecticide
Environmental treatment with organophosphates or
produced by Bacillus thuringiensis subspecies israelensis.
pyrethroids in domestic premises may be useful under
The use of any insecticide product should be combined
some circumstances. However, since off-host life cycle
with good sanitation practices that reduce breeding sites.
stages are often in highly inaccessible locations, environ-
mental treatment is usually of only limited efficacy.
Triatomine control
Domestic bugs can be controlled by spraying dwellings
with formulations of pyrethroid insecticide. This is often
enough to eliminate existing populations of the bugs
within a house, although reintroductions are possible.
22
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Table 3 Insecticides, acaricides and insect growth regulators used in the control of arthropod infestations
of dogs and cats.
Active ingredient
Product
Action on arthropod vectors
Application
Fipronil (phenylpyrazole)
 Frontline, Frontline Plus,
Neurotoxin; inhibits GABA-mediated receptors 
Topical spot-on, spray
Frontline Combo (Merial)
 in the arthropod CNs; flea adulticide, acaricide.
 When formulated with methoprene, flea 
larvicide
Imidocloprid (chloronicotinyl.
Advantage, Advantix
Neurotoxin; inhibits nicotinergic-mediated 
Topical spot-on
pyridylmethylamine)
for dogs (Bayer)
receptors. Flea adulticide. When formulated 
with permethrin will kill and repel ticks and 
 flies in dogs 
Selamectin
 Stronghold, Revolution 
 Neurotoxin; binds to glutamate-gated chloride
Topical spot-on
(macrocyclic-lactone)
(Pfizer)
channels in the arthropod CNs; flea adulticide 
 and larvicide. Some acaricidal activity
Amitraz (triazapentadiene)
Mitaban (Upjohn), Aludex Neurotoxin; action not fully understood;
Collar or topical 
(ntervet). Preventic
 insecticide and acaricide
pour-on
(Allerderm/virbac) and 
various generic brands
Nitenpyram (neonicotinoid,
Capstar (Novartis)
Neurotoxin; binds and inhibits insect-specific
Oral
 pyridylmethylamine)
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors; rapid acting
flea adulticide 
Organophosphates (e.g.
Various
 Neurotoxins; cholinesterase inhibitors;
Topical or systemic 
malathion, ronnel,
general adulticides
formulations, plus 
 chlorpyrifos, fenthion,
 environmental
dichlorvos, cythioate,
preparations
 diazanon) propetamphos,
phosmet
Carbamates (e.g. carbaryl.
Various
 Neurotoxins; cholinesterase inhibitors;
Topical or 
propoxur, bendiocarb)
general adulticides
environmental
 preparations 
Pyrethroids (e.g. permethrin,
Various
Neurotoxins; synthetic insecticides derived
Topical or 
deltamethrin, others)
from pyrethrins; interfere with sodium
environmental
 activation gate of the nerve cells; tick, flea,
preparations
fly adulticide and repellent. Do not use in cats
Lufenuron (benzoy)
 Program (Novartis)
Chitin synthesis inhibitor. Fea ovicide and
Oral or depot
phenylurea)
 some larvicidal activity
injection
Cyromazine
Staykil (Novartis)
Insect growth inhibitor. Flea larvicide
Environmental
 prepar ation
Methoprene, pyriproxifen
Various
Juvenile hormone and juvenile hormone 
Environmental 
analogues. Fea larvicide
 preparations, collars,
spot-ons
Natural botanical products
Various
Insecticidal or insect repellent properties.
(eucalyptus oil, pennyroyal oil.
However, the precise efficacy unknown.
tea tree oil, citrus oil and 
Neurotoxity after ingestion at high
 D-limonene, rotenone)
concentrations. Do not use in cats
The role of wildlife and
wildlife reservoirs
the
maintenance
of
arthropod-borne
infections
Kevin Bown and Malcolm Bennett
INTRODUCTION
directly or indirectly fi.e. via an arthropod vector), with a
As interest in emerging microparasitic infections of
reservoir host. For example, dogs and cats can become
human and domestic animals such as Borrelid
infected with Borrelia burgdorferi if fed on by an infected
burgdorferi, Anaplasma phagocytophilum and Bartonella
tick that has, in turn, fed on an infected vole or mouse
species has grown in recent decades, the key role of
during an earlier developmental stage, but dogs and cats
wildlife in their maintenance has led to increased interest
play no significant role in the overall epidemiology of the
in the ecology of these agents in their natural hosts. While
infection. In other cases, dogs and cats themselves may be
much is still unknown, it is becoming apparent that
reservoir hosts for an infection. For example, both wild
complex interactions between hosts, vectors and 
and domestic species of cat appear to be the sole reservoir
microparasites {bacteria, viruses and protozoa) have
host for Bartonella henseiae and B. clarridgeiae, while
evolved to enable the continued existence of such agents
dogs appear to fill this role for B. vinsoni subspecies
in natural systems. This chapter will highlight a number
berkhoffii.
of wildlife species important in the maintenance of
For many of the infections described in later chapters
arthropod-borne infections of dogs and cats, and some of
there is more than one reservoir species involved in
the key ecological adaptations involved.
maintaining the microparasite in nature, and as
recognition of the potential role of wildlife increases, so
THE IMPORTANCE OF WWILDLIFE IN THE
more and more species are being implicated in the
MAINTENANCE OF ARTHROPOD-BORNE
maintenance of vector-borne infections. For example
INFECTIONS
Anaplasmaphagocytophilumipreviously
Ehrlichia
phagocytophila, Cytocoetes phagocytophila), the agent
The concept of reservoir hosts
responsible for granulocytic ehrlichiosis in dogs and cats,
Wild animals ha ve been implicated in the epidemiology of
has long been associated in Europe with disease in sheep
many arthropod-borne infections and, as more research
and other ruminants, which were widely regarded as the
into emerging diseases takes place, more wildlife 
principal reservoir hosts. However, within the past few
reservoirs will be identified. Several of the infections
 years, small rodents have also been identified as reservoir
discussed in detail elsewhere in this book are maintained
hosts. The role rodents play in the epidemiology of
in wildlife hosts, and infection and disease in humans and
disease in humans and domesticated animals remains
domesticated animals occurs only "accidentally' as a result
unclear, not least as there is debate about whether all
of being bitten by a vector. These accidental hosts play
strains of A. phagocytopbilum are identical, or whether
little role in maintaining the microparasite. Those species 
each has its own host range and ecology and,
deemed essential for maintaining the infection within its
consequently, is of different pathogenicity to accidental
natural ecological system are termed reservoir hosts. Such
hosts such as dogs, cats and man.
hosts must be susceptible to infection and allow the
microparasite to reach the stage of development required 
Infection in reservoir and accidental hosts
for it to be transmitted. Infection can persist within
A difference often commented on between the beha viour
populations of reservoir hosts in the absence of host 
of arthropod-borne parasites in reservoir hosts and
species other than arthropod vectors, and infection in
 accidental hosts is in the pathogenesis of the infection and
accidental host species usually results from contact, either
 resultant disease. Many reservoir hosts show few clinical
23
24
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
signs of infection. For example, there is little evidence of
For example, Lyme arthritis is associated with B.
clinical disease in rodents with bartonellosis, babesiosis or
burgdorferi sensu stricto infection, neuroborreliosis with
 granulocytic ehrlichiosis. This is not, however, a hard-
B. garinii and B. afzeli is associated with acrodermatitis
and-fast rule, as some apparent reservoir hosts can
chronica atophicans {ACA). The pathogenic status of
become clinically diseased. For example, white-footed
other Borrelia species such as B. valaisiana and B.
mice {Peromyscus leucopus) may exhibit neurological
japonica is currently uncertain (see Chapter 9).
signs of infection with Borrelia burgdorferi despite being
an important reservoir host for this bacterium.
Co-infection
Furthermore, *disease' can be difficult to detect in wildlife
It should be noted that wildlife species can also be
unless it causes high mortality or obvious lesions such as
important
reservoir
effects on fecundity, susceptibility to predation, ability to
microparasites, and thus vectors feeding on them can
defend a territory or forage for food, or growth and
acquire multiple infections and consequently transmit 
maturation rates. Such parameters are difficult to study in
these to accidental hosts such as humans and companion
wild populations, and data on such aspects of wildlife
animals. Wild rodents in the USA may be concurrently
infections are scarce. F
However, while the selection
infected with Borrelia burgdorferi, Babesia microti,
pressures on hosts and parasites may often lead to the co-
Anaplasma phagocytophilum and various Bartonella
evolution of traits resulting in relatively subtle disease, no
 species, and similar findings have been reported in
such selection occurs during infection of accidental hosts.
Europe. Whether there is any interaction between these
Thus, although some accidental host species can have
Aaun ieadde pinom ln inq ieaun si saniseedoio
inapparent infections (in which case they will probably
that a mixed infection could be any less pathogenic than
not be noticed), in others the same agent, expressing genes 
a single one. In addition, in rodent communities, different
that have evolved for survival in reservoir hosts, may
rodent species may differ in their role as hosts to the
cause obvious disease. If these diseased, accidental hosts
various  microparasites. I
 For example, bank 
 voles
happen to be domesticated animals or human beings, then
(Clethrionomys  glareolus  [12]   and   wood  mice
the causative agent will be much studied as a pathogen'
{Apodemus sylvaticus [13]) in the UK are both reservoirs 
even though the occurrence of disease in such hosts might
for the same community of Bartonella species at relatively
be considered accidental.
high prevalences {up to 70%), but bank voles are
The co-evolution of reservoir hosts and agents can lead
significantly  1
more
likelytobeinfectedwith
to diverse ecological and pathogenic properties among
A. phagocytopbilum than are wood mice, and each
apparently closely related agents. For example, while it is
rodent species is infected with its own specific
often thought that Borrelia burgdorferi (see Chapter 9)
has a broad range of reservoir host species that includes
occur are unclear but if hosts living in close proximity and
rodents, lagomorphs, insectivores, birds and sheep, there
 exposed to similar microparasites differ in their response
is strong evidence for ecologically important relationships
to such infections, it seems obvious that such
between a particular host species and the species of
microparasites may invoke vastly different responses in
Borrelia for which it acts as reservoir. B. afzeli, for
accidental hosts.
example, is mainly associated with rodents and B. garinii
Hosts not regarded as being reservoirs for an infection
with birds. Recent studies suggest that the host ranges of
can still be vitally important in the epidemiology of that
these different species of Borrelia are determined by
infection. The possible *sterilizing' effect on ticks infected
differences in their sensitivity to host complement. While
with certain Borrelia species when they feed on some
B. afzeli is resistant to rodent complement and can thus
hosts has been mentioned already, and this can obviously
survive and be acquired by a feeding tick such as Ixodes 
reduce transmission of the parasite amongst a community
ricinus, it is sensitive to the complement of hosts such as
of tick hosts. In contrast, many deer species appear to be
birds. As such, a tick infected with B. afzeli by feeding on
poor hosts for Borrelia burgdorferi spirochaetes, as their
a rodent in one instar may lose that infection if it feeds on
complement has borreliacidal activity and transmission to
a bird during the next instar. These slight differences in
and from ticks feeding on deer does not occur. Yet deer
phenotype, which enable closely related agents to each
can still be a vital component of the epidemiology of
exploit their own ecological niches, can lead to differences 
borreliosis as they feed large numbers of adult ticks and
in behaviour and, therefore, pathogenicity in accidental
thus contribute to the size of subsequent tick populations,
hosts. Within the species that make up the Borrelid
the earlier instars of which feed on infected and infectious
burgdorferi complex, only some appear to be associated
hosts such as mice (see Box right).
with specific clinical syndromes in dogs, cats and humans.
The role of wildlife and wildlife reservoirs in the maintenance of arthropod-borne infections
25
12
13
12 Throughout the world, wild rodents such as this bank vole
13 Wood mouse (Apodemus syivaticus) infested with adult
(Clethrionomys glareolus) are important reservoir hosts for a
Ixodes frianguficeps ticks.
multitude of vector-borne infections. This species alone is a
reservoir for Borrelia burgdorferi, Anaplasma
phagocytophium, Babesia microt, various Barfonella
 species and tick-borne encephalitis virus.
The complex ecology of Lyme disease
A possible network of events has been described for Lyme disease in the eastern UsA that illustrates the potential complexity of
interactions that drive the dynamics of infections in wildlife, and can lead to outbreaks of disease in other hosts. The main host 
of Barrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto in the area is the white-footed mouse Perommyscus feucopus. Mouse population dynamics
depend on the amount of food available, in particular acorn crop sizes in the large oak woodlands. A particularly large acorn 
yield (which itself depends on a number of environmental factors) leads to greater survival and fecundity of mice, with a
consequent population explosion the following year. The ready availability of acorns also attracts deer to the same areas, and
the deer harbour large numbers of adult ticks. These ticks lay their eggs, which hatch into larvae the following year - just in
time to feed on the now greatly expanded mouse population. All of these factors combine to produce an explosion of Borrelia-
infected nymphs and larvae and consequent outbreaks of Lyme disease in humans
 It has even been suggested that the emergence of human Lyme disease in the eastern UsA might be a delayed consequence
01 umouy ae suoabid labuassed jo syoou obe Aunuan e (snjioiriaiu saisidorra) uoabid labuassed aul jo uouxa aul jo
Aaaaa sui jeui auapa Ae loduauon awos si alaul pue 'suone jo sdon ahiel yi seae oi Aienuue pate abiu aney
suppressed mouse populations and deer immigration. This in turn may have reduced the risk of Lyme disease to accidental hosts 
such as humans.
26
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
HOW ARE ARTHROPOD-BORNE
 host-parasite relationships have been shown to conform
INFECTIONS MaINTaINED BY WILDLIfe?
to the *20/80 rule', whereby 20% of the host population
are burdened with 80% of the parasites. Two independent
Basic epidemiology of infectious diseases
studies of the relationship between I. ricimus and rodent
For any parasitic infection to persist it is essential that, on
hosts reported that 20% of the rodents were infested with
 average, each infection results in at least one additional
approximately 80% of the tick larvae and the majority of
infection of another individual host. The number of new
nymphs. Such an aggregated distribution has been shown
(or "secondary') infections occurring as a result of each
essential for the maintenance of tick-borne encephalitis
original jor 
"primary') infection is termed the basic
virus (TBEV) by enabling co-feeding transmission (see
reproductive rate (Ro). Thus, in mathematical terms, for a
Box below) and by increasing Ro by three or four.
microparasite to be maintained in a population, Ro must
 There are a number of causes for aggregation of ticks
be >1. If Ro falls below one, then, over time, that
in host populations, one of which is the manner in which
microparasite will disappear from the population.
female ticks lay eggs. Female ixodid ticks such as I.
Aeu saop pue sies se yons sisou leuapioul jo uouoajuj 
ricinus and I. scapularis lay a single, large egg mass after
not lead to infection of another individual, due to
processing their final blood meal. Such egg masses can
physiological
ecological c
differences
between
comprise several thousand eggs. If eggs from such masses
themselves and reservoir hosts or as a result of veterinary
hatch successfully, then within a relatively small area,
treatment. Consequently, many accidental hosts are
several thousand questing larvae can be found. Any host
'dea d-end' hosts.
Jo iaqu aaiel e ae oi Aa sn si eaie au u
larvae, while those hosts travelling in areas where egg
Mechanisms of persistence in wildlife
masses are absent are unlikely to come into contact with
populations
larvae at all.
There are a number of obstacles to Ro remaining greater
The foraging behaviour of ticks is another potential
than one. Passage of an infection from one host to
mechanism leading to their aggregation on hosts. Ticks
another depends on a variety of factors. First, an infected
use a number of cues to locate hosts including CO2, NH3,
host must encounter a competent vector, which must
pheromones and body temperature.  In cases where
subsequently find and feed upon another suitable host,
pheromones released by feeding females attract adult
and thus the distribution and behaviour of vectors are
males to a host, it is obvious that this can result in
crucial to understanding infection dynamics.
 aggregation of numbers of ticks on a host.
 In addition to vector biology, there are several host-
Distribution of vectors in the environment
related factors that can influence parasite distribution
The distribution of parasites in nature is not usually
within a population. One of the most important of these
random but is aggregated (clumped) within the host
is host gender. Males of many species carry a higher
population. This is generally true for all macroparasites,
parasite burden than females, one reason being that they
including nematodes, cestodes, insects and arachnids.
have a larger territory. For example, male field voles
This aggregation of parasites within a host population
{Microtus agrestis) have home ranges about twice the size
results in a situation where many of the individuals will be
as those of females. As a result, the chance of
free from parasites, while a small proportion of
encountering parasites in the environment is much
individuals will be heavily parasitized. In fact, many
greater.
Co-feeding transmission between ticks
Within the past decade or so, the traditional view that arthropods could only acquire infections by feeding on hosts that were
parasitaemic, or through transovarial transmission, has been shown to be incorrect. Co-feeding enables microparasite
aus sey snn oiooul nog paodan is 'uouaouaud sul eaeiiseed isoy e jo auasge aut ui s uamiag uoissiusuen
been demonstrated to be an important route of transmission for Borretia burgdorferi, TBE group flaviviruses and possibly
where the infected hosts are only infective to ticks for a feww days or where parasitaemia never reaches infective levels. As ticks
typically feed for between four days and two weeks, the period over which naive ticks can acquire infection by feeding 
alongside infected ticks is greatly extended. Indeed, non-viraemic co-feeding transmission of TBEv may be essential for its 
 persistence, and this is further aided by the high number of ticks found on individual hosts.
As well as increasing the period over which transmission can occur, co-feeding transmission also enables ticks to acquire
Aau aal yhm pabualieup ae shuapon uaun uoajui aisesedon aui oi aunui ae ieun sisoy uo bupaay aum uoau!
produce an immune response that clears the viraemia and protects them against further challenge. However, despite this
apparent immunity, transmission can still occur between infected and naive ticks via dendritic cells that take up the virus and 
then migrate to the feeding sites of other ticks. This enables immune wild rodents to continue to act as vectors of TBEV
between ticks feeding on them.
The role of wildlife and wildlife reservoirs in the maintenance of arthropod-borne infections
¥27
Another possible way in which gender differences can
newborn rabbits. In addition, growth hormone produced
affect parasite distribution is through the immuno-
by newborn rabbits stimulates increased flea mating and
modulatory effects of sex hormones and consequent
feeding, thus 1
maximizing productivity.
 Once the
ability of the host to eliminate parasites. Experimental
production of growth hormone declines, the fleas return
studies performed with male sand lizards (Lacerta agilis)
to the mother and their reproduction halts.
implanted with testosterone showed that implanted males
An example of hosts determining both the spatial and
acquire heavier tick burdens than untreated males. This
temporal distribution of vectors has already been
was postulated to be due to the immunosuppressive effects
mentioned. Deer in North America, attracted to areas
of testosterone. A further example can be found in bank
where the acorn crop is high, bring with them the adult
voles. Bank voles are frequently exposed to ticks and they
ticks that will produce the larvae to feed on the following
can develop a density-dependent immunity that results in
 year's population of mice.
both reduced attachment of ticks and significantly reduced
Environmental factors such as climate can also have a
feeding success of those ticks that attach successfully.
dramatic effect on parasite development and survival. For
However, testosterone can impair this acquired immunity
example, the distribution of TBEV can be predicted using
in male bank voles. In addition, Babesia microti infections 
satellite-derived data on environmental conditions. 
In
in bank voles given testosterone implants produce a more
rodents, which are generally regarded as the most
severe parasitaemia of longer duration than those in
important mammalian host for TBEV, detectable viraemia
control animals. It is therefore apparent that certain
is rare and, when it does occur, is very short-lived. As a
groups within a host population, such as reproductively
result, the transmission of TBEV relies heavily upon
active males, may be of greater significance in the
infected nymphs feeding in synchrony with naive larval
 perpetuation of arthropod-borne infections than others.
ticks to enable non-systemic co-feeding transmission (see 
The importance to microparasite transmission of
Box, p. 26) to occur. This happens where summers are
cohorts determined by age and gender within a popu-
warm enough to allow rapid development of eggs, but
lation is demonstrated by the following example. In a
also where autumns cool down quickly enough to force
study of adult yellow-necked mice (Apodemus flavicollis),
emerging larvae to overwinter without feeding. This
although only 26% of the individuals captured were
results in both nymphs and larvae starting to quest at the
males, they made up a significantly greater proportion of
 same time the following spring.
the population involved in transmission of TBEV.
Therefore, in terms of disease control, targeting this
Vector competence and microparasite acquisition
group would be much more efficient than targeting the 
Once a vector has acquired infection, it must then feed on
population as a whole.
another competent host for the infection to perpetuate.
 In addition to determining the spatial distribution of
Vector competence for some infections is less restricted
vectors, host factors can sometimes determine their
than for others. Much depends on whether the mode of
temporal distribution. An example is the intricate
transmission is merely mechanical, where the vector acts
relationship that exists between Spilopsyllus cuniculi fleas
as little more than a hypodermic needle, or biological,
and rabbits. Hormones released by female rabbits in late
where the microparasite interacts in a more fundamental
pregnancy are essential for the maturation of Spilopsyllus
way (e.g. by replicating in the vector). Infections such as
flea eggs, thus ensuring that emergence of the next
myxomatosis in rabbits persist as a result of mechanical
 generation of adult fleas coincides with the presence of
transmission (see Box, p. 28) (14). In Australia and much
14 Rabbit showing clinical signs 
 14 
associated with myxomatosis. Infection 
in reservoir hosts is usually thought to be
asymptomatic, but this is an obvious
exception and an interesting study in
the co-evolution of host and pathogen.
28
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Myxomatosis - a disease in a reservoir host?
Rabbit myxomatosis illustrates an aspect of the relationship between host, agent and vector that is often misunderstood - that
of the role sometimes played by disease. It is a common misconception that endemic infectious agents and their hosts will
always co-evolve such that disease no longer occurs. Myxoma virus is endemic in rabbits of the genus Sytvilagus in southern
USA and Central and South America, and in these hosts, with which it is assumed to have co-evolved over thousands of years.
auobaoj e sueaw ou Ag s! l! 'ases aul ualjo s! sisoy ylonasan leanieu ul Aipjuabouied mol yons yhnouiy aseasip alll sasney 1!
aui ui spua ualo jeui aseasip ahaaas e si sisoteuoxauu (srjrjuna srarjorrrio) shggen ueadouni algidansns ul vosnpuon
death of the host, and the co-evolution of myxoma virus and European rabbits, albeit over only half a century, provides an
interesting model for study. when first introduced into rabbit populations in both Europe and Australia, there was certainly no
selection against highly pathogenic strains of virus - in fact quite the opposite. Immediately after introduction, highly virulent 
strains of virus were selectively advantaged. Increased virulence was associated with a greater area of infected skin on which
yiog (sieduinow siopan aul uo aojaiaut pue) anssl jeui ui snun jo sallisuap laybiy pue paay pinos saoinbsow pue seal
pue auani isauhy aut yh asoui aam dy isauhy aun yh suies sni aul uoissisueal aseaui oi pauigo shoey
pathogenicity - and the result for rabbit populations was catastrophic. However, as the number of susceptible rabbits plunged,
uoajui oi algidansns uoiieindod aul panpan shggen jo saull jueisisan aow Ajajeuu! jo uoipalas aul pue Aunuwi painbie
and, therefore, the frequency of contact between infectious and susceptible hosts. At this stage, viral strains causing longer
periods of infection had a selective advantage over more pathogenic strains, as they had a greater chance of being transmitted 
before the host died. Although this may at first sight appear to support the contention that co-evolution always leads to
reduced pathogenicity, it remains the case that within any individual susceptible rabbit, or small population of susceptible
rabbits, the more transmissible strains of myxoma virus (in this case, the more virulent and pathogenic strains) will always
outcompete the less transmissible, less pathogenic strains.
 The relationship between myxoma virus and wild rabbit populations today appears to be fairly stable - the rabbit population
in the UK is currently about 40% of that in the 1950s - with smaller populations of rabbits existing in dynamic equilibrium with
moderately virulent viruses.
 The important point is that selection pressure acted to maximise Ro, requiring an evolutionary trade-off between infectious
period and pathogenicity. the balance of which will depend on the life histories of the parasite and its host in any particular 
environment.
 of Europe the principal vectors appear to be mosquitoes,
tick-borne infections. While most insects, particularly flies
while in the UK, myxoma virus is primarily transmitted
and mosquitoes, may feed on a number of hosts within a
by fleas. In both situations the vector acquires the virus by
very short period, the life cycle of ticks prohibits such
feeding through infected skin. The virus survives on the
events. Hard ticks generally feed on three different hosts
mouthparts of the vector and is transmitted to a naive
before completing their life cycle, and usually only on a
host. As there is no biological interaction with the vector,
single host during each instar, while the period between
viral survival depends on its ability to persist in the
feeds can be several months. Recent studies on the tick I.
environment. Myxoma virus is a particularly robust virus,
ricirus suggest that questing nymphs and adults can
as are many poxviruses. It remains infective for many
survive for up to 12 months post moult, and that
months both in the environment and on the mouthparts 
 generally there is only one cohort of ticks recruited into
of the flea, while the mammalian host remains infectious
the population each year. In such a situation it is obvious
for only a few weeks. Not all arthropod-borne infections
that for a microparasite to persist within a population, it
are transmitted in a merely mechanical manner. In some
must be able to survive within the tick for several months
cases transmission may be reliant on interactions between
and, as such, transmission of tick-borne infections is
the vector and the microparasite. For example, when
almost invariably biological rather than mechanical. After
some species of flea feed on rodents infected with the
feeding, excretion of waste products from the tick is
plague bacillus ( Yersinia pestis), the bacilli colonize the
rapid, and those microparasites unable to infect the
flea's proventriculus,
where they replicate
(15).
tissues of the tick will also be excreted. The ability of
Eventually, perhaps after feeding on several other rodents,
microparasites to survive the moult and diapause that
the accumulation of bacteria at this site obstructs the
ticks undergo after each blood meal is termed trans-
flea's intestinal tract. Although the infected flea continues
stadial transmission. Borrelia burgdorferi spirochaetes
to feed despite the obstruction, ingested blood is
survive in the midgut of the tick, where they remain until
regurgitated back into the vertebrate host, taking with it
the tick feeds on another host. At this stage they migrate
many bacteria.
to the tick salivary glands from where they can potentially
Tick-borne infections differ fundamentally from those
infect the vertebrate host. The environment within a tick
that are insect-borne because of differences in their
is vastly different to that within a mammal or bird but one
feeding behaviour. The period between feeding on
way in which spirochaetes overcome this is by expressing
different individual hosts is greatly extended for many
different proteins, depending on their environment. While
The role of wildlife and wildlife reservoirs in the maintenance of arthropod-borne infections
in the midgut of a resting tick, they primarily express
detrimental effect on the ticks themselves. Despite this, it
outer surface protein A {OspA). If resident in a feeding
appears that transovarial transmission may be more
tick, they down-regulate OspA and up-regulate outer
important in perpetuating infection in nature than the
surface protein C (OspC) as they migrate to the salivary
acquisition of the organism from rickettsaemic hosts, as
glands. Spirochaetes continue to express Osp C during the
rickettsaemia in mammalian hosts is generally short lived.
initial stages of infection in the host. Conversely, when
uninfected  ticks acquire  spirochaetes the  bacteria up-
CONCLUSION
regulate OspA, which appears to be important in binding
This chapter has introduced some of the concepts, often
the spirochaete to the midgut wall (see Chapter 9).
still being debated, about the ecological mechanisms that
Some tick-borne infections are also transmitted
enable microparasites to persist in wild animal
transovarially and, in such cases, vertebrates may be more
populations, and it has also provided explanations for
important as hosts for the vector rather than hosts to the
some of the differences in the epidemiology and
infectious agent. Transmission of Rickettsia rickettsii fa
 pathogenicity of arthropod-borne infections in wildlife
member of the spotted fever group) from adult female
compared with domestic animals and human beings. It is
 Dermacentor variabilis to egs and subsequently larvae
vital to understand the ecology of arthropod-borne
can approach 100% efficiency under laboratory
infections in their reservoir hosts if we are to control these
conditions, though figures of 30-50% appear to be more
infections in accidental hosts such as domestic animals
representative of those seen in nature. There is also some
 and human beings.
evidence that infection with R. rickettsii can have a
15
15 Giant gerbils (Rhombomys opimus) in Kazakhstan are important
reservoir hosts for plague. Infection in other species occurs as a
result of increases in the abundance of these giant gerbils.
(Photo courtesy of M Begon)
Interaction of the host
3
mmune
e system with
arthropods a
and
arthropod-borne
infectious agents
Michael Day
INTRODUCTION
sandfly to probe the host dermis more frequently. Such
The transmission of infectious agents by haemophagous
interactions are likely a result of the prolonged co-
arthropods  involves a unique three-way interaction
 evolution of arthropods and the microorganisms that they
between arthropod, microorganism and the host immune 
carry.
system. The aim of the arthropod in this interaction is to
obtain a blood meal, using basic mechanisms that are
 produce disease by a complex pathogenesis that may in
relatively conserved between arthropod species. These
 part involve secondary immune-mediated phenomena.
include penetration of the host epidermal barrier and the
Both arthropod and microorganism may be involved in
secretion of a range of vasoactive and anticoagulant
manipulating the host immune system to induce these
molecules that encourage local blood flow and permit
 sequelae to infection.
uptake of the uncoagulated blood meal. Additionally,
Unravelling of these complex pathways provides an
there is modulation of the local cutaneous immune and
insight into potential stages at which immunological
inflammatory responses by potent  arthropod-derived
control of the organism or the vector may be achieved.
molecules that are injected into the feeding site. This
These mechanisms have been largely defined in
modulation may extend to influencing the immune
experimental systems with a range of tick and fly species,
sisss ai pue anssh pioqdual leuoiaan ui asuodsan
but there have been limited studies in dogs and there are
immune system and acting to prevent rejection of the
 no reported studies of the interaction of ticks or flies with
arthropod, particularly those that require prolonged
the immune system of cats. In contrast, the interaction of
attachment to the host (i.e. ticks).
fleas with the canine and feline immune system is an area
This manipulation of the host dermal micro-
of continuing investigation, but these studies address the
environment by infected arthropods also provides an
nature of salivary allergens rather than the ability of the
advantage to microorganisms by creating an optimum
flea to transmit pathogens to the host. The application of
environment for their transmission and the establishment
 molecular technology to the study of the host-arthropod-
of infection {16). This is exemplified by the persistence of
microbe interaction will provide rapid advances in the
infectious agents at the site of injection by ticks, which
future. The ability to sequence the complete genomes of
permits the infection of naive ticks in the absence of
both arthropods and microorganisms, coupled with
systemic  infection  of the host  ('saliva-activated
studies of functional genomics and proteomics, will
transmission' [see Chapter 2]) (17). Additionally, the 
 revolutionize this field.
This chapter will focus on relatively well characterized
its behaviour. For example, Borrelia-infected ticks have
 interactions of the mammalian immune system with ticks
altered questing behaviour, which provides them with an
and sandflies, and the microorganisms transmitted by
these arthropods. The potential for vaccination as a means
contrast, Leishmania-infected sandflies also have
control 
 of arthropod  infestation  and  disease
modified feeding behaviour, but here the advantage is to
transmission will be addressed. Finally, the interaction of
the microorganism rather than the arthropod. The plug of
 arthropod-borne microbes with the host immune system
Leishmania parasites within the proventriculus interferes
 and the induction of secondary immune-mediated disease
with the intake of blood, making it necessary for the
 as part of the pathogenesis of infection will be discussed.
30
Interaction of the host immune system with arthropods and arthropod-borne infectious agents
31
16 Effects of arthropod
 16 
 saliva on host biology.
 As part of the feeding
process, haemophagous 
 arthropods inject saliva
 into the host dermal
 microenvironment.
 Arthropod saliva 
 mediates a range of
 local effects including 
vasodilation, inhibition
of haemostasis and
 inhibition of host 
 inflammatory and 
immune responses. In the
case
 of ticks, there is also
Prevent host immune
Ater local
 salivary transmission
 rejection of tick
 immunological
of infectious agents.
 milieu for optimum 
transmission of
 infectious agents
Vasodilation
 Inhibit haemostasis
17 Saliva-activated transmission. In 'saliva-activated
17
 transmission' an arthropod injects an infectious agent into
Infected tick
Infect naive
 the host dermis. This agent persists at this location, likely
 co-feeding tick
 due to inhibition of the host immune response by salivary
molecules. For example, the saliva of some ticks inhibits the
 anti-viral effects of interferon and permits local replication of
Epidermal barrier
tick-transmitted virus. The persistent microbe may be taken 
up by uninfected arthropods that take a blood meal from the
Salivary
Transmit virus/Borrelia
site, and this occurs in the absence of systemic viral
immunomodulators
to host dermis
infection. This mechanism has also been demonstrated for 
transmission of Borrelia that may be taken up by uninfected
ticks prior to systemic spread of infection.
Permit survival of microbe
THE TICK-HOST INTERFACE: TICK
molecular weight) over several tick species and specific
MODULATION OF HOST BIOLOGY
molecules are induced in the early stages of feeding. In
Ticks have evolved specialized mechanisms that make
 several tick species, clear differences in the composition of
them particularly effective haemophagous parasites, and
male and female tick saliva have been demonstrated. In
the majority of these mechanisms are related to the
fed Rhipicephalus appendiculatus, specific novel proteins
 secretion of a range of salivary proteins. The composition
leqi susasans 'eaes ui uaut pue ydusjouaey u readde
 of tick salivary proteins has been studied biochemically.
some inducible salivary antigens are obtained from
 There is broad conservation in the range of molecules (by
haemolymph in this tick.
32
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Tick cement
derived PGE2 may have an effector function when
The action of tick mouthparts and deposition of ^cement'
delivered to host tissue. Although considered unlikely to
creates a firm attachment of tick to host that permits
be a cause of immunosuppression, PGEg may have a local
vasodilatory effect, thus enhancing delivery of the blood
A 90 kDa salivary protein that is conserved amongst tick
meal to the tick. Ticks cannot synthesize the prosta-
species and maximally secreted during the first two days
glandin precursor arachidonic acid, and must acquire
of feeding has been suggested to be a cement component.
this
from the host. PGFzα, PGDz and PGB2
A 29 kDa protein from Haemaphysalis longicornis has
have also been identified in saliva from ticks fed
been cloned and sequenced and it has been proposed that
 arachidonic acid.
this is also a cement component. Immunisation of rabbits 
The saliva of Ixodes scapularis has a kininase activity
with the recombinant 29 kDa protein confers protection.
mediated by dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase. This inhibits
bradykinin,
therefore reducing local F
pain and
Salivary anticoagulants
inflammation and the likelihood of the host grooming-out
A continual flow of blood is required from the tick
the tick. The saliva of R. appendicuiatus contains
attachment site into the tick gut. This is achieved by the
histamine-binding proteins that may compete with host
production of a range of anticoagulant salivary molecules
histamine receptors for histamine and, therefore, reduce
that are injected into the feeding site. For example,
local inflammation. A novel, low molecular weight, anti-
apyrase is an inhibitor of ADP-induced platelet
complement protein fisac) from the saliva of I. scapularis
'salseued snozeydoueey Aueu Aq paonpoud uouesaiage
inhibits the alternative pathway of the complement
Amblyomma americanum saliva inhibits Factor Xa and
cascade and inhibits generation of chemotactic C3a. In
thrombin, and saliva from R. appendiculatus contains an 
contrast, saliva from Dermacentor andersoni activates
complement Cs to produce chemotactic effects.
feeding. Two anticoagulants have been characterized in
the saliva of Ixodes ricinus: an antithromboplastin
Salivary immunomodulatory factors
{ixodin) and a thrombin inhibitor {ixin).
 The host immune response engendered by tick attachment 
has recently been discussed in terms of the Th1/Th2
Salivary osmoregulation and
paradigm, a fundamental immunological concept that has
control of secretion
reshaped understanding of the host immune response to
In addition to producing cement and anticoagulant
infectious agents. This model states that there are distinct
molecules, the tick salivary gland also functions in
functional subsets of CD4+ T lymphocytes that mediate
osmoregulation. Excess fluid from an ingested blood meal
either humoral or cell-mediated immunity. The humoral
is re-secreted to the host via tick saliva, and in free-living
effects (type 2 immunity) are mediated by Th2 CD4+ T
ticks the salivary gland functions in absorption of water
lymphocytes that produce the cytokines IL-4, IL-5, IL-6,
vapour from the air. Tick salivary tissue undergoes
IL-10 and IL-13. In contrast, cell-mediated immunity
hypertrophy and duct dilation during feeding and
(type 1 immunity) is driven by the effects of Th1 CD4+ T
secretion is under neurological control. Nitric oxide may
cells that produce IL-2 and IFNy (18). These two T cell
mediate duct dilation and dopamine has been shown to be
subsets are counter-regulatory, so in some situations
an important neurotransmitter in this respect.
immune responses may become polarized towards a
dominant humoral or cell-mediated response (19).
Salivary toxins
The two T cell subsets have a common precursor fa
The salivary glands of a range of tick species secrete
Th0 CD4+ T cell that produces a mixed cytokine profile).
 potent neurotoxins that interfere with the function of the
This requires particular activation signals to drive
neuromuscular synapse. This results in ascending motor
differentiation towards the mature Th1 or Th2
paresis ('tick paralysis') and death may follow respiratory
phenotype. These signals are largely derived from the
paralysis. A good example is the Australian tick Ixodes
antigen-presenting cell {APC) that activates the antigen-
holocyclus, which produces the toxin holocyclin that may
specific T lymphocyte. The nature of the APC signalling is
affect both dogs and cats.
determined by the binding of conserved molecular
sequences (often derived from microbes) known as
Salivary anti-inflammatory molecules
"pathogen-associated molecular patterns" (PAMPs), with
Anti-inflammatory factors are also secreted into the host
one of a series of 'pattern recognition' receptors expressed
dermal microenvironment. These contribute to the ability
by the APC. For example, many bacterial sequences will
of the tick to maintain prolonged attachment and,
induce the APC to secrete IL-12, which drives the
coincidentally, provide an optimum milieu for the
development of a Th1 dominated immune response (20).
transmission and establishment of infectious agents. Tick
This model has been largely developed with experimental
saliva contains prostaglandin Ez. This interacts with a
rodent systems, so whether it extends to other species
PGEg receptor within the tick salivary gland, leading to
ap Apauua iak iou si saop pue suewnq se yons
secretion of further bioactive salivary proteins that may
The immunomodulatory effects of tick saliva may be
facilitate acquisition of a blood meal. Additionally, tick-
manifest as an altered balance in the nature of the T cell
Interaction of the host immune system with arthropods and arthropod-borne infectious agents
33
18 Functional dichotomy of helper T lymphocytes. The 
18
Th1/Th2 paradigm defines two functional subpopulations
 of CD4+ T lymphocyte that are derived from a common 
Th0
Th0 precursor These cells are defined by their function,
 which in turn is determined by the profile of cytokines that
each selectively produces. Th1 cells are responsible for
cell-mediated immunity and provide B cell help for
 production of a restricted subclass of IgG (lgG2a in mice).
Th1
Th2
Th2 cells mediate humoral immunity providing B cell help
 Humoral
for production of lgE, IgA and IgG1. Th1 and Th2 cells are 
Cell-mediated
 immunity
 mutually antagonistic of each other via the secretion of
immunity
 specific inhibitory cytokines that counteract the function of
IL-4
lgE
the opposing subset.
IL-2
Mutual
IL-5
lgG1
lgG2a
IFNy 
anta gonism
IL-6 
lgA
IL-10
IL-13
6
 Normal
Appropriate immune
 Immune response
homeostasis
response to
 to infection modified 
intracellular infection
 by tick saliva 
19 Immunomodulation by tick saliva. Th1 and Th2 cells may be normally thought of as being in balance. The immune response to
particular types of antigen may disturb this balance and cause polarization of T cell function. In general, intracellular pathogens
will only be effectively destroyed in the presence of strong Th1 cell-mediated immunity. However the major effect of arthropod 
 saliva is to alter the balance in favour of Th2 immunity which favours replication of the pathogen.
 20 Induction of the adaptive immune response to 
　20
PAMP on pathogen
 pathogens. Induction of either Th1 or Th2 immune
IL-12
responses depends largely on signals delivered to
the Tho precursor by the dendritic antigen
Th1
 presenting cell (APC). Antigens derived from 
 pathogens are taken up and processed by the
080/86CD28
 APC into peptide fragments that associate with 
Pathogen
Th0
class Il molecules of the major histocompatibility
IL-4
complex (MHC). This complex of class Il peptide
TCR
 is expressed on the APC membrane. A range of 
MHC class II
Th2
 conserved motifs expressed by infectious agents
(PAMPs) bind to 'pattern recognition receptors'
 peptide 
(including those of the Toll-like receptor family)
 expressed on the APC. This induces dendritic cell
 maturation with further expression of MHC class Il 
Dendritic cell
and co-stimulatory molecules (CD80/86).
Additionally the interaction with Toll-like receptor
 induces expression of cytokines such as IL-12 that selectively induces the Th1 subset. By contrast, IL-4 is required for Th2
activation but it is not known whether this cytokine may be regulated by Toll-like receptors.
34
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
response engendered by tick-derived or microbe-derived
R. sanguineus saliva also inhibits Con A and antigen-
antigens. This altered balance is best detected by assessing
driven proliferation and IL-2 production of murine
the profile of cytokines produced by the activated T cells.
splenic T cells.
These properties of tick saliva have been demonstrated by
In experimental rodent systems the  immuno-
incorporation of I. ricimus salivary gland extract (SGE)
modulatory effects of tick saliva may be dependent
into in vitro cell culture systems (21). A range of other
on1
the strain of mouse used in the study.
For
immunomodulatory effects of I. ricinus SGE has also been
example, exposure of C3H/HeJ mice to Borrelid
shown, including reduction of cytotoxic function by
burgdorferi-infected I. scapularis results in CD4+ T cell
activated murine NK cells and reduction of the ability of
proliferation and preferential Th2 immunity (raised IL-4,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophages t
to
reduced IL-2, IFNy), but these effects are not marked in
 produce nitric oxide.
Balb/c mice. These observations may underlie the
Similar studies have shown the immunomodulatory
susceptibility of C3H mice to borreliosis. In this
capacity of saliva from Rhipicephatus sanguineus. When
experimental model, administration of recombinant Th1
lymph node cultures were established from tick-infested
cytokines to mice infested with Borrelia-infected I.
mice and stimulated with the mitogen Con A, there was
scapularis led to a switch from Th2 to Th1 immunity
reduced proliferation {relative to uninfested controls) and
(22). The effect of repeated infestation with uninfected I.
a distinct Th2 cytokine profile, with elevated IL-4, IL-10
scapularis on cytokine production by C3H/HeN and
and TGFβ, and reduced IL-2 and IFNy production.
Balb/c mice has also been compared. Neither strain of
 21
21 Tick saliva inhibits Th1 function. Murine spleen cells cultured
Borelia afzetlii
in vifro in the presence of antigens such as Borrelia afzelii
produce IFNy that is released into the culture fluid and can be 
readily measured by techniques such as ELISA. However, when
salivary gland extract from /xodes ricinus is incorporated into
the cultures, the cytokine profile changes to one of low IFNy
and high IL-10 production. Tick salivary molecules have
IFNy
switched this in vitro immune response from Th1 to Th2 in
nature. (Experiments reported by Kopecky J ef al. (1999)
Paraste Immunology 21, 351-356).
B. afzeli + 1. Ricinus SGE
FNT
 Splenocyte cultures 
 22 Immunosuppressive effect of tick saliva can be 
partially reversed by administration of Th1 cytokines.
rTNFα
C3H mice were infested with Ixodes scapularis ticks that
f. scapufaris +
or rlL-2
were infected with Borrelia burgdorferi. During the ten-
B. burgdorferi
or rlFNy
day period following attachment of the ticks, different 
 groups of mice were treated with recombinant cytokines
Daily for 10 days
that are associated with a Th1 immune response. At 21
post attachment 
days post attachment, biopsies of the ears were taken
from the mice for determination of the Borretia load by
 PCR. Mice treated with recombinant cytokine had
reduced infection, suggesting that the Th2 inductive
C3H/HeJ
PCR ear biopsy at
effects of tick saliva had been counteracted by
day 21 for Borrelia
 enhancing the opposing Th1 response. (Experiments 
reported by Zeidner N et al. (1996) Journal of Infectious
Diseases 173, 187-195)
Decreased infection 
Switch to Th 1?
Interaction of the host immune system with arthropods and arthropod-borne infectious agents
35
mouse became resistant to I. scapularis after four cycles of
infection at a separate skin site. Co-infected sheep have
infestation but in both strains there was polarization of
chronic, non-healing dermatophilosis, with chronic
the cytokine profile to Th2 (23).
 mononuclear cell infiltration of the dermis.
The immunosuppressive action of tick saliva has also
There have been limited studies of the interaction of
been documented with in vitro studies of human cells.
tick saliva with the canine immune system. A series of
Saliva from fed Dermacentor reticulatus inhibits human
studies from Japan have shown that infestation of dogs
NK cell function but saliva from unfed ticks does not.
with R. sanguineus causes suppression of antibody
Similar but less potent inhibition of NK cells is mediated
production, neutrophil function and the response (
o
by
SGE
from
Amblyomma
variegatum
and
blood lymphocytes to mitogens, and that R. sanguineus
Haemapbysalis inermis but does not occur with SGE from
SGE can mimic these effects in vitro, suppressing both T
1.
ricinus or R.
appendiculatus. SGE from  R.
 and B lymphocyte subpopulations.
appendiculatus reduces cytokine mRNA expression
Some studies have addressed the molecular weight of the
{IFNy, IL-1, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, TNFc) by LPS-
tick salivary immunosuppressive proteins by fractionation
stimulated human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs),
of saliva before inclusion in the in vitro systems described.
 and SGE from a range of Ixodid ticks can neutralize IL-8
The immunosuppressive activity of R. sanguineus saliva is
and inhibit the neutrophil chemotaxis induced by this
mediated by proteins of under 10 kDa. Saliva from Ixodes
cytokine. Similarly, cattle infested with Boopbilus
dammini has an immunosuppressive activity of greater than
microplus have altered in vivo immune function (reduced
5 kDa and saliva from Dermacentor andersoni has two
proportion of T cells in the blood and reduced antibody
immunosuppressive components of molecular weights 36-
'g pue (uunqleao ym uoezjunuw on asuodsa1
43 and under 3 kDa.
microphus saliva can suppress the in vitro response of
Overall consideration of the experimental data on tick
bovine PBLs to the mitogen PHA. Experimental
 salivary immunosuppression permits the development of
infestation of sheep with Amblyomma variegatum can
a hypothetical model for this effect and this is
influence the clinical course of Dermatophius congolensis
 summarized in 24.
23 Tick saliva induces Th2 activity through mechanisms
23
other than IL-4 production. Balb/c mice were exposed to 
repeated cycles of infestation with ixodes ricinus ticks. As
1. ricinus repeat
expected, the immune system of the mice was switched
exposure
towards Th2 responsiveness and the mice developed
elevated levels of serum IgE. A parallel group of mice was
treated with neutralizing monoclonal antibody to the 
cytokine IL-4 during the tick exposure; a group of mice with
a targeted disruption to the IL-4 gene (IL-4 knockout' mice,
IL-4-j-) was also exposed to ticks. These latter two groups
had reduced serum lgE but maintained the bias towards a
Th2 immune response. This experiment suggests that IL-4 
Balb/c
Anti-IL-4
IL-4f-
alone is not responsible for maintaining type 2 immunity.
Th2 response
↓lgE, but no effect on tick
The failure to revert completely to type 1 immunity in these
Raised serum IgE
 attachment/engorgement 
mice was mirrored by the fact that there was no difference
in tick attachment or engorgement in the immunologically 
Partial switch to Th1
manipulated animals. (Experiments reported by Christie M 
et al. (1998) Parasifological Research 84, 388-393)
24 A model for the immunosuppressive effects of tick saliva.
24
The salivary immunosuppressive proteins activate Th2 cells,
with production of the key cytokine in this system, IL-10.
The mechanism by which this selective activation occurs is
Salivary ,
-10
unknown, but potentially it is either a direct effect on T cells 
protein 
 or via the APC. IL-10 has a range of potent effects on
 macrophages, particularly in suppressing nitric oxide (NO)
Suppress NO
synthase. This in turn inhibits nitric oxide-dependent killing 
pathway and 
Aq pawsueni suahoyed jeinleoeu! jo sabeydooew Aq
intracellular
the tick (e.g. Ehrtichia, Rickeftsia). Moreover, the inhibition of
killing (e.g.
macrophage activity leads to reduced IL-12 production and 
Ehrtichia)
failure adequately to stimulate Th1 cells, which in turn
results in reduced IFNy production that further impairs
1h1
IL-12
macrophage activation.
36
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
THE SANDFLY-HOST INTERFACE: SANDFLY
HOST IMMUNE RESPONSE TO
MODULATION OF HOST BIOLOGY
ARTHROPODS
In contrast to ticks, the interaction between host and
This section discusses the protective host immune
haemophagous flies is relatively transient. Despite this,
response to arthropods, as opposed to the ability of the
these insects also inject their hosts with powerful
arthropod to manipulate host immunity as has been
vasoactive, anticoagulant and immunomodulatory
described above. In general terms it appears that both
substances. The latter may not necessarily benefit an
humoral and cell-mediated immune responses are made to
individual parasite but they will ensure that the host does
arthropod salivary proteins. The cutaneous immune
not develop protective immunity and that it remains
response to tick attachment has been characterized in a
susceptible to the entire parasite population over a period
number of species and is summarized in 25. More is
of time. This section will focus on the sandfly vectors of
known about humoral immune responses than cellular
leishmaniosis, as they are the most relevant to companion
responses, as these are more readily monitored. Several
animal disease.
human epidemiological studies have shown that tick-
exposed humans make anti-tick antibody responses, and
Salivary anticoagulants
these may correlate with the seroprevalence of infectious
The protein content of saliva is far greater in female
diseases in the same patients. For example, in a recent
sandflies and it increases over the first three days after
study of a Californian population, a significant
emergence, which correlates with the fact that these flies
correlation between seropositivity for B. burgdorferi and
Aus ' ien rae n siso ahq insn iu o
I. pacificus was reported. Similarly, antibody to a 24 kDa
saliva has potent anticoagulant activity mediated by
protein of R. sanguineus has been identified in the serum
apyrase. SGE from the New World sandfly Lutzomyid
of dogs following two experimental infestations.
longipalpis   contains 
the
powerful
vasodilatory
A series of studies has examined the comparative
polypeptide maxadilan, whereas the saliva of Old World
immune response to R. sanguineus made by dogs and
sandflies 
te.g.
Phlebotomus
papatasi)
mediates
guinea pigs. In these experiments, dogs were unable to
vasodilation via adenosine and 5'-AMP. The saliva of
develop resistance to infestation, whereas guinea pigs did
L. longipalpis also contains hyaluronidase, which may aid
become resistant. In one study, histopathological changes 
dispersal of other salivary molecules and of Leishmanid
at tick attachment sites in each species were examined
within the host dermis.
between four and 96 hours of attachment in primary,
secondary or tertiary infestation. Although both species
Salivary immunomodulatory molecules
responded with a mononuclear cell infiltrate, the major
The saliva of the sandfly has potent immunoregulatory
difference was that dogs also responded with a
activity that is thought to underlie the ability of the saliva
neutrophilic infiltrate, whereas guinea pigs had a
markedly to exacerbate Leisbmania infection. SGE from
predominant eosinophil infiltrate, suggesting that this
P. papatasi causes a switch from a Th1 to Th2 response in
underlies resistance in the guinea pig. However, this study
mice infected with Leishmania major {e.g. increased IL-4
is at odds with the commonly accepted description of the
and reduced IFNy in lymph nodes draining sites of
histopathology of tick attachment sites in the dog, which
experimental infection in the presence of SGE), and is
includes  a
granulomatous  inflammation  and  an
inhibitory of macrophage function in vitro. These effects
eosinophil response (26). This may in part reflect the
may be mediated by adenosine and 5'-AMP
kinetics of the host response, as most skin biopsies
SGE from L. longipalpis inhibits presentation of
collected in a clinical setting will be from tick bite
Leisbmania antigens by macrophages and thus suppresses
reactions of greater than 96 hours duration. Other factors
antigen-specific lymphocyte proliferative responses and
that may account for this discrepancy include the species
delayed type hypersensitivity {DTH). Macrophages co-
and strain of tick, and whether the tick is infected with
cultured with L. longipalpis SGE were refractory to
microorganisms.
activation by IFNy and unable to produce nitric oxide,
 In a similar study, the intradermal skin test response to
hydrogen peroxide or proinflammatory cytokines (e.g.
an R. sanguineus extract was compared in naive and
TNFo) - all necessary for destruction of the intracellular
infested dogs, and naive and infested guinea pigs. Infested
amastigotes. These effects are mediated by maxadilan,
dogs developed a strong immediate reaction but infested
which has dual action as a vasodilator. Maxadilan has
 guinea pigs had both immediate and delayed reactions.
homology with mammalian pituitary adenylate cyclase-
Control animals had no significant response. This
activating polypeptide (PACAP) and utilizes the receptor 
provides evidence that cell-mediated immunity is one
 for this molecule that is expressed by macrophages. In an
factor important for tick elimination and that this may be
experimental murine model of L. major infection, the
lacking in R. sanguineus-infested dogs. Resistance to
increased infectivity caused by sandfly saliva is due to
I. scapularis has also been studied in the dog using a
maxadilan. The immunomodulatory effects of sandfly
repeat infestation model. Tick performance parameters
saliva may cause in vitro *bystander suppression' of other
decreased with increasing exposure, suggesting the
immune res ponses.
development of a protective immune response.
Interaction of the host immune system with arthropods and arthropod-borne infectious agents
37
25
Langerhans
cell
Epidermal barrier
Basophil
Cytokine mRNA
72 hr: IL-4, IFNy
Blood
Serum 
vessel 
antibody
Lymph
 Eosinophil
node
Repeated exposure
Th2 to Th1 switch 
Lymphocyte
recirculation
 25 The host immune response to arthropods. The infested host will mount an immune response to
arthropods, and repeated exposure can induce resistance in some individuals. In the case of ticks, the
immune response will predominantly be directed against the injected salivary antigens. These will be
captured by dendritic APCs in the epidermis (Langerhans cells) or dermis, and carried to the regional
draining lymph nodes where activation of antigen-specific T and B lymphocytes occurs. Serum
 to the site of tick exposure via the interaction of lymphocyte homing receptors and the vascular
addressins expressed by the endothelium of vessels in the tick attachment site. Locally produced
cytokines and chemokines will recruit other leucocytes, chiefly eosinophils and basophils, to this dermal
location.
The nature of the dermal immune response will initially (up to 72 hours) reflect the immunomodulatory
 properties of the tick saliva (Th2 dominated), with mRNA encoding both IL-4 and IFNy found at the
attachment sites. With time the cytokine profile will switch and the site will become Th1-dominated.
 26 Histopathology of the tick attachment site. Skin biopsy
26
from a tick attachment site on a dog. There is a central region 
 of ulceration and necrosis that correlates with the site of
attachment and production of the salivary cement substance.
This is surrounded by a heavy infitration of mixed mononuclear 
 cells (including macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells)
 and eosinophils in this relatively chronic lesion. (Haematoxylin 
and eosin)
The immune response to the salivary proteins of
in infected dogs, there have been no reported
sandfly saliva has been extensively studied
in
investigations of the response to sandfly saliva or the
experimental models and it is clear that strong antibody
nature of the cutaneous lesions that might develop
and DTH responses can be made following the bite of
following the bite of these flies. Even less is known about
uninfected sandflies, injection with SGE or with
how the immune system of the cat might respond to
recombinant  salivary  proteins.
However, despite
sandfly bites.
numerous studies of the immune response to Leishmania
38
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
VACCINATION AGAINST ARTHROPODS
suggesting that dogs can develop spontaneous immunity
to R. sanguineus. Immunization of dogs with gut extract
Vaccination against ticks
 of R. sanguineus in Freund's adjuvant was more effective
Vaccination strategies have been devised to limit tick
than this extract adjuvanted in saponin, evidence for the
infestation and, therefore, the transmission of tick-borne
importance of cell-mediated immunity in resistance of
microbes. Additionally, there has been much research into
dogs to these ticks.
the development of vaccines for the individual microbial
A similar study has been reported in cattle with
agents themselves. Detailed discussion of the latter is
Hyalomma marginatum extracts but in this instance
beyond the scope of this review but will be covered in the
immunity, induced by repeat infestation or salivary
individual chapters of this book.
extract vaccination, was superior to vaccination with an
Tick salivary cDNA libraries have been created and
intestinal extract of the tick. Vaccination of catle with
molecules of immunological relevance have been
SGE of Hyalomma anatolicum in Freund's incomplete
identified by screening the libraries expressed in vector
adjuvant can be enhanced by incorporation of the
systems with sera from immune animals. For example, a
additional adjuvant effect of Ascaris suis extract into the
feeding-induced gene from I. scapularis (Salp 16) was
vaccine. The A. suis extract enhances IgE responses and
cloned in this manner and recombinant Salp 16 produced.
Although I. scapularis infested guinea pigs made high
reaction in immunized calves.
titred serum antibody to Salp 16, vaccination with the
recombinant molecule did not protect from infestation.
Vaccination against sandflies 
Although there have been numerous such studies of
Vaccination against other arthropods has also been
candidate tick vaccines, only one recombinant product
investigated as a potential control measure for the
has been produced commercially. The vaccine for bovine
microbial infections they transmit. Mice experimentally
B. microplus infestation contains the recombinant antigen
infected with  Leishmania major develop significantly
Bm86 and induces antibodies in immunized cattle that
more severe disease when co-injected with entire SGE or
 mediate lysis of tick gut cells when ingested in a blood
with synthetic maxadilan from L. longipalpis, suggesting
 meal. The reduced tick burden and fecundity produced as
that this latter molecule is responsible for the disease
a result  allows decreased  frequency of acaricide
exacerbation caused by sandfly saliva. Vaccination with
application to vaccinated animals. Some strains of B.
synthetic maxadilan induces a type 1 immune response
microplus are resistant to the Bm86 vaccine but may be
and serum antibody specific for the molecule, and
susceptible to a preparation containing the Bm95
protects mice from experimental infection with L. major.
recombinant antigen. Some tick-derived molecules may
The Old World sandfly Phlebotomus papatasi does not
induce cross-protection against other tick species that
produce maxadilan, but pre-exposure to the bite of
carry homologous antigenic epitopes, and the Bm86
uninfected Phlebotomus confers resistance to infection
vaccine offers such cross-protection against at least two
with L. major with a strong DTH response, suggesting a
other tick species.
similar effect with an alternative candidate protein. A
A recent study has examined the efficacy of
recent study characterized nine salivary proteins from
vaccinating naive dogs with salivary gland or midgut
P. papatasi and demonstrated that a recombinant form of
extracts of R. sanguineus before repeat experimental
U Hia Suos anpul ot aqe sem (sids) asaui jo auo
challenge seven and 21 days after the final vaccination.
mice and was protective when used as a vaccine against
During these challenges there was reduced tick
L. major.
attachment (for both salivary and midgut vaccines),
A
recent
unpublished  abstract  reported
an
feeding period and engorgement weight (greatest with
 experimental study in dogs co-injected with Leisbmanid
salivary vaccine) and fecundity (greatest with midgut
and sandfly SGE. Relative to controls that received only
vaccine). The observed greater efficacy of the gut extract
Leishmania, the test dogs developed clinical leishmaniosis 
may reflect the fact that the host is normally exposed to
several months earlier, which correlated with earlier
salivary antigens, and the tick may have developed means
 demonstration of Leishmania-specific T cell proliferative
of suppressing the host response to such antigens during
responses and IL-4 production. The investigators
co-evolution. Moreover, a control group repeatedly
suggested that this ‘early onset' model of canine
exposed to R. sanguineus also showed transient
leishmaniosis would permit more rapid assessment of
reductions in these tick performance parameters,
Leishmania vaccines in the dog model.
Interaction of the host immune system with arthropods and arthropod-borne infectious agents
39
IMMUNE-MEDIATED SEQUELAE
interaction of the infectious agent with the host immune
TO ARTHROPOD-TRANSMITTED
system. These clinical manifestations will be discussed in
INFECTIOUS DISEASE
 other chapters. It is suggested that the initial interaction 
The range of arthropod-transmitted pathogens that are
 of arthropod products with the host immune system may
the subject of this book have complex pathogenesis
redirect host immunity to a state that is optimum for
within the host. In broad terms, many of the clinical
subsequent immune-mediated disease related to the
disease manifestations in leishmaniosis, babesiosis,
microbe (27). In this respect, if arthropod salivary
ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, borreliosis, rickettsiosis,
molecules are able to subvert the host immune system and
bartonellosis and hepatozoonosis are related to the
a  l  a on ms,  a
27
Infect
 co-feeding tick
Co-infection
Tick salivary
Joint
molecules
Antigens
Uvea
Immune
complexes,
 Kidney
vasculitis
Skin
CNS
Non-protective
immunity
Cross-reactive Ab
Th2
Antibody
 Hypergammaglobulinaemia
Cytokines
Autoantibody
→ RBC, platelet
Acute disease
Chronic disease
27 Summary of the interaction between arthropod, infectious agent and the host immune system. Injection of arthropod salivary
 molecules resuts in redirection of the host immune system to the Th2 phenotype, both locally within the dermis and within the
regional draining lymph node. In rodent model systems this effect may also involve the systemic immune system. Salivary
 immunomodulation permits prolonged or repeated exposure to the arthropod and allows transmission of the arthropod-borne
 infectious agent (or agents in co-infections) and establishment of infection in the absence of a protective (type 1) immune
 response. Uninfected arthropods co-feeding at the site may acquire infection ('saliva-activated transmission'). The infectious
 agent may spread from the site of inoculation to produce parasitaemia and acute infectious disease. The bias towards Th2
 immunity may also underlie the chronic, secondary, immune-mediated sequelae to infection. These include excessive B cell
activation (hypergammaglobulinaemia), the formation of circulating immune complexes that may deposit within the
 microvasculature, and the induction of autoantibodies or antibodies that cross-react with microbial and self epitopes. (Redrawn 
after Shaw SE et al. (2001) Trends in Parasitology 17, 74-80)
0t
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
likelihood is that if an infectious agent is superimposed on
Such effects may be further complicated when there is
the immune system in this state, there will be humoral
multiple co-infection with arthropod-transmitted infec-
immune-mediated sequelae. For example:
tious agents. This model of type 2 directed immunity is
● Hyperglobulinaemia via polyclonal or monoclonal B
not all-encompassing, as type 1 {cell-mediated) effects do
cell activation fe.g. in  leishmaniosis or monocytic
comprise part of the pathogenesis of such infections; for
ehrlichiosis ).
example, the mononuclear cell synovitis that occurs in
 Induction of autoantibody fe.g. anti-erythrocyte in
 borreliosis is T cell mediated and the specificity of these T
babesiosis, anti-platelet in ehrlichiosis and ricket-
cells has been characterized.
tsiosis, both autoantibodies in leishmaniosis) or
CONCLUSIONS
mimicry between autoantigen and epitopes of the
The attachment of an infected arthropod to a mammalian
infectious agent (e.g. cross-reactivity of antibodies to
 host creates a severe challenge to the host immune system.
 neuroaxonal proteins and flagellin from Borrelia).
Host immunity to arthropods and arthropod-transmitted
 Formation of circulating immune complexes of anti-
infectious agents is based on a cell-mediated (Th1)
body and microbial or self antigen that may potentially
response, but arthropod salivary molecules are able to
Xaoouied ansst [ool asneo pue spaq Aieldeo ui apol
subvert host immunity to a dominant Th2 (humoral)
(e.g. uveitis, polyarthritis, vasculitis and 
I glomeru-
form. This
 permits prolonged feeding by individual
lonephritis that may occur in leishmaniosis).
arthropods
(ticks)  or  populations (sandflies)   and
 Granulomatous inflammatory aggregates of para-
 transmission of infectious agents into an environment in
 sitized macrophages that are unable effectively to kill
the intracellular microbe {e.g. dermal lesions in
to the organism. This latter effect may underlie the range 
leishmaniosis).
 of immunopathogenic mechanisms that characterize
arthropod-borne infections.
Laboratory
diagnosis
of
arthropod-transmitted
infections
Martin Kenny
INTRODUCTION
Borrelia burgdorferi and certain Bartonella species
The arthropod-transmitted pathogens discussed in this
{e.g. B. benselae) can be grown on media (Table 4). In
book are generally difficult to cultivate in vitro, are often
both cases it can take a month between inoculation with
au pue poola laudad u siaqunu mol Aiaa ui luasaid
clinical material and identification of visible growth,
clinical signs they cause are very variable, as are the
making culture inappropriate for diagnosis. Culture has
antibody responses they may evoke. The individual
the advantage of allowing analysis of relatively large
organisms are dealt with in detail in later chapters. This
sample volumes and it has high sensitivity. This is because
chapter gives an overview of the diagnostic tests used for
a single organism in a millilitre of blood will give rise to a
determining infection with these agents.
colony that can be used as the basis for more advanced
tests. Ideally, several replicates of each sample should be
'CLASSICAL' DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
inoculated to allow contamination and sensitivity issues
to be addressed.
Culture/propagation of pathogens
The arthropod-transmitted pathogens generally have
Microscopy
exacting nutritional requirements, reflecting their
In the hands of experienced microscopists, some parasites
intracellular or epicellular modes of existence, and are
may be definitively identified on the basis of their
difficult to grow in vitro. In exceptional cases, where
morphology (e.g. Babesia divergens), their cellular
 growth on synthetic, or semi-synthetic, media is possible,
tropisms je.g.
Ehrlichia  canis  selectively
infects
growth rates are very slow, with an attendant high risk of
monocytes; Anaplasma platys infects platelets; and
fungal or bacterial contamination despite rigorous aseptic
A. phagocytophilum infects neutrophils), or their staining
technique.
characteristics  in  peripheral  blood   smears  (e.g.
Mycoplasma haemominutum and M. haemofelis).
However, a common problem encountered in pathology
Table 4 Components present in media for cultivation of
laboratories is  the  interpretation  of  suboptimally
some Bartoneffa and Borrelia species.
prepared blood smears. A checklist of considerations
necessary in optimum smear preparation is included in
Table 5 (see p. 42).
Bartonella species:
Borrelia burgdorfer (sensu stricto):
Columbia agar
Standard differential stains such as May Grinwald
 BSK medium
Giemsa work well in blood smears for large protozoan
Peptone 
Glutamine 
 parasites, such as Leishmania species and Babesia species,
 Trypteine 
 Proteose peptone, tryptone and 
 and the multicellular aggregates (morulae) of Ebrlichid
yeastolate
Yeast extr act
species. In order to view bacteria such as Bartonella or the
HEPES*
rickettsias directly, more advanced staining methods such
Heart infusion extract Sodium citrate 
 as the Warthin-Starry silver stain can be employed using
Starch
Glucose
 Sodium chloride
suitably prepared biopsy material. However, these are
Sodium pyruvate
relatively non-specific and results must be interpreted
Agar
CMRL-1066 tissue culture medium
with ca ution.
Whole horse blood
 N-acetylglucosamine
For motile bacteria such as Borrelia species, darkfield
Magnesium chloride
Gelatine
microscopy, which utilizes a special condenser to direct
Bovine serum albumin (Fraction V)
light toward an object at an angle, rather than from
below, may be used. Using this method, particles or cells
 Rabbit serum, inactivated
are seen as light objects against a dark background.
* N-2[hydroxyethyllpiperazine-N'-[2-ethanesulphonic acid] 
Darkfield microscopy or phase contrast microscopy may
be used on fresh material {e.g. synovial fluid) to observe
41
42
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Table 5 Making the perfect blood film.
●Use EDTA as anti-coagulant. EDTA gives superior preservation of host and parasite cell morphology.
 Mix blood well (but gently) prior to making the film.
Avoid delay in making the blood film. Blood films should ideally be made within one hour of collecting the blood
sample; even if the sample cannot be stained or examined, it is better if the film is prepared as soon as posible.
 Avoid using too much blood. The commonest problem. A tiny drop should be applied to the slide using an applicator or
pipette tip.
Spread the film evenly. Spread the blood drop using another glass slide. Touch the drop then draw the slide away at an
angle of 30-40? in a smooth glide.
+
Air-dry the film as soon as possible. Water-induced artefacts are reduced by rapid drying of the slide. Waving the slide
vigorously, or using a flame or hair drier, are all effective, particularly in humid environments.
sapads eisaqeg pue sewseldowaey jo sisoubeip ui walgoad uowwon e s! juawipas uiers 'ueap suojanjos bujujeis daay
Stains should be filtered before use. Fresh stain and fixative solutions should be prepared regularly.
 Use a coverslip. Using a coverslip greatly enhances the visual image. It may be temporarily mounted with immersion oil
(Dr P Irwin, personal communication)
 organisms. Antibodies specific for particular pathogens,
response, which peaks after about 14 days. Measuring
linked to fluorescent dyes, can be used in conjunction
antibody levels in an animal with acute-onset disease,
with a fluorescence microscope to detect organisms in
such as babesiosis, would thus give little useful diagnostic
blood smears or tissue sections.
information. For more chronic and persistent infections,
such as that caused by Ehrlichia canis, measuring
Antibody-based methods (serology)
antibody levels may be more clinically useful, particularly
In general, exposure of mammals to complex non-self
when correlated with the epidemiology of the disease in
antigens (e.g. the surface components of a bacterium)
question. For example, low levels of antibody
to
results in the induction of an immune response. This
Rickettsia rickettsii may be incidental in animals that are,
response is characterized by the generation of antibody
or have been, resident in endemic areas, but may be
 and/or cell-mediated immunity. Serology, in the context of
significant in animals that have returned to a non-
this chapter, is the study of antibody responses to
endemic area after a short visit to an endemic area.
infectious agents.
The production of antibodies is an idiosyncratic
The nature and scale of the humoral immune response 
process, varying in both scale and specificity between
can give valuable information about host exposure to an
animals depending upon age, health status and genetic
ae suissasse u ydpay ssal sl inq iuaae snooa
background. The best way of assessing whether
infection or in quantifying the infectious load. Some of
 seroconversion to a particular pathogen has occurred is to
the more relevant methods involved in the detection of
analyse paired samples collected two to three weeks
antibodies with specificities for particular organisms or
apart. A rising antibody titre suggests a recent and,
proteins are described below. Serum (or plasma for some
therefore, clinically significant infection, especially if
applications) should be separated as soon as possible
supported by appropriate clinical signs. An alternative
from the blood clot or cell pellet to minimize the chance
 method for determining recent infection is to measure
of haemoglobin contamination, which may interfere with
some applications. Gel tubes provide an efficient means of
obtaining clear, sta ble serum.
28
The kinetics of the humoral response to many
pathogenic organisms have been described in detail and
100-
should be understood if logical conclusions are to be
10-
drawn  from serological testing.‘
The response
sequential challenge with antigen in terms of antibody
class and concentration is illustrated (28). The nature of
the response is determined by the number of exposures to
the antigen. Following the initial exposure, a second or
1 week
1 week
1 week
third exposure (or, more realistically, continued exposure)
Challenge 1
Challenge 2
Challenge 3
gives rise to more rapid induction of IgG compared to
Immunoglobulin G
IgM, which predominates in the early stages of infection.
Immunoglobulin M
Infection, or challenge', with a pathogen to which the
animal has had no previous exposure evokes a weak IgM
 28 Humoral immune responses to sequential challenge with
response after one week, and a gradually increasing IgG
 antigen in terms of antibody class and concentration.
Laboratory diagnosis of arthropod-transmitted infections
43
antigen-specific IgM concentrations. This is technically
aul oi se uoioidsns asien oi shnsau isiy aul saaos
more demanding and may give spurious results where
possibility of an infectious agent being responsible for
high concentrations of IgG are present in a sample. IgM
disease. To complicate matters further, certain arthropod-
concentrations are particularly useful in cases where
borne pathogens are actively immunosuppressive (e.g.
diseases are endemic and a high proportion of the
 Anaplasma phagocytophitum) and infected animals may
population may have antigen-specific IgG.
show spuriously low antibody levels despite active
Antibodies recognize small ( ~12 amino acid) regions of
infection.
antigenic  proteins
as well as larger structural
Despite the caveats described above, antibody-based
('conformational') determinants. Because of the modular
diagnostic tests are widely used commercially and in
way in which biological polymers are “designed', it is
 practice. Five methods are commonly used for detecting
quite often the case that two unrelated proteins will share
antibodies in serum samples.
structural or protein sequence motifs. This leads to the
phenomenon of cross-reaction whereby antibodies may
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
recognize molecules other than those that originally
ELISA uses the principle that proteins can be induced to
generated the immune response. Whilst this is an excellent
adhere
irreversibly
certain
plastic
surfaces.
 Strategy in evolutionary terms, for experimental purposes
 Immobilized antigen can be used to 'trap' complementary
it can be frustrating, leading to false-positive results. For
antibodies in a serum sample. The amount of antibody in
example, if one looks for antibodies against the agent of
the sample is determined by using a series of serum
Lyme disease, Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto, one must
 dilutions and assessing the limit at which the detection
ensure that exposure to related, non-pathogenic
signal is statistically indistinguishable from that of
spirochaetes, or to vaccinal antibodies (e.g. to Leptospira
background “noise". Binding of this primary serum
species), will not be detected by the assay.
 antibody to the immobilized antigen is detected using a
A number of the arthropod-transmitted pathogens
secondary
antibody,
，produced
against purified
specifically target cells involved in the immune response;
immunoglobulins of the species from which the test serum
for example, Leishmania species multiply in macrophages
 came, which has been conjugated to an enzyme fusually
and Ehrlichia canis has a tropism for monocytes. These
alkaline phosphatase or horseradish peroxidase). After a
organisms frequently dysregulate antibody production,
series of incubation steps, a visualization reagent is added,
causing the production of large quantities of non-specific
which contains a
 chromogenic substrate for the
IgG (monoclonal or polyclonal gammopathies). These are
conjugated enzymes. The reaction is stopped after a set
mostly non-functional antibodies with respect to the
 period of time and the last serum dilution resulting in an
organism, although they may be autoreactive and thus
unequivocally detectable amount of colour is determined
contribute to pathology. However, they may also cause
 spectrophotometrically. The titre of antibody is defined as
interference in diagnostic serological methods.
. The
the inverse of this last detectable dilution {e.g. a serum
presence of gammopathy can be a useful clue when
sample titrating to a dilution of 1:2,000 is quoted as
investigating more chronic arthropod-borne infections;
having an antibody titre of 2,000). The processes involved
indeed, IgG ‘spikes" on serum electrophoresis are
are depicted (29).
　29
Step 1. Coat
Step 2. Incubate
Step 3. Incubate with 
 Step 4. Add colour reagent. Colour
wells with
with diluted serum.
second, labelled,
change in wells is proportional to the 
antigen 
 Specific antibodies 
 antibody
amount of bound test antibody 
 bind to antigen 
0
0000
O
29 ELISA. Commercial test kits are usually provided with 
0000
the antigen of interest immobilized onto the plate. Effective
0000o
washing between steps is essential for reproducible, accurate
00
0000OO
results. The plate shown compares the antibody levels
0000
0000000
between a number of cats infected with feline
oh7
0o000000000
immunodeficiency virus. Individual animals are designated 
0000
0000000
on the top row, with dilutions shown down the side.
000000000000
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
ELISAs have become the preferred format for
antibody, specific for the pathogen in question. This
determining the presence of antibodies against pathogens
method
is
usedto detect
 pathogens such
as
from which antigens are freely available; that is, for
A. phagocytophilum, where the number of infected cells
may be low. Under fluorescent light, the infected cells are
which protein antigens have been identified, cloned and
immediately apparent.
expressed as recombinant proteins. The attraction of
ELISA technology is that it can be performed in a
Agglutination-based tests
microtitre plate format, is easy to automate and produces
The multivalency of antigen-binding sites on antibody
numerical, objective data. These features make ELISA
molecules (two for IgG; ten for IgM) allows them to
ideal for studies where the immune status of large
cross-link macromolecular structures (31). This cross-
numbers of animals is to be determined, as in vaccine
linking, or agglutination, is clearly visible because the
trials or sero-epidemiological surveys. If the appropriate
initial homogeneous suspension of carrier particles fe.g.
second antibodies are used, IgM or IgG {or both) can be
latex beads or tanned red blood cells) becomes turbid as
measured in a sample.
the individual particles aggregate. This test can be
The ELISA format can also be used to detect antigen in
performed on any solid surface and can use inexpensive
 samples if high affinity antibodies are available with
carriers such as latex beads. The agglutination occurs
which to coat the plates (the capture antibody) and to
rapidly at room temperature. Agglutination tests provide
detect bound antigen (the  visualization antibody).
 a rapid, simple method for detection of pathogen
 Monoclonal antibodies (or fragments) are generally used
 exposure or for determination of post-vaccination titres.
in this context. For example, antigen ELISA is a sensitive
Because the test relies on a universal property of
and specific tool for diagnosing Dirofilaria immitis
antibodies, it can be used for all species suspected of
(heartworm) infection. In some instances, multiple
pathogens can be tested for simultaneously in a single
valuable because they can detect antigen or antibody,
provided that target material is available to coat the
simultaneous testing for the presence of antibodies to
bea ds.
Ehrlichia canis and Borrelia burgdorferi and heartworm
antigen in a blood sample.
Immunofluorescent assay (IFA)
Where culture of organisms is difficult, or not advisable
due to safety concerns, another serological technique may
be used. In fluorescent antibody tests (FAT), organisms
may be detected in infected cells or tissues of a patient
30
{direct testing) or, more commonly, the presence of serum
 Secondary antibody
antigen-specific antibodies may be determined using an
labelled with
infected cell or tissue substrate {indirect testing [IFAT].
fuorochrome
The robustness of the antibody molecule is used to
Antibody derived
provide a reagent that can discriminate between closely
from serum
related protein molecules. In IFAT, infected cells, usually
sample
derived from tissue culture, are fixed onto microscope
slides or microtitre plates. A procedure similar to that
Infected cell
described for ELISA (see p. 43) is then employed to
immobilized
Pathogen
 determine if a serum sample contains antibodies against
on a
microscope
the particular pathogen {30). However, instead of using a
slide
chromogenic conjugate, the second antibody is labelled
with a dye molecule {e.g. fluorescein or Texas Red), which
fluoresces under light of a particular wavelength. Samples
containing antibodies cause the organisms within infected
 30 Indirect immunofluorescent antibody assay. Infected cells
cells to glow brightly when viewed with a fluorescence
 are immobilized onto an inert substrate. Serum (serially diluted 
microscope. This method is widely used in studying
 in a number of tests performed in parallel) is then applied.
antibody status to Leishmania and Babesia species. As
aeudoidde ue Xeme seipoque punoqun bujusem lan
with ELISA, the amount of antibody in a sample is
 purified antibody bound to a fluorescent dye is added. An
determined by limiting dilution and the results are given
intense fluorescence is observed in tests containing antibody
as a titre.
 concentrations above a certain threshold.
A similar but less sensitive method, the direct
fluorescent antibody test, involves incubating test tissue
sections or blood smears with a high affinity,
fluorescently-labelled antibody, often a monoclonal
Laboratory diagnosis of arthropod-transmitted infections
45
A sensitive and specific latex bead agglutination test
line in this precipitation zone. The kit comes with
has been validated for investigating human leishmaniosis
appropriate positive and negative controls and is semi-
in rural communities in Sudan. It uses latex beads coated
quantitative. In an alternative method, the test kit
with high affinity, purified IgG specific for Leishmania
and has been developed to detect urinary antigen. A
 allowing antigen in a sample to be detected. An example
comparison of IFA, agglutination and immunomigration
is shown {32)
methods (see below) for detecting Leishmania antibodies
showed that agglutination, despite its simplicity, had the
Immunoblotting ('western blotting' or
highest sensitivity.
'dot blotting')
ELISA, IFA, agglutination and RIM tests generally
Rapid immunomigration tests
employ a complex mixture of antigens such as cellular
 A number of in-practice' tests have been developed that
homogenates to capture reactive antibodies. Therefore,
allow rapid determination of an animal's immune status
when a positive result is obtained, minimal information is
with respect to particular infectious agents. A number of
obtained about the antigen-antibody binding events 
the tests available for arthropod-borne pathogens are
occurring in the test. For example, an animal may have
variants of the ELISA technique described earlier fe.g.
antibodies that non-specifically adhere to a component of
ImmunoCombTM and SNAPTM tests) A different method,
the plastic microtitre plate in an ELISA test, and the
known as rapid immunomigration (RIM), is used in tests
subsequent reaction would be read as a positive reaction
such as the WITNESSTM system. This method is a passive
to a pathogen. Alternatively, antibodies to common
chromatography system where animal serum is added to
environmental antigens may cross-react with components
a membrane containing gold-labelled antigens in solution.
of the antigen mixture used in the test of interest,
Any specific antibodies in the serum bind to the antigen
producing false seropositivity. It is possible to circumvent
and the resultant antibody-antigen complexes move along
these problems using pathogen-specific recombinant
the test strip until they reach a matrix that precipitates the
proteins that are also relevant to the disease process.
complex. Antibody-antigen complexes appear as a pink
 31 Agglutination-based assay. Diagrammatic
 31 
representation of the first stage of the agglutination 
 process. The bivalency of the IgG molecule allows it to 
cross-link relatively large particles. The cross-linking 
becomes apparent as the particles cohere and the
original solution becomes heterogeneous. This is seen 
Inert
carrier
Inert 
as an increased rate of precipitation of the inert carrier
L
carrier
IgM molecules are pentavalent and are much more
Antigen
efficient 'agglutinins'.
Antibody
(lgG)
32 Rapid immunomigration. The slide shows a positive result
32
for Borreltia serology. Serum is added to well A; a pink band in 
window B indicates a positive result. The band in window C is a
positive control that shows that the test is functioning correctly.
46
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
An alternative method for visua lizing antigen-antibody
reared, *clean', arthropod vectors (ticks, fleas or flies) on
interactions is immunoblotting. A complex mixture of
presumptively infected blood. Under optimal environ-
supioooe paieedas sl (suiaioud oi paldde isaq) suaaue
mental conditions, organisms will multiply rapidly in the
to molecular weight, with denaturing, sodium dodecyl
appropriate vector and can be easily visualized by plain
sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).
immunofluorescence-enhanced microscopy. This ampli-
The proteins are then transferred and immobilized on an
aul ul aaeiuape ol pasn uaaq seu pouaw uoueoy
inert membrane (e.g. nitrocellulose). Unoccupied protein-
diagnosis of human Trypanosoma cruzi  infection.
binding sites are then “blocked’ and the membrane is
Triatomid bug nymphs are allowed to feed on people with
probed’ with a primary antibody against the antigen(s) of
presumed chronic Chagas" disease. On engorgement
interest, as in ELISA and IFAT tests. An enzyme-labelled
(20-30 minutes), the bugs are removed and kept under
second antibody is then used to detect binding of primary
controlled conditions for 20-30 days. At this time, motile
antibody; addition of a specific substrate solution (giving
trypanosomes are detected by dark field microscopy in
 a precipitate in this case, rather than the soluble ELISA
the faeces and body contents of the bug if the person on
product) then allows visualization of antigenic bands. The
whom it fed was infected.
molecular weights of these bands can be determined by
reference to a mixture of known molecular weight
DNA-BASED DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
proteins separated on the same gel {33). An alternative to
The genome of a pathogen contains all the information
chromogenic substrates are those substrates that emit
required to produce the proteins and RNA molecules that
light that can then be detected on photographic film; this
it requires to successfully propagate itself. The sum of the
chemiluminescent system is more versatile and can give
gene expression that takes place within a pathogen is
enhanced sensitivity. The results from clinical samples can
 expressed as the phenotype. Looked at globally, the DNA
 be compared to patterns seen in confirmed infections and
sequences of the genes that are essential for life are quite
they add weight to the credibility of ELISA tests. The use
similar
between apparently
y  unrelated  organisms.
of immunoblotting has become established in the 
However, the small, subtle changes in DNA sequences 
diagnosis of Lyme disease, where ELISA results have a
that occur due to random mutation, and which offer a
significant  false-positive rate and 
wherei
vaccinal
selective advantage, or are selectively neutral over
antibodies (which are detected by ELISA)
can
be
 geological time frames, differentiate one pathogen from
distinguished from naturally induced antibodies.
another. In the last twenty years a revolution has taken
place in our ability to dissect, analyse and understand
Xenodiagnosis
 genomes. This section describes how these advances have
The difficulty in cultivating many tick-transmitted
 been applied to the identification of previously difficult-
organisms can be circumvented by feeding laboratory
to-detect organisms.
33
33 Immunoblot analysis to compare the antibody
profiles of dogs that have been naturally infected or
2
3
4
6
vaccinated with Borretia burgdorferi (simplified for
clarity); all dogs positive by standard ELISA.
Proteins from sonicated B. burgdorferi were
separated by sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacryla-
mide gel electrophoresis then transferred to 
nitrocellulose. Strips of membrane were then
probed with sera from naturally infected (1-4) or 
vaccinated animals (5-8). Serum from an animal
from a Lyme disease-free area was used as a
control (9). It can be seen that antibodies to
41-
antigens of 97 kDa and 41 kDa are common to
37
both groups of dogs. Antibodies to the 34 kDa and
31 kDa proteins (OspB and OspA repectively) are
34.
much more pronounced in the vaccinated animals.
31-
The 41 kDa band (flagellin) is shared with other
spirochaetes including Lepfospira species, perhaps
explaining the cross-reactive antibody seen in the
negative control. In this example, 37 kDa bands
 appear to be dia gnostic for natural infection.
Laboratory diagnosis of arthropod-transmitted infections
47
DNA provides an excellent template on which to base
frequency allows discrimination between closely related
a
diagnostic assay, due to its stability and unique
organisms (which will differ in fast-changing non-critical
 structure. Generic technologies exist for extracting nucleic
regions) and more disparate organisms, where rare
acids from all classes of pathogens in a variety of different
changes in critical regions will have occurred over a much
 sample types, including tissues and blood. This extracted
longer time span.
DNA can then be subjected to a number of assays that use
All the methods described below exploit the fact that
a combination of base-pairing characteristics and DNA
related organisms share DNA sequences; the more closely
repair enzymes from hyperthermophilic bacteria to
related two organisms are, the more highly conserved the
 generate a diagnostic signal.
nucleotide sequence of their genomes will be.
 The DNA sequence of a gene characterized from three
different, closely related organisms is shown (34). It can
Probe-based hybridization assays
be seen that sequences consist of areas where the
DNA is a very robust molecule. Its double helical
nucleotides are the same between the three species,
'uawaul yeie no sueay Aa (paddizun, aq ueo anns
whereas at other positions the bases vary. These sequence
without  damaging  the bonds  between adjacent
patterns reflect the fact that the product of the gene (e.g.
nucleotides. This results in two single-stranded molecules
an enzyme in this case) has areas that are critical and
that can be immobilized (to stop re-annealing) onto inert
which must be composed of specific amino acids if the
supports such as nitrocellulose. These single-stranded
enzyme is to function and the organism to survive. Other
molecules can then act as targets for labelled
positions, however, act as scaffolding to maintain the
oligonucleotide probes, which are designed to have
critical regions in the correct spatial orientation. In these 
 sequences complementary to a portion of the genome of a
areas the DNA and resultant amino acid sequence may be
 particular group of organisms (34). This is the basis for a
more variable. The degree of sequence conservation
variety of probe-based blotting/hybridization assays
therefore varies between different regions of the same
derived from the original method devised by Southern in
molecule. As two organisms evolve from a common
the 1970s.
ancestor, the nucleotide sequence of the genomes of the
 Originally, radioactively labelled probes were used and
two progeny lines will change in a characteristic way.
autoradiography was necessary to demonstrate that
Mutations in non-critical regions of the genome are likely
binding of probe to target had occurred. More recently,
seaiaum *pauieuieu snul pue Auasoud ot uo passed aq 01
enzyme-linked probes have been developed that allow for
the chance of a mutation in a critical region leading to a
chromogenic or chemiluminescent detection of binding
viable offspring, and thus transmission of this mutation,
events. Fluorescent dyes have also been used to allow
is much lower. This continuum of point mutation
visualization of probe binding.
34
Species A
1 ′'ggttaacgat gttaacatga acgagtactg gtaccatttg aaaccagaca
acggccagta 60
Species B
b04be6e622 64ee4e664o 0e27e6o62 864eoee226 4e6oee4266.s 1
tgggcctcaa 60
Species C
09 86e66e
Species A
61
ggatcggttc gggttaccaa cttaaggcct 
120
Species B
61(
cgttgcgtag cggtgaccga
 tgtaagccga gcccggattg acactaattc ccgggtttaa3'
120
Species C
120
 sequences in blue were produced, they would selectively hybridize to their parent organism's DNA but not with that of the two
other organisms shown (providing the correct stringency conditions were used during the hybridization process). By contrast,
probes designed to be complementary to either of the two longer conserved sequences (red) would bind to all three species.
48
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
In situ hybridization of probes {35) to bacterial or viral
As with most DNA-based methods, the equipment,
DNA is an excellent method for detecting low-grade
expertise and time required limit their use as routine
infections in tissue sections or cytological preparations.
laboratory diagnostic tools or in-practice tests.
35
 35 In sifu hybridization.
Substrate
 Streptavidin binds with very
Enzyme-labelled 
high affinity to biotin.
oligonucleotide probes can be
Enzyme 
 Enzyme attached allows for
 visualization after addition of 
used to detect the presence of
 suitable substrate
complementary DNA
Streptavidin
sequences in tissue samples.
In this case a biotinylated
Biotinylated
probe
oligonucleotide is shown.
Labelled oligonucleotide
probe enters tissue and 
binds to complementary 
pathogen sequences
 Tissue section treated to
denature DNA
36
 36 The polymerase chain
 reaction process as a
Blood sample
 diagnostic tool.
Red microbial DNA
in a sea of host
DNA (green)
 PCR machine - thermal cycler 
000D
Heat DNA to separate strands.
2888
 Cool. Short DNA 'primers' bind
□□□□
 selectively to target microbial
sequence
DNA polymerase
2
C
4
'extends' primer, adding 
bases complementary to
Analysis of results for Bartonella spp.
 bacterial DNA strands.
1: DNA size standards 2: Normal cat
 Repeat many times
3: Infected cat 4: +ve control
Laboratory diagnosis of arthropod-transmitted infections
49
Polymerase chain reaction
areas that are specific to individual strains. In parallel
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a method that
with this explosion of information, the commercial
involves the amplification of target DNA sequences by
synthesis of oligonucleotide probes and the generation of
repeated cycles of synthetic oligonucleotide primer-driven
economically priced, rapid DNA extraction kits mean
DNA synthesis. The key to the process is the use of a
that DNA-based diagnostic methods have become widely
thermostable DNA polymerase (such as that derived from
available. In many cases, where microbial culture is
the hot spring bacterium Thermus aquaticus) that remains
impossible, slow or undesirable due to biohazard
active after numerous cycles of heating to 94°C (201.2°F).
considerations, PCR is becoming the method of choice in
Newly synthesized double-stranded DNA can thus be
the diagnostic laboratory because of its sensitivity,
dissociated to act as templates for subsequent rounds of
selectivity and speed.
primer binding and DNA synthesis (36).
A recent development has been the linkage of
As the technology involved in determining the
fluorimetry and PCR in the process known as 'real-time'
nucleotide sequences of pathogen genes has developed, a
 PCR. In this method, fluorescent dyes incorporated into
reporter oligonucleotide probes, or dyes that bind to
data bases such as GenBank. This information can be used
double-stranded DNA, are included in the reaction
to determine areas of genes that are conserved between
mixture {37, 38). A number of different test formats are
species, genera and families of pathogenic organisms, or
 available but the common factor is that as PCR product is
37
38
Target DNA (template)
Aternative method 1: 'Taqman' probes.
An oligonucleotide with a fluorophore (F)
at one end and a quencher (Q) at the
Heat to 94°℃
cther is called a Taqman probe. This 
Denatures double helix 
binds to the middle of the amplified 
portion of template DNA. As the DNA
 polymerase copies the template it 
degrades the probe (P) releasing the
fluorophore
Primers anneal at
45-70°℃
New DNA synthesized
by thermostable DNA
polymerase
at ~72°℃
Aternative method 2:Molecularbeacons.
A hybridization probe is designed that 
 Newly synthesized PCR
has a cental portion, which is
[
products bind the dye
 complementary to the desired target.
(SYBR green), which
 Each end of the probe has nucleotide
【
then fluoresces
sequences which are complementary to 
each other and allow base pairing to
occur The ends of the probe are labelled
The point at which the
with a fluorescent reporter dye (R) and a
fluorescence value
quencher (Q). When the probe is *zipped 
 crosses a threshold
up' (no target template) there is no
 detection value (the Ct
 fuorescence but when template is 
value) is related to the 
 available the probe unzips and fluoresces
amount of target DNA
in the sample. Thus 
Fluorescence
sample A contains many 
R-）
more copies of target
DNA than sample B
Threshold 
B
value
38 Real-time PCR using alternative methods
30
to generate a fluorescence signal.
Cycle number
37 Real-time PCR using SYBR green.
50
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
produced  the
amount of fluorescence increases
non-overlapping spectral signature. At each cycle during
proportionately. Fluorescence is monitored throughout
the assay, the machine assesses the fluorescence produced
the assay and these data are converted into quantitative
by the binding of each probe independently. This gives
results reflecting the amount of pathogen in the sample
 great sa vings in time, speed and cost of analyses, and the
{rather than the qualitative results given by conventional
 added bonus of absolute quantitation of each analyte.
PCR). Therefore, this method has great advantages in
The major problem with all PCR-based methodologies
 assessing pathogen load' and responses to treatment.
 is their extreme sensitivity. This makes contamination a
The availability of machines that can monitor
major concern, and laboratory design should consider the
fluorescence at a number of different wavelengths has led
 need to keep reagent preparation, DNA extraction from
 to the development of multiplex assays where a number 
 samples, thermal cycling and agarose electrophoresis
of different organisms, or gene targets, can be probed
analysis {where conventional PCR is used) physically
simultaneously. In multiplex systems, labelled probes are
separate to minimize the generation of false-positive results.
used, each of which has a reporter dye with a distinct,
Eilarialinfeci
tions
Luca Ferasin and David Knight
INTRODUCTION
The primary pathological lesions occurring during
Filarial infections {filariasis) are caused by roundworms
filarial infections are caused by the presence of adults in a
(Phylum Nematoda) belonging to the ordor Spirurida,
specific organ or tissue. However, the immune response
superfamily  Filarioidea (commonly referred to
as
against the parasites may also play a pivotal role in the
"filarids'). There are approximately 200 species of filarial
pathophysiological mechanisms and, in many circum-
 nematodes and some of them can cause severe pathologies
 stances, microfilariae can also cause significant lesions.
in people and animals (Table 6). These parasites require
Filarial infections are often classified according to the
an arthropod intermediate host, commonly a biting
localization of the parasite within the host and the
insect, to complete their biological cycle and for
consequent pathological manifestations: 
transmission. The first larval stages {L1) of these filarial
· Lymphatic filariasis (e.g. Wucheria bancrofti and
nematodes are known as microfilariae and are found in
 Brugia species) is caused by the presence of nematodes
the blood stream or in the subcutaneous tissues of the
in the lymphatic vessels.
definitive host, from which they may be ingested during
● Subcutaneous filariasis
arthropod feeding. Adult nematodes may be found in a
Onchocerca
volvutus,
Loa
lod,
Dracunculus
variety of different organs and tissues, depending on the
medinensis) is caused by the presence of adults in the
species of parasite and the type of host. The microfilariae
subcutaneous tissues, which can sometimes be seen
of each species have a characteristic morphology that may
migrating through the body.
 be used to diagnose the type of infection.
Table 6 Biology and epidemiology of the principal agents of filarial infections.
Species
Dirofifaria immitis
Dirofilaria
Dipetalonema
Brugia species
(Nochtielfa)
reconditum
repens
Family
Onchocercidae
Onchocercidae
Setariidae
Onchocercidae
Common name(s)
Heartworm
Subcutaneous 
Subcutaneous
Brugian filariasis.
of the disease
flariasis 
filariasis 
elephantiasis
 Definitive hosts 
Dogs, cats, wild 
 Dogs, cats, foxes,
Canids
Humans, felids,
canids and felids.
bears, humans 
dogs, monkeys 
sea lions, ferrets,
humans
Intermediate hosts
 Mosquitoes
Mosquitoes
Fleas, ticks, lice
 Mosquitoes
Geographical
Tropical,
 Southern Europe,
USA, Africa,
 India, Malaysia.
distribution
subtropical and
Africa, Asia, USA,
Italy, Spain 
South-east Asia
warm temperate
Canada 
areas of the world
Morphology (adults)
m: 120-160 mm
m: 50-70 mm
m: 13 mm
m: 20 mm × 200-300 μm
f: 250-300 mm
f: 130-170 mm
f: 23 mm
f: 50 mm x 200-300 μm
Morphology
300 x 8-10 μm
360 × 12 μm
270 x 4.5 μm
210 x6 μm
(microfilariae)
 Site of lesions 
Right ventricle and 
 Subcutaneous
 Connective tissue;
Lymph nodes and
(adults)
pulmonary arteries; 
tissues
ectopic sites like 
lymphatic vessels
ectopic sites like
body cavities and
eye, CNS, systemic
kidney
arteries, body cavities
Site of lesions
Peripheral blood 
 Peripheral blood 
 Peripheral blood 
Lymphatic and capillary
(microfilariae)
vessels
vessels
vessels
vessels
m = male; f = female
51
52
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
●Serous cavity filariasis (e.g. Setaria species, Mansonelld
CARDIOPULMONARY DIROFILARIASIS
species) is characterized by the presence of parasites in
(HEARTWORM DISEASE)
the pleural or peritoneal cavity.
· Cardiopulmonary filariasis (Dirofilaria immitis) is
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
infection of the pulmonary arteries and the right side
Dirofilariasis, or heartworm disease (HWD), is a filarial
of the heart.
infection caused by Dirofilaria immitis. The parasite is
 Arterial filariasis {Elaeophora scbneideri) is caused by
the presence of adult worms in the systemic arteries.
heart of dogs and, less commonly, cats and ferrets. The
Ectopic filariasis is characterized by the incidental
infection can also occur in other species, such as wild
localization of a parasite in organs or tissues that are
canids, California sea lions, harbour seals, wild felids and
Jo auasaid g'a] saoads renoed ieul jo leidi iou
humans, but these species are normally considered
D. immitis in systemic arteries).
"aberrant' or "dead-end’ hosts since the parasites rarely
undergo final maturation to complete their biological
cycle. D. immitis has also been described in horses,
The biology and epidemiology of the filarial parasites
beavers, bears, raccoons, wolverines, muskrats and
affecting dogs and cats are shown in Table 6. The most
red pandas.
important and geographically widespread filarial disease
in the dog and cat is caused by D. immitis and is known
Life cycle
as
heartworm disease. D. (Nochtiella) repens is also
Dirofilariasis is transmitted by a mosquito bite (39) and
frequently observed in pet animals and represents a more
there are more than 70 mosquito species that can
common zoonotic risk than D. immitis. Dipetalonemd
 potentially transmit the infection (see Appendix, p. 143).
reconditum is another filarial nematode commonly found
Female D. immitis adults are viviparous and can
in dogs but with very little clinical significance.
release immature larvae ({Ll or microfilariae) into the
Brugiasis (B. malayi and B. pabangi) is a filarial
circulation. Microfilariae are ingested by a mosquito
infection that affects lymph nodes and lymphatic vessels
during a blood meal. Mosquitoes are not only vectors but
of dogs and cats in confined regions of south-east Asia.
also obligatory intermediate hosts and infection cannot be
transmitted without a sufficient period of larval
maturation (from L1 to L3) in the Malpighian tubules of
the insect. The maturation period is variable, depending
39
F
on  environmental temperature. Development cannot
occur below a threshold temperature of 14°C (57.2°F)
and the cycle will be temporarily suspended until warmer
 conditions resume. When the average daily temperature is
30°℃ (86°F) the maturation can be completed in eight
 days, while it takes approximately one month when the
environmental temperature is 18"C (64.4°F). As a
consequence, transmission of infective larvae is limited to
warm months and it varies depending on the geographical
location.
The infective L3 larvae migrate from the Malpighian
tubules to the lumen of the labial sheath in the vector's
mouth and, during a later blood meal on an appropriate
2-3 months
host, the L3 will exit the labium, enter the bite wound and
E
L5
D
penetrate local connective tissues. After approximately
one week the larvae moult from L3 to L4 and, after a
39 Life cycle of Dirofilana immitis. (A) Adult worms in the
migration of 2-3 months in the subcutaneous tissues,
pulmonary arteries and right ventricle of the definitive host
moult to immature adults (L5). The LS larvae penetrate a
release immature larvae (L1 or microflariae) into the
systemic vein and migrate to the right heart and
circulation. Microfilaraemia is uncommon in cats and humans.
pulmonary arteries within a few days, where they mature
(B) Microfilariae are ingested by a mosquito during a blood 
and mate after approximately 3-6 months, releasing
meal and they mature from L1 to L3 in the insect. (C) L3 larvae
microfilariae into the circulation and perpetuating their
penetrate the local connective tissues of the host during a later
life cycle.
blood meal. (D) The larvae mout from L3 to L4. (E) L4 mature
The life expectancy of D. immitis is approximately five
in the subcutaneous tissues until they reach the pre-adult
years in dogs and two years in cats. In experimental
stage (L5). L5 larvae migrate to the right heart and pulmonary
infections the adult worms in cats do not reach the same
arteries where they mature and mate, releasing microfilariae
size as in dogs, and their development is slower; therefore,
into the circulation and perpetuating the life cycle.
the average prepatent period is longer in cats feight
months) than in dogs {5-6 months). Furthermore, the
Flarial infections
53
pue ssop ul ueui 1amol Aleoidk si sieo ul uapinq uom
40
microfilaraemia is uncommon {less than 20% of infested
cats) and, when present, it is inconstant and transient.
Thus, cats are poor reservoirs of infection, as D. immitis
is lesslikely to mature in this species and adults are short-
lived when present.
Dirofilariasis is present in several countries, with a
variable prevalence that depends on the canine
population, the presence of mosquito vectors and the
climate. The climate must be sufficiently warm to allow
the presence of mosquitoes and the development of larval
stages in the insects. For this reason, the prevalence of
dirofilariasis varies with both geographical area and
season. This is an important concept to consider when
screening for the disease or planning a chemoprophylactic
schedule.
The disease has been diagnosed throughout North
America, in most countries of southern Europe and in
Africa, Asia and Australia. In non-endemic countries,
41
dirofilariasis may be diagnosed in dogs that have travelled
from or through countries where infection is prevalent.
However, at present, despite the presence of potential
vectors and infected dogs, spread of disease is limited
because of low average daily temperatures that do not
support larval maturation within the mosquito. Climate
change may result in the spread of infection into these
areas in the future.
Pathogenesis
Dirofilariasis is primarily a cardiopulmonary disease. The
presence of adult nematodes in the pulmonary arteries
CENTIMETERS
causes proliferation of the intima with consequent
narrowing and occlusion of the vessels (40-42). Direct
blockage by the adult worms is a less likely possibility.
The severity and extent of lesions depend on the number
42
and location of adult worms. The caudal lobar arteries
are usually the most heavily parasitized. Severe
pulmonary arterial disease may cause an increased
permeability of lung vessels, with periarterial oedema and
interstitial and alveolar cellular infiltrate, which can result
in irreversible pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmonary thrombo-
embolism (PTE) is another sequela of dirofilariasis. It is
initiated as a consequence of platelet aggregation
following exposure of collagen secondary to endothelial
damage induced by the parasite (40-42). Platelet
aggregation may also be responsible for the release of
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), which promotes
CM
1
2
4
S
6
proliferation of  medial  smooth muscle cells and
fibroblasts. PTE can also occur in response to adult worm
40-42 Lungs of a dog with diroflariasis. The presence of adult 
death either as a spontaneous event or induced by
nematodes in the pulmonary arteries causes proliferation of 
a dulticidal treatment. Experimental intravenous adminis-
the intima, with consequent narrowing and occlusion of the
tration of D. immitis extract induces shock in dogs as a
vessels. Severe pulmonary arterial disease may cause
consequence of mast-cell degranulation and histamine
increased permeability of lung vessels, with periarterial
release. This phenomenon seems to be caused by an
oedema and interstitial and alveolar cellular infiltrate. (40) The
unknown substance contained in the extract and may
entire lungs appear oedematous, with areas of haemorrhagic
explain the circulatory collapse that is occasionally seen
infarction. (41) Section of a lung lobe showing inflammatory 
in dogs after the spontaneous death of parasites or
oedema and a large area of infarction. (42) Adult parasites in
a dulticidal treatment.
 the lumen of a large pulmonary artery.
54
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
 In cases of severe infection, particularly where a large
right-sided heart failure with hepatomegaly, poor cardiac
number of parasites mature concurrently, retrograde
output and intravascular haemolysis with resultant
migration from the pulmonary artery to the right
haemoglobinaemia and haemoglobinuria is referred to as
ventricle, right atrium and venae cavae may occur
'ca val syndrome'. Severe cases of caval syndrome can also
{43-45). This induces incompetence of the tricuspid valve,
be characterized by the presence of adult worms in the
which, in association with the concurrent pulmonary
caudal vena cava and thromboembolic events accom-
hypertension, is the cause of backward, right-sided heart
panied by disseminated intra vascular coagulation (DIC).
failure (jugular distension, liver congestion, ascites) (46).
The pathogenesis of caval syndrome is not fully
Additionally, in heavy burdens, erythrocyte membranes
understood, even though the retrograde migration of
may be damaged as cells pass through the mass of
 adult nematodes from the pulmonary arteries to the right
intravascular parasites, causing haemolysis and haemo-
ventricle, right atrium and venae cavae seems the most
globinaemia. The presence of tricuspid incompetence,
con vincing explanation.
44
45
43-45 Necropsy specimens from a case of canine
 dirofilariasis. Right-side enlargement is primarily a
consequence of the concomitant pulmonary hypertension.
In cases of severe infection, migration of the parasites 
 into the right ventricle and right atrium can contribute to the
development of right heart enlargement. (43) Severe right 
ventricular enlargement (arrowheads). Hepatomegaly and liver
 congestion may also be appreciated. (44) Magnification of the
same heart. The right side appears significantly larger than the
left and there is gross dilation of the pulmonary artery. (45)
 Section of the right ventricle and pulmonary artery showing 
 numerous adult parasites.
CM
Flarial infections
55
Immune-complex glomerular disease is also commonly
dinical signs
reported in dogs with dirofilariasis. It is characterized by
 Dirofilariasis may be completely asymptomatic; however,
a protein losing nephropathy {PLN), with hypo-
clinical signs are generally present in cases with a high
albuminaemia and, eventually, reduced plasma anti-
worm burden and/or when there is a significant allergic
thrombin Ill (ATIll), which may exacerbate the
response of the host to the parasite. Infected patients may
development of PTE. The antigen that causes
 the
present with an acute onset of clinical signs but, more
immune-complex disease is unknown but it could be a
often, t
the disease develops slowly and gradually.
substance released by circulating microfilariae.
Furthermore, clinical signs of dirofilariasis are triggered
 In cats, pulmonary hypertension, right-sided heart
or exacerbated by exertion, and patients that perform
failure and caval syndrome are less common. In this
little exercise may never show overt signs of HWD. In
species the presence of parasites in the distal pulmonary
dogs, coughing is the most common clinical sign,
arteries may induce a diffuse pulmonary infiltrate and
followed by tachypnoea and dyspnoea, exercise
eosinophilic pneumonia. As in dogs, the subsequent death
intolerance, chronic weight loss and syncope. In severe
of adult parasites may cause acute pulmonary arterial
cases, haemoptisis can be present as a possible con-
infarction and the lung lobe involved can become
sequence of pulmonary arterial rupture. Jugular disten-
haemorrhagic, with areas of oedema. If the cat survives
sion,
hepatomegaly,  ascites and marked exercise
the initial embolic lesion, recanalization around the
 intolerance are typical signs of right-sided heart failure. In
obstruction occurs rapidly and pulmonary function can
these cases a systolic heart murmur or split second heart
improve markedly within days, with remission of the
sound can be heard on thoracic auscultation, with a point
clinical signs.
of maximum intensity over the right apex. Hindlimb
 Occasionally, adult worms can migrate to sites other
lameness and paresis have been described in dogs with
than the heart and the pulmonary arteries, and caused
 aberrant arterial localization of the parasites.
ectopic infection. Localization of D. immitis has been
Although the majority of infected cats are asympto-
reported in the eye, CNS {cerebral arteries and lateral
matic, cases of sudden death without any premonitory
ventricles), systemic arteries and subcutaneous tissue.
clinical signs have been described. Sometimes, sudden
Ectopic infections are more commonly seen in cats than in
Aiaeqoud 'sisho Aoiedsau ainoe ue Aq papaoand si yieap
dogs, suggesting that the parasite is not well adapted to
as a consequence of filarial embolism and obstruction of
feline hosts.
a major artery. When present, clinical signs of diro-
filariasis in cats are generally vague and non-specific.
These may include anorexia, lethargy, coughing,
vomiting, dyspnoea and collapse. In some cases the
respiratory signs are very similar to those observed in
cases of feline asthma.
Caval syndrome, a severe complication of HWD, is
characterized by anorexia and weight loss, respiratory dis-
tress, haemoglobinuria secondary to intravascular haemo-
lysis, signs of right-sided heart failure and possibly DIC.
Diagnosis
All diagnostic investigations are justified only if there is a
Baie ue ul saounbsou ol aunsodxa jo Aioisy snoiaand
where D. immitis infection is likely to be present.
Laboratory diagnosis
A routine laboratory work-up is usually insufficient to
make an aetiological diagnosis. Haematology often reveals
eosinophilia and basophilia in the early stage of infection.
Microfilariae can occasionally be seen on examination of
the blood smear. Serum biochemistry may show changes
related to secondary organ involvement fe.g. increased
hepatic enzymes or increased blood urea and creatinine in
cases of hepatic or renal damage respectively).
46 Chronic hepatic congestion in a dog with caval syndrome.
Hepatomegaly is present and the parenchyma appears dark
Cytological techniques
as a consequence of blood stasis. Eventually the liver
Cytology of bronchoalveolar lavage specimens may reveal
parenchyma may become fibrotic, with increased connective
the presence of numerous eosinophils 4-7 months after
tissue and atrophy of the hepatocytes. These lesions are
infection, especially in cats. However, differential
responsible for the portal hypertension and ascites.
diagnosis from feline asthma is often difficult.
56
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Imaging
antigen test is negative but dirofilariasis is still suspected
 Survey radiographs of the thorax may show characteristic
 based on compatible clinical signs, radiographic changes 
lesions, including main pulmonary artery bulge, enlarged
and/or positive antibody test results. In cases of severe
and tortuous pulmonary arteries, and interstitial and/or
infection, 
echocardiography may also show right
alveolar pattern, especially in the caudal lung fields (47,
ventricular dilation and hypertrophy and Doppler study
48). Moreover enlarged right ventricle and right atrium,
may confirm the presence of pulmonary hypertension and
enlarged caudal vena cava, hepatomegaly and ascites can
tricuspid insufficiency. Ultrasonography can also be
be observed in caval syndrome. In cats the vascular
particularly useful for the identification of parasites in
au aaui paaiasqo iuanbaig sal are sasueuo
ectopic locations.
commonly show radiographic changes similar to those
observed in cases of feline asthma or Aelurostrongylus
Specific laboratory testing
abstrusus infection, including overinflation of the lung
Tests to identify microfilaria
accompanied by a broncho-interstitial, bronchial or
 A direct microscopic examination can be performed by
alveolar pattern. Cats that have suffered recent episodes
depositing a drop of fresh blood under a cover slip. The
of pulmonary thromboembolism may show  localized
motility of microfilariae creates turbulence of the
 areas of increased lung opacity.
 surrounding red blood cells that can be easily observed
Non-selective angiography may help in the diagnosis
under the microscope at x100 magnification. This is a
of heartworm disease but it is rarely used because of the
quick, easy and inexpensive procedure but lacks both
risks related to this procedure.
Adult heartworms can be visualized on echo-
burdens are present. The modified Knott's technique
cardiography at the level of the main pulmonary artery,
(centrifugation and staining with methylene blue) and
right ventricle and right atrium. They appear as a double-
fltration methods are more sensitive than direct
lined hyperechoic structure resulting from the echo-
microscopic examination and allow morphological
genicity of the body wall of the parasite. A careful
examination of the microfilariae for species identification
examination of the right parasternal short-axis basilar
(49). In cats, given the absence or short presence of
view at the level of emergence of the main pulmonary
circulating L1 larvae, these tests have very little utility.
artery is especially recommended in cats in which the
47
48
47, 48 Thoracic radiographs of a dog with dirofilariasis.
(47) Dorsoventral view. The emergence of the main pulmonary
artery is characterized by a prominent bulge (arrow). The right 
ventricle and right atrium are also enlarged. (48) Right lateral
view. Enlarged and tortuous pulmonary arteries, and a mixed
interstitialalveolar pattern mainly affecting the caudal lung
felds, are present.
Flarial infections
57
49 L1 larva (microfilaria) identified by the Knott's test. The larva
 is surrounded by red blood cells and its dark colour is due to the 
methylene blue staining (x100 magnification).
Antigen testing for dirofilariasis
adulticidal therapy and this should be taken into account
The serological tests available for detecting heartworm
when re-screening for heartworm disease or evaluating
 antigens are summarized in Table 7. ELISA antigen tests
detect specific circulating proteins released by
the
for
 all the available kits. Small worm burdens, the
reproductive tract of the mature female worm, and a
 presence of immature females or male-only infections are
 strongly positive antigen test is normally correlated with
common causes of low antigen titres and false-negative
a heavy heartworm infestation. However, antigen level
results, particularly in cats, where these circumstances
can also vary between animals with identical
1 worm
occur more frequently. In dogs, specific
immuno-
burdens. These tests are available either as *in-clinic' tests
 chromatography techniques are also available. Antigen
or laboratory tests, and their sensitivity approaches 98%
tests should be carried out at least seven months post
but decreases to 35% in dogs with low worm burdens.
infection in order to allow a sufficient concentration of
The antigen levels become undetectable 8-12 weeks after
 antigens to accrue in circulating blood.
Table 7 Serological tests available to detect heartworm antigens in dogs and cats.
Test kit
Manufacturer
Type
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Species
Type of
(Mean [range])
(Mean [range])
sample
PetChek
IDEXX
ELISA
76 (66-98)
97(90-99)
Dogs
d'5
 SNAP canine HW
IDEXX
ELISA
67 (53-98)
98 (92-100)
Dogs
S. P WB
SNAP feline H
IDEXX
ELISA
73 (49-91)
99 (98-100)
Cats
S. P WB
SoloStep CH
Heska 
I-c
60 (44-97)
98 (92-100)
Dogs
S. P
Abboscreen
Abbott Lab.
I-C
52 (35-94)
96 (89-99)
Dogs
S. P
Dirochek
 Synbiotics 
ELISA
71 (59-98)
94 (86-97)
Dogs
S. P
Dirochek
 Synbiotics
ELISA
79 (54-94)
98 (96-99)
Cats
S. P
Witness
Synbiotics 
I-C
71 (69-92)
94
Dogs
S. P WB
blood; NA = published data not available.
581
Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Antibody testing for dirofilariasis
PCR testing for dirofilariasis
Antibody tests are currently available for routine
PCR may represent a very sensitive and specific diagnostic
screening of feline heartworm infection, either as "in-clinic
tool for routine identification of mature and immature
tests' or laboratory tests. They are summarized in Table 8.
adult worms, especially in unconventional hosts.
Antibody testing provides information about previous
However, at present, this test is not widely available.
exposure but not necessarily about current infection.
Consequently, antibody tests are more useful to rule out
Treatment
rather than confirm the infection. These tests are no
 Adulticidal treatment
longer used in dogs, given their low specificity and the 
The severity of the heartworm infestation should be
widespread availa bility of highly relia ble antigen tests.
carefully evaluated to determine the optimum treatment
Table 8 Serological tests available to detect heartworm antibodies in cats.
Test kit
Manufacturer
Type
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Type of
Mean (range)
Mean (range)
sample
SoloStep FH
Heska
ELISA
32 (13-57)
99 (97-100)
S. P WB
(5' incubation)
SoloStep FH
Heska
ELISA
47 (24-71)
94 (91-97)
S. P WB
(10' incubation)
SoloStep FH
Heska
ELISA
84 (60-97)
85 (81-89)
S. P WB
(20' incubation)
Assure FH
Synbiotics
ELISA
68 (43-87)
93 (89-95)
S. P
Witness
Synbiotics 
I-c
NA
NA
S. P WB
ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay: I-C = lateral floww immunosorbent assay: S = serum; P = plasma; wB = whole
blood; NA = published data not available.
Table 9 Classification of severity of heartworm infection in dogs.
dass 1
Class 2
Class 3
Grade of severity 
Mild
Moderate
Severe
 Clinical complaints 
None or
Occasional cough, mild 
Persistent cough (± haemoptysis), moderate
occasional cough 
exercise intoler ance
or severe exercise intolerance, weight loss.
enlarged abdomen 
 Physical findings
Unremarkable
Mildly increased lung
 Abnormal auscultatory findings (split S2, gallop
sounds
sounds, heart murmur, increased lung sounds):
tachypnoea/dyspnoea, ascites
 Radiographic changes 
Unremarkable
Mild enlargement of
 Right heart enlargement, patchy or diffuse
pulmonary arteries, patchy 
alveolar/interstitial patter, enlarged and tortuous 
alveolar/ interstitial 
pulmonary arteries, hepatomegaly, ascites 
infiltr ates 
 Echocardiographic
Unremarkable
Mildly enlarged pulmonary
Severely enlarged pulmonary arteries and
 changes
 arteries and mild pulmonary
 pulmonary hypertension, right ventricular and 
hypertension
atrial enlargement 
 Prognosis
Excellent 
Good in cases of successful 
Guarded 
treatment
Flarial infections
59
protocol and an accurate prognosis.  A simple
Macrolides
classification is available to assess the severity of the
Macrolides are an alternative option when adulticidal
disease (Table 9). Dogs in class 1 carry a good-to-
 treatment has been declined, as monthly administration of
excellent prognosis after adulticidal therapy. However, if
prophylactic doses  will  limit further infection.
clinical signs are not apparent, immediate adulticide
Furthermore, it has been shown that ivermectin and
therapy may not be considered necessary and periodic
milbemycin may kill some adult nematodes.
clinical and radiographic monitoring could be 
a
reasonable alternative. Dogs in class 2 may have a
Surgical removal of adult D. immmitis in caval
positive outcome but for those in class 3 the prognosis is
syndrome
 guarded due to the high risk of therapy-induced parasitic
Surgical heartworm removal has been well documented
thromboembolism. In the latter cases it is often difficult to
both in dogs and cats. Dogs with severe caval syndrome
decide whether adulticide treatment is warranted, and all
may benefit from the physical removal of worms from the
the possible complications of adulticidal therapy should
right heart and pulmonary arteries with flexible crocodile
be thoroughly discussed with the owners.
or basket-type retrieval forceps. This procedure can
 In cats, adulticidal treatment can be dangerous even in 
reduce the risk of thromboembolism following adulticidal
patients with low-grade infection, and the risk of
treatment and is also indicated for systemic arterial
pulmonary thromboembolism due to premature parasite
infections. The forceps technique requires general
death is high. Some cats undergo spontaneous clinical
anaesthesia and fluoroscopic imaging. In dogs the
remission after the natural death of D. immitis adults and,
expected outcome of this surgical procedure is positive in
therefore, adulticidal treatment may not be warranted.
approximately 80% of cases. However, the anaesthetic
Cats that show respiratory signs can be treated
risk, possible damage to cardiac structures and the
symptomatically as for feline asthma, with decreasing
potential hazard of postoperative ventricular arrhythmias
doses of prednisolone, starting at 2 mg/kg p/o daily and
 should be carefully evaluated.
diminishing gradually until the lowest effective dose
administered on an alternate daily basis is achieved. Cage
Microfilaricidal treatment
rest, oxygen supplementation, fluid therapy, broncho-
After recovery from adulticidal treatment (4-6 weeks),
dilators and injectable steroids {e.g. dexamethasone) can
circulating microfilariae should be eliminated. There are
be used to stabilize those cats that become acutely ill.
no approved drugs for microfilaricidal treatment but a
Adulticidal treatment can be considered as the last resort
single administration of ivermectin (50 μg/kg p/o) or
for cats in a stable condition but with clinical signs
milbemycin oxime (500 μg/kg p/o) in dogs has been
that cannot be successfully controlled by the suppor-
shown to be highly effective in eliminating the
tive therapy.
microfilariae from the circulation within a few hours.
Melarsomine dihydrochloride is a new generation
 Moxidectin and selamectin are also known to be potent
arsenical adulticide that is more expensive but offers
microfilaricides but, at present, there are still minimal
several advantages over its predecessor thiacetarsamide. It
data on the use of these drugs as microfilaricides. The
is less nephrotoxic and hepatotoxic, requires only a two-
sudden death of a large number of microfilariae can cause
dose protocol compared to the four required with
 anaphylactoid reactions associated  with vomiting,
thiacetarsamide, and has higher efficacy. Melarsomine is 
diarrhoea, ptyalism and circulatory collapse. These
injected intramuscularly into the lumbar muscles at a
adverse effects can be limited by simultaneously
recommended dose of 2.5 mg/kg and repeated after 24
administering
corticosteroids e.g.
 prednisolone
hours. In order
rtoreducethe
post-adulticidal
1-2 mg/kg p/o or i/m) with the microfilaricidal drug.
complications in class 3 dogs, only a single dose should be
injected, followed one month later by the standard
Prevention
protocol of two injections 24 hours apart. 7
This
Chemoprophylaxis is recommended for all pets living in
therapeutic strategy results in fewer worms being killed
endemic areas during the transmission period. In northern
with the first injection and minimizes the risk of
Italy, for example, where there is a high prevalence of
thromboembolism. Restricted exercise or cage rest, and
HWD, mosquitoes are present only during the warm
corticosteroids at an anti-inflammatory dose, may help in
months and chemoprophylaxis is only recommended
minimizing PTE in the 7-10 days that follow the
between May and October. Veterinarians should be aware
 a dministration of melarsomine.
of the seasonality of mosquitoes in their geographical
Sodium thiacetarsamide is an arsenical compound that
regions in order to prescribe chemoprophylaxis at the
has been used for decades in the treatment of HWD. The
recommended treatment regimen is 2.2 mg/kg twice daily
out the presence of the infection with adequate tests before
for two days by careful intravenous injection. However,
 starting the administration of chemoprophylactic drugs.
production of thiacetarsamide has ceased and it is no
longer available.
60
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Macrolides represent the most common and efficient
High doses of ivermectin and milbemycin oxime have
prophylactic drugs. There are, at present, four approved
 been shown to be potentially toxic in about one-third of
macrolides for prevention of HWD (Table 10). Ivermectin
collies  but side-effects
aré
 not observed when
(6-12 μg/kg p/o) was the first approved drug, followed by
administered at the recommended doses.
milbemycin oxime (500-1,000 μg/kg p/o), moxidectin
Daily administration of diethylcarbamazine citrate
{3-6 μg/kg) and topical selamectin (6-12 mg/kg). The
(DEC) was used for decades as a protocol for HWD
 prophylactic efficacy of macrolides is due to their ability
 prevention. However, its use is now limited as macrolides
to kill tissue-migrating L4 larvae of D. immitis up to the
 provide a more practical, reliable and safer alternative.
sixth week of infection. Therefore, macrolides provide a
There is minimal residual action and discontinuation for
high degree of protection when administered on a
only 2-3 days may eliminate protection. DEC does not
monthly basis. Although some degree of adulticide effect
have an immediate larvicidal effect and it should be
has been documented for macrolides at a prophylactic
administered daily during and for two months after
dose, patients that have missed one or more months of
exposure to infective mosquitoes.
prophylaxis should be tested for heartworm infection
after six months. This problem can now be avoided by use
OTHER FILARIAL INFECTIONS
of an  injectable sustained-release formulation 
of
moxidectin. This product is not available in all countries
Subcutaneous dirofilariasis
but it can confer complete protection against infection
Subcutaneous  
dirofilariasis  is  mainly(
caused
after exposure for at least six months.
D. (Nochtiella) repens, which parasitizes domestic dogs in
A chemoprophylactic schedule should be considered in
Europe {especially Italy, Spain, Greece, Yugoslavia and
non-endemic regions when pets are travelling to areas
France), Africa and Asia, and bears in the USA and
where dirofilariasis is prevalent. If pets reside in an
Canada. D. repens has also been reported in wild dogs,
endemic area for less‘
than 30 days, a single
cats and foxes (Table 6, p. 51). Subcutaneous diro-
administration of a prophylactic agent immediately after
their return to the country of origin would be sufficient to.
(genera Aedes, Anopheles and Culex) than those involved
 guarantee protection. Conversely, if pets are resident in an 
in D. immitis transmission. However, the biological cycle
endemic area for more than 30 days, administration of a
of D. repens is very similar to that of D. immitis except
prophylactic drug on a monthly basis after their departure
that adult D. repens worms reside in subcutaneous
is recommended.
tissues. The clinical significance of adult D. repens worms
Table 10 Chemoprophylactic drugs available for heartworm prevention.
 Trade name
Manufacturer
Active ingredient
Species
Recommended
Route of
frequency of
 administration
administration
Heartgard
 Merial
Ivermectin
Dogs, cats
Monthly
Oral
(Cardotek)
(chewable tabs)
Heartgard Plus
Merial
Ivermectin
Dogs
Monthly
Oral
(Cardotek Plus)
(+ pyrantel)
(chewable tabs)
 Advantage Duo
Bayer
Ivermectin 
Dogs
Monthly 
Topical 
(+ imidadloprid)
('Spot-on')
Interceptor
Novartis 
 Milbemycin oxime 
Dogs
Monthly
Oral
(flavour tabs)
Sentinel
Novartis 
 Milbemycin oxime
Dogs
Monthly
Oral
(Program Plus)
(+ lufenuron)
(flavour tabs)
 Proheart 
 Fort Dodge
 Moxidectin
Dogs
Monthly
Oral
(Guardian)
 Proheart 6
Fort Dodge
Moxidectin
Dogs
Every 6
Injectable 
(Guardian 6)
microspheres
months 
Revolution
 Pfizer
Selamectin
Dogs, cats 
Monthly
Topical
(Stronghold)
('Spot on')
Filaribits Plus
 Diethylcarbamazine citrate 
Dogs
Daily
 Oral 
(oxibendazole)
Flarial infections
61
in dogs and cats has not been clearly defined but nodular
HUMAN DIROFILARIASIS
skin lesions and abscesses have often been described in
Although humans are considered incidental hosts,
association with infection. Furthermore, the parasite and
D. immitis and D. repens infections have been frequently
its microfilariae appear to produce toxic substances and
uodun ue juasadau Aaul pue aldoad ul pahodai
induce immunological reactions. Treatment is achieved by
zoonotic risk. The parasitic lesions are generally benign
surgical removal of the parasites from skin lesions and the
but they may be misdiagnosed as more severe disease and
same prophylactic scheme used for D. immitis is also
prompt
 unnecessary
diagnostic
and
 therapeutic
effective in preventing D. repens infections.
 procedures.
D. immitis can cause pulmonary dirofilariasis in
Dipetalonema reconditum infection
humans. This is normally caused by a single nematode
This nematode is commonly found in dogs in the USA,
that rarely reaches sexual maturation and, after having
Africa, Italy, Spain and Australia. Unlike D. immmitis,
entered the right ventricle, dies and causes embolization
Dipetalonema reconditum infection is not limited to
 and small lung infarctions, which subsequently appear as
warm months because it is transmitted by fleas
solitary nodules on thoracic ra diogra phy. Microfilaraemia
(Ctenocephalides
species,
Pulex
 species),
ticks
and
 extrapulmonary
 dirofilariasis  have also  been
{ Rhipicephalus sanguineus) and lice (Linognathus species)
 described but they represent rare events.
( Table 6, p. 51). The biological cycle of D. reconditum is
D. repens is commonly found in people in different
very similar to that of D. repers and the adults live within
body locations, including conjunctiva, eyelid, scrotum,
the dog's subcutaneous tissues. Development of L3 larvae
inguinal area, breast, arms and limbs. Diagnosis of
in the intermediate host takes 7-19 days and the
human dirofilariasis depends mainly on microscopic
mechanism of entry into the definitive host is not
evaluation of the morphological characteristics of the
definitely known. It is possible that the infected flea is
nematode in histopathological specimens. Recently, a
aue aeaiel el pue Suuooia aum sop aul Aq paisaau1
PCR-based assay has been validated to identify the
released and then penetrate the mucous membranes of the
different parasites in humans, animals and vectors.
mouth. The prepatent period of D. reconditum is
However, this technique is not suitable for formalin-fixed
 approximately 60-70 da ys.
 specimens and can only be used with fresh or alcohol-
The clinical significance of D. reconditum is limited,
fixed material. This is an important limitation because
although it may induce eosinophilia. It may also confuse
tissue biopsies are normally fixed in 10% neutral buffered
the diagnosis of D. immitis infection if microscopic
forma lin.
examination of a blood sample alone is used. The
microfilariae of D. reconditum have a distinguishing
cephalic hook and are smaller and narrower than D.
immitis (Table 6, p. 51).
Acknowledgement
Dr David H Knight passed away in July 2002, a few
Histochemical differentiation of D. immitis, D.
days after the final revision of this chapter. Dr Luca
repens and D. reconditum microfilariae
Ferasin would like to acknowledge Dr Knight's precious
D. reconditum and D. repens can cause false positives in
contribution, valuable advice and encouragement in
tests for circulating D. immitis microfilariae but they can
reviewing the manuscript. Luca Ferasin would also like
be differentiated with acid phosphatase staining. D.
to dedicate this chapter to his friend David and their
immitis microfilariae concentrate the dye in two regions,
common passion for rowing and canoeing
namely the excretory and anal pores, while D. repens
anal pore and D. reconditum stains evenly.
This page intentionally left blank
Babesiosis
and
cytauxzoonosis
Peter Irwin
BABESIOSIS
Until recently it was assumed that Babesia gibsoni was
the only small piroplasm to exist in dogs (51). It was
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
originally described from India early in the last century
Babesiosis is caused by tick-borne  intraerythrocytic
and is considered to be widespread and endemic
 protozoan parasites of the genus Babesia and is one of the
most common  infections of animals  worldwide.
Babesiosis (also referred to as piroplasmosis) occurs in
domesticated dogs and cats, wild Canidae (wolves, foxes,
50
jackals and dingoes) and wild Felidae {leopards, lions),
u sisouooz Sug1awa ue se 1sauau1 Sujuiea sl pue
humans. In dogs and cats, babesiosis was originally
viewed as a tropical and subtropical disease but in recent
times it has been recognized with increasing frequency in
temperate regions of the world.
 The classification of Babesia species places them in the
phylum Apicomplexa, the order Piroplasmida and the
family Babesidae. The taxonomy of Babesia species has
relied primarily on morphological characteristics of the
intraerythrocytic parasites (merozoites and trophozoites)
and other life cycle observations. However, the traditional
methods of classification are gradually being replaced by
molecular biological techniques, as morphological
features by themselves are not sufficient for species
differentiation. Molecular phylogenetic analysis has been
useful not only for defining the relationships between
individual Babesia species but also for further elucidating
the association between Babesia and closely related
parasites such as Theileria species and Cytauxzoon
50 Large piroplasms of the dog (Babesia canis vogeli,.
species. The erythrocytic stages of all three genera are
similar, yet they are differentiated by the presence of
forms.
distinct exoerythrocytic life cycle stages within the
vertebrate host for Theileria and Cytauxzoon and by
transovarial transmission, which is a feature of Babesia.
51
Babesia parasites of the dog
Babesia parasites have been grouped informally into
"small Babesia and large’ Babesia within their vertebrate
1aa1el aul 'saop u! pazjusooau aue sadki ynoq pue sisou
piroplasm in dogs, Babesia canis, is recognized to
represent at least three (sub) species: Babesia canis canis,
1
B. canis rossi and B. canis vogeli, which are currently
thought to be transmitted by different tick vectors
(Table 11, p. 64). Intracellular forms are variable in
number and shape and are readily observed by light
microscopy due to their relatively large size (50). A
fourth, genetically distinct, large Babesia parasite was
 51 Small piroplasms of the dog (Babesia gibsoni, Malaysia).
recently discovered in the blood of a dog receiving
 Note the small, single piroplasms in each erythrocyte.
chemotherapy in the eastern USA (Table 11, p. 64).
(Specimen courtesy of Dr EC Yeoh)
63
64
Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Table 11 Piroplasms affecting domestic dogs and cats, their tick vectors and a guide to their virulence.
Host
Type
Size
 Piroplasm
Distribution
Tick vector
Virulence
(μm)
species (first
description)
Dog
Large
2 ×5
Babesia canis
 Southern Europe,
Dermacentor
Moderate/severe
canis (1895)
 Central Europe 
reticuratus
Babesia canis
Africa, Asia.
Rhipicephalus
 Mild/moderate
vogeli (1937)
N. and S. America,
sanguineus
 Australia, Europe
Babesia canis
 Southern Africa
Haemaphysalis
Severe
ross (1910)
leachi
Small 
0.8-1.2 × 3.2
Babesia gibsoni
Asia, N. America,
Haemaphysalis
Moderate/severe
(1910)
 Australia, Europe
longicornis.
Haema physalis
bispinosa,
Rhipicephalus
sanguineus?
Californian 
 Southern California 
Unknown 
Moderate/ severe
piropla sm
(1991)
 Spanish
 Northern Spain 
xodes
Moderate/ severe 
piropla sm
hexagonus?
= Theiieria annae
(2000)
2.3 × 4
North Carolina
North Carolina
 Unknown
Uncertain 
piropla sm 
(moderate:
(2004)
 single isolate)
Cat
1 x 2.25-2.5
Babesia felis (1929)  Africa
Unknown
 Mild/moderate
1.7 × 2.7
Israeli piroplasm = 
Israel
Unknown
Uncertain 
B. canis subsp.
(mild/moderate:
presenti (2004)
2 isolates)
Unknown
Babesia canis
Spain, Portugal
Unknown
Uncertain
(DNA only
canis (2003)
(asymptomatic
detected)
3 isolates)
1x2
Cytauxzoon
 Southern States,
Unknown
Moderate/severe
felis (1979)
USA, Zimbabwe 
throughout Asia. The full geographical range of
within the Babesiidae family (Table 11). It is likely that a
B. gibsoni, as with the other canine piroplasms, has yet to
better understanding of these species will be obtained as
be elucidated in detail but the organism has been found in
isolates  from  more  locations  around  the  world  are
dogs in the Middle East, parts of Africa, North America,
investigated. A small piroplasm genetically distinct from
Europe and most recently in Australia (Table 11). Reports
 B. gibsoni has been reported to occur in dogs in southern
of B. gibsoni from countries outside Asia are sporadic and
California (Table 11). This parasite has yet to be named
probably reflect its introduction as a consequence of pets
but it is more pathogenic than the B. gibsoni infections
travelling across international boundaries.
reported in other regions of North America. Although
A number of new canine piroplasms have been
morphologically similar to B. gibsoni, it displays a
described and there is growing evidence that some of
characteristic feature of “Maltese cross' formation {a
these should be classified as Theileria species rather than
tetrad of parasites) within some red cells. It is also
Babesiosis and cytauxzoonosis
65
phylogenetically more closely related to piroplasms from
Babesia parasites of the cat
humans and certain wildlife living in the western USA,
 Feline babesiosis appears to be less common and is not as
which in turn possesses a close genetic relationship with
well researched as the disease in dogs. The classification
Theileria species. A third small canine piroplasm has
of Babesia in cats is far from clear at the present time and
recently been found to be endemic in northern Spain
 is based largely on morphological studies of parasites 
(Table 11). This piroplasm foriginally referred to as
obtained from a variety of wild and domestic hosts.
Theileria annae) closely aligns with B. microti, a parasite
Babesia felis is currently recognized as the cause of
more commonly associated with rodent babesiosis.
babesiosis in domestic cats in parts of Africa (52). The
association  between  the  species found   in  wild
(B. berpailuri, B. cati) and domesticated cats has yet to be
52
determined and it is hoped that future studies using
molecular tools will help to clarify the phylogenetic
relationships of the feline Babesia parasites. Indeed, two
new isolates recently discovered in the blood of cats in
southwestern Europe and in Israel are most closely related
to B. canis after gene sequence analysis (Table 11).
Another closely related feline piroplasm, Cytauxzoon
felis, is described later in this chapter.
Life cycle
Most Babesia parasites described to date are transmited
aepoxil syot pieu, aul Aq sisoy aieahaa aul 01
The life cycle of Babesia is summarized (53). Infective
52 Babesia felis piroplasms in a cat with acute babesiosis
 sporozoites are injected into the dog or cat within saliva
(South Africa). Note the high parasitaemia and wide variety of
during engorgement of the tick. These organisms then
 morphological forms. There is also evidence of erythrocyte
invade, feed and divide by binary fission within, and
regeneration and the presence of single Howell-Jolly body
rupture erythrocytes during repeated phases of asexual
(arrow). (Specimen courtesy Dr T Schoeman)
53 Life cycle of Babesia in the dog and invertebrate
53
host (1) Sporozoites injected into bloodstream by
feeding tick. (2) Trophozoite (ring form). (3) Merozoite.
 Salivary gland
(4) Binary fission. (5) Paired trophozoites. (6) Infected
13
erythrocytes ingested by feeding tick. (7) Lysis of 
erythrocyte in tick gut. (8) Gamont development and 
fusion. (9) Kinete formation. (10) Kinete migration from 
gut to other tissues within the tick, notably ovaries and 
salivary glands. (11) Development of sporokinetes in 
12
ovaries (ensuring transovarial transmission). (12)
Ovary
 Development of sporokinetes to form a large,
mutinuclear sporont (containing many sporozoites).
Bloodstream
(13) Release of sporozoites from salivary gland during
1
feeding. (Adapted from Melhom H and walldorf V
(1988) Life cycles. In: Parasifology in Focus: Facts and
Fiction. (ed. H Melhom) Springer-Verlag, Berlin)
101
Gu
66
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
reproduction, releasing merozoites that find and invade
circumstances that favour the establishment of vector
other erythrocytes {54). In chronic infections it is assumed
ticks in previously non-enzootic regions, and the
that babesial parasites become sequestered within the
increasing ease of international pet travel associated with
capillary networks of the spleen, liver and other organs,
the relaxation of national quarantine regulations. The
from where they are released periodically into circulation.
Transmission to the vector may occur at any time that a
adaptable and may become established in homes with
parasitaemia exists. After ingestion by the tick, the
central heating, well beyond its usual enzootic range.
complex processes of migration and sexual reproduction 
Concurrent infection with other haemoparasites,
(gamogony and sporogony) take place, resulting in sporo-
notably
Ehrlichia species,
Mycoplasma
(Haemo-
zoite formation in the cells of the tick's salivary glands.
bartonella) species, Hepatozoon species and other species
While tick transmission is the major source of infection,
of Babesia, appears to be a common occurrence 
in
babesiosis may also occur after transfusion of infected
endemic regions and potentially complicates the diagnosis
 blood and in neonates after transplacental transfer.
and management of individuals by the veterinarian.
Multiple co-infections are difficult to diagnose without
Epidemiology
highly sensitive tests such as PCR.
 In endemic regions the prevalence of antibodies directed
against Babesia ranges from 3.8% to 80%, with the
Pathogenesis
highest seroprevalence rates reported from animal refuges
The severity of babesiosis in dogs and cats ranges from
and greyhound kennels. A higher prevalence of babesiosis
the development of mild anaemia to widespread organ
lasunos "Xleiauag 'pue saop aleu ul palodau uaaq sey
failure and death. The critical determinant of this variable
dogs (and cats) are more likely to develop clinical disease.
pathogenesis is the species or strain of Babesia parasite,
The efficiency of tick control largely determines the risk
yet other factors such as the age and immune status of the
of infection to individual household pets. A higher
host and the presence of concurrent infections or illness
prevalence of B. felis infections has been observed in
 are also important. While haemolytic anaemia is the
Siamese and Oriental cats in South Africa and there is an
principal mechanism contributing to the pathogenesis of
overrepresentation of Bull Terrier breeds in reports of B.
babesiosis, it has been recognized for many years that the
gibsoni infections outside Asia, and in the Tosa breed in
level of parasitaemia does not correlate well with the
Japan. These latter associations have prompted the
degree of anaemia, suggesting that multiple factors
suggestion of horizontal (direct dog-to-dog) parasite
contribute to erythrocyte destruction. Direct parasite-
 transmission through biting, and the possibility of vertical
induced red cell damage, increased osmotic fragility of
(dam-to-pup) transmission in these breeds.
infected cells, oxidative injury and secondary immune-
 Babesiosis is considered to be an emerging disease in
 mediated attack of the erythrocyte membrane result in a
many parts of the world. Veterinarians should retain a
combination
of
intravascular  and extravascular
high degree of clinical suspicion when faced with cases of
haemolysis.
haemolytic anaemia and should include questions relating
The wide spectrum of clinical signs associated with
to the pet's travel history during consultation. A
An
canine babesiosis has led to the classification of
increasing number of cases of canine babesiosis are
uncomplicated and complicated forms.
reported in regions where the disease was not previously
known to exist (e.g. northern Europe). Possible reasons 
Uncomplicated babesioisis
for this include changing ecological and environmental
Uncomplicated babesiosis is generally associated with
mild-to-moderate anaemia, lethargy, weakness and
hepatosplenomegaly, and is typical of B. canis vogeli
infections for example. Pyrexia, when it occurs, is
attributed to the release of endogenous pyrogens and
54
 inflammatory mediators from inflamed and hypoxic
tissue.
Complicated babesiosis
Complicated babesiosis refers to manifestations that
cannot be explained as a consequence of a haemolytic
crisis alone (Table 12). This form of babesiosis has been
extensively studied in southern Africa, where it is
associated with virulent B. canis rossi infection.
uwnq ot pauayu uaaq sey sisoisaqeq paneoduo
falciparum malaria and is characterized by severe
anaemia and dysfunction of one or more organs. Cerebral
babesiosis  causes  severe  neurological  dysfunction
 54 Free merozoites of Babe sia canis.
Babesiosis and cytauxzoonosis
67
Table 12 Features of complicated babesiosis.
dinical signs
Canine babesiosis
Veterinarians should be mindful that the clinical picture
Anaemia (PCV < 0.15 I/)
of canine babesiosis might be complicated by concurrent
+
 Renal dysfunction 
infection with pathogens that share the same tick vector
 Hepatic dysfunction 
or result from sequential infections by different ticks. The
 Cerebral complications 
most severe forms of the disease in adult dogs are
 Rhabdomyolysis
 generally associated with virulent infections {B. canis
 Pulmonary oedema
Consumptive coagulopathy (DIC)
rossi, B. canis canis, B. gibsoni and the Californian
+
●Mixed acid-base disturbances
piroplasm), yet pups are usually more severely affected
than adults regardless of the babesial species. Ticks may
or may not be found on the animal at the time of
presentation in endemic regions but there is usually a
{seizures, stupor and coma) that is often peracute and
history of known tick infestation or recent travel to a tick-
associated
with
congestion,
haemorrhage
and
enzootic region.
sequestration of parasitized erythrocytes in cerebral
Peracute babesiosis, a feature of B. canis rossi
capillaries. Hypotension and systemic inflammation are
infection, is characterized by the rapid onset of collapse.
associated with the activation of cytokines and potent
Clinical findings are typical of hypotensive shock and
humoral agents such as kallikrein, complement and the
include pale mucous membranes (sometimes  with
coagulation systems. Consumption of platelets and
cyanosis), rapid heart rate and weak pulse, profound
clotting factors may result in haemorrhagic diatheses.
weakness and mental depression. Fever may be present
 Renal dysfunction has been attributed to the development
but hypothermia is a more consistent finding in this state.
of haemoglobinuric nephrosis but this proba bly requires
Severe intravascular haemolysis leads to haemoglobinuria
additional processes such as hypoxia and reduced renal
('red water'). This presentation is usually associated with
perfusion to become clinically evident (5s, 56). A shift in
 complicated babesiosis, referred to in the previous
haemoglobin-oxygen dissociation dynamics has been
section, and affected dogs develop signs that reflect
reported to occur in dogs with virulent babesiosis, leading
widespread
organ
dysfunction 
associated
with
to less efficient oxygen off-loading in capillaries, further
hypotension, hypoxaemia and extensive tissue damage
compounding poor tissue oxygenation caused by the
such as anuria or oliguria, neurological dysfunction,
anaemia. Metabolic {lactic) acidosis in babesiosis has
 coagulopathies and acute respiratory distress (Table 12).
been attributed to anaemic hypoxia and capillary pooling.
A rapid deterioration to coma and death is the usual
Recently, mixed respiratory and metabolic acid-base
 outcome of peracute babesiosis.
with
Acute babesiosis is the clinical state that most
complicated babesiosis. With the buffering capacity of
veterinarians will encounter. Recurrent episodes may
blood adversely compromised by low haemoglobin
occur in some dogs infected with more virulent strains of
concentrations, arterial pH is reported to vary from
the parasite fe.g. B. canis canis, B. gibsoni). Dogs with
severe acidaemia to alkalaemia. Mortality in complicated
acute anaemia may have been unwell for a few days with
babesiosis often exceeds 80%.
non-specific signs such as anorexia, depression, vomiting
55
56
 55 Sectioned kidney from a necropsy examination of a puppy
56 Haemoglobinuric nephrosis. High-power view of the renal
that died of acute babesiosis, demonstrating the gross
cortex of the specimen in 55, demonstrating hyaline droplet 
appearance of haemoglobinuric nephrosis in the renal cortex.
formation in the proximal tubules, confirmed to be
haemoglobin by subsequent naphthol black staining.
68
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
and lethargy (57). The most consistent finding on physical
haemorrhages may be observed on the gums or ventral
examination is pallor of the mucous membranes, with a
abdomen in some dogs, consistent with the presence of
variable occurrence of fever, hepatosplenomegaly, icterus
concurrent thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathy. This
and dehydration (Table 13). Congested membranes are
may also suggest concomitant infection with a rickettsial
also occasionally reported. Petechial and ecchymotic
organism. Urine obtained from dogs with acute B. canis
infection is typically brown or dark yellow-orange,
 reflecting a mixture of haemoglobinuria and bilirubinuria.
57
The patient's serum is often overtly haemolysed or icteric.
A variety of atypical manifestations of severe babesiosis
(e.g. dermal necrosis, myositis, polyarthritis) have been
reported but the possibility of these being attributable to
co-infection has not been examined in detail.
It is likely that most dogs that survive the initial
infection become lifelong carriers of the parasite despite
appropriate treatment and resolution of the original signs.
Secondary immune-mediated complications such as
 anaemia, thrombocytopenia and glomerulonephritis may
develop but in general the consequences of chronic
infection are poorly understood. Many dogs remain
subclinical, in a state referred to as premunity, despite
intermittent, low parasitaemias. F
Recrudescence
of
intraerythrocytic parasites into the bloodstream may
occur following stressful situations, immunosuppressive
therapy or concurrent disease. In some individuals this
leads to a further significant disease episode, yet others 
may
develop only a mild anaemia and intermittent
 pyrexia. Chronic babesiosis has also been associated with
non-specific signs such as anorexia, weight loss and
lymphadenopathy. Although recurrent infections in the
 same dog may occur, in practice it is rarely possible to
 distinguish between recrudescence and a novel infection
 in endemic regions.
Feline babesiosis
 South Africa appears to be the only country where feline
babesiosis is currently recognized as a clinical entity in
 57 Acute babesiosis (8. canis canis) causing severe weakness
domestic cats; it tends to manifest as an afebrile, chronic,
and haemolytic anaemia in a six-year-old Labrador Retriever.
low-grade disease. Presentation of individuals to the
Table 13 Clinical features of babesiosis.
Uncomplicated
Complicated
Mild-to-moderate anaemia
Severe anaemia
Severe anaemia
(PCV 0.15-0.35 1/1)
(PCV <0.15 I/)
(PCV <0.15 1/l)
May be asymptomatic
Leth argy 
 Haemoglobinuria 
Lethargy
Weakness
Oliguria or anuria
Fever
Fever
Shock-like state 
 Hepatosplenomegaly 
 Anorexia 
Tachypnoea, dyspnoea, cough
 Anorexia 
Vomiting
 Neurological signs (depression, collapse,
Pallor
 Dehydr ation
 seizures, vestibular signs, coma)
 Mild icterus
Haemoglobinuria
 Petechial and ecchymotic haemorrhage 
Icterus 
Vomiting
Low mortality
 Moderate mortality
High mortality 
Babesiosis and cytauxzoonosis
69
veterinarian may be delayed when compared with dogs,
may
be observed in capillary
networks (58), a
due in part to the more introverted nature of cats and to
phenomenon that is possibly explained by the tendency of
the failure of the owners to recognize early signs of illness.
the parasite to proliferate locally in certain capillary beds
Furthermore, cats are able to tolerate more severe
or by the tendency of parasitized erythrocytes to
anaemia than dogs without showing signs. Anorexia,
 autoagglutinate. This characteristic is useful for diagnosis
depression and pallor were the clinical signs attributed to
 as higher parasitaemias can be demonstrated in blood
feline babesiosis most commonly in one study, with
uaoi pue (osh dil 1ea aul woy panalloo sajdues
weight loss, icterus, constipation and pica recorded less
frequently. Pyrexia is not a feature of feline babesiosis.
The highest prevalence of disease occurs in young adult
58
cats (<3 years old) during the spring and summer in
enzootic regions. Complications of feline babesiosis are
wide ranging and include hepatopathy, renal failure,
pulmonary oedema, cerebral signs and immune-mediated
haemolytic anaemia. Concurrent infections with feline
immunodeficiency virus, feline leukaemia virus and
Mycoplasma (Haemobartonella) species may occur in
older individuals. It is probable that young cats in
enzootic areas contract the infection early in life and
become subclinical carriers.
Diagnosis
The definitive diagnosis of babesiosis currently requires
 58 High-power view showing the accumulation of large
visualization of the parasite during light microscopic
 numbers of parasitized erythrocytes within a capillary.
examination of a blood smear It is expected that the
application of new, highly sensitive molecular techniques
such as PCR will complement the traditional methods of
69
diagnosis in the future.
Identification of the Babesia species, or at least a
distinction between 'small' and large' babesial organisms,
is essential with regard to the choice of therapeutic agent.
The search for Babesia-infected erythrocytes in a blood
smear may be tedious and time-consuming when the
preparation of good quality blood films (Table 5, p. 42).
Blood smears should be stained with a Romanowsky stain
(such as May-Grinwald/Giemsa). Some of the rapid
(Quick) stains that are available for in-house use are
reported to result in inadequate parasite staining. The
blood smear should be viewed through a cover slip, which
is placed over the slide on a drop of microscope oil, or
resin fixative (e.g. DPX) if a permanent mount is to be
made. Large Babesia trophozoites can be seen using an
objective lens magnification of x40, but oil-immersion
(x100  objective 
lens}
) is  required  for accurate
identification of small babesial parasites. Babesid
parasites should be differentiated from stain artefact and
Mycoplasma (Haemobartonela) species by a magenta-
staining nucleus and their blue and white cytoplasm (50,
51). In cats, Cytauxzoon felis appears very similar to
Babesia species and accurate differentiation may require
molecular techniques. Parasitaemias in cats with B. felis
59 Preparation of an ear tip capillary smear Fur should be
infection are variable and range from very low in chronic
removed from the tip of the pinna with scissors or electric
 disease to extremely high in acute cases (52).
clippers and the skin cleaned with a dry swab to remove skin
The physical properties of erythrocytes are altered
squames and dirt. The ear tip should be gently pricked with a fine
after infection by Babesia parasites. Infected red cells
(25-gauge) needle and pressure applied to squeeze out a droplet
become rigid, slowing down their passage through
of blood (top). A clean microscope slide is touched onto the drop
capillary networks. Large numbers of parasitized cells
 of blood and a smear is made in the usual way (bottom).
70
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
 Erythrocytes parasitized by the larger Babesia species are
within the range 20-90 x 109/l, and overt signs of a
less dense than normal red cells and they concentrate in a
bleeding
diathesis
(petechial
DuB
ecchymotic
layer immediately below the buffy coat within a
haemorrhages)
arej
 relatively
unusual.
Concurrent
haematocrit tube (60, 61). Parasitized erythrocytes are
ehrlichiosis might further exacerbate the potential for
also found in greater numbers around the periphery of the
bleeding
by
causing
platelet
dysfunction.
blood film and in the “feather' at the end of the smear.
Autoagglutination has been reported in babesiosis and up
Routine laboratory tests yield non-specific results in
to 80% of dogs give a positive result in direct antiglobulin
cases of babesiosis. Haematology typically reveals
(Coombs) tests,
 making the 
search for parasites
haemolytic anaemia, characterized by a regenerative
imperative in order to make the correct 
diagnosis.
anaemia, leucocytosis and thrombocytopenia. In peracute
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia is the main
cases the anaemia is normochromic and normocytic, with
differential diagnosis for babesiosis but other causes of
erythron regeneration only evident after 2-3 days. Large
haemolysis should be considered (Table 14).
'reactive' lymphocytes {62) may be observed in chronic
Serum biochemistry results  are  non-specific
in
babesiosis, indicating antigenic stimulation, but they are
babesiosis. Extravascular red cell lysis results in elevated
also associated with other infectious disease states.
serum 
bilirubin in both dogs and cats.
Acute
 Supuy uouuoo Aiaa e aq oi sieadde euadonooquoiu
hepatocellular injury leads to markedly elevated levels of
in babesiosis, although its clinical significance is unclear.
ALT and AP in dogs, whereas AP and GGT are generally
Platelet counts are rarely critical (<10 x 10*/l), typically
normal in cats with babesiosis. Azotaemia was recorded
60
61
60 Erythrocytes containing large Babesia piroplasms
61 High-power view of concentrated parasitized erythrocytes
 accumulate just beneath the white cellayer (buffy coat) in a
obtained from beneath the buffy coat (see 60).
microhaematocrit tube. The tube should be cracked at this
point with a diamond pencil to obtain a sample for a blood
smear.
Table 14 Differential diagnosis of haemolytic
anaemia in dogs.
62
Age of dog
Disorder
Neonates and
 Neonatal isoerythrolysis 
young dogs 
 Babesiosis
Inherited erythrocyte defects (rare)
 Transfusion reactions
 Older dogs
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia 
Babesiosis
Heinz body anaemia (onion poisoning 
and various drug toxicities)
 Anticoagulant toxicity
Dirofilariasis (caval syndrome)
Transfusion reactions 
62 Photomicrograph of a peripheral blood smear
Acute zinc and copper toxicosis 
Neoplasia (microangiopathic haemolysis)
demonstrating 'reactive' lymphocytes, which are a common
feature of chronic babesiosis.
Babesiosis and cytauxzoonosis
71
in 36% of dogs with Spanish piroplasm (T. annae)
the babesial infection and, indeed, it may be preferable to
infection in northwest Spain and was associated with a
induce a subclinical state of premunity in endemic regions
high risk of mortality. Hyperkalaemia and hypoglycaemia
where ongoing challenge is to be expected.
have been reported in pups with acute intravascular
haemolysis. Serum proteins are usually normal but
 Specific therapy for babesiosis
hyperglobulinaemia with hypoalbuminaemia has been
Drugs that have been used for the treatment of ba besiosis
recorded in some chronic cases of ba besiosis.
include the quinoline and acridine derivatives, the
Because of the difficulty associated with the
diamidine derivatives, the azo-naphthalene dyes, various
microscopic detection of babesial organisms, a variety of
 anti-malarial formulations and assorted antibiotics, yet
serological tests have been developed. These facilitate the
few have gained acceptance for being consistently reliable
identification of animals that have been exposed to
and safe. The choice of anti-babesial drug is determined
Babesia parasites but provide little information about the
individual's current infection status. The IFAT seems to be
emphasizing the importance of an accurate recognition of
the most reliable assay for clinical purposes and is offered
the parasites during the diagnostic process. In general,
by commercial diagnostic laboratories in the USA and
imidocarb, diminazine, phenamidine, trypan blue and the
Europe. In this test, I
 Babesia-infected erythrocytes are
combination of atovaquone and azithromycin are the
used as the antigenic substrate and positive reactions are
preferred choices for canine babesiosis and primaquine is
detected indirectly in titrated serum samples by using an
used for treating B. felis infections (Table 15, p. 72).
anti-canine globulin conjugated to a fluorescent marker.
Unfortunately, differences in national pharmaceutical
Specific methodologies vary between laboratories and the
registration laws mean that these drugs are not
clinician should seek advice from the laboratory
universally available.
regarding accepted cut-off values. In most reports, titres
exceeding 80 for B. canis and 320 for B. gibsoni are
imidocarb
considered to be indicative of infection. Unfortunately,
Imidocarb is an aromatic diamidine of the carbanilide
cross-reactivity between the canine babesial species often
series. In common with other diamidine derivatives, it
necessitates positive identification of the organism by
interferes with parasite DNA metabolism and aerobic
microscopy. Antibodies to Babesia may also cross-react
glycolysis, is rapidly effective and is slowly metabolized
with Neospora or Toxoplasma, giving further potential
from the host. While it is generally safe for use in very
 for false-positive serology.
young dogs with babesiosis, side-effects of imidocarb
Amplification of Babesia DNA using PCR is a highly
include pain at the site of injection and signs attributed to
sensitive technique that is gaining wider acceptance as a
cholinergic properties of the drug, such as vomiting,
diagnostic test, although it will be a few years before this
diarrhoea, salivation, muscle tremor and restlessness
type of testing becomes commercially available on a wider
(Table 15, overleaf).
scale. Its particular value is likely to be for the detection
of subclinical carriers in specific situations {e.g. before
Diminazine
importation into Babesia-free regions) and for screening
Diminazine is a diamidine derivative used for the
potential blood donors. Furthermore, real-time PCR may
treatment of B. gibsoni infection, since imidocarb is less
gain acceptance for quantitation of infectious load and
effective against the small babesial species. A single
for monitoring the effectiveness of therapy.
intramuscular dose is recommended for the treatment of
It is worth reiterating that the discovery of Babesia
canine babesiosis (Table 15, overleaf). The main
parasites in a blood film should always be viewed in the 
 disadvantage of diminazine is its low therapeutic index
light of the clinical findings and other laboratory test
 and, although the development of toxicity is dose-related
results. It is not uncommon to find a low number of
in most dogs, there appears to be variable susceptibility
Sop pu A e jo o a u so pau paoa
between individuals and idiosyncratic reactions occur.
living in an endemic region.
Signs of toxicity can develop as soon as one hour after
injection in some cases, or they may be delayed for up to
Treatment
48 hours. Affected dogs show signs of central vestibular
Issues to be considered when treating pets with a diagnosis
disease, including ataxia, rolling, vertical nystagmus and
of Babesia infection should include the clinical status of
conscious proprioceptive deficits that may progress to
the patient, the degree of anaemia, the identity of the
opisthotonos, paralysis and death. Mild cases usually
organism and its level of parasitaemia, and the potential
recover spontaneously but the worst affected dogs
for drug toxicity fespecially if there is a history of previous
 develop irreversible neurological deterioration. There is 
anti-babesial therapy). In all but mild, uncomplicated
 no antidote for diamidine poisoning so treatment should
cases, hospitalization and a combination of specific anti-
consist of supportive care. The toxicity of diminazine is
babesial therapy and supportive care is necessary.
cumulative and repeat injections should be avoided for at
Complicated babesiosis provides a challenge for even the
least 14 days. Diminazine has been successfully combined
most experienced intensive care clinicians. However, it is
with imidocarb for treating B. canis rossi infections in
unrealistic to expect that specific treatment will sterilize
South Africa, using a single injection of imidocarb
72
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Table 15 Anti-babesial drug therapy.
Host
Babesia
Drug name
Recommended 
Frequency
Notes/comments
type
(and salt)
dose
Dog
Large
Imidocarb
 5 mg/kg sfc
Repeat after
 Pain at site of injection 
(dipropionate 
or i/m 
14 days
and nodule may
and
develop at site of
dihydrochloride)
injection.
 Cholinergic signs 
controlled with
atropine (0.05 mg/kg s/c)
Trypan blue 
10 mg/kg iv
Tissue irritant, use as
1% solution. Reversible
 staining of body tissues
occurs
Large and 
 Phenamidine
15 mg/kg s/c
Once or repeat
Nausea, vomiting and 
 smmall
(isethionate)
 after 24 hours 
CNS signs are common
 side-effects
Pentamidine
16.5 mg/kg im
Repeat after 
(isethionate)
24 hours
Diminazine
3.5 mg/kg i/m
Once
Unpredictable toxicity.
(aceturate and 
 CNS signs may be
diaceturate)
 severe. Some preparations 
contain antipyrone
Small
Parvaquone
 20 mg/kg s/c
Once
 Atovaquone
13.3 mg/kg p/o
q8h for 10 days 
 Atovaquone should be
and
give with a fatty meal
 azithromycin
10 mg/kg p/o
q24h for 10 days
 Atovaquone preparations
 containing proquanil
 cause side-effects
Cat
B. felis
Primaquine (phosphate)
0.5 mg/kg p/o
Once
(6 mg/kg) followed by diminazine {3.5 mg/kg) the next
combination are its safety (compared with diminazine)
day. This combination is apparently safe but consecutive
and the oral formulations, which permit medication by
injections using other diamidine derivatives, such as
 the owner at home. Although an optimal dose regime has 
pentamidine or phenamidine, should be avoided 
uO
yet to be determined, treatment with atovaquone and
account of their cumulative toxicity. There have been
azithromycin results in a rapid reduction in parasitaemia
additional concerns about the use of diminazine in severe,
but, as with other anti-babesial treatments, elimination of
complicated babesiosis due to its hypotensive and
infection is not always achieved.
anticholinergic effects. For such cases it is advisable to
start intensive supportive therapy prior to administering
Other anti-babesia! drugs
the anti-babesial drug. Furthermore, some clinicians
Trypan blue was one of the earliest drugs to be used for
prefer to use another anti-babesial drug {e.g. trypan blue)
canine babesiosis but experience with this drug appears to
initially in these cases. Diminazine is also safe for use in
be limited to South Africa. It is relatively safe and is
very young dogs with babesiosis but strict attention must 
thought to suppress parasite numbers by preventing their
Pioae oi iyaiam xpoq slenpiaipui aui ol Pied aq
invasion of erythrocytes. Primaquine is an antimalarial
overdosing.
that is considered to be the most effective drug against
B. felis infection (Table 15). Although it reduces the
Atovaquone and azithromycin
parasitaemia (which can be extremely high in cats), it
A combination of the hydroxynaphthoquinone drug
does not sterilize the
infection..
Accurate dosage
atovaquone and the macrolide antibiotic azithromycin is 
calculations are required in cats in order to avoid toxicity;:
a welcome recent addition for the treatment of B. gibsoni
however, vomiting is a common side-effect at the
infection (Table 15). The advantages of this drug
recommended dose rate. Parvaquone may be used to treat
Babesiosis and cytauxzoonosis
73
Table 16 Drugs used for supportive care of canine babesiosis.
Uncomplicated
Complicated
Blood transfusion (packed RBC or whole blood)
Blood transfusion (whole blood)
Crystalloid infusion if dehydrated 
Crystalloid and colloid infusion as dictated
Dexamethasone? (0.2 mg/kg i/v once)
by patient's status 
Dexamethasone? (0.2 mg/kg iv once)
Outpatient medication 
Pulmonary oedema
Prednisolone?
Frusemide (2-4 mg/kg i7v or s/c q6-8h)
Oxygen therapy
Acute renal failure
Frusemide (2-4 mg/kg i7v q6-8h)
Mannitol 10% (1-2 g/kg iv once) OR dopamine
(1-5 μg/kg/minute iv)
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Plasma transfusion with heparin (75 units/kg
 added to plasma bagy
Heparin (75 mg/kg s/c q8h)
Outpatient medication
Prednisolone?
small canine piroplasms (Table 15). This drug has proven
Table 17 Formulae for blood transfusion.
efficacy 
against7
Theileria  species and the  close
phylogenetic relationship of some of the canine
piroplasms to these theilerial species may explain why
Whole blood transfusion:
 parvaquone is effective. There is anecdotal information
that doxycycline is effective against both large and small
Blood volume to be transfused 
canine piroplasms but convincing evidence for this claim
(required PCV - recipient PCV)
= k x body weight (kg) x
is currently unavailable.
PCV of donated blood
Constant 'k' = 90 in dogs, 60 in cats
Supportive care for babesiosis
Proactive supportive care is an integral component of
Packed red blood (pRBC) cell transfusion:
the treatment of a dog or cat with babesiosis (Table 16).
Infusion of 10 ml/kg pRBC will increase the recipient's PCV
Regular patient monitoring should include assessment of
by approximately 10% (0.1 I/)
mucous membrane colour, hydration status, respiratory
rate and pattern and urine production, and laboratory
evaluation of packed cell volume (PCV), serum total
Date
Cat
Date
63
Cat
protein (TP), electrolytes and acid-base status. In dogs
with severe anaemia, normalizing circulatory status is
Auto-
Auto-
best accomplished by blood transfusion. Both the
Anlineinareon
Aalecinaton
rapidity of onset and the degree of anaemia should be
considered when assessing the need to provide addi-
tional red cells. Blood transfusion is generally indicated
in dogs with a PCV of <0.20 l/l and cats with a PCV of
ypeA
<0.15 l/l. While in dogs it is preferable to confirm
Patient
Patient
compatibility of the donor blood prior to transfusion by
Test
Test
cross-matching, in cats this is mandatory due to the high
prevalence of alloantibodies in this species. The develop-
ment of “in-house’ blood-typing cards has greatly
facilitated the assessment of donor-recipient blood
Produ
compatibility in recent years (63). Fresh whole blood
bidVet is a trademark of dms laboratonies
transfusions are preferred for complicated babesiosis
63 Cards for in-house determination of feline blood types. The
cases but packed red cells are adequate in other cases
presence of agglutination indicates the blood type. The sample
(Table 17).
 on the left is type A and the sample on the right is type B.
74
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Crystalline fluid therapy should be given with caution
Babesia parasites of dogs fe.g. B. canis rossi and
in anaemic patients in order to avoid causing further
B. gibsoni) does not develop. However, when mixed
haemodilution or exacerbating respiratory distress.
B. canis canis and B. canis rossi antigens are incorporated
Oxygen therapy does not alleviate the hypoxia in anaemic
into a vaccine, heterologous protection is induced.
states but is indicated for the therapy of pulmonary
oedema in complicated babesiosis. Bicarbonate therapy
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
continues to attract controversy and its use is best
Babesiosis is an emerging zoonosis in many parts of the
restricted to institutions where acid-base status can be
world yet, with a few exceptions, the babesial parasites of
regularly assessed and interpreted. Organ dysfunction
companion animals have not been implicated in zoonotic
associated  with  complicated  babesiosis  should  be
transmission. The majority of human cases of babesiosis
managed according to the general guidelines provided in
in North America are associated with B. microti, a
current critical care manuals. A detailed review pertaining
 natural parasite of rodents, and these are typically mild or
to the supportive treatment of canine babesiosis has been
asymptomatic except in those individuals who are
published (see Further reading, p. 146). Glucocorticoids,
immunocompromised or splenectomized. In Europe,
including  dexamethasone  and
prednisolone
for
human babesiosis is less common but is associated with
prednisone), have been recommended by some authors
 greater morbidity (and mortality) and is usually caused by
but their benefits in babesiosis are currently unproven.
the bovine pathogen B. divergens. In 1991 an acute
malaria-like syndrome in a human patient on the west
Prevention and control
coast of the USA was attributed to a new Babesia-like
As with any tick-transmitted disease, removing all
piroplasm, designated WA-1. Molecular phylogenetic
possibility of exposure to the vector is the best way to
analysis has revealed that WA-1 is closely related to the
 prevent babesiosis. However, this is rarely achievable in
 small canine piroplasms (Table 11, p. 64) and falls within
endemic areas despite attentive ectoparasite control.
a cluster that includes Theileria equi (B. equi). A similar
Regular spraying, dipping or bathing with topical
piroplasm, designated CA-1, was discovered in several
acaricidal 
preparations  in  accordance  with
the
splenectomized humans in California and is related to, yet
manufacturers instructions should be practised in regions
distinct from, WA-1 and B. gibsoni. Serological surveys 
where tick challenge is continual. E
For dogs that are
have been used to investigate the prevalence of babesial
visiting tick-enzootic regions for a short time, and in cats
infections in regions where clinically apparent cases have
that may have increased susceptibility to the toxicity of
occurred. Surveys of blood donors have shown 3-8%
many acaricidal preparations, fipronil spray or 'spot-on'
prevalence for B. microti and up to 16% prevalence of
is a suitable choice, with a reasonable prophylactic effect.
antibodies against the WA-1 organism.
Owners should be encouraged to search their pets daily
for ticks and, once found, to physically remove and
CYTAUXZOONOSIS
dispose of them. Tick “removers have become available
commercially in recent years and the use of these devices
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
(and the wearing of gloves) may help to reduce the chance
Cytauxzoonosis is a tick-transmitted protozoal disease of
of inadvertent exposure of the owner to other potentially
clinical importance for domestic cats in southern regions 
infectious agents within the tick (e.g. Borrelia species).
of the USA. The causative agent is Cytauxzoon felis,
Several drugs have been investigated for their
which is recognized to have both pre-erythrocytic and
 prophylactic potential against babesiosis, yet none have
erythrocytic phases of its life cycle in the vertebrate host.
been consistently reliable in this regard. Experimental
The exoerythrocytic stage of the life cycle has led to its
studies have suggested that a single dose of imidocarb
taxonomic classification within the family Theileridae, in
dipropionate (6 mg/kg) protects dogs from Babesid
the
order Piroplasmida. Members of the genus
challenge for up to eight weeks, and that doxycycline at
Cytauxzoon are differentiated from Theileria species
5 mg/kg/day ameliorates the severity of disease when
based on the fact that schizogony in Cytauxzoon occurs
challenged with virulent B. canis. Higher doses of both
in macrophages, while schizogony in Theileria occurs in
drugs may protect more effectively for longer periods but
lymphocytes. However, it is clear that C. felis not only
the potential toxicity of imidocarb and the overuse of
shares morphological characteristics with organisms of
doxycycline would be of concern. Reliance on such
the genera Theileria and Babesia but it is also closely
 strategies cannot be recommended.
related on a molecular basis to the smaller piroplasms B.
Vaccines made from cell culture-attenuated antigens
rodhaini and T. equi (formerly Babesia equi).
have been developed for immunization against B. canis
The natural hosts are the North American wildcat
canis and are available commercially. While these
 species such as the bobcat {Lyrx rufus) and Florida
vaccines do not prevent infection, they limit the
panther {Puma concolor coryi) and it is thought that
parasitaemia and ameliorate the clinical signs and
transmission of C. felis to domestic cats represents the
laboratory changes that occur after acute infection. The
inadvertent infection of a dead-end host. Natural C. felis
use of vaccines containing B. canis canis antigen only is
infection may result from transmission by an attached
restricted to Europe, as cross-protection against other
tick, ingestion of infected ticks or by inoculation of
Babesiosis and cytauxzoonosis
¥75
64
infected blood or tissue during fights, notably with
bobcats. The highest incidence of disease occurs during
early summer through to autumn, corresponding to the
time when ticks are most active. More than one individual
 in a multicat household may be affected and it is wise to
check the other cats when the disease is first diagnosed.
The life cycle of C. felis is poorly understood. It is
suspected that Dermacentor variabilis is the principal
vector for natural transmission and is responsible for
injecting infective sporozoites from its salivary glands into
the mammalian host. Schizonts develop primarily within
aseaau 01 uo og pue suao Aun1 ul saioosy anss
 merozoites, which invade monocytes and erythrocytes. In
 cats that survive initial infection, low-level erythrocytic
 parasitaemias can persist for many years.
Pathogenesis
Infection of domestic cats with the schizogenous stage
typically results in a rapidly progressive systemic disease
with a high mortality rate. In natural infections with
Apuasoued ui uoueuea uaredde ue si auaui shaf 3
that may be associated with geographical location. In one
recent report, 18 cats living in an area near the northern
border of Arkansas and Oklahoma survived natural
infection and developed chronic parasitaemia.
. The
pathogenesis of cytauxzoonosis is attributed to the
schizogenous phase that ca uses mechanical obstruction to
blood fow through various organs, notably the lungs,
and results in a shock-like state. Vascular occlusion and
damage are further associated with the release of
65
inflammatory mediators and development of DIC.
Intravascular and extravascular haemolysis occur as a
res ult of erythrocyte invasion by merozoites.
dinical signs
The tissue schizont phase of infection with C. felis is
responsible for the clinical signs. Soon after infection,
 affected cats develop non-specific signs such as anorexia,
lymphadenopathy, fever and lethargy, but the course of
the disease is usually rapid, with the onset of a severe
clinical syndrome characterized by dehydration, pallor,
 dyspnoea, icterus, recumbency and death. Thoracic
radiographs may reveal enlarged and tortuous pulmonary
vessels as a result of vascular occlusion by the tissue stages 
(64, 65). Usually, by the time the cat is presented, it is
64, 65 Ventrodorsal (64) and lateral (65) radiographs of the
severely ill. Most cats die within 9-15 days following
thorax of a cat with cytauxzoonosis. The pulmonary vessels
infection by virulent strains, regardless of treatment.
are enlarged and appear increased in number The margins
 are slightly hazy due to a moderate diffuse increase in
interstitial opacity, with a mild bronchial component. Faint
pleural fissure lines indicate a small volume of pleural effusion.
(Radiographs courtesy Dr N Lester).
76
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Diagnosis
66
The diagnosis of cytauxzoonosis is made by the
identification of erythrocytic piroplasms in blood smears
stained with Wright's stain or Giemsa (66). There is no
serological assay commercially available at the current
time. Parasitaemias are typically low (1-4%), although in
some acute infections as many as 2s% of the red cells may
be infected. C. felis is a small piroplasm (Table 11, p. 64)
that must be differentiated from Babesia felis, which is
very similar in size and appearance, by light microscopy;
however, B. felis is confined geographically to southern
Africa. C. felis appears in a number of morphological
varieties including the signet-ring form, bipolar oval
forms, tetrads and dark-staining "dots', the latter of which
66 Cytauxzoon felis piroplasms in a domestic cat with terminal
may be mistaken for a more common and widespread
cytauxzoonosis (Oklahoma, USA). (Specimen courtesy Dr
parasite of cats, Mycoplasma (Haemobartonella) species,
J Meinkoth)
the cause of feline infectious anaemia. A unique, yet
uncommon, finding in cytauxzoonosis is the appearance
of tissue phase schizonts in blood smears and buffy coat
preparations. However, these forms are best demon-
67
strated in impression smears from bone marrow, spleen or
lymph nodes, where they are typically numerous (67).
Haematology and serum biochemistry abnormalities
 are typical of haemolytic anaemia. Initially, the anaemia is
normochromic and normocytic but it progresses to a
strong regenerative response, 
characterized by  the
presence of nucleated red cells by the time of death.
Moderate  to severe leucopenia  is typical
l and
thrombocytopenia, sometimes profound, is commonly
reported with or without DIC. Prolongation of clotting
aaq seu pue paioou uaaq seu iiidv pue 1dh sau
 Used to support a diagnosis of disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC),
but concentrations （
offibrin
degradation products (FDP) are variable. The plasma
appears icteric on the last day or two of life and is
associated with a high serum concentration of bilirubin.
67 Splenic impression smear from a domestic cat that died
Other clinicopathological changes that have been
from cytauxzoonosis. Note the large schizont-laden 
recorded    in   cases  of 
cytauxzoonosis
include
macrophages. (Specimen courtesy Dr J Meinkoth)
hyperglycaemia, hypokalaemia, hypocholesterolaemia
and elevations in serum ALT and AP; however, these
changes may be minimal in acutely affected individuals
that typically die before such abnormalities are recorded.
Necropsy findings in cats that have died of
cytauxzoonosis include pallor and icterus of the tissues,
petechial and ecchymotic haemorrhages on the serosal
surfaces of organs, oedematous lymph nodes and lungs,
and hepatosplenomegaly.“
The
diagnosis  may
be
confirmed by histological examination of the tissues.
these drugs are used in cats at lower doses than those
Large numbers of mononuclear phagocytes containing
usually recommended in dogs for the treatment of
schizonts are visible in the veins of most organs, including
babesiosis, and both may transiently worsen the clinical
the liver, lung, spleen, lymph nodes, kidneys and CNS.
status
of the recipient. Early administration
of
subcutaneous heparin, together with fluid therapy and
Treatment and control
blood transfusions, may also be beneficial in the
The  diagnosis  of cytauxzoonosis carries  a  grave
management of DIC, but controlled studies are lacking-
prognosis, with high mortality rates despite treatment. Of
the specific therapies that appear to help ameliorate the
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
disease, imidocarb dipropionate and diminazine aceturate
There is currently no recognized zoonotic potential of
have shown most promise (Table 18). It is suggested that
C. felis infection.
Babesiosis and cytauxzoonosis
77
Table 18 Treatment of cats with cytauxzoonosis
Type of
Drug/medication
Recommended
Frequency
Notes/comments
therapy
dose
Specific
 Diminazine aceturate 
2 mg/kg i/m
Once
Haemolysis and icterus may worsen
 transiently after injection 
Imidocarb 
2 mg/kg li/m
Repeat
Anticholinergic signs (vomiting.
dipropionate
after 3-7
diarrhoea, miosis, 3rd eyelid prolapse
days
and muscle fasciculations) controlled 
by atropine (0.05 mg/kg s/c)
Supportive
Crystalloid fluid 
To correct
 Ongoing 
Care to avoid excess haemodilution
therapy
dehydr ation 
 and provide
maintenance 
Blood transfusion
Refer to Table 17
As required
Blood typing or cross-match is
necessary to ascertain compatibility 
of donor blood 
Heparin 
100-150 units/kg 
q8h
Reduce dose gradually to avoid
5/c
rebound hypercoagulability
Hepatozoonosis
Gad Baneth and
Nancy Vincent-Johnson
CANINE HEPATOZOONOSIS
America, throughout Central America and in the northern
part of South America. In the USA, A. maculatum was
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
once confined to the warm, humid regions along the Gulf
Canine hepatozoonosis is a tick-borne disease caused by
 and South Atlantic coasts but recently its geographic
apicomplexan protozoa from the family Hepatozoidae.
range has expanded to reach as far inland as southern
Two distinct species of Hepatozoon are known to infect
Kansas and Kentucky. Both of the Hepatozoon species
dogs: Hepatozoon canis and Hepatozoon americanum.
that infect dogs are transmitted trans-stadially from the
 H. canis infection {HCI) was first reported from India
 in 1905 and has since been described in southern Europe,
A. maculatum ticks can also become infected and trans-
the Middle East, Africa, southeast Asia and South
mit H. americamum as newly moulted nymphs or adults.
America (68). H. canis infects the haemolymphatic tissues
Whereas H. canis appears to be a parasite of canines
and causes anaemia and lethargy. H. americanum
that is well adapted to dogs, and causes only mild clinical
infection (HAI) is an emerging disease in the USA that is 
signs in the majority of infections, it seems that
spreading north and east from Texas, where it was
H. americanum is less adapted to parasitic co-existence in
originally detected in 1978. This organism infects 
the dog, causing a severe disease in most cases. It is
primarily muscular tissues and induces severe myositis
possibly a parasite of some other animal in North America
and lameness. H. americamum was initially considered a
 and is transmitted to dogs through ingestion of ticks that
strain of H. canis, until it was described as a separate
feed as nymphs or larvae on the natural host. Gamonts
species in 1997. The species distinction was based on
and meronts of a Hepatozoon species have been reported
differences in the clinical disease manifestations, tissue 
in coyotes, bobcats and ocelots in the USA. The majority
tropism,
pathological
characteristics,
parasite
 of these animals were in good physical condition at the
 morphology and tick vectors. Subsequent genetic and
time of capture. H. americarum has been successfully
antigenic comparative studies have supported the separate 
transmitted to coyote puppies from A. maculatum ticks
species classification ( Table 19).
that had previously fed on infected dogs. In contrast to the
The main vector of H. canis is the brown dog tick
 infected adult animals, puppies developed clinical signs of
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, which is found in warm and
myasthenia, pain, ocular discharge, leucocytosis and
temperate regions all over the world. The Gulf Coast tick
inappetence. They also developed bone lesions typically
Amblyomma maculatum is the vector of H. americanum.
seen in dogs with HAI and one pup was infective to
A. maculatum exists in the southern part of North
nymphal A. maculatum ticks.
68
 68 Reported geographical
distributions of H. canis and
H. americanum.
Hepafozoon canis
Hepatozoon americanum
78
Hepatozoonosis
79
Table 19 Comparison of Hepatozoon americanum and Hepatozoon canis infections.
Organism
H. americanum
H. canis
 Main clinical signs
Lameness
Fever
Muscular hyperaesthesia
Lethargy 
 Fluctuating fever 
 Emaciation 
 Lethargy
Mucopurulent ocular discharge
Severity of signs
 Severe; signs may wax and wane
Often mild
A severe disease is seen in dogs
with a high parasitaemia
 Haematological findings
 Extreme leucocytosis
Common, may be as high as
Rare, found in dogs with a
200 x 10%/
high parasitaemia
 Peripheral blood gamonts
Rare
Common
 Parasitaemia
Usually < 0.1% of leucocytes
1-100% of neutrophils
Anaemia
Common
Common 
 Radiographic abnormalities 
 Periosteal proliferation of long bones 
 Non-specific
 Main diagnostic method
 Demonstration of cysts and 
 Detection of gamonts in 
 pyogranulomas in muscle biopsy
blood smears
 Primary target tissues
 Skeletal musdle, cardiac musde 
Spleen, bone marrow.
lymph nodes
Histopathological abnormalities
 Pyogranulomatous myositis
Splenitis, hepatitis, pneumonia 
 Distinct tissue parasitic forms
'Onion skin' cyst 
'Wheel spoke' meront 
Vector tick
Amblyomma maculatum
Rhipicephalus sanguineus
Therapy
 Trimethoprim/sulphonamide
 Imidocarb dipropionate 
 Pyrimethamine
Doxycyline
 Clindamycin
 Decoquinate
Life cycle and transmission
asexual reproduction of the parasite occurs. Nymphal or
The life cycles of H. canis (69) and H. americanum (70,
larval {in the case of H. americarum) ticks engorge with
overleaf) include two hosts: the tick as a definitive host in
gamont-infected leucocytes while feeding blood on an
which the sexual part of the cycle takes place, and a dog
infected intermediate host. Gamonts are freed from the
m       o 
leucocytes, associate in pairs in syzygy and transform into
69 Stages in the life cycle of H. canis. (1) Gamonts
69
ingested by a tick during a blood meal from a
 parasitaemic dog are released from neutrophils.
(2) Gamonts associate in syzygy during gametogony.
(3) Male and female gametes transform prior to
fertilization. (4) A zygote develops into an early oocyst.
(5) During sporogony numerous sporocysts are formed
within the oocysts. (6) Each sporocyst contains several
 elongated sporozoites. (7) After ingestion of an infected
tick, sporozoites are released from the oocysts and
Tick
Dog
penetrate the dog's intestinal tract. The sporozoites
 disseminate to target tissues, mainly haemolymphatic
organs. (8) Meronts containing macromeronts are formed
during merogony in the haemolymphatic tissues.
(9) Merozoites release from ruptured mature meronts 
13
and repeat the cycle of merogony. (10) Elongated 
micromerozoites are formed within a 'wheel spoke'-type
haemolymphatic organs. (13) Neutrophils containing mature gamonts enter the blood circulation and are ingested by a tick on
taking in a blood meal.
80
Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
70
70 Stages in the life cycle of H. americanum.
(1) Gamonts ingested by a tick during a blood
meal from a parasitaemic dog are released 
from leucocytes. (2) Gamonts associate and 
 undergo gametogony after which fusion
(syngamy) and fertilization take place within a
tick gut cell. (3) Zygote development within a
A. macurafum
Dog
 tick host cell. (4) Sporogony and formation of
tick (definitive
(intermediate host)
early sporocysts within the developing oocyst.
hosty
(5) The mature oocyst contains over 200
11
sporocyts. (6) Each sporocyst contains
10-26 elongated sporozoites. (7) After
ingestion of an infected tick, sporozoites are
12
released from the oocysts and penetrate the
15
13
dog's intestinal tract. (8) Sporozoites enter 
14
host cells and disseminate to target organs,
mainly skeletal and cardiac muscle. (9) Layers
of mucopolysaccharides are laid down around the parasite and host cell, forming an 'onion skin'-shaped cyst. (10) The parasite
undergoes merogony within the cyst. (11) Mature merozoites are formed in the cyst. (12) Rupture of the cyst is followed by release
 of merozoites and induction of a local inflammatory response. (13) A pyogranuloma with intense vascularization is created where 
 disseminate to other muscular tissues and repeat merogony (15) Mature gamonts in leucocytes enter the blood circulation and are
ingested by a tick upon taking in a blood meal.
12
 71 H. americanum oocyst containing numerous sporocysts.
72 Four attached H. americanum oocysts in a haemocoele
 smear.
73
74
73 Scanning electron microscope image of an H. canis oocyst.
74 H. americanum sporocyst containing sporozoites.
The oocyst is enveloped by a membrane and surrounded by
free sporocytes.
Hepatozoonosis
81
 75 Two H. canis macromerozoites in a section of spleen from
76 H. canis meront containing micromerozoites shaped in a
 an experimentally infected dog.
wheel spoke' form in a section of spleen from a naturally
 infected dog.
78
77 H. americanum cyst in skeletal muscle. Infrequenty, the
78 A pyogranuloma in muscle tissue from a dog with
cyst is found with a developing or mature meront with
H. americanum infection.
merozoites.
male and female gametes. Fertilization occurs and results
containing more than 20 elongated micromerozoites (76).
in the formation of zygotes that develop to oocysts. Each
When the meront matures and ruptures, merozoites are
mature oocyst (71-73) contains numerous sporocysts
released and penetrate neutrophils, in which they develop
(>200 for  H. americanum) and 10-26 sporozoites
into gamonts that circulate in peripheral blood.
develop within each sporocyst ( 74). After the tick moults,
H. americanum has an affinity for skeletal and cardiac
muscle tissue, where it develops between myocytes within
tick may carry thousands of infective sporozoites.
host cells of undetermined origin. Mucopolysaccharide
Hepatozoon parasites have not been shown to migrate to
layers encyst the host cell in the muscle (77), where the
tick salivary glands or mouthparts. Thus, transmission
parasite
subsequently
undergoes  merogony.
At
occurs by ingestion of an infected tick and not by a
maturation the cyst ruptures, releasing merozoites into
tick bite.
adjacent tissue. Neutrophils and macrophages are
jewueu alqdaosns 1auio 1o sop e Aq paisaaui aouo 
recruited to the area and may become infected, each with
the sporozoites of either species are released from the
a single zoite. A pyogranuloma forms where the cyst once
0ocysts, penetrate the intestinal wall and are transported
existed (78). Intense angiogenesis results in a highly
(possibly within a phagocytic cell) to target tissues and
vascular structure. It is hypothesized that this provides a
 Organs. H. canis disseminates via the blood or lymph and
route by which infected leucocytes re-enter the circulation
primarily infects the spleen, lymph nodes and bone
either become circulating gamonts or distribute parasites
marrow, where merogony takes place. Two forms of
to distant sites to repeat the asexual reproduction cycle.
H. canis meronts are found in infected tissues: one type
The life cycle of both Hepatozoon species is completed
containing 2-4 macromerozoites (75) and a second type
when ticks ingest blood infected with gamonts.
82
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Experimental infections have shown that H. caris
dinical signs
completes its development in the dog with the appearance
Hepatozoon canis
of peripheral blood gamonts within 28 days post
Infection with H. canis may be subclinical in some
infection. H. americanum completes its life cycle in the
animals but produce severe and fatal disease in others. It
dog within 32 days. The development of H. americanum
is difficult to characterize the clinical signs of HCI
in nymphal A. maculatum ticks from feeding to the
because: (1) dogs with low parasitaemia may be
observation of mature oocysts in the haemocoele of a
 apparently asymptomatic; (2) the non-specific nature of
newly moulted adult tick requires 42 days.
changes such as pale mucous membranes due to anaemia,
Other modes of transmission may exist. As with
and lethargy; and (3) the involvement of concurrent
Toxoplasma gondi, some species of Hepatozoon can be
diseases in some of the cases. Mild disease is common and
transmited through predation and ingestion of cysts 
is usually associated with low-level H. canis parasitaemia
present in tissues of intermediate hosts. This has not yet
{1-5%), frequently in association with a concurrent
been documented for either H. canis or H. americanum
disease. A more severe disease, characterized by lethargy,
but seems plausible. Vertical transmission of H. canis has
fever and severe weight loss, is found in dogs with high
also been reported in puppies born to an infected dam and
parasitaemia, often approaching 100% of circulating
raised in a tick-free environment. The importance of this
neutrophils (80). Dogs presenting with both leucocytosis
mode of transmission in the epidemiology of the disease
and high parasitaemia may have a massive number of
has not yet been determined.
circulating gamonts (>50,000 gamonts/mm?). This
extensive parasitism takes its toll on the canine host by
Pathogenesis
demanding nutrients and energy, by direct injury to the
Most dogs infected with H. canis appear to undergo a mild
affected tissues and by activating the different branches of
infection associated with a limited degree of inflammatory
the immune system. This massive parasitic load may lead
reaction. However, HCI may vary from being apparently
to extreme loss of weight and cachexia in dogs with a
asymptomatic in dogs with a low parasitaemia to life
high parasitaemia, although the dogs sometimes maintain
threatening in animals that present with a high
a good appetite.
parasitaemia. HCI can be influenced by immune suppres-
sion due to co-existing infectious agents, an immature
Hepatozoon americanum
immune system in young animals or the presence of a
Dogs infected with H. americanum are often presented
primary
immunodeficiency.
Immune
suppression
with gait abnormalities ranging from stiffness to complete
influences the pathogenesis of new H. canis infections or
recumbency, generalized pain and deterioration of body
the reactivation of pre-existing ones. Treatment with an
condition. On physical examination the most common
immunosuppressive dose of prednisolone is followed by
findings include fever, pain or hyperaesthesia, muscle
the appearance of H. canis parasitaemia in dogs with
 atrophy, weakness, depression, reluctance to rise and
experimental HCI. Concurrent HCI and infection with
mucopurulent ocular discharge (81). Body temperature
other canine pathogens are common; reported
Co:
tends to correlate directly with waxing and waning of
infections include parvovirus, Ehrlichia canis, Anaplasma
clinical signs and may range from normal to 41°℃ (106°F).
platys, Toxoplasma gondi and Leishmania infantum.
Hyperaesthesia and/or generalized pain result from
In contrast, immunosuppression or concurrent illness
 both pyogranulomatous inflammation in skeletal muscle
 is not necessary to induce clinical disease in dogs infected
and the periosteal reaction that causes bony proliferation.
with H. americanum. The earliest lesions in skeletal
Pain can manifest as cervical, back, joint or generalized
muscle are noted three weeks post exposure, when the
pain and clinical signs may resemble those of meningitis
parasite may be seen within the host cell. Over time, the 
or discospondylitis. Affected dogs may display a “His 
host cell produces the mucopolysaccharide lamellar
 Master's Voice' stance as a result of guarding the cervical
membranes around itself to form the “onion skin' cyst
region (82). Muscle atrophy becomes apparent with
unique to H. americanum infection (79). Some cysts
chronic disease and can result in secondary weakness.
01 1eadde siaqo aum Aiide1 A1aa Auosoaw orapun
Most dogs maintain  a relatively normal appetite
enter dormancy. Clinical signs in infected dogs result from
throughout the course of the disease. Despite this, weight
the pyogranulomatous inflammatory response that occurs
loss is common due to muscle atrophy and chronic
after the encysted mature meront ruptures, releasing
cachexia. Mucopurulent ocular discharge is common and
merozoites into the surrounding tissue.
is sometimes associated with decreased tear production. It
 Prolonged infection may occur from a single infecting
may coincide with fever spikes and owners often report
episode perpetuated by repeated merogonic cycles. Cysts
that the ocular discharge is the first noticeable sign of
 au rhe sieaa puno aq aeu uuau H jo
clinical relapse. Transient diarrhoea, often bloody, has
diagnosis in clinically recovered dogs. It is likely that these
been reported. Less frequently reported clinical signs
cysts have the potential to reactivate, producing
include polyuria and polydipsia, abnormal lung sounds or
continued cycles of asexual reproduction. This may cause
cough, pale mucous membranes and lymphadenomegaly.
the waxing and waning pattern of clinical signs and
rela pse following treatment.
Hepatozoonosis
83
1
79 H. americanum cyst. The round-to-oval 'onion skin'-shaped 
80 H. canis gamonts on the edge of a blood smear from a
cysts are 250-500 μm in diameter The outer portion of the
naturally infected dog with extreme leucocytosis and a high
 cyst is made up of concentric layers of fine, pale blue-staining 
'slldonnau aul jo %oo , buoeoidde ejweenseied 
laminar membranes. A developing parasite may sometimes be
observed at the centre of the cyst.
81
82
 82 Miniature Schnauzer naturally infected with H. americanum
 exhibiting "His Master's Voice' stance due to severe
musculoskeletal pain and excessive stiffness.
 81 Rottweiler naturally infected with
H. americanum, with typical mucopurulent 
ocular discharge and facial muscle atrophy.
84個
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Laboratory findings
83
Most dogs with HCI have white blood cell counts within
the reference range. However, (
dogs  with  a high
parasitaemia frequently have extreme neutrophilia fup to
150 x 10*/l), although it is less common than in dogs with
HAI. Normocytic, normochromic non-regenerative
anaemia is the most common haematological abnormality
reported in HCI. Less frequently, a regenerative anaemia,
sometimes severe, may be seen. In a case-controlled study
of dogs with H. canis parasitaemia admited to a
veterinary teaching hospital in Israel, dogs with
hepatozoonosis were significantly more anaemic than the
control hospital population admitted with other diseases,
and dogs with high parasitaemia were more anaemic and
had higher leucocyte counts than both the controls and
the dogs with low parasitaemia. Thrombocytopenia and
 proteinuria have also been reported in HCI.
In
dogs.
withHAI,
the
most outstanding
haematological abnormality is marked leucocytosis,
characterized by neutrophilia. The white blood cell count
typically ranges from 20-200 x 10°/, with reported
means of 76.8 and 85.7 x 10*/l. A mild to moderate
normocytic, normochromic, non-regenerative anaemia is
typical. Thrombocytosis, with platelet counts of 422-916
X 107/l, occurs in a considerable number of dogs.
Thrombocytopenia is rare unless there is concurrent
infection with Ehrlichia canis, Anaplasma platys,
Rickettsia rickettsi or other tick-borne organisms.
Abnormalities  in serum  biochemistry  in highly
parasitaemic dogs with HCI include hyperproteinaemia
with hyperglobulinaemia and hypoalbuminaemia, and
increased creatine kinase {CK) and alkaline phosphatase
(AP) activities. In dogs with HAI the most common
 83 Radiograph showing periosteal proliferation of the femurs
biochemical changes are a mild elevation in AP and
and pelvic bones in H. americanum infection. Bone lesions
decreased albumin. Artefactual hypoglycaemia (in the
range from rough irregularity to smooth laminar thickening
se mol se Aeuoiseoo pue Uouu 2e'5-zz'z jo sau1
such as in this case.
0.28 mmol/l) due to increased in vitro metabolism by the
elevated number of white blood cells may be seen if
sodium fluoride is not used for sample collection. The low
albumin has been attributed to decreased protein intake,
revealed that the stages of morphologic development of
chronic inflammation or renal loss. Blood urea nitrogen
the lesions very closely resemble those of hypertrophic
(BUN) is also frequently decreased below the reference 
osteopathy.
range. Surprisingly, CK activity is typically normal despite
the myositis caused by H. americanum. Although the
Diagnosis
ouedau jo aausaaans are Nna pue uunqie ui saseauoap
HCI is usually diagnosed by microscopic detection of
failure, both fasting and postprandial bile acids are
H. canis gamonts in the cytoplasm of neutrophils, and
usually within the reference range or only slightly
rarely monocytes, on Giemsa- or Wright's-stained blood
elevated.
smears. They have an ellipsoidal shape, are about 11 X
4 μm and are enveloped in a thick membrane (84).
Radiographic findings
Between 0.s% and 5% of the neutrophils are commonly
Dogs with HAI commonly develop osteoproliferative
infected, although this may reach as high as 100% in
lesions. Periosteal new bone formation is typically
heavy infections. A case-controlled study of dogs with H.
disseminated and symmetric and is usually most frequent
canis parasitaemia admitted to a veterinary hospital in
and severe on the diaphysis of the long bones. The
Israel indicated that 1s% had a high number of
radiographic appearance of the bony lesions ranges from
circulating parasites (>800 gamonts/mm?).
subtle bone irregularity to a dramatic smooth laminar
In contrast to H. canis, gamonts are infrequently found
thickening (83). A study of the formation of the bone
on blood smears from dogs infected with H. americanum.
lesions after experimental infection with H. americanum
When they are identified, it is usually in very low
Hepatozoonosis
85
numbers, rarely exceeding 0.1% of the leucocytes
Myositis with muscle atrophy, necrosis and infiltration of
examined (85). Gamonts may exit the leucocytes rapidly
inflammatory cells between muscle fibres is a frequent
after blood is drawn, leaving behind an empty capsule
finding. The parasites are widely distributed in the muscle
that is difficult to identify. Consequently, blood smears
tissue but multiple biopsies are recommended to increase
should be made rapidly after sampling to enhance
the chances of detecting the organism, especially in early
identification. Buffy coat smears will also increase the
or low level infections. The biceps femoris, semi-
chance of gamont detection. Bone marrow aspirates
tendinosus or epaxial muscles are recommended sites
usually show granulocytic hyperplasia with an increased
for biopsy.
myeloid:erythroid ratio, and lymph node aspirates often
An indirect fluorescent antibody test {(IFAT) and
reveal lymphoid hyperplasia. However, neither procedure 
western blot for the detection of anti-H. canis antibodies
is useful in making a definitive diagnosis as organisms are
were developed using gamont antigens (86). The IFAT has 
rarely seen in these samples.
been used for epidemiological studies in Israel and Japan.
Radiography of the limbs or pelvis can be used for
 A survey of dogs from Israel showed that 33% had been
screening a suspected animal because many dogs with
exposed to the parasite as indicated by the presence of
HAI will show periosteal proliferation. However, muscle
anti-H. canis antibodies. Only 3% of the seropositive
biopsy is a more consistent method of diagnosis of HAI as
dogs had detectable blood gamonts and only 1% had
it typically reveals the unique cyst and pyogranuloma
severe clinical signs associated with the infection. This
formation associated with H. americanum (77-79).
indicates that although there is a wide exposure to
84
85
 84 Single H. canis gamont on a blood smear from a naturally
85 Blood smear showing a gamont of H. americanum in a
 infected dog. Note the ellipsoidal shape of the gamont 
neutrophil. Although similar in appearance, the gamonts of
 compressing the lobulated neutrophil nucleus towards the cell 
H. americanum are slightly smaller in size than those of
membrane.
H. canis (8.8 x 3.9 μm compared to 11 x 4 μm).
 86 Indirect fluorescent antibody test (IFAT) for the detection of
86
antibodies against H. canis. Note the specific fluorescence of 
the gamont membranes in the positive reaction shown.
86
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
H. canis, most infections are probably subclinical. IgM
Cachexia and muscle atrophy are consistent gross
and IgG class antibodies to H. canis were detected by
findings on necropsy of dogs chronically infected with
IFAT in experimentally infected dogs as early as 16 and
H. americarum. Roughening and thickening of bone
22 days post infection, respectively, well in advance of
surfaces may be apparent. Grossly, pyogranulomas may
gamont detection by microscopy at 28 days post
appear as multiple, 1-2 mm diameter, white-to-tan foci
infection. Antibodies detected by IFAT may be formed
diffusely scattered throughout muscle and various other
against conserved antigens found in earlier life cycle
tissues.
Microscopically, ↑
the
cysts, meronts and
stages of H. canis.
 pyogranulomas are found predominantly in skeletal and
Sera from dogs infected with H. americanum showed
cardiac muscle but they may also be found sporadically in
only a low degree of cross-reactivity to H. canis antigens
other tissues including adipose tissue, lymph node,
by IFAT. However, an ELISA for H. americarum, using
intestinal smooth muscle, spleen, skin, kidney, salivary
sporozoites as antigen, was reported to have a sensitivity
gland, liver, pancreas and lung. Vascular changes 
in
of 93% and a specificity of 96% when compared with
various organs include fibrinoid degeneration of vessel
muscle biopsy.
walls, mineralization and proliferation of vascular intima
and pyogranulomatous vasculitis. Renal lesions are
Necropsy findings
frequently present and include focal pyogranulomatous
HCI may be found as an incidental finding
in
inflammation with mild glomerulonephritis, lympho-
histopathological specimens  from dogs from  endemic
plasmacytic interstitial nephritis, mesangioproliferative
areas. In dogs with a low parasitaemia, few tissue lesions
glomerulonephritis and, occasionally, amyloidosis. Amy-
may be identified. However, necropsies of dogs with a
loid deposits may also be found in spleen, lymph nodes,
high parasitaemia reveal hepatitis (87), pneumonia and
small intestines and liver. Occasional findings include
glomerulonephritis associated with numerous H. canis
pulmonary congestion, splenic coagulative necrosis,
meronts. Meronts and developing gamonts are also found
lymphadenopathy and congestion of the gastric mucosa.
in the lymph nodes, spleen and bone marrow (88).
H. canis meronts are usually round to oval, about 30 μm
Treatment and control
in diameter, and include elongated micromerozoites with
H. canis infection is treated with imidocarb dipropionate
defined nuclei. A cross-section of the meront through the
(5-6 mg/kg i/m every 14 days) until gamonts are no
midshaft of the micromerozoites reveals a form with a
longer present in blood smears. Doxycyline (10 mg/kg p/o
central core mass surrounded by a circle of micro-
q24h for 21 days) is also used in combination with
merozoite nuclei, which is often referred to as a "wheel
imidocarb dipropionate for treatment of HCl. The
spoke' (76). This form is typical for HCI but is not found
elimination of H. canis gamonts from the peripheral
in HAI. Meronts of H. canis can sometimes be detected in
blood may require eight weeks, and a haematological
tissues with litle or no apparent host inflammatory
response {89). This is possibly associated with the ability
recommended for all infected dogs, including those with a
of the parasite to cause chronic subclinical infections and
mild disease, because parasitaemia may increase over time
 a void an extreme immune response.
and develop into a severe infection. Generally, the survival
只
88
 87 Hepatitis associated with H. canis meronts in a section of
 88 Developing H. canis meront in a cytological preparation
liver from a dog with a high parasitaemia. Arrows indicate the
 from a bone marrow aspirate.
location of H. canis meronts.
Hepatozoonosis
87
Table 20 TcP treatment of H. americanum infection.
These drugs are given in combination for 14 days and
 followed by long-term treatment with decoquinate.
Drug
Dose rate
Frequency of
administration
Trimethoprim-
 sulphadiazine
15 mg/kg p/o
q12h
 Clindamycin 
10 mg/kg p/o
q8h
 Pyrimethamine
 0.25 mg/kg p/o 
q24h
89 H. canis meront in kidney tissue. An arrow indicates the 
location of the meront. Meronts are often found with little or no
 surrounding inflammatory response.
rate of dogs with a low H. canis parasitaemia is good. It
given every day to be effective. Although not approved for
is often dependent on the prognosis of any concurrent
ul ajes aq oi uaaoud uaaq sey aieuinbooap 'ssop ul asn
disease conditions. The prognosis for dogs with a high
nsuupe pasuonond pue saaesop qay qoq ie saop
parasitaemia is less favourable. Seven of 15 dogs (47%)
The drug is available in the USA as a cornmeal-based
with a high parasitaemia included in the case-controlled
 premix for livestock at a concentration of 27.2 grams of
study survived only two months after presentation despite
 decoquinate per pound of premix (Deccox, Alpharma Inc.,
specific treatment.
Fort Lee, NJ). The powder is given at a rate of 0.s-1.0
 Both specific therapy using antiprotozoal drugs and
teaspoonful per 10 kg body weight, mixed with moist dog
palliative therapy using a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
food and fed twice daily. This amount corresponds to a
drug (NSAID) have been used in the treatment of HAI.
decoquinate dosage of 10-20 mg/kg every 12 hours. It
The best results occur when both are used together
appears that the drug must be given long term (1-2 years
initially. An NSAID at standard doses can provide
 and possibly longer) to prevent relapses.
immediate relief from fever and pain during the first days 
In a study comparing treatment protocols, the two-
of therapy before the effects of the antiprotozoal drug
 year survival rate for dogs receiving only TCP was 12.5%
become evident.
 compared to a two-year survival rate of greater than 84%
Currently, it appears there is no drug capable of
when TCP was followed by long-term daily decoquinate
eliminating all stages of the organism. Remission of
therapy. Most dogs that received TCP alone had a very
clinical signs can usually be obtained quickly by
good initial response, followed by periodic relapses,
administering   a   combination   of   trimethoprim-
resulting in chronic wasting and debilitation and ending
sulphadiazine, clindamycin and pyrimethamine (TCP) for
in renal failure, euthanasia or death with a median
14 days (Table 20). Although the clinical response is
survival time of approximately 12 months.
dramatic, it is often short-lived and most dogs relapse 
within 2-6 months following treatment.
Control and prevention
The anticoccidial drug decoquinate helps prevent
Prevention of both HCI and HAI consists primarily of
relapses when given daily to H. americarum-infected dogs
 good tick control using an effective acaricide and close
after completion of TCP therapy. It likely arrests
examination of dogs after hunting or outdoor activity.
development of parasites released from mature meronts,
Dogs must be prevented from ingesting ticks. Until more
thereby interrupting the repeated cycles of asexual
is known about whether HCI or HAI can be transmitted
reproduction. Decoquinate does not clear gamonts from
through ingestion of infected tissues, dogs should also be
the dog's circulation nor is it effective in reducing clinical
prevented from eating raw meat or organs from wildlife
signs associated with acute relapse. This drug must be
 and prevented from sca venging.
88
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
FELINE HEPATOZOONOSIS
ZOONOTIC POTENTIAL/PUBLIC
Feline hepatozoonosis was first described in a domestic
HEALTH SIGNIFICANCE
cat in 1908 in India, and has since been reported from
There is only one report of human infection with a
several countries including France, Israel, South Africa,
 Hepatozoon species. Gamonts were found in the blood of 
 Brazil and Nigeria. The species of Hepatozoon that infect
a male patient from the Philippines on two different
cats have not been identified and the vector is unknown.
occasions but liver and bone marrow biopsies failed to
Gamonts of Hepatozoon are found in peripheral blood
reveal any parasites. Because canine hepatozoonosis
neutrophils (90) and  histopathological  studies have
occurs as a result of ingestion of a tick, transmission of
identified meronts in the myocardium and skeletal
daoxa Aeyun si sueuny oi ununoate 'H io suno 'H
muscles of infected cats. In addition, in one retrospective
soao uian ind on pauu ua ls ui sdad
 study elevated CK levels have been found in the majority.
into their mouths. Since other tick-borne diseases may be
of cats with hepatozoonosis, indicating the importance of
transmitted through the bite of a tick, all ticks should be
muscle as a target tissue for this infection. Feline
promptly removed from any human or animal.
hepatozoonosis
is
commonly
associated
with
 immunosuppressive  viral  disease 
caused  by 
feline
immunodeficiency virus or feline leukaemia virus.
Disclaimer
The views expressed in this chapter are those of the
authors and do not reflect the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army,
the
Department of Defense, or the US Government.
90
90 Gamont of an Hepatozoon species in a neutrophil of a
naturally infected domestic cat.
Leishmaniosis
Gad Baneth, Michael Day.
Xavier Roura and Susan Shaw
BACKGROUND, AETIOLOGY AND
ZVL transmission occurs in tropical, subtropical and
EPIDEMIOLOGY
 temperate regions of the world including southern Europe,
Canine leishmaniosis is an important, potentially fatal
North and Central Africa, the Middle East, China and
disease that is also infectious to people. It is a part of a
South and Central America (91). In the Mediterranean
broad spectrum of diseases caused in humans and animals
region and the Middle East, ZVL is caused by L. infantum
by several species of the intracellular protozoan genus
and in South America by L. chagasi, which is thought to
Leishmania and is transmitted by sandflies. The disease
be synonymous with L. infantum. Canine leishmaniosis
syndromes caused by Leishmania species in people are
caused by L. infantum has also been recently reported
cutaneous, mucocutaneous and visceral leishmaniosis, the
from multiple kennels in the eastern USA, where the
last being the most severe form. Visceral leishmaniosis is
patterns of transmission are currently unknown. An
further divided into zoonotic, in which dogs are reservoirs
additional Leishmania species, L. tropica, which is an
of the disease for people, and anthroponotic, in which
agent of cutaneous leishmaniosis in the Old World that
man is the reservoir of infection for other humans and
can visceralize in people, has been reported as a rare cause
transmission by sandfies occurs without apparent
of canine visceral leishmaniosis in North Africa.
involvement of an animal reservoir. L. infantum and
The prevalence rates of canine leishmaniosis in endemic
L. chagasi cause zoonotic visceral leishmaniosis (ZVL),
areas vary depending on the environmental conditions
while anthroponotic infection is caused by L. donovani,
required for transmission and the methods used for
mostly in India and East Africa. The two main groups of
detecting infection. Seroprevalence rates in the
human patients at risk for ZVL are young children and
Mediterranean basin range between 10% and 37% of the
HIV-positive patients. The domestic dog is considered the
dogs in endemic foci. Surveys employing methods for the
main reservoir for human ZVL infection and, more
detection of leishmanial DNA in canine tissues, or
recently, dogs have also been incriminated as reservoirs
combining serology and DNA detection, have revealed
for  Leisbmania species  causing cutaneous 
pue
 even higher infection rates approaching 70% in some foci.
mucocutaneous leishmaniosis in South America. Infection
It is probable that all dogs living in endemic foci of leish-
among populations of wild canines such as foxes and
maniosis are exposed to infection and will develop either
jackals has been reported in the Mediterranean basin and
disease or subclinical infection, or resistance to infection.
South America and may also play a role in the epi-
demiology of ZVL in these regions.
 91 The global distribution of
91
canine leishmaniosis.
89
90
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
 Leishmaniosis is now frequently diagnosed in countries
L. venezuelensis, L. mexicana, L. braziliensis and un-
where no sandfly transmission occurs in dogs; it is related
specified Leishmania species in Europe and South
to increased mobility of dogs and their owners. In Europe,
America and in the southern USA.
many dogs travel to and from Leishmania-endemic areas
and re-homing of stray animals from endemic areas by
Transmission and life cycle
welfare groups is increasing the number of clinical cases
 Leishmania are diphasic parasites that complete their life
seen in non-endemic areas. In addition, leishmaniosis is
cycle in two hosts: a vertebrate where the intracellular
seen in non-travelled animals resident in non-endemic
 amastigote parasite forms are found, and a sandfly that
 areas of both Europe and the USA. The mechanisms of
harbours the flagellated extracellular promastigotes.
 transmission in these cases are currently unknown.
Sandflies of the genus Phlebotomus are vectors in the Old
In contrast to dogs, natural infection and clinical
World, whereas the vectors in the New World are
disease in domestic cats caused by Leisbmania species
sandflies of the genus Lutzomyia. The life cycle in both
appear to be rare. Whether the low prevalence of infec-
the reservoir host and vector is illustrated (92).
tion/disease in endemic areas is due to under-reporting or
Although transmission of L. infantum occurs naturally
to the fact that cats have a high degree of natural
by the bite of sandflies, vertical transmission in utero
resistance is unknown. It has been shown that cats are
from dam to its offspring has been documented. Direct
relatively resistant to  experimental  infection
with
transmission without involvement of a haematophagous
L. chagasi and L. donovani. However, cases of systemic
vector has been suspected in some cases of infection in
clinical disease and asymptomatic infection due
to
areas
where 
vectorsofthe
disease are absent.
L. infantum and other species are reported, and wild cats
Transmission of L. infantum by infected blood trans-
have been incriminated as reservoirs for leishmaniosis in
fusion has been reported in dogs in North America and in
endemic Mediterranean countries. Cutaneous lesions
'edg ui saauas bueus siasn hnup snouaaeuu ueny
alone have been reported in association with
92
92 The life cycle of Leishmania infanfum in the
sandfy vector and its mammalian hosts (canines
and man). (1) During a blood meal taken by the
female sandfly, promastigotes are injected with 
saliva into the vertebrate host's skin. (2) and 
(3) Promastigotes are phagocytosed by
macrophages in the skin and multiply by binary
fission to amastigotes. (4) The macrophage
ruptures and free amastigotes penetrate
adjacent host cells and disseminate to the
visceral organs. (5) Cells containing amastigotes
are taken up by the sandfly during a blood meal.
(6) Amastigotes are released from host cells,
transform to promastigotes and multiply. (7)
Promastigotes attach to the sandfly's gut wall
where they continue to multiply and eventually
reach the proboscis before infecting a naive host.
Leishmaniosis
91
PATHOGENESIS
Immunopathogenesis
Leishmaniosis is the classical example of a disease where
Leishmaniosis provides the single best example of
the 
clinical signs and underlying pathology
 are
polarization of the immune response to an infectious
intrinsically related to the interaction between the
agent (see Chapter 3). Mice, humans and dogs generally
microbe, arthropod vector and host immune system.
develop chronic, progressive disease (a 'non-healing
 u  in  aae  a
phenotype) if the immune response is dominated by
experimentally induced and spontaneously arising disease
type 2 (Th2) immunity. In contrast, where immunity is
in a number of host species, and much of the current
 dominated by a type 1 (Th1) response, dogs may become
knowledge  concerning  the  functional interactions
infected without developing clinical disease or develop
between different T lymphocyte subpopulations was first
disease that is mild and self-limiting. The mechanisms
esta blished using murine models of this infection.
underlying this polarization are only just beginning to be
 In susceptible animals, motile Leishmania promasti-
understood. There is a clear genetic influence on the
disease resistant, 'self-healing' phenotype. This has been
rapidly to resident or recruited mononuclear phagocytes
shown in murine models and also likely holds true for the
in the skin, using complement receptors. This is followed
dog; for example, Ibizian Hounds have been shown to be
by rapid internalization of the parasite by phagocytosis
relatively disease resistant. Resistance may relate to the
and the transformation of promastigotes to non-motile
early interactions between the organism and particular
amastigotes that are protected within the phagolysosome
molecules expressed by antigen presenting cells of the
by low pH and the proteolytic activity of gp63 (93).
immune system (e.g- pattern recognition molecules). An
 an s   e 
association between disease resistance and expression of a
 cutaneous inflammatory response but this is followed by
particular form of the gene encoding the molecule
a macrophage and natural killer cell response. Later,
NRAMP1 (S1cl1a1) has been investigated in mice,
lymphocytes appear and progression to a local granu-
humans and dogs. The molecule encoded by this gene is
lomatous response occurs. Spread from the localized
cutaneous lesion is a major event in the pathogenesis of
 activation and control of Leishmania replication within
visceral leishmaniosis. In susceptible animals, dissemina-
the cytoplasmic phagosome. The gene has been implicated
tion of infected macrophages to the local lymph node,
in determining resistance or susceptibility to leishmaniosis
spleen and bone marrow occurs within a few hours of
in mice, and a recent study has suggested that mutations
inoculation. In resistant animals, parasites remain
in this gene may control susceptibility in dogs. An
localized in the skin or at worst are restricted to the local
association between susceptibility to leishmaniosis and
lymph node. Susceptible animals once infected may
 specific allotypes of canine MHC class II (DLA) genes has
remain asymptomatic for months to years and incubation
 also been recently defined.
periods as long as seven years have been reported.
More recent studies have suggested a role for
populations of regulatory T lymphocytes (e.g. IL-10
producing Treg cells) in the pathogenesis of leishmaniosis.
These Treg cells may inhibit the function of effector Th1
6
cells, thereby preventing complete elimination of the
 organisms and establishing persistent infection.
There is clear evidence in dogs of susceptible and
resistant phenotypes with polarized immune responses.
 Susceptible animals mount significant antibody responses
but have weak cell-mediated immunity. The reverse holds
true for resistant dogs. These have reduced serological
responses but strong intradermal responses to leishmanin
and production of Th1-related cytokines (e.g. IFNy) in
response to antigen stimulation of lymphocyte cultures.
Neutrophils and macrophages derived from Leishmanid-
infected dogs have reduced irn vitro killing function.
However, lymphocytes from resistant dogs co-cultured
with infected macrophages exhibit strong intracellular
killing of parasites. This killing is MHC class II restricted
ei saiaooudul 1 +ta pue +8a Aq paieipau s pue 
produce the cytokine IFNy. Immunohistochemical
investigations of cutaneous lesions have shown reduced
 expression of MHC class II by epidermal Langerhans cells 
 93 Transmission electron micrograph of a macrophage
and keratinocytes and fewer infiltrating T lymphocytes
 showing amastigote forms of Leishmania within a
within severe generalized nodular lesions, compared with
cytoplasmic compartment.
milder alopecic dermatitis. There is debate in the canine
92
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
literature as to whether there is an imbalance in the IgG
within the granulomatous uveal tract lesions of infected
subclass response to Leishmania in susceptible versus
dogs, together with evidence of vasculitis and thrombosis.
resistant dogs, and the variable results obtained in
Similar immunohistochemical studies have demonstrated
a jo anh aul jo uaaa e aq s sans aa
immunoglobulin deposition within the glomerular lesions
immunological reagents used. A recent study has
of infected dogs. Again, the antigenic content of these
suggested that the serological response may not be clearly
complexes has not been investigated in the canine disease.
polarized, as elevation in all four IgG subclasses occurs
The complex immunopathological mechanisms that
during infection.
 underlie the clinical features of Leisbmania infection may
There is very little information on the immunological
be further complicated in cases of co-infection with other
response to Leishmania infection in the cat. One cat with
arthropod-borne agents such as Babesia or Ebrlichid
species. For details of pathogenic mechanisms in these
respond to intradermal leishmanin injection, although
diseases see Chapters 6 and 11, respectively.
other parameters of immune competence were reported
as normal.
clinicopathological features of overt leishmaniosis as it
presents in the dog. In animals that develop disseminated
infection, lesions and clinical signs develop over a period
of three months to several years after infection. Parasite-
laden macrophages will accumulate in various sites of the
Table 21 Frequency of clinical signs occurring in a large
body, particularly the lymphoid organs, producing
canine leishmaniosis case series (>100 animals) from
generalized granulomatous lymphadenitis, splenomegaly
Italy and Greece. (After Ciaramella et al., 1997; Koutinas
et af., 1999)
and hepatomegaly. Extension of the disease process com-
monly leads to the development of granulomatous derma -
titis, uveitis and infiltration of the bone marrow with
infected macrophages. Case reports of leishmanial granu-
dinical signs
 Relative frequency of
'sasusuau a'a) sa1s iauno jo auei e ui suoisal snoieuol
occurrence (%)
pericardium, intestine, muscle) have been published.
Lymphadenopathy
65.2-88.7
Cutaneous involvement 
56.0-81.0
The dominance of type  2 (antibody-mediated)
 Pale mucous membranes
58.0
immunity in susceptible animals also has a role in the
Splenomegaly
9.5-53.3
immunopathogenesis of disease. In such dogs there will be
Weight loss 
25.3-32.0
massive   non-specific  polyclonal  activation  of  B-
Abnormal dlaws
24.0-30.5
lymphocytes, with associated lymphoid follicular
 Ocular involvement
16.0-24.1
hyperplasia  and  serum  hypergammaglobulinaemia.
Anorexia
16.5-18.0
Occasionally, monoclonal gammopathy occurs, sug-
 Epistaxis 
3.8-10.0
gesting a more restricted activation of B cell clones. This
Lameness
3.3
excessive antibody production in turn produces cellular
 Diarrhoea
3.0-3.8
and tissue damage by evoking classical type II and type IIl 
hypersensitivity mechanisms, and the end effect is to
mimic the clinical signs of multisystemic autoimmune
disease. For example, immune-mediated haemolytic
Table 22 Freguency of cutaneous findings occurring in
anaemia {Coombs test positive) and thrombocytopenia
may occur in infected dogs as a consequence of aberrant
canine leishmaniosis cases (n = 22) from Greece. (After
antibody production. However, it is not clear whether this
Koutinas et al., 1993)
au Aq pauaaa uoonpoud Apoquoine anul saaloaul
infection (perhaps by "molecular mimicry') or the non-
specific attachment of immune complexes to erythrocyte
 Dermatological signs
Relative frequency of
or platelet surfaces. Infected dogs may also be positive for
occurrence (%)
serum antinuclear antibodies {ANA). Low ANA titres
 Exfoliative dermatitis 
90.9
may simply reflect tissue damage in this disease but the
 Ulcer ation 
63.6
occasional occurrence of high titres makes distinction
Generalized hypotrichosis,
from systemic lupus erythematosus important.
especially face and pinnae
59.1
 Leishmaniosis is an excellent example of an infectious
Abnormal daws
54.5
disease that induces circulating immune complexes. At
 Focal alopecia (pinnae and 
least some of the glomerulonephritis, uveitis and synovitis
face)
50.0
that characterize the systemic infection likely relates to
 Mild to moderate pruritus 
18.2
 Paronychia
vascular deposition of these complexes. For example,
13.6
granular and diffuse IgG deposition has been recorded
Leishmaniosis
93
CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS
dermatitis, which produces a characteristic silvery scale
Dogs
that is prominent on the face, periocular region and
Clinical canine leishmaniosis has a chronic waxing and
pinnae; periocular alopecia; and abnormal growth of
waning course. Commonly, there is a history of non-
claws (Table 22) (94-97). Ulcerative and nodular derma-
specific illness combined  with  lymphadenomegaly,
 titis may occur secondary to vasculitis and granulomatous
 cutaneous signs, weight loss, splenomegaly and pale
inflammation (94-97).
 mucous membranes (Table 21). Cutaneous signs are of
96
 94 Crossbred dog showing facial alopecia, crusting and
95 Pododermatitis with scaling, paronychia and 
ulceration. In addition, there is depigmentation and ulceration 
onychogryphosis in a dog with leishmaniosis.
of the nasal planum.
96
 96 Depigmentation, erosion, ulceration and loss of
 97 Central foot pad ulceration secondary to granulomatous 
 cobblestone pattern of the planum nasale in a dog with
 dermatitis and/or vasculitis in a dog with leishmaniosis.
leishmaniosis.
94
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Ocular and periocular signs are frequently seen in
Cats
canine leishmaniosis (Table 23) (98, 99). Less commonly,
The pathogenesis of the disease in cats has not been
lameness due to arthropathies, diarrhoea and epistaxis
investigated. The clinical presentation is similar to that
are reported (Table 21, p. 92) (100). Although
seen in dogs, although the small number of cases makes
multisystemic disease is characteristic of leishmaniosis,
the association of infection and clinical signs difficult to
affected dogs may present with clinical signs referable to
interpret. Cutaneous lesions include diffuse areas of
one body system only. There are reports of infections
alopecia and granulomatous dermatitis of the head,
associated with colitis, myositis, osteomyelitis 
and
 scaling and pinnal dermatitis, ulceration and nodules.
arthrosynovitis, as well as isolated ocular disease.
Systemic involvement with L. infantum has been reported
Clinical laboratory findings are dominated by high
 in association with jaundice, vomiting, hepatomegaly,
globulin levels due to massive gammaglobulin produc-
splenomegaly,
 lymphadenomegaly,
membranous
tion, and a monoclonal or biclonal gammopathy may be
glomerulonephritis and granulomatous gastroenteritis. In
seen (Table 24) (101). Hypoalbuminaemia,
， pre-
the small number of cases investigated, association with
dominantly due to protein-losing glomeru-lonephropathy,
the immunosuppressive viruses (FIV or FeLV) has not
is also a common finding. Anaemia is frequently identi-
been confirmed.
fied and is often Coombs positive. Affected dogs are com-
monly ANA positive. Thrombocytopenia and haemo-
DIAGNOSIS
static abnormalities have been reported with varying
Confirming a diagnosis of leishmaniosis in an individual
frequency in cases of canine leishmaniosis. However,
case may be difficult, particularly if the clinical signs are
although prolonged bleeding times are consistently found 
not specific. In addition, longitudinal studies of
in infected dogs, reports disagree as to the frequency and
Leishmania infection show that relative predictive values
cause of thrombocytopenia. 
 Both antibody-mediated
for
 diagnostic tests vary depending on the stage of
destruction and disseminated intravascular coagulation
infection. Consequently, a diagnostic approach that
have been suggested. In addition, co-infection with
involves multiple testing is recommended and no single
Ehrlichia and Anaplasma species {see Chapter 11) should
diagnostic technique identifies all infected animals.
be
eliminated in cases with bleeding tendencies.
Concurrent Ebrlichia canis seropositivity was found in
14% of 150 Italian cases of leishmaniosis. Reported co-
infection with sarcoptic or demodectic mange and
hepatozoonosis may be coincidental.
Table 23 Frequency of ocular and periocular findings
Table 24 Frequency of clinical laboratory findings
occurring in canine leishmaniosis cases (n = 105) from
occurring in a large canine leishmaniosis case series
Spain. (After Pena et al., 2000)
(n = 150) from Italy. (After Ciaramella et al., 1997)
 Relative frequency of
 dinical laboratory signs
Ophthalmological signs
Relative frequency of
occurrence (%)
occurrence (%)
 Anterior uveitis
42.8
 Hyperglobulinaemia
70.6
Hypoalbuminaemia 
68.0
Conjunctivitis 
31.4
 Keratoconjunctivitis 
31.4
Anaemia
58.0
29.5
 Positive ANA
52.8
Blepharitis
 Periocular alopecia
 Neutrophila 
26.7
24.0
 Thrombocytopenia 
3.8
29.3
Posterior uveitis 
2.8
 Positive Coombs test
20.8
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
Azotaemia
16.0
 Orbital cellulitis 
1.9
 Elevated liver enzymes 
16.0
Leishmaniosis
95
66
98 Granulomas involving the lid margins, granulomatous 
99 Corneal granulomatous infiltrate with uveitis in a dog with
 bulbar conjunctivitis and corneal opacity in a dog with 
leishmaniosis.
leishmaniosis.
100
101
alb
CL1
C2
B
100 Epistaxis in a German Shepherd Dog with leishmaniosis
 101 Serum protein electrophoresis from a dog with
leishmaniosis, showing a biclonal gammopathy.
96
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Microscopic identification of
organisms or their DNA
Intracellular or extracellular Leishmania amastigotes can
be identified in Giemsa- or Leishmans-stained tissue
aspirates and impression or biopsy samples from lymph
node, conjunctiva, bone marrow {102), spleen and
lesional skin (103, 104). Amastigotes are small round or
oval bodies 1.5-3.0 x 2.5-3.5 μm in size and without a
free flagellum. The organism has a relatively large nucleus
and a kinetoplast. However, the sensitivity of microscopic
examination is relatively poor (60%) as more than 50%
of lymph node and bone marrow samples have low
parasite density. PCR targeting kinetoplast DNA, and
immunohistochemical
techniques
for
increasing
sensitivity and specificity of Leishmania detection, have
102 Bone marrow aspirate from dog with leishmaniosis,
been developed for use in fresh and frozen bone marrow,
 showing intracellular Leishmania amastigotes.
lymph node and skin biopsy specimens (10s). On such
samples the sensitivity of PCR approaches 95-100%.
However, the sensitivity of PCR on peripheral blood
samples is highest shortly after infection (88%) and then
103
decreases with chronicity and tissue sequestration of the
organism to 50-70%.
Serology
 Most dogs with visceral leishmaniosis develop a specific
humoral immune response and serodiagnostic testing is
widely used. However, specificity is decreased in Central
and South America due to cross-reactivity with
trypanosomes. The sensitivity of serology is lowest (41%)
early in Leishmania infection (first few months) but high
with progressive infection (93-100%). Sensitivity may
also be limited in cases of localized cutaneous leishmanial
infection. A wide variety of serological assays are
available, utilizing indirect immunofluorescence {IFA),
direct agglutination, conventional ELISA, dot-ELISA,
competitive ELISA and western blotting methodology.
104
Although there is some variation in specificity, sensitivity
and predictive values, most are acceptable. At present
most tests employ crude Leishmania antigen, although a
      
validated. Several rapid immunochromatographic test kits
have also been produced for canine leishmaniosis but
although most are relatively specific, sensitivity varies
from 35-76%.
Culture and species characterization
Culture can be used for diagnosis of canine Leishmanid
infection but it requires access to a laboratory with
technical expertise and appropriate containment facilities.
In addition, multiple samples are required from several
sites to achieve appropriate sensitivity. It is, however, the
103, 104 Skin biopsy from a dog with leishmaniosis. There are
basis for  species characterization using traditional
numerous infitrating macrophages in the superficial dermis,
isoenzyme analysis and molecular techniques such as
within which Leishmania amastigotes (104, arrows) can be
random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD).
clearly seen.
However, as primer sequences for differentiation of New
and Old World species are now available, PCR and
sequencing are commonly used.
Leishmaniosis
97
105
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
Chemotherapeutic treatment
of canine leishmaniosis
Several drugs are currently used for the treatment of
 canine leishmaniosis (Table 25). Therapy with these drugs
often achieves clinical improvement in dogs but rarely is
it associated with elimination of parasite carriage or the
 prevention
of
clinical
disease
relapse.
 Special
 consideration must be taken prior to therapy if the patient 
has impaired renal or hepatic function.
Antimonials have been used for the therapy of
leishmaniosis since the early 2oth century, when tartar
emetic {antimony potassium tartrate) was adapted for the
 105 Immunohistochemical labelling of skin biopsy from dog
treatment of human leishmaniosis in South America after
 with leishmaniosis to demonstrate the presence of
proving effective against African trypanosomiasis.
 amastigotes. (Photo courtesy Department of Pathology.
Pentavalent antimonials are still widely used against the
Veterinary Faculty Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona)
different forms of leishmaniosis in both human and
Table 25 Drugs used for therapy of leshmaniosis.
Drug
Common
Class
Mode of
Therapeutic protocol
Adverse
trade name
action
effects
Meglumine 
 Glucantime
 Pentavalent 
Inhibition of 
100 mg/kg s/c for
Nephrotoxicity.
 antimonate
 antimonial 
enzymes active
3-4 weeks
pain and muscle
in glycolysis 
fibrosis at the
and fatty acid 
 site of injection 
oxidation
Allopurinol 
Zyloric
Pyrazolpyrimidine 
Incorporation
(1) 20 mg/kg p/o q24h
 Xanthine
into RNA and
indefinitely
urolith 
inhibition of 
(2) 20 mg/kg p/o q24h
formation 
protein 
combined with meglumine
synthesis 
antimonate (100 mg/kg s/c
q24h for 20 days).
continued with allopurinol 
alone (20 mg/kg q24h
indefinitely)
Amphotericin B Fungizone 
 Polyene 
Alteration of
(1) For free amphotericin
 Nephrotoxicity
 macrolide
membrane 
B: 0.5-0.8 mg/kg iv or
permability by 
sfc 2-3 times a week until
binding to
 an accumulated dose of 
ergosterol 
15 mg/kg is reached 
(2) For administration in 
lipid emulsion: 1.0-2.5
mg/kg i/v mixed in lipid 
emulsion twice a week
until an accumulated dose
of 10 mg/kg is reached
AmBisome
(3) For liposomalized 
(liposomalized)
 amphotericin B: 3 mg/kg/day
iv until a total dose of
15 mg/kg is reached
98
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
veterinary medicine. The antimonials selectively inhibit
Vaccination
leishmanial enzymes that are required for glycolytic and
The development of an effective vaccine for canine
fatty acid oxidation. Meglumine antimonate is the
leishmaniosis remains a major challenge for the control of
principal  antimonial used as monotherapy or  in
this zoonotic infection in endemic areas and is an active
combination with other drugs for the treatment of dogs.
area of research. The enormous knowledge of the immune
The reports of L. infantum strains that are resistant to
response to this infection provides an excellent platform
pentavalent antimonials are of major veterinary and
for:
 such vaccine development, and there is a large
public health concern.
literature on the application of various vaccine candidates
 Allopurinol is an orally administered purine analogue
in murine models. Clearly, an effective vaccine requires
that is metabolized by Leishmania parasites and incor-
induction of a strong protective type 1 (Th1) immune
porated in RNA, causing an interruption in protein syn-
response in susceptible animals. For this to be achieved
thesis. The relative non-toxicity, clinical efficacy, low cost
there must be selection of the most appropriate antigenic
 and convenience of oral administration have made allo-
components of the organism, and the delivery of these to
purinol a popular choice for the treatment of canine leish-
the canine population in conjunction with an adjuvant
maniosis. It is recommended as daily treatment for an
system that optimally stimulates type 1 immunity.
indefinite period of time and is commonly administered in
Numerous studies have demonstrated seropositivity to a
combination or following initial therapy with meglumine
wide range of Leishmania antigens in infected dogs and
antimonate. The combination of allopurinol and meglu-
shown how the range of antigens recognized changes
mine antimonate allows a decrease in the duration of meg-
throughout the course of infection.
lumine therapy, making it better tolerated and les costly. In 
There have been relatively few studies of vaccination
addition, long-term therapy with allopurinol decreases the
against leishmaniosis  performed  in  dogs. 【
Dogs
 administered entire Leishmania promastigotes with BCG
Amphotericin B is a polyene macrolide that is mostly
 developed strong lymphocyte proliferative responses but
used as an anti-fungal drug but which also has activity
low antibody titre, in comparison with dogs administered
against some protozoal species. It acts by binding to
the same antigen in saponin, and a protective effect upon
ergosterol and altering cell membrane permeability.
challenge was shown. A field study using L. donovani
Amphotericin B has a toxic effect on the canine kidney,
fucose mannose ligand {FML) in Quil A saponin
demonstrated  induction  of protective  cell-mediated
subsequent reduction of the glomerular filtration
Irate,
immunity by vaccination. Not all studies have had a
 and possibly also by direct action on renal epithelial cells.
successful outcome. Dogs vaccinated with a 67-94 kDa
It can be administered to dogs with leishmaniosis in its
antigen derived from L. infantum promastigotes had a
highly nephrotoxic-free form, in a lipid emulsion, or in a
higher rate of infection and clinical disease than controls,
liposomal formulation that reduces its toxic effects and
suggesting that this vaccine may have induced non-
enhances penetration of the drug into macrophages and
protective Th2 immunity.
its accumulation in visceral organs.
Such approaches are relatively crude in terms of
Another drug that has been evaluated for canine
current approaches to vaccination, and it would seem
leishmaniosis is pentamidine, an aromatic diamidine used
likely that development of a molecular vaccine ('naked
also for pneumocystosis, babesiosis and trypanosomiasis.
 DNA' or plasmid vaccine) using molecular adjuvants (e.g.
It is injected intramuscularly in dogs and can cause severe
CpG motifs or cytokine genes) would be a logical
irritation at the site of injection, hypotension, tachycardia
 progression of these studies.
aue 1o pasn uaaq aaey ieul sanup yaulo Buuoa pun
being investigated for the treatment of canine
Other control methods
leishmaniosis include aminosidine, alkylphosphocholine
Efforts to control the spread of the disease in the canine
derivatives, metronidazole and ketoconazole.
 population have, in general, not been successful. Medical
The diagnosis and treatment of concurrent diseases
treatment is targeted only at individual symptomatic dogs
such as ehrlichiosis and babesiosis may be required, as
and is not even effective in eliminating the infection from
these infections are common in areas of L. infantum
these animals. The killing of seropositive sick dogs as
endemnicity.
exercised in South America is both unacceptable to the
The prognosis for canine leishmaniosis depends on the
owners and not effective, because asymptomatic dogs and
severity of organ injury at the time of diagnosis. In dogs
wild animal species serve as a source of parasite
that are not in renal failure, treatment frequently achieves
transmission. Chemical control by spraying insecticides
dramatic improvement in both cutaneous and systemic
against sandfly vectors is of limited effectiveness and may
signs of the disease and limits progression of the disease.
be harmful to the environment. A collar impregnated with
However, as mentioned previously, there are no treatment
the pyrethroid deltamethrin is manufactured for the
protocols published that result in parasitological cure.
protection of dogs from sandfly bites and appears to
Consequently, if treatment is discontinued, the chance of
decrease the rate of infection among dogs and humans in
disease recrudescence is high even if the clinical response
endemic regions.
The  collar  is  effective  against
was excellent.
Phlebotomus and Lutzomyia species and is indicated for
Leishmaniosis
99
protection of dogs residing in or travelling to disease foci.
 countries, compared with children in more affluent areas,
lopue spiorqiauad suueuoo sonpoud Aeids io uo-lods
Sop au ui ai aud yy rs e aa y
other chemicals that repel sandflies are available for direct
population.
application onto dogs.
With the appearance of the AIDS epidemic, HIV-
positive patients are now the predominant group of
ZOONOTIC POTENTIAL/PUBLIC
patients in southern Europe. The co-infection of HIV and
HEALTH SIGNIFICANCE
leishmaniosis reported from more than 33 countries
Visceral leishmaniosis is a potentially fatal disease, with
where these infections geographically overlap has been
500,000 new human cases annually and a population at
 described as a deadly gridlock' that does not respond
risk of 200 million people, as estimated by the World
well to therapy and is ultimately fatal. HIV-positive
Health Organization (WHO) in a report from 1999.
 patients are sensitive to new infection or a reactivation of
Anthroponotic   visceral 
leishmaniosis  caused
by
a present dormant infection. The presence of large
L. dorovani, mainly in India and Sudan, is responsible for
numbers of parasites in their tissues and blood makes
a large proportion of the fatalities in people. However,
them highly infectious to sandflies.
zoonotic visceral leshmaniosis, with the dog as a major
Keeping and treating infected dogs presents a dilemma
reservoir for the parasite, is a main concern in other parts
to owners, veterinarians and public health officials in
of the world including northeastern Brazil and southern
areas where suitable vectors are found, because of the risk
Europe. The major risk group for human disease caused
of transmission to other people and pets in the
by L. infantum has traditionally been infants and
community. Before deciding on therapy, owners must
children. Malnutrition has long been recognized as a risk 
receive a thorough and realistic explanation about the
factor for infantile leishmaniosis and this may explain
 disease, its zoonotic potential and the prognosis for their
why the disease is more prevalent among children in poor
dog and what should be expected from treatment.
Borreliosis
K Emil Hovius
AETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Epidemiology of the
Borrelia burgdorferi complex
Aetiology
Many wild mammals and birds are known reservoirs for
Spirochaetes comprising the genus Borrelia are vector-
Borrelia burgdorferi species. The range of these
is
transmitted bacteria of the order Spirochaetales. The
discussed fully in Chapter 2 and summarized in 107.
specialized, elongated structure of these bacteria enables
European Ixodes species ticks may harbour co-
an undulating motility in environments of high viscosity
infections of up to four different Borrelia species.
such as the intercellular matrix of skin (106). The eleven
Generally, B. afzeli appears to be most prevalent,
described species in the Borrelia burgdorferi complex
although B. valaisiana may occur locally in the UK and
are transmitted by hard ticks, primarily Ixodes species
Ireland and B. garini occurs in some localized areas in
(Table 26). Only three Borrelia species, B. burgdorferi
 Europe and Asia. In addition, even where one genotype
sensu stricto, B. garinii and B. afzelii, are clinically
predominates, infections with different strains of differing
important in humans and dogs. The other frequently
pathogenicity occur. Where strain variation exists, one
encountered species, Borrelia valaisiana, B. lusitanea and 
tick bite may result in heterogeneous infection. There is
B. japonica, are probably not of great clinical importance.
pronounced strain variability of B. garinii isolated from
Avian and bovine borreliosis, caused by B. anserina and
ticks, which may be induced by the dispersing capabilities
B. theileri, respectively, are transmitted by Argas and
of the reservoir birds. Nymphal ticks play a central role in
Boophilus ticks. Borrelia species are also associated with
B. burgdorferi transmission and may even have a
relapsing fever in humans: B. recurrentis is louse borne
reservoir function. Their greatest abundance is in spring.
while B. bermsii is transmitted by sof ticks of the genus
Dogs are capable of maintaining Borrelia infection;
Ornithodorus.
however, their role in the sylvatic cycle is limited. The
106
107
Spring
Winter
Spring
Autumn
106 Scanning electron microscope image of Borelia
Summer
burgdorferi organisms. The image shows typical clustering of 
spirochaetes in Barbour-Stoenner-Kelly (BSK) liquid culture 
medium. The unique bipolar orientated flagellum of the
107 The cycle of Borrelia spirochaetes through the tick vector
spirochaetes is encapsulated by the outer surface envelope,
 and vertebrate hosts. The European situation with mammalian
enabling the slender protoplasmic cylinder to coil.
 and avian species is depicted, emphasizing the central role of
(Electronmicrograph courtesy of Dr R Straubinger
the nymph. During the two-year tick life cycle the successive
and Dr S Al-Robaiy, Institute for Immunology, and 
stages acquire or transmit spirochaetes by feeding on
Prof J Seeger and Dr J Kacza, Institute for Histology
successively larger hosts. Birds are reservoirs for B. garinii
and Embryology College of Veterinary Medicine,
and B. valaisiana. Small mammals are the reservoir animals for
University of Leipzig}
B. burgdorferi sensu stricfo and B. valaisiana.
100
Borreliosis
101
Table 26 Distribution, vectors and clinical relevance of the major Borrelia species. B. burgdorferi sensu stricto is the
main species present in the UsA. Its distribution is mainly in the northeastern and mid-western states, where it is
transmitted by fxo des scapularis, and in the south-west where it is transmitted by f. pacificus. In Europe, B. burgdorferi
sensu stricto is transmitted by f. ricinus. B. burgdorferi sensu stricto does not survive in f. persulcatus and therefore is
not found in Asia. The occurrence of B. burgdorferi sensu stricto in the Old world and in the New world has been
explained by post-Columbus migrations. B. ga rinii is probably the most widespread species, with a range extending
from western Europe to Japan. It is transported by migratory thrushes through European and Asian countries, and 
has great strain diversity. It is also carried from the northern to the southern hemisphere by sea birds carrying f. uriae.
However, B. garinii is not detected in humans or in domestic animal species from the southern hemisphere. More
species are being identified (e.g. the Florida canine spirochaete, an unknown Borrelia causing disease in dogs in
Florida).
Lyme Borrelia
Main 
Human 
Canine
Canine
species
Main vector
reservoirs
Distribution 
disease
 infection 
disease
8. burgoorferi
I. ricinus.
Rodents/birds
N. America,
N. America,
N. America,
N. America
sensu stricto
f. scapularis.
western
Europe
Europe
Europe
1. pacificus
Europe
8. bisettii
I. pacificus.
 Rodents
USA
No
No
No
f. scapularis
B. andersonii
1. dentatus
Lizards
USA
No
No
No
B. afzelii
f. ricinus.
Mainly
 Euroasia 
Europe
Europe
Europe
f. persufcatus.
rodents 
1. hexagonus
8. garinii
1. ricinus.
Mainly birds 
 Euroasia 
Europe
Europe,
Europe,
I. persufcatus.
Japan 
Japan 
1. uriae
B. vataisiana
I. ricinus.
 Mainly birds
Euroasia
Uncertain 
Europe
Uncertain 
1. columnae
8. fusitaniae
I. ricinus.
Not well
South-central
No
No
No
f. persufcatus
known
 Europe
8. japonica
1. ovatus
Rodents
Japan
No
Japan 
Japan 
B. sinica 
f. ovatus
Rodents 
 South China
Unknown
Unknown
Unknown
8. tanukii
f. tanuki
Birds
Japan 
No
No
No
8. turdae
f. turous
Birds
Japan
No
No
No
reservoir competency c
of cats is currently unknown.
carry multiple Borrelia species. This implies differences in
Serological surveys of dogs for B. burgdorferi complex
infectivity and invasiveness of species and strains with
have been used as an indicator for infection rates in the
respect to the canine host, and this phenomenon requires
local tick and wild animal populations and, thus, as an
further investigation. The differential tissue tropism that
indication of risk for human infection. In Europe,
the three species exert in the human host - B. afzelii to
20-40% of questing (un-fed) ticks collected from the coat
skin, B. garinii to the CNS and B. burgdorferi sensu
of dogs, or from vegetation in woods where dogs will
stricto to synovial tissues - implies that differences in
walk, contain Borrelia DNA. Consequently, seropositivity
tissue affinity in the canine host might also be expected.
rates for European dogs from wooded areas approximate
Longitudinal studies have shown that all dogs in an
100%, and serological conversion in pups and rising titres
endemic area become infected. However, most dogs
in young dogs may occur during the tick seasons. In
remain asymptomatic, with moderate serum antibody
Westchester county, New York, 80% of questing ticks
titres, while only a small percentage (approximately 5%)
may contain borreliae and surveys of dogs in the
 develop disease concurrent with a steep rise in titre. In
northeastern USA reveal high levels ({30-90%) of
addition, persistence of moderate serum antibody titres is
seropositi vity.
 not associated with clinical disease. However, dogs with
 In North America, B. burgdorferi sensu stricto is the
heterogeneous infections or co-infections with other tick-
only pathogenic species found in dogs. In Japan, dogs are
transmitted pathogens ( Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, Bartonella,
probably infected with B. japonica and B. garinii. In
Babesia and/or Rickettsia speciesy may be more likely to
Europe, dogs are mainly infected with B. burgdorferi
develop clinical borreliosis than dogs infected with a
senst stricto and B. garini, even in areas where ticks
 single Borrelia strain.
102
Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Information on feline Borrelia infection is sparse. In a
PATHOGENESIS
 serological survey of cats in the northeastern USA, 20%
Different mechanisms are exploited by borreliae to
had antibodies against B. burgdorferi. In a UK study,
avoid clearance by the immune system, resulting in a
 4.2% of cats were positive compared to more than 20%
persistent infection and possibly chronic disease (108,
of dogs. None of these seropositive cats had clinical
Table 27). The Borrelia genome is unusual compared to
disease attributable to infection with the spirochaete. At
that of other bacteria, as it has a linear chromosome and
present, the species naturally infecting cats are unknown.
an extraordinary number (21) of circular and linear
108
Infected tick bite
Prior exposure
Non-immune host
Immune host
Vaccination
Infection of skin
Asymptomatic
No infection
 Symptomatic
Infection of muscle
 Persistent 
 and joint 
 Asymptomatic
infection 
IMMUNOCOMPROMISE
 Infection of heart,
liver, CNS,
 Symptomatic 
 peritoneum 
108 Possible outcome of Borretia infection. If an infected tick bites an immune host, infection will not establish and the animal will
remain asymptomatic. Transmission of borreliae to a non-immune host will allow the establishment of progressive infection in skin
and then muscle and joints. This infection may be either symptomatic or asymptomatic and is likely to be persistent.
Immunocompromise is likely to result in further spread of the infection, with the development of progressive clinical signs.
Borreliosis
103
plasmids. The chromosome has been completely
not exert bactericidal activity within the infected host but
sequenced and is thought to contain only around 800
prevent reinfection by killing borreliae in the presence of
genes encoding molecules with metabolic functions.
host blood complement in the tick gut.
Many genes encoding molecules with metabolic
 The large potential for antigenic variation and immune
functions normally present in bacterial genomes are
evasion within the Borrelia species is due
to
 missing, suggesting that borreliae are highly dependent 
recombination of numerous redundant gene copies found
on the host for metabolism. Borrelia species are not
in  t
the variable membrane protein-like system (vlsE)
dependent on iron, which is possibly an adaptation to
encoding for the vlsE surface lipoprotein. The vlsE
localization within connective tissue with limited access
antigen, although hypervariable, has fixed invariate
to the bloodstream. A large portion of the genome
regions that are conserved within all Borrelia species,
encodes molecules involved in motility, indicating the
 making it a useful target for serodiagnosis.
importance of migration in pathogenesis.
The key component of the Borrelia flagellum, the
The plasmids encode around 100 proteins, of which
41 kDa flagellin protein, is highly immunogenic.
the majority are lipoproteins located on the outer surface
Antibody directed to flagellin cross-reacts with other
envelope in direct contact with the host. Six outer surface
flagellated bacteria such as Treponema and Leptospira
proteins, OspA to OspF, have been characterized, and
 species. However, the variable central domain of the
these are highly immunogenic and antigenically variable.
 flagellin molecule is conserved within the genus Borrelia.
OspA {31-34 kDa) has been typed serologically, and
rendering it a useful antigenic target for detecting specific
seven serotypes are defined and assigned to three groups
antibodies. Antibodies directed at certain domains of the
corresponding to the three pathogenic B. burgdorferi
flagellin molecule may cross-react with neuroaxonal
species. OspB (34-36 kDa) is highly conserved among the
 proteins, causing neuroborreliosis.
three pathogenic species and in isolates from different
Immunocompetent host species studied, including rats,
geographical regions. Four phenotypes of the many Osp
mice, hamsters, dogs and humans, tend to develop
C (20-24 kDa) genotypes are considered virulence
persistent infection without clinical manifestations. For
factors, as their presence correlates with the capacity for
example, experimental infection of hamsters results in
visceral spread of infection. The change in expression
persistent cardiac and urinary tract infection without
from OspA to OspC on the outer envelope fthe
clinical signs or histological changes. Immunosuppression
"OspA/OspC switch') is mandatory for infection of the
is required for persistently infected animals to develop
vertebrate host. This occurs within the first 48 hours of
clinical disease. Susceptibility of laboratory mice
to
tick attachment. The expression of OspA is down-
 borreliosis is strain-dependent and related to the nature of
S Odso pue 'pooa ym oeiuo is Aq paieinaa1
the CD4+ I cell response to the organism (see Chapter 3).
expressed as spirochaetes migrate from the tick midgut to
In experimental canine infection, a single exposure to
the tick salivary gland. Consequently, OspC antibodies
infected ticks results in active disease in very young
are detected in early infection of man and experimental
animals only. In one study, beagle puppies (6-12 weeks of
animals, whereas OspA antibodies only occur in later
age) were infected by ticks harbouring B. burgdorferi
stages of disease. Antibodies to OspA, OspB and OspC do
sensw stricto. Two to five months after tick exposure the
Table 27 Possible disease phases of borreliosis in the dog. The disease phase (outcome) is determined by spirochaete
numbers. The status of the immune system, reflected by the whole cell ELisA antibody titre, was inferred from
experimental and natural infections. The clinical outcome of a Borrelia infection is dependent on an intricate balance
between the immune system and the infecting strain.
Disease state
Status of immune
Titre whole cell
Spirochaetes in tissues
(outcome)
system
ELISA
 Permanent
 Clears the spirochaetes
Very low to moderate
None or very low numbers 
 asymptomatic
 or in balance with the 
titre
spirochaetes
Acute and subacute
Immune suppression
Rise of titre to high
Very high numbers
disease
values
Chronic (intermittent)
 Differentiates towards 
Permanent high
 Fuctuating but high
disease
Th1 instead of Th2-
(fluctuating) levels
numbers
response
 Convalescent 
 Clears the spirochaetes
 Reverses to very low
None 
titres
104
Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
pups developed mild clinical disease characterized by
burgdorferi sensu stricto (Table 28). Skin and joint
transient fever, behavioural changes and lameness.
capsule taken from symptomatic dogs four months after
Approximately 50% of the animals had recurrent
infection contain many more spirochaetes than those
episodes of disease. After four months, clinical signs
from infected asymptomatic dogs. Symptomatic dogs also
abated but infection and high serum antibody tires
have a higher serum antibody titre. In this model, disease
persisted. By contrast, adult dogs do not develop clinical
is self-limiting and the convalescent stage is characterized
disease after a single exposure to Borrelia-infected ticks.
by a delicate balance achieved between the spirochaete
However, after 70 days of continuous or intermittent
and the host immune system. When this balance is
exposure to infected ticks, adult dogs develop mild
disturbed, spirochaete numbers increase in the skin again,
clinical signs. Affected joint capsules contain spirochaetes
antibody titres rise and clinical signs may recur. If the
and there is IL-8 production within the synovial
symptomatic dogs are treated with appropriate anti-
membrane and chemotactic attraction of neutrophils into
biotics, spirochaete numbers decrease more rapidly than
the joint. After several months of persistent infection, a
when convalescent. However, in some cases, several
mild subclinical polysynovitis occurs, with lympho-
months   post-antibiotic 
therapy {especially  when
plasmacytic infiltration of the synovial membrane.
glucocorticoids are used concurrently), Borrelia DNA can
Quantitative PCR has been used to monitor infectious
again be detected and antibody titres rise, indicating
load in the tissues of dogs experimentally infected with B.
 survival of the agent despite therapy.
Table 28 Presence of Borrelia burgdorfer in the tissues of symptomatic dogs. B. burgdorferi sensu stricto as a single
i panedwos (sanss snoigt) wsidoit anss suanahp e aaey Aew (suwnios e ishti uoiaju! lesuawjadxa ui suabe
B. garinii (liver) given as a coinfection with B. burgdorferi sensu stricto to European dogs (last column). Skin, lymph
node, fascia, muscle and joint capsule consistently become infected by active migration along connective tissue
planes. It is possible that this migratory route extends through the thoracic and abdominal wall and reaches the
peritoneum and pericardial tissues, which in experimental infections frequently contain Borrelia. Parenchymatous
tissues, supposedly infected by the circulatory route, contain fewer Borrelia. This likely reflects the fact that the
organisms are more easily eliminated by the immune system in these sites. Difference in sampling technique may
explain the discrepancy in results for muscle tissue between the naturally and experimentally infected dogs. Borrelia
DNA was not detected in the kidney: however, occasionally a spirochaete has been visualized in the tubules or
interstitial tissue. In one survey in Germany, approximately 15% of urine samples from dogs with cystitis and
prostatitis contained B. burgdorferDNA.
Percentage positive tissues in symptomatic dogs by:
Culture
Culture
PCR
PCR
Appel et al.
Straubinger
Chang et al.
Hovius et al.
(1993)
(2000)
(1996)
(1999)
n = 17
n = 42
n= 6 
n = 10
Tissue
Skin
30
85
85
50
Lymph node
0
75
65
0
Joint capsule 
25
70
95
60
Fascia
nd 
70
90
nd 
Muscle
50
65
100
0
Peritoneum
25
65
50
25
 Pericardium 
nd 
80
65
nd
Heart 
5
75
85
25
Meninges
nd 
30
50
nd 
SNJ
5
nd
nd
35
Liver
0
nd 
nd
60
Spleen 
0
0
35
Kidney
5
0
0
0
nd = no data
Borreliosis
105
CLINICAL SIGNS
spirochaete is most often detected in skin and joints,
although there is only mild pathology in these tissues
Borreliosis in dogs (Table 28)
(109). More often, a presumptive diagnosis is made based
Between 1975 and 1985, novel human and canine
on compatible clinical signs of acute malaise (fatigue,
infections were described from Old Lyme and other areas 
 anorexia and fever) followed by recurrent lameness (stiff
in Connecticut and from the lower Hudson Valley in New
gait, joint swelling, arthralgia), and on the exclusion of
York State, USA. Dogs were described with overt lameness
 other differential diagnoses (110). The period of malaise
 and swollen joints, mostly combined with fever. Although
 may precede lameness by days to months and its severity
the lameness spontaneously resolved in four days, 33% of
varies from listlessness to high fever ipyrexia occurs in
dogs relapsed. Similarities with human Lyme disease were
60-70% of cases).
recognized. In one dog, spirochaetes were visualized
microscopically within the synoviae and identified by
immunofluorescence as B. burgdorferi. In another canine
109
case from the same area, B. burgdrferi was implicated as
s 'ao poo aq sal ue aaag ro asno a
mittent and shifting, with involvement of several joints.
In clinical practice, confirmation of the aetiological
agent by detection of live spirochaetes is uncommon.
However, in experimental and some clinical cases the
109 Histopathological lesions in borreliosis. Lesions occur in
 many organ systems and are characterized by an infitration of
plasma cells and lymphocytes, as seen in experimental
 infection. (A) Severe follicular hyperplasia of the lymph node
adjacent to the location of tick bite (infection). (B)
Accumulation of plasma cells in the synovial membrane of the
joint near the site of a tick bite. (C) Mild non-suppurative
pericarditis. A naturally infected case in the USA presented
with a complete heart block, showing plasmacytic interstitial
myocarditis with macrophage infitration and focal fibre
necrosis. (D) Periarteritis, visible as small cuffs of
mononuclear cells around the vasa vasorum in artery walls, is
frequently seen in experimental infection. (Reprinted with 
 permission of Elsevier Science from Straubinger RK, Rao TD,
Davidson E, Summers BA, Frey AB (2001) Protection against
tick-transmitted Lyme disease in dogs vaccinated with a
multiantigenic vaccine. Vaccine 20, 181-93)
110
110 A four-year-old Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with a
history of recurrent malaise, pyrexia, generalized
musculoskeletal pain and polyarthritis. The dog is both
serologically positive (rising titre) and PCR positive (blood)
for Borrelia
106
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Clinical signs relate not only to joint disease but also to
DIAGNOSIS
multiple organ involvement. The skin is seldom visibly
affected and the easily recognizable erythema migrans
dinical diagnosis
{EM) lesion seen in human infections does not occur in
The clinical signs described above are not pathognomonic
dogs. There is some evidence suggesting that mild
S   a a l e  s p
localized excoriation and alopecia may be associated with
Consequently, making a definitive diagnosis based on
infection, but this is difficult to distinguish from acute
clinical signs alone is not possible. As the onset of
dermatitis initiated by the tick bite. Cardiac involvement
Borrelia-associated lameness often occurs after the period
is rarely observed clinically but is well described
of fever and malaise, it may be difficult to make a
pathologically. Hepatic disease suggested by hepato-
diagnosis on the basis of a single consultation. In
megaly and elevation of serum liver enzymes has been
addition, the specific antibody response may reduce
reported. In Europe, a non-specific reactive hepatitis has
 antigen load, thus modifying the expression of clinical
been observed on liver biopsy, and this is associated with
signs. Borrelia species or strain variation, or co-infection
detectable levels of B. garini DNA in liver tissue. Renal
with other arthropod-borne pathogens, may also alter
oum ue aq aew pue Auanba snmo awaaou
 clinical presentation.
pathological sequela to the infection, since borreliae are
A presumptive diagnosis of borreliosis is based on a
only occasionally detected in the kidney tissues (Table
history of tick exposure, compatible clinical signs,
28). Severe renal disease with membranoproliferative
including a history of recurrence, and exclusion of other
glomerulonephritis ("canine Lyme nephritis') has 
been
causes of non-degenerative arthropathy and fever of
reported in the USA, most frequently in Golden and
unknown origin. In particular, other immune-mediated
Labrador Retrievers. This is characterized by azotaemia,
causes of fever and shifting limb lameness should be
haematuria and urinary casts, with progression to
 considered. A definitive diagnosis of borreliosis always
irreversible uraemia. In Europe, a familial glomeru-
requires the addition of appropriate serological,
uaaq sey ssaueuel pue laaay Aq papaoaud Auiedol
molecular or microbiological tests.
described in Bernese Mountain Dogs, with a similar
clinical and pathological progression.
Laboratory detection of exposure and disease
Involvement of the peripheral nervous system in canine
Confirmation of the clinical diagnosis of borreliosis is
borreliosis has been described and is manifested by loss of
difficult  and
lrequires correlation  and realistic
proprioception, hyperaesthesia, posterior paresis or 
 interpretation of multiple laboratory investigations.
unilateral facial paralysis. Central nervous system
 Results from a European reference laboratory show that
involvement may manifest as aggression and epilepsy.
only 4.3% of sera from dogs clinically diagnosed as
Generally, mild to severe inflammatory infiltrates are seen
having borreliosis have significantly high Borrelid
in the nervous system and the spirochaete is detected
antibody titres. However, very high titres were found in
in 30-s0% of clinical cases in the meninges or CSF
24.6% of sera from Bernese Mountain Dogs with
(Table 28).
suspected borreliosis (111). These data correlate with the
recognized predisposition of this breed to clinical disease.
Borreliosis in cats
It is also evident that disease due to Borrelia infection
Reports of naturally occurring feline borreliosis are rare.
would be overdiagnosed if based on positive serological
In one UK study, positive Borrelia serology was not
res ults alone.
associated with clinical signs of lameness or fever, and
clinical signs seen in seropositive cats were
not
 Serology and western blotting
attributable to the spirochaete. Most seropositive cats had
A single IgG antibody test {IFA or ELISA) is insufficient to
antibodies  against (
OspA, as occurs in sera from
support a diagnosis of active borreliosis, as persistent
convalescent young dogs, further suggesting that cats
antibody production occurs in asymptomatic dogs. In
clear the infection without developing clinical signs.
addition, as disease does not often develop after the first
Experimentally infected cats exhibited recurrent
infection, an increase in specific IgM antibodies is limited
lymphocytosis and eosinophilia every 2-3 months, with
as a marker for active infection. Although a fourfold
concurrent hyperplasia of lymphoid tissue. [
Despite
rising IgG titre in paired samples is strongly supportive of
minimal clinical signs {a minority of cats exhibited slight
active Borrelia infection as the cause of disease, the time
lameness), infected cats had histopathological lesions that
involved in confirming the diagnosis may make this
paralleled those of natural canine infection. Lesions
impractical. As symptomatic dogs with borreliosis have
included perivascular lymphocytic infiltration of joint
significantly higher Borrelia-specific IgG antibody titres
capsules, cerebrum, meninges, kidney and liver, and mild
than asymptomatic dogs (112), very high titres are useful
multifocal pneumonia.
in supporting a diagnosis of clinical borreliosis, which
should be confirmed using western blotting, PCR or
culture {113). However, when low to moderate Borrelid
titres are encountered, consideration of other differential
diagnoses is recommended.
Borreliosis
107
111 Frequency distribution of the antibody titres of
111
 Frequency of whole cell ELISA titres
sera from dogs with a putative clinical diagnosis of
35
 borreliosis submitted to the referral laboratory of 
30
Utrecht University, the Netherlands. Around 4% of 
dogs
25
these dogs have a very high IgG antibody titre in
whole cell ELISA (log reciprocal 8 and higher) and
6
20
may thus be suspected of having borreliosis. Referral
15
 sera from Bernese Mountain Dogs have an even
10
 greater fraction (around 25%) of very high titres and 
this breed may have high susceptibility for borreliosis.
5
The data would suggest that borreliosis is clinically
overdiagnosed.
2
3
4
5
6
了
Log reciprocal titre
Total population (n = 986) 
 Bernese Mountain Dogs (n = 37)
112 Boxplots of IgG antibody titres of symptomatic
112
12-
 and asymptomatic dogs. Studies from Kornblatt et
Location 
al. 1985, Connecticut, USA and Hovius ef af. 2000,
Connecticut
Netherlands
The Netherlands, Europe are compared. Values in
10-
the latter study are more condensed because they
are the highest titres measured during a five-year 
ocal titre
8
 period. Values from the UsA are from a cross-
 sectional study. Statistically, symptomatic dogs have
recipr
6.
higher titres; however, around 20% of asymptomatic
 dogs may have a high titre (of log reciprocal titre 8 =
1/2560). In the practical situation, when this high
4-
 titre is encountered, it is advisable to perform a
 second test for confirmation of the putative 
1
 dia gnosis.
1
n=
43
34
61
24
 Asymtomatic
Symtomatic
113 (A) Antibody dynamics of a
113
 Golden Retriever acutely
A whole cell ELISA
B Western blot
developing fever and lameness in
its fourth year in association with
10
B31
a steep rising titre in whole cell 
9
mvy
Mab
ELISA. The dog was treated with
(kDa)
8
antibiotics and disea se resolved,
titre
97-
7
while the titre declined and
66-
remained low. (B) Western blots 
6
were performed before, during
45
-Fla
and after disease. The p41 and 
-OspB
p39 bands were weakly present,
Log
31-
OSpA
indicating asymptomatic infection 
2
before disease. More bands 
22
become apparent during disease
and p30 and p28 are particularly
4
visible against the B31 strain of 
B. burgdorferi sensu stricto. In the
Age of dog (years)
 convalescent state, OspA
2
3
antibodies are detected.
1 asymptomatic; 2 symptomatic; 3 convalescent
108
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Molecular diagnosis
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
The presence of Borrelia DNA in tissue or body fluids
(blood, joint fluid, CSF) can be determined by PCR
Antibiotic therapy
analysis using Borrelia genes encoding molecules such as
Recovery from infection is ultimately dependent on
flagellin or OspA, or the intergenic spacer region of
activation  of  specific cell-mediated  immunity  and
ribosomal 5S and 23S RNA, as targets. The species of
isuise Suoanoid ydso isueae sapoque jo uoonpoid
Borrelia involved can be determined by species-specific
reinfection {113). Disease can be induced if immunity is
PCR, DNA sequencing and/or K
hybridization
of
disrupted by administration of high-dose corticosteroids.
amplicons, using species-specific oligonucleotide probes.
The effect of antibiotic therapy on the course of infection
PCR positivity has been correlated with the presence of
is difficult to evaluate clinically, as the episodes of
clinical symptoms; however, because of its sensitivity,
lameness and fever usually resolve spontaneously after
PCR positivity in dogs in highly endemic areas may reflect
four days without treatment. However, antibiotics may
the high risk of exposure to infected ticks, rather than
help to era dicate infection if administered at the optimum
clinically significant infection. Interpretation of PCR data
time post infection. In experimentally infected dogs,
will be greatly facilitated by the increasing availability of
administration of antibiotics prior to development of an
quantitative PCR to determine and monitor infectious
 appropriate immune response resulted in failure to clear
load. The presence of Borrelia DNA in tissue or fluid
spirochaete infection. Antibiotic therapy is most effective
samples from dogs more than 90 days after a tick bite fi.e.
when administered during the first disease episode, when
in the winter months in Europe) confirms persistent
antibody titre is high but before the organism
infection and if accompanied by disease, is highly
sequestrates. The spirochaete load is greatly reduced after
 supportive of chronic borreliosis.
antibiotic treatment  and Borrelia-specific antibody
declines in parallel. However, in a minority (
of
Bacterial culture
experimentally and naturally infected dogs with chronic
Isolation of Borrelia burgdorferi by culture is difficult and
infection, spirochaetes can still be detected by PCR 500
is only successful by employing Barbour-Stoenner-Kelly
 days after treatment. It is hypothesized that spirochaetes
(BSK) liquid medium. The medium should be inspected
evade antibiotic therapy within tissue cysts or 'privileged
weekly for two months for the presence of spirochaetes by
sites', such as fibroblasts.
dark-field microscopy. After isolation, Borrelia are readily
Doxycycline (10 mg/kg p/o q12h for 28 days) is the
 grown and multiply rapidly after passage. Bacterial
antibiotic of choice for borreliosis because of its
culture of skin biopsies taken from the edge of an EM
intracellular penetration and concurrent effects on
lesion in infected humans is a highly sensitive method for
co-infecting Anaplasma and Ehrlichia species. High-dose
confirming the presence of Borrelia, and is used as the
 amoxycillin (20 mg/kg p/o q8h for 28 days) may be a
'gold standard’ for diagnosis. Blood is not considered the
better choice in very young animals because of the effects
sample of choice since Borrelia burgdorferi migration is
of tetracyclines on enamel formation.
seldom haematogenous. Although spirochaetes were
recovered by culture in 100% of skin biopsy samples
taken two weeks after experimental infection of dogs, a
Vaccination
positive skin culture of naturally infected dogs was only
A whole cell American strain {B31) bacterin vaccine is
seldom achieved.
licensed and widely used in the northeastern USA. In a
Organisms in skin and joint tissue samples from
large field efficacy study using this vaccine, the incidence
healthy dogs in endemic areas are rarely detected but
of borreliosis was 1% in the vaccinated group and 4.7%
when found they are considered to be the result of
in non-vaccinated dogs. No adverse effects of vaccination,
transient infection episodes due to current natural
even on dogs previously diagnosed and recovered from
exposure. Consequently, as for conventional molecular
borreliosis, were noted. It is estimated that around 75%
diagnosis, a positive culture under these conditions does
of dogs in northeastern USA have been vaccinated and it
not necessarily confirm Borrelia as the cause of disease.
has been suggested that the prevalence of canine Lyme
However, a positive culture in a symptomatic dog that has
arthritis has decreased as a consequence. The antibody
not been exposed to infected ticks for several months
response of vaccinated dogs is restricted to OspA and
confirms the presence of active infection and would
OspB, the 31 and 34 kDa proteins. The vaccinal
strongly support the diagnosis of borreliosis.
antibodies are bactericidal and prevent reinfection by
killing the spirochaetes in the gut of the fed tick by
complement dependent activity. Active immunization
with recombinant OspA renders the same protection
against reinfection but only against homologous strains of
Borrelia. Vaccination with bacterin has the advantage of
eliciting higher antibody levels; however, it requires
revaccination more than once a year to maintain adequate
protection, after an initial course of two vaccinations
Borreliosis
109
three weeks apart. Mixtures of sonicated strains may
human infection. In this respect, dogs function as
confer broad enough protection in areas where different
Borrelia strains and species occur Recombinant OspC
 Borrelia and do not interface to a major degree with
vaccines have not been licensed but have been shown to
sylvatic
wildlife
 cycles  of  Borrelia
infection.
protect gerbils and mice from infection by inhibiting the
Consequently, they pose no direct threat to human beings.
colonization of the tick salivary gland and thus blocking
However, dogs and cats may carry infected ticks into the
transmission to the vertebrate host. It is feasible that a
 peri-domestic environment, where there is a small risk
vaccine combining invasive OspC strains may protect
that an infected unattached tick may be dislodged. It is
 against chronic infecti on.
exposure to infected nymphs derived from small rodents
Prevention
or deer with access to the garden. There is anecdotal
Dogs with naturally occurring borreliosis generally have a
evidence of direct transfer of infected ticks from animals
history of severe tick infestation and, in experimental
to humans but no reports of disease transmission. There
infections, only dogs with high infectious loads develop
are no reports of humans becoming infected by dog
fever and lameness. Consequently, prevention of heavy
 bodily fluids, although dog urine may contain borreliae.
tick infestations by regular use of long-acting topical
Precautions should be taken when removing ticks
acaricides such as amitraz, fipronil or synthetic
attached to dogs or cats to prevent the possibility of
pyrethroids is key to prevention of disease. In addition,
exposure to borreliae released from crushed tick salivary
removing ticks within two days of attachment, before
glands, which might infect small wounds on the hand,
spirochaetes reach the tick salivary glands, will minimize 
although this has never been documented. In contrast to
transmission and lower infectious load. Avoidance of
dogs, humans may develop disease following a single tick
areas known to have a high density of ticks should be
bite, and thus should also take precautions such as
considered. The chance of acquiring pathogenic strains is
wearing protective clothing when entering areas of high
also decreased with aggressive tick prevention. It is
tick density.
probable that owner awareness and widespread use of
effective acaricides has played a role in decreasing the
 prevalence of canine borreliosis in the last decade.
PUBLIC HEALTH SIGNIFICANCE
Borreliosis in humans is a serious and debilitating disease
with high morbidity in endemic areas. Clinical signs relate
to the skin, neurological and/or musculoskeletal systems,
depending on the Borrelia species involved. Erythema
migrans typically develops within three months of an
infected tick bite. This expanding rash was first described
in 1910, and is now thought to indicate intradermal
multiplication of spirochaetes, which disperse through the
skin from the point of inoculation. All three Borrelia
species pathogenic for man can be easily cultured or
detected by PCR from these lesions. The presence of IgM
antibodies confirms the diagnosis in this initial stage of
human borreliosis. The second phase is marked by
dissemination to multiple organ systems. In Europe,
neurological disease is a more common presenting
complaint than chronic arthritis. This is due to the high
infection rate of European ticks with B. garinii and its
tropism for the neurological system. Although B. garini is
the major species involved in neuroborreliosis, B. afzeli
and B. burgdorferi sensu stricto are also isolated to a
lesser extent and co-infections involving all three can
occur. B. afzeli is almost exclusively isolated from the
skin of chronically infected human patients with
acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans (ACA).  Although
arthritis is the main symptom of B. burgdorferi sensu
stricto infection, this species is isolated from periarticular
tissues, rarely from synovial fluid.
Serological surveillance of dogs in an area endemic for
borreliosis may provide information on the risk for
Bartonellosis
10
Richard Birtles
BACKGROUND, AETIOLOGY
Arthropods as vectors of Bartonella species
AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
 Although the role of arthropods as vectors for Bartonella
Bartonellosis is the generic name given to a wide range of
species is widely accepted, there is very limited evidence
infections caused by members of the genus Bartonella, a
relating to transmission of this bacterium. Experimental
group of fastidious, facultatively intracellular gram-
negative bacteria that are most closely related to the
transfer of cat fleas (Ctenocepbalides felis) (114) from
Brucella genus and members of the plant-associated taxa
bacteraemic cats to specific pathogen-free {SPF) cats.
Agrobacterium and Rhizobium.
Bartonellae have also been observed in the midgut of
To date, twenty taxa have been described in
infected fleas, and they can be cultured from infected flea
association with a wide range of mammalian hosts (Table
faeces for up to nine days post feeding. Furthermore, the
29). Although not proven for all species, a general natural
intradermal inoculation of SPF cats with flea faeces has
cycle for Bartonella species involves a mammalian
been shown to induce bacteraemia. Thus, it appears that
maintenance host species, in which infection is usually
the transmission of B. benselae between cats involves the
chronic and asymptomatic, and a haematophagous
uptake of infected blood by fleas, followed by
arthropod vector that transmits infection between main-
multiplication of bacteria in the flea midgut, then
tenance hosts. However, outside this cycle the occurrence
excretion and persistence in flea faeces, and finally
of  infections  in  non-maintenance  hosts following
infection of a new host by the cutaneous inoculation of
accidental exposure to the bacteria has long been
infected faeces via a scratch or abrasion.
recognized. Although little is known about the relative
Although experimental studies into the transmission of
ease with which Bartonella species are able to infect
B. vinsoni subspecies berkhofi have yet to be reported,
accidental hosts, once established, infections can lead to
epidemiological evidence suggests that ticks may be
Overt clinical manifestations, ranging from mild and self-
involved in this process. Evaluation of the risk factors
limiting to life threatening disease. However, bartonellae
associated with exposure to this species identified that
may not just be opportunistic pathogens. The results of
recent studies investigating the effects of parasitism on
history of heavy tick exposure than control animals. In
maintenance hosts have suggested that these infections 
-0o jo Aouanbay yaiy e aq ot sieadde aiaul uouppe
too may well be detrimental to host well- being.
infections between B. vinsoni subspecies berkhoffi and
The nature of bartonellosis in cats is currently
 other tick-borne pathogens. Finally, surveys of questing
considered different from that in dogs. Cats are
ixodid ticks {115) in the USA and Europe using PCR-
recognized as maintenance hosts for Bartonella benselae,
based methods have yielded gene sequences that are very
the species most often implicated in human infections in
similar to several Bartonella species, including some for
the USA and Europe, and they are also likely maintenance
which other arthropods have been established as vectors.
hosts for two other species, B. clarridgeiae and
B. koeblerae. To date there has been no direct
demonstration of naturally occurring disease in cats
caused by B. benselae. However, there is experimental
evidence that in certain circumstances B. benselae
infection can provoke clinical manifestations, and there is
increasing speculation about the role of B. benselae as a
cause or co-factor in chronic diseases of cats. In contrast,
domestic dogs have not been clearly implicated as
maintenance hosts for any Bartonella species, although
the possibility that they may fulfil such a role cannot be
ruled out. Dogs are known to be prone to chronic
infections by Bartonella vinsonii subspecies berkhoffi
that may be asymptomatic or may provoke overt disease.
However, whether such infections are transmissible and,
therefore, whether dogs serve as truly competent
reservoirs, is unknown.
110
Bartonellosis
111
Table 29 Identity of currently recognised Bartonella species and details of their likely maintenance host species.
 Bartonella taxon
Maintenance host
Cat/dog association
B. alsatica
Rabbit 
×
B. bacilliformis
Man
B. birtfesii
 Small woodland mammals
B. bovis
Cow
十
B. capreoli
Roe deer
×
B. ciarridgeiae
1e3
B. doshiae
 Small woodland mammals
B. elizabethae
Rat
B. grahamii
 Small woodland mammals
B. henselae
183
B. koehierae
183
B. peromysci
 White-footed mouse
B. quintana
Man
B. talpae
Mole
B. taylorii
 Small woodland mammals
×
B. tribocorum
Rat 
B. schoenbuchii
Roe deer
×
B. vinsonii subspecies arupensis
Small woodland mammals 
B. vinsonil subspecies berkhoffi
Coyote
B. vinsoni subspecies vinsonii
Small woodland mammals 
114
115
114 Photograph of Cfenocephatides felis, the cat flea. (Photo
115 An engorged adult ixodid tick attached to the skin of a
 courtesy Merial Animal Health UK)
dog.
112
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Bartonella henselae and Bartonella
populations living in the southern USA than in those
clarridgeiae infection of domestic cats
living in the north, and recent surveys of cats in central
The role of cats as reservoir hosts for B. benselae and
and northern Scandinavia have found little evidence of
B. clarridgeiae has been established on the basis of
B. benselae infections. This correlation may be related to
extensive surveys of domestic cat populations and
warmer, more humid regions favouring Ct. felis
experimental studies of laboratory animals. Table 30
infestation, but may also reflect differences in the age
summarizes these surveys, which have been carried out in
profile or numbers of stray/feral cats in local populations.
over 20 countries and have included more than 7,000
Feline B. clarridgeiae infections appear to be less
animals. Overall, these data indicate that, worldwide,
 common than those due to B. benselae. Less than half the
15% of cats tested have ongoing infection and 27% of
surveys that encountered B. benselae also encountered
animals have evidence of past infection.
B. clarridgeiae, and when both species were encountered,
Significant differences in the prevalence of B. benselae
the prevalence of B. benselae was always the greater, with
infection among subsets of the cat population have been
over 80% of culture-positive cats yielding B. benselae and
reported, leading to the recognition of a number of
only about 25% yielding B. clarridgeiae. However, as
predisposing factors.  Risk  factors  associated
1with
currently used sampling methods ha ve been optimized for
bacteraemia include flea infestation, young age and being
the recovery of B. benselae, the recovery of B. clarridgeiae
stray or housed in cat shelters. Among pet cats, risk
may be compromised. The geographical distribution of
factors include ownership for less than six months,
B. clarridgeiae may also be more limited than that of
adoption from a shelter/found as a stray and cohabitation
B. benselae. The species is rarely encountered in the USA
with one or more cats. It has also been suggested that the
but appears more common in Europe and the Far East.
prevalence of infection/exposure is inversely related to
Within Europe, the species is relatively widely distributed
latitude. The seroprevalence of B. benselae is higher in cat
but may be absent from the UK and Scandina via.
Table 30 National estimates of prevalence of infection and exposure among domestic cats.
Country
Year of survey(s)
Sample
Prevalence of
 Prevalence of
Species
source
infection
exposure
identified*
Australia
1996
H. S
27/77. 35%
NT
BH
Austria 
1995
IN
32/96. 33%
Czech Republic
2003
H. S
5/61. 8%
NT
BH
Denmark
2002
H. S
21/93. 23%
42/92. 46%
BH
Egypt
1995
LN
8/42. 19%
France
1995.
1997. 2001
H. S
129/594. 22%
202/500, 40%
BH, BC
Germany
1997.
. 1999. 2001
H. S
33/293. 11%
107/713. 15%
BH, BC
Indonesia
1999
S'H
9/14. 64%
40/74, 54%
BH, BC
Israel
1996
IN
45/114, 39%
Italy
2002 x 2
H. S
24/264, 9% 
98/427. 23%
BH
Japan
1995. 1996.
.1998.
H. S
181/2170. 8%
73/670. 11%
BH, BC
2000. 2003
Netherlands
1997
H. S
25/113. 22%
85/163. 52%
BH, BC
New Zealand
1997
8/48. 17%
LN
BH
Norway
2002
H. S
0/100. 0%
1/100. 1%
 Philipines
1999
19/31. 61%
73/107. 68%
BH, BC
 Portugal 
1995
LN
2/14, 14% 
 Singapore
1999
NT
38/80. 47%
South Africa
1996. 1999
H. S
1/31. 3%
11/52, 21%
BH
Sweden
2002, 2003
1/100. 1%
73/292, 25%
BH
 Switzerland 
1997
H. S
NT
61/728. 8%
Thailand 
2001
76/275. 28%
LN
BH, BC
LK
2000. 2002
H. S
34/360. 9%
61/148. 41%
BH
USA
1994 x 2. 1995 x 4.
H. S
128/323. 40%
912/2910. 31%
BH, BC
1996. 1998
Zimbabwe
1996
H. S
LN
28/119. 24%
* by culture-based assessment only
H = cats residing within a household; S = feral, stray or shelter-living cats; NT = not tested; BH = Bartonelfa henselae; BC =
Bartonella ctarridgeiae.
Bartonellosis
113
B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffii
Molecular epidemiology of Bartonella species
infection of dogs
 associated with cats and dogs
The assumption that B. vinsoni subspecies berkhoffi is
Delineation of B. benselae isolates into one of two
always pathogenic in dogs is no longer valid. Despite
 genogroups on the basis of differences in 16S ribosomal
good evidence that dogs are frequently exposed to
RNA gene sequences has long been recognized, and
B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffi, reports of overt illness
descriptions of isolates as type I and type Il are
due to the species are still uncommon. Although a recent
commonplace. However, the distribution of these two
USA survey found 162 of 1,872 working dogs {9%) were
types among isolates does not appear to be entirely
seropositive for B. vinsonii subspecies berkhofli,
less
congruent with lineages allocated using a multilocus
than ten confirmed clinical case reports have been
aul ssasse oi qoeoudde (isT) Sudai aouanbas 
published. Furthermore, the species has been shown to
 B. benselae population structure. It therefore appears that
persist subclinically for 16 months in the blood of an
 distinguishing strains solely on a type I/type II basis is not
apparently healthy dog.
a sensitive indicator of clonal divisions within the species.
The recent demonstration of coyotes (Canis latrans) as
The population structure proposed by MLST is supported
 a major reservoir for B. vinsoni subspecies berkboffi has
by other means of assessing inter-strain genetic related-
 gone some way to clarifying the natural cycle of the
ness, including pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).
species in the USA.
 From a molecular epidemiological perspective, several
highly variable genomic loci have been identified
B. henselae, B. ciarridgeiae and
including the 16S/23S rRNA intergenic spacer region,
B. elizabethae infection of dogs
groEL, and pap31. PFGE (116), together with other pan-
In many parts of the world dogs are as prone to
genomic sampling methods such as amplified fragment
infestation with the cat flea as cats themselves, so it is
length polymorphism analysis, enterobacterial repetitive
surprising that B. benselae infections of dogs, either
intergenic consensus (ERIC)-PCR and arbitrarily primed-
clinical or subclinical, appear to be rare. A culture-based
PCR, has also been used to delineate B. benselae isolates.
survey in the UK failed to recover a single isolate of any
 Although the majority of these investigations have been
Bartonella species from over 2s0 dogs tested. Serosurveys
carried out on a small panel of isolates, a recent more
Auanedde ui uouaju jo suoeoipu auos papeia aaey
substantial PFGE-based survey showed good correlation
healthy dogs, although the accuracy of a serological
between the strain genotype and its geographical origin,
approach as a species-specific indicator of Bartonella
 oi sueadde sues assuedef pue uuy qm
infection is debatable. However, intriguingly, the recent
discrete clusters.
unexpected detection of B. benselae in the peripheral
blood of three dogs presenting with chronic illnesses has
a1asau e se ioe Aeu saop 4eu uousaaans aut payoaoid
for the species. Interestingly, DNA derived from (rodent-
reservoired) Bartonella elizabethae was detected in the
peripheral blood of a fourth dog presented as part of the
116
series described above, implicating this species as a canine
pathogen for the first time.
There is some circumstantial evidence that dogs can
transmit B. benselae and B. clarridgeiae. Reports from
Japan and Israel have suggested that human cases of
 B. benselae infection may result from contact with dogs,
possibly acting as vehicles for infected fleas.
116 Macrorestriction analysis of B. henselae isolates by pulsed
feld gel electrophoretic resolution of Smal digested genomic
DNA. Lane 1 contains a size marker and lanes 2-29 contain
DNA profiles obtained from 28 different B. henselae isolates
 obtained from cats in the UK. Variation in the profiles
demonstrates the genetic variability within the species. (Picture
 courtesy Dr M Arvand, University of Rostock, Germany)
114
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
PATHOGENESIS
kinetics of antibody appearance during infection varying
with individual antigens. A large-scale survey of naturally
B. henselae infection in cats
infected cats has demonstrated that the spectrum of B.
Experimental infections have demonstrated that cats are
 benselae immunogenic antigens varies between individual
prone to protracted bacteraemia of at least eight weeks,
 animals, but that a subset of the antigens recognized by
during which time the bacteria associate with, then
 experimentally infected cats are consistently encountered.
(probably) invade, erythrocytes. The concentration of
There is conflicting evidence regarding the role played
bacteria in blood rises rapidly to reach a peak within one
by the humoral response in the abrogation of B. benselae
week of inoculation, after which it gradually subsides.
bacteraemia. Experimental infection of B-cell deficient
Although in most experiments this resulted in disap-
mice has demonstrated that the cessation of bacteraemia
 pearance of bacteraemia after about three months, in some
due to Bartonella grabamii (a species associated with
'sao   p  sm o s
woodland rodents) is antibody-mediated, as persistent
recurrent periods of bacteraemia were observed (117).
bacteraemia was converted to a transient course by
Cats elicit a strong humoral response against inoculated
transfer of immune serum. However, infected cats with or
bartonellae. Significant titres of IgG and IgM can be
without serum IgG antibodies to B. benselae may become
detected in animals within two weeks of inoculation and
blood-culture negative simultaneously, suggesting that
antibodies persist for several months. However,
，the
IgG is not required to clear bacteraemia. There is no
evolution of immunoglobulin titres varies between
doubt that infected cats are prone to recurrent B. benselae
individuals {118). Western blot analysis has allowed the
bacteraemia despite the presence of circulating antibodies.
identification of at least 24 Bartonella-specific antigens 
However, as yet there is no evidence for the emergence of
recognized by experimentally infected cats, with the
 antigenic variants to explain this phenomenon, and the
potential for intracellular survival of Bartonella in cells 
 other than erythrocytes has not been fully investigated.
117
There has been very little study of the Bartonella-specific
cell-mediated immune response. Positive cutaneous delayed
hypersensitivity reactions in cats following exposure and
challenge with live B. benselae have been reported.
However, experimentally infected cats failed to make a
similar response following intradermal administration of
the cat scratch disease {CSD) antigen that is comprised of
s/ml
heat-treated pus collected from the lymph nodes of human
 CSD patients. The nature of the Bartonella-specific in vitro
3
lymphocyte proliferative response has also been examined.
bQ
117 Examples of different types of bacteraemias detected in
cats experimentally infected with B. henselae. The green curve
0
5
10
15
20
represents the most commonly observed, shortest infections:
Weeks post infection
 the blue curve represents a more protracted infection; whereas
 the red curve represents recurrent bacteraemia.
118
118 Examples of different types of
 antibody kinetics in cats experi-
100-
mentally infected with B. henselae.
The relative antibody levels for IgM 
80-
(4) and IgG () are shown. Type 1
2
(blue curves) involves an acute,
 antibody
60-
strong but short-lived IgM peak,
 followed by a strong and
protracted IgG response. Type 2
Relative
40
(red curves) involves a far weaker
and delayed IgM response, closely
20-
followed by a strong and
protracted IgG response. Type 3
(green curves) involves an acute
10
15
20
but relatively weak IgM response,
+
Weeks post infection
followed by a strong and
protracted IgG response.
Bartonellosis
¥115
B. clarridgeiae and B. koehlerae
infected with B. benselae developed delayed conception or
infection in cats
lack of conception, or fetal involution or resorption.
Experimental  i
infections of SPF cats with both
Only one group of researchers has consistently
B. clarridgeiae and B. koehlerae resulted in a subclinical
reported clinical disease resulting from experimental
chronic bacteraemia similar to that seen with B. benselae.
inoculation of laboratory cats, including the development
Comparison of infection kinetics indicated that cats
 of injection site reactions followed by fever and lethargy.
inoculated with B. koeblerae have a shorter duration of
It was proposed that the isolate of B. benselae associated
bacteraemia than those inoculated with B. clarridgeiae,
with the atypical clinical observations was a more
 and none developed relapsing bacteraemia. All infected
"virulent' strain, implying that the virulence of B. benselae
syoads aul isueae asuodsau lenounq e paunou sieo
in cats is strain dependent. This hypothesis has not yet
inoculum. There were no apparent differences in the
been tested elsewhere.
course of infection between cats inoculated with blood
co-infected with B. henselae and B. clarridgeiae and those
Disease association in natural feline
inoculated with B. henselae alone.
B. hensefae infection
Disease association with naturally occurring B. berselae
B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffii
infection is difficult to determine because of its high
infection in dogs
prevalence in asymptomatic cats. In Japan, one survey
Current understanding of the pathogenesis of B. vinsonii
demonstrated that seropositivity for B. benselae and feline
immunodeficiency virus was significantly associated with a
However, a recent immunopathological study of the
history of lymphadenopathy and gingivitis. Similarly, a
species in experimentally infected dogs found that despite
survey of cats from the USA and the Caribbean found that
production of substantial levels of specific antibody,
seropositivity was significantly associated with fevers of
B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffii was able to establish
unknown origin, gingivitis, stomatitis, lymphadenopathy
chronic infection. This resulted in immune suppression
and uveitis {119). In support of this final finding, a further
survey in the USA demonstrated that 14% of cats suffering
decreased  numbers of peripheral blood CD8+ T
from uveitis, but no healthy cats, had detectable Bartonella
antibodies in their aqueous humour. In a Swiss survey of
cell surface, and an increase in CD4+ lymphocytes in the
over 700 cats, there was significant correlation between
 peripheral lymph nodes.
high B. benselae antibody titres and a range of renal and
Demonstration of microscopic lesions in cardiac tissue
 urinary tract abnormalities. Furthermore, all sick cats over
from naturally infected dogs has been used to infer
 seven years old in this survey were seropositive.
B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffi pathogenicity. Multiple
Individual case reports supporting these associations
foci of myocarditis and endocarditis have been observed,
are almost entirely lacking. In one cat with anterior uveitis,
leading to the suggestion that bartonellae
may
significant  ocular production  of  Bartonella-specific
preferentially colonize previously damaged tissue and that
antibodies was demonstrated, supporting this as the
once colonization is established, a progressive inflam-
aetiological agent. B. benselae has also been unconvinc-
matory response develops to the organisms.
ingly associated with vegetative endocarditis in two cats.
CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL SIGNS OF
FELINE BARTONELLOSIS
119
It is generally believed that the cost of B. benselae
 parasitism to the feline host is minimal. However, there is
evidence that some strains of B. benselae may provoke
overt clinical signs in cats, and that hosting chronic
Bartonella infection is detrimental.
Experimental infection with B. henselae
Clinical and pathological evaluations of experimentally
infected cats have yielded inconsistent results, which may
reflect differences in experimental procedure between
different studies. Although in most animals clinical signs
were minimal and gross necropsy findings were
unremarkable, histopathological findings have included
inflammatory foci in the kidneys, heart, liver and spleen
119 Two one-year-old, littermate Persian cats, one of which
and in the peripheral lymph nodes. Less commonly, overt
has a febrile syndrome with pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis.
clinical signs have been described including fever,
Blood from the cat was PCR positive for B. henselae. The
lethargy, transient anaemia, lymphadenomegaly and
histopathological appearance of a lymph node biopsy from
neurological dysfunction. Some cats experimentally
this cat is shown in 122 and 123.
116
Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
120
12*
snoiewoinueiboad pelearan Aojoyiedoisih uoiben leainji aui leao uoeeoin jo seaie pezlleool pue inwnw seipier lll epae
swsuehio jo auasaid au paleaan apou ydua aun jo busuls Aens-uue pue suapudu uzoeu pue sewan 
treated with glucocorticoids for polyarthritis.
CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL SIGNS
several features were shared among the animals, and that
OF CANINE BARTONELLOSIS
 all responded well to appropriate antibiosis (in one case in
Most Bartonella-associated disease in dogs has been
conjunction with glucocorticoids), may support a
associated with  B. vinsoni subspecies berkhoffii
pathogenic role for B. benselae.
infection. However, as only a small number of cases have
been recognized, 
the
true
 spectrum of clinical
DIAGNOSIS
manifestations induced by Bartonella species in dogs must
Difficulties in interpreting the significance of positive
be considered virtually unknown. Of the eight confirmed
blood cultures and serology, particularly in cats,
cases of B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffi infection, two
necessitate the use of multiple diagnostic methods.
were asymptomatic, four presented with endocarditis and
Although isolation of a Bartonella species by blood
two had granulomatous disease (120, 121). A number of
culture from a non-reservoir host (e.g. B. benselae or
possible co-infections involving B. vinsoni subspecies
B. clarridgeiae from an ill dog) is supportive of its role as
berkhoffi and Ebrlichia species have also been reported.
a causative agent, diagnosis of bartonellosis is best
Both B. clarridgeiae and B. benselae have been
confirmed by demonstration of bartonellae in infected
associated with rare clinical disease in dogs. B.
tissues using histological,
,  immunohistological
or
clarridgeiae was identified in blood culture from a single
molecular methods (122, 123).
fatal case of canine endocarditis. In addition, B.
clarridgeiae DNA was detected in the deformed aortic
Histology and immunohistochemistry
valve and the dog was also seropositive for Bartonella
 The value of histopathology in the diagnosis of naturally
species. B. benselae has been implicated as a causative
occurring Bartonella infections has only really been
agent in a case of canine peliosis hepatis following the 
explored in dogs. The histopathological presentation of
detection of species DNA in affected hepatic tissue. Very
endocarditis and myocarditis due to infection with
recently, B. benselae has also been associated with chronic
 B. vinsoni subspecies berkhoffi is quite characteristic. In
illness in three dogs. Although each animal presented with
 one of the two reports of granulomatous disease in dogs
varying clinical manifestations, severe weight loss,
associated with B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffii,
e oi uouuoo aiam eixaioue pue aaieual paoeoid
Warthin-Starry (WS) silver staining of tissue sections
three..
All
three
dogs alsol
possessed
similar
revealed the presence of clusters of rod-like organisms
haematological and biochemical abnormalities that
within and between cells. However, in the second report
included eosinophilia, monocytosis, alterations in platelet
the stain failed to detect any organisms. A similar degree
numbers and elevated serum amylase. B. benselae was
ofi
inconsistency was apparent during diagnosis 0
of
implicated in the pathogenesis by the detection of DNA in
B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffi-associated endocarditis.
peripheral blood samples. The clinical relevance of these
In the first case report, WS and Gram staining revealed
microbiological findings is difficult to infer from such a
intense bacterial colonization of the margins of the
small case number, particularly given the degree of
infected valves, whereas in a subsequent case, no
variation  in  clinical,  haematological  and biochemical
organisms
were apparent.
 Transmission electron
abnormalities observed. Furthermore, two of the dogs
microscopy has also been used to demonstrate the
had other concurrent disease. However, the fact that
presence of gram-negative bacteria in tissue sections {124)-
Bartonellosis
117
122
123
122 Section of lymph node from cat with bartonellosis. within
123 Section of lymph node from cat with bartonellosis 
the medullary area there are foci of necrosis associated with
stained by the Warthin-Starry method. The darkly stained
 mixed mononuclear cell inflammation.
aggregates are consistent with the expected appearance
of Barfonella colonies.
124 Transmission electron
124
125
microscopic image of
Bartonella henselae. The outer
surface of the bacterium is
pilated. (x146,000) (Photo
courtesy
9
Dr J Iredell, University of 
 Sydney, Australia)
125 B. henselae colonies
growing on blood agar eight 
days after the plate was
 inoculated with the blood of
 an infected cat. The plate
was incubated at 35°C, in
a 5% COz atmosphere.
lsolation of Bartonella species
with colonies appearing smoother and shiny. There is
The recovery of bartonellae from the blood of naturally
infected reservoirs is relatively straightforward, whereas
samples are handled may influence the success of culture.
their recovery from non-reservoir {accidental) hosts is
Two procedures that enhance recovery of B. henselae
extremely difficult. The cultivation of B. benselae and
from infected cat blood are: {1) freezing samples to -80°C
B. clarridgeiae from the blood of cats untreated by
for 24 hours prior to testing; and (2) collection of blood
antibiotics is, therefore, relatively simple, requiring
into isolator blood lysis tubes rather than EDTA tubes.
prolonged incubation of inoculated blood-rich agar plates
The isolation of B. vinsoni subspecies berkhoffi from
at 35-37°C in a moist, 5% COg atmosphere. Colonies of
coyotes has been achieved using methods similar to those
bartonellae become visible between five and 15 days and
described for the isolation of B. benselae from cats. How-
are usually small, cauliflower-like, dry and of an off-white
ever, using these methods, the recovery of isolates from
colour (125), although often a "wetter' phenotype 0ccurs,
the tissues of infected dogs appears to be far less efficient.
118
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Serological methods
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
 Detection of circulating antibodies to Bartonella species has 
been performed using several different assay formats
 Antibiotic therapy
including IFATs, ELISAs and western blotting. Antigens for
The treatment of B. benselae bacteraemia in cats is
use in these assays are usually whole bacteria that have
problematic. Doxycycline, amoxicillin and amoxi-
been cultivated either on agar plates or, more often, in asso-
cillin/clavulanate used at higher than recommended dose
ciation with eukaryotic cell cultures. Serology is most com-
rates have been reported to be successful in suppressing
monly performed on serum/plasma samples but most body
bacteraemia in experimental infections. However, more
fluid samples, including aqueous humour, can be used.
detailed study suggested that although enrofloxacin was
In cats, serum IgG is very persistent, which limits the
 more efficacious than doxycycline for the treatment of B.
diagnostic usefulness of elevated antibody levels as an
benselae or B. clarridgeiae, neither drug eliminated the
indicator of ongoing infection. Investigation of the
infection in all animals, even when administered for four
relationship between infection status and seropositivity,
weeks. Data relating to the treatment of naturally infected
using a convenience sample of about 200 cats in the USA,
animals are scant. However, because of the difficulty in
revealed that antibody titres were higher in bacteraemic
eliminating bacteraemia, antibiotic therapy is only
aa iaaunon ieu pue 'sies suaeiaioeq-uou ui ueul sies
recommended for those cats that have confirmed
and seropositivity to B. benselae were associated with
Bartonella-associated disease or those in contact with
bacteraemia. However, as expected, the estimated positive
immunos uppressed owners.
predictive value of seropositivity as an indicator of
Treatment of canine endocarditis due to B. vinsonii
bacteraemia was found to be less than 50%, underlining
subspecies berkhoffi is also difficult. There has been no
the limited value of the assay.
clinical response reported to therapeutic protocols
In the canine cases reported to date for which
incorporating amoxicillin, enrofloxacin, cephalexin,
 serological data are available, significant antibody levels
 doxycycline and amikacin in combination with diuretics 
were detected. However, as several surveys have
and various combinations of cardiovascular drugs. Two
demonstrated significant antibody titres in apparently
dogs with granulomatous disease due to B. vinsonii
healthy dogs, the predictive value of serology for
subspecies berkhoffii appeared to respond well to
diagnosing clinical disease due to B. vinsoni subspecies
antibiotics: a three-week course of enrofloxacin {12.5
berkhoffi is likely to be limited.
mg/kg q12h) in the first case and a 30-day course of
The interpretation of Bartonella serological results has 
doxycycline (5.4 mg/kg q12h) in the second.
also been compromised by presumed cross-reactivity.
Certainly  t
there is
marked cross-reaction among
Bartonella species, although not with antigens derived
from close relatives of the Bartonellaceae {Brucella canis,
Ehrlichia canis and Rickettsia rickettsii). However, cross-
reactivity between Bartonella antigens and the antisera of
126
dogs with molecular evidence of infection due to non-
Bartonella C-subgroup Proteobacteria has been reported.
Molecular methods
A number of molecular methodologies have been
developed for the diagnosis of human Bartonella
infections and some have been successfully applied to
veterinary medicine. PCR-based methods have been
described, targeting a range of DNA fragments. However,
the sensitivity of these methods for the detection of
Bartonella DNA in infected blood appears limited and in
several comparative surveys they have not performed as
well as culture. Nonetheless, as tools for the detection of
Bartonella DNA in the tissues of diseased animals, PCR-
¥910
based methods have  proven useful additions to
histological and serological methods. Genomic targets for
126 Amplification products derived from a PCR targeting the
PCRs include fragments of the 16S rRNA-encoding gene 
16S/23S rRNA intergenic spacer region of Barfonella species.
or the 165/23S intergenic spacer region, and the citrate
Different Barfonella species yield different sized products, as
synthase-encoding gene (gitA) (126).
revealed by their resolution on a 3% agarose gel. Lanes 3 and 
8 contain size markers.
Bartonellosis
　119
Ectoparasite control
lymphadenopathy and affecting mainly children and
Ectoparasitic control should be of great prophylactic
young adults (127). However, systemic complications
benefit in preventing transmission of B. benselae and
may arise leading to more profound diseases. Accurate
B. clarridgeiae infection between cats. However, despite
diagnosis of CsD is important as it requires differen-
the availability and use of effective flea adulticide
tiation from other potentially more serious causes of
treatments, Bartonella infections remain common, even in
lymphadenitis such as abscesses, lymphoma, myco-
 the domestic cat populations of industrialized, affluent 
bacterial infections, toxoplasmosis and Kawasaki disease.
countries of Europe and North America. As yet no studies
When first characterized in the late 1980s, B. benselae
have been carried out examining the efficacy of different
was specifically associated with opportunistic infections
ectoparasiticides in the prevention of B. benselae
in AIDS patients. T
The advent of  more effective
transmission. Until proven otherwise, it is feasible that
prophylactic therapy for these patients has seen the
fleas introduced to ectoparasite-treated animals have the
incidence of these infections decline in the USA and
capacity to transmit infection before being affected.
Europe, although they are likely to remain a significant
health burden in Africa and other developing parts of the
ZOONOTIC POTENTIAL/PUBLIC HEALTH
world where therapies are not currently affordable.
SIGNIFICANCE
However, medical interest in zoonotic bartonellae
The zoonotic potential of B. benselae is enormous. For
 continues today, as an increasing spectrum of syndromes
example, in the UK, 4.5 million households (or more than
 among immunocompetent individuals is encountered.
1 in 4) house over 7.5 million cats, of which about 10%
 Perhaps of most relevance currently is the emergence of
are B. benselae bacteraemic. The potential threat of this
B. benselae in the aetiologies of ocular syndromes such as
reservoir is reflected in the frequency with which humans
uveitis and neuroretinitis.
acquire B. benselae infections, most commonly
 B. clarridgeiae has also been implicated as an agent of
manifesting as CSD. In the USA, about 24,000 cases of
CSD and B. vinsonii subspecies berkboffi has, on one
CSD are reported each year, of which about 2,000 require
occasion, been identified as the aetiological agent of
hospitalization. Fortunately, this syndrome is usually
endocarditis.
benign and self-limiting, manifesting as a regional
127
127 Cutaneous lesion (left) and inguinal adenopathy (right) in a boy following a cat
scratch on his right leg. (Photo courtesy Dr C wilkinson, Nottingham Public Health
Laboratory, UK)
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
Shimon Harrus, Trevor Waner,
Anneli Bjoersdorff and Susan Shaw
INTRODUCTION
· Genus Neorickettsia includes the ‘type’ species
Until recently, three groups of intracellular bacterial
Neorickettsia ristici, the cause of Potomac horse fever
organisms
within
the　genus
Ehrlichia (family
in the USA. There are also species that cause canine
Rickettsiaceae) were recognized as pathogenic in animals
infection and disease in the USA. Cats are susceptible
and humans. Reclassification based on phylogenetic
to experimental infection with N. ristici, and
analysis of gene sequences, including the 16S rRNA gene,
 serological evidence of naturally occurring infection
 has resulted in the formation of three separate genera:
has been reported.
Genus Ehrlichia retains the ‘type’ species Ehrlichid
canis, the cause of monocytic ehrlichiosis in dogs and
possibly cats. Other species infecting dogs, primarily in
Of these, organisms in the genera Ehrlichia and
the USA, include E. chaffeensis and E. ewingii.
Anaplasma are tick-transmitted and are discussed in this
chapter. The relationships of those species causing
Anaplasma
phagocytophitum,
the
cause
of
naturally occurring disease in dogs and cats to the other
granulocytic “ehrlichiosis" in dogs and cats, and
 species in the genera are illustrated (128). Members of the
A. platys, the cause of canine infectious cyclic
 genus Neorickettsia are non-arthropod transmitted.
thrombocytopenia.
128
Rickettsia
Rickettsia
rickeftsii
Ehrichia
muris
Ehrlichia (Cowdria)
Ehrtichia chaffeensis
Orienfia
ruminafium
Ehrtichia ewingii
tsutsugamushi
Ehrtichia canis
Anaplasma
marginate
Anaplasma
(Ehrtichia)
platys
Anaplasma
phagocytophila,
(Ehrtichia phagocytochia,
Ehrchia equr, HGE agent),
Wolbachia
Escherichia cofi
pipienfis
Neorickeffsia
Neorickeffsia
(Ehrtichia) risticii
heiminthoeca
Neorickeffsia
(Ehrtichia) sennetsu
128 Phylogeny of the family Ehrlichiae. (After Dumler JS and Walker DH (2001) Lancet Infectious
Diseases April, 21-28).
120
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
121
PART 1: EHRLICHIA CANIS
      a o 
GENOGROUP
identified by Donatien and Lestoquard in Algeria in 1935
and since then CME has been recognized worldwide as an
Shimon Harrus and Trevor Waner
important canine disease. CME gained much attention
when hundreds of American military dogs, many of
EHRLICHIA CANIS
which were German Shepherd Dogs, died from the
 disease during the Vietnam War. E. canis received further
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
attention in the late 1980s, when the organism was
Ehrlichia canis, the principal member of the E.
.canis
erroneously suspected to infect humans.
genogroup (Table 31), is a small pleomorphic gram-
Ehrlichial morulae have been detected in leucocytes of
negative, coccoid, obligatory intracellular bacterium. It is 
cats and seropositivity for E. canis has been detected in
the aetiological agent of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis 
both domestic and wild cats. Recently, E. canis DNA has
({CME), a tick-borne disease previously known as tropical
 been identified in the blood of three sick cats but to date,
canine pancytopenia. E. canis parasitizes circulating
attempts to culture E. canis from suspected feline cases
monocytes intracytoplasmically in clusters of organisms 
have been unsuccessful. The potential of E. canis to infect
called morulae {129, 130). It infects dogs and other
cats and cause disease has yet to be determined.
Table 31 Members of the Ehrlichia canis genogroup infecting canines': their geographic distribution,
vectors, hosts and target cells.
 Ehrlichial species
Geographic
 Primary vector
Primary
Target cell
distribution
host
E. canis
Worldwide,
Rhipicephalus sanguineus
Canids
Monocyte,
not Australia
macrophage
E. ewingii
USA
Ambiyomma americanum
Canids 
Neutrophil,
eosinophil 
E. chaffeensis
USA
Amblyomma americanum
Humans 
Monocyte.
macrophage
I The Ehrlichia canis genogroup indludes another two members: Cowdria ruminantium, which infects ruminants, and E. muris.
which infects mice. These two members have not been reported naturally to infect dogs or cats.
129
130
129 Ehrtichia canis morula (arrow) in the cytoplasm of a
monocyte as visualized in a blood smear (Giemsa stain, 
original magnification x1,000)
130 Morulae consisting of many Ehrichia canis organisms in
the cytoplasm of tissue culture cells (DH82 macrophages) as
x20,000)
122
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
E. canis is transmitted by Rhipicephalus sanguineus
 The acute phase may last 1-4 weeks; most dogs
(the brown dog tick) {131). Experimentally, it has also
recover in this phase provided there is adequate
been  transmitted by.
Dermacentor  variabilis ithe
treatment.
American dog tick). Transmission in the tick occurs trans-
Aew Apaieudouddeul paieaul asoul pue saop paieauun
stadially but not transovarially. Larvae and nymphs
enter the subclinical phase of the disease. Dogs in this
become infected while feeding on rickettsaemic dogs and
phase may remain persistent carriers of E. canis for
transmit the infection to the host after moulting to
months or years. It has been proposed that persistent
nymphs and adults, respectively. Throughout feeding.
infection is facilitated by repeated recombination of
ticks inject E. canis-contaminated salivary gland
the outer membrane protein genes of the organism,
secretions into the feeding site. Adult ticks have been
thus allowing immune evasion. The spleen plays a
shown to transmit infection 155 days after becoming
major role in the pathogenesis of the disease and the
infected. This phenomenon allows ticks to overwinter and
persistence of E. canis infection, and some studies
infect hosts in the following spring. The occurrence and
suggest that splenic macrophages harbour the
geographical distribution of CME are related to the
rickettsiae during the carrier phase.
distribution and biology of its vector. R. sanguineus ticks
Some
persistently
infected
dogs
may
recover
are abundant during the warm season; therefore, most
spontaneously; however, others subsequently develop the
acute cases of CME occur during this period. As
chronic severe form of the disease. Not all dogs develop
R. sanguineus ticks are cosmopolitan, the disease has a
the chronic phase of CME, and factors leading to the
worldwide distribution {Asia, ]
 Europe, Africa and
development of this phase remain unclear. The prognosis 
America). Dogs living in endemic regions and those
at this stage is grave, and death may occur as a
travelling to endemic areas should be considered potential
 consequence of haemorrhage and/or secondary infection.
candidates for infection. Infection with E. canis may also
occur through infected blood transfusions, therefore
Immunological mechanisms appear to be involved in the
screening of blood donors is extremely important.
pathogenesis of the disease. Positive Coombs and
autoagglutination tests indicate that infection induces the
Pathogenesis
 production of antibodies that bind to the membrane of
The incubation period of CME is 8-20 days. During this 
erythrocytes. Whether these are true autoantibodies (red
period, ehrlichial organisms enter the bloodstream and
cell antigen-specific) has not been determined. The
lymphatics and localize in macrophages, mainly in the
demonstration of platelet-bound antibodies in infected
spleen and liver, where they replicate by binary fission.
animals suggests that these play a role in the pathogenesis 
From there, infected macrophages disseminate 
the
of thrombocytopenia and thrombocytopathia in CME.
infection to other organ systems. It is likely that the 
Other mechanisms involved in the development of
mechanism by which ehrlichiae survive and multiply in
thrombocytopenia in CME include increased platelet
the infected cell relies on their ability to inhibit
consumption, splenic sequestration and shortened platelet
phagosome-lysosome fusion.  Doxycycline has been
life
 span during the acute phase, and decreased
shown to restore this function in cells infected with
production in the chronic phase. Recently, circulating
N. risticii and N. sennetsu. The incubation period is
immune-complexes were demonstrated in sera of dogs
followed consecutively by an acute, a subclinical and a
naturally and experimentally infected with E. canis,
chronic phase:
suggesting that S
 some pathological
and  clinical
manifestations in CME are immune-complex mediated.
dinical signs
E. canis infects all breeds; however, the German Shepherd
 [eoup oi aiadaosns aiou aq oi siadde sog
131
Moreover the disease in this breed appears to be more
severe than in other breeds, with a higher mortality rate.
There is no predilection for age and both genders are
equally affected. The disease is manifested by a wide
variety of clinical signs. Factors involved include
differences in pathogenicity between E. canis strains,
breed of dog, co-infections with other arthropod-borne
pathogens and the immune status of the host.
The clinical signs in the acute phase range from mild
and non-specific to severe and life threatening. Common
non-specific signs in this phase include depression,
凸
B
（}
lethargy, anorexia, pyrexia, tachypnoea and weight loss.
131 An engorged female (A), male (B) and nymph (C) of the
Specific clinical signs include lympha denomegaly, spleno-
brown dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus.
megaly, petechiation and ecchymoses of the skin and
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
123
mucous membranes, and occasional epistaxis {132, 133).
chronic CME. These include prolonged bleeding during
Less commonly reported clinical signs include vomiting,
oestrus, infertility, abortion and neonatal death.
serous to purulent oculonasal discharge and dyspnoea.
Ocular signs have been reported to occur during the
The signs in the chronic severe form of the disease may
acute and chronic phases and involve nearly every
be similar to those seen in the acute disease, but with
 structure of the eye. Conjunctivitis, conjunctival or iridal.
 greater severity. In addition, pale mucous membranes,
petechiae and ecchymoses, corneal oedema, panuveitis
emaciation and peripheral oedema, especially of the hind-
and hyphaema ha ve been reported (134, 135). Subretinal
limbs and scrotum, may also occur. Secondary bacterial
haemorrhage and  retinal detachment resulting  in
and protozoal infections, interstitial pneumonia and renal
 blindness may occur due to a monoclonal gammopathy
failure may occur during the chronic severe disease. Some
 and hyperviscosity.
reproductive disorders have also been associated with
132
133
132, 133 Petechiae and ecchymoses (132) and epistaxis (133) in dogs suffering from CME.
134
135
134, 135 A four-year-old Labrador Retriever with secondary
glaucoma, episcleral and conjunctival congestion, corneal
 neovascularization, corneal oedema and iris bombe secondary
to E. canis infection. (Photos courtesy Dr D Gould) (135 from 
Journal of Small Animal Practice (2000) 41, 263-265, with
permission)
124
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Neurological signs may occur during both the acute
Thrombocytopenia is the most common and consistent
and chronic disease. The signs associated include ataxia,
haematological finding in CME. A concurrent increase in
seizures, paresis, hyperasthesia, cranial nerve deficits and
the mean platelet volume is usually seen in the acute
vestibular {central or peripheral) signs. Neurological signs
phase, and megaplatelets appear in the blood smear,
may be attributed to meningitis or meningoencephalitis,
reflecting active thrombopoiesis. Mild leucopenia and
as evidenced by the extensive lymphoplasmacytic and
anaemia may also occur in the acute phase. Absolute
monocytic infiltration, perivascular cuffing and gliosis.
monocytosis and the presence of reactive monocytes and
On rare occasions, morulae may be detected in the
large granular lymphocytes are typical findings in acute
cerebrospinal fluid of dogs with neurological signs.
 CME. Mild thrombocytopenia is a common finding in the
 A recent small case series suggested that E. canis might
subclinical  
phase of the disease,
while
severe
infect cats. The clinical signs in the three suspected cats
pancytopenia is the hallmark of the severe chronic phase,
included anorexia, l
lethargy, fever, pale mucous
occurring as a result of a suppressed hypocellular bone
membranes, joint pain, lymphadenomegaly and petechial
marrow.
haemorrhages.
Serum biochemistry
Diagnosis
Hypoalbuminaemia and hyperglobulinaemia are the
 Diagnosis of CME is based on compatible history, clinical
 principal biochemical abnormalities seen in dogs infected
presentation  and  clinical  pathological findings  in
with CME. The hyperglobulinaemia is mainly due to
combination with serology, PCR or in vitro culturing of
hypergammaglobulinaemia. The hypergammaglobulinae-
the ricketsial organism. Living in an endemic area or
mia in CME is usually polyclonal, as determined by serum
travelling to such an area and/or a history of tick
 protein electrophoresis. On rare occasions, monoclonal
infestation should increase the suspicion of infection with
gammopathy may be noticed and may result in a
E. canis. The importance of early diagnosis lies in the
hyperviscosity syndrome {136). Pancytopenic dogs reveal
relatively good response to treatment before the dogs
significantly lower concentrations of total protein, total
enter the chronic phase.
gobulin  and  gammaglobulin  compared to  non-
pancytopenic dogs. Mild transient increases in serum ALT
Haematology and blood smear evaluation
and ALP activities may also be present.
Intracytoplasmic E. canis morulae may be visualized in
 Antiplatelet antibody test as well as Coombs test may
monocytes during the acute phase of the disease in about
be positive in infected dogs. Circulating immune com-
4% of cases {129) and their presence is diagnostic of
 plexes may also be demonstrated; however, anti-nuclear
CME. In order to increase the chance of visualizing
 antibodies are not detected in E. canis infected dogs.
morulae, buffy-coat smears should be performed and
carefully evaluated (see Chapters 4 and 6).
136
136 Serum protein electrophoresis from
the dog shown in 134 and 135. At the
 time of presentation (blue) there is a
monoclonal gammopathy the severity of 
which was reduced after treatment (red).
(From Journal of Smafl Animal Practice
(2000) 41, 263-265, with permission)
alb
01
02
B1
B2
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
　125
Specific tests
E. canis IgG antibodies have been developed and are
The IFA test is the most widely used serological assay for
useful in detecting E. canis antibodies. Recently, an ELISA
the diagnosis of canine ehrlichiosis ( 137). It is considered
test using the E. canis recombinant MAP2, a 26 kDa
the serological “gold standard’ for the detection and
protein, as an antigen has been developed and shown to
titration of E. canis antibodies. The presence of E. canis
be effective. Several sensitive and specific commercial dot-
antibody titres at a dilution equal to or greater than 1:40
ELISA tests for E. canis antibodies, designed for rapid in-
is considered evidence of exposure. Two consecutive tests
clinic use, have been developed. These include assays that
are recommended, 1-2 weeks apart. A fourfold increase
use the whole cultured rickettsia or specific E. canis
in the antibody titre indicates active infection. In areas
uazue jo aunos e se (le/0e d pue 0e d) suiaio1d
that are endemic for other Ehrlichia species, serological
Other methods used in diagnosing E. canis infections
cross-reactivity may confound the diagnosis. Cross-
are culturing the organism on macrophage cell lines
reactivity between E. canis and E. ewingii, E. chaffeensis,
(DH82 or J774.A1) {138) and PCR using specific primers
A. phagocytophilum, N. risticii and N. helminthoeca has
for E. canis. Both these methods require sophisticated
been documented and should be taken into consideration.
equipment.
There is no serological cross-reaction between E. canis
Concurrent infections of E. canis with other tick-borne
and A. platys (Table 32).
 pathogens such as Babesia species and Hepatozoon canis
Immunoblot analysis demonstrates that immune sera
are common. Therefore, it is important microscopically to
obtained from infected dogs react with the major
examine blood smears of infected dogs and to consider
antigenic proteins (MAP) of E. C
canis that have a
multiple serological or PCR screening for co-infecting
molecular weight of 28-30 kDa. Conventional ELISAs for
 organisms.
137
Table 32 Serological cross-reactivity of ehrlichial
organisms with E. canis antigen.
Ehrlichial agent
Serological IFA cross-
reactivity with E. canis
E. chaffeensis
+++
E. ewingii
++/+++
VHE/VDE* agent
+++
A. phagocytophitum
+/-
A. ptatys
N. heminthoeca
++
N. risticil
X
= no cross-reaction; + = weak cross-reaction; ++ =
137 IFA assay A positive test result showing Ehrtichia canis
intermediate cross-reaction; +++ = strong cross-
reation; * = Venezuela human Ehrlichia/Venezuela dog
morulae detected by overlaying seropositive patient serum
and fluorescein-conjugated anti-dog lgG.
Ehrlichia
138 Multiple Ehrtichia canis morulae in the cytoplasm of
138
 a tissue culture cell (DH82 macrophage). (Giemsa stain,
original magnification x1,000)
126
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Treatment and control
OTHER ERHLICHIA:
Doxycycline f10 mg/kg p/o q24h or 5 mg/kg p/o q12h, for
EHRLICHIA CHAFFEENSIS
a minimum period of 2-3 weeks) is the treatment of
choice for acute CME. Seven-day treatment with
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
doxycycline has been shown to be ineffective. Although
E. chaffeensis, the cause of human monocytic ehrlichiosis
ten-day treatment has shown success in several studies, in
(HME), was first isolated from a human patient in 1991.
the authors’ experience, ten-day treatment may not be
The organism has been convincingly identified from
sufficient for all acute cases. Most acute cases respond to
humans, deer, dogs and ticks only in the USA, mainly in
treatment and show clinical improvement within 24-72
the south-central, southeastern and mid-Atlantic states
hours. Dogs in the subclinical phase may need prolonged
and California. Detection of E. chaffeensis DNA by PCR
treatment. Treatment of dogs suffering from the chronic
amplification provided evidence for natural canine
 severe form of the disease is unrewarding.
E.
chaffeensis infection  in southeastern Virginia,
 Imidocarb dipropionate has previously been used in
Oklahoma and North Carolina.
conjunction with doxycycline in the treatment of CME.
E.
chaffeensis  is transmitted  by Amblyommd
Although previous studies have shown the in vivo efficacy
americanum (the lone star tick) and, to a lesser extent, by
of imidocarb against E. canis, recent in vivo and in vitro
D. variabilis. Persistently infected white-tailed deer
studies using molecular assays have indicated that this
{Odocoileus virginianus) and, possibly, canines serve as
drug may not be effective. Nevertheless, the use of
reservoirs.
imidocarb is indicated when concurrent infections with
other protozoa such as Babesia  species and/or
dinical signs
Hepatozoon canis are diagnosed. Other drugs with
Pups experimentally infected with E. chaffeensis have
known efficacy against E. canis include tetracycline
 shown fever and no other signs. Only one report has
hydrochloride (22 mg/kg q8h), oxytetracycline (25 mg/kg
suggested that E. chaffeensis may cause severe clinical
q8h), minocycline (20 mg/kg q12h) and chloramphenicol
signs in dogs, and the clinical significance of natural
(50 mg/kg q8h).
canine infection has yet to be determined.
After treatment, E. canis antibody titres may persist for
months and even for years. The persistence of high
Diagnosis
antibody titres for extended periods may represent an
The IFA test is a good screening test for exposure to
aberrant immune response or treatment failure, but a
rickettsiae; however, it cannot differentiate between
progressive decrease in the gammaglobulin concen-
E. canis, E. chaffeensis and E. ewingii antibodies. It is
trations is associated with elimination of the organism. E.
possible to discriminate between the three species by
canis antibodies do not provide protection against re-
western immunoblot analysis and by PCR using species-
challenge, and seropositive dogs remain susceptible to
specific primers.
infection after successful treatment.
To date, no effective anti-E. canis vaccine has been
Treatment and control
developed and tick control remains the most effective
Tetracyclines, especially doxycycline, are considered the
preventive measure against infection. In endemic areas,
drugs of choice. Control of infection is based solely on
low-dose 0xytetracycline treatment (6.6 mg/kg q24h) has
optimal application of acaricides or tick removal.
been suggested as a prophylactic measure. Recently this
method has been used with success by the French army in
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
Senegal, Ivory Coast and Djibouti, where dogs
  were
 E. chaffeensis infects humans and causes HME. Frequent
 treated prophylactically with oral oxytetracycline (250
presenting symptoms are fever, malaise, headache,
mg/dog p/o q24h). The estimated failure rate of the
myalgia, chills, diaphoresis, nausea and anorexia. HME
treatment was found to be 0.9%. This prophylactic
may be fatal. The role of dogs as zoonotic reservoirs for
method should be reserved for cases where all other
infection with E. chaffeensis has not been established.
prophylactic measures have failed, and should be applied
with great ca ution.
EHRLICHIA EWINGI!
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
In the years 1987-1991 E. canis was suspected to infect
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
humans, until a closely related organism named
 Although classified in the E. canis genogroup, E. etwingii 
E. chaffeensis was identified as the cause of human
infects granulocytes, causing a granulocytic ehrlichiosis in
ehrlichial disease. E. canis is not considered a zoonotic
canines. Based on 16S rRNA gene sequence, E. euwingii is
agent. However, an E. canis-like agent was isolated from
most closely related to E. chaffeensis (98.1%) and
a man in Venezuela in 1996, suggesting that the zoonotic
E. canis (98.0%). E. ewingii has not yet been cultured
potential of E. canis has yet to be fully elucidated.
in vitro.
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
127
Ehrlichiosis caused by E. ewingii has been diagnosed in
PART 2: GRANULOCYTIC
the USA only. It occurs mainly in the spring and early
EHRLICHIOSIS: ANAPLASMA
Aaua sarel e ul payuapi uaaq seu muma g rauuns
PHAGOCYTOPHILUM COMB.NOV
of ticks including R. sanguineus, A. americanum,
D. variabilis, Ixodes scapularis and I. pacificus. Of these
(E. PHAGOCYTOPHILA GENOGROUP)
tick species A. americarum is the only proven vector for
INFECTION
E. ewingii. The role of the other tick species in trans-
mission of the organism warrants further investigation.
Anneli Bjoersdorff
Clinical signs
The disease is usually an acute mild disease that can lead to
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
 polyarthritis in chronically infected dogs. Lameness, joint 
The reclassified species Anaplasma phagocytophilum
swelling, stiff gait and fever are common clinical signs.
comb.nov comprises the previously separate species of E.
phagocytophila, E. equi and the human granulocytic
Diagnosis
ehrlichiosis agent {HE agent).
Haematological changes in E. euwingii infection are mild
A. phagocytophilum comb.nov (A. phagocytophilum)
 and include thrombocytopenia and anaemia. Identification
are tick-borne rickettsial microorganisms primarily
of ehrlichial morulae in neutrophils in peripheral blood or
infecting granulocytes. They cause “tick-borne fever', an
joint effusions is diagnostic of granulocytic ehrlichiosis.
acute febrile disease originally described in the early
However, western immunoblot and PCR using species-
1930s in Scottish sheep. During the 1950s and 1960s the
specific ehrlichial primers should be used to confirm the
 microorganisms were reported from England and Finland,
ehrlichial species. Species determination is important as A.
respectively, as a cause of "pasture fever' in cattle.
phagocytophilum is also associated with intraneutrophilic
Ehrlichiosis in dogs due to A. phagocytopbium was
morula formation and similar clinical signs in dogs. As E.
reported from Switzerland, Sweden and North America in
ewingi has not yet been cultured in vitro, antigen is not
the 1980s. Granulocytic ehrlichiosis in cats was first
readily available for IFA test development. E. etwingi
reported from Sweden in the late 1990s and has now also
antibodies strongly cross-react with E. canis and E.
been reported from the UK, Denmark and North America.
chaffeensis, and do not for weakly) react with A. phago-
A. phagocytopbilum are obligate intracellular bacteria
cytopbilum. Therefore, demonstration of granulocytic
infecting cells of bone marrow derivation. They are
ehrlichial morulae and negative serology for A. phago-
readde pue lao isoy aul Aq sauososeud ul pazeuaiu!
cytopbilum should increase the suspicion of infection with
within the cytoplasm as membrane-bound vacuoles (139).
E. ewingii. In such situations, PCR for acute cases would
The bacteria multiply by binary fission and eventually
be the preferred diagnostic test. However, in the chronic
form large inclusion bodies (morulae). In untreated
stage of the disease, western blotting may assist in
animals the cytoplasmic inclusions can be detected in
diagnosing the agent.
circulating neutrophils for 1-2 weeks.
Treatment and control
Tetracycline and, especially, doxycycline elicit rapid
clinical improvement. As for the other ehrlichioses,
139
 prophylaxis is based on tick control.
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
E. euwingii has recently been implicated as the cause of
human infections in the USA, particularly
in
immunocompromised people. The role of the dog as a
zoonotic reservoir for E. etwingii infection is unknown.
139 Electron micrograph of an equine neutrophil showing 
Anaplasma organisms inside a cytoplasmic vacuole.
128
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Rodents, as well as domestic and wild ruminants
possible. Both animals and humans can be co-infected
(sheep and deer), have been reported as reservoir hosts of
with various Anaplasma, Ehrlichia, Borrelia, Bartonella,
A. phagocytophilum in Europe. The predominant
 Rickettsia, Babesia and arboviral species. Infection with
reservoir host varies depending on the local natural and
any of these organisms ca uses a wide range of clinical and
agricultural landscape. The vector of A. phagocytophilum
pathological abnormalities, ranging in severity from
in Europe is the common hard-bodied tick Ixodes ricinus.
asymptomatic infection to death. The risk of acquiring
A. phagocytophilum spend part of their normal life cycle
one or more tick-borne infections may be dependent on
within the tick and are transmitted trans-stadially. As
the prevalence of multi-infected vectors. It has been
I. ricimus feed on a wide range of vertebrate animals,
shown that ticks dually infected with A. phagocytophilum
 transmission of the infectious agent may take place to
and Borrelia burgdorferi transmit each pathogen to
multiple host species. Vector to host transmission is
susceptible hosts as efficiently as ticks infected with only
thought to occur within a narrow window of 40-48 hours
one pathogen. The presence of either agent in the tick
of feeding.
 does not affect acquisition of the other agent from an
infected
host.
Since
Borreliaburgdorferiand
Pathogenesis
A. phagocytophilum to a large extent share both reservoir
The pathogenesis of granulocytic ehrlichiosis is not clear.
hosts and vectors, it is hardly surprising that the
Organisms enter the dermis via tick-bite inoculation and
geographic areas where granulocytic ehrlichiosis is
are then spread via the blood and/or the lymph.
endemic overlap with areas where borreliosis is prevalent.
A. phagocytophilum is seen in mature granulocytes,
The general capacity of one tick-borne infection to
mainly in neutrophils but also in eosinophils, of the
Teap iou si uooajui iauioue aieaeoae 1o 0i asodsipaud
peripheral blood. However, it is not clear whether the
However, infection with A. phagocytopbilum has been
organisms invade mature cells or precursor cells within
shown to predispose sheep to disease of increased severity
the myelopoietic system. The adhesion molecule P-selectin
upon exposure to parainfluenza type-3 virus or louping-
that is expressed on the neutrophil surface may act as a
ill irus. In addition, concurrent A. phagocytophilum and 
receptor for the organism but the bacterial ligand for this 
Babesia infection can result in aggravated disease
receptor is unknown. After endocytosis, the bacteria
ma nifestations in humans.
multiply within cytoplasmic phagosomes. An important
virulence factor of A. phagocytophilum is the ability to
dinical signs
prevent phagosome-lysosome fusion within the cell and
The spectrum of clinical manifestations caused by
thereby evade degradation.
A. phagocytophilum is wide but disease most commonly
The first cytoplasmic inclusions can be detected in
presents as an acute febrile syndrome. The incubation
peripheral blood granulocytes of dogs 414 days after
period may vary from 4-14 days depending on the
experimental  infection.  Immunohistological  studies
immune status of the infected individual and the bacterial
demonstrate the presence of A. phagocytophilum in
strain involved. Dogs with granulocytic ehrlichiosis
phagocytes in many organs (e.g. spleen, lungs and liver).
usually present with a history of lethargy and anorexia.
Localized infection has also been seen in kidney and
The clinical examination commonly reveals  fever,
heart.
Infection
of
endothelial
cells
by
reluctance to move and, occasionally, splenomegaly
A. phagocytop hilum has also been reported. Endogenous
(140). More localized presenting signs referable to the
bacterial
 pyrogens
havé
10U
been  described
in
musculoskeletal system (lameness), gastrointestinal
experimental infections. It has been speculated that the
pathogenesis of ehrlichiosis is not entirely caused by the
organism itself but that injury may be in part host-
mediated. Severe pulmonary inflammation, alveolar
140
damage and vasculitis of the extremities in the absence of
bacterial  organisms  suggest  an immunopathological
course of events, such as cytokine-mediated stimulation of
host   macrophages  and  non-specific  mononuclear
phagocyte activity. The infection may also induce an
overactive inflammatory response such as a septic shock-
like syndrome, or diffuse alveolar damage leading to
respiratory distress syndrome. Phagocytic dysfunction of
infected neutrophils may result in a defective host defence
and subsequent secondary infections have been reported.
Persistent  A. phagocytopbilum  infection has been
demonstrated in experimentally infected, untreated dogs
for up to five-and-a-half months after inoculation.
140 A one-year-old, female Golden Retriever with acute
As I. ricinus ticks may harbour and transmit many
granulocytic ehrlichiosis (anaplasmosis). The dog showed
pathogens, co-infection with two or more pathogens is
pyrexia, weakness and lameness due to polyarthritis.
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
129
system {diarrhoea) or central nervous system {seizures or
characterized by major haematological changes typified by
proprioceptive
deficits) may
be  seen. Systemic
thrombocytopenia and leucopenia {141). The leucopenia
manifestations may include haemorrhage, shock and
is a result of early lymphopenia later accompanied by
multi-organ failure. However, seroepidemiological data
 neutropenia. The leucopenia is followed by transient
suggest that mild and subclinical infections are common.
leucocytosis. Thrombocytopenia is one of the most
consistent haematological abnormalities in infected dogs.
Laboratory findings
It may be moderate to severe and persists for a few days
Laboratory investigations of value include white blood cel
before returning to normal. Biochemical abnormalities
count, platelet count and hepatic transaminase levels.
 may include mildly elevated SAP and ALT activities.
During and after the period of bacteraemia, the disease is 
141 Serial changes in a range of parameters in a dog
141
 experimentally infected with a Swedish Ehrichia
erature
40
(Anaplasma) isolate and monitored for a 25-day period.
The dramatic haematological changes during the acute
39
stage of infection may be seen. (From Veterinary Record
(1998) 143, 412-417, with permission)
Body
38.
37
titre
10240
Rec
5120
5
元
Pe
8
4
2
0-
4
3
2
0-
600
400
Plat
X
200
0
5
10
15
20
-5
25
Days after inoculation
130
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Diagnosis
cytopbilum IgG and IgM antibody evaluation fIFAs,
Granulocytic ehrlichiosis should be considered when a
immunoblot analyses and ELISA) and PCR analyses
patient presents with an acute febrile illness in a geo-
(143). Some research laboratories also offer the service of
graphic area endemic for the disease, during a season
in-vitro culture for Anaplasma (144). The most widely
when ticks are host seeking. The Center for Disease
 accepted diagnostic criterion is a fourfold change in titre
Control {Atlanta, USA) case definition ada pted for granu-
by IFA {145). However, cross-reactivity may 0ccur with
locytic ehrlichiosis in dogs and cats is given in Table 33.
other members of the genera Anaplasma and Ehrlichia
As intracytoplasmic clusters of the bacteria (morulae)
(Table 32, p. 125).
may be visible, a Wright's-stained blood smear should be
PCR analysis using A. phagocytopbilum-specific
examined. Morulae typically appear as dark blue,
primers is a very sensitive and specific method for
irregularly stained densities in the cytoplasm 
of
establishing the cause of an infection. PCR is more
 neutrophils. The colour of the morulae is usually darker
 sensitive than direct microscopy, and Anaplasma are
than that of the cell nucleus {142). Morulae are often
 detected in the circulation for a longer time period by
sparse and difficult to detect and a negative blood smear
PCR compared with microscopy. In addition to blood,
cannot rule out A. phagocytophilum infection.
 synovial fluid, cerebrospinal fluid and tissue samples may
Specific diagnostic tests include anti-A. phago-
be analysed by PCR.
Table 33 Case definition of acute canine and feline granulocytic ehrlichiosis.
(Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2000)
 Clinical description 
A tick-borne, febrile illness most commonly characterized by acute onset. Clinical laboratory findings may include
Allepadsa) seiuadoo eaws pooig jelaydiad e jo saooynal ui (aeiniow) satebaibbe jeapeg pjuseidoieui
 thrombocytopenia and leukopenia) and elevated liver enzymes.
Laboratory criteria for diagnosis
pue -ane ui vil ag uabue wnudoiobeud y oi a Apogue ui abueuo lteaie no pionoy e po uoe ssuouaa
convalescent-phase serum samples, ideally taken greater than or equal to four weeks apart, or 
+
 Positive PCR assay and confirmation of A. phagocytophium DNA, or
+
Identification of morulae in leukocytes in blood, bone marrow or CSF, and a positive IFA titre to A. phagocytophilum antigen
(based on cut-off titres established by the laboratory performing the assay), or
· Culture of A. phagocytophium from a clinical specimen.
Case description
● Probable: a clinically compatible illness with either a single positive IFA titre (based on cut-off titres established by the
Iabor atory performing the test) or the visualization of morulae in leukocytes.
● Confirmed: a clinically compatible illness that is laboratory-confirmed.
142
142 A. phagocytophitum inclusion (morula) in a neutrophil
(arrowed).
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
131
143 Comparison of microscopy (a),
143
PCR (b) and serology (c) in an
20
Neutrophilis with inclusions
(a)
 experimental infection of a dog with 
15
a Swedish Ehrtichia (Anaplasma)
10
isolate. The dog was administered 
prednisolone on days 55 and 153
5
 and was monitored for a 180-day
 period. It can be seen that persistent
 infection results in prolonged
PCR
(q)
 seropositivity that does not
 discriminate the cyclical infection
Positi
 demonstrated by PCR. (From
Veterinary Record (2000) 146,
186-190, with permission)
 Reciprocal titre to E. equi
10240
10240
10240
(C)
m5120
2580
5120
5120
titre
1280
2580
1280
2660
40
bo
5
50
100
150
200
144
145
144 A. phagocyfophium-infected HL-60 cells (arrows).
 145 IFA test showing positivity for A. phagocytophitum.
A whole cell A. phagocytophium antigen is often used in
diagnostic IFA. The primary antibody-antigen reaction is
 demonstrated by the use of a secondary fluorescein-labelled
 antibody If the serum sample contains antibodies to the
 antigen, strong fluorescence is seen.
132
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Treatment and control
a part of the host inflammatory response to infection.
In vitro, A. phagocytophilum is susceptible to several
Laboratory data frequently demonstrate  thrombo-
intracellularly active antibiotics including tetracyclines,
cytopenia, leucopenia and elevated levels of hepatic
rifampicin, rifabutin and trovafloxacin. A. phago-
transaminases. Severe complications include prolonged
cytophilum is resistant to gentamicin, erythromycin,
fever, shock, seizures, pneumonitis, acute renal failure,
azithromycin, clindamycin and trimethoprim-sulpha-
rhabdomyolysis,
opportunistic
infections,  adult
methoxazole, and to all antibiotics that do not penetrate
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and death. Pre-
intracellularly including the β-lactam antibiotics.
existing immune dysfunction  predisposes  to poor
However, in-vivo effects have only been documented for
 prognosis and the risk of serious illness or death increases
tetracyclines and, to some extent, for rifampicin and
with advanced age and delayed onset of therapy.
chloramphenicol. Doxycycline (5-10 mg/kg q24h for 10
A wide spectrum of symptoms has also been found in
days to 3 weeks) appears to be the most effective regime
European cases, despite seroprevalence data suggesting
for treating granulocytic ehrlichiosis in dogs and cats.
that the infection is often mild and self-resolving. Fatal
Severe disease may require treatment for longer periods.
infections have not been reported to date in Europe.
In  young  animals  with granulocytic 6
ehrlichiosis,
doxycycline is still considered the drug of first choice. The
risks of enamel hypoplasia and discoloration are
PART 3: INFECTIOUS CANINE
considered low when balanced against the risk of serious
CYCLIC THROMBOCYTOPENIA:
infection. The most common side-effects of doxycycline
ANAPLASMA PLATYS COMB.
treatment are nausea and vomiting, which are avoided by
administering the drug with food. Simultaneous feeding
NOV INFECTION
 does not a ffect drug a bsorption.
Treatment using the anti-protozoal drug imidocarb
Susan Shaw
dipropionate in E. equi-seropositive dogs with long-
standing clinical signs has been evaluated. The dogs were
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
all non-responsive to previous doxycycline therapy. After
Canine cyclic thrombocytopenia, caused by Anaplasma
follow-up periods ranging from four months to 4.5 years
(E.) platys, was first described in the USA but has a
post imidocarb dipropionate treatment, 62% showed a
worldwide distribution. It has been reported from
favourable response.
southern Europe, Israel, southeastern and eastern Asia,
No vaccines for protection or immunoglobulins for
Venezuela and, most recently, Australia. The aetiological
postexposure prophylaxis are available. The most
agent is an obligate, intracellular rickettsial organism with
reliable, although not the most realistic way, to prevent
 tropism for mature platelets. Although originally referred
infections is to avoid tick-infested areas. Careful daily
to as Ehrlichia platys, based on phenotypic similarities to
inspection for and removal of ticks is recommended in
other organisms of this genus, it has recently been formally
combination with the application of residual acaricidal
classified according to its 16S rRNA gene sequence as a
products. Spray, spot-on liquid or collar formulations are
member of the genus Anaplasma. Although A. platys is
available with residual efficacy of one month or more
predominantly reported from domesticated dogs, the
depending on the product.
extent of its host spectrum has not been fully determined.
Similar organisms have been reported from North
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
American deer and from sheep species in South Africa.
The catholic feeding behaviour of the tick vector I. ricinus
A. platys organisms are round to oval in shape, vary in
permits transmission of A. pbagocytophilum to a wide
 size from 0.3-1.2 μm in diameter, and are enclosed by a
range of vertebrate species including humans. In spite of
double membrane. The mechanism by which organisms
this fact, less than 50 cases of human infection have so far
attach and penetrate platelet membranes is unknown.
been reported from Europe. The majority of cases of
 A. platys bacteria aggregate and divide within membrane-
human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (HGE) have been
bound vacuoles within platelet cytoplasm, producing the
reported from the USA, where HGE is regarded as a
morulae  i
identified on light microscopy. Further
significant emerging tick-borne infection. The most
bacteriological characterization  is limited, as the
common clinical manifestations of human ehrlichiosis are
organism remains uncultura ble.
fever and headache. The clinical disease is often
Infection with A. platys is presumed to be transmitted
accompanied by non-specific symptoms such as myalgia,
by the tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus, and its widespread
stiffness, malaise and arthralgia. Symptoms implicating
geographic：
 distribution supports
this  mode
of
pue juasaid osle aue suaisas ueaio iauno jo juauaaloaul
transmission. In particular, R. sanguineus is the only tick
include gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea),
species that has been identified in isolated areas of central
respiratory (non-productive cough) and central nervous
Australia where A. platys infection has been reported. In
system signs (confusion). Skin rashes are uncommonly
addition, co-infection with Ehrlichia canis, which is
reported and involvement of concurrent infectious agents
known to be transmitted by R. sanguineus, is reported
has been suggested in these cases. However, it may well be
from several areas of the world. A. platys DNA has been
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
133
identified in R. sanguineus ticks collected from dogs in
The spectrum of clinical signs is suggestive of
Japan but definitive evidence of natural transmission
geographical  strain  variation  and  minor  sequence
is
 still lacking and experimental transmission
by
differences have been detected in A. platys samples from
R. sanguineus has not been successful.
the USA and Australia.
There is limited information available on other
 It is widely accepted that clinical signs associated with
epidemiological aspects of A. platys infection, although
A. platys infection may be precipitated through co-
studies would suggest that the prevalence is relatively high
infection with other arthropod-borne diseases such as
in some dog populations. Using IFA testing, seropositivity
babesiosis and ehrlichiosis.
 in two southern states of the USA was widespread; 33%
Laboratory findings
In addition, 13/28 apparently healthy dogs sampled from
Thrombocytopenia is the major haematological finding,
one study site in northern Australia were positive for
although leucopenia has also been reported in rare cases.
A. platys DNA by PCR. Although puppies may be more
Cyclical thrombocytopenic episodes of 3-4 days duration,
susceptible to clinical A. platys infection in northern
followed by asymptomatic periods of 7-21 days, are
Australia, there are no breed, gender, individual
characteristic of A. platys infection. A moderate non
predispositions or risk factors for infection reported.
regenerative anaemia is associated with infectious canine
However, as mentioned below, concurrent infection with
thrombocytopenia, probably as a result of inflammation.
other arthropod-borne infections is a considerable risk
However, in the uncommon cases that experience severe
factor for the clinical expression of infection. Up to 50%
bleeding, a regenerative anaemia may be expected.
of dogs seropositive for A. platys in one USA study were
Moderate hypergammaglobulinaemia, occasional hypo-
concurrently seropositive for E. canis.
albuminaemia and hypocalcaemia have also been reported.
Pathogenesis
Diagnosis
In dogs the period of time from experimental inoculation
The microscopic identification of morulae in platelets,
 of A. platys to the appearance of circulating parasitized
with morphology characteristic of A. platys in stained
platelets ranges from 8-15 days. The period of ma ximum
blood smears, is diagnostic for infection. However, the
parasitaemia is followed by severe thrombocytopenia,
sensitivity of this technique is greatly limited by the low
possibly due to direct platelet injury. The number of
levels of parasitaemia seen during severe thrombo-
circulating organisms decreases and recovery in the
 cytopenic episodes and in chronic infections. Attempts to
platelet count occurs within 3-4 days. Repeated episodes
 culture A. platys have been uniformly unsuccessful.
 of parasitaemia and thrombocytopenia occur at 1-2 week
Serology has been the major technique used for
intervals. Although the degree of parasitaemia is much
A. platys diagnosis. IFA testing for A. platys has been
reduced (1% platelets infected) in recurrent episodes, the
 developed but its availability is currently severely limited
thrombocytopenia remains severe. Immune-mediated
by lack of antigen substrate. Cross-reactions with E. canis
platelet destruction is a more likely mechanism for
reportedly do not occur but cross-reactivity
with
thrombocytopenia during this phase. Chronic infection is
A. phagocytophilum has not been investigated.
associated with cyclic low-level parasitaemia and mild
 Several methods of species-specific PCR testing are
thrombocytopenia, which may reflect host-A. platys
available and, considering the limitations of serology and
adaptation. Antibody titres may persist for four months 
microscopy in the diagnosis of this infection, they are
to five years.
sensitive and specific adjuncts to diagnosis.
Clinical signs
Treatment and control
Infection with A. platys is commonly asymptomatic
 Although specific recommendations for treatment have
unless the dog undergoes surgery or has a concurrent
not been determined, A. platys infection should be treated
bleeding disorder such as that produced by co-infection
with tetracyclines using protocols discussed for other
with E. canis. However, there are reports from Greece and
members of the genera Ehrlichia and Anaplasma.
Israel of more severe disease associated with infection.
Prevention is dependent on vector control using effective
Clinical signs include cyclical fever {in the early phases of
 acaricides with long duration.
infection), lymphadenomegaly and bleeding disorders.
A. platys infection has been associated with cyclical
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
epistaxis and bleeding from venipuncture sites in adult
Currently, there are no recognized public health
dogs, and severe thrombocytopenia with anaemia and
implications associated with canine A. platys infection.
uunou ul uas saiddnd ui aieu Aieou paseau
Australian dogs. Bilateral uveitis has been reported in one
dog with A. platys infection.
Rickettsial infections
Craig Greene
TICK-TRANSMITTED
small rodents that have sufficient rickettsaemia to allow
RICKETTSIAL INFECTIONS
transmission. Immature ticks become infected and
infection is transmitted trans-stadially and transovarially
Introduction
to later tick stages, which feed on larger mammals.
Serologically and pathogenically distinct members of the
Therefore, the disease becomes established in a given
genus Rickettsia exist throughout the world and cause
 geogra phic region. Despite the presence of adequate hosts 
febrile exanthems in people. In the western hemisphere,
and ticks, R. rickettsi-infected ticks are limited to a small
Rickettsia rickettsii, the most important and most
 proportion of ticks in the overall population within an
pathogenic organism, causes Rocky Mountain spotted
area. This is caused by deleterious effects that the
fever (RMSF). This disease is important as a potentially
organism has on tick metabolism and antagonism or
fatal illness in people, and dogs are known to be similarly
immunity from co-infecting non-pathogenic rickettsiae. In
affected. Naturally occurring disease has not been
 addition to the low prevalence of infection, R. rickettsi in
reported in cats. Other closely related non-pathogenic
infected ticks are not immediately infectious but
members of the spotted fever group (SFG) in North
reactivate their virulence following tick attachment and
America are R. montana, R. rhipicephali, R. belli and R.
uptake of a blood meal at the beginning of the season.
canada. These are thought to produce subclinical
Generally, attachment periods of 5-20 hours are required
infections; however, R. canada may have some virulence.
for successful transmission.
Two ticks, Dermacentor andersoni and D. variabilis, are
primarily responsible for transmission of R. rickettsi in
Pathogenesis
North
America.
Rhipicephalus  sanguineus
and
Once R. rickettsii are inoculated into the body, they enter
Amblyomma cajermense are involved in transmission of
the bloodstream and infect endothelial cells. A
RMSF in Mexico and South America.
widespread vasculitis occurs, as the organisms cause
In other parts of the world, similar SFG rickettsial and
endothelial necrosis and spread to enter new cells.
tick reservoir cycles exist. R. conorii, which causes
Vascular injury leads to activation of the coagulation and
boutonneuse or Mediterranean spotted fever, is an 
fbrinolytic pathways. Platelet consumption and
analogous organism to R. rickettsi, predominating in
 destruction can be caused by coagulatory and immune-
Europe, Asia and Africa. It is primarily transmitted by
mediated mechanisms, respectively. In serious or long-
dog ticks of the genus Rhipicephalus, and dogs and
 standing untreated cases, organ systems with endarterial
rodents are the chief hosts. Dogs appear to have
circulation (e.g. the skin, brain, heart and kidneys) may
subclinical infection but they may facilitate transport of
develop multiple foci of necrosis. Severe organ failure
ticks and serve as reservoir hosts for infection of humans.
occurs less commonly in dogs than in people. Vascular
Queensland tick typhus {R. australis), Flinder's Island
injury leads to leakage of intravascular fluids into
spotted fever (R. bonei), African tick bite fever (R.
extracellular fluid  spaces  and  resultant oedema
africae), Astrakhan fever {Astrakhan fever rickettsia),
formation. Fluid accumulation in tissues such as the CNS
Japanese spotted fever {R. japonica), North Asian tick
can cause significant brain oedema, resulting in a
typhus (R. sibirica) and unnamed European rickettsioses 
 progressive mental and cardiorespiratory depression.
(R. helvetica, R. mongolotimonae, R. slovaca),
are
analogous diseases of humans caused by other SFG
Clinical signs
rickettsiae
and  transmitted 
 by arthropods
in
 Most dogs develop illness during the warmer months of
geographically distinct regions. The clinical significance
the year; however, this seasonality is less noticeable at
in, or reservoir status of, dogs or cats for these infections 
lower latitudes. Fever is one of the most consistent signs
in the eastern hemisphere has not been determined.
of illness. It may develop within several days after tick
exposure and is associated with lethargy, mental dullness
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
 and inappetence (146). Animals develop a stiff gait and
In this section, RMSF, as it occurs in the Americas, is
show arthralgia and myalgia, as demonstrated by
emphasized as the model disease for tick-transmitted SFG
difficulty in rising and eventual reluctance to walk.
rickettsiosis because it is the only infection ca used by tick-
Lymphadenomegaly of all peripheral lymph nodes is
borne rickettsiae documented to cause clinical illness in
apparent (147). Hyperaemia of mucosal surfaces and
dogs or cats.
subcutaneous 0edema develop (148, 149) and in severely
Ticks become infected with R. rickettsi by feeding on
affected animals, dermal necrosis ensues (150).
134
Rickettsial infections
135
146
147
 146 Mentally depressed Dachshund dog with RMSF.
147 Enlarged popliteal lymph node of a Dachshund dog with
(Photo courtesy CE Greene)
 systemic manifestations of RMSF. (Photo courtesy CE
148
149
with RMSF. (Photo courtesy CE Greene)
149 Scrotal oedema of the dog in 148. (Photo courtesy
150
Greene)
 148 Subcutaneous oedema of the limb of a mixed breed dog 
CE Greene)
150 Necrosis of the planum nasale in a German Shepherd
136
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
151
152
Dog with RMSF. (Photo courtesy CE Greene)
152 Fine petechiae on the penile mucosa of a dog with RMSF
151 Fine petechiae on the lip mucosa of a dog with RMSF.
(Photo courtesy CE Greene)
(Photo courtesy CE Greene)
In contrast to the disease in people, dogs infrequently
serum antibodies. When IgM levels are not increased in
develop petechial haemorrhages, and when they do the
the initial sample, the most definitive results are obtained
distribution is generally on the mucous membranes (151,
by measuring convalescent IgG in sera, collected after a
152). Haemorrhages are also more consistently found in
 2-3 week interval. Seronegative results on the first sample
the ocular fundus. Overt haemorrhage is rarely found in
do not eliminate the possibility of infection, and a
the most severely affected animals. Neurological
 subsequent serum sample should be taken under these
complications often result in animals that suffer a delay in
conditions. Although inter-laboratory variation exists in
diagnosis and treatment. These are caused by meningitis 
measured antibody titres, high IgG levels (e.g. a titre of
and can include hyperaesthesia, seizures, vestibular
21024) generally indicate exposure within the last year
dysfunction and a variety of manifestations depending on 
and may be presumed to mean recent infection if clinical
the lesion localization. Recovery is rapid and complete in
 signs are compatible.
those animals receiving treatment early, before the onset
Direct immunostaining of tissues has been used for
 of organ damage or neurological complications. Once the
clinical or postmortem diagnosis of RMSF. Full thickness 
neurological signs have developed, recovery is delayed, or
 skin biopsies have been submitted to detect the presence of
 deficits may be permanent.
the rickettsiae in dermal blood vessels. This method allows
for rapid confirmation of infection; however, it is not
Diagnosis
widely available and must be performed prior to the
Clinical laboratory findings are non-specific for a
administration of antimicrobial therapy.  Molecular
generalized acute phase inflammatory reaction. Leuco-
detection methods {e.g. PCR) have been used to identify
 penia in the acute stages is followed by a moderate leuco-
rickettsiae in blood or tissue specimens, and nucleic acid
cytosis and stress leucogram. A left shift and toxic
may be detected for a period of time after antimicrobial
granulation of neutrophils may be observed in animals
therapy has been instituted. Rickettsial isolation involves
with the most severe tissue necrosis. Thrombocytopenia is
risk and can only be done in high bio-containment
one of the most consistent laboratory findings. Coagu-
facilities. At necropsy, pathological lesions include petechial
lation times are usually within normal limits unless dogs
 and ecchymotic hemorrhages throughout all body tissues,
develop overt DIC. Serum biochemical abnormalities
lymphadenomegaly and splenomegaly.  Microscopically,
include hypoalbuminaemia, elevated serum alkaline
widespread necrotizing vasculitis occurs in many organs.
phosphatase activity and variable hyponatraemia and
hyperbilirubinaemia. Analysis of CSF may reveal a mild
Treatment and control
increase in protein and a neutrophil pleocytosis. Cell
Untreated RMSF is a highly fatal disease. Because of the
counts are increased in joint fluid, with a predominance
delay in obtaining antibody titres, treatment should be
of neutrophils. Results of tests for autoimmunity are
instituted whenever the disease is suspected. Tetracyclines
usually negative, with the exception of platelet
are the antibiotics of choice and treatment should be for
autoantibody. Electrocardiographic testing may show
at least one week (Table 34). Tetracycline is as effective as
conduction disturbances related to myocarditis. Thoracic
the more lipid soluble doxycycline, because intracellular
radiography may show a diffuse increase in pulmonary
penetration is not essential to eliminate the organism.
interstitial density.
Chloramphenicol and fluoroquinolones have equivalent
The microimmunofluorescence {Micro-IF) test is used
efficacy, while azithromycin is less effective. Early therapy
by most laboratories to determine specific IgG and IgM
may delay or suppress the rise in antibody titre of
Rickettsial infections 
137
Table 34 Drug therapy for treatment of spotted fever group rickettsial infections.
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Route
Frequency
Duration
(hours)
(weeks)
Tetracycline
22
P/0
8
Doxycycline
5
P/o
12
 Chloramphenicol
15-30
P/o, s/c, i/v
8
 Enrofloxacin 
3
P/o, s/c
12
(Modified from Greene CE, Breitschwerdt EB (1998) Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. In infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
(ed CE Greene) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, with permission)
convalescent samples. Fluid therapy must be restricted
FLEA-TRANSMITTED
because of the danger of causing more oedema in the
RICKETTSIAL INFECTIONS
CNS. Antibiotics are only effective if they are instituted
Two causes of flea-transmitted human typhus are now
prior to the onset of tissue necrosis or organ failure. The
recognized: Rickettsia typbi, which is transmitted by
response to treatment, as noted by a reduction in body
rodent fleas and has a worldwide distribution; and the
temperature and improvement in clinical illness, is
recently reported R. felis, which has been identified in
apparent within 24 48 hours if the diagnosis is correct.
cats, dogs and in cat fleas {Ctenocephalides felis) in the
Supportive care is needed in dogs with hypotension,
Americas and Europe to date. In endemic areas of the
coagulopathy or evidence of organ dysfunction.
USA, peri-urban opossums are major reservoir hosts for
Recovery from infection is associated with protective
R. felis but the reservoir potential of cats and dogs has not
immunity against infection with the same rickettsial
been determined. In North America, R. typhi infections
species. Vaccines are not available commercially, although
have been found in fleas and people in the same
experimental vaccines have been shown to be protective
geographic areas where R. felis exists, although co-
against severe or prolonged infection. Vaccines containing
infection is not common.
outer membrane proteins have produced protection
 Experimental infection of cats with R. felis has been
against challenge infection in experimental animals.
demonstrated, as has seropositivity to R. typbi. Cats
Prevention is best achieved by strict control of tick
infected with R. felis by repeat exposure to feeding fleas
vectors and periodic treatment with insecticides. Newer
 develop a subclinical illness with an incubation period of
means of tick control for dogs include the use of systemic
 2-4 months. However, the pathogenic potential of natural
 or topically applied acaricides.
infection with either rickettsial species in dogs and cats is
unknown. What is known is that cats and dogs will
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
transport Ct. felis into domestic surroundings and,
as
 RMSF is an important zoonotic disease beca use of its high
transovarial and trans-stadial transmission of R. felis has
prevalence and potentially fatal outcome if diagnosis is
shown, a domestic focus of infection for humans could
delayed or missed. Despite the availability of effective
be established.
treatment, annual mortality rates approach 5%. Infection
tadoad u ieul sielleied soop ui Aiuoseas pue aie1
however, this is caused by an exposure to the same ticks
ticks that infect people as they remove them or allow tick
excreta or haemolymph to enter abraded skin or mucous
membranes. Clinical signs in people are very similar to
those in dogs. Early signs in people may be vague and
misdiagnosis can occur until a rash develops later in the
course of the disease. Most of the fatalities are due to lack
of early suspicion and treatment. Care should always be
taken in removing attached ticks, and forceps or
protective gloves should be used. People should apply tick
repellents when spending time in tick-infested areas.
Other arthropod-borne
13
infections of dogs
and cats
Susan Shaw
INTRODUCTION
and wild cats are more susceptible to clinical yersiniosis
Major arthropod-borne infectious diseases with wide
than dogs. In experimentally infected cats, most develop
geographical distributions and serious clinical outcomes 
mild to moderately severe clinical disease, with
for dogs and cats have been the subject of preceding
subsequent recovery, although some develop an acute
chapters of this book. This chapter deals with infections
fulminating and fatal syndrome. Two main clinical
that are associated with:
syndromes are recognized in naturally infected cats.
· Low or sporadic prevalence of disease but where
Bubonic plague is associated with fever, dehydration,
 exposure, subclinical infection and zoonotic potential
weight loss and lymphadenopathy, with abscessation and
may be high.
draining tracts affecting the cervical, retropharyngeal and
 Focal geographical distribution but where there may
submandibular lymph nodes. Recovery may occur
be high morbidity, mortality and/or zoonotic potential.
following this stage or there is haematogenous spread
with progression to the often fatal, septicaemic syndrome.
YERSINIOSIS (PLAGUE)
Multiple organ involvement, endotoxic shock, oedema
 and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) with
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
 marked leucocytosis are characteristic. In cats, pneumonic
wnq sus-aods-uu aun Aq pasnio si anaid
involvement (
during  this  stage  is  common  and
Yersinia pestis. Localized foci of disease occur in
dissemination by aerosol may occur to in-contact
temperate, semi-arid areas throughout the world and
humans. Primary pneumonic plague in cats is rare. Less
infection is maintained in reservoir rodent populations via
commonly reported clinical signs are vomiting, diarrhoea,
transmission by rodent fleas (such as Xenopsylla species).
tonsillar and lingual lymph node enlargement and
Epizootic outbreaks of disease occur when Y. pestis
necrotic stomatitis.
infection spills over into more highly susceptible small
mammal populations. With semi-urban development now
Diagnosis
extending into endemic areas of plague, there is increasing
Notification of state veterinary or health services may be
risk of domestic dogs and, more particularly, cats being
required in some countries when a case of plague is
infected by bites from rodent fleas acquired during
suspected.  Confirmation of diagnosis is made by
hunting and ingestion of infected small mammals. The cat
cytological  or  histopathological  demonstration   of
flea Ctenocepbalides felis is a relatively ineffective vector
bacteria in affected tonsillar tissue or lymph node
for plague transmission.
aspirates, with appropriate Gram and Giemsa staining
characteristics. This is followed by culture. Stringent
 Pathogenesis
biosafety procedures should be followed in collection and
 aré
transport of specimens and culture requires a specialist
phagocytosed by macrophages, which transfer infection
containment laboratory. Serological testing by IFA and
to local and regional lymph nodes. The production of a
 demonstration of a rising serum antibody titre provide
capsular envelope ensures the intracellular survival of
diagnostic support. PCR is also available in Yersinid
 Yersinia. Lymphadenitis develops and this is followed by
reference laboratories in various areas of the world.
dissemination of infection and bacteraemia within 2-6
days. In contrast, after ingestion or inhalation of
Treatment and control
organisms and entry through a mucous membrane,
The decision to treat animals with plague should always
dissemination and the onset of bacteraemia is more rapid
take into consideration the zoonotic risk. In particular,
{1-3 days).
the potential for aerosol spread from pulmonary lesions
 in infected cats should be evaluated by thoracic radiology.
clinical signs
Appropriate protective clothing and gloves should be
Dogs with plague develop mild febrile illness, with
worn and all contaminated material or surfaces should be
lymphadenomegaly. However, humans and domesticated
disinfected. Y. pestis is sensitive to routine disinfectants
138
Other arthropod-borne infectious diseases of dogs and cats
　139
and a variety of antibiotics, including aminoglycosides,
involving a hare/rabbit reservoir-tick/mosquito cycle. Tick
doxycycline, chloramphenicol and fluoroquinolones.
vectors include species of Dermacentor, Amblyomma,
Therapy should be continued for a minimum of 21 days
Ixodes and Haemapbysalis. Cats may also be infected by
(Table 35). Doxycycline is most commonly used in the
ingesting infected rodent or lagomorph prey.
bubonic syndrome and can be used for prophylaxis in
exposed, subclinical cats.
Pathogenesis, clinical signs and diagnosis
Flea control in all in-contact cats and dogs is essential.
Cats appear more susceptible to naturally occurring
Safe, effective, residual insecticides combined with insect
clinical tularaemia than dogs, and younger cats appear
development inhibitors are available. If used regularly,
more predisposed. Clinical signs include fever, marked
they will provide excellent vector control. Minimizing
lethargy, anorexia, regional or generalized lympha-
access of dogs and cats to infected mammal carcasses is
denopathy with abscessation, splenomegaly and/or
also important. An effective and safe vaccination is not
hepatomegaly with abscessation, oral ulceration,
presently available for dogs and cats.
leucopenia, icterus and in some cases death. Presumptive
diagnosis may be made serologically but confirmation
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
requires culture of infected tissue or body fluids using
Bacteraemic cats are a source for human infection either
rigorous biosafety procedures to prevent human infection.
directly through aerosol spread, bites or scratches or
indirectly by transporting infected fleas into the domestic
Treatment and control
environment. Infection, if recognized early, can be treated
Therapeutic regimes for feline tularaemia have not been
effectively with antibiotics but untreated cases may be
thoroughly investigated and are adapted from human
fatal. Vaccines have been developed but are not
medicine. Aminoglycoside, tetracycline, chloramphenicol
commercially available.
and fluoroquinolone antibiotics ha ve been advocated, and
these should be administered for a 2-4-week period
TULARAEMIA
(Table 35).
Background, aetiology and epidemiology
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
The aetiological agent of tularaemia in mammals and birds
Humans may contract tularaemia by several routes
is the tick-transmitted bacterium Francisella tularensis.
including bites from arthropods, particularly ixodid ticks.
These organisms are distributed throughout the temperate
In addition, infected domestic cats may transmit
 and sub-Arctic areas of the northern hemisphere and there
aoe 'sais pue sq aq suy o ea
is geographic variation in strain, the species of tick vector
this is rare. In humans, cutaneous inoculation results in
and the reservoir hosts involved. Two biovars are
ulceroglandular tularaemia. An initial period of fever,
recognized and cats are susceptible to both. F tularensis
headache, chills, cough and myalgia is followed by a short
tularensis is distributed throughout North America and is
period {1-3 days) of clinical remission. Ulceration and
associated with a tick-rabbit cycle. F tularensis palearctica
necrotizing lymphadenitis develop in the second clinical
has a broad distribution throughout the northern
phase. Tularaemia is antibiotic sensitive but ulceroglandu-
hemisphere and has a more complex epidemiology
lar tularaemia may be fatal in up to 5% of cases.
Table 35 Drugs recommended for treatment of bacterial arthropod-borne infectious diseases.
Drug
Infection
Dose rate
Dose frequency
Route
(mg/kg)
(hours)
Doxycycline
Yersiniosis
5-10
12, decrease to 24
P/o
Oxytetracycline
 Tularaemia
10-25
8
P/o, iAv
Erythromycin
Coxiellosis
10-22
12
P/o, iv
Azithromycin ** 
Coxiellosis 
7-15
8-12
P/o
Chloramphenicol
Yersiniosis, tularaemia 
25-50
12-24
I/v, i/m, s/c, p/o
Fluoroquinolones* 
Coxiaellosis, yersiniosis,
5-10
24
Iv, i/m, s/c. p/o
(e.g. enrofloxacin)
tularaemia
Aminoglycosides
Yersiniosis, tularaemia 
2-4
24
I/m
(e.g. gentamycin)
Rifampicin* 
 Coxiellosis 
5-10 
24
P/o
Trimethoprim/sulphonamide?
Coxiellosis 
15-60
24
P/o
pyrimethamine
* = used in combination with other antibiotics; ** = not licensed for cats
140
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
COXIELLOSIS
although in some cases domesticated herbivores may
become part of the reservoir where habitats overlap.
Background, aetiology. epidemiology and
Companion animals and humans become exposed
zoonotic significance
Coxiella burnetii is an 
extracellular, arthropod-
 in high-risk habitats. Although only a small percentage of
transmitted, spore-forming bacterium, which in cats and
susceptible dogs and cats develop overt neurological
dogs produces subclinical infection but in humans ca uses
disease, a number of the arthropod-borne viruses cause
Q fever, a disease associated with fever, arthralgia,
 serious disease in humans.
myalgia, hepatitis and respiratory disease. A wide range
Flaviviruses have a worldwide distribution and some
 of wild and domesticated animals are considered reservoir
of these viruses cause diseases of both medical and
hosts for human infection. In wildlife reservoir cycles,
veterinary importance (e.g. West Nile fever, tick-borne
C. burnetii is commonly transmitted by arthropod
encephalitis (TBE), louping ill and Japanese 
B
vectors, including ticks. In addition, the sporulated form
encephalitis). Viruses in this group are more likely to be
of C. burneti is highly resistant to environmental
associated with clinical disease in dogs but have not been
10 uosaau1 Aq sisoq uaamiaq peads aq ueo pue sawa 1xa
reported to cause clinical signs in cats. Togaviruses cause
aerosol dissemination of infected fluids such as milk,
equine encephalitis in the western hemisphere and
urine and vaginal/uterine secretions, or by ingestion of
although dogs and occasionally cats are susceptible to
infected tissues such as placental material. Infected cats
 subclinical infection, naturally occurring clinical disease
aré
considered  i
important  reservoirs  f
for 
 human
has not been reported. Natural infections, albeit through
coxiellosis. C. burneti appears to be frequently carried in
non-arthropod borne routes, with viruses of the families
the vagina of healthy cats in endemic areas and contact
Bunyaviridae {Rift Valley fever) and Orbiviridae {African
with infected parturient cats is a risk factor for human 
horse sickness, bluetongue) have also been reported in
infection.
dogs.
 Seropositivity to C. burneti ranges between 16% and
20% in populations of stray and companion cats in the
TBE and louping ill
USA, Canada and Japan, while lower seroprevalences are
TBE and louping ill viruses are two closely related tick-
Cross-reactivity
between
transmitted
flaviviruses
that  occasionally 
cause
C. burneti and Bartonella benselae has been reported in
neurological disease in European dogs. The main vector
human studies and although this has not been
for both is Ixodes ricinus, although I. persculatus is a
investigated in cats, it may inflate seroprevalence figures
vector for TBE in Russia and some Baltic regions. TBE is
for Coxiella.
endemic in areas of central, eastern and northern Europe
where climatic and geographical factors are favourable.
Diagnosis
Reservoir hosts for infection include several species of
Diagnosis of active infection with Coxiella is made by
wild rodents ( Clethrionymys and Apodemys species). TBE
demonstration of a rising antibody titre, PCR or
virus is transmitted trans-stadially and transovarially and
 immunohistochemical techniques.
transmission also occurs between I. ricinus ticks by co-
feeding on Apoderus mice in the absence of systemic
Treatment and control
viraemia. Seropositivity is widespread in companion dogs
Treatment of cats may be required in households where
in
endemic areas, although illness is not commonly
there is increased risk of human infection. Coxiella
reported. In addition, experimental infection of dogs with
Adeuaun uase aauis oi aqudaosns Aqeea aue suoa
TBE fails reliably to reproduce clinical disease.
with macrolides (erythromycin, azithromycin), poten-
Louping ill virus is pathogenic for domesticated
tiated sulphonamides and fluoroquinolones for 2-4 weeks
herbivores, particularly sheep, and is maintained in a
duration (Table 35, p. 139). Combination therapy of
sheep-I. ricirus cycle, although wild ground-nesting birds
 doxycycline and fluoroquinolones with rifampicin may be
 such as red grouse are also involved. Both trans-stadial
more effective. Routine control of infection beyond
transmission and transmission by co-feeding ticks on non-
routine hygiene recommended for handling of at-risk
viraemic hosts occur. Wolves, dogs and foxes are
animals is not appropriate due to the sporadic nature of
 susceptible to infection but as with TBE, disease is rarely
human infection.
reported. Naturally occurring disease has not been
reported in cats with either virus.
ARTHROPOD-BORNE VIRAL
Both viruses cause acute neurological disease with a
ENCEPHALITIDES
seasonal (spring/summer) occurrence. In areas endemic
for louping ill, working sheep dogs and gun dogs are more
Background and aetiology
likely to be exposed and thus develop illness.
Dogs and cats are susceptible to infection with arthropod-
borne RNA viruses of several families. The viruses
Pathogenesis and clinical signs
concerned are naturally maintained in sylvatic cycles
Both virsues have tropism for the central nervous system
involving wild mammalian or bird reservoir hosts,
after a short period of viraemia. In most cases, infection is 
Other arthropod-borne infections of dogs and cats
¥141
eliminated by an active immune response and animals in
Occasional clinical signs occur in humans infected with
endemic areas may have detecta ble antibody titres for life.
louping ill virus. The clinical signs are similar to those
The incubation period is short (7-14 days or less).
seen in TBE, although milder.
Clinical signs of TBE are referable to multifocal neuro-
Both louping ill and TBE may also have alternative
logical involvement and include fever, gait abnormalities,
methods of transmission. Outbreaks of louping ill in
seizures, paresis and peripheral neuropathies, particularly
abattoir workers are reported and TBE can be transmitted
involving the cranial nerves. Initially, dogs with louping ill
through ingestion of infected milk.
have CNS signs of more localized cerebellar dysfunction,
with ataxia and tremor. Signs are rapidly progressive, with
West Nile virus encephalitis
the development of recumbency, tetraplegia, opisthotonus
West Nile fever is caused by a mosquito-transmitted
and death in some cases. Recovery can occur but it is slow
flavivirus that has been recognized in Europe and Africa
and may be associated with residual locomotor and
for several decades but has recently emerged in North
cerebral abnormalities. In a Swedish study, only 8% of
America. It causes neurological disease in humans, horses
seropositive dogs developed clinical signs and of these,
and certain species of birds, and is primarily maintained
most recovered from the initial disease over 2-3 months.
in wild bird reservoirs. The role of dogs in the
epidemiology of West Nile virus (WNV) is thought to be
Diagnosis
minor. Wild and domesticated canids are susceptible to
Clinical signs are not pathognomonic for either viral
natural infection, as shown by seropositivity, but clinical
infection. Clinical pathological parameters and CSF
disease is difficult to reproduce experimentally. However,
 analysis are compatible with non-suppurative meningo-
neurological disease associated with WNV has recently
encephalitis. Antemortem diagnosis is most commonly
been reported in susceptible dogs and a wolf in the USA.
made by demonstrating rising serum antibody titres.
Clinical signs included fever, lethargy, ataxia and
Serological testing is only available from specialist
multifocal central nervous system signs. H
Histopatho-
laboratories. A single positive test on serum is difficult to
logical findings were compatible with viral encephalitis
associate with disease due to the high exposure rates in
 and diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemistry
endemic areas. However, high titres in CSF compared to
and in situ PCR.
serum are S
supportive for
TBE. Histopathological
examination of brain tissue reveals neuronal necrosis and
TRYPANOSOMIASIS
perivascular lymphoid cuffing that is particularly
prominent in the spinal cord.  Viral isolation or
Aetiology
immunohistochemistry
on
brain 1
tissue
provides
Trypanosomiasis is caused by a flagellated arthropod-
 postmortem diagnostic confirmation.
borne protozoan parasite of the genus Trypanosoma.
Trypanosomes are maintained in a wide range of domestic
Treatment and management
and wild animal hosts in south and central America,
Supportive and symptomatic therapy during the acute
Africa and Asia. T. cruzi has been reported to cause
phase of illness is particularly important for recovery of
disease in dogs in both North and South America.
infected animals. No specific anti-viral chemotherapy has
Although cats are susceptible to infection, there are no
been recommended. Aggressive control of tick infestation 
reports of disease in this species. T. cruzi is transmitted
provides the most é
 effective prevention. In addition,
 primarily by the cutaneous inoculation of faeces from
control of louping ill in sheep will decrease the risk for
infected haematophagous Triatoma bugs, but infection
working dogs.
may also be transmitted by ingestion of infected bugs or
infected prey. The protozoan parasites are spread
Zoonotic potential/public health significance
haematogenously and then enter an intracellular phase in
Humans are accidentally infected with TBE virus through
macrophages and myocytes, where rapid intracellular
0l ysuuu relus e ui sanq y paioau oi aunsodxa
multiplication takes place.
companion dogs, although humans are more susceptible
to developing clinical signs. About 10-30% of infected
dinical signs
humans, particularly children, develop central nervous
In susceptible （
 dogs, clinical signs develop after
system disease. Clinical progression is usually biphasic,
14-17 days. Generalized lymphadenopathy is followed by
with a viraemic phase (malaise, fever, lethargy) followed
acute myocarditis, particularly in puppies. Chronic
by a period of clinical remission. Clinical signs are
disease is associated with right- and then left-sided
referable to non-suppurative meningitis, meningo-
congestive heart failure, dysrhythmias, ascites, pleural
encephalitis or polyradiculoneuritis. Although recovery
effusion and pulmonary oedema.
occurs in most cases, serious neurological or neuro-
psychiatric sequelae may persist for prolonged periods.
Diagnosis
Recovery is accompanied  by  lifelong  immunity.
Diagnosis in the acute stage is made by microscopic
Companion dogs are considered a sentinel for human
identification of the parasites in Wright's- or Giemsa-
TBE virus infection.
 stained blood smears, particularly those made from the
142
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
buffy coat/plasma interface in centrifuged samples.
acute phase usually succumb to congestive heart failure.
However, concentration techniques may be necessary in
Supportive therapy is recommended but progression
chronic infections with low level parasitaemia. Organisms
usually lea ds to death.
may also be identified in lymph node aspirates or from
fluid cytologies. Organisms are difficult to identify in the
Zoonotic potential/public
chronic stages of the disease. Isolation using culture is
health significance
difficult and may require cell culture systems. Several
Human trypanosomiasis due to T. cruzi (Chagas' disease)
serological tests are available at specialist laboratories but
is widespread in central and southern America. It is
there is cross-reactivity with Leishmania species.
 difficult to treat and causes severe disease. Infected dogs
 provide a peri-domestic reservoir of infection for the
Treatment
vector and, thus, human infection. Both veterinarians and
Nifurtimox has been used for treating acute canine
 staff should be aware of the potential risk of transmission
trypanosomiasis and is one of the drugs of choice for
 by blood from infected dogs.
humans. The prognosis is guarded as dogs surviving the
Appendix
Potential vectors of Dirofiaria immitis. (Modified and updated from Ludlam et al. [1970] Potential vectors of Dirofilaria
immitis. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 157: 1354-1359).
Species
Geographic area where
Species
Geographic area where
larval development
larval development 
in the mosquito has
in the mosquito has
been reported
been reported
Aedes aegypti
 Brazil Nigeria, USA, Japan
Anopheles maculopennis
Europe
Aedes albopictus
Taiwan, Brazil, Italy, Japan 
Anopheles minimus
 Philippines
Aedes atropalpus
USA
flavirostris
Aedes canadensis
USA
Anopheles plumbeus
Europe
Aedes caspius
Italy, Spain (**)
Anopheles punctipennis
USA
Aedes cinereus
USA
Anopheles quadrimaculatus
USA
Aedes excrucians
USA
Anopheles sinensis
China 
Aedes fijensis
Fiji 
Anopheles tesellatus
 Philippines
Aedes fitchii
USA
Anopheles waikeri
USA
Aedes geniculatus
Europe
Armigeres subalbatus
Taiwan
Aedes guamensis
Guam 
Coquillettida perturbans
USA
Aedes infirmatus
USA
Cufex anulorostris
Guam, Fiji. Oceana
Aedes koreicus
China 
Culex bitaeniorhyncus
Philippines
Aedes notoscriptus
Australia
Culex declarator
Brazil (*)
Aedes pandani
Guam 
Culex erraticus
USA
Aedes pempaensis
Africa 
Culex gelidus
Philippines 
Aedes poecilus
 Philipines 
Culex pipiens
USA, Switzerland, Italy
Aedes polynesiensis
French Polynesia, Fiji.
Culex pipiens
 Australia, Philippines, USA,
 Samoa
quinquefasciatus
Fji, Japan, Taiwan,
Aedes pseudoscutellaris
Fiji
Brazil, Guam, Oceana,
Aedes punctor
Europe
 Africa, Singapore
Aedes samoanus
Samoa
Culex pipiens molestus
UK
Aedes scapularis
Brazil
Culex pipiens pallens
Japan, China 
Aedes sierrensis
USA
Cufex restuans
USA
Aedes sollicita ns
USA
Culex saftanensis
Brazil (*)
Aedes sticticus
USA
Culex sitiens
Guam 
Aedes stimulans
USA
Culex tarsalis
USA
Aedes taeniorhyncus
USA, Brazil, Guyana
Culex territans
USA
Aedes togoi
Japan, Taiwan, Thailand 
Culex tritaeniorhynchus
Japan, China, Malaysia
Culex tritaeniorhynchus
 Philippines
Aedes triseriatus
USA
summorosus
Aedes trivittatus
USA
Mansonia annulata
Malaysia
Aedes vexans
USA, Switzerland 
Mansonia bonneae
Malaysia
Aedes vigilax
Australia 
Mansonia dives
Malaysia
Aedes zoosophus
USA
Mansonia indiana
Malaysia
Anopheles bradleyi
USA
Mansonia titillians
Argentina
Anopheles crucians
USA
Mansonia uniformis
Singapore, Philippines
Anopheles earlei
USA
Wyeomyia bourrouli
Brazil (*)
Anopheles francisoi
Philippines 
(*) larvae isolated at non-infective stage: (**) suspected vector but larvae not isolated from mosquito
143
Further reading
INTRODUCTION
Hudson PJ, Rizzoli A, Grenfell BT, Heesterbeek H, Doson
Estrada-Pena A {2001) Forecasting habitat suitability for
AP (2002) (eds) The Ecology of Wildlife Diseases.
ticks and prevention of tick-borne diseases. Veterinary
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Parasitology 98, 111-132.
Jones CG, Ostfeld RS, Richard MP, Schauber EM, Wolff
Patz JA, Reisen WK (2001) Immunology, climate change
JO (1998) Chain reactions linking acorns to gypsy
and vector-borne disease. Trends in Immunology 22,
moth outbreaks and Lyme disease risk. Science 279,
171-172.
1023-1026.
Shaw SE, Lerga AI, Williams S, Beugnet F, Birtles RJ, Day
Perkins SE, Cattadori IM, Tagliapietra V, Rizzoli AP,
MJ, Kenny MJ {2003) Review of exotic infectious
Hudson PJ (2003) Empirical evidence for key hosts in
diseases in small animals entering the United Kingdom
persistence of a tick-borne disease. International
from abroad diagnosed by PCR. Veterinary Record
Journal of Parasitology 33, 909-917.
152, 176-177.
Randolph SE, Gern L, Nuttall PA (1996) Co-feeding
Woolhouse MEJ (2002) Population biology of emerging
ticks: epidemiological significance for tick-borne
and re-emerging pathogens. Trends in Microbiology
pathogen transmission.  Parasitology  Today 12,
10, S3-S7.
472-479.
Zuckerman JN {2002) Travel medicine. British Medical
 Randolph SE, Miklisova D, Lysy J, Rogers DJ, Labuda M
Journal 325, 260-264.
{1999) Incidence from co-incidence: patterns of tick
infestations on rodents facilitate transmission of tick-
CHAPTER 1
borne encephalitis virus. Parasitology 118, 177-186.
Baker AS (1999) Mites and ticks of domestic dnimals. An
Sonenshine DE, Mather TN (1994) {eds) Ecological
Identification Guide and Information Source. Natural
Dynamics of Tick-borne Zoonoses. Oxford University
History Museum, London.
Press, New York.
Dryden MW, Rust MK (1994) The cat flea: biology,
Williams ES, Barker IK {2001) {eds) Infectious Diseases of
ecology and control. Veterinary Parasitology 52, 1-19.
Wild Mammais. 3rd edn. Iowa State University Press,
Hoogstraal H (1966) Ticks in relation to human diseases
Ames.
caused by viruses. Annual Review of Entomology 11,
261-308.
CHAPTER 3
Hoogstraal H {1967) Ticks in relation to human diseases
Gillespie RD, Mbow 
ML, Titus RG {2000) The
caused by Rickettsia species. Annual Revietw of
immunomodulatory
factors  of  blood  feeding
Entomology 12, 377-420.
arthropod saliva. Parasite Immunology 22, 319-331.
Lane RP, Crosskey RW {1993) Medical Insects and
Jittapalapong S, Stich RW, Gordon JC, Wittum TE,
Arachnids. Chapman & Hall, London.
Barriga  OO
{2000}
Performance
of
female
Mullen G, Durden L {2002) Medical and Veterinary
Rhipicephalus sanguineus fed on dogs exposed to
 Entomology. Academic Press, Amsterdam.
multiple infestations or immunization  with tick
Needham GR, Teal PD {1991) Off-host physiological
salivary gland or midgut tissues. Journal of Medical
ecology of ixodid ticks. Annual Review of Entomology
Entomology 37, 601-611.
36, 659-681.
Kamhawi
S
{2000)
The
biological
and
Wall R, Shearer D (2001) Veterinary Ectoparasites:
 immunomodulatory properties of sandfly saliva and its
 Biology, Pathology and Control. 2nd edn. Blackwell 
role in the establishment of Leisbmania infections.
Science, Oxford.
Microbes and Infection 2, 1765-1773.
Walker A (1994) The Arthropods of Humans and
Matsumoto K, Inokuma H, Ohno K, Onishi T (2001)
Domestic Animais. Chapman & Hall, London.
Effects of salivary gland extract from Rhipicepbalus
Zumpt F (1965) Myiasis in Man and Animals in the Oid
 sanguineus on immunoglobulin class productivity of
Worid. Butterworths, London.
canine peripheral blood lymphocytes. Journal of
Veterinary Medical Science 63, 325-328.
CHAPTER 2
Shaw SE, Day MJ, Birtles RJ, Breitschwerdt EB {2001)
Fenner F, Ratcliffe FN (1965) Myxomatosis. Cambridge
Tick-borne infectious diseases of dogs. Trends in
University Press, Cambridge.
Parasitology 17, 74-80.
144
Further reading
145
Szabo
MPJ,
Bechara
GH 
(1999)
 Sequential
Persing DH (1996) PCR Protocols for Emerging
histopathology at the Rhipicephatus sanguineus tick
Infectious
Diseases.
American
Society
for
feeding site on dogs and guinea pigs. Experimental and
Microbiology Press, Washington.
Applied Acarology 23, 915-928.
Smits HL, Chee HD, Eapen CK, Kuriakose M, Sugathan S,
Wikel SK (1999) Tick modulation of host immunity: an
Gasem MH, Yersin C, Sakasi D, Lai-A-Fat RF,
important  factor
in  pathogen   transmission.
Hartskeerl RA, Liesdek B, Abdoel TH, Goris MG,
International Journal for Parasitology 29, 851-859.
Gussenhoven GC (2001) Latex-based, rapid and easy
Wikel SK, Alarcon-Chaidez FJ (2001) Progress towards 
assay for human leptospirosis in a single test format.
molecular characterization of ectoparasite modulation
Tropical Medicine and International Health 6, 114-118.
of host immunity. Veterinary Parasitology 101,
Zarlenga DS, Higgins J {2001) PCR as a diagnostic and
275-287.
quantitative technique in  veterinary parasitology.
Willadsen P (2001) The molecular revolution in the
Veterinary Parasitology 22, 215-230.
development of  vaccines  against 
 ectoparasites.
Veterinary Parasitology 101, 353-367.
CHAPTER 5
Willadsen P, Jongejan F (1999) Immunology of the
Bredal WP, Gjerde B, Eberhard ML, Aleksandersen M,
tick-host interaction and the control of ticks and tick-
Wilhelmsen DK, Mansfield LS (1998) Adult Dirofilaria
borne diseases. Parasitology Today 15, 258-262.
repens in a subcutaneous granuloma on the chest of a
dog. Journal of Small Animal Practice 39, 595-597.
Courtney CH, Zeng QY (2001) Comparison of
CHAPTER 4
heartworm antigen test kit performance in dogs having
Attar ZJ, Chance ML, el-Safi S, Carney J, Azazy A, El.
low heartworm burdens. Veterinary Parasitology 96,
Hadi M, Dourado C, Hommel M {2001) Latex
317-322.
agglutination test for the detection of urinary antigens
DeFrancesco TC, Atkins CE, Miller MW, Meurs KM,
in visceral leishmaniasis. Acta Tropica 15, 11-16.
Keene BW (2001) Use of echocardiography for the
Brown SL, Hansen SL, Langone J (1999) Role of
diagnosis of heartworm disease in cats: 43 cases
serology in the diagnosis of Lyme disease. Journal of
(1985-1997). Journal of the American Veterinary
the American Medical Association 7, 62-66.
Medical Association 218, 66-69.
Courtney CH, Zeng Q (2001) Comparison of heartworm 
Goodwin  JK {1998)  The  serological  diagnosis of
antigen test kit performance in dogs having
low
heartworm infection in dogs and cats. Clinical
heartworm burdens. Veterinary Parasitology
96,
Techniques in Small Animal Practice 13, 83-87.
317-322.
Kittleson M (1999) Heartworm infestation and disease
 Dumler S, Aguero-Rosenfild ME (2000) Microbiology
(dirofilariasis). In: Small Animal Cardiovascular
and laboratory diagnosis of tick-borne disease.
.In:
Medicine. (eds MD Kittleson and RD Kienle) Mosby,
Tick-borne Infectious Diseases, Diagnosis
and
St. Louis, pp. 370-401.
Management. (ed BA Cunha) Marcel Dekker Inc.,
Knauer KW (1998) Human dirofilariasis. （
Clinical
New York, pp. 15-54.
Techniques in Small Animal Practice 13, 96-98.
Gurtler RE, Cecere MC, Castanera MB, Canale D,
 Knight D (1999) Guidelines for the diagnosis, prevention
Lauricella MA, Chuit R, Cohen JE, Segura EL {1996)
and management of heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis)
 Probability of infection with Trypanosoma cruzi of the
infection  in 
dogs.
http://heartwormsociety.org/
vector Triatoma infestans fed on infected humans and
ahsguide.htm
dogs in north-west Argentina. American Journal of
 Ludlam KW, Jachowski Jr LA, Otto GF {1970) Potential
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 55, 24-31.
vectors of Dirofilaria immitis. fournat of the American
Houpikian P, Raoult D (2002) Diagnostic methods:
Veterinary Medical Association 157, 1354-1359.
current best practices and guidelines for identification
Miller MW
(1998) Feline dirofilariasis.（
Clinical
of
 difficult-to-culture
pathogens
in
 infective
Technigues in Small Animal Practice 13, 99-109.
endocarditis. Infectious Disease Clinics of North
Rawlings CA, Calvert CA, Glaus TM, Jacobs GJ {1994)
America 16, 377-392.
Surgical
 removal
of heartworms.
Seminars
Iqbal J, Hira PR, Saroj G, Philip R, Al-Ali F, Madda PJ,
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Small Animal) 9,
Sher  A (2002)  Imported  visceral leishmaniasis:
200-205.
diagnostic dilemmas and comparative analysis of three
Rawlings CA (2002) Effects of monthly heartworm
assays. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 40, 475-479.
preventatives  on  dogs  with
 young heartworm
La Scola B, Raoult D {1999) Culture of Bartonella
infections. Journal of the American Animal Hospital
quintana and Bartonella henselae from human
Association 38, 311-314.
samples: a S-year experience (1993-1998). Journal of
 Snyder PS, Levy JK, Salute ME, Gorman SP, Kubilis PS,
Clinical Microbiology 37, 1899-1905.
Smail PW, George LL {2000) Performance of serologic
Paek SH, Lee SH, Cho JH, Kim YS {2000) Development
tests used to detect heartworm infection in cats.
of rapid one-step immunochromatographic assay.
Journal of the American VeterinaryMedical
Methods 22, 53-60.
Association 216, 693-700.
146
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Strickland KN (1998) Canine and feline caval syndrome.
Baneth G, Aroch I, Tal N, Harrus S (1998) Hepatozoon
Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice 13, 88-95.
species infection in domestic cats: a retrospective study.
Veterinary Parasitology 79, 123-133.
CHAPTeR 6
Baneth G, Barta JR, Shkap V, Martin DS, Macintire DK,
Vincent-Johnson N (2000) Genetic and antigenic
Babesiosis
evidence supports the separation of Hepatozoon canis
Camacho AT, Pallas E, Gestal JJ, Guitian FJ, Olmeda AS,
and Hepatozoon americamum at the species level.
Goethert HK, Telford SR {2001) Infection of dogs in
Journal of Clinical Microbiology 38, 1298-1301.
Baneth G, Samish M, Aroch I, Alekseev Y, Shkap V
Veterinary Record 149, 552-555.
(2001) Transmission of Hepatozoon canis to dogs by
Carret C, Walas F, Carcy B, Grande N, Precigout E,
naturally fed or percutaneously injected Rhipicepbalus
Moubri K, Schetters TP, Gorenflot A {1999) Babesia
sanguineus ticks. fournal of Parasitology 87, 606-611.
canis canis, Babesia canis vogeli, Babesia canis rossi:
Baneth G, Mathew JS, Shkap V, McIntire DK, Barta JR,
differentiation of the three subspecies by a restriction
Ewing SA (2003) Canine hepatoz0onosis: two diseases
 fragment length polymorphism analysis on amplified
caused by separate Hepatozoon species. Trends in
small subunit ribosomal RNA genes. Journal of
Parasitology 19, 27-31.
Eukaryote Microbiology 46, 298-303.
Ewing SA, Panciera RJ, Mathew JS, Cummings CA,
Homer MJ, Aguilar-Delfin I, Telford SR, Krause PJ,
Kocan AA (2000) American canine hepatozoonosis: an
Persing DH (2000) Babesiosis. Clinical Microbiology
emerging disease in the New World. Annals of the New
Reviews 13, 451-469.
York Academy of Sciences 916, 81-92.
Kjemtrup AM, Kocan AA, Whitwoth L, Meinkoth J,
Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson NA, Kane CW, Lindsay
Birkenheuer
AJ, Cummings J, Boudreaux 
MK,
DS, Blagburn BL, Dillon AR (2001) Treatment of dogs
Stockham SL, Irizarry-Rovira A, Conrad PA (2000)
infected with Hepatozoon americanum: 5S3 cases
There are at least three genetically distinct small
(1989-1998). Journal of the American Veterinary
piroplasms from dogs. International Journal for
Medical Association 218, 77-82.
Parasitology 30, 1501-1505.
Mathew JS, Ewing SA, Panciera RJ, Woods JP {1998)
Jacobson LS, Swan GE {1995) Supportive treatment of
Experimental
transmission
of
Hepatozoon
canine babesiosis. Journal of the South African
americamum to dogs by the Gulf Coast tick, Amblyom-
Veterinary Association 66, 95-105.
ma maculatum. Veterinary Parasitology 80, 1-14.
Melhorn H, Walldorf V (1988) Life cycles.
In:
Panciera RJ, Ewing SA, Mathew JS, Lebenbauer TW,
Parasitology in Focus: Facts and Trends. (ed H
Cummings CA, Woods JP (1999) Canine hepato-
Melhorn) Springer- Verlag, Berlin, pp. 1-148.
zoonosis: comparison of lesions and parasites in
Schoeman T, Lobetti RG, Jacobson LS, Penzhorn BL
skeletal muscle of dogs experimentally or naturally
{2001) Feline
 babesiosis:
 signalment, clinical
infected with Hepatozoon americanum. Veterinary
pathology and concurrent infections. Journal of the
Parasitology 82, 261-272.
South African Veterinary Association 72, 411.
Vincent-Johnson NA, Macintire DK, Lindsay DS, Lenz
Yamane I, Conrad PA, Gardner I {1993) Babesia gibsoni
SD, Baneth G, Shkap V, Blagburn BL {1997) A new
infections in dogs. Journal of Protozoology 3,
Hepatozoon species from dogs: description of the
111-125.
causative agent of canine hepatozoonosis in North
Zahler M, Schein E, Rinder H, Gothe R (1998)
America. Journal of Parasitology 83, 1165-1172.
Characteristic genotypes discriminate between Babesid
canis isolates of differing vector specificity and
pathogenicity to dogs. Parasitology Research 84,
CHAPTER 8
544-548.
Baneth G, Shaw SE (2002) Chemotherapy of canine
Zahler M, Rinder H, Schein E, Gothe R {2000) Detection
leishmaniasis. Veterinary Parasitology 106, 315-324.
of new pathogenic Babesia microti-like species in dogs.
Ciaramella P, Oliva G, de Luna R, Gradoni L, Ambrosio
Veterinary Parasitology 89, 241-248.
R, Cortese L, Scalone A, Persechino A, De Luna R
{1997) A retrospective clinical  study of canine
Cytauxzoonosis
leishmaniasis in 1s0 dogs naturally infected by
Meinkoth J, Kocan AA, Whitworth L, Murphy G, Fox
Leishmaniai
infantum. Veterinary Record 141,
CJ, Woods JP (2000) Cats surviving natural infection
539-543.
with Cytauxz0on felis: 18 cases (1997-1998). Journal
GarciaAlonso M, Blanco A, Reina D, Serrano FJ, Alonso
of Veterinary Internal Medicine 14, 521-525.
C, Nieto CG (1996) Immunopathology of the uveitis in 
canine leishmaniasis. Parasite Immunology 18,
CHAPTER 7
617-623.
Baneth G, Weigler B {1997) A retrospective case-control
Gradoni L (2001) An update on anti-leishmanial vaccine
study of canine hepatozoonosis in Israel. Journal of
candidates and prospects for a canine Leishmania
Veterinary Internal Medicine 11, 1891-1894.
vaccine. Veter inary Parasitology 100, 87-103.
Further reading
147
Koutinas AF, Polizopoulou ZS, Saridomichelakis MN.
Hovius KE, Stark LAM, Bleumink-Pluym NMC, Van der
Argyriadis D, Fytianou A, Plevraki KG {1999) Clinical
Pol I, Verbeek-De Kruif N, Rijpkema SGT, Schouls
considerations on canine  visceral leishmaniasis  in
LM, Houwers DJ (1999) Presence and distribution of
Greece: a retrospective study of 158 cases
Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato in internal organs and
(1989-1996). Journal of theAmerican Animal
skin  of  naturally infected  symptomatic
pue 
Hospital Association 35, 376-383.
asymptomatic dogs, as detected by polymerase chain
Koutinas AF, Scott DW, Kantos V, Lekkas S {1993) Skin
reaction. Veterinary Quarterly 21, 54-58.
lesions in canine leishmaniasis (Kala-Azar): a clinical
Hovius JWR, Hovius KE, Oei A, Houwers DJ, Van Dam
and histopathological study on 22 spontaneous cases
AP (2000) Antibodies against specific proteins of, and 
in Greece. Veterinary Dermatology 3, 121-131.
immobilizing activity against, three strains of Borrelid
Nieto CG, Navarrete I, Habela MA, Serrano F, Redondo
burgdorferi sensu lato can be found in symptomatic
E {1992) Pathological changes in kidneys of dogs with
but not in infected asymptomatic dogs. Journal of
natural Leishmania infection. Veterinary Parasitology
Clinical Microbiology 38, 2611-2621.
45, 33-47.
Kornblatt AN, Urband PH, Steere AC {1985) Arthritis
Pena MT, Roura X, Davidson MG {2000) Ocular and
caused by Borrelia burgdorferi in dogs. fournal of the
 periocular manifestations of leishmaniasis in dogs: 105
American Veterinary Medical Association 186, 960-964.
cases (1993-1998). Veterinary Ophthalmology 3, 35-41.
 Levy SA, Duray PH ( 1988) Complete heart block in a dog
 Pinelli E, Killick-Kendrick R, Wagenaar J, Bernadina W,
seropositive for Borrelia burgdorferi. Journal of
 Del Real G, Ruitenberg J (1994) Cellular and humoral
Veterinary Internal Medicine 2, 138-144.
immune responses  in dogs  experimentally and
Magnarelli LA, Anderson JF, Kaufmann AF, Liebermann
naturally infected with Leishmania infantum. Infection
LL, Whitney GD (1985) Borreliosis in dogs from
and Immunity 62, 229-235.
southern Connecticut. Journal of the American
Quinnell RJ, Courtney O, Davidson S, Garcez L,
Veterinary Medical Association 186, 955s-959.
Lambson B, Ramos P, Shaw J, Shaw MA, Dye C
 Stra ubinger RK, Straubinger AF, Harter L, Jacobson RH,
{2001) Detection of Leishmania infantum by PCR,
Chang YF, Summers BA, Erb HN, Appel MJG (1997)
serology and cellular immune response in a cohort
Borrelia burgdorferi migrates into joint capsules and
study of Brazilian dogs. Parasitology 122, 253-261.
[ouas ul s-uynaanu jo uoeinsaui-dn ue sasnio
Solano-Gallego L, Llull J, Ramos G, Riera C, Arboix M,
membranes of dogs experimentally infected with ticks.
Alberola J, Ferrer L (2000) The Ibizian Hound presents
Infection and Immunity 65, 1273-1285.
a predominantly cellular immune response against
Straubinger RK (2000)  PCR-based quantification of
natural Leishmania infection. Veterinary Parasitology
Borrelia burgdorferi organisms in canine tissues over a
90, 37-45.
500-day postinfection period. Journal of Clinical
 Solano-Gallego L, Morell P, Arboix M, Alberola J, Ferrer
Microbiology 38, 2191-2199.
L {2001) Prevalence of Leishmania infantum infection
in dogs living in an area of canine leishmaniasis
CHAPTER 10
 endemicity using PCR on several tissues and serology.
Birtles RJ, Laycock G, Kenny MJ, Shaw SE, Day MJ
Journal of Clinical Microbiology 39, 560-563.
(2002) Prevalence of Bartonella species causing
bacteraemia in domesticated and companion animals
CHAPTER 9
in the United Kingdom. Veterinary Record 151,
Appel MJG, Allan S, Jacobson RH, Lauderdale 
TL
225-229.
Chang YF, Shin SJ, Thomford JW, Todhunter RJ,
Breitschwerdt EB, Atkins CE, Brown TT, Kordick DL,
Summers BA {1993) Experimental Lyme disease in
Snyder PS (1999) Bartonella vinsonii subsp. berkhoffi
dogs produces arthritis and persistent infection.
and related members of the alpha subdivision of the
Journal of Infectious Diseases 167, 651-664.
Proteobacteria in dogs with cardiac arrhythmias,
Azuma Y, Isogai E, Isogai H, Kawamura K {1994) Canine
endocarditis or myocarditis. Journal of Clinical
Lyme disease: clinical and serological evaluations in 21
Microbiology 37, 3618-3626.
dogs in Japan. Veterinary Record 134, 369-372
Breitschwerdt EB, Kordick DL {2000) Bartonella
Chang YF, Straubinger RK, Jacobson RH, Kim JB, Kim
infection in animals: carriership, reservoir potential,
TJ, Kim D, Shin SJ, Appel MJG (1996) Dissemination 
pathogenicity and zoonotic potential for human
of Borrelia burgdorferi after experimental infection in
infection. Clinical Microbiology Revietws 13, 428-438.
dogs. Journal of Spirochetal Tick-Borne Disease 3,
Chomel BB, Kasten RW, Sykes JE, Boulouis HJ,
80-86.
Breitschwerdt EB {2003) Clinical impact of persistent
Dambach DM, Smith CA, Lewis RM, Van Winkle TJ
Bartonella bacteremia in humans and animals. Annals
(1997)  Morphologic,  immunohistochemical  and
of the New York Academy of Science 990, 267-278.
ultrastructural characterization of a distinctive renal
Guptill L, Slater L, Wu CC, Lin TL, Glickman LT, Welch
lesion in dogs putatively associated with Borrelid
DF, HogenEsch H {1997) Experimental infection of
burgdorferi infection:  49  cases (1987-1992).
young specific pathogen-free cats with Bartonella
Veterinary Pathology 34, 85-96.
henselae. Journal of Infectious Diseases 176, 206-216.
148
 Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Kitchell BE, Fan TM, Kordick D, Breitschwerdt EB,
Waner T, Harrus S, Jongejan F, Bark H, Keysary A,
Wollenberg G, Lichtensteiger CA {2000) Peliosis
Cornelissen WCA {2001) Significance of serological
hepatis in a dog infected with Bartonella benselae.
testing for ehrlichial diseases in dogs with special
Journal of the AmericanVeterinaryMedical
emphasis on the diagnosis of canine monocytic
Association 216, 519-523.
ehrlichiosis caused by Ehrlichia canis. Veterinary
Kordick DL, Brown TT, Shin K, Breitschwerdt EB {1999)
Parasitology 95, 1-15.
Clinical  and  pathologic  evaluation of  chronic
Bartonella henselae or Bartonella clarridgeiae infection
in cats..
Journal of Clinical Microbiology 37,
A. phagocytophilum
1536-1547
Bakken JS, Dumler JS (2000) Human granulocytic
 Pappalardo BL, Brown TT, Tompkins M, Breitschwerdt
ehrlichiosis. Clinical Infectious Diseases 31, 554-560.
EB (2001) Immunopathology of Bartonella vinsonii
Egenvall A, Bjoersdorff A, Lilliehook I, Olsson Engvall E,
(berkhoffi) in experimentally infected dogs. Veterinary
Karlstam E, Artursson K, Hedhammar A, Gunnarsson 
Immunology and Immunopathology 83, 125-147.
A (1998)  Early  manifestations  of  granulocytic
Pappalardo BL,1
 Brown T, Gookin JL, Morrill CL,
ehrlichiosis in dogs inoculated experimentally with a
Breitschwerdt EB (2000) Granulomatous disease
Swedish Ebrlichia species isolate. Veterinary Record
associated with Bartonella infection in two dogs.
143, 412-417.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 14, 37-42.
 Egenvall A, Bonnett BN, Gunnarsson A, Hedhammar A,
Mexas AM, Hancock SI, Breitschwerdt EB {2002)
Shoukri M, Bornstein S, Artursson K {2000)
Bartonella benselae and Bartonella elizabethae as
Seroprevalence of granulocytic Ehrlichia spp. and
potential canine pathogens. Journal of Clinical
Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato in Swedish dogs
Microbiology 40, 4670-4674.
1991-1994. ScandinavianJournal ofInfectious
Diseases 32, 19-25.
CHAPTER 11
Egenvall A, Lilliehook I, Bjoersdorff A, Engvall EO,
Karlstam E, Artursson K, Heldtander M, Gunnarsson
E.canis
A {2000) Detection of granulocytic Ehrlichia species
Dawson JE, Ewing SA {1992) Susceptibility of dogs to
 DNA by PCR in persistently infected dogs. Veterinary
infection with Ebrlichia chaffeensis, causative agent of
Record 146, 186-190.
human ehrlichiosis. American Journal of Veterinary
Herron MJ, Nelson CM, Larson J, Snapp KR, Kansas GS,
Research 53, 1322-1327.
Goodman JL (2000) Intracellular parasitism by the
Dumler JS, Walker DH (2001) Tick-borne ehrlichioses.
human granulocytic ehrlichiosis bacterium through the
Lancet Infectious Diseases April, 21-28.
P-selectin ligand, PSGL-1. Science 288, 1653-1656.
Harrus S, Waner T, Bark H (1997) Canine monocytic
Lepidi H, Bunnell JE, Martin ME, Madigan JE, Stuen S,
ehrlichiosis: an update. Compendium on Continuing
Dumler JS (2000)  Comparative pathology and
Education for the Practicing
Veterinarian
19.
immunohistology associated with clinical illness after
431-447.
Ehrlichia phagocytophila-group infections. American
Harrus S, Waner T, Bark H, Jongejan F, Cornelissen AWC
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 62, 29-37.
(1999) Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis: recent advances.
 Levin ML, Fish D {2000) Acquisition of co-infection and
Journal of Clinical Microbiology 37, 2745-2749.
simultaneous transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi and
Kelly PJ (2000) Canine ehrlichioses: an update. Journal of
Ehrlichia phagocytophila by Ixodes scapularis ticks.
the South African Veterinary Association 71, 77-86.
Infection and Immunity 68, 2183-2186.
Murphy GL, Ewing SA, Whitworth LC, Fox JC, Kocan
Lilliehook I，Egenvall A,Tvedten HW 
(1998)
AA (1998) A molecular and serologic survey of
Hematopathology  in dogs experimentally  infected
Ehrlichia canis and E. euwingi in dogs and ticks from
with a Swedish granulocytic Ehrlichia species.
Oklahoma. Veterinary Parasitology 79, 325-339.
Veterinary Clinical Pathology 27, 116-122.
Neer TM (1998) Ehrlichiosis. Canine monocytic
and
Walker DH (2000) The Task Force on consensus
 granulocytic ehrlichiosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the 
approach  for
ehrlichiosis.
Diagnosing human
Dog and Cat. (ed CE Greene) WB Saunders,
ehrlichiosis: current status and recommendations.
Philadelphia, pp. 139-154.
American Society of Microbiology News 66, 287-290.
Ristic M, Holland CJ {1993) Canine ehrlichiosis. In:
Zeidner NS, Burkot TR, Massung RF, Nicholson WL,
Rickettsial and Chlamydial Diseases of Domestic
 Dolan MC, Rutherford JS, Biggerstaff BJ, Maupin GO
Animals. (eds Z Woldehiwet and M Ristic) Pergamon
(2000)  Transmission  of the agent of human
Press, New York, pp. 169-186.
granulocytic ehrlichiosis by Ixodes spinipalpis ticks:
Stubbs CJ, Holland CJ, Reif JS, Wheeler S, Bruns C,
evidence of an enzootic cycle of dual infection with
Lappin MR {2000) Feline ehrlichiosis. Compendium
Borrelia burgdorferi in northern Colorado. Journal of
on Contimuing Education for the Practicing
Infectious Diseases 182, 616-619.
Veterinarian 22, 307-317.
Further reading
149
A. platys
Harrus S, Aroch I, Lavy E, Bark H {1997) Clinical
Levy MG, Brietschwerdt EB {1994) The use of a
ma nifestations
of
infectious
canine
cyclic
polymerase chain reaction as a diagnostic test for
thrombocytopenia. Veterinary Record 141, 247-250.
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. American Journal of
deAlvarado CMA, Parra OD, Palmar M, Chango RE,
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 50, 59-63.
Alvarado MC (1997) Ehrlichia platys: antigen
Sorvillo FJ, Gondo B, Emmons R, Ryan P, Waterman SH,
 processing and use of the indirect fluorescent antibody
Tilzer A, Andersen EM, Murray RA, Barr AR (1993)
test {IFA) in canines and humans. Revista Cientifica-
A suburban focus of endemic typhus in Los Angeles
Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias 2, 99-109.
County: association with seropositive cats and
Chang ACH, Chang WL, Lin CT, Pan MJ, Lee SC {1996)
opossums. American fournal of Tropical Medicine and
Canine infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia found in
Hygiene 48, 269-273.
Taiwan. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science 58,
Weiser IB, Greene CE (1989) Dermal necrosis associated
473-476.
with Rocky Mountain spotted fever in four dogs.
Brown GK, Martin AR, Roberts TK, Aitkin RJ {2001)
fournal of the American
Veterinary  Medical
Detection of Ehrlichia platys in dogs in Australia.
Association 195, 1756-1758.
Australian Veterinary Journal 79, 554558.
CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER 12
Barr SC (1991) Canine American trypanosomiasis.
Bouyer DH, Stenos J, Crocquet-Valdes P, Moron CG
Compendium on Continuing Education for the
(2001) Rickettsia felis: molecular characterization of a
Practicing Veterinarian 13, 745-754.
new member of the spotted fever group. Internationa!
Carlson ME {1996) Yersinia pestis infection in cats. Feline
fournal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology
Practice 24, 22-24.
51, 339-341.
Eidson M, Elstad JP, Rollag OJ {1991) Clinical,
Breitschwerdt EB, Papich MG, Hegarty BC, Gilger B,
clinicopathological and pathologic features of plague
Hancock SI, Davidson MG (1999) Efficacy
of
in cats: 119 cases (1977-1985). Journal of the
doxycycline, azithromycin or trovafloxacin 
for
American Veterinary
Medical Association 199,
 treatment of experimental Rocky Mountain spotted
1191-1196.
fever
in
dogs.
Antimicrobial
Agents
and
 Lichtensteiger CA, Heinz-Taheny K, Osborne TS, Novak
Chemotherapy 43, 813-821.
RJ, Lewis BA, Firth ML {2003) West Nile virus
Breitschwerdt EB, Walker DH, Levy MG, Burgdorfer W,
encephalitis and myocarditis in wolf and dog. Journa!
Corbett WT, Hurlbert SA, Stebbins ME, Curtis BC,
of Emerging Infectious Diseases 9, 1303-1306.
Allen DA (1988) Clinical, hematologic and humoral
Morita C, Katsuyama J, Yanase T, Ueno H, Muramatsu
immune response in female dogs inoculated with
Y, Hohdatsu T, Koyama H (1994) Seroepidemiological
Rickettsia rickettsii and Rickettsia montana. American
survey of Coxiella burnetii in domestic cats in Japan.
Journal of Veterinary Research 49, 70-76.
Microbiology and Immunology 38, 1001-1003.
Gasser AM, Birkenheuer AJ, Breitschwerdt EB {2001)
Nagaoka H, Sugieda M, Akiyama M, Nishina T, Akahane
Canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever: a retrospective
S, Fujiwara K (1998) Isolation of Coxiella burneti
study of 30 cases. Journal of the American Animal
from the vagina of feline clients at veterinary clinics.
Hospital Association 37, 41 -48.
Journal of Veterinary Medical Science 60, 251-252.
Greene CE, Burgdorfer W, Cavagnolo R, Philip RN,
Reid HW (1998) Louping ill. In: Infectious Diseases of
Peacock MG (1985) Rocky Mountain spotted fever in
the Dog and Cat. (ed CE Greene) WB Saunders,
dogs and its differentiation from canine ehrlichiosis.
Philadelphia, pp. 133-134.
JournaloftheAmerican
Veterinary   Medical
Shaw SE, Birtles H
RJ, Day MJ (2001) Arthropod-
Association 186, 465-472.
transmitted infectious diseases of cats. Journal of
Greene CE, Marks MA, Lappin MR, Breitschwerdt EB,
Feline Medicine and Surgery 3, 193-209.
Wolski NA, Burgdorfer W (1993) Comparison of latex
Weissenbock H, Holzmann H (1997) Tick-borne
agglutination, indirect immunofluorescent antibody
encephalitis in Austrian dogs. Veterinary Record 139,
and enzyme immunoassay methods for serodiagnosis
575-576.
of Rocky Mountain spotted fever in dogs. American 
Woods JP, Crystal MA, Morton RW, Panciera RJ {1998)
Journal of Veterinary Research 54, 20-28.
Tularemia in two cats. Journal of the American Animal
Holman RC, Paddock CD, Curns AT, Krebs JW,
Hospital Association 212, 81-85.
McQuiston JH, Childs JE {2001) Analysis of risk
factors for fatal Rocky Mountain spotted fever:
evidence for superiority of tetracyclines for therapy.
Journal of Infectious Diseases 184, 1437-1444.
Index
Page numbers in italic refer to
Bartonella benselae (continued)
capillary networks 69
tables or boxes
canine infection 116
carbamates 22
feline infection 112, 114, 115
cat scratch disease 119
acaricides 21, 22,109
genogroups 113
cattle 35, 38
acid-base disturbance 67, 74
human disease 119
caval syndrome 54, 55, 59
Aedes spp. 16, 17
Bartonela koebterae 110, 111, 115
cements, tick saliva 32
 agglutination tests 44
Bartonella vinsonii ssp. berkhoffii 110,
cephalexin 118
allopurinol 97
111,113, 115,119
Chagas' disease 20
Ambtyomma spp. 13, 32, 35, 78, 126
bartonellosis
chitin synthesis inhibitors 22
American dog tick 11, 12
aetiology and epidemiology 24, 25,
chloramphenicol 126, 136, 139
amikacin 118
110-13
Chrysops 19 
aminoglycosides 139
canine disease 113, 116
climate 10, 27
amitraz 22
diagnosis 116-18
clindamycin 87, 132
amoxicillin 118
feline disease 110, 112, 115
co-evolution 24, 28
amphotericin B 97, 98
 pathogenesis 114
co-infection 94, 132-3
anaemia, haemolytic 66, 70, 73-4
treatment and control 118-19
complement 24, 32
Anaplasma infections 94, 120
zoonotic potential 119
corticosteroids 59, 74, 108
Anaplasma phagocytophilum 24, 26
β-lactam antibiotics 132
Coxiella burneti 140
Anapiasma platys 132-3
bicarbonate therapy 74
coxiellosis 140
anaplasmosis 132-3
birds, wild species 24, 140
coyotes 78, 113
anti-inflammatory factors, tick saliva
blood smear
cross-reaction 43
32
babesiosis 69
Ctenocephalides canis 14
antibiotics 139
canine hepatozoonosis 83, 84-5
Ctenocepbalides felis 14-15, 112, 137,
rickettsial infections 136
ehrlichiosis 124, 130, 131
138
antibody testing, see serology.
feline hepatozoonosis 87, 88
Cutex spp. 16, 17
anticoagulants, vector saliva 32, 36
making 42
culture, of pathogens 41, 96, 108, 117
antigen tests 57
blood transfusion 10, 73
cutaneous disease 92, 93, 123
antigen-presenting cell (APC) 32
blood-typing_73
cyromazine 22
antimalarial drugs 72
bobcats 74, 78
Cytauxzoon felis 64, 74-6
antimonials 97-8
Boophilus microplus 35, 38
cytauxzoonosis 74-6, 77
arachidonic acid 32
Borrelia burgdorferi 14
cytokines 34-5
arsenical compounds 59
culture 41, 108
atovaquone 72
diagnosis of infection 43, 46
decoquinate 87
autoagglutination 70
epidemiology 100-1
deer 14, 24,25, 27
autoantibody induction 40
transmission 28-9, 34
deer fly (Chrysops) 19
azithromycin 72,132, 139
Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto 25,
deer tick (lxodes scapularis) 11, 14, 32,
43
34-5, 38.
B cells 92
borreliosis
dermatitis, leishmaniosis 93
Babesia canis canis 64
aetiology and epidemiology 24, 25,
Dermatocentor spp. 11, 12, 29, 32, 35
Babesia canis vogeli 64
100-2
Dermatophilus congotensis 35
Babesia felis 64, 65
clinical signs 105-6
diagnostic methods
Babesia gibsoni 9, 10, 63-4
diagnosis 43, 46, 106-8
It suahoyed jo uogegedoudyaimi
Babesia rossi 64
feline disease 102, 106
DNA-based 46-50
babesiosis
pathogenesis 102-3
microscopy 41-2
 aetiology and epidemiology 63-6
treatment and control 108-9
serology 42-6
clinical signs 67-9
zoonotic potential 109
xenodiagnosis 46
diagnosis 69-71
botanical products 22
diethylcarbamazine citrate 60
feline 65, 68-9
brown dog tick (Rhipicephatus 
diminazine 71-2
 pathogenesis 66-7
sanguineus) 10,11,34,35,38,
Dipetatonema reconditum 51, 61
 prevention and control 74
132-3
Dirofilaria immitis 16.
treatment 71-4
Brugia spp. 51
 biology and epidemiology 51
zoonotic potential 74
Bubonic plague 138
dagnosis of infection 44, 56-7, 61
Barbour-Stoenner-Kelly liquid medium
bugs, true 20, 21, 141
life cycle 52
100, 108
 potential vectors 143
Bartonella spp.
canine cyclic thrombocytopenia 132-3
surgical removal 59
culture 41, 117
canine monocytic ehrlichiosis (CME)
Dirofilaria (Nocthiella) repens 51, 60-1
 species and hosts 111
aetiology and epidemiology 121-2
dirofilariasis (heartworm)
Bartonella berkhoffii 119
clinical signs 122-4
 aetiology and epidemiology 52-3
Bartonella clarridgeiae 110, 111, 112,
diagnosis 124-5
aval syndrome 54, 55, 59
113,115,117,119
pathogenesis 122
cassification of severity S8
Bartonella elizabethae 111, 113
treatment and control 126
dinical signs 55
Bartonella benselae 110, 111, 113
 zoonotic potential 126
diagnosis 55-8
150
Index 151
dirofilariasis (heartworm) (continued)
Hepatozoon americanum (continued)
Leishmania donovani 79, 89, 98
feline 52-3
treatment of infection 87
Leishmania infantum 10, 89,90, 98,
human 61
99
pathogenesis 53-5
clinical signs of infection 79, 82
Leishmania tongiplapis 38
prevention 59-60
life cycle 79-81
Leishmania major 38
 subcutaneous 60-1
treatment of infection 86-7
Leishmania tropica 89
treatment 58-9
hepatozoonosis
leishmaniosis 9
DNA-based diagnosis 46-50
canine
aetiology and epidemiology 89-90
*dot blotting² 45-6
 aetiology and epidemiology 78,
dinicopathological findings 93-4
doxycycline 74, 109, 118, 126, 139
79
diagnosis 94-6
clinical signs 82
feline 90, 92, 94
echocardiography 56
 control and prevention 87
 pathogenesis 91-2
Ebrlichia canis 9, 42, 121-7
diagnosis 84-6
prognosis for canine disease 98
Ehrlichia chaffeensis 126
life cycle and transmission 79-82
tansmission of infection 18, 36-7,
Ehrtichia ewingii 126-7
pathogenesis 82
90
ehrlichiosis
 treatment and control 86-7
 teatment and control 97-9
 co-infection in leishmaniosis 94
feline 88
vaccination 38
Ehrlichia canis genogroup 121-7
 zoonotic potential 88
 zoonotic potential 99
granulocytic 127-32
HIV-infection 99
leucocytosis 84
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent
holocyclin 32
lizard, sand 27
assay) 43-4, 96, 106
host immune response 36-7, 39
louping ill 140-1
emergence of diseases 9-10, 66
leishmaniosis 91-2
lufenuron 22, 60
enrofloxacin 118
and sandfly saliva 36
Lutzomyia tongipatpis 36
epidemiology, changing patterns 9-10
and tick saliva 32-5
Lyme disease 24
 sxsda
host species
ecology 24, 25
601 sueigu euaaia
accidental 23-4
see also borreliosis
 erythrocytes, babesiosis 63, 65, 69-70
Bartonella 23, 110, 111
erythromycin 132, 139
 maintenance of infections 26-9
macrolides 59, 72
reservoir 23-4, 25
macrophages 40
feeding behaviour, arthropod vectors
human granulocytic ehrlichiosis 132
maxadilan 36, 38
30
human monocytic ehrlichiosis 126
 meglumine antmonate 97, 98
filarial infections 51
humidity, atmospheric 14, 15
melarsomine dihydrochloride 59
biology and epidemiology of main
humoural immune response 39 40, 91
methoprene 22
agents $1, 52
Hyalomma spp. 38
microscopy 41-2
classification 51-2
hybridization assays 47-8
bartonella spp. 116-17
diagnosis 44
hyperglobulinaemia 40
dirofilariasis 55, 56-7
Dipetalonema reconditum 51, 61
hypoglycaemia 84
Leishmania spp. 96
prevention 59-60
milbemycin oxime 59, 60
see also dirofilariasis
IFAT, see indirect fluorescent antibody
minocycline 126
fipronil 22
test {IFAT)
mobility, dogs and cats 9-10, 90
fagellin protein 103
imidocarb dihydrochloride 72
 molecular diagnostic methods 46-50,
faviviruses 140
imidocarb dipropionate 71, 72, 74, 86,
108, 118
fleas
126,132
 molecular epidemiology 113
bartonellosis transmission 119
jmidocloprid 22, 60
mosquitoes 16, 17, 52, 59, 60
control 21,22,139
 jmmune complexes, circulating 40
mouse
 morphology and life cycle 14-15
immune response, see host immune
white-footed 25
rabbit 27, 28
response
wood 24,25
 rickettsia transmission 137
immune-complex glomerular disease 55
yellow-necked 27
vectorial potential 15 
jmmunoblortting 45-6,125
moxidectin 59, 60
fies, true 19, 21,22
immunohistochemistry 116, 117
muscid flies 19
fluid therapy 74
in-situ hybridization 48
muscle cysts 81-2
fuoroquinolones 136, 139
 indirect fluorescent antibody test
myxomatosis 27-8
forest clearance 10
{IFAT) 44
Francisella tularensis 139
ehrlichiosis 125, 130, 131
neurological signs 105, 106, 124
hepatozoonosis 71, 85-6
neurotoxins
gammopathies 43
jnsect growth inhibitors 22
tick saliva 32
gender, host 26-7
jnsecticides 21, 22, 108-9
vector control chemicals 22
genome, pathogen 46-7
interferon {IFN) 32, 34, 35
neutrophilia 84
gentamycin 132
jnterleukins 32-5
nifurtimox 142
gerbil, giant 28
isac 32
nitenpyram 22
 granulomatous lesions, leishmaniosis
jvermectin 59, 60
nitric oxide 32
93
Ixodes dammini 35
Nochteilla repens, see Dirofilaria
Ixodes bexagonus 11, 12
repens
Haemaphysalis spp. 11, 32, 35
Ixodes bolocycius 32
 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
heartworm, see dirofilariasis
Ixodes pacificus 11
(NSAIDs) 87
hedgehog tick 11, 12
Ixodes ricinus 12-13, 28, 34, 140
helper T cells 32-5
Ixodes scapularis 11, 14, 32, 34-5, 38
ocelots 78
hepatitis 86
ocular signs 94, 123
Hepatozoon americanum
Knott's test 56-7
 organophosphate insecticides 22
diagnosis of infection 84-6
outer surface proteins {Osp) 29, 103
 signs of infection 79, 83-4
Leishmania chagasi 89
oxygen therapy 74
152
Arthropod-borne infectious diseases of the dog and cat
oxytetracycline 126, 139
 sequelae, immune-mediated 39-40
vaccination
serology 42-6
 against arthropod vectors 38
panther, florida 74
babesiosis 71
babesiosis 74
parvaquone 72
Bartonella spp. 118
borreliosis 108-9
pathogen-associated molecular patterns
dirofilariasis 57-8
leishmaniosis 98
{PAMPS) 32
leishmaniosis 96
rickettsial infections 137
pentamidine 72, 98
 sex hormones 27
vectors of infection
 periocular signs 94
sheep 35, 140
competence 27-9
periosteal bone formation 84, 85
sheep tick (lxodes ricinus) 12-13, 28,
control 21, 22, 108-9, 119
permethrin 21, 22
34,140
distribution in environment 26-7
Phtebotomus papatasi 18, 38
sodium thiacetarsamide 59
effects of infectious organisms 30
pigeon, passenger 25
spotted fever group infections 134-7
 interactions with host species 32-7
pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating
stable flies 19
see also named vectors
polypeptide (PACAP) 36
 supportive therapy 73-4, 77
viral encephalitides 140-1
plague (yersiniosis) 28, 29, 138-9
vole
pododermatitis 93
tabanid flies 19
bank 24, 25, 27
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
T cells 32-5, 91
feld 26
49-50, 96, 118
temperature 14, 15
babesiosis 71
testosterone 27'
Warthin-Starry staining 116, 117
borreliosis 108
tetracyclines 126, 127, 136
West Nile virus 9, 141
dirofilariasis 58
Theiteria spp. 64-5, 72, 74
western blortting 45-6, 96
ehrlichiosis 130, 131
T helper cells 32-5
wildlife
'real-time' 49-50
thiacetarsamide 59
maintenance of infections 26-9
primaquine 72
thrombocytopenia 84, 124
 reservoir host concept 23-4, 25
prostaglandin E 32
canine cyclic 132-3
pulmonary thromboembolism 53
thrombocytosis 84
xenodiagnosis 46
pyogranuloma, muscle 81-2
'tick paralysis' 32
pyrantel 60
tck-borne encephalitis (TBE) 10,
yersiniosis (plague) 28, 29, 138-9
pyrethroids 21, 22
140-1
pyrimethamine 87
tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV)
zoonotic disease
pyriproxifen 22
26,27
babesiosis 74
ticks
bartonellosis 119
rabbit flea 27
co-feeding 26
borreliosis 25, 109
rabbits 27-8
control of host infestations 21, 22,
dirofilariasis 61
radiography
74,87,109
ehrlichiosis 126, 127, 132
dirofilariasis 56
disease-transmitting species 11-12,
hepatozoonosis 88
hepatozoonosis 84, 85
64
leishmaniosis 99
rapid immunomigration tests (RIM) 45
effects of Borrelia infection 30
plague 139
relative humidity 15
host responses to 36-7
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 137
resistance to infection, ticks 3
life cycle 13-14
tick-borne encephalitis 141
Rhipicephatus spp. 134
 modulation of host immune response
typanosomiasis 142
Rhipicephatus appendicutatus 31, 32,
31-5
tularaemia 139
35
morphology and feeding 12-13, 28
zoonotic visceral leishmaniosis (ZVL)
Rhipicephalus sanguineus 10, 11, 34,
transmission of infections 26-9
89
35,38,132-3
bartonellosis 110
Richettsia spp. 15
hepatozoonosis 78, 79
Rickettsia conorii 134
vaccination against 38
Rickettsia felis 137
 vectorial potential 14
Rickettsia rickettsii 29, 42, 134-7
togaviruses 140
Rickettsia typhi 137
toxins, tick saliva 32
rickettsial infections
transmission of infections 26-9
flea-transmitted 137
between ticks 26
tick-transmitted 134-7
development of new modes 10
rifambutin 132
vector competence 27-9
rifampicin 132, 139
and vector saliva 32-6
RNA viruses 140
travel, dogs and cats 9-10, 90
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 134-7
Triatoma 20, 141
rodents, as reservoir hosts 23-8
triazapentadiene (amitraz) 22
trimethoprim 139
saliva (arthropod)
trimethoprim-sulphadiazine clindamcin
sandflies 36
 pyrimethamine (TCP) 87
ticks 32-5
trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole
salivary gland extract (SGE) 34-5, 36
132
sandflies
trovafloxacin 132
effects of Leishmania infection 30
trypan blue 72
host interactions 36-7
Trypanosoma cruzi 20, 46, 141
leishmaniosis transmission 90, 91
trypanosomiasis 141-2
morphology and life cycle 18
tlaraemia 139
vaccination against 38
selamectin 22, 59, 60
ultrasonography 56
selection pressures 24