Diagnosis
and treatment
of joint diseases
of small animals
Masahiro Okumura
Virbac
ANIMAL HEALTH
Diagnosis
and treatment
of joint diseases
of small animals
Masahiro Okumura
LaboratoryofVeterinarySurgery
DepartmentofVeterinaryClinicalScience
GraduateSchoolofVeterinaryMedicine
HokkaidoUniversity
Contents
Introduction
5
2
Structure and Function of Joints
3
 Joint diseases of animals and Diagnosis
11
JointDiseasesofAnimals
12
Diagnosis of Joint Diseases
13
 1 - General physical examination
13
2-Examination oflameness
14
 3 - Orthopedic evaluation
14
 4 - Diagnostic imaging
16
X-ray examination
17
Arthroscopy
18
Tomographic Imaging (X-ray CT, MRI, Ultrasonography, or others)
19
5 - Tests on the synovial fluid
20
Appearance
21
Cytological analysis
21
Protein content
21
Bacteriologic culture test
21
4
Treatment of Joint Diseases
23
1 - Conservative therapy
24
Non-drug conservative therapy
24
Drug therapy
24
Purposes
24
Control of pain
24
- Control of joint inflammation
25
Correction of degraded joint structure
25
-Modification of cartilage matrix metabolism
25
Practical aspects of drug therapy
25
-Steroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
25
Disease-Modifying OsteoarthritisAgents(DMOA)
27
2 - Surgical treatment
28
Conclusion
31
References
32
Authors
MasahiroOkumura
DoctorofVeterinaryMedicine,PhD(HokkaidoUniversity)
Brief academic and professional particulars:
March1990 GraduatedfromSchool ofVeterinaryMedicine,Hokkaido University
April1990JoinedadoctoratecourseatGraduateSchool ofVeterinaryMedicine,HokkaidoUniversity
August1990-July1992Tookleaves of absencefromGraduateSchool towork aslecturer ofparaclinical studies
at School of Veterinary Medicine,Zambia University.
September1993Left GraduateSchool ofVeterinaryMedicine,HokkaidoUniversity.
October1993Joined asAssistantProfessorin theLaboratory ofVeterinarySurgery,
School ofVeterinaryMedicine,HokkaidoUniversity.
April1995Joined theGraduateSchoolofVeterinaryMedicine asAssistantProfessor,Hokkaido
University;still holding this position currently.
December 2000 Obtained doctorate inVeterinaryMedicine(PhD)fromHokkaidoUniversity
Toru Fujinaga
Doctor ofVeterinaryMedicine
Brief academic and professional particulars:
1968GraduatedfromSchool ofVeterinaryMedicine,HokkaidoUniversity
1970Completed theMasterscourse atGraduateSchool ofVeterinaryMedicine,
Hokkaido University.
1970JoinedAnimal Clinic,Federation of HokkaidoAgricultural Mutual AidAssociations
(Hokkaido NOSAI).
1975JoinedSchool of VeterinaryMedicine,HokkaidoUniversity,asResearchFellow.
1976 Joined theNational Institute of Animal Health,Ministry ofAgriculture,Forestry
and Fisheries
1985 Joined in the Department of Surgery as Associate Professor, School of Veterinary
Medicine,HokkaidoUniversity.
1990 Joined in the Department of Surgery asProfessor, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Hokkaido University.
1995Joined Laboratory ofVeterinarySurgery asProfessor,theDepartment ofVeterinary
Clinical Science,GraduateSchool ofVeterinaryMedicine,HokkaidoUniversity.
Thisbookletispublishedwith thesupportfromVirbacSA.
Introduction
Today, small animal clinicians encountes dogs and cats
suffering from joint diseases more frequently than before.
This is due to the increase in life expectancy of the animals
and the current trend of people having medium to large
breeds of dogs, which are more likely to develop joint
disorders, as pets. Quite often veterinarians find it difficult
to accurately diagnose and treat joint diseases because of
the particular functional characteristics of joints.
In this article, the outline of the methods of diagnosing and
treating joint diseases of small animals are described.
5
Structure
and function
of joints
Structureandfunctionofjoints
Structure and function of joints
The joints of the limbs are regarded as synovial joints with a synovial membrane, nor-
mally containing synovial fluid (joint fluid). The opposing epiphyses of the bones that
form joints are connected together by a connective tissue membrane. Its outer layer is the
joint capsule,with a tough ligament-like structure,which is continuous with the perios-
teum. The inner layer of the capsule is the synovial membrane, which secretes and meta-
bolizes the synovial fluid that fills the articular cavity. The synovial membrane also
controls the cartilage matrix metabolism through synovial chemical mediators. Hyaline
cartilage covers the articular surfaces of the bones that constitute the joints. In addition,
menisci (articular discs) made of fibrocartilage are present between articular surfaces of
the facing epiphyses in some joints, such as knee joints (Fig. 1).
Fig.1 -Structure of a joint
Joint capsule
Articular
Perioste
Sthedition,IgakuSh
Articular cartilage consists of cartilage cells and a large amount of cartilage matrices pro-
duced from the cells. It does not have blood vessels, nerves or lymphatic tissues. Nutrients
are transferred through the synovial fluid. About 80% of the cartilage matrix is water, and
the rest of it consists of collagen(12%), proteoglycan(2%), and other substances. The bio-
chemicalcharacteristicsofthecartilagematrixhaveanimportantroleinabsorbingthe
impact of shock in the joint and its lubrication system. The cartilage matrix comprises
elastic tissue having a collagen skeleton and proteoglycan that controls the water content.
Proteoglycans have an unique structure in which a number of monomers are bound to hya-
luronic acid chains (Fig.2).
8
Structureandfunctionofjoints
Fig.2-Structureofthecartilagematrix
1.TypeIlcollagenfibre
2.Hyaluronic acid
3.Decholin core
4.Dermatansulphate
5.G1 domain
6.Chondroitin sulphate
7.G3domain
8.Chondroitinsulphate
9.Keratan slphate
10.G2domain
11.Link protein
12. Type IX collagen
rce:Reference3
Mcllwraith, C.W,Trotter G.W.
(1996):Joint disease in the horse.
W.B.Saunders,Philadelphia,USA.
Theproteoglycanmonomershaveabrush-likestructureinwhichanumber ofchondroi-
tin sulphate chains, which are the main components, and keratan sulphate chains are
connected toprotein,which connected to thehyaluronicacidchain(Fig.3).
Thematrix ismetabolized and controlled by the cartilage cells and thebalance between
itsanabolismandcatabolismisbeingmaintainedinhealthyjoints.
Fig.3-Proteoglycan monomer
In animals having joint disease,the homeostasis of cartilage matrixmetabolism breaks
down,and the characteristics of thematrix arebeinglost,causing lowering of viscoelas-
ticity and loss of the lowfriction characteristics of articular cartilage,eventuallyleading
to degenerative diseases such as osteoarthritis (OA), or degenerative joint disease
(DJD).
10
Joint diseases
of animals
and Diagnosis
JointdiseasesofanimalsandDiagnosis
Jointdiseasesofanimals
Joint diseases of small animals can be, based on their causes, classified into two catego-
ries; inflammatory diseases and non-inflammatory diseases.
.The causes of inflammatory joint diseases are very varied:
>Immune-mediated factors,
>Microbial infection,
>secondaryeffectsoftrauma.
Currently, more than 300 such causes have been listed in the medical literature.
Non-inflammatoryjoint diseasesinclude disorders such as:
osteoarthritis, osteoarthritis caused by the degeneration with age of joint
structures, such as cartilage,
-osteoarticulardysplasia thatoccurs duringthegrowthphase,such asdyspla-
sia of hips.
Although no proper epidemiological survey has been carried out in Japan, joint disorders
caused by osteoarticular dysplasia during the growth phase are found in large-sized cani-
ne breeds such as Retrievers or others. On the other hand, joint diseases caused by ageing
affect most canine breeds and are particularly common in Shetland Sheep dogs.
12
JointdiseasesofanimalsandDiagnosis
Diagnosis of joint diseases
Jointdiseases arediagnosedwiththehelpof
1) general physical examination,
2) examination of lameness,
3) orthopaedic evaluation,
4) examination of the synovial fluid,
 5) diagnostic imaging.
1 - General Physical Examination
Thefirststepindiagnosisistointerviewtheowner toobtainarecordofthehistoryofthe
animal’s disease.Age, sex,breed (for signalment) and vaccination history form the basic
data.Inaddition,informationonthehomeenvironmentandthereasonsforwhytheani-
mal is being kept are to be collected. The final objective of the therapy differs depending
on whether the animal is kept as a pet, as a working dog, for exhibition, or for racing.
Table1-Pointstobekeptinmindwhileinterviewingtheowner
fordiagnosingjointdiseases
1.Differentiate thepetowner'sopinions about theconditions theirpet isin from the ones
given from an objectiveperspective.
2.Onset of the disease:Was it sudden or gradual?
3.Theperiod forwhich theanimal hasbeen sufferingfrom theproblemand theprogress
ofthedisease.
4. If the symptoms appear intermittently,when do they appear and are they cyclic?
5.Movementof theanimal:Isit autonomous?Doestheanimalmovetogetherwith
other animals? What is theextent ofmovement?
Afterinterviewing theowner,carryouta medicalcheck,anexaminationof thegait,
andneurological tests on theanimal.
Thehistoryoftheanimalandtheperiodspentwiththecurrentowneralsoconstitute
important data.If the animal grewwith the present owner from birth,it may be possible
tofindouttheconditionofitssiblings.Inthecaseofanimalsrequiredtoperformcertain
kinds of work or participate in races, the disease may be related to changes in rearing
environment.
Informationaboutthecurrentdiseaseshouldthenbecollectedfromtheowner.
Information provided by the owner would become very useful in diagnosis if an abnor-
mal gait is themain complaint, and especiallywhen there is intermittent lameness or if
theextentoflamenesschanges.ThepointsmentionedinTable1should bekeptinmind
whileinterviewingtheowner.
13
Joint diseases of animals andDiagnosis
2 -Examination of Lameness
While examining animals for lameness, it is important to determine whether the cause
lies in the musculoskeletal system,nervous system,or elsewhere.
For inspecting the mode of lameness, firstly, examine the attitude of the legs.
Secondly, while observing the animal, have the animal walk towards you, and also have
the walk away from you.
Have the animal walk slowly, trot, run and jump.
In some cases, it may take some time for the lameness to appear.
The major points to be observed are the strides of each foot and whether all joints are
moving normally under loading.
3-OrthopaedicEvaluation
Orthopaedic examination is undertaken if the cause of the lameness is suspected to be in
the musculoskeletal system. In orthopaedic examination, the first step is to understand
the data collected by questioning the owner. It is also necessary to take the diseases that
are most frequent in animals of that age, sex and breed into account. Observing the gait
of the animal as explained above and its posture while standing also form part of ortho-
paedic evaluation.
Have the animal stand still and check whether there is any muscle atrophy in the legs.
Also,check muscle reactions,and whether the animal feels pain along the spine at the neck
or the back, and whether there is any fibrosis around any joints.
Secondly, palpate to identify joints, bones, ligaments and tendons that have pain, swel-
ling or instability (Table 2).
Table2Pointstobekeptinmind duringpalpationfordiagnosisof joint diseases
1.Is there any anatomical abnormality or displacement (luxation or subluxation)
2. When does the animal show signs of pain?
3. Is there any restriction in the range of motion of any leg or joint?
4.Is there any crepitus?
5.Whatis thecondition of thesoft tissues thatsupport the joints,such asthecollateral,
dorsal,palmarandcruciateligaments ofeach joint?
If the animal limps, palpate all the legs in the distal to proximal direction, and then, exa-
mine presences of pain, joint mobility, and the extent of swelling in order to identify the
abnormal part. If a joint has some disorder, there may be swelling because of an increase
in the amount of synovial fluid. This can be determined by pressing on the joint (Fig.4).
No sedative or analgesic should be given until this stage is completed because the ani-
mal's reactions need tobe observed.
14
JointdiseasesofanimalsandDiagnosis
Fig.4-1
Fig.4-2
Fig.4-3
Palpationof theelbowjoint
Palpationof theknee
Palpationofthehip
joint
joint
Next, carry out biodynamic tests on the joint afterimmobilizing the animal with a sedative
 or an anesthetic. The sedated animal will not show any signs pain, therefore, it is necessary
to identify the abnormal joint before sedating the animal.
The stability of the joint is examined by manipulation:
>to elicit the cranial drawer sign in case of anterior cruciate ligament rupture of the
knee joint (Fig. 5),
> the Ortolani sign (Fig. 6) used for evaluating stability of hip joints having dysplasia,
>theBardensigncanbedetected.
Fig.5-Detectionof
Fig. 6 - Detection of the Ortolani sign
thedrawersign
B
BookReference4.Whittick.W.G.
Source:Reference4.Whittick,W.G.(1990):Canine Orthopedics.Lea&Febiger,
Philadelphia,USA.
USA.
Asidefromexaminingthestabilityofthejoint,onehastoalsodeterminewhetherthejoint
has crepitus.This is an important clue in diagnosinginstability or damage of the joint struc-
ture, such as intra-articular fracture, or arthrophyte (a joint mouse).
15
JointdiseasesofanimalsandDiagnosis
4 -Diagnostic Imaging
Imagingcanbe animportant auxiliarytechniquein diagnosingjoint diseases.Simplex-
ray examination, arthroscopy, x-ray CT, MRI, or ultrasonography can be used for dia-
gnostic imaging. However,we have tokeep in mind that in the case of joint diseases the
images obtained in this manner do not always show the current problem only.Therefore,
it is necessary to balance the images obtained through the history with the findings of the
physicalexamination,andtheresultsoforthopaedicevaluation.
Fig.7-1-Changesinjoint structurecausedbyjointdisease
Increased
intramedullary
Bone
pressure
Distended
Periosteum
periosteum
Medullary
Remodeledsub-
cavity
Collateral
ligament
Physical/biochemi-
cal capsulitis
Joint
capsule
Osteophyte
Subchondral
bone
Erosion/ulceratior
Articular
ofcartilage
Articular
cartilage
Source:Reference3
Mcllwraith,C.W,Trotter,G.W.(1996):
Jointdiseaseinthehorse.,W.B.Saunders,
Philadelphia,USA.
Fig.7-2-OAofelbow joint
Fig.7-3-OAofelbow joint
(fragmentedmedialcoronoidprocessofulna)
(remodelingofthesubchondral bone)
Reference4
Whittick,WG.(1990):CanineOrhopedis.
Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia,USA.
16
JointdiseasesofanimalsandDiagnosis
Fig.7-4-0Aof hip joint
Fig. 7-5 - OA of knee joint
tedinthe
Source:RefreneWhittckWG.(1990:CaieOrpedis,andFebigerPhiladhiaUA
1 -Radiographicexamination
Radiographic examination is the most widely used and important confirmatory diagnostic
testforvariousdiseases.
Radiography can be used to :
-evaluate the state of the bones in the joint,
detect calcification (osteophyte, enthesophyte, or others) around the joint,
indirectlyestimatetheamountofsynovialfluid(byobservingtheshiftingofthejoint
capsule and adipose tissue),
-evaluate theswelling ofsoft tissues around thejoint(Fig.7).
TheitemslistedonTable3shouldbeconsideredwhileradiographicexaminationsare
conducted.Exceptforjointsshowingclearsignsofdislocationorinstability,orwhen
thereisafracturein or around thejoint,theradiographicfindingsmustbeinterpreted
takingtheclinical findings(resultsofgeneralphysical and orthopedictestsexaminations)
alsointoaccount,forevaluatingchronicdeformationofjoints.Althoughwhenananimal
shows anunnaturalgait,radiography should neverbeused just to“trytodetect the abnor-
malitybyradiographicexaminationofallthejointsofallfourlegs.
Table3-Points tobekeptinmindinx-rayexaminationofjoints
1.There is often a considerable time gap between the onset of the disease and the stage
when the lesionscanbedetectedbyradiography.
2. Not all lesions detected by x-rays may be directly related to the current disease.
3. Whether the x-ray images are the ones that were taken using acceptable methods should
be takeninto account.
4.Surveyradiography isusuallynot useful fordiagnosis of joint diseases,such as
osteoarthritis in particular.
17
Joint diseasesofanimalsandDiagnosis
2-Arthroscopy
Arthroscopic devices have been improved and miniaturized in recent years, and arthro-
scopes are beingused for diagnosis and treatment of joint diseases of small animals.
Apart from being less invasive, arthroscopy has the advantage of allowing in vivo obser-
vation of structures inside joints. Arthroscopic findings in the synovial membrane and the
articular cartilage surfaces inthe articular cavityfilledwith synovial fluid are often dif-
ferentfrom those obtainedwhen arthrotomyis done.Thefact that detailed observations
can be made in vivo by arthroscopy is a significant advantage in the diagnosis of joint
diseases (Fig.8).
Fig.8-Arthroscopyof theelbowjoint
Arthroscopy and arthroscopic surgery are currently used for excising and removing
osteocartilagenous parts affected by osteochondritis dissecans (osteochondral fragments)
(Fig. 9),
Fig.9-Fragmentedmedial coronoidprocess of the ulna
Humerus
Radius
meu
punfo
nders,Philadelphia,USA
18
Joint diseases ofanimals andDiagnosis
> for taking biopsy samples of inflamed synovial membrane (Fig. 10),
> for observing ligaments, tendons, synovial membrane and articular cartilage
inside the joint (Fig.11).
Fig.10-Inflammationof thesynovial
Fig.11-Thebiceps tendon
membrane
intheshoulderjoint
3 - Tomographic imaging (x-ray CT, MRI, ultrasonography, or others)
It is difficult to observe the three-dimensional structure of a joint through simple radio-
graphy. Thus, tomographic imaging of joint structures is regarded as an important mea-
sure for improving the accuracy of the diagnosis. Such modern techniques as x-ray, CT,
andMRI have begun tobe used for diagnosis of joint diseases of small animals.The
effectivenessofthesemethodsbywhichlesioncanbeobservedwithoutinterference
from overlapping bones and their usefulness in diagnosing several diseases of the hip
joints or elbow joints have been reported (Fig.12).
In some cases, the lesion can be easily observed in the computer reconstructed three
dimensional image (Fig. 13).
Fig.12-X-ray CTimage of a
Fig.13-X-rayCT3-D imageof a fragmentedmedial
fragmentedmedialcoronoidprocess
coronoidprocess of the ulna
oftheulna
Hum
Rad
Radius
lna
X-ray CT is excellent in detecting calcification while MRI can show an image of even
soft tissueslike cartilage and tendon.These techniques arenowused in human medicine
todiagnosejointdiseases.However,theirclinicalusehasnotyetbecomeroutine for
19
Jointdiseasesof animalsandDiagnosis
small animalsbecause they are presently expensive,require deep sedation or anesthesia,
andstillhaveproblemswiththeresolutionoftheimagesobtained.
Ultrasonography is also being carried out on joints.It has been found useful in detecting
lesions of meniscus and ligaments. However, ultrasound cannot pass through calcified
areas,so the acousticwindowwill be extremely small forthejoints of small animals,and
therefore,it isnot currentlyconsidered as apractical examination.
5 - Tests on synovial fluid
Examiningsynovialfluidisnotacommonlyusedprocedureinadiagnosisandtreatment
ofjointdiseasesinsmallanimals.However,sincetheinformationobtainedfromthe
synovial fluid reflects the conditions within the joint,it is quite effective in detecting and
evaluating infections,neoplasia,and inflammation,which are potential causes of morbid
changes.A 22-25G needle and an approximately 2 ml syringe are used for puncturing the
joints of small animals.The reason forusing a syringe of this size is to avoid loss of fluid
puncturing--, and also to ensure the negative pressure necessary for suction.When a large
amount of synovial fluid is to be sampled and tested, anticoagulation treatment with
EDTA or heparin becomes necessary.
The parameters that can be tested using the synovial fluid are listed in Table 4.
Only a small amount of synovial fluid as a sample can be taken when puncturing
a normaljoint.Forinstance,theamountoffluid is onlyabout0.01 to1.0mleven
in case of puncturing in large joints of dogs. If the amount of fluid sampled is
muchless thanwhatwasestimatedbypalpation,thiscould be anindication of
the formation of fibrin or pannus (granular tissue formed on the articular surface
because of inflammation) in the joint.
Table4-Particularsanalyzedusingthesynovialfluid
1.The amount of synovial fluid
2.Appearance:Colour,transparency andviscosity
3.Cytological analysis:Cell morphology and cell count
4.Proteincontent
5.Bacteriologicculture test:anaerobic and aerobic
6.Others(mucin,glucosesugars,jointmarkers,anti-nuclearantibodies,rheumatoid
factors,etc)
20
JointdiseasesofanimalsandDiagnosis
Appearance
Normal synovial fluid is transparent or has a slightly yellowish colour. Reduced transpa-
rency suggests bleeding in the joint or an increase in the cell count. A coloured superna-
tant of the synovial fluid suggests chronic intra-articular bleeding. The viscosity of the
synovial fluid is evaluatedvisually at the time of its sampling.If theviscosity is to be
compared, the fluid should be preserved after heparin is added so that it can be tested at
the same time as other samples are tested. The viscosity of the synovial fluid generally
decreaseswhen there is inflammation of the joint.
Cytologicalanalysis
Normal synovial fluid hardly contains any cells except for a few nucleated ones. It is
considered that the cell count differs depending on joints, and the nucleated cell count is
generally less than 3,000/ul of synovial fluid. When a much higher cell count is expec-
ted,thecellsmustbecounted afterdilutingthesamplewithphysiologicalsaline.Acidic
diluents should not be used because they may coagulate the mucin in the synovial fluid.
The nucleated cells are mostly lymphocytes and large monocytes, with very few neutro-
phils.Theneutrophil count,however,maybehigherif thereisinflammationinthejoint.
One can predict the type of morbidity in the jointby observing the morphology of the
neutrophils when there is an increase in their count.Infectious joint disease produces
toxic effects such as chromatic agglutination and granulation in neutrophils.They have
near-normal shape when the joint disease is immune-mediated. If cells of abnormal shape
are found in the synovial fluid, one should suspect a tumour, etc. or other disease.
Proteincontent
It has been reported that the protein content of normal synovial fluid taken from canine
shoulder, carpal orknee joints is 2.0-2.5 g/dl.The protein content can be determined with
a refractometer. The amount of the protein content increases according to severity of joint
inflammation, showing the level of value close to the one found in blood plasma.
Bacteriologicalculturetest
Culturingsynovialfluidortissueisdoneforbothaerobicandanaerobicbacteria,for
detecting bacterial infection in a joint. Gram staining of the synovial fluid is often useful
for a tentative diagnosis of bacterial infection before the results of the bacteriological cul-
ture are received. Even if the results of bacteriological culture test prove negative, other
tests should be carried out when other findings suggest infectious arthritis.
21
22
Treatment
of joint
diseases
23
Treatmentof jointdiseases
Treatment of joint diseases
Jointdisordersaretreatedthroughconservativetreatmentsorsurgery.Oneofthemajor
problems found in joint diseases is cartilage damage caused by primary and secondary
diseases. As discussed earlier, it is important to maintain cartilage matrix metabolism in
order to have the joint function retained. Once the cartilage is damaged by trauma or joint
inflammation,it will take a long time to heal.The primary goal of the treatment of joint
diseaseistorepair articularcartilageandrestorejointfunction.Treatmentsofosteoar-
thritis in the main,methods of treating joint disease and some points to be kept in mind
during a treatment shall now be discussed.
The administration of drugs alone is not sufficient to treat osteoarthritis. Drug therapies
needtobecombinedwithmildexerciseandweightcontrolforfastrestorationofthe
functions of joints.In some cases,an underlyingdiseasemayhave tobetreated,or sur
gery may be required.
1 - Conservative Therapy
The ultimate goals of conservative therapy should be:
>toremovethecauseofthejointdisease,
>tocontrol thepaininordertoimprovetheanimal'squalityof life,
> to repair the cartilage that has been damaged by the disease.
Plans for therapy can include weight control, management of exercise, and medication.
Non-drug conservative therapy
The physical build of an animal with joint disease should be evaluated, and its diet
should be suitably changed so that the animal will have an appropriate, or even a slight-
ly lower,body weight.It is recommended that animals with osteoarthritis should be pro-
hibited from doing work or strenuous exercise and, instead, be allowed to do some mild
exercise on a dailybasis.This istomaintaintherangeof motion of thejoint,tostreng
then soft tissues around the joint, and to enhance metabolic activity in the cartilage by
mild loading.
Drug therapy
Purposes
The expected effects and the points to be kept in mind while treating osteoarthritis with
drugs can be summarized as follows:
Control of pain
A pain caused by joint disease not only lowers the animal's quality of life but also
 induces inflammatory mediators in the joint. It has been pointed out that this aggra-
vates the disease.Pain control is,thus,an important part of the management of joint
24
Treatmentofjointdiseases
disease. However, if the pain is reduced rather unnecessarily, the animal may become
too active, and then the affected joint may become overloaded.
Controlof jointinflammation
Inflammation in the joint, of the synovium in particular, elicits the release of bio-
chemicalmediatorsthatacceleratethedegenerationofthearticularcartilageand
redirect the balance of cartilage metabolism in a direction that would destroy the
cartilage. Therefore, it is important to control inflammation in the joint.
Correctionofdegradedjointstructure
Therearenodrugsthatcanremovetheosteophytesorreversechangesinperiarticu
lar structures. Also, no drug can directly repair damaged cartilage. Therefore, auxi-
liarytreatmentistobegiveninordertopreventfurtherdamageinthejointstructure.
Also, surgerymay alsobe needed in some cases.
-Modificationofcartilagematrixmetabolism
The onset of joint disease alters the metabolic balance of the cartilage matrix and adver-
sely affects its biodynamics, allowing the advancement of osteoarthritis. DMOA
(Disease-ModifyingOsteoarthritisAgents)containingchondroitinsulphate,glucosami-
ne, hyaluronic acid, or other drugs, are presently drawing much attention as medications
that may suppress the decomposition of cartilage matrix and promote its formation.
Practical aspects of drug therapy
Medication is an important method of treating osteoarthritis that requires maximum cau-
tion. Since long-term use of drugs is usually necessary in animals with osteoarthritis, drugs
with minimum side effects are preferred. NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs),
steroids, and DMOAD may be a choice of the drugs used in order to achieve the purposes
mentioned above.
SteroidsandNSAIDs
The most commonly used drug therapy for canine joint disease at present is the admi-
nistrationofsteroidsorNSAIDs.
Steroids effectively alleviate symptoms temporarily, and intra-articular administration of
steroids may be effective for rapid suppression of acute synovitis in an early stage.
However,itcertainlyinhibitsthephysiologicalmechanismsthatarenecessaryinhealing
process of joint structure.While the symptoms are temporarily reduced,progressive arti-
culardisintegrationoccurssteadilyin thebackground (Fig.14).Therefore,steroidsmust
be used only after careful consideration, except in such a case that a temporary allevia-
tion of the symptoms is desired, or in case that it is considered difficult to use NSAIDs
on cats.NSAIDs have the effect of relieving inflammation by inhibiting the arachidonic
acid cascade via cyclo oxygenase (COX) (Fig.14). There are two types of COX on which
NSAIDs act. These are COX1, which is physiologically necessary, and COX2, which
causesproblemsatthetimeofinflammation.Unfortunately,noneoftheNSAIDspre-
sently available can specifically inhibit COX2 alone (Fig.15).Thus,no NSAIDs can eli-
minatetheir sideeffects on tothe digestive tract,thekidneys andother organs.
Meloxicam, carprofen, etodolac and nimesulide have been developed as NSAIDs that
25
Treatment of jointdiseases
have some specificity towards COx2 and ready for use in veterinary practice. These
NSAIDs can be administered over a longer period than the existing NSAIDs such as aspi-
rin, flunixine or other drugs. They are considered to improve veterinary drug therapy for
osteoarthritis.However,we have to remember thefacts that these newNSAIDs also have
side effects and have little direct effects on healing of damaged cartilage.
Fig.14-Mechanismofmanifestationofinflammationandtheactionofsteroids
&non-steroidalanti-inflammatorydrugs(NSAIDs)
Tissue damage
Cell damage
Induction of
inflammatory cytokines
Cell membrane
12-HETE,DHTs,EETS
phospholipids
Phospholipase A2
CytochromeP450
Suppression
monooxygenase
Arachidonic acid
Steroides
Lipooxygenase (Lox-tepoxalin)
Cyclooxygenase(Cox)
Suppression
PGH
Leukotriene,
lipoxin, etc.
PGs,thromboxane
NSAIDs
=Manifestation of inflammation =
Source:Refeence2Johnston,S.A.（1997):“Osteoarthritis"Veterinary ClinicsofNorthAmerica,SmallAnimalPractice27（4)
W.B.Saunders,Philadelphia,USA.
Fig. 15 -Action of cyclooxygenase (COX) and non-steroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Cell damage
Cell membrane
Physiological
phospholipids
Inflammatory
Arachidonic acid
COX-1
COX-2
PGH
NSAIDs
PGH2
PGH,thromboxane
PGH,thromboxane
Stomach,liver,
Monocytes, fibroblasts,
vascular endothelium.platelets
synovial cellscartilagecells
WB.SaePdpA
Disease-Modifying OsteoarthritisAgent(DMOA)
Presently, DMOA are gaining importance in both human and veterinary medicine as
drugs for treating osteoarthritis. It has been shown through basic studies that these new
drugs can prevent and repair cartilage damage whereas NSAIDs provide “passive” symp-
tomatictherapythatalleviatesthesymptomsanddelaystheadvancementofthedisease.
26
Treatmentofjointdiseases
Hyaluronicacidhasbeenreported asone oftheDMOAsinuse.Inhumans,whenhya
luronic acidisinjectedintothecavityof ajointafflictedbyosteoarthritis,symptomssuch
asjointpainareempiricallyalleviatedforarelativelylongtime(severalmonths)after a
series ofinjections.
Ithasbeenreportedrecentlythatsimilarresultstohyaluronicacidinjectionscanbe
achieved by orally administering chondroitin sulphate or glucosamine. These substances
are characterized as health foods rather than drugs. Therefore, all over the world, many
patients with osteoarthritis are taking them regularly. Similar products have been develo-
pedforthetreatmentofjointdiseasesofsmallanimals,andsomereportsontheireffica-
cy have also appeared. Currently, various experiments are underway in different labora-
toriestoclarifythemechanismofmanifestationoftheseeffects.Wehavealsoobtained
generally good results when we used these substances on osteoarthritic dogs.
Thesesubstances arecurrentlybelievedtoinhibitthe advancementofarthritisand assist
in the healing of articular cartilage.
Formulationsofhyaluronicacidandpolysulphatedglycosaminoglycansarebeing
used in veterinary practice for direct injection into the joints or as subcutaneous,
intramuscularorintravenousinjectables
- Chondroitin Sulphate and Glucosamine are being given orally. These substances
have been shown to bring about clear improvement in clinical symptoms of joint
diseases.Invitrostudieshaveshownthattheyalsohaveanti-inflammatoryand
cartilage protecting effects, through inhibition of inflammatory mediators in addi-
tiontoacartilagerepairingeffect.
The greatest advantage of using these substances in treating osteoarthritis of animals is
thattheyare apparentlyfreeofmajorsideeffects.Thepossiblesideeffectsareaheparin
like action or a glucose loading effect because of the sugar chains contained in them.
However, no significant effects of either type have been found up until now. This finding
can be of great advantage when these substances are to be given to animals with osteoar-
thritisthatrequirelife-longtreatmenttomaintainacertainqualityoflife.
Hyaluronic acid
Acertaindegreeofcareisneededintheadministrationof hyaluronic acidintothejoints
ofsmall animals.Asdiscussedinthesectionondiagnosis,thearticularcavitiesofsmall
animals have a fairly small capacity. If an excess of hyaluronic acid is injected into the
cavity,it can cause pain.If it were to leak around the joint, it could cause periarthritis.
Intra-articularinjectionofhyaluronicacidinsmall animalscanbedonerelativelysafe-
ly onlywhentheinjectionis doneintotheshoulder,elbow,hip andknee.Inmostcases,
the injection of hyaluronic acid improves the environment within the articular cavity,
and therefore, anti-inflammatory and cartilage protecting effects can be expected. The
dosageanddurationofadministrationmustbedecidedwhilemonitoringthealleviation
of symptoms. One can expect to see improvement after several injections at an interval
of 1-2 weeks. Intravenous administration of hyaluronic acid has now become a part of
clinical practice in horses. It is considered that the intravenously administered hyaluro-
nicacidiseffectivebecauseitreachesthejointsandalsoincreasestheamountofthis
acidbeingproducedendogenously.However,certainaspectsofclinicalintravenous
27
Treatmentofjointdiseases
administration of hyaluronic acid, such as the effect of the formulation’s viscosity,are
notyetwell understood.
Polysulphated glycosaminoglycans
Products containing polysulphated glycosaminoglycans are currently administered intra-
muscularly in treating joint diseases of small and large animals. Fairly extensive resear-
ch has been carried out on this substance, and it is widely used at present in the clinical
management of mild to moderately severe joint disorders. It can be certainly administe-
red through injection. However, since it is presently not considered to be an oral drug, pet
owners have no means to provide their pets with it at home. The rough treatment guide-
line is to administer it once or twice a week,for the period of 4 weeks.
ConclusionaboutDMOA
ManyDMOA products,including those containing chondroitin sulphate,glucosa-
mine and green-lipped mussel extract are now available.The basic effects expected
from these products is a cartilage healing action through the supply of raw materials
for cartilage matrix formation. Generally, the effectiveness of these formulations
becomes clinically apparent several weeks after the start of their use. Veterinarians,
therefore, should consider using them along with another drug such as an NSAID
for the initial treatment in order to quickly improve the quality of life (QOL) of the
animal. Although interactions between NSAIDs and DMOAs are not fully unders-
tood, it is generally agreed that NSAIDs that do not have a negative effect on carti-
lagemetabolismcanbeusedincombinationwithaDMOA.
2 - Surgical Treatment
A surgical procedure is selected, often as the last resort, when joint functions cannot be
restored and the control of pain becomes almost impossible. Such surgery includes repla-
cement arthroplasty, arthrodesis and arthroplasty.Because replacement arthroplasty uses
artificial materials, it is currently used only for the treatment of hip joint of large dogs
Basic studies on the use of artificial elbow joints in dogs are underway and arthrodesis
has been undertaken on many types of joints.
28
Treatmentofjointdiseases
Fig.16-1-Immune-mediated
Fig.16-2-Arthrodesisforrepairingarticular
polyarthritis
disintegration.
Thissurgical technique,however,is alastresort andisusedonlywhen allother thera-
pies are ineffective (Fig.16). Excisional arthroplasty is easier to perform than joint repla-
cement. However, except in hip joints, the functions of the affected limb are often seve-
relyrestrictedafterthesurgery.
Although these are not considered routine procedures for small animals, the possibility
of cartilage grafting,where the damaged cartilage is replaced with healthy cartilage, and
ofgenetherapythatmodifiescartilagemetabolism,are alsobeinginvestigatedforresto-
ring joint function.
29
30
Conclusion
Easy and objective methods of diagnosing joint diseases of
animals are not presently available. Often it is difficult to
make a confirmed diagnosis. While treating joint diseases,
clinicians have to not only treat the underlying disease but
also pay attention to the subsequent restoration of joint
functions. Presently, with animals having joint functions
that have deteriorated with old age and no specific disease,
veterinarians are still groping for methods of understanding
the condition of the animals and improving the quality of
theirlives.
In this publication, the diagnosis of joint diseases and the
management of osteoarthritis have been mainly discussed.
I would be delighted if the readers find this book useful in
understanding a guide to diagnose and treat joint diseases.
31
References
1.HLoulton,J.E.F,Collinson,R.W.(1994):Manual of smallanimalarthrology,B.S.A.VA,Cheltenham,U.K.
3.Mcllwraith,C.W,Trotter,G.W.(1996):Joint diseaseinthehorse,W.B.Saunders,Philadelphia,USA.
spectsofarthrologyfromthebasicstoclinicalpractice
4.Whittick,W.G.(1990):CanineOrthopedics.,Lea andFebiger,Philadelphia,USA.
AhandookoncanineorhpedicsincludingjoitdiseasesThetranstatedJapaneseversionhasthetitleSaishinnoShodobutsu
SeikeiGeka."
5.PiermatteiD.LFloG.L(1997):HandbookfSmallAnimalOrthopedicsandFractureRepair,3rded
Ahandbookontechniquesfrhopedisrgeryonsmallnials.tgivesi-depthinformationaoutjontsurger
Nirbac
ANIMAL HEALTH