VETERINARY
CLINICAL
PARASITOLOGY
8th
EDITION
Anne M.Zajac
Gary A.Conboy
AAVP
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology
Eighth Edition
Companionwebsite
www.wiley.com/go/zajac
The website includes powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading.
Veterinary
/ Clinical
Parasitology
Eighth Edition
Anne M. Zajac
Gary A. Conboy
Under the auspices of the A A V
American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sonis, Inic., Publication1
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
First, Second editions, 1948, 1955 @lowa State College Press
Third, Fourth, Fifth,Sixth editions,1961,1970, 1978,1994 Iowa State University Press
Seventh edition, 2006 @Black well Publishing
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ.
UK
Editorial ofices: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www. wiley.com/
wiley-black well.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been
granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for
users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2053-8/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Zajac, A.
Veterinary clinical parasitology / Anne M. Zajac, Gary A. Conboy. - 8th ed.
p.;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2053-8 (pbk. : a1k. paper)
II. Title.
[DNLM:
1. Parasitic Diseases, Animal-Laboratory Manuals.2. Parasitology-Laboratory Manuals.
SF 810.A3]
SF810.A3S58 2011
636.089'696-dc23
2011021939
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Set in 10/12 pt Times New Roman by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation
warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional
materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold
ser vices. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be
organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information
does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may
provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this
work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
12011
CONTENTS
Preface
vi
Acknowledgments
IX
Authors
xi
CHAPTER 1 Fecal Examination for the Diagnosis of Parasitism
3
Collection of Fecal Samples
3
Storage and Shipment of Fecal Samples 
Fecal ExamProcedures
4
Fecal Flotation
4
Additional Procedures for Fecal Examination
12
Quality Control for Fecal Exam Procedures
75
Use of the Microscope
16
Microscope Calibration
16
Pseudoparasites and Spurious Parasites
19
Procedures
23
Techniques for Evaluation of Strongylid Nematodes in Grazing Animals
28
Fecal Culture
28
Identification of Ruminant and Camelid Third-Stage Larvae
29
Identification of Horse Third-Stage Larvae
30
 Fecal Egg Count Reduction Test 
30
Identification of Adult Worms
38
Hoyer's Solution
39
Lactophenol
39
Parasites of Domestic Animals
39
Dogs and Cats
40
Ruminants and Camelids
88
Horses
114
Swine
128
Birds
140
Rodents and Rabbits
156
Reptiles
164
CHAPTER 2
2Detection of Protozoan and Helminth Parasites in the Urinary,
Reproductive, and Integumentary Systems and
in the Eye
171
Techniques for Parasite Recovery
171
Parasites of the Urinary System
171
Parasites of the Reproductive Tract
171
172
vi
CONTENTS
Urinary System Parasites
174
Reproductive System Parasites
Parasites of Other Systems (Excluding Arthropods)
178
CHAPTER 3 Detection of Parasites in the Blood
185
Immunologic Detection of Blood Parasites
185
 Microscopic Examination of Blood for Protozoan Parasites
185
Giemsa Stain
186
Microscopic Examination of Blood for Nematode Parasites
187
Tests for Canine Heartworm Microfilariae in Blood Samples
188
Blood Parasites of Dogs and Cats
191
Blood Parasites of Livestock and Horses
202
Blood Parasites of Birds
208
CHAPTER 4
Immunodiagnostic and Molecular Diagnostic Tests in
Veterinary Parasitology
213
Immunodiagnostic Methods
213
Molecular Diagnostic Methods
216
CHAPTER 5 Diagnosis of Arthropod Parasites
217
Subclass Acari (Mites and Ticks)
217
Mite Identification 
217
Tick Identification 
246
Class Insecta
264
Lice (Orders Anoplura and Mallophaga)
266
Fleas (Order Siphonaptera)
280
Flies (Order Diptera)
288
Other Insects
302
CHAPTER 6 Parasites of Fish
305
Techniques for Recovery of Ectoparasites
305
Skin Biopsy (Mucus Smear)
305
Fin Biopsy (Fin Snip)
306
Gill Biopsy (Gill Snip)
307
Recovery of Endoparasites
307
Parasites of Fish
308
Bibliography
325
Index
327
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/zajac
The website includes powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading.
PREFACE
Since the publication of the 6th edition of Veterinary Clinical Parasitology in 1994, the proceeds
of this book have gone to support graduate student travel to the annual meeting of the American
Association of Veterinary Parasitologists and thus encourage the development of new scientists in
  a m d   a  sn    o y 
areas of increasing concem in veterinary parasitology. Although the focus of the book continues to
be on the morphologic identification of parasites, we have also added a chapter by Dr. Karen F.
Snowden of Texas A&M University describing immunologic and molecular techniques of diagnosis
and provided a list of tests currently available commercially in the United States. These tests are
growing in number and use in the diagnosis of parasitic infection and disease.
As always, our goal is to provide a practical, useful book for those leaming the techniques
required for diagnosis of parasite infection and for the practicing diagnostician, and we hope that
this 8th edition of the book will continue to be helpful to all those involved in diagnosis of veteri-
nary parasites.
AnneM.Zajac
Gary A.Conboy
vili
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are very grateful to the members of the American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists
(AAVP) and others who provided material for Veterinary Clinical Parasitology. Appeals for pho-
tographs distributed through the AAVP listserv brought responses from as far away as Germany,
Brazil, and Australia. Although the source of each figure is credited in the figure legend (with the
exception of photos provided by chapter authors), we would also like to list all the contributors here
with our deepest thanks:
Mr. Gary Averbeck, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN
Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA
Dr. Byron Blagbum, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL
Dr. Dwight Bowman, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cormell University, Ithaca, NY
Dr. George Conder, Pfizer Corporation, Kalamazoo, MI
Dr. Hany M. Elsheikha, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Loughborough, UK
Dr. James Flowers, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFIA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
Mr. James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA
Dr. Ellis C. Greiner, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
 Dr. Larry Hammell, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown,
PE, Canada
 Dr. Bruce Hammerberg, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
NC
Dr. Patricia Holman, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX
Dr. David Lindsay, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA
Dr. Susan Little, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK
Dr. Aaron Lucas, Luray Clinic of Veterinary Medicine, Luray, VA
Dr. Eugene Lyons, Department of Veterinary Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY
 Dr. Charles Mackenzie, College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI
Dr. Gil Myers, Myers Parasitological Service, Magnolia, TN
Dr. Thomas Nolan, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
Dr. Christopher Paddock, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA
Dr. Fermando Paiva, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul, Campo Grande, MS, Brazil
Dr. Andrew Peregrine, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Dr. Sally Pope, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia
Dr. Steffan Rehbein, Merial GmBH, Rohrdorf, Germany
Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS
Dr. Nick Sangster, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia
ix
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dr. Philip Scholl, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
Dr. Stephen Smith, Virginia Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA
University, College Station, TX
Dr. T. Bonner Stewart, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
LA
Dr. Bert Stromberg, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
Dr. Donald B. Thomas, U.S. Department of Agriculture Subtropical Agriculture Research Laboratory,
Weslaco, TX
Dr. Donato Traversa, Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Teramo, Italy
Mr. Chris Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AK
Dr. Isabelle Verzberger-Epshtein, NRC Institute of Nutrisciences and Health, Charlottetown, PEI,
Canada
 Mr. Martin Visser, Merial GmBH, Rohrdorf, Germmany
Dr. Jerry Weintraub, Agriculture Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada
Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource Inc., Redmond, WA
Dr. Tom Yazwinski, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AK
Dr. Gary Zimmerman, Zimmerman Research, West Montana, Livingston, MT
 Dr. Kurt Zimmerman, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA
AUTHORS
Anne M. Zajac, DVM, PhD
 Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
Gary A. Conboy, DVM, PhD
 Department of Pathobiology and Microbiology
Atlantic Veterinary College
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island C1A 4P3
Canada
Ellis C. Greiner, PhD
Department of Infectious Diseases
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Box J-137
Gainesville, FL 32610
Stephen A. Smith, DVM, PhD
 Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
Karen F. Snowden, DVM, PhD
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology
 College of Veterinary Medicine and Biosciences
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-4467
xi
Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology
Eighth Edition
CHAPTER 1
EXP
Fecal Examination for the
FECAL
Diagnosis of Parasitism
The fecal examination for diagnosis of parasitic infections is probably the most cormmon laboratory
procedure performed in veterinary practice. Relatively inexpensive and noninvasive, fecal examina-
tion can reveal the presence of parasites in several body systems. Parasites inhabiting the digestive
systerm produce eggs, larvae, or cysts that leave the body of the host by way of the feces. Occasionally,
even adult helminth parasites may be seen in feces, especially when the host has enteritis. Parasitic
s p xd un o po n ae ss Asa a  a o sa um
lowed, and they too appear in feces. Mange or scab mites may be licked or nibbled from the skin,
thus accounting for their appearance in the feces. Many parasitic forms seen in feces have charac-
 s   an o a  po a  sn  
a particular species of parasite. On the other hand, certain parasites produce similar eggs, oocysts,
and so on, and cannot be identified to the species level (e.g., many of the strongylid-type eggs from
livestock). Fecal examination may also reveal to a limited extent the status of digestion, as shown
by the presence of undigested muscle, starch, or fat droplets.
COLLECTION OF FECAL SAMPLES
Fecal exams should be conducted on fresh fecal material. If fecal samples are submitted to the labo-
died and disappeared. The eggs of some nematodes can hatch within a few days in warm weather,
and identification of nematode larvae is far more difficult than recognizing the familiar eggs of
common species. Also, free-living nematodes rapidly invade a fecal sample on the ground, and
differentiation of hatched parasite larvae from these free-living species can be time-consuming and
difficult.
 Owners of small animals should be instructed to collect at least several grams of feces imme-
diately after observing defecation. This will ensure the proper identification of the sample with the
client's pet (i.e., a sample from a stray animal will not be collected) and that feces rather than
vomitus or other material is collected. The limited amount of feces recovered from the rectum on
a thermometer or fecal loop should not be relied on for routine parasitologic examination, since
a Pous so pass a l saa jo saqu ns Auo and pun suoou Au
instructed to store fecal samples in the refrigerator if the sample will not be submitted for examina-
tion for more than an hour or two after collection.
Feces should be collected directly from the rectum of large animals. This is particularly impor-
tant if the sample is to be examined for lungworrm larvae or cultured for identification of third-stage
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
larvae, since contaminating free-living nematodes and hatched first-stage larvae of gastrointestinal
nematodes may be confused with lungworm larvae. If rectal samples are unavailable, owners should
EE
be asked to collect feces immediately after observing defecation. The process of development and
CAL
when air is excluded from the sample by placing the collected feces in a plastic bag and pressing
 Out the air before sealing the bag.
STORAGE AND SHIPMENT OF FECAL SAMPLES
If collected feces cannot be examined within a few hours, the sample should be refrigerated until
needs to be evaluated for the presence of protozoan trophozoites like Giardia and trichomonads, it
should be examined within 30 minutes after collection. The trophozoite is the active, feeding
form of the parasite and is not adapted to environmental survival; it dies soon after being passed
in the feces.
If fresh fecal material is submitted to another laboratory for examination, it should be packaged
formalin. The use of formalin for fixation of samples has the additional benefit of inactivating
(PVA), are required to preserve protozoan trophozoites and are not routinely used in veterinary
practices.
Slides prepared from flotation tests do not travel well, even if the coverslip is ringed with nail
polish, since hyperosmotic flotation solutions will usually make parasite eggs or lar vae unrecogniz-
able within hours of preparing the slide. However, slides from flotation tests can be preserved for
    n   n   s rs  s 
moist paper towels to maintain high humidity. It is best to place applicator sticks under the slide to
prevent it from becoming too wet.
FECAL EXAM PROCEDURES
Before performing specific tests on the fecal sample, its general appearance should be noted; con-
sistency, color, and the presence of blood or mucus may all be indicative of specific parasitic infec-
tions. Hookworm disease in dogs, for example, commonly produces dark, tarry feces, whereas
diarrheic feces caused by whipworms may contain excess mucus and frank blood. The presence of
adult parasites or tapeworm segments should also be noted
Fecal Flotation
The technique most commonly used in veterinary medicine for examination of feces is the fecal
flotation test. This procedure concentrates parasite eggs and cysts and removes debris. Fecal fota-
tion is based on the principle that parasite material present in the feces is less dense than the fuid
flotation medium and thus will float to the top of the container, where it can be collected for micro-
scopic evaluation. Flotation tests are easy and inexpensive to perform, but in busy practices the
choice of flotation solution and test procedure often does not receive much consideration, despite
the substantial effect these choices can have on the sensitivity of flotation exams.
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
5
Choice and Preparation ofFlotation Solutions
Many different substances can be used to make flotation solutions. The higher the specific gravity
FECAL EXAM
(SPG) of the flotation solution, the greater the variety of parasite eggs that will foat. However, as the
y n   n  go y    o  s  's 
solution also increases. These factors limit the range of useful flotation solutions to SPG ranging from
solution and various salt solutions. No fecal solution is perfect for all parasites, and advantages and
 disadvantages of each should be considered when selecting a solution for general use.
Salt solutions are widely used in flotation procedures. Saturated solutions of sodium chloride
(SPG 1.20) and magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts, SPG 1.32) are inexpensive, easy to purchase and
 prepare, and are effective in floating common helminth eggs and protozoan cysts.
A common flotation solution used in the United States is a commercially available sodium
nitrate solution (Fecasol°, Vetoquinol USA, Inc., Fort Worth, TX), with SPG 1.2. This solution will
also foat common helminth eggs and protozoan cysts.The commercial solution is not a saturated
solution of sodium nitrate (SPG 1.33). Slides prepared with any salt solution need to be examined
relatively quickly after they are prepared because crystals form as slides dry, making them more
tion of Giardia is required, a better flotation solution is a 33% zinc sulfate solution (SPG 1.18).
which does not cause rapid destruction of Giardia cysts and allows them to be more easily recog-
chased commercially. None of these fotation solutions (commercial sodium nitrate, saturated
sodium chloride, saturated magnesium sulfate, and 33% zinc sulfate) will reliably foat most trema-
Another common solution used in routine fotation exams is Sheather's sugar solution (SPG
1.2-1.25). Sheather's solution is also more effective than some of the salt solutions for fotation
Aipideu se shsa poisip nou saop 11 uonppe ul Aisuap iauaiu jo sasa apoteuau pue uomaden jo
as the salt solutions. Sheather's solution is recormmended for recovery of Cryptosporidium oocysts
in fecal samples, but it does not appear to be as effective as 33% ZnSO4 solution for detection of
in the United States, but it is very viscous and sticky. The advantages and disadvantages of these
solutions are shown in Table 1.1 and instructions for preparing them are given below
Although the SPG of flotation solutions is not often measured in practices, it can be easily deter-
mined with an inexpensive hydrometer from a scientific supply company. A hydrometer will last
 indefinitely and should be considered part of quality control for the veterinary practice laboratory.
33% ZINC SULFATE SOLUTION (SPG 1.18)
Combine 330g zinc sulfate with water to reach a volume of 1000mL.
Additional water or zinc sulfate can be added to produce an SPG of 1.18 (if zinc sulfate solu-
tion is used with formalinized feces, the SPG should be increased to 1.20).
Check the SPG with a hydrometer.
SATURATED SODIUM CHLORIDE (NaC1, SPG 1.2) OR MAGNESIUM
SULFATE SOLUTION (MgSO4, SPG 1.32)
Add salt to warm tap water until no more salt goes into solution and the excess settles at the
bottom of the container.
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Table 1.1.
Comparison of commonly used flotation solutions
 Flotation Solution
Specific Gravity
Advantages
Disadvantages
Sodium nitrate
 Floats common helminth and
Distorts Giardia cysts rapidly; does not
CP
(NaNO,)
protozoa eggs and cysts
foat most fuke and some unusual
Fecasol
1.2
tapeworm and nematode eggs
Saturated NaNO;
1.33
33% Zinc sulfate
1.18
 Floats common helminth and
Less effective for fotation of common
(ZnSO4)
so pue saa cozonod
tapeworm eggs than others; does not
preferred for Giardia and
float most fuke and some unusual
some lungworm larvae
tapeworm and nematode eggs
Saturated sodium
1.2
 Floats common helminth and
Distorts Giardia cysts rapidly; does not
chloride (NaCl)
protozoa eggs and cysts
foat most fuke and some unusual
tapeworm and nematode eggs
Saturated magnesium
1.32
Floats common helminth and
Distorts Giardia cysts rapidly; does not
sulfate (Epsom
 protozoa eggs and cysts
foat most fuke and some unusual
salts)
tapeworm and nematode eggs
Sheather's sugar
1.25
Floats common helminth and
Does not foat most fuke and some
solution
protozoa eggs and cysts;
unusual tapeworm and nematode
preferred for
eggs; less sensitive than ZnSO for
Cryptosporidium oocysts; in
Giardia, creates sticky surfaces
general, causes less damage
to parasite eggs and cysts
than salt solutions
To ensure that the solution is fully saturated, it should be allowed to stand ovemight at room
temperature. If remaining salt crystals dissolve overmight, more can be added to ensure that
the solution is saturated.
Check the SPG with a hydrometer, recognizing that the SPG of saturated solutions will vary
slightly with environmental temperature.
SHEATHER'S SUGAR SOLUTION (SPG 1.2-1.25)
Combine 355 mL (12fl oz) of water and 454g (1 1b) of granulated sugar (sucrose). Corm syrup
and dextrose are not suitable substitutes.
Dissolve the sugar in the water by stirring over low or indirect heat (e.g., the top half of a
double boiler). If the container is placed on a high direct heat source, the sugar may caramelize 
instead of dissolving in the water.
After the sugar is dissolved and the solution has cooled to room temperature, add 6mL form-
aldehyde USP to prevent microbial growth (30mL of 10% formalin can also be used, with the
volume of water reduced to 330mL).
Check the SPG with a hydrometer.
Flotation Procedures
No matter how the fotation procedure is performed, the principle is the same. After mixing the
fotation solution and the fecal sample together, the less dense material eventually foats to the top.
This process can occur either by letting the mixture sit on the benchtop for a specified time or by
centrifuging the mixture. Regardless of the flotation solution used, centrifugation makes the fotation
occur more rapidly and efficiently. Many practitioners like to use convenient cormmercial flotation
kits that provide a container for collection of the sample and performing the test. However, the
convenience of the kits is offset by the loss of sensitivity in the fecal exam procedure. A smaller
amount of feces is used and the test cannot be centrifuged.
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
The increased sensitivity of the centrifugation procedure is particularly important in infections
where the diagnostic form of the parasite is present in low numbers (e.g., Trichuris and Giardia
FECAL EXAM
infections in dogs and cats). Centrifugation is also necessary when using 33% ZnSO4 or sugar
solution because of the slightly lower SPG of ZnSO4 solution and the high viscosity of sugar solu-
tion, both of which retard the fotation process. A veterinary practice that does not centrifuge flota-
tion tests and relies on the traditional benchtop incubation technique, substantially reduces the
sensitivity of its fecal exams.
CENTRIFUGAL FECAL FLOTATION PROCEDURE
This is the preferred technique for the standard fecal flotation test regardless of the flotation solu-
tion used. It is particularly important to use this procedure with Sheather's sugar and 33% ZnSO4
flotation solutions to ensure that the flotation is effective:
1.Mix 3-5g (about 1 teaspoonful) of feces with a small amount of flotation solution in a paper
or plastic cup. Cat feces and small ruminant pellets, which are sometimes too hard to break
up easily, can be ground with a mortar and pestle or allowed to soak in water until they become
softer.
 If the sample appears to contain a large amount of fat or mucus, an initial water wash is
performed, and water should be used in Step 1. The water wash can be eliminated for most
fecal samples of normal appearance.
2.
Strain the mixture of feces and flotation solution (or feces and water if a water wash is per-
formed) through a double layer of cheesecloth or gauze. A tea strainer can also be used.
 3. Pour the mixture into a 15-mL centrifuge tube. If the rotor on the centrifuge is not angled (i.e.,
if the tubes hang straight when not spinning), the centrifuge tube can be filled with flotation
solution until a reverse meniscus is formed and a coverslip is added (Fig. 1.1). The tube is spun
with the coverslip. The centrifugal force generated by the centrifuge will hold the coverslip in
place. If the centrifuge has an angled rotor, fill the tube as full as possible and place in the
centrifuge.
4. Spin the mixture in a benchtop centrifuge for about 5 minutes at approximately 500-650 × g
(650 × g is 2500rpm on a 4-in. rotor), regardless of whether the feces have been mixed with
water or with the flotation solution. If a specific g force and speed setting cannot be deterrmined,
spinning the tube at the same speed used to separate serum from blood cells is sufficient.
If the initial spin is a water wash, the supernatant should be discarded, the sediment resus-
pended with flotation solution, and Steps 3 and 4 repeated.
  s   s           
use of the brake may dislodge parasites from the surface layer.
6. Following centrifugation, there are several ways to harvest the surface layer of fuid containing
parasite eggs. If the tube has been spun with the coverslip in place, lift the coverslip off the
tube and quickly place it on a microscope slide. When the tube is spun without the coverslip.
remove the tube from the centrifuge after spinning and place in a test tube rack. Fill the tube
with additional fotation solution to form a reverse meniscus. Place a coverslip on the tube and
allow it to sit for an additional 5-10 minutes before removing the coverslip and placing it on
a slide.
Altermatively, after the centrifuge comes to a stop, gently touch the surface of the fluid in
the tube with a glass rod, microbiologic loop, or base of a small glass tube and then quickly
touch the rod to a microscope slide to transfer the drop or two of adhering fluid. This procedure
will be less efficient than allowing the tube to stand with a coverslip in place.
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
EE
CAL EXA
Fig. 1.1. Centrifuge tube flled with fotation solution to the top and coverslip placed in contact with the fuid column
BENCHTOP (SIMPLE OR PASSIVE) FLOTATION PROCEDURE
When a centrifugal flotation procedure cannot be performed, sodium nitrate and saturated salt solu-
tions can be used in a benchtop flotation test, although the sensitivity of the test will be reduced.
This technique 1s not recommended for 33% ZnSO4 or sugar fotation tests:
1.
2.
 Strain the mixture through cheesecloth or a tea strainer.
3. Pour into a test tube, pill vial, or container provided in a commercial kit. Add enough mixture
or additional flotation fluid until there is a reverse meniscus on the top of the container. Place
a coverslip on the fuid drop at the top.
+
Allow the flotation to stand for at least 10 minutes, remove the coverslip, place it on a slide,
saa aun uo azilisro A ns aun sui oo io puis on paoe si nsan aun jl 'auxa pues
of the coverslip so that it will not lie fat on the slide.
FLOTATION SLIDES
Fecal flotation slides should be scanmed using the 10x objective lens of the microscope (since most
microscopes also have an eyepiece magnification of 1ox, using the 10x objective gives a total mag-
nification of 100x). Although most helminth eggs can be detected with the 4× objective, protozoan
parasites are easily missed and this low power should not be used for scanning. The 40x lens should
be used when there is uncertainty about the identity of structures on the slide and for scanning
slides for Cryptosporidium oocysts. In some practices, to save expense, coverslips are not used.
However, slides without coverslips dry out faster, do not have a fat plane of focus, and cannot be
examined with the 40x lens, with the result that some parasites will be identified incorrectly or
missed entirely.
EGG-COUNTING PROCEDURES (QUANTITATIVE FECAL EXAMS)
Egg-counting techniques are also flotation tests and are recommended primarily to estimate the
extent of parasite egg contamination on pastures grazed by infected animals or to determine the
 a s g ( s      s    
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
value in making judgments about the clinical condition of individual animals because many factors
affect egg production, including parasite species, individual host immunity, and stage of infection.
Also, counts performed on combined samples from a number of animals may not accurately reflect
FECAL EXAM
parasitism within thatherd.
The easiest quantitative test to perform is the modified McMaster test. This test requires the
use of special reusable slides (Fig 1.2), which can be purchased from several suppliers (including
Chalex Corporation, Wallowa, OR [www.vetslides.com]; Focal Point, www.mcmaster.co.za; JA
Whitlock & Co., Eastwood, New South Wales, Australia [www.whitlock.com.au]). The capacity of
the counting chamber and the number of chambers counted per sample affect the sensitivity of the
test. Several different sizes are available, usually ranging from 0.15 to 0.5 mL. Saturated salt solu-
tions are usually used as the flotation solution in this test.
As it is most commonly used, the modified McMaster test has a sensitivity of 25 or 50 eggs
per gram (epg) of feces. This level of sensitivity is acceptable in most situations since parasite
control programs do not usually require detection of lower egg numbers. However, the accuracy of
 the McMaster test is reduced when egg counts are at the lower limits of detection. When egg counts 
of less than 200 epg are typical in a group of animals being evaluated (e.g., in adult cattle or cam-
elids) or when it is important to detect low numbers of eggs more accurately (e.g., in fecal egg
count reduction tests [FECRTs]), a modification of the test is appropriate. The sensitivity and accu-
racy of the test can be improved by using slides that allow examination of larger quantities of the
egg/flotation solution mixture, or by counting additional aliquots of the sample. Alternatively, the
Wisconsin sugar flotation test (double centrifugation procedure) or a modified Stoll egg-counting
test can be used for quantitative exams. These procedures permit detection of fewer than 10 epg of
fecal material but are more time-consuming to perform.
Regardless of the procedure used to count parasites, the most important element is consistency.
Each step of the procedure should be performed in the same way for every sample.
Modified McMaster test.
 For ruminants, combine 4g of fecal material with 56mL of fotation solution to yield a total
volume of 60mL. The test can also be performed with 2g of feces and 28 mL of flotation solu-
tion when only small amounts of feces are available. For horses, it is becoming standard in the
United States to use 4g of feces and 26 mL of fotation solution. See Note 1 below for modified
ADVANCED EQUINE
5004-228THAVESE
PRODUCTS
ISSAQUAHWA98027USA
Fig. 1.2. McMaster slide used in the modifed McMaster procedure for quantitative egg counts.
10
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
calculations. Portable electronic scales that weigh in 0.1-g increments are now widely available
and inexpensive.
FE
2. Mix well and strain through cheesecloth or a tea strainer if desired. The mixture does not have
CAL
to be strained, but it will be much easier to read the slide if large pieces of debris are removed.
EXA
An alternative to straining is to use a filter pipette to transfer material to the counting chamber
(a pipette with 12 mesh/cm wire mesh at the end is available from JA Whitlock & Co.
[www.whitlock.com.au]).
.Immediately fill each chamber of the McMaster slide with the mixture using a pipette or
syringe. The entire chamber must be filled, not just the area under the grid. If large air bubbles
are present, remove the fluid and refill.
Allow the slide to sit for at least 5 minutes before examining to allow the flotation process to
occur.
 Look at the slide with the lox lens, focusing on the top layer, which contains the air bubbles.
At this level, the lines of the grid will also be in focus. Count eggs, oocysts, and any other
parasite stages, in each lane of both chambers. Each type of parasite should be counted sepa-
rately. In some cases, eggs can be identified to genus or perhaps to species (e.g., Strongyloides,
Trichuris, and Nematodirus), whereas others must be counted as a category of parasites (coc-
cidia, strongylid eggs).
To determine the number of parasite epg of feces, add the counts for both chambers for each para-
site. The most commonly used McMaster slides in the United States are calibrated so that the
number of eggs counted in a single chamber represents the number present in 0.15 mL of fecal
mixture. If both chambers are counted and the results are added, the total represents the number of
eggs present in 0.3 mL, which is 1/200th of the total volume of 60mL; therefore, the number of
eggs must be multiplied by 200. However, since a total of 4g of feces was used in the test, the
result must be divided by 4 to yield epg of feces. Multiplying by 200 and dividing by 4 is equivalent
to multiplying the number of eggs counted by 50. Therefore, each egg observed represents 50 epg
in the final count. The same level of sensitivity can be achieved by using 2g of fecal material and
28 mL of flotation solution. The smaller amount of feces may be preferred when evaluating small
lambs or kids.
Additional Notes
1. If a sensitivity of 25 epg is desired, the McMaster test should be performed with 4g of feces
and 26 mL of fotation solution (results are then multiplied by 1 00 and divided by 4 as described
above). Other combinations of manure and flotation solution can also be used with appropriate
calculations using the formula
eggs/g= [no.eggs countedx(T /V)]/ F
where T = total volume of feces/flotation solution mixture, V = volume of aliquot exarmined in
slide, and F = grams of feces used.
 If pelleted feces are very hard, 2-5 mL of water can be added first and left to soften manure
for at least an hour. The fotation solution is then added to the softened manure (flotation solu-
tion volume reduced by the amount of water used to soften feces).
A variety of methods can be used to homogenize feces and liquid. As altermatives to mixing
with a tongue blade or other utensil, some laboratories use a mechanical or handheld kitchen
mixer to homogenize feces and water/flotation solution. Shaking manure and Hluid in a jar with
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
11
glass beads has also been used, but as previously stated, whatever method is used, it should be
consistent across samples.
FECAL EXAM
4. In another procedure for the McMasters test, feces is mixed initially with water, strained, and
centrifuged, and the supermatant is discarded. Flotation solution is added to resuspend the sedi-
ment and mixed, and the mixture is used to fill the counting chambers. For example, 3g of
feces is mixed with 42mL of water, strained and the fluid used to fill a 15-mL centrifuge tube,
which is then centrifuged at 300-650 × g for 2 minutes. The supernatant is then discarded and
flotation solution is added to partially fill the tube, which is either shaken or stirred to resuspend
the sediment. Additional flotation solution is added to fill the tube, and the counting chamber
by 50 to give the number of eggs per g. The number of epg can also be calculated using the
formula described in Note 1. This procedure is the most effective for reducing debris but
increases the time required to perform each test.
ModifiedStof! test.
Like the McMaster test, the modified Stoll egg-counting procedure is based on determining the
number of eggs present in an aliquot of the prepared feces/flotation solution mixture. Any of the
fecal flotation solutions can be used in this procedure.
1. Combine 5g of feces and 20mL of water in a cup.
2. Mix into a slurry and transfer lmL of the mixture to a centrifuge tube. If the mixture is
not strained, a widemouthed or mesh-covered filter pipette is needed to transfer the
mixture.
3. Fill the tube with flotation solution.
4. Place the tube in the centrifuge and add fotation solution until a slight inverse meniscus is
formed.
5. Place a coverslip on top of the tube. It should contact the mixture without causing any to
overflow.
Remove the coverslip and place on a glass slide.
8.
Examine with the 10x objective lens.
 Count and record the number of each type of parasite egg/cyst seen, systematically scanning
the slide and counting eggs or cysts of each parasite species or group separately. Care must be
taken to ensure that each microscope field on the coverslip is examined once but only once so
ami paunos 1o pass ane saa ou yeu
In this test, all the eggs present in 1 mL of the feces/fotation solution mixture were counted fol-
lowing centrifugation. This represents 1/25 of the volume of the mixture so the number of eggs
counted multiplied by 25 represents the total number of eggs present, but this must be divided by
5 (grams of feces used) to yield epg. In this situation, the multiplication factor is 5 and the minimum
sensitivity of the test is 5 epg. If the volume of fluid added to feces in the first step is 45mL, the
final multiplying factor would be 10.
Wisconsin, Cornelf-Wisconsin egg-counting test (double centrifugation procedure).
The Wisconsin egg-counting test or double centrifugation flotation test is the most sensitive proce-
dure because all the eggs in the fecal sample are counted. This procedure should only be used to
12
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
quantitate eggs when low counts are expected. More than lo0 epg are difficult to count accurately
FE
CAL
first cup with 2-3 mL of water and straining, pressing the liquid through. Pour into a 15mL
centrifuge tube.
's 01- rog 8 x 0g-oo e (au Aadod) sn
3.
After spinning, discard the supernatant and resuspend the pellet in flotation solution.
 4. Either spin the tube with a coverslip in place or allow additional incubation after spinning as
described for the centrifugal flotation procedure.
 Remove the coverslip and place on a glass slide.
6.
Examine with the 10x objective lens.
Count and record the number of each type of parasite egg/cyst seen, systematically scanming
the slide and counting eggs or cysts of each parasite species or group separately. Care must be
that no eggs are missed or counted twice.
This technique allows the quantification of less than l epg of feces.
Additional Notes
1. If desired, the initial water wash can be omitted and the sample can be mixed directly with
flotation solution and then centrifuged.
2. Alternatively, 22mL of flotation solution is mixed with 5 g of feces, and the resulting mixture
is divided between two tubes. This modification increases the accuracy of the procedure.
For additional information on quantitative egg-counting procedures, see references by Ballweber
(2006), Taylor et al. (2007), Coles et al. (2006), Egwang et al. (1982), and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Foods (1986).
Additional Procedures for Fecal Examination
The following procedures are used for identification of specific parasitic infections.
Direct Smear and Stained Fecal Smears
The direct smear is used to identify protozoan trophozoites (Giardia, trichomonads, amoebae, etc.)
or other structures that float poorly or are readily distorted by flotation solutions. Because very little
fecal material is used, the sensitivity of this test is low. It is not recommended for routine fecal
examinations:
Mix a very small amount of feces with a drop of saline on a microscope slide to produce a
layer through which newsprint can be read. Saline should be used because water will destroy
protozoan trophozoites.
Use a coverslip to push large particles of debris to the side and place the coverslip on the slide.
Examine with 1ox and 40x magnification. The 1oox lens (oil immersion) cannot be used
e ffectively with fecal smears.
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
13
3. If the fecal layer is too thick, it will be impossible to see small, colorless protozoa moving in
FECAL EXAM
fresh fecal smears. A drop of Lugol's iodine will enhance the intermal structures of protozoan
cysts but will also kill trophozoites present. To maximize the use of this test, it is best to look
at an unstained smear before adding iodine.
Fecal smears can also be stained for identification of intestinal protozoa. Several stains can be used
for identification of Cryptosporidium, including Ziehl-Neelsen, Kinyoun, carbol-fuchsin, and
Giemsa stains. Trichrome stain is widely used in human medicine for detection of Giardia cysts.
In general, however, stains are not used extensively in veterinary practices and are not required for
human parasitologic diagnosis should be consulted.
Feca! Sedimentation
A sedimentation procedure is used to isolate eggs of fukes, acanthocephalans, and some other
simple sedimentation test, tap water is combined with feces and allowed to settle briefly before the
supermatant is removed. This allows the removal of fine particulate material, but unlike the flotation
from the fecal sample if a centrifugal sedimentation exam is performed using ethyl acetate.
Unfortunately, ethyl acetate is toxic and very flammable. It should be stored in a flameproof cabinet
and used only in well-ventilated areas. An altermative to ethyl acetate is Hemo-De, available through
  s   s    ss a   a
1987).
The Flukefinder is a commercially available apparatus for performing sedimentation tests in
the laboratory. It utilizes several screens to rapidly remove fecal debris. This device is very useful
in practices conducting routine fecal examinations for flukes. Information on the Flukefinder can
be obtained at www.flukefinder.com.
SIMPLE SEDIMENTATION TEST
1. Mix about lo0mL of water with about 10g of feces, strain, and place in a beaker or other
container.
5.
 Add more water, mix, and repeat the sedimentation procedure.
Stir remaining mixture and place a few drops on a microscope slide. If desired, add one drop
of 0.1 % methylene blue. The methylene blue will stain the background debris blue but will not
stain fluke eggs, which will stand out with a yellowish brown color.
Coverslip and scan the slide using the 1 0x objective lens.
A smaller amount of feces and water can be used, placed in a test tube, and left to sit for 3-5
minutes between decantation steps. Addition of a drop of dishwashing soap to the water used in
the test helps to free eggs from surrounding debris.
14
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
CENTRIFUGAL SEDIMENTATION TEST
FE
1.Mix 1g of feces with about 10mL of 10% buffered formalin or water. Pour mixture into a
CAL
 s m - si i  ( ) a  1
2.
Add ethyl acetate (see above discussion on safety) or Hemo-De until the tube is almost full.
Because organic solvents may dissolve some plastic centrifuge tubes, it is recommended that
 glass or polypropylene tubes be used for performing this test.
Cap and shake the tube approximately 50 times.
4.
 Centrifuge for 3-5 minutes at about 500 × g (as for centrifugal flotation procedure).
5.
When the tube is removed from the centrifuge, it will have three layers: (l) an upper layer
containing ethyl acetate, fat, and debris; (2) a middle layer containing formalin or water and
fine particulate matter; and (3) a bottom layer of sediment. Using an applicator stick, loosen
the top debris plug that sticks to the sides of the tube, then decant the supermatant, leaving only
the bottom sediment.
0.
 Resuspend the sediment in a few drops of water or formalin, place one or two drops of the
sediment on a slide, coverslip, and examine with the 1ox microscope objective.
Baermann Test
The Baermann test is used to isolate larvae from fecal samples and is employed most often to
diagnose lungworm infections. It is very important that the fecal sample be fresh. If feces of a
grazing animal are being examined and an old sample is used, strongylid or Strongyloides eggs
    n    s     
h An y  sia m 'sas ns ul  ao yn u
and can be confused with lungworm or Strongyloides larvae.
out and be collected. This can now be most easily accomplished with the use of a plastic wine glass
with a hollow stem. In the absence of disposable wine glasses, the original Baermann apparatus
can be used. This consists of a funnel clamped to a metal stand. A short piece of tubing with a
clamp is attached to the end of the funnel. Larvae in feces placed either in the bowl of the wine
 n     n  hh   an jo   g an n o s
1. Place at least 10g of feces in a piece of double-layer cheesecloth. Gather the cheesecloth around
the sample so that it is fully enclosed. Use a rubber band to fasten the cheesecloth, and pass
through the rubber band two applicator sticks, a pencil or other object that will rest on the
edges of the glass or funnel and suspend the sample. Altermatively, place the sample on a sus-
pended piece of wire mesh or sieve.
2
 Fill the funnel or wine glass with lukewarm water. Make sure that the cormers of the cheesecloth
do not hang over the edge of the funnel or glass, because they will act as wicks for the water.
 Allow the sample to sit for at least 8 hours, preferably overmight.
4.
 If using the disposable plastic glass, remove the fecal sample and collect the material at the
bottom of the hollow stem using a Pasteur pipette or syringe. Transfer some of the fluid to a
microscope slide, coverslip, and examine with the 4x or 10x objective lens.
If using the funnel, release the clamp and collect the first 10mL of fuid into a centrifuge tube.
Spin as for a flotation exam, discard the supematant, and examine the sediment. Altermatively,
the very steady handed can carefully loosen the clamp and collect the first three or four drops
onto a microscope slide.
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
15
FECAL EXAM
o e m padwo y dag padsns e jo sunsso sdde  un aul () 'l 
diagnostic testing of fecal samples, it is much more convenient to perform the Baermann exam with a disposable plastic
wine glass (B).
Immunoiogic and Molecuiar Methods of Parasite Diagnosis
Immunologic methods have been important in the diagnosis of blood and tissue parasites for many
years, and they are now being used increasingly for identification of specific parasites in fecal
samples. Molecular diagnostic methods are also now being applied to detection of parasites in fecal
samples. Although these techniques cannot currently replace morphologic exam of feces as a routine
screening procedure for multiple infections, they are useful for specific diagnosis of some protozoan
parasites that are detected in feces. For the discussion of these procedures and a list of commercially
available tests in the United States, see Chapter 4.
QUALITY CONTROL FOR FECAL EXAM PROCEDURES
Although the concept of quality control is not often applied to fecal exams, attention to both equip-
ment and training will help ensure that fecal exams are consistently done correctly:
 Keep microscopes in good repair. Objective lenses and eyepieces should be routinely cleaned
with lens cleaner and lens paper. Have microscopes professionally cleaned and checked every
few years.
Check the SPG of fotation solutions with a hydrometer to ensure that they will recover parasites
effectively.
Use an ocular micrometer (see section on microscope calibration later in this chapter) to
measure structures seen on fecal exams. If possible, recalibrate the microscope when it is
cleaned.
16
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
4.
for untrained assistants to be given rudimentary instruction on performing fotation tests and
EE
then be assigned to do them. Under these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that air bubbles
CAL
are identified as coccidia and that smaller parasites are missed entirely.
D.
As a check on the diagnostic accuracy of in-clinic fecal exams, periodically submit duplicate
portions of fecal samples to a diagnostic laboratory. Both negative and positive samples should
be submitted.
USE OF THE MICROSCOPE
There are several points to remember in using the compound microscope to examine preparations
for parasites:
1. Use the 10x objective lens of the microscope for scanning slides. This will provide a total
magnification of 10ox since most microscope eyepieces contain an additional 10x lens. Start
in one corner and systematically scan the entire slide. The 40x objective lens (400x total mag-
nification with eyepiece) is useful for closer examination or for looking for very small organ-
isms such as Giardia or Cryptosporidium. The 100x (oil immersion) lens should not be used
for flotation preparations. Not only is it likely that fotation solution will contact the lens
and possibly damage it, but the pressure of the lens on the coverslip will create currents in the
fluid on the slide, keeping everything in motion and making examination of structures
difficult.
2.
 Most parasite eggs and larvae have little or no color and do not stand out well, so it is irmportant
to maximize the contrast between the parasites and their backgrounds. Using a microscope
with a substage condenser kept in the low position while scanning slides is the best way to
light projected on the slide is generally advisable, either by decreasing the microscope rheostat
setting or by reducing the aperture of the iris diaphragm. A higher power used for close exami-
nation will, of course, require an increased amount of light.
5.
When reading a slide, it is helpful to focus up and down with the fine focus to change somewhat
the plane of focus. Frequently, worm eggs will be at a slightly different level than protozoan
cysts or oocysts, and a small manipulation of the fine focus may make structures more readily
visible (Figs. 1.4-1.6).
Microscope Calibration
The ability to measure the size of parasitic organisms and structures is very helpful when identify-
ing unusual parasites or where different organisms are similar in appearance but differ in size. For
measurements, a micrometer disc, also known as a reticle (Fig. 1.7), is inserted into the ocular tube
of the microscope and calibrated against a known reference in the form of a stage micrormeter (Fig.
micrometer combination to be used and the calibrations should be posted close to the microscope
for easy reference. The calibration will be accurate only for that particular microscope ocular and
objective combination. Even if each lens is not calibrated with the stage micrometer, the ocular
FECAL EXAM
36um
Fig. 1.41.6. The importance of small changes in the microscope focus can be seen in these three photos of the same field
on a slightly different level.
7
18
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FECAL EXAM
10
203040
50
mi crometer.
50
QC
Fig. 1.8. A typical stage micrometer of 1 mm total length. Each division represents 10 μm.
grid will provide a consistent reference against which to compare objects seen in fecal samples.
These ocular micrometer discs and stage micrometers are not expensive and can be purchased from
scientific catalogs that include microscope equipment.
Calibration of the 40x objective illustrates the procedure for calibration of the micrometer:
 To calibrate the 40x objective, place the stage micrometer on the stage of the microscope and
(1000 μm) long and is divided into 100 parts; thus, each small division of the stage micrormeter
represents 10μum.
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
19
FECAL EXAM
conjunction of line ll of the stage micrometer with line 49 of the ocular micrometer.
 2. Superimpose any convenient numbered line of the ocular micrometer (usually the O mark) on
a convenient line of the stage micrometer (the first large line in the example). The field should
now resemble Figure 1.9
3. Find the two lines that are exactly superimposed. In the example, line 49 of the ocular microm-
eter falls exactly on line 11 of the stage micrometer. Thus, 49 divisions of the unknown ocular
micrometer represent 11 divisions, each 10 μm in length, for a total of 110μm. To complete
the calibration, divide 110 μm by 49 divisions, resulting in a calibration factor of 2.24 μm per
division for the ocular micrometer in the example.
4. Repeat this procedure for each objective lens to be calibrated on the microscope.
count the number of divisions subtended by the specimen, for example, 12. Multiply 12 by the
calibration factor (2.24 for the 400 lens in the example; 12 × 2.24 = 26.88 μum, the size of the object
measured).
PSEUDOPARASITES AND SPURIOUS PARASITES
Fecal samples may contain deceptive “pseudoparasites" and "spurious parasites." Pseudoparasites
are ingested objects that resemble parasite forms; these include pollen grains, plant hairs, grain
mites, mold spores, and a variety of harmless plant and animal debris (Figs. 1.10-1.14). "Spurious
 po saay aun un punog aq Ae sun iso jo sarads ao woy siso no sa aised ane saisd
scavenger or predator host as the result of coprophagy or predation (Figs. 1.15 and 1.16). One of
the best ways to avoid misidentifying these pseudo- and spurious parasites is to appreciate the
variety of parasites that normally infect a host species. If a fecal sample contains a possible pseu-
 doparasite or spurious parasite, it is best to repeat the examination with another sample collected
at a later time.
FECAL EXAM
animals (400x). (B) Adult free-living nematodes are also commonly found in fecal sarmples collected frorm the ground. These
ferent stages of the life cycle) are helpful in distinguishing these worms from parasitic larvae.
Fig. 1.11. Examples of pseudoparasites. (A) ln this ovine fecal sample, both a strongylid egg and a pseudoparasite (arrow)
are present. Characteristics helpful in the recognition of pseudoparasites are lack of clear internal structure and discontinui-
ties in the outer layer. (B) Pseudoparasite, probably a pollen grain (400x).
20
FECAL EXAM
B
bling the hooks of a tapeworm embryo, but there is no distinct embryo and the outer layer is poorly defined with projections
that are variable in size and shape (40x).
Fig. 1.13. Examples of pseudoparasites. (A) Plant hairs and other fibrous material can resemble nematode larvae. They
can be present in a variety of shapes and colors, but can usually be easily differentiated from nematodes because they lack
clear internal structures like a digestive tract. Also, while one end is tapered, the other end often looks as though it has been
and seen occasionally in dogs (400x).
21
EE
CAL EXAM
B
Fig. 1.14. Examples of pseudoparasites. (A) Free-living mites that contaminate animal feed can be found in fecal fotation
procedures. Unlike many parasitic mites, free-living species lack specialized structures on their legs (suckers, combs, etc.)
for adhering to the host. (B) Eggs from free-living mites will also foat in fotation solution. They are usually very large
(>1 00 μm). Developing legs of the mite can sometimes be seen inside the egg (arrow).
B
Fig. 1.15. Spurious parasites are parasite eggs or cysts from another host that are acquired through predation or coprophagy
ades a e u p a wade () ps uraq e a go n asap a yno passd aa aa pe
from a calf. Although the configuration of hooks inside this egg clearly identifies it as a tapeworm, it is most likely a rodent
strongylid species can be found in feces of manure-eating dogs. Ruminant and equine strongylid eggs look like canine
hookworm eggs but are larger.
22
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
23
FECAL EXAM
Fig. 1.16. Examples of spurious parasites. (A) Large cyst of Monocystis, a protozoan parasite of earth worms found in the
feces of a snake that feeds on earthworms (l 00x) (B) Eimeria oocysts (arrow) are a typical spurious parasite in dog feces.
This photograph also contains an individual Monocystis oocyst (M) that had been freed from a large cyst like the one shown
in Figure 1.15A. These individual Monocystis oocysts are common pseudoparasites (400x)
IDENTIFICATION OF NEMATODE LARVAE RECOVERED WITH
FECAL FLOTATION OR BAERMANN PROCEDURES
Nematode larvae are passed in the feces of animals infected with various species of lungworms
(Aelurostrongylus abstrusus,Angiostrongylus vasorum,Crenosoma vulpis,Dictyocaulus spp.,
Filaroides hirthi, Muellerius capillaris, Oslerus osleri, Protostrongylus spp., and others) or the
intestinal threadworm, Strongyloides stercoralis. Accurate identification of nematode larvae
detected on fecal flotation or Baermann tests tends to be a challenge for the veterinary laboratory
diagnostician. In many cases where larvae are detected on fecal flotation, the damage due to the
effects of high SPG fotation media obscures the larval morphology to the point that identification is
not possible (Fig. 1.17). Therefore, the Baermann technique is the preferred method to recover first-
stage nematode larvae from feces except in the case of O. osleri or F hirthi infection in dogs. The
Baermann technique is effective in recovering larvae that are vigorous and able to move out of the
fecal matter. The larvae present in feces of dogs infected with Oslerus and Filaroides are sluggish
and unable to migrate out of the feces. Therefore, zinc sulfate centrifugal fotation is the recom-
mended method for the detection of larvae in the feces of dogs infected with these lungworms.
 A further complication in larval identification may occur when there is a loss of sample integrity
due to improper collection. Fecal samples that are not collected immediately after deposit on the
ground may be invaded by free-living soil or plant parasitic nematodes. The challenge of sorting
out these nematodes from the true parasitic ones is beyond the training and experience of most
veterinary laboratory diagnosticians. In addition, hookworm, strongyle, or trichostrongyle eggs, if
 present in feces, can develop and hatch in a short time under warm conditions, resulting in the
detection of larvae that will be difficult to distinguish from those parasites normally passed as larvae
in the feces. In small-animal practice where pet owners collect the fecal sample, the clients must
be given guidance as to the requirements for a proper fecal sample. In the case of dogs, clients
should be instructed to collect the fecal sample immediately after deposit and place it in an airtight,
leakproof container. If submission to the veterinarian cannot occur within several hours of collec-
tion, the sample should be refrigerated at 4°C. In the case of cats, the litter pan should be cleaned
and the next fecal sample observed in the pan should be collected and handled as above. Ruminant
or horse samples should be collected from the rectum. If clients are collecting samples from the
ground, they should be instructed to avoid collection of the portion of manure in direct contact with
24
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
EE
CALEX
Fig. 1.17. Larva detected on fecal fotation from a dog infected with lungworm. The larva is damaged due to the osmotic
pressure of the high specific gravity fotation fuid. Loss of morphologic detail to this degree prevents specific
identification.
Fig. 1.18. Vaginal opening (arrow) of a free-living adult female nematode recovered from the feces of a dog. The feces
were left on the ground long enough prior to collection to allow free-living soil nematodes to invade the sample.
the soil. Lastly, a further complication in test evaluation can be the presence of spurious parasites
acquired through predation or coprophagia.
 The first question in the decision tree when evaluating nematode larvae is: parasite or free-
               
of a mouth opening leading to a buccal tube, esophagus, intestine, and anus. There may also be a
 discernable genital primordium. Free-living/soil/plant nematodes often occur in multiple life stages
(from egg to adult), and size measurements are highly variable. The presence of adult female (eggs
presence of an oral stylet in the buccal tube (Fig. 1.20) indicates that the sample may have been
invaded by free-living nematodes. Unfortunately, Strongyloides spp. have a free-living generation 
that will develop if the sample is incubated and therefore are also a possibility when adult stages
FECALEXAMINATION FOR THEDIAGNOSISOFPARASITISM
25
FECAL EXAM
Fig. 1.19. Tail of an adult male free-living nematode recovered from an improperly collected fecal sample of a dog. Note
the chitinized spicules (arrow) at the cloacal opening.
Fig. 1.20. Anterior end of a plant parasitic nematode recovered from an improperly collected fecal sample of a dog. Note
the oral stylet (arrow) in the buccal chamber. The stylet is a daggerlike structure used in the feeding process to pierce plant
roots. No parasitic first-stage larvae have this structure.
are recovered in a fecal sample. Detection of adult worms in the sample is an indication that the
animal should be resampled and a fresh fecal sample should be submitted.
Detection of larvae on microscopic examination of a slide prepared from a Baerrmann test is
facilitated by the eye-catching vigorous motion of the larvae. However, once detected, a careful
evaluation of the morphologic features is not possible in actively motile larvae. Therefore, it is
necessary to kill them in a way that does not damage the morphology. Larvae are best killed by
adding a drop of dilute Lugol's iodine (the color of weak tea) to the edge of the coverslip. The
iodine will be slowly drawn across the coverslip resulting in the death of the larvae. Alternatively,
the larvae can be heat killed by passing the coverslip over the flame of a Bunsen burmer to effect
(several to many times). Larvae recovered on fecal flotation may or may not be already dead. Fecal
fotation slides should be viewed as quickly as possible since the larval damage due to osmotic
26
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
EED
Ca
GI
MB
Gl
Fig. 1.21. (A) Anterior end of a first-stage larva of Strongyloides stercoralis recovered from the feces of a dog. This larva
has been killed and stained with dilute iodine. The rhabditiform esophagus is well defined and obvious. Note the short
buccal tube (arrow) and the rhabditiform esophagus made up of the corpus (C), isthmus (l), and muscular bulb (MB). Also
note the distinct border demarcating the end of the esophagus and the start of the intestine (Gl). (B) Anterior end of an
jodine-stained frst-stage larva of Crenosoma vutpis recovered from the feces of a dog. Note the poorly defined esophagus
(E). lt is difficult to discern the demarcation between the end of the esophagus and the start of the intestine (Gl).
pressure will progressively worsen over time. Differentiation of the various parasitic nematode
first-stage larvae is based on overall size and the morphology of the esophagus and tail. First-stage
larvae of intestinal parasites (i.e., S. stercoralis or hookworm-strongyle-trichostrongyle eggs that
have hatched) can be differentiated from the numerous lungworm larvae based on the presence of
a distinct rhabditiform esophagus (Figs. 1.21A, 1.22, and 1.24). The rhabditiform esophagus con-
sists of an anterior corpus that narrows to an isthmus and then ends in a muscular bulb. The rhab-
ditiform esophagus is sharply delineated and well defined with an obvious sharp demarcation
between the end of the esophagus and the beginning of the intestine. The overall length of the
rhabditiform esophagus is less than 25% of the total length of the larvae (Fig. 1.22). In contrast,
the esophagus of the lungworm larvae tends to be less well defined and longer, making up about
33%-50% of the total length of the larvae (Figs. 1.21B and 1.23). The relatively short buccal tube
differentiates the larvae of Strongyloides (Fig. 1.2lA) from those of hookworms-strongyles-
trichostrongyles, which have a long buccal tube (Fig. 1.24).
Differentiation of the various lungworm larvae is based on tail morphology. In dogs, larvae
with a straight tail and lacking a rhabditiform esophagus are C. vuipis (see Figs. 1.23 and 1.85).
Larvae that have a kinked S-shaped tail but lack a dorsal spine are either O. osleri or F hirthi (see
Fig. 1.88). Larvae with a kinked tail and a dorsal spine are A. vasorum (see Figs. 1.86 and 1.87).
In cats, larvae with a kinked tail and a dorsal spine are A. abstrusus (see Figs. 1.83 and 1.84).
There should be only a single nematode lungworm larva, Dictyocaulus viviparus (see Fig.
1.143), recovered in properly collected fresh feces of cattle. The larvae have an abundance of visible
FECALEXAMINATIONFOR THEDIAGNOSISOFPARASITISM
27
FECAL EXAM
GF
Fig. 1.22. Strongyloides stercoralis first-stage larvae recovered from the feces of a dog (Lugol's iodine stained and killed).
Note the rhabditiform esophagus (R), prominent genital primordium (GP), and the straight tail (T). The rhabditiform
esophagus makes up about 25% of the total length of the larvae.
Fig. 1.23. Crenosoma vutpis frst-stage larva recovered from the feces of a dog. Note the indistinct poorly defined non-
rhabditiform esophagus (E). The esophagus makes up about 33%-50% of the total length of the larvae in metastrongyloid
Jungworrmis.
food granules and a straight tail. The same situation occurs with the horse, although infection with
Dictyocaulus arnfieldi (see Fig. 1.168) is patent in donkeys, but only rarely in the horse. In small
ruminants, there are two larvae with straight tails, one with an abundance of visible food granules
(Dictyocaulus filaria) (see Fig. 1.143) and the other without (Protostrongylus rufescens) (see Figs.
1.141 and 1.142). Another lungworm, Muellerius capillaris, produces larvae with a kinked tail and
dorsal spine (see Figs. 1.139 and 1.140). Cystocaulus and Neostrongyius are small ruminant lung-
worms that are found in parts of Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. The tails of their larvae have
additional spines that can be used to differentiate them from Muellerius larvae.
28
VETERINARY CLINICALPARASITOLOGY
EE
CA
EX
BT
GI
Fig.1.24. Anterior end of a frst-stage larva of a hookworm, Uncinaria stenocephata, recovered from an improperly col.
lected fecal sample of a dog.This larvahasbeen killed and stained with dilute jodine.As with Strongyloides, note the corpus
(C), isthmus (l), and muscular bulb (B) of the rhabditiform esophagus and the intestine (Gl). In contrast to Strongyloides,
note the long buccal tube ( BT).
TECHNIQUES FOR EVALUATION OF STRONGYLID NEMATODES IN
GRAZING ANIMALS
Grazing animals are infected with a variety of species of strongylid nematodes, which produce eggs
that are not easily differentiated. In veterinary practices, it is usually unnecessary to identify indi-
vidual species because treatment and control are generally directed to the entire group of nematodes
rather than to a single species. If identification of the strongylid genera present in an animal or
group of animals is needed, the most convenient method for identification is culture of eggs to the
third larval stage. In ruminants, these larvae can then be identified to parasite genus. In horses, this
technique can be used to differentiate large and small strongyle larvae and identify some genera
specifically. Currently, researchers are developing protocols for identification of parasite genera
using molecular techniques (polymerase chain reaction [PCR]), but these procedures are not yet
commercially available.
Fecal Culture
1. Fresh feces from cattle or horses should be thoroughly mixed and moistened with water if dry.
Feces should not be wet, only moist. Larvae do not survive well in very wet fecal material. If
feces are very soft or liquid, peat moss or vermiculite can be added to create a more suitable
consistency. Sheep and goat pellets can be cultured as they are, without breaking therm up.
nematodes.
 Place feces in a cup or jar in a layer several centimeters deep. The container should have a
loose cover that does not prevent air circulation but will deter flies and reduce desiccation. The
culture can be kept at room temperature for 10-20 days or at 27°C for 7 days. Daily stirring
of the culture will inhibit mold growth and circulate oxygen for the developing larvae. Additional
water can be added if feces begin to dry out.
 Following the culture period, harvest larvae with the Baermann test described previously
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
29
Identification of Ruminant and Camelid Third-Stage Larvae
EXAM
To identify larvae, place a drop or two of liquid containing larvae from the Baermann procedure
on a microscope slide. Add an equal amount of Lugol's iodine. The iodine will kill and stain the
FECALI
larvae so that they can be examined closely.
Larvae recovered from ruminant fecal material can be most easily identified by a combination
of morphology and size. The shape of the head and the shape of the tail and of the sheath extending
beyond the tail at the posterior end of the larva are important characteristics, and both should be
evaluated on each larva before an identification is made. The sheath is the retained cuticle of the
second larval stage and provides larvae with increased protection from environmental conditions.
Measurements of total larval and sheath length are helpful as well (Table 1.2), but sizes often overlap
between genera and size characteristics can be affected by culture conditions and age of larvae.
Consequently, measurements alone should not be used to identify larvae.
Relative proportions of parasite genera in larval cultures cannot be used to predict numbers of
adult worms in the gastrointestinal tract. For example, Haemonchus contortus is highly prolific and
may dominate in small ruminant fecal cultures, even when adult parasites of other genera are present
 in substantial numbers. Figures 1.25-1.35 show morphologic characteristics of common third-stage
larvae of small ruminants and cattle.
Table 1.2.
 Morphologic characteristics of infective third-stage strongylid larvae of
domestic ruminants
Overall Length
Anus to Tip of
End of Tail to Tip
Genus
(μm)
Sheath (μm)
of Sheath (μm)
Other Characteristics
Trichostrongytus
Head rounded; tail of sheath short; tail
Sheep
622-796
76-118
21-40
may have one or two tuberosities
Cattle
619762
83107
25-39
Ostertagia
Head squared; tail of sheath shorter in
Sheep
797-910
92-130
30-60
sheep
Cattle
784928
126170
55-75
Haemonchus
Head rounded; sheath tail medium
Sheep
650-751
119-146
65-78
length,offset
Cattle
749-866
158193
87119
Cooperia
Head squared with two refractile oval
Sheep
711-924
97-150
35-82
bodies at anterior end of the
Cattle
666-976
109-190
47-111
esophagus; medium-length sheath
tail tapering to fne point
Nematodirus
Broad, rounded head; intestine with
Sheep
922-1118
310350
250290
eight cells; tail notched and lobed;
Cattle
1095-1142
296-347
207-266
long thin sheath tail
Bunostomum
Small Jarva with rounded head; long
Sheep
514678
153-183
85-115
thin sheath tail
Cattle
500-583
129-158
59-83
 Rounded head; long thin sheath tail;
Sheep
771-923
193-235
125-160
16-24 triangular intestinal cells
Cattle
726-857
209-257
134182
Chabertia
 Rounded head; long thin sheath tail;
Sheep
710789
175-220
110150
24-32 rectangular intestinal cells
Sources: Bowman (2009) and Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food ( 1986).
30
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
EE
Ca
EX
B
C
Fig. 1.25. Third-stage larvae of common small ruminant strongylid genera collected from fecal culture. This photo shows
the relative size relationships among the larvae. The following photographs show the details and the anterior and posterior
ends of the individual larvae. Nematodirus spp. larvae are usually not encountered in cultures and are not illustrated here.
Oesophagostomum/Chabertia, (D) Haemonchus, and (E) Cooperia. Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris
Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AK.
Additional photographs and a key to ruminant third-stage larvae can be found at the
website of the RVC/FAO Guide to Veterinary Diagnostic Parasitology: www.rvc.ac.uk/review/
Parasitology/Index/Index.htm.
Identification of Horse Third-Stage Larvae
Horses are infected with over 30 species of strongylid parasites, but only a few can be identified
on the basis of the third-stage larva. Most of the small strongyle species can only be identified as
cyathostome parasites from the infective larval stage (Fig. 1.36 and Table 1 .3). The posterior portion
of the sheath of horse strongyle larvae is very long and filamentous, making these larvae easily
recognizable as infective parasite larvae. The number of intestinal cells in these larvae is variable
and is useful in identification.
Fecal Egg Count Reduction Test (FEcRT)
One of the principal uses of quantitative egg counts is the evaluation of drug efficacy. Anthelmintic
resistance in strongylid nematodes of horses and small ruminants is rapidly increasing
worldwide, and drug-resistant strongylid nematodes of cattle have also been identified in a number
of countries. While there are several techniques for evaluating anthelmintic efficacy, the only one
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
31
currently practical for field use in all host species is the FECRT. In this procedure, the percentage
reduction in strongylid fecal egg counts following treatment is calculated to evaluate the efficacy
FECAL EXAM
of the product. This test has also been used to evaluate resistance to anthelmintics in equine
Parascaris equorum infections.
Although there is some variation in protocols for conducting FECRT, the following general
Tesf Groups and Selecfion of Animais
small flocks or herds, it is important to be cautious in interpretation of results. Ideally, 10-15
animals will be used for each drug to be tested. For horses, where herd sizes are often low, at least
five horses per group have been recommended. In very large herds, 10% of the total population is
adequate.
The World Association of the Advancement of Veterinary Parasitology (WAAVP) also recom-
mends that an additional group of untreated animals be included. An untreated group controls for
either increases or decreases in herd egg counts unrelated to drug treatment (e.g., because of sea-
FECRT can be performed without a control group.
Animals used in the FECRT should have >150 epg (>l00 epg for cattle) if a standard McMaster
procedure is used to quantify egg counts. If at all possible, fecal egg counts should be determined
before group allocation to ensure that all animals meet the minimum fecal egg count and to create
reasonably balanced groups so that individual animals with very high egg counts do not distort
counts cannot be determined in advance, younger animals (postweaning and before sexual maturity)
may be used for the test because their egg counts will usually be higher and less dramatically
skewed in distribution than those of adult animals. The use of young animals is less desirable with
horses because a shorter egg reappearance period may follow treatment in irmmature animals, which
may cause an underestimation of drug efficacy. If it is not possible to identify enough animals
used to provide an accurate picture of drug efficacy. Altematives include increasing the sensitivity
of a McMaster test by using larger sample aliquots (e.g., using larger counting chambers available
from several cormpanies) or using other tests based on centrifugal flotation procedures (Stoll or
Wisconsin egg-counting procedure; see section on “Egg-Counting Procedures [Quantitative Fecal
Exams]").
Test Drugs and CollectionofPosttreatmentSamples
Once the test groups of animals have been established, each animal should be individually weighed
and treated with an oral formulation of the test drug at the manufacturer's recommended dose. Use
of injectable or topical drug formulations may complicate the evaluation of drug efficacy because
of persistent activity.
32
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
FECAL EXAM
Fig. 1.26. Tetadorsagia larva from sheep, head (A) and tail sheath (B). The head of Trichostrongylus larvae is tapered and
the tail sheath is short. The tail may end in one or two tuberosities. Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris
Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AK
B
Fig. 1.27. Ovine Tetadorsagia head (A) and tail sheath (B). Teladorsagia can be confused with Trichostrongylus, but
Tetadorsagia is generally larger and the head is squared not tapered. The sheath of the tail of Teladorsagia is short. Photo
 On farms where individual animals cannot be weighed, the fecal egg count reduction (FECR) can
be approximated by treating all animals with the drug dose for the estimated heaviest animal in the
group. The results, however, will not be entirely accurate because some animals will be receiving more
than the recommended dosage, which may be temporarily effective against worms resistant to the
recommended dosage. This will lead to an overestimation of drug efficacy.
FECAL EXAM
23
Fig. 1.28. Oesophagostomum/Chabertia head (A) and tail sheath (B). The larvae of these two genera are not easily distin-
guishable, but they are not difficult to differentiate from other genera. The tail sheath is long and filamentous, and the head
is broad and rounded. Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University
of Arkansas,Fayetteville,AK.
B
Fig. 1.29. Haemonchus head (A) and tail sheath (B). The larvae of Haemonchus have the most narrowly rounded
head of the common larvae. The tail sheath is medium in length and often has a slight kink at the end of the tail.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville,AK.
33
EE
CAL EXAM
B
refractile bodies (arrow) present in a squared head. These bodies are difficult to photograph but easy to appreciate under
the microscope. The sheath of the tail is medium in length and tapering or finely pointed. Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom
Yazwinski and Mr. Chris Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AK.
Fig. 1.31. Strongyloides papillosus is a nematode of ruminants that is unrelated to the important strongylid nematodes.
Infective third-stage larvae of Strongytoides may be present in larval cultures. They do not have a sheath and the esophagus
is very long (E). Additionally, free-living nematodes may be numerous in cultures contaminated with soil. For information
on identifying free-living nematodes, see the section on identifying larval nematodes in fecal samples.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, A K.
34
FECAL EXAM
sheath is variable. Cooperia oncophora (A) produces larvae with a longer tail sheath than other species of the genus (B).
Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, AK
A
B
Fig. 1.33. Tail sheath of Ostertagia (A) and Trichostrongylus (B). Both genera have a short tail sheath, but Osertagia has
a blunter head. Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of
Arkansas, Fayetteville, A K.
35
36
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FECAL EXAM
B
Fig. 1.34. Tail sheath of Haemonchus (A) and Oesophagostomum (B) from cattle. The tail sheaths of the parasites occur-
ring in cattle are similar to those in sheep. Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris Tucker, Department of
Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AK.
Fig. 1.35. Tail sheath of Bunostomum. Species of this ruminant hookworm infect both cattle and sheep. The third-stage
larva is smaller than those of other genera and has a thin tail sheath. Photo courtesy of Dr. Tom Yazwinski and Mr. Chris
Tucker, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AK.
The optimum time following treatment for collection of posttreatment samples varies with the
test drug because of variable effects on larval stages and temporary sterilizing effects on adult para-
sites. For ruminants, the following intervals are recommended:
levamisole 3-7 days,
benzimidazoles 8-10 days,
macrolides 14-17 days.
FECALEXAMINATION FOR THEDIAGNOSISOFPARASITISM
37
FECAL EXAM
B
Fig. 1.36. Infective third-stage larvae of both large and small equine strongyles have a very long filamentous extension of
the sheath. (A) The larvae of small strongyles (cyathostomes) have eight intestinal cells, which can be easily counted in the
Jarva with at least 28 cells.
Table 1.3.
Morphologic characteristics of infective third-stage strongylid larvae
of horses
Genus
Characteristics
Strongyloides
Sheath absent; esophagus almost half the length of the body
Trichostrongylus axei
Tail of sheath short, not filamentous
Most small strongyles (Cyathostominae)
Long filamentous sheath; eight triangular intestinal cells
Gyatocephatus (small strongyle)
Long flamentous sheath; 12 rectangular intestinal cells
Oesophagodontus (small strongyle)
Large larva; long filamentous sheath; 16 triangular intestinal cells
Posteriostomum (small strongyle)
Long flamentous sheath; 16 roughly rectangular intestinal cells
Strongylus equinus (large strongyle)
Long, thin Jarva with flamentous sheath; 16 poorly defined rectangular
intestinal cells
Triodontophorus (large strongyle)
Medium-length and broad larva with filamentous sheath; 18-20
well-defined rectangular intestinal cells
Strongylus edentatus (large strongyle)
 Smaller larvae with filamentous sheath; 18-20 poorly defined and
elongated intestinal cells
Strongylus vulgaris (large strongyle)
Large larvae with filamentous sheath; short esophagus; 28-32
well-defined, rectangular intestinal cells
Note: Adapted frorm Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food ( I 986).
For convenience in both ruminants and horses, a standard period of 14 days before collection of
the posttreatment samples is often recommended.
Interpretation of Resuits
When using a control and treated group, the % FECR is calculated using arithmetic group means
in the following formula:
%FECR = ([control FEC - treatment FEC]/ control FEC)x100
38
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
If pre- and posttreatment results for each animal are used instead of a control group, the formula
is altered accordingly, using pretreatment and posttreatment arithmetic means:
FE
CAL
%FECR = ([pretreatment FEC - posttreatment FEC]/ pretreatment FEC)x100
EX
When small groups of animals are used, individuals with particularly high fecal egg counts can
dramatically skew the FECR when group means are used. In these cases (e.g., in small groups of
horses), it is best to calculate individual FECR using the above formula and then average the indi-
vidual FECR to obtain a group average.
Fully effective modern anthelmintics in ruminants can reliably decrease fecal egg counts by
 >95%. However, under typical field conditions, it may be more practical to suspect that some portion
of the worm population is resistant if the percentage reduction is less than 90%. For example, if
isisn qnd ae se aun ui sm jo uoodod s e ol si uonpai auaad a
If the reduction is 80%, the proportion of resistant worms is much smaller, but still significant. For
horses, minimum cutoff values for drug efficacy in FECRT have been suggested as 95% for mac-
rolides and 90% for benzimidazoles and pyrantel.
To further evaluate which worm genera are resistant in ruminants, feces from both control and
treatment groups can be cultured, and the larvae can be identified (see above). In horses, drug
resistance is present in small strongyles (cyathostomes), which cannot be differentiated to species
by lar val indentification.
IDENTIFICATION OF ADULT WORMS
u soan u passed aq Asno A sapoau psans ape pue suas umade
   sn  no sa so  q i  
may be more difficult to identify. When preserving nematodes for further identification, it is helpful
to place them first in tap water and refrigerate the container for several hours. This will relax the
worms and make them easier to examine. After relaxation, the worms can be placed in 10% buffered
formalin. This is not the optimum preservative for all helminths but is readily available for most
veterinarians.
 The most common nematodes presented by pet owners are the ascarids (roundworms; see Fig.
1.64). These large, stout-bodied worms are common in feces and vomitus of kittens and puppies
d  s   n  a   a n s s a
(Oxyuris). Larval or adult horse strongyles are usually red and no more than about 24 cm in length
(see Fig. 1.160). Oxyuris, the equine pinworm, can reach 15 cm, and the females have distinctive
long, thin tails (see Fig. 1.166). Nematodes are most likely to be seen in diarrheic feces or follow-
img treatment.
Specific identification of adult nematodes is usually based on morphologic variations of the
outer layer, or cuticle, of the worms. Microscopic examination of the mouthparts and accessory
sexual structures may be required. To enhance visualization of these structures, the worm can be
mounted in a clearing solution, which dissolves the soft tissue, leaving only the cuticle. If the worm
   (       s n  
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
39
and mounted in a few drops of the clearing solution. Unfortunately, these solutions require either
controlled or hazardous substances. Recipes for Hoyer's and Lactophenol solutions are given below,
FECAL EXAM
but they are not usually prepared in veterinary practices. Depending on the parasite species, accurate
worm identification may require the evaluation of subtle morphologic characteristics that will be
unfamiliar to most practicing veterinarians. When specific parasite identification is needed, worms
should be submitted to a parasitologist for examination.
Hoyer's Solution
Hoyer's solution can be used indefinitely and a single recipe will last for many years. It also provides
a permanent mounting medium for specimens, although the clearing process will continue until
eventually intemal structures will no longer be visible:
· 30g gum arabic,
·16mL glycerol,
*200g chloral hydrate,
·50mL distilled water.
Dissolve the gum arabic in water with gentle heat. Add the chloral hydrate, then the glycerol.
Lactophenol
·20mL glycerin, pure;
*10mL lactic acid;
· 10mL phenol crystals, melted;
·10mL distilled water.
Combine all ingredients.
PARASITES OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS
The following photographs in this chapter illustrate the diagnostic stages found in feces of a wide
variety of both common and some uncommon parasites of major domestic species. Because an
line drawing precedes sections showing parasites of common mammalian hosts (Figs. 1.37, 1.38,
1.111, 1.112, 1.154, 1.172). Generally, photographs of eggs and cysts were taken using the high-dry
(40x) objective, although some photographs using the 10x objective are included to show relative
sizes of eggs and cysts.
The figures in which each parasite appears are listed after the name. They may include figures
in other sections where more than one parasite is illustrated.
An effort has been made to minimize taxonomic information while still permitting an apprecia-
tion of the larger groups to which each individual species belongs. For more specific taxonomic
 information, a textbook of veterinary parasitology should be consulted.
Dogs and Cats
Helminth Ova and Protozoan Cysts
DOGS
as found in freshly voided feces of the
AND
Dog, Wolf, Coyote and Fox
CP
TS
ASCARID TYPE OVA
MORULATED (HOOKWORMTYPE) OVA
Uncinaria
Ancylostoma
Toxascaris leonina
Toxocara canis
stenocephala
caninum
OVA WITH BIPOLAR PLUGS
100μm
EMBRYONATED OVA
Trichuris vulpis
Capillaria spp.*
Strongyloides stercoralisPhysaloptera spp.*
OPERCULATED OVA
Alaria spp.
Paragonimus kellicotti
Nanophyetus
Diphyllobothrium latum
(Troglotrema) salmincola
EUCESTODA OVA
PROTOZOA
?
Isospora
Isospora
Taenia
Echinococcus
canis
rivolta
Spp.
Spp.
Giardia
Sarcocystis
SD
SPp.
Dipylidium caninum
Mesocestoides sp.
Copyrighl& 19g2, by Thea Univearsily af Minnasla 
Fig. 1.37. Common parasites found in canine feces. Figure courtesy of Dr. Bert Stromberg and Mr. Gary Averbeck, College
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. *Capillaria spp. of small animals have been reclassfed
as Pearsonema, Aoncotheca, and Eucoteus. **Spirocerca fupi, which is common in many parts of the world, has a larvated
for small canine Isospora oocysts.
40
Helminth Ova, Larva, and Protozoan Cysts
as found in freshly voided feces of
DOGS AND CATS
Cats
ASCARID OVA
LARVATED OVA
MORULATED OVA
Toxascaris leonina
Spirocerca lupi Physaloptera spp.
Toxocara cati
Ancylostoma tubaeforme
OVAWITHBIPOLARPLUGS
EUCESTODA OVA
Mesocestoides sp.
Echinococcus
Taenia spp.
multilocularis
Capillaria aerophila*
Capillaria putorii
LARVAL NEMATODE
OPERCULATED OVA
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
100μm
Paragonimus kellicotti
Alaria spp.
PROTOZOA
Isospora felis
Isospora rivolta
Toxoplasma
Spirometra sp.
qondlii
Nanophyetus salmincola
Sporocyst
Oocyst
Giardia sp.
Metorchis sp.
Sarcocystis sp.
Platynosomum
concinnum
Eurytrema sp.
llua1rated by GAFY A. AV ERBECK
Copyright @ 1992, by The University of Minnesota
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. * Capillaria spp. of small animals have been reclassifed
ance to Toxoplasma oocysts.
41
42
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Protozoan Parasites
DOGS
PARAS1TE: Isospora spp. (Figs. 1.39-1.43, 1.46, 1.65, 1.73, 1.93)
AND
Common name: Coccidia.
CP
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia). Several host-specific species are found in the dog (I. canis, I.
TS
ohioensis, I. neorivofta, I. burrowsi) and cat (I. felis, I. rivolta).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine, cecum, and colon.
Life Cycle: Cats and dogs are infected by ingestion of sporulated oocysts or transport hosts (often
rodents, but also including rabbits, ruminants, birds, and other prey animals). Following develop-
ment in the final host, oocysts are passed in feces and undergo sporulation in the environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Oocysts are detected by centrifugal or simple fecal fotation examination.
Oocysts have smooth, clear cyst walls, are elliptical in shape, and contain a single, round cell
(sporoblast) when freshly passed.
Size:
I. canis, I. felis
38-51 × 27-39μm
Other Isospora spp.
17-27 x 15-24μm
although other parasites also fall into this taxonomic group. Oocysts can be found in the feces of
many clinically normal young dogs and cats. Clinical coccidiosis most often occurs in puppies and
kittens, often in association with weaning, change of owner, or other stress factors. Signs include
diarrhea, abdominal pain, anorexia, and weight loss. In severe cases, bloody diarrhea and anemia
may occur. Respiratory and neurologic signs have also been reported in some animals. Clinical
disease has been difficult to reproduce in experimental infections.
DOGS AND CATS
20μm
Fig. 1.39. Dog and cat coccidia species produce oocysts of different sizes. This figure shows I. canis (larger oocysts) and
an oocyst of the I. ohioensis complex (smaller oocyst). Photo courtesy of Dr. David Lindsay, Virginia-Maryland Regiona]
College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
18μm
Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
7μm
Jarge, round residual body that is present in each sporocyst.
43
44
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Toxoplasma gondi, Neospora caninum (Fig. 1.44)
DO
OGS
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia).
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Intestine and other tissues of cats and other felids (Toxoplasma) and dogs and
CP
other canids (Neospora).
TS
Life Cycle: Toxoplasma is transmitted to cats by ingestion of cysts containing bradyzoites in tissues
of intermediate hosts. Prenatal and transmammary transmission as well as direct transmission
through ingestion of sporulated oocysts can also occur. Transmission of Neospora in dogs appears
to be similar to Toxoplasma transmission.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Oocysts are detected in feces by centrifugal or simple flotation techniques.
However, very few oocysts of Neospora appear to be produced in infected dogs. Immunodiagnostic
tests are available to identify current and past exposure to Toxoplasma in cats but are usually not
0 o nog paisan aq ose u so paao su sisoo go asd poay iae n ao
Neospora. The small, spherical-shaped oocysts of the two genera are morphologically identical,
have a clear smooth cyst wall, and contain a single round sporoblast.
Size: 11-14 × 9-11 μm
Clinical Importance: Toxoplasma infections in cats are generally well tolerated. Clinical disease
(ocular, respiratory, etc.) can occur in cats, especially young or immunosuppressed animals.
 Toxoplasmosis is an important zoonotic disease with especially serious consequences in pregnant
women and the immunosuppressed. Congenital Neospora infection can result in severe central
nervous system disease in dogs. Neospora infection is also an important cause of abortion in the
bovine intermediate host.
DOGS AND CATS
Fig. 1.42. Isospora oocysts usually
require a minimum of 12 days to become
infective for the next host (sporulated). In
warm conditions, oocysts undergo the first
cell division soon after being passed in the
feces. In the two-cell stage, they may be
mistaken for sporulated oocysts. ln this
fecal sample, a sporulated oocyst (arrow)
20μm
is adjacent to one in the two-cell stage.
Fig. 1.43. Eimeria spp. oocysts are
sometimes seen in dog and cat feces.
Eimeria does not infect these hosts, but
 oocysts consumed as a result of predation
r
coprophagy will  pass unharmed
through the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract and
may be misidentifed as Isospora. Many
(but not all) Eimeria oocysts have a knob
at one end called the micropyle cap
do eyos sos a ()
If this cap is present, an oocyst in dog or
sounds, e se payuapi aq ueo saoay ieo
14μm
parasite."
®
?
®
?
®
福
®
®
福
Fig. 1.44. Neospora and Toxoplasma
®
oocysts are similar to common Isospora
spp., but they are smaller. The oocysts
of these two coccidia genera are similar in
福
appearance and also cannot be distin-
guished from oocysts of Hammondia,
?
another coccidian genus of small animals.
This photo of a feline fecal sample also
shows an oocyst of Isospora rivolta
30μm
(arrow).
45
46
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Sarcocystis spp. (Figs. 1.45 and 1.46)
DOGS
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia). A number of species infect dogs or cats, each with a specific
intermediate host.
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
CATS
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs and cats.
Life Cycle: Cat and dog definitive hosts are infected by ingesting intermediate host tissue contain-
ing sarcocysts. Sexual reproduction in dogs or cats leads to formation of oocysts that sporulate
while still in the intestinal tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Oocysts form within the gastrointestinal tract of dogs and cats. The oocyst
wall breaks down in the gut, and small, ellipsoidal sporulated sporocysts are released in the feces.
They are detected by centrifugal or simple flotation techniques.
Size: 7-22 × 3-15 μm
Clinical Importance: Sarcocystis is generally nonpathogenic in the definitive host, although some
species can cause severe disease in the intermediate host (cattle, sheep, pigs, horses).
PARASlTE: Cryptosporidium spp. (Fig. 1.47)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia). Cryptosporidium felis and C. canis appear to be the primary
species infecting cats and dogs, respectively
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine.
Life Cycle: These parasites have a direct life cycle. Cats and dogs are infected following ingestion
of oocysts, which are infective as soon as they are passed in the feces. Following asexual and sexual
multiplication of the organism in the intestine, oocysts are produced and exit the host in the feces.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Small oocysts in the feces are detected by use of acid-fast or other stains
dures. Oocysts of C. parvum and C. canis are morphologically indistinguishable, while C. felis
Size:
C. felis
3.5-5 μm in diameter
C.parvum, C. canis
7×5μm
Clinical Importance: Cryptosporidiosis has been reported as an uncommon cause of chronic
diarrhea in cats. Affected cats are often immunosuppressed by other causes. Although implicated
in rare instances, Cryptosporidium infections in dogs and cats do not appear to be a significant
source of zoonotic exposure for humans.
DOGS AND CATS
8 μm
Fig. 1.45. Sarcocystis sporocysts are smaller than typical coccidia oocysts and have a smooth, clear cyst wal. Each spo-
rocyst contains four banana-shaped sporozoites. Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
16μm
Fig. 1.46. Sarcocystis sporulates in the intestines and the oocyst wall usually ruptures before exiting the body so that only
sporocysts. This fotation preparation also contains an Isospora oocyst.
25μm
guish by microscopic techniques; C. felis oocysts are slightly smaller in size. Cryptosporidum oocysts can also be detected
with acid-fast stains and imrmunodiagnostic tests.
47
48
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Trichomonads (Figs. 1.48 and 1.49)
DOGS
AND
cats were identified as genetically identical to Tritrichomonas foetus, the cause of bovine venereal
trichomoniasis.
CA
Geographic Distribution: Probably worldwide.
Location in Host: Large intestine of cats and dogs.
Life Cycle: Very little is known about transmission. Infection is probably by direct contact since
Laboratory Diagnosis: The presence of trophozoites can be detected in direct saline smears of
fresh feces. Flotation solutions will destroy trophozoites. Trichomonad organisms can be confused
trophozoites. For detection of Tritrichomonas foetus, a more reliable method of detection in the
United States is through use of the InPouchTM TF-Feline culture system, similar to the method used
for culturing T foetus infections in cattle (see Chapter 2). Feline feces (0.1 g or less) is added to
the system and cultured at 25°C for up to 11 days. A commercial PCR test is also available.
Size: 6-11 x 3-4μm
Clinical Importance: Cases of chronic diarrhea in cats have been associated with feline T. foetus
infection; however, most trichomonad infections are generally considered to be of limited
pathogenicity.
PARASlTE:Giardia intestinalis (=G.duodenalis), G. lamblia,G.canis,G.cati,etc.(Figs.1.40,
1.50-1.56, 1.58)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (flagellate). The number and correct nomenclature of species are
currently under investigation. Molecular analysis is now used to allocate isolates into assemblages.
Most isolates from dogs belong to Assemblages C and D, and cat isolates fall into Assemblage F.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs, cats, many other animals, and humans.
Life Cycle: Dogs and cats are infected by ingesting cysts in the environment. Trophozoites are
stimulated under certain conditions to encyst and are passed from the host in feces.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Examination of feces for cysts is the most sensitive microscopic technique.
Cysts are best detected by 33% ZnSO4 centrifugal fotation; other flotation solutions often cause rapid
distortion. Motile trophozoites are occasionally seen in a direct saline smear of fresh diarrheic feces
or may be in duodenoscopic aspirates (aspirates should be centrifuged and the sediment examined for
trophozoites). Trophozoites are likely to be dead and unrecognizable if fecal examination occurs longer
than 30 minutes after sample collection or if the sample has been refrigerated. Multiple fecal examina-
tions (i.e., three exams done on samples collected over a 5- to 7-day period) may be necessary to rule
out infection. A point of use fecal antigen test is available in the United States. Fecal enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) tests are also available.
Size:
Cyst
9-13 × 7-9μm
Trophozoite
12-17 x 7-10μm
Clinical Importance: Giardia is a common parasite of small animals. Many infections are asymp-
tomatic, but Giardia may cause acute, chronic, or intermittent diarrhea, particularly in young dogs
and cats. Since the role of pets in human Giardia infection is controversial, infections should be
regarded as potentially zoonotic.
DOGS AND CATS
14 μm
Fig. 1.48. Trichomonad parasites in dogs and cats have a distinctive undulating membrane. In fresh saline smears, they
are most easily confused with Giardia trophozoites, but trichomonads lack the facelike appearance and the concave ventral
surface of Giardia.
5um
Fig. 1.49. Stained fecal smear of a trichomonad organism showing the anterior fagella and part of the undulating membrane
(arrow).
16um
49
DOGS AND CATS
8μm
Fig. 1.51. A drop of Lugol's iodine may be added to a fotation preparation to stain Giardia cysts and make internal
structures more prominent. Two nuclei (N), intracytoplasmic fagella (F), and median bodies (M) can be seen in the cyst
shown here.
QQ
24 μm
Fig. 1.52. Giardia cysts undergo osmotic damage when exposed to the high specific gravity of salt solutions. With time,
increasing numbers of cysts appear vacuolated, with a characteristic half-moon shape. Plant pollen and yeast cells that mimic
Giardia cysts do not un dergo this same artifact change.
10μm
Fig. 1.53. The structures most often confused with Giardia cysts are yeast (arrows), which may be found in diarrheic feces
in large numbers. Yeast are commonly slightly smaller than Giardia cysts and lack the complex internal structure seen in
Giardia cysts.
50
DOGS AND CATS
15 jum
Fig. 1.54. Stained Giardia trophozoites in a direct smear. Trophozoites are bilaterally symmetrical and pyriform shaped
with two nuclei, eight fagella, two rodlike median bodies, and a ventral, concave, adhesive disk that gives them a clown
face.
5um
Fig. 1.55. Unstained Giardia trophozoite in a fecal smear. Live trophozoites have a characteristic wobbling motion when
 swimming (often described as looking like a falling leaf) and are easily kept in the microscopic field of view.
Fig. 1.56. Giardia trophozoite (arrow) associated with a portion of mucosa in a duodenal aspirate. Aspirates should be
examined within 30 minutes of collection, before the fragile trophozoites die.
51
52
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Heiminth Parasites
DOGS
PARAS1TE: Ancylostoma spp., Uncinaria stenocephala (Figs. 1.57-1.59, 1.65, 1.70-1.71, 1.103)
Common name: Hookworm.
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Strongylida)
TS
Geographic Distribution:
A. brasiliense (dogs and cats): tropical and subtropical distribution; in the United States found in
the Gulf Coast region.
A. tubaeformae (cats): worldwide.
A. ceylanicum (dogs and cats): various parts of Asia.
 Uncinaria stenocephala (dogs, rarely cats): occurs in the cooler northern temperate regions, includ-
ing the northem United States, Canada, and Europe.
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs and cats and wild canids and felids.
 p sss sn q so sop o o ygo usssu a a
skin penetration by infective larvae (most important), ingestion of infective third-stage larvae from
the environment or in paratenic hosts, and transplacental transmission (least important). Transmission
Of U. stenocephala occurs by ingestion of infective third-stage larvae or paratenic hosts, and rarely
by direct skin penetration of infective larvae. Cats can be infected with hookworms either by skin
penetration by infective larvae or by ingestion of larvae in the environment or in paratenic hosts
Laboratory Diagnosis: Hookworm eggs are detected using centrifugal or simple fotation fecal
examination techniques. Ancylostoma and Uncinaria eggs are morphologically identical, with an
elliptical shape and smooth shell wall containing a grapelike cluster of cells (morula). However,
they differ in size.
Size:
Ancylostoma spp.
52-79 × 28-58 μm
U.stenocephala
71-92×35-58μm
Clinical Importance: Ancylostoma caninum is common in North America. In heavy infections,
particularly in puppies, hookworms can cause severe anemia and death due to their voracious
bloodsucking habits. Peracute, acute, and chronic disease syndromes may occur. Ancylostoma
neous larva migrans) to humans. Ancylostoma spp. infections in cats are less common than in dogs.
Many feline infections are subclinical, but heavy infections causing anemia and weight loss can be
fatal. Uncinaria stenocephala is less pathogenic than A. caninum; infection may result in chronic
disease with diarrhea and hypoproteinemia
DOGS AND CATS
Fig. 1.57. Although Ancylostoma is the most common genus of hookworm in the United States, slightly larger Uncinaria
eggs may also be seen in canine feces, and mixed infections can occur, as shown here.
 24 μm
Fig. 1.58. Ancylostoma tubaeforme larvated and undeveloped eggs from a cat. The egg on the right contains a developed
rapidly develop to the larvated stage and hatch.
 26 μm
two Giardia sp. cysts (arrows).
53
54
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Toxocara spp. (Figs. 1.60-1.66, 1.68, 1.69, 1.71, 1.93, 1.95, 1.103)
DOGS
Common name: Roundworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Ascaridida).
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
CP
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs (7. canis) and cats (7. cati).
TS
Life Cycle: Single-celled eggs pass from the host in the feces and develop to the infective stage
p (uod iso) puds Aq suo  go suooaju aon soa uuoua an u
s (suao) sisou onuad o sa pai jo usa an Aq no uisss Asu
acquire T. cati infection by ingestion of larvated eggs or paratenic hosts. Transmammary transmis-
sion may also occur in some circumstances.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected using centrifugal or simple fotation examination tech-
niques. Toxocara eggs have a dark, round, single-celled embryo contained in a thick shell wall.
Eggs of the two species are difficult to differentiate. Toxocara canis tends to be subspherical, and
T. cati tends to be elliptical in shape.
Size:
T. canis
85-90 ×75μm
T. cati
65 × 75μm
Clinical Importance: Toxocara is an important pathogen in puppies and kittens. Stillbirths, neo-
natal deaths (7. canis), or chronic ill-thrift (7. canis, T. cati) can occur in infected animals. Adult
dogs and cats are much less likely to have symptomatic infections. Additionally, both species (espe-
cially T. canis) have zoonotic importance as causes of visceral and ocular larva migrans, particularly
im children.
DOGS AND CATS
30μm
Fig. 1.60. Toxocara eggs are typical ascarid eggs with a thick shell. They contain a single cell when frst passed in host
feces.
26μm
Fig. 1.61. When the microscope is focused on the surface of a Toxocara egg, the rough, pitted shell wall surface has a
golf-ball-like appearance.
正
26um
Fig. 1.62. Toxocara and other ascarids typically require several weeks of development in the environment before an infec-
tive larva forrms, although initial larval developrment can occur in a few days in hot weather.
55
56
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Toxascaris leonina (Fig. 1.63)
DOGS
Common name: Roundworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Ascaridida).
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
CP
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs, cats, wild canids and felids
TS
Life Cycle: The life cycle is similar to that of Toxocara spp., although there is no transmammary
or transplacental infection. Dogs and cats are infected following ingestion of larvated eggs or
paratenic hosts (rodents, rabbits).
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected using centrifugal or simple flotation fecal examination
techniques. Toxascaris eggs are elliptical with a thick, smooth outer shell wall containing a light-
colored, single-celled embryo. The internal surface of the shell wall appears rough or wavy due to
the vitelline membrane.
Size: 75-85 × 60-75 μm
Clinical Importance: Toxascaris is much less common in dogs and cats than Toxocara and is
considered to be of minor clinical significance.
30μm
DOGS AND CATS
Fig. 1.63. Toxascaris teonina egg and Toxocara cati egg. Note the dark single-cell embryo and rough mammillated (pitted)
outer shell wall surface of the Toxocara egg contrasted to the lighter appearance of the embryo and to the smooth outer
shell wall surface of the Toxascaris egg.
ww
4
Fig. 1.64. Ascarids are often passed in the feces or vomitus of dogs and cats, particularly in young or recently dewormed
 () ox o a sads o is  go po pssd um dus  e sa ens i sa un qsad s
Physaloptera (P) are shown here.
36μm
Fig. 1.65. Canine fecal sample containing Toxocara canis (T) and Ancylostoma (A) eggs and an Isospora oocyst (1).
57
58
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Baylisascaris procyonis (Figs. 1.66 and 1.67)
DOGS
Common name: Raccoon roundworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Ascaridida).
AND
Geographic Distribution: Parts of North America and Europe.
CP
Location in Host: Small intestine of raccoons and occasionally dogs.
TS
Life Cycle: Raccoons are infected by ingestion of infective eggs or paratenic hosts (rodents,
rabbits, birds). Routes of infection in dogs are presumed to be the same.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected by simple or centrifugal fecal fotation examination.
Eggs are thick walled, elliptical in shape, and contain a single, large, round-celled embryo. The
eggs are often covered with a brown proteinaceous substance and have a fine granular shell wall
surface.
Size: 63-75 x 53-60μm
Clinical Importance: Infection is well tolerated in the raccoon definitive host. Severe central
nervous system or ocular disease can result from exposure of birds, rabbits, rodents, marsupials,
 and humans to infective B. procyonis eggs. Infections in dogs may result in either patent adult
worms in the small intestine or larval tissue migration causing central nervous system disease.
30 μm
Fig. 1.66. Toxocara canis egg and Baylisascaris procyonis egg (arrow). Eggs of B. procyonis appear in the feces of dogs
due to either patent infections or coprophagy. The larger Toxocara egg (85-90 × 75 μm) has a rough, pitted, outer shell wal]
surface. The B. procyonis egg is smaller, has a finely granular shell wall surface, and may be brown in color. Baylisacaris
eggs are easily misidentified as Toxocara in canine fecal exams. Mistakes can be minimized with the use of an ocular
micrometer.
DOGS AND CATS
Fig.1.67. Baylisascaris procyonis egg from
the feces of a naturally infected dog. Usually,
Baylisascaris eggs are brown in color due to the
presence of a protein coat (see Fig. 1.66). When
lacking the protein coat, Baylisascaris eggs are
easily misidentifed as Toxocara canis.
Baylisascaris eggs can be differentiated from
those of Toxocara based on their smaller size
28 μm
and the absence of outer shell wall pitting.
Fig. 1.68. The morphology of the anterior end
of small animal ascarids can be used to differ-
entiate species. The anterior end of adult
Toxocara cati has an “arrowhead” appearance
due to the cervical alae ( winglike expansions of
the cuticle). Adult specimens of Toxocara cati
(A) recovered from the feces or vomitus of cats
can be differentiated from Toxascaris leonina
(B), which has less prominent cervical alae.
Fig. 1.69. The cervical alae of adult Toxocara
canis (A) are similar in appearance to those of
Toxascaris leonina. ln contrast to the other asca-
rids infecting dogs ( Toxocara, Toxascaris), adult
Bayfisascaris (B) lack visible cervical alae.
59
60
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Trichuris vulpis (Figs. 1.59, 1.70-1.74)
DOGS
Common name: Whipworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida).
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
CP
Location in Host: Cecum and large intestine of dogs and wild canids. Trichuris felis infection has
TS
been reported rarely in cats in Latin America and Australia.
Life Cycle: Dogs are infected by ingesting infective eggs in the environment. Eggs are produced
by adult worms in the large bowel and, after leaving the host in the feces, develop to the infective
stage in the environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are best detected by centrifugal flotation and less effectively by
shaped, and brown. The shell wall surface is smooth
Size: 72-90 × 32-40 μm
Clinical Importance: Heavy infection in dogs can cause weight loss, unthriftiness, and profuse
diarrhea that may be bloody. Infection in humans occurs rarely.
DOGSANDCATS
36μm
Capillarid species also produce eggs with similar polar plugs. In this fecal Hotation preparation, an Ancylostoma caninum 
egg is also present (A).
150um
Fig. 1.71. Toxocara, Ancylostoma, and Trichuris eggs in a canine fecal sample. These are the most common intestinal
University, Manhattan, KS.
 30 μm
Fig. 1.72. Capillarid egg (C), Ancylostoma egg (A), and Monocystis cysts (M). The protozoan Monocystis cysts seem to
61
62
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Eucoleus (=Capillaria) aerophilus, E. boehmi (Figs. 1.72-1.76, 1.93)
DOGS
Common name: Fox lungworm (E. aerophilus).
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida). These parasites were formerly in the genus Capillaria
AND
 and are still frequently referred to by that name.
CP
Geographic Distribution: Eucoleus aerophilus is found worldwide; E. boehmi has been reported
TS
from North and South America and Europe.
Location in Host: Trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles of dogs, cats, and foxes (E. aerophilus).
Epithelium of the nasal turbinates and sinuses of dogs and wild canids (E. boehmi).
Life Cycle: The definitive host is probably infected by ingestion of eggs containing infective larvae,
although an earthworm intermediate host may be involved.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected by fecal fotation examination or in tracheal or nasal
mucus samples. The eggs are clear to golden (E. boehmi) or brownish green (E. aerophilus), are
bipolar plugged, tend to be asymmetrical in shape, and contain a multicelled embryo.
Size:
E.aerophilus
58-79 × 29-40 μm
E.boehmi
54-60 × 30-35 μm
Clinical Importance: Eucoleus aerophilus is an important pathogen in farmed foxes and causes
bronchopneumonia. Infections in dogs and cats are usually subclinical; however, in some cases,
chronic cough occurs. Eucoleus boehmi infections are usually subclinical. Reported clinical signs
include sneezing and a mucopurulent nasal discharge that may contain blood.
28μm
Fig. 1.73. The only canine parasite eggs that could be mistaken for whipworm eggs belong to the capillarid parasites
Eucoleus and Aonchotheca. Trichuris eggs (T) are larger, have a smooth-walled shell, and are usually browner than the
smaller Eucoleus egg (E) shown here. Isospora oocysts are also present in this sample.
DOGS AND CATS
B
edde uo shnd reodg ra pue sha woadya ueun jaes ose ane sasa puede shnd a uo sapi y (a)
asymmetrical.
20 μm
Fig. 1.75. Eucoleus eggs are passed in the undifferentiated one- or two-celled stage. Eucoleus boehmi (right) and E.
aerophitus (lef) eggs are similar in appearance, although in fresh feces, eggs of E. boehmi already contain a morula (cluster
 of cells) that does not completely fill the interior of the egg. Differences in the eggshell can also be used to differentiate the
University, Manhattan, KS.
15μm
Fig. 1.76. Examination of the surface of the shell wall of small-animal capillarid eggs can be used in making a specifc
identification. With the high-dry objective (40x) of the microscope, the surface of the Eucoteus aerophilus egg has a network
63
64
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Aonchotheca (=Capillaria) putorii (Fig. 1.77)
DOGS
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida).
AND CATS
Geographic Distribution: North America, Europe, and New Zealand,
Location in Host: Small intestine and stomach of the cat, raccoon, and various wild felids and
mustelids.
Life Cycle: Definitive hosts are infected following ingestion of larvated eggs. Adults develop in
saoay aun ul passed ae en sasa aonpond pue pon jeusauons au
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected by centrifugal or simple fecal flotation examination. The
 yellow-gray eggs are asymmetrical about the bipolar plugs. The sides of the eggs tend to be parallel.
The shell wall surface has a network of deep longitudinal ridges.
Size: 56-72 x 23-32μm
Clinical Importance: Infections in cats are usually subclinical and are uncommon in North
 America. Gastritis with vomiting can occur. Hemorrhagic enteritis can occur in mink.
PARAS1TE: Physaloptera spp. (Figs. 1.78 and 1.79)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Spirurida). Several species have been described (P praeputialis, P
felidis, P pseudopraeputialis, P. rara, P canis).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Stomach of dogs, cats, and various wild animals.
Life Cycle: Cockroach, beetle, or cricket intermediate hosts ingest eggs shed in dog or cat feces.
The definitive host is infected by ingesting the insect intermediate host or a paratenic host (reptiles
and possibly other animals).
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs of this group of nematodes are not reliably detected by fecal flotation
due to their density. Physaloptera eggs are best detected by fecal sedimentation. The eggs are clear
and elliptical, have a smooth shell wall, and contain a larva coiled inside.
Size: 42-53 × 29-35 μm
Clinical Importance: This common parasite of several wild animal species is considered of minor
clinical significance in dogs and cats. Infections may result in clinical signs of vomiting and
anorexia.
26 μm
DOGS AND CATS
Fig. 1.77. Eggs of Aonchotheca putori are similar to those of other capillarids (A), but in contrast to the ridges of the
20μm
than those of Spirocerca (Fig. 1.80). Physaloptera eggs are smaller and have a thicker shel than larvated hookworm eggs,
with which they might be confused. Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State
University, Manhattan, KS.
8
Fig. 1.79. Adult Physatoptera may be seen with gastroscopy in cases where routine fecal fotation does not detect the para-
site eggs. Several worms can be seen on the surface of this canine stomach. Photo courtesy of Dr. Michael Leib, Virginia-
Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
65
66
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Spirocerca lupi (Fig. 1.80)
DOGS
Common name: Esophageal worm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Spirurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide but primarily in warmer regions.
Location in Host: Adults are found in the wall of the esophagus, stomach, and, rarely, aorta of
dogs, wild canids, and various other wild animals.
ingesting the insect interrmediate host or a paratenic host (rodents, other mammals, birds, reptiles).
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are best detected by fecal sedimentation or (less reliably) by fecal
fotation. The eggs are narrow, ellipsoidal, and cylindrical; have a smooth, clear shell wall; and
contain a fully developed larva coiled inside.
Size: 30-38 x 11-15μm
Clinical Importance: Infections are often subclinical. The most common clinical signs are dys-
and esophageal sarcomas may occur. Spirocerca infection is uncommon in the United States.
PARAS1TE: Strongyloides stercoralis (Figs. 1.21, 1.22, 1.81, 1.82)
Common name: Intestinal threadworm
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Rhabditida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Adult females live in the canine small intestine.
Life Cycle: Strongyloides parthenogenetic females in the small intestine release larvae that may
develop into infective parasitic larvae or, altermatively, may undergo a single free-living cycle of
maturation and reproduction before infective parasitic larvae are formed. Infection of the host from
if the dog is newly infected during lactation.
Laboratory Diagnosis: First-stage larvae may be identified in fresh feces using a Baermann test.
Strongyloides larvae do not have the modifications of the tail seen in most lungworm larvae. They
closely resemble hatched hookworm larvae or free-living nematodes that may be present in fecal
samples that have been allowed to sit for a period of time prior to collection (see section on iden-
tification of nematode larvae collected by Baermann exam, which is at the beginning of this
chapter). If identification of the first-stage larvae is uncertain, larvae in the feces can be cultured
for a few days, and the third-stage larvae can be identified.
Size: 150-390μm in fresh feces. Strongyloides larvae can grow quickly in the environment
and their size increases before the molt to the second larval stage. This results in a large size range
for the larvae. In addition, the size range may be increased by the mistaken identification and mea-
surement of larger second-stage larvae.
Clinical Importance: Infections may be subclinical, but heavy infection can produce respiratory
signs from migrating larvae as well as enteritis associated with adults. Strongyfoides stercoralis
also infects humans and may produce severe and even fatal infections in immunocompromised
humans. The degree to which canine strains infect humans is unclear, but because of the seriousness
Of some human cases, infection in dogs should be considered a zoonosis.
DOGS AND CATS
Fig. 1.80. Spirocerca eggs do not foat con-
sistently in common fotation solutions.These
larvated eggs are more elongated than
Physatoptera eggs. Photo courtesy of Dr.
Isabelle Verzberger-Epshtein, NRC lnstitute
for Nutrisciences and Health, Charlottetown,
35μm
PEl, Canada.
Fig. 1.81. Strongyloides frst-stage larva. In
a fresh fecal sample Strongyloides larvae need
to be differentiated from larvae of lungworm
species. A prominent genital rudiment (inset)
and a straight tail lacking accessory spines are
helpful in identifying first-stage Strongyloides
25μm
Jarvae.
Fig. 1.82. To confrm identification of S.
stercoratis, the fecal sample can be cultured
for 24 days and examined for third-stage
larvae, which have a distinctively long esopha-
gus(arrow indicates junction ofesophagus
and intestine) that is not seen in lungworm or
55μm
hookwormlarvae.
67
68
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Aelurosfrongylus abstrusus (Figs. 1.83 and 1.84)
DOGS
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida).
AND CATS
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
 Location in Host: Lung parenchyma (terminal respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts) of cats and
rarely dogs.
Life Cycle: First-stage larvae are released in the airways, coughed up, swallowed, and passed out
in the feces. Cats are infected by ingesting a snail or slug intermediate host or paratenic hosts
(rodents, birds).
Laboratory Diagnosis: First-stage larvae are detected in feces using the Baermann technique
(S-shaped curve) and a dorsal spine.
Size: 360-400 × 15-20μm
Clinical Importance: Infrequently diagnosed; infected animals may suffer signs of chronic cough
and anorexia. Heavy infection may be fatal.
PARAS1TE: Crenosoma vuipis (Figs. 1.21, 1.23, 1.85)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida).
Geographic Distribution: Northeastern North America and Europe.
Location in Host: Bronchioles, bronchi, and trachea of dogs, foxes, and various wild
carnivores.
Life Cycle: Canid definitive hosts are infected by ingestion of slug/terrestrial snail intermediate
hosts containing third-stage larvae. Larvae produced in the respiratory system by adult worms are
coughed up, swallowed, and passed from the host in feces.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Detection of first-stage larvae in feces using the Baermann technique
(most reliable) or by ZnSO4 centrifugal fecal flotation. First-stage larvae tend to assume a C shape
when they are killed by gentle heat or iodine. The terminus of the tail has a slight defection but
does not show the kink and spine seen in other nematode lungworms.
Size: 264-340 × 16-22μm
Clinical Importance: Crenosoma vuipis infection in dogs produces a nonfatal chronic cough.
Canine infection is generally rare in North America, except in the Atlantic Canadian provinces,
DOGS AND CATS
Fig. 1.83. Aeturostrongylus larva in a feline
fecal sample. Larvae have the distinctive
S-shaped kink at the end of the tail that is
typical of many members of this group of
lungworms. These larvae also show a subter-
38 μm
minal spine (Fig. 1.84).
Fig. 1.84. Detail of the tail of Aeturotrongytus
abstrusus larva showing its characteristic sub-
terminal spine that would be absent in other
larvae found in feline feces. For further infor-
mation on identification of lungworm larvae,
 see the section in this chapter "ldentifcation
of Nematode Larvae Recovered with Fecal
Flotation or Baermann Procedures."
Fig. 1.85. The tail of Crenosoma larvae has
a slight defection but lacks a definite kink
or dorsal spine, allowing it to be differenti-
ated from Ateurostrongylus,Angiostrongytus,
and Filaroides and Osterus. Larvae of
Crenosomα can be differentiated from those of
Strongyloides based on the morphology of the
30μm
esophagus (Fig. 1.23).
69
70
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Angiosfrongyfus vasorum (Figs. 1.86 and 1.87)
DOGS
Common name: French heartworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida).
AND
Geographic Distribution: Canada (Newfoundland), Europe, South America, Africa
2
Location in Host: Pulmonary arteries, right ventricle of dogs and foxes.
TS
i  n so  sss ss  'so a n ss a a si  a
they ingest intermediate hosts or paratenic hosts.
Laboratory Diagnosis : First-stage larvae in fresh feces are detected using the Baerrmann technique
(most reliable) or fecal flotation. The larvae have a cephalic button on the anterior end, and there
is a severe kink (S-shaped curve) in the tail, which has a dorsal spine.
Size: 340-399 × 13-17μm
pulmonary disease. Ocular and central nervous system disease and bleeding disorders have also
been reported.
PARAS1TE: Oslerus (=Filaroides) osleri (Fig. 1.88)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida). Two other closely related species (Filaroides hirthi, F
milksi) occur in the respiratory system of dogs but are rare and even more rarely cause disease.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Lumenal nodules in the tracheal bifurcation in dogs, coyotes, wolves, dingoes,
and foxes.
Life Cycle: Infection follows ingestion of first-stage larvae from sputum or vomitus of an infected
dog or other canid. This life cycle varies from that of other strongylid lungworms because the first
larval stage is infective for the definitive host. Typically, the third larval stage is the infective form.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Diagnosis is best achieved by visual observation of the nodules on tracheal
endoscopic examination. First-stage larvae may be detected in feces by ZnSOq centrifugal flotation
or in transtracheal wash samples. The Baermann technique is not the method of choice because
  1 -i an jo pn  ' o   a s an  ss a
S-shaped sinus wave curve but lacks a dorsal spine. The first-stage larvae of O. osleri are indistin-
guishable from those of F. hirthi.
Size:
Larvae recovered from feces
232-266μm
Larvae recovered from trachea
325-378μm
Clinical Importance: This is an uncommon infection in dogs in North America. Younger animals
tend to be more severely affected than older ones. Respiratory distress, chronic cough, and weight
loss can occur. Heavily infected animals may die.
DOGS AND CATS
38 μm
Fig. 1.86. Angiostrongytus vasorum first-stage larva. This species is uncommon in North America. Larvae can be differ-
entiated from those of and Ostenus in canine feces by the presence of the subterminal dorsal spine.
Fig. 1.87. High-magnification view of Angiostrongylus vasorum first-stage larva tail showing the S-shaped curve and the
dorsal spine. The tail of Aelurostrongylus abstrusus (Fig. 1.84) is similar in appearance.
20μm
Fig. 1.88. First-stage Osteruslarva in dog feces. The larvae have a kinked tail, but the accessory spine seen in Ateurostrongyfus
and Angiostrongylus larvae is not present. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond,
WA.
71
72
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Ollulanus tricuspis (Fig. 1.89)
DOGS
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida).
AND
Geographic Distribution: Europe, North America, parts of South America, Australia.
CA
Location in Host: Adult worms are found in the stomach of cats and other felids.
TS
host in vomitus. Infection of cats occurs through ingestion of these larvae in vomitus.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Infection is diagnosed by identification of larvae or the small adults in
vomitus, using the Baermann test. Rarely, stages of the parasite may be seen in feces, but they are
usually digested before reaching the environment.
Size:
Third-stage larvae
500μm
Adults
700-1000μm
Clinical Importance: Infection can cause chronic gastritis and vomiting in cats. Colony and feral
cats are most often infected.
PARAS1TE: Dipylidium caninum (Figs. 1.90, 1.91, 1.94, 1.97, 1.98)
Common name: Double-pored or cucumber seed or fea tapeworm.
Taxonomy: Cestode.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs and cats.
Life Cycle: Animals acquire infection through the ingestion of larval cysticercoids contained in
feas or, less frequently, in chewing lice (Trichodectes, Felicola). Arthropod intermediate hosts
Laboratory Diagnosis: Tapeworm segments in the perianal area or in feces are often observed by
sas   s a no un  a si sis  
contain 2-63 eggs (average of 25-30 eggs).
Size:
Egg packets
120-200 μm
Eggs
35-60μm
Clinical Importance: Infections of this common tapeworm are generally subclinical; however, the
passage of segments from the rectum may induce anal pruritis. Dipylidium caninum is zoonotic,
with young children at greatest risk of acquiring infections from ingesting the infected flea or louse
intermediate host.
DOGS AND CATS
70μm
Fig. 1.89. Adult male Otlutanus tricuspis in a fecal sample. Larvae and adult worms are only rarely present in feces.
Vomitus should be examined to diagnose infection. These worms can easily be differentiated from ascarids that may be
of 1 mm. Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
30μm
Fig. 1.90. Dipylidium caninum eggs containing a hexacanth embryo occur in packets of about 25-30 eggs. The hooks are
of North America: Small Animal Practice. Elsevier, 2009.).
38um
Fig. 1.91. Occasionally, Dipylidium eggs are released from the packets and may be detected individually on fecal fotation.
Note the clear, thin shell wall of the egg and the refractile hooks (arrow) of the embryo.
73
74
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Taenia spp. (Figs. 1.92-1.95, 1.97, 1.98)
DOGS
Taxonomy: Cestode. Numerous species infect small animals, including T. taeniaeformis in cats
and T. pisiformis, T. multiceps, T. hydatigena, T. ovis in dogs.
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
CP
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs, cats, and various wild carnivores.
TS
(morphologic forms include cysticerci, coenuri, and strobilocerci) in the tissues of prey animals.
Prey animals become infected with the metacestode through the ingestion of food contaminated
with eggs passed in carmivore feces.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected when free in the feces by fotation techniques. Generally,.
 however, eggs are passed from the host contained in tapeworm segrments. Therefore, fecal flotation
tends to be a poor indicator of infection status.
Size: 25-40 μm in diameter
Clinical Importance: Infections in the definitive host are generally subclinical; however, the
passage of segments from the rectum may induce anal pruritis. Taenia taeniaeformis (small-rodent
intermediate host) and T. pisiformis (rabbit intermediate host) are common species infecting pet
cats and dogs, respectively. Metacestode infection in the intermediate hosts can cause disease (7.
muiticeps) or meat condermnation (7. ovis).
DOGSANDCATS
20 μum
Fig.1.92. Taenia eggs are brown with a thick shell wall (embryophore) and contain a hexacanth embryo (six hooks). Note
the radial striations in the wall of the egg.
la
  g   ( 2o s )   () 2 )  s  
courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
Fig. 1.94. Tapeworm segments from an animal can usually be easily identifed as such by squashing the segment between
fied as segments by squashing them and observing the numerous small, round transparent bodies, called "calcareous
corpuscles."
75
76
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Echinococcus spp. (Figs. 1.92-1.95, 1.97, 1.98)
DOGS
Common name: Dwarf dog or fox tapeworm.
Taxonomy: Cestode. Echinococcus granulosus and E. multilocularis infect dogs and wild canids.
Cats are infrequently infected with E. multilocularis.
Geographic Distribution: Echinococcus granulosus is found worldwide; E. multilocularis occurs
in the United States, Canada, and in parts of Europe and Asia.
Location in Host: Small intestine.
Life Cycle: Carmivores acquire infections through the ingestion of metacestodes (hydatids) in the
tissues of prey animals. Prey animals become infected with the metacestode through the ingestion
of eggs passed in carnivore feces.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Like the eggs of Taenia, Echinococcus eggs have a thick shell wall with
radial striations (embryophore). The six hooks of the hexacanth embryo allow it to be distinguished
from pollen grains or other debris. The eggs of Taenia and Echinococcus are morphologically
identical.
Size: 25-40 μm in diameter
Clinical Importance: Infections in the definitive host are subclinical. Echinococcus spp. are
important due to their zoonotic potential. Human infection with hydatid cysts can cause serious
disease and death. In some countries, particularly in rural areas, hydatid disease can be an important
public health problem. In most areas of North America, canine infection and human hydatid disease
are rare.
PARAS1TE: Mesocestoides spp. (Figs. 1.96-1.98)
Taxonomy: Cestode. Species include M. corti, M. lineatus, M. variabilis
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs, cats, various wild mammals, and birds.
Life Cycle: The life cycle is not completely known. Dogs and cats acquire infections through
ingestion of tetrathyridia contained in the tissues of various reptiles, amphibia, birds, and mammal
first intermediate host and the form of the first larval stage of Mesocestoides are unknown.
round parauterine organ at the broad end of the segment. Eggs are rarely found free in the feces of
definitive hosts but would, presumably, be detected by fecal flotation.
Size: Eggs 30-40μm in diameter
Clinical Importance: Infection of the definitive host with the adult tapeworm is usually subclini-
cal. Fatal peritonitis due to large numbers of tetrathyridia or acephalic metacestodes has been
reported in dogs acting as hosts to the larval stages.
DOGS AND CATS
45μm
Fig. 1.95. Embryonic hooks are visible in the two Taenia or Echinococcus eggs in this photo (arrow). Hooks can be used
logically identical. A Toxocara egg is also present.
15 μm
Fig. 1.96. Mesocestoides eggs have a thin, clear, smooth shell wall and contain a hexacanth embryo. The hooks of the
embryo are readily visible.
Fig. 1.97. Mature tapeworm segments passed in the feces may be observed by owners and presented for identification. The
size and shape of these segments are quite characteristic: Taenia segments (T) are square to rectangular in shape, Dipylidium
segments( D) are more barrel shaped, and Mesocestoides has club-shaped segments( M). Both Mesocestoides and Echinococcus
(E) segments are small and are often overlooked. ldentification can be confirmed by examining eggs from the segments.
77
78
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Diphyllobothrium latum (Fig. 1.99)
DOGS
Common name: Broad fish tapeworm.
Taxonomy: Cestode. Dogs and cats can also be infected with D. dendriticum.
AND CATS
Geographic Distribution: Northerm Hemisphere and South America.
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs, cats, pigs, humans, and various other fish-eating
mammals.
Life Cycle: Eggs passed in the feces of the final host hatch coracidia, which are ingested by fresh-
water copepods (first intermediate hosts). Fish eat the copepods containing the next larval stage
(procercoids), which develop into the plerocercoids (infective stage) in the fish. Predatory fish can
acquire plerocercoids through ingestion of infected smaller fish. Marmmalian definitive hosts acquire
infections through the ingestion of plerocercoids contained in the tissues of fish.
Size: Eggs 58-76 × 40-51 μm
Clinical Importance: Uncommon in pets in North America. Infections are generally subclinical
in dogs and cats. Dogs and cats do not serve as direct sources of infection for humans. Human
infection with this tapeworm may lead to the development of vitamin Biz deficiency.
PARASITE: Spirometra spp. (Fig. 1.100)
Common name: Zipper tapeworm.
Taxonomy: Cestode.
Geographic Distribution: Spirometra mansonoides occurs in North and South America, and S.
erinaceieuropaei occurs in Europe and Asia
Location in Host: Small intestine of cats, dogs, and wild animals.
Life Cycle: Dogs and cats acquire infections by the ingestion of frogs, snakes, rodents, or birds
 s pu saop go saoa an un passd sg (eeds se uo) sproaad suu
coracidia, which are eaten by freshwater copepods and develop into procercoids. The second inter-
mediate hosts (frogs, snakes, etc.) acquire plerocercoids by feeding on the copepods.
Laboratory Diagnosis: The yellow-brown eggs can be detected in feces using a sedimentation
technique but are also often recovered in flotation procedures. Lengths of reproductively spent seg
ments are occasionally passed in the feces.
Size: Eggs 65-70 × 35-37μm
Clinical Importance: Infections in the definitive hosts are usually subclinical. Cats can also serve
as a paratenic host, with plerocercoids surviving in various tissues (sparganosis) and causing clinical
signs depending on their location.
DOGS AND CATS
Fig. 1.98. Within hours of passing from the host, tapeworm segments lose their motility and dry up. Clients may fnd dried
tapeworm segments in resting areas of dogs and cats. The dried segments still retain their characteristic shape. Shown in
this photo are Taenia (T), Echinococcus (E), Dipylidium (D), and Mesocestoides ( M) segments.
22μm
Fig. 1.99. Unlike common tapeworms, Diphyllobothrium eggs lack hooks and resemble trematode eggs. They are light
space within the eggshell. A pore in the shell wall at the pole opposite to the operculum is often visible due to the slight
bit of protein protruding from it.
22μm
Fig. 1.100. The operculate eggs of Spirometra also resemble trematode eggs. They contain an undifferentiated embryo and
yolk cells that completely fll the space within the eggshell. The eggs are asymmetrical about the long axis. The operculum
 in this egg is at the lower end.
79
80
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Alaria spp. (Figs. 1.101-1.103)
DO
OGS
Taxonomy: Trematode.
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs, cats, and various wild carnivores.
CP
TS
Life Cycle: Eggs are passed in the feces of the mammalian host. Following larval development in
a snail intermediate host, a second intermediate host (frog) is infected. Infection of dogs and cats
occurs by ingestion of frogs or various paratenic hosts harboring the larval stage (mesocercaria).
Transmammary transmission has been reported in cats.
Laboratory Diagnosis: The most reliable method is detection of eggs by sedimentation examina-
tion of feces, although sometimes eggs may be detected on fecal flotation.
Size: 98-134 x 62-68 μm
Clinical Importance: Infections are generally nonpathogenic in dogs and cats. Alaria is a poten-
tially serious zoonotic risk to humans through the ingestion of raw or improperly cooked frogs
containing mesocercaria.
DOGS AND CATS
22μm
Fig. 1.101. Alaria eggs are large, operculate, yellow-brown in color and contain an undifferentiated embryo surrounded
(moo) aus a u Amusp e Aq paye s anq s on sy s a s u wnmado au san yo q
32 μm
jo Ae oyads a a m paesse anssad ooso a o anp pap ro pasdeoo eadde saaa  pae aq ae
the fotation solution.
75um
x (mu uiy jo saa uueoo ades eoa sn u pua si sa dds miy yo azis ae au ti 
and Ancylostoma.
81
82
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Paragonimus kellicoffi (Fig. 1.104)
DOGS
Taxonomy: Trematode.
Geographic Distribution: North America. Other similar species of Paragonimus that infect
domestic animals, humans, and wildlife occur in South and Central America, Africa, and Asia.
Location in Host: Lung parenchyma of cats, dogs, pigs, goats, minks, and various other wild
mammals.
 s   pa s   s l   i a s a a
definitive hosts. Crayfish serve as the second intermediate host. Dogs and cats acquire infection by
 ingesting the metacercaria in the tissues of crayfish or paratenic hosts.
Laboratory Diagnosis: A sedimentation technique (recommended) or fecal fotation (less reliable)
Bs an ui  n e au a saa aao - an nap  as aq 
wall along the line of the operculum.
Size: 75-118 × 42-67 μm
Clinical Importance: Infection may be subclinical or cause eosinophilic bronchitis and granulo-
   s     n a  s
PARASlTE: Heterobilharzia americana (Figs. 1.105 and 1.106)
Taxonomy: Trematode.
Geographic Distribution: Southeastem United States.
Location in Host: Mesenteric and hepatic portal veins of dogs and various wildlife species.
Life Cycle: Eggs released in the feces of dogs produce ciliated larvae (miracidia) that develop in
a snail intermediate host. Cercariae that are released from the snail intermediate host infect dogs
and wildlife through direct skin penetration.
5% formol-saline). It is important to use saline in the procedure because eggs are stimulated to
hatch when they contact water. The free-swimming miracidia larvae can be observed by placing
the sediment in water after performing the sedimentation procedure with saline.
Size: Eggs 74113 x 60-80μm
Clinical Importance: Infection with H. americana in dogs is uncommon in most areas. Infection
can cause chronic diarrhea, anorexia, and emaciation. Heterobilharzia also has zoonotic importance
as one of the causal agents of cercarial dermatitis (swimmer's itch) in humans.
DOGS AND CATS
20 μm
Fig. 1.104. Paragonimus eggs are undifferentiated when passed in the feces. The yellow-brown, operculate eggs can be
differentiated by the characteristic thickened ridge in the shell wallalong the line of the operculum (arrow). Collapsed eggs
 may be seen in fotation preparations.
34 μm
Fig. 1.105. The large, elliptical eggs of Heterobitharzia americana have a smooth, thin shell wall and contain a fully
Flowers, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.
Fig. 1.1 06. On contact with freshwater, H. americana eggs hatch, releasing a ciliated miracidium stage. To prevent hatching
of the eggs, a sedimentation procedure for diagnosis should be performed using saline instead of water. Photo courtesy of
Dr.Bruce Hammerburg and Dr. James Flowers, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
NC.
83
84
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASiTE: Nanophyetus salmincola (Fig. 1.107)
DOGS
Common name: Salmon poisoning fuke
Taxonomy: Trematode.
AND
Geographic Distribution: Pacific Northwest region of North America.
Location in Host: Small intestine of dogs, cats, and various other piscivorous carmivores.
TS
fish (second intermediate hosts). Snails serve as the first intermediate host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs can be detected by sedimentation examination of feces.
Size: 72-97 × 35-55 μm
Clinical Importance: Nanophyetus salmincola serves as a vector for the causal agent of salmon
poisoning disease (Neorickettsia helminthoeca) and Elokomin fluke fever (Neorickettsia sp.).
Salmon poisoning disease is extremely pathogenic in dogs.
PARASlTE: Platynosomum concinnwm (Figs. 1.108 and 1.109)
Taxonomy: Trematode.
Geographic Distribution: Southeastem United States, South America, West Africa. Other fukes
that may be found in the bile or pancreatic ducts in North America include Eurytrema procyonis
and Fasciola hepatica.
Location in Host: Gall bladder and bile ducts of cats.
 ao a a 'so jo sa a u ssd a  a d s  a s
complex, involving snail, crustacean, and amphibian or reptile interrmediate hosts. Cats are infected
following ingestion of lizards or amphibians containing larvae.
Laboratory Diagnosis: A sedimentation procedure is most effective for recovering the relatively
small, operculate eggs of Platynosomum.
Size: 3450 × 20-35 μum
of weight loss and hepatomegaly.
DOGS AND CATS
48um
Fig. 1.107. The operculated eggs of Nanophyetus contain an undifferentiated embryo surrounded by yolk cells.
10 μm
 and may not be seen with routine fotation procedures.
Fig. 1.109. Cats in the eastern United States are rarely infected with the pancreatic fuke Eurytrema procyonis and their
eggs may be detected in feces. Small brown eggs can be seen within the body of this adult pancreatic fuke.
85
86
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Cryptocotyle lingua (Fig. 1.110)
DOGS
Taxonomy: Trematode.
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide in northern temperate marine coastal regions.
Location in Host: Intestine.
CP
TS
definitive hosts. Fish serve as the second intermediate host. Dogs, cats, and birds become infected
by ingesting metacercariae, visible as small black spots on the skin of fish.
Laboratory Diagnosis: A sedimentation technique (recommended) or fecal flotation (less reliable)
can be used to detect these small, undifferentiated, yellow-brown, operculate eggs. The eggs are
elliptical shaped with one end narrower than the other. The operculum occurs at the narrower end
and is difficult to see.
Size: 32-50 × 18-25μm
Clinical Significance: Clinical disease due to infection with this intestinal fluke appears to be rare.
Enteritis may occur in cases of heavy infections. Cats appear to be less susceptible to infection.
Dogs and cats may also be rarely infected withacanthocephalan (Onicola,Macracanthorhynchus)
and pentastomid (Linguatula) parasites. Eggs of parasites belonging to these groups are shown in
Figures 1.185 and 1.233.
DOGS AND CATS
Fig. 1.110. Cryptocotyle tingua egg detected on fecal sedimentation of feces from a dog. The operculum of Cryprocotyle
is diffcult to see; it occurs on the narrower pole of the egg (arrow). The eggs are undifferentiated when passed in the feces.
87
Ruminants and Camelids
C
Helminth Ova, Larva and Protozoan Cysts
E
as found in freshly voided feces of
05
Cattle
ASCARID OVUM
EUCESTODA OVA
Moniezia benedeni
Moniezia expansa
Toxocara vitulorum
OPERCULATED OVA
Dicrocoelium dendriticum
(Fluke Ova Without
Obvious Operculum)
Fascioloides magna
Fasciola hepatica
OVA WITH BIPOLAR PLUGS
100 μm
LARVATED OVUM
Strongyloides papillosus
Trichuris spp.
Capillaria spp. MORULATED OVA
‘Strongyle' Type Ova
Bunostomum phlebotomum
ARVAI
Nematodirus spp.
PROTOZOA
Eimeria
Eimeria zuernii
Eimeria bovis
auburnensis
Giardia sp.
Cryptosporidium sp.
Dictyocaulus viviparus
ILLUSTHATED BY GA RY A.AVERBECK
Copyrighl & 1992, by Thea Universily af Minnasla 
Fig. 1.111. Common parasites found in bovine feces. *Capitfaria has been reclassified as Aoncotheca. Figure courtesy of
Dr. Bert Stromberg and Mr. Gary Averbeck, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,MN.
88
司
Helminth Ova, Larva and Protozoan Cysts
SIN
as found in freshly voided feces of
Sheep and Goats
OVAWITH BIPOLARPLUGS
LARVATED OVA
Capillaria spp.
Trichuris spp.
Strongyloides
papillosus
Skrjabinema spp.
OPERCULATED OVA
100μm
MORULATED OVA
Dicrocoelium dendriticum
(Fluke Ova Without
Nematodirus spp.
Obvious Operculum)
'Strongyle' Type Ova
LARVALNEMATODES
Fasciola hepatica
Muellerius capillaris
Dictyocaulus filaria
PROTOZOA
Protostrongylus spp.
EUCESTODA OVA
Eimeria arloingi
Eimeria alijevi Eimeria christenseni
(Goat)
(Goat)
(Goat)
Moniezia expansa
Eimeria ovinoidalis
Eimeria ahsata
Thysanosoma actinoides
(Sheep)
(Sheep)
ILLUSTRATED BY GARY A.AVERBECK 
Fig. 1.112. Common parasites found in feces of sheep and goats. Figure courtesy of Dr. Bert Stromberg and Mr. Gary
Averbeck, College of Veterinary Medicine,University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
89
90
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Protozoan Parasites
2
PARAS1TE: Eimeria spp. (Figs. 1.113-1.121, 1.27, 1.131, 1.136)
Common name: Coccidia.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Many host-specific species of Eimeria infect the intestinal tract of domestic
ruminants and camelids.
Life Cycle: Fecal oocysts sporulate in the environment and infect intestinal cells following
ingestion. Asexual and sexual reproduction is followed by the production of oocysts that exit the
host in manure. Sporulated oocysts can survive for long periods under favorable environmental
conditions.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Oocysts are found on routine fecal fotation exam. Species identification
 of oocysts can also be present in the absence of clinical signs.
Size: Approximately 12-45 μm in length (oocyst), depending on species
Clinical Importance: Most ruminants become infected with coccidia at an early age, and low-level
infection persists through adulthood. While infection is often subclinical, coccidiosis is a common
cause of diarrhea in young ruminants. Signs range from mild diarrhea to severe, bloody diarrhea.
Not all species of Eimeria are equally pathogenic. Of 12 species of common bovine Eimeria,
clinical disease is usually associated with E. bovis, E. zuerni, or, less commonly, E. alabamensis.
Similarly, E. bakuensis, E. ahsata, and E. ovinoidalis are pathogenic ovine Eimeria species. In
goats, E. airlongi, E. caprina, E. ninakohlyakimovae, and E. christenseni have been associated with
clinical disease. Fewer species of coccidia have been described in camelids than in ruminants, but
they all have been reported to cause clinical disease. In the United States, E. macusaniensis is
considered highly pathogenic in naive animals, including adults.
RUMINANTS AND
CAMELIDS
Fig. 1.113. Ruminants and camelids are
 infected with a variety of Eimeria spp. The
oocysts of most of these species are color-
Jess, have a thin wall, and are oval or round.
When seen in fresh feces, oocysts contain a
19μm
single cell.
Fig. 1.114. Eimeria oocysts undergo spor-
ulation in the environment, resulting in an
infective oocyst. Four of the oocysts in this
sample are in the four-cell stage, which pre-
 cedes the developrment of sporocysts. These
oocysts are not infective, because they are
 not fully sporulated.
Fig. 1.115. ln this bovine fecal sample,
several fully sporulated Eimeria oocysts can
be seen. In some cases, examination of the
sporulated oocyst is required for confrma-
tion of identification of the Eimeria species.
In most clinical cases, specific identification
is not performed. Photo courtesy of Dr.
Aaron Lucas, Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia
27 μm
Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
91
CAMELIDS
Fig. 1.116. Many, but not all, Eimeria
species have a cap that covers the micropyle,
which can be seen at the upper end of this
oocyst. The micropyle cap, if present, is
helpful in identifying the genus in dogs that
have eaten feces of other animal species. The
photo shows the oocyst of Eimeria intricata,
24μm
a parasite of sheep. The oocyst is brown and
larger than other ovine Eimeria.
Fig. 1.117. Oocysts of four species of
bovine coccidia are seen in this photo:
Eimeria bovis (B),E. subspherica (S),E.
zuernii (Z), and E.cylindrical/ellipsoidalis
(C). Eimeria bovis and E. zuernii are consid-
ered the most pathogenic species and are
commonly seen in cattle. Unsporulated
oocysts of E. cylindricat and E. etlipsoidatis
cannot be distinguished. Photo courtesy of
Dr.
Aaron Lucas,
Virginia-Maryland
35 μm
Regional College of Veterinary Medicine,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
Fig. 1.118. Cattle can be infected with 12
species of Eimeria, although only three
species are considered pathogenic. This
photo illustrates the wide range seen in
oocycst size. Eimera subspherica (S) is the
smallest oocyst ( 1l μm), and E. pelfita (P) is
one of the largest (40μm). Photo courtesy of
Dr.  Aaron Lucas, Virginia-Maryland
Regional College of Veterinary Medicine,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
92
ANG
RUMINANTS
Fig. 1.119. Small ruminants are infected
with a variety of coccidia species,
although few are highly pathogenic.
Sheep and goats are considered to be
infected by different Eimeria spp. (E),
although oocysts from the two host
species are often indistinguishable.
Slightly out of focus in this photo are an
egg of Nematodirus (N) and a typical
strongylid egg (S).
40.um
Fig.
.1.120. Camelids are hosts to
several species of Eimeria that produce
oocysts similar in appearance to those of
common ruminant species. The large
brown structures in the photo are proba-
bly seeds. The feces of herbivorous
animals often contain numerous plant
artifacts that can be confusedwith
50um
parasites.
42um
Fig. 1.121. Camelids are also infected
with two species of Eimeria that produce
large brown oocysts that can be confused:
E.
macusaniensis (A) and E. ivitaensis
(B).The oocysts of E.macusaniensis are
pear shaped while those of E. ivitaensis
are more elongated and elliptical in
A
B
shape.
93
94
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Cryptosporidium parvum, C. andersoni (Fig. 1.122)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia). The taxonomy of Cryptosporidium species is currently undergo-
ing revision.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Cryptosporidium parvum is an intestinal parasite of ruminants, camelids, and
oe Ae pue unseoqe auoq an jo asd e si uosaapun unpodsoida 's sao
infect camelids.
Life Cycle: Ruminants are infected by ingestion of oocysts. Oocysts are infective as soon as they
 are passed in the manure and are very resistant to environmental conditions.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Very small oocysts are seen with Sheather's sugar centrifugal flotation
techniques. The oocysts of C. andersoni are slightly larger than those of C. parvum.
Size:
C. parvum
4-5 μm in diameter
C.andersoni
7×5μm
Clinical Importance: Infections with C. parvum may be subclinical or cause diarrhea of varying
severity in young animals. Some isolates of C. parvum can infect both humans and ruminants.
Cryptosporidium andersoni may cause chronic abomasal infections in cattle, including adults,
although it appears to have little economic significance.
PARASlTE: Giardia intesfinalis, also identified as G. lamblia, G. duodenalis, G. bovis, etc. (Figs.
1.123, 1.124, 1.135)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (fagellate). The taxonomy of Giardia species is currently undergoing revi-
sion. Isolates of the parasite are currently assigned to assemblages based on genetic analysis.
Isolates of hoofed stock typically belong to Assermblage E.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of ruminants and camelids.
Life Cycle: Giardia cysts passed in the feces infect other animals when ingested in the environ-
ment. Following excystation, trophozoites inhabit the small intestine.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Small cysts can be found in fecal samples using centrifugal flotation pro-
cedures (33% ZnSO4 fotation solution preferred). Trichrome-stained fecal smears and immunodi-
agnostic tests can also be used.
Size:
Cysts
9-13 × 7-9μm
Trophozoites
12-17 × 7-10μm
Clinical Importance: Many animals are infected, particularly when young, but clinical disease is
umcommon.
RUMINANTS
25μm
Fig. 1.122. The small oocysts of Cryptosporidium are best seen using the high-dry objective (40x) on the microscope.
They are highly refractile and often appear to have a single black dot in the center.
6 μm
Fig. 1.123. Although small, Giardia cysts contain internal structures that make them distinctive. A drop of Lugol's iodine
on the slide can help in visualizing internal structure. Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
15mm
Fig. 1.124. This fecal sample contains numerous Giardia sp. cysts (arrow). A strongylid egg is also present in this 40x
objective field. Although Giardia cysts may be present in large numbers in the feces of ruminants, they are usually not
incriminated as a cause of clinical disease.
95
96
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Heiminth Parasites
PARAS1TE: Strongylid Parasites of Ruminants and Camelids (Figs. 1.124-1.128, 1.119, 1.130,
1.131)
Common name: Various, including brown stomach worm, barber pole worm, hookworm,
nodular worm, strongyles, trichostrongyles.
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Strongylida). Numerous genera belong to this group, including
Ostertagia,
Haemonchus,
Cooperia,Trichostrongylus,
Teladorsagia,
Mecistocirrus,
Oesophagostomum, Bunostomum, Chabertia, Camelostrongylus, and Lamanema.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Gastrointestinal tract of ruminant and camelid hosts. The genera infecting these
Life Cycle: Adult worms in the gastrointestinal tract produce eggs that develop in manure in the
environment. Infective larvae are released onto pasture, where they infect grazing hosts.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected by routine or quantitative fecal fotation procedures.
 jo sisop ng grds pagi sea pou ae p aade u s a sig
 culture of feces and identification of infective third-stage larvae are perforrmed. Quantitative egg
 counts are useful in designing and evaluating parasite control programs.
Size: Approximately 65-100 × 3450 μm, depending on species
Clinical Importance: Virtually all grazing animals are infected with strongylid parasites, and
many infections are asymptomatic. Young, nonimmune animals are most susceptible to subclinical
and clinical disease, which may include diarrhea, anemia, hypoproteinemia, reduced growth, and
death in severe cases. The species of greatest importance vary with host and region.
30 μm
bovine, small ruminant, and camelid feces.In freshfeces,eggs are thin shelled and oval in shape and contain agrapelike
samples. ldentification of eggs to a specific genus or species is not generally considered reliable because of substantial
overlap in the sizes and shapes of eggs from different strongylid species.
RUMINANTS AND
CAMELIDS
Fig. 1.126. Egg of Mecistocirrus digita-
tus, a parasite of ruminants and pigs in
Asia and South America. The parasite
produces typical strongylid eggs. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre
for
Animal
Parasitology,
CFIA,
18μm
 Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
Fig. 1.127. Once strongylid eggs are
exposed to oxygen and adequate tempera-
ture, development to the first larval stage
begins. In warm conditions, partially (as
 seen in this photo) or fully formed larvae
may be seen when samples are collected
from the ground. In older samples, the
eggs will hatch releasing the larvae,
which cannot be easily identified.
Fig. 1.128. Strongylid eggs must be dif-
ferentiated from those of Strongyloides,
an unrelated nematode. Strongyloides
eggs (arrow) are larvated when passed in
fresh feces, and they are smaler than
38μm
strongylid eggs.
97
98
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Nematodirus spp. (Figs. 1.129-1.131, 1.119)
Common name: Thread-necked worm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida).
E
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Several species are found in the small intestine of ruminants and camelids.
Life Cycle: Unlike most other strongylids, larvae develop to the infective stage within the egg.
Ruminants are infected when they ingest the hatched infective larvae.
Size: 152-260 × 67-120 μm, depending on species (a similar egg is produced by Marshallagia
marshalli, a parasite of sheep in the westerm United States)
Clinical Importance: Most species of Nematodirus do not usually cause clinical disease.
Nematodirus battus, however, is an important cause of lamb diarrhea in some parts of the world.
Nematodirus infections may cause disease in young camelids.
RUMINANTSAND
35μm
Fig. 1. 129. Egg of Nematodirus sp. This is one of the few strongylid eggs of ruminants that can be easily identifed specif-
spp. are similar in size to those of Nematodinus. Marshatlagia spp. are found worldwide,but this genus is less common
than Nematodirus.
74um
Fig. 1.130. The egg of Nematodirus battus (B) is browner than eggs of other Nematodirus spp. (N). This sample also
contains a typical strongylid egg (S). Photo courtesy of Dr. Gary Zimmerman, Zimmerman Research, Livingston, MT.
100umo
Fig. 1.131. Ovine fecal sample containing strongylid eggs (S), a Nematodinus sp. egg (N), an Eimeria intricata oocyst (1),
and Eimeria sp. oocysts (E).
66
100
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Trichuris spp. (Figs. 1.132 and 1.134)
Common name: Whipworm.
CAME
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida). Several species (T. ovis, T. discolor, etc.) occur in
ruminants.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
D
Location in Host: Cecum and colon of ruminants and camelids.
Life Cycle: Eggs produced by adults in the large intestine are passed in the feces. After a minimum
sa  su e r o  s a a  sa a   sa e r
preparations.
Size: 70-80 × 30-42μm
Clinical Importance: Eggs of Trichuris are often found in ruminant fecal samples. Clinical disease
(diarrhea) is rare and associated with heavy infection.
PARAS1TE: Aonchotheca (=Capillaria) spp. (Figs. 1.133-1.135)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida). These parasites (A. bovis in cattle, A. longipes in sheep)
were formerly included in the genus Capillaria. Camelids are also infected with Aoncotheca.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of ruminants and camelids.
eggs in the environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs with bipolar plugs are detected by fecal flotation procedures.
Although they are similar to Trichuris (whipworm) eggs, Aonchotheca spp. eggs are smaller.
Size:45-50 x 22-25μm
Clinical Importance: Aonchotheca infection in ruminants is considered clinically insignificant
28 μm
Fig. 1.132. Trichuris eggs are common in ruminant feces. They have a thick, brown shell and polar plug at each end.
门N司
RUMIN
Fig. 1.133. These bipolar Aonchotheca (Capillaria) eggs can be confused with Trichuris eggs but are smaller and less
brownincolor.
100μmA
Fig. 1.134. Ruminant fecal sample containing both Trichuris (T) and Aoncotheca (A) eggs.
141
Fig. 1.135. Camelids can be infected with Aoncotheca sp. but are also parasitized by another capillarid, which produces
a distinctively larger egg with asymmetric bipolar plugs. Neither species appears to have clinical significance. A large capil-
Jarid egg (C) is shown with a Moniezia egg ( M).
101
102
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Strongyloides papillosus (Figs. 1.128, 1.136)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Rhabditida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of ruminants and camelids.
development in the environment, infective third-stage larvae are produced that infect the host by
strongylid eggs and contain a larva when passed in the feces.
Size: 40-60 × 32-40μm
Clinical Importance: Infection usually has no clinical significance, although very heavy infection
may produce severe diarrhea in young animals
PARASlTE: Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum (Fig. 1.137)
Common name: Roundworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Ascaridida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide, but rare in cattle in North America.
Location in Host: Small intestine of cattle and bison.
Life Cycle: Cattle are infected following the ingestion of larvated eggs in the environment. Larvae
migrate into tissues and form a somatic reservoir that is activated in pregnancy. Egg-producing adult
infections occur primarily in calves as a result of transmammary transmission.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Detection of typical ascarid-type eggs with flotation procedures.
Size: 75-95 × 60-75 μum
Clinical Importance: Infection with adult worms occurs in calves less than 6 months of age. Small
to moderate infection may be tolerated without signs of disease, but diarrhea, weight loss, and death
can occur in heavy infection.
PARASlTE: Skrjabinema spp. (Fig. 1.138)
Common name: Pinworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Oxyurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Cecum of sheep, goats, some wild ruminant species, and some camelids.
Life Cycle: Female worms deposit eggs on the perianal skin. Eggs fall off the host, become dis-
persed in the environment, and are eaten by other animals.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are rarely seen in routine fecal exams as they are not deposited in feces.
Size: 47-63 × 27-36 μm
Clinical Importance: Clinically insignificant.
RUMINANTS AND
20μm
Fig. 1.136. Strongyloides eggs may be confused with more common strongylid eggs. The two egg types can be easily
distinguished because Strongyloides eggs are smaller and contain a fully formed larva when passed in the feces. This calf
fecal sample contains a larvated Strongyloides egg (S) as well as numerous collapsed Giardia cysts (G). Several small
Eimeria oocysts (E) are also present. Most coccidia spp. oocysts are larger than Giardia cysts.
22μm
Fig. 1.137. Toxocara vitulorum eggs have the thick shell typical of ascarids. Toxocara is rare in cattle in North America.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Gil Myers, Myers Parasitological Service, Magnolia, TN, and Dr. Eugene Lyons, Department of
Veterinary Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.
24μm
Fig. 1.138. Skrjabinema, the ruminant pinworm. Pinworm eggs often appear fattened on one side. These eggs are rarely
found in fecal exarms because they are not passed in the feces.
103
104
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Muellerius capillaris, Protostrongylus spp. (Figs. 1.139-1.142)
RL
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Strongylida).
C
AME
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Lung parenchyma of sheep, goats, and some deer.
Life Cycle: Infection of small ruminants follows ingestion of infected snail or slug intermediate
Laboratory Diagnosis: The Baermann test is used for detection of first-stage larvae. Muellerius
has a kinked tail with an accessory spine, in contrast to the plain tail of Protostrongylus.
Size:
Muellerius
300-320μm
Protostrongylus
340-400μm
Clinical Importance: Most cases are asymptomatic. Heavy infections may cause clinical disease,
especially in goats infected with Muellerius.
25μm
Fig. 1.139. lodine-stained Muellerius larva.
RUMINANTS AND
Fig. 1.140. Muelterius larvae can be easily identifed by the presence of a kinked tail and accessory spine (arrow) at the
end of the tail.
70um
Fig. 1.141. Protostrongylus larvae have a plain tail without the kink and accessory spine seen in Muelterius larvae. Photo
 courtesy of Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
Fig. 1.142. Higher magnification view of the simple tail of a Protostrongyius first-stage larva in feces. Photo courtesy of
Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
105
106
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Dictyocaulus spp. (Figs. 1.143 and 1.144)
Common name: Lungworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida). Species include D. viviparus (cattle, camelids),
E
D. filaria (sheep, goat, camel), D. cameli (camel).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles.
Life Cycle: First-stage larvae are passed in the feces of the host. Infective third-stage larvae
s an on ausa a o aan aa z p pasal ae p asd uo donaa
ratory tract and become mature.
Laboratory Diagnosis: The Baermann test is used to detect first-stage larvae in fresh feces. Some
larvated eggs may also be present in fresh feces.
Size:
D.viviparus
300-360μm
D. filaria
550-580μm
Clinical Importance: Heavy infections may cause severe respiratory signs, especially in cattle.
Disease is usually seen in young animals before irmmunity develops.
PARAS1TE: Moniezia spp. (Figs. 1.145-1.147)
Common name: Tapeworm.
Taxonomy: Cestode. Species include M. benedeni and M. expansa.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of ruminants and camelids.
ingestion of the intermediate host (free-living pasture mites) containing the tapeworm larvae.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs may be found in fecal fotation tests, but infection is usually recog-
nized when owners see tapeworm segments on the animal or in the environment.
Size: 65-75 μm in diameter
that heavy infection may cause reduced growth in young animals.
RUMINANTS
50um
Fig. 1.143. Dictyocautus viviparus frst-stage larva. Intestinal cells contain characteristic dark food granules. Dictyocautus
filaria larvae have a small knob at the anterior end that is not present in D. viviparus larvae.
16 μum
Fig. 1.144. Although Dictyocautus larvae are most often seen in fecal samples, unhatched eggs may also be found in feces
and samples collected from the trachea. The dark food granules are evident even in this unhatched Dictyocautus larva. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
30 μm
The presence of the embryo with its six hooks clearly identifes these structures as tapeworm eggs. In this egg, four hooks
arevisible.
107
108
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Thysanosoma, Stilesia (Fig. l.148)
Taxonomy: Cestodes.
Geographic Distribution: Stilesia is found in Europe, Africa, and Asia, while Thysanosoma is
E
confined to North and South America. In the United States, its distribution appears to be limited
05
to the westerm states.
Location in Host: Bile ducts of ruminants, especially sheep, and camelids.
Life Cycle: Although these tapeworms have not been extensively studied, it is thought that their
intermediate hosts may be oribatid mites. Like Moniezia, the definitive host is infected following
 ingestion of the intermediate host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Tapeworm segments are passed in the feces and eggs may be found in
fecal flotation tests.
Size: Approximately 30 × 20μm
Clinical Importance: These tapeworms have no economic importance unless they are present in
large enough numbers to cause liver condemnation.
RUMINANTS AND
CAMELIDS
56μm
Fig. 1.146. Moniezia sp. eggs and a strongylid egg in an alpaca fecal sample.
Fig. 1. 147. Owners may be alarmed by the presence of Moniezia segments in the feces of their animals, although tapeworms
of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
20μum
Fig. 1.148. Packet of Thysanosoma eggs from a sheep. The eggs lack the pyriform apparatus seen in Moniezia eggs. Hooks
can be seen in some of the eggs. The entire packet of eggs is 124 × 62 μm. Photo courtesy of Dr. Ellis C. Greiner, College
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
109
110
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Fasciola hepafica (Fig. 1.149)
Common name: Liver fuke.
Taxonomy: Trematode.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide. A similar species, F gigantica, is also found in Africa, Asia,
and Hawaii.
Location in Host: Adults in the bile ducts of cattle, sheep, goats, camelids, and a variety of other
 animals, including dogs, horses, and humans.
Life Cycle: Miracidia hatch from the eggs and invade an appropriate snail host. Cercariae emerging
from the snail encyst on vegetation and are ingested by host animals. Larvae leave the gastrointes-
tinal tract and migrate through the liver to reach the bile ducts.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Large brown eggs are detected using a sedimentation procedure. Eggs may
be difficult to detect and not indicative of the level of infection in a herd. A commercially available
apparatus, the Flukefinder, simplifies the sedimentation procedure (see the section "Fecal
Se dimentation").
Size:130-150 x 63-90μm
Clinical Importance: Fasciola infections in ruminants may cause significant production losses.
Sheep are particularly susceptible, and heavy infection may be fatal. Chronically infected animals
can develop anemia and unthriftiness.
PARASlTE: Paramphistomum spp. (Fig. 1.150)
Common name: Rumen fluke.
Taxonomy: Trematode. Other genera belonging to this family include Cotylophoron and
Calicophoron.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Adult fukes in the rumen of cattle, sheep, other ruminants, and camelids.
Life Cycle: Eggs passed in the feces of the host animal hatch in water, liberating miracidia, which
 infect snails. Following development in the snail, cercariae are released, which encyst on vegetation.
 Definitive hosts are infected by ingesting fuke metacercariae while grazing.
 a  s go ason on s a ssd po  ris o
ture flukes, which are the most pathogenic stage of infection.
Size: Approximately 114-175 × 65-100 μm, depending on species
Clinical Importance: Clinical disease is rare in North America. In other parts of the world, larval
paramphistomes in the duodenum and upper ileum are reported to cause enteritis leading to diar-
rhea, emaciation, and death in severe cases.
PARASlTE: Dicrocoelium dendrificum (Fig. 1.151)
Taxonomy: Trematode.
Geographic Distribution: Europe, Asia, sporadic occurrence in North America.
CAMELDS
RUMINANTS
35 μm
Fig. 1.149. Fasciola hepatica egg. These large eggs have an operculum (arrow) and look similar to eggs of rumen fukes,
although Paramphistomum eggs are slightly larger (about 160μm) and less brown in color.
40 μm
Fig. 1.150. Paramphistome egg. These eggs wil not be detected with routine fotation tests. The operculum of this egg
can be seen as a discontinuity in the outline of the eggshell (arrow). Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
22μm
Fig. 1.151. Dicrocoelium dendriticum eggs contain a fully formed miracidium, tend to be fattened on one side, and are
smaller than eggs of Fasciota and the paramphistome fukes.
111
112
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Dicrocoelium dendriticum(continued)
Location in Host: Bile ducts of domestic and wild ruminants, pigs, dogs, horses, rabbits.
Life Cycle: Larvae in eggs are ingested by snails. Ants act as the second intermediate host, and
the final host is infected while grazing. Larval flukes enter bile ducts directly and do not migrate
through the liver.
VD
Laboratory Diagnosis: A sedimentation test will detect the small, brown, operculate eggs in the
feces.
Size: 38-45 × 22-30μm
Clinical Importance: In heavy infections, extensive cirrhosis of the liver can develop, leading to
anemia and weight loss.
PARASlTE: Eurytrema pancreaficum (Fig. 1.152)
Taxonomy: Trematode.
Geographic Distribution: Asia, parts of South America.
Location in Host: Adult fukes are found in the pancreatic ducts of small ruminants, cattle, camels,
pigs, and occasionally humans. Flukes are also occasionally found in the bile ducts and small
intestine.
Life Cycle: The eggs produced by adult fukes leave the host in manure. Snails are the first inter-
mediate host. A grasshopper or cricket second intermediate host transmits the infection when
ingested by the final host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: A sedimentation test will detect the small, brown eggs in the feces.
Size: 4448 × 23-36 μm
Clinical Importance: Many infections are subclinical. Heavy worm burdens can cause fibrosis of
the ducts and pancreatic atrophy, resulting in weight loss and poor condition.
PARASlTE: Schistosoma spp. (Fig. 1.153)
Taxonomy: Trematode. Several species infect ruminants, camels, horses, and pigs, including S.
bovis,S. mattheei, and S. japonicum.
Geographic Distribution: Africa, Asia.
Location in Host: Most important species are found in the portal mesenteric veins of the host.
Life Cycle: Eggs in host feces hatch in water, releasing the miracidia, which enter the snail inter-
mediate host. Cercariae produced by multiplication within the snail are released and penetrate the
skin of the definitive host. There is no second intermediate host in the life cycle.
Laboratory Diagnosis: A saline sedimentation procedure is used to detect eggs in manure. Fecal
examination is most useful in early infection because egg production declines as infection pro-
FECALEXAMINATIONFOR THEDIAGNOSISOFPARASITISM
113
AND
INANTS
108
22um
Fig. 1.152. The eggs of Eurytrema are similar in appearance to those of Dicrocoelium. Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin
Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
36μm
Fig. 1.153. Ruminant schistosomes typically produce a spindle-shaped egg. This egg of Schistosoma spindate, an Asian
species, has a spine at one end. Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan,Canada.
 gresses. Eggs do not have an operculum and most are spindle shaped. In some species, a spine is
present on one end of the egg.
Size: 130-280 × 38-85 μm, depending 0n species
Clinical Importance: Disease results from the host reaction to the presence of parasite eggs in
tissue. Clinical signs may occur in heavy infections, including diarrhea, anemia, and wasting.
114
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
Horses
In comparison to dogs and cats and ruminants, the diversity of parasite eggs and oocysts frequently
encountered in equine feces is much reduced. The most common finding in equine samples is the
strongylid egg. Horses are infected with 54 strongylid species, although individual species cannot
be determined. The parasites shown in this section can also infect other equid species. Parasites
illustrated in other sections may not be extensively covered here and references are given to figures
elsewhere in the book.
Helminth Ova and Protozoan Cysts
asfound infreshlyvoidedfecesof
Horses
ASCARID OVA
EUCESTODA OVA
Parascaris equorum
Parascaris equorum
Anoplocephala spp.
Paranoplocephala
mamillana
(Without Orange-Brown
Protein Coat)
100 μm
LARVATED OVA
Oxyuris equi
Strongyloides westeri
Habronema spp.
Draschia
Dictyocaulus arnfieldi
megastoma
MORULATED OVA
'Strongyle' Type Ova
PROTOZOA
Giardia sp.
Eimeria leuckarti
ILLUSTRATED BY GARY A.AVERBECK
Fig. 1.154. Common parasites found in fecal samples of horses. Figure courtesy of Dr. Bert Stromberg and Mr. Gary
Averbeck, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
115
116
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Protozoan Parasites
PARASITE: Eimeria leuckarfi (Fig. 1.155)
苏
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of horses and donkeys.
Life Cycle: Oocysts leave the host in the manure. Sporulation occurs in the environment, and new
hosts are infected by ingestion of infective oocysts.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Infection is diagnosed by finding the large, deep brown oocysts in the
feces. A sedimentation procedure has been recommended, but oocysts can also be seen with flota-
tion procedures.
Size: 80-88 × 55-59 μm
Clinical Importance: Infection appears to have little clinical significance in horses, although rare
PARAS1TE: Giardia intestinalis, Cryptosporidium spp. (Figs. 1.123, 1.124, 1.56, 1.57)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (Giardia, flagellate; Cryptosporidium, coccidia).
Geographic Location: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine.
Laboratory Diagnosis: As in other hosts, Giardia cysts can be detected with 33% ZnSOq centrifu-
gal fotation, and Cryptosporidium oocysts with Sheather's sugar centrifugal flotation. Both organ-
isms can also be found in fecal smears with appropriate stains and by non-host-specific
immunodiagnostic tests.
Clinical Importance: Both infections occur most frequently in young animals but are rarely asso-
ciated with clinical disease.
HORSES
18μm
Fig. 1.155. The large size and deep brown color of the oocysts of E. teuckarti make them very distinctive. They are seen
in feces of young horses.
8μm
Fig. 1.156. Fecal fotation tests containing iodine-stained Giardia cysts.
25μm
Fig. 1.157. Cryptosporidium oocysts in a sugar fotation preparation.
117
118
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Heiminth Parasites
PARAS1TE: Equine Strongylid Parasites (Figs. 1.158-1.160, 1.163, 1.171)
Common name: Various, including bloodworm, small and large strongyle.
ES
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Strongylida). Numerous genera belong to this group, including the
large strongyles (e.g., Strongylus vulgaris) the small strongyles (cyathostomes), and Trichostrongylus
axei.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Cecum and colon (with the exception of T. axei, a parasite of the stomach).
Life Cycle: Eggs released by adult worms in the large bowel develop in feces in the environment.
 Infective larvae on pasture are ingested by grazing horses. Large and small strongyles undergo a
period of development in the intestinal wall (small strongyles) or in extra-intestinal tissue (large
strongyles) before maturing in the bowel lumen.
aseed suuisp ui rasn ane suno sa aun ogroads pagnui aunu gou ane pue
control programs.
Size: Variable, with considerable overlap among species; eggs approximately 60-120 ×
35-60μm
Clinical Importance: Virtually all grazing horses are infected with strongylid parasites. Many low
to moderate infections are subclinical, although they may cause reduced weight gain and perfor-
mance. Young, nonimmune animals are most susceptible to clinical disease, which may include
diarrhea, colic, and hypoproteinemia
HORSES
25 μm
Fig. 1.158. Equine strongylid eggs in fresh fecal samples are typical of the order, with a thin shell surrounding a central
group of cells. In warm weather, larvae may form within 1 -2 days.
115μm.
Fig. 1.159. Several equine strongylid eggs are present in this fecal sample. Although egg size is variable, there is too much
also present.
Fig. 1.160. Equine small strongyle larvae (arrows) in manure. These small (less than 2 cm) red larvae may be present in
Jarge numbers in manure of horses with acute larval cyathostomiasis.
119
120
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Parascaris equorum (Figs. 1.159, 1.161-1.163)
Common name: Roundworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Ascaridida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
ES
Location in Host: Small intestine of horses and other equids.
Life Cycle: Infective larvae develop in eggs passed in the feces of horses. Infection occurs by
ingestion of larvated eggs. Larvae migrate through the liver and lungs of the host before returning
to the small intestine to mature.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Flotation procedures will detect the typical thick-shelled ascarid eggs.
Size: 90-100 μm in diameter
Following treatment with some anthelmintics, adult ascarids may be passed in manure. These
worms will be much larger than any other equine helminths, with females reaching 50 cm in length.
Clinical Importance: Adult worms are common in young horses, infrequent in adults. Heavy
infections can cause respiratory signs (from migrating larvae), ill-thrift, colic, diarrhea, and intes-
tinal obstruction that may be fatal.
HORSES
36μm
Fig. 1.161. Parascaris eggs are typical, thick-shelled ascarid eggs containing a single cell when passed in the feces. Figure
1.159 shows Parascaris eggs at a lower magnification.
26μm
ascarid eggs by the thick shell and single cell inside the egg.
26μm
Fig. 1.163. Larvated strongylid egg and Parascaris egg that has undergone the frst cell division. The fecal sample contain-
ing these eggs was fresh when collected but was not examined for some time, allowing development to occur.
121
122
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Strongyloides westeri (Figs. 1.128 and 1.164)
Common name: Threadworm.
HO
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Rhabditida).
RS
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
ES
Location in Host: Small intestine.
passed in the feces of foals lead to the development of infective larvae that can penetrate the skin
or be ingested. In adult horses, larvae migrate to tissues and form a somatic larval reservoir.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Small, larvated eggs are detected by flotation procedures.
Size: 40-52 x 32-40μm
Clinical Importance: Clinical disease occurs only in foals. Heavy burdens can produce severe
diarrhea and dehydration. Respiratory signs may develop associated with larval migration.
PARAS1TE: Oxywris eqwi (Figs. 1.165 and 1.166)
Common name: Pinworm.
horses.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Large intestine of horses and other equids.
lay clusters of sticky eggs. These eventually are rubbed off the horse and contaminate the
environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Because eggs are attached to hairs in the perianal region, they are not often
seen in flotation tests. A more successful procedure for recovering eggs is the "Scotch tape test.
A piece of clear adhesive tape is touched to the skin in the perianal area and then taped onto a
Size: 85-95 × 40-45 μm
Clinical Importance: Egg-laying activities of the female worms produce intense pruritus. Horses 
bite at and rub the perineal region, leading to a "rat-tailed" appearance and possible secondary
trauma.
HORSES
20 μm
Fig. 1. 164. Egg of Strongyloides westeri, the horse threadworm. These eggs are usually seen only in the feces of young
horses. Strongyloides eggs are already larvated when passed in the feces, and they are smaller than strongylid eggs. Figure
1.128 shows both Strongyloides and strongylid eggs of ruminants, which have a similar size relationship to the species found
in horses.
36μm
Fig. 1.165. Oxyuris eggs are asymmetrical with a polar plug (arrow). Eggs embryonate rapidly and may be seen with a
Jarva inside.
Fig. 1.166. Adult pinworms are occasionally seen in the feces of horses. Adult female Oxyuris can reach a maximum size
of 1 0cm and can be recognized by their thin, pointed tails. Male worms are much smaller. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F.
Williams,Vanson HaloSource, Inc.,Redmond,WA.
123
124
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Habronema microstoma, H. muscae, Draschia megastoma (Fig. l.167)
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Spirurida).
0
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
RS
ES
Location in Host: Stomach of horses and donkeys.
Life Cycle: Adult worms are found in tumorlike masses in the stomach. Larvated eggs are passed
in the feces and are ingested by fly larvae intermediate hosts. Infective worm larvae deposited by
adult fies around the lips of horses make their way into the mouth and to the stomach.
Laboratory Diagnosis: The larvated eggs passed in the feces are too dense to float in most flota-
tion solutions. A sedimentation procedure is recommended for detection.
Size:
H.microstoma
45-59 × 16μm
H.muscae
40-50 × 10-12μm
Clinical Importance: Gastritis resulting in poor growth may develop. If flies deposit third-stage
larvae on a wound, a condition known as “summer sore” can occur, in which larvae survive and
prevent wound healing. Since the introduction of macrolide anthelmintics, infection with these
species has become much less common.
PARAS1TE: Dictyocaulus arnfeldi (Figs. 1.168 and 1.169)
Common name: Lungworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Bronchi and bronchioles of horses and donkeys.
Life Cycle: Adult worms in the respiratory tract produce larvated eggs that hatch before or soon
after leaving the host. Eggs and/or larvae are coughed up, swallowed, and passed in the feces. Larvae
develop to the infective third stage in the environment and are ingested by grazing horses.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Larvated eggs may be detected in feces with fotation tests. However, eggs
hatch rapidly or even before leaving the host, so the Baermann test for the first-stage larvae is the
preferred technique for diagnosis. While lungworms readily mature in donkeys, they may not mature
in horses, making diagnosis more difficult
Size:
Eggs
74-96× 46-58μm
Larvae
420-480μm
Clinical Importance: Bronchitis and pneumonia may develop. Infections appear to be tolerated
better by donkeys than by horses.
HORSES
25μm
Fig. 1.167. This Habronema larva was teased from the uterus of an adult female worm. It will appear in a fecal exam in
this form surrounded by a very thin shell.
50 μm
Fig. 1.168. The only parasitic nematode larvae that would be expected in the fresh feces of horses are those of Dictyocautus.
See also Figure 1.144 for Dictyocaulus eggs that may be seen in tracheal fluid samples. Photo courtesy of Dr. Craig
Reinemeyer, East Tennessee Clinical Research, Knoxville, TN.
Fig. 1.169. Larvae of Dictyocaulus arnfietdi, the equid lungworm, have a small terminal projection at the posterior end
(arrow) that can be seen with higher magnification.
125
126
VETERINARY CLINICALPARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Anoplocephala perfoliata, A. magna, and Paranoplocephala mamillana (Figs. 1.1 70
and 1.171)
Common name: Tapeworm.
Taxonomy: Cestodes.
ES
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of horses and donkeys.
Life Cycle: Eggs passed in the feces are ingested by free-living pasture mites. Horses are infected
during grazing when they ingest mites containing tapeworm cysticercoid larvae.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Flotation procedures for detection of eggs in fecal samples are used but
false-negative results are common. An antibody test for detection of Anoplocephala infection is
available in Europe and the United States.
Size:
A.perfoliata
65-80μm in diameter
Other species
50-60μm
Clinical Importance: Most tapeworm infections are asymptomatic. Disease has been associated
with A. perfoliata. These parasites cluster at the ileo-cecal junction, where heavy infection can cause
ulceration leading to perforation or intussusception.
Horses may also be infected with some of the trematode (fluke) parasites that affect ruminants.
For information on these parasites, see above.
HORSES
22Jum
Fig. 1.170. The egg of the equine tapeworm Anoplocephata is similar in appearance to that of the ruminant tapeworm
Moniezia. The eggs of both genera are often irregularly shaped. A pyriform apparatus surrounds the embryo, which has six
hooks (hex acanth).
Fig. 1.171. Anoplocephatla egg (A) and several equine strongylid eggs.
127
128
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Swine
Helminth Ova and Protozoan Cysts
as found in freshly voided feces of
Pigs
ASCARIDOVA
Ascaris suum
Ascaris suum
(with protein coat)
(with protein coat)
LARVATED OVA
Strongyloides spp.
Ascarops strongylina
Metastrongylus spp.
MORULATED OVA
OVUM WITH BIPOLAR PLUGS
100μm
Trichuris suis
'Strongyle' Type Ova
PROTOZOA
ACANTHOCEPHALA OVUM
Isospora
Eimeria
suis
debliecki
Balantidium
Cryptosporidium sp.
coli
Macracanthorhynchus
hirudinaceus
ILLUSTHATED BY GA RY A.AVERBEC
Fig. 1.172. Parasites found in fecal samples of pigs. Figure courtesy of Dr. Bert Stromberg and Mr. Gary Averbeck, College
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
FECAL EXAMINATION FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITISM
129
Protozoan Parasites
PARAS1TE: Eimeria spp., Isospora suis (Fig. 1.173)
Common name: Coccidia.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia). Eight species of porcine Eimeria have been described, including
E. scabra, E. deblieki, and E. spinosa.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Intestinal tract; location depends on species and stage of development.
Life Cycle: Oocysts are shed in the feces and sporulate rapidly in warm weather. Pigs are infected
when they ingest sporulated (infective) oocysts. Transmission of I. suis is concentrated in the neo-
natal period of pigs.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eimeria oocysts are detected in feces with fotation procedures. Isospora
suis oocysts are shed at such a low rate in asymptomatic carriers that detection is very difficult. In
clinically affected neonatal pigs, disease usually develops before oocysts are shed, and intestinal
Size: Oocysts vary with species, with a range of 11-35 × 9-20μm
Clinical Importance: Eimeria spp. infections are common in swine but rarely produce clinical
disease. In contrast, I. suis can produce neonatal diarrhea in pigs (5-10 days of age) that may be
severe and cause death.
Swine may also be infected with C. parvum and G. intestinalis. These two protozoan parasites
appear to have little clinical significance but may have zoonotic importance. For further information,
see sections related to these parasites in the small animal and ruminant sections.
10 μm
Fig. 1.173. Eimeria spp. are the most common coccidia seen in porcine fecal samples. Although several species can infect
Lindsay, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
130
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Balanfidium coli (Figs. 1.174 and 1.175)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (ciliate).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Large intestine of swine; may also occasionally infect humans and other pri-
mates, camels, dogs, and other animals
Life Cycle: Infection follows ingestion of cysts shed into the environment from infected swine.
The only other stage of the life cycle is the motile trophozoite in the intestinal tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Motile trophozoites can be seen in direct fecal smears. Flotation tests are
 more sensitive for detecting cysts. The kidney-bean-shaped macronucleus is a distinctive feature.
Size:
Trophozoites
50-150μm
Cysts
40-60μm
Clinical Importance: Balantidium is generally asymptomatic in swine, although bloody diarrhea
may occur in some hosts.
3NIMS
40um
Fig. 1.1 74. Batantidium coti trophozoite in a direct smear. The cilia covering trophozoites can be seen as a halo surround-
Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
20μm
Fig. 1.175. The characteristic kidney-bean-shaped macronucleus of Balantidium is faintly visible in this cyst in a porcine
fecal sample. The macronucleus is usually easily seen in stained specimens. Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre
for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
131
132
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Heiminth Parasites
PARAS1TE: Ascaris suum (Fig. 1.176)
Common name: Roundworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Ascaridida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine.
Life Cycle: Pigs are infected when they ingest infective eggs in the environment. Following migra-
tion through the liver and lungs, adults develop in the small intestine. Like other ascarids, A. suum
has very resistant eggs that can survive for years in the environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs can be detected in feces with routine flotation procedures.
Size: 50-70 × 40-60 μm
Clinical Importance: Ascaris suum is a common and important parasite of swine, even in confine-
ment systems. Larval migration through liver and lung may cause liver condemnation and predis-
pose pigs to bacterial or viral pneumonia. Adult worms in the small intestine may cause reduced
 growth. Larvae can also migrate and cause disease in other animals and humans.
PARASlTE: Hyostrongylus rubidus, Oesophagostomum spp. (Fig. 1.177)
Commonname: Red stomach worm (Hyostrongylus), nodular worm(Oesophagostomum).
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Strongylida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Stomach (Hyostrongylus) and large intestine (Oesophagostomum) of wild and
domestic swine.
Life Cycle: These parasites have a direct life cycle; eggs are shed in the feces and hatch in the
Laboratory Diagnosis: Typical strongylid eggs are detected in fecal samples by fotation tech-
niques. Eggs of Hyostrongylus and Oesophagostomum cannot be distinguished from each other or
from less common strongylid parasites of swine, including Trichostrongylus axei and Globocephalus.
Size: 69-85 × 39-45 μm
 ulcerative gastritis, resulting in anemia and reduced production. Host response to Oesophagostomum
larvae in the wall of the intestinal tract leads to the development of nodules that, in heavy infec-
 tions, can lead to enteritis and reduced production.
PARASlTE: Trichuris suis (Fig. 1.178)
Common name: Whipworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Large intestine of wild and domestic pigs.
ENIMSE
 30 μm 
Fig. 1.176. Like other ascarid eggs, those of Ascaris suum contain a single cell surrounded by a thick shell when frst
 sa au jo om ui uaas se quasqe aq Aew as au jo ae jano umoq yonou aun 'saso awos u saoaj a u passd
this figure. Ascaris suum eggs are very similar in appearance to those of the human ascarid, A. tumbricoides.
24μm
Fig. 1.177. Hyostrongylus and Oesophagostomum are the most common and important strongylid parasites of swine and
necessary to identify parasitegenus.
20μm
Fig. 1.178. Like other members of the genus, eggs of Trichuris suis, the swine whipworm, are football shaped with a polar
plug at each end.
133
134
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Trichuris suis (continued)
Life Cycle: Trichuris spp. have a direct life cycle. Pigs are infected following ingestion of infective
the environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs can be detected in routine fecal flotation tests.
Size:50-60 x 21-25qm
Clinical Importance: This common helminth infection of swine may cause severe diarrhea and
dehydration. Severe infections can produce bloody diarrhea.
PARAS1TE: Strongyloides ransomi (Figs. 1.128, 1.179, 1.180)
Common name: Threadworrm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Rhabditida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine.
Life Cycle: Larvated eggs are passed in the feces and hatch in the environment. After a free-living
 period in the environment, third-stage larvae are produced that infect pigs through either ingestion
or skin penetration. Sows carrying larvae in the tissues transmit the parasite through the milk to
their litters.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected in fecal samples using fotation techniques. The thin-
shelled egg contains a larva in fresh fecal samples.
Size: 40-50 × 20-35 μm
Clinical Importance: Strongyloides causes diarrhea in pigs as young as 10 days of age. Severe
infections may be fatal.
PARASlTE: Metasfrongylus spp. (Fig. 1.181)
Common name: Lungworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida). Several species similar in life cycle and pathogenicity
have been described.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Bronchi and bronchioles of domestic and wild pigs.
Life Cycle: Eggs containing a larva are passed in the feces of pigs. When earthworm intermediate
hosts ingest the eggs, they hatch and develop to infective larvae. Swine are infected by ingestion
of earthworrms containing third-stage larvae.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Larvated eggs are detected in feces by flotation procedures.
Size: 51-63 × 33-42μm
Clinical Importance: These parasites are uncommon in intensively raised swine. Heavy infections,
especially in young pigs, can cause clinical respiratory disease.
20 μm
Fig. 1.179. Larvated Strongyloides eggs are usually present only in the feces of young pigs. Photo courtesy of Merial.
40 μum
Fig. 1.180. The Strongyloides eggs pictured here could be confused with strongylid eggs, but strongylid eggs are larger
and do not contain a larva in fresh fecal samples. Figure 1.128 shows the similar size relationship of ruminant strongylid
and Strongyloides eggs. Photo courtesy of Dr. T. Bonner Stewart, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA.
64m
Fig. 1.181. In fresh fecal samples, Metastrongylus eggs contain a Jarva and must be differentiated from other larvated
parasite eggs found in swine manure.
135
136
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Physocephalus sexalatus, Ascarops strongylina (Figs. 1.182 and 1.183)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Spirurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Stomach of domestic and wild pigs.
Life Cycle: Eggs containing larvae are passed in the feces, where they are ingested by beetle
intermediate hosts. Pigs are infected following ingestion of larvae in the intermediate host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: A sedimentation procedure is recommended for detecting spirurid parasite
feces.
Size: 39-45 x 17-26μm
Clinical Importance: Spirurid parasites are uncommon in intensively raised swine. Most infec-
 tions are asymptomatic, but heavy infections may produce gastritis, leading to weight loss or failure
to gain.
PARASITE:Fasciola spp.,Eurytrema pancreaticum,Dicrocoelium dentriticum,Schistosoma
spp. (Figs. 1.149, 1.151-1.153, 1.184)
Although swine are not considered to be the primary host for most trematodes, pigs may be
infected with trematode parasites (Fasciola spp., E. pancreaticum, D. dentriticum, Schistosoma
spp.) that also infect ruminants. Trematode infections of domestic swine would only be seen in
 pastured pigs because the complicated life cycle of flukes make transmission impossible in confine-
ment operations.
20 jμm
Fig. 1.182. Egg of Physocephatus. Photo courtesy of Merial.
20μm
Fig. 1.183. Ascarops egg. Spirurid eggs are unlikely to be seen if standard fotation procedures are used. Their larvated
o sans go saaa paasun a arn (a snose a u paede sa s y e ay sa
Metastrongylus. Photo courtesy of Merial.
90jm
 in other parts of the world where pigs range freely and infections also occur in other domestic animals. Photo courtesy of
Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
137
138
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus (Fig. 1.185)
Common name: Thormy-headed worm.
Taxonomy: Acanthocephalan.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine.
  e       ss a sa s  
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are not consistently recovered by fotation procedures. A sedimenta-
tion procedure should also be performed.
Size: Variable, 67-110 x 40-65 μm
Clinical Importance: Acanthocephalan parasites have a proboscis covered with hooks. Attachment
of the proboscis causes damage to the intestinal wall. Clinical signs range from none to diarrhea
and weight loss. Macracanthorhynchus is unlikely to be present in total-confinement systems.
3NIMS
20 Jum
Fig. 1.185. Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus egg. The embryo (acanthor) is surrounded by several membranes and
contains hooks at one end that are often visible (arrow). Common tapeworm eggs also contain hooks, but thorny-headed
Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
139
140
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Birds
Protozoan Parasites
PARAS1TE: Eimeria spp., Isospora spp. (Figs. 1.186-1.190, 1.194, 1.196, 1.198, 1.201)
Common name: Coccidia.
Columbriformes. Isospora coccidia species are more common in Passeriformes, Psittaciformes, and
Piciformes. Species of coccidia are host specific. Caryospora, Sarcocystis, and Atoxoplasma are
other coccidian genera that infect some birds.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Primarily in the gastrointestinal tract.
the environment. Sexual and asexual multiplication occurs within cells of the intestinal tract (some
 more unusual species are found in other organs). Development culminates in the production of
oocysts, which are passed in the feces.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eimeria oocysts are detected with routine flotation procedures. Sporulation
 of oocysts may be required for species identification.
Size: Approximately 10-45 μm in length (oocysts), depending on species
Clinical Importance: Coccidia are common parasites of domestic and wild birds. Many infections
are asymptomatic, but under some circumstances coccidia may cause severe diarrhea and death.
Eimeria spp. are among the most important pathogens in modem poultry confinement
operations.
50 μm
Fig. 1.186. Eimeria spp. oocysts from a chicken. Eimeria species are common parasites of wild and domestic birds.
Individual birds may be infected with multiple coccidia species.
SO
40 μm
Fig. 1.187. After reaching the environment, Eimeria oocysts sporulate; the length of time required for this process is
(arrow) contains four sporocysts (three are visible). Sporulated Isospora oocysts contain two sporocysts.
 60 μm
Fig. 1.188. Isospora spp. can also be found in birds, as seen in this fecal sample from a crow. Sporulated Isospora spp.
oocysts contain two sporocysts. Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada.
10μm
Fig. 1.189. Caryospora oocyst. The sporulated oocyst of this genus contains a single sporocyst with eight sporozoites.
Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
141
142
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Cryptosporidium spp. (Fig. 1.191)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia). Avian species of this genus include C. baileyi and C. meleagridis.
The latter species has been found to be infective for humans and some other mammals, as well as
birds.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Gastrointestinal, respiratory, and/or urinary tracts depending on host.
Life Cycle: Infection of the bird host follows ingestion of the infective oocyst. Development and
reproduction occur in the epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tract primarily. In
some bird species, the urinary tract is affected.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Oocysts can be detected with the Sheather's sugar fotation procedure.
Acid-fast or other staining procedures of fecal smears can also be used, as well as fecal irmmuno-
diagnostic tests.
Size: 4-6 μm in diameter
-  rs  sa  ss o a u  an 
ing, sneezing, and dyspnea or renal disease. Severe infection may cause death. Cryptosporidium
meleagridis can infect humans.
PARAS1TE: Gastrointestinal Flagellates (Figs. 1.192 and 1.193; see also Figs. 1.50-1.56 for
illustrations of Giardia)
    n      ( d 
Trichomonas,Cochlosoma,Histomonas,Giardia,Spironucleus(=Hexamita),and Chilomastix.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Trichomonas gallinae is found in the upper digestive system; Histomonas in
the cecum and liver; and Cochlosoma, Giardia, and Spironucleus in the intestines.
              
to bird by direct contact and contaminated food or water. Feeding of young birds by adults can also
transmit T. gallinae, while Histomonas can be carried in the eggs of the cecal roundworm, Heterakis.
Giardia trophozoites encyst in the intestinal tract. Cysts passed in the feces are ingested by birds.
Chilomastix also forms cysts.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Trichomonas trophozoites have anterior fagella and an undulating mem-
brane. They can usually be detected in smears made from exudates or lesions in the oral cavity,
esophagus, and crop. Giardia cysts can be recovered by ZnSO4 centrifugal fotation. Chilomastix
cysts are rarely found in feces. Giardia, Spironucleus, and Cochlosoma trophozoites may be seen
in very fresh fecal smears. Spironucleus has no sucking disk, unlike Giardia and Cochlosoma.
Histomonas is unlilkely to be detected in fecal smears.
Size:
Trichomonas
8-14 μm in length, depending on species
Giardia trophozoites
10-20 × 5-15 μm
Giardia cysts
10-14 × 8-10μm
Cochlosoma
6-10 × 4-6.5μm
Spironucleus
5-12 × 2-7μm
Chilomastix
6-24 × 3-10μm
6um
Fig. 1.190. Sarcocystis is another coccidian genus that may be found in the feces of carnivorous birds that act as the
the feces.
10μm
Fig. 1.191. Cryptosporidium spp. oocysts in birds are similar in appearance to those of mammalian species. Slides should
be ex amined using the 40x lens of the microscope.
Fig. 1.192. Trichomonas spp. in birds have an undulating membrane and several anterior fagella. They can be seen in
crop is also helpful in diagnosis.
143
144
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Gastrointestinal Flagellates (continued)
Clinical Importance: Pigeons and raptors are particularly susceptible to trichomoniasis of the
 and accumulation of cheesy material in the mouth, esophagus, and crop. Severe infections may be
fatal. Although many Giardia infections are asymptormatic, the parasite can cause diarrhea, depres-
sion, and debilitation, particularly in young psittacines. Feather picking associated with infection
has also been described. Histomonas is the cause of blackhead in turkeys. Other fagellates may
also produce diarrhea, but many infections are asymptomatic. None of these avian fagellates has
zoonotic importance.
Helminth Parasites
PARAS1TE: Avian Ascarids (Figs. 1.194 and 1.195)
Common name: Roundworm, cecal worm (Heterakis).
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Ascaridida). Ascaridia spp. and Heterakis spp. are common in
poultry and many wild bird hosts. Porrocecum spp. and Contracecum spp. are also found in a variety
of bird hosts.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Intestinal tract; Heterakis spp. parasitize the ceca of birds.
Life Cycle: Eggs are passed in the feces of the bird host and develop to the infective stage in the
port hosts.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Thick-shelled eggs are detected with fotation procedures. Eggs of
Ascaridia and Heterakis are similar in size and morphology and are not easily differentiated.
Size:
Ascaridia
77-94 × 43-55 μm
Heterakis
66-79 × 41-48 μm
Clinical Importance: Larvae of Ascaridia appear to be the most pathogenic stage and may cause
enteritis in the prepatent period. Heavy burdens of adult worrms can cause enteritis and intestinal
obstruction. Heterakis is primarily important in poultry as a vector of Histomonas meleagridis
(blackhead), which can be a serious disease of turkeys. The protozoan is carried from bird to bird
in the eggs and larvae of Heterakis. Fatal infections of Heterakis isolonche due to nodular typhlitis
have been reported in pheasants.
BIRDS
16μm
Fig. 1.193. Giardia trophozoites found in smears of avian feces are very similar in appearance to these mammalian
parasites.
18um
Fig. 1.194. A smooth, thick shellis seen in both Ascaridia spp. and Heterakis spp. eggs. This sample from a chicken shows
both an ascarid egg and a much smaller Eimeria oocyst.
20μm
Fig. 1.195. Ascaridia egg from a peacock. Another ascarid genus found in ducks and wild birds is Porrocecum, which has
eggs with a rough shell similar in appearance to that of many mammalian ascarid species.
145
146
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Capillaria spp. (Figs. 1.196, 1.197, 1.199)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida). A variety of species can be found in domestic and wild
birds.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Various locations in the gastrointestinal tract, depending on species.
Some species, such as C. obsignata, have a direct life cycle, while others have been shown to use
an earthworm intermediate host.
          i 
techniques.
Size: Approximately 45-70 μm in length, depending on species
Clinical Importance: Capillaria spp. can cause severe inflammation wherever species occur in
the digestive tract, including the esophagus, crop, and intestines. Heavy infections may be fatal.
PARASITE: Trichostrongylus tenuis, Amidostomum spp., and Other Avian Strongylids
(Fig. 1.198)
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Strongylida). Trichostrongylus tenuis and Amidostomum spp. occur
in domestic and game birds.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Cecum and intestines of game birds, poultry, and wild birds.
s      s   s an  s a s  a
develop to the infective stage in the environment, and develop to the adult stage when ingested by
the avian host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Typical thin-shelled strongylid eggs can be detected with fotation
procedures.
Size:
Varies with species
T. tenuis eggs
65-75μm × 35-42μm
Amidostomum anserieggs
85-110 × 50-82 μm
Clinical Importance: Heavy infections of T. tenuis can produce severe enteritis with resulting
hemorrhagic diarrhea, weight loss, and death.
SO
20μm
Fig. 1.196. Eggs of Capiltaria spp. are very common in the feces of domestic and wild birds. The bipolar-plugged eggs
have a thick shell and are typically yellowish. This Capillaria egg and Eimeria oocyst were present in a fecal sample from
a backyard chicken fock. Capillaria spp. are uncommon in poultry maintained in total-confinement systems.
20μm
Fig. 1.197. Capiltaria sp. egg in an owl (arrow). The Jarger, browner egg belongs to Trichosomoides sp., a parasite of the
badder of rats. Because parasite eggs of prey are sometimes found in predator feces, it is important to appreciate the normal
array of parasites found in a host so spurious parasites can be correctly identifed. Photo courtesy of Dr. Stephen Smith,
Virginia-Maryland Regional College ofVeterinary Medicine,Virginia Tech,Blacksburg,VA.
40 μm
Fig. 1.198. Strongylid egg and coccidia oocysts in an avian fecal sample.
147
148
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Syngamus spp. (Figs. 1.199 and 1.200)
Common name: Gapeworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida).
DS
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Trachea and bronchi of numerous domestic and wild birds. Species of a similar
genus, Cyathostoma, are found in some aquatic birds and birds of prey.
Life Cycle: Eggs are produced by females in the trachea and are coughed up, swallowed, and
passed out of the host in the feces. Infective larvae may be eaten directly from the environment by
the avian host, or they may be ingested by an earthworm or molluscan transport host that is eaten,
in turn, by a bird.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Ellipsoidal, bipolar eggs are seen in the feces with flotation procedures.
Size: 80-110 × 40-50μm
Clinical Importance: Young birds are most severely affected. Large numbers of parasites and
exudate obstruct the airways and can suffocate the host. The parasite's common name originates
from the gaping and gasping of infected birds as they attempt to breathe. Syngamus is uncormmon
in total-confinement poultry systems.
PARASlTE: Dispharynx, Echinwria, Tetrameres,
Subulura,Cheilospirura (Acuaria),
Serratospicufum, and Others (Figs. 1.20l and 1.202)
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Spirurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Species are found throughout the digestive tract. Serratospiculum parasitizes
the respiratory tract of some wild birds.
Life Cycle: Adults (except Serratospiculum) are located in the digestive tract. Eggs are passed in
the feces and are ingested by various arthropod intermediate hosts. Birds are infected by ingesting
an intermediate host carrying infective larvae.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Flotation and sedimentation techniques can be used to detect the relatively
small, larvated eggs in feces.
Size: Approximately 30-55 × 20-35 μm, depending 0n species
Clinical Importance: Most infections with this group of parasites are not highly pathogenic.
However, Tetrameres and Dispharynx in large numbers in the proventriculus may cause weight loss
and reduced production. In poultry, members of this group of parasites are rare in total-confinement
management systems.
SO
38μm
 ae s jo sa a o dds  jo s a asd edq a sa et 
and contain several well-defined cells (morula) when passed in the feces. In this specimen, both Syngamus and Capitlaria
eggs are present. The polar plugs of Syngamus can be seen in some of the eggs (arrow). Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
22μm
Fig. 1.2O0. Cyathostoma bronchiatis is a species similar to Syngamus that is found in the respiratory system of some
aquatic birds. Other species parasitize raptors. The polar plugs in this species are not prominent. The eggs shown here are
inside the uterus of a female worm removed from a goose.
14μm
Fig. 1.201. Tetrameres egg in the feces of a homing pigeon. Like other spirurid eggs, this Tetrameres egg is larvated when
passed in the feces, but further specifc identification is difficult. Also pictured is a coccidia oocyst. Photo courtesy of Dr.
Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
149
150
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASiTE: Echinostoma spp., Echinoparyphium, Prosthogonimus spp., and Others (Figs.
1.203 and 1.204)
Common name: Fluke.
Taxonomy: Trematode.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Domestic and wild birds are parasitized by many fluke species. Adults can be
found in various body systems, including the intestines and respiratory and reproductive tracts.
Life Cycle: Adult worms produce eggs that leave the host principally via the digestive tract. The
first intermediate host is a mollusk, and a variety of animals act as second intermediate host depend-
ing on the fluke species (with the exception of schistosome flukes, which do not require a second
intermediate host).
Laboratory Diagnosis: Fluke eggs in feces are best detected with a sedimentation technique
because of their higher density. Fluke eggs are typically operculated and brown.
Size: Highly variable with species, approximately 20-1 00 μm in length
Clinical Importance: Many fluke infections are of low pathogenicity. Some genera of importance
in domestic poultry are Echinostoma and Echinoparyphium, which may cause enteritis, and
Prosthogonimus, a parasite of the oviduct, which can cause abnormal egg production and peritonitis.
Because of their complex life cycles, flukes will be seen only in birds with access to intermediate
hosts and will not occur in poultry confinement operations.
BIRDS
20μm
Dr. Stephen Smith, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
35μm
Fig. 1.203. Fluke egg in the feces of a screech owl. The operculum is marked by an arrow.
15um
Fig. 1.204. The developing miracidium can be seen inside this avian trematode egg found in feces from a bird of prey.
151
152
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Davainea spp, Choanotaenia spp., Raillietina spp., Hymenolepis spp., and Others
(Figs. 1.205-1.207)
Common name: Tapeworm.
Taxonomy: Cestodes.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of a wide variety of domestic and wild birds.
 s  o nso  a ss s an  ssd a s a an
other invertebrates may also be used by some species (e.g., the intermediate host of Davainea is a
mollusk).
Laboratory Diagnosis: Although proglottids are intermittently passed in the feces, detection of
 Asdooau 1e apeu Alensn si sisousep pue 'aqenaun si wxa jeoay Aq sasa
Size: Varies with species; individual eggs of many species are approximately 50-80 μm; some
species have large egg packets
Clinical Importance: Many tapeworm infections are asymptomatic. However, some are serious
pathogens; for example, Davainea proglottina and Raillietina echinobothrida can cause severe
enteritis and death in domestic poultry. Tapeworms are common in unconfined poultry with access
to the intermediate hosts.
BIRDS
20μm
Fig. 1.205. Avian tapeworm egg. Several embryonic hooks are clearly visible, and this characteristic is very helpful in
Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
34μm
Fig. 1.206. Tapeworm eggs from a magpie. Scattered among the cestode eggs are occasional coccidia oocysts (arrows).
Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
20μm
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
153
154
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Polymorphus spp., Filicollis spp., and Others (Figs. 1.208 and 1.209)
Common name: Thormy-headed worm.
Taxonomy: Acanthocephalan.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Digestive system.
Life Cycle: Eggs are passed in the feces of the host. Infective larvae develop in arthropod inter-
 mediate hosts and infect birds when they are ingested.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are not consistently recovered by fotation procedures. A sedimenta-
tion procedure should also be performed.
Size: Approximately 50-100 μm in length, depending on species
because of their complex life cycles. Heavy infections may cause diarrhea and debilitation.
BIRDS
20μm
Fig. 1.208. Egg of a thorny-headed worm (Centorhynchus) from the feces of a barred owl. Acanthocephalan eggs have
several internal layers surrounding the larva (acanthor). Photo courtesy of Dr. Ellis C. Greiner, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
55μm
Fig. 1.209. Acanthocephalan eggs in the feces of a blue jay. Photo courtesy of Dr. Thomas Nolan, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
155
156
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Rodents and Rabbits
RODENTS
Protozoan Parasites
PARAS1TE: Eimeria spp. (Figs. 1.210-1.212)
ANE
Common name: Coccidia.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: A variety of species parasitize the intestinal tract of rodents and rabbits. Eimeria
stiedae is found in the bile ducts of rabbits.
Life Cycle: Oocysts passed in the feces can sporulate quickly and infect the host when ingested.
 Asexual and sexual reproduction occurs in cells of the gastrointestinal tract.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Oocysts can be detected in feces by centrifugal or simple fotation tech-
Size: Approximately 10-45 × 10-30μm, depending on species
Clinical Importance: Some species are nonpathogenic. Pathogenic intestinal coccidia can cause
anorexia, weight loss, profuse diarrhea, and death. Eimeria stiedae infection of the rabbit liver can
cause anorexia, diarrhea, distended abdomen, and death.
Rodents may also be infected with species of Giardia and Cryptosporidium (see Figs. 1.47 and
1.50-1.56).
RODENTS
®
®
®
?
®
75 μm
in this figure are Eimeria nieschutzi, a parasite of rats. Photo courtesy of Dr. George Conder, Pfzer Veterinary Medicine
Pharmaceuticals Clinical Development, Pfizer, Inc., Kalamazoo, Ml.
30 Jum
of rabbit Eimeria were detected in this sample.
20μm
Fig. 1.212. Once in the environment, oocysts undergo sporulation to the infective stage. Sporulated oocysts of Eimeria
this rabbit Eimeria sp. oocyst. Surrounding the oocyst are several elongated nonpathogenic yeast organisms that are very
cormirmon in rabbit feces.
157
158
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Heiminth Parasites
RODENTS
PARASlTE: Syphacia obvelata (Fig. 1.213)
RABBTS
Common name: Pinworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Oxyurida).
AND
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Large intestine of mice and gerbils.
Life Cycle: Eggs passed in the feces quickly become infective. Rodents develop infection follow-
 ing ingestion of larvated eggs.
Laboratory Diagnosis: When present in the feces, eggs can be detected by routine flotation tech-
niques. Eggs are normally found on the skin in the perineal region of infected animals.
Size: 100-142 × 30-40 μm
Clinical Importance: Infections are typically subclinical.
PARASlTE: Aspicularis tetraptera (Fig. 1.214)
Common name: Pinworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Oxyurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Large intestine of mice.
Life Cycle: The life cycle is similar to that of Syphacia oblevata. Adult pinworms develop follow-
ing ingestion of infective eggs.
The eggs are ellipsoidal with a distinctive double shell wall and contain an undifferentiated embryo
in fresh feces.
Size: 70-98 × 29-50μm
Clinical Importance: Infections are usually subclinical.
PARASlTE: Passalurus ambiguus (Fig. 1.215)
Common name: Pinworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Oxyurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Cecum of rabbits.
   n a  s n o sr an n ss a s a a
short period and infect the next host when ingested.
smooth, clear shell wall that is flat on one side.
Size: 95-103 × 43 μm
Clinical Importance: Infections are usually subclinical.
NG
S
RODENTS
 25 μm
Fig. 1.213. Syphacia egg in feces from a gerbil. Eggs of Syphacia have a smooth, clear shell wall; are fat on one side;
and contain an undifferentiated morula in fresh fecal samples.
20 μm
Fig. 1.214. Aspicutaris eggs have narrowed poles and a smooth, clear, double shell wall. Pin worms are common in rodents.
20μm
Fig. 1.215. Passalurus ambiguus eggs have an operculum-like structure at one end, and the eggs contain an undifferentiated
morula in fresh fecal sarmples.
159
160
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Paraspidodera wncinafa, Heterakis spumosa (Fig. 1.216)
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Ascaridida).
RABBITS
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Cecum of guinea pigs (Paraspidodera) and rats (Heterakis).
AND
Life Cycle: Eggs passed in the feces develop to the infective stage and infect the host when they
 are ingested.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Fecal flotation procedures can be used to recover these thick-shelled eggs.
Size:
Heterakis
55-60 × 40-55 μm
Paraspidodera
43 × 31 μm
Clinical Importance: Infection is usually subclinical. These parasites are seen primarily in wild
rats and guinea pigs raised on dirt.
PARASITE: Heligmosomoides polygyrus, Nippostrongylus braziliensis, Obeliscoides cuniculi,
Graphidium strigosum (Fig. 1.217)
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Strongylida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Stomach (Obeliscoides, Graphidium) of rabbits; small intestine of rats
(Nippostrongylus) and mice (Heligmosomoides).
development in the environment. In most cases, the definitive host is infected by ingesting third-
stage larvae, but larvae of Nippostrongyfus braziliensis usually penetrate the skin of the final host.
duced by these parasites.
Size: 52-106 × 28-58 μm (eggs), depending 0n species
Clinical Importance: Parasites belonging to this group of nematodes are unlikely to occur in caged
rabbits and rodents but are common in wild animals. Infection is usually subclinical.
PARAS1TE: Hymenolepis spp. (Figs. 1.218 and 1.219)
Common name: Dwarf tapeworm of humans (Hymenolepis nana).
Taxonomy: Cestode. The most common species in domestic rodents is Hymenolepis (= Vampirolepis)
nana. Other species infecting rodents are H. diminuta and H. microstoma.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of rodents (mouse, rat, hamster). Humans and other primates
also serve as hosts for H. nana.
Life Cycle: Eggs passed in the feces of definitive hosts are ingested by beetle intermediate hosts.
 Rodents and humans are infected following ingestion of the intermediate host containing cysticer-
coids. Infection with adult H. nana can also follow ingestion of the egg.
RODENTS
3mm
tode of rodents are similar to those of the avian cecal worm, Heterakis (Fig.
. 1.194). Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker,
School of Veterinary Medicine,Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
38μm
Fig. 1.217. These Heligmosomoides eggs are similar to eggs produced by other strongylid nematodes of rabbits and
rodents. Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
18μ4m
Fig. 1.218. Hymenotepis nana infects rodents and primates. Eggs are elliptical in shape with a smooth, clear shell wall
and contain an embryo with six hooks. There are two knoblike protrusions at each end of the embryo. Like eggs of other
 common tapeworms, hooks are visible within the embryo.
161
162
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Hymenolepis(continued)
RODENTS
RABBITS
fecal flotation examination.
Size:
H. nana
40-45 × 34-37μm
AND
H.diminuta
60-88 × 52-81 μm
Clinical Importance: Infections are usually subclinical. Heavy infections, particularly in young
PARAS1TE: Cittotaenia spp. (Fig. 1 .220)
Common name: Rabbit tapeworm.
Taxonomy: Cestode.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Small intestine of rabbits and hares.
stage. Rabbits are infected when they ingest the infected mites.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Fecal fotation procedures will recover Cittotaenia eggs.
Size: 64 μm in diameter
Clinical Importance: Heavy infections may cause weight loss.
O
RODENTS
S
20μm
Fig. 1.219. Other species of Hymenotepis found in rodents have larger, rounder eggs than H. nana. Hymenolepid eggs are
 seen occasionally in fecal samples of dogs and cats that have recently eaten rodents.
16μm
Fig. 1.220. Citotaenia eggs are quite similar in appearance to Hymenotepis eggs. The hooks in the tapeworm embryo are
usually easily seen.
163
164
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Reptiles
PARASiTE: Entamoeba, Cryptosporidium, Eimeria, Isospora, and Caryospora (Figs.
1.221-1.223)
ES
Taxonomy: Protozoa.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Gastrointestinal tract.
Life Cycle: Reptiles are infected by ingestion of cysts (Entamoeba) or oocysts that are passed in
host feces.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eimeria, Caryospora, and Cryptosporidium oocysts can be detected by
fecal fotation techniques (the centrifugal fotation procedure with Sheather's sugar solution is
recommended for Cryptosporidium). Wet mounts of feces or colonic washings can be examined
for Entamoeba trophozoites and cysts. Fecal smears may also be stained with Wright's stain or
Giemsa stain.
         
snakes, associated with weight loss and regurgitation. Entamoeba invadens can cause bloody diar-
rhea and hepatitis in snakes and some tortoise and lizard hosts. Weight loss and enteritis may
    
REPTILES
14μm
Fig. 1.221. Sporulated Eimeria oocyst in the feces of a king snake. Oocysts of prey coccidia species may also be found
in the feces of carnivorous reptiles. Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State
University, Manhattan, KS.
5μm
Fig. 1.222. Entamoeba invadens trophozoite in a stained fecal smear from a Burmese python. A single nucleus (N) is seen in
the trophozoite, and they are approximately 16μm in size. Trophozoite movement can be seen in a wet mount of fresh feces.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Ellis C. Greiner, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
10um
the cyst can be seen (arrow). Cysts are 1l-20 μm. Photo courtesy of Dr. Thomas Nolan, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Pennsy]vania, Philadelphia, PA.
165
166
VETERINARY CLINICALPARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Reptile Helminths (Figs. 1.2241.233)
Taxonomy: Nematodes, cestodes (tapeworms), trematodes (flukes), acanthocephalans (thormy-
headed worms), and pentastomid parasites.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Helminth parasites can be found in a variety of body systems, although those
detected by fecal exam are primarily gastrointestinal or respiratory system parasites.
Life Cycle: Life cycle varies widely depending on the species. Some nematodes have a direct life
cycle. Other nematodes and the remaining helminth groups all require at least one intermediate
host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are detected in feces by fotation or sedimentation procedures.
Clinical Importance: As in other hosts, low levels of helminth infection are usually well tolerated
by reptiles. Heavy infections may result in clinical disease, especially in young or immunosup-
pressed animals. The complex life cycles of most flukes, tapeworms, and thorny-headed worms
 make these parasites uncommon in reptiles bred in captivity.
40 μm
Fig. 1.224. Reptiles may be infected with the same groups of helminth parasites that infect other vertebrates. The photo
shows examples of reptile capillarid and ascarid eggs.
REPTILES
30 μm
Fig. 1.225. Pinworm eggs are frequently encountered in reptile feces. These eggs are usually elongated and may appear
flat on one side. The eggs shown here are from a bearded dragon.
16μm
Fig. 1.226. Pinworm egg from a turtle.
28 μm
Fig. 1.227. Katicephatus sp. egg from a python. This is one of the genera of strongylid nematodes parasitizing reptiles.
Eggs of this nematode group are thin shelled. ln fresh feces, reptile strongylid eggs may be larvated or contain a morula
(cluster of cells), like the one shown here. Photo courtesy of Dr. Ellis C. Greiner, College of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
167
ES
16μm
Fig. 1.228. Rhabdias egg in the feces of a rat snake. Eggs containing a larva are passed in the feces and are smaller than
strongylideggs.
20 μm
Fig. 1.229. Tapeworm egg from a water moccasin. This egg is surrounded by a gelatinous layer with one hook of the hexa-
canth embryo visible (arrow).
30μm
is clearly visible (arrows) in this fuke egg from a turtle.
168
REPTILES
20μm
Fig. 1.231. Spirorchid egg detected on sedimentation of feces from a wood turtle. Spirorchids are blood fukes infecting
various species of turtles. The large eggs lack an operculum and contain a fully formed miracidium. Note the two black eye
spots in this miracidium.
20 μm
Fig. 1.232. Acanthocephalans (thorny-headed worms) are also common in wild reptiles. This egg was found in mammalian
feces but shows the complex layered shell that would also be seen in the eggs of thorny-headed worms of snakes.
20μm
Fig. 1.233. Pentastomid egg in feces from a Boelon's python. Pentastomids are an unusual group that shows some arthropod
characteristics. Adults are parasites of the respiratory tract. Large eggs( over l00 μm) passed in the feces are often surrounded
by a capsule. Larvae within the eggs have legs bearing hooklets (arrow) and could be mistaken for mite eggs. An intermedi-
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
169
CHAPTER 2
Detection of Protozoan and
Helminth Parasites in the
Urinary, Reproductive, and
OTHER SYSTEMS
Integumentary Systems
and in the Eye
TECHNIQUES FOR PARASITE RECOVERY
Parasites of the Urinary System
Several organisms parasitize the urinary tract, and their eggs and cysts can be detected by routine
urine sedimentation. Samples collected by cystocentesis are preferred because voided urine samples
could be contaminated with fecal material containing parasite eggs or larvae from the intestinal or
respiratory systems.
Urine Sedimentation
Centrifuge 5-10mL of urine in a conical-tip centrifuge tube for 5 minutes at 1500-2000rpm
(approximately 100 × g).
Decant the supernatant fluid, leaving 0.5 mL. Resuspend the sediment.
Transfer a drop of sediment to a slide, add a coverslip, and examine.
Parasites of the Reproductive Tract
jo suaod quod nou ae ponn annpondan aun jo sanisd Aed ae yeun suss
common domestic species in North America, with the exception of Tritrichomonas foetus. In South
America, the Middle East, and parts of Africa, Trypanosoma equiperdum causes serious disease in
horses and is transmitted venereally. However, this parasite is difficult to recover from tissue fluids
or blood, and immunodiagnostic tests are usually used for confirmation of infection. Several other
parasites can affect reproduction as a part of general systematic effects, including Neospora,
Toxoplasma, and Sarcocystis. These parasites also would not be recovered and identified in the live
animal.
171
172
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
Tritrichomonas foetus is a parasite of cattle found in the uterus and vagina of cows and the
prepuce of bulls. Diagnosis of infection is usually by identification of the organisms in preputial
recommended that samples be collected in lactated Ringer's solution and submitted to a laboratory
for culture in Diamond's medium. There is also a commercial kit available that provides a plastic
pouch containing a medium into which the sample can be inoculated and cultured (InPouch? TF,
BioMed Diagnostics, Inc., White City, OR, www.biomeddiagnostics.com/)
Bovine Preputial Sample Collection
OTHER
Attach a dry 21-in. infusion pipette to a 20-cc syringe and insert into the prepuce of the bull.
The tip of the pipette is scraped back and forth across the epithelium while suction is applied.
SV
 Examine the collected sample microscopically irmmediately if desired and then inoculate into
TENS
Ringer's solution (or the commercial InPouch) and refrigerate for transport to the laboratory
for culture.
 Samples not placed directly into nutritive medium should not be held for more than 48 hours
in Ringer's or other balanced-salt solution.
Helminth Parasites of the Integumentary System
Several filarid nematode parasites produce microflariae that are found in the subcutaneous tissue
These larvae can be detected in fresh skin biopsies or on examination of fixed and stained biopsy
tissue sections. For recovery of microfilariae from fresh biopsies, the biopsy is macerated and
allowed to incubate in saline for several hours at room temperature. Following incubation, the saline
is examined microscopically for the presence of microfilariae. Free-living nematodes that occasion-
ally invade the skin may also be seen in fresh or fixed and stained skin biopsies
PARASITE DETECTION IN URINARY AND OTHER SYSTEMS
173
PARASITE:
Dioctophyme renale (Fig. 2.1)
Common name: Giant kidney worm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida).
Geographic Distribution: North America and Europe.
Location in Host: Kidney and occasionally peritoneal cavity of dogs, mink, and other domestic
and wild animals.
Life Cycle: Adult worms in the kidney produce eggs that are passed in the urine. The first inter-
mediate host is an annelid worm; the second intermediate host is a fish. The final host becomes
OTHER SYSTEMS
 infected when it eats a fish containing infective parasite larvae.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs with a thick, rough shell are detected in the urine.
Size: 60-80 × 39-46μm
the renal pelvis and eventually destroy the kidney, leaving only the capsule. Typically, only one
kidney (usually the right) is affected. Most infections are asymptomatic, despite the loss of a kidney,
although hematuria and dysuria may occur. Dioctophyme renale is a rare finding in dogs in North
America.
28mm
Fig. 2.1. Dioctophyme eggs are larger than those of Pearsonema and have a thicker eggshell with a rougher surface.
174
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
URINARY SYSTEM PARASITES
PARASlTE: Pearsonema (=Capillaria) plica, P feliscafi (Figs. 2.2 and 2.3)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida). These parasites were previously included in the genus
Capillaria.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Adult worms in the bladder of dogs and foxes (P plica) and cats (P feliscati)
Life Cycle: Parasite eggs passed in the urine become infective in the environment. Although the
HER
life cycle is not known with certainty, the final host is probably infected by ingesting an earthworm
SY
intermediate host or a transport host, such as a bird.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Typical capillarid eggs are detected in urine sediment. Cystocentesis is
TE
preferred for collecting urine sarmples since fecal material containing similar eggs of other capillarid
species may contaminate voided urine samples.
Size: 51-65 × 24-32μm
Clinical Importance: Many infections are asymptomatic, although infected animals may develop
Cystitis.
OTHER SYSTEMS
20 Jum
Fig. 2.2. Pearsonema feliscati egg in a urine sedimentation procedure. Methylene blue stain is often added to these prepara-
tions, which will stain the eggs purple. Like other capilarids, P feliscati eggs are elongated and bipolar plugged.
20 Jum
Fig. 2.3. If the microscope is focused on the shell wall of the Pearsonema egg, a thick globular pattern of ridges can be
seen.
175
176
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Stephanurus dentafus (Fig. 2.4)
Common name: Kidney worm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Strongylida).
Geographic Distribution: Tropical and subtropical regions.
Location in Host: Adults are found in the wall of the ureters and the pelvis of the kidney as well
as in the peritoneal fat of swine.
Life Cycle: Parasite eggs leave the host via the urine. Like other strongylids, first-stage larvae of
OTF
S. dentatus hatch from the eggs and develop to the infective third stage. The pig definitive host is
HER
infected by ingestion of infective larvae or of an earthworm transport host or by skin penetration
by infective larvae. Once in the host, larvae migrate through the liver before moving to the perirenal
S
S
tissues, where development is completed.
TE
Laboratory Diagnosis: Diagnosis is made by detection of eggs in urine sedimentation tests or
from clinical signs. However, disease may be present before the infection is patent (prepatent period
is 46 months).
Size: 90-114 × 53-65 μm
Clinical Importance: The damage associated with larval migration through the liver is an impor-
tant component of disease caused by the parasite. Pigs may show reduced growth or weight loss
and general loss of condition. Stephanurus dentatus is unlikely to occur in moderm swine confine-
ment systems.
PARASlTE: Trichosomoides crassicauda (Figs. 2.5 and 1.197)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Enoplida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Adult female worms are found in the wall of the bladder of wild and laboratory
u an a psai ae sa m soo un n an u ssu an aa sg a a
Laboratory Diagnosis: Infection is often detected by identification of adults in the bladder or
during histologic examination of bladder sections, but diagnosis may also be made by finding eggs
in the urine. Trichosomoides eggs are brown with bipolar plugs.
Size: 60-70 × 30-35 μm
Clinical Importance: Infection is typically subclinical but is undesirable in laboratory rats.
OTHER SYSTEMS
18 jum
Fig. 2.4. Stephanurus dentatus adults produce typical strongylid eggs that can be seen in urine. However, disease may
develop before the infection becomes patent. Photo courtesy of Dr. T. Bonner Stewart, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
20Jum
Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
177
178
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM PARASITES
PARAS1TE: Tritrichomonas foetus (Fig. 2.6)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (fagellate).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide, but uncommon where artificial insemination is widely
practiced.
Location in Host: Preputial cavity of bulls, uterus and vagina of cows
Life Cycle: Organisms are transmitted during breeding. The trophozoite in the reproductive tract
is the only form of the organism.
HER
Laboratory Diagnosis: Organisms are detected in vaginal or uterine discharges or in preputial
S
scrapings. The prepuce is the site most frequently sampled. Organisms may be present in small
TE
numbers, and culture is recommended using Diamond's medium or the commercial InPouch system
available in North America. Tritrichomonas is easily recognized by its undulating membrane and
three anterior fagella. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test is also available.
Size: 10-25 × 3-15μm
Clinical Importance: The presence of T. foetus in a cattle herd produces chronic abortion and
infertility and can have a serious economic impact on production.
PARASITES OF OTHER SYSTEMS (EXCLVDING ARTHROPODS)
PARAS1TE: Onchocerca spp., Stephanoflaria spp. (Figs. 2.7 and 2.8)
Taxonomy: Nematodes (order Spirurida).
Geographic Distribution: Onchocerca cervicalis and O. gutterosa are found worldwide. Other
species have more limited distribution, primarily in Africa but also in the Middle East and Asia.
Stephanofilaria spp. are found worldwide.
Location in Host: Onchocerca cervicalis is found in the equine nuchal ligament. Other species are
bovine parasites. Onchocerca gutterosa parasitizes the nuchal and gastrosplenic ligament, while O.
gibsoni is found in subcutaneous and intermuscular nodules and O. armillata is found in the wall of
the thoracic aorta. Stephanofilaria spp. live in the subcutaneous tissue of the ventrum in cattle.
Life Cycle: Depending on the parasite species, Culicoides (midges), Simulium (black flies),
Haematobia (hom flies), and Musca species act as the intermediate host and transmit the parasite
during feeding.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Diagnosis is made by skin biopsy of affected areas and examination for
microfilariae following saline incubation or histopathologic examination. Examination of tissues
from lesions caused by Stephanofilaria will reveal both adults and microfilariae.
Size:
Onchocerca microfilariae
approximately 200 to >300 μm in
length, depending on species
Stephanofilariamicrofilariae
approximately 50 μm
Clinical Importance: Onchocerca spp. are not generally considered to be highly pathogenic para-
sites, although equine O. cervicalis infection can be associated with dermatitis in horses, and some
of the bovine species cause skin or connective tissue lesions that must be trimmed at slaughter. In
North America, localized ventral midline dermatitis caused by Stephanofilaria is relatively common
in adult cattle but has no clinical significance.
OTHER SYSTEMS
10 um
several of the organisms. In culture, living organisms move in a jerky motion, and the rippling undulating membrane can
be seen with the 40x objective. Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan,Canada.
Fig. 2.7. Microfilariae of Onchocerca gutterosa (arrow) in bovine skin. Diagnosis can be made more rapidly by incubating
skin biopsies in saline and examining the fuid several hours later for moving microflariae that have migrated out of the
skin. Photo courtesy of Dr. Fernando Paiva, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul, Campo Grande, MS, Brazil.
Fig. 2.8. Horn fies ( Haematobia irritans) feeding on a Stephanofilaria stilesilesion on the ventrum of a bovine host. The fies
 are the intermediate host of the parasite and ingest microfilariae in the lesion during feeding. Stephanofilaria stilesi is common,
but unimportant, in North America. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redrmond, WA.
179
180
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Dracunculus insignis (Fig. 2.9)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Spirurida).
Geographic Distribution: North America.
Location in Host: Adults occur in the subcutaneous tissue, usually on the limbs. Raccoons, other
wild animals, and occasionally dogs are infected.
Life Cycle: The female worm creates an ulcer on the skin of a limb. When the limb is placed in
water, the female extrudes a portion of the uterus, which ruptures, releasing first-stage larvae into
OTHER
tive host becomes infected by drinking water containing the infected intermediate host.
SV
Laboratory Diagnosis: The diagnosis is usually made by examination of the skin lesion and
S
TE
removal of the worrm.
Size: First-stage larva 608 μm
Clinical Importance: Dracunculus occurs infrequently in dogs but can cause a chronic ulcer that
may develop secondary bacterial infection
PARAS1TE: Pelodera strongyloides (Fig. 2.10)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Rhabditida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Skin.
Life Cycle: Pelodera strongyloides is a free-living nematode that may invade the skin of animals.
It is usually seen as a pathogen where animals are confined to areas with moist bedding high in
 organic material that will support growth and development of the nematodes.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Parasite infection can be diagnosed by finding first-stage (rhabditiform)
larvae in skin scrapings from affected areas.
Clinical Importance: Pelodera is an uncommon cause of dermatitis in a variety of animal species.
PARASlTE: Thelazia spp. (Fig. 2.11)
Common name: Eye worm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Spirurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Conjunctival sac and lacrimal duct of cattle, horses, dogs.
Life Cycle: Muscid fies act as intermediate hosts and ingest first-stage larvae released by adult
worms into the tears. Development to the third larval stage occurs in the fy, which deposits the
infective larvae on the host during feeding.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Laboratory diagnosis is unnecessary since the worms can be seen during
examination of the eyes of the host.
Size: Adult worms 1-2cm
Clinical Importance: Worms may cause tearing and conjunctivitis, but many chronic cases are
asymptomatic.
OTHERSYSTEMS
38 um
the uterus of a worm removed from a skin ulcer and confirm the diagnosis of Dracuncuius infection.
Fig. 2.10. All stages of the life cycle from egg to adult are present in this agar plate culture of Pelodera. Only larvae would
be present in scrapings of skin infected with this free-living nematode.
Fig. 2.11. Thelazia in the eye of a cow. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond,
WA.
181
182
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Besnoitia spp. (Figs. 2.12 and 2.13)
Common name: Elephant skin disease (cattle).
Taxonomy: Protozoa (coccidia).
Geographic Distribution: Besnoitia besnoiti (cattle, goats) is found worldwide but is of greatest
importance in Africa. Besnoitia bennetti (horses and donkeys) occurs primarily in Africa, southerm
Europe, and South America but is also found in North America.
Location in Host: Cysts are seen in the subcutaneous tissue and scleral conjunctiva of livestock.
Life Cycle: The definitive host of this coccidian parasite is the cat. Oocysts are shed in cat feces
HER
 and are ingested by the intermediate host (cattle, horses, etc.). Parasites multiply in the endothelial
ss apan jo anss snoanns a ui sis an un uy pn shs
SY
S7
Laboratory Diagnosis: Besnoitia spp. often form cysts ("pearls") in the scleral conjunctiva that
TE
can easily be seen with the naked eye. Diagnosis can also be made by examining stained sections
of skin biopsies for the presence of subcutaneous cysts.
Clinical Importance: Many cases are as ymptomatic. However, an acute febrile illness can develop,
followed by thickening and wrinkling of skin that makes the hide unsuitable for leather production.
Affected animals may recover slowly. Although Besnoitia occurs in North America, its extent is
unknown, and it rarely seems to cause clinical disease.
OTHER SYSTEMS
Fig. 2.12. Extensive skin thickening and wrinkling caused by Besnoitia besnoiti. This disease is most prevalent in Africa.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, lnc., Redmond, WA.
Hany M. Elsheikha and Dr. Charles Mackenzie, College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Ml.
183
CHAPTER 3
Detection of Parasites in
the Blood
Various pathogenic and nonpathogenic protozoa and nematodes may be detected in blood samples
from domestic animals. Most of these parasites are ingested by arthropod vectors during
feeding and are present in the bloodstream of their mammalian hosts as a normal part of their life
cycles.
BLOOD
IMMUNOLOGIC DETECTION OF BLOOD PARASITES
Although the focus of this book is the morphologic diagnosis of parasitism, it is important to
recognize that immunologic tests are now widely used in conjunction with or in place of micro-
scopic examination of blood smears for some blood-borne parasites, and the use of these tests
can be expected to increase in the future. Immunologic tests offer increased sensitivity compared
with morphologic techniques in many cases and are especially valuable in some chronic hemopro-
tozoan infections and in canine and feline heartworm infection. In both cases, many infections
are undetectable by routine microscopic tests. The commercial immunologic tests used most
widely are the indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) test and the enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). For additional discussion of the basis and use of immunodiagnostic and
molecular diagnostic procedures in veterinary parasitology, particularly in the United States, see
Chapter 4.
MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATION OF BLOOD FOR
PROTOZOAN PARASITES
Most hemoprotozoan parasites are intracellular in erythrocytes or white blood cells and may cause
 anemia. A routine thin blood smear is therefore useful both for assessing erythrocyte abnormalities
and for detecting the presence of parasites. Parasites are most likely to be detected in blood smears 
during acute infection. Once infections become chronic, immunologic diagnostic techniques are
usually more sensitive.
 For microscopic examination of blood smears for hemoprotozoa, Giemsa stain is most effective,
but Wright's stain can also be used in most cases. Commercial stain kits used in many veterinary
practices (an example is Dip Quick Stain, Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland, CO, www.jorvet.com)
  o             o 
following procedure can be followed when Giemsa stain is used.
185
186
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Blood droplet
B
Blood film
blood; wait until the drop fows laterally. (B) Draw the spreader slide away from the drop, maintaining an angle. The blood
will spread into a smooth, thin film.
To prepare a thin blood smear, place a drop of blood on one end of a microscope slide and
draw the blood into a thin film as shown in Figure 3.1.
Giemsa Stain
Air-dry the blood film, protecting it from fies and other insects if it is not to be stained
immediately.
 Fix in absolute methanol for 5 minutes and air-dry.
 Dilute stock Giemsa stain 1 : 20 with distilled water and flood the film (or place slide in staining
广
jar). Fresh stain should be prepared at least every 2 days.
Stain for 30 minutes.
5.
Wash stain away gently with tap water.
6.
Air-dry; parasite cytoplasm will stain blue, and nuclei will stain magenta.
The stained blood film can be scanned using the 40x objective of the microscope with use of the
oil immersion lens for greater detail when suspected parasites are found.
The dimensions of blood parasites are best determined by means of an ocular micrometer (see
Chapter 1). A micrometer is highly recommended for accurate measurement of parasites in blood
and fecal samples. If a micrometer is not available, the size of the parasite on a blood film may be
approximated by comparison with the dimensions of host erythrocytes (Table 3.1).
DETECTION OF PARASITES IN THE BLOOD
187
Table 3.1.
Average diameters of erythrocytes
Animal
Erythrocyte Diameter (μm)
Horse
5.5
Cattle
5.8
Sheep
4.5
Goat
3.2
Dog
7.0
Cat
5.8
Chicken
7.0 x 12.0
Source: Measurements frorm Weiss and Wardrop (20 10).
MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATION OF BLOOD
FOR NEMATODE PARASITES
Many species of parasitic worms enter the bloodstream of the host to reach certain organs, where
they develop to maturity. These parasites usually stay in the blood only minutes or hours; thus, they
BLOOD
however, whose larvae (microfilariae) are normally found in the peripheral blood. The microfilarial
stage of these parasite species remains in the circulation until ingestion by the bloodsucking inter-
mediate host. Microfilaria testing is most often performed for detection of canine heartworm infec-
tion, and the following discussion of techniques for microfilaria detection is directed specifically
to heartwormm testing. However, all species of microfilariae in the blood could be detected by the
same microscopic techniques.
Although the techniques for microscopic detection of heartworm microfilariae are presented
below, the ELISA adult-female antigen test for diagnosis of canine heartworm infection is the
s a sisn u 'sisan or as  s  sn s ana
more sensitive than microfilaria tests because many heartworm infections are amicrofilaremic. The
absence of microfilariae may be due to low or single-sex worm burdens or immune clearance of
microfilariae. Moreover, the macrolide heartworm preventatives are microfilaricidal and sterilize
existing heartworm infections after several months of administration.
The American Heartworm Society and the European Scientific Counsel Companion Animal
Parasites (ESCCAP) currently recommend annual testing using an antigen test as the primary
 method of heartworm diagnosis for all dogs in endemic areas. Any dog testing positive on an antigen
test should also be tested for microfilariae to determine if microfilaricidal treatment is necessary.
If a microflaria test is used alone for heartworm testing, one of the concentration techniques
(Knott's or filter test) must be used
Antigen tests currently available in the United States are available in ELISA and immunochro-
 matographic formats. Although differences in sensitivity among these tests have been found experi-
mentally, they are not statistically significant. False-negative results are uncommon and are usually
the result of lab error, although a small number (<1%) of antigen-negative dogs will be microfila-
remic. Available tests are also highly specific.
Diagnosis of heartworm infection in cats is more difficult than in dogs. Several of the antigen
tests can be used in cats, but they can produce false-negative results because of the low worm
burdens usually found in cats. Similarly, cats are rarely microflaremic and may develop disease
before the adult stage, detectable by antigen testing, is present. To improve the sensitivity of heart-
worm detection in cats, heartworm antibody tests have been developed. These tests can detect
188
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
infection. Care should be taken in interpreting a feline antibody test, and the results of that test
alone should not be used to establish a diagnosis of heartworm infection. In a cat showing clinical
part of the diagnostic workup.
For current recommendations of the American Heartworm Society and the European Scientific
Counsel Companion Animal Parasites relating to diagnosis and treatment of heartworm infection
in dogs and cats, consult the websites of the two organizations: www.heartwormsociety.org and
www.esccap.org.
Tests for Canine Heartworm Microfilariae in Blood Samples
The following techniques can be used to detect microfilariae in blood samples. The canine heart-
worm, Dirofilaria immitis, is found throughout the world. In North America, dogs may
also be infected with Acanthocheilonema （=Dipetalonema) reconditum or, rarely, with
Dirofilaria striata, a parasite of wild felids in North and South America. In parts of Europe, Asia,
and Africa, Dirofilaria repens, Acanthocheilonema dracunculoides, and Cercopithifilaria
(=Acanthocheilonema) grassi parasitize dogs. When a microfilaria test is used for heartworm diag-
O0D
nosis, the microfilariae of other species must be differentiated from those of D. immitis.
Size is an important characteristic in identification of microfilariae (Table 3.2) and should be 
criteria can also be used to discriminate between species, but they are less dependable. Determination
of the length, width, and shape of the head of a microfilaria should allow identification of most
canine microfilariae. The standard measurements of these microfilariae were determined with
formalin-fixed specimens; use of other fixatives or lysing solutions may alter the size of the organ-
isms. Similarly, storage of whole blood for more than 3 days may cause some D. immitis microfi-
lariae to shrink in length to the size of A. reconditum.
Direct Smear
The direct smear is the simplest and most rapid of the procedures to be described for microfilariae.
 m nn  ym    aq  q a ss a   si 
test to determine if microfilariae are present or to evaluate the patterm of movement of microfilariae
when attermpting to differentiate between Dirofilaria and Acanthocheilonema:
Place one drop of venous blood onto a clean microscope slide and coverslip.
Examine the coverslip area under low magnification (lox) of the microscope. Look for undu-
lating movements of larvae, which may retain motility for as long as 24 hours.
Hematocrit Test
Draw fresh whole blood into a microhematocrit tube.
Spin for 3 minutes in a hematocrit tube centrifuge.
Examine the plasma portion of the separated blood, while still in the tube, under low magni-
fication (lox). Moving microfilariae will be present in the plasma above the buffy coat.
Table 3.2.
Characteristics of Dirofilaria spp. and other microfilariae found in canine blood based on formalin-fixed specimens
Diroftaria
Acanthocheilonema
Cercopithiflaria
Acanthocheilonema
Diroflaria immitis
repens
Dirofilaria striata
reconditum
grassi
dracuncutoides
Length (μm)
295-325
268-360
360-385
250-288
570
189-230
Width (μm)
5-7.5
5-8
5-6
4.5-5.5
12-25
5-6
Head
Tapered
Blunt
Tapered
Blunt
Blunt
Tail
Straight
Variable-
Curved
Variable—hooked
Slightly bent
 Sharp and extended
straight or
(30%) or curved
hooked
Body shape
Straight
S shaped
Curved
Motion (live)
Stationary
Stationary
Progressive
Relative number
Few to many
Few
Few
Location of adult
Pulmonary arteries,
Subcutaneous
Subcutaneousand
Subcutaneous
Subcutaneous
Peritoneum
right heart
intramuscular
intramuscular
tissues
tissue
tissues
tissue
Geographic
Worldwide
 Europe, Middle 
North and South
Africa, Europe,
Southern
Africa, Europe,
location
East, Africa,
America
North America
Europe,
India
Asia, North
Africa
America (?)
Y
BLOOD
190
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
The direct smear and microhematocrit techniques may not detect infections with only small numbers
of microfilariae. Therefore, if a microfilariae test is used as a screening procedure for heartworm
infection, one of the following concentration techniques 1s preferred.
Modiffied Knoff's Test
The modified Knott's technique is the preferred concentration method for the detection and iden-
tification of microfilariae in blood:
 Draw a sample of blood into a syringe containing anticoagulant such as EDTA or heparin.
Mix l mL of the blood with 9mL of a 2% formalin solution. If not well mixed, the red cells
will not be thoroughly lysed by the hypotonic formalin solution, making the test much more
difficult to read. Microfilariae, but not red cells, will be fixed by 2% formalin. If 10% formalin
is used (the concentration used for fixation of tissues), red cells will also be fixed and not lysed.
Centrifuge the mixture at l200rpm for 5 minutes (or as for fecal fotation procedures) and
discard the supermatant.
+.
Add one drop of 0.1 % methylene blue to the sediment, mix well, and transfer the stained sedi-
Examine using the 10x microscope objective. Microfilariae will be fixed in an extended posi-
LOOD
tion with nuclei stained blue.
An altermative procedure using the same amount of blood is the filter test, which traps microfilariae
on a filter that is examined with the microscope. This technique can be performed more quickly
than the modified Knott's test, but microfilariae are not easily measured for identification.
Fiffer Test
Kits containing filter apparatus, filters, lysing solution, and stain are commercially available (Difil-
Test, EVSCO Pharmaceuticals, Buena, NJ). Components of the test can also be purchased. Use
of 2% formalin as the lysing solution is recommended, since other lysing solutions may cause
significant changes in the size of microfilariae?
Mix1 mLof blood with9mL lysing solution 1n a syringe
 Attach the syringe to the filter holder containing a filter with a 5-μm pore size and empty the
syringe.
 Refill syringe with water and pass it through the filter to wash away remaining small debris.
 Refill syringe with air, reattach to the filter apparatus, and express.
5.
 Unscrew the filter assembly, remove the filter with forceps, and place the filter on a microscope
slide.
Add one drop of 0.1% methylene blue, coverslip, and examine at 10x
DETECTION OFPARASITESINTHEBLOOD
191
BLOOD PARASITES OF DOGS AND CATS
PARASlTE: Hepatozoon spp. (Fig. 3.2)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (hemogregarine).
Geographic Distribution: Hepatozoon canis occurs worldwide, while the distribution of
Hepatozoon americanum appears to be limited to the southeastermn United States.
Location in Host: Gamonts are found in polymorphonuclear leukocytes (H. americanum, H.
canis) and meronts in skeletal muscle (H. americanum) or various organs (H. canis) of dogs, cats,
andvariouswild carmivores.
Life Cycle: The tick intermediate host acquires infection during feeding. Dogs become infected
by ingesting infected ticks.Hepatozoon americanum is transmitted by Amblyomma maculatum (the
Gulf Coast tick), and the vector of H. canis is Rhipicephalus sanguineus (the brown
dog tick).
Laboratory Diagnosis: Sausage-shaped Hepatozoon gamonts can be detected in polymorphonu-
clear leukocytes in Wright- or Geimsa-stained blood smears. Although this method of diagnosis
can be used for H. canis, H. americanum is rarely found on blood smears, and a molecular diag-
nostic test may be used. Morphologic diagnosis of this species generally occurs by the detection of
00D
meronts in skeletal muscle biopsies or on histopathology after necropsy.
78
Size: Gamonts 8-12 × 3-6μm
Clinical Importance: Hepatozoon americanum can cause severe disease, with fever, depression,
joint pain, myositis, periosteal bone proliferation, and chronic wasting while H. canis infections are
usually subclinical.
10um
that stains only faintly in this specimen (arrow). Hepatozoon americanum is rarely present in blood films, and muscle
biopsies are more commonly used for diagnosis.
192
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Babesia canis and B. gibsoni (Figs. 3.3 and 3.4)
Geographic Distribution: Babesia mostly occurs in the tropical and subtropical regions of the
world. Babesia canis is worldwide in distribution; in the United States, it occurs in the southeast.
Babesia gibsoni infects canids in North Africa and the Far East and has recently been reported in
various states in the United States.
Location in Host: Canine red blood cells. Babesia spp. have been described in cats but are not
widely distributed and do not appear to be present in North America.
Life Cycle: In North America, dogs acquire B. canis and B. gibsoni infections from the brown dog
tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus. Other tick vectors include Dermacentor reticulatus in Europe and
Haemaphysalis leachi in Africa.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Piroplasms can be detected in erythrocytes on Wright- or Giemsa-stained
blood smears. Immunologic and molecular diagnostic tests can also be used and are a more sensi-
tive diagnostic technique in chronic infections. Babesia canis is pear shaped and usually occurs in
pairs; B. gibsoni is round to oval shaped.
Size:
B.canis
45μm
OL
B.gibsoni
1-3μm
Clinical Importance: Severity of clinical disease may range from mild to life threatening. Anemia,
hemolytic crisis, and multi-organ failure can occur. North American and European strains appear
         s  s
10 μum 
eight piroplasms may be found in a single red blood cell.
BLOOD
10 μm
Jess distinct with B. gibsoni. Photo courtesy of Dr. Kurt Zimmerman, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary
Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg VA.
193
194
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Cytauxzoon felis (Figs. 3.5 and 3.6)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (piroplasm).
Geographic Distribution: Southem United States.
Location in Host: Merozoites occur in red blood cells, and schizonts occur in histiocytes of
bobcats and cats.
Life Cycle: Infection transmission occurs through the blood-feeding activities of the tick vectors.
Dermacentor variabilis has been used to transmit infections experimentally.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Merozoites are detected in red blood cells (l-4 merozoites/erythrocyte)
in Wright- or Giermsa-stained blood smears. Schizonts are detected in mononuclear cells in bone-
marrow aspirates. A molecular diagnostic test is also available.
Size: 1-2μm
 n  s so i   si s o a 
cats die within a few days of the onset of clinical signs. Anemia, depression, high fever, icterus,
hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly occur.
PARAS1TE: Leishmania spp. (Figs. 3.7 and 3.8)
OOD
Common name: Visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (hemofagellate). Species include L. donovani, L. tropica, L. infantum, L.
chagasi, L. braziliensis, L. mexicana.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Amastigotes occur in macrophages and cells of the reticuloendothelial system
of various organs (skin, spleen, liver, bone marrow, lymph nodes).
Life Cycle: Blood-feeding sand flies (Lutzomyia, Phlebotomus) serve as intermediate hosts.
stained smears made from needle aspirate biopsies of lymph node, bone marrow, or spleen or in
impression smears of skin lesions. Amastigotes are rarely seen in stained peripheral
blood smears. Serologic and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques are also used in
diagnosis.
Size: 2.5-5.0 x 1.5-2.0 μm
Clinical Importance: Infection in dogs is often subclinical. However, disease may develop involv-
ing various visceral organs and skin, resulting in cutaneous lesions, lethargy, progressive weight
loss, and anorexia that may end in death. Infection with L. infantum has recently been found to be
widespread in foxhounds in the United States. Cats are rarely infected. Leishmaniasis is a serious,
potentially fatal disease in humans. Dogs serve as an important reservoir host of the parasite in
some parts of the world.
10 μm
Fig. 3.5. Small Cytauxzoon fetis merozoites in infected erythrocytes (arrow) have a dark nucleus and a light blue cytoplasm
on Wright- or Giemsa-stained blood smears. Photo courtesy of Dr. Karen F. Snowden, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
BLOOD
m
Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg VA.
8um
Fig. 3.7. Leishmania spp. amastigotes in a lymph node impression smear. Photo courtesy of Dr. Karen F. Snowden, College
of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
195
196
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Trypanosoma cruzi (Fig. 3.9)
Common name: Chagas disease.
T. congolense, and T. evansi, trypanosome species more commonly associated with large anirmals
(see below).
Geographic Distribution: North and South America.
Location in Host: Trypomastigotes occur in the blood; amastigotes and epimastigotes occur in
wildlife mammalian species.
pooq sup saoay aun u saonsodan ssed (snq ussesse io suss) spo ah a
feeding on the vertebrate definitive host. Parasites enter the definitive host through mucous mem-
branes or through the triatomid bite-wound site.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Trypomastigotes are detected on Wright- or Giemsa-stained blood smears
early in infection. Diagnosis in chronic or light infections may require serologic tests, culture, or
xenodiagnosis.
Size: 16-20μm
.00D
Clinical Importance: Infection with T. cruzi is highly pathogenic, causing acute and chronic
cardiac disease. Lymphadenopathy, pale mucous membranes, lethargy, ascites, hepatomegaly, sple-
nomegaly, anorexia, diarrhea, and neurologic signs may be seen. Infection in dogs and cats is rela-
tively uncommon in North America.
PARAS1TE: Diroflaria immifis (Figs. 3.10-3.12)
Common name: Heartworm.
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Spirurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide. Diroflaria striata is a rare parasite of dogs in the south-
eastern United States.
Location in Host: Adult worms are found in the pulmonary arteries and right ventricle of dogs,
wild canids, and ferrets. Cats are much less likely than dogs to become infected, and feline infec-
tions are rarely patent.
Life Cycle: Mosquitoes serve as intermediate hosts, acquiring microfilariae and transmitting infec-
tive third-stage larvae while blood feeding. The prepatent period in dogs is about 6 months
Laboratory Diagnosis: The most sensitive technique for heartworm diagnosis is detection of
antigen using one of the various commercial antigen kits for use with serum, plasma, and/or whole
blood. Less sensitive is testing for microfilariae in blood samples using the Knott's test or a filter
test, which is equal in ability to detect microfilariae. However, the Knott's test should be used for
specific identification of microfilariae (on the basis of size and morphology).
Size: 295-325 x 5-7.5μum
Clinical Importance: Heartworm infection is highly pathogenic and is an important medical
health issue in both canine and feline medicine. Chronic heartworm infection in dogs can lead to
fatal right-sided congestive heart failure. A liver failure (or Caval) syndrome occurs in some dogs
with heavy worm burdens (>lo0) that, without treatment, leads to a rapidly fatal hemolytic crisis.
Heartworm infection in cats can be subclinical or result in serious chronic disease (respiratory or
vomiting/gastrointestinal) or cats may die acutely
8um
seen adjacent to the nucleus in this amastigote. Photo courtesy of Dr. Bernard Feldman, Virginia-Maryland Regional College
of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.
BLOOD
5μm
Fig. 3.9. Stained trypomastigote of Trypanosooma cruziin a blood smear from an infected dog. The organisms often assume
a C shape in blood smears. The dark-staining kinetoplast can easily be seen in this specimen. Photo courtesy of Dr. Karen
F. Snowden, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
54μm
 courtesy of Dr. Thomas Nolan, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
197
198
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Acanthocheilonema (=Dipetalonema) recondifum (Figs. 3.13 and 3.14)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Spirurida). The genus Dipetalonema has been revised in recent years
and the correct name for D. reconditum is now considered to be Acanthocheilonema reconditum.
Geographic Distribution: United States, South America, Africa, southem Europe, Asia
Location in Host: Subcutaneous tissues of dogs and various wild canids.
Life Cycle: Dogs acquire infections from feas (Ctenocephalides, Pulex) and lice (Linognathus,
Heterodoxus). Arthropods ingest microfilariae in the blood (Ctenocephalides, Pulex, Linognathus)
or skin (Heterodoxus) of infected canids.
worm antigen tests do not give a positive reaction in the presence of Acanthocheilonema infection.
Microfilariae of A. reconditum have a blunt anterior end, and the tails of some individuals may form
a small hook or U shape, usually referred to as a "buttonhook.
Size: 250-288 × 4.5-5.5 μm
Clinical Importance: Infections with A. reconditum are subclinical. The accurate diagnosis of
A. reconditum infections in dogs is important in order to prevent misdiagnoses of heartworm
infection.
B
Fig. 3.11. Microfilariae of Dirofilaria immitis have gently tapered heads (A) and relatively straight tails (B).
32um
BLOOD
Fig. 3.12. Microflariae are at an earlier developmental stage than first-stage larvae and do not contain a digestive tract.
of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, lthaca, NY.
42μm
Fig. 3.13. Microfilariae of Acanthocheilonema (Dipetalonema) reconditum in a modifed Knott's test. The anterior end
(arrow) is blunter than that of D. immitis. Photo courtesy of Dr. Thomas Nolan, School of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Pennsyl vania, Philadelphia, PA.
199
200
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Dirofilaria repens (Figs.3.14-3.16)
Taxonomy: Nematode (Spirurida)
Geographic Distribution: Various countries in Europe, Asia, and Africa. Introduction into North
America is considered a possibility.
Location in Host: Subcutaneous tissues of canids, felids, and various other carmivores.
Life Cycle: Transmission occurs by introduction of infective third-stage larvae through the bite of
culicid mosquito intermediate hosts. After a prepatent period of 6-8 months, microfilariae are
produced and circulate in the blood of infected hosts.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Microfilariae are detected in circulating blood by the modified Knott's test
or by the use of filter tests. PCR tests have also been used. When detected by the modified Knott's
the buttonhook preservation artifact as occurs with A. reconditum. The larger D. repens microfilariae
are easily differentiated from D. immitis and A. reconditum based on size (see Table 3.2).
Size: 268-360 x 5-8 μm
Clinical Importance: Infection in dogs and cats in usually subclinical. Infection can result in
dermatitis with focal alopecia, pruritis, erythema, and crusting. Human infection can also occur.
OL
Fig. 3.14. The tails of some individual microfilariae
ofAcanthocheilonmea reconditum and Dirofilaria
repens may form a buttonhook shape when fixed. See
Table 3.2 for a comparison of morphologic charac-
teristics of microfilariae found in dogs.
BLOOD
Fig. 3.15. Dirofilaria repens microflariae. This
flarid species is expanding its range in Europe,
and microflariae can be difficult to distinguish
42μm
from those of Dirofilaria immitis.
Fig. 3.16. The head of Diroflaria repens
is blunt in comparison to the tapering head of
D. immitis (Fig. 3.11).
201
202
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
BLOOD PARASITES OF LIVESTOCK AND HORSES
PARASlTE: Babesia spp. of ruminants (Fig. 3.17)
Common name: Redwater, Texas fever, tick fever.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (piroplasm).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide, particularly in tropical regions.
Location in Host: Red blood cells of cattle (at least six species, including B. bovis, B. divergens,
Life Cycle: A variety of tick genera, including Ixodes and Rhipicephalus, act as intermediate hosts
 of Babesia spp. Ticks acquire the parasite during feeding.
Laboratory Diagnosis: In acute infection, blood smears stained with Giemsa or Wright's stain can
be exarmined for parasites in red blood cells. In chronic infection, parasites are difficult to find in
peripheral blood, and therefore, antibody tests, including IFA and ELISA tests, are used for diag-
nosis. Babesia typically appears as pairs of organisms in red blood cells, although erythrocytes may
also contain single organisms.
Size: 1.5-4.5 × 0.4-2.0μm, depending 0n species (B. bigemina: 4.5 × 2.5 μm; B. bovis:
2.4 × 1.5 μm)
OD
Clinical Importance: In susceptible animals, infection can lead to the development of anemia,
hemoglobinuria, and fever, with death often occurring during the acute phase of infection. Unlike
many parasitic diseases, young animals are less likely to develop disease than adults. Bovine babe-
siosis has been eradicated from the United States.
PARAS1TE: Babesia caballi, Babesia (=Theileria) equi (Figs. 3.18 and 3.19)
Geographic Distribution: Equine babesiosis is endemic in Central and South America, Africa,
southern Europe, the Middle East, and parts of Asia.
Location in Host: Equine erythrocytes. Tick intermediate hosts include species of Rhipicephalus,
Hyalomma, and Dermacentor.
Life Cycle: Similar to ruminant Babesia spp.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Blood smears are examined in acute infection. Chronic carriers are unlikely
to show parasites in the peripheral blood. ELISA and IFA tests are used for detecting antibody to
parasites in chronic infection.
Size:
B. equi
2μm
B.caballi
2.5-4μm
Clinical Importance: Equine babesiosis can cause anemia, hemoglobinuria, and edema. Babesia
caballi may cause incoordination and paralysis.
Fig. 3.17. Babesia bigemina can be seen in this
bovine blood smear. The teardrop-shaped organ-
isms are present in pairs in several erythrocytes.
Babesia trautmanni, a cause of porcine babesio-
sis in parts of Europe and Africa, has a similar
morphology. Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin
Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA,
8 μm 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
BLOOD
Fig. 3.18. Composite photo showing Babesia equi in
Fig. 3.19. Composite photo of Babesia caballi. The
equine red blood cells. The definitive diagnostic tetrad
definitive diagnostic form is the joined pair form, in
form is seen in the top right. Also shown in the photo
contrast to the tetrad form of Babesia equi (Fig. 3.18).
are the small rings (arrow) that are most commonly seen
Also shown are other forms of the organism. The differ-
in low parasitemia (carrier state). Photo courtesy of Dr.
ent Jarge forms of the two species demonstrate the dif-
Patricia Holman, College of Veterinary Medicine and
ficulty of distinguishing B. cabati from B. equi in the
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College
absence of paired piriforms in the former and tetrads in
Station,TX.
thelatter.Photo courtesy of Dr.Patricia Holman, College
of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX.
203
204
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Theileria spp. (Figs. 3.20 and 3.21)
Common name: East Coast fever, corridor disease, African Coast fever.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (piroplasm).
Geographic Distribution: Species of greatest importance are T. parva in East Central and South
Africa and T. annulata in North Africa and southern Europe.
Location in Host: Bovine erythrocytes and lymph nodes.
Life Cycle: Rhipicephalus (T. parva) and Hyalomma (T. annulata) ticks are infected when they
ingest host red blood cells. Following development in the tick, sporozoites are passed to cattle
during feeding and enter lymphocytes, where schizogony occurs, releasing merozoites that infect
red blood cells.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Schizonts can be seen in smears of lymph node biopsies and, in the case
of T. annulata, infection may be diagnosed by finding infected red blood cells in a blood smear.
Theileria parva is unlikely to be present in blood smears except in advanced cases. IFA and ELISA
tests are available, but because of the acute nature of clinical disease, these tests are of greater use
in assessing host response in recovered animals.
Size:
Piroplasms in red blood cells
1.5-2.0 x 0.5-1.0 μm
.00D
Schizonts in lymphocytes
approximately 8 μm
Clinical Importance: Susceptible animals develop fever, lymphadenopathy, depression, and nasal
discharge; there is high mortality in nonimmune animals. Chronic disease is associated with a
variety of signs, including diarrhea and reduced production.
PARAS1TE: Trypanosoma spp. (Figs. 3.22-3.27)
Common name: Nagana, sleeping sickness, surra, dourine.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (fagellate).
Geographic Distribution: Clinically important livestock species, including T. congolense, T.
T. vivax are also found in South America and parts of Asia. Trypanosoma theileri (cattle only) and
 in tropical and subtropical regions.
Location in Host: Bloodstream of ruminants, horses, swine, and other domestic animals.
Trypanosma brucei can also be found in other tissues, including the heart and central nervous
system and T. equiperdum is found in the urethra of stallions and vagina of mares.
Life Cycle: Trypanosomes are transmitted to the host by biting fies. The intermediate host of T.
congolense, T. vivax, T. brucei, and T. simiae is the tsetse fy (Glossina) in Africa. In other areas,
tabanid and other biting fies transmit T. vivax and 7. evansi. Tabanid fies are also the intermediate
host of T. theileri in cattle, while the sheep ked (Melophagus ovinus) is the intermediate host of T.
melophagium. The exception to fly transmission is T equiperdum, which is transmitted
venereally.
Laboratory Diagnosis: In acute infection, most trypanosome species can usually be detected
in wet mounts of blood. Species of trypanosomes can be differentiated based on size, presence
or absence of a free fagellum, location and size of the kinetoplast, and characteristics
10um
Fig. 3.20. Theileria parva multinucleated schizont in a lymphocyte. The species of Theiteria are diffcult to differentiate
morphologically. Photo courtesy of Dr. Andrew Peregrine, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario,Canada.
BLOOD
10 μm
Fig. 3.21. Theiteria sp. erythrocytic forms in a blood smear (arrow). Photo courtesy of Dr. Karen F. Snowden, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
10 μm
Fig. 3.22. Trypanosoma brucei and T. congotense are found in domestic mammals in Africa. Trypanosoma brucei has a
prominent undulating membrane (U) and a kinetoplast that is located subterminally (K). Photo courtesy of Dr. Andrew
Peregrine, Ontario Veterinary Collge, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
205
206
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Trypanosoma (continued)
of the undulating membrane. An ELISA antigen test and DNA probes have been developed for
a complement fixation test.
Size:
T. vivax
20-26μm
T. brucei
12-35 μm
T.congolense
9-18μm
T.evansi
15-35μm
T. theileri
60-70 μm, may be up to 120 μm
T.melophagium
50-60μm
T.simiae
13-18μm
Clinical Importance: The principal clinical signs of trypanosomiasis are anemia accompanied by
fever, edema, and loss of condition. Mortality may be high, especially if other disease agents are
also present. Trypanosoma equiperdum produces the disease known as dourine in horses, which is
marked by genital and ventral edema, abortion, nervous system disease, and emaciation.
Fig. 3.23. Trypanosoma congolense has a sub-
terminal kinetoplast that is on the margin of the
trypanosome ( K). Its un dulating membrane is not
distinctive.Photo courtesyof Dr. Andrew
10μm
Peregrine, Ontario Veterinary College, University
of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
Fig. 3.24. Trypanosoma vivax is found in Africa
and other parts of the world. lts kinetoplast is at
the end of the organism (arrow), and its undulat-
ing membrane is not distinctive. Photo courtesy
of Dr. Andrew Peregrine, Ontario Veterinary
3μm
College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.
10μm
from the pathogenic trypanosome species by their large size (50 μm or more). This blood smear from a calf demonstrates
the wide size variation that can occur with T. theileri.
BLOOD
10μm
Fig. 3.26. Trypanosoma evansi is an important pathogen of horses and camels in parts of Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
It is difficult to distinguish from T. brucei microscopically. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource,
Inc., Redmond, WA.
10μm
Fig. 3.27. Trypanosoma simiae is a parasite of African warthogs that is transmitted by the tsetse fy to domestic pigs and
Veterinary College,University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
207
208
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Trypanosoma melophagium and T. theileri are widespread nonpathogenic species that may occa-
sionally be seen in blood smears.
PARASITE: Setaria spp. (Fig. 3.28)
Taxonomy: Nematode (order Spirurida).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Adult worms are found primarily in the peritoneal cavity of ruminants and
equids.
Life Cycle: Microflariae in the blood are ingested by mosquitoes. The infective third larval stage
develops in the mosquito; transmission to the definitive host occurs during feeding.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Detection of sheathed microfilariae in blood smears.
Size: Approximately 200-300μm in length
Clinical Importance: Setaria has no clinical importance, with the exception of rare cases of
abnormal migration of parasites in the nervous system.
BLOOD PARASITES OF BIRDS
OL
PARAS1TE: Leucocytozoon spp. (Figs. 3.29 and 3.30)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (hemosporozoa).
Geographic Distribution: Important species include L. simondi, which is found worldwide in
domestic and wild ducks and geese; L. smithi in North American and European domestic and wild
turkeys; and L. caulleryi in chickens in Asia.
Location in Host: Gamonts (microgamonts and macrogamonts) occur in leukocytes and
erythrocytes.
Life Cycle: Black fies (Simulium spp. and other simulids) transmit infections to birds during blood
feeding.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Gamonts are detected in white and red blood cells on Wright- or Giemsa-
stained blood smears. Meronts are detected in stained tissue sections.
Size: Gamonts 14-22μm
  s         
younger birds. Clinical signs vary somewhat with species but can include lethargy, emaciation, and
acute or chronic fatalities.
25 μm
Fig. 3.28. Microflariae of Setaria spp. may occasionally be seen in ruminant or equine blood samples but have no clinical
significance. A clear sheath can often be seen projecting beyond the end of the larva, although it is not evident in this speci-
men. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
BLOOD
10um
Fig. 3.29. Host leukocytes and erythrocytes containing the sausage-shaped Leucocytozoon gamonts appear elongated, with
the remnants of the nucleus pushed to one side and the cytoplasm extending beyond the parasite and forming "horns." Photo
courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
10μm
Fig. 3.30. Birds may be infected with more than one species of protozoa. Both Leucocytozoon (L) and Plasmodium (P)
are present in this hawk. Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA.
209
210
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Haemoproteus spp. (Fig. 3.31)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (hemosporozoa).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide (except H. meleagridis, which occurs only in North
America).
Location in Host: Gamonts (microgamonts and macrogamonts) occur in erythrocytes of pigeons
and doves (H. columbae, H. sacharovi), wild and domestic turkeys (H. meleagridis), and wild and
domestic ducks and geese (H. nettionis).
Life Cycle: Birds acquire infections from blood-feeding hippoboscid flies, midges (Culicoides),
and deer flies (Chrysops spp.), which act as intermediate hosts.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Gamonts are detected in red blood cells on Wright- or Giemsa-stained
Aau 'sanuna quaid ueuo pue azis un Aa Ae snaiodouanh jo suo aui 'seas poo
appear morphologically identical to those of Plasmodium spp.
Size: Approximately 7μm
Clinical Importance: Infections are usually subclinical.
PARAS1TE: Plasmodium spp. (Figs. 3.30 and 3.32)
OL
Common name: Malaria.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (hemosporozoa).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location in Host: Erythrocytes and various other tissues in a wide variety of birds.
Life Cycle: Mosquitoes act as the intermediate host for Plasmodium. The parasite is transmitted
during insect feeding.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Gamonts, merozoites, and meronts are detected in red blood cells on
Wright- or Giemsa-stained blood smears. Gamonts of Plasmodium appear morphologically identi-
cal to those of Haemoproteus spp.
Size: Gamonts 7-8 μm
Clinical Importance: Most species are nonpathogenic. Exceptions are P cathemerium and P
matutinum in canaries; P gallinaceum and P juxtanucleare in chickens; P hermani in turkeys; and
P relictum in pigeons. Birds infected with these species may become anemic, with high fatality
rates possible.
10μum
Fig. 3.31. Gamonts of Haemoproteus in a Swainson's hawk. The gamonts are often crescent shaped and wrapped around
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University,Manhattan,KS.
BLOOD
10μm
-ia poai un (ss pe s ais uais) aised a go ss ad yo aeee al ee 
cytes differentiates Plasmodium infection from Haemoproteus (in which only gamonts are found). In this sample from a
cockatoo, several stages of the parasite are present (arrows). Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
211
CHAPTER 4
Immunodiagnostic and
Molecular Diagnostic Tests
in Veterinary Parasitology
Karen F. Snowden
IMMUNODIAGNOSTIC METHODS
 Immunodiagnostic methods for a range of parasitologic infections are increasingly available at fee-
for-service diagnostic laboratories and as point-of-use tests that can be conducted in a clinical
setting.
There are two basic approaches in designing an immunologic test. Antigen detection tests
identify specific parasite-associated compounds in blood, serum, or fecal suspensions that indicate
the presence of the organism in the host. Altermatively, antibody detection tests show the host
immune response to a parasite through the production of specific antibodies. To have a positive test
OTHER TESTS
result, it is assumed that the host animal is immunologically competent to react to the pathogen and
that a sufficient time of exposure has occurred for the animal to produce detectable antibodies.
There are a variety of test formats for immunodiagnostic tests. The enzyme-linked immunosor-
bent assay (ELISA) is designed with a series of wells in a plate or tray with an end result indicated
colorimetrically (Fig. 4.1). The lateral-flow immunochromatographic assay uses similar principles
  s           
 along a membrane with the end result indicated as a colored dot or line on the membrane (Fig. 4.2).
an   'sss  o  o  s paisa aq  s ra ano yo
formats have been developed for use with blood, serum, or feces. Most ELISA tests are designed for
processing sample batches in a diagnostic lab setting. However, selected ELISA tests as well as the
setting on one or several samples in a relatively rapid time frame.
The third commonly used format is the indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) test, which is an
antibody detection test designed for use with serum or plasma (IFA is compared with ELISA anti-
body test in Fig. 4.3). These tests are routinely performed in the diagnostic lab setting because a
compound microscope equipped with appropriate barrier filters and a UV light source is needed to
evaluate the test. Other less common immunodiagnostic test formats include direct or indirect
hemagglutination (HA or IHA), complement-fixation (CF) tests, and Westerm blot tests.
In the United States, two of the most widely used immunodiagnostic tests in companion animal
n n n pn d s s m sn   a a a
worms of Dirofilaria immitis in blood, serum or plasma, and the fecal antigen test for Giardia
intestinalis (Table 4.1)
213
214
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
enzyme
D
B
A
Fig. 4.1. Schematic of ELISA antigen detection procedures: A, test surface: polystyrene well; B, parasite-specifc capture
antibody (may be monoclonal or polyclonal); C, parasite antigen in serum of the animal patient; D, detecting reagent
parasite-specific antibody labeled with an enzyme; E, visualizing step: if enzyme is present, it acts on soluble substrate to
produce color, which can be evaluated visually or measured spectrophotometrically.
sample well
test line/spot
positive control line/spot
sample pad
absorbingpad
antibody conjugated
to particles
 membrane matrix
reagentflow direction
 negative test result
HER
colored positive control
no colored line/spot
positive control
colored particle
pathogen-specific
positive test result
antibody conjugated
colored positive control
to colored particle
colored line/spot
specific pathogen
antigen in sample
Fig. 4.2. Schematic of antigen detection using an immunochromatographic lateral fow test.
A much wider variety of antibody detection tests are available in fee-for-service veterinary
diagnostic laboratories (Table 4.1). The test result is typically expressed as a "titer," and the IgG
 antibody isotype is usually the immunoglobulin that is detected in the test. The titer value is the
reciprocal of the highest dilution of serum/plasma where the test remains positive. Different test
formats (ELISA vs. IFA most commonly) have different thresholds of antibody detection. Therefore,
the positive/negative cutoff value for each standardized assay should be provided by the laboratory
performing the test in order to adequately interpret the meaning of the antibody titer as positive/
negative or high/low. For example, the cutoff value for an IFA test might be a l : 10 dilution, while
a similar test in an ELISA format might have a l : 1oo dilution cutoff value as positive.
E
FITC
enzyme
D
D
C
C
B
B
A
A
Fig. 4.3. Comparison of common antibody detection procedures: indirect fuorescent antibody (1FA, left) test and enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA, right). A, test surface: glass slide (1FA) or polystyrene well (ELlSA); B, parasite
antigen: whole parasite, such as cultured tachyzoites and promastigotes (1FA), or soluble parasite antigen, which can be a
crude homogenate, a purifed protein, or a recombinant protein (ELiSA); C, serum of the animal patient, which may contain
parasite-specific antibodies; D, detecting reagent for host-specific antibody: host-specific antibody labeled with a fuoro-
chrome such as fuorescein (1FA) or host-specific antibody labeled with an enzyme (ELlSA); E, visualizing step: specific
step: if enzyme is present, it acts on soluble substrate to produce color, which can be evaluated visually or measured
spectrophotometrically.
Table 4.1.
Immunodiagnostic and molecular diagnostic tests for parasites available in the
United States*
Pathogen
Host
POU
Lab
Antigen detection
Cryptosporidium spp.
C, E, F, Ru (fecal)
X
Diroflaria immitis
C, F (blood)
X
X
Giardia intestinalis
C, F (fecal)
X
X
Antibody detection
Anoplocephata perfoliata
E
X
Babesia canis, B.gibsoni
C
Xc
Babesia bovis,B.bigemina
B
X
OTHER TESTS
Babesiacaballi,B.(Theileria)equi
E
Xc
Dirofilaria immitis
F
X
X
Encephalitozoon cuniculi
C,Ro,Rb
Leishmania donovani complex
C
X
Neospora caninum
C,B
X
Sarcocystis neurona (EPM)
E
X
F
X
Trypanosoma cruzi
C
X
 Other tick-borne bacterial/rickettsial pathogens such as
C
X
Ehrtlichia,Anaplasma,Borrelia
Molecular
Babesia spp.
C
X
dds unuodsoda
C, F
X
Cytauxzoonfetis
F
X
Giardia spp.
C, F
X
Hepatozoonamericanum
C
+
Leishmania spp.
C
X
Neospora caninum
B,C
X
Sarcocystis neurona (EPM)
E
X
Toxoplasma gondii
C,F
X
Tritrichomonas spp.
F,B
X
 Other tick-borne bacterial/rickettsial pathogens such as
C
X
Ehrlichia,Anaplasma, Borrelia
° Molecular and irmrmunodiagnostic tests for a rurmber of internationally important parasitic diseases such as 7rypanosomα brwcei and
Theileria parva are not readily available in North America.
Performed at site of patient care.
° Serologic tests for canine babesias are not federally regulated, but bovine and equine babesias are reportable to the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Anirmal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) and are reportable in sorme states; therefore,
serologic testing is regulated (www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/nahss/disease_status.htm).
B, bovine; C, canine; E, equine, F, feline; Ro, rodent; Rb, rabbit; Ru, ruminant; POU, point-of-use tests; EPM, equine protozoal
rrryeloencephalitis.
215
216
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
It is important to have an understanding of the life cycle and pathogenicity of a specific parasite
in order to interpret antibody titers in a specific test. For instance, having antibodies can indicate
animal is very unlikely to shed oocysts, and it is a low-risk animal as a pet for an immunocompro-
mised or pregnant owner. On the other hand, having a measurable antibody titer can be of significant
diagnostic value in confirming a parasite infection as the cause of clinical disease. For example, if
a dog has chronic dilitative cardiac disease with a titer to Trypanosoma cruzi, a probable diagnosis
is Chagas' disease. In a third scenario, having an antibody titer may indicate exposure but not
necessarily active parasite infection. An example of this situation is a domestic cat with an antibody
titer to Dirofilaria immitis. The cat can produce antibodies to the parasite after exposure to larvae
from an infected mosquito bite, but those parasites do not necessarily develop successfully to adult
worms causing a patent infection.
MOLECVLAR DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
 The advent of molecular diagnostic methods has resulted in an expanding selection of sensitive and
specific tests for a range of infectious organisms and genetic diseases. Molecular diagnostic assays
can be performed with many types of samples including blood, urine, tissues, feces, and other body
fluids as well as environmental samples. Regardless of the sample matrix, the first step in a protocol
1s to isolate the nucleic acid (DNA, RNA) for testing. The accuracy of the test depends on the
quality and quantity of DNA or RNA extracted as well as the presence/absence of inhibitors.A
typical assay uses that DNA, along with appropriate primers, enzymes, and nucleotides, in a poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify short specific DNA sequences that identify a particular
5
sized DNA amplicon is visualized by gel electrophoresis or detected by fluorescence. In other cases.
HER
the amplified DNA fragment must be sequenced to determine nucleic acid sequence variations that
are characteristic of various genetic mutations.
TESTS
An expanding variety of veterinary applications are available on a fee-for-service basis. The
tissues, or feces of the host animal. Other tests are designed to detect specific targeted genetic
variations in the host animal that are markers of diseases or anomalies. Although experimental
molecular diagnostic tests are increasingly reported in the scientific literature, few specific tests are
commercially available to detect parasitic pathogens.
The parasitologic molecular diagnostic test used most widely in the United States at this time
detects the venereal protozoan of cattle, Tritrichomonas foetus, in preputial swabs or specialized
short-term cultures. Since this parasite has become a regulatory issue in many states, the validation
and comparison of molecular and in vitro culture methods has become a topic of interest to many
diagnostic laboratories, and to veterinary practitioners and their clients as well.
Both canine and feline tick-borne disease agent panels that include hemoprotozoan parasites
are offered as well by a number of commercial and university-associated diagnostic laboratories on
a fee-for-service basis.
At the present time, use of PCR diagnostics for parasitic infections is not widely applied due to
difficulties in extracting quality DNA or RNA from tissue, blood, or fecal samples for testing.
acid extraction improve, facilitating the use of these tests. T'he high sensitivity and specificity of these
tests make them especially attractive in cases of low parasite burden. The parasitic infections that cur-
rently can be detected with molecular diagnostic methods in the United States are listed in Table 4.1.
CHAPTER 5
Diagnosis of
Arthropod Parasites
Ellis Greiner, contributing author
The phylum Arthropoda contains many species that parasitize domestic and wild animals and
humans. The most familiar of these parasites are ticks, mites (class Arachnida, subclass Acari), and
insects (class Insecta). Aquatic animals are parasitized by many crustaceans that also belong to this
phylum (see Chapter 6). All arthropods have jointed appendages and exoskeletons. The organisms
 pictured in this chapter represent a selection of arthropods that are common or important in domestic
animals.
SUBCLASS ACARI (MITES AND TICKS)
The bodies of mites and ticks are divided into two parts: the gnathosoma, which contains the
mouthparts on a false head (basis capituli), and the idiosoma, which comprises the remainder of
the animal and to which the legs are attached. After hatching from the egg, mites and ticks pass
through larval and nymphal stages before becoming adults. Larvae of ticks and mites have six legs;
while nymphs and adults have eight legs. Nymphal ticks and mites usually closely resemble the
 adults but are smaller and lack a genital opening.
ARTHROPODS
Mite ldentification
Parasitic mites are usually microscopic, rarely exceeding l mm in length. Female mites are usually
larger than males. Mites are covered by a relatively soft integument through which the smaller forms
respire. The larger forms breathe through openings called stigmata, sometimes used in identifica-
tion. Scales, spines, or setae (hairs) on the body and claws or suckers on the legs (Fig. 5.1) are used
 in identifying the organisms. Many common mange, itch, and scab mites resemble one another, but
they can be differentiated on the basis of the characteristics outlined in Table 5.1.
Most common mite infestations are diagnosed by deep or superficial skin scrapings. For a deep
skin scraping, a dulled, rounded scalpel blade (#10) and the area of skin to be scraped are coated
with mineral oil. The site selected for scraping should be at the periphery of a lesion or the predi-
lection site of the suspected parasite. The blade should be scraped back and forth over the skin until
capillary bleeding is evident (a shallower scraping is done for surface-dwelling mites). For collec-
tion of Demodex, the follicle mite, a skin fold should be squeezed between the fingers to express
217
Fig. 5.1. An important characteristic for identification of a number of common mites is length and segmentation of the
stalk (pedicle) connecting a sucker to the leg. In Sarcoptes spp. mites (A), the stalk is long and unjointed (arrow). Psoroptes
has a long, jointed pedicle (B).
Table 5.1.
Microscopic characteristics of some mange, itch, and scab mites
Leg Characteristics
Genus
 Egg-Laying Female
Male
Anus
AR
TE
Sarcoptes
Suckers on long, unsegmented stalks on
 Suckers on long unsegmented stalks on
Termina]
R
pairs 1, 2; pointed scales on dorsum
pairs 1, 2, 4; few pointed scales on
+
dorsum
Notoedres
 Suckers as above; many prominent rounded
Suckers as above; few rounded scales on
Dorsal
scales on dorsum
dorsum
Knemidokoptes
No suckers
Suckers on unsegmented stalks on pairs
Termina]
1, 2, 3, 4
Psoroptes
 Suckers on long, segmented stalks on pairs 
Suckers on long, segmented stalks on
Terminal
1, 2, 4 
pairs 1, 2, 3
Chorioptes
 Suckers on short, unsegmented stalks on
Suckers on short, unsegmented sta]ks on
 Terminal
pairs 1, 2, 4 
pairs 1, 2, 3, 4; pair 4 rudimentary
Otodectes
Suckers on short, unsegmented stalks on
Suckers on short, unsegmented sta]ks on
Terminal
pairs 1, 2; pair 4 rudimentary
pairs 1, 2, 3, 4
Trixacanus
 Suckers on long, unsegmented stalks on
Dorsal
pairs 1, 2
218
DIAGNOSIS OF ARTHROPOD PARASITES
219
the mites before the scraping is done. The debris collected on the scalpel blade is then placed on a
microscope slide, coverslipped, and examined using the 10x microscope objective. Several slides
may need to be examined before mites are found, especially in cases of Sarcoptes infestation.
To recover surface mites, such as Cheyletiella, a superficial scraping that does not
cause bleeding is made with a scalpel blade coated in mineral oil. Altermatively, clear acetate tape
can be used to collect material. The sticky side of the tape is pressed to the hair coat in an affected
 area and then placed on a microscope slide, trapping skin debris and mites against the slide and
allowing microscopic examination. Brushings from the hair coat may also be examined
If mites must be shipped to an acarologist or veterinary laboratory for identification, they
should be stored in 70% alcohol. Skin scrapings and mites that are stored dry cannot usually be
successfully identified.
ARTHROPODS
220
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Sarcoptes scabiei (Figs. 5.2-5.5)
Common name: Itch mite (often called scabies mite in dogs)
Taxonomy: Mite (family Sarcoptidae).
Host: Host-specific varieties of Sarcoptes are found on a wide range of dormestic animals, includ-
ing dogs, ruminants, horses, rodents, swine, and camelids. Humans also have their own strain of
Sarcoptes.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Hairless or thin-skinned areas of the body are usually the first to be affected,
 aas  P a o s n ro s a i
Life Cycle: Transmission of Sarcoptes is by direct contact with an infested animal or fomites.
Female mites tunnel into the epidermis, where eggs are deposited and where developrment of rmites 
occurs. The life cycle from egg to adult occurs in about 3 weeks.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Deep skin scrapings are used for diagnosis. However, mites may be dif-
ficult to recover, and several scrapings should be collected from suspected cases. Many cases are
treated presumptively when no mites are recovered. Fecal examination may reveal mites and mite
eggs swallowed during grooming. In swine, Sarcoptes can often be found in scabs in the ears of
chronically infected animals. To diagnose these infections on the farm, scab material can be
removed and broken up over dark paper. Tiny, moving specks will be mites. Scabs can also be
digested with 10% sodium hydroxide and the remaining material examined with the microscope.
Characteristics of the terminal suckers used in identification are found in Table 5.1.
Size: Females approximately 400 μm; males approximately 250 μm
Clinical Importance: Mange caused by Sarcoptes is a highly pruritic condition accompanied by
alopecia, thickening of the skin, and crust formation. In North America, infestations are most often
mites from animals can transiently infest humans and produce lesions.
R
+
125μm
Fig. 5.2. Sarcoptes and related mites are typically round bodied. The third and fourth pairs of legs are short and often do
not project beyond the margin of the body.
Fig. 5.3. Pruritic mite infestations may stimulate intense grooming by the host, resulting in the presence of both mites and
These eggs are much larger than common helminth eggs (about 200μm).
Fig. 5.4. Sarcoptes scabiei is a common cause of the condition called "scabies" in dogs. Lesions on the face and along the
margin of the ear are common early in infestation. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, lnc.,
Redmond WA.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.5. Sarcoptic mange in an alpaca. In chronic sarcoptic mange, affected skin is hairless, thickened, and wrinkled. These
nonspecifc changes also occur in other chronic skin diseases. Photos courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource,
Inc., Redmond, WA.
221
222
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Notoedres spp. (Fig. 5.6)
Common name: Ear mange mite (rodents).
Taxonomy: Mite (family Sarcoptidae).
Host: Notoedres cati occurs on cats. Other species occur on rodents, rabbits, and some wild
animals.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: The head is usually infested first, but mites may spread to other regions of the
body.
Life Cycle: Similar to Sarcoptes.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mites are observed with deep skin scrapings.
Clinical Importance: Feline notoedric mange is usually confined to the head and neck. Infestations 
are rarely seen in North America.
PARAS1TE: Knemidokoptes spp. (Figs. 5.7 and 5.8)
Common name: Scaly leg or scaly face mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (family Knemidokoptidae).
Host: Birds, including domestic poultry and pet birds.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Nonfeathered portions of the body, including feet, legs, and face.
Life Cycle: Like Sarcoptes, transmission occurs by direct contact with infested birds or fomites,
and all stages of the mite are found on the host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mites can be found in skin scrapings collected from the periphery of
lesions. Typically, the exudative lesions produced by the mites contain numerous small holes, giving
them a honeycombed appearance.
R
Size: Approximately 400 μm
R
Clinical Importance: Knemidokoptes species burrow under the scales on the legs or nonfeathered
+
portions of the face, inducing a serous exudate that hardens into crusts. These proliferative lesions
DS
eventually may cause trauma and disfigurement leading to the death of the host.
58 μm
Fig. 5.6. Notoedres mites are similar in appearance to Sarcoptes. However, the anus of Notoedres, unlike that of Sarcoptes,
is located on the dorsal surface rather than the ventral. Notoedres also has scalloped scales on the dorsum rather than the
sawtooth scales on Sarcoptes. The suckers on the front legs of Notoedres and Sarcoptes are attached to the legs by long,
unjointed stalks.
88um
Fig. 5.7. Knemidokoptes is a round-bodied mite, generally similar in appearance to sarcoptic mites.
ARTHROPODS
Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redrmond WA.
223
224
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Trixacarus spp. (Fig. 5.9)
Taxonomy: Mite (family Sarcoptidae).
Host: Guinea pigs (Trixacarus caviae) and rats (T. diversus).
Geographic Distribution: Europe and North America
Location on Host: Lesions begin on the head, neck, and back but can spread to other areas.
Life Cycle: Similar to Sarcoptes. Mites are readily transferred from the dam to young animals in
the neonatal period.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mites are identified in skin scrapings.
Size: Approximately 200μm
Clinical Importance: Trixacarus is the sarcoptic mange mite of guinea pigs. Infestation is associ-
ated with pruritus, alopecia, and hyperkeratosis and can become a serious problem in guinea pig
colonies. Humans in contact with infested guinea pigs may develop transient lesions.
PARAS1TE: Psoroptes spp. (Figs. 5.10-5.13)
Common name: Scab or scabies mite (ruminants).
Taxonomy: Mite (family Psoroptidae).
Host: Psoroptes ovis is the cause of psoroptic mange in ruminants; P cuniculi (now thought to be
sasoy uo punoy aq ose ueo dds saidouosd 'suuunu pue shqqnu uo punoy si (sio d jo uens e
and some wildlife hosts. The number of species within the genus is currently undergoing
revision.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Psoroptes cuniculi is found in the ears of rabbits, sheep, goats, and horses.
Other Psoroptes infestations are often first detected on the dorsum of the host but may spread to
other areas.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact or fomites. Unlike sarcoptic mites, Psoroptes spp.
do not burrow, and all stages are found on the skin surface. The life cycle can be completed in as
R
little as 10 days. Mites may survive for several days off the host.
IRO
lesions. Altermatively, skin scabs can be broken apart or digested and the residue examined micro-
1DS
scopically. Crusts from the ears can be treated similarly when infestations of P cuniculi are sus-
pected. Psoroptic mites are more oval in shape and have longer legs than sarcoptic mites.
Size: Approximately 750 μm
disease in ruminants worldwide. Infestation leads to exudative dermatitis and hair loss. In the United
States, the strain of P ovis affecting sheep has been eradicated, and the bovine strain has diminished
in importance since the introduction of macrolide endectocide drugs. In severe cases, P cunicufi
lesions on rabbits may extend beyond the ears to the face, neck, and back.
40μm
Fig. 5.9. Like other sarcoptic mites, Trixacarus is a round-bodied mite with short legs. Trixacarus caviae causes sarcoptic
mange in guinea pigs.
220μm
the legs by long, segmented stalks (Table 5.1). Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas
State University, Manhattan, KS.
ARTHROPODS
0.5 μm
Figure 5.1 B shows a closer view of the jointed pedicle on some of the legs of Psoroptes. Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker,
School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
225
226
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Chorioptes bovis (Figs. 5.14 and 5.15)
Common name: Foot mange, leg mange, itchy heel.
Taxonomy: Mite (family Psoroptidae).
Host: Varieties of C. bovis are found on ruminants, horses, and rabbits.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Chorioptes are found primarily on the lower body of the host. In horses, the
  a o as n  an  l n   s    s a s
back of the udder are most often affected.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact or fomites. Chorioptes mites spend their entire life
cycle on the skin surface. The life cycle can be completed in about 3 weeks.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mites are observed in skin scrapings. Chorioptes has short, unsegmented
stalks bearing the suckers on the legs (see Table 5.1).
Size: Approximately 300 μm
Clinical Importance: Infestation may be asymptomatic or cause only mild lesions in some animals.
As mite populations increase, pruritus, alopecia, and crusting may develop.
R
HR
+
that forrms a crust on the surface of the skin, with the resulting loss of the feece over affected areas.
Fig. 5.13. Psoroptic ear mange in a rabbit. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond
WA.
ARTHROPODS
100μum
Fig. 5.14. Chorioptes mite. The two "eyes" on the posterior end of this Chorioptes male are actually copulatory suckers.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redrmond, WA.
227
228
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Otodectes cynotis (Figs. 5.16 and 5.17)
Common name: Ear mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (family Psoroptidae).
Host: Dogs, cats, and ferrets.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Ear canal.
Life Cycle: Mites complete their life cycle in the ear. Transmission occurs by direct contact or
fomites. Kittens and puppies are easily infested by contact with the dam.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Routinely diagnosed by otoscope or microscopic examination of aural
exudate collected with cotton swabs.
Size: Approximately 300μm
Clinical Importance: These mites are a common cause of otitis extema. Bacterial decomposition
of otic secretions and exudate leads to the formation of black, waxy cerumen. Infested animals
often suffer severe pruritus that may lead to self-inflicted trauma. Heavy infestations may spread
outside the ear to the face, neck, and back.
+
Fig. 5.15. Chorioptes mites are very similar in appearance to Psoroptes spp. The two genera can be accurately differenti-
ated by the length and segmentation of the stalks (pedicles) carrying the suckers on the legs (Table 5.1). The suckers of
105μum
Fig. 5.16. Mating Otodectes cynotis mites from a ferret. Otodectes is another psoroptic mite with an oval-shaped body and
long legs. They are similar in size and appearance to Chorioptes. In heavy infestations, it is common to find copulating
mites in ear swab preparations. The short unsegmented stalks carrying the suckers can be seen in this photo.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.17. Otodectes cynotis infestation in a cat. The mites cause the production of black "coffee ground"” exudate. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
229
230
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Demodex spp. (Figs. 5.18-5.22)
Common name: Follicle mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (family Demodicidae).
'sasoy 'srd 'seo sop supnoun 'siso Sue o payuai uaaq aau xapoua jo saioads so
cattle, goats, sheep, laboratory animals, humans, and other species.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Sebaceous glands and hair follicles.
Life Cycle: Mites are usually transferred from the dam to offspring in the neonatal period. All
stages of the life cycle are found on the host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Deep skin scrapings are required for diagnosis. A skin fold should be
 e s 's snas p sg o s ssdxa on s aoaa pzaans
proportion of immature mites on a skin scraping is indicative of a more serious infestation than is
ond Aq suoong sunp paisalui aq Aeu sasa sil pue xapouaa 'sau nnpe jo aoueuopaid e
animals and be seen in fecal flotation tests.
Size: 100-400 μm, depending on species
Clinical Importance: Most infested animals do not develop clinical disease. Dogs are the host
most likely to be clinically affected. Generalized demodectic mange in dogs has a genetic compo-
nent and is thought to be associated with an immune deficiency. Demodecosis is rare in livestock
species.
R
R
+
1DS
75μm
Fig. 5.18. Demodex spp. are usually described as looking like cigars with short legs. Demodex canis, shown in this photo,
reaches a length of about 390μm.
20 μum
signs of infestation. Photos courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton
Rouge,LA.
Fig. 5.20. Demodex egg in a canine skin scraping. Both mites and eggs may be detected in feces when pruritic animals
swallow the parasites during grooming.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.21. Demodex is most often seen as a clinical problem in dogs. Lesions often appear first on the face or forelegs.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redrmond, WA.
231
232
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Cheylefiella spp. (Figs. 5.23 and 5.24)
Common name: Walking dandruff.
Taxonomy: Mite (family Cheyletiellidae).
Host: Cheyletiella parasitovorax, C. yasguri, and C. blakei are seen on rabbits, dogs, and cats,
respectively.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Cheyfetiella infestations are usually seen on the back. In cats, the head is also
often affected.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact or fomites. Cheyletiella can be carried from one
animal to another by feas (Ctenocephalides). Mites can live up to 10 days in the environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Cheyletiella is a fur mite and not a skin dweller, so only superficial skin
scrapings are required for diagnosis. Altermatively, if material combed from the hair is examined
against a dark background, mites can be seen as moving white dots ("walking dandruff"). The
distinctive feature of the mite is the large palpal claws.
Size: Approximately 400 μm
Clinical Importance: Many infested animals do not show clinical signs. Young animals are most
likely to show evidence of infestation, including crusting, increased skin scurf, and pruritus. In
heavy infestations, hair loss may occur. Owners may develop lesions in areas of close contact with
their animals.
R
+
Fig. 5.22. ln goats and cattle, clinical demodecosis is usually associated with the formation of pustules. Photo courtesy of
Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA, and Dr. C. S. F. Williams, Langley, WA.
Fig. 5.23. Cheyletietla is a surface mite that can be collected by brushing the hair coat or collecting material with sticky
tape. In heavy infestations, mites may be found throughout the hair coat.
ARTHROPODS
 are found on the legs instead of the suckers seen in some other species of parasitic mites.
233
234
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Lynxacarus radovskyi (Fig. 5.25)
Taxonomy: Mite (family Listrophoridae).
Host: Cats; other species infest bobcats and weasels
Geographic Distribution: Australia, southerm United States, Caribbean, and Hawaii.
Location on Host: Mites clasp the hairs of cats, primarily on the tail head tail tip, and in the peri-
neal area.
Life Cycle: The entire life cycle is spent on the host. Infestation is by direct contact.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Laterally flattened mites can be seen clinging to cat hairs. Eggs are
attached to the hairs.
Size: Approximately 450 μm
Clinical Importance: Heavy mite infestations can affect the entire body and lead to poor condition
of the hair coat. This mite is rare in North America.
PARAS1TE: Leporacarus (=Listrophorus) gibbus (Figs. 5.26 and 5.27)
Common name: Fur mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (family Listrophoridae). This mite formerly belonged to the genus Listrophorus.
Host: Rabbits.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Throughout the fur.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact. All stages of the life cycle are found on the host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mites are large enough to be seen as small specks on the hairs and can be
collected by combing and examining hairs with a magnifying glass or microscope.
Size: Approximately 350-500μm
R
present.
IRO
75 μm
used, along with the first two sets of legs, to encircle the hair.
100 μm
Fig. 5.26. Male Leporacanus mites have a brown anterior shield that projects beyond the mouthparts. Males also have
distinctive adanal clasping organs.
ARTHROPODS
100μm
Fig. 5.27. Female Leporacarus from a rabbit. The female mites also show the anterior shield.
235
236
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Chirodiscoides caviae (Fig. 5.28)
Common name: Fur mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (family Listrophoridae).
Host: Guinea pigs.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Attached to hairs.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact with an infested individual or fomite.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mites are detected by examining hairs from the host.
Size: Approximately 350-500 μm
Clinical Importance: This mite is considered generally nonpathogenic.
PARASITE: Mycoptes musculinus, Myobia musculi, Radfordia spp. (Figs. 5.29 and 5.30)
Common name: Fur mite.
Taxonomy: Mites (families Listrophoridae and Myobidae).
Host: Mice and rats.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Hair coat.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact; all stages of the life cycle are found on the host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Diagnosis is made by detecting mites on host hairs.
Size:
Radfordia and Myobia
approximately 400-450μm
Mycoptes
approximately 350 μm
signs, although pruritus, erythema, hair loss, and thickened skin may occur in others. Secondary
bacterial infections may develop.
R
TE
RO
1DS
+
80 jum
Fig. 5.28. Chirodiscoides from a guinea pig. The frst two pairs of legs are adapted for wrapping around the hair shafts of
the host. Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
88um
Fig. 5.29. Mycoptes musculinus from the hair coat of a mouse. In males, the fourth pair of legs is enlarged and directed
backward. Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
LA.
ARTHROPODS
120 μm
Fig. 5.30. Radfordia is found at the base of the hairs. The first pair of legs is modified for feeding and project forward.
Radfordiais similar in appearance to another rodent fur mite,Myobia musculi.However,Radfordia has two claws on the
second pair of legs, while Myobia has only one claw.
237
238
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Avian Feather Mites (Fig. 5.31)
Taxonomy: Mites (numerous families and species).
Host: Domestic and wild birds.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Species specialized for different feather environments.
Life Cycle: Most mites live on the feather surface and feed on secretions and skin and feather
debris. Quill mites live in the base of the feathers and feed on host tissue or fluids.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Diagnosis is made by detection and identification of mites on feathers.
Size: Variable with species
 Clinical Importance: Most feather mite infestations appear to cause little damage and are usually
 considered of minor clinical importance.
PARAS1TE: Ornithonyssus sylviarum, O. bursa (Figs. 5.32 and 5.33)
Common name: Northerm fowl mite, tropical fowl mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (order Mesostigmata).
Geographic Distribution: The northerm fowl mite, O. syiviarum, is found in temperate regions
worldwide. The tropical fowl mite, O. bursa, is found in tropical and subtropical climates. Both
species are found in the United States.
Location on Host: Mites and egg masses can be found on the skin among the feathers. In poultry,
O. syiviarum often concentrates around the vent, causing a dark discoloration of the area.
Life Cycle: Onithonyssus sylviarum spends its life on the avian host, whereas individuals of
O. bursa spend greater periods of time off the host. Wild birds can introduce the mites into poultry
facilities. Under appropriate conditions, the life cycle of O. syfviarum can be completed in a week.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Large mites are observed on birds or in the environment.
Size: Approximately 750 μm
Clinical Importance: Scabbing and matted feathers can develop on infested birds. In severe cases,
IRO
 anemia, decreased production, and death may occur. Mites can act as vectors of other avian disease
agents, including those causing Newcastle disease and fowl pox. Humans in contact with mites may
ODS
also develop lesions.
Fig. 5.31. Male Mesatgoides sp.mite from a wild bird.Feather mite species show great variation in morphology as aresult
of specialization for life in different parts of the avian feather environment.
150μum
Fig. 5.32. Ornithonyssus spp. belong to the mesostigmatid order of mites. These mites have long legs in the anterior portion
of the body and are more ticklike in appearance than other mites. In Ornithonyssus spp., the anus (arrow) is at the anterior
end of the anal plate. The anus of Dermaryssus spp, a morphologically similar mite, is located in the posterior portion of
the anal plate. Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
LA.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.33. Another characteristic used to differentiate Ornithonyssus from the similar genus Dermaryssus is the chelicerae
(arrow). The chelicerae in this Ornithonyssus mite are shorter than the long, whiplike chelicerae of Dermanyssus.
239
240
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Ornithonyssus bacoti (Figs. 5.32 and 5.33)
Common name: Tropical rat mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (order Mesostigmata).
Host: Rodents, occasionally other animals and humans.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Skin.
Life Cycle: Adult mites lay eggs in the environment. Mites visit the host only to feed; they spend
the rest of the time in the host's bedding or nest. The life cycle can be completed in about 2 weeks.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mites on animals or in the environment are observed.
Size:Approximately 750μm
Clinical Importance: In large numbers, this blood-feeding mite can cause anemia, debilitation,
PARASITE: Dermanyssus gallinae (Fig. 5.34)
Common name: Red poultry mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (order Mesostigmata).
Host: Wild and domestic birds.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Mites can occur anywhere on the body.
Life Cycle: Mites visit the host at night only to take blood meals. During the day, the mites are
found in crevices in the environment. The life cycle can be completed in as little as 10 days. Adults
 n  s  a  n s 
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mite infestation may be difficult to diagnose because the mites are not on
the host during the day. Close examination of the environment may reveal mites under crusts of
covered with a white cloth at night. In the morming, mites will be seen as small black or dark red
R
dots clinging to the cloth.
R
+
Size: Approximately 750 μm
1DS
Clinical Importance: Heavy infestation can cause anemia and death, particularly in hatchlings.
Hens may be reluctant to sit on their nests. Other animals and humans in close proximity to infested
birds or their nests may also be attacked and develop lesions.
150μum
Fig. 5.34. Dermanyssus gallinae infests both domestic and wild birds. The anus of this mite is present in a more posterior
ARTHROPODS
241
242
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE:Pneumonyssoides caninum (Fig.5.35)
Common name: Nasal mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (order Mesostigmata).
Host: Dogs. A similar mite, P simicola, parasitizes the respiratory system of some monkey species.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Nasal sinuses of dogs.
Life Cycle: The life cycle of this mite is poorly understood, but transmission is thought to be by
direct contact since mites are sometimes seen crawling on the nose.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Mites are observed in the nasal sinuses and passages or crawling outside
the nostrils.
Size: Approximately 1 mm
Clinical Importance: Infestations are usually asymptomatic but may produce sneezing, rhinitis,
sinusitis, and malaise. In captive monkeys, Pneumonyssus can cause significant respiratory disease.
PARAS1TE: Ophionyssus natricis (Figs. 5.36 and 5.37)
Common name: Snake mite.
Taxonomy: Mite (order Mesostigmata).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide on captive snakes.
Location on Host: Mites are found on the skin or under the scales of snakes and may also infest
lizards.
Life Cycle: Ophionyssus nymphs and adults feed and females deposit eggs in the environment
after taking a blood meal. Larvae do not feed. The entire life cycle takes about 13-19 days.
Infestation occurs by direct contact with an infested snake or its environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Identification of mites collected from snakes. Females that have taken a
blood meal are dark colored. A cotton-tipped swab can be dipped in mineral oil and used to collect
mites for identification.
R
Size: Females 0.6-1.3 mm
IRO
Clinical Importance: Ophionyssus infestations are common in captive snakes. Affected animals
may show irritation and depression. Shedding may increase, and snakes may soak themselves more
1DS
frequently in water.
200 um
Fig. 5.35. Pneumonyssoides caninum, the nasal mite of dogs. A related mite, Pneumonyssus simicola, is the lung mite of
several species of African monkeys. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
Fig. 5.36. Ophionyssus mites are the most common external parasite on captive snakes and may seriously affect the health
 of the host. Female mites lay eggs off the host, and successful control of infestation requires environmental treatment.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.37. Ophionyssus, like other mesostigmatid mites, has claws on the tips of the legs instead of the suckers seen in
many other parasitic mites (Fig. 5.1).
243
244
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Trombiculid Mites (Figs. 5.38-5.40)
Common name: Chigger, harvest mite, scrub itch mite.
Taxonomy: Mites (family Trombiculidae).
Host: Wide variety of animals and humans.
Geographic Distribution: Several species parasitize a variety of hosts, including Eutrombicula
alfreddugesi, E. splendens (North America), and Neotrombicula autumnalis (Europe).
Location on Host: Predilection sites include the face, head, and legs.
Larvae attach to a host and feed for 3-5 days and then complete development in the environment.
Adults are predators of other arthropods.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Small, often orange or red mites are often seen in clusters on the face of
the host. The presence of only larval stages is helpful in diagnosing chigger infestations.
Size: Approximately 200-500 μm, depending on species
Clinical Importance: Mites may cause pruritus and irritation. Humans are also susceptible to
at the waistband of pants, top of socks, etc.).
R
+
100 μm
Fig. 5.38. Only the six-legged larvae of chiggers are parasitic, which is helpful in identification of the parasites. This
Blankaartia sp. chigger was removed from a bird.
200μm
Fig. 5.39. Specimen of Trombicula sp., a cause of marmmalian chigger infestation. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams,
Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
ARTHROPODS
245
246
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Tick ldentification
Ticks are usually larger than mites, ranging in length from 3 to 12mm, or more in the case of
engorged females. Ticks are divided into two families: Ixodidae (hard ticks) and Argasidae (soft
ticks). The Ixodid (hard) ticks are of greatest importance in veterinary medicine. Various hard tick
species are vectors of a number of viral, bacterial, and protozoal animal and human pathogens. In
addition, hard tick species cause tick paralysis and tick toxicosis.
All ticks pass from the egg through larval and nymphal stages before becoming adults and
utilize one or more host animals during the developmental cycle. Eggs are always laid in the envi-
ronment. Hard tick larvae are acquired by the host from the environment. All hard ticks undergo a
 a m y an  o ps  p s u a mn g an  m a
These molts follow attachment and blood feeding on the host that usually lasts for several days.
Tick species that remain on the host during the two molting periods are known as one-host ticks.
 In two-host tick species, the molt to the nymphal stage occurs on the host, but the engorged nymph
leaves the host, molts in the environment, and then finds a new host. In the three-host tick life cycle,
both the larva and nymph leave the host to molt, attaching to a host again after each molt. In some
stage of the tick. In much of North America, the most important tick species are three-host ticks.
Soft tick life cycles are more variable than those of the hard ticks. Many soft tick species live in
the environment and visit the host only briefly to take repeated blood meals.
only a few millimeters in length and soft ticks usually do not attach for long periods. Hard ticks
are likely to be found attached in areas on the host that cannot be easily groomed, for example, the
head, neck, and ears of most host species, and also the tail of horses (Fig. 5.41). Because ticks are
important vectors of zoonotic diseases (Lyme disease, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, etc.), they
should be removed using forceps or tweezers instead of the fingers to reduce the possibility of
pads y aa pnos y a sso sno s sn oq yn  poo
directly behind the point of attachment to the skin and then pulled off. Often a small portion of
skin will also be pulled away.
Hard ticks have a hard dorsal shield called the scutum. The scutum is limited to the anterior,
central region of the dorsum in females, whereas in males, the scutum extends over the entire dorsal
Fig. 5.41. Ticks are most often found attached on parts of the body that are difficult for the host to groom. Unidentifed
ticks are attached to the ear of this dog. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
DIAGNOSIS OF ARTHROPOD PARASITES
247
pap
BOCPHIEUS
RHIPICEPHALUS
Dap
egment
bosis
aoitufu
DERMACENTOR
AMBLYOMMA
IXODES
Fig. 5.42. Comparison of the basis capituli and mouthparts of females of the important lxodid tick genera of domestic
animals in North America. The scutum of the adult male hard ticks covers the entire dorsum of the parasite. *Boophilus
ticks have now been incorporated into the genus Rhipicephatus.
region. The mouthparts of hard ticks are evident from the dorsal surface. The Argasid (soft) ticks
have a leathery integument, which often is spinose or bumpy. The mouthparts of soft ticks can be
seen only from the ventral aspect of the tick.
Identification of adult hard ticks to the level of genus is not difficult in a veterinary practice.
One of the most useful characteristics for identifying the genus of a hard tick is the shape of the
ARTHROPODS
basis capituli and mouthparts. Figure 5.42 shows these characteristics on adult females; a magnify-
margin of the body has a series of indentations, known as festoons. Features like festoons are much
females or males. Nymphs, like adults, have eight legs but lack the genital pore seen in adults.
Using these characteristics, a
 dichotomous
key for
the genera of adult
ticks
(Fig. 5.43) can be followed for identification of most tick specimens in North America. Identification
 of six-legged larval ticks (Fig. 5.44) is more difficult and may require the assistance of an expert.
Figure 5.45 shows adult female ticks of the most common species in the United States. They
also represent the most common tick genera found throughout the world. If assistance is needed
with specific identification of ticks, they should be preserved and submitted to a diagnostic labora-
tory in 70%-80% alcohol.
Fig. 5.43. Larval tick, also called a seed tick. Tick Jarvae can be easily distinguished from nymphs and adults because they
have only six legs. Larvae of comimon ticks in the United States often prefer different hosts than those of adult stages.
+
+
D5
courtesy of Dr. Susan Little, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK.
248
PICTORIAL KEY TO CENERA OF ADULT TICKS IN UNITED STATES
By Harry D
Pratt
Capitulum interior; scutum abscnt
Capitulam snterior; scutin present
FAWILY ARGASIDAE-SOFT TICKS
FAMILY IXOIDAE - HARD TICKS
Margin of body with definitc
Marginof body thick, rounded
Anal
groovc cither behird
Anai groove in frant of anus
without definite sutural line.
aus, indistivct, or absent.
Hypostome
with
-100p110m
Hypostome vestigial or with-
Secand seginent ot palpr not
out elfectve teeth. mlegu
Second segment of palpi lat-
opcd teeth, Intc gumcnt mamil-
ment tuberculaled or gtanu-
:atera!ly produced.
crally produccd.
lalced
Jaled.
GRNITHOOGROS
HAEMAPHYSALIS
Mosthparts as long as basis
Iategumenl of aoult granolar,
Integumeatofadutt and nyr p1
Mcuthparts nuch longer than
0l nympsfstage usually seen)
tuberculated.Hypostomo of
basis capituli,
capituli
very ssinose. Hyouslure of
ait scoop-likc.Associated
asult vesligai. srally ol
with bsts.
cattc. horses. or rabh:ts.
OTOSrUS
ANTRICOLA
 S. UFARTMENT OF HFALTH. EDLCATION. ANU WELFAR
Scutum wita eyes
Scutur:
Basis capitali lalera.ly pr0-
Basis capiluli not laterally
duced
produced
ARTHROPODS
AMBLYOMMA
APONOMMA
Palpi ridged dnrsally and
Festnons aosent.
Palpi nnt ridgsc.  Festoons presc.t.
Festoons eleve1
Festoons sevet
laterally
BOOPHILUS
RHIPICEPHALI
[(OTOCENTOR)
ULNIUK
X
30
Fig. 5.45. Key to adult tick genera found in North America. Examination of ticks with low magnification should allow
identification of features used in this key. Boophilus ticks have now been incorporated into the genus Rhipicephalus. Courtesy
of U.S. Public Health Service, CDC.
249
250
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Amblyomma spp. (Figs. 5.46-5.52; see also Fig. 5.45)
Common names: Lone star tick, Gulf Coast tick, Cayenne tick, bont tick, tropical bont
tick.
Taxonomy: Tick (family Ixodidae).
Host: A wide variety of domestic and wild animals serve as hosts.
common species in the United States. Ambyomma cajennense (Cayenne tick) and other species are
also found on a variety of wild and domestic animals in the United States, Mexico, and Latin
America. Amblyomma hebraeum and A. variegatium are important species in Africa.
Location on Host: Various, often found on domestic animals in the head and neck region.
Life Cycle: Amblyomma spp. are three-host ticks, meaning that each stage of the life cycle must
find a new host following a molt in the environment. Larvae and nymphs feed on a wide variety of
hosts; adults are often found on ruminants and other domestic animals and humans.
Laboratory Diagnosis : Long mouthparts are an important diagnostic feature of Amblyomma. The
scutum is usually omamented.
Clinical Importance: The long mouthparts of Amblyomma make attachment particularly painful
and susceptible to secondary infection. Economic loss from damaged hides may occur. Amblyomma
americanum is a vector of the bacteria causing tularemia and Q fever and several Ehrlichia species.
Persistent infestations of A. maculatum can cause permanent damage to the ears of cattle known
as “gotch ear.? The lesions caused by A. cajennense are particulary painful, and it can serve as a
vector of Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Rickettsia rickettsii). In Africa, A. hebraeum and A. var-
iegatum transmit heartwater (Cowdria), tick-bite fever (Rickettsia conori), and Nairobi sheep
disease (Nairovirus). Amblyomma variegatum also transmits heartwater in the Caribbean.
Fig. 5.46. Male and female Ambtyomma americanum (lone star tick). The female (right) of this common U.S. tick is easily
recognized by the presence of the large white spot at the posterior margin of the scutum. Males do not have conspicuous
ornamentation on the scutum, although with closer inspection, some iridescent markings can be seen on the margin of the
scutum and festoons.
opening. The nymphs of A. americanum lack the dramatic “lone star” of adult females. Photo courtesy of James Gathany
and G. Maupin, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Public Health lmage Library).
Fig. 5.48. Ambtyomma maculatum: (left) male; (right) female. The Gulf Coast tick is found in the southeastern United
States, Mexico, and South and Central America. lt feeds primarily on the head and neck of birds and mammals. Note the
long mouthparts typical of this genus. Photo courtesy of Dr. Susan Little, University of Oklahoma, Stillwater, OK.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.49. Ambhyomma cajennense: (left) male; (right) female. The Cayenne tick is found in Texas, Mexico, and Latin
America. lt parasitizes a wide variety of mammals and birds. Photo courtesy of James Gathany and Christopher Paddock,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( Public Health lmage Library).
251
252
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Hyalomma spp. (Fig. 5.53)
Common name: Bont-legged tick, camel tick, tortoise tick.
Taxonomy: Tick (family Ixodidae).
Host: Many host species, including domestic animals. One species, H. aegyptium, is a parasite of
tortoises.
Geographic Distribution: Asia, Europe, North Africa.
Location on Host: Various.
adult blood meals.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Ticks of the genus Hyalomma have eyes and long mouthparts like those
 of Amblyomma, but lack the ormamentation usually seen on Amblyomma spp.
Clinical Importance: Hyalomma species cause tick toxicosis and serve as vectors of Babesia,
Theileria, and Rickettsia spp.
Fig. 5.50. Larval or seed ticks, so called because of their small size. This tick has been treated with a clearing solution.
Larval ticks are much smaller than adults and have only six legs. Seed ticks of some species may attach in large numbers
R
to domestic animals or humans.
+
Fig. 5.51. Ambyomma vartegatum: [tejt) male; (righl) temale. Ine tropical pont uick 1s an important vector of heartwater
in cattle. This tick is also found in the Carribean.
Fig. 5.52. Ambtyomma spp. are common in the tropics and subtropics. They are often highly ornamented with iridescent
markings like these African Amblyomma. Some tick genera, like Amblyomma, have simple eyes on the margin of the scutum
(arYows).
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.53. Hyalomma spp. ticks are important disease vectors in Africa, Asia, and Australasia, although they are not found
in the Western Hemisphere. They have long mouthparts, eyes, and festoons like Ambtyomma but are not highly
ornarmented.
253
254
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Ixodes spp. (Figs. 5.54-5.56; see also Figs. 5.45, 5.65)
Common name: Black-legged tick, deer tick, European sheep tick (castor bean tick),
hedgehog tick, British dog tick, Australian and South African paralysis ticks.
200species.
Host: Many host species, including domestic animals and humans.
Geographic Distribution: Some of the most important species in domestic animals include I.
I. ricinus (sheep or castor bean tick), I. canisuga (British dog tick), and I. hexagonus (hedgehog
tick) in Europe; I. rubicundus (South African paralysis tick); and I. holocyclus (Australian paralysis
tick).
Location on Host: Various.
Life Cycle: Ixodes species are three-host ticks.
Laboratory Diagnosis: The most helpful characteristic for identification of Ixodes ticks is an anal
 y 's aun on oa isnf on poq an jo u nsd an y sn  a
glass or dissecting-type microscope may be needed to appreciate this feature.
Clinical Importance: Ixodes spp. in North America and Europe are vectors of Lyme borreliosis
and several species of Ehrlichia. Ixodes ricinus also transmits louping-ill and Babesia spp. in
Europe. Species of this genus can also cause dermatitis and tick worry and are major causes of tick
paralysis in Australia and South Africa.
R
R
+
BROOMALL
Fig. 5.54. Nymph and adult female Ixodes scaputaris, the deer tick. This species is the primary vector of Lyme disease in
the United States and is smaller than other common ticks (see Fig. 5.44 for comparison).
Fig. 5.55. The scutum of Ixodes scapularis is not ornamented. Photo courtesy of Agricultural Research Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.56. The distinctive morphologic detail of the Ixodes ticks is the groove that runs anterior to the anus (arrow). In
other tick genera, this groove is posterior to the anus or absent. Ixodes ticks also have long mouthparts.
255
256
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Dermacentor spp. (Figs. 5.57-5.60; see also Fig. 5.45)
Common name: American dog tick, Rocky Mountain wood tick, winter tick, tropical
horse tick.
Taxonomy: Tick (family Ixodidae).
Host: Depending on the species, a wide variety of wild and domestic hosts can be used.
(American dog tick), D. andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick), D. albipictus (winter or elk or
horse tick), and D. occidentalis (Pacific Coast tick) are found in North America and parasitize a
variety of animals. Dermacentor (=A nocentor) nitens is a parasite of equids in Florida, the Caribbean,
and Latin America. In Europe, D. reticulatus is an important species.
Location on Host: Various.
pue iae ui supon ls iayand eun son isou-aan ae dds ouama ison al a
nymphal stages and larger vertebrates in the adult stage. Dermacentor nitens and D. albipictus are
one-host ticks.
Laboratory Diagnosis : Dermacentor spp. are usually ormamented with relatively short mouthparts
and a rectangular basis capitulum.
Clinical Importance: Dermacentor spp. in the United States are the most common vectors of
Rocky Mountain spotted fever and can also transmit anaplasmosis to cattle. Dermacentor (Anocentor)
nitens is the vector of equine babesiosis in the United States. In Europe, D. reticulatus is the vector
of equine and canine babesiosis. Several species of Dermacentor are known to cause tick
paralysis.
American dog tick) is an ornamented tick. The short mouthparts, rectangular shape of the basis capituli, and presence of
festoons are used in identifying the genus.
 
central and western United States and Canada. Photo courtesy of James Gathany and Christopher Paddock, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (Public Health Image Library).
Fig. 5.59. Male Dermacentor albipictus, the winter or moose tick. This is a brown variant of the tick, which is usually
ornamented. lt occurs widely in the United States and Canada and is most active in winter. Photo courtesy of Dr. Susan
Little,Oklahoma State University,Stillwater, OK.
ARTHROPODS
 is a one-host tick species that prefers horses as host but will attach to many mammals. It is important as a vector of equine
piroplasmosis in Latin America, the Caribbean, Texas, and Florida.
257
258
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Rhipicephalus spp. (Figs. 5.61-5.66; see also Fig. 5.45)
Common name: Brown dog tick or kennel tick, brown ear tick, red-legged tick, cattle
fever tick, blue tick, tropical cattle tick.
Taxonomy: Tick (family Ixodidae). Important parasites of domestic animals include R. sanguineus
(brown dog tick), R. appendiculatus (brown ear tick), and R. evertsi (red-legged tick). Ticks previ-
ously classified in the genus Boophilus are now included in Rhipicephalus, including the former B.
microplus (tropical cattle tick), B. annulatus (cattle fever tick), and B. decoloratus (blue tick).
Host: This genus is most important in livestock and dogs.
Geographic Distribution: Rhipicephalus sanguineus is found worldwide. Rhipicephalus appen-
diculatus and R. evertsi are found on livestock in Africa. Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) microplus
(tropical cattle tick) is found worldwide; R. annulatus (cattle fever tick) is found in the Westem
Hemisphere and parts of Africa; R. decoloratus (blue tick) is an African tick.
Location on Host: Various.
Life Cycle: Rhipicephalus sanguineus is a three-host tick that uses a dog host for each stage of
the life cycle. Rhipicephalus appendiculatus is also a three-host tick, while R. evertsi is a two-host
tick and R. microplus, R. annulatus, and R. decoforatus are one-host ticks. After hatching from the
egg in the environment, ticks locate the host, where they remain through the subsequent nymphal
and adult stages. Females leave the host to lay their eggs in the environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Rhipicephalus spp. have a hexagonally shaped basis capitulum. The
members of the genus that was formally called Boophilus have ridged palps.
Clinical Importance: Rhipicephalus sanguineus transmits Babesia canis and Ehrlichia canis to
dogs. Rhipicephalus species infesting livestock, including R. appendiculatus, R. evertsi, R. micro-
plus, and R. annulatus are the primary vectors of bovine theileriosis and babesiosis and also transmit
anaplasmosis and Nairobi sheep disease to livestock
States, it is most common in southern states but can also be a pest in kennels in other areas since dogs are used as hosts
for every stage of the life cycle. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
Fig. 5.62. Rhipicephatus sanguineus male (tef)
and female (right). There are no markings on the
scutum of this tick.
Fig. 5.63. The brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus
sanguineus. Members of this tick genus have a
basis capituli that is hexagonal in shape with
fared sides (arrow; see also Fig. 5.42).
ARTHROPODS
Fig.5.64.Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) microptus
female (left) and (mate). This is a one-host tick
of cattle that acts as the vector for bovine
babesiosis.
259
260
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Haemaphysalis spp. (Figs. 5.65, 5.67-5.68; see also Fig. 5.45)
Common name: Rabbit tick, yellow dog tick, bush tick.
Taxonomy: Tick (family Ixodidae).
 uo supudap 'spi pu se jo sun apim e azsd sn ssayr so
species.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide. Haemaphysalis feporispalustris (rabbit tick) is found in the
Westem Hemisphere; H. leachi is the yellow dog tick found in Africa and parts of Asia; and several
species parasitize livestock in Europe, Africa, Asia, and Australasia.
Location on Host: Various.
Life Cycle: Haemaphysalis spp. are three-host ticks and leave the host after each blood meal.
Larvae and nymphs typically feed on small mammals and birds, and adult ticks feed on larger
mammals.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Ticks of this genus have festoons, and the second segment of the palps
flares out on the lateral margin.
Clinical Importance: Large numbers of Haemaphysalis ticks contribute to poor condition and
"tick worry" Haemaphysalis punctata can transmit several species of Babesia and anaplasmosis to
livestock. Haemaphysalis leachi is a vector of canine babesiosis. This genus is of minor importance
in North America.
R
+
Fig. 5.65. From left to right, engorged Ixodes, Haemaphysalis, and Rhipicephalus females. Photo courtesy of Dr. Nick
Sangster and Ms. Sally Pope, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
Fig. 5.66. The ridged palps of Rhipicephautus (Boophitus) microptus (arrow) can be seen more clearly in this cleared
specimen. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
Fig. 5.67. Haemaphysalis leporispatustris, the rabbit tick, is found in North America and can carry the bacterial agent of
tularemia, Francisetla tularensis.Other members of this tick genus are vectors of Babesia and Theileria in Africa, Asia,
and Australasia. The female tick in this photo (right) has host skin tissue attached to the mouthparts.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.68. The palps of Haemaphysatis ticks are wider than they are long, and in some species, the second segment of the
palps fares Jaterally (arrow).
261
262
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Otobius megnini (Figs. 5.69-5.71)
Common name: Spinose ear tick.
Taxonomy: Tick (family Argasidae)
Host: Ruminants and horses primarily, also camelids and small animals
Geographic Distribution: North and South America, Africa, India.
Location on Host: External ear canal.
Life Cycle: Eggs hatch in the environment. Ticks enter the ear of the host and may remain for
to the adult stage, which does not feed.
Laboratory Diagnosis: These ticks are easily diagnosed based on host location and recognition
of specimens as soft ticks. Otobius is covered with short spines, leading to the name spinose ear
tick. Hard ticks may also attach in the ears, but they have a distinctive hard, enameled appearance
compared with soft ticks like Otobius. Also, any adult-stage ticks found in the ears will not be
 Otobius, since spinose ear ticks are parasitic only as larvae and nymphs.
Clinical Importance: Large numbers can cause severe inflammation and rupture the ear drum.
+
Fig. 5.69. Otobius, the spinose ear tick and Dermacentor andersoni. This picture clearly demonstrates the difference
between hard and soft ticks. The soft tick, Otobius (lef), does not have the hard enamel-like surface of the lxodid tick,
Dermacentor (right). The capitulum of soft ticks is also not visible from the dorsal surface. Photo courtesy of Dr. Susan
Little, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK.
Fig. 5.70. Only larvae and nymphs of Otobius, the spinose ear tick, are parasites. They are found clustered in the ears of
the host. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.71. This closer view of Otobius shows the spines that cover the surface of the tick. Photo courtesy of Dr. Susan
Little, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK.
263
264
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Argas spp. (Fig. 5.72)
Common name: Fowl tick.
Taxonomy: Tick (family Argasidae). Important species include Argas persicus and Argas refexus.
Host: Poultry and wild birds.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Various.
Life Cycle: Argas is a soft tick that lives in the environment, attacking birds only to feed, usually
during the night. Several blood meals are taken by larval and adult ticks.
Laboratory Diagnosis: As their name suggests, soft ticks lack the hard “enameled" appearance
of hard ticks. The mouthparts of soft ticks cannot be seen from the dorsal surface, which also helps
 o   s s      o
Clinical Importance: Heavy burdens can cause loss of production and death. Argas spp. act as
vectors for Borrelia anserine and can cause fowl paralysis. They are uncommon in total-confinement
poultry systems.
PARASlTE: Ornithodoros spp. (Fig. 5.73)
Common name: Tampan.
one of the species found in the United States.
Host: Domestic livestock and humans.
Geographic Distribution: Africa, Asia, North and South America.
Location on Host: Various.
Life Cycle: These ticks are often nocturnal and are found in animal or human habitations, includ-
ing dens, nests, or crevices of buildings.
sutural line and there is no distinct body margin.
R
TE
Clinical Importance: Large numbers of these soft ticks can cause significant blood loss.
IRO
Ornithodoros transmits endemic relapsing fever in humans. In the United States, Ornithodoros ticks
are most common in the western and southwesterm states.
1DS
CLASS INSECTA
Like ticks and mites, insects also belong to the phylum Arthropoda. All insects have bodies com-
ss ipv uap an pue (sa aun seaq y) xaun aun pau an shed saun o psod
have six legs and some have wings. Life cycles of parasitic insects may be quite simple, in which
larval stages are similar in appearance to the adults, or very complex, involving transformation
from a wormlike maggot to a pupa and then to the adult. The insects of greatest veterinary impor-
tance are the lice, fleas, and fies.
Fig. 5.72. Argas sp., the fowl tick, is a soft tick. The ventral location of the mouthparts is clearly seen in this organism.
The surface of Argus is granulated. Photo courtesy of Dr. Dwight Bowman, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY.
Fig. 5.73. The surface of the soft tick Ornithodoros is covered with mammillae (small bumps) and there is no distinct
margin to the body.
ARTHROPODS
265
266
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Lice (Orders Anoplura and Mallophaga)
Lice are wingless, dorsoventrally fattened insects ranging in length from about 1 to 8 mm. They
losis." Lice are highly species specific, and the entire life cycle is completed on the host. Immature
lice resemble adults but are smaller. Eggs (nits) may be observed attached individually to hair shafts
and sometimes as white to yellow masses at the bases of feathers on birds. With close attention,
lice can usually be seen with the unaided eye.
Lice are divided into two orders: Mallophaga (chewing or biting lice) and Anoplura (sucking
lice). Birds are parasitized only by biting lice, while both biting and sucking lice are found on
mammals. The biting lice feed on skin scurf and other organic material on the skin. In contrast,
sucking lice feed on blood. Biting lice move rapidly, while sucking lice move more slowly and may
be seen head down close to the skin surface or actually feeding. Mallophaga have blunt heads that
are wider than the thorax and mandible-like mouthparts and are often a yellow color. Anoplura are
generally larger than chewing lice and are gray to dusky red, depending on the quantity of blood in
their intestines. The head of sucking lice is narrower than the thorax and has elongated protrusible
plercing mouthparts. W hile species identification of lice is usually not required in veterinary practice,
recognition of an organism as a biting or sucking louse may be helpful when selecting treatment.
a stiff-bristled brush. A magnifying lens or dissecting microscope may be useful if lice are very
small. Lice may be transferred into saline, mineral or immersion oil, or into Hoyer's solution on a
microscope slide with fine forceps, a swab, or a needle moistened with the same material.
PARASlTE: Hemafopinus spp. (Fig. 5.74)
Common name: Pig louse, short-nosed cattle louse, cattle tail louse
Taxonomy: Insect (order Anoplura).
Host: Species important in domestic animals include H. suis (pigs), H. asini (horses), H. eurys-
ternus (short-nosed sucking louse of cattle), and H. quadripertusus (tail louse of cattle). Sucking
lice are also found on camelids (genus Microthoracius).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide. Hematopinus quadripertusus is found primarily in the
tropics and subtropics.
Location on Host: Hematopinus spp. are often found on the head, neck, and back of the host.
R
Haematopinus quadripertusus is usually found around the tail.
+
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact or fomites. Eggs are glued to the hairs of the host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Members of this genus are large, about 45 mm in length, with the elon-
gated heads typical of the sucking lice.
Clinical Importance: Hematopinus infestations can produce alopecia and pruritus, leading to
self-inflicted trauma and production losses. Heavy infestations can produce anemia. Haematopinus
important cattle louse worldwide. Infestation of horses is uncommon in well-managed stables
PARAS1TE: Linognafhus spp. (Figs. 5.75 and 5.76; see also Fig. 5.83)
Common name: Face louse and foot louse of sheep, long-nosed cattle louse.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Anoplura)
1 mm
Fig. 5.74. Hematopinus spp. have prominent ocular points (arrow) and legs of equal size. Haematopinus suis, shown here,
is the largest louse found on domesticated animals. This dark-colored louse is usually not diffcult to identify on the host.
0.5mm
       i        a    a    
Members of this genus are usually 23 mm in length.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.76. Sucking louse species infesting the skin of a calf. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource,
Inc., Redmond, WA.
267
268
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Linognathus (continued)
Host: Linognathus pedalis (ovine foot louse), L. ovillus (ovine face louse), L. vituli (long-nosed
cattle louse), L. africanus (bovine African blue louse), L. setosus (dogs).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: The face and foot lice of sheep are found primarily in those locations; other
species are less restricted in distribution.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact or fomites.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Detection of lice and eggs on the host by gross observation.
Clinical Importance: As with other lice, infested animals show pruritus and dermatitis, and severe
 infestations can lead to production losses and anemia.
PARASlTE: Solenopotes capillafus (Fig. 5.77)
Common name: Little blue cattle louse.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Anoplura).
Host: Cattle.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Usually found concentrated on the face, neck, shoulders, back, and tail.
Life Cycle: The entire life cycle is spent on the host with transmission by direct contact or fomites.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Solenopotes capillatus is similar in appearance to Linognathus, but
Solenopotes has tubercles carrying spiracles that project from abdominal segments.
Clinical Importance: Large numbers of lice may cause production loss from dermatitis and anemia.
PARAS1TE: Pedicuius spp., Phthirus pubis (Figs. 5.78 and 5.79)
Common name: Human head louse, body louse, crab louse.
Taxonomy:Insects (order Anoplura).Pedicuius humanus humanus is the body louse; Pedicuius
humanus capita is the head louse; and Phthirus pubis is the pubic or crab louse.
R
IRO
Host: Humans.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
1DS
Location on Host: Head lice are found in that region, while body lice live principally in clothing
and visit the skin to feed. Crab lice are found in the pubic area or on other coarse body hair.
Life Cycle: Transmission of all human lice infestations is by direct contact or fomites. Head and
crab lice glue their eggs to host hair, while body lice deposit their eggs in clothing.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Observation of lice and eggs.
lies in the occasional detection of a human louse on a pet and resulting confusion about who gave
what to whom. In these cases, the family pet has lice only because of close contact with infested
humans. Human lice do not survive and reproduce on domestic animals.
0.3 mm
carrying spiracles on the abdominal segments of Sotenopotes (arrow) are helpful in identification of this louse. Photo
 courtesy of Merial.
0.5mm
Fig. 5.78. Pedicutus humanus has well-developed eyes, no ocular points, and three large pairs of legs.
ARTHROPODS
0.4mm
Fig. 5.79. The human crab louse, Phthirus pubis, has a distinctive crab-shaped body.
269
270
VETERINARYCLINICALPARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Sucking Lice of Laboratory Animals (Figs. 5.80 and 5.81)
Taxonomy: Insect (order Anoplura).
Host: Rodents, rabbits.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Predilection sites variable, depending on species.
Life Cycle: As with other lice, transmission is by direct contact with an infested animal or fomites.
 ss   o s   lo    h
PARAS1TE: Bovicola spp. (Figs. 5.82-5.87)
Common name: Biting louse.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Mallophaga).
Host: Bovicola bovis (cattle), B. equi (horses), B. ovis (sheep), B. caprae (goats), B. breviceps
(camelids).
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: In general, preferred sites include the neck, shoulder, and back, but lice can
spread throughout the body.
Life Cycle: Like the sucking lice, all stages of biting lice are found on the host, and transmission
is by direct contact with an infested animal or fomites.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Infested animals should be observed, although Bovicola spp. are only a
few millimeters in length and may be difficult to see. Hair coat brushings can also be examined
with a magnifying glass.
Clinical Importance: These common extermal parasites cause pruritus and dermatitis and are
associated with production losses and secondary infections in heavy infestations.
ARTE
HRO
1DS
0.2mm
specimen.
Jo sisoue u gda st sueu au uo (su,) saaa a jo auasand au ey neu e on pan sa xaod ia's 6
infestation.
ARTHROPODS
0.4mm
Fig. 5.82. Like other biting lice, the head of Bovicola spp. is broader than the thorax. Pictured here is the bovine parasite
Bovicola bovis. Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan,
KS.
271
1mm
Fig. 5.83. Biting lice of domestic animals are usually smaller than sucking lice. Bovicola bovis (arrow) is pictured here
with one of the bovine sucking lice, Linognathus. Photo courtesy of Dr. Robert Ridley, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
Fig. 5.84. Bovicola ovis is a small white or tan louse that can be very difficult to detect on a heavily feeced sheep. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
R
+
+
10
Fig. 5.85. Section of bovine skin with louse eggs (nits) attached to the hairs. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams,
Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
272
Fig. 5.86. Biting lice ( Bovicola equi) in the hairs of a horse.
Fig. 5.87. Lesions on the shoulder and neck of a horse with a heavy burden of biting lice. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey
F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, lnc., Redmond, WA.
ARTHROPODS
273
274
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Trichodectes canis (Figs. 5.88-5.90)
Taxonomy: Insect (order Mallophaga).
Host: Dogs and other canids. Cats have their own species of biting louse, Felicola subrostratus.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide. Another species of biting louse, Heterodoxus spinigera,
may also be found on dogs in tropical and subtropical areas.
Location on Host: Predilection sites for T. canis are the head, neck, and tail, but lice will be found
throughout the hair coat in heavy infestations.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact or fomites. Louse eggs are glued to host hairs.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Recovery and identification of lice. Felicola is the only louse infesting
cats, although infestations on cats may be difficult to diagnose because of the effective grooming
habits of the host. Dogs can be infested with the biting lice Trichodectes and Heterodoxus, as well
as the sucking louse, Linognathus setosus.
Clinical Importance: Large infestations of lice cause pruritus and poor hair condition. Trichodectes
is the most common dog louse seen in the United States and can act as an intermediate host for the
tapeworm Dipylidium caninum.
+
0.3mm
Fig. 5.88. Trichodectes canis is the canine biting louse.
0.2mm
Fig. 5.89. The head of Felicota subrostratus, the feline biting louse, is notched at the tip.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.90. White louse eggs (nits) can be seen attached to the hairs of this infested kitten. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F.
Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
275
276
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Avian Lice (Figs. 5.91-5.93)
Taxonomy: Insects (order Mallophaga).
Host: Lice are common external parasites of birds, and multiple louse species may be found occu-
  a n e l snas is as an u su a ds
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Lice can be found on all areas of birds, with different species showing specific
predilection sites.
Life Cycle: Similar to other lice; the entire life cycle is spent on the host, and transmission is by
direct contact or fomites.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Detection of lice and eggs on the host with morphologic identification of
lice.
Clinical Importance: Heavy infestations may cause loss of condition. Sick or malnourished birds
often carry large numbers of lice.
0.3mm
Fig. 5.91. There are more than 700 species of avian lice, all of which are biting lice. They show a variety of body shapes.
Shown here is Menopon gallinae, the shaft louse of chickens.
0.4mm
Fig. 5.92. Lipeurus caponis, the wing louse of poultry.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.93. Cotumbicuta columbae, the slender pigeon louse, on the flight feathers of a pigeon. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey
F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
277
278
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Gliricola porcelli (Fig. 5.94)
Common name: Slender guinea pig louse.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Mallophaga).
Host: Gliricola porcelli is the most common louse of guinea pigs. Two other species of biting lice,
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Gliricola porcelli prefers the fine hair around the back legs and anus, whereas
Gyropus ovalis is found around the head and face.
Life Cycle: Transmission is by direct contact
Laboratory Diagnosis: Detection and identification of lice and eggs. Gyropus ovalis is a broader
louse than Gliricola and has a wide head. Eggs of Gyropus ovalis can be found most easily around
the back of the ears. Trimenopon jenningsi is a dark brown louse that is less common than the other
two species.
Clinical Importance: Light infestations are usually asymptomatic. Heavier infestations may be
associated with hair loss, unthriftiness, and pruritus, especially at the back of the ears. Louse infes-
tation may not be evident until the death of the host, when lice move up to the hair tips as the body
temperature declines.
R
R
+
0.2mm
Fig. 5.94. Gliricota porcelli, one of three species of biting louse infecting guinea pigs.
ARTHROPODS
279
280
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Fleas (Order Siphonaptera)
Fleas are laterally compressed, wingless insects, typically medium to dark brown in color. Unlike
many insects, they do not demonstrate clear delineations between body regions (head, thorax, and
abdomen). The sucking mouthparts are usually seen protruding from the ventral aspect of the head.
The three pairs of legs originate on the thorax. The enlarged third pair of legs facilitates the incred-
ible jumping potential of these insects. In veterinary medicine, feas are most often encountered on
dogs and cats; however, they also live on a variety of other animals, including birds. Fleas are more
likely than lice to move onto a different host species if the preferred host is unavailable, although
they may leave after obtaining a blood meal. The adult fea is the only parasitic stage of the life
cycle. The egg, larva, and pupa are found in the environment.
quick-acting insecticide and then removing individual feas from the hair coat or combing them out
with a flea comb. On birds, fleas may be attached to the unfeathered portions of the host and can
be removed with forceps. Fleas should be placed in 70% ethanol for fixation and storage. They may
be cleared in 5%potassium hydroxide or mounted in Hoyer's solution to allow visualization of
reproductive structures used in identification. The presence of combs on the cheek (genal comb) or
at the back of the first thoracic segment (pronotal comb), the shape of the head, and host preference
When submitting feas for identification, it is best to submit as many individuals as possible to
ensure that both sexes are represented and that structures damaged on one individual are still intact
On another.
PICTORIAL KEYTO SOME COMMON FLEAS IN THEUNITED STATES
Genal and pronortal
Pronotal comb
Genal and pronotal
combs present
present
combs absent
Mie
onotal comb
Genal comb-
Genal comb of 5 or more
Genal comb of 4 spines
Labial palps not ex-
Labial palps ex-
Front margin ot
Front margin of
 spines. Eye present
Eye absent
tending beyond tro-
tending beyond tro-
iterofirstleg
headangular
Thorax normal
Thorax contracted
me
Genal comb
Genal comb
MOUSEFLEA
GROUND SQUIRREL FLEA
STICKTIGHT FLEA
horizontal
vertical
Leptopsylla
Diamanus
Echidnophaga
Spines pointed
Spines blunt
segnis
montanus
gallinacea
RABBIT FLEA
Cediopsylla
simplex
Segment 5 of
Segment 5 of hind
Mesopleurone not
 Mesopleurone divided
hind tarsus with
tarsus withI pair
divided by vertical
byverticalrodlike
5 pairs lateral
vetral (basal) and
thickening
thickening
Head length less
Head length
plantar bristles
4pairslateral
than twice height
twice height
plantar bristles
Spine I~
mre
Ocular bristle
Spine Il-
SpineIof genal
Spine I and spine
PREPARED BY H. D. PRATT
Spermatheca
comb distinctly
Ilof genal comb
shorter than
approximately
Ocular bristle in-
 Ocular bristle inserted
equal in length
COMMUNICABLE DISEASECENTER
PUBUC HEALTH SERVICE
serted beloweye
spine Il
in front of eye
DOG FLEA
CATFLEA
ATLANTA GEORGIA
NORTHERN RAT FLEA
SQUIRRELFLEA
HUMAN FLEA
ORIENTAL RAT FLEA
Ctenocephafioes
JUNE, 1956
Nosopsyllus
Orchopeas
Pulex
Xenopsylla
canis
fasciatus
howarol
irritans
cheopis
Fig. 5.95. Key to common fea species in the United States. Courtesy of U.S. Public Health Service, CDC.
ARTHROPODS
282
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Ctenocephalides felis felis (Figs. 5.96-5.99)
Common name: Cat fea.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Siphonaptera). A similar species, Ctenocephalides canis, also occurs but
is less common than C. felis felis on both dogs and cats.
Host: Cats, dogs, ferrets. Occasionally, populations may adapt to living on confined animals, such
as goats or calves in a barm.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide. Ctenocephalides is the most common fea of dogs and cats.
Location on Host: Fleas can be found throughout the hair coat, but predilection sites include the
tailhead, neck, and flanks.
hatch in the environment. Flea larvae feed on organic debris and adult fea feces and pupate in the
environment. Adults are stimulated to emerge from the pupa by vibration and mechanical compres-
Laboratory Diagnosis: Cat feas have both pronotal and genal combs.
Size:
Adult female
approximately 2.5 mm in length
Adult male
approximately 1 mm in length
Larva
approximately 5 mm in length
Clinical Importance: Low levels of fea infestation may be mildly pruritic. Large fea populations
can produce severe pruritus, alopecia, and anemia. Animals that develop fea-bite hypersensitivity
may suffer severe dermatologic disease even when fea numbers are very low.
+
ficult to differentiate from the less common Ctenocephalides canis. Characteristics helpful in identifying this genus are the
genal and pronotal combs. Photo courtesy of Dr. Byron Blagburn, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University,
Auburn,AL.
Fig. 5.97. Male Ctenocephalides fetis fetis. Male cat feas are smaller than females. Photo courtesy of Dr. Byron Blagburn,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL
Fig. 5.98. Ctenocephatides spp. egs are about 0.5mm long (arrow). Larvae and pupae (covered with sand grains) of the
cat fea are also shown in this figure. The surface of the pupa is sticky and becomes camoufaged with environmental debris.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Byron Blagburn, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.99. Pet owners may find larvae of the cat fea, C. felis felis, in their homes and present them for identification. Mature
Jarvae are about 5 mm long. The two "anal stuts" projecting from the posterior end of the body (arrow) are distinctive. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Byron Blagburn, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL.
283
284
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Pulex irritans (Fig. 5.100)
Common name: Human flea.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Siphonaptera). Pulex simulans is a closely related species found on dogs
and cats in the New World.
Host: Humans, pigs, dogs, cats.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: General distribution on the host.
Life Cycle: Like C. felis felis, only adults are found on the host; other stages are present in the
environment.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Identification of adult feas. Pulex irritans has no genal or pronotal combs
and possesses an ocular bristle below the eye.
Clinical Importance: Worldwide, P irritans is found more often on swine than on humans or cats
and dogs. Heavy fea infestations can produce intense irritation and pruritus. Pulex irritans is
uncommon in North America, although it has been recorded from most states in the United States.
Pulex spp. can serve as a vector of Yersinia pestis, the bubonic plague bacillus, and Rickettsia typhi,
the agent of murine typhus.
PARAS1TE: Fleas of Rodents and Rabbits (Figs. 5.101 and 5.102)
Taxonomy: Insects (order Siphonaptera).
Host: A variety of species parasitize rodents and rabbits, including Xenopsylla cheopsis (oriental
rat flea), an important vector of bubonic plague. Xenopsylla cheopsis will also readily feed on dogs,
cats, humans, and other animals when normal rodent hosts are unavailable.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: General distribution on the host. Spilopsyllus cuniculi, a flea of rabbits, attaches
to the skin in the ears for long periods of time in a manner similar to Echidnophaga gallinacea,
the sticktight flea of birds (see below).
Life Cycle: Similar to other feas. Some species of rodent fea only visit the host to feed, unlike
R
the common cat fea, which is resident on the host as an adult.
R
+
Laboratory Diagnosis: Rodent and rabbit  fleas are identified based on morphologic
characteristics.
Clinical Importance: Xenopsylla cheopsis and some other rodent feas are vectors of bubonic
plague, caused by Yersinia pestis, and murine typhus, caused by Rickettsia typhi. Because the bac-
teria interfere with normal fea feeding, fleas rapidly move from host to host, spreading infection.
Other rodent feas can transmit tapeworms, trypanosomes, and myxomatosis to rabbits.
Fig. 5.1O0. The human fea, Pulex irritans, is less common on people in industrialized countries. lt may also be found on
companion animals and pigs. The absence of genal and pronotal combs and location of the ocular bristle are helpful in
identification.
Fig. 5.101. Xenopsyfla cheopsis, the oriental rat fea. Fleas belonging to several genera are found on rodents and rabbits.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Byron Blagburn, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn AL.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.102. Cediopsylla simptex, a rabbit fea. Photo courtesy of Dr. David Baker, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana
State University, Baton Rouge, LA.
285
286
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Echidnophaga gallinacea, Ceratophyllus spp. (Fig. 5.103)
Common name: Sticktight flea, European chicken flea.
Taxonomy: Insects (order Siphonaptera).
Host: Echidnophaga gallinacea, the sticktight fea, is found on poultry, wild birds, and occasion-
ally on dogs, cats, and other animals. Ceratophyllus spp. are parasites of wild and domestic birds,
especially chickens.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide. Echidnophaga is found primarily in tropical and subtropi-
cal regions of the New World.
Location on Host: The sticktight fea is usually found on nonfeathered skin on the head, comb,
and wattles of poultry.
Life Cycle: The life cycle of poultry fleas is similar to other fleas, but female Echidnophaga attach
permanently to the head of the host. Eggs are deposited either onto the ground or into the sore
created at the attachment site.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Identification of adult feas. Female Echidnophaga can be identified by
their location and attachment. This species also lacks genal and pronotal combs and has a sharply
angled head. Ceratophyllus has a pronotal comb.
Size:
Female Echidnophaga
approximately 2 mm in length
Ceratophyllus
approximately 4mm in length
 Clinical Importance: Sticktight feas may cause severe irritation by their attachment to birds and
other hosts. Heavy infestations can produce anemia. In wild birds, attachment near the eyes may
lead to blindness and death. Heavy infestations of Ceratophyllus have been associated with anemia,
restlessness, and decreased production.
R
R
+
Fig. 5.103. Echidnophaga galinacea, the sticktight fea, has no combs and a sharply angled head.
ARTHROPODS
287
288
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Flies (Order Diptera)
Flies belong to the order Diptera, and some species are parasites in the adult or larval stage. Parasitic
adult flies are usually blood feeders. Larval fies parasitizing animals are referred to as either "bots"
("grubs" and "warbles" are synonymous terms) or "maggots." Bots are obligate parasites found in
specific intermal locations in the host. Mature bot larvae are barrel shaped and may have rows of
spines on the body. Maggots are fly larvae associated with "fly strike,” or "fly blow." In most cases,
they are opportunistic parasites. Adult flies attracted to wounds or hair stained with feces or blood
lay their eggs on the animal, and larvae feed on debris and necrotic tissue. Maggots are more elon-
gated than bots and are narrower at the anterior than at the posterior end. They are usually present
on the surface of the body in conjunction with wounds or hair soiled with feces, urine, blood, or
other organic material. A specialist can identify the genus of a bot or maggot by examining the
pattern of the spiracular plates surrounding the breathing holes (spiracles) on the posterior end of
the larva.
PARAS1TE: Cuterebra spp. (Figs. 5.104-5.106)
Common name: Rodent bot fly.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Diptera).
Host: Rodents and rabbits are the principal hosts. Dogs, cats, and rarely humans may also be
infected.
Geographic Distribution: Westerm Hemisphere.
Location on Host: Larvae are found in subcutaneous cysts in various locations. In dogs and cats,
they are seen most often on the head and neck.
a pe si oo pn a 'shn o sao son p sa i s n aa a
through facial orifices. Following migration to subcutaneous sites, the Cuterebra larva forms a
visible nodule with an extemal breathing hole. After completing development, the larva leaves the
host through the breathing hole and pupates on the ground.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Cuterebra larvae can usually be identified by location on the host. Specific
Clinical Importance: The presence of one or two bots in both the normal rodent hosts or dogs
R
T
and cats is usually not associated with clinical problems, although secondary bacterial infections
IRO
may develop. In dogs and cats, abnormal migration to the nervous system or other tissues occasion-
ally occurs and produces disease.
1DS
Fig. 5.104. Cuterebra larvae are about 2.5cm in length and dark colored when fully developed. Photo courtesy of Dr.
Philip Scholl, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE
Fig. 5.1 05. Veterinary practitioners occasionally remove young Cuterebra larvae from animals and, because of their small
size and white color, may have difficulty recognizing them as Cuterebra. Starting at the left, this figure shows larvae at 6,
8, 10, and 13 days after infestation of the host. Photo courtesy of Dr. Philip Scholl, Agricultural Research Service, US.
Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.106. This lesion caused by Cuterebra in a cat has become secondarily infected. The posterior end of the bot with
its brown spiracular plates is visible (arrow). Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond,
WA.
289
290
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Gastrophilus spp. (Figs. 5.107-5.109)
Common name: Stomach bot.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Diptera). Species include G. intestinalis, G. nasalis, and
G.haemorrhoidalis.
Host: Horses and other equids.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Equine stomach.
Life Cycle: Adult flies deposit eggs on the legs or face of horses. After hatching, larvae enter
through the mouth and spend a period of development on the tongue and gums before moving to
on the ground.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Bots are usually identified by presence in the stomach at necropsy, but
they may also be seen in the feces at different stages of development following treatment of the
host with macrolide anthelmintics. They can be recognized as bots by their barrel shape and rows
of spines.
Clinical Importance: Horses appear to tolerate small to moderate burdens of bots. Large numbers
may cause gastric ulceration. In rare instances, humans in close contact with horses are infested
and develop a transient dermatitis usually occurring on the face.
R
R
+
Fig. 5.107. Equine stomach bot, Gastrophitus. Species can be distinguished based on patterns of spines on the body, but
species identification is unnecessary for control and treatment of the parasite. Photo courtesy of Dr. Philip Scholl Agricultural
Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
Fig. 5.108. Second-instar Gastrophitus larvae. Following treatment with macrolide anthelmintics or other effective drugs,
young Gastrophitus larvae may also be present in manure. Although the less mature larvae lack the barrel shape of mature
bots, they still show the distinctive rows of spines around each segment. Photo courtesy of Dr. Philip Scholl, Agricultural
Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.109. The eggs of Gastrophitus intestinalis, the most common equine bot species, can be seen attached to the hairs
of the forelegs. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
291
292
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Hypoderma bovis, H. lineatum (Figs. 5.110-5.112)
Common name: Cattle grub, ox warble.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Diptera).
Host: Cattle are the normal hosts; horses and goats are occasionally infested. Other species of
Hypoderma parasitize deer and reindeer, and Przhevalskiana silenus is a similar parasite of goats
in the Mediterranean region.
Geographic Distribution: North America, Europe, Asia.
Location on Host: Visible nodules with an extermal opening appear on the backs of infested
animals.
Life Cycle: Adult fies deposit eggs on cattle. After hatching, larvae penetrate through the skin and
migrate to sites either along the esophagus or in the tissue surrounding the spinal cord. After a
period of development lasting several months, the larvae migrate to the host's back and form sub-
cutaneous nodules with a breathing hole. After several more months of development, larvae emerge
and pupate on the ground and adult fies are formed.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Diagnosis can usually be made based on parasite location in the host and
history.
Clinical Importance: Damage from Hypoderma comes from several sources. Adult fy activity
necrotic tracks in muscle tissue and the hide is damaged for leather production. In addition, if larvae
paralysis.
R
R
+
Fig. 5.110. Early third-instar catle grub, Hypoderma tineatum. Grubs or warbles can be distinguished from fly maggots
by their barrel-shaped bodies and typical location in the host. Photo courtesy of Dr. Philip Scholl, Agricultural Research
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
Fig. 5.111. Hypoderma sp. grub emerging from its subcutaneous location on the back of the bovine host. Photo courtesy
of Dr. Philip Scholl, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE,
and Dr. Jerry Weintraub, Agriculture Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.112. The hairy body of adult warble (bot) fies makes them look more like bees than fies. The presence of adult
warble fies, like this Hypoderma bovis, is distressing to potential hosts, which will actively try to avoid the fies. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Philip Scholl, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska,
Lincoln, NE, and Dr. Jerry Weintraub, Agriculture Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada.
293
294
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Oestrus ovis, Rhinoestrus spp. (Fig. 5.113)
Common name: Nasal bot.
Taxonomy: Insects (order Diptera).
Host: Oestrus ovis larvae are found in sheep and goats. Rhinoestrus larvae are found in horses.
Other species parasitize deer and camels (e.g., Cephalopina titillator).
Geographic Distribution: Oestrus ovis is found worldwide. Rhinoestrus infestation occurs in
Africa, Europe, and Asia.
Location on Host: Nasal passages and sinuses.
Life Cycle: Adult female flies deposit larvae in or near the nasal passages. Larvae develop in nasal
  ad  as a  mno  a a si aa m 'ss  ss
ground.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Nasal bots are not usually presented for identification because of their
location, but they are sometimes found by owners in water troughs or on the ground after they exit
the host. Specific identification is made by examination of the spiracular plates.
or moderate numbers of bots are usually well tolerated. Sheep will attempt to avoid ovipositing
female flies by keeping their muzzles near the ground or under available shelter (buildings, cars,
one another, etc.). Bots occasionally wander to abnormal sites, where they may cause serious
disease.
PARASITE: Dermatobia hominis (Fig. 5.114)
Common name: Human bot fly.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Diptera).
Host: Cattle, humans, dogs, other domestic and wild animals.
Geographic Distribution: Central and South America.
Location on Host: Various subcutaneous sites.
Life Cycle: Adult female Dermatobia glue clusters of eggs to various muscid flies and mosquitoes.
R
When these organisms visit a host, the Dermatobia larvae are deposited and enter the subcutaneous
IRO
tissue, where each larva develops in a nodule with a hole in the skin through which respiration
occurs. Larvae leave the host to pupate.
DS
Laboratory Diagnosis: Identification of larvae is based on shape and patterm of the spiracles.
   n    e     s s  
pest of cattle.
PARAS1TE: Louse Flies, Including Melophagus ovinus (Figs. 5.1 15 and 5.116)
Common name: Sheep ked, louse fly.
Taxonomy: Insects (order Diptera).
Fig. 5.113. Ovine nasal bot, Oestrus ovis. These bots are occasionally seen by producers when they leave the small ruminant
of Agriculture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
Fig. 5.114. Dermatobia hominis bots are often seen in the second-instar larval stage. At this stage, they have a distinctive
narrow, spineless posterior end that becomes less prominent as they continue development. Photo courtesy of Dr. Philip
Scholl, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.115. Adult and pupal stages of the sheep ked, Metophagus. Although sometimes mistaken for ticks, these organisms
are insects with six legs and three main body parts. Ked excrement, which resembles fea feces, can also be found on the
host and is helpful in diagnosis. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
295
296
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Louse Flies, Including Melophagus ovinus (continued)
Host: Sheep and goats are parasitized by M. ovinus, the sheep ked. Louse fies may be found on
a variety of animals. Examples include Hippobosca variegata on horses, cattle, and camels;
spq uo dds nyourjopnasd pue ssop uo suuadiuoi nnsoqoddn iaap uo dds puaidodr
             
(Pseudolynchia) are found on domestic animals.
Location on Host: Various.
they lose their wings after finding a host and become permanent parasites. The sheep ked,
Melophagus, has no functional wings and is transmitted only by direct contact of hosts. Adult female
u n o us an o Ai nd n n m s d
Laboratory Diagnosis: Identification is based on adult flies. Hippoboscid flies generally have a
rather flat, leathery appearance compared with other fies. Ked feces, which resemble fea feces,
may be found on the host.
Clinical Importance: Sheep keds can cause significant damage to the skin, making it unsuitable
for leather production, and can also reduce the value of the sheep feece. Biting activity of flies
causes pain and irritation.
PARAS1TE: Fly Strike or Blow Flies (Figs. 5.117 and 5.118)
sey au on uoq as g susno sioi aun o Aun (eadi rapio) soasul uuoxe
Calliphoridae (blow flies) and Sarcophagidae (fesh flies).
Host: Various, not host specific.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Various, wherever there is blood or other body secretion that atracts female
flies.
Life Cycle: Larvae of most of the fies in this group are not obligatory parasites. Adults are
attracted by the odors of decaying organic material and deposit their eggs on carrion. Wounds or
RT
skin on animals soiled with blood or feces may also attract the flies. Larvae feed primarily on
HRO
necrotic material, and when development is completed, they leave the host and pupate in the
environment.
+
1DS
Laboratory Diagnosis: Recognition of maggots on animals is sufficient for diagnosis of fly strike.
Specific identification of fly larvae requires examination of larval spiracles.
of large numbers of maggots may produce tissue destruction, toxemia, and even death.
Fig. 5.116. Typical hippoboscid louse fies showing the Hattened appearance of the body with relatively large legs and
wings. Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin Gajadhar, Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
cases, these fies are not true parasites and would be equally attracted to carrion. Sheep are particularly susceptible to fy
strike in warm weather if wool is persistently wet or becomes soiled with blood or feces. Photo courtesy of Dr. Dwight
Bowman, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, lthaca, NY.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.118. Lucilia spp. is one of the genera of blow fies that cause facultative myiasis (fy strike). Blow fies are typically
metallic blue, green, or bronze in color. Lucitia spp. infestations of sheep are a source of significant economic loss to the
Australian sheep industry. Photo courtesy of Dr. Nick Sangster and Ms. Sally Pope, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University
of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
297
298
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Cochliomyia hominivorax, Chrysomya bezziana (Figs. 5.119 and 5.120)
Common name:Screwworm.
Taxonomy: Insects (order Diptera). Screwworms belong to the blow fly family (Calliphoridae).
di  go are nq sas oo oe ae s pis po srads s
Host: Wild and domestic animals, humans.
Geographic Distribution: Cochliomyia hominivorax, the New World screwworm, is found in
South America. The Old World screwworm, Chrysomya bezziana, occurs in Africa, India, and
Southeast Asia.
Location on Host: Various, often on body openings or the edges of wounds.
Life Cycle: Adult female flies deposit eggs on the host. Larvae feed invasively on living tissue.
Following completion of development, larvae fall to the ground and pupate. Adults emerge and
mate. The entire life cycle can be completed in as little as 24 days.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Examination of larval spiracles is important for larval identification. The
larvae also have two posterior tracheal trunks, which look like dark lines extending anteriorly from
is possible. If screwworm infestation is suspected, larvae should be collected in 70% alcohol and
submitted to federal or state veterinarians for identification.
Clinical Importance: Screwworm infestation is a serious disease that can rapidly lead to the death
Of the host. The parasite was eradicated from the United States in the 1960s through a sterile-male
Central America, with only occasional outbreaks still reported.
PARAS1TE: Biting Flies (Figs. 5.121-5.128)
Common name: Horse fly, deer fy, mosquito, black fy, sand fy, tsetse fy, hom fly,
stable fy, midge, and so on.
Taxonomy: Insects (order Diptera). Biting flies belong to many families within the order.
Host: Domestic and wild animals and humans.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
R
IRO
Location on Host: Various, although many biting flies have predilection sites.
Life Cycle: Like other Diptera, biting flies lay eggs that hatch into larvae. Pupation follows a period
DS
of larval development, followed by the emergence of adult flies. In some biting fly species, like the
mosquito, only the females are blood feeders. In other species, adults of both sexes feed on blood.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Although detailed descriptions of biting flies are not within the scope of
this book, some generalizations can be made that allow basic identification (see figures).
Clinical Importance: Biting flies have enormous importance in veterinary medicine because of
their role as disease vectors. Mosquitoes alone transmit important protozoan, helminth, and viral
diseases of animals and humans. In addition, the activity of biting flies causes irritation, and their
bites can lead to allergic dermatitis and, in some cases of massive fly attacks, even toxemia and
death.
Fig. 5.119. Screwworm infestation on the ear of a calf. lf untreated, these infestations are often fatal. Photo courtesy of
Dr. Donald B. Thomas, US. Department of Agriculture Subtropical Agriculture Research Laboratory, Weslaco, TX.
METRIC1
Fig. 5.120. Screwworm maggots. If screwworm infestation is suspected in the United States, larvae should be submitted
in 70% alcohol to state or federal veterinarians.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.121. Tabanid fies. These large biting fies with big eyes are familiar worldwide. Horse fies may reach 2.5 cm in
length. Deer fies, Chrysops, also belong to this group. Deer fies are smaller and have distinct bands on their wings; horse
flies have unmarked or diffusely marked wings. This figure shows a large Tabanus sp. horse fy. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey
F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
299
Fig. 5.122. Horse fly from the genus Haematopota, which is uncommon in North America. Photo courtesy of Dr. Alvin
Gajadhar,Centre for Animal Parasitology, CFlA,Saskatoon,Saskatchewan,Canada.
Fig. 5.123. Most people in the world need little description of mosquitoes since they are common in so many regions.
parts that are at least twice as long as the head. Photo from Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
+
Fig. 5.124. Cuticoides (midges or no-see-ums) are very small biting fies (rarely larger than 2 mm) with patterned wings.
Species are found worldwide. Photo from Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
300
Fig. 5.125. Stomoxys catcitrans, the common stable fly These fies are very similar in appearance to the house fy, Musca
without magnification. Photo courtesy of Merial.
Fig. 5.126. Horn fies, Haematobia iritans, are a major pest of cattle in North America and other parts of the world. Horn
fies can be identifed by their behavior. They cluster on the dorsum of the host, heads pointing toward the ground. lf dis-
turbed, they fy a short distance into the air and rapidly settle on the host again. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams,
Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
ARTHROPODS
Fig. 5.127. Glossina, the tsetse fy, is the vector of trypanosomiasis in domestic animals and humans in Africa. Species of
University of Guelph,Guelph, Ontario,Canada.
301
302
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Other Insects
PARAS1TE: Cimex spp. (Fig. 5.129)
Common name: Bedbug.
Taxonomy: Insect (order Hemiptera).
Host: Humans and domestic animals. Other members of the genus parasitize birds and bats.
Geographic Distribution: Worldwide.
Location on Host: Bedbugs do not have specific predilection sites on the host.
pe sr ui so aiep puads pue paay on nuau ie Auo isoy an ns snaa raa a
Laboratory Diagnosis: Identification of dorsoventrally fattened insects. Adults are 5-7mm in
domestic animals. In the United States, bedbugs have recently become more common human para-
sites as the use of broad-spectrum pesticides for other insect pests has declined.
R
+
Fig. 5.128. Simutium, the black fy or buffalo gnat, has worldwide distribution. These small fies have a humpbacked
appearance. Eggs are laid in rapidly fowing water. In large numbers, black fies cause irritation, dermatitis, and even fatal
toxemia or exsanguination. Photo courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey F. Williams, Vanson HaloSource, Inc., Redmond, WA.
Fig. 5.129. Adult bedbug, Cimex sp., from a motel in Florida, USA.
ARTHROPODS
303
CHAPTER 6
Parasites of Fish
Stephen A. Smith
Fish can serve as definitive, intermediate, or paratenic (transport) hosts in the life cycle of many
species of protozoan, metazoan, and crustacean parasites. Most of these parasites can be readily
identified grossly or microscopically, and as with mammalian parasites, the correct identification
and an understanding of their life cycle are important in the prevention or management of an out-
break of disease due to parasites.
Protozoan parasites probably cause more disease in both omamental and cultured fish than any
other group of parasites. An example of a common protozoan disease in fish is white spot disease,
or "ich,” caused by Ichthyophthirius muitifiliis in freshwater fish or by Cryptocaryon irritans in
marine species. Other protozoan parasites that commonly occur on fish include Tetrahymena spp.,
Trichodina spp.,Trichophyra spp., Amyloodinium spp., Ichthyobodo spp., and Henneguya spp.
Metazoan parasites can be found as larval or adult forms in almost every tissue of fish. Most
can be grossly identified as monogeneans, digenetic trematodes, nematodes, cestodes, acantho-
cephalans, or crustaceans, but specific identification generally involves special staining techniques
or clearing of specimens.
Examples of common fish helminths include monogeneans on the gills and skin; larval dige-
    p  ss a an  ( n 
todes and nematodes in the visceral organs and abdominal cavity; and an assortment of adult
trematodes, nematodes, cestodes, and acanthocephalans in the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract.
 In addition, a number of arthropod parasites and leeches can be found occurring on or attached to
the skin and fins of fish.
TECHNIQUES FOR RECOVERY OF ECTOPARASITES
A variety of nonlethal techniques that include skin, fin, and gill biopsies have been developed for
the diagnosis of the common extermal parasites of fish. Most of these biopsy techniques can be
performed on live fish without the use of anesthesia, although light sedation often simplifies the
procedure and makes it less stressful for the fish.
Skin Biopsy (Mucus Smear)
HSL
the skin (Fig. 6.1) is one of the most useful and common samples for diagnosing ectoparasitic
problems. This biopsy is performed by gently scraping a small area on the surface of the fish with
a scalpel blade or the edge of a microscope coverslip in a cranial to caudal direction. Care should
305
306
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Fig. 6.2. Collection of a fin biopsy by clipping a small portion of the distal tip of the pectoral fn.
 be taken to use only a minimal amount of pressure to obtain this superficial scraping, since damage
 to the skin may result in secondary bacterial and fungal infections or osmoregulatory imbalance in
the fish.
The mucus from the skin scraping should be transferred immediately to a drop of aquarium,
tank, or pond water (either fresh or salt water, depending on the species of fish, but not city tap
water or distilled water) on a glass microscope slide and a coverslip carefully applied. This wet
 mount should then be examined under the compound microscope for the presence of free-swimming,
attached, or encysted protozoan or metazoan parasites.
Fin Biopsy (Fin Snip)
A fin biopsy (Fig. 6.2) is obtained by snipping a small piece of tissue from the peripheral edge of
  s s s    n n   si d s s  o a
PARASITES OF FISH
307
Fig. 6.3. Collection of a gill biopsy by lifting the operculum (gill chamber cover) and removing a few distal filaments
(Jamellae) of the gill.
wound is produced. The fin snip should be transferred immediately to a drop of aquarium, tank, or
pond water on a glass microscope slide, spread to its full extent, and a coverslip carefully applied.
This wet mount should then be examined under the compound microscope for the presence of
protozoan or metazoan parasites.
Gill Biopsy (Gill Snip)
A gill biopsy (Fig. 6.3) is obtained by inserting the tip of a pair of fine scissors into the branchial
cavity behind the operculum (gill cover) and cutting off the distal ends of several of the primary
gill lamellae attached to the gill arch. Since only the tips of the primary lamellae are removed,
minimal bleeding should occur. The gill tissue should be transferred immediately to a drop of
aquarium, tank, or pond water on a glass microscope slide; the individual lamellae separated; and
a coverslip carefully applied. This wet mount should then be examined under the compound micro-
scope for the presence of protozoan or metazoan parasites.
RECOVERY OF ENDOPARASITES
Examination of fish feces for the presence of intermal parasites is accomplished with the same
techniques as those used for mammals and birds. A fresh fecal sample is collected with a pipette
either from the bottom of the aquarium or as it hangs from the vent of the fish. If an appropriate
the application of gentle pressure on the sides of a netted fish often produces the desired sample.
The fecal specimen is then processed by standard fotation, sedimentation, or direct smear tech-
niques and evaluated for the presence of parasite eggs and larvae. Though specific parasite identi-
fication is generally impossible, fecal examination does provide useful information about the types
HSL
of parasites (nematodes, trematodes, cestodes, acanthocephalans) that may be present in a fish.
308
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITES OF FISH
PARAS1TE: Ichthyophthirius mulfiflis (Figs. 6.4 and 6.5)
Common name: “Ich' or freshwater white spot disease
Taxonomy: Protozoa (ciliate).
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater fish worldwide
Location in Host: Within the surface epithelial layer of the skin, fins, and gills.
Life Cycle: This parasite has a direct life cycle, with free-swimming, ciliated tomites (theronts) in
 a      s     s    s
and forrm large, feeding trophozoites (trophonts) that eventually excyst from the host and enter the
water, where each develops into a cyst. The cyst stage then undergoes multiple divisions, producing
numerous infective tomites that are released to the environment to infect other fishes.
Laboratory Diagnosis: This large, holotrich ciliate has a characteristic C-shaped macronucleus
 and is detected in wet mounts of skin biopsies and gill and fin snips.
Size:
Trophozoite in tissue
up to 1 mm in diameter
Tomite in water
25-50×15-22μm
 of extermal tissues and results in disruption of normal homeostatic osmoregulatory processes.
PARAS1TE: Cryptocaryon irritans (Fig. 6.6)
Common name: Marine white spot disease.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (ciliate).
Geographic Distribution: Marine and brackish water fishes worldwide
Location in Host: Within the surface epithelial layer of the skin, fins, and gills.
Life Cycle: The life cycle is similar to that of freshwater Icthyopththirius multifilis: free-swirmming,
ciliated tomites in the water invade the skin, fins, and gills, penetrate into the epithelial tissues, and
form large, feeding trophozoites that eventually excyst from the host into the water and develop
  s d sis a s n s   's s
that are released to the environment to infect other fishes.
Laboratory Diagnosis: This holotrich ciliate, which does not have a C-shaped nucleus like I.
multifilis, is detected in wet mounts of skin biopsies and gill and fin snips.
Size:
Trophozoite in tissues
up to 1 mm in diameter
Tomite in water
25-50× 15-22μm
FISH
Clinical Importance: Cryptocaryon irritans causes small, raised, white lesions on the skin, fins,
 loss of integrity of extermal tissues and results in disruption of normal homeostatic osmoregulatory
processes.
0.3mm
Fig. 6.4. Ichthyophthirius mulijfilis trophozoite. This ciliate, which produces small, raised, white lesions on the skin, fins,
 and gills of fish, is commonly called "ich" or "white spot disease." This freshwater parasite varies in size, ranging from 100
to 10o0μm, depen ding on the stage of maturation, available nutrition, and host species.
Fig. 6.5. Encysted trophozoite of Ichthyophthirius multifiliis embedded in the epithelial tissues of a gill filament of a
goldfish (Carassius auratus).
工
0.3 mm
Fig. 6.6. Cryptocaryon irritans trophozoite. This ciliated parasite, which has a similar life cycle to Ichthyophthirius mut-
uftliis, occurs in marine fish species.
309
310
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Tetrahymena spp. (Fig. 6.7)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (ciliate). Species include T. corlissi and T. pyriformis.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Trophozoites are generally found on surface epithelial layers of the skin and
'so jee pue 'asn 'sanss us adaap un puon aq Aeuoisooo A gnq su
Life Cycle: This parasite forms reproductive cysts in the freshwater environment in which two to
eight infective tomites are produced.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Small, cylindrical- to pyriform-shaped ciliates can be found in wet mounts
of skin biopsies.
Size:
Trophozoite
55 × 30μm
Clinical Importance: This facultative parasite can become histophagous and invade the skin,
muscle, and intermal organs causing osmoregulatory problems and body system dysfunction.
PARASlTE: Uronema spp., including U. marinum (Fig. 6.8)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (ciliate).
Geographic Distribution: Marine and brackish water fishes worldwide
Location in Host: Surface epithelial layers of skin and fins of marine fish, but may also invade
deeper skin tissues, muscle, and abdominal organs.
Life Cycle: This parasite (similar to freshwater Tetrahymena spp.) forms reproductive cysts in the
 marine environment in which several infective tomites are produced.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Small, cylindrical- to pyriform-shaped ciliates can be found in wet mounts
of skin biopsies.
Size:
Trophozoite
50 × 30μm
Clinical Importance: This facultative, histophagous parasite (similar to freshwater Tetrahymena
spp.) can invade the skin, muscle, and intermal organs, causing osmoregulatory problems and body
system dysfunction.
PARAS1TE: Epistylis spp. (Fig. 6.9)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (ciliate). Species include E. colisarum and E. Iwoff.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Attached to surface epithelial layers of the skin and fins.
Life Cycle: This sessile, peritrichous ciliate divides by binary fission along the longitudinal axis,
producing two daughter cells.
Laboratory Diagnosis: This colonial parasite is detected in wet mounts of the skin and is identi-
fied by its conical or elongated cylindrical body, branched noncontractile stalk, and epistomal disk
FISH
for attachment.
Size: 150-300 × 40-60 μm
Clinical Importance: The epistomal disk used for attachment to the host causes a localized skin
lesion and mechanical disruption of the normal osmoregulatory process of the skin. Generally, fish
develop skin lesions only in heavy infestations.
100um
(os x ss w) sqpads p e yodo uys e un ds uyo soodo g 
This small ciliate also infects many species of ornamental aquarium fish.
16 μum
Fig. 6.8. Tissue section showing numerous trophozoites of Uronema spp. invading the deeper tissues of a summer founder
(Paralichthys dentatus) species.This marine organism causes pathology similar to that of Tetrahymena spp.of freshwater
species of fish.
FISH
30μm
Fig. 6.9. Epistylis sp. is a colonial ciliate that has a conical or elongated cylindrical body, a noncontractile stalk, and an
311
312
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASITE: Trichodina Spp. (Fig. 6.10)
Dipartiella spp., Paratrichodina spp., and Tripartiella spp.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Generally on the external surface of the skin, fins, and gills, though a few species
are parasitic in the urinary tract of fish.
  o d ss   s  s s a s
Laboratory Diagnosis: This fattened, circular, ciliated protozoan is detected in wet mounts of
skin biopsies and gill and fin snips and is identified by its prominent intermal denticular (toothlike)
ring and its ventrally located concave adhesive disk.
Size: Variable, 150-300 × 40-60 μm
Clinical Importance: These organisms are usually ectocommensal but can become ectoparasitic
when environmental and host conditions are suitable. This mobile scrub-brush-like parasite may
gill and osmoregulatory processes of the skin. Generally, the parasite is only a problem in heavy
infestations of the skin and gill.
PARAS1TE: Trichophyra spp. (Fig. 6.11)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (ciliate).
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Attached to epithelial surfaces of the skin, fins, and gills.
Life Cycle: This parasite reproduces by endogenous budding.
and is diagnosed by its numerous suctorial tentacles.
Size: 30-50μm
Clinical Importance: This small, sedentary parasite is generally only a problem in heavy infesta-
tions, where this pincushion-like ciliate attaches to the skin, fin, and gill tissues and causes irritation
and localized lesions that disrupt normal respiratory and osmoregulatory processes of the fish.
PARASlTE: Amyloodinium ocellafum (Fig.6.12).
Common name: Velvet disease or rust disease.
Taxonomy: Protozoa (fagellate). Other genera include Oodinium spp. and Piscinoodinium spp.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, marine, and brackish fish worldwide
Location in Host: Attached to epithelial tissues of the skin, fins, and gills.
FISH
Life Cycle: The trophozoite attaches to the host via an attachment disk with filiform projections
that penetrate into the epithelial tissue of the host. The trophozoite detaches from the host and forms
an encysted tomont that divides and produces up to 256 free-swimming, infective dinospores that
are released into the water.
40 μm
Fig. 6.10. Trichodina sp. from a skin biopsy of a tropical freshwater Oscar (Astronotus ocellatus). These fattened ciliates
have a prominent circular, denticular ring (arrow), upon which specifc identification is based.
20μm
sy aean-pod yo se pue us a uo puno uao st pue (mou) aueeadde uoysud, e
福
T
Fig. 6.12. Amyloodinium ocellatum on the gill tissue of a striped bass (Morone saxatitis). This organism is the cause of
"velvet”" or "rust" in ornamental marine species of fish. Oodinium sp. is a similar parasite in freshwater fish.
313
314
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Amyloodiniumocellatum(continued)
Laboratory Diagnosis: Large, cylindrical dinoflagellates may be seen in wet mounts of gill snips
Size:
Trophozoite attached to tissues
up to 150-200 μm in length
Dinospores in water
12-15 pm in diameter
Clinical Importance: This ectoparasite primarily causes irritation of the gill, resulting in hyper-
plasia of the epithelial tissues and fusion of gill lamellae. Outbreaks may be fatal in heavily infected
fish, especially in fish that are weakened or stressed by other conditions.
PARASlTE: Ichthyobodo (=Cosfia) necafor (Fig. 6.13)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (fagellate).
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Attached to epithelial tissues of the skin, fins, and gills
 s u  e  s s a e a  a
reproduces by simple transverse division.
            
posteriolateral groove is detected in wet mounts of skin biopsies and gill snips. The parasite is
diagnosed by its small size and characteristic rapid erratic movements through the water.
Size:
Trophozoite
10-20 × 5-10μm
Clinical Importance: This often-overlooked parasite is extremely pathogenic in youmg fish and
older fish with lowered resistance. Icthyobodo causes irritation of the skin and gill tissue, resulting
PARASlTE: Myxobolus spp., including M. cerebralis (Fig. 6.14)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (Myxosporea). Numerous genera and species including Ceratomyxa spp.,
Kudoa spp., Sphaeromyxa spp., Myxidium spp., and Henneguya spp.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Generally the epithelial tissues of the gills, skin, or intestine, but may also
invade the muscle, cartilage, and other intermal organs.
Life Cycle: The myxospore stage of this parasite develops in an annelid or polychaete worm to
produce an actinospore stage that either penetrates or is eaten by the definitive fish host. The spo-
Laboratory Diagnosis: Variable-sized cysts found within wet mounts of various tissues contain
s
FISH
Size:
Spore
7-10μm in diameter
Clinical Importance: Infection of salmonids with M. cerebralis may cause loss of melanophore
control in the skin resulting in black-colored tails in very young fish, or skeletal deforrmities due to
cartilage destruction in older fish. This protozoan is a significant pathogen of wild and cultured
muscle tissue.
20um
Fig. 6.13. Ichthyobodo necator, attached to the skin (arrow), is an extremely pathogenic fagellate parasite of freshwater
fish that is often overlooked due to its small size.
Note the two polar capsules within the spore.
FSH
315
316
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARASlTE: Henneguya spp., including H. ictaluri (Fig. 6.15)
Taxonomy: Protozoa (Myxosporea). Numerous genera and species; see Myxobolus spp.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Generally the epithelial tissues of the gills and skin, but may also invade muscle
and internal organs.
produce an actinospore stage that either penetrates or is eaten by the definitive fish host. The spo-
ysy aun jo anssn naaen an u iso ouodsiod e sanpond pue sdopaaap uay asis wseidom
Laboratory Diagnosis: Variable-sized cysts found within wet mounts of gill or other tissues con-
taining spores with ellipsoidal, rounded, or spindle-shaped smooth valves, with or without caudal
appendages.
Size:
Spore
19 × 4.5 μm, with two caudal appendages of 45 μm each
Clinical Importance: Henneguya ictaluri causes a hyperplastic reaction in the epithelial cells of
the gills, causing severe branchitis with respiratory compromise, and is a significant pathogen of
the commercial catfish industry.
PARASlTE: Monogeneans (Fig. 6.16)
Taxonomy: Monogenea (Monopistocotylea). Including the genera Gyrodactylus spp., Dactylogyrus
spp., and Neobenedenia spp.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Attached to extemal surface of the skin, fins, and gills.
Life Cycle: Monogeneans complete their viviparous or ovoviviparous life cycle on one host.
Larvae are morphologically similar to adults.
Laboratory Diagnosis: These small- to medium-sized fatworms have a posterior attachment
organ, or opisthaptor, that may have hooks, anchors, clamps, or suckers. Monogeneans can be
detected in wet mounts of gill snips or skin biopsies.
Size: Up to 5 mm in length
Clinical Importance: These parasitic fatworms cause local damage at the site of attachment and
PARASlTE: Larval fukes (Fig. 6.17)
Taxonomy: Trematode (Digenea).
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
FISH
Location in Host: Encysted metacercaria can be found in various tissues of the fish, including the
skin, gills, muscle, eyes, brain, and visceral organs.
10 Jum 
Fig. 6.15. Giemsa-stained spores of Henneguya sp. (a myxosporidian) from a ruptured cyst in the gill filament of a fresh-
water channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus). Note the two anterior polar capsules within the spore and forked caudal
appendages.
65um
Fig. 6.16. Adult monogenean from a skin biopsy of a rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). These external parasites have
hooks, anchors, clamps, or suckers for attachment to the skin, fins, and gills.
ISH
工
Fig. 6.17. Encysted metacercariae of two different species of digenetic trematodes in the muscle of a bluegill (Lepomis
macrochirus). The smaller organism (B) is commonly called "black spot disease" (Neascus sp.), and the larger, paler one
(Y) is commonly called a "yellow grub" (Clinostomum sp.). Both are larval stages that will not complete metarmorphosis
until ingested by a carni vorous definitive host.
317
318
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Larval fukes (continued)
bird, or fish), which hatch, and release free-swimming miracidia that enter a first intermediate snail
host. The developing parasites emerge into the water from the snail as free-swimming cercariae
that penetrate the tissues of a second intermediate host, commonly a fish. The parasites then become
encysted metacercariae and do not develop further until ingested by the appropriate camivorous
host (e.g., fish-eating bird, fish, or mammal) where the parasite becomes a mature adult.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Larval trematodes are generally visible grossly within the fish tissue.
Size:
 MetacercariaVariable, up to several millimeters
Clinical Importance: These parasites are often unsightly in tissues, but generally are of minimal
significance unless large numbers of metacercariae interfere with organ function.
PARAS1TE: Argulus sp. (Fig. 6.18)
Common name: Fish louse.
Taxonomy: Arthropod (Crustacea, Branchiura).
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Generally on the extermal surfaces of the skin and fins.
Life Cycle: Eggs, which are laid in water, release free-swimming copepod larvae that attach to
suitable fish hosts and metamorphose several times before reaching the adult stage.
prominent sucking disks, two dark-colored eyespots, and a centrally located piercing stylet
Size: 3-5mm
Clinical Importance: This crustacean causes damage by piercing the extemal tissues of the host
and ingesting cellular fluids, and often causing a severe localized reaction at the site of stylet pen-
etration. These parasitic arthropods may be important vectors in the transmission of certain viral,
bacterial, and protozoan fish diseases.
PARAS1TE: Lepeophtheirus spp., Caligus spp. (Fig. 6.19)
Common name: Sea louse.
Taxonomy: Arthropod (Crustacea, Copepoda).
Geographic Distribution: Marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Generally on the extermal surfaces of the skin and fins.
swimming nauplii larvae. The copepod metamorphoses through multiple free-swimming and then
attached larval stages (copepodid and chalimus) to become parasitic adults feeding on the mucus,
skin, and blood of the fish.
PARASITES OFFISH
319
1 mm
 can be found on the skin and fins of freshwater fish. Other species can be found on brackish and marine species of fish.
1
C-II
C-IV
3mm
Fig. 6.19. Lepeophtheinus satmonis. Sea lice on the skin of an Atlantic salmon (Satmo salar). This copepod has severa]
into parasitic chalimus stages (C-l through C-]V), then a pre-adult stage (pA) before becoming a reproductive adult
(A = female adult). Photo courtesy of Dr. Larry Hammell, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island,
Charlottetown, PEl, Canada.
Laboratory Diagnosis: These grossly visible parasites have a large cephalothorax that acts like a
suction organ for holding the louse on the fish. Females, which are larger than males, often have
two long egg sacs trailing from their body.
Size: 5-8 mm
Clinical Importance: This crustacean causes physical, enzymatic, and infammatory damage at
the site of attachment and feeding resulting in hemorrhagic ulcerative skin lesions. These parasitic
320
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
PARAS1TE: Ergasilus spp. (Fig. 6.20)
Common name: Gill louse.
Taxonomy: Arthropod (Crustacea, Copepoda).
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Most commonly found attached to the gills, rarely the skin and fins.
  -a        sa an sh  a
males or attached parasitic females feeding on the mucus and skin of the fish.
Laboratory Diagnosis: These parasites have a large modified prehensile antennal segment for
grasping gill filaments of the fish. Gravid females commonly have two egg sacs trailing from their
body.
Size: 4-6mm
PARAS1TE: Lernaea spp. (Fig. 6.21)
Common name: Anchor worm.
Taxonomy: Arthropod (Crustacea, Copepoda).
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Most commonly found attached to the skin and fins.
copepod metarmorphoses through several free-swimming stages with mating occurring during the
last copepodid stage. After mating, the female attaches to the skin of the fish and transforms into
an unsegmented wormlike parasite. The anterior end becomes modified into an anchor-like holdfast
organ buried in the skin, while the posterior end hangs free in the water.
Laboratory Diagnosis: These parasites have a large anchor-like anterior end and a long unseg-
mented body. Females commonly have two egg sacs trailing from their body.
Size: 4-6 mm
Clinical Importance: This crustacean produces a localized, hyperplastic inflammatory reaction at
the site where the parasite is embedded in the tissue.
PARASITE: Leeches (Fig. 6.22)
Taxonomy: Phylum Annelida (subclass Hirudinea).
FISH
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide
Location in Host: Attached to extermal tissues of the skin, fins, and gills.
Life Cycle: Leeches are hermaphroditic and reproduce by reciprocal fertilization.
3mm
saxatitis) where they were firmly attached to the gillflaments. Each parasite has a cephlathorax with modifed grasping
appendages, a central abdomen, and two elongated egg sacs.
Fig. 6.21. Lernaea spp. This parasitic copepod, commonly known as an anchor worm, has several free-swimming larval
stages before becoming infective to the host. After mating, the male generally dies, while the female burrows into the fesh of
the fish. The anterior end of the parasite develops into an anchor-like adaptation that becomes embedded in the tissues of the
fish, while the posterior end becomes modifed into an unsegmented, wormlike body with two egg sacs that hang from the
fish 's body. Photo courtesy of Dr. Roy P. E. Yanong, Tropical Aquaculture Laboratory, University of Florida, Ruskin, FL.
FSH
Fig. 6.22. Leeches of an unidentifed species attached to the skin of a cultured hybrid striped bass (Morone saxatilis X M.
chrysops). These parasites can cause anemia in fish, as well as act as vectors of hemoparasites and other pathogens.
321
322
VETERINARY CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Leeches (continued)
Laboratory Diagnosis: These grossly visible fat to cylindrical wormlike parasites have a varying
number of body divisions and generally both anterior and posterior suckers.
Size: Variable, up to several centimeters in length
ties, leeches are vectors for a variety of fish pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, and
hem oparasites.
PARASlTE: Thorny-headed worm (Fig. 6.23)
Taxonomy: Phylum Acanthocephala.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Lumen of the posterior intestinal tract.
Life Cycle: These parasites have an indirect life cycle, with usually a crustacean intermediate host.
Laboratory Diagnosis: Eggs are observed on standard fecal fotation or direct smear.
Size: 50-65 × 30-40 μm
Clinical Importance: These parasites generally do not cause any clinical signs in fish. Rarely, a
severe infestation will result in perforation of the intestinal tract, with subsequent peritonitis.
PARAS1TE: Nematode Parasites (Fig. 6.24)
Taxonomy: Nematode.
Geographic Distribution: Freshwater, brackish, and marine fish worldwide.
Location in Host: Lumen of the intestinal tract.
Life Cycle: Both direct and indirect life cycles have been reported.
 Laboratory Diagnosis: A variety of nematode-type eggs may be observed on standard fecal fota-
tion or direct smear.
Size: Variable
Clinical Importance: Adult nematodes generally do not cause significant clinical signs in fish. A
severe infestation sometimes will result in mechanical blockage of the intestinal tract and/or chronic
weight loss.
FISH
20jum
Fig. 6.23. Egg of an acanthocephalan parasite from a black crappie (Pomoxis negromacutatus).
Fig. 6.24. Unidentifed nematode egg from a largemouth bass (Micropterus satmoides)
FSH
323
Bibliography
Atkinson, C. T., Thomas, N. J., and Hunter, D. B. 2008. Parasitic Disease of Wild Birds. Wiley-Blackwell,
Ames,IA
Baker, D. G. 2007. Flynn's Parasites of Laboratory Animals, 2nd ed. Blackwell Publishing, Ames, IA.
Ballweber, L. R. 2o06. Diagnostic methods for parasitic infections in livestock. Vet. Clin. North Am.
22:695-706.
Barnard, S. M., and Upton, S. J. 1996. A Veterinary Guide to the Parasites of Reptiles: Protozoa. Krieger
 Publishing Co., Malabar, FL
Bowman, D. D. 2009. Georgis' Parasitology for Veterinarians, 9th ed. Saunders, St. Louis, MO.
Bowman, D. D., Hendrix, C. M., Lindsay, D. S., and Barr, S. C. 2002. Feline Clinical Parasitology. Iowa State
University Press, Ames, IA.
Clyde, V. L., and Patton, S. 1996. Diagnosis, treatment and control of common parasites in companion and
avian birds. Semin. Avian Exot. Pet Med. 5:75-84.
Coles, G. C., Bauer, C., Borgsteede, F. H. M., Geerts, S., Klei, T. R., Taylor, M. A., and Waller, P J. 1992.
World Association for the Advancement of Veterinary Parasitology (W.A.A.VP) methods for the detection
of anthelmintic resistance in nematodes of veterinary importance. Vet. Parasitol. 44:35-44.
Coles, G. C., Jackson, F., Pomroy, W. E., Prichard, R. K., von Samson-Himmelstjerna, G., Silvestre, A., Taylor,
M. A., and Vercruysse, J. 2006. The detection of anthelmintic resistance in nematodes of veterinary impor-
tance. Vet. Parasitol. 136:167-185.
Egwang, T. G.,and Slocombe, J. O. D.1982. Evaluation of the Cornell-Wisconsin centrifugation fotation
technique for recovering trichostrongylid eggs from bovine feces. 1982, Can. J. Comp. Med. 46:133-137.
Foreyt, W. J. 1997. Veterinary Parasitology Reference Manual. Iowa State University Press, Ames, IA.
Fowler, M. E. 2010. Medicine and Surgery of Camelids, 3rd ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames, IA.
Garcia, L. S. 2006. Diagnostic Medical Parasitology, 5th ed. ASM Press, Washington, DC.
Georgi, J. R., and Georgi, M. E. 1992. Canine Clinical Parasitology. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
Greiner, E. C., and Ritchie, B. W. 1994. Parasites. In Avian Medicine: Principles and Application, ed.
B. W. Ritchie, G. J. Harrison, and L. R. Harrison, 1007-1029. Wingers Publishing Co., Lake Worth, FL
Hendricks, C. M. 2002. Laboratory Procedures for Veterinary Technicians, 4th ed. Mosby, St. Louis, MO.
Hoffman, G. L. 1999. Parasites of North American Fresh water Fishes. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Jacobs, D. E. 1986.A Colour Atlas of Equine Parasites. Gower Medical Publishing, London.
Jacobson, E. R. 2007. Infectious Diseases and Pathology of Reptiles. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Kassai, T. 1999. Veterinary Helminthology. Butterworth-Heinemann Publishing, Oxford.
Kaufmann, J. 1996. Parasitic Infections of Domestic Animals. Birkhauser Verlag, Boston.
Kennedy, M. J., Mackinnon, J. D., and Higgs, G. W. 1998. Veterinary Parasitology: Laboratory Procedures
Alberta Agriculture. Food and Rural Development Publishing Branch, Edmonton.
Kettle, D. S. 1995. Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 2nd ed. CAB International, Wallingford, UK
Klingenberg, R. J. 2007. Understanding Reptile Parasites. Advanced Vivarium Systems, Irvine, CA.
Levine, N. D. 1980. Nematode Parasites of Domestic Animals and Man, 2nd ed. Burgess Publishing,
Minneapolis, MN.
Lom, J., and Dykova, 1. 1992. Protozoan Parasites of Fishes. Developments in Aquaculture and Fisheries
Science 26. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
325
326
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ministry ofAgriculture, Fisheries and Food. 1986. Manual of Veterinary Parasitological Laboratory Techniques
Reference Book 418. Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London.
Mullen, G., and Durden, L. 2009. Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 2nd ed. Academic Press, New York.
Neimester, R., Logan, A. L., Gerber, B., Egleton, J. H., and Kleger, B. 1987. Hemo-De as a substitute for ethyl
acetate in formalin-ethyl acetate concentration technique. J. Clin. Microbiol. 25:425-426.
Owen, D. G. 1992. Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Royal Society of Medicine Services, London.
Roberts, R. J. 2001. The parasitology of teleosts. In Fish Pathology, 3rd ed. ed. R. J. Roberts, 254296.
W B. Saunders, Philadelphia
5:97105.
Smith, S. A. 2002. Non-lethal clinical techniques used in the diagnosis of fish diseases. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
220:1203-1206.
Smith, S. A., and Noga, E. J. 1992. General parasitology of fish. In Fish Medicine, ed. M. K. Stoskopf, 131-148.
W B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Smith, S. A., and Roberts, H. E. 2009. Chapter 8: parasites of fishes. In Fundamentals of Ornamental Fish
Health, ed. H. E. Roberts, 102-112. Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ.
Soulsby, E. J. L. 1965. Textbook of Veterinary Clinical Parasitology. F A. Davis Co., Philadelphia.
Soulsby, E. J. L. 1982. Helminths, Arthropods, and Protozoa of Domesticated Animals, 7th ed. Williams &
Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
Taira, N., Ando, Y, and Williams, J. C. 2003. A Color Atlas of Clinical Helminthology of Domestic Animals.
Elsevier Science, Amsterdam.
Taylor, M. A., Coop, R. L., and Wall, R. L. 2007. Veterinary Parasitology, 3rd ed. Blackwell, Ames, IA
Telford, S. R. Jr. 2009. Haemoparasites of the Reptilia. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Thienpont, D., Rochette, F, and Vanparijs, O. F. J. 1979. Diagnosing Helminthiasis through Coprological
Examination. Janssen Research Foundation, Beerse, Belgium.
US. Department of Agriculture. 1976. Ticks of Veterinary Importance. Agriculture Handbook 485. U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Valkiunas, G. 2005. Avian Malaria Parasites and other Haemosporidia. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Wall, R., and Shearer, D. 2001. Veterinary Ectoparasites: Biology, Pathology and Control. Blackwell Science,
London.
Weiss, D. J, and Wardrop, K. J. 2010. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, 6th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames, IA.
Williams, R. E., Hall, R. D., Broce, A. B., and Scholl, P J. 1985. Livestock Entomology. John Wiley & Sons
New York.
Wison, S. C., and Carpenter, J. W. 1996. Endoparasitic disease of reptiles. Semin. Avian Exot. Pet Med.
5:6474.
Woo, P T. K. 2006. Protozoan and metazoan infections. In Fish Diseases and Disorders: Volume 1, ed.
P T. K. Woo, 816. CABI Publishing, Oxfordshire, UK.
INDEX
Note: Page references given in italics indicate
Anchor worm, 320, 321
figures or tables.
Ancylostoma spp., 52, 53, 57,61
A.brasiliense, 52
A.caninum,52,53,61
Acanthocephalans
A. ceylanicum, 52
in birds, 154, 155
A.tubaeforme,52,53
Centorhynchus spp., 155
eggs,17,52,53,57,61
Filicollis spp., 154
Angiostrongylus vasorum,26, 70, 71
in fish, 322,323
Annelids (leeches), 320, 321
Macracanthorhynchus spp., 86, 138, 139
Anocenter nitens,256,257
Onicola spp., 86
Anoplocephala spp., 126, 127
Polymorphus spp., 154
A. magna,126
in reptiles, 166, 169
A. perfoliata, 126
in swine, 138, 139
Anoplura (sucking lice), 266
Acanthocheilonema spp.
Hematopinus spp., 266, 267
A. dracunculoides, 188,189
of laboratory animals, 270, 272
A.reconditum,188,189,198,199
Linognathus spp., 266, 267,272
Acari
Microthoracius spp., 266
mites, 217-245
overview, 264
ticks,246-265
Pediculus spp., 268, 269
Acuaria spp., 148
Phthirus pubis,268,269
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, 23, 68, 69
Polyplax,271
African blue louse, 268
Solenopotes capillatus, 268, 269
Affican Coast fever, 204
Antibody detection tests, 213-214, 215
Affican tampan, 264
Antigen detection tests, 213-214, 214, 215
Alpaca. See also Camels/camelids
Aonchotheca spp., 62, 64, 65, 100, 101
Monieza spp., 107
A. bovis, 100
sarcoptic mange in, 221
A. longipes, 100
Amblyomma spp., 248, 250,251
A. putorii, 64, 65
A.americanum,248,250,250
Argasidae
A.cajennense,250,251
Argas spp., 262, 264, 265
A. hebraeum, 250
Ormithodorus spp., 264, 265
A. maculatum, 191, 250, 251
Otobius spp., 262, 263
A.variegatum,250,253
Argas spp., 264, 265
Hepatozoon americanum vector, 191
A. persicus, 264
American dog tick, 248, 256
A. reffexus, 264
American Heartworm Society, 187, 188
Argulus sp.,318,319
Amidostomum spp., 146
Arthropods, 217-303
A. anseri, 146
acari
Amyloodinium ocellatum, 312, 313
mites, 217-245
Anaplasmosis, 258, 260
ticks, 246-265
327
328
INDEX
Arthropods (continued)
Babesiosis
crustaceans, ectoparasitic
bovine, 258
Argulus sp., 318, 319
canine,192,260
Ergasilus spp.,320,321
equine,202
Lepeophtheirus spp.,318,319
porcine, 203
Lemaea spp., 320, 321
Baermann test
insects, 264303
described, 1415, 15
bedbug, 302
identification ofnematode larvaerecovered
feas, 280-287
from fecal samples, 23-28, 24-28
fies, 288-301
Balantidium coli, 130, 131
lice, 266-279
Barber pole worm, 96
Ascaridia spp., 144, 145
Bats, Cimex in, 302
Ascarids
Baylisascaris procyonis (raccoon roundworm), 58,
Ascaridia spp., 144, 145
58,59
Ascaris suum, 132, 133
Bedbug, 303, 303
Baylisascaris procyonis (raccoon roundworm),
 Benchtop fecal fotation procedures, 8
58, 58
Besnoitia spp., 182, 183
in birds, 144, 145
B.bennetti, 182
Contracecum spp., 144
B.besnoiti, 182, 183
Heterakis spp., 144, 145, 160
 Bile ducts, parasites of
Parascaris spp., 31, 119, 120, 121
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 110, 111, 136
Paraspidodera uncinata,160,161
Eurytrema pancreaticum, 112, 113, 136
Porrocecum spp., 144
Eurytrema procyonis, 84, 85
Toxascaris leonina,56,57
Fasciola hepatica,84
Toxocara spp., 54, 55, 57-59, 61, 75, 77
Platynosomum concinnum,84,85
Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum, 102,
Birds
103
acanthocephalans, 154, 155
Ascaris suum, 132,133
Centorhynchus spp., 155
Ascarops strongylina, 136, 137, 138
Filicollis spp., 154
Aspicularis tetraptera, 158, 159
Polymorphus spp., 154
Assassin bug, 196
blood parasites, 208-211
Atoxoplasma spp., 140
Haemoproteus spp, 210, 211
Australian paralysis tick, 254
Leucocytozoon spp., 208, 209
Avian feather mites, 238, 239
Plasmodium spp., 210, 211
Avians. See Birds
cestodes, 152,153
Choanotaenia spp., 152
Babesia spp.
Davainea spp., 152
B.bigemina,202,203
Hymenolepis spp., 152
B.bovis,202
Mesocestoides spp., 76, 77
B.caballi,202,203
Raillietina spp., 152
B.canis,192,193,258
Cimex spp., 302
B. divergens, 202
coccidia
B. equi, 202,203
Atoxoplasma spp., 140
B.gibsoni,192,193
Caryospora spp., 140, 141
B. major, 202
Cryptospordium spp., 142
B.motasi,202
Eimeria spp., 140, 140,145, 147
B. ovis,202
Isospora spp., 140, 141
B.trautmanni,203
Sarcocystis spp., 140, 143
in dogs/cats, 192, 193
flagellates, 142, 143
in horses, 202,203
Chilomastix spp., 142
in livestock, 202, 203
Cochlosoma spp., 142
tick vectors, 252,254,258,260,261
Giardia spp., 142, 145
INDEX
329
Histomonas spp., 142
Blackhead, 144
Spironucleus spp., 142
Black-legged tick, 254
Trichomonas spp., 142, 143
Blankaartia spp., 245
fleas
Blood parasites, 185-211
Ceratophyllus spp., 286
birds, 208-211
Echidnophaga gallinacea, 286, 287
dogs/cats, 191-201
flies
immunologic detection, 185
Pseudolynchia spp., 296
livestock/horses, 202-209
helminths, 144-155
microscopic examination
lice, 276,277
for nematode parasites, 187-190
Columbicula columbae,277
for protozoan parasites, 185-186
Lipeurus caponis,277
Blood smear
Menopon gallinae, 277
Giemsa stain, 185, 186
mites
technique for making, 186
avian feather, 238,239
Bloodworm, 118
Dermanyssus gallinae, 240, 241
Blow fies, 296, 297
Knemidokoptes spp., 222, 223
Blue jay, acanthocephalan of, 155
Ormithonyssus spp., 238, 239, 240
Blue tick, 258
nematodes
Bobcats, Lynxacarus radovskyi in, 234
Amidostomum spp., 146
Body louse, human, 268
Ascaridia spp., 144, 145
Bont-legged tick, 252
Capillaria spp., 146, 147, 149
Bont tick, 250
Cheilospirura spp., 148
Boophilus spp.,247,248,258,259
Contracecum spp., 144
B.annulatus,258
Cyathostoma spp., 148, 149
B. decoloratus, 258
Dispharynx spp., 148
B. microplus, 258
Echinuria spp., 148
Babesia vector, 202
Heterakis spp., 144, 145
Borrelia anserine, 264
Porrocecum spp., 144
Bots, 288
Serratospiculum spp., 148
Bovicola spp., 270, 271-273
spirurids, 148, 149, 151
B.bovis,270,271,272
Subulura spp., 148
B. breviceps, 270
Syngamus spp., 148, 149
B.caprae,270
Tetrameres spp., 148, 149
B.equi,270,273
Trichostrongylus tenuis, 146
B. ovis, 270, 272
protozoans, 140-144
Bovine African blue louse,268
coccidia,140,140,143,147
Bovine preputial sample collection,
fagellates, 142, 143
172
Haemoproteus spp., 210, 211
Bovine theileriosis, 258
Leucocytozoon spp., 208, 209
Bovine venereal trichomoniasis, 48
Plasmodium spp., 210, 211
British dog tick, 254
ticks
Broad fish tapeworm, 78
Argas spp., 264, 265
Brown dog tick, 192, 258, 258
Haemaphysalis spp., 260
Brown ear tick, 258
trematodes
Brown stomach worm, 96
Cryptocotyle lingua, 86
Bubonic plague bacillus, 284
Echinoparyphium spp., 150
Buffalo gnat, 303
Echinostoma spp., 150
Bunostomum spp., 96
Prosthogonimus spp., 150
larvae, 37
Bison, Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum in, 102
morphological characteristics of infective
Biting louse, 270
third-stage larvae, 29
Black fy, 208, 298, 303
Bush tick, 260
330
INDEX
Caligus spp., 318
Carbol-fuchsin stain, 13
Calliphoridae, 296, 298
Carnivores. See also specifc species
Camelostrongylus spp., 96
Alaria spp., 80, 81
Camels/camelids
Crenosoma vulpis,68
cestodes
Echinococcus spp., 76
Monieza spp., 106, 107, 109
Nanophyetus salmincola,84,85
Stilesia spp., 108
Taenia spp., 74, 75, 77, 79
Thysanosoma spp., 108
Caryospora spp., 140, 141, 164
coccidia
Castor bean tick, 254
Cryptosporidium spp., 94, 95
Cat fea, 281, 282, 283
Eimeria spp., 90, 91-93, 99,103
Cats
fies
acanthocephalans
Cephalopina titillator, 294
Macracanthorhynchus spp.,86
Hippobosca variegata,296
Onicola spp., 86
lice
blood parasites, 191-201
Bovicola breviceps, 270
cestodes
Microthoracius spp., 266
Diphyllobothrium latum,78,79
mites
Dipylidiumcaninum,72,73,77,79
Sarcoptes spp., 220, 221
Echinococcus multilocularis,76
nematodes
Mesocestoides spp., 76, 77, 79
Aonchotheca spp., 100, 101
Spirometra spp., 78,79
Dictyocaulus spp., 106, 107
Taenia spp., 74,75,77, 79
identification third-stage larvae, 29-30
coccidia
Nematodirus spp., 98, 99
Cryptosporidium felis, 46, 47
Skrjabinema spp., 102
Isospora spp.,42, 45,75
strongylid, 93, 96-97, 99
Sarcocystis spp., 46, 47
Strongyloides papillosus, 102
Toxoplasma gondii,44,45
Trichuris spp., 100
fagellates
protozoans
Giardia,48,49-51
Cryptosporidium spp., 94,95
trichomonads, 48, 49
Eimeria spp.,90,91-93,99,103
Tritrichomonas foetus, 48
Giardia spp., 94, 95, 103
fleas
Trypanosoma evansi,207
Ctenocephalides, 281,282,282,
Trypanosoma simiae, 207
283
ticks
Ctenocephalides felis felis, 281, 282, 282,
Otobius spp., 262
283
trematodes
Echidnophaga gallinacea, 286
Eurytrema pancreaticum,112,113
Pulex simulans, 284
Fasciola hepatica, 110, 111
Xenopsylla cheopsis, 284
Paramphistomum spp.,110
flies
Schistosoma spp., 112
Cuterebra spp., 288, 289
Camel tick, 252
heartworm tests in, 187-188, 216
Canaries, Plasmodium spp. in, 210
helminth ova and protozoan cysts, 41
Canine biting louse, 274, 275
helminth parasites, 52-87
Canines. See Dogs
lice
Capillaria spp.
Felicola subrostratus,274,275
Aonchotheca (Capillaria) spp., 64, 65, 100,
mites
101
Cheyletiella blakei,232
in birds, 146, 147, 149
Demodex spp., 230
C. obsignata, 146
Lynxacarus radovskyi,234
Eucoleus (Capillaria) aerophilus,62,63
Notoedres cati, 222
Pearsonema (Capillaria) plica, 174
Otodectes cynotis, 228, 229
INDEX
331
nematodes
lice
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, 68,
Bovicola bovis,270, 271,272
69
Hematopinus spp., 266
Ancylostoma spp., 52,53,57,61
Linognathus spp., 266,267,268,272
Aonchotheca putori, 64, 65
Solenopotes capillatus, 268, 269
Diroflaria immitis,196
mites
Eucoleus spp., 62, 63, 75
Demodex spp., 230, 233
Ollulanus tricuspis, 72,73
nematodes
Pearsonema feliscati, 174, 175
Aonchotheca bovis, 100
Physaloptera spp., 57, 64, 65
Dictyocaulus viviparus,106,107
Toxascaris leonina, 56,57
Onchocerca spp., 178, 179
Toxocara cati, 54,57
Stephanofilaria spp.,178,179
Trichuris felis, 60
Thelazia spp., 180, 181
Uncinaria stenocephala.,52
Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum, 102,103
 pentastomid parasites, 86
protozoans
protozoans, 42-51
Babesia spp., 202, 203
Babesia spp., 192
Besnoitia spp., 182, 183
Cryptosporidium felis,46,47
Cryptosporidium spp., 94, 95
Cytauxzoon felis, 194, 195
Eimeria spp.,90,91,92,103
Giardia,48,49-51
Theileria spp., 204, 205
Hepatozoon spp., 191
Tritrichomonas foetus, 178,179
Isospora spp., 42, 45,75
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 206, 207
Leishmania spp.,194
Trypanosoma theileri, 204, 207
Sarcocystis spp., 46, 47
ticks
Toxoplasma gondii, 44, 45
Amblyomma maculatum,250
trichomonads, 48,49
Rhipicephalus spp.,258,259,260
Tritrichomonas foetus, 48
trematodes
Trypanosoma spp., 196
Eurytrema pancreaticum, 112, 113
trematodes
Fasciola hepatica, 110
Alaria spp., 80, 81
Paramphistomum spp., 110
Cryptocotyle lingua,86
Cattle fever tick, 258
Eurytrema procyonis, 84, 85
Cattle grub, 292
Nanophyetus salmincola,84,85
Cattle tail 1ouse, 266
Paragonimus kellicotti, 82, 83
Cayenne tick, 250, 257
Platynosomum concinnum, 84, 85
Cecal worm, 144
Cattle. See also Ruminants
Cediopsylla simplex,285
blood parasites
Centorhynchus spp., 155
Babesia spp., 202, 203
Centrifugal fecal fotation procedure, 7, 8
Theileria spp., 204, 205
Cephalopina titillator,294
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 207
Cercopithifilaria grassi, 188, 189
coccidia
Cestodes
Cryptosporidium spp., 94, 95
Anoplocephala spp., 126, 127
Eimeria spp., 90, 91,92, 103
Choanotaenia spp., 152
feas
Cittotaenia spp., 162, 163
Ctenocephalides,282
Davainea spp., 152
flies
Diphyllobothrium latum,78,79
Dermatobia hominis,294
Dipylidium caninum,72,73,77,79
Haematopota irritans, 301
Echinococcus spp., 76, 77, 79
Hippobosca variegata,296
Hymenolepis spp., 152, 160, 161, 162, 163
Hypoderma spp., 292, 293
Mesocestoides spp., 76,77, 79
screwworms, 299
Monieza spp., 106, 107, 109
helminth ova,larva,and protozoan cysts,88
Paranoplocephala mamillana, 126
332
INDEX
Cestodes (continued)
Caryospora spp., 140, 141, 164
Raillietina spp., 152
Cryptosporidium spp., 164
of reptiles, 166, 168
in birds, 142
Spirometra spp., 78,79
C. andersoni, 94
Stilesia spp., 108
C. baileyi, 142
Taenia spp.,74,75,77,79
C.canis,46,47
Thysanosoma spp., 108, 109
C. felis, 46, 47
Chabertia spp., 96
C. meleagridis, 142
larvae, 30, 33
C. parvum, 46, 94, 129
morphological characteristics of infective third-
in dogs/cats, 46, 47
stage larvae, 29
fecal fotation solution choice and, 5
Chagas' disease, 196
in horses, 116, 117
Cheilospirura spp., 148
in rodents, 156
Cheyletiella spp.
in ruminants/camelids, 94, 95
C.blakei,232
scanning fecal fotation slides for, 8
C.parasitovorax,232
stains for, 13
C. yasguri, 232
Eimeria spp.
superficial scrapping for, 219
in birds, 140, 141, 145, 147
Chickens.See also Birds;Poultry
in dog/cat feces, 45
Ascaridia spp., 144, 145
E.ahsata,90
Eimeria spp., 140, 140, 145,147
E. airlongi, 90
feas (Ceratophyllus spp.), 286
E.alabamensis, 90
Heterakis spp., 144,145
E.bakuensis,90
Leucocytozoon caulleryi,208
E.bovis,90,92
Plasmodium spp., 210
E. caprina, 90
shaft louse (Menopon gallinae), 277
E. christenseni, 90
Chiggers, 244, 245
E.cylindrical,92
Chilomastix spp., 142
E.deblieki, 129
Chirodiscoides caviae, 236, 237
E.ellipsoidalis,92
Choanotaenia spp., 152
E.intricata,92,99
Chorioptes bovis, 226, 227, 229
E.ivitaensis,93
Chrysoma bezziana, 298
E. leuckarti, 116, 117
Chrysops spp., 210, 299
E.macusaniensis, 90,93
Ciliates
E.nieschulzi,157
Balantidium coli,130,131
E.ninakohlyakimovae,90
Cryptocaryon iritans, 308,309
E.ovinoidalis,90
Dipartiella spp., 312
E. pellita,92
Epistylis spp.,310,311
E.scabra,129,129
Hemitrichodina spp., 312
E. spinosa, 129
Ichthyophthirius multifilis,308,309
E.stiedae,156
Paratrichodina spp., 312
E.subspherica,92
Tetrahymena spp.,310, 311
E. zuemii, 90,92
Trichodina spp., 312, 313
in horses, 116, 117
Trichodinella spp., 312
0ocysts as spurious parasites, 19, 23
Trichophyra spp.,312,313
in rabbits, 156, 157
Tripartiella spp., 312
in reptiles, 164, 165
Uronema spp., 310, 311
in rodents, 156, 157
Cimex spp., 302, 303
in ruminants/camelids, 90, 91-93, 99, 101
Cittotaenia spp., 162, 163
in swine, 129
Coccidia
Isospora spp., 47
Atoxoplasma spp., 140
in birds, 140, 141
Besnoitia spp., 182,183
in cats, 42, 45,75
INDEX
333
in dogs, 42, 43, 57, 62
in ruminants/camelids,94,95
1. burrowski, 42
Scanning fecal fotation slides for, 8
I.canis,42,43
stains for, 13
I. felis,42
Ctenocephalides spp.
I. neorivolta,42
Acanthocheilonema vector, 198
I.ohioensis,42,43
C.canis,281,282,282
I.revolta,42,45
C.felis felis,281,282,282,283
0ocysts,17,43,45,47,57,62,75
Cucumber seed tapeworm, 72
in reptiles, 164
Culicoides spp., 210, 300
in swine, 129
Culture, fecal, 28-29
Neospora caninum,44,45
Cuterebra spp., 288, 289
Sarcocystis spp., 46, 47, 140, 143
Cyathostoma spp., 148, 149
Toxoplasma gondii, 44, 45
C.bronchialis,149
Cochliomyia hominivorax, 298
Cyathostomes, 118
Cochlosoma spp., 142
Cyclops, 180
Columbicula columbae,277
Cystocaulus spp., 27
Complement fixation (CF) test, 213
Cysts
Contracecum spp., 144
hydatid, 76
Cooperia spp., 96
scleral with Besnoitia spp., 182, 182
C. oncophora,35
Cysts, protozoal
larvae, 30, 34,35
 canine parasites, 40
 morphological characteristics of infective third-
cattle parasites, 88
stage larvae, 29
feline parasites, 40, 41
Corridor disease, 204
goat parasites, 89
Cowdria,250
horse parasites, 115
Coyotes
sheep parasites, 89
helminth ova and protozoan cysts, 40
swine parasites, 128
Oslerus osleri, 70
Cytauxzoon felis,194,195
Crab louse, 268
Crenosoma vulpis,23,26,27,68,69
Dactylogyrus spp., 316
identification in fecal samples, 26, 26, 27
Davainea spp.
larvae, 26, 27, 68, 69
in birds, 152
Crow, Isospora spp. in, 141
D. proglottina, 152
Crustaceans, ectoparasitic
Deer
Argulus sp.,318,319
flies
Ergasilus spp.,318,319
Cephalopina titillator,294
Lepeophtheirus spp., 318,319
Hypoderma spp., 292
Lermaea spp., 320, 321
Lipoptena spp., 296
Cryptocaryon irritans, 308, 309
nematodes
Cryptocotyle lingua, 86, 87
Muellerius spp., 104
Cryptosporidium spp., 164
Protostrongylus spp., 104
in birds, 142
Deer fy, 210, 298,299
C.andersoni,94
Deer tick, 248, 254, 255
C. baileyi, 142
Demodecosis,230,233
C.canis,46,47
Demodex spp., 230, 230, 231
C. felis, 46, 47
D.canis,230
C. meleagridis, 142
skin scrapping for, 219, 230
C. parvum, 46, 94, 129
Dermacentor spp.,248, 256, 256, 257,263
in dogs/cats, 46, 47
Babesia vector, 192
fecal fotation solution choice and, 5
Cytauxzoon felis vector, 194
in horses, 116, 117
D.albipictus, 256,257
in rodents, 156
D.andersoni,256,257,263
334
INDEX
Dermacentor spp. (continued)
Pseudolynchia spp., 296
D.nitens,256,257
Rhinoestrus,294
D.occidentalis, 256
Simulium spp., 303
D.reticulatus,192,256
Stomoxys calcitrans, 301
D. variabilis, 194, 248, 256, 256
Dipylidium caninum,72,73,77
Dermanyssus spp., 239
Trichodectes as intermediate host for, 274
D.gallinae,240,241
Direct smear
Dermatitis
fecal, 11-13
Pelodera spp., 180
for microflariae, 188
Stephanofilaria spp., 178
Dirofilaria spp.
Dermatobia hominis,294,295
characteristics, 189
Diagnostic tests
D. immitis,188,189,196,197
immunodiagnostic methods, 15, 185, 213-216,
antibody titer in cats, 216
214,215
characteristics, 189
molecular methods, 15, 215, 216
heartworm antigen test, 213
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 110, 111, 136
D. repens, 188, 189,200, 201
Dictyocaulus spp., 106, 107
D.striata, 188, 189
D.arnfeldi,124,125
tests for microflaria in blood samples, 188-190
D. cameli, 106
Dispharynx spp., 148
D. flaria, 106, 107
DNA, use in molecular diagnostic tests, 216
D. viviparus,106,107
Dog fea, 287
identification in fecal samples, 28
Dogs
Digeneans, fish, 316, 317, 318
acanthocephalans
Dingo, Oslerus osleri in, 70
Macracanthorhynchus spp.,86
Dioctophyme renale,173,173
Onicola spp., 86
Dipartiella spp., 312
blood parasites, 191-201
Dipetalonema reconditum,188,189,198,199
cestodes
Diphyllobothrium latum,78,79
Diphyllobothrium latum,78,79
Diptera, 288-301
Dipylidium caninum,72,73,77,79
biting fies, 298, 299-301
Echinococcus spp., 76, 77, 79
blow fies, 296, 297
Mesocestoides spp., 76, 77, 79
Cephalopina titillator,294
Spirometra spp., 78,79
Chrysoma bezziana, 298
Taenia spp.,74,75,77,79
Chrysops spp., 299
coccidia
Cochliomyia hominivorax,298
Cryptosporidium canis,46,47
Culicoides spp., 300
Isospora spp., 42, 43, 57, 62
Cuterebra spp., 288, 289
Neospora caninum, 44, 45
Dermatobia hominis,294,295
Sarcocystis spp., 46, 47
fesh fies, 298
flagellates
Gastrophilus spp., 290, 291
Giardia,48,49-51
Glossina spp., 301
trichomonads, 48, 49
Haematopota spp., 299, 300
feas
Hippobosca spp., 296
Ctenocephalides canis,281
hippoboscid fies, 296, 297
Echidnophaga gallinacea, 286
Hypoderma spp., 292, 293
Pulex simulans, 284
larval, 288
Xenopsylla cheopsis,284
Lipoptena spp., 296
flies
Lucilia spp., 297
Cuterebra spp., 288
Melophagus ovinus,294,295,296
Dermatobia hominis,294
Musca domestica,300
Hippobosca longipennis, 296
Oestrus ovis, 294, 295
helminth ova and protozoan cysts, 40
Przhevalskiana silenus,292
helminth parasites, 52-87
INDEX
335
lice
Nanophyetus salmincola,84,85
Heterodoxus,274
Paragonimus kellicotti, 82, 83
Linognathus setosus, 266, 267, 268, 269
Donkeys
Tricodectes canis, 274, 275
Anoplocephala spp.,126,127
mites
Besnoitia bennetti, 182, 183
Cheyletiella yasguri,232
Dictyocaulus armfeldi,124,125
Demodex spp., 230, 231
Draschia megastoma, 124
Otodectes cynotis, 228
Eimeria leuckarti, 116, 117
Pneumonyssoides caninum,242,243
Habronema spp., 124, 125
Sarcoptes scabiei, 220, 221
Paranoplocephala mamillana, 126
nematodes
 Double-pored tapeworm, 72
Acanthocheilonema reconditum,198
Dourine, 204
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus,68
Ancylostoma spp., 52, 53, 57,61
Dracunculus insignis, 180, 181
Angiostrongylus vasorum,68,69
Draschia megastoma, 124
Crenosoma vulpis,26,26,27,68,69
Ducks
Dioctophyme renale,173,173
Haemoproteus nettionis, 210
Diroflaria immitis,196, 197
Leucocytozoon simondi, 208
Dirofilaria repens, 188
Dwarf dog tapeworm, 76
Dracunculus insignis, 181
Dwarf tapeworm of humans, 160
Eucoleus spp., 62,62,63
Oslerus osleri, 70, 71
Ear mange mite (rodents), 222
Pearsonema plica, 174
Ear mite, 228,229
Physaloptera spp.,57,64,65
East Coast fever, 204
Spirocerca lupi, 66,67
Echidnophaga gallinacea, 286, 287
Strongyloides stercoralis, 66, 67
Echinococcus spp., 76, 77
Thelazia spp., 180
E.granulosus,76
Toxascaris leonina,56,57
E.multilocularis,76
Toxocara canis,54,55,57,58,59
Echinoparyphium spp., 150
Trichuris vulpis,53,60,61-63
Echinostoma spp., 150
Uncinaria stenocephala.,52
Echinuria spp., 148
 pentastomid parasites, 86
Ectoparasite recovery techniques, in fish,
protozoans, 42-51
305-307
Babesia spp., 192, 193
fin biopsy (fn snip), 306, 306
Cryptosporidium canis, 46, 47
gill biopsy (gill snip), 307, 307
Giardia,48,49-51
skin biopsy (mucus smear), 305-306, 306
Hepatozoon spp., 191
Egg-counting (quantitative) fecal fotation
Isospora spp., 42,43, 57,62
procedures, 9-11
Leishmania spp.,194,195
modifed McMaster test, 9-11
Neospora caninum,44,45
modifed Stoll test, 11
Sarcocystis spp., 46, 45
sensitivity of test, 9
trichomonads, 48,49
Wisconsin egg-counting test (double
Trypanosoma cruzi, 196,197
centrifugation procedure), 11-12
ticks
Ehrlichia spp.
Haemaphysalis spp., 260
E. canis,258
Rhipicephalus spp.,248,258,258,259
vectors of, 250,254, 258
trematodes
Eimeria spp.
Alaria spp., 80, 81
in birds, 140, 141, 145, 147
Cryptocotyle lingua, 86, 87
in dog/cat feces, 45
Dicrocoelium dendriticum,110
E.ahsata,90
Fasciola hepatica, 110
E. airlongi, 90
Heterobilharzia americana,82,83
E.alabamensis,90
336
INDEX
Eimeria spp.(continued)
Eucoleus spp., 62, 63, 65, 75
E.bakuensis,90
E.aerophilus,62,63
E.bovis,90,92
E.boehmi, 62,63
E. caprina,90
European chicken fea, 286
E.christenseni,90
European Scientifc Counsel Companion Animal
E.cylindrical,92
Parasites (ESCCAP), 187, 188
E.deblieki,129
European sheep tick, 254
E.ellipsoidalis,92
Eurytrema spp.
E.intricata,92,99
E. pancreaticum, 112, 113, 136
E. ivitaensis,93
E. procyonis, 84, 85
E.leuckarti, 116, 117
Eutrombicula spp.
E. macusaniensis, 90, 93
E. alfreddugesi, 244
E.nieschulzi,157
E.splendens,244
E.ninakohlyakimovae,90
Eye worm, 180
E.ovinoidalis,90
E.pellita,92
Face louse, 268
E.scabra,129,129
Fasciola spp.
E. spinosa, 129
in bile or pancreatic duct, 84
E. stiedae,156
F gigantica,110
E.subspherica,92
F hepatica,84,110,111
E.zuernii, 90,92
in swine, 136, 137
in horses, 116, 117
Feather mites, 238, 239
 oocysts as spurious parasites, 22
Feather picking, 144
in rabbits, 156, 157
Fecal antigen test, for Giardia, 48, 213
in reptiles, 164, 165
Fecal egg count reduction tests (FECRTs), 9,
in rodents, 156, 157
30-38
in ruminants/camelids, 90, 91-93, 99,
interpretation of results, 37-38
103
test drugs and collection of posttreatment
in swine, 129, 129
samples, 31-32
Elephant skin disease, 182
test groups and selection of animals, 31
 ELISA. See Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Fecal exam procedures
(ELISA)
Baermann test, 14-15, 15
Elk tick, 256
direct smear, 12-13
Elokomin fuke fever, 84
fecal flotation, 4-12
 Endemic relapsing fever, 264
fecal sedimentation, 13-14
Endoparasite recovery, in fish, 307
benefits of, 13
Entamoeba spp.
centrifugal sedimentation test, 14
E.invadens,164,165
Flukefinder? apparatus, 13
in reptiles, 164, 165
simple test, 13
 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),
identification of adult worms, 38-39
185,187,213,214,215
immunologic and molecular methods, 15
for Giardia,48
microscope use, 16-19
for heartworm, 187
 pseudoparasites and spurious parasites found in,
Epistylis spp.,310,311
19-22
E. colisarum, 310
free-living nematodes, 23, 24, 25
E. lwof, 310
insect/plant hairs, 21
Equids. See Horses
mites, free-living, 21, 22
Equine babesiosis, 256
parasite eggs/cysts, 21, 22
Equine piroplasmosis, 257
pollen grains, 20
Ergasilus spp.,320,321
yeast,21
Erythrocytes, average diameters of, 187
quality control, 15
Esophageal worm, 66
stained smear, 13
INDEX
337
techniques for evaluation of strongylid
Fish
 nematodes in grazing animals, 28-38
ciliates
fecal culture, 28
Cryptocaryon irritans, 308, 309
fecal egg count reduction test (FECRT),
Dipartiella spp., 312
30-38
Epistylis spp.,310,311
identification of horse third-stagelarvae,
Hemitrichodina spp., 312
30
Ichthyophthirius multifilis,308,309
identification of ruminant and camelid
Paratrichodina spp., 312
third-stage larvae, 29-30
Tetrahymena spp., 310, 311
 Fecal fotation procedures, 412
Trichodina spp., 312, 313
benchtop, 8
Trichodinella spp., 312
centrifugal, 7-8, 8
Trichophyra spp., 312, 313
principle of, 4
Tripartiella spp., 312
quantitative (egg-counting), 8-12
Uronema spp., 310, 311
modified McMaster test, 9-11
crustaceans, ectoparasitic
modifed Stoll test, 11-12
Argulus sp.,318,319
sensitivity of test, 9
Caligus spp., 318
Wisconsin egg-counting test (double
Ergasilus spp.,320,321
 centrifugation procedure), 11-12
Lepeophtheirus spp.,318,319
slide preservation, 4
Lemaea spp., 320, 321
slides, 8
ectoparasite recovery techniques, 305-307
 solution choice and preparation, 5-6
fin biopsy (fin snip), 306, 306-307
advantages/disadvantages of common
gill biopsy (gill snip), 307, 307
solutions, 6
skin biopsy (mucus smear), 305-306, 306
magnesium sulfate solution, saturated, 5
endoparasite recovery, 307
 Sheather's sugar solution, 6
fagellates
sodium chloride solution, saturated, 5
Amyloodinium ocellatum,312,313
sodium nitrate solution (Fecasol?), 5
Ichthyobodo (Costia) necator,314,315
 specific gravity of solutions, 5
leeches, 320,321,322
zinc sulfate solution (33%), 5
monogeneans, 316, 317
Fecal samples
myxosporidians
collection of, 34
Henneguyu spp., 316, 317
fecal culture, 28
Myxobolus spp., 314, 315
shipment, 4
nematodes,322,323
storage, 4
thorny-headed worm, 322, 323
Fecasol?, 5
trematodes, 316, 317, 318
 FECRTs. See Fecal egg count reduction tests 
Fish louse, 318, 319
(FECRTs)
Fixatives, 4
Felicola subrostratus, 274, 275
Flagellates
Feline biting louse, 274, 275
Amyloodinium ocellatum,312,313
Felines. See Cats
Chilomastix spp., 142
Ferrets
Cochlosoma spp., 142
Ctenocephalides, 282
Giardia spp., 43,48,49-51,53
Diroflaria immitis,196
in birds,142, 145
Otodectes cynotis, 228, 229
cysts,5,43,48,49-50,53,94,95,103,116,
Filaroides spp.
117
Fhirthi,26,70
in dogs/cats, 43,48,49-51, 53
F milksi, 70
fecal antigen test, 213
F osleri, 70
fecal fotation solution choice and, 5
Filicollis spp., 154
G. bovis, 94
Filter test, for microflariae, 190
G. canis, 48
Fin biopsy (fn snip), 306, 306, 307
G. cati, 48
INDEX
Flagellates (continued)
Flies, 288-301
G.duodenalis,48,95
biting, 298, 299-301
G. intestinalis,48, 94, 116, 129, 213
blow, 296, 297
G.lamblia,48,94
Cephalopina titillator, 294
of horses, 116, 117
Chrysoma bezziana, 298
in rodents, 156
Chrysops spp., 299
in ruminants/camelids, 94, 95, 103
Cochliomyia hominivorax, 296
in swine, 129
Culicoides spp., 300
trichomonads confused with, 48, 49
Cuterebra spp., 288, 289
trichrome stain for, 13
Dermatobia hominis,294,295
trophozoites,48,51, 142, 145
fesh, 296
Histomonas spp., 144
Gastrophilus spp., 290, 291
Ichthyobodo (Costia) necator, 314, 315
Glossina spp., 301
Leishmania spp., 194,195
Haematopota spp.,300
Spironucleus spp., 142
Hippobosca spp., 296
trichomonads, 48, 49
hippoboscid flies, 296, 297
Trichomonas spp., 142, 143
Hypoderma spp., 292, 293
Tritrichomonas foetus,48,178,179
larval, 288
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 205-206
Lipoptena spp., 296
T. brucei,204,205
Lucilia spp., 297
T. congolense, 204,205
Melophagus ovinus, 294,295,296
T. cruzi, 194, 197,216
Musca domestica,301
T.equiperdum,204
Oestrus ovis, 294, 295
T. evansi, 204, 207
Przhevalskiana silenus,292
T. melophagium, 204,207
Pseudolynchia spp., 296
T. simiae, 204,207
Rhinoestrus,294
T. theileri, 204, 207
Simulium spp., 303
T. vivax,204,206
Stomoxys calcitrans,301
Flatworms. See also Cestodes; Trematodes
Flotation slides, 8
digeneans, fsh, 316, 317, 318
Flotation solutions, 5-6
monogeneans, fish, 316, 317
 advantages/disadvantages of common solutions,
Fleas, 280-287
Acanthocheilonema vector, 198
magnesium sulfate solution, saturated, 5
Cediopsylla simplex,285
Sheather's sugar solution, 6
Ceratophyllus spp., 286
 sodium chloride solution, saturated, 5-6
characteristics of, 280
sodium nitrate solution (Fecasol@), 5
collection of, 280
specifc gravity of solutions, 5
Ctenocephalides canis, 281, 282,282
zinc sulfate solution (33%), 5
Ctenocephalides felis felis, 281, 282, 282,283
 Flukefinder? apparatus, 13
Echidnophaga gallinacea, 286, 287
Flukes. See also Trematodes
eggs, 283
digeneans,fsh,316,317,318
key for identification, 281
Fly strike/fy blow, 288, 296, 297
larvae, 283
Follicle mite, 230
Nosopsyllus fasciatus,281
Foot louse of sheep, 268
Orchopeas howardi, 281
Foot mange, 226
Pulex spp., 281, 284, 285
Formalin, 38
pupae,283
Fowl paralysis, 264
of rodents and rabbits, 284, 285
Fowl tick, 264, 265
Spilopsyllus cuniculi, 284
Foxes
Xenopsylla cheopsis,284,285
Angiostrongylus vasorum, 70,71
 Flea tapeworm, 72
Crenosoma vulpis,68
Flesh fies, 296
Eucoleus spp., 62,62, 63, 75
INDEX
339
helminth ova and protozoan cysts, 40
cysts, 5,43,48,49-50,53,94,95,103,116,
Oslerus osleri, 70
117, 142
Pearsonema plica, 174
in dogs/cats, 43,48, 49-51, 53
Fox lungworm, 62
fecal antigen test, 213
Fox tapeworm, 76
fecal fotation solution choice and, 5
Francisella tularensis, tick vectors, 261
G. bovis,94
French heartworm, 70
G. canis, 48
Freshwater fish
G.cati, 48
Amyloodinium ocellatum,312,313
G.duodenalis,48,94
Argulus sp.,318,319
G. intestinalis,48, 94, 116, 129, 213
Dipartiella spp., 312
G.lamblia,48,94
Epistylis spp.,310,311
in horses, 116, 117
Ergasilus spp.,320,321
in rodents, 156
Hemitrichodina spp., 312
in ruminants/camelids, 94, 95, 107
Henneguyu spp., 316,317
in swine, 129
Ichthyobodo (Costia) necator,314,315
trichomonads confused with, 48, 49
Ichthyophthirius multiflis,308,309
trichrome stain for, 13
leeches, 320, 321
trophozoites,48,51,142,145
Lemaea spp., 320, 321
Giemsa stain
monogeneans, 316, 317
for blood smears, 185, 186
Myxobolus spp.,314,315
for fecal smears, 13
nematodes, 322, 323
Gill biopsy (gill snip), 307, 307
Paratrichodina spp., 312
Gill 1ouse, 320, 321
Tetrahymena spp., 310, 311
Gliricola spp.
thorny-headed worm, 322,323
G. ovalis, 278
trematodes, 317, 318
G. porcelli, 278, 279
Trichodina spp., 312, 313
Glossina spp., 204, 301
Trichodinella spp., 312
Goats. See also Ruminants
Trichophyra spp., 312, 313
coccidia
Tripartiella spp., 312
Eimeria spp., 90, 93
Freshwater white spot, 308
fleas
Fur mites
Ctenocephalides, 282
guinea pigs, 236
flies
rabbits, 234
Hypoderma spp., 292
rodents,236,237
Melophagus ovinus,294,296
Oestrus ovis, 294
Gall bladder, Platynosomum concinnum in, 84,
Przhevalskiana silenus,292
85
helminth ova, larva, and protozoan cysts, 89
Gapeworm, 148
lice
Gastrophilus spp., 290, 291
Bovicola caprae,270
G.haemorrhoidalis,290
mites
G.intestinalis,290,291
Demodex spp., 230, 231
G.nasalis,290
Psoroptes spp., 224
Geese
nematodes
Haemoproteus netionis, 210
Dictyocaulus filaria,106
Leucocytozoon simondi,208
Muellerius spp., 104
Gerbils
Protostrongylus spp., 104
Demodex spp., 231
Skrjabinema spp., 102
Syphacia spp., 158, 159
protozoans
Giant kidney worm, 173
Babesia spp., 202
Giardia spp., 43,48,49-51,53
Besnoitia besnoiti, 182
in birds, 142, 143
Eimeria spp.,90,93
340
INDEX
Goats (continued)
Heartworm
trematodes
antigen test, 187-188, 213
Fasciola hepatica, 110
in cats, 187-188, 196, 216
Paragonimus kellicotti,82,83
French, 70
Gotch ear, 250
microfilariae, test for in blood samples,
Graphidium strigosum,160
188-190
Grazing animals, techniques for evaluation
direct smear, 188
of strongylid nematodes in,
filter test, 190
28-38
hematocrit test, 188, 190
Grubs, 288
modified Knott's test, 190
Guinea pigs
Hedgehog tick, 254
lice
Heligosomoides polygyrus, 160, 161
Gliricola ovalis, 278
Helminths. See also Cestodes; Nematodes;
Gliricola porcelli, 278, 279
Trematodes
Trimenopon jenningsis, 278
of birds, 144-155
mites
of dogs/cats, 40, 41, 52-87
Chirodiscoides caviae,236,237
eggs/ova
Trixacarus caviae, 224,225
canine, 40
nematodes
cattle, 88
Paraspidodera uncinata,160, 161
feline, 41
Gulf Coast tick, 250, 257
goats, 89
Gyrodactylus spp., 316
horse,115
preserving, 4
Habronema spp., 124, 125
quantitative fecal exams for, 8-12
H. microstoma, 124
scanning fecal fotation slides for, 8
H. nuscae,124
sheep, 89
Haemaphysalis spp., 260, 260, 261
swine,128
Babesia vector, 192,260
of horses, 115, 118-127
H. leachi, 192, 260
 preserving adult, 36
H. leporispalustris, 260, 261
of reptiles, 166-169
H. punctata,260
of rodents and rabbits, 158-163
Haematobia irritans,179,301
of ruminants and camelids, 88, 89,
Haematopota spp., 300
96-113
Haemonchus spp., 96
Hemagglutination (HA) test, 213
larvae, 30,33,37
Hematocrit test, for microflariae, 188, 190
morphological characteristics of infective
Hematopinus spp., 266, 267
third-stage larvae, 29
H. asini, 266
Haemoproteus spp., 210, 211
H. eurysternus, 266
H. columbae,210
H. quadripertusus, 266
H. meleagridis,210
H. suis, 266, 267
H. nettionis,210
Hemitrichodina spp., 312
H. sacharovi,210
Hemoflagellates
Hamsters, Hymenolepis spp. in, 160
Leishmania spp., 194,195
Hard ticks. See Ticks, hard
Trypanosoma cruzi, 196,197
Harvest mite, 244
Trypanosoma spp.,204, 205-207
Hawks
Hemosporozoa
Haemoproteus spp., 211
Haemoproteus spp., 210, 211
Leucocytozoon spp., 209
Leucocytozoon spp., 208, 209
Plasmodium spp., 209
Plasmodium spp., 209, 210, 211
Head louse, human, 268
Henneguyu spp.,316, 317
Heartwater, 250
H. ictaluri, 316
INDEX
341
Hepatozoon spp., 191
Psoroptes spp., 224
H.americanum,191,191
Sarcoptes spp., 220
H. canis, 191
nematodes
Heterakis spp., 144, 145, 160
Dictyocaulus anfieldi,124,125
H. isolonche, 144
Draschia megastoma,124
Heterobilharzia americana,82,83
Habronema spp., 124, 125
Heterodoxus spp.
identification of third-stage larvae, 30
Acanthocheilonema vector, 198
morphological characteristics of third-stage
H.spinigera,274
larvae, 37
Hexamita spp., Spironucleus spp.
Oxyuris equi,122,123
Hippobosca spp., 296
Parascaris spp., 119, 120, 121
H. longipennis, 296
Probstmayria vivipara,122
H. variegata, 296
Setaria spp., 208, 209
Hippoboscid fies,210,296,297
strongylid parasites, 118, 119, 121, 127
Hirudinea (leeches), 320, 321, 322
Strongyloides westeri, 97, 122, 123
Histomonas spp., 142
Strongylus vulgaris, 118
H. meleagridis, 144
Thelazia spp., 180
Hookworms
Trichostrongylus axei, 118
Ancylostoma spp., 52, 53, 57,61
protozoans, 116, 117
strongylid parasites, of ruminants and camelids,
Babesia caballi,202,203
96
Babesia (Theileria) equi, 202, 203
Horn fy, 179,298, 301
Besnoitia bennetti, 182
Horse fy, 298, 300
Cryptosporidium spp., 116, 117
Horses
Eimeria leuckarti,116,117
blood parasites, 202-208
Giardia intestinalis, 116, 117
Babesia caballi,202,203
Trypanosoma equiperdum, 206
Babesia (Theileria) equi, 202,203
Trypanosoma Evansi, 207
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 207
ticks
cestodes
Dermacentor nitens, 256,257
Anoplocephala spp.,126,127
Otobius spp., 262
Paranoplocephala mamillana,126
trematodes
coccidia
Dicrocoelium dendriticum,110
Cryptosporidium spp., 116, 117
Fasciola hepatica, 110
Eimeria leuckarti, 116, 117
Schistosoma spp., 112
flagellates
Horse tick, 256
Giardia intestinalis,116, 117
House fy, 301
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 207
Hoyer's solution, 39
flies
Human body louse, 268
Gastrophilus spp.,290,291
Human bot fy, 294
Hippobosca variegata,296
Human fea, 281, 284
Hypoderma spp., 292
Human head 1ouse, 268
Rhinoestrus,294
Humans
helminth ova and protozoan cysts,
bedbug (Cimex spp.), 302, 303
115
cestodes
helminth parasites, 118-127
Diphyllobothriunlatum,78
lice
Dipylidium caninum,72
Bovicola equi,270,273
Echinococcus spp., 76
Hematopinus asini,266
Hymenolepis nana,160,161
mites
feas
Chorioptes bovis, 226
Pulex irritans,281,284,285
Demodex spp., 230
Xenopsylla cheopsis,284
342
INDEX
Humans (continued)
Isospora spp., 47
flies
in birds, 140, 141
Cuterebra spp., 288
in cats, 42,45,75
Dermatobia hominis,294
in dogs, 42, 43, 57,62
screwworms, 298
I.burowski,42
lice
I.canis,42,43
Pediculus spp., 268, 269
I. felis, 42
Phthirus pubis,268,269
I.neorivolta,42
mites
I.ohioensis,42,43
Demodex spp., 230
I.rivolta,42,45
trombiculid, 244,245
0ocysts, 17,43,45,47,57,62,
protozoans
75
Giardia,48
in reptiles, 164
Leishmania spp., 194
in swine, 129
ticks
Itchy heel, 226
Ormithodorus spp., 264
Ixodes spp.,248, 254,255, 260
trematodes
Babesia vector, 202
Eurytrema pancreaticum, 112
I.canisuga,254
Fasciola hepatica,110
1. hexagonus, 254
Hyalomma spp., 252, 253
1.holocyclus,254
H. aegyptium, 252
1. pacificus,254
as tick vectors, 252
I.ricinus,254
Hydatid cysts, 76
I.rubicundus,254
Hymenolepis spp., 152, 160, 161
1.scapularis,248,254,255
H. diminuta,160
H. microstoma,160
Kalicephalus sp., 167
H. nana, 160, 161
Kennel tick, 258
Hyostrongylus rubidus,132,133
Kidney worm, 176
Hypoderma spp., 292, 293
Kinyoun stain, 13
H. bovis,292,293
Kissing bug, 196
H. lineatum,292,293
Knemidokoptes spp., 222, 223
Knott's test, modifed,190,196,200
Ich, 305,308, 309
Ichthyobodo (Costia) necator,314,315
Laboratory animals. See also Rodents
Ichthyophthirius multifilis,308,309
Anoplura (sucking lice), 270, 271
Immunodiagnostic methods, 213-216, 214,
Demodex spp. in, 230
215
Lactophenol, 39
for blood parasites, 185
Lamanema spp., 96
on fecal samples, 15-16
Larvae. See also specific parasites
Indirect fuorescent antibody (IFA) test, 48, 185,
cat parasites, 41
213-214,215,216
cattle parasites, 88
 Indirect hemagglutination (IHA) test, 213
sheep and goat parasites, 89
InPouchTM TF-Feline culture system, 48
Lateral fow immunochromatographic assay, 213,
Insect hair, 27
214
Insects, 263-302
Leeches,320, 321
bedbug, 302
Leg mange, 226
feas, 280-286
Leishmaniasis, 194
fies, 288-301
Leishmania spp., 194, 195
lice, 266-278
L. braziliensis, 194
 Integumentary system, parasite recovery,
L. chagasi, 194
172
L. donovani, 194
Intestinal threadworm, 66
L.infantum,194
INDEX
343
L. mexicana, 194
Livestock. See also Ruminants; Swine
L. tropica, 194
blood parasites, 202-208
Lepeophtheirus spp., 318, 319
Haemaphysalis spp., 260, 261
L.salmonis,319
Rhipicephalus spp.,258,260
Leporacarus (Listrophorus)gibbus,234,
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 205-207
235
Lone star tick, 250, 253
Lernaea spp., 320, 321
Long-nosed cattle louse, 266
Leucocytozoon spp.
Louping-ill, 254
in birds, 208,209
Louse fies, 294, 297
L.caulleryi,208
Lucilia spp., 297
L.simondi,208
Lungworms
L.smithi,208
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, 23,68,
Lice,266-278
69
Acanthocheilonema vector, 198
Baerman test for diagnosis of, 14
Anoplura (sucking lice), 266
Crenosoma vulpis,23,26,27,68,69
Hematopinus spp., 266, 267
Cystocaulus spp., 27
of laboratory animals, 270, 271
Dictyocaulus spp., 106, 107, 124,
Linognathus spp.,266, 267,272
125
Microthoracius spp., 266
Eucoleus spp., 61, 62, 63, 75
Pediculus spp., 268, 269
Filaroides hirthi,23,70
Phthirus pubis,268,269
larvae, 26
Polyplax,271
Metastrongylus spp., 134, 135
Solenopotes capilatus, 268, 269
Muellerius capillaris,27
detection of, 266
Neostrongylus spp., 27
life cycle, 266
Oslerus osleri, 23, 70, 71
Mallophaga (biting/chewing lice), 266
Protostrongylus spp., 23, 104, 105
avian lice, 276, 277
Lutzomyia spp.,194
Bovicola spp., 270, 271-273
Lyme borreliosis, 254
Columbicula columbae,277
Lynxacarus radovskyi,234,235
Felicola subrostratus,274,275
Gliricola ovalis, 278
Macracanthorhynchus spp., 86
Gliricola porcelli, 278, 279
M.hirudinaceus,138,139
Gyropus ovalis,278
Maggots, 288, 296, 297, 299
Heterodoxus spinigera,274
Magnesium sul fate solution, saturated, 5
Lipeurus caponis,277
Mallophaga (biting/chewing lice), 266
Menopon gallinae, 277
avian lice, 276, 277
Tricodectes canis, 274,275
Bovicola spp., 270, 271-273
Trimenopon jenningsis,278
Columbicula columbae,277
nits, 266,275
Felicola subrostratus,274,275
species specificity of, 266
Gliricola porcelli, 278, 279
Linguatula spp.,86
Gyropus ovalis,278
Linognathus spp., 266, 267, 272
Heterodoxus spinigera, 274
Acanthocheilonema vector, 198
Lipeurus caponis, 277
L. africanus, 268
Menopon gallinae,277
L.ovillus,268
Tricodectes canis,274, 275
L.pedalis,268
Trimenopon jenningsis,278
L.setosus, 267,268
Mange
L.vituli,268
chorioptic, 226
Lipeurus caponis, 277
demodectic,230,231,233
Lipoptena spp., 296
notoedric, 222
Little blue cattle louse, 268, 269
psoroptic,224,227
Liver fuke, 110
sarcoptic,220,221
344
INDEX
Marine fish
Micrometers, microscope, 16, 17, 18, 18,19, 19
Amyloodinium ocellatum,312,313,314
Microscope use, 16-19
Argulus sp.,318,319
calibration, 16-19
Caligus spp., 318
focusing, 16, 17
Cryptocaryon irritans, 308, 309
micrometers, 18, 18, 19, 19
Dipartiella spp., 312
Microthoracius spp., 266
Ergasilus spp., 320, 321
Midge, 210, 398, 300
Hemitrichodina spp., 312
Mink
Henneguyu spp., 316, 317
Dioctophyme renale, 173
leeches, 320, 321
Paragonimus kellicotti, 82, 83
Lepeophtheirus spp.,318,319
Mites
monogeneans, 316, 317
avian feather, 238,239
Myxobolus spp., 314, 315
Blankaartia spp., 245
nematodes,322, 323
Cheyletiella spp., 232, 233
Paratrichodina spp., 312
Chirodiscoides caviae,236,237
thorny-headed worm, 322,323
Chorioptes bovis,226,227,229
trematodes, 316, 317,318
Demodex spp., 230, 231,233
Trichodina spp, 312, 312
Dermanyssus gallinae, 240,241
Trichodinella spp., 312
Eutrombicula alfreddugesi,244
Tripartiella spp., 312
Eutrombicula splendens,244
Uronema spp., 310, 311
identification of, 217-219, 218
Marine white spot disease, 308
Knemidokoptes spp., 222, 223
Marshallagia spp.,98,99
Leporacarus (Listrophorus)gibbus,234,235
M.marshalli,98
Lynxacarus radovskyi,234,235
McMaster slide, 9, 10
microscopic characteristics of, 218
McMaster test, modifed, 10-11
Mycoptes musculinus,236,237
Mecistocirrus spp., 96, 97
Myobia musculi,236,237
Melophagus ovinus,204,294,296
Neotrombicula autumnalis,244
Menopon gallinae, 277
Notoedres spp., 222, 223
Mesocestoides spp., 76, 77
Ophionyssus natricis,241,242,243
M. corti, 76
Omnithoryssus spp., 238, 239, 240
M.lineatus,76
Otodectes cynotis, 228, 229
M.variabilis,76
Pneumonyssoides caninum,241,242
Metastrongylus spp., 134, 135
Psoroptes spp., 218, 224, 225, 227
Mice
Radfordia spp.,236,237
Hymenolepis spp., 160
Sarcoptes spp., 218, 220, 220, 221
mites
Trixacarus spp., 224, 225
fur, 236, 237
Trombicula spp., 245
Mycoptes musculinus,236,237
trombiculid, 244, 245
nematodes
Modifed Knott's test, 190, 196, 200
Aspicularis tetraptera,158,159
Modified McMaster test, 9-11
Heligosomoides polygyrus, 160, 161
Modified Stoll test, 11
Syphacia spp., 158
Molecular diagnostic methods, 15, 215, 216
Microflariae
Monieza spp., 106, 107, 109
Acanthocheilonema reconditum,188,189,199,
M.benedeni, 106
200
M. expansa, 106
characteristics of, 189
Monocystis spp., 23, 61
Diroflaria immitis, 188, 189,196, 197
Monogeneans, fish, 316, 317
Dirofilaria repens, 188, 189,199,200,201
Moose tick, 257
Onchocerca spp., 178, 179
Mosquito, 398, 300
Stephanoflaria spp., 178, 179
Diroflaria vector, 196, 200
tests for heartworm in blood samples,
Plasmodium spp., 210
188-190
Setaria spp., 208
INDEX
345
Mouse. See Mice
Graphidium strigosum, 160
Mouthparts, ticks, 247, 247
Habronema spp., 124, 125
Mucus smear, in fish, 305-306, 306
Haemonchus spp., 96
Muellerius capillaris,27
Heligosomoides pobygyrus, 160, 161
Murine typhus, 284
Heterakis spp.,144,145,160
Musca domestica,301
Hyostrongylus rubidus,132, 133
Mustelids, Aonchotheca putorii in, 64, 65
identification of larvae recovered from fecal
Mycoptes musculinus,236,237
samples, 23-27
Myobia musculi,236,237
Kalicephalus sp.,167
Myxobolus spp.,314,315
Lamanema spp., 96
M.cerebralis,314
Marshallagia spp.,98,99
Myxosporidians
Mecistocirrus spp., 96, 97
Henneguyu spp., 316, 317
Metastrongylus spp., 134, 135
Myxobolus spp.,314,315
microscopic examination for blood parasites,
187-190
Nagana, 204
Muellerius capillaris, 104, 105
Nairobi sheep disease, 250, 258
Nematodirus spp., 29, 93,98, 99
 Nairovirus, 250
Nippostrongylus braziliensis,160
Nanophyetus salmincola,84,85
Obeliscoides cuniculi, 160
Nasal bots, 294, 295
Oesophagostomum spp., 96, 132, 133
Nasal mite, 242, 243
Ollulanus tricuspis, 72,73
Nematodes. See also specific nematode species
Onchocerca spp., 178, 179
Acanthocheilonema reconditum,188,189, 198,
Oslerus osleri, 70, 71
199
Ostertagia spp., 96
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, 23, 68, 69
Oxyuris equi,122,123
Amidostomum spp., 146
Parascaris spp., 119, 120, 121
Ancylostoma spp., 52,53,57,61
Paraspidodera uncinata, 160, 161
Angiostrongylus vasorum, 24, 70, 71
Passalurus ambiguus,158,159
Aonchotheca spp., 62, 64, 65, 100, 101
Pearsonema spp., 174, 175
Ascaridia spp., 144, 145
Pelodera strongyloides, 180, 181
Ascaris suum, 132, 133
Physaloptera spp., 57, 64, 65
Ascarops strongylina, 128, 136, 137
Physocephalus sexalatus,136,137
Baylisascaris procyonis,58,58
Porrocecum spp., 144
Bunostomum spp., 96
preserving adult, 36
Camelostrongylus spp., 96
Probstmayria vivipara,122
Capillaria spp., 146, 147, 149
Protostrongylus spp.,104, 105
Chabertia spp., 96
of reptiles, 166, 167, 168
Cheilospirura spp., 148
Serratospiculum spp., 148
Contracecum spp., 144
Setaria spp., 208, 208
Cooperia spp., 96
Skjabinema spp., 102, 103
Crenosoma vulpis, 23, 26,27,68,69
Spirocerca lupi,66,67
Cyathostoma spp., 148, 149
spirurids,148,148,151
Dictyocaulus spp., 106, 107, 124, 125
Stephanofilaria spp., 178, 179
Dioctophyme renale,174, 175
Stephanurus dentatus,176,177
Diroflaria immitis, 188, 189, 196, 197
Strongyloides spp., 97, 102, 103, 134, 135
Diroflaria repens, 188, 189,200,201
S. papillosus, 102
Dispharynx spp., 148
S.stercoralis, 66, 67
Dracunculus insignis, 180, 181
S. westeri, 97, 122, 123
Draschia megastoma, 124
Strongylus vulgaris, 37, 118
Echinuria spp., 148
Subulura spp., 148
Eucoleus spp., 62,62,63,65,75
Syngamus spp., 148, 149
fish parasites, 322, 322
Syphacia obvelata,158,159
free-living in fecal samples, 20, 24
Telodorsagia spp., 96
346
INDEX
Nematodes (continued)
Ormithoryssus spp., 238, 239, 240
Tetrameres spp., 148, 149
O.bacoti,240
Thelazia spp., 180, 181
O.bursa,238
Toxascaris leonina, 56,57
O. sylviarum, 238
Toxocara spp.,54,55-57,61,75
Oslerus osleri,23,70,71
Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum,102,103
Ostertagia spp., 96
Trichosomoides crassicauda,176, 177
larvae, 35
Trichostrongylus spp., 96, 118, 146
morphological characteristics of infective third-
Trichuris spp. in ruminants/camelids, 100,
stage larvae, 29
101
Otobius spp., 262, 263
Trichuris suis, in swine, 132, 133, 134
Otodectes cynotis, 228, 229
Trichuris vulpis, in dogs, 53, 60, 61-62, 63
Ova. See specific species
Uncinaria stenocephala.,52
Ovine face louse, 268
Nematodirus spp., 93, 98,99
Ovine foot louse, 268
morphological characteristics of infective
Ovine nasal bot, 294,295
third-stage larvae, 29
Ow1s
N. battus, 98, 99
Capillaria spp., 147
Neoascaris.See Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum
Centorhynchus spp., 155
Neobenedenia spp., 316
fukes, 157
Neorickettsia spp., 84
Ox warble, 292
N.helminthoeca,84
Oxyuris spp.
Neospora caninum,44,45
identification of adult worms, 38
Neostrongylus spp., 27
O.equi, 122, 123
New World screwworm, 298
Nippostrongylus braziliensis,160
Pacific Coast tick, 256
Nits, 266, 275
 Pancreatic ducts, parasites of
Nodular worm, 96, 132
Eurytrema pancreaticum,112,113,136
Northern fowl mite, 238
Eurytrema procyonis,84,85
Northern rat fea, 281
Fasciola hepatica, 84
Nosopsyllus fasciatus,281
Paragonimus kellicotti, 82,83
Notoedres spp., 222, 223
Paramphistomum spp.,112,113
N.cati,222
Paranoplocephala mamillana,126
Parascaris spp., 119, 120, 121
Obeliscoides cuniculi, 160
fecal egg count reduction test (FECRT), 30
Oesophagostomum spp., 96, 132, 133
P equorum, 31, 120
larvae, 30, 33,35
Paraspidodera uncinata, 160, 161
morphological characteristics of infective
Paratrichodina spp., 312
third-stage larvae, 29
Passalurus ambiguus,158, 159
Oestrus ovis, 294, 295
PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Old World screwworm, 298
diagnostic tests
Ollulanus tricuspis, 72, 73
Peacock, Ascardia spp. in, 145
Onchocerca spp., 178, 179
Pearsonema spp., 174, 175
O.armillata,178
P feliscati,174,175
O. cervicalis, 178
P plica,174
O. gibsoni, 178
Pediculosis, 266
O. gutterosa, 178, 179
Pediculus spp., 268, 269
Onicola spp., 86
P humanus,268,269
Oodinium spp., 312
Pelodera strongyloides, 180,181
Ophionyssus natricis, 242,243
Pentastomid parasites
Orchopeas howardii,281
Linguatula spp., 86
Oriental rat fea, 281, 284, 285
of reptiles, 166, 169
Ornithodorus spp., 264, 265
Pheasants, Heterakis isolonche in, 144
INDEX
347
Phlebotomus spp., 194
Plant hair, 21
Phthirus pubis,268,269
Plasmodium spp.
Physaloptera spp., 57, 64, 65
in birds, 209, 210,211
P canis, 64
P.cathemerium,210
P felidis,64
P gallinaceum,210
P. praeputialis, 64
P hermani, 210
P pseudopraeputialis, 64
Pjuxtanucleare,210
P rara, 64
P matutinum, 210
Physocephalus sexalatus, 136, 137
P relictum, 210
Pigeon fly, 296
Platynosomum concinnum,84,85
Pigeons
Pneumonyssoides spp.
Columbicula columbae (slender pigeon louse),
P caninum,242,243
277
Psimicola,242
Haemoproteus spp., 210
Pollen grains, 19, 20
Plasmodium relictum, 210
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) diagnostic tests,
Pseudolynchia spp., 296
216
Tetrameres spp., 148
Polymorphus spp., 154
trichomoniasis, 144
Polyplax, 271
Pig louse, 266
Polyvinyl alcohol, 4
Pigs. See Swine
Porrocecum spp., 144
Pinworms
 Poultry. See also Birds
Aspicularis tetraptera,158,159
cestodes
Oxyuris equi,122,123
Davainea proglottina, 152
Passalurus ambiguus, 158, 159
Raillietina echinobothrida,152
Probstmayria vivipara, 122
coccidia
reptile,167
Eimeria spp.,140, 140,145, 147
Skrjabinema spp., 102, 103
feas
Syphacia obvelata,158,159
Ceratophyllus spp., 286
Piroplasms, 192, 194
Echidnophaga gallinacea, 286,287
Babesia spp.
lice
B. bigemina, 202,203
Lipeurus caponis,277
B. bovis,203
Menopon gallinae,277
B.caballi,202,203
mites
B.canis,192, 193
Dermanyssus gallinae, 240, 241
B. divergens, 202
Knemidokoptes spp., 222, 223
B.equi,202,203
Ornithonysus spp., 238, 239
B. gibsoni,192, 193
nematodes
B. major,202
Amidostomum spp., 146
B. motasi, 202
Ascaridia spp., 144, 145
B. ovis, 202
Heterakis spp., 144, 145
B.trautmanni,202
Syngamus spp.,148
in dogs/cats, 192, 193
Trichostrongylus tenuis, 146
in horses, 202, 203
protozoans
in livestock,202,203
Eimeria spp.,140,141,145,147
tick vectors,252,254,258,262,263
Leucocytozoon spp., 208,209
Cytauxzoon felis,194,195
ticks
Theileria spp., 204, 205
Argas spp., 264, 265
T. annulata,204
trematodes
T. equi, 204
Echinoparyphium spp.,150
T. parva, 204, 205
Echinostoma spp., 150
vectors for, 252, 261
Prosthogonimus spp., 150
Piscinoodinium spp., 312
Preputial sample collection, bovine, 172
348
INDEX
Probstmayria vivipara,122
of dogs and cats, 4051
Prosthogonimus spp., 150
Entamoeba spp., 164, 165
Protostrongylus spp., 23, 104, 105
fish
Protozoans
Amyloodinium ocellatum,312,313
of birds, 140-144
Cryptocaryon irritans, 308, 309
blood parasites
Dipartiella spp., 312
Babesia spp., 192, 193, 202, 203
Epistylis spp.,310,311,312
Cytauxzoon felis, 194, 195
Hemitrichodina spp., 312
Haemoproteus spp., 210, 211
Henneguyu spp, 316, 316
Hepatozoon spp., 191, 191
Ichthyobodo (Costia) necator, 314,315, 315
Leishmania spp, 194, 195
Ichthyophthirius multifilis,308,309
Leucocytozoon spp., 208, 209
Myxobolus spp.,314,315
Plasmodium spp., 210, 211
Paratrichodina spp., 312
Theileria spp., 204, 205
Tetrahymena spp., 310, 311
Trypanosoma cruzi,196,197
Trichodina spp., 312,313
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 205-208
Trichodinella spp., 312
ciliates
Trichophyra spp., 313, 314
Balantidium coli, 130, 131
Tripartiella spp., 312
Cryptocaryon irritans, 308, 309
Uronema spp., 310,311
Dipartiella spp., 312
fagellates
Epistylis spp.,310,311
Chilomastix spp., 142
Hemitrichodina spp., 312
Cochlosoma spp., 142
Ichthyophthirius multiflis,308,309
Giardia spp.,43,48,49-51,53,94,95,103,
Paratrichodina spp., 312
116,117,129,142,145
Tetrahymena spp., 310, 311
Histomonas spp., 142
Trichodina spp., 312, 313
Leishmania spp.,194,195
Trichodinella spp., 312
Spironucleus spp., 142
Trichophyra spp., 312,313
trichomonads, 48, 49
Tripartiella spp., 312
Trichomonas spp., 142, 143
Uronema spp., 310, 311
Tritrichomonas foetus,48, 178, 179
coccidia
Trypanosoma spp.,196,197,204,205-208
Atoxoplasma spp., 140
hemosporozoa
Besnoitia spp., 182,183
Haemoproteus spp., 210, 211
Caryospora spp., 140, 141, 164
Leucocytozoon spp., 208, 209
Cryptosporidium spp, 46, 47, 94, 95, 116,
Plasmodium spp., 209, 210, 211
117,128,142, 164
of horses, 116, 117
Eimeria spp., 45, 90, 91-93, 99, 103, 116,
microscopic examination for blood parasites,
115, 128,129,140, 141, 145,147, 156,
185188
157, 164, 165
piroplasms
Isospora spp., 42,43,45,47,57,62,75,129,
Babesia spp., 192, 193, 202,203, 203, 252,
140, 141,164
254,258,260,261
Neospora caninum,44,45
Cytauxzoon felis,194,195
Sarcocystis spp., 46, 47, 140, 143
Theileria spp., 202, 204, 205, 252, 261
Toxoplasma gondi, 44, 45
of reptiles, 164, 165
cysts
of rodents and rabbits, 156, 157
canine parasites, 43
of ruminants, 90-95
cattle parasites, 88
of swine, 128, 129, 131
feline parasites, 41
Przhevalskiana silenus,292
goat parasites, 89
Pseudoparasites, 19, 20-23
horse parasites, 115
Psoroptes spp., 218, 224, 225,229
sheep parasites, 89
P cuniculi, 224,225
swine parasites, 128
P ovis, 224
INDEX
349
Pulex spp., 281,284,285
Rats
Acanthocheilonema vector, 198
Hymenolepis spp., 160
P irritans,281,284,285
lice
Psimulans,284
Polyplax,271
mites
Q fever, 250
fur, 236,237
Quality control for fecal exam procedures, 15
Trixacarus diversus, 224
nematodes
Rabbit fea, 285
Heterakis spp., 160
Rabbits
Nippostrongylus braziliensis, 160
cestodes
Trichosomoides crassicauda, 176,
Cittotaenia spp., 162, 163
177
coccidia
Red-legged tick, 258
Eimeria spp., 156, 157
Red poultry mite, 240
fleas
Red stomach worm, 132
Cediopsylla simplex,285
Redwater, 202
Spilopsyllus cuniculi, 284
Reindeer, Hypoderma spp. in, 292
fies
Reproductive tract
Cuterebra spp., 288
parasites, 176, 178
helminths, 158-163
sample collection, 172
lice
Reptiles
sucking lice, 270
helminths, 166-169
mites
protozoans, 164,165
Cheyletiella parasitovorax, 232
Caryospora spp., 164
Chorioptes bovis, 226
Cryptosporidium spp., 164
Leporacarus (Listrophorus)gibbus,234,
Eimeria spp., 164,165
235
Entamoeba spp., 164, 165
Psoroptes cuniculi, 224,225,229
Isospora spp., 164
nematodes
Rhabditiform esophagus, 26, 27
Graphidium strigosum, 160
Rhinoestrus, 294
Obeliscoides cuniculi, 160
Rhipicephalus spp.,247,248,249,258,
Passalurus ambiguus,158,159
258-259
protozoans,156,157
Babesia vector,192,202,260
ticks
Hepatozoon canis vector, 191
Haemaphysalis leporispalustris,260,261
R.annulatus,258
trematodes
R.appendiculatus,258
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 110-112
R.decoloratus,258
Rabbit tapeworm, 162
R.evertsi,258
Rabbit tick, 260, 261
R.microplus, 258,259
Raccoon
R. sanguineus, 191,248,258,259
Aonchotheca putorii, 64, 65
Rickettsia spp.
Baylisascaris procyonis, 58, 59
R. conori, 250
Dracunculus insignis, 180
R.rickettsii, 250
Radfordia spp., 236, 237
R. typhi, 284
 Raillietina spp., 152
vectors for,252
R.echinobothrida,152
 RNA, use in molecular diagnostic tests, 216
Raptors. See also Hawks; Owls
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 250
Centorhynchus spp., 155
Rocky Mountain wood tick, 256, 257
Cyathostoma spp., 148, 149
Rodent bot fy, 288
fukes, 157
Rodents
spirurids,151
cestodes
trichomoniasis in,144
Hymenolepis spp.,160,161
350
INDEX
Rodents (continued)
Setaria spp., 208, 209
coccidia
Skrjabinema spp., 102, 103
Cryptosporidium spp., 156
strongylid, 93, 96, 96-97, 99
Eimeria spp., 156,157
Strongyloides papillosus, 102
Cuterebra spp., 288
Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum,102,
feas, 284, 285
103
Giardia spp., 156
Trichuris spp., 100, 100
helminths, 158-163
protozoans, 90-95
lice, sucking, 270, 271
ticks
mites
Otobius spp., 262
fur, 236,237
trematodes
Ormithonyssus bacoti, 240
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 110,
Sarcoptes spp., 20
111-112
nematodes
Eurytrema pancreaticum,112,113
Aspicularis tetraptera,158, 159
Fasciola hepatica, 110, 111
Syphacia obvelata,158,159
Paramphistomum spp., 110, 111
Notoedres spp., 222
Schistosoma spp., 112, 113
protozoans, 156, 157
Rust disease, 312, 373
Radfordia spp., 236, 237
Roundworms. See also Ascarids
Salmon poisoning disease, 84
Ascaridia spp., 144, 145
Salmon poisoning fuke, 84
Ascaris suum,132, 133
Saltwater fish. See Marine fish
Baylisascaris procyonis (raccoon roundworm),
Sand fly, 194, 298
58,59
Sarcocystis spp.
Parascaris equorum,120
in birds, 140, 143
Toxascaris leonina, 56,57
in dogs/cats, 46, 47
Toxocara spp., 54, 55-59, 61, 77, 81
Sarcophagidae, 296
Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum,102,103
Sarcoptes spp., 218,220, 221, 223
Rumen fuke, 110
S. scabiei, 220, 221
Ruminants. See also specijfic species
Scab mite, 224
cestodes
Scaly face mite, 222
Monieza spp., 106, 107
Scaly leg mite, 222
Stilesia spp., 108
Schistosoma spp., 112, 113
Thysanosoma spp., 108, 109
S.bovis,112
coccidia
S. japonicum, 112
Cryptosporidium spp., 94, 95
S. mattheei, 112
Eimeria spp., 90, 91-93, 99, 103
Screwworms, 298,299
fagellates
Scrub itch mite, 244
Giardia spp., 94, 95, 103
Seed (larval) ticks, 248, 252
 helminth ova, larva, and protozoan cysts, 88-89
Serratospiculum spp., 148
helminthes, 96-113
Setaria spp., 208, 209
mites
Shaft louse of chickens, 277
Chorioptes bovis,226
Sheather's sugar solution, 6
Psoroptes ovis, 224, 227
Sheep. See also Ruminants
Sarcoptes spp., 220
blood parasites
nematodes
Babesia spp., 202
Aonchotheca spp., 100, 101
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 205, 206, 206, 207
Dictyocaulus spp., 106, 107
cestodes
identification third-stage larvae, 23-28
Stilesia spp., 108
Muellerius capillaris,104,104
Thysanosoma spp., 108, 109
Nematodirus spp., 98, 99
coccidia
Protostrongylus spp., 104,105
Eimeria spp.,90,91,92,99
INDEX
351
flies
Spirorchids, 169
fly strike, 297
Spirurids
Lucilia spp., 297
Acanthocheilonema spp., 188, 189, 198, 199
Melophagus ovinus,294,296
in birds, 148, 149
Oestrus ovis, 294
Cheilospirura spp., 148
helminth ova, larva, and protozoan cysts, 89
Dirofilaria spp.
lice
characteristics, 189
Bovicola ovis, 270, 272
D. immitis,188,189,196,197,199,214,216
Linognathus spp.,266
D. repens, 188,189,198,200,201
mites
D. striata, 188, 189
Demodex spp., 230
tests for microflaria in blood samples,
Psoroptes spp., 224, 227
188-190
nematodes
Dispharynx spp., 148
Aonchotheca longipes, 100
Echinuria spp.,148
Dictyocaulus flaria, 106
in ruminants and horses, 208, 209
Marshallagia marshalli,98
Serratospiculum spp., 148
Muellerius spp., 104
Setaria spp., 208, 209
Nematodirus spp., 99
Subulura spp., 148
Protostrongylus spp., 104
Tetrameres spp., 148, 149
Skrjabinema spp., 102
Spurious parasites, 19
protozoans
Squirrel fea, 287
Babesia spp., 202
Stable fy, 398, 300
Eimeria spp.,90,91,93,99
Stained fecal smear, 12-13
Trypanosoma melophagium,204,207,208
Stephanoflaria spp.,178,179
trematodes
S. stilesi, 179
Fasciola hepatica, 110
Stephanurus dentatus, 176, 177
Paramphistomum spp. 110
Sticktight fea, 286, 287
Sheep ked, 204, 295,296
Stilesia spp., 108
Shipment of fecal samples, 4
Stoll test, modified, 11
Short-nosed cattle louse, 266
Stomach bot, 290
Simulium spp., 208, 303
Stomoxys calcitrans, 301
Siphonaptera. See Fleas
Storage of fecal samples, 4
Skin biopsy (mucus smear), in fish, 305, 306
Strongyles, 96, 118
Skin scrappings, for mite identifcation, 217, 219
Strongylid parasites
Skrjabinema spp., 102, 103
of birds, 146, 147
Sleeping sickness, 204
of horses, 118, 119, 121, 127
 Slender guinea pig louse, 278
of reptiles, 167
 Slender pigeon louse, 277
of rodents and rabbits, 160, 161
Snake mite, 242
of ruminants and camelids, 93, 96, 96-97, 99
Snakes. See also Reptiles
Strongyloides spp, 97, 102,103
Ophionyssus natricis, 241, 242,243
S. papillosus, 34, 102
Sodium chloride solution, saturated, 5
S.ransomi,134,135
Sodium nitrate solution (Fecasol?), 5
S.stercoralis,66,67
Soft ticks. See Ticks, soft
identification in fecal samples, 2426, 26,
South Affican paralysis tick, 254
27
 Specifc gravity, of fecal fotation solutions, 5
larvae, 26,27, 66,67
Spilopsyllus cuniculi, 284
S. westeri, 97, 122, 123
Spinose ear tick., 262, 263
Strongylus vulgaris, 37, 118
Spirocerca lupi, 66, 67
Subulura spp., 148
Spirometra spp., 78,79
Sucking lice. See Anoplura (sucking lice)
S. mansonoides,78
Summer sore, 124
Spironucleus spp., 142
Surra, 204
352
INDEX
Swine
T. hydatigena,74
acanthocephalans
T. multiceps, 74
Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus,138,139
T. ovis, 74
cestodes
T.pisiformis,74
Diphyllobothrium latum,78,79
T.taeniaeformis,74
ciliates
Tampan, 264
Balantidium coli, 130, 131
Tapeworms. See Cestodes
coccidia
Telodorsagia spp., 30, 32, 96
Cryptosporidium parvum,129
Tetrahymena spp., 310, 311
Eimeria spp., 129, 129
T. corlissi, 310
Isospora spp., 128
T.pyriformis,310
flagellates 
Tetrameres spp.,
148,149
Giardia spp., 129
Texas fever, 202
Trypanosoma simiae, 207
Theileria spp., 204, 205
feas
T. annulata,204
Pulex iritans,284,285
T. equi, 202
helminth ova and protozoan cysts, 128
T. parva, 204,205
lice
vectors for, 252, 261
Hematopinus suis, 266,267
Thelazia spp., 180, 181
mites
Third-stage larvae, identi fication of
Demodex spp., 230
in horses, 30
Sarcoptes spp., 220
in ruminants and camelids, 29-30
nematodes
Thorny-headed worm
Ascaris suum,132, 133
in birds, 154, 155
Ascarops strongylina, 136,137
in fish,322,323
Hyostrongylus rubidus,132,133
in reptiles, 166
Mecistocirrus digitatus,97
in swine, 137, 138
Metastrongylus spp., 134, 135
Thread-necked worm, 98
Oesophagostomum spp., 132, 133
Threadworm
Physocephalus sexalatus,136, 137
in dogs, 66
Stephanurus dentatus,176,177
in horses, 122
Strongyloides spp., 134,135
in swine, 134
Trichuris suis, 132, 133, 134
Thysanosoma spp., 108, 109
protozoans,128,129,130,131
Tick-bite fever, 250
Babesia,202
Tick fever, 202
Balantidium coli,130,131
Tick paralysis, 256
Cryptosporidium parvum, 129
Ticks
Eimeria spp., 129, 129
hard
Giardia spp., 130
Amblyomma spp.,248,250,250-251
Isospora spp., 130
Boophilus spp.,247,249,258,259
Trypanosoma simiae,207
Dermacentor spp., 192, 248, 256, 257, 261
Trypanosoma spp., 204, 206, 207
Haemaphysalis spp., 192, 260, 260, 261
trematodes
Hyalomma spp., 252,253
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 110, 112, 136
Ixodes spp., 248, 254, 255,260
Eurytrema pancreaticum,110, 112, 113, 136
Rhipicephalus spp., 192, 247,248, 249, 258,
Fasciola spp., 136, 137
258-261
Paragonimus kellicotti, 82, 83
identification, 246-247,246-249
Schistosoma spp., 112-113, 136
key to genera, 249
Syngamus spp., 148, 149
larval (seed) ticks, 248, 252
Syphacia obvelata,158,159
life cycle, 246
location of, 246, 246
Tabanid fies, 204, 299
mouthparts, 247,247
Taenia spp., 74, 75, 77
ornamentation,247
INDEX
353
removal of, 246
Trichuris spp.
soft
in dogs, 53, 60, 61-63
Argas spp., 264, 265
in ruminants and camelids, 100, 107
Ormithodorus spp., 264, 265
in swine,132,133
Otobius spp., 262, 263
T. discolor, 100
Tick toxicosis, 252
T. felis, 60
Tick worry, 260
T. ovis, 100
Titers, 214, 216
T. suis, 132, 133, 134
Tortoises, Hyalomma aegyptium in, 252
T.vulpis,53,60,6163
Tortoise tick, 252
Tricodectes canis,274,275
Toxocara spp., 54, 55-58, 61, 75, 81
Trimenopon jenningsis, 278
eggs,17,54,55,57,58,61,75,81
Tripartiella spp., 312
T. canis, 54, 58
Tritrichomonas foetus,178, 179
T.cati,54,57
bovine preputial sample collection for, 172
Toxocara (Neoascaris) vitulorum, 102, 103
identification of, 172
Toxoplasma gondii, 44, 45, 216
InPouchTM TF-Feline culture system, 48
Trematodes
molecular diagnostic test for, 48, 216
Alaria spp., 80, 81
Trixacarus spp, 224, 225
Cryptocotyle lingua, 86, 87
T. caviae,224,225
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 110, 111, 136
T diversus, 224
digeneans, fish, 316, 317, 318
Trombicula spp., 245
Echinoparyphium spp.,150
Trombiculid mites, 244, 245
Echinostoma spp., 150
Trophozoites, 3, 4
Eurytrema pancreaticum, 112, 113, 136
Tropical bont tick, 250, 257
Eurytrema procyonis,84,85
Tropical cattle tick, 258
Fasciola hepatica,84,110, 111
Tropical fowl mite, 238
Fasciola spp., 136, 137
Tropical rat mite, 240
Heterobilharzia americana, 82,83
Trypanosoma spp.
Nanophyetus salmincola,84,85
T. brucei, 204, 205
Paragonimus kellicotti, 82,83
T. congolense, 204,205
Paramphistomum spp., 110, 111
T. cruzi, 196, 197,216
Platynosomum concinnum,84,85
T.equiperdum,206
Prosthogonimus spp., 150
T. evansi,206,207
of reptiles, 166, 168
I. melophagium, 206,207
Schistosoma spp., 112, 114, 136
T. simiae,206,207
Triatomids, 196
T. theileri, 206,207
Trichodina spp., 312, 313
T. vivax, 206, 206
Trichodinella spp., 312
Trypanosomiasis,206,301
Trichomonads, 48, 49
Tsetse fy, 204, 298, 301
Trichomonas spp.
Tularemia, 250, 261
in birds, 142, 143
Turkeys. See also Birds; Poultry
T. gallinae, 142
blackhead, 144
Trichophyra spp.,312, 313
Haemoproteus meleagridis,210
Trichosomoides spp., 147
Heterakis spp., 144
T.crassicauda,176,177
Histomonas spp., 142
Trichostrongyles, 96
Leucocytozoon smithi, 208
Trichostrongylus spp., 96
Plasmodium hermani,210
larvae, 30, 32, 35
Turtles
 morphological characteristics of infective
pinworms,167
third-stage larvae, 29
spirorchids, 169
T.axei,118
T. tenuis, 146
Uncinaria stenocephala,28,52
Trichrome stain, 13
Undulating membrane, 205, 206
354
INDEX
Urinary system
In swine, 132, 133,134
parasites, 174-177
Trichuris suis, 132, 133, 134
Dioctophyme renale, 173, 173
Trichuris vulpis,53,60,6163
Pearsonema spp., 174, 175
White spot disease
Stephanurus dentatus,176,177
freshwater fish (Ichthyophthirius), 308, 309
Trichosomoides crassicauda,176,177
marine fish (Cryptocaryon), 308, 309
sample collection, 172
Wing louse of poultry, 277
Urine sediment, 171
Winter tick, 256, 257
Uronema spp., 310, 311
Wisconsin egg-counting test (double centrifugation
U marinum,310
procedure), 11
Wolves
Velvet disease, 312, 313
 helminth ova and protozoan cysts, 40
Venereal trichomoniasis, bovine, 48
Oslerus osleri, 70
World Association of the Advancement of
WAAVP (World Association of the Advancement
Veterinary Parasitology (WAAVP), 31
of Veterinary Parasitology), 31
Wright's stain, 185
Walking dandruff, 232
Warbles, 288
Xenopsylla cheopsis,284,285
Warthogs, Trypanosoma simiae in, 207
Weasels, Lynxacarus radovskyi in, 234
Yellow dog tick, 260
Western black-legged tick, 254
Yersinia pestis, 284
Western blot test, 213
Whipworms
Ziehl-Neelsen stain, 13
in dogs, 53,60, 61-63
Zinc sulfate solution (33%), 5
in ruminants/camelids, 100, 101
Zipper tapeworm, 78