Slatter's Fundamentals of
Veterinary
Ophthalmology
Fourth Edition
David J.Maggs
Paul E.Miller
Ron Ofri
SAUNDERS
opynigitod Matenal
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
11830 Westline Industrial Drive 
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY,
EDITION 4
ISBN: 978-0-7216-0561-6
Copyright @ 2008, 2001, 1990, 1981 by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, Tecording, or any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights Deparment in Philadelphia, PA,
USA: phone: (+1)215 239 3804, fax: (+1) 215 239 3805, e-mail: healthpemmissions @elsevier.com. You may
also complete yourrequest on-line via theEseviehomepage(htp://www.eseviercom),by selecing
'Customer Support and then 'Obtaining Permissions'.
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this feld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden
our knowledge, changes in praclice, treatment and drug therapy may become necessary or appropriate.
 Readers are advised to check the most cuent infommalion provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the
manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method
and duration of administration, and containdications. It is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on
aui pue sasesop auaep o sesouaep ayew on juaged au jo aspa[mouy pue aouauadlxe umo ieq lo siu 
best teahment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precauions. To the fullest
extent of the law,neither the Publisher nor the Authors assume any liability for any injury and/or damage
yooq sq u peuequos [eaqeu aq go asn Aue ol pene[ai lo no usue Ajeloid 1o suosiad o
The Publisher
Library of Congress Control Number 2007924244
 Publishing Director: Linda Duncan
Acguisitions Editor: Anthony Winkel
Developmental Editor: Maureen Slaten
Publishing Services Manager: Paticia Tannian
Senior Project Manager:KristineFeeherty
Design Direction: Amy Buxton
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
Printed in China
www.elsevier.com | www.bookaid.org | www.sabre.org
ELSEVIER
ROOK AII)
 Sabre Foundation
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
CONTRIBUTORS
Itamar Aroch, DVM, DECVIM-CA
Gila A. Sutton, DVM, MSc, DACVIM-LA
 Senior Lecturer, Small Animal Medicine 
Clinical Instructor, Equine Internal Medicine
Koret School of Veterinary Medicine
Koret School of Veterinary Medicine
 Hebrew University of Jerusalem
 Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Rehovot, Israel
Rehovot, Israel
 Bradford J. Holmberg, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVO
 Brian P. Wilcock, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVP
Veterinary Referral Centre
 Department of Pathobiology
Little Falls, New Jersey
Ontario Veterinary College
University of Guelph
Ontario, Canada
PREFACE
In September 2005, the veterinary community lost one of the
updating them where necessary. Doug was particularly excited
pioneers of veterinary ophthalmology, a gifted surgeon, an
 about the introduction of color images in the fourth edition of
intuitive scientist, and a prodigious and highly respected
this text, and we are delighted that Elsevier has permitted us to
author, when Dr. Douglas H. Slatter died in Australia—his
honor, and even expand upon, that wish; other than a few black-
country of birth. Before his death, Doug had asked each of us
and-white figures that we have preserved for their historical
to work alongside him as he updated Fundamentals
of
value or because we considered them irreplaceable, every
Veterinary Ophthalmology for its fourth edition. He explained
 photograph is now in color.
that it was his goal to diversify the opinions and knowledge
As a preface to the first edition of Fundamentals
of
 contained in the book while avoiding the creation of a large
Veterinary Ophthalmology in 1981, Doug wrote, “The aim of
multi-author text. Without hesitation, the three of us joined
 this text is to provide a basic outline and introduction to clinical
together to continue this effort as a legacy to Doug following
ophthalmology for both undergraduate veterinary students and
his death.
practitioners." In that regard, nothing has changed. We hope,
We believe that earlier editions of Dr. Slatter's book have
with this fourth edition of Slatter's Fundamentals of Veterinary
stood apart from other ophthalmology texts because of the 
 Ophthalmology that we have built upon the astounding foundation
breadth of species covered; the logical, tissue-based format;
 Doug created, and we dedicate this book to our friend and
and the precise and detailed original figures. It has been our
colleague—Dr. Douglas H. Slatter.
goal to preserve and expand these features while trying to also
bring to the fourth edition something from the diversity of each
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 of our backgrounds and areas of ophthalmic interest, along
with the geographic regions in which we trained and now prac-
 A project of this magnitude depends on the teamwork and
tice. We also recruited four of the world's experts in their field
 assistance of a large number of people—more than we can do
to provide chapters on ophthalmology of exotic pets, ocular
justice to or name here. However, some deserve special
manifestations of systemic disease, ocular embryology, and
mention. We are indebted to the production crew at Elsevier
ocular pathology, and we are indebted to these authors for their
and in particular to Dr. Tony Winkel, our Editor, who oversaw
superb contributions.
the delicate transfer of Doug's text to our care with great
Throughout these updates, we have aimed to retain the crisp
diplomacy and kindness; Maureen Slaten, who managed the
 major artwork revisions; and Kristine Feeherty, who oversaw
ago. We begin with chapters on ocular structure and function,
the timely production of the text with great maturity and good
congenital anomalies, and the recent pharmacologic advances
humor. We also owe heartfelt thanks to Dr. Dan Lavach for his
and finish with a section on ocular emergencies, an appendix
sensitive reminiscences about Doug's life and his contributions
containing breed predispositions to ocular disorders, and a
in the dedication of this book. We would also like to thank Dr.
glossary to help readers negotiate the sometimes daunting
Robert Barishak for his insightful review of the chapter on
world of ophthalmic terminology. The chapters in between
 development and congenital abnormalities. Our invited
remain largely tissue-based—"from eyelids to orbit"-
—and
authors—Drs. Itamar Aroch, Bradford Holmberg, Gila Sutton,
within each chapter we have retained a brief description of the
 and Brian Wilcock—provided their expertise without hesitation,
clinically relevant anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology,
 and the text is greatly enhanced by their contributions. In
followed by extensively updated sections on newly recognized
 addition, much of the work we updated or edited was originally
diseases, diagnostic tests, the latest drugs, and innovative
 provided by contributors selected by Dr. Slatter, and their
surgical techniques, along with current reading lists. Care has 
 efforts remain an integral part of the current work. Many of the
been taken to ensure that therapies are recommended only
figures in the fourth edition were redrawn or extensively
when there is sufficient scientific evidence to support them. All
 modified by John Doval. His extraordinary skill and patience 
 the while, we have kept the busy general practitioner and
 are acknowledged with much gratitude, as is the colorization of
enquiring veterinary student in mind and made extensive use of
 the figures by Jeanne Robertson. Finally, we thank our families
tables, boxes, and figures.
 and colleagues who have, in so many ways, written this text
 As befitting someone dual-boarded in surgery and ophthal-
with us.
 mology, Doug created a text known for its exquisite surgical
descriptions and drawings. We have greatly enhanced these
David J. Maggs
Paul E. Miller
Ron Ofri
throughout the book with the introduction of color and by
Davis, California
Madison, Wisconsin
Rehovot, Israel
vii
TRIBUTE
Dr. Douglas H. Slatter was an
 In 1984, Drs. Slatter and Chambers returmed to the United
important and unique individual. As a
States. Dr. Slatter had been a visiting Professor of Ophthal-
student he excelled, graduating from
mology at the Scheie Eye Institute, University of Pennsylvania.
the veterinary school at the University
 Drs. Slatter and Chambers eventually acquired the Animal Eye
of
Queensland in 1970. He
was
Clinic in La Habra, California, from retiring Dr. Ralph
immediately accepted into a graduate
Vierheller, DAVCO, DACVS. Dr. Slatter and Dr. Vierheller had
program
Washington
State
the distinction of being board certified in both ophthalmology
 University and completed a Master of
 and surgery. Dr. Slatter continued with academic pursuits while
Science degree. During this time Dr.
in private practice. He was an adjunct professor of veterinary
Slatter learned considerable clinical
 ophthalmology at the Southerm Califormia College of Optometry
ophthalmology under the tutelage of
 in Fullerton, California. Drs. Slatter and Chambers practiced in
Dr. Gary Bryan, DACVO. Next, Dr.
La Habra, California, for the remainder of their lives. In
Slatter attended Colorado State University (CSU) in a
 addition, they operated ophthalmology clinics throughout the
Doctorate of Philosophy Degree program at the Surgical
 Los Angeles basin; in Bakersfield, California; and in Incline
Metabolic Laboratory directed by Dr. William Lumb. Dr.
Village, Nevada. Despite his busy practice schedule, Dr. Slatter
 Slatter excelled in this diverse academic environment. He had
traveled throughout the world lecturing about ophthalmology
 special interests in cardiac surgery and ophthalmology. While
 and surgery. He made it a priority to vacation in his homeland
at CSU, he spent time with Dr. Glenn Severin,
, DACVO,
 of Australia at least twice each year. During these working
DACVIM, furthering Dr. Slatter's clinical knowledge of
vacations, he managed to operate a land development company
veterinary ophthalmology.
and a small airplane import business. His passion and skill as a
An important friend at CSU was Mrs. Mary Fischer, BS,
private pilot were well respected in both Australia and the
MS. Mrs. Fischer had been the chief laboratory technician in
 United States. He was also a licensed Justice of the Peace in
the ophthalmology section of the Armed Forces Institute of
Australia.
Pathology. She had been hired in the CSU Department of
Throughout his years in private practice, Dr. Slatter
continued to pursue academic excellence. He published
Laboratory directed by Dr. Stuart Young, DACVP, Hon
 revisions to his original ophthalmology text, and he organized
DACVO. Dr. Slatter worked diligently with Dr. Young and
 and edited the two-volume Textbook of Veterinary Surgery and
 Mrs. Fischer in developing retinal digesting techniques to
the pocket companion to that book. Each of his textbooks and
advance the study of retinal vascular disease in dogs. His
their revisions were translated into several foreign languages.
doctoral thesis, “Effects of Hyperproteinemia and Aging on
Dr. Slatter also contributed more than 60 peer-reviewed scientific
Canine Eyes" (1975), was the culmination of this collaboration.
 manuscripts during his career.
Dr. Slatter was a perfect student. He accomplished an
 In addition to being a Diplomate in both the American
amazing feat by sitting for his board certification in veterinary
 Colleges of Veterinary Ophthaimology and Surgery, Dr. Slatter
surgery and veterinary ophthalmology in the same year,
was a Diplomate of European College of Veterinary Surgeons,
passing both examinations with high marks. Furthermore,
a Fellow of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, a
Dr. Slatter completed his doctoral research project and earned
 Member of the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists, and
his PhD degree in the same year. During this busy year he 
 one of four founding members of the International Society of
completed rough-draft preparations for the soon-to-be-published
Veterinary Ophthalmology.
first edition of this textbook: Fundamentals of Veterinary
 Dr. Douglas H. Slatter and Dr. Elizabeth D. Chambers were 
Ophthatmology.
 popular speakers, educators, and clinicians who devoted their
After graduate school, Dr. Slatter returned to Australia and
lives to improving veterinary ophthalmology and veterinary
 surgery. They will be missed.
University, Western Australia. He married Dr. Elizabeth
Chambers, and Dr. Chambers proved to be his soul mate, best
 J. Daniel Lavach, DVM, DACVO
friend, and fellow collaborator throughout the remainder of
Reno, Nevada
their lives.
ix
Chapter
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
OF THE EYE
Paul E. Miller
FUNDAMENTAIS OF VISION
VASCULAR ANATOMY AND PERIPHERAL
OCULAR REFLEXES
CENTRAL VISUAL PATHWWAYS
 NEUROANATOMY
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE AQUEOUS
mammals, cats are probably the most effciently adapted for
ision is a complex phenomenon in which light emanating
nocturnal vision, with a minimum light detection threshold up
from objects in the environment is captured by the eye and
to seven times lower than that in humans. Other adaptations
focused onto the retinal photoreceptors (Figures 1-1 and 1-2).
that permit cats to function well in nocturnal conditions are a
Electrical signals originating from these cells pass through a
tapetum lucidum, which reflects 130 times more light than the
number of cell types in the retina and throughout the central
human fundus; a vertical slit pupil, which produces a smaller
nervous system (CNS) before arriving at the visual cortex,
aperture in bright light than what is possible with a circular
where the sensation of vision occurs. Numerous species vari-
pupil but also allows the pupil to dilate 6 mm more than
ations exist on this basic theme, each allowing the animal to
the human pupil; a large cornea, which permits more light to
exploit a particular ecologic niche. The basic similarities
enter the eye; a relatively posteriorly located lens, which
among all vertebrate eyes and how they respond to insult allow
produces a smaller but brighter image on the fundus; and a
the comparative ophthalmologist to confidently treat a wide
retina rich in light-sensitive rod photoreceptors (Figure 1-3).
 range of ocular conditions in a diverse array of species.
Many of the other domestic mammals have similar but fewer
extreme adaptations for vision in dim light, allowing them to
FUNDAMENTALSOFVISION
exploit a photic environment that is not strictly diurnal or
nocturnal.
The act of “seeing" is a complex process that depends on (1)
 The tapetum is cellular in dogs and cats and collagenous in
light from the outside world falling onto the eye, (2) the eye
 horses and ruminants, suggesting that the visual advantages this 
efficiently transmitting and properly focusing the images of
structure offers are of suffcient magnitude that it has evolved
these objects on the retina, (3) the retina detecting these light
separately at least twice in mammals (Figure 1-4). In both
rays, (4) transmission of this information via the visual path-
 cases,the variety of tapetal colors seen during ophthalmoscopy
ways to the brain, and (5) the brain processing this information
results from the differential interaction of light with the
So as to make it useful. Differentiating between objects (e.g., a
tapetum's physical structure rather than from the inherent
 predator versus its surroundings) is one of the most critical
spectral composition, or color, of its pigments. The dorsal
aspects of vision, and because this distinction is so important 
location of the tapetum may enhance the view of the usually
for survival, normal animals can “see” an object if it differs
 darker ground, and the ventrally located, usually darkly pig-
sufficiently from its surroundings in any one of five different
mented nontapetal region may reduce light scattering originating
aspects: luminance ("brightness"), motion, texture, binocular
 from the brighter sky. In cats, the tapetum may also absorb light
disparity (depth), and color. In general, objects are differ-
in the shorter wavelengths and, via fluorescence, shift it to a
entiated on the basis of their motion, texture, depth, and
 longer wavelength that more closely approximates the maximal
luminance roughly equally well, but separations based on color
sensitivity of the photopigment, rhodopsin. This shift may
are less easily made. Although the individual components of 
brighten the appearance of a blue-black evening or night sky
vision can be divided into the ability to detect light and motion,
 and enhance the contrast between other objects in the environ-
visual perspective, visual feld of view, depth perception, visual
 ment and the background sky.
acuity, and the perception of color and form, the complete
The rhodopsin photopigment of dogs and cats is tuned to a
visual experience is a synthesis of these parts into a unifed
 slightly different wavelength of light from that in humans and,
perception of the world.
as is typical of species adapted to function well in dim light,
takes longer to completely regenerate after extensive exposure
Sensitivity to Light
to bright light. The ranges of wavelengths to which rhodopsin
in dogs, cats, and humans is sensitive are similar, however,
The visual system of most domestic mammals has evolved to
indicating that vision in dim light is not enhanced by expanding
improve performance under a wide range of lighting conditions
the range of detectable wavelengths. The slight wavelength
so that they may exploit specific ecologic niches. Of domestic
shifts in the maximal sensitivity of rhodopsin across species
之
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Pupi
Superior
 punctum
Cilia
Limbus
Conjunctiva
 Medial
(nasal)
Lateral
canthus
(temporal)
canthus
Inferior
punctum
 Third eyelid
 Figure 1-1. Frontal view of the external structures of the canine eye.
Figure 1-3. External view of the eye of a normal cat. Nocturnal
aclaptations that allow more light to enter the eye inclucle a large cornea,
a cleep anterior chamber, and a relatively posteriorly located lens. (From
Czeclerpiltz JMC, et al. [2005|: Putative aqueous humor misclirection
syndlrome as a cause of glaucoma in cats: 32 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Lacrimal gland -
Retinal veins
227:1476.)
Tarsal gland
,Hetina
,Pigment
 épithelium
suggests that domestic mammals and humans do not perceive
/Tapetum
the world in exactly the same way.
Choroid 
/Sclera
Sensitivity to Motion
Zonule
Dura mater
Cornea
uitreous
Arachnoid
Although little work has been done on the motion-detecting
Conjunctiva-
ens
-- Pia mater
abilities of most domestic animals, it is probable that the
Lacrimal -
puncta
Optic nerve
 perception of movement is a critical aspect of their vision and
that they, like people, are much more sensitive to moving objects
Pupil
 than stationary ones. Rod photoreceptors, which dominate the
Anterior chambe
amina cribrosa
retinas of domestic mammals, are particularly well suited for
Retinal arterioles 
detecting motion and shapes, and it follows that the motion-
ris
 vortex vein
detecting abilities of domestic mammals—especially in dim 
Cartilage of
ventral (inferior)
light—would be well developed. In a study of the visual per-
nictitating membrane
'w snioa
Non-tapetal fundus
formance of police dogs, the most sensitive dogs could
Gland of nictitating
 recognize a moving object up to 900 m away but could recog-
membrane
nize the same object, when stationary, at only 585 m or less.
 Because of the superior visual acuity of the human fovea, the
A
 minimum threshold for motion detection in bright light for cats
is approximately 10 to 12 times greater than that for humans.
Coronal Equatorial
Although humans may be better equipped to detect motion
when directly viewing an object in bright light, it is possible
Sagitta
that the vision of domestic mammals may be superior in dim
light, when an object is viewed peripherally, or if it is moving
 at a certain speed to which the retina is particularly attuned.
Posteriorpole
 The ability to detect motion may help explain certain
behavior—much of the very large peripheral visual feld of the 
Antetiorpo
horse probably supports only the detection of brightness and
motion. When combined with a “prey mentality,”' this may cause
the horse to treat every moving object in its peripheral feld of
view as dangerous and to be avoided. Similarly, many dogs and
cats ignore static objects, but when these objects move, chase
behavior is elicited, suggesting that the visual system has pre-
Horizontal
ferences for objects moving at certain speeds.
B
Sensitivity to Flickering Lights
 Figure 1-2. lnternal structures of the canine eye (A). Also shown are the
stanclard reference planes (B).
Although not related to motion detection, the point at which
 rapidly flickering light fuses into a constantly illuminated light 
(flicker fusion) provides insight into the functional charac-
StRUCTURE AND FuNCtION Of THe EYE I
3
Figure 14. Cellular tapetum of a cog
(A) and fibrous tapetum of a horse (B).
(B from Cilger B [2005l: Equine
OphthalmologySauncers,St.
Louis.
A and B courtesy Dr. Christopher J.
Murphy.)
B
 Figure 1-5. The effect of visual perspective on vision. The same scene as 
viewed by a small dog with eyes located 8 inches above the groundl (A),
im uosiad e pue a) puno ay aqe sauou  saa yim sop le e
eyes 66 inches above the ground (C). (From Miller PE, Murphy C] [1995|:
Vision in dog.]AmVet Med Assoc207:1623.)
teristics of rod and cone photoreceptors. The flicker frequency
 and has a major impact on the perception an animal has of its
at which fusion occurs varies with the intensity and wavelength 
 environment (Figure 1-5). For example, when the visual fields
 of the stimulating light. Because dogs can detect flicker at 70
of its two eyes are combined, the horse has a total horizontal
 to more than 80 Hz, a television program in which the screen is 
visual field of up to 350 degrees, with 55 to 65 degrees of
updated 60 times/sec and appears to people as a fluidly moving
binocular overlap and a virtually complete sphere of vision
 story line may appear to dogs as rapidly flickering.
around its body (Figure 1-6). The length of the horse's nose 
interferes with binocular vision, and so a horse views an object
Visual Field of View
binocularly until it is about 1 m away, at which point the horse 
must turn its head and observe with only one eye. In compar-
The extent of the visual field (i.e., the area that can be seen by
ison, humans have a visual field of approximately 180 degrees
an eye when it is fixed on one point) and the height of the eyes
(140 degrees of overlap), cats have a 200-degree field of view
salads pue spaanq Buoue Aeaia Area Aew punong sui aaoge
(140-degree overlap), and depending on breed, dogs have 250
1
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
with both eyes simultaneously does not guarantee improved
 perception of depth. Stereopsis (binocular depth perception)
65°
results when the two eyes view the object from slightly different 
vantage points and the resulting image is blended or fused into
a single image. If the two images are not fused, double vision
 may result. (Such an alteration in vision may occur in animals
with orbital diseases.) Although binocular depth perception is
VISION
superior if the images can be blended into one, monocular
Z
depth perception is also possible. Horses make distance judg-
146°
ments on the basis of static monocular clues; these clues
CULAR
 include relative brightness, contour, areas of light and shadows,
object overlay, linear and aerial perspective, and density of
VIS
 optical texture. In addition, movement of the head results in an 
N
apparent change in the relative positions of the objects viewed
(a phenomenon known as parallax) and produces the sensation
that objects are moving at different speeds, allowing depth to be
estimated (Figure 1-8).
Visual Acuity
BLIND AREA
Visual acuity refers to the ability to see details of an object
Figure 1-6. The visual field of the horse showing a binocular field
separately and in focus. It depends on the optical properties of
(65 clegrees) comparable to that of a cog but with much larger panorarnic
the eye (ie., the ability of the eye to generate a precisely
monocular fields (146 degrees), and a very small blind area (3 degrees).
focused image), the retina's ability to detect and process images,
and the ability of higher visual pathways to interpret images
degrees (30 to 60 degrees of binocular overlap) (Figure 1-7). The 
 sent to them. In general, visual acuity in most domestic mammals
horse has only a few minor “blind spots," which are located
is limited by the retina and not by the optical properties of the
superior and perpendicular to the forehead, directly below the
 eyes or by postretinal neural processing in the brain. The latter
nose, in a small oval region in the superior visual field where light 
two factors can limit visual discrimination in a variety of
strikes the optic nerve itself, and the width of the head directly
 disease states, such as when the lens is removed or when higher
behind. Clearly, this extensive visual field makes it very difficult
 CNS visual pathways are impaired.
for a person or potential predator to “sneak up" on a horse.
Optical Factors in Visual Acuity
Depth Perception
 The optical media of the eye, namely the cormea, aqueous humor,
 Depth perception is enhanced in those regions in which the 
lens, and vitreous humor, are responsible for creating a properly
visual fields of the two eyes overlap. Merely viewing an object
focused image on the retina. The cornea and, to a lesser extent,
140°
60°
NOI
AR
VIS
BLIND AREA
BLIND AREA
Figure 1-7. A, Visual field of a cat showing a large binocular field (140 cegrees) with a relatively srmall
monocular field (30 cegrees) and a relatively large posterior blind area (160 cegrees). B, Monocular and
(saaap o) pla jensa jenoug ysapou e sey sop au sop eydaosau eid e u spia ensa nenoug
with relatively large monocular visual fields (90 degrees) and a posterior blind area of approximately
120 dlegrees.
STRuCTURE AND FuNCtION Of THE EYE I
Figure 1-8. A number of cues allow clepth to be perceived with one eye 
or in a twa-climensional photograph. These cues inclucle apparent size
(the lef tower appears closer because it is larger than the right), looming
sidaae s)
interposition (near objects such as the bricge overlay the more cistant
hills), aerial perspective (water vapor and clust in the air make the more
distant hills less cistinct and relatively color-clesaturated), shadling
(shadlows on the tower suggest cepth), perspective (the parallel roacways
appear to converge toward the horizon),relative velocity (the nearer cars
appear to movefaster than more cistant ones), anc motion parallax(if the
eye is fixecl on the center of the bridge, the images of near objects appear
to move opposite to the direction the observer moves the head, whereas
Figure 1-9. Top, The image is properly focused on the retina
clistant objects move in the same clirection as the heacl). (From Cilger B
(emetrpia)ideTheageisfocused infrontf theretinamaking
[2005]: Equine Ophthalmology. Saundlers, St. louis.)
is behind the retina, making the eye farsighted (hyperopia). (Mocified 
from Miller PE, Murphy C] [i995l: Vision in dogs. j Am Vet Med Assoc 
207:1623.)
the lens are the principal refracting surfaces of the eye, and
their ability to bend (refract) light is determined by their radii
of curvature and the differences between their refractive index
errors of cats and horses are somewhat conflicting, it appears that
and that of the adjacent air or fluid. If the focal length of the 
the average refraction for these species approximates emmetropia,
focusing structures of the eye does not equal the length of the 
 although deviations of 1 to 2 D do regularly occur.
eye, a refractive error is present. In a normally focused
 In addition to myopia and hyperopia, other optical aberra-
(emmetropic) eye, parallel rays of light (effectively anything
tions (e.g., astigmatism) may result from imperfections in the
20 feet or more away from the eye) are accurately focused on
 refractive media such as the cormea or lens and lead to degradation
the retina. If parallel rays of light are focused in front the retina,
of the image formed on the retina. Astigmatism occurs when
 myopia (nearsightedness) results. If they are focused behind the
different regions of the optical system (especially cornea or
retina, hyperopia (farsightedness) results (Figure 1-9). Such
lens) do not focus light in a uniform fashion, resulting 
1n
errors in refraction are usually expressed in units of optical
warping of the image, an extreme example of which can be
power called diopters (D). The extent of the error can be
found in the irregular mirrors found at carnivals. Spontaneous
expressed by the formula D = 1/f, where f equals the focal
length (in meters) of either the lens or the optical system as a
observed in a variety of breeds. Astigmatism commonly
whole. Therefore if an eye is 2 D myopic at rest, it is focused at
accompanies corneal diseases that result in scarring and
a plane located 0.5 m in front of the eye. Similarly, an eye that
distortion of the corneal curvature (Figure 1-10).
 is emmetropic at rest but can accommodate (change focus) 3 D
Although visual acuity requires that optical portions of the
is capable of clearly imaging objects on the retina that range
eye be transparent and that optical blur from refractive errors or
from as far away as the visual horizon (infinity) to as near as
astigmatism be limited, an adjustable focusing (accommodative)
0.33 m in front of the eye.
mechanism is needed if objects at different distances are to be 
The average resting refractive state of the dog is within 0.25 D
 seen with equal clarity. Accommodation in dogs and cats may
of emmetropia. There are individuals, however, that are signifi-
be brought about by altering the curvature of the lens surface
cantly myopic, and breed predispositions to myopia are found in 
or, more likely, by moving the lens anteriorly (Figure 1-11).
German shepherds and Rottweilers. In one study, 53% of German
The accommodative range for most domestic animals is quite 
shepherds were myopic by -0.5 D or more in a veteri-nary clinic
limited and does not generally exceed 2to 3 D for dogs, 4 D for
 population, but only 15% of German shepherds in a guide dog
cats, and less than 2 D for horses. This finding suggests that
program were myopic, suggesting that dogs with visual
 dogs are capable of accurately imaging objects on the retina
disturbances such as nearsightedness do not perform as well as
that are within 50 to 33 cm of their eyes but that objects nearer
normally sighted dogs. It may be reasonable to screen dogs that
than this will be blurred. Hence, dogs use other senses, such as
willbe expected to perform visually demanding tasks, orthose on
smell or taste, to augment vision in the investigation of very.
which human life relies for refractive errors, before embarking on
near objects. For comparison, young children are capable of
extensive training programs. Although studies of the refractive
accommodating approximately 14 D, or to about 7 cm.
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
light as occurs in dogs typically requires that a greater number
of photoreceptors (primarily rods) synaptically converge on a
single ganglion cell. This results in reduced visual acuity, just
 as high-speed photographic film produces a “grainy" image in
bright daylight. Additionally, the tapetum also scatters light and
further degrades visual acuity in bright light. Retinas with
excellent resolving power have a high ratio of ganglion cells to
photoreceptors, a large number of ganglion cells and optic
nerve fibers, and a high density of photoreceptors and usually
lack a tapetum. In primates, the fovea has one ganglion cell per
 every four cones. In all species, there are fewer ganglion cells
 in the periphery of the retina than in the center, and the ratio
 may decline to 1:16 in primates and 1:20 in cats, explaining the
reduced visual acuity of their peripheral visual fields.
Figure 1-10. Corneal astigmatism after a corneal laceration with
Domestic mammals lack the highly developed primate fovea
subsequent scarring. Note the irregular flash artifact on the cornea
but, instead, have a generally oval visual streak that contains
incicating that light is being unevenly focused on the retina. (From Gilger
the greatest density of photoreceptors, ganglion cells, and
Dr. Ellison Bentley.)
 hodopsin and thereby affordsthe greatest visual acuity The visual
streak, located in the tapetal region slightly superior and tem-
poral to the optic nerve, has approximately linear, short
Loss of the lens, as occurs after cataract surgery, results in
temporal and longer nasal extensions (Figure 1-12). The oval
severe hyperopia (farsightedness), with objects being focused
temporal part of the visual streak is relatively free of blood
approximately 14 D behind infnity, and a reduction in visual
vessels larger than capillaries, and nerve fibers take a curved
acuity to 20/800 or worse. This means that aphakic eyes are
 course to the optic disc dorsal and ventral to the visual streak,
unable to image any object clearly, whether near or far away,
 presumably to avoid interfering with light reaching the photo-
and are unable to accommodate. Although the aphakic dog is
 receptors. The temporal, oval portion of the streak may facili-
shalqo ioy eui puru u nday aq isnu n tpagaisrey, Aauaxa
tate binocular vision, whereas the nasal, linear portion may be
of similar size, objects that are closer to the dog will create a
used to scan the horizon and better use the wider field of view
available to the domestic mammals.
away. Therefore the aphakic dog may be able to better visually
Wolves, presumably the ancestors of modern-day dogs, have
orient to near objects despite being "farsighted?" Surprisingly,
a pronounced visual streak with a dense central area and exten-
although this degree of hyperopia is markedly debilitating to
sions far into the temporal and nasal portions of the retina. In
some dogs, most dogs are still able to visually orient adequately
contrast, domesticated dogs, even of the same breed, have
 in their environment without correction.
either a similar pronounced visual streak or a smaller, less
densely packed, moderately pronounced visual streak. Wolves
Retinal Factors in Visual Acvity
also generally have a greater maximum density of ganglion
cells (12,000 to 14,000/mm?) than do most dogs (6,400 to
 The retina may be the limiting factor in visual acuity for normal
14,400/mm?). This difference implies that the visual acuity of
 domestic animals, and its architecture may provide clues to the 
wolves may be better than that of some dogs, and that the
potential visual abilities of the eye. Enhanced vision in dim
 constancy of the form of the visual streak in wolves may be a
Meridional fibers
Radial fibers
Figure 1-11. Classic accommocation in primates. Leff,
Distant vision. Relaxation of the ciliary muscle increases
Circular fibers
tension on the lens zonules, which flattens the lens and
Zonular fibers
Iris
brings dlistant objects into focus. Right, Near vision.
(suspensory ligaments)
Contraction of the ciliary muscle recluces tension on the
Lens
Lens
zonules, which allows the elastic lens capsule to assume a
Cornea
relaxed
accommodated
more spheric shape. The resulting increase in lens power
allows near objects to be brought into focus on the retina.
The importance of this mechanism of accommoclation in
most domestic mammals is clebatedl. (Modlified From Cetty
R [1975l: Sisson and Crossman's The Anatomy of the
Domestic Animals, 5th ecd. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Ciliary process
Fibers of ciliary
Fibers of ciliary
muscle relaxed
muscle contracted
STRuCTURE AND FuNCtION OF THE EYE I
A
B
pronounced wolflike visual streak (A) ancl a beagle with a moclerately pronounced visual streak (B). Retinas were
ganglion cell clensities. The irregular shape in the center of each retina is the region of the optic nerve heac.
Canglion cells could not be seen in this area because of thick, overlying nerve fiber layer. (Frorm Miller PE,
Murphy C) [1995l: Vision in dogs. ] Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1623.}
result of environmental selective pressures that were altered by
a moving cotton ball) test the motion sensitivity of virtually the
domestication. It is unclear whether there are differences in the
entire retina, and positive responses are still present even though 
visual acuity of dog breeds that have been developed to hunt by
visual acuity may be very poor (up to 20/20,000). Visually
sight (sight hounds) and breeds that have been developed to
 distinguishing the fine details in objects is less important for most 
hunt by smell (scent hounds), although the finding of a large
domestic mammals (even working animals) than it is for most
number of beagles (a scent hound) with a pronounced visual
people. The trade-off of improved vision in dim light for less
acute vision in bright light allows such animals to exploit
these two groups of dogs, despite their uses.
ecologic niches inaccessible to people and aids in both seeking
prey and avoiding predators.
Estimates of Visual Acuity
Color Vision
The most familiar indicator of visual acuity for the human eye
is the Snellen fraction, which relates the ability of a subject to
Color vision in domestic mammals has been the subject of
distinguish between letters or objects at a fixed distance
 numerous studies with conflicting results. More recent, well-
(usually 20 feet, or 6 m) with a standard response. Snellen
 controlled studies suggest that most domestic mammals possess,
fractions of 20/20, 20/40, and 20/100 mean that the test subject
 and use, color vision.
needs to be 20 feet away from a test image to discerm the details
The presence of cone photoreceptors in domestic mammals
that the average person with normal vision could resolve from
suggests the potential for color vision, although the numbers
20, 40, and 100 feet away, respectively. This test actually measures
 and types of cones are smaller than those in humans. Cones
the ability of the area of greatest visual acuity (the fovea) to dis-
 constitute less than 10% of the visual streak in the dog, whereas 
criminate between objects of high contrast. Peripheral visual
they occupy almost 100% of the human fovea. Additionally,
acuity in humans is typically quite poor (i.e., 20/100, 20/200, or
punoy (,anig, pue ,uaaig, pa,) sauoo jo sad aam jo peaisu
worse), presumably because the photoreceptor density is lower
in humans with normal color vision, dogs have only two
and the ratio of photoreceptors to ganglion cells is higher in
functional cone types. One type of canine cone is maximally
 these regions of the retina than in the fovea. The visual acuity
 sensitive to light at 429 to 435 nm (*"violet' to normal humans
 of the normal dog ranges between 20/50 and 20/140, with
seq adi iaqnoue pue (auoo anq, aqi on supuodsaioo pum
20/75 or so being the likely average. Feline visual acuity has
maximal sensitivity to light at 555 nm ("yellow-green' to normal
been estimated to be between 20/100 and 20/200, whereas the
humans) with extension into the red end of the color spectrum
larger eye of the horse (hence a greater numbers of photo-
(corresponding to the “red" cone). Dogs lack, or do not use,
receptors) may result in a visual acuity of 20/30. The visual
"green" cones and appear to confuse red and green colors (red-
acuity of cattle, however, is unclear, because the size of their
 green color blindness, or deuteranopia). This means that dogs
eyes and density of ganglion cells would suggest they possess
 are unable to differentiate middle to long wavelengths of light,
a visual acuity comparable to that of horses but behavioral
which appear to people as green, yellow-green, yellow, orange,
studies that depend on the cooperation of the animal have
or red.
documented a visual acuity of only 20/240 to 20/440.
pai, pue anig, s,sop ayi rayaym umouy nou st i yhnou
Most commonly used procedures to determine vision in
cones perceive colors in the same way as those of humans, the
animals (e.g., determination of menace responses by moving a
canine visible spectrum may be divided into two hues: one in
hand across the visual field or having the animal's eyes follow
the human violet and blue-violet range (430 to 475 nm), which
B
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
is probably seen as blue by dogs, and a second in the human
distinguish red, orange, yellow, and green objects solely on the
greenish-yellow, yellow, and red range (500 to 620 nm), which
basis of color. In these cases, other visual clues, such as relative
is probably seen as yellow by dogs. Dogs also appear to have a
brightness and contrast, or the other senses—smell, sound,
narrow region (475 to 485 nm, blue-green to humans) that
 taste, and touch—are required to differentiate objects that appear
Ad d ru ns s u r s se
similar in color. Additionally, dogs, and probably most other
appears to be white or a shade of gray to dogs. In people with
 domestic mammals, are able to differentiate perfectly between
deuteranopia, however, the neutral point is in a greener (505-nm)
closely related shades of gray indistinguishable to the human
region of the spectrum, so dogs are not exactly the same as red-
eye. This ability is far more valuable in exploiting their ecologic
 green color blind humans. Wavelengths at the two ends of the
niche than color vision, because it increases visual discri-
spectrum (blue at one end and yellow at the other) probably
 mination when insufficient light may be present to effectively
 provide the most saturated colors. Intermediate wavelengths
stimulate cones.
are less intensely colored, appearing as if they were blends with 
white or gray.
CENIRAL VISUAL PAIHWAYS
The cat has a limited but detectable capacity for color vision
 and can distinguish between two stimuli if they differ greatly in 
The eye is only the first step in “"seeing" (Figure 1-15). Vision
spectral content, especially if the stimuli are also large. Cats
is not simply a recording of each pixel in a scene, as a camera
appear to have the physical capacity (based on the presence of 
 would make, because that would quickly overwhelm the visual
three types of cones) for trichromacy like humans, although
system with massive amounts of information that may not be
behavioral studies have not demonstrated this ability and it is,
 pertinent to the animal's survival or lifestyle. The brain does
at best, a pale copy of human trichromacy. Horses appear to
 not, and cannot, consciously pay attention to the flood of infor-
have both a short-wavelength-sensitive (blue) cone with a peak 
mation it receives from the eyes, but instead categorizes the
sensitivity of approximately 428 nm, and a second cone with a
 information into specific “topics" that are channeled to specific
 peak sensitivity between the human red and green cones (539 nm, 
areas of the brain for further processing. These “topics" are
and called a middle-long-wavelength-sensitive cone). Therefore
"internal" features such as texture and contrast, the direction
although horses have only two cones like dogs, orange and blue
 and velocity of the object's movement, its overall orientation as 
colors appear similar (shades of gray) to horses, whereas red and
represented on the retinal surface, its shape, its color, and many
 green appear similar (as shades of gray) to dogs (Figures 1-13
 other aspects. Additionally, unlike a camera, the brain compares
and 1-14). Cattle and swine also appear to have two functional
 the current image with previous images, images from the other
 cone pigments. The yellow tint to the equine lens probably
eye, and input from other senses such as hearing, smell, and
filters out blue wavelengths, diminishing certain optical aberra-
 touch. Once this comparison is completed, only the information
tions as well as glare and increasing the contrast of certain
that is relevant for the task at hand, or the animal's survival,
objects on select backgrounds.
rises to the level of conscious attention. Therefore the act of
Restrictions in color vision are probably of limited con-
seeing depends not only on the function and health of the eye
sequence to domestic mammals, as it is likely that they react
 but also on the cognitive processes in the brain that decide what 
only to colors of biologic importance to them. Problems may
 information merits conscious attention and what is to remain
arise when one is teaching hunting and working dogs to
subconscious or ignored.
The central visual pathway begins with the retina, which is
 in effect an extension of the brain. In this tissue, information is
processed in three functional stages. The first stage occurs in
the rod and cone photoreceptors. These cells have varying
sensitivity to different wavelengths of light and require
 different numbers of photons to strike them in order to elicit a
0.7μm 0.6pm
0.5μm
0.4 μm
 response. The second stage of retinal processing occurs in the
Infrared
Ultraviolet
outer plexiform layer. At this level the photoreceptors, bipolar
cells, and horizontal cells synaptically interact, and the
responses of some photoreceptors are modulated by what is
happening to other photoreceptors (so-called "on" and “off’ or
"center" and “surround" responses). These responses are
associated with the static and spatial aspects of an object and
serve to better define an object's brightness and borders by
altering its contrast with surrounding objects. The third stage
occurs in the synaptic interactions in the inner plexiform layer.
which is more concerned with the dynamic and temporal
aspects of vision. At this stage, transient responses that may
C
underlie motion and direction sensitivity may occur in the
Figure 1-13. A, The color spectrum ancl corresponcling wavelengths of
light. B and C, Difference between dlichromatic color vision of the horse 
amacrine and retinal ganglion cells. The amount of retinal
and normal human color vision. B, Color wheel representing the
 processing of an image before it gets to the brain varies greatly
spectrum of colors perceived by the trichromatic hurman visual system.
by species.
C, Reclucing the number of types of cone from three to two results in
 Retinal ganglion cell nerve fibers then form the nerve fiber
dlichromatic color vision and an enormous reduction in the number of
layer of the retina, converge at the optic disc, turn posteriorly,
dlifferent colors seen. (A from Cilger B [2005l: Equine Ophthalmology.
Saundler,Philadelphia.anc Cfrom Carrol],et al.[2001l:Photopigment
 gain a myelin sheath, and pass through the sievelike opening in
basis for clichromatic color vision in the horse. J Vis Sci 1:80.)
the sclera, the lamina cribrosa. The fbers pass via the optic
StRuCTURE AND FuNCtION Of THE EYE I
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronicmedia.
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to theprinted publication
Please refer to the printed publication.
A
B
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronicmedia.
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Please refer to the printed publication.
C
D
Figure 1-14. Simulation of the visual acuity anc color vision of the horse. Originalimage (A, B). lmages acjusted
to reflect the visual acuity ancd color vision abilities of the horse (C, D). (From Carrol J, et al. [2001l:
 Photopigment basis for dlichrormatic color vision in the horse. J Vis Sci 1:80.)
nerve to the optic chiasm (see Figures 1-2, 1-15, and 1-16).
humans—as the eyes become more frontally directed. This
Fibers coming from different parts of the retina maintain definite
finding is clinically relevant because species with extensive
 positions within the optic nerve and throughout the path to the
binocular overlap will not necessarily bump into objects if only
visual cortex. Fibers from both optic nerves enter the optic
Jo apis suo Auo uo uoisal  si aaun lo pug st aa auo
chiasm, where partial decussation, or “crossing over"’ of fibers
the brain.
from one side to the other, may occur (see Figure 1-15).
The optic chiasm receives the optic nerves as they enter the
The proportion of optic nerve fibers that decussate in the
 cranial vault via the optic foramen and canals (Figure 1-17)
chiasm is related to the relative laterofrontal positioning of the
 The chiasm lies at the base of the brain adjacent and anterior to
orbit and eye in the skull and degree of binocular overlap.
the hypophysis, which sits in the pituitary fossa of the
Animals with laterally directed eyes and no overlap between
postsphenoid bone. This relationship between the pituitary
the visual felds of the two eyes exhibit complete decussation at 
and the chiasm and optic tracts is important in considering
the chiasm, and the information from the right (or left) visual
the potential effect of space-occupying masses of the pituitary
field is processed entirely by the opposite visual cortex. As
on vision.
the eyes become more frontally directed in different species,
 From the optic chiasm, fibers enter the left and right optic
however, it becomes possible for an object to be seen with both
 tracts, which then pass laterally from the chiasm, anterior to the 
eyes. For example, an object in the animal's right visual field
hypophysis, and beneath the ventral surface of the cerebral
(on its right side) falls on the nasal area of the right retina and
 peduncle. The tracts then curve dorsally and posteriorly, between
 the temporal area of the left retina. In order for the same side of
 the cerebral peduncle to which they are attached laterally and the
the brain (the left side in this example) to continue to process
 pyriform lobe. The tracts thus pass to the lateral geniculate body.
all the information from the right visual field, some optic nerve
 Before reaching the lateral geniculate body, some 20% to 30% of
fibers must remain ipsilateral and must not decussate at the
the fibers leave the tracts and enter the pretectal area. Some of
chiasm. This percentage varies by species, but in horses and
these fibers enter the superior colliculus directly, and others pass 
cattle, which have relatively laterally directed eyes, 83% to
via the tracts and lateral geniculate body to the colliculus
87% of the optic nerve fibers cross, whereas the percentage
 indirectly. The majority of fibers entering the lateral geniculate
decreases—75% for dogs, 67% for cats, and 50% for
 body synapse here with the third ascending neuron in the visual
10
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
system, which passes without further synapse to the visual
Temporal
Nasal
Nasa
Temporal
 cortex. The first two synapses are the photoreceptor-bipolar and
bipolar-ganglion cell interfaces.
Those fibers that leave the optic tracts before entering the
lateral geniculate body pass to the pretectal area, carrying
afferent impulses of the pupillary light reflex. In the pretectal
area much decussation occurs, and the fibers pass to the midline
Edinger-Westphal nuclei of the oculomotor nerve (see Figure
1-15). Efferent impulses pas from these nuclei to the pupillary
sphincter muscle in each iris.
 A positive pupillary light reflex does not mean that the eye can
LEFTEYE
RIGHTEYE
see. Fibers that mediate the reflex arc leave the optic tracts
Temporal
Nasal
before the tracts enter the lateral geniculate body.
retina
retina
 From the lateral geniculate body, fibers pass forward and lateral
to the lateral ventricle as the fanlike optic radiation, which
neptic
enters the occipital or visual cortex, where interpretation of
some visual stimuli occurs in domestic animals (Figure 1-18).
Optic
Optic
 Increases in intraventricular pressure (hydrocephalus) can
trac
chiasm
affect the visual pathway at this point.
 In dogs and cats the visual cortex is not the sole center of
Edinger-Westphal
 interpretation of visual stimuli. If the cortex is removed, light 
nucleus
Midbrain
 perception and discrimination of light intensity are retained, but 
familiarity of surroundings is lost. Subcortical integration is
believed to occur in the superior colliculus.
andpretectal area
VASCULAR ANATOMY AND PERIPHERAL
NEUROANATOMY
Further details of orbital anatomy may be found in Chapter 17.
radiation
Optic
Arterial Supply
Leftoccipital lobe 
Right occipital lobe
The major arterial supply of the eye is from the external
Figure 1-15. The visual pathway.
ophthalmic artery. a branch of the internal maxillary artery.
N. olfactorius I 
Olfactory bulb
 Olfactory peduncle
A.ethmoidalisinterna
Olfactory tracts:
Medial
A communicans rostralis
Lateral
N. opticus II
Rostral perforated substance
A cerebri rostralis
Optic chiasm
A.cerebri media
.Optic tract
A carotis interna,cut stump
lInfundibulum of hypophysis 
N. oculomotorius Ill -
Piriform lobe
Figure 1-16. Ventral view of the brain anc cranial
A. cerebri caudalis
-Mammillary body
nerves in the dog. Structures important to the
A. communicans caudalis
-Caudal rhinal sulcus
visual system are highlightedl. (From Done SH, et
al.[1996l:Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,
 A. cerebelli rostralis 
-Interpeduncular fossa
Volume 3. Mosby, St. Louis.)
N. trigeminus V 
-Cerebral peduncle
-N. trochlearis IV
N. abducens VI
N. facialis VII
Pons
-Paraflocculus
N. vestibulocochlearis VIll 
-Flocculus
N. vagus X and
N. glossopharyngeus IX
 Cerebellar hemmisphere
Acer
Trapezoidbody
N. accessorius Xl 
A. basilaris
N. hypoglossus XIl
Pyramid
N.cervicalis|
ventralmedianfissure
 StRuCTURE AND FuNCTION Of THe EYE I
11
Palatinefissure
Infraorbital foramen
 Fossa for lacrimal sac
Cribriform plate
Maxillary foramen
Lateral part of frontal sinus.
Alveolar foramen
Salcus chiasmatis
Figure 1-17. Skull of the clog with calvaria
 Optic canal
removed, cdorsal aspect. Structures important
Rostral clinoid process
to  the  visual  systerm  are highlighted.
Orbital fissure
(Modlifiecl from Evans HE [1993]: Miller's
Hypophyseal fossa ~
Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edl. Saunclers,
 Philacelphia. @ Cornell University 1964.)
Caudal clinoid process-
- Foramen rotundum 
Foramen ovale
Dorsum sellae -
Crista petrosa
 Canal for trigeminal nerve
Canal for transverse sinus
Internal acoustic meatus
Cerebellar fossa
 Jugular foramen
Hypoglossal canal
Condyloid canal
F = face
A = arm-forelimb
T = trunk
L = leg-hindlimb
M = mouth and tongue
N = nose and lips
Auditory area
Prefrontal area
Motor area
 Somatosensory
area
Visual area
Figure 1-18. Motor anc sensory areas of the cerebral cortex of the cog. (Moclified from Hoerlein BF [1978]:
Canine Neurology, 3rdl ecl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
which arises from the external carotid artery (Figure 1-19).
There is no central retinal artery in domestic species. Single
The contribution from the internal carotid artery is small,
medial and lateral long posterior ciliary arteries pass around
unlike the situation in primates, and is via an internal
the globe horizontally, within the sclera, to supply the ciliary
ophthalmic artery, which arises from the circle of Willis. The
 body. Muscular branches of the orbital artery, which supplies 
internal ophthalmic artery enters the orbit through the optic
the extraocular muscles, also enter the globe near the insertions
canal with the optic nerve. From the external ophthalmic artery,
of these muscles. These anterior ciliary arteries anastomose
numerous short posterior ciliary arteries arise (Figure 1-20)
with the long posterior ciliary arteries to form the ciliary
and penetrate the sclera around the optic nerve head. These
 arterial supply. When the globe is prolapsed, these muscular
arteries supply the retina and choroid.
branches may be destroyed, decreasing the available supply to
12
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
 M. rectus dorsalis
M. levator palpebrae
 Dorsal muscular br.
M. retractor bulbi 
Ext. ethoidal a.
Lacrimal gland 
Ext. ophthalmic a.
/ Int. ophthalmic a.
M. rectus lateralis
 Rostral cerebral a.
M.obliquus ventralis
Middle cerebral a.
Caud. communicating a.
M. rectus ventralis
Int.carotid a.
Malar 
M-N
Middle meningeal a.
Maxillary a.
Anastomotic ramus
Br. to m. rectus medialis /
Ext. ophthalmic a.
Ventral muscular br.
Rostral deep temporal a.
al  s ) ase  y  eo xa e  a  s a
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ecl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
 Anterior ciliary artery
Anterior ciliary vein
Long posterior
aliary artery
Vortex vein
 Anterior ciliary vein
, Retinal vein
Retinal arterioles
Ciliary'process
Long posterior
ciliaryartery
Figure 1-20. Vascular supply of the canine eye.
the anterior segment of the eye. Branches from the ciliary
The eyelids are supplied by the superficial temporal artery, a
arterial network form the majorarterial circle of the iris. The deep
branch of the extemal carotid artery, and by the malar artery, a
 conjunctival arterioles at the limbus anastomose with the anterior
branch of the infraorbital artery.
ciliary arteries before they enter the sclera, and also with arterioles
in the ciliary body. Vascular events of clinical importance (e.g.,
Venous Drainage
 inflammation in one area of this network of anastomosing vessels)
can often be seen in other parts, and their origin must be
The retina is drained by the retinal veins and venules, which
distinguished clinically if possible (see Figure 1-20).
 run from the peripheral retina toward the optic nerve head (see
 StRuCTURE AND FuNCTION Of THe EYe |
13
Orbital plexus
the vertebral sinuses, external jugularvein, and internal maxillary
vein. Venous blood thus passes posteriorly from the orbit via
Ophthalmic vein
this route. It may also pass anteriorly via anastomoses between
Vortex veins
the ophthalmic veins and the malar, angularis oculi, and facial
veins to the external maxillary and external jugular veins.
Angular vein
Considerable species variation exists in the vascular supply
and drainage of the eye and orbit.
Nerve Supply of the Eye and Adnexa
The general plan of nerve supply to the eye is shown in
-Internal maxillaryvein
Figure 1-22. For further details, see Chapter 16.
 Deep facial vein  Facial vein
Optic Nerve (Craniaf Nerve H)
External jugular veinExternal maxillary vein
The optic nerve and meninges pass from the globe, through the
Figure 1-2l. The venous crainage of the eye and orbit of the cog.
(Moclified from Startup FC [1969]: Diseases of the Canine Eye. Williarms
 cone formed by the retractor bulbi muscles, via the optic canal
& Wilkins, Baltirmore.)
to the optic chiasm. The dura covering the nerve is continuous
with the outer layers of the sclera. The optic nerve consists of
ganglion cells, whose cell bodies lie in the ganglion cell layer
Figures 1-20 and 1-21). The venous circle they form at the optic
of the retina. It is a tract of the CNS, not a peripheral nerve.
disc may be complete or incomplete in the dog. The venous
circle drains posteriorly through the sclera via the posterior
Oculomotor Nerve (Cranial Nerve I!)
ciliary veins to a dilation in the orbital vein, the superior
(dorsal) ophthalmic vein.
The nucleus of the oculomotor nerve lies in the brainstem and
 The choroid is drained by approximately four vortex veins,
has several components serving different extraocular muscles,
which leave the globe near the equator and join the superior
the
ventral rectus, dorsal rectus, medial rectus, inferior
and inferior ophthalmic veins. The ciliary body is drained by
 oblique, and levator palpebrae superioris muscles. The nerve
the anterior ciliary veins to the same superior and inferior
also carries parasympathetic fibers originating from the
ophthalmic veins that drain to the orbital venous plexus at the
Edinger-Westphal nucleus, which lies near the other nuclei of
apex of the orbit. This plexus drains to the cavernous venous 
 the oculomotor nerve, and serves the sphincter pupillae and
sinus within the cranial vault. The cavernous sinus drains via
ciliary muscles. The oculomotor nerve thus contains efferent
Optic nerve (sensory)
Retina
Optic foramen
(fissure)
Ciianrygang
+
 Levator palpebra and dorsal rectus muscle
 Medial ventral rectus muscle
Dorsal oblique muscle
 Skin of upper lid and forehead
Medial canthus and third eyelid
Lacrimal gland
 Nasal mucosa via ethmoid foramen
Round foramen 
sagilor
Cornea, iris, and ciliary body
 Extraocular muscles 
Lateral rectus muscle
Retractor bulbi muscle
Stylomastoid foramen
 Upper eyelid 
 Lower eyelid
Facial area
Lacrimal gland 
 Orbicularis oculi muscle
 ruminants, forming the foramen orbitorotundum 
 Only orbital branches shown here
Figure 1-22. Nerve supply to the eye.
14
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
motor fibers to the striated extraocular muscles, of mesodermal
and adjacent skin (Figure 1-25). In horses, cattle, sheep, and
origin, and parasympathetic fibers to the smooth muscles of the
 pigs, the nerve reaches the upper lid via the supraorbital
iris and ciliary body, of neuroectodermal origin.
foramen, but in dogs and cats, it passes beneath the orbital
The oculomotor nerve leaves the brainstem on its ventro-
ligament.
 medial surface (see Figure 1-16), and passes ventral to the optic
The lacrimal nerve supplies the lacrimal gland. The
tracts, through the cavernous sinus, and enters the orbit via the
nasociliary nerve, the major continuation of the ophthalmic
orbital fissure (foramen orbitorotundum in cattle, sheep, and
 nerve in the orbit, gives rise to the ethmoidal and infratrochlear
 pigs). In the orbit, the nerve divides into dorsal and ventral
 nerves. The ethmoidal nerve passes through the ethmoidal
rami. A branch from the ventral ramus passes to the ciliary
foramen to supply the mucous membranes of the nasal cavity.
ganglion, where the preganglionic parasympathetic fibers
The infratrochlear nerve passes beneath the trochlear, pene-
synapse. For more details on the fbers leaving the ciliary
trates the septum orbitale, and innervates the medial canthus,
ganglion, see Figures 1-23 and 1-24.
third eyelid, and adjacent lacrimal system (see Figure 1-25).
Within the orbit, the nasociliary nerve gives off the long ciliary
Trochiear Nerve (Cranial Nerve IV)
 nerve, which enters the globe near the optic nerve to provide
sensory innervation to the globe itself.
The trochlear nerve leaves the brainstem on the dorsal surface
The maxillary nerve passes through the round foramen and
and runs lateral to the tentorium cerebelli to the orbital fissure.
via the alar canal to the pterygopalatine fossa. It gives rise to
 It passes through the fissure with the oculomotor nerve and the
the zygomatic nerve, which divides into zygomaticotemporal
 ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve. The trochlear nerve
and zygomaticofaciat branches within the orbit. The zygomatico-
 innervates the dorsal oblique muscle only.
 temporal branch supplies sensory innervation to the lateral upper
lid and rostral temporal area. The zygomaticofacial branch
Trigeminal Nerve (Cranial Nerve V)
emerges from the periorbita ventral to the lateral canthus and
supplies the lateral lower lid and surrounding skin. Post-
The sensory branches of the trigeminal nerve receive the
ganglionic sympathetic fibers from the cranial cervical
majority of the input from the orbit and periocular area. The 
 ganglion may also be distributed to the orbit via the branches
nerve has both motor and sensory roots (see Figure 1-16),
 of the maxillary nerve, which has no other branches of ophthalmic
which pass in a common sheath through the petrous temporal
significance.
bone to the trigeminal ganglion. The three branches of the
nerve—ophthalmic, maxillary and mandibular—arise from the
Abducent Nerve (Cranial Nerve VI)
 trigeminal ganglion. The ophthalmic nerve leaves the cranial
cavity via the orbital fissure, and the maxillary nerve via the
The abducent nerve leaves the ventral surface of the medulla
round foramen (see Figure 1-22).
oblongata (see Figure 1-16) and passes through the wall of the
Once in the orbit, the ophthalmic nerve divides into the
cavermous sinus, forward via the orbital fissure (see Figure 1-22),
supraorbital (frontal). lacrimal, and nasociliary nerves. The
to enter the orbit and supply the retractor bulbi and lateral
supraorbital nerve is sensory to the middle of the upper eyelid
rectus muscles.
Major petrosal nerve.
. Tensor tympani muscle
Tigeminal nerve.
Chorda tympani
Abducent nerve-
 Minor petrosal nerve 
-- Head of malleus
Geniculate ganglion -
 Short crus of incus
Facial nerve -
-Stapes
Vestibularnerve
Vestibule
Cochlear nerve -
-Chordla tympani
 Glossopharyngeal nerve -
 Nerve to stapedius muscle
 Proximal ganglion of X-
Auricular branches of Vll
Vagus nerve
ocation of stapedius muscle
Hypoglossal nerve ^
uricular branch of X
Accessory nerve
Condyloid canal 
Figure 1-23. The canine petrous temporal bone, sculpturec to show the path of the facial nerve, corsal aspect.
(Modified from Evans HE [1993l: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadlelphia. @ Cornell
University 1964.}
STRuCTURE AND FuNCTION OF THe EYE I
15
AUTONOMIC INNERVATION
SYMPATHETIC
 Cranial nerve ganglion
>> Dilator pupillae muscle
Lacrimal gland
PARASYMPATHETIC
 Ciliary ganglion
> Sphincter pupilae muscle
via oculomotor nerve
> Ciliary muscle
 Pterygopalatine ganglion
Lacrimal gland
A
via facial nerve
Pretectal nucleus
Edinger-Westphal nucleus
Hypothalamus
Thoracic segments
Ciliary ganglion
Cranial cervica
Sympathetic chain ganglia
B
 ganglion 
Figure1-24.A,Autonomicinnervationof theeye.,hemotorpathways to theiris:parasympatheticconstrict
sas a pe na a all sa aa wo pa o) e aeds pe
Philacelphia.)
Facial Nerve (Cranial Nerve VII)
Autonomic Innervation
The mixed facial nerve contains somatic motor and para-
Action of the Ocular Muscles with Autonomic
Innervation (Table 1-1)
sympathetic fbers, innervating the orbicularis oculi and
retractor anguli muscles and the lacrimal gland. Cell bodies of
The pupillary dilator and sphincter muscles are antagonistic to
the motor fibers are found in the facial nucleus in the medulla
each other and control the size of the pupil. As one muscle
 oblongata. The parasympathetic cell bodies are located in the 
contracts, the other relaxes. If either muscle fails to function,
rostral salivatory nucleus in the medulla. The nerve leaves the
the effects of the remaining muscle predominate; for example,
 brainstem lateral to the origin of the abducent nerve (see Figure
paralysis of the dilator muscle alone results in a small pupil
1-16) and, with the vestibulocochtear nerve, enters the petrous
(miosis) because of the unbalanced action of the sphincter muscle.
temporal bone near the acoustic meatus (see Figure 1-23), a
The ciliary muscle varies in size and orientation among
point of clinical significance to be discussed later with
 species but in general is composed of one set of smooth muscle
hemifacial spasm (see Chapter 16). The facial nerve enters the
fibers arranged so as control tension on the lens zonules and the
facial canal of the temporal bone, where the geniculate
refractive power of the lens and another set that controls the
ganglion is situated.
relative width of the iridocorneal angle, through which aqueous
 From the ganglion arises the major petrosal nerve. Joined by
humor exits the eye. Muiller's muscle elevates the upper eyelid
the deep petrosal (sympathetic) nerve, the nerve of the
together with the levator palpebrae superioris muscle. If either
 pterygoid canal is formed and passes via the pterygoid canal to
 muscle is defective or denervated, the upper eyelid droops
the pterygopalatine fossa, ending as the pterygopalatine
(ptosis).
ganglion. The parasympathetic fibers synapse here, and some
pass to the lacrimal gland.
 The facial nerve passes from the geniculate ganglion and
Table 1-1 | Actions of the Ocular Muscles with
Autonomic Innervation
emerges from the stylomastoid foramen to give numerous
branches. The facial trunk terminates as the auriculopalpebral
SYMPATHETIC
PARASYMPATHETIC
nerve, which crosses the temporal region and zygomatic arch
(see Figure 1-25). The palpebral branch supplies the orbicularis
M. ditator pupiltae
M. sphincter pupillae
 Miller's muscle
Ciliary muscle
oculi and retractor anguli oculi muscles.
16
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
To scutuloauricularis superficial dorsal muscle
 To scutuloauricularis prof. major muscle
Rostral internal
 Rostral auricular nerve
auricular nerve
Palpebral nerve
Rostral auricular plexus
Middle internal
auricular nerve -
Zygomaticotemporal nerve 
Caudal internal
Supraorbital nerve (frontal)
auricular nerve -
Infratrochlear nerve
 Caudal auricular
 Zygomaticofacial nerve
 branch to platysma
Infraorbital nerve
(retroauricular nerve)
Great auricular nerve -
IIC, ventral branch-
 Caudal auricular [Ramus 1 -
branches:
[Ramus 2 
Facial nerve VlII
 External jugular vein -
Mentalnerves
To digastricus muscle
Buccalis nerve
 Branches of mylohyoid nerve
To parotidoauricularis muscle
 Dorsal buccal branch
To stylohyoideus muscle
Nerves to tactile and sinus hairs
 Lateral interior auricular nerve
Parotid cluct (cut)
Cervical branch
Auriculotemporal nerve 
Auriculopalpebral nerve  Ventral buccal branch
Figure 1-25. Superficial branches of the facial anc trigeminal nerves in the cog, lateral aspect. (Mocifiec from
Evans HE [1993]: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ec. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.  Cornell University 1964.)
Parasympathetic Supply
OCVLARREFLEXES
Parasympathetic fbers arise from the Edinger-Westphal
All ocular reflexes and responses may be thought of as having
nucleus of the oculomotor nerve and pass via the nerve to
five parts: (1) a receptor, (2) an afferent neuron, (3) intermeuronal
synapse in the ciliary ganglion (see Figures 1-24 and 1-26).
connections, (4) an efferent neuron, and (5) an effector.
Other fibers that pass into the ciliary ganglion but do not
 Knowledge of the pathways involved in each of the reflexes and
synapse in it are as follows:
responses is invaluable for the localization of neuroophthalmic
 lesions. Table 1-2 summarizes these reflexes and responses.
· Postganglionic sympathetic fibers from the cranial cervical
ganglion
Pupillary Light Reflex (See Figures 1-24 and 1-27)
 Sensory fibers from the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal
nerve (V)
Constriction of the pupil on the same (ipsilateral) side as the
stimulus is termed the direct pupillary reflex, whereas pupillary
Sympathetic Supply
constriction on the opposite (contralateral) side is called the
consensual light reflex. In order to obtain reliable reflexes, a
 Sympathetic fibers from the brain pass down the cervical spinal
bright penlight or transilluminator must be used. Both direct 
cord and leave via spinal nerves of segments T1 and T2
 and consensual responses are present in normal animals, although
(see Figures 1-24 and 1-26). The fibers leave the nerves, pass to
considerable differences exist in the speed of the reflexes
the sympathetic trunk, and pass cranially with it, in its com-
 between small and large animal species.
mon sheath with the vagus nerve. The sympathetic trunk
terminates cranially at the cranial cervical ganglion, where
Palpebral/Corneal Reflex
many of the fibers synapse. Postganglionic fibers pass via a
variety of pathways to the pupillary dilator muscle and to
The palpebral/corneal reflex is elicited by touching either the
Miller's muscle.
 periocular skin (palpebral) or the cornea (corneal). This reflex
STRuCTURE AND FuNCTION OF THe EYE I
17
Edinger-Westphal nucleus
Nasociliary nerve
Optic nerve
Eyeball
Short ciliary
Cranial
nerves
 Ciliary ganglion
cervical ganglion
 Figure 1-26. Autonomic innervation of the eye. (Modlified from Getty R [1975|: Sisson
 Anatomy of the Dormestic Animals, 5th ed. Saunders, Philaclelphia.)
 Table 1-2 | Neuroophthalmic Reflexes and Responses
AFFERENT
EFFERENT
REFLEX
STIMULUS
RECEPTOR
NEURON
INTERNEURON
NEURON
EFFECTOR
RESPONSE
P1R
Light
 Photoreceptors
11
Subcortical
111
1ris
Constrict
 Sphincter
 pupil
Menace
Hand motion 
 Photoreceptors
11
Cortical
/11
0OM
Blink
response
Cerebellum
(/1
RBM
 Retract globe
X1
BCM
Turn
 heacl/neck
Dazzle
Bright light 
 Photoreceptors
11
Subcortical
V/11
00M
Blink
Palpebral
Touch lids 
Touch receptors skin
V (Ophth)
Subcortical
V11
0OM
Blink
Corneal
Touch cornea 
Touch receptors cornea 
V(Ophth)
Subcortical
V11
0OM
Blink
V1
RBM
 Retract globe
Doll's eye
Head motion 
 Semicircular canals
V/111
Subcortical
111
Extraocular
 Maintain line
(VOR)
Cerebellum
muscles
 of sight
BCM, Brachiocephalic muscles; OOM, orbicularis oculi muscle; PLR, pupillary light reflex; RBM, reltactor bulbi muscles; VOR, vesibuloocular reflex.
Menace Response
The menace response is a learned response rather than a true
reflex, and as such, it may be absent in normal young, naive, or
stoic animals. Therefore lack of this response in such animals
should not be taken as definitive proof that they are blind. The
stimulus is hand movement across the animal's visual field, and
care must be taken to prevent air currents from stimulating a
corneal  or  palpebral reflex and causing a  false-positive
response. Motion parallel to the ocular surface (as opposed to
directly toward the eye) or application of the stimulus behind a
sheet of glass or plastic may prevent air currents from
stimulating the cormeal reflex and causing a false-positive
Figure 1-27. The pupillary light reflex. The dlirect pupillary light reflex is
response. Such false-positive and false-negative responses are
the response shown by the eye being illuminated. The consensual
often misinterpreted by owners as evidence of sight or
pupillary light reflex is the response shown by the contralateral eye, which
 blindness in an animal.
is not being illuminatedl.
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE AQUEOUS
is important to protecting the eye, and interference with it (e.g.-
facial paralysis, trigeminal palsy, local anesthesia) often results
Aqueous humor fills the aqueous compartment, which consists
in severe ocular damage. Closure of the lids of the stimulated
 of the anterior chamber between the iris and cornea, and the
eye is referred to as the direct corneal reflex, and closure of the
 posterior chamber, between the posterior iris surface and the
contralateral lids is termed the consensual corneal reflex. In
 anterior lens surface. The posterior chamber should not be
normal animals, the direct reflex is typically more pronounced
confused with the vitreous compartment, which is located pos-
 than the consensual reflex.
terior to the lens (Figure 1-28).
18
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Anterior chamber
in the inner layer of the unpigmented ciliary epithelium and
 may be associated with the “sodium pump" that probably accounts 
Posterior chamber
for the majority of actively formed aqueous.
Aqueous humor is also produced via the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase, which catalyzes the formation of carbonic acid
from carbon dioxide and water. Carbonic acid dissociates,
Vitreous
allowing negatively charged bicarbonate ions to pass to the
aqueous. Positively charged sodium ions, and eventually water,
then follow bicarbonate into the posterior chamber. Drugs that
inhibit carbonic anhydrase therefore result in decreased
aqueous production and a reduction in intraocular pressure
Figure 1-28. The charmbers of the eye. The aqueous compartrment is
(IOP; see later). Aqueous carries nutrients for the tissues it
bathes (ie., iris, cornea) and receives constant contributions of
subcivicled into two chambers by the iris cliaphragm. The anterior
chamber is anterior to the plane of the iris and pupil (blue), whereas the
waste products of metabolism. Thus the composition changes
posterior chamber (green) is posterior to the iris-pupil plane but anterior
 as it passes from the ciliary body to the drainage angle.
to the vitreous (white). The retina anc optic nerve are in yellow. (Moclifiedl
Aqueous may then leave the eye via several routes. In the
from Fine S, Yanoff M [1972]: Ocular Histology: A Text and Atlas. Harper 
& Row, New York.)
conventional or traditional outflow route, aqueous humor
 passes through the pupil into the anterior chamber, and from
there it enters the trabecular meshwork in the drainage
Formation and Composition
(iridocorneal) angle, the blood-free venous angular aqueous
plexus, and eventually the systemic venous circulation through
 In order to maintain the optical clarity of the eye, a series of
a plexus of small veins in the sclera, the scleral venous plexus.
blood-ocular barriers are present in the normal eye. The blood-
 Contraction of smooth muscle fibers of the ciliary muscle that
aqueous barrier reduces aqueous humor protein concentrations
 insert into the trabecular meshwork are probably capable of
to about 0.5% of plasma concentrations and also prevents many
increasing drainage of aqueous from the eye by increasing
substances, including drugs, from entering the aqueous. Most 
the size of the spaces in the trabecular meshwork. The vast
large molecules, including proteins, are unable to pass through 
majority of aqueous humor leaves the eye via the traditional
 or between cells in the two layers of the ciliary epithelium over-
outflow route.
lying the ciliary processes because of tight intercellular junctions
An alternative route of drainage—the uwveoscleral route—
between cells. Similarly, a blood-retinal barrier formed by the
normally accounts for about 3% to 15% of aqueous outflow in
 most species, and probably more in the horse. Aqueous passes
 also limits passage of substances into the retina so as to prevent 
through the ciliary body and choroid via the supraciliary
 distortion of the photoreceptors. The exact anatomic location of
 and suprachoroidal spaces, and from there it passes through
the barrier, however, is probably different for different substances
the sclera into the orbit. Outflow via this route may be sub-
(e.g, capilary endothelial cells, endothelial basement membrane,
stantially increased in certain disease states and in response
 or intercellular junctions). Inflammation and certain diseases
to some antiglaucoma drugs, such as the prostaglandin
frequently disrupt the blood-ocular barrier and allow higher
derivatives.
 amounts of proteins, including immunoglobulins and fbrinogen,
to enter the eye.
Pressure Dynamics
Aqueous is produced in the ciliary body. by passive
(diffusion and uttrafiltration) and active (selective transport
 Equilibrium between formation (production) and drainage
against a concentration gradient) processes. Fluid from ciliary
(outflow) of aqueous results in a relatively constant intraocular
capillaries passes into the stroma of the ciliary processes.
 pressure (IOP) (Table 1-3). IOP is affected by factors such as 
through the ciliary epithelium, and into the posterior chamber.
age, species, mean arterial pressure, central venous pressure,
An energy-dependent transport mechanism similar to that in the
blood osmolality, and episcleral venous pressure. IOP typically
renal epithelium is present in the ciliary body and results in
exceeds the pressure in the draining venous system (the epi-
higher concentrations of certain substances (e.g., ascorbic acid)
scleral veins) because aqueous humor is actively produced and
 in the aqueous than in the plasma. Sodium and chloride ions are 
the trabecular meshwork slows its departure (provides
actively pumped into the aqueous and draw water passively
 resistance) from the eye. The ease with which aqueous humor
 along a concentration gradient. Na-K-activated ATPase is present 
leaves the eye is called the facility of outlow (C). The various
Table 1-3 ,
 Aqueous Humor Statistics
RATE OF FORMATION
FACILITY OF OUTFLOW
UVEOSCLERAL
EPISCLERAL VENOUS
SPECIES
(μl/min)
(μl/min/mm Hg)
OUTFLOW (%)
 PRESSURE (mm Hg)
Dog
2.5
0.25 (normal)
15 (normal)
10-12
0.13 (glaucoma)
3 (glaucoma)
Cat
15.0
0.19
8
Rabbit
4.0
0.23
13-25
9
Human
2.0
0.28 (normal)
4-14
5-15
0.18 (glaucoma)
Modified from Gum G (1991 ): Physiology of the eye, in Gelatt KN (editor): Veterinary Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
 STRuCTURE AND FuNCTION OF THe EYE I
19
features of IOP dynamics may be related to each other with the
BIBLIOGRAPHY
following equation:
Budras KD, et al. (2002): Anatomy of the Dog: An Ilustrated Text.
Schlitersche,Hannover,Germany.
IOP =
Outflow facility
Duke-Elder S (1958, 1968): System of Ophthalmology: Vol. 1: The Eye in
Evolution,and Vol. IV:Physiology of the Eye and of Vision.Henry
or
Kimpton, London, pp. 605-706.
P。= (F/C) + P
Evans HE (1993): Miler's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.
where IOP (P。) is expressed in mm Hg, F is the rate of aqueous 
Jacobs GH(1993): The distribution and nature of color vision among the
mammals. Biol Rev 68:413.
formation in pL/min, C is the facility of aqueous outflow in
Kaufman PL, Alm A (2003): Adler’s Physiology of the Eye, IOth ed. Mosby,
μL/min/mm Hg via both the conventional and uveoscleral out-
St. Louis.
flow routes, and Pe is the episcleral venous pressure in mm Hg.
Miller PE, Murphy CI (1995): Vision in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
These relationships make it clear that there are multiple
207:1623.
Miller PE, Murphy CJ(2005): Equine vision: nomal and abnormal, in Gilger
avenues for decreasing IOP, including decreasing aqueous
BC (editor): Equine Ophthalmology. Saunders, St. Louis, pp. 371-408.
humor secretion, increasing conventional or uveoscleral outflow,
Neitz J, et al. (1989): Color vision in the dog. Vis Neurosci 3:1 19.
and potentially lowering episcleral venous pressure. They also
Peichl L (1992): TopogTaphy of ganglion cells in the dog and wolf telina.
suggest that (1) IOP can be reduced only to 8 to 9 mm Hg
J Comp Neurol 324:603.
(episcleral venous pressure) by methods that improve outflow
 Prince JH, et al. (1960): Anatomy and Histology of the Eye and Orbit of
via the conventional pathways but that (2) in theory, improving
Domestic Animals. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, IL.
Samuelson D, et al. (1989): Morphologic features of the aqueous humor
outflow via the uveoscleral pathway can achieve very low IOPs
drainage pathways in horses. Am J Vet Res S0:720.
because this route drains into the orbit, which has a pressure of
Walls GL (1963): The Vertebrate Eye and Its Adaptive Radiation. Hafner,
only 1 to 3 mm Hg.
New York.
Chapter
DEVELOPMENT AND CONGENITAL
Ron Ofri
DEVELOPMENT
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES
DEVELOPMENT
With the closure of the anterior end of the neural tube,
intratubular fluid accumulates and its pressure causes the
Formation of Optic Primordia
evagination of the optic grooves and their transformation into
 Broadly speaking, the embryonic and fetal development of the
the two optic vesicles (Figures 2-3 and 2-4). This marks the
eye occurs in three stages:
beginning of organogenesis. In the dog this event occurs on the
· Embryogenesis: Segregation of the primary layers of the
fifteenth day of gestation. The lumen of the neural tube remains
connected to the cavities of the optic vesicles by two optic
developing embryo. The period begins with fertilization and
 ends with differentiation of the primary germ layers.
stalks (see Figure 2-4, D). Under the pressure of the
 intratubular (intraventricular) fluid, the optic vesicles continue
· Organogenesis: Separation into the general pattern of
to enlarge and bulge, eventually coming in contact with the
various organs.
surface ectoderm. At the site of contact with the optic vesicle
 Diferentiation: Detailed development of the characteristic
the surface ectoderm thickens and forms the lens placode
structure of each organ.
(Figures 2-3; 2-4, C; and 2-5). The contact of the optic vesicle
 It is assumed that the embryonic development of the eye is
with the surface ectoderm serves as an induction for the optic
similar in sequence for all mammalian species and that inter-
vesicle to start invaginating, thus forming the double-layered
species differences pertain mostly to the duration of gestation
optic cup (see Figures 2-3 and 2-4, E and F).
 and the age of the various anatomic end pointsfor example,
The invagination of the vesicle progresses from inferior to
regression of embryonic vasculature or eyelid opening.
superior but is not completed on the ventral side of the optic
The optic primordia (rudimentary eye) develops from that 
cup, where a fissure, called the embryonic optic fissure, remains.
 portion of the embryo that later forms the anterior part of the
The double layers of the optic cup are aligned on both sides
 central nervous system (CNS). The first step in the embryogenesis
of the fissure, which extends posteriorly under the optic stalk.
of the future eye takes place at the embryonic plate stage, when 
 This fissure allows the secondary mesenchyme present around
the ectoderm invaginates along the posterior-anterior axis to
the cup to penetrate into the cavity of the optic cup to form the
form the neural groove. The two neural lips of the groove
hyaloid vascular system (twenty-fifth day of gestation in the
subsequently fuse, thus turning the groove into the neural tube
dog) (see Figure 2-4, G and H). This fissure gradually closes
(Figures 2-1 and 2-2). At the site of fusion, between the ecto-
leaving a small aperture at the anterior end of the optic stalk,
derm and the neuroepithelium (the epithelium of the neural
through which the hyaloid artery passes (Figure 2-6). The
tube), neuroepithelial cells proliferate to form the neural crest
hyaloid artery supplies the inner layers of the optic cup and
cells and migrate sideways into the paraxial and lateral meso-
developing lens vesicle. The two lips of the optic fissure fuse
derm. These neural crest cells mix with mesodermal cells and
anteriorly to the optic stalk. The fusion process progresses
form the secondary mesenchyme; this secondary mesenchyme
anteriorly and posteriorly, eventually causing closure of the
forms the main mesodermal structures of the eye. Therefore the 
optic cup and allowing intraocular pressure to build up (see
eye develops from the neural ectoderm, neural crest, and surface 
Figure 2-6).
ectoderm, with minor contributions from the mesoderm.
 The lens placode thickens to become the lens vesicle.
The anterior end of the neural tube enlarges and bends down 
 Following the invagination of the optic vesicle, the lens vesicle
to form the primordia of the CNS. On its outer surface, on both 
finds itself embedded inside the cavity of the cup (see Figure 2-4,
sides, appear two small pits called the optic grooves or optic
F and H). Anteriorly, the hyaloid artery gives branches, the
 pits. These pits, which appear on day 13 of gestation in the dog,
tunica vasculosa lentis, which cover the posterior and lateral
are the anlage of the eyes (see Figure 2-2, G).
faces of the lens. This vascular network supplies the metabolic
requirements of the lens during development. The hyaloid
vascular system disappears at advanced stages of the develop-
The author wishes to acknowledge the contibution of Dr. Robert Barishak,
ment or during the postnatal period. In dogs remnants of the
and to thank him for his input throughout the years and to this chapter.
hyaloid system might remain visible until the fourth postnatal
20
DEvELOPMENT AND CoNGENITAL ABNORMALITIES|
21
Optic vesicle
 Optic cup
Lens vesicle
Neuralcrest
Ectodlerm
Notochord
Mesoderm
Encoderm
Figure 2-3. Formation of the optic vesicle, optic cup, and lens vesicle.
 Figure 2-1. Developing embryo at the start of neural tube formation.
(From Yanoff M, Duker ] [2004l: Ophthalrmology, 2nd edl. Mosby.
(From Yanoff M, Duker ] [2004]: Ophthalmology. 2nd ed. Mosby,
St. louis.)
St. louis.1
Cut edge of
amnion
Level of
Neural fold -
section B
Neural groove -
Somite ~
Primitive node 
A Primitive streak -
E
Ectoderm
-Mesoderm
B
Endoderm
 Surface ectoderm
Neural crest
Mesoderm
 Neural tube of
F
neuralectoderm
C
Optic pit
Neural folds
D
G
Figure 2-2. Forrmation of neural tube. A, Dorsal surface of embryo as seen from above. B, Vertical section
through three-layered embryonic clisc. C, Neural groove forms in neural plate area of ectoclerm. D, Neural
groove invaginates and neural folcls are formed. E, Neural folds continue to grow toward each other. F, Neural
Crest cells separate from ectoclerm of neural folds as the folds fuse;neural tube is formed (of neural ectoclerm);
and surface ectocerm is again continuous. G, Evaginations in area of forebrain forrm the optic pits. (From
Remington LA [2005|: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nd ecd. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. Louis.)
month, whereas in cattle they may persist until 12 months of age.
is reviewed in the following sections, beginning with the
 In humans, but not in domestic animals, the caudal portions of 
 posterior parts of the eye and progressing anteriorly.
the hyaloid artery and vein transform themselves into the 
 central retinal artery and vein.
Retina
At this stage of development, organogenesis has been
completed and the general structure of the eye has been
The optic cup is lined by two layers of epithelium of neuro-
determined. It is followed by a period of differentiation as the
 ectodermal origin (see Figure 2-4, H). The inner layer, facing
specific structures of the eye begin to form. Their development
the vitreous, is nonpigmented, but the outer layer, facing the 
22
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Optic groove
-Level of section B
Optic groove
Neural fold
Neural fold
Mesenchyme
Neural groove
B
Surface ectoderm
Neural tube
Notochord
Optic stalk
Lens placode
Forebrain
Mesenchyme
Lens pit
Lens placode
Surfaceectoderm
~Optic vesicle
C
Early stage of optic cup
Mesenchyme
Midbrain ~
Outer layer of optic cup
Surface ectoderm
Innerlayer
of optic cup
Forebrain
Lens vesicle
Optic fissure
Hyaloid artery-
F
Level of section G
Optic cup
Hyaloid vein
Optic fissure
Hyaloid artery
 Lumen of optic stalk 
Lens vesicle
Mesenchyme
Wall of brain.
-Hyaloid artery
~ Intraretinal space
Hyaloid vein in
G
optic fissure
H
Figure 24. Early eye clevelopment. A, Dorsal view of the cranial end of 22-clay ermbryo, showing the first 
anc its covering layers of mesenchyme anc the surface ectoclerm from an embryo of about 28 clays. D, F, anc H,
Sections of the cleveloping eye, illustrating early stage in the clevelopment of the optic cup anc lens vesicle.
E, Lateral view of the brain of an ermbryo at about 32 clays, showing the external appearance of the optic cup.
G,Transverse section through the optic stalk, showing the optic fissure and its contents. (From Remington LA
(future) sclera, is pigmented. The anterior rim of the cup will
 The outer epithelial layer of the posterior optic cup forms
form the anterior uvea (ciliary body and iris), and the posterior
the pigment epithelium of the retina. The inner epithelial layer
 part of the cup will form the retina. The two epithelial layers of
forms the sensory retina (Figure 2-7). The two layers of the
the optic cup will form the two epithelial layers of the retina 
 posterior optic cup are separated by the intraretinal space
and the anterior uvea.
representing the cavity of the optic vesicle, which has gradually
DEvELOPMENT AND CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES |
23
 Neural 
and an inner neuroblastic layer (see Figure 2-7). These outer
ectoderm Retinal dlisc
and inner neuroblastic layers are separated by the fiber layer of
Surface
Chievitz. The cells of the outer neuroblastic layer differentiate
Mesenchyme
ectoderm
Lens placode
into cones and rods externally and horizontal cells intemally.
The cells of the inner neuroblastic layer differentiate into
ganglion cells, amacrine cells, bipolar cells, and Muiller's cells.
The rods and cones (ie., the photoreceptors) form the outer
retina and are adjacent to the choroid and sclera (Figure 2-8).
The ganglion cell layer, which originated in the inner neuro-
blastic layer, is called the inner retina because it is adjacent to
the vitreous. The resulting retina is called an inverted retina
because the photoreceptors are close to the outer layers of the 
eye and light must pass through all of the retinal layers to reach 
the photoreceptors. The reason for this arrangement is to place 
the photoreceptors next to the choroid, thus giving these cells,
which have very high metabolic requirements, their own
"private" blood supply.
 There is species variation in the degree of retinal development
 present at birth. In dogs it is possible to record electrophysiologic
activity of the photoreceptors during the first postnatal week;
signals reach adult amplitude by 5 to 8 weeks of age. Similarly,
differentiation of the rod and cone inner and outer segments is
Figure 2-5. Light micrograph of 6-mm pig embryo showing thickening of
lens placoce. (From Remington LA [2005]: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual
 evident histologically during the first 8 weeks of life.
System, 2nc ecd. Butterworth-Heinermann, St. Louis.)
Optic Nerve
been obliterated during the invagination of the optic vesicle.
Diseases of the posterior segment of the eye cause retinal
Axons from the ganglion cells grow toward the optic stalk, thus
 detachment in this space as the sensory retina separates from
forming the nerve fiber layer, the innermost layer of the retina
the pigment epithelium.
(see Figures 2-6, B and D; and 2-8). Axons from throughout the
The common neuroblastic layer, which is the nuclear portion
entire retina converge on the optic disc, where they form into
of the sensory retina, divides into an outer neuroblastic layer
bundles collectively known as the optic nerve (cranial nerve I1)
 Lumen of optic stalk
Lens
Inner layer of optic stalk
Hyaloid vessels
(containing axons of
in optic fissure
ganglion cells)
Mesenchyme
- Level of section B
 Optic stalk
Walls of optic stalk continuous
with the wall of the brain and
the Jlayers of the optic cup
Lens
- Axons of ganglion cells
- Optic fissure closed 
Hyaloid vessels
-- Level of section D
D
 Optic fissure closing
C
Hyaloid vessels
in optic fissure
Figure 2-6. Closure of optic fissure. A and C, Views of inferior surface of optic cup and stalk, showing
progressive stages in closure of optic fissure.Banc D,Transverse sections through optic stalk,showing successive
[2005|: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nc ed. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. louis.)
24
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
Vitreous
The embryonic vitreous consists of the primary, secondary, and
tertiary vitreous (Figure 2-11). The primary vitreous develops
  i   r a 
mesenchymal, neuroectodermal, and ectodermal components.
The mesenchymal elements enter posteriorly with the hyaloid
vessels, and anteriorly through the space between the anterior
Deeper,
Inner,
rim of the optic cup and the lens vesicle. The ectodermal
nucleated 
 nonnucleated
elements are the fibrils produced by the posterior face of the
layer
layer
lens. The primary vitreous also contains neuroectodermal
elements, which consist of the fibrils produced by the inner
limiting membrane of the retina. The secondary vitreous is the
Figure 2-7. The two retinal walls. The inner retinal wall shows two
zones—an inner, nonnucleated layer anc a ceeper, nuc leated layer. (From 
"definitive" vitreous that will persist into adulthood. It is
Yanoff M, Duker ] [2004]: Ophthalrmology, 2nd edl. Mosby, St. Louis.)
 denser, is more homogeneous and avascular, and is laid down
around the primary vitreous (see Figures 2-11, B, and 2-13). It 
is also secreted by the inner limiting membrane of the retina.
(Figure 2-9). The axons of optic nerve extend posteriorly to
The tertiary vitreous is secreted by the ciliary epithelium.
form the optic chiasm and optic tracts before making their frst
Bundles of fibers extend from the ciliary epithelium toward
synapse at the lateral geniculate nucleus.
the lens equator, covering the secondary vitreous anteriorly
As the ganglion cell axons collect at the optic disc they dis-
(see Figure 2-1l, C). In the adult they persist as lens zonules
 place primitive neuroectodermal cells forward, into the vitreous
(suspensory ligament of the lens).
cavity. These displaced cells form a glial sheath around the 
hyaloid artery. At the disc, the same cells may form an
Lens
agglomeration called Bergmeister's papilla, which protrudes
 into the vitreous. The papilla may persist into adult life
As noted earlier, thickening of the lens placode (on the
(especially in ruminants), or it may atrophy, thus forming a
seventeenth day of gestation in the dog) occurs as a result of
depression, known as the physiologic optic cup, in the optic
induction by the optic vesicle. The placode then invaginates,
disc (Figure 2-10). In newborns this physiologic optic cup may
and by day 25 it forms the lens vesicle (see Figures 2-3 and
be confused with a coloboma of the optic disc. In patients with
2-4, D. F, and H). This vesicle is lined by surface ectodermal
 glaucoma the physiologic optic cup may enlarge owing to the
cells, the apex of which is directed toward the center of the lens
forces of the increased intraocular pressure on this region of
vesicle cavity (Figures 2-14 and 2-15). The base of the cells
the eye.
forms the primitive lens capsule. The anterior cells of the lens
B
Retinal pigment
 epithelium
Photoreceptor
A
layer
External limiting
membrane
Sclera
 Outer nuclear layer
Choroid
 Outer plexiform layer
Inner nuclear layer
 Retina
 Inner plexiform layer
Ganglion cell
layer
 Nerve fiber layer
Internal limiting
membrane
Figure 2-8. Photormicrographs of the posterior section of the eye. A, The three posterior layers of the eye. The
sclera is the outermost layer, whereas the retina faces the vitreous. B, An enlargement of the 10 layers of
the retina. The retinal pigment epitheliurm anc the photoreceptors are the outermost layer of the retina, facing the
choroidl. The ganglion cell layer anc nerve fiber layer are the innermost layers of the retina, facing the vitreous.
DevELopMEnT ANd CoNGeNITAL ABNORMALitIES I
25
Ganglion cell
 hyer of the retina
- Axons of ganglion cells
 Sheath of the optic nerve (continuous 
 with the meninges of the brain and the
choroid and sclera)
Optic stalk
Central
Lens
artery and
vein of the retina
Opticnerve
 Axons of ganglion cells 
Level of section C
C
Optic fissure closed 
B
 Central vein and artery of the retina
B,Transverse section through the optic stalk, showing the formation of the optic nerve. The optic nerve is formed
after closure of the optic fissure (this stage follows the stage shown in Figure 2-6, C). C, The lumen of the optic
stalk is obliterated as axons of ganglion cells accurmulate in the inner layer of the stalk. (From Remington LA
[2005|: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nc edl. Butterworth-Heinermann, St. Louis.}
Figure 2-10. Optic nerve
heads of a dog (A) and a
sheep (B). The clark spot in
the center of the canine optic
nerve head is the physiologic
optic cup (arrow). The pink
tuft in the center of the sheep
 optic nerve headl is the ovine
Bergmeister's papilla (arrow).
(Courtesy
University
California, Davis, Veterinary
Ophthalmology Service Col-
lection.}
B
vesicle remain cuboidal, but the posterior cells elongate, become 
life from those equatorial epithelial cells that maintain their
columnar, and form the primary lens fbers (Figure 2-16).
lifelong mitotic activity. Successive layers of fibers are
These fbers extend anteriorly, thus filling the cavity of the
deposited on top of preexisting fibers, like the layers of an
vesicle with lens fibers (see Figures 2-14, D and E; and 2-16, C
onion. As a result the embryonal nucleus is surrounded by the
 and D). Their nuclei disappear, and these fibers constitute the
fetal nucleus, which in turn is surrounded by the adult nucleus
embryonal nucleus of the lens. As a result, the posterior aspect
and cortex (Figure 2-17).
of the adult lens is devoid of cells and is composed only of a
 Because none of the lens fibers is quite long enoughto reach
lens capsule. The anterior cuboidal cells, on the other hand,
fully from pole to pole, and because the cells are too thick at the
 remain as the adult lens epithelium.
ends for all to meet in a single point, they meet in a Y-shaped
The junction between the anterior lens epithelium and
 structure known as the lens suture. The anterior lens suture is
the primary lens fibers extends along the equator of the lens
 an upright Y, and the posterior suture is inverted (Figures 2-16,
and forms the equatorial zone. Epithelial cells in this area
F and G; and 2-18).
form the secondary lens fibers; these fbers extend anteriorly
The lens capsule is secreted anteriorly by the anterior lens
along the lens epithelium and posteriorly along the lens
 epithelium. Its formation continues throughout life, and there-
capsule. Secondary lens fibers continue to form throughout
fore its thickness increases with age. The posterior lens capsule,
26
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Primary vitreous
Secondary vitreous
Primary vitreous
(hyloid artery)
Primary
Primary
Secondary
vitreous
vitreous
 vitreous 
 Remains of primary vitreous
Figure 2-13. Vitreous clevelopment. The primary vitreous anc hyaloid
(Cloquet's canal)
artery fill the optic cup. The primary vitreous retracts and the hyaloid
artery regresses, while the secondary avascular vitreous cevelops. (From
Yanoff M, Duker ] [2004]: Ophthalmology, 2nc ed. Mosby, St. Louis.)
Secondary (adult) vitreous
Presumptive
fibers
Tertiary vitreous
(lens zonules)
B
 Remains of primary
vitreous (Cloquet's canal)
Secondary (adult)
C
vitreous
Elongating
Figure 2-11. Scheme of main features in vitreous clevelopment and
posterior
regression of hyalaid system, shown in clrawings of sagital sections.
epithelium
A, Hyaloid vessels and branches occupy much of the space between lens
D
and neural ectoclerm, forming the primary vitreous. B, An avascular
seconclary vitreous of fine fibrillar composition fills the posterior part of
the eye. The primary vitreous shown in A is conclensed into Cloquet's
Lens
Canal as the hyaloid vessels atrophy. C, Vessels of hyaloic system atrophy
fibers
progressively. Zonular fibers (tertiary vitreous) begin to stretch from
growing ciliary region toward lens capsule. (Modlified from Duke-Elcer S
E
[edlitorl [1963]: System of Ophthalmology. Vol ll: Normal and Abnormal 
Development, Part 1. Embryology. Henry Kimpton, Loncon.)
Figure 2-14. A, Formation of lens placocle. B, lnvagination forming lens 
vesicle. C to E, Development of embryonic nucleus. C, Hollow lens vesicle
is lined with epithelium. D, Posterior cells elongate, becorming primary
lens fibers. E, Primary lens fibers fill lumen, forming embryonic nucleus.
Tunica
Curved line formed by cell nuclei is called the lens bow. Anterior epi-
vasGulosa
thelium remains in place.(From Rermington LA [2005|: Clinical Anatormy
lentis
of the Visual System, 2nc ed. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. Louis.)
which is much thinner, is formed by the basal membrane of the
elongating primary lens fibers.
Hyaloid
artery
Primitive Vascular System
The hyaloid artery, a branch of the internal ophthalmic artery,
enters the optic cup through the embryonal optic fissure (see
 Figure 2-6, A). Its branches continue forward, reach the anterior
 margin of the optic cup, and anastomose with the annular vessel
Figure 2-12. Light micrograph of 25-mm pig ermbryo showing the hyaloid 
arterialsystemfillingfuturevitrealcavity.Vesselsareevident extending
(see Figure 2-6, C) formed by the choriocapillaris, which is
through the optic stalk, anc the vascular network attached to posterior
the capillary plexus that surrounds the optic cup. The hyaloid
lens is eviclent. (Moclified from Remington LA [2005]: Clinical Anatomy of
artery is called vasa hyaloidea propria; its anterior dividing
the Visual System, 2ncd ecl. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. Louis.)
branches form a net around the lens called the lateral and
DEvELOPMENT AND CoNGENITAL ABNORMALITIES|
27
Lens
vesicle
cavity
B
Posterior
epithelial
Gells
elongating
into primary
lens fibers
Figure 2-15. Light micrograph of 15-mm pig embryo showing lens vesicle
fillingwithprimarylensfibers;lensbowconfigurationisevicent.Moclifed
from Remington iA [2005|: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nd
edl. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. Louis.)
C
posterior tunica vasculosa lentis (Figure 2-19). The anterior
tunica vascuolosa lentis is formed by branches from the
annular vessel. These tunicas are responsible for vascular
supply to the lens during embryonic development. During
the last stages of embryologic development or soon after
birth, as the aqueous humor takes over this metabolic function,
the hyaloid vasculature atrophies, regresses, and is replaced by
E
the pupillary membrane (see also next section, Ciliary Body
and Iris).
The mesenchyme around the optic cup forms the choroid.
which surrounds the choriocapillaris. The nasal and tempora!
long posterior ciliary arteries branch offthe ophthalmic artery
and advance forward in the horizontal plane through the choroid
 to supply the future ciliary body. At the level of the ciliary body
they anastomose to form the major vascular circle of the iris.
Posteriorly, the short ciliary arteries arrange themselves around
the entrance of the optic nerve into the globe (Figure 2-20). The
vessels form an anastomosing plexus, called the Haller-Zinn
vascular circle, which plays a role in the vascular supply of the
G
H
optic nerve head.
Figure 2-16. Stages of clevelopment of the lens. A, Elongation and
anterior growth of posterior cuboidal epithelial cells to form primary lens
Ciliary Body and Iris
fibers. B, Elongation of primary lens fibers to fill the cavity in the I
lens
vesicle,and formation of thelens bowof cuboidal cellnucleiCandD,
The adult ciliary body is lined with two layers of epithelium of 
Seconcary lens fibers proliferate from the equatorial region of the lens,
covering the primary lens fibers anc scattered cuboiclal cell nuclei. E, The
neuroectodermal origin. The inner layer, close to the vitreous,
aclult lens. F and G, Appearance of the Y sutures. H, New layers of
is unpigmented. This layer is the anterior extension of the
seconclary lens fibers are laid dlown arounc the central primary lens fibers.
sensory neuroretina, though it contains no neural elements.
Growth continues throughout life. (A modlified from Severin GA [2000]:
The outer layer is pigmented and is the anterior continuation of
Severin's Veterinary Ophthalmology Notes, 3rd ed. Severin, Ft. Collins,
the retinal pigment epithelium. The ciliary epithelium forms
CO.)
folds called ciliary processes (Figure 2-21). These processes
are the production site of the aqueous humor; they also serve as
derived from the neuroectoderm of the anterior rim of the optic
the anchoring site of the lens zonules, which suspend the lens 
cup. The iris stroma originates from the neural crest-derived
in the eye. The underlying ciliary muscle and stroma of the
secondary mesenchyme (see Figure 2-21). This mesenchyme
 ciliary body originate from the neural crest-derived secondary
continues to grow over the anterior part of the lens, covering
 mesenchyme; the power of the muscle's contraction and relax-
the hole that will be the future pupil with a membrana pupil-
ation is transferred through the ciliary processes and zonules to
laris, which replaces the anterior tunica vasculosa lentis at the
 the lens, changing its refraction and the focusing of the eye.
 same location (see Figures 2-19 and 2-22). This membrane
 The anterior rim of the optic cup forms the iris, which has
 contains branches from the major arterial circle of the iris that
two pigmented epithelial layers on its posterior face. These
form a vascular net over the iris and the pupil. However, strands
epithelial layers are continuous with the two layers of the
 of the membrana pupillaris may remain attached to the anterior
epithelium of the ciliary body. The sphincter and dilator smooth
 surface of the iris. These strands, known as persistent pupillary
muscles of the mammalian iris, which control the constriction
 membranes, are inherited as a homozygous recessive trait in the
 and dilation of the pupil through their antagonistic actions, are 
basenji.
28
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Anterior capsule
Major circle of the iris
Anterior
Cortex
epithelium
Adult nucleus
Anterior ciliary artery
 Long posterior
Fetal nucleus
Equator
ciliary artery
Muscular artery
Embryor
to lateral rectus
muscle
Equatorial
epithelium 
transforming
into secondary
Choroidal blood
Muscular vein
lens fibers
vessels
 Retinal blood ves
Posterior capsule
Figure 2-17. Acult lens showing the successive layers of the lens that are
Vortexvein
laic arounc the embryonal nucleus throughout life. (From Remington LA
[2005]: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nd edl. Butterworth-
Long posterior ciliary artery
Heinemann, St. louis.)
 Short posterior ciliary arteries
Central retinal artery
Central retinal vein 
Elongation of posterior epithelium
dary lens fiber migration
Figure 2-20. Horizontal section of the eye showing ciliary circulation.
(From Remington lA [2005]: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nd 
edl. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. Louis.)
Cornea and Anterior Chamber
The outer corneal epithelium derives from the surface ecto-
derm, but the inner layers, which include the corneal stroma
and corneal endothelium, derive from the secondary mesen-
chyme. Descemet's membrane is secreted by the endothelial cells
(see Figure 2-22). Further ingrowth of secondary mesenchyme
 occurs between the epithelium and endothelium, forming the 
corneal stroma.
Figure 2-18. lens ermbryogenesis. Left, Elongation of the posterior 
epithelium results in obliteration of the lens lumen. Right, Seconclary lens 
 Between the cornea and the lens two spaces develop: the
fiber migration leacls to the forrmation of the Y sutures. (From Yanoff M,
 posterior chamber between the iris and the lens, and the anterior
Duker J [2004]: Ophthalmology, 2nd edl. Mosby, St. Louis.) 
chamber between the iris and the cornea (Figure 2-23). After
the regression of the pupillary membrane, aqueous may flow
from the posterior chamber to the anterior chamber through the
pupil.
Arnterior vascular capsule
Sclera and Extraocular Muscles
(pupillary mermbrane)
 Neural crest-derived mesenchyme surrounds the optic cup and
forms two layers. The inner layer, which is adjacent to the
retina, is the choroid, and the outer layer is the sclera. Con-
 densation of the sclera begins anteriorly, near the ciliary body,
 and proceeds posteriorly to the optic nerve, where it is continu-
Pasterir
ous with the dura mater of the optic nerve. Extraocular muscles
form in the neural crest-derived secondary mesenchyme of
capsule
the orbit.
Capsulopupillary
portion
Eyelids and Third Eyelid
The lower eyelid and the third eyelid are formed by the
 maxillary process. The upper eyelid is formed by the paraxial
 mesoderm. During development the upper and lower eyelids
Hyaloid artery
 are fused (Figure 2-24). With time, these fused eyelids separate,
Figure 2-19. Hyaloid vasculature and primary vitreous cluring embryo-
although the age at which separation occurs varies among
logic ocular clevelopment. (From Yanoff M, Duker ] [2004]: Ophthalmology.
species. In horses, cattle, sheep, and pigs, lids open at 7 to 10 days
2nd ed. Mosby, St. louis.)
 postpartum. During the formation of the eyelids their inner surface
DEvELOPMENT AND CoNGENITAL ABNORMALITIES I
29
-Cornea
Conjunctiva-
Outer, pigmented 
 lris sphincter
epithelium
-lris
8.7
Ciliary body ~
B
 Ciliary processes
Sclera
-Lens
Posterior,
pigmented
Figure 2-21. A dliagrarm (A) and a photomicrograph (B) of the
iris epithelium
periphery of the anterior segment of the eye. The nonpigmented
epithelium is the innermost layer of the ciliary body, facing the
 Inner, nonpigmented
Zonules
vitreous, and is continuous with the sensory retina (not shown).
A
epithelium 
The pigmentec epithelium is the outer layer, facing the sclera, and 
is continuous with the retinal pigment epithelium (not shown).
These two epithelial layers continue anteriorly as the pigrmented
epithelium on the posterior aspect of the iris. The zonules (which
are the tertiary vitreous) suspend the lens from the ciliary
processes, anc their remnants can be seen in B. (Modifiec from
Remington lA [2005|: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nd 
edl. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. Louis.)
B
Future iris
 Optic cup   Corneal epithelium
Fused Anterior Posterior
Cornea
lids  chamber  chamber 
4.mm
Hyaloid
artery
-Future cornea
Anterior
Lens
chamber
Descemet
endothelium 
Retina
(mesothelium)
Pupillary
Posterior
membrane
chamber-
- Mesoderm
Figure 2-22. Formation of the anterior charmber ancd cornea. Note the
pupillary membrane, which replacec the anterior tunica vasculosa lentis,
covering the future pupil.
 Figure 2-23. Section through eye and orbit of 48-mm human embryo
(approximately 9.5 weeks). (Moclified from Rermington LA [2005|: Clinical 
Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nd ecl. Butterworth-Heinemann,
St. louis.1
(and the anterior sclera) is lined with palpebral conjunctiva
tarsus and dermis of the lids, but mesoderm contributes to the 
derived from the surface ectoderm. This ectoderm also contri-
formation of eyelid muscles.
 butes to the formation of lid epidermis, cilia, and a number of 
glands: the lacrimal and nictitating glands, which produce the
Nasolacrimal System
aqueous portion of the tear film; the tarsal meibomian glands,
which produce the lipid component of the tear film; and Zeiss
The nasolacrimal groove separates the lateral nasal fold from
(sebaceous) and Moll (sweat) glands. Neural crest-derived
the maxillary processes. At the bottom of the groove a solid
secondary mesenchyme contributes to the development of the 
 cord of ectodermal cells forms and gets buried as the maxillary
30
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
 including microphthalmia, cataract, retinal dysplasia, anterior
segment dysgenesis, and optic nerve hypoplasia. It is only by
Fused
Cornea ,
detailed study of anomalies that etiology and pathogenesis
eyelids
of the lesions are understood, and subsequent diagnosis and
evaluation simplified.
Anterior
chamber
The stage of development (e.g., embryogenesis, organogenesis,
or fetal period) at which a teratogenic factor acts is most 
Iris
important in determining the final effects on the eye.
Extraocular
muscles
 In this section common congenital abnormalities of the
 whole eye of domestic animals are considered. Abnormalities 
 of the individual parts of the eye are discussed in the relevant 
chapters.
Anophthalmos and Microphthalmos
Anophthalmos means the total absence of an eye. It may be
Figure 2-24. Light micrograph of 45-mm pig ermbryo. Eyelidls are fused,
caused by the suppression of the optic primordia during the
extraocular muscle is evident, and axons are evident in optic nerve.
 development of the forebrain, may be caused by the abnormal
(Moclified from Remington LA [2005l: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual
 development of the forebrain, or may be due to the degeneration
System, 2nd ed. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. louis.)
of the optic vesicles after they have already formed as a result 
of a teratogenic insult.
process grows over it to fuse to the lateral nasal fold. Two
 True anophthalmos is very rare, and its diagnosis is made
ectodermal buds grow from the proximal end of the buried cord
after histologic examination of the orbital contents has not shown
 toward the upper and lower lid folds near the nasal canthus. These
the presence of any ocular structure. Most instances of presumed
buds form the superior and inferior lacrimal puncta. The distal end
clinical anophthalmos are cases of extreme microphthalmos,
of the cord enters the ventral nasal meatus. The entire cord
 because some histologic evidence of a rudimentary eye can
becomes the nasolacrimal duct by a process of canalization.
 Incomplete canalization is common in domestic animals, resulting
Microphthalmos is an eye that is smaller than normal
in obstruction of the tear drainage. In dogs the puncta and the
(Figure 2-25). Microphthalmos is most frequent in pigs and
 upper half of the nasolacrimal duct are most commonly affected.
 In horses the nasal meatus of the duct may be imperforate.
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES
 Teratology is the branch of embryology that deals with abnor-
mal development and congenital malformations. It is important 
to remember that not all congenital abnormalities are necessarily
 inherited, as some may result from toxicity or disease during
 development. Conversely, not every inherited abnormality is
necessarily congenital. Many inherited disorders (e.g., cataract,
A
progressive rod cone degeneration) may be manifested later
in life.
 The most important determining aspect of the character of a
deformity is the stage of development at which the etiologic
agent acts. Factors acting during the early period of embryo-
result in gross deformities affecting the whole eye (e.g.,
anophthalmia, microphthalmia, and cyclopia). If the factor acts 
 during the fetal period, when the most fundamental and active
stage has been completed, minor defects of individual parts of
the eye caused by arests in development and associated
deformities due to aberrant growth may occur. Because much
of the development and differentiation of the eye occurs very
early in gestation (during the first 2 weeks in the dog), events
 initiated during this time may result in malformations in struc-
B
tures that do not fully mature until much later. Studies of the
Figure 2-25. A, Bilateral microphthalmia as part of a multiple ocular
effect of exposure to teratogens on ocular development have
clefects synclrome, which also inclucles clevelopmental cefects in the iris,
identified narrow, critical periods for induction of malformations;
lens, retina and embryonic hyalaid apparatus. B, Close-up of the right eye
for example, exposure during gastrulation (formation of the
of the same cog, highlighting the microphthalmia and iris abnormalities.
(Courtesy University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology
 mesodermal germ layer) results in a spectrum of malformations 
Service Collection.}
 DEVELOPMENT AND CoNGENITAL ABNORMALITIES |
31
Table 2-1 |
 Anomalies Associated with Microphthalmos
 In cyclopia the prosencephalon does not show cleavage;
in Dogs
there is one midbrain, one dorsal cyst, and a single optic nerve
and optic canal. The frontonasal process presents a proboscis
ANOMALY
DOG
(displaced nose) above the single orbit. The lids of the two eyes
Anterior segment clysgenesis
Saint Bernard
are fused around the single orbit. Cyclopia has been reported,
Doberman
in Idaho and Utah, in lambs borm to ewes that grazed on Veratrum
Cataract
Old English sheepdog
californicum on the fourteenth day of gestation and, in Western
Miniature schnauzer
 Australia, in lambs born to ewes that grazed on unknown toxic
Cavalier King Charles 
spaniel 
plants.
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous 
lrish wolfhound 
 Retinal clyspiasia
Saint Bernard
Coloboma
Dober man 
Modifed from Cook C (1995): Embryogenesis of congenital eye
Coloboma is a condition in which a portion of the eye, usually
mal formations. Vet Comp Ophthal 5:110.
a portion of the uvea, is lacking. Most colobomas (typical
colobomas) are due to an incomplete closure of the embryonic
optic fissure (Figure 2-27). These colobomas are usually
dogs. In pigs, vitamin A deficiency in the dam is the most
situated in the inferonasal portion of the eye. The extent of the
common cause. In dogs, microphthalmos occurs frequently as
coloboma may vary. Severe colobomas are associated with the
part of the collie eye anomaly. Administration of griseofulvin
formation of an orbital cyst (microphthalmos with orbital cyst),
 to pregnant cats for treatment of dermatomycosis has resulted
because the optic fissure failed to close and form a vesicle.
in anophthalmos or microphthalmos in their kittens. In white
Moderate colobomas may involve numerous ocular structures,
shorthorn cattle hereditary microphthalmos is associated with 
whereas mild cases may manifest as only a simple notch in the 
large lids and third eyelid, resulting in entropion because the
lower nasal quadrant of the pupil.
 small globe does not support the elongated lids.
 Atypical colobomas are not associated with the incomplete
Microphthalmos may occur in eyes that are otherwise
closure of the embryonic fissure and are not located in the
(functionally) normal, if all the intemal eye structures remain
lower nasal quadrant. They are usually due to lack of induction
 proportional in size. It may also occur in eyes with multiple
 of one tissue by another. For example, lack of induction by
ocular anomalies, including cataract, retinal dysplasia,
and
 retinal pigment epithelium may cause colobomas in the choroid
anterior segment dysgenesis (Table 2-1). In Jersey calves, an
and sclera, whereas lack of induction by the anterior rim of the 
autosomal recessive condition causes congenital blindness with 
 optic cup may result in aniridia, or lack of iris.
microphthalmos, aniridia (lack of iris), microphakia (small 
Colobomas of the optic nerve head may be seen in dogs
lens), ectopia lentis (malpositioned lens), and cataract. Lambs
 affected with collie eye anomaly (Figure 2-28) and in basenjis
grazing on seleniferous pasture in Wyoming were afflicted with
that present with persistent pupillary membranes. In cats,
microphthalmos, ectopia lentis or aphakia, optic nerve hypo-
plasia, persistent pupillary membrane, uveal coloboma, and
nonattachment of the retina. In Hereford cattle an encephalopathy-
Mesodermal vascular tissue
microphthalmos syndrome is inherited as a simple autosomal
recessive hereditary trait. Animals present with a domed skull,
Retina
degeneration of skeletal muscles, small palpebral fissures, small
orbits, retinal dysplasia, vitreous syneresis, microphakia, and
 bilateral microphthalmos.
Cyclopia and Synophthalmus
 In cyclopia there is a single eye. In synophthalmus the eyes are
fused in the midline (Figure 2-26). These conditions are
incompatible with life.
Pigment epithelium
Retina
Pigment epithelium
Figure 2-27. The closure of the fetal cleft. The margins come together
accurately {fop), but subsequently an excessive growth of the inner
(retinal) layer leacls to its eversion (bottom), causing a coloboma of the
Figure 2-26. Cyclopia in larmbs whose clam grazed on Veratrum
retina and posterior uvea. (Modlified from Duke-Elcer S [eclitorl [1963|:
californicum. (Courtesy University of Wisconsin-Maclison Veterinary
Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
Part 2: Congenital Deformities. Henry Kimpton, London.)
32
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
Bistmer SI,et al. (1973): Development of the bovine eye. Am I Vet Red 34:7.
Boroffka SA (2005):Utrasonogtaphicevaluation of pre-and posmatal
development of the eyes in beagles. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:72.
Collinson JIM, et al. (2004): Analysis of mouse eye development with
chimeras and mosaics. Int I Dev Biol 48:793.
Cook C (1995): Embryogenesis of congenital eye malformations. Vet Comp
Ophthal 5:110.
Cook C,et al.(1993): Prenata] development of the eye and its adnexa,in
Tasman Jaeger W (editor): Duane's Foundations of Clinical
Ophthalmology. JB Lippincott, Phildelphia, p. I.
Cook CS (1989): Experimental models of anterior segment dysgenesis.
Ophthalmic Paediatr Genet 10:33.
Cvek] A, Tamm ER (2004): Anterior eye development and ocular
mesenchyme: new insights from mouse models and human diseases.
Bioessays 26:374.
Duddy JA, et al. (1983): Hyaloid artery patency in neonatal beagles.
Am J Vet Res 44:2344.
Gould DB, et al.(2004): Anterior segment development relevant to glaucoma.
Int J Dev Biol 48:1015.
Gum GG, et al. (1984): Maturabion of the retina of the canine neonate as
detemined by electroreinography and histologyAmJVetRes45:1166.
 Figure 2-28. A coloborma of the optic nerve heac anc sclera as part of the
Jubb KF, Kennedy PC (1993): Pathology of the Domestic Animals, 4th ed,
 collie eye anomaly synclrome.
Vol I. Academic Press, New York.
McAvoy JW, et al.(1999): Lens development.Eye I3:425.
Mey J, Thanos S (2000): Development of the visual system of the chick:
colobomas in the lateral segments of the upper eyelids are
1.Cell differentiation and histogenesis.Brain Res Brain Res Rev 32:343.
       
do n ssoeoaa pue s xed o) uedsapnd
 allow facial hair to irritate the cormea and conjunctiva.
Genet Dev 12:430.
Provis IM (200l): Development of the primate retinal vasculature. Prog Rein
Eye Res 20:799.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Reza HM, Yasuda K (2004): Lens differentiation and crystallin regulalion:
a chick model. Int J Dev Biol 48:805.
Achiron R, et al. (2000): Axial growth of the fetal eye and evaluation of the
Jo sases Aea unp pn Axo [eamloaa (6el) r aapn
  s n  
mammalian embryogenesis. Mutat Res 12: 113.
Aguine G, et al. (1972): The development of the canine eye. Am I Vet Res
Sengpiel F, Kind PC (2002): The role of acivity in development of the visual
33:2399.
system. Curr Biol 12:R818.
Bailey TJ, et al.(2004): Regulation of vertebrate eye development by
Spencer WH (1996): Ophthalmic Pathology, 4th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Rx genes. Int J Dev Biol 48:761.
Stromland K, et al. (1991): Ocular teratology. Surv Ophthalmol 35:429.
Baker CV, Bronner-FTaser M (2001): Vertebrate cranial placodes I: embryonic
Zieske JD (2004): Comeal development associated with eyelid opening.
induction. Dev Biol 232:1.
Int I Dev Biol 48:903.
   e go    
Basel, Switzerland.
Chapter
OCULAR PHARMACOLOGY AND
THERAPEUTICS
David J. Maggs
THERAPEUTIC FORMULATIONS
IMMUNOMODULATING THERAPY
 PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGUES
ROUTES OF ADMINISTRATION
(IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS AND
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
ANTIBACTERIAL DRUGS
1MMUNOSTIMULANTS)
ENZYMES AND ENZYME INHIBITORS
ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS
MAST CELL STABILIZERS AND
TEAR REPLACEMENT PREPARATIONS
ANTIVIRAL DRUCS
 ANTIHISTAMINES 
("ARTIFICIAL TEARS")
CORTICOSTEROIDS
HYPEROSMOTIC AGENTS
MISCELLANEOUS THERAPEUTIC AGENTS 
NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY
AUTONOMIC DRUGS
PHYSICAL THERAPY
DRUGS
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
THERAPEUTIC FORMULATIONS
ROUTESOFADMINISTRATION
Although topical application of solutions, suspensions, and
The main factors governing choice of the route of adminis-
cintments is most common in ocular medicine, parenteral
tration are as follows:
methods of administration via a systemic (i.e., intravenous,
· Inherent properties of the drug
intramuscular, subcutaneous) or local (i.e., subconjunctival,
intraorbital, intracameral, intravitreous) route are also used.
· Site of desired action (surface or intraocular structures)
· Frequency of administration possible
Drugs for ocular administration are prepared in various ways.
· Drug concentration required at target tissue
The topical use of powders for ocular treatment is detrimental
·  Vascularity of the target tissue
to the eye and outmoded. Solutions, suspensions, and oint-
ments for topical application must have physical charac-
Some drugs, because of their properties, are restricted as to
teristics within a relative narrow range to be well tolerated.
 the routes by which they can be given. For example, polymyxin
Of these the most important characteristics are tonicity
B cannot be given systemically because of nephrotoxicity
and pH. These parameters must also be considered by
 or by subconjunctival injection because of local irritation.
compounding pharmacists when formulating drugs for topical
Drugs required in high concentration in the cornea or conjunctiva
ophthalmic use.
-qns io uode dn unba Aq paasue Ansn an
 Ophthalmic preparations must be sterile, especially if they
conjunctival injection. If high concentrations are required in the
enter the interior of the eye. Bacterial filtering and the addition
anterior uveal tract (ie., inis or ciliary body), subconjunctival
of preservatives such as benzalkonium chloride are used to limit 
 injection, systemic administration, or frequent topical application
contamination of multidose containers. However, these preser-
 of drugs that will pass through the intact cormea are used. Drugs 
vatives are also toxic to mammalian cells. This fact has a
 that do not pass through the blood-ocular barrier still reach high
number of important clinical implications:
concentrations in the highly vascular anterior uvea (iris and
ciliary body), posterior uvea (choroid), and sclera. With inflam-
· Topical drug use is not benign and should always be limited
mation the blood-ocular barrier may be reduced, and drugs that
to the lowest effective concentration, frequency, and
duration.
cannot normally enter the aqueous or vitreous humor may do
so. If high concentrations are required within orbital tissues,
· Drugs designed for topical use should not be used
systemic administration is usually used. Choice of route is
 intraocularly or injected, especially subconjunctivally.
summarized in Figure 3-1.
 Preservatives in ophthalmic drugs and diagnostic agents
The cormea may be considered a trilaminar (lipid-water-
 may interfere with diagnostic attempts to isolate and grow
 lipid) “sandwich," in which the epithelium and endothelium are 
microbes from the ocular surface.
relatively lipophilic and hydrophobic, whereas the stroma is
Although topical application of drugs provides excellent 
relatively hydrophilic and lipophobic. Lipid-soluble drugs (e.g,
drug concentrations at the ocular surface, there are two critical
 chloramphenicol) penetrate more readily, whereas electrolytes
barriers to penetration of drugs into the eye. These are the
 and water-soluble drugs (e.g., neomycin, bacitracin, and peni-
blood-ocular barrier (which, like the blood-brain barrier, is
 cillin) penetrate poorly if at all after topical application. The
impermeable to most drugs unless there is significant intra-
 lipophilic properties of the epithelium may be partially bypassed
ocular inflammation) and the cornea (which becomes more
 by subconjunctival injection, provided that other properties of
 permeable when ulcerated).
 the drug are suitable for administration by this route.
33
34
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
Figure 3-1. Sites of clrug acministration. A, Topically applied
ointments, suspensions, and solutions achieve high drug
concentrations on the corneal and conjunctival surface. Not al
 penetrate through the cornea and so are not uniformly useful for
treating intraocular dlisease. Penetration to the posterior segment
is extremely limited for all topical medlications. B, Sub-
conjunctival injections facilitate high crug concentrations at the
ocular surface anc provicle a variable-cluration clepot effect. Not
all dlrugs are tolerated at this site. lntraocular penetration varies
B
with crug type. C, lntraocular (intracameral or intravitreal)
injection of crugs is used rarely because general anesthesia is
neecled, serious ocular risks are associatecl with this route of
therapy. and alternative routes often provide equivalent
intraocular crug concentrations. D, Systemically aclministerec
dlrugs (oral or parenteral) reach all vascutar ocular structures but
are not celivered in useful concentrations to the avascular
structures, such as the cornea and lens. Intraocular penetration of
systemically acministered drugs clepencs on the patency of the
blood-ocular barrier and the lipophilityof the drug.
D
Higher or more prolonged drug concentrations and therapeutic
Solutions and Suspensions ("Drops")
effects may be achieved with the following approaches:
Ophthalmic solutions and suspensions (or “drops") are com-
· Increasing drug concentration in the topical preparation;
monly used for topical treatment of ocular disease. They are
for example, 1% prednisolone suspension results in higher
usually easily instilled in dogs and cats but not in large animals.
 intraocular concentrations than does 0.5% suspension
The correct method for instilling eyedrops is shown in Figure 3-3.
(Figure 3-2).
 Drops permit the delivered dose to be controlled and varied
· Increasing the frequency of application; for example,
easily, and they are alleged to interfere less with repair of
 topical administration every 10 minutes for an hour results
comeal epithelium than ointments, although this last feature is
in higher concentrations than does a single application.
unlikely to be clinically significant. Drops are quickly diluted
?
 Slowing absorption. Drugs released over a long period can
and eliminated from the eye by tears, so greater frequency of
be used to maintain drug concentrations. This is one
application or drug concentration may be required, especially
 mechanism whereby subconjunctival administration leads to
 with increased lacrimation. It is important to note that systemic
higher topical concentrations of drug because of delayed
absorption of drugs from the conjunctival sac after topical
release (*"leakage'") of drug back along the injection tract.
application is rapid and may result in notable blood
 Penetration of topically administered drugs can also be
 concentrations. This may be of clinical significance with use of
enhanced through the use of preparations that maintain longer 
 phenylephrine (producing systemic hypertension) and long-term
contact with the eye before being washed away by the tears 
corticosteroid use (inducing iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism).
(e.g., ointments, suspensions, or more viscous solutions).
 Facilitation of passage of drug between epithelial cells by
limited and controlled damage of the intercellular adhesions
of the epithelium with a surface-active preservative such as
 benzalkonium chloride (an additive in some drugs).
Flucdrocortisone 0.1%
Cortisone 2.5%
Hydrocortisone 2.5%
Prednisolone 0.5%
Dexamethasone 0.1%
Figure 3-3. Correct method of instilling an eyedrop. The lower eyelicl is
Prednisolone 1.0%
held open with the hanc being used to restrain the patient's heacl. The
upper eyelid is retracted with the hand holdling the medlication. The
Figure 3-2. Relative antinflammatory action of various corticosteroid 
medlication container is held 1 to 2 cm from the eye, ancd a single clrop is 
preparations. Note that prednisolone (1.o%) and cexamethasone are
instilled. Care must be taken to avoicd the bottle touching the eye because
relatively more potent than hyclrocortisone. (Modifiec from Havener WH
this may injure the ocular surface or cause contarmination of the dlrug
[1994]: Ocular Pharmacology, 6th edl. Mosby, St. Louis.]
remaining in the bottle.
OcuLaR PhaRMAColoGY ANd TheRapeutics I
35
Continuous or Intermittent Ocular Surface
Subpalpebral lavage systems placed in the medial aspect
Lavage Systems
of the lower lid are associated with less common and less severe
ocular complications than those placed centrally and dorsally, even
With frequent treatment or in horses with painful eyes, a lavage
when left in place and used by owners for up to 55 days after
system allows medications to be conveniently, safely,
and
discharge from hospital. The lavage tube leads back to the
frequently delivered into the conjunctival sac. Originally, such
shoulder, where it is secured at the mane and where drugs can be
systems were placed within the nasolacrimal duct and medi-
administered with less risk of injury to the eye or the operator.
cations were instilled in a retrograde fashion. More recently
 Drugs are injected into the tube and either slowly propelled to the
subpalpebral lavage systems have been described that are
eye with a gently administered bolus of air from a syringe or
simply placed and avoid nasal irritation and risk of dislodge-
 continuously propelled by a gravity-fed botle or small mechanical
ment. A two-hole technique through the skin of the upper
 infusion pump connected to the tube. This method of therapy is
eyelid has now been replaced by single-hole systems, owing to
usually reserved for horses with severe cormeal or uveal disease. A
the commercial availability of lavage systems with footplates to
 protective eyecup can be applied over the lavage tube for
prevent inadvertent removal. The original one-hole system was
protection of the eye and apparatus. Ointments (and some more 
placed in the central upper lid but is associated with a relatively
viscous suspensions) cannot be applied through lavage systems.
high risk of complications, most notably corneal ulceration due
to rubbing of the footplate on the cornea. Placement of the sub-
Ointments
palpebral lavage system in the ventromedial conjunctival fornix
may be preferred because of the natural corneal protection
 In horses the orbicularis oculi muscle is very powerful, and
 provided by the third eyelid at that point (Figure 3-4).
it is impossible to tilt the head to allow a drop of solution to
二
C
D
Figure 34. Placerment of a subpalpebral lavage systerm in the meclial
aspect of a horse's lower eyelidl. A, A local (subcutaneous) injection of
liclocaine is acministeredl. B, The palpebral and fornicial conjunctival
surfaces are anesthetized with proparacaine-soaked cotton-tipped
applicators held in place for 1 or 2 minutes. C, A trocar is used to
penetrate the lower lid from the conjunctival fornix, anc the lavage tube
is threacled through it. D, The trocar is removed, anc the lavage tube is
pulled down until it lies snugly in the ventral conjunctival fornix between
the thirc eyelic anc lower licl. E, The lavage tube is suturec in place with
aclhesive tape tabs, and an injection port is placed at its terminus near the
mane on the same sicle as the affectedl eye.
36
| SlATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
enter without contaminating the bottle. Ointments are preferred
auriculopalpebral nerve block to produce akinesia of the upper
in such patients. Ointments also allow longer contact between
lid (see Chapter 5). A few drops of topical ophthalmic anes-
the drug and surface tissues. Finally, less drug enters the
 thetic (e.g., proparacaine) are instilled into the conjunctival sac.
nasolacrimal apparatus. Therefore ointments achieve higher
Conjunctival anesthesia is facilitated by a cotton-tipped
tissue concentrations than solutions or suspensions do. A
 applicator soaked in topical anesthesia and placed against the
soothing effect occurs on instillation, they are a more stable
 conjunctiva at the planned injection site for about 30 seconds.
medium for labile antibiotics and drugs, and they also provide
 The solution for subconjunctival injection then is administered
physical lubrication and protect against desiccation better than
through a 25- to 27-gauge needle with a 1-mL tuberculin or
solutions do. However, because oily ointment bases cause
insulin syringe under the bulbar conjunctiva as close as poss-
severe intraocular inflammation, and because application of
ible to the lesion being treated (Figure 3-6). Injection under
ointments may result in ocular trauma from the tube itself,
the palpebral conjunctiva is not effective. The needle is rotated
cintments are not recommended when globe perforation has
on withdrawal to limit leakage through the needle tract. Up
 occurred or is likely. Because they make tissue handling diffi-
to 1 mL of drug can be given beneath the bulbar conjunctiva,
cult and cause granulomatous inflammation if they penetrate
but most injections do not exceed 0.5 mL. Slight hemorrhage
ocular surface structures, ointments should also not be used
into the injection site occasionally occurs but is absorbed
before ocular or adnexal surgery. Finally, owners tend to over-
within 7 to 10 days. Injections of depot preparations should be
medicate when using ointments, resulting in loss of medication,
avoided at this site because they often lead to granuloma
higher cost, and lower compliance with treatment regimens. As
formation.
 little as 0.5 cm of ointment from a fine nozzle is suffcient to
medicate an eye.
Supplies for subconjunctival injection are topical anesthetic, a
 cotton-tipped applicator, a 1-ml syringe (tuberculin or insulin),
Subconjunctival, Subtenons, and Retrobulbar Injection
a 25- to 27-gauge needle, and solution for injection.
Subconjunctival injection permits a portion of the administered
 Retrobulbar injection is used rarely and only for treatment of 
drug to bypass the barrier of the corneal epithelium and
 disease processes in the orbit or posterior half of the globe. These
 penetrate transsclerally. However, a notable proportion of the
areas can usually be treated adequately with safer and simpler
injected drug leaks back out the injection tract and is absorbed
systemic routes of treatment. Therefore this route of therapy is
as if it had been administered topically. Subconjunctival
 now generally limited to the injection of local anesthetic into the
administration is used to facilitate high drug concentrations in
muscle cone behind the globe for removal of the bovine eye.
anterior regions of the eye, whereas deeper injections beneath
Tenon's capsule allow greater diffusion of drugs through the
Systemic Drug Administration
sclera and into the eye. Mydriatics (for pupillary dilation),
antibiotics, and corticosteroids are the main groups of drugs
Although there are rare exceptions, systemically administered
administered by this route. Some irritating drugs (e.g.,
 drugs should be considered to reach only the vascular tissues of
polymyxin B) or any topical drug containing a preservative
 the eye and surrounding structures—that is, not the cornea, the
lens, or (in the presence of an intact blood-ocular barrier)
sympathomimetic or vasopressor effects also should not be
the aqueous or vitreous humor. This knowledge may be used to
 given in this manner.
the clinician's advantage. For example, systemic administration
 In cooperative patients, subconjunctival injections can be
of a corticosteroid for control of uveitis in the presence of
 given using topical anesthesia only. Handheid lid retractors
 corneal ulceration is safe and effective, because the target tissue
may be helpful in all species (Figure 3-5). For horses and
(the uvea) is vascular, but the drug will not reach the avascular
cattle, one should also consider tranquilization, appropriate
 cornea in quantities suffcient to retard healing. Equally, the
restraint (a twitch for horses and nose grips for cattle), and an
systemic administration of an antibiotic for treatment of
A
B
Figure 3-5. A, Hancheld lid retractors. B, Retractor in use.
OCULAR PHARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEUTICS 
37
A
B
needl is inserted beneath the bulbar conjunctiva. Care must be taken not to penetrate the globe. B, The
medication injected forms a noticeable bleb that recluces in size over the next few minutes to hours. (Courtesy
Dr. David Ramsey.)
an ulcer in a nonvascularized cornea is of little value, and
often are used interchangeably. Antibacterial agents may be
topical administration is most effective. Therefore systemically
classified as bactericidal (destroying bacteria) or bacteriostatic
administered drugs should be reserved for treatment of diseases of
(inhibiting bacterial growth and reproduction; Box 3-1). Some
the eyelids, conjunctiva, sclera, uvea (iris, ciliary body, choroid),
antibiotics may act in either manner, depending on concen-
retina, optic nerve, extraocular muscles, and orbital contents
 tration. Combining bactericidal and bacteriostatic antibiotics
 As with other body systems, intravenous, subcutaneous, and
may result in antagonism between the agents, although the
intramuscular injections provide relatively high plasma con-
clinical importance of this effect is debated. In particular, com-
centrations of a drug to the vascular components of the eye.
 binations of bactericidal drugs infrequently used elsewhere in
However, because continuous treatment is necessary for many
the body are commonly employed in topical treatment of the
ocular disorders, oral drug administration by owners is used
eye. This practice allows a wider spectrum of activity than with
most frequently, particularly in dogs and cats. Continuous intra-
single drugs and reduces the chance of drug resistance. The
muscular administration is used occasionally in large animals.
combination of neomycin, polymyxin B, and bacitracin (or
Intravenous therapy is rarely used for ocular disease, with
 gramicidin) as so-called triple antibiotic is very useful. For
 the important exception of the administration of mannitol for
resistant infections combinations of agents with differing
reduction of intraocular pressure (IOP) and vitreous volume in 
mechanisms are sometimes used—for example, a penicillin or
acute glaucoma.
cephalosporin (which inhibits cell wall synthesis) with an amino-
 Intraocular drug concentrations attainable by systemic routes
 glycoside (which inhibits intracellular protein synthesis).
depend on the following three important factors:
 Absorption of the drug from the injection site or
Selection and Administration of Antibiotics
 gastrointestinal tract, and the plasma concentrations reached
The following factors must be considered in the selection of an
Vascularity of the target tissue
· Properties of the drug with respect to the blood-ocular
antibiotic:
barrier. Systemically administered drugs will not reach
· The offending organism and its sensitivity
those areas of the eye "protected" by an intact blood-ocular
· Location of the organism
barrier (the vitreous, aqueous humor, and retina). In 
· Penetration of available drugs to that site
inflamed eyes, this barrier is usually much less effective.
·Pharmacokinetics of the available drugs
Some examples reinforce these general points. Although
· Spectrum of activity of available drugs 
penicillin is readily absorbed by intramuscular injection, peni-
cillin G is poorly absorbed orally because it is destroyed by
Box 3-1 | 
 Classification of common ophthalmic
gastric acid. Even when adequate plasma concentrations are
antibiotics
achieved, it penetrates the blood-ocular barrier poorly. By con-
trast, chloramphenicol is well absorbed by dogs after oral
 administration and, once in the plasma, passes the blood-
Bactericidal
Bacteriostatic
aqueous barrier well. From these examples, it follows that the
Aminoglycosides
Chloramphenicol
clinician must understand the properties of the individual drugs
Bacitracin
Cephalosporins
used in order to predict their applicability for ophthalmic use.
Erythromycin*
Erythromycin*
Fluoroquinolones 
Tetracyclines
ANTIBACTERIAL DRUGS
Potentiated sulfonamides
Neomycin
Penicillins
Antibacterial drugs act by altering cell wall synthesis, protein 
 Polymyxins
synthesis, or cell wall permeability in bacteria but may also 
Vancomycin
have undesirable effects on the cells of the patient. Although 
not strictly accurate, the terms antibiotics and antibacterials
*Depending on concentration and organism.
38
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
· Toxicity of available drugs
Table 3-1 | Normal Flora of the Canine Conjunctival Sac 
· Owner compliance
 PERCENTAGE OF CASES
AREA AND FLORA
WITH POSITIVE CULTURES
The ideal basis for selection of an ocular antibiotic consists of
 identification of the responsible organism and its antibiotic sensi-
WESTERN UNITED STATES*
tivity. However, obtaining this information often cannot be
 Diphtheroids
75.0
justified because of expense or because treatment must be
 Staphylococcus epidermidis
46.0
Staphyltococcus aureus
instituted before the results of such testing are available. Therefore
24.0
Baciltus spp.
12.0
knowledge of the most likely organisms, their sensitivity, and the
Gram-negative organisms
7.0
 most likely effective antibiotics is necessary. Treating infections on
(Acinetobacter, Neisseria,
such an empirical basis, although practical and often unavoidable,
Moraxella, and Pseudomonas spp.!
does not always lead to a satisfactory result. A more rational
 Streptococcus spp. (α-hemolytic)
4.0
Streptococcus spp. (β-hemolytic)
choice of therapeutic agent can be made after examination of the 
2.0
staining and morphologic characteristics of organisms seen on a
 MIDWESTERN UNITED STATESt
Gram-stained or Diff-Quik-stained sample of the affected tissue
S. epidermidis
55.0
 and is essential in severe or nonresponsive infections. In more
S. aureus
45.0
 Streptococcus spp. (α-hemolytic)
severe infections (e.g., stromal comeal ulcers or endophthalmitis),
34.0
 Diphtheroids
30.0
the organism should be identified, and a combination of routes of 
Neisseria spp.
26.0
administration and synergistic drugs should be considered. If
Pseudomonas spp.
14.0
ocular infections persist or recur despite treatment with the
 Streptococcus spp. (β-hemolytic)
7.3
 appropriate antibiotic (based on results of culture and sensitivity
EASTERN AUSTRALIA*
testing), the infection may be secondary to an underlying disorder 
S. aureus
39.0
or pathologic process. Alternatively, a fastidious bacterium or 
Baciltus spp.
29.0
Corynebacterium spp.
19.0
 nonbacterial microbe not originally cultured (Chlamydophila
S. epidermidis
16.0
spp., Mycoplasma spp., fungus, virus, etc.) may be present.
Yeasts
5.0
Organisms commonly isolated from the conjunctival sacs of
 Streptococcus spp. (o-hemolytic)
3.0
normal and diseased animals are given in Tables 3-1 through
 Streptococcus spp. (nonhemolytic)
3.0
 3-9. These tables highlight a number of important general
Micrococcus spp.
3.0
Neisseria spp.
 points about ocular surface flora that are relevant when inter-
2.0
 Streptococcus spp. (β-hemolytic)
1.0
 preting these data in an individual patient:
Pseudomonas spp.
1.0
Nocardia spp..
· There are marked species, individual, geographic, and
1.0
Escherichia coli
1.0
seasonal variations in the normal ocular surface flora.
Clostridium spp.
1.0
The normal conjunctival sac often contains potential pathogens.
Enterobacter spp.
1.0
Because of the variety of organisms present, empirical
Flavobacterium spp.
1.0
Branhamelfa catarrhatis
treatment with standard antibiotics may be unsuccessful.
1.0
 Care is advisable in interpretation of frequency and
*Data from Bismer SI, et al. (1969): Conjuncival bactenia: clinical
sensitivity data from different geographic areas.
appearances can be deceiving. Mod Vet Pract 50:45.
· In vitro sensitivity data may not necessarily reflect in vivo
fData from Urban W, et al. (1972): Conjunchival flora of clinically nomal
experience when one is using topically applied antibiotics,
dogs. Am I Vet Med Assoc 161:201.
Data from McDonald PJ, Watson ADI (1976): Microbial flora of nommal
because high surface concentrations can be achieved.
canine conjuncivae. I Small Anim Pract 17:809.
 Previously untreated infections seen in general practice may
?
have a different spectrum of sensitivity from those reported
Because it is unstable at low pH, oral administration is not
 in referral hospital populations.
 possible, so the agent is administered by injection. Because of
The following sections provide a summary of some impor-
 its high water solubility, penicillin G does not penetrate the
tant properties of antibiotics used commonly in veterinary
 intact cornea when applied topically and does not pass through
ophthalmology, and Table 3-10 lists the typical Gram-staining
 the intact blood-ocular barrier. It is most effective against gram-
characteristics of, and the antibiotics of choice for, common
 positive organisms, but it is susceptible to β-lactamase. For all
organisms.
of these reasons penicillin G does not have a great number of
uses in veterinary ophthalmology, with perhaps the exception
Penicillins
of subconjunctival  injection for treatment of susceptible
 infections and in situations in which frequent applications
The penicillins form a large family of natural and synthetic
of medication are inconvenient (e.g., infectious bovine
 derivatives of 6-aminopenicillanic acid that range considerably
keratoconjunctivitis).
 in stability, solubility, spectrum of activity, ocular penetration,
 and resistance to β-lactamase.
Sodium Methicillin
Penicillin G
Methicillin is resistant to β-lactamase and is used by intra-
venous infusion for resistant staphylococci. Renal excretion is
 Penicillin G is soluble in water, attains high concentrations in
rapid. Because the drug is unstable in solution, it should be
blood, and is excreted in urine in 4 to 6 hours. Penicillin G is
dissolved just before use. Methicillin can be used topically or
available in crystalline, procaine, and benzathine forms.
by subconjunctival injection for corneal infections. Methicillin
 OcULAR PhARMACOLoGY AND THERAPEutiICS |
39
Table 3-2 | Organisms Cultured from Dogs with External
Table 3-4 | Fungal Flora from Normal Horses (50 Horses)
Ocular Disease
 PERCENTAGE OF CASES WITH
PERCENTAGE OF
ORGANISM
POSITIVE CUITURES
CASES WITH
AREA AND FLORA
 POSITIVE CUITURES
Aspergiltus spp.
36.0
Ciadosporium spp.
34.0
THE NETHERLANDS*
Positive but no quantitative data given: Afternaria, Fusarium,
Streptococcus canis
20.3
Monotospira, Paecifomyces, Phoma, Puutaria, Scoputariopsis,
No growth
18.7
 Streptomyces, Trichoderma, Verticuium spp.
 Staphylococcus epidermidis
14.0
Modifed from Smith PJ, et al. (1997): Identification of sclerotomy sites for
Staphyfococcus aureus
7.8
Other nonpathogenic Streptococcus spp.
posterior segment surgery in the dog. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 7:180.
7.8
Nocardia spp.
7.8
Absidia ramosa (fungus)
7.8
Table 3-5 | Organisms Cultured from Horses with 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
6.1
External Ocular Disease (123 Eyes)
Corynebacterium spp.
4.6
Other pathogenic S. canis spp.
3.1
PERCENTAGE OF CASES WITH
Proteus vulgaris
3.1
Clostridium perfringens
ORGANISM
 POSITIVE CUITURES
1.5
Candida spp.
1.5
 Streptococcus spp. (total)
43.9
COLORADO
β-Hemolytic
26.0
S. aureus
68.0
Other hemolytic
17.9
27.0
'dds snooonoydeis
S. epidermidis
24.4
19.0
Pseudomonas spp.
iouau-d) dds snonodas
13.8
Bacillus spp.
 Streptococcus spp. (α-hemolytic)
17.0
10.6
Enterobacter spp.
Proteus mirabilis
11.0
6.5
Escherichia coff
10.0
Escherichia cofi
4.0
5.0
Corynebacterium spp.
Bacillus spp.
3.2
Corynebacterium spp.
Profeus spp.
3.0
3.2
P aeruginosa
2.0
Aspergiltus spp.
2.4
Klebsielta spp.
Kiebsielta spp.
1.0
2.4
Moraxella spp.
2.4
ILLINOIS*
Pasteurella spp.
2.4
Staphylococcus spp.
39.4
Mima spp.
1.6
29.0
Diplococcus spp.
Coagulase positive
0.8
Staphyfococcus intermedius
17.0
Flavobacterium spp.
0.8
11.0
Fusarium spp.
S. epidermis
0.8
Streptococcus spp.
Neisseria spp.
25.2
0.8
17.0
Nocardia spp.
0.8
Pseudomonas spp.
Penicillium sp.
9.4
0.8
Rhizopus spp.
0.8
*Data from Verwer MAJ, Gunnick JW (1968): The occunence of bacteria in
Trichosporon spp.
0.8
chronic purulent eye discharge. J Small Anim Pract 9:33.
Data from Murphy JM, et al. (1978): Survey of conjunclival flora in dogs
Data from McLaughlin SA, et al. (1983): Pathogenic bactena and fungi
with clinical signs of extemal eye disease.J Am Vet Med Assoc 172:66.
 associated with extraocular disease in the horse. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Data from Gerding PA, et al. (1988): Pathogenic bacteria and fungi
182:241.
associated with external ocular diseases in dogs: 131 cases (1981-1986).
 J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:242.
Table 3-6 | Normal Flora of the Bovine Conjunctival Sac 
 PERCENTAGE OF CASES
Table 3-3 | Normal Flora of the Feline Conjunctival Sac 
AREA AND FLORA
WITH POSITIVE CUITURES
 PERCENTAGE OF CASES 
NORTHEASTERN AUSTRALIA
WITH POSITIVE CULTURES 
 Unicdentified gram-positive cocci
54.4
AREA AND FIORA
CONJUNCTIVA
1IDS
Corynebacterium spp.
27.4
Moraxefla nontiquefaciens
26.9
WESTERN UNITED STATES
 Streptococcus faecalis
20.0
Staphylococcus epidermidis
16.3
13.3
No growth
13.4
 Staphyfococcus aureus
10.4
8.8
Neisseria (Branhamelta) catarrhalis
10.5
Mycoptasma spp.
5.0
(nonhemolytic)
Baciltus spp.
2.9
1.7
Uniclentified gram-negative rods
8.5
 Streptococcus spp. (a-hemolytic)
2.5
1.7
Acinetobacter spp.
8.0
Corynebacterium spp.
1.3
Moraxella bovis
6.5
Escherichia coli
0.4
Coliforms 
6.5
 Staphyfococcus aureus
4.1
Data from Campbel L(1973): Ocular bactera and mycoplasma of the
Moraxetla fiquefaciens
2.2
clinically normal cat. Feline Pract Nov-Dec: 10.
Bacilus spp.
1.3
Unclassified Moraxefla
1.0
Actinobaciltus spp.
0.7
Proteus spp.
0.0
Data from Wilcox G (1970): Bacterial flora of the bovine eye with special
Teference to Moraxella and Neisseria. Aust Vet J 46:253.
40
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 3-7 | Normal Flora of the Ovine Conjunctival Sac
Amoxicillin and Ampicillin
PERCENTAGE OF CASES
 Ampicillin is a broad-spectrum penicillin that is often effective
AREA AND FLORA
WITH POSITIVE CUITURES
against Escherichia coli and Proteus spp. and may be given
EASTERN AUSTRALIA
 orally, intramuscularly, or subconjunctivally. Although it enters
 No growth
60.0
the aqueous humor to some extent, ampicillin is not the agent
Neisseria ovis
24.0
of first choice for gram-negative infections, because the high
Micrococcus spp.
ZQD
Streptococcus spp.
ZQD
Corynebacterium spp.
ZQD
the aqueous humor. Amoxicillin has a spectrum of activity
Achromobacter spp.
ZQD
similar to that of ampicillin but is better absorbed from the
Bacillus spp.
ZQD
gastrointestinal tract than ampicillin. Both ampicillin and
Moraxeffa spp.
ZQD
 amoxicillin are susceptible to β-lactamase. Amoxicillin reaches 
Data from Spradbrow P (1968): The bacterial flora of the ovine conjunclival
blood concentrations two to three times higher than those
sac. Aust Vet J 44: 117.
of ampicillin after oral administration, but both drugs enter
NQD, No quantitative data (present in small numbers, but NQD given).
the uninflamed eye to about the same degree. Because it
inhibits β-lactamases, clavulanic acid is added to preparations
Table 3-8
 Normal Bacterial Flora of South American
 of amoxicillin. This preparation is useful in initial treatment of 
Camelid Eyes (88 Animals)
chronic staphylococcal blepharitis—-in which the staphylococci
 PERCENTAGE OF CASES 
are often β-lactamase producers—and orbital cellulitis,
ORGANISM
WITH POSITIVE CULTURES
which may involve anaerobic bacteria implanted from the
oral cavity.
GRAM-POSITIVE
 Staphyfococcus spp.
58
Bacillus spp.
28
Cephalosporins
Streptomyces spp.
18
α-Hemolytic Streptococcus spp.
13
A range of cephalosporins is available. They are generally
Corynebacterium spp.
8
similar to the penicillins in mechanism of action and pharma-
Micrococcus/Planococus spp.
7
cology but are less susceptible to staphylococcal β-lactamases.
GRAM-NEGATIVE
 A type of β-lactamase (cephalosporinase) produced by some
Pseudomonas spp.
41
gram-negative organisms may inactivate them. Cephalosporins
Pasteurelta ureae
Klebsielta spp.
have had excellent results when administered subconjunctivally
Escherichia cofi
or topically via lavage tube to horses with corneal ulceration,
particularly those infected with Streptococcus spp. They are
Data include lama, alpaca, and guanaco eyes and are from Gionfiddo IR,
 also very useful for bacterial blepharitis. Cefazolin is the anti-
et al. (1991): Bacterial and mycoplasmal flora of the healthy camelid
biotic of choice for perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis in
conjunctival sac. Am I Vet Res 52: 1061.
small animal surgery.
Table 3-9 |
 Normal Fungal Flora of South American
Camelid Eyes (127 Animals)
Chloramphenicol
 PERCENTAGE OF CASES
 Chloramphenicol is a broad-spectrum bacteriostatic antibiotic
ORGANISM
WITH POSITIVE CUITURES*
effective against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-
Aspergiltus spp.
negative organisms, Ricketsia, spirochetes, and Chlamydophila
20-43
Fusarium spp.
2-30
spp. However, Pseudomonas aeruginosa is often resistant.
Rhinocladiefla spp.
8-35
Because of its lipid solubility, chloramphenicol passes the
Penicilium spp.
3-33
 blood-ocular barrier and through corneal epithelium better than
Mucor spp.
5-14
most water-soluble antibiotics. Chloramphenicol may be
 Dematiaceous fungi
12-33
administered orally, intramuscularly, subcutaneously, intra-
Data include lama, alpaca, and guanaco eyes and are from Gionfiddo JR,
venously, subconjunctivally, or topically. Because absorption
et al. (1992): Fungal flora of the healthy camelid conjuncival sac. Am J Vet
after oral administration results in high blood concentrations,
Res 53:643.
this is the route of choice for infections in the posterior
*Percentages vanied according to season and camelid species.
globe and orbit. Despite controversial toxicity studies in
cats, the drug has been used clinically over many years
with few ill effects except anorexia and occasional pyrexia
may be expected to enter the aqueous humor in therapeutic
in some cats after systemic administration, provided that
concentrations when the blood-ocular barrier is disrupted by
 administration is not prolonged. Because of its wide spectrum
inflammation.
 of activity and intraocular penetration, chloramphenicol as
an ointment or drops was widely used in veterinary practice
Sodium Oxacillin
 for ocular surface injuries and infections, but its use is
 declining in favor of bactericidal antibiotics. Polymyxin B is
Oxacillin is resistant to β-lactamase; it is also acid-stable and
often added to aid in control of gram-negative organisms,
may be used orally. Unfortunately, much of it is bound to
especially Pseudomonas spp. It is still useful in the topical
 plasma protein in the circulation and cannot enter the aqueous
treatment of suspected Chlamydophila infections in cats,
humor, even in an inflamed eye. Oxacillin is useful in orbital
although systemically administered drugs are preferable (see
and adnexal infections when given orally.
Chapter 7).
 OcULAR PHARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEU TiICS 
41
 Table 3-10 | Antibiotics of Choice for Common Organisms
ORGANISM
DRUG OF CHOICE
ORGANISM
 DRUG OF CHOICE
GRAM-POSITIVE COCCI
FUNGI AND YEASTS
Staphylococcus spp.
Neomycin
Fusarium spp.
Natamycin 
Bac itracin
Thiabendazole
Amoxicillin
Aspergitus spp.
Amphotericin B
Cephalosporins
Erythromycin
Ketoconazole
Fluoroquinolones
Itraconazole
Centamicin
Flucytosine
Staphyfococcus aureus
Nystatin
Oxacillin
Candida spp.
Nystatin
Methicillin
Amphotericin B
Cephalospor ins
Flucytosine
Fluoroquinolones
Ketoconazole
Staphyococcus epidermidis
Neomycin 
Itraconazole
Gentamicin 
Cryptococcus spp.
Ketoconazole
Erythromycin
Itraconazole
Fluoroquinolones 
Streptococcus spp.
Flucytosine
Penicillin 
Penicilium spp.
Natamycin
Chloramphenicol
Blastomyces and Histoplasma spp.
Ketoconazole
Amoxicillin
Itr aconazole
Cephalosporins
Amphotericin B
Microsporon spp.
GRAM-NEGATIVE COCCI
Ketaconazole
Neisseria spp.
Trichophyton spp.
Itraconazole
 Penicillin 
Epidermophyton spop.
Griseofulvin
Tetracyclines
Sulfonamides (± trimethoprim) 
ACTINOMYCETES
GRAM-POSITIVE RODS
Actinomyces spp.
Penicillin
Corynebacterium spp.
 Penicillin 
Tetracyc lines
Nocardia spp.
Chloramphenicol
Tetracyclines
(± streptomycin)
 Sulfonamicles (± trimethoprim)
(± isoniazid)
GRAM-NEGATIVE RODS
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
 Polymixin B
CHLAMYDIA
Chtamydia and Chlamydophila spp.
Azithromycin
Gentamicin
Tobramycin
Doxycycline
Amikac in
Tetracyclines
Chloramphenicol
Fluoroquinolones
Escherichia cofi
Chloramphenicol
MYCOPLASMA
Tetracyclines
Mycoptasma spp.
Tetracyclines
Gentamicin
Erythromycin
Fluoroquinolones
Enterobacter spp.
Amoxicillin (± streptomycin)
Chloramphenicol
Proteus spp.
Gentamicin 
Fluoroquinolones 
Tobramycin
Amikac in
Chloramphenicol
'dds snydowah!
Amoxicillin 
Tetracyclines
Moraxella spp.
Penicillin
Tetracyclines
Aminoglycosides
as a topical agent of first choice for bacterial prophylaxis.
Given its relatively narrow effective spectrum, and because this
Neomycin
spectrum encompasses gram-negative organisms, which are not
 Neomycin is a particularly useful bactericidal agent for ocular use
commonly found as part of the ocular surface flora, such use 
and is active against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria,
is questionable. As a result of this over-use, the value of
including Staphylococcus aureus. Bacterial resistance develops
gentamicin for treatment of more resistant organisms is now
less readily to neomycin than to streptomycin, and neomycin is
markedly diminished. Gentamicin is variably effective against
more effective against Proteus vuigaris than is polymyxin B.
many strains of S. aureus, Pseudomonas spp., E. coli.
Because of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity, neomycin is
 Aerobacter, Klebsiella spp., and Proteus spp. Topical appli-
 administered only topically or by subconjunctival injection.
cation does not result in high intraocular concentrations, and
Topical hypersensitivity to neomycin occasionally develops.
although some drug enters the eye after subconjunctival or
intravenous injection, vitreous penetration is poor regardless of
Gentamicin
 route of administration. Long-term systemic therapy is limited
by ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Gentamicin (like other
Gentamicin (perhaps only because of its relatively low cost)
aminoglycosides) causes cataract and severe retinal degener-
has unfortunately been used frequently and indiscriminately
 ation when injected intraocularly.
42
I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Tobramycin
Azithromycin
Similar to gentamicin, tobramycin is effective against
 Azithromycin is the first of a subclass of macrolide antibiotics
β-lactamase-producing staphylococci and is synergistic with
termed azalides. It is characterized by high and prolonged
carbenicillin in the treatment of resistant Pseudomonas infec-
tissue concentrations after oral administration and has been
tions. Resistance to tobramycin is less frequent, probably
used for Chlamydophila felis infections in cats. However,
because of its more recent introduction. It is also ototoxic and
results of a recent experimental study in specific pathogen-free
 nephrotoxic when given systemically but may be administered
cats suggest that although azithromycin and doxycycline both
topically. The injectable form (but not the topical drug) may
reduce chlamydophilal shedding and signs of infection in a
 also be administered via subconjunctival injection.
similar manner, the duration of this effect on shedding is tem-
 porary with azithromycin. Azithromycin has also been sug-
Amikacin
gested as a therapeutic agent for Toxoplasma gondii.
 Organisms that are resistant to gentamicin, neomycin, and
Sulfonamides
tobramycin may be susceptible to amikacin. However, when
 other aminoglycosides are effective, amikacin has no advantage
Although sulfonamides are bacteriostatic and act by blocking
 over them. Amikacin is ototoxic and nephrotoxic but may
be
utilization of para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) by bacteria,
administered topically and subconjunctivally. Its use should
 potential sulfonamides in more common use are bactericidal.
be restricted to Pseudomonas spp. and other bacteria resistant 
Sulfonamides inhibit many gram-positive and some gram-
to alternate aminoglycosides. For Pseudomonas infections, a
negative organisms, including Pseudomonas spp. As a class,
 proposed order of choice for usage is neomycin, gentamicin,
 sulfonamides tend to have the same range of therapeutic action
tobramycin, and amikacin.
and exhibit mutual cross-resistance. Drugs that are esters of
PABA (e.g., procaine, tetracaine) and purulent exudates that
Bacitracin
 contain PABA interfere with the action of sulfonamides. The
action of gentamicin against Pseudomonas spp. is inhibited by
 Bacitracin is effective against gram-positive organisms and is
sulfacetamide. For all of these reasons, topically administered
not inactivated by inflammatory exudates; bacterial resistance 
sulfonamides have largely been replaced by other topical anti-
to it develops rarely. Bacitracin is used very frequently in
biotics. Because other antibiotics are more effective for intra-
combination with one or more agents effective against gram-
 ocular infection, systemic sulfonamides also are rarely indicated
negative organisms for surface infections of the lids,
 in ophthalmic therapy, with the possible exception of treatment
conjunctiva, and cornea and is particularly useful for staphy-
of ocular toxoplasmosis. Several sulfonamides are confrmed
 lococcal blepharoconjunctivitis in dogs. Intraocular penetration 
 causes of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs, but tear production
 after topical application is poor, and because of nephrotoxicity,
 in horses is unaffected by these agents.
bacitracin is not used systemically
Fluoroquinolones
Polymyxin B
 Fluoroquinolones are potent, bactericidal agents active against
 Polymyxin B is used largely because of its activity against
a broad range of bacterial pathogens. They exert their action
Pseudomonas spp, which may cause rapid and devastating
 by inhibiting DNA gyrase. Plasmids capable of transferring
 infections of the cornea in dogs, horses, and cats because of
 resistance to quinolone activity are now known, and resistance
antibiotic resistance and protease production. Polymyxin B is
to fluoroquinolones by mutation has been demonstrated in
also effective against E. coli but not against Proteus spp.
numerous bacterial species. Fluoroquinolones are generally
Although this agent does not penetrate intact corneal
rapidly absorbed after oral administration, with peak serum
epithelium significantly, corneal ulcers will allow therapeutic
 concentrations reached in 30 to 60 minutes. Typical minimum
concentrations to be achieved in the stroma. Polymyxin B
 inhibitory concentrations for commonly encountered organisms
causes severe chemosis and necrosis after subconjunctival
are presented in Table 3-11.
 injection and should not be used via this route.
Enroffoxacin and Orbiffoxacin
Tetracyclines
Enrofloxacin and orbifloxacin are similar agents. Enrofloxacin
Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum bacteriostatic antibiotics;
 is metabolized to ciprofloxacin. Enrofloxacin enters the tears in
however, Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, and Proteus spp. are
inhibitory concentrations for most common pathogens. It is
usually resistant. Intraocular penetration is very poor regardless
eliminated by glomerular filtration and biliary secretion. Both
of route of administration. To avoid permanent dental dis-
agents are useful for staphylococcal infections of the eyelids
 coloration, tetracyclines should not be administered systemically
and orbital area but have limited effect against anaerobic
to young animals. Tetracyclines are useful in treatment of
bacteria often found in orbital cellulitis and abscesses. Because
infections with Chlamydophila and Mycoplasma spp. in cats.
they disrupt cartilage synthesis, enrofloxacin and orbifloxacin
Systemic administration to dogs affected with periocular stain-
are not typically recommended in dogs of the smaller breeds
 ing from pigments in the tears results in a decrease in staining
between 2 and 8 months of age, in larger breeds until 12 months
while the drug is being administered. Long-acting parenteral
of age, and in giant breeds until 18 months of age.
 tetracycline preparations are effective for treatment of Moraxe lla
Retinal degeneration has been demonstrated after the
 bovis infection in cattle.
clinical and experimental use of enrofloxacin in cats. Typically,
 OcULAR PhARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEu TiICS |
43
 Table 3-11 | Minimum Inhibitory Concentrations of Fluoroquinolones for Common Organisms
ENROFLOXACIN
ORBIFLOXACIN
CIPROFLOXACIN
(μg/mL)
(μg/mL)
(μg/mL)
Staphylococcus spp.
0.125
0.195->25
3.13-50.0
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
0.5-8.0
0.39->25
2.0-4.0
Escherichia coli
0.016-0.031
0.012-6.25
>2.0
Proteus mirabitis
0.062-0.125
0.39-1.56
0.5-2.0
 affected cats are presented for rapid vision loss with widely
mycoses; the reader should refer to Chapter 6 of this text and a
 dilated pupils. No age, breed, or sex predilection has been
dermatology text for current diagnostic and therapeutic approaches.
 determined, and no consistent underlying condition for which the 
Table 3-12 lists the major antifungal drugs used in the treatment of
enrofloxacin was prescribed has been identified. The single and
the systemic mycoses in veterinary medicine, along with their
cumulative doses of enrofloxacin incriminated and the duration of
 predicted spectra and penetration of various tissues. The following
therapy before onset of blindness vary; however, in a published
section discusses some of these agents commonly used for
retrospective series, only one cat believed to be affected received
treatment of patients with fungal endophthalmitis or keratitis.
less than 5 mg/kg once daily. Mydriasis is an early sign of toxicity
in some animals. A striking feature of this toxicity is the rapidity
Natamycin
with which funduscopic evidence of retinal degeneration (tapetal
hyperreflectivity and retinal vascular attenuation, sometimes with
Natamycin is the only commercially available antifungal agent
mottling of the nontapetal fundus) appears to occur. In some cases 
formulated and licensed in the United States for topical
retinal degeneration is advanced at presentation, sometimes
 ophthalmic use, although it is expensive. It is available as a 5%
within days of starting the drug. No evidence of pain or
 ophthalmic suspension, which is viscous but will pass through 
inflammation is noted, and no treatment is possible other than
ocular lavage systems in the horse without causing obstruction.
cessation of the drug. The extent to which vision is regained is 
It is effective against a broad variety of fungi, including Candida,
variable but usually minimal. Histopathology of affected
Aspergillus, Cephalosporium,Fusarium, and Penicillium spp.
retinas has revealed outer retinal degeneration, with diffuse loss 
of the outer nuclear and photoreceptor layers, and hypertrophy
Azoles
and proliferation of the retinal pigment epithelium. Electro-
retinographic abnormalities have also been demonstrated. At
Itraconazole, k
ketoconazole, fluconazole, voriconazole,
present, enrofloxacin dosage in cats should not exceed 5 mg/kg
clotrimazole, and miconazole are members of the azole group.
daily, and this dose may be best divided. It is important to note
They are especially useful for the treatment of systemic and
that enrofloxacin is not licensed in the United States for
ocular Cryptococcus spp. and Coccidioides immitis infections.
parenteral use in cats.
Side effects in dogs include inappetence, pruritus, alopecia, and
reversible lightening of the hair coat. In cats, anorexia, fever,
 depression, and diarrhea may occur. Long-term therapy, up to
Ciprofloxacin, Ofloxacin, and Others
6 months or longer, may be necessary because the drugs are
An increasing array of topical ophthalmic fluoroquinolone
fungistatic. Most azoles do not cross the blood-ocular barriers
solutions is becoming available. Some recent additions are
well. The exceptions are fluconazole and voriconazole. In
ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, norfloxacin, levofloxacin, gatifloxacin,
horses administered an oral loading dose of fluconazole
and moxifloxacin. These drugs are especially valuable in mixed
(14 mg/kg) followed by a daily maintenance dose (5 mg/kg) for
or virulent surface infections, especially deep or rapidly pro-
10 days, drug concentrations in the aqueous humor exceeded
 gressive comeal ulcers. They should be used only until bacterial
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for many fungi
sensitivity results are available, and definitely not for general
(although some studies suggest that Aspergillus spp. are
prophylaxis against surface infection. All of these topical
relatively resistant to fluconazole). By contrast, itraconazole
fluoroquinolones penetrate through the cornea, even when the
was not detected in the aqueous humor after oral or intravenous
epithelium is intact, and are found in the aqueous humor after
administration in horses.
topical instillation of drops.
 The intravenous forms of miconazole and fluconazole have
been administered topically in some horses, and some practitioners 
ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS
choose vaginal miconazole preparations (without alcohol) for
topical cormeal use. A compounded formulation of itraconazole
Important ophthalmic fungal infections may be considered in
with dimethyl sulfoxide ointment has been shown to penetrate the
the following three categories:
cormea well and was effective in resolving keratomycosis in 80%
of horses treated in the northeasterm United States. Finally, there
· Infections of the eyelids and surrounding skin
· Intraocular infection (usually endophthalmitis) associated
are recent data showing that topically applied voriconazole (1%) is
well tolerated, penetrates the cornea very well, and achieves
with penetrating foreign bodies or systemic mycoses, such
 therapeutic concentrations in the aqueous humor.
as cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and
coccidioidomycosis
· Mycotic keratitis following cormeal penetration or ulceration
Flucytosine
 Fungal infections of the eyelids and surrounding skin are
Flucytosine has activity against Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, and
 treated with the same therapeutic agents as used for dermato-
Candida spp. and is known to cross the blood-brain barrier in
44
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 3-12 I Antifungal Agents Used in the Treatment of Systemic Mycoses
 DRUG NAME/FORMULATION/
CLASS
MANUFACTURER
PHARMACOLOGY
INDICATIONS
 Echinocandins
Caspofungin/intravenous/Merck
Metab: liver
 Patients refractory to or intolerant of
Elim: bile/feces
amphotericin B or ltraconazole B
RF*: No change
or ltraconazole
CNS+: <10%
Abs: none
 Pyrimicdines
 Flucytosine/oral/CN 
Metab: none
Azole resistance, infections caused
Elim: renal
by Candida spp. or Cryptococcus spp.
RF*: redluce dose
%52SN
Abs: 90%
Azoles
 Fluconazole/oral or intravenous/generic
Metab: liver
 Infections caused by Candida spp. or
 Elim: renal 
Cryptococcus spp.,+ with CNS
RF*: reduce dose
involvement
CNS+: >60%
Abs: 90%
Itraconazole/oral or intravenous/] anssen
Metab: GI/liver
Coccidioides, Aspergilfus,
 Elim: feces/bile
nonmeningeal Blastomyces or
RF*: reduce dose
Histoptasma, intolerance to
CNS+: <10% 
amphotericin B
Abs: 10%-20% capsules
50% oral solution
Ketoconazole/oral/generic
Metab: GI/liver
Candida, Blastomyces, Histoptasma,
 Elim: bile/feces
Chromomyces spp.
RF* none
CNS+: <10%
Abs: 75%
Voriconazole/oral or intravenous/Pfizer
Metab: GI/liver 
Acute or refractory Aspergiltus,+
 Elim: bile/feces
Candida krusei, Candida glabrata,
RF*: none 
 Scedosporium, and Fusarium
CNS+: 75%
Abs: 96%
 Polyenes
Amphotericin B ceoxycholate/
Metab: none
 Life-threatening infections clue to
 intravenous/Geneva
 Elim: bile/feces 
Aspergillus, Btastomyces, Candida,
RF*:reduce dose
Coccidioides, Cryptococcus,
CNS+: <10%
Histoptasma, Sporotrix, Zygomyces
Abs: none
 Amphotericin B colloicdal dlispersion/
Metab: none
As above. Use in patients with RF or 
 intravenous/lntermune
Elim: bile/feces
 toxicity to amphotericin B
RF*: reduce dose
deoxycholate.
CNS+: <10%
Abs: none
 Amphotericin B lipid complex/ 
Metab: none
As above
intravenous/Elan
 Elim: bile/feces 
RF*: reduce dose
CNS+: <10%
Abs: none
 Liposomal armphotericin B/
Metab: none
 As above. Use in those patients with
 intravenous/Fujisawa
Elim: bile/feces
refractory disease, with intolerance
RF*: reduce dose
to above, or with CNS involvement.
CNS+: <10%
(CNS penetration may be
 greater than others)
Abs: none
From Wiebe V, Kaiker M (2005): Therapy of systemic fungal infections: a phamacologic perspechive. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 20:250.
Abs, Oral bioavailability; CNS, central nervous system; Elim, elimination; GI, gastrointeshinal; Metab, metabolism; RF, renal failure.
*Dose adjustment required in RF.
Percent of plasma concentration in CNS.
tFungal disease in which the listed agent is the drug of choice.
 OcULAR PhARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEu TiICS |
45
reasonable concentrations. It likely does cross the blood-ocular
Idoxuridine
barriers as well. It has been used in combination with
ketoconazole for treatment of feline endophthalmitis and
Idoxuridine is chemically similar to thymidine, one of the
meningitis due to Cryptococcus spp.
constituents of nucleic acids, which it replaces during DNA
synthesis, thereby inhibiting viral replication. Idoxuridine is no
Amphotericin B
longer commercially available in North America but can be
 compounded as a 0.1% solution or 0.5% ointment. It penetrates
Amphotericin B may be used topically, subconjunctivally, or
the intact comea poorly after topical application but is generally
parenterally. It has a wide range of activity against fungi but is
well tolerated by cats. It must be applied at least 5 times daily.
also toxic to host cells. Because of systemic toxicity and the
serious nature of lesions for which it is used, amphotericin B
Trifluridine (Trifluorothymidine)
should be used only in institutions in which adequate
supportive care and laboratory monitoring are available. More
Trifluridine inhibits DNA polymerase and thymidine synthetase
recently lipid-complex formulations have been developed that 
 and is the most active agent against feline herpesvirus in vitro.
reduce toxicity. Amphotericin is used for treatment of systemic
 In humans with herpetic keratitis the dosage recommended is
infections with Histoplasma, Blastomyces, Cryptococcus, and
 1 drop applied every 2 hours until reepithelialization occurs,
Coccidioides spp.
then every 4 hours for another 7 days. An effect should be seen
within 7 days. Obviously this dosage is often impractical in
ANTIVIRAL DRUGS
animals. Like other antiviral agents, though, trifluridine should 
be used at least 5 times daily. Trifluridine may be extremely
The use of antiviral drugs in veterinary ophthalmology is
irritating to cats, and it tends to be the most expensive agent when 
restricted to treatment of herpetic keratoconjunctivitis due to
purchased in its commercial form. These factors make it a less
feline herpesvirus (FHV-1) in cats or, occasionally, equine
viable choice despite its antiviral efficacy.
herpesvirus (EHV-2) in horses. Systemically administered anti-
viral agents can be associated with significant toxicity and must
Vidarabine
be used with caution. In addition, all currently available anti-
viral agents are virostatic, and most penetrate the cornea
Vidarabine interferes with viral DNA synthesis, and is
poorly. Therefore all currently available antiviral agents require 
moderately active against FHV-1 replication in vitro. It is usually
frequent topical application to be effective. Therapeutic effects
well tolerated when applied topically as an ointment.
are best achieved by applying solutions every 2 hours. Clearly
this frequency is impossible in many veterinary situations;
Acyclovir and Valacyclovir
however, very frequent application of ointments or solutions
    a is ( s 9 o 5 s e)
Acyclovir is widely available as a systemic drug but in some
continued until active inflammation and ulceration disappear.
countries is also available in a topical (ophthalmic) preparation.
Herpetic keratitis is resistant to cure in some individuals, and no
The in vitro efficacy of acyclovir against FHV-1 is low. This
antiviral agent has been proven to act against latent FHV-1 in the
 feature is compounded by relatively low bioavailability after
trigeminal ganglia. Recurrences are therefore common and
oral dosing in cats. Finally, cats receiving acyclovir sometimes
should be expected in susceptible animals. A number of agents
show toxic adverse effects. Taken together, this combination
have been tested in vitro against FHV-1 and have shown marked
 of features makes acyclovir an unsatisfactory drug for the
variability in potency (Table 3-13). Idoxuridine and vidarabine
treatment of FHV-1 in cats. Doses as high as 100 mg/kg in cats
 are often preferred in feline herpetic keratitis because of cost and
failed to achieve plasma acyclovir concentrations that approxi-
efficacy and because they are well tolerated by most cats. None of
mated those shown to be effective against FHV-1 in vitro, and
the agents has proven activity against other feline viruses.
yet produced clinical evidence of toxicity in some cats. The
principal toxic effects seen in cats are leukopenia and anemia.
 Although normalization of complete blood count (CBC) values 
Table 3-13 
 Relative In Vitro Potency of Select Antiviral
usually accompanies withdrawal of acyclovir therapy and
Agents against Feline Herpesvirus
appropriate supportive care, toxicity significantly limits use of
ANTIVIRAL DRUG
EDso (mm)
this drug for treatment of FHV-1 in cats.
Valacyclovir is absorbed more readily than is acyclovir and
Trifluricline
0.67
 then is metabolized to acyclovir. Unfortunately, this enhanced
Ganciclovir
5.2
 bioavailability is associated with fatal hepatic and renal necrosis
ldoxuridine
4.3-6.8
Cidofovir
11.0
 in cats, and valacyclovir must not be used in cats.
 Penciclovir
13.9
Vidarabine
21.4
[doxuridine and vidarabine are the preferred topical antiviral
 Acyclovir
57.9-85.6
 agents for cats infected with FHV-1. Acyclovir is ineffective,
Foscarnet
232.9
and valacyclovir is toxic.
Data from Nasisse MP, et al. (1989): In vilro susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-
I to vidarabine, idoxuridine, tiflunidine, acyclovit, or bromovinyldeoxyuridine.
Am J Vet Res 50:158: and Maggs DJ, Clarke HE (2004): In viro efficacy of
CORTICOSTEROIDS
ganciclovi, cidofovi, enciclovi,foscamet,idoxundine,and acyclovir against
feline herpesvirus type-1. AmJ Vet Res 65:399.
EDso, Effective doseso (or the in vitro concentation that is associated with
Although frequently misused with disastrous results, cortico-
suppression of viral growth to 50% of that seen without drug).
steroids are among the clinician's most useful and powerful
46
| SIATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
drugs, with specific properties, indications, and contra-
 more lasting lowering of IOP. Corticosteroids induce production
 indications that must be understood.
of an inhibitor of phospholipase Az and therefore act on both
 The following are good general rules to help govern oph-
the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways, whereas non-
thalmic use of corticosteroids:
a  n (sar s  os
 cyclooxygenase pathway (see Figure 3-7). At a physiologic
· Corticosteroids must not be used topically or subconjunctivally
level corticosteroids decrease cellular and fbrinous exudation,
 when fluorescein indicates a comeal epithelial defect.
 inhibit degranulation of mast cells, decrease release of inflam-
 Corticosteroids should not be used unless a diagnosis has
 matory mediators including prostaglandins, inhibit fibroblastic
been made and a specific immunologic or inflammatory
 and collagen-forming activity, retard epithelial and endothelial
response is to be inhibited.
regeneration and repair, diminish postinflammatory neo-
 Every "red" eye should be stained with fluorescein and its
vascularization, inhibit humoral and cell-mediated immune 
 IOP should be measured before indiscriminate therapy with
 responses, and tend to restore normal permeability to inflamed
 corticosteroids is initiated.
capillaries. As such, they can cause devastating progression of
· For nonulcerative corneal disease or intraocular disease, a
 some ocular diseases, especially those with an infectious com--
penetrating topical corticosteroid such as prednisolone or 
 ponent. However, they are particularly useful in treating ocular
dexamethasone must be administered. Hydrocortisone does
disease when correctly used, because severe or chronic inflam-
not penetrate the cornea.
mation that would be desirable in other organs and tissues (e.g..
· For inflammatory disorders of the eyelids, posterior
 fbrous tissue formation and contraction, neovascularization,
segment, optic nerve, or orbit, corticosteroids must be
infiltration with inflammatory cells) may be particularly
 administered systemically, not topically.
damaging in the eye if allowed to proceed unchecked.
Perhaps the most important ocular indication for corti-
Properties of Corticosteroids
costeroids is the control of inflammation that accompanies
immune-mediated ocular diseases, such as lens-induced uveitis,
 Prostaglandins are formed from arachidonic acid via the cyclo-
 chronic superficial keratitis ("pannus"), nodular granulomatous 
oxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways in response to irritating
episcleritis (NGE), and uveodermatologic (Vogt-Koyanagi-
or immunologic stimuli (Figure 3-7). When prostaglandins are 
 Harada-like [VKH-like]) syndrome. It is essential to appreciate
released intraocularly, they cause miosis, a rise in aqueous
that these ocular diseases are like immune-mediated disease
humor protein concentration, vasodilation within the conjunc-
elsewhere-
that is, they tend to have a waxing-waning course
tiva and iris, and a very transient rise in IOP, followed by a
 and are often recurrent, with each episode doing more permanent
 Cell membrane damage 
 Release of membrane
Corticosteroids
phospholipid
Phospholipase A2
Nonsteroidal
Arachidonic acid
antinflammatory drugs
Cyclooxygenase
Lipoxgenase 
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes
 Ocular inflammation 
 Chemotaxis
Vascular permeability
 Intraocular
changes
pressure changes
Vasodilation
Miosis
Blood-ocular
barrier breakdown
Figure 3-7. The arachidonic acid cascacle and effects on ocular structures. Corticosteroicls inhibit phospholipase
A2 and therefore both arms of the inflammatory cascace. Nonsteroidal antinflarmmatory drugs inhibit the
cyclooxygenase pathway only. (Modlified from CGiuliano EA [2004]: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory dlrugs in 
veterinary ophthalmology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:708.)
 OcULAR PhARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEu TiICS |
47
Blindness
Figure 3-8. The course of chronic/recurrent intraocular
Corticosteriod
or ocular surface inflammation can be modified by
therapy
antinflarmmatory therapy. The dliagram illustrates
Control by treatment, relapse with tapering of treatment,
control by more intense treatment, and, finally.
quiescence. (Modlified from Corclon D [1959]: The
treatrment of chronic uveitis: preliminary comments on
chronic clegenerative cliseases. Arch Ophthalmol
May continue
62:400.)
Course of
although suppressed
inflammation
May eventually
subside
damage to the globe (Figure 3-8). Severe ophthalmic inflam-
· The salt used: Acetates are more lipid-soluble and penetrate
mation, no matter how brief, or chronic inflammation, even if 
the cornea better than succinates or phosphates.
mild, often results in loss of vision and must be treated
· Frequency of application: More frequent application results 
vigorously if irreparable damage is to be averted. In these
 in higher intraocular concentration.
 diseases a rapid diagnosis must be made, corticosteroid therapy
Concentration of the drug: Low concentrations of a highly
begun early, clinical signs of inflammation monitored closely,
 potent steroid may have less antinflammatory effect than a
and therapy tapered slowly to avoid progression. If the clinical 
high concentration of a less potent steroid; for instance,
effect is less than desired, it is often better to increase the
topical 1.0% prednisolone has an antinflammatory effect
frequency of dosage rather than changing the concentration of
similar to that of 0.1% dexamethasone, although
dexamethasone has a greater ocular antinflammatory
Corticosteroids reduce resistance to many microorganisms
 potency than prednisolone (see Figure 3-2).
 and should not be used in their presence without coincident use 
· Proximity to the site of inflammation: The route of
of an effective antimicrobial agent. Accurate differential
administration is chosen in relation to the intended site of
diagnosis is essential whenever steroids are used. In addition to
action (see Figure 3-1). Inflammation of the cormea,
potentiating microbial infection corticosteroids increase the
conjunctiva, or anterior uvea is usually treated topically with a
activity of proteases present in cormeal ulcers by up to 13 times,
penetrating corticosteroid, or occasionally with subconjunctival
often resulting in rapid collagenolysis ("melting") of the cornea 
injection. Systemic therapy is required if involvement of
with rupture of the globe and prolapse of the ocular contents.
adnexal, posterior uveal, retinal, optic nerve, or orbital tissues is 
Likewise, although inhibition of collagen formation and
suspected. The retrobulbar route is also effective for disorders
fbroblastic activity by corticosteroids is useful in reducing
of the choroid, retina, optic nerve, and orbit but is rarely used.
cormeal scarring, it may be detrimental to the healing of surgical
wounds, requiring that suture removal be delayed. Ocular
%o'l jo uaensiuimpe ieidon siapros renoo rsou ro
 discharge or pain in any patient undergoing corticosteroid treat-
prednisolone or 0.1% dexamethasone is advised. Hydro-
ment requires immediate cessation of the corticosteroid and a
cortisone, a low-potency corticosteroid, does not penetrate
prompt and complete ophthalmic examination.
the cornea in any meaningful quantities. This feature renders
Topically administered corticosteroids also are known to
it useless for intraocular or deep comeal disease. Its avai lability
elevate IOP. This issue has been most closely invesigated in
 only in combination with three antibiotics in commercial
humans, in whom a familial susceptibility to ocular hyper-
 preparations makes it an even less appropriate choice for most 
tension from topical dexamethasone use is noted.
.Small
surface eye disease of dogs, cats, and horses.
increases in IOP also have been recorded experimentally
in
beagles with inherited open-angle glaucoma and in cats in
Most injectable steroids are suitable for subconjunctival use,
 response to topical corticosteroids, but clinically significant 
 with periods of activity varying from 7 to 10 days (triamcinolone,
complications resulting from such pressure elevations have not
dexamethasone) to 2 to 4 weeks (methylprednisolone). Care
been reported.
must be taken with repository forms given subconjunctivally
because they may leave unsightly and sometimes inflamed
Ocular Penetration of Corticosteroids
subconjunctival plaques requiring surgical removal. Repository
corticosteroids also have the distinct disadvantage that they
Dexamethasone, betamethasone, prednisolone, prednisone,
cannot be removed if the disease process changes.
triamcinolone, and hydrocortisone are used commonly in
veterinary ocular therapy. A variety of other corticosteroids
Long-Term Therapy
used in human ophthalmic therapy because they are less likely
to raise IOP are not widely used in veterinary ophthalmology.
 Unlike with the human eye, long-term topical therapy with
Corticosteroids penetrate the cormea to varying extents when
corticosteroids does not predispose the canine eye to glaucoma
 applied topically. Factors affecting the penetration and effect of
or cataract. Occasional statements that such treatment results in
 a corticosteroid are as follows:
fungal superinfection (infection with unusual organisms) are
48
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
not supported by research evidence. However, long-term
etodolac have become available for veterinary use, typically
topical usage in dogs may cause increases in liver enzymes and,
for uveitis or postoperative analgesia. Systemic nonsteroidal
especially in smaller dogs, adrenal suppression, and these
drugs inhibit disruption of the blood-ocular barriers (aspirin
effects should be taken into account in interpretation of
and flunixin, 70% to 80%; dexamethasone and flunixin, 61%;
laboratory tests and in management of patients with hepatic or
 aspirin, 50%; carprofen, 71%). Etodolac has similar ophthal-
endocrine disorders. Perhaps the most common clinical
mic uses but also causes keratoconjunctivitis sicca in some
scenario in which the systemic effects of a topically applied
 dogs. When given orally these drugs sometimes result in gastric
corticosteroid may be important is the treatment of lens-
ulceration and hemorrhage. This effect is not related to hydro-
induced uveitis due to cataracts in diabetic dogs. Although serious
chloric acid production per se, and cimetidine has not been
clinical disturbances due to such treatment occur infrequently,
 proven to have a protective effect in dogs. However, the ulcero-
the lowest concentration and frequency that produce the
 genic effects of orally administered NSAIDs may be reduced
 desired clinical effect should be used, or an NSAID considered.
by the concomitant oral administration of misoprostol. All
In particularly susceptible animals on continuous therapy,
drugs in the NSAID class should be used with caution and
 occasional laboratory evaluation should be considered.
 never in association with systemic corticosteroids.
Topical NSAIDs, including indomethacin, flurbiprofen,
Long-term use of topical corticosteroids may cause reversible
suprofen, diclofenac, and ketorolac, are available and may be
adrenocortical suppression or may disrupt management of
used in place of topical corticosteroids, compared with which
diabetes mellitus. Clinical consequences in otherwise healthy
they appear to be slightly less potent but also less likely to
patients are rare.
inhibit would healing. They are used for the same conditions
that corticosteroids would be but may be preferred in diabetic
 or cushingoid patients owing to their lack of systemic adreno-
General Indications for Corticosteroid Use
cortical effects. Topical NSAIDs inhibit breakdown of the
blood-aqueous barrier by 80% to 99% in research studies.
General indications for use of corticosteroids are as follows:
Clinical use of NSAIDs is summarized in Table 3-14.
· Immune-mediated ocular disorders (seasonal allergic
IMMUNOMODULATINGTHERAPY
conjunctivitis, drug and contact allrgies, chronic superficial
(IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS AND
keratitis or "pannus,” eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis,
IMMUNOSTIMULANTS)
episcleritis, some cases of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, lens-
induced uveitis, uveodermatologic (VKH-like) syndrome, etc.)
Various drugs are used to modulate (upregulate or downregulate)
Traumatic conditions resulting in severe inflammation
the host immune response. A complete discussion of these
(proptosis of the globe, contusion with hyphema)
agents is beyond the scope of this book, and only those currently
Anterior uveitis
 used for specific ocular disorders in animals are referred to.
 Postoperative immunomodulation (e.g., after corneal
 transplant or cataract extraction)
Azathioprine
· Reduction of postoperative swelling and inflammation after
cryosurgery (e.g., cyclocryotherapy or cryoepilation for
Azathioprine is an antimetabolite and T-cell suppressor used to
distichiasis or eyelid tumors)
treat severe immune-mediated diseases of dogs in which an
 infectious organism is not suspected, such as uveodermatologic
NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY
syndrome (VKH-like syndrome), serous retinal detachments,
DRUGS
nodular granulomatous episcleritis, and optic neuritis. It may
be used alone or in combination with corticosteroids if they
 Numerous NSAIDs have an important place in ophthalmology
have failed when used alone. The immunosuppressive effects
because of their potency, the destructive ocular effects
of
of azathioprine may not be evident or complete until 3 to
uncontrolled inflammation, and the sometimes undesirable
 5 weeks after initiation of therapy, and additional agents may
effects of corticosteroids. NSAIDs inhibit the cyclooxygenase
be necessary during this period. The recommended initial dose
 pathway but not the lipoxygenase pathway; therefore they tend
for most immune-mediated disorders in dogs is 2 mg/kg daily.
to be less potent than corticosteroids. Carprofen, which inhibits 
 This should be tapered at about 1 week to 0.5 to 1 mg/kg every
cyclooxygenase-2, represents the newer class of more selective
second day, and reduced again to 1 mg/kg once weekly as soon
cyclooxygenase inhibitors that are claimed to have fewer and
as clinical signs permit it. Lower doses and shorter durations
lesser deleterious effects on prostaglandin synthesis in the
may be used if responses are rapid. Plasma hepatic enzyme
gastrointestinal tract and kidneys. The original systemic agents 
 concentrations, total white blood cell count, and platelet count
used for ocular disorders in animals were acetylsalicylic acid
should be monitored every 2 weeks for the first 8 weeks, then
(aspirin), and flunixin meglumine. Although flunixin is not 
at least monthly during therapy. Elevations of liver enzymes
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
may occur, especially if corticosteroids are used concurrently.
use in dogs, there are a number of studies describing its use in
This drug is less safe in cats, for which alternatives should
this species.
be sought.
Many NSAIDs are available for human use, but, because of
severe side effects, caution must be used in extrapolating their
Cyclosporine
systemic use to animals. For example, ibuprofen, naproxen, and
indomethacin should not be used systemically. Recently
Cyclosporine suppresses production of the lymphokine
carprofen, ketoprofen, piroxicam, meloxicam, deracoxib, and
 interleukin-2 by helper T lymphocytes and enhances function
 OcULAR PhARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEu tiICS |
49
Table 3-14 | Clinical Use of Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
DRUG
SPECIES
INDICATION
DOSE, ROUTE, FREQUENCY
Carprofen 
Dog
Surgical
≤ 4.0 mg/kg 1V, SC, IM once at induction 
Antinflarmmatory
≤ 2.2 mg/kg PO q12-24h PRN 
Cat
Surgical
≤ 4.0 mg/kg SC lean weight once at induction 
Horse
Antinflammatory
0.7 mg/kg iV, PO q12-24h PRN 
 Flunixin meglumine 
Dog
Surgical
0.25-1.0 mg/kg 1V, SC, 1M q12-24h for 1-2 treatments 
Cat
Surgical
0.25 mg/kg SC q12-24h for 1-2 treatments 
Horse
Antinflammatory
1.1 mg/kg 1V, IM, PO q12-24 h 
Meloxicam
Dog
≤ 0.2 mg/kg IV, SC once 
≤ 0.1 mg/kg 1V, SC, PO q12-24h thereafter 
Antinflammatory
≤ 0.2 mg/kg PO once
≤ 0.1 mg/kg PO q24h thereafter
Cat
≤ 0.2 mg/kg SC, PO once 
≤ 0.1 mg/kg SC, PO lean body weight q2-3d
Antinflammatory
≤ 0.2 mg/kg SC, PO once 
≤ 0.1 mg/kg SC, PO lean bodly weight q2-3d
Horse
Antinflammatory
0.6 mg/kg 1V q12-24h
Ketoprofen
Dog
≤ 2.0 mg/kg 1V, 1M, SC, PO once
≤ 1.0 mg/kg g24h thereafter 
Antinflammatory
≤ 2.0 mg/kg PO once
≤1.0 mg/kg g24h thereater
Cat
Surgical
≤ 2.0 mg/kg SC once 
≤ 1.0 mg/kg PO q24h thereafter 
Antinflammatory
≤ 2.0 mg/kg PO once
≤ 1.0 mg/kg PO q24h thereafter
Horse
Antinflammatory
2.2 mg/kg iV, 1M q12-24h
Phenylbutazone
Dog
Antinflammatory
10-14 mg/kg PO q8-12h
Horse
Antinflammatory
2.2-4.4 mg/kg 1V, PO q12-24h
 Aspirin 
Dog
Antinflammatory, antithrormbotic
10 mg/kg g12h PO
Cat
Antinflammatory, antithrombotic
10-20 mg/kg q48-72h PO
Horse
Antinflammatory, antithrombotic
17 mg/kg q48h PO
Ketorolac
Dog
Surgical
0.3-0.5 mg/kg 1V, 1M 
Cat
0.25 mg/kg 1M q12h for 1-2 treatments 
 Etodolac
Dog
 Antinflarmmatory
≤ 15 mg/kg PO q24h 
Deracoxib
Dog
Antinflammatory
≤ 4 mg/kg PO q24h
Data from Davidson G (199): Etodolac. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 21:494; Fox SM, Johnson SA (1997): Use of carprofen for the treatment of pain and
inflammation in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2i0:1493; Hulse D (1998): Treatment methods for pain in the osteoarthritic patient. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract28:361;MathewsKA (2002):Non-steroidal ani-inflammatory analgesics:aeview of current practice.JVet EmergCnitCare12:89,MosesVS,BertoneAL
(2002): Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 18:21; and Smith SA (2003): Deracoxib. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
25:419.
This information is compiled without regard to egulatory approval for use of these drugs, which vanies by county. It is the individual clinician’s Tesponsibility to
determine the conditions for appropriate use in a particular patient. Bec ause of the incidence of gastrointestinal and renal side effects with this group of drugs,
care is necessary in their use.
of suppressor T lymphocytes. Cyclosporine affects both cell-
eyelid (with spontaneous regeneration of these glands while
mediated immunity and, possibly, humoral immunity by inhi-
treatment is continued) and directly reduces kerato-
bition of helper T cells but does not affect epithelial wound
conjunctivitis. The drug is also directly lacrimogenic. Finally,
 healing. When applied topically it penetrates the eye poorly and
 cyclosporine directly stimulates canine conjunctival goblet
 is not useful via this route for treatment of intraocular inflam-
cells to secrete mucin, possibly accounting for some of its
mation. However, topical application is used for moderating
therapeutic effect in canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca and
immune responses involving the lacrimal gland, conjunctiva,
 qualitative tear film disturbances. For all of these seasons, it is
cormea, and sclera. It is used for treatment of keratoconjunctivitis
 the most frequently used drug for canine keratoconjunctivitis
sicca, corneal graft rejection, autoimmune keratitis (especially
sicca.(
 Cyclosporine is absorbed systemically after topical
"pannus"), and immune-mediated episclerokeratoconjunctivitis.
 administration in dogs, and although depressed cell-mediated
Intraocular concentrations are achieved with the use of intra-
immunity can be demonstrated by lymphocyte stimulation
vitreous or suprachoroidal implants. These devices have been
indices, clinically relevant immunosuppression has not been 
used successfully for the treatment of equine recurrent uveitis
 reported. The drug is applied as a 1% or 2% solution in corn,
 in selected individuals.
canola, or olive oil, or as a 0.2% ointment. An aqueous prep-
Cyclosporine's most important ophthalmic use is in treat-
 aration can be compounded. Cyclosporine is also used orally
ment of canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca. It reduces auto-
for the treatment of canine atopic dermatitis, including
immune destruction of the lacrimal gland and gland of the third
blepharitis.
50
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
Tacrolimus
 Antihistamines are little used in ocular therapy. Systemic
antihistamines may be of some use in acute allergic conjunc-
The mechanism of action of tacrolimus is similar to that of
tivitis; however, contact dermatitis and conjunctivitis, especially
cyclosporine, in that it reduces T-cell activation by inhibiting
of the drug-induced variety, are not histamine-mediated. In
calcineurin-dependent activation of lymphokine expression,
almost all ocular disorders for which antihistamines have been
apoptosis, and degranulation. H
However, the intracellular
 advocated, corticosteroid or immunosuppressive therapy is more
 receptors for tacrolimus and cyclosporine are different, leading
effective.
 some veterinary ophthalmologists to use tacrolimus when cyclo-
 sporine is not effective for the treatment of keratoconjunctivitis
HYPEROSMOTIC AGENTS
in dogs. A 0.02% aqueous suspension was recently investigated
 in a double-masked study of 105 dogs with keratoconjunctivitis
A hyperosmotic agent increases the osmotic concentration of
sicca. Dogs naive to tear stimulation therapy, dogs maintained
blood perfusing the eye when administered systemically or of
the tear film when applied topically. Because of the corneal
cyclosporine therapy were all included. Twice-daily tacrolimus
epithelial and blood-ocular barriers, little or no osmotic agent
administration was continued for 6 to 8 weeks. Schirmer tear
enters the aqueous humor or vitreous, and the osmotic gradient
test results improved by 5 mm/min in more than 85% of dogs
 created causes withdrawal of water from the eye to the vascular
never treated before and in 51% of dogs whose disease was
system or tears. Systemic administration of osmotic agents
unresponsive to cyclosporine.
therefore causes reduction of vitreous volume. This, in turn,
 In March 2005 the FDA issued a public health advisory to
reduces IOP, both directly and via posterior movement of the
 inform health care providers and patients about a potential
lens, which reduces pupillary block and increases aqueous
cancer risk (lymphoma and “skin cancer'") associated with the 
humor outflow facility via opening of the iridocorneal angle
commercial topical (dermatologic) preparation of tacrolimus for 
and ciliary cleft (see Chapter 12). Mannitol is the most
human use. This issue may be relevant to topical (ophthalmic)
 commonly used systemic agent. Other osmotic agents, such as
veterinary use. The FDA's concerm was based on information from
urea, glycerol, and isosorbide, were used in the past but are not 
animal studies, case reports in a small number of patients, and how
used now because they lower IOP less effectively, cause tissue
drugs of this class work. The FDA estimates that it may take
necrosis after perivascular leakage (urea), or cause emesis
human studies of 10 years or more in duration to determine 
(glycerol). Osmotic drugs are applied topically to clear or
whether use of tacrolimus is linked to cancer. In the meantime the
reduce corneal edema. Hypertonic (5%) sodium chloride is the
agency advises that tacrolimus should be used only as labeled and
 commonly used topical agent.
for patients whose disease is unresponsive to or who are intolerant
of other treatments. The FDA also recommends avoiding use of 
Mannitol
tacrolimus in children younger than 2 years, using tacrolimus only
for short periods of time rather than continuously, and using the
Mannitol is a vegetable sugar that is not metabolized and is
minimum amount needed to control the patient's symptoms.
excreted in the urine, causing osmotic diuresis. However,
Owners of veterinary patients should be advised of these
diuresis is not the cause of reduced IOP. Mannitol is not
guidelines and to wear gloves when applying this medication.
absorbed after oral administration and therefore must be
Additionally, tacrolimus and cyclosporine are currently not
 administered intravenously. After intravenous administration
 recommended for patients with active feline herpesvirus infection.
 IOP typically falls within 30 to 60 minutes and remains low for
5 to 6 hours. Mannitol increases serum osmolality and
Immunostimulants
stimulates thirst, but if the ophthalmic effect is to be
maintained, water intake must be controlled by providing small
Nonspecific immune stimulants are sometimes used with variable
 amounts of water or ice cubes. Mannitol is not used for long-
results to treat ocular neoplasia. Perhaps the most widely used
term treatment of glaucoma and should not be used in animals
is live bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine or cell wall
with chronic renal failure or congestive heart failure. For acute
extracts of the same organism for the treatment of periocular
glaucoma 1 to 2 g/kg mannitol should be administered intra-
equine sarcoid. Extracts of other organisms that stimulate the
venously over 10 to 20 minutes. This can be used in
reticuloendothelial system, nonspecific immunostimulants, and 
 conjunction with an oral or topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
staphylococcal bacterins have also been used on occasions
 and a topical miotic agent such as pilocarpine (or, more recently,
for ophthalmic conditions, but little is published regarding
 a synthetic prostaglandin analogue), because these agents are
their use.
synergistic.
MAST CELL STABILIZERS AND
Topical Hyperosmotic Sodium Chloride
ANTIHISTAMINES
Sodium chloride prepared as 5% ointment or solution can be used
Medications that stabilize mast cells are used topically to
for reduction of corneal edema as seen in bullous keratopathy,
prevent release of histamine and other mediators of inflam-
 superficial corneal erosion, and endothelial dysfunction. In
mation in humans. They have received less use in veterinary
 patients with more advanced corneal edema the goal of therapy
patients; however, some veterinarians recommend their use in
should be not clearing of the cormeal opacity but rather reduction
patients with seasonal allergic conjunctivitis or eosinophilic
 of epithelial bullae. Responses are somewhat limited by the short
keratoconjunctivitis, usually in association with topical corti-
time such applications alter tear osmolality. Therefore frequent
costeroids. Examples of mast cell stabilizers are sodium
application is necessary. Because of duration of effect, ointments
cromoglycate, olopatadine, and lodoxamide.
are usually more successful and appear to be less irritating.
 OcULAR PHARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEu TiICS |
51
AUTONOMIC DRUGS
called denervation hypersensitivity, is used to pharmacologically
localize the site of denervation in Horner's syndrome.
Many important diagnostic and therapeutic drugs used in
Autonomic drugs may upregulate or downregulate the passage
ophthalmology act on ocular structures with autonomic inner-
of a nerve impulse in a number of ways (see Figures 3-9 and 3-10).
vation. The autonomic nervous system is divided into para-
The ocular effects of the autonomic agents commonly used in
 sympathetic and sympathetic components, with antagonistic
animals include mydriasis (pupil dilation), miosis (pupil
but not necessarily equal actions. Important features of the
constriction), cycloplegia (paralysis of the ciliary muscle), and
parasympathetic and sympathetic innervation of the eye, and
ciliary body contraction (opening of the iridocorneal angle);
the sites of action of commonly used drugs, are summarized in
they are summarized in Box 3-2. Note that pharmacologic
Figures 3-9 and 3-10. In both systems the neurohumoral trans-
mydriasis may be caused by paralysis of the iris sphincter
mitter at the ganglion is acetylcholine, which passes across the 
 muscle or stimulation of the iris dilator muscle, whereas miosis 
synaptic cleft and depolarizes the postsynaptic membrane. This
 may be caused by stimulation of the iris sphincter muscle or
action of acetylcholine is terminated through its cleavage by
 paralysis of the dilator muscle. However, species variation
acetylcholinesterase. In the parasympathetic system the post-
occurs. The iris in birds and reptiles is composed predominantly
ganglionic transmitter is also acetylcholine, but in the sympa-
of striated fibers, and skeletal neuromuscular blocking agents
thetic system, it is norepinephrine. Norepinephrine also causes
 (sometimes in addition to autonomic agents) must be used to
depolarization of the muscle cell, but it is not dissipated as simply
 produce mydriasis because the parasympatholytic agents used
as acetylcholine in the parasympathetic system. After release
in mammals have little effect (see Chapter 20).
 by the postganglionic sympathetic terminal norepinephrine may
enter the effector cell, may diffuse into the vascular system,
 Parasympatholytic (Anticholinergic) Agents
may undergo enzymatic degradation, or may be reabsorbed by
Atropine
the postganglionic terminal (Figure 3-11). After a period of
 absence, sympathetic or parasympathetic effector cells that are
Atropine is a parasympatholytic agent used as a mydriatic and
 deprived of transmitter substance become very sensitive to the
a cycloplegic agent principally for treatment of anterior uveitis
effects of that transmitter if it is applied. This phenomenon,
(iridocyclitis). In patients with anterior uveitis, mydriasis reduces
CNS
Antagonist
 Preganglionic
Agonist
 neuron 
Blocks ganglion
 Stimulates ganglion
 Acetylcholine
 Hexamethonium
Cholinesterase
Acetylcholine
Cilliary
 ganglion
Postganglionic
neuron
 Block cholinesterase
Echothiophate
 Acetylcholine
Isoflurophate 
Eserine
Cholinesterase
Physostigmine
 Demecarium
Block neuromuscular
Carbachol 
receptor
Atropine
Stimulate
Tropicamide
 neuromuscular receptor
Cyclopentolate
Pupillary
 sphincter 
Acetylcholine
Scopolamine
Pilocarpine
Homatropine 
Carbachol 
Figure 3-9. Parasympathetic innervation of the eye anc sites of action of major clrugs. Acetylcholine activity is
limited by enclogenous acetylcholinesterase. CNS, Central nervous system.
52
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
CNS C, T T2
 Antagonists
Aqonists
Preganglionic
neuron
Blocks ganglion
 Stimulates ganglion
Acetylcholine
Hexamethonium
Cholinesterase
Acetylcholine
Cranial
cervical
 ganglion
 Postganglionic
Block storage of
 neuron 
. Release of norepinephrine
 norepinephrine
 from nerve endings
Guanethidine
 OH-Amphetamine 
 Methyl-clopa 
Reserpine
Benzedrine
Norepinephrine 
Cocaine
Release of norepinephrine
 Block neuromuscular
 and direct muscle stimulation 
receptor
Ephedrine (α and β)
Dibenzyline 
 Phentolamine
Phenylephrine (x1)
Pupillary
Tolazoline
Betaxolol ()
cilator
Carteolol (β and β2)
 Stimulate neuromuscular
Levobunolol ( β and β2)
receptor
Metipranolol ( β, and β2)
 Epinephrine (Adrenaline) (α and β)
Timolol ( β and β2)
Apraclonidine (α2)
Figure 3-10. Sympathetic innervation of the eye anc sites of action of major clrugs. Encogenous armine oxiclases
limit norepinephrine action at the neuromuscular junction. Encogenous catecholomethyl transferase lirmits
norepinephrine action within the muscle cell CNs, Central nervous system; C, seventh cevical nerve; T, T2
first and second thoracic nerves.
0 - methylation
 augment cycloplegia and therefore are not analgesic. Atropine's
duration of action may be many days in some dogs and cats,
and longer than 1 week in horses. Therefore atropine
(1%) drops and ointment should always be administered
therapeutically to effect (i.e., until mydriasis is induced).
Effector
 Initially the frequency may be 2 or 3 times daily, but this can
Sympathetic nerve
cell
usually be reduced rapidly. The long duration of action also
makes atropine an  inappropriate mydriatic agent for
 ophthalmic examination, for which short-acting agents such as
 tropicamide are preferred. Atropine (and other dilating agents)
may induce ocular hypertension and ultimately worsen
Bloodstream
 glaucoma in susceptible breeds of dogs (e.g., basset hound,
Figure 3-11. Fate of norepinephrine. After release by the postganglionic
cocker spaniel). The parasympatholytic properties of atropine
sympathetic terminal, norepinephrine (NE) may enter the effector cell,
 also decrease tear flow after conjunctival instillation. Therefore
cliffuse into the vascular system, uncergo enzymatic cegraclation, or be
reabsorbec by the postganglionic terminal. (Modified from Kramer SC,
atropine is contraindicated in animals affected with lens
 Potts AM [1969|: 1ris uptake of catecholarmines in experimental Horner's
luxation, glaucoma, and keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
syndlrome. Am J Ophthalmol 67:705.)
 Following are some important species-specific considerations
for the use of atropine:
the chances of posterior synechia, whereas cycloplegia reduces
· Horses in which topical atropine is being used frequently
the pain of ciliary body spasm. Mydriasis induced by atropine
should be carefully observed for signs of colic, including
may be enhanced by addition of sympathomimetic agents (e.g,
absence of borborygmi, kicking or looking at the abdomen,
 phenylephrine); however, the sympathomimetic agents do not
 increased pulse rate, and sweating.
 OcULAR PhARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEu tiICS |
53
glaucoma (e.g., American cocker spaniel, basset hound) may
 Box 3-2 ↑ Ophthalmic drugs with autonomic
increase IOP, but because this effect is transient, it is unlikely
actions
to precipitate glaucoma.
Sympathomimetic
Indirect-Acting
Tropicamide is the mydriatic agent of choice for diagnostic
Direct-Acting
Reversible
 purposes in common domestic mammals.
Epinephrine
Carbachol (also acts
Dipiveffin
directly)
 Phenylephrine
 Demecarium bromide
Misceflaneous Parasympatholytic Agents
(slowly reversible)
Indirect-Acting
Physostigmine
Other parasympatholytic agents are used rarely in veterinary
InTeversible
Hydroxyamphetamine
medicine. Homatropine (0.5% to 2%) causes mydriasis and
Isoflurophate
Cocaine
Echothiophate
cycloplegia intermediate in duration between atropine and
 tropicamide. Cyclopentolate is a commonly used diagnostic
Sympatholytic (β-Blockers)
Parasympatholytic
 mydriatic agent in human beings but is used rarely in animals,
Timolol
because its effects last up to 3 days and it may cause pain and
Atropine
Betaxolol
Tropic amide
chemosis when administered topically.
Parasympathomimetic
Sympathomimetic (Adrenergic) Agents
Direct-Acting
Epinephrine (Adrenaline), Dipivefrin, and Phenylephrine
Acetylcholine
Epinephrine is the archetypical sympathomimetic agent; how-
Carbachol (also acts indirectly)
Pilocarpine
ever, it penetrates the eye poorly and so has had limited use for
intraocular disease when applied topically. It also is rapidly
sxa sanip asaq ol asuolsi ut suogeuea enpiaiput pue saoeis
absorbed systemically when applied topically and so exerts
some unwanted systemic side effects. It also deteriorates in
 solution owing to oxidization. For these reasons it has been
replaced by phenylephrine or dipivefrin (an epinephrine
· The presence of serum atropine esterase in some rabbits is
prodrug). Dipivefrin is converted to epinephrine as it traverses
 alleged to limit the duration of effect and efficacy of
the cornea and so enters the eye in its active form but has
atropine in those individuals.
limited surface or systemic side effects. Epinephrine is
· Paradoxically, atropine solution placed in the oral cavity or
occasionally still used to stimulate contraction of vascular smooth 
 reaching it via the nasolacrimal duct acts as a promoter of
muscle, resulting in vasoconstriction and control of intra-
salivary secretion because of its bitter taste. This effect is
operative hemorrhage. This is achieved by topical application
more noticeable with atropine solution than with ointment
for conjunctival or scleral hemorrhage or intracameral use
and may be especially troublesome in cats. However, this
during intraocular surgery to control hemorrhage and to induce
side effect may be used to test the patency of the parotid
mydriasis. Care must be taken with intraocular use of epinephrine 
salivary duct before or after its translocation for therapy of
because of the danger of inducing cardiac arrhythmias under
keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
general anesthesia. The vasoconstrictive effects of the
sympathomimetic drugs may also be used to distinguish deep
Tropicamide
(episcleral) vessels, which do not blanch rapidly, from
superficial (conjunctival) blood vessels, which do blanch rapidly
Tropicamide is a fast-acting parasympatholytic with short
after topical application of these agents in animals with reddened
duration of effect that is used to induce mydriasis for intra-
eyes. This practice assists in differentiating “deep" intraocular
ocular examination. Tropicamide is also used after intraocular
and potentially blinding disease, such as anterior uveitis, from
surgery (such as cataract removal), when the prolonged
superficial and less urgent conjunctivitis (see Chapter
7
mydriasis seen with atropine may unnecessarily increase the
Epinephrine is also occasionally used to retard absorption of
risk of glaucoma. When 1% tropicamide is instilled into the
drugs (e.g., penicillin, lidocaine) injected with it, particularly in
conjunctival sac, mydriasis occurs after 15 to 20 minutes (or
the retrobulbar space.
 slightly longer in animals with highly pigmented irides). Onset
The sympathomimetic agents may be used to pharma-
of mydriasis in normal eyes may be hastened by a second
cologically localize the lesion in patients with Horner's
drop 5 minutes after the first. Lack of mydriasis 20 minutes
 syndrome when sympathetic innervation of the eye is inter-
after 2 drops of 1% tropicamide indicates that uveitis or
 rupted. This maneuver relies on the phenomenon known as
posterior synechia may be present. In most patients, mydriasis 
"denervation hypersensitivity” (described previously). Instillation 
and cycloplegia last approximately 2 to 3 hours (12 to 18 hours 
of a dilute solution of a direct-acting sympathomimetic
in some dogs and cats and up to 12 hours in most horses).
(typically 0.2% to 1.0 % phenylephrine) into the conjunctival
This duration of effect, along with its lower potency compared
sac results in faster mydriasis in the affected eye than in the
with atropine, limits the therapeutic use of tropicamide. There
normal (contralateral) eye if the lesion is postganglionic.
is no evidence that animals that undergo dilation with
 Topically applied phenylephrine may also be used in differ-
tropicamide (or atropine) suffer retinal damage from ambient
 ential diagnosis of protrusion of the third eyelid ("haws") in
light levels under normal clinical circumstances. Diagnostic
 cats, because it stimulates the sympathetically innervated smooth 
mydriasis with tropicamide in breeds of dogs susceptible to
muscles controlling this membrane.
54
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
These drugs may also be used to augment mydriasis, but
with some combinations, competitive inhibition occurs. The
without coincident paralysis of the sphincter muscle with a
reversible inhibitors such as physostigmine and carbachol are
parasympatholytic agent, they are weak mydriatic agents and
not used in the control of glaucoma, because the irreversible
so are not used alone for this purpose. Phenylephrine causes
 agents such as demecarium are more effective and require less
some mydriasis in dogs but is ineffective as a mydriatic in horses
frequent administration. If treatment with any of the irreversible
and cats. Repeated use of phenylephrine at short intervals and
agents fails, the use of another member of the group is rarely
high concentrations can cause systemic hypertension.
useful. All drugs of this group may cause severe and even fatal
Topical application of dipivefrin is also used for treatment of
systemic toxicity through excessive topical treatment (con-
 glaucoma. Following conversion to epinephrine this drug acts
 centration or frequency of application), especially in cats. Signs
intraocularly to decrease production of aqueous humor without
of systemic toxicity include vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and
causing major changes in pupil size. It also stabilizes vascular
weakness. Particular care must be taken to avoid additive effects
endothelium. For this reason it has some use in treatment of
of these drugs with other organophosphates in flea collars,
glaucoma secondary to anterior uveitis in domestic animals.
washes, and systemic parasiticides.
 DEMECARIUM. Demecarium is stable in aqueous solution and
Parasympathomimetic (Cholinergic) Agents
 is usually administered once or twice daily. Demecarium bromide,
given once daily in conjunction with a topical corticosteroid (also
All commonly used topical parasympathomimetic agents in
once daily), significantly prolongs the time to onset of primary
veterinary ophthalmology (see Box 3-2) induce miosis and/or
glaucoma in dogs. Iridocomeal angle closure was delayed for
increase the facility of outflow of aqueous humor in glauco-
32 months in dogs treated with this combination, compared with
matous and normal eyes. This effect may be due to stimulation
8 months in untreated dogs. This drug is no longer commercially
of portions of the ciliary muscle that insert in the area of
 available but can be compounded as a 0.125% or 0.25% solution.
the irnidocorneal angle, resulting in increased drainage via the 
CARBACHOL.
Carbachol isa
direct-acting para-
trabecular meshwork. Contraction of the ciliary muscle may
sympathomimetic agent. However, it is reported to also have
also result in larger trabecular spaces through which fluid may
some indirect (cholinesterase-inhibiting) action. It causes
exit. Therefore their clinical indication is for treatment or
 modest decreases in IOP in beagles with inherited open-angle
delaying the onset of glaucoma. It is important to note that
glaucoma. It has longer duration of action than pilocarpine,
ciliary muscle spasm is often painful, especially in patients
 requiring administration 2 to 3 times daily, but frequently has
with preexisting anterior uveitis (iridocyclitis); therefore these 
 systemic side effects in dogs. Despite being a more powerful
 drugs may induce intraocular pain.
miotic than pilocarpine, carbachol (3%) is less useful in the
treatment of glaucoma than the irreversible cholinesterase
Direct-Acting Parasympathomimetic Agents
inhibitors. It is used intracamerally by some veterinary
 ophthalmologists immediately after cataract surgery to reduce
PILOCARPINE. Pilocarpine is the archetypical direct-acting
 transient postoperative rises in IOP.
parasympathomimetic agent. It acts directly on the muscle cells
 of the pupillary sphincter and ciliary body and is effective even
Sympatholytic Agents (Adrenergic Antagonists)
in the denervated eye or after retrobulbar anesthesia when
release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction is
 Numerous agents have become available that block, with differ-
blocked. Pilocarpine also stimulates secretory glands and may
ent selectivity, Q- and/or β-receptors. β-Blockers (β-antagonists)
be used topically or systemically in patients with kerato-
 are thought to lower IOP by reducing blood flow to the ciliary
conjunctivitis sicca, although the T cell-modulating drugs, such
body. However, sympathetic receptors are found in the irido-
as cyclosporine and tacrolimus, are more effective, have fewer
 corneal angle and drainage pathway and may also play a role in
side effects than pilocarpine, and have largely replaced it for
the action of these drugs.
treatment of this disease. Overdosage of topically or systemically
An expanding array of topical sympatholytic agents is
applied pilocarpine results in salivation, vomiting,
and
used for human glaucoma. Examples are timolol, betaxolol,
diarrhea, especially in cats. Pilocarpine penetrates the eye after
 levobunolol, carteolol, and metipranolol. Those that have been
topical instillation, and intraocular concentration depends 
on
studied in veterinary patients (principally dogs and cats) lower
frequency of application and concentration of the drops.
 IOP poorly and have limited use in therapy of overt glaucoma in
However, pilocarpine tends to be very irritating and induces
these species. However, these agents may have a role in glaucoma
breakdown of the blood-ocular barrier (and aqueous flare)
 prophylaxis in dogs. A recent study showed that betaxolol given
when applied topically, especially at higher concentrations. As 
twice daily significantly prolonged the time to onset of primary
a result of these side effects and the availability of more potent,
 glaucoma to 32 months, compared with 8 months in untreated
better-tolerated hypotensive agents, it is now rarely used for
dogs. Care must be taken in administering these agents to
 animals with cardiac or respiratory disease, and therapy should
be stopped 3 to 4 days before administration of general
Indirect-Acting Parasympathomimetic Agents
anesthesia. Timolol (0.5%) has been studied in normal horses 
and does lower IOP, but only by about 4 to 5 mm Hg. Its
 Organophosphates are indirect-acting parasympathomimetic
efficacy in horses with glaucoma has not been studied.
agents and may be reversible or irreversible in nature. They act
by inhibition of cholinesterase, causing preservation of acetyl-
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
choline, and hence have no effect on denervated structures. Com-
 binations of direct- and indirect-acting parasympathomimetic
The enzyme carbonic anhydrase is present in ciliary body
agents do not result in more profound or prolonged miosis, and
 epithelium, where it is responsible, in part, for aqueous humor
 OcULAR PhARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEu TiICS |
55
production. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs) reduce
 has been studied. Application of 1 drop leads to maximal anes-
aqueous humor production by up to 50%, thereby decreasing
 thesia for 15 minutes and statistically (although not necessarily
IOP, and their role in veterinary ophthalmology is in the
clinically) significant reductions in corneal sensation for
management of acute glaucomatous crises as well as long-term
45 minutes. These times increase to 25 minutes (maximal) and
control of IOP in some patients. When administered sys-
 55 minutes (duration) if a second drop is applied 1 minute after
temically these drugs also inhibit carbonic anhydrase in the
the first. In addition, 2 drops applied 1 minute apart caused a
 renal tubular epithelium and may cause mild diuresis. However,
 significantly greater anesthetic effect than did 1 drop when
just as with osmotic agents, their IOP-lowering effect is not the 
result of this diuresis. Similarly, other diuretics such as
difference was statistically significant, but its clinical signif-
furosemide do not significantly reduce aqueous humor
cance was not explored.
 production or IOP and should not be used for this purpose.
 The following cautionary notes should be considered in the 
Although diuresis is usually not clinically significant with this
use of this group of drugs:
group of agents, systemically administered CAls may cause
other undesirable side effects, such as metabolic acidosis
·  All topical anesthetics inhibit corneal epithelialization and
(usually noted as panting), gastrointestinal disturbance, and, in
 are toxic to normal corneal epithelium. They produce small
some cases, increased urinary loss of potassium with long-term
punctate ulcerations in normal cornea.
use. Occasionally, severe skin reactions or disorientation have
 Some are extremely toxic systemically (5 mL of 2%
been reported with some CAls. If side effects occur in a parti-
tetracaine solution is a fatal human dose) and are rapidly
 absorbed from the conjunctival sac. This fact is of most
the drug, and another CAl may be better tolerated. Topically
importance in the treatment of very small (exotic)
administered CAls are not associated with systemic side effects.
veterinary patients.
· Some anesthetics are antigenic and may cause sensitization.
Systemic Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
· Local anesthetics should not be dispensed to owners for any
reason.
The archetypical CAI was acetazolamide; however, because
· Local anesthetics placed into diseased, painful eyes abolish
this drug causes vomiting more frequently than more modern
 protective reflexes and increase the chance of further injury
agents in this group, it has now been largely replaced by CAIs
(e.g., entropion) in addition to causing corneal lesions
such as methazolamide and dichlorphenamide. These drugs are
themselves.
usually administered two to three times daily at 2 to 5 mg/kg.
· Ophthalmic anesthetics (like all other topical drugs) are
They are typically well tolerated in dogs, but side effects seem
unsuitable for injection.
more frequent in cats.
Local anesthetics should not be used therapeutically or included 
Topical Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
'uojperedaid io uawjgar pjnaderay Aue u!
Dorzolamide and brinzolamide are topically applied CAIs.
They lower IOP in dogs and cats when applied three times daily
Classically it has been recommended that samples for
and are a useful part of a combined regimen to lower IOP. They
bacterial analysis should be taken before local anesthetics are
may be used in patients whose glaucoma occurs secondary to
placed in the eye, because these agents and the preservatives
uveitis and have the advantage of lack of systemic side effects.
they contain may be bactericidal. In reality this practice is often
However, they occasionally sting and tend to be expensive.
too uncomfortable for the patient, raising the risk of patient move-
They are usually used to replace rather than supplement
ment and globe rupture. There is also evidence to suggest that
systemically administered CAIs.
although topical anesthetic agents may alter the bacteria cultured
in some circumstances, this feature is not consistent, and the
PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGUES
change in bacteria cultured before and after anesthesia is rarely
of clinical relevance. However, local anesthesia does reduce
Latanoprost, travoprost, bimatoprost, and unoprost are synthetic
Schirmer tear test values by about 50% and should not be
prostaglandins developed for the treatment of glaucoma in
used before such tests. Of the many agents available 0.5%
human beings but with some application in canine glaucoma.
 proparacaine is generally the most useful. Short-term storage of
Latanoprost is potent and effective in reducing IOP in canine
 proparacaine at room temperature does not reduce effcacy, but
glaucoma, and is also important in the emergency treatment of
storage at room temperature for more than 2 weeks results in a
glaucoma in dogs, in which it has largely replaced pilocarpine
decrease in drug effect. Brownish solutions of proparacaine are
(see Chapter 12). Travoprost lowers IOP significantly, and to a
inactivated and should not be used. Tetracaine may cause
degree equivalent to that achieved by latanoprost, in normal
sensitivity reactions in dogs.
dogs. Prostaglandin analogues are ineffective in the treatment
of glaucoma in cats and horses.
ENZYMES AND ENZYME INHIBITORS
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Enzymes and enzyme inhibitors are used infrequently in
veterinary ophthalmology but have a critical role when they are
Topical (local) anesthetics are used for ocular examinations and
employed. Classically they fall into two broad categories: those
minor manipulative and surgical procedures, but never for
agents used to catalyze dissolution of the protein within a blood
therapeutic purposes. The effect on corneal sensation of a
clot, and those employed to retard the degradation of collagen
single drop of proparacaine or 2 drops separated by 1 minute
in a cornea during "melting" or corneal malacia.
56
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Hyaluronidase
due to evaporation, or, in some cases, primary corneal pathology.
  n u a   a sn 
 Hyaluronidase depolymerizes hyaluronic acid, an important
with lacrimogenic agents, such as cyclosporine. The production
constituent of connective tissue, allowing faster passage of drugs
 of endogenous tears is always preferred over the replacement of
through tissues. Therefore it is sometimes injected into the
tears with “artificial’ tears. Aqueous solutions such as normal
retrobulbar region to promote dispersion of contrast or anesthetic
 saline are unsuitable for tear replacement because they do not
agents through orbital tissues. The permeability of tissues returms
 adhere to the lipophilic corneal epithelium and have extremely
to normal in 1 to 2 days. The enzyme is nontoxic and does not 
brief ocular retention times. Additionally they dilute what
cause inflammation or affect capillary permeability. However,
endogenous tears are present, and the preservatives most con-
it will not dissolve fbrin or inflammatory exudates.
tain may cause inflammation or worsening of primary disease.
Therefore aqueous solutions must be modified by the addition
Tissue Plasminogen Activator
 of agents to bind the solution to the epithelium and/or increase
viscosity of the preparation. In the normal precorneal tear film
Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) is used by
this function is performed by mucopolysaccharide molecules
 intracameral injection to lyse newly formed fbrin deposits and
within the mucin layer of the tear film and having both hydro-
facilitate dispersion of hyphema in uveitis, especially traumatic
 philic and lipophilic ends. Solutions modifed in this way,
and postoperative intraocular inflammation. Intracameral injec-
termed mucinomimetic, have longer contact time and better “eye
 tions should be performed only by those trained in this technique.
feel," and offer more antidesiccant advantages than traditional
Doses of 15 to 25 μg are typically used. TPA must be kept
saline solutions. The inclusion of a bicarbonate-based buffer
frozen until used.
to retain pH near that of normal tears also helps corneal
epithelium return to normal in the human eye.
Protease Inhibitors
 Indications for tear replacement preparations are as follows:
· For treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca ("dry eye")
 Tear film and cormeal proteases are produced by comeal epithelial
· For treatment of exposure keratitis (e.g., facial nerve
cells, stromal fibrocytes, inflammatory cells, and certain
bacteria, such as Pseudomonas spp. They are important for
 paralysis, buphthalmos, breed-associated lagophthalmos)
normal wound healing, especially in the cormea. However, in
·In patients with abnormal tear film breakup time
(qualitative tear film disturbances)
some disease states, their production, activation, and deactivation
· During and after general anesthesia to prevent
become unregulated, leading to detrimental effects. One of the
corneoconjunctival desiccation
most dramatic examples of this is their role in the pathogenesis
As a lubricant, refractive/electroconductive, and cushioning
of melting or malacic corneal ulcers in which there is altered
solution during gonioscopy and electroretinography
 protease homeostasis.
 As a diluent for compounding of some ophthalmic solutions
There are at least four categories of proteases, but matrix
· In patients with primary comeal disease, such as feline
 metalloproteinases and serine proteases appear most important
comeal sequestration and canine superficial punctate keratitis
 in corneal disease and health. They have been demonstrated in
increased amounts in the tear films of dogs, cats, and horses
The most commonly used classes of lacrimomimetic prep-
with corneal ulceration, and reduction of tear film proteolytic
arations, grouped according to the viscosity agent used, are
activity has been demonstrated in horses as ulcers heal. There-
listed in Table 3-15.
fore various protease inhibitors have been explored for the
treatment of corneal ulceration. Those used historically and
 MISCELLANEOUS THERAPEUTIC AGENTS
currently include N-acetylcysteine, disodium ethylenediamine
Surgical Adhesives
tetra-acetate (EDTA), tetracycline antibiotics, and autogenous
serum. Of these only serum is believed to have broad activity
Tissue adhesive (isobutyl cyanoacrylate) has been advocated
against both serine proteinases and metalloproteinases. Serum
for treating some corneal ulcers in dogs, cats, and rabbits; how-
also contains numerous growth factors that are believed to be
 ever, it must not be permitted to enter the eye and so should not
helpful in corneal wound healing. These facts, along with the
be used on leaking corneal wounds. Cyanoacrylate is used on
easy and inexpensive procurement of serum from the patient
a carefully dried corneal surface, where it engenders some
and because it is predictably well tolerated when topically
 inflammatory reaction that may be beneficial in stimulating
applied, make autogenous serum the first-choice proteinase
inhibitor for ophthalmic use.
Large amounts or long-term use of cyanoacrylate, however,
results in severe inflammation.
Matrix metalloproteinase (collagenase) inhibitors are extremely
important agents in the treatment of cormeal ulceration. Auto-
Eye Washes (Collyria)
genous serum is the most accessible and most broad in its
therapeutic effects and is well tolerated.
Sterile eye wash is used for removal of purulent exudates,
foreign bodies, and irritants from the eyelids and conjunctival
sac but not for long-term therapy. Many commercial formulas
TEARREPLACEMENTPREPARATIONS
are available. Eye washes in examination rooms should be
("ARTIFICIAL TEARS")
 changed regularly to prevent overgrowth with contaminating
microbial agents. Boric acid solution was commonly used in
Artificial tear preparations are used when the normal tear
the past, but because of its weak germicidal action and systemic
quality or quantity is altered or when loss of tears is increased
toxicity, it is no longer advocated.
OcULAR PHARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEU TICS |
57
 Table 3-15 | Commonly Used Lacrimomimetic Solutions and Ointments 
VISCOSITY AGENT
PRESERVATIVE
PRODUCT NAME
SOURCE
POLYVINYL ALCOHOL
Polyvinyl alcohol 1.4% 
Benzalkonium chloride
AKWA Tears
Akorn
 Polyvinyl alcohol 3% 
Thimerosal
 Liquifilm Forte
Allergan
 Polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%
Chlorobutanol
Liquifilm Tears
 Allergan
 Polyvinyl alcohol 1.4% 
Benzalkonium chloricle
Dry Eyes
Bausch & lomb
 Polyvinyl alcohol
 Benzalkonuim chloricde 
Hypotears
CIBA Vision 
 Lubricating Eye Drops
 Polyvinyl alcohol 1% 
None
 Hypotears PF Eye Drops 
CIBA Vision
 Polyvinyl alcohol
None
Ocutears PF
Ocumed 
 Polyvinyl alcohol
 Unknown
Ocutears
Ocumed 
 Polyvinyl alcohol
None
Tearfair
Pharmafair
CELLULOSE SOLUTIONS 
Carboxymethy lcellulose 0.25% 
None
Theratears
Advanced Vision Research
Carboxymethy lcellulose 1.0% 
None
 Celluvisc lubricant 
Allergan
 Carboxymethy lcellulose 0.5%
Purite
 Refresh Tears
Allergan
Hyclroxypropylmethylcellulose 0. 5%
Chlorobutanol
Lacri-lube
Allergan
Carboxymethy lcellulose 1.0% 
None
 Refresh Plus
Allrgan
 Carboxymethy lcellulose 0.5% 
None
Cellufresh 
Allergan
Hyclroxypropylmethylcellulose 1%
 Benzalkonium chloridle
lsopto AIkaline
Alcon
Hyclroxypropylmethylc ellulose 0. 5 %
Methylparaben, propylparaben
lsopto Tears Plain
Alcon
Hyclroxyethy lcellulose 
Benzalkonium chloricde
Comfort Tears
Barnes-Hind
 Methylcellulose 1%
None
Murocell 
Bausch & lomb
 Hyclroxypropylmethylcellulose 
Sodium perborate
 GenTeal lubricating Eye Drops
CIBA Vision
 Hyclroxypropylmethylcellulose 0.5% 
Benzalkonuim chloride
Tearisol 
lolab
Hyclroxypropylmethylcellulose 0.50%
Sorbic acid 
TearGard 
Med Tec
 Hyclroxypropylmethylcellulose 
None
LubriFair
Pharmafair
and dextran 
 Hyclroxypropylmethylcellulose 
 Sorbic acid 
Clear Eyes
Ross laboratories
and glycerine
POLYMER COMBINATIONS
 Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose and 
 Benzalkonium chloride
Tears Renewed
Akorn
Oz uengxap
Hyclroxymethylcellulose andl
Thimerosal 
Adsorbotear
Alcon
povidone 1.67%
 Hyclroxypropylmethylcellulose and 
None
Bio Tears
Alcon
 cextran
Hydroxypropylrmethylcellulose and 
Polyquarternium
Tears Naturale ll
Alcon
 cextran
 Hydlroxypropylmethylcellulose and 
None
 Tears Naturale Free 
Alcon
cextran
 Polyvinyl alcohol 1.4% and 
Chlorobutanol 
 Tears Plus
Allergan
povidone 0.6%
 Polyvinyl alcohol 1.4% and
None
 Refresh Tears
Allergan
 cextran
Hydlroxypropylmethylcellulose and
 Benzalkonium chloricde
Lubri Tears
Bausch & lomb
clextran
Hyclroxypropylmethylc ellulose,
Benzalkonium chloricde
Moisture Drops
Bausch & lomb
dextran 0.1%, povidone 0.1%, and 
glycerin 0.2%
 Polyethylene glycol 0.2%, cextran
None
Aquasite
CIBA Vision
0.1%, and polycarbophil 
Continued
58
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
Table 3-15 | Commonly Used Lacrimomimetic Solutions and Ointments-cont'd
VISCOSITY AGENT
PRESERVATIVE
PRODUCT NAME
SOURCE
 Polyvinyl alcohol 1%.
Benzalkonium chlorice
Hypotears
lolab
hyclroxyethylcellulose, and clextran
 Polyvinyl alcohol 1%.
Benzalkonium chlorice
Hypotears PF
lolab
hyclroxyethylcellulose, ancl clextran 
Hycroxypropylmethylcellulose and
None
LubriFair Solution
 Pharm afair
dextran
 Polyvinyl alcohol 1.4% ancd
 Benzalkonium chloride
Murine Eye lubricant 
Ross laboratories
povidone 0.60%
Hydlroxypropylmethylcellulose and
 Benzalkonium chloride
Nature's Tears
Rugby
dextran
OINTMENTS
 White petroleum and mineral oil
None
AKWA ointment
Akron
White petroleum, mineral oil, and 
None
 Duratears Naturale lubricant 
Alcon
anhydrous liquid lanolin
 Eye Ointment
White petroleum, mineral oil,.
Chlorobutanol
lacri-lube
Allergan
and lanolin 
White petroleum, mineral oil, and
None
Lacri-lube NP
Allergan
lanolin
White petroleum, mineral oil,
Chlorobutanol
Lacri-lube S.O.P.
Allergan
and lanolin
White petroleum, mineral oil,
None
Refresh PM
Allergan
andl lanolin
White petroleum and mineral oil
None
Dry Eyes
Bausch & lomb
 White petroleum and mineral oil
None
Duolube
Bausch & lomb
 White petroleum and mineral oil
None
 Hypotears Ointment 
CIBA Vision
White petr oleum
None
Lipotears
Coopervision
White petroleum, mineral oil.
None
Hypo Tears
lolab
and lanolin 
White petroleum 
Methylparaben
Ocutube
Ocumed
White petroleum
None
 Petroleum Ointment Sterile
 Pharmafair
White petroleum, mineral oil, and 
None
TearFair Ointment
 Pharmafair
lanolin clerivatives 
White petroleum, mineral oil, and
None
LubriFair Ointment 
 Pharmafair
lanolin
VISCOELASTIC PRODUCTS
Hylan 0.15%
None
1-Drop Vet
1-Med
Hylan 0.40%
None
1-Drop Vet 
1-Med
GLYCERIN PRODUCTS
Glycerin 0.3% 
None
Dry Eye Therapy
Bausch & lomb
 Glycerin 0.4%
Benzalkoniurm chloricle
Eye lube A
Optoptics
From Grahn BH, Storey ES (2004): Lacrimostimulants and lacrimomimetics. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:739.
Germicides
saline to form a 2% solution. Povidone-iodine solution, not
surgical scrub, must be used. Benzalkonium chloride is a
Germicides are used for disinfection of instruments, for pre-
wetting agent that enhances comeal penetration of certain
operative preparation of the lids and ocular surface, and as
 drugs as well as acting as a preservative. It is no longer usedfor
 preservatives in eyedrops. A number of solutions have been
surgical preparation of the patient or for sterilization of instru-
used as topical antiseptics or germicides for the eye. However,
ments. Other solutions, such as hexachlorophene, cresol, and
many are toxic to the corneal and conjunctival epithelium and
 mercury- and silver-containing compounds, can be very irritating
should not be used. Povidone-iodine solution is a reliable and
to the ocular surface, and their use is contraindicated. In
 nonirritating agent for destruction of bacteria, fungi, and viruses
 particular, silver nitrate applicator sticks (used for hemostasis
on the ocular surface and periocular skin before surgery, and
 after nail trimming in dogs) cause severe keratitis and epithelial
is the preferred product for this purpose. It is mixed with normal
sloughing in dogs and must not be used near the ocular surface.
 OcULAR PHARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEu TiICS |
59
Astringents and Cauterants
body, iridal, retinal, and lenticular) cells. From this list it is
clear that the effects of inadvertent or intentional irradiation of
 Astringents are locally acting protein precipitants; cauterants 
the eye are potentially wide-ranging. Two forms of radiation
are severe protein-precipitating agents that cause local tissue
are commonly used for the treatment of ocular disease-
destruction. Examples are copper sulfate, trichloracetic acid,
β-iradiation and x- or -iradiation. Because of safety precautions,
phenol, iodine, and zinc sulphate. Such agents have historically
licensing, and expense, treatment tends to be limited to larger
been used (sometimes indiscriminately) to treat a variety of
veterinary hospitals, and referral of cases requiring such
ocular diseases. However, identification and removal of the
 therapy is advocated.
cause or more modern medical and surgical approaches usually
achieve a better result in a more controlled manner, and
B-Irradiation
astringents and cauterants are no longer recommended for
ocular use.
β-Rays are low-energy electrons that penetrate tissue to 3 to
4 mm. Therefore they are used to treat superficial lesions only.
Vitamins
β-irradiation for ophthalmic use is obtained from a strontium-
90 ophthalmic applicator. This therapy is used to control comeal
Various vitamins have been advocated for their supposed thera-
 neovascularization and pigmentation seen  with chronic
peutic efficacy in the treatment of ocular disorders of animals.
 superfcial keratitis ("pannus") in dogs and to treat malignant
In the absence of a specific vitamin deficiency (e.g., vitamin A
ocular neoplasms, including squamous cell carcinoma of the
deficiency causing nyctalopia in cattle or conjunctivitis
in
lids, third eyelid, and conjunctiva in cattle, cats, and horses
turtles) there usually is little to be gained from such local
especially. Because of shallow penetration, β-irradiation from
 therapy. The exception is systemic and ocular signs of warfarin
 an applicator applied to the limbus does not reach the equatorial
 poisoning, which are treated with vitamin K and its analogues.
zone of the lens (Figure 3-12).
Antiparasitic Agents
Y- and X-Irradiation
Ivermectin is now used, almost to the exclusion of all older
y-Rays and x-rays have similar wavelength, energy, and
parasiticides, for treatment of parasitism such as habronemiasis
 penetrating properties but differ in origin. Y-rays emanate from 
and onchocerciasis in horses and ocular filariasis in small
the nucleus, and x-rays from the extranuclear portion, of the
animals. When it is used at excessive doses or at normal doses
atom. Both penetrate deeply and are used for lesions
in a susceptible individual such as a collie, ocular signs of
inaccessible to β-irradiation. Superficial, orthovoltage, and
ivermectin toxicity may be seen. They include mydriasis,
 megavoltage radiotherapy, cobalt 60, cesium-135, and radon
reduction or absence of pupillary light reflexes, blindness, and 
and gold implants (brachytherapy) have all been used.
 retinal folds or edema. These signs are typically temporary.
 Penetrating (x and y) irradiation may interfere with cell division
in the equatorial region of the lens, especially in young
PHYSICALTHERAPY
animals, resulting in partial or complete “radiation cataract."
Higher doses result in keratitis (41%), conjunctiviis (mild,
Contact Lenses
Therapeutic soft contact lenses (TSCLs) have been used in
veterinary patients as bandages to protect the cornea during
healing or sometimes as vehicles for delivery of hydrophilic
100-
drugs. Degradable collagen shields are also available; how-
50
ever, these typically degrade more rapidly than preferred
(usually within 72 hours). Both lens types must be placed
behind the leading edge of the third eyelid to reduce the chance 
of being dislodged. Many ophthalmologists recommend also
placing a partial temporary tarsorrhaphy over the TSCL, a
maneuver that requires general anesthesia or sedation and
%1.0-
regional anesthesia. A temporary tarsorrhaphy will continue to
provide a "bandage" effect even if the TSCL is dislodged.
Hydrophilic TSCLs may be soaked in a concentrated solution
 of some drugs before being placed on the eye to afford some
0.1-
depot effect.
Irradiation
0.01
 Irradiation may be used therapeutically for several ophthalmic
1mm1cm
diseases but also produces ophthalmic disease if the eye must
Figure 3-12. Craph indlicating the clecrease in intensity of β-irracliation
be placed in the field during irradiation for other diseases such
 emitted from a str ontium-90 ophthalmic applicator as a function of tissue
as nasal or orbital neoplasia. Radiation exerts its effect on
cepth. By 1-mm tissue penetration, the raciation intensity has cecreased
to 50%. The cliagrarm of the eye is clrawn to scale to show the relationship 
rapidly dividing cells, which in the eye include lymphocytes,
 of clecreasing intensity to various structures of the eye. (Moclified from 
vascular endothelium (uvea, conjunctiva, eyelids, retina), and
Gillette El [1970l: Veterinary radliotherapy. ] Am Vet Med Assoc
epithelial (eyelid, lacrimal gland, corneal, conjunctival, ciliary
157:1707.)
60
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
Carvalho AB, et al. (2006): Effects of travoprost 0.004% compared with
latanoprost 0.005% on the intraocular pressure of nommal dogs.
Vet Ophthalmol 9:121.
Cawtse MA, et al. (2001): Effects of topical application of a 2% solution of
dorzolamide on intraocular pressure and aqueous humor flow rate in
clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 62:859.
Clode AB,et al.(2006): Evaluation and concentation of voriconazle in
aqueous humor after topical and oral administration in horses. Am I Vet
Res 67:296.
Davidson G (1999): Etodolac. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 21:494.
Davidson MG (2000): Pharm profile: dorzolamide. Compend Cont Ed Pract 
Vet 22:340.
Davis IL, et al. (2005): Pharmacokinetics and issue distribution of
itraconazole after oral and intravenous administrabion to horses. Am J Vet 
Figure 3-13. Racliofrequency hyperthermia hanclpiece.
Res 66: 1694.
Eichenbaum JD, et al. (1988): Effect in Jarge dogs of ophthalmic
Wuy wy r uooung sgeday pue pue[a (euaipe uo aese nolosupaid 
Hosp Assoc 24:705.
34%; severe, 28%), cataract (28%), and keratoconjunctivitis
inflammation in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1493.
sicca. In one study, progression to corneal perforation occurred
Gelatt KN, et al. (20oi): Enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneralion in cats.
in 24% of patients, and 63% of cases of conjunctivitis and
Vet Ophthalmol 4:231.
keratitis were refractory to treatment.
Gelatt KN, et al. (1995): Evaluation of multiple doses of 4 and 6% timolol,
and timolol combined with 2% pilocarpine in clinically nomal beagles
and beagles with glaucoma.Am J Vet Res 56:1325.
Hyperthermia
Gelatt KN,et al.(I995): Evaluaon of mydiais in horse.VetCom
Ophthal 5:104.
Hyperthermia (local induction of heat within a tissue) is used to
Gelat KN, MacKay EO (2001): Changes in intraocular pressure associated
treat squamous cell carcinoma and some other tumors of the
sp sne ut az io pe ozio don 
Vet Ophthalmol 4:6 1.
eye and adnexa in horses and cattle. The temperature of the
Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (1998): The ocular hypertensive effects of topical
tissue is increased to 50° C for 30 sec/cm2 by the local passage
0.1% dexamethasone in beagles with inherited glaucoma. J Ocular
of radiofrequency current through the tissue (Figure 3-i3).
Phamacol Ther 14:57.
Gemensky-Metzler A,et al.(2004): The use of semiconductor diode laser for
Lasers in Veterinary Ophthalmology
deflation and coagulation of anterior uveal cysts in dogs, cats, and horses:
a Teport of 20 cases. Vet Ophthalmol 7:360.
Gerding PA, et al. (1988): Pathogenic bactenia and fungi associated with
Lasers have been described for  cyclophotocoagulation
extemal ocular diseases in dogs: 131 cases (1981-1986) J Am Vet Med
(glaucoma), retinopexy (retinal detachment), rupturing of iris
Assoc 193:242.
cysts, correction of entropion, and ablation of intraocular and
Gilger B,et al.(1997):Neodymium:ytrum-aluminum-gamet laser treatment
adnexal neoplasms. However, their advantages (if any) over
of cystic granula iridica in horses: eight cases (1988-i996). J Vet Med
Assoc 211:341.
standard surgical approaches have not been investigated or
Gilger BC, et al. (1996): Lymphocyte proliferation and blood drug levels in
 proven in most of these diseases. Diode, neodymium:yttrium-
dogs with keratoconjunctiviis sicca receiving long-term ocular
 aluminum-garnet, and CO, lasers are used most commonly in
cyclosporine. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 6:125.
veterinary ophthalmology.
GionfridoJR,etal.(1992):Fungalfloraofthehealthy camelid conjunctival
sac. Am J Vet Res 53:643.
Gionfiddo JR, et al. (1991): Bactenial and mycoplasmal flora of the healthy
camelid conjunctival sac. Am I Vet Res 52:106 1.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
GiulianoEA (2004): Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inveterinary
ophthalmology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:707.
Avunduk AM, et al. (2003): Comparison of effcacy of topical and oral
Giuliano EA,et al.(2000:Inferomedial placement of a single-entry
fluconazole tealment in experimental Aspergillus keratis. Curt Eye Res
subpalpebral lavage tube for Treatment of equine eye disease. Vet
26:113.
Ophthalmol 3:153.
Ball MA, et al. (1997): Corneal concentrations and preliminary toxicological
Grahn BH, Storey ES (2004): Lacrimoshimulants and lacrimomimetics.
evaluation of an itraconazole/dimethy] sulphoxide ophthalmic ointment.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:739.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 20:100.
Gum GG, et al. (1993): Effect of topically applied demec arium bromide
Ball MA, et al. (1997): Evaluation of itraconazole-dimethyl sulfoxide
ointment for realment of keratomycosis in nine horses. J Am Vet Med
with nommotensive eyes and beagles with glaucoma. Am J Vet Res 54:287.
Assoc 211:199.
Gum GG, et al. (1993): The tonogTaphic effects of piloc arpine and
 Beale KM (1 988): Azathioprine for treatment of immune-mediated diseases 
pilocarpine-epinephrine innomal beagles and beagles with inherited
of dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1316.
glaucoma. J Small Amim Pract 34:112.
Berdoulay A, et al. (2005): Effect of topical 0.02% tacrolimus aqueous
Gum GG, et al. (1991): The effect of topical tmolol maleate on intraocular
suspension on tear production in dogs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
 pressure in normal beagles and beagles with inherited glaucoma. Prog Vet
Vet Ophthalmol 8:225.
Comp Ophthalmol I:141.
Herring IP, et al. (2005): Duration of effect and effect of multiple doses of
steroid-induced ocular hypertension. Arch Ophthalmol 117:361.
topical ophthalmic 0.5% proparacaine hydrochloride in clinically nommal
BrighmanAHetal.(19l:fct of aspinnaqueuspotinvales
dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:77.
the dog. J Vet Med Assoc 178:572.
Hulse D (1998): Treatment methods for pain in the osteoarthnitic patient.
Bromberg NM (2002): Cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive for treatment of
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:361.
tefractory comeal ulceration. Vet Ophthalmol 5:55.
Hunter RP, et al. (1995): Pharmacokineics, oral bioavailability and tissue
Brooks DE, Ollivier FJ (2004): Matrix metalloproteinase inhibition in comeal
distribution of azithromycin in cats. J Vet Pharmacol 18:38.
ulceration. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:611.
 Kainer RA, et al. (1980): Hyperthemmia for treatment of ocular squamous cell
Bussieres M, et al. (2005): The use of carbon dioxide laser for the
tumors in cattle.J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:356.
ablation of meibomian gland adenomas in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
Kray KT, et al. (1985): Cromolyn sodium in seasonal allergic conjunctivitis.
41:227.
JAllergy Clin Immunol 76:623.
 OcULAR PhARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEutiICS I
61
Krohne SDG (1998): Carprofen inhibition of flare in the dog measured by
Rainbow ME, Dziezyc J (2003): Effects of twice daily application of 2%
laser flare photometry. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1:81.
dorzolamide on intraocular pressure in nommal cats. Vet Ophthalmol 6:147.
Krohne SDG, Vestre WA (1987): Effects of flunixin meglumine and
Roberts SM,et al.(1987): Ophthalmic complications following megavoltage
 dexamethasone on aqueous protein values after intraocular surgery.
inradiation of the nasal and paranasal cavities in dogs. I Am Vet Med
Am J Vet Res 48:420.
Assoc 190:43.
Latimer FG, et al. (200l): Pharmacokinetics of fluconazole following
Roberts SM, et al. (1986): Antibactenial activity of dilute povidone-jodine
intravenous and oral administrabion and ocular bissue and body fluid
solutions used for ocular surface disinfec hion in dogs. Am J Vet Res
concentrabions of fluconazole following repeated oral dosing in horses.
47:1207.
Am I Vet Res 62:1606.
Roberts SM, et al. (1984): Effect of ophthalmic prednisolone acetate on the
Maggs DI (2005): Update on pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of feline
canine adrenal gland and hepabic function. Am J Vet Res 45:1711.
herpesvirus type 1. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 20:94.
Rothschild CM, et al. (2004): Effects of trimethoprim-sulfadiazine on tear
Maggs DJ, Clarke HE (2004): In vitro effcacy of ganciclovit, cidofovit,
production and the fluctuations of Schirmer tear test values in horses.
enciclviscamtxdndaviganstl
Vet Ophthalmol 7:385.
type-1. Am J Vet Res 65:399.
 Simsek NA, et al. (1996): An experimental study on the effect of collagen 
Mathews KA (2002): Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics: a review of
shields and therapeutic contact lenses on comeal wound healing. Comea
curTent practice. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 12:89.
15:612.
McLaughlin SA,et al.(1983): Pathogenic bacteria and fungi associated with
Smith SA (2003): Deracoxib. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 25:419.
extaocular disease in the horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:241.
Sparks AH, et al. (1999): The clinical efficacy of topical and systemic
Mison MB, et al. (2003): Comparison of the effects of the COg surgical laser
therapyforthereatment of felineocular chlamydiosis.JFelineMed
and conventional surgical techniques on healing and wound tensile
Surg I:31.
strength of skin flaps in the dog.Vet Surg 32:153.
 Spradbrow P (1968): The bacterial flora of the ovine conjuncival sac. Aust
Vet I 44: 117.
isolates associated with infechious kerabitis in horses: 63 cases
Stiles I (2004): Warning of an adverse effect of etodolac. J Am Vet Med
(1986-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:928.
Assoc 225:503.
Moore CP,et al. (1983): Bacternal and fungal isolates from equids with
Stiles J,et al. (200l): The eficacy of 0.5% proparacaine stored at room
ulcerative keratitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:600.
temperature. Vet Ophthalmol 4:205.
Moses VS, Bertone AL (2002): Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Studer ME, et al. (2000): Effects of 0.005% latanoprost solution on
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 18:21.
intraocular pressure in healthy dogs and cats.Am J Vet Res 6l:1220.
Nasisse MP, et al. (1997): Effects of valacyclovit in cats infected with feline
van der Woerdt A,et al. (2000): Effect of single- and muliple-dose 0.5%
herpesvirus 1. Am J Vet Res 58:1141.
timolol maleate on intraocular pressure and pupil size in female horses.
Nasisse MP,et al. (1989): In vitro susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-I to
Vet Ophthalmol 3: 165.
vidarabine, idoxuridine,trifluridine, acyclovit, or bromovinyldeoxyuridine.
Ward DA (1996): Comparative efficacy of topically applied flurbiprofen,
Am I Vet Res 50:158.
diclfnactmenandsupofenftheamntfexpermntally
Olivero DK,et al. (1991): Clinical evaluation of 1% cyclosporine
induced blood-aqueous barrier disruphion in dogs. Am J Vet Res 57:875.
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Wiebe V,Kaiker M (2005): Therapy of systemic fungal inections: a
199:1039.
pharmacologic perspective.Clin Tech SmallAnim Pract 20:250.
WilcoxG(1970):Bactenal flora of the bovine eye with special reference o
fluid during comeal healing in I0 horses with ulcerative keratitis. Vet
Moraxella and Neisseria. Aust Vet I 46:253.
Ophthalmol 7:397.
Willis A, et al. (2001): Effects of topical administration of 0.005%
Owen RA, Jagger DW (1987): Clinical observalhions on the use of BCG cell
Jatanoprost solution on eyes of clinically normal horses. Am J Vet Res
wallfrachion for Tealment of periocular and other equine sarcoids. Vet Rec
62:1945.
120:548.
Willis AM, et al. (2001): Effect of topical administation of 2% dorzolamide
Owen WMA, et al. (2003): Effcacy of azithromycin for the realment of
hydrochloride or 2% dorzolamide hydrochloride-0.5% timolol maleate on
chlamydophilosis. J Feline Med Surg 5:305.
intraocular pressure in climically nomal horses. Am J Vet Res 62:709.
Owens JG, et al. (1996): Pharmacokinetics of acyclovir in the cat.
Zhan G, et al. (1992): Steroid glaucoma: corhicosteroid-induced ocular
J Vet Phammacol Ther 19:488.
hypertension in cats. Exp Eye Res 54:211.
Plummer CE, et al. (2006): Suspected ivermectin toxicosis in a miniature
mule foal causing blindness. Vet Ophthalmol 9:29.
Chapter
GENERAL PATHOLOGY OF THE EYE
Brian P Wilcock
OCULAR INJURY
RESTORATION OF HOMEOSTASIS:
OCULAR NEOPLASIA
OCULAR INFLAMMATION
OCULAR WWOUND HEALING
HISTOLOGIC BASIS FOR COMMON
CLINICAL LESIONS
Third, some of the most important ocular tissues (retina,
cular pathology is relevant to those interested in clinical
 corneal endothelium, most of the lens) are postmitotic and thus
veterinary ophthalmology because examination of the eye is
have limited capacity to regenerate after injury. In these
the direct observation of its gross pathology; even the
optically sensitive tissues the types of repair phenomena (e.g.,
ophthalmoscope is a low-power microscope. There is a strong
 fbrosis) that might return other organs to acceptable function
correlation between the observations made on clinical examin-
 often do not restore (and might even worsen) ocular function.
ation and the results of microscopic examination. Clinicians
 The repair of a skin wound by fbrous scarring is a familiar
and pathologists use exactly the same terminology—-a welcome
and useful phenomenon, but scarring of similar magnitude
accord that is almost unique among medical specialties and is
would be blinding in the cornea. Development of relatively
further testimony to the inseparability of clinical ophthalmology
minor amounts of granulation tissue, which would be helpful or
and ophthalmic pathology.
inconsequential elsewhere, can create occlusion of the pupil
 The widely held perception that ocular pathology is so com-
or of the trabecular meshwork, leading to glaucoma.
 plicated and so different from the pathology of other tissues
that it must forever remain the realm of the specialist is untrue.
OCULAR INJURY
The fundamental pathologic events in the eye are identical to
those occurring in other tissues. The outcomes of these events
The basics of tissue reaction to injury are the same within the eye
 may be quite different because of the following three important 
 as within other tissues, and it is not the purpose of this chapter to
 principles of ocular pathology.
review what is amply discussed in any textbook of general pathol-
First, the globe is a closed, fluid-filled sphere that is relatively
Ogy. Presented here is a brief overview of those responses, with a
 impervious to events occuring in other body systems but highly
 particular emphasis on those aspects that are different, or have a
sensitive to events occurring elsewhere within the eye itself.
different significance, within the eye from those in other tissues.
The internal environment of the eye is separated from general
body circulation by a series of intercellular tight junctions (the
Causes of Ocular Injury
blood-ocular barrier). At the same time the fluid aqueous and
vitreous allow diffusion of soluble nutrients and growth factors 
 Ocular injury can be attributed to a wider diversity of noxious
throughout the eye. This fluid environment permits structures
stimuli than is true of any other tissue. Most organs are injured
like lens, cornea, and (in some species) even retina to exist with 
by only one or two types of agents on a regular basis, and suffer
a degree of avascularity critical to proper optical function. The 
 injury only infrequently from other types of processes. The eye
 disadvantage of this closed system is that potentially injurious
is quite commonly injured by such a wide diversity of agents as
chemicals, such as inflammatory mediators, cell breakdown
 ultraviolet irradiation, nutritional excesses and deficiencies, toxi-
 products, and chemical promoters of fbroplasia, are also retained 
 cities, infectious agents of all types, physical trauma, desiccation,
and distributed throughout the globe. In nonocular settings,
 genetic disorders, immune-mediated phenomena, and neoplasia.
such chemicals are rapidly diluted, deactivated, or destroyed as 
 Although diseases that initially affect the eye rarely result in
they leave the immediate vicinity of their generation.
disease in other tissue, the converse is not true. The eye may
 Second, proper ocular function requires precise anatomic
be affected by disease in other tissues when its structural or
 relationships among many constituent parts. Many portions of
 physiologic barriers (i.e., the blood-ocular barrier, retinal vascular
the eye are uniquely unforgiving of the presence of even minor
 autoregulation) are insufficient to maintain ocular homeostasis.
 changes in microanatomy or physiology that occur during inflam-
Examples are ocular manifestations of systemic infectious
 mation and wound healing. A good example is serous retinal
disease, metastatic neoplasia, hypertension and diabetes, and
detachment, in which serous inflammation, ordinarily a minor
systemic nutritional deficiencies and toxicities.
 event, causes blindness as it elevates the retina out of visual focus
 and leads to eventual ischemic retinal necrosis because it separates
Consequences of Ocular Injury
the retina from its choroidal source of oxygen and other nutrients.
Similarly, something that is usually as harmless as edema can,
 At the cellular level the reaction of ocular tissue to injury is the
within highly regimented tissues like cornea or lens, critically
same as elsewhere, and depends on the nature, duration, and
alter the passage of light to the point of causing blindness.
severity of the insult. The response to the injurious stimulus is
62
GeneRaL PaTholoGY Of The EYE I
63
one or more of the following: resistance, adaptation, injury.
containment, and repair.
 Like any other tissue, the various ocular tissues are not with-
 out intrinsic resiliency and may successfully resist mild and
transient injury. Alternatively, mild injury may simply be
absorbed without any detectable change in ocular homeostasis.
More substantial injury, particularly if prolonged, will likely
trigger one or more adaptational changes, and even more
severe/persistent injury may cause cell death (necrosis). In
most instances such necrosis is then followed by some form of
inflammatory reaction intended to neutralize or otherwise con-
tain the injurious agent. Such containment is then followed by
tissue repair, ordinarily including varying proportions of fbrosis 
and parenchymal regeneration.
The various ocular tissues continuously interact with
innumerable internal and external environmental stimuli. The
 Figure 4-1. Focal hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium at a site
outcome of that ongoing interaction is the dynamic equilibrium
of serous retinal cletachrment. Degeneration of the photoreceptors and of
 the neurons within the outer nuclear layer incicates that this cletachment
u, jo unuyap au eu, s on aan Anso am je
has been present for at least several weeks.
is always subjective and is greatly influenced by the sensitivity
of the techniques we use to detect abnormalities.
When faced with an environmental challenge that exceeds
 by hypertrophy of the same cells. In general, hyperplasia is the
their resistance (yet is not severe enough to cause outright
 more efficient response to a need for more tissue mass in all
necrosis), the various parts of the eye respond with gradual
 tissues that are capable of mitotic replication. It is seen under
transformation into one or more adaptational states: hyper-
 many of the same circumstances as hypertrophy, and is relatively
trophy, hyperplasia, metaplasia, dysplasia, and atrophy. A stimulus
less common in the eye than it is in most other tissues because 
 that exceeds adaptational capacity triggers degeneration and, if
so many of the ocular tissues have limited or no proliferative
severe, necrosis. The same stimuli, if applied to the globe during
 capability. Many of the most dramatic examples of hyperplasia
its prenatal or postnatal development, can result in various degrees
within the eye are combined with metaplastic changes, as
of developmental arrest known as agenesis, aplasia, or hypoplasia.
described later. In most instances hyperplasia within the eye is
 seen as a transient phase of tissue regeneration that precedes
Agenesis, Aplasia, Hypopfasia
eventual normalization of the reparative tissue mass. It is seen
in conjunctival and corneal epithelium following any kind of
Agenesis, aplasia, and hypoplasia reflect varying severities of
injury and may remain in a permanently excessive state in the 
form of an epithelial facet (a plaquelike corneal epithelial
(agenesis), has failed to develop beyond its most primitive form
thickening). Similarly, it may remain as a plaque of hyper-
(aplasia), or has failed to complete its development (hypoplasia).
 plastic lens capsule epithelium in the form of an anterior capsular
Because the eye of some species (notably, dogs and cats) con-
or subcapsular cataract (Figure 4-2).
tinues to develop for many weeks after birth, there is ample
 opportunity for hypoplasia to occur in response to postnatally
Atrophy
acquired stimuli. In the eye one must therefore always be care-
ful to distinguish truly congenital (present at birth) from develop-
Atrophy implies the reduction of tissue mass at some point after
mental (occurring at any time during development) stimuli.
the tissue had reached its full development. Causes are as
diverse as ischemia, denervation, lack of hormonal or other
Hypertrophy
trophic stimulation, disuse, and loss of mass due to degeneration
0 Apuanba nsou pasn si ,Aydone, aa aun uym 'sisaroau o
Hypertrophy is defined as an increase in tissue mass because of
describe senile iris atrophy and pressure-induced glaucomatous
an increase in cell size. It is most commonly encountered as
atrophy of ciliary processes, retina, and optic nerve, and as a
hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) sub-
 relatively imprecise umbrella for a group of so-called retinal
sequent to retinal detachment of more than a few hours'
atrophies (Figures 4-3 and 4-4).
 duration. It is a rapid, reliable, and more or less specific change
The retinal atrophies comprise a very mixed group of
that allows one to separate genuine detachment from artifact
syndromes that can be called “atrophies" only in the most
(Figure 4-1). Hypertrophy is also seen in many other ocular
superfcial way. They include several congenital photoreceptor
 tissues as a prelude to replication, such as occurs with hypertrophy
 dystrophies, in which the clinical and histologic lesions are
of iris endothelium preparatory to the development of a preiridal
 delayed in onset, and others in which the mechanism of so-
fibrovascular membrane, hypertrophy of corneal stromal
 called atrophy is outright necrosis (as with viral retinopathies 
fbroblasts in the early stages of stromal repair, and hypertrophy
 and those caused by light or toxins).
 of lens epithelium at various stages of cataract formation.
Metaplasia
Hyperplasia
Metaplasia is the conversion of one adult tissue type into
Hyperplasia is defined as an increase in tissue mass because of
another, related and more durable, tissue type. The most prevalent
an increased number of cells. It may or may not be accompanied
examples are conversion of fibrous tissue into bone, or columnar
64
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
39
Figure 4-4. Photoreceptor atrophy in a canine retina. Only a clubbed
vestige of the photoreceptors remains. This could be either inherited
retinal atrophy or retinal atrophy seconclary to prolonged detachment.
Figure 4-2. Hyperplasia and fibrous metaplasia of lens epithelium creates
an anterior polar subcapsular cataract. Hydropic cdegeneration of
regenerating lens fibers creates the so-callecd bladlder cells typical of
cataract.
65.84.
Figure 4-5. Corneal cutaneous metaplasia in a dog with chronic corneal
irritationfrom entpion.lrregular epithelialhyperplasia,keratinizatin,
pigmentation, and superficial stromal fibrosis are present. This is a
universal response of cornea to any type of prolonged, mild to modlerate
RPE
injury (e.g., chronic clesiccation, any chronic irritation.)
Figure 4-3. Normal canine retina. Note the density of the outer nuclear
surface of the inconspicuous cuboidal cells that represent the retinal
pigment epitheliurm (RPE). The tapetum (T) and pigrmented choroid are
shown external to the RPE.
mucosal epithelium into stratified squamous epithelium. The
usual stimulus seems to be the need to adapt to a more hostile
environment by acquiring a more durable cellular phenotype.
Metaplasia is a relatively uncommon reaction in most tissues,
 but it is a particularly prevalent and clinically important reaction
within the eye. Common examples are so-called cutaneous
 metaplasia of the comea in cases of chronic keratoconjunctivitis
sicca or exposure keratitis, under which circumstances the
 cornea seems to recall its embryologic origins as skin, and thus
undergoes keratinization, pigmentation, and vascularization
Figure 4-6. Clinical counterpart of corneal cutaneous metaplasia, in a
(Figures 4-5 and 4-6). In this instance metaplasia is a protective 
dog with chronic keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
GenERAL PaTHoLoGY Of THe EYE |
65
adaptation, because the epithelium shifts to a phenotype more
 able to withstand dryness or chronic abrasion. Similarly, con-
junctiva commonly undergoes metaplasia to a stratified squamous
(and sometimes keratinized) epithelium in response to chronic
irritation.
 Other important examples of metaplasia occur inside the eye
as fibrous metaplasia of corneal endothelium, lens epithelium,
ciliary and iris epithelium, and RPE. All of these tissues are
 capable of fbrouslike metaplasia and quite substantial prolifer-
ation, creating retrocorneal, transpupillary, cyclic, and retro-
retinal fbrous membranes. The significance of these membranes 
varies with location: Those crossing the pupil create the risk of
blocking the outflow of aqueous humor and thus can cause
 glaucoma, whereas in other locations they may impairthe passage
of light or the diffusion of nutrients.
The most remarkable example of metaplasia is the develop-
 Figure 4-8. Disorganized retinal development in a cog with inherited 
retinal dlysplasia. The rosettelike structures most often represent transverse
ment of lens fibers within injured bird retina (lentoid bodies).
 sections through retinal foldls, which in turn probably represent reclunclant 
Such dramatic metaplasia defies our current understanding of
 retina in a globe with an imbalance between retinal and choroicdal/scleral 
[uida Aand jo st Apasodns sua ren u ooiqua renoo
growth.
origin and theoretically cannot arise as a metaplastic phenomenon
within the neuroectodermal retina.
Dystrophy
Dysplasia
 The much-abused term dystrophy is strictly defined as degen-
Dysplasia means disorderly proliferation. The term can be used
eration caused by tissue malnutrition, but hardly anyone uses it 
in an embryologic context to signify disorderly development of
in that fashion. It tends to be used to describe a variety of
a tissue, in the context of wound healing to imply a transient
juvenile or adult-onset degenerative diseases that have a pre-
jumbling of tissue organization that precedes normalization, or
sumed congenital basis. Ocular examples are several degenerative
in a neoplastic context to describe the state of disordered pro-
 corneal diseases characterized by adult-onset stromal depo-
liferation that is a prelude to malignant transformation. In
sition of lipid or mineral, and unexplained progressive degener-
 ocular pathology we use it in all three contexts. Familiar
ation of corneal endothelium that is clinically observed as
examples are jumbled retinal development that may be inherited
progressive diffuse corneal edema (corneal endothelial
or may follow viral or chemical injury to the developing retina
dystrophy). Using this definition, one should classify many of
(Figures 4-7 and 4-8), conjunctival or comeal epithelial dysplasia
the inherited photoreceptor atrophies (so-called progressive
that is a prelude to actinic squamous cell carcinoma, and non-
retinal atrophies) as dystrophies.
neoplastic jumbling of comeal epithelium in any healing comeal
ulcer (see Figure 4-5).
Necrosis
beyond its adaptational range will undergo lethal injury, termed 
necrosis. Most such injuries affect cell membranes and result in
defective regulation of transmembrane ion exchange. Parti-
cularly critical is an influx in calcium from the calcium-rich
extracellular fluid. When present in excess within the intra-
cellular environment, calcium is a powerful cytotoxic agent
that, among many other activities, disrupts oxidative phos-
phorylation within the mitochondria and triggers hypoxic cell
death. The morphologic outcome of the membrane damage and
energy paralysis is cellular swelling, hydropic disruption of the
cytocavitary network, irreversible mitochondrial swelling, and
eventually, irreversible damage to nuclear chromatin that mani-
fests as the familiar histologic hallmarks of necrosis: nuclear
pyknosis, karyorrhexis, and karyolysis.
Although necrosis is obviously a significant event because
such dead cells lose all function, we are often more able to
detect the sequelae of necrosis than the actual necrosis itself.
These sequelae may relate to the loss of barier function,
electrical activity or secretory function, or to the initiation of
Figure 4-7. Disorclerly repair within a neonatal canine retina injured by
 inflammation and healing.
canine clistemper virus infection. Although this is technically a
LOSS OF BARRIER FUNCTION. Normal ocular function
postnecrotic retinal "clysplasia," the appearance is completely dlifferent
from that of the retinal folds and rosettes seen in the idiopathic inherited
depends on the preservation of numerous critical barriers to
 dlysplasias that occur in many breeds of clogs.
maintain ocular clarity. For example, we ordinarily detect comeal
66
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
epithelial necrosis only because the underlying hydrophobic
 only by noting an increase in the tapetal reflex, because the
collagenous stroma osmotically imbibes the water from the tear
necrosis (especially if it involves the outer nuclear layer and
film, resulting in rapid localized corneal opacity (Figures 4-9
 photoreceptors) causes a focal thinning in the light-absorbing
and 4-10). Staining of the defect by fluorescein to facilitate
retina. Necrosis of the tapetum itself would create a focal fundic
clinical detection operates on exactly the same principle, as this 
 black spot as the normally hidden pigmented choroid becomes
hydroscopic dye binds to the now-exposed collagenous stroma.
exposed.
Similarly, necrosis of comeal endothelium results in deep comeal
LOSS OF SECRETORY FUNCTION. Damage to the ciliary
stromal edema, and necrosis of lens epithelium results in
 epithelium results in a profound reduction in the production of 
hydropic swelling of the normally dehydrated lens fibers,
aqueous humor. This reduction explains, in part, the routine
which we detect as cataract (see Figure 4-2). Loss of the endo-
 observation of transient ocular hypotension during uveitis of
thelial tight junctions (as in vascular hypertension, infection
any cause. We use it to our advantage in the management
with such organisms as the rickettsiae of Rocky Mountain
of glaucoma when we attempt to selectively destroy ciliary
 spotted fever) within the iris or choroidal blood vessels results
epithelium by transscleral application of cold or laser energy to
in serous effusion or even hemorrhage, which interferes with
the ciliary body.
the clarity of the ocular media, or more serious consequences
 INITIATION OF INFLAMMATION: THE FIRST STEP TOWARD
 of retinal ischemia.
NORMALIZATION. It is paradoxical that our first clinical clue
LOSS OF ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY. Necrosis within the retina,
that there is something wrong with the eye is often the detec-
if extensive, may be detected as alterations in vision or as
tion of inflammation because, in fact, inflammation is actually
changes in the electroretinogram. Focal necrosis may be detected
the first step in the repair process. In any tissue, cell death
triggers a localized inflammatory reaction intended to ingest
and remove the dead tissue. The mechanisms by which cellular
injury triggers inflammation are several: release of chemicals
 (ssd nd) a  pa 
act as direct inflammatory mediators, release of inflammatory
mediators from other cells within the neighborhood (parti-
cularly mast cells or platelets), and activation of latent
mediators within the plasma that frequently pools in areas
vacated by recently destroyed parenchymal cells. In addition to
the generation of chemicals intended to trigger the inflam-
matory response, these same events usually generate locally
acting growth factors that stimulate parenchymal regeneration
and fibrovascular stromal repair once the hostile events of
inflammation have subsided. During the interval between
Figure 4-9. Diffuse corneal ecema in a horse. The absence of con-
 necrosis and eventual repair, the injured tissue is frequently
junctival vascular reaction suggests that the cause is probably dliffuse
 ynu aq  j uun punnd un pa
corneal endothelial dlisease (lens luxation, glaucoma, or immune-medliated 
obvious, and more significant, than the tissue injury that
injury).
triggered it. Although it is true that necrosis of any cause will 
trigger some inflammation, necrosis is not the only trigger. In
fact, in most situations it is not the most potent initiator of
inflammation (infectious agents and immune phenomena are
 more prevalent and more potent causes).
Ocular inflammation and subsequent
repair are of such
 importance that they deserve specific consideration as separate
topics.
OCULAR INFLAMMATION
Philosophically, inflammation should be considered a transient,
controlled vascular and cellular response by living tissue to
injury of almost any type. That response should be qualitatively
and quantitatively appropriate to the nature of the tissue injury,
and it should serve to neutralize and remove the injury's
stimulus while also laying the groundwork for parenchymal
and stromal repair. In evolution, inflammation probably frst
appeared as a debridement phenomenon, whereby macrophages
or their equivalent would move into injured tissue, clear up the 
debris, and prepare the way for healing to occur. We now know
that this debridement itself consists of at least two simultaneous
 phenomena, namely, the removal of tissue debris and the pro-
Figure 4-10. Histology of corneal eclema. The normal stroma is cliluted by
 duction of various growth factors that initiate the subsequent
the accumulation offluid, changing the refractive inclex of the cornea and
tissue repair. Later in evolution the inflammatory process
causing the characteristic gray opacity noted on clinical examination.
assumed a more defensive role, tightly integrating with the
GeneRAL PaThoLoGY Of The EYE I
67
immune system to recognize and destroy a variety of infectious
These short-acting vasoactive mediators are then reinforced by
and noninfectious “foreign" agents.
a wide variety of mediators that are synthesized de novo from
 The major mechanical and chemical events of inflammation 
parenchymal cells, leukocytes, and other cells at sites of
do not differ among the various mammalian species. Considered
inflammation.
here are those aspects of inflammation that have particularly
This serous effusion that characterizes the very early stages
important consequences forthe eye or that are somehow modifed
of inflammation is beneficial, because it serves to flood the
 by peculiarities of ocular anatomy or physiology.
region with a substantial array of such activated humoral defenses
When it works as it should, the inflammatory reaction is a
as complement and some broadly acting antibodies as well as
beneficial physiologic reaction that is limited only to the
to engender the leakage of fbrinogen, which will then create
immediate area of injury. It should persist only as long as is
the fibrin scaffold that will enhance both the migration and the 
necessary for its defensive and debridement activities, and it
 phagocytic efficacy of the leukocytes that follow.
should selectively recruit only those body defenses most effec-
Within minutes of the initiation of the preceding changes in 
tive in combating the specific injurious agent. Inflammation
vascular permeability, leukocytes begin to settle out of circu-
should thus exhibit a remarkable degree of moderation and
lation, bind to endothelial cells, migrate through the now-
specificity so that there is no undue injury to bystander tissues
 permeable endothelial junctions, and then move through the
or to the overall health of the animal. This remarkable balancing
tissues in search of the cause of tissue injury. We have recognized
act is achieved by the local release of a wide range of chemical
for many years that the types of leukocytes recruited carry sub-
mediators that reside within normal parenchymal tissue, within
stantial diagnostic value, because certain types of infectious
leukocytes or platelets, and within the plasma itself. It is not 
agents or immune responses habitually recruit specific types of
practical to attempt to list all of the inflammatory mediators,
leukocytes. As a rule neutrophil-dominated inflammation is
their origins, and their physiologic activity. Not only does this
equated with bacterial infection, eosinophils predict hyper-
list grow almost daily, but such lists tend to reinforce the
sensitivity reactions, especially to parasites, and macrophage-
mistaken view that a given mediator has a specific, invariable
dominated (granulomatous) inflammation is restricted to
biologic activity.
cell-mediated immune events and to inflammation initiated by
 Like letters of the alphabet, each inflammatory mediator is a
a relatively small group of poorly degradable infectious or
hormonelike member of a complex biologic alphabet. Each
noninfectious agents. Only recently, however, has the basis for
"letter'’ may thus have many different meanings, depending on
 that sometimes remarkable specificity become apparent.
the company it keeps and in what sequence the letters occur.
Part of the answer lies in the mixture of mediators/cytokines
 These inflammatory mediators are part of a larger group of
 that are triggered by certain types of infections, but there was
locally acting hormonelike messengers called cytokines, so
always an inexplicable problem: Most described chemotactic
named because they stimulate some kind of proliferative
mediators have a fairly broad range of activity, so that many of
activity on the part of neighboring cells. These cytokines create
 them attract neutrophils, eosinophils, and macrophages with
the biologic language that carries the instructions for every-
almost equal avidity. How, then, could we explain the empiric
thing from coordinated embryologic development to orderly
 observation of almost purely eosinophilic infiltrates in some
cell death (apoptosis). One must thus read the supposed activity
parasitic diseases, or purely neutrophilic infiltrates in many
of any given cytokine with substantial skepticism, because
bacterial infections? The answer seems to lie in a second level
there is no guarantee that the activity that we have determined
of leukocyte “screening" that occurs at the level of the endothelial
by in vitro testing of isolated mediators at arbitrary dosages
cells themselves. The locally generated inflammatory mediators
has anything to do with their in vivo activity at physiologic
rapidly stimulate the expression of leukocyte-specific adhesion
dosages and in the company of many other members of the
molecules on the surface of the venular endothelium, which
cytokine alphabet.
will bind only to complementary receptors on the surface
 Although our understanding of the chemical mediation of
of stimulated leukocytes that have fallen under the influence
inflammation and repair is still quite primitive and is largely
of these same local mediators. Thus, although the general
limited to making lists of the chemicals involved, we know
chemotactic stimulus may attract many different leukocyte types
quite a lot about the mechanical events of inflammation. These 
into the permeable venules, only those leukocytes that can pass
events represent a stepwise, highly integrated chronologic
this second screening test will actually be allowed to enter the
sequence that involves changes in microvascular blood flow.
 tissue to take up the "search-and-destroy' mission.
endothelialpermeability.leukocyte migration，humoral and
 The leukocytes that thus enter the tissue become intermingled
leukocyte-dependent neutralization of foreign material, and
with the serum and fbrin that may already have accumulated
tissue debridement preparatory to parenchymal and stromal
because of the previous increase in vascular permeability, and
repair.
these mixtures form the inflammatory exudates that for years
 The initial events of inflammation involve microvascular
have formed the basis for the prediction of disease causation
dilation (hyperemia) and endothelial cell contraction to increase 
based on histologic or cytologic evaluation of such exudates.
the permeability of postcapillary venules to plasma solutes.
 o o r  ns nou a sn s
This creates the redness and serous effusion that typify early
amount and in cellular and humoral makeup according to the
inflammation, and that will continue as long as the active phase 
 ever-changing nature of the battle between the injurious agent
of inflammation persists. These early events are stereotypic:
 and the tissue defenses. In its simplest form these changes may
They are identical regardless of the stimulus, and they have no
be nothing more than a gradual reduction in the intensity of the 
diagnostic specificity in terms of predicting what type of injury
vascular response and leukocytic recruitment as the humoral
might have occurred. They occur in response to the rapid
 and cellular defenses accomplish their task of diluting and
release of preformed chemical mediators such as histamine
destroying the offending agent. On the other hand, the non-
from mast cells or platelets within the region of initial injury.
specific humoral and cellular defenses may become modified
68
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
by the addition of specific immune responses as the battle
continues. These immune responses act, in general, to improve
both the specificity and the efficacy of what at first are relatively
broad and nonselective defensive strategies.
 The purpose of these defenses is to confront and destroy the
 offending agent. In some circumstances this is a messy affair,
with spillage of leukocyte contents or excessive diffusion of
humoral cytotoxic chemicals (like complement fragments) into
the local environment. The resulting bystander injury is a sub-
stantial and undesirable side effect of inflammation, and it is
 sometimes a justification for intervening with drugs to dampen 
the inflammatory response.
Peculiarities of Ocular Inflammation
The eye seems reluctant to become involved in inflammatory
Figure 4-11. A layer of granulation tissue (arrow) has formed on the anterior
 disease, and for good reason: The visual function of the eye is
surface of the iris, representing a source fo hyphema and the potential to
easily disturbed and is sometimes destroyed by minor degrees
 cause glaucoma via occlusion of the pupil or the filtration angle.
of inflammation that would be considered inconsequential in
most other tissues. The blood-ocular barrier, the protective
 such as skin and muscle. Our discussion here is limited to those
 presence of eyelids, the tear film, the bony orbit, and a carefully
ccular tissues that, for one reason or another, undergo rather
regulated system of intraocular immune tolerance all seem
 specific and unusual patterns of inflammation.
designed to spare the globe from the need to participate in
inflammatory responses (inflammation is a second level of
Corneal Inflammation
defense to be triggered in any tissue only when the primary
structural barriers have failed). When the intraocular tissues do
The causes of comeal injury and subsequent inflammation are
become involved in an inflammatory reaction, the outcome is
thoroughly discussed elsewhere in this text, but it is nonetheless
 strongly influenced by the following three unique factors:
useful to remember that the normal comea is highly resistant to
infectious disease. With the possible exception of viral keratitis,
· The globe is a closed sphere that prevents the usual
almost allinflammatory corneal disease is triggered by some
dissipation of inflammatory mediators and the clearing of
exudates. Intraocular inflammation is thus virtually always
kind of “environmental" injury to the cornea: abnormalities in
the quantity or quality of the tear film, mechanical irritation from
diffuse, because inflammatory mediators and injurious agents 
eyelids, cilia, or foreign bodies, or outright physical trauma. We
easily become dispersed throughout the fluid media.
nonetheless are often guilty of drawing excessively simplistic
 Although clinicians distinguish anterior uveitis from posterior
uveitis, on a histologic basis virtually all intraocular
(and usually erroneous) conclusions about the significance of
various bacterial or fungal isolates in the pathogenesis of comeal
 inflammation is diffuse (i.e., endophthalmitis). The diffusion
disease. Such erroneous conclusions often form the basis for
of inflammatory mediators also probably explains why, for
ineffective or even harmful antimicrobial therapy.
example, inflammation that predominantly affects the iris 
 Because inflammation is fundamentally a vascular event, the
will also trigger perivascular inflammation within the distant 
retina, or why cormeal stromal inflammation will inevitably
 avascular cornea cannot undergo true inflammation until it has
acquired blood vessels by ingrowth from the limbus. The very
cause increased vascular permeability within the iris and
ciliary body, resulting in a clinically detectable increase in
 protein within the aqueous humor.
(neutrophilia and corneal edema) are in fact passive events
related to comeal ulceration, so that neutrophils and fluid are
 The intraocular environment contains virtually no resident
imbibed from the adjacent tear film. The first genuine inflam-
defenses. There are virtually no resident granulocytes,
matory reaction to corneal injury occurs in the nearest available
macrophages, or lymphocytes. There are no mechanisms for
vascular bed, ordinarily that of the limbus. Depending on the
self-cleansing like coughing or peristalsis.
diffusion of inflammatory mediators, vessels within the con-
 The function of the eye is easily disturbed by what
junctiva or even the iris may participate. A peripheral ring of
ordinarily might seem like minor manifestations of 
edema (serous effusion) commonly accompanies increased
inflammation, such as accumulation of fluid, leukocytes, or
tissue debris, or even by transient fluctuations in tightly
 permeability of limbal perivascular venules, and protein effusion
regulated intraocular physiologic processes like production 
from the inis vessels enters the aqueous humor to create aqueous
flare. Leukocytes (usually neutrophils) migrate through these
of aqueous humor. Even mild serous effusion can create
permeable vessels, and those from the buibar conjunctiva or
vision-threatening serous retinal detachment, corneal
limbic sclera migrate into the corneal stroma at a level appro-
edema, and cataract, whereas fbrinous effusions threaten to
 priate to the localization of the stimulus. Shallow injuries/
create traction retinal detachment, pupillary block, or
occlusion of other parts of the aqueous drainage pathway,
 infections thus stimulate only a superficial stromal infiltration.
The comeal stroma may be the victim of bystander injury as
culminating in glaucoma (Figure 4-11).
the intracellular neutrophilic enzymes diffuse into the sur-
Inflammation can occur in any of the intraocular and peri-
rounding tissue while the neutrophils do battle with various
 ocular tissues, but the periocular tissues—eyelid, conjunctiva,
infectious agents. The resulting lesion (Figures 4-12 and 4-13)
and orbital soft tissue—react exactly like other soft tissues,
is known as suppurative keratomalacia (malacia = softening).
GeNERAL PAThOLOGY Of THE EYE |
69
Nomenclature of Intraocular Inflammation
 In theory one can have inflammation that is isolated to any of the
intraocular compartments. Thus, one can postulate the existence
 of iritis, cyclitis (inflammation of the ciliary body), choroiditis,
retinitis, and even hyalitis (inflammation of the vitreous itself).
 In reality, however, the interior of the globe almost always acts
as a unit when responding to inflammatory stimuli, simply
because the fluid ocular media do not allow rigid isolation of
inflammatory agents or inflammatory chemical mediators. Thus
we habitually use broader terminology, as follows:
·Anterior uveitis (iridocyclitis): Inflammation of the iris and
ciliary body, with inflammatory exudate accumulating within
the aqueous humor as aqueous flare or (if purulent) hypopyon.
Figure 4-12. Severe cleep mycotic keratitis. The ceep corneal stroma has
· Posterior uveitis: Inflammation of the choroid, often with
been clestroyed by the bystancer effects of neutrophil accumulation.
[euny A pajelui Aeay s! 'euasu uuiys 'aueguau s,jaansa
 accumulation of inflammatory exudate in the subretinal
hyphae.
space to cause retinal detachment.
· Chorioretinitis: Inflammation affecting the choroid and
adjacent retina, almost always with exudate accumulating
within the adjacent vitreous and subretinal space.
· Endophthatmitis: Inflammation of the entire uveal tract
along with inflammatory effusion into the aqueous and
vitreous humors.
· Panophthalmitis: Endophthalmitis that has extended to
 involve even the sclera. Although there are traditional
clinical criteria to distinguish anterior from posterior
uveitis, or choroiditis from chorioretinitis, almost all
substantial intraocular inflammatory disease is histologically
classified as endophthalmitis. Even when the majority of the
inflammation is limited to the iris, there is almost always
some inflammation within retina, choroid, and vitreous.
Panophthalmitis is actually quite rare and is almost entirely
limited to being a late complication of uncontrolled
bacterial endophthalmitis after penetrating injury.
Common Sequelae of Intraocular Inflammation
Inflammatory Retinal Detachment
Because the retina is not truly attached to the RPE, there is a
Figure 4-13. Suppurative keratormalacia in an enucleated equine globe.
 potential space between the photoreceptors and the RPE that is the
The corneal stroma was cestroyec by enzymes released from neutrophils
 remnant of the original optic vesicle. Any increase in permeability
immigrating into the cornea in response to opportunistic bacterial
within the choroidal blood vessels, such as with hypertension or
nfection.
with acute inflammation, results in accumulation of fluid between 
the RPE and the photoreceptors, creating a serous retinal detach-
ment (Figure 4-14). Much less common is the so-called traction
These leukocytes and the injured cornea itself are the most
detachment that results from organization of vitreal fibrinous
important sources of the fibroblastic and angioblastic growth
exudates. Because the outer half of retina is nourished by diffusion 
factors that, after a delay of 3 or 4 days, initiate the ingrowth of
from the choroid, any separation has dire consequences in terms of
blood vessels and fibroblasts from the limbus. There will also
outer retinal viability. The rapidity with which there is micro-
be fibroblastic transformation of the keratocytes themselves,
scopically visible photoreceptor injury, and the time at which that
which begin to produce large amounts of extracellular matrix,
injury becomes ireversible, varies with the nature of the subretinal
particularly chondroitin sulphate.
fluid and with the height of the detachment (ie., the nutrient
As all clinicians recognize, the transformation of the avascular
diffusion distance). Light-microscopic evidence of photoreceptor
cornea into a vascularized tissue capable of participating fully
 damage occurs within about 10 days following experimental
 in inflammatory responses is a mixed blessing, for the enhanced
infusion of saline into the subretinal space. It seems to occur
 protective and wound-healing capabilities of this "transformed"
 much more quickly if that fluid is laden with leukocytic or
cormea are at the same time the events that will lead to some
other tissue breakdown products (see Figure 4-1).
degree of permanent corneal scarring. Incidentally, this 3- to
4-day delay in ingrowth of blood vessels is a "period of grace"
Cataract
during which the cornea (either with or without our assistance)
can try to deal with minor injury without running the risk of
Because lens nutrition depends totally on the controlled flow of
permanent scarring.
normal aqueous humor to deliver nutrients and remove wastes,
70
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 4-16. Posterior synechia leacling to a pupillary block, iris bombe,
ancl seconclary peripheral anterior synechia. The pupillary block anc the
peripheral anterior synechia combined to cause inevitable seconcary
glaucoma.
Figure 4-14. Diffuse encophthalmitis has caused serous retinal
cletachment, posterior synechia, anc iris bombe. The fixative has caused
Coagulation of the markecdly increasec protein within the aqueous and
vitreous hurmors that represents the inevitable outcome of greater vascular
contacts the anterior face of the lens, the most common of such
permeability curing acute inflammation.
 complications is posterior synechia, in which the inflamed iris
adheres to the surface of lens and results in pupillary
obstruction and iris bombe (Figures 4-14 to 4-17). In contrast,
 inflammation results in cataract because of the reduction in the
iridocorneal adhesion (anterior synechia) is almost always
 production of aqueous and the addition of abnormal chemical
associated with perforating cormeal injury, which serves to "suck"
 constituents as by-products of inflammation.
 the iris up to the cormeal defect to facilitate its adhesion at that site
(Figure 4-18). In contrast to what is often written, glaucoma
Glavcoma
caused by accumulation of inflammatory debris within the
trabecular meshwork appears to be a very rare event in any of the 
 Most cases of secondary glaucoma are related to consequences
domestic species. This is hardly surprising, because it is unlikely
of inflammation that, in most other tissues, would have been
that exudate will seal a significant proportion of the 360-degree 
considered minor inconveniences. Because the iris normally
filtration angle. A more important cause of glaucoma is the
development of a preiridal fibrovascular membrane on the face
of the iris and within the trabecular meshwork itself. Such mem-
 branes are nothing more than ordinary granulation tissue, the nor-
 mal response to the need to rebuild tissue scaffolding preparatory
to parenchymal regeneration. Within the unforgiving environment
 of the eye, however, this granulation tissue can be deadly, because
Figure 4-15. The histologic section from the eye shown in Figure 4-14.
Aanul jeauos sugeauad e oj asuodsan u paunso siwjeuydopua aui
(cat claw) that could have created traumatic uveitis, lens-incuced
Figure 4-17. The iris aclheres to the anterior capsule of a liquefied and
(phacoclastic) uveitis, ancl/or bacterial enclophthalmitis.
 collapsed lens, resulting in pupillary block and secondlary glaucoma.
GeNERAL PATHOLOGY OF THE EYE I
71
result of this disruption there is an abnormally vigorous
exchange of molecular substances between the intraocular and
extraocular environments. In terms of therapy, this disruption
of the blood-ocular barrier allows access of a wide range of
therapeutic agents to the eye, a positive side effect of the
inflammatory process. It also results in interaction between
ocular antigens and the systemic immune system, an inter-
action that ordinarily is tightly regulated to maintain tolerance 
by the extraocular immune system to small amounts of leaking
intraocular antigens.
The concept that most intraocular antigens, particularly
those of lens, are totally “foreign" is incorrect, but the amount
that normally reaches systemic (splenic) immunocytes is very
small. The concept of anterior chamber-associated immune
deviation presumes that intraocular antigens are somehow
processed within the eye (probably by dendritic cells within the
trabecular meshwork) before draining from the trabecular
 meshwork into systemic circulation. These antigens, upon
Figure 4-18. Transilluminatecl bovine globe with anterior synechia. The
reaching the spleen, initiate a typical humeral immune response
iris is crawn into a tent as it anchors into the cornea at the site of previous
perforating injury.
but an atypical, muted T-cell response. There is no defect in
proliferation of antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells, but there is
induction of a population of suppressor T cells, which inhibits
any cell-mediated hypersensitivity to the sensitizing antigen.
 The theoretical result is that any lymphocytes that return
to the eye are capable of producing only the most localized
and specific types of inflammatory events, and the subsets of
T celis that produce a lot of nonspecific “bystander' injury are
 suppressed.
Following virtually any kind of ocular injury, antigens leaving
the eye reach the spleen, stimulate lymphoid proliferation, and
result in return of splenic lymphocytes to the eye about 1 week
later. Typically these lymphocytes are seen as perivascular
aggregates in the iris and ciliary stroma. As in inflammatory
reactions anywhere else, only a small proportion of these return-
ing lymphocytes are specifically sensitized to the initiating
 antigen. The rest carry receptors for a wide variety of unrelated
antigens, which may be important to our understanding of the
Figure 4-19. Higher magnification of a preiridal fibrovascular membrane.
recurrent nature of many cases of uveitis in domestic animals.
The iris blood vessels are activated in response to angiogenic factors
contained within the aqueous humor, and migrate onto the surface of the
 In brief, it is quite plausible that the recurrent bouts of uveitis
iris.They may cause pupillary block,peripheral anterior synechia, r
are triggered by exposure of these polyclonal lymphocytes to a
hemorrhage.
wide variety of antigens, even vaccinal antigens, that have
nothing to do with the events that caused the original bout of
uveitis.
-no aedun o (yoog dndnd) amade Aednd a [eas Aeu i!
 The very slow restitution of a blood-ocular barrier and the
flow through the pectinate ligament (Figure 4-19).
presence of these polyclonal reactive lymphocytes would seem
to guarantee that all uveitis be persistent or cyclical. The
Alterations in the Blood-Ocular Barrier and Implications
 presence of active transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) in
for Immune-Mediated Disease
lymphocyte (particularly T-cell) proliferation and also on the
One of the fundamental events of inflammation, occurring
action of such potent effectors of cell-mediated immunity as
within minutes of the inflammatory stimulus, is the chemically
 interleukin-2 and interleukin-4. What we see is the outcome of
mediated contraction of endothelial cells that creates gaps
 a very complex interaction of many interacting and overlapping
through which fluid and, later, leukocytes may leave the vascular
 regulatory systems designed to enhance the specificity of the
 compartment. This results in rapid dissolution of the blood-
immune response, and to limit its duration and harmful side 
ocular barrier at the level of the endothelium of iris vasculature.
effects.
Disruption of the blood-ocular barrier is not so rapid within 
ciliary processes, which tend to distend with accumulating
Etiologic Implications of Inflammatory Exudates
inflammatory exudates until, eventually, the tight junctions of
the nonpigmented epithelium become disrupted. At this stage
The admirable specificity of the acute inflammatory response
these two components of the blood-ocular barrier are
notwithstanding, it is essential to recognize that inflammation 
temporarily incompetent; restitution of this disrupted barrier
is a dynamic and changing system and that the initial events of
 takes many months and may never be perfectly restored. As a
inflammation blend with those of immune-mediated events
72
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
even within a few days. Thus inflammation that is initially sup-
purative may change into something that looks granulomatous or
lymphocytic, and conversely, it is theoretically possible that 
neutrophilic inflammation may become eosinophilic, or that
eosinophilic may become granulomatous. An example is feline 
infectious peritonitis, which is described as being granulomatous
or pyogranulomatous but which may be suppurative, fibrinous,
lymphocytic-plasmacytic, or granulomatous, depending on the 
stage of the disease and on complex immunologic interactions
 that remain undiscovered.
Another example is phacoclastic uveitis, which varies from
suppurative to lymphocytic to granulomatous, depending on
the interval between lens injury and histologic examination.
This is a delayed, immune-mediated reaction to the release of 
large amounts of previously normal lens protein into the intra-
ocular environment. Although that lens protein is certainly not
completely “foreign," the sudden release of a large volume of 
such protein after spontaneous or traumatic lens rupture over-
whelms immune tolerance and results in a severe suppurative-
to-granulomatous perilenticular uveitis that often destroys the
globe. Even if the inflammation can be successfully controlled,
its wound-healing sequelae often induce pupillary block and
secondary glaucoma. The amount of lens material leaking out
Figure 4-20. Traurmatic lens rupture resulting in an intractable, immune-
of the lens seems to be the most important determinant of
medliated pyogranulomatous perilenticular inflammation known as
whether this fateful reaction is triggered. There are other vari-
phacoclastic uveitis.
ables as well, for considerable species differences cannot be 
explained just on the basis of duration of disease or the size of
the lens capsular defect. In rabbits and birds the reaction in
 phacoclastic uveitis is much more granulomatous than in dogs,
cats, or horses (Figures 4-20 and 4-21).
Nonetheless, certain broad principles allow a guess as to the
 nature of the offending agent until more definitive identification 
(via culture or other means) is available:
 Suppurative exudates imply bacterial infection, particularly
when the neutrophils are lytic. Neutrophils also predominate in
the early stages of phacoclastic uveitis.
Eosinophilic exudates occur with parasitic migration but are
 only rarely seen within the globe. They more frequently occur
around parasitic migration tracts within the conjunctiva (as with
Habronema or Onchocerca lsions in horses). More commonly,
eosinophilic infiltrates are seen with allergic reactions and are
particularly frequent in the conjunctiva and cornea of cats
Figure4-21.Phacoclastic uveitis in a rabbit. The still-intact lens fibers are
affected with eosinophilic keratitis.
surroundled by a layer of neutrophils, then foamy macrophages, and then
Granulomatous inflammation is inflammation that is domi-
lymphocytes.The character of the reaction varies substantially with time
nated, from its onset, by macrophages. It is a term that is com-
 and with the species.
monly abused, because how many macrophages are required, or
what percentage of the total leukocyte population must be
macrophages before such a classification can be properly used,
has not been established. Because all inflammation will sooner 
 more obvious in the subretinal space and choroid than in the
 or later become dominated by mononuclear leukocytes, there is 
anterior uvea (Figure 4-22). Finally, cell-mediated immune
a dangerthat the somewhat specific term “granulomatous" will
 responses frequently culminate in granulomatous inflammation,
be used interchangeably with simple chronic inflammation.
as occurs in phacoclastic uveitis and in the diffuse granulomatous
There are numerous dramatic examples of granulomatous
destructive endophthalmitis known as uveodermatologic
 inflammation in ocular pathology. Leakage of sebaceous secre-
syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome) that appears
tion from inflamed or neoplastic sebaceous glands results in a
to be an immune response against intraocular (and occasionally
 epidermal) melanin pigment.
chalazion. A mixed lymphocytic and granulomatous nodular
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflammation is the most common
 inflammation of the conjunctiva or adjacent sclera is common
 pattern of inflammation within the globe. It may reflect specific
 in dogs and has variously been called nodular fasciitis, nodular
recruitment of lymphocytes and plasma cells in response to
granulomatous episcleritis, or even fibrous histiocytoma.
 viral infection or to other intraocular antigens incapable of 
Various systemic mycoses stimulate a granulomatous or mixed
 inducing the other humoral and cellular types of inflammation.
 neutrophilic-histiocytic (pyogranulomatous) infiltrate, commonly
 Often, however, lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflammation reflects
GENERAL PATHOLOGY Of THE EYE |
73
Figure 4-22. Choraidal suppurating granuloma in a cog with systemic
blastomycosis. With higher magnification, bucding yeast was founc in
Figure 4-23. Coalescing perivascular lymphoid agregates create s0-
 similar granulomas throughout the choroic and subretinal space.
called lymphonoclular uveitis in a cat. Similar lesions are seen in all
species as the common histologic counterpart of persistent or recurrent
uveitis. The cause is rarely cleterrmined, anc such cases are frequently
clismissed as "immune-mecliatedl."
nothing more than the normal maturation of the inflammatory
 response. Virtually all types of inflammation, as they age,
recruit growing numbers of long-lived mononuclear leukocytes
 that eventually predominate within the exudate. Such accumu-
agent that is now recognized as an antigen, but it is equally
possible that these lymphocytes are responding to normal
disruption of the blood-ocular barrier. Lymphocytic anterior
uveitis is the usual pattern seen in posttraumatic uveitis even
when there has been no penetrating injury. Regardless, lympho-
cytes and plasma cells may occur as diffuse uveal infiltrates or
as discrete perivascular lymphoid aggregates. In all domestic
species we see persistent or recurrent lymphocytic-plasmacytic
uveitis, and hardly ever do we identify a specific offending
 agent or antigen (Figures 4-23 and 4-24).
RESTORATION OF HOMEOSTASIS: OCULAR
Figure 4-24. A higher magnification of the perivascular lymphoid
WOUND HEALING
accumulation within the iris of a cat with lymphonoclular uveitis seen in
Figure 4-23.
The mechanisms of wound healing within the eye have received
a great deal of attention for two reasons. First, healing of ocular
injuries is intrinsically important for the well-being of the eye,
interdependent and even complementary. Following any sub-
and even minor defects in this normally well-regulated process
stantial tissue injury, successful parenchymal regeneration
may have disastrous consequences for optical clarity, aqueous
 requires the removal of any persisting infection and tissue
drainage, or other ocular functions that are exquisitely sensitive
 debris, the preservation or reconstruction of a connective tissue
to minor changes in anatomic fidelity. Second, the ability to 
scaffold, the survival of an adequate population of mitotically
directly visualize the sequelae to injury in such tissues as comea
competent germinal cells, and the presence of an adequate blood
or even retina has made the eye a much-favored tissue for basic
supply. If the initial injury has so damaged the original tissue 
research in the mechanisms and pharmacologic manipulation
stromal scaffold or vasculature that it cannot perform this
of wound healing.
supportive role, parenchymal regeneration must wait until a
Wound healing includes both mitotic parenchymal regeneration
new scaffold and/or vasculature has been recruited from the
 and regeneration of the connective tissue scaffolding, some-
nearest available source. Although this new scaffolding may seem 
times simply referred to as “"scarring." They frequently are por-
unsightly or even excessive, it is a deliberate and essential pre-
 trayed as competing or antagonistic activities, but they are
 requisite to parenchymal rebuilding.
74
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
At a molecular level wound healing is regulated by a variety
mitotic figures are seen within the permanent replicative
 of locally produced cytokines, the most important of which are
 population at the limbus but are inconspicuous in the epithelium
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), epidermal growth factor
adjacent to the ulcer itself. Ater a single injury mitotic activity
(EGF), TGF-β, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and
becomes maximal at 10 days, dropping rapidly thereafter.
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). As with those
The loss of the hydrophobic epithelial barrier allows for the
cytokines that act as inflammatory mediators, the action of
rapid osmotic absorption of water from the tear film into the
these wound-healing cytokines also is greatly influenced by the
superficial stroma. Even in nonseptic shallow ulcers the fluid
context in which each occurs (i.e., where, when, how much, and
absorption is usually accompanied by modest numbers of
in what company). Although interest in these cytokines has 
 neutrophils (Figures 4-25 and 4-26). In the presence of bacterial
 given rise to a huge body of literature, it is wise to remember
or fungal contamination the number of neutrophils is greatly
the four classic “morphologic" prerequisites for regeneration:
 increased. The leakage of neutrophil enzymes into the sur-
 debridement, stromal scaffold, germinal cells, and blood supply.
 rounding stroma may lead to stromal malacia and the risk of
 It is inadequacy in one or more of these traditional prerequisites
corneal perforation and iris prolapse (Figures 4-27 and 4-28).
that most commonly results in a failure of proper healing, and
Persistent or repeated comeal epithelial injury, in the presence
 it also is these various phenotypic parameters that we attempt
of a competent germinal population and an adequate stroma,
to manipulate by such procedures as mechanical or chemical
 results in epithelial hyperplasia and even dysplasia. Such stimu-
 debridement, suturing, and grafting. Nonetheless, the availability
 lated epithelium may acquire rete ridges and even pigmentation,
of at least a few of these cytokines as purified therapeutic
 perhaps because the ingrowing cells from the limbus have not
agents holds great promise in the investigation and treatment
 entirely abandoned their conjunctival heritage. If the stimulus
of a whole range of conditions typified by apparently defective
is chronic desiccation, the epithelium will also undergo
repair.
adaptive keratinization. In most cases there is accompanying
injury to the superficial stroma, resulting in ingrowth of fibro-
Germinal Cells
blasts and blood vessels in parallel with the adaptive epithelial
changes and leading to so-called corneal cutaneous metaplasia
 Tissue regeneration can occur only in those tissues that contain
(Figures 4-29 and 4-30).
a population of mitotically competent germinal cells. The 
 A variety of ocular tissues, particularly corneal endothelium
application of this principle to the eye is obvious when one
and lens epithelium, offer interesting adaptations in cellular
 deals with wound healing in retina. Injuries to the developing
regeneration. Depending on the species, each of these tissues
retina often result in disorderly reparative proliferation of the 
has relatively little mitotic capability and, under normal circum-
retinal neurons, leading to retinal dysplasia. Exacty the same
stances, regenerates poorly. This is true of corneal endothelium,
injury to the adult retina results in retinal scarring, because only
which is claimed not to regenerate at all in adult dogs and cats.
the glial cells and vasculature are able to proliferate in the
Loss of cormeal endothelial cells results in sliding of adjacent
mature retina. The age at which the retinal neurons cease
mitotic activity varies with the species and results in a different
temporal definition of “retinal dysplasia," depending on the
species involved. For cattle and horses lesions of retinal
dysplasia (rosettes and disordered intermixing of the various
retinal layers) is necessarily an in utero event, but in dogs and
cats injury to the retina any time up to about week 6 after birth
 results in retinal dysplasia. Because, in the latter two species,
the retina matures first near the optic disc and ceases mitotic
activity last near the ora ciliaris, it is sometimes possible to
determine the age at which the insult occurred from the topo-
 graphic distribution of the dysplastic lesions. In those areas of
retina that had ceased mitotic activity at the time of the injury,
retinal scars rather than dysplastic foci will develop. In at least
some species of fish the retina retains mitotic capability through-
 out life, and thus lesions of retinal dysplasia could develop at
any age.
At the opposite end of the regenerative spectrum is the
conjunctival and corneal epithelium. The normal corneal
epithelium turns over every 7 to 10 days, fed by a population
of germinal cells with a limited number of "preprogrammed"
mitotic cycles (the transient amplifying population). The
permanent replicative population, with no apparent limit on
mitotic capability, is found at the junction of corneal and
 conjunctival epithelium near the limbus.
After shallow injury to the corneal epithelium, the
 immediate (after about 1 hour) reaction is one of flattening and
sliding by viable adjacent wing cells, and then by basal cells, so 
Figure 4-25. Normal canine cornea. The nonkeratinized, nonpigrmented,
that even large (l-cm) defects may be covered in as little as
stratified corneal epithelium acheres to the surface of a cell-poor,
72 hours if the basal lamina is intact. Within 24 to 36 hours
avascular, and highly regimented fibrous stroma.
GenERAL PaThoLoGY Of THe EYE I
75
Figure 4-29. Healed corneal ulcer with subepithelial fibrosis and
ulceration, viable epithelial cells adjacent to the clefect flatten anc slide
vascularization. The resulting cornea will be permanently opaque.
across the surface of the clefect. The clenucled corneal stroma rapidlly
 absorbs water anc neutrophils from the tear film.
Figure 4-27. Acute corneal ulcer progressing to suppurative keratitis. 1f
Figure 4-30. Corneal cutaneous metaplasia with subepithelial scarring
the exposed stroma becomes contaminated with bacteria, the recruitment
and pigmentation.This could be a sequel to previous ulceration,or t
 of neutrophils is greatly increased, and the potential for neutrophil-
persistent sublethal corneal irritation to which the cornea must aclapt.
medliated stromal clestruction (keratomalacia) is similarly greater.
sometimes resulting in so-called retrocorneal fibrous mem-
brane, which can lead to glaucoma. Similarly the mature lens
epithelium appears to have very little replicative capability yet
responds with fibroblastic metaplasia to a variety of injuries; in
this form, it is capable of dramatic proliferation, which can
result in drastic consequences in terms of pupillary obstruction.
As one “descends" the phylogenetic scale the proliferative 
capacity of ocular tissues increases, so that adult corneal
endothelial cells and even retinal neurons in reptiles,
 amphibians, and fish may retain mitotic capability.
Figure 4-28. Rapidly progressing corneal ulcer leadling to perforation and 
iris prolapse.
Tissue Scaffold
To rebuild a functionally significant anatomic unit, epithelial
viable endothelium to seal the defect and may not cause any
 cells require some kind of tissue scaffold as a “"road map" for
 permanent functional impairment of the endothelial monolayer.
repair. If the initial injury has not left enough of the original
 In contrast, some injuries result in fibroblastic metaplasia of 
scaffold, a new one must be built with contributions from the
the corneal endothelium. In this fibroblastic disguise the epi-
epithelial cells themselves (i.e., basement membrane) and from
 thelium seems to acquire very dramatic proliferative capabilities,
 proliferation of adjacent stroma. When properly regulated the
76
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
combination of these two phenomena results in perfect, or
from the stroma of the iris (or retina) that is “accidentally"
 almost perfect, restitution of normal structure and function.
exposed to growth factors released at some distant site within
 The best example is healing of comeal ulcers. A shallow
the eye (see Figures 4-18 and 4-19). Ciliary body tumors and
 defect heals by sliding, replication, and eventual normalization
detached retinas are particularly common and potent initiators
of the corneal epithelium as described earlier. Adhesion to the 
of preiridal and, occasionally, preretinal membranes. These
 denuded stroma is at first via fibronectin and laminin produced
membranes are initially fragile and may lead to intractable
by reactive stromal fibroblasts, absorbed leukocytes, and the
hyphema or, as they mature, may cause pupillary block, retinal
epithelium itself. In as little as 3 days, the epithelium produces
detachment, or sealing of the filtration angle. Trabecular
at least some fragments of new basement membrane in
endothelial cells within the filtration angle are also susceptible
amounts great enough to be microscopically detected. It tends
to the same proliferative stimuli and may contribute to the
to do this even if the original membrane is still present, and this
 glaucoma that frequently follows the formation of preiridal
thickening or duplication of basement membrane serves as a
membranes.
reliable marker of previous epithelial injury in cornea and lens.
 Re-formation of the hemidesmosomes and the ultrastructural
Adequate Nutrition
collagenous anchoring fbrils that represent the normal, firm
adhesion between the epithelium and the stroma may require
Lack of adequate nutrition is an important determinant of
many weeks
wound healing in the cornea and lens, two tissues that normally
Those defects that involve a loss of more than the superficial
have a precarious nutritional supply. Cornea is nourished by
25% of the stroma often require both stromal and epithelial
absorption from the tear film, anterior chamber, and vascular
juwixonddg ue isnf pun Aranqe st ainay siu) iredan
 network at the limbus. Of these, the presence of a quantitatively
numerous exceptions exist). In these instances the epithelial
 and qualitatively adequate tear film appears to be most important.
regeneration must await the rebuilding of the stromal scaffold
 Ingrowth of blood vessels from the limbus is commonly seen
that occurs via a process of fibroplasia and angiogenesis
during the healing of any severe cormeal injury (see Figures 4-29
 identical to wound healing in the skin. The major difference, of
and 4-30). Although it may have serious implications for later
 course, is the need for the normally avascular corneal stroma to
 corneal transparency, this ingrowth is an essential ingredient
recruit angioblasts from the limbus, and thus the process of
of the wound-healing process. Such vessels are permanent,
corneal stroma repair is considerably delayed compared with
although they diminish in size and are no longer filled with
that occurring in normally vascularized collagenous tissues 
 blood, because the requirement for this augmented nutritional
such as the dermis. Under experimental circumstances recruit-
support fades after reconstruction of the corneal wound.
 ment of the angioblasts begins by budding from venules at the
Various types of conjunctival grafts are nothing more than
limbus within as little as 72 hours after corneal injury, and these
efforts to speed up the arrival of blood vessels into the injured
vessels migrate in a laminar fashion into the stroma, moving
corneal stroma, therefore augmenting whatever nutrition is
 approximately 1 mm per day.
arriving via the tear film.
The combination of stromal fibroplasia and vascularization
(usually termed granulation tissue) can be seen migrating all
Diseases Resulting from Defective Wound Healing
the way from the limbus to the site of stromal injury. Over the 
 bed of granulation tissue, the epithelium slides, proliferates,
Although many ocular syndromes could be considered the
produces new basement membrane, and adheres. As in wounds
 result of inappropriate wound healing—comeal stromal scarring,
elsewhere, the fbroblasts produce a whole sequence
of
 posterior synechia, traction retinal detachment and postnecrotic
precollagenous and collagenous matrix types that eventually
retinal dysplasia, which have been mentioned already—the
remodel into a stroma that is only slightly less regular than the
wound healing in those syndromes is perfectly normal and appro-
adjacent normal stroma. The resultant scar never quite matches
priate to the nature of the initial injury. There are, however, a
the normal cornea in terms of histologic architecture or optical
few examples of improperly regulated or inadequate wound
clarity, but some cases come very close (see Figure 4-30).
healing that cause distinct ocular disease syndromes.
The same phenomena of epithelial proliferation, basement 
The syndromes canine persistent ulcer, feline corneal
membrane reduplication, and stromal fibroplasia/angiogenesis
sequestration, and equine corneal sequestration are probably all
occur elsewhere in the eye, but in these noncorneal locations 
reflections of the same fundamental defect. With every signifi-
they usually seem unwelcome events. For example, injury to
 cant corneal epithelial injury, there is a transient degeneration
lens epithelium via perforation, by adherence of pupillary
 of the most superficial corneal stroma, characterized by cellular
membranes, or sometimes just through the biochemical events 
 apoptosis and stromal matrix disintegration. In normal wound
of cataract results in plaquelike proliferation and fibrous
healing that superficial stromal degeneration is only transient 
 metaplasia of capsular epithelium, usually with reduplication
 and does not interfere with subsequent migration and adhesion
of multiple laminae of basement membrane to increase the
 of the regenerating epithelium. In some individuals, however,
 density and thus the visual significance of the lens opacity. As
the depth and persistence of that stromal degeneration are
a more exaggerated example, the devastating consequences of
excessive and it becomes histologically visible as a corneal
 lens rupture (phacoclastic uveitis) seem to be the result of
sequestrum. Because permanent adhesion of the regenerating
 escape of the lens epithelium through a rent in the lens capsule,
epithelium depends on the extension of ultrastructural “anchors"
resulting in perilenticular proliferation of this fibroblastic
from the epithelial cell membranes into the superficial stroma,
the inability of the degenerate stroma to secure those anchors
glaucoma (see later). The important phenomenon of preiridal
results in ineffective epithelial adhesion and recurrent ulcer-
fibrovascular membrane (and rarely, preretinal fibrovascular
ation. In dogs the most obvious clinical manifestation is the
membrane) is no more than a proliferation of granulation tissue
recurring ulceration; in cats the absorption of colored break-
GENERAL PATHOLOGY OF THE EYE |
77
down products from the tear film into the area of stromal
Ocular examples are numerous. The best known are the various
degeneration (creating the familiar dark brown-to-black lesion 
manifestations of sunlight-induced injury to the conjunctiva
 of feline comeal sequestration) is more obvious.
and eyelid skin. Initial injury is followed by hyperplastic
 Preiridal fbrovascular membrane is an important lesion in
epithelial regeneration, but if the injury persists, progressive
all species, reflecting the inappropriate activation of what would
dysplasia and, eventually, neoplasia occur. The most common
otherwise be considered a normal wound-healing response. It is
outcome is squamous cell carcinoma, but we suspect that
a membrane of highly vascular granulation tissue growing out
hemangioma/hemangiosarcoma of the third eyelid or temporal
of the iris stroma onto the anterior surface of the iris (see Figure
bulbar conjunctiva in dogs has a similar pathogenesis. Another
4-19). In this location it has the potential to act as a source for
striking example is primary feline ocular sarcoma, which most
persistent hyphema and to cause glaucoma by creating either a
frequently seems to originate as a strong fbroblastic wound-
 peripheral anterior synechia or a pupillary block. This fbro-
healing response after lens perforation, but which, in some cats,
vascular membrane is stimulated in response to angiogenic
slowly transforms into pleomorphic and very malignant stromal
growth factors originating elsewhere within the globe, most
sarcoma as these proliferating fibroblasts somehow escape
commonly from detached retinas and from intraocular neoplasms.
normal biologic control mechanisms (Figures 4-31 and 4-32).
The membrane is considered "inappropriate" because it has
 By the time they are first diagnosed, most neoplasms have
nothing to do with wound healing of the iris itself. These
 already completed most of their theoretical biologic lifespan
angiogenic growth factors are secreted into the aqueous or
and have been undergoing continuous biochemical and
vitreous and activate the fbrous and vascular stroma of the
structural phenotypic variation throughout that interval. Such
distant iris seemingly by accident (the iris stroma has no epithelial
tumors almost always contain numerous clones that are
membrane along its anterior surface, so the iris stroma is
structurally and biochemically different from their neighbors.
always in free communication with whatever chemicals are
This concept of continuous diversification is critical to under-
found within the aqueous humor). Understanding the pathogenesis
 standing how tumors can suddenly change in their behavior,
and significance of preiridal fibrovascular membranes has pro-
 and why chemotherapy or radiation therapy is almost never
vided a long-overdue explanation for why detached retinas or
successful in achieving cure. The unstable genome that is
even small intraocular tumors can cause persistent hyphema
 inherent in neoplasia continues to become ever more unstable
 and/or glaucoma.
and thus creates an increasing diversity of daughter cells. At
 The understanding of normal wound healing represents an
least some of these diverse mutants succeed in establishing
exciting frontier in terms of therapeutic intervention. We now
 their own small colonies of progeny, and therefore many large
have a whole variety of chemical promoters and inhibitors of
 tumors have distinct subpopulations that may differ in behavior
many different aspects of wound healing, including epithelial
and histologic appearance from other portions of the same
proliferation, fbroplasia, and angiogenesis. The problem is that
tumor. No matter how effective the chemotherapy, somewhere
we still do not understand the complexity of their interactions 
 there will always be that one clone that is sufficiently “different'"
with one another and with various components of the ocular
 that it will escape destruction.
environment that determine their activity in vivo. As mentioned
This concept also explains the empirical observation that
previously, most of these chemicals can manifest different (and
metastatic foci in different organs may be quite dissimilar from
 sometimes even contradictory) activities, depending on dosage,
one another and from the parent tissue. As a metastatic embolus
the time at which they are introduced, and the presence or
of tumor lands in some distant organ, not every member of that
absence of other chemical mediators. We are still in the early
diverse cluster will find that distant site to be equally hos-
 stages of learming when and how to use these products; it appears
pitable. One may flourish where the others cannot. This kind of
 that most of the time there is no deficiency in the availability of
marked diversity is common within feline iris melanomas,
 the naturally occurring chemical mediators of wound healing.
In many cases, simply adding more of these mediators is
unnecessary and even potentially harmful.
OCULAR NEOPLASIA
The eye is the origin for only a limited variety of neoplasms,
and accurate predictions about the type and the prognosis can
frequently be made even in the absence of histologic confir-
mation. Details about clinical appearance, treatment, and prog-
nosis can be found in the appropriate chapters elsewhere in this
text. This discussion is limited to fundamental aspects of cancer
 biology and the common principles that influence the effects of
neoplasms on the globe and its adnexa.
 There is little point in attempting to summarize here what
fills many volumes of oncology textbooks. The following are
some principles derived from this huge body of knowledge that
 are particularly important for ocular neoplasms.
Most types of malignant neoplasia develop stepwise after
Figure 4-31. Feline prirmary ocular sarcoma, creating a perilenticular
one or more injuries to replicative cells. The biochemical and
pleomorphic sarcoma clerived from fibroblastic metaplasia of injurec lens
structural alterations in malignant cells closely resemble
epithelium. Virtually all such cases show histologic eviclence of previous
changes in normal cells that are in the process of wound healing.
Iens rupture.
78
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
with completely harmless ("benign'") and invariably deadly
("malignant'") as only the two extremes. The great majority of
tumors are somewhere in between, and our job is to properly
 predict where they belong along that behavioral continuum.
Some ocular tumors are invariably benign regardless of histologic
appearance (ciliary body tumors), and others are unexpectedly
malignant despite a relatively bland histologic appearance
(conjunctival melanomas), so it is no easy task to properly predict 
the behavior of the various ocular neoplasms.
Clinical Signs Associated with Ocular Neoplasia
Hyphema
Spontaneous unilateral intraocular hemorrhage (hyphema) has
 long been cited as a clue to the presence of intraocular neoplasia,
Figure 4-32. Histopathology of feline primary ocular sarcoma, showing
even though the explanation was obscure. It now seems that the
 pleomorphic malignant stromal cells adjacent to the lens capsule.
 bleeding originates from the fragile vessels of a preiridal fibro-
vascular membrane, which is formed as an “accidental' response
which not only change histologic character and clinical
to the diffusion of growth factors produced by the tumor itself.
behavior over time but also show diverse histologic character
 These growth factors are intended to recruit the blood vessels
within the same tumor at the time of enucleation.
and fibrous stroma that the tumor needs for its own continued
 Malignancy (literally meaning "life threatening") requires
 growth. Because epithelial tumors have a much greater need for
that the tumor depart significantly from the structure and
stromal/vascular support than round cell tumors, melanomas, and
function of the parent tissue, acquiring the ability to penetrate
various stromal tumors, these preiridal fbrovascular membranes 
normal structural barriers, survive in normally inhospitable
are much more likely to be seen with iridociliary adenomas
foreign environments, and ignore the many levels of behavioral
than anything else.
 control normally exerted by the body's homeostatic mechanisms.
The basis for the histologic prediction of tumor behavior is
Glaucoma
based on the somewhat tenuous hypothesis that the degree to
which a neoplasm departs from the microscopic appearance of
 Intraocular tumors frequently cause glaucoma. Some (e.g., canine
the parent tissue predicts how much it will depart from the 
anterior uveal melanomas and feline iris melanomas) do so by
behavior of the parent tissue. This empirical observation seems
direct occlusion of the filtration angle (Figure 4-33). Ciliary
at odds with the fundamental concept of neoplasia as an
epithelial tumors (even very small ones that would otherwise be
unpredictable genetic wild card. Nonetheless, most tumors do
innocuous) do so by inducing preiridal membranes that occlude 
seem to follow some loose behavioral rules. There is a general
the pupil or trabecular meshwork.
correlation between how primitive a tumor looks and how
aggressively it behaves. The underlying principle here is that
Uveitis
primitive cells resemble the embryonic tissue that was, during
embryogenesis, able to disseminate and colonize throughout
It is not clear how much inflammation is actually caused by
the body. Presumably, such primitive cells no longer require the
 intraocular neoplasms. In many instances the rise in aqueous
local nutritional/hormonal/environmental factors that define the 
 protein and the presence of hyperemia or even hemorrhage are
specific niche occupied by the parent normal tissue.
 interpreted as evidence of uveitis although in fact they reflect
 There is no uniform system by which we can measure the
level of primitiveness (anaplasia) of different tumors and
therefore predict their behavior. Criteria like mitotic index and
 degree of nuclear variation cannot be applied with equal success
to all tumors. Even more importantly, the degree of anaplasia
required to confer behavioral malignancy varies among tumors.
Presumably, those cell types that are already very much "at
home' throughout the body (e.g., endothelial cells, lymphocytes,
endocrine cells) will require relatively little anaplasia before
the neoplastic cells are able to survive in distant metastatic
 sites. Conversely, highly specialized and tissue-specific cells
such as ciliary epithelial cells would have to become very
anaplastic before they would consider anywhere other than the
globe to be a hospitable environment. This may explain why
most primary intraocular neoplasms, even when histologically
quite anaplastic, rarely establish successful metastatic foci.
 The traditional insistence that all tumors be classified as
either benign or malignant is biologically invalid. Just as all
Figure 4-33. Canine anterior uveal melanocytoma. The trabecular
people cannot be classified as young or old, as ugly or beautiful,
meshwork is fillec with large, heavily pigmentec epithelioid melanocytes,
or as tall or short, so neoplasia represents a biologic continuum
resulting in seconclary glaucoma.
GENERAL PATHOLOGY OF THE EYE I
79
proliferation of leaking blood vessels in response to tumor-
fibrovascular membrane, so aqueous flare is not specific for
uveitis.
mation, as may immune response to tumor antigens.
 As in other tissues the serous inflammation may progress to
fibrinous or suppurative inflammation. Fibrin within the
HISTOLOGIC BASIS FOR COMMON
aqueous humor looks like fibrin anywhere else, and ordinarily
CLINICAL LESIONS
it is transient because the inflamed anterior chamber also con-
 tains abundant fibrinolytic plasmin. Purulent exudate settles by
The greatest practical benefit to understanding the general
gravity and looks like fluffy or globular yellow-white material
Jo peu ay on uoniona uq oi si aa aui jo Asooed
in the ventral portion of the anterior chamber. This accumu-
clinical disguises worn by some of the most common ocular
lation is commonly called hypopyon.
lesions, some of which do not match one's previous experience
nor the pictures in textbooks. Given here are some of the most 
Keratic Precipitates
common of these clinical observations and their histologic
basis.
Keratic precipitates are small, shimmering, refractile or globular
accumulations of leukocytes that adhere to the corneal endo-
Corneal Edema
thelium (see Figure 4-25). With inflammation, the corneal
endothelium expresses adhesion molecules that bind with
The diffuse gray opacity characteristic of corneal edema is
complementary receptors on the surface of neutrophils 
10
explained by histologic and ultrastructural changes within the
macrophages. Those clusters formed by macrophages tend to
comeal stroma. The increased binding of water changes the
 be larger and to glitter with engulfed lipids, creating so-called
critical spatial relationships among the stromal collagen fbrils,
mutton fat precipitates. Unlike aqueous flare, keratic precipi-
resulting in greatly increased scattering (refraction) of light as
 tates reflect a substantial leukocytic contribution to the inflam-
it attempts to pass through the edematous stroma. The initial
 mation, but not to the point of hypopyon.
defect that permitted the edema usually is disruption of one or
more of the structural barriers that actively and passively limit 
Hyphema
the presence of water within the stroma: epithelial ulceration,
corneal endothelial damage, or ingrowth of leaking blood
Intraocular hemorrhage (hyphema) in animals without any
vessels into the stroma. Loss of surface epithelium (corneal
history of ocular trauma and with a normal coagulation profle
ulcer) results in a zone of edema only slightly larger than the
most commonly originates from a preiridal fbrovascular mem-
ulcer itself. Loss or functional defect of the corneal endo-
brane associated with the presence of intraocular epithelial
thelium is often quite diffuse and creates diffuse edema, while
neoplasia or retinal detachment. Such membranes ordinarily
edema that results from leaking blood vessels occurs as a gray
cannot be detected by clinical examination. Other less common
halo surrounding the immature vessels as they grow inward
causes of unexplained intraocular hemorhage are ocular vascular
from the limbus.
hypertension and increased vascular fragility associated with
severe acute inflammation.
Corneal Pigmentation
Changes in Pupil Shape
 Corneal pigmentation is most commonly the result of ingrowth
by pigmented conjunctival epithelial cells in response to persistent
Some changes in pupil shape are due to changes in innervation and
comeal epithelial injury that has exceeded the regenerative
 have no histologic counterpart. Commonly, irregular or scalloped
abilities of the resident corneal epithelial cells. Depending on
 pupillary margins are due to fibrinous or fibrous adhesions that
the severity of the injury, that ingrowth may be accompanied by
change the configuration of the pupillary border of the iris (see
angiogenesis and fbroplasia, although that is not always the
 Figure 4-26). This border may fold forward to adhere to the
case. The bulbar conjunctiva is the normal home for the per-
anterior face of the iris (ectropion uveae) or backward to adhere to
manent replicative reservoir of corneal epithelial cells; under
 the posterior iris epithelium (entropion uveae) or to the lens itself
normal circumstances these cells lose their pigment and become
(posterior synechia). Sometimes the adhesion is a fibrinous or
true “corneal" cells as they migrate into the cornea itself. It is
fibrous sequel to ocular inflammation, but other examples reflect
not known why, under circumstances of persistent irritation,
the formation of preiridal fibrovascular membranes driven by the
they retain their conjunctival character (or at least their pigment).
 release of angiogenic and fbroblastic growth factors from any one
The common clinical designation “pigmentary keratitis" is firmly
 of several intraocular sources. In descending order of prevalence,
entrenched but incorrect, because inflammation is not an intrinsic
these sources are detached retinas, intraocular neoplasms, and
part of this reaction.
leukocytes or platelets within chronic inflammatory reactions.
Aqueous Flare
Changes in Iris Color
Aqueous flare results from the scattering of light as it hits the
Change in iris color is perhaps most commonly seen in cats
higher number of protein molecules that have entered the aqueous
with diffuse iris melanoma, diffuse uveal infltration by
humor as a result of increased vascular permeability within the 
lymphoma, or chronic uveitis, but such changes can be seen in
inis or ciliary body. Usually, it is the clinical counterpart of greater
any species. The changes in color are atributable to dilution of
vascular permeability due to acute inflammation (serous uveitis).
iris pigment by infiltrating leukocytes or tumor cells, to changes
It may also occur in animals with vascular hypertension and as
in optical density associated with inflammatory edema, and/or to
serum leakage from the immature vessels within a preiridal
increased stromal density due to fbrin accumulation or fibrosis.
80
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
Lens Opacity
 potential RPE cells. It is seen in retinas of dogs that have survived
canine distemper or in calves surviving in utero bovine viral
 Most lenticular opacity is the visible counterpart of hydropic
diarrhea infection (see Figure 4-6).
degeneration of lens fibers, which is the general definition of
cataract. This degeneration is seen histologically as swollen
BIBLIOGRAPHY
fibers (bladder cells), as spherical globules of denatured lens
 protein (morgagnian globules), or as lakes of free fluid (see
Aiello LP(1997):Vascular endothelial growth factor: 20th century
Figure 4-2). Much less commonly cataract may be caused by
mechanisms,21st century therapies.Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 38:1647.
Bentley E, et al. (2002): The effect of chronic comeal debridement on
reparative proliferation of lens epithelium or the lens capsule.
epithelial and stromal morphology in dogs. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
The gradual central opacification of the lens that occurs as a
43:2136.
normal aging change, called nuclear sclerosis, is due to the
 D'Amore PA (1994): Mechanisms of rebinal and choroidal vascularization.
 accumulation of compacted, effete lens fibers that have outlived
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 35:3974.
their useful function but that, because of the lens capsule, can-
Dubielzig RR, et al. (1994): Morphologic features of feline ocular sarcomas
jn 10 cats: light microscopy, ultrastructure, and immunohistochemistry.
not be shed. It has no easily seen microscopic counterpart.
Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 4:7.
English RV (1992): Regulation of intraocular immune Tesponses. ProgT Vet
Retinal Pathology: Hyperreflectivity and Opacity
Comp Ophthalmol 2:4 1.
JamelMta.99:Transfomnowthfctnmanq
The endless variations on the theme of hyperreflectivity and
humor. Cunr Eye Res 9:963.
 opacity seen in various retinal diseases can be directly correlated
Lu L, et al. (2001): Comeal epithelial wound healing. Exp Biol Med 226:653.
to histologic changes in retina, tapetum, and choroid. Atrophy
Martin P (1997): Wound healing—aiming for perfect skin regeneration.
 of any region of retina overlying tapetum results in an increase 
Science 276:75.
 in the amount of light reflected by the tapetal mirror and is seen 
corneal vascularization in the rat. Lab Invest 41:519.
by the observer as a bright spot. Conversely, any kind of exudate
Montali RI (1988): Comparative pathology of inflammation in higher
 in front of the tapetum (preretinal, intraretinal, or subretinal)
vertebrates (reptiles, birds and mammals). J Comp Pathol 99:1.
 results in increased absorption of light and thus creates a focus
Pober J, Cotran RS (1991): What can be leamed from the expression of 
 of opacity. The exact location of this exudate can be determined
endothelial adhesion molecules in tissues? Lab Invest 64:301.
Raphael B, et al. (1993): Enhanced healing of cat comeal endothelial wounds
by looking at the retinal blood vessels. If the vessels also are
by epidermal gTowth factor. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 34:2305.
cloudy, then the exudate must be preretinal or within the nerve
Rosenbaum JT(i993): Cytokines: the good, the bad,and the unknown.Invest
fiber or ganglion cell layers of the retina itself. If the vessels are
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 34:2389.
sharply visualized, but the tapetum is still cloudy, then the
Streilein JW (1993): Tissue bamiers, immunosuppressive microenvironments
exudate exists either within the outer retina or in the subretinal
and privileged sites: the eye's point of view. Reg Immunol 150:1727.
Tripathi RC, et al. ( 1990): Prospects for epidermal growth factor in the
space.
management of corneal disorders. Surv Ophthalmol 34:457.
 Dark gray or black spots in the tapetal fundus may represent 
van der Woerdt A (2000): Lens-induced uveitis. Vet Ophthalmol 3: 227.
 postnecrotic "holes" in the tapetum such that the pigment of the 
Wahl SM,et al.(1989): Role of gowth factorsin inflammation and epai.
choroid becomes visible. Altermatively, such spots may represent
J Cell Biochem 40:193.
Wilcock BP, et al. (2002): Histological Classific ation of Ocular and Otic
 intraretinal clumps of melanin-laden macrophages derived from
Tumors of Domesic Animals. WHO Intemational Histologic
the RPE. Such phagocytic metaplasia is seen as a consequence
Classfication of Tumors of Domestic Animals, Second Series. AFTP,
of chorioretinitis or, presumably, anything else that damages or
Washington, DC.
somehow triggers this phagocytic response within the pluri-
Chapter
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES
David J. Maggs
MEDICAL HISTORY
ASSESSMENT OF PUPIL SIZE, SHAPE.
OPHTHALMOSCOPY
EXAMINATION PROCEDURE
 SYMMETRY, AND MOBILITY
NORMAL FUNDUS 
SCHIRMER TEAR TEST
EXAMINATION OF THE ANTERIOR
EXAMINATION OF THE POSTERIOR
MICROBIOLOGIC SAMPLING
 SECMENT
SEGMENT
ADDITIONAL DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
affect the client's understanding of the disease and his or
arly and correct diagnosis of ocular disorders, which is
 her reactions to proposed treatment.
essential to a successful clinical result and a satisfied client,
· Is the animal experiencing visual diffculties? If so, is vision
relies almost completely on a thorough, orderly, and complete
 worse at night, during the day, or in familiar or unfamiliar
Ocular examination. As with all other body systems, investiga-
environments? How long has the visual deficit been present?
tion of a patient with ocular disease comprises the taking of a
 Is the visual problem slowly improving or getting worse? Is
thorough and directed history, a complete examination of the
the visual deficit worse on one side than the other?
ocular and periocular structures, and then, in many cases, some
· Has there been any discharge from the eye? If so, what kind?
specialized diagnostic testing as directed by the history and
· Has the affected eye appeared painful?
examination findings. The aim of this chapter is to help the reader
· Has the eye appeared discolored (e.g., opacity of the cornea
develop a systematic approach to the ocular examination,
due to edema, leukocoria due to cataract, redness due to
including the basic principles of some specialized diagnostic
episcleral or conjunctival injection)?
methods. As with other body systems, a problem-oriented
· Has the eye appeared abnormal in any other way?
approach is encouraged. Most of the examination techniques
· Has the animal shown any behavioral or locomotor
described in this chapter are applicable to exotic or avian species,
disturbances recently?
sometimes with minor modifications. However, the reader is
· Have any of the animal's close relatives or other members
referred to Chapter 20 for more specific description of examination
of the herd or household been affected with ocular disease?
techniques and diagnostic testing in exotic and avian species.
Additionally, this chapter introduces many new terms, and the
EXAMINATION PROCEDURE
reader is referred to the Glossary for a full definition of these.
 An ophthalmic examination requires a minimum of equipment
(Box 5-1). Ideally the examination is conducted in dim ambient 
MEDICAL HISTORY
light, preferably in a darkened room or stall, to minimize
A thorough, relevant history is an important part of the diag-
 interfering reflections. Once sedated, a horse can be examined
nostic process. To use the problem-oriented approach, the clini-
with the examiner's and the horse's heads under a blanket or
cian first determines the major problems that have caused the
dark cloth. Although the order in which the examination is con-
owner to present the animal for examination. These problems
 ducted is not critical for all components, certain tests either
form a temporary problem list and not only will direct the exam-
would compromise later parts of the ocular examination or
ination but also may suggest further avenues of questioning
 should not be performed until certain conditions have been
while the clinician is obtaining the complete history from the
 ruled out because they could exacerbate or complicate those
owner. Delaying taking the complete history until after the
 conditions or render them impossible to further examine. The
initial problems have been determined saves time and avoids
 major components of the ocular examination and the order in
 the collection of irrelevant historical data.
which each should be completed are described in Figure 5-1.
 Questions that are often helpful during the collection of a
Sometimes this order can be best recalled and examination
history for an ophthalmic patient include the following:
findings best recorded on a form designed specifically for the 
ophthalmic examination (Figure 5-2).
· Where does the animal live, and what is its diet?
· Has the patient had any major diseases or injuries in the 
SCHIRMER TEAR TEST
past, especially recent and especially ocular? If the animal
has already lost one eye, an attempt should be made to
The Schirmer tear test (STT) is a semiquantitative method of
determine the cause of loss. This may be of considerable
measuring production of the aqueous portion of the precorneal
assistance in diagnosing the current problem and assessing
 tear film. It must be performed before application of any topical
client compliance with treatment instructions, and may also
solutions, because these would artificially but temporarily raise
81
82
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
Box 5-1 I  Basic instruments and supplies
 Establish presenting complaint/s
 and take a brief history
- Focal light source (e.g., Finoff transilluminator)
• Magnifying loupes (e.g., Optivisor)
· Direct ophthalmoscope
● Indirect funduscopic lens (e.g., 20 D or 2.2 Panretinal lens)
·Schirmer tear test strips
· Fluorescein test strips
Conduct initial examination in lighted room:
·Tonometer (e.g., Tono-Pen)
· Tropicamide (1%)
Facial symmetry?
• Proparacaine (topical anesthetic)
Vision?
· Sterile eye wash/rinse
 Ocular discharge?
*Ocular discoloration?
the STT value. In addition, some topical solutions exert a more
No discharge
Discharge
 protracted inhibitory effect. For example, topically applied anes-
 or ulcer
thetics or parasympatholytic drugs used to induce mydriasis,
and local anesthetics, both will reduce STT values. Finally,
 Retroilluminate
Consider 
manipulative procedures such as corneal or conjunctival
 and
microbiologic
Consider
scrapings, flushing of the lacrimal apparatus, and potentially
test PLRs
 testing
STT
even application of bright lights to an inflamed eye will result in 
artificially elevated STT values. For these reasons, if the STT is
to be performed, it should be done as the first component of the
 ophthalmic examination.
Normal/low
 Perform
IOP
Apply.
 The test is performed with sterile, individually packaged strips
tonometry
 of absorbent paper with a notch 5 mm from one end. Each strip is
tropicamide
folded at the notch and hooked over the middle to lateral third of
the lower lid for 60 seconds (Figure 5-3). The distance from the
High
notch to the end of the moist part of the paper is measured
IOP
immediately on removal of the strip from the eye. This is the STT
1, which measures basal and reflex tearing, including that due to
 comeal stimulation provided by the test strip itself. That is why
 Sequentially examine anterior 
the STT strip should be placed in the middle to lateral region of
 segment with focal light source
and magnification in a darkened 
the lower eyelid, where it can gently contact the cormeal surface.
room
If it is placed more medially, the third eyelid can protect the
 cormea and reduce STT 1 results. In normal dogs, the STT 1 result
should exceed 15 mm in 1 minute. Readings of less than 10 mm 
 in 1 minute are considered diagnostic for keratoconjunctivitis
sicca. Values between 10 and 15 mm in 1 minute are considered
Examine
highly suggestive of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, particularly if
posterior 
appropriate clinical signs are present.
segment
The reported range for STT results in normal cats is 3 to
32 mm in 1 minute with a mean of 17 mm in 1 minute. How-
 mean can be expected in a clinical setting. This is probably due
to autonomic control of secretion and short-term alterations in
 tear flow due to stress in the examination room. Values should
Expand
still be recorded in cats but should be interpreted with caution
history
and always in conjunction with clinical signs. Commercial
 based on
strips are often unsuitable for horses if left in place for 60 sec-
findings
onds because of greater tear production in this species, which
quickly saturates the entire strip. Some recommend broader
strips, but these must be prepared in a very uniform manner.
Rather, it is probably better to leave a standard stip in place for
 only 30 seconds in this species. STT results are also published
 Perform 
for a number of exotic species (see Chapter 20).
additional diagnostic testing
 For measurement of the STT 2, corneal sensation is abolished 
 if needed
with topical anesthetic, and lower test values result because the
afferent limb of the reflex path is blocked and reflex secretion
 Figure 5-1. Suggested orcler for the cormplete ophthalmic examination in
by the lacrimal and nictitans glands is reduced. The STT 2 has 
all species. IOP, Intraocular pressure; PLRs, pupillary light reflexes; STT,
 not received widespread clinical application in animals but is
Schirmer tear test.
sometimes referred to in texts and research studies.
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES I
83
CaseNumber:
OPHTHALMOLOGYEXAMINATION
pecies
Breed
T
P
R
Wt.
Color
Sex
Age
History.
ClientName
Address
Telephone
Retroillumination:
OD:
OS:
Pupillary Light Reflexes:
OD:
direct
consensual
OS:
direct
consensual
(leftoright response)
(right to left response)
Vision(menaceresponse):
OD:
OS:
SchirmerTearTest:
OD:
mm/60seconds
OS:
mm/60seconds
OD:
mmHg
OS:
mmHg
Tonometry:
Fluorescein Stain
an
OS:
Aqueousffare
OD:
OS:
LeftEye
Right Eye
Fundus
Fundus
Diagnosis:
Treatment:
Comments:
Figure 5-2. Sample ophthalmic exarmination sheet. (Courtesy University of Missouri, Columbia, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
MICROBIOLOGIC SAMPLING
fluorescent antibody labeling. Some of these tests, especially
microbial culture, may be affected by many of the drugs applied
Ocular surface samples (typically a swab or scraping) may be
topically to the eye and by the preservatives that accompany them.
assessed for presence of a microbial pathogen by cytologic
Although topical anesthetic agents do contain preservatives,
assessment, culture, polymerase chain reaction, or immuno-
application of a topical anesthetic is essential for the safe and
84
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 5-3. Schirmer tear test being performec on a cat. Note that the
strip is placed into the lower lateral conjunctival fornix so that it lightly
Figure 5-4. Instruments suitable for collecting ocular surface samples for
contacts the lateral cornea.
Cytologic and microbiologic examination. Leff to right, Kimura platinurm
spatula, hancle-enc of Bard-Parker scalpel blacle, cytology brush.
humane collection of samples from the ocular surface. Therefore,
Retroillumination
if indicated, samples for microbiologic analysis should be
collected early in the examination process, immediately after the
 Retroillumination is a simple but extremely useful technique
STT if it is done. The indications for collection of samples for
for assessment of pupil size, shape, and symmetry. A focal light
microbiologic assessment include notable purulent inflammation; 
source (Finoff transilluminator or direct ophthalmoscope) is
chronic, unresponsive, or severe comeal or conjunctival lesions;
held up to the examiner's eye and directed over the bridge of the
deep corneal ulcers with stromal loss or malacia ("melting");
 patient's nose from at least arm's length from the patient so as to
 and severe blepharitis or periocular dermatitis.
 equally illuminate the two pupils and elicit the fundic reflection
Traditionally, microbiologic specimens have been collected
(Figure 5-5). This reflection is usually gold or green in tapetal
with a moist swab. However, some ophthalmologists prefer to
animals and red in atapetal individuals. With each eye equally
collect more cellular specimens from comeal or conjunctival
illuminated, the fundic reflex is used to assess and compare pupil
 Jesions by scraping or with a cytology brush. These samples can
size, shape, and equality (Figure 5-6). Retroillumination can
be submitted for culture and sensitivity testing, cytologic
also be used to judge the clarity of all of the transparent ocular
assessment, and Gram staining. A sterile instrument such as a
media (tear flm, cornea, aqueous humor, lens, and vitreous).
Kimura spatula, a cytology brush, or the handle-end of a scalpel 
 Opacities in the ocular media will obstruct the fundic reflection
blade should be used (Figure 5-4). Samples should be placed into 
and can be noted for more detailed subsequent examination.
 or onto media suitable for the organisms being sought, as advised
Retroillumination is particularly useful for differentiating
by the laboratory that will receive and interpret the samples,
nuclear sclerosis from cataract (see Chapter 13).
and shipped appropriately and as soon as possible.
ASSESSMENT OF PUPIL SIZE, SHAPE,
SYMMETRY, AND MOBILITY
Pupil dilation is essential if a thorough examination of the half
of the eye behind the iris (the ciliary body, lens, vitreous, retina,
tapetum, optic nerve head, choroid, and posterior sclera) is to
be conducted. However, pupil dilation will completely prohibit
 assessment of pupil size, symmetry, shape, position, and
reaction to light. It will also limit examination of the iris itself.
Therefore anisocoria, dyscoria, corectopia, or altered pupillary
light reflexes (PLRs) will be missed if a patient's pupils are
dilated before two straightforward tests are completed. Before
application of a topical mydriatic agent, patients should be
examined by retroillumination and their direct and consensual
PLRs should be assessed. Pupil shape and the speed and
 magnitude of the PLR differ among species. The feline pupil is a
Figure 5-5. Retroillumination is performed with a focal light source held
vertical ellipse, the dog's and bird's are circular, and most large
close to the examiner's eye or with the clirect ophthalmoscope held up to
the examiner's eye. The examiner stancls at arm's length from the patient
herbivores are horizontal slits. Despite these differences in pupil
and directs the light over the bridge of the patient's nose so as to
shape, pupils in these species dilate to approximately circular.
illuminate both pupils equally.
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES I
85
because its use complicates the examination in many ways.
Reflexes and responses, vision, pupil size, globe movement and
 position, STT value, moistness of the corneoconjunctival
 surface, palpebral fissure size, and deviations of the visual axes
cannot be assessed accurately if anesthesia or sedation has
begun. Further, the globe becomes enophthalmic and rolls
ventromedially, and the third eyelid covers much of the globe,
making a complete eye examination impossible.
 The exception to this rule is in the horse, in which sedation
and an auriculopalpebral nerve block are essential for a good
eye examination and should be performed after the assessment
Figure 5-6. Retroilluminatedl view of a dog with bilateral nuclear sclerosis
of pupil size, vision, STT (if necessary), and all reflexes and
(visible as a translucent ring insicle the pupils of both eyes). The tapetal
responses. The auriculopalpebral nerve block provides paresis
reflection is used to "backlight" (or retroilluminate) all the clear ocular
 mecia (vitreous, lens, anterior charmber, cornea, and tear film).
of the orbicularis oculi muscle and limits eyelid closure, which
is very forceful in the horse. Without an auriculopalpebral
block, it is generally not possible to examine the whole globe 
Pupillary Light Reflexes
of the horse and peripheral lesions will be missed. The
auriculopalpebral nerve is found by running a finger up and
 Following assessment of resting pupil size, shape, and symmetry,
down over the zygomatic process of the facial bone. The nerve
 pupil reactivity should be assessed (see also Chapter 16). The
can be palpated as it runs transversely in the subcutaneous
reflex constriction of the pupil in response to light striking the
space across the lower third of this process (Figure 5-7, A).
retina is termed the pupillary light reflex. In most mammals,
Approximately 2 mL of lidocaine is then injected over the
constriction of the pupil of the illuminated eye (the direct PLR) is 
nerve (Figure 5-7, B). Sometimes sedation can be avoided in
slightly greater than that of the pupil of the contralateral or
horses if a twitch is used. For food animals, a suitable crush or
nonilluminated eye (the indirect or consensual PLR). Inter-
race/chute and (especially in cows) nose tongs are useful.
 pretation of the PLR requires an understanding of the neurologic
 In all species and before sedation (if used), the eyes and
reflex as well as other potential confounding factors. The neural
 periocular region should first be examined from a distance and
 arc being tested has an afferent arm, which includes the retina,
 in normal ambient light for gross abnormalities, including
optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract, pretectal area, and the para-
asymmetry, palpebral fissure size, ocular or nasal discharge or
sympathetic nucleus of cranial nerve (CN) IIl, where there is a
dryness, periocular alopecia, deviations of the visual axes,
synapse with the pupillomotor fibers of CN Ill (oculormotor nerve),
 redness or other color change, and corneal clarity and
which stimulate the smooth muscles of the iris sphincter muscle to
moistness (reflectivity). The animal's response to the new
 cause pupil contraction In addition to pathology at any point along
environment of the examination room may also be used to
this neurologic pathway, the PLR may be decreased or absent if 
 judge visual function. Neuroophthalmic and visual testing may
there is iris atrophy (due to age), iris ischemia, (due to acute
then be conducted. Vision testing could include maze testing,
glaucoma), physical obstruction of the pupil (due to synechia or
tracking of objects that do not emit sound or odor (thrown
lens dislocation), prior use of a dilating drug, or high concen-
cotton balls or a laser pointer are excellent). The menace
 trations of circulating epinephrine (ie., in fearful animals). The
response, if conducted in such a way that air currents and direct
effect of these confounding factors is exacerbated if a weak light 
contact with the vibrissae are avoided, can also be used.
source is used. Also, it is critical to understand that because the PLR
 Normal palpebral reflex (a complete blink in reaction to digital
 is a subcortical reflex and requires relatively litte retinal function,
stimulation of the eyelid skin) should then be verified for
a positive direct PLR is not an indicator of vision. However,
because it tests many but not all of the same pathways required for
vision, it should be tested in all animals in which vision is impaired
A
B
as it may help with anatomic localization of the defect.
 Both the extent and speed of the PLR should be assessed and
compared in the two eyes and against what is considered
normal for that species. The PLR tends to be fastest and most
complete in carnivores, with the cat's being the fastest of all
common domestic animals. The normal equine pupil constricts
 slowly in response to a bright light. The PLR of the cow and
sheep is somewhat more rapid. Birds and reptiles do have a
 PLR, but they can override it because their iris musculature is
skeletal rather than smooth (see Chapter 20).
A positive direct pupillary light reflex is not a reliable indicator
of vision or normal retinal function.
EXAMINATION OF THE ANTERIOR SEGMENT
Figure 5-7. Performing an auriculopalpebral block. A, The auriculo-
palpebral nerve fyefow tine) is palpated by running a finger up and down
Every attempt should be made to avoid sedation or anesthesia
over the zygomatic process of the facial bone (white arrows). B, Approxi-
 before or during the ophthalmic examination in small animals,
 mately 2 ml of lidlocaine is then injectec over the nerve.
86
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 5-s. Finoff transilluminator anc Optivisor magnifying loupe.
both eyes as a test of CN V and CN VlI function. These tests
 are more thoroughly described later. Finally, globe movements
and position are examined. As the head is elevated, depressed,
and moved laterally, the eye should return to or remain in
the center of the palpebral fissure, producing a physiologic
nystagmus. Both globes should retropulse normally
and
symmetrically.
 Examination in dim ambient light is then commenced with
a magnifying loupe and a focal light source (Figure 5-8). A
 Finoff transilluminator, which fits to the direct ophthalmoscope
or otoscope handset, produces a brighter and more focused
beam of light than a penlight and is therefore preferred. A source
of magnification is absolutely essential to conduct a complete
 ocular examination. The most useful instrument for general
 practice is a simple magnifying loupe with a power of 2 to 4X
Figure 5-10. The use of parallax to localize intraocular opacities.
and a focal length of 15 to 25 cm (6 to 10 inches). Using this
1, Corneal opacity; 2, cataract on anterior lens capsule; 3, cataract on
combination of a focal light source and magnification, the
posterior lens capsule. The pupil is cilated for this examination. (From
Komar C, Szutter 1 [1968l: Tierarztliche Augenheilkuncde. Paul Parey.
clinician should examine the eye from many angles while the
Berlin.}
light is directed from many contrasting angles. Particular
attention should be paid to the Sanson-Purkinje images, which
result from reflections from ocular structures. When a focal
light beam is examined from an oblique angle as it passes
through the eye, three reflections can usually be seen: the
cornea, the anterior lens capsule, and, sometimes, the posterior
 lens capsule (Figure 5-9). The combination of variable viewing
and illumination angles permits the examiner to gain intra-
 ocular depth perception by virtue of parallax, shadows, per-
spective, and reflected light (Figure 5-10).
The slit-lamp biomicroscope (Figure 5-1l) is a more
sophisticated optical instrument that combines up to 40x
 magnification and illumination and can be used to examine
many different microscopic and optical features of the patient's
Figure 5-11. A slit-lamp biomicroscope in use. Slit-lamp biomicroscopes
providle binocular magnification (with stereopsis) and a focal light source
whose angle, shape, and intensity can all be altered. These greatly
facilitate ophthalmic examinations in all animals.
eye such as individual layers of the cornea that normally are
 invisible to the naked eye of the examiner. As such, it allows
Inverted posterior
 pathologic processes to be described more accurately so as to
lens capsule image 
better guide diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. Because
of the requirement for training and skill in their use, slit-lamp
biomicroscopes are usually found only in specialty practices
 Upright anterior
Upright
lens capsule image
 and teaching institutions.
corneal image
 Using a source of focal light and magnification, the clinician
Figure 5-9. The Sanson-Purkinje reflections off the cornea anc anterior
examines ocular structures sequentially according to a mental
and posterior lens capsules provide perspective during the examination 
 checklist (see Figure 5-2). A logical order appears to be to work
and should be used to jucge the cepth of lesions within the eye.
simultaneously from peripheral to axial and from anterior to
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES I
87
 posterior, as follows. More detail can be found in the specific
Conjunctiva
 chapters relating to diseases of these individual tissues.
 In addition to the conjunctiva that lines both surfaces of the third
Eyelids
eyelid, the remaining conjunctiva lining the eyelids (palpebral
conjunctiva) and the anterior globe (bulbar conjunctiva) must also
The eyelids should be examined with particular attention to the
be examined. This requires opening and eversion of the upper and
periocular skin, eyelid margin, and meibomian gland orifices.
lower eyelids and examination with the globe in many positions
Look in particular for the following:
of gaze. Look in particular for the following:
· Change in color: hyperemia, anemia, icterus, melanosis
· Periocular discharge: serous ("epiphora"), mucoid, purulent,
· Chemosis: conjunctival edema
sanguineous, or a combination of these
·Periocular dermatitis/blepharitis: alopecia, scaling,
· Surface irregularities, thickening, or masses
· Inadequate or excessive surface moistness or discharge
hyperemia, crusting, swelling, ulceration, maceration, etc.
·Subconjunctival hemorrhage or emphysema
· Palpebral fissure size: narrowed or macropalpebral fissure
· Eyelid position and motion: entropion, ectropion, ptosis,
blepharospasm
Nasolacrimal Apparatus
 Disorders of the cilia or periocular hair: ectopic cilia.
distichia, trichiasis
The only components of the nasolacrimal apparatus visible
during the external eye examination are the ventral and dorsal
puncta in the palpebral conjunctiva near the medial canthus.
Third Eyelid
However, pathology in any part of the nasolacrimal drainage
The position of the third eyelid should be examined at rest, and
apparatus can produce ocular and periocular signs. Look in
then its anterior face further examined through gentle digital
 particular for the following:
 retropulsion of the globe through the upper lid. This later step
·Ocular discharge (epiphora, mucoid, purulent, sanguineous,
should be omitted if a deep or penetrating corneal or scleral
 or a combination of these)
lesion renders the globe unstable. The posterior or bulbar face
· Tear staining at the medial canthus
of the third eyelid may be examined by means of protrusion and
· Negative fluorescein passage (Jones) test result (see later
eversion of the third eyelid with a pair of fixation forceps or
section on vital dyes)
mosquito hemostats after application of topical
anesthetic
· Occlusion or absence of one or both puncta: atresia,
(Figure 5-12). Look in particular for the following:
 fbrosis/ cicatrization, canalicular foreign body (typically a
grass awn)
· Increased prominence at rest: orbital mass, enophthalmos,
· Abscess, swelling, or purulent dermatitis near the medial
phthisis, microphthalmos, Horner's syndrome, Haw's
 canthus (dacryocystitis)
syndrome
Scrolled third eyelid cartilage
Cornea
· Masses: prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid ("cherry
eye'"), neoplasia
The normal cornea is transparent owing to a number of ana-
· Irregularities of the margin or surfaces: chronic
tomic and physiologic features. As a result, pathology within
conjunctivitis ("pannus" or conjunctivitis), trauma
the cornea manifests as opacity, often of a color and pattern
· Foreign bodies
highly suggestive of the pathologic process (see Chapter 10).
· Changed color: melanosis, hyperemia, anemia
 Look in particular for the following:
· Surface moistness and discharge: dacryocystitis,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
· Loss of transparency: fibrosis, edema, melanosis,
vascularization, cellular infiltrate, lipid or mineral
 accumulation, keratic precipitates
· Changes in contour: keratoconus, keratoglobus, globe
rupture, corneal ulcer
· Surface irregularities or dullness: corneal mass/plaque,
corneal ulcer/facet, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, iris
prolapse/staphyloma
· Change in corneal diameter: buphthalmos, microphthalmos,
phthisis
Sclera
Only the anterior portion of the scleral coat may be seen on direct
extermal examination of the eye. Even then, it is seen through the
almost transparent bulbar conjunctiva. The posterior sclera also is
usually not directly visualized except in dogs with a subalbinotic
Figure 5-12. Use of two hermostats to exteriorize the third eyelicd for
fundus. In these patients, the inner aspect of the posterior sclera
 examination following application of a topical anesthetic. This horse has 
(the lamina fusca) is visible between and through choroidal
 a squamous cell carcinoma on the leacling ecge of the thirc eyelid.
tissue. This tends to have a more tan appearance than the
88
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
external anterior sclera and is discussed more fully later as part of
iris bombe, many acute glaucomas, intumescent cataracts,
the ocular fundus. Pathology of the posterior aspects of the sclera
and aqueous misdirection in cats.
 can sometimes create notable changes in the adjacent choroid or
 Abnormal contents: anterior lens luxation, foreign body,
retina, which can be seen during the fundic exam or using
hyphema, fbrin, hypopyon, aqueous flare, iris cysts, tumors,
ultrasound. However, scleral changes can go unnoticed unless
 persistent pupillary membranes, vitreous, and anterior synechia
special care is taken to include this tissue on the mental checklist
for the eye examination. When examining the anterior portion
Iris and Pupil
 of the sclera, one should in particular look for the following:
 The iris and pupil are assessed together because alterations in
· Changes in thickness: thinning with or without staphyloma
 one often produce changes in the other. Both should be examined
or diffuse thickening with scleritis
before and after pupil dilation. Obviously the iris face is best 
 Surface irregularities: nodular granulomatous episcleritis,
examined before dilation, but abnormalities of the posterior iris
neoplasia, staphyloma, globe rupture 
 Alteration in scleral "show"': increased due to exophthalmos,
(and ciliary body) are sometimes not visible until full pupil
dilation is achieved. Horses and ruminants normally have cystic
 phthisis, microphthalmos, tetanus, macropalpebral fissure;
excrescences of posterior iris epithelium that emerge to varying
decreased due to symblepharon, ptosis, blepharospasm
Change in contour: due to globe rupture (often at or near
degrees through the pupil, especially dorsally and ventrally, as
the limbus)
the corpora nigra or granula iridica. This is very highly developed
 Change in color: episcleral injection, hemorrhage, icterus,
in the camelids, in which it forms a series of interdigitating
 pleats. Look in particular for the following:
melanosis, melanocytic tumor
·Altered pupil shape (dyscoria) or position (corectopia):
Anterior Chamber
synechia, iris atrophy, iris hypoplasia, iris coloboma
 More than one aperture in the iris: inis coloboma, persistent
 The anterior chamber is the aqueous humor-filled space between
the inis and posterior comea. As such, it can be difficult to
pupillary membranes, iris atrophy, iris hypoplasia
·
 Iridal masses: iris cysts, neoplasia, abscess/granuloma
 examine. The following three techniques assist with this problem:
 Altered iris color: heterochromia iridis, rubeosis iridis,
1. Assess the globe from the lateral side, looking “across" the
edema, melanosis, melanocytic neoplasia, iris granuloma/
 anterior chamber (Figure 5-13).
abscess, chronic or acute uveitis
 2. Assess the clarity of the view of the rest of the intraocular
 Altered pupil size: uveitis, glaucoma, Horner's syndrome,
structures, especially the iris face. If this is decreased, then
iris atrophy, retinal or optic nerve disease, central nervous
 corneal disease and/or anterior chamber debris is likely.
 system (CNS) disease, CN IIl paralysis, drug
 3. Give attention to the Sanson-Purkinje images as described
administration, lens dislocation 
previously.
 Iridodonesis (fluttering of the iris): surgical aphakia or lens 
dislocation
When assessing the anterior chamber, one should look in parti-
cular for the following:
 Altered pupil color: cataract, nuclear sclerosis, vitreous
hemorrhage, retinal detachment, asteroid hyalosis 
· Alterations in depth: increased with posterior lens
dislocation, microphakia, buphthalmos, hypermature
Lens
cataract or after surgical lens removal. Decreased with
 anterior lens dislocation, iris or ciliary body tumors/cysts,
Examination of the lens, like that of other clear ocular struc-
tures, can be confusing. Here,too, the Sanson-Purkinje images
are useful (see earlier). The examiner can use parallax (see
Figure 5-10) or the slit beam of the direct ophthalmoscope and
a source of manification to determine position of opacities
within the lens. Lens pathology is relatively limited, with
altered clarity (nuclear sclerosis or cataract) and dislocation
(luxation or subluxation) predominating. Look in particular for
the following:
· Altered size: microphakia, hypermature cataract,
 intumescent cataract
· Altered shape: spherophakia, lenticonus, lentiglobus,
hypermature cataract, intumescent cataract, lens capsule
rupture
 Altered position: luxation, subluxation, aphakic crescent
· Lens opacity: cataract, nuclear sclerosis, anterior lens
capsule melanosis, intralenticular hemorrhage, persistent
persistent tunica vasculosa lentis
Figure 5-13. Transverse view of the left eye of a cat. The view frorm this
Examination of the lens completes examination of the
angle is very useful for examination of the anterior chamber in animals.
 anterior segment, which will identify the vast majority of
 Magnification and a focal light source are also essential.
ocular lesions encountered in general practice. However, a
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES I
89
complete examination also necessitates examination of those
Ophthalmosc
structures in the posterior segment: the vitreous and various
structures of the ocular fundus. This requires some equipment
 and techniques additional to those used for examination of the
anterior segment, which are described in the following
 sections.
Examiner
Patient
OPHTHALMOSCOPY
The clinician can examine the fundus of larger eyes (notably
 those of the horse, cow, and many raptors) directly through a
Light bulb
widely dilated pupil by aligning the light beam with his/her
Figure 5-14. Direct ophthalmoscopy.Arrows show orientation of images
visual axis and standing a short distance from the patient, as for
in examiner's and patient's eyes. (Modified from Vaughan D, Asbury T
retroillumination (see Figure 5-5). However, this maneuver is not 
[1983]: Ceneral Ophthalmology, 10th edl. Lange Medlical, Los Altos, CA.}
possible for dogs and cats, and even for horses and cows, accurate
assessment requires examination using one of three methods of
ophthalmoscopy:
·The direct ophthalmoscope
二
· The indirect lens
·The monocular indirect ophthalmoscope
Although various writers describe one or others of these
ophthalmoscopes as easier to use, the old adage that practice
makes perfect applies, and persistence and practice are essen-
tial to master any ophthalmoscopic technique. Therefore rather
 than concentrating on the technique that is alleged to be easier
to learn, budding ophthalmoscopists should perhaps focus on
the technique most likely to be useful to them throughout their
careers with the aim being to become competent at that tech-
nique. Most ophthalmologists prefer to scan the whole fundus
with an indirect lens and then to examine more closely any
regions of interest using the direct ophthalmoscope. This
approach takes advantage of the greater field of view associated
Figure 5-15. The clirect ophthalmoscope. Controls for light intensity (A),
with indirect ophthalmoscopy and the higher magnification
focusing lenses (B), light aperture size anc shape (C), anc filters (D).
permitted by direct ophthalmoscopy. Regardless of the ophthal-
moscope used, thorough examination of the fundus requires
complete pupil dilation, which is achieved approximately 15 to
20 minutes after application of 1 drop of tropicamide. The
extent and speed of dilation can be enhanced in some patients
 by application of a second drop about 5 minutes after the first.
Direct Ophthalmoscopy
The direct ophthalmoscope directs a beam of light into the
patient's eye and places the observer's eye in the correct position
to view the reflected beam and details of the interior of the eye
(Figure 5-14). It is called a direct ophthalmoscope because it pro-
vides a direct and upright image of the fundus rather than a virtual
The direct ophthalmoscope (Figure 5-15) has a rheostat to
control the light intensity, colored filters, a slit beam for viewing
elevations and depressions within the fundus, an illuminated grid
 to project onto the fundus to measure lesions, and a series of lenses 
 Figure 5-16. The direct ophthalmoscope being used to examine a horse's
 On a rotating wheel that adjusts the depth of focus within the eye.
funclus.
 These lenses may be used to examine structures other than the
fundus or to measure the height of lesions by changing the focus
 eye. This is less important with laterally placed eyes such as in
from the tip of the lesion to the surrounding retina and determining
horses (Figure 5-16). Ideally, the examiner's opposite eye is left
the dioptric difference. However, many of these features are of
 open. With the ophthalmoscope set on O D and so that the
limited use in noncompliant veterinary patients.
largest circle of light is emitted, the ophthalmoscope is rested
To avoid interference between the examiner's and patient's
frmly against the examiner's brow and the patient's eye is
noses, the observer should use the left eye to examine the
 viewed in a darkened room from approximately 25 cm away.
patient's left eye and the right eye to examine the patient's right 
 The tapetal reflection is located, and then the observer moves
90
I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTA1S OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOIOGY
in to within 2 to 3cm of the patient's eye. If necessary,
adjustment may be made to the lens settings to bring the fundus
into focus. The fundus is then searched in quadrants, with the
optic nerve head used as a reference point. The direct
ophthalmoscope is analogous to the high-power lens of a
 microscope and provides an upright image magnifed 15 to 17×,
varying somewhat with the size of the patient's eye. Therefore
 thorough examination of the fundus by direct ophthalmoscopy is
 at best time-consuming and often impossible because the field
 examined is so small and the patient's eye is constantly moving.
Indirect Ophthalmoscopy
(aoe oo Ada) sua xaoe oso au 
is placed between the observer's eye and the patient's eye and an
inverted virtual image is formed between the lens and observer
Figure 5-19. The binocular indlirect ophthalmoscope anc a 2.2 panretinal
(Figure 5-17). The magnifcation and field of view depend on the
lens are ideal for funcuscopic examination of most comestic veterinary
patients.
dioptric power of the lens and on the size of the patient's eye.
 However, with the lenses typically used in veterinary medicine, the
Monocular Indirect Ophthalmoscopy
magnification is always less and the field of view greater than that
achieved with use of a direct ophthalmoscope. Therefore indirect
A number of new monocular indirect ophthalmoscopes that fit
ophthalmoscopy allows examination of a greater percentage of the
 onto the standard battery handset used for the direct ophthal-
fundus with each field and is faster and more thorough than direct 
moscope have become available (Figure 5-20). Monocular
ophthalmoscopy. The ability to compare all regions of the fundus
indirect ophthalmoscopy has features intermediate between
 present in one field of view is another important advantage. With 
those of direct ophthalmoscopy and the indirect lens. It produces
the binocular indirect ophthalmoscope (Figure 5-18), a head-
 an upright image of moderate magnification and moderate field
 sd s a   s  
of view. The instrument can be used with one hand and is
eyes to be used for the examination and creates depth perception
relatively easy for the beginner and infrequent user to master.
to better interpret raised and depressed lesions within the fundus.
However, because the observer uses only one eye, there is little
This technique also leaves both hands of the examiner free; one 
depth perception. Views of a canine fundus that would be
hand can then be used to position the patient's head and eyelids at 
 cbtained using the three methods of ophthalmoscopy are shown
 arm's length from the examiner, and the other to position the lens 
in Figure 5-21.
 and further control the patient's eyelids (Figure 5-19).
NORMAL FUNDUS
Ophthalmoscope
Condensing
The fundus of each domestic species has a characteristic but
lens
highly variable appearance, which must be learned through
regular practice with a reliable ophthalmoscope. The inter-
 pretation of fundic lesions is probably one of the most difficult
components of the ocular examination and is a common and
Examiner
Patient
 justifiable reason for referral to a veterinary ophthalmologist.
Figure 5-17. Indlirect ophthalmoscopy. (Moclified from Vaughan D,
The following structures are found in the fundus of domestic
Asbury T [1983l: Ceneral Ophthalmology, 10th edl. lange Medlical
species (Figure 5-22):
Publications, Los Altos, CA.}
· Tapetum: A highly reflective structure in the dorsal portion
of the fundus. The pig, bird, and camelids have no tapetum,
auo buiaeq Ansn saroads rauo un uaden jo aouasge p
Figure 5-18. A portable binocular indlirect ophthalmoscope.
Figure 5-20. The monocular incirect ophthalmoscope (Panoptic) in use.
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES I
91
二
C
Figure 5-21. View of a canine funclus as seen through the cirect ophthalrmoscope (A), the monocular inclirect (Panoptic) ophthalmoscope (B), anc a
(s p  aan) saeaa a yo ia a es se  a  sa a 
 present, myelin produces some irregularities in the border
Temporal
Nasal
(and therefore the shape) of the optic disc. Also, a small
depression of variable size is seen in the middle of the
 optic disc in myelinated nerves and is known as the
physiologic cup.
· Retina: The funduscopically important parts of the retina
 are the retinal vessels, the retinal pigment epithelium 
Venule -
-Tapetal
fundus
(RPE), and the neurosensory retina. The retinal vascular
 patterm varies among species. When present, retinal
arterioles and venules can be seen emanating from the optic
Arteriole-
disc. The RPE is perhaps poorly named because it is not
Optic disc
always pigmented (melanotic). When the tapetum (which it 
 overlies) is present, the RPE is typically nonpigmented to
Nontapetal
permit light to pass through it and reach the tapetum. In 
fundus
nontapetal animals and in those nontapetal regions of tapetal
fundi, the RPE may be more melanotic and may obscure the 
Generalized fundus
view of the choroid behind it. In some subalbinotic animals 
 Figure 5-22. Structures in the normal fundus. For this ciagram, species
the melanin content of the RPE is limited and a clear view of
dlifferences have been ignorecl. For incliviclual and species dlifferences, see
the choroid is possible (Figure 5-23). The neurosensory
Figures 5-23 through 5-29.
 retina itself is translucent (rather like wax paper) and, as
is considered a normal variation. When present the tapetum
typically occupies the dorsal half or less of the fundus. The
nonreflective ventral portion, termed the nontapetal area,
 may be variably melanotic with choroidal vessels evident if
melanin is suffciently lacking. Tapetal development 
continues postnatally. In young dogs and cats the fundus is 
grayish soon after the eyes open (7 to 10 days). With tapetal
development the dorsal fundus progresses through lilac and
 successively lighter blues to the adult color and reflectivity
by approximately 4 months of age.
Optic disc, optic nerve head, or optic papilla: The region of
the optic nerve where axons that form the nerve fiber layer
of the inner retina turn through about 90 degrees to exit the
eye and orbit as the optic nerve. It is ventrolateral to the
posterior pole of the globe. The degree of myelination 
varies among species and even individuals of the same
species (but minimally between eyes of the same
individual). As for the tapetum, postnatal development 
 Figure 5-23. Subalbinotic funclus of a cdog. The choroidal vessels can be
of the optic papilla occurs and myelination can continue 
seen easily because of sparse melanin within the choroid and retinal
in dogs until approximately 4 months of age. When
 pigment epithelium.
92
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
such, is not seen directly. Rather, its major effect on
lamina cribrosa with the nerve fbers but soon leave the nerve
funduscopic appearance is that it reduces the tapetal
to enter the orbit. Retinal arterioles (about 20) emerge from the 
reflection dorsally and makes the ventral nontapetal area
outer portions and margin of the disc and are considerably
seem slightly more gray than black. This effect is usually
smaller than the venules. There typically are three major retinal
not appreciated until retinal thickness is reduced in various
venules—superior, ventromedial, and ventrolateral—although
forms of retinal degeneration. The effect consists of tapetal
additional veins and variation in orientation are common. Over
hyperreflectivity, a more mosaic patterm to the nontapetal
the nontapetal fundus, the retinal vessels may normally exhibit
fundus, and retinal vascular attenuation.
a grayish silver sheen or “reflex" in the center of the vessel,
 Choroid: The choroid is a highly vascular, variably
which is not seen over the tapetum.
melanotic structure. Unlike the retinal vessels, which are
 relatively fine, dark red, branching vessels, choroidal
Cat
vessels appear as broad, orange to pink, spokelike 
vessels emanating from the optic disc. The choroid is seen
The feline fundus tends to be more uniform in appearance than
when there is no overlying tapetum and when the overlying
the canine fundus (Figure 5-25). A large, highly reflective,
RPE is not highly melanotic. This most commonly
relatively uniform tapetal region of gold or green is usually
occurs in the ventral fundus of subalbinotic animals (see
 present. The nontapetal region tends to be highly melanotic but
Figure 5-23).
can be amelanotic in subalbinotic animals, especially oriental
breeds. The optic disc is smaller and more circular and does not
Dog
have an obvious physiologic cup because of the lack of myelin.
The optic nerve head is usually present in the tapetal area. Like
Typically, tapetal and nontapetal areas are present in the canine
the dog, the cat has a holangiotic retinal vascular pattern.
fundus (Figure 5-24), although the tapetum can be normally
 However, the retinal vessels emanate from the edge of the optic
absent in dogs. Tapetal color is usually gold, bluish green, or
disc, and there is no venous circle on the optic nerve head. As
orange-brown. The tapetum has a fine beaded or granular
with the dog, there are generally three arterioles—superior,
appearance. The junction between tapetal and nontapetal areas
ventromedial, and ventrolateral—which are ciliary in origin.
is often irregular. The nontapetal fundus is deep brown to black
The area centralis is a region of high cone density for enhanced
and relatively homogeneous to slightly mottled. The choroid is
visual acuity. It is superior and temporal to the optic disc,
normally visible in the nontapetal fundus of subalbinotic,
within the tapetal fundus, and is usually visible as an oval to
lightly colored, or merle animals (see Figure 5-23).
elliptical area devoid of large blood vessels and with a slightly
The optic disc usually lies near the tapetal-nontapetal junc-
 granular appearance.
tion (depending on the size of the tapetum). When it lies in the 
tapetal region, a small hyperreflective ring immediately adja-
Horse
cent to the margin of the disc is normal and is called
peripapillary conus. The disc surface tends to be white to pink,
The equine fundus retina (Figure 5-26) differs greatly in
owing to admixing of myelin and numerous small capillaries.
appearance from the canine or feline fundus. Most horses have
The physiologic cup is a small gray depression in the center of
a tapetum with the junction between tapetal and nontapetal
the optic disc. The retinal vascular pattern is holangiotic, mean-
areas being relatively uniform. The tapetum varies in color
ing that vessels should extend from the optic nerve head to the 
from bluish purple to green and yellow. As with other
periphery of the retina. The major retinal venules typically
anastomose on the surface of the disc. The anastomoses may
appear complete or incomplete, depending on the degree of
 myelination covering the vessels. These venules penetrate the
Figure 5-24. Typical canine funclus. Note tapetum, holangiotic retinal
Figure 5-25. Typical feline funcus. Note tapetum, holangiotic retinal
vascular pattern, with anastormotic ring on the optic nerve head,
vascular pattern, with vessels extencling only to the periphery of the optic
melanotic retinal pigment epitheliurm and choroid, and myelinated optic
nerve head, melanotic retinal pigment epithelium and choroid, and
nerve headl.
nonmyelinated optic nerve headl.
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES I
93
jeuan soisueined unjadel aon snpuny auinba jeidil gz-s anai
Figure 5-27. Typical bovine fundus. Note tapetum, holangiotic retinal
vasculaitlensslanticn
pue piooys pue wnauida juauaid jeugai pgoueau usaed jensen
oval, salmon pink, nonmyelinated, optic nerve heacl. This horse has the
epithelium and choroid, and horizontally ovoid optic nerve head.
dliffuse color dilute region seen corsal to the optic nerve head in a nurmber
of normal horses.
herbivores, the horse's tapetum tends to be less reflective than
that of the carnivores with the stars of Winslow being far more
readily appreciated. These are small, uniformly scattered red
or dark pink dots and lines representing end-on views of
capillaries of the choriocapillaris traversing the tapetum to
supply the outer retina. The nontapetal area is typically brown
and relatively homogeneous. Absence of the tapetum or
amelanotic nontapetal area allows the choroidal circulation to
be seen but occurs relatively infrequently in horses compared
with dogs and cats. However, a common normal variant is a
relative reduction in tapetal coloration dorsal to the disc with
variable exposure of the choroidal circulation (see Figure 5-26).
The optic disc lies in the nontapetal fundus, is a horizontal oval,
and has 30 to 60 short vessels supplying the surrounding retina.
This is a paurangiotic vascular pattern with the arterioles and
venules indistinguishable from each other. The lamina cribrosa
 is often visible within the optic nerve head.
vascular pattern, with large, intertwined retinal vessels, melanotic retinal
pigment epithelium ancl choroid, anc kiclney bean-shapecl optic nerve head.
Sheep, Goats, and Cattle
The fundi of sheep, goats, and cattle are similar. They are
typically tapetal with a heavily myelinated optic nerve head.
EXAMINATION OF THE POSTERIOR
The optic nerve head varies in shape among these three domes-
SEGMENT
ticated ruminant species. In cattle it tends to be horizontally
Vitreous
ovoid (Figure 5-27), in sheep it is kidney shaped (Figure 5-28),
and in goats it forms an irregular circle (Figure 5-29). The
 The anterior vitreous can be partially examined along with the
nontapetal area is homogeneous brown/black except in albinotic
 anterior segment after pupil dilation and if a bright light source is
and subalbinotic animals, in which it may lack melanin,
used. However, examination of the vitreous is completed with oph-
revealing the subjacent choroidal vasculature. The retinal
thalmoscopy. As for the aqueous humor, the vitreous should be
vascular patterm is holangiotic with three or four major venules
transparent and should effectively go unnoticed during the
and arterioles radiating from the optic disc. The retinal vessels 
examination if it is normal. Therefore look in particular for the
are of large diameter and bulge (with the inner retina) into the
following:
vitreous. The dorsal retinal venule and arteriole often intertwine,
and tributaries of the dorsal vessels often appear like the
· Opacities within the vitreous: persistent hyaloid artery or its
hanging branches of a tree. Remnants of the hyaloid vascular
 remnants (perfused or nonperfused), asteroid hyalosis,
system may persist centrally on the optic nerve head as
synchysis scintillans, inflammatory exudates, vitreous
Bergmeister's papilla.
hemorrhage, traction bands, obvious vitreous plicae 
94
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
ADDITIONAL DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
 Following a through examination of the anterior and posterior
segments, additional testing should be chosen on the basis of
 presenting complaint, history, signalment, examination findings,
and disease suspicion. Discussion of such tests forms the
 remainder of this chapter.
Aqueous Flare
Aqueous flare (sometimes just called “flare") is a pathog-
nomonic sign of anterior uveitis due to breakdown ofthe blood-
ocular barrier with subsequent leakage of plasma proteins
(often along with cells) into the aqueous humor within the
anterior chamber. Aqueous flare is best detected with the use of
 magnification and a very focal, intense light source in a totally
darkened room after pupil dilation. The path taken by the beam
Figure 5-29. Typical caprine fundus. Note tapetum, holangiotic retinal
of light is viewed from an angle. In the normal eye, a focal
vascular pattern, melanotic retinal pigment epithelium anc choroid, and 
reflection is seen where the light strikes the cornea. The beam
roughly circular optic nerve heacl. (Courtesy University of California,
is then invisible as it traverses the almost protein- and cell-free
Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
aqueous humor in the anterior chamber. The light beam becormes
visible again as a focal reflection on the anterior lens capsule and
then as a diffuse beam through the body of the normal lens
because of the presence of lens proteins (Figure 5-30, A). If
· Swirling of the vitreous with globe movement: liquefaction
uveitis has allowed leakage of serum proteins from the iris or
of the vitreous (syneresis)
ciliary body into the aqueous humor, the light will scatter as it 
· Retinal detachment/dialysis/tears 
 passes through the anterior chamber. Aqueous flare is therefore
 detected when a beam of light is visible traversing the anterior
Retina
chamber and joining the focal reflections on the cormeal surface
 and the anterior lens capsule (Figure 5-30, B).
Retinal disease is usually best observed as changes in the
A slit-lamp biomicroscope provides ideal conditions for
appearance of the underlying tapetum, choroid, or RPE. Look 
 detecting flare (Figure 5-31); however, the beam produced by
 in particular for the following:
the smallest circular aperture on the direct ophthalmoscope
held as closely as possible to the cornea in a completely darkened
· Changes in color: inflammatory cells, edema, melanin,
room and viewed transversely with some source of magnifi-
hemorrhage, fbrosis (gliosis), retinal folds, neoplasia, and
cation also has excellent results (Figure 5-32). The smallest
lipid accumulation, all of which obscure the view of the
 circle of light is preferred over the slit beam on the direct
tapetum
ophthalmoscope because the slit beam is not as intense and
· Changes in tapetal reflectivity: hyporeflctivity (typically
  a arm  eo saa,  s arad ou sa
active and acute processes) or hyperreflectivity (indicative
of more chronic and inactive changes)
?
 Difficulty focusing on all of the retina at once: vitreous
 debris, retinal edema, retinal detachment, scleral
A
coloboma/ectasia
· Changes in the vascular appearance: retinal vessels may
 appear attenuated (retinal degeneration, anemia) or
enlarged/tortuous (systemic hypertension, chorioretinitis,
vasculitis, collie eye anomaly)
Optic Nerve
B
 Interpretation of optic nerve head changes requires an appre-
 ciation of the normal species-related variations as well as some 
 individual variations. Look in particular for the following:
· Increased size or prominence: optic neuritis, papilledema,
excessive myelination
 Decreased size or prominence: coloboma, optic nerve
hypoplasia, micropapilla, optic nerve atrophy, glaucomatous
Figure 5-30. Detection of aqueous flare. A, In the normal eye a focal light
beam is visible only where it traverses the cornea and lens but not within
cupping
the anterior charmber. B, With leakage of serurm proteins from the iris or
Vascular changes: hemorrhages, anemia, engorgement,
ciliary body into the aqueous humor (anterior uveitis), the beam of light is
 Bergmeister's papilla
also visible traversing the anterior chamber.
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES |
95
reddened eye, such as keratitis, conjunctivitis, scleritis, and
orbital cellulitis (in which IOP should be unaffected). Fol-
lowing confirmation of uveitis or glaucoma, tonometry should
be an essential and perhaps the most important method of
monitoring response to therapy and judging the tapering or
augmentation of therapy. The ready availability of the Tono-
n r   
   an    s
private practices and is the basis of this section. However, other
methods of tonometry are also described.
Cannulation measures IOP directly; it is used experi-
mentally but not clinically. Other methods employ measure-
ments of corneoscleral tension to estimate IOP. Digital
palpation of the globe through closed lids provides an
Figure 5-31. Photograph of a clog with aqueous flare. Note that the beam
extremely unreliable, nonreproducible measure of IOP and will
of light is visible within the anterior chamber behind the cornea.
fail to identify animals in which IOP is within a range for which 
treatment is likely to be successful. Dependence on this method
 leads to inaccurate diagnosis and inappropriate ocular therapy,
with unacceptable consequences such as blindness or ongoing
ocular pain. Therefore a method of IOP measurement is an
essential part of a thorough ophthalmic evaluation.
Indentation Jonometry
The Schiotz tonometer relies upon indentation tonometry. In
this method, a standard force is applied with a metal rod to the
anesthetized cornea. The distance the rod indents the cornea is
measured and is inversely related to the IOP (i.e., the greater
the tonometer scale reading, the lower the patient's IOP). This
method is easily understood if one regards the eye as analogous
to a water-flled balloon. If the blunt end of a pencil is applied
to the balloon with a given force (e.g., the weight of the pencil
placed vertically), the pencil indents the surface of the balloon
Figure 5-32. The clirect ophthalmoscope can be used to assess aqueous
 by a certain distance. If the pressure in the balloon is decreased
flare. 1t is turnec to the small circle of light, heldl very close to the patient's
(some of the water is let out), the tension in the rubber wall
pauayiep e ul asue asiansuen e je pamalA s! weag uall au pue 'eauy
decreases, and the same pencil resting on the balloon indents it 
room using a source of magnification.
farther. Conversely, if the pressure in the balloon is increased,
the same pencil indents it less. The Schiotz tonometer (Figure 
 appreciated more easily. Assessment of flare may be easier after
5-33) consists of three parts: the plunger (analogous to the
complete pupil dilation because the dark space created by the
 pencil), the footplate assembly (a device to measure indenta-
pupil provides an excellent "backdrop" against which the light
tion), and the handle. A further refinement is added: The weight
beam can be seen traversing the anterior chamber. If flare is
applied to the eye through the rod may be varied by adding or
seen, then anterior uveitis can be diagnosed with certainty.
subtracting weights (5.5 g, 7.5 g, 10.0 g, or 15.0 g). The greater
However, it is important to note that not all eyes with uveitis 
have flare. The absence of this sign should not be used to
eliminate the diagnosis of uveitis, and other signs of uveitis
(low intraocular pressure, miosis, rubeosis iridis, keratic
precipitates, etc.) should be searched for.
All red, inflamed, or painful eyes should undergo assessment
for aqueous flare to facilitate the diagnosis of uveitis.
Tonometry
Tonometry is the measure of intraocular pressure (IOP) and is
perhaps one of the most important but underused diagnostic
tests in veterinary medicine. For too long, tonometry has been
taught as simply a method of diagnosing glaucoma (in which
IOP is raised). However, it is far more than this. It is also a
method of diagnosing anterior uveitis (where IOP is typically
reduced) and of confirming the diagnosis of all other causes of
Figure 5-33. The Schiotz tonometer.
96
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Owing to ease of use, the Tono-Pen has largely replaced the
Schiotz tonometer in progressive practices.
Applanation Tonometry
 Unlike indentation tonometry, applanation tonometry using
the Tono-Pen is suitable for large animals, is unaffected by
variations in ocular rigidity, requires no conversion tables, and
needs no sterilization. The principle of applanation tonometry
is that the force required to flatten a given area of a sphere is
equal to the pressure within the sphere (the Imbert-Fick law).
Therefore if the area is known (the size of the footplate) and the
force is measured, the pressure can be calculated. Although
there are numerous types of applanation tonometers, the most 
 commonly used in general and specialty veterinary practice is
the Tono-Pen. This instrument has changed design somewhat
over the years but the basic utility of the instrument is
unchanged (Figure 5-35).
The advantages of the Tono-Pen include the following:
· It is accurate and easy to use.
Figure 5-34. The Schiotz tonometer in use on a cat. Note that the
 The animal's head does not need to be held vertically, although
tonometer must be held vertically, making its use awkward or impossible 
 the probe must applanate the cormeal surface at right angles.
 in many veterinary patients.
 Errors induced by different sizes and curvatures of corneas 
in different species are less important.
· Because of the small instrument head, irregular or diseased
the weight applied to the eye at a given IOP, the greater the
corneal areas may be avoided, and accurate readings
 penetration of the rod.
obtained from even small comeas of exotic species.
 Before use of the Schigtz tonometer, a drop of local anesthetic
· The probe tip is covered with a disposable latex cap, which
 is placed on the surface of the eye. The patient is then restrained
is changed between uses and prevents transfer of infections.
 and the lids are carefully retracted without placing pressure on the
· Minimal restraint is required.
 globe. Since the indentation tonometer relies on gravity for an
 The pressure is displayed in mm Hg without need for
accurate reading, it must be placed vertically upon the cormea
(Figure 5-34). This requires that the head be elevated so that the
conversion via tables.
 comeal surface is horizontal. The tonometer is placed on the eye,
 Before use, a drop of topical anesthetic is applied to the
either with no weight in place (the plunger weighs 5.5 g) or with
 cornea. The patient is minimally restrained by an assistant so as
the 7.5-g weight in place. The scale reading is recorded. The
 not to artificially raise IOP via direct pressure on the jugular
calibration table supplied with the instrument is then used to
 veins, and the operator carefully retracts the eyelids using the
 convert the scale reading to the IOP via the appropriate column,
 nondominant hand. Care must be taken not to place pressure on
selected according to the weight used. Human calibration tables
the globe. The dominant hand holding the Tono-Pen should
supplied with the instrument are more accurate than veterinary
then be stabilized against the hand holding the eyelids, and the 
versions. The data are recorded as scale reading/weight/
 central comea gently touched with the instrument's tip using
pressure (e.g., 5.0 units/5.5 g/21 mm Hg).
multiple, very light “blotting" movements. Particular attention
 Because of difficulties in head positioning and patient
cooperation, Schiotz tonometry is difficult in many small
animals and impossible for large domestic animals. Also, if,
under the influence of the Schiotz plunger, the sclera and
TONO-PEN HISTORY
 cornea stretch because of the slight increase in IOP caused by
the indentation, a higher scale reading and a lower IOP are
measured, because the ocular rigidity has changed. This ocular
rigidity varies considerably in dogs. A quick check to deter-
mine the influence of ocular rigidity on the accuracy of the 
readings may be performed by measuring the pressure with two
different tonometer weights (using the lighter weight first). If
the pressures obtained are similar, the influence of ocular
rigidity is small. If the pressure obtained with the heavier
weight is considerably less, the ocular rigidity is low and the
walls of the globe are stretching. The plunger assembly of the
Schiotz tonometer must be kept clean because mucus and salts
from tears can dry on the plunger rod surfaces, prevent free
movement of the plunger, and cause inaccurate results. The
Figure 5-35. A series of Tono-Pens showing the evolution of the
 instrument may be sterilized with ethylene oxide to prevent
instrument through the years. Despite these changes, the utility of this
transfer of pathogenic microorganisms between patients.
instrument is unchangedl.
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES |
97
should be paid to the “approach angle" of the tip to the cornea
Normal IntraocularPressure
so that the tip's flat surface is parallel to the cormeal surface
(i.e., so that the Tono-Pen itself is perpendicular to the corneal
Across large populations, normal canine and feline IOP is
surface). This is best achieved by viewing the interface between
reported as approximately 10 to 20 mm Hg. However, significant
the cornea and the tip from the side. The cornea is "blotted"
variation is noted among individuals as well as among techniques
suficient times to elicit an average reading. The digital display
and the time of day at which IOP is measured. Therefore
is in mm Hg. The reliability (coefficient of variance) of the
 comparison of IOP between right and left eyes of the same animal
result should be 5%, or tonometry should be repeated.
is critical to interpretation of results. A good rule of thumb is that 
IOP should not vary between right and left eyes of the same
ReboundTonometry
patient by more than 20%. As with all other measured biologic
values, one should not treat a low or high IOP but should use it as
Rebound (or impact or dynamic) tonometry is a third
an indicator of uveitis or glaucoma, respectively, and should
mechanism by which IOP may be measured and which uses a
assess the patient for other signs consistent with those diagnoses.
different mechanical principle. Rebound tonometers eject a
Additionally, IOP can vary with some exogenous and endogenous
small probe (such as a metal pin with a rounded end) at a fixed
factors. Sedatives, tranquilizers, and anesthetic drugs can cause
distance from the cornea and assess the motion of the probe as
lowered IOP readings because of reduced extraocular and adnexal
it strikes the cornea and is returned (rebounds) to the instru-
muscle tone. By the same mechanism, ketamine may cause a
ment. Eyes with higher IOP cause a more rapid deceleration
slightly elevated reading. Patient cooperation is an important
of the probe and shorter return time to the instrument. This
factor, and care should be taken to minimize pressure applied
technique is affected by ocular surface tension and so should be
around the neck or orbital area, or in retracting the eyelids.
performed before application of any topical medications,
including topical anesthetic. This feature raises some questions
Tonography
as to how readings by such tonometers might be affected by
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (in which surface tension would be
Tonography is the study of aqueous outflow facility in response
altered) and by the presence of comeal pathology as is fre-
to pressure applied to the eye. It is based on the observation that
quently encountered in animals with glaucoma or uveitis.
applied pressure softens an eye because fluid is forced out
Additionally, the probe distance from the eye is likely to exert
 through the iridocorneal (or “drainage") angle. This softening
some influence on readings, and ensuring the proper distance
occurs to a lesser extent in a glaucomatous eye because
can be difficult in uncooperative animals. The technique was
aqueous is less able to pass out of the anterior chamber (i.e.,
 developed more than 50 years ago and only recently has under-
outflow facility is decreased). In tonography, a Schigtz-type
gone a resurgence in popularity owing to the release of a new
weight and plunger are placed on the cornea of a still patient
rebound tonometer, manufactured as Tono Vet or iCare (Figure
and the gradual reduction in IOP over 4 minutes is measured
 5-36). This instrument has so far been calibrated for dogs, cats,
 graphically on a strip chart recorder. The outflow facility
and horses only, and one must select the correct software for
coeffcient (C) can be calculated from this graph. This tech-
each species before beginning IOP measurements. In a study
 nique is used predominantly in research settings.
using normotensive dog eyes, the TonoVet consistently
reported lower IOP than the Tono-Pen did; however, the
Gonioscopy
difference was only about 1 to 2 mm Hg. The reliability of the
rebound tonometer in patients with diseased corneas or when
Gonioscopy describes examination of the iridocorneal or
measured through a contact lens has not yet been assessed.
"drainage” angle (the junction between the iris and cornea). In
the normal eye of most species light rays that are reflected from
The IOP should be measured in all red, inflamed, or painful
 the drainage angle strike the posterior cornea and undergo total
eyes to diagnose or eliminate from consideration both glaucoma 
 internal reflection as in a prism (Figure 5-37, A). This occurs
and uveitis.
because of the difference in refractive index between the cornea
 and the surrounding air, and the high angle of incidence of
the light rays from the drainage angle. By replacing the air
surrounding the cornea with a goniolens that has an index of
refraction close to that of the cornea, total internal reflection is
 avoided and light rays from the drainage angle can be viewed
directly through the goniolens. Additional modifcations may
be made to the goniolens to provide magnification. Magnifying
 instruments such as the biomicroscope, gonioscope, head loupe,
and fundus camera may also be used. Direct goniolenses (e.g.
Koeppe; Figure 5-37, B), through which the angle is viewed
directly and indirect goniolenses (e.g., Goldmann; Figure 5-37,
C), in which the image is viewed in a mirror, are both available.
Low-vacuum goniolenses are very useful for veterinary use, as
they are held in place by low-pressure vacuum applied by a
 2-mL syringe and a column of saline held below the level of the
eye. All goniolenses are bonded to the cornea with a liquid
medium such as saline (for low-vacuum goniolenses) or
Figure 5-36. The TonoVet rebound tonometer in use.
methylcellulose solutions (for nonvacuum goniolenses).
98
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOIOGY
二
Figure 5-39. Conioscopic view of a normal canine iridocorneal
(drainage) angle. A, Outer pigrment bandl; B, inner pigrment band;
C, pectinate ligarments; D, iris root.
exudates. The technique is applicable to all domestic species
but is most commonly used in dogs. In cats and horses the
 anterior chamber is deeper than in dogs and parts of the drain-
 age angle can be examined without a goniolens.
Figure 5-37. Conioscopy permits examination of the iricocorneal or
an ae aep a wy se ean  alsue ae
Vital Dyes
suao ya v g ea nasod ay e uoaa leaun le
refracts light so that the clrainage angle may be viewed clirectly. C, An
Vital dyes stain living tissues. Fluorescein and rose bengal are
inclirect goniolens refracts light so that the irmage is viewed in a mirror.
 most commonly used in veterinary ophthalmology.
Fluorescein
Gonioscopic examination is a frequent part of the examina-
tion of patients in which suspected glaucoma or ocular hyper-
Fluorescein is a water-soluble dye that is retained by all
 tension is suspected and complements tonometry and tonography.
hydrophilic but not hydrophobic structures. The classic
 In cooperative patients topical anesthesia is usually sufficient 
 example of its use is in the identification of a cormeal ulcer, in
(Figure 5-38); however, tranquilization may be necessary in 
which the fluorescein is retained by the hydrophilic stroma
refractory animals. The normal structures of the canine drain-
wherever it is exposed by loss of the hydrophobic epithelium.
 age angle are shown in Figure 5-39. Gonioscopy is used primarily
 Fluorescein should always be applied from an impregnated
to determine whether the angle is open, narrow, closed, or
 paper strip. Prepared solutions should not be used because they
obstructed by mesodermal remnants, and to check for the
can become contaminated by bacteria. The strip is removed
presence of foreign bodies, tumors, and inflammatory
from the packet, moistened with a drop of sterile saline or eye
 rinse, and touched very briefly to the conjunctival and not the
corneal surface. Direct application of the strip tothe cornea can
cause artifactual stain retention. Excess dye should always be
rinsed with sterile saline, and the eye examined with magnifi-
cation and a blue light from a cobalt filter attached to a Finoff 
transilluminator or from the direct ophthalmoscope. A Wood's
light also may be used.
 Defects in the corneal epithelium appear as bright green
areas. However, various ulcer types demonstrate different and
characteristic staining patterns. Recognizing these patterns will
 greatly assist in differentiating simple (superficial) ulcers from
complicated (deep, infected, or indolent) ulcers. In superficial 
ulcers the stain adheres only to the ulcer floor and has distinct
 margins (Figure 5-40). In deeper stromal ulcers both the walls
and floor of the ulcer will stain and there may be some
diffusion of fluorescein into the neighboring stroma, producing
 less distinct margins (Figure 5-41). With descemetoceles the
Figure 5-38. A gonioscopic lens in place on the anesthetized cornea of
center of the ulcer will fail to take up stain and will appear
an unseclated dlog.
black because Descemet's membrane, which does not stain
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES I
99
Figure 5-40. Characteristic staining pattern of a superficial ulcer. Note
that the fluorescein stain acheres only to the floor of the ulcer and has
dlistinct rmargins.
Figure 5-42. Characteristic staining pattern of a clescemetocele. Note that
the fluorescein stain acheres only to the walls of the ulcer; the center
("floor") of the ulcer fails to take up stain anc appears black because the
exposec regions of Descemet's membrane clo not retain fluorescein stain.
Note that the fluorescein stain acheres to the walls and floor of the ulcer
and that there is some dliffusion of fluorescein into the neighboring 
 stroma, proclucing less clistinct margins.
with fluorescein, is exposed (Figure 5-42). Indolent ulcers (see
 Chapter 10) have a characteristic fluorescein staining pattern
Figure 5-43. Characteristic staining pattern of an incolent ulcer. Note that 
because they are superficial and therefore have a stained floor
fluorescein stains the floor of the ulcer but that this area does not have
clistinct margins. Rather, it is surrounclec by a halo of less clistinct stain 
(like other superficial ulcers) surrounded by a halo of less
seen through the nonacherent epithelial lip.
distinct stain seen through their nonadherent epithelial lip
(Figure 5-43). A penetrating corneal wound will also produce a
characteristic stain pattern. In addition to all areas of exposed
eye with a blue light and magnification while an assistant rinses the
comeal stroma retaining fluorescein dye, the egress of aqueous
comea. Fluorescein stain cannot be rinsed from an ulcer, whereas 
resulting from the globe rupture will produce tiny rivulets in the
 stain pooling in a facet can easily be rinsed.
fluorescein dye as they dilute it at the corneal surface.
Evaluating for this feature is called a Seidel test. This test is
All red, inflamed, or painful eyes should be stained with
performed by applying a concentrated solution of fluorescein
fluorescein to diagnose or eliminate from consideration
and not rinsing it off but rather allowing the aqueous humor
comeal ulcers.
to do so, while viewing with a blue light source and a source of
magnification.
Fluorescein dye may also be used for other ocular diagnostic
 Nonulcerative lesions sometimes stain and can cause confusion
 tests. Topical ophthalmic application of fluorescein dye and
unless they are recognized. For example, the surface of a
 observation for its appearance at the nares confrms patency of
vascularized or roughened cormeal lesion may show diffuse, faint 
 the nasolacrimal duct on that side and is referred to as the Jones
fluorescein staining because of pooling of stain due to surface
 or fluorescein passage test (Figure 5-44). The interval required
tension. Fibrovascular (granulation') tissue will also retain stain 
for fluorescein to appear is variable (up to 5 to 10 minutes in
owing to its hydrophilic nature. Finally, an epithelialized
some normal dogs). In some dogs and cats, especially
stromal defect (afacet) pools stain and must be differentiated from
brachycephalic breeds, drainage from the nasolacrimal duct
 a comeal ulcer. One can make this distinction by examining the
 may occur into the posterior nasal cavity, resulting in false-
100
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Rose Bengal
 Rose bengal stains dead and devitalized cells and therefore is
 retained by corneas in which the epithelium is eroded to less
than its full thickness. Therefore there is no exposure of corneal
stroma, and fluorescein stain would not be retained. It is even
retained by surface squamous cells that have altered surface
characteristics or altered mucin coating. As such, it is very
useful for the diagnosis of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, qualita-
tive tear film deficiencies, or early dendritic corneal ulcers
associated with the herpesviruses, in which there is necrosis
and desquamation of corneal and conjunctival epithelium but 
 not exposure of the underlying stroma.
Tests of Lacrimal Patency
Figure 5-44. A positive Jones or fluorescein passage test result, as
eviclenced by the appearance of fluorescein stain at the nostril following
its application to the ipsilateral corneal surface.
Blockage of the nasolacrimal ducts causes overflow of tears
(epiphora) at the lid margin near the medial canthus, with
staining of the surrounding hair. For more detailed discussion
of the lacrimal system, see Chapter 9. Blockage of the naso-
lacrimal ducts may be evaluated by:
· The fluorescein passage (or "Jones") test as described 
previously
 Flushing the upper and lower puncta in dogs or cats or the
 lower (nasal) punctum in horses
· Dacryocystorhinography with radiographs or computed
tomography (see later)
Neuroophthalmic Testing
Many cranial nerves are involved to varying degrees with
ocular function (see also Chapter 16), as follows:
· CN II: vision and PLRs
CN Il: globe movement via the medial, ventral, and dorsal
rectus and inferior oblique muscles; eyelid opening; pupil 
constriction (via parasympathetic fibers carried with CN III)
 CN IV: globe movement via the superior oblique
(extraocular) muscle
Figure 5-45. In some dogs the nasolacrimal duct opens caudally within
CN V: facial and ocular sensation; lacrimation (via
the nasopharynx, anc fluorescein stain is founc in the mouth rather than
parasympathetic innervation of the lacrimal gland); pupil
the nostril after application of the stain to either corneal surface.
dilation (via sympathetic innervation of the dilator muscle)
 CN VI: globe movement via the retractor bulbi and lateral
rectus muscles
negative result of the Jones test unless the mouth is also
CN VIl: eyelid closure
examined (Figure 5-45).
 Basic neuroophthalmic tests therefore form a critical part of
 The tear film break-up time (TFBUT) is an assessment of the
stability of the precorneal tear film. The clinician applies a drop
the complete ophthalmic examination. In most cases they are
of fluorescein stain to the cornea and immediately closes the
extremely simply performed. Commonly employed neurooph-
 thalmic tests include the following:
lids until a pre-prepared source of magnification and a blue
light are moved into the viewing position. The lids are then
PLRs (described previously)
opened, and the dorsolateral quadrant of the precorneal tear
· Swinging flashlight test
film is observed closely while the lids are held apart. The time
Dazzle reflex
is recorded from lid opening until the tear film “breaks up" as
· Palpebral reflex
evidenced by dark spots appearing in the dorsolateral quadrant 
 Menace response
 of the otherwise green fluorescein stain. In the presence of a
·Behavioral testing of vision
normal lipid layer of the tear film the TFBUT is a quantitative 
 measure of mucin quantity and quality. Decreased mucin quantity
Swinging Flashlight Test
or quality causes tear film instability and a shortening of the
TFBUT. Average TFBUT in dogs is approximately 20 seconds,
The swinging flashlight test is a modification of PLR testing.
and in cats is about 17 seconds. In cats with tear flm distur-
 Owing to incomplete decussation in most mammals, the pupil
bances TFBUTs as short as l second have been recorded.
under direct illumination usually constricts slightly more than
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES |
101
the contralateral pupil. Therefore when a light source is
threatening motion can be performed behind a transparent
directed rapidly from one eye to the other (as would be done to
sheet of Plexiglas.
test and verify the consensual PLR), the newly illuminated
· Each eye must be tested individually (with the nontested
pupil should constrict a little farther than it had already cons-
 eye closed) because unilaterally blind animals are adept at
tricted due to the consensual PLR. In patients with a unilateral
protecting both eyes when the sighted eye is stimulated.
prechiasmal lesion (i.e., a lesion of the optic nerve between the
·Placid or fearful animals may show little response,
chiasm and the retina, or of the retina itself), the pupil on the
 preferring to watch the menacing gesture.
affected side will constrict when stimulated via the contra-
· The eye should be menaced from the nasal (medial) and
lateral, normal retina (i.e., will have a normal consensual PLR)
temporal (lateral) directions.
but will dilate as the light is swung from the normal eye to the
· The menace response is a learned response that is absent for
affected eye. This is a called a positive swinging flashlight test
the frst 10 to 14 weeks of life in puppies and kittens and
result or a Marcus Gunn pupil and is pathognomonic for a
the first 10 to 14 days in foals.
prechiasmal lesion on the side on which the pupil dilates when
illuminated.
Even when the test is performed correctly, however, the
menace response is a particularly coarse assessment of vision.
Dazzle Reflex
To put it in perspective, the equivalent test in humans—the
ability to simply see hand motions—is considered one grade
The dazzle reflex is manifested as partial or complete eyelid
closure on the illuminated side (and sometimes on both sides)
 diagnosed. The afferent arm of the menace response includes
when a bright light is directed at the eye. The reflex follows the
all components of the eye necessary for vision, especially the
same afferent pathway as the PLR but synapses with fibers of
retina and optic nerve; and the efferent pathway requires nor-
the facial nerve in the nucleus of CN Vll in the midbrain
 mal facial nerve (CN VIl) and eyelid function. However, the arc
(presumptively at the rostral colliculus). Therefore it can be
 also passes through the cerebellum, so absence of the menace 
used in association with the PLR to further localize some
 response is also associated with degenerative lesions of the
lesions. The reflex is absent in the presence of severe retinal,
cerebellar cortex. Whenever the menace response is absent, the
optic nerve, optic tract, or facial nerve lesions.
palpebral reflex (see earlier) should be tested as a second
method of evaluating the efferent pathway shared by the two
Palpebral Reflex
reflexes.
The palpebral reflex consists of a partial or complete closure of 
Behavioral Testing of Vision
the eyelids in response to touching the eyelid skin. Interpretation
of the palpebral reflex requires an understanding of the
Evaluation of vision in veterinary patients remains one of
neurologic reflex as well as other potential confounding factors.
the most challenging parts of the ophthalmic examination
The afferent arm of the neural arc being tested includes the
(see Chapter 1). Because vision is a cortical function and
sensory fibers of the trigeminal nerve; the efferent pathway uses
many neuroophthalmic tests are actually tests of the visual
the motor fibers of the facial nerve and the muscles of eyelid
pathways (or segments of them) but not truly tests of vision,
 closure (principally the orbicularis oculi). In addition to pathology
vision is best assessed with various behavioral tests. How-
at any point along this neurologic pathway, lagophthalmos due
ever, results of these tests are affected by some subjectivity and
to a physical obstruction of eyelid closure, such as severe
must be very critically analyzed. Each test must be interpreted by
buphthalmos or exophthalmos, can cause decrease or absence of 
the clinician, with consideration given to the animal's personality,
the palpebral reflex. The reflex can be overridden in very fear-
emotional state, state of consciousness, and cognitive function.
ful animals, especially birds and exotic species. The palpebral
Given the subjective nature of visual testing, visual deficits can
reflex should be tested through stimulation of the skin at both
 be described at best as mild, moderate, severe, or total
the medial canthus and lateral canthus. Most animals respond
 Much can be gained from an accurate history. In particular,
with complete eyelid closure to stimulation at the medial canthus.
information should be sought about the extent and rapidity of
Fearful animals and animals with breed-related lagophthalmos
vision loss, whether both night vision and day vision are
may not completely close the eyelids in response to stimulation 
affected, and whether the owner believes the visual impairment
 at the lateral canthus.
 is unilateral or bilateral. When judging apparent unilateral
visual loss, one must recall the physiologic effects of optic
Menace Response
nerve fiber decussation at the optic chiasm. Objects approach-
ing from the left of the patient are perceived by the medial (or
A normal menace response is evident as eyelid closure when
 nasal) half of the left retina and the lateral (temporal) half of the
the examiner stimulates the eye in a visually "threatening"” way,
right retina. The inverse is true for the right visual field.
usually by waving a hand in front of it. However, this response has
Therefore patients blind in only one eye may still retain vision
 a number of limitations that must be understood, as follows:
in the visual field on the side of the affected eye; from the
lateral retina of the opposite, functioning eye (see Figure 1-15
· The stimulus must be visual only. No direct contact with
in Chapter 1).
the patient's periocular tissues or creation of air currents,
odors, or noise can be associated with the gesture.
During any behavioral tests of vision, individual eyes should
Achieving this goal is very difficult in any animal in which
ideally be tested independently by "patching" of the remaining
 these senses are heightened, especially in cats and in most
eye if the animal will tolerate it.
visually impaired animals. To prevent air currents, the
102
 | SlATTER'S FUNDAMENTAlS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Various visual “tracking" tests form the basis of vision
I.D.:
testing in small animals. A small cotton ball is dropped 20 to
30 cm in front and to each side (i.e., in each visual feld) of the
patient. Most dogs and cats follow the object to the floor,
especially on the first one or two attempts. Alternatively, some
animals “track" a silent toy or a laser pointer or other light
source directed onto the wall or floor in front of them. A maze
test is an excellent method of assessing vision in dogs and
horses but is of litle value in most cats. In this test, a variety of
test obstacles of different sizes and shapes (e.g., chairs,
 buckets) are placed around a room or pen. With a small animal,
the owner is placed on one side of the obstacles and calls the
OS
5nS/Diu
Filter:N
F1
Cursors
：
m1
animal from the clinician, once only. Both the client and
4
Anplitudg(nS)
clinician remain still and quiet during the test. With horses,
ents:
the patient is led through the maze on a long (3 to 4 m)
Dark-Adapt:15 nin.
 lead rope. Horses, cattle, and sheep that are unused to being led
 Figure 5-47. A normal electroretinograrm.
can be released in a pen or barn that they are not used to, and
their movements watched. If the result of such a passive test is
negative, large animal patients may be driven through the
 movements. It is useful in all species. Electroretinography is a
obstacles.
test of retinal but not optic nerve or visual function. It is usually
 Regardless of style used, maze testing should be performed
available only at specialty ophthalmology practices. The ERG
 in the dark (to test scotopic vision) and in lighted conditions (to
 may be used for the following purposes:
test photopic vision). Scotopic maze tests assess rod dysfunc-
· Preoperative evaluation of retinal function before cataract
tion (e.g., early retinal degeneration in dogs or cats, vitamin A
extraction when fundic examination is not possible
deficiency in cattle) and should be performed before photopic
 Diagnosis and differentiation of inherited retinal disorders 
testing or the obstacles should be changed between scotopic
and photopic testing because animals with decreased visual
(e.g, rod-cone dysplasias, progressive retinal degeneration,
function often become very adept at memorizing their way
hemeralopia)
· Investigation of unexplained visual loss (amaurosis) in
 through tight spaces.
 which retinal lesions are not visible ophthalmoscopically
(e.g., sudden acquired retinal degeneration [SARD], optic
Electroretinography and Visual Evoked Potentials
neuritis, CNS disease)
Electroretinography (ERG) is the study of electrical potentials
 These diagnoses are discussed more fully in Chapter 15.
produced by the retina when light strikes it. Light of varying
 Following placement of additional electrodes in the skin over
intensity, wavelength, and flash duration is directed onto the 
 the visual cortex and with some alterations in the stimulatory and
retina and the resulting potential differences are detected by
analytical protocols, electrical potentials at points in the visual
electrodes placed around the eye (Figure 5-46). These are then
 pathways central to the retina can be recorded in response to a
amplified and form a characteristically shaped wave that can be 
flash of light into each eye. These responses, called visual
recorded on paper or stored electronically and assessed for
evoked potentials (VEPs), are rarely used clinically.
amplitudes and implicit times (Figure 5-47). For accurate
 results the ERG is performed with the animal under general
Retinoscopy
anesthesia or deep sedation to minimize periocular muscle
Retinoscopy is a technique for objective evaluation of the
refractive state of the eye and allows determination of refractive
errors such as hyperopia ("farsightedness"), myopia ("nearsighted-
ness"'), and astigmatism. It is used to evaluate refractive errors after
cataract extraction and for evaluation of the visual state of animals
a sanouqn ou ytm un inq suaqand nsa jardde y
 found on ophthalmoscopy or electroretinography.
Imaging Techniques
Radiography
 Dorsoventral, lateral, anterior-posterior, and oblique plain film
radiographs of the orbit and surrounding skull may reveal disease
 processes in and around the orbit, maxillary dental arcade, and
paranasal sinuses. Sometimes a radiopaque ring of stainless steel
wire is placed around the limbus to serve as an anatomic reference
point. Occasionally contrast techniques are also used, although
Figure 546. An electroretinogram being performed on a dog. Note the
these are now used less commonly because cross-sectional
 ground and reference (subcutaneous) electrocles as well as the corneal
 imaging techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
contact lens electrodle.
and computed tomography (CT) have become more widely
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES |
103
(Figure 5-48). Lateral and dorsoventral views are both
useful. The technique is equally applicable to large and
small animals. CT dacryocystorhinography combines the
opportunity for two-dimensional cross-sectional images 
with the contrast-assisted outlining of the nasolacrimal
 apparatus and is particularly useful.
· Contrast zygomatic sialogram: injection of contrast medium
 into the zygomatic salivary gland duct within the mouth to
 outline the gland in the ventral orbit
 Orbital venography (injection of contrast medium into the
angularis oculi vein) and contrast orbitography (injection of air
or radiopaque contrast agents into the orbit) have now been
replaced by CT and MRI.
Uitrasonography
 In ultrasonography, high-frequency sound waves above the
Figure 548. A lateral cacryocystorhinogram in a cog. A, lacrimal
audible range are directed posteriorly through the eye from the
Canaliculus; B, lacrimal sac; C, nasolacrimal cluct. (Courtesy Dr. R.
cornea, and the echoes are detected, amplified, and displayed
Wyburn.)
on an oscilloscope screen. In B-scan ultrasonography a two-
dimensional cross section of the eye and orbit is obtained
 available and provide more information with less risk to the
(Figure 5-49). A-scan ultrasonography is less commonly used.
 patient. Plain films are always assessed before contrast techniques
In this technique the echoes are viewed as a series of peaks
 are commenced. All radiographic techniques for ocular disease 
(Figure 5-50) and permit measurements of various anterior-
require general anesthesia for maximal diagnostic yield and
posterior distances within the eye (biometry). Ultrasonography
 radiologic safety, except perhaps a simple lateral or DV radio-
is used to examine the contents of eyes in which opacity of one
graph to assess for a radioopaque foreign body. Contrast tech-
 of the usually clear ocular media (cornea, aqueous humor, lens,
niques still in reasonably common use include the following:
or vitreous) prevents visualization of the structures caudal to it.
It is also useful to assess orbital structures and to guide fine-
· Dacryocystorhinography: injection of contrast medium into
 needle aspiration of intraocular and orbital structures.
the lacrimal canaliculi, lacrimal sac, and nasolacrimal duct
 Ultrasonography is easy to perform, and gives immediate
 for assessment of nasolacrimal obstruction/dysfunction
results with excellent definition. However, differentiation 
A
B
C
KON2000
KON2000
TIKON2000
20MHz
20MHz
20MHz
Gain:95dB
Gain:95dB
Gain:95dB
Figure 5-49. B-mocle ultrasounc images of A, a normal globe; B, a cletachec retina (*); C, a posteriorly luxated lens (*).
104
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
AB
C
DE
Figure 5-50. Schematic of A-mode ultrasonography of a normal eye,
showing the transmitter pulse (A), anterior lens capsule echo (B), posterior
lens capsule echo (C), posterior globe wall echo (D), and retrobulbar
tissue echoes (E). (From Rubin LF, Koch SA [1968]: Ocular dliagnostic
ultr asonography. J Am Vet Med Assoc 153:1706.)
Figure 5-51. T1-weighted, post-contrast injection, frontal magnetic
resonance irmage of a cat with a space-occupying mass behind the right
eye. Cytology and culture testing performec onmaterial aspirated from
 between neoplasia and inflammation is not reliable. The patient 
this mass permitted dliagnosis of a bacterial retrobulbar abscess/cellulitis
that responcled well to antibiotic therapy. (Courtesy Dr. Winnie Lo.)
 is best examined without general anesthesia or sedation, which 
 causes enophthalmos and reduces the clarity of the image
obtained. A drop of topical anesthetic is applied to the ocular
surface, and the ultrasound probe with sterile coupling gel is
 mass type remains essential. Therefore one or sometimes both
applied directly to the cornea or eyelids as the patient permits.
of these imaging techniques are now performed almost
 Direct corneal contact yields slightly superior images. A trans-
routinely before biopsy or surgical excision of orbital masses in
cutaneous temporal technique also has been described and is 
animals.
useful for visualization of retrobulbar structures.
 Utrasonography is particularly useful for the following:
Fluorescein Angiography
· Detection of retinal detachment (see Figure 5-49, B)
Fuorescein angiography is used to investigate retinal and
· Detection of lens dislocation or rupture (see Figure 5-49, C)
choroidal vascular patency, vessel-wall permeability, and pig-
· Detection of vitreous degeneration 
 mentary abnormalities of the fundus. For this technique the
· Detection of intraocular tumors or foreign bodies
patient is sedated or anesthetized, fluorescein is injected intra-
· Characterization of retrobulbar disease
venously, and the fundus is illuminated with a light of a specific
· Guidance of fine-needle aspirates of orbital and ocular lesions
wavelength that stimulates fluorescence. The emitted light is
 photographed in a series of approximately 30 photographs
Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance Imaging
taken in the first 30 seconds, followed by single photographs 20
and 30 minutes later (Figure 5-52). Circulation of the
CT and MRI provide superb detail for localization of orbital
fluorescein proceeds through the following phases:
lesions (Figure 5-51) and, with increasing availability, have
· Choroidal phase: Choroidal vasculature has filled.
largely replaced skull radiography.  Contrast sialography
· Arteriolar phase: Retinal arterioles have filled.
and dacryocystorhinography are as applicable to CT as they
· Arteriovenous phase: Retinal arterioles and venules have
are to radiography and provide superior detail. The normal
filled.
CT and MRI appearances of canine, feline, and equine
orbital, ocular, and periocular structures have now been well
· Venous phase: Retinal arterioles have emptied and veins
 described, and case reports and case series are expanding
have begun to fill.
knowledge of the CT and MRI appearances of various
· Late phase: Certain tissues (e.g., optic nerve head) stain
 pathologic conditions. The superior detail shown by these
with fluorescein.
 cross-sectional imaging techniques not only greatly assists
 In the normal eye fluorescein does not penetrate the endo-
surgical planning but also may be used to help differentiate
 thelium of retinal or choroidal vessels but does pass the chorio-
individual tumor types on the basis of differing invasion
capillaris. In disease states these relationships are altered. For
patterms. In cats, for example, indentation of the globe is
example, with neovascularization, hypertension, vasculitis, or
more frequently seen with lymphomas, whereas squamous
chorioretinitis, retinal and/or choroidal blood vessels may show
cell carcinomas are more likely to produce lysis of orbital
 increased permeability to the dye. Fluorescence of the tapetum
bones. In dogs adenocarcinomas were associated with diffuse
 in domestic animals and the lower frequency of retinal vascular
bony lysis. However, there are exceptions to these trends,
 disease in domestic animals than in humans decrease the utility
and histopathologic or cytologic confirmation of retrobulbar
of the technique in veterinary medicine.
BASIC DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES I
105
A
B
C
Figure 5-52. Normal canine fluorescein angiogram. A, Choroidal phase; B, arteriovenous phase;
C, venous phase; D, late phase. (Courtesy Dr. R.W. Bellhorn.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Karpinski LG (2004): The prepurchase examination. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 20:459.
Abrams K, et al. (1990): Evaluation of the Schirmer tear test in clinically
Knollinger AM, et al. (2005): Evaluation of a ebound tonometer for measuring
nommal rabbits. Am J Vet Res 51:1912.
Acland GM (1988): Diagnosis and differentiation of retinal disease in small
Komaromy AM, et al. (2006): Effect of head position on inttaocular pressure
animals by electroreinography. Semin Vet Med Surg 3:15.
in horses. Am I Vet Res 67: 1232.
Bauer GA, et al. (1996): Exfoliative cytology of conjunciva and comea in
Lavach JD, et al. (1977): Cytology of nommal and inflamed conjunchivas in
domesic animals: a comparison of four collecting tec hniques. Vet Comp
dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:722.
Ophthalmol 6: 181.
LeCouteur RA, et al. (1982): Computed tomography of orbital tumors in the
Bedford PGC (1973): A prachical method of gomioscopy and
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:910.
goniophotography in the dog and cat. J Small Anim Pract 14:601.
Leiva M, et al. (2006): Comparison of the Tebound tonometer (ICare) to the
Bellhom RW(1973):Fluorescein fundus photography in veterinary
sop aisoou ut (x udoo lou uogeuedde
ophthalmology. J Anim Hosp Assoc 9:227.
Vet Ophthalmol 9: 17.
Calia CM, et al. (1994): The use of computed tomogtaphy sc an for the
Lim CL, Cullen CL (2005): Schirmer tear test values and tear film break-up
evaluation of orbital disease in cats and dogs.VetComp Ophthalmol 4:24.
times in cats with conjuncivitis. Vet Ophthalmol 8:305.
Manming JP, St. Clair LE (1976): Palpebral, frontal, and zygomatic nerve
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 20:285.
 blocks for examination of the equine eye. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 71:187.
Cotrill NB, et al. (1989): UltrasonogTaphic and biometric evaluation of the
Martin CL (1969): Gonioscopy and anatomical conelations of the drainage
      
angle of the dog. J Sm Anim Pract 10: 171.
Dziezyc J, et al. (1987): Two dimensional real-bime ocular sonography in the
Martin CL (1969): Slit lamp examinabion of the nommal canine anterior ocular
diagnosis of ocular Jesions in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:501.
segment part I: introduction and technique. J Small Anim Pract I0:143.
Fike JR, et al. (1984): Anatomy of the canine orbital region. Vet Radiol 25:32.
Martin CL (1969): Slit lamp examination of the nommal canine anterior ocular
Gelatt KN, et al. (1976): Fluorescein angiography of the nomal and diseased
 segment part I: description. J Small Anim Pract 10: 151.
MartinCL(1969:Sit lampexamnaionof thenomalcanineanteriorocr
ocular fundi of the laboratory dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:980.
Gelatt KN, et al. (1975): Evaluation of tear fomation in the dog, using a
segment part II: discussion and summary. J Small Anim Pract I0: 163.
modification of the Schimer tear test. I Am Vet Med Assoc 166:368.
Massa KL, et al. (1999): Usefulness of aerobic microbial culture and
Gelatt KN,et al. (1970): RadiogTaphic contrast techniques for detecing
cytologic evaluation of comeal specimens in the diagnosis of infectious
 orbital and nasolacrimal tumors in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 156:741.
ulcerabive kerabitis in animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1671.
Gorig C, et al. (2006): Comparison of the use of new handheld tonometers
Miller PE, Pickett JP (1992): Comparison of the human and canine Schigtz
and established applanation tonometers in dogs. Am I Vet Res 67: 134.
tonomety conversion tables in clinically nomal cats. JI Am Vet Med
Hager DA, et al. (1987): Two-dimensional real-time ocular ultrasonogTaphy
Assoc 201:1017.
in the dog-technique and normal anatomy.Vet Radiol 28:60.
Miller PE, Pickett JP (1992): Comparison of the human and canine Schigtz
Hamor RE (200 1): Techniques for collection and interpretation of issue
tonomelty conversion tables in clinically normal dogs. I Am Vet Med
samples in ocular disease. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16: 17.
Assoc 201:102.
106
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Miller WM, Cartee RE (1985): B-scan ultasonography for the detection of
van der Woerdt A, et al. (1995): Effect of auriculopalpebral nerve block and
space-occupying masses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:66.
intravenous administration of xylazine on intraocular pressure and comeal
Moore PA (200l): Examination techniques and interpretation of ophthalmic
thickness in horses.Am J Vet Res 56:155.
findings. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16: 1.
Veith L, et al. (1970): The Schirmer tear test in cats. Mod Vet Pract 51:48.
Penninck D,et al.(2001):Cros-sectional imaging techniques in veterinary
ophthalmology. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract I6:22.
aspects of the ocular fundus in dogs. A study of 24 cases. Eur J Comp
Rubin LF (1974): Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy. Lea & Febiger,
Anim Pract 10: 177.
 Philadelphia.
Willis M, et al. (1997): Conjunctival brush cytology: Evaluation of a new
Rubin LF (1967): Clinical electrorelinography in animals.JAm Vet Med
cytological collection technique in dogs and cats with a comparison to
Assoc 151:1456.
conjunctival scraping. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 7:74.
Rubin LF, Koch SA (1968): Ocular diagmostic ulrasonography. J Am Vet
Willis MA, Wilkie DA (1999): Avian ophthalmology part I: anatomy,
Med Assoc 153:1706.
examination, and diagmostic techniques. I Av Med Surg 13: 160.
Schiffer SP,et al.(1982):Biometic study of the canine eye,using A-mode
ultrasonography. Am J Vet Res 43:826.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 159:1417.
Slatter DH (i973): Differential staining of canine comea and conjunchiva with
Zook BC, et al. (198 I): Anatomy of the beagle in cross sechion: head and
 Tose bengal and alcian blue. J Small Anim Pract 14:291.
neck. Am I Vet Res 42:844.
Stuhr CM, Scagliotti RH (1996): Retrobulbar ultrasound in the
mesalicephalic and dolichocephalic dog using a temporal approach.
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 6:91.
Chapter
EYELIDS
David J. Maggs
ANATOMY, FUNCTION, AND
 PROMINENT NASAL FOLDS
CHALAZION
 PATHOLOGIC RESPONSES
DISORDERS OF THE CILlA
HORDEOLUM AND MEIBOMIAN ADENITIS
DELAYED OR PREMATURE OPENING OF
ENTROPION
NEOPLASIA
 THE EYELIDS IN NEONATES 
ECTROPION
SKIN DISEASES AFFECTING THE EYELIDS
EYELID AGENESIS (COLOBOMA) 
EYELID INJURIES
ANATOMY, FUNCTION, AND PATHOLOGIC
(cranial nerve [CN] VIl) (Figure 6-5). Localization of this
nerve is important for injection of local anesthetic and induc-
RESPONSES
tion of akinesia of the upper eyelid in large animals.
Anatomy and Function
 The general pattern and innervation of muscles surrounding
the eyelids is similar in all species, although the names and
The eyelids consist of a fbrous tarsal plate and muscle,
relative development differ somewhat among species. The
bounded by skin on the outer surface and conjunctiva on the
orbicularis oculi muscle is the major muscle responsible for
 inner surface (Figure 6-1). In addition, there are a number of
eyelid closure. It is anchored medially to the wall of the orbit
adnexal specializations, such as cilia (eyelashes) and glands.
by the medial palpebral ligament (see Figure 6-5) and laterally
These components vary by species; however, some general
by the retractor anguli oculi lateralis (see Figures 6-3 and 6-4).
comments are possible. The skin on the outer surface of the
In cattle and sheep this latter structure is fibrous in nature and
eyelid is thinner, more mobile, and more pliable than skin
 is known as the lateral palpebral ligament (see Figure 6-5). In
elsewhere on the body. Cilia are present on the outer surface of 
horses it is visible as a fibrous raphe within the orbicularis
the upper eyelid margin in dogs, horses, cattle, pigs, and sheep.
muscle. The medial and lateral attachments of the orbicularis
A few cilia also are present on the lower eyelids of horses,
oculi preserve the elliptical shape of the palpebral fissure and
cattle, and sheep. Cats have no cilia but do have a line of
prevent it from becoming circular during contraction of the
modified hairs that are essentially identical. Modified sweat 
 orbicularis. Excessive muscle tone in the orbicularis oculi
glands—the glands of Moll—open onto the eyelid margin near
 muscle, called blepharospasm, may result in spastic entropion.
the base of the cilia. The glands of Zeis are rudimentary
Opening of the eyelids requires not only relaxation of the
sebaceous glands that open into the follicles that produce the
 orbicularis oculi muscle but also elevation of the upper eyelid
cilia. The tarsal or meibomian glands (Figures 6-1 and 6-2)
and depression of the lower eyelid. The upper eyelid is more 
are modifed sebaceous glands that are embedded in the
mobile than the lower eyelid in mammals, although the opposite
tarsal plate, a layer of fibrous tissue that gives some structural
is true in birds and reptiles. The major elevators of the upper
rigidity to the eyelid. The meibomian glands open right at the
 eyelid are the levator palpebrae superioris, which originates
eyelid margin posterior to the cilia. Their orifices are visible
near the optic foramen, inserts into the tarsal plate, and is inner-
grossly, and a grayish white secretion rich in phospholipids
vated by the oculomotor nerve (CN IIl), and Muiller's muscle,
can be expressed from them. This secretion has two functions:
which lies posterior to the levator and is sympathetically inner-
It coats the eyelid margins to minimize overflow of tears and it
vated (see Figure 6-1). The levator and superior rectus muscles
forms the superficial lipid layer of the precorneal tear film. This
have common innervation (CN IIl), so that elevation of the
lipid layer has high surface tension and thereby adds stability to
 globe by the superior rectus muscle is coordinated with elevation
 and reduces evaporation of the aqueous layer of the tear film.
 of the upper eyelid. If it were not, the animal would see the
 Tear film components drain from the ocular surface through
inner surface of the upper eyelid on elevation of the globe. The
the lacrimal puncta, which lie on the inner surfaces of the upper
levator anguli oculi medialis and frontalis muscles are minor
and lower eyelids 3 to 4 mm lateral to the medial canthus,
 elevators of the upper eyelid and are both innervated by the 
approximately opposite the last of the meibomian gland
 palpebral nerve (see Figures 6-3 and 6-4).
 openings. The lacrimal canaliculi drain into the lacrimal sac,
The lower eyelid is depressed by the malaris muscle, which is
which lies in a fossa of the lacrimal bone. Blinking creates a
innervated by the dorsal buccal branch of the facial nerve. Note
negative pressure within the sac, thereby drawing tears into it.
 that different branches of the facial nerve supply the orbicularis,
During the relaxation phase of blinking, pressure is placed on
which narrows the palpebral fissure, and the malaris, which
the sac, thereby forcing tears down the nasolacrimal duct. This
widens it. Actions of the muscles of the eyelids are summarized
forms the so-called lacrimal pump. Blinking occurs with
in Figure 6-6. Sensory innervation for the dog, horse, and ox is
contraction of the orbicularis oculi muscle, which encircles
shown in Figures 6-7 to 6-9. Interference with sensory or motor
and closes the palpebral fissure (Figures 6-3 and 6-4). It is
innervation of the eyelids may result in severe desiccation of the
innervated by the palpebral nerve, a branch of the facial nerve
cornea and conjunctiva.
107
108
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
 mucopolysaccharide layers of the precorneal tear film,
Levator
 Superior transverse
Frontal bone
respectively
ligament
muscle
 Physical protection against trauma
Adipose tissue
 Reduction of evaporation of tears 
 Distribution of the precormeal tear flm by eyelid
movements
“Pumping"” of tears down the nasolacrimal duct, preventing
epiphora and promoting a precorneal tear film of uniform
 Orbital septum
thickness and optical properties
Pathologic Responses
Orbicularis
 The eyelids show pathologic reactions and diseases characteris-
muscle
Muiller's muscle 
tic of skin. However, these may be modified by the extremely
vascular nature of eyelids and by the numerous associated
specialized structures (glands, cilia, etc.). In addition, malfunc-
 Tarsal plate
tion and poor conformation of the eyelids are very common
causes of ocular disease in animals, especially dogs, and
frequently result in painful and potentially blinding secondary
ocular disease, especially of the conjunctiva and cornea.
Meibomian
gland
DELAYED OR PREMATURE OPENING OF THE
EYELIDS IN NEONATES
 In the newborn foal or calf the eyelids are open at birth;
Cillia
whereas in the kitten and puppy they open at about 10 to 14 days
of age. Premature opening occurs infrequently in dogs and cats
but when it does, it results in comeal desiccation, keratitis, comeal
ulceration, and conjunctivitis because tear production takes several
weeks to reach adequate levels. If these consequences are left 
untreated, corneal perforation and endophthalmitis may occur.
Figure 6-1. Anatory of the normal eyelicd. (From Remington lA [2005|:
Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nd ecl. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Treatment consists of frequent application of a topical lubricating
St. Louis.)
 ophthalmic ointment. Rarely, a temporary tarsorrhaphy may be
necessary to further limit evaporation of tears and aid in corneal
healing (see Chapter 10). A small gap should be left at the medial
 canthus to permit administration of bactericidal antibiotic or bland
 lubricating ointment. Sutures are removed after 7 to 10 days, but
topical treatment may be necessary for a few days longer.
More commonly, delayed opening of the eyelids
B
(ankyloblepharon) occurs in dogs or cats. This is often associ-
 ated with accumulation of mucus and sometimes with infection
(ophthalmia neonatorum). Typical infectious agents vary
somewhat by species: Chlamydophila felis or feline herpesvirus
is common in cats, and Staphylococcus spp. may infect dogs or
cats. Ankyloblepharon can be treated conservatively with warm
 compresses for a short period in the expectation that the eyelids
will open. However, if they do not open within a day or so, the
or by inserting the nose of a closed pair of small mosquito
hemostats at the medial canthus, where there is often a small
 gap between the eyelids. The hemostats can then be gently
 opened in this position but should not be reclosed while inserted
Figure 6-2.Photomicrograph of the normal eyelid stained with trichrome
between the eyelids, so as to avoid damage to surface ocular
(Masson) showing tarsal (meibomian) gland (A) and cilium (B). (Courtesy
Dr.RichardDubielzig.}
structures. A sharp instrument should never be used for this
 purpose, and the fused eyelid margins should never be incised
to separate them, because either action would cause irreversible
 damage to the eyelid margins themselves and/or the meibomian
The eyelids protect the eye in the following ways:
glands with subsequent lifelong keratitis. After the eyelids are
· Sensory and protective effects of the cilia and sensory
pried apart, the ocular surface should be liberally inmigated with
vibrissae surrounding the eye
 saline or dilute (1:50) povidone-iodine solution (not povidone-
· Secretions of the meibomian glands and conjunctival goblet
iodine scrub) and the cormea checked with fluorescein stain for
 cells, which contribute to the outer lipid and inner
evidence of ulceration. A topical antibiotic ointment with a
EYELIDS
109
Frontalis
Aponeurosis
Sphincter colli prof.-pars intermedia
Zygomaticoauricularis 
 Retractor anguli oculi
 Oblique and transversi auriculae
Zygomaticus
 Levator anguli oculi medialis 
Cervicoauricularis superficial
Orbicularis oculi
Cervicoauricularis prof. major
Levator nasolabialis 
Cervicoauricularis prof. minor
Maxilionasolabialis
Temporalis
pars nasalis
pars labialis
Mentalis
Orbicularis oris
Parotid duct
N
Buccinator-oral portion
 Sphincter colli prof.-pars palpebralis Mandibular lymph nodes
Parotid gland
 External jugular vein
Mandibular gland  Depressor auriculae
 Figure 6-3. lateral view of the superficial muscles of the canine heacl (platysma ancl sphincter colli muscles
removedl). (Mocified frorm Evans HE [1993l: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edl. Sauncers, Philaclelphia.)
spectrum appropriate for the suspected organisms should be
the defect so as to create a wedge defect (Figure 6-11). This is
 applied a few times daily for approximately 1 week.
 then closed in two layers with special care to accurately appose
the sides of eyelid margin without leaving sutures that may
EYELID AGENESIS(COLOBOMA)
 abrade the cornea (Figure 6-12). Sutures are removed 10 days
later. Postoperatively, an Elizabethan collar is used. The two-
Eyelid coloboma refers to congenital absence of a portion of an
layer eyelid closure also should be used for reapposition of any
eyelid. It can occur in all species but it is most common in cats, in
incisions or lacerations involving the eyelid margin, including
which it usually affects the lateral portion of the upper eyelid
 traumatic injuries, medial canthoplasty, tumor resection, and
(Figure 6-10). In piebald and Karakul sheep it has been described
treatment of some cases of entropion or ectropion.
as affecting the middle of the upper eyelid. Coloboma is believed
to be a hereditary condition. Dermoids may be seen in association
PROMINENT NASAL FOLDS
with coloboma (see Chapter 10). Eyelid colobomas are associated
with excessive evaporation and inadequate dispersion of the
 In Pekingese, pugs, English bulldogs, Boston terriers, and
precormeal tear film, and sometimes with trichiasis. Together, these
 similar brachycephalic breeds the nasal folds may be unusually
lead to secondary keratoconjunctivitis, pain, and sometimes
prominent. When this feature is combined with a shallow orbit
 Cormeal ulceration. If the lower eyelid is affected, epiphora may
and prominent globe, the hair on these skin folds may contact
occur owing to escape of tears through the defect. With time,
the cornea with resultant epiphora, corneal melanosis, vascu-
 cormeal scarring, pigmentation, and vascularization are common.
larization, and, in some cases, ulceration. A careful inspection 
 Eyelid colobomas are repaired with a variety of blepharo-
should be made for other causes of irritation (e.g., distichiasis,
plastic procedures; the choice depends on the size and position
medial entropion) that also are common in these same breeds.
of the defect. Larger defects require more extensive reconstruc-
When this syndrome is seen in young puppies of breeds at risk
tive procedures and are best referred to a veterinary ophthal-
but before the development of keratitis, the owner should be 
 mologist. However, simple defects affecting less than one third
 advised to observe the eyes carefully for signs of ocular disease
of the eyelid margin can be restored by removal of the edges of
 as the animals mature.
110
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Cervicoscutularis
Cervicoauricularis
superf.
Occipitalis
Cervicoauricularis prof. major 、
Interparietoscutularis
 Anterior part of
Interparietoauricularis -
cervicoauricularis superf.
Scutuloauricularis
Interscutularis-
 superf. accessorius 
Scutuloauricularis
superf. medius
 Scutiform cartilage
Scutuloauricularis
superf. dorsalis 
Zygomaticoauricularis
Zygomaticus and
sphincter colli prof.
-pars intermedia
 Retractor anguli oculi
Orbicularis oculi
Frontalis
 Levator anguli oculi medialis
Levator nasolabialis
Buccinator
Maxilionasolabialis
pars labialis-
pars nasalis
Figure 64. Dorsal view of the cleep muscles of the canine heacl. (Moclified from Evans HE [1993l: Miller's
Anatomy of the Dog, 3rc ecl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Frontal vein
 Auriculopalpebral branch of
Skin
facial nerve to frontal muscle
Frontal muscle (cut) ~
Medial
Palpebral branches of
palpebral ligament -
acrimal nerves underlying
superficial muscles 
 Lateral palpebral ligament 
Orbicularis oculi muscle
Medial canthus
Malar muscle (cut)
Palpebral fissure
Figure 6-5. Frontal view of the norrmal bovine orbit anc acnexa, also showing the terminations of the lacrimal
and facial nerves. Note the position of the auriculopalpebral branch of the facial nerve for injection of local
anesthetic for akinesia of the upper lid. (Modified from Getty R [1975|: Sisson anc Grossman's The Anatomy of
the Domestic Anirmals, 5th ecl, Vol 1. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
EYELIDS I
111
Levator anguli oculi medialis muscle
/ Levator palpebrae superioris muscle
(palpebral branch of facial nerve)
(oculomotor nerve) plus Muiller's muscle (sympathetic) 
Frontalis muscle
(palpebral branch of facial nerve)
Horner's muscle
(part of orbicularis)
 Orbicularis oculi muscle
(palpebral branch of facial nerve)
 Retractor anguli muscle 
(palpebral branch of facial nerve)
 Medial palpebral ligament 
Malaris muscle (dorsal buccal
 branch of facial nerve)
Figure 6-6. Action anc innervation of the muscles of the eyelicds. C, Contracts palpebral fissure (closes upper andl 
lower lids); D, clepresses lower lidl; E, elevates upper eyelidl.
Frontal nerve
Lacrimal nerve
Frontal nerve
Infratrochlear
nerve
Infratrochlear
nerve
Infraorbital
Infraorbital
nerve-
nerve
Auriculotemporal
nerve
Zygomatic
nerve
Superficial
temporal nerve
Mental nerve
Mental nerve
Figure 6-7. Sensory innervation of the canine periocular area. (Modlified
Figure 6-8. Sensory innervation of the equine periocular area.
from Westhues M, Fritsch R [1964]: Animal Anaesthesia, Vol 1: local
Anaesthesia. Oliver & Boyd, London.)
DISORDERS OF THE CILIA
 If nasal folds are causing keratitis, they should be removed
either partially (Figure 6-13) or totally (Figure 6-14). In partial
 Normally positioned cilia emerge from the dermal side of the
removal, only the medial portion of the fold is removed, where it
eyelid margin (Figure 6-15, A). The three common disorders in
touches the comea, resulting in less alteration from the breed
which aberrant cilia or hair cause corneoconjunctival irritation
"norm' desired by some owners. The wound is closed with simple
are as follows:
interrupted sutures of 4/0 silk placed 2 mm apart. In both methods
the suture ends should be short enough to prevent corneal
· Distichiasis (Figure 6-15, B): Cilia emerge from the
irritation. Sutures are removed 10 days later. Postoperatively,
 openings of the meibomian glands. A few soft distichia can
 an Elizabethan collar is used. Nasal fold removal should be per-
be seen in many dogs, especially poodles and cocker
formed in conjunction with reconstructive medial canthoplasty
 spaniels. Without clinical evidence of irritation, they are
when there is associated corneal drying, corneal exposure, and
 considered insignificant. The typical clinical appearance of 
keratitis due to macropalpebral fissure and lagophthalmos or
distichiasis is shown in Figure 6-16.
lower medial entropion (see later discussion of brachycephalic
· Ectopic cilia (Figure 6-15, C): Cilia arise from the meibomian
ocular syndrome).
 glands and emerge through the palpebral conjunctiva where
112
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Frontal and
infratrochlear nerves
Cornual nerve
Zygomatic
nerve.
Infraorbital
nerve ~
Superficial
 temporal nerve
Mental nerve
 Figure 6-9. Sensory innervation of the bovine periocular area.
Figure 6-10. Eyelid agenesis of the right eye in a cat. Note the congenital
absence of upper eyelid margin laterally and the subsequent chronic
keratitis evicent as superficial corneal vascularization clue to trichiasis.
(Courtesy University of California, Davis,Veterinary Ophthalmology
Service Collection.
B
二
c
D
Figure 6-11. Eyelid wedge resection. This general technique may be used 
Figure 6-12. Stanclarcl two-layer closure technique. A, This technique is
for correction of some cases of entropion or ectropion and smaller eyelid
used for all eyelid wounds or incisions that involve the eyelid margin.
 colobomas, freshening and closure of eyelid lacerations, and removal of 
B, A buried 3/0 to 5/0 absorbable horizontal mattress suture is placed
eyelid turmors. A, The extent of eyelicd margin to be resected may be
without penetrating the skin, the margin itself, or the conjunctiva. The
iclentifiec by gently crimping the eyelicds with hemostats or with a
suture is placed so that the appositional forces are at the margin, but the
clerrmatologic marker pen. B, The apex of the triangle or "wedge" to be
knot is cistal from it so as to avoid corneal contact. This buriec suture may
resectec is then marked in a similar manner. Usually the height of this
be continued if necessary in a continuous or interrupted pattern from the
triangle is approximately twice its base. C, The skin inc ision is macle with
eyelid margin to the apex of the incision so as to close the subcutis. C, The
a No. 15 Barcl-Parker scalpel while the eyelid is supported by a Jaeger lid
skin is closed using a figure-of-eight suture of 3/0 or 4/0 silk or braicled 
plate. D, The subcutis and conjunctiva are cut with straight Mayo or
nylon. Numbers iclentify orcler of neeclle passage through the tissue so that 
Stevens tenotomy scissors, so that the tissue wedge is completely
appositional forces are again at the margin but the knot is clistal from it.
resectedl. The method of closure is clescribed in Figure 6-12.
 Both suture encls are lef long at this stage. D, The rest of the skin incision
is closed with a series of closely spaced simple interruptec sutures. The
encs of the figure-of-eight suture are incorporatecl into the knot of the first 
simple interruptecl suture so that they are dlirected away fror the eye.
EYELIDS I
113
A
B
C
 Figure 6-13. Partial removal of the nasal foldl. A, Lateral view of nasal foldl. B, Removal of nasal portion with
curved scissors. Note that the nasal portion of the fold is rermovedl. C, The sutured wounc with a small fold 
remaining that is more prominent laterally. The knots are placec on the anterior side of the incision in orcler to
limit corneal contact.Rerawn from Severin GA[2000l:Severin'sVeterinary Ophthalmology Notes,3rd ed.
Severin, Ft. Collins, CO.}
B
Figure 6-14. Total rermoval of the nasal foldl. A, Rermoval of the fold, starting laterally. B, The fold rermoved.
C, The fold suturecl. The knots are placec on the anterior side of the incision in orcder to recuce the chance of
corneal contact. (Reclrawn from Severin CA [2000l: Severin's Veterinary Ophthalmology Notes, 3rd edl. Severin,
Ft. Collins, CO.)
they cause marked cormeal inritation and usually ulceration.
Clinical Signs of Cilia Disorders
Cilia may be white or pigmented, and considerable diligence
may be needed to find them. On occasions, they are visible
 All cilia disorders produce similar signs, as follows:
only with the illumination and magnification provided by a
slit-lamp or operating microscope.
· Epiphora: Excess tearing and staining of facial hairs is
Trichiasis (Figure 6-15, D): Cilia or adjacent skin hairs
usually present despite patency of the nasolacrimal apparatus.
 arising from a normal location are misdirected so that they
 Purulent discharge is unusual except with comeal ulceration.
touch the cornea. This may be a primary condition but is
· Blepharospasm: Pain associated with constant irritation and
also a consequence of nasal folds, eyelid coloboma, eyelid
 sometimes corneal ulceration is evident as blepharospasm
 agenesis, and entropion.
and occasionally rubbing. In some dogs pain and epiphora
are intermittent.
 Cilia disorders can be bilateral or unilateral and can affect upper
· Chronic conjunctival hyperemia: The surface vessels of the
or lower eyelids. However, ectopic cilia are more common on the
conjunctiva are engorged, and a reddish pink capillary flush
upper eyelid. Although not necessarily congenital, disorders of
 is present. It is unusual for clinically significant disorders of
 the cilia usually are seen early in life and rarely make their first
cilia to be present without this sign.
appearance after full maturity. Disorders of cilia are most common
· Corneal ulceration: Disorders of the cilia, particularly
in dogs, in which they are breed-related and familial. Horses are 
ectopic cilia, can cause corneal ulceration. Ulcers caused by
 sometimes affected with ectopic cilia; however trichiasis acquired
cilia are usually shallow and are frequently eccentrically
following eyelid trauma is the most frequent cilia disorder in
 placed on the cornea, corresponding to the position of the
horses. Cats are uncommonly affected by cilia disorders.
cilia. As with ulcers due to any other cause, secondary
114
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
infection may cause corneal malacia or stromal loss (see
 Chapter 10). In all cases of corneal ulceration a thorough
search for cilia should be undertaken, with magnification
and use of general anesthesia if necessary.
Adequate magnification is essential for detecting abnormal
Cilia.
Treatment of Distichiasis
A
 Numerous methods have been advocated for the correction of
canine distichiasis. “Eyelid-splitting" and partial tarsal plate
excision techniques have been abandoned because of post-
operative cicatricial entropion, scarring of the eyelid margin,
and destruction of the meibomian glands. Cryoepilation or
electroepilation is used most commonly now. Electroepilation
is useful for treating a small number of follicles but tends to be
 less reliable and convenient than cryoepilation, especially when
large numbers of follicles are to be treated. Simple epilation by
forceps without adjunctive cryotherapy or application of an
c
D
electric current is a temporary measure because the cilia regrow
within 3 to 4 weeks. However, it can be useful to determine the
Figure 6-15. A, Normal eyelidl. Note the position of cilia in relation to the 
orifice of the meibomian glancd. B, Distichiasis. Cilia emerge from
 clinical significance of the epilated cilia.
the meibomian glanc orifice. C, Ectopic cilium. The cilium arises from the 
meibomian gland but emerges through the palpebral conjunctiva.
Cryoepilation
D, Trichiasis. Normal cilia or hairs arising from a normal location reach
 the cornea dlue to alterecl facial or eyelid conformation.
 Cryoepilation takes advantage of the selective susceptibility of 
hair follicles to cold. A nitrous oxide or liquid nitrogen cryo-
 probe is applied to the conjunctiva overlying the meibomian
glands that contain the offending cilia (Figure 6-17). The ice 
ball is observed as it advances over the line of gland openings
on the eyelid margin. Two rapid freeze-slow thaw cycles are
used. Following thawing of the second freeze, all visible cilia
Figure 6-17. Cryoepilation for clistichiasis. The tarsal glancls from which
the clistichia originate are isolated with a chalazion clamp. The clamp
B
Figure 6-16. Distichiasis in two clogs. A, This clog has clistichia on both
The licd is everted anc the cryoprobe is appliec over the tarsal glancl from
upper and lower eyelidls, which are best seen when viewed against the
 the conjunctival surface. The ice ball is allowed to aclvance to the eyelid
third eyelid or sclera. B, Retroillumination also provicles an excellent
margin. A clouble freeze-thaw cycle is performecl. Care must be taken to
methoc of cetecting more subtle clistichia. (Courtesy University of
avidcealnatfthawingf hecnfzelvislli
Missouri, Colurmbia, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
are manually epilatedl.
EYELIDS I
115
are manually epilated. Postoperatively, the eyelid swells and
the meibomian glands undergo cryonecrosis. However, eyelid
tissues other than the follicle are relatively spared. By 4 weeks,
 the treated meibomian glands have regenerated without cilia;
however, new cilia may appear from untreated areas.
 Postoperative swelling can be reduced by perioperative use
of a systemically administered corticosteroid or nonsteroidal
antinflammatory drug (NSAID). An oral NSAID may be
continued postoperatively for analgesia. An antibiotic-steroid
ophthalmic ointment may also help diminish conjunctival swell-
 ing. Some depigmentation of the eyelid margin may occur, but 
most of this pigment returns within 6 months.
 Failures with cryoepilation may be atributed to the following:
· Use of a “counting" or timed technique to determine the 
size of the ice ball rather than actual, precise observation of
the frozen area through the operating microscope
· Failure to appreciate the spherical nature of an ice ball, and
the potential for inadequate freezing at depth when adjacent 
 Figure 6-18. Resection of an ectopic cilium. The eyelicd surrouncling the
 areas are frozen. Overlapping of frozen areas avoids this
 cilium is clamped with a chalazion clamp for hemostasis, and the eyelid
is everted.Awedge of palpebral conjunctiva inclucling the ectopic cilium
problem.
 andl its follicle is resected en bloc.
 Departure from the principles of controlled cryoneciosis. The
ideal is a double cycle of rapid freeze-slow thaw. A Desmarres
chalazion clamp with screw lock (see Figure 6-17) helps
Treatment of Trichiasis
speed the freeze and slow the thaw by reducing blood
supply to the area being treated.
Depending on location of the offending hairs, trichiasis is treated
· Failure to identify all aberrant cilia
with any of the following:
Electroepilation
· Regular trimming of the periocular hairs by the owner.
This is often neglected by inexperienced owners and is
The ideal electroepilator supplies direct current (1 to 5 mA) to
important in breeds such as the poodle, shih tzu, and Lhasa
the offending meibomian gland, destroying it by electrolysis.
apso.
A fine needle (25 or 26 gauge) can be used as the applying
· Cryoepilation of the offending hairs (Figure 6-19). This
electrode. It is passed alongside the cilium and into the follicle
 method is especially useful at the medial canthus when
with use of adequate magnification. Current is applied for 20 to
there are a large number of hairs on the inner surface of the
30 seconds. Easy removal of the cilium, which often adheres to
canthus and on the medial caruncle. As with cryotherapy
the epilation needle, indicates follicle destruction. Low currents,
elsewhere on the eyelids the owner must be warned that the
supplied by a small battery, prevent contraction of the
frozen area may be depigmented for up to 6 months.
orbicularis oculi, excessive damage to surrounding structures,
 Surgical correction of the deformity causing the trichiasis
as well as postoperative scarring. High-frequency alternating
(e.g., entropion, nasal folds, eyelid coloboma).
current supplied by electrosurgical units must not be used for
epilation, because it may cause severe necrosis and scarring.
Treatment of Ectopic Cilia
Ectopic cilia are treated with resection of the affected cilium
and meibomian gland under magnification. An elliptical
Desmarres chalazion clamp with screw lock is placed around
the cilium for hemostasis, and the eyelid is everted. A block of
tissue containing the offending follicle and meibomian gland is
removed with a small (No. 65 Beaver) scalpel blade (Figure 6-18),
leaving the eyelid margin intact. No sutures are placed. Digital
 pressure for several minutes is sufficient to control hemorrhage.
A topical broad-spectrum antibiotic ointment is applied three
times daily for 5 to 7 days postoperatively. If correctly per-
formed, this technique is highly effective and is rarely associ-
ated with recurrence, although follicles may arise in the future
from different sites.
 Figure 6-19. Cryoepilation for trichiasis. The offencling hairs are identified 
and the cryoprobe is applied over the clermal surface. A lid plate is
Focal tarsoconjunctival resection is the method of choice for
necessary to protect the cornea. The ice ball is allowed to aclvance to the
removal of ectopic cilia.
 eyelid margin. A clouble freeze-thaw cycle is performed. After thawing of
 the seconc freeze, offencing hairs are manually epilated.
116
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
ENTROPION
Entropion, or inward rolling of the eyelid margin, is common
in many species. It may be conformational, spastic,
10
cicatricial or may occur subsequent to alteration in globe
position (enophthalmos) or size (phthisis/microphthalmos).
Conformational entropion occurs most frequently in dogs and
sheep but is uncommon in cats, horses, and cattle. Confor-
mational entropion usually affects both eyes, although
occasionally only one eye is affected or there is marked
asymmetry in severity of the entropion. The upper eyelid is less
commonly affected than the lower. The whole length of the
eyelid may be affected in severe cases, but the affected area is
usually restricted to one portion of the margin. In brachy-
Figure 6-20. Entropion of the lower eyelid of a dog with consequent
cephalic animals entropion is more notable medially, whereas
 epiphora and conjunctival hyperemia.
in large, broad-skulled dogs conformational entropion fre-
 quently affects the lateral part of the lower eyelid and the lateral
canthus. Conformational entropion is believed to be inherited 
· Excoriation and maceration of the eyelid surface from
in a large number of dog breeds, including the chow chow,
constant contact with tears
English bulldog, Irish setter, Labrador and golden retrievers, Saint 
Rubbing of the affected area
Bernard, shar-pei, Rottweiler, Great Dane, and Chesapeake 
Corneal ulceration
Bay retriever. Although conformational entropion may be man-
 Corneal melanosis and vascularization in chronic cases
ifest soon after eye opening, it often does not become clinically
 Conjunctival hyperemia
evident in many affected breeds until later in life as the skull and
· Epiphora or mucoid discharge
 associated facial skin gain their adult conformation. Occasionally
maturation is associated with reduction or sometimes even
Treatment of Entropion
resolution of entropion. For these reasons, surgery is always
 delayed until facial maturity is achieved.
The various methods of treating entropion are summarized
Spastic entropion occurs with spasm of the orbicularis oculi
here. The choice of procedure depends on the level of facial
 muscle (blepharospasm) due to painful ocular conditions such as
maturity, species, severity and position of eyelid abnormality,
ulcerative or nonulcerative keratitis, conjunctivitis, or uveitis. It is
and (in lambs) economic factors. Although there are surgical
relatively common in cats, possibly owing to the frequency with
techniques specific to each procedure, the following general
which feline herpesvirus causes cormeal disease and associated
 principles apply to all:
pain in this species. However, because clinically significant
entropion—regardless of cause—is always associated with some
 1. Always eliminate other causes of spastic entropion before
degree of trichiasis, spastic entropion is a component of all 
 deciding on the extent of surgical resection.
cases of entropion. It is important to eliminate this spastic
 2. Accurately assess extent of skin resection before
 component before permanent surgical correction of entropion;
sedation, premedication, or induction of anesthesia.
 otherwise postoperative ectropion may occur. Therefore thorough 
Consider use of a dermatologic marker pen. If
assessment of entropion includes determination of the cause
bilateral surgery is planned, make careful preoperative
and relative contribution of blepharospasm through the use of
note of whether the extent of resection required is
the following steps:
symmetric.
3. Undercorrection, with the need for a second operation, is
1. Examination of the patient before and after the application
preferable to overcorrection, which causes cicatricial
of a topical anesthetic.
 2. Assessment of the tear film with the Schirmer tear test.
ectropion.
3. Fluorescein staining. (Ulcers may be the cause or result of
 4. Minimize surgical tissue trauma.
5. It is not necessary to remove orbicularis oculi muscle;
entropion. Regardless, they will exacerbate the spastic
doing so increases hemorrhage, operating time,
component.)
postoperative edema, and risk of infection.
4. Examination with magnification for coexistent cilia disorders.
6. Use fine suture material (4/0 or smaller in dogs and cats).
 5. Assessment of aqueous flare and intraocular pressure.
 7. Use fine, swaged-on, cutting suture needles.
Although treatment of the underlying condition sometimes
8. Place multiple, closely spaced sutures of small "bites."
relieves the spasm, surgical correction, as for conformational
 9. Use an Elizabethan collar until 2 to 3 days after suture
 entropion, may be necessary.
removal.
10. Provide adequate postoperative analgesia for the frst 
Clinical Signs of Entropion
7 to 10 days.
 11. For the first few days after surgery, while the tissues are
· Rolling in of the eyelid (Figure 6-20). This can be very
swollen, the eyelid may appear overcorrected, but as
subtle in some mild cases, especially if the dog is excitable
swelling subsides (over 5 to 7 days) the correction can be
 in the examination room.
better evaluated. Delay any decision regarding a second
 Blepharospasm with further rolling in of the eyelid (*spastic
operation for at least 4 to 6 weeks, when wound
entropion")
contraction is complete.
EYELIDS
117
Temporary "Jacking" Techniques
Because entropion progresses or improves with maturity in
some animals, permanent surgical correction of entropion is
best delayed until facial maturity is reached. Likewise, surgery
should not be performed in patients with a temporary cause of
entropion, such as transient enophthalmos due to lack of orbital
fat, as seen in young animals, especially foals. However, all
these patients will benefit from some form of temporary relief 
of the entropion until surgery is performed. This has
 traditionally been achieved with a series of temporary tacking
sutures placed so as to evert the eyelid (Figure 6-2l). More
recently, surgical staples have been used in place of sutures
because they are quicker, less traumatic, and less irritating,
persist in the tissue longer than sutures, and can be applied
without general anesthesia (Figure 6-22). An Elizabethan collar
is necessary when sutures are placed but can often be removed a
few days after staples are placed because the latter are less
Figure 6-22. Lower eyelid entropion in a Labrador retriever puppy that
iritating. A topical antibiotic ointment is used initially but is often
has been temporarily everted with surgical staples. These can be placed
not necessary once surgical inflammation and comeoconjunctival
without sedation and often do not reguire use of an Elizabethan collar.
irritation from the entropion have resolved. The staples or sutures
are left in place for as long as necessary. In some animals tacking
lid is often effective. However, if air from sheep yards is used,
may have to be repeated several times until facial maturity is
 injection of airborne spores of Clostridium tetani may occur.
reached and permanent corrective surgery can be performed.
 Injection of procaine penicillin or long-acting tetracycline has 
also been described. The use of paraffin for this technique
Injection Technique in Lambs
 is often associated with severe lipogranuloma formation and
should be avoided. As entropion is often hereditary in lambs,
For economic reasons entropion in lambs has been treated with
 breeding stock should be examined for evidence of entropion,
subcutaneous injection of a liquid to physically alter lid align-
and the affected animals culled.
ment. However, manual eversion of the eyelid alone may be
successful if perforrmed within 48 hours of birth, and stapling
Wedge Resection
as described previously is preferable to injection techniques.
Various fluids have been injected to evert the lower eyelid. A
When entropion is due to euryblepharon (elongated eyelids), the 
 subcutaneous injection of sterile air along the affected area of
lower eyelid can be shortened by resection of a full-thickness
wedge from its lateral end as described previously for correction
of eyelid coloboma (see Figure 6-11). If the entropion is associ-
ated with a “notch' deformity, the wedge can be repositioned to
remove the deformed tissue. However, the medial canthal area
and nasolacrimal apparatus must be avoided. As with all incisions
that involve the eyelid margin, accurate apposition with a two-
layer closure is essential (see Figure 6-12).
Hotz-Ceisus Procedure
The majority of cases of simple, breed-related or confor-
mational entropion can be addressed using a Hotz-Celsus
procedure (Figure 6-23). The initial incision parallel to the
eyelid margin should be made at the haired-nonhaired border.
A common error is to place this incision too far from the
eyelid margin. This placement causes a significant loss of
"mechanical advantage" and achieves less eversion for the
same amount of tissue resection. The length of this first inci-
C
sion is dictated by the length (extent) of inverted eyelid. Gentle 
Figure 6-21. Temporary "tacking" sutures used to correct entropion in
 pressure with the thumb on the lower lid at the point of
immature animals or anirmals with a transient cause for entropion.
entropion until the eyelid margin (meibomian gland orifices)
A, Lower eyelid entropion. B, Placement of a series of vertical mattress
 can be seen along the whole length will assist with outlining the
sutures.The first bite is taken very close to the eyelid margin,and the
seconcd bite is taken a few millimeters dlistant to the first. It is important to
full lateral and medial extent of entropion. Other clues are
not penetrate through the conjunctival surface because doing so would 
provided by the pale discoloration, blepharedema, and alopecia
irritate the cornea.The suture is directed exactly perpendlicular to the
 that occur secondary to maceration of eyelid skin from constant 
eyelid margin. A 2/0 or 3/0 nylon suture is recommencledl. C, As the suture
 exposure to the tear film. The tendency is to make this incision 
is tightened a small furrow between the two bites is created and causes
the eversion of the eyelicl. The sutures are tiec with the knots as clistant
too short. In fact, given that the amount of resected tissue will
from the eye as possible.
taper sharply at each end of the incision, very little eversion is
118
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
management consists of topical antibiotic ointment, an
Elizabethan collar, and a systemically administered NSAID for
 analgesia. Systemic antibiotics are not necessary. Sutures can
The Hotz-Celsus procedure is a very effective method of
surgically correcting many simple forms of entropion in all
species.
Arrowhead Procedure for Lateral Entropion
For a number of years it was recognized that dogs with broad
B
skulls, such as Rottweilers, retrievers, and Great Danes, had a
peculiarly lateral entropion that could be quite subtle and seemed
ess responsive to Hotz-Celsus procedures than other, simpler
forms of entropion. Subsequently, an anatomic study revealed that
the lateral canthal ligament in these breeds was directed in such a
way that it caused an inversion of the lateral canthus. The arrow-
D
head procedure with lateral canthal tenotomy was developed to
Figure 6-23. Hotz-Celsus proceclure for correction of entropion. A, A
 correct these anatomic variations. It has greatly improved man-
Jaeger lid plate is inserted into the conjunctival fornix to provide support
agement of these cases with a single procedure.
for the incisions.The initial incision is mace parallel ta the eyelid margin
at the haired-nonhaired borcler.A second incision is male that arcs
The lateral canthal tenotomy should be performed first. An
between the encs of the first incision. The wiclth of the skin to be removecl
eyelid speculum is placed, and the eyelid margins are firmly
cletermines the extent of eversion this procecure will create. B, The defect
 grasped at the lateral canthus with tissue forceps. The canthus
is closed with a series of sirmple interrupted skin sutures. The first suture
 is elevated away from the orbit in a lateral and rostral direction.
placed shoulc be at the wiclest point of the resected tissue. C, Each of the
This tightens the lateral canthal tendon, which is really simply
following sutures is then placed so as to bisect the space remaining. D,
Final appearance. (Modified from Moore CP, Constantinescu CM [1997]:
 a condensation of subconjunctival fibrous tissue extending from
Surgery of the aclnexa. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:1011.)
the lateral canthus to the orbital rim. Blunt-tipped tenotomy
scissors can then be used in a closed position to identify the
tendon by gently “strumming" across this conjunctival surface.
caused at the lateral and medial extremes of the incision, and 
A small conjunctival incision is then made over this tendon
the surgeon should err on the side of a longer rather than a
using scissors. The tendon is further localized with the same
shorter incision. The real “art" of entropion surgery is in
strumming motion and then cut blindly. A gradual "relaxation"
deciding on the amount of tissue to be resected at the widest
 of the tension with which the lateral canthus is attached to the
point. The same clues used for the decision regarding incision
lateral orbit can be appreciated. Although some authors recom-
length can be used to determine the amount of tissue that needs 
 mend removal of a small section of the ligament, it is usually
to be resected. The most important point is to ensure that the
 not necessary. The conjunctival incision is not sutured.
widest tissue resection is planned for the most inverted section
The second part of the procedure follows basic principles
of the eyelid, even if this creates an asymmetric area of resected
almost identical to those described earlier for the Hotz-Celsus
tissue. In general, it is better to err on the side of under-
 procedure. The initial skin incision is placed along the haired.
treatment as a subsequent entropion operation can always be
 nonhaired border as for the Hotz-Celsus procedure, except that it
 performed. Use of calipers or some other simple method of
 includes parts of the upper and lower eyelids and lateral canthus
measurement may assist in resection of a symmetric portion
(Figure 6-24). Sufficient tissue to evert the entropic regions of the
 of the contralateral eyelid if that is required.
upper and lower eyelids is then resected as for the Hotz-Celsus
The skin incisions are best made with a No. 15 Bard-Parker or
 procedure. The outer curvilinear incisions are joined at a point
 No. 64 Beaver scalpel blade. The eyelid tissue is then best resected
sufficiently lateral to the lateral canthus to laterally evert the
with a small pair of tenotomy scissors such that it has a V-shaped
inverted canthus. Some authors recommend augmenting this
or boat keel-shaped profile. This shape ensures maximal eversion
everting force by placement of a buried everting mattress suture
and excellent wound apposition. The wound is then closed with
 at the lateral canthus to further ensure correction of any entropion
multiple, small, closely spaced, simple interrupted sutures of 3/0
of the lateral canthus. However, this step is usually not necessary
 or 4/0 braided nylon or silk. Despite being an absorbable suture,
 and tends to cause additional conjunctiva to show lateral to the
 polyglactin is sometimes used to close the skin because of its other
 globe. The incisions are closed with use of the rule of bisection,
desirable features. Sutures should be placed perpendicular to the 
beginning with a suture placed at the lateral canthus. All sutures
eyelid margin with use of the “rule of bisection.’ This
 must be placed perpendicular to the eyelid margin if maximal
technique both permits apposition of two wound margins of
eversion is to be achieved. Postoperative management is as for
unequal length while minimizing tissue redundancy at the far end
the Hotz-Celsus procedure.
of the wound and ensures that the widest point of resection is not
displaced laterally or medially as would occur if the wound were
Medial Canthoplasty for Lower Medial Entropion and
sutured from one end to the other. It is easily performed by
Brachycephalic Ocular Syndrome
placement of the first suture centrally (at the widest point of
resection) and placement of each subsequent suture such that it
A syndrome of eyelid, conjunctival, and corneal lesions is seen
 bisects the distance still to be sutured. Standard postoperative
commonly in brachycephalic dogs and, to a lesser extent, cats.
EYELIDS 
119
二
B
111
c
D
Figure 6-25. Meclial canthoplasty. A, The area to be resectecl is outlinec ancl
should incluce approximately the mecial one fourth of the upper and lower
Figure 6-24. lateral arrowheacl proceclure for entropion of the lateral
eyelid margins,the medial caruncle, and a section medlial to the medial
aspects of the upper and lower eyelids and the lateral canthus. This is
canthus. Care is taken to not resect the nasolacrimal puncta. B, The outlinecl
usually performed after a lateral canthal tenotomy. A, An arrowheadl-
tissue is resected using a No. 64 Beaver blacle. The incisions should be
shaped section of tissue to be removed is outlinec surrouncling the lateral
suaaeannaa
canthus. lts climensions are cictated by the severity anc extent of the
C, A buried matress suture is usec to appose the fresh ecges of the canthus,
entropion anc may be asymmetric. B, The tissue is resectec with a scalpel
 as clescribec in Figure 6-12. This may be continuecd as a series of mattress
blacle anc tenotomy scissors. C, The incisions are closed using the rule of
sutures if requiredl. D, The skin is closecl with a figure-of-eight suture at the 
bisection, beginning with a suture placec at the lateral canthus. D, All
new canthus and a series of simple interrupted sutures medial to that (as 
sutures must be placed perpencicular to the eyelid margin if maximal
clescribed in Figure 6-12). (Modlified from Moore CP, Constantinescu GM 
eversion is to be achieved.
[1997|: Surgery of the acnexa. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:1011.)
This so-called brachycephalic ocular syndrome consists of any
follicles from the medial caruncle and conjunctiva, careful incision
 combination of the following features:
of the eyelids, perfect realignment of the eyelid margin, and appro-
· Lower medial entropion
 priate postoperative management as for other eyelid procedures.
· Breed-related exophthalmos (shallow orbits)
· Macropalpebral fissure (evident as excessive limbal or
ECTROPION
scleral exposure)
Ectropion, or eversion of the eyelid, invariably affects the lower
Lagophthalmos (and/or sleeping with the eyelids
eyelid only. Clinically significant ectropion is much less common 
incompletely closed)
than entropion. The most common type is conformational or
Medial caruncular trichiasis
· Nasal fold trichiasis
breed-related ectropion, which is seen in dogs with loose facial
skin, such as retrievers, Saint Bemards, bloodhounds, and cocker
·Pigmentary keratitis
spaniels (Figure 6-26). Ectropion is so common in these breeds
· Epiphora due to “kinking" of the nasolacrimal canaliculi
that a degree of clinically insignificant ectropion is sometimes
and obscuring of the puncta
considered "normal:" Cicatricial ectropion is an altermate form of 
 Brachycephalic ocular syndrome is sometimes exacerbated
ectropion due to contraction of scar tissue from previous injuries 
 by distichiasis and decreased tear production or quality.
or surgical procedures such as overcorrection of entropion.
 The medial canthoplasty provides a way to neatly correct many
Cicatricial ectropion is most common in horses and dogs.
of the contributing features of this syndrome, by shortening the
Regardless of cause, ectropion may result in severe secondary
lower and upper eyelids, removing the medial caruncle, and
 cormeoconjunctival lesions if severe enough and left untreated.
everting the lower medial entropion, thereby reducing corneal
exposure, frictional irritation, and functional nasolacrimal
apparatus obstruction. It is recommended for dogs with progressive
cormeal lesions. It is also suitable for patients with postproptosis
exophthalmos that does not resolve and causes lagophthalmos and
secondary comeal lesions. In very severe cases, medial and lateral
canthoplasties may be required. The technique is illustrated in
Figure 6-25 but is best performed by those with some experience
at eyelid surgery and with use of magnification. The animal may
be placed in dorsal recumbency with the neck ventroflexed or may
be placed in stemal recumbency with the head elevated so that the
symmetry of the surgical technique may be accurately assessed
Figure 6-26. Bilateral ectropion in a young labraclor retriever. (Courtesy
during the procedure. Important features of the procedure are
University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
avoidance of the lacrimal puncta, meticulous removal of all hair
Collection.)
120
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Treatment of Ectropion
to correction of ectropion due to a broad, contracted scar. The
V-to-Y blepharoplasty is begun with outlining of a triangular
Ectropion requires surgical correction when it causes con-
 piece of skin with the base parallel and equal in length to the
junctivitis, keratitis, or exfoliative blepharitis due to epiphora
affected eyelid margin. A skin incision is made along the two
or when it exacerbates keratoconjunctivitis sicca. However,
 lower sides of the triangle, and the skin between them is under-
 many animals tolerate slight ectropion with no ill effects and
 mined to elevate a V-shaped flap. Scar tissue beneath the flap is
 correction is required much less frequently than for entropion.
excised. The ventral ends of the incisions then are sutured
A variety of techniques has been described for the correction
together with simple interrupted sutures of 3/0 to 5/0 braided
of ectropion. Only commonly used methods suitable for the
nylon or silk to form a vertical line perpendicular to the eyelid
 majority of simpler cases are described here. Patients with more
margin. This vertical portion forces the triangle and eyelid margin
complex ectropion and combined entropion-ectropion should be
superiorly. The length of the vertical portion depends on how
 referred to an ophthalmologist.
much elevation/inversion of the eyelid margin is required to
 return it to its normal position. To allow for subsequent wound
Wedge Resection
 contraction, it should be about 2 to 3 mm longer than required.
 Finally, the remaining parts of the two incisions are sutured to
When there is marked conformational ectropion, the lower eyelid
the free edges of the flap so that the sutured skin forms a Y.
can be shortened by resection of a full-thickness wedge from the
 lateral end of the lower eyelid as is done for eyelid coloboma (see
EYELID INJURIES
Figure 6-11). A standard two-layer closure (see Figure 6-12) is
then used to perfectly appose the sides of the eyelid margin. For
The eyelids have an excellent blood supply, and injuries to
ectropion due to either focal cicatricial contraction or a “notch"
them heal rapidly when repaired correctly. The following con-
deformity in the lower eyelid, the wedge should be repositioned to
siderations are important to ensure an optimal outcome:
remove the deformed or scarred tissue. However, the medial
 canthal area and nasolacrimal apparatus must be avoided.
 1. Because of this rich blood supply, the eyelids are susceptible
to severe edema and distortion after even relatively minor
"V-to-Y" Blepharoplasty
injury (or surgery).
2. Although it is preferable to treat eyelid injuries as soon as
The V-to-Y (Wharton-Jones) blepharoplasty procedure is used
 possible, the patient's general condition must be stabilized
 s  a  s     
before eyelid injuries are repaired.
 resection is insuffcient (Figure 6-27). It is particularly well suited
 3. When an eyelid injury is noted, a thorough search must be
 made for concurrent injuries to the cornea, sclera, and 
 nasolacrimal apparatus in particular, and to the globe as a
whole.
 4. In all cases, the nasolacrimal puncta should be identified
 and cannulated, and the nasolacrimal apparatus flushed to
ensure patency.
 5. Sutures in the eyelids must be kept away from the globe
 and should be soft and pliable to prevent injury to the
cornea.
6. The margin should always be accurately reapposed with a
standard two-layer closure (see Figure 6-12).
7. Bacterial flora in the conjunctival sac and surrounding area
may readily invade this area, but severe postoperative
septic blepharitis is uncommon if a course of systemic
antibiotics with good spectrum of activity against gram-
 positive organisms (such as amoxicillin-clavulanic acid or
 a cephalosporin) is instituted.
8. Severe pruritus and self-trauma may occur during wound
healing, especially if inflammation is present as a result of
infection, tissue trauma, or large or tight sutures. Control
of these primary factors as well as provision of an
 Elizabethan collar and postoperative use of warm packs
 and analgesics will minimize this problem and are
C
D
essential.
Figure 6-27. V-to-Y (Wharton-jones) blepharoplasty. A, A triangle of skin is
outlinedl. The base is cleterminec by the extent (wiclth) of the lid margin
affected by ectropion. The height of the triangle is cletermined by the extent
Treatment of Eyelid Injuries
of eversion to be correctecl. A scalpel is usecl to incise the skin along the two
sicles but not the base of the triangle. B, The skin flap created is elevated anc
 Provided that one third or less of the eyelid margin is missing.
unclermined, along with any scar tissue. C, The two sicles of the triangle are
direct closure of the wound via the same technique used to
suturecl together to form the vertical portion of the Y.The length of the
close a wedge resection (see Figure 6-12) may then be used
vertical portion of the wound is cetermined by the extent of eyelidl eversion.
Arrows show the tissue forces createdl. D, The incisions are closed so as to
(Figure 6-28). If the defect is more extensive, an advancement
form the two arms of the Y.
flap or other reconstructive procedure may be necessary.
EYELIDS 
121
Systemically administered NSAIDs and application of warm
     d a  s
collar is essential to prevent self-trauma.
 Lacerations and injuries involving the nasolacrimal apparatus 
will cicatrize, leading to impaired drainage of tears and
epiphora. Although many animals with dysfunction of one
punctum or canaliculus (especially if it is the dorsal punctum)
show no epiphora, this is not constant or reliable. Therefore
every effort should be made to repair damage to the naso-
lacrimal apparatus as soon as possible after injury. Because
this repair requires magnification and experience, referral to a
veterinary ophthalmologist is frequently indicated. If primary
repair of the nasolacrimal apparatus is unsuccessful, drainage
of tears into the nasal cavity can be effected with con-
junctivorhinostomy (see Chapter 9).
CHALAZION
A chalazion is a nonneoplastic enlargement of the meibomian
gland caused by blockage of its duct and inspissation of its
secretory products. It is generally a painless swelling that
appears yellowish-white when viewed through the palpebral
conjunctiva or skin (Figure 6-29). However, if the gland rup-
tures, lipid-laden sebaceous material escapes into the eyelid
stroma and causes a lipogranuloma that may become quite
inflamed. Meibomian gland duct obstruction (and therefore
a chalazion) is commonly seen with meibomian gland
neoplasms. Treatment of a chalazion (with or without
drainage. Manual expression is contraindicated because it
might spread infection and/or glandular secretions into
surrounding tissues. With general anesthesia, the affected area
is clamped with Desmarres chalazion forceps and a small
incision is made into the mass through the palpebral
conjunctiva. The contents are removed with a chalazion curette
(Figure 6-30). Conjunctival sutures are not placed because they
would abrade the cornea and are not required because the
conjunctiva heals rapidly. Some ophthalmologists follow up
B
with two cycles of rapid freeze-slow thaw cryotherapy if there
Figure 6-28. A, Lower eyelicl laceration in a clog. Note that the eyelicd 
is concern about an associated meibomian gland neoplasm.
margin is involved and rmust be apposed accurately to avoid trichiasis.
 Postoperative application of a topical corticosteroid-antibiotic
B, lmmediate postoperative appearance. A stancard two-layer closure as
ointment is advisable. As with all other forms of blepharitis,
 clescribecl in Figure 6-12 was usecl.
Surgical preparation and clipping should be gentle to prevent
further edema. Tissue debridement must be minimal so as not 
to further shorten the eyelid; this minimal approach is possible
because the extensive blood supply of the eyelid limits
secondary infection at this site, especially if antibiotics are
provided. An excellent technique to “freshen" wound margins 
on the eyelid while resecting the minimum tissue necessary
involves gentle scraping (not incising) of tissue edges with a
scalpel blade until they are cleaned of obvious debris and
exudates and bleeding is noted. This also permits identification
of viable tissue. A standard two-layer closure with soft, braided
suture can then be used to close the eyelid laceration as for all
other incisions involving the eyelid margin (see Figure 6-12).
Systemic and topical antibiotics should be used perioperatively.
Postoperatively, an ophthalmic ointment is preferred as it
provides lubrication and protects the cornea during wound
healing. Topical corticosteroids are usually unnecessary and
should be avoided if there is coincident corneal ulceration.
Figure 6-29. Chalazion in a clog.
122
 Figure 6-31. Meibomitis or marginal blepharitis in a dog
Table 6-1
 Therapy for Canine Meibomitis or
 Marginal Blepharitis
DISEASE
MEANS OF
SEVERITY
DIAGNOSIS
THERAPY
Early/mildl
Clinical signs
Topical antibiotic-
B
± Culture and 
corticosteroid preparations
sensitivity testing
 Systemic antibiotics
Figure 6-30. Treatrment of chalazion. A, A chalazion clamp is appliedl to
(e.g., doxycycline,
the affectec region of the eyelicd, anc the chalazion is incisecl through the
cephalosporin, clavulanic
palpebral conjunctiva with a small scalpel blacle. B, Cranulomatous 
acid-amoxicillin, or as
material and glandular secretions are removed with a chalazion curette.
dlictated by culture and 
Two freeze-thaw cycles of cryotherapy may be applied as for dlistichiasis
sensitivity results)
(see Figure 6-17).
Continue therapy for at least
3-4 wks
warm compresses are useful in cooperative patients and reduce
Moderate
 Clinical signs
 Initially as for early/mildl 
postoperative edema, swelling, and pain. A similar disease,
Culture and 
cisease
lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis, is seen in cats, although it 
 sensitivity testing
Revise accordling to 
 Conjunctival and skin
cliagnostic test results
 involves multiple meibomian glands (see Chapter 7).
scrapings for
Continue therapy for at least
 cytologic assessment 
6-8 wks
HORDEOLUMANDMEIBOMIANADENITIS
If no fungal or parasitic
agents found, systemic
An external hordeolum (or stye) or internal hordeolum is a
preclnisolone
(0.5 mg/kg PO
purulent bacterial infection of a gland of Zeis or meibomian
gland, respectively. The infecting bacterium is often
q24h for 7 days}
cluring the third wk of
antibiotic therapy
Staphylococcus aureus and therefore these lesions tend to be
 more painful and inflamed than chalazia. Involvement of multi-
 Severe.
 As for moderate dlisease As for mocerate disease but 
ple glands is common, especially in dogs, and is then termed
 chronic,
Biopsy
 may need longer or
meibomitis, meibomian or tarsal adenitis, or marginal
Or
indefinite course of
 blepharitis. Clinical signs include variable erythema and swell-
recurrent
appropriate antibiotics
and corticosteroids
ing of the eyelid margins, pruritus, pain, chemosis, and
Consult veterinary
 purulent conjunctivitis (Figure 6-31). Because the meibomian
dermatologist
glands secrete the lipid layer of the tear film, which is critical
Consider bacterin
to tear function, meibomian adenitis is often associated with
injections
corneal and conjunctival disease and may precipitate
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Therapy should be scaled to match
disease severity and chronicity (Table 6-1). Systemic antibiotic
sensitivity to staphylococcal antigens is suspected, systemic
therapy and topical antibiotic-corticosteroid administration are
 administration of a corticosteroid is required. Systemic antibiotics
required. Without culture and sensitivity data or while waiting
should be initiated before, during, and after corticosteroid use.
for these results, administration of amoxicillin-clavulanic
 Chronic, severe, or recurent meibomitis requires patience and
acid, doxycycline, or a cephalosporin is advisable. Protracted
 protracted treatment for control (and usually not cure). Some
 therapy is often necessary as with deep pyoderma elsewhere. If
authors claim success with administration of appropriately
there is significant lipogranulomatous inflammation or hyper-
prepared staphylococcal bacterin of animal origin. Therapy can
EYELIDS
123
gradually be tapered according to clinical improvement. In
treated surgically, often with adjunctive therapy such as cryo-
unresponsive cases, confirmation of microbial involvement
therapy, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or immunotherapy
through careful collection of meibomian secretions for
(see Chapter 3). Cryotherapy is particularly useful for eyelid
 cytologic examination, fungal culture, or bacterial culture and
lesions, as most eyelid tissues (including the nasolacrimal
apparatus) are relatively resistant to the effects of cryotherapy
also be caused by dermatologic fungi (e.g., Microsporum canis.
and the lid retains function after cryonecrosis sufficient to
Microsporum
gypseum,
Trichophyton mentagrophytes,
 produce tumor cell death. Cryotherapy is particularly useful
Aspergillus niger). Involvement of Demodex mites should also
for small or early tumors, especially in elderly or debilitated
be investigated through microscopic examination of secretions
 patients.
from the meibomian glands as well as skin scrapings or hair
plucked from adjacent eyelid skin. Immune-mediated derma-
Surgical Excision
topathies that target mucocutaneous borders should also be
 considered and require biopsy for definitive diagnosis.
As much of the neoplasm as possible should be removed,
including the regional lymph node if affected, and margins of
NEOPLASIA
the excised tissue should be examined histologically.
For
smaller tumors involving one third or less of the eyelid margin,
Eyelid tumors are relatively common in all domestic species.
a simple, full-thickness wedge resection with two-layer closure 
However, the most common eyelid neoplasms vary by species,
similar to that used to correct coloboma, entropion, or
as follows:
ectropion is indicated (Figure 6-32). As much of the eyelid
 margin as possible is retained. When more than one third of the
· Dog: meibomian adenoma, papilloma, histiocytoma,
eyelid length must be removed, total excision is usually not
melanoma (Table 6-2)
possible without some sort of blepharoplastic procedure, and
· Cat: squamous cell carcinoma
· Horse: squamous cell carcinoma, equine sarcoid, melanoma
referral may be indicated. One of the more straightforward
· Cattle: squamous cell carcinoma
blepharoplastic procedures is the H-plasty or full-thickness
 advancement flap (Figure 6-33). For more extensive lesions, a
Although each of these tumors has some characteristic or
variety of advancement, rotation, axial pattem skin flaps, and
suggestive clinical features, only histologic examination of an
myocutaneous free grafts can be used, depending on the size and
incisional or excisional biopsy specimen or cytologic examina-
 location of the tissue to be replaced. These procedures should be 
tion of an aspirate,impression smear or scraping is defnitivel
 performed by a surgeon experienced in reconstructive surgery and
diagnostic, and resected tumors should always be submitted
 microsurgical vascular anastomoses.
for histologic examination. Therapy should be tailored to the
individual tumor type and the patient after systemic assessment
Specific Tumor Types
and in accordance with owner concerns. In particular,
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
rate of growth, position, presence of metastases, local invasive-
 Squamous cell carcinoma may involve the eyelids of all species
ness, degree of corneoconjunctival iritation, and response
 but is especially common in poorly pigmented areas of the
to previous and current therapy. Eyelid tumors are typically
eyelids in horses, cattle, and cats (Figure 6-34). The tumor is
associated with exposure to ultraviolet light. The pathogenesis
Table 6-2 | Frequency of Canine Eyelid Tumors
TUMOR TYPE
TOTAL NO.
PERCENTAGE
Meibomian (tarsal)l aclenoma
58
28.7
Squamous papilloma
35
17.3
Meibomian (tarsal)
31
15.3
 adenocarcinoma
 Benign melanoma 
26
12.9
 Malignant melanoma
16
7.9
Histiocytoma
7
3.5
Mastocytoma
2.5
 Basal cell carcinoma 
5
2.5
A
 Squamous cell carcinoma
5
2.5
Fibroma
4
2.1
2
1.0
Lipoma
1.0
Adnexal carcinoma
0.5
0.5
Malignant lymphoma
0.5
Neurofibroma
0.5
Neurofibrosarcoma
1
0.5
Atypical epithelioma 
0.5
Undletermined
1
0.5
C
Total benign
148
73.3
Figure 6-32. A, An eyelid tumor affecting less than one third of the
 Total malignant
54
26.7
margin. B, The tumor and a surrounding area of normal tissue are
removed by fullthickness wecge excision (see Figure 6-11 for more
From Krehbiel JD, Langham RF (1975): Eyelid neoplasms of dogs. Am J Vet 
cletail). C, The clefect is closed with a stancard two-layered closure as
Res 36:115.
clescribed in Figure 6-12.
124
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
b = 120% a
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 6-33. Aclvancerment flap or H-plasty for eyelicl lesions greater than
one third of the eyelid length. A, The tumor before excision. lncisions are
outlined by clottec lines.Vertical sices of the triangles (b) are 20% longer
than the vertical incisions adjacent to the tumor (a), to allow for wound 
contraction. B, The tumor (with aclequate margins) is outlined with a
uaus ane plaha pajeiosse pue aown au uoisioul ensueysan ao anenks
 ugeuexa iedos a pagns pue paasan Aaadu
B
full-thickness marginal ceficit remains. Two triangular areas are excised as
Figure 6-34. Erosive lower eyelid squarmous cell carcinoma in a cat (A)
originally outlined. D, A slicling half-thickness "flap" of lower eyelic is
and a more proliferative but ulcerated lower eyelid squamous cell
Createc by blunt and sharp clissection and is elevated into the marginal
carcinoma in a horse (B). (Courtesy University of California, Davis,
clefect. E, Figure-of-eight sutures of 5/0 or 6/0 nylon or silk are placed at
Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
the two marginal wouncls, as for simple eyelid closures (see Figure 6-12.
C). The apices of the triangles are then sutured with simple interrupted
sutures using the same suture material. F, Remaining sutures are placed
approximately 2 mm apart. If the palpebral conjunctiva is mobile, it is
elevated and sutured to the outer aspect of the skin ecge with a simple
siuia j s ai on  o  a jo ans son
occurs subsequently, cryotherapy may be required (see Figure 6-19).
Acanthosis
with focal
 Papilloma
ulceration
of eyelid squamous cell carcinoma is shown in Figure 6-35.
lymph nodes and eventually to the lungs, these tumors are typically
Carcinoma in situ
 characterized by local invasiveness. The invading neoplasm results 
(tumor has not "broken 
 in local inflammation with blepharitis and conjunctivitis. Clinical
 through" epithelial 
signs include chronic purulent ocular discharge, which may be 
basement membrane)
temporarily or partially responsive to antibiotics. Periocular
excoriation, chronic conjunctivitis, and encrusted or hemorrhagic
lesions of the eyelids are common. Squamous cell carcinoma
 must be distinguished from other causes of chronic blepharitis,
Squamous cell carcinoma
for which it is frequently mistaken. Diagnosis is confirmed with 
cytologic assessment of scrapings or by biopsy.
 In horses, squamous cell carcinoma of the eyelid is common,
although less so than that of other ocular sites. In a survey of 49
Local invasion and secondary infection
patients, the third eyelid in 26%, and the limbus in 25%.
Multiple lesions in one eye were present in 8% of patients, and
16% of patients had bilateral lesions. The mean age of affected
 Metastasis
horses was approximately 10 years. In cattle, squamous cell
carcinoma occurs more commonly on the conjunctiva and third
 Figure 6-35. Pathogenesis of eyelid squamous cell carcinoma.
EYELIDS
125
eyelid (75%) than on the eyelids (25%). However, the rate of
However, smaller lesions may be debulked in this manner and
metastasis is greater from lesions on the eyelids and third eyelid
 via curettage through a conjunctival incision as for treatment of
than from the cornea or conjunctiva. More detailed discussion of
chalazion (see Figure 6-30). This must be followed by two
ocular squamous cell carcinoma in cattle is found in Chapter 7.
freeze-thaw cycles of cryotherapy as described for distichiasis
Squamous cell carcinoma of the eyelid is frequent in white cats
(see Figure 6-17) to reduce recurrence. Debulking and cryo-
and often occurs along with lesions involving the nasal planum
therapy can be done with sedation and regional anesthesia,
and pinnae. Ocular squamous cell carcinoma is uncommon in
making it preferable in older dogs. Full-thickness wedge
dogs. In one study, squamous cell carcinoma represented only
excision (see Figure 6-1l) followed by two-layer closure (see
2.5% of 202 canine eyelid neoplasms (see Table 6-2).
 Figure 6-12) reduces recurrences further but requires general
Squamous cell carcinomas should undergo complete sur-
anesthesia and more postoperative care. A 15% recurrence rate
 gical resection whenever possible. For larger lesions, this requires
and mean recurrence time of 7.4 months have been shown after
a blepharoplastic procedure to ensure retention of proper eyelid
cryosurgery, compared to an 11% recurrence rate and mean
function. If excision is not likely to be complete, debulking
recurrence time of 28.3 months after surgical excision.
 followed by cryotherapy or radiation therapy may be necessary.
In cattle, large (>50 mm in diameter) squamous cell carcinomas
Eqvine Sarcoid
of the eyelid respond poorly to cryotherapy, hyperthermia, and
immunotherapy. For such tumors surgical excision followed
Equine sarcoid or fbrosarcoma is the second most common
by interstitial brachytherapy and/or immunotherapy is recom-
tumor of the equine eyelid. Lesions may be present elsewhere 
mended if available. For advanced recurrent or infiltrative lesions,
on the face and body, but the tumor is often restricted to the
enucleation or exenteration may be necessary. In horses
eyelids (Figure 6-37). Sarcoids are nodular masses usually
interstitial brachytherapy  with iridium-192 or intralesional
beneath intact skin and firmly adherent to the overlying dermis
cisplatin injection has also been recommended.
and subcutaneous tissues. Occasionally they can be ulcerated and
must be distinguished from the eyelid lesions of habronemiasis
Meibomian Adenoma
in endemic areas. In a survey of 10 cases of sarcoid, the mean
age of the affected animals was 4.4 years and there was no sex
 Meibomian adenoma is the most common eyelid tumor in dogs,
 predilection. Because of the infiltrative nature, poor definition,
occurring most frequently after middle age. It is uncommon in
and often advanced state at clinical presentation, complete
other species. The tumors originate in the meibomian glands,
surgical excision of sarcoids is difficult and recurence is likely.
and although many grow rapidly and sometimes appear histo-
If surgical excision is used, a wide surrounding margin of normal
logically malignant, they are usually clinically benign. Typically
they appear as proliferative masses appearing from the meibomian
gland orifice (Figure 6-36). Enlargement of the gland itself is
often visible, especially when viewed from the conjunctival
surface. These tumors also may be associated with glandular
enlargement due to retained secretions and associated lipo-
granuloma formation (chalazion). The tumor may cause fric
tional keratoconjunctivitis and should be removed as soon as
the diagnosis is made.
 Simple removal of the section of the mass protruding from
the eyelid margin is inadequate, because the tumor arises from
the meibomian gland and will recur if not totally removed.
B
Figure 6-36. Upper eyelid meibomian aclenoma in a dog. Note that a
Figure 6-37. A, Equine sarcoid at the meclial canthus of the right eye. B,
ay uo ao pueg ueiuoglau e woy sapnoad nowng aui jo uogas
Same tumor 2 months later after surgical debulking and three treatments 
eyelicl margin.
eauaam e a eayay uanaen ym
126
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 6-39. Solitary histiocytoma of the upper eyelidl of a young cog.
 group of diseases. The tumors vary from benign lesions that 
Figure 6-38. Lower eyelid papilloma in a clog. Note the lack of marginal 
involvement in this case compared with the meibomian aclenoma in
regress spontaneously to tumors that are metastatic from or to
Figure 6-36.
the eyelids and therefore may involve regional lymph nodes or
other organ systems. All affected dogs therefore warrant a
tissue should be removed with reconstruction via a preplanned
thorough dermatologic and general physical examination as well
method. Because of these difficulties, treatment with immuno-
as histologic assessment of the mass, often with immunopheno-
therapy (usually bacille Calmette-Guerin [BCG]), cryotherapy, or
typing by a pathologist with some expertise in this group of
radiation therapy is often preferred. Radiofrequency hyper-
diseases. Histiocytomas involving the eyelid typically appear as
thermia has also given good therapeutic results. The following
tan to pink, somewhat alopecic masses that may grow relatively
12-month nonrecurrence rates have been reported:
quickly and may ulcerate quickly (Figure 6-39).
 Treatment should be chosen after thorough assessment of
· Iridium-192 brachytherapy: 86.6% (74.0% at 5 years)
the extent of disease and the effect of the mass upon ocular
Radon-222 brachytherapy: 92%
function (lid closure, corneoconjunctival irritation, etc.).
Cobalt-60 radiotherapy: 58%
Solitary massesin young dogs may pontaneously regess, uually
Gold-198 brachytherapy: 83%
within the first few weeks to months. If not, surgical resection
?
Orthovoltage therapy: 33%
of solitary eyelid masses is possible as for other eyelid tumors
· BCG injection: 100%
(see Figures 6-32 and 6-33). Dogs with systemic or widespread
cutaneous involvement carry a more guarded prognosis and
Viral Papillomatosis
Viral papillomas of the eyelids and conjunctiva occur in young
SKIN DISEASESAFFECTING THE EYELIDS
dogs and cattle as part of oral or generalized papillomatosis.
They can also occur as solitary eyelid lesions in older dogs
The preceding sections of this chapter describe blepharitis
(Figure 6-38). When continually moistened by tears, the tumors 
when it occurs as a distinct entity. However, the lids are fre-
are grayish white and soft. The disease is often self limiting,
quently inflamed as part of more widespread dermatitis. In
especially in younger animals, and excision or cryotherapy is
some patients, blepharitis may be more overt than dermatitis in
required only if the tumors are causing secondary mechanical
other regions because the eyelids are so vascular and prone to
damage to the eye.
exaggerated inflammatory responses. Alternatively, they may
simply be a site where dermatitis is more likely to be noticed
Histiocytoma
owing to anthropomorphic attention to the eyes or because the
eyelid margin is one of the more clearly visible mucocutaneous
 Histiocytic masses involving the eyelids occur occasionally in
junctions affected in a wide variety of skin diseases. As such,
dogs. They may occur as single or multiple eyelid lesions in an
all patients with blepharitis should undergo a complete derma-
 otherwise well dog, as part of a broader cutaneous histiocytosis 
tologic examination. Table 6-3 provides a comprehensive list
complex, or as part of the systemic histiocytosis syndrome.
of common skin disorders that may affect the eyelids, their
Bernese mountain dogs, Irish wolfhounds, Rottweillers,
clinical signs, important diagnostic steps, and suggested
retrievers, and basset hounds seem to be predisposed to this
treatment.
EYELIDS I
127
Table 6-3 | Skin Diseases Affecting the Eyelids
Drs. C.A. Outerbridge and P]. lhrke
DISORDER AND
 AFFECTED ANIMAIS
CLINICAL SIGNS
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
PARASITIC
 Sarcoptic acariasis (scabies)
 Eyelids alone unlikely Head and 
Clinical signs (intense pruritus)
 All in-contact animals must be treated.
Sarcoptes scabiei
 ears often initial sites; also
and appropriate history
 Dogs: Numerous topical 
Dogs, hrses, pi, cale, sh
hocks and elbows are
(abrupt onset). Skin scrapings
parasiticides: lime sulfur is safest
preferential sites in dogs.
to identify the mite 
topical for all ages and species.
Intense pruritus and papular
(can be dlifficult to findl).
 Systemic ivermectin (SC or PO) or
eruptions are important features.
Occasionally skin biopsy.
 milbemycin (PO), 4-6 sequential
Alopecia, erythema, crusting.
Response to therapy.
weekly treatments. Do not use in.
 scaling. and ulceration
ivermectin-sensitive breecls. Cheek
secondary to self-trauma
swab sarmple can be submitted for
are common.
MDR-1 gene analysis to
cletermine whether dog is an
ivermectin-sensitive inclivicual.
Selamectin applied topically every 
2 wks for 4 sequential treatments.
Cattte: Topicals appliec at 10-cdlay 
 intervals for 6 treatments: lincane.
coumaphos, diazinon, malathion,
toxaphene, anc lime sulfur.
 Jvermectin SC; repeat in 2 wks.
Horses: Rare disease worlcdwicle
eraclicated in United States so
dliagnosed cases should be
reported to the USDA
Demodicosis*
Facial lesions and periorbital
Appropriate history anc physical
 Treatment may not be required in all
Demodex spp.
clistribution common; patchy
exam finclings. Skin scrapings
cases because lesions may regress 
Dogs, goats, catle, pigs.
alopecia and mild erythema
of affected areas to iclentify
 spontaneous ly.
cats, sheep, horses
with scaling andl follicular
 the mite. Skin biopsy rarely
Dogs:
plugging, Chronic seconcary
necessary except in the
1. Localizecd: therapy not required 
lesions of lichenification,
shar-pei and in cases of
2. Generalized: topical therapy:
hyperpigmentation, and scale 
pododemodicosis.
Amitraz dips: Clip long coats and
common, especially in goats.
shampoo with benzoyl peroxide
Ruminants can have nodular
as follicular flushing agent before
lesions involving face, neck,
clipping.
and shoulders.
 Systemic therapy: ivermectin or
 milbemycin daily until two 
consecutive negative scrapings
4-6 wks apart. Do not use in
ivermectin-sensitive breed unless
MDR-1 gene analysis confirms
 incivicual is not sensitive.
Horses: Do not use Amitraz. Disease
 usually regresses without
treatment. Daily ivermectin may
have efficacy.
 Ruminants: Surgical excision or
topical iodlide
Notoedric acariasis
 Eyelids are not the only affected
 Distribution of lesions and
Many topical therapies can be toxic
Notoedres cati
 site. lesions, typically
intense pruritus should
to cats. Lime sulfur 2% to 3% is
Cats
bilaterally symmetrical
heighten suspicion. Skin 
safe for use in cats. Clipping of
start at medlial ecge of pinna
scrapings to idlentify the mite.
hair and soaking of crusts may be
 and spread to involve face,
required.
eyelicls, and neck. Skin is
 Systemic therapy: ivermectin SC or
thickened, partially alopecic,
 PO 3-4 sequential weekly
with acherent yellowish to
treatments; all in-contact cats must 
gray crusts. Intense pruritus.
be treated 
 Selamectin applied topically every
2 wks for 2-3 treatments shoulc be
effective.
Continued
*iseases that might manifest only as lesions on the eyelid in some species.
128
I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 6-3 | Skin Diseases Affecting the Eyelids-cont'd
DISORDER AND
AFFECTED ANIMALS
CLINICAL SIGNS
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
 Psoroptic acariasis
Eyelicds rarely affectedl alone.
 Skin scrapings to iclentify the
Topical therapies: lincane,
Psoroptes equi
 Pruritus is often intense with
 mite. Appropriate clinical signs.
coumaphos, diazinon, toxaphene,
Psoroptes hippotis
crusted papules and
chlordane, malathion, or lime
Psoroptes bovis
 secondary excoriations and
sulfur should be applied to all 
Psoroptes ovis
 serocellular crusts. Weight loss.
affected anc contact animals
Psoroptes capri
 anemia, and secondary
weekly for at least 2 wks.
Psoroptes cuniculf
infections can be associatedl.
Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg SC is approved
Horses, pigs, cattle, sheep.
for use in cattle.
goats, rabbits; not in horses or
sheep in the Unitecd States 
Echidnophaga galinacea
 Acherent flea found often on
 Icentifying flea. Possible
 Avoid reexposure. Topical flea
"Sticktight flea"*
 pinnal margins, eyelids, and
 exposure to poultry.
 aclulticides.
 Dogs, cats, rabbits, horses
muzzle. 
 Cutaneous onchocerciasis
 Preferential sites for microfilaria:
History, clinical signs, skin
 Jvermectin PO
Onchocerca cervicatis
ventral midlline, lower eyelid.
Horses
and lateral lirnbus of the eye.
 microfilarial sa line
Hypersensitivity reaction 
preparation
results in patchy alopecia,
 Disease now rare in those
 erythema, and scaling. Focal
 regions where iverrmectin is
 depigmentation can occur.
 routinely used as anthelmintic
Ticks*
 Preferentially attach to
 Find and identify the tick.
 Remove the tick. Acaricicles.
 Small animals: Dermacentor spp.
mucocutaneous junctions such
Rhipicephatus sanguineus
 as eyelicls and to poorly haired
lxodes
regions. Cause focal swollen,
Amblyomma
erythematous lesion at site of
Large animals: Boophitus (cows)
 attachrment. Can transmit 
Haemaphysatis spp.
rickettsial and protozoal
Ixodes spp.
dliseases.
Amblyomma
 Cutaneous habronemiasis
Cutaneous lesions occur when
History and clinical findings.
 Surgical debridement if possible.
(summer sores)
larvae are deposited on
 Skin biopsy.
Corticosteroids: systemic,
Habronema spp.
 damaged skin or moist areas:
intralesional, topical. Systemic
Draschia megastoma
 medial canthus of eye.
insecticidal therapy to eracicate
 Spread by Musca spp. and
 urethral process, and lower 
aclults and prevent reinfestation.
Stomoxys spp.
limbs. Ulcerative, nodular 
Control vectors.
Horses
 masses may have necrotic.
 yellow mineralized foci.
Flies
 Fly strike is uncommon around
Clinical signs, presence of larvae 
 Remove larvae, clip affectecl areas of
 Flesh-eating: larvae of Lurcilia
 the eyes, found typically in 
hair, clean and debride.
Protophormia
wet, contaminated areas of
Phormia
 the body. Poll strike in sheep
Calliphora
may affect eyelids.
Sacrophaga spp.
 Sheep, cattle, dogs, horses, cats
Biting:
 Ear margins, periorbital,
Clinical signs, presence of flies 
 Avoid exposure. Fly control.
Musca
 preferential sites on face to
Tabanidae
find bleeding or scabbed
Hydrotaea
bites. Often very painful bites
Stomoxysh
with some species (Stomoxys,
Haematobia
Tabanidaey and may cause
Horses, cattle, dogs 
livestock to become very
 agitated.
ARTHROPOD HYPERSENSITIVITY
 Eosinophilic folliculitis and 
 Acute onset (hours) of
 History and clinical signs:
 Avoid exposure to causative
furunculosis
well-clemarcated, alopecic,
clistinctive lesions with
arthropodls. Corticosteroicl therapy
Dogs
erythematous papules and
 possible exposure to wasps.
for 2-3 wks.
 nocules that often coalesce,
bees, hornets, spiders, or
 involve corsal muzzle, and
ants
 can be periorbital. Fistulous
 Seasonality linked to arthropod 
tracts may also be present.
 exposure. Cytologic
 lesions are often bilaterally
 cemonstration of eosinophils 
 symmetrical with ulcerative
on impression smears of
 anc hemorrhagic surface.
lesions. Skin biopsy.
Pruritus and pain can
be intense.
EYELIDS I
129
Table 6-3 | Skin Diseases Affecting the Eyelids—cont'd
DISORDER AND
 AFFECTED ANIMAIS
CLINICAL SIGNS
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
 Mosquita-bite hypersensitivity
 Bilaterally symmetrical lesions 
 Distinctive lesions, clistribution
Avoid exposure. Corticosteroicds.
Cats
incluce papules, nocules on 
with possible exposure.
the pinnae, erythema, erosive.
Seasonality. Skin biopsy.
 hemorrhagic crusting of dorsal
muzzle, self-trauma. Affects 
corsal muzzle, preauricular
area, periorbital area, and
pinnae.
FUNGAL
Dermatophytosis*
Young animals most susceptible.
Microscopic evaluation of hairs.
Large animals:
Microsporum canis,
 Pleomorphic and often 
 Fungal culture. Skin biopsy.
 Dermatophytosis may spontaneously
Microsporum equinum,
multifocal lesions of alopecia,
resolve. Topical therapies:
and Microsporum gypseum
scaling, and crusting. Periorbita
chlorhexicline, lime sulfur,
Trichophyton mentagrophytes,
 commonly affected in dogs.
miconazole, captan, povicone-
Trichophyton equinum, and
cats, andl cattle. Cattle have
iodide.
Trichophyton verrucosum
 marked lichenification.
Small animats: Clip hair.
 Dogs, cats, horses, cattle;
Kerion clermatophytosis:
Topical therapies: lime sulfur.
rare in sheep and goats
 well-cemarcated nocule with
enilconazole
 erythema and ulceration.
 Systermic therapies: griseofulvin,
 Pruritus is typically minimal.
ketoconazole, itraconazole
 Environmental cecontarmination
 Deep systemic mycosis
 Cutaneous lesions includle 
 Skin biopsy of lesions and 
Appropriate systemic antifungal
Histoplasmosis (cats)
 dermal or subcutaneous 
idlentification of fungal agent.
therapy
 Blastomycosis (dogs)
nodules that may ulcerate
 Other organ systems may
Cryptococcosis (cats)
anc form fistulous tracts.
be affected. Serology.
lesions may be found 
anywhere cutaneously but 
 can involve the face, inclucling
eyelicds.
BACTERIAL
 Focal folliculitis andl furunculosis*
Hair projects from surface of the
 Cytologic evaluation and Gram 
Appropriate antibiotic therapy.
 Small anirmals: Staphyfococcus spp.
 papule or pustule. Crusts.
 stain of pustular contents
 Evaluate for underlying
 large animals: variable bacteria:
alopecia.
Culture of a pustule
 predlisposing causes.
Staphylococcus spp.
Corynebacterium spp.
 Dogs, cats, horses, goats, cattle
 Dermatophilosis
 Proliferative crusts with matted
 Cytologic examination of crusts 
Removal of crusts. Topical therapy
Dermatophitus congotensis
hair, exucation, and crust
for characteristic actinomycete.
with povicone-iocine shampoo or
Cattle, horses, sheep, goats
formation. Crusted papules.
 Culture. Skin biopsy.
chlorhexicline daily for 7 days, then 
Removal of crusts reveals a
twice weekly. Systemic therapy for
granulation bed. lesions often
severe cases: penicillin or
involve muzzle, neck, dorsum.
oxytetracycline (ruminants).
and distal extremities.
 Periorbital involvement is
uncommon. Painful, not pruritic.
 Nonpigmented skin is more
susceptible.
 Feline leprosy 
Single or multiple cutaneous
 Findling of acid-fast organisms on 
 Surgical excision, enrofloxacin,
Mycobacterium tepraemurium
 nocules: often fistulous or
 cytologic or histologic samples.
 clarithromycin, clofazimine
Cats and possibly ferrets
ulcerated. Affects face, 
Diffuse granulomatous
inclucing eyelidls and distal
inflammatory response is seen
extremities. May be associated 
histologically. Appropriate test
with underlying
for FelV/Flv. Culture is clifficult.
immunosuppression, although 
most cats are not systemically
unwell.
FeLV/FIV, Feline leukemia virus/feline immunodeficiency virus.
Continued
130
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 6-3 | Skin Diseases Affecting the Eyelids-cont'd
DISORDER AND
AFFECTED ANIMALS
CLINICAL SIGNS
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
PROTOZOAL
Leishmaniasis
 Exfoliative cermatitis with silvery
 Exposure to endemic area and
 Meglumine antirmonate, allopurinol 
Leishmania sop.
 acherent scales on face; can
 compatible clinical signs.
Dogs; rare in cats
be generalized. Periocular
 Jdentification of amastigotes in
alopecia. Ulcerative cermatitis:
lymph noce aspirates or bone
lips, eyelics. Sterile pustular
 marrow specimens. Skin biopsy 
 dlermatitis, nasal
 reveals organisms in 50%
depigmentation, or nodules
 of cases. Immunohistochemistry
may also be seen.
Can be helpful in icdentifying
 Concomitant systemic signs.
 organisms in tissue. Serologic
assay can cross-react with
Babesia spp. and Trypanosoma
cruzi.
VIRAL
 Feline pox virus
Ulcerated crusted papules or 
 Skin biopsy may demonstrate
None
Cats
 nodules that progress to scar.
 viral inclusions. Virus isolation
 Rare and regional
 Often introduced through bite
or PCR from skin biopsy.
wound on head or forelimb.
 Feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1)
Ulcerative and sometimes 
 Skin biopsy may reveal
 SC interferon, PO lysine.
Cats
proliferative crusting skin
 intranuclear viral inclusions.
 PO famcic lovir 
lesions most commonly
 PCR of skin biopsy may reveal
involve the dorsal muzzle 
 FHV-1 DNA.
anc nasal planum but may
 progress to involve medial
canthi.
ALLERGIC
Atopic cermatitis 
 Bilaterally symmetrical periorbital  Seasonal history of pruritus is 
 Antihistamines and essential fatty
(environmental allergy to
 erythema; alopecia and
helpful (seasonality varies with
 acicd supplements. Judlicious use of
 pollens and molds)
 crusting due to self-trauma.
geography and chronicity).
low-close corticosteroids. Allergen-
Dogs, cats, horses, goats
 Pruritus often present
 Diagnosis of exclusion; all other 
specific immunotherapy
elsewhere, in particular feet,
 causes of pruritus must be
(hyposensitization therapy) based 
ears, groin, and axillae
 eliminated 
 on results of intradlermal skin
 in dogs. Horses may
 All secondary opportunistic
testing of ElISA for antigen-specific
be presented with
infections must be iclentified 
IgE. Systemic cyclosporine.
urticarial reactions.
 and treated.
 Food allergy (cutaneous adverse
 Bilaterally symmetrical periorbital   Nonseasonal history of pruritus.
 Strict cliet using a single novel protein
food reaction}
 erythema; alopecia and 
 Resolution of pruritus with
source. Treat all secondary
Dogs, cats, horses
 crusting due to self-trauma
feeding of a single novel
infections.
 Distribution of pruritus involves
 protein-source diet. Diagnosis
feet, face, ears, axillae, inguinal
 confirmec by rechallenge with 
regions. In cats, head.
previous dliet for return of
periorbita, and neck
pruritic signs. All seconclary
 involvedl. Horses may be
 opportunistic infections must 
presented with urticarial
 be icdentified and treated.
reactions.
Contact clermatitis (irritant or
 Erythema, papules, exudation
 Distribution of lesions 
Avoid exposure. Remove offencling
 allergic}
and crusting. alopecia. lesions Provocative exposure Or
substance with bathing.
 Dogs, cats, horses, ruminants 
are seen in sparsely haired
 patch testing
Corticosteroids.
regions or areas with known
contact with substance
(consider topical therapies,
i.e., eye medications).
 Drug hypersensitivity/drug
 Pleomorphic cutaneous or 
 Accurate past cdrug history.
Remove offencling cdrug.
 eruption/fixed drug eruption 
 mucocutaneous reactions. Can
Skin biopsy.
 Dogs, cats, horses, cattle
look like other skin cliseases.
Often bilaterally symmetrical.
ELISA, Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay: IgE, immunoglobulin E; PCR, polymerase chain reaclion.
EYELIDS I
131
Table 6-3 | Skin Diseases Affecting the Eyelids—cont'd
DISORDER AND
 AFFECTED ANIMAIS
CLINICAL SIGNS
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
AUTOIMMUNE
 Pemphigus foliaceus 
Exfoliative crusting. pustular
Skin biopsy: broac subcorneal
 Immunosuppressive doses of
Dogs, cats, horses, goats
 clermatitis
pustules often spanning several
corticosteroids (all species). Can
 Breed predlilections: chow chow.
 Indiviclual pustules may be large.
follicles. Neutrophilic or
also consider gold salts
 Akita, beardled collie, 
 Often begins on the face
 eosinophilic infiltrate with
(chrysotherapy; all species).
Newfoundllandl, schipperke,
(dorsal muzzle, periorbital
rafts of acantholytic cells.
chlorambucil (dogs and cats), or
 Doberman dogs; appaloosa
with bilaterally symmetrical
azathioprine (not in cats).
horses
generalize, often
involving footpads.
Often involves coronary bands
in horses ± concurrent pitting
edlema. Can be predominantly
facial.
 Pemphigus vulgaris
Vesicobullous eruptions lead
 Skin biopsy: suprabasilar clefting
 lmmunosuppressive therapy with
Dogs, cats
 rapidly to ulcerative lesions
with acantholysis leacling 
corticosteroids, azathioprine,
Rare
with irregular margins. Oral 
to bulla forrmation
chlorambucil. Poor prognosis.
cavity (90%) and
mucocutaneous junctions are
affected. Nikolsky's sign may
be present.
 Permphigus erythermatosus
 Erythematous, pustular clermatitis
 Skin biopsy ± DiF, positive ANA
Topical corticosteroicls, tetracycline,
Dogs, cats
of face and ears with crusts,
result
 niacinamide, systemic
Breed predilections: collie,
exudation, alopecia, and
Histofogy: Subcorneal pustule
corticosteroids, azathioprine in
 German shepherd
erosions. Typically, lesions are
 formation with acantholysis.
dogs
Rare
bilaterally symmetrical.
 There may be some lichenoid 
 Depigmentation of nasal
 interface inflammation at the 
planum may be seen.
epiclermal-cermal junction.
Restricted to head and neck.
lcleally, D1F-positive at intercellular
and possibly basement membrane
zones.
 Discoid lupus erythermatosus 
 lesions restricted to face:
 Skin biopsy ± DIF, negative ANA
Avoid sun exposure; use topical
Dogs
 Clepigmentation, erythema,
result
sunscreens and corticosteroicds.
 Breed predlilections: collie.
scaling, ulceration of the nasal
Historogy: Patchy vacuolar
topical tacrolirmus. Systemic
 Shetland sheepdog. Cerman
planum causing loss of
clegeneration of the basal cell
tetracycline and niacinamice.
shepherd, Siberian husky
cobblestone appearance; can
layer. Lichenoic or interface
 Common autoimmune skin
involve clorsal muzzle,
dermatitis. Heavily
disease in dogs
 periorbital, lip margins.
lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate.
Typically, lesions are bilaterally
Apoptotic cells may be evident.
symmetrical. Scarring and
 Pigrmentary inc ontinence.
fibrosis cause flaring of
alar foldls.
 Systemic lupus erythermatosus 
Multisystemic disease.
Skin biopsy ± DiIF, positive ANA 
 lmmunosuppressive therapy with
Dogs, cats
Cutaneous signs are seen in
 result, systemic evaluation for
corticosteroids ± azathioprine or
Breed predilections: collie,
<20% of cases. Pleomorphic
immune-medliated clisease in
other irmmunosuppressive crugs.
zds opdaays pueaus
lesions: erythema, alopecia,
other organ systems:
Appropriate supportive therapy:
poodlle, Cerman shepherd 
scaling, crusting.
polyarthritis, anemia, uveitis,
fluids, transfusion.
clogs: Siamese cats at
cepigmentation often partially
 myositis, thrombocytopenia,
increased risk 
bilaterally symmetrical
neuropenigmerulonprit.
Ulcerations of footpads.
Historogy: Lichenoic interface
mucocutaneous junctions,
 clermatitis with vacuolar
 and oral cavity can occur.
 cegeneration of the basal cell
layer. Presence of apoptotic
cells. ldeally, D1F-positive at 
basement membrane; often in
a clumped pattern.
 Bullous clermatosis affecting 
Vesiculobullous; intact lesions 
Skin biopsy ± DIF
 Immunosuppressive therapy:
basement membrane zone:
 and multifocal ulcerative
Historogy: Subepicdermal cleft 
corticosteroids, azathioprine,
bullous pemphigoid.
lesions may be seen; affects
 formation. Acantholysis is not
chlorambucil
 epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
 oral cavity, mucocutaneous 
seen. ldeally, D1F-positive at
Dogs, horses
 junctions, and intertriginous 
basement membrane; zone in
areas of groin and axillae
bullous pemphigoid.
ANA, Antinuclear antibody; DIF, direct immunofl uorescence.
Continued
132
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 6-3 | Skin Diseases Affecting the Eyelids-cont'd
DISORDER AND
AFFECTED ANIMALS
CLINICAL SIGNS
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
Vogt-Koyanagi-Haracla (VKH)-like  Symmetric clepigmentation of
 Skin biopsy. Clinical signs
 Systemic corticosteroids and 
(or uveoclermatologic) syndrome
 nasal planum, muzzle,
(concurrent uveitis) and breed 
azathioprine as well as topical
Dogs
 periorbital. Erythema and
affected.
(ophthalmic) prednisolone. level of
 Breed predilection: Akita
crusting may be noted in 
Histofogy: Decreased or absent
therapy usually clictated by severity
 affected areas. Concurrent
 epidermal melanin. Early lesions 
 of ophthalmic lesions. Cutaneous 
uveitis.
have clermal inflarmmation with
lesions are generally milder and
large macrophages containing
are markers for the ophthalmic
 melanin pigment.
disease.
Alopecia areata
 Focal or multifocal patches of
Skin biopsy
 None. Can recover spontaneously.
Dogs, cats, horses 
 alopecia with no associated
Historogy: Epiclermis is normal.
Breed preclilection: clachshund
inflarmmation. Pinnal and
 Hair follicles are atrophic and 
 symmetrical periorbital
 sometimes dlistorted.
 alopecia may be present.
 Inflammatory cells around the
 distal portion of the follicle.
 Nocular panniculits
 Focal or multifocal dermal 
 Skin biopsy, negative fungal and
 lmmunosuppressive therapy with
Dogs
 nocules that rupture with
 bacterial cultures from
 Corticosteroids, azathioprine
 greasy exucate and crust
 macerated tissue. Systemic
formation. Smaller nodlules 
workup: rule out pancreatitis
 may be present on eyelid 
 and infectious causes.
margins. Anirmals often appear
Historogy: Multiple clermal
 systemically unwell.
 granulomas or pyogranulomas
composed of large 
 macrophages and neutrophils
 may extencd to involve
panniculus.
ISCHEMIC/VASCULAR DISEASES
 Canine farmilial cermatomyositis
Alopecia, crusting, erosions,
 Skin biopsy ± EMG and muscle
 Pentoxifylline, vitamin E.
Dogs
and scarring. Often facial,
biopsy
Corticosteroids, niacinamide, and
 Breed predilections: collie,
 particularly over bony 
tetracycline. Treat seconcary
sheltie, fox terrier, corgi
prominences, distal extremities,
infections.
tip of tail. Signs of muscle
involvement may be present:
weakness, megaesophagus.
Vaccine-incluced ischemic
 Alopecia, erythema, scaling.
 Skin biopsy. May be associated
 Pentoxifylline, vitamin E.
clermatopathy
Ulceration. Often tail tip.
with recent vaccinations,
 Corticosteroids, niacinamide, and 
Dogs
 ear margins, periocular.
 particularly rabies vaccine.
tetracycline. Treat secondary
infections.
NUTRITIONAL/METABOLIC DISEASES
 Zinc-responsive cermatitis
 Acherent fine scale, crusting.
 Compatible signalment and 
 Zinc supplementation
Dogs
 erosions, and ulcers. Often
 Clinical signs. Skin biopsy.
 Breed predilections: arctic
 perioral and periorbital 
breeds (husky, malarmute)
dlistribution.
Generic dog food-associated
 Well-demarcated lesions of
 Skin biopsy anc history of
Good-quality diet
Dogs
 severe adherent scale, crusting.
inappropriate diet
 erosions and ulceration;
perioral and periocular in
distribution. Animals appear
 systemically unwell.
 Superficial necrolytic clermatitis
Ulceration, severe crusting.
 Skin biopsy. Systemic workup is
Palliative therapy with protein
(hepatocutaneous syndrome)
 alopecia. Perioral, periorbital,
indicated. Associated with 
supplementation, fatty acid, and
Dogs
 pinnae, perianal, scrotal.
hepatic or pancreatic disease.
zinc may improve the cutaneous
 Almost always involves foot 
Characteristic hepatic changes
 manifestations. Parenteral therapy
pads with severe hyperkeratosis
 on ultrasonography and 
with intravenous amino acids may
and fissuring.
 characteristic hepatic
be beneficial for some dogs.
 histopathology. Minority of
Long-term prognosis is poor.
 dogs may have pancreatic
 glucagonoma. Plasma amino 
 acids, if measured, are
markedlly clepleted.
EMG,Electromyography.
EYELIDS I
133
Table 6-3 | Skin Diseases Affecting the Eyelids—cont'd
DISORDER AND
 AFFECTED ANIMAIS
CLINICAL SIGNS
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
 NEOPLASTIC
Squamous cell carcinoma*
Erosions, ulceration, particularly
Biopsy
Surgical resection, cryosurgery.
Dogs, cats, horses, cattle 
 of nonpigrmented skin
raciation therapy, strontiurm
therapy, photodynamic therapy
Sarcoid 
Verrucous or proliferative
Biopsy
Cryosurgery, BCG, intralesional
Horses 
 plaques or nodules 
chemotherapy
Melanoma*
 Firm, raised, alopecic lesions.
 Cytology of fine-needlle aspirate.
Wide surgical excision, racliation,
Dogs, horses, cats
Epithelium is usually intact
Biopsy.
 photocynamic therapy
 Breed precdilection: gray-coated 
but may be ulcerated, and
Horses: surgical excision,
horses
tumor is typically pigmented.
 cryosurgery, cimetidline
May be epiclermal or clermal.
Histiocytoma*
 Rapidly growing, alopecic,
Cytology of fine-needle aspirate.
 Spontaneous regression typical over
Dogs
erythematous, raised nocules
Biopsy.
weeks to months
 in young cogs. May have
ulcerated surface.
 Reactive histiocytosis
 Skin lesions incluce multiple
 Skin biopsy. Systemic workup:
Therapies to consider incluce 
(two forms: cutaneous and
 papules, nodules, and plaques
radliography and
 systemic corticosteroids,
systermic)
anywhere on the bocy. lesions 
 ultrasonography to evaluate 
 Cyclosporine, and leflunomide.
Dogs
may ulcerate. Frequently on
for hepatic anci splenic
 Breed predlilections: Bernese
muzzle, eyelicls, nasal planum.
involvement.
 mountain dog, golden retriever 
lesions of cutaneous 
histiocytosis are limitec to the
skin; if lymph nodes.
conjunctiva, sclera, nasal 
cavity, lungs, spleen, or bone
marrow is involved, clog has 
systemic histiocytosis.
Mastocytoma/mast cell tumor*
 Single cutaneous nodule; surface
 Cytology of fine-neeclle aspirate.
Wide surgical excision, radliation
Dogs, cats, horses
 may be alopecic, haired, or
'Biopsy.
 therapy, intralesional therapy.
ulcerated; may be associated
 Often benign in horses
various chemotherapy protocols
with erythema.
 Epitheliotrophic cutaneous
 Pleomorphic, exfoliative lesions
Biopsy
Corticosteroids, retinoids, lomustine, 
T-cell lymphoma 
with erythema
 other chemotherapeutics associated 
(Mycoses fungoides)
 Depigmentation of nasal
with variable, often poor,
Dogs, cats, horses
philtrum
results, resection for solitary lesions,
radliation therapy
 PIGMENTARY DISORDERS
Vitiligo*
 Focal loss of pigment in skin and 
 Clinical signs. Skin biopsy.
 Consicler tetracycline and niacinamide;
Dogs, horses, cats, cattle 
hair. Often macular
dietary supplements in large animals.
 Breed predlilection: Rottweiler
cepigmentation that involves
Therapy may not restore
muzzle, nasal planum, eyelid
 pigment in all cases.
margins, and eyelashes. Can
also affect foot pads.
 Lentigo simplex*
Macular pigmentation of nasal
Clinical signs
None
Orange cats
 planum, gingival margins.
eyelid rmargins.
 MISCELLANEOUS
Juvenile cellulitis 
Pustules, nodules, fistulous tracts.
Distinctive lesions in young
Corticosteroids ± antibiotics?
Dogs
 exucative. Pronounced
Aaojgn isdoig uys Addnd 
Iymphacenopathy. Affects ears,
of fine-needlle aspirate of
muzzle, periorbital area, and
lymph nocles. Negative
eyelids. Animals often appear
cultures.
systemically unwell: concurrent 
fever, lameness.
BCG, Bacille Calmette-Guerin.
134
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Lavach JD, Severn GA (1977): Neoplasia of the equine eye, adnexa and
orbit——a Teview of 68 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:202.
Bonney CH, et al. (1980): Papillomatosis of the conjunchiva and adnexa in
Lewin G (2003): Eyelid reconstruc hon in seven dogs using a split eyelid flap.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:48.
J Small Anim Pract 44:346.
Bowman DD (2003): Georgi’'s Parasitology for Veterinarians, 8th ed.
Martin CM,et al.(1996): Ocular adnexal cryptococcosis in a cat. Vet Comp
Saunders, St. Louis.
Ophthalmol 6:225.
Bussieres M, et al. (2005): The use of carbon dioxide laser for the ablation of 
Mosunic CB, et al. (2004): Effects of trealment with and without adjuvant
meibomian gland adenomas in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:227.
Tadiation therapy on recurrence of ocular and adnexal squamous cell
carcinoma in horses: 157 cases (1985-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Persi an cats. Vet Ophthalmol 7:121.
225: 1733.
Newton SA (2000): Periocular sarcoids in the horse: three cases of successful
chronic staphylococcal blepharitis in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
treatment. Equine Vet Ed 12:137.
185:422.
Owen RA, Jagger DW (1987): Climical observations on the use of BCG cell
Chambers ED, Slatter DH (1984): Cryotherapy of canine distichiasis and
wall fraction for treahment of periocular and other equine sarcoids. Vet Rec
tmichiasis. An experimental and clinical report. J Small Anim Pract 25:647.
120:548.
Collins BK,et al. (i992): Idiopathic granulomatous disease with ocular
ens a q saop ay u uogonsoi piag (teel d aed
adnexal and cutaneous involvement in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
flap tec hnique. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 4:93.
201:313.
 Poli A, et al. (2002): Feline leishmaniosis due to Leishmania infantum in
Degner DA, Walshaw R (1997): Medial saphenous fasciocutaneous and
Italy. Vet Parasitol 106: 181.
myocutaneous free flap transfer in eight dogs. Vet Surg 26:20.
Roberts SM, et al. (1986): Prevalence and treatment of palpebral neoplasms
Donaldson D, et al. (2005): Surgical management of cicatricial ecropion
in the dog—200 cases (1975-1983). J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1355.
following scanring demmatopathies in two dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 8:361.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1229.
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:515.
Scott DW, et al. (2001): Muller & Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 6th ed.
Greene CE (2006): Infechious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders,
 Saunders, Philadelphia.
Scott DW, Miller WH (2003): Equine Dermatology. Saunders, St. Louis.
St. Louis.
Gross TL, et al. (2005): Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and
Smith BP (2002): Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd ed. Mosby, St. Louis.
Stiles I, et al. (2003): Use of a caudal aunicular axial pattern flap in three cats
Hamilton HL, et al. (2000): Diagnosis and blepharoplasic repair of
and one dog following orbital exenteration. Vet Ophthalmol 6:121.
confommational eyelid defects.Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet 22:588.
TheonA，t al.(1993:Intatumoralchemotherapywithcisplatinnily
HelperLC,MagraeWG (1970)Eetopiciaof thcanne eyelidmall
emulsion in horses. J Vet Med Assoc 202:261.
Anim Pract I1:185.
Theon AP, Pascoe JR (1995): Iidium-192 interstitial brachytherapy for
Hoffman A, et al. (2005): Feline periocular peripheral nerve sheath tumor: a
equine periocular tumors: tealment results and prognosic factors in
case series. Vet Ophthalmol 8:153.
Ii5 horses. Equine Vet I 27:117.
Hurn S, et al. (2005): Ectopic cilium in seven horses. Vet Ophthalmol
8:199.
7:284.
Johnson BW, Campbell KL (1989): Dermatoses of the canine eyelid. Comp
Withrow SJ, Vail DM (2007): Withrow & MacEwen's Small Animal Clinical
Cont Ed 11:385.
Oncology, 4th ed. Saunders, St. Louis.
 Krehbiel JD, Langham RF (1975): Eyelid neoplasms of dogs. Am I Vet Res
Wolfer JC(2002): Correction of eyelid coloboma in four cats using
36:115.
subdermal collagen and a modified Stades technique. Vet Ophthalmol
Lackner PA (200l): Techniques for surgical correction of adnexal disease
5:269.
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16:40.
Chapter
CONJUNCTIVA
David J. Maggs
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
CLINICAL SIGNS OF CONJUNCTIVAL
CONJUNCTIVITIS
DISEASE
OTHER CONJUNCTIVAL DISORDERS
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
overlie the deeper, straighter episcleral vessels, although the
 two systems communicate. The superficial conjunctival vessels
The conjunctiva is a mobile mucous membrane covering the
form loops or arcades at the limbus. It is from these loops that
inner surface of the lids, the inner and outer surfaces of
[oo [eioyadns oi asuodsan ui sinooo ,suppng rtanpua,
the third eyelid, and the anterior portion of the globe adjacent
disease, resulting in superficial corneal vascularization. Deep
to the limbus (Figure 7-1). The space lined by the conjunctiva
corneal vascularization originates from the deeper episcleral
is called the conjunctival sac. The palpebral conjunctiva is
 and scleral blood vessels.
tightly bound to the inner surface of the lids. In the dorsal
fornix the conjunctiva is supported by an anterior extension
Conjunctival Wound Healing
of the muscle sheath of the levator palpebrae and dorsal
rectus muscles. This band moves the loose conjunctiva of the
 Simple, uncomplicated wounds of the conjunctiva heal rapidly,
fornix with the globe and prevents it from falling down over
usually within 24 to 48 hours. Denuded areas of sclera are also
the cornea. The bulbar conjunctiva is loosely attached to the
rapidly reepithelialized in this manner. Within a few hours,
episclera over the globe and is anchored more firmly near
conjunctiva attaches to the episclera, and healing occurs by
the limbus.
epithelial sliding and mitosis.
The conjunctiva consists of a nonkeratinized columnar
epithelium with goblet cells, subtended by the substantia
Cellular Responses in Conjunctival Disease
propria and overlaid by the tear film (Figure 7-2). The tear film
that coats and nourishes the cornea is also an essential pro-
Identification of predominant cell type(s) in the conjunctiva
tective and nutritional layer for the conjunctiva. Alterations in tear 
may be useful in differentiating possible causes and chronicity
film quantity or quality, as seen with keratoconjunctivitis sicca,
of conjunctivitis (Table 7-1). Neutrophils are typically seen in
cause marked deterioration in conjunctival as well as corneal
acute conjunctivitis, especially of bacterial or viral origin.
health. Additionally, the conjunctival goblet cells contribute the
 Lymphocytes and plasma cells are more typical of chronic and
mucin layer of the tear film, which gathers in the conjunctival
often immune-mediated conjunctivitis and sometimes organize
fornices as a mucous thread. The mucous thread migrates
into follicles visible both histologically and clinically (Figure 7-4).
medially, gathering dust particles and cells for eventual disposal
Lymphoid follicles indicate chronic antigenic stimulation and
down the nasolacrimal duct or onto the surface of the skin at the
do not signify a specific disease. Eosinophils are seen in allergic
 medial canthus. In animals with a deep inferior fornix (e.g., Irish
 or immune-mediated conjunctivitis, especially in cats 
and
setters, Dobermans, collies), the normal mucous thread may be
horses. As conjunctivitis becomes more chronic, goblet cells
particularly prominent, accumulating as a grayish gelatinous
can increase in number, and the epithelium proliferates and is
mass at the medial canthus (so-called medial canthal pocket
thrown into folds (papillary hypertrophy), which give it a
syndrome).
"velvety" appearance. Metaplasia of the conjunctiva may occur
 The conjunctiva is the most exposed mucous membrane in
with chronic vitamin A deficiency, especially in chickens and
the body. To respond rapidly to noxious stimuli, it has well-
turtles/tortoises. Inflammatory membranes may also form as
developed defense mechanisms and has been compared with an
conjunctivitis becomes chronic. True membranes consist of
everted lymph node (Figure 7-3). The subepithelial substantia
 cellular debris and fbrin, are firmly attached to the underlying
propria comprises loose fibrous connective tissue but also con-
 epithelium, and when removed leave a raw, bleeding surface.
tains numerous lymphocytes that, when stimulated by antigens,
 Pseudomembranes consist of similar material that is nonadherent
form active follicles. These follicles are present throughout the
 and easily removed.
conjunctiva but are particularly numerous on the bulbar surface
of the third eyelid. Two layers of lymphatic drainage are present—-
CLINICAL SIGNS OF CONJUNCTIVAL
one adjacent to the superficial conjunctival blood vessels and 
DISEASE
one in the deeper fibrous layer.
The arterial supply of the conjunctiva is prolific, coming
 The accurate observation and interpretation of conjunctival
from the peripheral and marginal arcades of the eyelids and the
signs are essential in the differential diagnosis of "the red eye*"
anterior ciliary arteries. The superficial conjunctival vessels
 Too frequently, serious intraocular diseases such as uveitis and
135
136
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7-2. Normal conjunctival histology. A, Columnar epithelial cells;
B, goblet cells. Substantia propria lies beneath the epithelium and
Figure 7-1. Areas of conjunctiva: I, palpebral; 2, fornix; 3, anterior third 
contains numerous spaces and blood vessels of significance in the
eyelicl; 4, posterior third eyelicl; 5, bulbar.
forrmation of chemosis.
Epithelium
THE LYMPH NODE
THE CONJUNCTIVAL SAC 
Afferent
Afferent
Cortex
Medulla
Capsule
Follicle
Follicle
Split
Eferent
Hilum
"Medulla"
Efferent
Figure 7-3. The relationship between a lymph nodle and the conjunctival sac. (Modified from Duke-Elcler S
[1965]: System of Ophthalmology, Vol 8, Par 11. Henry Kimpton, Loncon.)
glaucoma, which also produce redness, are misdiagnosed as
ally, conjunctival hyperemia can occur as a result of reduced
 conjunctivitis, and the underlying disorder continues, destroying 
venous drainage due to increased central venous pressure (e.g
vision or the eye and leading to chronic discomfort or occasionally
ventricular septal defect) or, more commonly, obstruction of
death of the animal from systemic disease.
local venous drainage by cervical or orbital neoplasms. It is
 Conjunctival inflammation is typically characterized by con-
 essential to distinguish hyperermia (or injection) of episcleral
junctival hyperemia, ocular discharge, and chemosis (conjunctival 
vessels from hyperemia of conjunctival vessels, because this
edema). Other changes seen in conjunctival disease are
distinction permits the critical differentiation of deep and
summarized in Box 7-1.
 potentially vision-threatening diseases, such as uveitis, glaucoma,
and deep (stromal) keratitis, from more superficial surface
Conjunctival Hyperemia
 ocular diseases, such as conjunctivitis and superficial keratitis
(Table 7-2).
Conjunctival hyperemia generally occurs as a result of local
 Episcleral and conjunctival injection can coexist. Therefore
release of inflammatory mediators (conjunctivitis). Occasion-
it is essential to realize that although more serious deep corneal
CONJUNCTIVA |
137
Table 7-2 ↑ Differentiation of Episcleral and Conjunctival
Injection
CONJUNCTIVAL VESSELS
 EPISCLERAL VESSELS
Finer
Larger
 Branch frequently
Branch occasionally
Form arcadles or loops
 Dive through sclera just before lirmbus
 at limbus 
 Pink/red
Dark red
Mobile 
Fixed 
 Bulbar, palpebral, forniceal,
 Seen only overlying sclera
and third eyelid all
involved 
Tortuous route
Relatively straight
 Blanch rapicdly with topical 
 Blanch siowly if at all with topical 
application of dlilute
application of dilute
Figure 74. Follicular conjunctivitis in a cog. Note the follicle formation
epinephrine
epinephrine (1:100,000) or
in the ventral conjunctival fornix and on the anterior face of the third
(1:100,000) or
phenylephrine (0.25%)
eyelicd.
phenylephrine (0.25%)
 Individual vessels tend
 Indlividual vessels tend to be dlistinct 
to be incistinct
Table 7-1 | Cellular Responses Associated with Specific
 Ocular clischarge often
Ocular dlischarge often serous 
Conjunctivitides
 juajnandosnu ao piosnu 
 Pupil size usually normal
Miosis or mydlriasis possible
DISEASE
CELLULAR RESPONSE
Intraocular pressure (1OP)
 JOP usually high or low
 usually normal
Acute bacterial
 Preclorminantly neutrophils; few
 Chemosis often present
Chemosis sometimes present 
conjunctivitis
 mononuclear cells; many bacteria; 
Diffuse corneal ecema
 Diffuse corneal edema often present 
clegenerating epithelial cells
 usually not present 
Chronic bacterial
 Precominantly neutrophils; many
 Presence indicates
 Presence indicates scleral or cleep 
 conjunctivitis
 mononuclear cell; cegenerate or
 conjunctival or superficial
 corneal disease, glaucoma,
keratinized epithelial cells; goblet
corneal disease
or uveitis 
cells; bacteria may or may not be
seen; mucus; fibrin
 Feline herpesvirus
Pseucomembrane formation; giant
conjunctivitis
 Cells; fibrin; erythrocyte, neutrophil.,
 mation of the conjunctival vessels, the reverse is not true.
 and mononuclear cell numbers
 clepend on stage of infection 
 Feline mycoplasmal 
 Preclorminantly neutrophils; fewer
Ocular Discharge
 conjunctivitis
 mononuclear cells; basophilic coccoid 
 or pleomorphic organisms on cell 
Mucopurulent discharge is a common sign of conjunctival
 membrane
 Predominantly neutrophils; in 
disease, especially keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Epiphora alone
 Feline chlamycial
is rarely a sign of primary conjunctival pathology unless
conjunctivitis
 subacute cases mononuclear cells
 increased in number; plasma cells;:
Jo uononpond paseaioun se yons 'suais iano Aq panunduoon
giant cells; basophilic cytoplasmic
 mucus, follicle formation, hyperemia, or blepharospasm. With
inclusions early in the clisease
severe ocular discharge the eyelid margins may stick together,
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca Keratinized epithelial cells; goblet cells;:
especially upon waking. Change in color of the mucous thread
 mucus; neutrophilic response marked 
 if there is much infection; bacteria 
from transparent or gray to yellow is due to accumulation of
Canine distemper
Varies with stage of dlisease: early—giant
inflammatory cells and cellular debris within it. Sanguineous
 cells and mononuclear cells; later
discharge is seen in ulcerative or traumatic conjunctivitis.
neutrophils, goblet cells, and mucus; 
 infrequent intracellular inclusions
 Allergic conjunctivitis
 Eosinophils; neutrophils may be markedl;:
Chemosis (Conjunctival Edema)
 basophils possible
Chemosis may be caused by any stimulus that results in acute
From Lavach JD, et al. (1977): Cytology of normal and inflamed conjunchivas
 inflammation. It is especially common in acute allergic con-
in dogs and cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 170:772.
junctivitis, toxic injuries, and trauma. It is usually but not
always seen with concurrent hyperemia and can be dramatic
enough to prevent full eyelid closure and to predispose to
 Box 7-1 |  Clinical signs of conjunctival pathology
conjunctival desiccation.
Ocular discharge (typically mucoid)
Conjunctival and Subconjunctival Hemorrhage
Chemosis
 Conjunctival hyperemia
Subconjunctival extravasations and ecchymoses are seen relatively
Abnormal swellings
frequently with severe, acute, systemic inflammation (septicemia),
 Emphysema
Follicle formation
vasculitis, and coagulopathies as well as after trauma. Large
Pruritus
 subconjunctival hemorrhages are usually traumatic in origin.
Hemorthage
The hemorrhage is resorbed over 7 to 10 days and changes
successively from bright red to dark red, yellow, and white.
138
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAlS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Subconjunctival Emphysema
Box 7-2 | Means of classifying conjunctivitis
Subconjunctival emphysema manifests as a subconjunctival
Etiology
Duration
swelling with crepitus. It is caused by the entry of air into the
Appearance
periorbita from surrounding paranasal sinuses, usually after
Bacterial
Acute
Mucoid ("catarrhal")
 traumatic damage to the sinus walls. Subconjunctival emphysema
Viral
Subacute
Purulent
is an indication for thorough imaging of the sinuses and a
Fungal
Chronic
Mucopurulent
Parasitic
 Recurrent
Hemorrhagic
 complete ocular examination. Depending on the severity of the 
Immune-mediated
 Follicular
initial trauma, subconjunctival hemorrhages and intraocular
Toxic or chemical 
Membranous
damage may also be present. In the absence of more severe
Tear film abnormalities
 Pseudomembranous
 lesions the air is usually absorbed in 7 to 14 days. A systemic
 Frictional (see Box 7-3):
Ligneous
 antibiotic should be administered to prevent orbital infection by
Endogenous
Exogenous
 normal flora from the damaged sinus.
Follicle Formation
 Box 7-3 | Frictional irritants causing conjunctivitis
Lymphoid follicles frequently occur after chronic antigenic
Exogenous
Endogenous
stimulation (see Figure 7-4). Slight epiphora and follicle formation 
are often the only signs of mild allergic conjunctivitis. Follicles are
Foreign body
Qualitative tear film deficiencies
 normally present on the bulbar surface of the third eyelid but, after 
Dust
Quantitative tear film deficiencies
stimulation, may appear in other parts of the conjunctiva.
Sand
Entropion
Smoke
Distichiasis
Smog/pollution
Nasal fold trichiasis
Pruritus
Low humidity
Ectopic cilia
Allergens
 Conjunctivitis is commonly associated with pruritus, although
Ectropion
Wind
 Lagophthalmos
the history provided by the owner, plus secondary lesions (e.g-,
Contaminated water
 periocular alopecia and erythema, stained or matted hair on the
Toxins
 medial aspect of the metacarpus) may be the only indication.
Deep ocular pain, as in glaucoma or uveitis, is more likely to
cause blepharospasm or changes in behavior or appetite sug-
blepharitis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, dacryocystitis, uveitis, and
 gestive of pain. Superficial pruritus usually causes rubbing
 glaucoma. Therefore conjunctivitis should be seen as a potential
 motions with the paws.
sign of numerous, diverse, and often blinding ocular diseases and
 occasionally as a sign of systemic and potentially life-threatening
Swellings or Conjunctival Masses
disease. As a result every eye in which conjunctival inflammation
is identifed should undergo thorough diagnostic testing including
Swellings and infiltrates are examined for color, rate of growth,
 at the very least comparison of pupil size between eyes, Schirmer
 position, and attachment to conjunctiva, sclera, or adjacent struc-
 tear testing, assessment of aqueous flare and intraocular pressure,
tures. Although not all swellings and infltrates are tumors, the
globe retropulsion, and application of fluorescein stain. An
 diagnostic approach and some potential causes are discussed in
algorithm showing the diagnostic approach to a patient with
 the section on conjunctival neoplasia.
 conjunctival inflammation is shown in Figure 7-5.
Once it has been verified that the patient has primary con-
CONJUNCTIVITIS
 junctivitis and not conjunctival inflammation as a sign of more
Classification
serious ocular and/or systemic disease, a specific etiologic diag-
nosis should be sought (see Box 7-2, Box 7-3, and Figure 7-5).
Conjunctivitis has been classified on the basis of duration,
The major causes of conjunctivitis vary by species. For example,
nature of discharge, appearance, and etiology (Boxes 7-2 and
feline conjunctivitis is largely infectious (Chlamydophila felis
7-3). Of these, etiology is the most important, and an etiologic
 or feline herpesvirus), whereas canine conjunctivitis is almost
diagnosis should always be sought as a basis for rational
exclusively noninfectious (e.g., pannus, keratoconjunctivitis
therapy. Classification according to duration or appearance is
sicca, entropion, foreign bodies, etc.). By contrast, horses are
useful only as a step toward an etiologic diagnosis. Numerous
rarely affected with primary infectious conjunctivitis and are
systemic diseases—canine distemper, feline herpesvirus,
more likely to have conjunctival inflammation as a sign of
Chlamydophila spp., and infectious bovine rhinotracheitismay
 keratitis or uveitis, and ruminants are more prone to infectious
 also cause conjunctivitis and must be considered.
 conjunctivitides. These guidelines should be used to aid in
 prioritizing differential diagnoses in each species.
 Differential Diagnosis
Diagnostic Methods
The general and common clinical signs of conjunctivitis
Bacterial Culturing
(hyperemia, discharge, chemosis, and follicle formation) do not
assist with an etiologic diagnosis or with the differentiation of
Bacterial culturing is not the first diagnostic procedure in
primary from secondary conjunctivitis. In fact, conjunctiva is
 determining the cause of conjunctivitis. Very few primary bacteria
often secondarily inflamed with almost all other ocular and
cause conjunctivitis, especially in small animals, and most
periocular diseases, including primary keratitis, orbital disease,
(Chlamydophila, Mycoplasma, etc.) require special collection
CONjuNCtIvA I
139
Suspect conjunctival disease
Subconjunctivall
Conjunctival
 Chemosis
Mucoid
Conjunctival
 Conjunctival
hemorrhage
 hyperemia
 present
discharge
mass 
thickening
present 
present 
 present
present
present 
Rule out:
Rule out:
Rule out:
· Systemic hypertension
· Infectious conjunctivitis
· Neoplasia
*Vasculitis
· Allergic conjunctivitis
· Immune-mediated disease
·Coagulopathy
· Subconjunctival neoplasia
* Granulomatous
· Local trauma
* Lymphoma
 episcleritis 
· Plasmacytoma
· Feline eosinophilic
· Jugular compression
· Foreign body conjunctivitis
 keratoconjunctivitis
History/blood pressure!
·Cyst
 coagulation profile 
Cytology/biopsy
· Chalazion
Hematology
PCRAFA/culture
 Scrape/aspirate/biopsy
Rule out:
 Rule out:
 Rule out:
Episcleral hyperemia
· Increased production
 Epithelial disease
 Intraocular pressure!
· Conjunctivitis
· Chronic conjunctivitis
flare/fluorescein staining 
· Decreased hydration 
· Subepithelial disease
 Orbital disease
· Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
· Tarsal gland disease
Retropulsion
· Blepharitis
· Conjunctivitis
· Lymphoma/plasmacytoma
 Schirmer tear test
 Schirmer tear test!
 Schirmer tear test
fluorescein staining
 fluorescein staining
fluorescein staining
PCR/IFA/culture
 PCR/FA/culture
PCR/FA/culture
Cytology/biopsy
Cytology/biopsy
Cytology/biopsy
Figure 7-5. Diagnostic algorithm for common pathological responses in patients with conjunctival clisease. fFA,
Immunofluorescent antibody; PCR, polymerase chain reaction. (Modified from Slatter D [2003|: Textbook of
 Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
 and/or culture conditions. Therefore cultures are performed rarely
 elementary bodies, and Mycoplasma spp. in cats and sheep).
and usually after initial antibiotic therapy has been unsuccessful. In
The types of cells commonly encountered are described in
fact, cultures usually show either an organism present in the normal
Figure 7-6 and Table 7-1.
flora or a common pathogen. Failure of conjunctivitis to respond to
antibiotics is more commonly the result of incorrect diagnosis and
Conjunctival Biopsy
failure to determine the etiology rather than incorect choice of
antibiotic. Many causes of conjunctivitis result in increased
A small “snip biopsy" of conjunctiva can be obtained with use
 numbers of bacteria from the normal flora or growth of
of only topical anesthesia. After topical application of two
common pathogens, and, therefore the cause of the conjunctivitis
drops of anesthetic 5 minutes apart, a cotton-tipped applicator
typically should not be ascribed to the bacteria isolated.
soaked in proparacaine (or other topical ophthalmic anesthetic)
When culture specimens are taken, swabs should be
should be applied gently to the surface. A small area of the
 moistened (with saline solution), and the sample plated onto
conjunctiva to be sampled is then delicately “tented" with fine 
blood agar or into nutrient and thioglycollate broth as soon as
tissue forceps and resected with small tenotomy scissors
possible. See Tables 3-1, 3-3, 3-4, and 3-6 to 3-9 in Chapter 3
(Figure 7-7). The sample should be minimally handled to avoid
for normal ocular surface flora of common domestic species.
artifactual changes, spread onto a flat surface, and fixed for
histologic processing. Before fixation, equine conjunctival
Conjunctival Scrapings
samples also may be sliced and incubated in saline at 37° C,
 and the supernatant centrifuged and examined for Onchocerca
 Unlike culture, scrapings and biopsies are frequently extremely
microflaria.
useful for better defining cause and chronicity of conjunctivitis
and for guiding therapy. Scrapings are particularly useful to
General Treatment Considerations for Conjunctivitis
determine the potential malignancy of cells associated with
conjunctival masses, such as squamous cell carcinoma. For
After determination of the etiology and treatment of non-
method of collection, see Chapter 5. Scrapings are examined for
conjunctival factors (e.g., correction of lid defects, removal of 
 cellular alterations (Giemsa stain) and bacteria (Gram stain) as
foreign bodies, replacement of deficient tear film, protection
well as inclusion bodies. Intracytoplasmic melanin granules
from exogenous factors), the following therapeutic agents can
should be differentiated from other inclusions (e.g., chlamydial
be employed:
140
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7-6. For tegend, see opposite page
CONjuNCtIvA I
141
biotics, use of corticosteroids is not always rational. As a rule,
they should be used in noninfectious disorders after correction
of nonconjunctival factors. Their major role is in those con-
junctivitides, such as pannus and allergic conjunctivitis, in
which an immune-mediated cause is suspected. By contrast,
corticosteroids are contraindicated in most feline conjunc-
tivitides because the vast majority are infectious in nature
(feline herpesvirus and C. felis). Corticosteroids should not be
 a routine part of conjunctivitis therapy or be used in the absence
of a specific diagnosis.
Cleansing Agents
Removal of accumulated ocular discharge is important to
prevent maceration, blepharitis, periocular dermatitis, and
eyelid or conjunctival adhesions, and to improve patient
Figure 7-7. A conjunctival "snip" biopsy specimen being taken from the
comfort and penetration of ophthalmic medications. Therefore 
ventral conjunctival fornix of a cat with chronic conjunctivitis.
cleaning, flushing, and warm-packing of the eyelids is a useful
adjunct in the early therapy of many conjunctival disorders,
particularly when done in conjunction with more specific
therapy. However, removal of one sign of conjunctivitis
Antibiotics
(discharge) is no substitute for specific treatment and resolution
of the primary cause. Many commercial solutions are available.
Topical antibiotics are frequently prescribed for patients with
 Cleansing may be followed by application of a bland protective
conjunctivitis. This approach is appropriate, however, only for
ointment.
treating a primary bacterial conjunctivitis (which is relatively
rare) or if the goal is simply to limit overgrowth of the normal
Jopical Mast Celf Stabiizers and Antihistamines
conjunctival flora while the primary cause of conjunctivitis is
simultaneously addressed by another therapy. The reflex use of
Sodium cromoglycate, olopatadine, lodoxamide, and other mast
an antibiotic whenever conjunctival inflammation is seen and
cell-stabiliing agents have been used topically to treat allergic
without further testing or thought as to the primary cause of
and eosinophilic conjunctivitis. However, anecdotal reports of
conjunctival inflammation must be avoided. Apparent (but
the efficacy of these products vary, and controlled studies on
temporary) response to antibiotic therapy can entrench such
 their safety or efficacy in veterinary patients are lacking.
prescribing pattems. For example, conjunctivitis due to aqueous
tear film dysfunction (keratoconjunctivitis sicca) will improve
VasoactiveAgents
while but not because the patient is treated with an antibiotic.
The improvement is due to both reduction of overgrowth of
Sympathetic agents in low concentration are available and are
flora (which occurred because of tear film disturbance) and the
used for their vasoactive effects. Their empirical use to reduce
lubricating property of the vehicle in which the antibiotic is
hyperemia and chemosis in acute conjunctivitis or allergy may
delivered. Meanwhile, though, nothing has been done to limit
be effective, but topical corticosteroids are more potent and
the ongoing destruction of the lacrimal gland, thus reducing
better address the cause.
 prognosis for response to cyclosporine at a later date. Giving
consideration to the primary cause of conjunctivitis before
Bacterial Conjunctivitis
prescribing an antibiotic (alone) is always warranted.
.See
Chapter 3 for rational choices of antibiotics for specific con-
Primary bacterial conjunctivitis is common in cattle and sheep,
junctival pathogens and overgrowth of flora.
in which Moraxella bovis, often in association with other
agents, causes infectious keratoconjunctivitis (see Chapter 10).
Corticosteroids
Moraxella spp. have also been isolated from horses with
conjunctivitis in North America and Australia. In dogs,
Corticosteroids are commonly used to treat conjunctivitis,
Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and
often in conjunction with antibiotics. However, as with anti-
Streptococcus spp. can be isolated from animals with external
Figure 7-6. Cell types founc in clifferent types of conjunctivitis. A, Epithelial conjunctival cells from a normal clog. The cells are founc in sheets anc are
round to oval,with large nucleiB,Conjunctival epithelial cells containing melanin granules.Melanin occurs invarying amounts andmay be iclentified
as dark green to black granules after Giemsa staining. C, Keratinized epithelial cells. These cells are abnormal in large nurmbers. D, Conjunctival goblet
cells. Goblet cells contain a large amount of mucus, which displaces the nucleus to the periphery. E, Scraping from a dog with acute bacterial
conjunctivitis. large numbers of neutrophils anc degenerating epithelial cells are present. F, Scraping from a kitten with herpesvirus infection.
Mononuclear cells precominate. Viral inclusions are not visible. G, Plasma cell (arrow). This finding is abnormal and suggests inflammatory clisease but
is not associated with any specific disease. H, Multinucleated cell in a scraping frorm a dog with distemper. Neutrophils, mononuclear cells, and 
clegenerating epithelial cells are also present. I, Chlarmyclial inclusion (arrow) in the cytoplasm of an epithelial cell from a cat with acute conjunctivitis.
J, Neoplastic epithelial cellfrom a cat with squamous cell carcinoma of the lid margin. The cell is unusually large anc vacuolatedl. (From Lavach JD, et
al. [1977|: Cytology of normal and inflamed conjunctivas in cogs ancl cats. Am Vet Med Assoc 170:722.]
142
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
ocular disease (see Table 3-2 in Chapter 3), but these organisms
exists, especially from birds, but appears to be minor in other
are frequently found in normal eyes and likely represent over-
species.
 growth of normal flora in an eye debilitated from another cause.
 In cats, chlamydial conjunctivitis initially may be unilateral
Acute bacterial conjunctivitis can occur, however, especially in
but typically spreads to the other eye within 7 days of primary
 outdoor dogs that swim in contaminated water. Such cases should
infection. Mild rhinitis, fever, and submandibular lymph-
 respond rapidly and completely to a short (7-day) course of a
adenopathy are typically seen coincident with ocular signs
topical broad spectrum antibiotic and should not recur.
in primary exposure but often resolve more promptly and
Conjunctivitis that does not respond or responds only tem-
completely than the conjunctival signs, which can be very
 porarily to topical antibiotic therapy is unlikely to be bacterial
 persistent. Chemosis is a predominant feature. With chronicity.
in origin. Examination of the lids, lid margins, and naso-
 membranous or follicular conjunctivitis can be notable.
.If
lacrimal system, measurement of tear production and intra-
untreated the disease may last for months, and a protracted
 ocular pressure, and fluorescein staining should form a routine
 carrier state can occur. Chlamydial conjunctivitis is diagnosed
 part of examination in such eyes. Chronic bacterial conjunc-
from its clinical signs, a history of exposure, occasional
tivitis is frequently associated with lid abnormalities or with
 demonstration of characteristic intracytoplasmic elementary
infections in the ear and skin; as such, it forms part of a
bodies in scrapings of epithelial cells (see Figure 7-6, D), or
spectrum of surface inflammatory conditions, including
 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. The major differ-
generalized seborrhea, pyoderma, and severe periodontal
ential diagnosis is herpetic conjunctivitis due to feline herpes-
 disease. These are sometimes exacerbated by endocrinopathies,
virus type 1 (FHV-1). Table 7-4 provides some guidelines for
 and a complete diagnostic approach is recommended. Typically
 differentiating these two diseases.
the conjunctival signs improve as these other disorders are
Chlamydial conjunctivitis also occurs in sheep, often in
 controlled. Successful treatment depends on improvement
 association with lameness due to polyarthritis. This condition is
of the patient's general condition and treatment of associated
distinguishable from infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis by
infections.
 the presence of lameness and lack of comeal lesions. Chlamydial
 conjunctivitis also occurs in birds and in the Australian koala,
Treatment
in which a high proportion of the population may be affected
with chronic keratoconjunctivitis and infertility. Different 
1. Correction of the primary cause.
strains of Chlamydia are responsible for infection of the con-
2. Topical broad-spectrum antibiotics (see Chapter 3 for
junctiva and genitalia. Stress is believed to play a major role in
choice of antibiotic).
the pathogenesis in koalas. Many koalas harbor the organism
3  Removal of crusts and exudates by soaking with saline-
but lack clinical signs.
moistened cotton or commercial eye cleaning solutions.
 4. Systemic antibiotic therapy if conjunctivitis is associated
Treatment
with blepharitis, generalized dermatitis, or otitis.
 5. Prevention of self-trauma with an Elizabethan collar.
b,  so    
6. Topical therapy with a combined antibiotic-steroid is
Chlamydophila in nonocular sites. This finding, along with
sometimes necessary in chronic conjunctivitis but should
 controlled studies comparing topical and systemic therapy, has
not be used routinely.
led to the recommendation that systemic antibiotics (typically
doxycycline) be used in addition to or instead of topical
Chlamydial Conjunctivitis
ophthalmic ointments. The same information, although not 
 confirmed as applying to all other host or chlamydial species,
Members of the family Chlamydiaceae have undergone
could be used to justify systemic treatment (usually in con-
reclassification and renaming as a result of better charac-
 junction with topical therapy) in most individuals in which
terization using new molecular biology techniques. However,
chlamydial infection  is  (
diagnosed. Azithromycin initially
the range of diseases these organisms cause remains largely
reduces clinical signs and shedding of C. felis in experimentally
unchanged by this reclassification. Table 7-3 shows the previous
 infected cats but does so only temporarily and less effectively
and current names for the major organisms of veterinary
than doxycycline.
importance. Chlamydial spp. cause notable conjunctivitis in
cats, birds, and small ruminants. The potential for zoonosis
Mycoplasmal Conjunctivitis
Mycoplasma spp. have formerly been described as a cause of
Table 7-3 | Nomenclature for Chlamydial Organisms of 
conjunctivitis in cats. However, approximately 90% of normal
Veterinary and Human Importance
cats harbor the organisms, and their clinical significance as a
PREVIOUS NAME
CURRENT NAME(S)
SPECIES AFFECTED
cause of feline conjunctivitis is debatable. Likewise, the
 importance of Mycoplasma spp. in infectious ovine and bovine
Chtamydia psittaci
Chtamydophita felis
Cats
 keratoconjunctivitis and in many infectious conjunctivitides in
Chtamydophita caviae
Cuinea pigs
other animals is questionable or undetermined. It is possible
Chiamydophila
Humans, horses.
that culture of Mycoplasma spp. from debilitated eyes
abortus
ruminants, and
pigs
represents only an overgrowth of flora.
Chtamydophila psittaci
Humans and birds
Mycoplasma spp. have been isolated from numerous out-
Chiamydia
Chiamydophila
Koalas, frogs, and 
breaks of conjunctivitis in house and wild finches in the United
pneumoniae
 pneumoniae
horses
 States. Clinical signs consisted of severe unilateral or bilateral
Chiamydia pecorum
Chiamydophiia pecorum
 Pigs, cattle
chemosis with serous to mucopurulent drainage and nasal
CONjuNCtIvA I
143
Table 7-4 | Characteristic Features of Infectious Feline Keratoconjunctivitis
 CLINICAL SIGNS
FELINE HERPESVIRUS 1
 FELINE CALICIVIRUS
CHIAMYDIA
Malaise/anorexia
+++
++
士
Sneezing
+++
++
Nasal discharge
+++
++
十+
 Oral ulceration 
 Ptyalism
Ocular clischarge
+
土
+++
Conjunctivitis 
+++
(Hyperemic)
++：
(Chemotic)
 Keratitis
+++
upper respiratory tract disease, in Chandler EA, Gaskell CJ, Gaskell RM (eds): Feline Medicine and Therapeutics, 2nd ed. Blackwell Scientifc, Boston.
+, Mild; ++, moderate; +++, severe; -, absent; ±, variably present.
exudate. Transfer of infection at shared feeders was incriminated
Lifelong latency within the trigeminal ganglia of carrier cats
in the epidemiology of many of the outbreaks.
occurs in at least 80% of cats and should be considered the
norm. At least half of these cats assume epidemiologic import-
ance owing to later reactivation and shedding of virus. Such
Treatment
episodes of reactivation may be stimulated by stress such as
Mycoplasma and Chlamydia have similar susceptibility patterms.
rehousing, intercurrent illness, or changes in the human or pet
Topically and systemically administered tetracyclines are an
population within a household. The administration of corti-
excellent choice of therapy for mycoplasmal conjunctivitis.
costeroids is a very reliable method of reactivating latent virus
under experimental conditions, and this possibility should be
Viral Conjunctivitis
considered whenever one is tempted to administer a topical or
systemic corticosteroid to a cat.
Conjunctivitis is caused by a variety of viruses in all species.
 FHV-1 causes disease via a number of theorized mech-
 The following general considerations are important:
anisms, each of which requires a different therapeutic
approach. After primary inoculation of oral, nasal, or
 Although the conjunctiva is frequently an important portal
conjunctival mucosa there is an initial period of rapid
of entry of systemic viral diseases, it is not always the site
replication within and associated cytolysis of epithelial cells at
of severe pathology or predominant clinical signs.
these sites. This can sometimes be observed directly in the
· Conjunctivitis is present in both mild and severe forms in 
cornea as the pathognomonic dendritic ulcers. This phase of
 numerous systemic diseases (e.g., infectious bovine
cell destruction also causes rhinitis and conjunctivitis.
If
rhinotracheitis, canine distemper, feline herpesvirus infection).
cytolysis is severe enough to cause ulceration of mucosal
· Severe viral conjunctivitis is commonly the most obvious
surfaces, serosanguineous ocular or nasal discharge can be
clinical signs, although other systems may be involved
seen. Exposure of conjunctival substantia propria and corneal
(e.g., herpetic conjunctivitis in cats)
stroma permits formation of symblepharon, or adhesions
· Not all viruses isolated from the conjunctiva are pathogenic,
between these tissues (Figure 7-8). If viral infection occurs before
nor is their significance completely understood. For
the eyelids open, large amounts of inflammatory debris may
example, adenoviruses have been found in cattle with
accumulate in the conjunctival sac (conjunctivitis neonatorum).
 infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis.
 Primary disease is usually self-limiting within 10 to 20 days.
However, during this period, viral latency is established in the
Feline Viral Conjunctivitis
majority of cats (Figure 7-9). Intermittent, and usually
recurrent, episodes of viral reactivation from the latent state
FHV-1 is considered the most common cause of conjunctivitis
may be followed by centrifugal spread of virus back along the
(and keratitis) in cats. In fact, FHV-1 and C. felis probably
 sensory axons to peripheral epithelial sites in a minority of
account for the vast majority of all feline conjunctivitides.
 animals. Association of these episodes of reactivation with
Differentiation of these two organisms is guided largely by
clinically evident disease at peripheral sites is termed
clinical signs (see Table 7-4) because diagnostic test results can
recrudescence. Recrudescent disease may be ulcerative or
 be falsely positive or negative for these organisms.
nonulcerative and may involve the same tissues (cornea,
 Critical to the interpretation of diagnostic test results for FHV-
conjunctiva, nose) as in primary disease; however, it may be
1 and the management of cats infected with this organism is
unilateral, unassociated with systemic or nonocular signs, and
knowledge that FHV-1 establishes a permanent latent or carrier
is usually milder although often more chronic and/or recurrent
state in most cats infected. Additionally, FHV-1 is a ubiquitous
 than primary bouts of disease.
and highly conserved virus worldwide. Serologic studies
 During recrudescent or primary disease, FHV-1 induces
suggest that at least 95% of cats have been exposed to the virus
 tissue damage via two classic mechanisms—as a direct result
via either vaccination or transfer of wild-type virus between
of viral replication (cytolysis) and indirectly through immuno-
cats by macrodroplets or fomites (including hands of owners).
pathologic processes mediated by inflammatory cells. The
Although long-lived within the ganglia of cats, FHV-1 is
most striking example of immunopathologic herpetic disease 
extremely labile in the environment and susceptible to com-
in cats is stromal keratitis (see Chapter 10), but chronic immu-
monly used disinfectants.
nologic conjunctivitis also occurs.
144
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Box 7-4 | Epidemiclogic factors to consider in the
management of cats with feline
herpesvirus (FHV-1)
 Feline populations (not the environment) are the reservoir of
infection.
· FHV-1 infection (but not necessarily disease) is common.
· FHV-1 establishes lifelong latency in most cats.
· FHV-1 commonly reactivates from latency with or without
 obvious cause and with or without clinical evidence of
Teacti vation.
· FHV-1 reactivation is associated with recrudescent disease in
 only a small percentage of cats.
· FHV-1 induces disease via two distinct mechanisms with
 Figure 7-8. Symblepharon (conjunctival anc corneal achesion) in a cat 
 important therapeutic implications:
after recovery from feline herpesvirus 1 infection. Forniceal conjunctiva
● Cytolysis due to viral replication: An antiviral agent may
has achered to the cornea.(Fror August ] [2001l:Consultations in Feline
 be needed; immunomodulation is contraindicated.
Internal Medicine, 4th ed. Saunclers, Philadelphia.)
· Immunopathology: Antinflammatory therapy may be
indicated, usually along with antiviral agents.
DISEASED CATS
 NORMAL CATS
teristic and self-limiting, making definitive diagnosis less
necessary. By contrast, during the more chronic FHV-1-
Minority
Prlmary Infectlon
 associated syndromes, the diversity and ambiguity of clinical
[cytolytic disease)
Virus Cleared 
signs make viral identification more desirable, especially if
specific antiviral therapy is being considered. However, the
 elusive nature of the virus in these chronic syndromes and sub-
Majority
clinical shedding in some animals make this issue difficult.
Extraneural
Latent vlrus 
Perslstence
Indeed, the diagnosis of FHV-1 in individual cats represents
one of the greatest challenges in the management of chronic
FHV-1-related diseases.
Recrudescent Dlsease 
Subclinical
Canine Viral Conjunctivitis
(cytolytic or immunologic disease)
 Shedding
The major viral cause of conjunctivitis in dogs is canine dis-
Figure 7-9. Pathogenesis of feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1). Traclitionally.
 temper virus. Canine adenovirus and canine herpesvirus have also
three phases of viral activity have been clescribecl for FHV-1: primary
historically been blamed for mild conjunctivitis. With distemper
infection, neural latency, and recruclescent infection. Recent eviclence
suggests that extraneural persistence of virus may also occur. (Modified
virus, conjunctivitis is frequently present in the early stages,
from August ] [2001l: Consultations in Feline Internal Mecicine, 4th edl.
appearing as severe hyperemia and serous discharge combined
Sauncers, Philacelphia.}
with tonsillitis, pharyngitis, pyrexia, anorexia, and lymphopenia,
 especially in young pups. Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in
epithelial cells are difcult to find in conjunctival scrapings, but
The basic epidemiologic factors that must always be con-
viral antigen may be detected by IFA, or viral DNA detected by
sidered in the diagnosis and management of cats infected with
 PCR. In advanced stages of distemper, chronic bilateral con-
FHV-1 are summarized in Box 7-4.
junctivitis and a dull and sometimes scarred comea result from
There are two broad categories of testing methods for FHV-1:
 low Schirmer tear test readings due to keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
 Bilateral mucopurulent rhinitis is often also present. Secondary
Viral detection using virus isolation (VI),
bacteria (e.g., S. aureus) are common.
immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) testing, or PCR testing
Canine adenovirus I (infectious canine hepatitis) and
 Detection of antibodies (usually in serum) using serum
adenovirus II (infectious tracheobronchitis) can cause con-
 neutralization (SN) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
junctivitis in dogs, although the former is a rare cause. Marked
(ELISA)
bilateral hyperemia and serous or seromucous exudate are
As always, understanding the limitations of these tests is
 present. Age, vaccination history, recent contacts and environ-
critical (Table 7-5). It is important to note that no test differ-
ment, and systemic signs help to differentiate dogs infected
 entiates vaccine virus from wild-type virus.
with one of the adenoviruses from those infected with canine
 Because of the widespread exposure of cats to wild-type or
 distemper, except in severe complicated tracheobronchitis.
 vaccine virus, serologic test results are predictably positive in a
 Other ocular lesions of infectious canine hepatitis are discussed
 majority of cats and are therefore not useful for diagnosing
in Chapter 10.
FHV-1 in individual cats. When it comes to viral detection, a
 major paradox exists with respect to the diagnosis of FHV-1.
Equine Viral Conjunctivitis
 Cats experiencing primary FHV-1 infection shed virus in suffi-
cient quantities that viral detection is relatively easy. However,
Viral conjunctivitis in horses is frequently associated with
clinical signs during this phase of infection tend to be charac-
(but usually forms a relatively minor component of) upper
 CoNjUnctIva |
145
Table 7-5 | Attributes of Commonly Used Diagnostic Tests for Feline Herpesvirus (FHV-1)
VIRUS
POLYMERASE CHAIN 
IMMUNOFLUORESCENT
ATTRIBUTES
ISOLATION
REACTION TEST
ANTIBODY TEST
SEROLOGY
Detects
Virus
Virus
Virus
Host response
Viable virus necessary
Yes
Zo
Zo
No
 Prior use of vital stains affects test result
Yes
Maybe
5a人
No
 Collection and transport techniques
Detailed
 Simple
Simple
Simple
 Differentiates vaccine from wilcd type virus
No
No
Zo
No
respiratory tract infections. The most common diseases are
Antiviral agents should be considered when signs are severe,
those due to equine herpesvirus (EHV), parainfluenza, and
persistent, or recurrent, especially when there is comeal involve-
influenza. Conjunctivitis usually resolves simultaneously with
ment (with or without ulceration). Some important general con-
or before the more major systemic signs, and specific
cepts about antiviral agents assist with selection and expectations
 conjunctival treatment is not necessary.
of this class of drugs. Because viruses reside intracellularly and
utilize host cellular “machinery" antiviral agents tend to
Bovine Viral Conjunctivitis
exhibit greater host toxicity compared with antibacterial drugs.
This tendency rarely limits topical application of these drugs but
 Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR) and malignant catarrhal
may severely limit their systemic use. Antiviral agents in cormmon
fever (MCF) are the only common viral diseases resuting in
use are virostatic; therefore they require frequent dosing or
conjunctivitis in cows. Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
topical application. In some cases hourly application of
(IBK or "pink eye") also causes a severe conjunctivitis but largely
 ophthalmic preparations is recommended for at least the first
as a result of and in association with the more significant and
24 hours of therapy in humans. Given owner and veterinary
serious keratitis (see Chapter 10). Numerous diseases exotic to
 limitations as to therapeutic frequency, antiviral agents should
many parts of the world (e.g., Rift Valley fever, foot-and-mouth
be applied at least 5 times daily, especially in the early stages
disease) cause conjunctivitis in ruminants, in addition to the
of disease. Therapy with any of these drugs should be con-
 more important systemic signs. Table 7-6 lists some clinical
tinued for at least 1 week beyond resolution of ocular lesions,
features useful for differentiating IBR, MCF, and IBK.
which typically occurs within 2 to 3 weeks.
The in vitro efficacy against FHV-1 of many drugs developed
Treatment of Viral Conjunctivitis
 for the human herpesviruses has been studied and their relative 
potencies reported as follows:
No antiviral agents have been developed for treatment of
Trifluridine >> idoxuridine = ganciclovir > vidarabine =
viruses of veterinary ophthalmic importance. However, various
antiviral agents developed for human use have been tried in
animals. Unless these have been tested for efficacy against the
virus of interest or for safety in the host species, such thera-
is somewhat different (ganciclovir > acyclovir > adefovir =
peutic extrapolations may not necessarily be safe or effective.
cidofovir > foscarnet).
 Safety is rarely of importance for a topically applied medication
Only four antiviral drugs have received relatively wide-
but is often important for a systemically administered antiviral
spread clinical use in cats over a number of years and are
drug. Efficacy concerns exist regardless of route of adminis-
discussed here. The others require clinical testing before they
 tration. The major studies in veterinary medicine have involved
 can be recommended in cats or other species.
the safety of these drugs in the cat and their efficacy against
 The superior in vitro potency and corneal penetration of
FHV-1.
 trifluridine suggest that it should be the frst choice for topical
Table 7-6 | Characteristic Features of Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis
INFECTIOUS BOVINE
MALIGNANT CATARRHAL
INFECTIOUS BOVINE
CLINICAL SIGNS
RHINOTRACHEITIS
FEVER
KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS 
Conjunctivitis
+++
+++
+++
Acute hyperemia
Acute hyperemia
Acute hyperemia
Chemosis
Blephar ospasm
 Systermic signs
Respiratory
Mucosal necrosis
Few/None
Lymphacenopathy
Keratitis
+++
++++
(l imbal)
(limbal)
Corneal ulceration
 Other ocular clisease
None
Anterior uveitis
 Severe keratitis
Panophthalmitis
Blepharitis
Cause
Bovine herpesvirus 1
Alcelaphine herpesvirus 1
Moraxefla bovis
+, Mild; ++, moderate; +++, severe; -, absent.
146
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
therapy. Unfortunately, however, cats often show marked
Antibacterial therapy: No antiviral agents are reported to
aversion to application of this drug, suggesting that it is
 have antibacterial activity and so antibacterial drug
irritating. It is available as a 1% solution. Idoxuridine may be a
administration may be wise, especially if there is concurrent
more practical choice in veterinary patients owing to its high
corneal ulceration or severe systemic debilitation. Given the
 clinical efficacy, lower cost, and reduced irritancy. In many
frequent involvement of Chlamydia or Mycoplasma spp. in
countries, idoxuridine is no longer available as a commercial
the eyes of species often affected by viral agents of ocular
ophthalmic solution; however, compounding pharmacists can
importance, systemically and locally administered
formulate a 0.1% ophthalmic solution or a 0.5% ointment.
tetracyclines may be a good choice.
Vidarabine as a 3% ointment appears to be well tolerated by a
Lysine: Lysine reduces in vitro replication of FHV-1, and its
majority of cats. Treatment is recommended at least 4 times
oral administration decreases shedding of feline herpesvirus 
daily. With all topically administered agents, use of an ointment 
 from latently infected cats and severity of conjunctivitis in
 may be particularly helpful when keratoconjunctivitis sicca is
cats undergoing primary infection with the virus. Oral
apparent.
administration of 500 mg of lysine twice daily appears safe
Acyclovir and its prodrug, valacyclovir, are the only
and can be given long term to cats with recurrent infections.
 systemic antiherpetic drugs that have received adequate clinical
 Interferon: Neither topical nor systemic therapy with
and research attention in feline medicine. Acyclovir must be
interferons has been conclusively shown by controlled
activated by multiple phosphorylation steps. The initial
studies to be effective for the treatment of viral conjunctivitis.
phosphorylation is catalyzed by viral thymidine kinase. It is
this feature that accounts for the drug's relative safety in humans
Mycotic Conjunctivitis
as a systemic antiviral agent. The capacity of FHV-1 thymidine
kinase to perform this phosphorylation step is believed to be
 Mycotic conjunctivitis is uncommon in all species and tends to
limited and may explain the poor efficacy of acyclovir against
be chronic. Exudates can be relatively tenacious and form crusts
FHV-1. Poor bioavailability further limits use of this drug in
around the eyelid margins. Organisms involved are Candida
 cats. Doses as high as 100 mg/kg in cats failed to attain plasma
spp, Aspergillus spp., and yeasts. The history is usually one of
acyclovir concentrations that approximate the effective dose to
chronic conjunctivitis with little or no response to previous
kill FHV-1, and some cats showed toxic effects at these doses.
 antibiotic or antibiotic-steroid therapy. Diagnosis is made via
The principal toxic effects seen in cats are leukopenia and
culture and cytology. Causes of local or systemic immuno-
anemia, although normalization of the complete blood count 
deficiency should be considered. Mycotic keratitis in horses
usually accompanies withdrawal of acyclovir therapy and appro-
usually lacks conjunctival involvement. The same topical
priate supportive care. Valacyclovir is an acyclovir prodrug that
 preparations used for mycotic keratitis are recommended for
has superior bioavailability but unfortunately causes severe
mycotic conjunctivitis (see Chapters 3 and 10).
 renal and hepatic toxicity in cats. Valacyclovir must not be used
in cats. Neither orally nor intravenously administered acyclovir
Parasitic Conjunctivitis
 achieved therapeutic concentrations in horses.
In addition to specific antiviral therapy, the following
 Parasites that may cause conjunctivitis in various species are
supportive/adjunctive care should be considered:
shown in Table 7-7. Additionally, a chronic blepharoconjunctivitis 
 associated with constant irritation from flies (Musca domestica) is
· Supportive therapy remains the mainstay of therapy for
sometimes seen in horses during summer. Mucopurulent dis-
viral conjunctivitis. It consists of frequent cleaning of eyelid
charge, epiphora, and moist eyelid margins are the usual signs.
margins followed by application of a suitable lubricant
Control of flies using repellents and fly veils/masks is essential.
ointment, as well as maintenance of adequate nutrition and
 Treatment consists of local antibiotic preparations and application
hydration in systemically affected animals. Corticosteroids
of corticosteroids to conjunctiva and eyelid margins in severe
(by any route) are generally contraindicated.
cases. In very severe cases, insect-proof stables are sometimes
Table 7-7 | Parasitic Conjunctivitis
PARASITE
SPECIES AFFECTED
TREATMENT AND PREVENTION
Thelazia spp.
 Dog, cat, cattle, horse, pig, sheep, cleer, human
 Removal uncer local anesthesia
 Topical cemecarium bromide 
Topical echothiophate iodlide
Systemic ivermectin
Onchocerca cervicalis
Horse
Systemic ivermectin 
Topical corticosteroicls
Draschia megastoma
Horse
Fly control/repellents
 Systemic ivermectin
Oestrus ovis
Sheep
Mechanical removal
 Systemic ivermectin 
Oxyspirura mansoni
 Poultry (especially turkeys)
 Removal of parasites
Control of intermediate host (cockroach)
Habronema spp.
Horses
Jvermectin 
 Intralesional corticosteroids
CONjuNCtIvA I
147
 necessary. In some areas this “summer conjunctivitis" is due to
plasma cells are frequently seen. Secondary bacterial con-
release of Habronema larvae by feeding flies.
junctivitis may occur after inflammation has been initiated by
an antigen. Toxins produced by bacteria (e.g., S. aureus) present
Immune-Mediated Conjunctivitis
in the conjunctival sac or meibomian glands may also initiate
allergic conjunctivitis, but the clinical appearance differs
Because of the conjunctiva's exposed position and resident
from that of spontaneous or atopic conjunctivitis. Food allergy
lymphoid tissue, immunopathology may occasionally initiate
 also results in allergic conjunctivitis in calves. Hypersensitivity
and often exacerbates conjunctivitis. In this chapter, the terms
to medications such as neomycin and other aminoglycosides
"immune-mediated" and “autoimmune' are not used inter-
may occur.
changeably as is sometimes the case. Rather, disease caused by
 an autoimmune response form a subgroup of the broader
Jreatment of Immune-Mediated Conjunctivitis
immune-mediated group of diseases-that is, they are immune-
mediated disease in which the antigen is identified and is an
1. Topical corticosteroid therapy at a frequency and
autoantigen. Four reasonably common examples of conjunc-
 concentration as low as possible to control (but usually not
a  [n s u us an o [n
 cure) the condition is the mainstay of therapy. In mild
practice: nodular granulomatous episclerokeratoconjunctivitis,
cases, a low-potency corticosteroid such as hydrocortisone
allergic conjunctivitis, eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis, and
may be used intermittently. More commonly, especially
pannus (or chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis). Because
 early in the disease course, topical application of a more
all except allergic conjunctivitis typically produce more overt
 potent, penetrating corticosteroid such as dexamethasone
signs of keratitis than of conjunctivitis, they are described in
or prednisolone is required.
Chapter 10. Allergic conjunctivitis is discussed here.
 2. Topical application of cyclosporine has been used for some
 time to treat immune-mediated conjunctivitis in dogs and
Allergic Conjunctivitis
is now under investigation for vemal conjunctivitis in
humans.
Allergic conjunctivitis can occur after exposure of the
 3. Mast cell-stabilizing agents and antihistamines have been
conjunctiva to antigens as a result of direct contact (airborne or
used topically to treat allergic and eosinophilic
topically applied agents), inhalation, or ingestion and may be
conjunctivitis. However, anecdotal reports of the efficacy
seen with signs of more widespread atopy or allergic responses.
 of these products vary, and controlled studies on their
 The response is elicited by many different kinds of antigens and
safety or effcacy in veterinary patients are lacking.
 can occur in all species. The clinical signs are as follows:
4. Local antibiotic preparations may help in the short term if
· Periocular erythema and conjunctival hyperemia (Figure 7-10)
secondary bacterial conjunctivitis is present. However,
· Serous to mucoid discharge
many antibiotics (such as neomycin) can cause allergic
conjunctivitis. Although this drawback is insufficient to
· Chemosis
· Concurrent inflammation of the skin, paws, nasal cavity,
prevent their routine use, it should be considered if the
 conjunctivitis worsens when a new drug is begun.
ears, or pharynx
 5. Systemic therapy with corticosteroids, more potent
As with all other forms of conjunctivitis, achieving an
immunosuppressive agents, antihistamines, antibiotics, and
 etiologic diagnosis is essential. Trials whereby potential antigens
hyposensitization therapy may be required in severe cases
are removed from and then reintroduced to the animal's
with skin (including eyelid) involvement.
environment are useful. However, it is most important to
eliminate other, more common causes of conjunctivitis.
OTHER CONJUNCTIVAL DISORDERS
Therefore a Schirmer tear test should always be performed to
eliminate keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Conjunctival cytology is
Drug Plaques
important in the accurate diagnosis of allergic conjunctivitis.
 Certain repository medications (e.g, methylprednisolone) leave
Eosinophils are not always present, but lymphocytes and
 unsightly, creamy-white subconjunctival plaques months after
injection in some animals (Figure 7-11). The material in these
plaques may also incite a local granulomatous conjunctivitis
around the material. In such cases surgical excision is required.
Conjunctival Lacerations
Traumatic lacerations of the conjunctiva heal very rapidly, and
small lacerations usually require only short-term topical antibiotic
therapy. More severe lacerations are flushed with saline to
remove foreign material, sutured with 6/0 or 7/0 polyglactin
910 (Vicryl) or polydioxanone (PDS) suture, and treated with
topical antibiotics.
Ligneous Conjunctivitis
Figure 7-10. Allergic clermatitis (blepharitis) and conjunctivitis. (From
Muller CH, Kirk RW [1989l: Small Animal Dermatology, 4th edl.
Ligneous conjunctivitis is a chronic, membranous conjunc-
Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
tivitis with gross thickening of palpebral and third eyelid con-
148
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 7-11. Plaque formation following subconjunctival injection in the
 dlorsal bulbar conjunctiva of a clog.
junctivae bilaterally (Figure 7-12). There is some evidence that 
 younger, female Doberman pinschers may be predisposed. A
Figure 7-13. lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis of the upper eyelid of a
conjunctival biopsy should be performed to confirm the diag-
16-year-old clomestic cat. (From Read RA, Lucas
】[2001]:
Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis: clinical findings from 21 eyes in 
nosis. Histology demonstrates a characteristic amorphous,
13 cats. Vet Ophthalmol 4:93.
eosinophilic hyaline material throughout the subconjunctiva. In
some animals, other mucous membranes may also be involved
and most dogs have evidence of nonocular disease, especially
 in association with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). If meibomian
involving the upper respiratory or urinary tract. A vascular
 glands rupture, secretions leak into the surrounding tissue and
basis for the disease is proposed. Topically administered
cyclosporine is often effective at controlling the disease, although
 appearance is similar to that of chalazia in dogs (see Chapter 6).
systemic administration of immunomodulatory agents may be
Surgical extirpation of glandular material and associated
 necessary, and recurrence is relatively common.
 granulomatous infiltrate has been recommended for this con-
dition. A conjunctival approach is preferred because of the
Lipogranulomatous Conjunctivitis
rapidity with which conjunctiva heals and to avoid surgical
disruption of the eyelid margin. Surgical treatment involves
 Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis has been described in cats. It
resection of lipogranulomas and overlying conjunctiva as a
is an inflammatory condition that arises from the meibomian
single strip of tissue outlined by two incisions parallel to the
glands and therefore manifests superficially as blepharitis and
 eyelid margin. The defect is allowed to heal without suturing.
on the inner eyelid surface as a nodular conjunctivitis (Figure
7-13). Involvement of multiple tarsal glands across one or more
Conjunctival Neoplasia
eyelids, producing a multifocal nodular white thickening of 
involved lids, is common. The upper eyelid is involved more 
 Neoplasia of the conjunctiva may occur in any species and may
commonly than the lower lid. Actinic radiation may be important
represent primary or metastatic disease. Of the conjunctival
in the pathogenesis of these lesions because they have been
 neoplasms, SCC is the most common. Others commonly recorded
reported more commonly in white-skinned cats and sometimes
 are hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma, melanoma, papilloma,
 and mastocytoma. As with masses elsewhere, cytologic assess-
ment of scrapings or aspirates, or histologic assessment of
biopsy specimens is essential for accurate diagnosis because
neoplastic and nonneoplastic masses may appear similar on
clinical examination alone. Involvement of neighboring
eyelids, cornea, or sclera is common, and the reader is referred
also to chapters dealing with these tissues for additional
information.
Conjunctival Dermoid
Dermoids are examples of a choristoma or congenital circum-
scribed overgrowth of microscopically normal tissue in an
abnormal place. Conjunctival dermoids represent histologically
normal skin arising in the conjunctiva, usually laterally, and
frequently involving the limbus (Figure 7-14). Dermoids
occasionally involve the eyelids and may coexist with an eyelid
Figure 7-12. ligneous conjunctivitis in a dog. (Courtesy Dr. David
coloboma. Dermoids containing hair follicles have hair growing
Rarmsey.)
from the surface, which causes conjunctival and cormeal irritation
CONJUNcTIvA I
149
Globe,
Lids
Third eyelid
Plaque
 Keratoma
Papilloma
Carcinoma in situ
+
Carcinoma in situ 
SCC
SCC
Figure 7-15. Pathogenesis of bovine squarmous cell carcinoma (SCC) at
various ocular sites.
Figure 7-14. A conjunctival clermoid with obvious tufts of irritating hairs
in a 6-month-old shih tzu.
and leads to epiphora and keratitis. Dermoids usually grow
slowly, if at all. In Hereford cattle they are inherited, with
recessive and polygenic genetic characteristics being reported.
 Treatment for dermoid is careful surgical excision via con-
junctivectomy and dissection down to bare sclera. If the lesion
extends onto the cornea, referral to an ophthalmologist for
combined conjunctivectomy and keratectomy is recommended.
Ocufar Squamous Celfl Carcinoma
SCC is probably the most common conjunctival neoplasm in
veterinary medicine. It is regularly seen in horses, cattle, small 
Figure 7-16. Eyelid keratorma on the lower eyelid of a cow. This is a
ruminants, and cats but occurs very infrequently in dogs. Some
precursor lesion for squarmous cell carcinoma. (Courtesy Dr. Davicd Ramsey.)
general comments regarding clinical signs, progression, malig-
nancy, diagnosis, and therapy are possible. Some specific
comments regarding this tumor in cattle are found in the next 
section.
ETIOLOGY. The exact etiology is unknown. However, inci-
dence of SCC is much higher in animals with hypo-
pigmentation and in areas of high sunlight or altitude, in which
exposure to ultraviolet radiation is greater. About 75% of cases
in cattle occur in animals lacking pigment in the eyelids, third
eyelid, or conjunctiva. Therefore selection for lid pigmentation
has been used as a control measure in cattle. Lid pigmentation
is highly heritable and is present at birth, whereas conjunctival
pigmentation has a lower heritability and develops throughout
life. Although viral particles have been demonstrated in SCC
lesions, an etiologic relationship has not been established.
CLINICAL SIGNS AND PATHOGENESIS. For the globe
(conjunctiva, cornea, and limbus) and third eyelid, plaque is
the initial precursor lesion of SCC (Figure 7-15). Plaques
Figure 7-17. Corneoscleral limbal squamous cell carcinoma in a cow.
are grayish-white areas of thickened epithelium occurring
most frequently at the nasal and temporal limbus. On the
lids, the precursor lesion is the keratoma, a brown, crusty,
SCC. The surface of carcinomas may be roughened or papillary,
and sometimes homlike structure, that occurs at mucocutaneous
hemorrhagic, or ulcerated. (Figure 7-17).
junctions (Figure 7-16). Papilloma is the next stage and has a
similar distribution, but the surface is roughened and the mass is
 involve eyelids, intraorbital space and tissues, and even bone
frequently pedunculated or moveable. The base often merges with
 and paranasal sinuses. Metastasis is less common and typically
an underlying plaque. Carcinoma in situ may arise from any of
involves local lymph nodes. The rate of progression of SCC is
these lesions. This term is used for the stage before the neoplastic
variable, with lesions ranging from slow-growing to highly
cells have penetrated the basement membrane of the epithelium
 malignant. Both cell-mediated and humoral immunity to tumor
and entered the subepithelial connective tissue to become true
 antigens has been demonstrated.
150
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. SCC must be distinguished
 cutaneous papillomatosis is not established. Surgical removal
from the following conditions:
or cryotherapy is the treatment of choice, especially if the
lesion is causing pain from friction. Recurrence has been
· Other neoplastic lesions of the conjunctiva, including but
observed. Spontaneous regression of ocular papillomas occurs,
not limited to melanoma (which can be poorly pigmented),
especially in young animals.
lymphangiosarcoma, hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma,
dermoid (which are not always haired), and lymphoma
· Granulation tissue, as seen with any chronic inflammatory
Equine Conjunctival Angiosarcoma
process but especially pannus of dogs, eosinophilic
Conjunctival angiosarcomas occur in aged horses, grow slowly,
keratoconjunctivitis of horses and cats, and chronic
and metastasize despite excision and radiation therapy. They
ulceration of any species but especially infectious bovine
 must be differentiated from SCC by biopsy. Enucleation may
keratoconjunctivitis in ruminants. Differentiation of
be necessary because these tumors are often very aggressive.
granulation tissue from SCC is particularly challenging
when it occurs after resection of SCC when it may be
mistaken for early tumor recurrence.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Biopsy or cytologic scraping (see Figure 7-6, J) of suspicious
Barkyoumb SD, Leipold HW (1984): Nature and cause of bilateral oculat
lesions is indicated and usually diagnostic, with up to 90%
 demoids in Hereford cattle. Vet Pathol 21:316.
BentzBG,etal.(2006):Phamacokinetisf acyclovirafersingleinavenous
 accuracy having been reported.
and oral administrabion to adult horses. J Vet Intem Med 20:589.
TREATMENT. Treatment depends on species, tumor location,
Bonney CH, et al. (1980): Papillomatosis of conjunctiva and adnexa in dogs.
value of the animal, and stage of the disease. Treatment options 
J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:48.
include surgical excision or debulking, cryotherapy, hyperthermia,
Browning GF (2004): Is Chlamydophila felis a sigmificant zoonotic pathogen?
immunotherapy, radiation therapy (numerous types), intralesional
Aust Vet J 82:695.
Collins BK, et al. (1993): Biologic behavior and histologic charactenistics of
chemotherapy, and photodynamic therapy (see Chapter 3). Cryo-
 canine conjunctival melanoma. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 3:135.
therapy has the advantages of simplicity and rapidity, economy,
Gatre B, et al. (2007): In vitro susceptibility of six isolates of equine
analgesia, minimal preoperative and postoperative treatment,
herpesvirus I to acyclovi, ganciclovir, cidofovit, adefovir, PMEDAP and
foscarnet. Vet Microbiol (in press).
repeatability, and minimal side effects. Economic and radio-
Hacker DV,et al. (1986): Ocular angiosarcoma in four horses. J Am Vet Med
logic health considerations may limit the use of radiotherapy.
Assoc 189:200.
Johnson BW, et al. (1988): Conjunctival mast cell tumors in two dogs.
Bovine Ocular Squamous Cell Carcinoma
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:439.
Haesebrouck Fat al.(1991): Incidence and sigmifcance of isolation of
INCIDENCE. SCC of the eye and adnexa is one of the most
Mycoplasma felis firom conjunchival swabs of cats. Vet Microbiol 26:95.
Lavach JD, et al. (1977): Cytology of nomal and inflamed conjuncivas in
 common and most important ocular conditions affecting cattle. It 
dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:722.
is uncommon in breeds with pigmented conjunctiva and lids but 
Longbottom D, Coulter LJ (2003): Animal chlamydioses and zoonotic
may occur in any breed. Herefords are affected most frequently
implic aions. J Comp Pathol 128:217.
(incidence may reach 10%), but SCC also occurs in shorthorm and
h o suen pue soap sasod no aen o) r ss
Friesian cattle. Both the precursors to SCC and the disease itself
 herpesvirus type I. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 20:94.
 s o o   e e  s
are usually unilateral (10% are bilateral). Ocular lesions
cats latently infected with feline herpesvirus. Am I Vet Res 64:37.
outnumber lid lesions by a ratio of 3:1, whereas lesions of the
Maggs DJ, Clarke HE (2004): In vitro effcacy of ganciclovir, cidofovir,
third eyelid account for less than 5% of the total lesions. Precursor
 penciclovit, foscamet, idoxuridine, and acyclovir against feline herpes virus
lesions are not uncommon in animals younger than 4 years,
type-1. Am J Vet Res 65:399.
Mosunic CB, et al.(2004): Effects of teatment with and without adjuvant
whereas SCC is more common at 7 to 9 years and is rare before
Tadiation therapy on Tecurrence of ocular and adnexal squamous cell
 5 years. Fifty percent of precursor lesions manifesting at the end
carcinoma in horses: 157 cases (1985-2002). I Am Vet Med Assoc 225:1733.
ans jxau a Aq readdesip Au rauns auo jo
Mughannam AJ, et al. (1997): Conjunchival vascular tumors in six dogs.
TREATMENT. In a large study of cryotherapy using a double
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 7:56.
Nasisse MP, et al. (1997): Effects of valacyc lovit in cats infected with feline
freeze-thaw cycle to -25° C, an overall cure rate of 97% was
herpesvirus 1. Am J Vet Res 58:1141.
achieved, and even quite large lesions responded well. Treatment
Nasisse MP, et al. (1993): Clinical and laboratory fndings in chronic
with bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) cell wall vaccine injected into
conjunchiviis in cats: 91 cases (1983-1991). I Am Vet Med Assoc 203:834.
the tumor caused regression in 71% of affected animals.
Owens JG, et al. (1996) Pharmacokinetics of acyclovir in the cat.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 19:488.
Intratumoral injection of 200,000 units of interleukin (IL-2)
 Pentlarge VW (1991): Eosinophilic conjunctivitis in five cats. J Am Anim
resulted in a 67% complete regression at 20 months after injection.
Hosp Assoc 27:21.
CONTROL. Incidence of ocular SCC within a herd may be
Pusterla N,et al. (2003): Cutaneous and oculathabronemiasis in horses:
reduced by selective breeding for lid, limbal, and conjunctival 
63 cases (1988-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:978.
 pigmentation, which are genetically related and heritable. Use 
Ramsey DT, et al. (1996): Ligmeous conjunctivitis in four Dobemman 
 of breeding animals whose progeny have not demonstrated SCC
pinschers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:439.
Read RA,LucasJ(200l:Liogranulmatous conjunctivis lnicalfndings
is also recommended because genetic factors other than
from 21 eyes in 13 cats. Vet Ophthalmol 4:93.
 periocular pigmentation are believed to be involved.
Sparkes AH et al. (1999): The clnical effcacy of topical and systemic therapy
for the reatment of feline ocular chlamydiosis. J Feline Med Surg I:31.
Stewart RJ, et al. (2005): Local interleukin-2 and interleukin-12 therapy of 
Canine Conjunctival Papillomatosis
bovine ocular squamous cel carcinomas. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 
106:277.
Papillomas usually occur on the eyelids or mucocutaneous
Stiles JI, et al. (2002): Effect of oral administration of L-lysine on
junctions and may be multiple, especially in young animals.
conjunctivitis caused by feline herpesvirus in cats. Am J Vet Res 63:99.
Sykes JE (2005): Feline chlamydiosis.Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 20:129
For those arising from the conjunctiva, the most important
von Bomhard W, et al. (2003): Detection of novel chlamydiae in cats with
differential diagnosis is SCC. The relationship to oral and
 ocular disease. Am I Vet Res 64:1421.
Chapter
THIRD EYELID
David J. Maggs
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
NEOPLASMS AFFECTING THE THIRD
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS OF THE
EXAMINATION
EYELID
THIRD EYELID
DISEASES OF THE THIRD EYELID
TRAUMA TO THE THIRD EYELID
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
 ment. The third eyelid in birds does not have a gland associated
with it.
 The third eyelid (or nictitating membrane) is a mobile, protective,
 The third eyelid has the following important functions:
and glandular structure lying between the cornea and the lower
· Distribution of the precorneal tear film
eyelid in the medial portion of the inferior conjunctival sac
· Protection of the cornea
(Figure 8-1).
· Production of aqueous and immunoglobulin for the tear film
The third eyelid (Figure 8-2) consists of the following:
(in domestic mammals)
·A T-shaped cartilaginous “skeleton"
 Therefore removal of the third eyelid or its gland predisposes
· The gland of the third eyelid 
to the following problems:
· Conjunctiva covering the bulbar and palpebral surfaces
· Numerous superficial lymphoid follicles under the bulbar
· Increased corneal exposure, drying of the cornea, corneal
surface
 trauma, and chronic keratitis
The T cartilage provides essential rigidity to the third eyelid.
A chronic conjunctivitis that is often purulent and
frequently resistant to treatment
Its "horizontal" arm lies paralll to and about 1.5 mm from the
· Decreased tear production, which contributes to the first
leading edge of the third eyelid. The "vertical" arm runs perpen-
two problems
dicular to the free edge and at its base is encircled by the gland of
the third eyelid (see Figure 8-2). The gland of the third eyelid is
seromucoid and produces up to 50% of the normal tear film in
The third eyelid is a useful and important structure. The only
indications for its removal are severe, irreparable trauma and
dogs. In the dog, this gland has both adrenergic and cholinergic
histologically confirmed malignant neoplasia.
innervation, with cholinergic being the denser. In the pig and
many rodents a portion of the gland of the third eyelid or a
separate gland (the Harderian gland) is found deeper within the
orbit. The cartilage and gland are covered on both bulbar and
EXAMINATION
palpebral surfaces by conjunctiva that is tightly adherent at the
free margin of the third eyelid but looser over the base and gland.
The clinician can easily examine the palpebral surface of the
third eyelid by digitally retropulsing the globe through the
The free margin and a portion of the anterior face of the third
 upper lid. The bulbar surface is examined after application of
eyelid are often but not always pigmented. Lymphoid follicles,
topical anesthesia and the use of forceps or mosquito hemostats 
which are pinkish red, are normally present beneath the
conjunctiva on the bulbar surface of the third eyelid (Figure 8-3).
to grasp the leading edge of the third eyelid just outside the
 A poorly defined fascial retinaculum secures the base of the
horizontal arm of the cartilage. The membrane can then be
reflected to examine the bulbar surface and the space between
gland and the cartilage to the periorbita surrounding the ventral
the third eyelid and the globe (see Figure 8-3). This is a
oblique and rectus muscles. The musculature controlling the
common site for foreign bodies to become lodged. The bulbar
third eyelid is largely vestigial in domestic species, and the
surface is normally follicular and may become more so with so-
membrane moves passively across the eye when the globe is
called follicular conjunctivitis (see Chapter 7).
retracted by the retractor bulbi muscles innervated by the
abducens nerve. Movement is in a dorsolateral direction, toward
Perhaps the most common abnormality of the third eyelid
noted during an ocular examination is unusual prominence.
the orbital ligament. The position of the third eyelid is also
This sign is seen with a number of third eyelid diseases dis-
partially determined by sympathetic tone of the orbital smooth
cussed in this chapter. However, prominence of the third eyelid
muscles. Interruption of this sympathetic supply, as in Horner's
can also indicate other orbital, neurologic, or ocular diseases,
syndrome, results in enophthalmos (posterior displacement of
which are discussed elsewhere; they include the following:
the globe within the orbit) and prominence of the third eyelid.
 In birds the third eyelid is almost transparent and is under
· Horner's syndrome (sympathetic denervation)
voluntary control (Figure 8-4). It sweeps over the globe in a
· Third eyelid protrusion (or "haws") syndrome
ventromedial direction from the dorsolateral quadrant,
· Space-occupying orbital lesions that push the membrane
although there is some species variation in direction of move-
across the eye from its base
151
152
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Sclera、
lris
Iris,
Sclera
Pupil
Lateral
canthus -
Bulbar surface
Medial
 of third eyelid
Lateral
canthus.
canthus
Pupil
Lymphoid tissue
Extent of cartilage
Third eyelid
Figure 8-3.Diagram of the third eyelid manually everted to shownormal
of third eyelid
(palpebral surface)
lymphoid follicles on the bulbar surface. (Modified from Evans HE [1993|:
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.1
Figure 8-1. Diagram of the eye showing normal position of the third
 eyelidl. (Modlified from Evans HE [1 993|: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd
edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
· With a small globe due to microphthalmos or phthisis bulbi
· With enophthalmos due to active retraction of the globe in
 painful ocular conditions or due to loss of orbital contents 
 as in dehydration, atrophy, or fibrosis 
 With tetanus, especially in large animals
·Tranquilization (e.g., with acetylpromazine)
DISEASES OF THE THIRD EYELID
 Because the third eyelid has two surfaces of conjunctiva and is
intimately associated and confluent with the rest of the con-
 junctiva, it is predictably involved in many conjunctival dis-
orders. These are discussed more fully in Chapter 7. This
 Figure 8-4. Third eyelid of a peregrine falcon showing translucency and
 chapter emphasizes conditions peculiar to the third eyelid.
voluntary dorsal-to-ventral movement typical of the avian third eyelid.
Amelanotic Leading Edge of the Third Eyelid
When such eyes become inflamed for other reasons, the
Congenital absence of melanin on the free or leading edge of the
amelanotic third eyelid may appear more visible because the
 third eyelid in some individuals reveals normal, well-vascularized
 conjunctival vasculature is not obscured by pigment. Also, such
 conjunctiva, which is frequently mistaken by owners or breeders for
eyelids are presumed to be at higher risk for solar-induced neo-
third eyelid protrusion or inflammation. This appearance is not
 plasms, such as hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, and squamous
abnormal, however, and does not require surgical correction.
cell carcinoma.
Palpebral surface
Bulbar surface
Lymphoid tissue
 Cartilage of third eyelid
~ Gland of third eyelid
Figure 8-2. Transverse section of the third eyelidl. A, Clanc of the thircl eyelicl; B, cartilage of the thircl eyelicl.
(Moclifiedl from Evans HE [1993|: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rcd edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.}
ThiRd EYelid
153
Figure 8-5. Everted or "scrolledl" cartilage of the third eyelid in a cog.
Figure 8-7. Protrusion of the glanc of the third eyelicd ("cherry eye") in a
dog
Eversion or Scrolling of the Third Eyelid
defective, scrolled portion of cartilage is usually found in the 
vertical arm of the cartilage, near its junction with the hori-
Eversion of the third eyelid or "scrolled third eyelid" refers to
zontal arm of the T. A topical antibiotic ointment should be
rolling out of the margin of the membrane due to abnormal
 used for approximately 1 week after surgery.
curvature of the vertical portion of the T-shaped cartilage
(Figure 8-5). This condition may be unilateral or bilateral, and
Protrusion of the Gland of the Third Eyelid
although most commonly seen in young dogs, it occasionally
develops in middle-aged dogs. It is common in Weimaraners,
Protrusion of the gland of the third eyelid (or “cherry eye")
Saint Bernards, Newfoundlands, Great Danes, German short-
occurs most commonly in dogs and occasionally in cats. The
haired pointers, and Irish setters, and a hereditary basis has
appearance is characteristic, with the gland of the third eyelid
-aa pi ay jo umns adudu pue sanui passns uaaq
protruding as a reddish follicular mass from behind a usually
lid may also result in eversion.
"floppy" margin of the third eyelid (Figure 8-7). It likely results
0 pasodxa sewue Sunox un) eisediady pioydusl uoy
Treatment
environmental antigens for the frst time) and laxity of the
retinaculum that should attach the third eyelid to the periorbita
Eversion of the third eyelid is corrected surgically because of
(in genetically predisposed, especially brachycephalic, animals).
its undesirable cosmetic appearance and the resultant second-
This combination of events allows the gland to evert while
ary conjunctivitis and keratitis in some animals. The deformed
remaining attached to the cartilage of the third eyelid.
or buckled section of excessive cartilage is removed via a
 The gland should be surgically replaced to retain essential
surgical approach from the bulbar surface (Figure 8-6). The
lacrimal function and to prevent the exposed gland and over-
lying conjunctiva from becoming dry, inflamed, secondarily
infected, and cosmetically unappealing. Prolapsed glands of
the third eyelid should never be removed because the gland of
the third eyelid is a significant contributor to precormeal tear film 
production. Studies confrm clinical experience that kerato-
conjunctivitis sicca is commonly seen, often years later, in
animals, especially those of susceptible breeds in which the
third eyelid or its gland was removed. Also, complications have
 been reported in prolapsed glands left in the prolapsed position.
Treatment
Occasionally in the early stages, a prolapsed gland can be
manipulated into its normal position. However, recurrence is
almost inevitable. For these reasons surgical replacement is
 practiced. If the gland is severely inflamed or the conjunctival
surface secondarily infected, preoperative treatment for a few
days with a topical antibiotic-steroid ointment is advisable;
however, this treatment will not result in resolution of protrusion.
 Corrective surgical procedures may be broadly categorized
Figure S-6. Surgical correction of thircl eyelicl cartilage eversion. A, On
the bulbar side of the third eyelid,the conjunctiva isincised overlying
method involved suturing the gland to the ventral aspect of the
each sicle of the scrolled vertical part of the thirc eyelic cartilage. B, The
scrolled cartilage and overlying conjunctiva are unclermined with
globe. This had a relatively high rate of recurrence owing to
tenotomy scissors. C, The unclermined section of scrolled cartilage and
difficulty accessing and suturing to the sclera, and too frequently
 Overlying conjunctiva is resected. No sutures are required.
resulted in globe penetration during suturing. Therefore it is no
154
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
longer recommended. Numerous variations of the anchoring
techniques have been proposed, with one of the methods in
which the gland is sutured to the periosteum of the ventral
orbital margin now being preferred (Figure 8-8). This pro-
cedure is associated with some reduction in third eyelid mobility.
As a result, pocket techniques may be more physiologic. Of the
 pocket techniques, the technique of Morgan is very useful
(Figure 8-9). Medical treatment after any replacement
 technique includes topical antibiotic-steroid ointment or solution 
and use of an Elizabethan collar. Oral administration of a
operative analgesia. Recurrence is possible, even with a correctly
performed pocket or anchoring technique, especially in the very
large breed dogs such as mastiffs and Newfoundlands.
Figure 8-9. Surgical replacerment of a prolapsec glanc of the third eyelid
("cherry eye") via a mocification of the conjunctival pocket technique of
Prolapsed glands of the third eyelid are treated by replace-
Morgan. A, Two semielliptical incisions are macle through the bulbar
ment, not by excision.
 Conjunctiva around the periphery of the prolapsed glandl. The outer (free)
edges of conjunctiva createc by these incision are then apposed over the
prolapsed gland using 4/0 to 6/0 absorbable suture, such as polyglactin
 Protrusion of the harderian gland occurs in dwarf lop rabbits
910 (Vicryl in a simple continuous pattern. The initial anc final anchoring
with clinical signs and sequelae similar to those of third eyelid
knots are placed on the anterior face of the third eyelid to avoid frictional
gland protrusion in dogs and cats. Replacement of the gland by
irritation of the cornea. B, The seconc (Cushing) layer of a continuous
 anchoring to the orbital rim is recommended.
Connell-Cushing pattern is then placed with bites parallel to the
 conjunctival incisions, and, again, knots are placed on the anterior face
of the thirdl eyelidl.
NEOPLASMS AFFECTING THE THIRD EYELID
Squamous cell carcinoma commonly involves the third eyelid in
cattle and horses (Figure 8-10). Amelanotic or poorly pigmented
 third eyelids appear more susceptible. Third eyelid squamous cell
carcinoma is sometimes also seen in small animals, but
lymphoma (Figure 8-1l), hemangioma or hemangiosarcoma
(Figure 8-12), and adenocarcinoma (Figure 8-13) of the third
eyelid also are common. Wilcock and Peiffer (1988), who
described seven cases of adenocarcinoma of the canine third
eyelid in dogs between 10 and 16 years of age, observed frequent 
 local recurrence (57%) and suspected metastasis after excision.
 Identification of a third eyelid neoplasm should stimulate a
thorough assessment of the orbit, regional lymph nodes, and
distant sites for metastases or extension. Surgical excision is
recommended for all malignant tumors other than lymphoma,
which can be treated via systemic chemotherapy. For focal
masses near the third eyelid free margin resection of the mass
and surrounding normal tissue may be possible (Figure 8-14).
Figure 8-8. A, Surgical replacerment of a prolapsed gland of the third 
eyelid ("cherry eye") via anchoring to the ventral orbital rim. B, A small
incision is macle in the ventral conjunctival fornix to allow access to the 
orbital rim. C, A 2/0 nylon suture is anchored to the orbital fascia
immedliately acjacent to the orbital rirm (1) passed up through the lateral
sidle of the exposed gland (2), across the corsal aspect of the gland (3),
and clown through the medial sicle of the gland (4) to re-ermerge opposite
the initial bite (1). D, The suture is tied in a surgeon's throw anc with
sufficient tension to recuce the prolapsed gland. E, The conjunctival
incision is closed with 6/0 polyglactin 910 (Vicryl) in a simple continuous
pattern. F, Cross-sectional view showing position of both sutures and the 
Figure 8-10. Squarmous cell carcinoma of the third eyelid in a lightly
reduced glandl.
melanotic horse.
ThIR EYeLic|
155
日
Figure S-11. Lymphoma involving the third eyelid of a cat.
C
D
Figure 8-14. Surgical removal of a small neoplasm on the free margin of
the third eyelidl. A and B, The thircd eyelid is grasped with forceps or
mosquito hemostats, and the mass plus acequate margin are rermoved
with tenotomy scissors. C anc D, The bulbar and anterior conjunctival
surfaces are sutured over the ecge of any exposed cartilage using 6/0
absorbable suture in a simple continuous pattern. Adjunctive raciation or
cryotherapy may be necessary in the region outlined by a clotted line.
Figure 8-12. Hemangiosarcoma of the third eyelic of a cog.
flaps off the leading edge can be safely removed. Larger
lacerations, especially those involving the free margin and
creating larger loose flaps, may benefit from careful
appositional suturing with knots placed on the anterior surface
so as to avoid frictional irritation of the cornea (Figure 8-16).
Although some retraction takes place during healing, a
functional third eyelid can often be retained. In some circum-
stances grafting of oral mucous membrane may be useful for
replacing large defects.
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS OF THE
THIRDEYELID
The third eyelid is predictably involved in most conjunctival
 Figure 8-13. Adenocarcinorma of the third eyelid glanc in a cog.
disorders. These are discussed more fully in Chapter 7. The
third eyelid can be involved more obviously than or, rarely, to
the exclusion of other conjunctival surfaces in so-called atypical
pannus (see Chapter 10), eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis of cats
 Larger tumors necessitate complete excision of the third eyelid
and horses (see Chapter 10), ligneous conjunctivitis of dogs
and surrounding conjunctiva (Figure 8-15).
(see Chapter 7), habronemiasis of horses (see Chapter 7), and
nodular granulomatous episclerokeratoconjunctivitis of dogs
TRAUMA TO THE THIRD EYELID
(see Chapter 10). Although these disorders may represent
clinically unusual distribution of the lesions, diagnosis and
Injuries to the third eyelid occur as a result of fights, motor
therapy are the same as for the more "typical' forms, and prog-
vehicle accidents, and foreign body penetration. Usually, tears
 nosis may be better than for those forms that also or only
involving the conjunctiva only do not require suturing. Small
involve cornea.
156
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
D
Figure 8-16. Repair of a more major third eyelid laceration (minor
lacerations co not need surgical correction). A, Torn third eyelid with a
loose necrotic flap. B, Any loose or necrotic tissue should be resectedl.
C,The bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva is mobilizec from the unclerlying
 cartilage with tenotomy scissors. D, The mobilized conjunctiva is sutured
with a continuous suture of 6/0 or 7/0 polyglactin 910 (Vicryl), with the
knots tied on the anterior (palpebral) surface.
246
Figure 8-15. A, Cormplete resection of the third eyelid is required for
larger tumors of the third eyelid. B, An eyelid speculum and mosquito
BIBLIOGRAPHY
hemostats are usec to ensure aclequate exposure of the third eyelicd.
Hemostats are then placed along the corsomeclial and ventrolateral
Constantinescu GM, MeClure RC (1990): Anatomy of the orbital fasciae and
borclers of the third eyelidl. C, Scissors are used to cut on the third eyelid
the third eyelid in dogs. Am JI Vet Res SI:260.
sicle of each hemostat, and the anterior and posterior (bulbar) surfaces of
sectioned conjunctiva are oversewn in a simple continuous pattern using
 third eyelid gland in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 20l: 1861.
6/0 or 7/0 polyglactin 910 (Vicryl). D, The base of the third eyelid is
Keil SM, et al.(1997): Bilateral nodular eosinophilic granulomatous
clampec cleep enough within the orbit that the gland and cartilage are
 jnflammation of the nic itating membrane of a cat. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
completely resected, and the conjunctival ecges are oversewn in the same
7:258.
manner as cescribecl in C. E, Final appearance showing the three lines of
Komaromy AM, et al.(1997): Primary adenocarcinoma of the gland of the
simple continuous suture, which ensure against orbital fat prolapse.
michitating membrane in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 33:333.
Mod Vet Pract 58:768.
Larocca RD (2000): Eosinophilic conjunchiviis, herpes virus and mast cell
tumor of the third eyelid in a cat. Vet Ophthalmol 3:221.
Martin CL (1970): Everted membrane nichitans in Gemman shorthaired
pointers. J Am Med Assoc I57:1229.
Moore C, et al. (1992): Dishibution and course of secretory ducts of the
canine third eyelid gland. Vet. Pathol 29:480.
Morgan RV, et al. (1993): Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid in dogs: a
Powell CC,Martin CL (1989):Distribution of cholinergic and adrenergic
nerve fbers in the lacrimal in dogs. Am J Vet Res 50:2084.
Rebhun WC, Del Piero F (1998): Ocular lesions in horses with
lymphosarcoma: 21 cases(1977-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:852.
Stanley RG, Kaswan RL (1994): Modification of the orbital rim anchorage
method for surgical replacement of the gland of the third eyelid. Am I Vet
Res 205: 1412.
Stuhr CM,et al.(1999): Surgical epait of third eyelid lacerations in three
 birds. J Adv Med Surg 13:201.
Wilcock BL,Peiffer RL(1988): Adenocarcinoma of the third eyelid in seven
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 15:193.
Chapter
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
Paul E. Miller
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOIOGY
DISTURBANCES OF LACRIMAL FUNCTION 
NEOPLASIA
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Precorneal Tear Film
The lacrimal system consists of the following structures:
The precorneal tear film covers the cornea and conjunctiva
(Figure 9-5). It consists of three layers, differing in compo-
· Lacrimal and third eyelid glands
sition, and is about 8 to 9 μm thick.
· Accessory lacrimal glands
The outer superficial (lipid) layer (O.1 μm thick) is composed
· Precorneal tear film
of oily materials and phospholipids from the tarsal glands and
· Lacrimal puncta and canaliculi (Figure 9-1)
the glands of Zeis along the lid margin. Its two functions are as
·Lacrimal sac
follows:
· Nasolacrimal duct
· To limit evaporation of the aqueous layer
· Nasal puncta
· To bind the precorneal tear film to the cornea at the lid
 margins and prevent overflow by its high surface tension
Lacrimal and Third Eyelid Glands
 Drugs containing preservatives with detergent properties
The gland of the third eyelid, which lies within the stroma
and commercial shampoos remove this layer and can lead to
of the third eyelid, is partially visible on the inner surface
corneal drying and possibly corneal ulceration. The layer is
of the third eyelid (see Chapter 8 and Figure 9-2). The tubulo-
difficult to appreciate clinically but may be observed as an oil-
alveolar lacrimal gland is flattened and lies over the superior-
like film over the ocular surface if the eye is examined with
temporal part of the globe. In the dog it lies beneath the orbital
oblique illumination and at high magnifcation. Altematively,
ligament and supraorbital process of the frontal bone and is
the layer has been evaluated experimentally with polarized
related to the medial surface of the zygomatic bone (Figure 9-3).
light biomicroscopy.
The position is similar in species with a fully enclosed
The middle, or aqueous, layer, consisting predominantly of
bony orbit.
water derived from the lacrimal gland and the gland of the third
Lacrimal secretions enter the superior conjunctival fornix
eyelid is the thickest layer (approximately 7 μm) and serves the
from the canine lacrimal gland via three to five microscopic
following functions:
ducts, and from the gland of the third eyelid via multiple ducts
 opening on the bulbar surface of the third eyelid between the
· To flush foreign material and bacteria from the conjunctival
normal lymphoid follicles. The precorneal tear film is distributed
sac
 over the ocular surface by gravity, blinking, and movement of
· To lubricate the lids and third eyelid as they move over the
cornea
the third eyelid.
· To supply the cormea with nutrients, including oxygen,
amino acids, vitamin A, growth factors, and antibodies
Accessory Lacrimal Glands
(immunoglobulin [Ig] A), and to remove metabolic waste
 products. White blood cells also reach the ocular surface
The accessory lacrimal glands (Figure 9-4), which are near the
lid margins and contribute to the precorneal tear flm, are
via the tear film.
· To give a smooth surface to the cornea for optimal optical
composed of the following:
 effciency. The inner mucin layer also performs this
· The meibomian (tarsal) glands. In the dog, 20 to 40 of these
function by filling in irregularities in the corneal surface.
glands open onto the lid margin. They produce the
 To act as a source of antibacterial substances, such as
superficial layer of the precorneal tear film.
immunoglobulins, lactoferrin, and lysozyme. Tears also
· The glands of Moll (modified sweat glands)
 contain protease inhibitors that protect the cornea from
· The glands of Zeis (modified sebaceous glands associated
degradative enzymes released by bacteria, inflammatory
with the cilia)
cells, and keratocytes.
The functional significance of the glands of Moll and Zeis
The inner mucoid layer (1.0 to 2.oμm thick) consists of
in animals is unknown, although infections of the glands
hydrated glycoproteins derived from the conjunctival goblet
of Zeis occur clinically and are called external hordeolum
cells. This layer is critical in binding the lipophobic aqueous
(stye).
layer to the lipophilic corneal surface and in preventing the tear
157
158
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Lacrimal puncta
Lacrimal gland
Canaliculi
Lacrimal ducts
Tarsal glands
 Gland of third eyelid
Nasal punctum
Figure 9-1. Compo
Figure 9-2. Tubuloalveolar structure of the canine glanc of the third
eyelid. (Courtesy Dr. Richardl R. Dubielzig.)
Frontal nerve(branchofophthalmic)
Infratrochlear nerve -
Lacrimal gland
 Short ciliary nerves
Zygomaticotemporal nerve
 Ciliary arteries
Branch to lacrimal gland 
 External ethmoidal artery .
/Zygomaticofacial nerve 
Cribriform plate 
To rectus ventralis muscle
Trochlear nerve to
To obliquus ventralis muscle
Ciliary ganglion
 Internal ophthalmic artery-
Ethmoidal nerve
To rectus lateralis muscle
Long ciliary nerve 
Nerves to retractor bulbi muscle
 To rectus dorsal and
Abducent nerve
levator palpebrae muscles -
Oculomotor nerve
Nasociliary nerve
(branch of ophthalmic) -
External ophthalmic artery
 Rostral cerebral artery :
Lacrimal nerve (branch of frontal)
Optic nerves II 
Ophthalmic branch of V
 Internal ophthalmic artery.
Trochlear nerve IV
Caudal communicating artery
Zygomatic branch
Middle cerebral artery
Round foramen
 Anastomotic ramus 
Maxillary branch of V
Dorsum sellae 
Mandibular branch of V
Oculomotor nerve Ill 
- Middle meningeal artery
Internal carotid artery 
 Trigeminal ganglion 
Abducent nerve VI /
 Trigeminal nerve V
Figure 9-3. Superficial clistribution of the nerves of the canine eye, corsal aspect. Note the position of the
lacrimal gland beneath the orbital ligament. (Moclified fror Evans HE [1993l: Miller's Anatormy of the Dog.
 3rd edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
LACRIMAL SYSTEM |
159
A
E
Figure 9-4.A,The openings of the meibomian (tarsal) glanc cluctules are apparent as multiple, circular, lightly
pigmented fociat the eyelid margin in this goat.The sebaceous secretions of these glands contribute to the lipidl
layer of the tear film. B, Cross-sectional view of the normal canine eyelicl. The accessory lacrimal glandls of the
eyelid margin inclucle the tarsal (rmeibomian) glancls (T), glancls of Moll (M), and glancs of Zeiss (Z). (B courtesy
Dr. Richard R. Dubielzig.)
Orbital crest
Frontal process
A
Facial surface -
Fossa for lacrimal sac
Bristle through
)C
lacrimal canal
Orbital surface
Cornea
Figure 9-5. Precorneal tear film. A, Superficial lipid layer; B, aqueous
layer; C, inner mucoid layer.
Figure 9-6. left canine lacrimal bone, lateral aspect, showing the
lacrimal fossa (Modified from Evans HE 1993|: Miller's Anatomy of the 
Dog, 3rd edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
film from "beading up" on the corneal surface much like water
does on the surface of a freshly waxed car. The mucoprotein
molecules are thought to be bipolar, with one end lipophilic
Accumulations of normal mucus are frequently mistaken by
(associated with the cormeal epithelium) and one end hydrophilic
 owners for signs of ocular disease. Yellowish or green mucus,
(associated with the aqueous layer). This layer is also diffcult 
however, is a sign of inflammatory cells in the mucus.
mination of the tear film break-up time (TFBUT).
Lacrimal Puncta, Canaliculi, and Nasolacrimal Duct
Mucous Threads
 In most domestic mammals the inferior and superior puncta lie
Fine mucous threads lie in the superior and inferior con-
on the inner conjunctival surface of the eyelids, near the nasal
junctival fornices in the normal animal. These strands are
limit of the tarsal glands (see Figure 9-1). Rabbits possess only
accumulations of mucus derived from the conjunctival goblet
 one large inferior puncta that is a few millimeters from the 
cells and exfoliated epithelial cells. The threads migrate nasally
 eyelid margin.
in a predictable fashion, collecting debris from the conjunctival
The lacrimal canaliculi (superior and inferior) lead to a
sac. Vacuoles within the threads contain debris and exhibit
variable dilation in the common nasolacrimal duct—the
enzymatic activity. Dehydrated remnants of these threads are
lacrimal sac. The lacrimal sac varies in size, in some animals
frequently found on the skin at the nasal canthus in the morning
consisting only of a slight dilation in the duct. The sac lies
("'sleep" or "sleepy seeds"). These accumulations are normally
within a depression in the lacrimal bone called the lacrimal
grayish and translucent and may be quite large in animals with
fossa (Figure 9-6).
deep conjunctival fornices (e.g., Irish setters, Doberman
From the lacrimal sac, the nasolacrimal duct passes via a
 pinschers). In cats it is not uncommon for the threads to be deep
 canal on the medial surface of the maxilla to open in the nasal
red to black because they are stained with tear porphyrins. In an
 cavity (Figure 9-7). In dogs the opening is ventrolateral near
animal without signs of conjunctival inflammation or epiphora, 
 the attached margin of the alar fold; in horses it is ventral on the
larger accumulations are normal if they are grayish or trans-
 mucocutaneous junction; and in cattle it is more lateral. In
lucent (possibly reddish black in cats). Increased quantities are
 cattle and horses the nasal opening is readily visible and can be
often a sensitive indicator of ocular surface inflammation. A
cannulated, but in dogs it can be seen only after exposure with
change in color of the mucous thread to green or yellow is a
 a speculum or other suitable instrument with the animals under
reliable indicator of the presence of inflammatory cells and
general anesthesia. In dogs the nasolacrimal duct commonly
 mandates a careful clinical examination.
has an opening into the nasal cavity between the lacrimal sac
160
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Innervation
 Innervation of the lacrimal gland and control of secretion are
complex, and the exact details are undetermined in domestic
animals. Fibers from the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal
nerve, facial nerve, pterygopalatine ganglion, and sympathetic
fibers from the carotid plexus have been traced to the lacrimal
gland.
DISTURBANCES OF LACRIMAL FUNCTION
 The two categories of lacrimal dysfunction are as follows:
· Inability of the drainage system to remove the tears
Figure 9-7. Cutaway clrawing of the canine skull, showing the lacrimal
produced. This may be caused either by obstruction of the
fossa, lacrimal foramen, and relative position of the nasolacrimal cluct.
(Modified from Severin CA [2000l:Severin's Veterinary Ophthalmology
drainage system or overproduction of tears. The clinical
signs depend on the relative amounts of tears produced and
Notes, 3rd ecl. Severin, Ft. Collins, CO.)
drained away.
 Failure to produce a normal precorneal tear film (or one of
its components), usually resulting in secondary
conjunctivitis and keratitis. Abnormalities are quantitative
(insufficient aqueous component) or qualitative
(abnormalities in components or function of the superficial
lipid layer, or the inner mucoid layer).
Effects of Precorneal Tear Film Dysfunction
Abnormalities in the quantity or quality of the tear film may
compromise function. Deficiency of the tear flm may cause the
following:
· Hypertonicity of the remaining tear film
 Dehydration of the conjunctival and comeal epithelium
· Hypoxia of the corneal epithelium and subepithelial
stroma
· Lack of lubrication with frictional irritation of the ocular
surface by the eyelids and third eyelid
· Increase in numbers of microorganisms and mucus on the
ocular surface and on the eyelids
A
· Secondary inflammation of the conjunctiva and cornea with
 Figure 9-8. Diagram of the rabbit nasolacrimal cluct. A, The cluct bencls 
 stromal vascularization and later pigmentation
anc narrows at two points, proxirmally as it passes through the maxillary
bone ancd clistally as it bencls near the incisor tooth root. This anatomy
· Corneal erosions or ulcers
makes the rabbit prone to cacryocystitis and nasolacrimal duct
obstruction. B, Higher magnification of the area outlined in the box in
Examination
A, showing the single canaliculus anc the location of the lacrimal sac.
(From Burling K, et al. [1991l: Anatomy of the rabbit nasolacrimal cluct
 The techniques for examination of lacrimal disorders have been
and its clinical implications. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1:33.}
 discussed in Chapter 5. The reader is referred to that chapter for
 descriptions of the following specifc tests:
Schirmer tear test (STT) (p. 81) for quantitative
and the nasal opening, although the remainder of the duct
is intact. In rabbits the nasolacrimal duct has multiple sharp
abnomalities
 TFBUT for qualitative disorders
bends and constricted areas, which may be associated with the
·Fluorescein stain for corneal ulceration
frequency of duct obstruction and dacryocystitis in this species.
 Rose bengal stain (p. 100) to detect epithelial abnormalities
 Cannulation is also difficult in most rabbits (Figure 9-8).
Approximately 25% of the precorneal tear film is lost by
caused by quantitative and qualitative disorders 
evaporation. The remainder passes into the puncta and via the 
 Fluorescein passage or Jones test (p. 99) for drainage
 canaliculi, sac, and duct to the nasal cavity. A large proportion
disorders
 Nasolacrimal cannulation and flushing (p. 95) for drainage
 of the precorneal tear film accumulates in the inferior fornix as
the lacrimal lake. Most of this fluid enters the inferior punctum
disorders
Dacryocystorhinography (p. 103) for drainage disorders
through capillary attraction and movements of the lids. During
 contraction of the orbicularis oculi, the wall of the sac is tensed,
The fluorescein passage test (Jones test) is reliable only
creating lower pressure within the lumen and causing tears to
when its result is positive. Because of communications between
 enter; this mechanism is called the lacrimal pump.
the nasolacrimal duct and the nasal cavity, false-negative results
LACRIMAL SYSTeM 
161
occur even though the duct is patent. If epiphora is due to over-
Chronic dacryocystitis may cause recurrent unilateral con-
production of tears, the eye is usually red and the STT values
junctivitis with no other apparent clinical signs.
 are higher than normal.
CLINICAL SIGNs. The clinical signs of dacryocystitis are as
Disorders Characterized by Epiphora
follows:
The conjunctiva is usually quiet in patients with epiphora due
· Ocular discharge ranging from clear tears to more
to passive or simple mechanical obstruction of the nasolacrimal
 commonly thick mucopurulent exudate at the medial
system, whereas it is reddened in patients with epiphora due to
canthus; the exudate may have layers of purulent and clear
chronic irritation/inflammation of the cornea, conjunctiva, or
 material or gas bubbles within it
lacrimal sac.
· Mild conjunctivitis—especially medially
· Expression or flushing of mucopurulent material from the 
Dacryocystitis
nasal or lacrimal puncta; this area often is painful to the 
 touch but sometimes is totally painless
Dacryocystitis is inflammation within the lacrimal sac and
· Painful, erythematous dermatitis at the medial canthus in
nasolacrimal duct. It occurs most frequently in dogs and cats
some cases
 and less frequently in horses. Although foreign bodies (e.g,
·Abscessation of the sac in severe cases; in chronic cases,
 grass awns, sand, dirt, and concretions of mucopurulent
this abscessation may cause a large cavity to form
material) can be expressed in some patients, the primary cause
· History of recurrent unilateral conjunctivitis with temporary
is often undetermined. Cystic dilations of the nasolacrimal duct
responses to topical antibiotics and attempted flushing
causing chronic dacryocystitis in dogs have been described.
They are treated by creation of a drainage stoma into the nasal
DIAGNOSIS. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, especially
cavity (Figure 9-9). The infected focus within the proximal
expression of purulent material from the puncta. The exact
 portion of the duct may reinfect the conjunctival sac, resulting
site of the obstruction may be determined by cannulation,
in chronic, unilateral conjunctivitis of apparent unexplained
dacryocystorhinography, or magnetic resonance imaging.
cause. Often the amount of ocular discharge in dacryocystitis is
TREATMENT
far in excess of what would be expected in view of the severity
 Nasolacrimal Catheterization. Because of its tendency to
 of conjunctivitis present.
recur, definitive surgical catheterization (Figure 9-10) is
Figure 9-9. A, lateral racliographic view of the skull of a 4-year-oldl
golcden retriever with recurrent intermittent episocles of purulent dlischarge
from the right eye. A racliolucent area with sclerotic margins (arrow) is
eviclent clorsal anc rostral to the maxillary_process of the maxillary bone
(dlorsal to the upper right fourth premolar). B anc C, Dacryocystorhinogram
of the right nasolacrimal duct of the same cog before surgery (B) and
9 months after surgery (C). Before surgery, contrast material accumulated 
in the cyst indicated in A, and the nasolacrimal cluct was visible proximal
to the radliolucency. After surgery, contrast material was evident in the
ao lap ue woi) js au ui aenunse you p ng aessed eseu
A, et al.[i997l: Surgical treatment of dacryocystitis caused by cystic
dilatation of the nasolacrimal system in three dogs.] Am Vet Med Assoc
211:445.)
162
 I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAlS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
：
B
D
Figure 9-10. lnclwelling nasolacrimal cluct catheterization for correction of recurring obstruction.
A, A monofilament nylon thread (2/0 with a smooth melted end) is passed via the superior punctum to emerge
from the nose. lf an obstruction is present in the sac, the cluct is threaclec from the nasal enc, anc the thread is
manipulated to emerge from the superior punctum. B, Fine polyethylene (PE9o), polyvinyl, or silicone tubing
with a bevelec enc is passec over the threacl. Halsted forceps are clarmped behinc the tubing, which is pulled
from the nasal end by forceps on the threadl. 1n horses, larger tubing is usec. C, Care is taken as the tubing enters
Sugn aul pasn sem wnund sy ea supeau y pasn aq osie Aeu wnund aoaui au aon wnund au
is pulled cown the nasolacrimal cuct, past any obstructions. D, The tube is sutured in place for 2 to 3 weeks. An
's ausia wo papo) paposip suiaq woy ugn au juaaad on panaisuo an pinous elos ueyagezie
et al. [1977l: Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmic Surgery. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
indicated for dacryocystitis. Although daily flushing and
Congenital Atresia, Ectopia, and Imperforate Puncta
topical medication are effective in some cases, they are less
reliable than catheterization and there is a greater chance of
 In dogs, imperforate puncta (usually of the inferior puncta) and
recurrence. The tube is left in place for 2 to 3 weeks. The
punctal aplasia are common, especially in American cocker
inserted tubes rarely cause discomfort unless they become
spaniels, Bedlington terriers, golden retrievers, miniature and
 loose. For the first few days the uncannulated punctum may be
toy poodles, and Samoyeds. The condition is congenital and is
flushed daily with a topical ophthalmic antibiotic solution, and
often characterized by epiphora, although some animals are
topical antibiotic/corticosteroid solution is also applied to
relatively asymptomatic and epiphora may not become apparent
the ocular surface. If abscessation of the sac or severe dermatitis
until several weeks of age, when tear production increases.
is present, systemic antibiotics are added.
 Diagnosis is made by examination of the normal location of the
 Dacryocystotomy. For patients in which obstruction prevents
 puncta with magnification and from the inability to cannulate
the passage of a catheter, the lacrimal sac may be exposed ab
or probe the puncta with a small polytetrafluoroethylene
externo, through an incision parallel to the lower lid, followed
(Teflon) IV catheter (minus needle), a lacrimal cannula, or fine
by removal of the outer surface of the lacrimal bone with a Hall
nylon thread. In most cases the obstruction consists of a layer
 Surgitome bur over the sac, flushing of the sac, and placement
 of conjunctiva over the lumen, but occasionally obstructions
of the catheter (Figure 9-1l). In some chronically affected
 are present in other parts of the nasolacrimal duct. The over-
animals a cavity may develop in the region of the sac. If the
 lying conjunctiva may be removed with fine scissors after it is
 catheter is left in place and antibiotic therapy is continued, the
elevated with liquid under pressure (Figure 9-12) or through
space usually fills with fbrous tissue and a patent duct remains.
 retrograde probing with fine nylon thread (2/0) from the nasal
This may take several months.
opening (Figure 9-13). Some patients require short-term (1 to
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
163
Tissue“tent"
formed by thread 
Nasolacrimal duct
 Nylon thread in nasal punctum
 Figure 9-13. Retrograce probing of imperforate punctum. The nasal
meatus of the nasolacrimal cluct is probed using a nylon (2/0) threadl. The
probe is passed up to elevate the obstructing conjunctiva, which is
excisedl. This proceclure is most useful for the superior punctum, because
E
itismore dlifficult topassa probe inta the inferior punctumfrom the nasal
end.
Figure 9-11. Dacryocystostomy in the dog. A, An incision is completed
ventral to the meclial canthus into the lacrimal sac. B anc C, The foreign
material is removed and submitted for laboratory evaluation. The
 polyethylene tubing, and the nasal mucosa is incised until the
nasolacrimal cluct system is cannulated with a Silastic tube (D), anc the
lumen is entered. The stoma is cannulated with the tubing,
shapoia :aell g uye wog papo) (3) Alaugnon paso s uosiou
which is sutured in place for 7 to 21 days. Daily application of
and surgery of the canine nasolacrimal system, in Celatt KN (edlitor:
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Lippincott Williarms & Wilkins,
 a topical antibiotic-corticosteroid preparation for 3 to 4 days
 Philacelphia.)
 after removal of the tube is advisable to reduce the chance of
 postoperative stricture formation. A variety of diverse con-
genital anomalies of the nasolacrimal duct occur in all species,
but all are rare.
In young cats, the most common cause of apparent con-
genital lacrimal obstruction is cicatrization of the puncta due to
feline herpesvirus type 1 conjunctivitis.
Cystic Disorders
Cystic disorders of the lacrimal system and tissues are uncommon 
but may affect the lacrimal gland, canaliculi, nasolacrimal duct,
gland of the third eyelid, zygomatic salivary gland, conjunctival
A
 goblet cells, lacrimal sac, and parotid duct after transplantation.
Figure 9-12. Repair of imperforate punctum through the use of
Clinical signs are usually restricted to localized swelling, and
sl anssad pue paenuuen s! wngsund suisoddo aui ' 'ping pazianssad 
 treatment consists of careful surgical excision and, sometimes,
cannulation (see also section on dacryocystitis). Periorbital
over the other punctum. The use of methylene blue solution aicls in the
location of the bleb. Some loss of saline occurs clown the nasolacrimal
 epidermoid cysts have also been described at the medial canthus 
cluct. B, The tissue is grasped with fine forceps ancl incisecd with strabismus
in dogs.
scissors or other fine scissors. Antibiotic-corticosteroid preparations are
appliec for 7 to 10 clays to prevent scarring anc obstruction. Daily clilation
Cicatricial Nasolacrimal Obstructions
ancl flushing may be neeclec for a few cays to prevent closure. lf the
membrane is thick or bleecls when incisecl the nasolacrimal system may
In cats, especially kittens, scarring and blockage of the puncta
 need to be cannulated for 1 to 3 weeks to prevent fibrosis of the newly
Createdl stoma.
or nasolacrimal ducts are common sequela of presumed herpetic
keratoconjunctivitis and upper respiratory tract infections. Similar
changes due to variety of causes may be seen in any species and
 3 weeks) placement of an indwelling catheter to prevent fibrosis
frequently accompanies symblepharon. If the puncta and ducts
of the newly created stoma, especially if the wound bleeds after
cannot be cannulated, conjunctivorhinostomy or drainage pro-
excision.
cedures to the oral cavity (conjunctivobuccostomy) are the only
 In foals (and crias) the obstruction is usually at the nasal
remedy. Conjunctivorhinostomy and conjunctivobuccostomy
puncta instead of the inferior puncta. The nasal puncta may be
are usually performed by a veterinary ophthalmologist
in
covered with mucosa, and a variable portion of the nasolacrimal
 animals without evidence of active conjunctivitis or chronic
 duct may be missing. Additional or abnormally positioned
 respiratory disease. Active, or recurrent, disease increases the
 chance the newly created opening will scar closed and usually
duct is distended with saline via the lacrimal puncta, or with
means that surgery will fail to correct the problem. If recurrent
164
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
respiratory disease is present in cats, a careful examination for
evidence of herpetic keratitis is performed and serologic tests
for feline leukemia virus, feline immunodeficiency virus, and
 possibly cryptococcosis should be considered.
CONJUNCTIVORHINOSTOMY. In conjunctivorhinostomy a
 communication is made from the medial conjunctival sac to the 
 nasal cavity and is kept open with a stent of plastic or silicone
tubing until healed (Figure 9-14). The method is most suitable
for dogs lacking lacrimal drainage but can be used in cats. In
cats the opening tends to become obstructed with scar tissue,
and the stent is left in longer (8 to 12 weeks) before initial
A
 removal. During the postoperative period the topical antibiotic
therapy is continued and the stent is cleaned frequently. Also,
7me
the eye is checked weekly to ensure that the stent is not causing
ocular irritation (e.g., by pressing on the cornea through the
third eyelid).
CONJUNCTIVOBUCCOSTOMY. Conjunctivobuccostomy is an
 altermative method of providing lacrimal drainage (Figure 9-15).
Tear-Staining Syndrome in Dogs
C
D
The miniature and toy poodle and the Maltese terrier are most
Figure 9-15.Conjunctivobuccostomy.A,Direction of the final clrainage
commonly affected by tear-staining syndrome (Figure 9-16), a
 canal. B, A canal is mace from the inferior conjunctival fornix to the oral
Cavity with straight hemostats. C, A tube is passec anc suturec to the oral
 primarily cosmetic defect in which the hair around the medial
mucosa.D,The upper end of the tube is sutured to the skin in the region
 canthus is stained reddish brown from constant epiphora. The
of thenasalcanthus so asnot torubon the cornea.The tubeisleft inplace
condition is usually present from a young age and is rarely
for a minimum of 2 months. (Modified from Lavach JD [1985]: Lacrimal
 accompanied by other significant ocular disorders. Some animals
Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
 may also have a localized dermatitis in the medial canthal
 region. Although it is most obvious in animals with a lightly
A
Figure 9-16. Chronic tear-staining syncrome in a miniature poodlle.
colored hair coat, it occurs in animals with dark hair coats as
well. The staining is believed to be due to lactofermin-like pig-
 ments in the tears, which overflow because of a functional or
 partial obstruction of the drainage system.
Various causes of tear-staining syndrome have been pro-
 posed, including caruncular hairs, which wick tears onto the
face; medioventral entropion or trichiasis; kinking of an other-
wise patent inferior puncta; small lacrimal lake; tight medial
B
 canthal ligaments; folds of conjunctiva, which prevent entry of
Figure 9-14. Conjunctivorhinostomy. A, The conjunctiva is removed from
tears into the puncta; and abnormal lid closure resulting in
the inferior nasal area overlying the lacrimal bone. B, A communication
failure of the lacrimal pump. In some animals multiple factors
is macde from the conjunctival sac to the nasal cavity with a Steinmann
 may be involved, and in others an obvious cause is not apparent.
 orthopaedic pin. The pin is clirected toward the contralateral external
nares but is aclvanced only until it enters the nasal cavity. A stent of plastic
Epiphora also occurs commonly in brachycephalic Persian cats
tubing is sutured in place.
 owing to obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM|
165
TREATMENT. Treatment for tear-staining syndrome in dogs
15 mm/min. This procedure is not used indiscriminately or
 consists of the following approaches:
as a substitute for full ophthalmic investigation of the
epiphora. It is essential to obtain fully informed consent
· If a specific cause can be identified, treatment of that 
on the part of the owner before performing this procedure
condition may alleviate the epiphora. Often, if a specific
as keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) may occur
cause cannot be identified, the owner simply needs to be
 postoperatively.
reassured that the problem is primarily cosmetic in nature
 and that the pet's vision or comfort is not threatened
Other Causes of Epiphora
·If medial lower lid entropion or trichiasis is present,
temporary eversion of the inferior-medial lower eyelid with
Other causes of epiphora, discussed in Chapters 6 and 7, are as
a single suture in the medial canthus or eversion with one 
follows:
or two small surgical staples (Precise DS-15 surgical staple
or similar) may be used diagnostically (Figure 9-17). If
· Prominent nasal folds
after 1 to 2 weeks the owner reports that eversion of the
·Entropion
inferior eyelid has reduced the wetness (staining may not
·Disorders of cilia
improve until the hair grows out), a permanent medial
· Allergic inhalant dermatitis and conjunctivitis
entropion correction may resolve the problem.
· Oral tetracycline 5 mg/kg once daily provides definite short-
Deficiency of the Precorneal Tear Film
term improvement. Similar results may be achieved with
Mucin Deficiency
oral metronidazole. Staining normally reappears 2 to
3 weeks after cessation of therapy. How these antibiotics
Decreased numbers of conjunctival goblet cells, caused by
reduce staining is unknown, but because tear production
 chronic inflammation, metaplasia, hypoplasia, or fibrosis, can
remains normal and the face still remains wet (if less
cause mucin deficiency—especially in dogs and probably cats.
stained), it is possible that they act by interfering with
Affected animals may have many of the signs of the milder
bacteria that create the compounds staining the hair.
forms of KCS except that the STT values may be normal to
· Treatment of concurrent allergies with topical and antibiotic
slightly subnormal. Because mucin helps bind the aqueous por-
steroid drops, mast cell stabilizers, and systemic low-dose
tion of the tear film to the ocular surface, moisture does not
 steroids is helpful if these agents are used judiciously in
uniformly wet the surface of the eye but instead "beads up" on
patients with allergic disease.
the ocular surface effectively leaving some areas of the cornea
 Affected animals should not be bred. Since the 1960s the
dry. Decreases in TFBUT and numbers of goblet cells on
incidence of very severely affected individuals appears to
histologic evaluation can confrm the diagnosis (Moore et al.,
have decreased markedly.
1987). Unless these tests are performed, it is often hard to make
 Although controversial and not the procedure of choice,
the diagnosis of mucin deficiency because of the diffculty in
partial removal of the gland of the third eyelid may result in
identifying this layer clinically. Treatment is best accomplished
improvement (Figure 9-18) in patients with severe disease
with cyclosporine, which may improve ocular mucins, and the 
that cannot otherwise be controlled. Because this procedure
use of tear replacement solutions, preferably by one of the
permanently removes a portion of the tear production
 polyvinylpyrolidone or methylcellulose derivatives, which
mechanism, it is performed only if STT values exceed
more closely simulate natural mucins.
Lipid Deficiency
 Deficiencies of the precorneal tear film are typically due to
inflammation of the eyelid margin and meibomian glands.
Common causes are staphylococcal and Malassezia-associated
blepharitis, generalized seborrhea, atopy, and demodicosis.
Aberrant lipids may be directly toxic to epithelial cells, and loss
of this layer may allow premature dispersion of the aqueous
layer of the tear film, resulting in corneal drying. Clinical signs
 include sometimes subtle blepharitis manifested as swollen,
rounded eyelid margins, swelling of the openings of the
meibomian glands, hyperemia of the mucocutaneous junction,
dry crusty lid margins, chalazia, and a yellow-white appearance 
to individual meibomian glands when viewed from the con-
junctival surface. Gentle expression of the meibomian glands
does not yield the normal clear, viscous oil but instead often
yields a thick, opaque, cream-cheese-looking substance. Chronic
Figure 9-17. Diagnostic stapling for epiphora. A fine surgical staple (3M's
Precise Ds-15 or similar) or termporary everting suture is placec so as to
keratitis, usually much less severe than in patients with deficiency
 evert the medial canthus. lf this procecure alleviates the epiphora over a
of the aqueous layer, may also be present. The conjunctiva is
period of several days, a permanent procedure that everts the medial
often hyperemic, there is a mucoid to mucopurulent discharge,
canthal area would be expectec also to alleviate the epiphora. f this
 and the corneal epithelial surface may have faint localized areas 
temporary procedure does not resolve the epiphora, eversion surgery is
also unlikely to be of benefit, and adldlitional possible causes of the 
 of edema, multifocal areas of epithelial roughening, and, possibly,
epiphora should be explored.
overt corneal erosion. Surface disease in these animals is
166
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
A
Figure 9-18. Partial rermoval of the glancd of the third eyelidl.
A, Fixation forceps are applied to the edges of the
Cartilaginous T portion of the thircl eyelicl. B, The glanc is
exposed by traction, and 0.25 m1 of 1:100,000 epinephrine
proael sisesouay aoy Alesunuosgns pasaui si uonlos
use of epinephrine with hatothane anesthesia). C, With
strabismus scissors, the conjunctiva is incised at the base of
the gland. D, The gland is exposed by blunt subconjunctival 
dlissection. E, Twenty-five to seventy-five percent of the
gland is removed.
+
D
believed to be the result of poor surfacing of the tear film,
ETIOLOGY. The etiology of KCS can be classified as
frictional irritation from swollen lid margins, and perhaps toxic
follows:
 effects of abnormal lipids or inflammatory products.
 Drug-Induced. KCS in dogs has been associated with the
 This condition is treated with warm, moist compresses for
 nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug (NSAID) etodolac as well
several minutes two to three times per day and topical and
as with many sulfa derivatives, including trimethoprim-
systemic antibiotics, choice of which is ideally based on results
sulfamethoxazole, sulfadiazine, and sulfasalazine. Sulfa-
of culture and sensitivity testing of secretions expressed from
derivative KCS is associated with a direct toxic effect on the
the eyelid margin. In select cases systemic or topical corti-
 lacrimal acinar cells by the nitrogen-containing pyridine and
costeroids may also be helpful, especially if granulomas have
pyrimidine rings of these drugs. Up to 50% of dogs in which
 developed in the eyelid as a result of the escape of meibomian
 KCS develops after they receive a sulfa derivative do so within
lipids into the surrounding tissue. Topical therapy with a lipid
30 days of starting the drug, and KCS has been reported to
substitute, such as petrolatum, mineral oil, or lanolin, may also
occur as soon as within the first week. Animals weighing less
be beneficial. Often the disease is chronic, and some form of
than 12 kg may be at increased risk. Sulfasalazine and its
long-term maintenance therapy is required.
derivatives (used to treat chronic colitis in dogs) also cause
KCS in dogs, but not all drugs of the group do so. 5-Amino
Deficiency of the Aqueous Phase
salicylic acid (5-ASA), a derivative of sulfasalazine that is the
 active constituent in the treatment of colitis, also causes KCS in
 Deficiency of the aqueous phase of the precorneal tear film is a
 dogs. KCS has also been associated with phenazopyridine, a
common disorder in dogs (less so in cats and horses) that leads
rarely used urinary analgesic, which also contains a nitrogen
to xerosis (abnormal dryness) and KCS. Drying resulting from
ring. It causes KCS after 7 to 10 days of use in most dogs, but
decreased secretion by the lacrimal glands is distinguished
 not in cats. Temporary reduction in tear production may also be
from drying attributable to increased evaporation of the
 caused by general anesthesia and topical or systemic atropine.
 aqueous layer in animals with congenitally open eyelids, facial
Surgically Induced. KCS commonly occurs after removal of
 paralysis, and exophthalmos.
a prolapsed gland of the third eyelid, but the median time for
this occurrence is 4.5 years after the operation. It may also been
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
seen in patients in which the facial nerve is disrupted (e.g., ear
canal ablation).
The incidence of KCS in canine patients has been estimated at 
Immune-Mediated. KCS in dogs is most often immune-
1% (Moore, 1999).
mediated. The lacrimal acinar epithelial cells may be an
LACRIMAL SYSTEM|
167
immune-privileged site and may be protected by a blood-tear
cell hyperplasia and increased mucin production. Additionally,
barrier. Disruption of this barrier may allow immune-mediated
 at least in the acute phase, the tear film becomes more hyper-
 destruction of these tissues, resulting in KCS. Indeed, in some 
 tonic, leading to dehydration of the ocular surface epithelium
dogs with KCS circulating autoantibodies to the lacrimal
(corneal and conjunctival), in turn resulting in edema, vacuolar
 glands, salivary glands, and gland of the third eyelid are
degeneration, and generalized thinning of the corneal/
present. As in humans, animals with KCS may also be affected
conjunctival epithelium. Cormeal epithelial cells are more readily
with a variety of autoimmune or immune-mediated disorders,
exfoliated by the greater friction associated with blinking and a
including Sjogren's syndrome (dry mouth as well as eyes),
roughened, keratinized conjunctival epithelium. Overt epithelial
systemic
 lupus erythematosus, 
 pemphigus foliaceus,
erosion or corneal ulceration may then occur, leading to sub-
rheumatoid arthritis, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, poly-
stantial ocular pain as the trigeminal nerve endings in the cormea
myositis and polyarthritis, atopy, glomerulonephritis, and
 are exposed. Over time the conjunctiva becomes hyperemic and
ulcerative colitis.
chemotic, and the epithelium undergoes squamous metaplasia
Idiopathic. The majority of cases of idiopathic KCS may
and hyperkeratinization. The corneal epithelium also thickens 
actually be immune-mediated, both in dogs and in the less 
and keratinizes. The resulting irregular epithelial surface may
commonly affected cat.
reduce the adhesion of the remaining tear film to the ocular
Orbital and Supraorbital Trauma. Trauma that either affects
 surface, further worsening the condition. Inflammatory cells
the glands directly or damages the nerves that innervate them
and blood vessels infltrate the anterior corneal stroma, and
may cause KCS. The disorder frequently accompanies
pigment, lipid, and calcium may be secondarily deposited.
traumatic proptosis. In horses KCS is rare, but the most
When this occurs the cornea is typically less susceptible to
common cause is regarded as trauma to the facial nerve.
ulceration, and if an ulcer develops it may be less painful
Infectious. Canine distemper virus affects the lacrimal
because of loss of the superficial corneal sensation. Loss of
glands and glands of the third eyelid and may result in
 antimicrobial substances normally suspended in the aqueous
temporary or permanent dysfunction. KCS has also been
portion of the tear film (lgA, lysozyme) predisposes the dry eye
associated with Leishmania infection and with chronic viral or
to secondary bacterial and sometimes fungal infections. Not
bacterial conjunctivitis with fibrosis of the glands or their ducts.
only may the bacteria lead to comeal malacia and perforation
Feline herpesvirus may induce KCS through fbrosis of the
but the increased protease and inflammatory debris present
lacrimal gland ductules.
within the remaining tear film may also raise the risk of corneal
Locoweed Poisoning. In cattle, sheep, and horses, locoweed 
melting and perforation. A dry eye should be regarded not only
 poisoning can cause KCS.
as an immunocompromised eye but also as a nutritionally
 Other Causes. Debilitated or dehydrated animals frequently
 deficient one because the precorneal tear film supplies the
have decreased tear production. Vitamin A defciency rarely
 anterior cornea with a significant portion of its metabolic needs.
causes KCS in dogs, although it may do so somewhat more
 BREED PREDISPOSITION. KCS occurs more commonly in
frequently in other species. Eosinophilic granulomatous
the American cocker spaniel, bloodhound, Boston terrier,
dacryoadenitis, perhaps secondary to parasitic invasion into the
Cavalier King Charles spaniel, English bulldog, English
lacrimal glands, has been reported as a cause in horses.
springer spaniel, Lhasa apso, miniature schnauzer, Pekingese,
 Congenital. Congenital acinar hypoplasia occurs in miniature
 poodle, pug, Samoyed, shih tzu, West Highland white terrier,
breeds such as the pug, Chihuahua, and Yorkshire terrier. Cats
 and Yorkshire terrier.
with eyelid agenesis may also exhibit KCS due to absence of
CLINICAL SIGNS. The signs of KCS depend on whether the
the glands or their ductules
condition is bilateral or unilateral, acute or chronic, and tem-
Senile Atrophy. Dogs 10 years or older are at increased risk 
 porary or permanent (Figures 9-19 to 9-21).
for KCS due to senile atrophy of the lacrimal glands.
Mucoid and Mucopurulent Discharge. A thick, often ropy
Radiation. The lacrimal gland and gland of the third eyelid,
ocular discharge that clings to the ocular surface is the most
if in the feld, may be damaged by radiation therapy.
 consistent clinical sign of KCS. The discharge may be the
Neurogenic. KCS may be seen in conjunction with loss of
result of increased mucin production by the conjunctival goblet
parasympathetic innervation of the lacrimal glands (cranial nerve
 cells and/or a reduction in the rinsing function of the tear film.
[CN] Vll) and in certain other neurogenic disorders, especially
 The purulent component of the discharge may be sterile and the
those involving the trigeminal nerve (CN V) and dysautonomia.
Often, neurogenic KCS is unilateral and the nares on the affected
side is also dry if the parasympathetic innervation is damaged
 proximal to the pterygopalatine ganglion.
Corneal vascularization
Lusterless cornea
KCS is a common and important ocuiar disease in dogs. It
should be suspected whenever chronic conjunctivitis, keratitis,
Pigmentation
 or ocular discharge is present.
Ulceration
Excision of the gland of the third eyelid is a common cause of
Dry, sticky, mucopurulent
KCS in dogs.
discharge
- Dry ipsilateral nostril
PATHOLOGIC CHANGES. A reduction in the aqueous por-
tion of the tear film may result in compensatory conjunctival
Figure 9-19. Clinical signs of keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
168
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Dry Ipsilateral Nostril. The nares and nostril may also be dry
 on the affected side, especially in neurogenic KCS. This sign is
thought to be due to impaired innervation of the lateral nasal
 gland in addition to the lacrimal glands.
 Chronic Staphylococcal Blepharitis. Chronic infection of the
eyelids and the tarsal glands, sometimes with hypersensitivity,
may occur. Deficiency of the lipid layer of the tear film may
 Intermittent KCS is a common clinical entity and often can
be diagnosed only with repeated performance of the STT.
Unilateral cases of KCS may be more likely to be intermittent 
 in nature than bilateral cases. Many patients show fluctuations 
in STT values above and below the normal lower limit of
10 mm/min, with clinical signs being more common either in
the winter when humidity in the home is low or at hot, dry times
of the year when evaporation of the tear film is the greatest. In
 brachycephalic breeds intermittent instances of KCS may result 
 in ulceration. KCS should be suspected as a cause of the ulcer
Figure 9-20. Mild keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a dog with a history of
interrmittent conjunctival hyperemia and clischarge. At this stage tear
if the cornea is ulcerated and the STT value is less than 10 to
puo aui asousepsiu o Asea si i pue auem pue xem Aeu uognpoad
perhaps 15 mm/min, because the normal response of the eye to
as intermittent conjunctivitis presumably of bacterial or allergic origin.
ulceration should be to increase tear production above normal.
DIAGNOSIS. The diagnosis of KCS is suggested by the
bouts of conjunctivitis that recur when topical medication is
discontinued), clinical signs, and STT values. STT values less 
than 10 mm/min are suspicious for KCS, especially
in
brachycephalic breeds of dogs or in patients that should have
epiphora (corneal erosion, conjunctivitis, etc.). Rose bengal
staining may also be of value. Rose bengal stains conjunctival
 cells and mucus a bright rose red when devitalized by drying.
The clinician should consider a complete hematologic and serum
chemistry profle and other diagnostic tests to rule out other
 concurrent disorders or immune-related diseases that have been
associated with KCS, including diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism,
polyarthritis and polymyositis, rheumatoid arthritis, and
immune-mediated skin disorders.
NATURAL COURSE OF THE DISEASE. KCS caused by drugs,
systemic diseases, and orbital and supraorbital trauma may
Figure 9-21. Severe keratoconjunctivitis sicca in an American cocker
 resolve spontaneously in 45 to 60 days, but many patients do
spaniel. Note the thick mucopurulent clischarge that clings to the cornea,
ueuauid pue suuaynon eauon pue 'egunuos eiwajady a] 
not recover. The majority of cases of idiopathic KCS do not 
 improve without treatment. Patients with untreated, or under-
treated, KCS are at substantial risk for vision loss.
result of inflammatory cell infltrate into the conjunctiva or
 cornea, or it may be septic if secondary bacterial infection has
Failure by owners to apply treatment adequately and con-
 occurred. Dried discharge is often present on the eyelids. The 
sistently is a common cause of poor therapeutic results in KCS.
 conjunctiva is usually hyperemic, thickened, and chemotic.
The importance, aims, cost, and alternatives for therapy must 
Blepharospasm. Variable severity of blepharospasm and
be discussed with the owner at the start and reinforced through-
protrusion of the third eyelid (presumably from frictional
out therapy.
irritation as the lids move over a dryer ocular surface) are
common. The level of pain depends on the amount of ocular
TREATMENT. Initial therapy is medical, and in the majority
surface sensitivity remaining.
 of patients consistent medical therapy adequately controls the
Corneal Ulceration. In severe or acute cases the comeal
disease. In select cases surgery may be of benefit. In general,
 epithelium is lost, especially centrally. Mucopurulent material or
 when multiple medications are being given to the same eye, it 
 malacic cormeal stroma may adhere to the ulcer bed. Cormeal
is best to space the applications out as evenly as possible. If
 perforation and endophthalmitis may occur.
such spacing is diffcult, or impossible, solutions and suspen-
 Corneal Vascularization and Pigmentation. Superficial and
 sions should be given no closer than 5 minutes apart and oint-
 deep corneal vascularization and pigmentation often occur in
 ments should be given no closer than 30 minutes apart. Given
chronic KCS. These changes are common causes of vision loss
the current range of treatment options, poor owner compliance
in this disorder.
 or low patient acceptance of therapy is the primary cause of
 Dry, Lusterless Cornea. The dry appearance of the cornea
visual impairment in KCS.
due to lack of the precorneal tear film is characteristic of KCS
 Medical Therapy. All medications should be applied to an eye
but occurs in only 25% of dogs with the disorder.
that is as free of discharge and as clean as possible to ensure
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
169
adequate contact of the preparation with the target tissue. Appli-
determined to be safe for the animal as well as for the human
cation of any medication to a dry eye filled with debris and caked
who applies the medication. A related compound, pimecrolimus,
with discharge is almost invariably ineffective. Cleaning of the 
 also experimentally improved tear production in dogs treated
eyes and periocular tissue is usually best accomplished with a
with a 1% corn oil-based formulation three times a day, but its 
sterile eye wash and gentle wiping of the eyes with soft gauze
long-term safety is also unknown.
or tissue. The aims of medical therapy are as follows.
Pilocarpine, administered either topically or systemically,
Stimulate Natural Tear Production. Topical cyclosporine
may be used in selected cases in an effort to stimulate tear pro-
forms the cornerstone of KCS therapy. Available preparations
duction. In view of its mechanism of action, it would be expected
include 0.2% ointment, which is approved by the U.S. Food
to be most effective in patients with neurogenic KCS secondary
and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in dogs, and 1% or 2%
 to parasympathetic denervation, in which peripheral cholinergic
compounded formulations in an olive oil or corn oil base. All 
receptors have undergone upregulation and are more sensitive
three formulations are clinically effective, although some patients 
to the effects of cholinergic stimulation than other cholinergically
may be more responsive to the 1% or 2% compounded formu-
innervated tissues. Pilocarpine may be used topically in a dilute
lations than to the commercially available ointment prepa-
form in artificial tears (0.125% or 0.25%) given every 6 to
ration. The compounded formulations, however, may be more
8 hours or orally by being mixed with the animal's food. In the
irritating than the ointment in a small proportion (5% to 10%)
latter instance the initial dose applied to the food is 1 drop of
of animals, and 2% cyclosporine may suppress systemic lym-
2% topical pilocarpine per 10 kg of body weight twice daily.
phocytes. There have been no reports of systemic adverse
The dose is increased in 1-drop increments every 2 to 3 days
effects with topical cyclosporine.
until signs of systemic toxicity develop (inappetence, hyper-
The exact mechanism by which cyclosporine increases tear
salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia). Because the efficacy
 production is somewhat uncertain but involves immuno-
of this approach depends on a differential sensitivity of the
modulation by inhibition of helper T cells and by direct stimu-
lacrimal glands than other tissues (gastrointestinal, cardiac), the
lation of tear production by binding to the cyclophilin receptor and 
therapeutic window is quite narrow, and one needs to see subtle
thereby inhibiting prolactin, which in turm limits tear production.
signs of toxicity in other tissues before concluding that the drug
Additional effects of cyclosporine that are independent of its tear
is ineffective. In my experience the drug is seldom effective
stimulatory effects are a reduction in corneal pigmentation and
in treating KCS, and its side effects (local ocular irritation,
 an improvement in conjunctival goblet cell mucin secretion.
inappetence, vomiting/ diarrhea) may preclude its long-term use.
 A common regimen is to begin with topical cyclosporine
Other promising tear stimulants in dogs in the experimental
ophthalmic ointment every 12 hours for a month and recheck tear
setting are the use of 100 μL of nerve growth factor ointment
 production several hours after the medication has been
every 12 hours and oral administration of low-dose interferon-0.
 administered. Topical cyclosporine therapy often requires a
The long-term safety and effcacy of these compounds remain
month or more before an effect may be seen (perhaps because of 
to be elucidated.
the time required to immunomodulate helper T cells and to allow
Replacement of the Precorneal Tear Film. Wetting agents are
the gland to regenerate), but once tear production does increase,
second best to drugs, which increase natural tears. They do,
the response to the drug is more immediate (minutes to hours after 
 however, play an important role in improving the ocular health of
application). The latter response may be a function of a
animals in which tear stimulant therapy does not raise tear
neurohormonal mechanism of action of the drug. If STT values
production to adequate levels or while waiting for tear stimulant
are not substantially increased (> 10 mm/min), the same regimen
therapy to begin to work. There are many types of artificial
may be continued for 2 more months or 1% or 2% compounded
tears, and in addition to a wetting agent, they contain varying
cyclosporine every 12 hours may be used for several months.
amounts and types of preservatives. A preparation is initially
During this time an STT, performed a few hours after cyclo-
selected on the basis of the tear function that needs replacement
sporine has been applied to the eye, is performed monthly. If tear
 and the individual needs of the patient. If a particular brand of
 production still has not increased, 1% cyclosporine every 8 hours 
tear replacement therapy is effective but irritating, a related
 or topical tacrolimus every 12 hours may be tried. If tear
compound with a different or no preservative should be tried.
production (STT value) consistently exceeds 20 mm/min
Often a variety of agents are tried before the optimal formu-
(uncommon), tear stimulant therapy may be reduced to once a
 lation is identifed for an individual patient.
day and all the other medications may be discontinued.
 Preparations with polyvinyl alcohol (common in many over
Tacrolimus (formerly FK506) is a potent immunomodulator
 the-counter formulations) are relatively watery in consistency,
with a mechanism of action believed to be similar to cyclosporine
resulting in a relatively short contact time and the need for
A but with a reported 10- to 100-fold higher potency. In one
frequent application. They are best selected when the goal is to
study, compounded 0.02% tacrolimus suspension applied every
keep the eye free of debris, and by themselves they are typically
12 hours was highly effective at improving tear production. All
inadequate to treat a substantially dry eye. The addition of
dogs that were controlled with cyclosporine A also could be
dextrans (e.g., Hypotears) results in a slightly more viscous
 controlled with tacrolimus, and in about one quarter of those 
material that better mimics natural mucins and should be con-
dogs, tear production rose an additional 5 mm/min or more.
 sidered if the goal is to replace the mucin layer. The addition of
Additionally, a significant number of dogs who did not experi-
methylcellulose (e.g., Isopto Tears, Tears Naturale, GenTeal
ence increased tear production with cyclosporine did so with
lubricating eyedrops, GenTeal gel, Refresh Celluvisc Tears)
 tacrolimus. In addition to increasing tear production, tacrolimus
makes the solution more viscous, slows its evaporation rate,
 also reduced many of the other symptoms of KCS. Despite
increases the corneal contact time, and also is beneficial if the
these promising results the potential toxic side effects of the
 goal is to replace the mucin layer. The greater viscosity of these
 drug and the potential carcinogenicity of the compound do
agents also makes them good choices when the goal is to
indicate that further studies are required before the drug can be
lubricate the eye, although they may result in more debris
170
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
around the eyelids. The addition of viscoelastic agents such as
 Follow-up. Initial therapy typically consists of cleaning the
chondroitin sulfate and sodium hyaluronate (Hylashield) result 
eyes at least once daily with sterile eye wash, topical appli-
in one of the longest contact times, but these compounds may
cation of cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment every 12 hours, use
 not be readily available in the United States.
of an artificial tear (selected on the basis of the most pressing
Ointments containing petrolatum, mineral oil, or lanolin
 need for replacementcleaning, lubrication, or addressing
(e.g., Duratears, Lacri-Lube, Puralube, Lubri-Tears) are very
 exposure) every 2 to 4 hours, and topical application of anti-
thick and have the longest contact time but are the least like
biotics if bacterial overgrowth has occurred. If the conjunctiva
natural tears. They are best used in animals with exposure
 is quite chemotic and the cornea is negative to fluorescein stain,
keratitis expected to go long periods without treatment, just
topical corticosteroids or an NSAID may be considered. In
before bedtime, or in patients with lipid layer deficiencies.
select cases with copious discharge a mucolytic may also be
Although the long contact time makes it appealing to use these
used. A lubricating ointment is usually given at bedtime. The
compounds in severely dry eyes, their viscous nature usually
patient is examined at 1 month (ideally a few hours after
an aq   [na a, y e un ssa
 receiving cyclosporine), and tear stimulant therapy is adjusted
Severely dry eyes typically respond better to less viscous
 as described previously. Unless advised otherwise, many owners
 compounds than the ointments.
do not treat the pet on the day of the visit, thereby making it
Reduce Ocular Surface Inflammation. Topical cyclosporine
difficult for the clinician to assess the effcacy of cyclosporine
or tacrolimus may have some efficacy at reducing ocular surface
therapy. If a corneal ulcer or erosion was present at the initial
inflammation—even if they do not increase tear production. If
 examination, the timing of the recheck appointment is dictated
these agents are inadequate, a short course (1 to 4 weeks) of
by the corneal defect and not by the KCS.
topical 0.1% dexamethasone or 1% prednisolone acetate applied
 In many animals cyclosporine or tacrolimus may increase tear
every 6 to 8 hours may be used to reduce cormeal vascularization,
 production to the extent that other medications may be reduced or
 pigmentation, and inflammation. Topical corticosteroids may
eliminated. Even if tear production does not increase, therapy
 also be useful in patients in which conjunctival swelling around
with cyclosporine and the other compounds often results in
the lacrimal ductules precludes tear secretion stimulated by
 substantial clinical improvement and retention of vision. A higher
cyclosporine or tacrolimus. Topical corticosteroids are usually
 proportion of dogs with an initial STT value above 2 mm/min
not used long term, and it is mandatory to perform fluorescein
show a beneficial response to cyclosporine than those with a
staining of the cornea before their use to ensure absence of even
 reading below 2 mm/min. Ifthe STT value is 0 at commencement 
minor cormeal erosions or abrasions. In general these compounds
 of treatment, the chance of response to cyclosporine is less,
should be used with extreme caution in acute KCS because of
although overall clinical response to the regimen may be good.
the risk of corneal ulceration or perforation. Altermatively a
 Corneal pigmentation may be reduced in about 80% of affected
 topical NSAID such as flurbiprofen could be used.
dogs. In rare cases or in patients with intermittent KCS,
Control Secondary Infection. Because white blood cells may
 cyclosporine may be discontinued and tear production remains at
be present within the cornea/conjunctiva and on the ocular
normal levels. Topical cyclosporine is ineffective in KCS
surface simply as a result of inflammation associated with
secondary to distemper, trauma, or advanced glandular fibrosis
 drying, the presence of a purulent discharge does not necessarily
 and in many drug-induced forms of the disorder.
 indicate a secondary bacterial infection. Conjunctival cytology
 If severe ulceration is present, the above topical therapy,
can be a useful guide in determining whether the discharge is
including cyclosporine, is used in addition to aggressive anti-
sterile or septic and whether topical antibiotics are required. If
biotic therapy, and the eye is treated as described in Chapter 10.
bacterial overgrowth or secondary infection has occurred,
 Some patients need immediate surgical therapy if cormeal rupture
topical antibiotics such as neomycin/bacitracin/polymyxin B
is imminent, and such high-risk patients should be referred to
may be used every 6 to 8 hours. If cormeal ulceration has occurred,
an ophthalmologist.
topical antibiotics should be applied more frequently and cormeal
 A minimum of 3 to 6 months of medical therapy is desirable
cytology and culture/sensitivity testing should be considered
 before surgical therapy for KCS is considered, because some
(see Chapter 10for details). Additionally, the response to therapy
dogs regain tear production during this time. If surgical
should be closely followed because ulcerative keratitis in patients
treatment is performed too early, epiphora may result when tear
with KCS often becomes malacic and corneal perforation is not
production retums, requiring surgical reversal. By the end of 3
uncommon. In general topical antibiotics are not typically
to 6 months, the owner has often decided in favor of either
required on a long-term basis, and their continual application
 medical or surgical treatment. For long-term medical treatment,
 typically results only in ocular irritation or resistant organisms.
 antibiotics, corticosteroids, and acetylcysteine may be reduced
Removal of Excess Mucus. Rinsing the eyes with sterile eye
 or deleted from the regimen. For cases that fail to respond with
wash is often suffcient to remove excess mucus. Mucolytics may
 increased tear production or in animals that demonstrate sensi-
be used in selected patients with copious discharge that clings
tivity to cyclosporine or tacrolimus or for whose owners topical
tenaciously to the ocular surface and eyelids. Although 5%
treatment is inconvenient, surgical therapy is a viable
acetylcysteine may be used as a mucolytic, its low pH may result 
alternative.
 in irritation, it has a shelf-life of only a few days once opened, and
 Complications of KCS with medical therapy include
 it is expensive. Nevertheless it may be useful, at least in the short
vascularization, scarring, and pigmentation of the cornea to
 term, in patients with unusually thick and tenacious discharge.
 varying degrees. Surgical attempts to remove this opaque tissue
by keratectomy have a low success rate, with postoperative
return of the tissue in a high proportion of patients. Compli-
Owner noncompliance with frequent medication regimens is
 cations of such keratectomy include reduced tear flow, thought
an important cause of treatment failure, especially when
to be due to section of the corneal nerve and reduced reflex
response to cyclosporine is poor.
lacrimation, bacterial keratitis, predominantly with gram-positive
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
171
organisms, and delayed reepithelialization of the cornea. The
antibiotics are used several times a day. Small, regular amounts
best candidates for this procedure are patients with an excellent
of food (e.g., a dry dog biscuit every hour or so at the owner's
response to cyclosporine, STT values above 15 mm/min, absence
convenience) and soft food are used to establish a continuous
 of recent or current bacterial conjunctivitis, and minimal limbal
supply of secretion until skin sutures are removed at 10 days.
 or conjunctival pigment.
Operative and Postoperative Complications. Postoperative
Surgical Therapy
subcutaneous edema is common for the first few days and can
Parotid Duct Transposition. The parotid duct conducts saliva
be limited by careful suturing of the oral mucosal incision to
from the parotid gland to an oral papilla near the carnassial
 prevent saliva from entering the wound.
tooth. In the transposition procedure the duct and papilla are
 The most severe intraoperative complication is severing the
mobilized and transferred to the conjunctival sac to provide
duct from the papilla, which results in scar formation and
substitute lubrication. The technique is technically demanding
constriction around the junction with the conjunctiva. If the end
and requires precision and practice. Even if successful, it rarely
of the duct is opened with an incision along both sides for 2 to
eliminates the need to treat the eye topically.
 2.5 mm, a wider opening with less chance of constriction can
Because of potential complications (occurring in 9% to 37%
be obtained. Careless or traumatic handling of the duct with
of cases, as reported by various authorities), parotid duct trans-
instruments leads to cicatricial constriction and obstruction.
position should be undertaken only by a competent surgeon
Microsurgical resection and anastomosis of obstructions is
 experienced in the technique and after medical treatment has
 possible but cannot be relied on to repair the results of poor
been evaluated for at least 3 to 6 months.
 Before this technique is performed, the teeth are cleaned,
 The most common postoperative complication is accumu-
and if periodontal disease is present, systemic antibiotics are 
 lations of whitish crystalline mineralized material from salivary
given for 14 days. Before surgical intervention, the clinician
secretions on the ocular surface and lid margins. These
confirms function of the parotid gland and patency of the duct
accumulations cannot be prevented and, if substantial, result in
and eliminates the possibility of xerostomia by placing one or
blepharoconjunctivitis and blepharospasm. They can be 
 more drops of 1% atropine onto the oral mucosa and cbserving
reduced by frequent applications of 1% to 2% ethylene-
the papilla for secretion. In this circumstance, 1% atropine is used
 diaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in artificial tears. Continued
not for its parasympatholytic effects (which would reduce saliva
 use of cyclosporine may be helpful because of its lubricant and
Aanoe pun Sunsnn ang Araa si l asoaq ing (uononnd
antinflammatory properties. Facial irritation from over-
induces profuse salivation when administered via this route.
 production of saliva may occur, but ligation of the parotid duct
 Under general anesthesia the oral cavity is cleaned
1 and
is rarely necessary. After parotid duct transposition, the
packed with gauze soaked in povidone-iodine solution. The
numbers of bacteria on the surface of the eye increase, with
lateral surface of the face is prepared for surgery, and the 
 many uncommon organisms isolated. Usually these organisms
parotid papilla is cannulated with 2/0 nylon (colored) with a
are nonproblematic although they may contribute to blepharo-
smooth blunt end (Figure 9-22). This cannula facilitates later
conjunctivitis in some patients. If glandular function returns
identification and manipulation of the duct. Because of a right-
after transposition, epiphora can result. It may be prevented in
angle bend in the duct as it enters the papilla, perseverance may
 the majority of patients by adequate medical evaluation before
be necessary to effect cannulation. Grasping the papilla and
surgery is attempted. If epiphora should occur, ligation of the
moving it rostrally reduces the bend and makes passage of the
duct or re-transposition to the mouth is curative. Salivary flow
nylon easier.
can also be reduced by surgical reduction of the diameter of the
Subcutaneous approaches ("closed procedures") in which
parotid duct.
no facial skin incision is made have also been described. In this
version the papilla and duct are dissected free via the oral
NEOPLASIA
cavity to the point near where the duct attaches to the gland.
From there a subcutaneous tunnel is made by blunt dissection
 Neoplasms of the lacrimal gland are rare in dogs and manifest
to the inferior-lateral conjunctival cul-de-sac, where the papilla
 as space-occupying lesions that can be removed by suitable
is sutured in place. Extreme care must be taken not to twist or
 orbital approaches (see Chapter 17). Lacrimal adenocarcinoma
 rotate the duct as it is being transposed.
has a good prognosis if removed early, while still localized.
 Conjunctival neoplasms may invade the nasolacrimal duct and
the decision as to which one to use is largely personal prefer-
 spread to the nasal cavity; likewise, neoplasms in the nasal
ence because both procedures have their proponents and
cavity may invade the nasolacrimal duct. Space-occupying nasal
detractors.
lesions may obstruct the nasolacrimal duct, causing epiphora.
 Postoperative Treatment. Until a regular supply of parotid secre-
Cryotherapy may be used near the lacrimal puncta and canaliculi
tions is established, cyclosporine, artificial tears, and topical
without causing permanent obstruction.
172
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
?1
D
Figure 9-22. Parotic cluct transposition. A, Diagrarm of the face (top) anc enlargement of the area where the cluct
enters mouth (bottom). I, Dorsal buccal nerve; 2, anastomosis of dorsal buccal and ventral buccal nerves;
3, ventral buccal nerve; 4, parotid salivary glandl; 5, parotid cluct; 6, papilla of parotid duct; 7, facial vein;
8, upper carnassial tooth. B, Monofilament nylon suture marker in place of the parotid cluct. C, Cotton soaked
with 1:750 aqueous benzalkonium chloricle placed over the paroticl cluct papilla. The course of the cluct is
marked on the skin. D, Umbilical tape passec beneath parotic cluct so that the cuct can be manipulated without 
being clarmaged by forceps. E, Completec clissection beneath the facial vein and branches of buccal nerve with
blunt scissors. (From Severin CA [1973]: Keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Vet Clin North Am 3:407.)
LACRIMAL SYSTeM 
173
H
Figure 9-22, cont'd. Parotid duct transposition. F, Position of biopsy punch to cut the mucous membrane plug
 containing the parotid papilla and cluct. G, Pulling the parotid duct and papilla into the facial wound.
H, Parotid cluct clissected free to the angle of the mancible. I, Tunneling to the lower lateral fornix with blunt
clelicate scissors. I, Oral mucous membrane plug with parotid cuct papilla positioned for suturing to the
conjunctiva. (From Severin CA [1973]: Keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Vet Clin North Am 3:407.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Collins BK, et al. (1994): Immune-mediated keratoconjuncivitis sicca in a
horse. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 4:61.
Barnett KC, et al. (1995): Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs
Collins BK, et al. (1986): Sulfonamide-associated keratoconjunchivitis sicca
with cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment: a European clinical feld tmial.
and corneal ulceration in a dysuric dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:924.
Vet Rec 137:504.
Covitz D, et al. (1977): Conjuncivorhinostomy: a surgical method for the
Berdoulay A, et al. (2005): Effect of topical 0.02% tacrolimus aqueous
control of epiphora in the dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 171:251.
suspension on teat production in dogs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Cullen CL,et al. (2005): Tear fim breakup times in young healthy cats before
Vet Ophthalmol 8:225.
and after anesthesia. Vet Ophthalmol 8:159.
Berger S,et al. (1995): A quanitative study of the effects of Trbrissen on
Gao J, et al. (1998): The role of apoptosis in the pathogenesis of canine
1 s d    d  
keratoconjunctiviis sicca: the effect of topical cyclosporin A therapy.
Burling K, et al. (1991): Anatomy of the rabbit nasolacrimal duct and its
Cornea 17:654.
Chinic al implications. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol I:33
Gilger BC, et al.(1999): Low-dose oral administration of interferon-alpha for
CatetR,ColitzCMH (2002): The causes,diagmosis, and treament of canine
the teatment of immune-mediated keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Vet Med 97:683.
J Interferon Cytokine Res 19:901.
Carrington SD,et al. (1987): Polarized light biomicroscopic observations on
Gilger BC, et al. (1995): Cellular immunity in dogs with keratoconjuncivitis
the precomeal tear film. 2: keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the dog. J Small
sicca before and after tealment with 2% cyclosporine. Vet Immunol
Anim Pract 28:671.
 Immunopathol 49:199.
Coassin M, et al. (2005): Effcacy of topical nerve growth factor teatment in
ogisodsuen onp poed jo anbuqoa peypo  (I 6l) a uosme r ue
dogs affected by dry eye. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 243:151.
for the Teatment of keratoconjunchiviis sicca in he dog. Vet Rec 88:210.
174
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Grahn BH, Mason RA (1995): Epiphora associated with dacryops in a dog.
Nykamp SG, et al. (2004): Computed tomogTaphy dactyocystogTaphy
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:15.
evaluatbion of the nasolacrimal apparatus. Vet Radiol Ulrasound 45:23.
Hartley C,et al. (2006): Effect of age, gender, weight and time of day on tear
Olivero DK,et al.(1991): Clinical evaluation of 1% cyclosporine for topical
production in normal dogs.Vet Ophthalmol 9:53.
treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Harvey CE,Koch SA(197i): Surgical complications of parotid duct
199:1039.
Tansposition in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 7:122.
Petersen-Jones SM (1997): Quantifc alion of conjunctival sac bacteria in
Headrick JF, et al. (2004): Canine lobular orbital adenoma: a Teport of
normal dogs and those suffering from keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Vet Comp
15 cases with distinctive features. Vet Ophthalmol 7:47.
Ophthalmol 7:29.
HicksSJ,et al.(1998):Biochemical analysisof ocular suface mucin
Petersen-Jones SM,Carrington SD (1988): Pasteurella dacryocystitis in
abnormalities in dry eye: the canine model. Exp Eye Res 67:709.
Tabbits. Vet Rec 122:514.
Izci C,et al. (2002): Histologic characteristics and local cellular immunity of
 Playter RF, et al. (1997): Lacrimal cyst (dacryops) in 2 dogs. I Am Vet Med
the gland of the third eyelid after topicalophthalmic administrationof2%
Assoc 171:736.
cyclosporine for treatment of dogs with keratoconjunchivitis sicca.
Reily L, Beech J (1994): Bilateral keratoconjunc hiviis sicca in a horse.
Am J Vet Res 63:688.
Equine Vet J 26:171.
Kaswan RL, et al. (1995): Diagmosis and management of keratoconjunctivitis
Salisbury MR, et al. (195): Microorganisms isolated fom the corneal
sicca. Vet Med 90:539.
surface before and during topical cyclosporine reatment in dogs with
Kaswan RL, et al. (1985): Keratoconjunchivitis sicca: immunological
keratoconjunchivitis sicc a. Am J Vet Res 56:880.
evaluation. Am J Vet Res 46:376.
Sansom J,et al. (1985): Keratoconjunchiviis sicca in the dog associated with
Laing EJ, et al. (1988): Dacryocystotomy: a treatment for chronic
the administration of salicylazosulphapyridine (sulphasalazine). Vet Rec
dacryocy shiis in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:223.
116:391.
Latimer CA, Wyman M (i984): Alresia of the nasolacrimal duct in three 
Schlegel T,et al. (2003): IgA and secretory component (SC) in the third
horses. I Am Vet Med Assoc 184:989.
eyelid of domestic animals: a comparative study. Vet Ophthalmol 6: 157.
Lavach JD, et al. (1984): Dacryocystitis in dogs: a review of 22 cases.
Schmidt G, et al. (1970): Parotid duct transposition: a follow-up study of
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:463.
sixty eyes. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 6:235.
Lim CC,Cullen CL(2005): Schirmer tear test values and tear flm break-up
Slatter D, Davis WI (1974): Toxicity of phenazopyridine: electron
himes in cats with conjunchi vitis. Vet Ophthalmol 8:305.
microscopical studies on canine lacrimal and mictitans glands. Arch
Martin CL, et al. (1987): Cystic lesions of the periorbital region. Comp Cont
Ophthalmol 91:484.
Ed 9:1022.
SpeissBMtal1989:philicgaatusacryodnitisc
wass Aoaias [ie[ ai o Aiaains pue sasas 66l  aloo
bilateral keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a horse. Equine Vet J 21:226.
GelattKN (editor):Veterinary Ophthalmology,3rded.LippincottWilliams
& Wilkins, Philadelphia.
cyclosporine responsive chronic keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Vet Comp
Moore CP, et al. (1987): Density and distribution of canine conjuncival
Ophthalmol 5:25.
goblet cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 28:1925.
Temmote S (2003):Paroid salivary ductmucocele and sialolithiasis following
Naranjo C, et al. (2005). Characterizabion of lacrimal gland lesions and
parobid duct transposition. J Small Anim Pract 44:21.
possible pathogenic mechanisms of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs with
van der Woerdt A, et al. (1997): Surgical treahment of dacryocystitis caused
Jeishmaniosis. Vet Parasitol 133:37.
by cystic dilatation of the nasolacrimal system in three dogs. I Am Vet
Nell B, et al. (2005): The effect of topical pimecrolimus on
Med Assoc 211:445.
keratoconjunchi vitis sicca and chronic superfcial kerabiis in dogs: results
Wilkie DA, Rings MD (1990): Repair of anomalous nasolacrimal duct in a
from an exploratory study. Vet Ophthalmol 8:39.
 bull by use of conjunctivorhinostomy. I Am Vet Med Assoc I96: 1647.
Chapter
CORNEA AND SCLERA
David J. Maggs
ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY, AND WOUND
CORNEAL DISEASES BELIEVED TO BE
SCLERAL DISORDERS BELIEVED TO BE
HEALING
INHERITED
INHERITED
 PATHOLOGIC RESPONSES
ACQUIRED CORNEAL DISEASES
ACQUIRED SCLERAL DISORDERS
ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY, AND WOUND
brane becomes exposed in ulcers in which there is complete
HEALING
stromal loss (descemetoceles). It does not stain with fluorescein
Cornea
and therefore appears as a dark, transparent, sometimes outwardly
bulging structure in the center of a deep cormeal ulcer or wound.
The outer, fbrous coat of the eye consists of the posterior,
 The endothelium is one cell layer thick and lies posterior to
 opaque sclera and the anterior,transparent cornea. The anterior-
Descemet's membrane, lining the anterior chamber. Its role is
 most sclera is covered by the translucent bulbar conjunctiva.
 to pump ions from the stroma into the aqueous. The movement 
The point at which the cornea, sclera, and bulbar conjunctiva
 of water that follows these ions ensures that the corneal stroma
merge is called the limbus. In domestic species the horizontal 
emains relatively dehydrated. This function is a major contributor
 diameter of the cornea is greater than the vertical diameter. This 
 to corneal transparency. Endothelial cells in the adult animal are 
 difference is especially notable in the large herbivores. The 
postmitotic and have a limited capacity to replicate in most
cormeal thickness varies among species and across regions of
species. With advancing age, endothelial cells are lost and the
the cornea but is usually between 0.5 and 0.8 mm.
corneal stroma becomes thicker owing to subtle edema. The
The cornea has the following four layers (Figure 10-1):
normal canine endothelial cell density in young dogs is
approximately 2800 cells/mm?. Corneal decompensation and
· Stratified epithelium and its basement membrane
· Collagenous stroma
inability to remove water from the stroma occur when endo-
thelial cell density falls below 500 to 800 cells/mm?. The endo-
·Descemet's membrane (basement membrane of the
thelium may be prematurely lost or damaged because of genetic
endothelium)
predisposition (endothelial dystrophy), trauma (exogenous and
· Endothelium
due to anterior lens luxation), intraocular or corneal surgery,
The corneal epithelium is stratified, squamous, and non-
 intraocular inflammation (uveitis), or glaucoma. Such loss of
keratinized. From deep to superficial it comprises the basement
 corneal endothelium, beyond the ability of surrounding cells to
membrane, basal epithelial cells, wing cells, and squamous 
 compensate, usually causes permanent cormeal edema and opacity.
surface cells (Figure 10-2). Basal cells are attached to the base-
 The cornea is the most powerful optical refracting surface
ment membrane by hemidesmosomes. As basal cells divide,
in the eye. This ability relies mainly on appropriate corneal
daughter cells are forced toward the surface, become flattened
 curvature and transparency. Cormeal transparency is maintained
as wing cells, and gradually lose many of their organelles. Basal
by numerous specialized anatomic and physiologic features.
cells are replaced by stem cells at the limbus that are constantly
The following features keep the cornea transparent:
undergoing mitosis and migrating centripetally. Surface
· Lack of blood vessels
squamous cells possess microvillous projections that anchor
the deep mucin layer of the precomeal tear film. The corneal
· Relatively low cell density
·Lack of melanin (or other pigments)
stroma, composed of keratocytes, collagen, and ground sub-
· Maintenance of a relatively dehydrated state
stance, constitutes 90% of the cormeal thickness and lends
· A smooth optical surface (provided by the precormeal tear flm)
rigidity to the globe. The parallel collagen fibrils form lamellae
· A highly regular arrangement of stromal collagen fibrils
of interlacing sheets (Figure 10-3), with occasionalinterspersed
keratocytes (which are modified fibroblasts), lymphocytes,
· Lack of keratinization
macrophages, and neutrophils. The regular spacing of stromal 
 Factors that alter the collagen lattice or spacing of collagen
collagen fibrils maintains corneal transparency and distinguishes 
fbrils, the optical surface, or the type of collagen all reduce 
 cormeal stroma from the collagen in scar tissue and sclera.
 corneal transparency (see Figure 10-3). Common examples are
Descemet's membrane is the basement membrane of the
corneal edema, comeal scarring, loss of epithelium, alterations
endothelium, lying between the posterior stroma and the endo-
in the precorneal tear film, elevated intraocular pressure (IOP),
thelium (see Figures 10-1 and 10-4). Because it is continuously
damage to endothelium, formation of scar tissue, altered
secreted by endothelial cells throughout life, this membrane
glycosaminoglycan content, melanosis, corneal vascularization,
thickens with age. It is very elastic but can break from globe
 and infiltration of the stroma with white blood cells.
stretching (buphthalmos), as seen with advanced glaucoma,
Because the cornea is avascular, oxygen and nutrients must
 or with penetrating injuries or ruptured ulcers. Descemet's mem-
be obtained and metabolites disposed of through alternate
175
176
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
日
D
Figure 10-1. Photomicrograph of the feline cornea. A, Epithelium;
B, stroma; C, Descemet's membrane; D, enclothelium.
B
。
G
Figure 10-3.The coreal stroma.A,Collagenlamellae.Parallelcollagen
fibrilsliewithinalamellaandrunthefulllengthof thecorneaSuccessive
C
lamellae run across the cornea at angles to one another. Fibroblasts are
shown between the lamellae. B, Cross-sectional orientation of normal
stromal collagen fibrils. Each of the fibrils is separated from its fellows by
equal dlistances because of mucoprateins, glycoproteins, and other com-
B
ponents of the ground substance. Maurice has explainecl the transparency
of the cornea on the basis of this very exact equiclistant separation, which
results in the elimination of scattered light by clestructive interference.
C, Cross-sectional view of disoriented collagen fibrils, which scatter light
and result in reduction of corneal transparency. The orderly position of the
fibrils can be clisturbed by eclema, alterations in the grounc substance,
D.
scar formation, or infiltration of the interlamellar spaces by cells or
substances such as mineral and lipidl. (Modified from Hogan M), et al.
[1971l: Histology of the Human Eye. Sauncers, Philadlelphia.)
Corneal
lamellae
Figure 10-2. Drawing of the corneal epitheliurm cormprising colurmnar
Descemet's
basal cells (A), polyhecral wing cells (B), and nonkeratinized surface
membrane 
squamous epithelial cells (C). The basal cells are subtencled by the epi-
thelial basement membrane (D), stromal keratocytes (E), and collagenous
-Enclothelium
stroma (F). Note also the extensive arrays of microplicae anc microvilli at 
Tight junction
the corneal surface (C), which help retain the tear film. A sensory
(trigeminal) nerve fiber (H) is shown penetrating the epithelium at its base,
Marginal folds
and a lymphocyte (l) can be seen migrating through the basal epithelium.
 uewn au yo AooHl6ll 1e a [w ueso wo papn)
Microvilli
Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Figure 10-4. lnner cornea showing the ceepest corneal lamellae,
 Descemet's membrane, and the encothelium. The cleeper stromal lamellae
split, and some branches curve posteriorly to merge with Descemet's
membrane. Descemet's membrane is seen in meridlional and tangential
routes (Figure 10-5). Such routes include the aqueous humor,
planes. The encothelial cell are polygonal. Microvillion the apical surface
the precomeal tear film and the atmosphere, and adjacent capil-
of the encothelial cells and marginal folds at the intercellular junctions
lary beds in the sclera and bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva.
protrucle into the anterior chamber. lntercellular spaces near the anterior
The endothelium and posterior stroma receive most of their
chamber are closec by a tight junction. (Moclifiec from Hogan M), et al.
[1971I: Histology of the Human Eye. Saundlers, Philadelphia.]
nutrients from the aqueous humor, but the tear film and atmo-
spheric oxygen are the major sources for the anterior cornea.
An understanding of these differences will help the clinician
 Normal Corneal Healing
better assess whether healing is progressing abnormally, take
appropriate steps to halt delayed healing or clinical deterio-
Each component of the cornea heals to a different degree, at 
ration, and offer more accurate prognoses after ocular injury or
a different rate, and via completely different mechanisms.
disease.
CORNEA AND SCLERA I
177
5
Corneal "ghost vessels"
Conjunctival flush
(visible when magnified)
 Palpebral conjunctival 
Ciliary flush
capillaries-
Precorneal film-
Aqueous humor
2
Cornea
Lesion resolves 
Endothelial budding
Vessels collapse
(4-7-day lag phase)
Limbal capillaries-
Deep
 Superficial
Figure 10-5. Sources of oxygen available to the cornea. (Modlified from
Vessels
3
Saunclers, Philaclelphia.
Figure 10-6. Sequence of corneal vascularization.
 3. About 48 hours after injury, macrophages invade the lesion
Epithelium
and remove cellular debris.
The cormeal epithelium has great regenerative capacity. Within
4. Within the ensuing weeks to months, the density of the
minutes after an injury, epithelial cells surrounding the margin
scar decreases but it does not disappear. Scar resolution
 of the lesion begin to slide and cover the affected area. During
varies somewhat with the species and age of the affected
sliding, melanocytes from the limbus may be carried into
individual.
formerly transparent areas and may be grossly visible as corneal
melanosis. The entire cornea can reepithelialize within 4 to
In vascularized healing of destructive lesions, cellular infl-
7 days although it takes longer for the epithelium to regain full
tration is more extensive, and the area is invaded by blood
thickness and maturity. Once epithelial cells have slid to cover
vessels originating from the limbus (Figure 10-6). Granulation
the defect, mitosis occurs and the multilayered epithelial sur-
tissue is laid down and forms a denser scar than in avascular
face is reconstituted. Finally, firm attachment to the basement
 healing. Eventually the blood vessels cease to be perfused, but
 membrane via the hemidesmosomes is reestablished.
they remain as "ghost vessels" and are visible on slit-lamp
examination. If inflammation recurs at a later date, these ghost
Stroma
vessels may rapidly become perfused, creating the clinical
appearance of more severe or chronic inflammation than is
Stromal collagen is replaced slowly by fibrovascular ingrowth
actually present. Corneal nerves damaged by the lesion
from the adjacent limbus (vascular healing), activation of kerato-
 gradually regenerate, and sensation returns slowly to the
cytes into active fbroblasts (avascular healing), or a combi-
affected area.
nation of the two mechanisms. Uncomplicated stromal wounds
tend to undergo avascular healing, but infected or destructive
Endothelium and Descemet's Membrane
 lesions usually stimulate, and require, vascularized healing, as
in other sites in the body. After injury, stromal keratocytes are
Because of its elasticity, Descemet's membrane retracts when
capable of synthesizing collagen, glycosaminoglycans,
and
damaged, forming tight curls and exposing the subjacent pos-
mucoprotein of the ground substance and of transforming to
terior stroma. Neighboring endothelial cells slide in to cover
fbroblasts that produce nontransparent collagen. However,
the area, and a new Descemet's membrane is eventually laid
stromal collagen replacement rate and repair vary with species
down. In extensive lesions, however, endothelium may not
and may extend to years. Because epithelium heals more
 cover the area, and an area of swollen and edematous stroma
rapidly than stroma, stromal defects are often covered by new
 persists. Endothelial regenerative capability varies with species 
 epithelium before they are filled with new collagen,resulting in
 and age but is generally minimal in mature animals of common 
a facet. Stromal regeneration then occurs beneath the new
 domestic species.
epithelial surface.
 Avascular healing of corneal stroma occurs as follows:
Effects of Corticosteroids on Corneal Healing
1. Due to chemotactic influences, neutrophils infiltrate and
Topical corticosteroids limit corneal opacification by inhibiting
surround the lesion. These cells reach the lesion from the
fibroplasia, decreasing vascularization, and reducing melanosis.
tear flm, from the aqueous humor, and by migration through
 They also control the potentially blinding consequences of
 the corneal stroma after release from limbal vessels.
 anterior uveitis that frequently accompanies corneal wounds.
 2. Keratocytes in the immediate area die. Surrounding
 However, corticosteroids also inhibit epithelial regeneration,
 keratocytes transform to fibroblasts and migrate to the
comeal infiltration with inflammatory cells, fibroblastic activity,
 damaged area, where they synthesize collagen and ground
and endothelial regeneration. The strength of the resulting wound
substance. The collagen fbrils laid down during stromal
is lessened, collagenases are potentiated up to 15 times, and the 
 regeneration are irregular and decrease corneal
risk of infection is greatly enhanced when corticosteroids are
transparency.
used. These potential negative and positive effects on wound
178
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
outcome and healing must be considered carefully. Typically
of onset and recovery, and can become intractable. Also, changes
there is good justification for the use of topical corticosteroids
that would be mild or even unnoticed in other tissues, such as
provided that:
edema, slight scar formation, lipid accumulation, or change in
tissue tension, may greatly alter transparency and therefore are
· Infection has been controlled
 more significant in the cornea.
 An epithelial covering, as demonstrated by lack of 
 Comeal disorders are of three general categories with respect
fluorescein retention, has been established
to origin, as follows:
The structural integrity of the cornea is not compromised
·Exogenous
· The cormeal disease was not caused by feline herpesvirus or
another primary infections agent
· Extension from other ocular tissues
snouagopug -
 Using these guidelines, clinicians tend to use topical corti-
Exogenous insults must first pass through or damage the
costeroids for control of  inflammation associated  with
corneal epithelium, which—despite its special properties and
surgically induced corneal wounds when close monitoring is
 precarious position—is an extremely effective barrier to most
 possible and usually in combination with topical antibiotics.
microbial organisms. With the exception of Moraxella bovis
and the herpesviruses, microorganisms cannot initiate primary
Sclera
keratitis in animals. However, once the epithelium has been
 breached, most microorganisms can readily establish themselves
 The sclera forms a larger portion of the fibrous coat of the eye
 and spread within the avascular stroma. The efficiency of the
than the cornea. The sclera is composed of three layers. From
 epithelial barrier is indicated by the frequency with which
outside to inside they are the episclera, the sclera proper or
pathogenic bacteria are found in the normal conjunctival sac of
scleral stroma, and the lamina fusca. The episclera is composed
domestic animals but the relative rarity of primary disease
of a dense, highly vascular, fbrous layer that binds Tenon's
arising from their presence (see Chapter 3).
capsule to the sclera. Collagenous fibers within the episclera
 Extension of disease processes from adjacent ocular tissues
blend into the superficial scleral stroma. Anteriorly, the episclera
 is a common cause of comeal disorders. Examples are the entry
thickens and blends with Tenon's capsule and subconjunctival
of infectious canine hepatitis virus into the cornea from the
connective tissue near the limbus. The scleral stroma, like the 
aqueous, the effects of uveitis, anterior lens luxation, or glau-
corneal stroma, is composed of collagen fibers and fibroblasts.
coma on the cornea, and the infltration of corneal stroma by
However, scleral collagen fibers differ in diameter and shape,
 inflammatory cells and blood vessels in some systemic diseases,
 run in different directions in different parts of the globe, and are
 most notably neoplasias such as lymphoma.
not regularly spaced, thus making the sclera nontransparent.
Endogenous disorders of the cornea include the corneal
The lamina fusca is the zone of transition between the sclera
 dystrophies, which are familial and likely inherited.
 and the outer layers of the choroid and ciliary body.
Numerous channels exist in the sclera through which vessels
Corneal Reactions to Disease
and nerves pass. These channels also provide routes by which
disease processes such as infections and neoplasia may enter or
The majority of clinically important keratopathies manifest as
leave the eye. The optic nerve leaves the eye through a sievelike
 one or more of the following major pathologic reactions:
perforation of the sclera at the posterior pole called the lamina
cribrosa. Alterations in tension on the lamina cribrosa during
· Corneal edema
glaucoma reduce the size of the spaces through which nerve axons 
· Corneal vascularization
pass and interfere with axoplasmic flow within the optic nerve,
Corneal fbrosis (scar formation)
thereby contributing to optic nerve degeneration in this disease.
 Corneal melanosis
The short posterior ciliary arteries and nerves pierce the sclera
 Stromal infiltration with white blood cells
around the optic nerve and enter the choroid. The long posterior
 Accumulation of an abnormal substance within the cornea
ciliary arteries and nerves pierce the sclera near the optic nerve
(usually lipid or mineral)
and pass anteriorly around the eye to the ciliary body. Anterior
·Stromal malacia (or “melting")
ciliary arteries and vortex veins enter and leave the sclera in the
area overlying the ciliary body. The intrascleral venous plexus lies
Corneal Edema
anteriorly in the outer portion of the scleral stroma. It receives
aqueous humor from the area of the iridocormeal angle via the
 Control of entry of water into the cornea and maintenance of a
angular aqueous plexus and aqueous veins and then passes the 
state of relative dehydration is critical to corneal transparency.
aqueous humor to the choroidal venous system (see Chapter 12).
Comeal edema results when excess fluid accumulates within
 In fish, lizards, birds, and some amphibians, cartilaginous
the stroma and forces the collagen lamellae apart, leading to
and/or bony ossicles may form part of the sclera. These struc-
 loss of transparency (Figure 10-7). The endothelium makes the
tures are thought to enhance ocular rigidity and aid in
 major contribution to control corneal stromal fluid balance by
accommodation. Surgical techniques for removal of the eye
moving solutes (and therefore water) from the stroma to the
(enucleation) must allow for these ossicles (see Chapter 20).
 aqueous against the IOP gradient that forces water into the comea.
The epithelium plays a lesser but critical role by preventing
PATHOLOGIC RESPONSES
tears from entering the stroma. Dysfunction of either of these
 cell layers leads to stromal edema and loss of transparency. For
Because of its avascularity and compact construction, patho-
example, if the comeal epithelium becomes ulcerated, water
enters the stroma from the precorneal film, and gross swelling
CORNEA AND SCLERA 
179
Figure 10-7. Corneal ecema procuces a dliffuse blue corneal opacifi-
cation.(Courtesy University of Calfornia,Davis,Veterinary Ophthalmology
Service Collection.)
conjunctivitis sicca.
and discoloration occur until a new layer of epithelium has
covered the area and fluid balance is restored. Endothelial cell
loss tends to cause more marked and more diffuse corneal
edema. Because endothelial cells are postmitotic and do not
regenerate, some degree of endothelial cell loss and dys-
function occur as part of the normal aging process in all
domestic species. This physiologic loss of endothelium does
not cause appreciable edema. Hastened cell loss may also occur
as a result of primary corneal or intraocular disease processes
such as corneal endothelial dystrophy, glaucoma, uveitis, and
anterior lens luxation. Regardless of cause, corneal edema
appears hazy blue and may be localized or diffuse. Corneal
edema is reversible if the underlying cause is removed,
 Superf
ficial
sufficient endothelial cell function remains, and fluid balance is
reestablished. Severe corneal edema may result in epithelial
 daa e ym p e u sass poa je da i an
bullae formation (bullous keratopathy) and sometimes corneal
 ulcer. Note also the superficial vessels and diffuse corneal ecema.
vascularization (see later).
Corneaf Vascularization
and corneal clearing occur in the vascularized zone between the
vessel extremities and the limbus. Therefore, although corneal
The normal cornea contains no blood vessels; however, vessels
blood vessels may result in ingrowth of melanin, influx of
invade the comeal stroma in response to various pathologic
inflammatory cells, and facilitate stromal fbrosis, control of 
 processes and especially during vascularized stromal healing.
vascularization with the use of topical corticosteroids during
Corneal vascularization may be superfcial, deep, or both.
the repair process may not always be indicated.
Superficial vessels occur in the anterior third of the stroma and
appear "treelike"; that is, they usually begin at the limbus as a
Cormeal vascularization may be either deep or superficial.
single vessel and branch extensively within the cormea (Figure
Depth of the invading vessels indicates depth of the inciting
10-8). Very superficial vessels may be seen crossing the limbus
lesion.
because they are continuous with the conjunctival circulation.
 Deep intrastromal vessels appear more “hedgelike"; that is, they
are shorter and straighter, branch less, and look like paintbrush
Corneal Fibrosis
 strokes (Figure 10-9). They appear to arise from under the limbus
because they are continuous with the ciliary circulation. The
Collagen fibrils produced during repair of a stromal lesion are
depth of the invading vessels is usually a very accurate indication
of the depth of the initiating lesion—-deep vessels suggest comeal
light transmission. This produces a grey "wispy" or "feathery"
stromal or intraocular disease, whereas superficial vessels are
 opacity within the cornea under a normal epithelium that is not
induced by surface (usually cormeal epithelial) disease. The
associated with other signs of inflammation except perhaps
sequence of vascularization is shown in Figure 10-6. In compli-
some residual corneal blood vessels (Figure 10-10). With time,
cated and persistent corneal lesions, aggressive vascularization 
scars may clear optically but often do not do so completely. The 
with granulation tissue formation occurs.
 tendency to clear is greater in young animals and also in cattle,
 Corneal vascularization is generally beneficial, especially
sheep, and cats. Melanosis of the scarred area often occurs in
in stromal repair. Clinical evidence of this tendency is seen in 
dogs. In dogs lipid deposition may also occur near the scar. The
repair of corneal stromal abscesses, especially in horses. In 
deeper the initial injury, the more dense and permanent the scar
such cases, as corneal blood vessels advance from the limbus
and the lesser the tendency for transparency to return. With
toward and through a lesion, resolution of other comeal disease
increasing size, a corneal scar is termed a nebula, macula, and
180
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
and migration of normal limbal melanocytes during corneal
inflammation. The more heavily melanotic the limbus, the
more likely and the denser the corneal melanosis.
Corneal melanosis is a nonspecific response to chronic
 corneal irritation as seen with exposure (due to lagophthalmos,
facial nerve dysfunction, macropalpebral fissure, etc.), frictional
 irritation (due to distichiasis, entropion, nasal skin folds, etc.),
tear film abnormalities (especially keratoconjunctivitis sicca
[KCS]), or chronic immunologic stimulation such as pannus
(chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis). In these disorders,
removal of the stimulus usually prevents or slows progression
of the melanosis but may not cause it to recede. With severe
and/or chronic imitation, melanosis is accompanied by changes in
the comeal epithelium such as thickening, rete peg formation,
metaplasia, vascularization, and keratinization. Species variation
Figure 10-10. Corneal fibrosis anc superficial vascularization in a horse.
 in the tendency for development of corneal melanosis exist,
with birds being extremely resistant, horses and cats moderately
resistant, and dogs extremely susceptible.
 Corneal melanosis itself is not normally treated unless it is
 rapidly progressive in susceptible breeds (e.g, pug) or is inter-
fering with vision. However, detection of corneal melanosis
should always stimulate thorough diagnostic investigation for
the underlying source of irritation. The underlying cause should
A
B
c
be removed when possible (e.g., immunomodulation in pannus,
Figure 10-11. Types of corneal scars. A, Nebula; B, macula; C, leukoma.
removal of source of frictional irritation, reconstructive
blepharoplasty, tear replacement therapy).
At the very least, animals with corneal melanosis should
leukoma (Figure 10-1l). If the iris attaches to the posterior
undergo the following evaluations:
surface of the leukoma owing to anterior synechia, the lesion is
called an adherent leukoma.
 Schirmer tear test
 Assessment of palpebral reflex
Corneal Melanosis
 Application of fluorescein stain
 Examination for presence of trichiasis, distichiasis, ectopic
Corneal melanosis is frequently called corneal pigmentation
cilia
or pigmentary keratitis (Figure 10-12). This term ignores the
 Assessment for entropion or ectropion
fact that pigments other than melanin (such as hemoglobin or
Corneal cytology if there are masslike or plaquelike lesions
the soluble pigment in corneal sequestra of cats) may cause
as seen with pannus (chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis)
opacification of the cornea; therefore corneal melanosis is the
preferred term. Regardless of the term chosen, it is often used
Cormeal melanosis ("pigmentary keratitis") is not a diagnosis
as if it were a clinical diagnosis; actually, corneal melanosis is
but a nonspecific sign of chronic cormeal irritation. It should
merely a sign of chronic corneal irritation that may arise from
stimulate a thorough diagnostic investigation of potential
any number of causes, each with a different treatment and
underlying causes.
 prognosis. Melanin is deposited in the corneal epithelium and
sometimes the anterior stroma and originates from proliferation
Stromal Infiltration with White Blood Cells
 Inflammatory cell infiltration of the corneal stroma appears as
yellowish green discoloration (Figure 10-13). It usually occurs
in response to an infection or in association with a corneal
foreign body. However, nonseptic infiltration of the cornea can
occur. This finding is most dramatic in the equine cornea, is
commonly seen in dogs, and is relatively infrequently seen in
cats. Inflammatory cells originate from the tear film, limbus, or
uveal tract (via the aqueous humor) and can accumulate within
the comeal stroma surprisingly quickly, indicating a potent
chemotactic stimulus. Cormeal cytology along with culture and
sensitivity testing should be performed, and broad-spectrum
 antibiotic therapy initiated promptly. Frequent reexamination
of the cornea is justified because liberation of lytic enzymes
Figure 10-12. Corneal melanosis and vascularization clue to brachy-
from inflammatory cells, microbes, and corneal cells can be
cephalic ocular syncrome ina shih tzu.(CourtesyUniversity of California,
associated with rapid collagenolysis (i.e., malacia or corneal
Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
"melting").
CORNEA AND SCLERA |
181
 Figure 10-15. Corneal lipid cegeneration and ecema in a dog with
Figure 10-13. Corneal stromal infiltration with white blooc cells (equine
episcleritis.(CourtesyUniversity fCalifornia,Davis,Veterinary Ophthal
stromal abscess). Note also the cleep corneal blood vessels. (Courtesy
mology Service Collection.)
University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
Collection.)
Accumulation of Abnormal Substances (Lipid or Mineral)
In some animals, deposition of lipid in the cornea is due to
within the Cornea
elevated serum lipid concentrations. Investigation of common
causes of systemic hyperlipidemia, such as hypothyroidism,
diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, and primary hyper-
line, or shiny white areas in the cornea. These accumulations
lipidemia, is therefore warranted. Both serum cholesterol and
frequently contain cholesterol and/or calcium in varying
 triglyceride concentrations should be assessed. If serum lipid
combinations. All corneal layers may be involved, but lipid/
values are elevated, dietary management and treatment for
mineral deposits are usually subepithelial, so the cornea does
 the underlying cause are necessary. Surgical removal of lipid
not retain fluorescein stain. Such accumulation occurs as a
plaques is contraindicated until hyperlipidemia is corrected,
primary or inherited, but not necessarily congenital, condition
because keratitis from the keratectomy increases lipid deposition
in many canine breeds (corneal lipid dystrophy) but rarely in
during healing. A specifc lipid keratopathy is noted in frogs
(see Chapter 20).
condition (corneal lipid degeneration) in dogs and horses but
pue [eaeq Aeoidai si Aydonssp pidrT "sies ui Aiarn
Stromal Malacia(or"Melting")
nonpainful, has minimal effect on vision, and requires no
therapy (Figure 10-14). Corneal lipid degeneration, by contrast,
Stromal malacia or "melting'’ occurs as a result of collagenolysis 
is usually unilateral  and frequently associated
with
 due to collagenase liberation from invading white blood cells,
inflammation (keratitis, scleritis, or uveitis). Coincident
especially neutrophils within the corneal stroma, micro-
cormeal edema, vascularization, fbrosis, and melanosis are
organisms, or corneal epithelial cells or keratocytes. The result
common (Figure 10-15). Occasionally there is a history of
is loss of rigidity and structure of the corneal collagen with
ocular trauma, often with ulceration that healed with lipid
subsequent “sagging" or “oozing" of the stroma over the
deposition. Corneal lipid accumulation may also occasionally
ventral cornea or eyelid (Figure 10-16), followed by stromal
be seen with long-term corticosteroid use.
loss with development of a deep ulcer or descemetocele. This
change can occur very quickly and in relative isolation if the
stimulus for collagenase production is marked and rapid but is
more commonly seen in association with other corneal
pathology, notably stromal white cell infiltration and edema.
CORNEALDISEASESBELIEVED TOBE
INHERITED
Microcornea
Microcornea can be diagnosed through measurement of the
horizontal and vertical diameters of the cornea and comparison
of the results with values from the other eye (Figure 10-17).
The condition is usually unilateral and associated with
 microphthalmia (see Chapter 2).
Dermoid
Figure 10-14. Corneal lipicl/mineral cystrophy in. a cog. (Courtesy
 Dermoids are examples of a choristoma or congenital circum-
Collection.)
182
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
A
Figure 10-16. Corneal malacia ("melting"} and stromal eclema in a horse. A, Frontal view; B, profile. (Courtesy
University of Missouri, Columbia, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.
Figure 10-17. Right anc left globes from a limousin calf. Note the uni-
lateral microphthalmia anc microcornea. This calf also hac arthrogryposis.
(Courtesy University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology
Service Collection.)
Figure 10-19. lris-to-cornea persistent pupillary membranes. (Courtesy
University of Missouri, Columbia,Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
Collection.)
limbus. Because the comea underlying dermoids may be thinner
than normal, referral to an ophthalmologist is recommended.
Persistent Pupillary Membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs) are an inherited failure of
the uveal tract to regress appropriately during embryologic and
 immediate postnatal development. They are more fully discussed
 in Chapter 11. However, they can cause cormeal opacity if they arc 
from the iris collarette to the comeal endothelium (Figure 10-19),
where they are associated with comeal edema, melanosis, and/or
Figure 10-18. Corneal (limbal) clermoic in a clog.
fibrosis. These are noninflammatory and vary in their effect on
vision according to severity. No therapy is possible or necessary
for PPMs; however, affected animals should not be bred.
abnormal place (Figure 10-18). They may involve conjunctiva,
third eyelid, eyelid margin, limbus, or cornea in various
Congenital Subepithelial Geographic Corneal
combinations. In dermoids containing hair follicles, hair grows 
Dystrophy
from the surface, which causes conjunctival and corneal
irritation evident as corneal opacity, conjunctival hyperemia,
Congenital subepithelial  geographic  corneal dystrophy is
and ocular discharge. Dermoids usually grow slowly, if at all.
transient and occurs in many dog breeds. It appears as hazy,
They are believed to be inherited in Hereford cattle, Birman 
grayish-white, geographic or mosaic areas of usually subtle
and Burmese cats, Saint Bernard dogs, dachshunds, and
superficial comeal opacity in the interpalpebral fissure of neonatal
 Dalmatians. Treatment requires careful surgical excision with
 puppies. It is painless and often goes unnoticed. The condition
 conjunctivectomy, combined with keratectomy if they cross the 
usually resolves by 10 weeks of age. Treatment is not required.
CORNEA AND SCLERA I
183
therapy usually does not appreciably reduce stromal edema or
the blue discoloration of the cornea. Thermokeratoplasty may
be beneficial in advanced cases. This technique involves making
multiple, small, superficial stromal bums with a specialized
ophthalmic cautery unit. Referral to an ophthalmologist for this
 procedure is recommended because the cornea can be perfo-
rated by the heat of the cautery unit. Corneal endothelial
dystrophy is usually progressive and permanent.
ACQUIRED CORNEAL DISEASES
Acquired disorders of the cormea may be categorized as ulcerative
or nonulcerative, infectious or noninfectious, or by cause,
topography, species affected, or depth. However, regardless
of the classification system used, some overlap occurs. For
example, ulcerative disease may have numerous causes and
Figure 10-20. Superficial punctate keratitis in a dog. (Courtesy University
stromal diseases may also be ulcerative. Therefore the following
of Missouri, Columbia, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
discussion of the common acquired keratopathies of the domestic
species is made without regard to classification systems.
Superficial Punctate Keratitis
Corneal Ulcers
The term superfcial punctate keratitis is applied to multiple,
superficial, circular defects in the corneal epithelium that may
Broadly defined, a comeal ulcer is any keratopathy in which
or may not stain with fluorescein (Figure 10-20). The affected
there is loss of epithelium. Ulcerative keratitis is an equivalent
areas are scattered diffusely across the cormeal surface, some-
term because there is always some inflammation associated
times leaving the cornea looking like the skin of an orange. The
with corneal ulceration. Corneal ulcers occur commonly in
condition is recognized as familial in shelties and dachshunds,
veterinary practice, and although simple (uncomplicated) ulcers
may be due to a qualitative tear film deficiency (most likely
would likely heal without veterinary attention, a complicated
ulcer requires optimal management if the affected eye is to be 
topically twice daily. Recurrences are frequent. Similar (non-
saved.
recurrent and noninherited) keratopathies may be induced by
Optimal management of corneal ulcers requires knowledge
mild comeal insults, such as exposure during general anesthesia
 of the following information:
and use of topical anesthetics.
· Common causes of ulceration
Corneal Lipid Dystrophy
· Expected healing times for ulcers
· Classification of ulcers as simple or complicated
Deposition of lipid or, occasionally, mineral in the anterior
· Classification of complicated ulcers into three
stroma (immediately subjacent to the epithelium) is relatively
therapeutically relevant categories
common in dogs and is seen rarely in cats and horses. Deposits
·General medical therapy
are usually central or isolated from the limbus and are bilateral
·Indications for surgery
although they may be asymmetrical (see Figure 10-14). The
condition appears to be familial and may be static or slowly
Common Causes of Corneaf Ulceration
progressive. The lipid may take a variety of forms, including
circles, ovals, and arcs concentric with the limbus. This con-
Corneal epithelium is constantly being physiologically abraded
dition can be differentiated from corneal degeneration
(see
by normal blinking and desiccation and being replaced by
Figure 10-15) or diseases caused by circulating hyperlipidemia,
 normal cell turnover. Rate of regeneration and surface protec
because corneal lipid dystrophy is noninflammatory, lacks
 tive mechanisms are usually sufficient to ensure that ulceration
connection with the limbus, and is associated with normal fasting
does not occur. Therefore, from a purely mechanistic view-
serum cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations.
point, cormeal ulcers may be thought of as arising when this
situation becomes unbalanced owing to decreased corneal epi-
Corneal Endothelial Dystrophy
thelial protection or increased comeal abrasion (Figure 10-21).
Cormeal protection is provided by the tear film along with the
Corneal endothelial dystrophy is relatively common in Boston
upper, lower, and third eyelids. Inadequate production,
terriers, boxers, dachshunds, poodles, and Chihuahuas. The
retention, or dispersion of the tear film is therefore frequently
condition is believed to be inherited and results in a premature
associated with corneal ulceration.
and clinically relevant loss of corneal endothelial cells to the
 Excessive abrasion can be further divided into endogenous
point at which cormeal edema results. Unless the edema becomes
causes, such as abnormal lid position or anatomy and eyelash
severe enough to cause bullae formation and secondary ulcer-
abnormalities, and exogenous causes, such as trauma and
ation, the disease is characteristically nonpainfu1. Symptomatic
foreign body retention in the conjunctival fornix—all of which
 treatment with hyperosmotic 5% sodium chloride ointment may
are common in dogs but less common in most cats because of
minimize epithelial edema and subsequent bullae formation.
breeding practices and the relatively more protected environ-
Unless the ointment is applied at least four times daily, this
ment in which cats tend to live. Brachycephalic cats are more 
184
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
 Corneal Ulceration 
At every examination all ulcers should be classified as"simple"
or "complicated" on the basis of their duration and depth.
Inadequate Corneal Protection
Excessive Epithelial Los8 
 Nonhealing ulcers in all patients can be assigned to one of
Tear film
Eyelid
Endogenous
Exogenous
deficiencies
- dysfuncti on
 causes
the following three categories:
causes
 Lagophthalmos 
 Entroplon 
Trauma 
KCS
CN VIl paralysis
·The underlying cause went undiagnosed or untreated and is
 Distichiasis
Foreign body
CN V paralysis
still present. Reexamination of the eye, with special
Qualitative tear
 Ectopic cilia
deficiencies
Ectropion 
FHV-1
Trichiasis
attention to trichiasis, distichia, ectopic cilia, tear film
Meibomitis
Macropal pebral 
Lid tumors 
EHV-2
health, presence of herpesvirus or M. bovis, lagophthalmos,
..fsure..
 Blepharitis
M. bovis
ectropion, entropion, neuroparalytic/neurotrophic keratitis,
Check:
or a foreign body, is essential.
 STT and TFBUT 
 Corneal reflex
The ulcer has become infected by bacteria. Such ulcers
Tarsal gland exam 
 Palpebral reflex
Thorough palpebral exam
Conjunctival biopsy
With magnification
typically have stromal involvement or loss and frequently
Lid closure
 Lid anatomy
appear malacic or “gelatinous" The surrounding corneal
stroma may be greenish yellow, suggesting inflammatory
Figure 10-21. Diagnostic algorithm for patients with corneal ulcers. CN,
cell infltration.
Cranial nerve; EHV2, equine herpesvirus type 2; FHV-1, feline herpesvirus
type 1: KCS, keratoconjunctivitis sicca; STT, Schirmer tear test; TFBUT
· The ulcer has become indolent. A canine-specific diagnosis,
tear filrm break-up time.
indolent ulcer describes a superficial ulcer with a lip of
nonadherent corneal epithelium (see later). Recently a
similar syndrome has been suggested in horses, but 
likely to have these eyelid/cilia abnormalities. Horses are
histologic confirmation is lacking so far. By contrast,
susceptible to exogenous trauma but rarely suffer eyelid or tear
nonhealing superficial ulcers with nonadherent lips in cats 
film abnormalities. Infectious agents also qualify as exogenous
 are presumed to be due to feline herpesvirus until proven
 causes of cormeal ulceration, but it should be noted that other
otherwise. In horses, fungi and herpesvirus are often
than M. bovis and the herpesviruses, primary infectious
implicated in nonhealing ulcers. Therefore persistent
ulceration does not occur.
 superficial ulcers in cats and horses fit into one of the two
preceding categories in this list—that is, the original cause
Ulceration due to exogenous trauma is a diagnosis by
(herpesvirus) is still present or they have become infected
exclusion and can be reached only after all other potential
(with a fungus).
causes are eliminated through consideration of limited
infectious agents, thorough examination of lid function and
All complicated ulcers should be further characterized as
 anatomy, and measurement of tear production.
 indolent (in dogs), infected, or having a persistent (and perhaps
unrecognized) cause.
With consideration of the known causes of ulcers, the basic
diagnostic approach to corneal ulceration should consist of the
following evaluations:
General Medical Therapy for Corneal Ulcers
·Schirmer tear test
 Regardless of cause, chronicity, severity, and whether the ulcer
· Assessment of corneal and palpebral reflex
is complicated or simple, some general comments about
·Thorough examination of lid and conjunctival anatomy and
 medical therapy are possible. Most important is identification
function, including the posterior face of the third eyelid
 and removal or correction of the cause. Without this step, ulcers
· Microbiologic assessment if the ulcer is believed to be 
will not resolve and may progress. At the very best, they will
infected
heal only to recur shortly afterwards. Other important thera-
·Fluorescein staining
 peutic considerations are the topical use of an antibiotic and a
mydriatic agent along with prevention of self-trauma. Some
Simple versus Complicated Uicers
  i     
 medication, which are more fully described later.
Corneal wound healing was fully described earlier. An ulcer
ANTIBlOTICs. Topically applied antibiotics are indicated
should heal (i.e., become reepithelialized and no longer retain 
for all corneal ulcers. Although no bacteria are believed to be
fluorescein stain) within 7 days and without progression to
primary corneal epithelial pathogens and therefore initiate
involve the stroma. Failure of occurrence of both of these
ulcers in small animals, disruption of epithelium does pre-
events is abnormal. Therefore at every examination all
dispose the comeal stroma to infection. In ruminants, M. bovis
ulcers should be classified as “"simple" or "complicated" on the 
and perhaps Chtamydia and Mycoplasma spp. may initiate
basis of two defining features—duration and depth. Simple
keratitis; these plus other bacteria will certainly complicate
ulcers heal without stromal involvement and within 7 days.
ulcers and delay healing. A full discussion of each of the major
Complicated corneal ulcers involve the stroma (i.e., are deeper)
 antibiotics appears in Chapter 3. The following discussion is a
and/or persist longer than 7 days. It is important to note
brief summary of some useful antibiotics.
that to be classified as simple, ulcers must be both acute
Triple antibiotic (neomycin and polymyxin B along with
and superficial; whereas to be classified as complicated, ulcers
bacitracin or gramicidin) is an excellent frst choice for
need only be deep or chronic, although of course they can
 prophylaxis because it is broad spectrum and polymyxin B is
be both.
effective against many Pseudomonas spp. Gentamicin and
CORNEA AND SCLERA |
185
tobramycin are widely used and inexpensive, but they have
discouraged. Subconjunctival injection of antibiotics may be
relatively poor efficacy against the majority of organisms
beneficial in therapy of rapidly progressive ulcers but is not
constituting normal conjunctival flora and therefore are not
intended as a substitute for frequent topical therapy, and
ideal first choices for broad-spectrum prophylaxis. Frequency
extreme care must be taken to avoid globe penetration at the
of antibiotic application is determined by severity of the
 time of injection. Topical ophthalmic preparations must not
condition. Ointments should be avoided when there is a risk of
be used for injection; this route of therapy is discussed
cormeal perforation because the petrolatum vehicle causes a
more fully in Chapter 3. Most systemically administered anti-
severe granulomatous uveitis if it enters the eye.
biotics are not expected to achieve therapeutic concentrations
More aggressive therapy is needed if there are initial signs
in the cornea because it is avascular. These agents may be
of infection (stromal loss, infiltration with white blood cells,
indicated, however, if perforation has occurred or is impending,
or malacia), rapid progression of the ulcer, or poor response
 in heavily vascularized corneas, and after conjunctival graft 
to standard therapy, or when cytology and/or culture results
placement.
suggest that organisms are present. Fortified and compounded
 MYDRIATIC THERAPY. Stimulation of corneal nerves can
solutions can be formulated in such cases (Box 10-1). Alter-
natively, some of the newer topical fluoroquinolone prepa-
pain associated with ulceration and can cause animals to rub
rations are particularly effective, especially for Pseudomonas
 their eyes and worsen corneal ulceration. Topical application of
 spp. In all situations in which more resistant organisms are
 a mydriatic agent is therefore justified in most cases of corneal
suspected, corneal culture and sensitivity testing should be
 ulceration. Atropine 1% ointment or ophthalmic solution should
performed, and antibiotics chosen wisely to minimize develop-
be used at a frequency sufficient to effect mydriasis-usually
ment of resistant organisms. Widespread use of any of these
 between one and three times daily initially with rapid tapering
preparations for prophylaxis in noninfected ulcers is strongly
of dose frequency as adequate pupil dilation is achieved.
 Box 10-1 | Compounding fortified and noncommercial topical antibiotic solutions 
Amikacin
Final concentration = 14 mg/mL (1.4% solution).
 Shelf lifet = 30 days.
 1. Remove 2 mL from a 15-mL squeeze bottle of artificial tear
 solution' and discard.
Ticarcillin
 2. Add 2 mL of injectable amikacin (50 mg/mL).
 Final concentration = 6.7 mg/mL (0.67% solution).
1. Reconstitute a 1-g vial of ticarcillin with 9.4 mL of sterile
Shelf lifet = 30 days.
water.
 2. Add 1.0 mL (100 mg) of this solution to a 15-mL squeeze
Cefazolin
 bottle of artificial tears.
 Final concentration = 6.3 mg/mL (0.63% solution).
 1. Remove 2 mL from a 15-ml squeeze bottle of artificial tear
Shelf lifet = 4 days.
 solution and discard.
 Keep the solution reffigerated.
 2. Reconstitute a 500-mg vial of cefazolin with 2 mL of sterile
water.
Tobramycin (Fortified)
 3. Add entire 500 mg of the reconstituted cefazolin (2.4 mL) to
 the bottle of artificial tear solution.
1. Add 1.0 mL of injectable tobramycin (40 mg/mL) to a 5-mL
 Final concentration = 33 mg/mL (3.3% solution).
bottle of commercial ophthalmic tobramycin solution (0.3%).
Shelf lifet = 14 days.
Final concentration = 9.2 mg/mL (0.92% solution).
 Keep the solution reffigerated.
 Shelf lifet = 30 days.
Cephalothin
Vancomycin
 1. Remove 6 mL from a 15-ml squeeze bottle of artificial tear
1. Remove 9 mL from a 15-ml squeeze botle of artificial tear
 solution and save.
 solution and discard.
2.
Add the 6 ml of tear solution to a 1-g vial of cephalothin.
 2. Reconstitute a 500-mg vial of vancomycin with 10 mL of
 3. Add the entire 1 g of the reconstituted cephalothin (6.4 mL) to
sterile water.
 the bottle of artificial tear solution.
 3. Add the entire 500 mg of reconstituted vancomycin (10.2 mL)
 Final concentration = 65 mg/mL (6.5% solution).
to the bottle of artificial tear solution.
Shelf lifes = 14 days.
Final concentration = 31 mg/mL (3.1% solution).
Shelf lifet = 4 days.
 Keep the solution refrigerated.
Keep the solution reffigerated.
Gentamicin (Fortified)
1. Add 2 mL of injectable gentamicin (50 mg/mL) to the 5-mL
bottle of commercial ophthalmic gentamicin solution (0.3%).
Adapted from Baum JL (1988): Antibiotic use in ophthalmology, in Tasmen W, Jaeger EA (editors): Duane's Clinical Ophthalmology, 4th vol. JB Lippincott,
Philadelphia.
ophthalmic antibioic preparahions. Am J Ophthalmol I1l:686.
sData from Osbome E, et al. ( 1976): The stability of ten antibiolics in artifcial tear solutions. Am I Ophthalmol 82:775.
186
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Atropine compromises tear production and should be used
cautiously if at all in the treatment of ulcers associated with
KCS. Monitoring of gastrointestinal function of horses
 receiving topically administered atropine is also important.
ANALGESIC/ANTIINFLAMMATORY AGENTS. Topical corti-
 costeroids are totally contraindicated in the therapy of corneal
ulcers because they predispose to infection, delay corneal heal-
ing, and potentiate enzymatic destruction of the cornea. The
(NSAIDs) (see Chapter 3) also may delay corneal healing, and
use of such agents has recently been associated with devastating
ulcer progression and globe rupture in some humans with
infected ulcers. Therefore these drugs are contraindicated in
the presence of herpesvirus and for other infected ulcers.
Systemic administration of NSAIDs may be indicated, and
systemic corticosteroids can be used judiciously to treat severe
Figure 10-22. Deep stromal ulcer with cliffuse corneal eclema, cleep
concurrent uveitis, even if the corneal wound is infected. With
corneal vascularization, and stromal white blood cell infiltration. There
long-term use, however, they may impede vascular ingrowth,
is also hypopyon ventrally. (Courtesy University of California, Davis,
which is required for healing of deep stromal ulcers.
Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
 PREVENTION OF SELF-TRAUMA. Prevention of self-trauma
 is an elementary but often overlooked part of ulcer manage-
ment. Exacerbation of ulceration through self-trauma often
 goes unobserved but is common and especially important in
treatment of indolent ulcers, in which poorly adherent corneal
epithelium may be easily abraded if the patient rubs the eye.
All ulcers should be treated by removal or correction of the
 cause, application of a topical antibiotic, and prevention of
self-trauma.
Treatment of Uncomplicated (Simple) Corneal Ulcers
A
C
The basic tenets for treatment of superficial ulcers are identif-
Figure 10-23. Deep corneal ulcers anc their sequelae. A, Descemetocele;
B, anterior synechia; C, iris prolapse.
cation and treatment of the cause and institution of broad-
spectrum antibiotic therapy. Prevention of self-trauma and
induction of mydriasis are considered on an individual basis.
A recheck examination should always be scheduled within
 7 days. Uncomplicated, superficial ulcers treated in this manner
should have healed at the recheck. If they have not, one of the
most common errors in ulcer treatment is frequently made: It is
assumed that the wrong antibiotic was chosen and a different
one is tried. Rather, an ulcer that has not healed at the l-week
recheck should be recognized as a complicated ulcer and
should be further categorized as complicated by the primary
cause still being present, by secondary infection, or because it 
is indolent.
When a superficial ulcer does not heal in 7 days, change the
diagnosis, not the antibiotic.
Figure 10-24. Descemetocele stained with fluorescein. Note that the
ulcer's "walls" retain stain but the "floor" cloes not. This photograph was
Treatment of Deep (Stromal) Corneal Ulcers or
obtained while the patient was uncler general anesthesia before place-
Descemetoceles
 ment of a conjunctival graft. An eyelic speculum has been placed, anc the 
 globe is being rotated with a pair of forceps.
Ulcers that are rapidly progressive or that have areas of stromal
melting (see Figure 10-16), stromal loss (Figure 10-22), or
marked cellular infiltrate (see Figure 10-13) are considered
 Descemet's membrane (which is sometimes forced outward by
complicated and assumed to be infected. A scraping should be
the IOP), the lesion is called a descemetocele (Figure 10-23, A).
collected and assessed cytologically, and a sample submitted
 Descemet's membrane does not stain with fluorescein (Figure
for aerobic bacterial and sometimes fungal culture and sensi-
 10-24). If untreated, Descemet's membrane may rupture with
tivity testing. If the stroma is entirely destroyed exposing
 escape of aqueous, which carries the iris forward into the hole.
CoRNEA AND SCLERA I
187
If the iris is incorporated into the healing wound, an anterior
synechia is formed (Figure 10-23, B). If the iris is carried out of
the wound, iris prolapse results (Figure 10-23, C).
 Medical treatment for stromal ulcers and descemetoceles is
similar to (although usually more intensive than) that for simple
ulcers: An initiating cause should be sought and removed or
controlled if possible, broad-spectrum topical antibiotic and
mydriatic therapy should be initiated, and an Elizabethan collar
should be provided. Stromal ulcers should be topically
medicated with antibiotics as often as hourly for the first 1 to
2 days. If the ulcer is deeper than half corneal thickness, it will
also benefit from surgery because the corneal stroma has only
 a limited ability to regenerate, and healing is slow, often requiring
fbrovascular infiltration. This process may take weeks if it
occurs spontaneously from the limbus but can be rapidly pro-
vided by conjunctival grafting.
 Conjunctival grafts provide the following advantages:
· Mechanical support for a thin or weakened cornea
· A continuous supply of serum, which contains
anticollagenases and growth factors
24.
 An immediate source of actively replicating fibroblasts for
collagen regeneration in the stroma
Figure 10-25. A, A conjunctival islanc graft is harvested from the
 e anss y d uzee e jo asn ym un ae
·A route for systemic antibiotics to be delivered to the
The island graft is sutured into the corneal clefect around its whole
corneal ulcer
perirmeter. C and D, A 360-dlegree conjunctival graft is harvested by
 Conjunctival grafts are somewhat tedious and time-consuming
complete perilimbal incision and centripetal aclvancement of conjunctiva.
Aensn s! pue syaap eauao ael o paasa a pinous ad ye sul
to perform and require advanced training, excellent magnifi-
a globe salvage technique because scarring is comrmonly extensive.This
cation, correct instrumentation, access to and familiarity with
 graft does not require corneal sutures, although they can aid in recucing
use of 7/0 or smaller suture material with a swaged-on, spatula-
the chance of clehiscence.
tipped needle, and knowledge of basic microsurgical
prin-
 ciples. In most cases the patient needing a conjunctival graft
should be referred to an ophthalmologist. Probably the most
difficult skill to acquire is judgment of depth for placement of
cormeal sutures. Ideally, they should be placed approximately
three-quarter cormeal thickness and without penetrating the
anterior chamber.
 There are at least five broad types of conjunctival grafts:
· Island or free grafts (Figure 10-25, A and B)
· Complete or 360-degree grafts (Figure 10-25, C and D)
· Simple advancement or hood grafts (Figure 10-26, A)
· Rotational pedicle grafts (Figure 10-26, B)
· Bridge grafts (Figure 10-26, C)
Advancement-type (hood or 360-degree) grafts are probably
C
easiest to harvest and place; however, rotational pedicle grafts
more easily reach a defect in the central cornea. For rotational
pedicle grafts, dissection is typically begun with tenotomy
176.
scissors at the temporal bulbar conjunctiva (Figure 10-27).
 Figure 10-26. A, A conjunctival aclvancement graft is harvested frorm the 
A strip of conjunctiva of suffcient length and width to reach
bulbar conjunctiva acjacent to the corneal clefect. This works best for
and cover the ulcer is freed from the underlying Tenon's
paraxial corneal cefects. B, A rotational pedicle graft in which a
capsule. The conjunctival graft should be thin and mobile.
conjunctival pedlicleisharvested from the lateral bulbarconjunctiva and
A useful rule of thumb is that if tenotomy scissors can be
rotated over the corneal clefect. These grafts provicde support and
readily visualized through the conjunctiva, the graft is thin
vascularity to axial defects. C, A conjunctival bridge graftis also harvested
frorm bulbar conjunctiva but is left attached at both encls to enhance the
enough. Comeal epithelium should be gently debrided for 
vascular supply and equalize retraction forces that may cause clehiscence.
 approximately 1 mm around the ulcer before suturing the
In all three graft types, the conjunctiva is moved to cover the corneal
graft to ensure union between the subconjunctival tissue of
clefect in the clirection of the arrow.
the graft and the corneal stroma in the ulcer bed. Debrided
    s   
 simple continuous pattern. Additional sutures at the limbus
examination. The graft is sutured to viable cornea surrounding
 may help secure the graft. It is not essential to close the rent in
the ulcer with simple interrupted sutures. An alternative
 the bulbar conjunctiva; however, doing so tends to reduce post-
 approach is to tack the graft with four to six simple inter-
 operative pain. The rent can be closed with a simple continuous
rupted sutures and then oversew the graft perimeter with a
pattern.
188
I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
junctival edges are simply apposed to each other with horizontal
mattress sutures of 6/0 or 7/0 polyglactin 910 (see Figure 10-25,
C and D). Although this feature makes the graft technically
easier to perform, early graft retraction is the major
disadvantage. The 360-degree graft may be necessary, however,
for very large central corneal ulcers.
TEMPORARY TARSORRHAPHYVERSUS THIRDEYELID
FLAP. Third eyelid flaps have been used widely for treatment of
ulcers. Although they do provide a "bandage" that reduces
desiccation and frictional irritation of the cornea by the upper
and lower eyelids, they are also associated with some unwanted
and potentially deleterious effects. Penetration of medications 
through or around the third eyelid to the affected cornea is
questionable at best; indeed the anterior face of the third eyelid
provides a slick, and direct "chute' to the nasolacrimal puncta.
Inability of the owner and clinician to monitor progress or,
more important, worsening of the ulcer behind the third eyelid
 is another serious limitation of this technique. Some of the
C
D
more serious, progressive ulcers presented to veterinary
Figure 10-27. Fornix-based aclvancement flap for smaller lesions near the
 ophthalmologists have developed behind a third eyelid flap.
limbus. A, A small limbal incision is macle adjacent to the lesion. B, The 
flap isuncermined using blunt dlissection.C,Parallelor slightly civergent
 In comparison, a temporary lateral tarsorrhaphy is extremely
 conjunctival incisions are macle toward the fornix, with the flap wiclth
easy to perform, provides adequate comeal protection, and
sufficient to cover the corneal lesion. D, The conjunctival flap is aclvanced 
allows medication and monitoring of the ulcer (Figure 10-29).
centrally to cover the corneal lesion and sutured in place with simple
A temporary tarsorrhaphy is performed using 3/0 or 4/0 silk or
interrupted sutures of 7/0 to 9/0 polyglactin.
braided nylon on a %- or /%-curved, cutting micropoint needle,
with the aid of 3x to 5x magnification. The upper eyelid is
Medical therapy for ulcerative keratitis is continued, and the 
 grasped gently with fine tissue forceps, and the needle is passed
 graft can be trimmed when the cornea is healed (Figure 10-28).
Trimming is usually done at least 6 to 8 weeks after graft
 placement, although thin grafts may slowly integrate with the
 cornea and not require trimming. Use of topical corticosteroids
to minimize scarring and reduce vascularization was tradition-
ally recommended. More current information suggests that
avascularity is the natural state for the cornea and will be
regained spontaneously as the biologic need for blood vessels 
wanes. Cyclosporine (2% solution) does have some anti-
 angiogenic properties and may be a safer alternative if anything
is needed.
Other types of conjunctival grafts vary mostly in extent of
 dissection. Free or island grafts provide mechanical support to
the cornea and may be sutured around their whole perimeter,
B
thus ensuring a good "seal"; however, they lack the vascular
advantages of other grafts. The 360-degree graft is unique in
that it does not require corneal sutures; rather, the free con-
c
D
Figure 10-29. Temporary tarsorrhaphy. A to C, A series of intermarginal
horizontal matress sutures are placed with knots on the upper eyelid to
minimize accumulation of secretions.Stents are notnecessaryunless the
lids are undler a great deal of pressure as with exophthalmos or replace-
nonhaired junction and emerge at the eyelid margin, just anterior to the
meibomian gland orifices (B) so that they do not abracle the cornea even
if the lids subsequently gap slightly. D, Sutures placed too ceeply so as to
emerge through the conjunctival surface result in corneal uiceration.
(Moclified from Severin CA [2000l: Severin's Veterinary Ophthalmology
Figure 10-28. Conjunctival peclicle graft irmmecliately after being trirmmecl.
Notes, 3rd edl. Severin, Ft. Collins, CO.)
CORNEA AND SCLERA I
189
through the skin, entering at the haired-nonhaired junction
vial or commercially available eyedrop container. Autologous
approximately 3 mm from the eyelid margin and emerging just
serum can then be applied to the infected eye as needed (as
anterior to the meibomian (tarsal) gland orifices, which appear
frequently as every 30 to 60 minutes for a rapidly melting
as a gray line of small circles along the margin. Care is taken
 corneal ulcer). Serum should be stored in the refrigerator and
not to penetrate the conjunctiva, as doing so would cause suture
replaced every few days.
to rub on the cornea. The suture is then continued through the
lower lid, entering just anterior to the meibomian gland orifices
Treatment of Indolent Corneal Ulcers in Dogs
and emerging at the haired-nonhaired junction. A mattress
suture is completed by passing of the needle back through the
Indolent ulcers (also known as refractory or "boxer” ulcers,
lower and then upper lids in an identical manner approximately
spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial defects, and recurrent
5 to 7 mm medial to the point where the original "bites" were
erosions) are a unique type of superfcial ulcer in dogs that is
taken. The suture should be knotted firmly to further reduce the
frustrating for veterinarians and clients alike. This type of ulcer
chance of corneal contact with the suture if “gapping" of the 
is due to a failed union between epithelial basement membrane
eyelids occurs. This completes a horizontal mattress-type pattern
and the anterior layers of the corneal stroma and, defined as
in which the knot is on the upper lid and less likely to be coated
such, has been proven to occur in dogs only thus far, although
with ocular secretions. Usually one or two mattress sutures in
a clinically similar ulcer has been described in horses. These
this style beginning at the lateral canthus will close the lids to
ulcers are typically chronic, superficial, noninfected, and
an extent that still permits monitoring and topical treatment
minimally to moderately painful. They usually vascularize
medially but provides adequate corneal protection.
slowly if at all and are characterized by a nonadherent lip of
CYANOACRYLATE ADHESIVES (TISSUE GLUE). In some
cormeal epithelium at the ulcer perimeter that is easily debrided
cases medical-grade ophthalmic cyanoacrylate adhesives may
with a cotton-tipped applicator (Figure 10-30). The epithelial
be used as an alternative to surgery. These provide structural
lip often produces a characteristic "halo" fluorescein staining
support for deep stromal ulcers but none of the biologic advan-
 pattern because the stain runs under and is then seen through the
tages of conjunctival grafts. Cyanoacrylate has some inherent 
 lip (Figure 10-31). Indolent ulcers, which are seen regularly in
antimicrobial properties and helps stimulate vascular ingrowth
but should be reserved for ulcers in which the health of the
surrounding stroma is adequate and certainly not malacic. The
technique is simple, but optimal position of the globe should be
obtained to avoid inadvertently gluing adnexal structures. The
patient is anesthetized and the eyelids are held open with a wire
eyelid speculum. To facilitate adhesion, the corneal wound
edges are gently debrided of epithelium, and the ulcer bed is
cleaned and dried very gently with sterile cellulose sponges. A
single drop of cyanoacrylate is applied through a 27- or
30-gauge needle or painted onto the ulcer with a tuberculin
syringe lacking a needle. The smallest drop can be generated by
turning rather than pushing the plunger. The goal is not to fill
the entire defect but rather to apply a thin coat over the ulcer
bed and adjacent normal cornea for approximately 1 mm. The
glue is typically extruded within 7 to 14 days as cormeal blood
vessels and/or epithelium migrate underneath it. A soft contact 
Figure 10-30. 1nclolent corneal ulcer in an elcerly golclen retriever. Note 
the inclistinct ulcer margins anc the mild corneal ecema. There is also
lens and/or a partial temporary tarsorrhaphy may be placed for
some superficial vascularization. (Courtesy University of California, Davis,
 added protection and to reduce frictional irritation from the
Veterinary Ophthalrmology Service Collection.
rough glue surface.
PROTEASE INHIBITORS. Corneal “melting" (or malacia) is
one of the most devastating consequences of severe ulceration
as well as a prerequisite for stromal involvement. Collagenases
 are enzymes produced by certain bacteria, especially gram-
negative organisms such as Pseudomonas spp. They are also
elaborated by degranulating neutrophils and damaged corneal
stromal or epithelial cells. Therefore deep (stromal) ulcers are
assumed to be infected until proven otherwise. For patients
with deep ulcers and for which surgery is not an option, protease
inhibitors may be applied topically. Anticollagenase products
are used in hope of inhibiting corneal melting. Acetylcysteine 
was once widely advocated for this purpose. More recently,
autologous serum has been promoted as a preferred product.
 In addition to serum's broad-spectrum anticollagenase properties,
it also contains numerous growth factors assumed to be beneficial.
Figure 10-31. The same inclolent corneal ulcer as in Figure 10-30, here
shown after fluorescein staining. Note the indistinct manner in which the
 Serum is harvested from a venous blood sample collected
ulcer bec stains anc that there is a "halo" of stain rather than a stainecd area
aseptically and allowed to clot in a red-top tube. After centri-
with sharp borcers.(Courtesy University of California,Davis,Veterinary
fugation, serum is separated and stored in a sterile multidose
Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
190
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
older dogs of any breed and boxer dogs of any age, are believed
lium through the ulcer bed and must emerge in normal adherent
to represent a defect in either the epithelial basement membrane
 epithelium on the other side of the ulcer. They must be multiple
or, more likely, the anterior stromal surface that prevents
and deep enough to create obvious, visible score marks in the
adhesion between these two structures. Diagnosis relies on
corneal stroma.
 characteristic signalment, chronicity, clinical appearance, and
 Medical therapy is continued afterward as for any superficial
staining pattern of the ulcer as well as the ease with which the
ulcer. A single postoperative dose of atropine is usually
 epithelium is debrided.
sufficient to control reflex uveitis. Hyperosmotic (5%) sodium
Grid keratotomy is the treatment of choice for indolent ulcers
chloride ointment is recommended if corneal edema is marked,
(Figure 10-32). Indolent ulcers should probably be pretreated for 
because it might further decrease already impaired epithelial
a few days with a broad-spectrum ophthalmic antibiotic (such as
 adhesion. Grid keratotomy may be combined with application of 
a triple-antibiotic formulation) to sterilize the cormeal surface
a soft contact lens and partial temporary tarsorrhaphy. This step
 before the grid keratotomy is performed. The first stage in this
 provides greater protection for the healing cornea and contact
therapeutic procedure is conveniently the final step required for
lenses may increase surface tension via a gentle “suction-cup"
 diagnosis—removal of any redundant, nonadherent epithelium 
effect, thereby enhancing epithelial adhesion. When a contact 
via debridement with a dry cotton-tipped applicator after
lens is in place, ophthalmic solutions rather than cintments
corneal application of topical anesthetic. The epithelial lip
should be used to ensure drug delivery to the corneal surface
surrounding indolent ulcers is very easily debrided, which some-
and to minimize chances of dislodging the contact lens. A
times results in an extensive ulcer. Occasionally, epithelium can
 success rate of approximately 80% can be expected with grid
be debrided out to the limbus over part or all of the corneal
 keratotomy alone. Treatment failures tend to arise when patients
surface. This is, however, a necessary first step, and inadequate
are “under-treated" by inadequate debridement or by making
 debridement is one of the more common reasons for treatment
too few, too superficial, and/or too short score marks in the
failure. A simple (nonindolent) ulcer cannot be debrided in this
cornea. For indolent ulcers that have not healed 10 to 14 days
fashion.
after an initial grid keratotomy, the procedure should be
Grid keratotomy is performed after debridement. General
repeated. Recurrent or unresolved cases should be referred for
anesthesia or sedation is recommended for fractious dogs and
a superficial keratectomy.
for a clinician learning this technique. With compliant animals
 Grid keratotomy is a potent treatment for indolent ulcers in
and an experienced operator, topical anesthesia and good
dogs, but it is contraindicated in all other ulcer types in dogs
restraint or sedation may be sufficient. Grid keratotomy con-
 and in ulcers in other species. The indolent ulcer diagnosis has 
sists of making linear striations in the cornea in a “cross-hatch"
 not been proven to occur in cats or horses, and grid keratotomy
or grid pattern using the tip of a 25-gauge needle. A tuberculin
is absolutely contraindicated in cats, in which it frequently
syringe seems to make the ideal "handle" for directing the
induces a corneal sequestrum.
needle. Striations must extend from normal adherent epithe-
Grid keratotomy is the treatment of choice for indolent ulcers
in dogs. It should never be used in cats.
Epithelial Inclusion Cysts
Epithelial inclusion cysts are an uncommon sequela to corneal
ulceration or trauma. They occur when epithelial cells become
disorganized during healing such that they form small,
日
flled, yellow corneal masses (Figure 10-33). They protrude
from the comeal surface and indent the stroma itself but are not
C
D
2A6.
Figure 10-32. Corneal cebricdement anc grid keratotomy. A, After appli-
cation of a topical anesthetic, all loose corneal epithelium is debrided 
with a cotton-tipped applicator in radlial sweeps toward the limbus. B, A
25-gauge needlle is dlragged on a shallow angle and with its bevel up
across the ulcerated cornea until a series of approximately parallel score
markshas been macle in the corneal stromatoa depthnotexceecling 25%
of the stroma; inset shows greater cletail. C, A second set of stromal
groovesisaeataoutretthfirsteDtapetif
contact lens or biocegraclable collagen shield can be placed over the
ulcerated cornea. Note: This technique is contraincicated in feline 
Figure 10-33. Corneal epithelial inclusion cyst. (Courtesy University of
corneas.
California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
CORNEA AND SCLERA |
191
 infected and cause litle corneal reaction or pain. The cysts are
removed with superficial keratectomy.
Mycotic Keratitis
Bacterial and viral infections of the cornea are much more
commonly recognized than fungal infections in most parts of
the world. However, particularly in tropical and subtropical
areas, any corneal ulcer that does not respond to antibiotic
 therapy, especially one associated with stromal infiltration with
white blood cells and especially in a horse, should be scraped.
The exfoliated tissue should then be examined cytologically
and cultured for possible mycotic involvement. Antifungal
sensitivity testing can be done but is slow and expensive. There
is also some controversy about the clinical applicability of in
vitro sensitivity data. In a study of equine ulcerative
Figure 10-35. Cytologic specimen from a corneal scraping showing
keratomycosis in Florida, the frequency of fungal isolates was
septate, branching fungal hyphae (A), a neutrophil (B), anc some corneal
Aspergillus, 41%;
Fusarium,
32%;Penicillium,
epithelial cells (C). (Courtesy University of California, Davis, Veterinary
9%;
Ophthalmology Service Collection.
Cylindrocarpon, 4%; Scyalidium, 4%; Torulopsis. 4%; and
 yeast, 4%. The in vitro susceptibility of the isolates to different 
antifungal agents was natamycin = miconazole > itraconazole
hyperemia, epiphora, and corneal edema and neovascularization.
> ketoconazole. The organisms were significantly
less
susceptible to fluconazole than to the other medications. In a
 than would be expected for a similarly severe bacterial keratitis.
separate series of 35 fungal isolates from equine eyes, the
 Diagnosis requires observation of fungal elements within samples
following susceptibilities were reported: natamycin, 97%;
submitted for cytology (Figure 10-35), culture, or histopathology.
nystatin, 74%; miconazole, 69%; amphotericin, 51%; 5-fluoro-
A subpalpebral lavage tube is essential in severe cases
cytosine, 49%; and ketoconazole, 31%. Such reports must be 
J rqu pu Aouanba aq se am sn und an on suno
interpreted with caution, however, because frequency of
 medications needed. Medical therapy should include topical or
 different organisms shows geographic variation.
 systemic treatment with an antifungal drug. Commonly used
The clinical appearance of mycotic keratitis can also vary
topical agents are shown in Table 10-1. Systemically administered
 greatly. Generally, fungal infections have a much slower onset
 agents are discussed in Chapter 3. Some authors recommend
 and course than bacterial infections as well as a classic history
treatment as infrequently as once or twice daily at first,
of having been resistant to conventional antibiotic therapy.
especially if reflex uveitis is poorly controlled because rapid
Horses with keratomycosis may be presented with ulcerative
 fungal death is alleged to incite a potent immune reaction and
keratitis or comeal abscessation underneath an intact epithe-
 worsening uveitis. Control of secondary uveitis with flunixin
lium (see later). Regardless, one of the more characteristic
 meglumine, and of ciliary spasm with 1% atropine ophthalmic
features is focal, creamy yellow, somewhat "fluffy" corneal
drops or ointment, is essential. Because most antifungal agents
opacities at the advancing edge of the lesion—so-called satel-
 do not have antibacterial properties, topical application of a
lite lesions (Figure 10-34). These are sometimes characteristically
broad-spectrum antibiotic is also required if ulceration is
deep within the corneal stroma or at the inner endothelial
 present. If the cornea is malacic, serum should be applied
surface. Other clinical signs are as expected for corneal lesions
topically for its anticollagenase properties. In many horses an
and include blepharospasm, conjunctival and episcleral
early decision to surgically debulk the lesion will hasten heal-
 ing time, reduce pain, lessen the chance of globe rupture, and
 permit the harvesting of diagnostic samples from deep in the
 cornea. Keratectomy of the lesion and surrounding stromal
opacities, followed usually by placement of a conjunctival graft 
to cover and vascularize the stromal defect, is also an excellent
 choice. Referral for penetrating or posterior lamellar kerato-
plasty may be required for very deep lesions.
Stromal Abscess
Corneal stromal abscesses are believed to occur when small
corneal puncture wounds allow bacteria or fungi to gain
entrance to the stroma. The epithelium then rapidly heals over
 these sites, leaving the infectious organisms sequestered in the
 avascular cornea, where they can replicate and elicit a marked
inflammatory response known as a corneal abscess. Stromal
abscesses are seen most commonly in horses. They appear as
Figure 10-34. Equine stromal keratomycosis. Note the "fluffy" stromal
infiltrate as well as the associatec dliffuse corneal eclerma anc cleep and
focal yellowish white corneal opacities, with evidence of
superficial corneal blooc vessels. (Courtesy University of California, Davis,
usually marked uveitis (Figure 10-36, A). Corneal vascular-
Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
ization is variable and is the means by which these lesions
192
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 10-1 | Topical Treatment of Mycotic Keratitis
PREPARATION FOR
DRUG
TOPICAL OPHTHALMIC USE
COMMENTS
 POLYENES
 Natamycin
 5% ophthalmic suspension
Only commercial ophthalmic preparation
Usually well tolerated 
 Has broad spectrum and good efficacy against common fungal isolates from equine
keratomycosis
Expensive
Amphotericin B
0.10%-0.25% solution
Dilute with sterile water or 5% clextrose (not saline)
 Irritating when injectedl; do not use subconjunctivally
 Antagonizes miconazole
 Nystatin
 50,000-200,000 U/ml
Highly effective against yeasts
ung snauey suee Ae pa
IMIDAZOLES
 Miconazole
0.5%-1.0% solution
Dilute with saline or 5% cextrose (not artificial tears)
 Broacl-spectrum activity similar to that of natamycin
 Some activity against gram-positive bacteria
Antagonizes armphotericin B
 Subconjunctival use recommenced by some authors 
 Fluconazole 
0.2% solution
 Some stucies have suggested low susceptibility among equine corneal isolates
 Cood corneal penetration
 Subconjunctival use recommenced by some authors 
Itraconazole
1%
 Equivalent to 5% natarmycin in one stucly
Addition of 30% dlirmethyl sulfoxide improves corneal penetration
Voriconazole
1%
 Experimental application to normal horses only
Good corneal penetration
No clinical reports available
Figure 10-36. A, Equine stromal abscess. Note the markecd inflarmmatory cell infiltrate within the cornea and
intense vascular response. B, The same eye after 5 cays of medlical treatment. Note the decrease in stromal
cellular infiltrate, especially_peripheral to the acvancing corneal blood vessels. (Courtesy University of
California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.).
ultimately heal if not surgically resected and treated with a
Corneal Lacerations
 corneal or conjunctival graft (Figure 10-36, B).
 Etiologic diagnosis is challenging because the depth of these
 Comeal lacerations occur commonly in all species. In dogs and
 lesions within the cornea limits collection of samples to those
cats they are frequently secondary to cat-scratch injuries. In
 obtained surgically during keratectomy. Likewise, penetration
horses sharp trauma from objects in the environment is most
 of antimicrobial agents is often limited by the intact epithelium
 common. Blunt trauma also causes globe rupture; however, this 
overlying these abscesses. For these two reasons, referral for
tends to be along the limbus rather than dissecting across the
diagnosis and surgical treatment is recommended. Recently
central cornea. An attempt to differentiate blunt from sharp
some success has been achieved with systemic administration
trauma is important because the former carries a greater risk
 of an antifungal agent such as fluconazole, which penetrates
 of intraocular damage. Regardless of cause, three prognostic
the blood-ocular barrier and achieves adequate concentrations 
factors should be established in all corneal lacerations: depth
in the aqueous humor (see Chapter 3).
 of the laceration, involvement of the lens, and extension of the
CORNEA AND SCLERA 
193
Figure 10-37. Corneal laceration (A) and associatec anterior lens capsule
rupture (B). Owing to the elasticity of the anterior lens capsule, a simple
linear laceration usually "gaps" open to become elliptical, as seen here.
Note also the intralenticular melanin and iris from the neighboring iris.
Asaano) aangdn ansde sual jo agsasns Asuoas si aueeadde su
University of California,Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
 Figure 10-38. Repair of a corneal laceration. A, Correctly placed corneal
Collection.)
suture. B to D, Incorrectly placed sutures: B, Suture macle too cleep
penetrates the anterior chamber. C, Suture male too superficial results in
 poor encothelial closure and persistent eclerma. D, Uneven suture bites lead
laceration beyond the limbus. Whenever possible, referral to an
poor apposition of wound edges.(Modlified from SlatterD [eclitorl 2003）:
 ophthalmologist is recommended.
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, Vol ll, 3rdl ed. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
 Lacerations that penetrate the superficial corneal layers only,
rather than the entire corneal thickness, usually have a good
 prognosis with appropriate care. They are treated in essentially
the same way as ulcers. Perforating wounds with globe rupture
have a poorer prognosis because of intraocular damage and
greater tissue disruption at the wound edge. They heal by
vascularization (either slowly and naturally from the limbus or
prolapsed iris, or via a conjunctival graft). Regardless, there is
more scar tissue and corneal opacification.
A careful examination is made to evaluate the extent of intra-
 ocular injuries. Great care must be taken to prevent pressure on
the globe so as to avoid the risk of further intraocular damage.
One of the most common causes of severe endophthalmitis and
 often secondary glaucoma leading to enucleation is unrecognized
damage to the lens and its capsule from a perforating corneal
injury (Figure 10-37). This damage causes phacoclastic uveitis
that is usually unresponsive to medical treatment and may
 Figure 10-39. Superficial, partially embecddled corneal foreign bocy. This
require emergency lensectomy (see Chapter 13). A careful assess-
was a piece of plant material that could be forcibly rinsed from the
ment of the limbus for the full 360 degrees should be conducted.
corneal surface.
Lacerations that extend beyond the limbus carry a great risk of
involvement of the underlying ciliary body and retina with
marked uveitis, retinal detachment, and sometimes phthisis
being likely. If a menace response cannot be elicited and the
intraocular structures cannot be fully examined, a consensual
 pupillary light reflex from the affected to the normal eye should
be evaluated. If major intraocular damage is evident, a
consensual pupillary light reflex is present, and the limbus is
intact, the patient should be referred for suturing of the corneal
wound (Figure 10-38).
Removal of Corneal Foreign Bodies
Corneal foreign bodies are usually of two different types,
those that adhere to the corneal surface by surface tension and
may subsequently become even more firmly attached by
creating an ulcerated region at their borders (Figure 10-39) and
 Figure 10-40. Penetrating plant rmaterial foreign bocy in a horse. This foreign
those that penetrate into the cornea and sometimes into the
bocy penetrated at the meclial lirmbus anc crossed the anterior charmber
globe itself (Figure 10-40). They must be removed to limit
without penetrating or clamaging the lens or iris. trequired surgical removal.
194
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOCY
pain, reduce the risk of infection, and prevent vascularization
inflammatory corneal disorders. Epidemiologic evidence of
and scar formation. Small adhered foreign bodies are best
 increased severity and greater resistance to treatment in patients
removed with a fine stream of eye rinse or saline directed
residing more than 4000 feet above sea level suggests that
forcefully at the corneal surface after application of a topical
ultraviolet radiation is important in the pathogenesis. It has been
anesthetic. This procedure is safe only if the cornea is not 
 proposed that ultraviolet radiation alters the antigenicity of tissue
weakened, because a stream of fluid can rupture a
descemetocele or other deep ulcer. Penetrating foreign bodies
 In the early stages, corneal epithelial cells proliferate and the
are more problematic and should be referred for surgical
superficial stroma is infiltrated by plasma cells and lymphocytes.
removal by means of an incision made in the cornea over the 
 As the disease progresses, melanocytes, histiocytes, and fibro-
long axis of the foreign body under an operating microscope.
cytes also enter the cornea, and edema and neovascularization
After removal of either class of foreign body, a broad-spectrum
occur. In the advanced stage, the corneal epithelium and
 topical antibiotic and atropine are administered to limit infec-
 anterior stroma become heavily melanotic and vascularized,
tion and the effects of secondary uveitis, respectively. If globe
and the epithelium may become keratinized (Figure 10-41).
perforation has occurred, a systemically administered antibiotic
The epithelium remains intact in this disease, but frequently the
should also be used. Corneal epithelial healing is normally
mounds of fbrous granulation tissue retain fluorescein and the
rapid as long as secondary infection is controlled.
inregular corneal surface permit pooling of fluorescein. Both
findings provide the illusion of ulceration. The syndrome tends
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
to affect the temporal, nasal, inferior, and superior corneal
quadrants, listed in descending order of occurrence and
 KCS is discussed in detail in Chapter 9.
severity. Corneal vascularization and melanosis occur first at
the temporal limbus and gradually move centrally. The other
 Pigmentary Keratitis
quadrants are gradually affected, and eventually the whole
 cornea may be involved. Edema and corneal degeneration often
Pigmentary keratitis is sometimes used as a clinical diagnosis
 occur in the stroma 1 to 3 mm ahead of the advancing lesion.
when corneal melanosis is noted. In fact, corneal melanosis is
Depigmentation and thickening of the external surface of the
simply a sign of chronic keratitis due to any number of causes,
third eyelid, usually near the margin, is common and can even
each with a different treatment and prognosis. Corneal melanosis 
occur without corneal lesions. This process contributes to the
(see Figure 10-12), its causes, and the diagnostic steps to follow
inflamed appearance of the eye. Mucoid ocular discharge is
when it is noted were previously described in the section on
common.
 pathologic responses. The most common causes of corneal
 The age of onset and breed of the affected animal are of
 melanosis (and the chapters in which they are discussed) are as
prognostic significance. In animals affected when young (e.g,
follows:
1 to 2 years) the condition usually progresses to severe lesions,
whereas animals first affected at a later age (e.g., 4 to 5 years) have
· Chronic exposure due to brachycephalic ocular syndrome
(see Chapter 6)
less severe lesions. Severity of the disease also appears to vary
with locality. Animals with higher sun exposure (because of
Cilia disorders (see Chapter 6)
latitude or elevation) show more severe lesions, which progress
Tear film dysfunction (see Chapter 9)
more rapidly to a more advanced state and respond to therapy
· Any combination of the preceding conditions
less favorably, than do dogs with less ultraviolet exposure.
 Treatment is directed at halting progress of the melanosis
 Lesions must affect a large area of the cornea before vision is
through correction of the underlying cause. This usually stops
affected, and some cases may be quite advanced before frst
further melanin deposition, but melanin already present may be
being noticed by the owner. Although the appearance of lesions is
slow to recede if it does so at all. For this reason, the import-
ance of early detection of subtle melanosis and correction of
 causes before melanosis is advanced cannot be overstated.
"Pannus" or Chronic Immune-Mediated Superficial
Keratoconjunctivitis
Pannus classically refers to nonspecific vascularization of
avascular tissue (e.g., cartilage or cornea). However, it has
been used so commonly to describe a characteristic immune-
mediated disease of the cornea and conjunctiva of dogs that it
is also used here by common convention. Other synonyms that 
have been used are Uberreiter's syndrome and chronic
immune-mediated keratoconjunctivitis syndrome. Although a
distinct breed predilection for this disorder is seen in German
shepherds and greyhounds, it can affect any dog breed and
should never be discounted as a diagnosis simply because the
Figure 10-41. "Pannus" (chronic immune-mecliated keratoconjunctivitis
 patient is not one of the commonly affected breeds.
synclrome) in a cog. Note the cobblestone-like plaque of granulation
tissue and rmelanin over the lateral cornea with a leadling banc of corneal
The exact etiology is unknown. Cell-mediated immunity to
eclema. The third eyelid is similarly affected, as is comrmon in this
 corneal and uveal antigens has been demonstrated in affected
synclrome. (Courtesy University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthal-
corneas; however, this can also occur in many other chronic
mology Service Collection.)
CORNEA AND SCLERA |
195
often characteristic, especially if noted in a predisposed breed
lateral) tarsorrhaphy (see Figure 10-29) to prevent cormeal trauma
with appropriate sun exposure, diagnosis can be confirmed by
 and desiccation. Supplementation of the tear film is essential, and
 cytologic assessment of a corneoconjunctival scraping, which is
usually almost purely lymphocytic/plasmacytic. Pannus must
present. Prognosis totally depends on the cause and treatment
be distinguished from cormeal melanosis due to other chronic
options for the primary condition causing the neurologic deficit.
irritation, such as KCS, exposure, and frictional iritation, as
If treatment is not possible, enucleation may be required.
well as from granulation tissue present in vascular healing of
comeal stromal wounds.
Feline Herpetic Keratitis
 Pannus is a chronic progressive corneal disorder that cannot
be cured. The therapeutic goal should be control and some-
Feline herpesvirus type 1 (FHV-1) is a very common pathogen
times regression of the lesions so that blindness can be avoided.
of the cornea and conjunctiva of the cat. Although the virus
The owner must understand that lifelong therapy is necessary at
preferentially infects and replicates within the conjunctiva, it
a level depending on the severity in each patient and the
does commonly cause corneal disease. Only the corneal syn-
 geographic locality. With the exception of susceptible patients
dromes are discussed here. The reader is referred to Chapter 7
living at high elevation, useful vision can usually be preserved
for a full discussion of relevant virology, pathogenesis, and
with medical therapy alone. In patients living at low elevation
conjunctival signs, along with methods of diagnosis and treat-
or for mild lesions occurring in middle-aged dogs, treatment
ment. Feline herpesvirus may affect the corneal epithelium or
consists of topical application of a potent and penetrating
stroma and produce different clinical entities in each. Epithelial
 corticosteroid eyedrop, such as 0.1% dexamethasone or 1%
replication results in severe ulcerative keratitis, which 
1S
prednisolone two to four times daily and/or topical cyclosporine
dendritic at first (Figure 10-42) but rapidly becomes geographic
(1% to 2%) twice daily until an adequate response is seen.
(i.e., maplike). Disease within the corneal stroma is believed to
Therapy can then be tapered as dictated by severity of signs.
result from viral particles or antigens entering through
Improvement usually takes a minimum of 3 to 4 weeks to
ulcerated epithelium and may result more from immuno-
 become apparent. The goal should be the minimum number
 pathology than from viral replication. Both forms can occur in
and frequency of medications needed to prevent progression or
 young kittens after primary infection or in adult cats as a result
recurrence. If possible, the corticosteroid should be stopped
of reactivation of virus quiescent in sensory ganglia after
and the animal maintained on cyclosporine alone, as the latter
 periods of stress or administration of corticosteroids.
has fewer side effects with long-term use. In severe or resistant
Herpetic keratitis in cats, like herpetic conjunctivitis, is
cases, subconjunctival corticosteroids (preferably short-acting
frequently resistant to treatment, and relapses are common.
repository preparations with 7 to 14 days' duration of action)
Therapy usually involves topical use of antiviral agents, topical
 may be necessary in addition to topical therapy.
antibiotics if ulceration is present, and, sometimes, oral
administration of lysine. Occasionally, surgical removal of the
Neurogenic Keratitis
affected tissue by superficial keratectomy is also useful. The
use of corticosteroids and cyclosporine is controversial and
Neurogenic keratitis is a collective term for neurotrophic
 usually contraindicated, and these agents certainly should never
keratitis due to loss of sensory innervation to the cornea
 be used without concurrent antiviral therapy and close clinical
(trigeminal nerve dysfunction) and neuroparalytic keratitis due
monitoring.
to loss of motor innervation to the eyelids (facial nerve
dysfunction). With neurotrophic keratitis, the corneal
Corticosteroids are contraindicated in feline herpetic keratitis
pathogenesis involves failure of the sensory stimulus to blink
 and should be used with caution in any feline eye because of
and protect the cornea as well as loss of the trophic factors
the frequency of herpesvirus infection.
supplied to the cornea via axoplasmic flow through the
trigeminal nerve. There may also be associated masticatory
muscle atrophy and enophthalmos. In neuroparalytic keratitis,
interruption of motor innervation of the eyelids causes
inadequate blink, lack of distribution of the precomeal tear
film, and lack of protection of the corneal and conjunctival
surfaces from friction and exposure. Instead of the normal
blinking action of the upper and lower eyelids, the globe is
often retracted, with subsequent passive movement of the third
eyelid across the cornea.
Owing to anatomic position of the relevant nerves, neuro-
trophic keratitis tends to be associated with orbital disease,
whereas neuroparalytic keratitis is seen most commonly in
horses with guttural pouch disease and in other animals
(especially dogs) with chronic otitis or after surgery for chronic
 otitis. In the early stages of both diseases, corneal epithelial
degeneration and stromal edema occur. More advanced lesions
include corneal desiccation and opacification due to vascular-
ization and melanosis. Ulceration may occur with either form
Figure 10-42. Denclritic corneal ulcers in a cat. These lesions are
consicdered pathognomonic for feline herpesvirus infection. (Courtesy
of neurogenic keratitis and may progress to perforation.
University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
Treatment involves temporary or permanent partial (usually
Collection.)
196
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 10-43. Feline eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis. Note the raised
chalky plaque in the corsolateral cornea and the leacling zone of corneal
Figure 10-44. Equine eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis. Note the simi-
ulceration with cendlritic margins. (From August jR [2001l: Consultations
larities in clinical appearance to feline eosinophilic keratitis as shown in
in Feline Internal Medlicine, ed 4. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Figure 10-43.
Feline Eosinophilic Keratoconjunctivitis
Equine Eosinophilic Keratoconjunctivitis
Feline eosinophilic keratitis (FEK) is an enigmatic disease of
A disease similar in appearance and cytologic appearance to
cats. Clinically, it appears as single or multiple focal, raised,
FEK is also recognized in horses (Figure 10-44). Like cats,
pink plaque(s) resembling granulation tissue. Sometimes the
horses affected with equine eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis
plaques have a chalky appearance (Figure 10-43). Most cases
demonstrate blepharospasm, epiphora or sometimes more
are unilateral, but bilateral involvement is possible. Typically
caseous mucoid discharge, chemosis, conjunctival hyperemia,
the lateral cornea is initially involved, but in ad vanced cases the 
and, often, a white corneoconjunctival plaque surrounded by a
entire cornea may be affected. Areas of corneal ulceration are
region of superfcial corneal ulceration and vascularization.
also possible, particularly on the leading edge of the lesion.
 The lateral limbal area is most commonly affected, and patients
Third eyelid and/or conjunctival involvement is seen relatively
may be unilaterally or, less commonly, bilaterally affected.
commonly along with keratitis and occasionally alone. Eyelids
As in cats, diagnosis is confirmed by demonstration of large
can also be involved. Diagnosis is suggested by clinical appear-
 numbers of eosinophils in corneal scrapings. Once infectious
 ance and confirmed with cytologic demonstration of eosinophils 
 organisms, especially fungus, have been eliminated by cytologic
and mast cells along with neutrophils and hyperplastic or
 examination and culture, treatment should be initiated with
dysplastic epithelial cells. The cause is undetermined, but the 
topical dexamethasone or prednisolone (usually with a broad-
condition appears to be due to an aberrant immune response.
spectrum antibiotic such as neomycin-bacitracin-polymyxin B)
 In many cases the antigenic stimulus is unrecognized; however, a
 applied three or four times daily. In resistant lesions, superficial
 recent investigation suggests that FHV-1 DNA can be detected in
 keratectomy may enhance healing and shorten the course of the
cormeal samples from approximately 75% of cats with FEK.
disease.
 This disease has traditionally been treated with topical corti-
costeroids and/or systemic megestrol acetate. However, recur-
Corneal Sequestration
rences are common with this protocol. Potential involvement
of FHV-1 presents clinicians with a dilemma, because use of
Comeal sequestration is a corneal disease unique to the cat.
immunomodulatory drugs, especially topical corticosteroids,
Synonyms include feline comeal necrosis, corneal mummifi-
for treatment of an eye that is potentially infected with FHV-1
 a o o    s  
warrants caution. Some cases improve with antiviral medi-
Persian, Burmese, Himalayan, and maybe Siamese cats appear
cations alone, and so it appears wise to begin therapy with a
to be more susceptible. The cause of the disease is unknown,
 but it usually occurs after chronic ulceration. As such, feline
or so. If there is improvement and the owner is compliant,
herpesvirus is frequently incriminated and can be detected in at 
 n ssu sh  h aq  a s gn 
least 50% of biopsy specimens from cats with this disease.
 se n p aq ps an ia a a
Occasionally corneal sequestration is seen in cats with no
as there is evidence of active viral replication and certainly
 previous history of ulcerative cormeal disease. The clinical
while ulceration is present. More commonly, a form of immuno-
signs are classic, with the appearance of afocal amber to black,
modulatory therapy must be added to the regimen. Topical corti-
usually central corneal plaque surrounded by a broader area of
costeroids may be used if no ulcers are present, but even then,
 superfcial ulceration (Figure 10-45). These lesions tend to be
reactivation of FHV-1 and/or ulcer formation may occur once
painful, and blepharospasm and epiphora are expected.
corticosteroid therapy is begun. This problem has led to the 
 Depending on chronicity, sequestra are often accompanied by
recommendation of oral megestrol acetate for FEK. However,
corneal vascularization, edema, and stromal white blood cell
potential complications of its use, such as mammary hyper-
infltration due to a foreign body reaction stimulated by the
plasia, diabetes mellitus, and mammary neoplasia, should be
 necrotic tissue. The black material is pigmented and necrotic
explained to the animal's owner. Early diagnosis and treatment
cornea, not melanin.
as described of recurrences will limit the need for protracted
 The necrotic plaque sometimes sloughs without the need for
therapy.
surgical intervention. In such cases ongoing medical manage-
CORNEA AND SCLERA |
197
Figure 1045. Corneal sequestrum in a cat. Note also the surroundling
corneal eclema and vascularization. (Courtesy University of California,
Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
ment of the ulcer and secondary uveitis with topical antibiotics 
and atropine, respectively, along with antiviral therapy
if
herpesvirus is believed to be the initiating cause should be
provided until sloughing occurs. Corticosteroids should not be 
used for sequestra. However, most animals exhibit signs of
marked ocular pain during this period, and removal of the
plaque by keratectomy is preferred as it shortens this period of
discomfort. Associated keratitis should be controlled before
keratectomy is performed. Manual removal of sequestra should
 not be attempted, because some sequestra extend to Descemet's
membrane and globe rupture is possible. After keratectomy,
most ophthalmologists graft the corneal defect with con-
junctiva or corneoconjunctival transposition. Recurrences after
Figure 10-46. Bullous keratopathy. A, Frontal view; B, profile.
 treatment may occur, but results are normally excellent.
Feline sequestra are painful and may take many months to 
underlying cause can be cured. Extensive bullous keratopathy
slough. Keratectomy hastens healing and resolves discomfort.
has a poor prognosis.
"Florida Keratopathy" or "Florida Spots"
Bullous Keratopathy
Small, usually multifocal, white corneal stromal opacities unique
Bullous keratopathy is a nonspecific diagnosis that describes
to tropical and subtropical climates have been described in both
the formation of small vesicles in the epithelium and stroma of
dogs and cats. These opacities, called Florida keratopathy or
an edematous cornea (Figure 10-46). These vesicles ultimately
Florida spots, are not associated with inflammation or pain, do
coalesce to form larger bullae. The surrounding epithelium and
not respond to any therapy, and are apparently self-limiting.
stroma are edematous and often vascularized, either in response
Their cause is unknown.
to the bullae or as a result of the underlying corneal disorder.
Rupture of the bullae with subsequent ulceration is expected
Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis
once they become severe.
 Treatment relies on resolution of the underlying condition,
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBK), one of the most
although this is often not possible. Symptomatic therapy with
common diseases of cattle, is of major economic importance
hyperosmotic sodium chloride ointment may reduce the edema
in beef- and milk-producing areas throughout the world.
and limit rupture of bullae. Topical antibiotics should be applied
Synonyms include “pink eye" and "New Forest eye." M. bovis
if bullae rupture and fluorescein is retained by the exposed
is considered the causative agent as well as one of very few
stroma. In intractable, progressive bullous keratopathy, thermo-
 organisms considered to be a primary corneal pathogen-that
keratoplasty may be used. In this technique the cornea is treated
is, one that can attach to and penetrate through intact corneal
carefully with focal application of heat. A scar forms in treated
epithelium. In fact, M. bovis is the only bacterium of veterinary
areas, and the associated tissue contraction “squeezes" out
importance that can initiate comeal ulceration. Piliated M. bovis
 stromal fluid and limits further stromal distention. Altermatively,
 organisms adhere to the corneal epithelium and produce cyto-
complete corneal coverage with a very thin, 360-degree 
toxins, epithelial detachment factor, and hemolysins, which,
conjunctival graft may reduce bullae formation. The patient is
together with collagenases from host cells, cause necrosis of
best referred to an ophthalmologist for these treatments. The
epithelium and stroma. Other organisms, including Myco-
 prognosis for mild bullous keratopathy is good, especially if the
plasma bovoculi, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus (BHV-1),
198
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAlS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Box 10-2 | Microbial, host, and environmental or
husbandry factors involved in the
pathogenesis of infectious bovine
keratoconjunctivitis
Microbial Factors
· Pili
·Hemolysins
 Epithelial detachment factor
Cytotoxins
· Presence of other infectious organisms:
● Infectious bovine thinotracheitis virus (BHV-1)
·Mycoplasma spp.
·Ureaplasma spp.
· Ability to use iron bound by lactoferin 
Figure 1047. lnfectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis. Note the central
ulceration with stromal white blood cellinfiltration along with cliffuse
Host Factors
 ecdema and ceep corneal vascularization.
· Genetics (Bos indicus less susceptible)
milk yields may occur. In less severe cases recovery takes 1 to
·Age
 3 weeks, with vascularization and clearing from the limbus toward
· Periocular pigmentation?
the center of the cormea. Some residual scar formation is expected.
Environmental or Husbandry Factors
However, the bovine cornea possesses remarkable reparative
ao a so ns sxa   s
· Ultraviolet radiation
· Herding animals together
 healed a year later, especially in young animals. Nevertheless,
· Infectious bovine thinotracheitis vaccination 
severe scarring does remain in a proportion of affected eyes.
Dust
 If possible, affected animals should be segregated to limit
· Fly vectors:
spread of the disease and provided with shade. Attempts to
·Musca autumnalis
reduce the vector fly population may be instituted. Individual
· Musca domestica
animals may be treated with injections of procaine penicillin G
-Stomoxys calcitrans
beneath the bulbar conjunctiva. In a study in which penicillin
·Heavy snowfall
was injected into the superior palpebral conjunctiva of
· Transport stress
 naturally infected calves, the therapy did not shorten healing
· Dry tall weeds?
time, proving that site of injection is critical. A single systemic
 dose of repository oxytetracycline (20 mg/kg) followed by 10
Ureaplasma spp., and adenoviruses, have been isolated from
days of oral oxytetracycline has been shown to be superior to
field outbreaks of IBK and are likely also involved in the
300,000 U procaine penicillin G injected subconjunctivally and
pathogenesis of some outbreaks. Other microorganisms and
to no treatment and may be used if withholding regulations are
environmental and host factors are also critical in the patho-
followed. Florfenicol, given once subcutaneously (40 mg/kg)
 genesis of IBK; these cofactors are listed in Box 10-2.
or twice 2 days apart intramuscularly (20 mg/kg) to experi-
 In herds with no previous outbreaks, young and older animals
 mentally infected calves, also significantly reduced healing times
are equally severely affected. After the initial occurrence,
compared with that in untreated calves. This finding was
however, younger animals are more frequently and severely
subsequently verified in a natural outbreak. Finally, a single dose
 affected. Affected animals possess some immunity that becomes 
 of ceftiofur injected subcutaneously into the pinnae has also shown
less effective after 1 or 2 years, frequently allowing reinfection.
to be a useful therapy. Severe lesions can be protected by a
The effectiveness of this immunity depends directly on the
 temporary tarsorrhaphy (see Figure 10-29) or third eyelid flap.
severity of the initial disease. Unfortunately, attempts to produce 
 Control measures include genetic selection, elimination of
either live or killed vaccines against M. bovis have been dis-
carrier animals, and good fly control. After an outbreak or in
appointing. Recent commercial vaccines using pili antigens
newly introduced animals, carrier status can be shortened by
require further field evaluation before their true value is known.
Peak outbreaks usually occur in summer,especially when ultra-
The use of vaccines cannot be recommended to prevent IBK,
violet radiation,flies, and dusty conditions prevail.
 although decreased prevalence and severity have been reported
The initial lesion is severe, ulcerative keratoconjunctivitis
when vaccination is performed 6 weeks before the expected
(Figure 10-47) associated with intense epiphora, blepharospasm,
onset of the disease season. Calves are vaccinated at 21 to
and marked corneal edema. There is a usually central corneal
 30 days of age with a second vaccination 21 days later. Powders
 opacity due to stromal cell infiltration, which enlarges, ulcerates,
 and sprays are contraindicated in the treatment of IBK because
and vascularizes. Secondary (so-called reflex) uveitis is marked.
they provide suitable antibiotic concentrations only for short
Ulceration may progress to involve the stroma, and descemetocele
periods and are iritating.
formation with perforation and subsequent panophthalmitis
may occur. At the peak of disease, the animal is in considerable
Infectious Bovine Rhinotracheitis
 pain, may be totally blind, and may have difficulty walking and
finding food and water. Such animals are often dangerous for
 Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR) is due to bovine
farm staff to handle, and extensive weight losses and reduced
herpesvirus. In affected animals, conjunctivitis is more
CORNEA AND SCLERA |
199
 prominent than keratitis (see Chapter 7). However, peripheral
Treatment is directed at limiting permanent endothelial cell 
cormeal edema, ulceration, and vascularization are occasionally
death or dysfunction, anterior uveitis, and secondary glaucoma. In
present. Keratitis due to IBR virus must be distinguished from
the acute stages, topical corticosteroids, sometimes in combination 
cormeal lesions of malignant catarrhal fever (bovine malignant 
with topical NSAIDs, should be used to control uveitis. Systemic
catarrh), IBK, and squamous cell carcinoma.
administration of corticosteroids or NSAIDs may also be
necessary. Frequent reexaminations with regular measurements of
Malignant Catarrhal Fever
 IOP are advisable. Topical atropine should be applied if IOP is not
elevated. Topical hyperosmotic sodium chloride ointment may be
 Malignant catarrhal fever (MCF) is discussed more fully in
used to limit edema or bullae formation, but its effect is mild and
Chapter 18. The corneal signs only are emphasized here.
 transitory. If response is not evident in 4 to 5 weeks, permanent 
Ocular lesions are typically seen in the "head and eye" form of
corneal edema is likely. Once glaucoma has occurred, intra-
the disease. Lesions begin in the central cornea and move
ocular prosthesis or enucleation is necessary.
toward the limbus. If the cornea remains clear, signs of uveitis,
including aqueous flare, cells, fibrin, miosis, and iris swelling,
SCLERAL DISORDERS BELIEVED TO
may be observed. MCF is suspected when nasal, oral, and
BE INHERITED
ocular lesions occur with persistent pyrexia, enlarged lymph
Colobomatous Defects
nodes, and encephalitis. The presence of ocular lesions differ-
entiates MCF from rinderpest, bovine viral diarrhea mucosal
Colobomatous or notch defects in the sclera most commonly
disease, infectious stomatitis, and calf diphtheria. IBR 
is
occur toward the equator or posterior pole of the globe. Their
distinguished by its infectious nature, respiratory signs,
clinical appearance varies greatly according to location, but in
recovery rate, and predominance of conjunctivitis rather than
both situations the areas of scleral absence (coloboma) or
endophthalmitis. Ocular signs arise from the necrotizing effect
thinning (ectasia) are associated with protrusion of the under-
of the virus on vascular tissues and vary according to the form
lying uveal tract through the affected sclera. At the equator the
of the disease.
 protrusion appears as a black or blue bulge often almost
completely hidden by the eyelids in most normal positions of
Infectious Canine Hepatitis
 gaze (Figure 10-49). Unless they are large and cause significant 
weakening of the globe, such protrusions can be monitored.
Infectious canine hepatitis due to infection with canine adeno-
 Repair involves a scleral or other tectonic grafting procedure
virus type l causes hepatic and renal disease in dogs and is
and requires referral to a veterinary ophthalmologist. At the
discussed in Chapter 18. The major ocular effect is corneal
posterior pole, scleral thinning or absence typically involves the
edema, leading to its lay name "blue-eye." The corneal edema
optic nerve as well as the choroid. If it is severe, the overlying
is due, in part, to anterior uveitis, which can be extremely
retina may detach. This is a common feature of collie eye
marked and can even lead to secondary glaucoma. However,
 anomaly, which is discussed in the chapter on retinal disease
corneal edema also arises from endothelial cell death or
(see Chapter 15).
dysfunction as a direct result of viral replication as well as
antigen-antibody complex deposition within cormeal endothelial
ACQUIRED SCLERAL DISORDERS
cells themselves (Figure 10-48). If endothelial damage is tem-
Scleritis/Episcleritis
porary, corneal edema usually resolves in 1 to 2 weeks, but
some animals have permanent partial or total corneal opacity.
Anteriorly, the sclera is overlaid by a loose connective tissue
called the episclera, which connects it to the bulbar conjunctiva.
At the limbus, the sclera is confluent with the cornea. Posteriorly,
the sclera overlies the choroid and retina and extermally it is
adjacent to the orbital tissues. Because all of these layers are so
Figure 10-48. Diffuse marked corneal eclema clue to endothelitis and
anterior uveitis in association with infectious canine hepatitis virus.
 Figure 10-49. Equatorial scleral coloboma with associated staphylorma.
(Courtesy University of Missouri, Columbia, Veterinary Ophthalmology
(Courtesy University of Missouri, Colurmbia,Veterinary Ophthalrnology
Service Collection.)
Service Collection.}
200
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
intimately related anatomically and physiologically, inflammation
Because of the alleged immune-mediated nature of the con-
of the sclera and episclera inevitably involves adjacent tissues and
dition, long-term immunomodulatory treatment is usually
therefore can lead to chorioretinitis (and potentially retinal
necessary for its control, although some cases regress
detachment), orbital cellulitis, keratitis, conjunctivitis, and
 completely. Without treatment, the condition is usually slowly
 blepharitis in any combination. Partly because of this variation in
 progressive. Immunomodulatory therapy must be provided at
clinical involvement, the terms scleritis, episcleritis, episclero-
the maximum level tolerated by the animal and the minimum
conjunctivitis, episclerokeratitis, and episclerokeratoconjunctivitis
level that causes some regression of the lesion. Frequency of
have become somewhat jumbled in the literature. Here the term
application as well as concentration or dose of medications
episcleritis is used with the acknowledgment that the neighboring
should be tapered as rapidly as possible as the patient improves.
tissues are almost inevitably involved to varying degrees.
Additionally, medication type and route can be altered so as to
 Episcleritis has been broadly divided into necrotizing and
cause the minimum of side effects as the disease regresses.
 nodular variants. In the necrotizing form, there is inflammation,
 Recommended therapies and routes of administration are as
necrosis, and thinning and loss of sclera and surrounding
follows:
tissues. In the nodular form, there is granulomatous thickening
of the sclera and/or episclera. The latter has commonly been
· Corticosteroids:
callednodular granulomatous episclerokeratoconjunctivitis
·Systemic
(NGE). Regardless of their histologic and clinical nature, this
· Subconjunctival
 group of diseases is believed to be immune-mediated and is
· Intralesional
typically treated with immunomodulation. Some of the
· Topical (dexamethasone or prednisolone only)
disorders are remarkably resistant to therapy, frequently recur,
Topical cyclosporine (1% or 2 %)
and often require prolonged treatment.
· Systemic tetracycline and niacinamide (not niacin):
Typically, NGE appears as a single or sometimes multiple,
· For dogs weighing less than 10 kg: 250 mg of each drug
raised, tan to red subconjunctival mass(es) at the limbus
q8h
(Figure 10-50). Occasionally there is a more diffuse thickening
· For dogs weighing 10 kg or more: 500 mg of each drug q8h
of a broader region of episclera. The dorsolateral limbus is
·Systemic azathioprine
most commonly affected, but other limbal regions and even
Surgical removal/debulking
the third eyelid are occasionally affected. There is associated
Cryotherapy
conjunctivitis and often the cornea becomes affected as the
·β-Irradiation
lesion advances into the corneal stroma. Crystalline opacities
(presumably cholesterol or triglycerides) and corneal edema are 
Scleral Trauma
the classic lesions. The syndrome occurs predominantly in
collies, but many other breeds may be affected. Commonly used
 Blunt or sharp trauma to the sclera may result in thinning
synonyms are nodular fascitis. fbrous histiocytoma, limbal
or rupture of the sclera with subsequent protrusion of the
granuloma, and collie granuloma. The etiology is unknown.
underlying uveal tract—a traumatic staphyloma. As with cor-
Lesions may be bilateral but are usually not symmetrical.
 neal perforations, prognosis depends largely on the extent of
Although clinical appearance is usually highly suggestive, histo-
 damage to the intraocular structures. Hyphema, iris prolapse,
logic analysis is required to definitively confirm the diagnosis
vitreous hemorrhage, lens capsule rupture, lens luxation, and
and differentiate this syndrome from neoplastic diseases such
retinal detachment are all possible and obviously indicate a
 as squamous cell carcinoma and amelanotic limbal melanoma.
 poor prognosis. For simple uncomplicated penetrating wounds,
The lesions consist of masses of histiocytes and fbrocytes.
surgical closure along with control of postoperative uveitis with
corticosteroids and prostaglandin inhibitors is often successful.
Systemic antibiotics and antinflammatory agents should also
be administered. For more extensive injuries, referral to an
ophthalmologist for more sophisticated procedures (e.g., lens
removal, vitrectomy, scleral allografting) may be indicated.
Severe blunt or concussive injuries can also cause scleral
rupture, usually with even more devastating intraocular con-
sequences than those of sharp trauma. In such instances, the eye
usually ruptures adjacent to and concentric with the limbus (Figure
10-51). This situation is particularly common in the horse,
especially when kicked by another horse. These ruptures may vary
in size from a few millimeters in length to involvement of almost
the entire circumference, with prolapse of lens, vitreous, iris, and
ciliary body. Less extensive ruptures should be referred for
 primary closure and control of uveitis. The prognosis for extensive 
ruptures depends on damage to intraocular structures but is
always guarded to poor. Damage to the ciliary body frequently
 leads to phthisis bulbi, and enucleation is recommended.
Figure 10-50. Noclular granulomatous episclerokeratoconjunctivitis in
a dog. Note extension into the neighboring corneal stroma. (Courtesy
Penetrating and concussive scleral injuries are often associated
University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
with phthisis, especially when hyphema is marked.
Collection.)
CORNEA AND SCLERA |
201
Figure 10-51. Corneoscleral rupture with uveal prolapse in a clog.
Figure 10-52. Limbal (or epibulbar) melanoma in a dog. Note extension
into the neighboring corneal stroma. (Courtesy University of California,
Limbal Neoplasia
 Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
Primary scleral and cormeal tumors are rare. In fact, rather than
being a site of neoplastic origin, the sclera and comea are
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Andrew SE, et al. (2002): Density of comeal endothelial cells, cormeal
neoplasms to other parts of the body and intraocular spread of
thickness, and comeal diameters in normal eyes of llamas and alpacas.
 adnexal or orbital tumors. However, intraocular neoplasms may
Am I Vet Res 63:326.
leave the eye via the optic nerve, ciliary and vortex veins, and
Andrew SE, et al. (2001): Density of comeal endothelial cells and
intrascleral nerve canals.
comeal thic kness in eyes of euthanatized horses. Am I Vet Res
 In contrast to the cornea and sclera proper, the cormeoscleral
62:479.
Andrew SE,et al.(1998): Equine ulcerative keratomycosis: visual outcome
limbus is a relatively common site of origin for neoplasms.
and ocular survival in 39 cases (1987-1996). Equine Vet I 30:109.
 Perhaps this is because it is a region of very high mitotic activity
Angelos JA,et al.(2000): Effcacyof flofenicol for reatment of aturally
and, particularly dorsolaterally, experiences notable exposure
occurring infectious bovine keratoconjuncivitis. I Am Vet Med Assoc
to ultraviolet light. The most frequently observed tumors are
216:62.
Ball MA, et al. (1997): Evaluation of itraconazole-dimethy] sulfoxide
ointment for treament of keratomycosis in nine horses. J Am Vet Med
horses), limbal melanoma (dogs), and squamous cell carcinoma
Assoc 211:199.
(horses and cattle). Squamous cell carcinomas are discussed in
Befanis PJ, et al. (1981): Endothelial tepair of the canine comea. Am J Vet
Chapter 7, because they almost always extend caudally from
Res 21:113.
Bentley E (2005): Spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial defects in dogs:
the limbus to involve the conjunctiva in addition to or instead
a review. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 4l:1 58.
of the cornea.
Bentley E, Murphy CI (2004): Thermal cautery of the comea for treatment of
spontaneous chronic comeal epithelial defects in dogs and horses. J Am
Limbal (Epibulbar) Melanocytoma
Vet Med Assoc 224:250.
Bosscha MI (2004): The effcacy and safety of topical polymyxin B,
neomycin and gramicidin for treatment of presumed bacterial corneal
Limbal melanocytomas are relatively common in dogs. They
ulceration. Br J Ophthalmol 88:25.
arise from melanocytes in the superficial tissues near the
Brooks DE,et al. (1998): Antifungal susceptibility patterns of fungi isolated
limbus but often invade the adjacent corneal stroma or, less 
from cases of ulcerative keratomycosis in Florida horses. Am I Vet Res
frequently, extend posteriorly into the sclera (Figure 10-52).
59:138.
Brown MH, et al. (1998): Infectious bovine keratoconjunctiviis: a review.
Outward growth such that the tumor protrudes from the ocular
J Vet Intern Med 12:259.
surface is common, but intraocular penetration of the sclera and
Chmielewski NT, et al. (1997): Visual outcome and ocular survival following
invasion of the iris or ciliary body is uncommon. When it does
 inis prolapse in the horse: a teview of 32 cases. Equine Vet I 29:31.
occur, intraocular extension makes differentiation of a
Clode AB, et al. (2006): Evaluation of concentration of voniconazole in
melanocytic tumor of limbal origin from one of anterior uveal
aqueous humor after topical and oral administration in horses. Am J Vet
 origin challenging. Although they are sometimes referred to as
Res 67:296.
CrispinS(2002):Ocular lipiddeosiionand hperipoproteinaemia Pog
"limbal melanomas,' these tumors have a low metastatic poten-
Retin Eye Res 21:169.
tial and are often slow growing, especially in older dogs. There-
Deykin AR, et al. (1997): A retrospechive histopathologic study of primary
fore they are best called limbal melanocytomas because of their
 episc leral and scleral inflammatory disease in dogs. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
7:245.
biologic behavior. In younger dogs or when there is rapid
Dueger EL, et al. (2004): Efficacy of a long-ac bing fomulation of ceffiofur
growth, these tumors may be surgically debulked and treated
Crystalline-free acid fortheTeament ofnaturally occurring infecious
with cryosurgery or with en bloc resection followed by a
bovine keratoconjunchi vitis. Am I Vet Res 65: 1i85.
comeoscleral allograft. The prognosis for survival is excellent,
Eastman TG, et al. (1998): Combined parenteral and oral administration of
and vision can also frequently be saved. Reduction in tumor
oxytetracyclineforcontrol of infectiousbovinekeratoconjunctiviis.JAm
Vet Med Assoc 212:560.
 size can also be achieved by laser photocoagulation; however,
Featherstone HJ, Sansom J (2004): Feline corneal sequestra: a review of
 a 25% recurrence rate has been recorded for this approach.
64 cases (80 eyes) from 1993 to 2000. Vet Ophthalmol 7:213.
202
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Gaarder JE,et al. (1998): Clinical appearances,healing pattns, isk factos,
Nasisse MP, et al. (1998): Detection of feline herpesvirus I DNA in corneas
and outcomes of horses with fungal kerabis: 53 cases (1978-1996). J Am
of cats with eosinophilic keratitis or comeal sequestrum. Am J Vet Res
Vet Med Assoc 213:105.
59:856.
Gionfiddo JR, et al. (2003): Idiopathic ocular and nasal granulomatous
 Ollivier FI, et al. (2004): Profles of matrix metalloproteinase achivity in
inflammatory disease in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 6: 163.
equine tear fluid during corneal healing in I0 horses with ulcerative
Gwin RL, et al. (1982): Decrease in canine comeal endothelial cell density
kerabibis. Vet Ophthalmol 7:397.
and increase in comeal thickness as functions of age Invest Ophthalmol
Paulsen ME,et al. (1987):Nodular gTanulomatous episclerokeratitis in dogs:
Vis Sci 22:267.
19 dogs (1973-1985).J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1581.
Gwin RL, et al. (1982): Primary canine comeal endothelial cell dystrophy:
SauerP,etal.(2003):Changesinantibioticresistance inequine bacteral
specular microscopic evaluahion, diagmosis and therapy. I Am Anim Hosp
ulcerabive keratitis (1991-2000): 65 horses. Vet Ophthalmol 6:309.
Assoc 18:471.
[do  o e u ges o h xpu ra yos
Hendrix DV, et al. (1995): Comeal stromal abscesses in the horse: a review of 
6:93.
24 cases. Equine Vet J 27:440.
Smith PC, et al. (1990): Effectiveness of two commercial infec hious bovine
Hurn S, et al.(2005): Ectopic cilium in seven horses. Vet Ophthalmo] 8:199.
keratoconjunc ivitis vaccines. Am J Vet Res S1:1147.
MarTion RM, Riley LK (2000): Detection of cell detachment aclhi vity induced
e sop u oe (q jo uoenoo 96l) (e  us
by Moraxella bovis. Am I Vet Res 6l: 1145.
cats: 15 cases (1989-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:891.
Martin CL (1981): Canine epibulbar melanomas and their management.
Sweeney CR, Irby NL (1996): Topical teatment of Pseudomona.s sp-infected
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:83.
cormeal ulcers in horses: 70 cases (1977-1994). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Michau TM,et al.(2003): Superficial,nonhealing corneal ulcers in horses:
209:954.
23 cases (1989-2003). Vet Ophthalmol 6:291.
Watte CM, et al. (2004): Clinical experience with butyl-2-cyanoacrylate
Michau TM, et al. (2003): Use of thermokeratoplasty for treatment of
adhesive in the management of canine and feline comeal disease. Vet
ulcerative keratitis and bullous keratopathy secondary to comeal
Ophthalmol 7:319.
endothelial disease in dogs: 13 cases (1994-2001). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Williams DL (2005): Major histocompatibility class I expression in the
222:607.
normal canine cornea and in canine chronic superfcial keratitis. Vet
Moore CW, et al. (1995): Antibactenial sensitivity pattems for microbial
Ophthalmol 8:395.
isolates associated with infechious keratitis in horses: 63 cases
Yamagata M, et al. (1996): Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis in seven horses.
(1986-1994). I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:928.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1283.
Morgan RH,et al.(1996):Feline eosinophilic keratiis:a retrospective study
of 54 cases (1989-1994). Vet Comp Ophthalmol 6:131.
Chapter
UVEA
Paul E. Miller
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
UVEITIS
UVEAL CYSTS AND NEOPLASMS
PATHOLOGIC REACTIONS 
TRAUMA
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
CONGENITAL UVEAL ABNORMALITIES
HYPHEMA
SURGICAL PROCEDURES
pigment ruff. The posterior pigmented epithelium is continuous
1 he uvea plays an important role in ocular physiology, and
with the nonpigmented epithelium covering the ciliary body
disorders of this tissue are common in veterinary practice The inis
 and eventually with the retina.
controls the amount of light entering the eye, and the ciliary body
The bulk of the iris is stroma, which consists of fibrous
alters the focal power of the lens, produces aqueous humor that
connective tissue with bundles of collagen, pigmented and non-
supplies nutrition to ocular structures, and aids in regulating
pigmented cells, and blood vessels in a mucopolysaccharide
intraocular pressure (IOP). Together they also form a blood-
matrix. Variations in iris color are due to variations in pig-
 aqueous barrier so as to maintain the clarity of the aqueous humor
mentation of the stroma and posterior pigmented epithelium and
and vitreous. The choroid plays a major role in providing nutrition 
 in the arrangement of the anterior border layer (Figure 11-6).
to the retina. Because of these diverse roles, uveal disorders are
The temporal and nasal long ciliary arteries enter the iris
frequently associated with alterations in vision and IOP.
near its root (see Figure 11-3) and form the major arterial circle,
which may be incomplete. The vascular supply of the iris of
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
domestic animals greatly exceeds that of the human iris. There-
fore surgical procedures near the iris root in animals often result
 The eye consists of the following basic layers (Figure 11-1):
in profuse hemorrhage if the major arterial circle is transected.
The dilator pupillae muscle extends as a continuous sheet in
· Fibrous (outer) layer—the sclera and cornea
front of the anterior epithelium (see Figure 11-4) and is intimately
· Vascular (middle) layer—the uvea, or uveal tract
 related with it. The constrictor pupillae muscle is a flat ring of
· Neuroectodermal inner layer—the retina and optic nerve
smooth muscle surrounding the pupil in the posterior iris stroma
The uveal tract has three parts: the iris and the ciliary body.
(see Figure 11-5).
which together form the anterior wvea, and the choroid, which
 In horses, cattle, sheep, and goats, which have a horizontally
is also known as the posterior uvea.
elliptical pupil, black masses suspended from the superior and
occasionally the inferior rim of the pupil are termed corpora
Iris
nigra (e.g., in horses) or granula iridica (e.g., in ruminants).
 These masses aid in further control of light entering the pupil
The iris controls the amount of light entering the eye by vary-
 and should not be mistaken for tumors or cysts.
ing the size of the pupil. Reduction in the size of the pupil also
 increases the depth of field for near objects and reduces certain
Ciliary Body
optical aberrations. To accomplish this goal, the iris has two
sets of muscles:
The ciliary body lies immediately posterior to the iris. On its
posterior surface the ciliary body has numerous folds known as
·Musculus constrictor pupillae: A circular band of muscle
the ciliary processes (Figures 11-7 and 11-8). This area of the 
fibers concentric with the pupil. These fibers have
ciliary body, termed the pars plicata (folded part), merges
predominantly parasympathetic innervation (Figure 11-2).
·Muscutus dilator pupillae: Radially oriented fibers passing
posteriorly into a flat area (pars plana), which joins the retina.
from near the root of the iris toward the pupillary margin.
The zonular fibers, which support the lens, originate from the pars
 plana and between the ciliary processes (Figures 11-9 and 11-10).
These fibers have predominantly sympathetic innervation.
Viewed in section, the ciliary body is triangular, with one side
Viewed from the anterior surface, the iris has two zones, the
joining the sclera, one side facing the vitreous body, and the base 
pupillary zone (Figures 11-3 and 11-4) and the ciliary zone. A
giving rise to the iris and iridocorneal angle (Figure 11-1l1). The 
variable thickening of the iris at the junction of these two zones
ciliary body is covered with two layers of epithelium, the inner
is called the collarette. The anterior surface of the iris is
 layer of which is nonpigmented and the cuter layer of which is
covered by a modified layer of stromal cells, the anterior
pigmented. It is continuous with similar epithelium on the
border layer (Figure 11-5). The remaining parts of the iris are
 posterior surface of the iris and the pigment epithelium of the
the stroma and sphincter muscle, the anterior epithelium and
retina (Figure 11-12). The smooth muscle fibers of the ciliary
dilator muscle, and the posterior pigmented epithelium and
     
203
204
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
ON
Figure 11-1. The three layers of the eye. CB, Ciliary body; Ch, choroicl;
Co, cornea; ON, optic nerve; R, retina; S, sclera. (Moclified from Fine BS,
Yanoff M [1972|: Ocular Histology. Harper & Row, New York.)
Dilator
pupillae muscle
(sympathetic)
 Constrictor pupillae
muscle
(parasympathetic)
Figure 1l-4. Pupillary portion of the iris. The clense, cellular anterior
borler layer (a) terminates at the pigrment ruff (b) in the pupillary margin.
The sphincter muscle is at (C). The arcacles (d) frorm the minor circle
extendl toward the pupil and through the sphincter muscle. The sphincter
muscle anc the iris epithelium are close to each other at the pupillary
margin. Capillaries, nerves, melanocytes, and clump cells (e) are found
DILATION (mydriasis)
CONSTRICTION (miosis)
within and around the muscle. The three to five layers of clilator muscle
 Dilators contract
 Constrictors contract
(f) graclually clirminish in number until they terminate behinc the
Constrictors relax
Dilators relax
midportion of the sphincter muscle (arrow), leaving low, cuboidal
Figure 1l-2. Control of pupil size. The arrangement of the constrictor 
epithelial cells (g) to form the anterior epithelium to the pupillary margin.
fibers varies among comestic species, but the principles are similar.
Spurlike extensions from the cilator muscle form Michel's spur
(h) and Fuchs's spur (i) (these spurs are not commonly cescribecd in
clomestic animals). The posterior epithelium (j) is formed by columnar
cells with basal nuclei. Its apical surface is contiguous with the apical
surface of the anterior epithelium. (From Hogan M], et al. [1971l:
Histology of the Human Eye. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Figure 11-3. Clinical anatomy of the iris. The pupillary zone of the iris is
a  e pall s a  a ii
junction between the two zones is termec the iris collarette (sofid arrow).
Persistent pupillary mermbranes, if present, typically originate at the iris
collarete region.The sinuous posterior ciliary artery enters the iris near
the limbus at the 3 anc 9 o'clock position (open arrows). From there it 
Figure 11-5. Structure of the iris. A, Anterior borcer layer; B, stroma; C,
dividles into superior and inferior branches to forrm the major vascular 
constrictor muscle; D,dilator muscle;E,posterior epithelium.(Courtesy
circle of the iris.
Dr. Richard R. Dubielzig.
LvEA |
205
BROWNIRIS
POSTERIORSURFACE
Figure 11-8. Posterior aspect of the canine iris anc ciliary bocly (with the
lens rermovedl) showing the arrangerment of the numerous blaclelike ciliary
e aess  s ad aaa ais su ur sasad
present at the tips of these processes. (Courtesy Dr. Richarcd R. Dubielzig.)
Figure 11-6. Surfaces ancl layers of the iris. Clockwise from the top the iris
a pue suo (g) e pue e) eidnd au smous uas-sn
surface view shows a brown iris with its clense, matted anterior borcer
layer. The blue iris surface shows a less clense anterior borcler layer and
more prominent trabeculae. Arrows inclicate circular contraction furrows.
C, Fuchs's crypts; d, pigment ruff; e, major arterial circle. Raclial branches
 of arteries and veins extend towarc the pupillary region. The arteries form
the incomplete minor arterial circle (f), from which branches extend
toward the pupil, forming capillary arcacles. (Note: The incormplete minor
arterial circle is variable or absent in many animals.) g, Circular
arrangerment of the sphincter muscle; h, racial processes of the dlilator
muscle; i, racial contraction furrows; j, structure folds of Schwalbe; k, pars
plicata of the ciliary body. (Modified from Hogan M], et al. [1971]:
Histology of the Hurman Eye. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.
Figure 11-9. Posterior aspect of the ciliary bocy, showing pars plicata (a)
anc pars plana (b). The junction between ciliary bocly ancl retina is at C,
anc the retina at d. In primates this junction is scallopec with bays
Figure 11-7. Dissecting microscope view of the relationship between the
{e), clentate processes (f), and striae (g) (ora serrata), but in most domestic
species it is a straight line（ora ciliarisretinae).(From Hogan M],et al.
iris, ciliary body, and iridocorneal angle. C, Enclothelial surface of the
[1971l: Histology of the Human Eye. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.) 
cornea; CP ciliary processes; f, iris at pupil margin; PL, pectinate 
ligament; TM, trabecular meshwork. (Courtesy Dr. Mitzi Zarfoss.)
206
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
SVP
PL
PP
Figure 11-10. Anterior view of ciliary processes showing zonules
attached to the lens: a, lens zonules; b, ciliary process; c, d, and e,
B
attachment of zonules to lens capsule; f, raclial folds in iris; g, circular
foldls in iris. The precise arrangerment of the lens zonules with the lens
Figure 11-12. A, Normal ciliary body of a cat: CC, region of the ciliary
capsule varies considerably armong species. (From Hogan M], et al.
clef; CP ciliary processes; I, iris; PL, pectinate ligament, PP, pars plana;
[1971|:Histology of the Hurman Eye.Saundlers, Philaclelphia.)
SVP, scleral venous plexus. B, The ciliary body epithelium is bilayered,
with the innerrnost layer being nonpigmented and the outer layer
Containing pigment.CoureyDRichardRDublzi
Iris
· Relaxation of lens zonules and change in shape or position
of the lens to allow for near vision
Anterior
· Increased drainage of aqueous via the trabecular meshwork
chamber
Ciliary process
 Inflammation of the ciliary body often leads to spasm of the
Pars plicata
ciliary muscle, which in turn causes ocular pain. Pain relief
may be achieved by use of a cycloplegic drug (e.g., atropine),
Pars plana
which relaxes the ciliary body. Although drugs that dilate the
Pectinate ligaments 
 pupil (mydriatics) may also relax the ciliary muscle (atropine),
not all do so (e.g., epinephrine).
Scleral venous sinuses
Choroid
Triangular outline
of ciliary cleft
The choroid is a thin, variably pigmented, vascular tissue forming
Triangularoutline
the posterior uvea. It joins the ciliary body anteriorly and lies
 of ciliary body
Sclera
between the retina and sclera posteriorly. The choroid is
 Figure 11-11. Parts of the ciliary bocy.
 extremely vascular, with its capillaries arranged in a single layer
 on the inner surface to nourish the outer retinal layers (Figure
11-14). In species with limited retinal vasculature (e.g., horse,
rabbit, guinea pig) the retina depends to a large extent on the
vessels, connective tissue, and nerves occupy a large portion of
choroidal blood supply. The choroidal stroma typically con-
the ciliary body (Figure 11-13). The muscle fbers originate
tains numerous melanocytes, which form a dark optical back-
 near the apex of the triangle and insert into the region of the
 ground to the retina. In most domestic mammals except the pig,
ciliary cleft and trabecular spaces of the iridocormeal angle.
a reflective layer—the tapetum lucidum—lies within the inner
Contraction of the ciliary muscle causes the following:
capillary layer. In large animals the tapetum is penetrated by
UvEA I
207
CC
CC
CC-
Figure 11-13. Degree of clevelopment of the ciliary body musculature
aue do) aenun a u sasue eai ue uoe
(middie), and ape (botftom). Development is most pronounced in
primates (ape) and least pronounced in herbivorous species (ungulate),
with carnivore clevelopment between. The size of the iriclocorneal angle
ancd its cilioscleral cleft or sinus (CC) is inversely large or most
 Figure 11-14. Choroidal blood supply and innervation, and Bruch's.
:o66ll va uoslanues woy papow) ajejnun ayi ul paounouoid
membrane. The retina is located at the bottom and the sclera at the top of
Ophthalmic anatomy, in Gelatt KN [eclitorl: Veterinary Ophthalmology.
the crawing.The retinal pigment epitheliurm (a) is in close contact with
3rd ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philaclelphia, p. 77; which was
 Bruch's membrane (b). The choriocapillaris (c) forms an intricate network
along the inner choroid.Bruch's membrane is very thin in some cormestic
Eye in Evolution. Henry Kimpton, Loncon.)
species. In the superior funcus the tapetum lies between the branching
vessels in the choroid and the single layer of the choriocapillaris uncler the
retina. Venules (d) leave the choriocapillaris to join the vortex system (e).
numerous small capillaries, which appear as small focal dark
The short ciliary artery is shown at f, before its branching (g) to form the
spots (the stars of Winslow) when viewed end-on with the
choriocapillaris. A short ciliary nerve enters the choroid at h anc branches
ophthalmoscope. The arteries and nerves to the anterior parts of
into the choroidal stroma (i). j, Superchoroidea. (Modlified from Hogan
M], et al. [1971l: Histology of the Human Eye. Saunders, Philaclelphia.}
the eye pass forward through the choroid. The choroid receives 
its main arterial supply from the following vessels:
· Short posterior ciliary arteries, which penetrate the sclera
breed, age, and species. Reflecting light through the retina a
around the optic nerve
· Long posterior ciliary arteries, which enter near the optic
second time improves the animal's ability to function in dim
nerve and branch near the ora ciliaris retinae and lead back
light.
into the choroid
·Anterior ciliary arteries, which send branches back into the
Blood-Ocular Barrier
choroid after penetrating the anterior sclera
The uveal tract plays a key role in maintaining the blood-ocular
Histologically the choroid consists of the following layers (see
barrier (Figure 1l-16). Diseases involving the uveal tract
Figure 11-14):
frequently cause a breakdown of this barrier, which leads to
exudation of excessive amounts of proteins or cells into the
· Suprachoroidea: avascular, pigmented connective tissue
 lying adjacent to the sclera
aqueous humor, vitreous, or subretinal space. The blood-ocular
barrier is composed primarily of a blood-retinal barier and a
· Large-vessel layer: typically also contains numerous
blood-aqueous barrier. The blood-retinal barrier is formed at
melanocytes
the level of the retinal capillary vascular endothelium, which is
· Intermediate-vessel layer: also contains the tapetum in the
 nonfenestrated and has tight junctions, and the retinal pigment 
superior fundus
epithelium, which also has tight junctions and separates the
· Choriocapillaris: a layer of capillaries adjacent to Bruch's
relatively leaky choroidal blood vessels from the overlying retina.
membrane and the retina
The blood-aqueous barrier is formed by tight junctions at the level
In herbivores the tapetum is fibrous in nature (tapetum
of the nonfenestrated iridal vascular endothelium and between
fibrosum). whereas in carnivores the tapetum is cellular and
cells constituting the nonpigmented ciliary body epithelium. Most
composed of reflective crystals (tapetum cellulosum) (Figure
large molecules, especially proteins, are unable to pass through or
11-15). The reflective properties of the tapetum, and not the
between the cells in this barrier system. The exact anatomic
presence of pigments, causes the distinctive color of the fundi
location of the barrier is probably different for different
of different animals and is the reason an animal's eyes “shine"
substances (e.g., capillary endothelial cells, endothelial basement
in the dark. This color varies with thickness of the tapetum,
 membrane, and intercellular junctions). By limiting the amount of
208
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Bruch's
Sclera (S) 
Choroid (C)
Tapetum (T)
Retina (R)
retinal vessels (RV)
Zonules
Pigmented ciliary 
ody opithelium (PE)
 Nonpigmented ciliary
body epithelum (NPE)
strated capils
Pars plicata
Figure 11-15. A, Normal canine tapetum cellulosum (arrow). 1t is located 
between the choroid and the photoreceptor layer and pierced by the
choriocapillaris. B, Normal tapeturm fibrosum of a bovine (arrow).
(Courtesy Dr. Richardl R. Dubielzig.)
 protein and other large molecules that may scatter light in the
 aqueous and vitreous humor, these barriers serve to create a more
 optically perfect media. They are, however, frequently disrupted
Figure 11-16. A, Blooc-ocular barrier. The barrier normally prevents large
by inflammation or other disease processes.
molecules anc cells from leaving the blooc vessels ancl entering the eye,
thereby maintaining clarity of the aqueous humor and vitreous.
B, Aqueous flare in a cat with uveitis. This findling, which represents
PATHOLOGIC REACTIONS
breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier, is a hallmark of anterior uveitis.
(A from Gilger B [2005|: Equine Ophthalmology. Saunclers, St. louis.)
Definitions
Although the uvea exhibits the same range of reactions as other
tissues, inflammation is the most important. The follow-
 Because of the continuity between the various parts of the
ing terms describe inflammation of the various parts of the
uvea, aqueous humor, and vitreous, however, uveal inflam-
uveal tract:
 mation often involves many ocular structures. The retina and
choroid are adjacent, with no major barriers between, so they
·Uveitis: inflammation of the uvea
 are frequently inflamed together. Consequently, the following
· Iritis: inflammation of iris
terms are often preferable:
Cyclitis: inflammation of ciliary body
· Iridocyclitis: inflammation of iris and ciliary body
· Anterior uveitis: inflammation of iris and ciliary body
·Choroiditis: inflammation of choroid
· Posterior uveitis: inflammation of choroid
UvEA |
209
·Chorioretinitis: inflammation of choroid and retina with
Corectopia (which is congenital) must be distinguished from
 primary focus in choroid
a pupil pulled out of shape by synechia (which is acquired). In
 Retinochoroiditis: inflammation of choroid and retina with
synechiation the pupil is distorted by adhesions between the
 primary focus in retina
lens and iris. Pupillary abnormalities are rarely significant by
·Panuveitis: inflammation of all uveal components
themselves, but they may be an important indication of other
abnormalities.
Immune Mechanisms
Persistent Pupillary Membrane
The uvea is an immunologically competent tissue that behaves
as an accessory lymph node. Intraocular antigens may enter the
 During development the pupillary membrane (anterior portion of
systemic circulation and stimulate distant lymphoid organs. In
the tunica vasculosa lentis) spans the pupil from one portion of the 
5 to 7 days sensitized B and T lymphocytes migrate toward the
inis collarette to another and supplies nutrients to the developing
antigen within the eye, enter the uvea, and engage in antibody
lens (see Chapter 2). In dogs this membrane is usually resorbed
formation or cell-mediated immune reactions, which may
during later fetal development and the first 6 weeks of life, leaving
create intraocular inflammation. Subsequent exposure
to
a clear pupillary aperture. It is not uncommon, however, for
the same antigen results in a faster and greater (anamnestic)
remnants to remain for several months or longer. In general small
response.
remnants spanning from one portion of the iris to another (iris-to-
 The uvea is often secondarily inflamed when other parts of
iris persistent pupillary membranes [PPMs]) have no visual con-
 the eye are inflamed (e.g., secondary anterior uveitis frequently
sequences, although visual impairment may occur if strands
accompanies keratitis). Although such reactions are commonly
contact the cormea (iris-to-cormea PPMs) or lens (iris-to-lens
beneficial in resolution of the primary disease (e.g., production
 PPMs) and create an opacity within the visual axis (Figure 11-17)
of immunoglobulins and sensitized lymphocytes), excessive
PPMs occur in a large number of dog breeds, most notably
secondary uveitis may irreparably damage the eye.
the basenji, in which they are recessively inherited (see
 Autoimmune phenomena also occur in the uvea. Preceding 
Appendix I). A genetic basis is also likely in many other dog
tissue damage (e.g., previous inflammation) releases tissue-
 breeds, but the mode of inheritance is probably not simply
specific retinal or uveal antigens that are normally intracellular
 mendelian. PPMs may span from one region of the iris to
or otherwise immunologically isolated. Hence one cause of
 another (sometimes crossing the pupil) or they may extend to
uveal inflammation (e.g., trauma, infection by various organisms)
 the comea or lens, creating opacities in these structures. PPMs
may subsequently lead to a secondary, immune-mediated
can usually be differentiated from inflammatory anterior or
mechanism that results in persisting or recurring inflammation.
 posterior synechia on the basis of their origin near the iris
 Such a response may be involved in recurrent equine uveitis.
collarette region (versus an origin at the pupillary margin for
Immune-mediated inflammation may also occur after exposure
 synechia) and their presence at birth. It usually is possible to
 to lens proteins that have been immunologically isolated by the 
 see the membrane extending from the iris collarette region to
lens capsule before birth (e.g., lens-induced uveitis) or in response
the cornea or lens, although occasionally the membrane may
to antigens associated with uveal melanocytes (e.g., uveo-
have broken free and the cornea or lens opacity (often
 dermatologic syndrome).
 pigmented) is all that remains. Therapy is not typically required
Autoimmune diseases may originate with, or be perpetuated
or possible. The best method of preventing the disorder is to
by, the following processes, which may also lead to recurrent
examine breeding stock and breed only animals that are free
episodes of uveitis:
of PPMs. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy is essential for the
examinations.
· Molecular mimicry: Externally derived antigens
(bacterial, viral, other) mimic host antigens, thereby
directly stimulating T cells to attack sequestered host
antigens.
·Bystander damage: An agent (viral or otherwise) damages
tissue, releases sequestered antigens, and re-stimulates
resting autoreactive T cells.
Epitope spreading: The immune response spreads from
 one autoantigenic molecule to another (intermolecular) or
from one site on the same molecule to another
(intramolecular).
CONGENITAL UVEAL ABNORMALITIES
Abnormalities of the Pupil
 Pupillary abnormalities are as follows:
· Dyscoria: abnormally shaped pupil
Figure 11-17. Persistent pupillary membranes (iris to cornea) in a young
· Corectopia: eccentrically placed pupil
Saint Bernard cog. Unlike postinflammatory anterior synechia, these irical
·Polycoria: more than one pupil
strancs originate near the iris collarette region. Anterior synechia would
originate at the pupillary border or in the far periphery of the iris, near the
·Aniridia: lack of iris
iricdocorneal angle. (Courtesy University of Wisconsin-Maclison Veterinary
· Coloboma: sector defect in iris (see later)
Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
210
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Coloboma
A coloboma is a defect in the eye resulting from incomplete
closure of the embryonic fissure. Typical colobomas occur in
the inferomedial portion of the iris or choroid or adjacent to the
optic disc (Figure 11-18). Colobomas of the sclera also occur
in the collie eye anomaly. Although the embryonic fissure is not
 involved, coloboma is also applied to lid defects and to sector
defects in the iris and lens.
Anterior Segment Dysgenesis
Anterior segment dysgenesis is an autosomal recessive trait in the
Doberman pinscher characterized by variable degrees of
microphthalmia, corneal opacity, lack of anterior chamber,
ay uieun Ayoy e ui sisauan yauas aauy zil an
undifferentiated iris and ciliary body, hyaloid artery remnants,
presumed to be homozygous for the responsible gene. The iris is smooth,
clark, anc histologically hypoplastic. The pupil resists clilation, presumably
 absence of or rudimentary lens, retinal dysplasia and separations,
owing to clefects in the iris musculature. This horse had other anterior
 and congenital blindness. There is no treatment for this disorder.
segment anomalies, inclucing ciliary cysts, iris hypoplasia, iricocorneal
 Anterior segment dysgenesis syndrome occurs frequently in
achesions anc opacification, nuclear cataract, anc megalocornea.
 Rocky Mountain horses and has two distinct ocular phenotypes:
(1) large cysts originating from the temporal ciliary body or
that ciliary cysts are seen in heterozygous animals and multiple
 peripheral retina (Figure 11-19) and (2) multiple anterior segment
 anterior segment anomalies are seen in homozygous animals.
anomalies, including ciliary cysts, iris hypoplasia, iridocorneal
 adhesions and opacification, nuclear cataract, and megalocornea
Disorders of Pigmentation
(Figure 11-20). This condition may be codominantly inherited, so
Partial albinism (subalbinism) refers to reduction in ocular
pigmentation. Part or all of the iris may lack pigment and appear
blue. In a true albino the iris is pink.
Heterochromia
Hete rochromia refers to variations in iris coloration. Both eyes, one
 eye only, or only part of an iris may be affected, and often there are
concurrent variations in coat color (Table 11-1). Heterochromia
Table 11-1 |Breeds Affected by Heterochromia Iridis
SPECIES
BREED
CHARACTERISTICS
Cat
Siamese
Subalbinism
Burmese
Variable iris
hypopigmentation 
Figure 11-18. Several small iris colobomas are visible as full-thickness 
Abyssinian
Variableiris
defects in the iris in this Australian shephercl clog.
hypopigmentation 
 Persian
Variable iris
 hypopigmentation
Dog
Australian cattle dog
Merling
Dappling
Australian shepherd
Boxer
White coat
Collie
Merling (autosomal 
 cominant!
Great Dane
 Harlequin coat (autosomal
 cominant)
long-haired clachshunc 
 Harlequin coat (autosomal 
 cominant)
 Dalmatian
 Dappling (autosomal
 dominant)
Malamute
Dappling
Old English sheepcog
Heterochromia iridis
Siberian husky
 Dappling (autosomal 
 dominant)
Weirmaraner
lris hypopigrmentation
varies
Horse
 Pinto, appaloosa, white
Variable heterochromia
Figure 11-19. A temporally locatec cyst involving the posterior iris, ciliary
and gray horses
body, and peripheral retina in a Rocky Mountain horse presumed to be 
Cattle
Hereford, shorthorn
Albinism, subalbinism
heterozygous for the responsible gene.
UvEA I
211
Figure 11-21. Heterochromia iridis (blue and brown iris in an otherwise
Figure 11-22. lris nevus (freckle) in a cat. Such lesions should be regularly
normal Australian shepherd clog.
 monitored for signs of progression.
iridis refers to variations in pigmentation of different regions of the
Iris Nevus
iris in the same eye (Figure 11-21), and heterochromia iridium
refers to variations in coloration between the two eyes of the same
Iris nevi (Figure 11-22) are most commonly observed in cats
animal. Although heterochromia may be normal, blue iridal tissue 
and dogs. They may consist of focal spots of hyper-
has also been associated with iris hypoplasia, iris coloboma, and
 pigmentation. They must be differentiated from neoplasms that
corectopia as well as with absence of or a small tapetum and lack
require surgical treatment. Iris nevi do not protrude above the
 of pigmentation of the nontapetal fundus. An association between
surface of the iris and do not enlarge. Nevi have a low malig-
congenital deafness and heterochromia has also been recognized in
nant potential and show an increase in the number of cells or
blue-eyed white cats and in the Dalmatian, Australian cattle dog,
 greater pigmentation of existing cells. They must be observed
English setter, Australian shepherd, Boston terrier, Old English
 carefully for changes, especially in cats, in which they may
 sheepdog, and English bulldog.
transform into the early stages of diffuse malignant iris
Lay terms for heterochromia are as follows:
melanoma.
· Wall eye: blue and white iris or part of an iris
· China eye: blue iris or part of an iris
Waardenburg's Syndrome
· Watch eye: blue and yellow/brown iris or part of an iris
Waardenburg's syndrome consists of deafness, heterochromia
 In dogs, heterochromia is due to incomplete maturation or
iridis, and white coat color. Although this hereditary syndrome 
 absence of pigment granules in the iris stroma or anterior pig-
occurs most commonly in blue-eyed white cats, it also occurs
mented layer. Heterochromia iridis is proposed to be due to
in dogs (especially the Australian cattle dog, Great Dane, and
 decreased availability of tyrosine hydrolase, necessary for the
Dalmatian), mice, and humans. Not all blue-eyed white cats are
synthesis of melanin, as follows:
affected. In the cat, the syndrome is inherited as a dominant
L-tyrosine → L-dihydroxyphenylalanine → melanins
trait with complete penetrance for the white coat and incomplete 
 penetrance for deafness and blue irides.
tyrosine
UVEITIS
hydrolase
Clinical Signs
 In most species heterochromia is of no clinical significance. In
cattle ocular albinism has been further subdivided (Table 11-2).
The detection of uveitis depends on familiarity with the clinical
signs. In general the clinical signs of uveitis are similar regard-
Table 11-2 | Ocular Albinism in Cattle
less of cause. Signs of ocular discomfort are as follows:
· Photophobia and blepharospasm
TYPE OF ALBINISM
FEATURES
· Pain (may manifest as anorexia or depression)
Partial
 Iris blue and white centrally, brown peripherally
· Epiphora
Hair color normal
Incomplete
 lris light blue, gray, and white
 Clinical signs more specific for uveitis are as follows:
Hair color white
 Some brown sectors in iris, and some colored 
·Aqueous flare
hair patches
 Nontapetal funcdus incompletely pigmented and
· Inflammatory cells free in the anterior chamber or adherent 
 choroical vasculature visible
to the corneal endothelium (keratic precipitates)
Complete
 Jris very pale blue or white
· Hypopyon or hyphema
Hair pure white 
·Episcleral vascular injection or circumcorneal ciliary flush
Variable funcus colobomas and tapetal
· Corneal edema
hypoplasia
·Miosis
212
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
·Resistance to mydriatics
or a scalloped appearance on dilation, with pigment remnants
· Lowered IOP
 on the anterior lens capsule. If posterior uveitis is present, the 
 Anterior or posterior synechiae
vitreous may become hazy, and retinal edema, exudates, or
 Swollen or dull appearance of the iris
detachments may be seen.
 Increased pigmentation of the iris
Vitreous haze or opacity
Sequelae of Uveitis
· Retinal edema, exudate, or detachment
 Aqueous lipemia, which may be seen if circulating lipid
Posterior Synechiae
levels are high
Posterior synechiae occur when fbrinous adhesions form
between the lens and iris, with fbrovascular organi-
Aqueous flare is due to breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier
zation occurring later (see Figure 1l-24). Formation of
 with increased permeability of vessels in the iris and ciliary body,
synechiae is more likely when aqueous protein content is
 resulting in release of protein into the aqueous. Keratic precipitates
high. If synechiae form around the entire circumference of the
(KPs) are accumulations of inflammatory cells (neutrophils,
pupil, iris bombe occurs, preventing aqueous flow to the
lymphocytes, or macrophages) that adhere to the corneal
anterior chamber, and secondary glaucoma almost invariably
endothelium. In large numbers these cells form a white layer in
follows. An irregularly shaped pupil is frequently caused by
 the anterior chamber called hypopyon (Figure 11-23). KPs may
 synechiae. If blood or exudate organizes in the anterior chamber,
 be small and scattered (in feline infectious peritonitis) or large
a connective tissue membrane may occlude or obliterate
and yellow (*mutton-fat'" KPs) in granulomatous diseases.
the pupil.
Miosis may be due to iridal edema or spasm of the iridal
sphincter muscle. As the inflammation subsides, synechiae
Peripheral Anterior Synechiae
may form, causing an irregularly shaped pupil (Figure 11-24)
Adhesions may form between the iris and trabecular mesh-
work or between the iris and cornea. Swelling, iris bombe,
and cellular infiltrates may reduce drainage of aqueous through
the iridocorneal angle early in uveitis, but once peripheral
anterior synechiae have formed, an alternative route for
 drainage must be provided, because the angle is held closed by
the synechiae.
Cataract
Cataract (opacity of the lens) occurs frequently after uveitis. It
is probably caused by altered composition of the aqueous that 
interferes with lens nutrition. When an animal with a cataract
 and signs of uveitis is examined, determination must be made
as to whether the cataract caused the uveitis or the uveitis
caused the cataract.
Figure 11-23. Hypopyon in the ventral anterior chamber in a clog that hacl
Glavcoma
suffered a penetrating ocular injury. Unless the cornea has been
perforated, the anterior charmber is usually sterile in most patients with
IOP is usually lowered during uveitis because an inflamed
hypopyon.
prostaglandins may increase uveoscleral outflow. If iOP is
normal or increased in the presence of active inflammation, it 
is likely that aqueous humor outflow via the trabecular mesh-
work is impaired in one of the following ways:
· Blockage of the angle with inflammatory cells, debris, or
neovascular membranes
· Peripheral anterior synechiae
· Occlusion of the pupil by posterior synechiae
 Eyes with normal IOP and active uveitis may have impaired
aqueous humor outflow and should be monitored carefully for
glaucoma.
 Intractable secondary glaucoma due to lens-induced uveitis
is a common entity, especially in dogs. This condition may be
seen after penetrating injuries to the lens, in patients with long-
Figure 11-24. Dense "mutton fat" keratic precipitates with acmixec blood
in a cat with chronic anterior uveitis. The pupil is irregularly shaped 
standing cataracts undergoing lens resorption, and sometimes
(ectropion uveae) owing to small posterior synechia. 
 after cataract extraction.
UvEA |
213
Retinal Detachment
orders (Table 1l-4). Such diseases usually affect other parts of
the eye in addition to the uvea and are discussed in Chapter 18.
 Exudation and cellular infiltration from the choroid may cause
Once uveitis is detected, every effort should be made to identify
retinal detachment.
a specific cause of the inflammation so that the most effective 
therapy may be started. A thorough history and complete
Atrophy
physical examination are essential for the proper diagnosis as
to the cause of the inflammation in a given patient.
The iris and ciliary body atrophy as the stroma is replaced by
Numerous uveitis classification schemes have been proposed,
fibrous tissue. Defects may appear in the iris. Atrophy of areas of
including those based on the tissues affected (anterior uveitis,
the choroid frequently results in atrophy of the overlying retina,
 posterior uveitis, panuveitis), on the presumed histologic nature 
which is visible ophthalmoscopically. Severe atrophy of the
 of the disorder (suppurative, nonsuppurative, granulomatous,
ciliary body causes hypotony (lowered IOP). In some animals
nongranulomatous), on whether the cause starts inside the eye
the color of the iris becomes darker after uveitis. In severe cases
or from its surface (endogenous versus exogenous), and on a
the entire globe may shrink, a condition called phthisis bulbi.
specific etiology (see Table 11-4). Although each of these
schemes has its own advantages and disadvantages, classifi-
Preiridal Fibrovascular Membranes
cation into granulomatous or nongranulomatous and then by
specific etiology is probably the most useful method in a
In some animals with chronic anterior uveitis new blood
clinical setting, because it also helps guide specific therapy
vessels and fibrous membranes form on the anterior surface of
(Table 11-5). This scheme, however, is plagued by the presence
 the iris. These may result in eversion of the pupillary margin,
of a large percentage of patients having idiopathic uveitis in
 called ectropion uveae, or glaucoma as they cover the trabecular
which the cause remains obscure and therapy can be only non-
meshwork.
specific and directed at controlling inflammation and
preventing further damage to the eye. Presumably, most of
Cyclitic Membranes
these cases are immune-mediated or involve microorganisms
that are not yet recognized as pathogenic. It is hoped that over
A cyclitic membrane is a band of fibrovascular tissue extending
 time the percentage of patients with idiopathic uveitis will decline
from the ciliary body across either the pupil or the anterior face
 as our understanding of the causes of this disorder improves.
of the vitreous. It consists of fibrous tissue and blood vessels
 Although classification as granulomatous or nongranulomatous
and may severely obstruct vision.
uveitis is based on a histologic classification scheme, the criteria in
Table 11-5 can also be used to make reasonable clinical inferences
Sympathetic Ophthaimia
about the histologic nature of the inflammation and to allow for
prioritization of the diagnostic tests to be performed. Most cases of
Sympathetic ophthalmia is a rare immune-mediated disorder in
granulomatous uveitis are associated with microorganism or
humans, and perhaps in animals, in which unilateral intraocular
foreign material stimulation of a chronic immune response,
inflammation liberates previously immunologically isolated
whereas nongranulomatous uveitis is often associated with phys-
antigens. The resulting immune response to these ocular antigens
ical, toxic, or allergic causes. After determining whether a specific
leads to damage of the previously normal other eye.
animal has granulomatous or nongranulomatous uveitis, the
clinician should consider specific tests to try to determine the exact
Diagnosis of Uveitis
cause (e.g., serum titer measurement for Toxoplasma). In general
 the following specific categories of uveitis should be considered:
Anterior uveitis is distinguished from conjunctivitis, superficial
keratitis, and glaucoma, the other causes of the red-eye syndrome 
· Infectious associated—algal, bacterial, fungal, viral,
(Table 11-3). The uvea is involved in numerous systemic dis-
 protozoal, parasitic
Table 11-3 | Differential Diagnosis of Ocular Inflammations
PARAMETER
ANTERIOR UVEITIS
CONJUNCTIVITIS
SUPERFICIAL KERATITIS
GLAUCOMA
Conjunctiva
Variably thickened
Thick; folded
Variably thickened
Not thickened
Conjunctival vessels
 Episcleral; not movable 
 Superficial, liffuse, extensive
 Superficial, diffuse, extensive 
 Episcleral, not
with conjunctiva.
branching
branching
movable with
infrequently branch
conjunctiva,
infrequently branch
 Secretion or discharge
None to serous 
Moderate to copious, serous
Moderate to copious,
None to serous
Pain
Moderate
to purulent
serous to purulent 
Moderate to severe
None to slight
Moderate to severe
Photophobia
Moderate
None
Severe
Slight
Cornea
Clear to steamy
Clear
Clouded to opaque 
Steamy
Pupil size
Small, sluggish, irregular.
Normal
Normal to small
Dilated, moderate to
 or fixed
 complete, and fixed
Pupillary light response 
Variable
Normal
Normal
Absent
 Intraocular pressure
Variable: may be normal, 
Normal
Normal
Elevated
elevated, or ciminished
Modifed from Lavignette AM (1973): Differential diagmosis and treatment of anterior uveitis. Vet Clin North Am 3:504.
214
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Table 11-4 | Causes of Uveitis
MOST COMMONLY
MOST COMMONIY
CAUSE
AFFECTED SPECIES
CAUSE
AFFECTED SPECIES
NEOPLASTIC/PARANEOPLASTIC
Viruses
 Lymphosarcoma
Any
 Canine aclenovirus types 1 and 2
Dog
Melanoma
Dog.
cat
(irmmune-mecliatec)
 Histiocytic proliferative dlisease
Dog
Canine clistemper virus
Dog
 Hyperviscosity syndrome 
Dog
Coronavirus (feline infectious peritonitis) 
Cat
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
Dog
 Feline leukermia virus 
Cat
 Miscellaneous prirmary intraocular turmors 
Any
 Feline immunoceficiency virus
Cat
Miscellaneous metastatic tumors 
Any
Herpesvirus (Marek's disease)
Chickens,
turkeys
METABOLIC
 Herpesvirus
 Diabetes mellitus (lens-inclucec uveitis)
Dog
 Feline herpesvirus 1
Cat
 Systemic hypertension
Cat, dog
Canine herpesvirus 1
Dog
 Hyper lipidemia
Dog
Equine herpesvirus 1 anc 2
Horse
Coagulopathies
Any
Ovine herpes virus 2 (MCF)
Cattle
Alcelaphine herpes virus 1 (MCF) 
Cattle
IDIOPATHIC
Any
Rabies virus
Dog
IMMUNE-MEDIATED
Equine influenza 
Horse
 Equine viral arteritis
Horse
Cataracts (lens-incucec uveitis)
Any
 Parainfluenza type 3
Horse
lens trauma (phacoclastic uveitis)
Any
MCF
Cattle
 Immune-medliated thrombocytopenia
Any
 Immune-medliated vasculitis 
Any
Parasitic
Uveocermatologic syncrome
Taenia mufticeps
 Sheep, dog
(awoapurs ay!-epe neH-lseueroy-aon)
Dog
Echinococcus granurosis
Horse (rare)
Angiostrongytus vasorum
Dog
INFECTIOUS
Diroffaria immitis
Dog
Algae
Setaria spp.
Horse
Ceotricha spp.
Dog
Onchocerca cervicalis
Horse
Prototheca spp.
Dog
(equine
recurrent
Bacteria
uveitis}
 Septicemia/encotoxemia cue to any cause
Any
Strongytus
Horse
Leptospira spp.
Dog. horse
Diptera spp. (ophthalmormyiasis interna)
Various
Bartonella spp.
Dog. cat
Toxocara spp., Baylisascaris spp. (ocular larval
Dog. cat 
 Borretia burgdorferi
Dog. horse
migrans}
Sheep/Goats,
Brucella spp.
Dog. horse
Trypanosoma sp.
cat
Escherichia cofi
Cattle, horse
Elaeophora schneideri
Sheep/Goats
Streptococcus spp.
Horse
Rhodococcus equi
Horse
TOXIC
Listeria monocytogenes
Sheep, cattle
Drugs
Haemophilus spp.
Cattle
 Pilocarpine, carbachol other 
Any
Tuberculosis
Cattle, cat 
parasympathomimetics
Prostaglanclin clerivatives (latanoprost) 
Any
Protozoa
Sulfarmethazine/trimethoprim (imrmune-medliated)
Dogs
Toxoplasma gondi*
Any
Encotoxemia from any systemic source
Any
Leishmania donovani
Dog
 Infectious keratitis with bacterial toxin procuction
Any
Ehrlichia canis or Ehrtichia ptatys
Dog
Radiation therapy
Any
Rickettsia rickettsil
Dog
TRAUMA
Yeasts and Fungi
Blunt or penetrating injuries 
Any
Aspergittus spp.
Chickens,
 Corneal foreign bodies 
Any
turkeys, cat
Blastomyces spp.
Dog. cat
REFLEX UVEITIS
Coccidioides immitis
Dog
 Ulcerative keratitis of any cause 
Any
Cryptococcus spp.
Dog, cat
Deep necrotizing or nonnecrotizing scleritis
Dog
Histoplasma capsuratum
Dog. cat 
 Episcleritis 
800
 Pseudafescheria boydii
Dog
MCF, Maligmant catamhal fever.
*Neosporum caninum has been found responsible for some cases of dogs previously diagmosed with T. gondi infeclion. The clinical sigmificance is
un determined.
· Immune-mediated
Differential diagnosis of the cause of uveitis often requires
· Neoplastic or paraneoplastic
 Metabolic
specialist assistance, notably when potential zoonotic diseases
·Traumatic
may be involved or the cause remains unclear.
·Reflex
A few generalizations may be made. Uveitis associated with
·Idiopathic
 KPs is often associated with intraocular neoplasia, feline infectious
UvEA |
215
Table 11-5 | Classification Criteria for Anterior Uveitis
2. Systemic prednisone 0.25 mg/kg PO in dogs and cats; in
horses a systemic nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug
 NONGRANULOMATOUS
GRANULOMATOUS
(NSAID) should be used instead
Acute onset
Gradual onset
· For severe uveitis (marked conjunctival hyperemia, marked
Short course
Chronic or recurrent 
aqueous flare/fbrin/hypopyon, with/without miosis):
No keratic precipitates
Keratic precipitates/greasy exuclate
1. Topical corticosteroids—0.1% dexamethasone or 1%
 on lens surface 
prednisolone acetate ql-4h 
No synechiae
Posterior synechiae
No iris nodules 
lris nodules may be present 
2.S
 Systemic prednisone 1.0 mg/kg PO in dogs and cats; in
Primarily anterior uveitis
Posterior uveitis may also be present 
horses a systemic NSAID should be used instead
 3. Consider triamcinolone acetonide 1-2 mg per eye
These criteria are useful but not absolute and are interpreted along with other
clinical sigmns.
administered subconjunctivally.
NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS. Significant
peritonitis, deep fungal agents, and intraocular foreign bodies.
protein leakage from uveal vessels during inflammation is
 Severe uveitis that involves the anterior and posterior segments is
mediated by prostaglandins. Inhibition of prostaglandin pro-
often associated with a deep fungal agent, lymphosarcoma, or
duction decreases the amount of antibody present to engage in
uveodermatologic syndrome. The last is also commonly associ-
immunologic reactions and also decreases fbrin, which reduces
ated with loss of pigment in the uveal tract, skin, or hair. Uveitis
 synechia formation. Because endogenous prostaglandins also
with hemorhage is often associated with systemic hypertension,
contribute to miosis by a mechanism that is not blocked by
intraocular neoplasia, coagulopathy, or a tick-borne disorder.
atropine, an NSAID may facilitate pupillary dilation with atropine.
In general topical and systemic NSAIDs are not as potent as
General Therapeutic Principles
corticosteroids in the treatment of immune-mediated uveitis but
may approximate or exceed the efficacy of corticosteroids in
1: Make an Etiologic Diagnosis
traumatic uveitis. Topical NSAIDS include flurbiprofen,
 The clinician must make a concerted attempt to find a cause for
suprofen, and diclofenac. These drugs are administered every 6
the uveitis. Although not all such attempts are successful,
to 12 hours in most species. Systemic NSAIDS are typically
idiopathic uveitis is a diagnosis of exclusion. Often, if a specific
 dosed at levels recommended for the species being treated.
cause is identified, more effective therapy may be instituted
IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE AGENTS. Topical 0.02% to 2.0%
(e.g., removal of an abscessed tooth, treatment for deep mycosis,
 cyclosporine, oral cyclosporine, or oral azathioprine may be
control corneal infection, chemotherapy for lymphosarcoma).
used in select cases of nonresponsive uveitis. Typically these 
Routine hematologic analysis and serum chemistry profles are
 agents require periodic laboratory evaluations for systemic side
useful in indicating the presence of inflammatory disorders and
 effects, especially those involving the bone marrow, liver, and
concurrent systemic disease (see Table 11-4). In endemic areas
kidney. Azathioprine has been suggested at 1 to 2 mg/kg/day
 appropriate serologic tests are indicated (e.g., for toxoplasmosis,
for 3 to 7 days, followed by tapering to as low a dosage as
coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, cryptococcosis). Blasto-
possible.
mycosis is found most frequently in the central United States
east of the Mississippi River, and coccidioidomycosis is found 
3: Prevent Undesirable Sequelae
in Arizona, Nevada, and the central valley of California.
 MYDRIATICS/CYCLOPLEGICS. Pupillary dilation (mydriasis)
2: Control Inflammation
can help reduce synechiae formation and the likelihood of iris
bombe with secondary glaucoma. Relaxation of the ciliary
CORTICOSTEROIDS. Corticosteroids may be given via the
muscle (cyclopiegia) can help lessen ocular pain. In general the
topical, systemic, or, occasionally, subconjunctival route. These
dose required to dilate the pupil is somewhat lower than that
agents inhibit cell-mediated immune reactions, decrease anti-
necessary to induce cycloplegia and provide pain relief. One
 body production, and stabilize lysosomal membranes, reducing
 percent atropine ophthalmic ointment or solution is a para-
release of intracellular proteolytic enzymes. If corticosteroids are
sympatholytic agent with potent mydriatic and cycloplegic
administered via the topical or subconjunctival routes the
activity, whereas 0.5% to 1.0% tropicamide solution is a shorter-
comea must not retain fluorescein stain. Additionally, immuno-
acting parasympathomimetic with relatively potent mydriatic
suppressive therapy should not be instituted if active infectious
effects but milder cycloplegic effects. Sympathomimetics, such
diseases, such as a deep fungal agent, have not been ruled out.
as 10% phenylephrine given every 8 to 12 hours, can boost the
In general the following approach is helpful:
mydriatic effects of atropine and tropicamide, but these drugs
afford no meaningful cycloplegia. On rare occasions mydriasis
· For mild uveitis (mild conjunctival hyperemia, no obvious
can compromise the drainage angle, leading to rises in IOP, or
 or only minimal aqueous flare, hypotony, with/without 
reduce tear production, especially in animals with kerato-
miosis):
conjunctivitis sicca. In general atropine is used one to three
1. Topical corticosteroids—0.1% dexamethasone or 1%
times per day or to effect.
prednisolone acetate q6-12h
ANTIGLAUCOMA DRUGS. IOP is typically low in uveitis
· For moderate uveitis (moderate conjunctival hyperemia,
because an inflamed ciliary body makes less aqueous humor
readily detected aqueous flare, normal or decreased IOP,
and endogenous prostaglandins increase uveoscleral outflow. If
with/without miosis):
IOP is normal or elevated in the presence of inflammation, the
1. Topical corticosteroids—0.1% dexamethasone or 1%
 drainage angle is probably compromised and the clinician must
 prednisolone acetate q4-6h
be concerned about impending glaucoma. It is essential that 
216
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
irreversible glaucomatous damage not be allowed to occur while
retriever, Siberian husky, and Irish setter. It is a spontaneous
antinflammatory therapy works to clear the drainage angle. In
autoimmune disease apparently directed against melanin that
general a topical or systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
 affects the anterior and posterior uvea, frequently resulting in
(dorzolamide or methazolamide), a topical β-blocker (timolol),
blindness from retinal detachment or glaucoma. Antiretinal
or an adrenergic agent (dipivefrin) is preferred to a para-
 antibodies to previously sequestered retinal antigens may also
sympathomimetic (pilocarpine, demecarium bromide) or a
be present. Presumably the antibodies develop after the initial
 prostaglandin derivative (latanoprost, travoprost), either of which 
 insult has severely damaged the retina and may represent epitope
 may exacerbate intraocular inflammation.
spreading. Depigmentation of the mucocutaneous junctions,
eyelids, and hair coat may precede or follow the ocular signs.
4: Refieve Pain
Histologic examination of a biopsy specimen from the muco-
cutaneous junction (especially the lips), even if the tissue
The cycloplegic action of atropine relaxes the ciliary muscle
appears grossly normal, can be useful in the diagnosis of this
and helps reduce ocular pain in uveitis. The patient may also be
disorder if results of a systemic evaluation are otherwise non-
placed in a darkened room or stall to alleviate photophobia.
 contributory and the animal has severe anterior and posterior
Topical or systemic NSAIDs can provide pain relief as well as
uveitis. Neurologic signs are associated with the syndrome in
aid in controlling inflammation. For severe pain a systemic
humans but are rare in dogs. In some geographic regions the
analgesic, such as butorphanol, morphine, or oxymorphone,
onset of the disease has a definite seasonal incidence (e.g)
may be used.
February to May in southern California).
Vigorous early antinflammatory therapy with topical and
Specific Forms of Uveitis
systemic steroids, NSAIDs, and azathioprine is often necesary
to save vision. Recurrences of the disease can be expected, with
Infectious Uveitis
 maintenance therapy using appropriate medications between
The infectious causes of uveitis are summarized in Table 11-4
recurrences. Given the severe and relentless nature of the
Many of these agents are located in specific geographic regions, a
uveitis, the immediate assistance of a veterinary ophthalmologist 
feature that helps narrow the list of possible causes in a given
should be sought in the handling of dogs affected with uveo-
 patient. Not all patients with infectious uveitis have living organ-
dermatologic syndrome.
isms within the eye. Uveitis may occur as a result of intraocular
LENS-INDUCED UVEITIS. The embryology of the lens is
 infection or in response to bacterial toxins generated within or
such that the lens capsule essentially isolates the lens proteins
outside the eye, or may stem from an immunologic response to
 immunologically from the immune system before birth. There-
the organism, which may be within the eye or elsewhere in the 
fore if the lens capsule ruptures or leaks, lens proteins may
body. It is well recognized that uveitis may be associated with
enter the aqueous and elicit an immune-mediated uveitis that
infection outside the eye, including prostatitis, endometritis,
may be acute or chronic. The most common causes of lens-
 gingivitis and tooth root abscess, mastitis, metritis, navel ill,
 induced uveitis are liquefaction of cataractous lens proteins that
and pneumonia. In these cases uveitis may result from shedding
 escape through an intact lens capsule, swelling of a cataractous 
of bacteria into the circulation, the uveitis being secondary to
lens with increased “porosity"” of an otherwise intact lens
previously sensitized lymphocytes in the uvea, or may be due to
capsule, small tears in the lens capsule from rapidly forming
bacterial toxins released from the primary site. Often the uveitis
cataracts and lens swelling (diabetes mellitus), and traumatic
 is recurrent in these cases, and hematologic examination or blood
 disruption of the lens capsule (cat scratch, penetrating injuries).
culture may be of value in ariving at a definitive diagnosis.
Leakage through the Intact Lens Capsule. The most common
Blastomycosis, ehrlichiosis, histoplasmosis, and coccidioido-
form of lens-induced uveitis is caused by leakage through
mycosis are important causes of uveitis in dogs, as 
are
intact lens capsule, which is most frequently seen in con-
cryptococcosis, toxoplasmosis, and feline infectious peritonitis
junction with the advanced stages of cataract (complete on
 in cats. If uveitis is present in association with lesions of lungs,
 resorbing). It should be suspected in every animal in which a
bone, lymph nodes, skin, or testicles or if the animal is located 
complete or resorbing cataract precedes the onset of a “red
in an area endemic for any of these organisms, appropriate
aq A il lo e pn aa pan, e qm s ui no 
serologic, radiographic, and cytologic tests are indicated.
 differentiated from uveitis-induced cataract by the fact that in
the latter, the “red eye" uveitis precedes the cataract. Lens-
Immune-Mediated Uveitis
induced uveitis should be anticipated in all eyes with cataract,
although it does not always occur. In this form of the disease
 Immune-mediated uveitis may be the result of a primary reaction
the lens capsule becomes permeable, allowing liquefied cortex
to a foreign antigen, an autoimmune phenomenon directed
to leak into the aqueous and creating an immune-mediated
against self-antigens, or a combination of the two. It is believed
uveitis and, possibly, secondary glaucoma. Without tonometry
that the majority of idiopathic cases of uveitis are actually
 and biomicroscopy, this inflammation may not be evident, and
immune-mediated. Often the diagnosis is made through exclu-
many such eyes exhibit a dilated pupil—not a miotic pupil as
sion of all known causes of uveitis. In some cases specific 
would be expected inuveitis. Affcted eyes, however, dotypically
clinical signs (depigmentation) or historical events (a complete 
exhibit at least some conjunctival hyperemia. Eyes with lens-
cataract preceding the inflammation or cat-scratch injury
induced uveitis before cataract surgery have a greater risk for
 involving the lens) support the diagnosis of immune-mediated
uveitis, and a detailed evaluation is not required.
than eyes without it.
UVEODERMATOLOGIC SYNDROME. Synonym: Vogt-
Therapy with topical corticosteroids or NSAIDs, often for
Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome.
relatively long periods, may be needed to control lens-induced
Uveodermatologic syndrome affects certain breeds more
uveitis. In particularly severe cases systemic antinflammatory
commonly than others—Akita, Old English sheepdog, golden
agents may be required. Corticosteroids, even those administered
UvEA |
217
FELINE UvEITIS. Causes of uveitis in cats include feline
infectious peritonitis, lymphosarcoma caused by feline leukemia
virus, feline immunodeficiency virus, toxoplasmosis, crypto-
coccosis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidiomycosis.
For details of the ocular manifestations of specific disorders,
see Chapter 18. A specific type of nongranulomatous anterior
uveitis described as lymphocytic-plasmacytic uveitis has been
recognized as a common precursor to glaucoma if the uveitis is
uncontrolled. It is also a common cause of glaucoma in cats.
Idiopathic lymphocytic-plasmacytic uveitis occurs in both diffuse
and nodular forms, with the nodular form being more commonly
unilateral, and the diffuse form bilateral.
A minimum laboratory evaluation for cats with either uni-
lateral or bilateral uveitis consists of the following procedures:
· Complete blood count
· Serum biochemical profile
Figure 11-25. Chronic lens-incluced uveitis in a basenji puppy after a cat 
·Urinalysis
Claw injury. The lens capsule has been ruptured by the nail.
· Serologic tests relevant to the geographic location:
 Toxoplasma (immunoglobulin [Ig] G and IgM), feline
topically, should be used with caution in dogs with poorly
leukemia virus, feline immunodeficiency virus,
regulated diabetes mellitus, cataract, and lens-induced uveitis
Cryptococcus, Blastomyces spp., Histoplasma spp., and
so as to avoid worsening the glycemic control.
Coccidioides spp.
Lens-induced uveitis should be suspected in all red eyes in
which  cataract preceded the conjunctival hyperemia.
Uncontrolled or unobserved idiopathic fymphocytic-plasmacytic
Claucoma should be ruled out in these cases.
uveitis is a common cause of feline glaucoma.
Failure to recognize and treat lens-induced uveitis when
In 93 cats with endogenous uveitis in Colorado in which a
cataracts are first diagnosed is a very common cause of lower
specific agent was identified, the following seroprevalence of
success rates of cataract surgery in dogs. Medical therapy for
infection was found: Toxoplasma gondii, 78.5%; feline immuno-
lens-induced uveitis should be implemented as soon as the
 deficiency virus, 22.9%; feline leukemia virus, 4.95%; and feline
diagnosis is established.
coronavirus, 27%. The combination of topical corticosteroids
 Penetrating Lens Injuries. Penetrating injuries to the lens often 
and clindamycin hydrochloride (25 mg/kg, divided, twice daily)
quickly progress to endophthalmitis with secondary glaucoma
was beneficial in cats with uveitis associated with toxoplasmosis
(Figure 11-25). Bacteria are commonly inoculated during the
(Chavkin et al., 1992). It is highly probable that the various causes 
injury, resulting in a mixed purulent inflammation with numerous
of feline uveitis vary greatly by geographic region.
neutrophils. Early lens extraction may offer the greatest chance
EQUINE RECURRENT UVEITIS. Synonyms: "moon blindness,"
for saving the eye, although large case studies to support this
 periodic ophthalmia.
aggressive method of treatment are lacking. In many older dogs,
 As in other species, the horse may exhibit a single episode
medical treatment after lens capsule rupture cannot prevent loss
of uveitis due to any one of a multitude of causes. In addition
of the eye through uncontrolled inflammation and secondary
to this form of uveitis, horses also frequently have apparently
 glaucoma. In young dogs (less than 12 months), much of the lens
spontaneously recurring episodes of uveitis (equine recurrent
cortex may be resorbed, with less inflammation than in older
animals, provided that infection is controlled. Nevertheless the 
however, is not a single disease as the name would imply but
long-term prognosis remains guarded in these animals.
instead is a group of diseases united only by a clinical pattern
of recurrent bouts of uveitis. With each subsequent uveitis
Penetrating injury and lens capsule rupture are common
 attack, cumulative damage occurs to the ocular tissues, and
causes of uveitis and endophthalmitis in dogs and cats.
 blindness may result. The long-term prognosis is guarded, but
with therapy, vision may be retained for a prolonged period in
UVEITIS ASSOCIATED WITH DENTAL DISEASE. Untreated
 many animals
gingivitis, periodontitis, and tooth root abscesses are very com-
History and Geographic Distribution. ERU has been recorded
mon causes of severe uveitis in dogs. Treatment of dental dis-
for millennia and is the most common cause of vision loss in the 
orders is essential before any intraocular surgery is undertaken
horse. As with many ancient disorders, the proposed causes and
 as well as for the patient's general health.
treatment have varied greatly over the years, and the disease has
PIGMENTARY UVEITIS IN GOLDEN RETRIEVERS. In pig-
 often been shrouded in folkiore, ignorance, and misconceptions.
mentary uveitis in golden retrievers, pigment is dispersed in the
 For example, the term “moon blindness" has two origins: (1)
anterior chamber, the iris becomes dark and thickened, and
 the frequent recurrences were once thought coincident with the 
clumps of pigment may be seen on the lens capsule and corneal
phases of the moon and (2) the cataract that often accompanies
endothelium. Aqueous flare, posterior synechiae, cataract,
 chronic ERU looked like a small moon in the eye.
and glaucoma may also occur. The cause of the disorder is
The disease is worldwide in distribution, although distinct
undetermined, although some workers believe it to be immune-
  au si l  oanba u saaa ia
 mediated and others have associated it with uveal cysts.
North America than in Australia, the United Kingdom, or
218
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
South Africa. An incidence of up to 12% has been recorded in
pomona, bratislava, autumnalis,grippotyphosa, canicola,
easterm areas of the United States, and some investigators believe
icterohemorrhagiae, hardjo, and sejroe.
it is more prevalent in low-lying areas with high rainfall. There
There are at least two main theories as to the role of
 js no age or sex predilection. The Appaloosa breed appears to
Leptospira in ERU. In the first theory, ERU after infection with
be at higher risk for development of recurrent uveitis, suggest-
Leptospira is primarily an immune-mediated disorder in which
ing a genetic predisposition to ERU.
the organism is no longer present. In this scenario autoimmune
 Etiology. There is no single cause of ERU (see Table 11-4).
 inflammation tends to "burm out'’ as antinflammatory regulatory
The most commonly held explanation is that the uveitis is an
cells get the upper hand in an active attack, leading to a
autoimmune phenomenon in which IgG antibodies and auto-
 clinically quiescent period. Recurrent active periods may be the
 reactive T cells specific for retinal antigens are present. A cell-
result of the autoimmune response shifting from one site to
mediated immunity to uveal antigens has also been
demonstrated in horses with ERU. The association between
to another entirely different autoantigen (intermolecular
ERU and previous or current infection with Leptospira has
spreading). This theory is supported by the responsiveness of the
been studied in greater detail than many of the other known
disease to immunosuppressive therapy, which, if viable
etiologies of ERU. This organism appears to be capable of
 organism were to be present in the eye, would be expected to
immunologically cross-reacting with the equine cornea and
ultimately result in an exacerbation of the inflammation.
lens, and in horses with ERU, leptospiral antisera is also cross-
Alternatively, it has been theorized that persistence 
of
 reactive with the equine iris pigment epithelium and retina. In
L. interrogans in the vitreous humor of horses with ERU can
     ss  
 induce and maintain an autoimmune uveitis. During the periods
fluids of horses with chronic ERU, and it is postulated that
between overt episodes, the number of leptospiral organisms may
 persistent intraocular leptospiral infections by certain strains of
 decline to such a level that overt inflammation is not clinically
the organism cause ERU. Many horses with ERU in the United
 detectable, and antibody titers decline. When the antibody titer
States, however, do not appear to be infected with leptospiral
falls below a certain threshold, bacterial numbers may increase,
 organisms; also, potent immunosuppressive therapy with drugs
 resulting in a resurgence of antibodies that cross-react with host 
such as intravitreal cyclosporine does not exacerbate the
antigens, leading to greater inflammation, damage to adjacent
 disease as would be expected with an active infectious process.
tissues, and, perhaps, recognition of new antigenic epitopes. This
Therefore the relative importance of the direct effects of
 theory is supported by the observation that infusion of antibiotics
the organism on the eye, locally produced antibodies against 
into the vitreal cavity in conjunction with a surgical vitrectomy
Leptospira interrogans, and autoantibodies against retinal
 may greatly reduce the frequency of recurrent episodes.
autoantigens (retinal S-antigen and interphotoreceptor retinoid-
 Clinical Signs. Clinical signs vary with the phase of the disease
binding protein) remain unclear in the pathogenesis of ERU. In
(Figure 11-26).
 any event, it is clear that ERU is a highly complex disorder with 
 Active Phase. Clinical signs in the active phase are as follows:
 multifactorial causes related to the genetic constitution of the
animal and that it is strongly immune-mediated. Common
·Marked blepharospasm
causes of ERU are Leptospira-associated uveitis and uveitis
· Photophobia
associated with migrating microfilariae of Onchocerca
· Lacrimation
cervicalis.
·Pain
 Leptospira-Associated Uveitis. Although both experimental
· Protrusion of the third eyelid
infections and natural outbreaks of leptospirosis have been
· Corneal edema
associated with ERU, clinically apparent uveitis does not 
·Scleral injection
 develop in most adult horses until 1 to 2 years after infection.
Aqueous flare (with/without hypopyon)
Several reports have described isolation of L. interrogans from
·Miosis
various ocular fluids, especially the vitreous, in horses with
 Thickened, infltrated iris
 chronic ERU. The organism is difficult to culture, however, and
Anterior and posterior synechiae
results of polymerase chain reaction testing for leptospiral
Fibrinous clots in anterior chamber
 DNA are typically positive in many animals that are culture-
Decreased IOP (occasionally increased)
negative, suggesting that the organism may be more prevalent 
· Depigmented butterfly lesions near optic disc
than once thought. Serum antibody titers greater than 1:400 are
(Figure 11-27)
suggestive of previous infection, although lower serologic titers
·Any of the quiescent signs
may be found in many infected horses. In fact, negative
 In an animal with onchocerciasis, the following may be seen
serologic titers do not necessarily rule out leptospirosis as a
 in addition to the typical ocular lesions of ERU:
possible cause, because the organism or its DNA is occasion-
ally identified in the intraocular fluids of horses with negative 
· Focal dermatitis on the head, ventral thorax, and neck
serologic titer results. Interpretation of serologic test results 
· Vitiligo affecting the scrotum, lateral canthus, or lateral
may be further confounded by the occurrence of positive
conjunctival limbus
serologic titer results for Leptospira in horses without uveitis.
Vitreal titers for Leptospira may also be elevated, although
again the value of this test remains questionable.
Acute onset
Quiescant
 Numerous serologic studies have shown widespread expo-
RecLrrences or
Paths ogic
 phase
 phase
vaving seventy
sure (up to 30%) of the equine population to a variety of
serotypes of Leptospira in North America, Britain, Europe, and
Australia. Serotypes associated with the disease include
 Figure 11-26. Clinical course of equine recurrent uveitis.
UvEA |
219
topical therapy alone, whereas more severe inflammation typically
demands systemic therapy as well. Initial therapy usually includes
the following measures:
1. Attempt to establish a definitive etiologic diagnosis, and
 specifically address the cause if possible.
 2. Ensure good husbandry practices: Place the horse in a dark
stall to relieve photophobia. Prevent ocular trauma by
 mowing pastures and removing sharp objects from the
 environment. Reduce contact with cattle and wildlife that
may harbor leptospirosis, prevent access to ponds and
swampy areas, and ensure good insect and rodent control.
Minimize stress, ensure a good diet, and employ an
optimal deworming schedule. Vaccinations should be
 optimized for each patient and based on the horse's use
Figure 11-27. Wing-shapec hypopigmented lesions nasal and temporal to
and specific needs. Multiple vaccinations should be spaced
the optic dlisc ("butterfly lesions") are suggestive of previous uveitis.
 at least 1 week apart so as to avoid excessive antigenic
(Courtesy University of Wisconsin-Maclison Veterinary Ophthalrmology
Service Collection.)
stimulation and potential exacerbation of the disease.
 3. Atropine ointment (1%) applied 1 to 4 times a day. This
medication reduces pain by relaxing the ciliary muscle,
· Focal corneal opacities at the lateral limbus
aids in the prevention of synechia, and may help stabilize
· Hyperemia and chemosis of the perilimbal temporal
the blood-aqueous barrier. Atropine should be discontinued
conjunctiva
or reduced in frequency if the horse shows reduced gut
motility and/or colic. Resistance to pupillary dilation is an
In the active phase, rapid intensive treatment is mandatory to
indicator of the severity of the uveitis, the presence of
prevent severe complications (e.g., synechiae, cataract, retinal
synechia, or both. Once the uveitis is controlled, the pupil
detachment). Most active periods last several days to weeks.
may remain dilated for days to weeks, especially if the
 drug was used frequently during an acute attack.
Quiescent Phase. Typically an active period is followed by a
 4. Systemic NSAIDs (listed here in order of potency—use
quiescent phase of variable duration. Although inflammation
only 1 at a time):
may be clinically minimal or undetectable in the quiescent
· Flunixin meglumine 0.25 to 1.0 mg/kg q12h, IV, IM, or
phase, histologic signs of inflammation and altered vascular
PO for 5 days; then, if required by the severity of the 
permeability continue. During the quiescent phase immuno-
inflammation and if patient is appropriately monitored
logically active cells and cytokines also persist, and new
for gastric and renal side effects, 0.25 mg/kg PO
antigenic epitopes or autoantigens may be recognized-
q12-24h on a more long-term basis. If after 5 days
prompting a resurgence of inflammation (Figures 1i-28 and
 systemic antinflammatory therapy is still required, many
 11-29). It is not uncommon for horses in the quiescent phase to
ophthalmologists switch from flunixin meglumine to
be offered for sale by unscrupulous individuals who represent
phenylbutazone. Flunixin meglumine may also facilitate
the horse as “sound" or by those who are unaware of a horse's
pupillary dilation by atropine because endogenous
past history.
prostaglandins can induce miosis by directly acting on
 Clinical signs most likely to be seen during clinical examin-
the iris sphincter muscle; this action is blocked by
ation of horses in the quiescent phase are as follows (Figures
NSAIDS but not by atropine.
11-30 and 11-31):
· Phenylbutazone 1 g per adult horse (or up to 4.4 mg/kg)
 q12-24h IV or PO. This drug typically is used after a
· Corneal opacity
5-day course of flunixin meglumine if additional systemic
· Pigment on anterior lens capsule
antinflammatory therapy is required. On occasion, with 
 Anterior and posterior synechiae
 appropriate monitoring for gastric and renal toxicity, it is
· Blunted and rounded corpora nigra
used as long-term therapy in an effort to reduce the
 Occluded pupil
frequency and severity of acute episodes, especially if
· Iris atrophy
 aspirin is ineffective at such reductions.
· Cataract (poor surgical candidates)
Aspirin 25 mg/kg PO q12-24h (12.5 g/500 kg). Typically
· Vitreous bands and opacities
 this agent is used in horses in which long-term topical anti-
· Butterfly lesions or retinal detachment 
inflammatory therapy cannot prevent recurrent outbreaks
· Phthisis bulbi
and long-term systemic NSAID therapy is required.
· Partial or complete loss of vision
 Consider ranitidine (6.6 mg/kg q8h) and sucralfate
(20 mg/kg PO q8h) or omeprazole (4 mg/kg PO q24h)
-pu! aka aujnba ue ul aejanbas Aroreuweyu! jo aouasard aul
for gastric ulcer prophylaxis in foals.
cates the possibility of ERU.
5. Topical corticosteroids (e.g., 0.1% dexamethasone 
ointment, 1.0% prednisolone) applied every 1 to 6 hours,
Treatment. In general the number of medications and
depending on severity. Long-term therapy is often required,
frequency of the therapy are adjusted in accordance with the
and it is generally advisable to treat an acute episode for at
severity of the clinical signs. Mild disease may be treated with
least 2 weeks after the apparent resolution of all signs of
220
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Rightswer
Pleaserefer to the printed publication
B
Rightsweettedtnlehgenlctrna
Please refer te the printed publiation.
Please refer to the printed publication.
C
D
Rightsweeetnhiigen
Rights werenot granted toinclude this fgureineectrnicmeia.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Pleaserefer to the printed publication.
E
F
  san anai aa eaaxa im saiy  sa j ee ios  an
equine retina. Bar, 25 μm. B, Normal equine retina stained with antibodlies to retinal S-antigen (S-Ag).
clestruction of retinal architecture associatec with immune-mecliatec clisease cirectec against retinal S-Ag. CD3+
neovascularization were visible in the retina (*). Bar, 25 μm. D, Retinal infiltration by T cells (CD3+; brown,
arrows). Destruction of photoreceptor outer segments with some remaining cells from the inner or outer nuclear
layer anc formation of epiretinal gliosis (EC). NL, Nuclear layer; bar, 15 μm. E, Severely clestroyed retina in
affectec horse. lnfiltration of CD3+ T cells (brown, arrows) in the nuclear layer (NL) of the rermaining
photoreceptor cells (visualized by rec staining for S-Ag) and in the neuronal cell layer at the borclerline to a
severe epiretinal gliosis (EC). Bar, 40 μm. F, Subconjunctival lymphoicl follicle (CD3+ cells stain redl). *, Sclera;
bar, 120 μrm. (From Deeg CA, et al. [2004]: The uveitogenic potential of retinal S-antigen in horses. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 45:2286.)
active inflammation. In many patients long-term topical
1. Topical NSAIDs (e.g., flurbiprofen 0.03%, 0.1%
corticosteroid therapy is required to reduce the frequency
diclofenac, or another topical NSAID applied every
and severity of subsequent attacks.
6 hours): These agents are not as potent as topical
 corticosteroids in ERU therapy, but in severe cases they
 Additional approaches that can be used in unusually severe
 may be used in addition to topical corticosteroids.
Alternatively, they may be used long term, either alone or
follows:
 with topical corticosteroids in an effort to prevent recurrent 
UvEA |
221
penetration of this compound when applied topically,
however, its efficacy appears to be somewhat less than that 
of topical corticosteroids. Experimentally, an intravitreal
sustained-release insert containing cyclosporine has shown 
considerable promise in the treatment of ERU.
 3. Subconjunctival corticosteroids (triamcinolone acetonide):
Reported dosages for triamcinolone acetonide vary greatly
from 1 to 2 mg per eye, to 20 mg per eye, to 40 mg per eye
as often as every 1 to 3 weeks. Usual duration of action is
7 to 10 days. The major concerm with this drug is that it
 creates a strong predisposition for bacterial and fungal
keratitis and that, unlike topically applied corticosteroids, it 
cannot be withdrawn if the disease should occur. Therefore
 it is typically used as an adjunct to topical corticosteroids
in the acute phase in especially severe cases or when the
owner has diffculty medicating the horse as often as
Figure 11-29. lymphocytic inflammation of the ciliary body of a horse
with chronic equine recurrent uveitis. (Courtesy Dr. Richarcd R Dubielzig.)
required. Note: The sustained-release vehicle in
methylprednisolone acetate may result in an unsightly
 plaque and irritating granuloma.
4. Systemic corticosteroids (e.g., dexamethasone 5 to
10 mg/day PO or 2.5 to 5.0 mg daily IM or oral
prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg q24h): In general, because of
frequent adverse effects, systemic corticosteroids are used
only as a last resort in the treatment of ERU. They can be
 considered in unusually severe cases or when the
 inflammation is refractory to systemic NSAIDS and topical
 corticosteroids. Side effects include laminitis and
 gastrointestinal upset.
5. Antibiotic therapy in horses with presumed leptospiral-
associated uveitis: The effcacy of this therapy remains
speculative, and side effects are not uncommon. Drugs that
have been suggested include streptomycin (11 mg/kg IM
q12h) and a 4-week course of oral doxycycline (10-20 mg/kg
Figure 11-30. Acute equine recurrent uveitis. Note the extensive
q12h). In one study by Gilmour et al., however, doxycycline 
Conjunctival hyperemia, miosis, and blue-green hue to the iris. The yellow
serum of horses often makes a blue iris appear green.
at 10 mg/kg q12h orally did not result in appreciable drug
concentrations in the aqueous humor or vitreous of normal
eyes. Some researchers believe that the efficacy of vitrectomy
for this disorder is due to the use of gentamicin in the
inmigation fluid as much as the procedure itself. This theory
has prompted some ophthalmologists to give a single
 intravitreal injection of 4 mg of gentamicin in an effort to
 prevent oreliminate recurent episodes in severely affcted
eyes. Gentamicin injections, however, should be made with
extreme caution because the drug may cause retinal
degeneration, cataract formation, intraocular inflammation,
endophthalmitis, and irreversible vision loss.
 6. Surgical vitrectomy via a pars plana approach has been
advocated by some workers to reduce the frequency and
severity of attacks of ERU. The rationale for its use is based
on the hypothesis that persistent organisms within the vitreal
cavity (and perhaps the uveal tract) are capable of
Figure 11-31. Chronic equine recurrent uveitis. The iris
perpetuating an immune-mediated uveitis. Controlled clinical
is
hyperpigmented. Note also the numerous posterior synechiae and early
trials have yet to demonstrate the efficacy of this procedure,
cataract formation.
 and cataracts are a common postoperative complication.
 7. Vaccination is controversial. No approved vaccine is
 available for horses. The cross-reactivity of leptospiral
episodes. Topical NSAIDs can slow corneal
antigens with normal constituents of the equine eye
epithelialization.
suggests that vaccination may actually cause the disease in
2. Cyclosporine A: Topical 0.2% cyclosporine ophthalmic
some animals. Vaccination of seronegative horses with a
ointment or 2% cyclosporine in oil applied every 6 to
multivalent bovine vaccine, with appropriate informed
12 hours has been suggested to be of value in the treatment
 consent, may help suppress a herd outbreak. Vaccination as
 of ERU. Because of the relatively limited intraocular
an adjunctive therapy in horses with ERU, however, failed
222
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAlS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
to slow the progression of the disease in one study
(Rohrbach et al., 2005).
8. Enucleation is, on occasion, the only means of effectively
treating a blind, painful globe.
Onchocerca Uveitis. O. cervicalis lives in the ligamentum
 nuchae of the horse. The microfilariae released by these adults
migrate to the skin and ocular region and are transmitted by
midges of the genus Culicoides and mosquitos. Ocular lesions
are associated with the migration of the microfilariae from the 
ligamentum nuchae to the skin, some entering vessels of the
bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva. The microflariae are most
readily found in the conjunctiva adjacent to the temporal
limbus and in the corneal stroma adjacent to this area.
 In 1971 Cello described the corneal lesions as “superficial
subepithelial fluffy or feathery white opacities 0.5 to 1.0 mm in
Figure 11-32. Uveitis anc focal lens capsule rupture with cataract
diameter, located 1 to 5 mm from the temporal limbus*" The
formation associated with the protozoan Encephalifozoon cuniculi in a
adjacent conjunctiva was hyperemic and chemotic, but
rabbit.
biomicroscopic examination was required to demonstrate the
corneal lesions.
endophthalmitis has also been observed when microfilariae are
The ocular lesions of onchocerciasis alone, including
 present in the eye and an adulticide is administered.
conjunctival vitiligo, are insufficient to indicate the presence of
PHACOCLASTIC UVEITIS IN RABBITS. An unusual form of
microfilariae. Unilateral ocular infestations with microflariae
uveitis associated with apparent spontaneous lens capsule
may also occur.
 rupture, phacoclastic uveitis, occurs in the rabbit and frequently
ERU is said to be caused by the dead microfilariae or to be
results in enucleation (Figure 11-32). Organisms believed to be
mediated by immunopathologic mechanisms involving IgE.
Encephalitozoon cuniculi have been identified in affected
Diethylcarbamazine stimulates IgE antibody responses. This
 lenses. Clinical signs of infection include a white or yellowish
feature, rather than a reaction by the host to killed microflariae,
uveal or anterior chamber mass that progresses to severe uveitis
 may explain the inflammation seen after its administration.
 and glaucoma that is usually refractory to treatment. Early lens
Microfilariae are demonstrated by removing, under local
 removal has been suggested as a method of treatment to prevent
anesthesia, (l) a small piece of conjunctiva from the affected
development of uveitis.
area or (2) a piece of skin from the ventral thoracic midline.
 TOXIC UVEITIS. The eye is exquisitely sensitive to bacterial
The tissue is minced with scissors and placed in 5 mL of saline
endotoxins, and amounts as small as a few nanograms are
at 37° C for 30 to 50 minutes (e.g, in a small vial in the
 capable of inducing substantial uveitis. Other toxic agents are
clinician's pocket). The supernatant is centrifuged and 
 pilocarpine and other topical parasympathomimetics as well as
examined for motile microfilariae. Alternatively, the tissue may
topical prostaglandins used in the treatment of glaucoma (e.g-,
be examined in saline on a slide immediately after collection.
latanoprost). Ethylene glycol poisoning has been associated
 Interpretation of such slides must be made in association with
with anterior uveitis in dogs. Sulfa-containing drugs and
 other clinical findings, because many horses without ERU have 
those associated with thrombocytopenia or coagulopathies
microfilariae.
have also been associated with uveitis (usually associated with
hemorrhage).
Microfilaricides must not be used during acute uveitis.
TRAUMA
Treatment. The treatment is the same as that for Leptospira-
Traumatic Uveitis
associated uveitis. After the inflammation has subsided,
ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg may be administered systemically. A single
dose of ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg was found to be very effective in
Trauma is a common cause of uveitis in domestic animals.
eliminating microfilariae from the skin of horses afflicted with
dermatitis due to O. cervicalis. Altematively, diethylcarbamazine 
 Uveitis may result from either blunt or sharp trauma to the globe
4 mg/kg daily is administered in the food for 21 days. At the first 
 or may occur after intraocular surgical procedures. Therapy is the
sign of recurrent inflammation during treatment, corticosteroid
same as that for other forms of uveitis, although topical
therapy is begun. In endemic areas prophylactic feeding of
 corticosteroids should be avoided if a comeal erosion or ulceration
diethylcarbamazine and aspirin is recommended throughout the 
 is present; in this case topical NSAIDS may be used, although
season when vectors are present. Aspirin may also be used
they, too, may impair cormeal epithelialization and there is some
continuously. The routine use of ivermectin and other highly
 potential for topical NSAIDS to elicit a comeal melt. Topical and
effective anthelmintics appears to have substantially reduced
systemic NSAIDs are also typically avoided if significant
the incidence of onchocercal uveitis in the United States
intraocular hemorrhage is present. If the corneal epithelium is
UVEITIS DUE TO Dirofilaria immitis. Mature and immature
not intact, a topical antibiotic such as neomycin-polymyxin
adult diroflaria are infrequently reported in the anterior
B-bacitracin combination product applied every 6 to 8 hours
chamber of dogs. Treatment is surgical removal. If adulticides
should be used prophylactically. If the globe has been penetrated,
 are used while adult worms are present in the anterior chamber,
the wound may require suturing and systemic antibiotics in addi-
severe uveitis and endophthalmitis may result. Severe
 tion to topical therapy. Traumatic uveitis is aggressively treated in
UvEA I
223
the horse because a traumatic breakdown of the blood-aqueous
hemorrhage can result. Enucleation or evisceration and
barrier may increase the risk of recurrent episodes of uveitis.
intrascleral prosthesis are alternative therapies if the eye is
blind.
[n severe ocular trauma, early and vigorous treatment is required
 pareada1 'sdeurad 'pue agewep relnoo juauewad juanaid ol
Visual Outcome and Ocular Survival after Iris Prolapse
episodes of uveitis.
in Horses
 In many cases the long-term prognosis of traumatic uveitis
 Iris prolapse is usually associated with a ruptured corneal ulcer
is determined more by the nature of the injury than by the
or full-thickness corneal laceration. In a review of 32 cases,
 therapy that was chosen.
combined medical and surgical therapy (primary closure with
 Common uveal injuries are as follows:
or without a conjunctival graft) was successful in saving vision
of 40% of eyes with perforating corneal disease (ulcers or
· Iris prolapse: Protrusion of a portion of the iris through a
stromal abscesses) and 33% of eyes with perforating
corneal or scleral perforation
lacerations (Chmielewski et al., 1997). Complications resulting
· Hyphema: Hemorrhage into the anterior chamber
in blindness included phthisis bulbi, extensive keratomalacia,
·Staphyloma: A weakened or protruding lesion in the cornea
and endophthalmitis. A favorable visual result was more
or sclera into which a portion of the uvea protrudes from the
likely in horses presented for specialist care with ulcers of
inside; the uveal tissue usually adheres to the cormea or sclera
Jess than 15 days’ duration or corneal lacerations smaller than
Concussion
15 mm.
· Iridodialysis: Tearing of the iris from the ciliary body at its
 root. This condition is uncommon in domestic animals. Iris
HYPHEMA
prolapse and hyphema are discussed in greater detail later.
 The emergency treatment of hyphema is discussed in Chapter 19.
Iris Prolapse
Etiology
Iris prolapse is a common sequela to penetrating corneal
wounds or ruptured corneal ulcers. The iris is carried forward
 Hyphema may be idiopathic or may result from many factors,
into the corneal defect by escaping aqueous. Emergency treat-
such as the following:
ment of such injuries is described in Chapter 19. When iris
passes through such a corneal defect, its vascular supply is
· Traumatic disruption of a uveal blood vessel: sharp or blunt
usually compromised, resulting in venous congestion and edema.
trauma, severe pressure around the neck as in choking or
This changes the appearance of the protruding mass so that it
increased intrathoracic pressure in severe traumatic
commonly looks like uvea-colored mucus adhering to the cormea.
compression of the chest or dystocia
· Fragility of vessel walls, especially preiridal fibrovascular
Signs
membranes that form in response to chronic disorders
causing intraocular hypoxia (e.g., inflammation, glaucoma,
Clinical signs of iris prolapse are as follows:
retinal detachments, neoplasia, or after intraocular surgery)
· Clotting disorders, platelet disturbances, and blood
· The color of the prolapsed portion becomes lighter than the
dyscrasias
 remaining iris.
·Highly vascularized tumors
· The protruding iris tissue forms a mound on the cornea.
·Severe uveitis
 The tissue has a gelatinous mucoid appearance and
· Retinal dysplasia with rupture of vessels
frequently atracts adhering strands of conjunctival mucus.
· Systemic disease (e.g., tropical canine pancytopenia, Rocky
The pupil is eccentric as a result of traction of the
Mountain spotted fever)
 protruding iris tissue.
The corneal wound is often obscured by the edematous iris
Erythrocytes released into the anterior chamber undergo
tissue. Protrusion of the ciliary body occurs most
phagocytosis by the cells lining the trabecular meshwork. The
commonly in horses as a result of scleral rupture posterior
surface of the iris provides fibrinolysin, which aids in resolving
to the limbus after blunt trauma.
clots in the anterior chamber. The sequelae of hyphema often
have a greater impact on the ultimate visual outcome than the
Treatment
hemorrhage itself (Figure 11-33).
 If the corneal wound is small, iris prolapse may be treated
u! Aisnoaueruods paqrosal are pue lews are sewaydky rsow
temporarily with a third-eyelid flap and topical and systemic
a few days.
antibiotic solutions until specialized assistance is available. In
larger wounds requiring immediate repair, an attempt is made
to replace the iris with an iris spatula before the cornea is
Treatment
sutured. If this is not possible, the protruding piece may be
carefully excised with the use of an electrosurgical unit. The
The treatment of hyphema is controversial because of conflicting
 cornea is sutured, and the anterior chamber reconstituted with
experimental results with different drug regimens in different
balanced salt solution or an air bubble. Caution: If the major
 species. In the vast majority of patients surgical drainage of the
arterial circle of the iris is transected, profuse intraocular
hyphema is not useful because rebleeding is frequent. The
224
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Glaucoma
cations, use of vitamins C and K is not advised, nor are such agents
Blaod dyscrasias
Fibrinous bands
 as proteolytic enzymes or carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. Recurrent
Uveitis ·
 hyphema, especially with glaucoma, should prompt the clinician
and synechiae
to rule out intraocular neoplasia as the cause of the bleeding.
Trauma
Hyphcma
Occlusion of
the pupil
Neoplasia 
UVEAL CYSTS AND NEOPLASMS
Cataract
Congenital causes
The uvea may be affected by cystic disorders that mimic
Phthisis bulbi
Systemic diseases
neoplasia or by both primary and secondary neoplasms. Intra-
Hecurrenl hyphema
ocular tumors frequently are also accompanied by glaucoma,
Neovascularizalion 
 intraocular hemorrhage, or chronic unresponsive uveitis
Corneal opacity
Figure 11-33. Causes ancl effects of hyphema. (Moclifiec from Blogg JR
[1980l: The Eye in Veterinary Practice. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Uveal Cysts
Uveal cysts are fluid-filled, ovoid to spherical structures that
 procedure may be considered, however, in patients with glaucoma
 originate from the posterior pigmented epithelium of the iris or
secondary to blood in the anterior chamber in which the cause
the ciliary body. Although they may represent a recessively
of the bleeding has been controlled. Although different
inherited, congential uveal defect (especially in Great Danes
 methods are used, the aims are to:
and golden retrievers), they are often not seen until adulthood.
They also are commonly seen in Boston terriers and occasion-
· Identify the cause
·Prevent recurrent bleeding
ally in cats and Rocky Mountain horses. A second type of cyst
 in horses may be seen within the iris stroma at its base in lightly
 Control uveitis
pigmented irides. Uveal cysts may also occur secondary to
· Limit the sequelae of uveitis
 inflammation. The cysts either remain attached or break free
and float into the anterior chamber, either singly or in groups
Surgical removal of clots from the anterior chamber is
(Figure 11-34). In the anterior chamber they may float free or
 generally not an effective therapy.
adhere to the iris or corneal endothelium, occasionally
 obstructing the visual axis and the pupil. Deflated cysts appear
The following treatment is recommended for hyphemia:
 as patches of pigment adherent to the corneal endothelium. In
1. Prevent further trauma by immediate and enforced cage or
rare circumstances large numbers of cysts may push the iris
stall rest.
 root forward, causing secondary closed-angle glaucoma. Uveal
 2. Administer corticosteroid drops (dexamethasone 0.1%,
cysts may be differentiated from a pigmented neoplasm or iris
prednisolone 1%) three times daily. NSAIDs are not used
nevus by the ability of the cyst to be transilluminated with a
because of their effects on platelets and blood clotting.
bright focal light, although this feature may be sometimes diffi-
 3. Intracameral tissue plasminogen activator may be
cult to appreciate in horses or very heavily pigmented cysts. In
 beneficial in select patients.
such cases ultrasonography may be required to differentiate a
cyst from neoplasia.
Additional Therapy for Mild Hyphemia
 Removal of a uveal cyst is rarely indicated but should be
considered in the following circumstances:
1. If the hyphema is not secondary to uveitis, administer
 The pupil is obstructed, impairing vision.
1% to 2% pilocarpine drops three times daily and attempt
Glaucoma is impending or present owing to anterior
to dilate the pupil every second day with phenylephrine
displacement of the inis by large numbers of cysts, or
(10%) to prevent synechia formation.
multiple cysts are present and the debris liberated by their
 2. If the hyphema is secondary to uveitis, dilate the pupil with
1% atropine every 8 to 12 hours.
collapse may obstruct the trabecular meshwork.
3. Monitor IOP.
Additional Therapy for Severe Hyphemia
1. Instead of pilocarpine, use 1% atropine ophthalmic ointment
or solution three times daily to relieve pain if present.
 2. Administer systemic corticosteroids (e.g., prednisolone or
 dexamethasone) in appropriate systemic dosages.
3. Monitor IOP twice daily.
4. If glaucoma is incipient, use a topical or systemic carbonic
anhydrase inhibitor or topical dipivefrin.
Recurrent Hyphema
 If the hyphema is recurrent, a complete laboratory examination,
including measurement of complete blood count, platelets, and
Figure 11-34. Causes anc effects of hyphema. (Moclified from Blogg IR
clotting parameters, is indicated. In the absence of specific indi-
[1980|: The Eye in Veterinary Practice. Sauncers, Philacelphia.}
UvEA I
225
· The cyst is contacting the comeal endothelium, causing
corneal edema.
Cysts may be removed by aspiration under microsurgical
control or deflated by laser photocoagulation.
Cystic Corpora Nigra in Horses
Corpora nigra generally occupy the central portions of the upper
and lower pupillary margins. Cystic corpora nigra appear as large,
smooth structures at the pupillary margin. They may obstruct the
 pupil enough to cause visual impairment or blindness, manifested
 as decreased jumping performance or head shaking.
 The differential diagnosis for such cysts is as follows:
Figure 11-35. Ciliary bocly aclenoma extencling from the ciliary bocy
· Cystic dilation of the iris stroma (blue or lightly pigmented
through the iris anc into the anterior chamber of a cog. (Courtesy
irides)
University of Wisconsin-Maclison Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
·Free-floating iris cysts
Collection.)
· Pigmented neoplasms, such as melanoma
· Hypertrophic corpora nigra
Adenocarcinoma and Adenoma
· Inflammatory nodules
 Neoplasms of the ciliary epithelium are occasionally observed in
Cystic dilations of the iris stroma and free-floating iris cysts
dogs. Such a lesion usually appears as a single mass protruding
in horses rarely require treatment. Cystic corpora nigra must be
distinguished from neoplasms, but they do not transilluminate
from behind the iris into the pupil (Figure 11-35). The mass may
be pigmented or unpigmented, depending on whether it arose
from pigmented or unpigmented ciliary epithelium, and must be
melanomas and hypertrophic corpora nigra have a roughened
 distinguished from melanocytoma or potentially malignant
surface. Ultrasonography may be used to distinguish cystic
melanoma of the same site. The neoplasms infrequently infiltrate 
corpora nigra from melanoma or hypertrophic corpora nigra.
anteriorly into the drainage angle and iris, elevating IOP. The
Cystic corpora nigra may be removed by aspiration under micro-
extent of the lesion may be outlined by transillumination and
surgical control or with laser therapy.
reflected light from the tapetum, and by ultrasonography.
Treatment consists of removal of the tumor and adjacent ciliary
Primary Tumors
body (iridocyclectomy), frequently including replacement of
Of the primary uveal tumor types listed in Box 1l-1, adenoma,
the defect with a scleral graft, laser cyclodestruction, or, if the
tumor is extensive, enucleation. Provided that the tumor has
adenocarcinoma, and melanoma are the most common. Iris
 remained within the globe, the prognosis for survival is good.
nevi were discussed earlier.
Melanocytoma and Melanoma
 Box 11-1 | Classification of primary tumors
Although the vast majority of uveal melanomas are benign,
Melanocytes
malignant tumors arising from the iris, ciliary body, or, less
Acquired
commonly, the choroid do occur. They are most common in
dogs and cats and less common in horses and cattle. Mitotic
Iris nevus 
Melanocytoma (benign)
index is a more useful indicator of behavior and prognosis in
 Melanoma (potentially malignant)
dogs than the histologic criteria used for human ocular
Diffuse iris melanoma (feline)
melanomas. The potential for metastasis is present, but
different studies demonstrate wide variation in observed rates,
 Ciliary Epithelium
making generalizations diffcult. Intraocular and palpebral
Congenital
 melanomas in cats have a greater tendency to metastasize and
 Benign medulloepithelioma
are more malignant than those in dogs, with higher rates of
Malignant medulloepithelioma
mortality and metastasis.
 Benign teratoid medulloepithelioma
 Melanoma in dogs and cats, unlike that in humans, ocurs
 Malignant teratoid medulloepithelioma
more frequently in the iris and ciliary body (Figure 11-36) than
Acquired
in the choroid and has a reasonable prognosis for survival if the
eye is enucleated before the tumor has penetrated the sclera.
 Nonpigmented:
 Penetration may occur via ciliary arteries, veins, or nerves, by
Adenoma
direct extension, or via the optic nerve. In a study of feline
Adenocarcinoma
ocular melanomas by Patnaik and Mooney (1988) 10 of 16 uveal
 Pigmented:
Adenoma
melanomas had metastases before enucleation. On the basis of
tumor behavior in only three animals in the same study, feline 
Adenocarcinoma
 palpebral melanomas may have a high rate of metastasis.
226
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
 1. If the tumor is small or localized, local excision with
or neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser
 photocoagulation may be considered. By the time clinical
signs are present, many tumors are too large for this
treatment.
 2. Enucleation of the globe is often mandated by the presence
of intractable glaucoma, uveitis, or hyphema.
The prognosis for the animal's survival after enucleation is
good; in one study, only 7 of 129 canine uveal melanomas had
confirmed metastases. If there is any indication of scleral
 penetration, orbital exenteration is performed in an attempt to
remove tumor cells.  Frequent postoperative examinations
(every 3 months for a year, then annually) are advisable, with
special attention given to the submandibular, retropharyngeal,
sl ssew aul Sop e ul (ewouelau) aown Apog Ael "9-ll aimsi
and bronchial lymph nodes. Adjunctive chemotherapy
or
posterior to the iris but extends through the iris nasally. (Courtesy
radiation therapy may be used, although the efficacy of these
University of Wisconsin-Madlison Veterinary Ophthalrmology Service
Collection.)
treatments is unclear.
Primary Feline Ocular Sarcomas
 Posttraumatic sarcomas of the feline eye have been reported to
occasionally occur months to years after severe ocular trauma.
Although the vast majority of cats with primary ocular sarcomas
have a history of penetrating trauma that damaged the lens and/or
other intraocular structures, a few cases have been described in
which there is no history of trauma, infection, or ocular surgery. In
addition to clinical signs consistent with the injury, signs of ocular
sarcoma are chronic, relatively unresponsive uveitis, glaucoma
with buphthalmos, and a previously phthisical eye that is now
enlarging. Metastasis or local recurrence after enucleation is
common. Because it lines the inner surface of the globe, the tumor
commonly extends into the orbit via the optic nerve. Metaplastic
bone has also been observed in ocular sarcomas. Although some
 researchers have suggested removal of all traumatized or phthisical
Figure 11-37. Epibulbar melanoma in a Cerman shephercd. This benign
feline eyes to prevent development of this rare tumor, the value
tumor must be clifferentiated from an intraocular turmor that has broken
 of this approach remains to be determined.
through the sclera.
Feline Diffuse Iris Melanoma
Epibulbar melanomas occur in dogs, cats, and horses
(Figure 11-37). In dogs the average age of onset is 6 years, the
The diffuse iris melanoma seen in cats has specific features that
most common site is the superior limbus, and the German
 differentiate it from other anterior uveal tumors. The tumor is
shepherd has a higher incidence. These tumors grow slowly
often very slowly progressive, arising from pigmented areas on
and are treated with local surgical excision, cryotherapy, or
the anterior surface of the iris (see Figure 11-22) and perhaps
laser photoablation. The resulting defect may require structural
eventually involve the iridocorneal angle, causing secondary
support with a graft of autogenous or heterologous tissue or a
glaucoma (Figure 11-38). In some cats, however, the tumor is
synthetic material. Small, slow-growing tumors in older animals 
rapidly progressive and quick to metastasize. Although the
or animals with limited life span may simply be observed.
tumor is potentially malignant, the risk for metastasis in the
CLINICAL SIGNs. Melanomas usually cause the following
majority of cats appears to be relatively low. Cats with this
clinical signs:
disorder should be regularly evaluated by a veterinary
ophthalmologist to ascertain whether or when enucleation may
· Change in color or visible mass in the iris
be indicated. In single or multiple early iris melanomas that are
· Uveitis or endophthalmitis due to necrosis of the tumor;
 progressing, tumor ablation with laser therapy may be useful.
 comea is often opaque
Because the disease is slowly progressive, the clinical conflict
Hyphema
is
whether to simply observe the patient or enucleate a
· Secondary glaucoma
functional eye if persistence of such an eye may present a risk to
the animal's life through metastasis. Many affected cats,
Melanomas ofen cause secondary glaucoma.
however, even those with metastatic disease, may live for long
 periods with few ill effects.
TREATMENT. Treatment of melanomas and melanocytomas
 All pigmented irnis tumors in cats should be referred to a
 consists of the following measures:
 veterinary ophthalmologist for evaluation and long-term therapy.
UvEA I
227
Figure 1l-39. Lymphosarcoma of the iris of a cat. The iris is clifusely
Figure 1l-38. Diffuse iris melanoma in a cat. The iris is cliffusely
thickened with neoplastic lymphocytes. (Courtesy_ University
infiltrated, and the pupil is clyscoric. Enucleation is aclvised.
Wisconsin-Madison Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
Criteria for considering enucleation of an eye with a progressively
 In cats similar but less common ocular lesions occur in
enlarging hyperpigmented iridal lesion are as follows:
lymphosarcoma, myeloproliferative disease, reticuloendotheliosis,
feline immunodeficiency virus infection, and feline kukemia
· Noticeable thickening of the inis stroma with distortion of
virus infection (Figure 11-39). Older male cats are more fre-
the pupil or its mobility
quently affected with ocular lymphosarcoma; ocular signs were
· Involvement of the ciliary body
the initial presenting sign in more than 50% of affected cats in
·Extension into the sclera
a retrospective pathologic study by Corcoran et al. (1995). In
·Secondary glaucoma
cattle ocular lesions in lymphosarcoma are restricted to infl-
· Intractable uveitis
tration of orbital tissues, often resulting in exophthalmos with
exposure keratitis. Up to 10% of cattle with lymphosarcoma
Secondary Tumors
may have exophthalmos.
With the exception of lymphosarcoma, tumors metastasizing to
Lymphosarcoma should be considered in cattle with
the uvea are uncommon. Although any metastatic tumor may
exophthalmos.
potentially spread to the eye, the most common tumors to do so
in dogs are mammary carcinoma, hemangiosarcoma, thyroid,
 In poultry, infiltration of the iris and uveal tract with a
pancreatic and renal carcinomas, malignant melanoma of the 
change in color to bluish gray ("pearly eye") is seen in Marek's
skin, seminoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Any metastatic
disease; it is called epidemic blindness.
tumor may spread to the eye, however.
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
Lymphosarcoma
Iris Hypoplasia
 Ocular manifestations of lymphosarcoma occur in the dog, cat,
 In congenital iris hypoplasia in color-dilute, albinotic, and
cow, and horse (see Chapter 18). In the dog ocular
subalbinotic animals, the iridal holes may progress over time,
manifestations are clinically similar to those of uveitis and
leaving large spaces in the iris.
endophthalmitis; they include iridal swelling, hyphema,
aqueous flare, retinopathy and retinal detachment, con-
Iris Atrophy
junctivitis, keratitis, noninflammatory chemosis, corneal
edema with vascularization, KPs, intrastromal corneal hemor-
Several types of iris atrophy occur, as discussed here.
rhage, miosis, hypotony, ciliary injection, and secondary
  s o  x sm
Primary Iris Atrophy
show some ocular signs. Histologically, the iris and ciliary
body are more frequently affected than the choroid. Dogs
A slowly progressive iris atrophy in previously normal adults
with ocular signs may have a poorer prognosis for long-term
occurs in dogs and cats. Spaces and holes develop in the iris,
remission and response to chemotherapy.
Detailed
often leading to dyscoria, and are especially visible on retro-
consideration of chemotherapy for lymphosarcoma is beyond
illumination, in which light is reflected from the tapetum back 
the scope of this book; however, animals blinded by
toward the examiner. The condition is especially seen in
lymphosarcoma may recover vision once chemotherapy with
 Siamese cats, miniature schnauzers, poodles, and Chihuahuas 
one of the standard regimens is begun. Adjunctive topical
but may occur in any breed. Although the disorder is not
 therapy with corticosteroids, atropine, and antiglaucoma drugs 
typically associated with obvious clinical signs, anisocoria may
should be considered in animals with uveitis secondary to
 be present, and the pupillary light reflex may be diminished or,
lymphosarcoma.
occasionally, absent.
228
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Secondary Iris Atrophy
· Iridectomy (removal of part of the iris): For focal
circumscribed melanomas of the iris. Such lesions may also
Atrophy of the iris may occur after the following conditions:
be treated by diode or Nd:YAG laser photocoagulation.
·Chronic glaucoma
Iridocyclectomy (removal of a portion of iris and ciliary
body): For neoplasms of the ciliary body. Many neoplasms
·Chronic recurrent uveitis
 are too advanced at presentation for this procedure, but for
·Severe ocular trauma
those in the early stages the technique, although
demanding, allows removal of affected tissue and salvage of
Senile Iris Atrophy
the eye and vision. For larger neoplasms infiltrating the
sclera, the scleral defect may be replaced with an
Senile iris atrophy occurs in older animals of all species and is
autogenous graft.
characterized by irregular pupillary margins, spaces in the iris,
Sphincterotomy (incision of the sphincter): Performed
and sluggishness or absence of pupillary reflexes. The con-
occasionally during cataract surgery. The sphincter is cut in
 dition must be distinguished from secondary iris atrophy. It is
one or more places, if mydriasis is poor, to allow access to 
common in toy and miniature poodles, miniature schnauzers,
 and Chihuahuas and is significant in the evaluation of patients
the lens and to reduce the chance of a small pupil
 postoperatively. Since the advent of NSAIDs the technique
with cataract or visual impairment (Figure 11-40).
 is rarely necessary. The use of iridectomy and iridencleisis
for canine glaucoma has been superseded by
SURGICAL PROCEDURES
cyclocryotherapy and laser cyclotherapy (see Chapter 12).
Surgical procedures for primary diseases of the iris are rarely
 performed, even in specialty practice. Examples are as follows:
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Angles JM, et al. (2005): Uveodemmatologic (VKH-like) syndrome in
American Akita dogs is associated with an increased frequency of
DQA 1*00201. Tissue Antigens 66:656.
Bergsma DR, Brown KS (1971): White fur, blue eyes and deafness in the
domestic cat. I Hered 62:171.
Bistmer SI, et al. (1972): A review of persistent pupilary membrane in the
basenji dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 7:143.
Carter WJ, et al. (2005): An immunohistochemical study of
8:17.
Cello RM (1971): Ocular onchocerciasis in the horse. Equine Vet I 3:148.
Chavkin MI, et al. (1992): Seroepidemiologic and clinical observalions of
93 cases of uveitis in cats. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 2:29.
Chmielewski NT, et al. (1997): Visual outcome and ocular survival following
inis prolapse in the horse: a review of 32 cases. Equine Vet I 29:31.
Colitz CMH (2005): Feline uveiis: diagnosis and treahment. Clin Tech Small
Anim Pract 20:117.
Collins BK, Moore CP (1999): Diseases and surgery of the canine uvea, in
Gelatt KN: Veterinary Ophthalmology, 2nd ed Lippincot Williams &
Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Collinson PN,Peiffer RL (1994):Clinical presentation,morphology,and
A
behavior of primary choroidal melanomas ineight dogs.Prog Vet Comp
Ophthalmol 3:158.
Corcoran KA, et al. (1995): Histopathologic features of feline ocular
lymphosarcoma: 49 cases (1978-1992). Vet Comp Ophthalmol 5:35.
Corcoran KA, Koch SA (1993): Uveal cysts in dogs: 28 cases (1989-1991).
I Am Vet Med Assoc 203:545.
Davidson MG (2000): Toxoplasmosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
30:1051.
Davidson MG, et al. (199 1): Feline antenior uveitis: a study of S3 cases.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:77.
Davidson MG, et al. (1989): Oculat manifestations of Rocky Mountain
spotted fever in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:777.
Deeg CA, et al. (2006): Inter- and intramolec ular epitope spreading in equine
Tecurrent uveiis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 47:652.
Deeg CA,et al. (2004): Equine recurent uveitis is strongly associated with
the MHC class I haplotype ELA-A9. Equine Vet J 36:73.
Deeg CA,et al. (2004): The uveitogenic potential of retinal S-antigen in
horses. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 45:2286.
Deeg CA, et al. (2002): Immunopathology of tecurrent uveiis in
Tetinoid -binding protein is similar to the spontaneous disease.
Eur J mmunol 32:2598.
B
Deeg CA, et al. (2001): Immune responses to retinal autoantigens and
Figure 1140. A, Markec iris atrophy in a miniature pooclle. Full-thickness
eptides in equine recurrent uveitis.Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci42:393.
holes in the iris are reaclily visible. B, Milder form of iris atrophy. Note that
Deehr AJ, Dubielzig R (1997): Glaucoma jn golden retievers, in Proceedings
the pupil is clyscoric anc that the pupillary light reflex in such cases is
of the American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists, 28th Annual
often reduced.
Meeting, Santa Fe, NM, p. 105.
UvEA |
229
Denis HM, et al.(2003): Detection of anti-lens crystallin antibody in dogs
Lucchesi PM, Parma AE (1999): A DNA ffagment of Leptospira interrogans
with and without cataracts.Vet Ophthalmol 6:321.
encodes a protein which shares epitopes with equine comea. Vet Immunol
 Dubielzig RR (1995): Morphologic features of feline ocular sarcoma in
Immunopathol 71:173.
10 cats: light microscopy, ulrastructure and immunohistochemisty. Vet
Lucchesi PMA, et al. (2002): Serovar distibution of a DNA sequence
Comp Ophthalmol 4:7.
Dunc an DE, Peiffer RL (1991): Morphology and prognostic indicators of
comea. BMC Microbiol 2:3.
anterior uveal melanomas in cats. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1:25.
Maggs DJ, et al. (1999): Detection of feline herpesvirus-specific antibodies
Dwyer AE,et al.(1995): Association of Jeptospiral seroreactivity and breed
andDNAinaqueoushmorfomcatswithorwithoutuveitisAmIVet
with uveitis and blindness in horses: 372 cases (1986-1993). J Am Vet
Res 60:932.
Med Assoc 207:1 327.
Massa KL, et al. (2002): Causes of uveiis in dogs: 102 cases (1989-2000).
Eule JC, et al. (2000): [Occurence of various immunoglobulin isotopes in
Vet Ophthalmol 5:93.
horses with equine Tecurent uveiis (ERU)]. Berl Munch Tierarzt]
Michau TM,et al.(2003): Bartonella vinsoni subspecies berkhoff as a
Wochenschr 113:253.
 possible cause of anterior uveitis and choroidiis in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol
Ewart SL, et al. (2000): The horse homolog of congenital aniridia confomms
6:299.
to codominant inheritance. I Hered 91:93.
Murphy CJ,et al. (1991): Antj-retinal anibodies associated with Vogt-
Faber NA, et al. (2000): Detecion of Leptospira spp. in the aqueous humor of
Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
horses with naturally acquired TecurTent uveiis. I Clin Microbiol 38:2731.
27:399-402.
French DD, et al. (1988): Efficacy of ivemmectin in paste and injectable
Patnaik AK, Mooney S (1988): Feline melanoma: a comparative study of
fomulations againstmicroflariae of Onchocerca cervicalis andresolution
ocular, oral and dermal neoplasms. Vet Pathol 25:105.
 of associated dermabiis in horses. Am J Vet Res 49:1550.
  s o s  a    
Gelatt KN, et al. (1969): Ocular anomalies of incomplete albino cattle:
139 cases (1978-1988). I Vet Med Assoc 198:135.
ophthalmoscopic examination. Am J Vet Res 30: 1313.
Roberts SR (1963): Fundic lesions in equine periodic ophthalmia.
Gemensky-Metzler AJ, et al.(2004): The use of semiconductor diode laser
Am J Ophthalmol 55:1049.
for deflation and coagulation of anterior uveal cysts in dogs, cats and
Rohrbach BW, et al. (2005): Effect of vaccination against leptospirosis on the
horses: a report of 20 cases. Vet Ophthalmol 7:360.
frequency, days to recurence and progtession of disease in horses with
Gilger B, et al.(1997): Neodymium:ytrium-aluminum-garnet laser reatment
equine recurent uveitis.Vet Ophthamol 8:171.
of cysic granula inidica in horses: eight cases (1988-1996). I Vet Med
Romeike A,et al.(1998): Immunohistochemical studies in equine recurent
Assoc 211:341.
uveiis (ERU). Vet Pathol 35:S15.
Gilger BC, et al. (2001): Use of an intraviteal sustained-release cyclosponine
s o  d e (     
delivery device for treatment of equine Tecurrent uveitis. Am I Vet Res
ocular melanomas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:60.
62:1892.
Schaffer EM, Funke K (1985): Primary intraocular melanomas in dogs and
Gilger BC, et al. (2000): Effect of an intravireal cyclosporine implant on
cats. Tierarztl Prax 13:343.
experimental uveitis in horses. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 76:239.
Schmidt GM,et al.(1982): Equine ocular onchocerciasis: histopathologic
Gilger BC, Michau TM (2004): Equine Tecurent uveitis: new methods of
study. Am J Vet Res 43: 1371.
management. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 20:417.
Spiess BM, et al. (1996): [Eye injuries in the dog caused by cat claws].
Gilmour MA,et al. (2005): Ocular penettalion of oral doxycycline in the
Schweiz Archiv Tierheilkd 138:429.
horse. Vet Ophthalmol 8:331.
Sulivan TC, et al. (1996): Photocoagulation of limbal melanomas in dogs
Grahn BH, Cullen CL (2000): Equine phacoclashic uveitis: the clinical
and cats: 13 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:891.
manifestations, light microscopic fndings, and therapy of 7 cases. Can Vet 
Trepanier LA (2004): Idiosyncratic toxicity associated with potentiated
J41:376.
sulfonamides in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 27:129.
Halliwell RE, et al. (1985): Studies on equine recutent uveitis II: the role of
Trepanier LA, et al. (2003): Clinical findings in 40 dogs with hypersensitivity
infechion with Leptospira interrogans serovat pomona. Cunr Eye Res
associated with administration of potentiated sulfonamides. J Vet Intem
4:1033.
Med 17:647.
Halliwell RH, Hines MT (1985): Studies on equine recurent uveitis I: evels
Trucksa RC,et al. (1985): Inraocular canine melanocytic neoplasms.
of immunoglobulin and albumin in the aqueous humor of horses with and
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:85.
without intraocular disease. Curr Eye Res 4:1023.
vanderWoerdtA(200l):Managementof intraocularinflammatory disease
Hartskeerl RA,et al. (2004): Classification of Leptospira from the eyes of
 Clin Tech Small Anim Pract i6:58.
horses suffering from recurrent uveitis. I Vet Med 51:1 10.
van der Woerdt A (1992): Lens induced uveitis in dogs: I51 cases (1985-
Herd RP, Donham JC (1983): Effcacy of ivermecin against Onchocerca
1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:921.
cervicalis microfilarial demabitis in horses. Am J Vet Res 44:1 102.
Verma A, et al. (2005): LruA and LruB, novel lipoproteins of pathogenic
Huston K, et al. (1968): Heterochromia inidis in dairy cattle. I Dairy Sci
Leptospira interrogans associated with equine recurent uveitis. Infect
51:1101.
Immun 73:7259.
 Kalsow CM, Dwyer AE (1998): Reinal immunopathology in horses with
Vinayak A,et al. (2004): Clinical Tesolution of Brucetla canis-induced ocular
uveitis. Ocular Immunol Inflamm 6:239.
 inflammation in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1804.
Kem TJ, et al. (1985): Uveitis associated with poliosis and viligo in six
Wanke MM (2004): Canine brucellosis.Anim Reprod Sci 82-83:195.
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 187:408.
Wilcock BP, et al.(1990): The cause of glaucoma in cats.Vet Pathol 27:35.
Koutinas AF, et al. (1999): Clinical considerations on canine visceral
Wilcock BP, Peiffer RL(1987): The pathology of lens-induced uveitis in
leishmaniasis in Greece: a retrospechive study of 158 cases (1989-1996).
dogs. Vet Pathol 24:549.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:376.
Wilcock BP, Peiffer RL (1986): Morphology and behavior of primary ocular
Krohne SG, et al. (i994): Prevalence of ocular involvement in dogs with
melanomas in 91 dogs. Vet Pathol 23:418.
multicentric lymphosarcoma: prospechive evaluation of 94 cases. Vet Comp
Wikie DA,Wolf D (1991): Treatment of epibulbar melanocytoma in a dog.
Ophthalmol 4:127.
usingfullthicknessyewlesectionad synthecgaftAmVMed
Lappin MR (2000): Feline infecious uveiis. JFeline Med Surg 2:159
Assoc 198:1019.
WolferJ et al. (93): Phacoclasicuveis in theabbitProgVet Comp
aqueous humor of cats. Am J Vet Res 56:774.
Ophthalmol 3:92.
Wollanke B,et al. (2001): Serum and vitreous humor antibody titers in and
uveitis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1205.
isolation of Leptospira interrogans from horses with recurrent uveitis.
Leiva M, et al. (2005): Ocular signs of canine monocybic ehrlichiosis: a
 I Am Vet Med Assoc 219:795.
Tetrospecive study in dogs from Barcelona, Spain.Vet Ophthalmol 8:387.
Loesenbeck G, et al. (1996): Immunohistochemical fndings in eyes of cats
serologically posibive for feline immunodeficiency virus (FTV). Zentralb]
VeterinaermedB 43:305.
Chapter
THE GLAUCOMAS
Paul E. Miller
AQUEOUS PRODUCTION AND
CLINICAL SIGNS
TREATMENT
DRAINACE
CLASSIFICATION
FELINE GLAUCOMA
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
PATHOGENESIS
EQUINE GLAUCOMA
this leads to aqueous humor production is unclear, it appears
I he glaucomas are a diverse group of diseases united only by
that positively charged sodium ions, and eventually water, follow
the fact that intraocular pressure (IOP) is too high to permit the
negatively charged bicarbonate ions into the posterior chamber.
optic nerve and, in some species, the retina to function normally.
 Drugs that inhibit carbonic anhydrase therefore decrease aqueous
 Characteristic changes of glaucoma include disrupted axoplasmic
 production and reduce IOP.
flow in the optic nerve head, death of retinal ganglion cells and
 Aqueous exits the eye via several routes. In the conventional
their axons, cupping of the optic disc, and visual impairment or
or traditional outflow route aqueous humor passes from the
blindness.
posterior chamber, through the pupil, and into the anterior
chamber. Because of temperature differences between the iris
AQUEOUS PRODUCTION AND DRAINAGE
and cornea, thermal convection currents occur in the anterior
 chamber, with aqueous near the iris rising and aqueous near the
The production and drainage of aqueous humor are influenced
 cornea falling. This is one reason cells and particulate matter in
not only by the anatomy of the anterior segment but also by a
the anterior chamber may settle on the inferior corneal endo-
large number of endogenous compounds, including neuro-
thelial surface. Aqueous humor then leaves the anterior
transmitters, hormones, prostaglandins, proteins, lipids, and
 chamber by passing between the pectinate ligaments to enter
 proteoglycans. Indeed, so many factors influence the production
the ciliary cleft. which contains the trabecular meshwork
and drainage of aqueous humor that it is difficult to identify a
(Figure 12-1). After filtering between the beams of the sponge-
 single pathway or drug that is capable of dramatically lowering
like meshwork, aqueous crosses through the endothelial cell
IOP in every patient.
membranes of the meshwork to enter a series of radially
Aqueous humor is produced in the ciliary body by both active
oriented, blood-free collecting vessels collectively called the
(selective transport of larger or charged molecules against a
angular aqueous plexus. From there it enters an interconnected
 concentration gradient) and passive processes (diffusion and
set of blood/aqueous-filled vessels (the scleral venous plexus)
ultrafiltration). In diffusion, lipid-soluble substances enter the 
before draining either anteriorly via the episcleral and
aqueous humor by passing through the ciliary epithelial cell 
 conjunctival veins or posteriorly into the vortex venous system
membrane in proportion to their concentration gradient across
and into the systemic venous circulation (Figure 12-2). Con-
the membrane. Ultrafiltration is the passage of water and
traction of smooth muscle fibers of the ciliary muscl that
water-soluble substances (which are generally limited by their 
insert into the trabecular meshwork are probably capable
size or charge) through theoretical micropores in the cell mem-
 of increasing drainage of aqueous from the eye by enlarging
 brane in response to an osmotic gradient or hydrostatic pressure.
the spaces in the trabecular meshwork. In most species
 Many substances in the blood pass by ultrafiltration from the
the majority of aqueous humor (about 50% in horses, 85%
ciliary capillaries into the stroma of the ciliary processes before
in dogs, and 97% in cats) leaves the eye via the traditional out-
accumulating behind the tight junctions of the nonpigmented
flow route.
ciliary epithelium (the site of the blood-aqueous barrier). Some
The remainder of the aqueous humor leaves the eye
substances, such as sodium and chloride ions, are then actively
via the wveoscleral pathway (see Figure 12-1). In this route
 pumped across the membrane into the posterior chamber, there-
aqueous humor passes through the root of the iris and
by drawing water passively along this concentration gradient.
 interstitial spaces of the ciliary muscle to reach the supraciliary
This process may account for the majority of actively formed
space (between the ciliary body and the sclera) or the
aqueous.
suprachoroidal space (between the choroid and the sclera).
 Aqueous humor is also produced via the enzyme carbonic
From these locations aqueous humor may pass through the
anhydrase, which catalyzes the formation of carbonic acid
sclera into the orbit either via pores in the sclera where
from carbon dioxide and water as follows:
blood vessels and nerves enter the eye or between the scleral
 collagen fibers themselves. Outflow via this route may
CO+ HO 
HCO，
HCO+H+
substantially increase in certain disease states and in response
Carbonic acid then dissociates, allowing negatively charged
to certain antiglaucoma drugs, such as the prostaglandin
 bicarbonate ions to pass to the aqueous. Although exactly how
derivatives.
230
THe GLAUCOMAs |
231
Angular aqueous plexus
Scleral venous plexus
Figure 12-1. The routes of aqueous clrainage from the canine iricocorneal
angle. Aqueous humor passes between the bearmlike pectinate ligarment,
then through the trabecular meshwork to enter the angular aqueous
plexus and eventually the scleral venous plexus.From there, aqueous
humormay crain1)anteriorly to the episcleral and conjunctival veins,
{2) posteriorly into the scleral venous plexus anc vortex venous system,
or (3) through the ciliary muscle interstitium to the suprachoroid and
dliffuse through the sclera (uveoscleral flow). (Modlified frorm Martin C1
[1993]: Glaucoma, in Slatter D [edlitorl: Textbook of Small Animal
Figure 12-2. A, The scleral venous plexus is often visible in normal
Surgery, 2nc ecl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.
animals as a series of interwoven blood vessels several millirmeters
posterior to the limbus. B, Prominent episcleral and, to a lesser extent,
intraocular pressure compresses the intrascleral blood vessels, which
Balancing Aqueous Production and Outflow
clrain posteriorly. This forces more blood through the episcleral and
conjunctival veins—-one reason the eye appears injectec in glaucoma.
IOP is the result of a delicate balance between production and
outflow of aqueous humor (Figure 12-3). In glaucoma both
production and outflow are altered. Usually a large percentage
of the outflow pathway (perhaps as much as 80% to 90%)
needs to be impaired before IOP starts to rise. If the outflow
awake and adrenergic tone is present. This means that although
system is impaired to the point that IOP begins to increase, the
 a drug such as timolol can reduce IOP in a cat when it is awake,
eye usually attempts to compensate by reducing the passive
 the agent may not control IOP for the more than 20 hours a day
 production of aqueous humor. Active secretion, however, typically
the cat is sleeping.
continues at a relatively normal rate, perhaps because if it did
 As expected, β-adrenergic drugs such as epinephrine and its
not, the avascular tissues of the eye that rely on aqueous humor
 derivative dipivefrin may transiently increase IOP, presumably
for their nutrition would starve. Because the glaucomatous eye is
 by increasing aqueous humor production via stimulation of
functioning on a greatly diminished percentage of its normal
 CAMP. A few minutes after application of these drugs, how-
levels of aqueous humor outflow and production, and because
ever, IOP begins to decrease, and it stays reduced for several
it has exhausted its usual compensatory pathways, pathologic
hours. This is because epinephrine also increases aqueous out-
processes or drugs that alter production or outflow only a small
flow via βz receptors in the trabecular meshwork, and does so
amount can have dramatic effects on IOP. This characteristic is
 to a greater degree than it increases aqueous humor production.
one reason that glaucomatous eyes are typically more responsive
Epinephrine may also lower IOP by (1) reducing blood flow to
to antiglaucoma drugs than normotensive eyes, but it also
the ciliary body (thereby lowering aqueous production) and
 explains why IOP can rapidly rise to very high levels in a matter
(2) increasing uveoscleral outlow by relaxing the ciliary muscle
of 1 to 2 hours in some patients.
and recruiting prostaglandins. The latter means, which can be 
 Often it is difficult to empirically predict the effect a given
 blocked by topical nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs, may
drug or its antagonist will have on IOP because many compounds 
result in further increases in uveoscleral outflow and additional
affect both aqueous humor production and outflow—sometimes
 decreases in aqueous humor production. Complex interactions 
in complex and contradictory ways. For example, stimulation
 such as this are but one reason why both β-adrenergic agonists
of β-adrenergic receptors in the ciliary processes increases
 intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), resulting
species and individual differences in the density, distribution,
in greater aqueous humor production. β-Adrenergic blocking
 and type of receptors as well as differences in the cause of the
drugs (e.g., timolol, betaxolol) decrease cAMP, thereby
glaucoma, it is easy to see why it can be diffcult to precisely
lowering aqueous humor production and ultimately reducing
 predict what effect a given drug will have on IOP in a particular
IOP. β-Blockers reduce IOP, however, only if the patient is
patient.
232
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Blood Flow
Disorders associated with substantially lower blood flow
to the eye (e.g., dehydration, hypovolemic shock, cardio-
genic shock) tend to result in lower IOP. A dog collar
can significantly increase IOP if the dog is pulling
 against a leash or if the collar is too tight. Dogs with glaucoma
Outflow
Aqueous
probably should be exercised with a harness rather than a
facility
production
collar.
Pressure constant
Normal state
Drugs
 In addition to the numerous antiglaucoma drugs that alter IOP,
other drugs also may affect IOP. Most general anesthetics and
tranquilizers cause IOP to fall. Ketamine may temporarily
increase IOP, presumably owing to extraocular muscle spasm.
Ocufar Inffammation
Outflow
Aqueous
constant
production falls
 Both spontaneous and surgically induced inflammation lower
Uveitis, drugs
aqueous production and IOP. A profound reduction in IOP is an
Pressure falls
 important diagnostic clue to the presence of intraocular inflam-
mation, especially uveitis.
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
Tonometry
Measurement of and normal values for IOP are discussed in
Chapter 5. It is suggested that the reader refer to that discussion
before proceeding with this chapter. Despite its disadvantages,the
Outflow
Aqueous
 most economical instrument in general veterinary practice is the
falls
production constant
Schigtz tonometer with the human conversion tables. Surprisingly,
dog-specific conversion tables for the Schigtz tonometer do not
Pressure rises
Glaucoma
Figure 12-3. Common alterations in aqueous procuction and outflow
 agree as well with the more accurate applanation and rebound
facility and their effects on intraocular pressure.
tonometers, and dog specific tables should not be used to convert 
Schiotz scale readings to IOP estimates in dogs or cats. Two
handheld tonometers that are more accurate and easier to use than
the Schiotz instrument are the Tono-Pen applanation tonometer
and the TonoVet rebound tonometer. The ability to perform
Causes of Variations in Intraocular Pressure
 tonometry is essential to every veterinarian engaged in small
animal practice. Tonometry minimizes the chances of making
Diurnal Variation
 an important or even catastrophic error in diagnosis.
 IOP varies slightly with time of day in many species, being the
greatest in the morning and gradually declining over the course
IOP should be determined in every red eye with an intact
of the day in dogs and humans. The opposite phenomenon
comea and sclera.
has been suggested to occur in cats, rabbits, and nonhuman
 primates.
Ophthalmoscopy
Age
 Direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy may be used to examine
 Both production and outflow of aqueous humor tend to decline
the optic nerve head for cupping of the optic disc, which is the
with age, but production declines at a little faster rate than out-
hallmark of glaucoma. The red-free filter (green light) on many
flow in most individuals. In humans, aqueous production and
of these instruments facilitates examination of the optic nerve
IOP tend to decline after 60 years of age, although this
 and retinal nerve fiber layer.
tendency varies considerably with ethnic background and the
 presence of other diseases, such as systemic hypertension
Gonioscopy
and obesity. Similarly, IOP in cats has been shown to
 decline approximately 1 mm Hg per year after 7 years of
Gonioscopy is a very useful technique for examining the
age. In a small percentage of humans, and perhaps animals,
 iridocorneal (filtration) angle and managing glaucoma. It is
however, aqueous humor outflow is reduced to a greater degree
discussed in detail in Chapter 5. Gonioscopy allows the clini-
than aqueous humor production, resulting in increased IOP
cian to differentiate between open-angle and closed-angle
with age.
glaucoma, to estimate the severity of the obstruction of the
THE GLAUCOMAS |
233
1
B A
BA
B A L
BA
Terminology
Closed
Narrow
 Slightly narrow
Open
Wide open
 Numerical grade
IV
Relative interval (x = A/B)
x ≤ 0.15
0.15 <x ≤ 0.30
0.30 <x ≤ 0.45
0.45 < x ≤ 0.55
0.55<x
E
GF
 og suael auad au jo uo au w aue a pue  al e a jo uuado noae aio
anterior surface of the cornea (B) is estimated. C, Pupil; D, iris; E, pectinate ligament; F, ceep pigmented zone;
features of the iridlocorneal angle to intaocular pressure in Sarmoyedls. Arm J Vet Res 52:1875.)
D
.
Figure 12-5. Coniophotograph of a normal cog. A, Pupil; B, iris;
Figure 12-6. Normal canine iridocorneal angle as seen with a goniolens.
C, pectinate ligament strancs (thin brown lines); D, bluish-white zone of
the uveal trabeculae (trabecular meshwork); E, ceep pigmentec zone;
F, superficial pigmented zone; C, cornea.
sider whether the lesions and clinical signs observed are
associated with or result from the cause of the increased
pressure.
iridocorneal angle, and to evaluate the response to therapy
(Figure 12-4). It does, however, require considerable practice to
Claucoma is one of the most commonly misdiagnosed eye
 recognize the many normal variations and hence gonioscopy
 conditions. Failure of owners to recognize the disease early in
tends to be performed almost exclusively by veterinary
its course may prevent effective treatment of the first eye.
 ophthalmologists. Examples of gonioscopic findings are shown
 Failure of clinicians to recognize onset in the second eye may
in Figures 12-5 to 12-11.
prevent retention of sight.
CLINICAL SIGNS
The clinical signs of glaucoma in the dog are summarized in
 Figure 12-12. The signs present in a particular animal depend
The effects of increased IOP on ocular tissues are similar
 on the duration, intensity, and cause of the pressure elevation.
regardless of the cause of the elevation. It is essential to con-
 In general the most obvious signs are associated with end-stage
234
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 12-7. Conioscopic view of the iridocorneal angle of a dog in
which the angle is fillec with liberatecd pigment. The physical wiclth of the
Figure 12-10. Markec pectinate ligament clysplasia characterized by large
angle is normal, but the pigment occlucles the trabecular meshwork andl
sheets of mesoclerrmal tissue in a 7-year-old Bouvier cog. Although
 prevents reaclily identifying the pectinate ligament.
xa ue ouiny snane sull eou um is s anssaad enoe
the eye only via a few small "flow holes" in the mesoclermal sheets.
Figure 12-8. Conioscopic view of a closed angle in a cog with secondary
glaucoma. The retina was massively cetached, resulting in forward shifting
of the lens and, ultimately, of the iris into the iridlocorneal angle. Note that
Figure 12-11. Scanning electron micrograph of a canine ricocorneal angle.
the pectinate ligarment cannot be seen.
A, lris; B, cornea; arrow, pectinate ligament. (From Martin Cl, Wyman M
[1978]: Primary glaucoma in the dog. Vet Clin North Am 8:257.)
Figure 12-12. Clinical signs of canine glaucoma: 1, Descemet's streaks
(adlvanced cases); 2, aphakic crescent; 3, luxated lens (some cases);
4, corneal ecma; 5,iris atrophy; 6,enlarged episleral vessels; 7,fixed,
dlilated pupil; 9, shallow anterior chamber; I1, cupping of the optic clisc;
12, retinal atrophy and vascular attenuation; 13, buphthalmos. Not
Figure 12-9. Mild pectinate ligarment dlysplasia characterizec by broacl-
shown:8,increased intraocular pressure;0,partial or complete lossf
based pectinate ligarment strandls and a srmall region of "sheeting."
vision; I14, ocular pain; 15, loss of corneal sensitivity.
THe GLAUCOMAS |
235
disease in which there is no hope of preserving vision. In the
Figure 12-1). Conjunctival capillaries may also be engorged,
very early stages of glaucoma, in which there is a chance of
 preserving vision, the eye may appear normal and IOP may or
 is a sign of intraocular disease (anterior uveitis or glaucoma)
may not be elevated. In some patients there is only a history of
and may be differentiated from superficial conjunctival vessel
intermittent episcleral injection (especially in the evening) that
engorgement (which indicates ocular surface disease) by the
spontaneously resolves, and IOP is normal on examination in
following features:
the office. Glaucoma may be detected in these animals only by
performing tonometry when the eye is red or, occasionally, by
· Episcleral vessels are larger, darker red, and more visible,
repeatedly measuring IOP over 24 hours. In other patients the eye
and pass over a conjunctiva that is usually white or slightly
may appear to be essentially normal and the only finding is
pink. Superficial conjunctival vessels are brighter pink to
increased IOP on tonometry. In these patients it is essential to
red and cover a larger portion of the sclera.
differentiate glaucoma from increased IOP measurements
· Episcleral vessels do not typically branch the closer they get
associated with an uncooperative patient, technical problems with
to the limbus, whereas superficial conjunctival vessels do.
measuring IOP (excessive tension on the eyelids, a collar that is
· Episcleral vessels blanch slowly or not at all after the
too tight, compression of the jugular veins during restraint, etc.),
application of topical 1% epinephrine, whereas superficial
and malfunction of the instrument. Specialist assistance may be
conjunctival vessels typically blanch within 1 to 2 minutes.
required to make the diagnosis of glaucoma in its early stages.
Corneal/Scleral Changes
Increased Intraocular Pressure
Edema
 IOP values exceeding 25 mm Hg in dogs and 27 mm Hg in cats 
 Increased IOP impairs the function of the corneal endothelium,
in conjunction with compatible clinical signs are sufficient for
resulting in cormeal edema. Typically the entire comea is diffusely
a presumptive diagnosis of glaucoma. IOP values greater than
edematous in glaucoma, and the edema can be quite dramatic
 20 mm Hg are suspicious for glaucoma if other clinical signs,
in acute glaucoma when IOP is very high (Figure 12-13). In
especially anterior uveitis, are present or if the patient is being
advanced cases subepithelial bullae may form, which can lead
treated for glaucoma. Often IOP exceeds 40 mm Hg by the time
to comeal ulceration if they rupture. In chronic glaucoma both
the owner notices changes in the eye. Frequent measurement of
superficial and deep vascularization, scarring, and pigmentation 
 IOP is an integral part of diagnosis and treatment of the patient 
are common.
with glaucoma.
Buphthalmos and Descemet's Streaks
Pain, Blepharospasm, and Altered Behavior
 Chronic increases in IOP results in stretching of the cornea and
An acute increase in IOP to 50 to 60 mm Hg or more is
sclera and enlargement of the globe (buphthatmos; Figure 12-14).
typically described by a human as "the worst headache of my
s a u pd Arasa a  sng
life." It is likely that animals experience a comparable degree of
 and in shar-peis, who have a more easily distended cornea and
pain with pressures in this range. If the IOP rise is acute, the
sclera than most adult dogs. Buphthalmic eyes are almost
dog may be blepharospastic, depressed, less active, timid, or, in 
invariably blind, although limited vision may be retained for a
rare cases, more aggressive. Some sleep more, eat less, vomit,
while in some puppies and shar-peis. Buphthalmos is irreversible
 and are less interested in play. On occasion they rub at the eye,
even if the pressure is later reduced, although a variety of surgical
but this behavior is an unreliable sign of glaucoma. Application
 procedures are available to restore a cosmetically acceptable
of pressure to the affected eye through the upper lid or to the
appearance.
surrounding area may cause severe pain. If the condition is not
 By the time severe stretching has occurred, atrophy of the
 treated, severe pain and blepharospasm are replaced by signs of
 ciliary body may have reduced the IOP to normal and pain may
chronic pain that many owners may not properly recognize as
be lessened. As the cormea stretches, linear ruptures in Descemet's
being attributable to glaucoma. Frequently the owner believes
that the pet is simply "“getting old'' and this is why it is less active,
sleeps more, and is less playful. A surgical procedure that
alleviates the increased pressure (and accompanying pain)
almost invariably results in a comment from the owner that the
pet “acts like a new dog*"
Elevated IOP should be considered to be painful even if the
 disease is chronic and the animal outwardly appears normal.
Engorged Episcleral Vessels
Engorgement of episcleral veins (see Figure 12-2, B) is one of
the more common signs of increased IOP. Episcleral engorge-
ment arises because the increased IOP reduces flow through the
ciliary body to the vortex veins, and increased flow passes
forward via anastomosing episcleral veins at the limbus (see
Figure 12-13. Diffuse corneal eclema in a clog with glaucoma.
236
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Figure 12-16. Myclriasis (anc anisocoria) in a Shiba Inu dog with primary
angle-closure glaucoma. A dlilated pupil may be the result of ischemia of
 the iris sphincter muscle or interference with the function of the optic or
ciliary nerves.
Figure 12-14. Buphthalmos in an American cocker spaniel with chronic
 prirmary angle-closure glaucorma. Exposure keratitis is also present.
 invariable sign of glaucoma— the pupil may be normal in mild
 IOP elevations, and miosis may be present in uveitis-induced
glaucoma. In these latter cases, a careful examination is necessary
to distinguish glaucoma from uveitis, and it is possible for both to
be present in the same eye. In chronic glaucoma, or when IOP is
acutely markedly elevated, the direct and consensual pupillary
light reflexes are usually greatly impaired or absent. The longer
glaucoma remains unresolved, the greater the chance that
 peripheral anterior synechiae will form and permanently block
the drainage angle by fixing the peripheral iris in position.
Although a dilated, unresponsive pupil is consistent with
glaucoma, it may be due to other diseases (e.g., progressive
retinal degeneration, sudden acquired retinal degeneration
syndrome, optic neuritis) and is not by itself diagnostic for
glaucoma.
Figure 12-15. Curvilinear breaks in Descermet's mermbrane (Haab's striae)
Lens Changes
in the cornea of a horse with chronic glaucoma (intraocular pressure
greater than 50 mm Hg).
 Lens luxation in glaucoma may be either primary or secondary.
A glaucomatous eye with a luxated, cataractous lens may have
membrane, called Descemet's streaks (Haab's striae), may
reached this state by one of several ways:
occur (Figure 12-15).
· Cataract (variety of etiologies) → lens-induced uveitis
→ glaucoma →> buphthalmos →> tearing of zonules → lens 
Changes in Anterior Chamber Depth
luxation
 Zonular malformation → lens luxation (or subluxation)
 Depth of the anterior chamber (distance between cornea and
→ glaucoma → cataract
iris) is evaluated with an oblique focal source of light or, better
· Glaucoma (variety of etiologies) → buphthalmos → tearing
yet, by biomicroscopy. Decreased depth of the anterior chamber
of zonules → lens luxation →> cataract
is often associated with impediments to outflow through the
pupil (because the lens and iris are in greater contact) and the
 Lens luxation or subluxation may be recognized from the
iridocomeal angle (because the anterior chamber is more
following signs:
crowded). A shallow anterior chamber is an especially pro-
· Presence of the lens in front of the iris (anterior luxation)
minent sign in cats in which aqueous humor is misdirected into
■
Presence of an aphakic crescent in the pupil (most frequent
the vitreal cavity (resulting in a forward displacement of the 
in subluxation)
lens and iris) and in any animal in which the lens is anteriorly
 Movement of the iris (iridodonesis) or lens (phacodonesis)
luxated or subluxated. Therefore a shallow anterior chamber
Abnormally shallow or deep anterior chamber
should alert the clinician to the possibility of glaucoma.
Glaucoma may also be associated with an abnormally deep
Vitreous strands in the pupil
 anterior chamber in animals with posterior lens luxation or in 
 If a luxated lens enters the anterior chamber and touches the
buphthalmic eyes.
corneal endothelium, a focal area of corneal edema may result.
This opacity is frequently permanent, even if the lens is later
Fixed Dilated Pupil
removed. The continuous presence of a luxated lens in the
anterior chamber damages the endothelium over a wider area
As IOP rises, the pupillary constrictor muscle becomes ischemic
and lowers the probability of successful surgical removal of
and the pupil dilates to midrange or larger (Figure 12-16). A
the lens.
dilated pupil, along with episcleral injection and pain, may be
The recognition of how the final state was reached is
among the first signs noticed by the owner. Mydriasis is not an
important in determining which combination of therapeutic
THe GLAUCOMAs |
237
 Box 12-1 |  Inherited and breed predisposition to 
lens luxation in dogs
 Breeds in Which Lens Luxation Is Inherited
Border collie
Caim telTier
 Jack Russell tefTier
Lakeland teITier
 Manchester terTier
 Miniature bull terTier
Norfolk teTier
Norwich terTier
Scottish teTTier
Sealyham teITier
 Skye telTier
Figure 12-17. Chronic glaucoma in a basset hounc resulting in
 Smooth haired fox terTier
buphthalmos and seconclary tearing of lens zonules. The equator of the
West Highland white terTier
lens is visible superonasally that creates an aphakic crescent in this
 Tibetan telTier
region.
Wirehaired fox terTier
 Breeds with Predisposition to Lens Luxation
methods is required. History and signalment are critical factors
 Australian shepherd
in differentiating between these various possibilities. In all three 
 Basset hound
pathways the lens may be displaced anteriorly or posteriorly or
Beagle
may be in the plane of the iris (either superiorly or inferiorly).
Chihuahua
An aphakic crescent is formed when the lens zonules have
Geman shepherd
 broken for a portion of the circumference of the lens, and it is 
Greyhound
 possible to visualize the tapetal reflex through a crescent-
 Miniature poodle
 Miniature schnauzer
shaped space between the lens equator and the pupillary border
 Norwegian elkhound 
(Figure 12-17). After luxation the lens frequently, but not 
Pembroke Welsh corgi
 invariably, becomes cataractous.
 Spaniel breeds
 Primary lens luxation, as occurs in terriers and certain other
Welsh terTier
breeds (Box 12-1), may result in pupillary block with acute
alpood Ao
elevations in IOP. The presence of vitreous strands in the
 
 anterior chamber in the absence of buphthalmos suggests pri-
mary lens luxation. In these animals the lens may be completely
Modifed from Gelatt KN, Brooks DE (1999): The canine glaucomas, in
GelatKNedir:VeyalgddnctWiim
luxated or only partially luxated (subluxation), and usually the 
& Wilkins, Philadelphia.
lens is not cataractous until it becomes luxated (Figures 12-18
and 12-19).
 Primary glaucoma tends to occur in middle-aged to some-
what older dogs of certain breeds (Box 12-2), and the lens
Figure 12-18. Lens subluxation in an 8-year-old wirehaired fox terrier.
Notice that the anterior chamber is cleeper superiorly than inferiorly.
inclicating that the lens has shiftec position. The iris and lens also
 Figure 12-19. Complete anterior lens luxation associated with chronic
"trembled" when the eye movec (iricdoconesis and phacoclonesis).
 uveitis in a cat. Seconcary glaucoma was also present.
238
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Box 12-2
 Breeds of dog most commonly affected
with different types of glaucoma
Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma
Mixed breeds 
American cocker spaniel
 Basset hound
Boston terTier
 Miniature schnauzer
Beagle
Chow chow
Siberian husky
Standard poodle
Closed-Angle Glaucoma
American cocker spaniel
Mixed breeds
 Basset hound 
Samoyed
Beagle
 Siberian husky
 Labrador retriever
 elpood XoL 
Secondary Glaucoma
Mixed breeds
 American cocker spaniel
Wirehaired fox terTier
Toy poodle
 Boston tefTier
 Miniature poodle
B
Labrador retriever
 Siberian husky
 Basset hound 
Beagle
From Miller PE (1995): Glaucoma, in Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current 
Veterinary Therapy Xll: Small Animal Prachice. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Breeds are listed in descending order of frequency as recorded by the
Veterinary Medical Data Base over a 20-yeat period.
subluxation or luxation does not occur until the globe has
become buphthalmic and the lens zonules are stretched beyond
the breaking point (secondary luxation). Similarly, primary
cataract formation in a wide variety of breeds is frequently
followed by lens luxation and glaucoma. Lens-induced uveitis
C
from a secondarily luxated lens that has become cataractous
Figure 12-20. Simulated changes in vision clue to glaucoma. A, Normal
from elevated IOP, and decreased IOP from the uveitis further
visual field. B, Mocerate vision loss in glaucoma; the peripheral visual
field isreducedbutcentraisionmaypersst,Endstageglaucma;
 complicate diagnosis and treatment. Thus the combination of
vision is completely lost.
 glaucoma, cataract, and lens luxation in any particular eye may
 occur through several mechanisms and may be associated with
a variety of IOP values at any given moment.
and it is difficult, if not impossible, to detect these changes
in most animals. Complete vision loss can occur in a very
Lens luxation in a glaucomatous eye does not necessarily
short period (hours to a day) if the increase in IOP is very
mean that luxation was the inciting cause of the glaucoma.
high, or over a period of weeks to months if the pressure
The luxation may have resuited from the glaucoma.
increase is more insidious. Preservation of vision depends on
control of IOP
Fundus Changes
Optic Disc Cupping
Impaired Vision
Cupping. or posterior bowing of the optic disc through the
Loss of some or all vision is a common sequela of glaucoma.
lamina cribrosa, is the hallmark of glaucoma. Retinal nerve
 In the early stages peripheral vision may be lost (Figure 12-20),
fbers run parallel to the surface of the retina and then turn
THE GLAUCOMAS I
239
90 degrees to enter the multilayered, fenestrated meshwork of
the lamina cribrosa before exiting the eye. Glial cells, blood
vessels, and collagen beams form variably sized pores through
which the optic nerve fibers pass. When IOP rises the scleral
lamina cribrosa bows posteriorly, distorting the alignment of
the pores and compressing the optic nerve fbers. Although
this change may initially be so subtle as to not be detected
ophthalmoscopically, it is sufficient to mechanically interfere
with axonal axoplasmic flow and also probably with blood
supply to the optic nerve head. Very large increases in IOP may
also interfere with blood flow to the choroid and produce vision
loss through ischemic damage to the photoreceptors and outer
retinal layers. In acute glaucoma the optic disc may appear swollen
in response to ischemia. Within a day or two the increased
pressure may cause the disc to appear pale and compressed. As
ganglion cell axons die, optic nerve head tissue is lost and
pressure forces the lamina cribrosa outward (Figures 12-21 to
Figure 12-21. Cupping of the optic clisc with loss of tissue anterior to the
12-23). This change indicates irreversible damage to the optic
l       
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rc edl. Saunders, Philaclelphia.)
nerve. Wallerian degeneration of the optic nerve follows
(Figure 12-24).
Retinal Degeneration
In progressive retinal degeneration the other signs of glaucoma
 are lacking, the disease is usually bilateral, the optic disc is not 
 In advanced glaucoma, profound retinal atrophy with increased
 cupped, and differential diagnosis may be determined by the
tapetal reflectivity occurs together with attenuation or complete
breed of dog and lack of other clinical signs of glaucoma.
loss of retinal vessels, atrophy of the pigment epithelium in the
Ophthalmoscopically visible retinal and optic nerve lesions of
nontapetal fundus, and optic atrophy (grayish-white appear-
 glaucoma are irreversible.
ance; Figure 12-25). These findings are also present in advanced
Elevation of IOP decreases blood flow in the choroid,
 progressive retinal degeneration (progressive retinal atrophy).
 resulting in ischemia. This ischemia can be demonstrated func-
B
Rightsw
Please
A
C
Pleaserefertotheprintec publicaticn,
Figure 12-22. The scleral larmina cribrosa in normal ancd glaucomatous eyes. A, Normal (upper) and
glaucomatous (lower) eye pore arrangement. From the norrmal pores in the normal eye, glaucoma causes pore
Suuns pue uogsp uisdi g esogn euwel aui jo suiddn io juauao aasod pue yuauliesi
electron microscopy of a normal dog optic nerve head cemonstrates the three-clirmensional architecture of the
a prirmary open-angle glaucormatous optic nerve head shows posterior cisplacerment and loss of pore
arrangement, which may impair axoplasmic anc local capillary blood flow (original magnification, x60). (From
asue-uado Aead yim saeag jo esog eul a ul sasu piooudi aal e ja 'a syooig
glaucoma. Am J Vet Res 50:936.)
240
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
 Figure 12-23. Optic clisc cupping. Most retinal vessels disappear at the
clisc ecge. The center of the clisc is in focus below the level of the retinal
surface and is grayish. There also is a peripapillary ring of altered retinal
reflectivity. (Courtesy Dr. Christopher J. Murphy.) 
B
Figure 12-25. Retinal changes in acute prirmary angle-closure glaucoma.
A, The retinal cells, which stain brown in this irmmunohistochemically
stained section, are uncergoing apoptosis. B, Histologic section of a retina
showing segmental loss of nuclei in the photoreceptor layer (*). (Courtesy
Dr. Richard R.Dubielzig.)
Figure 12-24. Cross-sectional view of the optic nerve of a clog with
glaucoma. The paler blue areas represent clegeneratec nerve fiber axons.
(Courtesy Dr. Richarcl R. Dubielzig.)
tionally by depressed electroretinograms, and in some patients 
Figure 12-26. Postenucleation specimen frorm a dog with acute prirmary
it is possible to visualize wedge-shaped defects in the retina
angle-closure glaucorma. Light-colored, roughly wedge-shaped regions of
 that correspond to pressure-induced infarction of the choroidal
blood supply (Figure 12-26). Early in glaucoma, if the pressure 
are apparent. (Courtesy Dr. Richard R. Dubielzig.)
elevation is acute and very large, the photoreceptors in the
retina undergo necrosis. In the next few days they begin to die
 primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), in which the rise in
 by apoptosis as well. Ophthalmoscopically the cell death is
 IOP is more insidious and of usually smaller magnitude than in
seen as increased tapetal reflectivity. As in any other severe
 acute canine primary angle-closure glaucoma (PACG), vision
retinal atrophy, the condition is irreversible.
loss is usually attributed mainly to retinal ganglion cell degen-
 It has now been recognized that increased IOP may initiate 
 eration. Pressure-associated alterations in microcirculation and/or 
a chain of events that can continue to impair vision despite
axoplasmic flow at the level of the lamina cribrosa may play a
return of IOP to within normal limits (Figure 12-27). In human
 role in the death of ganglion cells in this form of glaucoma. Dying
THe GLAUCOMAS |
241
Impaired Outflow
Damage
Repair
Health
Deformlaminacribrosa
Stress proteins., growth factors
Reduce blood flow
 antiapoptosis compounds
Nitric oxide
Glutamate
Glutamateblockers
Calcium
synthase inhibitors
Nitric Oxide
Calcium blockers
Stress proteins
Free Radicals
Antioxidants
Excitotoxin
Release
Death
Figure 12-27. Cell ceath in glaucoma. Potential therapeutic interventions are in redl. Once cell ceath begins, a
self-perpetuating circle can occur that is not susceptible to intervention by current intraocular pressure-lowering
melications or surgery.
 ganglion cells may then release glutamate and other excitatory
humor production is less than normal (but still excessively high
compounds that initiate a self-perpetuating circle of apoptotic
in view of the outflow capacity of the eye). The mechanism of
cell death in previously unaffected neighboring ganglion cells.
this impairment may be etiologically classified as primary or
In dogs with acute PACG and more rapid/marked increases in
secondary. Primary glaucomas have no consistent, obvious
IOP, one study found retinal damage to extend well beyond the 
association with another ocular or systemic disorder, are typically
ganglion cell layer. Within the first few days of an attack of
bilateral, have a strong breed predisposition, and hence are 
acute PACG ganglion cell necrosis and segmental full-thickness 
believed to have a genetic basis (see Box 12-2). Primary
areas of retinal attenuation consistent  with infarction were
glaucoma is subdivided into two main forms, primary open-
apparent. As ganglion celland retinal necrosis decreased over the
angle glaucoma, in which the drainage angle appears
ensuing days retinal cell death by apoptosis markedly increased.
 gonioscopically normal (presumably because the impediment
This finding suggests that in acute PACG, the marked increase in
to aqueous outflow is deep to the pectinate ligaments) and
 IOP not only interferes with axoplasmic flow through the lamina
primary angle-closure glaucoma, in which the drainage angle
cribrosa but also causes ischemic necrosis of the retina. Again, as
appears gonioscopically narrowed or closed (Figures 12-28
these cells die they initiate a vicious circle of progressive cell
through 12-33). In the dog, PACG is at least eight times more
death due to apoptosis that continues despite normalization of 
common than POAG. Acute PACG also is two times more
IOP. This hypothesis would explain the clinical observation
common in female dogs than in male dogs. A similar sex pre-
that even though IOP is controlled in some dogs with PACG,
disposition has been found in humans with PACG and has been 
 progressive vision loss still occurs.
attributed to a generally shallower anterior chamber in women
Although this sequence of events is discouraging, it does 
than in men.
offer the possibility for the development of additional thera-
Secondary glaucomas are at least twice as common as
peutic avenues for the treatment of glaucoma, including neuro-
 primary glaucomas in dogs (and even more common in cats) and
protective agents that prevent cell suicide via apoptosis, drugs that
are associated with other ocular or systemic disorders that alter
help maintain retinal/optic nerve blood flow and minimize
aqueous humor dynamics. Secondary glaucoma may be
ischemia, and modalities that interrupt reperfusion injuries when
unilateral or bilateral and may or may not be inherited; the
 IOP is reduced from very high levels to normal. These differences
 physical width of the gonioscopically visible drainage angle may
in the histologic appearance among the various forms of glaucoma
also be classified as open or closed. Often the exact mechanism
also reinforce the concept that glaucoma is not a single entity
 by which outflow is impaired in secondary glaucoma is unclear.
and that there are likely to be important differences in the
 Because glaucoma is almost always due to the impaired flow
cellular events leading to vision loss in patients with glaucoma.
of aqueous humor, it can be very useful to classify glaucoma
according to the location(s) of those impediments (Box 12-3).
CLASSIFICATION
Impediments to the normal flow of aqueous humor commonly
occur at the level of the ciliary body, pupil, trabecular meshwork,
Glaucoma almost invariably is the result of impaired aqueous
angular aqueous plexus, scleral venous system, or episcleral
 humor outflow. In fact, in most patients with glaucoma aqueous 
veins. Frequently the obstruction to outflow starts at one place
242
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 12-28. A beagle with chronic primary open-angle glaucoma.
A, Both pupils are dilated and intraocular pressure is increased in both
eyes (approxirmately 50 mm Hg). B, Fundus photograph of the same clog.
The optic nerve is clepressecl from the surface of the funclus (cuppedl), has
little myelin, and is clarker than normal. The area surroundling the optic
 clisc also has alterecl reflectivity.
(for example, the lens-pupil interface), but as the disease
progresses, impediments to outflow also develop in more
anterior structures (for example, at the iridocorneal angle;
Figure 12-34), further worsening the problem. Therefore the
B
 longer the increased IOP persists, the more difficult it will be to
successfully treat the patient.
nition of the problem, correct identification of the location of
the impediment to outflow, and circumvention of that obstruc-
tion before additional impediments to outflow develop.
PATHOGENESIS
C
Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma
Figure 12-29. Primary open-angle glaucoma in a beagle (same dog as in
 POAG is a bilateral disorder in which IOP tends to increase in a
Figure 12-28). A, The iridocorneal angle is gonioscopically relatively
slow, insidious fashion simultaneously in both eyes in young to
aon yuawsas nolsaue ayi jo aseul punosejn uognlosai-uaih 'g uado
that the iris does nothave the sarme conforrmation as in dogswith primary
 middle-aged dogs of certain breeds, most notably the beagle and
angle-closure glaucoma (see Figure 12-31) anc that the ciliary cleft is still
the Norwegian elkhound (see Figures 12-28 and 12-29). Initially
the gonioscopically visible angle is open. Over time the angle
angle of a cog that has been stained to highlight the normal
closes, the globe becomes buphthalmic, and the lens may
glycosarminoglycans (CACs) in the trabecular meshwork (cleep blue
between the pigmented pectinate ligaments). Abnormal CACs are
subluxate. The precise mechanism of POAG in dogs is unclear, but 
believed to play a role in the genesis of primary open-angle glaucorma.
it most likely results from subtle biochemical alterations in the
 trabecular meshwork that ultimately lead to greater resistance to
 aqueous outflow and increased IOP. In beagles, the defect appears
to be inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and may involve
the glycosaminoglycan accumulation in the trabecular meshwork.
THE GLAUCOMAS
243
B
C
Figure 12-30. Acute angle-closure glaucoma in an American cocker spaniel. A, This clisorler usually first 
a jun smous adosouo a paae Aaen ane saa yog ing aseas eaeun e se sysaue
Aededuad ans s aay pue aled s aau do ay saeys ane ay ur pas s aue eauaoi
Swelling (arrows).
Normal
PACG
B
Figure 12-31. A, High-resolution ultrasound image of a normal eye. AC, anterior charmber; C, cornea; CB, ciliary
body; i, iris; L, lens. White arrows outline the ciliary cleft. B, An eye with acute primary angle-closure glaucoma
{PACC). Note the sigmoicdal shape of the iris, increased contact of the peripheral iris with the cornea (btack
arrow), and collapse of the ciliary cleft (white arrow).
244
I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Box 12-3
Glaucoma classification by location
(posterior to anterior)
Trabeculae
obstructed
>27 mm Hg
1. Ciliary body-vitreous-lens (malignant glaucoma):
a. Block at ciliary body, vitreous, and lens with posterior
pushing of lens-iris diaphragm
2. Pupil:
 Relative block due to iris to lens apposition
Vitreous within pupil aperture
C.
Lens within pupil aperture:
(1)  Luxated lens
(2) Intumescent lens
d. Posterior synechia/iris bombe
3.
Trabecular meshwork:
a.
 Primary open-angle glaucoma
b.
Secondary obstructions:
{1)
 Preiridal fibrovascular membranes 
Figure 12-32. Open-angle glaucoma clue to trabecular obstruction. The
 angle itself is normal gonioscopically.
(2)
 Cellular/proteinaceous material:
(a)
Vitreous
(b)Plasma proteins
(c)
 Neoplastic cells
 Ciliary cleft obstructed 
(d)  Red blood cells
(e)
Pigment
by peripheral iris,
>27 mm Hg 
 Epithelial downgrowth through comeal
perforation
C. Primary angle-closure glaucoma:
(1}
 Appositional closure
(2)
 Synechial closure
d. Secondary angle-closure glaucoma:
(1}
 Peripheral anterior synechia
(2）
 Ciliary body swelling/inflammation/cysts
(3)
 Neoplasia
(4)  Anterior shifts of lens-iris diaphragm
4. Posttrabecular forms:
a. Angular aqueous plexus
 b. Scleral outlet channels 
C.F
 Episcleral vein obstructions
 Figure 12-33. Closedl-angle glaucoma. The peripheral iris prevents access 
 5. Developmental anomalies of the outflow system
by the aqueous to the ciliary cleft anc clrainage network. Obstruction at
6.
Idiopathic mechanisms 
the pupil is also common in the closed-angle glaucomas.
7.
 Combined-mechanism glauc oma: more than one of the
 preceding mechanisms
Adapted from Slatter D (2003): Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 31d ed.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Primary Angle-Closure Glaucoma
 PACG is also a bilateral disorder but it tends to manifest as an
 initially unilateral, rapid, marked increase in IOP in middle-
aged to older dogs of certain breeds (see Figures 12-30 and 12-31,
Box 12-2, and Table 12-1). An overt attack of glaucoma usually
occurs in the initially normotensive fellow eye a median of 8
months after disease in the first eye becomes apparent. Again,
the precise mechanism by which PACG occurs is uncertain, but
there is a clear association with congenital pectinate ligament
dysplasia (PLD or goniodysgenesis; see later). It is also
associated with a female sex predisposition (approximately 2:1
Figure 12-34. Proposed reverse pupillary block theory of the mechanism
female-to-male ratio), periods of stress or excitement, and dim
of prirmary angle-closure glaucoma in dogs. See text for complete
light. Women also have a similarly higher risk of PACG than
clescription. Pectinate ligarment clysplasia holcds the peripheral iris in close
contact with the inner surface of the cornea. Stress or excitement
men, which has been attributed to a smaller, somewhat more
increases the choroidlal pulse, forcing small aliquots of aqueous humor
"crowded" anterior chamber in women. Whether a similar
into the anterior chamber, which result in a slightly higher pressure in the
 phenomenon explains the female sex predisposition to PACG in
anterior chamber than in the posterior chamber. This clifference forces the
dogs is unclear. Some dogs also experience transient, self-
iris against the lens near the pupil borcler, creating pupil block (A).
 Prolonged increases in intraocular pressure lead to peripheral anterior
limiting episodes in which IOP spikes upwards but sponta-
 synechia (B) anc further impedliment to aqueous humor outflow.
 neously returns to normal.
THe GLAUCOMAs |
245
Table 12-1 | Features of Canine Breed-Specific Glaucomas
 ASSOCIATION WITH
 PECTINATE 1IGAMENT
BREED
TYPE
USUAL PRESENTATION
DYSPLAS1A
FEATURES
Armerican cocker spaniel
Narrow to closed
Acute and chronic presentations
Infrequent
Most common primary
angle
 glaucoma in United
States. A series of self-
lirniting attacks may
 prececle a final overt
attack.
Chow chow
Narrow to closed 
 Acute anc chronic presentations
Infrequent 
 Vision often retained with
 angle
high pressures
Welsh springer spaniel
Narrow to closed 
 Acute and chronic presentations
No
Possible dominant
angle
inheritance
 Bassett hound
 Narrow to closed 
 Acute and chronic presentations
Common
Uveitis often also present 
angle
 but not clear if cause or
effect
 Flat-coated retriever
Narrow to closed
Acute and chronic presentations
Common
More common in England 
 angle
 than in United States
Great Dane
Narrow to closed
Acute presentation
Common
 More common in England 
angle
 than in United States
Sarmoyed
Narrow to closed 
 Acute and chronic presentations
Common
Lens is positioned
 angle
 anteriorly; pupil block 
may be involved 
 Bouvier cles Flancres
Narrow to closed 
 Acute and chronic presentations
Common
May affect young cogs
angle
(1-3 yrs of agel as well
as olcler (6-9 yrs of age)
Beagle
 Open angle
Clinical cases rare; chronic syndrome
No
 Autosomal recessive, angle 
closes late in disease.
Clinical signs slow and
insidious. Typically
2-5-yr-olc clogs.
 Norwegian elkhound 
 Open angle
Clinical cases rare; chronic syncrome 
No
 Vision often retained with
high pressures
Narrow to closed angle
glaucoma with pectinate
ligament clysplasia may
also occur in breed
 PLD is a condition in which the normally fine pectinate liga-
ments are replaced by tissues that range from a few broad-
based, thick pectinate ligaments to large sheets of dysplastic
tissue that cover varying amounts of the trabecular meshwork
 and deeper structures of the iridocormeal angle (see Figures 12-9,
12-10, 12-35, and 12-36). Large sheets of tissue may be punc-
tuated by variably sized perforations ("flow holes") that permit
aqueous humor to enter the trabecular meshwork. The deeper
tissues of the iridocorneal angle may or may not be normal.
Because the spaces within the trabecular meshwork tend to
segmentally interconnect beneath the sheets of dysplastic
pectinate ligaments, IOP tends to be normal even if only a few
flow holes are present. Although virtually any breed of dog can
be affected by PLD, the disorder is especially common in the
basset hound, Bouvier des Flandres, American and English
cocker spaniels, Norwegian elkhound, Siberian husky, dachshund,
miniature poodle, Welsh terrier, wirehaired fox terrier, and
Chihuahua.
 PLD, however, is only one risk factor for PACG and in and
of itself it is insufficient to cause glaucoma in all but the most
Figure 12-35. Sheets of mesoclermal tissue obstructing access by aqueous
to the ciliary cleft. Compare with the normal angle in Figure 12-11. Note
extreme and rare case in which the dog is born with glaucoma
the flow holes (arrows). C, Cornea; I, iris; S, sclera. (From Martin Cl,
(congenital glaucoma). Evidence for this view comes from the
Wyman M [1978l: Primary glaucoma in the dog. Vet Clin North Am
observation that even though PLD is present at birth, glaucoma
8:257.)
246
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
the anterior chamber. This results in a transient pressure differ-
ential in which pressure is slightly greater in the anterior chamber
than in the posterior chamber. If the pupil is midrange in size
the iris can be pressed more firmly against the lens, resulting in
a "ball-valve'" effect and a so-called reverse pupillary block (see
Figure 12-34). A midrange to somewhat dilated pupil (as occurs
 in dimmer light or during excitement) is more floppy and readily
pressed against the lens than a very large or very small pupil.
Very large pupils tend to cause the iris to "slide' off the more
highly curved equatorial region of the lens, and very small
pupils tend to have an iris that is taut and more resistant to
compression against the lens. The next systole resuts in the
forcing of a little more aqueous humor from the posterior
chamber into the anterior chamber, further increasing IOP. This
 process continues until IOP reaches a physiologic maximum
(typically 60 to 80 mm Hg) that is related to systemic blood
 pressure and the resistance of the intraocular tissues. Intermittent,
spontaneously resolving attacks may occur if reverse pupil block
develops but the pupil dilates to the point at which it can “slide"
Figure 12-36. lesion similar to the one shown in Figure 12-35, but with
 off the more highly curved equatorial region of the lens and break
more extensive obstruction. C, Cut cornea; I, iris; S, sclera. Arrows
the block at the pupil; this block would then allow the excess
clelineate sheet with pores. (From Martin Cl, Wyman M [1978]: Primary
aqueous humor to flow back through the pupil into the posterior
glaucoma in the dog. Vet Clin North Am 8:257.)
chamber. If the block is not broken at the pupil, the irnidocormeal
angle and ciliary cleft may further collapse, thereby worsening
the attack and making effective therapy much more difficult
does not develop until the dog is typically middle-aged to old.
even though the whole process is of relatively short duration.
Additionally, although virtually every dog in which PACG
PACG may also be classified as having the following poten-
develops has PLD, only about 1% of dogs with PLD have
tially overlapping phases:
glaucoma at some point in their lifetimes. This means that the
vast majority of dogs with PLD never have glaucoma. Even if
Latent: The fellow, normotensive eye has all the risk factors
one limits the population to include only the dogs with the most 
that the overtly affected eye exhibits, except that IOP has
extreme form of PLD (360-degree sheets with few flow holes),
 not increased. This eye should receive prophylactic therapy,
the risk of glaucoma increases to only about 15%. Finally, PLD
because in 50% cases the fellow eye will experience overt
alone does not explain the association of PACG with other risk
PACG in 8 months if untreated.
factors, such as female sex predisposition, stress, and dim light.
 Intermittent: Characterized by transient (minutes to hours)
 In the aggregate, these observations suggest that PLD is only
increases in IOP that spontaneously resolve.
the first step in a multistep process leading to PACG.
Acute congestive: Characterized by very rapid, marked
Recent imaging of the anterior segment in dogs experiencing
(50 to 80 mm Hg) increases in IOP with overt clinical
 an acute episode of PACG has led to a mechanistic theory, which 
signs.
holds that the event that initiates an attack may be impaired
Postcongestive: Refers to an eye that has been successfully
outflow at the level of the pupil (see Figures 12-30, 12-31, and
treated for acute congestive glaucoma and now has a
12-34). According to this theory, stress or excitement may raise
normal or subnormal 1OP.
heart rate and increase the difference between the systolic and
Chronic: IOP is chronically elevated. This state may follow
diastolic blood pressures in the choroidal blood vessels. The
an acute congestive episode that does not respond to
increases in heart rate and pulse pressure result in a faster and
therapy. Less commonly, multiple episodes of intermittent 
 larger forward “push" by the choroidal blood vessels on the
 angle closure may slowly close the angle and create a
 posterior vitreous during systole. This force ultimately is trans-
 clinical course that is characterized by multiple transient
ferred through the vitreous to the aqueous humor in the posterior
spikes in IOP and a gradually rising IOP between the 
chamber, causing an additional small bolus of aqueous humor
spikes.
to be forced through the pupil into the anterior chamber during
·Absolute: End-stage disease. Vision is lost, the eye is
systole. In the normal eye (or if the pulse pressure is normal)
usually buphthalmic, and many secondary changes are
this fluid would simply flow back into the posterior chamber
typically present (lens luxation, corneal ulceration, etc.).
during diastole or, if trapped in the anterior chamber, it would
force the iris more posteriorly, thereby opening the iridocorneal
Secondary Glaucomas
angle and allowing the additional fluid to exit via an expanded
trabecular meshwork. In the eye at risk for PACG, however, exit 
Obstrvction of the Iridocorneaf Angle
of this small bolus of additional aqueous humor is impeded by
The iridocomeal angle may be of normal width and simply filled
abnormal pectinate ligaments, which may also prevent the angle
with cells or substances that impair outflow (so-called secondary
au ur ainssaid pasaou o asudsai u guado suddod, u
open-angle glaucoma) or the angle may very gradually narrow
 anterior chamber. Alternatively, or perhaps in combination with 
until closed by peripheral anterior synechia, fbrovascular mem-
 PLD, age-associated declines in trabecular meshwork facility
branes, and so on (so-called secondary closed-angle glaucoma).
may also prevent the additional aqueous humor from escaping
 In general, secondary open-angle glaucomas carry a somewhat
THE GLAUCOMAS
247
Figure 12-37. Coniophotograph showing blood in the trabecular
 meshwork. Intraocular pressure was elevatedl, but obvious hyphema was 
Figure 12-38. High-resolution ultrasounc image in a dog with glaucoma
 not clinically apparent.
seconcdary to iris bombe. The pupillary borcler is acherent to the anterior
lens capsule and the remaining iris bows anteriorly. Adlclitionaly the
ciliary cleft is collapsed, incicating that there are at least two obstructions
to outflow in this patient. (Courtesy Dr. Ellison Bentley.)
better prognosis than secondary closed-angle glaucomas because
 the anatomy is less severely deranged. Examples of materials that
may obstruct the trabecular meshwork are uveal cysts, neoplastic
cells (especially melanocytes), inflammatory cells and debris,
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
scar tissue (following chronic uveitis or intraocular surgery), red
Please refer to the printed publication.
blood cells, macrophages filled with lens debris after capsule
rupture (phacolytic glaucoma), vitreous, new blood vessels
(preiridal fibrovascular membranes), air, viscoelastic materials
used during intraocular surgeries, and epithelial cells originating
from the cornea or conjunctiva. In many patients blocks may
 also exist at other locations in the eye (Figure 12-37).
Pupifary Block
 In traditional pupillary block the flow of aqueous humor from
the posterior chamber to the anterior chamber is impaired. This
may result from direct physical adhesions between the iris and
lens (iris bombe; Figure 12-38) due to chronic anterior uveitis
or may simply reflect a condition in which the iris and lens are
in tight apposition to each other but not physically fused
(physiologic iris bombe). Pupillary block in the absence of
physical adhesions commonly occurs in eyes in which the lens 
is very large (intumescent) or luxated into the pupillary aperture
Figure 12-39. Proposed  concept of ciliovitreolenticular block
or when a portion of the lens zonules is disrupted and vitreous
cermonstrating the potential locations misdirectec aqueous hurmor may
is able to move forward and occlude the pupil. In all forms of
collect in the vitreal cavity, inclucling in the anterior peripheral vitreous 
pupillary block glaucoma, however, aqueous accumulates in
{A), as lacunae in the central vitreous (B), dliffusely throughout the
the posterior chamber, thereby increasing IOP. Very often,
vitreous (C), and between the posterior vitreous and retina (D). increased 
fluicl in the vitreal cavity dlisplaces ancl conclenses the anterior vitreal face,
secondary angle-closure glaucoma complicates the latter stages
leadling to anterior shifting of the lens-iris dliaphragm. Eventually
of the process as the root of the iris is pushed forward into the
glaucoma occurs as more and more fluid is trapped within the vitreal
angle. These apposed but not fused tissues (appositional closure)
cavity by a barrier createc by the anterior ciliary bocly, clisplaced vitreous,
quickly lead to permanent adhesions and peripheral anterior
to flow through the pupil and then at the iridocorneal angle/ciliary cleft.
synechia (synechial closure). Chronic low-grade uveitis due to
(From Czederpiltz JMC, et al. [2005l: Putative aqueous humor
lens movement also often leads to secondary angle closure.
misclirection syndlrome as a cause of glaucoma in cats: 32 cases. J Am Vet 
Med Assoc 227:1476.)
Ciliary Body-Vitreous-Lens Block
between the vitreous and the retina (Figures 12-39 and 12-40).
Sometimes called “aqueous humor misdirection" or “malignant 
The remaining vitreous is forced anteriorly, compressing its
glaucoma," ciliary body-vitreous-lens block glaucoma develops
proteins and forcing them between the ciliary body and the
when aqueous humor flows posteriorly into the vitreal cavity or
lens. This tends to impair the forward flow of aqueous humor
248
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
TREATMENT
The higher the IOP and the longer it remains increased, the
less the chance that vision can be restored; 24 to 72 hours of
very high IOP usually results in irreversible vision loss.
 The specific actions of the antiglaucoma drugs are discussed
in Chapter 3. Ideally the primary cause of the glaucoma should
be treated directly. In some outflow obstructions, however,
 direct treatment may not be possible, and the surgeon is forced
to treat the problem indirectly by reducing the production of
A
 aqueous humor. Regardless of cause, urgent therapy is required
if vision is to be preserved. Often a combination of medical and
surgical therapy is required, and the specific drugs and pro-
Rightswerenot granted to include thisfigureinelectronicmedia
 cedures chosen depend on the cause and stage of glaucoma and,
Please refer to the printed publication.
to a significant extent, on the clinician's personal experiences.
Effective client education is essential in the therapy
of
glaucoma. Many owners' sole experience with glaucoma has
been with POAG in older humans. In this disorder there is no
 pain, the rise in IOP is very slow and generally mild, and vision
can often be maintained for the remainder of the person's life
with medical therapy alone. The clinician should be careful to
explain to the owner of an animal with glaucoma that there are 
POAG in older people are not appropriate for the vast majority
 of cases of glaucoma in animals (or other forms of glaucoma in
humans, for that matter). Because many forms of glaucoma
 initially manifest with only one eye affected but are bilateral
B
disorders, it is also imperative to inform the client about the
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
clinical signs that should prompt him or her to seek medical
Please refer to the printed publication.
 attention in the event of an attack in the animal's fellow eye.
Primary glaucoma is a bilateral disease in dogs. Once a
diagnosis of glaucoma has been made in one eye, the remain-
ing eye should receive prophylactic medication and regular
pressure checks.
The first step in the treatment of the animal with newly
diagnosed glaucoma is to determine whether (1) the disorder is
acute and the eye still has the potential for vision or (2) the
 problem is chronic and the eye is irreversibly blind (Figure 12-41).
C
 Regardless of the cause of the glaucoma, aggressive, potentially
Figure 1240. Feline aqueous hurmor misclirection syndrome. A, Frontal
toxic, and expensive medical therapy is generally of limited to no
view; mild anisocoria is present. B, Affected cat eye viewed from the sicle.
value in patients with end-stage disease and an irrevocably
The anterior charmber is uniformly very shallow. C, Normal cat eye for 
blind eye. The clinician can more effectively treat such patients
comparison purposes. (From Czederpiltz JMC, et al. [2005l: Putative
aqueous hurmor misdirection syndlrome as a cause of glaucoma in cats:
by identifying the cause of the glaucoma (neoplasia, lens luxation,
32 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1476.)
 primary angle closure, hyphema, etc.) and then performing the 
appropriate surgical procedure (cyclodestruction, enucleation,
at the level of the ciliary body and to displace the entire
evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis, etc.) in conjunction
lens-iris diaphragm anteriorly, shallowing the anterior
with evaluating the risk of glaucoma in the remaining eye. If
chamber. Pupillary block is common, and in the later stages of
the affected eye has the potential for sight, however, aggressive
the process secondary angle closure develops as well.
A
attempts to lower IOP should be instituted. In these cases the
syndrome of aqueous humor misdirection, shallow anterior
 next step is to determine the inciting cause of the glaucoma and
chamber, pupil dilation, and glaucoma is common in older cats.
 directly address that cause, if possible.
 It can be differentiated from a luxated/subluxated lens by the 
 absence of iridodonesis and phacodonesis.
Emergency Treatment of Acute Glaucoma
Combined-Mechanism Glaucoma
Claucoma is usually treated by a veterinary ophthalmologist
Glaucoma also can occur via a combination of mechanisms,
 after the family veterinarian has made the initial diagnosis and
 and in some patients it is not yet possible to definitively ascertain 
 provided emergency therapy.
the mechanism by which IOP increases.
THe GLAUCOMAS |
249
GLAUCOMA
VISUAL
VISUAL OR BLINd ?
BLIND
 Determine primary cause
Relieve pain
PRIMARY OR SECONDARY?
Enucleation
+
Evisceration/prosthesis
Cyclodestructive procedure
 PRIMARY (CLOSED)
SECONDARY
Medical Therapy
 Evaluate Fellow Eye
0.005% Latanoprost 
Treat 1° Cause
Uveitis
r
Lens Luxation 
Mannitol
2% Pilocarpine
Hyphema
 Ncoplasia 
Methazolamide
 Evaluate Fellow Eye
 Recheck I0P in 1-2 hours
Evaluate Fellow Eye
 Prophylactic Therapy
 Demecarium or Betaxolol
Monitor IOP q 1 month for
 3 months then q 3 months 
I0P > 20
IOP<20
 Perform surgery
Surgery
Continue medical Rx
 Combined Procedures
Consider surgery now
Cyclocryosurgery
 or do if IOP becomes
 Cyclophotocoagulation
> 20 mm Hg 
Gonioimplantation
 Figure 12-41. Flow chart for the treatment of glaucoma.
Box 12-4 | 
Emergency therapy for primary angle-
 long-term control of most forms of glaucoma in animals and
closure glaucoma in an eye with the
humans.
potential for vision
 Reduction in pressure with this regimen is usually rapid
(1 to 2 hours) but temporary (12 to 36 hours). If the eye responds
1. Latanoprost 0.005%: 1 to 2 drops topically and recheck 
to latanoprost, this medication should be continued every
intraocular pressure in 1 to 2 hours 
12 hours until the patient can be evaluated by a specialist. Mannitol
 If latanoprost is unavailable or ineffective:
1. Mannitol (1.0 to 1.5 g/kg IV): 5.0 to 7.5 mL/kg of 20%
 is very potent but it also can be quite toxic, so its use is limited
 solution over 15 to 20 minutes
to eyes with the potential for vision. If IOP remains elevated
 2. Methazolamide or dichlorphenamide: 2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg
after a single injection of mannitol the 1.0 g/kg dose may be
orally every 8 to 12 hours for dogs
 repeated in 4 hours if necessary, but long-term use should be 
 3. Pilocarpine (2.0% drops): 1 drop every 10 minutes for
avoided. Because mannitol solution is at or near the saturation
 30 minutes, then every 6 hours
 point it may need to be heated or put through a 5-qum filter to
 Water should be withheld for several hours after
avoid intravenous injection of crystals and potentially fatal con-
 administration of mannitol.
sequences. Mannitol lowers IOP by dehydrating the vitreous
 Systemic dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg IV) or topical 0.1%
along with the rest of the animal. Side effects include headache,
 dexamethasone (every 6 to 8 hours) may be useful as well if
osmotic diuresis, and worsening of dehydration, renal failure,
 pressure-induced ischemia has resulted in significant 
or cardiovascular disease. Deaths due to pulmonary edema also
 intraocular inflammation.
If the other eye is still normotensive, prophylactic therapy
have been reported if mannitol is given to animals anesthetized 
 consisting of demecarium bromide (0.25% every 24 hours at
with methoxyflurane. A hyperosmotic agent should be used
 bedtime with a topical corticosteroid) or betaxolol 0.5% every
with caution if the blood-ocular barrier is not intact (uveitis,
 12 hours should be instituted.
hyphema), because a leaky barrier may allow mannitol to enter
the vitreous, thereby pulling water into the vitreal cavity and
increasing IOP.
Oral glycerin at 1 to 2 mL/kg orally is an alternative to
 Early identification of the cause of the glaucoma and rapid
 mannitol, although it is a less reliable ocular hypotensive drug
reduction of IOP are essential to prevent permanent damage;
and frequently induces vomiting. The probability of vomiting
Box 12-4 summarizes emergency treatment for PACG in an eye
may be reduced by dividing the dose into thirds and giving it
 that still has the potential for vision. Although the initial response 
 chilled or mixed with food. Glycerin is contraindicated in diabetic
to medical therapy may be dramatic, definitive treatment, usually
patients. On rare occasions glycerin may be used every 8 hours
surgical, must follow medical therapy in order to control IOP in
for up to 5 days if toxicity is not significant. Glycerin is occasion-
the long term in most patients. Except in very specific circum--
 ally dispensed for the owner to administer to treat a sudden
250
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
attack of glaucoma immediately before seeking professional
Box 12-7
 Emergency therapy for lens
assistance.
 Boxes 12-5 through 12-7 summarize emergency treatment
luxation-associated glaucoma
for glaucoma associated with, or due to, specific circumstances
1. If lens in anterior chamber, dilate pupil with atropine 1% or
or diseases.
 tropicamide 1.0%.
 2. Topical dexamethasone (0.1% every 2 to 4 hours) or
Long-Term Management of Glaucoma
 prednisolone acetate (1.0% every 6 to 8 hours)
If ineffective:
In most cases, definitive therapy for glaucoma is surgery
1. Mannitol (1.0 to 1.5 g/kg IV): 5.0 to 7.5 mL/kg of 20%
(cyclocryotherapy, laser cyclophotocoagulation, gonio-
 solution over 15 to 20 minutes 
 implantation, evisceration with intraocular prosthesis insertion,
 2. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors either topically (dorzolamide
-addns Aeu shnp euoone snue paninbai f "(uogeaonua 1o
 2% or brinzolamide 1%, both every 8 hours) or systemically 
 ment surgery and fine-tune IOP control. Certain types of glaucoma
(methazolamide or dichlorphenamide: 2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg
(e.g., uveitis-induced or hyphema-associated) may be treated
orally every 8 to 12 hours for dogs and 1 to 2 mg/kg every
medically first; if medical therapies fail, surgical methods may
8 to 12 hours for cats)
then be used. Glaucoma following primary lens luxation may
 3. If additional intraocular pressure lowering required,
consider adding topical epinephrine 1% every 6 to 8 hours
be controlled medically if the lens remains posterior to the iris.
or dipivefrin 0. 1% every 6 to 8 hours.
 4. If the lens is in the anterior chamber, pilocarpine, timolol,
Surgical Therapy for Glaucoma
and latanoprost should be avoided.
 Referral to a specialist for further evaluation is ad visable.
 Particular attention should also be paid to the patient's general
physical health before surgery, because alterations in hydration,
electrolyte, and acid-base status are common in animals that
Box 12-5 丨 
 Emergency therapy for uveitis-induced
have malaise, inappetence, and so on from the pain associated
glaucoma
with high IOP or that have received antiglaucoma drugs. Blood
 gas and acid-base status along with serum potassium levels
1.
 Identify underlying cause and directly address it if possible.
 may also need to be assessed before induction of anesthesia,
2. Systemic dexamethasone (0.1mg/kg IV) or flunixin
meglumine (0.1 mg/kg IV)
especially if a systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (CAI) has
3. Topical dexamethasone (0.1% every 2 to 4 hours) of
been administered recently. Preoperative rehydration may be
 prednisolone acetate (1.0% every 2 to 4 hours)
 necessary in animals that have received mannitol.
 4. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors either topically (dorzolamide
 Glaucoma procedures used to treat eyes with the potential
 2% alone or in combination with timolol, or brinzolamide
for vision are classified according to whether they increase
1%, both every 8 hours) or systemically (methazolamide or
aqueous humor outflow (e.g., gonioimplantation, filtering
dichlorphenamide: 2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg orally every 8 to
 procedures) or decrease aqueous humor production (cyclo-
12 hours for dogs and 1 to 2 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours for
 photocoagulation, cyclocryosurgery). A combination of outflow-
cats)
enhancing and inflow-reducing procedures may be more
 5. If additional intraocular pressure lowering required,
effective than either one alone at controlling IOP and pre-
consider adding in topical timolol 0.5% every 8 to 12 hours, 
epinephrine 1% every 6 to 8 hours, or dipivefrin 0. 1% every
serving vision. In current clinical practice gonioimplantation,
6 to 8 hours.
cyclophotocoagulation, and cyclocryosurgery are by far the
6. Usually, pilocarpine, latanoprost, and systemic 
dominant surgical procedures used to treat an eye with the
 hyperosmotics should be avoided.
 potential for retaining vision. If the eye is irreversibly blind,
 enucleation, evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis, and perhaps
a cyclodestructive procedure are more appropriate.
Box 12-61
Emergency therapy for hyphema-
 associated glaucoma
 Surgery to Increase Aqueous Humor Outflow
Historically a number of procedures to increase outflow
1.
 Identify underlying cause and directly address it if possible.
2. Topical dexamethasone (0.1% every 2 to 4 hours) or
(iridencleisis, corneoscleral trephination, cyclodialysis, and
sclerectomy) have been used alone or in combination in an
 prednisolone acetate (1.0% every 2 to 4 hours)
3. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors either topically (dorzolamide
effort to address glaucoma due to impaired outflow of aqueous
2% alone or in combination with timolol or brinzolamide
humor. These procedures would theoretically address the root
1%, both every 8 hours) or systemically (methazolamide of
cause of the glaucoma and allow for more normal nutritional
dichlorphenamide: 2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg orally every 8 to
support for the cornea and lens, because they would enable
 12 hours for dogs and 1 to 2 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours for
aqueous humor production to continue at more normal levels.
cats) or together
Full- or partial-thickness holes in the sclera, however, have been
4. If additional intraocular pressure lowering is required,
 plagued by fibrosis over the filtering site and long-term failure
 consider adding in topical timolol 0.5% every 8 to 12 hours,
to control IOP in most patients. Artificial aqueous humor shunts
epinephrine 1% every 6 to 8 hours, or dipivefrin 0.1% every
(gonioimplants) with or without pressure-sensitive valves (to
6 to 8 hours.
 5. Usually, systemic hyperosmotics should be avoided.
 prevent IOP from getting too low) have also been used to try to
6. The use of topical pilocarpine or atropine is controversial.
create a pathway for aqueous to drain from the eye, but these
also have the problem of development of a scar tissue-lined,
THE GLAUCOMAS 
251
vision loss even though IOP is controlled. Failure to control IOP
in the long term with these procedures is the result of inadequate
destruction of the ciliary body, regeneration of the ciliary epi-
thelium, and progressive angle closure with loss of additional
outflow capacity. Despite these limitations, however, a cyclo-
 destructive procedure is more appealing as a single procedure
 than a gonioimplant or filtering procedure because it is faster,
technically easier, less expensive to perform, and repeatable.
Cyclodestruction is indicated in cases of medically uncon-
 trollable primary glaucoma in an eye that still has the potential
for vision and for the relief of chronic ocular pain in an irreversibly
blind eye in an animal whose owner wishes to preserve the
 globe. The success rate is much lower in eyes with glaucoma
secondary to chronic anterior uveitis, preiridal fbrovascular
membrane formation, or retinal detachments. Relative contra-
Figure 12-42. Positioning of an Ahmed gonioimplant. The conjunctiva has
indications include intraocular neoplasia, hyphema, and anterior
been removed for clarity. The irmplant is sutured to the sclera between the
lens luxations.
extraocular muscles so that the leading ecge is 8 to 10 mm posterior to
 the limbus. A small tunnel incision is macle in the sclera for the tubing to
Cyclocryotherapy
enter the anterior chamber. The implant has a one-way valve that opens 
Controlled application of intense cold to the sclera overlying
(enudlapelud 'sapunes pa pae Aasans ieus lews yo yoogxal
the ciliary body causes necrosis of the ciliary body and reduced
aqueous production. Both liquid nitrogen and nitrous oxide are
cystlike space that again becomes relatively resistant to the
acceptable cryogens, but some surgeons believe liquid nitrogen 
flow of aqueous humor (Figure 12-42). In an effort to avoid
 to be a more reliable agent, perhaps because it achieves a colder
fibrosis around the drainage device, some surgeons have placed
 temperature than nitrous oxide.
the distal end of the tubing into the frontal sinus, parotid salivary
Preoperatively dexamethasone (O.1 mg/kg IV) and flunixin
 duct, nasolacrimal duct, or the orbit. None of these approaches, 
 meglumine (O.1 mg/kg IV) are administered in anticipation of
however, has been demonstrated to be more effective than
the severe uveitis than may follow cyclocryosurgery. Precise
subconjunctival drainage, and endophthalmitis is always a risk 
application of the cryoprobe over the ciliary processes and
if the tube is placed in structures that communicate with the
avoiding the 3 and 9 o'clock positions is essential. If the globe 
outside environment. Use of an antimetabolite such as
is approximately normal size, a 3-mm (diameter) nitrous oxide
mitomycin C or 5-fluorouracil may limit fibrosis over the body
 glaucoma cryoprobe is centered 5 mm posterior to the limbus
of the implant and improve its long-term filtering capacity.
(Figure 12-43). If the globe is enlarged, the cryoprobe is centered
Adjunctive medical antiglaucoma therapy, or a limited cyclo-
5.5 to 6.0 mm posterior to the limbus. Gentle pressure on the
destructive procedure, may also be used to fine-tune IOP control
globe, slightly indenting it, enlarges the extent of the ciliary
once control is achieved grossly with the implant.
destruction by shortening the distance between the cryoprobe
and target tissue and by reducing blood flow to the area. Usually
Surgery to Reduce Aqueous Humor Production
six to eight spots are frozen for 2 minutes when nitrous oxide
instrumentation is used. Timing begins when the probe achieves
Although these procedures do not address the underlying reason
a temperature of -70° to -80° C, a range that correlates with a
for the glaucoma (impaired outflow), they can be quite effec-
tive at lowering IOP. Techniques for destroying the portion
of the ciliary body that make aqueous humor include cyclo-
cyclophotocoagulation (cyclophotoablation) with either a diode 
or neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser,
cyclodiathermy, focused ultrasound, and chemical ablation. In
practical terms, however, only cyclocryosurgery and cyclo-
 photocoagulation are reliable and used with any regularity today.
These are relatively crude procedures because they require the
 surgeon to estimate both the degree of outflow impairment and
 the amount of cyclodestruction necessary to match that impair-
ment. Often the outflow facility is so severely compromised
that the eye is highly sensitive to even minor alterations in
aqueous production, resulting in a relatively narrow margin for
error in these estimates. Too litle destruction can result in
persistence of the glaucoma, and too much can lead to phthisis
bulbi. It is also not uncommon for outflow to be so severely
Figure 12-43. Cryoprobe cooled by liquid nitrogen, positioned 5 mm
impaired that aqueous humor production must be reduced to
posterior to the lirmbus anc acljacent to the ciliary bocy. (Modlified from
levels that cannot maintain normal ocular health, resulting in
Roberts SM, et al. [1984]: Cyclocryotherapy. Part i: evaluation of a liquidl 
cataract formation or corneal endothelial decompensation and 
nitrogen system. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:823.)
252
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
necessary to cause cyclodestruction. If liquid nitrogen is used,
 Nd:YAG laser. Laser therapy has the advantages of being more
the probe is placed in the same location, but the cryogen is
controllable and potentially causing less reaction than
circulated through the probe until the ice ball extends 1 mm
cyclocryotherapy. It can also be repeated with less risk of
 past the limbus into clear cornea, after which the freeze is
hypotony. It suffers from the disadvantage of frequently requiring
terminated. The larger size of the tip (2.5 x 6.5 mm) and the
 more than one treatment and of having a higher failure rate than
more profound freeze usually allows fewer sites to be frozen
cyclocryotherapy. Laser cyclophotocoagulation is exclusively
(perhaps as few as two to four).
 performed by ophthalmic surgeons trained and experienced in
At the conclusion of the procedure a subconjunctival injec-
its use.
tion of 0.5 to 1.0 mg of dexamethasone or other suitable corti-
costeroid may be given. Systemic analgesics may be necessary
Combined Procedures
 in some animals because freezing can induce significant ocular
 pain. The marked chemosis that follows freezing can result in
The combination of a limited cyclodestructive procedure and a
exposure conjunctivitis and/or keratitis, so a partial temporary
gonioimplant (with or without adjunctive medical therapy) offers
tarsorrhaphy may also be performed at the conclusion of the
some attractive theoretical advantages in treating glaucomatous
 procedure.
  (n anon  isa  d   s
Marked conjunctivitis, chemosis, and uveitis should be
the postoperative IOP spike that often accompanies a cyclo-
expected. Topical 0.1% dexamethasone/triple antibiotic
destructive procedure and can destroy the last vestiges of vision
ophthalmic ointment is administered every 4 to 6 hours, depend-
the patient has, (2) allowing for a greater level of aqueous 
ing on the degree of inflammation. Antiglaucoma drugs are
humor production postoperatively so as to improve intraocular
continued as before surgery, and if the eye has the potential for
nutrition and reduce the chance a blinding cataract will occur,
vision, the IOP is carefully followed for several days, and then
 and (3) allowing for a finer control of IOP in the postoperative
at 1 and 2 weeks. If the eye is irreversibly blind, antiglaucoma
 period. In one retrospective study a combination of the two
drugs are continued for 10 to 14 days, after which the patient is
 procedures appeared to be more effective than a single pro-
reevaluated. Marked postoperative IOP spikes can persist for
 cedure and allowed more than 50% of patients to retain vision
days after surgery, and occasionally aqueocentesis may
be
for at least l year after an overt attack of angle-closure glaucoma.
necessary to control IOP in the immediate postoperative period.
 Combining procedures also allowed for a greater percentage of
Tapping the anterior chamber, however, can be detrimental
 patients to maintain IOP within the normal range, even though
because doing so exacerbates the uveitis, risks introducing
vision was ultimately lost either because of progressive retinal
bacteria or damaging the lens, and probably increases the chance
 and optic nerve degeneration secondary to an apoptotic cascade
of reperfusion injury to the retina and optic nerve. If IOP is well
or because of cataract. The frequent follow-up visits, additional
controlled 2 weeks postoperatively, the antiglaucoma medication
expense, and potentially greater complications of a combined
 dosage may be gradually tapered. The timing of further follow-
 procedure, however, do not allow for it to be advocated for the
up examinations varies according to response to therapy and
treatment of irrevocably blind eyes, for which the goal of
whether the eye has the potential for vision.
therapy is simply pain relief.
Complications include the aforementioned IOP spike,
uveitis, exposure keratoconjunctivitis, neurotrophic keratitis if
Lens Luxation
the long posterior ciliary nerves are damaged, hyphema, retinal
detachment, recurrence of glaucoma, and phthisis bulbi with a
The clinician should be aware that primary lens luxation is
cosmetically unacceptable globe. The relatively high frequency
bilateral and usually hereditary, although very commonly the
of these complications indicates that cyclocryosurgery should
 patient initially presents with an overt luxation in only one eye.
not be performed as a prophylactic measure in the normotensive
An acute episode of glaucoma associated with lens luxation is
fellow eye of an animal with glaucoma.
 managed as previously described in this chapter. If the eye is
Success rates vary with the duration of follow-up, whether
irreversibly blind the clinician should consider enucleation,
 IOP control or preservation of vision was the goal, and whether
evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis, or perhaps a cyclo-
the owner permits more than one freezing episode. If IOP con-
 destructive procedure. Lens extraction is seldom indicated in
trol, not vision, is the goal and the owner will allow multiple
blind eyes because it is more costly than other procedures and
procedures to be performed, cyclocryosurgery can have a success
because other impediments to outflow (e.g., at the angle) are
rate as high as 90%. If the eye has the potential for vision at the
usually present and cause glaucoma to persist postoperatively.
outset, the rates of vision preservation may be as high as 60%
 Longer-term therapy for an eye with the potential for vision
at 6 months postoperatively. Unfortunately, as for all glaucoma
and glaucoma attributable to a subluxated or luxated lens
 procedures, the success rate declines with the length of follow-
depends on the position of the lens and whether or not other
up. If IOP begins to rise again additional medical and or sur-
impediments to outflow are present. If lens luxation is acute
gical therapy is required. In general cats seem to have a lower
 and the lens has luxated posteriorly, the eye may be treated with
success rate than dogs. Certain breeds (cocker spaniel, Siberian
miotics to ensure that the lens does not enter the anterior
husky, Norwegian elkhound, chow chow, and shar-pei) may
chamber. Many animals tolerate a lens in the vitreous for long
require more aggressive ciliary body destruction to ensure
 periods without recurrences of glaucoma, provided that medi-
long-term IOP control.
cations are continued. If the lens is opaque and interferes with
vision in the vitreous or has very recently become luxated, or
Laser Cyclophotocoagulation
if the pupil will not effectively constrict, intracapsular lens
extraction may be performed, although the prognosis is
An alternative method of destroying the ciliary body processes 
 guarded even when the procedure is performed by experienced
is transscleral irradiation of the ciliary body with a diode or
surgeons.
THe GLAUCOMAS |
253
If the lens has luxated into the plane of the pupil or anterior
ciliary body), cyclocryotherapy, or laser photocoagulation is
chamber, most surgeons prefer to remove it by either intra-
successful in treating circumscribed tumors. By the time
capsular lens extraction or phacoemulsification. Alternatively,
glaucoma is present the tumor is usually too advanced for this
the pupil may be dilated and an attempt made to get the lens to
type of therapy. Glaucoma secondary to lymphosarcoma may
fall back into the vitreous. If the lens does fall into the vitreous,
 respond to medical antiglaucoma therapy and defnitive systemic
miotics may then be used in an effort to ensure that it remains 
chemotherapy. In general evisceration with placement of an
there. If it does not, it should be surgically removed. The long-
intrascleral prosthesis is to be avoided in patients with presumed
term success of any of these treatment strategies hinges on
 intraocular neoplasia.
whether the patient has either POAG or peripheral anterior
synechia and secondary angle-closure glaucoma in addition to
Absolute Glaucoma
the lens luxation. Unfortunately, both of these conditions
commonly occur in patients with primary lens luxations
Absolute glaucoma is the end stage of chronic, increased IOP
thereby greatly reducing the probability of maintaining a
with buphthalmos, severe degenerative changes in most ocular
comfortable and sighted eye over the long term.
tissue, blindness, and, almost invariably, pain. Although the 
patient with absolute glaucoma frequently shows no pain on
Glaucoma Secondary to Uveitis
palpation of the eye, and the owner may not believe the animal
has pain, enucleation of the affected eye almost invariably
Gonioscopy is performed once emergency therapy has been
results in increased playfulness and improvements in the patient's
implemented and the inflammation has been reduced. If the
demeanor. This observation leaves little doubt that chronic
angle is open, medical therapy may be slowly reduced in
glaucoma is a painful condition in the vast majority of animals.
accordance with control of the uveitis. The ability of topical
The goal of therapy for absolute glaucoma is to provide pain
dexamethasone 0.1% to increase IOP in normal dogs and dogs
relief and address any cosmetic concerms the owner may have.
with POAG is of uncertain importance in the treatment of dogs
Eyes with end-stage glaucoma are best treated by enucleation
with uveitis-induced glaucoma. In a clinical setting the relatively
(with or without an intraorbital prosthesis), evisceration with
small rise in IOP attributable to topical corticosteroids
is
intrascleral prosthesis, or a cyclodestructive procedure.
masked by the much more dramatic changes in IOP induced by
inflammation of the ciliary body and the compromise of the
Evisceration with Intrascleral Prosthesis
drainage angle (both of which may be returned to more normal
values by the use of topical corticosteroids). Therefore it seems 
Evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis is indicated if the
reasonable to use topical corticosteroids for the treatment of
owner desires to maintain a more cosmetically pleasing eye.
uveitis-induced glaucoma, although these agents should not be 
After a careful assessment of the eye (Box 12-8), the globe is
employed indiscriminately.
eviscerated via removal of the intermal contents through a limbal
 If peripheral anterior and posterior synechiae are present,
incision, leaving a scleral and comeal shell. After hemorrhage is
-nd an a ora m te nu sp assard p
controlled a silicone prosthesis is inserted (Figure 12-44). The
nosis for retaining vision is very poor. If the eye still has
enlarged globe shrinks to the size of the prosthesis over the next
vision and an open iridocorneal angle, laser iridotomy may
3 to 4 weeks. During this time the cornea may vascularize and
be attempted to create a new hole in the iris to allow aqueous
appear red. This appearance eventually resolves, and the cornea
to bypass the occluded pupil; however, the iris holes usually
assumes its final gray or black color. The extent
tof
seal closed with time. Laser iridotomy is much less effective in 
pigmentation is impossible to predict, and owners are so
eyes that also have peripheral anterior synechia and angle
advised before surgery. Prostheses may also be used after
closure because it does not resolve this additional impediment
 severe injury, when phthisis bulbi is beginning, to preserve a
to outflow at the level of the angle. Gonioimplantation may also
be attempted, but frequently this procedure fails because the
tube rapidly occludes with inflammatory debris and the sub-
 Box 12-8 I  Indications and contraindications for
conjunctival filtering bleb rapidly scars. A cyclodestructive
intraocular prosthesis insertion
procedure may also be attempted although it frequently
exacerbates the uveitis, possibly leading to even more synechia
Indications
and outflow impairment. If the eye is irreversibly blind the
clinician should consider enucleation (with histopathology to
 Chronic glaucoma ± buphthalmos
determine the cause of the uveitis), evisceration with an intra-
Prevention of phthisis bulbi
scleral prosthesis (again with histopathology; it should not be
 Blinding ocular trauma (may be used even after penetrating
performed if neoplastic or infectious causes of the uveitis
 comeal wounds)
are suspected), or, in carefully selected cases, a cyclodestructive
 Chronic, noninfectious uveitis 
procedure.
Contraindications
Glaucoma Secondary to Intraocular Neoplasia
Intraocular neoplasia
Panophthalmitis
Ulcerative keratitis
Melanoma of the iris or ciliary body is a relatively common
Senile degenerative keratopathy
cause of secondary glaucoma in dogs and a less common one
Degenerative corneal disorders
in other species. In most cases, enucleation, with or without an
Foci of bacterial infection (e.g., severe untreated dental
orbital prosthesis, is the treatment of choice. In very select
 disorders, discospondylitis, otitis extema)
cases iridocyclectomy (removal of a portion of the iris and
254
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Secondary glaucoma, most frequently due to chronic uveitis
or intraocular neoplasia, is approximately 19 times more com-
mon than primary glaucoma in cats. Inherited congenital POAG
has been described in Siamese cats, but acute PACG as seen in
dogs is rare to nonexistent in cats. The rise in IOP in the vast
majority of cats tends to be slow and insidious, and the con-
dition is usually unilateral. Many cats with glaucoma initially
B
present for another ocular disorder (chronic uveitis, iris color
change, intraocular mass). Another common presentation,
especially for those with aqueous humor misdirection syndrome
(see earlier description in this chapter), is anisocoria with slowly
progressing buphthalmos. The buphthalmos can be quite
extreme in some animals. Ocular pain also tends to not be as
cbvious as in dogs, perhaps because the rise in IOPis typically
not as abrupt or as high as in dogs, but there is no reason to
C
believe that the condition is not painful in cats like it is in other
D
species. Often the inciting cause is difficult to identify by the time
Figure 12-44. A, A fornix-basec conjunctival flap is prepared, anc the
sclera is incised parallel to the limbus. B, Ocular contents are removed by
the patient is first seen.
dlissection between the choroid and the inner scleral layers, leaving only
 Common causes of glaucoma in cats include feline aqueous
the corneoscleral shell. C, A silicone prosthesis 1 mm larger than the
humor misdirection syndrome, chronic low-level lymphocytic
lirmbal cliarmeter of the other, normal eye is inserted with a prosthesis 
 plasmacytic uveitis with the formation of preiridal fibrovascular
inserter. D, The sclera and conjunctiva are closed with interrupted or
simple continuous absorbable sutures.
membranes, and neoplasia such as diffuse iris melanoma and
uveal lymphoma. In one study Toxoplasma was implicated in
79%, feline corona virus in 27%, feline immunodeficiency
virus in 23%, and feline leukemia virus in 6%. The most com-
cosmetically acceptable eye. Prostheses have been successfully
 mon clinical signs are dilated pupil, lens luxation, buphthalmos,
 inserted into equine eyes with glaucoma previously unresponsive
exposure keratitis, and retinal degeneration. Cats with uveitis
to medications and cyclocryotherapy. Although this procedure
 and prominent lymphoid nodules in the iris and iris erythema
 is generally quite successful, complications include ocular pain
are considered to be at high risk for eventual development of
in the immediate postoperative period, ulcerative keratitis
glaucoma. Cats with positive Toxoplasma titers are more
(potentially with exposure or extrusion of the prosthesis), kerato-
effectively treated with a combination of clindamycin and
conjunctivitis sicca, infection, and recurrence of an unsuspected
topical corticosteroid than with either drug alone.
tumor. Because of the last possibility, all excised tissue should
 Medical therapy for glaucoma in cats is similar to that in the
be histologically examined.
 dog, although cats tolerate some glaucoma medications poorly
 and may respond differently to antiglaucoma drugs. For example,
Enucleation
 latanoprost and the other commercially available prcstaglandins
 do not lower IOP in cats, although they can induce profound
 Once an eye has been thoroughly evaluated and a diagnosis of
miosis. The topical CAI brinzolamide did not lower IOP in
absolute glaucoma with pain has been made, the owner may
normal cats when administered every 12 hours but may do so
decide to have the eye removed. An intraorbital prosthesis may
when given every 8 hours to cats with glaucoma. A related
 or may not be placed, depending on the owner's wishes. See
topical CAl, dorzolamide given every 8 hours, is effective in
Chapter 17 for the technique.
lowering IOP in glaucomatous cats. As in dogs, topical appli-
cation of dexamethasone or 1% prednisolone acetate has
All enucleated eyes should be examined by an experienced
increased IOP in cats, but the clinical significance of this find-
veterinary ophthalmic pathologist.
ing is unclear. Additionally, unilateral topical administration of
0.5% tropicamide can raise IOP an average of approximately
3.5 mm Hg in both the treated and untreated eyes, and in some
FELINE GLAUCOMA
 cats this increase may be as much as 17 to i8 mm Hg in the
treated and untreated eyes. These observations reinforce the
 The general principles of glaucoma therapy also apply to feline
concept that cats are anatomically and physiologically distinct 
glaucoma. In general, normal feline IOP tends to be greater
from dogs and that some therapies appropriate for the dog may
than that of the dog and to decline with age. One study found
not be transferable to the cat.
normal IOP for young cats with the Tono-Pen to be 20.2 ±
 Although surgical therapy for feline glaucoma is similar to
5.5 mm Hg with a range of 9 to 31 mm Hg, whereas the Tono-
that for dogs, cyclocryotherapy must be quite aggressive if
Pen yielded readings of 12.3 ± 4.0 mm Hg (range 4 to
used, and liquid nitrogen is recommended as the cryogen to
21 mm Hg) in cats 7 years or older. The exact incidence of
limit treatment failures. Cyclodestructive procedures are often
glaucoma in cats is unclear, although data from the Veterinary
unsuccessful in the long term in cats, perhaps because of the
Medical Data Base suggested that 1 in 367 cats presenting to a
nature of their glaucoma. Evisceration with insertion of an
University Teaching Hospital had glaucoma. In contrast, a
 intrascleral prosthesis may be performed, although the cosmetic
results with a black silicone ball are less satisfactory than that
found that 0.9% of cats 7 years or older had abnormally high
achieved with dogs because of the normally brightly colored
IOP on tonometric screening.
feline iris and vertically oriented slit pupil. Varying the color of 
THE GLAUCOMAS |
255
the sphere and tattooing a slit pupil onto the cormea can improve
able, but blind eye. One study suggested that an effective
 the postoperative appearance of the globe. Enucleation, with or
Nd:YAG laser protocol in horses with glaucoma is a power
without the placement of an intraorbital prosthesis, is a reasonable
setting of 11 W, duration of 0.4 second, applied 5 mm posterior
procedure in cats. There are some suggestions, however, that cats
to the limbus at 60 sites, resulting in a total energy dose of 264 J.
may reject an intraorbital sphere more frequently than dogs.
Additionally, equine glaucoma has been effectively treated
with an intrascleral prosthesis and enucleation (with or without 
EQUINE GLAUCOMA
an intraorbital prosthesis). Despite the best efforts of the
clinician, however, the long-term prognosis for retaining vision
Normal equine IOP is higher than a cat's or dog's, averaging
in a glaucomatous equine eye is poor.
approximately 23 mm Hg and ranging up to the low to mid 30s.
 Glaucoma is less commonly recognized in horses than in dogs
BIBLIOGRAPHY
or cats, perhaps because the uveoscleral pathway constitutes a
greater percentage of the equine outflow pathway. Although
Abrams KL (2001): Medical and surgical management of the glaucoma
primary glaucoma appears to occur in horses, the most com-
patient. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16:71.
Bentley E, et al. (2003): Use of high-resolution ulrasound as a diagnoshic
mon form is glaucoma secondary to chronic anterior uveitis or
tool in veterinary ophthalmology. I Am Vet Med Assoc 223:1617.
intraocular neoplasia. Appaloosas, horses with concurrent equine
Bentley E, et al.(1999): Combined cycloablation and gonioimplantation for
recurrent uveitis, and horses older than 15 years are at greater
treahment of glaucoma in dogs: 18 cases (1992-1998). J Am Vet Med
risk of glaucoma. Clinical signs of equine glaucoma include
Assoc 215:1469.
Bentley E, et al. (1996): Implantahion of fltering devices in dogs with
comeal striae (caused by rupture of Descemet's membrane),
 glaucoma: preliminary results in 13 eyes. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 6:243.
buphthalmos, decreased vision, lens luxation, loss of the
BirosDJ,et al.(2000): Development of glaucoma after cataract surgery in
pupillary light reflex, mild anterior uveitis, optic nerve atrophy,
dogs: 220 cases (1987-1998). I Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1780.
optic disc cupping, and elevated IOP. Because many horses
Bjerkas E,et al.(2002):Pectinate ligament dysplasia and narowing of the
with glaucoma also have anterior uveitis, the pupil is often 
ls g  u   pe t
spaniel. Vet Ophthalmol 5:49.
miotic or normal in size and is not dilated as is common in
Blocker T,van der Woerdt A (2001): The feline glaucomas: 82 cases
other species. A feature that complicates both the diagnosis and
(1995-1999). Vet Ophthalmol 4:81.
therapy of equine glaucoma is that the IOP fluctuates markedly,
 Brnkmann MC, et al. (1992): Neodymium: YAG laser trealment of iris bombe
and frequent measurements may be necessary to demonstrate
and pupillary block glaucoma. Proc Vet Comp Ophthalmol 2: 13.
the presence of glaucoma and the effects of treatment. The
Brooks DE (1999): Equine ophthalmology, in Gelatt KN (editor): Veterinary
reason for this fluctuation is unclear but it may involve
Brooks DE,et al. (1997): Vitreous body glutamate concentration in dogs with
compression of the globe by the orbicularis oculi orextraocular
glaucoma. Am J Vet Res 58:864.
muscles. Auriculopalpebral nerve block may be required to
Brooks DE,et al. (1995): Histomorphomety of optic nerves of nomal dogs
obtain accurate applanation tonometry in fractious horses, and
 sedatives may significantly decrease IOP.
Chavkin MI,et al. (1992): Seroepidemiologic and clinical observalions of
93 cases of uveitis in cats. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 2:29.
 The principles of medical and surgical therapy for glaucoma
Cook C, et al. (1997): Diode laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation for the
in other species apply to horses with glaucoma, although the
trealment of glaucoma in dogs: results of six and twelve months' follow-
response to antiglaucoma medications in horses may be dif-
ups. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 7:148.
Cullen CL (2004): Cullen frontal sinus valved glaucoma shunt: preliminary
ferent from that in dogs and cats. Studies of antiglaucoma drugs
 findings in dogs with primary glaucoma. Vet Ophthalmol 7:311.
in horses often yield conflicting results, suggesting that there
 o s se    a 
may be considerable interindividual variations in the respon-
cases presented at the Westem College of Veterinary Medicine from
siveness of this species to many antiglaucoma drugs. For
1992-1999. Can Vet I 41:470.
example, topical pilocarpine given alone can increase IOP in
Czederpiltz JM, et al. (2005): Putative aqueous humor misdirection syndrome
many, but not all, horses. The mechanism for this finding is
as a cause of glaucoma in cats: 32 cases (1997-2003). J Am Vet Assoc
227:1434.
unclear but may involve exacerbation of preexisting uveitis,
Davidson HJ, et al. (2002): Effect of topical ophthalmic latanoprost on
pupillary block, or a reduction in the uveoscleral outflow path-
intraocular pressure in normal horses. Vet Ther 3:72.
way. Atropine, which stabilizes the blood aqueous barrier and
Davidson MG, et al. (1991): Phacoemulsification and intaocular lens
may increase uveoscleral outflow, can reduce IOP in many
implantation: a study of surgical results in 182 dogs. Vet Comp
Ophthalmol 1:233.
normal horses and in horses with glaucoma secondary to chronic
Deehr AJ, Dubielzig RR (1998): A histopathological study of inidociliary
uveitis. Atropine can, however, also raise IOP in some horses. The
cysts and glaucoma in golden retrievers. Vet Ophthalmol I: 153.
 prostaglandin derivative latanoprost does not lower IOP in normal
 osn jooa   sis
horses (or does so only by 1 to 2mm Hg) and can be quite
inidocorneal angle to intraocular pressure in Samoyeds. Am I Vet Res 
irritating. Other studies have indicated that topical prostaglandins 
52:1875.
Ekesten B, Torang I (1995): Age-related changes in ocular distances in
exacerbate elevated IOP in horses with glaucoma. Only timolol or 
ormal eyes of Samoyeds.Am J Vet Res 56:127.
the topical CAIs seem to consistently lower IOP in horses.
Ekesten B,Torang I(1995):Heritability of the depthof the openingof the
Systemic CAls may be prohibitively expensive in horses, and
 ciliary cleft in Samoyeds. Am J Vet Res 56: I138.
their efficacy and safety has not been determined. Antiglaucoma
Gelatt KN, Brooks DE (1 999): The canine glaucomas, in Gelatt KN (editor):
therapy in the horse often involves a combination of antiglaucoma
Philadelphia.
and antinflammatory drugs. Unfortunately, the therapy of
Gelatt KN, Mackay EO (2004): Prevalence of the breed-related glaucomas in
primary equine glaucoma is largely empirical owing to our lack
pure-bred dogs in North America. Vet Ophthalmol 7:97.
 of understanding of the pathogenesis of the condition.
Gelatt KN, Mackay EO (2004): Secondary glaucomas in the dog in North
 America. Vet Ophthalmol 7:245.
A cyclodestructive procedure (cyclocryotherapy, laser
GelattKN,Mackay EO (2001): Changes in intraocular pressure associated
cyclophotocoagulation) may be used in equine eyes that have
'ssop snoonels u pe oza [eio pue pmeoziop (edo qm
 the potential for vision and in an attempt to maintain a comfort-
Vet Ophthalmol 4:61.
256
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Gelatt KN, Mackay EO (2001): Effects of different dose schedules of
Momis RA, Dubielzig RR (2005): Light-microscopy evaluation of zonular
Jatanoprost on intraocular pressure and pupil size in glaucomatous beagles.
Vet Ophthalmol 4:283.
Vet Ophthalmol 8:81.
Gelatt KN, Mackay EO (1998): The ocular hypertensive effects of topical
Mughanmam AJ,et al.(1999): Effect of topical atropine on intraocular pressure
0.1% dexamethasone in beagles with inheried glaucoma. I Ocul
 and pupil diameter in the normal horse eye. Vet Ophthalmol 2:213.
Pharmacol Ther 14:57.
Nasisse MP, et al. (1990): Treatment of glaucoma by use of transscleral
Gelatt-Nicholson KJ, et al. (1999 ): Comparative Doppler imaging of the
neodymium:ythium aluminum garnet laser cyclocoagulation in dogs.
ophthalmic vasculature in nommal beagles and beagles with inherited
J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:350.
glaucoma. Vet Ophthalmol 2:97
NasisseMP, GloverTL (1997): Surgery for lens instabilityVet CnNoh
Glover TL,et al. (1995): The intracapsular extaction of displaced lenses in
Am Small Anim Pract 27:1175.
dogs: a retrospecive study of 57 cases (1984-1990). J Am Anim Hosp
O'Reilly A, et al. (2003): The use of transscleral cyclophotocoagulation with
Assoc 31:77.
a diode laser for the treatment of glaucoma occuring post intracapsular
Gorig C, et al. (2006): Comparison of the use of new handheld tonometers
extraction of displaced lenses: a Tetrospeclive study of 15 dogs
(1995-2000). Vet Ophthalmol 6: 113.
Gum GG, et al. (1993): Effect of topically applied demecarium bromide and
Pauli AM, et al. (2006): Effects of the application of neck pressure by a collar
echothiophate iodide on intraocular pressure and pupil size in beagles with
or harness on intraocular pressure in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp 42:207.
nomotensive eyes and beagles with glaucoma. Am I Vet Res 54:287.
Pickett JP,et al. (1993): Equine glaucoma: a relrospective study of Il cases.
Gum GG, et al. (1992): Effect of hyaluronidase on aqueous outflow resistance in 
Vet Med 88:756.
mormotensive and glaucomatous eyes of dogs. Am J Vet Res S3:767.
Plummer CE, et al.(2006): Comparison of the effects of topical
Gwin RM, et al. (1978): Effcts of topical L-epinephrine and dipivalyl
administrabion of a fixed combinabion of dorzolamide-bimolol to
epinephrine on intraoculat pressure and pupil size in the normotensive and
monotherapy with timolol or dorzolamide on IOP, pupil size, and heart rate
glaucomatous beagle. Am J Vet Res 39:83.
in glaucomatous dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 9:245.
Gwin RM, et al. (1977): The effect of topical pilocarpine on intraocular
Read RA, et al. (1998): Pectinate ligament dysplasia (PLD) and glaucoma in
pressure on pupil size in nommotensive and glaucomatous beagles. Invest
flat coated retievers. I: objectives, technique and results of a PLD survey.
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 16:1143.
Vet Ophthalmol 1:85.
Hamor RE,et al.(1994): Intraocular silicone prostheses in dogs: a review of
Reilly CM, et al. (2005): Canine goniodysgenesis-Telated glaucoma: a
the literature and 50 new cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:66.
morphologic review of 100 cases looking at inflammation and pigment
Hampson EC, et al. (2002): Primary glaucoma in Burmese cats. Aust Vet J
dispersion.Vet Ophthalmol 8:253.
80:672.
Ridgway MD, Bnghtman AH (1989): Feline glaucoma: a retrospective study
Hering IP, et al.(2000): Effect of topical 1% atropine sulfate on intraocular
 of 29 clinical cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:485.
pressure in nommal horses. Vet Ophthalmol 3:139.
Riggs C, Whitely RD (1990): Two cases of intraocular silicone prostheses in
Kato K, et al. (2006): Possble association of glaucoma with pectinate
eyes with traumatic corneal Jacerations. I Vet Med Assoc I196:617.
ligament dysplasia and narrowing of the inidocorneal angle in Shiba Inu
Roberts SM, et al. (1984): Cyclocryotherapy. Part I: evaluation of a liquid
16 o  dr u s
nirogen system. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:823.
Knollinger AM, et al. (2005): An evaluation of a rebound tonometer for
Roberts SM, et al. (1984): Cyclocryotherapy. Part I: clinical comparison of
measuring intraocular pressure in dogs and horses. I Am Vet Med Assoc
liquid nirogen and nitrous oxide cryotherapy on glaucomatous eyes.
227:244.
J Am Anmim Hosp Assoc 20:828.
Kroll MM, et al. (2001): Intraocular pressure measurements obtained as part
Rosenberg LF, et al. (1996): Cyclocryotherapy and noncontact Nd:YAG laseT
cyclophotocoagulation in cats. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 37:2029.
age or older. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1406.
Samuelson D, et al. (1989): Morphologic features of the aqueous humot
  o       
drainage pathways in horses. Am I Vet Res 50:720.
phacoemulsifcabion for removal of cataracts in dogs: 22 cases
Samuelson DA, et al. (1983): Orthogtade rapid axoplasmic transport and
(1987-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:70.
ultastructural changes of the optic nerve part I: beagles with primary
Martin CL (1975): Scanming electron microscopic examination of selected
open angle glaucoma. Glaucoma 5:174.
canine inidocomeal angle anomalies. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc Il:300.
Sapienza JS, et al. (2000): Golden reliever uveitis: 75 cases (1994-1999). Vet
Martin CL(1969): Gonmioscopy and anatomical correlations of the drainage
Ophthalmol 3:241.
angle of the dog. J Small Anim Pract 10:171.
Sapienza JS, van der Woerdt A (2005): Combined tanssc leral diode laser
Martin CL, Wyman M (1978): Primary glaucoma in the dog. Vet Clin North
cyclophotocoagulation and Ahmed gonioimplantation in dogs with primary
Am 8:257.
Martin CL, Wyman M (1968): Glaucoma in the basset hound. Am J Vet Res
29:379.
on primary glaucoma in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188: 1028.
Mellnay TR, et al. (2004): Evaluation of glutamate loss from damaged retinal
 cells in dogs with primary glaucoma. Am JI Vet Res 65:776.
dogs: 139 cases (1992-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:105.
McLaughlin SA,et al.(1995): Intraocular silicone prosthesis implantationn
Smith Pl, et al.(1986): Unconventional aqueous humor outflow of
eyes of dogs and a cat with intraocular neoplasia: 9 cases. I Vet Med
microspheres perfused into the equine eye. Am J Vet Res 47:2445.
Assoc 207:1441.
Studer ME, et al. (2000): Effects of 0.005% latanoprost solution on
Meek LA (1988): Intraocular silicone prosthesis in a horse. I Am Vet Med 
 s     s e u ad e
Assoc 193:343.
Stuhr CM, et al. (1998): The effects of intracameral carbachol on
Miller PE, et al. (2000): The effcacy of topical prophylachic antiglaucoma
sop u ieins iei laje ssu ainssad reoe aealood
therapy in primary closed angle glaucoma in dogs: a multicenter clinical
J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1 885.
tmial. J Am Anim Hosp 36:431.
Takiyama N, et al. (2006): The effects of a bmolol maleate gel-fomming
Miller PE,etal.(1997):Mechanisms of acute intraocular pressureincteases
 solution on nommotensive beagle dogs. J Vet Med Sci 68:63 1.
 phacoemulsificabion lens extrachion in dogs. Am J Vet Res 58:l159.
Miler PEet al.(o)Evalationof twappananmeerhr.
device in dogs. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 4:77.
Am J Vet Res 51:935.
Miller PE, Picket JP (1992): Comparison of the human and canine Schigtz
glaucoma in the dog. Vet Ophthalmol 6:273.
tonometry conversion tables in clinically normal cats. I Am Vet Med
van der Linde-Sipman JS (1987): Dysplasia of the pectinate ligament and
Assoc 201:1017.
primary glaucoma in the Bouvier des Flandres dog.Vet Pathol 24:201.
Miller PE, Pickett JP (1992): Comparison of the human and canine Schigtz
van der Woerdt A, et al. (1998): Nommal variation in, and effect of 2%
tonometry conversion tables in clinically normal dogs. I Am Vet Med
pilocapine on, intraocular pressure and pupil size in female horses.
Assoc 201:1021.
Am J Vet Res 59:1459.
Miller TL, et al. (200l): Description of ciliary body anatomy and
Whigham HM, et al.(1999): Treament of equine glaucoma by transc leral
identific abion of sites for ranssc leral cyclophotoc oagulation in the equine
neodymium: ytrium aluminum garnet laser cyclophotoc oagulabion: a
eye. Vet Ophthalmol 4:183.
Tetospective study of 23 eyes of 16 horses. Vet Ophthalmol 2:243.
Miller TR, et al. (1995): Equine glaucoma: clinical findings and response to
WhitelyD,etal.(1985):Imlantainf inaoclar prosthesesindog.
 teatment in 14 horses. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 5: 170.
Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet 7:802.
The GLAuCOMAs |
257
Whiteman AL, et al. (2002): Morphologic features of degeneration and cell
Willis AM, et al. (2001): Effects of topical administralion of 0.005%
deathin theneurosensoryrebnandogs with primary angle-closute
latanoprost solution on eyes of clinic ally nommal horses. Am J Vet Res
glaucoma. Am J Vet Res 63:257.
62:1945.
Wilcock BP, et al. (1991): Glaucoma in horses. Vet Pathol 28:74.
Wood JL, et al. (1998): Pectinate ligament dysplasia and glaucoma in flat 
coated relrievers. I: assessment of prevalence and heritability.
Pract 20:381.
Vet Ophthalmol 1:91.
Willis AM, et al. (2002): Advances in topical glaucoma therapy.
Vet Ophthalmol 5:9.
Chapter
ENS
Ron Ofri
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
CATARACT
LENS LUXATION
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
 30% to 35% of the eye's refractive power and is used for fine
 adjustment for objects at different distances.
 Development of the lens is described in Chapter 2. The lens is a
 transparent, avascular, biconvex body with an anterior surface that
Lens Components
is flatter or less curved than the posterior surface (Figure 13-1).
Capsule
The centers of the surfaces are called the anterior and posterior
poles. The rounded circumference is the equator, which has
The capsule is a transparent, elastic envelope surrounding the
 numerous irregularities where zonular fibers attach. Its anterior
lens (Figure 13-6). It provides insertion for zonular fbers that
aspect is in contact with the posterior surface of the iris and fills
 suspend the lens in the eye. In primates, the capsule regulates
the pupil. Its posterior aspect is in contact with the vitreous
 lens shape through its elasticity. The capsule is impermeable to
Or, more specifically, a depression in the vitreous called the
large molecules (e.g., albumin, globulin) but allows water and
hyaloid (patellar) fossa.
electrolytes to pass. The anterior lens capsule, which is associ-
The lens consists of the capsule, anterior epithelium, and
ated with the underlying epithelium, is much thicker than the
lens fibers. It is divided into two general regions, the cortex
 posterior lens capsule, which lost its underlying epithelium
(outer areas near the capsule) and the nucleus (central area)
during embryonic development (see also Figure 13-2).
(Figure 13-2). As the lens grows throughout life, layers of
fibers are produced in the equatorial area and are laid down on
Lens Epithelium
top of the former layers, forcing older fibers toward the lens
center in a process resembling the formation of rings in tree
 Cuboidal epithelial cells lie beneath the anterior capsule (see
trunks. These successive layers are visible clinically with
 Figure 13-6). Toward the equator, the cells proliferate (through
biomicroscopy. They are called the adult, fetal, and embryonal
mitosis), become more columnar, and elongate into new lens
nuclei, respectively (Figure 13-3).
fibers (see Figure 13-2). Because of mitotic activity in this area,
The lens is supported at the equator by the lens zonules, or
these cells are susceptible to toxic and pathologic influences,
suspensory ligaments—collagenous fibers that attach to the
which may become apparent as equatorial opacities. The lens
 processes of the ciliary body and suspend the lens in the middle
 epithelium is important in transport of cations through the lens
of the pupil (Figure 13-4). Alterations of tension in these fibers 
capsule. The posterior lens epithelium, which transforms into
alter the refractive (optical) power of the lens. To view nearby
lens fibers of the embryonic lens nucleus, is not seen in new-
objects, the animal accommodates through contraction of the 
borns and adults.
ciliary body muscles, mediated by parasympathetic stimulation.
 In primates and birds, this contraction leads to an increase in the
Lens Fibers
curvature of the lens (i.e., it becomes more spheroid), thus
increasing its refractive power (Figure 13-5). In carmivores, the
 Lens fibers make up the substance of the lens and are arranged
 contraction of the ciliary muscle results in forward movement 
in interdigitating layers (Figure 13-7). These fbers stretch
of the lens in the eye, allowing the animal to accommodate for 
from the equatorial region toward the anterior and posterior
nearby objects. To view distant objects, sympathetic stimu-
 poles of the lens. However, they do not quite reach the poles
 lation causes the animal to disaccommodate by relaxing its
but instead meet fibers from the opposite equator and form a
 ciliary muscle. In primates and birds the relaxation results in a
Y-shaped suture patterm with them (Figure 13-8). The suture
flatter lens with reduced refractive power. In carnivores it
 pattern may become visible as a prominent upright (anterior)
results in posterior movement of the lens in the eye. In general,
or inverted (posterior) Y if the lens becomes cataractous
the accommodative ability of birds and primates is superior to
(see Figures 13-1 and 13-3). Because new lens fibers are
that of carnivores; most herbivores, reptiles, and rodents possess
formed throughout life, the older fibers in the (central) lens
virtually no accommodative capabilities. However, it is worth
 nucleus are denser and less transparent than the younger fbers
 remembering in this context that the cormea is the most important 
laid down around them in the cortex. This difference between
 refracting surface in the eye, accounting for the majority of the
nucleus and cortex becomes more pronounced as the animal
 optical power (because light undergoes significant refraction as
ages and may result in the formation of nuclear sclerosis
it passes from air into the cornea). The lens accounts only for
(see later).
258
Lens I
259
Equator
Anterior
Equator
pole
Posterior
/pole
A
B
Figure 13-1. Canine lens. A, Anterior view of the upright anterior Y suture
anc equatorial margin. B, Lateral view of the poles anc equator. Note the
greater curvature of the posterior surface.
Anterior
Anterior capsule
epithelium
Equato
Cortex
Adult
Figure 13-3. Optical section of normal aclult lens. I, Anterior capsule;
Fetal
Embryonal
 nucleus 
2, anterior line of disjunction (anterior epithelium); 3, anterior surface of
nucleus
aclult nucleus;4,anterior surface of fetalnucleus;5,anterior （upright)
nucleus
Y suture; 6, inner layer of posterior half of fetal nucleus, containing
posterior (inverted) Y suture; 7, posterior surface of fetal nucleus; 8,
Regionof
posterior surface of acult nucleus; 9, posterior line of disjunction; 10,
transformation
posterior capsule. (From Remington LA [2005l: Clinical Anatomy of the
of epithelial
Visual System, 2nd ed. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. Louis.)
cells into
lens fibers
Posterior capsule
Figure 13-2. The aclult lens, showing the nuclear zones, cortex, anterior
epithelium, and capsule. Epithelial cells can be seen uncergoing
transformation into lens fibers at the equatorial region. The varying thickness
of the lens capsule in various zones is also shown. (Moclified from Hogan M].
 et al. [1971l: Histology of the Human Eye. Sauncers, Philaclelphia.)
Metabolism and Composition
Because the lens is avascular, its metabolic needs are met by
the aqueous humor. Therefore lens metabolism is precarious 
and depends on constant composition of the aqueous.
lojaue woij su nsar) uojisoduos snoanbe ui sasueqins!o
uveitis) affect lens metabolism and transparency.
 Metabolism of glucose provides most of the energy require-
ments of the lens. Glucose enters from the aqueous by both
diffusion and assisted transport. Most of the glucose is broken
down anaerobically to lactic acid via the hexokinase (pentose
Figure 134. Scanning electron micrograph of anterior zonular insertion
phosphate) pathway, although some aerobic glycolysis occurs via
after rermoval of cornea anc iris. (From Streeton BW [1982l, in Jakobiec
the citric acid cycle. Elevation in glucose levels (in diabetic
FA [edlitorl: Ocular Anatormy, Embryology, and Teratology. Harper & Row.
patients) inhibits the hexokinase enzyme, and the glucose is
Philadelphia.}
diverted into the sorbitol shunt, where it is converted by aldose 
reductase into sorbitol (Figure 13-9).
The lens is high in protein (35%) and water (65%) and low
proteins drops with age, and a similar process occurs when the
in minerals. The proteins are divided into soluble proteins, or
lens becomes cataractous, as the proportion of insoluble proteins
crystallins, and insoluble, or albuminoid, proteins. The former
 rises. During cataract formation, the lens proteins break into poly-
constitute approximately 85% of the lens protein content, but
 peptides and amino acids that diffuse through the lens capsule into
their proportion varies with species, location within the lens,
the anterior and posterior chambers. Because these molecules
 age, and, most significantly, disease. The proportion of soluble
 are usually not recognized by the eye's immune system, the
260
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Unaccommodation
Ball-and-
socket
intercellular
process
6m
(20 t)
Fiber cells
Ball-and-
socket
intercellular
Accommodation
processes
Pyknotic
nudeus
of fiber
cell
Figure 13-7. Fiber cells of the lens cortex with their typical interdigitating
pattern (transmission electron microscope; x600o). (From Krause W).
   o yo xal a llal H si
Baltirmore.)
the older cells become more tightly packed, the nucleus
becomes denser and harder. In dogs, after about 6 years of age
this greater nuclear density becomes visible as a grayish blue
Figure 13-5. The accommodative power of the lens. At rest the
haze known as nuclear sclerosis (Figure 13-10). This haze is
unaccomodated  eye  focuses  on  distant  objects  but needs  to
probably associated with increased insoluble proteins and
accommoclate to focus on near objects. (From Yanoff M, Duker JS [2004|:
decreased soluble crystallins (y-crystallin) in the lens nucleus.
Ophthalmology, 2nc ed. Mosby, St. Louis.)
Advanced nuclear sclerosis may appear similar to cataract, and
 in fact, the two are frequently confused by owners and practi-
tioners. However, use of mydriatics and retroillumination
 (illumination of the lens by reflection of strong light from the
 tapetum) can help in differentiating between the two entities. The
retroillumination will highlight the cataractous opacities, easily
Lens fibers
 distinguishing them from the transparent nuclear sclerosis. In
most animals, except for the most severe cases, the effect of
nuclear sclerosis on vision is minimal, and the fundus can be
readily visualized.
Anterior lens epithelium
Lens capsule
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
Congenital anomalies of the lens are rarely seen in clinical
 practice (congenital cataract is discussed later). They include
Figure 13-6. light micrograph showing lens capsule, anterior lens
the following:
epithelium, and lens fibers of the cortex. (From Remington LA [2005|:
Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System,2nc ecl.Butterworth-Heinemann,
St. Louis.)
·Aphakia: Absence of lens
· Microphakia: Small lens, usually associated with other
ocular malformations
breakdown and diffusion of cataractous lens protein usually trigger
·Spherophakia: Spherical lens
an inflammatory reaction known as lens-induced uveitis (LIU).
· Lenticonus: Anterior or posterior protrusion of the lens
capsule at the pole. Posterior lenticonus may occur with
Nuclear Sclerosis
 persistent hyaloid artery and persistent hyperplastic primary
vitreous. These disorders are discussed in detail in Chapter 14.
 Throughout life, new lens cells are produced at the equator, forcing
Coloboma: Notching of the lens equator, associated with
older cells toward the nucleus (see Figures 13-2 and 13-3). As
similar defects in the ciliary body and zonules 
Lens I
261
Molecular and Cellular Pathogenesis of Cataracts
Lens biochemistry is complex, as are the many different
causes of cataract. With the exception of diabetic, galactosemic,
and experimental cataracts, the exact biochemical dis-
orders responsible for the formation of cataracts in domestic
 animals are imperfectly understood. However, in general it may
be stated that noxious influences affecting any of the following
lens functions may result in opacity:
· Lens nutrition
· Energy metabolism
· Protein metabolism
·Osmotic balance
changes in lens protein contents, metabolic pumps, ionic
concentrations, and antioxidant activity. The proportion of non-
soluble (albuminoid) proteins in the lens increases at the expense
of the soluble (crystallin) protein fraction. Epithelial Nat/K+
adenosine triphosphate pump activity decreases, resulting in a shift
in the ionic balance within the lens, and antioxidant activity in
the lens likewise diminishes. At the same time, proteolytic
enzyme activity increases in the lens, causing breakdown of
 cell membranes and degradation of lens protein. All of these
events amplify and cascade as the cataract progresses, causing
visible changes in the lens. These changes are caused by
morphologic changes in the lens capsule, epithelium, and fibers 
that accompany the molecular events. The end result is loss of
transparency due to lens fbers rupture, cell death, and water-cleft
formation. The clinical picture is determined by the nature and
Figure 13-8. Embryonal anc aclult lens showing sutures and arrangement
position of these opacities. They seldom appear simultaneously
of lens cells. A, The ermbryonal nucleus. The anterior Y suture is at a, and
throughout the whole lens cortex. Sometimes they remain
the posterior at b.The lens cells are widle, shacled bands.Cells attaching
stationary for a long time and interfere little with vision. At other
to tips of Y sutures at one pole of the lens attach to the fork of the Y at the
opposite pole. B, Adult lens cortex. The anterior and posterior
 times, when they are associated with considerable imbibition of
organization of the sutures is more cormplex. Lens cells arising from the
fluid into the cortex, complete opacification may be rapid.
tip of a branch of the suture insert farther anteriorly or posteriorly into a
 Degeneration of all the cortical cells then may occur with rapid
fork at the posterior pole. This arrangement conserves the shape of the
 liquefaction of the fibers.
lens. This clrawing shows the suture lying in a single plane for pictorial
al oy umop snaonu pue xajon au ysnoun spuaxa i ing 'suosean
Y sutures in the embryonal nucleus. The exact shape of the aclult sutures
Classification
varies in comestic species, but in young animals especially, the Y shape
of the embryonal nucleus predominates and must be distinguished 
Cataract refers to a group of lens disorders of varying age
clinically from pathologic lens opacities (cataract). (Mocified from Hogan
of onset, speed and extent of progression, appearance, and
M], et al. [1971l: Histology of the Hurman Eye. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.] 
 etiology. Because of the variable nature and appearance of
cataracts, numerous methods of classification are commonly
used (Table 13-1).
CAIARACT
Table 13-1 | Summary of Cataract Classification
The term cataract comprises a common group of ocular dis-
orders manifested as loss of transparency of the lens or its
FEATURE
 SUBCLASSIFICATION OF TERMS
capsule. The opacities may be of varying sizes, shapes, location
 Stage of development 
Incipient, immature, mature, hypermature,
within the lens, etiology, age of onset, and rate of progression.
(maturity)
 morgagnian
 Position within the lens Anterior capsular, anterior subcapsular,
A recent large-scale retrospective study covering 40 years
cortical, equatorial, nuclear, posterior
and 230,000 dogs has shown that the prevalence of canine
subcapsular, posterior capsular
cataracts in North America has slowly been increasing and is
Age of development 
Congenital, developmental, juvenile,
reportedly 2.42% in the last decade. The increased prevalence
 senile, acquired
Etiology or
 Primary: inherited 
 is attributed to improved training and diagnostic techniques in
 pathogenesis
 Secondary: traumatic, intraocular
veterinary ophthalmology and to the increased popularity of
disease (uveitis, infection), nutritional,
purebred dogs during the twentieth century. The overall
radliation, diabetic, toxic, congenital
abnormalities, senile
prevalence of cataracts in mixed breed dogs, which presumably
Consistency
Fluid, soft, hard 
are not affected by hereditary cataracts, is 1.61%.
262
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
5%
Glucose
5%
Sorbitol <
Gluconic acid
Aldose reductase 
Polyol dehydrogenase 
 Sorbitol
Hexokinase
90%
pathway
Glucose-6-phosphate
10%
Fructose
6-phosphogluconate
 Pentose phosphate
Phospho-
pathway
Glycolysis
Ribulose-5-phosphate
fructokinase
80%
lyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
Glycercaldehyde-
3phosphate
cehydlrogenase
Tricarboxylic
Pyruvate kinase
acid cycle
Lactate
cehydrogenase
 Pyruvate
 Acetyl CoA
3%
Figure 13-9. Overview of the major pathways of glucose metabolism in the lens. Percentages represent the
estirmated amounts of glucose usecl in the clifferent pathways. (From Yanoff M, Duker JS [2004]: Ophthalmology.
2nc edl. Mosby, St louis.
Cataracts may be classified according to cause. In many
 Cataracts may also be classified according to the location of 
 canine breeds, inheritance is the most common cause of cataracts.
the initial opacity (e.g., nuclear, cortical, anterior/posterior sub-
Additional causes are metabolic, traumatic, toxic, and develop-
capsular). Many inherited canine cataracts are characterized by
 mental disorders of the eye. Cataracts also may be caused by
 a typical initial location (see later), and therefore an opacity in
nutritional deficiencies or may be secondary to other ocular
a characteristic location in the lens of a susceptible breed
diseases. Causes of cataracts are discussed in detail in a later
should be suspected to be hereditary. Metabolic cataracts may
section.
 also be classified according to typical location, with the vacuoles
that characterize diabetic cataracts initially appearing in the
equatorial cortex. Cataracts may also be classified according to
age of onset. Some cataracts, usually developmental, toxic, or
inherited, may be congenital. Others may appear in juvenile,
adult, or elderly patients. Once again, in many dog breeds
inherited cataracts are characterized by a typical age of onset
(see later).
 However, in many ways, the most relevant method of classify-
ing cataracts is according to their stage of development (matu-
ration), which determines the extent of visual deficits, the onset
 of lens-induced uveitis, and the time of surgical intervention.
Stages of Cataract Development
· Incipient (Figure 13-11): There is early, focal opacity with
sight unaffected.
Immature (Figure 13-12): The opacity is more extensive,
and most of the lens is involved in the pathologic process.
The transparency of the lens is reduced but not totally lost.
Therefore the tapetal reflection is still visible, although the
sual asuap e si azy ag aui sop e ui sisoalns eaonn i-h an
fundus may be partially obscured ophthalmoscopically.
nucleus, containing lens fibers that have been pushed anc compactec at
the lens center throughout life. Although seemingly clense, the nucleus is
Vision is affected (just as it is affected by a dirty car
usually transparent, and it rarely affects vision. (Courtesy University of
windshield or by unclean glasses), but the animal is still 
Missouri Veterinary Ophthalmology Case Photo Collection.)
visual.
Lens I
263
Figure 13-13. A mature cataract. The lens is totally opaque, and no
funcus reflection can be seen.his eye is functionallyblind, althoughit is
 possible to elicit a pupillary light reaction.
Figure 13-11. lncipient cataract. A focal white opacity can be seen in the
Center (to the right of the flash reflection), against the recclish reflection of
the tapetum.
Figure 13-14. A hypermature cataract. Note that most of the cortex has
 Figure 13-12. lmmature cataract. Though most of the lens is involved, it is
resorbed, except for a few scattered rermnants. Only a nuclear cataract
still mostlytransparentand theanmal stillhasisionNotethevacuoles
rermains.
in the periphery, which inclicate that this cataract is seconclary to cliabetes.
These vacuoles will not be seen unless the pupil is dlilatedl.
liquefied (Morgagnian cataract). As the lens shrinks, the
anterior chamber deepens. Small glistening particles may be
· Mature (Figure 13-13): The lens is totally opaque, and
 present from degraded lens fibers.
therefore the eye is functionally blind. There is no tapetal
reflection, and the fundus can no longer be examined
It should be noted that in young dogs the resorption can be
ophthalmoscopically.
extensive enough to involve most (or all) of the cataractous
·Hypermature (Figure 13-14): Some mature cataracts
lens, thus allowing the animal to regain vision. Once again,
 progress to hypermaturity, whereby they begin to liquefy
however, the resulting secondary inflammation must be treated
owing to proteolysis (lens resorption). This process usually
aggressively. Some lens resorption also occurs in elderly dogs
begins in the cortex and spreads to the nucleus at later
affected by mature cataracts. However, in these patients its extent
stages as disintegration of the cortex proceeds much more
is limited. The resorption will trigger LIU but will rarely lead
rapidly than autolysis of the nucleus. In advanced stages of
to regaining of vision.
resorption, the nuclear remains may be freely movable in 
the milky cortical fluid in which they are suspended. The
Lens-Indvced Uveitis
degraded lens proteins leak through the lens capsule into
the anterior chamber. This results in reduction in the
LIU is an inflammation of the eye caused by a reaction to the
volume of the lens, imparting a characteristic wrinkled
 presence of lens antigens in the aqueous humor. The antigens
appearance to the capsule. The nucleus may remain with a
usually leak from the lens into the anterior chamber following
shrunken capsule around it, after the cortex has escaped,
the degradation of lens protein in cataracts, thus causing
 and may sink to the bottom of a lens whose cortex has
phacolytic uveitis. The degradation and resulting LIU are
264
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
limited in mature cataracts and more extensive in hypermature
 Careful examination of young animals with inherited cataracts
cataracts. Phacolytic uveitis is a humoral and cell-mediated
 often demonstrates early, minute changes, but behavioral signs of
immune reaction of the uvea to the released lens protein. The
visual impairment may not become evident until much later.
 inflammation is a result of the fact that lens proteins are separated
Hereditary cataracts can be either recessive or dominant
from the immune system before birth and are regarded as
 genetic traits. However, determining the genetics ofa particular
foreign. These antigens—especially the α-crystallins——are organ
 cataract in one breed does not exclude another genetic factor
specific rather than species specific and cross species lines.
from causing a different type of cataract in the same breed. For
 Reaction to their presence is less severe in younger animals. A
example, there is evidence that both dominant and recessive
more severe form of granulomatous LIU may occur in older
 cataracts are present in the golden retriever.
 dogs with hypermature cataracts.
It is likely that the list in Table 13-2 is by no means final. On
 the basis of a very high cataract incidence and the same criteria
Clinical signs of uveitis include photophobia, blepharospasm,
(typical age, location, and progression), it is likely that cataracts
cormeal edema, ciliary injection, aqueous flare (reduced trans-
 are inherited in many additional canine breeds that have a cataract
parency of aqueous humor due to leakage of inflammatory
 prevalence greater than 1.61%, including numerous terriers,
cells and mediators to the anterior chamber), miosis, a dark
 spaniels, sheepdogs, and retrievers (see the Appendix).
iris, and hypotony (reduced intraocular pressure [IOP]).
Although a detailed discussion of the characteristic patho-
genesis of cataracts in each breed is beyond the scope of this
 This inflammation must be treated medically (see Chapter
book, their early recognition has significant implications for
11) because it may gravely affect the prognosis of cataract
 prognosis and prevention. If a clinician recognizes a lenticular
surgery. Furthermore, the inflammation may cause secondary
opacity in a characteristic location in a purebred dog of the
complications, including glaucoma and posterior synechia.
right age, it may be assumed that the cataract is inherited in
LIU may also occur after traumatic rupture of the lens capsule
 origin. Client education about cataract progression in this
with subsequent exposure of lens protein to the aqueous humor.
breed, as well as recommendations concerning neutering,
This inflammation is known as phacoclastic uveitis. The differ-
should be provided. Such counseling is not required if there is
ence between phacolytic uveitis and phacoclastic uveitis has
evidence that the cataract is secondary to some nonhereditary
been proposed to be that in phacolytic uveitis (via leakage), only
cause.
 recrystallized lens proteins are presented to the immune system;
in phacoclastic uveitis (with capsule rupture), intact lens 
Congenital Cataracts
antigens including membrane-associated antigens are released
and are able to interact with Class II major histocompatibility
 Congenital cataracts begin during fetal life, are present at birth,
T cells and macrophages, resulting in a cell-mediated or delayed-
and may be stationary or progressive. They may be inherited,
-au pun anissu Aq paunsns uonon Anisuasiadq ada
secondary to other ocular developmental abnormality, or the 
 term antigen release.
 result of maternal influences.
Not all congenital cataracts are inherited, and in fact, the
Causes of Cataracts
majority are not genetic. It is important to breeders to deter-
 mine whether genetic factors are involved. A thorough history
Hereditary Cataracts
 is needed to better determine inheritance.
In many pure breed dogs, inheritance is probably the most
 When questioning the breeder, the clinician should ask the
common cause of cataracts. The large-scale study cited earlier
following questions:
than the “baseline" prevalence of 1.61% reported in mixed
 1. Did the same dogs mate previously?
breed dogs. Seven breeds, including the toy and miniature
2.
Were previous litters normal?
poodle, had a cataract prevalence greater than 10%. Obviously,
 3. How many of the litter were affected?
any breed in which the prevalence of a disease is higher than
4. What was the survival rate of the litter?
that of the general population should be suspected of being
 5. Were the parents normal?
genetically susceptible to the disease. However, just as with any
6. Have cataracts been diagnosed in the bloodline?
other disease, the inheritance of cataracts can be proven
7.
Was the dam ill during pregnancy?
conclusively only through identification of a responsible gene,
8. What was the dam's diet?
 or by rigorous inheritance testing, including repeat breedings
 9. Was the dam given drugs during pregnancy?
and cross-matings, over several generations. Such testing has
10. Was the dam exposed to chemicals or toxins?
demonstrated the inheritance of cataracts in several equine and
bovine breeds and in approximately 20 canine breeds,
A thorough ocular and physical examination should be per-
including the Afghan hound, American cocker spaniel, bichon 
formed. If a genetic cause cannot be eliminated, repeat breeding
frise, Boston terrier, Chesapeake Bay retriever, German
 of the parents may be necessary to determine whether a genetic
shepherd, golden retriever, Labrador retriever, miniature
 influence is involved.
schnauzer, Old English sheepdog, toy and miniature poodl,
 Congenital cataracts are observed secondary to, or associated
Sealyham terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, and wirehaired fox
 with, other ocular developmental abnormalities, such as the
terrier (Table 13-2). Hereditary (and acquired) cataracts are
following:
very rare in cats.
 In each of these 20 breeds the cataract is characterized by a
· Persistent pupillary membrane
typical age of appearance, initial opacity location within the 
· Persistent hyaloid artery and persistent hyperplastic primary
lens, and rate of progression (or lack thereof) (see Table 13-2).
vitreous
Lens I
265
Table 13-2 | Inherited Cataract Syndromes*
 SPECIES AND BREED
INHERITANCE
AGE OF ONSET
INITIAL 1OCATION
DOG
Afghan hound
Autosomal recessive
6-12 mos
 Equatorial/posterior cortex
 American cocker spaniel
Autosomal recessive/polygenic
6 mos
Anterior/posterior cortex
 Bichon frise
Autosomal recessive
2 yrs
Anterior/posterior cortex
 Boston terrier
Autosomal recessive
Congenital
Nuclear/posterior sutures
3-4 yrs
 Equator, anterior cortex
 Chesapeake Bay retriever
 Incomplete cominant 
6 mos-6 yrs
Cortex/nuclear
English cocker spaniel
Congenital
Bilateral anterior capsular
Entlebucher mountain dog
Autosomal recessive
1-2 yrs
Posterior cortex
German shepherd 
 Incomplete cominant 
8 yrs
Cortex/posterior sutures
Autosomal recessive 
8 wks
 Posterior sutures progressing to nuclear/
cortical cataract by 2 yrs
 Golden retriever
 1ncomplete dominantt
6 mos
Posterior subcapsular (tiangular)
Congenital
Labrador retriever
 Incomplete cominant 
6 mos
 Posterior subcapsular (triangular)
Congenital
Miniature poodle
2-6 yrs
Cortical
 Miniature schnauzer
Autosomal recessive
Congenital 
 Nuc lear/posterior cortex
Autosomal recessive
6 mos
Posterior cortex
 Norwegian buhund
Autosomal dominant
Congenital
Nuclear/cortical over 4-5 yrs 
Old English sheepdog
 Autosomal recessive
Congenital-2 yrs
Cortex/nuclear
Rottweiler
Unknown
>10 mos 
 Posterior/anterior polar, cortical
 Staffordshire bull terrier
Autosomal recessive
6 mos
Posterior sutures/cortex
Standard poodle 
Autosomal recessive
1 yr 
Equatorial cortex 
Welsh springer spaniel
 Autosomal recessive
Congenital
 Nuclear/posterior cortex
West Highland white terrier 
Autosomal recessive
Congenital
 Nuclear/posterior sutures
CAT
Hiralayan
Autosomal recessive
Congenital
 Posterior cortex (triangular)
CATTLE
 Friesian
 Probably nonhereditary
Congenital
 Bilateral spherical nuclear cataract 
 Holste in-Friesian
Autosomal recessive
Congenital
Hereford
Autosomal recessive 
Congenital
Jersey
Dominant
Congenital
Autosomal recessive
Congenital
White shorthorn
Dominant (?)
Congenital
 Associated with multiple ocular anomalies
 All breeds
 Infectious (maternal bovine viral
Congenital
Cortical cataract
dliarrheal
HORSE
Belgian
Dominant
Congenital
Morgan
Congenital
 Nuclear, nonprogressive
Thoroughbred
Dominant
Congenital
Various
Congenital
ae[d su g se noud pa pie ow[do Aeua (io) NY ne[ ut (666) s sn  uosp woy Peyo 
*See also the Appendix, Breed Predisposition to Eye Disorders.
tIt has been suggested that hiscataract istecessively inhernted, witheterozygotes also expressing the condition.
· Microphthalmia
surgical treatment of severe cases through corneal trans-
· Multiple ocular anomalies (an inherited syndrome in the 
plantation or cataract extraction. Others argue against surgery
Australian shepherd, characterized by multiple anomalies of 
due to the stationary character of the cataract and corneal
both the anterior and posterior segments)
lesions, and because the PPM may be patent and ocular hemor-
rhage could occur during surgery. Medical treatment, using
Persistent pupillary membrane (PPM) (see Chapter 11) is
 topical 1% atropine applied every 2 or 3 days to dilate the pupil
 inherited in the basenji, but familial and noninherited PPMs 
and help vision, has also been suggested. However, many cases
 may be found in any dog breed and in numerous species. PPM
 receive no medical or surgical treatment.
 may cause cataracts or corneal endothelial dystrophy, or both.
Persistent hyaloid artery and persistent hyperplastic
Stationary anterior capsular cataracts develop if a strand of
 primary vitreous are discussed in detail in Chapters 2 and
membrane adheres to the lens. The strand may or may not be
14. When the remnants of the embryonic blood supply
absorbed before maturity; in either case, it will leave a
 contact the lens, cataracts of the posterior capsule and/or cortex
       
 result. The extent of visual interference depends on the size
Adhesion of a strand of pupillary membrane to the corneal
of the opacity. The remnants may persist as any of the
endothelium results  in permanent  corneal endothelial
following:
dystrophy, which will similarly affect vision. Strands are not
clinically significant if both ends attach to the iris or if one end
· A single blood vessel attached to the posterior pole of the
is free in the anterior chamber. Some clinicians advocate
lens
266
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 13-16. A cat claw injury caused perforation of this cornea and
anterior lens capsule. Some bloocd from the resulting uveitis may be seen.
Figure 13-15. Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous in a golcen
(Courtesy Veterinary Ophthalmology Service, University of California,
retriever. Note the fibrovascular opacity with patent vessels near the
Davis.}
posterior lens capsule. The lesion is viewec in reflectec light from the 
tapetum.
· An artery with a capsular, vascular tunic and posterior polar
 resulting in severe myopia. However, studies on these subjects
cataract
are lacking in veterinary ophthalmology. Another complicating
· A vascularized area in the posterior axial cortex. Cortical
factor in the decision-making process is that in young animals,
vascularization will appear as a dark area.
cataracts may undergo significant resorption, thus allowing
them to regain vision without surgical intervention.
The most common clinical lesion resulting is a small,
stationary posterior polar cataract involving the capsule and
Acquired Cataracts
sometimes the subcapsular cortex (Figure 13-15). As in the
case of opacities resulting from PPM, some clinicians advocate
There are numerous causes for acquired cataracts, including
surgery (subject to the vessel's patency) or topical 1% atropine 
trauma, other ocular disease, nutrition, metabolic diseases, and
applied every 2 to 3 days to improve the patient's vision. Many
toxicity.
cases, however, receive no surgical or medical treatment.
 Penetrating foreign bodies, such as cat claws, thorns, or
 Most cataracts in foals are congenital. Occasionally a foal's
firearm ammunition, cause traumatic cataracts in dogs and cats
 history suggests an acquired cataract, but the cataract has prob-
(Figure 13-16). Once the capsule is perforated the hole usually
ably been present since birth and is now becoming clinically
remains and aqueous enters. Lens fbers imbibe fluid, swell,
visible. Inheritance should be considered in foals with con-
and become opaque within a few hours. The main concern in
genital cataracts.
these cases is the secondary (phacoclastic) LIU caused by lens
 In cases of congenital cataracts early surgical intervention
material leaking through the torn lens capsule. Small holes
should be considered. The reason is that in experimental
(less than 1.5 mm) in the anterior polar region may heal with
animals, including chickens, cats, and monkeys, reduction of 
 residual opacity in dogs. Usually the swollen lens material under-
light stimuli reaching central visual pathways during the period
 goes proteolytic digestion, exposing further lens substance to
of light susceptibility—namely, from the time the eyelids open 
attack and finally rendering the lens opaque and swollen
to approximately 12 weeks of age—can result in severe neuro-
(intumescent). Removal of lenses with traumatic ruptures larger
physiologic anomalies. Experimental evidence indicates that 
than 1.5 mm has been recommended. Such cases should be closely
lack of adequate light or pattem stimulation (visual stimulation)
 monitored for signs of LIU and should receive aggressive treat-
to the central nervous system produces irreversible functional
 ment, either medical or surgical. Metallic foreign bodies also
 and structural abnormalities in the lateral geniculate nuclei and
incite an inflammatory reaction depending on the metal
visual cortex. Therefore amblyopia ("lazy eye, or dimness of
 involved—lead pellets can be well tolerated, whereas iron and
vision) can develop in very young animals with dense congenital
copper cause an intense inflammatory reaction. Intraocular
cataracts, corneal opacities, or lid occlusion. Additionally, third 
 infection, due to contamination of the penetrating foreign body,
eyelid flaps or tarsorrhaphies placed over the globe of young
is also possible.
animals (for 3 to 12 weeks) may, depending on the length of 
Cataracts may also result from other ocular disease, most
time the cormea is occluded, predispose to amblyopia. In
 notably anterior uveitis. The reason is that the avascular lens
considering whether an animal with congenital cataracts is a
 depends totally on the aqueous humor for its metabolic needs,
candidate for cataract surgery, one must recognize the
 and any change in the constitution of the latter can have grave
 phenomenon of amblyopia. If the animal is already several months 
consequences for lens metabolism and transparency. Further-
old, it is possible that its postoperative visual performance will
more, inflammatory material present in the aqueous humor
be affected. Furthermore, visual deprivation during the develop-
during the course of uveitis (e.g., fbrin) may adhere to the
mental period may cause elongation of the vitreous body,
anterior lens capsule and reduce its transparency. Posterior
Lens I
267
 synechia (adherence of the iris to the anterior lens capsule) is a
 Radiated energy may cause cataracts by affecting dividing
further complication of the anterior uveitis. It may lead to
cells in the equatorial area. Use of megavoltage x-radiation to
secondary glaucoma, and even if the adhesions resolve,
treat tumors of the nasal cavity caused cataracts in 28% of
residual iris pigment will usually be left on the anterior lens
canine patients, whereas β-radiation radiotherapy treatment of
capsule.
intraocular tumors resulted in a 3% incidence of cataracts. Use
Nutritional cataracts are caused by use of inappropriate
of laser to treat glaucoma (cyclophotocoagulation) may also
milk-replacement formulas in young animals. In dogs and cats,
cause cataract in some patients.
such cataracts are due to a deficiency in essential amino acids
Cataracts may also be caused by other insults to the dividing
in the formula. They do not progress to maturity and in fact may
cells in the equator. These are usually due to toxicity, and
 even regress. Most nutritional cataracts have a minimal effect on
 numerous compounds and drugs have been shown (in toxicology
vision and do not require surgery. The opacities are located in the
studies) to cause cataracts in animals. However, most of these
equatorial and posterior subcapsular regions. Similar cataracts
agents were used in high, nontherapeutic doses. An exception
have been observed in wolf cubs. Because the cataracts are
may be ketoconazole, which causes bilateral, progressive cataracts
thought to be most common if the pup is totally deprived of the
after long-term administration in dogs. Another type of
dam's milk or is fed replacement milk during the first week of
 possible "toxic" cataract is one that may result from con-
life, it has been proposed that these cataracts can be controlled
comitant retinal dystrophy. It has been postulated that toxic
by limiting feeding of replacements and increasing the use of 
substances released by the degenerating retina cause cataracts
the dam's milk during this first week of life.
in dogs, thus accounting for the common presentation of pro-
 Nutritional cataracts also develop in orphaned kangaroos
gressive retinal atrophy and cataract in the same patient.
and wallabies fed cow's milk (Figure 13-17). These galactosemic
However, this pathogenesis, and the association between these
cataracts form because of the animal's inability to break down
two diseases, remains unproven and controversial in the dog,
the galactose and lactose in the replacement cow's milk. These
 and it is possible that such eyes are affected by two separate
molecules are therefore diverted into the sorbitol pathway (see
diseases.
later discussion of diabetic cataracts). Unlike the nutritional
cataracts in dogs and cats, the resulting galactosemic cataracts
SenileCataracts
 progress to maturity, causing loss of vision. Furthermore, the
surgical prognosis for these cataracts is poor owing to severe
Senile cataracts are part of the aging process and occur in both
 postoperative uveitis and opacification of the vitreous in affected
 animals and humans. These lesions are frequently preceded by
animals.
the formation of a dense nuclear sclerosis. Opaque streaks
 Nutrition has also been implicated in cataracts that develop
extend from the nucleus toward the cortical equator like spokes
in fish raised in hatcheries, although other husbandry con-
of a wheel. Opacification progresses to involve the entire lens,
ditions (e.g., oxygen and light levels, excessive handling and
resulting in a mature cataract (see Figure 13-13). However,
agression) may also play a role in the pathogenesis. Another
progression of senile cataracts is extremely slow, and it may
common cause of cataracts (in wild and farmed fish) is parasitic
take years for the cataract to reach total maturity.
infection. Numerous species of fish throughout the world are
A recent study reported that by age 13.5 years, all dogs
affected by different species of trematode larvae that enter the 
examined had some degree of cataract. According to the authors,
lens and cause cataract. The fish is an integral part of the life 
the age at which half the animals are affected by cataracts is 9.4
cycle and is usually eaten by a bird in the next phase, so
years in the dog, compared with 12.7 years in the cat and 28.3
presumably the blindness increases the likelihood of the fish's
years in the horse, thus demonstrating a correlation between
being caught and eaten by a bird. Infections have also been
prevalence of cataracts and longevity. However, it should be
implicated in the pathogenesis of cataracts in poulry;
noted that senile cataracts are a controversial subject in
spontaneous cataracts have been observed in turkeys and in
veterinary ophthalmology, with some authorities claiming that
chickens with avian encephalomyelitis and Marek's disease.
they are in fact late-onset inherited cataracts. Other writers
Encephalitozoa cuniculi infection has been implicated in the
counter that the initial location of the opacity and the differences
 pathogenesis of cataract, and lens capsule rupture, in rabbits.
in the rate of progression distinguish these two entities. Large-
scale studies of elderly canine populations are needed to
resolve the issue.
Diabetic Cataracts
The most prevalent ocular sign of diabetes mellitus in the dog
is bilateral cataracts that may mature in a very short time course
(days to weeks). In fact, any dog with rapidly developing
cataracts should be screened for diabetes mellitus. Though
control of hyperglycemia (through diet and insulin) may delay
cataract onset or progression, owners of diabetic dogs should
be advised that despite treatment, the animals will most likely
develop cataracts.
Hexokinase is saturated in hyperglycemia, and more glucose
enters the sorbitol pathway, where it is metabolized by aldose
reductase (see Figure 13-9). Therefore the development of a
Figure 13-17. Cataract in a young kangaroo that had been fed cow's milk.
diabetic cataract depends on the activity of aldose reductase in
268
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
lenticular cells, which leads to the formation and accumulation 
caused by noxious substances secreted by the degenerating
 of sorbitol, fructose, and dulcitol in the lens. The resulting
retina. Breeds commonly affected by both cataracts and
hyperosmolarity of the lens leads to fluid ingress. Initial
 progressive rod-cone degeneration are the miniature poodle,
changes include vacuole formation along the equatorial cortex
Labrador retriever, and toy poodle. However, because the two
that progresses to the anterior and posterior cortex (see Figure
 diseases can occur in any breed, an assessment of retinal health
13-12). As more fluid enters the lens and the cataract matures,
 cannot be made based on signalment and history. The retina
it may swell dramatically, a phenomenon known as an
 must be examined ophthalmoscopically or electrophysiologically
intumescent cataract. The swollen lens may push the iris
(see following sections) before cataract surgery. As mentioned,
forward, resulting in a shallow anterior chamber and a narrowed
u ym smooo (uoisia uap ood jo) aronsy ansoddo, un
iridocomeal angle, thus predisposing the animal to glaucoma.
 axial cataract and healthy retinas: The pupil becomes miotic in
Because of the role of aldose reductase in the formation of
 bright light, restricting light entrance through the small pupil to
diabetic cataracts, studies are underway to reduce their
the opaque area of the lens.
 incidence and severity using aldose reductase inhibitors.
 Diabetes is not an impediment to cataract surgery as long as
Clinical Signs
the animal can withstand the anesthesia. Results of surgery in
 diabetic dogs are good, though postoperative medications (which 
 Lens examination is part of a complete ophthalmic examination.
usually include glucocorticosteroids) have to be replaced by
The pupil must be dilated to enable adequate evaluation of the
 nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Ens; if this is not done, peripheral cortical changes and capsular
Diabetic cataracts are rare in cats. This is because aldose
opacities near the quator may be overlooked. Pupil dilation also
reductase activity is significantly higher in cats younger than
helps distinguish between nuclear sclerosis and "true' cataracts.
4 years than in older cats. Because diabetes mellitus occurs pri-
Topical tropicamide (1%) administered immediately after the
marily in older cats, the relatively low aldose reductase activity
 initial examination and repeated once in 5 to 10 minutes produces
protects the lens of the elderly diabetic cat from cataract forma-
adequate mydriasis in most patients in 20 minutes. Both eyes
tion. Instead, diabetic cats may frequently suffer from retinal
 must be examined, as each may be affected differently.
hemorrhages. However, these should not be confused with
Routine evaluation can be adequately performed in a dark
 diabetic retinopathy, a complication of diabetes that leads to loss
 room using a focal examining light and binocular loupe. Light 
of vision in humans. The pathogenesis of the human disease
 reflected back from the tapetum (retroillumination) is also most 
 involves retinal neovascularization that is not observed in cats.
helpful, as any lens opacity will appear darker than the
surrounding. In some dogs, slit-lamp examination reveals early
Diagnosis
and subtle changes that cannot be seen by a binocular loupe
(see Table 13-2). Common sites for initial opacity development
History
are at the equator, at anterior and posterior subcapsular areas,
The extent of the visual deficits caused by cataract depends on
and along Y sutures (Figure 13-18). As noted, hereditary
the location and severity of the opacity. Small cataracts in the
cataracts in each breed have a characteristic initial location as
center of the visual axis interfere with vision through a small
well as characteristic progression (e.g., from subcapsular
 pupil but have less effect with a dilated pupil. Therefore owners
 opacities to nuclear involvement, or from equatorial vacuolation
of patients with centrally located cataracts often observe that
to cortical opacification). However, regardless of the location of 
the patient sees better under diminished light conditions
the initial lesion, the opacity (with the exception of traumatic
(cloudy days, evenings, or inside buildings) than in bright
and secondary cataracts) most frequently will progress to
sunshine. In diminished light the pupil dilates and the patient 
immature and mature cataract (see Figures 13-11 to 13-13).
sees around the cataract.
The severity of the lens opacity also determines the effect on
vision: Small vacuoles and opacities have minor effects. When
the lens is diffusely opaque (immature cataract), sight is
/ Coronary or equatorial
reduced. However, some vision is often maintained until both 
(peripheral cortical)
eyes are affected by mature cataracts. In most cases the patient
is presented because the owner noted a change in behavior due
to failing vision or total blindness (e.g., bumping into objects in
Subcapsular
-Posterior
Reduplicated
unfamiliar surroundings, timidity or change in personality,
cortical
anterior pole
 inability to catch a ball). Such changes are more prominent when
both eyes are affected (e.g., hereditary cataracts). In cases of
unilateral disease (e.g., traumatic cataracts), behavioral visual
Posterior
deficits may be less obvious. Such patients may be presented
polar
due to a change in appearance of the eye itself (e.g., a white
appearance that is more noticeable at night when the pupil is
Nudear~
dilated).
 It is also important to determine from the owner whether the
 animal has had poor night vision during cataract development.
Lamellar-
 This feature may indicate that the patient is also suffering from
 progressive rod-cone degeneration. As noted previously, there
is still a debate about whether such patients are suffering from
Figure 13-18. Classification of cataracts accordling to position within the
lens. (Moclifiedl from Trevor-Roper PD [1984]: The Eye anc Its Disorclers.
two distinct hereditary diseases, or whether the cataract is
Blackwell Scientific, Oxfordl, Englandl.)
Lens I
269
Table 13-3 
 Cataract Prognosis in the Miniature
gression of cataracts in dogs. Various systemic and topical
Schnauzer Based on Position of the Initial
agents, including selenium-vitamin E, orgotein (superoxide
Opacity
dismutase), zinc ascorbate, and carnosine, have been studied
POSITION
PROGNOSIS
 Internet distributors. Many of these agents are marketed
Anterior capsular polar 
 Usually nonprogressive
without supporting clinical and experimental data, whereas
Anterior cortical
Variable progression
others have been evaluated only in vitro. The only clinical trial
Equatorial
Usually progressive
conducted to date in dogs has found a “marginal reduction" in
Nuclear
 Usually static or reduced in size
lens opacity, which was clinically insignificant. Owners should
Posterior cortical
Variable progression.
 Posterior capsular and axial
Usually nonprogressive
not be misled into thinking that they can use drugs to cure their
 pet's cataracts. On the contrary, such attempts at treatment will
Modifed from Gelatt KN, et al. (1983): Biometry and clinical characterishics
only delay professional care, thereby worsening any existing
of congenital cataracts and microphthalmia in the miniature schnauzer. J Am
LIU and impacting gravely the prognosis of the inevitable
Vet Med Assoc 183:99.
surgery. While it is hoped that one day an effective medical
treatment for cataracts will be discovered, at the time of writing
Owners often ask how long it will take for the cataract to
all cataract patients should be referred for treatment of LIU and
 become mature and for total blindness to occur. With the excep-
 possible surgery.
tion of diabetic cataracts, which may progress rapidly to maturity
(i.e., days to several weeks), this issue is most difficult to
Surgical Case Selection
 predict, although a rough estimate can sometimes be provided
in breeds that have been thoroughly investigated (Table 13-3).
Not all animals with cataract are suitable candidates for surgery.
This process may take months or longer.
The following prerequisites should be fulfilled before cataract
 As noted, breakdown and leakage of lens protein begins in
extraction is recommended:
 mature cataracts but its extent is limited. The process is accelerated
in hypermature cataracts. Signs of resorption are as follows:
1. The affected eye should have a significant visual deficit.
Obviously the eye shown in Figure 13-11 does not require
· Small, shiny crystals and multifocal white plaques, resulting
surgery. There is some debate among veterinary
from protein breakdown, are visible in the lens.
ophthalmologists regarding the stage (of maturity) at which
· Deepening of the anterior chamber and a concave iris
surgery should be performed. Surgery in early stages of
surface as the lens volume decreases; conversely, swelling
immaturity is technically easier, and there is less
of the lens in early cataract formation causes a shallow
 preoperative uveitis. However, if there are no significant
anterior chamber and a convex iris surface
· Decrease in lens diameter and thickness
visual deficits it is difficult to justify a complex and
 a nu sp  aad ns aaisada
· Corrugation of the anterior capsule
 success. On the other hand, it is inadvisable to wait until
· Signs of LIU
the cataract reaches advanced stages of maturity, as the
The extent of the resorption varies with age. It will be
concomitant development of LIU will affect the surgical
limited in elderly patients and will rarely improve the patient's
prognosis. The success rate is higher for surgical removal
vision. In young subjects it can be more extensive. As the lens
of immature cataracts than for removal of mature cataracts.
becomes small, vision can be aided with mydriatics (1%
2. Obviously, for the patient to regain vision, its retina must
atropine every 2 to 3 days). Complete resorption allows vision
be healthy and functional. Ideally, the fundus should be 
comparable to that after successful surgical lens removal
examined by the surgeon early in the disease, when the
(without IOL implantation). Lens removal is not performed in
cataract is not yet advanced and the retinal details are still
the presence of active uveitis or resorption.
visible. Alternatively, if the fundus cannot be examined
LIU is a major cause of complications in cataract surgery. It
 thoroughly (because of the cataract), retinal function
can be assumed to be present in all patients with mature or
should be evaluated with electroretinography (ERG) to
hypermature cataract until proven otherwise. Early therapy for
 ensure that retinal degeneration is not present. ERG is
this uveitis and referral for treatment of the cataract are essen-
described in Chapter 15. Because retinal degeneration can
 tial if optimal results are to be obtained.
occur in any breed, an ERG evaluation is mandatory in
 bilaterally affected dogs in which the fundus cannot be
Treatment
examined. The owner must be carefully questioned about 
Medical Therapy
the relative onset of visual difficulty, cataract, and
nyctalopia. However, patient history, signalment, and the
 In the early stages of cataract, especially when the opacity lies
lou an nue oi asuodsai ui uononnuoo dnd jo paads
on the visual axis, or in advanced stages of resorption, vision
 reliable indicators of the presence or absence of
can be improved with the use of a mydriatic when required.
progressive rod-cone degeneration.
a m a on a a a so o
 3. Any incipient LIU—indicated by ciliary injection,
reductase inhibitors. Studies have shown that both systemic and
hypotony, miosis, aqueous flare, change in iris color, or
topical inhibitors can slow, halt, and perhaps reverse the pro-
resistance to mydriasis—must first be controlled by topical
 gression of cataracts in diabetic patients. However, such drugs
corticosteroids and/or NSAIDs under the supervision of the
are still considered experimental.
person who will perform the surgery. The incidence of
 As oxidation plays a role in the pathogenesis of cataracts, it
short- and long-term complications is greater when uveitis
has been proposed that antioxidants may halt and reverse pro-
is present preoperatively.
270
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAlS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
 4. No other ocular pathologic process should be present. The
Injection of flushing solution
eye must be examined by an experienced veterinary
Aspiration of liquid cortex + solutior
ophthalmologist. Any concurrent disease, such as keratitis
or glaucoma, must be controlled before surgery. Older dogs
or dogs affected with hypermature cataracts may have
 zonular instability. In many practices an ultrasound
examination is performed before surgery to rule out
vitreal/retinal detachment. In patients that are susceptible
to postoperative retinal detachment (due to vitreous disease
or breed susceptibility) some clinicians advocate
prophylactic retinopexy ("fixating" the retina in its place),
A
B
Figure 13-19. Cataract extraction using dlissection ancd aspiration.
cataract surgery
A, Rupture of lens capsule. B, Aspiration of contents via two-way cannula.
5. The patient should be in good general health, should not
suffer from any systemic diseases, and should undergo
 tests to ensure it is a suitable candidate for anesthesia.
by rigorous flushing to remove any remaining lens particles
6. The patient must be amenable to intensive handling,
(Figure 13-20). The posterior lens capsule, which is attached to
because frequent topical applications of medication are
the vitreous, remains intact. This method has largely been
 required in both the preoperative and postoperative periods.
replaced by phacoemulsification.
 One cannot overemphasize the importance of postoperative
Phacoemulsification. Surgery begins with a small incision
treatment and its effect on the outcome. An excitable or
 at the limbus and tearing of the anterior lens capsule. A special
fractious dog that cannot be handled and medicated is
 probe is then used to shatter the lens with high-frequency ultra-
usually an unsuitable candidate. If there is doubt regarding
sonic waves, and the debris is removed via automated irrigation
the owner's ability to medicate the dog postoperatively,
and aspiration (Figure 13-21). In fact, the technique for
topical medication should be provided preoperatively to
phacoemulsification is similar to that for discission, with the
determine the feasibility of drug application.
exception that a phacoemulsifier is used instead of cannulae.
7. The owner must be prepared to sustain the cost and effort
 Phacoemulsification has the advantages of requiring a smaller
required to perform preoperative and postoperative
limbal incision than extracapsular extraction (the incision has
treatment and to return for rechecks. Willingness to pay the
to accomodate only the probe) and allowing more complete
bill is not enough. Long-term treatment to avoid uveitis,
removal of lens cortical material because the smaller incision
 IOP monitoring for glaucoma, and frequent rechecks are
results in faster surgery and healing, and because of the automated
mandatory for long-term visual success. An owner who
flushing system. The method has achieved widespread use
cannot provide the required postoperative therapy and care
because the smaller incision results in faster surgery and healing.
should be counseled against surgery.
 and because the postoperative inflammation is more moderate, in
8. For an older dog, the owner must be counseled that
 comparison with extracapsular extraction. This results in fewer
senility, cognitive dysfunction, motor problems, and other
 postoperative complications and less patient discomfort.
aspects of old age may be as important in the dog's
Intracapsular Extraction. Removal of the entire lens with-
behavior as the cataract, and that cataract removal,
out opening or tearing the lens capsule is called intracapsular
although technically successful, may not result in the
extraction. This method is restricted to the removal of luxated
improvement sought (the expectation often is that the dog
lenses, following tearing of the zonules (see following section).
will see and behave like a young dog again).
 Because the capsular bag is not opened during surgery there is
no leakage of lens protein, and the postoperative inflammation
Surgical Correction
is minimal. However, surgery may lead to anterior movement
of the vitreous body (and possible secondary retinal detach-
 Once preexisting uveitis has been controlled, retinal function 
ment or glaucoma), as the lens that normally separates the
determined, and other tests completed, the patient is scheduled
vitreous from the anterior chamber has been removed. There-
for surgery. Many surgeons prefer to perform bilateral surgery
fore some surgeons will combine this surgery with prophylactic
(assuming that both eyes are similarly affected), athough some 
vitrectomy (removal of the vitreous body). Others will implant 
 prefer to operate on one eye at a time.
a synthetic IOL fixed by sutures in the ciliary sulcus as a barrier
 The four methods of surgical correction commonly used are
 against vitreous movement and to improve postoperative vision
(1) discission and aspiration, (2) extracapsular extraction,
(see later).
(3) phacoemulsification, and (4) intracapsular extraction.
Discission and Aspiration. Discission and aspiration con-
Postoperative Vision and Intraocular Lens Implantation
sists of opening the cornea and anterior lens capsule and using
irrigation and aspiration to remove the contents from within the
After cataract extraction surgery the patient is severely hyperopic
capsule (Figure 13-19). This method is restricted to young
(farsighted) owing to the loss of the refractive power of the
animals with liquid cataracts and animals with very small eyes
 lens. This visual deficit can be corrected by implantation of an
(usually exotic pets) that will not accommodate regular
 artificial lens (an IOL), which thus helps the patient achieve post-
 ophthalmic instrumentation.
 operative emmetropia (focused vision). With this aim in mind,
Extracapsular Extraction. In extracapsular extraction, a
veterinary ophthalmologists began implanting IOLs in their
wide (180-degree) incision is made in the limbus and the anterior
canine patients in the late 1980s (Figure 13-22). Subsequent
lens capsule, nucleus, and cortex are extracted manually, followed
studies have shown that the optical power of canine IOLs should 
LENs 
271
be approximately 41 D, and such lenses are now regularly
implanted by veterinary ophthalmologists, with significant
improvement in postoperative visual performance.
 As stated earlier, however, the cornea is the major refractive
organ of the eye, and the lens plays a less significant role in
refraction and accommodation in animals. This means that
contrary to popular belief, and to the owners' puzzlement, vision
Figure 13-21. Phacoemulsification surgery to remove a cataract. Note the
au jo dig aun jasul on painban (uogisod yoolo,o 9) uoisioul lews
phacoemulsifier into the eye. The instrurment shatters the lens with
ps aul uogese pue uoesal sad pue sam punosenin
instrument (8 o'clock position) is used to rotate the lens pieces toward
the phacoemulsification tip. (From Yanoff M, Duker JS [2004]:
Ophthalmology, 2nd edl. Mosby, St louis.)
is possible postoperatively even without an IOL. Aphakic patients
(in which IOLs have not been implanted during surgery) are
visual because the opaque lens has been removed and light can
once more reach the retina. Indeed, for decades veterinary
ophthalmologists did not implant IOLs in their canine patients,
and even today implantation of IOLs in feline and equine
 patients is in its infancy. As in the dog, if the surgery was success-
ful, an aphakic cat or horse will regain vision although it will 
be hyperopic.
Complications, Postoperative Care, and Prognosis
 The two major intraoperative complications of cataract surgery
are damage to the corneal endothelium and rupture of the
E
posterior lens capsule. Damage to the endothelium may be
Figure 13-20. Extracapsular cataract extraction via limbal incision.
A,A canthotomy is performed and thelics are retractecd with sutures of
o egunuos au ul paeid ane als og jo saanns uoexi oml lls 0/
 allow manipulation of the globe. B, A corneal incision is macle adjacent
to the limbus. C, The incision is extencled with left and right corneal 
scissors. D, A suture with a porcelain beacl attached is preplaced at the
12oclockpositionThesuure8/0t90plygactin910Vcylised
Q
to prevent instrurment cdamage to the encothelium. E, The anterior lens
capsule is grasped with lens capsule forceps, and the edge of the capsule 
au uaama paeid sl oeslaai us  oan sl ansde au asiui s!
lens cortex and the posterior capsule, and the cortex is gently irrigated
forwarc with balanced salt solution. A lens loop is placec behind the lens 
to rermove it. Alternatively, the lens may be removed by careful pressure
from the ventral limbus, without placement of a loop or irrigator in the 
eye. Care is taken to avoid the corneal encothelium. G, f miosis occurs 
during the surgery, a sphincterotomy may be performed at the
6oclockposition t allowaccessto theens.Alternatively,aniriclectomy
 may be perforrmed if necessary, at 12 o'clock, with electrocautery. H, The 
preplaced suture is tiec and theincisionisclosecwithsinpleinterrupted
sutures at 1-mmintervalsundermagnification.I,Amoclified conjunctival
H
flap may be placed over the corneal wound to seal it. The anterior
chamber may be reconstructed with an air bubble. (Modified from
Severin, Ft. Collins, CO.}
272
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
A
B
Figure 13-22. A, lntraocular canine lens for placement after cataract rermoval. B, An intraocular lens has been
implantec in a cog after cataract removal.The pupilhas beenlilated.Marginsof the lens arenot normally visible
in the nondlilated, resting pupil (Courtesy Dr. ] Gaicdon.)
caused by improper handling of the cornea leading to trauma,
results of cataract surgery are excellent, and more than 95% of
 or by exposure to the energy emitted by the phacoemulsifier.
the patients regain useful vision. However, with time some of
Endothelial cell loss can be decreased by flling the anterior
these patients may lose vision in one or both eyes. The reasons
chamber with viscoelastic substances (sodium hyaluronate,
 are the insidious nature of the uveitis, secondary complications,
methyl cellulose and its derivatives), which physically shield
 and failure of the owners to adhere to a long-term treatment and
and protect the cells, and by keeping the duration of phaco-
recheck schedule. Possible complications resulting from uveitis
 emulsification to a minimum.
include secondary glaucoma, posterior synechia, and lens epi-
 In both phacoemulsification and extracapsular extraction,
thelial fbrous metaplasia and postoperative opacification.
the surgeon will try to avoid perforating the posterior lens
 Retinal detachment, intraocular hemorhage, infection, and suture
capsule. Such perforation may allow vitreous to enter into the
failure are possible, though less common, complications.
anterior chamber and cause secondary glaucoma. If the pos-
terior lens capsule is torn during cataract surgery, the surgeon
Cataracts in Horses
 may perform vitrectomy to reduce the risk of glaucoma.
The major postoperative surgical complication is LIU.
Cataracts are less common in horses than in dogs. In some
 Because of the immunogenicity of the lens proteins, cataract
breeds, including Belgian and thoroughbred horses, cataracts
surgery (which involves opening the lens capsule) inevitably
have been demonstrated to be hereditary (dominant). Non-
results in uveitis. The inflammation is treated aggressively with
 progressive, nuclear cataracts that do not interfere with vision
mydriatics and various combinations of topical and systemic
occur in Morgan horses. However, most cataracts of adult horses
antinflammatory drugs. Many surgeons begin treating their
are secondary to trauma or equine recurrent uveitis. Senile
patients several days before surgery to ensure a dilated pupil
 cataracts causing visual impairment may occur in horses older
 during the operation (because the lens is removed through the
than 20 years. Elderly horses are also affected by nuclear
pupil) and as prophylactic treatment for the uveitis. The treat-
sclerosis, which, like the condition in the dog, does not affect
ment is intensified on the day of surgery, with many animals
vision. Cataracts (both hereditary and secondary) are a relatively
receiving intravenous, intramuscular, and/or subconjunctival
 common ocular defect in foals.
antinflammatory drugs, and the treatment is continued post-
 Foals and adult horses with visual impairment are suitable
 operatively according to the surgeon's preference. Topical and/
 candidates for lens extraction, provided the horses are tractable
 or systemic antibiotics are usually provided, and some surgeons
 and can be medicated postoperatively. In foals, early return of
may add prophylactic glaucoma treatment because post-
 vision is important to development of higher visual centers.
operative spikes of IOP (often temporary but blinding) have
The workup, techniques, and complications of cataract removal
been reported. Frequent rechecks to monitor IOP and LIU are
are similar to those in the dog.
mandatory in the immediate postoperative period, and some
surgeons may even hospitalize their patients for 1 to 2 days for
LENSLUXATION
evaluation. With time, the frequency of treatments and rechecks
decreases, although occasional rechecks (once every 6 to
Luxation occurs when all of the lens zonules are torn, leading
12 months) are warranted due to the insidious nature of LIU.
to displacement of the lens from the hylaoid (patellar) fossa.
With improvement in surgical techniques and instrumen-
Following the luxation, the lens may move anteriorly, pos-
tation, and with better understanding and treatment of the
teriorly, or in the vertical plane of the eye. Lens luxation may
postoperative complications, the immediate postoperative
be preceded by subluxation, resulting from tearing of some (but
LEN5
273
not all) of the zonules, and leading to partial displacement of
the lens from the hyaloid fossa.
Etiology
Lens luxation may be classified as primary (hereditary) or
secondary. Primary lens luxation is most commonly seen in dogs.
The luxation is due to weakened lens zonules that rupture early in
life (up to 5 years of age). This condition is inherited in wirehaired
A
日
fox, Sealyham, Manchester, Cairm, Jack Russell, Tibetan, and
miniature bull terriers and miniature schnauzers. It is also common
in poodles, but the hereditary nature is unconfirmed in this breed.
Electron microscopy studies in the Tibetan terrier have shown that
the insertions of the lens zonules into the lens capsule are
abnormal. In such cases, luxation may follow minor trauma, which 
ruptures the weakened zonules. Primary congenital luxation,
 seen in multiple ocular anomalies, is rare in clinical practice.
Secondary luxation may be due to any of the following
conditions:
C
· Blunt traumas (e.g., a violent strike to the orbital region)
Figure 13-23. lens luxation and vitreous syneresis. A, Normal lens
position.B,Zonules are ruptured dorsally but lens isheld in place by the
may cause secondary lens luxation (traumatic luxation).
vitreous. C, Early liquefaction of the vitreous, which allows more lens 
Trauma violent enough to cause lens luxation may also
 moverment. D, lens motion accelerates syneresis, anc the lens may sink 
cause other severe ocular lesions (e.g., hyphema, retinal
ventrally. (Courtesy Dr. G.A. Severin.)
detachment, scleral rupture). Perforating traumas, such as
cat claws, do not cause lens luxation, as they do not
generate the mechanical forces needed to tear the zonules.
· Glaucoma: When the globe enlarges in chronic glaucoma
the zonules may break, leading to lens subluxation and
luxation. It is noteworthy that glaucoma may also be caused
by lens luxation (see later), and when both diseases are
 present in an eye it may be difficult to determine which is
the cause and which the effect.
· Uveitis: Alterations in the aqueous humor, and the presence
 of inflammatory mediators in the posterior chamber, may
weaken the zonules.
 Intraocular tumors: As a tumor enlarges, it may displace the
lens, creating a luxation or subluxation.
· Cataract: If a cataractous lens swells (intumescence), the
zonules may break.
Figure 13-24. An aphakic crescent clue to posterior lens luxation. The white
lens is visible from the 4 to 9 o'clock positions because it luxatec in a
Clinical Signs and Diagnosis
ventronasal clirection (while maintaining its vertical orientation). Only the
clorsotemporal part of the lens is visible; the rest of the lens is obscured
 In a normal eye, the iris rests on the anterior lens surface, which
by the iris. An aphakic crescent is visible between 9 o'clock and
gives it its slightly convex curvature. If the zonules deteriorate
4 o'clock, in the partof the pupil that has been vacated by the lens. (Courtesy
or pull free from the lens, rapid eye movement causes the lens
University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
 to oscillate back and forth in the hyaloid fossa. This oscillation 
Collection.)
A  s sis is   s
sign of impending lens displacement and becomes more evident
edge of the lens becomes visible in the pupil. The dorsal area
as the lens continues to loosen from the zonules.
of the pupil where the lens is missing is called an aphakic
 Increased lens movement causes the vitreous touching the
crescent (Figure 13-24).
posterior lens to separate from deeper vitreous, allowing more
 Syneresis may continue until most of the vitreous disappears.
movement of the lens. Eventually the damaged vitreous liquefies 
 When this occurs, the lens may settle ventrally at the “bottom'' of
and is replaced by aqueous. This process of liquefaction of the
the eye and may disappear from the pupil (see Figure 13-23, D).
vitreous is referred to as syneresis (Figure 13-23). Therefore
This condition is called posterior luxation. In such cases, it is
vitreous fibrils floating through the pupil in the aqueous are also
 possible to observe the retinal blood vessels and optic disc without
 a sign of zonule disruption and potential future luxation.
 an ophthalmoscope, through the use of only a basic source of light.
 If the lens is subluxated in the equatorial plane, the iris is
Lens luxation causes changes in anterior chamber depth and
convex where it touches the lens and flat in the area of dis-
iris (Figure 13-25). The clinician can best evaluate anterior
location (compare the dorsal and ventral iris in Figure 13-23, B).
chamber depth and iris position by observing the eye from the
 As the subluxation progresses to luxation, the luxated lens
side rather than the front. The normal iris rests on the anterior
usually sinks ventrally owing to the effect of gravity. The dorsal
surface of the lens and therefore is slightly convex (see Figure
274
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
· Glaucoma: As the lens is luxated anteriorly, it may "pull"
the vitreous behind it. The presence of vitreous in the pupil
 or in the anterior chamber impedes the flow of aqueous
humor and causes an elevation in IOP. The presence of the
lens in the anterior chamber further obstructs drainage of 
 aqueous humor (see Figure 13-25, B). Glaucoma may also 
occur as a result of posterior lens luxation, because the
"barrier'" between the vitreous and the pupil disappears. As
A
with anterior luxation, this may result in anterior movement
Figure 13-25. A, lens luxation with anterior cisplacement of the iris (and
of the vitreous, provided that it has liquefied or has become 
possible pupillary blockage of aqueous passage: Anterior charmber is
shallow. B, Luxation into the anterior chamber, which appears cleep.
 detached from its posterior attachment to the retina.
Endlothelial dlamage causes corneal eclema where the lens capsule
touches it. (Courtesy Dr. G.A. Severin.)
A clinician should suspect anterior lens luxation in cases of
acute onset of severe pain, corneal edema, and/or glaucoma,
especially when presented unilaterally and in susceptible breeds.
13-23, A). Initially the vitreous may swell, forcing the lens forward
The severe cormeal edema, blepharospasm, and possible hyphema
 and resulting in a shallow anterior chamber and a more convex
(in cases of traumatic luxation) that can accompany lens luxation
iris (see Figure 13-25, A). If the pupil dilates, the lens may
may make it diffcult to visualize the luxated lens or the
luxate through the pupil into the anterior chamber (Figure 13-26).
changes in the depth of the anterior chamber and iris position.
The luxation may be partial or complete.
In these cases, ultrasound may be used to demonstrate the
When the lens is luxated, the depth of the anterior chamber
location of the lens in the eye (Figure 13-27).
will usually increase, regardless of the direction of the luxation
(an exception is seen in Figure 13-25, A). In cases of anterior
Treatment
luxation the lens fills the anterior chamber, and therefore it
physically pushes the iris posteriorly (see Figure 13-25, B). In
 Some controversy exists regarding the treatment of subluxated
 cases of posterior luxation, the iris loses its posterior support and
 lenses or posteriorly displaced lenses. Some surgeons prefer to
moves posteriorly (see Figure 13-23, D). In both cases the
 remove them using intracapsular lens extraction techniques (in
increase in anterior chamber depth is accompanied by a more 
 combination with vitrectomy) to prevent glaucoma. Others
concave position of the iris.
 provide long-term miotic treatment to ensure that the luxated
 Anterior lens luxation is considered an ophthalmic emergency
lens does not move anteriorly and educate the clients about
for the following reasons:
signs of anterior luxation and glaucoma.
·Edema: Luxation into the anterior chamber brings the lens in
 Because of the complications described in the previous
section, there is no controversy surrounding the need to remove
contact with the cormeal endothelium. This impairs the
 anteriorly luxated lens. These may be removed by intracapsular
endothelial function, resulting in comeal edema. Furthermore,
extraction or phacoemulsification. The major complication
as the head of the animal moves the lens repeatedly strikes the
with extraction of luxated lenses (regardless of whether they
comeal endothelium. This may cause permanent endothelial
luxated anteriorly or posteriorly) is glaucoma. Therefore many
damage and irreversible comeal edema.
clinicians combine this procedure with vitrectomy, thus
 Pain: Pain is caused by the striking of the inner cornea by
the lens.
RTEYE
Patient
D1.10
Hospita
Figure 13-27. Ultrasonographic irmage of a posterior lens luxation. The
Figure 13-26. Anterior lens luxation. Note that the entire lens equator can
lens, which could not be seen because of corneal eclema, is visible as a
be seen and that the lens partially obscures the iris. (Courtesy University
hyperechoic mass in the posterior part of the eye dashed line connecting
of Missouri Veterinary Ophthalmology Case Photo Collection.1
the two asterisks). (Courtesy Dr. 1. Aizenberg.)
Len5
275
reducing the risk of anterior vitreous movement. If glaucoma is
Dwyer WP, Smith CE (1988): Metacercariae of Diplostomum spathaceum in
 present before the lens is removed, a lower success rate is
the eyes of fishes ffom Yellowstone Lake, Wyoming. J Wildi Dis 25:126.
achieved than if the lens is removed before glaucoma occurs.
Dziezyc J, et al. (1991): Use of phacofragmentation for cataract removal in
horses: 12 cases (1985-1989). I Am Vet Med Assoc 198:1774.
Placement of an IOL fixed by sutures has also been advocated
Garcia-Sanchez GA,et al.(2005): Ahmed valve implantation to contro]
 after removal of luxated lenses in dogs. The IOL serves as a
intractable glaucoma after phacoemulsification and intraocular lens
barrier to prevent anterior vitreal movement and improves
implantabion in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 8:139.
postoperative vision.
Gelatt KN, et al.(2003): Catarac ts in the bichon fise. Vet Ophthalmol 6:3.
Gelatt KN, Mackay EO (2005): Prevalence of primary breed-related cataracts
 In cases of anterior luxation where surgical removal is not
 in the dog in North America. Vet Ophthalmol 8: 101.
feasible, the lens may be pushed from the anterior chamber
Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (2004): Secondary glaucomas in the dog in North 
back to the posterior part of the eye (reclination). This is a
 America. Vet Ophthalmol 7:245.
noninvasive procedure that may be facilitated by anesthesia (to
Gemensky-Metzler AJ, Wilkie DA (2004): Surgical management and
reduce globe tension caused by the extraocular muscles) and by
histologic and immunohistochemical features of a cataract and retrolental
plaque secondary to persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
administration of hyperosmotic agents (to decrease the volume
jentis/persistent hyperplastic primary vireous (PHTVL/PHPV) in a
of the vitreous body). Following the procedure, permanent
bloodhound puppy. Vet Ophthalmol 7:369.
miotic therapy is instituted to ensure that the lens remains in the
posterior part of the eye.
Prototype intraocular lenses for the feline eye.Am J Vet Res 59:1339.
Glaze M, Blanchard G (1983): Nutritional cataracts in a Samoyed litter.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:951.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Glover TL,et al. (1995): The intacapsular extraction of displaced lenses in
dogs: aretrospechive study of 57 cases (1984-1990). J Am Anim Hosp
Alpar JI (1987):Useof Healonindifferent cataract surgery techniques:
Assoc 31:77.
endothelial cell count study. Ophthalmic Surg 18:529.
Grahn BH, Cullen CL (2004): Iris to lens persistent pupillary membranes.
Barnett KC (1985): Hereditary cataract in the miniature schnauzet. J Small
Can Vet I 45:613.
Anim Pract 26:635.
Grahn BH, Cullen CL (2000): Equine phacoc lashic uveibis: the clinical
Barnett KC (1980): Cataract in the golden retiever. Vet Rec Il1:315.
manifestations, light microscopic fndings, and therapy of 7 cases.
Barnett KC (1980): Hereditary cataract in the Welsh springer spaniel. J Small
Can Vet J 41:376.
Anim Pract 21:621.
Gwin RM, et al. (1983): Effects of phacoemulsification and exltacapsular lens
Barros PS, et al. (2004): Blood and aqueous humour antioxidants in
Temoval on comea thickness and endothelial cell density in the dog.
cataractous poodles.Can J Ophthalmol 39:19.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 24:227.
BasPetal.(999:xidantpoflfcataractusEngishoc
Harding JI (1992): Physiology, biochemistry, and epidemiology of cataract.
spaniels. Vet Ophthalmol 2:83.
Basher AW, Roberts SM (1995): Ocular manifestations of diabetes melitus:
Hardman C, et al. (2001): Phacofagmentation for morgagmian cataract in a
diabetic cataracts in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 25:661.
Bayon A, et al. (2001): Ocular complications of persistent hyperplastic
Jamieson V, et al. (1991): Ocular complications following cobalt 60
primary vitreous in three dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 4:35.
Tadiotherapy of neoplasms in the canine head region. I Am Anim Hosp
Beach I, Irby N (1985): Inherited nuclear cataracts in the Morgan horse.
Assoc 27:51.
J Hered 76:371.
Johnstone N, Ward DA (2005): The incidence of posterior capsule disruption
Bernays ME, Peiffer RL (2000): Morphologic alterations in the anterior lens
during phacoemulsifcation and associated postoperative complication rates
 capsule of canine eyes with cataracts. Am I Vet Res 6l:1517.
in dogs: 244 eyes (1995-2002): Vet Ophthalmol 8:47.
Biros DJ, et al. (2000): Development of glaucoma after cataract surgery in
Kenny D, et al. (2003): Intacapsular lens removal in a Przewalskis wild
dogs: 220 cases (1987-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1780.
horse (Equus caballus przewalskii). J Zoo Wildl Med 34:284.
Bjerkas E, Haaland MB (1995): Pulverulent nuclear cataract in the
Lannek EB, Miller PE (2001): Development of glaucoma after
Norwegian buhund. J Small Anim Pract 36:471.
phacoemulsification for removal of cataracts in dogs: 22 cases
Brainard J, et al. (1982): Evaluation of superoxide dismutase (Orgotein) in
(1987-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:70.
medical treatment of canine cataract. Arch Ophthalmol 100:1832.
Lazarus JA,et al. (1998): Primary lens luxation in the Chinese shar-pei:
clinical and hereditary characteristics. Vet Ophthalmol I:101.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:5.
Leasure J, et al. (2001): The relationship of cataract maturity to intraocular
Brightman AH, et al. (1981): Effct of aspinin on aqueous protein values in
pressure in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 4:273.
the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:572.
Ledbetter EC, et al. (2004): Microbial contaminalion of the anterior chamber
Buschmann W, et al.(1987): Microsurgical teatment of lens capsule
during cataract phacoemulsifcalion and intaocular lens implantation in
perforations. Part I: experimental research. Ophthalmic Surg 18:731.
Colitz CM, et al. (2000): Histologic and immunohistochemical
MagTane WG (1969): Cataract exraction: a follow-up study (429 cases).
characterization of lens capsular plaques in dogs with cataracts. Am J Vet
J Small Anim Pract 10:545.
Res 61:139.
MagTane WG (1961);: Cataract exlraction: an evaluation of I04 cases. I Small
Colitz CM, et al. (1l999): Telomerase activity in lens epithelial cells of nomal
Anim Pract I: 163.
and cataractous lenses. Exp Eye Res 69:641.
Martin CL (1978): Zonular defects in the dog: a clinical and scanning
electron microscopic study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:571.
the Tibetan terrier. J Comp Pathol 93:151.
Martin CL, Chambreau T (1982): Cataract production in experimentally
Curtis RC, et al. (1983): Clinical and pathological observations conceming
the aetiology of primary lens luxation in the dog. Vet Rec 112:238.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:115.
Davidson MG, et al. (2000): Effect of surgical technique on in vilro posterior
Matthews AG (2004): The lens and cataracts. Vet Clin North Am Equine
capsule opacification. I Cataract Refract Surg 26:1550.
Pract 20:393.
Davidson MG,et al. (200o): Ex vivo canine lens capsular sac explants.
Matthews AG (2000): Lens opacities in the horse: a clinical classifcabion.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 238:708.
Vet Ophthalmol 3:65.
Davidson MG, et al. (1991): Phacoemulsifcation and intraocular lens
Miller PE,et al. (1997): Mechanisms of acute intraocular pressure increases
duo eA soid ssop z8l u sinsal [eoains jo Apns e uogeue[dl
Ophthalmol 1:4.
Miller TR,et al.(1987): Phacofagmentation and aspiraion forcataract
Davidson MG, et al. (1991): Traumatic anterior lens capsule disruption.
extrac hion in dogs: 56 cases (1980-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1577.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:411.
Milichamp NJ, Dziezyc J (2000): Cataract phacoffagmentation in horses.
DeCosta P, et al. (1996): Cataracts in dogs after long-temm ketoconazole
Vet Ophthalmol 3: 157.
therapy. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 6: 176.
Moore DL, et al. (2003): A study of the morphology of canine eyes
Denis HM, et al. (2003): Detection of anbi-lens crystallin antibody in dogs
enucleated or eviscerated due to complications following
with and without cataracts. Vet Ophthalmol 6:321.
phacoemulsification. Vet Ophthalmol 6:219.
276
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Murphy JM,et al. (1980): Sequelae of extracapsular lens extraction in the
Remillard R,et al.(1993): Comparison of kittens fed queen’s milk with those
mommal dog. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 16:17.
fed milk replacers. Am J Vet Res 52:901.
Narfstrom K (1999): Hereditary and congenital ocular disease in the cat.
Richter M, et al. (2002): Aldose reductase activity and glucose-related
J Feline Med Surg I:135.
aIg s  rw ses pue sop wo s put ut so
Narfstrom K, Dubielzig R (1984): Posterior lenticonus, cataracts and
Rooks RL, et al. (1985): Extracapsular cataract extrachions: an analysis of 240
microphthalmia: congenital ocular defects in the Cavalier King Charles
operations in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc I 90:1580.
spaniel. J Small Anim Pract 25:669.
Sanford SE, Dukes TW (1978): Acquired bilateral corhical cataracts in mature 
Nasisse MP,et al. (1995): Lens capsule opacifcation in aphakic and
sows. J Am Vet Med Assoc 173:852.
pseudophakic eyes. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 233:63.
Sato S, et al. (1998): Dose-dependent prevention of sugar cataracts in
Nasisse MP, et al.(1995): Technique fot suture fixation of intraocular lenses
galactose-fed dogs by the aldose reductase inhibitor M79175. Exp Eye Res
in dogs. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 5: 146.
66:217.
Nasisse MP, Davidson MG (1999): Surgery of the lens, in Gelatt KN (editor):
Sato S,et al.(1991): Progtession of sugar cataract in the dog. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 32: 1925.
Philadelphia.
Sigle KJ, Nasisse MP (2006): Long-temm complications after
Nasisse MP, Glover TL (1997): Surgery for lens instability. Vet Clin North
phacoemulsifcation for cataract removal in dogs: 172 cases(1995-2002).
Am Small Anim Pract 27:1175.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:74.
Norton JH (1980): Cataracts in sows. Aust Vet I 56:408.
Slatter DH, et al. (1983): Hereditary cataracts in canaries. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 183:872.
Vet Rec 136:276.
Slatter DH, et al. (1980): Cataracts and depressed galactose-I-phosphate
OliverK,etal (1991):Feneensdisplacemenaeospective analyis
uridyl transferase deficiency in a cus cus (Phalanger maculatus). Aust Vet
 of 345 cases. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol I:239.
J 56:141.
O'Reilly A, et al. (2003): The use of transcleral cyclophotocoagulation with
a diode laser for the treatment of glaucoma occurnng post intracapsular
dogs: 139 cases (1992-1993). I Am Vet Med Assoc 209:105.
exTachion of displaced Jenses: a retrospective study of I5 dogs
Stephens T, et al. (1974): Deficiency of two enzymes of galactose metabolism
(1995-2000). Vet Ophthalmo] 6:113.
in kangaroos. Nature 248:524.
On JI, et al. (2000): Posterior lenticonus with congenital cataract in a shih tzu
van der Woerdt A, et al. (1993): Ulrasonogtaphic abnomaliies in the eyes
dog. J Vet Med Sci 62: 1201.
 of dogs with cataracts. 147 cases (1986-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Oz HH, et al. (1986): Bilateral cataract surgery in a Suffolk ewe. Vet Rec 
203:838.
118:512.
van der Woerdt A,et al. (1992): Lens induced uveiis in dogs: 151 cases
 Paulsen ME (1986): The effect of lens-induced uveitis on the success of
(1985-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc 120:921.
ex lracapsular cataract exlrachion—-a retrospechive study of 65 lens
Warren C (2004): Phaco chop technique for cataract surgery in the dog.
removals in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:49.
Vet Ophthalmol 7:348.
Peiffer RL, Weintraub BA (1979): Clinical and histopathologic effcts of
Williams DL, et al. (2004): Prevalence of canine cataract: preliminary results
 of a cross-sechional study. Vet Ophthalmol 7:29.
Assoc 15:421.
Williams DL, et al. (1996): Current concepts in the management of canine
 Pollet L (1982): Refrachion of nommal and aphakic canine eyes. J Am Anim
 cataract: a survey of techniques used by surgeons in Britain, Europe and
Hosp Assoc 18:323.
the USA and a review of tecent literature. Vet Rec I38:347.
 Ranz D, et al. (2002): Nutritional lens opacities in two litters of
Williams DL, Munday P (2006): The effect of a topical antioxidant
Newfoundland dogs. J Nutr 132:1688S.
formulation including N-acetyl camosine on canine cataract: a preliminary
study. Vet Ophthalmol 9:311.
Chapter
VITREOUS
4
Ron Ofri
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
ACQUIRED DISORDERS
SURGICAL AND DIAGNOSTIC
PATHOLOGIC REACTIONS
ROLE OF THE VITREOUS IN THE
PROCEDURES
CONGENITAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL
PATHOGENESIS OF OCULAR DISEASES
ABNORMALITIES
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
Therefore anterior movement of the vitreous (such as occurs
Anatomy
after lens luxation) may pull the retina off the retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE) and cause traction retinal detachment. A
The vitreous is a transparent elastic hydrogel (Figure 14-1). It
potential space exists between the vitreous and the inner
occupies about 80% of the volume of the eye (Figure 14-2).
surface of the retina. Blood and exudates may accumulate
 During embryonic development, primary, secondary and tertiary
 in this space if the vitreous and retina separate, resulting in
vitreous are formed and laid down (Figure 14-3). Their genesis 
subhyaloid hemorrhage.
 is described in detail in Chapter 2. Briefly, the primary vitreous
 The collagen fbrils are also responsible for the numerous
is associated with the hyaloid vascular supply system, which
 attachments of the vitreous to the adjacent structures—the
nourishes the lens during development. The secondary vitreous
posterior lens capsule, the ora ciliaris retinae (the vitreous
is laid down around the primary vitreous and forms the defi-
base), and the optic nerve head (see Figure 14-4). Collagen
nitive (adult) vitreous, whereas the tertiary vitreous contributes
 fbrils are present in greater concentrations at the vitreous bases
to the formation of the lens zonules.
and around the optic disc, where attachment is the strongest.
The vitreous body is divided into the following zones
 The lens sits in a depression in the anterior face of the vitreous
(Figure 14-4):
cortex, the hyaloid fossa (patella fossa). Collagen fibrils form
attachments between the posterior lens capsule and the anterior
 1. Anterior vitreous, located anterior to the ora ciliaris retinae
vitreous. These attachments are especially significant in dogs.
(see Figure 14-4, area 5)
 2. Posterior vitreous, located posterior to the ora ciliaris
Removal of the posterior lens capsule, as in intracapsular lens
retinae (see Figure 14-4, area 7)
extraction, results in loss of vitreous.
Hyalocytes are numerous within the vitreous and are more 
 3. Cortex, which comprises the peripheral vitreous 
(see Figure 14-4, area 12), including:
numerous near the cortex. The functions of these cells are unclear,
a. Vitreous base, which is the attachment of the vitreous at
but they may possess secretory and phagocytic capabilities as
the ora ciliaris retinae (see Figure 14-4, area 6)
well as the potential for reversion to primitive fbioblasts able
 b. Peripapillary vitreous, located adjacent to the optic disc 
to form scar tissue. Mucopolysaccharides, containing a high
 proportion of hyaluronic acid, are intimately related to the collagen
(see Figure 14-4, area 10)
fibrils and hyalocytes and are present in higher concentration
4. Central vitreous, including Cloquet's canal (see Figures 
14-3 and 14-4, area 13). Cloquet's canal, which is a cleft in
where hyalocytes are common. Hyaluronic acid provides the
the vitreous where the hyaloid vasculature passed during
viscoelasticity of the vitreous body.
 embryonic development, is visible with the biomicroscope
With the exception of collagen and hyaluronic acid, aqueous
humor and vitreous are similar in composition, with free move-
(see Figure 14-3, B and C).
ment of many substances between them. The principles that govem
 entry of substances, including drugs, from the vascular circulation
Composition
 into the aqueous humor generally apply to the vitreous as well.
Vitreous is a complex gel with the following constituents:
Function
·Water (99%)
· Collagen fibers, which serve as a skeleton for the gel
The vitreous does not have a specific and clearly defined role in
·Cells (hyalocytes)
ocular physiology of the adult. It contributes to maintaining
·Hyaluronic acid
ocular volume and possibly the shape of the globe. It also helps 
maintain some ocular structures, notably the lens and retina, in
Collagen fbrils form a meshwork internal to the retina (the
 their correct anatomic locations. Also, it forms part of the optical
vitreous cortex) and intermingle with the fibers of the internal
 pathway that light must pass on its way to the retina. However, the
limiting membrane of the retina, thus forming a firm attach-
vitreous does not have a significant role in refraction of this
ment between the vitreous cortex and the retina (Figure 14-5).
light, because its refractive index is similar to that of the lens.
277
278
| SlATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOCY
Primary vitreous
(hyloid artery)
 Remains of primary vitreous
(Cloquet's canal)
Figure 14-1. Vitreous after dlissection of the sclera, choroid, and retina.
A banc of clark tissue can be seen posterior to the ora ciliaris retinae,
 circling the clorsal two thircds of the vitreous. This is neural retina that was
Secondary (adult) vitreous
firmly aclherent to the vitreous base and could not be cissected. The
B
vitreous also remains attached to the anterior segment (ciliary body, iris,
and lens). The vitreous is almost entirely gel anc thus is solid, maintaining
its shape even though situated on a surgical towel exposed to room air.
(From Yanoff M, Duker JS [2004l: Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Mosby,
St. Louis).
Tertiary vitreous
(lens zonules)
 Remains of primary
vitreous (Cloquet's canal)
+
Secondary (adult)
vitreous
Virtreous
compartment
Figure 14-3. Stages of vitreous clevelopment. A, Prirmary vitreous and
hyaloid vessels nourishing the embryonic lens. B, The seconclary vitreous
laid down around the primary vitreous, which conclenses into Cloquet's 
canal. The seconclary vitreous will become the aclult vitreous. C, Tertiary
Figure 14-2. The vitreous body (shaded area) occupies the posterior
viteous (lens zonules or ligarments) at the lens periphery. (Courtesy
compartment of the eye. (Moclified from Fine BS, Yanoff M [1979]: Ocular
Histology. Harper & Row, New York.)
Dr. G.A. Severin.)
PATHOLOGIC REACTIONS
 Because of its simple structure and lack of vascular and lymphatic
supply, the vitreous has a limited range of pathologic reactions,
as follows:
Liquefaction: Because of its high water content, the
vitreous gel may liquefy (syneresis) in response to many
13
12
stimuli (e.g., infection, trauma, uveitis, senile changes).
 After liquefaction, the vitreous separates from the retina,
10
encouraging retinal detachment from the underlying RPE.
Liquified vitreous may also enter the subretinal space
Figure 14-4. Relations and attachments of the vitreous bocy:
through retinal holes, predisposing to rhegmatogenous 
1, attachment of anterior zonular fibers to the lens; 2, attachment of
retinal detachment.
posterior zonular fibers to the lens; 3, attachment of anterior vitreous face
Cicatrization: After inflammation of surrounding tissues or
to posterior lens capsule; 4, anterior extrermity of Cloquet's canal
(Mittencorfs cot; 5, anteriormost attachment of vitreous base to mid pars
infection, scar tissue may form in the vitreous. These
plana; 6, region of vitreous "base": 7, region of clirminishing acherence of
vitreous bands may contract and detach the retina (traction 
vitreous base to retinal surface; 8, vitreous-retinal attachment; 9, vitreous-
detachment).
retinal attachment at margin of fovea centralis fabsent in domestic
Proliferative vitreoretinopathy: This reaction occurs in
animats); 10, attachment of posterior vitreous around optic dlisc; 11,
posterior extremity of Cloquet's canal (Bergmeister's papilla); 12, cortical
 association with retinal disease. In response to retinal 
vitreous; 13, central vitreous. Density of lines inclicates approximate
disease, glial or RPE cells proliferate on the innermost
relative cegrees of strength of attachment. (Modified from Fine Bs, Yanoff
retina or in the vitreous and form scars. Subsequenty, these
M [1979]: Ocular Histology. Harper & Row, New York.)
VitreouS |
279
of optic disc, which are surrounded by glial tissue, are called
 Bergmeister's papilla (see Figure 14-4, area 11). These appear
ophthalmoscopically, end-on, as red to white tufts originating
from the optic disc and extending anteriorly a variable distance
into the vitreous (see Figure 2-10, B, in Chapter 2). Similarly,
at the distal end of the artery, remains of its attachment to the
posterior lens capsule may be seen. The remains are known as
Mittendorf's dot (see Figure 14-4, area 4). It does not interfere
with vision, except for rare occasions when it induces focal,
posterior cataracts. A persistent artery, however, may extend
from the disc all the way to the posterior lens. Peisistence of the
hyaloid artery may be hereditary in the Doberman pinscher and
Sussex spaniel. In rats, the hyaloid artery may bleed into the
vitreous during normal atrophy.
 A persistent hyaloid artery and its attachment to the pos-
terior lens capsule must be differentiated from the following
conditions by the following means:
slla aln aui euan eaudiad a neau as snoa aui sti ainai
(a) have a basement mermbrane (b) that forms the inner limiting
·Posterior capsular and subcapsular cataracts: By accurate
mermbrane of the retina. The collagen fibrils (c) of the vitreous base form
 localization of the opacity. In the golden retriever and
a meshwork internal to the retina. These fibrils join the internal limiting
 Labrador retriever, Mittendorf's dot is differentiated from a
membrane. (From Hogan M], et al. [1971l: Histology of the Human Eye.
Saundlers, Philaclelphia.)
cataract on the basis of its smaller size and location on the 
 posterior lens capsule. The cataract is much larger and is
usually triangular, and careful examination may determine
fibrotic membranes may form that pull on the retina,
 that it is located in the posterior lens cortex, rather than
causing it to tear and detach.
capsule. Mittendorf's dot usually has the anterior remnant 
Vascularization: The vitreous has no blood supply, but
of the hyaloid artery attached as a small white “tail visible
 blood vessels may grow into it from an inflamed or
biomicroscopically.
malformed retina (neovascularization). These vessels often
·Normal lens sutures (especially in cattle and horses): By
are incomplete or fragile and are a source of vitreous
familiarity with the normal appearance
hemorrhage (e.g., in the collie eye anomaly).
·Vitreous bands: By the linear appearance of the bands,
· Infection and inflammation: These reactions are discussed
which are usually located outside Cloquet's canal as well as
later.
by the presence of other signs of injury or inflammation
Elongation: Elongation of the vitreous body causes
(see Acquired Disorders)
elongation of the axial length of the eye and, consequently.
·Persistent tunica vasculosa lentis and persistent hyperplastic
of the pathway that light must pass on its way to the retina.
primary vitreous: By the more extensive nature of the opacity
As a result, light that was previously focused on the retina
 on the posterior lens capsule (see following sections)
is now focused in front of the retina, thereby causing
shortsightedness (myopia). Such elongation occurs as a
Persistent Tunica Vasculosa Lentis
result of visual deprivation during the neonatal period. It
may be induced by lid suturing and other deprivation
This condition is similar to persistent hyaloid artery, the differ-
techniques during the critical developmental period in
ence being that it is the tunica vasculosa lentis (TVL), rather
 animal models of myopia. It may also occur naturally, as a
than the hyaloid artery, that has also failed to regress post-
result of neonatal cataracts or corneal opacities that cause 
natally. The TVL is visible as a netlike opacity on the posterior
visual deprivation, resulting in neonatal myopia (as well as
surface of the lens. Because the opacity is usually a very fine
abnormalities in the visual cortex). This is another reason
 matrix, it does not interfere with vision.
why congenital ocular opacities should be corrected as soon
as possible, before irreparable changes occur in the eye, and
 Persistent Hyperplastic Primary Vitreous
why third eyelid flaps and tarsorrhaphies should be
carefully considered in neonates.
Unlike the former two disorders, which involve failure of the
hyaloid artery and TVL to regress postnatally, this disorder
CONGENITAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL
involves fetal and postnatal hyperplasia of the hyaloid system,
ABNORMALITIES
TVL, and primary vitreous. Therefore the resulting opacity
(which varies in size) is usually more severe. The disorder may
 Persistent Hyaloid Artery
occur in cats and in most dog breeds, and it has been demonstrated
The hyaloid artery is part of the embryonic vascular supply of
to be hereditary in the Bouvier des Flandres, Staffordshire bull
the lens, which is described in Chapter 2. In most species, the
terrier, and Doberman pinscher. Extensive studies of PHPV in the
hyaloid artery atrophies within a few weeks after birth (see
 Doberman pinscher in The Netherlands have shown it to be an
Figure 14-3). An exception is ruminants, in which remains of
 autosomal incompletely dominant trait with variable expression.
the artery may be observed in a significant number of adults.
Clinically PHPV appears as a white or fbrovascular plaque
However, persistent remnants of varying extent may be found
in the posterior pupil near the posterior lens capsule and anterior
in any species. The remnants of the artery origins on the surface
vitreous (Figure 14-6). Vessel ingrowth and frank hemorrhage
280
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 14-7. Hyphema and vitreal hemorrhage. The latter may be
 observed as a clark opacity in the posterior segment. (Courtesy David J.
(s88ew
Figure 14-6. Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous in a golclen retriever.
Note the fibrovascular opacity with patent vessels near the posterior lens
· Severe retinitis and retinochoroiditis (e.g., canine
 capsule. The lesion is viewed in reflectec light from the tapetum.
 ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, brucellosis,
feline infectious peritonitis, feline leukemia virus; also-
into the vitreous and lens substance, calcium deposits, posterior
depending on geographic location—-intraocular mycotic
lenticonus, microphakia, lens coloboma, intralental pigmentation,
disease, including blastomycosis, coccidiomycosis,
 progressive cataracts, and elongated ciliary processes may also
cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis)
be present. Surgery of cataracts associated with PHPV carries
 Collie eye anomaly
a guarded prognosis due to opacifcation of the posterior lens
· As a sequel to intraocular surgery
capsule, the possibility of a patent blood vessel, and the need to
· Severe anterior uveitis of many different causes
combine the surgery with anterior vitrectomy.
 Small amounts of vitreal hemorhage may resorb, but larger
ACQUIRED DISORDERS
amounts may cause long-term visual disturbances. Whether a
Vitreous Degeneration
vitreous hemorrhage resorbs depends on the associated
 pathologic changes in adjacent tissues and on the location of the
Vitreous degeneration is separation of the fluid and solid con-
hemorhage within the vitreous body. Resorption is infrequent in
stituents of the vitreous into segregate fractions, resulting in vitreal
collie eye anomaly because neovascularization of the vitreous
 near the retina has occurred with rupture of some of the vessels.
elderly patients, or following inflammation, and may predispose
 In hypertensive retinopathy, resorption may occur if the hyper-
the eye to retinal detachment. Degeneration of the vitreous is
tension is controlled, but recurrent hemorhage is common owing
commonly demonstrated by ultrasonography in dogs with cataract
to the nature of the lesions, especially if the hypertension is not
as part of the preoperative screening of surgical candidates. In one
well controlled. In retinitis, retinochoroiditis, ocular trauma,
study of 124 eyes degeneration was found in 50% of subjects with
 and anterior uveitis, resorption is more likely if the underlying
       o 
 inflammation and vascular damage resolve.
cataract, and 100% with hypermature cataract. Eighty-six
 Conservative treatment, consisting of antinflammatory and
percent of eyes with lens-induced uveitis had vitreous degene-
 mydriatic drugs, is recommended for recent hemorrhages. Vitreal
ration, whereas 67% of those with cataracts but without uveitis
 membranes and traction bands may develop; these abnormalities 
were affected. The higher incidence of rhegmatogenous retinal
 may also cause secondary traction retinal detachments months
detachments in eyes with hypermature cataracts may be associ-
 after the primary cause of the hemorrhage has resolved (Figure
ated with this increased incidence of vitreal degeneration.
14-8). Therefore, if membranes and bands are seen, an intra-
ocular injection of tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) may be
Vitreous Hemorrhage
advocated. The aim of the injection is to break down fibrin
traction bands and thereby prevent vitreoretinal detachment.
 Because the vitreous does not have a vascular supply, vitreal
sp  on e si uonoaun un yons iog mouim an, [ai au
hemorhage is a relatively uncommon presentation (Figure 14-7).
after the primary event. If the TPA is injected too early, the
The source of the blood may be leakage from abnormally
hemorrhage may recur (because the clots that sealed the vessels
proliferating vessels, but it usually originates in retinal or uveal
 are also dissolved). The injection is ineffective if enough time
blood vessels due to the following:
has passed to allow fibrin organization.
· Hypertensive retinopathy in dogs and cats
Infection and Inflammation
· Clotting disorders (e.g., thrombocytopenia) and
coagulopathies
Inflammation of the vitreous is called hyalitis or vitritis.
· Ocular trauma
Because of its lack of vasculature, primary inflammation per se
ViTReouS |
281
probably represent degenerative changes in the vitreous. They
5
may also appear following vitritis, especially in horses, in
which case they usually contain blood or exudate. A focal light
47业
source with a binocular loupe or direct ophthalmoscope is
adequate to demonstrate these opacities. Vitreous floaters are
not responsible for the “fly-biting syndrome," in which an
31M
affected animal appears to be biting at moving objects in the
OUER
air. This syndrome is now believed to be due to seizures of the
FPS
temporal or occipital lobe and responds to appropriate medi-
cation. Surgical treatment of vitreous floaters is not required.
2
EDGE
Asteroid Hyalosis (Asteroid Hyalitis) and
2
Synchysis Scintillans
GRE
JOTH
These are two pathologic conditions with a very similar presen-
Figure 14-s. Ultrasounc image of retinal cletachment in a 6-year-old
tation. Both are characterized by the appearance of numerous,
small, refractile bodies scattered through the vitreous. Vision is
which is the cletached retina acherent to the globe at the optic nerve heacl
not affected. The two conditions may occur spontaneously in
and the ora ciliaris retinae. The hyperechoic opacities anterior to the
older animals and also in association with chronic inflam-
cetachec retina are fibrin strands that caused the cetachment.(Courtesy
Dr. 1. Aizenberg.)
matory and degenerative ocular disorders. In asteroid hyalosis
the particles consist of calcium and phospholipids complexes
(Figure 14-9). In synchysis scintillans the particles are composed
does not occur in the vitreous as in other tissues. However, the
of cholesterol. The two conditions can be distinguished
vitreous may be affected by inflammatory disorders of sur-
clinically based on the mobility of the particles. In asteroid
rounding tissues (e.g., chorioretinitis, optic neuritis, anterior
hyalosis the particles are attached to the collagen framework of
uveitis). The inflammation may cause opacification, hemorrhages,
the vitreous (Figure 14-10). Therefore they are fixed in the
syneresis, and cellular exudation. Vitreous haze is common in
vitreous and move only with head or globe movements. In
inflammatory disorders of the posterior globe, and its dis-
 appearance is a valuable indicator of the efficacy of treatment.
Reduction of this haze often improves vision. The treatment is
similar to that of vitreal hemorrhage. The primary cause of the
inflammation must be diagnosed and treated; the eye is treated
symptomatically with cycloplegic and antinflammatory drugs.
 Infection of the vitreous by a variety of microorganisms is seen
in penetrating injuries, systemic bacteremias, and ocular fungal
infections. After the initial infection the surrounding vitreous
liquefes and the infection spreads rapidly. Infections of the
vitreous are associated with endophthalmitis (inflammation of all 
tissues of the eye except the sclera) and may progress to vitreous
abscess. These infections must be treated aggressively with
topical and systemic antibiotics or antifungal drugs. Severe cases
are treated by intraocular injection of antimicrobial drugs, or
surgically, by vitrectomy (see relevant section). Hyalocentesis
Figure 14-9. Asteroid hyalosis in a dog. Note the numerous white
(tapping of the vitreous) may be conducted for diagnostic pur-
 particles scattered in the patient's vitreous body. (From Rubin 1F [1974]:
Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy. lea & Febiger, Philaclelphia.)
poses in cases that do not respond to medical therapy, with
samples submitted for cytology, culture, serology, and pathology.
The prognosis for these infections is usually very guarded.
The vitreous has also been implicated as a repository site for
B-scan
the antigens that cause the recurrent inflammation associated
DATE:
Jan12,1994
VECT:
with equine recurrent uveitis (ERU). In particular, antigens of
YE:
left
Leptospira, which are commonly associated with ERU, have been
58.9d
detected in the vitreous of affected horses. The involvement of the
vitreous in the pathogenesis of ERU has led to the development of
two novel treatment strategies. One consists of surgical removal
of the vitreous (vitrectomy, discussed later). The other is based
EYE
on the use of suprachoroidal implants for long-term release of
RAIN
cyclosporine, thereby suppressing the inflammatory reaction.
EC
Vitreous Opacities (Floaters)
40
58
 Floaters are small, mobile flakes that are seen in the vitreous.
Figure 14-10. Subretinal hematoma, vireous hemorhage, and asteroid
In most cases they are a benign finding in elderly patients and
hyalosis in a shih tzu. (Courtesy Dr. Ursula Dietrich.)
282
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
cause secondary glaucoma. Lens luxation is illustrated and dis-
RTEYE
cussed in detail in Chapter 13.
Aqueous Humor Misdirection Syndrome
direction syndrome occurs in approximately 1% of cats older
 than 6 years presented to private practitioners for routine health
care. In this disorder, aqueous humor is misdirected into the
vitreous via minute breaks in the hyaloid membrane (perhaps
 during blinking or upon eyelid squeezing) rather than entering
the posterior chamber. These breaks are suggested to act as
one-way valves, trapping pools of aqueous humor in the vitreous,
displacing the lens anteriorly (with intact lens zonules), dilating
the pupil, and uniformly shallowing the anterior chamber. As
the vitreal elements are compressed anteriorly it becomes much
more difficult for aqueous humor to cross the hyaloid mem-
Figure 14-11. Ultrasounc irmage of a vitreal mass, in this case a posterior
 brane. In some animals glaucoma may result. Therapy consists
luxated lens. (Courtesy Dr. 1. Aizenberg.)
 of suppressing aqueous humor production with topical carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors or, in intractable cases, removal of the
synchysis scintillans the bodies are mobile within the liquified
lens and anterior vitreous. Glaucoma is discussed in detail in
vitreous. If the head is moved, the particles can be seen whirling
Chapter 12.
like snowflakes in the vitreous, and then they slowly settle
ventrally.
Retinal Detachment
Vitreous Mass
As noted, lens luxation may facilitate anterior prolapse (or
movement) of the vitreous. Because of the attachment of the
The differential diagnosis of a mass in the vitreous includes the
 posterior vitreous to the inner retina, anterior movement of the
following entities:
vitreous may pull the retina off the choroid and cause traction
retinal detachment. It is important to note that anterior vitreous 
· Retinal detachment (see Figure 14-8)
prolapse may occur as a result of either anterior lens luxation
 Cataractous or normal, luxated lens (Figure 14-11)
(the lens pulls the vitreous forward) or posterior lens luxation (the
· Intraocular neoplasm (usually by extension from the urea)
lens being a "barrier"’ against vitreous movement, its posterior
· Hemorhage (acute or chronic) (see Figures 14-7 and 14-10)
luxation may facilitate such prolapse). Traction retinal detach-
·Foreign body
ment may also occur following the formation of vitreal mem-
· PHPV
branes or bands in the course of vitritis, infection or hemorhage.
· Persistent hyaloid artery
 As the membranes and bands contract, they may pull the neuro-
 Traction band or fibrous tissue
retina off the RPE (see Figure 14-8).
Vitreous abscess or endophthalmitis
The vitreous is also involved in the pathogenesis of
·Parasites (e.g., Diroflaria immitis, Toxocara canis larvae in
rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. This kind of detachment
dogs, Echinococcus spp., ophthalmomyiasis interna
is usually observed in elderly patients. Liquefied vitreous enters
[fly larvae])
spontaneously occurring retinal holes and percolates into the
 Cyst (from the pigmented epithelial layer of the ciliary
subretinal space, causing detachment of the neuroretina from the
body)
 RPE. Retinal detachment is discussed in detail in Chapter 15.
ROLEOF THEVITREOUSIN THE
SURGICAL AND DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
PATHOGENESIS OF OCVLAR DISEASES
Hyalocentesis
Vitreous and Lens Luxation
Hyalocentesis is the removal of a small amount of liquefied
If lens zonules break, the lens may be partially or totally luxated.
vitreous for cytologic or microbiologic analysis. Indications for
 In the early stages, when small numbers of lens zonules rupture,
hyalocentesis include diagnosis of vitreous opacities suspected
vitreous may escape into the anterior chamber and may be visible
to be infectious or neoplastic in origin. The procedure is per-
as fine strands in the anterior chamber or near the pupillary
formed with the use of general anesthesia, after thorough pre-
margin. Pigment may be seen in this prolapsed vitreous and is a
 operative preparation of the eye (see Chapter 5), and usually by
possible indicator of the presence of uveitis. As the number of
 an experienced veterinary ophthalmologist. Punctures must be
ruptured lens zonules rises, the stability of the lens decreases,
 accurately located in the pars plana ciliaris because more
and it may be subluxated within the hyaloid fossa, in the plane
anterior punctures can strike the lens and result in cataract, or
of the iris. Due to gravity the lens settles ventrally; the part of
else they may penetrate the pars plicata ciliaris and result in
the pupil that is no longer occupied by the lens is visible as an
severe intraocular hemorrhage (Figure 14-12 and Table 14-1).
aphakic crescent dorsal to the visible lens border. As the lens
On the other hand, punctures made too posteriorly perforate the
becomes fully luxated, more vitreous may prolapse into the
retina. A 22-to 26-gauge needl is directed into the material of
pupil or iridocorneal angle, obstruct the flow of aqueous, and
interest, while pointing toward the posterior pole to avoid the
VitreouS 
283
lens. An equal volume of balanced salt or lactated Ringer's
Vitrectomy
solution is used to replace the liquefed vitreous removed.
Vitrectomy is the removal of a portion of the vitreous body.
Hyalocentesis is performed by an experienced veterinary
Indications for vitrectomy include the following:
ophthalmologist for the diagnosis of serious intraocular dis-
· Severe intraocular infection
orders. It carries the risk of intraocular hemorrhage.
· Prophylactic treatment of glaucoma, in cases where the
 vitreous presents in the anterior chamber following lens
luxation or cataract surgery
· Surgical reattachment of a detached retina
· Recently vitrectomy has been advocated as surgical
 treatment for ERU, because the antigens that trigger the 
recurrent inflammation are postulated to be located in the 
Pars plana
Limbus
vitreous.
In the course of anterior segment surgery (removal of cataracts
and luxated lenses), small amounts of vitreous may present in
the anterior chamber. These may be removed easily using
sponges and scissors (Figure 14-13). When vitreous is removed
it must not remain between wound edges, where it would
interfere with wound healing, or in the anterior chamber, where 
it may lead to glaucoma. After lens luxation, syneresis is usually
present. When syneresis or loss of vitreous is anticipated, use
of hyperosmotic agents is advised to reduce the size of the
vitreous body and risk of its subsequent loss.
Figure 14-12. Hyalocentesis. Precise location of the point of insertion of
 More extensive vitrectomy is required in the treatment of
ay 0 a5o ww / 0 5 apaau (w 50 0 00) ane-9 0 - e
limbus, clepencling on the ocular quaclrant and globe size as cletermined
ocular injuries and for treatment of retinal detachments and
by calipers or ultrasonography, is of utmost importance to avoid
 vitreal traction bands. The procedure requires more sophisticated
intraocular trauma. (Mocified from Boeve MH, Stadles FC [1999|:
instrumentation and surgical approaches to the posterior
Diseases and surgery of the canine vitreous, in Gelatt KN [edlitorl:
segment of the eye (see Figure 14-13, C and D). The incidence
Veterinary Ophthalrmology. 3rd ed. Lippincott Williarms & Wilkins,
 of postoperative complications is relatively high. Because of
Phi lacelphia.)
the intimate associations among the collagen framework
of the vitreous body, lens capsule, and inner limiting membrane 
Table 14-1 | Location of the Pars Plana Ciliaris in
of the retina, removal of large amounts of vitreous carries a sig-
the Dog
 nificant risk of postoperative retinal detachment.
SITE (DISTANCE POSTERIOR
QUADRANT
TO THE LIMBUS)
Vitreous Replacement
Superotemporal
7 mm 
If larger amounts of vitreous are removed, the physical deficit
Superonasal
5-6 mm
must be replaced. Vitreous replacements are especially useful
Inferotermporal
5-6 mm
 in canine patients for maintaining retinal position after surgical
Inferonasal
ww 5
correction of retinal detachment, because head shaking tends to
Modified from Smith PJ, et al. (1997): Identification of sclerotomy sites for
disrupt the delicate retinal reattachments. Vitreous substitutes are
posterior segment surgery in the dog. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 7:180.
also used to roll out folded retina before reattachment and to
Figure 14-13. Vitrectormy can be performed rmanually or using
automated instruments. If small amounts of vitreous are
present in the anterior chamber (e.g., following lens luxation
a ene paowa a ue asu ans ee o
vitreous is pulled out with a sponge (A) and cut with scissors
A
B (B). Removal of large amounts of vitreous (e.g., during surgical
reattachment of the retina or as glaucoma prophylaxis) is
performec using a vitrector. The instrument may be inserted
through the anterior charmber (C) or using a scleral port (D).
a ai aa s sual  sas le u aon
from Deustch TA, Feller DB [1985l: Paton and Coldberg's
Management of Ocular Injuries. Saunders, Philaclelphia.)
C
D
284
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
float pieces of dropped lens into the anterior chamber for removal
Fruhauf B,et al.(1998): Surgical management of equine recunent uveitis
 during cataract extraction. Many different substances, including
with single port pars plana vitrectomy. Vet Ophthalmol 1: 137.
Gemensky-Metzler AJ, Wilkie DA (2004): Surgical management and
 perfluorocarbons, silicone, and fluorosilicone, have been used.
histologic and immunohistochemical features of a cataract and retrolental
Complications from the toxicity of these substances include
plaque secondary to persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
cataract formation, keratopathy, and glaucoma.
Jentis/persistent hyperplasic primary vilteous (PHTVL/PHPV) in a
bloodhound puppy. Vet Ophthalmol 7:369.
Gilger BC, et al. (2005): Ocular parameters related to drug delivery in the
Advanced Vitreoretinal Surgical Techniques
canine and equine eye: aqueous and vitreous humor volume and sc leral
surface area and thickness. Vet Ophthalmol 8:265.
Many surgical techniques have been developed for the
Gilger BC,et al.(2001): Use of an intravitreal sustained-release cyclosporine
reattachment and prevention of retinal detachments. Examples are
delivery device for teatment of equine Tecurrent uveitis.Am J Vet Res
laser and cryosurgical retinopexy, pneumatic retinopexy, scleral
62:1892.
buckling procedures, and pars plana vitrectomy; most of these are
o e s  e o    e  
experimental uveitis in horses. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 76:239.
applicable to the canine eye. For details of these methods, which
Gilger BC,et al.(2000):Long-tem effect onthe equne eye of anintavitreal
are beyond the scope of this text, the reader is referred to a recent 
device used for sustained release of cyclosporine A. Vet Ophthalmol 3: 105.
review (Vainisi and Wolfer, 2004). The scope and complexity of
Gonig C, et al. (2006): Evaluation of acoushic wave propagaion velociies in
the surgery depends on the extent of the retinal detachment. Laser
the ocular lens and vitreous tissues of pigs, dogs, and rabbits. Am I Vet 
retinopexy and cryoretinopexy are used to "weld" the retina to the
Res 67:288.
Grahn BH,et al. (2004): Inherited retinal dysplasia and persistent
 choroid in cases of retinal holes or partial detachment, in order
 hyperplastic primary vitreous in miniature sc hnauzer dogs. Vet Ophthalmol
 to stop progression to full retinal detachment. More advanced
7:151.
techniques and specialized equipment are required to reattach a
Kroll MM, et al.(200l): Intaocular pressure measurements obtained as part
ofacomprehensive geriatichealthexaminationfomcatssevenyearsof
fully detached retina. Prognosis depends, to a large extent, on the
age and older. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1406.
 duration of the detachment before reattachment, and it is accepted
Leon A (1988): Diseases of the vilreous in the dog and cat. J Small Anim
that retinas reattached within 4 weeks may regain some useful
Pract 29:448.
vision. A recent retrospective study of 500 canine cases reported
Leon A, et al. (1986): Hereditary persistent hyperplasic pimary viteous in
theStaffordshire bullterier.JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 22:765.
 restoration of some vision in 76% of patients.
Martin CL (1978):Zonular defects in the dog:aclinical and scanning
electron microscopic study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:571.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
On J etal.(998Persistent hlasti pmay vieous PHV)n w
Siberian husky dogs. J Vet Med Sci 60:263.
Allgoewer I, Pfefferkom B (2001): Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Peiffer RL, Weintraub BA (1979): Clinical and histopathologic effects of
Jentis and persistent hyperplastic primary vilreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in two
Jensec tomy and anterior vitrectomy in the canine eye. I Am Anim Hosp
cats. Vet Ophthalmol 4:161.
Assoc 15:421.
Bayon A, et al. (2001): Ocular complications of persistent hyperplastic
Rubin LF (1963): Asteroid hyalosis in the dog. Am J Vet Res 24: 1256.
 primary vilreous in three dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 4:35.
Smith PI (i99): Surgery of the canine posterior segment, in Gelatt KN
Tetrievers.I:proliferative vitreoretinopathy.ArchOphthalmol103:848
Wilkins, Philadelphia, p. 935.
Boeve MH, Stades FC (199g): Diseases and surgery of the canine vilteous, in
Smith Pl, et al. (1997): Identifcation of sclerotomy sites for posterior
segment surgery in the dog. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 7:180.
& Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Stades FC (1980): Persistent hyperplastic tumica vasculosa lentis and
BoroffkaSA (2005): Ultrasonographic evaluation of pre- and postnata]
development of the eyes in beagles. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:72.
pathological aspects. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:791.
Boroffka SA,et al.(1998): UtrasonogTaphic diagnosis of persistent
StadesFC(I90)Persistenthypelastictunicavasculosalentisand
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis/persistent hyperplastic primary
sanoa sesud uego ut snoaa Aeid ose adq ssd
vitteous in two dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:440.
and results of surgery.JAmAnim Hosp Assoc 16:393.
Chrisman CL (1991): Problems in Small Amimal Neurology, 2nd ed. Lea &
Stades FC(1980):Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosalentis and
Febiger, Philadelphia.
A[s o u (AHALH sna Aed os[aq ssid
Colitz CM, et al. (2000): Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lenbis and
Telated Dobeman pinschers: clinical aspects. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
persistent hypeplasic primay vieous i tansgenic line TgN326Rpw.
16:739.
Vet Pathol 37:422.
Tolentino Fl, et al.(1965): Biomicroscopy of the vilreous in collie dogs with
Cullen CL, Grahn BH (2004): Diagnoslic ophthalmology: persistent hyperplastic
vilreous abnormalities. Arch Ophthalmol 73:700.
bunica vasculosa lentis and primary vilreous. Can Vet I 45:433.
Vainisi SJ, Wolfer JC (2004): Canine retinal surgery. Vet Ophthalmol 7:291.
Deeg CA, et al. (200 1): Immune Tesponses to Tetinal autoantigens and
van der Woerdt A,et al. (1993): Ulrasonogaphic abnomalities in the eyes
Deptides inequine Tecurrent uveitis.Invest OphthalmolVisSci42:393.
of dogs with cataracts: 147 cases (1986-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Dietich U (1996): Ultrasonogtaphic examination of the eyes of dogs with
203:838.
cataracts using the combined B-mode/vector A-scan system, dissertation,
Wollanke B, et al. (2001): Serum and vitreous humor antibody titers in and
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat, Munich.
isolation of Leptospira interrogans from horses with recurrent uveiis.
Duddy JA,et al. (1983): Hyaloid patency in neonatal beagles. Am J Vet Res
J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:795.
44:2344.
Zeiss CJ, Dubielzig RR (2004): A morphologic study of intraviteal
Epstein DL, et al. (1979): Expernimental perfusions through the anterior and
membranes associated with intraocular hemorhage in the dog.
viteous chambers with possible relationships to maligmant glaucoma.
Vet Ophthalmol 7:239.
Am I Ophthalmol 88:1078.
Chapter
RETINA
Ron Ofri
CELLULAR ANATOMY
PATHOLOGIC MECHANISMS
RETINOPATHY
PHYSIOLOGY AND BIOCHEMISTRY
CONGENITAL RETINAL DISORDERS
RETINAl DETACHMENT
APPLIED ANATOMY (OPHTHALMOSCOPIC
VARIATIONS)
unpigmented in the tapetal fundus and cannot be seen clinically;:
 he retina is the organ responsible for transducing light into
therefore it could be argued that the name RPE in this area is a
neuronal signals that are eventually perceived as a visual image.
misnomer, because the cells are nonpigmented retinal pigment
One might say that the entire purpose of the eye is to enable
epithelium. The lack of RPE pigment in the tapetal area allows
focused light to strike a functional retina.
 incoming light that has not been absorbed by the photoreceptors to
More specifically, the light strikes the photoreceptors, a
reach the tapetum. The tapetum acts as a mirror that reflects this
complex layer of specialized cells—the rods and cones—which
light back toward the photoreceptor layer, thus increasing the
 contain photopigments that produce chemical energy on expo-
 probability that it will be absorbed by the photopigment and
sure to light. This energy is converted (transduced) into electrical
contribute to visual sensation in dim light (Figure 15-3).
 energy, which is processed by the retina and transmitted by the
optic nerve, via the optic chiasm, optic tracts, lateral geniculate
 Normal function of the pigment epithelium is essential to retinal
body, and optic radiations, to the visual cortex.
integrity and function.
The retina is a unique organ in that it can be studied non-
invasively with the ophthalmoscope to show in vivo intricate
The RPE has two main functions. The first is to serve as
details of pathologic processes that in most other organs are
metabolic interface between the photoreceptors and their
only visible histopathologically, or during invasive surgery.
 choroidal blood supply, supplying metabolites and removing
This enables the clinician to correlate clinical findings with 
waste from the outer retina. The second function is to recycle
histopathologic findings and may frequently allow specific,
the “used" (or bleached) photopigment of the photoreceptors.
 accurate diagnosis.
 Discs containing the photopigment are continually synthesized
and move from the base of the photoreceptor outer segment to-
CELLULAR ANATOMY
ward its distal end. After the photopigment absorbs the energy
 of the incoming light and transduces it into a neuronal signal,
Broadly speaking, the retina can be regarded as a three-neuron
 the disc is shed and phagocytized by the engulfing RPE (Figure
sensory unit, because photoreceptors relay the visual signal
15-4). The recycling of the pigment by the RPE and the pro-
through bipolar cells and onto the ganglion cells (Figure 15-1).
duction of new discs by the photoreceptor outer segments are
However, this is a gross simplification, and traditionally the retina
essential for the retina's sensitive response to light. The RPE
is described as having 10 layers. The structure of these layers is
 also has a phagocytic role in retinal inflammations (see later).
summarized in Table 15-1, and their function is detailed below.
 Layers 2 through 10 are collectively called the sensory retina or
From the outside (facing the choroid and sclera) to the inside
 the neuroretina because they process the neuronal signal, or visual
(facing the vitreous) these layers are as follows (Figure 15-2):
 sensation (as opposed to the RPE, which has only a supporting
role). It may be remembered from Chapter 2 that the neuroretina
 1. Retinal pigment epithelium
Photoreceptor layer
and the RPE originate from two different embryonic layers.
2.1
 3. External limiting membrane
The photoreceptor layer (layer 2) is composed of the outer
segments of the rods and cones, which contain the visual photo-
4.（
 Outer nuclear layer
 pigments within discs stacked like a pile of coins (Figure 15-5).
 5. Outer plexiform layer
6. Inner nuclear layer
This is the site where vision is "initiated," because it is here that
7. Inner plexiform layer
the process of phototransduction, or the conversion of a visual
stimulus into an initial neuronal signal, ocurs (see Visual
8. Ganglion cell layer
9. Optic nerve fber layer
 Photopigments). Therefore the previous statement, that the
10. Internal limiting membrane
purpose of the eye is to enable focused light to strike the retina,
could be refined—light should be focused precisely on the
The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) (layer 1) is the outer-
 photoreceptor layer. As noted, a result of the phototransduction 
most layer of the retina, facing the choroid. It is pigmented in 
process is the bleaching and shedding of the photopigment
 the nontapetal part of the fundus of domestic animals and gives 
by the outer segments, and its subsequent phagocytosis and
a homogenous brown-black color to this area. It is normally
recycling by the RPE.
285
286
I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
NEURONAL CONNECTIONS IN THE RETINA
Table 15-1 | Summary of Retinal Structure
AND PARTICIPATING CELLS
LAYER
CONSTITUENTS
 Internal limiting 
membrane 
 1. Retinal pigment epithelium
 Pigment epithelial cells 
 2. Photoreceptor layer
Outer segments of photoreceptors;: 
 Ganglion cell
 processes of Muller's cells
 3. External limiting membrane 
Terminal processes joining rods.
 cones, and Miller's cells
4. Outer nuclear layer
Nuclei of rods and cones
 5. Outer plexiform layer
 Axons of rods and cones synapse
with clenclrites of bipolar and
Amacri
ne cell
horizontal cells and with other
Bipolar
Inner nuclear
Horizontal cell
photoreceptors
cell
layer
 6. lnner nuclear layer
Nuclei of bipolar, Miller's,
horizontal, and amacrine cells
7. Inner plexiform layer 
 Axons of bipolar and amacrine.
 cells synapse with clendlrites of
ganglion cells
8. Canglion cell layer 
Cell bodies of ganglion cells 
 9. Nerve fiber layer
Axons of ganglion cells
Externallimiting
10. 1nternal limiting membrane
 Basement membrane and
membrane
footplates of Miller's cells 
 Muller's
fber (glia)
(see Figures 15-5, A, and 15-6). The cells also perform impor-
tant metabolic functions, such as energy storage and ionic
Cone
regulation.
 The outer nuclear layer (layer 4) consists of the nuclei of the
Rod
rods and cones. The outer plexiform layer (layer 5) is a synaptic
layer. Here, axonal extensions of the photoreceptors dilate to 
Figure 15-1. Rocls anc cones relay a visual signal through bipolar cells 
form synaptic expansions, which synapse with dendrites of
onto ganglion cells. Amacrine and horizontal cells contribute to
bipolar cells as well as with adjacent photoreceptors. This is the
processing of the signal, while Muller's cells provide structural support.
(From Yanoff M, Duker ]S [2004]: Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Mosby.
site of the first synapse, which the neuronal visual signal must 
St. Louis.)
 pass, and hence a potential site for its initial processing.
The inner nuclear layer (layer 6) contains the following
four types of nuclei: (1) bipolar cells, (2) Miller's cells, (3)
The external limiting membrane (layer 3) is formed by terminal
horizontal cells, and (4) amacrine cells. Bipolar cells synapse
 processes joining the cell membranes of rods, cones, and Muiller's
with photoreceptor cells in the outer plexiform layer.
cells. Miller's cells extend across the entire retina, from the
 Horizontal and amacrine cells are lateral communicating cells 
 extemal limiting membrane to the intemal limiting membrane, and 
that modulate the neuronal activity and the visual signal.
therefore serve as its structural "skeleton." Small Muiller's cell
The inner plexiform layer (layer 7) is the second synaptic
 processes pass between the outer limbs of rods and cones
layer, consisting of axons of bipolar, horizontal, and amacrine
contributing to the formation of the outer limiting membrane
cells and dendrites of ganglion cells. Numerous synapses occur
Internal limiting
Nerve fiber layer {
.membrane
Ganglion↑
Ganglion
cell layer 
Nerve fiber layer
Inner plexiform
Interplexiform 
 Ganglion cell layer
layer
Amacrine
Inner plexiform layer
Inner
layer
Inner nuclear layer
Bipolar
Outer plexiform layer
Outer
plexiform
layer
Outernuclearlayer
Outer nucleal
External limiting
layer
membrane
Photoreceptor layer
Cone
Retinal pigment
 Hetinal pigment
A
epithelium 
B
epithelium 
Figure 15-2. A, Plan of the retinal layers. All 10 cellular and synaptic layers are inclicatecl. B, Light micrograph
of fullthickness view of the retina, with the architecture corresponding to the layers indicated in A. (From
Rermington LA [2005|: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nd edl. Butterworth-Heinemann, St. louis.)
RetiNA |
287
Nuclei of axons in the optic nerve lie in the ganglion cell layer
of the retina.
Rods
Intuitively, it may seem that the orientation of the retina,
and cones
with the photoreceptors being the outermost layer facing the
 choroid and the ganglion cells the innermost layer facing the
Pigment
vitreous, is illogical. Indeed, this anatomic arrangement is
Tapetum
epithelium
called an inverted retina—incoming light must transverse the
Choriocapillaris
entire retina to be absorbed by the outer photoreceptors, and the
generated signal must again transverse the entire retina to exit
Tapetal fundus
Nontapetal fundus
the eye through the axons of the inner ganglion cells. The
Figure 15-3. Function of the tapetur. Three incoming photons are
shown. Two are absorbed by the photoreceptors and contribute to a visual
 requirements of the photoreceptors, which necessitate placing
sensation, andl the third passes through the retina without being absorbedl.
 In the nontapetal fundus (right) this photon's energy dissipates in the 
these cells next to their "private' blood supply, that is, the choroid
a  snpun eade a urpasem aaays pue wnayia uaid
(see next section).
photon is reflected back onto the photoreceptors. ln this case it is
absorbed and contributes to vision, thus increasing sensitivity to low
Blood Supply
levels of light. Because the photon is eventually absorbed by a
photoreceptor that is not in its original trajectory, the resulting image is
blurredl. This blurring affects the acuity of claytirme vision but has less
 The retina is the most metabolically active tissue in the body, as 
irnpact at night,when the cones are not active.Note that the overlying
indicated by its high oxygen consumption. Therefore in most
retinal pigment epithelium is pigmented where there is no tapetum and
species it has a dual blood supply. The outer retina (i.e., the
nonpigmented over the tapetum.
 photoreceptors) is supplied by the choroid, and the inner retina
and midretina are supplied by inner retinal vessels, which 
 are usually visible ophthalmoscopically on the inner retinal
surface. Arterioles, capillaries, and venules originating in these
inner vessels penetrate the retina to supply the midretina. Inter-
 ruption of either choroidal or retinal vasculature quickly results in
ischemia and severe, irreversible loss of function, despite reserves
of glycogen within Muller's cells. (The clinical implication of
 this feature is that retinal detachment must be treated early to
avoid irreversible loss of function.) The blood-retina barrier
therefore has two components. The first is the RPE, which
separates the retina from the choroid. The second component is
formed by the endothelial cells of the inner retinal capillaries
and their basement membrane. Both of these barriers limit the 
Figure 15-4. Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE, blue) phagocytosis of
passage of substances into the retina. There is litle extracellular
photoreceptor outer segments (brown). The phagosorme, containing the
ingested material consisting of bleached photopigment, enters the RPE
space in the retina, and transport of solutes from capillaries
cytoplasm, where it merges with lysosomes to facilitate cligestion of the
occurs via Miller's cells and astrocytes.
outdated mermbranes. (Adapted from Steinberg RH, et al. [1977|: Pigment
In animals, the inner retina is supplied by vessels arising
epithelial ensheathrment anc phagocytosis of extrafoveal cones in human
from the short posterior ciliary arteries (which are therefore
retina. Philos Trans R Soc lonc 277:459.1
called cilioretinal arteries) that penetrate the sclera in a circle
around the optic disc. A notable exception is in primates,
whose retinas are supplied by a single central retinal artery.
in the inner plexiform layer between bipolar and ganglion cells,
 making them susceptible to ischemia due to occlusion. Retinas
 and laterally between horizontal and amacrine cells and bipolar
 of domestic animals are classified according to the pattern of
 and ganglion cells. These lateral connections between cells
their inner retinal vasculature (Table 15-2). The most common
coordinate and integrate retinal function.
 pattern is holangiotic, whereby most of the inner retinal surface 
The ganglion cell layer (layer 8) consists of cell bodies of
is transversed by blood vessels (Figure 15-7). In merangiotic
the ganglion cells. Except in the central retina, the ganglion cell 
 retinas, the vessels extend from the optic disc laterally and
layer is usually one cell thick. Axons of ganglion cells form the 
medially but other regions of the retina are uncovered (Figure 
nerve fiber layer (layer 9). They run parallel to the retinal
 15-8), whereas in paurangiotic retinas only the area around the
surface and converge onto the optic disc. Here they form
 optic disc is supplied by short, peripapilary inner retinal vessels
bundles of nerve fibers that constitute the optic nerve, which
(Figure 15-9). In species with paurangiotic supply, such as the
exits the eye through the lamina cribrosa (a sievelike opening
horse, the retina therefore depends more on choroidal supply;
in the sclera). These ganglion cell axons will reach their first
thus the consequences of interruption to choroidal supply by
synapse in the lateral geniculate body (although those axons
 trauma or anemia are more serious for the equine retina. The
contributing to the pupillary light response (PLR) will synapse
avian fundus is characterized by the presence of a pecten—a
in the pretectal nucleus).
pigmented vascular structure protruding into the vitreous from
The innermost layer, facing the vitreous, is the interna!
the retina (Figure 15-10). The avian retina is usually avascular,
limiting membrane (layer 10). It is a basement membrane to
 and the pecten may have a nutritional role. A similar structure,
which the inner ends of Muiller's cells are closely attached (see
a conus papillaris, is found in many reptilian and amphibian
Figure 15-1).
species (Figure 15-11).
288
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOCY
Spherule
Pedicle
Outer
plexiform
Inner
layer
fiber
Muiller's.
cell
Cell
body
Outer
Figure 15-5. A, Photoreceptor cells. The cliscs of
nuclear
the outer segrments (facing the retinal pigment
Outer
layer
epithelium [RPEl] contain the photopigment
fiber
External
required for vision. The cells inner segments
limiting
 contain the mitochoncria. The rod spherule and
membrane
cone peclicle are the synaptic expansions of the
Myoid<
photoreceptors where their axons synapse with
Inner
clencrites of bipolar cells in the outer plexiform 
segment
layer. Portions of Miller's cells (dotted fines) are
Ellipsoid
shown acljoining the rocs anc cones. B, Retina
Cilium 
(x1000). Rod and cone outer segments are
shown in close contact with the underlying RPE.
Cilium
Photoreceptor
Above them, the inner segments are visible (Rod,
layer
Cone). Photoreceptor nuclei are located at the
Outer
top, in the outer nuclear layer. (A from
segment
Remington 1A [2005l: Clinical Anatomy of the
Visual System, 2nd edl. Butterworth-Heinemann,
St. Louis; B from Krause W], Cutts JH [1981]:
Concise Text of Histology. Williams & Wilkins,
Baltimore.)
Rod
Cone
Outer
-Nucleus of rod
limiting
-Nucleus of cone
membrane
Cone
-Rod
Inner
Inner
B
segment
segment
Outer
segments
Pigment
epithelium-
 Table 15-2 ↑ Classification of Retinal Vascular Patterns
TYPE
FEATURES
EXAMPLES
Holangiotic
The whole inner retina receives a clirect blooc supply.
Most mammals, inclucling the cog, cat, cow, sheep, rat,
 either from a central artery (in primates) or from
mouse, and primates
cilioretinal arteries that ermerge as several branches 
 from or around the optic cisc (in most other mammals)
Merangiotic
 Blood supply localized to the nasal and temporal parts 
Rabbit
 of the inner retina
Paurangiotic
The vessels are minute and extend only a short distance
Horse, rhinoceros, elephant, marsupials
 from the optic clisc, leaving most of the retina avascular
Anangiotic
Inner retinal surface is clevoicd of blood vessels 
 Most nonmammalians, includling birds, reptiles, and
amphibians; some mammals, inclucing beaver,
chinchilla, porcupine, armadlillo, sloth, guinea pig.
and bats
RetinA |
289
Internal
 limiting mem.
Table 15-3 | Characteristics of Rods and Cones
Nerve
RODS
CONES
fiber I.
 Function in low light levels 
Function in high light levels
(scotopic)
(photopic)
.Ganglion
 Sensitive to small change in
 Insensitive to small change in light
cell l.
light intensity
 intensity
 low visual discrimination
High visual discrimination (high
(low acuity)
 Responsive to blue light
 Responsive to red light
Internal 
 No color differentiation: 
Color dlifferentiation: dlichromatic,
plexiform I.
monochromatic
 trichromatic, or tetrachromatic
absorbance
 Sensitive to motion
 Sensitive to contrast
 Detect light flashing at low
 Detect light flashing at high
frequency (low FFF)
frequency (high FFF)
More in peripheral retina 
Internal
More in central retina
nuclear l.
FFF,Flicker fusion frequency.
inevitably some axons have more than one photoreceptor
(typically rods) associated with them. By converging large
numbers of rods in a particular area onto a single bipolar cell,
External
and by converging several bipolar cells onto a ganglion cell, the 
plexiform I.
rod pathway can amplify the response to low levels of light
(Figure 15-12). This is because just a single photon falling
 anywhere in a large area can activate the regional ganglion cell
(see Figure 15-12, left panel). However, this amplifcation
occurs at the expense of fine discrimination—if this regional
..External
ganglion cell fires, there is no way of knowing which of its
nuclear l.
associated rods was hyperpolarized by a photon. Maximum
visual discrimination occurs when one photoreceptor is con-
nected to one bipolar cell and to one ganglion cell, which is the 
External
typical synaptic cone pathway (see Figure 15-12, right panel).
limiting mem.
This is because the firing of any given ganglion cell can be
 triggered only by hyperpolarization of a single, specific cone that 
is associated with this ganglion cell. However, more photons are
Figure 15-6. Structure of Muiller's cells. Note how the (dlark colorel) cell
required for the activation of this system, making it active only at
transverses 9 of the 10 retinal layers, thus leacing structural support to the 
entire retina anc forrming the outer ancd inner limiting membranes. a,
high intensities of light. The effect of retinal anatomy and
Raclial processes; b, honeycomb meshwork; c, horizontal fibers; d, fiber
function on vision is described in detail in Chapter 1.
baskets; t., layer; mem., membrane. (From Hogan M], et al. [1971l:
 The retinas of birds and primates possess a specialized area
Histology of the Hurman Eye. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.
called the fovea. This region is populated only by cones (and
their associated bipolars and ganglion cells) and provides these 
PHYSIOLOGY AND BIOCHEMISTRY
species with their high resolution and rich color vision. In most 
Rods and Cones
(nonprimate) mammalian species, this function is served by a
region called the area centralis, which has a relatively high
As mentioned earlier, the outer segments of the rods and cones
cone concentration. In these species, however, rods outnumber
contain light-sensitive photopigments that absorb the energy of
cones even in the area centralis, accounting for the lower visual 
incoming light particles (photons). Because rods and cones have
resolution and greater light sensitivity of most domestic
differing functions (Table 15-3), the pigments in each are differ-
 species. In all animals, including those that possess a fovea, the
ent, and they also vary with species. Rods are much more
 rpd-to-cone ratio rises towards the peripheral retina, which is
sensitive than cones to low levels of light and to small changes
typically characterized by low-resolution, light-sensitive vision
in illumination. Therefore they function in dim environments
(Figure 15-13). Some nocturnal animals have a pure rod retina
and at night (scotopic vision). Rods are also responsible for
with no cones, whereas some raptor species have two foveas,
processing motion. Cones are less sensitive to small
giving these birds very high visual resolution.
fluctuations in light levels, functioning predominately at high
levels of illumination (photopic vision). On the other hand,
Visual Photopigments
 cones are capable of greater visual discrimination than rods,
 thus providing for high-resolution vision; in many species, cones 
Molecules that absorb light are termed photopigments. Visual
also contain pigments for color vision.
photopigments in the photoreceptors can absorb a range of
 Some of the difference in sensitivity between rods and cones
wavelengths, with each class of photopigment having peak 
is accounted for by retinal summation. For instance, there are
absorption at a particular wavelength. The molecule is
 approximately 130 million photoreceptors in the human retina
also capable of absorbing other wavelengths with decreasing
but only 1.2 million axons in the optic nerve. This means that
efficiency, thus forming a bell-shaped curve of absorption
290
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
A
B
C
D
F
Figure 15-7. Holangiotic vascular supply of the retina in various species. A, Dog. Note the color anc shape of
disc, caused by myelination of the optic nerve fibers, and the fact that the veins form a venous circle on the
Jo ypel o suimo 'ssip ydo auues aui ueu hapunon pue sayep s! ysip aul je 'a 'osp ydo aun jo aeuns
myelination. The veins stop at the dlisc margin anc do not cross its surface. The arteries of the feline retina are
fewer and less torturous compared with those of the canine retina. C, Sheep. Major arteries and veins are paired
anc intertwined, and the optic clisc is kiclney shapecl. D, Cow. The general appearance is similar to that of a sheep
funclus, except that the optic cisc is oval. E, Albino rat. A round optic cisc, with vessels racliating outward like
sun rays. F, Owl monkey. In prirmates, the vessels cross over the surface of the unmyelinatec optic clisc. (A anc 
C to F courtesy University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.
versus wavelength, with its peak is known as the absorption
which generates a neuronal signal, as detailed in the next
maximum, or Amax (Figure 15-14).
section (Photochemistry). The opsin is the part of the molecule
Visual photopigment molecules consist of two parts, a
that determines the wavelength the photopigment will absorb,
 chromophore (which is a derivative of vitamin A) and a protein,
thus allowing the eye to perceive color in that spectrum. There-
or opsin. The chromophore is the part of the molecule that
fore species possessing trichromatic vision, such as primates,
 transduces the energy of the light photon into a chemical reaction,
have three cone populations as defined by their respective
RetiNA |
291
Figure 15-s. A merangiotic blood supply of the inner retina in an albino
rabbit. Only the nasal and temporal retinas are suppliecd by vessels that
can be seen at the optic disc at the 3 o'clock and 9 o'clock positions. The
thick red bands elsewhere in the fundus are choroidal blood vessels.
ea-g ue u eujai auul au jo Aiddns poog soisuened  6-st amsi
(Courtesy University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology
old Welsh pony. Note that vessels are restricted to the area arounc the
Service Collection.}
optic dlisc. (From Rubin 1F [1974]: Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmology. lea
& Febiger, Philaclelphia.)
opsins. These three opsin populations enable the cones to
Photochemistry
 blue). The richness of the human color vision, and the number
of shades we can see, is made possible by the overlapping
When a photon of light is absorbed by a rhodopsin molecule, it 
 absorption curves of these three primary colors. Species with
initiates a chemical process that results in phototransduction of
 dichromatic vision have two classes of cones (possessing two
 its energy into a neuronal signal: The opsin breaks off the
types of opsins). Contrary to popular belief that animals see in
 chromophore (i.e., 1l-cis retinal aldehyde) and the chromophore 
black-and-white, most domestic species, including dogs, horses,
 is isomerized into the more stable all-trans retinal aldehyde.
and ruminants, are dichromatic, enabling these animals limited
 The isomerization triggers a complex chain reaction involving
color vision consisting of two primary colors and their inter-
numerous enzymes. The final step in this cascade is hydrolysis
mediate shades; cats may even possess trichromatic vision.
of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) into GMP by
Tetrachromatic species, such as birds, have a fourth class of
 phosphodiesterase. The resulting decrease in cGMP levels closes
cones, with an extra opsin absorbing ultraviolet light and allow-
sodium channels in the outer segments, leading to hyper-
 ing for color vision that is richer than that of humans.
polarization of the photoreceptor; that is, a neuronal signal.
The photopigment that has been studied most extensively is
(Photoreceptors are exceptional neurons in that they are
rhodopsin. This photopigment, found in rods, also consists of a
depolarized in their resting state [at darkness] and are hyper-
chromophore and an opsin. The rod chromophore is a vitamin
 polarized following excitation [by light].) Mutations in the genes
A, derivative (ll-cis retinal aldehyde). The rod opsin has an
encoding for any of the enzymes involved in this cascade cause
absorption maximum of approximately 495 nm (see Figure 15-
inherited retinal degeneration in a number of species, notably
14). Much of what we know of visual photochemistry comes
 dogs and humans (see Inherited Retinopathies).
from the study of rhodopsin, although it is assumed that cone
 One of the by-products of the phototransduction process is
 photopigments function similarly.
the isomerized chromophore, all-trans retinal aldehyde. This
Retina
Choroid
Sclera
Figure 15-10. A, Structure of the pecten,
showing its relationship to the entrance
of the optic nerve and its vascular
connections. The supplying artery sends
Efferent
a branch to each foldl. The efferent vein
vein
receives a branch from each angle of the
foldl. B, Ophthalmoscopic view of the
funclus of a barn owl (Strix ffammea).
Note that no vessels can be seen on
Pecten-
the surface of the retina. (A modlified
Optic
from Duke-Elder S [1958]: System of
nerve
Ophthalmology, Val 1. Mosby, St. Louis; B
courtesy University of California, Davis,
Veterinary
 Ophthalmology  Service
Collection.)
A
Supplying artery
B
292
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
RODS
CONES
Bipolar
cells
Bipolar cells-
Ganglion
cells
Ganglion cell-
To optic
To optic
nerve
nerve
Figure 15-11. A gecko funclus, typical of the anangiotic blood supply of
Figure 15-12. Retinal summation. The roc pathway is converging, as large
the reptilian retina. No vessels can be seen, ancd the optic dlisc is obscured
numbers of rocs are connected to a bipolar cell (although only two to
by a conus papillaris. (Courtesy University of California, Davis, Veterinary
three converging rods are shown here) and several bipolar cells are
Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
connected to a ganglion cell. In the cone pathway there is little or no
sasdeus eu llas jeodig auo o sasdeus auos auo asnesaq 'uogeuuins
with one ganglion cell. This arangement allows cones faster condluction
 molecule, representing bleached photopigment, is shed by the
aal u og Algisuas mol jo aad ay je uognosan ens yty pue
photoreceptor and phagocytized by the RPE for “recycling"
(see Figure 15-4). In the RPE, the all-trans retinal aldehyde can
be isomerized back to the 1l-cis retinal aldehyde and re-form 
 blindness. In young animals it may also cause bone remodeling,
rhodopsin (Figure 15-15), or it can be reduced to all-trans 
leading to stenosis of the optic foramen and blindness due to
retinol and esterified. The esters are stored in the pigment 
the resulting optic nerve atrophy.
epithelium until required for dark adaptation (see later). After
all-trans ester has been deesterified, oxidized, and isomerized,
Vitamin A deficiency causes night blindness (nyctalopia),
it is available for spontaneous regeneration of rhodopsin in
retinal and optic nerve atrophy, and convulsions in cattle, and
the dark.
microphthalmia and nyctalopia in the offspring of deficient 
Vitamin A in the eye turns over very slowly with other body
SoWs.
stores of vitamin A, and only a small proportion of ingested
vitamin A reaches the eye to form the chromophore of the
visual photopigment. Vitamin A deficiency does not affect the 
Dark Adaptation
eye until other body stores are depleted. Hypovitaminosis A
causes loss of rod function (owing to depletion of the rhodopsin)
 Dark adaptation is the transition of the retina from the light-
and, when chronic, leads to complete retinal degeneration and
adapted (photopic) to the dark-adapted (scotopic) state. Visual
Central
Peripheral
Receptors
Receptors
(mostly rods)
(many cones)
summated
summated but
extensively in:
Figure 15-13. Comparative anatomy of the central and
little in:
peripheral retina. The dlifferent ratios of rodls and cones
in these regions result in clifferent relative numbers of
bipolar and ganglion cells, leacing to varying cegrees
 of summation in the optic nerve fibers and procucing
characteristic clifferences in the relative thickness of
the retinal layers. (Modlified from Duke-Elcler S [1958]: 
Bipolar cells
System of Ophthalrmology, Vol 1. Mosby, St. Louis.)
finally summated
but little in:
Bipolar cells
finally summated
extensively in:
Ganglion cells
Ganglion cells
RetiNA |
293
80
40
the
20
400
500
600
700
Wavelength in μm
20
Figure 15-14. Absorption spectrum of rhocopsin (at dlifferent light 
sensitivity is not all-or-nothing. Rhodopsin has absorption maximum, or
 Figure 15-16. Increasing amplitucle of the b wave (arrow) in response to
Amsx values of 495 and 525 nr (cepencling on light intensity) but can
flashes of light cluring cark aclaptation in a normal clog cluring
absorbh shorter and longer wavelengths with clecreased effectiveness.
electroretinography. Note that as the animal spendls more time in the dark
(incicated in minutes in the left column), the amplitude of the response 
 Philadelphia. Modified from Hecht.)
increases. S, The timing of the light flash stimulus that elicits the retinal 
response. (Moclifiecl from Aguirre CD, Rubin 1 [1971|: The early cliagnosis
of rocd dysplasia in the Norwegian elkhouncl. Am Vet Med Assoc 159:429.)
Rhodopsin
Light
11-cis retinal + Opsin 
-All-trans retinal + Opsin 
 Alcohol dehydrogenase; DPN
F
(other redox pathways, TPN)
11-cis vitamin A, All-trans vitamin A
(retinol)
 Figure 15-17. Electroretinogram of a normal cark-aclapted canine in
 Esterifying enzymes
response to a white light flash, 0.02 second in cluration (denoted as s). The
downward deflection, the a wave, is composed mostly of photoreceptor
  a oaa ai) pn   p si 
representing bipolar and Mullers cell activity. (From Rubin LF [1974]:
11-cis vitamin A esters ≤2
All-trans vitaminA esters
(retinyl esters)
Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy.lea&Febiger,Philadelphia.
Figure 15-15. Rhoclopsin (containing 1l-cis, retinall is isomerized by light
into all-trans retinal. All-trans retinal rmay be either isomerized to re-form
rhodopsin or recduced to all-trans retinol. After esterification it can be
sensitivity, presumably because rhodopsin stores are lower
stored in the retinal pigment epitheliurm until neecled for clark aclaptation.
DPN, Diphosphopyridine nucleotide; TPN, triphosphopyridline
 after exposure to bright light and have to be reconstituted from
 stores in the pigment epithelium.
nucleotide. (From Wald C [1968]: Molecular basis of visual excitation.
Science 162:230.)
 Dark adaptation in domestic animals is measured by (1)
increase in amplitude of the electroretinogram (ERG) with time
spent in the dark (Figure 15-16) and (2) the ability to detect
 acuity is greatest in the photopic state, whereas light sensitivity
 dimmer lights with time spent in the dark. The latter may be
is maximal in the scotopic state. The three physiologic
 measured electrophysiologically as a decrease in the stimulus
processes contributing to the increased light sensitivity of the
intensity required to produce a given ERG amplitude in
retina in darkness are dilatation of the pupil, synaptic 
the dark.
adaptation of retinal neurons, and increase in the concentration
 of rhodopsin available in the outer segments. Together, these
Electroretinography
three processes may increase the sensitivity of the eye by 5 to
8 log units (i.e., by up to 100 million). Maximal sensitivity is
The ERG is the electrical response recorded when the retina is
reached after 30 minutes or more in the darkness, depending on
stimulated by flashes of light (Figure 15-17). Although it is
 the species and light level before adaptation began. In making
possible to relate different parts of the ERG wave to different
the transition from light to dark, the brighter the preexisting
structures within the retina (e.g., the a wave to the rods and
light level, the longer the eye takes to reach maximal
cones, the b wave to the bipolar and Muiller's cells, and the 
294
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
even in the presence of cataracts (or a corneal opacity) that
 affect vision, sufficient light reaches the retina to elicit an
electrophysiologic response, provided that the retina is
functional. This is also the reason why PLR can be elicited
in cataractous patients.
Diagnosis of retinal disorders in which no ophthatmoscopic
abnormalities are evident: These include early stages of
retinal dysplasia, day blindness (hemeralopia) in Alaskan
malamutes and German short-haired pointers, congenital
stationary night blindness (CSNB) in dogs and horses, and
sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD). In all of
these diseases, ERG abnormalities may be recorded even
though the fundus may seem normal.
Differentiating between retinal and postretinal causes of
blindness: For example, cases of SARD and retrobulbar
Figure 15-18. Electroretinography (ERC) performed in 6-month-old 
optic neuritis may manifest similarly as acute loss of vision,
American Bulldog using the hanclheld multispecies ERC cevice
a normal-looking fundus, and fixed, dilated pupils. An ERG
(HMsERG). For the purpose of the recording, the dog is anesthetized, its 
 may be used to differentiate between the two, because the
pupil is clilated, and the lics are retracted with an eyelid speculum. The
response willbe extinguished in SARD (which is a retinal
flash stimulus isdelivered by the HMsERG,and the electrical response f
the retina to the stimulus is recorcled by means of a contact lens electroce
disease) but normal in optic neuritis (which is a postretinal
placed on the cornea (visible as a red wire). (Courtesy Kristina N.
disease).
Narfstrorm.)
Early diagnosis of inherited photoreceptor atrophies: In
many dog breeds and in some cat breeds, the ERG may
C wave to the pigment epithelium), such attempts are an over-
detect changes in retinal function long before
 simplification of a complex process that is incompletely under-
 ophthalmoscopic or behavioral signs are observed. This
stood. For clinical purposes the ERG is best considered a mass
early detection is invaluable to breeders wishing to screen
 response of the entire outer retina to flashes of light. Therefore 
their animals for inherited retinal diseases (Figure 15-19).
the ERG is usually used to assess outer retinal function in
animals affected with disorders of the rods and cones. Although
 Flash electroretinography is a summed response of the outer
electroretinography requires sophisticated equipment (Figure
retina. Focal retinal lesions (e.g., scars), or inner retinal disease 
15-18) and specialized training in its operation and inter-
(e.g. glaucoma) may not affect the flash ERC.
 pretation of results, it is an extremely valuable diagnostic tool
for the veterinary ophthalmologist.
Based on the clinical indication for the ERG, two recording
Electroretinography is useful in the following circumstances:
protocols have evolved for performing the test in dogs.
The first is the rapid, “yes-no" protocol used to demonstrate
·Routine preoperative evaluation of retinal function before
retinal function. It is conducted to rule out SARD or to deter-
cataract surgery: Unfortunately, many dogs may be
mine whether the patient is a suitable candidate for cataract
simultaneously affected with both retinal dystrophy and
surgery. For early detection and evaluation of inherited photo-
cataract. Regardless of whether these two diseases are
receptor diseases, a more exhaustive recording protocol is
related or independent, it is obvious that cataract surgery
required. This protocol involves extensive testing of rod and
will not restore vision if the retina is not functioning.
cone function, based on their different physiologic properties
Because the cataract prevents a thorough ophthalmoscopic
(see Table 15-3). It includes testing the process of dark and
evaluation of the retina, an ERG is required to determine
light adaptation (see Figure 15-16), responses to dim and bright
the prognosis of the surgery. It is important to note that
light (see Figure 15-19), responses to red, blue, and white
Figure 15-19. Electroretinography (ERC) responses recorcled
500
500
with the handheld multispecies ERG device in a normal
Abyssinian cat (I) anc in an Abyssinian cat affected with
heredlitary rod cone clegeneration (2). The a wave (negative
ceflection),representing photoreceptor function,is attenuated
by 80% in the affected cat. The b wave (positive cleflection),
representing bipolar activity, is unaffectecd by the clisease
process. (Courtesy Kristina N. Narfstrom.)
50
100
150
50
100
150
RetiNA |
295
Figure 15-20. Flicker fusion responses recorcled in the same
50
cats as in Figure 15-19. The signals are recorcled in response to
light flashes presentec at a high frequency. In the normal cat (1),
there is a normal signal in response to each flash, whereas in the
affectec cat (2), the responses are climinished anc clelayed,
because the diseased photoreceptors cdo not fully recover before
subsequent flashes (note that the two recorclings appear sirmilar
but their scales cliffer). If the frequency of the flashes is increased
further, the normal photoreceptors will not be able to recover
fully either. At a thresholdl frequency, the flashes are so rapid that
the photoreceptors do not recover at all, and their responses
uoisny juanap A paiaeeuo ane saon pue spoy asn
thresholc frequencies. (Courtesy Kristina N. Narfstrom.)
00
lights, and flicker fusion frequency (FFF) recorded in response
those presented for nonophthalmic reasons) as part of a
to rapid flashes of light (Figure 15-20). FFF is the frequency of
 comprehensive examination and in order to familiarize them-
stimulation beyond which individual ERG responses are not
selves with its normal appearance.
recorded, and it depends on whether the rods and cones are
functioning under the prevailing levels of illumination. ERG
Tapetum
results are typically reported as a- and b-wave amplitudes and
implicit times in response to the various stimuli used (Figure
The tapetum is a reflective layer located in the choroid. It can
15-21). A summary of electroretinographic alterations in various
 be found in many mammalian species (with the notable excep-
ocular disorders is given in Table 15-4.
tions of primates, pigs, and rodents) as well as in nocturnal
nonmammalian species. Although the structure of the tapetum
The ERG is a test of retinal function, not of vision. Therefore it
differs among different species (i.e., it may be fbrous or
may be normal in some cases of blindness. For example, the
cellular), its role is similar. The tapetum acts as a mirror that
ERG is normal in cases of postretinal blindness such as optic
reflects the light back toward the photoreceptor layer, thus
neuritis or cortical disease, even though the patient is blind.
increasing the probability that the light will be absorbed by the
photopigment and contribute to visual sensation in dim light
(see Figure 15-3). Because melanin absorbs light and would
APPLIED ANATOMY (OPHTHALMOSCOPIC
prevent it from reaching the tapetum, the RPE overlying the
VARIATIONS)
tapetum is nonpigmented, thereby allowing it to fulfll its
physiologic role.
Before pathologic processes can be recognized, common
Color variations in the tapetum occur in all species. They are
variations in fundus appearance must be appreciated. Detailed
 most frequent in dogs, where various shades of yellow-orange
fundus diagnosis is the province of the veterinary ophthalmologist,
 and green-blue are commonly observed, although other colors
but familiarity with common, normal fundus variatiors is essen-
 may also be seen. In newborn pups the fundus is dark at birth;
tial so that the general practitioner can recognize and distinguish
the tapetal area gradually changes shades into gray and blue
them from pathologic processes. Students and clinicians are
before adult colors appear (Figure 15-22).
encouraged to examine the fundus of every patient (including
ERG CALCULATIONS
b-
b-wave
peak amplitude
0 line
a-wave
peak amplitudle
a-wave peak b-wave peak
 implicit time   implicit time 
Figure 15-21. Electroretinography pararmeters. (From Howarcl DR, et al.
Figure 15-22. Funclus of a 13-week-olcl Alaskan malarmute. The area of
[1973|: Clinical electroretinography: a protocol for testing the retina. J Am
the future tapetum is blue at this age. (From Rubin LF [1974]: Atlas of
Anim Hosp Assoc 9:219.1
Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy. Lea & Febiger, Philadlelphia.)
296
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Table 15-4 | Electroretinogram (ERG) Findings in Selected Ocular and Vision Disorders
DISEASE
ERG FINDINGS
COMMENTS
Cataract
ERG incicates retinal function or lack thereof
 ERG very important in cletermining whether retina is normal.
as it can't be examined ophthalmoscopically. Therefore
ERGisused t determine prgnosisor severely diseased
before cataract surgery.
Retinal cletachrment 
 ERG response may be present or absent, depending
 Ultrasound may be of greater dliagnostic value
 on duration of detachment; ERG cannot be used
 to determine prognosis of surgical reattachment 
surgery
Cortical blindness
 ERG response normal
 ERG useful in dlifferentiating retinal anc cortical blincness 
 Optic neuritis and optic
 ERG response normal
ERG useful in cases of retrobulbar neuritis in which no 
 atrophy
 ophthalmoscopic lesions can be observed 
Glaucoma*
 Flash ERG response normal in early cases if
 In early cases of glaucoma there is ganglion cell loss with
pressure not markedlly elevated; it is absent in 
 saeys paueape ur asuodsai Dye ysey u asueys ou
acvanced stages of clisease or in acute, high
theaagreatiafctin
1OP spikes
ERC response. The flash ERC is not diagnostic for
glaucoma.
Hemeralopia (cday blindness)  Rod ERC response normal; cone ERG response
 ERC essential for definitive dliagnosis of hemeralopia, as
absent
 funcus looks normal
 Feline central retinal
 Initially, cone responses are affectedl. Disease
 ERG may be abnormal 10 wks before onset of
clegeneration (taurine
 affects rod function in acvanced stages.
 ophthalmoscopic signs
dleficiency)
 Congenital stationary night
 Decreasec b-wave and increased a-wave
ERG essential for clefinitive cdiagnosis of CSNB, as funcus 
blindness (CSNB)
armplitucles
looks normal 
 Inherited photoreceptor
 Decreased rodl/cone function, cepencing on type of
 In some breecls (lrish setter, miniature schnauzer) the ERC
clysplasia (rcd)
disease
can be dliagnostic before 2 months of age
 Inherited rod-cone
 Decreased rod function (abnormal clark acaptation,
The ERC can be cliagnostic months or years before the onset
 degeneration (prcd, PRA)
scotopic responses, and flicker fusion 
 of behavioral and ophthalmoscopic signs 
frequency! progressing to attenuation of
all ERG responses
 Retinal pigment epithelial
 ERG response may be normal until advanced 
Ophthalmoscopy sufficient for dliagnosis; ERG is of no value
clystrophy (RPED)
stages
 Retinal clystr ophy in Briard 
 ERG indicates congenital abnormalities in rod 
 Distinguishes the dlisease from RPED, although both are 
 function
 caused by RPE abnormality
 Sucden acquired retinal 
 ERG response extinguished
 ERC essential for dliagnosis, as fundus looks normal
clegeneration 
IOP, Intraocular pressure; PRA, progtessive retinal atrophy, prcd, progTessive rod -cone degeneration; rcd, rod-cone dysplasia.
*Describes ERG results tecorded in esponse to a flash simulus, which is commonly used in veterinary medicine. ERG results recorded in response to a shifing
 pattem shimulus are used for diagmosing glaucoma in human palients.
Pigment  is 
occasionally observed in the normally
unpigmented pigment epithelium in the tapetal area and should
be differentiated from pathologic pigmentation. The pigmented
areas are more common at the tapetal-nontapetal junction
(Figure 15-23). The transition between tapetum and nontapetum
 may be gradual or sharply demarcated.
 Absence of the tapetum occurs in all species, although it is
 most prevalent in subalbinotic and color-dilute eyes. Absence
of the tapetum may be total (Figure 15-24) or focal (Figure 15-25).
 The RPE is often unpigmented in association with tapetal
agenesis. In these regions, where there is no tapetum and the
RPE is nonpigmented, the underlying wide choroidal vessels
are visible through the retina as numerous thick, parallel
red stripes, the so-called tigroid fundus (see Figures 15-24, B.
and 15-25). Note that the much finer retinal vessels are visible
overlying the choroidal vasculature. This type of fundus
Figure 15-23. Multifocal areas of pigmentation of the retinal pigrment
causes a red funduscopic reflection (through the pupil or
epithelium overlying the tapetum in a clog. This is a normal variation.
ophthalmoscope), and although it is a normal variation, it is 
(Frorm Rubin LF'[1974l: Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy. lea &
sometimes mistaken for hemorrhage.
Febiger, Philaclelphia.)
RetiINA |
297
Figure 15-24. Funclus pictures of two
cogs with tapetal aplasia. A,The retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) throughout
the retina is pigmented, providing
for a cark funclus. B, There is no
pigrment in the choroid and the RPE
throughout the fundus, allowing for
visualization of the choroidal  blood 
vessels. Both pictures_ are_ normal
variations. (From Rubin 1F [1974]: Atlas
of Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy. lea &
Febiger, Philaclelphia.)
A
B
 In some animals only small tapetum "islands" may be seen
appaloosa, merle collie). If there is no pigment in the RPE, the
(Figure 15-26). In canine toy breeds the tapetum is frequently
underlying choroid and sclera may be visualized in the
small. Primates (see Figure 15-7, F), pigs, most rodents (see
nontapetal area (tigroid fundus).
Figure 15-7, E), and many nonmammalian species (see Figures 
15-10, B, and 15-11) lack a tapetum all together.
Optic Disc
Nontapetum
The location of the optic disc in the eye is fixed because it is
determined by the location of the underlying optic foramen
In most mammals, the tapetum covers approximately the dorsal
 through which the optic nerve exits the orbit. However, the size
third of the fundus. The rest of the fundus is called the
of the tapetal and the nontapetal regions may vary, so the disc
nontapetum. Here the underlying RPE is pigmented, giving this
 may be visualized in the tapetal area (if the tapetum is large), in
area its characteristic dark appearance (see Figure 15-7, A. C.
 the nontapetum (if the tapetum is small), or in their junction.
and D). However, the amount of the pigmentation may vary.
 The presence of myelin determines the size and shape of the
Moderate amounts of RPE pigment in the nontapetal area give
 optic disc. In the cat, myelination of the optic nerve fibers
this region a light brown (chocolate) shade rather than the
 begins posterior to the disc, and therefore the disc is round and
characteristic black appearance. Lack of pigment in the pigment 
dark (similar to an atrophied canine disc) (see Figure 15-7, B).
epithelial cells of the nontapetal retina is a common variation
 In dogs, myelination of the fibers usually begins at the level of
(see Figures 15-24, B, and 15-27) and is frequently seen in
the disc, giving it a characteristic triangular shape and pink
subalbinotic or color-dilute animals (e.g., Siamese cat,
shade (see Figure 15-7, A). However, variations in size, shape,
Figure 15-25. localized absence of the tapeturm in a yearling. Although
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in the nontapetum is pigmented, the
RPE overlying the region of tapetal aplasia is unpigmentec,allowing
Figure 15-26. In thefundus of this dog only a fw tapetal islands are
visualization of the unclerlying choroidal vessels, which can be seen as
visible through the pigmented retinal pigrment epithelium. Myelination of
broac rec bancls. This is a normal variation. (From Rubin 1F [1974]: Atlas 
the nerve fibers can be seen as white streaks racliating from the clisc. This
 of Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy. Lea & Febiger, Philadlelphia.)
is a normal variation.
298
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 15-27. Funcus pictures of
two anirmals in which the retinal
pigment epitheliurm in the non-
tapetum does not contain melanin.
Its absence allows visualization of
the undlerlying choroidlal vessels.
which can be seen as broac red
bandls. ln both cases, the tapetal
area is normal. A, A comestic
shorthair cat; B, a horse. (From
Rubin LF [1974]: Atlas of Veterinary
Ophthalmoscopy. lea & Febiger,
Philaclelphia.)
A
B
and color of the optic disc, based on the extent of myelination,
(e.g., anemia, inflammation, retinal detachment, increased intra-
are common in the dog. The disc may also be surrounded by a
 ocular pressure, decreased orbital circulation after trauma) may
ring of pigment or hyperreflectivity, both of which are con-
result in decreased retinal circulation and tissue hypoxia.
sidered normal variations. A dark spot may be seen in the
 center of the disc, the physiologic cup representing the origin of
Repair Processes
the embryonic hyaloid vascualture.
Like other neural tissues, the retina has limited or no regenerative
Blood Vessels
capacity. Changes in photoreceptor and neural elements are
almost always irreversible, limiting the scope of treatment for
As noted previously, the blood vessels seen ophthalmoscopically
 many disorders to prevention of further damage. Repetitive or
are those supplying the inner retina and midretina. The large,
 chronic stimuli thus result in cumulative damage until vision is
straight vessels are the veins. There are usually three veins,
affected.
although it is not uncommon to see four or more large veins. In the
cat the veins stop at the edge of the disc, but in dogs they cross over
Retina-Optic Nerve Interaction
its surface and usually form a vascular ring (see Figure 15-7, A and
B). In dogs in which the veins stop abruptly on the disc surface,
Diseases that result in severe and widespread retinal lesions,
a coloboma or glaucomatous cupping should be suspected.
especially of the ganglion cell layer, eventually also cause
Arteries are the smaller vessels. They are more numerous
lesions of the axons of these cells in the optic nerve—the
(10 to 20) and usually more tortuous than veins. In dogs arteries
clinical disorder of optic atrophy. Similarly, lesions to the optic
usually stop at the disc rim and do not cross the disc surface as
nerve fbers (e.g., in chronic optic neuritis) eventually cause
 do the veins. It is important to learn to distinguish arteries from
death of the ganglion cell body. This is believed to be due to
veins, because arteries are the first vessels to undergo attenuation
 interruptions of axoplasmic flow—the flow of solutes along the
 in cases of inherited retinal atrophies.
axon both toward and away from the cell body.
A process of transsynaptic atrophy also takes place across the
Myelination of Nerve Fiber Layer
various layers of the retina. Lesions of the photoreceptors in the
 outer retina eventually result in damage to the intermediate layers
Myelination of canine optic nerve fibers usually begins at the
 and loss of ganglion cells with optic atrophy. Conversely, although
optic disc. Occasionally myelination spreads into the nerve
glaucoma is primarily a ganglion cell and optic nerve disease,
fber layer of the retina, appearing as white fan-shaped streaks
 damage to the outer retina may be observed in chronic cases.
radiating from the optic disc (see Figure 15-26). These are
differentiated clinically from papilledema and optic neuritis 
Interactions with Choroid
(see Table 16-10 in Chapter 16).
Because of their proximity, inflammation of the choroid
PATHOLOGIC MECHANISMS
frequently extends to involve the retina, and vice versa. Common
examples are hematogenous bacterial and viral infections of the
Ischemia
choroid (feline infectious peritonitis [FIP]), bovine malignant 
The retina has a bipartite blood supply, because the choroid
catarrhal fever) that extend to the retina, thereby causing
supplies the outer retina, and the inner retinal vessels (visible
chorioretinitis. Neurotrophic viral retinitis (e.g., canine
ophthalmoscopically radiating from the disc) supply the inner
distemper) may proceed from retina to choroid, thereby causing
retina and midretina. Owing to its high metabolic rate, the retina
retinochoroiditis. However, the distinction between retino-
 is particularly susceptible to interruptions in blood supply. After
choroiditis and chorioretinitis is somewhat semantic, as
hypoxia begins, death of retinal cells follows rapidly, intracellular
clinically it is impossible to distinguish between the two. The
 and extracellular edema occurs, neural elements disintegrate, and
 inflammation invariably results in a breakdown of the blood-
atrophy and gliosis of the retina result. Many disease processes
 ocular barrier and spreads to both the retina and choroid. The
RetiNA |
299
consequences of many of these disorders are often much more
devastating to the retina than to the tissue from which they arose.
Primary Photoreceptor Disease
ae Aiurund ,saydone [eunai, jo dnai a u siapiosp Aun
 the photoreceptors. In most cases the disease process begins in the
more peripheral retina and in its early stages may be visualized as
discoloration of the peripheral tapetum. However, with time the
disease progresses to involve the entire retina. As the retina
atrophies, it becomes thinner, resulting in increased tapetal
reflectivity. If the tapetum and transparent retina are compared
to a mirror (tapetum) and curtain (retina), when the curtain is
removed (retinal atrophy), reflectivity is increased (Figure 15-28).
This increased reflectivity is visible ophthalmoscopically
(Figure 15-29; compare it with Figure 15-7, B).
The second ophthalmoscopic sign associated with retinal
atrophy is gradual vascular attenuation. Vascular attenuation is
secondary to the atrophy, rather than its cause. Blood supply
A
 diminishes as the atrophic retina has fewer metabolic require-
ments (see Figures 15-29, B, and 15-30; compare them with
Figure 15-7, B and A, respectively). The attenuation may be
observed as a decrease in both the diameter and number of
vessels. Arteries are affected before veins, and small vessels are
 affected before larger vessels are affected.
Reactions of Pigment Epithelium
Besides its roles in metabolic support and photopigment
recycling, the RPE has potential phagocytic activity. Therefore
inflammation or infection of the retina is frequently
 accompanied by a phagocytic reaction of the RPE, with cells
B
undergoing hypertrophy, proliferation, and migration to the
 Figure 15-29. Funclus picture of retinal atrophy in two Abyssinian cats.
Compare these pictures with the normal feline funclus in Figure 15-7, B.
 Subsequently, the RPE may also undergo atrophy.
A, A moclerately aclvancecl case. Note the hyperreflectivity of the tapetal
Reactions of pigment epithelium are frequently visible
funclus, observed most clearly in the upper micperipheral area. See also
Figure 15-47, which shows the histopathologic changes in this retina.
ophthalmoscopically. If atrophy of the pigment epithelium
B, Aclvanced stage. Note the hyperreflectivity next to the optic dlisc, and
occurs over the tapetum, it is not readily apparent because it is
the further attenuation of the blood vessels. (Courtesy Kristina N.
nonpigment (and hence invisible ophthalmoscopically) in this
Narfstrom.)
 region. However, if it occurs in the nontapetal area, the affected
 region is visible as a depigmented or pale area, giving the
nontapetal fundus a mottled appearance (Figures 15-31 and
-Tapetum
Tapetum
Retina
Atrophic
retina
 Light beam
 Light beam
+
Light absorbed
Less light
by retina
absorbed
by retina
Figure 15-30. Vascular attenuation in a poodle with progressive retinal
cegeneration. Compare diarmeter of blood vessels with those seen in
Figure 15-7, A.
 Figure 15-28. Pathogenesis of increasec tapetal reflectivity in cases of
retinal atrophy. A thinner (atrophiedl) retina absorbs less light; hence more
light reaches the tapetum and is reflected toward the observer.
300
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 15-31. Focal loss of pigment (arrow) from pigment epithelial cells
in the nontapetal area in a dog with progressive retinal cdegeneration.
Figure 15-33. Hypertrophy of pigment epithelial cells (arrows) and
atrophy of the undlerlying retina as a result of chorioretinitis in a dog.
Figure15-34.Thr aras of inactive retinitis inthe tapetal dogfuncus.n
Figure 15-32. Ophthalmoscopic appearance of paler "punchec-out" area
each area, the atrophied retina is visible as a hyperreflective region, the
 of cepigmentation of the pigment epitheliurm in the nontapetal fundus in 
eugan sl duno sul 'dunio juawaid e Ag paidnsno sl yium jo lauan
progressive retinal cdegeneration.
pigment epithelium that migrated to this region to phagocytose
inflammatoryebris.CourtesyniversityfCalifornia,avis,Veterinary
Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
15-32). When proliferation of pigment epithelial cells occurs,
with either hyperplasia or hypertrophy, the results are visible
 as a white or gray sheath around vessels that sometimes obscures
 ophthalmoscopically as focal areas of increased pigmentation,
their color (Figure 15-36).
or pigment clumps. These areas are most readily visible in the
tapetal fundus (Figures 15-33 and 15-34). If the primary cause
Retinal Hemorrhages
is an inflammation of the retina, the hypertrophy and hyper-
plasia of pigment epithelial cells are often accompanied by loss
 Hemorrhages into and around the retina occur in many diseases
of adjacent rods and cones. In such cases, areas of pigment 
and conditions, such as anemia, coagulopathy, systemic hyper-
 clumping may be surrounded by focal regions of tapetal hyper-
tension, hyperviscosity, and systemic infectious diseases such
reflectivity, similar to the hyperreflectivity seen in inherited
as canine ehrlichiosis and bovine thromboembolic meningo-
 photoreceptor diseases.
encephalitis (see also Chapter 18). Based on their ophthalmoscopic 
appearance, it is possible to localize the position of these 
 Perivascular Cuffing
hemorrhages to the layer involved, that is, subretinal (between
the retina and choroid), intraretinal, nerve fiber layer, or pre-
 In inflammatory and neoplastic diseases, inflammatory cells
retinal (between the retina and vitreous) (Figure 15-37). The
frequently accumulate around retinal vessels, as they do in any
 localization helps in identifying the source of the blood because
other tissue. However, in the eye, unlike any other organ, this
subretinal hemorhages originate in the choroidal vessels, whereas
reaction can be visualized in vivo using an ophthalmoscope
 preretinal hemorrhages originate in the ophthalmoscopically
(Figure 15-35). The vasculitis, or "perivascular cuffing, is visible
visible vessels of the inner retina.
RetiINA |
301
hereditary, although dysplasia may also be found with maternal
viral infections (e.g., canine herpes, feline panleukopenia,
ovine blue tongue, bovine viral diarrhea), toxicities in utero,
and multiple ocular anomalies. Cases of noninherited retinal 
 dysplasia are frequently accompanied by other developmental
neurologic abnormalities, notably cerebellar hypoplasia.
 Inherited canine retinal dysplasia occurs most commonly in
American cocker spaniels, English springer spaniels, beagles,
Labrador retrievers, miniature schnauzers, Australian shepherd
dogs, Rottweilers, and Bedlington, Sealyham, and Yorkshire
terriers, but it can occur in any breed. It can be subdivided into
the following three forms:
·Focal or multifocal retinal dysplasia: Retinal folds and
 rosettes are seen as areas of reduced tapetal reflectivity, as
 gray streaks in the tapetal area, and as gray or white streaks
in the nontapetal area (Figure 15-40). The streaks may be
linear or Y- or V-shaped. They are most commonly found in
the central fundus, in the tapetal area. Vision is usually
Figure 15-35. Perivascular cuffing of inflammatory cells around retinal
vessels in a cat ciagnosed with feline infectious peritonitis. (Courtesy
normal. This form is seen in spaniels, beagles, Rottweilers,
University of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
 and Labrador retrievers.
Collection.}
· Geographic retinal dysplasia: Irregular or U-shaped areas
 are seen in the tapetal fundus. Elevated and thinned parts of
the retina may be present, with gray or black areas
delineating the affected retina (Figure 15-41). Areas of
hyperreflectivity may also be present. Retinal pigment
epithelial hypertrophy may be indicated by areas of
increasing pigmentation. Vision may be severely affected,
 depending on the size of the lesion. The commonly affected
breeds include the spaniels and Labrador retriever.
·Complete retinal dysplasia with detachment: A completely
 detached neural retina attached at the optic nerve head is
seen. Vitreous dysplasia, leukocoria, rotatory nystagmus,
and hemorrhages may be seen in affected animals.
Blindness or severe visual impairment is usual. This form is
seen in Bedlington and Sealyham terriers, English springer 
spaniels, and also in Labrador retrievers and Samoyeds 
when combined with skeletal chondrodysplasia. In the
 retinal dysplasia with associated chondrodysplasia in
Figure 15-36. Perivascular cuffing forming a gray-white sheath around
 Labrador retrievers and Samoyeds, ocular lesions include
retina vessels of a dlog with systemic mycosis. (Courtesy University of
cataracts, vitreous strands, persistent hyaloid remnants,
retinal folds, retinal dysplasia, peripapillary
byperreflectivity, and rhegmatogenous retinal detachments.
Skeletal effects include short forelimbs and abnormal
Gliosis
morphology of the radius and ulna. The condition is due to
 one abnormal gene, which has recessive skeletal effects and
 In many acute, severe insults, neural elements of the retina may
incompletely dominant ocular effects.
be lost early, but the more resistant glial Muller's cells survive
and may proliferate to fll spaces left by neural cells. The end
The most common reasons for presentation of animals with
stage of many chronic retinal disorders is often a glial scar
inherited retinal dysplasia are blindness and intraocular hemor-
replacing the retina (Figure 15-38).
rhage in puppies, although these occur only in a small pro-
 portion of affected dogs. Milder forms of dysplasia and folds
CONGENITAL RETINAL DISORDERS
may be seen during routine screening programs for hereditary
ocular defects in puppies and older dogs. Because the mild
Retinal Dysplasia
forms of the disease have minimal effect on vision, owners will
Primary retinal dysplasia is a congenital, developmental abnor-
frequently breed them even though the offspring may be
mality of the retina. It occurs in all species but is of greatest
affected with severe forms of the disease. Dysplasia is usually
transmitted as a simple recessive trait, although dominant
and cattle. It has been defined as an anomalous differentiation,
inheritance with incomplete penetration may afflict the
characterized histologically by linear folding of the sensory
Labrador retriever.
retina and formation of rosettes containing variable numbers of
neuronal retinal cells around a central lumen (Figure 15-39).
Animals with retinal dysplasia should not be bred.
The most significant forms of canine retinal dysplasia are
302
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Retinal pigment epithelium
Photoreceptor outer segments
 External limiting membrane
Outer nuclear layer
~Outer plexiform layer
- Inner nuclear layer
 Inner plexiform layer 
Ganglion cell layer
-Nerve fiber layer
 Internal limiting membrane 
Vitreous
日
Hemorrhages follow
the direction of the 
nerve fibers giving
a"brush" or "flame"
shaped margin
Figure 15-37. Retinal hermorrhages Classified by cepth. A, Deep intraretinal hemorrhage. B, Superficial
intaretinal hemorrhage. C, Preretinal (subvitreal) hemorthage D, Subretinal hemorrhage, between the retina
and choroid.
RetiNA |
303
Figure 15-38. Glial band replacing the retina in chronic glaucoma
Figure 15-41. Ceographic retinal clysplasia in the Cerman shephercdl.
Veterinary Ophthalmologists, 1999.)
Figure 15-39. Retinal folcls ancd rosettes in a kitten whose clam was
affected with panleukopenia during pregnancy. Cerebellar hypoplasia was
also present. (Courtesy Drs. C.A. Severin and Julie Gionfriddo, Colorado
StateUniversity.)
Figure 15-42. Choroiclal hypoplasia termporal to the optic disc in a collie
withcollie eye anomaly.Owing to thehypoplasiachoroicalvesselsmay
be visualizec as thick rec bancis. These vessels are abnormal in nurmber
and shape (compare them with the choroiclal vessels in Figure 15-27, A).
pigment allows visualization of abnormal choroidal blood vessels
(Figure 15-42). The vessels appear wider, fewer in number, and
irregularly oriented. Up to 35% of CEA cases may also be
affected by optic nerve head colobomas (Figure 15-43). A
Figure 15-40. Foci of retinal clysplasia in a 7-month-olc Armerican cocker
coloboma can be seen as a gray indentation of variable depth in 
spaniel. Areas overlying the tapetum appear as clark streaks, surrouncled
by a narrow zone of hyperreflectivity. (Courtesy Dr. A. MacMillan.)
 the optic disc and is further described in the following section.
Other clinically significant features are intraocular hemor-
rhages and retinal detachments, which may be partial or
Collie Eye Anomaly
complete, although these are far less frequent and occur in less
than 10% of affected dogs. Tortuous blood vessels, retinal dys-
Collie eye anomaly (CEA) is an inherited, congenital disorder that
plasia, and microphthalmia may also be present. Dogs with com-
affects collies, Shetland sheepdogs, Lancashire heelers, and
 plete retinal detachment are blind, whereas those with optic nerve 
Australian shepherds. It has also been reported in several non-
coloboma or partial detachment have visual deficits. However,
shepherd breeds, including long-haired whippets and Nova Scotia
choroidal hypoplasia by itself does not cause any visual deficits,
duck-tolling retrievers. The disease has worldwide distribution,
 leading some breeders to downplay the significance of CEA.
with prevalence of 30% to 85% reported in various countries. Its
The inheritance mode of CEA is still being studied. Simple
 defining feature is choroidal hypoplasia in the region temporal to
 autosomal recessive transmission has long been suspected, but
the disc. Within this area, focal absence of tapetum and RPE
recent evidence suggests that the disease is polygenic, thus
304
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Figure 15-44. Coloboma in a basenji pup with persistent pupillary
mermbrane. Note the retinal rosettes on the right side of the coloboma
beneath the retina.
Figure 15-43. Coloboma of the sclera and optic nerve in a collie with
collie eye anomaly. Retinal vessels reaching the edge of the dlisc
 Coloborma dlisappear frorm view as they "dive" into the coloboma.
hindering attempts to reduce the prevalence of CEA through
selective breeding. Another complicating factor in the control
 of the disease is the “go normal" phenomenon. In maturing
 puppies, the characteristic choroidal hypoplasia may be covered
by RPE pigment, which masks the underlying lesion (thus
making the eye appear to “go normal"). In Norway it has been
shown that approximately half the CEA cases may be masked
 after 3 months of age. Therefore it is recommended that puppies
be screened for the disease at 7 to 8 weeks of age. The advent of 
 genetic testing for CEA may help in the control of the disease,
although large-scale studies of its accuracy are still lacking.
Coloboma
Figure 15-45. Giant coloboma of the optic nerve head in a cat. The
patient also suffered from a coloboma (agenesis) in the lateral aspect of
Colobomas are congenital malformations caused by incomplete
both upper eyelids. (Courtesy University of Wisconsin-Macison
closure of the embryonic optic fissure (see Chapter 2). As a
Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
result, a section of the uvea, retina, choroid, sclera, and/or optic
nerve may be missing. Colobomas of the iris or lens appear as
actual notches in these organs. Colobomas of the retina and
choroid and/or retina (e.g., canine distemper, fungal disease,
 choroid appear as focal areas of hypopigmentation. Colobomas
FIP) and cardiovascular diseases (e.g., systemic
hypertension, anemia, hyperviscosity) (see Acquired
Their depth is variable and may be estimated using a direct
 Retinopathies in this chapter and Chapter 18).
ophthalmoscope. Blood vessels may be seen disappearing over
 Specific retinopathies: Atrophy secondary to glaucoma
the coloboma as they “dive' into the pit. Colobomas of the
(see Chapter 12), uveodermatologic syndrome (see
optic nerve are seen in CEA (see Figure 15-43), in basenjis in
Chapter 11), and SARD (see later).
association with persistent pupillary membranes (Figure 15-44),
Retinopathies of miscellaneous causes: Causes may be
and in Charolais cattle. Isolated colobomas are uncommon but 
nutritional deficiency (e.g., taurine deficiency in cats,
are seen occasionally in all species (Figure 15-45). Scleral
hypovitaminosis A in cattle), storage diseases (e.g, ceroid
 colobomas appear as actual indentation in the wall of the globe.
 lipofuscinosis in dogs, cats, and sheep, or mannosidosis in
Aberdeen Angus cattle and cats), or drug or plant toxicity
RETINOPATHY
(e.g., bracken ferm poisoning in sheep, oxygen toxicity in
 premature human infants and in animal models, including
 Retinopathies can be divided into the following four major classes:
kittens and puppies).
·Inherited dystrophies,dysplasias,degenerations and
Inherited Retinopathies
atrophies: For example, progressive rod-cone degeneration
(prcd) in the poodle and American cocker spaniel, rod
Historically, all inherited retinopathies were given the collec-
dysplasia in the Norwegian elkhound, etc. (discussed next)
tive name retinal atrophy. However, this broad defnition
· Acquired retinopathies: These retinopathies are secondary
encompasses a large group of diseases that differ in the age of 
 to systemic diseases, such as infectious diseases of the
 onset, the breed and cells they primarily affect, mode of inheri-
RetiNA |
305
tance, and genetic and molecular pathogenesis (Table 15-5). The
Classification of Inherited Retinopathies
situation is further complicated by the fact that classification
and subdivision of retinal disorders in dogs continue to evolve as
AGE OF ONSET. Broadly speaking, inherited retinopathies
detailed genetic, electron microscopic, and electroretinographic 
can be classified as dysplasia or degenerative. Rod-cone dysplasia
 studies are performed on specific disorders in different breeds.
(rcd) (which should not be confused with retinal dysplasia, the
 Therefore the list in Table 15-5 should by no means be regarded
abnormal differentiation and folding of the retina described
as final. Based on clinical examinations, many other dog breeds
 previously in the section on congenital diseases) is defined as
are suspected of being affected by inherited retinopathies, and
atrophy of the photoreceptors that occurs before they have
it is possible that future studies will lead to their inclusion in
completed their development. Examples of photoreceptor
 this list (see the Appendix). Furthermore, inbreeding in existing
dysplasia are the rcd type 1 in the Irish setter, rcd type 2 in the
breeds and "development'" of new breeds may cause the disease 
collie, rod dysplasia in the Norwegian elkhound, and photo-
 to appear in additional breeds.
receptor dysplasia in the miniature schnauzer.
Table 15-5  Classification of Inherited Retinopathies
BREED
CONDITION NAME
SYMBOL
INHERITANCE
EARLY-ONSET DISEASE
Alaskanmalamute
Cone degeneration (hemeralopia)
cd
Autosomal recessive
Belgian shepherd
 Photoreceptor dysplasia
 Bernese mountain dog
Progressive retinal atrophy
PRA
Autosomal recessive
Briard
Retinal clystrophy
Autosomal recessive
Bull mastiff
Canine multifocal retinopathy
CMR
Autosomal recessive
Cardligan Welsh corgi
Rod-cone cysplasia 3
rcd3
Autosomal recessive
Collie (rough and smooth)
Rodl-cone clysplasia 2
rco2
Autosomal recessive
Coton de Tulear 
Canine multifocal retinopathy
CMR
Autosomal recessive
Dachshund (miniature long hairedl)
 Cone-rod degeneration 1
crd!
Autosomal recessive
Dachshund (standard wirehaired)
Cone-rod degeneration
crd
Autosomal recessive
 Douge de Bourdeaux
Canine multifocal retinopathy
CMR
Autosomal recessive
 French mastiff 
Canine multifocal retinopathy
CMR
Autosomal recessive
Cerman shorthaired pointer
Cone degeneration (hemeralopia)
Autosomal recessive
Great Pyrenees
Canine multifocal retinopathy
CMR
Autosomal recessive 
 lrish setter* (red and white)
Rodl-cone clysplasia 1
rcd1
Autosomal recessive
Mastiff (oldl English)
Canine multifocal retinopathy
CMR
Autosomal recessive 
 Norwegian elkhound 
Rod dysplasia 
rd
Autosomal recessive 
Early rod degeneration 
erd
Autosomal recessive
 Pit bull terrier 
Cone-rod degeneration 2
crd2
Autosomal recessive
Schnauzer* (miniature)
Type A-progressive retinal atrophy
Type A-PRA
 Partially cominant
LATE-ONSET DISEASE
Akita
Progressive retinal atrophy
PRA
Autosomal recessive
 American cocker spaniel
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prcd.
Autosomal recessive
 American Eskimo 
Progressive rod-cone clegeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive 
Australian cattle dog*
 Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Australian shepherd
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Australian stumpy tail cattle dog*
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prco
Autosomal recessive 
 Bull mastiff 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
PRA
Dominant
 Chesapeake Bay retriever
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Chinese crested*
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prco
Autosomal recessive
Cockapoo
Progressive rod-cone clegeneration
prcd
 Autosomal recessive 
 English cocker spaniel
Progressive rod-cone clegeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Entlebucher mountain dog
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Finnish lapphund*
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prco
Autosomal recessive
Colden retriever
Progressive rod-cone clegeneration
prcd
 Autosomal recessive 
Kuvasz
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
labracor retriever
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Lapponian hercler*
 Progressive rod-cone cegeneration
prcd
 Autosomal recessive 
Mastiff (olcl English)
Progressive retinal atrophy
PRA
Dominant
Nova Scotia dluck-tolling retriever
 Progressive rod-cone cegeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Papillon 
Progressive retinal atrophy
PRA
Autosomal recessive
Poodle* (miniature and toy)
Progressive rod-cone clegeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
 Portuguese water dog
 Progressive rodl-cone cegeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive 
Samoyed
X-linked progressive retinal atrophy
XLPRA
X-linked 
Schapendoe
 Progressive retinal atrophy
PRA
Autosomal recessive
Siberian husky
X-linked progressive retinal atrophy
XLPRA
X-linked
usnos
Rod-cone degeneration 1a
rcd1a
Autosomal recessive
Spanish water dog
Progressive roc-cone degeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Sweclish Lapphuncd*
Progressive rod-cone clegeneration
prcd
Autosomal recessive
Tibetan spaniel
Progressive retinal atrophy
PRA
Autosomal recessive 
 Tibetan terrier
Progressive retinal atrophy
PRA
Autosomal recessive 
*Breed is probably affec ted by more than one form of inherited retinopathy.
306
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 15-6 | Onset of Ophthalmoscopic, Behavioral, and Electroretinogram (ERG) Signs of Progressive Retinal
Degeneration (Atrophy)
BREED
OPHTHALMOSCOPIC SIGNS
BEHAVIORAL SIGNS
ERG ABNORMALITIES
lrish setter
12-16 wks
6-8 wks
3-6 wks
Collie 
12-16 wks
6 wks
2-6 wks
 Norwegian elkhound (early rod degeneration)
6-12 mos
6 wks
5-6 wks
 Miniature longhairec cachshunc
6-12 mos
6 mos
4-9 mos
Tibetan terrier
10-18 mos
6-12 mos
10 mos 
Akita
1.5-2.0 yrs
1-3 yrs
1.5-2.0 yrs
Miniature schnauzer
1-2 yrs 
6-12 mos
6-8 wks
Siberian husky
1.5-2.0 yrs
2-4 yrs
1 yr
Poodle 
3-5 yrs
3-5 yrs
6-9 mos
 American cocker spaniel 
SAA 5-E
3-5yrs
9 mos
Portuguese water clog
3-6yrs
53A 5-E
1.5 yrs
 Labracor retriever
4-6 yrs
515-
3 yrs
 English cocker spaniel
4-8 yrs
3-5 yrs
12 mos
Modifed from Curtis R, et al. (1991): Diseases of the canine postenior segment, in Gelatt KN (editor): Veterinary Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Lea & Febiger,
 Philadelphia.
Degenerative retinopathy, on the other hand, is defined as an
 or the mutation locus. Thus, for example, rcdl in the Irish setter
 inherited atrophy of the photoreceptor that takes place after the
and rcd2 in the collie present with similar clinical, ERG, and
cells have completed their development. Therefore it is a late-onset 
histopathologic findings, but they differ as to which gene is
 disease, although the age of onset may vary greatly among breeds.
 mutated. Mating of affected dogs from the two breeds therefore
For example, cone-rod degeneration (crd) may be diagnosed by
 produces normal offspring that are carriers of both diseases.
 age 4 to 6 months in the miniature longhaired dachshund, and
Generally speaking, however, all of the inherited rod-cone
early retinal degeneration (erd) may be observed before 1 year of 
retinopathies are caused by mutations in one of the enzymes
 age in the Norwegian elkhound (Table 15-6). On the other hand,
responsible for the phototransduction process. The mutation
progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd). which is probably the
 causes disruption of the biochemical cascade that takes place in
 most common form of inherited retinal degeneration, is typically
the outer segment of the photoreceptor. The disruption results
diagnosed in dogs older than 3 years, although it may also be
in accumulation of one of the substrates (e.g., a mutation
diagnosed in elderly dogs. The disease affects at least 20 breeds,
in cGMP phosphodiesterase causes elevation of cGMP),
 including popular breeds such as the toy and miniature poodles,
 eventually leading to cell death.
Labrador retriever, and American and English cocker spaniels.
AFFECTED CELLS. Inherited retinopathies may initially affect
Clinical Signs
the rods, cones, or RPE. The name of the disease is commonly
 indicative of the cell that is primarily affected. Thus in both rcd
 A comprehensive discussion of the clinical signs associated with
 and prcd the disease process initially involves the rods and then 
each form of inherited retinopathy is beyond the scope of this
 spreads to the cones. Cone degeneration (cd) in the Alaskan
book. As noted previously, one of the largest variables isthe age at
malamute and German shorthaired pointer is a nonprogressive
which clinical signs appear. However, regardless of the age of
 disease that affects only the cones, whereas crd in the dachshund
 onset or the exact genetic mutation and mode of inheritance, most
and pit bull terrier spreads from cones to rods. RPE dystrophy
 inherited retinopathies (with some notable exceptions, such as cd 
(RPED) is a disease that affects primarily the RPE.
and RPED, which are discussed later under Specific Forms of
 MODE OF INHERITANCE. The great majority of the inherited
Inherited Retinopathy) give rise to similar clinical signs, as
retinopathies are autosomal recessive diseases, with some excep-
listed here. The disease invariably affects both eyes.
tions. RPED may be a dominant disease with variable penetrance
PROGRESSIVE LOSS OF VISION. Early stages of inherited
in the Labrador retriever. PRA is inherited as a dominant
 retinopathy are characterized by loss of night vision (nyctalopia)
 disease in the mastiff and the bullmastiff, and it is X-linked in
due to early degeneration or dysplasia of rods (Figures 15-46
the Siberian husky and Samoyed. Sometimes the same breed
 and 15-47). Affected animals often have difficulty seeing moving
may be afflicted with two different forms of the disease. The 
objects. As the disease progresses cones are also affected and
Abyssinian cat, for example, is afflicted with both early-onset 
 day vision is also lost, making the animal blind. At the time of the
rcd, which is inherited as an autosomal dominant disease, and
 initial diagnosis it is difficult to estimate how long it will take for
a late-onset rod-cone degeneration, which is inherited as an
the dog to become totally blind. Patients frequently have severe
autosomal recessive disease.
visual defects before any change is noticed by the owner, which
GENETIC AND MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS. The list of
often happens when the dog is taken out of its familiar
breeds in which retinal atrophy is suspected to be a hereditary
environment—for example, on vacation or for grooming or
disease is very long (see the Appendix). During the last decade
boarding. Therefore owners complaining of “acute vision loss"
the genetic, molecular, and biochemical abnormalities that
should be carefully questioned about events surrounding the
 cause inherited retinopathies have been the subject of intensive
 s  s h ss r 
research in scores of dog breeds. Obviously, the great variation
that the loss of vision is associated with a change in the dog's
surroundings, and ophthalmoscopic examination will reveal
a wide variety in the genotype of the disease. At least seven
signs of long-standing, progressive disease. On the other hand,
forms of PRA have been identified, based on the mutated gene
many owners will have noticed the gradual progression from
RetiNA |
307
RETINAL BLOOD VESSELS. The disease is characterized by
progressive attenuation and thinning of retinal blood vessels.
Arterioles are the first to be affected, and their appearance (at
the disc margin) should be carefully examined. As the disease
 progresses the arteries decrease in number and the large veins
become noticeably thinner (compare Figure 15-29, B. with
Figure 15-7, B; and Figure 15-30 with Figure 15-7, A).
OPTIC Disc. The optic disc becomes pale dark brown owing
to loss of capillaries on its surface and demyelination and
atrophy of the nerve fibers caused by extensive degeneration of
the retina (compare Figure 15-30 with Figure 15-7, A).
NONTAPETAL FUNDUS. Focal depigmented areas in the
nontapetal fundus are seen relatively early and may enlarge to
affect the entire nontapetal fundus (see Figure 15-32).
CATARACTS. Many dogs suffer from both cataracts and
A
B
 inherited retinopathy. The cataracts appear as radial, spokelike
Figure 1546. A, Electron microscope image of the photoreceptor layer of
opacities from the equator to the center of the lens. They usually
respectively) are approximately the sarme length, although cones are
progress to maturity and are easily noticed by the owners.
 Because the two diseases are frequently diagnosed in the same
broacler anc have a very clistinct mitochondlria-rich ellipsoid region (E)
near the apex. The outer segrments of rods (RO) and cones (CO) contain
animal, every patient with cataract must be screened electro-
parallel membranous cdiscs in a "coin stack" configuration.
retinographically before cataract surgery to determine whether
B, Photoreceptor layer from a 12-week-old Norwegian elkhound with rod
its retina is functional. There is still considerable debate about
cysplasia. Cone inner and outer segments are normal, but rod inner
 whether such cases represent two separate diseases or whether
segments are smalland outersegments are disorganized anc disoriente.
(Frorm Aguirre CD [1978]: Retinal clegenerations in the cog. 1: rod
the cataracts are secondary to release of toxic substances from
clysplasia. Exp Eye Res 26:233.)
the degenerating retina. Regardless of this debate, if inherited
retinopathy is diagnosed, surgical removal of the cataract is
contraindicated because it will not restore vision. An exception
to this rule is the removal of an anteriorly luxated cataractous
lens, which should be removed to avoid the complications
discussed in Chapter 13.
Additional Diagnostic Testing
Electroretinography is a useful, noninvasive tool to assess photo-
receptor function (see previous section, and Figures 15-16
 through 15-21). Stimulus parameters such as light intensity and
wavelength, dark adaptation, and FFF can be used to separate
rod and cone function, thereby diagnosing various forms of
Figure 15-47. light micrograph of the retina of the Abysinian cat shown 
inherited retinopathies or different stages of the disease (see
in Figure 15-29, A. Note the severe atrophy of the outer retina with only
 Tables 15-4 and 15-6). The test is particularly important in
some sparse nuclei rermaining of the photoreceptor cells, whereas the
 cases of inherited retinopathies for the following reasons:
inner retina appears normal. Compare it with the anatomy of a normal
retina, shown in Figure 15-2, B. (Hematoxylin & eosin stain.) (Courtesy
Kristina N. Narfstrom.)
· In most dog breeds, ERG abnormalities may be detected
long before the onset of behavioral signs (i.e., nyctalopia)
and funduscopic abnormalities (see Table 15-6). The ERG
may provide a very early diagnostic tool and is therefore 
nyctalopia to total blindness. Owners should be carefully
questioned (without being "“led") about whether blindness was
particularly useful to breeders who want to begin breeding
their dogs as soon as possible.
preceded by preferential loss of night vision.
· In some inherited retinopathies, such as cd in the Alaskan
 malamute and German shorthaired pointer or CSNB in the
Early loss of night vision is due to rod degeneration.
collie dog and appaloosa horse, the animal presents with a
 normal-looking fundus. A definitive diagnosis can be made
TAPETAL HYPERREFLECTIVITY. As the retina thins it absorbs
only with the ERG.
less light and more light is reflected back to the observer. The
· As noted, electroretinography must be performed on every
granular appearance of the tapetum changes to a homogeneous
 dog that is a candidate for cataract surgery to rule out
sheen (see Figures 15-28 and 15-29).
concurrent inherited retinopathy.
PUPILS. As a result of the disease, the pupils are more
mydriatic than usual, and their reaction to light is slower. How-
With the advances in the genetics of inherited retinopathies,
ever, except in the most severe cases, some degree of PLR will
commercial companies now offer DNA testing for various
be present. Therefore presence of PLR should not be used to
forms of inherited retinopathies in more than 30 dog breeds.
rule out PRA. If the tapetal hyperreflectivity is severe, it may
These tests have several important advantages, including the 
sasio isou u anou dnd pae aun qanarn paaasgo ag
fact that they can be conducted on an animal of any age, and
ophthalmoscopy is required to appreciate increased reflectivity.
their ability to detect carriers (who are heterozygous for the
308
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
mutated gene). This means breeders can avoid breeding two
 Intensive research is under way to restore vision to humans
carrier dogs that are phenotipically normal but that will give birth
blinded by retinal dystrophies, with experimental studies con-
to affected dogs. Most importantly, a DNA test that has identified
 ducted using gene therapy, retinal transplantation, stem cell
the actual mutation is 100% accurate. In this context, however, it 
 therapy, neuroprotective treatments, nutritional supplementation,
is important to note that in a number of diseases the companies 
 and even retinal prostheses. Indeed, some of the research has
test not for the actual gene but for a genetic marker of the disease.
been conducted in dogs and cats suffering from hereditary
Such tests contain an unknown margin of error. Furthermore,
retinal dystrophies, several of which regained long-term vision
some breeds (e.g., toy and miniature poodles) may be affected
following experimental treatments. Even though these animals
by more than one genetic form of the disease (see Table 15-5).
 are sometimes just an experimental model and not the intended
Therefore a test targeting one form of the disease will not diag-
beneficiaries of the research, it is to be hoped that, if effective
nose its other forms, in contrast to electroretinography
or
therapy is found for humans suffering from inherited
 clinical examination, which are genetically insensitive.
retinopathy, it can also be used in canine and feline patients.
Treatment
Specific Forms of Inherited Retinopathy
Currently there is no treatment for inherited retinopathy.
HEMERALOPIA. The Alaskan malamute and German
Owners should be educated about the progressive nature of the
shorthaired pointer are affected by a cone disorder that causes
 disease and the inevitable blindness. Despite the initial dismay
day blindnes. The age at onset of clinical signs is at 8 to
of many owners at the news that their pets are (or will become)
10 weeks, but the disease is nonprogressive and night vision is
irreversibly blind, they should be counseled that the disease is
not affected. Ophthalmoscopic examination reveals
no
not painful and is not associated with any ocular or systemic
funduscopic abnormalities, but an ERG will show lack of cone
 complications. Therefore the pets can continue living happy
function. Dachshunds and pit bull terriers are affected by crd.
lives while owners take the necessary precautions of living with
This means that the disease starts as hemeralopia due to cone
blind animals. Websites such as www.blinddogs.com offer
damage in the initial stages. However, unlike cd in the Alaskan
valuable advice to owners of such dogs.
 malamute and the German shorthaired pointer, eventually rod
function is also affected, and funduscopic abnormalities may
Currently, there is no treatment for retinal dystrophy.
be seen.
RETINAL PIGMENT EPITHELIUM DYSTROPHY. Retinal pig-
Although there is no treatment for inherited retinopathy,
 ment epithelium dystrophy (RPED), which has been described in
 steps can be taken to decrease its prevalence. Owners of affected
a number of breeds, was formerly called central PRA. The name
dogs should be made aware of the hereditary nature of the
was altered when it became clear that unlike in PRA, the primary
disease. They should be encouraged to neuter affected animals
 problem in RPED is not in the photoreceptors. Rather, as the new
and should be strongly cautioned against mating them with
 name indicates, the disease affects the RPE, with the photo-
 dogs of the same breed. Another important element in preventing
 receptors undergoing secondary atrophy as a result of losing the
the spread of the disease is screening programs for inherited
 metabolic support of the RPE. The disease probably has both a
eye diseases. The screening, which is conducted by board-
 genetic component, because it is more prevalent in some breeds,
certified specialists, is mandated by many kennel clubs and
 and a nutritional basis, in that low levels of vitamin E have been
encouraged by others. Results are kept in a central registry.
associated with its pathogenesis. Hypercholesterolemia and
Owners of purebred dogs of susceptible breeds should be
 neurologic deficits have also been noted in some affected dogs.
encouraged to breed their dogs only with animals that were
Clinical features of prcd and RPED are compared in
screened for inherited eye disease.
Table 15-7. Initial behavioral signs, which are compatible with
 Humans also suffer from inherited retinopathies, some of
 central retinal dysfunction, include diminished daytime vision
which are very similar to the canine forms of the disease.
and poor perception of nearby or stationary objects. Peripheral
Table 15-7 | Comparison of Clinical Features of Progressive Rod-Cone Degeneration (PRCD) and Retinal Pigment
Epithelial Dystrophy (RPED)
FEATURE
PRCD
RPED
Effect on vision:
Night vision 
Affected in early stages 
Affectedl in aclvanced stages
Day vision
 Affected in aclvanced stages 
Affected in early stages
Peripheral vision
Affected in early stages 
Affected in advancecd stages
Central vision 
Affected in acvanced stages
Affected in early stages
Detecting motion
Affected in early stages
Affected in advanced stages
 Detecting stationary objects 
Affectecl in aclvanced stages
Affected in early stages
 Blincness
Inevitable
Rare
 Pupillary reflex
Diminished in aclvanced stages
Diminished in aclvanced stages
Retinal vessels 
Arterioles attenuated in early stages 
 Normal until late in course
Veins attenuated in acvanced stages
Tapetal funcus
Hyperreflectivity
Multifocal clumps of brown pigment, with some 
hyperreflectivity later
Optic disc
 Pale as disease progresses
Normal until very late in course
Nontapetal funclus
Focal depigmentation and mottling later 
saes paueape Aaa un sasus sesusis on
Electroretinography
 Useful in dliagnosis 
saseys pasuenpe ul uaas ane sasueyp se sisouseip ul asn oN
RETINA |
309
and are preceded by mydriasis, nystagmus, and impairment of
the PLR. The disease progresses rapidly, and by 1 year of age
signs compatible with advanced canine prcd are observed. Rod-
cone degeneration is a recessive disease of later onset in the
 Abyssinian, with signs beginning at 1.5 to 2.0 years of age,
progressing to complete atrophy by 4 to 6 years of age.
Ophthalmoscopic and clinical signs in cats are similar to those
in dogs, although cataracts occur infrequently (thus casting
doubts on the hypothesis suggesting a role for prcd in the genesis
of canine cataracts). Once again, affected Abyssinian kittens
can be diagnosed with electroretinography earlier than with
ophthalmoscopy (see Figures 15-19 and 15-20).
Acquired Retinopathies
Acquired retinopathies are almost invariably ocular mani-
Figure 15-48. Retinal pigment epithelium dlystrophy (RPED) in a dog. The
festations of systemic diseases and are therefore discussed in
brown spots represent accumulation of lipofuscin material in the RPE,
detail in Chapter 18. Only the general principles and clinical
"uisa suae Aenaaa pue uouny syi suied!
signs are discussed in this section.
vision and perception of distant and moving objects are retained
Retinopathy Secondary to Cardiovascular Diseases
until advanced stages of the disease. Ophthalmoscopically.
focal areas of brown pigmentation are present in the central
 The eye is a unique organ in that it allows the clinician, using
fundus overlying the tapetum (Figure 15-48). These represent
 an ophthalmoscope, to visualize blood vessels in vivo. There-
accumulation of lipofuscin in the RPE, possibly due to anti-
fore disorders affecting systemic blood flow can be readily
 oxidant (vitamin E) deficiency. The size and shape of affected
diagnosed in the retina with noninvasive methods. Ophthal-
areas vary. With time, tapetal hyperreflectivity occurs between
moscopy can be used to detect changes in the diameter of blood
coalescing pigment spots. Late in the disease the fundus
vessels (which may be thinner or engorged), the tortuosity of
resembles that of end stage prcd as the optic disc may become
the vessels, and the color of the blood flow (which may change
pale, the vessels attenuated, and the nontapetal fundus pale and 
in anemia, hyperlipidemia, polycythemia, and other diseases).
 gray-brown. The ERG is often normal until late in the disease
Hemorrhages, which may be preretinal, intraretinal, or sub-
and is not used for early diagnosis.
retinal in location, can also be observed (see Figure 15-37).
CONGENITAL STATiONARY NIGHT BLINDNESS. This is an
These are usually associated with either clotting disorders (e.g
inherited, congenital disease affecting horses (particularly
 thrombocytopenia, coagulopathies) or systemic hypertension
appaloosas) and dogs (particularly collies). As the name
(Figure 15-49). The latter is frequently secondary to renal
implies, affected animals are night blind, but the disease does
disease and is more common in the cat than in the dog. Severe 
not progress to affect day vision. Ophthalmoscopic examin-
subretinal hemorrhage may also lead to retinal detachment (see
ation shows no funduscopic abnormalities, but an ERG exam-
later). In many cases, the bleeding is not restricted to the retina,
 ination demonstrates impaired midretinal (bipolar cell) activity.
 and vitreal hemorrhage and/or hyphema may also be observed.
CANINE MULTIFOCAL RETINOPATHY (CMR). This disease
 It is important to note, however, that with rare exceptions,
was first reported in 1998 in Great Pyrenees in Canada but has
these hemorrhages are invariably caused by vascular and/or
since been reported in additional breeds, including mastiffs,
cardiac diseases. Therefore changes in retinal vasculature
bull mastiffs, Dogue de Bordeaux, and Coton de Tulear. This is
should be regarded as ophthalmic manifestations of systemic
an early onset disease, usually affecting dogs 3 to 6 months of
diseases rather than a primary ophthalmic problem-despite
age. Puppies are presented with acute, multifocal, serous retinal
the fact that in some cases, notably retinal detachment or severe
and RPE detachments. The lesions are circular and gray-tan.
hyphema, the animal may be presented with an ocular
They may regress, remain, or progress into areas of multifocal
 complaint. Thus, detection of retinal hemorrhage, changes in
retinal degeneration, but changes usually are not seen beyond
 retinal blood vessels, and so on, should direct the clinician to 
1 year of age. It is suspected that the detachments are due to
perform further diagnostic evaluation, such as measurement of
secretion and absorption defects in the RPE, and therefore the
blood pressure, complete blood counts, serum biochemistry,
 disease may be regarded as a form of RPE dysplasia.
and clotting profles. Similarly, treatment should be aimed at
RETINAL DYSTROPHY IN BRIARDS. Affected dogs are
the primary cause; ocular treatment is not required except in
congenitally night blind. However, unlike CSNB, the disease is
cases of hemorrhage, for which symptomatic treatment is
progressive and day vision is impaired in advanced cases, and
provided. The various cardiac and vascular diseases that may
funduscopic changes may be seen. The disease is probably due
affect the eye are discussed in detail in Chapter 18.
to RPE abnormalities and therefore was initially confused with
RPED, although the clinical presentation of the two differs.
Retinopathy Secondary to Infectious/Inflammatory
INHERITED RETINAL DEGENERATIONS IN CATS. Inherited
Diseases
retinopathies are rarely reported in the cat. Abyssinians seem to
be susceptible, with two forms of inherited diseases reported.
 Because of the close proximity of the retina and the choroid,
Rod-cone dysplasia is a dominant disease. Signs of retinal
the retina rarely shows isolated inflammation; the choroid is
degeneration are evident ophthalmoscopically at 8 to 12 weeks
usually involved as well. In fact, in a majority of cases the
310
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
A
B
Figure 15-49. Retinal hermorrhages (anc cetachrment) in
an Alaskan malamute dliagnosec with Ehrtichia canis (A),
in a clomestic shorthairec cat cliagnosec with systemic
hypertension (B), and in a cow with thromboembolic
meningoencephalitis (C). (C courtesy Drs. C.A. Severin
and Julie Gionfriddo, Colorado State University.)
C
 primary ocular manifestation of the disease is an inflammation
of the choroid—choroiditis or posterior uveitis. As a result of
 ment. A retina that underwent total detachment may be seen
the breakdown of the blood-retinal barrier, the inflammation 
through the pupil (without an ophthalmoscope) as a large
spreads from the choroid to the retina, resulting in chorioretinitis.
"curtain' with blood vessels located behind the lens (see Figure
 In rare cases, notably canine distemper and Neospora caninum
15-49). The curtain will be transparent, white, or bloody,
 infection, the primary infection is in the retina, with the choroid
depending on the fluid (serous, exudative, or hemorrhagic,
being secondarily affected (i.e., retinochoroiditis).
respectively) that caused the detachment, and the eye will
Clinically, however, it is impossible to distinguish between 
be blind. Partial retinal detachments may also occur but 
ophthalmic signs of retinochoroiditis and chorioretinitis.
 may be harder to detect and cause only partial loss of vision in
 Rather, signs of posterior segment inflammation are classified
the eye.
as being either active or inactive. Distinguishing clinical signs
The retinitis may frequently be accompanied by anterior
of the two stages are described here.
uveitis and its associated clinical signs. Secondary compli-
ACTIVE RETINITIS (Figure 15-50). Clinical signs of active
cations of the uveitis, such as synechia or glaucoma, may also
 retinitis are similar to those of inflammation in any other organ.
be observed.
Edema, exudate, and cellular infiltration may be seen as white or
As was noted previously for the cardiac and vascular
blurry sheaths around retinal blood vessels (see Figures 15-35
 diseases, these signs of posterior segment inflammation should
and 15-36). In affected areas, the retina appears dull. This 
 not be regarded as a primary problem but rather as ocular mani-
appearance is more easily observed in the tapetal region, as the
festations of a systemic disease. Therefore systemic diagnostic
edema and infiltration reduce tapetal reflectivity. The borders
evaluation is waranted. In the case of chorioretinitis the primary
 of the inflamed areas are indistinct. Massive cellular infiltration 
 cause of the inflammation is usually an infectious agent. There-
 may lead to the formation of granulomas, which may be seen
fore complete blood counts, serologic evaluation, and other
as focal white or gray spots in both the tapetum and non-
diagnostic tests (e.g., urinalysis, radiography) should be under-
tapetum. The inflammation may also spread to the adjacent
taken. If a diagnosis is not reached through systemic workup,
vitreous, causing it to appear hazy.
the anterior chamber (or vitreous) may be tapped and a sample
Active retinitis may also be accompanied by retinal
of fluid submitted to cytologic or serologic evaluation.
hemorrhage, the appearance of which depends on its depth
However, it is important to note that in cases of infective
within the retina (see Figures 15-37 and 15-49). Significant
 retinitis the primary infectious agent does not always enter the
RetiNA |
311
.
A
Figure 15-50. A, Peripheral retina of a cow with active retinitis. Pigmentation is eviclent clorsally, with several
 areas of active retinitis surrouncled by pale eclerma and cellular infiltration. A hyperreflective margin fyefow) is
preent around theupper lesion,Histopathologymicrographshowingacaseof chronic retinitisinaogot
the extensive perivascular infiltration by lymphocytes and plasma cells. Retinal cletachment also occurredl.
(Hematoxylin & eosin stain.) (A courtesy Dr. l. Klein; B courtesy Dr. Emmanuel loeb.)
eye. Although some organisms (e.g., fungal agents) may enter
 Numerous apoptotic nuclei have been recorded in the outer
the eye, others (e.g., Ehrlichia canis) do not. In these cases, the
nuclear layer of the diseased retinas, with both cones and rods
choroid and retina are not infected. Rather, they are inflamed
affected. The typical presentation is of acute blindness, with
owing to the presence of sensitized immunocytes and anti-
 dilated, nonresponsive pupils. Initially the fundus looks normal,
bodies. Consequently, unless contraindicated by the systemic
although ophthalmoscopic signs of progressive retinal degene-
(or ocular) condition of the patient, the treatment of the primary
ration may appear over the next few months. Because an animal
 cause should be augmented with systemic and topical anti-
with retrobulbar optic neuritis may also be presented with similar
inflammatory drugs as well as mydriatic agents to treat the
signs of acute blindness, dilated and nonresponsive pupils, and a
inflammation of the posterior segment of the eye.
normal-looking fundus, the ERG is particularly useful in distin-
INACTIVE RETINITIS. Following the inflammation, affected
guishing between the two diseases. The signal is normal in optic
areas of the retina undergo atrophy. In the tapetal region, the 
neuritis but extinguished in SARD.
atrophy may be seen as distinct foci of hyperreflectivity with
Although SARD is defined as an acquired disease, intensive
well-defined borders alongside areas of normal retina (see
research has not succeeded in identifying the primary cause.
Figures 15-28 and 15-34). In the nontapetal region, pale, light
For many years, the most commonly accepted theory was that
brown areas of depigmentation may be seen (see Figure 15-32,
SARD is the result of an endocrinologic disorder. The disease
which is of similar clinical appearance, although the cause is
is most common in midle-aged adult dogs, especially obese,
different). Retinal vessels decrease in size and number
in
spayed females, and may be more common in winter. A history
affected areas (see Figures 15-29, B. and 15-30, which are of
of recent polyuria, polydypsia, weight gain, and lethargy
1S
 similar clinical appearance, although the cause is different).
typical. A significant percentage of patients have a blood profle
On occasion, sclerotic choroidal vessels appear as radiating
suggestive of hyperadrenocorticism, with lymphopenia, elevated
 thin white lines through a depigmented retina and choroid.
 alkaline phosphatase, hypercholesterolemia, and an abnormal
 Because the RPE has a phagocytic role during inflammation,
adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation test result. Recently,
it undergoes hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and migration. Following
however, other causes have been proposed for SARD, including
the inflammation, multifocal clumps of RPE may be seen in
 autoimmune inflammation (resulting from production of anti-
 both the tapetum and nontapetum, usually within the areas of
retinal antibodies) and toxicity. Unfortunately, because the
the atrophied retina (see Figures 15-33 and 15-34).
primary cause has yet to be identifed, there is curently no
treatment for SARD, and the blindness is irreversible.
Specific Retinopathies
Miscellaneous Causes of Retinopathy
Glaucomatous Retinopathy
See Chapter 12.
Nutritional Causes
FELINE CENTRAL RETINAL DEGENERATION. Taurine is an
Uveodermatologic Syndrome
essential amino acid for cats, which lack the enzyme cysteine
sulfinic acid decarboxylase needed to synthesize taurine.
See Chapter 11.
Therefore felines depend on dietary intake to meet their taurine
requirements, and a deficiency in taurine may lead to progres-
Sudden Acquired Retinal Degeneration
sive retinal degeneration as well as dilated cardiomyopathy.
The initial lesion a small, rounded lesion temporal to and
SARD is a disease that has been reported only in dogs. As the
slightly above the disc in the area centralis. Because of its
name implies, it is a retinal degeneration of sudden onset.
location, the syndrome has been called feline central retinal
312
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
only after depletion of hepatic reserves. Diagnosis can be made
if liver vitamin A levels are less than 2.0 μg/g of liver or if
 plasma vitamin A levels fall below 20 μg/dL. Steers have been
reported more susceptible to vitamin A deficiency than heifers.
In pigs, deficiency in pregnant sows causes microphthalmia and
 blind piglets. Deficiency in adults can also cause nyctalopia late
in the disease.
Hypovitaminosis A also causes abnormal thickening of
growing bones, including those of the skull and around the
optic canal, leading to compression of the optic nerve. Fundic
examination reveals pale tapetum, papilledema, indistinct disc
margins and tortuous retinal blood vessels. Retinal detachment,
subretinal hemorrhages, and optic nerve ischemia may also
occur. The condition has recently been reported in lions but is
most commonly seen in calves.
Ocular signs of hypovitaminosis A are given in Box 15-1
Figure 15-51. Feline central retinal cegeneration in a cheetah that was fed
and are depicted in Figures 15-52 and 15-53.
a taurine-ceficient dliet. The hyperreflective banc arounc the cisc is
characteristic of the clisease.
Storage Diseases
degeneration (FCRD). The lesion becomes progressively
ellipsoid, extending in a band from the temporal fundus across
The large group of storage diseases is characterized by accumu-
the top of the optic disc to the nasal fundus (Figure 15-51). The
lation of metabolic substrates within cells. They are rare genetic
 area within the lesion is hyperreflective. ERG has shown initial
 disorders, in which an enzyme deficiency causes accumulation
cone dysfunction starting in the area centralis, with rod
 of that enzyme's substrate within neurons and glial cells as well
function affected in later stages of the disease, and the animal
 as in other cells in the body. Accumulation in the retina causes 
blindness and has been reported to occur in mucopoly-
further lesions from developing and will reverse 
the
saccharidosis, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, and gangliosidosis.
cardiomyopathy but has not been proved to restore vision that 
 In some storage diseases retinal lesions are present and are of
has been lost.
diagnostic value. Blindness and other neuroophthalmic signs may
 The prevalence of FCRD has been dramatically reduced
 also be the result of storage diseases affecting the postretinal
after recognition of the role of taurine in its pathogenesis,
visual pathways and other parts of the CNS.
because the amino acid is now added to commercial cat diets.
 Storage diseases have been reported in various breeds of
FCRD may still be observed in cats that are fed commercial
dogs, cats, cattle, pigs, and sheep but not in horses. Animals
dog diets, although some manufacturers add taurine to canine
 sis  s a mns ig  ne [ou a an
diets to prevent this complication. FRCD has also been
CNS dysfunction early in life. The diseases are slowly pro-
reported in captive feline wildlife species, including tigers and
 gressive and result in the death of the affected animal. There-
cheetahs, that were fed inadequate diets. Therefore the diets of
fore storage diseases should be considered among the
all felines that do not eat commercial cat food should be sup-
differential diagnoses in cases of neonatal death or in young
plemented with taurine. The amino acid can be supplemented
animals presented with nonspecific neurologic signs (e.g.,
in solution, powder, or tablet form, with a suggested dose of
ataxia, seizures), especially in purebred patients. Definitive
400 ppm daily.
Box 15-1 I
Ocular signs of hypovitaminosis A
Cats should not be fed commercial dog food.
in cattle
Apparent exophthalmia
Feline cardiomyopathy patients should undergo ophthal-
Epiphora
moscopic examination to detect retinopathy due to taurine
 Reduced comeal sensitivity
deficiency.
Nystagmus
Papilledema—in calves may be due to constriction of
HYPOVITAMINOSIS A. Vitamin A deficiency has been demon-
 optic nerve by bone malformation; in calves and adults
 strated to cause vision impairment in a number of species. The
 due to malasborption of cerebrospinal fluid
visual deficits occur via two different pathophysiologic
 Retinal venous congestion 
 mechanisms. First, because vitamin A (retinol) is a component
 Focal superficial retinal and papillary hemorrhages 
of rhodopsin, the visual photopigment of rods, hy povitaminosis 
 Subretinal hemorrhages and retinal detachment 
A causes impaired rod function. This impairment is expressed
Tapetal pallor
behaviorally as nyctalopia (night blindness). If the deficiency is
Fixed, dialted pupils 
 chronic, progressive retinal degeneration and complete blind-
 Optic atrophy
ness may occur. The condition has been reported in young
Retinal degeneration (both outer and inner retina)
horses, cattle, and pigs. In cattle, nyctalopia is an important sign
Nyctalopia—-night blindness may be responsive to
of hypovitaminosis A. In addition, poor reproductive effciency,
treatment
skin and central nervous system (CNS) lesions, and
Complete blindness—-nonresponsive to treatment
conjunctivitis are encountered. Plasma levels of vitamin A fall
REtiNA
313
Figure 15-54. Bright blindness in a sheep. Note increased tapetal
reflectivity and vascular attenuation. Compare with normal ovine funcus
in Figure 15-7, C. (Courtesy Keith C. Barnett.)
 Figure 15-52. Papillecema and pigment clisruption in the nontapetal
region of a blind steer with vitamin A cleficiency. (From Divers T), et al.
[1986]:Blinclness and convulsion associated with vitaminA ceficiencyin
depressed PLRs, tapetal hyperreflectivity (Figure 15-54),
feecllot steers. ] Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1579.)
pale optic disc, and narrowing of retinal blood vessels.
Outer retinal layers are destroyed, and inner layers are
spared.
·“Blindgrass" (Stypandra sp.) toxicity occurs in Western
Australia and affects sheep and goats. Most animals
are affected with posterior paresis and some die, but
survivors become blinded by lesions in the photoreceptor
layer, optic nerve, and optic tracts.
· Male fern (Dryopteris filix mas) causes demyelination of
 the optic nerve. Blindness, fixed and dilated pupils,
papilledema, and retinal hemorrhages have been described 
 in affected cattle.
·Helichrysum argyrosphaerum poisonings cause gliosis and
 demyelination of the optic nerve, as well as outer retinal
degeneration, in grazing ruminants.
PLANT POISONINGS IN HORSES. Cortical blindness was
reported in hoses following ingestion of fiddleneck (Amsinckia
Figure 15-53. Optic atrophy with a pale gray optic clisc after longstancling
sp.) and horsetail (Equisetum arvense). Grazing on blindgrass
vitamin A cleficiency in a calf. (From Rubin LF [1974]: Atlas of Veterinary
causes retinal and optic nerve degeneration similar to that
Ophthalmoscopy. Lea & Febiger, Philaclelphia.)
observed in ruminants.
DRUG TOXICITIES IN SMALL ANIMALS. In dogs,
retinal toxicity has been reported after the use of ethambutol,
diagnosis can be made, depending on the disease process, by
quinine, rafoxanide, chloroquine, azalide, and diphenyl-
demonstration of either deficient enzyme activity or substrate
thiocarbazone. The drugs cause retinal degeneration and
accumulation.
blindness. In cats, retinal degeneration and blindness have been 
 reported due to griseofulvin, megesterol acetate, and ethylene
Drug and Plant Toxicities
glycol.
OXYGEN TOXICITY IN CATS AND DOGS. Newborn and
Numerous plants and chemical agents induce retinopathy in
 young puppies and kittens (less than 3 weeks of age) that are
different species. However, many of these agents are experi-
exposed to high oxygen concentrations demonstrate an
 a a    s n n 
abnormality of retinal vasculature and consequent retinopathy
 cussed here.
termed retrolental fibroplasia or proliferative retinopathy. A
PLANT POISONINGS IN FOOD ANIMALS. Ingestion of
similar disease, known as retinopathy of prematurity, occurs in
various plants was shown to cause blindness in grazing cattle
human infants. Clinical signs include dilated and tortuous
and sheep:
 retinal vessels, vitreous hemorrhage, altered fundus pigmen-
tation, incomplete vascularization of peripheral retina, and
· "Bright blindness" has been reported in cattle and sheep in
 massive intravitreal neovascularization. Changes in vessel
the United Kingdom due to long-term ingestion of bracken
diameter are seen after as little as 1 hour of a high-oxygen
fern (Pteris aquilina). This disease causes dilated pupils,
environment.
314
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Severe retinal lesions are caused by exposure of neonatal dogs
and cats to a high-oxygen atmosphere.
Additional Retinopathies and Neuropathies of Horses
Horses suffer from several retinopathies and neuropathies that
have not been described in other species. Proliferative optic
neuropathy is characterized by a progressive white mass
enlarging on the surface of the optic nerve (see Figure 16-35 in
Chapter 16). It does not affect vision and is regarded as an
incidental finding. A similar white mass, however, is also seen in 
exudative optic neuritis, an acute edema of the optic disc in
which the animal is blinded (see Figure 16-34 in Chapter 16).
The cause of both diseases is unknown, and there is no treatment.
Ischemic optic neuropathy is an iatrogenic disease: Ligation of
the intemal and external carotid arteries (to treat epistaxis caused
Figure 15-56. Histopathology micrograph showing a case of retinal
by guttural pouch mycosis) causes ischemia of the optic nerve
cletachment in a cog. Note that the cletachment occurred between the
 and irreversible blindness. Although initially the affected optic
sensory neuroretina (i.e., the outer segments of the photoreceptors) and
nerve appears normal, edema, hyperemia, and hemorrhages may
the retinal pigrment epithelium (RPE). As a result, the RPE unclerwent
be observed after 24 hours. A similar presentation may also be
hypertrophy, giving it the classic "tombstone" appearance. There is also
eviclence of inflarmmation in the retina. (Hermatoxylin & eosin stain.)
seen in cases of traumatic optic neuropathy. in which a blunt
(Courtesy Dr. Emmanuel loeb.)
trauma causes acute blindness (Figure 15-55).
 Equine motor neuron disease is a disorder of mature horses
characterized by degeneration of motor neurons in the ventral
hom of the spinal cord and selected brainstem nuclei causing
RETINAL DETACHMENT
 muscoskeletal and neurologic deficits, including generalized
weakness and muscle tremors. Equine motor neuron disease
Retinal detachment is the separation of the retina from the
also causes ophthalmoscopically visible pigment aberrations 
underlying choroid. More precisely, separation of the retina
similar to those seen in canine RPED (see Figure 15-48). The
usually occurs between the photoreceptor layer and the
yellow-brown pigmentation is due to accumulation of ceroid
pigment epithelium (Figure 15-56). This is because the RPE
lipofuscin in the RPE. As in the case of canine RPED, chronic 
and the sensory neuroretina are two embryologically distinct 
dietary vitamin E deficiency is implicated in the pathogenesis
layers, with a potential space between them (see Chapter 2).
of the disease. The effect on vision is inconsistent, but diminished
The intimate contact between the photoreceptors and pigment
b-wave amplitudes on ERG have been reported.
epithelial cells is disrupted, and metabolites are no longer
 Equine recurrent uveitis is a common cause of blindness in 
available from the choroid, nor can end products of meta-
adult horses worldwide. Loss of vision results from chorio-
bolism be removed. Because of the retina's high metabolic
retinopathy caused by posterior uveitis. The disease is dis-
rate, severe and irreversible changes may occur soon after
 cussed in detail in Chapter 11.
separation.
Etiology
 Possible causes of retinal detachment/separation are as follows:
 Congenital disorders: Including retinal dysplasia, CEA, and
 multiple congenital anomalies
Serous detachments: Accumulation of fluid beneath the retina
 pushes it away from underlying tissues. Two types of serous
detachments are recognized, on the basis of the type of fluid
 causing the separation. Exudative detachments are due to
infectious diseases caused by viral (e.g., distemper, FIP),
fungal (e.g, blastomycosis) or protozoal (e.g., leishmania)
disease. Hemorhagic detachments are caused by systemic
hypertension, by vascular diseases such as coagulopathy,
thrombocytopenia, anemia, and hyperviscosity (see Figure 
15-49), or by trauma (Figure 15-57). Specific causes are
discussed in Chapter 18.
· Traction detachments: After uveitis (e.g., in equine
recurrent uveitis), contraction of scar tissue or fbrin within 
Figure 15-55. Traumatic optic neuropathy in a horse. The trauma was
caused when the horse flipped over cluring a colic attack. (Courtesy
the vitreous pulls the retina off the RPE. Anterior
University of Wisconsin-Madlison Veterinary Ophthalrmology Service
 displacement of the vitreous (for example after lens
Collection.)
 luxation) may also pull the retina off the RPE.
RetiNA |
315
31
PS
NOOTH
Figure 15-5s. Ultrasouncd image of retinal cetachment in a 6-year-old
Figure 15-57. Complete retinal cetachment in a cog causec by a nearby
Samoyed with uveitis. The image shows the classic "seagull wings" sign.
bomb blast. The cletached clorsal (tapetall retina cletached at the ora
ciliaris retinae and “fell ventrally. t may be seen as a gray sheet overlying
which is the cletached retina acherent to the globe at the optic nerve heacl
and the ora ciliaris retinae. The hyperechoic opacities anterior to the
the dlisc and obscuring its details.
cletached retina are fibrin strands that caused the cetachment.(Courtesy
Dr. 1. Aizenberg.)
· Vitreous degeneration: Liquefaction of the vitreous is
important in the pathogenesis of human retinal detachment.
Therapy
The exact role of liquefaction in spontaneous retinal
detachment in aged animals is poorly understood. The
 In patients presented for sudden loss of vision due to serous
liquefied vitreous enters the subretinal space through retinal
retinal detachments, vision can sometimes be restored by
holes, causing rhegmatogenous detachment. This type of
medical therapy. Initial diagnostic attempts are directed at
detachment is more common in elderly patients, which are
determining the cause of the detachment. Patients with retinal
more susceptible to retinal hole formation and vitreous 
detachment should receive complete ophthalmic and physical
liquefaction (see Chapter 14).
examinations, a complete blood count for infectious and
· latrogenic: Retinal detachment may occur after cataract
vascular diseases, serum chemistry profle to evaluate renal
extraction. Tears near the ora ciliaris retinae are thought to
function, systolic blood pressure measurement, and serologic
be the cause of postoperative retinal detachment.
evaluation for possible responsible infectious causes (see
Chapter 18).
Signs
Treatment consists of treating the primary cause and symp-
 tomatic treatment of the detachment itself. If hypertension is
Signs of retinal detachment are as follows:
 confrmed at the initial examination, antihypertensive therapy is
indicated. Appropriate antimicrobial (i.e., antibiotic, antifungal)
· Acute loss of vision. Blindness is noted in cases of
therapy should be administered systemically if the cause is
complete detachment. Focal detachments are usually
infectious. Depending on the patient's systemic condition, oral
innocuous, and their effect on the visual field is not noticed
diuretics and corticosteroids should be administered, with the
by the owner.
aim of draining the subretinal fluid. Excessive amounts of fibrin,
·Dilated pupil that is nonresponsive to light. However, if the
which may predispose the eye to traction retinal detachment,
other eye is unaffected, a consensual light response to the 
can be treated with an intraocular injection of tissue plasminogen
affected eye will be present.
activator.
Appearance of a floating sheet (i.e., the detached retina)
 Partial retinal detachments after cataract extraction may be
 may be seen behind the lens without the use of an
successfully prevented from progressing to a full detachment
ophthalmoscope (see Figure 15-49). The sheet may be
by laser retinopexy along the edge of the separation. Similar
transparent, white, or bloody depending on the type of fluid
 treatment may be used to prevent progression of rhegmatogenous
(serous, exudative, or hemorrhagic, respectively) involved
detachments. In some referral practices, the veterinary
in the pathogenesis of the detachment. Retinal vessels are 
ophthalmologist may be able to offer additional surgical options
clearly visible on the retina as it moves up against the lens 
 for complete retinal detachments. See Chapter 14 for additional
(see Figure 15-49).
discussion.
· If the posterior segment of the eye cannot be visualized
(due to hyphema, for example), an ultrasound examination
BIBLIOGRAPHY
may be used to demonstrate the condition. The classic
appearance of a detached retina is the “seagull sign"—-a 
Acland GM, Aguirre GD (1987): Retinal degeneralion in the dog. IV: early
detached retina that remains fixed to the posterior wall of 
Telinal degeneration (erd) in Norwegian elkhounds. Exp Eye Res 44:491.
q os auos pe pi go oesan a- o) (e ja  e
the eye at the optic nerve head and at the ora ciliaris retinae
 single dose TAAV-mediated gene transfer to the relina in a canine model of
(Figure 15-58). Causes of the detachment, such as
childhood blindness. Mol Ther 12:1072.
subretinal fluid and vitreal inflammation, may also be seen
Acland GM, et al. (1995): Exclusion of the cyclic GMP-PDE beta subunit 
on ultrasound.
gene as a candidate in the pcrd dog. Invest Ophthalmology 36:S891.
316
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Acland GM, et al. (1994): XLPRA: a canine retinal degeneration inherited as
CurtisR,et al.(1987): An early onset etinal dystrophy with dominant
an X-linked trait. Am J Med Genet 52:27.
inheritance in the Abyssinian cat: clinical and pathological findings. Invest
Acland GM, et al. (1989): Non-allelism of three genes (redI, rcd2, and erd)
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 28:62.
for early-onset hereditary retinal degeneralion. Exp Eye Res 49:983.
Davidson MG et al. (1998): Rebinal degeneration associated with vitamin E
Aguie GD, Acland GM (i988): Variabion inreinal degeneration phenotype
deficiency in hunting dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 213:645.
inherited at the prcd locus. Exp Eye Res 46:663.
 s   d  s   uag  
Aguie GD, et al. (1998): Congenital stabionary might blindness in the dog:
generalised progTessive retinal atrophy (gPRA) mutations in dogs. Genet
commonutaonRPE65genedicatesfondereffectMVi23
Sel Evol 35:445.
Aguine GD, et al. (1982): Pathogenesis of rod-cone degeneration in
miniature poodles. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 23:610.
afflicted with generalized progTessive retinal atrophy. BMC Genet 3:12.
Aguime GD, et al. (1982): Retinal degeneration in the dog. II: abnommal
Dekomien G, Epplen JT (2002): The canine phosducin gene: characterization
cyclic nucleotide metabolism in rod-cone dysplasia.Exp Eye Res 35:625.
of the exon-intron structure and exclusion as a candidate gene for
Aguine GD, et al. (1978): Rod-cone dysplasia in Inish seters: a cyclic GMP
generalized progressive retinal atophy in1I dog breeds.MolVis 8:138.
metabolic defect of visual cells. Science 201:1133.
Dice PF (1980): Progressive retinal atrophy in the Samoyed. Mod Vet Pract
Aguinre GD, Rubin LF (1975): Rod-cone dysplasia (progressive retinal
61:59.
alrophy) in Irish setters. J Am Vet Med Assoc 166:157.
 Divers TI, et al. (1986): Blindness and convulsion associated with vitamin A
Aguie GD, Rubin LF (1975): The electroretinogtam in dogs with inherited
deficiency in feedlot steers. I Am Vet Med Assoc 189: 1579.
cone degeneration. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 14:840.
Edwards JF,et al. (1994): Juvenile-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in
Aguire GD, Rubin LF (1974): Pathology of hemeralopia in the Alaskan
Rambouillet sheep. Vet Pathol 31 :48.
Ehrenhofer MC, et al. (2002): Nommal structure and age-related changes of
Aguie GD, Rubin LF (1972): ProgTessive Telinal atrophy in the miniature
the equine rebina. Vet Ophthalmol 5:39.
poodle: an electrophysiologic study. J Am Vet Med Assoc 160:191.
Evans J,et al. (2005): A varant fom of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in
Aguine GD, Schmidt SY (1978): Retinal degeneration associated with the
American bulldogs. J Vet Intern Med 19:44
feeding of dog food to cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 172:791.
Fischer CA (1970): Retinopathy in anemic cats. I Am Med Assoc 156:1415)
Aroch I,et al.(1996):Haematologic,ocular and skeletal abnomalitiesina
Ford M, et al. (2003): Gene transfer jn the RPE65 nullmutation dog:
family of Samoyeds. J Small Anim Pract 37:333.
Telationship between construct volume, visual behavior and
 Anderson PA, et al. (1979): Biochemic al lesions associated with taurine
electrorelinogTaphic (ERG) results. Doc Ophthalmol 107:79.
deficiency in the cat. J Anim Sci 49: 1227.
Gelatt KN, MeGill LD (1973): Clinical characterisics of microphthalmia
Bainbidge JW, et al. (2003): Stable TAAV-mediated transduction of od and
with colobomas of the Australian shepherd dog.J Am Vet Med Assoc
cone photoreceptors in the canine retina. Gene Ther 10:1336.
162:393.
Barlow RM, et al.(198 I): Mannosidosis in Aberdeen Angus cattle in Britain.
Giuliano E,van der Woerdt A (1999): Feline retinal degeneration: clinical
Vet Rec 109:441.
expenience and new findings (1994-1997). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:511.
Barnett KC,et al. (1970): Ocular changes associated with hypovitaminosis A
Goebel HH, Dahme E (1986): Ulrastucture of tetinal pigment epithelial and
in cattle. Br Vet J 126:561.
neural cells in the neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis affected Dalmabian dog.
Barnett KC, Watson WA (1970): Bright blindness in sheep: a primary
Retina 6:179.
Tetinopathy due to feeding bracken Pteris aguilina).ResVet Sci 1l:289.
Graydon RJ, Jolly RD (1984): Ceroid-lipofuscinosis (Batten's disease):
Bedford PGC (1984): Reinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (CPRA): a study
oi  s d e an
of the disease in the Briard. J Small Anim Pract 25:129.
ovine model. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 25:294.
Bedford PGC (1982): Mul6focal elinal dysplasia in the Rottweiler. Vet Rec
Guven D, et al. (2006): Implantation of an inactive epirelinal poly(dimethy)
111:304.
siloxane) electrode anfay in dogs. Exp Eye Res 82:81.
Bellhorn RW, et al. (1974): Feline central reinal degeneration. Invest
Guven D, et al. (2005): Long-tem shimulation by achive epiretinal implants in
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 13:608.
normal and RCDI dogs. J Neural Eng 2:S65.
Bellhorn RW, Fischer CA (1970): Feline cenral retinal degenerahion.
Hakanson N, Narfstrom K (1995): Progresive retinal atrophy in papillon
J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:842.
 dogs in Sweden: a clinical survey. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 5:83.
Bergsjo T, et al.(1984): Congenital blindness with ocular developmental
Harper PA, et al. (1988): Neurovisceral ceroid-lipofuscinosis in blind Devon
aomalies, including retinal dysplasia, in Dobeman pinscher dogs. I Am
cattle.Acta Neuropathol 75:632.
Vet Med Assoc 184:1383.
 Jolly R, et al. (1987): Mannosidosis: ocular lesions in the bovine model.
Berson EL, Watson G (1980): ElectroreinogTams in English seters with
Curr Eye Res 6:1073.
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 19:87.
Katz ML, et al. (2005): Assessment of retinal function and characterization of
Bildfell R, et al. (1995): Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in a cat. Vet Pathol
lysosomal storage body accumulation in the retinas and brains of Tibetan
32:485.
teltiers with ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Am J Vet Res 66:67.
Katz ML, et al. (2002): Assessment of plasma carnitine concentralions in
 spaniel in Norway and Sweden. Vet Rec 134:377.
Telation to ceroid lipofuscinosis in Tibetan terriers. Am J Vet Res 63:890.
Koch SA, Rubin LF (i972): Distribution of cones in retina of the normal dog.
retievers. I: development of relinal tears and detachment. Arch
Am J Vet Res 33:361.
Ophthalmol 103:842.
Komaromy AM, et al. (2003): Flash electroretinography in standing horses
s ut u ai e jo d a l e   
using the DTL microfiber elec Tode. Vet Ophthalmol 6:27.
cows. J Comp Pathol 92:69.
Kommonen B, et al. (1997): Impaired rebnal function in young Labrador retiever
 Burns MS, et al. (1988): Development of hereditary tapetal degeneration in
the beagle dog.Curr Eye Res7:103.
Kommonen B, et al. (1994): Early morphometry of a retinal dystrophy in
Buyukmihci N, et al. (1982): Retinal degenerations in the dog. II:
Labrador retrievers. Acta Ophthalmol 72:203.
development of theetinainrod-cone dysplasia.Exp EyeRes 30:575.
Komnenou AA, et al (2007): Ocular manifestations of natural canine
Carnig CB, et al. (1988): Inheritance of associated ocular and skeletal
monocytic ehrlichiosis /Ehrlichia canis);: a relrospechive study of 90 cases.
 dysplasia in Labrador retrevers. I Am Vet Med Assoc 193: 1269.
Vet Ophthalmol 10: 137.
Cideciyan AV, et al. (2005): In vivo dynamics of retinal injury and repair in
Kukekova AV,et al. (2006): Linkage mapping of canine tod cone dysplasia
the thodopsin mutant dog model of human reinitis pigmentosa. Proc Natl
type 2 (red2) to CFA7, the canine orthologue of human Iq32. Invest
Acad Sci U S A 102:5233
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 47: 1210.
Clegg FG, et al. (1981): Blindness in dairy cows. Vet Rec 109:101.
Laratta LJ, et al. (1985): Multiple congenital ocular defects in the Akita dog.
Collier LC, et al. (1985): Tapetal degeneralion in cats with Chediak-Higashi
Comell Vet 75:381.
syndrome. Curr Eye Res 4:767.
ads 1auds usg a u eise[dsp [eay (el) (e nea r qoe] 
CollinsBK,etal.(1992):Familial cataracts and concurent ocular anomalies
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:192.
in chow chows. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1485.
Le Meur G, et al.(2005): Postsurgical assessment and long-term safety of
Cullen CL, Grahn BH (2002): Acute prechiasmal blindness due to sudden 
Tecombinant adeno-associated virus-mediated gene transfer into the retinas
acquired retinal degeneration syndrome. Can Vet I 43:729.
of dogs and primates. Arch Ophthalmol 123:500.
  u oe i si al    s
LeivaMtal):hayfadvisalsnsis
haired dachshund dogs. Br Vet J 149:71.
Vet Ophthalmol 8:71.
REtINA 
317
Lewis DG, et al. ( 1986): Congenital microphthalmia and other developmental
Pizzitani S (2003): Transpupillary diode laser retinopexy in dogs:
ocular anomalies in the Doberman. I Small Anim Pract 27:559.
ophthalmoscopic fluorescein angiographic and histopathologic study.
Lightfoot RM, et al. (1996): Reinal pigment epithelial dystrophy in Briard
Vet Ophthalmol 6:227.
dogs. Res Vet Sci 60:17.
Rabin AR, et al. (1973): Cone and rod responses in nutritionally induced
MacMillan AD, Lipton DE (1978): Henitability of multifocal relinal dysplasia
Tetinal degeneration in the cat. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 12:694.
 in American cocker spaniels. I Am Vet Med Assoc 172:568.
Rampazzo A, et al.(2005): Collie eye anomaly in a mixed-breed dog.
Matz-Rensing K, et al. (1996): Retinal detachment in horses. Equine
Vet Ophthalmol 8:357.
Vet J 28:111.
Reppas GP, et al. (1995): Trauma-induced blindness in two horses.
McLeod DS,et al. (1998): Climical and histopathologic features of canine
Aust Vet J 72:270.
Ris R, et al. (1999): Ocular manifestations of equine motor neuron disease.
McLeod DS,et al.(1996): Vaso-obliteration in the canine model of oxygen-
Equine Vet J 31:99.
induced retinopathy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 37:300.
Rubin LF (1971): Hemeralopia in Alaskan malamute pups. JAm Vet Med
McLeod DS, et al. (1996): Vasoproliferation in the neonatal dog model of
Assoc 158:1699.
Rubin LF (1968): Heredity of retinal dysplasia in Bedlington temiers.
Meyers VN,et al. (1983): Short-linked dwarfsm and ocular defects in the
J Am Vet Med Assoc 152:260.
Samoyed dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 183:975.
Rubin LF (1963): Atrophy of rods and cones in the cat retina. JI Am Vet Med
Miller PE, et al. (1998): Photoreceptor cell death by apoptosis in dogs with 
Assoc 142:1415.
 Sandberg MA, et al. (1986): Full feld electroretinograms in miniature
Milichamp NJ (1988): ProgTessive reinal atrophy in Tibetan terriers. J Am
poodles with progressive rod-cone degeneration. Invest Ophthalmol
Vet Med Assoc 192:769.
27:1179.
Munroe G (200): Survey of Tetinal haemorthages in neonatal thoroughbred
foals. Mol Ther 12: 1072.
Narfstrom K, Ekesten B (1999): Diseases of the canine ocular fundus, in
Schaffer EH, Wallow IHL (1975): Rhegmatogenous bilateral retinal
 n  p     
detachment in a poodle dog. J Comp Pathol 85:195.
&Wilkins,Philadelphia
Schmidt GM,et al.(1979):Inheritance of tetinal dysplasiain the English
 springer spaniel. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:1989.
with and without hereditary retinal degeneration. Am J Vet Res 59:221.
sxue qpn o e u s an o e eas
Narfstrom K, et al. (2003): Functional and structural recovery of the relina
blast. Vet Ophthalmol 10: 196.
aftergenetheayinthePEulmutaondogvestOphhallVs
SlatteD,tal(:Prv ldeat 
Sci 44:1663.
Aust Vet J 56: 106.
Narfstrom K, et al.(2002): Guidelines for clinical elec troretinography in the
Slatter D, et al. (1980): Stypandra spp. (*blindgtass") poisoning in ruminants-
dog. Doc Ophthalmol 105:83.
ocular and neurological findings in spontaneous cases. Aust Vet I 57:132.
Narfstrom K,et al.(1995): Clinical electroretinography in the dog with
SlateralChrnpatyastdiath
Ganzfeld shimulation: a practical method of examining rod and cone
following infec hion with equine herpesvirus-I1. Vet Rec 131:237.
function. Doc Ophthalmol 90:279.
Narfstom K,et al.(1994): Hereditary retinal dysophy in the Briard dog:
Vet Ophthalmol 8:337.
clinical and hereditary characteristics. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 4:85.
Tao W, et al. (2002): Encapsulated cell-based delivery of CNTF teduces
Narfstrom K, et al. (1989): The Briard dog: a new animal model of congenital
photoreceptor degeneraion in animal models of retinitis pigmentosa.
staltionery might blindness. Br J Ophthalmol 73:750.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 43:3292.
Narfstrom K, et al. (1988): Hereditary reinal degeneration in the Abyssinian
cat: developmental studies using clinical electroretinogTaphy. Doc
Tetinal lesions in an animal model of juvenile batten disease. Am J Med
Ophthalmol 69:111.
Genet 42:622.
Narfstom K, et al. (1985): Progressive elinal atrophy in the Abyssinian cat:
Url A, et al. (20ol): Equine neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Acta Neuropathol
studies of theDC-recorded electroretinogram and the standing potentialof
(Berl) 101:410.
the eye. Br J Ophthalmol 69:618.
Vainisi SJ, Packo KH (1995): Management of giant retinal tears in dogs.
Narfstrom K, Nilsson SE (1985): Hereditary reinal degeneration in the
J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:491.
Abyssinian cat: corelation of ophthalmoscopic and electroretinographic
Watson P, Bedford PGC (1992): The pigments of retinal pigment epithelial
findings. Doc Ophthalmol 60:183.
dystrophy in dogs.Vet Pathol 29:5.
Nelson DL, Macmillan AD (1983): Mulifocal retinal dysplasia in feld tial
Watson WA, et al. (1972): ProgTessive retinal degenerahion (bright blindness)
Labrador reltievers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:388.
 in sheep: a review. Vet Rec 91:665.
Nilsson SEG,et al. (1992): Changes in the DC electroretinogtam in Bniard
Witzel DA, et al. (1977): Night blindness in the appaloosa: sibling
dogs with hereditary congenital stationery might blindness and partial day
Occunence. J Equine Med Surg I:383.
blindness. Exp Eye Res 54:291.
WitzelED,tal.77Elecorngaphf coneitaihbes
Nunnery C, et al. (2005): Congenital stationary might blindness in a
 an appaloosa flly. J Equine Med Surg I:266.
thoroughbred and a paso fino. Vet Ophthalmol 8:415.
Wolf ED,et al. (1978):Rod-cone dysplasiain the colie.JAmVet Md
Offi R, Narfstrom K (2007): Light at the end of the tunnel? Advances in the 
Assoc 173:1331.
understanding and treatment of glaucoma and inherited retinal
Woodford BJ,et al. (1982): Cyc lic nuc leotide metabolism in inherited
degeneration. Vet I (E-pub ahead of print).
Telinopathy in collies. Exp Eye Res 34:703.
OfiR,etal.(1996):Feline cental etinaldegeneration incaptive cheetahs
Wrigstad A,et al.(1995): Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in the Polish
(Acinonyx jubatus). J Zoo Wild] Med 27: 101.
 owczarek nizinny (PON) dog: a retinal study. Doc Ophthalmol 91:33.
O*Toole DO, et al. (i983): Retinal dysplasia of English springer spaniel dogs:
light microscopy of the postnatal lesions. Vet Pathol 20:298.
Tetinal pigment epithelium in Bniard dogs with hereditary retinal dystrophy.
ParshallC,et al.(i991): Photoreceptor dysplasia: an inherited progressive reinal
Doc Ophthalmol 87:337.
altophy of miniature schnauzer dogs. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol I1:187.
Wyman M, et al. (2005): Ophthalmomyiasis (intema posterior) of the
Paulsen ME, et al. (1989): Blindness and sexual dimorphism associated with
posterior segment and cenral nervous system myiasis: Cuterebra spp. in a
vitamin A deficiency in cattle.J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:933.
cat. Vet Ophthalmol 8:77.
Peiffer RL, Fischer CA (1983): Microphthalmia, elinal dysplasia and anterior
Yanoff M,et al. (1970): Oxygen poisoning of the eyes: comparison in
segment dysgenesis in a litter of Doberman pinschers.JAm Vet Med
cyanotic and acyanotic dogs.Arch Ophthalmol 84:627.
Assoc 183:875.
Zeiss CJ, et al. (2006): CNTF induces dose-dependent alteralions in retinal
Petersen-Jones S (2005): Advances in the molecular understanding of c anine
morphology in normal and rcd-1 canine retina. Exp Eye Res 82:395
Tetinal diseases. J Small Anim Pract 46:371.
Zeiss CJ, et al. (2000): Mapping of X-linked progTessive retinal atrophy
Petersen-Jones SM, Zhu FX (2000): Development and use of a polymerase
(XLPRA), the canine homolog of tetinitis pigmentosa 3 (RP3). Hum Mol
chainreaction-baseddiagmostic test forthe causalmutationofprogressive
Genet 9:531.
Tetinal arophy in Cardigan Welsh corgis. Am I Vet Res 6l:844.
lazneuos aineuu u (pl) eise[dsAp iodaaiooud (666l) (e je 0 sueqz
Pion PD, et al. (1987): Myocardial failure in cats associated with low plasma
dogs: evaluation of candidate genes by molecular genetic analysis.
taurine:areversible cardiomyopathy Science 237764.
I Hered 90:57.
Chapter
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY
Ron Ofri
ASSESSING VISION AND PUPILLARY
LESIONS CAUSING EYELID
AUTONOMIC INNERVATION AND
LIGHT RELFEXES
ABNORMALITIES
ABNORMALITIES
LESIONS IN PATIENTS WITH VISUAL AND
LESIONS OF ADDITIONAL CRANIAL
VESTIBULAR SYSTEM
PUPILLARY LICHT REFLEX DEFICITS
NERVES
CENTRAL VISUAL PATHWAYS
LESIONS CAUSING STRABISMUS
threat with its normal eye and respond by blinking bilaterally,
euroophthalmology should not be a daunting study. If
thus creating a false positive response (i.e., a blink “response"
anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the ocular and visual
 in a blind eye). It is crucial to the validity of this test that the
 innervation are understood, a diagnosis can be reached through
threatening hand does not touch the patient or create enough air
 deduction and elimination rather than from memory.
 currents to be felt by the patient, which may also generate a
The following cranial nerves are significant in relation to ocular
false positive response (Figure 16-1).
functions:
 The normal response to this threat is a rapid blink and closure
 of the palpebral fissure. The anatomic pathways of the afferent
• Optic nerve: Cranial nerve (CN) II—relays the visual signal
and efferent components are depicted in Figure 16-2. The afferent 
from the retina to the central nervous system (CNS)
component of the response is relayed by the optic nerve,
· Oculomotor nerve: CN Ill—innervates four extraocular
muscles (dorsal, medial, and ventral recti and the ventral
through the optic chiasm, optic tract, lateral geniculate nucleus 
(LGN), and optic radiation to the visual cortex located in the
oblique) and the levator palpebral muscle (elevating the
occipital lobe. It is assumed that the visual cortex projects to
upper eyelid); also provides parasympathetic innervation to
the motor cortex, which in turn projects via the intermal capsule
the iris sphincter
and crus cerebri to the facial nuclei in the medulla, and from
 Trochlear nerve: CN IV—inmervates the dorsal oblique muscle
· Trigeminal nerve: CN V—its ophthatmic and maxillary
there the facial nerve (CN Vll) relays the efferent signal to the 
 eyelid muscles. The complexity of this pathway implies that the 
branches provide sensory innervation to the eye and its
resulting blinking is not a reflex but a learned response. There-
accessory organs, including the cornea, conjunctiva,
fore this response may not become fully developed until 10 to
lacrimal gland, and periocular skin
12 weeks of age in some small animals. It is usually present by
· Abducens nerve: CN VI—innervates the lateral rectus and
5 to 7 days in foals and calves. As a result, menace testing in
retractor bulbi muscles
young patients may result in a false negative result, as the
 Facial nerve: CN VlI—innervates the various muscles
controlling the blink response
animal does not blink even though it can see.
 Crossover of optic nerve fibers occurs at the optic chiasm
In addition, significant parts of the CNS are devoted to
(Figure 16-3). Consequently, the left occipital cortex receives
vision processing and ocular control. Therefore the workup of
the axons of the lateral retina of the left eye (inputting from the
the neuroophthalmologic patient requires comprehensive
right visual field) as well as the axons of the medial retina of
neurologic and systemic examinations, in addition to a thorough 
the right eye (inputting, again, from the right visual field) (see
neuroophthalmologic examination (Table 16-1). This chapter
orange pathways in Figure 16-3). The right occipital cortex
reviews the examination, clinical signs, and diseases of the
inputs from the left visual felds of both eyes (see green
 neuroophthalmologic patient.
pathways in Figure 16-3). In humans, where 50% of the axons
cross over in the chiasm, the left occipital cortex inputs the
ASSESSINGVISIONANDPUPILLARY LIGHT
right visual hemifield of both eyes, and the right occipital
REFLEXES
cortex inputs the left visual hemifield (orange and green
Vision and the Menace Response
pathways, respectively, in Figure 16-3). In animals, where a
greater percentage of fibers cross over, the left occipital cortex
Vision is initially evaluated as the patient walks into the clinic
will input a greater proportion of the right visual field of the
or examination room. The ability to navigate in these unfamiliar
right eye and a smaller proportion of the right visual field of the
surroundings may reveal visual deficits. A more direct assess-
left eye. Therefore, in humans, a lesion in the left optic
 ment is made by testing the animal's response to a menacing
radiation or occipital cortex, for example, will cause a loss of
 gesture. The menace response is evoked by making a threatening
the right visual hemifield, with symmetric deficits in both eyes
 gesture with the hand at each eye while the other hand covers
(homonymous hemianopia). In animals, however, such a lesion
the opposite eye. If the other eye is not covered, an alert animal
will cause greater deficits in the visual field of the right eye
that is unilaterally blind in the eye being tested may observe the
than those of the left eye. In the dog, where 25% of the fibers
318
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
319
Table 16-1
 Summary of the Neuroophthalmologic
Examination
TEST OR OBSERVATION
NEUROLOGIC COMPONENTS
Menace response
CN 11, optic chiasm, optic tract,
 lateral geniculate nucleus, optic
 radiation, visual and motor cortex,
facial nucleus and nerve
cerebellum 
Diencephalon
 Size of pupils and
 CN 11, optic chiasm, proximal optic
reaction to light
tract, CN ill, sympathetic nerves,
 dliencephalon-mesencephalon
 (pretectal and oculomotor nuclei)
Eyelids (size of fissure)
CNs l1, VIl, sympathetic nerves 
Third eyelid 
Sympathetic nerves  
 Position of eyes
CNs l1, 1V, V1, vestibular system,
 brainstem
 Normal and abnormal
 CN Vll-brainstem and vestibular
nystagmus
 system—CNs 11, 1V, V1 
Palpebral reflex
CNs v, V11 
Mes.
CN, Cranial merve.
Met.
10
011
16
15
Q
Figure 16-2. Anatomic pathway of the menace response: The afferent
component of the response is relayed from the retina (I) by the optic
nerve (2), through the optic chiasm (3), optic tract (4), lateral geniculate
nucleus (5) and optic racliation (6) to the visual cortex (7) located in the
occipital lobe. Note that the afferent pathways common to the pupillary
light reflex and menace response (up to the level of the proximal optic
tract) are coloredl in lighter shacles. Afferent pathways that serve only the
menace pathways (from the dlistal optic tract onwardl) are depicted in
clarker shacles. lt is assumed that the visual cortex projects to the motor
cortex, which in turn projects via the internal capsule {8) anc crus cerebri
(9) to the facial nuclei (15) in the meclulla, anc from there the facial nerve
(cranial nerve Vll) relays the efferent signal to the eyelid muscles (16). The
cerebellurm participates in moculating the menace response and
 Figure 16-1. The menace response of the right eye is tested while the left 
integrating function of the motor cortex, using pathways that incluce: 10,
eye is being covered. This eliminates the possibility of a blinking response
longituclinal fibers of pons; I1, pontine nuc leus; 12, transverse fibers of
generated by the visual,untested eye.To eliminate stimulation cue to air
pons and middle cerebellar pecduncle; 13, cerebellar cortex; 14, efferent 
 movement or touching of hair, the menacing gesture may be macle behind 
cerebellar pathway; 15, facial nuclei; 16, facial muscles—orbicularis
 a transparent glass or plastic sheet.
oculi. The wiggling line (-) indlicates axons crossing the midine of the
brain.(Modlified from de Lahunta A [1983|:Veterinary Neuroanatomy and
Clinical Neurology, 2nd edl. Sauncers, Philaclelphia.)
remain on the ipsilateral side and 75% of the fibers cross over
in the chiasm, a unilateral lesion will cause deficits of 25% and
 is possible that the patient is visual but cannot blink due to
 75% in the visual fields of the ipsilateral and contralateral eye,
facial nerve paralysis. This is checked by touching the lateral
respectively. In the cat, the respective figures are 33% and 67%.
 and medial canthi of the eyelids to test the palpebral reflex,
In dogs and cats such visual deficits are difficult to detect as an
which is expressed as a blink in response to the tactile
 animal moves in its surroundings. Occasionally, the animal
stimulation. Another way to rule out a false negative response 
may bump into an object on the side opposite the lesion, but
caused by facial nerve paralysis is to carefully watch the eye
 often there is no evidence of visual deficit because 25% to 33%
while performing the menace test. If a facial nerve paralysis
 of the visual field is relayed to the unaffected lobe. In horses,
 exists, forehead or eye retraction is observed when that eye is
 sheep, and cattle with 80% to 90% decussation of optic nerve
threatened, but no blinking is observed. With slight retraction 
axons there is a greater tendency to walk into objects on
 of the eye, the third eyelid passively protrudes. A patient with
the side of the visual deficit, contralateral to the lesion.
i s, ay a a sisd siu e n
Theoretically, these deficits could be tested separately by
 eyelid," which is an indication that vision is intact. If there is no 
threats from the lateral and medial visual fields. However, this 
facial nerve paralysis and no menace response occurs, the
approach is unreliable, and in all domestic animals menace
 animal should be lightly struck two or three times with the
 reflex is poor or absent on the side contralateral to the lesion.
threatening hand, and then the threat should be repeated
 If the menace response does not occur, the examiner should
without touching the patient. This procedure often arouses and
 rule out another potential cause of false negative responses by
 directs the attention of the patient and is then followed by a
checking the facial nerve innervation of the orbicularis oculi. It
 normal response. Significant cerebellar disease may also cause
320
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOCY
Visual fields
Left
Right
Left
Right
Maze Test
This test assesses the patient's ability to navigate through an
obstacle course. The test may be conducted with one eye covered
Retina
to assess unilateral vision. It can also be conducted both in light
and dim environments (to test for early signs of inherited
Optic nerve
 retinopathies). The patient's performance in the course should
 always be compared with that of normal animals.
Optic chiasm
Visual Placing Postural Reaction
 Optic tract
 In the visual placing postural reaction test, the animal is held
Diencephalon
off the ground and brought to a table edge. If it sees the table,
 it elevates its limbs to place them on the table's surface before
the limbs touch the table. A blind animal does not elevate the
Lateral geniculate nucleus
limbs until they touch the table's edge (Figure 16-4).
Afferent pathways
of the pupillary
Pupillary Light Reflex
light reflex 
Optic radiation
The Anatomic Basis of the Pupillary Light Reflex
(projecting to midbrain)
The afferent and efferent pathways controlling pupil size and
reaction are depicted in Figure 16-5. The size of the pupil at
Occipital cortex
rest represents a balance between two anatagonistic forces: (1)
the amount of incident light stimulating the retina and
 Figure 16-3. Central visual pathway for conscious perception inclucles the
influencing the oculomotor neurons to constrict the pupil
retina, optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract, lateral geniculate nucleus,
(parasympathetic innervation through CN II1), and (2) the
optic radliation, and occipital cortex. Note that the afferent pathways
emotional status of the patient (e.g., fear, anger, or excitement),
Common to the pupillary light reflex and menace response (up to the level
nd sas p ss os an sn 
of the proximal optic tract) are colored in lighter shacles. Afferent pathways
dilation. In the resting pupil, both pupillary dilator (sympathetic)
that serve only the menace pathways (from the clistal optic tract onwarl are
clepictecl in clarker shacles. Because of the crossover in the chiasm, the left
and the antagonistic pupillary sphincter (parasympathetic)
occipital cortex receives the axons of the lateral retina of the left eye
 muscles are active. The relative resting parasympathetic and
(inputting from the right visual fielcl as well as the axons of the meclial retina
sympathetic innervation and resulting muscle tone determine
of the right eye (inputting, again, frorm the right visual fielc). In humans,
the size of the pupil (see Figure 16-5, efferent pathways A and
where 50% of the axons cross over in the chiasm, the left occipital cortex
therefore inputs the right visual hemifield of both eyes. In animals, where a
 B, respectively). The pupillary sphincter (or constrictor) is the
greatntafecili
more powerful of the two muscles.
greater proportion of the right visual field of the right eye anc a smaller
 As noted, pupillary constriction and pupillary light reflex
proportion of the right visual fielc of the left eye.Therefore, in humans, a
(PLR) are controlled by the parasympathetic system. The
lesion in the left optic radliation or occipital cortex will cause a loss of the
afferent pathway to the parasympathetic oculomotor nucleus is
right visual hemifield, with symmetric cleficits in both eyes. In animals, the
resulting cleficits from the right eye will be greater than those frorm the left 
via the optic nerve to the optic chiasm (where some crossing
eye. (Modlified from de Lahunta A [1973l: Small animal neuro-
occurs), through both optic tracts, over the LGNs without
ophthalmology. Vet Clin North Am 3:491.)
forming a synapse, and ventrally into the region between the
thalamus and the rostral colliculus, called the pretectal area.
lack of menace response in a visual animal, as pathways from
the visual cortex to the facial nucleus likely run through the
cerebellum (see Figure 16-2).
 In patients in which results of the menace testing are
equivocal, vision can be assessed using any of the three follow-
ing tests:
Tracking Moving Objects
Vision can be assessed in young small animals that may not yet
have learned the menace response, and occasionally in stoic
older animals, by throwing cotton balls in the air in front of the 
 animal. A normal, alert animal that may not readily respond to 
a menace gesture will follow the cotton ball. Avoid throwing
heavier objects that cause significant air movement or noise,
because the animal may respond to these stimuli. Some
 Figure 164. The placement reflex is evaluated in cases in which the
animals, especially cats, will follow the red light emitted by a
menace response is inconclusive. The animal is suspencled in the air and
led toward a table. A visual animal will extencl its forelimbs toward the
laser pointer. Young, hungry calves and foals often follow a
approaching surface. This reflex is cormposed of an afferent visual
 moving hand or a nursing bottle.
'asuodsan nogou jua laa ue pue asuodsan
NeuROOPHTHALMoLoGY I
321
Synapse takes place in the pretectal nuclei in the mesencephalon
only two short ciliary nerves, each serving half of the iris. A
(see Figure 16-5). Crossing between sides occurs between the
partial parasympathetic lesion may therefore cause a
pretectal nuclei via the caudal commissure. Axons of the pretectal
hemidilated pupil (partial internal ophthalmoplegia) in the cat.
cell bodies pass to the Edinger-Westphal (parasympathetic
The anatomy of the sympathetic pathway, responsible for
 oculomotor) nucleus of both sides. The parasympathetic axons
pupil dilatation, is discussed later in this chapter (see
leave the mesencephalon with the motor axons of CN lI (that
Sympathetic Lower Motor Neuron Innervation).
control four of the extraocular muscles and the levator
palpebral muscle), and enter the orbit through the orbital
Testing the Pupillary Light Reflex
fissure. The ciliary ganglion is located at the rostral end of the
oculomotor nerve, ventral to the optic nerve (see Figures 16-5 and
The size and response of pupils to light are assessed after the
 16-6). Preganglionic parasympathetic axons of the oculomotor
menace test. If there is a visual deficit, localization of the lesion
nerve synapse here with the cell bodies of the postganglionic
depends on a careful examination of the eyes and the pupils.
axons. The postganglionic axons pass via short ciliary nerves,
 First, the size of the pupils at rest (without stimulation)
enter the globe adjacent to the optic nerve, and innervate the
should be evaluated both in normal room light and in dim light.
ciliary body and pupillary constrictor muscles. The feline eye has
If the pupils cannot be seen without extra light, a dim penlight
is held in front of the nose of the patient and at a distance that
will just allow the pupillary margins to be seen, without stimu-
Visual fields:
Hight
lating them. The size of the pupils is assessed and compared
A.Constrictor
Retina
with each other to determine if there is anisocoria (unequal
B. Dilator of pupil
pupils).
 Next, the reaction to strong light is tested. Because of the
Ciliary ganglion
crossover in the optic chiasm and mesencephalon (see Figure 
16-5), stimulation of the retina of one eye with a bright source
Oculomotor
Optic trar
of light causes constriction of both pupils. First the examiner
nerve
Diencephalor
evaluates the direct PLR by shining a bright light into one eye
Lateral geniculate
LGN
 Caudal
while observing the reaction of its pupil. To evaluate the
nucleus (LGN)
commissure
indirect PLR, the examiner shines a bright light into one eye 
while observing the reaction of the contralateral pupil. The
Pretectal nucleus 
Middle
 patient should be relaxed for this part of the examination,
ear cavity
because circulating epinephrines and sympathetic stimulation
Edinger-Westphal
may interfere with the PLR.
(oculomotor,
 Cranial cervical
 parasympathetic
 It is important to remember that PLR, as well as the follow-
nucleus)
ganglion
ing four tests described next, evaluate subcortical reflexes. There-
fore they are not indicators of vision and may be normal in a
Lateral
blind animal (e.g., in cases of cortical disease). Furthermore,
tecto-
tegmentospinal
the PLR is remarkably resistant to serious ocular diseases that
Cervical spinal cord
system
substantially reduce its afferent input. Animals with extensive
retinal disease (e.g., progressive rod-cone degeneration) or
mature cataracts can be functionally blind and yet their pupils
Cervical
may still respond to bright light. However, these animals have 
Thoracic spinal
sympathetic trunk
cord T1-T3
 pupils that are dilated more than normal in the room light
because they do not react to incident light in the room. This
Figure 16-5. Neuroanatomic tracts controlling the pupil size and
helps distinguish them from cases of central blindness, where
response incluce parasympathetic (A) anc sympathetic (B) pathways. The
 pupils constrict in response to incident light. If the clinician is
afferent pathway to the parasympathetic oculomotor nucleus is via the
not aware of this possibility, he or she may erroneously
optic nerve to the optic chiasm (where some crossing occurs), through
diagnose a lesion in the central visual pathways in that patient
both optic tracts, over the lateral geniculate nucleus (without forming a
synapse) to synapse in the pretectal nuclei in the mesencephalon. Note
(based on the presence of PLR in a blind animal).
that fibers inputting to the lateral geniculate nucleus anc visual cortex
cliverge in the micldlle of the optic tract; these are clepicted in carker
Swinging Flashfight Test
shacles of green and orange. Crossing of the afferent PlR fibers between
sides occurs between the pretectal nuclei via the caudal commissure.
Axons of the pretectal cell bodlies pass to the Eclinger-Westphal
A swinging flashlight test is used by some clinicians. In a nor-
(parasympathetic oculomotor) nucleus of both sides.The parasympathetic
mal animal, a quick redirection of a flashlight from one eye to
axons leave the mesencephalon with the motor axons of cranial nerve lll,
the other (by swinging it from side to side) should reveal semi-
enter the orbit through the orbital fissure, and synapse in the clfiary
 constriction of the second pupil. The second pupil initially
ganglion.The postganglionic axons pass via short ciliary nerves,enter the
underwent limited constriction owing to the consensual
globe acjacent to the optic nerve, and innervate the pupillary constrictor
stimulus from the frst eye; swinging the flashlight causes
muscles. Preganglionic sympathetic cell bodies are locatec in the first
uea asaui iii pon euds eo a o suaas aa
further constriction, because now the second eye is stimulated
axons join the thoracic sympathetic trunk insicle the thorax anc terminate
 directly. On the other hand, if a retinal or optic nerve disease is
in the cranial cervicat gangtion. The postganglionic fibers pass between
 present in the second eye, swinging the flashlight to this eye
the tympanic bulla and the petrosal bone into the middle ear cavity and
continue to the eye, where they innervate the iris clilator muscle.
 will result in a dilatation of its pupil. This is because the second
(Modified from ce lahunta A [1983]: Veterinary Neuroanatormy and 
 pupil initially underwent limited constriction owing to the con-
 Clinical Neurology, 2nd edl. Sauncers, Philaclelphia.)
sensual stimulation from the first eye; however, when the light
322
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Superior
Ciliary
Inferior 
dlivision
ganglion
division
Lacrimal nerve
Oculomotor
nervé
 Maxillary nerve
Greater petrosal nerve Ophthalmic
 Edinger-Westphal
nerve
- Iris sphincter
nucleus
muscle
Internal
Lacrimal
auditory
glanid
Facialner
canal
acrimal
Zygomatio
henve
Vidian
nerve
Deep
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Stylomastoidplexus
nerve
pramen
Facial nerve
Parasympathetic
Sympathetic
Sensory
Sympathetic
10:0,
 Figure 16-6. Parasympathetic (oculormotor) innervation to the iris sphincter anc ciliary bocy muscle. 1nset shows 
sensory, sympathetic, and parasympathetic fibers into ciliary ganglion; only parasympathetic fibers synapse. Each
 au o   ol  y  a go sa a le s au  
 System, 2nc edl. Butterworth-Heinermann, St. louis.)
is moved to the diseased eye, it dilates as it receives no direct
to light stimulation. The test is described in detail in Chapter
stimulation. This quick dilation of the second pupil, called a
 15. It may be used to determine whether blindness is caused by
positive swinging flashlight test result or presence of the
retinal or postretinal disease. Placing the active electrode
Marcus Gunn sign, is considered pathognomonic for a
 over the visual cortex, rather than on the cornea, allows for the
 prechiasmal lesion.
recording of visual evoked potentials, which are useful in
 determining cortical function and vision.
Pupillary Escape
Another phenomenon often seen with pupil assessment is
 pupillary escape. When a light is applied to the eye the pupil
 constricts and then immediately dilates slightly. This is due to
light adaptation of the photoreceptors and is more common
with weak light sources.
Dazzle Reflex
If the PLR cannot be evaluated (e.g., due to severe corneal
edema or hyphema), the dazzle reflex is also often helpful in
 lesion localization. Shining a bright light into the eye elicits a
subcortically mediated, reflex rapid eye blink (Figure 16-7).
 Because this is a subcortical reflex, it may be present in a blind
animal. This response involves CN II, the rostral colliculus, and 
 CN Vll. Therefore it will be present in an animal blinded by a
cerebrocortical lesion but absent in a patient blinded by
subcortical diseases.
Electrophysiology
Figure 16-7. The cazzle reflex is evoked with use of a strong light source.
The efferent arrm of the reflex causes the patient to squint. This is a
 Retinal function can also be evaluated electrophysiologically,
subcortical reflex, anc the squinting coes not necessarily mean that the 
using electroretinography to record the responses of the retina
 animal is visual.
NeuROoPHTHAlMoLoGY |
323
Table 16-2 | Clinical Signs of Visual Deficit
LESIONS
RIGHT OPTIC
RIGHT CRANIAL
RIGHT
RIGHT OPTIC
RIGHT VISUAL
NERVE*
NERVE 111t
RETROBULBAR+
TRACTE
CORTEX
FEATURES
Left Eye (OS)
Pupil at rest 
Normal size
Normal size
Normal size
Normal size
Normal size
 Response to light 
 Both pupils constrict
Only OS constricts
Only OS constricts
 Both pupils
Both pupils
in OS
constrict
constrict
Menace response
Present
Present
Present
Mostly absent
Mostly absent
Right Eye (OD}
 Pupil at rest 
Partial dilationll
Complete cilation 
Complete dilation
Normal size
Normal size
 Response to light 
Neither pupil constricts 
Only OS constricts
Neither pupil constricts
Both pupils
Both pupils
 in OD
 constrict
constrict 
 Menace response
Absent
Present
Absent
Mostly present
Mostly present
Adapted from de Lahunta A (1983): Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology, 2nd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.
*See also Figure 16-8.
See also Figure 16-11.
Both cranmial nerve II and cranial nerve Ilaffected.
See also Figure 16-10.
IPupil not fully dilated as consensual input from OS causes some constiction.
LESIONS IN PATIENTS WITH VISUAL AND
GME in dogs, thrombotic meningoencephalitis in cattle, and
PUPILLARY LIGHT REFLEX DEFICITS
 parasitic cysts (coenurosis in sheep) or migrations. These diseases
are discussed at the end of this chapter (see Diseases of the
Based on the results of the visual performance and PLR tests,
Central Visual Pathways).
patients with deficits may be divided into one of three categories:
·Blind patients with normal PLRs
Lesions in Blind Patients with Abnormal Pupillary
· Blind patients with abnormal PLRs
Light Reflexes
· Visual patients with abnormal PLRs
As can be seen in Figures 16-2, 16-3, and 16-5, the afferent fibers
This simple categorization is the first step in localizing the
of the PLR and visual signal run together from the retina
pathologic lesion (Table 16-2 and Figures 16-8 to 16-12). It
through the optic nerve, optic chiasm, and proximal optic tract,
assumes that ophthalmic examination did not reveal any
diverging just before the LGN (see light green and light orange
pathology that would prevent light from reaching the retina
pathways in these figures). Minor lesions in this common
(e.g., hyphema, cataract).
pathway (e.g., early retinal degeneration) may cause visual
deficits without affecting the PLR. This is because, as noted
Lesions in Blind Patients with Normal Pupillary
earlier, the PLR is resistant to deficits in afferent input.
Light Reflexes
Therefore if a lesion in this common pathway is significant
enough to cause a pupillary abnormality, it usually also causes
Based on the anatomy of the PLR pathway, the size of the
blindness. Converesely, if the eye is blind due to an afferent
pupils and their response to light are normal in blind animals
lesion, the PLR is almost always abnormal (though
not
with disease limited to the distal optic tract (after the afferent
necessarily absent). As a rule, afferent lesions that interrupt this
 PLR fibers have diverged), LGN, optic radiations, and/or visual
pathway occur in the retina, optic nerve, or optic chiasm (see
 cortex (see dark green and dark orange pathways, Figures 16-2
Figures 16-8 and 16-9). Rarely both proximal optic tracts are
and 16-3).
affected sufficiently to cause pupillary abnormalities, because
Bilateral cerebral lesions that cause blindness include
the tracts are spread out over a relatively large area. A single
prosencephalic hypoplasia with no cerebral hemispheres
 optic tract lesion is rare and may cause no PLR abnormality
(calves), hydranencephaly (calves, lambs), cerebral contusion,
(due to the crossover in the pretectal and oculomotor nuclei)
cerebral edema (following trauma, postictal, or due to space-
(see Figure 16-10).
 occupying lesions), viral encephalitis, thrombotic meningo-
 A patient with a unilateral lesion in the retina or optic nerve
encephalitis (Haemophilus somnus in cattle), inflammatory
 has no menace response in that eye. The pupil in that eye may
 diseases such as granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME)
 be slightly larger (because it receives no direct parasympathetic
in dogs and horses, metabolic disorders (hypoglycemia, hepatic
stimulation from incident light), although it is not fully dilated 
encephalopathy), poisonings, and nutritional and storage diseases.
(due to the indirect stimulation from the unaffected eye)
These diseases are discussed at the end of the chapter (see
(Figure 16-13). Light directed into the affected eye causes no
Diseases of the Central Visual Pathways).
response in either eye. Light directed into the unaffected eye
The most common causes of a unilateral cerebral lesion
elicits a bilateral response (see Figure 16-8). To assess direct
with contralateral visual deficit are neoplasms in small animals
and indirect responses, the examiner moves the light back and
and abscesses in large animals. Others are cerebral infarction
forth between the eyes. In an animal with a unilateral lesion, as
(most common in cats), protozoan encephalitis in horses,
the light is directed from the unaffected eye to the affected
chronic canine distemper encephalitis, Toxoplasma granulomas,
eye, the pupil in the affected eye dilates back to the resting
324
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
OR
RIGHT EYE
LEFTEYE
RIGHT EYE
LEFT EYE
Anisocoria
REST
Left eye stimulation:
B
both pupils constrict
 Right eye stimulation:
neither pupil constricts
Gidding
juait aa ja ayi woy ndu jensuasuo o anp paep Alnj jou s! ldnd aul pajep Aeed ag oj aa jubl au
stirmulation of the left eye incluces constriction of both pupils due to crossover in the chiasm anc mesencephalon.
jaage au yim auaaaui aun jo asnesa ldnd auia u aueu ou sanpoid aa ul au jo uoienugs uai
 (sensory) limb of the pupillary reflex in the right optic nerve.
state created by the room light (indirectly, through the
 longer stimulated indirectly by room light through the normal,
unaffected eye). This is because the strong light source was
covered eye.
taken away from the unaffected eye (thereby removing the
 Common causes of unilateral lesions resulting in PLR and
indirect stimulation) and the lesion in the affected eye has
visual deficits include retinal detachment, glaucoma, and
interrupted the direct afferent pathway for this reflex. This
retrobulbar abscess or neoplasia. Trauma to the optic nerve is
phenomenon is readily apparent as the light is repeatedly
 another common cause of unilateral lesions. The trauma may
 moved between the eyes. Further confirmation of a unilateral
cause direct avulsion of the axons at the level of the optic
lesion is made by covering the normal eye and observing
canals or interference with the vascular supply of the
further dilation of the pupil in the affected eye which is no
 intracanalicular part of the optic nerve. This problem may be
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
325
RIGHTEYE
LEFT EYE
RIGHT EYE
LEFT EYE
 Bilateral
mydriasis
REST
B
No reaction to light
Figure 16-9. A, lesion of the optic chiasm. B, A lesion of the optic chiasm causes resting bilateral mydlriasis.
 Both pupils are unresponsive, as clenotec by the clashed red anc blue lines of the efferent limb of the PiR.
more common in horses and in brachycephalic dogs.
 compression from stenosis of the optic canals. Rarely in cats
Ophthalmoscopic examination often shows optic disc atrophy,
 does ischemic encephalopathy syndrome result in infarction of
with secondary retinal degeneration.
the optic chiasm.
Severe bilateral retinal, optic nerve, or optic chiasm lesions
The optic chiasm may be compressed by extramedullary
cause blindness with dilated pupils that are unresponsive to
 space-occupying lesions near the hypophyseal fossa. Pituitary
light (see Figure 16-9). Bilateral retinal diseases include retinal
 neoplasms are the most common tumor in this site, although
detachment, end-stage retinal degeneration, SARD, and
 meningiomas and germ cell neoplasms (teratomas) have also
glaucoma. The most common optic nerve disease to affect
n s ui o r an r au aai uag
vision and PLR is optic neuritis. The disease may be infective
than 5 years. Diseases of the optic nerve and chiasm are dis-
(e.g., distemper, cryptococcosis, toxoplasmosis) or inflam-
 cussed further at the end of the chapter (see Diseases of the
 matory (GME) though it is frequently idiopathic in nature. It
Central Visual Pathways).
can affect both optic nerves and the optic chiasm, and the
 A retrobulbar or intracranial lesion that affects both the optic
patient presents with blindness and fixed, dilated pupils (optic
nerve and the parasympathetic part of the oculomotor nerve
neuritis is discussed under Diseases of the Optic Nerve). In
 causes a widely dilated pupil in the ipsilateral eye at rest (see 
young cattle, vitamin A deficiency may cause optic nerve
Figures 16-8 and 16-11). Because of CN II involvement there
326
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Edinger-Westphal nucleus
- Pretectal area
Optic tract
Optic chiasm
Opticnerve
Ciliary ganglion
RIGHT EYE
LEFT EYE
RIGHT EYE
LEFT EYE
Usually equal
REST
B
 Direct and consensual
PLRs present in
botheyes
Figure 16-10. A, lesion of the optic tract. B, A lesion of the right optic tract causes equal resting pupils, and light
clirected into either eye will cause constriction of both pupils. This is because crossover of fibers in both the optic
chiasm and mesencephalon provicles efferent innervation to both pupils.
is no menace response from this affected eye, and light directed
 damage from intracranial injury and to evaluate the response
 into the affected eye elicits no response in either eye. Light
to therapy. Pupil size and prognosis in intracranial injury are
 directed into the unaffected eye causes pupillary constriction only
shown in Table 16-3.
 in that eye (due to CN III lesion in the affected eye). In addition to
 Brainstem contusion with hemorrhage and laceration of the
loss of PLR, a complete oculomotor nerve deficit will also cause
 midbrain and pons is a common sequel of trauma. The parenchymal
ventrolateral strabismus and ptosis due to denervation of four
components of the oculomotor neurons are interrupted, causing
extraocular muscles and the levator palpebral muscle. However,
both pupils to be widely dilated and unresponsive, a grave sign.
lesions that involve only the oculomotor nerve, and do not affect
Affected animals are also recumbent and semicomatose or
vision, may also occur. These are discussed later (see Lesions
 comatose. Severe caudal brainstem lesions that are life threatening
 Causing Pupillary Light Reflex Abnormalities in Visual Patients).
also result in partly dilated, fixed, unresponsive pupils.
 Injuries that predominately involve the prosencephalon
Pupils in Patients with IntracranialInjury
sign of acute, extensive brain disturbance that by itself is not 
Pupillary abnormalities are common after intracranial trauma.
 necessarily of any localizing value. The return of the pupils to
 s   aas n  a 
 normal size and response to light is a favorable prognostic sign
 as those found in polioencephalomalacia and lead poisoning
 and indicates recovery from the brain disturbance, especially
 in ruminants. Evaluation of the size of the pupils is important 
following trauma. However, progression from bilateral miosis
to the assessment both of the location and extent of brain
to bilateral mydriasis with fixed pupils that are unresponsive to
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
327
 RIGHT EYE
LEFT EYE
RIGHT EYE
LEFT EYE
 Right eye: mydriasis,
REST
ptosis, and ventro-
lateral strabismus
B
Right eye stimulation:
right pupil unchanged,
left pupil constricts
Left eye stimulation:
left pupil constricts,
right pupil unchanged 
Figure 16-11. A, lesion of the oculomotor nerve. B, A lesion of the right oculomotor nerve causes ipsilateral
mydlriasis because of clenervation of the iris sphincter (cenoted by clashed rec line). There is ptosis of the upper
eyelidl (note smaller palpebral fissure compared with left eye) cue to clenervation of the levator palpebral muscle.
Ventrolateral strabismus (exotropia) owing to cenervation of the clorsal, ventral, and medial recti muscles and the
ventral oblique muscle is also eviclent. There is no clirect pupillary reflex, but the consensual reflex to the left eye
is normal. When the light is clirected into the left eye, the dlirect pupillary reflex is normal, but the consensual
reflex to the right eye is absent.
light in trauma cases indicates that the brain disturbance (e.g.,
The cause of unilateral or bilateral miotic pupils in acute brain
hemorrhage, edema) is advancing and the oculomotor neurons
 disease is not known. It probably represents facilitation of the
in the midbrain are nonfunctional (Figure 16-14). This pro-
oculomotor parasympathetic neurons released from higher-center
gression often accompanies severe contusion of the midbrain 
 inhibition owing to its functional disturbance. Pupillary changes
with hemorrhage, usually along the midline, which may cause
 may take place hourly after head trauma. Unilateral mydriasis that 
brain swelling and herniation of the occipital lobes ventral to 
 in some cases may be accompanied by miosis of the other pupil
the tentorium cerebelli, accompanied by compression and dis-
is probably brought about by compression of the ipsilateral oculo-
placement of the midbrain or oculomotor nerve (or both).
 motor nerve; the pupils, though anisocoric, may be slightly reactive.
328
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
RIGHT EYE
LEFTEYE
RIGHT EYE
LEFTEYE
Anisocoria
REST
B
 Right eye stimulation:
right pupil unchanged,
left pupilconstricts
Left eye stimulation:
left pupil constricts,
right pupil unchanged 
Figure 16-12. A, lesion of the oculomotor (Eclinger-Westphal) nucleus. B, A lesion in the right Eclinger-Westphal
nucleus causes a wicely clilated, resting right pupil. There is no clirect pupillary reflex in the right eye (as clenotecl
by clashec red line), but the consensual pupillary reflex to the left eye is normal. In the left eye, the clirect
pupillary reflex is normal, but the consensual pupillary reflex to the right eye is absent.
 Experiments in dogs have shown that compression of the brain-
stem tectum at the level of the rostral colliculus causes miosis.
after it has exited the mesencephalon. As noted previously,
 Compression of CN Ill produces mydriasis.
the oculomotor nerve provides (l) somatic efferent inner-
vation to the dorsal, medial, and ventral recti muscles, the
Lesions Causing Pupillary Light Reflex
ventral oblique muscle, and the levator palpebral muscles and
Abnormalities in Visual Patients
(2) parasympathetic innervation to the iridal sphincter. Both
functions may be affected by lesions to the nerve. There-
 Abnormalities in pupillary constriction that are not accompanied
fore such a patient will present with three clinical signs (see
by visual deficits localize the lesion to the oculomotor nerve
Figure 16-11):
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
329
· A fixed, dilated pupil, due to loss of parasympathetic
innervation to the iris sphincter. This sign is also called
internal ophthatmoplegia.
Ventrolateral strabismus, due to loss of innervation to the
 dorsal, medial and ventral recti and the ventral oblique
muscles. This sign is also called external ophthatmoplegia.
· Ptosis of the upper eyelid, due to loss of innervation to the
levator palpebral muscle
Common sites for lesions of the oculomotor nerve are the
cavernous sinus or orbital fissure. Therefore tumors or inflam-
mations at these sites cause cavernous sinus syndrome and
orbital fissure syndrome, respectively. Because CNs IV, V, and
VI also pass through these sites, both syndromes are also
 characterized by deficits in the function of these nerves.
It is possible for patients with oculomotor nerve lesions to
Figure 16-13. Unilateral myclriasis clue to an old trauma that causecl
sectioning of the left optic nerve.
present with internal ophthalmoplegia, indicating loss of para-
sympathetic oculomotor function, without loss of innervation
to the eyelid and extraocular muscles. In other words, these
 patients will present with fixed, dilated pupils but no strabismus
or ptosis. This presentation is possible because of the topo-
graphical arrangement of the fibers in CN IIl: The parasympathetic
fibers are superficial and medial to the motor fibers. Therefore 
compression during midbrain swelling or displacement may
affect the former but not the latter.
 Fixed, dilated pupils caused by parasympathetic denervation
are also a characteristic sign of dysautonomia. Because patients
also suffer from concomitant sympathetic denervaiton, the
disease is discussed later in this chapter.
Additional Causes of Pupillary Light Reflex Abnormalities
PLR abnormalities and anisocoria may also be caused by
several processes that are unrelated to neurologic disease:
Figure 16-14. Bilateral myclriasis following heacl trauma.
· Iris degeneration with atrophy causes ipsilateral mydriasis
with a variable response to light (sometimes none). This is
more common in older animals.
Glaucoma causes ipsilateral mydriasis as increased
 intraocular pressure paralyzes the pupillary sphincter.
Table 16-3 ↑  Pupillary Reactions in Intracerebral Injury
CONDITION
PUPIL SIZE
PROGNOSIS
Unilateral oculomotor nuclear or nerve contusion or
Anisocoria
Guardled 
compression*
+
Compression of miclbrain tectumt
Bilateral miosis
Guardled 
 Bilateral oculomotor nuclear or nerve contusion or
Bilateral mycriasis
Grave
 compression
*Asymmetic interference with cerebral control of oculomotor neurons or the sympathetic upper motor neuron system, or both.
tBilateral sympathetic upper motor neuron deficiency or elease of oculomotor parasympathetic neurons from cerebral inhibition.
330
I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Therefore there is no direct or indirect PLR in the affected
· Feline leukemia virus infection occasionally results in static
eye. The consensual reflex to the contralateral eye is often
 anisocoria. An RNA virus has been found in the short ciliary
lacking, because sustained elevation of intraocular pressure
nerves and ciliary ganglia of some cats with this condition.
also damages retinal function.
 Anterior uveitis causes stimulation and spasms of the
LESIONS CAUSING STRABISMUS
 pupillary constrictor and ciliary muscles, resulting in 
Function of the Extraocular Muscles
miosis. Alternatively, anterior uveitis may cause posterior
synechia, thus affecting pupil motility.
 Innervation and action of the extraocular muscles are sum-
 Ocular disorders causing pain (e.g., keratitis) induce
marized in Figure 16-15 and Table 16-4. The globe has three
activation of the oculopupillary reflex. Therefore ocular
 axes of rotation, and the muscles are grouped into three opposing
pain leads to ipsilateral miosis due to spasms of the ciliary
 pairs. Each muscle in the pair acts in a reciprocal manner with
and iridal muscles.
 its partner, similar to flexor and extensor muscles in the limbs.
 Dorsal oblique
D.o. (CN IV)
Dorsal rectus
D.r. (CN III)
A
Lateral-
Lr. (CN VI)
rectus
Ventral rectus
V.o. (CN II)
Vr.(CN III)
Ventral oblique
+
D
Figure 16-15. A, Functional anatomy of the extraocular muscles (right eye), anc their innervation (left eye). B,
 Paralysis of the oculormotor nerve results in ventrolateral strabisrmus (exotropia) due to clenervation of the ventral,
medial, and dorsal recti muscles and the ventral oblique muscle. Upper lid and pupillary constriction are also
affected (not shown). C, Paralysis of the abclucent nerve causes clenervation of the lateral rectus muscle (as well
as the retractor bulbi muscle), causing meclial strabismus (esotropia). D, Paralysis of the trochlear nerve causes
clenervation of the corsal oblique muscle, resulting in corsolateral strabismus which is especially noticeable in
 ejunet ap wo paypo) jdnd euoziaoy e aey yey) siewue aiel pue (dnd ea e aey eu) se
[1983|: Veterinary Neuroanatormy anc Clinical Neurology, 2nc edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
 Table 16-4 | Extraocular Muscles: Innervations and Actions
MUSCLE
INNERVATION
ACTION
 Superior (dorsal) rectus 
Oculomotor (CN 1)
Elevates globe (rotates upwardl)
 Inferior (ventral) rectus
Oculomotor (CN )!
 Depresses globe (rotates cownwardl)
Medial rectus 
Oculomotor (CN 1)
Turns globe nasally (acduction)
Lateral rectus 
Abducens (CN V1)
Turns globe temporally (abcuction)
Superior (dorsal) oblique
Trochlear (CN IV)
Intorts globe (rotates 12 o'clock position nasally)
Inferior (ventrall oblique
Oculomotor (CN 1) 
(leodua uogisod yo,o zl saeo) ago sox
 Retractor bulbi
Abducens (CN V1)
Retracts globe
CN, Cranial nerve.
NeuROOPHTHALMoLoGY I
331
Such a pair of extraocular muscles is termed yoke muscles.
Strabismus due to Disorders of theVestibular System
When the two eyes move in the same direction the movement
is called conjugate. Around a horizontal axis, passing trans-
Strabismus that occurs only in certain positions of the head indi-
versely through the center of the globe, the medial rectus
cates lesions in the vestibular system. It can occur peripherally
muscle adducts and the lateral rectus muscle abducts the globe.
with lesions in the inner ear and vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VII)
Around the anterior-posterior axis, through the center of the
or centrally with lesions in the vestibular nuclei of the medulla
globe, the dorsal oblique intorts the globe (rotates the dorsal
or vestibular pathways in the cerebellum. The strabismus
portion medially toward the midline), and the ventral oblique
involves the eye on the same side as the vestibular abnormality,
extorts the globe (moves the same point laterally away from the
is usually a ventrolateral strabismus, and is present with only
midline). The dorsal and ventral rectus muscles rotate the globe
some positions of the head. It is most evident when the head and 
 dorsally and ventrally, respectively.
neck are extended. Normally, in small animals, both eyes
The extraocular muscles of both eyes do not function
elevate and remain in the center of the fissures so that no sclera is
independently. Rather, they act together in a synergistic or
visible. This normal ocular elevation is less obvious in horses and
antagonistic manner to provide conjugate movements of the
least in cattle. In vestibular disease the eye on the affected side fails
two eyes in the same direction at the same time. This is demon-
to elevate normally in the palpebral fissure. Sclera is evident
strated, for example, by the action of the medial and lateral
dorsally in the “drooped" eye. The ventrolateral strabismus
rectus muscles in horizontal conjugate movement. When the
associated with vestibular disease can be differentiated from
eyes move conjugately to the right, facilitation of abducent
the strabismus of an oculomotor nerve lesion based on of the
neurons to the lateral rectus of the right eye and inhibition to
 presence of abnormal nystagmus and signs of vestibular system
those of the left eye are required in conjunction with inhibition 
disturbance in the former. Furthermore, in oculomotor nerve
 of the oculomotor neurons to the medial rectus of the right eye
Jesions there is inability to adduct the eye normally on testing of
and facilitation to those of the left eye. The medial longitudinal
 normal nystagmus, as well as ptosis and mydriasis. (Nystagmus
fasciculus (MLF) functions in coordinating this activity.
 and lesions to the vestibular system are further discussed later,
 Functions of the extraocular muscles in domestic animals
under Vestibular System.)
do not compare exactly with those in humans because of
anatomic differences in the position of the eye with respect to
Strabismus due to Lesions in Innervation of the
the muscle insertion. Another difference between humans and
Extraocular Muscles
animals is the presence of a retractor bulbi muscle, which is
 present in many mammalian species (but absent in birds and
OCULOMOTOR PARALYSIS. Lesions of the oculomotor
reptiles). As the name implies, this muscle, innervated by CN
nucleus, or oculomotor nerve lesions, cause a lateral and slightly
Vi, is responsible for retracting the globe in response to pain
ventral  strabismus-
exotropia—primarily   from  loss  of
or threats.
innervation of the medial rectus and secondarily from the
denervation of the dorsal and ventral recti muscles and the ventral
Lesions Causing Strabismus
oblique muscle (see Figures 16-11 and 16-15, B). There is
experimental evidence to support the direction of this strabismus,
Strabismus, an abnormal position of the eye, results from
although it is difficult to explain the ventral deviation on the basis
lesions of the nuclei or cranial nerves that innervate the striated 
of the anatomy of the oblique muscle. Due to the lesion, eye
extraocular muscles (CNs IIl, IV, and VI). It may also occur in 
adduction is deficient due to denervation of the medial rectus
some head positions with lesions in the vestibular system.
 muscle. This can be observed on testing of normal vestibular
When a strabismus is suspected, the eye movements are tested
nystagmus: As the head is moved in a dorsal plane, side to side,
to verify the paralysis of the extraocular muscles. The head of
the eyes normally develop a jerk nystagmus with the quick
the patient is moved vertically or horizontally while symmetry
phase in the direction of the head movement. The jerklike
of ocular movements is evaluated. Movements of the head
movement toward the nose is adduction resulting from
require a simultaneous conjugate response by both eyes to
 contraction of the medial rectus innervated by the oculomotor
maintain fixation on objects in the visual field. The vestibular
 nerve (CN II). This adduction, as well as lid opening and
and cervical proprioceptive systems exert considerable
 pupillary constriction, will be reduced by lesions to CN II1.
influence on the nuclei of the cranial nerves that innervate the
extraocular muscles in order to move the eyes so that they
Ptosis, ventrolateral strabismus, and a dilated, unresponsive
remain fixated on the visual target. One of the major pathways
pupil accompany a complete loss of oculomotor nerve
involved in connecting the vestibular system to these nuclei is
function.
the MLF.
 Lesions of the vestibular system or MLF may cause an
Causes of oculomotor nerve dysfunction were discussed in
 abnormal ocular position when the head is in certain positions.
previous sections (see Pupils in Patients with Intracranial
 This appears as strabismus but usually can be corrected by
Injury and Lesions Causing Pupillary Light Reflex Abnor-
repositioning of the head (see following section). Strabismus
malities in Visual Patients). Depending on the location of the
resulting from faulty extraocular muscle innervation persists in
lesion, patients may present with or without other CNS and
 all positions of the head.
visual deficits.
It should be remembered that strabismus may be also be
 Exotropia may also be seen in hydrocephalic animals that
caused mechanical and muscular disorders within the orbit that
have an enlarged cranial cavity. Both eyes often deviate ventro-
restrict movement of the globe. Common causes include
laterally, and therefore the syndrome is called sunset eyes. This
tearing of extraocular muscles following traumatic proptosis,
abnormality is thought to result from a malformation of the
and orbital fractures that cause incarceration of muscles.
orbit that occurs when the cranial cavity is distorted by the
332
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
early development of the brain abnormality. The eyes adduct
and abduct normally on testing of normal vestibular nystagmus,
and no ptosis or pupillary abnormality is present. Therefore this 
exotropia is not related to oculomotor dysfunction.
 ABDUCENT PARALYSIS. Lesions of the abducent nucleus or
nerve cause paralysis (palsy) of the lateral rectus and retractor
bulbi muscles. Paralysis of the retractor bulbi muscle prevents
Figure 16-17. Horner's syncrome in this golden retriever presents with
the eye from retracting in response to a threatening gesture.
third eyelid prolapse, miosis, and ptosis of the upper lid in the right eye.
This can be tested by performing the menace test while holding
No primary cause was cliagnosed, and the synclrome was clefined as
the upper eyelid open. Globe retraction and the resulting third
icliopathic, which is a common conclition in this breedl.
eyelid elevation may be observed in a normal animal. Paralysis
of the lateral rectus muscle causes unilateral esotropia (medial
strabismus), resulting in asymmetry (see Figure 16-15, C).
striated muscle from the lateral rectus and levator palpebrae
Compared with the normal eye, the affected eye cannot be
superioris attach to the two extremities of the membrane and
abducted fully. The clinician can detect this difference by
 may contract and contribute actively to this protrusion.
moving the patient's head from side to side in a horizontal
plane and observing the extent of abduction and adduction of
Protrusion of the Third Eyelid
each eye.
TROCHLEAR PARALYSIS. Lesions of the trochlear nucleus or
 Protrusion of the third eyelid is a typical feature of the follow-
nerve paralyze the dorsal oblique muscle, causing dorsolateral
ing diseases:
strabismus. In species with a round pupil, such as the dog, it is
 HORNER'S SYNDROME. A constant partial protrusion of the
difficult to detect this type of strabismus; however, ophthal-
third eyelid occurs in Horner's syndrome because of loss of the
moscopic examination may show that the superior retinal vein
sympathetic innervation of the smooth muscle that normally
 is deviated laterally from its normal vertical position because of
keeps it retracted (Figure 16-17). The syndrome is discussed
the abnormal rotation caused by the tone in the unopposed
separately later in this chapter.
ventral oblique muscle. In cats, which have vertical pupils, the 
TETANUS. Brief, rapid, passive protrusions ("flashing") of
 dorsal aspect of the pupil deviates laterally with a lesion of the 
the third eyelid occur in tetanus owing to the effect of tetanus
trochlear neurons (see Figure 16-15, D). In cattle and sheep,
 toxin on neurons that innervate the extraocular muscles. This
which have horizontal pupils, the medial portion of the pupil is 
effect causes brief contractions of the muscles, especially if the
 deviated dorsally (Figure 16-16). Trochlear nerve (CN IV) lesions
animal is startled. Contraction of the retractor bulbi muscle
 are rare. This abnormality is seen in polioencephalomalacia in 
 causes passive flashing of the third eyelid. The reaction is most
 ruminants and is thought to represent a unique susceptibility of 
 noticeable in horses but also occurs in other species.
the trochlear neurons to this metabolic encephalopathy.
FACIAL PARALYSIS. In an animal with facial paralysis the
orbicularis oculi is paralyzed and the efferent branch of the
LESIONS CAUSING EYELID ABNORMALITIES
 menace response is intemupted, preventing the blinking response
Third Eyelid Abnormalities
to a threatening gesture. However, in response to the menace the
 globe is retracted, causing a brief rapid protrusion of the third
Normally the mammalian third eyelid is kept in its position
eyelid. Facial paralysis is discussed separately later in this
ventromedial to the eye by the tone in its smooth muscle, which
section. Paralysis of the orbicularis oculi with ventral
keeps it retracted. This is a function of its sympathetic
relaxation of the lower lid may also make the third eyelid
 innervation. The normally protruded position of the eye in the
s  yanoy uaa siApered lA N jo saseo u papnnoid readde
orbit also contributes to the normal position of the third eyelid.
 actually in its normal position.
The third eyelid may protrude for a number of reasons.
"HAWS SYNDROME." The so-called haws syndrome in cats
Except possibly in the cat, this protrusion is a passive event.
consists of bilateral protrusion of the third eyelid. The con-
The third eyelid protrudes passively when the globe is retracted
dition is sometimes associated with diarrhea and loose stools,
actively by the retractor bulbi (CN VI). In the cat, slips of
but in most cases the cause is unknown and the syndrome is
classified as idiopathic. It has been proposed that haws syn-
 drome is due to an imbalance in sympathetic and parasympathetic
tone—that is, a decrease in sympathetic tone, causing the pro-
trusion of the third eyelid, and an increase in parasympathetic
tone. In some cases, the latter may cause greater intestinal motility,
shorter fecal passage time, and diarrhea. A torovirus-like agent
has also been proposed. The syndrome may persist for 4 to
6 weeks but is usually self-limiting. Protrusion of the third
eyelid may be treated symptomatically with topical sym-
pathomimetics (1% phenylephrine solution) though this is
usually not required. If diarrhea is present, it also is treated
symptomatically.
 DYSAUTONOMIA. Bilateral protrusion of the third eyelids
occurs in dysautonomia because of sympathetic denervation.
Figure 16-16. Infection with Listeria monocytogenes caused ventrolateral
 However, the patient's pupils are dilated in dysautonomia (due
strabismus in this sheep. (Courtesy Merav H. Sharmir.
 to parasympathetic denervation), thus distinguishing the disease
NEuROOPHTHALMoLoGY |
from Horner's syndrome, in which the patient presents with
strabismus with decreased ability to adduct the eye normally
third eyelid protrusion and pupillary constriction. The syndrome
because of denervation of the extraocular muscles (see Figure
is discussed separately later in this chapter.
16-11). Lesions were discussed previously under Oculomotor 
CONGENITAL MYOTONIA. This is an inherited disease of
Paralysis.
dogs and cats, characterized by persistence of active muscle
·Homer's syndrome—sympathetic denervation causes loss of
contraction after the stimulation or voluntary movement has
sympathetic tone to the levator palpebrae muscle, leading to
stopped. Bilateral protrusion of the third eyelids is one of the
ptosis. A lesion in the sympathetic innervation also produces 
clinical signs associated with the disease.
enophthalmos, an elevated third eyelid, and miosis (see 
NONNEUROGENIC CAUSES. Several
Inonneurogenic
Figure 16-17). The syndrome is discussed separately later in
processes may cause prolapse of the third eyelid. Severe dehy-
this chapter.
· Facial nerve paralysis or paresis causes drooping of the
decrease in the amount of orbital tissue causes enophthalmos,
upper eyelid in horses due to denervation of superficial
resulting in passive prolapse of both third eyelids. Enophthalmos
facial muscles. Therefore the ptosis will be accompanied by
and secondary third eyelid prolapse may also be caused by
inability to blink. Otitis media can affect facial neurons in 
atrophy of the orbital fat or the temporal and pterygoid muscles
all large animals, and rarely guttural pouch mycosis can
after trauma or inflammation, and in senility. Paradoxically, an
 involve such neurons in horses. Facial nerve paralysis is
increase in the volume of orbital tissue (e.g., retrobulbar abscess,
discussed in the next section.
retrobulbar tumor) may cause protrusion of the third eyelid as
· Hemifacial spasm—-A narrowed palpebral fissure occurs
the mass pushes the nictitating membrane. The resulting pro-
with spasm of the facial muscles on one side.
 trusion is usually unilateral.
·Tetanus
· A small palpebral fissure occurs following extensive atrophy
Lesions Causing Abnormalities of the Palpebral
of the muscles of mastication, as the eye retracts into the
Fissure
 orbit. This atrophy can result from an extensive myositis of
these muscles or from their denervation due to lesions of the
Innervation of the Upper Eyelid
 mandibular nerve component of the trigeminal nerve.
In small animals, the size of the palpebral fissure primarily
depends on normal tone in the levator palpebrae superioris
Facial Nerve Paralysis
muscle. This muscle is innervated by somatic efferent fibers of
the oculomotor nerve (CN IIl), providing for elevation of the
Lesions of the facial nucleus or the nerve up to the level of its
upper eyelid. Sympathetic tone to Muiller's muscles of the
termination into branches that supply the different muscle groups
 eyelid helps maintain eyelid elevation. In large animals super-
result in complete facial palsy or paralysis. Clinical signs of facial
ficial facial muscles (e.g., the frontalis muscle) innervated by
paralysis are as follows (Figure 16-18):
the facial nerve (CN VIl) insert in the upper eyelid and help
 keep the fissure open.
·Facial asymmetry: Paralysis is evident in the asymmetric
Eyelid closure (blinking) is mediated by the orbicularis
position of the eyelids, lips, and nose. The palpebral fissure
 oculi muscle. It is innervated by the facial nerve, and its func-
 in affected small animals may be slightly wider than normal
tion is observed when the menace response is tested.
owing to paralysis of the orbicularis oculi. In large animals,
the loss of tone in the frontalis muscle—which contributes
Lesions Increasing the Size of the Palpebral Opening
fibers that elevate the upper eyelid—causes slight ptosis.
In small animals, the size of the palpebral fissure is basically
unaffected by facial nerve paralysis, although it may be slightly
larger because of loss of tone in the orbicularis oculi. Facial
 paralysis is discussed separately later in this chapter.
 Occasionally in animals with serious cerebellar disease that
involves the cerebellar nuclei, one palpebral fissure is slightly
wider or one third eyelid is mildly elevated. These signs have
also been produced experimentally with lesions in the nuclei of
the cerebellum.
Lesions Decreasing the Size of the Palpebral Opening
A decrease in the size of the palpebral fissure is usually caused
by ptosis, or drooping of the upper eyelid. Neurogenic causes
include the following:
·A lesion in the oculomotor nucleus or nerve causes
denervation of the levator palpebral superioris muscle,
leading to ptosis. With complete oculomotor paralysis the
ipsilateral pupil is dilated and is unresponsive to light directed
Figure 16-18. Unilateral facial paralysis (icliopathic) in a cog. Note the
into either eye (due to loss of parasympathetic innervation of 
wicened palpebral fissure, dlry cornea, and drooping jaw. (Courtesy
 the sphincter). There is also a lateral and slightly ventral
Dr. G.A. Severin.)
334
| SlATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOCY
The ears may droop in those animals with normally erect
Table 16-5 | Frequency of Signs and Causes of Facial
ears, although if the ear cartilage is stiff, as in most cats and
Paralysis
some dogs, it may keep the ear erect despite paralysis.
% OF DOGS
% OF CATS
 Drooling of saliva: The lip may droop on the affected side,
FEATURE
(79 CASES)
(16 CASES)
allowing saliva to drip from the comer of the mouth. It is
helpful to extend the head with a finger between the
CAUSES
mandibles and examine the corner of the lips for
ldiopathic
25
2513
asymmetry. On the paralyzed side more mucosa is exposed,
Surgery
9
and drooling may be apparent.
Trauma
5
31
 Neoplasia
2
25
?
Displacement of the nasal philtrum: Acutely,the nose may
Otitis media
6
be pulled toward the normal side, owing to the unopposed
Unknown
59
一
nasal muscles, especially in horses. In dogs there is slight 
SIGNS*
deviation of the philtrum from its normal vertical position.
Neuropathy as the only sign
39
50
During inspiration the nostril may not be opened as wide as
Associated signs:
usual on the affected side.
Hypothyroidlism
25
· Lack of blinking: In facial paralysis, eyelid closure is weak
Keratoconjunctivitis
19
13
 or absent. Lack of normal blinking, as well as absence of
sicca
Otitis media 
15
38
the menace response and the palpebral and corneal reflexes,
Horner's syndrome
15
25
is observed. In cases of suspected unilateral facial nerve
Other cranial nerve
8
paralysis, the eyelids of both sides are palpated
 neuropathies
simultaneously for strength of closure.
Vestibular signs
88
Corneal desiccation and ulceration: Parasympathetic
S6 :ses pue sop u Aqedonan [eieg 2861) N 9a r uay woy ee
 innervation to the lacrimal gland originates in the
cases (1975-1985). I Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1604.
 parasympathetic nucleus of the facial nerve (see Figure
*Total of sigms gTeater than I00% as some animals presented with more than
16-6). These fibers run together with the motor fibers of the
one sign.
facial nerve till the genu. Therefore lesions to the facial
nerve may also affect parasympathetic innervation to the
lacrimal gland if they are located before the genu. In such 
reticular activating system, resulting in signs ranging from
cases, the patient will present with both facial paralysis and
depression to coma; and the abducent nucleus, causing
reduced tear production. Furthermore, as blinking is
 esotropia. General proprioception may also be affected, result-
required to spread the tearfilm on the cornea, facial
ing in ataxia. On the other hand, otitis may cause sympathetic
 paralysis will cause desiccation of the cornea even if tear
denervation, in which case the clinical signs of facial and
 production is normal. In animals with chronic facial
vestibulocochlear nerve dysfunction will be accompanied by
paralysis, dry eye and cormeal ulceration may be the major
signs of Horner's syndrome.
clinical difficulty in management. These cases are not
CAUSES OF FACIAL NERVE PARALYSIS. Frequency of the
responsive to conventional dry eye therapy. If tear
 causes of facial nerve paralysis and associated disorders is
 production is reduced because of lacrimal gland
shown in Table 16-5. In cats and horses, facial nerve paralysis
denervation, the patient may be treated with cholingergic
 is more commonly traumatic. In all species, otitis media involves
drugs such as pilocarpine. Third eyelid flaps should be
the facial nerve as it passes through the facial canal in the
considered to prevent exposure of the cornea.
petrosal bone, close to the tympanic bulla. The entire area of
distribution of the facial nerve is usually affected by the
Lesions of individual branches of the facial nerve along their
resulting paresis or paralysis. Signs of vestibular ataxia and
course produces paralysis restricted to the muscle groups
nystagmus are usually present, because the vestibulocochlear
 innervated by those branches. Injury to the buccal branches of the
 nerve in the inner ear is also involved. Lesions to the sympathetic
facial nerve on the side of the masseter muscle causes the lips to
 fbers that pass near the middle ear will also cause concomitant 
 droop and the nose to be pulled toward the normal side. This
signs of Horner's syndrome.
 patterm is seen in horses that have been kept recumbent for surgery
 Injury to the petrosal bone may cause hemorrhage in the
for prolonged periods without padding of the head. Eyelid and ear
 middle and inner ears and bleeding from the external ear canal
function is normal. On the other hand, injury to the
 through a ruptured tympanum, usually in association with frac-
auriculopalpebral nerve at the zygomatic arch causes paresis of
ture of the basioccipital or petrosal bone. Facial and vestibulo-
the ear and eyelid muscles.
 cochlear nerve function may be affected. In guttural pouch
The facial and vestibulocochlear nerves are closely associ-
 mycosis in horses, extensive inflammation may cause paralysis
 ated and may be affected by the same lesion in the medulla or
 of the adjacent facial nerve in addition to Horner's syndrome.
in the petrosal bone. Both a medullary neoplasm and otitis
In dogs (and less commonly in cats) permanent or
 media or interna can affect the function of these two cranial
temporary spontaneous facial paralysis of unknown etiology
nerves at these two locations, respectively. It is important to
 occurs. Cocker spaniels, Pembroke corgis, boxers, and English
distinguish between the two locations because of the poor
setters are at greater risk, with dogs older than 5 years being
prognosis for medullary lesions. Medullary lesions usually
predisposed. Temporary cases resolve within 4 to 6 weeks.
affect other brainstem structures, resulting in additional CNS
Tarsorrhaphy, use of a third eyelid flap, and topical therapy
signs that aid in localization of the lesion. Structures that may
 may be necessary to prevent corneal dessication. An associ-
be affected by medullary neoplasms include the upper motor
ation with hypothyroidism in some cases has been confirmed
neuron, causing tetraparesis or hemiparesis; the ascending
'sbop u!
NEUROOPHTHALMoLOGY |
335
LESIONS OF ADDITIONAL CRANIAL NERVES
and medulla. The hypothalamus is the primary integrating
Trigeminal Nerve Dysfunction
center for the autonomic nervous system. Nuclei in its rostral
portion subserve the parasympathetic division of the autonomic
Sensory innervation to the eye, adnexa, and periocular region is
system. These hypothalamic nuclei receive afferent input from
via branches of the ophthalmic and maxillary nerves from the
the cerebrum (by numerous pathways), thalamic nuclei, and
 trigeminal nerve (CN V). Although the ophthalmic nerve branches
 ascending general visceral afferent pathways. The hypothalamus
are predominately medial and the maxillary are lateral, there is
influences the activity of the metabolic centers in the reticular
extensive overlap in the areas they innervate. The only
formation of the midbrain, pons, and medulla.
autonomous zone of ophthalmic nerve innervation is a small
 In general, autonomic innervation is composed of two neurons
area of skin dorsomedial to the medial angle of the eyelids. The
interposed between the CNS and the organ innervated. The cell
only autonomous zone of the maxillary nerve innervation is
body of the first neuron is located in the gray matter of the
ventrolateral to the lateral angle of the eyelids. Sensory deficits
CNS, and its axon passes through a cranial or spinal nerve to
in the periocular skin will cause loss of the palpebral reflex,
the peripheral ganglion, where it synapses with the cell body of
which is elicited by touching the medial and lateral canthi.
the second neuron. The first neuron is therefore called the
Sensory deficits are uncommon compared with facial nerve
preganglionic neuron. The cell body and dendritic zone of
paralysis and can be mistaken for it. However, animals with
the second neuron are in a peripheral ganglion, and its axon, the 
only a trigeminal nerve lesion blink spontaneously and when 
postganglionic axon, terminates in the innervated structure.
the eye is menaced, helping in the diagnosis.
Anatomically and physiologically the autonomic system
 The trigeminal nerve also provides sensory innervation to
grouped into two divisions. The sympathetic system
1s
the cornea through long ciliary nerves originating in the
(thoracolumbar) has cell bodies of preganglionic neurons in the 
ophthalmic branch. Loss of sensory innervation may cause
intermediate gray column of the spinal cord from approximately
 the first thoracic to the fifth lumbar spinal cord segment. With few
sistent minor trauma, or neurotrophic keratitis (see Chapter 10).
 exceptions, the neurotransmitter released at the postganglionic
The most common cause of trigeminal nerve dysfunction is
 axon in the sympathetic system is norepinephrine (Figure 16-19).
trauma. Bilateral mild injury (neurapraxia) of the mandibular
The parasympathetic system (craniosacral) has cell bodies of
branch has been seen in dogs after prehension of large objects.
preganglionic neurons in sacral segments of the spinal cord and in
Bilateral disease of the trigeminal nerve motor neurons causes
the nuclei of the brainstem associated with CNs III, VIl, IX, and
a drooped jaw that cannot be closed. The patient has difficulty
 XI. The neurotransmitter released at the postganglionic axon in
 grasping food or retaining it in the oral cavity. Manipulation of
 the parasympathetic system is acetylcholine (Figure 16-20).
the jaw reveals muscle atonia, and neurogenic atrophy of
the temporal muscles follows if paralysis persists. Unilateral
Parasympathetic Lower Motor Neuron Innervation
disease may be difficult to discover until muscle atrophy
appears. The lower jaw may be directed toward the side of the
The anatomy and diseases of the parasympathetic parts of the
lesion by the unopposed tone in the normal pterygoids, and 
autonomic nervous system that pertain to the eye were dis-
chewing may be asymmetric, although this abnormality is
 cussed at the beginning of the chapter (see Pupillary Light
difficult to detect. The condition resolves spontaneously in 4 to 5
 Reflex and Lesions Causing Pupillary Light Reflex Abnormalities
weeks if the dog is fed soft foods and the mandible is fastened to
in Visual Patients).
the maxilla. Recovery of the comeal reflex is slower than return
of mandibular control. Lesions to the trigeminal nerve may also
Sympathetic Lower Motor Neuron Innervation
occur in conditions that affect multiple cranial nerves (see
following section).
Preganglionic cell bodies are located in the first three segments
of the thoracic spinal cord (see Figures 16-5 and 16-21). Their
Multiple Cranial Nerve Disorders
axons join the thoracic sympathetic trunk inside the thorax and 
 pass through the cervicothoracic and middle cervical ganglia
Numerous conditions result in disorders of one or more of the
and forward in the cervical sympathetic trunk, as part of the
nerves associated with the eye and adnexa. As mentioned
vagosympathetic trunk. Ventromedial to the tympanic bulla, the
previously (see Oculomotor Paralysis), neoplasms or inflam-
cervical sympathetic trunk separates from the vagus and
mations in the orbital fissure or cavernous sinus may affect CNs
terminates in the cranial cervical ganglion, where the pre-
III, IV, V, and Vl. In cases of retrobulbar neoplasia or abscess,
 ganglionic axons synapse. The cell body of the postganglionic
both CNs II and II may be affected. Numerous systemic diseases,
 axon is in the cranial cervical ganglion.
including Cryptococcus neoformans infection, pseudorabies,
The postganglionic axons  for sympathetic ocular
GME, myasthenia gravis, listeriosis, equine focal protozoal
innervation in dogs and cats pass rostrally through the
encephalitis, and polioencephalomalacia in ruminants, may
tympanooccipital fissure with the internal carotid artery and
 also cause multiple cranial nerve dysfunction. Some of these
 then between the tympanic bulla and the petrosal bone into the 
 diseases are discussed in Chapter 18.
middle ear cavity, closely associated with the ventral surface of
the petrosal bone. The axons continue rostrally between the
AUTONOMIC INNERVATION AND
 petrosal and basisphenoid bones to join the trigeminal ganglion
ABNORMALITIES
and ophthalmic nerve. The ophthalmic nerve enters the peri-
orbita through the orbital fissure.
 The autonomic nervous system is a physiologic and anatomic
 Postganglionic sympathetic axons are distributed together
system with central and peripheral components. It consists of
with ophthalmic nerve branches to smooth muscles of the orbit,
higher centers situated in the hypothalamus, midbrain, pons,
Muiller's muscle of the upper lid (and analogous sympathetically
336
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Ne
Ne
ACh
Dilator
Sphincter
Ne
ACh
NG
A
A
ACh
Ne
Ne
ACh.
Pk
Ep
Ph
Pi
B
B
Ne
Ne
CHydroxy
AChe
C
Ne
Ne
Ne
D
Ne
Physo
D
AChe
Ne
Figure 16-20. Cholinergic neuromuscular junction of the parasympathetic
Ne
systerm and actions of cholinergic agonists on the iris sphincter. A,
Ne
Acetylcholine (ACh) is released by the axon terminal and binds to sites on
the iris sphincter muscle, causing contraction. B, Pilocarpine (Pi) is a
dlirect-acting cholinergic agonist that binds to those sites on iris sphincter
Ne
muscle, causing contraction. C, Once released from the effector site, ACh
E
Cocaine
is broken clown by acetylcholinesterase (AChe), which prevents ACh from
rebinding to site. D, Physostigmine (Physo) is an indlirect-acting
system anc actions of aclrenergic agonists on the iris dlilator. A, Norepine-
cholinergic agonist that inhibits AChe, allowing ACh to remain active in
 phrine (Ne) is released by axon terminal anc bincls to sites on iris dilator
the neuromuscular junction.(From Remington 1A [2005|: Clinical Anatomy
muscle,causing contraction.B,Epinephrine (Ep)and phenylephrine (Ph)
of the Visual System, 2nd ed. Butterworth-Heinermann, St. Louis.)
are clirect-acting aclrenergic agonists that bind to those same sites on
the iris dilator muscle, causing contraction. C, Hyclroxyamphetamine
Hydroxy) is an indirect-acting acrenergic agonist that acts on nerve fiber,
Diseases of the Sympathetic System
causing release of Ne. D, Once released from effector site, Ne is taken 
iaae sue-aun ue aeo g uua aau A dn ye
HORNER'SSYNDROME
agonist, prevents reuptake of Ne, allowing it to remain in the neuro-
Clinical Signs. Loss of sympathetic innervation causes a lack
muscular junction and rebind to the effector site. (From Remington LA
of tone in the orbital smooth muscle and the eye retacts
[2005]: Clinical Anatomy of the Visual System, 2nc edl. Butterworth-
Heinemann, St. louis.)
slightly, producing enophthatmos. Loss of tone in Muiller's
muscle in the upper eyelid causes slight narrowing of the
palpebral fissure resulting from incomplete elevation of the
 innervated tissue in the lower lid), third eyelid, ciliary muscle,
upper lid (ptosis). As sympathetic tone contributes to
 pupillary dilator, and receptors in the iridocorneal (drainage)
 maintaining the third eyelid in retracted position, denervation
angle (see Figures 16-6 and 16-21). The exact function of auto-
(combined with retraction of the eye) causes protrusion of the
 nomic innervation in control of aqueous outflow facility in the
third eyelid. Lack of normal sympathetic tone in the pupillary
 drainage angle is unknown. Normal tone of sympathetically
dilator causes miosis and anisocoria (see Figure 16-17). These
 innervated ocular structures keeps the eye protruded, the
four signs, collectively called Horner's syndrome, are
palpebral fissure widened, the third eyelid retracted, and the 
associated with lesions in any portion of the sympathetic
pupil partially dilated.
pathway from the hypothalamus to the first three thoracic
NeuROOPHTHALMoLoGY |
337
AUTONOMIC INNERVATION
SYMPATHETIC
 Cranial nerve ganglion
> Dilator pupillae muscle
>> Lacrimal gland
PARASYMPATHETIC
Ciliary ganglion
 Sphincter pupillae muscle
via oculomotor nerve
 Ciliary muscle
 Pterygopalatine ganglion
>Lacrimal gland
via facial nerve
Pretectal nucleus
Edinger-Westphal nucleus
Hypothalamus
 Thoracic segments
1
2
3
Ciliary ganglion
Cranial cervical
 Sympathetic chain ganglia
 ganglion
sympathetic cellbodlies are located in the first three segments of the thoracic spinal cord (Ti-T3).These
 aa ss sa  a  ea e a  ae xe 
tympanicbulla and thepetrosal bone into themidlleearcavity,anc continue to the eye,where theyinnervate
the iris clilator muscle. Parasyrmpathetic innervation of the eye originates in the pretectal cell boclies, which pass
to the Edinger-Westphal (parasympathetic oculorotor) nucleus of both sices. Additional postganglionic
sympathetic fibers synapse in the pterygopalatine ganglion and are clistributed to the lacrimal acinar glancls. The
parasympathetic axons leave the mesencephalon with the motor axons of cranial nerve ll, enter the orbit
uaepe a a aua suoxe uouesod au uoues e au u asdeus pue anss eg au yna
to the optic nerve and innervate the pupillary constrictor and ciliary bocy muscles. (Modified from Hoerlein BF
[1978]: Canine Neurology, 3rc edl. Saundlers, Philaclelphia.]
spinal cord segments to the effector muscle in the eye or orbit
Table 16-6 | Frequency of Causes of Horner's Syndrome
(see Figures 16-5 and 16-21).
 In addition to signs of denervation of the iris dilator and
% OF DOGS
% OF CATS
orbital smooth muscle, peripheral vasodilation occurs and may
CAUSE
(18 CASES)
(8 CASES)
cause increased warmth, pinkness of the skin best observed in
lciopathic
44
25.0
 the ear, and congestion of ipsilateral nasal mucosa. These signs 
Car accidents
22
25.0
may be difficult to detect, especially in small animals.
Bites
11
12.5
 Preganglionic or postganglionic destruction of sympathetic
 Cervical disc protrusion
11
innervation of the head in horses causes profuse sweating of the
Otitis media
 Foreign body
12.5
ipsilateral half of the face and cranial neck. The same area is
Spinal neoplasia
12.5
hyperthermic, and the nasal and conjunctival mucosae are con-
latr ogenic
12.5
 gested. Hyperthermia is determined by palpating the ears. There
is a prominent ptosis of the upper eyelid, but only slight pro-
pue sies u awoipus seuoH :(8a1) Hy yooig uap uea woy peypo
trusion of the third eyelid and slight miosis. In cattle, sheep,
dogs: a review. J Small Anim Pract 28:929.
and goats the most constant signs are hyperthermia detected on
ear palpation, and ptosis. Miosis and third eyelid protrusion are
 dismissed, however. Based on the anatomic location of the
subtle. In cattle less sweating is visible on the surface of the 
lesion, the possible causes of Horner's syndrome are as follows
nose on the denervated side.
 (the frequency of the various causes in dogs and cats is listed in
 Etiology. Most cases of Horner's syndrome in dogs and cats 
Table 16-6):
 are idiopathic. Golden retrievers are especially susceptible to
idiopathic Homer's syndrome. Cases of idiopathic Horner's
· Injury, infarction, or neoplastic involvement of the cranial
syndrome are usually postganglionic, and they resolve
 thoracic spinal cord causes signs of paresis or paralysis of
spontaneously within 6 to 8 weeks. Other causes should not be
the pelvic limbs and deficits in the thoracic limbs, in
866
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
addition to ipsilateral Hormer's syndrome. Unilateral
facial paresis, or both. There is a higher incidence of the
 infarction of the lateral funiculus of the cervical spinal cord
 syndrome after ear cleaning.
from fibrocartilaginous emboli may cause a persistent
 Retrobulbar injury, neoplasia, and abscess are common 
Horner's syndrome, along with hemiplegia, in dogs.
causes of Homer's syndrome. Involvement of additional
 Avulsion of the brachial plexus roots in dogs and cats, with
cranial nerves may cause blindness and strabismus.
resultant thoracic limb paralysis, occurs after car accidents.
Ipsilateral Hormer's syndrome indicates that the injury to
Neurologic lesions causing Horner's syndrome, their
the nerves innervating the thoracic limb is in or adjacent to
 location, and associated neurologic deficits are summarized in
the cranial thoracic spinal cord.
Table 16-7.
 Thoracic inlet or cranial mediastinal lesions (such as
Diagnosis. Denervation hypersensitivity is a phenomenon
 lymphosarcoma) involving the cranial thoracic sympathetic
 peculiar to smooth muscle innervated by the general visceral
trunk, the caudal cervical sympathetic trunk, or both, may
efferent system. Following denervation there is increased sen-
 cause Horner's syndrome without additions CNS signs
sitivity of the muscle to neurotransmitters. This is evident in
(unless the tumor invaded the spinal cord).
smooth muscle innervated by sympathetic neurons when the
· Injury to the cervical sympathetic trunk from a dog bite or
postganglionic axon is affected. Such denervated muscle
from surgical exposure causes an ipsilateral Horner's
shows hypersensitivity to the application of epinephrine or to
syndrome that is usually transient (Figure 16-22).
circulating epinephrine released during excitement. This
Neoplasms involving the cervical sympathetic trunk, such
phenomenon has been studied in dogs with lesions of the
as thyroid adenocarcinoma, are another cause.
sympathetic innervation of the ocular smooth muscles. Great
· Mycosis of the guttural pouch in horses may involve the
hypersensitivity is present with lesions of postganglionic axons 
cranial cervical ganglion or internal carotid nerve and
or their cell bodies than with lesions of preganglionic neurons,
 produce ipsilateral Horner's syndrome.
and this effect is used in localizing the site of the lesion to the 
 Ctitis media may produce Hormer's syndrome often
sympathetic system.
 accompanied by signs of peripheral vestibular disturbance,
 Topical application of 0.1 mL of 0.001% epinephrine causes
pupilary dilation in 20 minutes with lesions of postganglionic
axons or their cell bodies, and in 30 to 40 minutes with lesions 
of preganglionic neurons (see Figures 16-19 and 16-22).
 Treatment. The most important task is to determine the site
 of the lesion in an animal with Horner's syndrome. In general,
 preganglionic lesions have a less favorable prognosis than post-
ganglionic lesions. With postganglionic Horner's syndrome, in
which an exact cause cannot be determined, symptomatic treat-
ment may be instituted with phenylephrine drops (0.125% or
10%) as necessary to relieve the clinical signs. Most cases of
postganglionic Horner's syndrome resolve spontaneously with-
in 6 weeks. If the lesion is preganglionic, additional diagnostic
procedures are undertaken to determine the site and cause,
including neurologic examination and imaging (cervical and
thoracic radiography; computed tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging of the neck) (see Table 16-7). Because of
the frequency of lymphosarcoma with cranial mediastinal
lesions, thoracic radiographs are routinely taken in cats affected
with Horner's syndrome.
DYSAUTONOMIA (KEYGASKELL SYNDROME). Synonyms:
 Dilated pupil syndrome, feline autonomic polyganglionopathy.
Dysautonomia is an idiopathic disturbance of systemic auto-
nomic innervation with a marked reduction in the number of
neurons in autonomic ganglia, resulting in complete sympathetic
and parasympathetic denervation of the eye (and other organs).
The majority of affected animals are younger than 3 years. The
disease was initially regarded as a feline syndrome, and it is still
most common in the cat, but lately it has also been reported in
clusters of dogs living in the American Midwest. The disease is
of acute onset, with signs developing within 2 days in cats and
14 days in dogs.
Clinical Signs. Clinical signs of dysautonomia are as follows:
B
· Dilated unresponsive pupils
Figure 16-22. Preganglionic Horner's syncrorme in the left eye of an
· Protrusion of the third eyelids
Alaskan malamuteA,Beforeinstillationofepinephrine.B,Mycriasis
·Blepharospasm
35 minutes after application of 0.1 ml of 0.0o01% epinephrine solution.
The lesion was preganglionic anc associatec with trauma resulting from
·Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
vigorous lunging on a chain. It resolved spontaneously in 5 to 6 weeks.
· Dry, crusted nose
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
339
Table 16-7 | Horner's Syndrome: Summary of Neurologic Lesions
10CATION
LESION
ASSOCIATED NEUROLOGIC DEFICIT
Cervical spinal cord 
External injury
Tetr aplegia-spastic
Focal leukomyelormalacia (ischemic)
Hermiplegia—-ipsilateral, spastic 
T1-T3 spinal cord
External injury
 Pelvic anc thoracic limb paresis or paralysis with lower 
Neoplasia
Jaddn pue squill yiseaoy ui sipjap uonau aogou 
Focal poliomyelomalacia (ischemic)
motor neuron deficit in pelvic limbs 
Diffuse myelomalacia 
Lower motor neuron deficit and analgesia of tail.
anus, pelvic limbs, (ascencling anc descendling)
abcomen, and thorax with paretic thoracic limbs
 T1-T3 ventral roots, proximal spinal nerves 
Avulsion of roots of brachial plexus
 Brachial plexus paresis or paralysis of the ipsilateral 
thoracic limb
Cranial thoracic sympathetic trunk
Lymphosarcoma
 None if confined to the trunk 
Neurofibroma
 Cervical sympathetic trunk
Injury from surgical intervention in 
 None if unilateral; bilateral lesions interfere with
the area, or from dog bites
laryngeal ancd esophageal function because of vagal
 Neoplasm (thyroid aclenocarcinoma)
involvement
Middle ear cavity
Otitis media
 Signs of peripheral vestibular cisturbance: ipsilateral
ataxia, head tilt, nystagmus, and sometimes facial
palsy or hemifacial spasm 
Retrobulbar
Contusion
Varies with cegree of contusion to the optic and
Neoplasia
 oculomotor nerves, which also influences pupillary 
SIZe
From de Lahunta A (1983): Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology, 2nd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.
· Dry oral mucous membranes and oral cavity
retract in a denervated eye because of hypersensitivity of the
Anorexia and lethargy
orbital smooth muscle to the epinephrine.
· Megaesophagus and difficulty in swallowing
Treatment. The prognosis is poor, and in cats the reported
Vomiting/regurgitation
survival rate is only 25% to 50%. Many patients are euthanized
· Slow gastric emptying
owing to systemic complications. Treatment consists of the
·Fecal and urinary incontinence
following approaches:
·Bradycardia
· Distended bladder
1. General supportive therapy, including subcutaneous and
oral fluids.
 Diagnosis. Dysautonomia is diagnosed from its clinical
 2. Routine topical agents for keratoconjunctivitis sicca
signs, especially protrusion of the third eyelids with fixed.
(KCS), including compound KCS drops and artificial tears.
dilated pupils. Together with the other signs, these two findings
 3. Laxatives and prokinetic gastrointestinal drugs.
differentiate the disorder from Horner's syndrome, in which the
 denervation is limited to the sympathetic system, is usually
VESTIBULARSYSTEM
unilateral and presents with miosis. Lack of the normal flare
 response in intradermal histamine injection has also been used
The vestibular system maintains the position of the eyes, trunk,
for diagnosis of dysautonomia.
and limbs in reference to head position or movement. It
 Pharmacologic testing can be used to demonstrate denervation
consists of receptors and cell bodies in the vestibular ganglion 
hypersensitivity of both sympathetic and parasympathetic
in the petrosal bone (inner ear), axons in CN VIll, neurons in
 systems (see Figures 16-19 and 16-20). The principles are
the vestibular nuclei of the cerebellum, and axons in the MLF.
similar to the testing described for Horner's syndrome. The
The MLF connects vestibular neurons with neurons in the
 procedure consists of the following steps:
 brainstem nuclei that innervate extraocular muscles (CNs III,
Demonstration of Parasympathetic
Denervation. Para-
 IV, and V1). Figure 16-23 illustrates prominent anatomic features 
sympathetic denervation, which is also called Adie's pupil and
of the system.
 pupillatonia, can be demonstrated as follows:
Nystagmus (Box 16-1)
1. Instill a drop of 0.1% pilocarpine and measure pupillary
 diameter every 5 minutes. If denervation is present, the 
Normal Vestibular Nystagmus
resulting miosis will occur much faster compared with a
 Nystagmus is an involuntary, rhythmic ocular movement, the aim 
normal animal.
of which is to keep the eyes fixated on a visual target as the head
 2. Instill a drop of 0.06% echothiophate iodide (phospholine 
 iodide). The denervated eye will show no change in
moves. The head movement induces impulses in the vestibular
component of CN VII by stimulating the receptors in the
semicircular ducts of the inner ear. The afferent neuronal pathway
Demonstration of Sympathetic Denervation. Instill one drop
that results in nystagmus continues through the vestibular nuclei
of 1:10000 epinephrine into the eye. The third eyelid will
in the medulla and via the MLF to the brainstem nuclei of CNs
340
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Schematic Anatomy
of the Vestibule System
Cerebellum
Petrosal
bone
8V
O MLF
VN
Medulla
UMN
External
UMN
ear canal
SN
Auditory tube
Tympanic
Vestibulospinal
bulla
tract
Extraocular
Spinal cord 
muscles
Flexor muscles
Extensor muscles
Extensormuscles
MLF)
Figure 16-23. Anatomy of the vestibular system. F, Flocculus; MLF, meclial longituclinal fasciculus; N, noclulus;
S, saccule; SN, sympathetic neurons; U, utricle; UMN, upper motor neuron; VN, vestibular nucleus;
3, oculomotor nucleus; 4, trochlear nucleus; 6, abcucens nucleus; 7, facial nucleus; 8C, cranial nerve V1
Cochlear portion; 8V, cranial nerve Vll, vestibular portion. The vestibular system consists of receptors and cell
bodies in the vestibular ganglion in the petrosat bone (iner ear), axons in cranial nerve Vll, neurons in the
vestibular nuclei of the cerebellurm, and axons in the MlF. The MlF (located on both sicles of the brainstem)
Connects vestibular neurons with neurons in the brainstem nuclei that innervate extraocular muscles (cranial
nerves 1,1V, and V1).(Modified from de Lahunta A[1983|:Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology
 2nd edl. Sauncers, Philaclelphia.)
Box 16-1 |  Characteristics of nystagmus
 III, IV, and Vl, whose axons provide efferent innervation to the
extraocular muscles (see Figure 16-23). Normal vestibular
Normal
 nystagmus is tested by slowly moving the patient's head from side
to side and observing the limbus to note the resulting eye
· Occurs with head movement
movement. This form of nystagmus has a rapid phase in one
· Quick phase in same direction as head movement
●Horizontal plane →> horizontal nystagmus
direction and a stow phase in the other direction.
· Vertical plane → vertical nystagmus
The direction of nystagmus is defined by the direction of the
Abnormal
rapid phase.
· Occurs spontaneousty or with head held flexed laterally or
extended (positionat rystagmus)
 The rapid phase of the normal (physiologic) nystagmus is in 
· Peripherat receptor disease: The nystagmus is either
the same direction as the movement of the head: Left move-
 horizontal or fotatory (direction from 12 o'clock point on
 ment causes left nystagmus, and ventral movement causes ventral
globe). Its quick phase is constantly to side opposite from 
nystagmus. Normal vestibular nystagmus occurs only as the
lesion. The direction of the nystagmus does not alter when 
head is being moved. Both eyes are affected and move simul-
 the head position changes.
taneously in conjugate fashion. Testing normal vestibular
· Centrat vestibular disease (pons, medulla, cerebellum): The
 nystagmus evaluates the patient's ability to abduct and adduct
nystagmus may be horizontal, rotary, or vertical. The quick 
each eye. The result is abnormal if nystagmus persists after the
 phase may be in any direction, opposite from or toward side
head movement is stopped or if the head is extended or flexed
 of lesion, or vertical. The quick phase varies in direction 
 with different positions of the head.
laterally and nystagmus develops in that position.
· Quick phase varying in direction with different positions of
the head
Lesions that destroy the vestibular system, the MLF, or neurons
· Lack of any response to head movements or rapid rotation 
of CNs Ill, IV, and Vl cause loss of normal vestibular
 indicates severe bilateral receptor or severe brainstem
nystagmus.
disease.
· Lack of any response to cold water inrigation of one of the
 In neurologic evaluation after intracranial injury it is important 
 extemal auditory canals (caloric test) indicates a severe
to distinguish between signs of diffuse cerebral edema and of
lesion in the receptor of that side.
brainstem contusion. Loss of vestibular nystagmus indicates a
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
341
severe lesion in the brainstem affecting the vestibular nuclei,
Disorders of the Vestibular System
MLF, or the nuclei of CNs III, IV, and VI.
Otitis Media and Otitis Interna
 Observation of ocular movements in normal nystagmus also
 allows evaluation of specific extraocular muscles. For example,
Otitis is the most common cause of pathologic nystagmus in
signs of right abducent nerve paralysis are esotropia of the right
animals. Vestibular signs occur in animals when middle ear
eye and failure of the eye to abduct fully when the head is
inflammation indirectly or directly affects the function of the 
moved to the right.
membranous labyrinth. Varying levels of unilateral vestibular
disturbance appear, which consist of asymmetric ataxia with
Abnormal Nystagmus
strength preservation. Sometimes only a head tilt and positional
 nystagmus are evident. If the inflammation spreads to the inner
When the head is flexed laterally to either side or extended
ear, these signs may be accompanied by an ipsilateral facial
fully, no nystagmus is normally found. In vestibular disease.
paresis or palsy, Horner's syndrome, or both. This is because of
nystagmus may be observed as follows:
concurrent involvement of the facial and/or sympathetic nerves,
· Spontaneous nystagmus: Present when the head is at rest
cat (see Figures 16-5 and 16-6). Unilateral deafness may occur
·Positional nystagmus: Present when an abnormal head
but is difficult to determine clinically.
 position is induced
 In peripheral vestibular receptor disease the nystagmus is
Idiopathic Vestibufar Disease (Feline Vestibufar
either horizontal or rotary. and always in a direction (quick
Syndrome, Idiopathic Benign Vestibular Disease, Old
 phase) away from the side of the lesion. The direction of rotary
Dog Vestibular Disease)
nystagmus is defined by the change in the dorsal limbus during
the quick phase. This direction does not change when the posi-
This is a disease affecting dogs, cats, and horses. Patients present 
tion of the head is changed.
with head tilt and spontaneous nystagmus, with the fast phase
With disease of the vestibular nuclei or vestibular pathways
opposite to the head tilt. The nystagmus is usually horizontal and
in the cerebellum, the nystagmus may be horizontal, rotary, or
occasionally rotatory. At onset a head oscillation may occur
vertical and may change in direction with position of the head;
 simultaneously with nystagmus. The disease is self-limiting, and
any of these types of nystagmus suggests central involvement
 after 3 or4 days spontaneous nystagmus disappears, but abnormal
of the vestibular system. However, in most cases it is
 positional nystagmus may still be elicited on altering the position
impossible to further localize of the lesion based only on the
of the head. The direction remains opposite to the head tilt.
nystagmus.
Central Disorders
Peripheral receptor disease is suggested if the direction of
 Signs of vestibular system disturbance referable to disease of
nystagmus does not change when the position of the head is
changed. Vertical nystagmus or nystagmus that changes direction 
 the vestibular nuclei or their pathways are similar to those seen
when the position of the head is changed suggests a central
 in diseases of the peripheral vestibular system.
 Vestibular signs usually seen only with diseases of the central
disorder of the vestibular system.
pathways are as follows:
Eye Position in Vestibular Disease
·Vertical nystagmus
· Nystagmus that changes direction with different positions
In vestibular disease, most postural reactions remain intact
of the head
except for the righting response. Usually the patient experi-
·Disconjugate nystagmus
ences diffculty righting itself, with an exaggerated response
toward the side of the lesion. When the head is extended in the
The lesion is localized to the central pathways mostly
tonic neck reaction, the eyes should remain in the center of the
 because of the presence of signs that accompany the brainstem
palpebral fissure in the dog and cat. This often fails to occur on
involvement of other functional systems.
the side of the vestibular disturbance, and resulting in a
The most common cause of central vestibular system
drooped or ventrally deviated eye.
pathology is GME. Infectious diseases affecting the central
 In ruminants it is normal for the eyes to deviate ventrally
vestibular system include canine distemper, toxoplasmosis,
with neck extension. In horses there is normally a slight ventral
monocytic ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, feline 
deviation, which is more pronounced in the eye ipsilateral to a
infectious peritonitis, and fungal diseases. In ruminants, Listeria 
vestibular system lesion. Occasionally in vestibular disease, an
 monocytogenes causes inflammation of the brainstem with signs
eye is deviated ventrally (hypotropia) or ventrolaterally without
 referable to this location, including vestibular disturbance.
extension of the head and neck. This deviation appears as a
Intracranial injury may also affect the central vestibular path-
lower motor neuron strabismus but can be corrected with
 ways in addition to other systems in the brainstem. The degree
movement of the head into a different position or with induc-
of vestibular disturbance manifested depends on the severity of
tion of the patient to move the eyes to gaze in different
 disturbance to other systems, which may mask the vestibular dis-
directions. It is referred to as a vestibular strabismus. The
 turbance. Abnormal nystagmus may be the only sign of vestibular
cranial nerves that innervate the extraocular muscles are not
 disturbance evident in the tetraplegic, semicomatose patient.
paralyzed. The ventrally deviated eye is on the side of the
Compression of the central vestibular system by tumors,
lesion in the vestibular system. Sometimes the other eye may
toxicity (e.g., metronidzole overdose in dogs and cats) and
appear to be deviated dorsally (hypertropia).
 thiamin deficiency may also cause pathologic nystagmus.
342
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Congenital Nystagmus
determine. For example, canine distemper encephalitis often
 produces extensive lesions in the optic tracts without obvious
 Congenital nystagmus occurs in humans as an inherited functional
clinical deficit of vision or pupillary functions.
abnormality or secondary to congenital lesions in the visual system
 of the infant. The nystagmus is usually pendular. Similar nystagmus
The magnitude of visual deficit depends on location and extent
has been described in dogs. In cattle pendular nystagmus occurs in
 of the lesion in the visual pathway.
the Holstein-Friesian, Jersey, Guermsey, and Ayrshire. It is 
significant for diagnostic purposes only and does not affect vision.
Congenital pendular nystagmus has also been reported in
Histopathologic Reactions of Visual Pathways
 Siamese and albino cats. It is due to an abnormal crossover pattern 
to Disease
 of optic nerve fibers at the optic chiasm. The nystagmus and con-
current medial strabismus are believed to be an attempt by the cat
 Nervous tissue is composed of three elements: neurons, neuroglia
 to correct for the resulting abnormal projections to the visual cortex.
(astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia), and vascular con-
Congenital nystagmus occurs in young animals with severe
nective tissue (Figure 16-24). Neurons—for example, retinal
visual deficits during the early postnatal period. These occur in
 ganglion cells (RGCs)—have large cell bodies with huge nuclei
animals born with significant corneal opacities or cataracts, in
 and prominent nucleoli. Dendrites conduct impulses toward the
cases of neonatal retinal detachment or intraocular hemorrhage,
cell body—for example, RGC dendrites receive synaptic input
or following lid suturing (third eyelid flaps or tarsorrhaphy) in
from the midretina in the inner plexiform layer. Axons transmit
young patients.
impulses away from the cell body—for example, RGC axons
constitute the fibers of the optic nerve, relaying the visual
CENTRALVISUAL PATHWAYS
signal to the LGN. RGC axons in the nerve fiber layer of the
 retina have no myelin sheath as they converge on the optic disc.
Anatomy of the central visual pathways is discussed in Chapter 1
However, they are myelinated in the optic nerve by oligo-
and was summarized at the beginning of this chapter (see
dendrocytes. Myelin in the optic nerve differs from that in
Vision and the Menace Reponse and Figure 16-3)
peripheral nerves, in which Schwann cells (lemmocytes) form
the myelin. Diseases affecting Schwann cells do not influence
Clinical Signs of Diseases of the Central Visual
the optic nerve, and diseases that affect oligodendrocytes of the
Pathways
 optic nerve do not affect peripheral nerve myelin.
Axoplasmic flow of metabolites and cell organelles occurs
The effects of diseases of the central visual pathways on the
in both directions in the axon, to and from the cell body.
menace response and PLR have been discussed in detail in
 Interruption of this flow in the optic nerve is significant in the
the beginning of the chapter (see Figures 16-8 to 16-12 and
 pathogenesis of papilledema (see later).
Table 16-2). Briefly, lesions that destroy the retina or optic
nerve in one eye cause blindness and a partially dilated pupil in 
Acute Neuronal Degeneration
that eye (see Figures 16-8 and 16-13). The pupil is not fully
dilated due to consensual input from the unaffected eye. The
 Because neurons are specialized cells that have litte ability to
 menace response and direct PLR are lost in the affected eye but
 regenerate or proliferate, alterations seen are the result of degene-
are retained in the contralateral eye. The consensual PLR to the
affected eye is normal, but the consensual PLR from the affected
eye is absent. There are no other CNS signs. Total bilateral retinal,
optic nerve, optic chiasm, or proximal optic tract destruction
causes complete blindness, with both pupils widely dilated and
unresponsive to light directed into either eye (see Figure 16-9).
 Retinal degeneration is the most common cause of this deficit.
Unilateral lesions in the distal optic tract, LGN, optic
radiation, or visual cortex cause a visual deficit in the contra-
lateral visual field (see Figure 16-10). As noted at the beginning
of the chapter, in humans, where 50% of the optic nerve fibers
cross over at the chiasm, the visual deficit affects 50% of the
visual field in each eye. In domestic animals, where a larger
 percentage of fibers cross over at the chiasm, a unilateral lesion
will cause a significant visual deficit in the eye contralateral to
the lesion and a lesser deficit in the ipsilateral eye (see Figure
16-3). The deficit is pronounced from the temporal side (visual
field) when there are contralateral lesions in the central visual
pathway. In all postchiasmal unilateral lesions the PLR
responses are usually normal because of decussation at the
chiasm, pretectal area, and Edinger- Westphal nuclei.
Complete bilateral lesions in the optic tracts (after the afferent
Figure 16-24. A histologic micrograph of the normal canine optic nerve
fibers of the PLR have diverged), LGN, optic radiations, or visual 
in the larmina cribrosa region. The optic nerve is composed of axons of
cortex produce total blindness with normal PLR. More often,
retinal ganglion cells anc microglial anc macroglial celis.(Hematoxylin &
however, the lesions are partial and clinical signs are difficult to
eosin stain.) (Courtesy Dr. Emmanuel loeb.)
 NeUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
343
Myelin Degeneration
 Destruction of the optic nerve causes alterations in the myelin
sheath. The complex lipids in myelin turn into simple lipids.
These simple lipids are lost during routine histologic process-
 ing, leaving spaces (Figure 16-26). Macrophages phagocytize
the lipid (Figure 16-27).
Pathologic Reactions of the Neuroglia
 Neuroglial cells are the supporting cells of the CNS and are
classified by characteristics of their cytoplasmic processes.
Astrocytes proliferate when stimulated, although severe acute
degenerations of the retina may destroy both neurons and
neuroglia. In the retina the astrocytes become larger, proliferate,
Figure 16-25. Histopathology micrograph showing inner retinal atrophy
secondary to glaucoma in a dog. Note that except for a few degenerative
nuclei, no ganglion cells can be observed in the inner retina (right side).
A marked, cliffuse eclema is also notecl. (Hematoxylin & eosin stain stain.)
(Courtesy Dr. Emmanuel loeb.)
ration or necrosis (Figure 16-25). Severe, acute insults cause
immediate damage and destroy the cell. The duration of the
insult is more important than the cause. The sequence is as
follows:
Acute insult → Swelling, fragmentation, and dissolution of 
cell bodies → Necrosis
Tissues become edematous or cystic and later collapse and
shrink. There is minimal reactive proliferation, and remnants of 
disintegrating RGCs are phagocytized by microglia. Neuroglial
Figure 16-26. Myelin clegeneration of the optic nerve of a horse with
cells may fill in the defect ("gliosis") (see Figure 15-38 in
equine recurrent uveitis.
Chapter 15).
Chronic Neuronal Degeneration
73
More stages are identifiable in this process than in acute
degeneration. Neurons may swell and accumulate cytoplasmic
lipoidal vacuoles. Others may shrink, losing cell bodies and
processes, to leave only a pyknotic nucleus.
Axonal Degeneration
 Lesions and degenerative processes may occur in axons distant
from the cell body. Indeed, numerous degenerative conditions
affect the optic nerve, which is a collection of axons, before the
 RGCs are affected. Segments distal to the injury shrink rapidly,
 but proximal segments attached to the cell body survive longer,
and bulblike swellings develop at the site of injury. However,
IAL
the bubbles do not persist, and eventually both proximal and
distal portions of the neuron, including the cell body, degenerate 
due to interruption of the axoplasmic flow. Therefore chronic
i
atrophy of the optic nerve ultimately leads to retrograde
 Figure 16-27. Severe acute toxic optic neuropathy in a sheep poisoned
atrophy of the nerve fber and RGC layers of the retina.
with Stypandra imbricata ("blindgrass"). Note the loss of normal
Similarly, loss of RGCs causes anterograde atrophy of the
architecture, loss anc clisorganization of axons, anc presence of gitter (fat-
corresponding axons in toptic nerve.
laclen macrophages).
344
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
and fill in defects caused by disappearance of other neuronal
 Although papilledema does not cause primary loss of vision,
chronic papilledema may lead to progressive visual deficits due
or fixed macrophages of the CNS are termed microglia. They
to optic nerve atrophy. Furthermore, in cases where papilledema
phagocytize fatty materials released during degeneration of
is caused by brain tumors, cortical lesions may cause visual
nervous tissue and become large and rounded with a vacuolated
deficits, as well as other neurologic deficits (see Table 16-8).
cytoplasm (gitter cells).
Diseases of the Central Visual Pathways
with visual dysfunction and papilledema is highly suggestive
 of an intracranial space-occupying lesion.
Diseases of the Optic Nerve
PAPILLEDEMA. Papilledema ("choked disc') is not a disease
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
but edema of the optic nerve head caused by elevation in intra-
Aplasia and Hypoplasia. Aplasia of the optic nerve is com-
cranial pressure. As the subarachnoid space of the brain is
 plete absence of the nerve, an extremely rare condition. Hypo-
continuous with the optic nerve sheath, elevation in cerebro-
plasia of the nerve is defined as significant reduction in the
spinal fluid (CSF) pressure is transmitted to the optic nerve.
number of optic nerve axons. The primary developmental
The result is disruption of the axoplasmic flow between the
 abnormality is thought to be in the number or differentiation of
RGC body and the axonal terminal. The most common cause of
the RGCs whose axons form the optic nerve. Therefore in optic
papilledema is brain tumors, with one study reporting a 48%
nerve hypoplasia the number of RGCs is usually also
incidence of papilldema in 21 dogs with brain tumor
 decreased, and the nerve fiber layer is thin. Hypoplasia of the
(Table 16-8). Of the 21 dogs, 11 were boxers. In addition to
optic nerve occur infrequently in dogs, cats, horses, and cattle,
intracranial neoplasia, papilledema occurs in orbital inflam-
 and may be unilateral or bilateral. The condition is believed to
mations and neoplasms (including optic nerve neoplasms), in
be hereditary in a number of dog breeds, although it may also
vitamin A deficiency in cattle, and in some forms of toxic optic 
be acquired (see the section on vitamin A deficiency in cattle
 neuropathy (e.g., male fern and lead poisonings in cattle).
and pigs). Prenatal infection with bovine viral diarrhea-
Qinical Signs. The clinical signs of papilledema are as follows:
 mucosal disease may cause congenital optic nerve atrophy.
 In aplasia the optic disc is entirely lacking. If retinal vessels
· The disc is swollen and elevated above the surrounding
are present, hypoplasia is more likely, with a small remnant of
retina.
· Disc margins are indistinct and fluffy.
the optic disc present. In horses few if any retinal vessels are
· Retinal arterioles and veins show a distinct kink as they
 present in either hypoplasia or aplasia. In hypoplasia the disc is
 pass down over the edge of the disc into the retina.
gray and may be heavily pigmented (Figure 16-28). Secondary
 retinal degeneration may be present.
The disc has a "watery pink" appearance.
 In optic nerve aplasia, the eyes are congenitally blind; pupils
?
 Retinal veins are congested, dilated, and tortuous, and many
are dilated and unresponsive to light (Figure 16-29). In optic
 more fine veins are visible.
· Small flame-shaped hemorrhages may be present on or near
nerve hypoplasia there are significant visual deficits and PLR
the disc margin.
abnormalities. Their extent, however, varies with the number of
functional RGCs and optic nerve axons.
The main differential diagnosis for papilledema is optic
Aplasia-hypoplasia should be differentiated from atrophy,
 neuritis, which presents with similar clinical signs (see follow-
 which is usually not present in young animals. Histologically, the
 ing section). The two are distinguished by the fact that the
presence of retinal gliosis, inflammatory cells, or degenerative
former causes no functional deficits, whereas the latter causes
changes in retinal ganglion cells indicates atrophy rather than
loss of vision and PLR.
aplasia-hypoplasia. Another differential diagnosis (for hypo-
plasia) is micropapilla, a normal variation in which an animal has
Papilledema itself does not cause visual deficit.
a smaller-than-usual optic nerve, but no visual or PLR deficits.
Colobomas. Colobomas are pits or excavations in the optic disc
and peripapillary area, caused by incomplete closure of the
embryonic fissure (see Chapter 2). They are typical if seen in
Table 16-8 | Clinical Signs in 21 Cases of Canine
the inferior medial portion of the disc, and atypical if located
Brain Tumor
elsewhere. In dogs, colobomas occur most commonly in the collie
CLINICAL SIGN
% AFFECTED
eye anomaly in collies and Shetland sheepdogs (Figure 16-30),
although they may also be inherited as separate distinct entities 
 Papillecdlerma
48
(e.g., in basenjis). Colobomas are also inherited (as an autosomal
Visual defect (inclucling pupils)
71
dominant trait with incomplete penetrance) in Charolais cattle but
Hemianopia
33
Nystagrnus.
may occur sporadically in any species. The lesions are congenital
29
 Ocular cleviation and cranial nerve paralysis
33
and nonprogressive, varying in size from small pits to excavations
 Change of temperarment
81
several times the size of the normal optic disc. If a coloboma is
Locomotor cleficiency
81
Circling
large enough, vision and PLR are affected because the nerve
43
Hemiplegia
38
fber layer is disrupted as it enters the optic nerve head. Small 
Convulsions
38
 colobomas have minimal effect on vision and PLR.
Head turn or tilt
33
 The clinical appearance of a coloboma is a white-gray
Sensory deficit
19
indentation in the optic nerve. Blood vessels reaching the
Pituitary signs
14
margin of the coloboma disappear from view as they “dive"
Modifed fom Palmer AC, et al.(1974) Clinical signs including papilledema
into the excavation. The depth of the coloboma may be esti-
associated with brain tumors in twenty-one dogs. I Small Anim Pract I5:359.
mated by focusing on it using a direct ophthalmoscope, and
NeuROOPHTHALMoLoGY |
345
A
Figure 16-30. Optic nerve (and scleral) coloboma in a collie with collie
aapa au je slassan poog au jo aueieaddesip., au aon Aleuoue aha
of the optic dlisc as they "dlive" into the large coloboma.
Etiology. Causes of optic neuritis are as follows:
· Infectious diseases affecting other nervous tissues (e.g,
canine distemper, cryptococcosis, hog cholera,
toxoplasmosis, feline infectious peritonitis) (Figure 16-31)
· Inflammatory diseases, most commonly GME or meningitis
· Trauma, especially after proptosis of the globe
· Orbital diseases (e.g., orbital cellulitis and orbital abscess)
· Neoplastic disorders. These may be primary optic nerve
tumors (e.g., meningioma) or orbital tumors affecting
the nerve.
· Exogenous toxins (e.g., optic neuropathy in cattle from the 
ingestion of male fern and in sheep from the ingestion of
Stypandra imbricata [*blindgrass"]) (see Figure 16-27). In
B
humans, numerous drugs (e.g., chloramphenicol, alcohol,
Figure 16-28. Hypoplastic (A) ancl normal (B) optic nerves of the left and
nicotine) cause optic neuropathy, and drugs are often
right eyes, respectively, of a 4-year-old golclen retriever. Note obvious
se ul saso oros u sas uaaun nq padsns
clifferences in color, size, and shape of the optic dliscs. This was an
· Vitamin A deficiency causing abnormal bone growth that
inciclental fincling,anc the owner was unaware that theleft eyewas blind.
 constricts the optic canal
· Many cases, especially in dogs, are of unknown etiology,
and in fact most cases are classified as idiopathic.
 Clinica/ Signs. The clinical signs of optic neuritis are as follows
(in retrobulbar neuritis, the ophthalmoscopic signs marked with an 
asterisk [*] may be absent, because the more distal part of the
nerve is affected; in these cases, the fundus may look normal):
·Acute loss of vision
· The pupil is dilated and unresponsive. In unilateral cases,
Figure 16-29. Myclriasis in a cat with bilateral aplasia of the optic cliscs.
The two eyes are similar, are normal in size, anc have clilatec pupils.
there is a consensual PLR from the unaffected eye, but not
(From Barnett KC, Grimes TD [1974]: Bilateral aplasia of the optic nerve
from the affected eye.
in a cat. Br J Ophthalmol 57:663.)
· The optic disc is swollen and raised. It appears to be 
 congested, and its margins are blurry (Figure 16-32)*
·Hemorhages on or around the optic disc*
comparing the refractive power to that required to focus on
· The retina around the disc may be edematous or detached.
the adjacent disc or surrounding retina. Colobomas must be 
With time, peripapillary retinochoroidal degeneration may
distinguished from glaucomatous cupping, which is an
appear.*
indentation in the optic nerve head (centered in the center of the 
· Exudation and haze in the adjacent vitreous*
 optic disc) caused by elevation in intraocular pressure.
· Concurrent signs of CNS disease may be present,
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS 
 depending on the primary cause.
Optic Neuritis. Optic neuritis is an inflammation of the optic
· Optic neuritis, if untreated or uncontrolled, frequently leads 
nerve. The inflammation may be unilateral, though it is usually
to optic atrophy, with a pale, grayish, shrunken optic disc and
 bilateral; it may affect the entire nerve or parts of it.
 attenuation of blood vessels (see Optic Neuropathy later).
346
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Differential Diagnosis. Acute blindness with fixed, dilated
 pupils may also be caused by the following conditions:
· Glaucoma: Other clinical signs are usually present
(see Chapter 12).
 Retinal detachment: The detached retina is usually visible
behind the lens or can be demonstrated ultrasonographically
(see Chapter 15).
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD): The
electroretinogram response is extinguished in SARD but
normal in optic neuritis (see Chapter 15).
The appearance of an inflamed disc should be distinguished
from papilledema and from myelination of the nerve fiber layer of
 50 μm
the retina surrounding the optic disc (Figure 16-33; Table 16-9).
Treatment. Comprehensive ophthalmic, neurologic, and
physical examinations should be performed in order to identify
A
the primary cause (if present), and appropriate therapy should
be instituted. The inflammation itself is treated symptomatically
with high doses of systemic steroids. However,the prognosis
for return of vision is poor, and indeed some of the primary
causes (e.g., distemper) may even be life threatening.
Equine Optic Neuritis/Neuropathy. These diseases are
usually seen in elderly horses. Equine exudative optic neuritis
(Figure 16-34), is characterized by the following signs:
· Sudden, bilateral onset of blindness, accompanied by signs
of optic neuritis
 Multiple round or oval yellowish bodies protruding from
the borders of the optic disc and extending into the vitreous
· Pupillary dilation and loss or depression of PLRs
· Hemorrhages on or around the optic disc that may precede
or accompany the appearance of the yellow bodies
Figure 16-31. Histopathologic micrograph showing a case of canine optic
 Because the condition is uncommon, cumulative experience
neuritis seconclary to viral meningoencephalitis. A, Note the extensive,
 in its treatment is lacking, and optic atrophy is the usual sequel.
dliffuse infiltration of inflarmmatory cells around the nerve. There is also
An important differential diagnosis is equine proliferative
multifocal infiltration of the optic nerve by inflammatory cels. B, A
higher-magnification view of the same case, showing the nonsuppurative
optic neuropathy. a disease of elderly horses that is also
nature of the perivascular infiltrate. (Hematoxylin & eosin stain.) (Courtesy
characterized by papillary or peripapillary white masses (Table
Dr. Emmanuel Loeb.)
16-10, Figure 16-35). However, this disease causes no visual
disturbance and the condition is usually found incidentally
Figure 16-32. Optic neuritis in a cog. Note the blurry clisc margins and
Figure 16-33. Myelination of the nerve fiber layer of the retina in a clog.
the loss of cletail on the dlisc surface, caused by ecema of the nerve headl.
seen as white streaks extencling from the clisc. This must be clistinguishecl
from papilleclerma and optic neuritis. Clinical signs are lacking, and vision
Service Collection.)
is normal.
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
347
Table 16-9 | Differentiation of Optic Neuritis, Papilledema, and Excessive Nerve Myelination
 EXCESSIVE MYELINATION
FEATURE
OPTIC NEURITIS
PAPILLEDEMA
OF THE NERVE
Age
ssop pase-ap!
No specific age group unless 
Present from birth, nonprogressive,
 associated with cerebral
 and not pathologic 
 neoplasia, which is more
 common in older dogs 
Vision
Severely affectecl or absent
No effect 
No effect
 Direct pupillary light reflex
Depressed or absent 
Present
Present
Disc hemorrhages
Usually present
Rarely present
Absent
Peripapillary chorioretinitis
Often present
Absent (edema may be present)
Absent
"Kink" in vessels at dlisc margin
Often present
 Often present
Absent
Vitreous haze
Often present
Absent
Absent
Figure 16-34. Exucative optic neuritis in a horse. (Courtesy Dr. G.A.
Severin.}
Figure 16-35. Proliferative optic neuropathy in a horse. (Courtesy University
during fundus examination. Lesions are unilateral, are
of California, Davis, Veterinary Ophthalrmology Service Collection.
nonprogresive, do not affect vision or PLR, and are not preceded
or accompanied by hemorhages around the disc. Proliferative
· The optic nerve head or posterior section of the globe may
optic neuropathy was formerly reported as astrocytoma, but
be indented by the retrobulbar mass. Retinal edema and
histologic studies indicate that it is a lipid storage disorder.
folds resulting from pressure exerted by orbital masses on
Optic neuropathy in horses may also be ischemic, due to
the posterior of the globe may also be observed
 trauma or following ligation of the internal and external carotid
 ophthalmoscopically.
 Progressive exophthalmous that may even lead to ptosis
(see Figure 15-55 in Chapter 15). Although initially the affected 
of the globe. Position of the globe and direction of the 
 optic nerve appears normal, edema, hyperemia, and hemor-
visual axis may assist in determining the position
rhages may be observed after 24 hours, and irreversible blind-
of the mass. Exophthalmous caused by retrobulbar
ness is a common sequel.
neoplasia can be differentiated from that caused by a
 NEOPLASMS. Primary neoplasms affecting the optic nerve
retrobulbar abscess as the latter is painful and of acute
include meningioma, glioma, and astrocytoma. They are un-
 onset, whereas the former is nonpainful and slowly
 common in all species. Secondary metastatic neoplasms may
progressive.
also occur.
Clinical Signs. The clinical signs of neoplasms of the optic
Treatment. Imaging techniques, including radiography,
nerve are as follows:
computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, may
be used to delineate the extent of the tumor. In cases of retro-
· Mydriasis and abolition of the direct PLR in the affected
bulbar tumors, cytology samples may be obtained using
 eye, and the consensual PLR to the unaffected eye. With a
ultraound-guided fine needle aspiration. Treatment of optic
large infiltrating orbital mass, the consensual reflex from
neoplasms consists of anterior or lateral orbitotomy if the globe
the contralateral eye to the affected eye may be abnormal
is to be saved, or orbital exenteration if the neoplasm is too
because of destruction of efferent nerves of CN Ill. In such
extensive or infiltrates the globe or secondary lesions are pre-
cases, strabismus and ptosis will also be noted.
sent in the globe.
Orbital neoplasms may cause papilledema and/or optic neuritis
 OPTIC NEUROPATHY
that will eventually progress to optic neuropathy (see following
Etiology. Optic neuropathy is atrophy of the optic nerve. The
section).
condition has numerous causes and is the end stage of
348
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 16-10 | Differential Diagnosis of Equine Exudative Optic Neuritis and Proliferative Optic Neuropathy
FEATURE
EXUDATIVE OPTIC NEURITIS
PROLIFERATIVE OPTIC NEUROPATHY
Vision
Severe disturbance
No disturbance
Age
Elcerly 
Elcler ly  
Symmetry
Bilateral (unless traumatic)
Unilateral
Course
Progressive, often leadling to optic atrophy
Stationary
Appearance
1. Multiple bodlies protrucling from dlisc
1. Single body on dlisc surface
2. Hemorrhages often present
2. No hemorrhages
3. Vitreous haze may be present
3. No vitreous haze
Pupil
Mydriasis
Normal 
 Direct pupillary light reflex 
Depressed or absent
Normal
From de Lahunta A (1 983): Veterinary Neuroan atomy and Clinical Neurology, 2nd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.
numerous pathologic processes. Some of the more common
 in optic tract disease is demyelination. It may be caused by canine
 processes are as follows:
 distemper, which has a predilection for the optic tracts. As noted
previously, the virus may also cause optic neuritis, and the dog
· Advanced retinal degeneration of any type, as the
will present with signs of optic nerve inflammation. However,
 degeneration eventually spreads to the RGCs and their
often no clinical visual deficit is observed, and optic tract
axons
 demyelination may be the only pathology. The diagnosis is
?
 Glaucoma, as the RGCs and their axons are damaged by the
confirmed by PCR testing of various tissues, notably conjunctival
 elevation in intraocular pressure
 Orbital disorders (e.g., retrobulbar abscess, orbital cellulitis,
swabs and blood samples. The disease is discussed in detail in
Chapter 18. Demyelination of the optic tracts may also be seen in
canine extraocular myositis)
some storage diseases (see later). Occasionally, canine pituitary
· Intraorbital nerve damage secondary to traumatic proptosis
neoplasms affect the optic tracts when the hypothalamus is
in dogs and cats
invaded or compressed by the neoplasm.
 Sequel to optic neuritis
UNILATERAL DISEASE. Neoplasms in the hypothalamus and
 Prolonged papilledema
thalamus may encroach on one optic tract, causing a visual
· Intraorbital and intracranial neoplasia
 deficit in the contralateral eye, but PLRs are unaffected.
Clinical Signs. The clinical signs of optic atrophy are as
 Because of close approximation of the internal capsule and
follows:
rostral crus cerebri to the optic tract, space-occupying lesions
· Pale, grayish white, shrunken disc with extensive papillary
 in the lateral hypothalamus or thalamus (or both) that affect the
optic tract usually also affect the internal capsule and rostral
and peripapillary pigmentation (similar in appearance to
 crus cerebri. The result is mild contralateral hemiparesis, which
Figure 16-28, A)
 often is not evident in the gait but is demonstrable as asymmetry
 Slight depression of the disc surface
with postural testing.
 Exposure and increased visibility of the lamina cribrosa
 Traumatic or ischemic lesions that cause necrosis of these
· Attenuation of retinal vessels
tissues on one side can result in the same residual neurologic
Treatment. Except to prevent further damage to the nerve by
signs, that is, contralateral visual deficit and postural reaction
the original cause, treatment of optic neuropathy has no effect.
deficit (*"hemiparesis").
Diseases of the Optic Chiasm
Diseases of the Lateral Genicufate Nucleus
The most common disease of the optic chiasm is pituitary
Destruction of the LGN produces signs similar to those
neoplasia. In domestic animals, unlike in humans, the pituitary
cbserved with distal optic tract lesions. It may be caused by any
gland is located caudal to the optic chiasm. Therefore most 
 multifocal or diffuse brain disease that involves the thalamus
 pituitary neoplasms expand into the hypothalamus, and the chiasm 
and LGN, or by inflammatory, neoplastic, or storage diseases.
is affected only in advanced stages of growth. The result is bilateral
An abnormality in the retinogeniculate projections and
visual and PLR deficits. Occasionally, the cerebral infarction
 neuronal organization in this nucleus occurs in albinotic cats
syndrome in cats causes ischemic encephalopathy and necrosis
of all sizes, from Siamese cats to tigers, and in minks. In
of the optic chiasm, with blindness and dilated, unresponsive
some animals it is associated with congenital esotropia and
 pupils (see Diseases of the Optic Radiation and Visual Cortex).
nystagmus.
 In severe proptosis or traction during enucleation, the optic
chiasm may be traumatized, thus causing optic neuropathy and
Diseases of the Optic Radiation and Visual Cortex
 blindness in the contralateral eye that was not affected initially.
This condition is most commonly seen in cats, as the retro-
UNILATERAL DISEASE. Unilateral lesions of the optic
 bulbar optic nerve is particularly short in this species.
radiation and visual cortex produce hemianopia in the contra-
lateral visual feld. Pupillary size and response to light are
Diseases of the Optic Tracts
 normal. Common lesions of these structures and their clinical
signs are as follows:
BILATERAL DISEASE. Incomplete bilateral optic tract lesions
 Neoplastic Lesions. Neoplasms produce progressive signs of
may produce partial bilateral  visual deficit  with variable
neurologic deficit. Convulsions or changes in behavior may
 pupillary responses. The most common histopathologic finding
accompany the visual deficit.
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY |
349
 Traumatic Lesions. Traumatic lesions causing necrosis may
of considerable use in diagnosis (see Figure 15-49, C in
leave a residual neurologic defect limited to a contralateral
Chapter 15).
visual deficit. If the entire hemisphere is involved, a contra-
 Metabolic Diseases. Cortical blidness may also be caused by
lateral postural reaction deficiency may be seen on neurologic
 a number of metabolic diseases, notably hepatic and uremic
examination. Immediately after an injury the neurologic
encephalopathy, and hypoglycemia. The diseases may also
signs may be more extensive, suggesting diffuse cerebral dis-
affect the brainstem, resulting in subsequent PLR and eye
turbance. As hemorrhage and edema subside, the residual
movement abnormalities.
neurologic deficits relate to areas of necrotic tissue.
Inflammations. Cortical blindness may be caused by GME,
Feline Ischemic Encephalopathy. This is a syndrome
an idiopathic inflammation characterized by formation of
consisting of peracute signs of unilateral cerebral disturbance
 granulomas in the visual pathways, including the visual cortex.
in adult cats of all ages and both sexes, believed to be caused
Immunosuppresive treatment is recommended, though prognosis
by aberrant migration of Cuterebra. CNS signs are variable,
is grave. The treatment and prognosis are similar in necrotizing
with some animals showing only severe depression with mild
 meningoencephalitis, a disease of the cerebral hemispheres in
ataxia, circling, or both, whereas others circle continuously.
small breed dogs.
Other cases begin with seizures and consist of tonic or clonic
Ischemic Necrosis of Cerebrum. Anesthetic overdose leading
activity of the muscles on one side of the head, trunk, and limbs.
 to prolonged apnea and cardiac arrest may cause diffuse ischemic
Changes in attitude and behavior are common and may involve
necrosis of the cerebrum. Animals may recover, the only residual
severe aggression. Pupils are often dilated, and blindness may
deficit being blindness with intact pupillary reflexes.
be apparent. For the first 1 to 2 days, observable hemiparesis
 Poisonings in Cattle and Sheep. Severe cerebral disturbance,
may be present. Acute signs usually resolve in a few days,
including frequent blindness, is seen in cattle and sheep with
leaving signs of a nonprogressive unilateral cerebral lesion. The 
polioencephalomalacia, or thiamine (vitamin B,) deficiency.
loss of neurons in the visual cerebral cortex or optic radiation
The visual deficit is due to necrosis of the visual cortex
causes contralateral loss of the menace reflex, with normal
 caused by elevation in thiaminase levels following ingestion
pupillary reflexes.
 of bracken fern or excess thiaminase production in the rumen.
 Unilateral cerebral lesions are usually in the frontal lobe.
Lead poisoning causes similar acute necrosis of the cerebral
Examination may demonstrate a unilateral facial hypalgesia 
cortex and associated blindness. Similarly, severe water intoxi-
contralateral to the cerebral lesion. No other cranial nerve
 cation with cerebral disturbance may cause blindness.
deficits have been observed. Ischemic necrosis of the cerebral
Intoxication by wheat seed fungicide containing mercury
hemisphere is variable and is usually unilateral but occasion-
has been reported in cattle and pigs. The metal causes chronic
ally bilateral. The necrosis may be multifocal or the infarction
 degeneration of neurons in the cerebral cortex and replace-
may involve up to two thirds of one entire cerebrum. Vascular
 ment of astrocytes. Convulsions and blindness may appear
 occlusion occurs most commonly in the middle cerebral artery.
in the chronic stages. Mercury toxicity also occurs in dogs
Most cats with cerebral vascular disease survive, but behavioral
and cats.
changes and uncontrollable seizures may persist.
Tentorial Herniation. As noted in the previous section,
Unilateral Cerebral Abscess. In horses, abscesses caused by
 space-ocupying granulomas caused by a number of infective
Streptococcus equi or by Sarcocystis neurona may affect the
agents may cause cerebral edema, leading to elevation in intra-
 optic radiation and cause a contralateral visual deficit with nor-
cranial pressure, bilateral ventral ocipital lobe herniation, and
mal pupillary reflexes. Expansion of the lesion with
blindness. The same explanation for bilateral signs of visual
accompanying cerebral edema raises intracranial pressure and
deficit from tentorial herniation can be offered for any space-
causes the occipital lobes to hemiate ventral to the tentorium
cerebelli. The herniation further compromises function of
 Head injury that causes progressive cerebral edema causes
the visual cortex bilaterally, and total blindness results if both
blindness. The pupillary activity varies with the extent of brain-
sides are affected. Similar signs occur in ruminants with
stem involvement (see Pupils in Patients with Intracranial
Corynebacterium pyogenes abscess.
Injury).
 Encephalitis. In encephalitis caused by Toxoplasma gondi, a
Hypoplasia of the Prosencephalon in Calves. In calves with
space-occupying granuloma may be produced in the optic
hypoplasia of the prosencephalon, the rostral portion of the
radiation and cause a contralateral visual deficit. CSF contains
malformed diencephalon protrudes through a defect in
inflammatory cells, often with neutrophils and increased amounts
the calvaria and is attached to the adjacent skin. The skull is
of protein.
flatter than normal to conform to the malformed brain, which
BILATERAL DISEASE. Total blindness with normal PLRs is
consists of a brainstem with a small cerebellum and no cerebral
characteristic of bilateral visual cortex lesions. Common lesions 
hemispheres. The lack of cerebral tissue causes visual deficit
 and their findings are as follows:
 despite a functional brainstem. Affected animals may be able to
Canine Distemper. Chronic encephalitis due to canine dis-
 stand and usually live for a few days.
temper may result in demyelination and astrocytosis of the optic
Hydranencephaly. In hydranencephaly the cerebral hemi-
radiation. This is a sclerosing encephalitis that may produce a
spheres are reduced to a membranous sac filled with CSF,
unilateral or bilateral visual deficit with normal pupillary
which may cause a “dummy" syndrome in calves and lambs
function. Chorioretinitis may be visible ophthalmoscopically.
with ataxia and visual deficit. This disorder may be caused by
The disease is discussed in detail in Chapter 18.
Akabane virus in cattle and bluetongue virus in sheep.
Thromboembolic Meningoencephalitis. Infarction of the
 Obstructive Hydrocephalus. Obstructive hydrocephalus is
cerebral white matter by septic emboli occurs in cattle afflicted
 caused by obstructions in CSF flow and drainage, leading to
with thromboembolic meningoencephalitis caused by H. somnus.
 accumulation of fluid in the lateral ventricles or subaracnoid
Visual deficits may result. Severe ophthalmoscopically visible
space. The elevation in pressure compromises the optic
retinal lesions are the probable cause of visual deficits and are
radiation in the internal capsule, in which it forms the lateral
350
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
wall of the dilated lateral ventricle. Bilateral visual deficits and
humans. All are progressive, degenerative disorders of the
ataxia are common signs, reflecting attenuation of the cerebral
nervous system, usually of a recessive nature. The onset is
white matter, optic radiation, and visual cortex.
usually some time after weaning. Signs represent diffuse
involvement of the nervous system but often begin with pelvic
Additional Neuroophthalmic Diseases
limb ataxia and paresis. In the advanced stages of many of
these diseases blindness is common because the retina or visual
Vitamin A Deficiency
 pathways are affected.
Vitamin A deficiency is of clinical, ophthalmic, and economic
Storage diseases are usually caused by an absence or severe
significance in cattle, pigs, and sheep. The disease affects the 
deficiency of a specific degradative enzyme, which leads to
visual system through two mechanisms. In young animals, it
 abnormal accumulation of the sub-strate normally metabolized
causes abnormal thickening of growing bones, including
by that enzyme. These metabolic disorders may be ex pressed in
the bones around the optic canal. This thickening leads to con-
neurons by the accumulation of complex lipids in neuronal
striction and compressions of the optic nerve. Clinical signs are
cytoplasm (lipodystrophy) or in the myelin by demyelination
as follows (see Figures 15-52 and 15-53 in Chapter 15):
and accumulation of complex lipids in macrophages
(leukodystrophy). Leukodystrophy involves an abnormal meta-
· Papilledema. As the deficiency progresses, papilledema
bolism of myelin and its subsequent degeneration, whereas
worsens, the optic disc enlarges and becomes pink and pale,
lipodystrophy consists of abnormal neuronal metabolism associ-
and details of the central optic disc are obscured. In the
 ated with accumulations of complex lipids in neurons and their
later stages or if treatment is not given, irreversible optic
subsequent degeneration.
nerve atrophy occurs and the optic disc becomes gray, flat,
and shrunken.
Meningitis
 Tortuous retinal blood vessels, which later become attenuated
 Retinal detachment and hemorrhage
Canine meningitis may cause various neurologic and neuro-
 Retrograde degeneration of the retina, especially in the
 ophthalmologic deficits, depending on the cause (Table 16-11).
peripapillary region
 Anterograde degeneration of the optic chiasm and tracts
Cerebellar Disease
 Mottling of the tapetum and pallor of the nontapetum
 Reduced CSF absorption, leading to increased CSF
It is assumed that the pathway between the visual cortex and
 pressure, ataxia, tetraparesis, and seizures
the facial nucleus passes through the cerebellum (see Figure
16-2). Therefore significant cerebellar disease will interrupt the 
As vitamin A is used in the synthesis of visual photo-
efferent pathway of the menace response. Patients will have no
pigments in the rods (see Chapter 15), hypovitaminosis A will
menace response, even though they are visual. Animals with
also impair rod function, leading to night blindness. In chronic
this condition also have significant signs of cerebellar ataxia. A
deficiencies, progressive loss of vision and complete retinal
unilateral cerebellar lesion causes an ipsilateral menace deficit 
degeneration will occur.
with normal vision. This occurs because of the crossing of the
 Clinical signs become apparent when vitamin A levels have
 visual pathway in the optic chiasm and the reciprocal interaction
dropped to about 20 μg/dL of blood or 2 μg/g of liver. For
between the cerebrum on one side and the opposite cerebellar
diagnosis of vitamin A deficiency, liver levels are more reliable
hemisphere
than blood levels. Affected animals should be treated as follows:
 Involvement of the cerebellum may also cause vestibular
disturbance, with loss of equilibrium, nystagmus, bizarre
1. Vitamin A (water-soluble preparation) at 440 IU/kg
 postures, and a broad-based staggering gait with jerky move-
intramuscularly
ments as well as a tendency to fall to the side or back, especially
 2. Provision of rations containing vitamin A, 65 IU/kg body
if the thoracic limbs are elevated. Abnormal nystagmus is
weight per day
 observed only occasionally
 Occasionally in animals with significant cerebellar disease
Storage Diseases
 that involves the cerebellar nuclei, one palpebral fissure is slightly
wider or one third eyelid is mildly elevated. The pathogenesis
 Inherited storage diseases of the nervous system occur in most
 of these signs in poorly understood, even though they have also
domestic species and are models of comparable diseases in
been reproduced experimentally.
Table 16-11 |  Clinical Signs of Meningitis
DISORDER
NEUROOPHTHALMIC SIGNS
OTHER SIGNS
 Necrotizing vasculitis
 Blincness
Cervical rigiclity and pain, paralysis, seizures,
neutrophilia
 Pyogranulomatous meningoencephalitis
 Cranial nerve cleficits
Ataxia, stiff gait, cervical rigidlity, hyperesthesia 
 Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
 Blinclness, facial paresis, trigeminal 
Cervical pain, fever, ataxia, seizure circling, heac tilt
 paralysis, nystagrmus 
 Bacterial meningitis
Nystagmus, blindness
Cervical rigiclity, hyperesthesia, fever, vomiting.
bradlycardia, seizures, hyperreflexia, paralysis,
paresis, head tilt
Modifed from Menic SM (1988): Canine meningiis: a review. I Vet Intem Med 2:26.
NEUROOPHTHALMOLOGY
351
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jolly R, et al. (1987): Mannosidosis: ocular lesions in the bovine model. CufT
Eye Res 6:1073.
Aguine GD, et al. (1983): Feline mucopolysaccharidosis. VI: general ocular
Kali RE, et al. (1971): Anomalous relinal pathways in the Siamese cat: an
 and pigment epithelial pathology. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 24:991.
 inadequate substrate for normal binocular vision. Science 174:302.
Allgoewer I, et al. (2000): Extraocular muscle myosiis and Testictive
Kay TIA, Gaskell CI (1982): Puzzling syndrome in cats associated with
Shrabismus in 10 dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 3:21.
pupillary dilation. Vet Rec 110:160.
Baker HJ, et al. (1971): Neuronal GM gangliosidosis in a Siamese cat with
Kem TJ, Erb N (1987): Facial neuropathy in dogs and cats: 95 cases
beta galactosidase deficiency. Science 174:838.
(1975-1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1604.
Barnhatt KF,etal.(200l):Symptomatic granular celltumor involving the
Kem TJ, et al. (1989): Horner's syndrome in dogs and cats: 100 cases
pituitary gland in a dog: a case report and review of the literature.
(1975-1985). I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:369.
Vet Pathol 38:332.
Kem TI, Ris RC (1981): Optic nerve hypoplasia in three miniature poodles.
Berghaus RD, et al. (200 1): Risk factors for development of dysautonomia in
J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:49.
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 218: 1285.
Kinde H,et al. (2000): Halicephalobus gingivalis (H. deletrix) infection in
Bichsel P, et al. (1988): Neurologic manifestations associated with
two horses in southem California. J Vet Diagn Invest 12:162.
hypothyroidism in four dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc I92: 1745.
Lorenz MD, Komegay JN (2004): Stupor and coma, in Lorenz MD,
Bistner S, et al. ( 1970): Phammacologic diagmosis of Homer's syndrome in the
dog. JAm Vet Med Assoc 157:1220.
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 297.
Boydell P (1995): Idiopathic Horner's syndrome in the golden reltiever.
Matin CL, et al. (1986): Four cases of traumatic opic nerve blindness in the
J Small Anim Pract 36:382.
horse. Equine Vet J 18:133.
Brouwer GJ (1987): Feline dysautonomia—pharmacological studies. I Small
Mayhew IG (1989): Neurologic evaluation, in Mayhew IG (editor): Large
Anim Pract 28:350.
Animal Neurology: A Handbook for Veterinary Clinicians. Lea & Febiget,
Chrisman CL (199 1): Visual dysfunction, in Chrisman CL (editor): Problems
 Philadelphia, p. I5.
 in Small Animal Neurology, 2nd ed. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, p. 207.
Mayhew IG, et al. (1986): Ceroid-lipofuscinosis (Batten's disease):
Cumming SJF, de Lahunta A (1977): An adult case of canine neuronal
pathogenesis of blindness in the ovine model. J Comp Pathol 254:543.
ceroid-lipofusc inosis. Acta Neuropathol 39:43.
Menic SM (1988): Canine meningitis: a review. J Vet Int Med 2:26.
Davidson MG,et al.(1991): Acuteblindness associated with intracranial tumors
Miller PE,Murphy CJ(2005): Equine vision: nomal and abnommal, in Gilger
m dogs and cats: eight cases (1984-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:755.
B (editor): Equine Ophthalmology. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 371.
de Lahunta A (1983): Visual system—special somatic afferent system, in de
Morgan RV,Zanothi SW (1989): Homer's syndrome indogs and cats:
Lahunta A (editor): Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology.
49 cases (1980-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1096.
Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 279.
Muir P,et al. (1990): A clinical and microbiological study of cats with
de Lahunta A,Alexander JW(1976): Ischemic myelopathy secondary to
 protruding nichitating membranes and dianrhea: isolation of a novel virus.
presumed fibrocartilaginous embolism in mine dogs. I Am Anim Hosp
Vet Rec 29: 127.
Assoc 12:37.
Narfstrom K, Ekesten B (1999): Diseases of the canine ocular fundus, in
Dewey CW (2003): Encephalopathies: disorders of the brain, in Dewey CE
  e e      
s m oo h e a o a (e  (ro)
& Wilkins, Philadelphia, p. 869.
Press, Ames, p. 99.
Nash AS (1987): Feline dysautonomia—clinical features and management.
Dewey CW (2002): Ex ternal hydrocephalus in a dog with suspected bac terial
J Small Anim Pract 28:339.
meningoencephalitis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:563.
)  s  6)  
Teview. Irish Vet J 58:86.
Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy, 2nd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 325.
 Palmer AC, et al. (1974): Clinical sigms including papilloedema
Enzerink E (1998): The menace response and pupillary light reflex in
neonatal foals. Equine Vet I 30:546.
15:359.
Evans HE (1993): Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed. Saunders,
Peterson BW (2004): Cunent approaches and future directions to
Philadelphia.
understanding control of head movement. Prog Brain Res 143:369.
Gancz AY, et al. (2005): Horner’s syndrome in a red-bellied parrot
Pettersson LG, Perfliev S (2002): Descending pathways controlling visually
(Poicephalus rufiventris). I Av Med Surg 19:30.
guided updating of reaching in cats. Eur J Neurosci 16:1 349.
Garosi LS, et al. (2003): Thiamine deficiency in a dog: clinical, clinicopathologic,
Polin M, Sulivan M (1986): A canine dysautonomia resembling Key-Gaskell
ad magnetic resonance imaging fndings. J Vet Intem Med 17:719.
syndrome. Vet Rec I18:402.
Gaskell CJ (1987): Feline dysautonomia-introduction and backgTound.
Ryan K, et al. (2001): Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis in dogs
 J Small Anim Pract 28:337.
Comp Cont Ed Vet Pract 23:644.
Godinho HP, Getty R (1975): Peripheral nervous system, in Getty R (editor):
 Shamir MH, Ofi R (2006): Comparalive neuro-ophthalmology, in Gelatt KN
(editor): Veterinary Ophthalmology, 4th ed. Blackwell Science,
Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 650.
Philadelphia.
Greet TRC (1986): Outcome of treatment in 35 cases of guttural pouch
Singh M, et al. (2005): Thiamine deficiency in dogs due to the feeding of
mycosis. Equine Vet J 18:294.
sulphite preserved meat. Aust Vet J 83:412.
Griffths IR (1987): Feline dysautonomia—pathology. J Small Anim Pract
 Stadtbaumer K, et al. (2004): Tick-borne encephalitis virus as a possible
28:347.
cause of optic neuritis in a dog. Vet Ophthaimol 7:271.
Griffths IR, et al. (1985): Feline dysautonomia (the Key-Gaskell syndrome):
Stalis IH, et al. (1995): Necrobizing meningoencephaliis of Maltese dogs.
an ultrastructural study of autonomic ganglia and nerves. Neuropathol
Vet Pathol 32:230.
Appl Neurobiol II:17.
 Summers BA, et al. (1995): Inflammatory diseases of the central nervous
Guillery RW, Kaas JH (1973): Genetic abnomality of the visual pathways in
system, in Summers BA, et al. (editors): Veterinary Neuropathology.
a "white" tiger. Science 180:1287.
Mosby, St. Louis, p. 95.
Harkin KR, et al. (2002): Dysautonomia in dogs: 65 cases (1993-2000).
Taylor RM, et al. (1987): Canine fucosidosis: clinical fndings. I Small Anim
J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:633.
Pract 28:291.
Harper PA, et al. (1988): Neurovisceral ceroid-lipofuscinosis in blind Devon
Theissen SK,et al. (1996): A retrospective study of cavernous sinus
cattle. Acta Neuropathol 75:632.
syndrome in 4 dogs and 8 cats. J Vet Intem Med 10:65.
Hartley WJ (1963): Polioencephalomalacia in dogs. Acta Neuropathol 2:271.
 Thomas WB (2000): Veshibular dysfunction. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Hayes KC, et al. (1968): Pathogenesis of the optic nerve lesion in vitamin
Pract 30:227.
A-deficient calves.Arch Ophthalmol 80:777
Troxel MT, et al. (2005): Signs of neurologic dysfunchion in dogs with
Hogg DA (1987): Topographical anatomy of the central nervous system, in
 cental versus peripheral veshibular disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc
King AS (editor): Physiological and Clinical Anatomy of the Domestic
227:570.
Mammals, Vol I: The Central Nervous System.Blackwell Science,
Vandevelde M, Zurbriggen A (2005): Demyelination in canine distemper
Oxford, England, p. 256.
virus infection: a review. Acta Neuropathol 109:56.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN (1971): AberTant visual projections in the Siamese cat.
Wenger DA, et al. (1999): Globoid cell leukodystrophy in caim and West
Physiology 218:33.
Highland white terTiers.J Hered 90:138.
Jeffery G,Erskine L (2005): Varations in the architecture and development
Yoshitomi T, Ito Y (1986): Double reciprocal innervations in dog inis
 of the vertebrate opbic chiasm. Prog Retin Eye Res 24:721.
sphinc ter and dilator muscles. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 27:83.
Chapter
ORBIT
Paul E. Miller
ANATOMY
ORBITAL DISEASES
SURGICAL PROCEDURES
PATHOLOGIC MECHANISMS
OPHTHALMIC MANIFESTATIONS OF
OCULAR PROSTHESES
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
DENTAL DISEASE
ORBITOTOMY AND ORBITECTOMY
ANATOMY
·Infections of the sinuses or nasal cavity may enter the orbit
in all domestic species (Figure 17-11). The junction of the
The orbit is the cavity that encloses the eye. The two orbital
frontal, lacrimal, and palatine bones in the medial wall of 
 patterms in domestic animals are as follows:
the canine orbit (see Figures 17-2 and 17-11) is often thin
· Incomplete bony orbit, found in dogs and cats (Figures 17-1
and may be eroded by disease processes in the nasal cavity,
which then enter the orbit. The bone is thicker in horses 
to 17-3)
· Complete bony orbit, found in horses, oxen, sheep, and pigs
(Figure 17-12).
· Fractures of walls of the sinuses can cause emphysema,
(Figures 17-4 and 17-5)
with gas visible beneath the conjunctiva or palpable under
The orbit separates the eye from the cranial cavity, and the
the skin.
foramina and fissures in its walls determine the path of blood
· Infections of the roots of the molar teeth can affect the
vessels and nerves from the brain to the eye. The walls of the
 orbit, uvea, and periocular area in dogs and cats.
a n  i ag p a nna a
Entargement of the canine and feline zygomatic salivary
temporal, presphenoid, palatine, and maxillary bones, which
gland may cause increased pressure within the orbit or
 are similar in other species. In the dog and cat the dorsolateral
 protrusion of the gland into the ventral conjunctival fornix
portion of the orbit is spanned by the dense collagenous orbital
(Figure 17-13). When the mouth is opened, especially in
ligament, which passes from the zygomatic process of the
dogs and cats with greater mobility of the mandible, the
frontal bone to the frontal process of the zygomatic bone. The
vertical ramus of the mandible moves forward, exerting
basic foramina and fissures of the orbit are the orbital, rostral
pressure on the orbital contents. This is painful if orbital
and caudal alar, oval, supraorbital, ethmoidal, lacrimal,
contents are inflamed.
maxillary, sphenopalatine, round, and palatine. In cattle, the 
orbital foramen and the foramen rotundum fuse to form
The orbital contents are completely enclosed in a sheet of
the foramen orbitorotundum. The vessels and nerves that
 connective tissue—the periorbita—that lies next to the bone in
pass through these foramina and fissures in the dog
are
the bony parts of the orbital wall and that is thicker laterally
shown in Figures 1-16, 1-17, and 1-19 to 1-22 in Chapter 1 and
where the wall is incomplete (in carnivores). The periorbita is
Figure 17-6.
reflected over the extraocular muscles and forward over the
 The position of the orbit within the skull varies with species.
 globe to become Tenon's capsule, lying beneath the conjunctiva
 In cattle, sheep, and horses the eyes are situated laterally, giving
(Figure 17-14). The periorbita is continuous with the periosteum
 panoramic vision, whereas in dogs and cats the eyes are located
 of the facial bones at the orbital rim, with the orbital septum
more anteriorly, which emphasizes binocular overlap between
anteriorly, and with the dura mater of the optic nerve. The
the two eyes. The visual, orbital, and optic axes, defined as
 orbital fat pad lies between the periorbita and the extraocular
follows, do not coincide (Figure 17-7):
 muscles. Intraorbital fat lies between the muscles and fascial
·Visual axis: Line from the center of the most sensitive area
layers (Figure 17-15). In animals with an incomplete bony orbit,
the masticatory muscles play a critical role in providing posterior
of the retina to the object viewed
support for the orbital contents. Orbital disease prcesses may
· Orbital axis: Line from the apex of the orbit to the center of
the external opening
thus be located in one of the following three planes:
· Optic axis: Line from the center of the posterior pole of the
·Within the muscle cone
eye through the center of the cornea
· Outside the muscle cone but within the periorbita
·Within the orbit but outside the periorbita (e.g., posterior to
The angle formed by the optic axes, a measure of binoc-
the periorbita laterally where there is no bony wall, as
ular overlap, is shown in different species in Figures 17-8
occurs in myositis of the temporal muscle)
to 17-10.
The relationships of the orbit to the paranasal sinuses, teeth,
The lacrimal gland lies beneath the orbital ligament on the
zygomatic gland, and ramus of the mandible are important,
dorsolateral surface of the globe (see Figure 17-14). The base
because they affect incidence, diagnosis, and pathogenesis of
of the third eyelid and gland is held down by the orbital
clinical diseases of the eye and orbit, as follows:
retinaculum, which are poorly defined sheets of collagenous
352
ORBIT|
353
Zygomatic
Wing of sphenoid
Frontal
Parietal
Palatine
Lacrimal
Maxilla
Temporal
Nasal
Occipital
Incisive
Tympanohyoid
Stylohyoid carilage
Trachea
Mahdible
Epihyoid
Figure 17-4. left lateral view of the equine skull. Note the enclosed
Ceratohyoid
clorsolateral surface of the orbit. (Moclifiecl from Dyce KM, et al. [2002|:
Basihyoid
Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy, 3rd edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Thyrohyoid 
Cricoid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Nuchal crest
Figure 17-1. Bones of the skull, hyoic apparatus, and laryngeal cartilages,
lateral aspect. (Moclifiecl from Evans HE [1993|: Miller's Anatomy of the
Occipital.
 External sagittal crest
Dog. 3rd ed. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Interparietal --
 Temporal fossa
Parietal-
Temporal crest
Squamous part
Coronoid process
of temporal
 Frontal
Zygomatic arch
Parietal
Frontal
-Zygomatic process 
Lacrimal
 Supraorbital foramen 
Nasal
Orbit
Zygomatic-
Incisive
Occipital
Lacrimal -
Facial crest
Maxilla-
Temporal
Maxilla
Palatine
Sphenoid
Nasal-
Infraorbital foramen
Zygomatic
 Pterygoid
(cut)
Figure 17-2. Skull, lateral aspect (Zygomatic arch removedl). (Moclified
from Evans HE [1993l: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rcl ecl. Saunclers,
 Philacelphia.)
Nasal process
of incisive
Interparietal process
Body of incisive
Parietalbone
External sagittal crest.
Interincisive canal
-Squamous part
 Figure 17-5. Dorsal view of the equine skull. (Modlified from Getty R
Temporal line.
 of temporal bone
[1975|: Sisson anc Grossman's the Anatomy of the Domestic Animals, 5th
ecl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.!
Zygomatic process 
 of temporal bone
Frontal bone
Coronoid process -
tissue continuous with the periorbita but that contain smooth
Frontal process of
Zygomatic process
muscle with sympathetic innervation.
zygomatic bone
Zygomatic bone
Lacrimal bone
Maxilla
Extraocular Muscles
Infraorbital foramen-
Nasal bone
Seven extraocular muscles control movements of the globe
Nasal process
of incisive-
(Figure 17-16; Table 17-1). The extraocular muscles arise from
Canine teeth
 the annulus of Zinn, which circles the optic foramen and orbital
Upper
Lower
Body of incisive
fissure, and insert onto the globe. Neurologic abnormalities in
their function are discussed in Chapter 16.
Incisor teeth
Figure 17-3. Dorsal view of the canine skull. (Modlified from Cetty R
PATHOLOGICMECHANISMS
[1975|: Sisson anc Grossman's the Anatomy of the Domestic Animals, 5th
edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Because the orbit forms a semiclosed space, increases and
decreases in the volume of its contents affect the position of the 
354
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAlS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Temporal branches
Masseteric
Middle meningeal
Transverse facial
Rostral auricular
Lateral dorsal palpebral
~ Lateral ventral palpebral 
External ethmoidal
Occipital branch
Rostral deep temporal
Medlial auricular-
Anastomotic ramus to internal carotid
Deep auricular -
~Buccal
 Intermediate auricular 
Zygomatic branch
Lateral auricular
Malar
Infraorbital
Muscular branch
Sphenopalatine
 Caudal auricular
Major palatine
External carotid
Minor palatine
Pterygoid branch
Superficial temporal
Artery of pterygoid canal
Masseteric ramus
 External ophthalmic
Temporomandibular ramus 
 Pterygoid branches
Maxillary
 Caudal deep temporal
Rostral tympanic Mandibular alveolar
Figure 17-6. Arteries of the heacl in relation to lateral aspect of the skull. (Modified from Evans HE [1993]:
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ecl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Visual axis
Rectus tendon
Zonular fibers
Vitreous chamber
(contains vitreous humor) ~
Ciliary body
 Posterior chamber
Choroid -
Anterior chamber
(contains aqueous humor)
Optic nerve ~
-Lens
Iris
Nerve sheath
Cornea
Limbal zone
Conjuctiva
Optic axis
Figure 17-7. The visual and optic axes of the eye. (Mocified frorm Getty R [1975l: Sisson and Grossman's the
Anatomy of the Domestic Anirmals, 5th edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.
Table 17-1 | Extraocular Muscles: Actions and Innervations
MUSCLE
 INNERVATION
ACTION
Superior (dorsal) rectus
Oculomotor (CN 1)
Elevates globe
 Inferior (ventral) rectus
Oculomotor (CN 11)
Depresses globe
Medial rectus
Oculomotor (CN 111)
Turns globe nasally
Lateral rectus
Abdlucens (CN VI)
Turns globe termporally
 Superior (dorsall oblique
Trochlear (CN 1V)
(1eseu uogisod ynol,o zl sajejoi) agog spiour
Inferior (ventral) oblique
Oculomotor (CN 11)
Extorts globe (rotates 12 o'clock position temporally)
Retractor bulbi
Abducens (CN Vl)
Retracts globe
 levator superioris
Oculomotor (CN )
 Elevates upper lid 
CN, Cranial nerve.
OrBItI
355
VISION
146°
146°
Figure 17-s. Comparison of the angle formed by the _optic axes of
dlifferent species of clomestic animals. (From Getty R [1975i: Sisson and 
Crossman's the Anatomy of the Domestic Animals, 5th edl. Saunclers,
 Philacelphia.)
Binocular field
124°
3°
BLIND AREA
Figure 17-10. Visual field of the horse, showing a smaller binocular fieldl,
large panoramic uniocular areas, and a minute blind area.
Uniocular
 Uniocular
42°
42°
eye in relation to the orbital rim and to the other eye. Space-
Occupying lesions (Figure 17-17) push the eye forward, causing
exophthatmos, and often the third eyelid also protrudes as it is
 passively forced out of the orbit. In dogs and cats orbital
masses usually result in swelling of the tissues caudal to the last
upper molar tooth, because the orbital floor is only soft tissue
 in this area. With decreased volume of the orbital contents (e.g.
dehydration or atrophy of fat or muscle), the eye sinks further
Blind area
into the orbit—enophthatmos—and the third eyelid protrudes.
152°
Osteomyelitis of the bones forming the orbit due to organisms
Figure 17-9. Visual field of a primate, showing a large binocular field,
such as Cryptococcus and Actinomyces spp. may also cause
small uniocular areas, and a large blind area. (Moclifiec from Duke-Elcler
 exophthalmos.
S [1958l: System of Ophthalrmology, Vol 1: The Eye in Evolution. H.
Compton, London.)
Exophthalmos 
must  be  distinguished from  apparent
exophthalmos due to shallow orbits (occurring in brachycephaly,
sisee eio, pue euone uoeyalq.na snydaopy
Brachycephalic
xouMesaticephalic
Maxillary sinus
Dolichocephalic
Frontal sinus
Figure 17-11. Relationship of the paranasal sinuses to the orbital walls in the cog. (Moclifiecl frorm Evans HE
[1993|: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rc ed. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
356
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
The position of space-occupying lesions alters the direction 
Lacrimal
Tenon's capsule
of displacement of the globe and is used to determine the site
gland
of the offending mass (Figure 17-18) and the optimal route of
 Orbital
surgical exploration.
septum
Periorbita
 Because the subconjunctival tissues and the orbit are con-
 nected, orbital diseases frequently cause chemosis. If the orbital
lesion compresses the orbital veins, posterior venous drainage
Muscle
 diminishes and chemosis is further increased. In horses, orbital
fascial
swelling or inflammation commonly
 causes filling of the
sheaths
 depression superior to the upper eyelid.
 Check ligament
Figure 17-14. Divisions of the periorbita.
 Figure 17-15. loss of orbital fat and masticatory muscle mass, as in this
Figure 17-12. Transverse section through heac of horse at level of orbital
aged golcen retriever, can result in profound enophthalmia.(Courtesy
cavities; rostral surface of section. A, Ethrmoidal labyrinth; B, corsal nasal
University of Wisconsin-Macison Veterinary Ophthalmology Service
conchal sinus; C, frontal sinus; D, sphenopalatine sinus; E, vomer bone;
Collection.)
F, Zygomatic process of frontal bone; C, palatine bone; H, mandlible;
1, perpenclicular plate (lamina); 2, tectorial plate; 3, orbital plate; 4, basal
plate; 2-4, papyraceous plate; 5, dorsal nasal concha (encoturbinate 1);
6, middle nasal concha (endoturbinate ll); 7-10, encoturbinates 11-V1,
respectively. (Modified from Getty R [1975]: Sisson and Grossman's the
Anatomy of the Domestic Animals, 5th ecl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
 Rectus lateralis muscle 
 Retractor bulbi muscle
Temporal fossa .
Sclera
 Rectus dorsalis muscle -
Zygomatic gland -
Periorbital fat
Maxillary division, Vn. -
Zygomatic arch, cut
Maxillary artery
Deep facial vein
Facial vein
 Pterygoideus medius muscle -
Upper lip
Shearing tooth
Openings of ducts from
zygomatic gland
Figure 17-13. Lateral aspect of canine orbital contents anc the zygormatic salivary glanc. Note multiple clucts of
the Zygommatic glandl entering the oral cavity. (Modlifiecl from Evans HE [1993l: Miller's Anatormy of the Dog.
3rcl edl. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
ORBIT|
357
Superior rectus
Trochlea
 Exophthalmos frequently causes greater evaporation of the 
Annulus of Zinn
 precormeal tear film and exposure keratitis.
Superioroblique
 Because of the many tissue types present, numerous kinds of
neoplasms may affect the orbit. The most common causes
of exophthalmos in one case series of dogs and cats were
Medial rectus
neoplasia (52%), orbital abscesses/cellulitis (30%), hematoma
Insertion of retractor bulbi
Inferioroblique
(9%), zygomatic mucocele (5%), arteriovenous fistula (2%),
Lateral rectus
and eosinophilic myositis (2%).
Inferior rectus
Figure 17-16. Ceneral arrangement of the orbital muscles. (Molifiec from 
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
 Prince JH, et al. [1960l: Anatomy and Histology of the Eye and Orbit in
Domestic Animals. Charles C. Thomas, Springfieldl, 11.)
 The diagnosis of orbital disorders requires a complete ophthalmic
 examination and perhaps additional special diagnostic tech-
niques, as follows (Figure 17-19).
· Determination of globe and optic axis displacement helps
 localize the lesion.
Lnlargement of
Orbital tumors
tempora rusclcs
Orbilai mflammation
Exophtnalmos
Orbital edema
or abscesses
Zygomatic muo
Extensinn of pathogenic
oral cavity, sir uses, teth 
Vascular anomalies
Orbital AV fistula
Figure 17-17. Mechanisms of exophthalmos. AV, Arteriovenous.
Within muscle cone
Dorsal mass
Ventral mass
Nasal and temporal masses
(soe a pajeipui se suawaeds aos yo uogaap au uo suoisal susadnso-aeds jo sae gii ama
358
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
A
A
01972
SCN#=10437
YR FELINE FEMALE
YR.FEMALE
TR=250M
TE=28M
O=11
EN=1/
NSQ=
ZnES=a.aAC
D
o si sse leisnuis eu e yim  e yo s aun o ma deen enos v i-i an
cortical bone of the right frontal sinus is present fopen arrow). Fluic clensity is present in the right tympanic bulla
central areas of mineral opacity is present. Lysis of the cribriform plate anc cortical bone of the right frontal sinus
o  au jo ai aueosa ae paylall ieuo  eae pue ea esp uasad ae
the same cat. A large mass of uniform isointensity to peripheral brain parenchyma is dlisplacing and compressing
the clorsal mecial quaclrant of the globe and the parenchyma of the right rostral cerebral hemisphere and
photograph of the skull of the sarme cat. The clorsal calvarium has been removed. A large orbital mass (arrows)
is present,causing exophthalmos of the right eye and compresson of the frontal lobe of the brain.Lysis of
cortical bone is present dorsal anc caudal to the mass. (From Ramsey DT, et al. [1994]: Comparative value of
dliagnostic imaging techniques in a cat with exophthalmos. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 4:198.)
· Orbital palpation. The consistency and position of orbital 
· B-scan ultrasonography (see Chapter 5) is very useful for
contents can often be determined by placing pressure on the
evaluation of soft tissue masses within the orbit and may
globe itself, through the eyelids (retropulsion of the globe).
 guide further diagnostic procedures, such as fine-needle
 Additionally, careful orbital palpation along the rim and 
aspiration.
inside the orbit with a lubricated fingertip can be useful in
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed
localizing lesions.
tomography (CT) (Figures 17-19 through 17-21) yield
 Opening of the mouth. Inability to fully open the mouth 
superior definition in localizing orbital lesions. They allow
with enophthalmia is consistent with a restrictive myopathy
the extent of disease to be better estimated and enable more
of the masticatory muscles. If the globe is exophthalmic,
 accurate surgical planning. CT may be used to guide fine-
substantial pain on opening the mouth suggests an 
needle aspiration or biopsy, thus avoiding exploratory
inflammatory process, whereas the absence of pain is more
orbitotomy.
consistent with neoplasia. In dogs and cats the soft tissue
· Contrast radiographic techniques have been largely
posterior to the last upper molar should be carefully
supplanted by ultrasound and CT/MRI but may be useful in
inspected and palpated if possible.
select cases. The techniques consist of contrast orbital
OrgIt |
359
Figure 17-20. Cormputed tomographic scan of a multilobular ossifying
fibroma (sarcoma, chondroma rodens) originating from the right petrous
temporal bone ancdl extencing rostrally to invacle the orbit anc nasal cavity.
and medlially into the micddle cerebral fossa, via the frontal, temporal, and 
parietal bones. The eye was clisplaced anteriorly. The patient was a
12-year-old Brittany spaniel. (Courtesy Dr. R. Bellhorn.)
ES
B
Figure 17-22. A, Normal lateral orbital venograrm in a 5-year-old pooclle
(right eye). B, Venogram of left orbit of same dog showing a lymphoid 
pseucotumor in the inferonasal orbit. The inferior ophthalmic vein is 
obliterated. (Courtesy Dr. R. Dixon.)
Figure 17-21. Magnetic resonance image of nasal carcinoma invaling the
orbit of a cdog anc causing exophthalnos.
5266R
venography (Figure 17-22), contrast orbitography
(Figures 17-23 and 17-24), and orbital arteriography
(Figures 17-25 and 17-26).
· Fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of orbital contents for
cytologic analysis or culture. Guiding these procedures with
ultrasound or CT imaging has allowed many orbital lesions
to be characterized without resorting to surgical exploration.
· Surgical orbital exploration with or without preservation of
the globe
Localization of Foreign Bodies
Depending on the type of foreign body, ultrasonography or
 radiography can be used to localize a foreign body. For radio-
 Figure 17-23. Contrast orbitography. Lateral racliograph with the needle in
position in the orbital cone after injection of 4 ml of contrast meclium. The
graphy a reference ring of wire may be placed at the limbus
cone is well filled, with leakage ventrally. A wire marker ring is placedl at the 
(see Figure 17-23); radiographs are taken at four different
lirmbus. (From Munger R], Ackerman N [1978]: Retrobulbar injections in
angles (lateral, ventrodorsal, oblique, frontal) in an attempt to 
the dog: a cormparison of three techniques. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 14:490.)
360
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Orbital Cellulitis and Retrobulbar Abscess
 Orbital cellulitis and retrobulbar abscess occur most commonly
in dogs and cats.
ETiOLOGY. Although retrobulbar abscess is common, its
etiology is poorly understood and is not always confrmed. It is
assumed to be a bacterial infection, either of hematogenous
origin or due to penetrating injury from the oral cavity in
association with a foreign body. Mixed flora or no growth is a
common finding on aerobic bacterial culture, and in many cases 
anaerobic culture testing methods are required in order to
demonstrate the organisms. Aspergillus spp. and Penicillium
spp. have been isolated from orbital cellulitis in cats, and
Pasteurella spp. have been isolated from both dogs and cats.
The process begins as orbital cellulitis; then localization occurs
and an abscess may form. At the stage of cellulitis, the clinical
signs are less extreme; that is, pain may be less, oral signs non-
existent, and diagnosis more difficult.
 CLINICAL SIGNS. The most important clinical signs of retro-
bulbar abscess/cellulitis are as follows:
Exophthalmos (Figure 17-27)
· Periorbital swelling
 Pain on opening the mouth (often extreme)
 Fluctuating red swelling in the oral mucous membrane
behind last upper molar (Figure 17-28)
 Protrusion of the third eyelid
· Chemosis, which is usually unilateral
·Pyrexia
·Anorexia
· Leukocytosis
·Acute onset (usual)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. Retrobulbar abscess must be
 distinguished from orbital cellulitis (a generalized diffuse inflam-
mation of orbital tissues), which has similar but less marked
 clinical signs. In orbital cellulitis pain is less evident, pyrexia
and anorexia are not as pronounced, and less exudate or no
exudate is present on orbital drainage. Orbital celulitis may
 progress to retrobulbar abscess. Retrobulbar abscess may be
distinguished from other causes of exophthalmos on the basis
Figure 17-24. Contrast orbitography. A, Ventrocorsal radliograph of a cat
of its acute onset, pain, and, often, pyrexia. Leukocytosis with
after injection of contrast medlium. The cat was blind and exhibited
neutrophilia may be present.
ophthalmoplegia and exophthalmos (orbital fissure syncrome). A filling
clefect (arrows), present at the left orbital apex, is clue to orbital extension
of an intracranial lymphosarcoma involving the optic chiasm. B, A lateral
 Clinical signs of retrobulbar abscess are often pathognomonic.
oblique view of the skull showing a filling clefect (arrows) at the apex of
the orbit. (Courtesy Dr. R. Munger.)
TREATMENT. Orbital cellulitis and retrobulbar abscess are
treated similarly, as follows:
differentiate ocular and orbital foreign bodies and determine
1. Drainage via an incision behind the last upper molar (Figure
their location. Nonmetallic foreign bodies tend to be better
 17-29). A small incision is made through only the oral
visualized ultrasonographically. Porcupine quills, which are
mucosa. A pair of curved Crile hemostats or a blunt probe
common orbital foreign bodies in dogs in certain geographic 
(Figure 17-30) is inserted and opened in small steps until the
areas, have a characteristic double-banded, linear hyperechoic
orbit is reached. Orbital tissues should not be crushed or cut
appearance useful in identifying, localizing, and establishing a
during this process so as to avoid damage to the optic nerve
 prognosis. Wooden slivers, however, are not easily visualized
or orbital vasculature. This technique allows pockets of
with either technique.
exudate to be drained while limiting damage to the orbit.
 Considerable amounts of exudate under pressure may be
ORBITAL DISEASES
released, and dependent drainage to the oral cavity is
established. Although exudate is frequently not obtained,
A summary of orbital diseases, classified by type, is given in
drainage is an important prerequisite step in treatment.
Table 17-2.
 Failure to locate exudate indicates that the process is still at
OrgIt |
361
Figure 17-25. Lateral canine orbital arteriogram proclucec after
a retrograde injection of 5 to 10 ml of contrast medlium into 
the infraorbital artery. The arteries of the eye and orbit are
outlined. A, Infraorbital artery; B, sphenopalatine artery;
C,majr palatine artery;D,maxillaryartry;,alar arry
F, anterior deep temporal artery; C, orbital artery; H, ventral
muscular branch; i, external ethmoid artery; /, external
ophthalmic artery; K, external carotid artery; L, superficial
temporal artery; M, posterior cleep temporal artery;
N, mandlibular alveolar artery; O, choroidl; P ciliary body;
Q cannula.(From Ticer JW[1984]: Radliographic Technique in
 Small Animal Practice. Saunclers, Philacleiphia.)
G
B
Figure 17-26. Canine orbital arteriogram, open-mouth view, produced
Figure 17-27.Retrobulbar abscess in a springer spaniel. A, Frontal view.
after a retrogracle injection of contrast meclium into the infraorbital artery.
B, Dorsal view. Note the exophthalmia of the right globe.
 Displacement, filling defects, and increased vascularity incicate the
C, major palatine artery; D, sphenopalatine artery; E, orbital artery;
Clinical improvement is usually rapid, occurring within
F, external ethmoid artery; C, external ophthalmic artery. (From Ticer JW
[1984]: Radliographic Technique in Srmall Animal Practice. Saunclers,
24 hours of treatment. In resistant cases or cases in which a
Philadelphia.)
retained foreign body is suspected, exploratory orbitotomy may
be necessary.
the cellulitis stage. Ultrasonographic imaging may
facilitate draining an orbital abscess.
Cystic Orbital and Periocular Lesions
 2. Exudate, if present, is collected for cytologic analysis and
 possibly aerobic/anaerobic culture.
Orbital and periocular cysts are uncommon. Numerous lesions and
 3. The orbit is gently flushed with sterile saline via the oral
 tissues may cause cystic swellings, including dacryops (cyst of the
 incision and the use of a blunt cannula. The wound in the 
 lacrimal sac), zygomatic and lacrimal mucoceles in both dogs and
mouth is left open.
cats, retained glandular tissue from the lacrimal or third eyelid
 4. Systemic antibiotics (e.g., amoxicillin/clavulanic acid,
 gland after enucleation or trauma, sialocele after transplantation of
 clindamycin, metronidazole) are administered for 7 to 14 days.
the parotid ducts, and mucocele of the nasal and frontal sinuses,
 5. Soft foods are fed during the recovery period.
especially in association with neoplasia. Abscesses of the
362
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 17-2 | Summary of Orbital Diseases 
TYPE OF DISORDER
CONDITON
CLINICAL SIGNS
 Developmental abnormalities
1. Shallow orbit (brachycephalic breeds)
1. Exophthalmos, exposure keratitis, corneal ulceration,
pigmentation
 2. Microphthalmia, anophthalmia
2. Small or no globe, narrow palpebral fissure,
 prominent third eyelid, epiphora, blindness 
3. Hyclrocephalus with orbital malformation
3. Exotropia, hypotropia, poor vision 
4. Euryblepharon 
4. long palpebral fissure resulting in apparent 
 exophthalmos
 5. Orbital arteriovenous fistula
 5. Exophthalmos, fremitus, pulse detectable 
("exophthalmos pulsans")
Trauma
1. Hemorrhages
1. Subconjunctival and episcleral hemorrhages;
 retrobuibar hemorrhage with exophthalmos 0r
proptosis
 2. Penetrating foreign bodies (grass awns.
 2. Discharging sinus fluid through the conjunctiva,
 needles, and so on from mouth!
 periocular skin, buccal mucosa; pain on opening
mouth
 3. Orbital fractures
 3. Pain, crepitus, skin abrasions, dlisplacement of globe 
 Infections
1. Bacteria, fungi
1. Ocular dlischarge usually secondary to penetrating
les jeio an eaountuos woaj saipog uslanoy
sinusitis, rhinitis, or infections of roots of teeth 
2. Parasites (Dirofitaria immitis; Pneumonyssus
 2. Cranulomatous lesions due to wancdering larvae.
caninum)
e.g., Dirofiaria (rare), or extension of infection from
nasal cavity (Pneumonyssus)
 Neoplasia 
1. Primary orbital neoplasms—sarcoma,
1. Exophthalmos, exposure keratitis, strabismus,
 meningioma, acenocarcinoma from nasal
displacement of globe
 cavity, lymphosarcoma in cattle
 2. Metastatic or invasive neoplasms 
2. As for (1), plus nasal or neurologic signs
Miscellaneous condlitions
1. Zygomatic mucocele
1. Exophthalmos, strabismus, swelling in any part of
 orbit, or behind upper last molar tooth
2. Infections of roots of teeth (especially
 2. Discharging fistula beneath eye in dogs 
carnassial}
3. Dehyclration
3. Enophthalmos, passive protrusion of thirc eyelid 
4. Eosinophilic myositis 
4.Exophthaospainwithyphagiinacuteta
 enophthalmos potentiated by opening mouth in
 chronic stage when temporal muscles have atrophied 
5. Horner's syndrome
5. Enophthalmos, miosis, ptosis, protrusion of third
eyelid, ipsilateral sweating in horses, lermal
vasodlilation, and hyperthermia
6. Orbital emphysema 
 6. Crepitus beneath the conjunctiva 
Modifed from Smith JS (1977): Diseases of the orbit, in Kirk RW (editor): Current Veterinary Therapy VI. Saunders, Philadelphia.
lacrimal sac and protrusion of orbital fat must be distinguished
from cysts because their appearances may be similar.
Frontaf Sinus Mvcocele
Obstruction of drainage of the frontal sinus into the nasal
cavity, combined with creation of an opening from the frontal
sinus into the orbit either by trauma, malformation, or other
disease processes such as neoplasia, may result in passage of
sinus secretions into the orbit via the medial orbital wall. This 
often results in orbital swelling and orbital pain; if the tract
reaches the conjunctiva or periocular skin, there may be a pro-
fuse intermittent ocular discharge. The condition often
 responds temporarily to antibiotic therapy. Diagnosis is made
via radiography, CT, or MRI of the frontal sinus, although in
Figure 17-28. A fluctuating swelling cauclal to the last upper molar in a
select cases a blunt instrument can be passed from the con-
dlog with a retrobulbar abscess is indlicated by arrows.
 junctival fistula into the sinus. It is imperative to rule out frontal
 sinus neoplasia or fungal infection in patients with mucoceles.
Treatment is aimed at establishing drainage from the frontal
sinus to the nasal cavity via frontal sinusotomy. Communi-
cations between the frontal sinus and the orbit secondary to
 osteomyelitis may be repaired with a temporalis muscle flap.
OrBIT|
363
are uncommon but must be considered in the differential diag-
nosis of exophthalmos and space-occupying orbital lesions.
CLINICAL SIGNS. The clinical signs of zygomatic mucocele
are as follows:
·Orbital swelling
·Exophthalmos
·Protrusion of the third eyelid
· Protrusion of the oral mucous membrane behind the last
upper molar tooth
· Protrusion of a mass beneath the conjunctiva in the inferior
temporal or nasal conjunctival fornix
Position of the mucocele within the orbit is variable, with
the clinical signs varying accordingly. Aspiration of fluid from
within the sac may reveal tenacious, straw-colored, honey-like
liquid. Zygomatic mucoceles are usually painless. A zygomatic
sialogram may be used to outline the mucocele for planning of
 surgical removal. Prior to removal, the gland may be outlined
by injection of methylene blue up a zygomatic duct.
TREATMENT. Zygomatic mucoceles are best removed by
 localized orbitotomy depending on the location of the mass, as
follows:
Figure 17-29. To clrain a retrobulbar abscess, an incision approximately
 1. For masses protruding beneath the conjunctiva behind the
1 cm long (incicated by dotted fine) is macle through the oral mucosa with
 lower lid: transconjunctival approach via the inferior
 a scalpel blacle cauclal to the last molar.
conjunctival cul de sac behind the lower eyelid 
 2. For masses protruding beneath the conjunctiva laterally: an
 approach posterior to the orbital ligament and dorsal to the
 Zygomatic arch. If necessary the orbital ligament may be
 transected and resutured.
 3. For bulging of the oral mucous membrane, an oral
approach behind the last upper molar tooth. If feasible, the
 mass may be marsupialized into the oral cavity.
Neoplasms and Space-Occupying Lesions
 Numerous orbital neoplasms have been described in domestic
species, including meningioma, lymphosarcoma, adeno-
carcinoma, fbrosarcoma, multilobular osteosarcoma, glioma,
myxoma, squamous cell carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and
canine lymphoid pseudotumor (Figure 17-31). Retrobulbar
neoplasms are uncommon and, in the early stages, present a
diagnostic challenge. The most common primary orbital
neoplasm in the dog, meningioma is usually a benign solitary
neoplasm that grows slowly and produces pressure atrophy.
Corect diagnosis is essential to effective treatment.
CLINICAL SIGNs. The clinical signs of orbital neoplasms are
as follows:
· Exophthalmos; usually unilateral, slowly progressive, and
painless
· Intraconal deviation, displacement, or reduced motility of
Figure 17-30. A pair of hemostats are insertec in the wounc anc opened 
the globe (see Figure 17-18)
in small steps to establish clrainage frorm the orbit into the oral cavity.
· Periocular swelling
(Courtesy Dr. Ellison Bentley.)
· Prominent or protruding third eyelid
· Blindness in some cases; useful to differentiate from ocular
 enlargement due to glaucoma, for which blindness is the
Zygomatic Mucocele
rule
A mucocele is caused by leakage of saliva from a gland or duct,
· Secondary exposure keratitis
with consequent inflammation and fbrous tissue reaction to the 
· Retinal folds or detachment on ophthalmoscopic 
saliva. The condition is most commonly seen in dogs, occurring
 examination, due to indentation of the globe by the
both spontaneously and after head trauma. Zygomatic mucoceles
neoplasm
364
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
tumor type, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and radiation may
be combined with surgery to control the neoplastic tissue but
are ineffective alone. If radiation therapy is used, the ocular
 complications must be considered (see Chapter 3).
Multilobular Osteoma
 Synonyms: Chondroma rodens, calcifying aponeurotic fibroma.
Multilobular osteoma occurs in dogs, cats, and horses, in
which it arises from the flat bones of the skull. Exophthalmos
 is the most common sign in the orbit. Diagnosis is made by
either histopathology or recognition of the radiographic signs
(homogenous stippling, evenly undulating well-demarcated
borders with a highly radiodense granular appearance). These
localized multilobular osteoma can be removed surgically.
Growth is slow, metastasis is late, and local recurrence can be
expected if removal is incomplete. The clinical signs and behavior
of multilobular osteoma are similar to those of parosteal
osteosarcoma, a rare tumor of the periosteum that has the
 potential to metastasize, usually later in its course.
Periorbital Fractures
 Periorbital contusions and fractures, which occur most commonly
 in horses, are caused by trauma, uncontrolled or unrestrained
behavior, or violent recovery from anesthesia. Diagnosis is more
accurate through physical examination performed before and
during surgical exploration than with radiography. Clinical
signs include pain, crepitus, exophthalmos, periorbital swell-
ing, abrasions, corneal ulceration, uveitis, blepharospasm,
ocular entrapment, and facial asymmetry. Fracture of the
supraorbital process with extension nasally to the supraorbital
foramen and fractures of the lacrimal bone at the nasal canthus
may damage the nasal mucosa, causing epistaxis. Bony fragments
 projecting into the orbit and causing pain, ocular entrapment,
 and exophthalmos have been observed with fractures near the
B
 medial canthus. The nasolacrimal duct may also be damaged.
Figure 17-31. A, Transverse computed tomographic scan of a cat with a
If fractures are demonstrated on oblique radiographs or on
orbital tumor. The left orbit is "full," anc the globe is cleviated anteriorly.
surgical exploration, small pieces of bone may be removed.
B, Reconstructec view of the same image set from above. The retrobulbar
mass is clearly visible. (Courtesy University
/ of Wisconsin-Maclison
The conjunctival fornices are palpated, and any bony fragments 
Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.
palpable in the orbit are removed or surgically replaced. Larger
fragments may be wired in place, pinned, or treated con-
servatively by restriction of the horse for 4 to 6 weeks. Early
surgical treatment prevents fixation of fragments in abnormal
· Dilated or eccentric pupil
· Papilledema
positions by formation of fibrous tissue. Solid synthetic polymers
(e.g., silicone or polytetrafluoroethylene [Teflon] sheets) may
·Nasal discharge
be inserted and contoured to restore facial profles for cosmesis.
TREATMENT. Thorough surgical removal is the treatment of
Associated ocular injuries, including corneal ulceration and
choice In dogs, approximately 90% of orbital tumors are malig-
traumatic uveitis, are common and must be addressed. Con-
 nant, and complete surgical excision is required. If specialized
tusions and associated edema are treated prophylactically with
surgical assistance is available, an exploratory orbitotomy via
systemic penicillin/gentamicin and allowed to resolve sponta-
zygomatic arch resection is recommended. This technique
 neously. If necessary, tetanus antiserum should be given.
allows exploration and removal of the tumor mass, if possible,
with retention of the globe. If the neoplasm is invasive,
 Early surgical intervention in equine periorbital fractures yields
exenteration of the orbit may be required. In advanced cases
superior cosmetic results.
with invasion into the bony orbital boundaries, radical
orbitectomy may be considered. Orbitotomy allows removal of 
benign and nonneoplastic lesions (e.g., zygomatic salivary
 Eosinophilic Myositis
gland mucocele) without loss of the eye. If the lesion is small
 or well localized by diagnostic procedures, a transconjunctival 
Eosinophilic myositis occurs most commonly in German
approach or less radical orbitotomy is useful. Depending on
shepherds and Weimaraners but is a rare disorder. It usually can
OrBIt|
365
be differentiated from orbital neoplasia, orbital cellulitis, and
which the air may have entered the orbit via the nasolacrimal
retrobulbar abscess because it is bilateral.
duct during labored respirations after a routine enucleation.
The clinical signs of eosinophilic myositis are as follows:
 If emphysema is present, a radiographic study of the sinuses
is indicated. The animal is started on systemic antibiotics to
· Typically bilaterally symmetrical swelling of masseter,
 prevent infection of the orbit via the paranasal sinuses. In reported
temporal, and pterygoid muscles
cases, spontaneous resolution occurred. If the condition occurs
· Exophthalmos (variable in extent)
after enucleation, the nasolacrimal duct may be ligated at its
· Chemosis/eyelid edema
·Protrusion of the third eyelid
orbital exit.
· Pain on opening the jaws fully
Proptosis of the Globe
 Some animals die during acute attacks; in others the disease
resolves, but recurrences are common. Attacks may last 10 to
 Proptosis constitutes an ocular emergency, and its treatment
 21 days. Eosinophilia is not a constant sign. The disease may
 and prognosis are discussed in Chapter 19.
be diagnosed from clinical signs, electromyography, and
temporal muscle biopsy. The etiology of eosinophilic myositis
OPHTHALMIC MANIFESTATIONS OF
is unknown. High doses of systemic steroids and azathioprine
DENTAL DISEASE
have been recommended for treatment. After recovery, temporal
and masseter muscle atrophy may occur, together with atrophy
Because of the proximity of the roots of the teeth to the orbit,
of orbital fat and enophthalmos. Affected animals often have
ocular manifestations and complications of dental disease are
difficulty opening the mouth as a result of scarring of the
common and are frequently overlooked. The most common
 muscles of mastication.
 ocular signs are pain and swelling anterior and inferior to the
globe secondary to an abscess of the upper fourth premolar in
Extraocular Muscle Myositis
dogs. The globe may be enophthalmic, and the third eyelid may
 protrude. Additionally, dental disease has been associated with
An uncommon, presumably immune-mediated disorder, myositis
chronic uveitis and conjunctivitis in dogs and cats.
of extraocular muscles affects young (usually less than 1 year)
dogs of many breeds, but especially golden retrievers. It is
SURGICAL PROCEDURES
characterized by chemosis and bilateral exophthalmia in which
the globes are deviated directly along the direction of the
The most common orbital procedures are for removal of the
orbital axis (Figure 17-32). Occasionally vision loss occurs if
whole or part of the globe or orbital contents; they are defined
massively swollen extraocular muscles compress the optic
as follows (Figure 17-33):
nerve. Histologic analysis shows that extraocular muscles (with
· Enucleation: Removal of the globe, third eyelid,
the exception of the retractor bulbi, which is spared) are
 conjunctiva, and eyelids
infiltrated by lymphocytes and histiocytes. Therapy consists of
· Exenteration: Removal of the globe, orbital contents, and
systemic corticosteroids, with the dosage slowly tapered as the
eyelids
condition resolves. Azathioprine is an alternative drug for use
· Evisceration: Removal of the intraocular contents, uvea,
in resistant cases. Although in most animals the disease responds
lens, retina, vitreous, and eyelids
rapidly, recurrence is possible.
Orbital Emphysema
Enucleation
INDICATIONs. Enucleation is performed for the following
Orbital emphysema uncommonly occurs in dogs and cats after
trauma to the paranasal sinuses, with leakage of air into the
reasons:
orbit. The air is palpable as crepitus beneath the conjunctiva or
· Intraocular neoplasia
periocular skin. Orbital emphysema has been described, in
· Severe perforating ocular trauma with disruption and loss of
ocular contents. An evisceration with placement of
intraocular prosthesis can often be used instead to preserve
cosmetic appearance if desired.
· Uncontrollable endophthalmitis or panophthalmitis
· Intractable ocular pain, especially in glaucomatous eyes
· Owner inability or unwillingness to give long-term
 treatment to a blind eye to keep it comfortable
 Enucleation is an admission that therapeutic attempts to con-
 trol a pathologic process have failed. t is not used in lieu of a
correct diagnosis or treatment.
After enucleation, an intraorbital prosthesis may be used to
give a superior cosmetic result. Enucleation in a young animal
results in a slower rate of growth of the orbit and a decrease in
i sp pa paxu e un sislod asn nenoenxi zei an
the final orbital volume than in the other, normal orbit. This
two globes are equally exophthalmic and deviated along the orbital axis.
slower rate of growth is due to lack of orbital contents.
366
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Lateral Subconjunctival Enucleation Technique
The lateral subconjunctival approach to enucleation has the
advantage of giving better exposure of the optic nerve and
orbital vessels. It is used in dogs and cats. The technique
 proceeds as follows:
Removal of the
globe only
1. A lateral, 1- to 2-cm canthotomy is performed to improve
exposure (Figure 17-34, A).
2. The conjunctiva is grasped near the limbus with toothed
forceps, and a 360-degree perilimbal incision is made
beneath it (Figure 17-34, B).
A
3. The sclera is separated from the conjunctiva, Tenon's
capsule, and extraocular muscles with curved Metzenbaum
or Mayo scissors around to the optic nerve (Figure 17-34,
B). The lacrimal gland beneath the orbital ligament is left 
attached to the globe, if possible.
Removal of the globe 
4. The optic nerve may be severed with scissors or with an
and orbital contents
electrosurgical unit equipped with a tonsil snare
(Figure 17-34, C). Traction must not be placed on the
nerve, nor should it be twisted because twisting or traction
 may damage the optic and cause blindness in the 
 remaining eye, especially in cats. Traction on the
 extraocular muscles may result in a reduction in heart rate
(oculocardiac reflex), especially in horses and birds. A
ligature may be placed around the nerve, encircling the 
associated short and long posterior ciliary vessels before
B
their entry to the sclera. Often it is unnecessary to ligate 
the optic nerve in dogs and cats. The globe is removed and
 placed in fixative.
 5. An attempt is made to control arterial and venous
hemorrhage from the orbital cone with ligatures. If this is
impossible, one or two surgical sponges are placed
temporarily (5 minutes) in the orbit (Figure 17-34, D).
6. The third eyelid and gland are carefully removed
Removal of the
(Figure 17-34, D).
intraocular
7. Two to 3 mm of the lid margins are removed from the
contents only
lateral to the medial canthus (Figure 17-34, E).
 8. Conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule are closed with a
simple continuous suture of 3/0 or 4/0 absorbable material.
 After the conjunctiva has been almost closed, the
C
surgical sponges are removed and closure is completed.
Closure forms a seal to contain further hemorrhage
(Figure 17-34, F).
Figure 17-33. Diagrammatic representations of (A) enucleation, (B)
9. The lid incisions are closed with simple interrupted sutures
exenteration, and (C) evisceration.
of 4/0 or 5/0 nylon or polypropylene (Prolene)
(Figure 17-34, F). Postoperative swelling is not unusual
Replacement of orbital volume with prosthetic materials
(especially if continuing hemorrhage occurs) but resolves
after enucleation in a young animal tends to result in an
within 3 or 4 days. As clots within the orbit break down,
orbit that more closely approximates normal size. If a
bloody fluid may appear at the nostril, via the nasolacrimal
prosthesis is placed in the orbit of a young animal, a slightly
duct, on the third to fifth day, and owners should be
larger prosthesis is chosen than would be indicated by the
advised accordingly. Postoperative analgesia with oral
size of the contralateral eye, to allow for the stimulating
carprofen and morphine is advised in dogs; carprofen is
effect of the implant on orbital growth, and for normal orbital
not approved for use in cats.
growth.
There are numerous variations of enucleation techniques.
The emotional resistance of owners to enucleation should not
The lateral subconjunctival and transpalpebral approaches are
be underestimated.
described here. Preoperative use of oral carprofen 12 to
24 hours before surgery in dogs, and of intramuscular morphine
All enucleated globes should be submitted for histo-
(dogs) or butorphanol (dogs and cats) before anesthetic
pathologic examination to rule out an unsuspected disease
induction, is recommended. Postoperative analgesia for 2 to
 process, such as neoplasia (Figure 17-35) or lens capsule
3 days is also advised.
rupture.
ORBIT |
367
A
D
F
C
Figure 17-34. Enucleation. A, A lateral canthotomy is performecl. B, The
globe is dissected free from the conjunctiva via a perilimbal incision.
Extraocular muscle insertions and periorbita are dlissected from the globe
back to the optic nerve. No traction is placed on the globe or optic nerve.
C, The optic nerve is transectec near the globe anc the eye removed. D,
The cavityispackedwith spongesfortemporaryhemostasis,and thethid
eyelid is removed cormpletely. E, The lid margins are removedl. F, The
sponges are removed, and the conjunctiva is sutured with 3/0 or 4/0
G
absorbable material. G, The lid incision is sutured completely with 4/0 or
 5/0 nylon or polypropylene (Prolene).
Insertion of an Intraorbital Prosthesis
implant can be minimized by prophylactic use of systemic
bactericidal antibiotics. The size of the implant is determined
 Silicone or methyl methacrylate spheres may be used to prevent
by the depth and diameter of the orbit—generally 16 to 22 mm
unsightly postoperative depressions in the orbit (Figure 17-36).
in dogs and cats, up 35 mm in horses.
Insertion of an implant is a safe and inexpensive method of
 In some patients the intact sphere may simply be placed in
 improving postoperative appearance. An implant should not be
the orbit with acceptable cosmetic results. In many patients,
placed if the reason for enucleation was neoplasia outside the
however, shaping a silicone sphere to the contours of the orbit
globe or infection inside the globe, or if the patient has foci of 
offers a superior cosmetic result and puts less tension on the
possible hematogenous bacterial infection elsewhere (e.g.,
 skin incision. If a shaped sphere is to be used, the diameter of
severe periodontal or gingival disease, pyoderma, prostatitis,
the sphere is typically chosen according to how closely it
chronic otitis externa, or blepharitis). Bacterial invasion of the
 approximates the diameter of the orbit. One then determines
368
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
the proper depth of the sphere by placing it within the orbit and
beyond the orbital rim is then trimmed away with a clean
estimating the amount of the sphere required to approximate
horizontal slice with a No. 10 scalpel blade, and the sharp edges
the depth of the orbit (e.g., meet the orbital rim), allowing an
are smoothed and contoured with a Mayo scissors or scalpel
additional 1 to 2 mm for postoperative contraction of orbital
blade. The implant is inserted with the flat side uppermost. The 
tissues. The excess portion of the sphere that would project
implant is then secured firmly in place by suturing of the
 periorbital fascia with a continuous absorbable 3/0 suture. A
subcuticular suture layer and simple interrupted sutures close the
incision. The success rate with orbital prostheses in dogs is high
(98% to 99%), with a higher extrusion rate in cats (up to 5%).
Transpalpebral Enucleation-Exenteration Technique
Transpalpebral enucleation-exenteration, which can be used in
all species, differs from the lateral conjunctival approach in that 
the lids are sutured closed and dissection into the orbit is made
through the skin and initially outside the extraocular muscles.
Once the orbit is entered the extraocular muscles may be cut
free of the globe at their insertions on the sclera if only
an
enucleation is required, or the entire orbital contents may 
be
removed if an exenteration is appropriate. This approach is
preferable to a subconjunctival approach if the ocular surface is
infected or if ocular neoplasia has escaped from the globe. A
silicone sphere may be placed as previously described.
The transpalpebral approach is useful in the field for
enucleation of bovine eyes with advanced squamous cell
Figure 17-35. The importance of histopathologic examination of
carcinoma. The cow is restrained in a head gate or chute, or
enucleated globes. Amelanotic melanoma was seen histologically in the 
against a strong railing fence, and tranquilized with xylazine.
eye of this cat, which had a history of chronic, nonresponsive anterior
 The recommended method of local anesthesia is to infiltrate the
uveitis and seconclary glaucoma. (Courtesy University of Wisconsin-
upper and lower lids with 10 mL of lidocaine 1 to 1.5 cm from
Madlison Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
the margin, and to perform a four-point block consisting of
placing 5 to 10 mL of lidocaine into the orbit by retrobulbar
injection with a 5- or 6-cm needle at each of four sites adjacent to
the globe at the 12, 3, 6, and 9 o'clock positions (Figure 17-37).
Gently bending the needle prior to insertion into the orbit may
facilitate avoidance of the globe. An auriculopalpebral nerve
block may also be useful. This produces anesthesia, akinesia, and
exophthalmos, which aids in surgical exposure (Figure 17-38).
As the globe is removed, additional local anesthetic may be
 infltrated into orbital tissues as required. General anesthesia is
Figure 17-36. Preparation of the orbital implant. A, Approximately one
thircd of the silicone sphere is removed so that the flat surface protrucles
Figure 17-37. lnjection sites for local anesthesia prior to transpalpebral
1 to 2 mm above the level of the orbital rirm when placed in the orbit.
enucleation in cattle. Five to 10 ml of liclocaine is injectec at each site to
B and C, The cut edge is contoured and smoothed with Mayo scissors or
produce anesthesia and proptosis. The needle may be slightly curved
a scalpel blacle.
before injection to facilitate entry of the orbit anc avoidance of the globe.
ORBIT |
369
ocular neoplasms, an extension of the transpalpebral approach
is used, with wider removal of orbital tissues. If large amounts
of periocular tissues are also removed, the resulting skin defect
may be repaired with a caudal auricular axial pattem flap.
Evisceration and Intrascleral Prosthesis
Evisceration (see Figure 17-33, C)—removal of the contents of
B
the globe leaving only the corneoscleral shell—is appropriate
for insertion of an intrascleral prosthesis in dogs and cats and,
 occasionally, in horses (see later).
OCULAR PROSTHESES
 Ocular prostheses are of the following three types:
· Intrascleral: Used in the treatment of chronic glaucoma and
C
D
to prevent phthisis bulbi in the early stages after severe trauma
· Extrascleral: Placement of porcelain shell on the surface of
the globe for cosmesis
· Intraorbital: Used to replace an enucleated globe
Intrascleral Prosthesis
E
 In the past, intrascleral prostheses in dogs and cats were associ-
Figure 17-38. Transpalpebral enucleation/exenteration. A, The eyelics are
ated with persistent infection and extrusion. Use of a silicone
sutured with a simple continuous suture tied at either end and are held
sphere and careful technique have greatly reduced these
with hemostats. B, A periocular incision is mace, and cissection is
performed initially outsicle the conjunctival sac and extraocular muscles.
complications. The procedure is particularly useful in the 
If an enucleation is to be performed, the extraocular muscles are severed
 treatment of blind glaucomatous eyes and after severe ocular
 at their insertion on the sclera. lf an exenteration is to be performed, the
trauma, in the absence of infection or severe contamination, to
clissection continues to the orbital apex. C anc D, The optic nerve and
associated vessels may be cut with scissors or clamped, ligated, and
 prevent phthisis bulbi. The diameter of the implant is equal
transected.E,Theremainingperiorbita and ceep subcutaneous tissueare
to the horizontal corneal diameter of the contralateral normal
sutured with 3/0 or 4/0 absorbable suture, anc the skin is closed with
eye plus 1 mm.
simple interrupted nonabsorbable sutures appropriate for the size and
After thorough evisceration of the intraocular contents, a
environment of the patient.
silicone sphere (Figure 17-41) is placed in the corneoscleral
shell. Care should be taken to avoid trauma to the corneal
used in dogs, cats, and horses. The plane of dissection in this
endothelium if possible. After insertion into buphthalmic eyes,
technique may be extended to perform an exenteration.
the sclera and cornea contract to the size of the prosthesis, the
time for contraction depending on the original size of the eye.
Enucleation in Birds
 In very large eyes, contraction may take up to 6 weeks, and
 often the cornea has a bluish cast postoperatively. If the cornea
Techniques for removal of the eye in birds are modified
is in better condition before surgery it may remain clear, but
because of the presence of scleral ossicles and the limited space
even then, corneal vascularization in the 2 to 3 weeks after
in the avian orbit, into which the eye fits snugly. A transaural
insertion of the prosthesis is not uncommon. This vascularization
approach is suitable for owls (Figure 17-39), which allows
resolves over the first postoperative 6 weeks but may alarm
retention of the globe for histologic analysis, and a globe-
owners and therefore must be explained to them in advance. After
 collapsing technique is suitable for all birds, although it may
insertion the cornea frequently pigments, usually with an
interfere with histologic examination (Figure 17-40). Meticulous
improved cosmetic outcome, but the extent of pigmentation is
hemostasis (including cautery, bovine thrombin, absorbable
unpredictable. The complication rate with this procedure is also
gelatin sponges, chilled saline, etc.) is also required for
low when it is performed in correctly chosen cases. Compli-
enucleation in a bird, because the large orbits are capable of
 cations include comeal mineralization, ulceration, extrusion of
sequestering large fractions of the animal's blood volume.
 the implant, and keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Although implants of
 Traction on the extraocular muscles is to be avoided in birds
different colors are available, the cosmetic result in cats is
because it could invoke a lethal oculocardiac reflex.
generally less satisfactory than that seen in dogs with dark irides
because of the normal bright coloration of the feline iris and a
vertically elliptical pupil. In select cases, especially in cats,
Exenteration
"pupils" may be tattooed onto the comea to improve cosmesis.
Exenteration refers to removal of the globe and as much of the
ocular contents as possible. It is performed in cases of orbital
Extrascleral (Shell) Prosthesis
infection, orbital neoplasia, and ocular neoplasia that has
extended beyond the globe. For orbital neoplasms, far better
 The extrascleral prosthesis, as commonly used in humans, is a
exposure is gained for exenteration by lateral orbitotomy. For
porcelain shell inserted into the conjunctival sac over a
370
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
5
6
7
 Figure 17-39. Proceclure for avian enucleation. I, The birc is anesthetized and placed in lateral recumbency. The
feathers over the orbital and auricular regions are plucked, and the area is prepared for aseptic surgery. Two stay
sutures of 4/0 silk are placed in the lid margins. The anterior auricular margin is extencled rostrally to visualize
the posterior aspect of the globe. The incision line is inclicatecl by the clashec line. 2, A small scalpel blacle is
usedl to perform a lateral canthotomy that extencls through the anterior auricular margin to the junction of the
ue enane aaue au ne paanoua s! lassa leus  ssaod eanod au ym a engn
Hemorrhage from this vessel can be controllec with electrocautery. The incision passes through conjunctiva and
an extension of periorbital fascia, which is the equivalent of Tenon's capsule. 3, The skin is gently dlissected free,
exposing the posteriorlimit of thetubularglove.A360-cegree subconjunctivaldissection isextenced posteriorly
necessary to mobilize the globe. 4, A finger is placed at the limbus, and pressure is applied mecially while a
s1 des e layy 's suawala eigqao Auog au pue agos ay uaamag des e ajean o pasn s! apelg ladiens leus
Created, tenotomy scissors are used to dlissect the globe free of its extraocular elements and to sever the optic
nerve. The globe is then celivered through the lateral aperture. Some bleedling will occur as the vessels are
severed, but blood loss will be minimized if the surgeon rapicdly proceedls with removal of the globe. Blooc loss 
then can be controlled by packing of the orbit with gauze pacls. The gauze is removed before closure. 6, After
hemostasis is obtained,the membrana nictitans and conjunctiva are removed, anc a 2-mm strip of lid marginis
resected. Closure is accormplished with the use of fine absorbable suture material (5/0 to 7/0) in a simple
interrupted pattern. The fine suture is used to recreate the anterior auricular margin. The aural closure is then
et al. [1983|: Enucleation in birds of prey. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:1234.)]
disfigured cornea or phthisical globe. Typically an eye (i.e.,
Intraorbital Prosthesis
conjunctiva, cormea, and iris) is painted onto the extemal surface
of the shell, although in some animals the dark conformer can
See earlier discussion of intraorbital prosthesis insertion in the
be cosmetically acceptable in and of itself (Figure 17-42). Shell 
 enucleation section.
 prostheses are used mainly in horses but are available for dogs.
The manufacture and insertion of a shell are time consuming
ORBITOTOMYANDORBITECTOMY
and expensive but the shell has gratifying results for clients 
 prepared to bear the cost and time commitment. Each shell is
 A detailed discussion of orbitotomy techniques is beyond the
individually cast to fit the affected eye, fitted over a period of 
scope of this text, as the procedure is performed by veterinary
several weeks, then painted to match the remaining eye. The
services of a specially trained oculist are invaluable. After
tive basis. The choice of approach to the orbit depends on the
insertion the shell must be removed daily and washed by the
size and position of the lesion being excised, as follows:
owner (a relatively simple procedure in a tractable horse). A
technique has also been described for insertion of a customized
· Superior, medial, and lateral transconjunctival approaches are 
 prosthesis into a bed of polyvinylsiloxane within the orbit of
used for small lesions anterior to the equator of the globe.
fish to improve appearance and allow public display after
Limited orbitotomy involving transection of the orbital
disfiguring eye disorders.
ligament is used when limited exposure to the orbit is
ORBIT|
371
Figure 17-42. Extrascleral (shell) prosthesis in a horse. A custom-macle
prosthesis that fits between the conjunctival fornices may be placecl over
unsightly phthisical globes or after enucleation. The prosthesis may be
simpleasinhiscase,ranculistmaypaintacosmeticalconvining
eye on a porcelain shell. (Courtesy University of Wisconsin-Maclison
Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
Figure 1740. Globe-collapsing procedure for enucleation. 1, The bird is
anesthetized anc placed in lateral recumbency. The orbital region
placed under the membrana nictitans and lower lidl. A lateral canthotomy
extencls corsal to the anterior auricular margin. 2, A 180-clegree corsal
limbalncisionismaeanastaysutureisplacedntheincisedcorea
membrana nictitans, and periorbital fascia. 3, The region cleep to the
auricular skin is gently unclerminedl. 4, Mayo scissors are placed carefully
between the uveal tract anc sclera so that only the sclera anc its
margins of the sclera inward, allowing access to the posterior aspect of the
orbit. To prevent clamage to the optic chiasm, excessive traction shoulc be
avoiclecl. The extraocular attachments to the globe anc the optic nerve are
severed, anc the eye is removed. 6, The conjunctiva anc membrana
nictitans are removed, and a 2-mm strip of lid margin is resected. Closure 
is accomplished with the use of a fine (5/0 to 7/0) absorbable suture in a
simple interrupted pattern. (Moclified from Murphy C], et al. [1983]:
Enucleation in birds of prey. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:1234.)
Batih
Figure 17-43. Exposure of the inferior lateral orbit by lirmited orbitotomy.
The globe, zygomatic salivary gland, and transected orbital ligament are
visible. (Modified from Bistner Sl, et al.[1977l: Atlas of Veterinary
Ophthalmic Surgery. Saunclers, Philaclelphia.)
Figure 17-41. Postoperative appearance of an intrascleral prosthesis 
(right eye).
372
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
required (Figure 17-43), as for removal of a well-delineated
muscle flaps and the medial mucosa of the lip may be
zygomatic mucocele.
used to reconstruct orbital margins, protect exposed
 Orbitotomy with zygomatic arch resection is used to
brain, and reestablish oral, nasal, and orbital cavities.
completely expose the orbit, as for neoplasia (Figure 17-44).
Adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy may
 Extensive partial and total orbitectomy is used for invasive
be useful for osteosarcomas, squamous cell carcinomas,
periorbital neoplasms, such as multilobular osteosarcomas
and hemangiomas of the orbit because of the
and squamous cell carcinomas (Figure 17-45). Temporalis
tendency for both local recurrence and metastasis,
although protocols based on prospective studies are
unavailable.
Temporalis Muscle Flap
The temporalis muscle originates from the parietal, temporal,
frontal, and occipital bones and inserts onto the coronoid pro-
cess of the mandible. It is the largest muscle in the head of the
dog. The muscle is covered by a strong fascial sheet and
supplied by the superficial temporal artery. Although the pro-
cess is time consuming and technically challenging to perform,
flaps from the temporalis muscle have been used to reconstruct
the lateral wall of the calvarium, orbital rim, and the medial
wall of the orbit. In cats, such flaps are used to obliterate the
Figure 17-44. Exposure of cdeep orbital tissues by orbitotomy with
space within the frontal sinus, in combination with autogenous
zygomatic arch resection.
fat grafts.
Superior
Inferior
Total
Figure 17-45. Diagrammatic examples of surgical resections usec to perform an orbitectomy. As incicated, the
top and micldlle rows illustrate superior anc inferior partial orbitectomies, respectively. The bottom row illustrates
total orbitectomy. (Moclifiedl from O'Brien MG, et al. [1996l: Total and partial orbitectomy for the treatment of
periorbital tumors in 24 clogs anc cats: a retrospective stucly. Vet Surg 25:471.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gilger BC, et al. (1992): Orbital neoplasia in cats: 21 cases (1974-1990).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 20l:1083
 Adams WM, et al. (1998): An accelerated technique for irradiation of
Hakanson N (1994): Frontal sinus mucocele in a dog presenting with
 malignant canine nasal and paranasal sinus tumors. Vet Radiol Ulrasound
intermittent profuse ocular discharge. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 4:34.
HamorRE,etal.(1993):Useof orbital mplantsafterenucleationinogs,
39:475.
Bellhorn RW (1972): Enucleation tec hmique: a lateral approach. JI Am Anim
horses, and cats: 161 cases (1980-1990). I Am Vet Med Assoc 203:701.
Hosp Assoc 8:59.
  o    a o  a   
Bentley JF,et al. (1991): Use of a temporalis muscle flap in reconstruchion of
and humans. Adv Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg 9: 1.
the calvarium and orbital rim in a dog. JI Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:463.
Kern TJ (1985): Orbital neoplasia in 23 dogs. JAm Vet Med Assoc 186:489.
Calia CM, et al. (1994): The use of computed tomogTaphy scan for the
Lavach JD, et al. (1984): Dacryocysibis in dogs: a review of twenty two
evaluation of orbital disease in cats and dogs.VetComp Ophthalmol 4:24.
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:463.
Caron JP,et al.(1986):Perorbital skull fractures in five horses.JAm Vet
Marin CL, et al. (1987): Cystic lesions of the periorbital region. Comp Cont
Med Assoc 188:280.
Ed 9:1022.
Carpenter JL, et al. (1989): Canine bilateral extraocular polymyositis.
Mason DR, et al. (2001): Ultasonographic fndings in 50 dogs with
Vet Pathol 26:510.
Tetrobulbar disease. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:557.
Diesem C(1975), in Getty R (editor): Sisson and Grossman’s the Anatomy of
MeekLA(1988Intraocular prosthesisin ahorseJAmVetMed Assoc
the Domeshic Animals, Sth ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.
13:343.
Duke-Elder S (1958): System of Ophthalmology, Voi I: The Eye in Evolution.
H. Kimpton, London.
 orbit of the dog and cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35: 102.
Evans HE (1993): Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed. Saunders,
Mughannam A, Reinke JD (1994): Two cosmetic techniques for enucleation
 Philadelphia.
Gilger BC,et al.(1994): Modifed lateral orbitotomy for removal of orbital
Murphy Ci, et al.(1983): Enucleation in birds of prey. I Am Vet Med Assoc
neoplasms in two dogs. Vet Surg 23:53.
183:1234.
ORBIT|
373
in fish. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:603.
and catssymptoms and diagmosis. Tierarztl Prax 23:306.
Nasisse MP, et al. (1988): Use of methy lmethacrylate orbital prostheses in
Slatter D, Basher T (2003): Orbit, in Slatter D (editor): Textbook of Small
dogs and cats: 78 cases (1980-1986). I Am Vet Med Assoc 192:539.
Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.
O'Brien MG,et al.(1996): Total and patial orbitectomy for the teatment of
periorbital tumors in 24 dogs and 6 cats: a relrospective study. Vet Surg
Med Assoc 175s:1179.
25:471.
Stades FC, et al. (2003): Suprasc leral removal of a foreign body from the
Penninck D,et al.(2001):Cross-sectional imaging techniques in veterinary
Tetobulbar muscle cone in two dogs. I Small Anim Pract 44: 17.
 ophthalmology. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16:22.
Stiles J,etal. (2003):Useof a caudal auricular axial patm flapinthree cats
Prince JH, et al. (1960): Anatomy and Histology of the Eye and Orbit in
 and one dog following orbital exenteration. Vet Ophthalmol 6:121.
Domestic Animals. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, IL.
Straw RC, et al. (1988): Multilobular osteosarcoma of the canine skull:
16 cases (1978-1988). I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1764.
dental disease in dogs in cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:215.
Tuner AS (1979): Surgical management of depressed factures of theequine
Ramsey DT, et al. (1994): Comparative value of diagmostic imaging
skull. Vet Surg 8:29.
tec hniques in a cat with exophthalmos. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 4: 198.
 y e e od q o  16l r  H a
Testoration of facial contour in a horse. I Am Vet Med Assoc I88:249.
Anim Pract 27:1215.
Chapter
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF
8
SYSTEMIC DISEASES
Itamar Aroch, Ron Ofri, and Gila A. Sutton
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC
DISEASES IN DOGS AND CATS
 DISEASES IN HORSES
 DISEASES IN RUMINANTS
 chapter for lists of systemic differential diagnosis of the various
 ystemic diseases commonly cause associated ocular lesions
ocular disorders.
and signs in all domestic species as well as in humans. Recog-
nition of ocular signs assists both ocular and systemic
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC
diagnosis, because the eye can be examined readily. Such
DISEASES IN DOGS AND CATS (Tables
recognition allows earlier and more accurate diagnosis of sys-
18-1 to 18-16)
temic disorders as well as more effective evaluation of treat-
Infectious Diseases
ment. Ocular signs of some of the less common systemic
 diseases are poorly documented. Therefore this chapter focuses
Canine Viral Diseases
on the ocular manifestations of the more common systemic
CANINE DISTEMPER. Distemper is a disease of wo rldwide
 diseases. Ocular manifestations of neoplastic, nutritional, and
prevalence afflicting many canids, including the dog. It is
dermatologic conditions as well as uncommon diseases are not 
caused by a paramyxovirus (Morbillivirus) designated canine
discussed in this chapter; the reader is referred to standard
distemper virus (CDV) that is spread by aerosol and droplet
 internal medicine, oncology, and dermatology texts for discus-
exposure.
sion of these diseases.
The systemic and ocular clinical signs vary with the stages
of the disease and depend on the immune status of the dog (i.e.,
Ocular examination is an essential part of a complete physical
age, vaccination status, individual variation), the virulence of
examination.
the virus, and environmental conditions. Most (50% to 70%) of 
the infections are subclinical.
This chapter is divided into three sections. The first deals with
The ocular signs are the
 earliest manifestations of the
ocular manifestations of systemic diseases in the dog and cat.
systemic disease; they include acute, mild to severe, bilateral,
Most of the diseases are discussed separately for these two
 serous to mucopurulent conjunctivitis, mostly with involvement
species. For some diseases, however, the discussion of both
of the palpebral conjunctiva. With the progression of disease,
species has been combined because the interspecies differences
os Aeu Aa eadde sulis [eunsauiansne roue Aonndsai
are minute; the heading of each subsection indicates the orien-
cause lacrimal gland adenitis with decreased tear production
tation of the discussion. The first section also includes a number
leading to blepharospasm, keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS),
of tables that provide systemic differential diagnosis for ocular
and possible cormeal ulceration. Corneal ulceration may be
signs in the two species. These tables are arranged in the
severe and may not respond well to routine therapy. KCS may
anatomic order of the ocular structures to which they refer (i.e.,
resolve after recovery from the systemic disease.
disorders of the eyelids, conjunctiva, cornea, sclera, uvea, etc.)
Anterior and posterior uveitis often accompany distemper
 in order to facilitate finding the list of differential diagnosis for
encephalomyelitis and may be observed even if the dog is
a given disorder. The following two sections, also containing
clinically asymptomatic for the latter. A high incidence (41%)
similar tables, are devoted to ocular manifestations of systemic
 of multifocal, nongranulomatous chorioretinitis has been found
 diseases in horses and ruminants.
 in the neurologic forms of canine distemper. Choroidal exuda-
It should be noted that for each systemic disease, the ocular
tion may induce retinal detachment. Retinal atrophy and scarring
 manifestations and their treatment are described rather briefly.
 are the chronic sequelae of chorioretinitis. In the tapetal fundus 
 For detailed discussion of these manifestations, the reader is
they are characteristically observed as circumscribed, hyper-
referred to the respective chapters in this book. Systemic
reflective areas with clumps of pigment in the center, whereas
 pathogenesis, signs, diagnosis, and treatment of the diseases
the nontapetal lesions are characterized by depigmentation (see
are discussed in greater detail. However, this discussion is not
Chapter 15, Figure 15-34).
 intended to replace the relevant textbooks. Rather,it is intended
CDV has a predilection for the central nervous system
as a teaching and diagnostic aid to students and practitioners
(CNS), including the central visual pathways. It may cause
who are also urged to consult the numerous tables in this
 inflammation or demyelinization of the optic nerve and tract,
374
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
375
Table 18-1 | Systemic Causes of Eyelid Disorders in the Dog and Cat
DISORDER
DOG
CAT
 Infectious blepharitis*
Dermatophytosis (Microsporum canis, Trichophyton spp.)
Bartonellosis (Bartonella hensetae, Bartonelfa spp.)
Leishmaniasis (Leishmania donovani, Leishmania infantum,
Dermatophytosis (Microsporum canis, Trichophyton spp.)
Leishmania chagasi)
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus neoformans)
Trypanosomiasis (Trypanosoma brucei, Trypanosoma vivax)
 Parasitic blepharitis*
 Demodicosis (Demodex canis)
Demodicosis (Demodex cati, Demodex gatoi)
Insect bites (spiders, fire ants, etc.)
Mange (Notoedres cati, Sarcoptes scabei var. canis)
Insect bites (spicers, fire ants, etc.)
 Immune-mediated 
Canine idliopathic granulomatous disease 
 Pemphigus complex 
blephar itis*
Pemphigus complex
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile pyoderma/juvenile cellulitis
Toxic blepharitis*
 Sulfonarmidle/trimethoprirm toxicity (in Doberman pinschers)
 Allergic blepharitis*
Atopy
Atopy
 Flea bite hypersensitivity
Food hypersensitivity
Flea bite hypersensitivity
 Miscellaneous causes 
 Zinc responsive clermatosis
 of blepharitis*
 Eye lid masses
Canine viral papillomatosis
Larval migrans (Cuterebra spp.)
Lymphoma
 Lymphoma
 Systemic histiocytosis
Ptosis
Pseudorabies
Horner's syndrome
Multifocal diseases affecting the oculomotor nucleus,
inclucing toxoplasmosis, distemper, mycosis, and 
 granulomatous meningoencephalitis
The sigsofblepharsaegeneralized (ie,not cause-secic); theynlude dmatis,alpecia,scales,custs,ucers of the skin,and conjuncivis,chmosi,
and congestion of the palpebral conjunchiva.
5 to 21 days after exposure and may be demonstrated in
cytologic smears. Immunofluorescence (IF) techniques for the
detection of these inclusion bodies may be used on different
cytologic smears, including conjunctival epithelial smears.
Recently, CDV amplicons were detected by reverse transcriptase-
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of conjunctival swabs of
all dogs experimentally with CDV, from day 3 to 14 after
infection. The detection rate of these amplicons in conjunctival
swabs was significantly higher during most of the experimental
period compared to other tissue samples. Ocular treatment,
which is essentially symptomatic, consists of topical ophthalmic
antibacterial preparations for conjunctivitis and corneal ulcers.
Cases of KCS may be treated with artificial tears, topical anti-
biotics, and lacromimetics. Treatment of severe corneal ulcer-
ation may require surgical intervention. Systemic and topical
steroids as well as topical atropine are indicated in cases of
uveitis. However, atropine should be used with extreme caution
if the animal is also suffering from KCS, and steroids may not
Figure 18-1. Optic neuritis in a dog. Note the blurry disc margins,
be used if the cornea is ulcerated. Systemic administration of
hemorrhages, and loss of cletail on the dlisc surface caused by eclema of
antinflammatory dosages of glucocorticosteroids is indicated
the nerve heacl. (Courtesy University of California, Davis, Veterinary
in an animal with acute optic neuritis following confirming
Ophthalmology Service Collection.)
 diagnosis of distemper, even if there is no other sign of clinical
disease.
lateral geniculate nucleus, optic radiations, and visual cortex.
INFECTIOUS CANINE HEPATITIS. Caused by canine
Patients may present with actue, bilateral blindness and fixed,
 adenovirus 1 (CAV-1), infectious canine hepatitis affects dogs
dilated pupils due to severe optic neuritis (Figure 18-1). The
 and foxes. The virus is shed in the feces and urine of infected
inflammation may be isolated, prodromal, or concurrent with
animals, and dogs are exposed through the oronasal route.
 other neurologic signs of canine distemper.
After an incubation period of 4 to 7 days, seronegative animals
The diagnosis of canine distemper is complicated because
infected by CAV-1 exhibit systemic clinical signs that range
many dogs are infected but not clinically ill. Cytoplasmic
from those of a mild upper respiratory disease to those of a
inclusion bodies may be present in conjunctival epithelial cells 
 severe systemic disease, including hepatomegaly, icterus, and
376
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
Table 18-2 I Systemic Causes of Conjunctivitis* in the Dog and Cat
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Viral diseases
Canine listemper virus 
 Feline rhinotracheitis ([FRV|, feline herpesvirus 1 [FHV-1|)
Canine herpesvirus in neonates 
 Feline calicivirus (FCV)
Canine oral papilloma virus
Feline immunocleficiency virus (FIV)
Infectious canine hepatitis (canine aclenovirus 1 [CAV-11)
 Bacterial and rickettsial 
Monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrtichia canis)
 Chlamydliosis (Chtamydophila felis, formerly Chtamydia
diseases
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Rickettsia rickettsii)
psittacil
Lyme borreliosis (Borrelia burgdorferi)
Neochtamydia hartmanneffae (obligate amebic host of
Hartmannella vermiform is!
Mycoplasmosis (Mycoptasma felis, Mycoptasma gateae,
 andl/or Mycoplasma arginini) has been described as a
 secondary opportunistic pathogen 
 Bartonellosis (Bartonella hensetae, Bartoneffa spp.)
Protozoal diseases
Leishmaniasis (Leishmania donovani, Leishmania infantum)
Trypanosomiasis (Trypanosoma brucei, Trypanosoma vivax)
Parasitic diseases
Ophthalmomyiasis (Diptera spp.)
 Immune-mediated 
Canine idiopathic granulomatous dlisease
diseases
 Dermal diseases
Atopy
Atopy
 Zinc responsive clermatosis 
 Foodl hypersensitivity
Miscellaneous dliseases 
 lonizing radliation
Sulfonamicles/trimethoprim toxicity in Doberman pinschers 
*Associated ocular signs include ocular discharge/secreion, chemosis, congesion, and follicular hyperplasia.
bleeding that may progress to disseminated intravascular coag-
 after direct and indirect contact with sick and carrier animals;
ulation. The prevalence of the disease has been dramatically
the infection occurs through the oronasal and conjunctival
reduced with the introduction of vaccination. Immunization
routes. Cats that recover from the disease probably remain
with attenuated CAV-1 and, to a lesser extent, CAV-2 strains led
 persistent carriers, a state characterized by latent infection and
to ocular signs of anterior uveitis and corneal edema in some
 intermittent periods of virus shedding.
animals. Dogs are currently vaccinated mostly with attenuated
Secondary bacterial infections are common complications,
strains of CAV-2.
 especially with Chlamydophila felis. Unilateral or bilateral
Ocular signs of infectious canine hepatitis are seen within 7
 conjunctivitis with hyperemia, ocular discharge, chemosis, and
to 21 days of infection or vaccination. The signs are due to the
 blepharospasm are the most common lesions in adult cats with
presence of immune complexes in the eye and occur during
 no respiratory disease. Other ocular signs are dendritic (Figure
convalescence. The initial signs include blepharospasm,
18-3) or geographic corneal ulcers, KCS, and stromal keratitis.
miosis, hypotonicity, and anterior chamber flare (Figure 18-2)
Symblepharon is a common sequel of infection (Figure 18-4),
due to anterior uveitis. Corneal edema (*blue eye") may
and FHV-1 may also play a role in the pathogenesis of corneal
develop within 1 to 2 days, although it is bilateral in only 12%
sequestration and eosinophilic keratitis. Vascularization of the
to 28% of cases. The edema may be severe and lead to
cornea and pain may be severe or absent.
formation of keratoconus. Such cases may progress and cause
Confirmatory diagnosis of FHV-1 can be made through
corneal scarring and pigmentation. Persistent or long-lasting
virus isolation in feline cell cultures. Serology is not very
corneal edema may also occur, and the Afghan hound has been
useful owing to the presence of antibodies from vaccination;
described as predisposed to chronic edema and glaucoma.
however, immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) techniques can be
However, in most cases the edema is transient, and animals
used on cytologic and histologic specimens. PCR analysis has
recover spontaneously within a few days to 2 to 3 weeks
been used successfully to identify infected cats, but it is of limited
 The diagnosis of the ocular disease is based on the signal-
use in a clinical setting because of the high prevalence of the
ment, history, and clinical signs. Treatment is symptomatic,
 infection in the general feline population.
 including topical glucocorticoids or nonsteroidal antinflam-
 In vitro sensitivity studies have identified several effective
 matory drugs (NSAIDs) and atropine. Hypertonic solutions and
antiviral drugsin decreasing order of potency, they are
 ointments may be used to resolve severe comeal edema.
trifluridine, 5-iododeoxyuridine, and vidarabine. However, treat-
 ment is hampered by drug irritancy and availability. Trifluridine is
Feline Viral Diseases
 commercially available but is topically irritating and needs to be
administered at high frequency. The other two drugs are less
FELINE HERPESVIRUS INFECTION. Feline herpesvirus 1
 inritating and administered less frequently but are difficult to obtain
(FHV-1) infection, also called feline rhinotracheitis (FRV), is
because they are not available commercially. Bromovinyl-
caused by a member of the Alphaherpesvirinae subfamily that 
deoxyuridine and acyclovir are not effective against FHV-1,
affects all members of the Felidae, and all isolates belong to
whereas valacyclovir is toxic in felines. Promising in vitro results 
the same serotype. The virus is widespread in the domestic cat
have been reported with ganciclovir, cidofovir, and penciclovir,
 population, especially in colonies and catteries. Cats are infected
 but large-scale clinical studies with these drugs are still lacking.
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
377
Table 18-3 | Systemic Causes of Miscellaneous Conjunctival Disorders in the Dog
DISORDER
CAUSES
Conjunctival hyperermia
Any cause of conjunctivitis
Blastomycosis (Biastomyces dermatitidis)
Hyperlipidemia
 Polycythermia
Masticatory myositis
Conjunctival/subconjunctival hemorrhage
Monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrtichia canis)
Rocky Mountain spottec fever (Rickettsia rickettsi)
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombopathy (inclucling von Willebrancd's clisease)
Anticoagulant poisoning.
Disseminatec intravascular coagulation
Figure 18-3. Rose bengal staining used to clemonstrate cenclritic corneal
ulceration, typical of feline herpesvirus 1 infection. (Courtesy Mark 
Nasisse.)
B
Figure 184. Symblepharon (aclhesions of the conjunctiva to the cornea)
Figure 18-2. Slit-lamp photography is used to illustrate aqueous flare
following feline herpesvirus 1 infection in a cat. Note that the
characteristic of uveitis. A, Two beams of light, on the corneal and anterior
corsotemporal part of the cornea (anc inner ocularstructures) isobscured
lens surfaces, are visible. B, The aqueous humor between these two
by the aclherent conjunctiva and its blood vessels. (Courtesy David J.
beams is translucent owing to the presence of inflammatory material. This
Maggs.)
results in light scattering similar to that observed while driving on a foggy
night. (Courtesy Paul E. Miller.)
The use of glucocorticoids is contraindicated, as it may induce
 Use of human recombinant interferon, administered topi-
shedding of viral particles in the latent stage. Topical tetra-
cally or orally, has shown synergism in vitro and has decreased
cycline is frequently added because coinfections with
the severity of clinical signs in experimentally infected cats
Mycoplasma spp. and/or Chlamydophila felis (formerly
when given 1 to 2 days after inoculation. L-Lysine, admin-
Chlamydia psittaci) are common. Topical treatments are
istered orally, may also inhibit viral replication. Treatment of
frequently continued for several weeks after resolution of
deep comeal ulcers and necrosis includes surgical intervention.
clinical signs to prevent recurrence.
378
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Table 18-4 I Systemic Causes of Corneal Diseases in the Dog and Cat
DISEASE
DOG
CAT
 Infectious causes of keratitis*/
Canine listemper virus (CDV)
Feline rhinotracheitis (feline herpesvirus 1 [FHV-1|)
keratoconjunctivitis
Canine herpesvirus (neonates only) 
 Bartonellosis (Bartonella hensetae, Bartonelta spp.)
Pseudorabies
Canine oral papilloma virus 
Lyme borreliosis (Borrelia burgdorferi)
Coccidioidomycosis (Coccidioides immitis)
Leishmaniasis Leishmania infantum,
Leishmania chagasi)
Trypanosomiasis /Trypanosoma brucei,
Trypanosoma vivax)
Corneal ulcers
Hyperadrenocorticism 
Feline rhinotracheitis (feline herpesvirus 1 [FHV-1|)
Tyrosinemia
 has been implicatecd in the pathogenesis of
Insect bites (spiders, fire ants, etc.)
corneal sequestrum 
 Primary corneal ecemat
Infectious canine hepatitis (CH)
Canine herpesvirus (puppies only)
Dirofilariasis (Dirofitaria immitis)
Tocainide toxicity
 Nonedematous corneal opacities 
Hypothyroidlism 
 Feline leukermia virus (FelV)
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Mucopolysaccharidosis 1, 1V
Tyrosinemia
Gangliosidosis (CM, GM2) 
Hyperlipidernia
 Systemic histiocytosis 
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
American hepatozoonosis (Hepatozoon americanum)
 Feline cysautonomia (Key-Caskell syncrome)
Hyperadrenocorticism
Sulfonamicle toxicity.
Phenazopyricline toxicity
lonizing radiation
Systemic autoimmune secretory gland acenitis
(associatec with hypothyroiclism, systemic lupus
erythematosus, etc.
Canine distemper
Symblepharon
Feline rhinotracheitis (feline herpesvirus 1 [FH'v-1I)
Chlamyciosis (Chtamydophita [formerly
Chtamydial psittaci)
*Associated ocular signs include epiphora and discharge,blepharospasm, conjuncival congestion, comeal edema, vascularizaion, inflration, ulceralion, and
pgmentation.
Associated signs include comeal opacity, bullous keratopathy, keratoconus, and impaiment of vision.
Stress is a very important factor in the pathogenesis of the
 oral and respiratory signs may be absent. FCV is also involved in
clinical disease, and events such as the introduction of a new
 chronic gingivitis. Recently, highly virulent strains of FCV have
 animal to the household or traveling to cat shows may exacerbate
 emerged that are associated with high mortality and a new range
the symptoms. For this reason, frequent treatment with multiple
 of clinical signs (FCV-associated virulent systemic disease). The
 drugs may sometimes aggravate the clinical signs of the disease.
ocular lesions of FCV include mainly conjunctivitis, but the
If worsening of signs is noted, the clinician is advised to
disease is milder than that induced by FHV-1.
 carefully consider reducing treatment rather than increasing it.
 The diagnosis of FCV infection is based mostly on the clinical
 FELINE CALICIVIRUS INFECTION. Feline calicivirus (FCV),
signs. The virus can be isolated in feline cell cultures from
which belongs to the family of caliciviruses, affects only
 oropharyngeal swabs. These samples may serve for PCR analysis
 members of the Felidae family. The genus consists of one
that allows identification of the virus and its strains. Con-
serotype and many different strains varying in antigenicity and
 junctivitis should be treated symptomatically.
pathogenicity. It is widespread in the domestic cat population,
FELINE LEUKEMIA VIRUS INFECTION. A retrovirus with
 si a  s pr  ae
worldwide distribution, feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is trans-
similar to that of FHV-1, and despite extensive vaccinations,
 mitted primarily through the saliva, although it can be present
 many cats are carriers of FCV. Some of these cats remain carriers
in any body secretion. Infected cats become viremic and may
for life and shed the virus continuously. Feline immunodeficiency
be persistently infected or clear the infection. Latent infections 
virus (FIV) infection may potentiate FCV shedding from carriers.
and carrier states are common. The virus is responsible for a
 Infection by FCV occurs through the oronasal and conjunctival
 third of feline cancer-related deaths through cell transformation
routes. The clinical signs may vary owing to differences in
and may also lead to anemia and immunosuppression. The
virulence and tropism of the different virus strains. They include 
 prevalence of FeLV-related diseases has been declining over the
fever, anorexia, oral and tongue ulceration, and mild respiratory
 past 10 years owing to the introduction of a protective vaccine.
signs (sneezing, nasal discharge). Certain FCV infections may
 The clinical signs of FeLV infection vary with the virus subtype
manifest as shifting lameness and pyrexia for 24 to48 hours, and
and the body system involved.
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
379
Table 18-5 | Systemic Causes of Scleral and Episcleral Diseases in the Dog and Cat
DISEASE
DOC
CAT
 Scleritis/episcleritis
Toxoplasmosis (Toxoptasma gondlil)
Leishmaniasis (Leishmania infantum, Leishmania chagasi)
 Scleral/episc leral
Onchocerciasis (Onchocerca stitesi, Onchocerca fienalis)
Ophthalmomyiasis (Cuterebra spp.)
granulomas
Canine idliopathic granulomatous disease
Table 18-6 | Systemic Causes of Uveitis in the Dog and Cat*
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Viral diseases
Canine dlistemper virus (CDV})
 Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV)
Infectious canine hepatitis ([ICH], canine acdenovirus 1
Feline immunodeficiency virus (F1V)
[CAV-1I}t 
 Feline leukemia virus (FelV)
Pseudorabies
 Feline sarcoma virus (FesV) (experimental infection) 
Mycotic diseases
Blastomycosis (Blastomyces dermatitidis)t
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus neoformans)
Coccidliaicdomycosis (Coccidioides immitis)t
Blastomycosis (B. dermatitidis)
Histoplasmosis (Histoplasma capsutatum)
Coccidioidomycosis (C. immitis)
Cryptococcosis (C. neoformans)
Histoplasmosis (H. capsuiatum)
Opportunistic cleep mycoses (e.g., aspergillosis)
Candidliasis (Candida atbicans)
Bacterial diseases
Monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrtichia canis)
Infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia (Anaptasma platys)t
Lyme borreliosis (Borrelia burgdorferi)
 Protozoal diseases
Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondil)
Toxoplasmosis (T. gondi) 
(unuues eiodsoaN) sisouodsoaN
Trypanosomiasis (Trypanosoma brucei)
American hepatozoonosis (Hepatozoon americanum)
leishmaniasis (Leishmania infantum, Leishmania chagasiyt
Parasitic diseases
 Dirofilariasis (Dirofitaria immitis)
Larval migrans (Metastrongytus spp.)
Ophthalmomyiasis interna (Cuterebra spp.)
Ophthalmomyiasis interna (Diptera spp.)
Ancylostomiasis (Ancylosoma caniumjt
Neoplastic diseases 
Systemic histiocytosist
Lymphoma
Lymphomat
Metastatic ocular disease
Metastatic ocular cliseaset
Other systemic causes 
Systemic hypertensiont
Periarteritis nodosa
Hyper lipidem iat
Hyperviscosity syndromet
Uveodermatologic syndromet
lonizing radiation
s
congestion, and photophobia. Secondary glaucoma and lens luxation are possible sequelae.
tHas been reported to cause sec ondary glaucoma.
The ocular disease in FeLV-infected cats may relate to
lymphoma, and transformed lymphocytes invade the globe
through the uvea, leading initially to a mild uveitis charac-
terized by corneal precipitates. Small masses may be observed
on the iris (Figure 18-5), and with progression they will lead to
thickening and distortion of the iris. Secondary glaucoma is a
common complication because of infiltration and obstruction
 of the iridocorneal angle by tumor cells.
The diagnosis of FeLV infection in cats can be made by
serologic testing (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
[ELISA], IFA) and PCR analysis. The latter can be used to detect
viral material in tissues, including the cornea, when blood
samples and immunohistochemistry of tissues are negative.
 The treatment of lymphoma in cats usually requires a multi-
 drug chemotherapy protocol. FeLV-positive cats with lymphoma
treated chemotherapeutically were found to have significantly
Figure 18-5. Multifocal gray masses on the surface of the iris of a 12-year-
old male cat seropositive for feline leukemia virus.Histopathology
shorter remission and survival times compared with FeLV-
confirmed the diagnosis of lymphorma.
negative cats with lymphoma treated with the same chemo-
 therapeutic protocols. Other systemic conditions, including the 
380
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
ocular disease, are treated symptomatically. However, fre-
tion. At least four subtypes (A to D) have been isolated in
quently the uveitis may be unresponsive to treatment or may
different regions of the world, and cats can be concurrently
 cause secondary glaucoma, thus necessitating enucleation.
infected with more than one subtype. The seroprevalence of
FELINE IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS INFECTION. Feline
FIV varies among countries, approaching 30% where the free-
 immunodeficiency virus is a lentivirus with worldwide distribu-
healthy cats. The virus is known to infect other Felidae. The
primary mode of transmission is through bite wounds, because
Table 18-7 | Systemic Causes of Cataract in the Dog
the virus is present in the blood and saliva of infected cats.
and Cat
Thus, intact outdoor male cats are at the highest risk of infec-
tion. Other important modes of transmission are the in utero
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
 route and through infected queens' milk to suckling kittens.
Infectious
 Infectious canine hepatitis
The disease has three main phases—acute, asymptomatic,
diseases
in neonates ([CH| canine
 and terminal. With the beginning of the terminal phase consist-
aclenovirus 1 [CAV-1|] 
ing of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-
Metabolic
Diabetes mellitus.
related complex (ARC), cats exhibit nonspecific signs that
diseases
 Hyperadrenocortic ism 
reflect opportunistic infections (e.g., toxoplasmosis, feline
Tyrosinemia
 infectious peritonitis virus, systemic mycoses, exacerbation of
 Nutritional 
Vitamin E cleficiency
Arginine-clefic ient rmilk-
FHV-1) in different body systems.
(chronic)
 replacement formulas
The ocular disease manifests mainly as conjunctivitis and
Arginine- and methionine-
in kittens
cleficient milk-
 Histicline-cleficient cliet 
 anterior uveitis. Pars planitis has been observed in four of nine
replacement formulas
 in kittens 
cats with natural FIV infection. Many FIV-positive cats may
(in the first week of life)
exhibit a concurrent FIV- and Toxoplasma-induced ocular
Toxic causes 
 Disophenol toxicity
 disease that manifests mainly as an anterior uveitis and chorio-
 Hypercupremia 
retinitis. Other ocular abnormalities reported are glaucoma
Chronic toxicity of
(Figure 18-6) with or without uveitis, focal retinal degenera-
HMG-CoA reductase
tion, and retinal hemorrhages.
inhibitors
The diagnosis of an FIV infection in cats relies mostly on
 Dimethylsulfoxice
(DMSO) poisoning
serologic tests for antibody detection, including ELISA (most 
 Ketoconazole toxicity
commonly) and IFA as well as Western blot and immunoblot
Other
Uveodermatologic
Chediak-Higashi
techniques. Cats in the acute phase of the disease may be
syndrome
 seronegative; so if the disease is suspected in a seronegative 
systemic
 syndrome
causes
Jonizing radliation
animal, a second test should be performed after 6 to 8 weeks.
 Electrocution/electric
Treatment of the ocular disease in FIV- and Toxoplasma-
 shock/lightning strikes
 positive cats should include topical glucocorticoids and atropine
Table 18-8 | Systemic Diseases Causing Posterior Uveitis* in the Dog and Cat
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Viral diseases
Canine distemper
Feline immunoceficiency virus (F1V)
Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV)
Feline leukemia virus (FelV)
Bacterial diseases
Lyme borreliosis (Borretia burgdorferi)
Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bovis, Mycobacterium
Monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrtichia canis)
fubercufosis, Mycobacterium avium)
 Bartonellosis (Bartonefla vinsonii ssp. berkhoff)
Bartonellosis (Barfoneffa hensetae, Bartonelfa spp.)
Fungal diseases
Blastomycosis (Btastomyces dermatitidis)
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus neoformans)
Coccidioidomycosis (Coccidioides immitis)
Blastomycosis (B. dermatitidis)
Histoplasmosis {Histoptasma capsulatum)
Coccidioidomycosis (C. immitis)
Cryptococcosis (C. neoformans)
Histoplasmosis (H. capsutatum)
Opportunistic dleep mycoses (e.g, aspergillosis)
Candidiasis (Candida albicans)
Protozoal diseases
Toxplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondi)
Toxoplasmosis (T. gondl)
Neosporosis (Neospora caninum)
Protothecosis (Prototheca zopfi, Prototheca wickerhamii)
American hepatozoonosis (Hepatozoon americanum)
 Parasitic diseases
Ocular larval migrans (Toxocara canis) 
Larval migrans (Metastrongylus spp.)
Ophthalmomyiasis interna (Cuterebra spp.)
 Neoplastic diseases
Lymphoma
 Lymphoma
Systemic histiocytosis
 Other systemic causes 
 Sulfonamice/trimethoprim toxicity in Doberman pinschers 
Periarteritis nodosa
 Systemic hypertension
*Includes chorioretinitis and choroiditis.Associated signsinclude diffuse or multifocal retinal edema and hemorrhage,subretinal effusion and hemorhage,
vascular cuffng, and loss of vision. Rebinal detachment and retinal atrophy are possible sequelae. Retinochoroiditis, which has a similar clinical presentation, is
caused by canine distemper virus.
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
381
Table 18-9 | Systemic Noninfectious Causes of Retinal/Chorioretinal Scarring and Atrophy in the Dog and Cat*
CAUSES
DOGt
CATt
Nutritional causes
Chronic vitamin E cleficiency
Taurine deficiency
 Cardiovascular diseases
Systermic hypertension
 Systemic hypertension
Chronic severe anemia
Hyperviscosity syncrome
Toxic causes
Sulfonamicle/trimethoprim toxicity in Doberman pinschers
Megestrol acetate (may incluce cliabetes mellitus)
Griseofulvin
 Other systemic causes 
 Sudden acquired retinal clegeneration (SARD) syncrome
 Checiak-Higashi syndrome (also causes nontapetal
Uveoclermatologic syncrome
hypopigmentation)
Mucolipidosis
sass pooa (eugai go uogenue pue aay ele uogmal suun umtd euess [eog(n anout suss pess*
tMaybe causedby any systemic disease causingposterior uveis.
Table 18-10 :
 Systemic Causes of Lipemia Retinalis in the
FIP. Macrophages carry FIPV to the tissues and viscera. The
Dog and Cat
exact mechanism responsible for the higher virulence of FIPV
 compared with FECV is currently unknown. It is postulated,
DOG
CAT
however, that in immunosuppressed cats under a heavy FECV
Hyperadlrenocortic ism
Primary inherited
infection and replication load, mutations of FECV are more
 Hypothyroidlism (may also 
hyperchylomicronemia
likely to occur, leading to its increased virulence and trans-
 cause lipemic aqueous
 Idiopathic hyperchylomicronemia
formation to FIPV. Cats become infected with FCoV mainly
humor!
ldiopathic transient hyperlipidemia
 (andl anemia) in kittens
 through ingestion, and the virus replicates in enterocytes and is
Glucocorticoid excess (iatrogenic)
shed through the feces. It may also replicate in the tonsils, in
which case it is shed in the saliva.
 Kittens are more prone than adult cats to development of
In cats, it is advised to use atropine ointment rather than
 FIP, and 50% of the cats with FIP are younger than 2 years. The
solution, because the latter may drain through the nasolacrimal
 incidence of FIP is higher in cats from catteries, shelters, and
duct and induce profound salivation due to its bitter taste.
multiple cat households. Stress may predispose cats to the
Topical tropicamide may substitute atropine. Cats may require a
disease. FIP is an immune complex disease resulting from
prolonged topical glucocorticoid therapy for control of the
 interactions between the virus, or its antigens, and specific anti-
anterior uveitis; however, pars planitis responds poorly to such
viral antibodies, complement, and inflammatory cells. The
therapy. In cases of posterior uveitis, systemic clindamycin and
reaction leads to a pyogranulomatous vasculitis that affects the
 glucocorticoids are indicated.
organs supplied by these blood vessels, including the retina
 FELINE INFECTIOUS PERITONITIS. Feline infectious perito-
(see Chapter 15, Figure 15-35). Cats with clinical FIP may
nitis (FIP) viruses (FIPVs) are biotypes (or strains) of feline
exhibit an effusive (wet) or a noneffusive (dry) disease. The
corona virus (FCoV), along with the feline enteric corona
effusive disease is usually the more acute form. The non-
viruses (FECV), and have a worldwide distribution. In contrast 
 effusive form develops over a longer period and is postulated to
to FECV that infects and replicates only in enterocytes and
 result from partial immunity to the virus.
leads to diarrhea, FIPV has an additional tropism to macro-
Ocular lesions are very common in dry FIP, and the disease
phages and can replicate within these cells, eventually causing
was found to be the most prevalent post-mortem finding in cats
with uveitis. The ocular signs include iritis with color changes
in the iris, bilateral anterior uveitis with aqueous flare, keratic
precipitates (Figure 18-7), fibrinous exudates in the anterior
chamber, hemorrhage into the anterior chamber, chorioretinitis,
retinal hemorrhages and detachment, and optic neuritis.
Neurologic signs may also be present due to focal, multifocal,
or diffuse CNS involvement.
 No single diagnostic test can confirm the presence of FIP.
Rather, it is the combination of many data that leads to the final
diagnosis of the disease—the history, clinical signs, hematologic
and serum biochemistry abnormalities, ultrasonography findings,
serologic results, cytologic and biochemical findings in effu-
sion samples, histopathology and immunohistochemistry of
biopsy and fluid samples, and RT-PCR analysis results. Each
finding is given a “likelihood for FIP" grade, and a scale for the
total score has been suggested, in that the higher the score the 
Figure 18-6. Claucoma (seconcary to posterior synechia) in clormestic
 greater the likelihood of the disease.
shorthair cat positive for feline immunocleficiency virus. Note swelling of
the iris due to increased aqueous pressure in the posterior chamber,
The prognosis of cats with FIP is poor despite therapy.
A pue sia au ul saueuo ao aopus auo sial au jo ieidi
Treatment, which is essentially symptomatic and supportive,
Congestion are indlicative of uveitis.
includes immunosuppressive drugs (i.e., glucocorticoids, cyclo-
382
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 18-11 | Systemic Causes of Retinal Hemorrhage in the Dog and Cat
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Infectious ciseases
Canine clistemper virus (CDV)
Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV)
Monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrlichia canis)*
Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bovis, Mycobacterium
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Rickettsia rickettsii)
tubercufosis, Mycobacterium avium)
Lyme borreliosis (Borrelia burgdorferi)
Blastomycosis (Blastomyces dermatitidis)
Coccidliaidomycosis (Coccidioides immitis)
 Parasitic diseases
 Ophthalmomyiasis interna (Diptera spp.)
Ophthalmomyiasis interna
Carcliovascular dliseases
 Systemic hypertension*
Systemic hypertension 
Hyperviscosity syncrome*
Hyperviscosity syndrome 
Polycythermia*
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombopathy
Thrombopathy
Severe anemia
 Severe anemia
Metabolic diseases
Diabetes mellitus*
Diabetes mellitus
Toxic causes
 Anticoagulant poisoning 
Megestrol acetate (may incluce dliabetes mellitus)
 Neoplastic diseases
Lymphoma
Lymphoma
Multiple myeloma 
Intracranial neoplasia
 Intracranial neoplasia
 Other systemic causes
Cranulomatous meningoencephalitis (CME) 
lonizing radiation
*Has also been associated with increased tortuosity and/or dilatation of retinal blood vessels.
phosphamide, melphalan, chlorambucil), human interferon-α,
signs of infection. Other Brucella species (e.g., Brucella
vitamins (A, thiamine, C), aspirin, anabolic steroids, and anti-
melitensis, Brucella abortus) may also infect dogs and cats
biotics. Ocular FIP is treated with glucocorticoids (topical or
through contaminated milk products and infected aborted
subconjunctival) and atropine ointment.
fetuses. Clinical signs of canine brucellosis may often be
absent or may vary and include listlessness, fatigue, lethargy,
Canine Bacterial Diseases
exercise intolerance, weight loss, lymphadenopathy, back pain
(due to diskospondylitis), lameness (due to arthritis), neurologic
BRUCELLOSIS. Brucellosis is a venereal disease of Canidae,
and behavioral abnormalities (due to meningoencephalitis),
including the dog, caused by the gram-negative intracellular
 infertility (in both genders), painful scrotal enlargement (due to
coccobacillary bacterium Brucella canis. Transmission may
 orchitis), and testicular atrophy.
occur via contact with contaminated body fluids. B. canis
Diagnosis relies mostly on serologic testing, with the rapid
causes a long-lasting bacteremia and is spread hematogenously
 slide agglutination test (RSAT) as the screening test, followed
to the eyes, where it commonly leads to unilateral uveitis
by the tube agglutination test (TAT) as a confirmatory and
(Figure 18-8) or endophthalmitis. Owing to the insidious nature
quantifying test when the RSAT result is positive. TAT titers of
of the disease, ocular signs are sometimes the only presenting
200 or higher often correlate with positive blood culture results
Figure 18-7. The anterior segment of a 2-year-old cat with anterior uveitis
eaeu oeeu suad snoaun aulay A pasne Agensaad
that is prevalent in the aqueous humor is cleposited on the interior
(encothelial) aspect of the cornea and is seen as the ventral brown stains,
Figure 18-8. Anterior uveitis in a 3-year-old female Cerman shephercd
a phenomenon known as keratic precipitates. lridal congestion and fibrin
dliagnosed with Brucella canis. Conjunctival and ciliary injection, corneal
 cleposition on the anterior lens capsule also indlicate anterior uveitis.
uasaid ane aeupajad pue uogsauos epal pue euapa 
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
8
Table 18-12 | Systemic Causes of Retinal Detachment in the Dog and Cat*
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Infectious ciseases
Monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrtichia canis)
Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV)
Lyme borreliosis (Borrefia burgdorferi)
Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bovis, Mycobacterium
Blastomycosis (Btastomyces dermatitidis)
tubercurosis, Mycobacterium avium)
Histoplasmosis (Histopfasma capsufatum)
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus neoformans)
Cryptococcosis (C. neoformans)
Blastomycosis (B. dermatitidis)
Opportunistic cleep mycoses (e.g., aspergillosis) 
Coccidioidomycosis (Coccidioides immitis)
Protothecosis (Prototheca zopfi, Prototheca wickerhamii)
Parasitic diseases
 Dirofilariasis (Dirofiaria immitis)
 Ophthalmomyiasis interna
 Cardliovascular dliseases
Systemic hypertension 
 Systemic hypertension 
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Neoplastic diseases
Multiple myeloma
Systemic histiocytosis
Toxic causes
Ethylene glycol toxicity (suspectedl)
Megestrol acetate (may induce dliabetic retinopathy)
 Other systemic causes
Periarteritis nodosa
Associated signs include anteriordisplacement of the reina andits vessels, loss of vision and pupilarylight reaction, and focalmulifocal/difuse etinal folds.
Retinal detachment may also be caused by any disease causing retinal hemorrhage, as listed in Table I8-1l.
and are presumptive indications of active infections. An agar
gel immunodiffusion test for B. canis is a sensitive serodiag-
 nostic test for the detection of infection. Recently, PCR testing
of whole blood and semen samples has been shown to have
equal or higher sensitivity, compared with blood culture or the
RSAT, in the diagnosis of canine brucellosis.
 Owners need to be aware of the zoonotic potential of the
disease, and its persistent nature, before therapy is attempted.
Treatment includes a long course of a systemic antibiotic of the
tetracycline group, such as doxycycline or minocycline, with
serologic or PCR monitoring for its efficacy. Relapses are com-
mon once antibiotic therapy is discontinued, and male
dogs rarely recover from infection. Ocular treatment consists
of topical glucocorticoids and atropine for uveitis. However,
intractable cases of endophthalmitis may require enucleation.
BORRELIOSIS (CANINE LYME DISEASE). Lyme borreliosis is a
worldwide tick-borme disease caused by the spirochete Borrelia
burgdorferi. It is transmitted to dogs mainly by ticks of the Ixodes
ricinus complex, including Ixodes scapularis. Systemic clinical
signs include fever, inappetence, lymphadenopathy, and shifting
Figure 18-9. Preretinal petechiae on the funcus of a 7-year-old
lameness due to polyarthritis. Nevertheless, ocular signs can be the
 bloodhound dliagnosed with canine Lyme dlisease.
presenting signs. They include conjunctivitis, anterior uveitis,
chorioretinitis, and retinal petechiae (Figure 18-9) and detachment.
tick Dermacentor variabilis and the American dog tick
 Infection may be suspected from the clinical signs in an
Dermacentor andersoni. However, the brown dog tick
endemic area. Definitive diagnosis can be made through PCR
Rhipicephalus_sanguineus and Amblyomma spp. can also
analysis or by growing the spirochete in a culture from body
 transmit RMSF, and the former has recently been involved in
fluids, although the latter is more challenging. Serologic testing
the transmission of the disease in Arizona. The disease is seen
is nonspecific because of persistence of antibodies, cross-
in most parts of America, although the majority of cases in the 
reactivity with other bacteria, and exposure of healthy animals
United States occur in the Southwest. The systemic signs of
in endemic areas. Systemic treatment for 10 to 14 days with a
RMSF are variable, resulting from endothelial damage and
variety of antibiotics (e.g., tetracyclines, ampicillin, ceftriaxone)
vasculitis. They include fever, anorexia, depression, tachypnea,
has been shown to be effctive. Uveitis is treated symptomatically
 coughing, and polyarthritis.
with NSAIDs or glucocorticoids, and atropine.
Ocular abnormalities occurred 14 to 21 days after an experi-
RICKETTSIOSIS (EHRLICHIOSIS AND ROCKY MOUNTAIN
 mental infection, and were described in 9% to 11% of dogs in
SPOTTED FEVER). Rickettsiae and Ehrlichiae are two tribes
 natural cases. The abnormalities include subconjunctival hemor-
within the family Rickettssiales, which include many patho-
 rhage, conjunctivitis, chemosis, anterior uveitis (Figure 18-10),
genic, obligate intracellular, gram-negative, coccobacilli bacteria.
 retinal petechiae, and focal retinal edema.
 Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Rocky Mountain spotted
 RMSF may be suspected on the basis of the seasonal occur-
fever (RMSF) affects humans and dogs. It is caused by
 rence, history of tick infestation, and clinical signs. Thrombo-
Rickettsia rickettsii, which is transmitted mainly by the wood
cytopenia is the most consistently observed hematologic
384
| SlATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOCY
Table 18-13 | Systemic Causes of Optic Neuritis in the Dog and Cat*
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Infectious diseases
Canine dlistemper virus (CDV)
Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV)
Infectious canine hepatitis ([ICHl, canine adenovirus 1 [CAV-1l) Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bovis, Mycobacterium
American hepatozoonosis ( Hepatozoon americanum)
tubercufosis, Mycobacterium aviumy
 Blastomycosis (Btastomyces dermatitidis)
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus neoformans)
Coccidiaidomycosis (Coccidioides immitis)
Histoplasmosis (Histoplasma capsulatum)
Toxoplasmosis (Toxoptasma gondil) 
 Cardliovascular dliseases 
 Systemic hypertension
Systemic hypertension
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Hyperviscosity syndrome
 Neoplastic diseases 
 Intracranial neoplasia
 Other systemic causes
Vitamin A cleficiency (experimental clisease only)
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME)
*Associated signs include papillary edema, optic nerve head congestion, hemorhage of optic nerve vessels, and loss of vision and pupillry light reacion
 abnormality. Confirmation of the diagnosis is based on results
 characterized by lymphoid hyperplasia and vasculitis with sub-
 of PCR analysis or serologic tests such as IFA in tissue biopsy
sequent thrombocytopenia. The subclinical phase follows,
specimens. A fourfold increase in indirect IFA antibody titer
consisting of persistence of thrombocytopenia, neutropenia,
between acute and convalescent sera is also diagnostic. Culture
and anemia. The chronic phase of CME is characterized by
may also be used for the confirmation of the diagnosis,
hyperglobulinemia and bone marrow suppression with resultant
 although it is not readily available.
pancytopenia.
 The treatment of choice for RMSF is tetracycline, 22 mg/kg
The ocular disease may be present in up to 50% of the dogs
q8h, or doxycycline, 5 mg/kg q12h, for 14 days. The ocular
in the acute phase of experimental infections. Under natural
disease is treated with topical or subconjunctival gluco-
 conditions, ocular signs were reported in 10% to 15% of dogs.
 corticoids and topical atropine.
Resulting from thrombocytopenia and vasculitis, ocular signs
CANINE MONOCYTIC EHRLICHIOSIS. A worldwide tick-
include hemorrhagic uveitis, hyphema, retinal hemorrhages
borne disease of dogs, canine monocytic ehrlichiosis (CME) is
 leading to retinal detachment (Figure 18-11), and optic neuritis.
 most prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions. It is caused
 Blindness may occur from ocular hemorrhage, and glaucoma is
by Ehrlichia canis, and is transmitted by R. sanguineus. A
 not an uncommon complication.
clinically and serologically indistinguishable disease is caused
 CME can be suspected in dogs with a history of tick infes-
by Ehrlichia chaffeensis; however, its pathogenic importance
tation that manifest the preceding clinical signs and hema-
 and mode of transmission are currently unclear.
tologic abnormalities. Confrmation of the disease is based on
E. canis infection leads to acute, subclinical, and chronic
 detection of the typical morulae within monocytes in peripheral
disease phases. The acute phase, which lasts 2 to 4 weeks, is
Figure 18-11. Hermorrhagic retinal cletachment in a 4-year-olcd male
Figure 18-10. Anterior uveitis in the left eye of a 9-year-old mixec breed 
Alaskan malarmute cliagnosed with ehrlichiosis. The retinal blood vessels
dlog seropositive to Rickettsia rickettsi. lricdal congestion, blood anc fibrin
as well as hemorrhage on the retinal surface may be clearly seen through
in the anterior charmber, and secondary glaucoma (iris bombe) can be
the pupil without the use of an ophthalmoscope. Acute blincdness was the
seen.
presenting complaint in this case.
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
385
Table 18-14 | Systemic Causes of Disorders of the Globe in the Dog and Cat
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Exophthalmos
Masticatory myositis
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus neoformans)
Lymphoma
Lymphoma
Systemic histiocytosis
 Retrobulbar abscess/tumor/granuloma
Retr obulbar abscess/tumor/granuloma
 Enophthalmos
Masticatory myositis
Dehydration
Dehycration
Cachexia
Cachex ia
Horner's syncrome (enophthalmos associated 
Horner's syncrome (enophthalmos associated 
with ptosis, third licd prolapse, anc miosis) 
with ptosis, thirc lid prolapse, and miosis)
Table 18-15 | Systemic Causes of Endophthalmitis/Panuveitis in the Dog and Cat
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Infectious diseases
Canine herpesvirus (puppies only)
Feline immunodeficiency virus (F1V)
Ehrlichiosis (Ehrtichia canis)
Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV)
Nonspecific systemic bacterial infections
Feline leukemia virus (FelV)
Brucellosis (Brucelfa canis, Brucela spp.)
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus neoformans)
Blastomycosis (Btastomyces dermatitidis)
Blastomycosis (B. dermatitidis)
Histoplasmosis (Histopfasma capsutatum)
Histoplasmosis (H. capsufatum)
Coccidioidomycosis (Coccidroides immitis)
Coccidioidomycosis (C. immitis)
Opportunistic ceep mycoses (e.g., aspergillosis)
Candidliasis (Candida atbicans)
Trypanosomiasis ( Trypanosoma brucei, Trypanosoma vivax)
Protothecosis (Prototheca zopfi, Prototheca wickerhamil)
Parasitic diseases
Toxoplasmosis (Toxopfasma gondli)
Ophthalmomyiasis interna 
Neoplastic diseases
Lymphoma
Lymphoma
Ocular metastases of clistant tumors 
 Ocular metastases of dlistant tumors 
 Other systemic causes
Uveocermatologic syncrome
Periarteritis nodosa
blood smears or by PCR analysis, cell culture, or serologic
cats either as a sole organism or concurrently with B. henselae,
antibody testing (IFA, Western blot technique, ELISA). The
 and has also been reported to cause cat-scratch disease in people.
latter is most useful for the diagnosis in nonendemic areas.
B. vinsonii ssp. berkoffi is transmitted by the brown dog tick
The treatment of choice for CME is with tetracycline anti-
(R. sanguineus) and has been identified as a cause of canine 
biotics (tetracycline, 22 mg/kg q8h, or doxycycline, 10 mg/kg
endocarditis and granulomatous lymphadenitis.
q24h, for a minimum of 21 days). Imidocarb dipropionate may
Despite the persistence of bacteremia in naturally
be added (5 mg/kg IM twice in 14-day interval); however, it has
Bartonella-infected cats, it is a subclinical infection, and a
been associated with failure to clear the organism when used as
cause-and-effect relationship between infection and disease in
a single agent. Systemic glucocorticoid therapy is controversial
cats has not been established. Cats may have a mild febrile
but has been suggested by some clinicians for the acute disease
disease upon infection, and a transient neurologic disease was
 phase. Treatment of the ocular disease is the same as for RMSF.
described in a naturally infected cat. Little is known of the 
ocular disease in dogs and cats. It has been reported that feline 
Bacterial Diseases of Dogs and Cats
bartonellosis is associated with anterior blepharitis, conjunc-
tivitis, keratitis, corneal ulcers, uveitis, and chorioretinitis.
BARTONELLOSIS. Species of Bartonella are small, hemo-
 In one study of cats chronically infected with Toxoplasma
tropic, gram-negative bacteria, and they have been isolated
gondi, inoculation with B. henselae and later with FHV-1
from apparently healthy and ill dogs and cats. Bartonella henselae.
failed to reactivate ocular toxoplasmosis. B. vinsonii ssp.
Bartonella clarridgeiae (in cats), and Bartonella vinsonii ssp.
berkoffi was implicated as a cause of canine anterior uveitis
berkoffi (in dogs) were established as infectious agents in
and choroiditis.
companion animals. B. henselae is the primary cause of cat-
The diagnosis of bartonellosis can be made with serologic
scratch disease in people and is prevalent in most of the temperate
 testing (IFA), blood and tissue cultures, and PCR analysis.
regions of the world. The overall seroprevalence in the United
Feline bartonellosis can be treated with amoxicillin,
States is 28%, and positive bacterial cultures have been reported in 
 amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, doxycycline, and enrofloxacin,
8% to 53% of cats tested as well as in up to 89% ofcats owned by
 but the doses required to suppress bacteremia are higher than
Bartonella-infected people. Seropositivity was higher in outdoor
recommended doses. Addition of rifampin to doxycycline has
cats and in younger cats and was associated with flea infestations.
led to bacterial clearance. Infection with B. vinsonii ssp.
PCR studies have shown that 17% of tested cat fleas
berkoffi in dogs can be treated with doxycycline, enrofloxacin,
(Ctenocephalides felis) were positive for B. henselae. Prairie dogs
and rifampin. The duration of therapy is controversial, but it
and their fleas in Colorado were also positive for B. henselae when
 should be at least 14 to 21 days. Culture specimens should be
evaluated with PCR. B. clarridgeiae can occur in asymptomatic
collected at least 3 weeks after antibiotic discontinuation to
386
| SlATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOCY
Table 18-16 | Systemic Disorders Causing Blindness in the Dog and Cat
CAUSES
DOG
CAT
Acute blindness
Any cause of severe ocular opacity, retinal cletachment,
Any cause of severe ocular opacity, retinal
 optic neuritis, and glaucoma
 cetachment, optic neuritis and glaucoma
Canine dlistemper virus (CDV)
Systemic hypertension
Pseudorabies
Ischemic encephalopathy
Protothecosis (Prototheca zopfi, Prototheca wickerhamii)
Cerebral hypoxia
 Ocular larval migrans (Toxocara canis)
Hepatic encephalopathy
Uveodermatologic syndrome
 Intracranial neoplasia
Masticatory rmyositis
 ntracranial neoplasia 
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (CME)
Ivermectin toxicity
 Progressive blinclness
Any cause of retinal or optic nerve atrophy
Any cause of retinal or optic nerve atrophy
Ocular larva migrans (T. canis)
Intracranial ophthalmomyiasis (Cuterebra spp.)
Diabetes mellitus 
Cerebral coenurosis (Taenia serialis)
Fucosidosis 
Hepatic encephalopathy
Globoid cystrophy
Mucolipidosis 
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Taurine ceficiency
Vitamin E deficiency (chronic)
Systermic hypertension 
Vitamin A ceficiency (experirmental disease only)
Cerebral hypoxia
 Intracranial neoplasia
Intracranial neoplasia (meningioma, carcinoma)
GME
lonizing radliation
verify treatment effectiveness. Treatment of the ocular disease
 in cats and dogs is essentially symptomatic.
Feline Bacterial Diseases
CHLAMYDIOSIS (CHLAMYDOPHILOSIS). Chlamydiae are
obligate intracellular bacteria that also have an extracellular
form during their development cycle. They are commensals of
ocular, gastrointestinal, respiratory and genitourinary mucosae.
Chlamydophila felis (formerly Chlamydia psittaci) is the only
important chlamydial species in cats, and several strains with
genetic similarity have been isolated. In the cytoplasm of
susceptible cells, the organism forms an initial body that
proliferates through budding and fission; later, through a phase
of rapid division, these bodies form a large population of
elementary bodies that are released from the cell and infect
other cells. As many as 45% of healthy cats are seropositive for
Figure 18-12. Severe chermosis (conjunctival eclerma) characteristic of
Chlamydophila psittaci; however, the organism was isolated
Chtamydia infection in a cat. (Courtesy Davic j. Magg.)
from conjunctival swabs only in 6%. The isolation rates and
seropositivity rise up to 30% and 69%, respectively, in cats
with conjunctivitis, and a similar trend was observed through
of the mucosae or shedding of the organism. Nevertheless, they
 PCR analysis of conjunctival specimens.
lead to reduction of the clinical signs in infected cats.
Cats infected with Chlamydophila psittaci rarely show
 MYCOPLASMOSIS. Mycoplasmas are small gram-negative
systemic signs, although some may have mild upper respiratory
bacteria.Mycoplasmafelis,Mycoplasma gateae,and Mycoplasma
signs. The ocular signs are those of conjunctivitis, including
arginini have been isolated from healthy and ill cats. Most
conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis (Figure 18-12), serous to
mycoplasmas are normal inhabitants of the upper respiratory
 mucopurulent ocular discharge, and blepharospasm. Cats may
tract but do not appear in the lungs of healthy cats.
become chronically ill. Concurrent FIV or FHV-1 infection
Mycoplasma organisms can be secondary opportunistic
 prolongs the conjunctivitis.
 pathogens in virus infections and complicated pneumonia cases,
The diagnosis of chlamydiosis can be made through cell
mostly in kittens. They may also be isolated from visceral
culture, cytologic analysis of conjunctival swabs (Giemsa stain 
 organs of seriously ill and debilitated animals. Mycoplasmosis
and IFA), serologic testing (IFA, ELISA) of patient specimens,
has a controversial role in feline conjunctivitis, because the
and PCR analysis. Therapy of chlamydial infection consists of
 organisms have been isolated from healthy cats as well as from
oral tetracyclines (doxycycline, tetracycline) and, in cases of
cats with conjunctivitis. Although Mycoplasma spp. lead to
multiple-cat households and catteries, should be continued
 conjunctivitis in young cats, experimental infections in adult
for 6 weeks. Ocular infections respond well to tetracycline
cats failed to induce the disease. Mycoplasma spp. can probably
ophthalmic ointment. Modified live vaccines provide the best
 complicate cases of conjunctivitis caused by primary pathogens
protection against the organism but do not prevent colonization
such as FHV-1 or Chlamydophila psittaci.
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
387
The diagnosis of mycoplasmosis can be made through
to severe comeal edema. Obstruction of the iridocormeal angle
culture and observation of the cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in
with inflammatory material may lead to secondary glaucoma
epithelial cells (in cytologic preparations). PCR analysis of
and potential loss of vision. Periorbital cellulitis also occurs. In
nasal swabs is more sensitive than culture in cats.
cats, the main ocular signs are chorioretinitis, retinal detachment,
Mycoplasma conjunctivitis can be treated with most ocular
 and panophthalmitis.
antimicrobial preparations, although tetracycline is the drug of
 Diagnosis of the ocular disease is based on identification of
choice.
 the fungus in cytologic (e.g., vitreous aspiration) or histologic
(e.g., enucleated eye) preparations. Serologic testing and
Mycotic Diseases of Dogs and Cats
thoracic radiography may support the diagnosis if the history
and clinical signs are compatible and when microscopic
See also Table 18-17. It should be noted that in addition to the
identification of the fungus has failed.
ocular signs described here, fungal infections may also cause
 Treatment of blastomycosis includes systemic antifungals
focal or multifocal (granulomatous) lesions in the CNS, leading
(i.e., itraconazole, amphotericin B, and ketoconazole) for at
to various signs of neurologic or neuroophthalmic dysfunction.
least 60 days, and for at least 1 month after all signs of the
 Blindness due to involvement of the central visual pathways,
disease have resolved. Such long-term treatment may be expen-
including the optic nerve (i.e., optic neuritis) and chiasm, may
sive, and relapses are common. Ocular signs are treated with
also occur.
topical atropine and antinflammatory therapy. Glaucoma may be 
 BLASTOMYCOSIS. Blastomycosis is a systemic infection
treated with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, but a nonresponsive 
caused by the dimorphic fungus Blastomyces dermatitidis. It
 case may require enucleation of the affected eye.
affects dogs and humans most commonly, but cats are also
COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIs. Caused by the geophilic, sapro-
affected. The disease is prevalent in North America and it has
phytic, dimorphic fungus Coccidioides immitis, coccidioido-
been reported in Africa and Central America. The endemic
 mycosis is endemic in the southwest desert areas of the United
distribution in North America includes the Mississippi,
States, Mexico, and South America. It affects virtually all
Missouri, and Ohio River valleys, the Mid-Atlantic States, and
 mammalian species, including humans, dogs, and cats, as well
the Canadian provinces of Manitoba, Ontario, and Quebec. The
as some reptiles; however, cats are more resistant to infection
reservoir for the fungus is the soil, and proximity to water and
than dogs. Young (less than 4 years), medium to large dogs are 
rain facilitates the release of infectious organisms. The spores
 most commonly affected. Rainy weather followed by dry environ-
are acquired mostly by inhalation, leading to establishment of
mental conditions promotes the spread of the arthrospores.
the fungus in the lung tissue, but there are rare reports of inva-
These are inhaled into the lung and to the subpleural tissue,
sion through skin wounds in dogs. The organism disseminates
where spherules and subsequently endospores are formed. The
in the body through the hematogenous route or via the
 disease is disseminated via the hematogenous and lymphogenous
lymphatics to preferred sites, including the eyes. Most dogs
routes to many tissues, including the eyes. Almost 50% of
(85%) with blastomycosis have pulmonary lesions. Recently,
affected dogs show no systemic signs of the disease.
-o ar sn qns suis pn suis nnosr
The ocular disease is unilateral in 75% of the dogs, affecting
carditis endocarditis, heart block, heart base or intracardiac
mainly the posterior segment. The prevalence of ocu lar signs in
mass lesions, and syncope have been described in dogs from
cats is 10%. Ocular lesions include keratitis, uveitis (Figure
endemic areas.
18-14), and chorioretinitis and may lead to retinal detachment 
 Ocular signs have been reported in up to 40% of the dogs with
and glaucoma.
the disease, and in 50% of cases the ocular lesions were bilateral.
 The disease can be suspected in animals presented with the
They include mainly granulomatous anterior (Figure 18-13)
 preceding clinical signs in endemic areas. Confirmation of
 and/or posterior uveitis that may be difficult to observe owing
the diagnosis can be made through identification of the organ-
Figure 18-13. Anterior uveitis in a 1-year-old female Weimaraner
cliagnosed with blastomycosis. Conjunctival and ciliary injection, corneal
eclema, iridal congestion, anc fibrin in the anterior chamber may be seen.
 Figure 18-14. Hypopyon (precipitating inflarmmatory clebris in the ventral
The dog was subsequently euthanized because of progressive central
aspect of the anterior charmber) in a 4-year-old mixed breed cog
nervous system signs. (Courtesy Renee Carter.)
dliagnosed with coccidlioiclormycosis.
388
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Dog: 1 mg/kg Iv, tiw
Surglcalrermoval of
TREATMENT
assay; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM,
aldu
6
 agglutination
CF
-linked
uny!
 specim
cheal
211
ELISA,
OCULAR SIGNS
Uveitis, secondary
etinal
chorioretinitis,
chr
detad
herr
onal
a
etinal
Keratitis,
asic
Dant
 se pue sio yo sassi snoen neoo pue siss I /l-at alqe
ystunction,
SYSTEMIC SIGNS
iratory
idue
sU0
xa
553
sale,
的
ler
brain,
al
arr
 PREDISPOSITION
a0o
BREED
rrman
Cats: More
Dobe
Atlantic
Worldwide
Iver
DISEASE
8
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
389
3y/w1 5-5'2 alozel
 TREATMENT
Ketacol
 DNISEI
hoalveolar
DIAGNOSTIC
urinalysi
he
一
antibodies; FeLV feline leukemia virus; FIP, feline infectious peritonitis.
 OCULAR SIGNS 
Table 18-17| Systemic and Ocular Granulomatous Diseases of Dogs and Cats—cont'd
blindness
infecte
3
lesions (granulomas)
SYSTEMIC SIGNS
le wasting
Ap
mem
oares
8
 PREDISPOSITION
BREED
pointers.
5
GEOGRAPHIC
DISTRIBUTION
Worldwide
lasma
capsuiatum,
DISEASE
DIC,
390
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
al
TREATMENT
cats 
Clindamycin 
:310
Sabin-Feldman
impression
Radiology
stainy
一
ium spp.).
Iordiffuse
OCULAR SIGNS
 optic neuritis
Table 18-17 | Systemic and Ocular Granulomatous Diseases of Dogs and Cats-cont'd
iultifocal
Cat:
Bronchopneumonia,
SYSTEMIC SIGNS
diarrhea, harsh 
ductive
enlargement
oulmonar
Intestinal
anemla
eneral
hlar
in close
with
lnfec
Worldwide
Wor ldwide
avium complex)
DISEASE
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
391
ism in cytologic smears from infected organs, including the
exudates, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and in fine-needle aspirates
vitreous, or in histopathologic specimens from biopsy.
from affected tissues, including the aqueous humor or vitreous.
Culturing of the fungus with inoculation into animals is poss-
Gram and new methylene blue stains are superior to Romanowsky
ible; however, because of the highly infective nature of the
stains for their detection. Serologic tests are very rapid and
arthrospores and the risk to laboratory personnel, it is not per-
useful in suspected cases in which yeasts are not detected by
formed routinely. Serologic tests include the agar gel immuno-
cytology; such tests include latex agglutination of cryptococcal
diffusion (AGID) for the detection of precipitin immunoglobulin
capsular antigen and ELISA. Both tests detect all known
(Ig) M antibodies, and complement fixation (CF), which
serotypes and can be conducted in serum, urine, or CSF samples.
detects IgG.
 Histopathologic analysis of biopsy specimens may also help if
 The treatment of coccidioidomycosis is identical to that of
cytology has failed to reveal the organism. The organism can be
blastomycosis.
cultured from exudates, body fluids, and tissues, although
CRYPTOCOCCOSIS. Cryptococcosis is an opportunistic
growth may take up to 6 weeks.
 disease of worldwide distribution that affects people and
 The treatment of cryptococcosis in both cats and dogs involves
animals, including the dog and the cat. It is caused by the 
 a long (1 to 10 months) course of a systemic antifungal drug-
saprophytic, round, yeastlike fungus Cryptococcus neoformans
amphotericin B with or without flucytosine, ketoconazole,
(var. neoformans and var. gatti). The disease is the most
itraconazole, or fluconazole. The last has been recommended
common systemic mycosis in the cat, in which it is much more
for the CNS disease because of its better distribution in the
common than in dogs. Pigeons are considered the main vectors
 system, including the CSF. Nevertheless, itraconazole has been 
of the organism, and high numbers of the organism are found
used successfully in cases of feline cryptococcal meningitis.
in pigeon roosts, habitats, and droppings, where it can survive 
Recently, the success rate of treatment of cryptococcosis in
up to 2 years.
dogs and cats has been reported to be 55 and 76%, respectively.
 Inhalation of the organism is the most common route of
The median duration of treatment required to effect a cure at first
infection, leading to nasal lesions. Smaller, desiccated, encap-
attempt was significantly shorter for fluconazole (4 months;
sulated organisms may reach the alveoli, where they may cause
range 1 to 8 months) than for itraconazole (9 months; range
 granulomas. The disease is disseminated through direct local
3 to 24 months). Cats with neurologic involvement, disseminated
extension or hematogenous spread and affects mainly the CNS,
disease, or refractory disease treated with protocols containing
eyes, and skin. Natural infections in dogs and cats have been
amphotericin B did as well, on average, as cats with less severe 
reported to worsen and accelerate owing to the immuno-
 disease treated with azole monotherapy. Treatment of the ocular
 suppression due to gluccorticoid therapy.
 disease is similar to that provided in cases of blastomycosis.
Ocular lesions in cats include anterior uveitis, granu-
HISTOPLASMOSIS. Histoplasmosis is a systemic mycosis
lomatous chorioretinitis (Figure 18-15) frequently leading to
caused by the soil-borne dimorphic fungus Histoplasma
retinal detachment, optic neuritis, and exophthalmos. In dogs,
capsulatum. The disease has been reported in North and South
the lesions are similar; however, optic nerve leptomeningitis
America. In the United States, most cases occur in the regions
is common and is probably the route of ocular infection from
of the Ohio, Mississippi, and Missouri rivers. In the mycelium 
the CNS.
 stage, the fungus is present in soil and produces microconidia
 The diagnosis of cryptococcosis is based on identification of 
that are infectious to mammals. Both dogs and cats can be
the typical thickly encapsulated yeasts that show narrow base
affected; however, cats are more susceptible to infection than
budding. These organisms can be seen in nasal and skin
dogs. In both species young (less than 4 years) adults are
mostly affected. The microconidia are inhaled into the lung and 
transformed to the yeast phase, which multiplies by budding.
The disease usually starts with respiratory signs, although some
cases of gastrointestinal histoplasmosis, with no respiratory
involvement, have been described. Dissemination of the organ-
ism from the respiratory system occurs through hematogenous
and lymphatic routes.
Ocular lesions in dogs and cats include anterior uveitis,
granulomatous chorioretinitis, and optic neuritis. Blindness
may result from retinal detachment or optic neuritis.
 Histoplasmosis can be suspected in dogs and cats with the
above clinical signs exhibiting a normocytic normochromic
anemia and radiographic evidence of a linear to diffuse pul-
monary interstitial pattem associated with granulomatous fungal
pneumonia. A definitive diagnosis can be made with fine-
needle aspiration of affected tissues and effusions, and identifi-
cation of the organism within macrophages in routine
Romanowsky stains. Histopathology of tissue biopsy speci-
mens, including endoscopic samples, may be attempted when
cytologic samples fail to demonstrate the organism. Culture is
Figure 18-15. Multifocal chorioretinal granulomas, causing retinal
possible, although it is not recommended because of the poten-
dletachments, in a cat dliagnosecd with cryptococcosis. The organism was
tial hazard of the organism to humans. Serologic testing is
iclentified in an aqueous humor sample. Note that the retinal blood
vessels are coursing over some of the granulomas, indlicating their
unreliable owing to many false-positives and false-negative
intraretinal or subretinal nature.
results.
392
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Histoplasmosis is best treated with oral itraconazole, and in
Systemic toxoplasmosis can be treated with a variety of anti-
fulminating cases amphotericin B is added for a more rapid
 microbials. However, treatment results in suppression, rather
control of the disease. Fluconazole may be preferred in CNS
than killing, of the organism. Clindamycin (25 mg/kg PO q12h
or ocular disease because of its better distribution, and
for 21 to 30 days) is the drug of choice for treatment of clinical
ketoconazole may be used. The latter is not recommended as a
 disease. Combinations of sulfonamides, pyrimethamine, and
first-choice drug owing to its toxicity, although it may be
trimethoprim act synergistically in suppressing the parasite,
considered when cost is a concern. The duration of treatment
although supplementation with folic acid is advisable, espe-
should be 4 to 6 months at least. Treatment of the ocular disease
cially in cats. Other drugs that have shown in vitro and/or in
is similar to that provided in cases of blastomycosis.
vivo activity against T. gondi include doxycycline, minocycline,
newer macrolides (roxithromycin, azithromycin, clarithromycin)
Parasitic Diseases of Dogs and Cats
 and several other antibacterial drugs; however, these should be
further evaluated in dogs and cats.
TOXOPLASMOSIS (see Table 18-17). Toxoplasmosis is a
The ocular disease is treated with topical glucocorticoids and
zoonotic disease of worldwide distribution that affects all
 atropine, and in cases of posterior uveitis, systemic clindamycin
mammals and is caused by the obligate intracellular coccidian
 and glucocorticoids are indicated.
Toxoplasma gondi. Cats, the definitive hosts, shed oocysts in
their feces. Other mammals, including cats and dogs, may
Canine Parasitic Diseases
ingest sporulated oocysts. Cats are infected mostly by ingesting
intermediate hosts infected with tissue cysts and can also be
NEOSPOROSIS. Canine neosporosis has worldwide distri-
infected by ingestion of oocysts; however, only 20% of cats fed
bution. It is caused by the apicomplexan protozoan Neospora
oocysts have a patent infection. Congenital infection due to
caninum, which has a similar morphology to T. gondii. Its life
transplacental infection or through the queen's milk has been 
 cycle is at present incompletely understood. The definitive host
reported in kittens. The incidence of congenital infection in
is probably a carnivore that sheds oocysts in the feces; the
dogs is unknown.
 oocysts are ingested by herbivores, in which tissue cysts are
The brain, liver, lungs, skeletal muscle, and eyes are com-
formed. As many as 20% of dogs are seropositive, probably
 mon sites of cyst formation, initial replication, and persistence
infected subclinically and, supposedly, transplacentally during
of chronic infection.
gestation.
 In cats, ocular signs were observed in 81.5% of cases, most 
 Ocular lesions of neosporosis include mild anterior uveitis,
 commonly consisting of bilateral anterior and/or posterior
 retinitis and retinochoroiditis.
uveitis. Secondary lens luxation, glaucoma, and retinal detach-
 Serologic testing (IFA) of serum and CSF is the most com-
 ment were also described. Ocular manifestations in dogs are (in
 monly used diagnostic method for neosporosis. Most animals
 decreasing order) anterior uveitis, retinitis, choroiditis, scleritis,
with the clinical disease show an increase in IgG titers within
 optic neuritis, and episcleritis.
1 to 2 weeks of initial signs. The organism may be observed in
Cytologic preparations of e
effusions may reveal the
cytologic preparations of CSF and tissue fine-needle aspirates.
tachyzoites, which occasionally may be observed in other
  asr a s 
samples (i.e., CSF, transtracheal or bronchoalveolar lavage, and
 strate the tachyzoites or the typical thick-walled cysts. PCR
fine-needle aspirates from tissues). There are multiple serologic
analysis may prove the presence of the organism and helps in
tests for antibody detection; however, no one test is con-
its differentiation from related organisms.
firmatory, and 30% of dogs and cats in the United States are
 Treatment of neosporosis is similar to that described for
seropositive. A positive IgM titer or a fourfold increase in IgG
toxoplasmosis. Young affected animals have a guarded to poor
or IgA titer can verify a recent infection; positive IgM titers can
 prognosis, whereas adult dogs respond better to therapy.
persist for months after infection, however, and high IgG titers
VISCERAL LEISHMANIASIS. Leishmaniasis is a disease caused
have been detected 6 years after inoculation in cats. Serologic
by the dimorphic protozoans of the genus Leishmania that
tests cannot be used accurately to predict the oocyst shedding
 affects humans and animals worldwide. The natural reservoir of
period. Simultaneous measurement of Toxoplasma-specific
the parasite, dogs have clinical disease. Visceral leishmaniasis is
antibody titers in the CSF or aqueous humor and in the serum
transmitted in the Old World by sandflies of the genus
of animals presented with a neurologic and/or an ocular
Phlebotomus and is caused primarily by Leishmania infantum.
 disease, along with measurement of other agent-specific anti-
 New World visceral leishmaniasis is transmitted by sandflies of
body titers in these same samples, may help discriminate
the genus Lutzomyia and is caused by Leishmania chagasi,
between local production of Toxoplasma-specific antibodies
which is considered identical to L. infantum. In recent years,
and serum antibodies passively leaking through damaged
foci of leishmaniasis caused by L. infantum have been reported
endothelial barriers. High ratios of Toxoplasma-specific
 in the United States, mainly in foxhounds, and the disease has
antibody titers in the CSF or aqueous humor to serum titers in
been transmitted to dogs accidentally through transfusion of
comparison with other agent-specific antibody titers are
 contaminated blood products. In mammalian hosts the parasite 
evidence of local antibody production of antibodies and, thus,
is seen as the intracllular nonflagellate form, the amastigote,
suggest the presence of active infection in the CNS or eye,
within macrophages. The disease incubation period before the
respectively. The presence of the organism can be confirmed by
appearance of clinical signs may last months to years, during
inoculation of laboratory mice or cell culture, with detection of 
which the parasite disseminates in the body. Some dogs
tachyzoites or specific antibodies. The presence of T. gondii in
 develop clinical disease, whereas others remain asymptomatic
tissue and body fluid samples can also be confirmed by PCR
 carriers that are infectious to sandflies and can thus transmit the
 analysis, although a positive result cannot confirm the presence
disease to other dogs and humans. Systemic signs of visceral
of an active disease.
leishmaniasis may include dermal abnormalities (e.g., exfoliative 
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
393
dermatitis, mainly involving the head and ears), lymph-
injections of pentavalent antimonials (meglumine antimonate,
adenopathy, splenomegaly, signs of renal insufficiency, epistaxis,
sodium stibogluconate) for 3 to 4 weeks. Adverse effects and
and musculoskeletal abnormalities.
relapses are common. Oral allopurinol results in suppression of
The ocular signs include blepharitis (Figure 18-16), lid
the parasite and clinical improvement but does not cure the
granulomas (Figure 18-17), conjunctivitis, scleritis, keratitis,
disease. It has very few side effects and can be used as a sole
anterior uveitis, panophthalmitis, and secondary glaucoma.
 agent or in combination with pentavalent antimonials. Lipid-
 Serologic tests can confirm the presence of antileishmanial
associated amphotericin B has been shown to lead to clinical
antibodies but cannot prove the presence of an active disease.
improvement in sick dogs but not to eliminate the infection.
Many highly specific and sensitive serologic tests are available,
Ocular treatment is directed against the inflammatory reaction
including IFA, ELISA, direct antiglobulin test, and CF. The
and consists of topical atropine as well as glucocorticoids
presence of a high titer in a dog with the characteristic signs is
or NSAIDs.
highly suggestive of active disease. Ten percent to 20% of the
Endocrine Diseases
healthy and still harbor active infection. The amastigotes may
Endocrine Diseases of Dogs and Cats
be detected in cytologic and histologic preparations, within
DIABETES MELLITUS. Diabetes mellitus (DM), the most
 macrophages. Cuiture or PCR analysis of splenic or bone mar-
common endocrine disease in dogs and cats, is similar in inci-
row aspirates may also confrm the presence of the organism.
dence for dogs and cats, with reported frequencies of 1:100 to
Recently, PCR studies have shown that conjunctival swabs
1:500. The disease is classified to two subtypes, type I (insulin-
were the most reliable source for parasitic DNA in dogs experi-
dependent diabetes mellitus [IDDM]) and type II (non-insulin-
mentally infected with L. infantum.
dependent diabetes mellitus [NIDDM]). IDDM, the more 
 Treatment of infected dogs rarely achieves complete elimi-
common form, is seen in almost all dogs and in 50% of 70% of
nation of the parasite. Traditional treatment consists of daily
the cats with DM. This type is characterized by loss of pancreatic
beta cells and subsequent insulin deficiency, leading to
hyperglycemia. In contrast, NIDDM is uncommon in dogs, is 
observed more commonly in cats, and is characterized by insulin
 resistance. Consequently, insulin concentrations are variable
and can be normal, decreased, or increased; however, hyper-
glycemia is always present. Ketoacidosis is seen more
commonly in IDDM than in NIDDM. A transient form of DM
has been described in cats, and rarely in dogs, in which some
factor predisposes the animals to insulin antagonism and
resistance, resulting in persistent hyperglycemia. The elevated
glucose concentrations may lead to beta cell refractoriness and
even to glucose toxicity and irreversible lesions in beta cell
functions. Treatment of the underlying disease and the diabetic
state may lead to transition to subclinical DM and euglycemia,
with no requirement for insulin or other oral hypoglycemic drug
therapy.
 The most prevalent ocular sign of DM in dogs is bilateral
cataracts. Initial changes include vacuole formation along the 
equatorial cortex that progresses to the anterior and posterior
Figure 18-16. Severe blepharitis in a clog cliagnosecl with leishmaniasis.
cortex. Diabetic cataracts progress very rapidly and may reach
(Courtesy Gad Baneth.)
maturity, which may develop in a short time (days to weeks),
and owners may present with a complaint of relatively acute
blindness (Figure 18-18). Cataract formation depends on the
age of the animal as well as on the magnitude and duration of
hyperglycemia. Cataracts are detected in a high proportion of
diabetic dogs and lead to lens-induced uveitis. The tendency for
 development of a diabetic cataract depends on the activity of
aldose reductase in lenticular cells. Aldose reductase is the key
enzyme in the formation and accumulation of sorbitol, fructose,
and dulcitol in the lens. The resulting hyperosmolarity of the
lens leads to fluid ingress with subsequent swelling, fiber rupture,
and eventual cataract formation. Activity of aldose reductase in
dogs is high in the lens regardless of age, whereas in cats it is
significantly higher in those younger than 4 years than in older
cats. Because DM occurs primarily in older cats, the relatively
low aldose reductase activity protects the feline lens from
Figure 18-17. Licd granulomas (especially on the nasal aspect of the upper
cataract formation. Blindness due to diabetic cataracts can be
eyelic) and anterior uveitis (note the conjunctival and ciliary congestion
and the corneal eclema) in a cog diagnosec with leishmaniasis. (Courtesy
corrected only with surgical removal of the lens, although
Teresa M. Pena anc Xavier Roura.)
experimental work using aldose reductase inhibitors to prevent
394
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOCY
yim uonounfuoo u no sjuan alos se pasn aq ueo (aptinqalg pun
insulin. Oral vanadium therapy may also be useful in treatment
of DM. Dietary modification should always be a part of the
therapy of DM. Its aims are to minimize postprandial glucose
concentration fluctuations and treat or prevent obesity.
Modified diets for DM are limited in simple carbohydrates,
 include complex carbohydrates, and contain high fiber; some
diets, mostly feline, are high in protein. Acarbose may be used
in diabetic animals whose glucose concentration is poorly
 controlled despite insulin therapy and dietary modification. For
treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis, the reader is referred to
textbooks of veterinary internal medicine.
Canine Endocrine Diseases
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM. Hyperadrenocorticism (HAC,
Figure 18-18. Diabetic (mature) cataract in a cog. Note the prominent
anterior Y sutural clefts. (Courtesy Paul E. Miller.)
Cushing's syndrome) is a common canine endocrinopathy
characterized by glucocorticoid excess. The disease can be
caused by an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting
the development of diabetic cataracts has shown promising
hyperplastic or neoplastic pituitary gland (pituitary-dependent
results. The prognosis for successful outcome of surgery is
HAC) or a cortisol-secreting adrenocortical tumor or may be
 reportedly unaffected by the presence of DM, although peri-
iatrogenic, due to chronic excessive glucocorticoid therapy.
operative medical management has to be modifed to include
 Dogs with HAC may have concurrent DM.
 NSAIDs instead of glucocorticoids, and the incidence of long-
The ocular surface lesions associated with canine HAC include
term complications may be higher. See Chapter 13 for
 progressive, nonhealing cormeal ulceration, corneal calcification,
 additional discussion of diabetic cataracts.
and KCS. Corneal ulceration is not the direct result of HAC, but 
the high levels of endogenous glucocorticoids may delay healing
Diabetic cataracts may progress to maturity within a few
 of a corneal ulcer from other mechanisms. Cataracts are usually
 weeks. The disease should be considered in patients presented
 observed in dogs that suffer from concurrent DM. Intraocular
with rapid-onset cataracts.
manifestations include lipid accumulation in the aqueous,
lipemia retinalis, and hypertensive retinopathy. Hyperlipidemia,
 DM has also been associated with retinal and vitreal hemor-
commonly observed in dogs with HAC, and concurrent uveitis
rhages, as well as retinal detachment. This involvement of the 
are responsible for the development of lipemia retinalis and
posterior segment is more common in the cat and rare in the
lipids in the aqueous. Dogs with HAC also suffer from a
dog. The presentation is similar to diabetic retinopathy. a
relatively high incidence of sudden acquired retinal degen-
blinding disease in humans. However, microaneurysms and
eration (see Chapter 16).
 proliferative changes in retinal vasculature, which are the hall-
The diagnosis of canine HAC requires endocrine tests that in-
marks of the human disease, have not been documented in
clude urinary cortisol-to-creatinine ratio, ACTH stimulation (with
animals.
measurements of cortisol, with or without 17-hydroxyprogesterone)
 Diabetic dogs have significantly reduced corneal sensitivity
and low-dose dexamethasone suppression. Differentiation
 compared with nondiabetic normoglycemic dogs. It has been
between pituitary-dependent HAC and adrenocortical tumor
suggested that trigeminal nerve dysfunction may be associated
may require additional testing (i.e., measurement of endogenous
with recurrent or nonhealing ulcers in diabetic dogs for which
ACTH concentration and high-dose dexamethasone suppression).
 no other underlying cause can be found.
The most commonly used drug in the treatment of canine
The diagnosis of DM is based on detection of persistent
HAC is mitotane (op'-DDD); recently, however, trilostane has 
fasting hyperglycemia (or glycosuria). In addition, ketonemia
been shown to be as effective as mitotane in the treatment of
and/or ketonuria are present in ketoacidosis. Serum fructosamine 
 canine pituitary-dependent HAC. The ocular lesions are treated
or glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations may help in
symptomatically. Comeal ulcers may heal once control of HAC
differentiating stress-induced hyperglycemia from DM. Some
is achieved.
diabetic dogs and cats have concurrent hyperadrenocorticism,
HYPOTHYROIDISM. Hypothyroidism is a common canine
and diabetic cats may have concurrent hyperthyroidism.
endocrinopathy, with a prevalence of 0.2%, but is extremely
 Diagnostic procedures should include specific tests to exclude
 rare in cats. It leads to decreased production of thyroxine (T4) and
these diseases in cases where there is a high index of suspicion
triodothyronine (Ts). The disease can be the result of a hypo-
for them. Acute pancreatitis may lead to destruction of islet 
thalamic disorder leading to deficiency of thyrotropin-releasing
cells, with subsequent DM, that may be permanent or transient; 
hormone (TRH) (tertiary hypothyroidism), a pituitary disorder
therefore screening for presence of concurrent pancreatitis is
 leading to thyrotropin deficiency (secondary hypothyroidism) or
advisable. A urine culture is recommended if the urinalysis
a thyroid gland disorder (primary hypothyroidism). Most canine
 yields results consistent with urinary tract infection.
cases are primary hypothyroidism and result from lymphocytic
Treatment of uncomplicated DM is primarily aimed at
thyroiditis or idiopathic thyroid atrophy.
normalizing the glucose concentration. This is achieved prin-
The ocular manifestations of canine hypothyroidism are
cipally with insulin therapy, although in certain animals with
 primarily the result of hyperlipidemia that may lead to lipid
NIDDM, mostly cats, oral hypoglycemic drugs (e.g., glipizide
dystrophy (corneal lipidosis) (Figure 18-19) with secondary
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
395
 Hyperlipidemia may be primary (usually hereditary or familial)
or secondary, and both forms have been described in dogs and
cats, although secondary hyperlipidemia is much more com-
mon. In dogs secondary hyperlipidemia may result from
hypothyroidism, DM, hyperadrenocorticism, glomerulo-
nephropathy, pancreatitis, or cholestasis or may be due to a
high-fat diet. Similar mechanisms lead to feline hyper-
lipidemia. In cats, excessive administration of megestrol
acetate and glucocorticoids may lead to DM and secondary
hyperlipidemia.
 The ocular manifestations of hyperlipidemia include lipemia
of the ocular blood vessels, cormeal lipid keratopathy, lipemic
aqueous, and lipid infiltration of the globe, most noticeably in 
 the peripheral cornea and the uveal tract. When hyperlipidemia
 is associated with hypertriglyceridemia, visible changes may
be observed in the conjunctival and retinal blood vessels, which
cepositions of lipids in the cornea,such as thiscase,bviously affect th
look pink and engorged. Lipemic retinal blood vessels, lipemia
dlog's vision and may warrant surgical removal (superficial keratectomy).
retinalis, are more easily visualized over the nontapetal fundus
(Figure 18-20). Lipids may also be observed in the anterior
ulceration and uveitis, lipid deposition in the aqueous, and 
 chamber, usually as a result of uveitis allowing leakage from
lipemia retinalis with retinal bleeding and detachment. Sec-
vessels.
ondary glaucoma has been reported in canine hypothyroidism.
 The diagnosis of hyperlipidemia relies on the demonstration
There is an association between KCS and canine hypothy-
 of fasting hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypercholesterolemia.
roidism, and 20% of dogs with the disease have been reported
 In secondary hyperlipidemia, depending on the primary disease,
to be diagnosed with concurrent KCS. This association is prob-
further tests include urinalysis, urine protein-to-creatinine ratio,
 ably an indirect one, likely resulting from a multiple glandular,
liver function tests, serum lipase-like immunoreactivity, hor-
immune-mediated inflammation.
monal assays, abdominal ultrasonography, and a careful analysis
 The diagnosis of canine hypothyroidism is mainly based on
of the diet. In suspected cases of primary hyperlipidemia, every
evaluation of total and/or free T4 along with canine thyroid-
effort should be made to rule out the presence of another pri-
stimulating hormone (TSH) measurement. Other, more advanced 
 mary disease, and additional testing includes lipoprotein pro-
tests are responses to TSH or TRH, measurement of anti-
filing (e.g., electrophoresis, densitometry, precipitation techniques,
thyroglobulin or of anti-T and anti-T4 antibodies, scintigraphy,
 and ultracentrifugation).
and thyroid biopsy. Advanced brain imaging (computed tomo-
Treatment of secondary hyperlipidemia is directed at the
 graphy, magnetic resonance imaging) may be needed to diag-
primary disease, whereas primary hyperlipidemia is usually
nose hypothalamic or pituitary lesions leading to tertiary and
treated with low-fat diets. Treatment of the secondary ocular
secondary hypothyroidism, respectively.
 complications is essentially symptomatic. Anterior uveitis
Treatment of canine hypothyroidism essentially comprises
treatment should be provided in cases of lipemic aqueous
oral levothyroxine (L-thyroxine) supplementation (22 μg/kg
humor. Cases of comeal lipidosis in which vision is affected
q12-24h). Restriction of cholesterol and lipids in the diet is
indicated. KCS should be treated, and topical glucocorticoids 
or NSAIDS (based on presence of cormeal ulcers) should be
used to treat the secondary keratitis and uveitis. Surgical
removal of moderate corneal lipid plaques is contraindicated
because recurrence of such plaques is often more severe than
the initial lesion. Surgery is reserved for cases where
significant visual deficits occur (see Figure 18-19).
Metabolic Diseases of Dogs and Cats
HYPERLIPIDEMIA. Defned as excess blood lipids, hyper-
lipidemia can result from an increase in fasting serum
triglycerides, in cholesterol, or both. A serum (or plasma) that
appears grossly milky or turbid, referred to as hyperlipemic,
results from triglyceride excess; hypercholesterolemia does not
lead to increased serum turbidity and hyperlipemia. The term
hyperlipoproteinemia is sometimes used interchangeably with
hyperlipidemia, because lipoproteins carry both triglycerides
 and cholesterol in the plasma, and often there is a concurrent
increase in serum lipoproteins when hyperlipidemia is present.
However, this term should be reserved to cases in which
laboratory tests confrm an increase in the concentrations of
ud aui eaiday ym je e ui suan eadit oh ani
serum lipoproteins. The incidence of hyperlipidemia in the
color of the biood vessels is easily appreciated against the
cark
canine population was approximately 14% in one study.
background of the nontapetum. (Courtesy David J. Maggs.)
396
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 18-18 
 Ocular Signs of Hematologic Disorders in
toxicity, paraproteinemia, immune-mediated mechanisms (e.g.,
Dogs and Cats
antiplatelet antibodies, circulating immune complexes and
vasculitis), disseminated intravascular coagulation (fbrinogen
DISORDER
OCULAR SIGNS
degradation products excess), uremia, neoplasia (e.g,
 Monoclonal gammopathy and
 Retinal hemorrhages (small or
hemangiosarcoma), and liver failure.
hyperviscosity
Targe)
The ocular manifestations include both extraocular and
 Dilated tortuous retinal veins 
intraocular bleeding, such as subconjunctival hemorrhage,
with irregular filling
("boxcar" appearance)
hyphema, iridal petechias, and preretinal, intraretinal, and sub-
 Conjunctival hemorrhages
retinal hemorrhages. The latter may also lead to retinal
 Massive intraocular hemorrhages
 detachment and blindness. Depending on the primary cause of
(rare)
the platelet disease, anterior uveitis may also be present (e.g.,
Thrombocytopenia and 
 Subconjunctival, preretinal,
 in canine monocytic ehrlichiosis).
thrombopathy
intraretinal, and subretinal
 The diagnosis of thrombocytopenia is based on hematologic
hemorrhages
examination. Bleeding diathesis usually does not occur until
Hyphema 
 platelet numbers fall below 50,000 cells/μL and is more com-
 Seconcary retinal cletachment 
 mon in acute than in chronic conditions. Very commonly, auto-
Severe anemia
 Retinal and vitreous
 mated platelet counts in cats are falsely decreased, necessitating a
hemorrhages
 Seconcary retinal cdetachment 
manual count or a blood smear evaluation. The presence of
thrombopathy can be confirmed by measurement of buccal
 Polycythemia
 Dilated and tortuous dark red
mucosal bleeding time (provided that there is no concurrent
 to brown conjunctival and
retinal blood vessels,
thrombocytopenia). However, the diagnosis of the specific dis-
 retinal hemorrhages and 
 order requires special laboratory tests. Canine von Willebrand's
cetachment, uveitis and
factor assays are available (electroimmunoassay, ELISA).
chorioretinitis
Thrombocytopenia may be corrected by treatment of the
von Willebrandl's disease
 Retinal hemorrhages 
primary disease but this may prove difficult. Acute life-
 Retinal cletachrment 
threatening thrombocytopenia is treated with fresh whole blood
Conjunctival petechiae
 or platelet-rich plasma transfusions. Von Willebrand's disease
is treated with desmopressin and cryoprecipitate or fresh-frozen
plasma transfusions. Intraocular hemorrhage is treated with
may be treated surgically, although recurrences should be
topical steroids, and systemic glucocorticoid treatment should
considered.
be considered if the animal's systemic condition allows it.
Mydriatics should be considered to prevent possible posterior
Cardiovascular Diseases of Dogs and Cats
synechia, as should prophylactic antiglaucoma treatment.
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION. Systemic hypertension occurs
Ocular signs associated with hematologic disorders are
in both dogs and cats. It is more common in cats because this
summarized in Table 18-18.
species has a relatively higher incidence of chronic kidney
disease. Systemic hypertension has been described in chronic
BASTHENIA).
Thrombocytopenia
isa very
/common
kidney disease (cats, dogs) due to several renal disorders (e.g.-
hematologic disorder in the dog but is less frequent in cats. In
chronic interstitial nephritis, amyloidosis, glomerulonephritis,
 dogs the most common causes of thrombocytopenia are infec-
 pyelonephritis, polycystic kidney disease, renal dysplasia), HAC
tious diseases (e.g., RMSF, monocytic ehrlichiosis, infectious
(dogs, 60%), pheochromocytoma (dogs, 50%), DM (dogs, 51%),
cyclic thrombocytopenia, babesiosis), neoplasia (e.g., many
hyperthyroidism (cats, 87%), primary aldosteronism (dogs)
carcinomas and sarcomas, myeloproliferative and lympho-
and hypothyroidism (dogs), hyperkinetic cardiac syndrome
proliferative
disorders),
immune-mediated
disorders
(e.g, anemia, polycythemia, fever, arteriovenous fistula), hyper-
(e.g, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, systemic lupus
 calcemia (dogs), and hyperestrogenism. Physiologic hypertension
 erythematosus), and toxicities due to drugs (e.g., trimethoprim-
is present in gazing hounds, in which it is probably a normal
sulfamethoxazole, many cytotoxic drugs) and other substances
 phenomenon. Essential (primary, idiopathic) hypertension is
(e.g.,snakebites).
Vasculitis, neoplasia, protein-losing
 probably an extremely rare condition in dogs and has not been
enteropathy/nephropathy, and disseminated  intravascular 
 described in cats. Obesity has been described as a risk factor for 
coagulation may lead to platelet activation and consumption,
 systemic hypertension in dogs. Most (77%) of the hypertensive
and subsequently to thrombocytopenia. In cats, immune-
dogs are males.
 mediated thrombocytopenia is rare; however, FeLV infection
 The ocular lesions in systemic hypertension include retinal
 and neoplasia have been associated with thrombocytopenia.
 and papillary edema, tortuous retinal blood vessels, and pre-
Thrombopathy (thrombasthenia), a functional defect of
 retinal, intraretinal, and subretinal hemorhage. Secondary retinal
platelets, can be inherited or acquired. Inherited thrombo-
 degeneration, probably due to ischemia and/or inflammation,
pathies have been reported mostly in dogs, and include von
 is a common sequel. Animals with systemic hypertension may
Willebrand's disease (vWD, also reported in cats), basset hound
be presented with a complaint of acute blindness (with fixed,
hereditary thrombopathia, canine thrombasthenic thrombopathy,
dilated pupils) caused by bullous retinal detachment due to
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia, cyclic hematopoiesis,
and
subretinal effusion (Figure 18-21).
storage pool disease. In cats the Chediak-Higashi syndrome is
The diagnosis of systemic hypertension requires measure-
 associated with platelet function defects. Acquired thrombopathy
 ment of systolic or, preferably, systolic and diastolic blood
may accompany thrombocytopenia and can result from drug
pressures (BPs). Fractious animals may exhibit erroneously
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
397
 Table 18-19 | Normal Arterial Blood Pressure Values
(mm Hg) in the Dog and Cat
DOG
CAT
 Systolic
148 ± 16
171 ± 22
Diastolic
87 ± 8 
123 ± 17
Data ffom Gordon DB, Goldblatt H (1967): Direct percutaneous
determinationof systemic blood pressure and producion of enal
hypertension in the cat. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 125:177; and Cowgill LCD,
Kallet AJ (1986): Systemic hypertension, in Kirk RW (editor): Current
Veterinary Therapy IX, 9th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.
or several agents, depending on the clinical signs and the under-
lying disease. These drugs include oral angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (e.g., enalapril, benazepril), calcium
channel blockers (e.g., amlodipine), cardioselective adrenergic
β-blockers (e.g., atenolol), vasodilators (e.g., hydralazine), and
diuretics (e.g., furosemide). In emergency cases intravenous
Figure 18-21. Retinal cetachment in a cat with systermic hypertension.
administration of nitroprusside or hydralazine may be advised;
The retina is clearly visible as a vascularized membrane (note the folds of
however, BP and urine production should be constantly
'lldnd ay ysnoy uaas (,auequau, a)
monitored with this treatment because it may lead to a sharp
drop in glomerular filtration.
elevated BP. Therefore acclimation and several repeated mea-
Ocular treatment may be given to prevent secondary glaucoma
surements in a quiet, stress-free environment are advised. BP
 and uveitis. Topical steroids may be prescribed, and systemic
values (systolic/diastolic) exceeding 180/100 mm Hg are con-
antinflammatory treatment can be considered if the animal's
 sidered abnormally high, and values higher than 200/110 mm Hg
systemic condition allows. Some clinicians advocate therapy
to have clinical significance (Table 18-19).
with systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
 Treatment of systemic hypertension is primarily aimed at
POLYCYTHEMIA. Polycythemia is an increase in the red blood
the underlying disorder. Commonly used drugs are listed in
 cell mass above the reference range. Relative polycythemia is
Table 18-20. Antihypertensive drug therapy of systemic hyper-
 also referred to as erythrocytosis; this term is usually reserved
tension should lower the BP to a level that is not associated
for milder elevations of the hematocrit, most commonly due to
with the appearance of new lesions and probably should not
 hemoconcentration secondary to dehydration, and is a transient 
attempt to normalize the BP. Drug therapy may consist of one
condition. True polycythemia can be primary or secondary.
Table 18-20 | Antihypertensive Drugs
DOSAGE
GENERIC NAME
DOG
CAT
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME INHIBITORS
Enalapril
0.5 mg/kg PO q12-24h 
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO q12-24h
Captopril
0.5-2.0 mg/kg PO q8-12h
3.1-6.25 mg/cat PO q8-12h
 Lisinopril.
0.5 mg/kg PO q24h 
 Benazepril
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO q24h 
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO q24h
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS 
Diltiazem
0.5-1.5 mg/kg PO q8-12h to maximum of 200 mg/dlay
1.75-2.4 mg/kg g8h
 Diltiazem sustained release
10 mg/kg PO q24h
10 mg/kg PO q24h
 Amlodipine
0.1 mg/kg PO q24h or 2.5 mg/dog
0.625-1.25 mg/cat PO q24h 
β-ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS
 Propranolol
0.2-1 mg/kg PO q8 to maximum of 200 mg/dlay
0.4-1.2 mg/kg PO q8h or 2.5-5 mg/cat PO q8-12h
Atenolol
y1 Od 80p/8 521-529 10 4-1b 0d 88 z-20
2-3 mg/kg PO q12h or 6.25-12.5 mg/cat PO q12h 
β-ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS
Prazosin
 0.065 mg/kg (1 mg/15 kg) PO q8-12h
0.065 mg/kg (1 mg/15 kg) PO q8-12h
 Phenoxybenzam ine
0.2-1.5 mg/kg PO q8-12h
2.5-7.5 mg/cat PO q8-12h or 0.5 mg/kg PO q12h
VASODILATORS
Hydralazine
0.5-2 mg/kg PO q12h
2.5 mg/cat PO q12-24h
Nitroprussicde
1-10 μg/kg/min IV CR1
1-10 μgkg/min 1V CR1
DIURETICS
Chlorothiazide
20-40 mg/kg PO q12-24h
 20-40 mg/kg PO q12-24h 
 Hydrochlorothiazide
 2-4 mg/kg PO q12h
 2-4 mg/kg PO q12h
 Furosemide
1-4 mg/kg PO, iM, 1V or SC q8-12h (or as needled) 
1-4 mg/kg PO, iM, 1V or SC q8-24h 
CRI, Constant infusion rate.
398
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOCY
Primary polycythemia (polycythemia rubra vera) is a rare
 leishmaniasis). The increase of serum viscosity, which is due to
myeloproliferative disorder more commonly observed in cats
 the production and greater serum concentration of paraproteins,
(associated with FeLV infection) than in dogs. It is charac-
occurs more commonly with IgM class paraproteins (ie., macro-
terized by an abnormal proliferation of erythrocytes, platelets,
globulinemia); however, IgA and IgG paraproteins have also
 and granulocytes; serum erythropoietin (EPO) concentrations
sop jq u auus sady cn pa oi ai ag
-Alod Ars pasaa Aipu no leou Ansn an
and cats. Clinical signs appear when serum viscosity rises to
cythemia may be appropriate and inappropriate and is
four to five times the normal level. Approximately 20% of the
associated with general hypoxemia or hypoxia, respectively.
 dogs with multiple myeloma have hyperviscosity syndrome.
Chronic cardiopulmonary disorders, such as pulmonary
The ocular signs of hyperviscosity syndrome include dilated,
neoplasia and right-to-left cardiac shunts, lead to hypoxemia,
congested, tortuous retinal blood vessels, kinking of retinal blood
whereas renal neoplasia or neoplastic disorders of other
 vessels, papillary edema, retinal hemorrhages, intraretinal cysts,
 abdominal organs may cause renal arterial blood flow obstruc-
 bullous retinal detachment, retinal degeneration, and blindness.
tion and, consequently, renal hypoxia and a resultant increase
 Uveitis and secondary glaucoma have also been reported.
in EPO concentrations. Hemoglobin disorders may also cause
The diagnosis of hyperviscosity syndrome is based on serum
hypoxemia but are extremely rare in dogs and cats. All of these
mechanisms lead to increases in production of EPO and its
to diagnose the specific causative disease. The diagnosis of
release from the hypoxic kidney, resulting in higher serum EPO
 multiple myeloma (and macroglobulinemia) may require serum
concentrations, and, subsequently, in greater erythropoiesis and
electrophoresis and immunoelectrophoresis, skeletal survey
secondary polycythemia. EPO-secreting tumors have been
radiographs, urinary heat precipitation test, and immuno-
reported rarely in humans and dogs (leiomyosarcoma,
electrophoresis, whereas the definitive diagnosis usually
schwannoma) and were associated with secondary inappropriate
requires a bone marrow aspirate or core biopsy. The diagnosis
polycythemia. Polycythemia leads to hyperviscosity, which
of lymphosarcoma may call for fine-needle aspirates or
reduces blood flow in the microcirculation resulting in local
biopsies from lymphoid and visceral organs, thoracic radio-
tissue hypoxia.
graphy, and abdominal ultrasonography. The diagnosis of
 The ocular signs include dilated and tortuous dark red to
chronic lymphocytic leukemia is based on hematologic tests 
brown conjunctival vessels, and the owner may complain of a
(e.g., complete blood count and peripheral blood cytology) and
"red eye" Similar changes are seen in the retinal vasculature,
bone marrow cytology.
 and retinal vessels are described as having a "boxcar appearance"
Multiple myeloma is best treated with melphalan or with
(i.e., intermittent dilatation and constriction of vessels). With
other alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide and chlor-
progression, retinal hemorrhages and detachment occur.
ambucil. Some texts recommend the use of glucocorticoids,
Uveitis and chorioretinitis were observed in dogs with poly-
especially in presence of hypercalcemia and during te initial
cythemia vera.
phase of treatment. Lymphoma is treated with a multidrug
 Examinations to diagnose polycythemia include hemato-
chemotherapeutical protocol, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia
logic profile, serum biochemistry, and urinalysis to dif-
is usually treated with glucocorticoids and chlorambucil.
ferentiate relative (erythrocytosis) from absolute polycythemia.
 Plasmapheresis is the preferred mode of therapy to treat hyper.
 Further tests, such as arterial blood gas measurement, thoracic
viscosity. Ocular treatment is symptomatic.
radiography, abdominal ultrasonography, and serum EPO
 concentration measurements, should be considered. In secondary
Immune-Mediated Diseases in Dogs
polycythemia, the serum EPO concentration will be increased,
whereas in primary polycythemia it will be low normal to
UVEODERMATOLOGIC  SYNDROME (VOGT-KOYANAGI-
 decreased. Bone marrow cytologic examination shows erythroid
HARADA-LIKE SYNDROME). The uveodermatologic syndrome
hyperplasia and a decrease in the myeloid-to-erythroid (M:E)
has been described in humans as well as in several dog breeds,
 ratio in all polycythemic patients and thus is not diagnostically
including Samoyed, old English sheepdog, Siberian husky,
useful.
Saint Bernard, Akita, Irish setter, chow chow, Shetland sheep-
 Relative polycythemia is treated with fluid therapy. Severe
 dog, golden retriever, and Australian shepherd. The mean reported
polycythemia is treated with repeated phlebotomies (10 to
age was 3 years, and the ocular signs most commonly preceded
20 mL/kg per treatment, until reaching a hematocrit of 50% to
 the dermatologic lesions. The syndrome is a combination of
55%). The treatment of secondary absolute polycythemia is
several dermatologic signs (i.e., poliosis, vitiligo, and some-
aimed at the primary disease whenever possible. In poly-
times ulceration) and ocular signs. Meningitis or meningo-
cythemia rubra vera and in cases of secondary absolute
 encephalitis has been reported in the human disease; however,
 polycythemia in which correction of the primary disease is not
these complications are extremely rare in dogs. The cutaneous
possible (e.g., cyanotic heart disease), repeated phlebotomies
 manifestations are most commonly restricted to the head area,
and oral hydroxyurea (30 to 50 mg/kg q24h for 7 days, and then
occurring in the planum nasale (Figure 18-22), eyelids, and
titration of dosage to effect) are recommended. Resolution of
lips, but the footpads and the scrotum may be affected. The
the ocular signs has been observed in cases in which
 immunohistochemical findings in a recent study have suggested
 polycythemia was resolved.
that the skin lesions were mediated by T cells and macrophages
HYPERVISCOSITY SYNDROME. In dogs and cats hyper-
(Th1 immunity), whereas the ocular lesions were more consistent
viscosity syndrome is most commonly associated with malig-
 with a B-cell and macrophage response (Th2 immunity). These
nancies such as multiple myeloma, chronic lymphocytic
immune reactions are directed against melanocytes in the skin
leukemia, lymphoma, and plasmacytoma (solitary osseous or
 and in the (anterior and posterior) uvea.
extramedullary); however, it may also occur in certain infec-
 The ocular disease is manifested as a bilateral uveitis—anterior
tious inflammatory diseases (e.g., canine ehrlichiosis and
uveitis or both anterior and posterior uveitis (panuveitis).
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
399
Table 18-21 
 Systemic Causes of Conjunctivitis* in
Horses and Cattle
CAUSES
HORSE
cOW
Viral dliseases
Equine influenza
 Bluetonguet
Equine herpes (EHV-2)
 Infectious bovine
Equine acenovirus
rhinotracheitis
 African horse sickness
(BHV-1)
 Bacterial and
Chlamydophila
 related diseases
(formerly
Chiamydia)
psittacit
Mycoptasma spp.t
Mannheimia
(Pasteurefla)
pneumonia
Leptospira pomona
Figure 18-22. Depigmentation of the nasal planum in a 4-year-old
(experimentally
seconclary glaucoma led to loss of vision in both eyes clespite treatment
induced)
Septicemia
with azathioprine.
Listeriosist
 Protozoal diseases
Babesiosist
 Secondary ocular lesions, including cataract, posterior synechia,
Trypanosoma spp.t
glaucoma, bullous retinal detachment, retinal and optic nerve
 Fungal diseases
Histoplasmosiss
atrophy, and acute blindness, are common. There is progressive 
 Parasitic diseases 
Habronemiasis
Gedoelstiasist
 depigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium in the non-
 Onchocerca cervicalis
tapetum, tapetal hyperreflectivity, and attenuation of the retinal
 Immune-medliated  Pemphigus foliaceus 
blood vessels.
diseases
 The diagnosis is based mainly on signalment and clinical
 Neoplastic diseases Lymphoma/lymphosarcoma 
presentation—in other words, on a combination of the ocular and
Toxic diseases
Generalized
Vetch poisoning
dermatologic lesions. Histopathologic examination of the
granulomatous
cutaneous lesions demonstrates a lichenoid dermatosis with
disease
dermal infiltration of histiocytes and lymphocytes and some giant
cells as well as decreased melanin in the dermis and hair follicles.
*Associated ocular signs include ocular discharge/secretion, chemosis,
Medical treatment consists of oral glucocorticoids and
con gestion, and follic ular hyperplasia.
fCauses disease in both bovine and ovine species.
azathioprine for long periods (up to lifelong), combined with 
Causes disease in ovine species.
topical corticosteroids, NSAIDs, and atropine. In humans, an
 May cause ulceration of the conjunchiva and thereby lead to secondary
intravitreal triamcinolone-acetonide injection has led to improve-
corneal imi tation.
ment in vision and uveitis. Topical cyclosporine therapy has
 also been suggested. Treatment of the secondary complications
of the syndrome is essentially symptomatic, and some
 recur from a latent phase. The virus was successfully recovered
complications (e.g., glaucoma, cataract) may require surgical
 from horses experimentally treated with corticosteroids, and it
intervention. Long-term prognosis for vision is usually poor.
 has also been found in lymph nodes of horses with no clinical
Recently, successful results were reported in a dog with use of
signs of the disease. As with other viral respiratory diseases,
oral and topical prednisone, along with 1% indomethacin eye-
 rhinotracheitis is characterized by a high fever (up to 41° C)
drops, methylprednisone (twice via the subconjunctival route at 
that is often biphasic and a serous to mucopurulent nasal dis-
an interval of 15 days), and dorzolamide and timolol eyedrops,
 charge. In experimentally infected pony foals, mandibular
to prevent the development of secondary glaucoma due to
lymph nodes were more significantly enlarged and coughs were
 posterior synechiae. Both dermatologic and ophthalmic signs
less prominent with herpesvirus infection than with influenza
showed good improvement, vision was preserved, and some
 infection. Leukopenia is the typical hematologic response.
 repigmentation of the skin and hair occurred.
Conjunctivitis or keratitis may be observed, and a purulent
ocular discharge could develop. Experimental infection of six
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC
foals resulted in bilateral chorioretinitis with mononuclear cell
DISEASES IN HORSES (Tables 18-21 to 18-32)
 infltration in one foal. Rhinotracheitis or rhinopneumonitis is
Infectious Diseases
usually a self-limiting disease, but topical antibiotics may be
used to control secondary bacterial infections.
Viral Respiratory Diseases
EHV-1 may also cause abortions or weakness in neonatal
EQUINE HERPESVIRUS (RHINOTRACHEITIS OR RHINO-
foals within the first week of life, as well as neurologic disease,
 PNEUMONITIS). Rhinotracheitis or rhinopneumonitis is a
which is apparently due to an immune complex vasculitis.
contagious viral respiratory disease caused by a member of the
Horses with neurologic disease may demonstrate nystagmus or
Alphaherpesvirinae subfamily (equine herpesvirus [EHV]-1 or
blindness, depending on the location of the CNS lesions.
EHV-4). It is difficult to differentiate clinically from signs due
Exposure keratitis or KCS secondary to facial paralysis and
to other respiratory viruses. Infection is transmitted by aerosol,
ulcerative lesions due to prolonged recumbency have also been
and the incubation period is 3 to 7 days. The disorder may also
documented.
400
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Table 18-22
 Systemic Causes of Miscellaneous
Table 18-23 | Systemic Causes of Keratitis/
Conjunctival Disorders in Horses and
Keratoconjunctivitis* in Horses and Cattle
Cattle
CAUSES
HORSE
cOW
DISORDER
HORSE
COW
Viral diseases
Equine viral arteritis 
Bovine viral cliarrhea
Conjunctival/
Equine infectious
 Bovine viral cliarrhea
Equine influenza
Infectious bovine
subconjunctival
anemia 
Septicemia 
 Equine herpes (EHV-2)
rhinotracheitis
hemorrhage
 African horse sickness 
Trypanosoma spp.
(BHV-1)
Babesiosis
Bracken fern toxicity
 Malignant catarrhal
 Potomac horse fever
Warfarin/coumarin
fevert
Lymphoma/
toxicity
Bacterial and 
 leptospirosis
Chiamydophita
 lymphosarcoma
Multiple myeloma
related diseases
(former ly
Chlamydia)
Equine purpura
psittacit
hemorrhagica
Mycopiasma spp.t
 Neonatal
Leptospira pomona
 maladjustment
(experimentally
Neonatal
induced)
Mycobacterium ovist
isoerythrolysis
Listeriosist
 Immune-meciated 
 Protozoal diseases
Trypanosoma spp.t
 hemolytic anemia
Fungal dliseases
Histoplasmosis
 Conjunctival icterus Equine infectious 
Babesiosis
Toxic plant ingestion 
Parasitic cliseases
Habronemiasis
 anem ia
Gedoelstiasist
Leptospirosis
Onchocerca cervicalis
 Elaeophorosis
Babesiosis
Tyzzer's dlisease
Immune-mediated
Combined 
ciseases
immunodleficiency
Generalized 
 granulomatous
Toxic dliseases
 Generalized
 Anhydrous ammonia
disease
granulomatous
poisoning
 Neonatal 
disease
Phenothiazine
 isoerythrolysis
 poisoning
Toxic plant ingestion
*Associated ocular sigms include epiphora and discharge, blepharospasm,
conjunchival congestion, and corneal edema, vascularization, inflraion,
ulceralion, and pigmentation.
EQUINE VIRAL ARTERITIS. Equine viral arteritis is an
tCauses disease in both bovine and ovine species.
arterivirus infection that causes vasculitis leading to abortion,
tCauses disease in ovine spec ies.
respiratory disease, and even death. It can be transmitted by
inhalation or venereally. There is a chronic carrier state in
resolve with resolution of the respiratory signs and do not
stallions. Clinical signs of the respiratory disease include
require local treatment.
 pyrexia (up to 40.59 C) for 1 to 5 days, anorexia, depression,
serous nasal discharge, lacrimation, and coughing. Edema of
Bacterial Diseases
the limbs, eyelids, and scrotum is characteristic but is not seen
 in all cases. Leukopenia is found on hematologic evaluation.
STRANGLES. Streptococcus equi causes the disease known
 Neonatal foals may die acutely or may show severe respiratory
 as "'strangles" in horses. It affects primarily younger horses but
signs. One ocular sign is serous to mucoid ocular discharge, as
 may affect older horses that are immunologically naive. S. equi
in the other respiratory viruses, but periorbital edema may also
 infection is transmitted by direct contact or via fomites such as
be seen. Corneal opacity and photophobia have been described.
water troughs, feed bunks, pastures, and stalls. The organism
 EQUINE INFLUENZA. Equine influenza is a contagious viral
can survive at least 3 months in the environment. The disease
respiratory disease caused by the orthomyxovirus known as
usually causes fever and respiratory signs. The name is derived
Equine influenza, particularly subtype 2 (AE-2). Outbreaks are
from the propensity of the organism to produce abscesses of
more common in cooler, humid weather, as in winter and
lymph nodes, particularly around the head and upper neck,
spring, depending on the climate. Horses 1 to 3 years of age are
 which can lead to suffocation through obstruction of the pharynx.
 more susceptible during outbreaks. Infection occurs by aerosol,
 Other lymph nodes, such as the mesenteric nodes, may also be
and the incubation time is 1 to 3 days. The damage to respi-
ratory epithelial cells reduces the mucociliary clearance rate,
 Pharyngeal lymph nodes often drain before the horse recovers.
apparently leading to secondary bacterial infections. Clinical
 r       a 
signs include elevated rectal temperatures (40° to 41° C) that
including dacryocystitis and transient KCS. The ocular dis-
may be biphasic, reduced appetite, serous to mucoid nasal dis-
charge is often serous initially and mucopurulent later. Intra-
charge, enlarged mandibular lymph nodes, and a cough. The 
ocular manifestations include anterior uveitis, panuveitis,
cough may be very deep and last for several weeks. Detection
chorioretinitis, retinal detachment, vitreous abscess, and optic
of viral antigen up to 3 weeks after infection within vacuoles of
 neuritis. Ocular discharge and chorioretinal depigmentation in
alveolar macrophages has been reported. Hematologic changes
the nontapetal fundus of several horses have been described
 include lymphopenia and eosinopenia followed by monocytosis a
 in one report. The depigmentation resolved spontaneously. In
few days later Ocular signs include epiphora and conjunctivitis
one case, anterior uveitis developed 10 days after Strangles
 (serous and erythematous) or keratoconjunctivitis, which usually
and subsequently progressed to cormeal stromal abscesses and
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
401
Table 18-24
 Systemic Causes of Anterior Uveitis* in
Recovered horses may shed Salmonella for months. Other
Horses and Cattle
manifestations of salmonella infections are chronic colitis and
abortions in adult horses and respiratory infections, spinal
CAUSES
HORSE
cOW
abscesses, and septic arthritis in neonates. Signs of ocular involve-
Viral diseases
 Equine adenovirus-
Malignant catarrhal
ment include anterior uveitis and hypopyon. The organism has
microscopic
fever
 been cultured from the anterior chamber.
panuveitis
 LEPTOSPIROSIS. Leptospira interrogans serovar pomona, a
 Bacterial and
Leptospirosist
Listeriosis
spirochete, has been documented in several foals and a stallion
 related diseases
Strangles
Leptospira pomona
over the past decade. Pathogenetically, infection with the
{Streptococcus equi)
(experimentally
bacteria primarily causes a vasculitis and endothelitis in multi-
Lyme diseaset
inducedt
ple organs, particularly the kidneys and liver. Clinical signs
Salmonellosis
Mycobacterium bovis
Brucella spp.t
Septicemia
include fever, depression, and partial anorexia. Azotemia is
 Potomac horse fevert
Trypanosoma spp.
common. Gross hematuria has been observed in one foal, and
 Protozoal diseases
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma gondli
leptospiruria detected in one foal. Leptospirosis should be
(suspected)
considered in cases of acute renal failure with no obvious
Parasitic diseases
Onchocerca cervicalist
Elaeophorosis
etiology. Leptospirosis also causes abortions, although less
Setaria spp.
commonly in mares than in cows. Mares may show fever,
Dirofitaria spp.
depression and anorexia, and icterus for 3 to 4 days. Abortions
Halicephatobus detetrix
occur 1 to 3 weeks later. Abortions are more common from the
Neoplastic dliseases
Lymphoma/
 seventh month of pregnancy to term. Placentitis via ascending
 lymphosarcoma 
infections through the cervix is the primary cause.
Other systemic
Multiple myeloma*
 Uveitis has been associated with leptospirosis but primarily
causes
weeks to months after the acute disease. Uveitis was not seen
Foal cliseases
 Sepsis ancd failure of
until 18 to 24 months after the acute outbreak of leptospirosis 
passive transfer
in one account. In an experimental infection the uveitis appeared
Tyzzer's disease*
no earlier than 1 year after infection and as late as 2 years later.
Immune-meciated
Leptospira has been implicated as causing corneal opacities,
 hemolytic anemiat
Rhodococcus equit
anterior uveitis, equine recurrent uveitis, peripapillary
Neonatal isoerythrolysist
 chorioretinitis (Figure 18-23), and optic neuropathies, at least
Combined
 in experimentally infected horses. The association with equine
immunodeficiency
recurrent uveitis may be directly due to bacterial infection or
*Associated ocular signs include comeal edema, flare (hypopyon/hyphema),
secondary to an immunologic reaction to infection. Even when
antigen to Leptospira was found in the eye, antibiotic treatment 
photophobia. Secondary glaucoma and lens luxalion are posible sequelae.
did not decrease the inflammation. Serum titers for leptospira
Photophobia can also be caused by equine herpesvirus 2, equine viral
organisms were similar in horses with or without uveitis, but
arteritis, Leptospira, and Onchocerca in the horse.
 there were significant vitreous titers in 67% of eyes with uveitis
tHas been implic ated as a potential cause of equine recurrent uveiis.
tHas been shown to cause hyphema.
and 0% in eyes without uveitis, indicating probably intraocular
synthesis of antibodies. Direct culture of Leptospira from vitreous
material taken from horses affected by equine recurrent uveitis
 panophthalmitis. The organism was cultured from the eye. In a
was first reported in 1998 (9% of cases). Brem et al. (1998) report 
case of a brain abscess due to S. equi, the horse was blind.
that two serovars were isolated, Leptospira grippotyphosa in three
SALMONELLOSIS. Salmonellosis typically causes an acute
cases and a serovar out of the serogroup Australis in one case.
 colitis characterized by profuse watery diarrhea, endotoxemia,
LYME DISEASE. B. burgdorferi has been reported to cause
 and coagulopathies with many severe sequelae, such as laminitis
 polyarthritis in horses. One case report described organisms cul-
 and acute renal failure. Horses are often depressed, dehydrated,
 tured from the anterior chamber. Spirochetes of B. burgdorferi were
febrile, and tachycardic and may exhibit abdominal pain.
identified within the eye of a pony with arthritis and panuveitis.
Table 18-25 | Systemic Diseases Causing Posterior Uveitis* in Horses and Cattle
CAUSES
HORSE
COW
Viral diseases
Equine herpesvirus (experimental infection)
 Malignant catarrhal fever
 Bacterial anc relatec cliseases 
Leptospirosis
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis (TEME)
Strangles (Streptococcus equi)
Mycobacterium bovis
Lyme dlisease
Leptospira pomona (experirmentally inducel) 
Tuberculosis
Protozoal diseases
Toxoplasmosis 
Toxoplasmosis
Parasitic diseases
Onchocerca cervicalis
Elaeophorosis
Halicephalobus detetrix
Immune-mediated dliseases 
Combined irnmunodeficiency
 Foal/calf diseases
 Sepsis anc failure of passive transfer 
Septicemia
Toxic diseases 
Generalized granulomatous disease
Jncludes choriorenitis and choroidiis.Associated signsncludeeinal edema and hemohage,subretinaleffusion and hemohage,vascular cuffng,and loss
of vision. Retinal detachment and retinal atrophy are possible sequelae.
402
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Table 18-26
Systemic Causes of Retinal Detachment, Hemorrhage, Atrophy, and Choroidal Depigmentation in Horses
and Cattle
DISORDER
HORSE
cOW
 Retinal cletachrment 
Strangles
Bovine viral cliarrhea
Tuberculosis
Mycobacterium bovis
Lyme disease
Scrapie
Hydatid disease
Septicemia
Leptospirosis
Lymphoma/lymphosarcoma
Multiple myeloma
 Failure of passive transfer and sepsis
 Combined immunodeficiency 
Retinal hermorrhage
 Equine infectious anemia
Bovine viral cliarrhea
 Sepsis ancd failure of passive transfer
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis (TEME)
 Neonatal maladjustment syndrome
Leptospira pomona (experimentally inducedl)
Hypovitaminosis A
Septicemia 
Retinal atrophy
Lyme cisease
Arthrogryposis-hydrencephaly
Bluetongue
Bovine viral cliarrhea
Septicemia 
Elaeophorosis
Hypovitaminosis A
Choroidal/nontapetal cepigmentation
 Equine motor neuron disease
Streptococcus spp.
Severe panuveitis with hyphema may occur, resulting in
B. caballi can be passed vertically from one tick generation to
 ocular hypotony or secondary glaucoma. Chronic inflammation
the next, but T. equi is considered to be more pathogenic and
may lead to rubeosis iridis (preiridal fibrovascular membranes,
tends to produce a carrier state in the horse. The ocular sign
which appear clinically as congestion of the iris vessels),iridal
most commonly seen is icterus of the conjunctiva and sclera.
hyperpigmentation, posterior synechiae, cataract, retinal
 Petechial hemorrhages of the conjunctiva, swelling of the 
 atrophy and detachment, and blindness.
periorbital fossa and eyelids as well as serous ocular discharge
have also been reported with varying frequencies.
Protozoal Diseases
POTOMAC HORSE FEVER. Neorickettsia risticii (formerly
Ehrlichia ristici) is a known cause of Potomac horse fever
BABESIOSIS (PIROPLASMOSIS). Babesiosis (piroplasmosis)
(PHF), a disease characterized by enterocolitis in horses. The
is a tick-borne protozoan parasitic disease affecting red blood
disease causes clinical signs of acute colitis similar to those of
cells. Horses may be infected with Babesia caballi or Theileria
 salmonellosis. The diarrhea can be profuse and watery and may
equi (formerly known as Babesia equi). Typical signs of acute
babesiosis include fever (39° to 42° C), hemolytic anemia, and
jaundice. Hemoglobinuria and death can occur. B. caballi can
be recognized as large intraerythrocytic organisms on blood
smears, whereas T. equi is smaller and is often seen as four
organisms in one erythrocyte, forming a "Maltese cross"
Table 18-27 |
 Systemic Causes of Optic Nerve Disease in
Horses and Cattle
DISEASE
HORSE
COW
 Optic neuropathy
leptospirosis
Arthrogryposis-
Intracranial
hycrencephaly
abscess/neoplasia
 Bovine viral dliarrhea
Elaeophorosis
Male fern poisoning
Optic neuritis
Strangles
 Bovine viral dliarrhea 
Aspergillosis
Trypanosoma spp.
Infectious meningitis
Coenurosis
Neonatal
Polioencephalormalacia
maladjustment
 Hypovitaminosis A
Figure 18-23. Peripapillary chorioretinal changes in a horse with chronic
syndrome
equine recurrent uveitis that was also seropositive for leptospirosis. The
Intracranial
pale lesions around the optic clisc, called "butterfly lesions," are
abscess/neoplasia
pathognormonic for the chorioretinitis that characterizes the disease.
(Courtesy Paul E. Miller.)
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
403
Table 18-28 | Systemic Causes of Central Blindness in Horses and Cattle*
CAUSES
HORSE
cOW
Viral diseases
Equine herpesvirus
Arthrogryposis-hycrencephaly
Viral encephalitis
Bovine viral cliarrhea
 Bacterial dliseases
Strangles (Streptococcus equi)
Listeriosis
 Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis (TEME)
Protozoal diseases
Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
Parasitic diseases
Coenurosis
 Neurologic dliseases
Leukoencephalomalacia
Polyneuritis equi
Intracranial neoplasia/abscess
Metabolic diseases
 Polioencephalomac ia 
Pregnancy toxemia/ketosis
Hypovitaminosis A
Poisonings
 Thiamine ceficiency
Lead toxicity
Foal diseases
 Neonatal maladljustment syncrome
Benign epilepsy of the Arabian foal
*Optic nerve and retinal disorders may also cause blindness.
be accompanied by endotoxemia. Endotoxemia is charac-
 Lesions may be seen on limbs, ventral body, prepuce, urethral
terized by fever, leukopenia, congested mucous membranes,
 process of the penis, commissure of the lips, and any other area
and hypercoagulability. Complications include sequelae typical
of traumatized skin, but also in the conjunctiva and medial
of endotoxemia, but hypoproteinemia and laminitis are more
canthus of the eye. The granulation tissue may be a hyper-
commonly seen. N. risticii has also been associated with abortion
sensitivity reaction to dead or dying larvae.
between 6 and 8 months of pregnancy, but the incidence is not
When 63 cases were reviewed, ocular lesions were the most
known. The organism may directly infect the eye, or ocular
common, being seen either at the medial canthus (17 cases) or in
complications may result from systemic reaction to the disease.
the third eyelid (8 cases). Lesions were described as raised,
Hemorrhages may occur on the ocular surfaces, and infection
 proliferative, nonhealing wounds or granulation tissue with sulfur
 of the eye may result in anterior uveitis and hyphema.
granules, mucopurulent discharge, chemosis, and injection of
conjunctival vessels. The lesions may be friable and pruritic and
Parasitic Diseases
may bleed easily. Fistulous tracts and subdermal nodules may
develop below the medial canthus (Figure 18-24). The sulfur
HABRONEMIASIS. The larvae of the nematodes Habronemd
granules often seen are 1 to 2 mm in size. Cormeal vascularization
muscae, Habronema majus, and Draschia megastoma cause
and edema can occur as a result of irritation of the cornea and
ulcerative cutaneous granulomas in horses. The adult nematodes
altered lid function. Occasionally, corneal ulcers (2/17 in one 
inhabit the stomach. The eggs and larvae pass through the
study) and blepharospasm have been reported. Compared with
feces and are ingested by the maggots of the intermediate hosts
the control population, Arabian horses were overrepresented,
(Musca domestica and Stomoxys calcitrans). The adult flies
 and thoroughbreds underrepresented. Color distribution may be
then deposit the larvae onto the mucous membranes, abraded
a confounder, however, because horses of lighter colors are
skin, or open wounds in the horse. The disease occurs in the
overrepresented compared with those of darker color, and
summer. Affected horses are predisposed to yearly recurrences.
 Arabians tend to be lighter in color than thoroughbreds. There 
The infected area develops either proliferative, exuberant
were no cases in horses younger than l year.
granulation tissue or ulcerative, nodular, and tumorous masses,
which may have the characteristic yellow (sulfur) granules.
Table 18-29
 Systemic Causes of Neuroophthalmic
Disorders in Horses and Cattle
DISORDER
HORSE
cOW
Nystagmus
Equine herpesvirus
Listeriosis
Equine protozoal
Thromboembolic
 myeloencepha litis
 meningoencephalitis
Viral encephalitis 
(TEME)
 Infectious meningitis
 Polioencephalomalacia
Intracranial abscess/neoplasia
Hypovitaminosis A
Unilateral vestibular clisease
Tyzzer's disease
Strabismus
Viral encephalitis
Listeriosis
 lnfectious meningitis
Thromboembolic
 Intracranial abscess/neoplasia 
 meningoencephalitis
Vestibular dlisease
(TEME)
 Hypovitaminosis A
Tetanus
Figure 18-24. Habronemiasis in a horse. The nematode infestation causec
an ulcer at the medlial canthus, which drained into a fistulous tract.
404
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 18-30 
 Systemic Causes of Orbital Disorders in
observed. The former is characterized by photophobia,
Horses and Cattle
epiphora, miosis, aqueous flare, iris congestion, and hypotony.
The latter is seen funduscopically as hyporeflective areas
DISORDER
HORSE
COW
 representing retinal edema. Inflammation around the optic
Exophthalmos
Cryptococcosis
 Polioencephalomalacia
 papilla in a butterfly-shaped pattern may be present (see Figure
Hydatid disease
Lymphoma/
18-23) but is often hard to see owing to vitreous and aqueous
Intracranial
lymphosarcoma
opacification. Intraocular changes usually occur together with
 abscess/neoplasia
Cedoelstiasis
the eyelid lesions, suggesting that the initial invasion is in the
 Lyrmphoma/lymphosarcoma Hypovitaminosis A
eyelids. Intraocular filariae have been reported within the
 Periorbital 
 Equine viral arteritis
anterior chamber. O. cervicalis has also been implicated as a
cistention/
African horse sickness
Babesiosis
cause of equine recurrent uveitis.
edema 
Cryptococcosis
Setaria INFECTION. Setaria are primarily filarial parasites of
 Malignant ecema
 cattle, which may aberrantly infect horses intraabdominally or
Intracranial
in the spinal cord where they cause clinical signs of CNS
 abscess/neoplasia
disease. Reported cases included clinical signs of a hypotonic
Equine purpura 
hemorrhagica
tail, bladder paralysis, ataxia, and conscious proprioceptive
deficits.Setaria digitata and Setaria equina occasionally
 Orbital cellulitis
Actinomycosis
invade the eye, causing severe intraocular inflammation. They
are the most common intraocular nematodes in the horse, parti-
Table 18-31 
 Systemic Causes of Pupillary Disorders in
cularly S. digitata. Successful surgical removal of the parasites
the Horse
from the anterior chamber has been reported.
DISORDER
CAUSES
Neurologic Diseases
Horner's syndrome
Aspergillosis 
Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
 EQUINE PROTOZOAL MYELOENCEPHALITIS. Equine proto-
Intracranial abscess/neoplasia
zoal myeloencephalitis (EPM) is a multifocal, progressive disease
Vestibular clisordlers
Abnormal pupillary
Botulism
of the CNS, most commonly caused by Sarcocystis neurona,
light reaction
Leukoencephalomalacia
although there have been reports of Neospora spp. as a cause.
Viral encephalitis 
 Clinical signs vary with the areas of the CNS affected. Originally
 Infectious meningitis
the disease was described as causing asymmetric ataxia and
Intracranial abscess/neoplasia
associated muscle atrophy; however, involvement of cranial
nerves and lesions of the cerebrum has also been reported. Ocular
changes, including exposure keratopathy secondary to facial
CUTANEOUS ONCHOCERCIASIS. Cutaneous onchocerciasis,
paralysis and decreased tear production, have been reported.
a dermatitis caused by the microfilariae of Onchocerca cervicalis,
Ptosis, enophthalmos, and prominence of the supraorbital
 is seen primarily in adult horses. The adult parasites are found
 process due to muscle denervation atrophy, Horner's syndrome,
in the funicular part of the ligamentum nuchae. The females
nystagmus, and blindness have also been reported. Horner's
 produce microfilariae that migrate to the superficial dermis.
syndrome is a neurologic condition relating to an interruption of
The larvae are ingested by the vector, Culicoides, and trans-
the ocular sympathetic pathways. In horses, the signs of Hormer's
 mitted to other horses after development of the larvae within
 syndrome primarily include ptosis, sweating, and warmth on the
the vector. Cutaneous lesions include diffuse or patchy
 denervated side. Other signs seen in small animals with Hormer's
alopecia, erythema, and scaling. Focal cutaneous depigmen-
 syndrome, such as miosis and enophthalmos with elevation of
tation is common. Most of the lesions are found on the ventral
the third eyelid, are not prominent in the horse.
midline, the lower eyelid, and the lateral limbus of the eye.
 VIRAL ENCEPHALITIS. The viruses of the Togaviridae family of
Some are also found at the base of the mane as well as on the
arboviruses cause encephalitides in horses. The most prominent
 dorsomedial proximal forelimbs and cranial pectoral region. A
 are members of the alphaviruses, which cause Eastern Westem,
 bull's-eye lesion in the center of the forehead is characteristic.
and Venezuelan equine encephalitides. Flaviviridae can also
 The lesions are nonseasonal and nonpruritic in most cases.
cause encephalitis, such as West Nile fever, and Japanese,
 Ocular involvement is common in cutaneous onchocerciasis,
 California, St. Louis, and Murray Valley encephalitides as well as
being seen in 10% to 50% of cases. Initially there is chemosis
 Cache Valley, Main Drain, and Borna fever. The clinical signs of
and hyperemia of the conjunctiva accompanied by increased
all of the encephalitides are similar. Fever is often reported
lacrimation and blepharospasm. Later, conjunctivitis, keratitis,
early in the disease. Neurologic signs related to diffuse
 depigmentation of the lateral limbus, and intraocular lesions are
encephalitis—depression, constant walking, head-pressing,
observed. Small, raised, white nodules (0.5 to 2 mm in diameter)
constant chewing movements and ataxia—have been reported
in the limbal conjunctiva and punctate, subepithelial corneal 
 with Eastern and Western equine encephalitis. Additional signs,
 opacities of similar size are commonly present. Corneal lesions 
such as blindness, circling, excitement, and aggressive behavior,
are often wedge-shaped with the base of the triangle at the
may also develop. As cortical damage worsens, paralysis of
limbus and are characterized by varying degrees of superficial
larynx, pharynx, and tongue may develop along with loss of
and deep neovascularization and cellular stromal infltrates.
brainstem function, leading to head tilt, nystagmus, strabismus,
Lesions may progressively enlarge. With chronicity, patches of
 and pupil dilation. Signs of Venezuelan equine encephalitis may be 
depigmentation occur. Recurrent episodes of keratoconjunc-
similar to those of the other encephalitis viruses or may be
tivitis are common. Both anterior and posterior uveitis are also
unrelated, such as epistaxis, pulmonary hemorrhage, oral ulcers,
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
405
Table 18-32 | Systemic Causes of Adnexal Abnormalities in Horses and Cattle
ABNORMALITY
CAUSES IN HORSE
CAUSES IN COW
Facial nerve paralysis*
Equine herpesvirus 
Listeriosis
Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
Viral encephalitis
Infectious meningitis
Intracranial abscess/neoplasia
Polyneuritis equi
 Eyelid edema, infiltration, ulcers, alopecia, or crusting 
 African horse sickness 
Histoplasmosis
Mycotic clermatitis
Mange
Onchocerca cervicalis
Permphigus
Urticaria
 Ceneralized granulomatous disease
 Eye lid protrusion
Tetanus
 Hyperkalermic periodic paralysis 
Transient keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Strangles (Streptococcus equi')
*May lead to decreased tear production, secondary keratoconjunctivitis sicca, secondary comeal ulceralion, exposure keratitis, and periorbital muscular atophy.
and diarrhea. Horses with Venezuelan equine encephalitis
meningitis include fever, anorexia, stiff neck, and hyper-
occasionally appear blind. Seizures may occur with all three
esthesia. It may be accompanied by diarrhea. The patient may
encephalitides.
be extremely depressed or hyperexcitable. Various other
 Ocular signs are secondary to CNS disorders. They include
neurologic signs can be seen in addition to cranial nerve
 blindness, nystagmus, strabismus, pupillary dilation, and facial
dysfunctions. Signs may progress to coma or status epilepticus.
nerve paralysis with secondary exposure keratopathy. Also,
Ophthalmic signs are primarily due to cranial nerve dys-
recumbency in horses may cause injuries to the eye or peri-
function and include ptosis, strabismus, nystagmus, anisocoria,
orbital tissue owing to direct pressure, abrasion, chemical con-
optic neuritis, and blindness.
tact (e.g., urine), or foreign bodies such as shavings, dirt, and
 PHOTIC HEAD SHAKING IN HORSES. Photic head shaking
straw. These can cause conjunctivitis, keratitis, corneal ulcers,
 in horses is stimulated by exposure to light and is exacerbated
 and secondary uveitis.
by exercise. The onset of the condition is usually in the spring.
 Clinical signs of Boma disease are similar to those of other
Affected horses often seek a darkened area. The mechanism is
equine encephalitides. Visual impairment and blindness may
proposed to be an optic trigeminal summation via the infra-
occur with CNS signs. Blindness is reportedly regularly observed
orbital or facial sensory branch of the trigeminal nerve, with
in acute Borna disease. Nystagmus, strabismus, and miosis, due 
nasal stimulation or, alternatively, some as yet unidentified
 to involvement of the cranial nerves, have been reported.
damage to the peripheral maxillary branch of the trigeminal
West Nile virus meningomyeloencephalitis is a mosquito-
nerve. Some success has been reported following treatment
borne virus closely related to St. Louis, Japanese, and Murray
with cyproheptadine (O.3 mg/kg bid), a histamine and serotonin
Valley encephalitides. A febrile response may occur with the
 blocking agent or with carbemazepine, a sodium channel
onset of clinical disease. Initial signs, such as depression,
 blocking drug, or both. Attempts to control the signs have also
listlessness, ataxia, and paresis, occur abruptly. Other signs
included use of tinted contact lenses. Many cases do not
progress over 1 to 3 days. These may include head shaking,
 respond to treatment.
incessant chewing, paralysis of the lower lip or tongue, severe
ataxia, ascending paralysis, and terminal recumbency. Ocular
 Neuromuscular Diseases
signs, predominantly blindness, have been reported in horses
with West Nile virus, particularly in the year 2000. This is a
TETANUS. Tetanus is a neuromuscular disease caused by the
zoonotic disease, although horses are not a source of human
 toxin of the bacterium Clostridium tetani. It is characterized by
infection. In humans, occlusive vasculitis, uveitis, chorioretinitis,
muscular rigidity and death from respiratory arrest or convul-
 and optic neuritis have been reported.
sions. Usually, isolated cases occur when wounds are contami-
 MENINGITIS. Meningitis occurs either by direct extension
nated with the bacterium. Signs usually appear 2 to 4 weeks
 of infectious agents into the calvarium (as with skull fractures
from the time of the injury. Within the first 24 hours, horses
or osteomyelitis from sinusitis or otitis, or as a sequel to
 may show signs of colic. Additional early signs may include
surgical removal of progressive ethmoidal hematomas) or from
 stiffness or lameness in the infected limb. The signs then
hematogenous infection. Infection may be fungal, as with
 progress to generalized spasticity with extended head posture.
C. neoformans, but are more commonly bacterial. Bacteria
The hypertonia is most evident in the extensor muscles, so that
involved in equine meningitis include Streptococcus zooepi-
the characteristic posture resembles that of a sawhorse
demicus and Streptococcus suis in foals and Actinomyces spp.
("sawhorse stance"). The tail becomes elevated, and eventually
in adults. Meningitis of hematogenous origin in neonates com-
the lips and ears are pulled back. The jaws are tightly shut. The
monly involves gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli
rigidity can be worsened by auditory, ocular, or tactile
and Satmonella spp. and is associated with sepsis. Signs of
stimulation. The mortality is high, and death is usually due to
406
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
hypoxia from paralysis of the respiratory muscles. Survivors
begin to improve after 2 weeks, but the disease may take a
 month to resolve and the signs may not disappear completely.
A classic sign of the disease is called "haws'"; it involves the
flashing of the third eyelid due to retraction of the eye that can
be induced by sudden noises or sudden movement or contact
such as a menacing gesture or a sharp blow to the lower jaw or
neck.
BOTULISM (SHAKER FOAL OR FORAGE POISONING).
 Botulism is a neuromuscular disease caused by the toxin of the
bacterium Clostridium botulinum. Most commonly, the disease
 develops in adults through direct ingestion of the toxin, and in
foals through ingestion of the spores or by contamination of
wounds, as with tetanus. Signs of botulism are generalized
muscle tremors and progressive weakness that can lead to
 recumbency. The animals remain bright and alert. Constipation 
and ileus are consistent signs that may cause colic. Dysphagia
is common, and a characteristic sign is weakness ofthe tongue,
Figure 18-25. Orbital lymphoma with involverment of the bulbar and
   aa  a sn o 
palpebral conjunctiva. (Courtesy Davicd 1. Maggs.)
respiratory failure. In the case of recovery, the process is slow,
requiring 10 to 14 days to resolve. Moderate mydriasis is an
early sign of the disease and the pupillary light response may
 in all 11 horses. Two horses had lesions limited to the third eye-
be sluggish. Ptosis has also been described.
lid. Two horses had unilateral exophthalmos caused by diffuse
 EQUINE MOTOR NEURON DISEASE. Equine motor neuron 
orbital infltration of lymphosarcoma, and two horses had
disease is presumed to be an oxidative condition of horses
 corneoscleral masses.
 deprived of adequate dietary vitamin E. Clinical signs include 
 Malignant lymphoma frequently also invades the uvea and
 muscle weakness and fasciculations with prolonged recumbency.
 induces anterior uveitis (four horses in the 1998 study). Uveitis
Ocular involvement is common, being identified in 40 of 42 horses 
 causes corneal edema, thickening of the iris, miosis, aqueous 
 in one report. The fundic changes notes consisted of a dense
flare, and possible intraocular hemorrhage. Intraocular pressure
 mosaic of brown to black discoloration in lesions that were either 
usually decreases but may rise if glaucoma develops. If the
 widespread or found primarily in the transitional zone from tapetal
vitreous is invaded by neoplastic cells, hemorrhage and retinal
to nontapetal fundus. Electroretinographic recordings showed a
detachment can occur, thus leading to blindness. If the
dramatic reduction in response to light stimulation, though
 conjunctivae are invaded, then conjunctival ulceration can be
behavioral visual defects are inconsistent.
seen. One would expect to find pale mucous membranes or
petechiae in these cases because anemia and thrombocytopenia
Neoplastic Diseases
are common fndings in horses with lymphoma in general
(multicentric lymphoma, intestinal or thoracic).
LYMPHOMA (LYMPHOSARCOMA). Lymphoma is a spo-
radic but relatively common neoplasm in horses of all ages.
Neonatal Diseases
Many organs can be involved. Leukemia is rare, although
anemia is relatively common. The anemia may be due to bone
ACQUIRED ENTROPION. Entropion may be congenital or
 marrow suppression or infltration and therefore may be non-
acquired in the neonate. Acquired entropion occurs with pre-
 regenerative. Alternatively, blood loss may be the cause of the
 maturity (see following section), with dehydration and the lack
 anemia or immune-mediated hemolysis may occur, particularly
of periorbital fat, and with conditions associated with various
in the alimentary form of the disease. Lymphoma can affect
disease processes, such as sepsis. Entropion leads to
horses of all ages, although the alimentary type appears to be 
mechanical corneal abrasions or ulcers (Figure 18-26), which
more common in younger horses. Clinical signs include
 in turn cause conjunctivitis, lacrimation, and corneal edema.
depression, weight loss, and lymphadenopathy. There may also
 PREMATURITY. Prematurity is a condition in which small or
be fever, respiratory distress, neurologic disease, mild colic,
immature-appearing foals are born. A common definition is a
diarrhea, or ventral edema, depending on the tissues involved.
foal born before 320 days of gestation. Signs of prematurity are
Lymphadenopathy may be generalized or may involve only a
small body size, short and silky haircoat, increased range of
few regional lymph nodes that may be internal, as occurs with
 motion of joints, and immature skeletal ossification. Problems
the alimentary form. Splenic enlargement may be palpated
typical of premature foals include musculoskeletal problems,
rectally.
failure of passive transfer (see following section), and pulmonary
 Rebhun and Del Piero (1998) describe involvement of the
 dysfunction. Pulmonary dysfunction may be due to lung imma-
 eye in 21 of 79 horses with lymphosarcoma seen over a 20-year
turity, as a primary or secondary surfactant deficiency. Retinal
 period at the New York State College of Veterinary Medicine.
hemorrhages can be observed in hypoxic foals. Acquired entro-
The most common ocular manifestation was infiltration of
 pion also occurs in premature foals (see Figure 18-26).
the eyelids and palpebral conjunctivae (11 horses). Consistent
SEPSIS AND FAILURE OF PASSIVE TRANSFER. Bacterial
findings included conjunctival thickening, hyperemia, and edema
 infections are an important cause of morbidity and mortality in
causing chemosis easily seen from a distance (Figure 18-25).
neonates. Infections may be acquired prenatally through the
 Persistent serous or mucopurulent ocular discharge was observed
placenta, from the mare's genital tract, or from the environment
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
407
corneal edema, iris congestion, hypototony, miosis, aqueous
flare with fibrin deposition, hypopyon or hyphema, and, in
severe cases, panophthalmitis may be seen. Chorioretinitis,
retinal detachment, blindness, and neuroophthalmologic signs
due to CNS involvement may also occur.
NEONATAL MALADJUSTMENT SYNDROME. Neonatal mal-
adjustment syndrome (NMS) is a noninfectious CNS disorder
of newborn foals of normal gestational age. Synonyms for the 
“dummies,” and “wanderers.” The time of onset of signs varies
from immediately at birth to around 24 hours of age. Affected
foals primarily have signs of cerebral dysfunction or spinal
cord deficits or both. Cerebral signs include loss of suckle
reflex, aimless wandering, hyperexcitability or depression,
extensor spasms or clonic convulsions, excessive chewing and
Figure 18-26. A 3-clay-old Westphalian foal. Dehycration caused
salivation, abnormal vocalization, abnormal respiratory patems,
enophthalmia, which led to entropion of the lower eyelicl. Mechanical
and apparent central blindness. Spinal cord signs include limb
abrasion by the inverted eyelid caused a corneal ulcer seen here stained
weakness, ataxia, and depressed spinal reflexes. The etiology is
with fluorescein. (Courtesy Paul E. Mille.)
unknown, but birth asphyxia has been proposed. Many foals
diagnosed as having neonatal maladjustment syndrome make a
after birth. Infections most commonly involve gram-negative
complete recovery with no residual neurologic deficits. The
organisms normally present in the genital tract, skin, or environ-
prognosis is less optimistic if sepsis occurs concomitantly, or if
ment. E. coli is most commonly isolated. There seems to be a
the signs began with birth or with dystocia, or if there is a
trend recently, however, to more gram-positive isolates, such as
history of asphyxia.
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Enterococcus, and Clostridium
Complete or partial blindness may be seen in neonatal mal-
spp. Portals of entry include the respiratory and gastrointestinal
 adjustment syndrome. Subconjunctival hemorhage, anisocoria,
tracts and the umbilicus. Failure of passive transfer of
retinal hemorrhages, and papilledema have also been reported.
immunoglobulins is assumed to be the predisposing cause of
As with adults, however, secondary ocular findings in cases of
sepsis in foals. The infection leads to septicemia, which pre-
CNS disease include keratoconjunctivitis and corneal ulcers
cipitates multiple organ failure. Later, the infection localizes in
due to trauma during recumbency and entropion, which may be
various organs, causing acute sepsis. Organs such as the lung,
caused by spasm from comeal pain but commonly results from
bones, joints, CNS, gastrointestinal system, and eyes are
dehydration (see Figure 18-26).
involved. Decreased pulmonary perfusion with sepsis can lead
Pulmonary lesions may develop secondary to neonatal mal-
to dyspnea, or alternatively secondary pneumonia may develop
 adjustment syndrome due to sepsis or aspiration pneumonia.
either hematogenously or because of milk aspiration due to
 If lung lesions lead to hypoxia, retinal hemorrhages can be
weak suckle reflex. Infections acquired in utero can also lead to
observed.
 pneumonia, which can result in hypoxia. Retinal hemorrhages
NEONATAL ISOERYTHROLYSIS. Neonatal isoerythrolysis is
can be observed in hypoxic foals.
characterized by the destruction of red blood cells in the
Sepsis may cause anterior uveitis (Figure 18-27), which
circulation of a foal by alloantibodies of the mother absorbed 
may be due to bacterial infection in the eye or to a sterile
by the foal from the mare's colostrum. Because the antibodies
immunologic reaction. When due to bacterial infection, vitreous
are not naturally occurring, the disease does not appear until the
abscesses may develop. Ocular signs of anterior uveitis include
mare is sensitized either by exposure during a previous preg-
nancy or through blood transfusion, or transplacentally during
the current pregnancy, which is rare. The foals are normal at
birth, developing signs 24 to 36 hours after ingesting colostrum.
Early signs are those of progressive lethargy and weakness.
Mucous membranes may be pale initially, but icterus develops.
Hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria may be seen. Breathing
becomes difficult, and seizures may occur as the anemia becomes
more severe.
 The predominant ocular sign is icterus of the conjunctiva;
together with icterus of other mucous membranes, it is con-
sidered the cardinal sign of neonatal isoerythrolysis. However,
conjunctival, episcleral, and intraocular hemorrhage can also
occur.
Rhodococcus equi INFECTION. Rhodococcus equi (formerly
 Corynebacterium equi) is a pleomorphic gram-positive rod that is
a normal inhabitant of soil and can be cultured from horse
feces. It causes a pyogranulomatous pneumonia in foals aged
Figure 18-27. Anterior uveitis after septicemia in a foal. Note the cliffuse
corneal eclema, the fibrin in the anterior chamber, anc the miotic pupil.
 2 to 6 months that are living on endemic farms. Infection is
The large armount of fibrin in the anterior charmber is very incdicative of
apparently transmitted through aerosolization of the bacteria and
foal septicermia. (Courtesy David J. Maggs.)
entry via the respiratory tract. Because the organism can live and
408
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
multiply in alveolar macrophages, prolonged treatment with
appropriate antibiotics is required. Clinical signs of R. equi
infection are similar to those of pneumonia from other causes:
fever, mucopurulent nasal discharge, tachypnea, dyspnea, and
 abnormal lung sounds on auscultation. Joint effusion that may
 be sterile, dianhea, peritonitis, subcutaneous abscesation, and
septic osteomyelitis and arthritis can also occur. Ocular signs
described include hyphema and fbrin in the anterior chamber
due to uveitis. The organism was cultured from the eye of one
foal, indicating that the uveitis may be septic and not simply
immune-mediated, as is often seen with the joint effusion. When
large amounts of fibrin are found in the anterior chamber (see
 Figure 18-27), intracameral tissue-plasminogen activator
treatment may be considered to prevent posterior synechia or
 traction retinal detachment.
Figure 18-28. Corneal ulcer (stained with fluorescein) cue to exposure
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC
keratitis in a sheep with listeriosis. The bacteria causes facial nerve
DISEASES IN RUMINANTS (see Tables
paralysis, leadling to this concition. Note the corneal edema and
18-21 to 18-32)
vascularization around the ulcer. (Courtesy David J. Maggs.)
Infectious Diseases
Bacterial Diseases
LISTERIOSIS. Listeriosis is a bacterial disease of the brain
caused by Listeria monocytogenes. Fever, anorexia, and
depression are frequently observed. The organisms have a
predilection for the brainstem, producing foci of necrosis and
inflammation. The multiple neurologic signs include unilateral
facial nerve paresis or paralysis, abducent nerve paralysis,
trigeminal nerve motor paralysis, possible paresis or paralysis
ui sunae jo suis sisered urend pue nun a jo
consciousness, circling, and paresis or paralysis of the limbs
 indicate that the lesion is confined to the CNS. Vestibular signs
often accompany the lesion because of the involvement of
vestibular nuclei in the medulla. Progression of the disease is
associated with decreased consciousness, coma, and con-
vulsions. CSF is often abnormal, with changes characteristic of
 nonsuppurative disease (despite the fact that this is a bacterial
infection. Note the conjunctival congestion, severe vascular reaction, and
disease).
dliffuse stromal infiltration. (Courtesy University of Wisconsin-Maclison
Ophthalmic signs include exposure keratitis (Figure 18-28)
Veterinary Ophthalmology Service Collection.
and, in chronic cases, KCS, anterior uveitis, and panophthal-
mitis. The disease may also cause lacrimation, photophobia,
conjunctival hyperemia, and corneal edema. Neuroophthalmic
keratitis with peripheral edema, especially dorsally, and neo-
signs are ptosis, medial strabismus, nystagmus, amaurosis, and
vascularization may be seen in association with the lameness
blindness. Medial strabismus, together with other cranial nerve
and swollen joints. C. psittaci is also a major cause of abortion
dysfunctions, strongly suggests listeriosis (see Chapter 16,
 in sheep and goats. Usually abortion occurs from placentitis in
Figure 16-16).
the fourth or fifth month of gestation. The dam is rarely ill.
 Other syndromes seen with L. monocytogenes are abortions
 Other animals in the herd may have pneumonia or arthritis,
 and neonatal septicemia. No ocular signs have been associated
although the serotype is perhaps not the same. The abortion
with listerial abortion. Infected lambs may have spinal myelitis
serotype may not be associated with polyarthritis or kerato-
without brainstem disease. Some animals are depressed, and
conjunctivitis. Topical tetracycline may be administered in
some not. Clinical signs include tetraparesis, tetraplegia,
addition to the systemic treatment, but the disease is usually
 paraparesis, paraplegia, conscious proprioceptive deficits, and
self-limiting.
recumbency.
 MYCOPLASMAL KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS IN GOATS AND
OVINE CHLAMYDIAL POLYARTHRITIS AND CONJUNC-
SHEEP. Mycoplasma conjunctivae has been isolated from
TIVITIS. Chlamydophila psittaci (formerly Chlamydia psittaci)
 epidemics of keratoconjunctivitis, respiratory disease, and/or
 causes lameness and swollen joints in lambs. It is associated
 arthritis in goats and sheep (Figure 18-29). Mycoplasma and
with high fever as well as with respiratory and, occasionally,
 Ureaplasma have been isolated from cattle with conjunctivitis
neurologic disease. High morbidity and mortality are common.
and mild respiratory signs. Mycoplasma mycoides var.
Up to 85% of lambs may show polyarthritis with lameness, stiff
 mycoides has been isolated from an epidemic of mastitis, arthritis,
gait, and pyrexia. Ocular signs associated with kerato-
and keratoconjunctivitis in goats. Mycoplasma agalactiae and
conjunctivitis may be an accompanying feature. Epiphora, con-
Mycoplasma arginini have also been described as causing
junctival hyperemia, follicular hyperplasia and conjunctivitis,
 keratoconjunctivitis and systemic disease.
 OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
409
THROMBOEMBOLIC MENINGOENCEPHALITIS. Thrombo-
embolic meningoencephalitis (TEME) in cattle is due to
Hemophilus somnus infection.It occurs in feedlots of yearlings
in North America, especially during early winter. The infection
produces vasculitis with thrombosis. H. somnus also causes
yearling calf pneumonia, vulvitis, vaginitis, endometritis, and
abortion in cattle. Death may occur 36 hours after appearance
of the first neurologic signs in cattle with TEME.
Clinical signs include pyrexia, holding of the head up and
forward, stupor, opisthotonos, ataxia, weakness, and paralysis.
Circling may also be present. The classic ophthalmic sign is
retinal exudates with hemorrhages (retinitis) (Figure 18-30),
 although nystagmus, strabismus, and blindness may also occur.
 In later stages of the disease, quadriplegia and cranial nerve
 deficits reflect focal brain lesions. CSF has a high protein content
Figure 18-31. Anterior uveitis in a calf with septicemia. Note the cliffuse
and neutrophilia but is usually sterile.
corneal eclema and miotic pupil. (Courtesy David l. Maggs.)
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis may be tentatively
diagnosed ophthalmoscopically.
SEPTICEMIA. Septicemia is the most common cause of
 Peracute deaths with neurologic and ophthalmoscopic signs
uveitis in calves. Ophthalmic signs include conjuncival and
are suggestive of thromboembolic meningoencephalitis.
The
ciliary injection, miosis, iris congestion, hypotony, and fbrin or 
diagnosis is confirmed by the histologic lesions. A vaccine is
hypopyon in one or both eyes (Figure 18-31). Chorioretinitis
available. Early treatment before recumbency may be imple-
may also occur, and panophthalmitis has been described in
severe cases. Typical embolic lesions of multifocal hemorhages,
long-term growth and performance.
exudates, and focal retinal detachments (see Figure 18-30) may
Mannheimia (Pasteurefla) PNEUMONIA. Severe Mannheimia
 also be present but may not be observed owing to the changes
(Pasteurella) haemolytica pneumonia in calves may cause con-
 in the anterior chamber. Uveitis associated with septicemia is
junctivitis resulting in a mucopurulent discharge. The disease
less common in adult cattle than in calves but does occur. Adult
cattle are susceptible to septic mastitis, septic metritis,
for treatment of the conjunctivitis.
 peritonitis, and endocarditis. Therapy should include treatment
TUBERCULOSIS. Mycobacterium bovis is the most common
of the uveitis. Septicemia may also result in chorioretinitis.
cause of tuberculosis in cattle and goats. Sheep are relatively
Funduscopically, the lesions appear as focal or multifocal
resistant. Clinical signs are often inapparent; however, weight
exudative lesions, often perivascular (see Chapter 15, Figure 
loss, variable appetite, and fluctuating fever may occur. Signs
15-50, A). Inactive retinal lesions from prior septicemia may be
related to the respiratory system are relatively common, but
observed as hyperreflective areas in the tapetal region and
gastrointestinal signs and reproductive disorders may also be
seen. Granulomatous lesions in the eyes of cattle have been
The scarred lesions in the tapetum may be hyperpigmented
reported. The uvea is initially affected in both the anterior and
centrally. In most cases the lesions do not cause blindness. In
posterior sections. Keratitis, anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis,
 overwhelming septicemia, thrombocytopenia can occur from
 and retinal detachment may be seen.
the excessive consumption of platelets, which can lead to dis-
seminated intravascular coagulation. In this situation, con-
junctival hemorrhages may be seen as petechiae or ecchymoses.
Viral Diseases
ARTHROGRYPOSIS-HYDRENCEPHALY. Akabane virus is
and hydrencephaly (replacement of missing cerebral tissue) in
sheep. Calves born to affected cows show arthrogryposis and
hydranencephaly as well. These conditions frequently cause
dystocia at birth. Those surviving can be blind and mentally
deranged. Ocular lesions include attenuation of retinal vessels,
tapetal hyperreflectivity, pigmentary changes, and optic
atrophy. Diagnosis is confirmed by a rising titer to the virus in
serum.
 BLUETONGUE. Bluetongue is an arthropod-borne viral
disease that infects ruminants. Clinical signs are most com-
monly seen in sheep, but cattle and goats occasionally show
 signs of the disease. Bluetongue causes a vasculitis and may
Figure 18-30. Retinal cletachment anc multifocal hemorrhages, charac-
teristic of retinitis, in a cow with thromboermbolic meningoencephalitis.
cause a reproductive syndrome leading to abortion, embryonic
(Courtesy Drs. C.A. Severin and Julie Gionfriddo, Coloradlo State University.)
 death, and fetal anomalies. Vaccination of pregnant ewes with 
410
 | SIATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
attenuated bluetongue virus in the frst half of pregnancy leads
MALIGNANT CATARRHAL FEVER. Malignant catarrhal
to necrotizing retinopathy and CNS malformations. During the
fever, also known as bovine malignant catarrh, is a highly fatal
 last half of pregnancy the fetus is resistant.
viral disease of cattle that may cause sporadic outbreaks or
epizootics. The disease in cattle is caused by a herpesvirus, and
 Ewes should not be vaccinated for bluetongue in the first half 
the sheep disease may be caused by a sheep herpesvirus. Ocular
of pregnancy.
lesions are seen in the "head and eye' form of the disease,
 although four other syndromes have been described. The catarrhal
 In cattle infection is usually asymptomatic, although severe
inflammation of upper respiratory and alimentary mucous
conjunctivitis with serous or mucopurulent discharge may be
 membranes aids in differentiating the disease from other fulmi-
seen, particularly in chronically infected animals. Systemic
nating bovine viral diseases. Keratoconjunctival exanthema and
 signs include mucosal lesions, edema of the lips, and laminitis.
lymph node enlargement also occur. Ocular lesions distinguish
malignant catarrhal fever from mucosal disease, rinderpest,
fetus, abortion, arthrogryposis, and other defects.
 muzzle disease, and infectious stomatitis.
INFECTIOUS  BOVINE  RHINOTRACHEITIS.
Bovine
The corneal lesions of malignant catarrhal fever start at the
herpesvirus 1 infections occur in four forms—the conjunctival
limbus and progress toward the center of the cornea, distin-
form, in which no other signs are present, and the more com-
guishing them from infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis,
mon respiratory form, often referred to as infectious bovine
which usually begins in the center of the cornea. In addition
 rhinotracheitis or rednose. In this form, conjunctivitis is some-
to the classic corneal lesions, severe bilateral uveitis and
times absent. Infectious pustular vulvovaginitis and an abortive
 panophthalmitis occur (Figure 18-33) together with the high
form also occur, depending on the strain of virus. In the 
fever (40.5° to 42° C), depression, and mucosal erosions. The
conjunctival and respiratory forms conjunctivitis  is 
acute,
disease is almost always fatal over 24 to 96 hours. Ocular
erythematous, and serous with profuse lacrimation.
White
 manifestations include severe bilateral uveitis, leading to ciliary
plaques may be present on the conjunctiva (Figure 18-32).
 injection, corneal edema, hypotony, miosis, iris congestion, and
 Chemosis is sometimes present, but corneal lesions are rare. In
fbrin or hypopyon in the anterior chamber (see Figure 18-33).
the respiratory form, anorexia, fever, hyperemia of the nasal
The choroid is usually spared, but retinal vasculitis is often
mucosa, nasal discharge, and salivation occur. In the early
 present and blindness is possible. It is difficult to observe the
acute stages, ocular lesions can be distinguished from those of
 retinal lesions in the living animal because of the lesions in the
 infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (pink eye) by the lack of
anterior segment. Histopathologic examination shows severe
corneal involvement. In later stages, nonulcerative keratitis
vasculitis in all major organs and all parts of the eye except the
with corneal vascularization and opacity, spreading toward the 
choroid.
 center of the cornea, may occur.
BOVINE VIRAL DIARRHEA. Bovine viral diarrhea virus is a
pestivirus RNA virus of the Flaviviridae family. It causes a
Early infectious bovine rhinotracheitis is distinguished from
widespread contagious viral disease of cattle, sheep, goats, and
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis by lack of cormeal
wild ruminants, occurring in mild, acute, and chronic forms. In
involvement.
its mucosal disease syndrome it causes diarrhea outbreaks and
can be a fatal disease in persistently infected catte from in
Goats are also susceptible to infectious bovine kerato-
utero exposure. A hemorrhagic syndrome is characterized by
 conjunctivitis. Ocular signs include conjunctivitis and keratitis,
 marked thrombocytopenia, bloody diarrhea, epistaxis, hemor-
which occur after onset of respiratory illness. Infectious bovine
 rhages on mucosal surfaces such as the conjunctiva, hyphema,
keratoconjunctivitis virus has been isolated from ocular and
bleeding from injection sites, pyrexia, leukopenia, and death.
nasal discharge in goats.
This syndrome is associated only with the noncytopathic
isolate of bovine viral diarrhea virus. Bovine viral diarrhea also
Figure 18-32. Severe conjunctivitis in a cow with infectious bovine
rhinotracheitis. Note the white plaques that characterize the conjunctival
Figure 18-33. Anterior uveitis, with severe corneal eclema, in a cow with
forrm of the dlisease. (Courtesy Cecil Moore.)
malignant catarrhal fever. (Courtesy Cecil Moore.)
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
411
plays a role in the respiratory disease complex, together with
M. haemolytica and viruses such as bovine herpesvirus 1
(BHV-1) and bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV), by
virtue of the immunosuppressive effects it produces. It has also
been implicated in hydranencephaly, abortion and early
embryonic death, and fetal anomalies.
 Bovine viral diarrhea causes corneal opacity in adult cattle.
Exposure of the fetus to the virus causes cataract, retinal
atrophy, optic neuritis, microphthalmia with retinal dysplasia,
and cerebellar hypoplasia. A gray optic disc due to optic
atrophy, vascular attenuation, tapetal hyperreflectivity, pigment 
clumping, and multifocal depigmentation of the nontapetal
fundus characterize the funduscopic lesions. Calves with ocular
signs may be blind, with or without pupillary light response,
and there may be ocular discharge in acute or chronic cases.
MAEDl-viSNA. Maedi-visna is a chronic progressive
 Figure 18-34. Orbital lymphosarcoma, with extensive conjunctival
encephalitis of sheep caused by a retrovirus (subfamily
involvement, in a cow. The tumor also caused exposure keratitis and 
Lentivirinae). Nervous system signs of the disease are charac-
Corneal clesiccation. (Courtesy Paul E. Miller.)
teristic of diffuse encephalitis. They include ataxia, twitching
of the facial muscles, conscious proprioceptive deficits, staggering
 most commonly seen in sheep but can occur in cattle and goats
or stumbling when turmed, circling, and blindness. PCR analysis,
 as well. The initial clinical signs include frenzy, convulsions
immunohistochemistry, and in situ PCR examination have been
 and salivation. They are followed by dullness, head pressing,
used to detect the virus in third eyelids of infected sheep with
head deviation, and circling as well as by ophthalmic mani-
 typical maedi-visna pulmonary lesions.
festations, including papilledema and blindness.
SCRAPIE. Scrapie is a transmissible form of spongiform
encephalopathy that causes degenerative CNS disease in sheep
Neoplasia
and, less commonly, goats. The disease occurs in animals 1 to
5 years old. It has a slow clinical course. Nervousness, restless-
LYMPHOSARCOMA. Lymphosarcoma should be suspected
ness, weight loss, and pruritus have been described. In both
in a cow with exophthalmos, because the tumor may involve
sheep and goats scrapie causes multifocal, round retinal detach-
 the retrobulbar lymphoid tissue. Unilateral presentation is most 
ments in the tapetal fundus owing to accumulations of sub-
common. In the absence of other enlarged lymph nodes or other
retinal fluid. Finding of these lesions in association with chronic
areas of lymphocytic infltration, differential diagnoses include
neurologic signs suggests a diagnosis of scrapie.
orbital cellulitis, orbital trauma, retrobulbar hemorrhage, and
chronic sinusitis with orbital extension. The cornea on the
Protozoal Diseases
affected side can be expected to undergo rapid desiccation and
ulceration (Figure 18-34). A syndrome consisting of solid
BABESlOSIS. As mentioned in the section on horses,
infltration of the conjunctiva is also observed and must be
babesiosis is a tick-borne intraerythrocytic disease. The acute
distinguished from chemosis. Affected animals are sent to
disease is characterized by fever, hemolytic anemia, icterus,
slaughter.
hemoglobinuria, and death. At least six species of Babesia
infect cattle, and two infect sheep and goats. Cerebral babesiosis,
Metabolic Diseases
characterized by hyperexcitability, convulsions opisthotonos,
coma, and death, may be observed in cattle, particularly those
POLIOENCEPHALOMALACIA (PEM). Polioencephalomalacia,
infected with Babesia bovis. Babesiosis due to Babesia spp.
also called cerebrocortical necrosis, occurs in pigs, sheep,
also causes conjunctival injection and icterus in affected cattle.
 and cattle and may be related to thiamine deficiency. Lambs 
The signs resolve with treatment of the systemic disease.
between 2 and 4 months of age and 6-month-old calves are most
Trypanosoma brucei causes keratoconjunctivitis, uveitis, and
 commonly affected. Policencephalomalacia occurs at pasture
optic neuritis in sheep. Other Trypanosoma spp. cause edema,
and in feedlots.
 hyperemia and petechiation of the conjunctiva in ruminants.
 The initial ocular sign in sheep is trochlear nerve paralysis,
Toxoplasma gondfi INFECTION. The ubiquitous protozoan.
which causes dorsomedial strabismus. Initial clinical signs in
T. gondii is a major abortifacient in sheep and goats. It rarely
 sheep include head pressing, aimless wandering or motionless
causes disease in ruminants, and infection with the protozoan is
standing, and cortical blindness. These initial signs progress to
often asymptomatic. Ocular signs are rare, but T. gondii may
recumbency, opisthotonus, hyperesthesia, tonic-clonic con-
infiltrate the retina and uvea, causing retinitis and chorio-
vulsions, and nystagmus.
retinitis due to a primary posterior segment lesion. Anterior
 Initial clinical signs in cattle include cortical blindness,
uveitis may also be present.
muscle tremor (head especially), salivation, opisthotonus, con-
vulsions, head pressing, depression, and anorexia. These signs
Parasitic Diseases
are followed by recumbency, nystagmus, and papilledema.
 Blindness is often the first sign to appear and the last to resolve
COENUROSIS. Coenurosis, also known as gid and sturdy, is
 and may be the only sign, other than depression, in adult cattle.
 a disease caused by invasion of the ovine brain by intermediate
 It may take up to one week after the resolution of the other signs
stages of Taenia multiceps and Taenia serialis. The disease is
for vision to return. Despite the fact that the blindness is
412
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
central, papilledema and decreased pupillary light reflexes may
Willis AM (2000): Canine viral infections. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
 occur and bilateral dorsomedial strabismus may be present.
Pract 30:1119.
Infectious Canine Hepatitis
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infectious diseases, in
Toxic Diseases
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI: Small
Animal Prachice, 13th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 276.
TOXIC PLANTS. Various toxic plants have been described as
Greene CE (2006): Infectious canine hepatis and canine acidophil cell
causing ocular lesions. Among them are the following:
hepatitis, in Greene CE (editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 41.
Sellon RK (2005): Canine viral disease,in Etinger SJ, Feldman EC (editors):
· Male fern (Dryopteris spp.), which causes blindness due
Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders, St. Louis,
to optic nerve atrophy
P.646.
· Bracken fern, which can cause conjunctival hemorrhages
Stiles J (2006): Ocular infections, in Greene CE (editor): Infechious Diseases
and outer retinal degeneration
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
·Helichrysum argyrosphaerum, causing blindness with
Willis AM (2000): Canine viral infec hions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 30: 1119.
retinal lesions in sheep and cattle 
Fefine Herpesvirus (Fefine Rhinotracheitis Virus, FHV-1, FRV) Infection
· Veratrum in sheep, which leads to cyclopia or
Gaskell RM, Dawson S (2005): Other feline viral diseases, in Ettinger SJ,
anophthalmia in lambs when the ewes ingest the plant
Feldman EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th ed.
during pregnancy
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 667.
· Locoweed, causing blindness with various intraocular,
Gaskell R, et al. (2006): Feline respiratory disease, in Greene CE (editor):
histopathologic changes
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis,
p. 145.
· Many plants that cause liver damage, which manifests as
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infectious diseases, in
jaundice of the conjunctiva and sclera
Bonagura ID (editor): Kirk's Curent Veterinary Therapy XIl: Small
Animal Prachice, 13th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 276.
VETCH TOxICITY. Vetch (Vicia spp.) poisoning has been
Lappin MR, et al. (2002): Use of serologic tests to predict resistance to feline 
 reported in cattle. The following three clinical manifestations
herpesvirusIfelinecalcivirusand flineparvovirusnfecionnats.
have been described:
J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:38.
Nasisse MP, et al. (1993): Clinical and laboratory fndings in chronic
· An acute neurologic manifestation
conjunctivibis in cats: 91 cases (1983-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
· A fatal form leading to death in 12 to 15 days and
203:834.
Stiles J (2006): Ocular infections, in Greene CE (editor): Infeclious Diseases
causing signs of weakness and loss of appetite, alopecia,
 of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
subcutaneous swellings, herpetiform eruptions of the 
oral mucous membranes, purulent nasal discharge,
Stiles J (1995): Trealment of cats with ocular disease atributable to
abnormal lung sounds, cough, and cyanosis of mucous
herpesvirus infec hion: 17 cases (1983-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc
membranes
207:599.
StilesJ,et al.(1997):Comparison of nested polymerase chainreaction, vius
· A systemic granulomatous disease, causing dermatitis,
isolabion, and fluorescent antibody testing for identifying feline
pruritus, diarrhea, dehydration, weight loss, decreased
herpesvirus in cats with conjunctivitis. Am J Vet Res 58:804.
milk yield, cough, dyspnea, and conjunctivitis
Feline Caficivirus Infection
Dawson S, et al. (1994): Acute arthritis of cats associated with feline
A study of 10 cows with high suspicion of vetch toxicity
calicivirus infechion. Res Vet Sci 56:133.
Gaskell R, et al. (2006): Feline respiratory disease, in Greene CE (editor):
reported moderate ocular and nasal discharge, which was
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 145.
usually serous but in some cases mucopurulent, in 7 animals.
These researchers did not mention necropsy findings of ocular
Feldman EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th ed.
 changes; however, ocular lesions in other species with vetch
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 667.
Hurley KF, Sykes JE (2003): Update on feline calicivirus: new tends.
toxicity include conjunctivitis, ulcerative keratitis, and diffuse
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2003 33:759.
 granulomatous inflammation of the choroid.
 Knowles JO, et al. (1991): Studies on the role of feline calicivirus in chronic
stomalitis in cats. Vet Microbiol 27:205.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Radford AD, et al. (2007): Feline calicivirus. Vet Res 38:319.
Ramsey DT (2000): Feline chlamydia and calicivirus infections. Vet Clin
 Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Disease in Dogs and Cats
North Am Small Anim Pract 30: 1015.
StilesJ (2006): Ocular infections,in Gteene CE (editor):InfectiousDiseases
Canine Distemper
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infec bious diseases, in
Sykes JE, et al. (1998): Detec hion and strain differentiation of feline
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII: Small
 calicivirus in conjunchival swabs by RT-PCR of the hypervariable region of
Anmal Practice,I3thed.Saunders,Philadelphia,p.276.
the capsid protein gene. Arch Virol 143: 1321.
Greene CE, Appel MI (2006): Canine distemper, in Greene CE (editor):
Feline Leukemia Virus infection
Infechious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed Saunders, St. Louis, p. 25.
Arjona A, et al. (2000): Seroepidemiological survey of infection by feline
         
in19caesofcainedistemperencephalomyeisJCompPathol26:47.
Jeukemiavirus and immunodeficiencyvirusin Madrid andcorrelation with
some clinical aspects.J Clin Microbiol 38:3448.
Raw ME, et al. (1992): Canine distemper infechion associated with acute
Gilger BC(2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infectious diseases,in
nervous signs in dogs. Vet Rec 130:291.
Bonagura ID (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl: Small
Sellon RK (2005): Canine viral disease, in Etinger SJ, Feldman EC (editors):
Textbook ofVeterinary Internal Medicine,6th ed.Saunders,St.Louis,
Animal Prachice, 13th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 276.
Hartmann K (2006): Feline leukemia virus infechion, in Greene CE (editor):
p. 646.
Infechious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p.105.
StilesJ(2006): Ocular infections,in Greene CE(editor): Infectious Diseases
Lappin MR (1995): Opportunistic infec hions associated with retroviral
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
infections in cats. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 10:244.
Tipold A (1995): Diagmosis of inflammatory and infectious diseases of the
Levy JK, Crawford PC (2005): Feline leukemia virus, in Etinger SJ, Feldman
central nervous systemic dogs: a relrospec ive study. J Vet Intem Med
EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders,
9:304.
St. Louis, p. 653.
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
413
Stiles J (2006): Ocular infections, in Gieene CE (editor): Infectious Diseases
Carmichael LE, Shin SJ(1996): Canine brucellosis: a diagnostician's
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
dilemma. Semin Vet Med Surg I1:161.
Vail DM, et al. (1998): Feline lymphoma (145 cases): proliferation indices,
 Dziezyc J (2000): Canine systemic bacterial infections. Vet Clin North Am
cluster of differentiation 3 immunoreachivity, and their association with
SmallAnimPract 30:1103.
prognosis in 90 cats. J Vet Intem Med 12:349.
Hartmann K, Greene CE (2005): Diseases caused by systemic bactenial
Willis AM (200o): Feline leukemia virus and feline immunodeficiency vius.
jnfections, in Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30:971.
Internal Medicine, 6th ed Saunders, St. Louis, p. 616.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus infection
Hollett RB (2006): Canine brucellosis: outbreaks and compliance.
Arjona A, et al. (2000): Seroepidemiological survey of infechion by feline
Theriogenol 66:575.
Kerwin SC, et al. (1992): Diskospondylitis associated with Brucella canis
some clinical aspects. J Clin Microbiol 38:3448.
Beatty JA, et al. (1998): Feline immunodefciency virus (FIV)-associated
Mateu-de-Antonio EM, Martin M (1995): In vitro efficacy of several
ssas unown ut nogoungsp aunmmt iog aoi [euaod e emoudua
antimicrobial combinahions against Brucela canis and Brucella melitensis
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 65:309.
shains isolated from dogs.Vet Microbiol 45:1.
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infectious diseases,in
Stiles J (2006): Ocular infections, in Greene CE (editor): Infechious Diseases
s x ae   s   
 of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 974.
Animal Practice, 13th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 276.
Vinayak A,et al. (2004):Clinical Tesolution of Brucella canis-induced oculat
Harmann K (2005): Feline immunodeficiency virus infection and related
inflammation in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1804.
diseases,inEttingerSJ,Feldman EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary
Borreliosis (Canine Lyme Disease)
Intemal Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 659.
Appel MIG, et al. (1995): Ocular CVT update: canine Lyme disease, in
Hartmann K (1998): Feline immunodeficiency virus infection: an overview.
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl Small
Vet I 155:123.
Animal Practice, 12th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 303.
Lappin MR,et al. (1996): Primary and secondary Toxopiasma gondi
Fritz CL, Kjemtrup AM (2003): Lyme boneliosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
infection in nomal and feline immunodeficiency virus-infected cats.
223:1261.
J Parasitol 82:733.
Hartmann K, Greene CE (2005): Diseases caused by systemic bacterial
Lappin MR, et al. (1992): Serologic prevalence of selected infectious diseases
jnfectionsinEtinger SJ,Feldman EC(editors):Textbook ofVeterinary
 in cats with uveitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1005.
Internal Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 616.
Malik R, et al. (1997): Prevalences of feline leukaemia virus and feline
Litman MP (2003): Canine boneliosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 
33:827.
Nasisse MP,et al.(i993): Clinical and laboratory fndings in chronic
Stiles J(2006): Ocular infections, in Greene CE(editor): Infectious Diseases
conjunchivitis in cats: 91 cases (1983-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
203:834.
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (Dogs) and Canine Monocytic
Sellon RK, Hartmann K (2006): Feline immunodeficiency virus infection, in
Greene CE (editor): Infec ious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed.
Ehrfichiosis
Belanger M, et al. (2002): Comparison of serological detechion methods for
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 131.
Stiles J(2006): Ocularinfections,in Greene CE(editor): Infectious Diseases
diagmosis of Ehrlichia canis infections in dogs. J Clin Microbiol 2002
40:3506.
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
Willis AM (200o): Feline leukemia virus and feline immunodeficiency virus.
Breitschwerdt EB (2005): Obligate intacellular bacterial pathogens, in
Ettinger SJ,Feldman EC(editors):Textbok of VeterinaryInternal
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30:971.
Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 631.
Feline Infectious Peritonitis infection
Davidson MG,et al.(1990): Vascular pemeability and coagulation during
 ss sd   o  
Rickettsia rickettsit infechion in dogs. Am I Vet Res Sl:165.
infected with feline coronavirus. Am J Vet Res 56:429.
Gasser AM, et al. (2001): Canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever: a
Addie DD, Jarret O (2006): Feline coronavirus vius infection, in Greene CE
Teltospecive study of 30 cases. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:41.
(editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders,
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infectious diseases, in
St. Louis, p. 88.
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIIl: Small
Addie DD, Jarett O (2001): Use of a reverse-Tanscriptase polymerase chain
Animal Practice, 13th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 276.
Teachion for monitoring the shedding of feline coronavirus by healthy cats.
Gould DJ,et al. (2000): Canine monocyhic ehrlichiosis presening as acute
Vet Rec 148:649.
blindness 36 months after importation into the UK. JSmall Anim Pract
Foley JE, et al. (1997): Patterns of feline coronavirus infection and fecal
41:263-265.
shedding from cats in multiple-cat environments. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Greene CE, Breitschwerdt EB (2006): Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Murine
210:1307.
typhuslike disease, Rickettsialpox, Typhus, and Q fever, in Greene CE
Foley JE, et al. (1997): Risk factors for feline infectious peritoniis among
(editor): Infechious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders,
cats in multiple-cat environments with endemic feline enteric coronavirus.
St. Louis, p. 232.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 210: 1313.
Greig B, et al. (2006): Canine gTanulocytotropic ehrlichiosis, in Greene CE
Gamble DA, et al. (1997): Development of a nested PCR assay for detec bion
(editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders,
of feline infectious peritonitis virus in clinical specimens. IClin Microbiol
St. Louis, p. 217.
35:673.
Harrus S, et al. (1999): Recent advances in determining the pathogenesis of
Gilger BC (2000): Oculat manifestabions of systemic infechious diseases, in
canine monocyic ehrlichiosis. J Clin Microbiol 37:2745.
s  e a  s  r
Harus S, et al. (1997): Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis: an update. Compend
Animal Practice, I3th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 276.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:431.
Legendre AM (2000): Diagmosis and prevention of feline infec lious
Harvey JW (2006): Thrombocytotropic anaplasmosis(A.platys{E.Platys)
peritonitis, in Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk’s Cuent Veterinary Therapy
infechion), in Greene CE (editor): Infec ious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
XII: Small Amimal Practice, I3th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 291.
3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 229.
Li X, Scot FW (1994): Detechion of feline coronaviruses in cel cultures and
KomnenouAA,et al.(2007):Oculamanifestations of natural canine
in fresh and fixed feline tissues using polymerase chain reaction.
monocytic ehrlichiosis Ehrlichia canis): arelrospec ive study of 90 cases.
Vet Microbiol 42:65.
Vet Ophthalmol 10: 137.
 Olsen CW (1993): A review of feline infectious peritonitis virus: molecular
Neer TM, et al. (2006): Canine monocytotropic ehrlichiosis and
biology, immunopathogenesis, clinical aspects, and vaccination.
neorickettsiosis, in Greene CE (editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and
Vet Microbiol 36:1.
Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 203.
Stiles J (2006): Ocular infections, in Greene CE (editor): Infectious Diseases
Stiles J(2006): Ocular nfections,in Greene CE(editor): Infeclious Diseases
 of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
Bruceffosis (Dogs)
Stiles I (2000): Canine nicketsial infechions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Carmichael LE, Greene CE (2006): Canine brucellosis, in Greene CE
Pract 30:1135.
(editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders,
Warner RD, Marsh WW (2002): Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J Am Vet
St. Louis, p. 369.
Med Assoc 221:1413
414
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Bartoneffosis
neug u se pe sso go s sdo  s epso
Birtles RJ, et al. (2002): Prevalence of Bartonella species causing.
(editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xli: Small Animal Practice,
bacteraemia in domesticated and companion animals in the United
12th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 301.
Kingdom. Vet Rec 151:225.
Blastomycosis
Breitschwerdt EB, et al. (2003): The immunologic response of dogs to
Arceneaux KA, et al. (1998): Blastomycosis in dogs: 115 cases (1980-1995).
Bartonella vinsoni subspecies berkhofi antigens: as assessed by Western
J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:658.
immunoblot anal ysis. J Vet Diagn Invest 15:349.
Gilger BC (2000): Oculat manifestations of systemic infectious diseases, in
Breitschwerdt EB, et al. (2006): Bartonellosis, in Greene CE (editor):
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl: Small
Infechious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, 
AminalPrcicI3thdSandersPhadlphia76.
P.511.
Gionfrido JR (200o): Feline systemic fungal infections.Vet Clin North Am
Chomel BB,et al. (2001): Aortic valve endocardiis in a dog due to
 Smal Anim Pract 30: 1029.
Bartonella clarridgeiae.J Clin Microbiol 39:3548.
Hendnix DV, et al. (2004): Comparison of histologic lesions of 
Glaus T, et al. (1997): Seropievalence of Bartonella henselae infection and
endophthalmitis induced by Blastomyces dermatitidis in untreated and
cofTelation with disease status in cats in Switzerland. J Clin Microbiol
treated dogs: 36 cases (1986-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1317.
35:2883.
 Kerl ME (2003): Update on canine and feline fungal diseases. Vet Clin North 
Guptill L (2003): Bartonellosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Am Small Anim Pract 33:721.
33:809.
 Krohne SG (2000): Canine systemic fungal infections. Vet Clin North Am
Guptill L, et al. (2004): Prevalence, nisk factors, and genetic diversity of
 Small Anim Pract 30: 1063.
Bartonela henseiae infectionsin pet cats in four regions of the United
Legendre AM (2006): Blastomycosis, in Greene CE (editor): Infectious
States. J Clin Microbiol 42:652-659.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 569.
Keting KL, et al. (2004): Bartonella: a new etiological agent of feline ocular
Stiles J(2006): Ocular infechions, in Greene CE(editor): Infectious Diseases
disease. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40:6.
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
Jo ae aissod e se ogau s aia 66l r ya  ude
uveitis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1205.
EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine,6th ed. Saundes,
Luria BJ, et al. (2004): Prevalence of infectious diseases in feral cats in
St. Louis, p. 671.
Northern Florida. J Feline Med Surg 6:287.
Coccidioidomycosis
Mexas AM, et al. (2002): Bartonella henselae and Bartonella elizabethae as
Davies C, Troy GC (1996): Deep mycotic infechions in cats. I Am Anim
potential canine pathogens. J Clin Microbiol 40:4670.
Hosp Assoc 32:380.
Powell CC, et al. (2002): Inoculation with Bartonella henselae followed by
Gilger BC (2000): Oculat manifestations of systemic infectious diseases, in
feline hepesvirus I fails to achivate ocular toxoplasmosis in chronically
infected cats. I Feline Med Surg 4: 107.
Rolain JM, et al. (2004): Prevalence of Bartonella clarridgeiae and
Gionfniddo JR (2000): Feline systemic fungal infechions. Vet Clin North Am
Bartonellahenseiaeindomestic catsfromFrance anddetectionof the
 Small Anim Pract 30: 1029.
organisms in erythrocytes by immunofluorescence. Clin Diagn Lab
Greene RT (2006): Cocidioidomycosis and paracoccidioidomycosis, in
mmunol 11:423.
Solano-Gallgo L, et al. (2004): Bartonella henselae IgG antibodies are
Greene CE (editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed.
Devalent in dogs from southeastem USA. Vet Res 35:585.
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 598.
Greene RT,Troy GC (1995): Coccidioidomycosis in 48 cats: a relrospective
Chlamydiosis (Chfamydophilosis) (Cats)
study (1984-1993). I Vet Intem Med 9:86.
Greene CE, Sikes JE (2006): Chlamydial infechions, in Greene CE (editor):
Johnson LR, et al. (2003): Clinical, clinicopathologic, and radiographic
Infechious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p.
findings in dogs with coccidioidomycosis: 24 cases (1995-2000). I Am Vet
245.
Med Assoc 222:461.
McDonald M, et al. (1998): A comparison of DNA amplification, isolation
Kerl ME (2003): Update on canine and feline fungal diseases. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 33:721.
Vet Rec 143:97.
 Krohne SG (2000): Canine systemic fungal infections. Vet Clin North Am
Nasisse MP,et al.(1993):Clinical and laboratory fndingsin chronic
Small Anim Pract 30:1063.
conjunchivitis in cats: 91 cases (1983-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Stiles J (2006): Ocular nfecthions, in Greene CE(editor): Infectious Diseases
203:834.
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
 Ramsey DT (2000): Feline chlamydia and calicivirus infecions. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract. 30:1015.
EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders,
Sparkes AH, et al. (1999): The clinical efficacy of topical and systemic
St. Louis, p. 671.
therapy for the treatment of feline ocular chlamydiosis. I Feline Med Surg
Cryptococcosis
1:31.
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infectious diseases, in
Sykes JE, et al. (2001): Detechion of feline calicivirus, feline herpesvirus I
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl: Small
and Chlamydia psittaci mucosal swabs by muliplex RT-PCR/PCR. Vet
Animal Pracice, 13th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 276.
Microbiol 81:95.
Gionfniddo JR (2000): Feline systemic fungal infechions. Vet Clin North Am
Sykes JE, et al.(1999): Comparison of the polymerase chain reaction and
culture for the detection of feline Chlamydia psittaci in untreated and
Small Anim Pract 30:1029.
Yn u e ssep (eung u e au uo aep eo)  [
doxycycline-reated experimentally infec ted cats. J Vet Intern Med 13:146.
Am Small Anim Pract 33:721.
Sykes JE, et al. (1999): Prevalence of feline Chlamydia psittaci and feline 
Krohne SG (2000): Canine systemic fungal infections. Vet Clin North Am
herpesvirus I in cats with upper respiratory Tact disease. I Vet Intem Med
13:153.
Small Anim Pract 30: 1063.
von Bomhard W, et al. (2003): Detection of novel chlamydiae in cats with
Lester SJ, et al. (2004): Clinicopathologic features of an unusual outbreak of
cryptococcsisndogscatsfetsandabird:casesJanuary toJuly
ocular disease. Am J Vet Res 64:1421.
2003). I Am Vet Med Assoc 225: 1716.
Mycoplasosis (Cats)
Malik R,et al.(2006):Cryptococcosis, in Greene CE (editor): Infechious
Chalker VJ, et al. (2004): Development of a polymerase chain reaction for the
 Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 584.
detec ion of Mycoplasma felis in domeshic cats. Vet Microbiol 100:77.
Malik R, et al. (1999): Serum antibody response to Cryptococcus neoformans
Chandler JC, et al. (2002): Mycoplasmal espiratory infections in small
in cats, dogs and koalas with and without achive infecion. Med Mycol
animals: 17 cases (1988-1999). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:111.
37:43.
Foster SF,et al. (2004): Lower respiratory tract infechions in cats: 2l cases
Malik R, et al. (1997): Nasopharyngeal ctyptococcosis. Aust Vet I 75:483.
(1995-2000). J Feline Med Surg 6: 167.
O'Bnien CR, et al. (2006): Long-term outcome of therapy for 59 cats and
1I dogs with cryptococcosis. Aust Vet J 84:384.
lavage cytology and microbiology (1995-2000). I Feline Med Surg 6: 189.
O'Bren CR, et al.(2004): Retrospecive study of feline and canine
Greene CE (2006): Mycoplasmal, ureaplasmal and L-forms infechions, in
Cryptococcosis in Australia from 1981 to 2001: 195 cases. Med Mycol 42:449.
Greene CE (editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed.
Stiles J (2006): Ocular infeclions, in Greene CE (editor): Infeclious Diseases 
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 260.
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES |
415
Schatzberg SJ, et al. (2003): Use of a multiplex polymerase chain reacion
EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders,
 assay in the antemortem diagnosis of toxoplasmosis and neosporosis in the
St. Louis, p. 671.
central nervous system of cats and dogs. Am I Vet Res 64:1 507.
TichesD,etal. (9g8:Acasofcanineentaevous syemcryptocoss
Canine Visceraf Leishmaniasis
 soss       
Alvar I, et al. (2004): Canine leishmaniasis. Adv Parasitol 57:1.
Histopfasmosis
Baneth G, et al. (2006): Leishmaniasis, in Greene CE (editor): Infechious
Davies C, Troy GC (1996): Deep mycotic infections in cats. J Am Anim
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 685.
Hosp Assoc 32:380.
Baneth G, Shaw SE (2002): Chemotherapy of canine leishmaniosis. Vet
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infechious diseases, in
Parasitol 106:315.
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII: Small
Cortadellas O (2003): Initial and long-term efficacy of a lipid emulsion of 
amphoteicin B desoxycholate in the management of c anine leishmaniasis.
Gionfiddo JR (2000): Feline systemic fungal infections. Vet Clin North Am
J Vet Intern Med 17:808.
Small Anim Pract 30:1029.
Garcia-Alonso M, et al. (1996): Immunopathology of the uveiis in canine
Greene CE (2006): Histoplasmosis, in Greene CE (editor): Infechious
leishmaniasis. Parasite Immunol 18:617.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 577.
Gaskin AA, et al. (2002): Visceral leishmaniasis in a New York foxhound 
Hodges RD, et al. (1994): Iraconazole for the treatment of histoplasmosis in
kennel. J Vet Intem Med 16:34.
cats. J Vet Intern Med 8:409.
Giger U, et al. (2002): Leishmania donovani transmission by packed RBC
Johnson LR, et al.(2004): Histoplasmosis infection in two cats from
transfusion to anemic dogs in the United States. Transfusion 42:381.
Califomia. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 40: 165.
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestations of systemic infectious diseases, in
Kerl ME (2003): Update on canine and feline fungal diseases. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 33:721.
AnimalPractice, 13thed.Saunders,Philadelphia, p.276.
Krohne SG (2000): Canine systemic fungal infections. Vet Clin North Am
Grosjean NL, et al. (2003): Seroprevalence of anibodies against Leishmania
Small Anim Pract 30:1063.
spp. among dogs in the United States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:603.
Stiles J(2006): Ocular infections, inGieene CE (editor): Infectious Diseases
Lappin MR (2005): Protozoal and miscellaneous infections, in Etinger SJ,
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
Feldman EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th ed.
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 638.
EC(editors):Textbook of Veternary Internal Medicine,6thedSaunders,
St. Louis, p. 671.
baseddiaosisandfolw-upof camnesceralleishmanioisVt
Toxoplasmosis
Parasitol 125:251.
Bresciani KD, et al. (1999): Experimental toxoplasmosis in pregmant bitches.
Rosypal AC, et al. (2003): Canine visceral leishmaniasis and its emergence in
Vet Parasitol 86:143.
the United States. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33:921.
 Davidson MG (2000): Toxoplasmosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 
Stiles J (2006): Ocular infections, in Greene CE (editor): Infeclious Diseases 
30:1051.
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
Davidson MG, English RV (1998): Feline ocular toxoplasmosis.
Strauss-AyaliD,et al.(2004):Polymerase chainreaction using noninvasively
Vet Ophthalmol 1:71.
Dubey JP (2004): Toxoplasmosis—waterborne zoonosis. Vet Parasito]
I Infect Dis 189: 1729.
126:57.
Diabetes Meffitus
Dubey JP, Lappin MR (2006): Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis, in Greene CE
Bennett N (2002): Monitoring techniques for diabetes mellitus in the dog and
(editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders,
the cat. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 17:65.
St. Louis, p. 754.
Cusick M, et al. (2003): Effects of aldose teductase inhibitors and galactose
Gilger BC (2000): Ocular manifestalions of systemic infechious diseases, in
Wor ssop paj-asoie ee ur suoisa sydeiaoaue uasaing uo (emeipim
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Cuent Veterinary Therapy XII: Small
Ophthalmol 121: 1745.
Animal Practice, 13th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 276.
 Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004): Canine diabetes mellitus, in Feldman EC,
Lappin MR (2005): Protozoal and miscellaneous infechions, in Ettinger SJ,
Nelson RW (editors): Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction,
FeldmanEC(editors):Textbook ofVeterinary Internal Medicine,6thed.
3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 486.
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 638.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004): Feline diabetes melitus, in Feldman EC,
Lappin MR (2000): Feline infec hious uveitis. J Feline Med Surg 2: 159.
Nelson RW (editors): Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduchion,
Lappin MR (1995): CVT update: feline toxoplasmosis, in Bonagura JD
3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 539.
 Fleeman LM, Rand JS (2001): Management of canine diabetes. Vet Clin
12th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 309.
North Am Small Anim Pract 31:855.
Lappin MR, et al. (1992): Serologic prevalence of selected infectious diseases
Good KL, et al. (2003): Comeal sensibivity in dogs with diabetes mellitus.
in cats with uveitis.J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1005.
Am J Vet Res 64:7.
 Powell CC, Lappin MR (200l): Climical ocular toxoplasmosis in neonatal
Hess RS,et al. (2000): Concurrent disorders in dogs with diabetes mellitus:
kittens. Vet Ophthalmol 4:87.
221 cases (1993-1998). I Am Vet Med Assoc 2i7:1166.
Schatzberg SJ, et al. (2003): Use of a muliplex polymerase chain reaction
Hoenig M (2002): Comparative aspects of diabetes mellitus in dogs and cats.
assay in the antemortem diagnosis of toxoplasmosis and neosporosis in the
Moi Cell Endocrinol 197:221.
 central nervous system of cats and dogs. Am J Vet Res 64: 1507.
Neuenschwander H, et al. (1997): Dose-dependent reduction of retinal vesse]
Stiles J (2006): Ocular infections, in Greene CE (editor): Infectious Diseases 
changes associated with diabetic retinopathy in galactose-fed dogs by the
 of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 974.
aldose reductase inhibitor M79175. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 13:517.
Neosporosis (Dogs)
Peikes H,etal.(2001):Dematologic disordersindogswith diabetes
Buxton D,et al. (2002): The comparative pathogenesis of neosporosis. Trends
mellitus: 45 cases (1986-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:203.
Parasitol 18:546.
 Richter M, et al. (2002): Aldose reductase activity and glucose-related
 Dubey JP (1999): Neosporosis—the first decade of research. Int J Parasitol
opacities in incubated lenses from dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res
29:1485.
63:1591.
 Dubey JP (1999): Recent advances in Neospora and neosporosis. Vet
Hyperlipidemia
Parasitol 84:349.
Barne J, Watson TDG (1995): Hyperlipidemia, in Bonagura JD (editor):
Dubey JP, Lappin MR (2006): Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis,in Greene CE
Kirk's Curent Veterinary Therapy XIl: Small Animal Practice, I2th ed.
(editor): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. Saunders,
Saunders Philadelphia, p 430.
St. Louis, p. 754.
Bauer JE (1995): Evaluation and dietary consideraions in idiopathic
Dubey JP, Lindsay DS (1993): Neosporosis. Parasitol Today 9:452.
hyperlipidemia in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206: 1684.
LappiM205:PrtozaldmiselounEting
Elliott DA (2005): Dietary and medical considerations in lipidemia, in
Feldman EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th ed.
Ettinger SJ,FeldmanEC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Interal
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 638.
Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 592.
Ortuno A, et al. (2002): Seroprevalence of antibodies to Neospora caninum in
 e pe dq   e a-n
dogs firom Spain. I Parasitol 88:1263.
kittens. Vet Rec 140:355.
416
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Johnstone AC, et al. (1990): The pathology of an inherited
Brooks MB, Catalfano JL (2005): Platelet disorders and von Willebrand
hyperlipoproteinaemia of cats. J Comp Pathol 102:125.
disease, in Etinger SJ, Feldman EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders, St. Louis, p. 1918.
hyperchylomicronaemia. Vet Rec I19:268.
Davidson MG, et al. (1990): Vascular permeability and coagulation during
Jones BR,et al.(1983):Occurrence of idiopathicfamilal
Rickettsia rickettsi infechion in dogs. Am I Vet Res Sl:165.
hyperchylomicronaemia in a cat. Vet Rec 112:543.
Grindem CB, et al. (1991): Epidemiologic survey of thrombocytopenia in
Peritz LN, et al. (1990): Characterizaion of a lipoprotein lipase classII type
dogs: a report on 987 cases. Vet Clin Pathol 20:38.
defect in hypertniglycenidemic cats. Clin Invest Med 13:259.
Hackett TB, et al. (2002): Clinical findings associated with prairie rattlesnake
Sato K, et al. (2000): Hypercholesterolemia in Shetland sheepdogs. J Vet Med 
bites in dogs: 100 cases (1989-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1675.
Sci 62:1297.
Hatrus S, et al. (1998): Acute blindness associated with monoclonal
Watson P, et al. (1993): Hypercholesterolaemia in briards in the United
gammopathy induced by Ehrlichia canis infection. Vet Parasitol
Kingdom. Res Vet Sci 54:80.
78:155.
Whitney MS (1992): Evaluation of hyperlipidemias in dogs and cats. Semin
Hisasue M, et al. (2001 ): Hematologic abnormalities and outcome of 16 cats
Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 7:292.
with myelodysplastic syndromes. J Vet Intern Med 15:471.
Kirby R,Rudolf E (2000): Acquired coagulopathy VI: disseminated
atherosclerosis and cutaneous xanthomatosis in a cat. Vet Q 16:199.
inavascularcoagulation,inFeldmanBF,etal.(editors):Schalms
Hyperadrenocorticism (Dogs)
Veterinary Hematology, Sth ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams &
Behrend EN,Kemppainen RJ (2001): Diagnosis of canine
Wilkins, p. 579.
hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 31:985.
Scott MA (2000): Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, in Feldman BF, et al.
Braddock JA,et al.(2003): Tilostane Teatment in dogs with pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Aust Vet J 81:600.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, p. 478.
Chapman PS, et al. (2004): Adrenal necrosis in a dog receiving tilostane for
Segev G, et al. (2004): Vipera palaestinae envenomation in 327 dogs: a
the tealment of hyperadrenocorticism. I Small Anim Pract 45:307.
Tetrospective cohort study and analy sis of risk factors for mortality.
Feldman EC,Nelson RW(2004): Canine hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s
Toxic on 43:691.
syndrome),inFeldman EC,Nelson RW (editors): Canine and Feline
Topper M, Welles EG (2003): Hemstasis, n Latimer KS, et al. (edtors):
EdocrnlgyandRdunddetouis
Duncan and Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory Medicine Clinical Pathology,
Laus JL, et al.(2002): Combined corneal lipid and calcium degeneration in a
4th ed. Ames, Iowa State Press, p. 99.
dog with hyperadrenocorticism: a case report. Vet Ophthalmol 5:61.
Trepanier LA, et al. (2003): Clinical fndings in 40 dogs with hypersensitivity
W e  sapuns peeaod po uognsupe m paeroose
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 150:799.
Med 17:647.
Reusch CE (2005): Hyperadrenocorticism, in Etinger SJ, Feldman EC (editors):
Zimmerman KL (2000): Drug-induced thrombocytopenias, in Feldman BF,
Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th ed. Saumders, St. Louis, p. 1592.
et al. (editors): Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, Sth ed. Philadelphia,
Rishic IM, et al. (2002): The use of 17-hydroxyprogesterone in the diagmosis
Lippincott Willams & Wilkins, p. 472.
of caninehyperadrenocorticism.J Vet InternMed16:433.
Systemic Hypertension
Wenger M, et al. (2004): Effect of trilostane on serum concentrations of
Bartges JW, et al. (1996): Hypertension and renal disease. Vet Clin North Am
aldosterone, cortisol, and potassium in dogs with pituitary-dependent
Small Anim Pract 26:1331.
hyperadrenocorticism. Am I Vet Res 65: 1245.
Hypothyroidism (Dogs)
echocardiogTaphic abnormalities, and survival rate. I Vet Intem Med
Dixon RM, et al. (1999): Epidemiological, clinical, haematological and
17:89.
biochemical characteristics of canine hypothyroidism. Vet Rec
Crispin SM, Mould JR (2001): Systemic hypertensive disease and the feline 
145:481.
fundus. Vet Ophthalmol 4: 13.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004): Hypothyroidism, in Feldman EC, Nelson 
Elliott J, et al. (2001): Feline hypertension: clinical fndings and response o
  e   e   
 antihypertensive treahment in 30 cases. J Small Anim Pract 42:122.
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 86.
Komaromy AM, et al. (2004): Hypertensive reinopathy and choroidopathy in
Graham PA, et al. (200i): Lymphocyic thyroiditis. Vet Clin North Am Small
 a cat. Vet Ophthalmol 7:3.
Anim Pract 3 1:915.
Maggio F, et al. (2000): Ocular lesions associated with systemic hypertension
Hess RS, et al. (2003): Association between diabetes melitus, hypothyroidism
in cats: 69 cases (1985-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:695
 hyperadrenocorticism, and atherosclerosis in dogs. J Vet Intem Med 17:489.
Mertz BP, et al. (1990): Rhegmatogenous reinal detachment in a
Jaggy A (2000):Neurologic manifestation of canine hypothyroidism, in
hypertensive dog. Lens Eye Toxic Res 7:67.
Bonagura JD (editor):Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII: Small
Miller RH, et al. (i999): Effect of enalapil on blood pressure, renal function,
AnimalPracticthdanersPhiladeph6.
and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in cats with autosomal
dominant polycystic kidney disease. Am J Vet Res 60:1516.
perspecives from a testing Jaboratory. Vet Clin North Am Smal Anim
Pedersen KM, et al. (2003): Increased mean arterial pressure and aldosterone-
Pract 31:951.
to-renin ratio in Persian cats with polycyshic kidney disease. J Vet Intem
Nachreiner RF, et al. (2002): Prevalence of serum thyroid hormone
Med 17:21.
autoantibodies in dogs with clinical signs of hypothyroidism.J Am Vet
Polzin DJ, et al. (2005): Chronic kidney disease, in Ethinger SJ, Feldman EC
Med Assoc 220:466.
(editors): Textbook of Veterinary Intemal Medicine, 6th ed. Saunders,
Panciera D (2000): Cardiovascular complications of thyroid disease, in
St. Louis, p. 1756.
Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII: Small
Sansom J, et al. (2004): Blood pressure assessment in healthy cats and cats
Animal Practice, 13th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 716.
with hypertensive retinopathy. Am J Vet Res 65:245.
Panciera D (2000): Complications and concurent conditions associated with
Snyder PS, et al. (2001): Effect of amlodipine on echocardiographic variables
      s
Veterinary Therapy Xill: Small Anmal Practice, I3th ed. Saunders,
Syme HM, et al. (2002): Prevalence of systolic hypertension in cats with
Philadelphia, p. 327.
chronic renal failure at initial evaluation. I Am Vet Med Assoc 220: 1799.
Panciera DL (2001): Conditions associated with canine hypothyroidism.
Van Boxtel SA (2003): Hypertensive relinopathy in a cat. Can Vet I 44:147.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 31:935.
Polycythemia
Scott-Moncrieff JC, Gupil-Yoran L (2005): Hypothyroidism, in Etinger SJ,
Cote E, Etinger SJ (2001): Long-tem climical management of Tight-to-
Feldman EC (editors): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th ed.
P mau lea r ssop e u snsoee snonp uaed (apesiaat,) yal
Saunders, St. Louis, p. 1535.
15:39.
Thrombocytopenia and Thrombopathy (Thrombasthenia)
Couto CG, et al. (1989): Tumor-associated erythrocytosis in a dog with nasal
Boozer AL, Macintie DK (2003): Canine babesiosis. Vet Clin North Am
fibrosarcoma. J Vet Intem Med 3: 183.
 Small Anim Pract 33:885.
Crow SE, et al. (1995): Concurent renal adenocarcinoma and polycythemia
Boreaux MK (2000): Acquired platelet dysfunchion, in Feldman BF, et al.
in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:29.
Evans LM, Caylor KB (1995): Polycythemia vera in a cat and management
Wilkins, Philadelphia, p. 496.
with hydroxyurea. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:434.
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES I
417
Foster ES, Lothrop CD Jr (1988): Polycythemia vera in a cat with cardiac
Pe sn sdo posssa a is ) e e A 
hypertrophy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1 92:1736.
chorioretinitis.Am J Ophthalmol 136:1183.
Gorse MJ (1988): Polycythemia associated with renal fbrosarcoma in a dog.
Blogg IR, et al. (1983): Blindness caused by Rhodococcus egui in a foal.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 192:793.
Equine Vet J Suppl 2:25.
Gray HE, et al. (2003): Polycythemia vera in a dog presenting with uveibis.
Brem S, et al. (1998): Intraocular leptospira isolation in 4 horses suffering
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:355.
from equine Tecurent uveitis (ERU). Berl Muinch Tierartztl Wochenschr
Hasler AH, Giger U (1996): Serum erythropoielin values in polycythemic
111:415.
cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:294.
Browning GF, et al. (1988): Latency of equine herpesvirus-4 (equine
Hemy CI, et al (199): Primary renal tumours in cats: 19 cases (1992-1998).
Thinopneumonitis virus). Vet Rec 123:518.
 J Feline Med Surg I:165.
Collinson PN, et al. (1994): Isolation of equine herpesvirus-2 (equine
Meyer HP, et al. (1993): Polycythaemia vera in a dog treated by repeated
gammaherpesvirus-2)from foals with keratoconjunctivitis. JAm Vet Med
phlebotomies. Vet Q 15:108.
Assoc 205:329.
Moore KW, Stepien RL (2001): Hydroxyurea for treatment of polycythemia
Cumutte JT,(I993):Chronic gtanulomatous disease: the solving of a clinical
secondary to night-to-left shunting patent ductus arteriosus in 4 dogs.
Tiddle at the molecular level. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 67:S2.
I Vet Intem Med 15:418.
Cutler TI (2002): Ophthalmic findings in the geriatic horse. Vet Clin North
Sato K, et al.(2002): Secondary erythrocytosis associated with high plasma
Am Equine Pract 18:545.
erythropoietin concentraions in a dog with cecalleiomyosarcoma.
 Edington N, et al. (1985): Expenimental reachivation of equid herpesvirus-1
J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:486.
(EHV-1) following the administralion of corticosteroids. Equine Vet I
van Vonderen IK, et al. (1997): Polyuria and polydipsia and disturbed vasopressin
17:369.
Telease in2 dogs with secondary polycythemia. I Vet Intem Med II:300.
Ellis PM, et al. (2000): Japanese encephalitis. Vet Clin North Am Equine
Pract 16:565.
Gniffth G (1987): Pemphigus foliaceus in a Welsh pony. Compend Contin
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, p. 216.
Educ Pract Vet 9:347.
Hyperviscosity Syndrome
Heath SE, et al. (1990): Idiopathic gTanulomatous disease involving the skin
Boone LI (2000): Bence-Jones proteins, in Feldman BF, et al. (editors):
in a horse. I Am Vet Med Assoc 197: 1033.
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, Sth ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott
Henry M, et al. (1989): Hemorhagic diatheses caused by muliple myeloma
Williams & Wilkins, p. 925.
in a three-month-old foal. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:392.
Forrester SD, et al. (1992): Serum hyperviscosity syndrome associated with
 Jones TC (1969): Clinical and pathologic features of equine viral arteritis.
mulhiple myeloma in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:79.
J Am Vet Med Assoc I55:35.
Kaiser PK,et al.(2003): Occlusive vasculitis in apatient with concomitant
et al. (editors): Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, Sth ed. Philadelphia,
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, p. 929.
Kuchtey RW, et al. (2003): Uveibis associated with West Nile virus infection.
Fox LE (1 995): The paraneoplasic disorders, in Bonagura JD (editor): Kirk's
Arch Ophthalmol 121: 1648.
Current Veterinary Therapy XIl: Small Animal Pracice, I2th ed. Saunders,
Lavach JD (1992): Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases. Vet Clin North
Philadelphia,p.S30.
Am Equine Pract 8:627.
Harrus S, et al. (1998): Acute blindness associated with monoclonal
Leiffson PS, et al. (1997): Ocular tuberc ulosis in a horse. Vet Rec 141:651.
gammopathy induced by Ehrlichia canis infection. Vet Parasitol 78:155.
Madigan JE, et al. (1995): Photic head shaking in the horse: 7 cases. Equine
Hawkins EC,et al. (1986): Immunoglobulin A myeloma in a cat with pleural
Vet I 27:306.
effusion and serum hyperviscosity. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:876.
Martin CL (1999): Ocular manifestations of systemic disease, in Gelatt KN
Hohenhaus AE (1995): Syndromes of hyperglobulinemia: diagnosis and
 s nor pa pre odo e ()
 therapy, in Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl: Small Animal Practice,
Wilkins, Balimore.
12th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 523.
MeConnico RS, et al. (1991): Supportive medical care of recumbent horses.
Hoskins JD, et al. (1983): Serum hyperviscosity syndrome associated with
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 13:1287.
Ehrlichia canis infechion in a dog. Am Vet Med Assoc 183:101 1.
Miller TR, et al. (1990): Herpeic keratitis in a horse. Equine Vet I Suppl
Ward DA, et al. (1997): Orbital plasmacytoma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
10:15.
38:576.
Newton SA, et al. (2000): Headshaking in horses: possible aetiopathogenesis
Weber NA, Tebeau CS (1998): An unusual presentation of muliple myeloma
suggested by the results of diagmostic tests and several treatment fegimes
in two cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:477.
used in 20 cases. Equine Vet I 32:208.
Uveodermatologic Syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-Like Syndrorme)
Ostlund EN, et al. (2001): Equine West Nile encephalitis, United States.
Emerg Infect Dis 7:665.
(Dogs)
Bedford PG (1986): Uveodermatological syndrome in the Japanese Akita.
Pusterla N, et al. (2003): Cutaneous and ocular habronemiasis in horses:
63 cases (1988-2002). I Am Vet Med Assoc 222:978.
Vet Rec 118:134.
Rames DS, et al. (1995): Ocular Halicephalobus (syn. Micronema) deletrix in
Bussanich MN, et al. (1982): Granulomatous panuveitis and dermal
depigmentation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc I8: 131.
a horse. Vet Pathol 32:540.
 Rebhun WC, Del Piero F (1998): Ocular lesions of horses with 
Carter WJ, et al. (2005): An immunohistochemical study of
lymphosarcoma: 21 cases (1977-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:852.
uveodermatologic syndrome in two Japanese Akita dogs. Vet Ophthalmol
Richt JA,et al.(2000): Borna disease in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine
8:17.
Pract 16:579.
Cottrell BD, Barnett KC (1986): Harada's disease in the Japanese Akita.
Rico-Hesse R (2000): Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis. Vet Clin North
J Small Anim Pract 28:517.
Am Equine Pract 16:553.
 Kem TI, et al. (1985): Uveiis associated with poliosis and vitiligo in six
Savage CJ (1998): Lymphoproliferalive and myeloproliferalive disorders.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:408.
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 14:563.
Laus JL, et al. (2004): Uveodematologic syndrome in a Brazilian fila dog.
Vet Ophthalmol 7:193.
Sippel WL, et al. (1962): Equine piroplasmosis in the United States. J Am
Lindley DM,et al. (1990): Ocular histopathology of Vogt-Koyanagi-
Vet Med Assoc 141:694.
Smith BP (editor) (2002): Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd ed. Mosby,
Harada-like syndrome in an Akita dog. Vet Pathol 27:294.
Muller RS, et al. (1992): The uveodermatologic syndrome in dogs. Tierarztl
St. Louis.
Suton GA, et al. (1998): Pathogenesis and clinical signs of equine
Prax 20:632.
herpesvirus-I in experimentally infected ponies in vivo. Can I Vet Res
 Read RW (2002): Vogt-Koy anagi-Harada disease. Ophthalmol Clin North Am
62:49.
15:333.
Sutton GA,et al. (1997): Study of the duration and distribution of equine
Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Disease in Horses
influenza virus subtype 2 (HNg) antigens in experimentaly infected
ponies in vivo.Can JVet Res 61:113.
Aleman M, et al. (2006): Juvenile idiopathic epilepsy in Egypian Arabian
foals: 22 cases (1985-2005). J Vet Intem Med 20:1443.
Wada S, et al. (2003): Nonulcerative keratouveitis as a manifestation of
Anderson CA, Divers TI (1983): Systemic granulomatous inflammation in a
 Jeptospiral infection in a horse. Vet Ophthalmol 6:19 1.
Woods LW, et al. (1992): Systemic granulomatous disease in a horse grazing
horse gTazing hairy vetch. J AmVet Med Assoc 183:569.
pasture containing vetch (Vicia sp.). J Vet Diagn Invest 4:356.
418
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
 Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Diseases in Ruminants
Pierson RE, et al. (1973): An epizootic of maligmant catarrhal fever in feedlot
 Abdelbaki YA, Davis RN (1972): Ophthalmoscopic fndings in elaeophorosis
cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 163:349.
of domeshic sheep. Vet Med 67:69.
Radostits O, et al. (2007): Veterinary Medicine, IOth ed. Saunders, London.
Adcock, J, Hibler CP (1969): Vascular and neuroophthalmic pathology of
Rebhun WC (1986): Diseases of the bovine orbit and globe. J Am Vet Med
elaeophorosis in elk. Pathol Vet 6:185.
Assoc 190: 171.
Bistmer SI, et al. (1970): The ocular lesions of bovine viral diarrhea-mucosal
Rebhun WC (1984): Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases in cattle. Vet 
disease. Pathol Vet 7:275.
Clin North Am Large Amim Pract 6:623.
Capucchio MT, et al. (2003): Maedi-visna virus detechion in ovine third 
Rebhun WC (1982): Orbital lymphosarcoma in cattle. I Am Vet Med Assoc
eyelids. J Comp Pathol 129:37.
180:149.
Collier LC, et al. (1979): Ocular manifestations of the Chediak-Higashi
Rebhun WC, Del Piero F (1998): Ocular lesions in horses with
 syndrome in four species of animals. I Am Vet Med Assoc 175:587.
lymphosarcoma: 21 cases (1977-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:852.
Dukes TW (1971): The ocular lesions of thromboembolic
RebhunWC,de Lahunta A(1982): Diagnosis and treatment of bovine
meningoencephalitis in cattle. Can Vet J 12:180.
Jisteriosis. I Am Vet Med Assoc 180:395.
Fighera RA, Baros CSL (2004): Systemic granulomatous disease in
Roeder PL, et al.(1986): Pestivirus fetopathogenicity in cattle: changing
Brazilian cattle grazing pasture containing vetch (Cicia spp). Vet Human
sequelae with fetal maturahion. Vet Rec 118:44.
Toxicol 46:62.
Silverstein AM, et al (1971): An experimental virus-induced retinal dysplasia 
George L,et al.(1988):Enhancement of infectious bovine
 in the fetal lamb. Am J Ophthalmol 72:22.
keratoconjunchivitis by modifed live infechious bovine rhinotracheitis virus
Slatter DH, et al. (1979): Efects of experimental hyperlipoproteinemia on the
vaccine. Am I Vet Res 49: 1800.
canine eye. Exp Eye Res 29:437.
Hopkins JB, et al.(1973): Conjunctivitis associated with chlamydial
Smith BP (editor) (2002): Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd ed. Mosby,
 polyarthritis in lambs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 163:1157.
St. Louis.
Martin CL (1999): Ocular manifestations of systemic disease, in Gelatt KN
ss   s  
 se n  pe oo e (i)
d    e    
Wilkins,Baltimore.
Stephens LR, et al. (1981): Infec bous thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
Mushi EZ, et al. (1980): Isolation of bovine maligmant catarhal fever virus
in cattle: a Teview. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:378.
from ocular and nasal secretions of wildebeest calves. Res Vet Sci 29:168.
van der Lugt JI, et al. (1996): Status spongiosus, optic neuropathy, and retinal
Pierson RE,et al. (1973): Clnical and clinicopathologic observations in
degeneration in Helichrysum argyrosphaerum poisoning in sheep and a
induced maligmant catarthal fever of cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc
goat. Vet Pathol 33:495.
173:833.
Whiteley HE, et al. (1985): Ocular lesions of bovine malignant catarhal
fever. Vet Pathol 22:219.
Chapter
OCULAR EMERGENCIES
Paul E. Miller
MATERIALS REQUIRED
SEVERE OCULAR AND ADNEXAL
HYPHEMA
PROPTOSIS OF THE GLOBE
 CONTUSIONS AND CONCUSSION
ACUTE ANTERIOR UVEITIS
GLAUCOMA 
PENETRATING INJURIES OF THE GIOBE
SUDDEN BLINDNESS
CORNEAL LACERATIONS
SEVERE CORNEAL UICERATION 
LID LACERATIONS
DESCEMETOCELE OR IRIS PROLAPSE
 he conditions discussed in this chapter are the most
Always perform a thorough clinical examination before
important disorders for which early action is necessary to
manipulating the eye.
 prevent severe or permanent damage to the eye. Emergency
 treatment is outlined separately for ready clinical reference,
followed by further discussion for those conditions not covered
PROPTOSIS OF THE GLOBE
 elsewhere in the text.
 At initial presentation it is often preferable to try to salvage the
MATERIALS REQUIRED
globe rather than to remove it.
Basic Diagnostic Instruments and Supplies
· Magnifying loupe 2x to 4x magnification
·Direct or indirect ophthalmoscope
Emergency treatment for proptosis of the globe
·Finhoff transilluminator
(Figure 19-1)
· Sterile eye wash
· Schirmer tear test strips
1. Replace the globe as soon as possible to prevent severe
·Fluorescein strips
comeal damage. If treatment is delayed because the animal
· Cotton-tipped applicators or "Weck cell’ cellulose
is far away, advise that the owner keep the eye moist with
sponges
saline, water, petroleum jelly (Vaseline), or antibiotic
Tonometer—Schigtz, Tono-Pen, or TonoVet
ointments and avoid additional trauma when moving the
· Culture swabs and media
animal.
· No. 15 scalpel blades
 2. Carefully examine the patient for systemic injuries and
· Glass microscope slides
provide appropriate supportive care.
· Needles, 20- to 27-gauge
3.
 Protect the surface of the comea with antibiotic ointments.
4.
 When the patient is stable, induce anesthesia.
5.
 The basic procedure is to lift the lid margins over the
Surgical Instruments
equator of the globe while pushing the globe back into the
 orbit at the same time.
·Needle holders (Derf or Castroviejo)
 6. Flush the conjunctival sac free of extraneous debris with
· Tenotomy scissors
sterile lactated Ringer's solution.
· Lacrimal cannula or 20- to 25-gauge Teflon IV catheters
7.
Roll out the lid margins with hemostats or forceps and
·Irrigating bulb or syringe
 place a temporary tarsorrhaphy suture. In general, three or
· Fixation forceps
four simple interrupted or horizontal mattress sutures of
· No. 15 scalpel blade
4/0 nylon are used as shown in Figure 19-2, A and B.
Sutures should emerge from the lid margin (in line with the
· Lid retractors (Castroviejo or Vierheller)
 meibomian gland openings) rather than on the conjunctival
surface so as to prevent sutures rubbing on the comea.
Medications
8.
 Apply a suitable antibiotic ointment (e.g., neomycin,
polymyxin B, bacitracin) to the eye.
 Topical anesthetic
9. 
 Place a scalpel handle over the comea, which is well
Tropicamide (Mydriacyl), 1%
 lubricated with either an antibiotic or artificial tear
Atropine, 1% drops and ointment 
ointment, and draw up on each of the sutures
 Mannitol, 20%, parenteral
simultaneously, as shown in Figure 19-2, C and D. This
Pilocarpine, 2% drops
 maneuver prevents forward movement of the globe while
Neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin drops
pulling the eyelids up and over the comea. Once the comea
Tear-replacement solution/cyclosporine
Continued
419
420
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
repair of the extraocular muscle tears may be indicated in select
 Emergency treatment for proptosis of the globe
cases.
(Figure 19-1)—cont'd
Hyphema
is protected, tie the sutures (Figure 19-2, E). If necessary
(i.e., if pressure is extensive), additional sutures may be
Marked hyphema is an unfavorable sign, because it is usually
 placed between the original sutures. Usually the medial
canthus is left open for a few millimeters so topical
associated with severe damage to the uveal tract or rupture
 of the globe, which leads to ocular hypotension and phthisis bulbi.
medications may be applied.
10. Give dexamethasone 0.1 mg/kg IV to control secondary
 uveitis. Systemic steroids may then be used to treat optic
Pupils
neuritis if present.
 The size of the pupil is not associated with the ulimate visual
outcome, but the presence of an intact direct and consensual
Prognosis
pupillary light reflex is generally a good prognostic sign. The
 absence of a direct or consensual pupillary light reflex, how-
If there is any doubt as to whether the globe can be salvaged,
 ever, does not indicate that the prognosis is invariably poor. The
 an attempt should be made to replace it back into the orbit. The
reason is that mydriasis can result from damage to either the
sooner the eye is replaced, the better the prognosis, both for
afferent limb of the pupillary light reflex (the retina or optic
saving the eye and for shortening the convalescent period.
nerve) or the efferent limb (the oculomotor nerve or the iris
Unfortunately, some eyes are inevitably lost despite early and
sphincter muscle), and miosis may result from iridocyclitis
vigorous treatment. Enucleation as the initial therapy should be
 attributable to the injury or loss of sympathetic innervation
considered if (1) the owner is unwilling or unable to provide what 
of the pupil. A midrange pupil may occur if the tone of both the
 may be potentially long-term postoperative care, (2) the eye has
sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves is lost, or if the optic
 ruptured, (3) three or more extraocular muscles are torn, or (4)
nerve is severed only in 1 eye. The most favorable set of prog-
the eye is completely filled with blood. The following are
 nostic indicators are as follows:
useful prognostic indicators.
· Presence of vision at initial presentation
· Minimal damage to extraocular muscles (none, one, or two
Avulsion of Extraocufar Muscles
injured)
The medial and inferior (ventral) recti and inferior (ventral)
 Absence of hyphema
oblique muscles rupture first. Because branches of the ciliary
· Normal findings on fundus examination
artery to the anterior segment enter the globe with the extraocular
 muscles, complete avulsion of three or more muscles indicates an
Skull Conformation
unfavorable prognosis. In eyes with only a few of the muscles
ruptured, temporary postoperative deviations (usually lateral or
Proptosis occurs most frequently in brachycephalic breeds
superolateral) of the globe occur (Figures 19-1 and 19-3).
with shallow orbits (e.g., Pekingese, Boston terrier, pug). It is
These deviations often diminish over weeks to months (up to
extremely important that excessive pressure around the neck of
6 to 9 months), or the exposed conjunctiva becomes pigmented,
these breeds be avoided, especially after proptosis. Because
thereby improving the cosmetic appearance of the eye. Surgical
more force is required to produce proptosis in cats and
mesocephalic and dolichocephalic dogs, its presence in these
animals warrants a less favorable prognosis than proptosis in
brachycephalic dogs. Concurrent facial fractures also warrant a
poor prognosis.
Maintenance Therapy
1. Systemic oral antibiotics for at least 7 to 14 days
 2. Application of topical antibiotic ointments every 6 hours
(neomycin/bacitracin/polymyxin B or gentamicin) and 1%
atropine ointment every 12 hours through the medial
 canthus if the patient is tractable
 3. Initial sutures are left in place for up to 3 weeks. If some
 degree of lagophthalmia is present, it may be better to
remove the sutures sequentially rather than all at once. If
after 3 weeks the lids still do not close well over the globe,
the sutures should be replaced and maintained for an 
additional 2 to 3 weeks to allow residual orbital swelling to
 regress and to prevent cormeal desiccation and ulceration. In
 some cases sutures may be left in place for 3 to 6 months.
Figure 19-1. Proptosis in a young Boston terrier after a cog bite injury.
(Courtesy University of Wisconsin-Maclison Veterinary Ophthalmology
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca and comeal ulceration secondary
Service Collection.}
to exposure are common in the postoperative period. Supple-
OCULAR EMERGENCIES I
421
+
E
L-M.
interrupted traction sutures of 4/0 nylon. Alternatively, a series of mocifiec horizontal matress sutures may be
usedl. Sutures should enter anc exit at the lid margin anc not on the conjunctival surface. C, Placement of scalpel
hanclle on a cornea lubricated with an artificial tear ointment. D, Traction on the sutures anc replacement of the
globe. E, Completion of the sutures.
Figure 19-3. Superolateral cleviation of the globe after proptosis suggests
clamage to the medial rectus and inferior oblique extraocular musc les.
mental artificial tears or topical antibiotic ointments are often
In some patients chronic partial exophthalmos and chronic
required for several weeks or longer after proptosis to lubricate
 corneal exposure continue to be problems. Usually this situation 
the eye and prevent infection. Additionally, many severely
 results from facial nerve palsy, damage to extraocular muscles
traumatized eyes demonstrate a deep corneal vascularization
that retain the globe in the orbit, organized blood/scar tissue
 that proceeds from the limbus to the center of the cornea before
within the orbit, or eyelid retraction. In affected patients further
gradually regressing over 4 to 8 weeks. If the cornea is
surgical intervention, such as extraocular muscle repair, per-
not ulcerated or subject to exposure, topical corticosteroids 
 manent medial or lateral tarsorrhaphy, or, in extreme cases,
(0.1% dexamethasone or 1% prednisolone acetate) may be
 enucleation, should be considered. Mild cases usually do not
used every 6 to 12 hours in an effort to moderate this vascular
 need surgery and may be managed with supplemental artifcial
response.
 tear ointment to prevent corneal drying.
422
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAIS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
GLAUCOMA
 Emergency treatment of corneal laceration-cont'd
 The steps listed here are only for the emergency treatment
of canine acute primary angle-closure glaucoma in which
the defect with a dry fluorescein strip. If the wound is
the eye has the potential for vision. Other forms of glaucoma
leaking the normally orange dye mixes with the escaping
 aqueous humor, resulting in a green rivulet of stain exiting
(e.g, secondary to lens luxation or uveitis) are often treated
quite differently (e.g., lens extraction, antinflammatory
the wound.
3. If the wound is leaking, or if the comea is unstable and there
control). Eyes that are irreversibly blind from glaucoma are
will be a delay until the patient is seen by a veterinary
often better treated surgically (evisceration and intrascleral
ophthalmologist, place an Elizabethan collar (or eyecup in a
prosthesis, enucleation, etc.). Paracentesis of the anterior
 horse) before referral.
 a   u n  si 
4
Institute systemic antibiotic therapy (e.g., cefazolin,
glaucoma because of the risk of hemorrhage from the uveal
 enrofloxacin, penicillin/gentamicin).
tract and because sudden decompression may further damage
5.
the optic nerve.
(systemic dexamethasone IV to dogs and cats, flunixin 
meglumine to horses).
 jou ae sudone pue sonoque se yons suogeoipau leoidoi '9
Emergency treatment of acute primary angle closure
 usually used until the comea is structurally intact, because
glaucoma
 solutions contain preservatives that may damage intraocular
structures and some ointments may lead to the formation of
intraocular granulomas.
Option A
7. If the comea is not leaking aqueous humor, apply topical.
1. Topical application of 0.005% latanoprost twice, 30 minutes
antibiotics (neomycin/bacitracin/polymyxin B) q4-6h and
apart
 administer 1% atropine drops q8-24h.
2. If intraocular pressure is not substantially reduced in 1 to
8. Lacerations that are superficial, do not gape open, and dont
2 hours, go to Option B.
 perforate through the comea (Seidel test result negative) are
 treated as described in Chapter 10. Wounds that penetrate
Option B
 the comea, that are long or deep, or that gape open usually
1. Intravenous mannitol 1.0 to 2.0 g/kg IV over 20 minutes
require suturing and should be treated by a veterinary
ophthalmologist.
 2. Oral methazolamide or dichlorphenamide at 2.2 to
4.4 mg/kg q8-12h (dogs)
3. 2% pilocarpine solution q 10min for 30 min, then q6h.
 Monitor for bradycardia and other side effects of
parasympathetic stimulation during this time.
4. Dexamethasone 0.1 mg/kg IV may be useful.
LID LACERATIONS
See also Chapter 6.
Interim Therapy
Treatment
After initial lowering of pressure, the patient should be referred
to a veterinary ophthalmologist for further diagnostic proce-
The following four factors determine the treatment of lid
 dures and defnitive therapy. Additionally, it should not be
lacerations:
forgotten that the fellow eye has a 50% probability of develop-
ment of glaucoma in the next 8 months. Prophylactic therapy
· Time since injury, which affects extent of bacterial
of the fellow eye with either 0.25% demecarium bromide
contamination
and a topical corticosteroid once a day at bedtime, or 0.5%
 Involvement of lid margin and especially lacrimal puncta
betaxolol every 12 hours has been demonstrated in a clinical
 and canaliculi
 Extent of lesion (plastic reconstruction may be necessary)
fourfold. Topical pilocarpine and an oral carbonic anhydrase
Whether the laceration crosses the lid margin; if so, globe
 inhibitor should be continued until the patient can be evaluated
integrity should be verified
by a veterinary ophthalmologist.
CORNEAL LACERATIONS
Emergency treatment of lid lacerations
 Emergency treatment of corneal laceration
1. Determine the time since injury and proceed as follows:
 a. 4 hours or less: Repair immediately.
1. Carefully examine the eye. If a laceration is suspected, either 
 b. 4 to 24 hours: Repair may be immediate or delayed,
 refer the patient immediately to a veterinary ophthalmologist
 depending on evaluation of injury.
 OT sedate/anesthetize the animal to prevent further damage to
 C. After 24 hours: Treat as an open wound until gross 
the eye and allow a closer examination.
infection is controlled, then repair in an elective
 2. Avoid pressure on the globe and ocular adnexa. Examine the
procedure.
anterior chamber with a focal light, and perform a Seidel test
2. Administer appropriate systemic antibiotics (e.g., cefazolin
with fluorescein dye to determine whether the comea has
in dog or cat, penicillin/gentamicin in horse.
been perforated and continues to leak. "Paint'" the surface of 
3. Induce general anesthesia.
OCULAR EMERGENCIES |
423
· Associated signs of central nervous system damage 
Emergency treatment of lid lacerations--cont'd
(e.g., coma, nystagmus)
4. If the lid margins are involved, perform reapposition 
usou, jueaaid oy uolu o/g buisn sinns pue Aiaeinooe
Emergency treatment of ocular contusions and
postoperative scarTing, entropion, ectropion, and epiphora,
concussions (Figure 19-4)
and to generally improve the cosmetic appearance
(see Chapter 6).
1. After a general physical examination and treatment of life-
5. Iflid margins are not involved, teat as a simple skin
threatening disorders, examine the eye and adnexa and
laceration, avoiding tension on the lid margins.
record fndings. If necessary, anesthetize the patient. Palpate
 6. If the wound is extensive, requires plastic surgical repait, 
the orbital rim and facial bones, and, if necessary, radiograph
Or involves the lacrimal canaliculi, complete initial frst aid
the area.
 procedures and protect the wound against further damage
 2. Evaluate for direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes.
(e.g., by use of bandage, Elizabethan collar, and systemic
 Carefully examine the comea with a magnifying loupe and,
antibiotics) before the animal is transported to a referral
if necessary, stain with fluorescein.
center for final evaluation and treatment.
 4. Perform an ophthalmoscopic examination and check for the
position of the lens, hemorthages in the vitreous or retina,
retinal detachment, and fibrin in the anterior chamber.
Important Facts
 5. Administer the following agents:
a. Antinflammatory agents (systemic corticosteroids, e.g.
1. Preserve as much lid tissue as possible—minimal
 dexamethasone, in dog and cat, flunixin meglumine in a 
 debridement is best.
horse)
 2. Because of the excellent blood supply to the eyelids, lid
b. Systemic antibiotics (cefazolin in dog and cat,
 lacerations usually heal well even if contaminated.
penicillin/gentamicin in horse)
 3. Because lid lacerations are often irritating during the
C.
 1% atropine ointment or drops q8-24h 
 healing phase, the following measures may be taken if
d. Tear replacement solutions as necessary
 necessary to prevent self-mutilation:
 6. Provide cage rest or stable confinement immediately, and
· Elizabethan collar
ex amine the eye frequently (at least every 4 hours)
· Eyecup in horses
thereafter.
· Sedation or tranquilization
 7. If complications develop or severe intraocular lesions are
 suspected, refer animal for specialist treatment.
· Analgesics as indicated
SEVEREOCULARANDADNEXAL
PENETRATING INJURIES OF THE GLOBE
CONTUSIONS AND CONCUSSION
A contusion is damage from direct contact of the globe with an
Emergency treatment of penetrating injuries of
object. A concussion is damage due to trauma adjacent to the
the globe
eye when forces are transmitted to the eye. The two important
factors in treatment of contusions or concussions involving the
Ainfu reuing suueaaid je penoenp aie sjdune reniu 
eye are as follows:
1.
 Obtain a thorough history of the cause of the trauma and
 how it occured. This is important so that preventive
1. External trauma may cause severe intraocular injuries even
measures to avoid further complications may be taken if
if the globe is not penetrated.
necessary (e.g., in the case of vegetable foreign bodies, 
 2. Posttraumatic uveitis is common and must be controlled.
"(suoous leung snaydoides jo soinos aie yya
2. Administer tranquilizers or analgesics as necessary to
Common Clinical Signs Associated with Ocular
prevent self-trauma.
Trauma
3. Avoid all pressure on the eye and periorbital area until the
comeasclera have been determined to be structurally stable.
·Hyphema
4.
 Carefully examine the eye to evaluate the extent of injuries.
Chemosis
 5. Administer systemic antibiotics to prevent infection
· Subconjunctival hemorrhages
(ses pue shop u1 AI 1o I By/Bu oz ne uozeje)
penicillin/gentamicin in horses). A dminister topical
Corneal desiccation
antibiotics (drops) frequently if the outer coat of the eye
 Proptosis of the globe (see Figure 19-1)
(comea/sclera) is intact and intraocular contents are leaking
· Swollen lids
through the wound.
· Paralysis of lids
6.
 Administer species-appropriate antinflammatory agents
 Absence of pupillary light reflexes
(systemic corticosteroids in dogs and cats, flunixin
·Pain on palpation
 meglumine in horses).
· Fibrin in the anterior chamber
7. Protect the eye from further trauma by the following means, 
· Miosis or anisocoria (difference in the size of pupils)
as necessary:
· Corneal edema
a.
Third eyelid flap or temporary tarsorrhaphy
b. Elizabethan collar
· Lens luxation or subluxation
C.
Tranquilizers and analgesics
· Retinal detachment and hemorrhages
d. Eyecups, cross-tying, or neck brace in horses 
· Decreased motility or deviation of the globe
· Blindness or visual field defects
Continued
424
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
 OCULAR CONTUSION OR CONCUSSION 
Chemosis
Pain on
Subconjunctival
Globe
Orbilal
Intraocular
Orhital and
palpation
hemorrhage.
rupture
fractures
lcsions
periorbitallesions
ecchymosis
Lacrima!
Hetrobulbar
Nerve
damage
hemorrhage
damage
Keratoconjunctivitis
 Proptosis (obvious
Lagophthalmos
sicca
appearance)
Paralysis
Corneal
Scarring of
Corneal
External
Radiography
desiccation
 extraocular muscles
anesthesia
 examination
and restriction
Corneal
ofmovement
 degeneration
Orbital nerve
injunies and
rosuriting pupillary
Diagnostic
abnomalities
 recognition 
Lens luxation
Hemorrhage
Oplic neuritis
leading to
Retinaledema
ir.doconeal
Retinal detachment
angle lesions
Hyphema
Uvcitis
Cataract
Iricodialysis
Giaucoma
Fibrin in anterior
Rctinal and
 chamber
vitreous
hemorrhages
Tonometry
Ophthalmoscopic
Schirmer
External
and focal light
tear test 
examination
examination
 Figure 194. Algorithm for diagnosis anc sequelae of ocular concussions and contusions.
Emergency treatment of penetrating injuries of
Emergency treatment of corneal ulceration—-cont'd
the globe-cont'd
4. Initial antibiotic therapy is based on cytology results and,
 8. Maintain antibiotic and steroid coverage until specialist
ultimately, on culture and sensitivity testing results. Initial
assistance can be obtained. (All penetrating or severe ocular
therapy usually consists of topical neomycin/polymyxin
injuries should be treated by a veterinary ophthalmologist,
B/bacitracin, or ciprofloxacin, or a combination of
if possible.)
 cefazolin/tobramycin q2-4h. The last is prepared by
Teconstituting injectable cefazolin with artifcial tears to a
final concentration of 33 mg/mL of cefazolin. The
tobramycin is fortified by adding injectable tobramycin to
SEVERE CORNEAL ULCERATION
 the commercial ophthalmic preparation so as to achieve a
final concentration of 9 mg/mL.
A thorough eye examination is performed with special attention
 5. In horses topical antifungal therapy consisting of miconazole
 given to the eyelids, third eyelid, and anterior chamber.
 or itraconazole in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) should be
considered. A subpalpebral lavage system may be required
in some horses to effectively medicate the eye.
 Emergency treatment of corneal ulceration
6.
Give atropine 1% drops q6-24h if substantial pain or
 intraocular inflammation is present and keratoc onjunctivitis
1. Perform a Schirmer tear test.
sicca is not present.
 2. Perform a culture, cytologic examination, and Gram stain of
 7. If ulceration is especially severe, the patient should be
a scraping from the margins of the ulcer (not the
Teferred to a spec ialist.
 conjunctiva). Use a moistened swab to obtain the specimen.
 8. The patient should be closely monitored for worsening of 
 3. Fluorescein stain: Carefully draw the extent of the defect so
the ulcer.
 the efficacy of therapy can be accurately determined.
 OCULAR EMERGENCIES |
425
DESCEMETOCELE OR IRIS PROLAPSE
Emergency treatment of hyphema
Once the diagnosis has been confrmed, immediate steps are
undertaken to prevent either rupture of the cornea or further
1. Prevent further ocular trauma and confine the patient as soon 
displacement of the iris before surgery. Therapy is directed
as possible after injury. If there is no evidence of trauma,
toward stabilizing and supporting the cornea until defnitive
begin diagnostic testing for disorders such as immune-
 mediated thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, intraocular
 surgical treatment can be performed.
neoplasia, and systemic hypertension.
 2. Administer corticosteroid drops or ointment (0.1%
dexamethasone or 1.0% prednisolone acetate) q6-8h if the
 comea does not retain fluorescein stain and the hyphema is 
Emergency treatment of descemetocele or iris
mild to moderate in severity.
prolapse
 3. If the hyphema is mild and is not secondary to uveitis,
administer 1% to 2% pilocarpine drops 3 times daily and
1. Anesthetize or tranquilize the patient.
attempt to dilate the pupil every second day with
 2. Prevent further trauma with an Elizabethan collar, eyecup, OT
phenylephrine (10%) to prevent synechia formation. If the
other device.
glaucoma is secondary to uveitis, dilate the pupil with 1%
3. If the ulcer is deep, but has not perforated the comea, begin 
 atropine q8-1 2h.
aggressive antibiotic therapy as for severe comeal ulceration 
 4. If the hyphema is severe, administer 1% atropine drops q8h
and consider anticollagenase therapy (see Chapter 3) if
 to control the presumed uveitis, and monitor intraocular
examination by a specialist will be delayed.
 pressure once or twice daily as the blood is resorbed.
4. Refer the patient for surgical repair by a specialist
Rebleeding occasionally occurs within the first 5 days.
(e.g, direct sutring, a grafing procedure, comelal
Administer systemic corticosteroids (e.g., prednisolone or
transposition).
 dexamethasone) in appropriate systemic antinflammatory
 5. If referal is not possible and the iris has prolapsed, the
dosages for dogs and cats.
Aeu (eoueieadde ui ysieia Aensn) sul yo aoeid supnnoid
 5. If glaucoma is impending, use a topical or systemic carbonic
be excised, the comea sutured, and the anterior chamber 
 anhydrase inhibitor or topical dipiveffin.
reconstituted with physiologic saline or an air bubble
6. If the color of the hyphema changes from bright red to
(Figure 19-5). Surgical successrequires microsurgical
bluish black ("8-ball hemorhage") at 5 to 7 days after onset
 skills, fine suture material (7/0 or smaller), and high
and intraocular pressure increases, surgical intervention may
magnification.
be indicated. If available, tissue plasminogen activator may
be used to resolve the clot.
 7. If the hyphema recurs and a laboratory evaluation has not 
aleady been done, obtain specimens for measurements of
complete blood cell count, platelet count, buccal mucosal
bleeding time, and clotting parameters. Ocular ultrasound to
look for an intraocular tumor should be considered.
 Note: Although uveitis is often present with hyphema, use of
prostaglandin inhibitors is not advised because many agents
 also prolong blood clotting through their effect on platelets.
 Carprofen (Rimadyl) is claimed by the manufacturer to have a
lesser effect on clotting than other nonsteroidal anti-
 inflammatory agents.
ACUTEANTERIORUVEITIS
 Figure 19-5. Technique for removal of incarceratecl iris tissue in a corneal 
 Acute anterior uveitis requires urgent treatment for the follow-
woundl. Sutures sizecd 7/0 to 10/0 are placed at approximately 90% of the 
ing reasons:
clepth of the corneal stroma but co not enter the anterior chamber. The
anterior chamber can be reformed by an air bubble celiverec through a
· It can be extremely painful.
27-gauge needlle entering the eye at the lirmbus. Acequately closed corneal
ym pauiens uaym aowny snoanbe yeal jou op pue juae ane spunom
· It may be associated with life-threatening systemic disorders.
fluorescein stain (Seidel test). Optirmal surgical success requires
· Permanent structural lesions may result in undesirable
microsurgical skills, fine suture material, anc high magnification.
consequences (e.g., secondary glaucoma, iris bombe, cataract).
(Modlified from Bistner S1, Aguirre CD [1972|: Management of ocular
emergencies. Vet Clin North Am 2:359.)
 Emergency treatment of acute anterior uveitis
After diagnosis the following treatment is instituted:
1. Full ophthalmic and physical examination and laboratory 
HYPHEMA
evaluation to find the cause of the uveitis. Even if a specific 
cause is not identifed, this approach allows potentially life-
Hyphema is the presence of blood in the anterior chamber.
threatening systemic disorders to be ruled out.
It most commonly results from hemorrhage from the iris and
2. Topical 0.1% dexamethasone or 1% prednisolone acetate q4-6h
ciliary body. Less commonly blood originates from the posterior
uveal tract or retina (e.g., systemic hypertension).
Continued
426
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Retinal or vitreous hemorrhages (e.g., feline hypertensive
 Emergency treatment of acute anterior
retinopathy, rodenticide poisoning)
uveitis-cont'd
 Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (canine)
 After epileptic seizures
 3. Species-appropriate systemic antinflammatory drugs in
Various toxicities (e.g., owner-administered marijuana in
 moderate to severe cases. Consider IV dexamethasone of
small animals, Stypandra imbricata toxicity in sheep,
 Oral prednisone in dogs and cats, and flunixin meglumine of
 jvermectin in dogs/cats, enrofloxacin in cats)
 phenylbutazone in horses. See Chapters 3 and 11.
 Note: Use systemic corticosteroids at immunosuppressive
 End-stage progressive retinal degenerations 
 doses with caution, or not at all, if an infectious cause is
 Acute onset of cataract (e.g., in diabetes mellitus)
· Inflammatory disorders of the central visual pathways (e.g-,
suspected.
4. Topical atropine 1% 3 times daily
post-distemper encephalitis, reticulosis)
 5. Topical and systemic antibiotics typically have limited value
 Cerebral hypoxia after general anesthesia for routine
 in most forms of uveitis except those due to bacterial 
procedures such as declawing or neutering or after
keratitis or systemic bacterial infections; they are useful for
cardiopulmonary resuscitation with a period of hypoxia
prophylactic application in patients undergoing
immunosuppressi ve therapy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Fritsche J, et al. (1996): Prolapse of the eyeball in small animals:
a Tetrospective study of 36 cases. Tierarztl Prax 24:55.
SUDDEN BLINDNESS
Gilger B,et al. (1995): Traumatic ocular proptoses in dogs and cats: 84cases
(1980-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1186.
A complete history and eye examination are necessary to diag-
Giuliano EA (2005): Feline ocular emergencies. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 
 nose the cause of sudden loss of vision. Differential diagnosis
20:135.
 in dogs and cats includes the following conditions:
Hamilton HL (1999): Pediatric ocular emergencies. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 29: 1003.
Mandell DC, Holt E (2005): Ophthalmic emergencies. Vet Clin North Am
·Acute glaucoma
Small Anim Pract 35:455.
 Retinal detachment
Rebhun WC (1994): Ocular emergencies. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
· Acute uveitis with retinal detachment or optic neuritis (e.g.,
10:591.
Severin GA (1995): Veterinary Ophthalmology Notes, 3rd ed. Severin, Fort
uveodermatologic syndrome)
Collins, CO.
Chapter
OPHTHALMOLOGY OF
1
EXOTIC PETS
Bradford J. Holmberg
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION AND
MICE AND RATS
SNAKES
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
RAPTORS AND PET BIRDS
AMPHIBIANS
RABBITS
LIZARDS, TURTLES, TORTOISES, AND
FERRETS
CROCODILIANS
ing easier placement. However, because this practice is not
cular anatomy of the vertebrate has been remarkably con-
standardized, there is large variability between results, making
served throughout evolution. Structures universally present in
interpretation of values difficult.
 these eyes are an outer fbrous tunic (cornea and sclera), middle
A phenol red thread test is more appropriate for the smaller
vascular tunic or uvea (iris, ciliary body, choroid), inner neural
eyes of exotic animals. The test is performed similarly to the
tunic (retina), and internal optical media (aqueous humor, lens,
 Schirmer tear test. The thread is placed in the lateral canthus
vitreous). This basic pattern, particularly as it applies to
 for 15 seconds, and the millimeters of wetting are measured.
mammals, is outlined in Chapter 1. Familiarity with general
 Normal values for the Schirmer tear test and phenol red thread
 ocular anatomy and physiology is crucial to understanding the
test for a number of species are shown in Table 20-1. Quali-
clinical signs and pathogenesis of ophthalmic disease. The
tative tear film deficiencies are currently diagnosed in canine
objective of this chapter is to discuss differences in ocular
and feline ophthalmology through the use of the tear film
anatomy and provide the general practitioner with information
 break-up time. This technique is not yet in common usage with
 pertaining to the ophthalmic examination and diagnostic testing.
exotic species.
common ophthalmic diseases, and their treatments in exotic
 species.
The phenol red thread test is the preferred method to evaluate 
tear production in exotic pets.
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION AND
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
 IOP evaluation, or tonometry, can readily be performed in
conscious exotic animals. Two types of tonometers are most
Many of the exotic animal species are not accustomed to fre-
frequently used to evaluate IOP, an applanation tonometer
quent handling or the restraint necessary to perform a thorough
(Tono-Pen) and rebound tonometer (TonoVet). Published IOP
 ophthalmic examination. Knowing the appropriate technique
values for a number of exotic animal species are shown in
for proper restraint not only allows a better examination but
Table 20-2
also reduces overall stress on the animal. For example, the
The small globe (short axial length) of many exotic animals
rear limbs and spine of a rabbit should always be adequately
increases the difficulty of critically examining the fundus. How-
-san Aiqissod asnns Aeu Aaun passans usym paoddns
 ever, performing indirect ophthalmoscopy should be a standard
ing in hyperextension of the lumbosacral spine and vertebral
 part of the ophthalmic examination and is facilitated through
fractures. During the examination of raptors, the practitioner
 pharmacologic mydriasis and use of a highly refractive indirect
 must always be cognizant of the talons, because severe injury
lens. Lenses of 30, 40, or 60 D are particularly useful. Pupillary
can occur if appropriate precautions are not taken.
dilation in mammals is achieved with 1% tropicamide, usually
 The techniques used in the ophthalmic examination are no
within 20 minutes and persists for 4 to 8 hours. The pupils of
 different whether one is examining an exotic species or a dog
birds and reptiles will not dilate with anticholinergic agents
or cat. A guide to these techniques is outlined in Chapter 5.
 owing to the presence of striated muscle fibers in both the
However, evaluation of the tear film, intraocular pressure (IOP),
 pupillary sphincter and dilator muscles. Achieving mydriasis in
and fundus may be more diffcult in exotic animals owing to
these species is more diffcult and may require intracameral
 their smaller globes.
infusion of curariform neuromuscular blocking agents. More
The most common method of evaluating the tear film is
recently, topical application of vecuronium bromide (1 drop
through the quantification of aqueous tear production with a
twice at a 15-minute interval) with or without the addition of
Schirmer tear test (see Chapter 9). The strips used for the test
phenylephrine and atropine has been demonstrated to cause
 are 5 mm wide, making their use difficult in eyes in which
 consistent mydriasis lasting 1.5 to 4 hours in birds. Other
palpebral fissure length is less than 1 cm. Historically, these
 curariform neuromuscular blocking agents used topically have
strips have been cut lengthwise to decrease their width, allow-
 been associated with severe side effects, including paralysis of
427
428
I SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 20-1 | Normal Values for Tear Quantification Tests
lary bones and passes in close proximity to the apices of the
in Exotic Species
molar and incisor teeth before emerging through the nasal
mucosa. Owing to several sharp bends and associated duct
PHENOL RED
 narrowing, blockage of the duct and subsequent dacryocystitis
SCHIRMER TEAR
THREAD
SPECIES
TEST RESULT
TEST RESU1T
is common.
The most remarkable anatomic difference of the rabbit
Rabbit
5 ± 3 mm/min 
24 ± 4 mm in 15 sec
 eye from that of other species is its retinal vascular pattern.
Rat
8 ± 3 mm in 5 min
14 ± 3 mm in 2 min 
Lagomorphs are the only species with a merangiotic fundus, in
Mice
3 ± 0.2 mm in 2 min*
 3 ± 1 mm/min 
 22 ± 4 mm in 15 sec
which the retinal blood vessels radiate horizontally from the
Bircls
uwyuw EF 5 
(Psittaciformes)
optic disc, running with the myelinated nerve fber layer. The
optic disc is situated in the superior fundus and thus requires
*Modified Schirmer tear test strip.
that the examiner use an upward gaze to view the optic disc. An
 obvious central depression in the optic disc (physiologic cup) is
Table 20-2  Normal Intraocular Pressure Values for
apparent secondary to lack of a developed lamina cribrosa and
Exotic Species
extensive myelination of optic nerve axons at that point. This
SPECIES
TONOMETRY VA1UE (mm Hg)
appearance can be challenging to distinguish from glauco-
 matous cupping of the optic nerve head.
Rabbit
13 ± 6
Ferret
5 
Orbital Disease
Mice
15 ± 5
Rat
15 ± 5
Birds (raptors)
20 ± 4
Exophthalmos is the most prevalent clinical sign associated with
Owls
11±4
 orbital disease. In rabbits, retrobulbar abscesses are commonly
the cause of exophthalmos (Figure 20-1). Pasteurella multocida
has frequently been implicated as the cause for these abscesses,
muscles outside the eye, especially those of respiration.
although confirmation through culture is rarely attained.
Caution should always be exercised in the use of these agents
 Regardless of the specific pathogen responsible, it likely gains
topically or intracamerally. Their use has not yet been evalu-
access to the orbit either through infected molar tooth roots or
 ated in reptiles. Mydriasis may also be achieved with general
from hematogenous spread. Diagnosis is made through clinical
 anesthesia, although this method has its own inherent risks and
signs and ocular ultrasonography. Successful treatment is diffi-
complications.
cult. The abscess cannot be drained through the oral cavity
because of the rich vascular plexus lining the rabbit orbit as
 Pharmacologic mydriasis is difficult to achieve in birds and
well as the extremely caseous nature of the contents. Many
 reptiles due to the presence of striated iridal muscle fibers.
cases require exenteration and long-term medical therapy with
a broad-spectrum antibiotic. True Pasteurella-induced abscesses
 Other diagnostic tests, including fluorescein and rose bengal
 may respond favorably to parenteral penicillin therapy at a dose
staining, exfoliative cytology, and microbial culture, are com-
of 60,000 IU/kg q24h for several weeks. However, the use of
 pleted as they are in the more common domestic species; they
penicillins in rabbits warrants extreme caution because they
 are described in detail in Chapter 5.
can cause anaphylaxis or fatal enterocolitis due to alteration of
the normal gastrointestinal flora. Even with aggressive surgical
RABBITS
and medical therapy, many of these abscesses recur and at
Ophthalmic Anatomy
times necessitate euthanasia. Less common causes of exoph-
thalmos in rabbits include parasitic cysts, orbital neoplasia, and
 Like many prey species, rabbits have large, laterally placed
 metastatic thymoma.
eyes. The angle between their orbits is 150 to 175 degrees,
allowing a visual field of almost 360 degrees. Their stereoptic
vision is poor, with only 10 to 35 degrees of binocular overlap.
The orbit contains a large venous sinus, extending from the
 orbital apex to the globe equator and draining posteriorly to
the pterygoid and cavernous sinuses. This extensive vascular
network within the orbit is a common cause of significant
hemorrhage during enucleation.
 The nasolacrimal apparatus of the rabbit is unique. Although
rabbits only blink once every 5 to 6 minutes, their tear film
remains stable and they rarely have exposure keratitis secondary
to evaporation. Tear film stability is likely enhanced by the
presence of four orbital glands: the lacrimal gland, an accessory
lacrimal gland with retrobulbar, orbital, and infraorbital lobes,
superficial gland of the third eyelid, and deep gland of the third
eyelid (harderian gland). Retention of the lacrimal lake may be 
facilitated by the lack of a superior lacrimal puncta, which
Figure 20-1. Markec exophthalmos of the right eye of a rabbit seconclary
would result in a slower rate of tear clearance. The nasolacrimal
to a large retrobulbar abscess. Culture of the abscess was negative for
duct follows a tortuous route through the lacrimal and maxil-
 aerobic and anaer obic organisms.
OpHTHALMOLoGY OF ExoTIC PetS I
429
 Figure 20-2. Entropion of the right upper eyelic of a rabbit with seconclary
Figure 20-3. Marked blepharitis and severe mucopurulent ocular dis-
ulcerative keratitis.
charge in a rabbit with Treponema cunicufi.
The indiscriminate use of antibiotics with a gram positive
may also be caused by self-induced trauma or maceration due
spectrum in rabbits can result in severe, life-threatening 
to ocular discharge secondary to dacryocystitis, conjunctivitis,
complications.
or keratitis (discussed later).
Neoplasia of the eyelids is rarely reported in the rabbit. The
 most common tumors of the eyelid are squamous cell carci-
Adnexal Disease
noma, fibrosarcoma, and melanoma. Squamous cell carcinoma
must be differentiated from treponemal blepharoconjunctivitis,
Adnexal disease is uncommon in rabbits, with entropion being
because both can have similar clinical presentations. Diagnosis
the most commonly observed abnormality. Entropion may
is made through biopsy, preferably excisional biopsy, which
involve the upper and/or lower eyelids and may be primary
may be curative in cases of squamous cell carcinoma. If diffuse
or secondary. Primary (congenital) entropion has been
disease prevents complete excision, adjunctive therapy with
described in the New Zealand white and French lop breeds.
These breed predispositions suggest an inherited basis, but a
are not available, referral or enucleation is recommended.
mode of inheritance has not been determined. The lower eye-
Fibrosarcoma manifesting in the eyelid may represent
lids are most commonly affected in New Zealand white rabbits,
 extension from the orbit. Careful examination, including globe
whereas the upper eyelids are affected in French lops. Clinical
retropulsion as well as advanced imaging using computed
signs associated with primary entropion include epiphora,
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging, may aid in
blepharospasm, conjunctival hyperemia, and, sometimes, ulcer-
distinguishing the extent of tumor involvement. Orbital
ative keratitis (Figure 20-2). Application of a topical anesthetic
 involvement carries a guarded prognosis. Exenteration may be
 such as 1% proparacaine will facilitate ophthalmic examination
palliative and may increase survival time. Melanomas of the
by alleviating surface ocular pain. It will also remove any spastic
eyelid tend to be benign although locally invasive. Surgical
component to the entropion, allowing appropriate surgical
excision is curative.
planning. Correction of entropion with a modified Hotz-Celsus
procedure allows restoration of normal anatomic conformation,
Conjunctival Disease
thereby preventing further ocular irritation.
Entropion may occur from cicatrix formation secondary
Conjunctivitis may be a primary clinical sign but is frequently
to chronic blepharitis or blepharoconjunctivitis. Before any
associated with blepharitis or keratitis. Noninfectious causes of
attempt at surgical correction, the underlying cause must be
conjunctivitis include keratoconjunctivitis sicca, trauma (self-
identified and treated. Otherwise entropion will likely recur.
induced or due to foreign bodies such as straw, dust, seed
Cicatricial entropion is corrected using a Y-to-V blepharoplasty,
 husks), and environmental allergens. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
with care taken to completely excise the offending fbrotic tissue
is uncommon, is diagnosed with the aid of a Schirmer tear test
during the procedure. Infectious blepharitis may result from
with accompanying clinical signs, and is frequently the result
exposure to Treponema cuniculi, or rabbit syphilis (Figure 20-3).
 of chronic conjunctivitis. Treatment consists of artificial tear
T. cuniculi is a spirochete bacillus transmitted by infected dams.
 replacement therapy.
 The most commonly affected areas are the vulva, prepuce, lips,
Bacteria and viruses are commonly present in infectious con-
nares, and anus. Clinical signs include thickening, crusting,
junctivitis; however, fungi are rarely encountered. Offending
and, possibly, ulceration of the eyelid. Diagnosis is confirmed
bacteria may represent overgrowth of the normal conjunctival
through identification of spirochetes in biopsy or skin scraping
flora and include Staphylococcus aureus, P. multocida,
samples. Darkfield microscopy enhances visualization of the
Haemophilus spp., Pseudomonas spp, and Chlamydia spp.
organism. Three doses of parenteral benzathine penicillin G
Treatment should be based on results of culture and sensitivity
or procaine penicillin G at a dose of 42,000 IU/kg at 7-day
testing but frequently includes topical chloramphenicol or
intervals is the treatment of choice. Careful monitoring of the
ciprofloxacin used long term. Relapses are common, and the
 patient for potentially fatal enterocolitis is necessary. Blepharitis
addition of systemic antimicrobial agents may be necessary.
430
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
Viral causes of ophthalmic disease are relatively uncommon
Nasolacrimal Disease
in domestic rabbits in the United States. Myxoma virus is a
member of the Poxviridae family and is endemic in the western 
The tortuous path of the rabbit nasolacrimal duct predisposes it
United States (especially among brush rabbits in California),
to recurrent dacryocystitis. Primary duct occlusion may occur
Europe, and Australia. The virus is transmitted by an arthropod
with oil droplets or inspissated purulent material. Dental
vector, including both mosquitoes and fleas. Clinical signs are
disease or osseous changes to the maxillary bone secondary to
blepharoconjunctivitis with a thick mucopurulent discharge,
 nutritional hyperparathyroidism may also lead to the develop-
blepharedema, and edema and nodule formation on the ears,
 ment of duct obstruction. Of these, dental disease is alleged to
head, body, and limbs. Myxoma virus was formally thought to
be the most common cause. Malocclusion of the molars and
have 100% mortality, but more recent data suggest that the
 premolars and, less frequently, the incisors results in retro-
prognosis varies according to the strain of the virus and species/
pulsion of the tooth and impingement on the nasolacrimal duct.
breed of rabbit. Diagnosis is obtained from clinical signs, gross 
Secondary infection ensues, and a wide range of organisms has
pathology findings, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
been cultured, including Neisseria, Moraxella, Bordetella.
 analysis of tissue extracts. Treatment is supportive only.
Streptococcus viridans, Oligella urethralis, Pasteurella, and
Rabbit fibroma virus has also been responsible for the
Pseudomonas. Clinical signs include epiphora, usually in con-
formation of flat, subcutaneous tumors of the periocular skin.
 junction with mucopurulent discharge. Secondary conjunctivitis
Similar to myxoma virus, it is also a member of the Poxviridae
 may also be present. Dacryocystitis can be differentiated from
family and is transmitted by an arthropod vector. Unlike with
 primary conjunctivitis by digital pressure on the lacrimal sac.
 myxoma virus, lesions resolve spontaneously and treatment is
With dacryocystitis, a mucopurulent exudate can usually be
usually not necessary. A predisposition of fibroma virus for
expressed from the lacrimal puncta. Diagnosis is made on the
 cottontail rabbits is reported. Differentiation of this virus from
basis of clinical signs and a negative fluorescein dye passage
myxoma virus is important because the prognoses for survival
test result. A CT scan or plain radiograph of the head, some-
are significantly different.
times augmented by dacryocystorhinography, may aid in differ-
 Formation of a conjunctival membrane over the cormeal surface
 entiating the underlying cause and location of duct obstruction.
 is a condition unique to rabbits. This condition has been labeled
Treatment is first aimed at correcting the underlying abnor-
pseudopterygium, comeal occlusion syndrome, conjunctival
mality, especially correction of any dental disease (occlusal
centripetalization, and epicorneal membrane (Figure 20-4).
adjustment). The duct is then flushed with sterile saline through
Progressive ingrowth of the bulbar conjunctiva occurs
a 23-gauge lacrimal cannula. After flushing with saline, dilute
symmetrically and centripetally. The conjunctiva does not 
povidone-iodine solution (1:50) is flushed through the duct.
adhere to the corneal surface, separating this condition
Repeated flushings may be necessary to maintain patency of
from true pterygium described in humans. The disease may be
the duct. If the duct cannot be flushed, long-term systemic
unilateral or bilateral. The cause has not been determined,
 antibiotic therapy (enrofloxacin 5 mg/kg/day) may be necessary
although a collagen dysplasia has been proposed. Surgical
to control infection. Recurrences are common.
correction is completed through a modified Arlt procedure. The 
conjunctival tissue is partially trimmed by sharp dissection,
Dacryocystitis is usually secondary to dental disease in
divided in half along the horizontal axis, and the leading edge is 
rabbits.
sutured to the conjunctival fomix. Because of the likelihood that 
this disease is immune mediated, application of cyclosporine,
As in dogs, prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid may
mitomycin C, or a steroid may decrease recurrence. However,
occur in rabbits. This is uncommon and usually involves the
topical administration of these agents may result in systemic
harderian gland. Chronic conjunctivitis commonly persists
 immunosuppression and therefore they must be used with caution.
without treatment. Surgical therapy is curative and involves
performing a modified Morgan-pocket technique. The gland
should not be surgically excised because there is significant
vascularization of the gland, so severe hemorrhage may occur.
Corneal Disease
 The large, prominent globes and decreased blink rate of rabbits
 may predispose them to corneal disease. Corneal ulceration is
 common; it may be associated with trauma, exposure after
anesthesia, distichiasis, entropion, and trichiasis and may occur
secondary to blepharoconjunctivitis or dacryocystitis. Thorough 
examination will aid in diferentiating the underlying cause.
If no conformational abnormality is noted, trauma can be
 assumed. Diagnosis is facilitated by the use of fluorescein stain
as in other species. Uncomplicated defects are treated symp-
tomatically with a broad-spectrum topical antibiotic, such as
chloramphenicol, several times daily. Ulcers that do not heal,
have significant stromal loss, or are infected are deemed
Figure 20-4. Pseuclopterygium in a rabbit. The conjunctiva has grown
"complicated" and require more intensive therapy. Nonhealing
centripetally over the corneal surface. Only a small area of cornea is
or indolent corneal ulcers are common and should be treated
noticeable (black ovoid area).
like those in dogs. Aggressive corneal debridement with a
OpHTHALMoLoGY Of ExoTIC Pets I
431
cotton-tipped applicator after topical anesthesia is recommended.
A grid or multiple superfcial punctate keratotomy may also be
necessary to promote healing. Cytology and culture and sensitivity
testing of infected comeal ulcers are recommended so that
 appropriate antibiotic therapy can be initiated. When there is
significant stromal loss or a descemetocele is present, referral to an
ophthalmologist is warranted. Placement of a conjunctival pedicle
 graft is the treatment of choice, although this procedure is more
difficult in rabbits owing to their notably thin comea (0.36 mm)
compared with dogs (0.56 mm). After surgery, antimicrobial
therapy is initiated on the basis of cytology and culture results.
Reflex uveitis secondary to keratitis likely occurs in rabbits as
it does in dogs, and application of atropine may help alleviate 
ciliary spasm associated with uveitis through cycloplegia.
However, the presence of atropinase in the rabbit uvea may
 prevent its effectiveness. Because atropinase is not universally
Figure 20-5. A complete, spontaneous cataract in a rabbit.
present and not all rabbits are immune to atropine's effects, its
application is recommended. During treatment of corneal disease
 cytology via aqueocentesis were obtained infrequently due to
in rabbits, ophthalmic solutions or suspensions are prefered to
the relative invasiveness of this procedure. When performed,
ointments because of their normal grooming behaviors.
White corneal opacities are occasionally observed and may
 rations. Further evaluation of these iridal abscesses has revealed
represent either mineral or lipid. Corneal dystrophy with sub-
pyogranulomatous inflammation associated with lens capsule
 epithelial mineral deposition has been described as an inherited
 rupture (phacoclastic uveitis). Therefore the uveitis may have
trait in American Dutch belted rabbits. Treatment is not usually
not been the inciting cause but the result of cataract formation 
necessary because the lesions do not cause visual deficits or
with subsequent lens capsule rupture.
keratitis. Comeal lipidosis occurs secondary to high cholesterol
 Intralenticular organisms have been identifed in approxi-
diets in most rabbit species. A hereditary hyperlipidemia has
mately 75% of rabbits with cataract formation with secondary
been described in the Watanabe rabbit. Lipid accumulates first
 phacoclastic uveitis. These organisms were 1 to 6 μm in size
at the limbus and then may proceed axially, resulting in either
and consistent with the obligate intracellular protozoa,
a subtle or marked opacity with obvious keratitis. Depending
Encephalitozoon cuniculi. Rabbits are infected with E. cuniculi
on the degree of keratitis and size of the plaque, conservative
after ingestion of food contaminated with urine. Nonocular
(dietary) therapy may be sufficient. However, if the plaque is
signs include neurologic disease (head tilt, torticollis, seizures,
large and causing visual deficits, a superficial keratectomy is
ataxia, paralysis) and renal disease. Lens infection occurs in
recommended. Definitive diagnosis is obtained through histo-
utero owing to vertical transmission from an infected dam.
Dwarf and young rabbits are predisposed. Clinical signs are
stains such as oil red O.
usually unilateral and include spontaneous lens capsule rupture
with resultant phacoclastic uveitis (including aqueous flare,
Cataract
hypopyon, and hypotony), iridal granuloma formation, and
 cataract formation (Figures 20-6 and 20-7). Diagnosis is based
on clinical signs along with supportive results from serology
uveitis in rabbits. Some spontaneous cataracts (Figure 20-5)
(indirect fluorescent antibody test, enzyme-linked immuno-
are suspected to be inherited in nature, although no genetic
sorbent assay) or PCR analysis of lens tissue. Serology is quite
evidence is available because of the low incidence. Evaluation
of laboratory New Zealand white rabbits revealed a 4% preva-
lence of spontaneous cataracts with no difference between
lens-induced uveitis or visual deficits are present. Removal of
the lens via phacoemulsification is the treatment of choice. The
procedure is similar to that performed in dogs, although the
surgeon must take care upon entering the anterior chamber,
because it is shallow and iris prolapse through the incision is
more likely. Additionally, meticulous irrigation/aspiration of
the peripheral lens cortex is necessary owing to the greater
likelihood of lens fiber regrowth.
 Uveitis was considered the most common cause of cataracts
in rabbits. Rabbits were usually presented with a discrete, white,
raised abscess within the iris overlying a focal cataract. Aqueous 
flare and hypotony were also present. Septicemia secondary to
Pasteurella or Staphylococcus spp. was implicated as the cause
of uveitis. Diagnosis was based solely on ophthalmic clinical
 signs, although many animals also had systemic disease con-
Figure 20-6. Focal lens capsule rupture, cataract, anc iridal granuloma
sistent with septicemia. Diagnostic samples for culture and
formation in a clwarf rabbit with Encephalitozoon cunicufi.
432
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
a topical β-blocker, such as 0.25% timolol, can be added to
 the treatment protocol. Whenever using topical medications the 
 animal must be carefully monitored for systemic side effects.
FERRETS
Ophthalmic Anatomy
Even though ferrets are carnivorous, their eyes have aspects
globes are laterally placed in a deep, open orbit approximately
32 degrees off midline, providing a visual feld of about 270
 degrees. Stereopsis is limited to approximately 40 degrees. The
pupil is horizontally ovoid, decreasing light exposure and
bleaching of the rod photopigment during daylight hours.
 Nocturnal vision is improved by the rod-dominated retina and
a tapetum rich in zinc and cysteine, similar to that in the dog.
 Ferrets have a holangiotic retinal vascular pattern, and the optic
Figure 20-7. Same rabbit as in Figure 20-6, after 2 weeks without therapy.
 disc is variably myelinated.
 Phacoclastic uveitis is present as eviclenced by lens capsule rupture,
 cataract formation, hyphema, anc hypopyon.
Orbital Disease
sensitive, as rabbits mount a humoral response within 2 weeks,
Like rabbits and rodents, ferrets have a well-developed retro-
and in one study 100% of rabbits with ocular signs were
bulbar venous plexus. This has been used as a blood collection
seropositive.
site, with a technique similar to that described in rodents.
Surgical therapy is recommended for E. cuniculi-induced
However, this technique should not be used, especially in pet
lens capsule rupture and, when successful, is curative. The lens 
ferrets, owing to the potential for severe ocular complications,
is removed by phacoemulsification and the iridal granuloma
 including globe rupture, corneal ulceration, hematoma for-
 can be aspirated by automated irrigation/aspiration. Medical
 mation, and exophthalmos. Exophthalmos may also be caused
therapy alone may slow progression of the uveitis but rarely
 by retrobulbar neoplasia or zygomatic salivary gland mucocele
 clears the infection. Medical treatment involves frequent use of
formation. Lymphoma is the third most common neoplasia in
topical antinflammatory agents. Because of their relative lack
 pet ferrets as well as the most common retrobulbar neoplasia in
of potential side effects, nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
 this species. Exophthalmos is often the initial clinical sign of
(NSAIDs), such as flurbiprofen and diclofenac, are preferred
lymphoma. Complete blood count alterations and mediastinal
over topical steroids. The antiparasitic agent albendazole has
 masses may also be present, necessitating a thorough systemic
demonstrated efficacy in vitro, but its in vivo activity seems
evaluation. Because clinical progression can be rapid, early
 poor. The recommended dose of albendazole is 20 to 30 mg/kg
diagnosis and treatment with chemotherapy offer the best
once daily for 3 to 10 days, and that for fenbendazole is
 chance for remission.
 20 mg/kg once daily for 28 days. However, they must be used
The ferret's zygomatic salivary gland is located ventral and
with extreme caution because severe side effects, including
 posterior to the globe. Trauma to the head has been implicated
death, have occurred with their use.
as the cause of mucocele formation. Diagnosis is based on
findings of ocular ultrasonography and cytologic evaluations
Encephalitozoon cuniculi is the most common cause of
of fine-needle aspirates. Cytology may show mucinous debris
 phacoclastic uveitis in rabbits.
with few red blood cells, inflammatory cells, and epithelial
 cells. Treatment is surgical removal via orbitotomy, which is
curative.
Glaucoma
Conjunctival Disease
An inherited glaucoma is recognized in New Zealand white
rabbits. Rabbits homozygous for the bu gene experience an
 Infectious conjunctivitis in ferrets is usually a manifestation
 increase in IOP at 1 to 3 months of age. Buphthalmos and blind-
 of systemic disease. Commonly incriminated causes are canine
 ness ensue, and over time the IOP returns to normal secondary
 distemper virus, human influenza virus, salmonellosis, and
to ciliary body degeneration. Histopathology demonstrates
mycobacteriosis
classic pectinate ligament dysplasia as the cause of glaucoma.
 Canine distemper virus is a RNA virus of the morbillivirus
Medical therapy is ineffective, and surgical intervention (cyclo-
 genus. Ferrets are infected by direct contact with saliva, feces,
 photocoagulation, cyclocryoablation, gonioimplants) has not
or urine. Infection is now uncommon because of vaccination,
been reported. The bu gene is semilethal, and affected rabbits 
which is recommended because mortality rates approach 100%.
should not be bred. Primary glaucoma not associated with the
 Clinical signs begin 7 to 10 days after infection with the onset
bu gene is uncommon.
of moderate conjunctivitis and mucopurulent ocular discharge.
Most cases of glaucoma are secondary to lens-induced
Additional ocular signs include blepharitis, keratoconjunctivitis
uveitis due to E. cuniculi infection. These cases may respond to
sicca, ulcerative keratitis, and photophobia. With disease pro-
topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors applied every 8 hours (see
 gression, anorexia, pyrexia, and hyperkeratosis of the foot pads
 Chapter 12). If satisfactory control of IOP is not accomplished,
occur. Death ensues within 12 to 35 days after infection,
OpHTHALMoLoGY OF ExoTIC PetS I
433
depending on the strain (canine versus ferret). Diagnosis is
located posterior to the globe: the intraorbital, extraorbital, and
obtained in an animal with suspicious clinical signs by means 
harderian glands. The extraorbital gland is commonly mistaken 
of the indirect fluorescent antibody test on conjunctival
for a mass because it is located at the base of the masseter
scrapings. Cytologic examination of conjunctival scrapings may
muscle. The harderian gland is located within the orbit adjacent
 also show intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions similar to
to the third eyelid. This gland not only is important in production
those seen in the dog.
of the tear film but also may have a role in social interactions
 Human influenza virus types A and B have been responsible for
through the production of pheromones. Melatonin, a hormone
mild conjunctivitis in ferrets. Infection occurs via aerosolized
involved in regulating circadian rhythms, is also produced by
droplets from the nasal mucosa. Other clinical signs are anorexia,
the harderian gland and has been suggested to be involved in
sneezing, pyrexia, and serous nasal discharge. Treatment is merely
extraretinal photoreception much like the pineal gland. How-
supportive because most adults recover. Neonates may succumb to
ever, because diumal fluctuations in harderian gland melatonin
a secondary bacterial infection, requiring systemic antibiotics. The
concentration and secretion are not always present, the purpose 
clinical signs may mimic those of canine distemper virus infection,
of this tear component is not known.
and differentiation of these two etiologies is important because 
The lens of mice and rats is large and spherical, resulting 
the prognoses for survival differ significantly.
in a narrow anterior chamber. The size and shape of the lens
More substantial conjunctivitis has been noted with septi-
suggest that the rat eye is hyperopic. However, retinoscopy of
cemia secondary to Mycobacterium and Satmonella. Dissemi-
rat eyes has revealed a large variation in refractive error, ranging
nated mycobacteriosis caused by Mycobacterium genavense
from near emmetropia (-0.1 D) to extreme hyperopia (+19 D).
may cause generalized conjunctivitis or a focal lesion. Aggres-
The large lens also distorts the image of the fundus obtained
sive therapy with oral rifampicin, clofazimine, and clarithromycin
with indirect ophthalmoscopy, making the retina appear
along with topical chloramphenicol was curative. Diagnosis is
detached. The retina is holangiotic with blood vessels radiating
obtained through PCR analysis of conjunctival biopsy samples.
from the optic disc. Because of the rat's nocturnal lifestyle, it is 
Systemic salmonellosis may result in conjunctivitis and is
not surprising that its retina is dominated by rod photoreceptors.
commonly accompanied by hemorrhagic diarrhea and fever.
 In young rats it is common to see persistent hyaloid vasculature
extending from the optic disc toward the posterior pole of the
Conjunctivitis in ferrets may be an extension of systemic disease 
lens. The patency of this vessel usually subsides over time but
and warrants thorough evaluation.
 can occasionally cause transient vitreous hemorrhage. Common 
diseases of the rat and mouse eye involve the nasolacrimal
 system, cornea, lens, and fundus.
Cataract
Nasolacrimal Disease
Spontaneous cataracts are considered the most common ocular
abnormality in ferrets. When their eyes were evaluated by slit-
 Chromodacryorrhea is the excessive production of "red tears."
lamp biomicroscopy, approximately 47% of 1-year-old labo-
The red discoloration of the tears should not be confused with
ratory ferrets in one study had some form of cataract. Cataracts
blood. Porphyrins in the tears secreted by the harderian gland
ranged from incipient to hypermature, and progression was
are responsible for the reddish brown color seen with this
common. The cause is not known, although genetic and
condition (Figure 20-8). The harderian gland is innervated by
nutritional (hypovitaminosis A) causes have been postulated.
the parasympathetic nervous system, and any increase in para-
An autosomal dominant cataract has been described and is
sympathetic drive can result in chromodacryorrhea. Usually
 associated with microphthalmia, thickened irides, and progres-
clinical signs are associated with nutritional deficiencies, chronic
sive retinal degeneration. Surgical removal of spontaneous
physiologic stress, chronic light exposure, or dacryoadenitis.
cataracts via phacoemulsification in ferrets with normal-size
Evidence of chromodacryorrhea should prompt the clinician to
globes is similar to that in other species. The normal ferret is
 evaluate the animal for systemic disease.
moderately hyperopic (approximately 7 D), and therefore one
 Dacryoadenitis in rats is commonly secondary to sialo-
can assume that the aphakic eye is severely hyperopic and
 dacryoadenitis virus (SDAV) or mycoplasmosis. SDAV is a
visual acuity is greatly impaired. However, aphakic ferrets
 coronavirus that is readily transmitted between rats by aerosol,
appear to behave as if sighted but may be using olfactory cues
and vibrations from the vibrissae to navigate.
MICE AND RAIS
Ophthalmic Anatomy
The rodent eye is similar in structure to the rabbit eye. Posterior
to the globe, an orbital venous plexus is present in rats, and an
orbital venous sinus is present in mice. As in the rabbit, this
 collection of vessels and blood behind the globe can become a
source of significant hemorrhage during enucleation. This area 
has been used for blood collection in laboratory animals but
potential for severe, globe-threatening complications, including
exophthalmos, retinal detachment, globe puncture, and
necrosis of the harderian gland. Three lacrimal glands are also
Figure 20-8. Chromoclacryorrhea in a rat with sialodacryoadenitis virus.
434
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
direct contact, or fomite transmission. Early signs include
Transient, anesthesia-induced cataracts in mice and rats are
blepharospasm, photophobia, and epiphora, but the most obvious
 secondary to tear film evaporation.
fnding is intermandibular swelling due to inflammation of
the submandibular salivary glands. Chromodacryorrhea and
exophthalmos due to inflammation of the harderian gland may
Retinal Disease
occur over several days. Chronic cases may cause keratitis,
ulcerative keratitis, keratoconjunctivitis, uveitis, hyphema, multi-
Two retinal diseases in mice and rats warrant discussion,
focal retinal degeneration, and secondary cataract or glaucoma
 primary and secondary retinal degeneration. Primary or heritable
formation. The virus is usually self-limiting, and the harderian
retinal degeneration has been described in the Royal College of
gland may recover, depending on the degree of ductal squamous
Surgeons rat. Degeneration occurs within the first 2 weeks of
 metaplasia and periacinar fibrosis. Mycoplasmosis is a primary
life secondary to impaired phagocytosis of rod outer segments
cause of conjunctivitis in rats and may also cause dacryo-
by the retinal pigmented epithelium. This rat strain has been
adenitis. Other bacteria, including Pseudomonas, Satmonella,
 extensively used as a model for retinitis pigmentosa in humans.
Streptobacillus, and Corynebacterium, have been implicated in 
The most common form of secondary retinal degeneration is
 conjunctivitis in rats. Treatment is based on culture and sensi-
 phototoxic retinopathy. There are two forms, determined by
tivity results. Chloramphenicol (0.25 mg/mL) or oxytetracycline
whether animals are exposed to extremely bright light for short
 in the drinking water (3.5 mg/day) may be efficacious, depend-
durations or to low-intensity light for long periods. The first
ing on the offending agent.
type results in damage to both the photoreceptors and retinal
 Exophthalmos is not commonly observed in rats and mice.
 pigmented epithelium, and the second type primarily affects the
 Most cases are secondary to inflammation of the harderian gland
 photoreceptors. Factors associated with occurrence of photo-
or iatrogenic trauma to orbital structures during retrobulbar
toxic retinopathy include location of cage relative to the light
blood collection. Aged rats may be presented with unilateral
exophthalmos without signs of dacryoadenitis. In these cases
type of cage top (clear plastic versus metal), duration and inten-
 retrobulbar neoplasia secondary to adenocarcinoma, carcinoma,
sity of light, age of the animal, and extent of ocular melanosis.
and poorly differentiated sarcomas may be present.
Albino mice and rats are more sensitive because they lack
 protective melanin in the retinal pigmented epithelium. Photo-
Corneal Disease
toxic retinopathy most commonly occurs because of a light
timer malfunction or human error.
Multifocal, punctate subepithelial white opacities are commonly
observed in the interpalpebral fissure of both rat and mice
RAPTORS AND PET BIRDS
corneas. Approximately 6% to 15% of rats have corneal dys-
OphthalmicAnatomy
trophy, with Sprague-Dawley, Wistar, and Fischer 344 breeds
predisposed. The opacities are usually present shortly after
The structure of the avian eye is truly remarkable. The globes
birth and do not tend to progress. Corneal degeneration has
 are very large and may outweigh the brain. The globe may have
been reported in mice, most likely secondary to environmental
one of three shapes: flat, globose, or tubular. The flat shape is
ammonia concentrations. Mice kept in clean cages or lower in
 most common and has a short anteroposterior axis and a partly
racks had a much lower incidence of corneal degeneration than 
 concave ciliary region. The posterior segment is hemispheric,
those kept in cages cleaned less frequently or in higher racks.
 increasing retinal surface area. Crows and diurnal raptors have
Unlike dystrophy, corneal degeneration is not inherited and
a globose globe, in which the ciliary region protrudes farther
may progress, as evidenced by more severe corneal opacifi-
from the posterior segment but is still somewhat concave. This
cation in aged mice. Treatment is not necessary for dystrophy.
shape contributes to high-resolution distance vision. Owls have
Degeneration is best treated by prevention, keeping environ-
a tubular globe, in which the concave intermediate zone (ciliary
 ments clean and ammonia concentrations low.
region) is elongated in the anteroposterior axis. The shape of 
the avian globe is formed and maintained by scleral hyaline
Cataract
cartilage along with 10 to 18 scleral ossicles. The cartilage is
located in the posterior sclera, and the ossicles in the ciliary
Spontaneous cataracts occur in about 10% of rats and mice,
 region. In addition to structural rigidity, these bones contribute
with mice more frequently affected. These cataracts are usually
to accommodation, becoming a buttress for ciliary muscle action
focal and do not significantly interfere with vision. An interest-
 on the lens. The globe fits snugly into the bony orbit, which is
ing phenomenon has been observed in anesthetized mice. After
large, shallow, and incomplete. A thin bony septum separates
approximately 10 minutes of anesthesia, anterior subcapsular
the two eyes. The six of the extraocular muscles common to
cataracts develop and become denser over time. After anesthetic
 mammals are present (four recti, superior and inferior oblique)
recovery, the cataracts gradually resolve over 24 hours. Theories 
but are poorly developed, and therefore there is minimal globe
for the formation of the transient cataracts included anesthetic
 movement. The retractor bulbi muscle is not present but rather
type and changes in anterior chamber temperature. However,
is replaced by the pyramidalis and quadratus muscles, which
it has been demonstrated that these cataracts are secondary to
 are responsible for third eyelid movement. These two muscles
tear film evaporation. With evaporation of the tear film, the
 are suspected to be evolutionarily derived from retractor bulbi
aqueous osmolarity increases and fluid is lost from the anterior
of crocodilians.
lens, resulting in a cataract. Prevention of these cataracts is
 Birds have upper and lower eyelids, of which the lower
easily accomplished by either taping the eyelids closed or
 eyelid is more mobile. Meibomian glands are absent. The third
applying a lubricating artificial tear preparation at the start of
eyelid is 90% transparent, arising at the dorsomedial orbit and
anesthesia.
 covering the globe by extending ventrolaterally. Movement is
OpHthalmoloGY of Exotic Pets I
435
achieved by contraction of the pyramidalis muscle as it loops
 some birds with visual acuity several times better than that of
through the quadratus muscle posterior to the globe. The lead-
humans.
ing edge of the third eyelid contains a marginal plait that acts
much like a squeegee, collecting and distributing the tear film
Several ocular anatomic modifications exist in the avian eye
along the corneal surface. The tear film is produced by lacrimal
that result in faster accommodation and possibly enhanced
and harderian glands located ventrolateral to the globe and adja-
vision compared with mammals.
cent to the base of the third eyelid, respectively. Two lacrimal
puncta are present, allowing drainage of tears through the naso-
lacrimal duct and into the nasal cavity.
Ophthalmic Disease
 The anterior uvea of birds has a distinct role in accommo-
dation. The iris musculature is predominantly striated, although
Trauma
limited amounts of smooth muscle and myoepithelium exist
 In raptors and wild passerines, blunt trauma is a common cause
within the dilator muscle. Therefore pharmacologic dilation
of ophthalmic disease. Clinical signs may be confined only
must involve the use of curariform neuromuscular blocking
to the globe, but usually other systemic signs are evident.
agents applied either intracamerally or topically. Topical use of
 Ophthalmic signs include periocular bruising, subconjunctival
such agents frequently does not provide sufficient mydriasis,
hemorrhage (Figure 20-9), conjunctivitis, hyphema, anterior
although the inherent risk of intracameral injection limits this
uveitis, and posterior segment abnormalities. The posterior
 route. The ciliary muscles are also striated, allowing quick
 segment is most commonly affcted, most likely because of
accommodation. Accommodation in the avian eye is accom-
the large size of the globe, its tight fit in the orbit, and its
 plished through three mechanisms: change in the corneal curva-
inflexibility due to scleral ossicles. A coup-contrecoup injury
ture, deformation of the lens, and anterior movement of the lens.
may cause anteroposterior shifting of the vitreous and lead to
Three muscles are involved in accommodation. The muscle of
retinal detachment, retinal tears, vitreous and choroidal hemor-
Crampton is the most anterior ciliary muscle. It extends from
rhage, or avulsion of the pecten.
the innermost scleral ossicles to the corneoscleral junction.
The systemic condition of the bird should first be evaluated,
With contraction, the radius of curvature of the cormea is
 and supportive care given. When only anterior segment abnor-
altered. Bricke's muscle and Muller's muscle are posterior to
 malities are present, prognosis for vision is sometimes good.
the muscle of Crampton. Contraction of these muscles exerts
 If present, anterior uveitis should be treated with a topical
force on the ciliary processes that are fused to the lens capsule
NSAID several times daily. Topical steroids should be used
equator. As these muscles act, the lens is squeezed or moved
with caution, because their systemic absorption may lead to
anteriorly to assist in accommodation. Similar to the muscle of
generalized immunosuppression. When the posterior segment
Crampton, Bricke's muscle and Muiller's muscle insert along
is involved, prognosis for vision is usually guarded to poor.
the scleral ossicles and push against them during contraction.
Because vision is integral to catching prey, affected birds are
Using these three mechanisms, the avian eye has an accommo-
 frequently euthanized. Owls and other auditory hunters may be
dation range from 2 to 50 D.
an exception to this rule and can possibly be rehabilitated and
To allow faster accommodation, the avian lens is softer and
released into the wild. However, some authorities have suggested
more pliable than lenses of mammals. It is relatively spherical
that changes in facial (and therefore aural symmetry) with
in noctumal species and flattened anteriorly in diurnal species.
altered globe size (buphthalmos or phthisis) or subsequent to
An interesting modification of the equatorial lens is the
enucleation may affect the birds' ability to hunt and survive
presence of the ringwulst, or annular pad located adjacent to
using auditory cues. In pet birds or birds destined to a life in a
the fused ciliary processes. It consists of hexagonal lens fiber
rehabilitation facility, enucleation may be necessary if pene-
cells arranged in a radial fashion and likely contributes to
 trating trauma or severe panophthalmitis is present. Enucleation
accommodation.
 The avian fundus is perhaps the most interesting of all species.
 Indirect ophthalmoscopy reveals a nontapetal, anangiotic retina
with a large, pigmented, vascular pecten extending into the
vitreous. The pecten overlies the optic disc, obscuring its view.
The three shapes of pecten that have been described are pleated
(found in most species), vaned (present in ostriches), and
conical (found in the kiwi). Although numerous functions have
been proposed for the pecten, it likely serves a nutritional role
aui uo supuadag uononpod snoanbe on anqnnuoo Aeu pu
species, the distribution and ratio of rods to cones in the retina
vary. A predominance of double cone photoreceptors is present
that each contain an oil droplet in the chief cone. A remarkable
adaptation further increasing visual acuity is the presence of
a fovea. Most domestic species are afoveate, and others are
monofoveate. However, many diurnal raptors and others (such
as hummingbirds) are bifoveate, having a fovea centrally and
another laterally. The lateral fovea is believed to be important 
for binocular vision, and the central fovea for monocular
vision. The combination of several ocular adaptations along
with a large occipital cortex (called the visual wulst) provides
trauma. Erythema of the clorsal periocular skin is also present.
436
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHAlMOLOGY
can be completed through either a transaural approach or a
Clinical signs, which appear approximately 10 to 14 days after
globe-collapsing technique.
infection, include unilateral or bilateral ulcerative blepharitis
and secondary conjunctivitis and ocular discharge. Scabs and
Conjunctival Disease
raised papules may develop on the eyelids. Diagnosis is made
through identification of eosinophilic, intracytoplasmic inclu-
Conjunctivitis is the most common ocular disease in captive
sion bodies (Bollinger bodies) from skin or mucosal scrapings.
 birds and nonraptor species. Clinical signs usually involve a
 Rhinitis commonly accompanies the blepharoconjunctivitis.
serous or seropurulent discharge, blepharospasm, conjunctival
Treatment is supportive, involving gentle cleaning of the eyelid
hyperemia, and increased preening activity. Causes include
margins and topical application of a broad-spectrum antibiotic
trauma from foreign bodies, excessive preening/pecking,
for secondary bacterial infections. Other, less common viruses
environmental irritants, and infectious agents such as parasites,
 causing conjunctivitis in birds are adenovirus, reovirus, herpes-
bacteria, virus, and fungi. Obtaining a thorough history and
virus, and paramyxovirus (Newcastle's disease). Severe systemic
examining the bird in its natural environment may facilitate
signs, including death, are usually associated with these
diagnosis. After performing a complete ophthalmic exami-
viruses.
nation, the practitioner should obtain conjunctival swabs for
cytologic examination and appropriate culture.
LIZARDS, TURTLES, TORTOISES, AND
Traumatic conjunctivitis may be secondary to accumulation
CROCODILIANS
 of foreign material in the conjunctival sac or excessive preening
or pecking by cage mates. Foreign bodies can be gently
The class Reptilia is comprised of five orders: lizards, snakes,
removed through the use of copious lavage with balanced salt
chelonians (turtles and tortoises), crocodilians, and the tuatara
solution or manually with fine forceps. If trauma is secondary
(New Zealand "lizard"). Snakes have several anatomic differ-
to the housing situation, separation of the affected bird is
ences from the other reptiles and therefore are considered
warranted. Treatment may not be necessary once the offending
separately.
agent is removed. A broad-spectrum antibiotic drop, such as a
triple-antibiotic formulation, may be used as needed. Topical
OphthalmicAnatomy
steroids should be used with caution, because systemic toxicity
can occur.
Reptilian and avian eyes are remarkably similar. Except in
Several parasites, including Oxyspirura, Thelazia, and
certain geckos and the ablepharine skinks, well-developed
Cryptosporidium spp., have been demonstrated to cause avian
eyelids are present, with the lower lid being more mobile than
conjunctivitis. Pet birds, especially budgerigars, are more
 the upper. Chameleons are an exception because their palpebrae
commonly infested with the scaly face mite Knemidokoptes
 are constricted around the cornea and have limited movement.
pilae. Clinical signs include scaly, proliferative lesions of the 
A lacrimal gland and a harderian gland are present ventromedial
legs, cere, and eyelids. Diagnosis is made through identification
 and dorsolateral to the globe, respectively. Tear secretions drain
of the organism in skin scrapings. Treatment involves systemic
 through an inferior punctum located in the ventromedial con-
administration of ivermectin, diluted 1:10 in saline and given
junctival sac and into the oral cavity. Chelonians do not have
at 200 μg/kg subcutaneously or orally. Treatment is usually
lacrimal puncta or a lacrimal duct, and therefore epiphora and
curative.
periocular tear staining are commonly observed. A third eyelid
Bacteria and viruses are the most commonly diagnosed infec-
is present and arises at the ventromedial orbit, although a true
tious causes of conjunctivitis in birds. Bacterial conjunctivitis
gland of the third eyelid as seen in mammals is absent. All
may be an extension of infection from the upper respiratory
extraocular muscles are present, but they are poorly developed,
system or secondary to an opportunistic infection by the normal
because reptiles tend to move their heads more than their eyes
conjunctival flora. A thorough examination of the choanal
 to scan the environment. Chameleons, however, have exceptional
region and periorbital sinuses is recommended. Offending
 independent movement of each globe, permitting exact fixation
bacteria include Pseudomonas, Staphylococcus, Pasteurella,
on their prey. Scleral ossicles and cartilage are present, with
Citrobacter, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella. Mycoplasma spp.
the cartilage present from the posterior pole to the equator and
are not frequently isolated from the normal conjunctiva but
the ossicles extending anteriorly. As in birds, these give shape
are likely a common cause of conjunctivitis. Mycoplasma is
 and stability to the globe and serve as support for the ciliary
contracted through inhalation or direct contact and is usually
muscle during accommodation. An annular or equatorial pad
associated with an upper respiratory infection. Diagnosis is
similar to the ringwulst of birds is present and plays a role in
difficult and may be aided by PCR analysis of conjunctival,
accommodation.
sinus, or tracheal swabs. Because mortality can be high, aggres-
 Reptilian eyes have a ciliary roll rather than the ciliary
sive treatment with systemic tetracyclines or fluoroquinolones
 processes present in birds and mammals. The retina is avascular
is recommended. For conjunctivitis not secondary to Myco-
and receives nutrition from the choriocapillaris. The conus
 plasma, treatment is based on results of culture and sensitivity
 papillaris is an epithelium-lined, pigmented, highly vascular
testing of isolates. The majority of gram-positive organisms are
structure derived from the hyaloid and, like the pecten of birds,
susceptible to triple-antibiotic preparations, and most gram-
 projects into the vitreous cavity (Figure 20-i0) to provide
negative organisms to topical fluoroquinolones. If concurrent
 nutrition for the retina. There is also a vast capillary network
respiratory disease is present, additional systemic antimicrobial
along its periphery. The conus regresses in crocodilians, giving
therapy should be initiated.
the optic disc a melanotic appearance. All reptiles lack the
Numerous viruses have been implicated in avian conjunc-
choroidal tapetum typical of many mammals, but crocodilians
tivitis. Avian poxvirus is responsible for most cases of viral con-
have an accumulation of guanine crystals in the retinal
 junctivitis in birds. Poxvirus is spread via infected mosquitoes.
pigmented epithelial cells (i.e., a retinal tapetum) that may aid
OPHTHALMOLoGY OF ExOTIC PeT5 
437
Figure 20-12. Severe blephareclerma in a turtle with hypovitarminosis A.
Figure 20-10. Conus papillaris of a gecko. The conus extencls from the
optic disc into the vitreous cavity.
nocturnal vision. The ratio of rods and cones in the retina varies 
muscle, as in birds. Addressing the husbandry issues is para-
greatly among species. Chameleons have a pure cone retina
 mount to avoiding future insults.
necessitated by their diurnal lifestyle and exact targeting of
Feeding an unbalanced diet, specifically one deficient in
their prey. The ellipsoid region of the cone photoreceptors
vitamin A, can lead to squamous metaplasia of ductal epithelium.
contains oil droplets, which are believed to function as light 
This condition has been most commonly reported in young,
filters and to contribute to color discrimination.
fast-growing aquatic reptiles being fed primarily an insect-
and/or meat-only diet. For unknown reasons, tortoises appear
Ophthalmic Disease
to be much less susceptible to hypovitaminosis A. With meta-
plasia, the orbital glands enlarge and the ducts become pluged
Suboptimal husbandry, including poor diet, inappropriate
with desquamated cells and debris, resulting in the ophthalmic
thermal gradient, overcrowding, overhandling, inappropriate
clinical signs of palpebral edema and blepharoconjunctivitis.
humidity, poor sanitation, and environmental stressors, is the 
The palpebral fissure may be narrowed with edematous con-
primary contributing factor to ophthalmic disease in captive
junctiva protruding through the fissure (Figure 20-12). Because
reptiles. Ocular trauma from bedding material is common.
the renal, gastrointestinal, and respiratory epithelia are also
Foreign material in the conjunctival fornices is frequently
 affected, early diagnosis and treatment are necessary to prevent
observed and may lead to conjunctivitis, ulcerative keratitis, or
death. In very early stages, changing the diet and adding a
comeal perforation with resultant uveitis (Figure 20-11). After
vitamin A supplement, such as cod liver oil, may reverse the
topical application of proparacaine, the foreign material can
clinical signs. However, as the disease progresses, parenteral
be removed either by gentle flushing or with fine forceps.
administration of vitamin A at 1000 to 5000 1U weekly until
Fluorescein staining will aid in evaluation of the integrity of the
 clinical signs abate may be necessary. Parenteral administration
cormeal surface. Corneal ulceration in reptilians is treated like
of vitamin A must be done carefully, because oversupplementation
that of mammals, with topical antibiotics and surgery
will lead to epidermal sloughing.
 necessary. Parasympatholytic agents are ineffective and do not 
cause cycloplegia because of the abundance of striated iridal
The majority of ocular diseases in reptiles is secondary to poor
husbandry.
 Other ophthalmic diseases occur sporadically in repiles.
Congenital microphthalmos has been reported and may be
associated with other craniofacial abnormalities. Abnormal
environmental temperatures during gestation and/or incubation
of eggs may lead to congenital abnormalities. Conjunctivitis
 in reptiles has been associated with three viruses: herpesvirus,
iridovirus, and virus "X" Other mucosa-lined organ systems 
are usually involved, and stomatitis, rhinitis, and pneumonia
are frequently present. Fibropapillomas in marine turtles often
occur as aggregates around the eyelids and may become large
enough to obscure vision and prevent normal feeding. The
cause of the fibropapillomas is unknown, although replicating
herpesvirus has been identified within the masses. Bacterial
Figure 20-11. Superficial corneal ulcer seconclary to trauma in a basilisk
ocular infections are not common and when present are likely
izarc.
a manifestation of septicemia. Uveitis with hypopyon has been
438
 | SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
have oil droplets within their retinas. Retinal nutrition likely
comes from the choroid, although a membrana vasculosa is
 present within the vitreous that may have some nutritive role.
The optic nerve is similar to that in reptiles, but a conus papil-
 laris is not present. Ophthalmoscopically, the central aspect
of the optic disc is commonly melanotic, similar to that in
crocodilians. This feature is suspected to be a remnant of the
conus papillaris that regressed during ocular development. The 
 conus may persist in the viper.
Almost all reported ophthalmic disease in snakes concerns the
 anterior segment, most likely owing to the difficulty examining
the fundus. Not only does the small eye present a challenge,
but mydriasis is difficult to achieve. Topical medications are
not effective because of the presence of the spectacle. Addition-
Figure 20-13. Complete cataract in a monitor lizarcl seconclary to uveitis.
ally, the striated muscle in the iris would require the use of
 curariform neuromuscular blocking agents for paralysis. General
Note the focal posterior synechia ventrally.
anesthesia with injectable or inhalant anesthetics may produce
 sufficient mydriasis for fundus examination.
observed in septicemic reptiles. Cataracts are uncommon but 
may occur secondary to uveitis (Figure 20-13).
Spectacular Disease
SNAKES
Retained spectacles, subspectacular abscesses, and pseudo-
buphthalmos are the most common ophthalmic diseases of
Ophthalmic Anatomy
snakes. Spectaculitis has also been reported secondary to mites
Although a member of the class Reptilia, snakes have several
of the Ophionyssus spp. that tend to congregate around the
unique anatomic alterations separating them from lizards,
spectacle, where they are able to receive a blood meal. Spec-
chelonians, and crocodilians. Like geckos and ablepharine
tacular opacification has been demonstrated after contact with
skinks, snakes possess not eyelids but a clear, transparent
 aerosolized organophosphates or polyurethane solvents. Mycotic
spectacle. The spectacle is formed embryologically by fusion
keratitis has alsobeen described, likely secondary to penetrating
of the eyelids. Although it is transparent, there is a vast vascular
 injury of the spectacle and cornea.
network within the spectacle that has been demonstrated by
Dysecdysis is abnormal shedding of the epidermal or super-
 microsilicone injection. The spectacle is, in essence, skin and
ficial layer of the skin. When it occurs over the eye, the
prevents topical medications from reaching the ocular surface.
spectacle is retained and forms a cloudy, wrinkled opacification
The outermost layer or epidermal aspect of the scales is normally
(Figure 20-14) that obscures vision. Many factors may con-
shed through a process called ecdysis. Ecdysis depends on food
tribute to dysecdysis, but poor husbandry, specifically insufficient
 intake, humidity, air temperature, age, and presence or absence of
humidity, is the most common cause of retained spectacles.
systemic disease. Just before ecdysis the skin dulls, including the
Initial treatment is conservative, involving correction of
spectacle; at this point the snake is severely visually impaired
husbandry issues. Increasing the cage humidity to at least 50%
and may become more aggressive. The outer skin and spectacle
to 60% and ensuring proper hydration may be all that is
should be shed in one complete piece but may not do so,
 necessary for dislodgement of the retained epidermal layers. If
 depending on systemic health and husbandry conditions.
the condition persists, the snake can be soaked in water or
Snakes do not have a lacrimal gland or third eyelid but do
topical acetylcysteine can be applied to help loosen the
possess a well-developed harderian gland, located posterior to the
spectacle. Most times, after the husbandry issues are addressed,
globe. Oily secretions from the harderian gland bathe the
the retained spectacle is shed at the next ecdysis. If not, manual
subspectacular space and exit through the lacrimal duct into
the mouth, as in lizards. This direct communication between the
 mouth and subspectacular space may allow ascending infections.
 Unlike in other reptiles and birds, there is no cartilage
 present in the sclera of snakes. The cornea is relatively thin with
only a single layer of epithelium. A thick corneal epithelium is
not necessary because the comea is protected by the spectacle.
The anterior chamber is narrow, secondary to a large spherical
lens. As in other reptiles and birds, the iridal musculature is 
striated. Accommodation in the snake is believed to occur via
action of a muscle at the root of the iris that presses on an
anterior lens pad to alter lens shape. In addition, the ciliary
muscle exerts force on the vitreous, causing forward displace-
ment of the lens. The retina is similar to that of mammals in
that it contains both rods and cones; the ratio of rods to cones
varies significantly between species, most likely owing to their
diurnal or nocturnal lifestyle. Unlike reptiles, snakes do not
 Figure 20-14. Retained spectacle in a Burmese python.
OpHTHALMoLoGY OF ExoTIC PetS I
439
Figure 20-15. Subspectacular abscess in a green tree snake. Note the
Figure 20-16. Right eye of the snake in Figure 20-15 after a wecge spec-
clistension of the spectacle with purulent exuclate.
taculectomy.Note thewecge-shapec incisionin theventral spectaclethat
allows lrainage anc treatment of the subspectacular space.
removal may be necessary. This procedure usually warrants
involves creating a new drainage pathway. A spectacular wedge
referral because it must be done with magnification, fine
resection, as described previously, is efficacious although it 
forceps, and extreme caution. If more than just the outer layers
may need to be repeated after ecdysis because of healing of
of the spectacle are removed, a severe exposure keratitis will
 the spectacular incision. Conjunctivoralostomy has been per-
ensue, potentially requiring enucleation.
formed, although it requires significant skill and should not be 
 Subspectacular abscesses occur when there is an accumu-
 attempted without proper training.
lation of purulent debris between the spectacle and cornea
within the subspectacular space (Figure 20-15). Infection arises
Retained spectacle, subspectacular abscess, and pseudo-
within the subspectacular space via three potential routes:
 buphthalmos are the most common ocular diseases observed 
penetrating spectacular trauma, ascending infection throu gh the 
in snakes.
lacrimal duct from the mouth, and hematogenous spread. On
examination, anterior bulging of the spectacle is evident. The
bulging is caused by a grossly distended subspectacular space
AMPHIBIANS
filled with caseous purulent debris. Evaluation and treatment
Ophthalmic Anatomy
for septicemia and stomatitis are necessary, along with
ophthalmic treatment; otherwise recurrence is likely. Treatment
Amphibians are classified into three orders, tailless (Anurans
is surgical and is best performed by an ophthalmologist. After
such as frogs and toads), tailed (Urodelas such as salamanders
either injectable or inhalant anesthesia is achieved, magni-
and newts), and legless (Apoda). Many Apoda species live
fication and Vannas scissors are used to resect a 30-degree
underground and have either no or rudimentary eyes. The 
spectacular wedge ventrally (Figure 20-16). Particular care
anuran eye is the most highly developed of the three and has
must be taken not to injure the cornea. After partial spectacular
been extensively used in research. The structure of the adnexa
resection, the purulent debris is lavaged from the subspectacular
depends on the animal's habitat. Larval amphibians and aquatic
space with balanced salt solution. Aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal
adults do not have eyelids. Urodelas have well-formed eyelids.
culture of the debris should be obtained. Pseudomonas spp.
Anurans have poorly developed, immobile upper eyelids and a
have been implicated as the causative agent, although other
 transparent ventral conjunctival fold serving as a "false third
organisms may be present. Pending results of culture and
 eyelid" or lower eyelid. The conjunctival fold moves dorsally
sensitivity testing, a broad-spectrum antibiotic is applied
to cover the cornea when retractor bulbi muscle contraction
topically until the next ecdysis. Fluoroquinolones and amino-
causes enophthalmos. This contraction not only is important
glycosides have been efficacious in clinical cases. Systemic
for corneal protection but also serves a vital role in swallowing.
 antimicrobial agents may be indicated if there are clinical signs
 With retraction, the globe and associated musculature contact
 of disease elsewhere.
the oropharynx and aid in pushing the prey material into the
 Gross distention of the subspectacular space with clear fluid
esophagus. The globe is returned to its normal posiion by a
from the harderian gland occurs secondary to occlusion of
levator bulbi muscle located posteriorly. The other six typical
the lacrimal duct. Because the globe appears (but is not) larger,
 extraocular muscles are present, but their function is negligible.
this condition has been referred to as pseudobuphthalmos, but
 The tear film is derived from a lacrimal gland, a harderian gland,
bullous spectaculopathy is a more appropriate term. Causes of
 and superior or inferior (in the case of terrestrial salamanders)
lacrimal duct obstruction include ulcerative stomatitis, con-
eyelid glands. The presence of lacrimal puncta and a naso-
 genital atresia, cicatrization from trauma or burns, and block-
lacrimal duct varies among species, but these structures are
age from an external granuloma or neoplastic mass. Treatment
usually absent.
440
| SLATTER'S FUNDAMENTAlS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
The uvea is quite peculiar in amphibians. The iris can be
very colorful owing to carotenoid pigments and guanine
crystals. A myoepithelial sphincter and dilator muscle is
 present, although pupil movement is minimal. The shape of the
pupillary aperture varies dramatically at rest and with miosis
but is circular with mydriasis. The ciliary body is triangular
with numerous folds, which may continue to the pupillary
margin and result in a nodule. As in elasmobranchs,
a
 protractor lentis muscle is present. Contraction of the muscle
moves the lens anteriorly, aiding in accommodation. The lens
 is large and spherical. Interestingly, some species are capable
of regenerating the lens from either the pigmented epithelial
cells of the dorsal iris or from the cornea, like tail and limb
regeneration after amputation. Examination of the fundus is
difficult but when accomplished demonstrates a remarkable
vascular preretinal membrane within the vitreous. Urodelas
that do not have a vascular preretinal membrane receive
Figure 20-17. Lipic keratopathy in an African bulfrog. Corneal melanosis
all retinal nutrition from the choroid. The retina is similar to
 and superficial vascularization are also present.
that of reptiles, with some cone photoreceptors having oil
droplets.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abrams GA, et al. (2002): Conjunc hivitis in birds. Vet Clin North Am Exot
Ophthalmic Disease
Anim Pract 5:287.
Andrew SE (2002): Corneal diseases of rabbits. Vet Clin North Am Exot
Only sporadic cases of amphibian ocular disease are reported in
Anim Pract 5:341.
the literature and are usually associated with systemic disease.
Bagley LH, Lavach D (1995): Ophthalmic diseases in rabbits. Califomia Vet
Redleg, one of the most common systemic diseases of Anurans,
Bauck L(1989): Ophthalmic condions in pet rabbits and rodents. Comp
49:7.
is a catchall term for infection secondary to gram-negative
Cont Educ 11:258.
bacteria including Aeromonas hydrophila and Citrobacter
Beaumont SL (2002): Ocular disorders of pet mice and 1ats. Vet Clin North
freundi Redleg septicemia in fire-bellied toads was found to
Am Exot Pract 5:311.
result in difuse corneal edema, hyphema, hypopyon, irido-
Bellairs Ad'A(1981): Congenital and developmental diseases,inCooper J,
cyclitis, cataract, chorioretinitis, and, sometimes, periocular
Jackson OF (editors): Diseases of the Repilia. Academic Press, London,
p. 469.
blood-filled blisters. Experimentally induced septicemia with
 Burling K, et al. (1991): Anatomy of the rabbit nasolacnimal duct and its 
Flavobacterium indologenes caused anterior uveitis and
secondary corneal edema in leopard frogs. Affected animals
Coke RL, Couillard NK (2002): Ocular biology and diseases of Old World
usually do not show response to therapy, and morbidity is high.
chameleons.Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 5:275.
Corneal ulceration infrequently occurs and may progress
Cullen CL, et al. (2000): Diagmoshic ophthalmology. Can Vet J 41:327.
DavidsonMG(96):Caninedistemerviusfectionthedomesticfeet.
to bullous keratopathy. Because of the size of the animals,
Comp Cont Ed 8:448.
systemic toxicity after topical application of antibiotics is
Donnelly TM (1997): What's your diagnosis? Blood-caked staining around
 possible. Gentamicin diluted to 2 mg/mL has been effective and
the eyes in Sprague-Dawley rats. Lab Anim 26:17.
reported to be safe. Alternatively, the false third eyelid can be
Duke-Elder S (i958): The eyes of amphibians, in System of Ophthalmology,
Vol I: The Eye in Evolution. Mosby, St. Louis, Pp. 333-351
sutured to the upper eyelid to provide protection of the corneal
Duke-Elder S (1958): The eyes of birds, in System of Ophthalmology, Vol I:
surface.
The Eye in Evolution. Mosby, St. Louis, pp. 397-427.
The most commonly encountered and best studied ocular
 disorder in amphibians is lipid keratopathy. It was first reported
inEvoluion.Mosby,St.Louis,Pp.353-395.
Elkan E, Zwart P (1967): The ocular disease of young terrapins caused by
in Cuban tree frogs and has since been identified in several
vitamin A deficiency. Pathol Vet 4:201.
other species. In hylid, leptodactylid, and ranid species,
generalized xanthomatosis occurred, affecting not only the
Encephalitozoon cuniculi-induced phacoclastic uveitis in a rabbit. Vet
cornea but also brain, some viscera, peripheral nerves, peri-
Ophthalmol 5:211.
Fox JG, et al. (1979): Congenital entropion in a liter of tabbits. Lab Amim
articular soft tissues, and digital pads. Ophthalmic signs appear
Sci 29:509.
similar to those of corneal arcus, including a circumferentially
GlorisJC,et al. (1974):Miobiological studies n septicicbulfogs
 progressive sparkly or creamy white anterior stromal infiltrate
(Rana catesbeiana). Am I Vet Res 35:1241.
consisting of cholesterol and lipid-laden macrophages.
Good KL (2002): Ocular disorders of pet ferrets. Vet Clin North Am Exot 
Classically, excessive lipid mobilization associated with
Anim Pract 5:325.
 0ogenesis was suspected as the cause because all affected frogs
Greenacre CB (2005): Viral diseases of companion birds. Vet Clin North Am
Exot Anim Pract 8:85.
were female. A later study demonstrated that diet may
Harcourt-Brown FM, Holloway HKR (2003): Encephalitozoon cuniculi in pet
responsible, with frogs fed high-cholesterol diets demon-
Tabbits. Vet Rec 152:427.
Jacobsen ER (1977): Histology, endocinology, and husbandry of ecdysis in
snakes. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 72:275.
of vitellogenesis. Nutritional therapy may slow the accumu-
lation of lipid but is rarely curative. If lipid keratopathy is left
Pract 12:61.
untreated, diffuse corneal vascularization and superficial
 Kashuba C (2005): Small mammal virology. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
melanosis may occur (Figure 20-17).
Pract 8:107.
 OpHThALMoLoGY Of ExOtIc PetS |
441
Keller CB, Shilton CM (2002): The amphibian eye. Vet Clin North Am Exot
Moore CP, et al. (1987): Anterior comeal dystrophy of American Dutch
Anim Pract 5:261.
belted rabbits: biomicroscopic and histopathologic findings. Vet Pathol
Kem TJ (1997): Rabbit and rodent ophthalmology. Semin Avian Exot Pet 
24:28.
Med 6:138.
Krogstad AP, et al. (2005): Viral diseases of the rabbit. Vet Clin North Am
Vet Ophthalmol 5: 177.
Exot Anim Pract 8:123.
Murphy CJ (1987): Raptor ophthalmology. Comp Cont Educ 9:32.
Langlois I (2005): Viral diseases of fenrets. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Murphy CJ, Dubielzig RR (1993): The gToss and microscopic structure of the
Pract 8:139.
Li X, et al. (1998): Neoplashic diseases in ferrets: 574 cases (1968-1997).
Murphy CI, et al. (1983): Enucleation in birds of prey. I Am Vet Med Assoc
J Am Vet Med Assoc 212: 1402.
11:1234.
Loerzel SM, et al. (2002): Vecuronium bromide, phenylephrine and atropine 
Mutti DO, et al. (1992): Reinoscopic measurement of the refractive state of
combinations as mydriatics in juvenile double-crested cormorants
the tat. Vision Res 32:583.
{Phalacrocorax auritus).Vet Ophthalmol 5:149.
Ramer JC, et al. (1996): Effects of mydriatic agents in cockatoos, Affican
Luc as J, et al. (2000): Mycobacterium genavense infection in two aged ferrets
gTay panrots, and blue-fronted Amazon patrots. I AmVet Med Assoc
with conjunchival lesions. Aust Vet I 78:685.
208:227.
Marimi RP, et al. (1989): Proven or potential zoonoic diseases of ferrets.
Ridder, WH, et al. (2002): Causes of cataract development in anesthetized
I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:990.
mice. Exp Eye Res 75:365.
Mauel MJ, et al. (2002): Bacterial pathogens isolated from cultured bulfrogs
 Rothwell TL, Everitt AV (1986): Exophthalmos in ageing rats with harderian
(Rana castesbeianaj. J Vet Diagn Invest 14:431.
gland disease. Lab Anim 20:97.
MeCalla TL, et al. (1997): Lymphoma with orbital involvement in two
Roze M, et al. (2001): Comparative morphology of epicomeal conjuncival
ferrets. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 7:36.
membranes in rabbits and human pterygium. Vet Ophthalmol 4:171.
Mead AW (1976): Vascularity of the repilian spectacle. Invest Ophthalmol
 Ryland LM, et al. (1983): A clinical guide to the pet fenret. Comp Cont Ed
Vis Sci 15:587.
5:25.
Mikaelian I, et al. (1994): Comparabive use of vanious mydriatic drugs in
Seely JC (1987): The hardenian gland. Lab Anim 16:33.
kestrels Fatco tinnunculus.Am J Vet Res S5:270.
Stiles J,et al. (i997): Encephalitozoon cuniculi in the lens of a abbit with
g  xg  s o  6  
 phacoclastic uveitis: confirmation and treatment. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
Miller PE, Dubielzig RR (i995): Autosomal dominant microphthalmia,
7:233.
cataract, and retinal dysplasia in alaboratory colony of ferets. Invest
Wellehan JF, Johnson AJ (2005): Reptile virology. Vet Clin North Am Exotic
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 36(Suppl): S64.
Anim Pract 8:27.
Miller PE,et al. (1993): Cataracts in a laboratory colony of ferets. Lab Anim
Williams DL (2002): Ocular disease in rats: a review. Vet Ophthalmol 5: 183.
Sci 43:562.
Williams DL (2002): Rabbits, in: Petersen-Jones S, Crispin S (editors):
Miller PE, Pickett JP (1989): Zygomathic salivary gland mucocele in a ferret.
Manual of Small Animal Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. British Small Animal
J Am Vet Med Assoc 194: 1437.
Veterinary Assoc iation, Gloucester, UK, pp. 276-284.
Millichamp NI (1990): Lipid keratopathy in frogs: histopathology and
Williams DL (1996): Ophthalmology, in Mader DR (editor): Reptile
biochermistry. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 15:587
Medicine and Surgery. Saunders, Philadelphia, Pp. 175-184.
Millichamp NJ, et al. (1986): Conjuncivoralostomy for teatment of an
Williams DL, Whitaker BR (1994): The amphibian eyea clinical review.
occluded lacrimal duct in a blood python. J Am Vet Med Assoc 9:1136.
I Zoo Wildl Med 25: 18.
Millichamp NJ, et al. (1983): Diseases of the eye and ocular adnexa in
Teptiles. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183: 1205.
Appendix
BREED PREDISPOSITION TO EYE
Paul E. Miller
Conditions listed are those observed or
Entropion
Glaucoma—narrow to closed angle
reported with higher frequency in the
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
listed breed. Some are of breeding signifi-
 Retinal dysplasia
Lacrimal punctal atresia
cance and others, such as chronic
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
immune-mediated keratoconjunctivitis,
Akbash
Optic nerve colobomas
are considered not inherited but seen
Persistent pupillary membranes
more frequently in certain breeds (e.g.,
Ciliary body cysts
Pigmentary keratitis
German shepherd).
 Entropion
Progressive retinal degeneration
The following list reflects recognized
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
 breed predispositions to ocular diseases.
Akita
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Predispositions to ocular disease may be
Retinal dysplasia—-geographic/detached
 present in breeds not covered here, but at
Entropion
Staphylococcal blepharitis with hyper-
this time there is insufficient data to
Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis and angle
sensitivity
include them.
closure
Trichiasis
Multiple ocular anomalies (microph-
DOGS
thalmia, congenital cataracts, posterior
 American Eskimo Dog
Afghan Hound
lenticonus, retinal dysplasia)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—anterior cortex
 Cataract—anterior cortical
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Cataract—equatorial
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—recessive, equatorial/posterior
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
cortex
Uveodermatologic syndrome
American Pit Bull Terrier
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
 Deep medial canthal pockets
Alaskan Malamute
Distichiasis
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
Cataract—fibrillar nuclear
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
closure
 Cataract—posterior cortical
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Comeal dystrophy
American Staffordshire Terrier
Uveodermatologic syndrome (formerly
Distichiasis
known as
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
Distichiasis
syndrome)
closure
Entropion
Hemeralopia (cone dysplasia)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Airedale
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
 Corneal dystrophy
American Cocker Spaniel
American Water Spaniel
Distichiasis
Cataract—recessive/polygenic—anterior, 
 Cataract—anterior and posterior cortex
 posterior, or equatorial cortex
Distichiasis
*Author's note: Considerable geogTaphic variation
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Entropion
occurs in breed disorders. Conditions are often
reported in a particular breed for scientific
Chronic superficial keratitis
Retinal dysplasia—folds
purposes, when such condiions do not represent a
Corneal dystrophy epithelial/stromal
common clinical problem in that breed (e.g-,
Distichiasis
glaucoma in thebeagle).Frequent reports in the
Australian Cattle Dog (Queensland
Ectopic cilia
Heeler or Blue Heeler)
Ectropion
indicate study of the disorder in a successful
experimental colony. A single report of a condition
Entropion
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
does not constitute a "breed problem."
Eyelid neoplasia
rial cortex
442
APpenDIx |
443
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Beagle
Belgian Tervuren
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Lens luxation
Cataract-anterior capsular
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Cataract—posterior cortex
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Corneal dystrophy
Comeal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal 
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Eyelid tumors
Micropapilla
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
 Glaucoma (primary open-angle)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Lens luxation (secondary to glaucoma)
"Plasmoma"
Australian Shepherd
Microphthalmia/multiple ocular defects
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Optic nerve hypoplasia
Retinal dysplasia—folds and geographic
Cataract—anterior cortex
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—nuclear fibrillar
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Bernese Mountain Dog
Cataract—posterior cortex
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Choroidal hypoplasia (collie eye anomaly)
 Retinal dysplasia—retinal folds
Cataract—posterior and equatorial cortex
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Tapetal degeneration
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
Ectropion
Fundus coloboma
Bearded Collie
Entropion
Heterochromia iridis
Optic nerve coloboma
Iris coloboma
Cataracts
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Microphthalmia with multiple congenital 
Choroidal hypoplasia (collie eye anomaly)
 Progressive retinal degeneration
defects
Corneal dystrophy epithelial/stromal
 Retinal detachment
Persistent hyaloid artery
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Systemic histiocytosis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Bichon Frise
Retinal detachment
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Bedlington Terrier
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Uveodermatologic syndrome
 Comeal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Atresia of lacrimal puncta or canaliculi
Distichiasis
Australian Terrier
 Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Entropion
rial cortex
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract
 Corneal dystrophy epithelial/stromal
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia—folds 
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Entropion
Retinal dysplasia—folds 
Microphthalmia
Black and Tan Coonhound
Nyctalopia
Basenji
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—a variety of forms
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Retinal dysplasia—folds 
Coloboma of the optic disc
 Retinal geographic/detached
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Corneal dystrophy—endothelial
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Belgian Malinois
Bloodhound
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract-anterior or posterior cortex
Cataract—-anterior or posterior cortex
 Spontaneous retinal detachment 
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Ectropion
Basset Hound
"Plasmoma'
Entropion
Progressive retinal degeneration
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia—folds
eyelid
Ectropion
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Entropion
Belgian Sheepdog (Belgian
Macroblepharon
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Shepherd—Groenendael)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
closure
 Cataract—-anterior or posterior cortex
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Iris/ciliary body cysts
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Border Collie
 Persistent hyaloid artery
Micropapilla
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—anterior cortex
 Progressive retinal degeneration
"Plasmoma"
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Retinal dysplasia—folds 
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Choroidal hypoplasia (collie eye anomaly)
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Comeal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal 
444
| APPENDIX
Lens luxation
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Distichiasis
 Nodular episcleritis
Corneal dystrophy—endothelial
 Ectropion
Optic nerve coloboma
Corneal dystrophy epithelial/stromal
Entropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis
Glaucoma—closed angle
Progressive retinal degeneration
Ectopic cilia
Macroblepharon
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Ectropion
Optic nerve hypoplasia
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Entropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Eyelid neoplasia
Progressive retinal degeneration
Border Terrier
 Macroblepharon
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Bull Terrier
rial cortex
Boykin Spaniel
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—cortical
 Progressive retinal degeneration 
Cataract—posterior cortex
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
Ectropion
 Persistent hyaloid artery
Entropion
Borzoi
Persistent pupillary membranes
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Cataract—nuclear fbrillar
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Lens luxation
Cataract—posterior cortex
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Micropalpebral fissure
 Microphthalmia/multiple ocular defects
Microphthalmia
 Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapilla
Briard
Optic nerve hypoplasia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
"Plasmoma"
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration 
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Boston Terrier
 Progressive retinal degeneration 
Vitreal degeneration
 Retinal dystrophy (congenital stationary
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
night blindness)
Cairn Terrier
rial cortex
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Cataract—recessive congential-
-poste-
Cataract—anterior cortex
rior sutures/nuclear
Brittany Spaniel
Cataract—posterior and equatorial cortex
 Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Chronic comeal erosion syndrome 
Corneal dystrophy
endothelial
Cataract—posterior cortex
Ectopic cilia
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial stromal
Distichiasis
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
Distichiasis
Glaucoma—closed angle or secondary
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Glaucoma—closed angle
Lens luxation
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
 Haired medial caruncle
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Ocular melanosis with and without
Iris/ciliary body cysts
Progressive retinal degeneration
glaucoma
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Retinal dysplasia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Medial canthal entropion/trichiasis
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent hyaloid artery
Vitreous degeneration
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Pigmentary keratitis
Brussels Griffon
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Cataract—anterior cortex
Strabismus
nial cortex
Chronic comeal erosion syndrome
Vitreal degeneration
 Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Distichiasis
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
 Bouvier de Flandres
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Exposure keratitis
Cataract—posterior cortex and nucleus
Lens luxation
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Ectropion
Optic nerve coloboma
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Entropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
closure
 Retinal dysplasia—folds/geographic
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Ulcerative keratitis
Cataracts—cortical
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Vitreous degeneration
Corneal dystrophy—
-epithelial/stromal
Distichiasis
Boxer
Bull Mastiff
Entropion
Exposure keratopathy syndrome
Cataract—anterior cortex
Cataract—cortical
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
APPenDIX |
445
Microphthalmia with multiple ocular
Ectropion
Entropion
defects
Entropion
Optic nerve coloboma
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Macroblepharon
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Vitreal degeneration
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Dachshund (All Varieties)
Chesapeake Bay Retriever
Collie (Rough and Smooth)
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Cataract—incomplete dominant, pos-
 Blepharophimosis (micropalpebral fis-
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
terior cortex
sure)
 Cormeal dystrophy—endothelial
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
 Collie eye anomaly:
 Cormeal dystrophy—epithelial
Distichiasis
 Choroidal hypoplasia
Dermoid
Entropion
Optic nerve coloboma
Distichiasis
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
 Retinal detachment
Entropion
eyelid
Corneal dystrophy—stromal
Iris coloboma
Iris/ciliary body cysts
Deep medial canthal pockets 
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Dermatomyositis
Microphthalmia with multiple ocular
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Distichiasis
defects
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Entropion
Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapillae
Retinal dysplasia-
—geographic/detached
Eyelid neoplasia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Microphthalmia
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Nodular episcleritis
 Punctate keratitis
Chihuahua
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Sudden acquired
1  retinal  degeneration 
 Persistent hyaloid artery
syndrome
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Persistent pupillary membranes
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Corneal dystrophy—endothelial 
Progressive retinal  degeneration—rod/
Distichiasis
 cone degeneration
Dalmatian
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Progressive retinal degeneration—rod/
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
cone dysplasia
Cataract—cortical
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Retinal dysplasia-
-folds
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Senile iris atrophy
Cormeal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Trichiasis
Coonhound
Dermoid
Vitreal degeneration
Distichiasis
Cataract—cortical
Entropion
Chinese Crested
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Glaucoma—closed angle
Distichiasis
Iris coloboma
Cataract—cortical
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Entropion
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Corgi
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Vitreal degeneration
See Cardigan Welsh Corgi, Pembroke
Distichiasis
Welsh Corgi.
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
Chow Chow
closure
Coton de Tulear
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis
Ectropion
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Doberman Pinscher
Entropion
Distichiasis
Glaucoma—closed angle
Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—posterior cortex
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Deep medial canthus pockets 
 Pigmentary keratitis
Retinal dysplasia—folds, bullae
Dermoid
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Vitreal degeneration
Distichiasis
Entropion
Clumber Spaniel
Curly Coated Retriever
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Eyelid melanomas, multiple
Cataract-posterior cortex
Cataract—anterior and posterior cortex
Microphakia
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Choroidal hypoplasia (collie eye anomaly)
Microphthalmia with multiple ocular
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
defects
446
| APPENDIX
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Cataract—nuclear fibrillar
Fox Terrier (Smooth)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
 Persistent tunica vasculosa lentis
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
 Cataract—-anterior or posterior cortical
"Plasmoma"
Corneal dystrophy epithelial/stromal
Glaucoma—primary open angle?
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Distichiasis
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Ectropion
Persistent pupillary membranes
Entropion
English Bulldog
Eyelid neoplasia
Fox Terrier (Wirehaired)
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
 Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
closure
 Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equatorial
 Chronic staphylococcal blepharitis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
cortex
Chronic superficial keratitis
"Plasmoma"
 Chronic comeal erosion syndrome
Distichiasis
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Corneal dystrophy (epithelial, endo-
 Ectopic cilia
Retinal dysplasia—folds
thelial)
 Ectropion
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
 Distichiasis
Entropion
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
 Glaucoma—-primary open angle?
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Macroblepharon
English Toy Spaniel (King Charles,
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Nasal fold trichiasis
Prince Charles, Ruby, Bfenheim)
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Superficial corneal erosion syndrome
Prolapse
 of the gland of the third
 Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
eyelid
Corneal dystrophy epithelial/stromal
French Bulldog
 Redundant forehead skin
Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Entropion
Cataract—cortical
Trichiasis
Persistent hyaloid artery
 Cataract—posterior lenticonus
 Pigmentary keratitis
Distichiasis
English Cocker Spaniel
 Progressive retinal degeneration 
Entropion
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Retinal dysplasia—geographic
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
rial
 Cataract—nuclear fibrillar
Entlebucher
German Shepherd
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Distichiasis
 Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equatorial
Cataract—incomplete dominant—con-
 Ectropion
cortex
genital—rare
Entropion
Cataract-
-autosomal recessive-
-posterior
Cataract—posterior cortical or nuclear
Glaucoma-
a—goniodysgenesis with angle
cortex
Chronic comeal erosion syndrome
closure
 Distichiasis
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
 Imperforate lacrimal puncta
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Conjunctival melanoma
Optic nerve coloboma
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Field Spaniel
Deep medial canthus pockets
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Dermoid
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Cataract——anterior cortex
 Epibulbar melanoma
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
Distichiasis
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Ectropion
 Medial canthal erosion syndrome
English Setter
Entropion
Myopia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapilla
Cataract—posterior cortex
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
"Plasmoma'
Distichiasis
Progressive retinal degeneration
Ectropion
Flat Coated Retriever
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Entropion
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Cataract—cortical
(Europe)
eyelid
Corneal dystrophy-
epithelial/stromal
 Eyelid neoplasia
Distichiasis
German Shorthaired Pointer
Progressive retinal degeneration
Entropion
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
Cataract—posterior cortex
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
closure
Cone degeneration—day blindness
 Micropapilla
Distichiasis
English Springer Spaniel
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Entropion
Progressive retinal degeneration
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Cataract—cortical
 Retinal pigment epithelial cell dystrophy
eyelid
APpenDIx |
447
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Great Dane
Prolapse of the gland of the third
 Persistent pupillary membranes
eyelid
 Persistent tunica vasculosa lentis
 Cataract—-anterior, posterior, or equatorial
 Retinal detachment 
 Progressive retinal degeneration
cortex
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Congenital nyctalopia
Vitreous degeneration
Strabismus
Deep inferior conjunctival fornix
 Deep medial canthal pockets
Irish Setter
German Wirehaired Pointer
Distichiasis
 Ectropion
 Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Cataract—posterior cortex
Entropion
 Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
 Distichiasis
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Deep inferior conjunctival fornix
Entropion
Glaucoma—ganiodysgenesis with angle
Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia—folds
closure
Entropion
Iris/ciliary body
cysts（±
secondary
 Everted cartilage of the third eyelid
Giant Schnauzer
glaucoma)
Glaucoma
Multiple ocular defects with merling
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Cataract—-posterior or equatorial cortex
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Persistent hyaloid artery
Everted cartilage of the third eyelid
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
 Persistent pupillary membranes
closure
Great Pyrenees
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
cone dysplasia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
 Progressive retinal degeneration
nial cortex
Uveodermatologic syndrome
 Retinal dysplasia—folds 
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Deep medial canthus pockets 
Irish Water Spaniel
Golden Retriever
Distichiasis
Ectropion
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Adult onset ciliary body neoplasia
Entropion
rial cortex
Cataract—anterior cortex
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis
Cataract—incomplete dominant—pos-
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent hyaloid artery
terior cortex
Retinal dysplasia—folds 
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Congenital tumors of the iris and ciliary
Greater Swiss Mountain Dog
body
Irish Wolfhound
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Cataract—anterior, posterior,
-gnba1o
 Distichiasis
torial cortex
Cataract-posterior cortex or nuclear
Entropion
Distichiasis
 Cormeal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Glaucoma—primary angle closure or
Entropion
Distichiasis
secondary
Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapilla
Entropion 
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Everted cartilage of the third eyelid
Iris/ciliary body
cysts (± secondary
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Iris/ciliary body cysts
 Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapilla
 Pigmentary uveitis
Greyhound
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Pseudopapilledema (heavily myelinated
Cataract-posterior cortex
optic disc)
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Italian Greyhound
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Corneal dystrophy
Retinal dysplasia-
—folds
Deep medial canthal pockets
 Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equatorial
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
Glaucoma—secondary
cortex
 Uveodermatologic syndrome
Lens luxation
Glaucoma—associated
with
vitreal
 Progressive retinal degeneration
degeneration
Gordon Setter
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Lens luxation
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
 Persistent hyaloid artery
Cataract—posterior cortex
Vitreal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Deep medial canthal pockets
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Distichiasis
Havanese
 Retinal detachment
 Ectropion
Vitreous degeneration
Entropion
Cataract-
posterior cortex
 Iris/ciliary body cysts
Distichiasis
Jack Russell Terrier
Persistent pupillary membranes
Lens luxation
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Distichiasis
448
|APPENDIX
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Labrador Retriever
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration 
Cataract—anterior or equatorial cortex
Vitreal degeneration
Vitreal degeneration
Cataract—incomplete dominant—pos-
terior cortical
Maltese Terrier
Japanese Chin
Ciliary body neoplasia
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
 Canine allergic inhalant conjunctivitis
 Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equatorial
Deep medial canthal pockets 
(atopy)
cortex
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Entropion
Ectopic cilia
 Distichiasis
Iris/ciliary body cysts
 Entropion (lower medial canthus)
Entropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Glaucoma—narrow to closed angle
 Exposure/pigmentary keratitis
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Haired medial caruncule
 Persistent hyaloid artery
 Pseudopapilledema (heavily myelinated 
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
optic disc)
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Retinal dysplasia-
-detached
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Persistent tunica vasculosa lentis
 Retinal dysplasia-
folds/geographic
 Tear-staining syndrome
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Retinal dysplasia
1 with skeletal abnor-
Retinal dysplasia—folds/geographic
malities
Manchester Terrier
Ulcerative keratitis
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Vitreal degeneration
Cataract—posterior cortex
Lakeland Terrier
 Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Keeshond
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—posterior cortical
Cataract—cortical
Distichiasis
Mastiff
Distichiasis
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Ectopic cilia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—nuclear and cortical
Entropion
Distichiasis
Glaucoma—open angle
Leonberger
Ectropion
Iris/ciliary body cysts
Entropion
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—posterior cortex
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Distichiasis
Glaucoma
Ectropion
 Iris/ciliary body cysts
Kerry Blue Terrier
Entropion
 Macroblepharon
Everted cartilage of the third eyelid
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—posterior cortex
Glaucoma—primary angle closure
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal 
Iris/ciliary body cysts
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Distichiasis
 Macroblepharon
 Retinal dysplasia—folds/geographic
Entropion
 Persistent pupilary membranes
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Miniature Australian Shepherd
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Lhasa Apso
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Choroidal hypoplasia (collie eye anomaly)
Trichiasis
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Distichiasis
Vitreal degeneration
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
 Fundus colobomas
Ciliated caruncle
Inis coloboma
Komondor
Corneal dystrophy-
epithelial/stromal
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Distichiasis
 Cataract—posterior cortical
Ectopic cilia
Miniature Bull Terrier
Distichiasis
Entropion, medial lower lid 
Ectropion
Euryblepharon
Corneal dystrophy—endothelial
Entropion
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Entropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Persistent pupillary membranes
Lens luxation
Trichiasis
Pigmentary keratitis/exposure keratitis
 Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapilla
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Kuvasz
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Vitreal degeneration
Retinal dysplasiafolds/geographic
Distichiasis
Vitreal degeneration
Miniature Pinscher
 Ectropion
Entropion
Lowchen
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Lens luxation
Distichiasis
 Persistent hyaloid artery
APpenDIx |
449
Persistent pupillary membranes
Persistent pupillary membranes
Glaucoma—primary open angle?
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Progressive retinal degeneration—early
Lens luxation
Vitreal degeneration
rod degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration—rod 
Vitreal degeneration
 Miniature Schnauzer
dysplasia
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Pekingese
Atresia of lacrimal puncta and canaliculi
Cataract—recessive
-nuclear/posterior
Norwich Terrier
Atresia of lacrimal puncta and canaliculi
cortex—congenital
Cataract—anterior cortex
Cataract—recessive—posterior cortex
Cataract—-posterior or equatorial cortex
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Deep corneal ulcers
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Lens luxation
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Ectopic cilia
Entropion
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Entropion/trichiasis (medial)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Exotropia
Lens luxation
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling
Haired medial caruncle
Microphthalmia/multiple ocular defects
Retriever
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Macroblepharon
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Cataract—posterior cortex
Nasal fold trichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Pigmentary keratitis
Progressive retinal  degeneration—rod/
Distichiasis
 Progressive retinal degeneration
cone dysplasia
Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapilla
Traumatic proptosis
 Retinal dysplasia
awith or without per-
 Persistent hyaloid artery
 sistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Pembroke Welsh Corgi
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
syndrome
Retinal dysplasia—folds/geographic
Cataract—posterior cortex
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Newfoundland
 Old English Sheepdog
Distichiasis
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Cataract—posterior cortex
Cataract—autosomal recessive—nuclear/
Persistent hyaloid artery
 Deep medial canthal pockets
 cortical—congential
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Ectropion
Cataract—-posterior cortex—adult onset
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Entropion
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial stromal
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Euryblepharon
Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid 
Entropion
Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
Glaucoma
Glaucoma
 Iris/ciliary body cysts
Microphthalmia/multiple ocular defects
Petit Basset Griffon Vendeen
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Retinal detachment
Comeal dystrophy—endothelial 
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Distichiasis
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Entropion
Norfolk Terrier
Glaucoma
Papillon
Lens luxation
Cataract-posterior cortex
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Lens luxation
Cataract—cortical
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Optic nerve coloboma
Cataract—nuclear
Retinal dysplasia
Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapilla
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Vitreal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis
Entropion
Pointer
Norwegian Buhund
Lens luxation
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cataract—initially equatorial
 dominant—nuclear fibrillar
Progressive retinal degeneration
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
 Cormeal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Norwegian Elkhound
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Entropion
Vitreal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—posterior or equatorial cortex
Retinal dysplasia
Distichiasis
Parson Russell Terrier
Entropion
 Polish Lowland Sheepdog
Glaucoma—primary open angle
Cataract—posterior cortical
 Lens luxation (with primary open angle
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Comeal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
glaucoma)
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
450
|APPENDIX
 Persistent pupillary mermbranes
Haired medial caruncle
Saint Bernard
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Macroblepharon
Cataract—posterior cortex
Nasal fold trichiasis
Dermoid
 Pomeranian
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Distichiasis
Pigmentary keratitis
Ectropion
 Atresia of lacrimal puncta
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Entropion
Canine allergic inhalant conjunctivitis 
Ulcerative keratitis
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
(atopy)
eyelid
 Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Puli
Macroblepharon
 Distichiasis
 Microphthalmia/multiple ocular defects
Entropion
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
 Persistent pupillary mermbranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Entropion
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration 
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Tear-staining syndrome
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Redundant facial skin
Trichiasis
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Uveodermatologic syndrome
Poodle (All Varieties)
Queensland Blue Heeler
Saluki
 Atresia of lacrimal puncta and canaliculi
See Australian Cattle Dog.
 Cataract—equatorial cortex
Canine allergic inhalant conjunctivitis 
Corneal dystrophy
(atopy)
Rat Terrier
 Deep medial canthal pockets 
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Entropion
rial cortex
Cataract
Glaucoma-
goniodysgenesis with angle
Cataract—recessive-
-equatorial
cortex
Distichiasis
closure
(standard)
Lens luxation
 Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
 Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Deep medial canthal pockets (standard)
 Vitreal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Distichiasis
 Ectopic cilia
Redbone Coonhound
Samoyed
 Entropion
Glaucoma-
—goniodysgenesis with angle 
 Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
closure
Cataract—nuclear fibrillar
Glaucoma-
—primary open angle (rare)
Rhodesian Ridgeback
Chronic comeal erosion syndrome
Haired medial caruncle
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Iris atrophy-
—senile
Cataract—posterior cortex
Distichiasis
 Lens luxation (± glaucoma)
Distichiasis
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle 
Microphthalmia
Entropion
closure
 Optic nerve hypoplasia/micropapilla
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Glaucoma—primary open angle (rare)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
eyelid
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Progressive retinal degeneration-
/poI-
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes
cone degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Retinal dysplasia—folds (± skeletal dys-
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Rottweiler
plasia)
Tear-staining syndrome
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
Trichiasis
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
 Portuguese Water Dog
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Schipperke
 Deep medial canthal pockets
Cataract—cortical
Distichiasis
Cataract—anterior cortex
Distichaisis
Ectropion
Distichiasis
Entropion
Entropion
 Entropion
Lens luxation
Iris/ciliary body cysts
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Microphthalmia/multiple ocular defects
Iris coloboma
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary mermbranes
 Macroblepharon
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Microphthalmia
Myopia
Scottish Terrier
Pug
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Progressive retinal degeneration
 Cataract—cortical or nuclear
Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
 Entropion (medial)
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
Distichiasis
Ectopic cilia
Lens luxation
APPenDIX |
451
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Chronic exposure keratitis/pigmentary
 Spinone Italiano
 Progressive retinal degeneration
keratitis
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Corneal dystrophy-
endothelial
Cataract—anterior cortex
Corneal dystrophy-
epithelial/stromal
Entropion
Sealyham Terrier
 Corneal ulceration
Eversion of the cartilage of the third
Distichiasis
eyelid
Atresia of the lacrimal puncta and
Ectopic cilia
Iris coloboma
canaliculi
Entropion (medial)
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Haired medial caruncle
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Distichiasis
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Macroblepharon
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Spitz
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Retinal detachment 
Retinal dysplasia—complete with com-
Vitreal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 plete retinal detachment
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Siberian Husky
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
Vitreal degeneration
Cataract—-posterior cortex and juvenile
Cataract—recessive—posterior sutures/
Shar-Pei
Chorodial hypoplasia (collie eye anomaly)
cortex
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Distichiasis
Cataract
Corneal dystrophy—endothelial
Entropion
Entropion
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Persistent hyaloid artery
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
Distichiasis
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
closure
Entropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Lens luxation
Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with closed
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration 
angles
 Protrusion of the gland of the third eyelid 
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Standard Schnauzer
Redundant facial skin
Progressive
retinal
degeneration-
X-linked
Cataract—congenital with microcornea
 Shetland Sheepdog (Sheltie)
 Retinal detachment
 Cataract-posterior cortex
Uveitis
Comeal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Atresia of the lacrimal puncta and
 Uveodermatologic syndrome
Distichiasis
canaliculi
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Choroidal hypoplasia (collie eye anomaly)
Silky Terrier
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Colobomas (optic disc)
Corneal  dystrophy
 epithelial/stromal
 Atopic conjunctivitis and blepharitis
 Sussex Spaniel
(multifocal and often ulcerative)
 Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Distichiasis
rial cortex
Distichiasis
Ectopic cilia
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
Ectropion
Nodular episcleritis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent hyaloid artery
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Progressive retinal degeneration
Vitreal degeneration
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
 Swedish Vallhund
Retinal dysplasia
 Skye Terrier
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Cataract
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Lens luxation
Cormeal dystrophy epithelial/stromal
Distichiasis
Shiba Inu
Smooth Fox Terrier
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
See Fox Terrier (Smooth).
Retinopathy
Distichiasis
Vitreal degeneration
Ectopic cilia
Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier
 Glaucoma—goniodysgenesis with angle
Tibetan Spaniel
closure
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Lens luxation
Distichiasis
Cataract—cortical
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Micropapilla
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Microphthalmia with multiple ocular
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Vitreal degeneration
defects
Distichiasis
 Persistent hyaloid artery
Entropion
Shih Tzu
Persistent pupillary membranes
Iris/ciliary body cysts
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Cataract—anterior cortex
Retinal dysplasia—folds
Micropapilla
452
|APPENDIX
 Persistent hyaloid artery
Welsh Terrier
Birman
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
Cataract—congenital—posterior nuclear
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Distichiasis
Corneal dermoids
Ectopic cilia
Tibetan Terrier
Glaucoma—closed angle
Burmese
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Cataract—posterior cortex
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Corneal dermoids
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Corneal sequestrum
 Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
Progressive retinal degeneration
Eyelid hypoplasia ("coloboma")
 Distichiasis
Glaucoma—narrow to closed angles
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
West Highland White Terrier
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Atopic conjunctivitis and blepharitis
 Retinal degeneration—night blindness-
Cataract—adult—anterior or posterior
Domestic Shorthair
young age
cortex, nuclear
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Cataract—recessive—posterior sutures
A-mannosidosis
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
GM' gangliosidosis
Toy Havanese
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
GM gangliosidosis
Lens luxation
 Mucopolysaccharidosis I
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Microphthalmia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Himalayan
Toy Terrier
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
Cataracts—posterior cortex
Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Corneal sequestrum
Whippet
Epiphora
Vizsla
Medial lower lid entropion
 Lens luxation (± secondary glaucoma)
Cataract—anterior or posterior cortex
 Progressive retinal degeneration
Korat
 Corneal degeneration—epithelial/stromal
Vitreal degeneration
Distichiasis
 GM gangliosidosis
Entropion
Wire Fox Terrier
GM’ gangliosidosis
 Eyelid melanomas, multiple
 Persistent pupillary membranes
See Fox Terrier (Wirehaired).
Manx
 Progressive retinal degeneration 
Yorkshire Terrier
 Progressive corneal edema
Weimaraner
 Atopic conjunctivitis and blepharitis
Persian
Cataract—anterior cortex
Cataract—anterior, posterior, or equato-
Chronic corneal erosion syndrome
rial cortex
A-mannosidosis
Corneal dystrophy-
epithelial/stromal
Corneal dystrophy—epithelial/stromal
 Atresia of the lacrimal puncta and canaliculi
 Deep medial canthal pockets
 Distichiasis
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Distichiasis
Entropion
Corneal sequestrum
 Entropion
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Epiphora
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Medial lower lid entropion
Eyelid neoplasia
 Progressive retinal degeneration
 Progressive retinal degeneration—recessive
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Retinal dysplasia—geographic/detached
early onset
 Retinal dysplasia—folds
CATS
Siamese
Welsh Springer Spaniel
Abyssinian
 Congenital nystagmus
 Cataract—anterior cortex
 Progressive retinal degeneration—domi-
Convergent strabismus
Cataract—recessive—congenital—nuclear/
nant trait—kitten
Corneal sequestrum
posterior cortex
 Progressive retinal degeneration-
-reces-
Glaucoma—primary
Corneal dystrophy-
-epithelial/stromal
sive trait——2 to 4 years old
 Globoid cell leukodystrophy
Distichiasis
Glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe's
Entropion
Albinotic Felidae
disease)
Glaucoma—dominant—closed angle
GM' gangliosidosis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Esotropia
Herpetic keratitis
Progressive retinal degeneration
Inis atrophy
Retinal dysplasia—folds
 Mucopolysaccharidosis V1
 Progressive retinal degeneration
APPenDIX |
453
Sphingomyelin lipidosis (Niemann-Pick
Hereford
Shropshire
disease)
 Tapetal degeneration (hereditary)
Cataract—congenital—recessive
 Essential iris atrophy
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (recessive)
CATTLE
Dermoids (hereditary)
Southdown
Aberdeen Angus
Heterochromia with complete albinism
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
Congenital (possibly inherited) photo-
Mannosidosis
Microphthalmia
sensitivity
Multiple ocular anomalies
Ayrshire
Optic nerve coloboma (associated with 
 South Hampshire
incomplete albinism)
 Pendular nystagmus
Squamous cell carcinoma
 Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Esotropia
Jersey
Suffolk
Beef Master
Cataract—congenital—recessive
 Essential iris atrophy
 Neuronal lipodystrophy
 Convergent strabismus with exophthalmia
Esotropia and exophthalmos
HORSES
Brahman
Multiple ocular defects—inherited
 Pendular nystagmus
Appaloosa
 Squamous cell carcinoma
Congenital stationary night blindness 
Shorthorn
Equine recurrent uveitis (chronic form)
Brown Swiss
 Squamous cell carcinoma
Congenital nystagmus
Strabismus
Esotropia
Convergent strabismus with exophthalmia
Extra lacrimal drainage openings
Dermoids
Arabian
Heterochromia with complete albinism 
Esotropia and exophthalmos
Multiple ocular anomalies (including
 Glycogen storage disease type II
Cataract
cataracts)
Heterochromia with complete albinism
Melanoma
Microphthalmia
Charolais
Multiple ocular anomalies
Belgian
Susceptibility to infectious bovine kerato-
Colobomas (posterior pole)
conjunctivitis
 Congenital aniridia and cataract (dominant)
 Squamous cell carcinoma
 Susceptibility to squamous cell carci-
 Squamous cell carcinoma
noma
Devon
Clydesdale
Simmental
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
 Squamous cell carcinoma
Entropion
Friesian (Holstein)
Squamous cell carcinoma
Lipizzaner
Accessory nasolacrimal duct openings
SHEEP
Melanoma
Cataract, lens luxation, glaucoma (domi-
Corriedale
nant)
Morgan
Cataract—congenital—recessive
Congenital (possibly inherited) photo-
Congential corneal edema
sensitivity
Cataract—nuclear-
-congenital—possibly
Esotropia
 Glycogen storage disease type II
 dominant 
GM' gangliosidosis
Glucocerebroside storage disease type II
Pendular nystagmus
Quarter Horse
Hampshire Downs
German Spotted
Aniridia—dominant?
Entropion
Cataracts—nuclear
and
cortical-
 Squamous cell carcinoma
dominant
New Zealand Romney
 Dermoid (with cataracts and iridal hypo-
Guernsey
plasia)
Cataract
Sarcoids
 Microphthalmia
Multiple ocular anomalies
Piebald
Rocky Mountain Horse
 Heterochromia with complete albinism
Pendular nystagmus
 Congenital upper eyelid eversion
Anterior segment dysgenesis
Eyelid agenesis
Megalocornea
Uveal cysts
454
| APPENDIX
Shire
PIGS
REFERENCES
Squamous cell carcinoma
Miniature Swine
American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
Entropion
(2007): Ocular Disorders Presumed to be
Inherited in Dogs, Sth ed. ACVO, Urbana, IL.
Thoroughbred
Optic nerve and choroidal colobomas 
Bistner SI, et al. (1977): Atlas of Veterinary.
Ophthalmic Surgery. Saunders, Philadelphia.
 Cataract—congenital—dominant 
Blogg JR (1980): The Eye in Veterinary Practice,
Entropion—congenital
Pot-Bellied
Vol.1.Saunders,Philadelphia
Entropion
XIl. Saunders, Philadelphia.
GOAT
Clark RD, Stainer JR (1983): Medical and Genetic
Angora
Yorkshire
Aspects of Purebred Dogs. Veterinary Medicine
Publishing Co., Edwardsville, KS.
Helper LC (i989): Magrane's Canine
Squamous cell carcinoma
Cerebrospinal lipodystrophy
Ophthalmology,4th ed.Lea &Febiger,
Microphthalmia
Philadelphia.
Rubin LF (1989): Inherited Eye Diseases in
Purebred Dogs. Williams & Wikins, Baltimore.
GLOSSARY
 accommodation adjustments in focal
body, iris (and pupil), anterior chamber,
Bergmeister's papilla mass of glial
 power of the eye necessary to maintain
 cormea, anterior sclera, and conjunctiva
 cells surrounding the hyaloid artery in
a clearly focused image on the retina
(cf. posterior segment).
the center of the optic disc; pathologic
 as an object moves closer to or farther
anterior uveitis inflammation of the
in most species; seen commonly in
from the eye; largely accomplished by
ciliary body (cyclitis) and iris (iritis);
ruminants.
 changes in shape or position of the lens 
also called iridocyclitis.
binocular vision the ability to use the
through action of the ciliary muscle. In
aphakia absence of the 
lens.
Occurs
 two eyes simultaneously to focus on
some species (e.g., birds, fish) additional
extremely rarely as an inherited con-
the same object. Fusion of these two
 mechanisms are involved.
dition; extreme microphakia is more
 separate images by the brain allows for
adnexa (ocular) periocular
structures,
likely.
stereopsis and a further improvement
consisting of orbit, orbital contents,
aphakic crescent crescent-shaped space
in the ability to detect depth.
eyelids, nasolacrimal system, con-
 created between the equator of a dis-
 blepharitis inflammation of the upper or
 junctiva, and third eyelid.
located (luxated or subluxated) lens
lower eyelids.
agenesis failure of development of an
and the dilated pupil. Pathognomonic
 blepharoplasty plastic surgery of the
organ/tissue.
for lens dislocation.
eyelids.
 albinism congenital and inherited absence
 aqueous flare Tyndall effect seen when
 blepharospasm spasm of the orbicularis
of melanin. In ocular structures, this is
 a focal beam of light passes through
 oculi muscle resulting in eyelid closure.
 most striking in the iris (which is pink)
aqueous humor containing excessive
 blood-aqueous barrier physiologic barrier
and fundus (in which the choroid is
protein and/or cells (plasmoid aqueous).
formed by the iris and ciliary body
easily seen).
Pathognomonic for disruption of the
 alopecia absence of hair from an area
 blood-aqueous barrier.
epithelium that limits movement of
where it is normally found.
 aqueous humor clear fluid made by the
plasma components into the aqueous
 amaurosis complete blindness without 
ciliary body epithelium; is released
 humor. Part of the blood-ocular barrier.
overt ocular cause (cf. amblyopia).
into the posterior chamber, fills the
 blood-ocular barrier physiologic barrier
 amblyopia reduced vision without overt
anterior chamber, and egresses through
 formed by the vascular endothelium and
ocular cause (cf. amaurosis).
the iridocorneal angle. Responsible (in 
 some intraocular epithelial tissues that
 angle-closure glaucoma glaucoma due
part) for meeting the metabolic needs
 limits movement of plasma components
to mechanical obstruction of the irido-
of the avascular lens and cornea.
 into the eye. Composed of the blood-
corneal angle that prevents aqueous
 area centralis retinal region with high
aqueous barrier anteriorly and the
humor from reaching the trabecular
density of cone photoreceptors and
 blood-retinal barrier posteriorly.
meshwork. Also known as narrow-
 ganglion cells that is lateral to the optic
 blood-retinal barrier physiologic barrier
angle or closed-angle glaucoma (cf.
 nerve head in cats. Important for visual
formed by the retinal vascular endo-
open-angle glaucoma).
acuity.
thelium and the
retinal pigment
 aniridia inherited congenital complete
 asteroid hyalosis fixed opacities com-
epithelium that limits movement of
 absence of iris. Aniridia is extremely rare
 posed of a calcium-lipid complex and
 plasma components into the retina and
because usually some iris root is present.
occurring in an otherwise normal
vitreous. Part of the blood-ocular
 anisocoria disparity in pupil size between 
vitreous body. Relatively common
barrier.
the two eyes.
in older animals (cf. syneresis and
bulla a large fluid-flled vesicle or blister, 
ankyloblepharon fusion of the eyelid
synchysis scintillans).
 usually due to corneal edema.
 margins; physiologic for the first 10 days
 astigmatism optical condition in which
bullous keratopathy disease of the comea
 in puppies and kittens.
 light coming from a single point in the
 associated with bullae formation.
 anophthalmos/anophthalmia complete
 environment is not focused to a single
buphthalmos/buphthalmia enlarge-
absence of the eye. Anophthalmos is
point on the retina, usually owing to
ment of the eye due to glaucoma.
extremely rare; usually some ocular
irregularities in corneal curvature. In
 canaliculus small epithelium-lined tube
tissues are present; microphthalmos is
regular astigmatism the cornea is
 at the inner aspect of the upper and
more common.
 shaped more like a football than like
 lower lids, leading from the nasolacrimal
anterior
chamber space
papunoq
 part of a sphere and the resulting
punctum to the lacrimal sac (plural:
 anteriorly by the cormea and posteriorly
 image is distorted but in a somewhat
canaliculi).
by the iris and anterior lens. Contains 
predictable
fashion.
irregular
 canthoplasty plastic surgery on the medial
aqueous humor.
 astigmatism the cormea is very irregular
 or lateral canthus.
 anterior segment collective term for
 and light is not uniformly brought into
 canthotomy surgical incision of (usually
those parts of the eye anterior to the
focus on the retina; usually due to
 the lateral) canthus to improve surgical
 vitreous; consisting of the lens, ciliary
comeal disease or injury.
visualization or access.
455
456
|GLOSSARY
canthus the angle at the medial and
cilium eyelash (plural: cilia).
corectopia displacement of the pupil
lateral ends of the palpebral fissure
closed-angle glaucoma glaucoma assocj-
from its normal position.
where the upper and lower eyelids join.
 ated with apposition of the peripheral
corneal degeneration unilateral
caruncle a small piece of skin at the
iris to the peripheral cornea (cf. open-
bilateral  keratitis characterized by
 medial canthus from which hairs often
angle glaucoma).
corneal edema and subepithelial
protrude.
collie eye anomaly inherited develop-
 deposition of lipid and/or mineral, and
cataract opacity of the lens and/or lens
mental defect of collies and some other
 often with corneal vascularization (cf.
capsule.
breeds characterized by choroidal
corneal dystrophy).
central progressive retinal atrophy a
hypoplasia, with or without colobomas,
 corneal dystrophy progressive, bilateral,
group of disorders in which retinal
 and retinal detachment.
approximately symmetrical hereditary
degeneration is accompanied by nu-
 collyrium eye wash.
corneal disease unassociated with
merous, small, pigmentlike foci over
coloboma congenital
 inflammation; may affect the epithelium,
 the tapetal fundus. The primary defect
 ocular tissue. Commonly affected tissues
stroma, or endothelium (cf. corneal
 is in the retinal pigment epithelium,
are eyelid, iris, choroid, and optic disc.
degeneration).
whereas in generalized progressive
Usually present as a gap, hole, fissure,
 corneal erosion loss of corneal epithe-
 retinal atrophy (PRA) the defect is in
or notch-shaped defect.
Sometimes
lium. Distinguished from cormeal ulcers
the photoreceptors. Also known as
differentiated into typical colobomas
by connotation, erosions being super-
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy.
(defects lying in or near the 6 o'clock
ficial (sometimes not even all epithelial
chalazion lipogranuloma of a tarsal
 position within the eye and due to failed
 layers) and typically recurrent.
(meibomian) gland due to impaction
closure of the fetal fissure) and atypical
 corneal graft surgical placement of a
of secretions and sometimes rupture
colobomas (defects occurring in areas
section of donor cornea to replace a
 into the surrounding eyelid tissue.
other than the fetal fissure).
diseased region of host cornea (cf.
chemosis conjunctival edema.
cone retinal photoreceptor adapted for
keratoplasty).
"cherry eye lay term for prolapsed gland 
 vision in bright light, for color vision,
corneal mummification see cornea!
 of the third eyelid.
 and for fine visual acuity.
sequestrum.
chorioretinitis inflammation
ofthe
 conjugate ocular movements move-
corneal necrosis see corneal sequestrum.
choroid and retina in which choroiditis
 ment of the eyes in the same fashion;
corneal reflex closure of the eyelids
is the dominant and presumed initiating
e.g, movement of both eyes to the
 induced by light touching of the cornea
factor (cf. retinochoroiditis).
right, left, up, or down. These move-
with a few wisps of cotton teased off a
choroid the posterior aspect of the uveal
ments are known as versions.
 cotton-tipped applicator.
tract immediately extemal to the retina;
 conjunctiva mucus membrane lining the
 corneal sequestrum enigmatic con-
esponsible for nutrition of the outer
 posterior aspect of the upper and lower
 dition unique to the cat cornea in which
retinal layers.
eyelids (palpebral conjunctiva), both
a (usually axial) region of stroma
choroiditis inflammation of the choroid;
surfaces of the third eyelid, and the
 becomes amber to black, undergoes
usually caused by or causing associated
anterior sclera (bulbar conjunctiva).
degeneration, and may be slowly
retinitis, resulting in retinochoroiditis 
 conjunctival follicles hypertrophy
yand
extruded by the surrounding normal
 and chorioretinitis, respectively.
coalescence of conjunctival lymphoid
 comea while eliciting a marked foreign
chronic immune-mediated
kerato-
tissue in response to conjunctival
 body reaction. Corneal ulceration may
conjunctivitis
syndrome
(CIKS)
inflammation. Produces a character-
 or may not be present. Also known as
characteristic immune-mediated disease 
istic cobblestone appearance on the
feline keratitis nigrum, corneal necrosis,
of the comea and conjunctiva of dogs
 conjunctival surfaces, especially with-
and corneal mummification.
aso known as chronic superficial
in the conjunctival fornix.
corneal ulcer a break in continuity of
keratitis (CSK), pannus, and Uberreiter's 
 conjunctival fornix region where the
 comeal epithelium with or without loss 
syndrome.
palpebral
conjunctiva
reflects
to
of corneal stroma.
、Also known as
chronic superficial keratitis (CSK) a
become bulbar conjunctiva or to cover
ulcerative
keratitis
(cf.
cornea!
 general descriptive pathologic term
the anterior face of the third eyelid.
erosion).
that is sometimes used to describe a
There is also a secondary fornix
 corpora nigra irregular cystic dilations
 characteristic immune-mediated disease
between the posterior aspect of the
 on the pupillary margin of the iris in
of the comea and conjunctiva of dogs
third eyelid and the globe. Also known 
large herbivores. Most notable dorsally
 also known as pannus, chronic immune-
as the conjunctival cul-de-sac.
but typically also present ventrally.
 mediated keratoconjunctivitis syndrome
conjunctivorhinostomy
surgical
Also known as granula iridica.
(CIKS), and Uberreiter's syndrome.
 creation of a communication between
 cortical blindness blindness caused by a
ciliary body part of the uveal tract
the conjunctiva and the nasal cavity
 lesion in the visual (occipital) cortex.
 between the inis and the choroid; consists
 performed to circumvent a dysfunctional
 cotton-wool spots fluffy white opacities
 of ciliary processesthat produce aqueous
nasolacrimal system.
within the nerve fiber layer of the retina
humor and the ciliary muscle responsible
 contact lens thin plastic lens that fits
due to edema secondary to micro-
for accommodation and iridocorneal
directly on the cornea under the eye-
 infarcts. Seen as an early change with
 angle/trabecular meshwork opening.
lids, thereby
 a 
systemic hypertension.
ciliary sulcus poorly defined transition
during healing. Also known as a thera-
 cryotherapy localized tissue destruction
 point between the posterior surface of
peutic soft contact lens (TSCL).
by freezing.
the iris and the anterior surface of the
contralateral situated on or pertaining
cyclitic membrane organized fibrinous
ciliary body.
to the other side.
exudate and, subsequently, a fbro-
GLOSSARY |
457
vascular membrane extending from the
descemetocele deep corneal ulcer char-
is properly focused onto the retina
ciliary body over the posterior lens
 acterized by sufficient stromal loss
when the eye is “at rest" (i.e., not 
capsule as a result of uveitis.
that there is exposure of Descemet's
accommodating).
cyclitis inflammation of the ciliary body;
membrane.
endophthalmitis inflammation of the
usually seen with iritis and therefore
Descemet's membrane the basement
intraocular contents, excluding the
termed iridocyclitis (or anterior uveitis).
membrane of the corneal endothelium.
cormeoscleral tunic (cf. panophthalmitis).
cyclo- of or pertaining to the ciliary body.
diopter unit of measurement of the
 enophthalmos abnormal recession of
cyclocryotherapy cryodestruction of the
refractive power of lenses, equal to
the  eye.
within
the
orbit
(cf.
 ciliary body epithelium by application
the reciprocal of the focal length of the
exophthatmos).
of a cryoprobe to the overlying sclera
lens expressed in meters.
 entropion an introversion or rolling in of
to reduce the rate of aqueous humor
diplopia the perception of one object as
 the eyelid.
 formation and lower intraocular pressure
two images ("double vision").
entropion uvea posterior rolling (or
for the treatment of glaucoma (cf.
distichiasis condition in which a single
cyclophotoablation).
cilium emerges from
one or more
the posterior chamber; usually associ-
cyclodialysis surgical
procedure
for
 meibomian (tarsal) gland orifices (cf.
 ated with anterior uveitis (cf. ectropion
glaucoma to establish a communi-
districhiasis.
ectopic
cilia,
and
uvea).
 cation between the anterior chamber
trichiasis).
 enucleation surgical removal of the eye
 and the suprachoroidal space.
districhiasis condition in which multiple
(cf. evisceration, exenteration).
cyclodiathermy procedure for glaucoma
cilia emerge
 from one meibomian
 epilation removal of hair, especially
 to destroy a portion of the ciliary body
(tarsal) gland orifice (cf. distichiasis,
cilia
 by diathermy and reduce the quantity
ectopic cilia, and trichiasis).
epiphora overflow of tears due to
of aqueous humor produced.
 drainage angle traditional outflow path-
impaired drainage, excessive pro-
cyclophotoablation destruction of the
way by which aqueous humor exits
 duction, or both.
 ciliary body epithelium by application 
 the eye. It is bounded anteriorly by the
episcleritis inflammation of the con-
of a laser probe to the overlying sclera 
 peripheral cornea, posteriorly by the
 nective tissue immediately exterior to
to reduce the rate of aqueous humor
iris and ciliary muscles, internally by
the sclera.
formation and lower intraocular pres-
the pectinate ligaments, and externally
 equine recurrent uveitis (ERU) recurrent
sure for the treatment of glaucoma (cf.
 by the sclera. The trabecular meshwork
inflammation of the anterior and/or
cyclocryotherapy).
and ciliary cleft are contained within
 posterior uvea in horses; the cause is
cycloplegia paralysis
 the iridocorneal angle. In some cases
unknown (older terms include “periodic
muscle induced to reduce pain due to
this term is used to refer to the geometric
 ophthalmia" and "moon blindness").
 ciliary spasm associated with anterior
 angle between the anterior surface of
 esotropia form of strabismus in which
uveitis.
the iris and cormea (synonyms: filtration
there is convergent deviation of one
dacryoadenitis inflammation  of the
angle, iridocorneal angle)
eye toward the midline while the other
lacrimal glands (orbital or third eyelid).
dyscoria abnormally shaped pupil (adj.
fixates normally (cf. exotropia).
dacryocystitis inflammation  of the
dyscoric).
 euryblepharon horizontally
enlarged
lacrimal sac.
 dystrophy noninflammatory, develop-
palpebral fissure due to excessive
dacryocystorhinography use of contrast
mental,
 nutritional,
or
 metabolic
eyelid length (also known as macro-
 material for radiographic studies of the
 abnormality.
palpebral fissure).
 nasolacrimal drainage system.
ectasia dilation or expansion; may be
 evisceration surgical removal of the
dacryocystorhinostomy surgical
toward the observer (e.g., corneal
 intraocular contents, with retention of 
procedure to
 construct an alternate
ectasia) or away from the observer (e.g..
the corneoscleral tunic and placement
 nasolacrimal drainage system into the
 posterior scleral ectasia).
 of a prosthesis within the corneoscleral
nasal sinuses.
ectopia displacement or 
malposition,
shell.
dark adaptation biochemical and neuro-
especially congenital (adj. ectopic).
exenteration (orbital) surgical removal
logic process by
which the eye
 ectopic cilia hair/cilia protruding through
of all the 
 orbital tissues, including
becomes more sensitive to light during
 palpebral conjunctiva. The cilia usually
 the eye and its nervous, vascular, and
a period in darkness.
abrade the cornea, causing pain and
 muscular connections.
dazzle reflex subcortical reflex in which
ulceration.
exophthalmos abnormal
protrusion
 a rapid eye blink is elicited by a bright 
 ectropion an eversion or rolling out of
of the eye from the orbit (cf.
light shone into an eye.
the eyelid.
enophthatmos). May be pulsatile when
decussation crossing of nerve fibers or
 ectropion uvea eversion of the posterior
 associated with an orbital arteriovenous
tracts from one side of the nervous
 iris epithelium around the pupillary
fistula.
 system to the opposite side, for example
 margin and into the anterior chamber;
 exotropia form of strabismus in which
 as occurs at the optic chiasm.
usually associated with anterior uveitis
 there is divergent or lateral deviation
 denervation hypersensitivity increased
(cf. entropion uvea).
of one eye while the other fixates
sensitivity to neural effector substance
electroretinogram
(ERG) a
graphic
normally (cf. esotropia).
 that follows postganglionic interruption
 record of the action potential that follows
fascia bulbi connective tissue sheath
 of the nerve supply of organs innervated
stimulation of the retina by light.
encircling the globe posterior to the
by the autonomic nervous system.
emmetropia condition
in 
which
no
limbus (also known as Tenon's capsule).
dermoid a congenital tumor consisting
 refractive error is present within the
 fltration angle traditional outflow path-
of skin and its appendages.
 eye such that a distant point of light
way by which aqueous humor exits the
458
|GlOSSARY
eye. It is bounded anteriorly by the
and
edema within the
crack.
 refractive error created by lens removal
peripheral cornea, posteriorly
by
 Pathognomonic for glaucoma in most
 for cataract or lens dislocation.
the iris and ciliary muscles, internally
species; however, their significance in
intumescent lens a swollen or enlarged
by the pectinate ligaments,
and
horses is not understood. Also called
lens.
externally by the sclera. The trabecular
striate keratopathy.
ipsilateral situated on or pertaining to
meshwork and ciliary cleft
are
haws syndrome bilateral condition in
 the same side.
contained  within  the iridocorneal
cats characterized by protrusion of the
iridencleisis surgical
procedure for
 angle. In some cases this term is used
third eyelids without detectable cause.
 glaucoma in which an incision is made
 to refer to the geometric angle between
hemeralopia visual impairment/ blindness
 at the limbus and the iris is incarcerated
the anterior surface of the iris and
 in bright light ("day blindness").
into the wound to create a filtering
cornea (synonyms:
drainage angle;
hemianopia blindness involving
one
wick between the anterior chamber
iridocorneal angle).
half of the visual field.
and the subconjunctival space. Per-
fluorescein angiography
 serial  photo-
heterochromia iridis condition in which
formed rarely
 in domestic animals
graphy of the ocular fundus after
the iris is not of uniform color or in
owing to the excessive inflammatory
intravenous administration of fluo-
which the right and left irides of one
 response in these species.
rescein solution. Used to characterize
animal differ in color from each other.
iridocorneal  angle traditional  outflow
vascular disease of the retina, choroid,
hippus spasmodic dilation and contrac-
 pathway by which aqueous humor
 and optic nerve head.
tion of the pupil independent of stimu-
exits the eye. It is bounded anteriorly
fluorescein dye/stain a vital dye that
lation with light.
by the peripheral cornea, posteriorly
fluoresces when stimulated with blue
 hordeolum localized, purulent infection
by
 the iris and ciliary muscles,
light. Used in many ophthalmic diag-
 of a gland of the eyelid. May be external
internally by the pectinate ligaments,
nostic tests, including the identif-
(infection of the glands of Moll or
and externally by the sclera. The
cation and characterization of corneal
Zeis; also known as stye) or internal
trabecular meshwork and ciliary cleft
ulcers.
(infection of the meibomian [tarsal]
are contained within the iridocorneal
focus point of convergence of light rays.
glands).
angle. In some cases this term is used
fovea retinal region of high visual acuity
 Horner's syndrome set of ocular signs
to refer to the geometric angle between
 in primates and birds.
 due to sympathetic denervation. May
the anterior surface of the iris and
fundus (ocular) the posterior portion of
include miosis, ptosis, enophthalmos,
cornea (synonyms: filtration angle;
the eye visible through an ophthal-
 and protrusion of the third eyelid.
drainage angle).
moscope, composed of the
esclera,
 hyalitis evidence of inflammation (usually
 iridocyclitis inflammation of the iris
choroid, retina, and optic nerve head.
white blood cells, inflammatory proteins/
(iritis) and ciliary body (cyclitis). Also
glands of Moll apocrine glands of the
debris, etc.) within the vitreous body;
called anterior uveitis.
upper and lower eyelid margins.
reflects inflammation of the surround-
iridodialysis separation of the base of
glands of Zeis sebaceous glands of the
ing tissues (ciliary body, retina, and
 the iris from the ciliary body; usually
upper and lower eyelid margins.
choroid) rather than primary inflam-
 posttraumatic.
glaucoma ocular disease that may pro-
mation of the vitreous body itself (cf.
 iridodonesis tremor or
“fluttering" of
duce a syndrome of findings but that in
aqueousflare).
 the iris that occurs after loss of support
domestic animals is uniformly char-
hyalo-/hyaloid pertaining to the vitreous.
due to luxation or removal of the lens.
acterized by increased intraocular
hy peropia (hypermetropia) refractive
 iridoplegia paralysis of the iris sphincter
 pressure with resulting damage to the
state of the eye in which the parallel
muscle (i.e., mydriasis).
 optic nerve. Categorized as primary
rays of light would come to focus
 iris bombe adhesions (synechiae) between
glaucoma (occurring without
pre-
behind the retina if not intercepted by
 the pupillary margin of the iris and the
existing ocular disease in an otherwise
it (*"farsightedness"). (See also myopia.)
 anterior lens capsule due to anterior
apparently healthy eye) or secondary
hypertropia deviation of the eyes in
uveitis. The condition results
in
glaucoma (glaucoma attributable to
which one eye is higher than the other.
 accumulation of aqueous humor in the 
 another ocular abnormality, such as lens 
hyphema blood in the anterior chamber.
 posterior chamber, ballooning forward
luxation, intraocular tumor, anterior
hypopyon white blood cells in the
of the iris, and obstruction of the
uveitis).
 anterior chamber.
iridocorneal angle, which induces
gonioscope specialized instrument for
 hypotony reduced intraocular pressure.
secondary glaucoma.
 studying the iridocorneal angle.
image visual impression of an object
 iris “freckle? lay term for iris nevus; a
gonioscopy examination of the irido-
formed by a lens or mirror. In optics, a
 focal region of increased pigmentation
corneal angle with a goniolens, mag-
 real image is an optical image that can
of the iris.
nifying device, and light source.
be received on a screen. It is formed by
 iris prolapse protrusion of the iris through
 granular iridica irregular cystic dilations
the meeting of convergent rays of
 a perforating corneal or corneoscleral
 on the pupillary margin of the iris in
light, whereas a virtual image is an
wound (cf. staphyloma).
large herbivores. Most notable dorsally
 optical image that cannot be received
 iritis inflammation of the iris.
but typically also present ventrally.
on a screen. It is formed by diverging
keratectomy excision of part of the
Also known as corpora nigra.
rays of light that appear to come from
cornea.
Haab's striae linear gray-blue opacities
the image
 point but do not pass
keratic precipitates (KPs) clumps of
deep within the cornea caused by
through it.
leukocytes and fibrin adhering to the
fractures or stretching of Descemet's
 intraocular lens (IOL) artifcial lens
corneal endothelium as a result of (and
membrane and development of fibrosis
placed within the eye to correct
 pathognomonic for) anterior uveitis.
GLOSSARY 
459
keratitis inflammation of the cornea.
the least dense opacity is termed a
previously none (as in cornea or on
Typically classified as ulcerative or
nebula. Adherent leukoma describes 
face of iris. (See also rubeosis iridis.)
nonulcerative.
a corneal opacity in which the iris
 neurotrophic keratitis keratitis caused
keratitis nigrum see corneal sequestrum.
adheres to the endothelial surface.
by dysfunction of cranial nerve V with
kerato-/keratic pertaining to the cornea.
limbus circular junction of the cornea
 associated anesthesia of the cornea.
keratoconjunctivitis simultaneous
and sclera.
 nevus region of focally increased pig-
inflammation 
of the cornea and
 macropalpebral  fissure horizontally
mentation, usually of the iris (lay term:
conjunctiva.
enlarged palpebral fissure due to
"iris freckle").
keratoconjunctivitis
sicca
(KCS)
excessive eyelid length (also known as
nodular 
 granulomatous 
 episclero-
inflammation of the cornea and con-
euryblepharon).
keratoconjunctivitis (NGE) a disease
junctiva secondary to dryness caused
macula moderate corneal opacity; a less
 seen in many breeds but particularly
 by impaired lacrimal gland function
 marked opacity is called a nebula, and
 rough collies and characterized by a
and decreased tear flow.
the most dense opacity is termed a
tan-pink raised mass arising from the
 keratoconus enlargement of the cornea
leukoma. Altemative definition: a cone-
episclera (subconjunctiva) usually at
 in which the cornea is protruded and
rich area of high visual acuity in the
the dorsolateral comeoscleral limbus,
conical.
 primate retina that is devoid of blood
 with adjacent conjunctival inflammation
keratoglobus enlargement of the cornea
vessels.
 and often with comeal inflammation
in which the cornea is protruded and
meibomian glands altered sebaceous
evident as corneal edema and corneal
globular.
glands located in the eyelids
and
lipid degeneration.
 Suspected to
be
keratomycosis keratitis caused by fungi.
opening onto the eyelid margin, pro-
immune-mediated.
Terminology
is
keratoplasty transplantation of a portion
ducing the outer, oily layer of the tear
 confusing but various synonyms have
of the cormea. May be lamellar (replace-
film. Also known as tarsal glands.
been used: nodular fascitis, proliferative
ment of only the deep or superficial
menace response eyelid
Iclosure
in
keratoconjunctivitis syndrome, fibrous
 layers) or penetrating (replacement of
 response to a visually threatening
histiocytoma, limbal granuloma, collie
the entire depth of a corneal region; a
movement.
granuloma.
corneal graft).
 microphakia abnormally small lens.
 nyctalopia visual impairment/blindness 
lacrimation secretion of the precorneal
 microphthalmos/ia congenitally  small
in reduced
illumination
("night
tear film (tears).
globe.
blindness").
 lagophthalmos incomplete eyelid closure
miosis constriction of the pupil (cf.
 nystagmus oscillatory movement of the
and globe coverage. Often associated
mydriasis).
eye. May be physiologic (optokinetic)
with exposure keratitis.
 miotic pertaining to or characterized by
 or pathologic due to vestibular disease.
lamina cribrosa fenestrated area of sclera
 constriction of the pupil (cf. mydriatic).
 Categorized as jerk nystagmus (having
approximately at the posterior pole of
Mittendorf's dot opacity of the posterior
fast and slow phases), pendulous
 the globe, where optic nerve fbers exit
lens capsule at the posterior pole
nystagmus (oscillations are approxi-
the eye.
 marking the embryologic site of hyaloid
mately equal in deviation and speed;
lens glass
S or other refractive material
artery insertion.
occurring in individuals in whom
used to optically modify the path of 
"moon blindness"*
see equine recurrent
vision in both eyes has been defective
light.
wveitis (ERU)
since birth), and rotary nystagmus
lens dislocation collective term for lens
morgagnian cataract a hypermature
(the eye partially rotates around the
subluxation or luxation.
 cataract in which the cortex is liquefied,
visual axis; seen in central vestibular
lens luxation disinsertion of lens zonules
 permiting the lens nucleus to float or
disease).
from the complete lens equator such
sink within the capsule.
oculocardiac
C reflex vagally mediated
that the lens luxates into the anterior
mydriasis dilation of the pupil (cf.
 decrease of heartbeat caused by pres-
chamber (anterior lens luxation) or
miosis).
sure or traction on the eye; most
into the vitreous cavity (posterior lens 
 mydriatic pertaining to or characterized
 notable with patient under general
luxation).
 by dilation of the pupil (cf. miotic).
 anesthesia and especially in horses and
lens subluxation disinsertion of lens
 myopia refractive state of the eye in which
birds.
 zonules from the less than 100% of the
 parallel rays of light come into focus in
O.D. oculus dexter; the right eye.
lens equator such that the lens sub-
front of the retina (*"nearsightedness").
 open-angle glaucoma glaucoma associ-
luxates away from the region of
(See also hyperopia.)
ated with a gonioscopically normal
disinsertion.
narrow-angle glaucoma glaucoma due
appearing drainage angle (cf. closed-
lenticonus abnormality of the lens char-
to mechanical obstruction of the irido-
angle
glaucoma,
narrow-angle
 acterized by a conical prominence on
corneal angle that limits 
snoanbe
glaucoma).
 the anterior or posterior lens surface.
humor from reaching the trabecular
 ophthalmia neonatorum conjunctivitis
 lentiglobus abnormality
of the lens
meshwork. Also
known as closed-
 in the newbom, especially behind closed
 characterized by a spherical bulging of
angle or angle-closure glaucoma (cf.
lids of neonatal kittens and puppies
 the anterior or posterior lens surface.
open-angle glaucoma).
with physiologic ankyloblepharon.
leukocoria literally, "white pupil" Usually
 nebula minor comeal opacity; a moderate
 ophthalmoplegia paralysis of the ocular
a sign of cataract, nuclear sclerosis, or
opacity is called a macula, and the
muscles.
Further
categorized
as
 retinal detachment.
most dense scar is termed a leukoma.
external (paralysis of the extraocular
leukoma notable corneal opacity; a less
neovascularization formation of new
muscles; with strabismus) or internal
 marked opacity is called a macula, and
blood vessels where there were
(paralysis of the iris and ciliary body
460
|GlOSSARY
muscles; with pupil dilation and loss of
(iris-to-lens PPMs), or to the corneal
the globe equator protrudes beyond the
 accommodation).
 endothelium (iris-to-cornea PPMs).
 eyelid margins as occurs during trauma,
ophthalmoscope an instrument with a
 Peter's anomaly developmental defect 
especially in brachycephalic dogs.
 special ilumination system for view-
in
which
ocular
components
 pseudopterygium region of bulbar con-
ing the inner eye, particularly the retina
surrounding the anterior chamber fail
 junctiva that advances over but does
 and associated structures.
to cleave properly, resulting in anterior
not adhere to the comea (cf. pterygium);
 optic disc ophthalmoscopically visible
segment dysgenesis.
 Severity varies.
seen most commonly in rabbits, in
 portion of the optic nerve in the globe.
May include adherent cormeal leukoma,
which it is also called corneal occlusion
Also called the optic nerve head and
cormeolenticular
stalk,
 persistent
syndrome.
optic papilla.
pupillary membranes,
 cataract, and
 pterygium egion of bulbar conjunctiva
 optic disc cupping abnormal depression
iridocomeal angle malformations with
that advances onto and adheres to the
in the optic disc 
 associated  with
glaucoma.
cornea (cf. pseudopterygium).
glaucoma.
photophobia
 ocular discomfort induced
 ptosis drooping of the upper lid due to
 optic neuritis inflammation of the optic
by bright light.
.(Because this is a
dysfunction of the oculomotor nerve
 disc with decreased vision. Also called
symptom, not a clinical sign, it must be
(cranial nerve IIl), sympathetic dener-
papillitis (cf. papilledema).
inferred in domestic animals.)
vation, or excessive weight of the upper
optic papilla ophthalmoscopically visible
 photopic pertaining to vision in bright
eyelids.
portion of the optic nerve in the globe.
 ambient light; an eye that has become
 pupil hole in the center of the iris that
Also called optic nerve head.
light-adapted.
regulates light entering the posterior
O.S. cculus sinister; the left eye.
photoreceptor specialized outer retinal
eye. Shape varies with species.
O.U. oculi uterque; both eyes.
 cell (rod or a cone) that converts light 
 pupillary block blockage of the passage
palpebral reflex eyelid closure in re-
to an electrical
stimulus through
 of aqueous through the pupil between
 action to stimulation of the periocular
 phototransduction.
the posterior and anterior chambers.
skin.
phthisis bulbi A small, shrunken, and
Associated
with some forms of
 pannus classically, nonspecific 
vascu-
 deranged globe due to scarring second-
glaucoma.
 larization of avascular connective tissue
ary to (usually massive or chronic) intra-
pupillary light reflex (PLR) constriction
(e.g., cartilage, cornea). However, the
 ocular inflammation.
of the pupil when the retina of the same
term is used commonly in ophthal-
 plasmoid (secondary) aqueous protein-
eye is stimulated with light (direct
  s n 
aceous aqueous resulting from leakage
 PLR) or when the retina of the oppo-
immune-mediated disease of the cormea
of plasma proteins into the aqueous
site eye is stimulated (consensual PLR).
 and conjunctiva of dogs. Synonyms
humor across
a disrupted blood-
 reflex involuntary, invariable, adaptive
include Uberreiter's syndrome and
aqueous barrier.
. Pathognomonic for
subcortical reaction to a stimulus. See
chronic  immune-mediated 
kerato-
anterior uveitis.
also descriptions of corneal reflex,
 conjunctivitis syndrome (CIKS).
 polycoria occurrence of more than one
pupillary light reflex,palpebral reflex,
 panophthalmitis inflammation of all
pupil in the iris; classified as true
and dazzle reflex (cf. response).
 ocular and intraocular tissues, including 
rauds Aq paunois j ouoorod
 refraction the bending of rays of light that 
the neural, uveal, and fbrous tunics of
muscle, and as pseudopolycoria if not.
 occurs as they pass from one transparent
the eye, and often the orbital tissue as
 posterior chamber space into which the
 medium into another of different density,
well (cf. endophthatmitis).
aqueous
humor
is
first released
such as passage from air into the cormea,
papilledema edema of the
optic disc
bounded anteriorly by the posterior
 or from the aqueous humor into the lens.
with normal vision (cf. optic neuritis).
surface of the iris and posteriorly by
 response cortically mediated voluntary
 papilitis inflammation of the optic disc
the anterior lens capsule.
reaction to a stimulus that can be
with decreased vision.
Also
 called
 posterior segment collective terrn for
exaggerated or over-ridden and that
optic neuritis (cf. papilledema).
 those parts of the eye posterior to the
 may need to be leamed so is not always
pectinate ligaments thin “fingers"
of
lens, including the vitreous, retina,
 present from birth. An example is the
anterior uveal tissue spanning from the 
choroid, optic nerve, and sclera (cf.
menace response (cf. reflex).
iris root to the inner cornea/sclera
anterior segment).
 retina the innermost tunic of the eyeball,
 across the iridocorneal angle.
 presbyopia refractive condition in which
containing the neural elements for
'periodic
ophthalmia""
see
equine
 there is a diminished power of accommo-
 reception and transmission of visual
recurrent uveitis (ERU).
 dation arising from impaired elasticity of
stimuli.
 peripheral anterior synechiae adhesions
the crystalline lens, as occurs with aging.
 retinal detachment separation of the
 between the iris root and the peripheral
progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)
neurosensory retina from the retinal
cornea. May occur after unrelieved
 collective term for a series of inherited
 pigment epithelium. Because this is an
 attacks of angle-closure glaucoma or
but rarely congenital progressive degen-
intraretinal breach, the term retinal
chronic anterior uveitis (often seen only
 erative conditions affecting the neuro-
separation is more strictly correct.
with gonioscopy).
sensory retina or retinal
pigment
 retinal dialysis tearing of the retina from
 persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs)
epithelium
 and
associated
with
 its attachment at the ora ciliaris retinae
impaired vision and, ultimately, blind-
or, less commonly, from the optic disc
strands of fetal vascular tissue extend
ness. Also known
as_progressive
 in association with retinal separation
from the iris collarette to other regions
retinal degeneration (PRD).
 such that the retina is seen hanging
of the iris collarette
e (iris-to-iris
 proptosis forward displacement of the
from the optic nerve or ora ciliaris
PPMs), to the anterior lens capsule
globe
(exophthalmos)
such that
retinae (also called retinal disinsertion).
GLOSSARY |
461
retinal disinsertion tearing and dis-
folded over the lid margin for 1 minute
directed into the opposite eye. The
 insertion of the retina from the ora
 and the amount of wetting measured.
result is positive when the contralateral
ciliaris retinae in association with
 scleritis inflammation of the sclera.
 pupil dilates as the light is diverted to
 retinal separation such that the retina is
Scotopic pertaining to vision in dim
it and is associated with a severe
seen hanging from the optic nerve or
 ambient light or to an eye that has
prechiasmal (retinal or prechiasmal
ora ciliaris retinae (also called retinal
become dark-adapted.
optic nerve) lesion on that side.
dialysis).
sector iridectomy removal of an entire
symblepharon permanent 
 adhesion
 retinal dysplasia abnormal differentiation 
sector of iris extending from the
 between adjacent conjunctival surfaces 
of retinal layers.
pupillary margin to the root of the iris.
 or between comea and conjunctiva.
retinal  pigment epithelial dystrophy
Usually performed for tumor removal.
synchysis scintillans cholesterol crystals
 collctive term for a group of disorders
sequestrum see corneal sequestrum.
 in a liquefied vitreous body (cf. asteroid
in which  retinal degeneration  is 
 slit-lamp biomicroscope microscope
hyalosis).
accompanied by numerous, small,
for examining the eye, consisting of a
 Syndrome a group of clinical signs that
pigmentlike foci over the tapetal
binocular microscope with a movable
occur together; a disease or definite
fundus. The primary defect is in the
light source that that can be changed in
morbid process having a characteristic
 retinal pigment epithelium, whereas in 
size, color, and focus.
 sequence of signs; may affect the whole
 generalized progressive retinal atrophy
 spherophakia abnormally spherical lens.
body or any of its parts. Syndromes of
(PRA) the defect is in the photo-
 Staphyloma protrusion of uveal tissue
importance in veterinary ophthalmology
receptors. Also known as central
(iris or ciliary body) into a bulging
are listed in alphabetical order within
progressive retinal atrophy.
area of cormea/sclera due to thinning
this glossary.
retinal separation separation of the
 (ectasia) or rupture of the wall of the eye.
 Synechiae adhesions between the iris
neurosensory retina from the retinal
 stars of Winslow multiple dark dots
 and adjacent structures occurring as a
pigment epithelium.
1. Sometimes less
 seen throughout the tapetal area of the
result of anterior uveitis. Anterior
correctly called retinal detachment.
 fundus, which represent an end-on
 synechiae occur between the iris and
 retinitis inflammation
the
retina;
 view of small choroidal vessels pene-
cornea. Posterior synechiae occur
usually caused by or causing associated
 trating the tapetum to reach the outer
between the iris and anterior lens
choroiditis, resulting in the term chorio-
 retina. Most notable in herbivores
capsule (sing. synechia).
retinitis or etinochoroiditis, spectively.
and cats.
syneresis liquefaction of the vitreous
retinochoroiditis inflammation of the
 strabismus condition in which the two
 body. May ocur as a result of pathology
 choroid and retina in which retinitis is
 eyes are not simultaneously directed at
Bubg [euiou 10 
 the dominant and presumed initiating
the same object in
1a coordinated
tapetum approximately
 semicircular,
factor (cf. chorioretinitis).
fashion. Categorized as concomitant
 reflective layer of the choroid occupy-
 retinopathy any disease condition of the 
strabismus,
、in which the angle of
ing up to the dorsal half of the fundus
retina.
deviation
1 remains constant for all
in many domestic species.
retinoschisis a congenital cleft of the
directions of gaze and with either eye 
tarsal glands altered sebaceous glands
retina; a cleavage of retinal layers.
fixating (typically
without muscle
 located in the eyelids and opening onto
 retrobulbar optic neuritis inflammation
paralysis),
and
nonconcomitant
 the eyelid margin that produce the
of the optic nerve occurring without
strabismus,
.in which the angle of
outer, oily layer of the tear film. Also
funduscopically visible involvement of 
deviation varies with the direction of
known as meibomian glands.
the optic disc.
 the gaze or the eye that fxates (typically
tarsorrhaphy operation in which the
retroillumination use of light reflected
caused by paralysis or paresis of one or
lids are sutured together to reduce
from a deeper structure to examine a
more extraocular
r muscles). Further
 corneal exposure. May be temporary
more anterior structure; for example,
 categorized as convergent strabismus,
 or permanent; partial or complete.
light reflected from the
tapetum
in which the
deviating eye turns
tear flm break-up time (TFBUT) an
may be used to examine the clarity
inward ("cross-eyed"), and divergent
assessment of precorneal tear film
and
position
o
the
lens (cf.
 strabismus, in which the deviating eye
stability. In the presence of a normal
transillumination).
turns outward.
lipid layer of the tear film, the TFBUT
rod retinal photoreceptor adapted for
 striate keratopathy linear gray-blue
is a quantitative measure of mucin
vision in dim light and motion detec-
opacities deep
within the cornea
 quantity and quality. Decreased mucin
tion. Most domestic animal retinas are
 caused by fractures or stretching of
quantity or quality causes tear film
relatively rod-rich compared with the
Descemet's membrane and develop-
 instability and a shortening of the
 primate retina. (See also cone.)
 ment of fibrosis and edema within the
TFBUT.
 rubeosis iridis neovascularization of the
crack. Pathognomonic for glaucoma in
Tenon's
capsule connective
tissue
iris.
most species; however, their signifi-
 sheath encircling the globe posterior to
 Sanson-Purkinje images series of images
cance in horses is not understood (also
the limbus (also known as fascia butbi).
reflected from the surface of the cormea
called Haab's striae).
 Tenon's space episcleral space between
and the anterior and posterior lens cap-
stye localized, purulent
 infection of a
 Tenon's capsule and the globe.
 sules. Used to judge depth within the eye.
 gland of Zeis or Moll. Also known as
therapeutic soft contact lens (TSCL)
 Schiotz tonometer indentation tonometer
an internal hordeolum.
(See also
 thin plastic lens that fits directly on the
for assessing intraocular pressure.
hordeolum.)
cornea under the eyelids, thereby
 Schirmer tear test (STT) test for tear
 swinging flashlight test observation of
 providing corneal protection during
formation in which absorbent paper is
contralateral pupil size after light is
healing.
462
| Gl0SSARY
tonography measurement of amount of
Termed anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis
central (retrobulbar) visual pathways
fluid forced from the eye by constant
when the iris and/or ciliary body is
after visual stimulation; used to assess
 pressure during a constant period. Used
involved; posterior uveitis when the
the integrity and function of these
to assess the facility of aqueous outflow.
choroid is involved; and panuveitis
pathways.
 Reduced in patients with glaucoma or a
when all three are involved. Sometimes
visual field extent of space that can be
 predisposition to glaucoma.
 categorized by cause as endogenous
 perceived when the head and eyes are
tonometer instrument for measuring the
(arising from causes within the body,
 kept fixed; the field may be monocular
tone of the eye wall; used to estimate
such as neoplasia and infection) and
or binocular.
intraocular pressure. Categorized as
exogenous
(arising
from
causes
vitreous body transparent, colorless,
applanation tonometer (instrument
outside the body, such as trauma).
 gel-like mass between lens and retina.
that estimates intraocular pressure by
uveodermatologic syndrome autoim-
 vitreous cavity space containing the
 measuring the resistance of a specified
mune destruction 
 of melanocytes
vitreous body and bounded anteriorly
area of cornea to being flattened or
causing marked panuveitis, retinitis,
by the posterior lens capsule and
 applanated; e.g., Tono-Pen), indentation
and dermatitis seen in dogs.
The
 posteriorly by the inner limiting mem-
tonometer (instrument that estimates
human counterpart condition is Vogt-
 brane of the retina.
intraocular pressure by measuring the 
Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome.
vitreous veils/plicae faint curtainlike
 resistance of the cornea and anterior
 versions simultaneous parallel move-
 opacities seen by focal light through a
chamber to being indented; e.g., Schigtz
 ments of both eyes, such as eyes right,
 dilated pupil in the normal eye. The
 tonometer), or induction-impact (or
 eyes left, eyes up, and eyes down.
veils move gently in the vitreous when
rebound) tonometer (instrument that
 viscoelastic material gel-like hyaluronic
the eye moves.
estimates intraocular pressure
by
 acid or methylcellulose derivative used
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syn-
measuring the vibration of a plunger as
to protect the corneal endothelium and
drome autoimmune destruction of
it rebounds from the ocular surface;
inflate the anterior chamber during
melanocytes
causing
marked
e.g., Tono Vet).
intraocular surgery.
 panuveitis, retinitis, and dermatitis
transillumination examination of an 
vision faculty of seeing; sight. Requires
 seen in humans. The term VKH-like or
ocular structure by use of a trans-
functional eye and central nervous
uveodermatologic syndrome is pre-
versely directed beam of focal light;
system, including visual (occipital)
ferred for the similar syndrome in
especially useful when the trans-
cortex. Can be further defined as
'sBop
illuminated structure is semitransparent
binocular vision (image formed using
Wood's light light source equipped with
and permits some light to pass through 
 both eyes synchronously), color vision
a nickel oxide filter that produces
it (e.g., iris cyst) (cf. retroillumination).
(ability to distinguish subjectively a
ultraviolet light, used to stimulate fluo-
trichiasis pathologic condition in which
large variety of wavelengths of light in
rescence of fluorescein dye.
hairs from normal skin reach and
the visible spectrum), photopic vision
 xeromycteria drying of the nasal mucosal
irritate the corneoconjunctival surface
(vision in bright illumination), and
surfaces as seen with neurogenic
(cf. distichiasis, ectopic cilia).
scotopic vision
(vision
dim
keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
tumor a swelling or enlargement of vary-
illumination).
 xerophthalmia drying of the ocular
ing size that may involve any structure;
visual acuity ability to distinguish shape
 surface tissues as seen with tear film
not necessarily neoplastic.
 and detail. This depends on the optical
 abnormalities.
 Uberreiter's syndrome characteristic
system of the eye (cornea, aqueous
 xerosis pathologic dryness of the con-
 immune-mediated disease of the comea
humor, lens, and vitreous), the sensi-
 junctiva, mucus membranes, or skin.
 and conjunctiva of dogs. Also known
tivity of the retina, and the interpretation
 xerostomia drying of the oral mucosal
as chronic immune-mediated kerato-
of the images by the brain. Regions of
surfaces,
as
seen
with
reduced
conjunctivitis syndrome (CIKS), pannus,
higher visual acuity within the retina
 salivation as in Sjogren's syndrome.
or chronic superficial keratitis (CSK).
 are usually associated with a greater
 zonules the numerous fine tissue strands
uvea/uveal tract middle vascular tunic
density of cone photoreceptors and
(ligaments) that stretch from the ciliary
of the globe; consists of the iris and
 Occur in species-dependent regions of
 processes to the lens equator for a full
ciliary body anteriorly, and the choroid
the retina. (See also fovea, macula, and
360 degrees and hold the lens in place.
(including the tapetum) posteriorly.
area centralis.)
zonulysis dissolution of the zonules, as
uveitis inflammation of the iris, ciliary
visual-evoked
potentials
(VEPs)
with chymotrypsin, to facilitate intra-
 body, or choroid in any combination.
 recording of electrical activity in the
 capsular lens extraction.
INDEX
Allergic disorders of eyelid skin, 130t
Anticholinergic drugs, 51-53
Abducent nerve
Allergy, food, eyelid skin disease due to, 130t
Anbifungals, 43-45, 44t 
anatomy and function of, 14, 318
Alopecia areata, 132t
Aniglaucoma drugs, 215-216 
strabismus due to lesions of, 332
Amblyopia, 266
Antihistamines, 50, 141
tesing of,100
Amelanotic leading edge of third eyelid, 152
Antihypertensive drugs, 397, 397t
Abscess
Amikacin, 42, 185b
Antinflammatory drugs. See Also
cerebral, 349
Aminoglycosides, 41-42
Corticosteroids
comeal, 191-192, 192f
Amoxicillin, 40
for comeal ulcers, 186
retrobulbar, 360-361, 361f, 362f, 363f
Amphibians, 439-440,440f 
for emergency treatment of ocular
in rabbits, 428, 428f
Amphotericin B,44t,45, 192t
 subspectaculat in snakes, 439, 439f
Ampicillin,40
monsteroidal (See Nonsteroidal
Absolute glaucoma teahment,253-254, 253b,
Analgesics for corneal ulcers, 186
antinflammatory drugs)
Anaplasia in neoplasm, 78
254f
Antioxidants for cataracts, 269
Absorption maximum,290, 293f
Anemia,396t
Antiparasic agents, 59
Acanasis, 127t, 128t
Anesthetics
Antiseptics, 58
Accommodation, 5,6f, 258, 260f,435
local, 55
Anbivirals, 45, 45t, 145-146
Acetylcholine, 53b
topical
Aphakic crescent, 273, 273f
Acyclovir,45,45t, 146
for injections, 36
Aplasia, 63
Adaptation in ocular injury, 63
for microbiologic samplings, 83-84
Applanation tonometry, 96-97, 96f
Adenocarcinoma
Angiography,fluorescein,104,105f
Aqueous
third eyelid,154,155f
Angiosarcoma, conjunctival, 150
loss of, necrosis and, 66
uveal, 225, 225f
Aninidia, 31, 209
physiology of, 17-19, 18f, 18t
Adenoma
Anophthalmos, 30
production and drainage of, 230-232, 231f,
meibomian, 125, 125f
Anterior chamber
232f
uveal, 225, 225f
anatomy of, 17, 18f
surgical procedures on, for glaucoma,
Adenovirus, canine, 144, 375-376, 377f
embryonic and fetal development of,28, 29f
250-251, 251f
Adhesion molecules
examination of, 88, 88f 
Aqueous compartment, 17, 18f
in inflammatory process, 67
shallow, in glaucoma, 236
Aqueous flare
in keratic precipitates, 79
Anterior segment
comeal inflammation and, 68
Adhesives
dysgenesis of, 210, 210f
detec hion of, 94-95, 94f, 95f
cyanoacrylate,189
examination of, 85-89, 85f, 86f, 87f, 88f
histology, 79
Anterior uveitis, 213t 
surgical, 56
in uveitis, 212
Adnexa
atropine for, S1-52
Aqueous humor misdirection syndrome,282
disease of
classification of, 215t 
Aqueous layer of precomeal tear film, 157
in rabbits, 429, 429f
defned, 69, 208
deficiency of, 166
 systemic causes of in horses and cattle,
emergency treatment of, 425-426
ATrowhead procedure for lateral entropion, 1I18,
405t
systemic causes of, 401t
119f
nerve supply of, 13
Antibiohics, 3743, 37b. See Also specific types 
Artenial blood pressure, nomal, 397t 
Adrenaline, 53-54
aminoglycosides, 41-42
Artenial cicle of inis, 12
Adrenergic agents, 53-54
azithromycin, 42
Arterial supply, 10-12, 12f
Adrenergic antagonists, 54
bacitracin, 42
ArteriogTaphy, orbital, 359, 361f
Advancement conjunctival graft, 187, 187f,
cephalosporins,40
Arteris, equine viral, 400
188f
chloramphenicol, 40
ArthrogTyposis-hydrencephaly,409
Advancement flap for eyelid reconstruction,
for conjunctivitis, 141
Arthropods in skin disease of eyelid,
123, 124f
allergic, 147
128t-129t
Age factors
viral, 146
Artifcial tears, 56, 57t-58t
in cataract formation, 267
for corneal lacerations, 424
A-scan ultrasound, 103, 104f 
in inherited retinopathies, 305-306
for corneal ulcers, 184-186, 185b, 186
Aspergillosis, 389t
in intraoc ular pressure, 232
for equine ecurent uveitis, 221
Aspinin, 48, 49t, 219
Agenesis, 63
fluoroquinolones, 4243, 43t 
Asteroid hyalosis, 281-282, 281f
for hordeolum and meibomian adenitis, 122,
Astigmabism,5, 6f
Akabane virus, 409
Albendazole, 432
122t
Astringents, 59
Albinism, ocular, 210, 211t
for ocular contusions and concussions, 423
Atopic dermatitis, 130t
Algae in uveitis, 214t
penicillins, 38-40
Altesia, congenital lacnimal, 162-163
Allrgic conjunciviis, 137t,147, 147f
polymyxin B,42
Atrophy, 63, 64f
selechion and administrabion of, 37-38, 38t,
ofinis, 63, 227-228, 228f
39t, 40t, 41t
opic,298
 Page numbers followed by findicate figures;
sulfonamides, 42
retinal,304, 381t, 402t
tetracyc lines, 42
in uveitis, 213
t, tables; b, boxes.
463
464
|INDEX
Atropine, 51-53, 53b
Blepharospasm
Calves
for emergency trealment of oculat
in cilia disorders, 113
athrogryposis-hydrencephaly in, 409
contusions and concussions,
in entropion, 116
Mannheimia pneumonia in, 409
423
jn glaucoma, 235
prosencephalon hypoplasia in, 349
for equine tecurrent uveiis, 219
in keratoconjunchivitis sicca, 168
septicemia in, 409, 409f
for hyphema, 224
Blindgrass toxicity, 313
Canaliculi, lacnimal, 159-160, 159f, 160f 
Auriculopalpebral nerve block, 85, 85f
Blindness
Canine adenovirus, 144, 375-376, 377f
Autoimmune disease
bight, in sheep, 313, 313f
Canine distemper virus, 374-376, 375f, 377f
ofeyelid skin, 131t-132t
color, 7
in conjunchivitis, 137t, 144
uveitis, 209
congenital stationary night, 309
in ferrets, 432-433
Autonomic drugs, 51-54, 51f,52f, 53b
due to cerebral lesion
in keratoconjunchiviis sicca, 167
Autonomic nervous system
with abnormal pupillary light reflexes,
in optic adiation and visual cortex
innervabion of, 15-16, 15t, 17f, 335-336,
323-328, 329f, 329t
disorders, 349
336f, 337f
with nomal pupillay light reflexes,
Canine familial dermatomyositis, 132t
sympathebic system diseases of, 336-339,
323
Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis, 384-385, 384f
337t, 338f, 339t
electroretinogram in, 296t
Canine multifocal retinopathy, 309
Avulsion of extraocular muscles, 420, 420f,
epidemic,227
Canthoplasty, medial, 118-119, 119f
421f
in retinopathies, 306-307
Carbachol, 53b, 54
Axonal degeneration, 343
sudden,mgeny eament of 46
Carbonic anhydrase
Azalides, 42
systemic disorders causing,386t,403t
in aqueous humor production, 230
Azathioprine, 48, 215
Blinking, 107, 109f
inhibitors of, 54-55, 250b
Azithromycin, 42
Blood-aqueous banier, 18, 207
Carboxymethylcellulose, 57t
Azoles, 43, 44t
Blood disorders, 396t
Cardiovascular disease, 309, 310f, 396-398,
Blood flow, intraoculat pressure and, 232
397f, 397t
B
 Blood-ocular barriers
"ae p
Babesiosis, 402, 411
inflammation in alterabions of, immune-
Carprofen,48,49t
Baciltracin, 42
 mediated disease and, 71
Caspofungin, 44t
Bacterial culturing in conjunctivitis, 138-139
structure and function of, 18
Bac terial infection
uvea and, 207-208, 208f
bacterial disease in, 385-387, 386f
canine,382-386,382f,33f, 384f
 Blood pressure, nomal, 397t
cardiovascular disease in, 396-398, 397f,
conjunchival, 137t,141-142
Blood-retinal barrier, 18, 207
397t
in birds, 436
Blood vessels, tetinal, 298 
cataracts in, 265t
in rabbits, 429
“Blue eye,” 199
chlamydial conjunchiviis in, 142, 143t
equine,400-402, 402f
01-60t
color vision in, 8
of eyelid skin, 129t
Borreliosis, 383, 383f
diabetes mellitus in, 393-394, 394f
feline, 385-387, 386f
Botulism, 406
diffuse inis melanoma in, 226-227, 227f
meningitis, 350t
Bovine keratoconjunchiviis, infechious, 145,
eosinophilic keratitis in, 196, 196f
ruminant, 408-409, 408f, 409f
145t
facial paralysis in, 334t
uveal, 214t
Bovine thinotracheitis, in fectious. See
fundus of, examination of, 92, 92f
Barkers, 407
Infectious bovine thinotrac heitis
fungal infection in, 387-392, 388t-389t,
Barrier function, loss of, necrosis and, 65-66,
"Boxer" ulcer, 189-190, 189f, 190f
391f
66f
Brachycephalic ocular syndrome,medial
glaucoma in, reatment of,254-255
Bartonellosis, 385-386
canthoplasty for, 118-119, 119f
heterochromia inidis in, 210t
Basal cells in comeal epithelium, 175, 176f
Bracken fem, bright blindness due to, 313
Homer's syndrome, 337t
Behavioral testing of vision, 101-102
Brain injury, 326-328, 329f, 329t
ischemic encephalopathy in, 349
Benign neoplasm, 78
Brain lesions
leprosy in, 129t
Benzalkonium chloride, 58
in blind patients
metabolic disease in, 395-396, 395f
Bergmeister's papilla 24, 25f, 279
with abnormal pupillary light reflexes,
nocturnal vision of, 1, 2f
Beta blockers, S3b, 54
323-328, 329f, 329t
momal flora of, 39t
Betamethasone, 47
with nomal pupilary light reflexes, 323
mommal intraocular pressure in, 97
Betaxolol, 249b
clinical signs in, 344, 344t
parasiic infection in, 390t, 392
Binocular feld, 352, 355f
in visual patients with normal pupillary light
rebinal degeneration in, 309, 311-312, 312f
Binocular indirect ophthalmoscope, 90, 90f 
teflexes,328-330
sarcomas in,77,77f,226
Biomicroscope, sli-lamp, 86,86f 94, 95f
Brainstem contusion, 326
uveitis in, 217
Biopsy, conjunchival, 139, 141f
Bndge conjunchival grafs, 187, 187f
veshibular disease in, 341
Birds, 434-436, 435f
Bnight blindness in sheep, 313, 313f
viral conjuncbiviis in, 143-144, 144b, 144f,
normal intraoculat pressure values for, 428t 
Brucellosis, 382-383, 382f
145t
orbital enucleabion in, 369, 370f, 371f
B-scan ultrasound, 103, 103f
viral disease in, 376-382, 377f, 379f, 381f,
third eyelid of, 151, 152f
orbital, 358
382f
β-Iradiation, 59, 59f
Bullous dematosis, 131t 
visual acuity in, 7
Blastomycosis, 129t, 387,387f, 388t
Bullous keratopathy, 197, 197f
visual feld of, 3, 4f 
 Blepharitis
Buphthalmos, 235-236, 236f
Cataract,261-272
marginal, 122-123, 122f,122t
Bystander injury, inflammatory, 68
acquired, 266-267, 266f, 267f
in rabbit, 429, 429f
comeal, 68, 69f
after uveitis, 212
staphylococcal, in keratoconjunchivitis sicca,
uveal, 209
as anomaly associated with
168
microphthalmos, 31, 31t
systemic causes of, 375t
C
classifcation of, 261-263, 261t, 263, 263f
Blepharoplasty, V-to-Y, 120, 120f
Calicivirus infec bion, 378
congenital, 264-266, 266f
INDex ∣
465
Cataract—cont'd
"Chenry eye," 153-154, 153f, 154f
Conformahional ectropion, 116
diabetic,267-268
China eye, 211
Congenital abnormalities, 30-32
diagnosis of, 268-269, 268f, 269t
Chlamydial infechons, 137t, 142, 142t, 143t,
anophthalmos and microphthalmos, 30-31,
disease of in mice and rats, 434
386, 386f, 408
30f, 31t 
elecroretinogram in, 296t
Chloramphenicol, 40
cataracts, 264-266, 266f
in ferrets, 433
 Cholinergic agents, 54
coloboma, 31-32, 31f, 32f
hereditary, 264, 265t
Choriocapillaris, 26
cyclopia and synophthalmus, 31, 31f 
in horses, 272
Choriorebinitis, 209, 298
lacrimal atresia, 162-163
 inflammation as cause of, 69-70
Choroid
of lens, 260
intumescent, 268
anatomy and physiology of, 206-207, 207f,
myotonia, 333
lens-induced uveitis and, 263-264
208f
nystagmus, 342
molecular and cellular pathogenesis of, 261
examination of, 92
optic nerve, 344-345, 345f
nutritional, 267
Tetinal interaction of, 298-299
tetinal, 301-304
persistent hyaloid artery versus, 279
Choroiditis, 208
collie eye anomaly, 303-304, 303f, 304f
in rabbits, 431-432, 431f, 432f
Chromodacryorrhea, 433, 433f
coloboma, 304, 304f
retinopathies and, 307
Chromophore, 290, 291
dysplasia, 301, 303f
stages of development of, 262-263, 263f
Cicatricial ectropion, 119
stationary night blindness, 309
systemic causes of,380t
Cicatricial nasolacrimal obstruchion, 163-164,
subepithelial geographic comeal dystrophy,
eabment of, 269-272, 270f, 271f, 272f
164f
182
Cathetenization, nasolacrimal, 161-162, 162f
Cicalrizabion, vireous, 278
uveal, 209-211,209f, 210t, 211f 211t
Cattle
Cidofovir, 45t
of vilreous, 279-280, 280f
cataracts in, 265t
Cilia
Conjunctiva, 135-150
conjuncival squamous cell carcinoma in,
anatomy of, 107, 108f
anatomy and physiology of, 135,136f
150
disorders of, 111-115, 114f, 115f
cell types found in, 140f-141f
fundus of, examinabion of, 92, 93f
Ciliary arteries, 11-12, 12f,27,207
disorders of
heterochromia inidis in, 210t
Ciliary body
cellular response in, 135, 137f, 137t
hypovitaminosis A in, 312b
anatomy and physiology of, 203-206, 205f,
clinical signs of,135-138, 137b, 137t
infectious keratoconjunctivitis, 197-198,
206f, 207f
conjunchivitis (See Conjunchivitis)
198b, 198f
embryonic and fetal development of, 22, 27,
drug plaques, 147,148f
infectious thinotracheitis in, 198-199
29f
in ferrets, 432-433
lymphosarcoma in, 411,411f 
Ciliary body-vitreous-lens block glaucoma,
lacerations, 147, 148f
mommal flora of, 39t
247-248, 247f, 248f
neoplastic, 148-150, 149f
 ocular albimism in, 211t 
Ciliary muscle
in rabbits, 429-430, 430f
ocular manifestations of systemic disease in,
anatomy of, 13, 15, 203-206, 207f
in raptors and pet birds, 436
408-412
fetal development of, 27
 systemic causes of, 377t, 400t
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis in,
Ciliary processes, 203, 205f, 206f
edema of, 137
409, 409f
Ciliary veins, 12f, 13
emphysema of, 138
toxic disease in, 412
Ciprofloxacin, 43, 43t
examinabion of, 87
viral conjunchivitis in, 145, 145t
Circle of Willis, I1
hemorrhage from, 137
Cauterants, 59
hyperemia of, 136-137, 137t
Cavernous sinus syndrome, 329
Closed-angle glaucoma, 238b, 244f
in cilia disorders, 113
CEA. See Collie eye anomaly
Clotimazole, 43
palpebral, 29
Cefazolin, 185b
CME. See Canine monocylic ehrlichiosis
wound healing in, 74
Cellulitis
CMR. See Canine multifoc al retinopathy
Conjuncival grafts, 187-188, 187f, 188f
juvenile, 133t
Cocaine, 53b
Conjunchivitis,138-147,213t
orbital, 360-361, 361f, 362f, 363f
Coccidioidomycosis, 387-391, 387f, 388t
bactenial, 141-142
Central visual pathways
Coenutosis, 411
in birds, 436
disease of, 342-350, 342f, 343f, 344t, 345f,
Colliculus, superior, 9
cellulat responses in, 137t
346f, 347f
Collie eye anomaly, 31, 32f, 303-304, 303f, 304f
chlamydial, 142, 142t, 143t
structure and function of 8-10,10f, 1f
Collyria, 56
ovine, 408
Cephalosporins, 40
Coloboma, 31-32, 31f, 32f
classification of, 138b
Cephalothin,185b
eyelid, 109, 112f
diagnosis of, 138-139, 140f, 141f
Cerebellar disease, 350
jn iris, 210, 210f
differential diagnosis of, 138, 139f
Cerebral abscess, 349
lens, 260
in ferrets, 432-433
Cerebral cortex, 10, I1f
optic nerve, 344-345,345f
fichonal imitants causing, 138t
Cerebral lesions
retinal, 304, 304f
immune-mediated, 147, 147f 
in blind pabients
in collie eye anomaly, 303, 304f
Jigneous, 147-148, 148f
with abnormal pupillary light reflexes,
scleral, 199, 199f
lipogTanulomatous, 148,148f
323-328, 329f, 329t
Color of inis, changes in, 79
mycoplasmal, 142-143
with normal pupillary light reflexes, 323
Color vision, 7-8, 8f, 9f
mycotic,146
clinical signs of, 344, 344t
Computed tomogTaphy, 104, 104f,358, 359f
parasitic,146-147, 146t
yay Aiednd eou qm suaed [ensa u
Concussi,mgeny eaet of 424
pruritus associated with, 138
Teflexes,328-330
Cone-rod degeneration, 306
in rabbits, 429-430, 430f
Cerebral peduncle, 9
Cones
systemic causes of, 376t, 399t
Cerebrum, ischemic necrosis of, 349
anatomy of, 286f, 288f, 289, 289t, 292f
treatment of, 139-141
Chalazion, 72, 121-122, 121f, 122f
 in central visual pathway, 8
viral, 143-146, 144b, 144f, 145t
Chemical mediators in inflammation, 67
in color vision, 7-8
Conjunchivobuccostomy, 164, 164f
Chemosis, 137
fetal development of, 23
Conjunchivorhinostomy, 164, 164f
466
|INDEX
Contact dermatitis, 130t
Comeal ulceration—cont'd
Cyst—cont'd
Contact lenses, 59 
fluorescein staining of, 98-99, 99f
periocular, 361-363
Contrast radiography, 102-103, 358-359, 359f
jn keratoconjunctivitis sicca,168
uveal, 224-225, 224f
Contusion
in rabbits, 430-431
brainstem, 326
simple versus complicated, 184
Cystic lacrimal disorders, 163
emergency treatment of, 423,424f
systemic causes of,378t
Cytokines
Conus papillaris, 287, 292f
treahment of, 184-190, 185b,186f, 187f,
 in inflammatory process, 67
Corectopia,209
188f, 190f
in wound healing, 74
emergency, 424
anatomy and physiology of, 175-176, 176f,
wound healing of, 76
D
177f
Corpora nigra, cystic, in horses, 225
Dacryoadeniis in rats, 433-434
astigmaism of,5, 6f
Corticosteroids, 45-48
Dacryocystiis, 161-162,161f,162f,163f
cutaneous metaplasia of, 64, 65f, 74, 75f
for conjunchivitis, 141
Dacryocystorhinogtaphy,103,103f
disease of in mice and rats, 434
allergic, 147
Dacryocystotomy,162,163f
disease of in rabbits, 430-431
effects of on corneal healing, 177-178
Dark adaptation, 292-293, 293f
drug administration and, 33
feline herpesvirus I and, 195
Dazzle reflex, 17t, 101,322, 322f
edema of (See Corneal edema)
for hyphema, 224, 425
Degeneration
embryonic and fetal development of, 28, 29f
Jong-term therapy with, 4748
ax omal, 343
epithelial inclusion cyst of, 190-191, 190f 
ocular penetration of,47
cone-rod, 306
examination of,87
properties of, 4547,46f, 47f
myelin, 343,343f
fbrosis in, 179-180, 180f
for uveitis, 215
neuronal, 342-343, 343f
foreign bodies in, removal of, 193-194, 193f
equine Tecurrent, 219, 221
infecious bovine keratoconjunctivitis and,
vitreous, 280
197-198, 198b, 198f
34t
Tetinal detachment and, 315
infecious bovine thinottacheitis and,
Corynebacterium spp., 41t
Degenerative retinopathy, 306, 306t
661-861
Cranial nerves. See Also specific nerves
Demecarium, 53b, 54, 249b
 infechious canine hepabbis and, 199, 199f 
anatomy and function of, 13-14, 14f, 15f,
Demodicosis, 127t
infammation of, 68-69, 69f
16f, 318
Denervation hypersensitivity, 51, 53, 338, 339
inherited disease of, 181-183, 182f, 183f
disorders of, 335
Dental disease
keratitis of (See Keratitis)
shrabismus due to lesions in, 331-332, 332f
 orbital manifestabions of, 365
Jacerations of, 192-193, 193f
testing of, 100-102
uveibis associated with, 217
emergency treatment of, 422
ventral view of, 10f
Deoxyribonucleic acid testing, 307
lipid and/or mineral accumulation in, 181,
Crocodilians, 436-438
Depth perception, 4, 5f
181f
Cryoepilation, I14-115, 114f,115f
Deracoxib, 48, 49t
malignant catarhal fever and, 199
Cryotherapy
Dermatitis
pannus of, 194-195, 194f
for eyelid tumors, 123
atopic, 130t
pathologic responses in, 178
for glaucoma,251-252,251f
contact, 130t
pigmentation in, 180,180f
Cryptococcosis, 129t, 388t, 391, 391f
inritant, 130t
histology of,79
CT. See Computed tomography
superfcial necrolytic, 132t
in keratoconjunctivitis sicca,168
Cuffng nvasular, real00
zinc-responsiveness, 132t
Teactions of to disease, 178-181
Culturing, bactenal, in conjunctivitis, 138-139
Dermatomyositis, canine familial, 132t
sequestrabion of, 196-197, 197f
Cupping, optic disc, in glaucoma, 238-239,
Dematopathy, vaccine-induced, 132t
shtroma of (See Comeal stroma)
239f, 240f
Dermatophilosis, 129t
ulceration of (See Comeal ulceration)
Cutaneous habronemiasis, 128t
Dermatophytosis, 129t
vascularizabion in, 179, 179f
Cutaneous metaplasia of comea, 64, 65f, 74,
Dermoid
in keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 168
75f
conjunctival, 148-149, 149f
in visual acuity, 4-5 
Cutaneous onchocerciasis, 128t, 404
comeal, 181-182, 182f
wound healing in,74, 176-178, 177f
Cyanoactylate, 56, 189
Descemetoceles
Corneal edema, 178-179, 179f
Cyclitic membranes in uveitis,213
fluorescein staining of, 98-99, 99f
in comeal inflammaion, 68
Cyclitis,208
teatment of, 186-189,186f, 187f,188f
in glaucoma, 235, 235f
Cyclocryotherapy for glaucoma, 251-252, 251f,
emergency, 424,425f
histology of, 79
254-255
Descemet's membrane, 175, 176f, 177
lens luxabion and, 274
Cyclooxygenase pathway
Descemet's streaks in glaucoma, 235-236, 236f
systemic causes of, 378t
corticosteroids and,46,46f
Deuteranopia, 7
Corneal reflex, 16-17, 17t
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs and, 48
Developmental orbital abnomaliies, 362t
Corneal stroma
Cyclopentolate, 53
Dexamethasone, 34t, 47
abscess in, 191-192, 192f
Cyclophotocoagulation, laser, for glaucoma,
for glaucoma, 249b, 250b, 422
anatomy of, 175, 176f
252
for hyphema, 224
healing im, 177, 177f
Cyclopia, 31, 31f
for uveitis, 215
inflammatory cell infltraion of, with white
Cycloplegics for uveitis, 215
equine recurrent, 219, 221
blood cells, 180, 181f 
Cyclosporine, 48-49
Diabetes mellitus, 267-268, 393-394, 394f
malacia of, 181, 182f 
for allergic conjunctivitis, 147
Diagmosis, 81-106
ulcers in, 186-189, 186f, 187f, 188f
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 169, 170
anterior segment examinaion in, 85-89, 85f,
fluorescein staining of, 98, 99f
for uveitis, 215
86f,87f, 88f
wound healing and, 76
equine recurrent, 221
aqueous flare detection in, 94-95, 94f, 95f
Corneal ulceration
Cyst
electrorelinography and visual evoked
in cilia disorders, 113-114
comeal, 190-191, 190f
potenbials in, 102, 102f
common causes of, 183-184, 184f
orbital, 361-363
examinaion in, 81, 82b, 82f, 83f
INDex ∣
467
Diagnosis—cont'd
Dog—cont'd
Dystrophy—cont'd
in exoic pets, 427-428, 428t
metabolic disease in, 395-396, 395f
Tebinal pigment epithelium, 308-309,308t,
fuorescen angigaphyin,104,f
microphthalmos in, 30f, 31, 31t
309f
fundus examinabion in, 90-93, 91f, 92f, 93f
motion detecion in, 2
gonioscopy in, 97-98, 98f
myopia in, 5
imaging techniques for,102-104,103f,
nomal flora of, 38t
Ecdysis, 438
104f, 105f
normal intraoculat pressure in, 97
Echothiophate, 53b
Jacrimal patency teshing in, 100
parasitic infection in, 390t, 392-393
Ectopia lentis, 31
 medical history in, 81
pigmentary uveitis in, 217
Ectopic cilia,I11-112, 114f, 115, 11f
microbiologic sampling in, 83-84, 84f
Tetinopathies in
Ectropion, 79, 119-120, 119f, 120f
neuroophthalmic teshing in, 100-102
degenerative, 306t
Edema
ophthamoscopyn89909f90f9f
inherited, 305t
conjunchival,137
posterior segment examination in, 93-94
mulifocal, 309
comeal (See Comeal edema)
pupil assessment in, 84-85, 84f, 85f
tear-staining syndrome in, 164-165, 164f,
Edinger-Westphal nucleus lesion, 328f
retinoscopy in, 102
165f, 166f
Effusion, serous, in inflammatory process, 7
Schirmer tear test, 81-82, 84f
vestibular disease in, 341
Ehrlichiosis, canine monocytic, 384-385,384f
tonography in, 97
viral conjunchivitis in, 144
EHV-1. See Equine herpesvirus I
tonometry in, 95-97, 95f, 96f, 97f
viral disease in, 374-376,375f, 377f
Electrical activity, loss of, necrosis and, 66
vital dyes in, 98-100, 99f, 100f
visual acuity in, 7
Elecroepilation, I15
 Diarthea, bovine viral, 410411
visual feld of, 3-4, 3f 
Electrophysiology, 322
 Diastolic blood pressure, nommal, 397t 
Doll's eye teflex, 17t
ElechroretinogTaphy, 102, 102f, 293-295, 293f,
Dichlorphenamide, 249b, 250b, 422
Doxycycline,221
294f, 295f, 296t, 307
Dichromatic vision, 291
Drainage angle
Embryogenesis, 20
 Differenbation in embryonic and fetal
examination of, 97-98, 98f
congenital malfomation development
development, 20, 21
obstruction of, glaucoma due to, 246-247,
during, 30
Diffusion, aqueous, 230
247f
Embryonic and fetal development, 20-30
Diopters, 5
Draschia megastoma, 146t
abnormalies of 30-32, 30f, 31f, 31t, 32f
Dipivefin, 53-54, 53b
Drooling of saliva due to facial paralysis, 334
of ciliary body and iris, 27, 29f
Direct ophthalmoscopy, 89-90, 89f, 94, 95f
Drops, 34, 34f
of comea and anterior chamber, 28, 29f
Dirofilaria immitis, 222
Drugs, 33-61
 of eyelids and third eyelid, 28-29, 30f 
disaccommodation, 258, 260f
anbbiobcs, 3743, 37b, 38t, 39t, 40t, 41t
of lens, 24-26, 26f, 27f, 28f
Discharge
anti fungals, 43-45, 44t
of nasolacrimal system, 29-30
jn conjunctival disease, 137
antivirals, 45, 45t
of opic nerve, 23-24,24f, 25f
in differential diagmosis of oculat
autonomic, 51-54, 51f, 52f, 53b 
of opic primordia, 20-21, 21f, 22f, 23f
inflammation, 213t
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 54-55
of rebina, 21-23, 24f
in keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 167-168, 167f,
corticosteroids, 45-48, 46f, 47f
 of sclera and extraoc ular muscles, 28
168f, 170
effects of on intaocular pressure, 231, 232
 of vascular system, 26-27, 28f
Discission and aspiraion of cataracts, 270, 270f
 enzymes and enzyme inhibitors, S5-56
of vitreous, 24, 26f
Distemper. See Canine distemper virus
 eyelid skin disease due to hypersensiivity
Emergencies, 419-426
Dishichiasis, 111, 114-115, 114f
to,130t
acute anterior uveitis, 425-426
Z nssnd nensou ut uoeea (emna
hyperosmotic, 50
comeallacerations, 422
DM. See Diabetes mellitus
mmunomodulabing, 48-50
comeal ulceration, 424
DNA testing, 307
keratoconjuncthivitis sicca due to, 166
descemetocele or inis prolapse, 424, 425f 
Dog
local anesthetics, 55
 diagnosic instruments and supplies needed
bacterial disease in, 382-386, 382f, 383f,
 mast cell stabilizers and antihistamines, 50
for, 419
384f
nonsteroidal antinflammatory, 48, 49t 
glaucoma, 248-250, 249b, 250b, 422
canine familial denmatomyositis in, 132t
 oculat emergencies, 419
hyphema, 425
cardiovascular disease in, 396-398, 397f,
plaques dueto,conjunctival, 147,148f
lid Jaceralions, 422-423
397t
prostaglandin analogues, 55
medications for, 419
cataracts in, 264, 265t
retinopathy due to toxic levels of, 313-314,
 ocular adnexal contusions and concussion,
color vision in, 7-8
313f
423,424f
 conjunctival papillomatosis in, 150
Toutes of administrabion for, 33-37, 34f, 35f,
penetrating injuries of globe, 423-424
deep muscles of head of, 110f
36f, 37f
proptosis of globe, 419-421, 420f, 421f
endocrine disorders in, 393-395394f, 395f
tear replacement preparations, 56, 57t-58t
sudden blindness,426
eye anatomy in, 1, 2f
therapeutic formations for, 33
surgical instruments needed fo, 419
eyelid tumors in, 123,123t
Dryopteris filix mas, 313
Emmetropia, 5, 5f
facial paralysis in, 334t
Dysautonomia, 332-333, 338-339
Emphysema
fundus of, examinabion of, 92, 92f
Dyscoria, 209
orbital, 365
fungal infechion in, 387-392, 388t-389t,
Dysecdysis, 438
subconjunctival, 138
391f
Dysgenesis, anterior segment, 210, 210f
Encephalitis, viral, 404-405
glaucoma in, 237-238,238b, 245t
Dysplasia, 65, 65f
Encephalopathy, feline ischemic, 349
heterochromia inidis in, 210t, 211
pectinate ligament, glaucoma and, 245-246,
Endocrine disease, 393-395, 394f
Horner's syndrome, 337t
245t
Endophthalmibis, 69, 70f,385t
immune-mediated disease in, 398-399, 399f
retinal, 301, 303f
Endothelial dystrophy, corneal, 183
indolent corneal ulcer in, 189-190, 189f,
jn wound healing, 74
Endothelium, corneal
J061
rod-cone,305, 308t
anatomy of, 175
infectious hepatitis in, 199, 199f 
Dystrophy, 65
embryonic and fetal development of, 28
lens luxation in, 237, 237b
comeal, 182, 183
healing in, 74-75, 177
468
|INDEX
Enrofloxacin, 42-43
Examinabion—cont'd
Eyelid—cont'd
Enterobacter spp., anibiotics of choice for, 41t
fundus, 90-93, 91f, 92f, 93f
disorders of
Entropion, 79, 116-119, 116f, 117f, 118f, 119f
in lacrimal disorders, 160-161
chalazion, 121-122,121f, 122f
neonatal equine, 406, 407f
neuroophthalmic, 100-102, 319t
cilial, 111-115, 114f, 115f
in rabbits, 429, 429f
ophthalmoscopic, 89-90, 89f, 90f, 91f
coloboma, 109, 112f
Enuc leation, orbital, 365-369
posteriot segment, 93-94
ectropion, 119-120, 119f, 120f
in birds, 369, 370f, 371f
of third eyelid, 151-152
enropion, 116-119, 116f, 117f,118f,
for equine tecurrent uveitis, 222
 Examinaion sheet, 83f
119f
lateral subconjuncival approach, 366, 367f,
Excision, neoplasic, eyelid, 123, 124f
hordeolum and meibomian adenitis,
368f
third, 155, 155f, 156f
122-123, 122f, 122t
[osthesis insertion following, 367-368, 368f
Exenteration, orbital, 368-369, 368f, 369,369f
lesions causing, 332-334, 332f, 333f,
transpalpebral enucleation-ex tenteration
Exophthalmos, 355, 357f,428, 428f
334t
technique, 368-369, 368f, 369f
Exotic pets, 427-441
prominent nasal folds, 109-111, 113f
Enzymes, 55-56
amphibians, 439-440, 440f
systemic causes of, 375t
Enzyme inhibitors, S5-56
ferrets, 432-433
embryonic and fetal development of,28-29,
Eosinophilic exudate, 72
lizards, turtles, tortoises, and crocodilians,
30f
Eosinophilic foliculis, 128t 
436-438, 437f, 438f
examination of, 87
Eosinophilic furunculosis, 128t
mice and rats, 433-434, 433f
injunes of, 120-121, 121f
Eosinophilic keratitis, 196, 196f
ophthalmic examination and diagnoshic
innervation of upper,33
Eosinophilic orbital myosiis, 364-365
testing of, 427-428, 428t
 jo suuado anewaind 1o peke[ap [ejeuoau 
Eosinophils in conjunctival disease, 135
rabbits, 428-432, 428f, 429f, 431f, 432f
108-109
Epibulbar melanocytoma, 201, 201f
raptors and pet bids, 434436, 435f
meoplasia of, 123-126, 123t, 124f, 125f,
Epidemic blindness, 227
snakes, 438-439, 438f, 439f
126f, 429
Epinephrine, 53-54,53b
Exotropia, 331-332
801 'yo sesuodsai ao[ouied
Epiphora
Extemal limiting membrane of retina, 286,
skin diseases of, 126,127t-133t
in cilia disorders, 113
286f,286t
third (See Third eyelid)
 in lacrimal system disorders, 161-65, 161f,
Extemal ophthalmoplegia, 329
Eye washes, 56
162f, 163f, 164f, 166f
Extracapsular cataract extracion, 270, 271f,
Episcleris, 199-200, 200f, 379t 
272
F
Episclerokeratoconjunchiviis, nodular
Extraoc ular muscles
Facial asymmetry due to facial paralysis, 333-
gTanulomatous, 200, 200f
anatomy of, 353, 354t, 357f
334
Epithelial cells in conjunchivitis, 140f-141f
avulsion of, with proptosis of globe, 420,
Facial nerve
Epithelial inclusion comeal cyst, 190-191, 190f
420f, 421f
anatomy and funchion of, 15, 107, 110f, 318
Epithelium
embryonic and fetal development of, 28, 29f
testing of, 100
comeal
function of, 330-331, 330f
Facial paralysis, 405t
anatomy of, 175, 176f
in globe movement, 353, 354t, 357f
papebralfsure abmalie,3,
embryonic and fetal development of, 28
myositis of, 365, 365f
333f, 334t
healing in, 74, 177
nerve supply to, 13-16, 330t
third eyelid protrusion in, 332
lens, 258, 259f
stabismus due to lesions in, 331-332,
Facility of outflow, 18-19, 18t
fetal fommalion of, 25
332f
Failure of passive transfer, 406-407, 407f
retinal pigment (See Retinal pigment
Exttascleral prosthesis, 369-370, 371f
Familial demmatomyosiis, canine, 132t
Exudate, inflammatory, 67, 71-73,72f,73f
Farsightedness, 5, 5f, 6
Epitome spreading, 209
Eye
FCRD. See Feline cental relinal degeneralion
EPM. See Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
FCV. See Feline calicivirus infection
Equine eosinophilic kerabiis, 196, 196f
in amphibians, 439-440
FEK. See Feline eosinophilic keratitis
Equine herpesvirus I, 399-400
aqueous physiology in, 17-19, 18f, 18t
 Feline calicivirus infec bion, 378
Equine influenza, 400
artenal supply in, 10-12, 12f 
Feline cental reinal degeneration, 3ll-312,
Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis 404
in dogs, 2f
312f
Equine recurrent uveitis, 217-222,218f,219f,
in ferrets, 432
Feline eosinophilic keratitis, 196, 196f
220f, 221f
in lizards, turtles, tortoises, and
Feline herpesvirus 1, 376-378, 377f
vitreous and, 281
cTocodilians, 436-437, 437f
anbiviral drugs used for, 45, 45t
ERG. See Electroretinography
in mice and rats,433
in conjunchiviis, 137t, 143-146, 143t, 144b,
ERU. See Equine recurent uveitis
nerve supply in, 13-16, 13f, 14f, 15f, 16f
144f, 145t
Escherichia coli
ocular reflexes in, 16-17, 17f,17t
jn eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis,196
antibiobics of choice for, 41t
in rabbits, 428
in eyelid skin disease, 130t
fluoroquinolones for, 43t
in raptors and pet birds, 434-435
in keratitis, 195, 195f
Esolropia, 332
in snakes, 438
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection,
Etodolac, 48, 49t
venous drainage in, 12-13, 13f
380-381, 381f
keratoconjunctivitis sicca due to, 166
vision and, 1-8
Feline infectious ritomtis,7238-382
Eversion of third eyelid, 153, 153f
embryonic and fetal development of, 20-30
Feline ischemic encephalopathy, 349
Evisceration
(See Also Embryonic and fetal
Feline leprosy, 129t
with intrascleral prosthesis, for absolute
development)
Feline leukemia virus infechion, 378-380, 379f
glaucoma, 253-254,253b, 254f
examination of, 81, 82b, 82f, 83f (See Also
Feline pox virus, 130t
orbital, 369
Diagmosis)
FeLV. See Feline leukemia virus infection
Examination, 81, 82b,82f, 83f
Eyedrops, 34, 34f
Fern toxicity, 412
anterior segment, 85-89, 85f, 86f, 87f, 88f
Eyelid,107-134
Ferrets, 432-433
in cataracts, 268, 268f
anatomy and function of, 107-108, 108f,
'of san[ea ainsseid 1e[nsoeiut [ewou 
of exobic pets, 427428, 428t
109f, 110f, 111f, 112f
428t
INDex ∣
469
Fetal development. See Embryonic and fetal
C
Goat—cont'd
development
Galactosemic cataracts, 267,267f
 oculat mani festations of systemic disease in,
FFF. See Flicker fusion frequency
y-Inradiation, 59-60
408-412
FHV-1. See Feline herpesvirus 1
Ganciclovir, 45t
tuberculosis in, 409
Fbrosarcoma, eyelid, equine, 125-126, 125f
Ganglion cells
Goblet cells in conjuncivitis, 140f-141f 
Fbrosis
 in central visual pathway, 8
comeal, 179-180, 180f
fetal development of, 23
Gonioimplants for glaucoma, 250-251, 251f
in ocular injury, 63
retinal, 286f, 286t, 287
Gonioscopy97989f3333f3
Fbrovascular membranes, preinidal. See
in visual acuity, 6, 7f 
Graft, conjuncival,187-188,187f,188f
 Preiridal fibrovasc ulat membranes
Geniculate body, lateral, 9
Granulation lissue, 76
Fnoff transillminator, 86, 86f
Gentamicin, 41
Granulomatous inflammation, 72
FIP. See Feline infec hious pernitoniis
for corneal ulcers, 184-185, 185b
Gnid keratotomy for indolent corneal ulcer, 190,
FTV. See Feline immunodeficiency virus
for equine recurrent uveiis, 221
190f
infec hion
 GeogTaphic corneal dystrophy, congenital
Flap
subepithelial,182
H
temporalis muscle, 372
GeogTaphic distribution of equine recurrent
Haab's stiae, 236, 236f
third eyelid for comeal ulcers, 188-189
uveibis, 217-218
Habronema sPp., 128t, 146t, 403,403f
Fleas, stickhight, 128t
Geographic reinal dysplasia, 301, 303f
Haller-Zinn vascular circle, 27
Flicker fusion fiequency, 295, 295f
Germicides, 58
 t agqei ut uotsnod pue[8 ueuepieH 
Flies, eyelid, 128t 
Germinal cells in wound healing, 74-75, 74f,
Haws syndrome, 332
Floaters, 281
75f
Head trauma, 326-328, 329f, 329t
Flonida keratopathy, 197
Glands of Moll, 157
Heart disease. See Cardiovascular disease
Fluconazole, 43, 44t, 192t
Gilands of Zeis, 157
Helichrysum argyrosphaerum poisoming, 313
Flucytosine, 43-45, 44t 
Glaucoma
Helper T cels, cyclosporine and, 48-49
Fludrocortisone concentration in topical
aqueous production and drainage and,
Hemangiosarcoma, third eyelid, 154, 155f
preparabion, 34t
230-232, 231f, 232f
Hematologic disorders, 396t
Flumixin, 48, 49t
associated with neoplasia, 78, 78f
Hemeralopia, 308
for equine tecurrent uveiis, 219
ciliary body-vitreous-lens block, 247-248,
Hemophilus spp. 41t 
for glaucoma, 250b
Hemohage
247f, 248f
Fluorescin angiogaphy,104,10f
classifcation of, 241-242, 242f, 243f, 244b,
conjunchival and subconjunctival, 137, 377t
Fluressaget0f
244f
in birds, 435, 435f
Fluorescein staining, 98-100, 99f, 100f
clinical signs of, 233-241, 234f
tetinal, 300, 302f, 382t, 402t
of indolent corneal ulcer, 189, 189f
 anterior chamber depth changes, 236
subhyaloid, 277
Fluoroquinolones, 42-43, 43t, 185
corneal/scleral changes, 235-236, 235f,
vitreous, 280, 280f
Foal, shaker, 406
236f
Hepatitis, infectious canine, 199, 199f 375-376,
Focal folliculitis, 129t 
engorged episcleral vessels, 235
377f
Foc al furunculosis, 129t 
fixed dilated pupil, 236, 236f
Hepatocutaneous syndrome, 132t
 Folliculitis
fundus changes, 238-241, 238f, 239f,
Hemiation, tentorial, 349
eosinophilic,128t
240f, 241f
Herpesvirus 1
focal, 129t
jneasedinulapessu
equine, 399-400
Food allergy, eyelid skin disease due to, 130t
Jens changes, 236-238,237b, 237f, 238b
feline (See Feline herpesvirus I)
 pain, blepharospasm, and altered
Heterochromia, 210-211,210t, 211f, 211t
Foramen and canals, optic, 9, 11f
behavior, 235
Hishocytoma, eyelid, 126, 126f, 133t
Foramen orbitorotundum, 14
diagnosis of, 213t, 232-233, 233f, 234f
Histoplasmosis, 129t, 389t, 391-392
Foreign bodies
18X10SH
due to uveitis, 212
cataracts due to, 266, 266f
treatment of, 215-216
Homatropine, S3
comeal, removal of, 193-194, 193f
 inflammabion as cause of, 70-71, 70f, 71f
Hood conjunchival grafts, 187, 187f
orbital, localizabion of, 359-360
lens luxabion and, 274
Hordeolum, 122-123,122f, 122t,157
Foscamet, 45t
malignant, viteous and, 282
Horizontal cells, retinal, 23
Fracture, periorbital 364
primary angle-closure, 243f, 244-246, 245f,
Homer's syndrome, 332,332f, 336-338, 337t,
Free conjunchival grafts, 187, 187f, 188
245t, 246f
338f, 339t
Frontal sinus mucocele, 362-363
emergency trealment of, 422
Horse
Fundus
primary open-angle,242,242f
bactenial disease in, 400-402, 402f
of birds, 435
in rabbits, 432
cataracts in, 265t, 272
effects of glaucoma on, 238-241, 238f,
secondary, 241, 246-248, 247f, 248f
color vision in, 8, 8f, 9f
239f, 240f, 241f
teabment of, 248-254, 249b, 249f, 250b,
conjunchival angiosarcoma in, 150
examination of, 90-93, 91f, 92f, 93f
422
cyshic corpora nigra in, 225
Fungal infection
in cats, 254-255
eosinophilic kerabitis in, 196, 196f
antifungal drugs for, 43-45, 44t
in horse, 255
eyelid sarcoid in, 125-126, 125f
canine and feline, 387-392, 388t-389t, 391f
Gliosis, retinal, 301, 303f
fundus of, examination of, 92-93, 93f
conjuncival, 146
Globe proptosis, emergency management of,
glaucoma in, 255
comeal, 191, 191f, 192t
419-421, 420f, 421f
heterochromia indis in, 210t
of eyelid skin,129t
Glucose metabolism in lens, 259, 260, 262f
inis prolapse in, 223
in keratitis, 191, 191f, 192t
Glycerin, 58t, 249-250
lymphoma in, 406, 406f
uveal, 214t
Goat
motor neuron disease in, 314
Furunculosis
fundus of, examinabion of, 92, 93f
meonatal disease in, 406-408, 407f 
eosinophilic, 128t
mycoplasmal keratoconjunchiviis in, 408,
neurologic disease in, 404-405
focal, 129t
408f
 neuromuscular disease in, 405-406
470
|INDEX
Horse—cont'd
Hypothyroidism, 394-395, 395f
Inflammation—cont'd
nommal flora of, 39t
Hypovitaminosis A,292, 312, 312b, 313f, 350
third eyelid, 155
ophthalmic examination in, 85
vitreous, 280-281
e -9e u Aeonusnu sdo
Inflammatory cell infltration of comeal stroma,
parasitic disease in, 403-404, 403f
IBK. See Infechious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
180, 180f
plant poisoning in, 313
IBR. See Infechious bovine thinotracheitis
Influenza, equine, 400
protozoal disease in, 402 403
Idoxunidine, 45, 45t, 146
Injection
recurrent uveiis in, 217-222, 218f, 219f,
Imaging techniques, 102-104, 103f, 104f, 105f
for entropion in lambs, 117
220f, 221f
Imbert-Fick law, 96
 subconjunchival, subteton, and retrobulbar,
Tetinopathies and neuropathies in, 314, 314f
Imidazoles, 192t
34f, 36, 36f, 37f
viral conjunchivitis in, 144-145
Immune-mediated disease 
 Injury. See Trauma
viral disease in, 399-400
conjunctival, 147, 147f
Imner retina, 23
visual acuity in, 7, 9f
corticosteroids for, 46-47
Innervation. See Nerve supply
visual feld of, 3, 4f
disruption in blood-ocular barrier and, 71
Jnstruments
Hotz-Celsus procedure, I17-118, 118f
keratoconjunchivitis sicca, 166-167
for examination, 82b
H-plasty for eyelid reconstruction, 123,124f
superficial keratoconjunctivitis, 194-195,
for microbiologic sampling,84, 84f
Hyalin, 58t
194f
for ocular emergencies, 419
Hyalocentesis,282-283,283f,283t
uveitis, 214t, 216-222
Interferon for viral conjunctivitis,146
Hyaloid artery
uveodermatologic syndrome, 72, 132t, 216,
 Internal limiing membrane of rebina, 286f,
 embryonic and fetal development of, 20-21,
398-399, 399f
286t, 287
23f
Immunodeficiency virus infection, feline,
Internal ophthalmoplegia, 329
persistent, 279
380-381, 381f
Intracapsular cataract extraction, 270
cataracts and, 265-266
Immunofluorescent anbibody test, 144, 145t
Intacramal njury,pupis and, 36-328329f
Hyalosis, asteroid, 281-282, 281f
Immunomodulating drugs, 48-50
329
Hyaluronidase, 56
Immunostimulants, 50
Intraoculat pressure, 18-19, 18t
Hydranencephaly, 349
Immunosuppressives for uveitis, 215
aqueous balance in, 231,232f
Hydrocephalus,10
Imperforate puncta, 162-163, 163f
causes of variabions in, 232
obstructive, 349-350
Implantation, lens, for cataracts, 270-271, 272f
corticosteroids and, 46, 47
Hydrocortisone, 34t, 47
Inclusion cyst, corneal epithelial, 190-191, 190f
in differential diagnosis of ocular
Hydroxyamphetamine, 53b
Indentabion tonometty, 95-96, 95f, 96f
inflammabion, 213t
Hydroxyproymethylculoset8
Indirect ophthalmoscopy,9090f
in glaucomas, 235 (See Also Glaucoma)
Hyperadrenocorticism,394
Indolent comeal ulcer
measurement of, 95-97, 95f, 96f, 97f
Hyperemia
in dog, 189-190, 189f, 190f
nommal, 97
conjunctival,136-137,137t
fluorescein staiming of, 99, 99f
in exoic species, 428t
in cilia disorders, 113 
Infection
reduction of
systemic causes of, 377t
bacterial (See Bactenial infechion)
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for, 55
in inflammatory process, 67
orbital,362t
hyperosmotic agents for, 50
Hyperlipidemia, 395-396, 395f
parasitic (See Parasitic infection)
in uveibs, 212, 215-216
Hyperopia,5,5f
protozoal (See Protozoal infechion)
Intaorbital prosthesis, 367-368, 368f
loss of lens and, 6
retinal, 309-311, 311f
Intrascleral lens implantation for cataract,
Hyperosmotic drugs, 50
uveal, 214t
270-171, 272f
Hyperplasia,63,64f
viral (See Viral infection)
Intascleral prosthesis, 369, 371f
Hyperplastic primary viteous, persistent, 279.
vitreous,280-281
for absolute glaucoma, 253-254, 253b, 254f
280,280f
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis, 145,
eviscerabion for, 369
cataracts and, 265-266
145t, 197-198, 198b, 198f
 Intumescent cataract, 268
Hyperreflecbivity, retinal, 90
Infectious bovine thinotacheiis, 198-199, 410,
Inverted retina, 23, 287
Hypersensitivity
410f
IOP. See Intraocular pressure
arthropod, 128t-129t
in conjunchviis, 145, 145t
Iridocomeal angle
denervation,51,53,338,339
in infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis,
anatomy of, 203, 205f
drugs,eyelid skindisease due to,130t
197, 198b
examination of, 97-98, 98f, 232-233, 233f,
mosquito-bite, 129t
Infectious canine hepatitis, 199, 199f
234f
Hypertension, systemic, 396-397, 397f, 397t
Infectious uveibis, 214t, 216
obstruchion of, glaucoma due to, 246-247,
Hyperthermia, 60, 60f
Inflammation, 66-73
247f
Hypertrophy,63,63f
 blood-ocular banTier alterations due to,
Iridocyclibis, 69, 208
Hyperviscosity syndrome, 398
immune-mediated disease and, 71
Iridodialysis, 223
Hyphema
cataracts due to, 69-70
Iris
etiology of,223, 224f
comeal, 68-69, 69f
anatomy and phy siology of, 203, 204f, 205f
glaucoma associated with,250b
corticosteroids for, 45-48
attenial circle of, 12
histology of, 79
effects on intraocular pressure, 232
atophy of, 63, 227-228, 228f
neoplasia and, 78
exudate from, 71-73,72f,73f
changes in color of, 79
with proptosis of globe, 420
glaucoma due to, 70-71, 70f, 71f
coloboma in, 210, 210f
treabment of,223-224, 425
granulomatous, 72
embryonic and fetal development of, 22, 27,
Hypophysis,9
nectosis and, 66
29f
Hypoplasia,63
in ocular injury, 63
examination of, 88
iris, 227
opic nerve,454,46f347f7t
feline diffuse melanoma in,226-227, 227f
optic nerve, 344, 345f
peculiarities of, 68, 68f
hypoplasia of, 227
of prosencephalon in calves, 349
retinal detachment due to, 69, 70f
pigmentation disorders of, 210-11 20t,
Hypopyon, 79
retinopathy secondary to, 309-311, 311f
211f, 211t
INDEX∣
471
Inis—cont'd
Lacrimal pump, 160
Lens—cont'd
prolapse of, 223
Lacrimal puncta
sublux abion of, 272-273
jn corneal ulcerabion, 187
anatomy and physiology of, 159-160, 159f,
uveitis induced by, 216-217, 217f
emergency reatment of,424,425f
160f
in visual acuity, S
Ins bombe,212,247
embryonic and fetal development of,30
wound healing in, 74-75
Ins nevi, 211, 211f
Lacnimal sac, 159
Lens capsule, 25-26
Inibis, 208
Lacrimal system, 157-174
Lens-induced uveitis, 263-264, 269
Inradiabion, 59-60, 59f
anatomy and physiology of, 157-160, 158f,
Lens luxahion, 272-275, 273f, 274f
Imitant dermatitis, 130t
159f, 160f
in glaucoma, 236, 237,237b
Ischemic disease of eyelid skin, 132t
disorders of, 160-171
Teatment of, 250b, 252-253
Island conjuncival grafts, 187, 187f, 188
cicaticial nasolacrimal obstruction,
vitreous and, 282
Isoerythrolysis,neonatal,407
163-164, 164f
Lens placode, 20,22f,23f, 26f
Isoflurophate, 53b
congenital atesia, ectopia, and
Lens suture, 25
Iracomazole, 43, 192t
imperforate puncta, 162-163, 163f
Lens vesicle, 20, 21f, 24, 27f
Ivermectin, 59, 222
cystic,163
Lens zonules, 24
dacryocystitis, 161-162, 161f, 162f 163f
Lenticonus, 260
examination in, 160-161
Lentigo simplex, 133t
Jones test, 99-100, 100f, 160-161
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 166-171,
Leprosy, feline, 129t
Jugular vein, 13
168f, 172f-173f
Leptospira spp.1822,401,4
Juvenile cellulitis, 133t
precomea] tear film, 160, 165-166
Leukemia virus infection, feline, 378-380, 379f
tear-staining syndrome in dogs,
Leukocytes, 67, 68-69
K
164-165, 164f, 165f, 166f
Leukoma, comeal, 180, 180f
KCS. See Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
neoplasm of, 171
LGN. See Lateral geniculate nucleus disease
Keratic precipitates, 79, 212
Lacnimomimetic agents, 56, 57t-58t
Lid laceralions, emergency teahment of, 422-423
Keratitis
Lamina ctibrosa, 8
Lid reractors for drug administation, 36,36f
eosinophilic, 196,196f
Lanolin ointment, 58t, 170
Light
herpetic,195,195f
Laser therapy, 60
flickering, sensitivity to, 2-3
mycotic,191,191f,192t
for glaucoma,251, 252, 255
sensiivity to,1-2,2f,3f
neurogenic,195
Latanoprost for glaucoma, 249, 249b, 422
Ligneous conjunctivitis, 147-148, 148f
pigmentary, 194
Lateral geniculate nucleus disease, 348
Limbal neoplasm, 201, 201f
cormeal, 180,180f
Lateral subconjunchival orbital enucleation
Limiting membrane of retina
superfcial punctate, 183, 183f
technique,366,367f,368
external, 286,286f, 286t
systemic causes of,378t, 400t
Lavage ytadiis
intemal, 286f, 286t, 287
ulcerative, of cornea (See Comeal 
Leishmaniasis, 130t, 392-393, 393f
Lipemia retinalis, 381t,395,395f
ulceration)
Lens, 258-276
Pd!
Keratoconjunctivitis
anatomy and physiology of, 258-260, 259f,
comeal accumulation of, 181, 181f 
260f
 deficiency of, precomeal tear film and,
194-195, 194f
capsule in, 258, 260f
165-166
herpeic, 45, 45t
epithelium in, 258
Lipid dystrophy, comeal, 183, 183f
infectious bovine, 145, 145t, 197-198, 198b,
fbers in, 258, 260f, 261f
  saye u Aedoy pid
198f
metabolism and composition in,
Lipid layer of precorneal tear film, 157
mycoplasmal in goats and sheep, 408, 408f
259-260, 262f
Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis, 148, 148f
systemic causes of, 378t, 400t
nuclear sclerosis in, 260, 262f 
Lipoxgenase pathway, corticosteroids and, 46,
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 137t, 166-171, 168f,
cataract of, 261-272
46f
172f-173f, 378t
acquired, 266-267,266f, 267f
Liquefaction, vireous, 278
Keratoma, eyelid, 149, 149f 
classifcabion of, 261-263, 261t, 263,
Listeniosis, 408, 408f
Keratomalacia, suppurabive, 68-69
263f
LIU. See Lens-induced uveitis
Keratopathy
congenital,264-266,266f
Lizards, 436-438
bullous, 197, 197f
diabetic, 267-268
Local anesthetics, 55
Florida, 197
diagnosis of,268-269, 268f, 269t
Locoweed poisoning, 167, 412
lipid in amphibians, 440, 440f
hereditary, 264, 265t
Lower motor neuron innervation, 335-336, 337f
Keratotomy, gid, 190, 190f
in horses, 272
Luxation of lens. See Lens luxation
Ketoconazole, 43, 44t 
lens-induced uveitis and, 263-264
Lyme disease
Ketoprofen, 48, 49t 
molecular and cellula pathogenesis of,
canine,383,383f
Ketorolac, 48, 49t
261
equine, 401-402
Key-Gaskellsyndrome, 338339
senile, 267
Lymph node, conjunchival sac and, 135, 136f
stages of development of, 262-263,263f
1
heahment of, 269-272, 270f, 271f, 272f
Lymphoma, 406, 406f
Lacerations
congenital anomalies of, 260
third eyelid, 154, 155f
conjunchival, 147,148f
effects of glaucoma on, 236-238, 237b,
Lymphosarcoma
comeal, 192-193, 193f, 422
237f, 238b
equine,406, 406f
eyelid, 422-423
embryonic and fetal development of, 24-26,
ruminant, 411, 411f
third, 155, 156f
26f, 27f, 28f
uveal, 227, 227f
Lacnimal canaliculi, 159-160, 159f, 160f
examination of, 88-89
Lysine, 146
Lacrimal fossa, 159, 160f
implantation, 270-171,272f
Lacrimal glands, 157, 158f, 159f
loss of in severe hyperopia, 6
M
Lacnimal lake, 160
Juxation of (See Lens luxalion)
Macrophages, 72
Lacrimal nerve, 14, 110f 
opacity of, 80
Macula, corneal, 179, 180f
472
|INDEX
Maedi-visna, 411
Microcomea, 181, 182f
Nearsightedness, 5, 5f
Magmetic resomance imaging, 104, 104f, 358,
Microphakia, 31
Nebula, corneal, 179, 180f 
358f, 359f
Microphthalmos, 30-31, 30f, 31t
Necrolytic demmatitis, superficial, 132t
Magmifying scope, 86f
Mineral oil ointment, 58t, 170
Nectosis, 65-66, 66f
Malacia, stromal, 181, 182f
Minerals, corneal accumulation of, 181, 181f 
of cerebrum, 349
Malaris muscle, 107
Mittendorf's dot, 279
Neisseria spp., 41t
Male fem, 313
MLF See Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Neomycin, 41, 184
 Maligmant catarthal fever, 410, 410f
Mobility, retinal, assessment of, 84-85
 Neonatal maladjusthment syndrome, 407
in conjunchiviis, 145, 145t 
 Monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy, 90, 90f,
Neonate
comeal sigmns in, 199
91f
 delayed or premature eyelid opening in,
 Maligmant glaucoma, 282
Moraxella spp., 4lt, 141
601-801
Malignant neoplasm, 78
Mosquito-bite hypersensitivity, 129t
equine, diseases of, 406-408, 407f
Mannheimia pneumonia, 409
Motion sensitivity, 2
Neoplasm, 77-79,77f,78f
Mannitol, 50, 249, 249b, 422
Motor neuron disease, equine, 314, 406
cerebral, 344,344t
Marcus Gunn pupil, 101, 322
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
conjuncbival, 148-150, 149f
Mast cell stabilizers, 50, 141, 147
Mucin deficiency, 165
comeoscleral limbal, 201,201f
Mast cell tumor, eyelid, 133t
 Mucinomimetic agents, 56
eyelid, 123-126, 123t, 124f, 125f, 126f, 133t
Mastocytoma, eyelid, 133t
Mucocele, 362-363
glaucoma secondary to, 253
Maxillary attery, 10-11
Mucoid discharge in keratoconjunctivitis sicca,
lacrimal gland, 171
Maxillary merve, 14
167-168, 167f, 168f, 170
lymphoma, 406, 406f
Maxillary vein, 13
Mucoid layer of precomeal tear film, 157-159
optic nerve,347
Maze test, 102, 320
Mucous threads in lacrimal system, 159
opic radiation and visual cortex disorders,
MCF. See Maligmant catahal fever
Muller's cells, 286, 288f, 289f
348
Medial canthoplasty, 118-119, 119f 
fetal development of, 23
orbital, 362t, 363-364, 364f
Medial longitudinal fasciculus, 331
Muller's musc le, action of, 15
in rabbits, 429
Mediators in inflammation, 67
Multilobular osteoma, 364
uveal, 214t, 225-227, 225b, 225f, 226f, 227
Medical history, 81
Muscles
Neosporosis, 391
Medications. See Drugs
Nerve block, auriculopalpebral, 85, 85f
 Meibomian gland
15, 15t
Nerve fibers
adenoma of, 125,125f
ex taocular (See Exraocular musc les)
in central visual pathway, 8-10
anatomy of, 107,108f, 157, 159f
ofeyelids, 107, 111f
reinal, 286f, 286t,287
chalazion of, 121-122, 121f, 122f
Mycoplasmas
 Nerve growth factor ointment, 169
Meibomiis, 122-123, 122f, 122t
jn conjunciviis, 137t, 142-143
Nerve supply, 13-16, 13f, 14f, 15f, 1f
Melanin, congenital absence of on leading edge
feline, 386-387
autonomic innervation in, 15-16, 15t, 17f,
of third eyelid, 152
in keratoconjunch vitis
335-336, 336f, 337f
Melanocytoma
bovine, 197, 198b
cranial nerves in, 13-15, 13f, 14f, 15f, 16f
Jimbal, 201, 201f
in goats and sheep, 408, 408f
to extraoculat muscles, 330f, 330t
uveal, 225-226, 226f
Mycotic infechion. See Fungal infection
shrabismus due to lesions in, 331-332,
Melanoma
Mydniatic therapy
332f
epibulbar, 226, 226f
alropine in, 51-52
to eyelids, 107,111f
eyelid,133t
for comeal ulcers, 185-186
to lacrimal system, 160
feline diffuse iris, 226-227, 227f
for uveitis,215
Neural crest, 20
glaucoma secondary to, 253
Myelination of optic nerve fbers, 298
Neural gtoove, 20, 21f
uveal, 225-226, 226f
Myelin degeneration, 343,343f
Neural tube, 20, 21f 
Melanosis, comeal, 180, 180f
Myeloencephalitis, equine protozoal, 404
Neuniis, opbc, 345-347, 346f, 347f, 347t, 384t
Meloxicam, 48, 49t
Myopia,5,Sf
Neuroblashic layer, 23
"Meling,” stomal, 18l, 182f
Myosiis, eosinophilic, orbital, 364-365
Neurogenic keratis, 195
Menace tesponse, 101, 318-320, 320f, 321f
Myotonia, congenital, 333
Neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis, 167
Meningitis, 350, 350t, 405
Myxoma virus, 430
Neuroglia, pathologic reachions of, 343-344
Meningoencephalis, thromboembolic,349,
Neurologic disorders,equine,403t,404405
409, 409f
 Neuromusc ular disease, 405-406
Metabolic disease
Nasal folds, prominent, 109-1l1, 113f
Neuronal degenerahion, 342-343, 343f
of dogs and cats, 395-396, 395f
Nasociliary merve, 14
 Neuroophthalmologic examinabion, 100-102,
of eyelid skin, 132t
Nasolacrimal system
319
optic radiation and visual cortex disorders
anatomy and physiology of, 159-160, 159f,
Neuroophthalmology
in, 349
160f
autonomic innervation and abnormalities,
ruminant, 411-412
catheterizabion of, 161-162, 162f
335-339, 336f, 337f, 337t, 338f
uveitis in, 214t
disease of
339t
Metabolism in lens, 259, 260, 262f
in mice and tats, 433 434, 433f
central visual pathways, 342-350, 342f,
Metaplasia, 63-65, 64f
in rabbits, 430
343f, 344t, 345f, 346f, 347f, 347t
Metastahic neoplasm, 77-78
embryonic and fetal development of, 29-30,
lesions causing eyelid abnommalities, 332-
Methazolamide, 249b, 422
30
334, 332f, 333f, 334t
Methicillin, 38-40
examination of, 87
lesions causing strabismus, 330-332, 330f,
Methylcellulose, 57t, 169
obstruction of
331t, 332f
Mice, 433-434, 433f
assessment of, 100
lesions in patients with visual and pupillary
cicaticial, 163-164, 164f
light reflexes,323-330, 329f,329t,
Miconazole, 43, 192t
of rabbits, 428
330f, 331t
Microbiologic sampling, 83-84, 84f
Natamycin, 43, 192t
meningitis, 350, 350t
INDex ∣
473
Ofloxacin, 43
Orbit—cont'd
pupillary light reflex in, 320-321, 321f, 322f
Oinhments, route of administration for, 35-36
disease of, 357-365
storage diseases, 350
Onchocerca cervicalis, 128t, 146t, 222,404
cellulitis and retrobulbar abscess,
vestibular system, 339-342, 340b
Opacity
360-361, 361f, 362f, 363f
vision assessment in, 318-320, 320f,
due to comeal edema, 178, 179f, 378t 
cysts, 361-363
321-322, 321f, 322f
lentic ular, 90
diagnosis of, 357-360, 358f, 359f, 361f
vitamin A deficiency, 350
retinal, 90
emphysema, 365
Neuropathy,equine, 314, 314f
of vitreous, 281
eosinophilic myositis, 364-365
opic, 346-347,347f
Ophthalmia, sympathetic, 213
exlaocular muscle myositis, 365, 365f
Neuroretina, 285
Ophthalmic artery, 10, 11
in ferrets, 432
Neutrophils
Ophthalmic examinabion. See Examination
fractures, 364
jn conjunctival disease, 135,140f-141f
Ophthalmic vein, 13, 13f
neoplasm and space-occupying lesions,
in comeal healing, 72,72f, 73f
Ophthalmoplegia
356, 357f, 363-364, 364f
in suppurative exudate, 72
external, 329
systemic causes of,385t, 404t
Nevi, inis, 211, 211f
intemal, 329
extraoculat muscles and, 353, 354t, 357f
"New Forest eye," 197-198, 198b, 198f
Ophthalmoscopy, 89-90, 89f, 90f, 91f
pathologic mechanisms in, 353-357, 357f
 NGE. See Nodular gTanulomatous 
in aqueous flare detection, 94, 95f
penetrating injuries of, 423-424
episclerokeratoconjunctivitis
in glaucomas, 232
 proptosis of, emergency management of,
Night blindness, congenital stationary, 309
Opsin, 290-291
419-421, 420f, 421f
NMS. See Neonatal maladjushment syndrome
Optical canal, 13
prosthesis for, 369-370, 371f
Nodular gTanulomatous
Optic axis, 352, 353f, 355f
 surgical procedures on
episclerokeratoconjunctivitis,
Optic chiasm
enucleation, 365-369, 367f, 368f, 369f,
200, 200f
in central visual pathway, 9
370f, 371f
Nodular panmiculitis, 132t
diseases of, 325f, 348
orbitotomy and orbitectomy, 370-372,
 Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs, 48, 49t
optic nerve anatomy and,13
371f, 372f
for corneal ulcers, 186
Optic cup, 20, 21-23, 21f, 22f, 24,24f
prosthesis, 369-370, 371f
keratoconjunctivitis sicca due to, 166
Optic disc
temporalis musc le flap, 372
properies of, 46
anatomy of, 297-298
Orbital axis, 352, 353f
for uveibis, 215
 in central visual pathway, 8
Orbital fissure, 14
equine recurrent,219,220-221
cupping of in glaucoma,238-239, 239f,
Orbital fissure syndrome, 329
traumalic, 222
240f
Orbital venography, 103358-359,39f
Nontapetum
examination of, 91
Orbital venous plexus, 13, 13f 
anatomy of, 297,298f
in dogs, 92
Orbitectomy, 370-372, 371f, 372f
examination of, 91
in horses, 93
OrbitogTaphy, contast, 359, 359f, 360f
Norepinephrine, achion of, 51, 52f
retinopathies and, 307
Orbitotomy, 370-372, 371f, 372f
Normal flora, 38t, 39t, 40t
Optic foramen and canals, 9, 11f 
Organogenesis, 20
Notch defect, scleral,199
Optic grooves ot pits, 20, 21f, 22f
congenital malformation development
 Notoednic acariasis, 127t
Optic nerve
during, 30
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal antinflammatory
anatomy and function of, 13, 318
Organophosphates, 54
sanp
 in central visual pathway, 8-9
Osteoma, multilobular, 364
Nuclear layer of tetina, 286, 286f, 286t
disease of, 324f, 344-348, 344t, 345f, 346f,
Oiis intema, 341
Nuclear sclerosis in lens, 80, 260, 262f
347f, 347t
Ohbis media, 341
Nutrition
systemic causes of, 402t
Oxacillin, 40
cataracts and, 267,267f
embryonic and fetal development of, 23-24,
Oxygen available to cornea, 175-176, 176f
retinopathy and, 311-312, 312b, 312f, 313f
24f, 25f
Oxygen toxicity, 313-314
wound healing and, 76
examination of, 91, 94, 100
Oxyspinura mansoni, 146t
Nutitional disorders of eyelid skin, 132t
in cats, 92
Oxytetracycline, 198
Nystagmus, 339-341, 340b
in sheep, goats,nd catte99f
congenital, 342
fbers of, myelinaion of, 298
P
Nystatin, 192t
Tetinal interaction with, 298
PABA. See Para-aminobenzoic acid
Optic neuris, 345-347, 346f, 347f, 347t, 384t
PACG. See Primary angle-closure glaucoma
0
Optic neuropathy, 314, 314f
Pain
Oblique muscles, 13, 14
Optic primordia, fommalion of, 20-21, 21f,22f,
in differential diagnosis of ocular
Obstruction
23f
inflammaion, 213t
cicatricial nasolacrimal, 163-164, 164f
Optic radiation, 10
of glaucoma, 235
iridocomeal angle,glaucoma due to,
disease of, 348-349
of lens lux ation,274
246-247, 247f
Optic stalks, 20, 22f
management of in uveitis, 216
lacrimal, 160
Optic tact
Palpation, orbital, 358
Obstrucive hydrocephalus, 349-350
 Palpebral conjunc biva
Ocular reflxes, 16-17, 17f, 17t 
disease of, 326f, 348
anatomy of, 135
Oculomotor nerve, 10
Optic vesicle, 20, 21f, 22-23
embryonic and fetal development of, 29
anatomy and function of, 13-14, 14f, 15f,
Optivisor magmifying scope, 86f
 Palpebral fissure, lesions causing abnormalities 
318
Orbicularis oculi muscle, 107
of, 333-334, 333f, 334t
lesion of, 327f, 328-329
Orbifloxacin, 42-43
Palpebral reflex, 16-17, 17t, 101
strabismus due to, 331-332
Orbit, 352-373
Panniculitis, nodular, 132t
testing of, 100
anatomy of, 352-353,353f, 354f, 354t,
Pannus, 194-195, 194f 
Oculomotor nucleus lesion, 328f
355f, 356f, 357f
 Panophthalmitis, 69
Oestnus ovis, 146t
 dental disease and, 365
Panuveiis, 209, 385t
474
|INDEX
Papilledema, 344, 344t, 347t, 350
Peritonitis, feline infecious, 72, 381-382, 382f
POAG. See Primary open-angle glaucoma
Papillomatosis
Perivascular cuffng, rebinal, 300, 301f
Poisoning. See Toxicity
conjunctival, canine,150
Persistent hyaloid artery, 279
Polioencephalomalacia, 411412
viral, of eyelid, 126, 126f
cataracts and, 265-266
Polyarthritis, ovine chlamydial, 408
Para-aminobenzoic acid, 42
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitrous,
 Polycoria, 209
Parallax, 4, 86, 86f
279-280, 280f
Polycythemia, 396t, 397-398
Paralysis
cataracts and, 265-266
Polymerase chain reaction, 144, 145t
facial, 405t
Persistent pupillary membranes, 182, 182f 209,
Polymyxin B, 42, 184
 palpebral fissure abnommalities in,
209f
Polyvinyl alcohol, 57t-58t,169
333-334, 333f, 334t
cataracts and, 265
Posterior chamber anatomy, 17, 18f 
third eyelid protrusion in, 332
embryonic and fetal development of, 27
Posterior segment examination, 93-94
oculomotor, 331-332
 Persistent tunica vasculosa lentis, 279
Posterior uveitis
Paranasal sinuses, orbit and, 352, 355f, 356f
Phacoclasic uveitis, 72, 72f, 222, 222f, 264
defined, 69, 208
Parasibicides, 59
Phacoemulsifc abion, 270, 271f, 272
systemic causes of, 380t, 401t
 Parasitic infec tion
Phacolytic uveiis, 263-264
 Postsphenoid bone, 9
canine and feline,390t, 392-393
Pharmacology. See Drugs
Potomac horse fever, 402-403
conjunchival, 146-147, 146t
Phenol red thread test, 427, 428t
 Povidone-jodine solution, 58
in birds, 436
Phenylbutazone, 48, 49t, 219
Pox virus, 130t, 436
equine, 403-404, 403f
Phenylephrine, 53-54, 53b, 224
PPMs.SeePersistent pupillarymmbraes
of eyelid skin, 127t-128t
PHF. See Potomac horse fever
Precomeal tear film
uveal, 214t
 Photic head shaking in horses, 405
anatomy and physiology of, 157-159, 159f
Parasympathebic nervous system, 15t, 16, 16f,
Photochemistry,291-292, 293f
deficiency of, 165-166
335
 Photophobia in differential diagmosis of ocular
dy sfunchion of, 160
Parasympatholytic drugs, 51-53, 51f, 53b
inflammaion, 213t
Predmisolone, 34t, 47
 Parasympathomimetic agents, 53b, 54
 Photopic vision, 289
for equine recurrent uveiis, 219, 221
Paroid duct tansposiion, 171, 172f-173f
Photopigments, 287f, 289-291
for hyphema, 224,250b
Pars plana cilianis, 282,283f
Photoreceptors
 Preiidal fbrovascular membranes
Passive transfer, failure of, 406-407, 407f
anatomy of, 285,286t, 288f
glaucoma from, 70,71f
Pathology,62-80
 in central visual pathway, 8
in uveitis, 213
common clinical lesions seen with, 79-80
in color vision, 7
in wound healing, 76
inflammabion, 66-73
dysplasia of, 305
defective,77
 blood-ocular barrier alterations due to,
fetal development of, 23
Prematurity, equine, 406
 jmmune-mediated disease and, 71
primary disease of,299, 299f
Preservatives in drugs, 33
cataracts due to, 69-70
in visual acuity, 6
Pretec tal area, 9
corneal, 68-69, 69f
 Phototoxic etinopathy in mice and rats, 434
Primary angle-closure glaucoma, 241, 243f,
exudate from, 71-73,72f, 73f
PHPV. See Persistent hyperplastic primary
244-246, 245f, 245t, 246f
glaucoma due to,70-71,70f,71f
vilteous
in dogs, 238b
peculiarities of, 68, 68f
Physicaltherapy 59-60, 59f, 60f
emergency treatment of 422
Tetinal detachment due to, 69, 70f 
Physiologic optic cup, 24
vision loss in, 240-241
injury, 62-66
Physostigmine, 53b
Primary open-angle glaucoma, 240-241, 242,
causes of, 62
Pigmentary keratitis, 194
242f
consequences of,62-66, 63f, 64f, 65f,
Pigmentary uveiis in golden retievers, 217
Prolapse
66f
Pigmentation
inis, 223
neoplasia, 77-79, 77f, 78f
comeal, 180,180f
in comeal ulceration, 187
wound healing, 73-77
histology of, 79
emergency treatment of, 424, 425f
diseases resuling from defective, 76-77
in keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 168
third eyelid gland, 153-154, 153f, 154f
germinal cells in, 74-75, 74f, 75f
eyelid, disorders of, 133t
Prominence of third eyelid, 151-152
nutrition in, 76
ins, disorders of,210-211, 210t, 211f,211t
Proptosis of globe, 419-421, 420f, 421f
Lissue sc affolding in, 75-76
of retinal pigment epithelium, 296, 296f 
Prosencephalon
Pecten, 287, 291f
 Pigment epithelium, retinal. See Retinal
hypoplasia of in calves, 349
 Pecinate ligament dysplasia, glaucoma and,
 pigment epithelium
injury to, 326-327
245-246, 245t
Pilocarpine, 53b, 54
 Prostaglandin analogues, 55
PEM. See Polioencephalomalacia
for glaucoma, 249b,422
Prosthesis
Pemphigus erythematosus, 131t
for hyphema, 224
extrascleral, 369-370, 371f
Pemphigus foliaceus, 131t
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 169
inserion of intraorbital, 367-368, 368f
 Pemphigus vulgaris, 131t 
Pinkeye,197-198,198b,198f
intrascleral, 369, 371f
Penciclovir, 45t
 Piroplasmosis, 402
for absolute glaucoma, 253-254, 253b,
Penetrating injury
 Pituitary fossa, 9
254f
to globe, 423-424
Placement reflex, 320, 320f
evisceration for, 369
to lens, uveitis due to, 217
Plant toxicity
Protease inhibitors, 56, 189
Penicillins, 38-40
tetinopathy due to, 313-314, 313f
Proteus spp., 41t, 43t
Penicillin G, 38
in ruminants, 412
Protothecosis, 389t
Peniocular cyst, 361-363
Plaque, conjuncival,147,148f,149,149f
Protozoal infection
 Periorbita
Plasma cells, 72-73, 140f-141f
equine, 402-403
anatomy of, 352, 356f
PLD. See Pectinate ligament dysplasia
neurologic, 404
fracture of,364
Plexifom layer of tetina, 8, 286-287, 286f, 286t
of eyelid skin, 130t
Peripheral neuroanatomy, 13-16, 13f, 14f, 15f,
PLR. See Pupillary light reflex
ruminant, 411
16f
Pneumonia, Mannheimia, 409
uveal, 214t
INDEX∣
475
Protrusion
Recrudescent disease, 143 
Retinal detachment, 314-315, 314f, 315f
third eyelid, 332-333, 332f
Rectus muscles
electroreinogTam in, 296t
third eyelid gland,153-154,153f, 154f
anatomy of, 13
inflammatory, 69, 70f 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 4t, 43t
paralysis of, 332
systemic causes of,383t, 402t
 Psoroptic acanasis, 128t
Redleg, 440
in uveitis, 213
Ptosis, 15, 375t
Reflexes
vitreous and, 280, 280f, 282
 Puncta, lacrimal
comeal, 16-17, 17t
Retinal pigment epithelium
anatomy and physiology of, 159-160, 159f,
dazzle, 17t, 101, 322
anatomy of, 285,286f,286t, 287f
160f
ocular, 16-17, 17f, 17t
degeneralion of, electrorelinogTam in,
imperforate,162-163,163f
palpebral, 17t,101
296t
Punctate keratitis, superficial, 183,183f
examination of, 91, 91f
Pupil
Reflex uveitis, 214t
hypertrophy of, 63,63f
congenital abnormalities of, 209
Refractive elTor, 5
Teactions of, 299-300, 300f
examination of, 84-85, 84f, 85f, 88
Reptilia, 436-438, 437f, 438f
Retinal pigment epithelium dystrophy, 308-309,
fixed and dilated, in glaucoma, 236, 236f
Resistance in ocular injury, 63
308t, 309f
intracranial injury and, 326-328, 329f, 329t
Retina, 285-317
Retinal summation,289,292f
Marcus Gunn, 101, 322
anatomy of, 295-298,295f, 296f, 297f
Retiniis, 310-311, 311f
proptosis of globe and, 420
cellular, 285-289, 286f, 286t, 288f,
Retinochoroiditis, 209, 298
retinopathies and, 307
289f
Retinopathy, 304-314
shape of
optic disc in,297-298
degenerative,306,306t
changes in,histologic basis for,79
in rabbits, 428
due to drug and plant toxicities, 313-314,
examinabion of, 84-85, 84f, 85f
alrophy of, 63, 64f, 381t
313f
systemic causes of disorders in, 404t
blood supply to, 287,288t, 290f, 292f
due to infec ious/nflammatory disease,
Pupillary block, glaucoma due to, 71, 71f, 247,
 in central visual pathway, 8
309-311, 311f
247f
congenital disorders of, 301-304
in horses, 314, 314f
Pupillary escape, 322
collie eye anomaly, 303-304, 303f, 304f
inherited, 304-309
Pupillary light eflex,16,17f, 17t,320-321,
coloboma, 304, 304f
classifcabion of, 305-306, 305t, 306t
321f, 322f
dysplasia, 301, 303f
clinical sigms of, 306-307, 307f
abnommal, 323-328, 329-330, 329f, 329t
degeneralion of (See Retinal degeneralion)
diagnosis of,307-308
in blind pabients, 323-328, 329f, 329t
detachment of (See Retinal detachment)
treatment of, 308
in visual patients, 328-330
dystrophy of,in briards,309
types of, 308-309, 308t, 309f
assessment of, 84, 85
embryonic and fetal development of, 21-23,
nutibional causes of, 311-312, 312b, 312f,
in differenial diagnosis of ocular
24f
313f
inflammation, 213t
examination of, 91-92, 91f, 94
phototoxic in mice and rats, 434
lesions in blind patients with normal, 323
hyperreflectivity of, 80
secondary to cardiovascular disease, 309,
nerve fibers in, 10
inverted, 287
310f
proptosis of globe and, 420
lesions of, 324f
storage disease and, 312-313
 Pupillary membranes, persistent, 182, 182f,
opacity of, 80
 sudden acquired retinal degeneraion, 311
209, 209f
 pathologic mechanisms in, 298-299, 298-
Retinoscopy, 102
cataracts and, 265
301
Retractor bulbi muscles
embryonic and fetal development of, 27
choroid interactions, 298-299
anatomy of, 13
Pupillary sphincter muscle, 10
gliosis, 301, 303f
paralysis of, 332
Pupillary zone of inis, 203, 204f
hemorrhage, 300, 302f
Retractors for drug administration, 36, 36f
Pyrifom lobe, 9
ischemia, 298
Retrobubar abscess, 360-361, 361f, 362f, 363f,
perivasculat cuffng, 300, 301f
428,428f
pigment epithelium reactions, 299-300,
Retrobulbar injechion
Rabbits, 428-432
300f
Toutes of administrahion, 36, 36f
adnexal disease in, 429, 429f
primary photoreceptor disease, 299,
Retroilluminabion, 84, 84f, 85f 
cataracts in, 431432, 431f, 432f
299f
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, 282
conjunctival disease in, 429-430, 430f
repair, 74,298
Rhinopneumonitis, herpetic, 399-400
comeal disease in, 430-431
retina-optic nerve interaction, 298
Rhinoltacheibis
glaucoma in, 432
physiology and biochemistry of,289-295
equine herpetic, 399-400
masolacrimal disease in, 430
dark adaptation in, 292-293, 293f
infecious bovine, 198-199, 410,410f 
mommal intraoculat pressure values fot, 428t
electroretinography, 293-295,293f,
in conjunctivitis, 145,145t
ophthalmic anatomy of, 428
294f, 295f, 296t
in infectious bovine keratoconjuncbiviis,
orbital disease in, 428, 428f
photochemistry in, 291-292,293f
197, 198b
phacoc lastic uveiis in, 222,222f
rods and cones in, 289,289t,292f
Rhodococcus equi infection,407-408
protrusion of harderian gland in, 154
visual photopigments in, 289-291, 293f
Rhodopsin
Radiation therapy, 59-60, 59f
 plexiform layers in, 8
Jight sensiivity and, 1-2
keratoconjunctivitis sicca due to, 167
venous drainage of, 12-13, 12f, 13f
as photopigment, 290,291, 293f
RadiogTaphy, 102-103, 103f
in visual acuity, 6-7, 7f
RMSF. See Rocky Mountain spotted fever
orbital, 358-359, 358f 359f
wound healing in, 74
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 383-384, 384f
Ranitidine, 219
Retinal artery,287
Rod-cone dysplasia,305,308t
Raptor, 434-436, 435f
Retinal degeneration
Rods
momal intraoculat pressure values for, 428t
feline, 309, 311-312, 312f
anatomy of 286f, 288f, 289, 289t, 292f
Rat, 433-434, 433f
in glaucoma, 239-241, 240f, 241f
in central visual pathway, 8
nommal intraoculat pressure values for, 428t
 in mice and rats, 434
dysplasia of, 305
Rebound tonomelty, 97, 97f
sudden acquired, 311
fetal development of, 23
476
|INDEX
Rods—cont'd
Sheep
Subalbinism, 210
sensitivity to motion and, 2
bright blindness in, 313, 313f
Subconjunctival emphysema, 138
in visual acuity, 6
chlamydial polyarthritis and conjunctivitis
Subconjunctival hemorhage, 137, 435, 435f
Rose bengal stain, 100
in, 142, 408
Subconjunctival injection, routes of
Rotaltional pedicle conjunctival grafts, 187,
fundus of, examination of, 92, 93f
administration, 34f, 36, 36f, 37f
187f
injection technique for entropion in, 117
Subepithelial geogaphic cormeal dysrophy, 182
Routes of administrabion, 33-37, 34f
maedi-visna in, 411
Subhyaloid hemorrhage, 277
for ocular surface lavage system, 35, 35f
mycoplasmal keratoconjunctivitis in, 408,
Subluxation, lens, 272-273
for ointments, 35-36
408f
Subpalpebral lavage system, 35, 35f
for solutions and suspensions, 34, 34f
oculat manifestations of systemic disease in,
Subtenon drug administration, 36
for subconjunchival, subtenons, and
408-412
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration, 311
Tetrobulbar injections, 36,36f,37f
tuberculosis in, 409
Sulfonamides, 42
systemic, 36-37
Shell prosthesis, 369-370, 371f
Summabion, reinal, 289, 292f
RPE. SeeRetinal pigment epithelium
Sialodacryoadenitis virus, 433-434
Sunset eyes, 331
RPED. See Retinal pigment epithelium
Sinuses, paranasal, orbit and, 352, 35f, 356f
Superficial necrolyic dermatis, 132t
dystrophy
Sinus mucocele, frontal, 362-363
Superfcial punctate keratitis, 183, 183f
Skin diseases of eyelid, 126, 127t-133t
Supplies for examination, 82b
allergic, 130t
Suppurative exudate, 72
 Saliva, drooling of, due to facial paralysis, 334
arthropod hypersensitivity, 128t-129t
Suppurative keratomalacia, 68-69
Salivary gland,zygomatic,elationship to orbit,
autoimmune, 131t-132t
Supraorbital nerve, 14 
352, 356f
bactenal, 129t
Surgery
Salmonellosis, 401
fungal, 129t
cataract, 269-272,270f, 271f, 272f
Sampling, microbiologic, 83-84, 84f
ischemic/vascular, 132t
ectropion,120, 120f
Sanson-Purkinje images, 86, 86f
neoplastic,133t
entopion,117-119,117f,118f,11f
Sarcoid,eyelid,125-126,125f 13t
nutitional/metabolic, 132t
eyelid injury, 121-121, 121f
Sarcoma in cats, 77, 77f, 226
parasitic, 127t-128t
eyelid neoplasm,123,124f
Sarcoptic acariasis, 127t
pigmentary, 133t
glaucoma,250-252,251f
SARD. See Sudden acquired retinal
protozoal, 130t
feline, 254
degeneration
viral, 130t
orbital, 365-369, 366f, 367f, 368f, 369f,
Scabies, 127t
Skull confomation, poptosis of globeand,420
370f, 371f
Scaffold, tissue, in wound healing, 73, 75-76
Slit-lamp biomicroscope, 86-87, 86f, 94, 95f
third eyelid, 153-154, 153f, 154f
Sc arring, 73
Snakes, 438-439, 438f, 439f
keratoconjunctivitis sicca development
comeal, 179-180, 180f
Snellen fraction, 7
following, 166
tetinal, 381t
Smip biopsy of conjunctiva, 139, 140f
uveal, 228
SCC. See Squamous cell carcinoma
Sodium chloride preparations, 50
vilreous, 283, 283f
Schiotz tonometer, 95-96, 95f, 96f
 Sodium methicillin, 38-40
Surgical adhesives, 56
Schirmer tear test, 81-82, 84f
Sodium oxacillin,40
Surgical instruments needed for oculat
on exotic pets, 427, 428t
 Solutions, route of administrabion for, 34, 34f 
emergencies, 419
in keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 168, 169, 170
Spastic entropion, 116
Suspensions, route of administration for, 34, 34f
Sclera
Spectacular disease in snakes, 438439, 438f 439f
Sutures, temporary, for entropion, 117, 117f
anatomy and physiology of, 178
Spherophakia,260
Swinging flashlighttest,10010132322
disorders of, 199-201, 199f, 200f, 201f
Sphincter musle, pupillary, 0
Symblepharon, 143, 144f
effects of glaucoma on, 235-236,236f
Squamous cell carcinoma
Sympatheltic nervous system
embryonic and fetal development of,22, 28,
conjunchival, 149-150, 149f
anatomy of,15t, 16,335-336, 337f
29f
eyelid, 123-125, 124f, 133t
diseases of, 336-339,337t, 338f, 339t
examination of, 87-88
third, 154, 154f
Sympathetic ophthalmia, 213
Scleritis, 199-200, 200f, 379t
Squamous epithelium, comeal, 175, 176f
Sympatholytic agents, 52f, 53b, 54
Sclerosis, nuc lear, in lens, 80, 260, 262f
Staining, vital dyes, 98-100, 99f, 100f
Sympathomimetic agents, 53-54
Scotopic vision, 289
Staphylococci
Synchysis scintillans, 281-282, 281f
Scrapie, 411
anibiotics of choice for, 41t
Synec hiae
Scraping, conjuncival, 139, 140f-141f
fluoroquinolones for, 43t
jn comeal ulceration, 187
Scrolling of third eyelid, 153, 153f
 in hordeolum and meibomian adenitis, 122
in glaucoma, 70, 70f, 71f
SDAV. See Sialodacryoadenitis virus
Staphyloma, taumaic, 200, 223
in uveis, 212
Seidel test, 99
Stapling for tear-staining syndrome, 165, 165f
Syneresis, vitreous, 273, 273f, 278
Self-tauma, prevenion of in corneal ulceraion,
Stars of Winslow, 207
Synophthalmus, 31
186
Stationarymight blindess, congenital 39
Systemic disease
Senile cataract, 267
Stereopsis, 4
 adnexal abnomalities due to, 405t 
Senile inis atrophy, 228,228f
Sticktight flea, 128t
bacterial
Sensory relina, 285
Storage disease, 312-313, 350
canine,382-386,382f,383f, 384f
Seplicemia
Strabismus, lesions causing, 331-332, 33f
equine, 400-402, 402f
in cattle, 409, 409f
Strangles, 400-401
feline, 385-387, 386f
neomatal equine, 406-407, 407f
Streptococci
Tuminant, 408409, 408f, 409f
Sequestration, corneal, 196-197, 197f
antibiotics of choice for, 41t
blindness due to, 386t, 403t
Serous detachment, 314
in shrangles, 400
cardiovascular, 396-398, 397f, 397t
Serous effusion in inflammatory process, 67
Stroma, comeal. See Corneal stroma
cataracts due to, 380t
Serous uveitis, 79
STT. See Schirmer tear test
choroidal depigmentation due to, 3402t
Setaria infechion, 404
Stye, 122-123, 122f, 122t, 157
conjuncival disorders due to,376t, 377t,
Shaker foal, 406
Stypandra,313,345
399t, 400t
INDEX∣
477
Sy stemic disease—cont'd
Tear film—cont'd
Toxicity—cont'd
comeal disease due to, 378t
precorneal
in ruminants, 412
endocrine, 393-395,393f 394f
anatomy and physiology of, 157-159,
vetch, 412
endophthalmiis/paneveitis due to, 385t
159f
Toxic uveiis, 214t, 222
eyelid disorders due to, 375t
defciency of, 165-166
Toxoplasmosis, 390t, 392, 411
fungal
dysfunction of, 160
TPA. See Tissue plasminogen achivator
canine and feline,387392,38f,t
of rabbit, 428
Traction retinal detachment, 314
390t, 391f
Tear film break-up time, 100
Transilluminator, Finoff, 86, 86f
equine, 403-404, 403f
Tear quanification tests in exotic pets, 427,
Transpalpebral enuc leation -extenter ation 
ruminant, 411
428t
technique, 368-369, 368f, 369f
globe disorders due to, 385t
Tear replacement preparations, 56, 57t-58t,
Trauma, 62-66
hematologic, 396t
169-170
cataracts due to, 266, 266f
immune-mediated, 398-399, 399f
Tear-staining syndrome in dogs, 164-165, 164f,
causes of, 62
keratitis/keratoconjunciviis due to, 400t
165f, 166f
cerebral,pupils in, 326-328, 329f, 329t
lipemia retinalis due to, 381t
Technique of Morgan, 154, 154f
consequences of, 62-66, 63f, 64f, 65f, 66f
metabolic
TEME. See Thromboembolic
eyelid,120-121,121f
canine and feline, 395-396, 395f
meningoencephalitis
third, 155, 156f
ruminant, 411-412
Temporalis muscle flap, 372
globe
meonatal, 406-408, 407f
Tenon's capsule,352,356f
penetrating injuries of, 423-424
neoplastic
Tentorial herniation, 349
proptosis of, 419-421, 420f, 421f
equine, 406, 406f
Teratology, 30
 lacrimal system, keratoconjunchivitis sicca
ruminant, 411, 411f
Tetanus, 332, 405-406
due to, 167
neurologic, 404-405
Tetracycline, 42, 165, 165f, 198
Jens, uveitis due to, 217
neuromuscular, 405-406
TFBUT. See Tear film break-up time
in optic radiation and visual cortex
neuroophthalmic disorders due to, 403t
Thelazia spp, 146t
disorders, 349
opbic nerve disease due to, 384t, 402t 
Therapeutic fommations, 33
orbital, 362t
orbital disorders due to, 404t
Therapeutic soft contact lenses, 59
in raptors and pet birds, 435-436, 435f
parasitic, 390t, 392-393
Thiamine deficiency, 349
scleral, 200, 201f
protozoa]
Third eyelid, 151-156
uveal, 214t, 222-223
equine, 402-403
 anatomy and physiology of, 151, 152f
Treponema cuniculi, 429,429f
Tuminant, 411
disease of, 152-154, 153f, 154f, 323
Tiamcinolone, 47, 215, 221
pupilary disorders due to, 402t
embryonic and fetal development of, 28-29,
Tnchiasis, 113, 114f, 115, 115f
retinal/chorioretinal scarrng and atrophy
30f
Tichromacy, 8
due to, 381t
examination of, 87, 151-152
Tichromalic vision, 290
retinal detachment due to, 383t, 402t
gland of, 157,158f
Tifluorothymidine, 45 
tetinal hemorthage due to, 382t, 402t
inflammatory disorders of, 155
Tifluridine, 45, 45t, 145-146
scleral and episcleral disease due to, 379t
neoplasm of, 154-155, 154f, 155f, 156f
Trigeminal nerve
toxic, 412
prominence of, 151-152
anatomy and function of, 14,16f,318
uveitis due to, 379t
protrusion of, 332-333, 332f
dysfunc hion of, 335
antenior, 401t 
tauma to, 155, 156f
testing of, 100
posterior, 380t, 401t
Third eyelid flap for comeal ulcers, 188-189
Trochlear nerve
VITa]
360-degTee conjunctival grafts, 187, 187f, 188
 anatomy and function of, 14, 318
canine, 374-376, 375f, 377f
Thrombocytopenia, 396, 396t
shrabismus due to lesions of, 332, 332f
 Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis, 349,
testing of, 100
feline, 376-382, 377f, 379f, 381f, 38
409, 409f
Tropicamide, 53, 53b
ruminant, 409-411, 410f 
Thrombopathy, 396
TSCLs. See Therapeutic soft contact lenses
Systemic drug administrabion, 34f, 36-37
Ticarcillin, 185b
Tuberculosis, 390t, 409
Systemic lupus erythematosus, eyelid skin
Ticks,eyelid,128t
Tumor. See Neoplasm
disease due to, 131t
Tissue adhesives, 56, 189
Tunica vasculosa lentis, 20, 27, 28f
Systolic blood pressure, normal, 397t
Tissue plasminogen activator, 56, 280
persistent, 279
Tissue scaffolding in wound healing, 75-76
Turtles, 436-438
Tobramycin, 42, 185, 185b
TVL. See Tunica vasculosa lentis
"Tacking" for entropion, I17, 117f
TonogTaphy, 97
Tacrolimus, 50, 169, 170
Tonomety, 95-97, 95f, 96f, 97f, 232
L
Tono-Pen, 96-97, 96f
Uberreiter's syndrome, 194
anatomy of, 1, 206, 207, 208f, 295-297,
Tono-Vet rebound tonometer, 97, 97f
Ulcer, corneal. See Comeal ulceration
295f, 296f, 297f
Topical anesthetics
Ultrafiltaon,aqueus 230
examination of, 90-91, 92-93, 92f
for injections,36
Ultrasonogtaphy, 103-104, 103f, 104f
function of, 285, 287f
for microbiologic samplings, 83-84
Uvea, 203-229
hyperreflectivity of, etinopathies and, 307
Topical applicabion of drugs, 33, 34f
anatomy and physiology of, 203-208, 204f
Tarsal gland,107,108f
Tortoises, 436-438
in blood-ocular barier, 207-208, 208f 
Tarsorhaphy,temporary, for comeal ules,
Toxicity
choroid in, 206-207,207f, 208f
188-189, 188f
cataracts due to, 267
ciliary body in, 203-206, 205f, 206f,
Tcells
cerebral disturbances due to, 349
207f
cyclosporine and, 48 -49
enrofloxacin, 42-43
iris in, 203, 204f, 205f
 in immune-mediated disease, 71
locoweed, 167,412
congenital abnomalibies of, 209-211, 209f,
Tear film
oxygen, 313-314
210f,211f,211t
conjunchiva and, 135
retinopathy due to, 313-314, 313f
cysts of, 224-225, 224f
478
|INDEX
Uvea—cont'd
Veratrum californium, 31,32f
Vitreous—cont'd
glaucoma secondary to, 250b,253
Vertebral sinuses, 13
degeneration of, 280
hyphema, 223-224, 224f
Veshibular system, 339-342, 340f
retinal detachment and, 315
immune mechanisms and, 209
disorders of, 341-342
elongation of, 279
inis atrophy in, 227-228, 228f
eye position in, 341
embryonic and fetal development of, 24, 26f
inis hypoplasia in 227
strabismus due to, 331
examinabion of, 93-94
neoplasmof 225227,22b,22f, f
nystagmus and, 339-341, 340b
hemorrhage of, 280, 280f
227f
Vestibuloocular reflex, 17t
hyalocentesis of, 282-283, 283f, 283t
pathologic reactions in, 208-209
Vetch toxicity, 412
infec hion and inflammabion of, 280-281
surgical procedures on, 228
Vidarabine, 45, 45t, 146
lens luxabion and, 273, 282
Uveibis, 208, 211-222
Viral infection
mass in, 282, 282f
anterior (See Anterior uveitis)
canine, 374-376, 375f, 377f
opacities of, 281
associated with neoplasia, 78-79
conjuncival, 143-146,144b, 144f, 145t
pathologic teactions in, 278-279
cataract and, 263-264, 269
in birds, 436
persistent hyperplastic primary, 279-280,
clinical signs of, 211-212, 212f
in rabbits, 430
280f
diagmosis of,213-215,213t, 214t, 215t
equine, 399-400
cataracts and, 265-266
mmune-mediated, 216-222
 in encephalitis, 404-405
teplacement of, 283-284
 dental disease and, 217
ofeyelid skin, 130t
retinal detachment and, 282
due to Dirofilaria immitis, 222
feline, 376-382, 377f, 379f, 381f, 38
surgical removal of portion of, 282-283,
equine recurrent, 217-222,218f, 219f,
ruminant, 409 411, 410f
283f, 283t
220f, 221f
uveal, 214t
synchysis scinillans of, 281-282, 281f
feline, 217
Viral papillomatosis of eyelid, 126, 126f
syneresis of, 273, 273f, 278
lens-induced, 216-217, 217f
Vision, 1-8
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome, 72,
phacoclastic in rabbits, 222,222f
assessment of, 318-320, 320f,321f
132t, 216, 398-399, 399f
pigmentary in golden retrievers, 217
behavioral tesing of, 101-102
von Willebrand's disease, 396t
toxic, 222
color, 7-8, 8f, 9f
Voniconazole, 43, 44t, 192t
uveodermatologic syndrome, 216
deficits of
V-to-Y blepharoplasty, 120, 120f
infectious, 216
clinical sigms of, 323t
phacoclastic,264
in glaucoma, 238, 238f
 inflammatory exudate in, 72, 72f
lesions in, 323-328
Waardenburg*s syndrome, 211
phacolytic, 263-264
depth perception and, 4,5f
Wall eye, 211
posterior
dichromabic, 291
Wanderers, 407
defined, 69
field of view and, 3-4, 3f, 4f
Watch eye, 211
systemic causes of, 380t, 401t
flickering light sensitivity and, 2-3
Wedge resection
in rabbits, 431
light sensiivity and, 1-2, 2f, 3f
for ectropion, 120
sequelae of, 212-213
loss of in reinopathies, 306-307, 307f
for entropion, 117
seTous, 79
motion sensitivity and, 2
for eyelid coloboma, 109, 112f
systermic causes of, 379t
postoperative, cataract surgery, 270-271
Whartonesphalasty20
taumabc, 222-223
scotopic, 289
White blood cells, comeal stromal infltration
treatment of, 215-216
tnichromatic, 290
with, 180, 180f
Uveodermatologic syndrome, 72, 132t, 216,
visual acuity and, 4-7, 5f, 6f, 7f
White petroleum ointment, 58t
398-399, 399f
Visual acuity, 4-7, 5f, 6f, 7f
Wolves, visual streak of, 6-7, 7f
Visual axis, 352, 353f
Wound healing, 73-77
Visual cortex
conjunctival, 135
Vaccine
01o 
comeal, 176-178, 177f
for equine Tecurrent uveitis, 221-222
disease of, 348-349
diseases resulting from defecive, 76-77
ischemic dermatopathy induced by, 132t
Visual evoked potentials, 102, 102f, 322
gemminal cells in, 74-75, 74f, 75f
Valacyclovir, 45,146
Visual feld, 34, 3f, 4f
nutribion in, 76
Vancomycin,185b
 central visual pathway and, 9
tissue scaffolding in, 75-76
Vasculanizabion
Visual pathways, central, structure and function
comeal, 179, 179f
of, 8-10, 10f, 11f
X
vitreous, 279
Visual streak, visual acuity and, 6-7, 7f
X-inradiation, 59-60
Vascularsystem
Vitamins, 59
Vitamin A defciency,292, 312, 312b, 313f,30
Y
arterial supply in, 10-12, 12f
Vitamin B, deficiency, 349
Yeasts in uveitis, 214t
venous drainage in, 12-13, 13f
Vitiligo, 133t
disease of, eyelid skin, 132t
Vitrectomy, 283,283f
7
embryonic and fetal development of, 26-27,
Vitreoretinal surgery, advanced, 284
Zinc-responsiveness denmatitis, 132t
28f
Vitreoretinopathy, proliferative,278-279
Zonal fibers of ciliary body, 203, 206f
hyaloid, 20
Vitreous, 277-284
Zygomabic mucocele, 363
retinal, 287,288t, 290f, 292f
anatomy and physiology of, 277-278, 278f
Zygomatic salivary gland
Vasoactive agents, 141
aqueoushumormisdirecionsyndrome of82
in ferret, 432
Venogaphrb359
asteroid hyalosis of, 281-282, 281f
telationship to orbit, 352, 356f
Venous drainage, 12-13, 13f
congenital and developmental abnormalities
Zygomaic sialogTam, contrast, 103
Venous plexus, orbital, 13, 13f
of, 279-280, 280f