BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline
British
Small Animal
Gastroenterology
Veterinary
Association
Second edition
Edited by
Edward J. Hall,
James W. Simpson and
David A. Williams
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline
Gastroenterology
Second edition
Editors:
Edward J. Hall
MAVetMBPhDDipECVIM-CAMRCVS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Science, University of Bristol,
LangfordHouse,Langford,BristolBS405DU
James W. Simpson
SDABVM&SMPhi MRCVS
Royal(Dick)School ofVeterinaryStudies,
EasterBushVeterinaryCentre,Roslin,MidlothianEH259RG
and
David A. Williams
MAVetMBPhDMRCVSDipACVIMDipECVIM-CA
DepartmentofSmallAnimalClinicalSciences,4474TAMU,
TexasA&MUniversity,CollegeStation,TX77843-4474,USA
BritishSmall Animal VelerinaryAssociation
WoodrowHouse1Telford Way,Waterwells
BusinessarkQuedgeley,GloucesterGL22AB
A Company Limitedby Guarantee in England.
Registered Ccmpany No.2837793.
Registered as a Charity.
Copyright@2005 BSAVA
1561#8
First edition 1996
Secondedition 2005
mechanicalhotocopyingrecordingorotherwisewithout priorwritten
permission of the copyright nolder.
ThefollowingillustrationswerereatedbyEllenwilliamsMold
Flintshire:Fures5.135.145.15,5.195.20,.3.242.
22.2,22.3,22.4and22.6.
Figures 1.11,5.5,5.7,5.8,5.9,5.10,5.12 and 17.1 were drawn
by S.J.Elmhurst BA Hons.and are printed with her permission.
Acataloguerecord forthisbookisavailablefromtheBritishLibrary.
ISBN0905214730
The publishers andcontributorscannot lakeresponsibility lorinformation
inthispublication.Detailsofthiskindmustbeverifiedbyindividualusers
from the appropriateliterature.
Tyesetby:FuinDesignWarhamDorset
Printed by:ReplikaPressPvtLtd,India
MITRA
636./.8.09
Other titles in the
BSAVA Manuals series:
Manualof Advanced Veterinary Nursing
Manual of Canine & Feline Behavioural Medicine
Manualof Canine &Feline Clinical Pathology
Manual of Canine & Feline Dentistry
Manual of Canine & Feline Emergency and Criticai Care
Manual of Canine & Feline Endocrinology
Manual of Canine & Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
Manual of Canine & Feline infectious Diseases
Manual of Canine & Feline Nephrology and Urology
Manual of Canine&Feline Neurology
Manual of Canine & Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Manual of Canine & Feline Oncology
Manual of Companion Animal Nutrition and Feeding
Manual of Exotic Pets
Manual of Ornamental Fish
Manual of Psittacine Birds
Manual of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfow!
Manual of Reptiles
Manual of Small Animal Anaesthesia and Analgesia
Manual of Small Animal Cardiorespiratory Medicine and Surgery
Manual of Small Animal Dermatology
Manual of Small Animal Diagnostic imaging
Manual of Smail Anima! Fracture Repair and Management
Manual of Smail Animal Ophthalmology
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatoiogy
Manual of Veterinary Care
Manual of Veterinary Nursing
Manual of Wildlife Casualties
Forthcoming titles:
Manual of Canine & Feline Abdominal Surgery
Manual of Canine & Feline Articular Surgery
Manual of Canine & Feline Head, Neck and Thoracic Surgery
 Manual of Canine & Feline Lameness Diagnosis
For information on these and all BSAVA publications please visit our website: www.bsava.com
teni
1
List of contributors
V
Foreword
vii
Preface
vit
Part 1:
Diagnostic procedures
1
 Approach to the investigation of gastrointestinal diseases
1
James W. Simpson
2
Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
13
Jorg M. Steiner
3
Imaging the gastrointestinal tract, liver and pancreas
22
Robert T. O'Brien
4
Gastrointestinal endoscopy
34
James W. Simpson
5
Gastrointestinal immunology and biopsy
Gastrointestinal immunology
50
Michael J. Day
b
Biopsy: sample collection
57
John M. Wiliams
Bjopsy: handling, processing and interpretation
62
Michaei J. Day
Part 2:
 Presenting complaints
6
Dysphagla and regurgitation
69
Robert J. Washabau
7
Acute and chronic vomiting
73
Kenneth W. Simpson
8
Acute diarrhoea
78
Michael S. Leib
6
Chronic diarrhoea
82
Aibert E. Jergens
10
 Malabsorption
28
David A. Williams
11
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
91
Michael D. Willard
12
Dyschezia and tenesmus
94
Aibert E. Jergens
13
Ascites
97
Edward J. Hail
14
Jaundlce
103
Susan E. Bunch
1训
15
Hepatic encephalopathy
109
Jill E.Maddison
16
Infectious and parasitic diseases
112
Stanley L. Marks
Part 3:
Systems approach
17
Disorders of the oral cavity
122
Linda J. DeBowes
18
Disorders of the pharynx and oesophagus
133.
Robent J. Washabau
19
 Diseases of the stomach
151
Kenneth W. Simpson
20
 Diseases of the small intestine
176
Alexander J. German
21
Diseases of the colon and rectum
203
Aibert E. Jergens and Debra L. Zoran
22
Disorders of the perineum and anus
213
John M. Williams
23
Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
222
David A. Williams
24
Diseases of the liver
240
Penny Watson
25
Diseases of the biliary system
269
Jan Rothuizen
Part 4:
Critical care and therapeutics
26
Critical care of patients with gastrointestinal disease
279
Maureen McMichaei
27
Feeding tubes
288
Debra L.Zoran
28
Therapeutics
297
Edward J. Hall
Appendices
1
Drug formulary
313
2
Abbreviations used throughout the text
319
3
Conversion tables
321
Index
322
iv
Contributors
Susan E. Bunch DVM PhD DipACVIM
13514 Steeplechase Drive, Bowie, MD 20715, USA
     r    Ss
University of Bristol, Langford, Bristol BS40 5DU
LInda J. DeBowes DvM MS DipACVIM (Small Animal) DipAVDC
Shoreline Veterinary Dental Practice, 16037 Aurora Avenue North, Seatle, WA 98133-5653, USA
Alexander J. German BVSc(Hons) PhD CertSAM DipECVIM-CA MRCVS
Crown Street, Liverpool L7 7EX
Edward J. Hall MA VetMB PhD DipECVIM-CA MRCVS
Division of Companion Animal Studies, Department of Clinical Veterinary Science, University of Bristol,
Langford House, Langford, Bristol BS40 5DU
Albert E. Jergens DvM Ms DipAcVIM
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University,
Ames, IA 50014, USA
Michael S. Leib DVM Ms DipACVIM
Virginia Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
Jill E. Maddison BVSc Dip.Vet.Clin.Stud PhD FACVSc MRCVS
Beamont Animals' Hospital, Royal College Street, London NW1 OTU
Stanley L. Marks BVSc PhD DipACVIM (Intornal Medicine, Oncology) DipACVN
Davis, CA 95616, USA
Maureen McMichael DvM DipACvEcC
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 4474 TAMU, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4474, USA
Robert T. O'Brien DvM Ms ACvR
Vet Med Consultants, 4015 East Cactus Road, Phoenix, AZ 85032, USA
Jan Rothuizen DvM PhD DECVIM-CA
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
James W. Simpson sDA BVM&s MPhil MACVS
Royal (Dick) Schocl of Veterinary Studies, Easter Bush Veterinary Centre, Roslin, Midlothian EH25 9RG
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-6401, USA
TX 77843-4474,USA
Robert J. Washabau VmD PhD DipACvlM
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA
Penny WatSOn MA VetMB CertVR DSAM DipECVIM MHCVS
Madingly Road, Cambrldge CB3 0ES
Michael D. Willard DvM DipACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine, 4474 TAMU, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-4474, USA
David A. Williams MA VetMB PhD MRCVS DipACVIM DipECVIM-CA
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, 4474 TAMU, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843-4474, USA
John M. Williams MA VetMB CertVR FRCvs DipECvS
Oakwood Veterinary Referrals, 267 Chester Road, Hartford, Northwich, Cheshire CW8 1LP
Debra L. Zoran DvM PhD DipACVIM
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, 4474 TAMU, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843-4474, USA
vi
Foreword
For this second edition of the BSA VA Manual of Canine and Feline
Gastroenterologythe editors have successfully drawn together the
 knowledge of internationally recognized specialists.
The Manual is divided into four sections and has a logical and
 user-friendly layout. The first section provides a comprehensive
 overview ofdiagnostic methods and their interpretation. The second 
section takes a problem-solving approach to the investigation of
 presenting signs. This is complemented by the third section, which
takes a'systems approach'. Critical care and therapeutics comprise
the final section to complete the manual. Sections are cross-
referenced in order to make certain this is a 'joined-up' reference
resource. The text is amply supplemented throughout with clear
tables, photographs and excellent line drawings.
Thanks are due to the editors for their hard work in preparing the
manual and to the authors for contributing their expertise and time
 to producing yet another high quality publication. As usual, thanks 
also go to the Publications Committee and the team at Woodrow
House, without whose superb efforts no manual could be produced.
As with the previous edition I am confident that this manual will
 become an immensely valuable part of every practice library.
Ian Mason BVetMed PhD CertSAD DipEcVD MRCVS
BSAVA President 2004-2005
vif
Preface
This second edition of the BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Gastroenterology builds on
the strengths of the first edition, incorporating not just new information available since its
original publication in 1996, but also additional chapters on diagnostic techniques and a new
based editor, with contributions from many eminent gastroenterologists who are leaders in
their field, strengthens the international appeal of the Manual. This is important because
there are gastrointestinal diseases which, although currently restricted in geographica!
distribution, are already important to overseas readers, and may be important in the future
to British veterinary surgeons as quarantine regulations are relaxed.
The book is divided into four parts - diagnostic techniques, presenting complaints, organ
systems, and critical care and therapeutics - which are heavily cross-referenced tohelp give
chapter is wellillustrated, and the inclusion of video-endoscopicimages highlights the power
of this diagnostic modality. Other chapters in the first section include descriptions of how to
perform radiographic and ultrasound examination of the gastrointestinal tract in practice
section concludes with a description of how to collect biopsy samples by endoscopy and
surgery, and an exploration of the role of histopathology in diagnosis.
In the second part, short chapters provide a practical approach to the investigation of
presenting complaints such as regurgitation, vomiting, diarrhoea, Gl bleeding, ascites and
o ooidde swass paseg-uebio euope aow aui sidope ted pn aul 'aounen
 gastroenterology, passing through the conventional route from mouth to anus. The section
includes new chapters on oral, anal and perineal diseases, as well as new information in
chapters reprised from the first edition: the role of Helicobacter in gastritis; the distinction
between antibiotic-responsive diarrhoea and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth; the
immune dysregulation that underlies inflammatory bowel disease; and latest information on
the diagnosis and treatment of pancreatic diseases. Hepatic diseases are subdivided into
The Manual concludes with a fourth part containing chapters on the increasingly sophisti-
cated medical therapies available to treat gastrointestinal and hepatic diseases, and an
reader is referred to the forthcoming BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Abdominal
Surgery for instructions on how to perform such procedures. References for each chapter
are restricted to important papers published since 2000, with further reading indicating key
. reviews for the keen reader requiring more information.
In summary, the editors believe this new edition of the BSA VA Manual of Canine and Feline
and hepatic disease in a format that gives the busy practitioner a logical approach to
gastrointestinal problems and their solutions.
Edward J. Hall
James w. Simpson
 David A. williams
December 2004
vii
Approach to the investig
lation of
gastrointestinal diseases
James W. Simpson
Introduction
and the health of the owner. Where zoonotic disease is
suspected pracautions must be taken to ensure the
Disorders of the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract are one of
safety of all practice personnel and other patients.
the commonest reasons for seeking veterinary assist-
ance in small animal practice. The majority of alimen-
tary disorders in dogs are self-limiting and are usually
Clinical recognition versus problem
associated with dietary indiscretions; these patients
solving
respond well to symptomatic treatment. However, in a
significant minority of dogs and in most cats, an inves-
When approaching a new clinical case the clinician has
tigation will be required either because the animal fails
two options:
to respond to symptomatic treatment or because it is
seriously ill from the outset.
Use clinical recognition
Traditionally the Gl tract includes nat anly the
 Employ a problem-solving approach.
1
digestive tract but the liver and pancreas. Itis naturalto
assume that patients presenting with vomiting and/or
The majority of dogs and cats presented with Gl
diarrhoea have a primary Gl disorder but these signs
signs will be diagnosed and treated by recognition of a
 set of clinical signs previously observed by the clinician
 Many of the signs are non-specific or vague and may
in similar cases. The majority of these patients will
not point directly to an alimentary tract problem. Even
respond to this treatment and make a tull recovery.
when symptoms such as jaundice are present, the
Good examples of this would be pafients with parvovirus
Infection, haemorrhagic gastroenteritis and parasitism.
than just liver disease and be aware of the possible
Where the patient failsto make a satlsfactory recov-
 presenca of pre-hepatic or post-hepalic disease. In
ery, is referred with achronic historyof alimentary tract
extreme cases the clinician can be completely misled;
disease or presents with a set of clinical signs which do
 for example, a patient presenting with coughing, dysp-
not fit with a recognized pattem, then the clinician
noea, pyrexia and exercise intolerance may have aspi-
should adopt a problem-soiving approach to the case.
ration pneumonia secondary to oesophageal disease.
It is therefore very important when investigating a
patient with suspected Gl disease to start with the
Problem-solving approach
collection of a thorough history and then carry out a
full physical examination. In this way systemic dis-
With this method the clinician uses a systematic logical
eases will not be missed and vague or misleading
 approach based on identifying all of the patient's prob-
presentations of alimentary tract disease will not be
lems. The basis of this system is shown in Figure 1.1
misinterpreted. The history assumes special impor-
and always starts with the clinical examination, com-
tance when considering the alimentary tract because
[eoishyd yonoou e pue Aoisiu paliiap e busud
the majority of the tract is relatively inaccessible to
examination of all body systems. The importance of
routine physicai examination, although diagnostic
carrying outa thoroughclinicalexaminationandformu-
imaging may supplement information which might
lating a diagnostic plan cannot be over-emphasized.
otherwise have been obtained from the physical ex-
The use of sophisticated diagnostic tests, such as
amination. For example, physical examination cf the
ultrasonography and endoscopy, should be reserved
oesophagus is limited to the cervical region, and
for those cases where the clinical examination and
 disorders involving the thoracic oesophagus may be
investigation suggest their use; they should not be
suspected from the history but cannot be confirmed
used to replace the clinical examination.
from the physical examination alone.
 Once the clinical examination has been carried out
It is also extremely important to be aware that some
a problem list can be established. This should take the
of the diseases of the Gi tract are infectious, some of
form of a bullet point list of all abnormalities found
which are zoonotic. Therefore, when collecting a his-
during the history and examination. From this list the
tory from a client it may be useful not only to ask about
clinician can determine whether the patient's condition
vaccination status, but the heaith of in-contact animals
is life-threatening and in need of immediate therapy
Chapter 1Approachto the investigationofgastrointestinal diseases
reachinga definitive diagnosis.Forexample,a patient
Clinical features
presented withregurgitationof food shortly aftereating
Patient details:
carries a differential diagnostic list that includes disor-
breedaend thp
ders of the pharynx and oesophagus.In this case,
Owner's complaint orreason for seeking veterinary advice
radiography is likely toyield highlyvaluable additional
Previous medical history including:
infomationandpossiblyadefinitivediagnosis.Detec-
details of vaccination and worming
tionof aforeignbodypermitstheclinician toproceed
immediately toa treatmentprotocol.However,the
administration of anymedications
presence ofamegaoesophagus confirms suspicions
。
other pets in the household
human ilness
a definitive diagnosis;thismight includeendoscopy to
dietary management
lookfora strictureoroesophagitis andblood testsfor
overseastravel
hypoadrenocorticismandmyastheniagravis.
reproductive history
Theultimate aim of the diagnosticplan is to account
Current history:
foralltheidentifiedproblemsandobtain adefinitive
when did the signs first appear?
diagnosis.Consequently,the clinician caninitiate spe-
expansion of the owner's complaint
cific therapyin orderto treat thepatient.If thepatient
Physical examination of albody systems
failstorespondadequatelytheclinicianshouldbe
prepared tore-assess the patient and,if necessary,
Diagnosis
carry out further diagnostictests in ordertoreconfirm
Problem list:
thediagnosisoraddress any inaccuracy indiagnosis.
a summary of allidentified problems from the abovedata
Itmustberememberedthatthepatientmayhavemore
Productionofadifferentialdiagnosisforeachproblem
than one disease present.
Diagnostic plan:
In some cases the clinicianmaynot reacha defini-
a structured setof investigative procedures aimed atidentifying the
tive diagnosis throughcostconstraints orbecause the
undelarliniffttainui
abilitytocarryout specialized testsislimited.In the
Revised prcblem listbased on primary investigations
former situation,as many differential diagnoses as
Second or third diagnostic planto reacha definitive diagnosis
possibleshouldberuledout and then themost likely
condition treated,provided this treatment will dono
Treatment
harm.It isessentialtoevaluatethetreatmentregime
Treatment protocol
and re-assess the patient if it fails.In the latter situation,
the caseshould bereferred toaspecialistcentre for
1.1
Methcd of carrying outa problem-solving
further specificinvestigation.
approachto the investigationaf alimentary tract
dsorders.
History
The first step in any investigationistorecord the
priortofurtherinvestigation.lfthisisthecaseabalance
patient's details.This allows the clinician to consider
must befound betweenreaching a definitive diagnosis
specificconditionsor anybreedpredisposition to ali-
andproviding supportivetherapy.Whereverpossible
mentarytractdisease(Figure1.2).Considerationshould
attemptsshould bemade to collect samplesprior to
be given to the patient'sage asyoung animals are
administrationofevenlife-savingtreatment,asthiswill
morelikelytohaveacongenitalorhereditarycondition,
prevent the emergency treatment interfering with the
whileolderanimals aremore likelyto haveacquired or
results of diagnostic tests. These samples will also
neoplastic disease.
provide a setof baseline results on which to assess
Thepreviousmedical historyof thepatientshould
response to treatment.
bereviewed.It mayyield important informationregard-
Sometimes thebodysystem(ororgan)responsible
ing the cause of the present problem.For example,
for theseproblemsmaybeidentified.Itis important to
repeatedepisodesofchronicvomiting,diarrhoeaand
assesswhetherall theproblemsfitapatternwhichcan
anorexia ina catmaybeassociatedwith chronic
be associatedwith a singledisease orwhetherthere is
pancreatitis;a dogwhich haspreviouslyrecovered
evidence of two or more concurrent diseases.For
example,whereproblemssuchasvomiting,diarrhoea,
small intestinal absorptivedifficulties.
jaundice and abdominalpainarerecorded,apattern
Whethertheenvironment inwhich thepatient lives
can beseen where allthe signscouldberelated toone
presents anincreased riskof alimentary tract disease
disease,suchaspancreatitis.Otherwise,adifferential
should be considered.A farmdog orcatmaybeable
diagnosis should be made,and from thisa diagnostic
toscavengeorhave access toavarietyof chemicals
plan established.
andothertoxic agentswhichpredispose to alimentary
Thediagnosticplan aims tofollowup the abnor-
tract disease.
malitiesdetectedandshouldconsider themostvalu-
vaccinatedandwormed isunlikely todevelopdistem-
list.Selectionofdiagnostictestsshould bemadeonthe
per,infectious canine hepatitis,leptospirosis,feline
basis of how useful theywillbeinconfirmingorruling
or canine parvovirus,feline leukaemia,hookworms,or
out as many differential diagnoses as possible.Select-
whipworms,whilethose living inamulti-pethousehold
ing suchprocedures willbe costeffective and helpful in
andwith accesstooutdoors aremore likely to.
2
Chapter1Approachto theinvestigationofgastrointestinal diseases
Breed
Confirmed or suspected disease predisposition
s6og
Airedale Terier
Pancreatic tumour
Basenji
Lymphocytic plasmacytic enteritis
Beagle
Chronic hepatis
Bedlington Terrier
Copper hepalotoxicosis
Belgian Shepherd Dog
Gastric carcinoma
Boston Terrier
Vascular ring anomaly
Boxer
Histiocytic colitis
Bulldog
Vascular ring anomaly
Cairn Terrier
Portosystemic shunt,microvascular dysplasia
Chow Chow
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Cocker Spaniel
Chronicais phagel dagi
Dobermann
Chronic hepatitis
FoxTerrier
Anal tumours
German Shepherd Dog
vascular ring anomaly
Golden Retriever
Inflammatoryboweldseasepeciallyolt
GreatDane
Gastric volvulus; megaoesophagus
lrish Setter
Megaoesophagus;gastricvovulus gluten sensitity, vascula rinanomaly
IrishWolfhound
Megaoesophagus;portosystemic shunt
Lhasa Apso
Pyloric stenosis
Jack RussllTerrier
Salivary gland necrosis
Poodle
Hepatic encephalopathy
Maitese
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis; lymphangiectasia
Miniature Schnauzer
Haemorhagic gastroenteris pancreatitis
Norwegian Lundehund
Protein-losing enteropathy and lymphangiectasia
Rottweiler
Lymphangiectasia;parvovirus enteritis;protein-losingenteropathy
Rough Collie
Gastrictumour;exocrine pancreatic insuficiency
Scotish Terrier
Chronic hepatitis
Shar Pei
Inflammatory bowel disease;food intolerance
Shih Tzu
Pyloric stenosis,cricopharyngeal achalasia
Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier
Protein-losing enteropathyandoftenconcurrent protein-losingnephropathy
WestHighlandWhiteTerrer
Chronic hepatopathy
Yorkshire Terrer
Portosystemic shunt; ymphangiectasia protein-losing enteropathy
Cats
General
Hepaticlipidosis
Abyssinian
Megaoesophagus; inflammatoryboweldisease
Bengal
Inflammatory bowel disease;feline infectious peritonitis
Manx
Constipation and faecal incontinence
Persian
Feliniousiislytiae/ihlngi
Siamese
Megaoesophaguspylonicstenosisgastrictumours
Sphinx
Inflammatoryboweldisease
1.2
Confirmcd and susoected species and breed predispositions to alimentary tract cisease.
3
Dietplays animportantpart in the aetiologyof
alimentary tract disease,especially in the dog.In
alimentary tractdisease,theymayallbeassociated
particular the type and amount of food given,including
withdiseaseofotherbodysystems.
all snacks and treats,should be considered bearing in
In additiontrcordingthignsitisportan
mind clients rarelyview the latter as food”ordiet'.
note their duration and frequency as this helpsreflect
Important questionsinclude:
the severityof the disease.Forexample,apatientwith
inflammatorybowel disease(IBD)maypresentwitha
Doesthepatientscavengeeitherfood orwater
historyofchronicvomitingforseveral weeksbutmay
(i.e. drinking out of rivers or dirty puddles)?
Have therebeenanysuddendietarychangesor
be still eating andrelatively bright,whereas another
patientwithapyloricobstructionmaypresentwith
changes in thepatient's appetite?
severe vomiting,dehydrationand anorexia.Weight
It should benoted thatalimentarytract disease can
lossisanothercommonfeatureofalimentarytract
presentwithanormalappetite,anorexia orpolyphagia.
disease.Therapidityandseverityofweightloss should
Manyof the signs observed inpatientswith alimen-
be assessed.Clearlya patient that hasbeenvomiting
tary tract disease are not specific（Figure 1.3).It is
forseveral weeksbut hasmaintaineditsbodycondition
therefore very important toask questionsabout all
is lesslikelytobeseriouslyillthanapatientwhichhas
bodysystemstoensure thatadistinctioncanbemade
the same signs but has lost20%of itsbodyweight.
betweenprimarydiseaseof thealimentarytractand
Although norule can be established,it has been the
systemic disease(Figure 1.4).Although signs such as
author's experience thatpatientswitha significant
weight lossare often hypoalbuminaemic.Yet many of
thesepatientswill notshowsignsofascites,hydrotho-
Sign
AorS
Sign
AorS
raxorsubcutaneousoedemawhichwouldnormally
Abdominal pain
A+S
Haemaiochezia
A+S
draw the clinician'sattention to the possibility of
Anorexia
A+S
Halitosis
A+S
hypoalbuminaemia.Serum albumin and globulin con-
centrationsshouldalwaysbeevaluatedintheinitial
Ascites
A+S
Jaundice
A+S
diagnosticevaluation of thesepatients.
Behaviour changes
A+S
Melaena
A+S
Borborygmi
Appetite
A
Nausea
A+S
Appetite willvary considerably inpatientswith GI
Coprophagia
A+S
Pica
A+S
disease.Dysphagic patients are usually hungry and
Depression,lethargy
A+S
Polyphagia
A+S
may evenbe described aspolyphagicdue to repeated
Polyuria and polydipsia
A+S
attempts toeat.Whereweight lossisassociatedwith
Diarrhoea
A+S
true polyphagia,the clinician should considerthe path-
Dyschezia
A
Ptyalism
A+S
Dysphagia
A+S
Tenesmus
A
to assess thequantity and qualityof food ingested and
Flatus
A
Vomiting
A+S
whether signs couldbe due to digestive or absorptive
failure,suchaswithexocrinepancreaticinsufficiency
Haematemesis
A+S
Weight loss
A+S
(EPI)or IBD.Some patients are hypermetabolic and
S gns associated with alimcntary ract discase
loseweight because of increasedutilizationof nutri-
1.3
are almostallnon-specific.Theymaybe
ents,as can occurwith feline hyperthyroidismand
observed in dogs and catswith either primary alimentary
neoplastic disease.Interestingly,although most EPI
tract disease (A) or systemic disease (S).
patients arepolyphagic,most IBDpatients arenotand
may have a normal or even depressed appetite.Co-
Central nervoussystem traumaand tumours
prophagiaandpicaareoften associatedwithEPl but
Diabetesmellitus
couldbeassociatedwith specificnutrientdeficiency.
Drug interaction:digoxin,morphine,codeine,xylazine
Anorexia is also observed inpatients who are inpain,
Feline immunodeticiency virus
or where nausea ispresent.
Felineinfectiousperitonitis
Feline leukaemia virus
Thirst
Hypoadrenocorticism
Usually thirstand urinationremainnormal inpatients
Hypoparathyroidism
Limbic epilepsy
beseen inprimaryalimentary tractdiseasewhere the
Masticatory myositis
Meningitis
patientislosing waterand electrolytesthroughvomiting
Metastatic disease
and/ordiarrhoea.Polyuria and polydipsia in conjunction
Motion sickness
with alimentarysignsmaybeobservedwherethereis
Myasthenia gravis
systemic disease present, such as hypoadrenocortic-
Poisoningleadthylenglycolorganophoshats
Primary hyperparathyroidism
ism,hyperthyroidism,hepatopathy and renal disease.
Pyometra
Halitosis
Renal failure
This ismost often associated with oropharyngeal dis-
Vestibulardisease
easeorcoprophagia.Occasionallyit willbeobserved
This figure lists some of the systemic diseases
withpulmonary diseasewhereaforeignbodyispresent
1.4
that may lead tosignsofalimentary tract
orinoesophagealorgastricdiseasewherethemucosa
cisease in the dog and cat.
is infected,and sometimes inmalabsorption.
Salivation
arching the back or adopting theprayingposition.
Increasedproductionofsalivaorptyalismisanormal
Thismaybefurtherevaluated bypalpation of the
physiological response to the sight,smell or taste of
abdomen during thephysical examination.
food.However,it maybe associated with:oropharyn-
Ascites
geal disease;as aresponse to irritant drug administra-
Abdominalenlargementassociatedwithfluidaccumu-
tion;where an oesophageal foreign body exists:and
lationis animportant clinical finding in thepatient with
with limbicepilepsy.Excessive salivationhasbeen
alimentary tract disease. There are many types of fluid
observedincatswithportosystemicshuntsandindogs
thatcanaccumulateintheabdomenand determining
withgastricneoplasia.Impairment of theswallowing
which typeof fluid ispresentcanbeof considerable
processwillprevent theanimal fromremovingnormal
diagnosticvalue(Figure1.5;see Chapter13).
amounts of saliva from the mouth,giving theimpres-
sion of hypersalivation.
Dysphagia
Thismaybedefinedasdifficultyineatingandis usually
Gas
associatedwitheitheroral,pharyngealoroesophageal
Theproductionofexcessiveamountsof gasevidenced
disease (Figure 1.6), and almost always with eating.
by eructation.orflatulence maybe associatedwith
Regurgitation,whichisapassiveprocessinvolvingno
inappropriatedietoraerophagia.However,accumula-
abdominal contractions,is themostcommonmanifes-
tion of gasmayreflecta moreserious alimentary tract
tationof dysphagia.Inhalation of food and fluid is
disease,suchasgastricdilatationandvolvulus,motil-
ity disorders(e.g.ileus)or perhaps,most commonly,
willusuallybeadditional signsassociatedwiththe
malabsorptive disorders.
respiratorysystem,such ascoughingordyspnoea;the
animal may also havepyrexia and showexercise
Abdominal pain
intolerance. Occasionally dysphagic patients may
The detection ofpaininanimals canbe difficult due to
presentonly with signs ofrespiratory diseasebecause
theirindividualcharacterand painthreshold.Changes
the owner hasnotobserved theregurgitation(see
in behaviour that suggest abdominal pain include
Chapter 6).
Fluid type
Potential cause
True transudate
Hypoproteinaemia
Modified transudate
Cardiac failure:portal hypertension(liver disease)
Exudate
Septicandaspticperitonitisfelinenfctiousperitonitis
Bile efusion
Rupturedgallbladder;perforatedbileduct
Gut contents
Perforating foreign bodyor tumour; gunshol
Urine
Rupurdkiyrl
Blood
Cloting defect,haemangicsarcoma trauma
Chylous
Tumour; trauma; idiopathic
Ascitesmayhavemany causes.Classification of the fluid present alows the differential diagnosis to bereduced
1.5
or a definitive diagnosis made.
Oral dysphagia
Pharyngeal dysphagia
Oesophageal dysphagiac
 Caustic agent ingestion
Cranial nerve defit
Botulism
Cleft palate
Cricopharyngeal achalasia
Canine and feline dysautonomia
Cranial nerve deticit
Foreign body
Diverticulum
Eosincphilic granuloma
Neoplasia:squamous cellcarcinoma,
Foreign body
Foreign body
tonsillar carcinomamelanoma
Hiatus hernia
Fractured mandible
Pharyngis
Hypoadrenocoricism
Masticatory myositis
Rabies
Lead poisoning
Pemphigus; systemic lupus erythematosus
Megaoesophagus
Sialocoele
Myasthenia gravis
Siomaiis ingiis periodontal disae
Oesophagitis
Tooth fracture and abscesses
Organophosphate poisoning
Tumour
Spirocerca lupi
Stricture formation
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Tumour
Vascular ring anomaly
Thisfigureshowshowdysphagia canbedivided intothreemaincategoriesancilustrates thediscrderswhichmay
1.6
beassociatedwitheachdivision.Poblemswithprehendingfood,constantchewingand food fallingoutof themouth.
5
Chapter 1Approach to the investigation ofgastrointestinal diseases
Regurgitation versusvomiting:Many clientsreport
theirpet tobe'vomiting'butinasignificantminorityof
Primary vomiting
Secondary (systemic) vomiting
casesthey areactuallyreferring tothepatient'regurgi-
Acute gastritis
Azotaemia and uraemia
tating'.It is therefore very important not to take the
Chronic gastritis
Central nervous system trauma
ownerscomplaint ofvomiting'at facevaluebutto
Colitis
ortumour
Gastric foreign body
Diabeticketoacidosis
questions (Figure 1.7):
Gastricneoplasia
Drugs:morphine, xylazine
Gastric ulceration
Hyperthyroidism
Is the‘vomiting'associated with eating?
Hepatitis
Hypoadrenocorticism
Doesthepatient appearanxious,salivate and
Hyperrophic gastritis
Motion sickness
retchbefore food isbrought up?
Intestinal obstruction
Poisons: ethylene glycol, lead
Are there strong abdominal contractionspresent
Intussusception
Pyometra
ordoesthepatientsimply arch itsneck and expel
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic
Vestibular disease
the food?
gastritis
What isactuallyproduced?
Pancreatitis
Peritonitis
Pyloric stenosis
Thesequestionswill help thecliniciandetermine
whichprocessispresent and direct the investigation
1.8
The aetiology of vomiting carriesa large
accordingly.
alimentary tract disorders and secondary systemic
diseases in the dog and cat.
Sign
Regurgitation
True vomiting
Prodromal salivation
No
Yes
beenretroperistalsisofduodenalsecretionsintothe
Prodromal retching
No
Yes
stomach and consequentlythepylorus mustbe patent.
Biliousvomitingis mostoftenobserved inpatients
Abdominal contractions
No
Yes
persistentlyvomitingonan emptystomach.
pHof vomitus
Neutral or high
Usually low
Occasionallypatientswill bereported tovomitfae-
cal'material.Thisis associatedwithintestinal obstruc-
Presence of bile
No
Yes
tion and retroperistalsis or with coprophagia.
Sausage-shaped vomitus
Yes
No
Haematemesis is often considered pathognomonic for
Always
primary gastric ulceration,but such bleeding may be
Undigested food
Sometimes
associatedwithprotractedvomitingwithruptureofgas-
Thisfigure shows some of the ways in which
tric capillaries,a clotting disorderor swallowing blood
1.7
regurgitation can be differentiated from true
producedin therespiratorysystem,whichiscoughedup
vomiting.
andswallowed(seeChapter 11).Wheregastriculcera-
tionispresentit may be associatedwith neoplasia,
Vomiting
eosinophilicgastritisoruseofdrugs,suchassteroidsr
Unlike regurgitation,vomiting is an active process
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.The detection of
involving contraction of abdominal muscles against a
'coffee grounds'inthe vomitusreflects thepresence of
fixed diaphragm.It maybe associated withprimary Gl
bloodwhichhasbeendegraded inthestomachby
gastricacid andpepsin.Itisimportanttonote thatnotall
(Figure 1.8).The material produced can vary consider-
patientswithgastriculceration exhibit haematemesis.
ably from undigested food,tobile,water,blood and
intestinal contents(see Chapter 7).
Faeces
Projectilevomitinghasbeen consideredpathogno-
Thefaecalcharacterof patientswithintestinal,pancre-
monicofpyloricoutlow obstruction,but in fact may
atic,hepatic or systemic disease may become
occurwheneverthereis severeGl disease.Vomitingis
diarrhoeic.Diarrhoeamaybe defined asthepassage
likely to bepersistent where there is severe gastric
offaeceswithagreater thannormalcontentofwater
inflammationorobstructionatthelevelofthepylorusor
and/ornutrients.Equally,patients with colonic,rectal
proximal small intestine.
or anal disease may present with constipation, pas-
Chronic intermittentvomitingisusuallyassociated
sageof veryhardfaecesorfailure topassfaecesatall
withchronicinflammation of the Gl tractbut maybe
Diarrhoea is a commonpresenting complaintpar-
observedinpatientswithdistalsmallintestinalobstruc-
ticularly in the dog but alsoin cats and it isimportant to
tion and intussusception.Where gastritis ispresent,
determine thecharacterof thediarrhoea during collec-
thepatientmay vomit immediatelyafter eating(often
tion ofahistory(Figure1.9).The questionsare designed
confused with regurgitation);however,in this situation
itisassociatedwithfailureinreceptiverelaxationofthe
thesmallorlargebowel.Althoughusuallyrewarding,
fundus to accommodate food thereby increasing
questioning can yield confusingresults giving signs of
intragastricpressure andreflexlycausingvomition.
bothsmalland large bowel disease.Thismayreflectthe
Equally,some patientswithgastritis developgastric
fact that there isdisease ofboth the small and large
atonyandmayvomitundigestedfoodmanyhoursafter
bowel,orthatsmallbowel diseasehasoverwhelmedthe
eating.If thepatientvomitsbile thisimplies there has
largebowel'sfunctional reserve.
6
Chapter 1Approach to the investigation of gastrointestinal diseases
Symptom
Small bowel
Large bowel
Colonic disorders:
Faecalvolume
Increased
Decreased
stricture
tumour
Faecal frequency
Less than3
More than6
Dehydration
(motions per day)
Drug administratincodinemohinesucralfatebariumsupha
Urgency
Usuallynone
Often present
contrast media)
Feline and canine dysautonomia
Tenesmus
Absent
Offen present
Focd:
Faecalmucus
Rare
Often present
fur and hair ingestion
Haematochezia
Rare
Often present
bones
high or very low fibre diets
Melaena
May be present
Rare
Hospitalization (inactivity)
Steatorthoea
May be present
Absent
Megacolon
Orthopaedic:
Dyschezia
Absent
May be present
fracturedpelvis
Common
Rare
hindlimb injury
Weight loss
Vomiting
Maybe present
discprotrusion
May bepresent
Paraprostatic cyst
Flatus/borborygmi
Present
Absent
Prostatic disease
Rectal disorders:
1.9
stricture
rcgarding the clinical signs mayhelp the
tumour
clinician determire the origin of the diarrhoea.
foreign body
perineal hemia
anal sac disease
Faecal colourcanvary considerably and changes in
。
anal furunculosis
colourshould beinterpreted withcaution.Trulyacholic
pseudocoprostasis
faeceswithsteatorrhoeamaybeobserved inhepatic
disease and post-hepatic bile duct obstruction (see
This figure shows the diverse aetiologies of
1.10
Chapter14).Where freshblood,mucus and tenesmus
constipation.It isimoortant toremember it also
includesdisorders that arenot associaledwith the
bowel involvement.It shouldbenoted thatupto30%of
intestinatract.
patientswithcolitiswillpresentwithvomitingaswellas
Physical examination
diarrhoea,but have no gastric disease.Where undi-
Thisshould notbeviewed asa separate procedure but
gested food ispresent in the diarrhoea,together with
rather an extension of history collection.Thephysical
significantweight loss,thispointstoEPlorsmallbowel
examination shouldsubstantiate thehistorical findings
disease.In thesecasesthe diarrhoeawill cease if the
and supplement themwithadditional observations,
patientisstarved,confirmingthepresenceofanosmotic
thusallowingthecliniciantoestablishanoverall im-
diarrhoea.Diarrhoea which does notresolve with di-
pression of the patient.
etaryrestislikelytobesecretoryandmayhavean
The clinician should:
infectious aetiology.Patients with parvovirus produce a
verycharacteristicdiarrhoeawhichisusuallyfluid,con
1.
Observe theunrestrainedpatientfroma
tainsblood andoften mucosa andhasa typical foetid
distance,and assessbody condition,attitude to
smell.Patients with haemorrhagic gastroenteritis(HGE)
surroundings,posture,breathing patern and
alsoproduce haemorrhagic foetid diarrhoea,but this
general behaviour.lf thepatient isreported tobe
differsfrom thatseeninparvoviruspatients asit more
dysphagic,foodorwaterisofferedand the
closelyresembleswholeblood.
response observed.
Animalsthatproducenormal faecesin themorning
2.
Examineeachbody system in turn and not
but progressively develop diarrhoea during the day
mayhaveirritablebowel syndrome(IBS)ratherthan
Examinationof themucousmembraneswill assist
pathologicaldisease.In thesecasestheinvestigation
indetermining whether thepatient is dehydrated,
should focus on thepatient's environment.Most sus-
shocked,anaemic or jaundiced.The capillary refill
pected cases of IBSoccur intoybreeds andworking
time will help assessperipheral perfusion.
dogs.Activitywillalsoaffectfaecalquality,andpatients
Peripheral lymph node enlargement may point to
whicharehospitalizedorrestricted inexerciseoften
infection orneoplasticdisease.Pyrexia suggests
develop constipation,hence the reason why many
painorinfectionwhileasubnormal temperature
patientswithdiarrhoeaimproveonhospitalization.
mayreflectoverwhelming disease or shock.
Constipationcarriesa large and divergent differen-
3.Inspect the mouth and pharynx for ulceration,
tial diagnosis list (Figure 1.10) so the patient requires a
periodontal disease,halitosisevidence f
thoroughphysicalexaminationtoidentify theunderlying
neoplasia or foreign bodies.lf the patient is
problem.Inaddition,a careful examinationof the peri-
dysphagic a more detailed examination maybe
nealregionforherniationandtumours,analtoneand for
required undergeneral anaesthesia.The exteriorof
anal sac disease should be carriedout.This should be
thepharynx andneckshouldbepalpated forpain
followedbyarectal examinationtodeterminewhether
and masses,especially thyroid masses in cats,
there isobstruction to thepassage of faeces.
and the cervical oesophagus for abnormalities.
7
Chapter1Approachtotheinvestigationofgastrointestinaldiseases
4.Examinethethorax.Physicalexaminationof the
accumulation.lfpalpationinducesvomitingthis
thoracic oesophagus is limited and,where the
usually indicates generalized peritonitis.The
history supports a problem in thisregion,imaging
stomach isoften difficult topalpate unlessfull
shouldbeusedtoobtainadditional information.
becausewhen emptyit normallyliesunder the
However,the thoraxshould be auscultated and
costal arch.To assist in gastric palpation,the
percussedparticularlyasdysphagicpatientsmay
patient maybe elevated by its front legs.
develop aspiration pneumonia.The heart should
When examining the small intestine the
be auscultated asvascularringanomalies causing
fingers should be spread on each sideof the
dysphagia occasionallyresult in abnormal heart
abdomen andgently drawnbackwards,allowing
sounds.When thepatienthas ascites associated
the intestines to'slip'through the fingers.This
withhypoproteinaemia,auscultationand
will minimize thechancesof missingintestinal
percussion of the thorax can assist in determining
foreignbodies,tumours and intussusceptions.
whetherhydrothoraxispresent.
Whilepalpating theintestineitissometimes
5.Palpate the abdomen.Thisshouldbecarriedout
possible to gain an impression of wall thickness.
thoroughlyandisgenerally easier incats than in
Inaddition thepresence of fluid,gasorhard
dogs.A soundknowledgeof the topographical
faeces inthe intestinecan usuallybedetermined.
anatomywill assist inidentifying abnormalities
Lack of borborygmi detected by auscultation of
found duringthispartof theexamination.
theabdomen canassistindeterminingthe
Suddenlyapplyingpressure to the abdomen will
presence of ileus
evoke“boarding’or ‘splinting’，which is a normal
Palpationof the colon isoftenbest initiated at
reflexactionandneedstobedifferentiatedfrom
thepelvicinlet,wherea faecal-filled coloncan
abdominalpain.Pain,whenpresent,maybe
usuallybe detected.The fingers can bemoved
generalized or localized toonequadrantof the
forwardslowlyalong thelengthof thedescending
abdomen.Figure 1.11 shows how it ispossible to
colon until thecostal arch isreached.Here the
suggest thelikelysourceof localizedpain
transverse andascendingcolon startand are
The abdomen is examined frombehindwith
less easily palpated.
the patient standing.Using the finger tips gently
6.Examine the perineal region and perform a
toincreasepressureovertheabdomenthe
rectalexamination.These examinations should
clinician canidentifynormal structuressuch as
be carried out routinelyinpatientswith
liver,spleen,kidneys and intestines.Bybeing
alimentary signs.The examinationaims torule
systematic,starting at the front of the abdomen
out thepresence of perineal hernia,anal sac
andworkingbackwardsslowly,palpationshould
disease,rectal stricture,tumoursorforeign
detectorganomegaly,massesorfluid
bodies.Assessing anal tone is particularly
Careful palpation of
1.11
the abdomencan
yieldvaluable diagnostic
information.Theclinicianaims
to identify normal structures and
anyabnormal structure
Kidney!
suggesting the presence of
pain,foreign bodies,masses or
fluid accumulations.By divicing
Stomach
Colon
the abdomen inte four sectians,
it should bepossible to localize
Pancreas
Small
thelesiondetectedtoone
intestine Prostate
quadrant and thentoconsicer
Liver
Bladder
what tissuesnormally lie in this
Spleen
area and could thereforebe
involved.
8
Chapter 1
1Approach totheinvestigation ofgastrointestinal diseases
important in thosecasespresentingwithfaecal
incontinence.Prostatic size and pelvic canal
Initial diagnostic plan
dimensionscanbe determined by therectal
Routine haematology
examination.Finally carrying out arectal
Serum biochemistry
examinationpermitsthecliniciantodetectthe
Urinalysis
presence of freshbloodormelaena.
Faecalanalysisdirectmearand fltationelctivebacterialcutre
Surveyradiography
Problem list
Specific diagnostic tests
From theclinicalexaminationthe cliniciancanproduce
a problemlist.This isabullet point summary of the
ACTH stimulationtest
abnormalities detected in the history and physical
Serum trypsin-likeimmunoreactivity(TLI)
examination.From thislist the cliniciancan look for
Serum folate and ccbalamin assay
patterns of disease and ask the following questions.
Breath hydrogen assay
Duodenal aspiration and culture
Do all theproblems fitwithdiseaseof the
Serumlipase
alimentarytractordo theysuggestasystemic
Serum pancreaticlipase immunoreactivity (PLI)
disease?
Liverfunctiontests-serumbileacids,pre-andpostorandialbileacids
Do theproblems appear divergent suggesting
Surveyand contrast radiography
more than one disease process is present?
Fluoroscopy
Whatarethedifferential diagnosesforthe
Ultrasonography
problems?
Endoscopy
Exploratorylaparotomy
Diagnostic plan
Dietary trials
A differential diagnosis should beproduced from
Drug therapy
theproblem list and a diagnosticplanestablished.
The initial diagnostic plan aims to use a diagnostic
1.12
in tnemajorityof clinical cases thetests shown
in theinitial ciagnosticplanwill allowa
testtoreachadefinitivediagnosiswheretheprob-
diagnosis to be reached.However,in other cases the
lemsclearlypointtowardsonedisease,ortofollowup
initialtestswillindicatethemost likelydagnosiswhich
identified problemsin ordertoget closer tothedefini-
can be confirmed using more specifictests carried out in
tive diagnosis.In thelattercasea second,and some-
a second dagnostic pian.
times a third,diagnosticplanmaybe requiredusing
more specifictestsinordertoreachadefinitive
Elevations inserumalanine aminotransferase(ALT),
diagnosis.The types of diagnostic testsused in as-
aspartate aminotransferase(AST),gamma glutamyl
sessingpatientswithalimentarytractdisease are
transferase (GGT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and
shown in Figure 1.12.
bilirubin suggest hepatic disease.Care should be
takenin assessingALP levels in dogsas itmaybe
Initial diagnostic(screening)tests
elevated during bone growth,bone disease and en-
dogenous and exogenous steroid administration.Un-
Routinehaematology:Ingeneral,haematologyisnot
likeinthedog,ALPtendsnottobecomeelevatedafter
steroid administrationin the catorinfeline cholestatic
tarytractdisease.It ismorelikelytobeofdiagnostic
disease,althoughit isoftenelevated infelinehepatic
valuewhere systemic disease is suspected.Where
lipidosis.InthecatGGTisabettermarkerofcholestasis
melaena,haematocheziaorhaematemesisisdetected,
than ALP. The ratio of conjugated to unconjugated
measuringredcell indices,includingreticulocytesand
bilirubinasamethodofdifferentiatinghepaticfrom
platelets,togetherwithclottingfactors,maybeofvalue.
post-hepatic disease (vanden Bergh test is extremely
Infectiousdiseasemayresultinchangesinthewhite cell
unreliable and should notbe used.
series,especiallyinthosecaseswheretranslocationof
Thepresenceof hyponatraemiaorhyperkalaemia
infection from the intestinehastakenplace.Alimentary
mayreflect hypoadrenocorticism,although electro-
parasitism may produce apersistenteosinophillia.Dogs
lyte abnormalities may be absent in this disease.
andcatswithalimentarylymphomararelyshowsys-
Serumelectrolytechangessimilarto thoseseenwith
temicchangesinthewhitecellpicture,althoughocca
hypoadrenocorticism have also been observed in
sionallythelymphocytecount maybelow.Thismayalso
primary Gl diseases.Anadrenocorticotropichormone
beobservedwith lymphangiectasia.Hypoadrenocorti-
(ACTH)stimulation test isrequired to makea defini-
cism may result in lymphocytosis and eosinophilia.
tivediagnosisregarding thepresence or absenceof
hypoadrenocorticism.
Serum biochemistry:Serum biochemistry can be
Elevations inblood urea and creatinine suggest
valuableintheinvestigationof bothprimaryalimentary
renal disease or severe dehydration.Urinalysis to-
tractandsystemicdisease.ltis extremelyimportant to
getherwithassessmentof serumcalcium and phos-
interpret biochemical results in relation to the patient.
phate concentrations usually helps to clarify the
Carryingoutscreeningtestsasa shortcuttodiagnosis,
underlyingcause.Elevations inblood urea alonemay
insteadof carryingouta thorough clinicalexamination,
occur withGlbleeding,while lowblood urealevels
will lead to incorrect interpretation of results,mis-
togetherwithelevations inserum ammoniamaybe
diagnosisandfailureof treatment.
associatedwithportosystemic shunts.
6
Chapter 1 Approach to the investigation of gastrointestinal diseases
Serum protein measurements can be very useful in
and its significance is still uncertain. In general it
Gl investigations. Panhypoproteinaemla (low albumin
is necessary to detect not the organism (which is
and globulin) is most often seen with protein-losing
often present in normal dogs) but rather the toxin. The
enteropathy (PLE). However, occasionally hypoprotein-
latter test is limited to very few commercial laborato-
 aemia may be associated with a fallin albumin alone.
ries and tends to be very expensive. The importance
In these cases the changes are more likely to be due to
of Escherichia colf in feline and canine gastroenter-
hepatic or renal disease, although PLE should still be
ology is unclear. There appearto be some pathogenic
considered. Albumin tends to fall late in hepatic dis-
strains, but the availability of tests to detect these
ease, so signiflcant changes in liver enzymes and
strains is still very limited and their significance is
function tests should be present, and where protein-
still controversial.
losing nephropathy (PLN) is suspected, urinalysis will
When bleeding into the Gl tract is suspected, an
reveal proteinuria. Hyperglobulinaemla (values >70
occult blood test can be carried out. Tests cross-react
g/l) is a feature of two feline diseases: feline infectious
with meat-containing foods so there may be a require-
peritonitis and lymphocytic cholangichepatitis; and it
ment to feed a special diet for at least 3 days prior to
may occur in some dogs with PLEs, particularly Basenji
testing (see Chapter 2).
dogs and dogs with fungal enteropathies.
Survey radlography: Survey chest and abdominal
Urinalysis: In addition to detecting the presence of
radiographs are important diagnostic tests in patients
renal disease, urinalysis can assist in the assessment
with regurgitation, vomiting and acute diarrhoea but
of the state of hydration. A significantly increased urine
are less helpful in cases of chronic diarrhoea. They
protein:creatinine ratio indicates the presence of PLN,
allow identification of foreign bodies, obstructions and
which sometimes occurs concurrently with PLE, espe-
masses (see below and Chapter 3).
cially in Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers. Some patients
with hepatic disease, and especially those with cirrho-
Specific diagnostic tests
sisor portosystemic shunts, excrete ammonium biurate
Specific procedures, such as ultrasonography, endo-
crystals in their urine. Bilirubin can normally be conju-
scopy and exploratory laparotomy, should not be
gated and excreted by the canine kidney. However,
used to replace the clinical examination, formation of 
this is not the case in cats, where the presence of
a problem list and initial diagnostic plan. The tests in
bilirubinuria is always considered abnormal and sug-
this category are reserved for those cases where the
gests hepatic disease.
the test chosen will yield a definitive diagnosis. For
Faecal analysis: Faecal analysis for parasites and
example, where chronic diarrhoea or weight loss is
selected bacterial pathogens should be carried out in
reported, EPl is a major differential diagnosis and a
all patients presenting with diarrhoea. The types of
TLI test will confirm or refute the diagnosis. Where the
diagnostic test that can usefully be performed on
patient presents with vomiting, jaundice and anterior
faeces are shown in Figure 1.12.
abdominal pain and the liver enzyme tests are el-
The presence of undigested food particles may
evated, it would be appropriate to carry out liver
suggest maldigestion, but this must be confirmed by
function tests and tests for pancreatitis, together with
carryingout more specific tests, such as the trypsin-like
ultrasound examination of the liver and pancreas.
immunoreactivity test (TLl), and such faecal examina-
Specific organ biopsy may be required to make a
tion is no longer recommended. Similarly, measuring
definitive dlagnosis.
faecal proteolytic activity using X-ray film, gelatin tube
and azo-casein plates should be avoided as they
ACTH stimulation test: This testshould be carried out
frequently yield false results and have been super-
if there are clinical signs or electrolyte changes that
 seded by the TLl test in both dogs and cats.
make hypoadrenocorticism a possibility.
Various tests are available for the detection of
intestinal parasitism (see Chapter 16). Salt flotation is
Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivlty test: Spe-
used to detect nematode and cestode eggs. Where
giardiasis is suspected at least three zinc sulphate
dogs and cats and allow a definitive diagnosis of EPl
 flatations or an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
in both species. The Tll test may also be used to
test should be carried cut. Repeat examinations for
assist in reaching a diagnosis of pancreatitis. How-
Giardia cysts -are required as parasites are excreted
ever, the TLl assay is less sensitive than the newer
serum pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLl) test,
Giardia trophozoites and cysts in fresh faecal smears,
which is more reliable for the diagnosis of pancreatitis
but these are very unreliable.
(see Chapter 23).
Culture of faeces for bacterial pathogens such as
Saimonella spp., Campylobacter spp., Clostridium
Serum folate and cobalamin: Measurement of these
difficile and Clostridium perfringenscan be carried out
vitamins is useful for the detection of small intestinal
(see Chapter 16). However, rectal samples do not
disease. Where concentrations of serum folate and
necessarily reflect bacterial populations within the
cobalamin are very low (in the absence of EPl) they
small intestine and repeat cultures may be required
indicate the presence of severe small intestinal dis-
as pathogens are often excreted intermittently. Con-
ease. Furthermore, vitamin supplementation may be
firming the presence of C. perfringens can be difficult
required to rectify deficiency states. Serum folate and
10
cobalamin concentrafions have also been used to
consigned to history. However, intestinal sugar per-
detect the .presence of small intestinal bacterial
meability testing may still be of value. In these tests
cvergrowth (SIBO). However, the definition of SIBO is
two or more sugars (a monosaccharide and disaccha-
controversia! and results should be interpreted with
ride) are given orally and the amount absorbed and
 great cauition (see Chapters 2 and 20).
excreted in the urine measured over 6 hours. The
tests are designed to detect increased intestinal per-
Breath hydrogen assay: Measuring exhalad hydro
meability to some sugars related to reduced intestinal
 gen levels in dogs and cats after ingestion of a test 
surface area or. enterocyte dysfunction, all of which
meal or substrate, such as glucose, has been used to
may be associated with lBD or intestinal neoplasia
detect the presence of carbohydrate malabsorption.
(see Chapter 2).
The principle of the test relies on overgrowing bacte-
Plain and contrast radiography, and fluoroscopy:
ing hydrogen as a by-product. This is absorbed and
Plain radiographs of the thorax are invaluable in as-
excreted in exhaled breath. Unfortunately, multiple
sessing the thoracic oesophagus, as it cannot be
protocols for breath hydrogen testing have been de-
examined as part of the physical examination. Where
scribed and none has been widely adopted (see
an abnormality is detected these films may be supple-
Chapters 2 and 20).
mented by contrast studies, often carried out using
fluoroscopy. Contrast studies are particularly valuable
Duodenal aspiration and culture: Duodenal aspi-
in patients presenting with dysphagia but should not be
rates collected by endoscopic catheter piacement can
used where oesophageal perforation is suspected
be of diagnostic value. Aspirates have been used to
Plain radiography of the abdomen should always
detect Giardia trophozoites and pathogenic bacteria
be carried out on patients presenting with vomiting, an
such as Saimonella spp. However, the main use of
acute abdomen or where there is suspicion of ob-
duodenal aspiration and culture has been for the detec-
struction. The value of abdominal radiography in
tion of SlBO, and has traditionally been considered the
patients with chronic dlarrhoea is limited. Contrast
 gold standard test for this condition. However, bacte-
studies may be used to assess gastric emptying.
riological culture of duodenal aspirates is now recog-
intestinal transit or confirm obstruction. However.
nized to be an unreliable method to quantify the
contrast media should not be used when perforation
endogenous microflora and in any case practical con-
is suspected. Barium impregnated polyethylene
de siyn o uoniodde aue hwl asuadxa pue sues
spheres (BIPS) are now available for a simpler as-
proach (see Chapter 20).
sessment of gastric emptying and intestinal transit
time. In addition, BiPs may be used to detect a partial
Serum amylase and fipase: Serum amylase and
obstruction. Plain radiography may be used to detect
peritonitis, fluid accumulations and abnormalities ·of 
a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis but are now consid-
fhe liver and possibly the pancreas.
Angiography, involving catheterization of a me-
specific in origin and because any impairment of renal
senteric vein and use of an iodine-based contrast
function will reduce excrefion of these enzymes and
medium, is of particular diagnostic value in detecting 
artificially elevate their activities. Furthermore, it is not
the presence of portosystermic shunting. In some
uncommon for animals with pancreatitis to have nor-
cases portosystemic shunts may be diagnosed using
mal activities of both enzymes. However, recently
uitrasonography.
developed assays for canine and feline PLl appear to
overcome these limitations, and provide tests for pan-
Ultrasonography: The diagnostic value of ultrasono-
creatitis that appear to be both sensitive and specific
 graphy in the investigation of the alimentary tract
(see Chapter 23).
disease cannot be over-stated. In experienced hands
this is a very powerful diagnostic tool that is being used
Liver functlon tests: Elevations in liver enzymes
with increasing frequency in gastroenterology. Not
indicate hepatocyte damage and cholestasis but they
only can the architecture of the tissues be assessed,
do not measure liver function, Where the clinical ex-
but the size of organs and especially the intestinal wall
amination and liver enzyme tests suggest liver disease
thickness can be measured, motility observed, lymph
to be present, itis impartant to carry aut additional tests
nodes assessed and small fluid accumulations
that wll detect liver dysfunctlon. Serum bile acids, a
detected. Ultrasonography can be used to assist in
bile acid stimulation test and measurement of serum
albumin, ammonia and clotting factors will give an
detecting abnomal blood flow to the liver.
indication of liver function. Liver biopsy will be required
to reach a definitive diagnosis (see Chapter 24)
Endoscopy: Endoscopy is anather powerful diagnos-
tic tool when used in the right clrcumstances by an
Intestinal function tests: A relatively large number
 of dynamic function tests have been used in the past
been collected from the Clinical examination and initial
to assess small intestinal and pancreatic function.
diagnostic tests indicate oesophageal, gastric or intes-
Specifically, the xylose absorption test, fat absorption
tinal disease, endoscopy may be considered the most
test and benzoyl-tyrosyl para-amino-benzoic acid
effective method of reaching a definitive diagnosis. Not
(BT-PABA) test have been used, but have now been
'snbeqdoseo aul jo aoepns jesoonw aul ueo Auo
11
Chapter 1   Approach to the investigation of gastrointestinal diseases
stomach, duodenum, jejunum and colon be assessed
employment of empirical treatment regimes in chronic
but biopsy samples can be collected from these areas.
In addition, endoscopy can be used to remove some
cost more than initiating a proper problem-solving
oesophageal and gastric foreign bodies. Where spe-
investigation as described in this chapter.
cialist equipment is available, oesophageal strictures
can be dilated with balloon catheters and minor surgi-
cal procedures, such as polyp removal using dia-
References and further reading
thermy, can be carried out. Gastrostomy tubes may
also be placed during endoscopy. Being a relatively
BissettSA,Guiltord WG andSpohrA (1g97)Breathhydrogen testlng
non-invasive technique, endoscopy alows the clini-
in small aniemal practice, Compendium on Continuing Education
for the Practicing Veterinarian 19, 916-931
cian to re-assess the Gl tract following treatment, a
Burrows CF (1994) An approach to the patient wilhchronic diarrhoea.
procedure which most clients find acceptable where
ProceedingWAAbanoufia4
Delles EK(1992) Chronic vomiting in the dog.WaithamFocus 2,
repeat exploratory taparotomy wouid not be.
14-19
DiBartola SP, Johnson SE, Davenport DJ, Prueter JC, Chew DJ and
liws ae Adoosopua Ag pepalloo saidwes sdoig
 Sherding RG (1985) Clinicopathological findings resembling 
hypoadrenocorticism indogs withprimary gastrointestinaldisease.
and only sample the mucosa, and it is therefore possi-
Joumal of American Veterinary Mcoical Association 187, 60-63
ble to miss deeper lesions. Thus, in each individual
Hart CA,Embaye H,Getty B,Saunders JR and Batt RM (1990)
case the clinician must determine whether endoscopy
Uitrastructural lesions lo thc canine intestinal epithelium caused
by enteropathagenic E. coll journal of Smalf Animal Practice 31,
or exploratory laparotomy is the most effective method
591-594
of progressing the investigation to reach a definitive
   o   H    'i 
phenotypic characterisation oi Clostridium perringens and
diagnosis (see Chapter 4).
Clostridium dificile in diarrheic and healthy dogs. Joumal of
Vetennary Intemal Medicine 16, 533-540 
Quigg J, Bryden G, Forguson A and Simpson Jw (1993) Evaluation
Dietary and drug regimes: There is no definitive
 of canine small intestinal permeability using the lactulose/
method available for the detection of true dietary sen-
rhamnosc wrinary excretion test. Research in Veteninary Science
sitivities, although serum tests that measure immu-
55,326-332
Simpson JW (2001) Pathophysiology of vomiling. UK Vet 6, 27-30
noglobulin levels to food antigens are available. Since
 Simpson Jw (20o1) Problem orientaled small animal medicine. UK
no laboratory tests are reliable when food sensitivity is
Vet 6, 36-42
Slmpson JW and Eise Rw (19g1) Diseases of the large intestine.In:
suspected, a dietary trial must be employed as a
Digestive Disease in the Dog and Cat, ed. Jw Simpson and RW
diagnostic procedure, using a novel protein source
Else pp. 140-169, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford
together with a single carbohydrate fed tothe exclusion
 Simpson KW, Simpson JW. Lake S, Martin DB and Balt RM (1991)
Eifects of pancreatectomy on plasma activities of amylase, iso-
of all other foods. If a favourable response is obtained,
amylase, lipase and trypsin-llke imrnunoreactivlty in dogs.
provocative testing using previous dietary ingredients
Research inVeterinary Science 51,78-82
can be carried out to confirm specific sensitivities (see
Stonehewer J, Mackin AJ, Tasker S, Simpsan JW and Mayhew IG
(2000) Idiopaihic phenobarbilal responsive hypersalialosis in the
Chapter 20).
dog; an unusual form of limbic epilepsy. Journaf of Smat Anima!
Diet does also play an important part in the man-
Practice 41, 416-421
agement of many Gl disorders, aspecially IBD. The
Tams TR (1992) Irritable bowel syndrome. In: Current Veterinary
Therapy Xi, ed. RW Kirk et al., pp. 604-608. WB Saunders.
 mechanism of action of diet in IBD is not clearand may
Philadelphia
be due to correction of a dietary sensitivity, provision of
Tasker S anu Gunn-Moore D (200o) Differential diagncsis of asciles
different fermentable or non-fermentable fibres, or ta 
Yam P(1997) Decision makingin the management of conslipation in
in cats. fn Pracfice 22, 472-479
 modification of the intestinal flora.
the cal. in Practice 19, 434-440
The use of diets and or drugs as diagnostic tests,
Willard M (1989) Chronic Intestinal bacterial overgrowth. In: Current
Vetennary Thcrapy X, ed. RW Kirk et al. pp. 933-938. WB
other than described above, should be avoided. The
Saunders, Phlladelphia
12
Laboratory evaluation of
gastrointestinal disease
Jorg M. Steiner
Introduction
The likelihoodratiocanbecalculatedfromstudies
thatevaluate the test ina groupofclinicalpatients
Clinical signs of gastrointestinal (Gl) disease,such as
(Figure 2.1).
changes in appetite, vomiting, weight loss and diar-
rhoea,are extremelycommoninsmallanimalpatients.
Whenseekingadvicefromaveterinary surgeon,pet
Patients
Test results
owners expect an accurate diagnosis and definitive
Positive
Negative
Testsums
therapy of the problem.ln fewcases can the diagnosis
Patients with disease
A
B
A+B
be madeby physical examination alone,e.g.an oral
foreignbody.Usuallytheveterinary surgeonhastouse
Patients without disease
C
D
C+D
tests tomakea diagnosis,and amajorchallenge isto
Patient sums
A+C
B+D
A+B+C+D
choose themost appropriate tests to arrive at an
accurate diagnosis.Intestinal biopsy is animportant
Sensitivity =
A(A+B)
diagnostictest and is discussed indetail in Chapter5.
Specifcity=
D(C+D)
Accuracy=
[A'(A+B}]×[D/(C+D)]
Choosing a test
Prevalence=
(A+B)/(A+B+C+D)
Prior todiscussionofanumberof laboratory tests,the
Positive predictive value =
A(A+C)
following paragraphs outline important epidemiologi-
Negative predictive value =
D(B+D)
cal factors that should be considered when choosing
Likelihood ratio for a positive test =
[A(A-B)]/[C/(C+D)]
Likelihood ratio for a negative test =
[B(A+B)]/[D(C+D)]
diagnostic tests(seeFigure 2.1).In general,clinicians
should onlyperform diagnostictestswhen theresultof
Definition of eoidemiological parameters.This
the test will have an impact on patient management.
2.1
figure gives themathematical formulae for
This principle canbe expressed more scientifically by
deriving some important epidemiological parameters
that are used to describe the clinical usefulnass of
stating that:
diagnostic tests.
Adiagnostictestshouldonlybeperformed if the
Evaluating testresults
post-testprobabilityfora disease is either
Other,morecommonlyusedparametersof theclinical
significantlylessthan,orsignificantlygreater
usefunessofdiagnostictestsaresensitivity,specificity
than,the pre-test probability.
accuracy,positivepredictivevalue and negativepre-
dictive value(see Figure 2.1).
Thepre-testprobability inagivenpatient isdeter
mined bytheprevalence of the disease inaparticular
Sensitivityisa measureof howwella diagnostic
population of animals.Forexample,the pre-test prob-
test identifiespatientswith a disease.
abilityforexocrine pancreaticinsufficiency(EPl) inany
Specificityisameasureof howwellthe test
dog isprobably somewhere in therangeof 0.01%;that
distinguishespatientswiththediseasefrom
isonein10,000dogsisaffected.Thepre-testprobabil-
those that do not have the disease.
itymight increase to 1.0% if one were to limit the
Accuracy is derived from the multiplication of
population to German Shepherd Dogs, and would be
sensitivity andspecificity and reflectsoverall test
evenhigher,perhaps10.0%,ifoneweretoevaluate
performance.
onlyGermanShepherdDogswithchronicdiarrhoea
and weight loss.
Sensitivity and specificityare characteristicfor
each test and arenotinfluenced by the prevalence of
Therelationshipofpre-test and post-test
the disease.However,the clinicianalso needs some
probabilityisdeterminedbythe likelihoodratio,
senseofhowtointerpreta testresult inlightof the
whichisdefinedastheprobability thata
populationexamined.
specifictestresultwill befound inpatientswith
the disease,dividedbytheprobability that the
Positivepredictivevalue is a measurefor the
same testresult will be found in apatient
confidence thecliniciancanplaceinapositive
without thedisease.
test result.
13
Chapter 2 Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
down urea to ammonia, leading to a rise in pH
confident the clinician can be to exclude the
and a colour change of the pH indicator.
disease in a patient with a negative test result.
Although not commercially available,
Helicobacter can be identified in gastric biopsy
Predictive values do depend on the prevalence of
the disease in the test population, which should be
chain reaction (PCR) techniques employing
taken into account when evaluating the clinical useful-
specifio primers for individual Helicobacterspp.
ness ofa new diagnostictest, i.e. ifa disease israre, the
chances of a test result indicating a true positive may
For all tour tests collectian of samples from multiple
be outweighed by the chances of a false-positive.
sites is recommended since organisms are not evenly
Another issue that must be carefully considered
distributed throughout the gastric mucosa.
when evaluating test results is that of 'cut-off values.
Helicobacter infection can also be diagnosed by
While some diagnostic tests are either negative or
 detection of antibodies in serum. However, serological
positive, most will yield a quantitative result that needs
tests are usually specific forone species of Helicobacter
to be interpreted. This is achieved by comparing the
and serological test kits for species most commonly
result observed in a diseased animal with that of
observed in dogs and cats are not commercially avail-
healthy animals (reference, control or normal popula-
able. Non-radioactive carbon isotope (13C) -based
tion). However, a result outside the reference range
tests, which have been widely used in human beings
does not necessarily indicate disease, and cut-off
for the diagnosis of Helicobacter pyiorinfections, have
values need to be determined that afford the best test
also been used in dogs and cats. An aqueous solution
characteristics for the diagnosis of a disease. A result
outside the reference rangg may have diferent impli-
intubation. Breath or blood samples are collected at
cations fordifferenttests. For example, if theupperlimit
several time points after 13C-urea administration. The
of the reference range for serum creatinine concentra-
presence of Helicobacter organisms in the stomach
tion is 120 mmoll, a result of 150 mmol/l may very well
leads to breakdown of urea, release of 13C, and an
be significant, whilst a serum alanine aminotrans-
increase in the fraction of 13C in CO2 in sampled breath
ou jo ag Aew bop e u 1i 92 jo Ae (17v) e98ie
or gas extracted from blood samples. When collected
significance if the reference range is 0-65 IU/l. There-
 into appropriate tubes, blood and breath samples are
fore, for each diagnostic test a cut-off value that deter-
stable at room temperature for several weeks and
mines whether a result is abnormal enough to warrant
months, respectively, and can be shipped to a labora-
diagnosis of a disease must be identified.
tory that offers fractional mass spectrometry for quan-
tification of 130.
Tests for gastric diseases
Parasitology
Bacteriology
Vomitus
Hellcobacter
The gastric nematode Oliulanus tricuspis has been
Helicobacter pylori is one of the most important infec-
reported in cats worldwide. The prevalence varies
tious organisms in human beings and is believed to be
widely depending on geographical location, but can
responsible for a wide variety of gastric disarders.
reach up to 40%. The parasite occurs much less
Helicobacter pyiorihas not been identified in naturally
frequently in dogs. Microscopic examination of vomitus
infected dogs and cats, but several other Helicobacter
is the cnly reliable method for the diagnosis of this
spp. have frequently been identified in both species.
The pathogenic impact of Helicobacter spp. in dogs
parasite is rather small (i.e. <1 mm long) and has a.
and cats is still unknown, but when no other aetiology
rolled up anterior end.
for gastric disease can be identified and the presence
of Helicobacterspp. can be verified, it may be prudent
Faecal flotation
to recommend trial therapy.
The stomach of dogs and cats can be infested with
A number of different tests have been described for
several other parasites. Physaioptera (not in the Uk),
the diagnosis of Helicobacter infections.
a nematode infesting the stomach of dogs, and less
commonly cats, can be diagnosed by detection of
Cytological examination of touch preparations
eggs during faecal flotation, but is most commonly
after Gram or Diff-Quik staining has been
diagnosed by gross observation during gastroscopy.
reported to be sensitive for diagnosing
Eggs of other nematodes, including Gnathostoma
Helicobacter infections.
in cats, Spirocerca lupiin dogs and cats, and Aoncho-
 Helicobacter organisms can also be observed by
theca putorl in cats, are occasionally identified during
histopathology, but special stains may be
faecal flotation.
required when the colanization density is low.
Quick-urease tests are simple and rapid. One or
Biochemistry
more biopsy sample(s) are callected and placed
into the testing device. The device contains urea
Gastrin
and a pH indicator. If Helicobacter organisms are
Gastrinomas, neuroendocrine tumours that secrete
present urease from these orgarisrms breaks
 gastrin and most commonly located in the pancreas,
14
Chapter 2
Laboraiory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
can lead to hyperchlorhydria, gastric ulceration and
Tests for intestinal diseases
gastric mucosal hypertrophy. Gastrin concentration
Virology
in serum or plasma is the most valuable test for
diagnosis of gastrinoma. Even though a species-
 specific assay for the determination of gastrin con-
Parvovirus
Parvovirus enteritis can be diagnosed by observation
centration in dogs or cats is not available, several
of virus particles in faeces using electron microscopy.
been validated for use in dogs and also appear to
However, this is not widely available and not cost-
effectiveinmostcases. Severalimmunologicalassays
be useful in the cat. According to diagnostic recom-
for detection of parvovirus-specific antigens have been
mendations for humans, a presumptive diagnosis
developed. These assays are highly sensitive and
of gastrinoma should be made when the 24-hour
 specific for the presence of viral particles in faeces.
fasting serum gastrin concentration is ten times the
However, it has been speculated that false-negative
upperlimit of the reference range. This recommenda-
test results can be observed if the animal has mounted
tion is rather conservative and reflects the high preva-
an immune response, leading to the binding of virus
lence of chronic atrophic gastritis in human beings,
which can also cause severely elevated serum gastrin
particles by endogenous antibodies, rendering the viral
particles undetectable by the test kit (see Chapters 16
 concentrations. If the fasting serum gastrin concen
and 20).
tration is not severely increased, a secretin- or cal-
cium-challenge test may lead to a more definitive
Bacteriology
diagnosis. It should be noted therapy with antacids,
such as Hz antagonists, or proton pump inhibitors
Clostridium enterotoxin
may lead to falsely elevated serum/plasma gastrin
The pathogenic role of Clostridium perfringens and
concentrations.
Clostridium difficile has not been conclusively deman-
strated (see Chapter 16). Both organisms may be
Pepsinogen
present in the faeces of healthy dogs and cats, but
 Pepsinogen, the zymogen (enzyme precursor) of the
diarrhoea occurs only when the bacteria produce spe-
gastric protease pepsin, is secreted by cells of the
cific enterotoxins. Therefore, diagnosis has focused on
gastric mucosa. Different isoforms of pepsinogen
identification of enterotoxin in faeces. The enterotoxin
have been identified and have been assigned to
of C. perfringens is released during lysis of the vegeta-
two groups (A and C) in humans. Serum concentra-
tive cell and can be identified by latex agglutination or
 tions of pepsinogen A and C, and especially the ratio
by enzyme immunoassay (ElA). Similarly,C. difficile
of serum pepsinogen A to serum pepsinogen C,
enteratoxin can be identified by latex agglutination or
have been used to diagnose a variety of gastric
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays(ELISAs). How-
disorders in human beings. A group of closely related
ever, the presence of either enterotoxin in a faecal
pepsinogens, all very similar to human pepsinogen A
sample does not establisha cause and effect relation-
isoforrms, have been identified in both dogs and cats,
ship in a particular patient with diarrhoea. PCR-based
and species-specific immunoassays have been estab-
assays for the expression of genes encoding various
lished. Unfortunately, initiai studies in dogs and cats
enterotoxins have been described but these tests are
have failed to show significant clinical utility of serum
currently only used on an experimental basis.
tric diseases.
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Sucrose permeability
Duodenal juice cuiture: Quantitative bacteriological
The mucosa lining the Gl tract serves as a barrier
culture of duodenal juice is considered the gold stand-
against potentially harmtul substances. In normal indi-
ard test for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO)
viduals the gastric mucosa is also impermeable to
(see Chapter 20). Duodenal juice can be collected
during endoscopy by aspiration through a sterile tube
the duodenum, where it is hydrolysed by brush border
advanced through the working channel of the endo-
sucrase to glucose and fructose, which are then ab-
scope,orbydirectneedleaspirationduring exploratory
sorbed in the small intestine. When there is gastric
laparotomy. However, collectian of sufficient duodenal
ulceration or gastritis, the gastric mucosa becomes
juice can be difficult. Duodenal juice must be cultured
more permeable and sucrose passes intact into the
immediately after collection in order to preserve obli-
vascular space, and is subsequently excreted in urine.
gate anaerobic organisms. Qualitative and quantita-
The amount of sucrose that has permeated the gastric
tive bacteriologicai assessment requires culture of fhe
 mucosa can thus be quantified in serum or urine. This 
sample at several cifferent dilutions and on several
 test has been evaluated in human beings, horses,
 differentselective media, rendering this technique both
laboratory animals and dogs. Treatment of gastric
impracticai and prohibitively expensive for routine use.
ulcers leads to normalization of sucrose permeability.
 Furthermore, reported normal ranges for results of 
Few laboratories are able to assay sucrose concentra-
duodenal juice culture in'dogs and cats vary widely.
tions in urine or serum samples, however, and the
making assessment of a result from a single clinical
practical utility of sucrose permeability testing for the
sample virtually impossible. Standardized procedures
diagnosis of gastricdisease in clinical patients remains
for collection and quantitative culture of duodenal juice
to be demonstrated.
have not yet been adopted.
15
Chapter 2  Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
Serum unconjugated bile acids: Ble acids are syn-
live outside have a higher prevalence of endoparasites,
thesized and conjugated in the liver. After secretion into
but even pets that live exclusively indoors can be
the small intestine they facilitate fat emulsification. A
infested with parasites. Given the low cost of evaluat-
small proportion of intraluminal bile acids are
ing a patient for endoparasitic infestation and the low
deconjugated by bile sait hydrolase-producing bacteria,
cost, efficacy and ease of treatment, faecal examina-
and this deconjugation increases when there is SiBO
 tion for evidence of endoparasitic infestation should be
with those anaerobic bacterial species that possess
routine in any small animal patient presenting with
deconjugating hydrolases. Unconjugated bile acids are
clinical signs of intestinal disease (see Chapter 16).
quickly reabsorbed into the bloodstream where theycan
A fresh faecal smear can be examined under low
be quantified. In a preliminary study, 9 af 10 dogs with
magnification for the presence of Giardia or Tritricho-
culture-proven SIBO had increased serum concentra-
monas foetustrophozoites. Giardiatrophozoites show
tions of unconjugated cholic acid, the predominant bile
a typical falling leaf motion, while T. foetustrophozoites
show erratic movement and an undulating membrane.
unconjugated serum bile acid concentrations do not
A zinc sulphate flotation should also be performed.
 appear to identify dogs with antibiotic-responsive diar-
This technique is quick and simple and allows identifi-
rhoea (see Chapter 20), and this test is probably more
cation of many common endoparasites. However, a
useful forlongitudinal studies of individual patients rather
faecal zincsulphate flotation isthe most reliable rmeans
than for the diagnosis of SIBO in clinical practice.
of identifying the presence of Giardia cysts in faeca!
samples. Inone study, three consecutive flotations had
Breath hydrogen: Mammalian cells do not synthesize
a sensitivity for Giardia infestation in dogs of 96%.
hydrogen, but bacterial metabolism leads to hydrogen
Giardia cysts can sometimes be confused with yeasts
production. Several protocols have been described for
but Giardia cysts are much larger and contain visible
hydrogen breath testing in dogs and cats. One protocol
internal structures.
involves oral administration of a sugar salution, fol-
lowed by assay of breath hydrogen every 15 minutes
Giardia: While Giardia infestation can be diagnosed
for several hours. In normal dogs the sugars in the test
by faecal smear or zinc sulphate flotation, in many
solution are digested and absorbed before they reach
cases multiple faecal examinations are required to
liws Auo pue auseui aiel aun jo eo leaig au
detect the organism. A direct immunofluorescent as-
amounts of hydrogen are producad. However, in dogs
say as well as several ELiSAs that detect Giardia-
with SIBO appreciable carbohydrate fermentation may
occur because of the increased number of bacteria in
fluorescent assay usesa monoclonalantibody directed
the small intestine. Hydrogen generated as a result of
against a component ofthe Giardiacyst walland needs
this fermentation diffuses Into the bloodstream, reaches
to be performed by a laboratory equipped for fluores-
the alveoli and is excreted in expiratory air. Since the
cence microscopy. Faecal sarnples can be shipped
hydrogen is produced in the small intestine, the peak in
in 10% formalin. The ELISAs are directed against
breath hydrogen concentration occurs earlier than in
different proteins produced by Giardia trophozoites.
patients with malabsorption, in which unabsorbed car-
While highly sensitive for Giardia infections in human
bohydrates are eventualy fermented by bacterla in the
patients, a report has indicated one ELiSA test to be
large intestine, thereby generating a later peak in
slightly less sensitive for diagnosis of Giardia infection
breath hydrogen concentration. Unfortunately, no stand-
inthe dog than three consecutivezincsulphate flotations 
performed properly.
widely adopted, and its value in the diagnosis of SIBO
is still unclear.
Cryptosparidium: Cryptosporidium parvumisa ubiqui-
tous coccidian that can infect dogs and cats. In other-
Faecal culture
wise healthy animals cryptosporidiosis will lead to
Non-specific culture of faeces is of little use for the
shedding of infectious oocysts without clinical signs.
diagnosis of Gl disorders. However, culture of faecal
Immunocompromised orotherwise sick dogs and cats,
material for specific pathogens is indicated in some
especially neonates, may show clinical signs of small
patients. Fresh faecal material can be cultured for
bowel dlarrhoea. As for Giardia, Cryptosporidium can
Salmonella spp., Campyiobacter spp. and Yersinia
be diagnosed by identification of oocytes during zinc
spp. While each of these organisms can cause chronic
 sulphate flotation. Identification of Cryptosporidium by
diarrhoea in dogs and cats they are more commonly
formalin-ethyl-acetate sedimentation and directsmears
using acid-fast stains has also been reported. A spe-
hospitalized. These patients commonly have an acute
cific immunofluorescence assay and several ELISAs
onset of bloody diarrhoea, often associated with sys-
are available to detect specific antigens, butthe clinical
temic clinical signs. However, the yield of faecal cul-
 utility of these assays has not been conclusively demon-
tures for these enteropathogens is low in most cases.
strated in dogs and cats. Detection of Cryptosponidium
 in faeces by PCR-based methods has been reported in
Parasitology
human beings but not in dogs and cats. As the oocysts
that are present in fresh faeces are infectious to labora-
Faecal smear and flotation
tory personnel, faecal samples should be mixed with
The true prevalence of Gl parasites in dogs and cats is
formalin (1 part formalin and 9 parts faeces) in order to
unknawn and dependent on many factors. Pets that
 inactivate the oocysts befare shipping.
16
Chapter2
Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinal disease
Tritrichomonasfoetusincats:Tritrichomonas foe-
andcannotbeabsorbed inthisform.In thestomach
tus,aprotozoanknownto infect thereproductive tract
digestionofdietaryprotein isinitiatedbypepsin and
of cattle,hasrecentlybeenshown tobe anintestinal
hydrochloric acid,and cobalamin is released(Figure
pathogenin catsleading tochroniclarge bowel-type
2.3).Free cobalamin is immediately bound by R-
diarrhoea.Affectedcats areusuallyyoung and live in
proteinpresentin saliva andgastricjuice,therebyonce
large colonies.Tritrichomonas trophozoites can be
again rendering the vitamin unabsorbable.lIn the small
identifiedonadirectfaecalsmearbut thesensitivityof
intestine R-proteins are digested bypancreatic
thistechnique isprobablylow.Useofaculturesystem
proteases and the liberatedcobalamin is bound
developed for thediagnosisof T.foetusfrom the
by intrinsic factor, of which 90% is secreted by the
reproductive tractof cattle hasrecently been described
pancreas in the dog, and 99% in the cat. Finally,
in cats.A tiny amount of faecal material(<0.1 g) is
cobalamin-intrinsicfactorcomplexesare absorbed by
placed intotheculture pouch.Culture pouchesarekept
specificreceptors in the ileum.Cobalaminmalabsorp-
atroom temperatureforupto11daysandcan be
tioninitselfdoesnotnecessarilyleadtocobalamin
intermittentlyexaminedbylightmicroscopyatamag-
deficiency.Onlyifcobalaminmalabsorptionislong-
nificationofx20tox40formotileorganisms.
standingdobodystoresbecomedepleted,ultimately
leading to cobalamin deficiency.
Biochemistry
Folate
Folicacidis awater-solubleBvitaminthatisplentiful in
mostcommercialpetfoods.However,dietaryfolicacid
Key
ispresent as folate polyglutamate,which can not be
Cobalamin
readilyabsorbed.Intheproximal smallintestinefolate
Dietary orotein
polyglutamate is convertedbybrushborderfolate
Pepisinandhydrochloric
deconjugase to folate monoglutamate,which is then
R-protein
absorbed byspecific folate carriers locatedexclusively
Pancreatic proteasen
in the proximal small intestine(Figure 2.2).
Intrinsicfacto
Cosalaminreceptor
Key
Folate deconjugasc
2.3
Principles of cobalamin absorption.
Folate carniers
Distal small intestinal disease may lead to lossof
cobalamin receptors in the ileum, thereby causing
Folatepolyglutamate
cobalamin malabsorption.Inarecent study61%of 80
cats with clinical signs of chronic Gl disease had
Folate moncglutamate
decreased serum cobalamin concentrations.Diffuse
small intestinal diseasemay also lead tocobalamin
malabsorptionas longas theileum isinvolved inthe
diseaseprocess;concurrentsubnormalserumcobala-
2.2
Principles of folate absorpion.
min and folate concentrations usually reflectquite
severe diseaseaffecting theentirelengthof the small
intestine.Exocrinepancreaticinsufficiency can also
Whenthereisseverediseaseaffecting theproxi-
lead to cobalamin deficiency in dogs,and almost
mal smallintestine,folate absorption canbe compro-
invariablydoessoincats,reflecting therelativeimpor-
mised. If malabsorption is sufficiently severe and
tance of the pancreas as a source of intrinsic factor in
long-standing.body stores of folatemaybe depleted,
these species.Finally, SIBO can lead to a decreased
leading toa decreasedserumfolateconcentration.
serumcobalaminconcentrationsincemanybacterial
DogswithtrueSIBOhavean alteredmicroflora in
speciesarticularlyobligateanaerobicbacteria,com
the uppersmall intestine,and may developincreased
petefordietarycobalamin.The clinicalutilityof folate
serum folateconcentrationsifoneormoreof the
and cobalamin concentrations in antibiotic-responsive
speciesproliferating inabnormal numbers is synthe-
diarrhoea and SIBO is further discussed in Chapter 20.
sizing folicacid.Theclinical utility of folate and cobala-
Cobalaminisessentialforcatalysisofsome impor-
min concentration in antibiotic-responsive diarrhoea
tantbiochemical reactions in the body.andvirtually all
andSIBOisfurther discussed in Chapter20.
tissues need cobalamin for optimal function.Clinical
signsofcobalamindeficiencyvaryconsiderablywith
Cobalamin
age and species.Some patients mayjust showlethargy,
Cobalamin,vitaminB2,s also a water-solublevita
anorexia andweight loss,whileothersmay showdiar-
min that isplentiful in most commercial dog andcat
rhoea,intermittentsepticepisodesorevenneurological
foods.Dietary cobalamin isbound todietaryprotein
signs.Experimentalcobalamindeficiencyinkittensleads
17
Chapter 2  Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
to progressive anorexia, weight loss and an unkempt
faecal α.,-Pl concentrations long before they develop
haircoat. Additionally, humanswithcobalamin deficiency
clinical signs of Gl disease or hypoalbuminaemia.
have been shown to develop intestinal abnormalities
Currently, these assays are only available through
including villaus atrophy, infiltration of the intestinal
the Gl Laboratory at Texas A&M University.
 mucosa with inflammatory cels, further cobalamin mal-
absorption and malabsorption of other nutrients. Similar
Faecal occult blood
 Gl effects of cobalamin deficiency have notbeen proven 
Many Gl disorders are associated with loss of blood
in dogs or cats with cobalamin deficiency but there is
 into the intestinal lumen. While some disorders (e.g.
evidence that they occur. Thus, cobalamin deficiency
parvovirus enteritis) can be associated with fresh blood
can lead to further and more severe clinical signs, and
in the stool, other disorders, such as severe gastric
dogs and cats with Gl disease and concurrent cobala-
ulceration, can beassociated with melaena. Both groups
 of patients are easy to assess as the presence of blood
unless also treated with cobalamin supplementation.
in faeces is obvious. In other instances, Gl blood loss
may be hidden or 'occult, and definitive diagnosis may
C-reactive protein
require use of an occult blood test kit. Several types of
C-reactive protein is one of the acute phase reactants,
test kits are available. Kits that use specific antibodies
a group of proteins that are synthesized and secreted
to detect specific blood proteins in humans are not
by the body during a variety of inflammatory conditions.
useful in dogs and cats because of lack of immunologi-
An assay for canine C-reactive protein in serum
cal cross-reactivity between species. Kits based on
has been developed and is available commercially.
two different test principles are available for use in
Initial data have shown that serum C-reactive protein
veterinary patients.
concentration correlates with disease severity in
canine patients with inflammatory bowel disease
Guaiac-based tests contain guaiaconic acid,
(IBD). Thus, serum C-reactive protein concentration
which when oxidized by haemoglobin leads to
can be used to objectively monitor therapeutic success
development of a blue quinone.
in patients with lBD. Unfortunately, measurement of
 O-toluidine-based tests contain
canine C-reactive protein is rather expensive and cur-
tetramethylbenzidine, which when oxidized by
rently not widely available.
haemoglobin aiso leads to generation of a blue
compound.
Faecal α,-proteinase inhibitor
Many Gl disorders are associated with enteric protein
Both kit types can give positive test results when
loss. The gold standard for the diagnosis of Gl protein
exposed to red meat or peroxidase-rich foods, such as
loss is measurement of loss of 51cr-labelled albumin
turnip and cauliflower, present in the diet. However, in
into faeces, but this test is impractlcable, labour and
paiejoosse sem jsal paseg-auipiniolo ue Apns euo
time intensive, and associated with exposure of the
with far fewer false-positive resuits due to diet than a
patient and technical staff to radioactivity. Recently.
guaiac-based test. In another study the same o-toluid-
assays for canine and feline α-proteinase inhibitors in
ine-based test was also slightly more sensitive than a
faeces have been developed. c,-Proteinase inhibitor
guaiac-based test at 12 hours after oral administration
(α,-Pl) is synthesized primarily in the liver and inhibits
of haemoglobin.
 a variety of different proteinases, most importantly
neutrophil elastase. α,-Proteinase inhibitor has a mo-
Intestinal permeability and mucosal function
lecular mass of approximately 60,000 Daltons, similar
n psiae ag e s ses o jsi a
to that of albumin. .Thus, when Gl disease is severe
controlled entry of unwanted molecules that are poten-
enough to be associated with Gl albumin loss, α,-Pl is
tially harmful to the body. The barrier is notcomplete and
also lost. In contrast to albumin, however, α-Pl is not
trace amounts of a wide range of relatively small mol-
hydrolysed in the Gl tract since it is a proteinase
ecules can traverse the intestinal mucosa in normal
inhibitor, and it can be detected in faeces when meas-
animals. The integrity of the barrier function of the Gl
ured by a species-specific immunoassay. Thus, signiff-
tract has been evaluated by permeability testing in
cant Gl protein lass is associated with an increased
several species, and many different marker molecules,
faecal α,-PI concentration.
including 51Cr-EDTA, polyethylene glycols, and mono-
Patients with hypoalbuminaemia should firstbeevalu-
and disaccharides, have been evaluated.
ated for potential blood loss. Ater bload loss has been
 In general, the Gl mucosa is believed to have two
ruled out, protein-losing nephropathy and hepaticfailure
types of aqueous pores through which there is non-
should be ruled out byevaluating urine protein:creatinine
carrier-mediated uptake of small molecules. The smaller
ratio and serum total bile acids concentratian, respec-
pores are hypothesized to be located within the cell
tively. lf these test results are negative, measurement of
membranes and are believed to allow permeation by
faecal o,-Pl can be used to confirm Gl protein loss.
small molecules, including monosaccharides. The cver-
Faecal α-Pl can also be used to monitor the severity of
 all frequency of these transcellular pores is believed to be
Gl disease associated with enteric protein loss. Finally.
large and proportional to the total surface area of the
faecal α,-Pl can be used as an early indicator of Gl
intestinal mucosa. Smallintestinal disease is often asso-
disease in dogs with a potential genetic predisposition to
ciated with villous atrophy and a consequent decrease in
protein-losing enteropathy (PLE). For example, Soft
surface area leadingtodecreased permeability to mono-
Coated Wheaten Terriers with PLE have increased
saccharide markers. The larger pores are believed to be
18
Chapter 2  Laboralory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
located paracellularly in the area of the tight Junctions.
vascular anomalies preprandial serum bile acid con-
centrations may be only mildly increased, while post-
meation of larger molecules such as 51Cr-EDTA and
prandial concentrations are often severely increased.
 disaccharides, is much smaller and is largely dependent
In some normal patients paradoxical results are ob-
on mucosal integrity. In many small intestinal disorders
served in that preprandial serum bile acid concentra-
tight junctions become leaky, leading to increased per-
tions are higher than postprandial concentrations. It
meability to disaccharide markers.
has been suggested that this finding is due to unpre-
The urinary recovery of other monosaccharides
dictable intermittent gall bladder contractions. Increased
transported across the Intestinal mucosa by special-
preprandial bile acid concentrations have also been
ized carriers, such as methylglucose and xylose, has
found in some dogs with evidence of an altered small 
 also been used to evaluate small intestinal absorptive
intestinal microflora; in these patients the increased
capacity, thereby concurrently evaluating another as-
total serum bile acids reflects an increase in the con-
 pect of small intestinal rmucosal function.
centration of unconjugated bile acids as a result of
For combined Gl permeability and mucosal func-
 microbial deconjugation.
tion testing a solution containing several sugar mark-
ers is administered orally, and the sugars that either
urinary bile acid concentrations in dogs and cats with
Suspected hepatic disease has been described. How-
mediated process are assayed in serum or urine. Gl
ever, furher studies are necessary before routine
 permeabiity and mucosal function testing has been 
assay of bile acids in urine rather than serum can be
evaluated in many Gl and systemic diseases but is
recommended.
currently not used in routine practice.
13C-aminopyrine demethylation blood ar
breath test
Tests for hepatobiliary diseases
Aminapyrine, a compound chemically similarto the non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs antipyrine and phenyl-
Biochemistry
butazone, is demethylated by microsomal enzymes in
 Serum activities of hepatic enzymes are analysed as
 the liver. The liberated methyl groups are oxidized to
markers for hepatocellular damage. Unfortunately,
 CO2, which diffuses into the bloodstream, reaches the
some of these enzymes are alsa expressed in other
pulmonary alveoli and is released in the expiratory air.
tissues. Therefore, increased activities of some he-
The administration of aminopyrine labelled with either
patic enzymes can be seen with many other conditions
13C or 14C isotopes allows specific measurement of CO2
unrelated to impaired hepatic function (see BSAVA
derived from aminopyrine, by detection of CO, isotopes
Manual of Canine and Feline Clinical Pathology).
 present in either expired breath or acid-treated blood.
Serum urea, cholesterol and albumin concentra-
The amount of labelled CO2 measured is given as a
tions can allbedecreased in dogs and cats with hepatic
percentage of aminopyrine administered.
 failure. However, these findings are rather insensitive
The aminopyrine breath test(ABT) has been shown
and are also not spacific for hepatic failure.
to be useful in quantifying hepatic microsomal enzyme
function in human beings and laboratory animals.
Bile acid
Several studies have shown that the ABT is a useful
Bile acids are synthesized from cholesterol, conju-
indicator of disease sevenity in human patients with
gated in the liver and secreted in bile. After a meal, the
chronlc hepatitis or hepatic cirrhosis. Reproducible
hormone cholecystokinin (CCK) stimulates gall blad-
collection of breath samples can be difficult in veteri-
der contraction resulting in release of bile into the
 nary species. Therefore,a 13C-aminopyrine demethyla-
duodenum. Conjugated bile acids play a cruclal role in
tion blood test has been developed and is currently
fat absorption as they help to emulsify fat. A small
being evaluated in dogs and cats that undergo hepatic
amount of bile acids .are deconjugated by the small
biopsy. Initial resuits are encouraging.
intestinal microflora. These unconjugated bile acids
 are absorbed in tha smail intestine and are no longer
available for fat emulsification. In contrast, conjugated
Tests for exocrine pancreatic
bile acids are absorbed into the portal blood when they
diseases
reach the ileum, and are subsequently extracted from
the portal blood by the liver.
Serum biochemistry
Pre- and postprandial bile acid concentrations are
used for the diagnosis of hepatic.dysfunction and
Trypsinogen activation peptide
portosystemic shunting. Food is withheld from the
When trypsinogen is activated to trypsin a small pep-
patient for 12 hours and a serum sample is collacted.
tide, trypsinogen activation peptide (TAP), is split from
A small amount of food, rich in fat, is fed to cause CCK
the trypsinogen molecule. Under normal conditions
release and stimulate gall bladder contraction, and
activation of trypsinogen occurs only in the small intes-
another serum sample is collected 2 hours later. When 
tine. Thus, normal dogs arid cats have undetectable or
 hepatic function is significantly impaired extraction of
minimal concentrations of TAP circulating in the blood-
bile acids from the portal blood becomes less efficient
 stream. During pancreatitis, trypsinogen is activated
and both pre- and postprandial serum bile acid concen-
prematurely in the pancreas and TAP is released into
trations may increase. In patients with portosystemic
the vascular space, where its concentration increases.
19
Chapter 2 Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
In a clinical trial the sensitivity of urinary
than pancreatic acinarcells. Many non-pancreatlccon-
TAP:creatinine ratio and plasma TAP concentration in
ditions including renal disease, hepatic disease and
dogs with pancreatitis were poor. Another recent study
neoplastic diseases have been associated with in-
also evaluated plasma and urinary TAP concentrations
for the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis. Only plasma
ministration of prednisolone or dexamethasone also
TAP concentration was significantly increased in cats
cause increases in serum lipase activity in dogs. While
with pancreatitis, but plasma TAP concentration does
some dogs with pancreatitis have increased serum
not appear to have any advantage over the determina-
lipase activities, others exhibitno, or minimal, increases
tion of serum feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity (fTLI)
in serum lipase activity. In one study, serum lipase
concentration. Furthermore, TAP is relatively labile in
activity showed a specificity for canine pancreatitis of
plasma and urine samples, and the assay is expensive
only55% and asensitivityof73%.Thus,indogs,serum
and not widely available, making plasma TAP less
lipase activity should be used only as a screening test
attractive than serum TLl as a diagnostic tool. Thus,
until the diagnosis can be confirmed by other, more
 use of the TAP assay for the diagnosis of pancreatitis
 specific, tests. Even then, pancreatitis can be present
in dogs and cats cannot be recommended.
when serum lipase activity is normal.
Cats with experimentally induced pancreatitis
α,-Proteinase inhibltor-trypsin complexes
 showed significantly increased serum lipase activities
In healthy animals, only minimal quantities of trypsin
in one study, but cats with spontaneous pancreatitis
reach the vascular space. In contrast, when the pan-
usually do not, suggesting that, in cats, serum lipase
creas is inflamed, trypsin is released into the vascular
activity is of no value in the diagnasis of pancreatitis.
space from where it is removed by two scavenger
molecules, α -proteinase inhibitor and αz-macroglabu-
Amylase
lin. α,-Proteinase inhibitor binds trypsin reversibly.
 Serum amylase activity, like serum lipase activity, is
Under normal conditions, the concentration of α-
not specific for exocrine pancreatic function. Dogs with
proteinase inhibitor-trypsin complexes in serum is
experimentally induced pancreatitis have increased
undetectable orlow, while during pancreatitis increased
serum amylase activities, but while some dogs with
concentrations would be expected. In one experimen-
spontaneous pancreatitis have increased activities,
tal study of canine pancreatitis, serum concentrations
others have activities in the normal range. Further-
of α1-proteinase inhibitor-trypsin complexes were sig-
more, dogs with non-pancreatic Gl disease sometimes
nificantly higher than in healthy controls, and the mag-
have increased serum amylase activities. Finally, ad-
nitude of elevation reflected disease severity. However,
ministration of prednisolone and dexamethasone to
 serum α,-proteinase inhibitor-trypsin complexes were
healthy dogs leads to decreased serum amylase activ-
not significantly increased in dogs with spontaneous
ity, in contrast to the increases observed in serum
pancreatitis, thus indicating that this parameter is not
lipase activity. In one study serum amylase activity had
clinically useful for the diagnosis of spontaneous dis-
a specificity of 57% and a sensitivity of 62% for canine
ease in the dog.
pancreatitis, indicating that as for serum lipase activity,
serum amylase activity should at best only be used as
0.,-Macroglobulin
a screening tool for canine pancreatitis until the diagno-
o-Macroglobulin is another scavenger protein for
sis can be confirmed by other tests.
Serum amylase activity was decreased in one
reversibly to α-Pl, the bond with αg-macroglobulin is
study of cats with experimental pancreatitis but in cats
irreversible and trypsin-α2-macroglobulin complexes
with spontaneous disease changes in serum amylase
are rapidly removed by the reticuloendothelial sys-
activities have not been observed, suggesting that
tem. Thus, &g-macroglobulin is utilized during pancre-
serum amylase activity has no clinical usefulness inthe
atic inflammation and serumconcentrations decrease.
diagnosis of feline pancreatitis.
Unfortunately, measurement of serum vz-macroglobu-
lin is not clinically useful for the diagnosis of canine
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity
pancreatitis; an assay for this protein in cats has not
Pancreaticacinarcells synthesize and secrete trypsino-
been evaluated.
 gen, the inactive zymogen of the proteolytic enzyme
trypsin. Almost all trypsinogen is secreted into the
Lipase
duodenum via the pancreatic ducts. However, a small
 Serum lipase activity has been used for diagnosis of
 proportion is released into the vascular space and can
human and canine pancreatitis for several decades.
be measured by use of species-specificimmunoassays
However, in both species it has been well recognized
for measurement of TLl.
that serum lipase activity is neither very sensitive nor
Dogs and cats with EPl have a severely depleted
very specific for pancreatitis. Many cell types have
number of pancreatic acinar cells, and thus a de-
been shown to synthesize and secrete lipases. Lipases
 creased secretion of pancreatic enzymes, including
of different cellular origins share a common function
trypsinogen, both into the duodenum and into the
and thus can nat be differentiated by use of a catalytic
vascular space, leading to a decreased serum TLI
assay, such as the ones currently used to determine
concentration. Canine serum TLl concentrations ≤ 2.5
lipase activity in serum. Serum lipase activity is not
μg/l are highly sensltive and specific for diagnosis of
decreased in dogs with EPl, indicating that most serum
canine EPl, while values of feline TLI ≤8 μg/l are highly
lipase activity originates from additional sources other
specific for EPl in cats.
20
Chapter 2  Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
Pancreatic inflammation can lead to increased re-
Initial clinical studies of fPLl in cats have also been
ui osl sds jenosen au ou uabousdn ja aseal
promising. In a group of cats with experimentally in-
pancreatitis, prematurely activated trypsin leaks directly
duced pancreatitis, both serum fTLI and fPLl concen-
into the vascular space, where it is rapidly bound by
trations increased initially but the increase in serum
plasma protease inhibitors. Like trypsinogen, trypsin is
fPLI persisted much longer than that of serum fTLI
also detected by immunoassays for TLl, although with
suggesting that, as in the dog, serum PLl concentration
much lowerefficiency, and sototalserum TLl concentra-
is more sensitive for pancreatitis than serum TLl can-
tion can increase in dogs and cats with pancreatitis.
centration. In another study of cats with spontaneous
Significantly increased serum TLl concentration (>50
pancreatitis serum fPLl concentration was both more
μg/l in dogs and >100 μg/l in cats) is highly specific for
sensitive and specific than either serum fTLl concen-
pancreatitis buthasa lmlted sensitivity of 30-60%, most
tration or abdominal uitrasonography.
likely due to its short half-life. Serum TLl concentration
Thus, in both dogs and cats serum PLI concentra-
is probably of most diagnostic value early in the course
tion is the most sensitive and specific diagnostic test for
of spontaneous pancreatitis in dogs and cats, while
pancreatitis yet identified. These assays are currently
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLl; see below) is
only available through the Gl Laboratory at Texas A&M
superior as the disease evolves.
University.
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
Many different cell types in the body synthesize and
References and further reading
secrete lipases. In contrast to non-specific catalytic
assays for the measurement of lipase activity.
Barr SC (1agaa) Cryptosporidiosis and cyclosponasis. In: Infectious
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2d edn, ed. CEGreene,pp.518
immunoassays allow specific measurement of lipase
524, WB Saunders, Philadelphia
activity specifically synthesized by the exocrine pan-
Barr SC (i998b) Enleric pratozoal infections.In: Infectious Diseases
of the Dog and Cat,2edn,ed.CE Greane, pp.482-491.WB
creas. Immunoassays for the measurement of serum
Saunders, Philadelphia
concentrations of canine and feline PLl (cPLl, fPLl)
Center SA (1996)Diagnostic procedures for evaluation of hepaic
have recently been developed and validated, and
dlsease.In: Stromback's Small Anima! Gastroenterology,3
edn, ed. WG Guilfterd et al., pp. 130-188. WB Saundcrs,
increases in serum Pll can be seen in dogs and cats
Phlladelphla
with both experimental and spontaneous pancreatitis.
Gookin JL, Foster DM, Poore MF, Stebbins ME and Lovy MG (2003)
Serum cPLl concentrations are decreased in dogs
Use of a commercially available culture system for diagnosis of
Tritrichomonas foetus infection in cats. Jourmat of the American
with EPl showing that cPLl is pancreatic acinar cell-
Veterinary Medical Ass0ciation222,1376-1379
specific. However, there is slightly more overlap of 
JohnstonKL(1999) SmallIntestinalbacterialovergrowth.Veterinary
Cinics of North America: Smal Animal Practice 29, 523-550
serum cPLI concentrations than serum cTLI concen-
Lund EM and Klausner JS (1995) Clinical epidemiology for the
trations between healthy dogs and dogs with EPl,
veterinary practitioner the diagnostic process. In: Kirk's Current
indicating that serum cTLI remains the test of choice for
Veterinary Therapy,Xifedn,ed.JD Bonagura,pp.7-11.WB
Saunders,Philadelphia
Mansfleld CS and Jones BR (2ooo) Plasma and urinary trypsinagen
 confirmed spontaneous pancreatitis, the sensitivity of
serum cPLl concentration was >80%, compared to
dogs with cthar systemic diseases. Australian Veterinaryfounal
78, 416422
<55% and <35% for serum lipase activity and serum
 Neiger R and Simpson KW (2000) Helicobactarinfectlon in dogs and
cTLI, respectively. Serum cPLI concentration is signifi-
cats: facts and fiction. Journal of Veterinary Intemal Medicine 14,
cantly greater in dogs with experimentally induced
125-133
Slmpson KW, Fyfe J, Cornetta A, Sachs A, Strauss-Ayall D, Lamb SV
 chronic renal failure than in clinically healthy dogs, but
and Reimers TJ (2001) Subnormal concentrations of serum
most dogs with renal failure have serum cPLI concen-
cobalamtn, (Vitamin B,) in cats with gastrointestinal dlsease.
Joumal of Veterinary internai Medicine 15, 26-32
trations within the reference range, and concentrations
do not exceed currently recommended cut-off values
In: BSAVA Manual of Small Animal Endocrinology, 2ne edn, ed.
for diagnosing pancreatitis. Thus, this indicates that
AG Torrance and CT Mooney, pp. 173-178. BSAVA Publications,
Cheltenham
serum cPLI concentrations can be used as a.diagnostic
 Steiner JM (2003) Diagnosis of pancreatitis. Vaterinary Clinics of
test for pancreatitis even in dogs with renal failure. Oral
North America: Smafl Animal Practice 33, 1181-1195
 administration of prednisolone does not change serum
Williams DA (1996) The pancreas.In: Smalf AnimalGastroenterology.
" edn, ed. DF Strombeck et al., pp. 381-410. WB Saunders,
cPLI concentration.
Philadelphia
21
Imaging
 the gastrointestinal
tract, liver and pancreas
Robert T. O'Brien
Introduction
Many clinical signs of gastrointestinal (Gl) disease are
vagueand donotlocalizepreciselytoaparticular
organ.Imaging is often very important both to identify
anobviousabnormality andtogain confidencethat no
obvious conditionexists thatwoulddictate a surgical
emergency.This chapter providesanoverview of
imaging modalities and stresses the indications,
contraindications,andnormalandabnormal findings.
Gastrointestinal imaging
Radiographyisthemostcommonimagingmodalityin
veterinarymedicine.Whilehazardousifmisused,few
modalities canmatch the clinical utility ofradiography
forproviding an overview of theneck,thorax and
abdomeninclinicalevaluationoftheentireGl tract.
Right lateral radiograph of 6-year-oldmale
3.2
neutered Dcbermann with a 3-hour history of
Surveyabdominalradiography
retching. Note the gastric dilatation volvulus with air-filled
Abdominal radiography isa very important tool for
pylorus()in cranial dorsal position.Pncumoperitoneum is
seen secondary to gastric wall necrosis,as shown by the
many reasons. The most important purpose is for the
free air caudal to the diaphragm (white arrow) and the
diagnosisof the acute abdomen:gastric dilatation and
incrcascd serosal detail of intestinal loops(black arrow).
volvulus(GDV);Gl foreign body;small intestinal ob-
struction;andpneumoperitoneum asa signof a rup-
ventral,caudalandright-sided,andthefundusisdorsal,
tured segment of Gl tract. Secondly,radiography
cranial and left-sided.DuringaGDVthepylorusrotates
providesanoverviewofabdominalcontrast.Causes of
totheleftandassumesamorecranialand dorsal
decreasedperitoneal or retroperitonealcontrast are
locationrelativetothefundus.Thefundusisidentifiedby
listedinFigure3.1.Theimportanceof abdomino-
centesisorultrasonographyintheclinicalevaluationof
tion to the duodenum.
radiographicloss of detail should benoted.
Themost important smallintestinal disease that can
Gl diseasescan oftenbediagnosedwithsurvey
radiography.For example,classic signs of GDV are
obstruction.Whethercausedbyneoplasticmass,lucent
dilatation(withgas,fluid,foodora combinationthereof),
foreignbody,intussusception or dysfunctional aboral
compartmentalization andmalpositionof thegastric
segment,theresultant effect isdilatation of theorad
fundus and pylorus(Figure 3.2).The pylorusis normally
portion.The criteria of dilatationare somewhat contro-
versialandaratioof1.6:1betweenthemaximumsmall
intestinaldiameterand theheightof thebodyof thefifth
Cause
Adjunctive tests
lumbar vertebra at its narrowest point hasbeen consid-
Neonatal brown fat
Correlatewith clinical details
ered theupper limit of normal intestinal diameter.Alter-
Emaciation
Correlate with physical examination
natively small intestinal loopsshouldnotbewiderthan
Mass/organomegaly
Abdominal ultrasonography
theheight'ofacraniallumbarvertebralendplate(not
the mid-bodyregion)on a lateralprojection of the
Free tiuid
Abdominocentesis:uitrasonography
abdomen (Figure 3.3).The diagnosis of mechanical
Peritonitis
Abdomincentesisulrasonograhy
obstructionrequirespersistenceof thedilatationand,
Carcinomatosis
Abdominocentesis;ultrasonography
therefore,repeatradiographs are almost always pru-
dent.Additionally,rightand left lateralprojectionsare
Differential diagnoses for loss of peritoneal
complementaryfordemonstrationofdilated intestinal
3.1
detail.
gas patterns (Figure 3.4).
22
Chapter3Imaging thegastrointestinal tract,liverandpancreas
3.3
Radograph of a 5-year-oid intact male Golden
evidence of small intestine (Sl) oostruction is
3.5
Laleral radiographic projection of 4-year-old
demcnslraled by loops of Si that arewider(serosa-to-
GermanShepherdDogwith2cays'duration of
scrosa)than the height of the verteoral endolate of L2.
vamitingfollowingingestionof a linearforeignbody.Note
the aoncrmally shaped small intestine.The gas pockets in
the small intestines in theventral abdomen areraund to
cvoid,the loops are bunched and the inlestines are
bending in tight corners.
Whilemanymedicalcausesof Gl diseaseresult in
mild tomoderate intestinal wall thickening,measure-
mentsofwall thickness shouldnotbe attempted on
surveyradiography;this canonly beperformed during
an upper Gl contrast study.
Contrastradiography
Oesophagography
In cases of dysphagia orregurgitation,imaging of the
(a)
head and neck is essential (see Chapters 6 and 18).
While someof these disorders canbe diagnosed by a
single lateral projection(e.g.metallic foreign body),the
majority are dynamicconditionsrequiring thereal-time
imaging ofapositivecontrastoesophagram.Although
uncommon in general practice,analogue or digital
image-intensified fluoroscopy is available in larger
referral practices and academicinstitutions.These are
challenging studies even withproper equipment,so
are not discussed here.
Similartooropharyngeal diseases,some oesopha-
geal diseasesmaybediagnosedbyacompletesetof
(b)
plain film thoracic radiographs.The most common
(a) Right and (b) left lateral radiographs of
condition seeningeneral practiceismegaoesophagus
3.4
3-year-old female spayedDomestic Short-hair
(Figure 3.6).This is very commonly misinterpreted or
cat with gastric diatation causedbypyloric obstruction.
evenoverlooked.Infact,themoreseveretheoesopha-
The stomach appears as a soft tissue mass,
indistinguishable from aliver mass,on the righl laleral
geal dilatation,the morecommonlythewalls arenot
projection.On the left latcral projecticn the luminal gas
seen.lIt isvery important tosearchforthe distribution
rises to tha non-dependent pylorus and descending
of the megaoesophagusand concurrent lesions,and
duodenumprovicingbettercontrast and verification of
todeterminewhether theoesophageal dilatation is
the cause of the cranial organomegaly.
regional or throughout the entire thorax.In a neonate,
a megaoesophagus limited to the cranial thoracic and
Animportant surgical conditionin cats and dogs is
caudal cervical regions should alert theclinician toa
a linearforeignbody.Althoughmany arediagnosed
possiblevascular ring anomaly.Concurrent lesions
onhistoryand oral examination,theremainderare
thatmaybeassociatedwith localizedmegaoesophagus
usually identified by radiographic findings.These
includeforeign bodiesormasses.
findingsinclude clumpingoftheintestines,tightbends
In the event thatclinical signs suggest regurgitation,
or figure C-shaped loopsand manyround to ovoid
but thereisnoevidenceonplainradiographyofa
(butnot tubular-shaped) gaspockets in the small
megaoesophagus,then a dynamic contrast study is
bowel (Figure 3.5).
indicated.ldeallythesamereal-time imaging equipment,
23
Chapter3Imaging thegastrointestinal tract,liverand pancreas
。
A demonstrated tendencyforaspirationpneumonia
Evidenceofoesophagealperforation.
The clinical manifestationof aspiration of barium is
cluding aspirationpneumonia)and the volumeof barium
aspirated.If the volume is not excessive,the fluid
component of the bariumsuspension(water) is rapidly
absorbedand thesuspendedbariumparticlescleared
by themucociliaryapparatus.lf severethebariummay
becomealveolarized,resultinginbariumgranuloma
formationandpossibledeposition in the tracheobron-
chial lymph nodes.This may result in permanent and
dramatic,albeit often subclinical,changes noted on
futurethoracicradiographs.
(a)
(a)Leff lateral
Gastrography
3.6
The diagnosis ofa radiolucent gastricforeign body can
and(b)
ventrodorsal radiographs
be quite challenging. Residual food may resemble
of a9-year-old German
cloth oranothertypeof lucent foreignbody,andso the
Shepherc Dog with a
time of lastfood ingestionisveryimportant.Mostdogs
6-month historyof
regurgitation.Note the
will haveanemptystomachwithin4hoursofa typical
wall of the oesophagus
meal,andpersistentamorphous soft tissue material
(white arrows)on lefl
admixedwith airin thestomach mayindicate either
lateral andventrodorsal
delayed gastric emptying orlucent foreignbody(see
prcjections. Regicns of
Figure 3.4).A negative contrast gastrogram is indi-
alvcolarconsolidationare
cated forthediagnosisofalucentgastricorproximal
seen in the right m ddle
duodenal foreign body(Figure 3.7).
and caudal lung lobes.
The cog was diagnosed
withidiopathic
(b)
megaoesophagus and
aspiration pneumonia.
asmentionedaboveforapositivecontrastoesophagram,
should beused.Thiswilloptimizelocation of subtle
lesions,such as oesophageal stricture,orfunctional
diseases of the gastro-oesophagealjunction.Neverthe-
onds after swallowing will often produce a diagnostic
image.Contrast agents available foroesophagography
includebarium-coatedkibble,bariumpaste andbarium
suspension.Oesophagramsareusuallybegunwith the
(a)
typeof material thepatient hashistoricallyswallowed
best. lf the doggags on waterbut eats food with no
discomfort,thenanoesophagramwithbarium-coated
kibbleshouldbeattemptedfirstfollowedifnecessary
bypaste andfinallybariumsuspension.Alternatively,if
amegaoesophagus is suspected but is intermittent on
theimages andispossibly duetoa systemicdisease or
sedationprovided fortheimaging,thenbariumsuspen-
sion may be indicated as the sole contrast agent.This
material willpassinto thestomachmosteasilyandcan
be removed if necessary by placement of anoesopha-
geal tube.
Themost importantcomplicationwith theuseof
oral barium contrast mediaisaspiration,whichmay
(b)
cause a dramaticloss ofventilatory capacity.This
risk canbeminimized by avoiding oral administration
(a) Survey and(o) negative contrast
3.7
of barium in certain clinical contraindications,for
ventrodorsal projecticnsof the cranial abdomcn
of a 1-year-old Cardigan WelshCorgi withvomiting of
example:
1months duration.The survey raciograph wasnormal but
on thenegative contrast gastrcgram,air intheproximal
A strong clinical suspicion of megaoesophagus
descendingduodenum surroundsaroundsofttissue
Broncho-oesophageal fistula oroesophageal
filling defect (arrowed). The dog had & large acorn
rupture
rcmovcd endoscopicelly.
24
Chapter3Imaging thegastrointestinal tract,liver and pancreas
ThespecificdosagesforcommonGl contraststud-
series.Radiography,usuallyright lateral andventro-
ies are provided(Figure3.8).However,the dosages for
dorsalprojections,should beobtained at0,5,15,30
the negative contrast gastrogram and pneumo-
and 60minutes,and thenhourly until the end of the
colonogramcouldjust as wellread‘toeffect',because
study.Comparedwith aproperly exposed survey
the desiredeffectisafull(notdilated) stomachorcolon,
radiograph, the kVp should be increased 10% during
respectively.Multiple positions are often required to
the upper Gl contrast study.The images obtained
place theforeignbodyin a diagnostic location.Both
earlyin the study areoftenthemost important since
laterals(seeFigure3.4),ventrodorsalanddorsoventral
theorad intestinal loopsmayonlybefullofbarium
projections may all be necessary.The recommended
immediatelyafterthestartoftheseries.Theendpoints
sedativeforcontrastradiographyoftheGltract,dueto
for anupper Gl contrast study are:
itsdependablelevelofsedationforeaseoforogastric
tubeplacement and minimal effecton Gl motility,is
Small intestinal transit (time for theleadingedge
acepromazine maleate.
of thebarium toreach thecolon)
Gastricemptying(timeforall thebarium toleave
the stomach).
Contrast study
Dose
Contrast medium
Oesophagram
1mlper5kg
Radiologicaldeterminationofagastricemptying
Barium suspension (60%
bodyweight
weight/volume)
disorder isbasedonsubstantial residual barium sus-
pension in the stomach2hours(cat)or4hours.(dog)
Upper gastrointestinal
13mlkg
Barium suspension(20%
afterbeginning the upper Gl contrast study,although
series
weight/volume)
the onset ofgastric emptying in the cat isvariable
Negative contrast
6m/kg
Air
dependingonlevelsofendogenoussympathomimetics.
gastrogram
Since thetiming describedaboveisbased onthetime
Pneumocolongram
6ml/kg
ofonsetofemptying,somecatswillbenefit frombeing
Air
placedinacalm,quietenvironment toallowthestom-
Dosagos andmedia for contrast radiographyof
ach tobeginnormal contractions.
3.8
lhe Gl lracl.
Pneumocolonography
Upper gastrointestinal series
Intestinal obstructionis an important diagnosis andyet
An upper Gl contrast study (Figure 3.9) is indicated
often difficult toestablish onsurveyradiography.One
when clinical signs indicate the Gl tract isinvolved and
obstruction needs to beruled out first.This study is
small and large intestine.Apneumocolonogram can
aid this process. Slow infusion of air (see Figure 3.8)
technicallydemandingtoperform and amongst the
most difficult tointerpret.Themost common technical
into therectum throughaninflatedballoon-tipped cath-
mistakes are:
etercanprovidenegativecontrastenhancementof the
colon (Figure 3.10).
Toolowavolumeofadministeredbarium
suspension
Improper patient preparation
Insufficient radiographs at suitable timepoints.
Patientsshouldbefasted forat least 12hours
and have cleansing enemas;the goal is an empty
stomach and colon.Persistence of gastric contents
is a relative contraindicationfor starting theupperGl
3.9
Ventrocorsal
radicgraph
of a 5-year-olc intact
Labrador Retriever
oitchwith lethargyfor
3 days, obtained
15minuesafter
administration of13ml/
kg of 20%weight/
volumebarium
suspension.Nole Ihe
3.10
normal position and
ventrodorsal(pncumocolonogram)raciographs
shape cf the small
of 10-year-od femalespayeo DomesticShort-hair cat-with
intestinal loops.
2-month history of vomiting.On the survey image a caudal
leff-sided bowel loop (black arrow) was thought to be a
diatcd small intcstinal loop.On the oncumocolonogram
the loop is ro longer seen an the laft side,but the gas
RS
filed descending colon is ontheright side.
Chapter3 Imaging the gastrointestinal tract,liver and pancreas
Ultrasonography
ultrasonographicappearanceofahalvedgrapefruit
The use of ultrasonographyhaslargelyreplacedcon-
(Figure 3.12).This classicalappearance allows evalua-
trast radiography for the diagnosis of Gl neoplasia,
tionofwalllayerdefinition and thickness.
intussusceptionanddiffusemuralinfiltrativedisease.lt
nowhasbecome thegoldstandard inveterinarymedi-
inflammatory or neoplastic conditions but thickening
cineforevaluating theabdomenformetastaticdis-
withlossof normal layers ismorecommonlyassoci-
ease.The complete ultrasoundevaluation of the Gl
atedwith neoplasia.Regional thinning within a thick-
tract in catsand dogshasneverbeeneasieror more
ened areamayrepresenta gastriculcer.Othersigns of
rewarding.All intra-abdominal segments should be
ulcerationincludea trappedfocus of air in theulcer
systematically evaluated for thickening (Figure 3.11),
crater,whichwillpersistregardlessofpositioningofthe
lossof layering andregional lymphadenopathy.A
patient.Concurrent free fluidindicatesa peritonitis and
limited ultrasound evaluationof the cranial thoraxfor
aspiration shouldbe attempted forculture and cytology
sternal lymphadenopathyispossiblewhen Gi orother
if clinicallyindicated.lf theresuminalfluidthegastric
cranial abdominal neoplasia is suspected.Radio-
contentscanbe evaluatedfor evidenceofforeign
graphy is an important complementary imaging modal-
bodies.Gastric outflowdisorders usuallyresultinlarge
ity,especiallywhenanapparentoverabundanceofgas
amounts of luminal gas or fluid accumulations.The
makescompleteevaluationof theabdomen difficult.
hepaticlymphnodesareoften seenwithin thelesser
curvatureof thestomachand adjacenttotheportal
dependentmodality.Image qualiy isbased on ma-
vein in normal cats.
chine-related issues (as in all imaging), but is more
dependenton theskilland experienceof theoperator
STOMACH
(ultrasonographer) thananyotherimagingmodality.ln
theGl tracttheselimitations arecompounded by
variable amountsof gas,food and faeces.
Gastrointestinal
Cat
Dog
segment
Stomach:fundus
2.0
5.0
pylorus
2.5
5.0
Duodenum
2.5
5.0 (<30 kg bodyweight)
6.0 (≥30 kg bodyweight)
ununfer
2.5
4.0 (<20kg bodyweight)
3.12
Transverseplaneulirasound image of normal
4.5 (>20 kg bocyweight)
stomach of a cat.Mcasurements of wall
3.2
4.0
lleum
Colon
1.7
2.0
Thepyloricregion shouldbeevaluatedinevery
patient.If the stomach is empty the pylorus isright-
Upper limit of normal gastrointestinal wall
3.11
sided indogs and closer to midline in cats.With
segment thickness(mm).
increased gastricvolume the pylorus in cats will be
positionedmore to the right.In order to locate the
Oropharyngealandoesophageal
pylorus,the descending duodenum canbe traced to
It is not overly simplisticto suggest that itis possible to
thecranialduodenalflexureandeventuallytothe
stomach.Thismethoddictatesthatthe operatorisable
as the anatomy isknown.The oral cavity,pharynxand
toidentify theduodenumwith confidence.
oesophagus can be imaged in cats with signs of
Amajoradvantagewithultrasoundis thereal-time
dysfunction or a mass,e.g.neoplastic and chronic
capability to watch gastric contractions and pyloric
inflammatoryconditionsusuallylead tohypoechoic
emptying.However,patientsgivenvarioussedatives
thickening.These changesare appreciated best when
or thatareveryexcitedmayhave abnormallyde-
asymmetricaland located superficially.Case exam-
creased gastricfunction.
plesincludelymphoplasmocyticpharyngitisandoropha-
ryngeallymphoma.Deeperlocations,especiallylesions
Duodenum
hidden beneath airways, are more difficult to image.
The duodenum isoften thefirst smallintestinal loop
Endoscopicultrasound systemscan overcome many
ventral to theright kidney.Thisis also important for
of theselimitations andhavetremendousclinicalpo-
proper examination of thepancreas.The duodenal
tential foroesophageal imaging.
wall hasexcellent layerdefinitionandhasauniformly
hypoechoicmucosal layer.
Stomach
Bothinflammatorybowel diseasesand lymphoma
Dogs tendtopantandfilltheir stomachswithgasmaking
canhave manifestationsranging fromnormalultra-
evaluation of allbut themost superficialportionsof the
sonographic appearance to generalized thickening
stomach difficult.Cats in comparison tend topant less
with enlarged regional lymph nodes.More specific
andwillusuallyhaveanemptystomach thattakesonthe
tolymphoma isloss of distinctlayers.Pancreatic
26
Chapter3
Imaging thegastrointestinal tract,liverandpancreas
adenocarcinomamayinvadetheduodenal wallresult-
Colon
ing in the appearance of a duodenal wall mass.This
Usually thecolon is intentionally avoided during the
tumourhasoftenmetastasizedtoregionallymphnodes.
course of mostof theabdominal ultrasound examina-
liver and the thorax by the time of initial diagnosis.
tion.Faeces andgas in the colonic lumen cause
Whenever Gl neoplasia issuspected,ultrasonogra-
substantial challenges to obtaining a diagnostic image
phersshouldperformalimitedultrasoundexamination
duringroutinescanning.Afastedcatwill typicallyhave
of thecranial thorax.Thestemal lymphnodes,pleural
a full colon.Although cleansing enemasmaybeneces-
spaceand lung arevery commonlyaffectedwith Gl
sarytoemplythecolon,manycatswith lowerGl signs
tumours and areeasily scannedas anadjunct to the
have lower residualvolumesassociatedwiththeir
abdominal ultrasoundexamination.
tenesmus.Likeotherregions of theintestinal tract,the
Identificationof massesorforeignbodiesrequires
colonis athighriskforinflammatorybowel diseases
a completeevaluation of the duodenum.Foreignbod-
and lymphoma. lf diffuse or regional thickening is
ieswill usually havecomplete attenuation of the trans-
noted,evaluationof themedialiliac(sublumbar)lymph
mittedsoundresultinginadenseshadowartefactand
nodesforevidenceof metastasisorconcurrentinflam-
focal intestinal dilatation.
mation is indicated and may provide aneasier organ on
whichtoperformultrasound-guidedbiopsy than the
Jejunum
affected colon.
The challenge with imaging this segment is in being as
complete aspossible.Unlike the duodenum,a com-
plete tracingof the entirelengthof thejejunumisallbut
impossible.All that canbedone is to try toperform a
Liver imaging
methodical search of the entire mid-abdomen.An
overabundanceofgas in the small intestinesshould
alert theultrasonographer topotential obstructiveGl
veryrapidrateinthelast10years.Majorprogresshas
disease.Under these circumstances radiographic
beenmade with ultrasonography,scintigraphy,com-
evaluationmaybehelpful.
puted tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRl)of the liverin small animal patients.
lleum
Whilst most general small animal practitioners will be
Theileumisaveryspecialsubsectionof the SI thatonly
limitedtoradiography andultrasonography,there should
recently hasreceivedan appropriatelevel of attention
be an awarenessof the advantagesof more advanced
from ultrasonographers.The ileum is a‘must see
structureonthelistoforgansnecessaryforacomplete
imaging techniques.
abdominal ultrasound examination (Figure 3.13) as
this very small part of the intestines seems overly
Surveyradiography
predisposed to infitrative diseases, including lym-
For thedeterminationof liversize,surveyradiography
phoma,andtointussusceptions.Thissegmentisfound
isprobably still thebest tool.Liversize isdetermined
by searching theright mid-abdomenfora small intes-
fromtheconsensusofthegastricaxis,theextentof the
tinal loopwith a typically thickmuscularis layer(com-
liverbeyond thecostal arch,and the thicknessof liver
pared with other segments) that is contiguous with the
between gastric wall and diaphragm. The gastric axis
large intestine.The colon is typically much thinner and
istheline drawnbetween thecentreof thefundus
(dorsal-, cranial- and left-most aspect of the stomach)
gas-or faeces-filled. The lymph nodes in this region
(right colic lymph nodes) are seen in many catswith no
and the centre of the pyloric antrum(ventral-,caudal-
clinical signs and may benormal,but could represent
and right-most aspect of the stomach). The normal
mildlyreactive lymphnodes in subclinical disease.
gastricaxisonlateralprojectionsisaline thatlieswithin
theangleformed bya lineperpendicular tothe spine
GE
anda lineparallel to theribs.On ventrodorsal projec-
tionsthenormal gastric axisisperpendicular tothe
spine. If the liver is small the pylorus is positioned
closertothediaphragmmaking the axismorevertical
(or even inclined cranially) on lateral projections and
deviatedwiththepylorusmorecranial thanthefundus
onventrodorsal projections.Most normal liversdonot
extend beyond the costal arch.As more experienceis
gained,asubjectiveinterpretationofnormalliverwidth
onlateral projectionsis incorporated into theradiologi-
cal interpretation.
Evaluationof thegall bladderandbiliarytractwith
Occasionallyrefluxofduodenal gasorinfectionwith
gas-forming organisms may causea decreased opac-
3.13
Sagiltal plane ultrasound image of normal
ileocolic junction cf a cat.Arrow indicales the
ityto thebiliary tract.Mineralization can cause in-
ileum:; note the thick outer hypercchcic (darker)
creasedopacity in thegallbladder orbiliarytract.
muscularisayer.Arrcwhead indicates the colon:note the
Althoughuncommon, stones(cholelithiasis orcholido-
thin walls and barely detectable layering.
cholithiasis)can sometimesbevisualized.
27
Chapter 3Imaging the gastrointestinal tract, liver andpancreas
Ultrasonography
Uitrasonographyof hepatopathies
Ultrasonography is thegoldstandard in generalprac-
Hepaticpathologywillbedetectableultrasonographically
ticeforevaluating theinternal structuresandoverall
onlyifitleadstoachangeinthesize,shapemarginatin
texture of the liver.Adequate machine systems can
orechogenicityof theliver.
be quite affordable and,with moderatetraining and
Changes inthe sizeof the liverarereliablydetected
skill the general practitioner will be able to locate
only at the extremes. Microhepatica is usually appar-
the liverand identifymany abnormalities.Mostof the
ent byvirtueof the difficulty in finding the livervia the
livercanbeimagedviaanacousticwindowimmedi-
usual acoustic windows.Differential diagnosesfor
ately caudal to the xyphoid.Application of some
microhepatica includehypoplasia(secondary to con-
pressurewhile angling the transducercraniallyfrom
genital portosystemic shunt, cirrhosis or a normal
the paraxyphoid and subcostal approaches may
variant.Anotherconsiderationfordifficulty finding the
be required to obtain good images.Portions of the
liverisdiaphragmaticherniation.Caremustbetakento
hepaticparenchyma that cannotbe imaged from
avoidconfusingthiswith themirrorimage artefactthat
this site areusually accessibleviaparaxyphoid,sub-
costal and rightintercostal approaches.Inmost dogs
phragm.Generalizedhepatomegalyisrecognized when
it isnecessarytouseanintercostalacousticwindow
a largeportionof the liver extendsbeyond thecostal
toimage the liver cranial tothe rightkidney.When
arch and themargins arerounded.
using an intercostal window excessive pressure
Changesinthe shape andmarginationareimportant
upon and between the ribs must be avoided as it will
ultrasonographic signsof hepaticdisease.These can
causepatientdiscomfortand thereforereducepatient
be subtlebutareoften theonly signincaseswherethere
compliance.
isadiffuseorfocal disease thathasnotalteredthe
Thenormal hepaticparenchyma hasa diffusely
echogenicityofthe affected hepaticparenchyma.Some-
coarse echotexture best described ashomogene
timeschangesinshape and margination areonlyvisible
ouslyheterogeneous'.Whencompared with thenor-
duetodistortionof thenormal hepaticstructures,such
mal echogenicityofsplenicandrenalparenchyma
asdisplacementofvasculature,thegallbladderorcystic
theliverisintermediate,appearing hypoechoictothe
duct,orasirregularitiesof theusually smoothcontour
spleen and hyperechoic to therenal cortex.In cats
andsharpedgesof thenormal liver.
Changes in liver echogenicity can be focal or dif-
fuse.Focallesions are more easilydetectedintheliver
obese patients. The best comparative structure for
than diffuse hepatopathiesprovided thatthey aresuf-
assessmentof hepatic echogenicityin cats is thefat
ficientlydifferentfrom thenormal surroundingecho-
of the falciform ligament,which ishyperechoiccom-
genicityand are ofa sufficient size.The lesion will often
pared with normal hepaticparenchyma.The division
notbeseenwithinthe typical coarseechotextureofthe
oftheliver intoindividual lobesbyfissuresisnot
hepaticparenchyma in large dogswhenimagingwith
apparent in the normal liver except in instances of
a lowfrequencytransducer orwhenimaging isrushed
peritoneal effusion.The marginsof theliver are usu
so that a thoroughexamination isnotperformed.
ally smooth with sharp edges.
The hepaticandportal veinsare anechoic and
smalllesionsareimprovedwithhigher transmitted
round in transverseplane.However,rotation of the
frequencies.An important diagnostic and prognostic
transducer90degreeselongatesthevesselssothat
consideration is the location and numberof lesions.A
they appearas tapering and branching tubes.Portal
solitary smalllesioninanolderdogisveryoftenbenign.
veins are distinguished from the hepaticveins by
virtueof their apparently thicker,hyperechoicwalls.
Thewallsof thehepaticveinsblend with the adjacent
tions.Multiple lesions may represent more than one
hepaticparenchyma and arenot seen.The vascula-
pathological process.Differential diagnoses for com-
tureat theportahepatishasahyperechoicrim due
monfocal liver diseasesarelisted inFigure3.15.
to fatand connective tissue.The normalhepatic
arteriesand intra-hepaticbileducts are notseen
ultrasonographically.
Thenormalgall bladder islocated to theright of
midline and is an anechoicround to oblong tapering
structure. The wall of the gallbladder appears as a thin
hyperechoicrim oralternatively isnot seen atall.As a
consequenceof distalenhancement(orthroughtrans-
mission),structures imaged deep to the gall bladder
appearhyperechoicwhencomparedwithadjacent
parenchyma at the same depth in the ultrasound im-
age.Commonly there is echogenic debris within the
lumenof thegallbladder thatsetlesinitsdependent
portion.This material (inspissated bile or‘sludge')is
3.14
Ultrasound image of 12-year-old spayed
usually considered of no clinical significance.It is
Golden Retriever bilch with multiple mixed
normal fora gall bladder tobedistended inan animal
echoic masses in the liverreprescnting mcrastatic
that has not eaten for one or more days.
intestinal adenocarcinoma.
28
Chapter3 Imaging the gastrointestinal tract,liverand pancreas
Hyperechoic
Hypoechoic
Mixed echoic
Metastatic neoplasia
Metastatic reoplasia
Metastatic neoplasia
Nodular hyperplasia
Nodular hyperplasia
Nodular hyperpla.sia
Dystrophic
Primary neoplasia
Primary neoplasia
mineralization
Abscess
Abscess
Focal parenchymal
Cyst (anechoic)
gas
Focal fattyinfiltration
Differential diagnosislist forcammcnfocal liver
3.15
diseases.
Widespreadchanges of theliver echogenicity
usually represent a diffuse infltrative process.Figure
3.16givesthedifferential diagnosislistforcommon
3.17
Sagittal planeof livcr(L)anc falciform fat(F)of
diffuseliverdiseases.These diseases may cause the
an11-yea-od maleneuteredDomesticShort-
liver to be diffuselyhyperechoicor hypoechoic.Dif-
hair cal wilh hepaliclipidosis.
fuse changes in liver echogenicity arereliable only at
It is important to note that bothbenign and malig-
orrenal cortex tobe normal forvalid comparison.To
nant disease canaccountforsimilar,even identical,
complicate matters further,some diffuse hepatopa-
lesions on ultrasonography. A cytological or histologi-
thies,such aslymphoma,feline infectiousperitonitis
cal diagnosisisnecessary to determine the aetiology.
and cholangiohepatitis,may not affect hepatic
Ultrasound guidance allows accurate diagnosticsam-
echogenicity atall.Ultrasonographic determinationof
plingviafineneedle aspirationforcytologicalexamina-
diffuse hepatopathies thatresult in an increase in
tion and biopsy for histopathological evaluation.
echogenicityaremoreeasilydetected thanthose that
result in hypoechogenicity.This is partly associated
Ultrasonography of gall bladder diseases
with the diffuse increase in acoustic attenuation (re-
There isnormalvariation in the sizeof the gallbladder.
duction of image brightness with increased depth in
As described above,the gall bladder of a fasted or
anorexicanimal willbedilated.Thenormal common
eases that cause hyperechogenicity of the liver. In
bile duct is not seen ultrasonographically.Even with
these cases thehepaticparenchyma in thenearfield
markeddilatationof thegallbladderinadogorcatthat
appearsbrighterand thatin thedistalfieldappears
hasnoteatenforsome time,thecommonbile ductwill
darkerthannormalliver.Diffuseinfiltrationof the liver
not be dilated.Whendistended secondary toobstruc-
withlipid,asoccurswithdiabetesmellitusandfeline
tion of the common bile duct,the neck of the gall
hepatic lipidosis (Figure 3.17),or glycogen,as occurs
bladder iswider and more tortuous.The dilated com-
insteroidhepatopathies(endogenousandiatrogenic),
monbileductcanbetracedfrom theneckof thegall
causes theliver to be hyperechoic and hyper-
attenuatingcomparedwithnormal.Catsthatareobese
difficult to follow the bile duct asitpassesbehind the
accumulatelipidwithinvacuolesinhepatocytesand
stomachviathelessercurvaturebecauseof gaswithin
sinusoidal lining cells. This results in a liver that is
thegastric lumen.However,with distal dilatation it may
hyperechoicwhencomparedwith thefatofthefalciform
beseen adjacent to theproximal portionof the duode-
ligament,although lessechoicand lessattenuating
num.Dilatation of the lowerbiliarytract canextend to
than in feline hepatic lipidosis.
the intra-hepaticbile ducts and canaliculi,butsince this
may takeuptoaweek todevelopfollowingextra-
hepaticobstruction it isnot areliable sign of acute
biliaryobstruction.Dilated intra-hepaticbileductshave
Hyperechoic
Isoechoic
Hypoechoic
echogenicwallsand anechoiclumens,similar tothe
Steroid hepatopathy
Normal
Hepatitis
portalveins,butaretortuousandirregularlybranching.
(bop)
Oncedilated,anyportionof thebiliarytractmayremain
Lymphosarcoma
Cholangitis
persistentlydilated afterresolution of the obstruction.
Hepatic lipidosis (cat)
Cholangitis
Lymphosarcoma
Extra-hepaticobstruction maybe caused bypancre-
Cirrhosis/fibrosis
Feline infectious
Congestion
atic,hepatic,duodenal or mesenteric masses (ab-
Lymphosarcoma
peritonitis
scess,granuloma,neoplasm,lymphadenopathy),
Fat (dabetesmellius)
pancreatitis orcholelithiasis.
Fatty (cat:nomal
Themostcommoncause ofregionalorgeneralized
variant)
irregulargallbladderwall thickeningisidiopathiccystic
mucinoushypertrophy(Figure 3.18).In more severe
Differential diagnosis list for commonciffuse
forms of this disease the bile becomes gelatinous and
3.16
liver diseases.
dogsmaypresent with signs of biliary obstruction.This
29
Chapter3Imaging thegastrointestinal tract,liver andpancreas
before a biopsy procedure.Ultrasound-guided core
biopsy maybe contraindicated insuspected cases of
cirrhosis,feline hepatic lipidosis or severe necrosis
due to increased risk of bleeding during the procedure.
Doppler ultrasonography
Doppler ultrasonographyprovidesvery good vascu-
larinformationandallowsdifferentiationofabnormal
dilated bileductsfrom normalvessels.The diagnosis
ofportosystemic shunt isconsiderablymore accurate
when colour Doppler isused.The three forms of
Dopplersuitableforabdominal use arespectral,col-
ourandpower.
Spectral Doppler:Spectral Doppler is the toolmost
3.18
old spayed Cocker Spaniel bitch with cystic
oftenutilizedinthe abdomentodetermine estimatesof
mucinous hypertrophy and severely inspissated and
velocities and differentiatebetweenvessel typesbased
gelatinized bile,causing biliary obstruction.
onflow patterns.This is achieved by displaying the
distributionof frequencies(reflectorvelocities)contrib-
disease is poorly understood and difficult tomanage
utingtothesignal.Byconventionthevelocitiestowards
medically.Uniform thickeningof thewall of thegall
the transducer are displayed above thebaseline(posi-
bladder with a distinct hypoechoichalo' is seen with
tive)andflowawaybelow(negative).ln spectralDoppler
oedema or cholecystitis.Oedema of thegallbladder
a samplevolume(gate) isplacedwithin the concurrently
wallmaybeduetofocal inflammatoryconditionsora
displayedB-modeimageandrepresentsthe siteswhere
resultof anysystemiccauseofhydrostatic,oncoticor
frequency shiftswillbedetected.The angleof flowmust
vasogenic oedema.Cholecystoliths(gall bladder
be correctedfor,ortheultrasoundmachineassumesthe
stones)arefreelymovable,dependentlylocated,hyper-
flowisparallel tothe incident soundbeampath.
cause distal shadowing due to their mineral content.
ColourDoppler:WithcolourDoppler a colourisas-
signed to the averageDoppler shift frequencies(blood
Ultrasound-guidedbiopsyoftheliverandgall
velocities) from a small region in the area ofinterest.
bladder
Unlike spectralDoppler,incolourDopplernoquantita-
Ultrasonographyallowssafeand accurateplacement
tiveinformationisavailablefrom thegraphicrepresen-
ofa needle(22gauge)forcytological diagnosisof focal
tationof velocities.Byconventionthevelocitiestowards
ordiffusehepaticdisease(see Chapter5).Similarly it
the transduceraredisplayedasshadesofredandflow
isgenerallysafe toaspiratebilefrom thegall bladder
away as shades of blue. Aliasing is a persistent problem
lumen for culture and cytology incases of suspected
cholangitis. The potential for bile peritonitis can be
velocityutilizecosO,whereistheangleformedbythe
directionof blood flowcomparedwith the directionof the
liverinto thegallbladder lumen.lt iscontraindicatedto
ultrasound beam.In colour Doppler the regions of
puncturethegallbladderif thebiliarytract isunder
sampling maybe larger,providing more of anoverview
pressure incases of biliary obstruction.
ofregional flowpatterns.Framerate and coloursecton
Cytology may be non-diagnostic with sampling
width areinverselyproportional;thewider the area
errors(e.g.missed target,haemodilution orpaucity of
being interrogated theslower theframerate.
cells)ordiseases that have occult multifocal distribu-
tion,donot exfoliatewell orrequire architectural infor-
Power Doppler:Power Doppler is similar to colour
mation for diagnosis.Diseases that fallinto the last
Doppler inthatflowisgraphicallydisplayedwitha
group,which demandlarger samplesforhistological
colour.However,powerDopplerprovidesnovelocity
diagnosis,include:
information.Thebrightness of the colouris ultimately
related tothenumberof movingreflectors,regardless
Cirrhosis
of thevelocity.Somemachinesprovide directional
Portosystemicvascular shunting
informationwithpowerDoppler.Aliasing isnot acon-
Manymesenchymal tumours
cern sincevelocity isnotcalculated,andpowerDop-
Lowgradelymphoma
pler is less subject to limitations due to incident angle
Differentiationofregenerativenodules from
of interrogation.The clinical utilityofPowerDoppler
hepatocellular carcinoma.
liesinthereportedsuperiority inlowflow detection,
comparedwithspectral andcolourDoppler.Identifica-
Corebiopsy,involving largerdiametersamplesfor
tionof manydiseasesrequiresidentificationof'noflow
histologicalevaluation,carriesahigher likelihoodof
states,e.g.theabilitytodifferentiatea dilated bileduct
morbidityfrombleedingandrequiresanaesthesia and/
fromadjacent vessels.Disadvantages of powercom-
orsedationwith analgesiatoavoidpainandmovement
paredwithcolourDopplerinclude thelackofvelocity
of thepatient.Allpatientswill requirehaematological
and directional information,and increased flasharte-
examination(clottingprofilesandresting haematocrit)
fact.Flash artefact isrelated to colour signals arising
30
Chapter3Imaging the gastrointestinal tract,liver andpancreas
from tissue motion or transducer movement.Even
3.19
Conlrasl
normal respiratorymotion canproduce an excessive
harmonic
amount of flash artefact.
ul.rasound image of
metastaticnodule
Advanced imaging
ina 12-year-olc
LabracorRetriever
BeyondDoppler technologiesareanumberof ad-
withprimarysplenic
vanced imaging techniquessuitableforexamination of
haemangiosarcoma.
theliver.These arenotyetwidelyavailable onmachine
Note hypcachoic
systems in general veterinary use.Theusefulness of
irregularly shaped
3Dandextended-field-of-view technologiesseems
nocules
LL:O:
surrounded oy
somewhatlimitedatthistimeduetoslowreconstruc-
normal hyperechoic liver.Atthis ohase of the contrast
tiontimeandneedforanimmobilepatient.Thiswill
stucy,mid-portal pefusionpeak,henormal liveriswell
probablyberesolvedwhenfastercomputerproces-
sors become available.Harmonic ultrasonography.
poorly perfused (hypcechoic).Poor perfusicn of a mass or
however,has already demonstrated clinical applica-
nodiein theliver,duringpeakoerfusionofnormal
tions in veterinarymedicine.
adjacent liver,is the characteristic of malignancy.
Harmonicultrasonography
perfusionpatterncomparedwithadjacentnormal liver
Infundamental ultrasonography the same frequency
Harmonicimaging has thepotential to enter into veteri-
spectrum fis transmitted andreceived;i.e.a3MHz
narymedicinefairlyrapidly,atleastintotheacademic
transducerhas a 3MHztransmitted signal,andre-
and tertiaryreferral setting.
ceives and processesthereflectionof the same3MHz
signal. Harmonic ultrasonography is based on the
Computed tomography and magneticresonance
imaging
principle of transmitting at frequency fand receiving at
BothCTand MRIhavebeen used forclinical imaging of
hepatobiliarydiseases.Clinical studies demonstrating
through thedevelopmentof widebandwidth transduc-
improvedaccuracywithdecreaseddependenceonthe
ers.Using newerwidebandwidth technologya 3MHz
technician'sexpertisehavebeenreported forboth the
transducer may transmit orreceive a range of frequen-
CT and MRI diagnosis of congenital and acquired
cies from 1-7 MHz; e.g. a 3 MHz transmitted pulse
portosystemic shunts in dogs.Both of these modalities
couldbe transmitted and a6MHzsignalreceived and
are limited totertiaryreferralinstitutionsorprivateprac-
processed by the machine.
There are two formsof harmonic ultrasonography:
very advanced imaging techniques.There is alsogreat
tissue andcontrast.In ultrasound imaging the transmit-
promise forimprovedvisibilityand differentiationbe-
ted signal is distorted in the patient,generating sound
tween benign and malignant liver nodules with these
frequenciesthataremultiplesof theoriginal funda-
modalities(Figure3.20).CT-guided biopsymaybeused
mental frequency.Tissueharmonicsmake use of the
in situations where ultrasonography is difficult.
distortion of transmittedultrasound signals.Different
tissues distort the signal differently,resulting in in-
creased contrast of the image.Many lesions that are
3.20
subtleor isoechoiconfundamental ultrasonography
Magnctic
haveimprovedvisibilityinthetissueharmonicmode.
resonance mage
Anotheradvantageof thismodality isthedecreased
(T1post-conrast)
number of detrimental artefacts,such as body wall
ofhypointense
ring-down, scattering and volume averaging.but an
poorly enhanced
nodules(arrowed)
increaseinclinicallyuseful artefacts,suchasshadow-
in theliver of a dog
ingand distal enhancement.Theimagequality using
withmetastatic
tissue harmonic ultrasonography is consistently im-
haemangiosarcoma.
proved in everypatient,butwhich organorlesionwill
demonstrate theimprovement isnotpredictable.
Intravenous ultrasound contrast agents are small
(2-5μm)microencapsulated bubblesof inertgasand
very efficient generators of harmonics. Changing the
incident frequencyacousticpressureand pusert
tion affects the harmonicresponse of contrastmedia.
Scintigraphy
Thisfeature allowsimaging of contrastmediaineither
Scintigraphy is the imagingof radioactivepharmaceu-
high flow locations (large vessels or the heart) or in
tical agents.The dominant clinical use of scintigraphy
terminal arterials and capillaries as an indicationof
in small animal practice isforthediagnosis of congeni-
tissueperfusion.Contrastharmonicshavedemonstrated
tal portosystemic shunts （Figure 3.21).The overall
improveddetectionofsubtleorisoechoicmasslesions
accuracyofscintigraphyisquitehigh,althoughlimita
(Figure3.19).There areindicationsthatthis modality will
tionsinclude:theneedforvery specializedequipment;
provideimproved differentiationof benignversusmalig-
nant lesions.Many malignant lesions in the liverhave
tiating congenital from acquired shunts,and intra-
increasedarterialvesselsandaconcurrentdifferent
hepaticfrom extra-hepaticforms of the disease.
31
Chapter3Imaging thegastrointestinal tract,liver and pancreas
identification of the duodenum,the imaging should
continue cranially to thepancreaticbodyregion and
then caudallyto theregionof thedistalrightlimb,
searchingforregionsofhypoechogenicity.Thenormal
pancreaticoduodenal vein lieswithin theright limbof
thepancreas and isavery usefullandmark.This struc-
tureshould notbemistakenforadilatedpancreaticduct.
The leftpancreatic limb is in theregion of thesplenic
hilus,medialandslightlycaudaltothespleenandcranial
totheleftkidney.Incatsthebloodvessel isperipheral
and the ducta dependablycentral structure.
cific,depending on the findings of the ultrasound ex-
3.21
Scintigraphic image of 8-month-old male
YorkshireTerrier with solitaryextra-hepatic
amination, although variably sensitive with differing
levels ofoperator proficiency.The ultrasonographic
portocaval shunt.Notethesmalliverwithpoor
radioactivity() caudal to the heart (H)
findings of pancreatitis include:
Hypoechoicpancreaticparenchyma
Pancreatic imaging
Hyperechoicperipancreaticfat
Regional effusion
The pancreas is one of the most difficult organs to
Biliary obstruction
image in the dog or cat.It is not normally seen on
Regional intestinal ileus
radiography,andonlywithgreatexpertisewhenusing
Localized pain during theprocedure.
ultrasonography.The diagnosis of pancreatitis orpan-
creaticneoplasm ismadeonlyindirectlywithradiogra-
Peripancreatic hyperechogenicity(Figure 3.22) is
the most specific sign in dogs and cats.In cats the
23).The gas,ileus and pain associated with many
hypoechoicpancreasmaybe theonlyabnormality.
casesseverelyconfound theultrasound examination.
Of specialnote is the distributionof pancreatitis
in dogs and cats.While in dogs ultrasonographic abnor-
Radiography
malities seem to bemuch morecommon in theright
Radiographically thenormalpancreasisoccult except
pancreatic limb,incats theyaremoreevenly distributed
under unusual circumstances.In obese cats it is occa-
between the left and right limbs (Figure 3.23).Part of
sionallyseenmedial tothespleenandcaudal tothe
the ultrasound examinationfora dogorcat withpan-
gastricfundus on theventrodorsal projection.Withpan-
creaticdiseaseinvolvestheidentificationofsecondary
creatitis theregional inflammationresults in a spectrum
of inconsistent roentgen signs.In cats most cases of
3.22
Ultrasound
pancreatitis are occult.Themost common signindogs
image of 11-
isloss ofperitoneal detail in theright dorsal cranial
year-old femalespayed
abdomen.However,thispartofthe abdomenhasinher-
Domcstic Short-hair cat
entlypoor detail.Other more specific signs,although
with diabetesmellitus
less common, include thesignal'or'sentinel loop'sign,
and 1 day nistory of
vomiting and diarrhoea.
moregeneralized lossof detailassociatedwitheffusion,
Note the hypoechoic
and secondary systemic signs ofvasculitis.The'signal
pancreas(esterisked)
loop' signrepresents ileus in the region of localized
below the cat's right
peritonitiscaused by the inflamedpancreas.The mani-
abcominalwall
festation of thisperitonitis is gas-filledor distended
(arrowed),surrounded
by hyperechoic
intestinal loopsin theright dorsal abdomen,including
peripancreatic fat
the duodenum,ascending colon and stomach.More
(arrowheads).
generalized signsof pancreatitisinclude the manifesta-
tions of a generalizedvasculitis (including peritoneal
3.23
Ultrasound
andpleuraleffusion),pulmonaryandperipheraloedema
imageof
same cat in Figure 3.22,
and signscompatiblewith disseminated intravascular
obtained after 5 months.
coagulation.Theroleofcontrastradiography for the
The cat had another
diagnosis ofpancreatitisis indirect.AnupperGlcontrast
acute onset of vomiting
study canprovide supportive evidence of aregional
and incoordinalion.Nole
ileusbut isneverspecificforpancreatitis.
theill-defined
hypoechoic pancreas
Ultrasonography
and hyperechoic
Ultrasonographicimaging of thepancreasrequires a
peripancreatic fat
strictregimenoffinding the duodenum and splenic
adjacent tc spleeri and
left kidrey.Tne asterisks
hilus in every dog and cat.By scanning in the trans-
mark the dimensions of
verseplaneandignoringtheoccasionallydorsally
the width of the pancrcas
positioned colon,the duodenum is usually the first
at its thinneslpoint:the
small intestinal loopventral totherightkidney.After
widthwas1.25cm.
32
. Chapter 3 Imaging the gastrointestinal tract, liver and pancreas
manifestations of pancreatitis (including biliary ob-
Kumar R, Peshin PK and Nigarn JM (1981) Double contrast
struction), metastasis and the effects of vasculifis.
gastrography In dogs. Moderm Veterinary Practice 62,719-721
Pancreatic neoplasia is usually radiographically
gasirointestinal tract of the dog and cat.Veterinary Clinics of
occult and ultrasonographically very challenging to dif-
North Amcrica: Smalf Animai Practice 29, 307-342
Lester NV, Robarts GD, Newell SM, et al. (1999) Assessment of
ferentiate from intfammation. Radiographicaliy the most
barium impregnaled polyothylene spheres (BIPS) as a mcasure
common manifestationsare the widespread metastases
of solid-phase gastrlc amptying in normal dogs - comparison 1o
in the abdomen (liver and lymph nodes) and lungs.
 scintigrephy. Veterinary Radiology and Uitrasound 40, 465-471
 Manczur F and Voros K (2ooo) Gastraintestinal ultrasonography ol
Ultrasonographic signs are the metastases and often
the dog: a review of 265 cases (1996-1998). Acta Veterinaria
the ability to detect the infiltration and loss of distinct
Hungarica 48, 9-21
Moon ML, Biller DS and Armbrust LJ (2o03) Ulrasonographic
layering cf the duodenum. A hypoechoic pancreas inthe 
face of lymphadenopathy and liver metastases makes a
strong case for primary pancreatic neoplasia.
Paolonl MC,PenninckDG and Moore AS (2002)Ulrasonographlc
and clinicopathologic findings in 21 dogs with inieslinal
adenocarcinoma.VeterinaryRadiologyandUtrasound43,56-
567
References and further reading
 aheueap oseg (a6 t) hn neauuog pue 7 uolaig w sobioabeded
procedures: elfects in normal dogs. Il. Clinical observalions and
gastric emptying. Vetennary Surgery 16, 332-340
Agut A, Wood AK and Martin IC (1996) Sanographic obsarvations of
Quick CBand Rendano VT (197B) Theuse of contrast media insmall
the gastroduodenel junclion of dogs. Aimerican Journat of
 animal rediglogy. Comell Velennanian 68, 89-102
Veterinary Research 57, 1266-1273
 Roberts GM, Robeit's EE, Davles RL and Evans KT (1977) In vlvo and
Brawner WR and Bartels JE Jr. (1983) Contrasl radiography of the
in vilro assessment gf barium sulphate suspensions. British
digestive tract. Indlcatlons, techniques, and complications.
JounaofRadlology50,541-545
Veterinary Clinics ofNorth America:Small Animal Prectice 13,
 Root CR and Morgan JP [1969) Contrast radiography of the upper
599-626
gastroinleslinal tract in the dog. A comparison ol micropulverized
Daniel GB,Bright R, Olis P, etal. (1991) Per rectal portalscintigraphy
bariumsulfate andU.S.P.bariumsulfate suspensionsinclinically
nomal dogs.JournaiofSmaiAnimalPractice10,279-285
shunts in dogs and cats. journa! of Veterinary internal Medicine
Saunders HM, VanWinkle TJ, Drobatz K, Kimmel SE ang Washabau
5,23-27
Etue SM, Penninck DG, Labalo MA, et al. (2001) UItrasonography of
pathologic, and histologic evidence of acute pancreatic necrosis:
the normal feline pancreas and associatcd anatomic landmarks:
20 cases (1994-2001): joumaf of the Amcrican Veterinary
a prospective study of 20 cats. Veterinary Radioiogy and
Medica!Associatfon221,1724-1730
Uilrasound 42, 330-336
VanEnkcvort BA, O'Brien RT and Young KM (1999) Pancrcatic
pseudocysts in 4 dogs end 2 cats: ultrasonographic and
interprelation. Veterinary Clinics of North America 4, 805-842
clinicopathglogic tindings. Journalof Veterinary internai Medicine
13, 309-313
Clinics of North America 2, 105-129
Weber MP, Stambouli F, Martin LJ, Dumon HJ, Biourge VC and
Koblik PD, Hornof WJ, Yen CK, et al. (1995) Use of lechnetiur-99m
Nguyen PG (2002) Influence of age and bady slze on
 sulfur colloid to evaluate changes in reticuloendothelial function
gastroinlestinal transit lime of radiopaque mearkers in healthy
in dogs with cxperimentaly induced chronic biliary cirrhosis and
dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research 63, 677-682
portosystemlc shunting. AmericanJournal of Veterinary Research
Ziegler L and O'Brien RT (2002) Harmonic ultrasound; a review.
56,688-693
Veterinary Radioiogy and Uitrasound 43, 501-509
KullPA,HessRS,Craig LE,t al. (2001) Clinical, clinicopathologic
Zontine WJ (1973) Effect of chernical restraint drugs on the passage
radiograghic, and ultrasonographic characterislics of inlestinal
 of barium sulfate through the stomach and duodenum of dogs.
lympnangiectasiain dags:17cases (1996-1998).journa/of the
Journal of the American Velerinary Medical Association 162,
American Veterinary Mcdical Associalion 219, 197-202
878-884
33
Gastrointestinal endoscopy
James W. Simpson
Introduction
The history and thephysical examination of apatient
indicatestothecliniciantheprobableregionof the
gastrointestinal(Gl) tract responsible forclinical signs.
Furtherinvestigations using plain and contrastradio-
graphy,ultrasonography and functional tests may
permit a tentative diagnosis to be made.However,
these investigative procedures rarely permit a defini-
tive diagnosis.Until recently clinicians have been
Rigid encoscopes canbe used forexamination
limited intheirabilitytodiagnose Gl diseasemorpho-
logicallybecause of theneed to carry out anexplora-
foreign bodics and examination of therectum.
tory laparotomy inordertoobtainbiopsysamples,
wheresuchaproceduremaycompromiseanalready
useofendoscopy to assist inplacementoffeeding
seriously ill patient.The ability to.pass a flexible
tubesisdiscussed inChapter27.Informationprovided
endoscopedirectlyintotheGl tractandvisualizethe
in thischapterwill assist not onlythe clinician consid-
mucosa for gross abnormalities and collectbiopsy
ering the initial purchase of an endoscope but also
sampleswithoutresortingtosurgeryhasrevolution-
thosepractitioners already using them.
ized gastroenterology.
For most general practitioners the major issues
However,endoscopy should not beviewed as the
include choosing the right equipment and the cost of
ultimatediagnostictoolforGldisease.Insomecases
that equipment.Aithough rigid endoscopes aremuch
Gl functionmaybe compromised inthe absenceof
cheaper thanflexibleendoscopesthey are limited in
morphologicalchanges andinsome cases anexplora-
their application,as indicated above.Second-hand
tory laparotomymaybeamoreappropriatemethod of
human endoscopes are now available at reasonable
prices,but care must be exercised to ensure the
aforeignbody,intussusceptionortorsion,orwherethe
endoscope isnotonly suitableforveterinarypurposes
potential existsnotonly tocollectbiopsysamplesbut
but of serviceablequality.Several companies arenow
also to carry out corrective surgery.The author has
offeringrefurbishedhumanendoscopeswithaguaran-
experience of cases where the small size ofendo-
teeofquality.However,newveterinary endoscopes
scopicbiopsysamples hasnotpermitted a definitive
nowcostmuchlessthanequivalenthumanendoscopes.
diagnosis tobe made,and recourse to full-thickness
Theserepresentexcellentvalue andinmostcasesthe
companies offer sound advice to ensure the right
doscopycanprovidevaluabieinformation,forexample
instrumentispurchased.Thelatestvideoendoscopes
to confirm an oesophageal foreign body,flexible
are definitelyout ofreach of mostpracticesin theUK
but second-hand systemsarebecoming increasingly
bodies.Theyareusuallybetterremovedusinga rigid
affordable.It is clearly essential tobuy high quality
endoscope （Figure 4.1)and large grasping forceps.
equipment and to maintain the equipment in good
Rigid endoscopes are not only useful for the examina-
working condition soit canbe of diagnosticvalue and
tionof theoesophagusbuthave valueinexamination
more importantly,to ensure the safety of both
of therectum and distal colon.
endoscopist and patient.
Previouslyonlyhumanendoscopeswere available
Giventhevariationinsizeofpatientsseeninsmall
forveterinaryuse and inmostcaseswere unsuitable
animal practice there isno‘universal'endoscope to
for the purpose.However,with the availability of spe-
fit all patients. In the ideal world this problem would
be solved bypurchasing two or three endoscopes
human endoscopes it isnowpossible to useflexible
designed for different sized patients and procedures.
In practice this israrely justifiable on economic
num in many dogs and cats.
grounds, so a single endoscope is usually chosen
This chapterreviews therole of flexible endoscopy
thatisoftenacompromise aimedatsuiting themajor-
in thediagnosis of Gl diseasein thedog and cat.The
ity of patients.
34
Chapter4Gastrointestinal endoscopy
Having obtained a suitable endoscope thesecond
fibreiscoatedinareflectivesubstance,whichreduces
majorproblemforpractitionersinvolvesthe abilityto
the loss andimproves thequalityof the light/image
use the equipment effectively.Likelearning to drive a
along thelengthofthe fibre.These arecalledclad
car,this cannotbe achievedfroma textbookand takes
fibres.Each fibrehas a very mall diameter,so more
practice tomaster.Thebest advice thatcanbe given
than200,000fibresare incorporated intobundlesin
isto tryandobtain training fromanexperienced
endoscopistandtouse theendoscopeinitiallytocarry
Non-coherent bundles of optical fibres are arranged
out simpleprocedures,such as oesophagoscopy and
atrandom, sonorecognizableimage canbe transmitted
proctoscopy,thus avoiding the frustration of failure
along thebundle.Such bundles are much cheaper to
while building confidence.Intubation of the duodenum
produce and areperfectlyadequateforthetransmission
should notbe expectedonone'sfirstattempttousethe
of light down theendoscope to illuminate the mucosa.
flexible endoscope,as thiswillprobablyend in failure
Coherent bundles of optical fibres are used to
and disappointment for beginners.Even the most
transmit images to the eye piece from the distal tip of
the endoscope.In this construction theindividualfibres
ceduredifficultorevenimpossible.
areorientated sothatthefibres atone end of thebundle
Endoscopy is remarkably well tolerated,even in
are in the corresponding location at the other end.
seriouslyillpatients,inpartbecause unless duodenal
Images are therefore transmitted intact along the fibre
intubationisattemptedoftenonlylight general anaes-
bundle andcanbeobserved through the eyepiece.
thesia or sedation isrequired.Complications associ-
While smal, such images are adequate for diagnostic
ated with endoscopyperse are fortunatelyrare,but
purposes.Videocamerascanoftenbe attached tothe
may includehaemorrhage andbowel perforation.
eyepiece to transmit theimagefordisplay ontoa
Amajorlimitingfactorassociatedwithendoscopyis
monitor,which is useful for teaching or group evalua-
the inability to observemacroscopicormicroscopic
tion.However,thequalityof suchimagesfallsshort of
changeswhenpathology lies in deeper tissues.Only
thoseobtained usingvideo endoscopes.
mucosa canbevisualizedandbiopsysamplesob-
tained,sochanges indeepertissuesmaygoundetec-
Video endoscopes
ted.Fortunately in themajority of patientsexhibiting
In the most modern endoscopes,coherent fibreoptic
chronic symptoms of Gl disease thereis almost always
bundles have been replaced by a small video chip
mucosal involvement.
(charge coupled device) located in the distal end of the
endoscope.The chip transmits signalsvia cables toa
computer,which constructs a colour image that is
Flexible endoscope design
displayedon a monitor.
Thereisnoeye piece onvideoendoscopes and the
Fibreopticendoscopes
operator performs the procedure whilst viewing the
Fibreoptic endoscopes are composed ofbundles of
videomonitor.Thequalityandsizeof theimageissuch
individualoptic fibres.Eachfibrehas theability to
that even subtle changes to the mucosa can be de-
transmi light orpartofanimage alongits length,even
tected,making thevideoendoscope a betterdiagnos-
when thefibres arebent ashappenswhen the endo-
tic tool. Videoendoscopes are excellent teachingtools,
scope ispassed along the Gl tract.
permit groupevaluationofobservedabnormalities and
Lightcanbelostfromtheopticalfibre atitsreflective
surface,therebyreducing thequalityof the light/image
electronicformats.
transmission(Figure4.2).Forthisreason eachoptical
The video camera liesjustbehind theobjective lens
at the distal end of the endoscope.Some systems
employacolourchipbutintheUKamonochromechip
isused.In order toview the image in colour using a
monochrome chip,a sophisticated illumination and
processingsystem is required toprojectacolourimage
on to themonitor.This is achieved byplacingawheel
Non-clad fibres
containing red,green and blue filters separated by
opaque segments in front of the light source.This
wheelrotatesmore thanthirty timespersecondso the
light transmitteddowntheendoscopeflashespulsesof
red,greenandbluelightandnota constantwhitelight
Cladding
beam.Duringtheredphase thevideocamera captures
an image of the mucosa,which is transmitted to the
computerand stored duringtheperiod whenanopaque
Clad fibres
segment shuts off the light.The sameprocess occurs
for thepulsesofgreen and blue light.Eachtime the
filterwheelrotatesonce,anewimage iscreated.The
4.2
There would be a loss of ight passing along.
data stored by the computer asred,green and blue
non-clad fibres due tc the absence cf suitable
images are transmitted to the electron guns of the
cladding arounc the fibre.Tnis is wny only light is
transmittec downnonclad fibres,while themore
monitor where a complete colour picture is produced,
expensive clad fibres are used to transmit tre image.
soproviding a newlive image.
35
Chapter 4 Gastrointestinal cndoscopy
Components of the endoscope
Bluebutton
Red button
All flexible endoscopesare constructed ina similar
Biopsy cha
manner (Figure 4.3). The handpiece is the control
centre of the endoscope from which alloperationsare
carriedout.It isconnected to thelight source by an
umbilicalcord.This cord transmitsnotonly light to the
endoscope tipbutalsoairforinflationoftheboweland
orblankin
suction forremoval of Gl secretions and excessgas.
ideoscopes
The insertion tube is theportion of theendoscope that
Dialstorotate tip
is introduced into the patient. lt has a smooth cylindri-
Immersible
Umbiical cord
cal,yet flexible,structureand the distalendofitthe
bending section)canbe moved in fourdifferentdirec-
tionsvia thetwowheelsonthehandpiece.
4.4
The handpiece of a flexiole endoscope carries
various important operational controls.
Red and
Handpiece
Biopsy channel
bluebuttons
Eyepiece
Hpcontro
Tiprotation occurs
nobs
hrough90degrees
inallotherdirections
Jmbilicalcord
(a)
Insertion tube
Endoscope tip
4.3
handpiece and umbilical cord.
retroflexed
The insertion tube of a fibreopticendoscope con-
tainscoherent and non-coherent optical fibrebundles
for the transmissionof theimage and illuminatinglight,
(b)
respectively.Abiopsychannel isalso includedwithin
Thetip of the insertion tube can berotaled
the insertiontube,asisasmall tubecarryingwaterand
4.5
through90 degrees in three planes and 180
degrees in one plane.
objective lens and inflating the gut,respectively.
Thehandpiece caries various important opera-
Theentrance to thebiopsychannel will befound in
tional controls(Figure 4.4).The tworotating wheels
oneof several locationsdependingonthemodel of
on theright-hand sideof thehandpiececontrol move-
endoscopebeing used.It isclosed by areplaceable
ment at the endoscope tip.The innerwheel controls
rubber valve through which instrumentscanbeintro-
up and downmovement,while theouterwheel con-
duced withoutallowing airto escape from the Gllumen.
trolsleftand rightmovement.Generally,movement
Biopsy forcepsofvarious designs canbeintroduced
through 90 degrees is possible inall directions,with
through the channel from this position.Cytology
movementofatleast180（andupto210)degreesin
brushes,balloon catheters and basket snares may
one specificdirection.Thispermitsthe endoscopist to
alsobeintroduced down thischannel.
retroflexthe endoscope tip to examine blind spots
To ensure allendoscopicfunctions canbecarried
within the Gl tract(Figure 4.5).A locking device is
out,theendoscopistmustlearntohold thehandpiece
normally included tohold thetipinaparticularposi-
with one hand (Figure 4.6).This technique allows the
tion.Onfibreopticendoscopesthereisusuallyafocus
endoscopist todirect the insertiontube tipandinflate
controlontheeyepiecetoallowoptimalvisualization
thelumenwitharoraspiratefluid,whileusingtheother
by individual operators.
hand tocontrol theinsertion tube or instruments.
On the top of the handpiece are twocolour-coded
The majority of flexible endoscope insertion tubes
buttons.The code is the same for allmanufacturers.
arebuilttoastandarddesign,althoughsomeindividual
Thefirstbutton(red)activatessuction whendepressed.
variations mayexistforspecialistpurposes.Thedistal
The second button (blue) has a hole on its surface
tipof the endoscopemaybeforward-viewing or side-
through.which airfromthelight source(delivered by
viewing.Thelatterisof littlevalue inveterinary endo-
the umbilical cord)can escape.When this hole is
scopyasit isdesigned specifically toexamine and
covered bya finger,airis diverted down the endo-
intubatethehumanpancreaticorbileductfrom the
scope allowingtheboweltobeinflated inacontrolled
duodenallumen.Forward-viewingendoscopesare the
manner.If the blue button is fully depressed water is
mostappropriateforveterinaryuseastheyallowthe
directeddown the insertiontube towashthelens
operator to see directly aheadof the advancing inser-
when it becomessoiled.
tion tube (Figure 4.7).
36
Chapter4Gastrointestinalendoscopy
In summary, the following facilities must be avail-
ableon theflexible endoscopewhen the Gltractof
dogs andcats aretobeexamined:
1metre insertion tube length(maximum 1.5m)
Insertiontubediameterof7to9mm
Aminimumof2mmbiopsychannel
Four-way tip deflection
180degreedeflectionof the tipin atleastone
direction
Locking device for the tip
Waterandairfeedfacility
Forward-viewing tip
Lightsource
There arebasicallytwo typesof light source available
One-handedmanipulationof the headpiece.All
for modern endoscopes:the halogen bulb and the
4.6
endcscopists need to learn this technique.
xenonbulb.Theformerisalowcost150wattcoldlight
source thatiseffective forroutine usewith fibreoptic
endoscopes (Figure 4.8). The xenon bulb is more
Side-viewing
endoscope
expensive but muchbrighter and is usedroutinely
withvideo endoscopes.lt providesexcellent light for
photography.
End-viewing
Ligh
A newmetal halide light sourceprovides thebright-
endoscope
nessofa xenon bulb atacost closertoa halogen bulb.
Biopsy
Light
Biopsy channel
There are two typesof end piece available for
flexbleendoscopes.The end-viewing tio is
more popular and is used for tho majority of examinations,
where the endoscopist wishes to see directly forward.The
side-viewing endoscope is designed to allowgcod
visualization of thewall of theboweland toassist in
catheterizing ductssuch as the bile duct.lt israrely used
in smallanima practice.
Thesizeof the insertiontube mayvarydepending
on its purpose.The majority of endoscopes are made
withan insertion tube length of 1metre,although
modelsranging from500cm(bronchoscopes)to2
metres (colonoscopes) or longer are available.The
outsidediameteroftheinsertiontubeisofconsiderable
importancetotheveterinaryendoscopist.Whenthe Gl
tract of both the dog and cat are to be examined, the
VES150A
ideal diameterof insertion tube is 7-9mm.Many
humanendoscopeshavean11mmor14mmdiameter
insertiontube,whichisonlysuitableforverylargedogs
and is of novalue in small dogs andcats.
Thesize of the biopsychannel isto some extent
dependent on the diameter of the insertion tube.The
larger theinsertion tube diameter,thelargerthebiopsy
channel that can be incorporated.Ideally the endo-
scope shouldhave abiopsy channel of at least2mm
andpreferably2.8mmtopermitbiopsy samplesof the
4.8
best diagnosticqualitytobecollected(seeChapter5)
designed for fibreoptic endoscopes
37
Chapter 4 Gastrointestinal endoscopy
Normally the Gltractisanemptycollapsed tube
similar in basic design.The main variables are the
that cannotbeviewedwithout firstbeingdilatedwith
air.Itisextremelyimportant,therefore,that thesystem
ofcollection cupsat thedistalend.Thediameterof
includes anairinflationpump.Airis directed down the
endoscopetodilate thelumenwhena fingerisplaced
ent on the size of the biopsy channel. The forceps
over the blue button.Where an air pump is incorpo-
workfromahandpiece thatopens andclosestwohalf
rated intothelightsourceit isusuallyaccompanied by
cupsat theother end of theflexible metalrod that
awashfacility,permittingthelensontheendoscopetip
passes down thebiopsychannel.In addition toplain
tobecleaned insituwhenthebluebuttononthe
cups there are fenestrated cups,which permit the
handpiece is fully depressed.
collectedbiopsy to bulge through the sidewallsto
Suction units (Figure 4.9) are sold as separate units
preventartifactual damage to the sample.Whether
and arenot incorporatedinto the lightsource.Suctionis
plain orfenestrated,the cups may containa spike to
attached to theumbilical cord of the endoscope and is
assist in fixing theforceps on to themucosa to be
operated by thered button on the handpiece.Suction
sampled;thismay be useful when the forceps are not
units are not essential,but are highly desirable to
perpendicular to themucosa,suchas occurs in the
facilitateremovalofaccumulated liquidandexcessgas.
small intestine(Figure 4.10).
4.10
There arevarious types of biopsy forceps cups
that can be used to collect samples.This figurc
showsbiopsy forceps,with andwithoul a centra spike,
which are commonlyused fcr biopsy collection.
Grasping and basket forceps are designed for
removal of foreign bodies,although, this is usually
limitedbytheactualsizeandstrengthof theforceps
available(Figure4.11).Undernocircumstances should
biopsyforcepsbeused toretrieveforeignbodies asthe
forcepswill become irreparably damaged.
4.9
Two types of sucticn unit that can be used with
flexibleendoscopes.
Accessories
The accessories available forflexible endoscopes in-
clude:
Biopsyforceps:fenestrated,spiked orplain
Cytology brushes
Graspingforceps
Basketforceps
?
Wire snares
?
Sterile catheters.
The only essential accessoriesrequired forrou-
4.11
Baskel forcepswhichcanbe usedtoretrieve
tineendoscopyarebiopsyforceps,whichareallvery
gastric foreignbodies with the cndoscope.
38
Chapter4Gastrcintestinalendoscopy
Care and cleaningofendoscopes
4.12
'Red out'
occurs
Endoscopes should alwaysbe transported in their
whereverthe
encosccpe is passed
originalcase to avoid damage,especially tothe coher-
through a sphincter or
ent optical fibres,as even gentle knocks can break
comcs up against thc
mucosalsurface
sertion tube casing.
Whennotinuse,endoscopesshouldbehungupon
a suitable endoscope holder.This allows the endo-
scopeto dry and theinsertion tubetohangvertically,
keepingit straight.lf the endoscope iskeptcurled in its
nentcurvewhichmakesit difficulttouse and if put away
damp it may grow mould.
An endoscopeshouldneverbeexposedto tem-
at various times during mostendoscopic examina-
perature extremes.Verylow temperaturescause the
tions.Correction of‘redout'involves stopping further
opticfibrestobecomebrittlewhilsthigh temperatures
advancementof theendoscope and slowlyinflatingthe
willdamage thewaterproofcoveringof theinsertion
lumenwithairuntilanimageisseen.Where thetipof
tubeand lensmounts.
the endoscopeis still in contactwith the mucosa the
Disinfection shouldbeemployed toreduce cross-
endoscope shouldbewithdrawn slightly and the image
infection between patients.Aseptic technique is
willberestored
obviouslylimited,especiallywhenconductinga colon-
Thepresenceof food,mucus or faeceswithin the
oscopy,mphasizing theneed forthoroughcleaning
bowel will interferewithimagequalityandprevent the
and disinfection afterevery use.The manufacturers'
endoscopist viewing the underlying mucosa.If the
instructionsregarding cleaning should alwaysbefol-
endoscopeenterssuchmaterial itshouldbeslightly
lowedandit is important toremember thatonly the
withdrawnandthelensflushedwithwaterusingthe
more recent endoscopes(i.e.those with a blue ring
bluebutton on the handpiece.A highlyreflective im-
around the eye piece) are fully immersible.With older
age,resuling ina loss of definition, is most frequently
endoscopes onlythe insertion tube canbe immersed in
due to thepresence of mucus on the lens.This can
cleaning and disinfection solutions as thehandpiece is
usuallyberesolved bywashing thelens again or by
not waterproof
aspiration of the material covering the lens.
Thorough washing of the outer surface and the
Inabilitytoilluminatethemucosaadequatelymay
variouschannelstoensureallsecretions areremoved
be due to contamination of theendoscope lenswith
isrequired;otherwise,blockagemayoccur,resultingin
equipment failure.The endoscope must never be
source is faulty or where the non-coherent optical
sterilized using heat as this will result in total
bundles have been damaged.The presence of distinct
destructionof theequipment.Disinfectant solutions
blackdotsintheimageisanindicationofindividual
specificallydesigned for endoscopes are available
optical fibre damage in the coherent image bundle.The
including:Gigasept FF,containing succindialdehyde
more fibres that are broken,the moreblackdots that
and MedDis,containing halogenated tertiary amines.
appear.Thissignof damage indicates that the endo-
Aswith all disinfectants,theyshouldbeusedwithcare
scope isreaching the end of its useful working life.
and following themanufacturers'instructionscarefully.
Thepassageof the endoscope along the Gl tract
The endoscope should be rinsed thoroughly after dis-
may cause abrasions to themucosa,which are una
infection toavoid exposing thepatient's Gl mucosa to
voidable.Care must be exercised ininterpreting such
disinfectant solution at the next endoscopy.
damageasinflammationorulceration.Mucosalbleed-
Personalprotection while washing and using the
ing is commonlyobserved after collecting a biopsy
sample.Such bleeding should beno more thanminor
protectiveclothing shouldbeusedto avoid contact
seepage and should stop shortlyafter thebiopsy has
with body secretions.Operators should always be
been collected.
awareof theriskof zoonoticdisease and take appro-
priate precautions.
Biopsy collection
Common problems encountered
Themucosa should becarefullyexaminedformacro-
during endoscopy
scopic abnormalities.Where a focal lesionis found,
multiplebiopsysamplesof thelesionandsurrounding
During endoscopy,the endoscopistwill periodicallybe
'normal’ tissue should be collected into separate
unable to recognize any structures and will see a
bottles.
diffusered colour.This image is called a‘red out' and
Wherenoobviouslesioncanbedetectedbiopsy
is duetothereflectionoflight at the endoscope tip,
samplesshouldstillbecollectedasmany Glconditions
which has come into contact with the collapsed lumen
of thebowel or with Gl secretions(Figure 4.12).This
tion.Multiplesamplesshouldbe collected from differ-
'redout'isobserved,evenbyexperiencedendoscopists,
ent areasof the tissuebeingexamined.
39
Chapter 4 Gastrointestinal endoscopy
Whenalesionisobserved,theendoscopeshould
oesophagus,which lies dorsal to the trachea(Figure
beorientatedso thataclearforwardviewof thelesion
4.14) but is not essential.A mouth gag is essential to
isprovided.Thebiopsy forceps should be guided
prevent damage to the endoscope and thepatient
towards the lesion with the jaws open (Figure 4.13).
shouldbeplaced inleft lateralrecumbency,asthisaids
Theforcepsshould bepushed into thelesion and the
thepassage of the endoscope through thepylorus and
jaws closed.With thejaws closed the forceps should
into the duodenum.
bewithdrawncompletelyvia thebiopsychannel to-
getherwith the sample.Anassistantcannowcarefully
remove thebiopsy from the forcepsusing a small
hypodermicneedleandplace the sample in10%
buffered formol saline.The sample should not be
crushed andmaybeplaced ona presoaked card or
nylon sieve toprevent transport damage and to facili
tateorientationof the specimen during subsequent
processing.Alternatively the forcepscanbeimmersed
directlyinformalintofixthebiopsybutmustbewashed
before reinserting into the patient.
4.13
Gastric
biopsy site
and biopsy forcepsas
seen through the
endoscope.
4.14
The patient isplaced in left lateral recumbency
withtheendotrachealtubetied to themandible
and with the mouth gag inplace.The flexible endoscooe
can nowpasseasily along the hardpalareandinto the
pharynx.
Oesphagoscopy
Indications
It must beremembered that the samples collected
presented with regurgitation of undigested food,in
dysphagicpatients and where there is unexplained
pathologist canoffer a diagnosisisif adequate sam-
salivation.
pleshave beencollected and they have beencarefully
stored. Since some biopsy samples will always be
geal disease and this may be further substantiated by
damaged during handling and preparation,multiple
plain and contrastradiography.In somecases thiswil
biopsysamplesareessential tomaximize the diagnos-
providea definitive diagnosisofoesophageal disease.
ticyield.
Megaoesophagus,oesophageal foreignbody,vascu-
larringanomaly,strictureformation(seeBSAVAManua
ofCanineandFelineHead,NeckandThoracicSur-
Patient preparation for the upper Gl
gery) and extra-oesophageal masses maybe diag-
endoscopy
an important role in evaluation of these conditions and
UpperGlendoscopyrefersto the examination of the
in their treatment.Endoscopy is the only practical
pharynx,oesophagus,stomachandduodenum.With
method of diagnosingrefluxoesophagitisas thiscan-
specialist endoscopesit isalso nowpossible toexam-
not be detected using radiography.The only other
ine the jejunum.
alternativeisplacementofapHprobein thedistal
Patient preparationstarts with 12-24 h withdrawal
oesophagus,a technique not readily available.
offood,withwaterbeingwithheldfor4hourspriorto
Oesophageal neoplasia israre but is mosteasily
theexamination.Wheredelayedgastricemptyingis
definitively diagnosed by endoscopy and biopsy.
suspected,aplainlateralradiographshouldbetaken
beforeinitiating theproceduretoensure the stomach
Procedure
is empty.
Contraststudiesshould notbecarriedoutimmediately
General anaesthesia isrequired forboth dogs and
prior tooesophagoscopy asretention of barium in the
cats.The authoruses acepromazine maleate and
oesophagus may make endoscopy difficult and will
buprenorphine aspremedicant followedbypropofol
increase therisk of pulmonary aspiration.Patients
intravenously,intubation and maintenanceonhaloth-
should beprepared in the manner described in the
ane andoxygen.Endotracheal intubation is essential
preceding section.
topreventaspiration pneumonia from occurring.Tying
theendotracheal tube tothe mandible andnot the
1.
Advance theendoscopealong themidlineof the
maxilla,canaidthepassageof theendoscopeinto the
hardpalateand into thepharynx.
40
Chapter4Gastrointestinal endoscopy
2.Stopat thispoint and carefullyvisualize the
4.18
The cardia
pharyngeal tissuebefore enteringthe oesophagus.
high
The cricopharyngeal sphincterliesdorsal tothe
pressure zone.
separating the
lateralfoldsofthelarynxandtheendotrachealtube
oescphagusfrom the
(Figure 4.15).The cricopharyngeal sphincter is
stomach.
usually closed, so advancing fhe endoscope will
bemetwithresistanceand'redout'willbeobserved.
3.Oncepast the sphincter,stop further
advancement and inflate the oesophaguswith air
until an image is observed.
4.Move the endoscope slowly along the
oesophagus,keeping the entire mucosal
circumference in view (Figure 4.16).
4.15
Endoscopic
In megaoesophagus endoscopy will simplyreveal
viewof the
a largecavernousoesophageallumen,notcreated by
pharynx.The
laryngeal apening
airinflation,extendingfromthecricopharyngealsphinc-
(white arrow) and the
ter to the cardia (Figure 4.19). In megaoesophagus
lateral fold cf the
secondarytovascularringanomaly,dilatationextends
larynx(olackarrow)
onlytotheheartbase whilst theoesophageal diameter
arevisibc.
beyond isnormal.Inbothcasessalivawill beobserved
toaccumulatetovarying degreeswithinthedilated
oesophageal lumen.
sphincte
4.19
Large
cavernous
Viewelong
oesophagus
4.16
the length
associatedwith
of anormal cranial
megaoescohagus.
cesophagus.
Oesophageal stricturescan occuranywhere along
Findings
thelength of the oesophagusbut are more common
By examining themucosa as the endoscope is ad-
distaily.Strictures usually develap secondary toa
vanced,pathological lesionswillnotbe confusedwith
foreign body (Figure 4.20) or reflux oesophagitis (Fig-
jatrogenic damage.lt will be noted that the trachea
ure 4.21).Varying degrees of dilatation willbe ob-
indents into the oesophagus,and in the cat annular
served cranial to thestricturedepending onhowlong
ringswill be observed in the mucosa of the distal
it hasbeen present.The stricture appears asa distinct
oesophagus (Figure 4.17).The gastro-oesophageal
circumferential narrowing of the lumen,and is often
junction is a highpressurezonerather than a true
pale due to fibrous fissue deposition(Figure 4.22) and
maybesufficientlynarrow topreventadvancementof
pearance (Figure 4.18).
the endoscope.
4.17
Annular
rings seen
4.20
in the caudal
 jp snbeudoseo
Oescphageal foreign
cats.
oody locged in the
caudal oesophagus.
41
Chapter4 Gastrointestinal endoscopy
4.21
Therapeuticuse
Endoscopycanbeusedtotreatsomeformsofoesopha-
Refluxoesoohagitis
withgastric
gealdisease,includingremovalof foreignbodiesand
secrelions,lying in
dilatation ofoesophageal strictures(seeChapter 18
the cesophagus.
andBSAVAManualofCanineandFelineHead,Neck
and Thoracic Surgery).
Gastroscopy
Gastric
Indications
secretion
Gastroscopy is often indicated in patients presenting
withvomiting.Withacutevomiting,followingradio-
graphicexamination,endoscopymaypermit theclini-
4.22
cian to confirm thepresence ofagastricforeign
bodyand maybeusedforitsremoval.Withchronic
Oesophageal
stricture showing
vomiting,radiographic changesmaysuggest a filling
defectassociatedwithanulceroragastrictumour.
chianges tcthe
mucosal coiour due
Endoscopycanbeused toconfirmthelikelypresence
to liorosis.
ofatumourbyvisualizingthetissuesandcollecting
biopsy samples for cytological and histopathological
examination.lnflammatorydiseaseisacommoncause
of chronic vomiting and in these cases no changes will
beobservedwithradiography.Endoscopicexamina-
tionandbiopsycollectionisthereforeessentialin
reaching a diagnosis.
Oesophageal foreignbodiesarereadilydetected
Enteroscopy
Enteroscopy is often performed at the same time as
as theendoscopeispassed along theoesophagus
gastroscopy. lt has been suggested that attempts to
(seeFigure4.20).Although theyaremostcommonin
theregionbetween thebaseoftheheartandthe
intubatetheduodenumaremore likelytosucceed if
cardia,theycanoccuranywherealongthelengthofthe
carried outbefore complete gastroscopy orbiopsy
oesophagus.Insomecasestheymaybedifficulttosee
collection.Thisisbecauseitiseasytoover-distend the
duetotheaccumulationofsalivacranialtotheobstruc-
stomachwhile collectingbiopsy samples,which can
tion;insuchcases the use of suctionwill permit better
reflexivelyclosethepylorus,making duodenalintuba-
visualization.Manyobjects can obstruct theoesopha-
tionverydifficult.
gusbutchickenbones andvertebral bones arethe
most common.Tumoursof the oesophagus are very
Procedure
Patients should be prepared in the manner described
rareexcept ingeographicalareaswhere infectionwith
Spirocercalupiiscommon,butwhenpresenttumours
above.
usuallyoccurinthedistaloesophagusandbecome
space-occupying（Figure 4.23).
1.Insert theendoscopeinto theoesophagus until
thegastro-oesophageal junctionisvisualized.
2.Align the tip of the endoscopewith thecardia
4.23
(seeFigure 4.18)and gently advance
Oesophageal
overcomingtheslightresistance,duringwhich
'red out' willoccur.As the endoscope enters the
tumour.These are
rareindogsand
stomachtherewillbeasuddenlossof
cats.
resistance.Stopfurtheradvancementof the
endoscope and inflate thestomachwithairuntil
an image of thegastricmucosa isseen.
3.If resistance is not lost as the endoscope
attemptstoenter thestomach,this isusually
because the endoscope hasbeen misdirected.
Do not apply excessive force; withdraw the
endoscope slightly andredirectbeforebeginning
the process again. Occasionally the cardia will be
Theoesophageal mucosa isvery tough and is
openandentryintothestomachcanbeachieved
normallyverydifficult to biopsy.Fortunatelythis
without lossof theimageorincreasedresistance.
israrelyrequired.On those occasionswhere tissueis
4.
Oncethetipof theendoscopehasentered the
required,focallesionswithabnormalsoftsurfacesare
stomach anda clearimagehasformed,the
oftenpresentand sampling usinga cytologybrush,as
fundicmucosa,completewithrugal folds,willbe
well as biopsy forceps,may behelpful.
revealed(Figure4.24).Asthe stomachisinflated
42
Chapter4Gastrointestinalendoscopy
Oesophagus
Fundus
Pylorus
Angular
incisure
Duodenum
Body
Antrum
4.24
Normal
4.25
The
gastric
images
fundus shcwing
show aviewof the
the rugal folds.
(Diagram
angularincisure
reprcduced from
on thelesser
curvature of the
Tams(1990) with
slomach. This is a
permission from
Elsevier.)
veryimportant
endoscopic
lancmark.
(Diagram
reprocuced from
Tams(1990)with
permission from
Elsevier.)
with air,so therugal foldsbecome less
4.26
Theangular
prominent. If the rugal folds are completely
incisure
becomesmore
absent,creatingasmoothmucosal surface,over-
prominent as the
inflationwith airhasoccurred.In this situation,
stomach becomes
decompress the stomach using endoscopic
distended with air.
suction.Failure toreverse this distension may
not only close thepylorus and make duodenal
intubationimpossible,but also compromise
anaestheticsafetybyimpairingvenousreturn to
theheart andbreathing.
5.Examine the funduscarefully for lesionsby
moving the endoscope tipin different directions.
Fluid can usuallyberemoved bysuction allowing
6.Advance the endoscopeslowlya little furtherto
the gastroscopy to continue. But both food and fluid
allow a clear view of the body of the stomach and
can mask the presence of a foreign body. Bile in the
entrance to the antrum (Figure 4.25). Look
stomachindicatesa patent pylorus but may also indi-
carefully at the angularincisure,which is an
cate failure ofgastrichousekeepercontractions or the
important landmarkfoundon thelesser curvature
presence of retroperistalsis associatedwithan intesti-
of the stomach at the entrance to the antrum.It
nalobstructionorothermotilityabnormality.Observing
appearsasa crescent-shaped band across the
fresh or changed blood (coffee grounds) is abnormal,
stomach,which becomes moreprominent as the
and the endoscopistshould lookforableedingfocus
stomach is inflated with air (Figure 4.26).
such as an ulcer or tumour.
Irrespective of whether abnormalitieshave been
Findings
detected uponinitialexamination,theremainderof the
Theinitial examinationof thestomachshouldpermit
stomachshouldnowbeexamined.Theendoscope
the detectionof foreignbodies,food,fluid，bile and
shouldbepushedgentlyforward towards theantrum
blood.Suchfindings mayprovideimportantindicators
along the greatercurvature of the stomach.lftheantrum
of the underlying pathology but may hinder further
cannotinitiallybeobseved,followtherugalfoldsasthy
endoscopicexaminationof thestomach.
pass towards the antrum.Beforeentering the antrum,
Thepresenceoffood inthestomachofapatient
the tipof theendoscope should beretroflexed toallow
thathasbeen adequatelyfastedprior toendoscopy
visualizationof thecardiaandfundicarea,whichliesin
may suggest delayed gastric emptying.Foodwill pre-
the *blind spot’ on entry to the stomach (Figure 4.27).
vent full examinationof the stomach asit often accu-
This examination is performed bygentlyrotating the
mulates in the antrummakingvisualizationpoor and
insertion tube on its long axis.After this has been
passage of theendoscope into the duodenum difficult.
completed the tipshould bereturnedtoviewthe antrum.
43
Chapter4Gastrointestinal endoscopy
4.28
Over-dis:cnsion of
tha stomach will
resul: in the angular
incisure closing
overtreantrum,
leading to difficulty
in intubating the
antralcanaland
pylorus.
(Reprcduced from
Tams(1990) with
permissionfrom
Elsevier.)
4.27
Retroflexedview
of tne gastrio
cardiawiththe
endoscope clearly
vis.bleentering
4.29
Thepylorus
the stomach.
canusually
(Diagran
be visualized with the
reoroduced from
Endoscope
encoscope in the
Tams(1990)with
antral canal.Often the
permissionfrom
pylorus is closed,out
Elscvier.)
here it is open. Some
bile-stained fluid can
be seen in tre antral
canal.
Advancement of theendoscopeintotheantrum
lookseasyfrom thislocationbut inpractice thiscanbe
avery difficultmanoeuvre.As the tiplooksalong the
antral canal and the insertion tube advanced,the tip
may appear to move backwards,i.e.away from the
Peristalticcontractions against aclosedpylorus are
antrumratherthan forward.Thisiscalledparadoxical
frequentlyobserved andmayintermittentlyobscure the
movement and occursbecause the insertion tubeis
image.The pylorus itself may beopenor closed in the
lying along thegreatercurvatureof thestomach,and
normal animalandbilemaybeobserved torefluxinto
pressureappliedto the insertiontube to advance the tip
the stomach. The endoscope should be moved along
isactually directed at the greater curvature,which
the antral canal looking for abnormalities.
expandsto accommodate it.lf pressure is continually
Neoplasia
andbackintothefundus.Thisoccursmorereadilyifthe
On gastroscopy, one of the following observations
stomach isover-inflated asit closes theantrumand
(Figure4.30)issuspiciousforneoplasia;three ormore
makes movement to the pylorus difficult.
is highly suspicious:
Over-inflationof thestomach andpressureonthe
greater curvature can move the angularincisure to
Ulceration
closeoffthe antral canalsothatthestomachassumes
An obviousmucosal mass
around ball like structure (Figure 4.28).In this case it
Deeppigmentation of the mucosa
isdifficulttofindthepylorusandintubatetheduode-
Lossofnormal gastriclandmarks
num.When thisoccurs airmustberemoved from the
Mucosal colour change to amottled purple
stomachbysuctionand theendoscopetipmovedback
insteadofpink
to the fundus beforerepeating the manoeuvre.When
Rigidity of the gastric mucosa.
repeated,itisimportanttoensure thatairisnotcontinu-
allybeingfed into thestomach and tokeep the endo-
However,in all cases the observational diagnosis
scope tiplyingalong thegreatercurvature,so thatthe
tip ismore likelytomove into the antral canal success
examination.
fully.Gentlerotation of the insertion tube on its long
axis may assistin thisprocess and is ofparticularvalue
Biopsy
incats.Theinexperiencedendoscopistmayhave totry
Wheremacroscopiclesions are detected duringgas-
thisprocedure several times before the endoscope
troscopy,multiplebiopsysamplesshouldbecollected
passes into the antral canal.
fromthelesion'and the surrounding'normal'tissue.If
Once in the antrum it will benoted that there are no
nomacroscopic lesionshave been observed,chronic
rugalfolds,themucasaissmoothand palerincolourand
inflammatorydiseasemaystillexistandbiopsysam-
the lumen tapers towards the pylorus(Figure 4.29).
ples should alwaysbe collected from all regions of the
44
Chapter4Gastrointestinalendoscopy
Gastriculcer
(a)
(c)
4.30
Someof themucosal
changes which may be
observed individually,or in combination,
in animals with gastric carcinoma.
(a) Large gastric ulcer at thc cntrance to
the antrum. (b) Mass and pigmentation.
(c)Proliferative rrass.(d) Loss of normal
architecturc.(e) Colourchange to the
muicosa.
a)
stomach.When collecting biopsy samples the stom-
Perforationof the stomach isveryrare.lt ismost
ach should notbeover-inflated as thisstretches the
likelytooccur if ulcers arebiopsied orexcessive
mucosa andresults incollectionofvery small samples.
pressureisapplied to the insertiontube.ltismorelikely
Ideally,the forceps should be advanced through the
tooccurwhen trying to intubate the duodenum.
endoscope andappliedperpendiculartothemucosato
ensure a good sampleis collected(see Figure 4.13).At
Treatment
least fourbiopsy samples should be collected from the
Gastroscopy can be used to remove gastric foreign
fundus,two fram the body andtwo from the antral
bodies.The ability to carry out this procedure is
canal.The mucosa of the antrum is tough and can be
dependent on the size and shape of theforeignbody.
difficult tobiopsy.Whereanulcerisobserved,biopsy
It is also dependent on the type and size of retrieval
samples should be collected from the periphery and not
forceps available. In some cases the problem is not
the centre of thelesion.Thisisbecause biopsying the
grasping theforeignbodybut trying togetit through
centreof thelcerratermayresult inperforationnd
the closed cardia.
isusually not diagnostic,harvesting only fibrous or
necrotic tissue and some inflammatory cells.When
neoplastic disease is suspected, repeated sampling
Enteroscopy
from the same peripheral site mayreveal neoplastic
cellsdeeperinthelesion,whilesuperficiallayerscontain
Indications
onlynon-specificnecroticand inflammatory changes.
Enteroscopy is indicated in cases of chronic vomiting
and diarrhoea. It is especially indicated where the
Complications
patient also exhibits haematemesis,melaena,hypo-
Gastroscopy is a relatively safe procedure and al-
proteinaemia and weightlossthoughttobe ofintestinal
though problems may arise,they are fortunatelyrare.
origin.Patients,especiallycats,with small intestinal
Over-inflation of the stomach is the commonest prob-
disease often present with chronic vomiting ratherthan
lemencountered.Thiswill reducevenousreturnto the
chronic diarrhoea. ln some cats recurring fur balls are
heart and exert pressure on the diaphragm,causing
associated with inflammatory bowel disease.thus indi-
respiratory difficulty.Over-inflationhinders antral and
cating the need forenteroscopy.Inall cases where the
pyloric intubation and also reduces the quality of the
stomach isbeingexamined,itis usual toexamine the
biopsy samples.
duodenumat thesame time.
Haemorrhage followingcollectionofbiopsysam-
Theinvestigationof chronic smallintestinaldisease
ples is rarely significant.Where a significant bleed
initiallyinvolvesfaecalanalysis,haematology,serum
does occur,application of icecoldwater through an
biochemistryprofile,diagnostic imaging and GI func-
endoscopic catheter will usually halt the bleeding. f
tion tests (see Chapters 1,2,3and 20).Theresults f
this fails an epinephrine (adrenaline) solution (1:1000)
theseproceduresareusedtoprovideevidence to
maybe applied ina similar manner.
suggestsmall intestinal disease and demonstrate the
45
Chapter 4 Gastrointestinal endoscopy
needtocollectbiopsy samples.Biopsy samplescan be
4.As the tip of theendoscopepasses through the
collected byexploratorylaparotomyorendoscopy.
pylorus,theresistancewill lessen and oftena
Thelatterisminimallyinvasive,safe andwherediffuse
colourchange from'red out' to'yellowout'may
diseaseexists,providesadiagnosiswithoutrecourse
be observed,indicating the presence of bile in
to surgery.in addition,patients with protein-losing
the duodenum.
enteropathies are poor surgical risks,often having
5.Once in the duodenum,stop advancing the
delayed healing and poor immune status.Endoscopy
endoscope and inflate the lumen with air so that
provides theclinicianwith thesafest method ofobtain-
the mucosa can bevisualized(Figure 4.32)
ing a definitive diagnosis in these cases.However,itis
important to emphasize that on some occasions endo-
full-thickness biopsy material.
Endoscopyhasproved tobeofconsiderablevalue
in diagnosing small intestinal disease now thatbiopsy
samples can be taken from the duodenum,jejunum
and ileum. Most standard length gastroscopes will
permit theduodenum to bevisualized in all but the
largestdogs.However,whereaspecialistenteroscope
with an insertion tube longer than1metre is available,
it ispossible tovisualize and biopsy the jejunum
(Figure 4.31).Recentresearch hasshown that similar
morphologicalchangesare usuallyobservedinduode-
4.32
num and ileum.However,visualization of the distal
Normal cuodenal
small intestine(ileum) can be achieved quite often
mucosa has a
'velvet"
endoscope reaches the ileocolic junction during
appearance due
to the presenceo
through the sphincter into the ileum.
thousandsof
intestinalvilli
(Diagram
4.31
A.flexible
reprcduced from
endoscope
Tams (1990) with
madcwitha.6metre
insertion tube,
permissionfrom
Eisevier.)
permitting the jejunum
to be examined in
dcgs and cals.
(Courtesy of Guice
Dogs for the Blind)
It is important toemphasize that duodenal intuba-
tionisoneof themost difficultendoscopicprocedures
tocarry out,especially where the pylorusis closed.In
suchcases the tipof the endoscopeisoftenretroflexed
back into the fundusby antral peristaltic contractions.
Even experienced endoscopists canfind intubation of
the duodenum in some individuals impossible to
achieve.lt is therefore important not topersistin such
Preparation
cases as injury orperforation of the pylorus canoccur.
Undue forceto try and enter the duodenum should
for theexamination of the oesophagus and stomach.lf
never be used as this will certainly increase the risk of
ileal biopsysamples arerequired thenfurtherprepara-
perforation.Occasionallyinthesepatients,rotatingthe
tion is required (see below).
animal toa dorsal oraright lateralrecumbencymay
facilitate success.
Procedure
Once the descendingloop ofduodenum has
beenvisualized it is normally relatively easy topush
1.Position the endoscope in the antrum,with the tip
the endoscope along the intestine.Paradoxically,
alignedwith thepylorus inthecentre of the field
furthermovement alang the duodenumcanoftenbe
of view(seeFigure 4.29)
achieved by slightlywithdrawing the insertiontube,
2.
Gently applypressure to the insertion tube so
that the tip lies against the pylorus.
in the stomach.Only the descending loop of the
Maintain thepressure until the tip is‘accepted
duodenum can be reached using standard length
by the pylorus during thenext antral contraction.
'Red out'occurs throughout this procedure,so
scopes(enteroscope) the ascending loop of duode-
intubation isnotsomuch avisual,buta tactile
numandproximal jejunumcanoften be examined
process.
and sampled.
46
Chapter4Gastrcintestinal endoscopy
Findings
1.Place the endoscope tipdirectlyin front of the
As withotherregions,theduodenum should be care-
sphincter.
fullyexamined as the endoscope is advanced in
2.Advance the endoscope gently through the
order to ensure iatrogenic changes are not misdiag-
sphincter and into the ileum.
nosed as pathological disease.The villus structure
If the endoscope tip does not move into the ileum,
biopsy collectionmay be carried outblind’after ad-
ance in the normal dog and cat.Lymphoid tissue
is abundant in the duodenum andPeyer'spatches
vancingthebiopsyforcepsthroughtheileocolicvalve.
will oftenbeobserved indogsasflatpalecircular-like
Thisprocedure mayberepeatedseveral times at
depressions in the mucosa. The major and minor
differentdistancesfrom thevalvetoensurerepre-
duodenal papillae may be observed as raised nipple-
sentativesamplesareobtainedsafely.
likestructures.
Biopsy
Colonoscopy
Duodenal ulcerationis rare in the dog and cat,how-
Indications
everinflammationis common.This may lead to friabil-
Colonoscopy is a common endoscopic procedure
ityof themucosa,loss of thevelvet appearance and
carried out in dogs and cats. There are several rea-
occasional bleeding.However,itisimportant tonote
that many forms of small intestinal disease are not
sons for this:
apparent macroscopically and can be detected only
Colonic disease is common,especially in the dog
after histological examination ofbiopsy samples.
The colon isvery accessiblefor complete
Therefore,nallcases,multiplemucosalbiopsysam-
endoscopicexamination
plesshouldbe collected from differentregionsof the
Colonoscopy frequently provides a definitive
small intestine. Biopsy collection is not easy as it is
diagnosis without recourse to surgery.
difficult togetthebiopsyforcepsperpendiculartothe
mucosa.lf thebiopsyforcepsareused parallel to the
For these reasons,and because colonoscopy is a
mucosaonly thevillus tipswill be sampled,making
safeprocedure,ithasbecome themethod of choicefor
histopathological examination lessrewarding.Col-
investigating patients exhibiting classical signs of co-
lonic disease(see Chapter 21).Radiography and con-
maybefacilitatedbywaiting fora duodenal contrac-
traststudies arerarely carriedout in thesepatients as
tion to occur in front of the forceps;as the lumen
theyare time-consuming andexpensive.Even when an
closes in front of the endoscope the forceps can be
abnormalityis detectedbiopsycollectionisstillrequired.
advancedon to themucosa perpendicularly.Sample
Surgical collection of biopsysamples israrelyindicated,
collectionis also usuallyproductive where the de-
exceptwhere surgical excisionof masslesions is at-
scending turns to form the ascending loop.
tempted in cases of suspected neoplastic disease.
Indications for colonoscopy include dyschezia,te-
nesmus, constipation or chronic diarrhoea containing
lleoscopy
mucus and/or fresh blood. These signs may be asso-
ciatedwithunderlying inflammatory,neoplasticorin-
This can only be performed following successful
fectious disease.
colonoscopy, as described in the next section. In
Patients with suspected colonic disease should
order tovisualize the ileocaecocolic junction,the
undergo a haematological and biochemical screen
small intestine and colon must have been thoroughly
togetherwithfaecalculture,faecalflotationandexami-
prepared.The ileocolic junction can be recognized
nation for giardiasis. A rectal examination should al-
next to the blind-ended sac,the caecum (Figure
waysbecarriedoutinordertoruleoutarectalobstruction
4.33). It often has a button or mushroom-like appear-
and toensure that administration ofenemas canbe
ance and appears darkerred in colour.Although
carried out safely.
the sphincteris usually closed,it is not difficult to
Preparation
intubate.
The importance of correctpatientpreparation cannot
be over-emphasized.Even when the colon hasbeen
4.33
Biopsy of
thoroughly prepared using enemas,the ascending
theileum
can be carried out via
colonisdifficult toevacuateandrapidlyrefillswithileal
the colon.
contents,making completecolonicexaminationdiffi-
cult to achieve.For thisreason thepatient should be
starved for 24 hours prior to colonoscopy and oral
cleansing solutions should be administeredon the
afternoon before the procedure.These human oral
cleansing solutions,containingpolyethyleneglycolas
an osmotic laxative and electrolytes to prevent dehy-
dration,are of considerablevalue indogs and catsbut
Previous textshave suggested using bowel cleansing
47
Chapter4Gastrointestinal endoscopy
solutions at approximately20-30ml/kg.Patientscan
Viewalong
rarelybecoaxedto ingestsuchvolumes andsothe
4.34
the
preparationsusuallyneed tobe administered bygas-
descending colon
tricintubation.On themorningof theprocedure the
from therectum.
patientshould receive twowarm waterenemas at upto
20ml/kg,with thelastbeinggivenonehourbeforethe
colonoscopy.The patient's tail should be bandaged to
reduce soiling of the coat.
Afterthelastenema hasbeen administered,the
patient shouldreceive asuitable sedativeandanalge-
sic.The author has found a combination of ace-
promazine maleate at 0.05mg/kg and buprenorphine
at 0.01 mg/kg given intramuscularly to be the effective
fordogs.This combinationensurespatientcompliance
4.35
The splenic
without theriskassociatedwithgeneralanaesthesia.
flexure can
Whencats are toundergo colonoscopy,orif upper Gl
be clearly seen,
endoscopyistobe performed at the same time indogs,
indicating the end of
the descending colon
a generalanaesthetic isrecommended.
Forflexiblecolonoscopy,thepatientshouldbeplaced
and the start of the
transverse colon.
inleft lateralrecumbency.Thisensuresthatanyfluid in
the transverse colondrainsintothedescending colonby
gravity,nablingbettervisualizationof the transverse
and ascending colon.This position also allows easier
passage of the endoscope through the colonicflexures.
in contrast,rigid colonoscopyisusuallyperformed with
thepatient in right lateral recumbancy.
The entire length of the colonic mucosa should
Procedure
always be examined while advancing the endoscope.
1.Insert the endoscope gently through the anus
Once at the ileocaecocolic junction, the endoscope
and into therectum.
shouldbewithdrawn slowlyre-examiningthemucosa
2.
Once intherectum,inflate thelumenwith airuntil
and collecting biopsy samples. Only if a focal lesion
themucosa can bevisualized.Pinching theanus
is detected should biopsy samples be collected
aids inflation by preventing air leakage.
immediately.Biopsy samples should be collected
3.Advance the endoscope: it should be possible to
from the actual lesion and surrounding‘normal'tis-
see directly along the descending colon(Figure
sue,eachbeingplaced inseparate suitably labelled
4.34).
containers.When no gross lesions are found sam-
4.Advance the endoscope along the descending
ples should be collected from the ascending, trans-
colon, observing the mucosa for evidence of
verseand descendingcolon.Themajorityof patients
pathological change.At the cranial end of the
with colitis have diffuse disease involving the
descending colon thefirstof twoflexureswill be
wholecolonbutoccasionally more focal inflammation
observed(Figure 4.35).The splenic flexure
mayexist.
separates the descending colon from the
Tenesmus is frequentlyassociated with rectal
transversecolon.The transversecolon is much
lesions due to stricture,polyps,inflammation or
shorter than the descending colon and ends at
tumours.Carefulexamination is required sincelesions
the second flexure（the hepaticflexure),which
can be obscured by extensive mucosal folding. In
separates the transverse and ascending colon.
addition toexamining themucosa onthe initial pas-
Sometimesmovementround theseflexurescan
sage of the endoscope, it is well worthwhile examin-
be difficult,but significantresistance shouldnot
ing the mucosa carefully while removing the
be encountered.
endoscope,eeping thelumendilated withair.ome
5.To enter the ascending colon,gently manipulate
timeslesionswill beseen in thisphase of theexami-
theendoscopeforwards andbackwardswhile
nation that weremissed on initial examination,
inflatingwith some air.Redirectionof the
particularly at the anorectal junction.
endoscope tip is sometimes necessary.
In colitisthesubmucosal bloodvessels,whichare
normallyveryprominent(Figure4.36),becomedifficult
Findings
to visualize due to thickening of the colonic mucosa.
The ascending colon is short and ends with a distinct
This is themost obvious feature ofnon-ulcerative
opening into the caecum, next to which lies a raised
colitis.In ulcerative colitismultiple small ulcers may be
button-like structure,which is the opening into the
observed throughout thelengthof themucosa(Figure
ileum(seeFigure 4.33).The caecum canbe routinely
4.37).The mucosa in such cases is often friable and
examinedwithoutdifficultybuttheileumissometimes
even gentle contact with the endoscope along the
difficult to enter.However,biopsy of the ileumwith
bowel wall will result in haemorrhage.Patientswith
direct visualization rarely providesmore diagnostic
eosinophilicandhistiocyticcolitisoftenhavefriable
information than blind biopsy collection.
andulcerated mucosae.
48
Chapter4Gastrcintestinal endoscopy
4.36
Inthe
lesions of colonic disease.The former should be re-
normal dog
strictedtothedistalcolonandrectum.
orcat,colonic
Tumours of the large bowel includerectal adeno-
submucosal blood
mas andpolyps,which areusually space-occupying
vesselscanbeeasily
seen. This is not an
and areoftentraumatized andulceratedbythepas-
indicationof
sage of faeces (Figure 4.38). Adenocarcinomas may
inflammaticn.
occurin therectumorcolon,growaggressivelyintothe
lumen and frequentlyulcerate,resultinginbleeding
and dyschezia.Lymphosarcomas aremore often dif-
fuse and tend nottogrowinto thelumenof thebowel.
They often appear macroscopically similar to non-
ulcerativecolitisandhistopathological examinationis
4.37
Ulcerative
required tomake thedistinction.
colitis in the
dog.
4.38
Rectal
adenoma
obstructing tne lumen
of therectum.
Whipwomcolitisisrareinthebut,whenpresent,
adult worms arereadily seen on themucosal surface.
Whipworm larvae may be found on histological exami-
Referencesand furtherreading
nationof biopsy samplessincetheyinvadethemucosa
BrearleyMJ,CooperJEandSullivanM(1991)AColourAtlasofSmali
and induce achronicinflammatoryresponse.Granulo-
Animai Endoscopy.WolfePublishing,London
matous colitisis theleastcommonofalltheinflamma-
BrockmanDand Holt D (in preparation)BSAVA Manual of Canine
andFelineHadNeckandThoracicSurgeryAVA
torydisordersandoftenpresentswitha focalarea of
Publications,Gloucester
ulceration and bleedingintheascendingcolon,rather
thandiffuse disease.Finally,care isrequired to distin-
resultsofrecentclinicalresearch.UKVe7,530
Strombeck DR and Guilford WG (199o) Small Animal
guish artefactual damage to the rectal and colonic
Gastroenterology,2ednStonegatePublishing,Califrnia
mucosasecondarytoenema administrationfromtrue
TamsTR(1990) Small Animal Endoscopy.Mosby,Philadelphia
49
Gastrointestinal immunology
Michael J.Day
Introduction
bothdogs and catshasahighconcentrationof IgAwith
less IgG and IgM.These immunoglobulins are prima-
Thegastrointestinal(Gl)tract has the highest concen-
rily produced by local plasma cells (numerous IgA
trationof immunological tissuewithin thebody,whichis
plasma cellsare associatedwithsalivary tissue)but
not surprising given the continual bombardment of the
some may leak fromtheserum.Themucosal surfaces
GI mucosal surface with antigenic material.The GI
oftheoralcavitydraintotheregionalsubmandibular
immunesystemishighlyregulatedandretainstheability
and retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
tomountarobustimmuneresponse toinvadingpatho-
gens(e.g.bacteria,viruses,protozoa,helminths)whilst
selectively ignoring other classesofantigen that are of
benefittothehost(e.g.commensalflora,foodparticles).
Thislatterphenomenon istheclassicalexampleof a
process known as mucosal (oral) tolerance.
A clear knowledge of the anatomy and function of
the Gl immunesystemisessential forunderstanding
the pathogenesis and management options for the
spectrum of immune-mediated diseases that affect the
Gl tract(e.g.inflammatory bowel disease,IBD;dietary
hypersensitivity;small intestinal bacterial overgrowth,
SIBO;antibiotic-responsive diarrhoea,ARD).More-
over,study of the deliveryof antigen tothe intestinal
1.0mm
mucosa is an active area of immunological research
thatwill lead to futuredevelopmentoforalvaccine
5.1
Section of a canine lonsil. Squamous epithelium
strategies,or exploitation of the oral tolerancephe-
(arrowed) covers the crganized lymphoid tissule
nomenon to treat systemic immune-mediated
(LT) of the organ. The salivary gland (SG) is present deep
(autoimmune orallergic) disease.
to the lymphoid area.
Whilstwenowhavean increasingknowledgeof
Stomach
the Gl immune system of dogs and cats,there is litle
The acidic environment of the stomachhas tradition-
knownabouttheimmunesystemof theliverasitrelates
allyled tothisareabeing consideredsterile,and thus
tonormal immunological homeostasis,the immune
thegastricimmune system hasreceived littleattention.
response tohepaticinsult,and therange ofputative
The stomach mucosa has a diffuse scattering of iso-
immune-mediated hepatopathies in these species.
lated gastriclymphoidfollicles(Figure5.2)thatarebest
Anatomyofthe Gl immune system
Oral cavity
Theoral cavityis a complexenvironment rich inresi-
dentmicroflora andsubjecttocontinualminormucosal
abrasion and exposure to foreign (food) antigen.As
elsewhereinthebody,there areregional examplesof
organized lymphoid tissue,best epitomized by the
tonsils (Figure 5.1) together with scattered mucosal
lymphoid tissue.Recent studies have characterized
thelattertissueinthe felineoralcavityand identified
small subepithelial aggregates of T lymphocytes and
antigen-presenting cells (APCs). The oral cavity is
500
bathed in salivary secretion thatisrich in antimicrobial
5.2
Section of canine gastricmucosa showing an
substances.particularlyimmunoglobulin.The salivaof
unencapsulated lympnoic aggregate.
50
Chapter5a
Gastrointestinal immunology
characterized in the dog.These are a normal constitu-
entof themucosawithbothTandBlymphoidzones
represented,andarepresentingreatestnumberinthe
fundic area.Aselsewhere in the Gl tract,a diffuse light
scaltering of mixed mononuclearcells(lymphocytes,
plasma cells and macrophages) and occasional
eosinophils are normal within the superficial lamina
propriaof thegastricmucosa.Afferent lymphfromthe
gastric mucosa drains to the hepatic,splenic,gastric
andpancreaticoduodenal lymphnodes.
In recent years,much research has focused
upon the apparently commensal Helicobacter spp.
that live associatedwith thegastricmucosaof both
dogsand cats
a
200μm
Thereis evidence thatcats and dogs carrying gastric
Helicobactermore commonlyhavemucosal inflamma-
tion and hyperplasia of the gastric lymphoid follicles.
Smallintestine
The immune system of the small intestine is the best
characterizedpartof thegut-associated lymphoid tis-
sue(GALT)inboththe dogandcat.Asinotherspecies,
therearethree specificimmunological'compartments
within the small intestine.
The first compartment comprises the organized,
unencapsulated, secondary lymphoid tissues
represented by the Peyer's patches (Figure 5.3).
(q)
100um
The second compartment comprises diffuse
5.4
(a) Section of canine villus showinig the
lymphoid tissuescattered throughout the
enterocytes and underlying lamina propria
mucosal lamina propria(Figure5.4a).
which contains a mixture of mononuclear cell types.
The third compartment comprises the epithelial
(b) Secticnof canine villus irinunohistochemically labelled
to stain T lymphocytes (expressing the CD3molecule)
lining of the intestine (enterocytes)and is also
golden brown.Intraepithelial and lamina propria T cells
considered immunologically active(Figure 5.4b).
are evident
These sites are drained by the mesenteric lymph
nodes,the efferent lymphfrom which in turn drains
eventuallyinto thevascular system(Figure5.5).In the
dog,the nature of the cellular content of bothPeyer's
patches and laminapropriavariesbetween duode-
num,jejunumand ileum.Thesmallintestinal GALTis
the most cited modelofmucosal immunity,and the
functional relationship of these anatomical compart-
mentswill be considered furtherbelow.
Efferent lymoh
Diagram showing the maiorcomparimenls of
5.5
the smallinestinal GALT;the epithelium,lamina
propria andPeyer'spatch.Lympnoid cells activated by
1.0mm
exposure to antigen in the Peyer'spatch or lamina propria
Section of aPeyer'spatcn from a feline ileum.
migrate in aiferent lymph to mescnteric lymph nodes.
5.3
Note thc cxtensionof lymphoid tissue up into
IEL = intraepithelil lymphocyte; LPL = lamina propria
modified areasof'dome'-shaoedmucosa.
lymohocyte.
51
Chapter 5a Gastrointestinal immunology
Large intestine
Innate immune system
The caecum of dogs and cats is small, relative to that
The innate immune system of the Gl tract includes
in herbivorous species, but is rich in organized lym-
factors such as:
phoid tissue thatconcentrates around theileal ostium
in the dog,and the caecal apexin thecat.The colonis
Theepithelialbarrierwithtightjunctions,whichin
alsowell suppliedbyGALT-presentboth asisolated
partmediates“immuneexclusion'of luminal
colonic lymphoid aggregates with follicular and
antigenfrom theunderlyinglaminapropria
parafollicularzones,and asdiffuselyscattered lamina
Thepresence ofcommensal microflora
propria mononuclear cells (Figure 5.6).Similar struc-
Theperistalticmovement of thegut
turesprovideimmune defence totherecto-anal tissue,
Secretions containing antimicrobial substances
and in dogs there is a high concentration of lymphoid
and‘polyreactive'immunoglobulins(lgA and IgM)
tissue at the recto-anal junction(the‘anal tonsil').
abletobindwithlowspecificitytoawiderangeof
antigens and contribute to the effect of immune
exclusion'of antigen
The alternative and lectinpathwaysof
complement activation
Leucocytes,including lamina propria neutrophils,
mastcells,macrophages,dendriticcells,naural
killer(NK) cells and some subtypes af T
lymphocyte.One particular form of T cell
considered tobepartof thisinnateimmune
system is the intraepithelial lymphocyte (IEL);a
first lineofcontact with antigenpassing through
theepithelial barrier(seeFigure5.4).These IELs
areparticularlycharacterized bytheexpression
of a T cell receptor (TCR) comprising and 8
500μm
chains(they8 TCRs).
5.6
Section of canine colonicmucosa.Tnere are
scatteredmononuclear cells(arrowed)within
Although once considered simplistic,the innate
thonormal lamina propria.
immune system is nowrecognized to control thesub-
sequentinduction of theadaptive immune system and
eventhefine functional specificityof thisadaptive
Basic immunology
immuneresponse.Thekey cell that links the innate
and adaptive immune systemsis the dendriticAPC.
An understanding of the Gl immune system requires a
backgroundexplanationofthebasicimmuneresponse
Adaptiveimmune system
as it occurs in any part of the body (Figure 5.7).
Theimmunesystemhas twobroaddivisions
innate andadaptive.lnnateimmunityismoreprimitive,
Thevarious populations of lymphocytes(B cells,
probably evolutionarilyolder and iscontinuallyactive
T cells including T helper,T cytotoxic and T
atbody surfacesproviding thefirst line'of defence.
regulatory or'suppressor'cells)
The antibody-secreting plasma cells
INNATE
ADAPTIVE
High secificityantibodiesof thelgG,gMIAr
lgEclasses
T
Molecuiesof theclassical pathwayof the
complement system
The cytokines (interleukins,monokines),which
mediate'communication'betweenimmune cells
Patho
The chemokines(chemotactic cytokines),which
direct themovement of immunecellswithin
tissue.
The first stage of a generic immune response in-
Granulocyle
Plasm
Epithelial
volves the foreign antigenbeing taken up(generally by
barrier
phagocytosis)byanAPC,primarily dendritic cells and
macrophages.The APC translocates antigen from the
Antibody
site of exposure to the regional lymphoid tissue by
migration within the afferent lymph.Additionally.the
5.7
The basic immune response.Foreign antigen
foreign antigen is broken down into small peptide frag-
firscontacts the innate immune system and,
aftcr processing by a dendritic cell tnere is subsequent
ments within the cytoplasm of the APC,and these
activationof the T and B lymohocytes of the adaplive
fragments arere-expressed(presented')onthe surface
immune systerm.NK = natural kiler cell;To = T cytotoxic
of thecellinassociationwithclasslorclassllmolecules
cell;Th=T hcper cell;Treg =Tregulatory cell.
of the majorhistocompatibility complex(MHC).
52
Chapter5a
Gastrointestinal immunology
Within the lymphoid tissue,the antigenicpeptideis
recognized bya smallnumberof Thelper lymphocytes
throughinteractionof the antigen-specificTcellreceptor
with the MHC-peptide complex.In the presence of
othersurfacemolecularinteractions and cytokine sig-
nalling,theTcellsbecome activated andmigratefrom
the T cell zone (e.g.the lymph node paracortex)to the
Bceli follicles.Here theThelpercellsareinvolved in
Mccll
activation of antigen-specificB lymphocytes by‘co-
Peyer'spatch
stimulating'Bcells that havebound the same antigen
via surface membrane immunoglobulins (the Bcell
receptor,BCR).
The consequence of these activation events is the
division(clonalproliferation)oftheantigen-relevantT
and B cells within the lymphoid tissue.These numer-
ous activatedlymphocytesare thenexported tothe
bloodstreamwherethey'recirculate'until theyreach
thevascularsupplyof thetissue wherethe antigenwas
originally encountered. Here, the antigen-specific
Mesenteric
lyrnphnode
lymphocytesselectivelyegressfrom the circulation to
the tissue,byvirtue of the interactionof specificmol-
eculesexpressedby thelymphocytes and thelocal
vascularendothelium.
The ensuing ‘effector phase' of the immune re-
sponseresultsinantigeneliminationbymechanisms
such as antibody production (humoral immunity)for
opsonization and phagocytosis,orcomplement-medi-
Response of the GALT to a pathogenic
5.8
atedlysisor cytotoxicity of targetcellsbearing the
organism.Pathoger-derived antigen most likely
antigen(cell-mediated immunity,CMl) mediated by
enters thePeyer's patch via theM cell.Antigen-spccificT
cytotoxic T cells. At the conclusion of the effector
and B lymphocytes are activared within the patch or the
mesenteric lymph noce and must circulate tnrough the
phase,the large numbers of antigen-specific cells
blocdstream to enter the intestinal lamina prcpria to mount
must becontrolledbefore they cause damagetonor-
thecffecior pnaseo the immuneresponse.Scme
mal tissue.Thisinvolves thepopulationsof Tregula-
activated lymphocytes enter other mucosal tssues aspart
tory(suppressor)cells,ofwhichthere areseveraltypes
of the'common mucosal' immune system.DC = dendritic
now recognized.The antigen-activated lymphocyte
cell;PC= plasma cell.
populationis never totallyeliminated,as a smallgroup
of memory TandBcellswillberetained tomount the
lymphocytes.Some gut-activated lymphocytesmay
more potent‘secondaryimmune response'on re-
alsoleave the circulation at other mucosal sites(e.g.
exposure to antigen.
respiratory tract,mammary gland,ocular,urogenital)
aspart of thecommon mucosal system'.
The nature of the effectorimmuneresponse will be
Gl immuneresponses
determined by the antigenbut mayprimarily involve:
Gl immuneresponses arebest exemplified bythe
IgAproduction and secretion across the
responseof the small intestinai mucosatoantigen
epithelium into thegutlumen(forexamplein
(Figure 5.8).A wide rangeof pathogens canpotentially
response to some bacterial infections).IgA may
infectthesmall intestineandwill inducean immune
alsobind antigenswithin thelaminapropria or
response that in many cases will be protective.In
within enterocytes,whilst undergoing transcytosis
general terms,antigen derived from the pathogen is
through the cell(immune elimination)
firsttaken upbythe GALT.lt isbelieved that themost
An IgEmast celland eosinophil dominated typel
important route of uptake of pathogen-derived antigen
hypersensitivityresponse(in response to
isvia themicrofold(M')cellswithinthemodified dome
helminth parasites).This is a classical type 2
epithelium that overlies the Peyer's patch.These M
immuneresponse that iscontrolledbya
cells translocate antigen tothewaitingpopulation of
population of T helper 2 (Th2) lymphocytes
APCs,andTandBcellswithinthe subepithelialdome,
A cell-mediated Tcell cytotoxicandcytokine
initiating animmuneresponseeither in thePeyer's
(e.g. IFNy) response to viral infection. This is a
patch itselforwithin thedrainingmesentericlymph
classical'type1'immuneresponsethatiscontrolled
node.As described above,antigen-activated T
bya population of T helper 1(Th1) lymphocytes.
lymphocytes will migrate (home') back to the Gl mu-
cosa from theblood,via the expression ofmolecules
The secretion of IgA is fundamental to theGl
(particularlyMAdCAM-1)onthevascularendothelium
immune response（Figure 5.9).IgA is produced by
and (particularly α4β>) on the activated lymphocytes.
intestinal lamina propria plasma cellsas a dimer of two
Similar recirculation occurs for antigen-specific B
IgAmoleculeswith a joining chain.The IgA dimer is
53
Chapter5a
Gastrointestinalimmunology
Secretion of IgA across the
Enterocyte
5.9
epithelial barrier. IgA
dimers（two IgAmonomers linkedby
Lumen
Lamina propria
the J chan) are secreled by a lamina
propria plasma cell.The dimer binds
to the polymeric lg receptor(plgR)on
thebasal surfaceofan enterocyte and
Secretory
chain
thisccmolexisinternalizedbythecell
Thecomplexpasses through thecell
/piece
cytoplasm tobecomere-expressed on
the luminal surface.The dimer is
PlgH
released, carrying a small porticn of
IgA
the plgR as thesecretorypiece'that
SecretorylgA
Plasma
dimer
cell
protectsit fromproteolysiswithinthe
intestinal lumen.
Secretion
boundbythe polymericimmunoglobulinreceptor(plgR)
expressed on thebasal surfaceof the enterocyte,
LirnitedlgA
Dresponse
internalizedandtranscytosedtotheluminal surface.
Antiger
Here the molecule is released,carrying with it a portion
of theplgR thatbecomes theprotective'secretory
piece'thatwraps around thelgAdimerandprevents
proteolysisin theluminal environment.
Oraltolerance
Whilst the generation of an active immune response to
pathogensisnotsurprising,themore strikingfeature of
?
theGlimmunesystemistheabilitytoselectively
recognize and ignore non-pathogenic antigens (e.g.
。。
mechanismsisthoughttounderliethisphenomenon of
。。
oral tolerance(Figure 5.10).Oral tolerance was first
Antigen
recognized experimentally,when laboratory rodents
toliver
werefed an antigen andsubsequentlyfailedtore-
spond immunologically to the same antigen injected
parenterally.The mechanisms of oral tolerance have
Systemic tolerance
Ccmmonmucosal
been largely described usingsuchrodent models,but
?
thephenomenonhas alsobeen demonstrated in the
5.10
Mechanismsof oral tolerance.Antigens from
dog and cat.
foodorendogenousmicrofloraenter the lamina
praoria and activate populaticns of regulatoryT
Oraltoleranceisregardedasbeingan'active'immuno-
lymphocytes thal prevent a full-scaleimmuneresponse
logical process,ratherthanthegut simplyignoring these
being mounted. These regulatory cells may also act
classes of antigen and failing torespond to them. lt is
systermically toprevert reactions to the same antigens
encountered parenterally.PC= plasma cell;
laminapropria compartment through theenterocytes or
=T regulatory cell.
lamina propria dendritic cells that extend cyloplasmic
processes through the epithelial tight junctions (as op-
systemicimmuneunresponsivenessbyfeedingantigen
posed tovia Mcellsand Peyer'spatches).Here,theyare
(or delivery of antigen via other mucosal routes) is an
presented (by either dendritic cells or enterocytes,or
active area of current research as ameansof treating
both)to activate regulatorypopulations of Tcells,in
inappropriateimmunereactivitysuchasoccursin
paricularTregulatorycellscharacterized by dominant
autoimmune orallergic diseases.Of greaterimmediate
production of the regulatory cytokine interleukin 10 (IL-
relevance to companion animals,thepathogenesisof
10)orThelper3(Th3)cellsthat predominantlyexpress
the spectrum of IBD is thought toinvolveafailure of
transforming growth factorbeta (TGFβ).These regula-
normal toleranceto endogenousbacterial microaflora,
tory Tcells may mediate local unresponsiveness and
may,in addition,travel to thesystemicimmune system
immunologicaltolerancetonormaldietaryconstituents.
to mediate the systemic unresponsiveness that charac-
Novel therapiesforthese disordersinvolveblocking the
terisesexperimentaloraltolerance.The abilitytoinduce
immunepathwaysdescribed above.
54
Chapter5aGastrointestinal immunology
Liverimmunology
inhibitors and a range of cytokines and chemokines
Relative to the Gl tract,there hasbeen little study of
that recruit monocytes and lymphocytes.Hepatic
thehepaticimmunesystemincompanion animals,so
sinusoidsarelined bya uniquepopulation of liver
most of our understanding isbased upon extrapola-
sinusoidalendothelial cellsLSECs)whichhave gaps
tionfromotherspecies.Thenormal liverisendowed
between eachcell,are fenestrated,lackabasement
witha largepopulation ofmobilesinusoidalKupffer
membrane and can present antigen.There is there-
cells thatare activelyphagocytic,expressMHCclass
forereadymovementofmoleculesfromthesinusoi-
II(Figure 5.11),secrete cytokines (e.g.IL-6 and
dal bloodinto thespace of Disse(Figure 5.12).These
tumournecrosisfactoralpha（TNFc),which stimulate
cells constitutively express adhesion molecules that
production of acutephaseproteins) and act asAPCs.
can engage ligands on circulating lymphocytes.Cir-
Macrophages and dendriticcellsmayalsobefound
culating lymphocytes and dendritic cells may be
within the portal triad.The liver has aresident popu-
chemotacticallyattractedintothe spaceofDisseand
lation of lymphoid cells,includingportal and sinusoi-
move from there into theportal lymphaticvessels.
dal Tcells,and intraepithelial Tcellswithinthebile
Thebiliaryepithelial cellsmayalsobeimmunologically
duct epithelium.TheT cell population isenrichedfor
active,can express MHC class ll and act as APCs
CD8+and8TCR+cells,and a significant numberof
akin to enterocytes.
NKcells are alsopresent.B lymphocytes arefound in
Bile is extremelyrich in lgAinboth dogs andcats,
small numbers in the portal areas.
but littleisknownof the method and significance of
Thepopulation ofmesenchymal cells within the
secretion of biliary lgA in these species.In other
space of Disse (lto cells,stellate cells or hepatic
species(e.g.rodents) some biliary lgA is produced
lipocytes)producecollagen,collagenases,collagenase
locally,butmost isproduced in the intestinal mucosa,
absorbedintothevascularcirculation and transferred
fromblood tobilebyhepatocytesfollowingbindingof
thelgAtohepatocyteplgR.Thisisaminormechanism
in humanswhere thereisvery lowexpressionof
hepatic plgR.
Inadditionto having thecapacitytomountanactive
immuneresponse,theliver is alsoa majorsitefor
inductionofimmunological tolerancetoavarietyof
antigens,including food-derived antigens that enter
the livervia theportal circulation.TheLSECsmay be
important in presenting such antigen tohepaticlym-
phoidpopulations in the initiation of this tolerance.The
tolerogenic environment is enhanced by theproduc-
tionof theregulatorycytokinesJL-10and TGFβby
Kupffercells,sinusoidalendotheliumand Itocells.This
default'stateofhepaticimmunologicaltolerancemay
200m
5.11
Secicnofliverlabelledimmunohistochemically
to show expression cf the class ll molecules of
Long-termmaintenanceof liver allografts
the major histocompatibility complexbyKupfercells and
Readyestablishment of tumourmetastases in
dendrilio cells (stained brcwn） within sinusoids anc the
theliver
space of D sso.
Persistence of some hepaticinfections.
5.12
Hepatic immune system.A
Stellate cell
Lymphatic
range of anticen-presenting
cells(APCs)and lymphocyles migrate
from the sinusoidal blooc to the space
of Disse.Other res dent immune cells
arefoundwithin theportal areasof the
Space
D
liver.
of Disse
Lymph
B
Sinusoid
福
Bileduct
Hepatocytes
Dendritic
Bile
Endothelial
Kuplle
Intre-hepalic
cell
cell
cell
Tcell orNKcell
55
Chapter 5a
Gastrointestinal immunology
References and further reading
Veternary Record 152, 125-129
immune call populations in oral mucosal tissue of healthy adult
Crispe IN (2003) Hepatic T cells and liver tolerance. Nature Aeviews
cats. Joumal of Comparative Pathology 128, 146-155
Immunology 3, 51-62
Kita H, Mackay IR, van de Water J and Gershwin ME (2001) The
 Day MJ (1998) Immunohislochemical characterisation of the lesions
lymphoid iver considerations onpathways toautoimmune injury.
of falina progressive lymphocytic cholangis/cholangiohepatitis.
Gastroenterology 120, 1485-1501
Journal of Cormparative Pathoiogy 119, 135-147
Knolle PA and Limmer A (2001) Neighborhood politics: the
German A, Bland PW, Hall EJ and Day MJ (1ege) Expression of
immunoregulatory function of organ-residen liver endothelial
cells. Trends in Irmunology 22, 432-437
intestine. Veterinary immunology and immunopathology 61,
Kolbjornsen O, Press CMcl, Moore PF and Landsverk T (1995)
171-180
Lymphoid folicles in the gastric mucosa of dogs. Distribution and
German AJ, Hall EJ and Day MJ (1999)] Analysis of leucocyte subscts
lymphocyte phenotypes. Veterinary Immunoiogy and
In the canlne Inlestlne. Joumai of Comparative Patho/ogy 120,
immunopathology 40, 299-312
129-145
Lamb ME and Philips-Quagliata JM (2002) Origin and homing of
IntestlnallgA antlbody-secretlng cels.ournafofExperimenta!
1:
shop peydeus ueues woij suejdxe jeuaponp Aq uononpod
Medicine 195, F5-F8
with small intestinal disease. Veterinary tmmunology and
Lau AHand ThomsonAW(2003) Dendiccells and immune regulation
Immunopathology 76, 25-43
 in the liver. Gur 52, 307-314
 German AJ, Hall EJand Day MJ (2003) Chronic intestinalinflammation
Mowat AM (2003) Anatomical basis of tolerance and immunity to
and intestinal disease in dogs. Joumal of Veterinary Intemal
intestinal antigens. Nature Reviews /mmunoiogy 3, 331-341
Medicne17,8-20
van Egmond M, Daman CA, van Spriel AB, Vidarsson G, van
 German AJ, Hall EJ, Moore PF, Ringler DJ, Newman W and Day MJ
Garderen E and van de Winkel JGJ (2001) IgA and the IgA
(1999) Analysis of the distribution of lymphocytes expreesing cf
receptor. Trends in Immunology 22, 205-211
and  T cellreceplors and expression of mucosal addressin cell
Waly N, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Stokes CH and Day MJ (200t) The
adhesion molecule-1 in the canine intestine. journar of
distribution of leucocyte subsets in the smal intestine of normal
Comparative Pathology 121, 249-263
cats. Journai gf Comparative Pathotogy 124, 172-182
Hartey R, Gruffydd-Jones TJ and Day MJ (2003) Salivary and serum
Weiner HL(t997)Oral tolerance:imrnune mechanisms and treatment
immunoglcbulin levels in cats with chronic gingivostomatitis.
of autoimmune diseases. Trends in immunology 18, 335-343
56
Biopsy: sample collection
John M.Williams
Gastrointestinal biopsy
Indicationsforbiopsyarediscussedelsewhere inthe
Manual.
Pre-biopsyconsiderations
The collection of gastrointestinal (Gl) biopsy samples is
anelectiveabdominalprocedure,whichinvolvesentering
a viscus and canbeclassified aseitherclean or clean/
contaminated.Due to theriskofpostoperative infection
antibioticsshouldbegivenintravenously30-60minutes
priorto surgerytoensuremaximaltissue concentration at
the timeofsurgery.Systemicantibioticspreventbacterial
multiplicationforuptothreehourswithamaximaleffect
ataroundonehour.Astheriskisof theorderof5%then
5.14
Diagrammaticrepresentation cf a transvcrsc
eitherclavulanicacidpotentiated amoxicillinorasecond
closure,usedtominimizeossofluminal diameter.
generationcephalosporinshouldbe considered.
Foroptimal healingbyfirst intention,accurate ap-
Biopsy technique
positionof thewoundedges isneeded.Thisrequires
Following exteriorization and packing off the selected
proper alignment of the submucosa so that there is
portionof intestine,thecontentsare milked away from
approximationof bloodvessels.Such directapposition
theproposed incisionsite;atraumaticbowel clamps
promotesrapidre-epithelialization anddeposition of
maybeappliedtoisolate thearea butarenotessential.
wellvascularizedcollagenandminimizestheriskof
The antimesenteric border is selected and,using a
reducing thebowel lumen diameter.It iscritical with
scalpel blade,a full-thickness longitudinal incision is
appositionalsuturingtopassthesuturematerial through
made（Figure 5.13).The longitudinal enterotomy is
the submucosa(Figure 5.15),the collagen-containing
ideal for obtaining elliptical biopsy samples;where
there is concernoverluminalnarrowing,transverse
closure can beperformed(Figure 5.14).
5.13
Longitudinal
antimesenteric
biopsy.
(q)
5.15
Diagrammaticrepresentation of suturematerial
passing lhrough submucosa.
57
Chapter5b Biopsy:sample collection
layerofstrengthwithin the intestinal tract.Thesuture
hypoalbuminaemicasa consequence of liver disease,
material needs tobe2Metricmonofilamentfor the
stomach,with 1.5Metricused for theintestine.A
should be given a pre-biopsy plasma transfusion re-
swaged-on taperpoint needle ispreferred.
gardless of the surgical technique employed.
A syntheticmonofilament absorbablesuture ispre-
ferred.Poliglecaprone25is absorbedbyhydrolysis,
Percutaneousultrasound-guided biopsy
producesminimal frictionanddragasit passes through
The competent ultrasonographer can identify focal
tissue andhasminimalmemory,whichallowssnugsafe
hepaticlesions,suchasneoplasia,cystsorabscesses,
knots tobeproduced.Chromiccatgutisbest avoided in
and identifygeneralized changesinthe hepaticparen-
GI tractsurgeryasthereis alwaysaninflammatory
chyma.This allows foraccurate guided needle or core
response,more so incats than dogs,which can lead to
biopsy of from solid lesions(Figure 5.16).The advent
fibrosisandmarked intestinal narrowing.
of‘one-handed”biopsy instruments has made this
Theselectionofsuturepatternandmaterial isvery
easier(Figure 5.17).Cysts and abscesses should not
much an individual choicebutone-ortwo-layerappo-
be biopsied percutaneously.
sitionalsuturingisthemostlogical.Thepatternmaybe
simple interrupted,aninterrupted crushing suture,or
Liver
simplecontinuous;ifa two-layerclosureisselected
Bodywall
theinnerlayeristhemucosa and submucosa whilethe
outer layeris themuscularis and serosa.Two-layer
closureisusuallyreservedforthestomachassingle
layer closureis adequatefor the intestines.
Thecolon
Thelarge intestineposesaparticularproblemtothe
(a)
[d)
surgeon because healing tends to be slower.This is
dueinparttothepoorervascularsupplytothisarea
andthegreaterpotentialriskofcontamination from
bacteria.Bowel preparation(i.e.oral antibiotics,multi-
ple enemas) isnot necessary,particularlyasenemas
can increase theriskof peritoneal spilagebyproduc-
ing a liquid slurry within the colon,whichreadily leaks.
During the early stagesof the healingprocess in the
(b)
(e)
colon,itisbelievedthatcollagenlysisgreatlyexceeds
synthesis,thoughrecentmolecularstudieshaveques-
tioned this.Care mustbe takenin apposing the tissue
anda1.5-2Metric syntheticmonofilamentabsorbable
suture should be used e.g.polydioxanone,monofila-
ment Glycomer631orpoliglecaprone25.Vascular
supplyto thearea should beaugmentedby overlying
the wound with omentum.
Endoscopicbiopsy
()
Endoscopy may be used to harvest mucosal biopsy
5.16
Percutaneous ultrasound-guided corebicosy
samplesfrom the stomach,duodenum andcolon.The
tecnnique.
technique is discussed in Chapter4.
Hepatic biopsy
Indications forbiopsy are discussed in Chapter 24.
Pre-biopsyconsiderations
Severe haemorrhage isa potential consequenceof
5.17
Core biopsy instrument.
hepatic biopsy in small animals but it is rare;it is
only likelyif there isa significantlyprolongedbleeding
time or concurrent thrombocytopenia（usuallywhen
Surgical biopsy
the patient has disseminated intravascularcoagu-
This biopsy technique has the advantage of allowing
lation,DiC).In animals with severe hepatocellular
explorationof the abdomenandspecificareasof the
damage,ora suspected complete extra-hepaticbile
liver(Figure5.18).The disadvantage is thata general
duct obstruction,a coagulationprofile should beob-
anaestheticand an invasivesurgicalprocedureare
tainedpreoperatively.lt is nowrecognized thatin
required.lItis important to considertheroleof the liver
patientswith onlymild coagulationabnormalitiespost-
in metabolizing sedative and induction agents when
operativehaemorrhageisrare.lfanimalsareseverely
choosing ananaestheticprotocol.
58
Chapter 5b Biopsy:sample collection
5.18
Forceps technique
Apairof haemostaticforcepsisplaced acrossthe tipof
Liver at laparotomy.
a liverlobe tocrush theparenchyma.Tissue distaltothe
forceps is excised witha scalpel.Absorbable mattress
suturesmaybeplacedproximaltotheforcepsifrequired
to control haemorrhage(Figures 5.20and 5.21).
Bleedingfrom thebiopsysitecanbeidentifiedand
controlled.lfgeneralizedhepaticdiseaseispresent,the
samplecanbetakenfrom themostaccessiblesite.With
focal disease theentirelivershouldbepalpated carefully
for the presence of intraparenchymal nodules orcavities.
Guillotine ligaturetechnique
Marginal biopsy samples using ligatures are easy to
obtain.A loop ofa syntheticabsorbableligature is
passedoveraneasilyaccessibleedgeofliverlobe and
5.20
Forceos technique for liver biopsy.
theparenchyma crushed as theligatureis tightened,
thereby ligating vessels and biliary ducts (Figure 5.19).
5.21
Thesample isremovedby amputatingapproximately
5mm distaltothe ligature.lf thereisanyhaemorrhage,
(a)Forceos
an absorbablehaemostaticmaterial canbe applied or
technique at
theomentumplaced overthe site.
surgery.
(b)Mattress
suturepassed
tnrough
parenchyma.
(a)
'Skinpunch'biopsy
Since the forceps technique isrelatively straight-
forward,a‘skinpunch’technique(Figure 5.22)is
5.19
Guillotine ligature technique for liver bioosy.
rarelyrequired.Itsuseisgenerally limited tofocal
59
Chapter5bBiopsy:sample collection
Pancreatic biopsy
Indicationsforbiopsy are discussed in Chapter 23.If a
pancreaticbiopsy is tobecarriedout theveterinary
surgeonmustknow thelocationof the pancreatic ducts
andunderstand the blood supply to thepancreas
5.22
Skin or Keys' punch.
(Figure 5.23).
lesionsontheventral liversurfaceandcaremustbe
It isessential thatneithertheductsystemnorthe
takennottopenetratedeeper than50%of theparen-
chyma.Theresulting defect can eitherbe sutured
procedure.
withamattresssutureofa syntheticabsorbable
suture material,orbeplugged with omentumoran
Incaseswherethereisdiffusedisease,thetipofthe
absorbablehaemostaticmaterial.
right(duodenal) limbischosen duetoitsaccessibility;
and given its peripheral position, the riskof damage to
Laparoscopy
ducts and vesselsis small.Eithera suture fractureor
Thistechnique allowsvisualizationof the liverand for
surgical dissection and ligation(Figure 5.24) can be
focal biopsy with a minimally invasive technique. The
used.Whichever technique isused,it is essential to
disadvantagescurrentlyareexpenseof theequipment
suture themesoduodenum closed and to cover the
and thatfewveterinarysurgeonshave thenecessary
woundwithomentum.Thiswill helpminimize therisk
experience in its use.
of pancreatic enzyme leakage.
5.23
(a)Anatomical
relationshipof
pancreatic ducts.(b)Blood
Common bile duct
supply lo the pancreas.
Major duodenal
papilla
Pancreatic
ponp
Minorduodenal
papilla
Accessory
pancreaticduct
(a)
Left gastric artery
Right
gastroepiploic
artery
Hepaticartery
Splenic
artery
Cranial
pancreaticoduodenal
artery
Coeliac
artery
Caudal
pancreaticoduodenal
artery
(b)
60
Chapter5bBiopsy:sample collection
5.24
Surgical dissection
and ligat on for
pancreatic biopsy.
References and further reading
DSlatter,pp.113122.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
HaltDEand BrockmanD(2003)Largeintestine.In:Textbookof Small
Anima/urgeryedn,dlatter,.82.WBSaudrs,
BrownDC(2003)Smallintestines.In:TextbookofSmallAnima/Surgery,
Philadelphia
3eddar.4464Baila
NilesJD,WilliamsJM and Crips PJ (2001)Haemostatic profiles in
Dunning D (2003) Surgical wound infection and the use of
39dogswithcongenitalporiosystemicshunts.VeternarySurgery
antimicrobials.in:Textbook ofSmallAnima/Surgery,3edn,d.
30,97-104
61
Biopsy: handling, processing
and interpretation
Michael J. Day
Routine histopathology
muscularis mucosa).The superficial nature of the
samplesmeans that itisnotpossible torule out deeper
Sample collection and processing
underlying pathology（Figure5.25).Forexample,the
mucosaoverlying an alimentary neoplasm might be
thicknessintestinalbiopsyperformedduringlaparotomy
ulcerated and inflamed; an endoscopic biopsy might
aredescribedinChapter4andChapter5b,respectively.
onlysample thisreactive tissue andmiss theunder-
Similarly,percutaneousneedlecorebiopsyof liverand
lying tumour.
wedgebiopsyof liverandpancreasarediscussed in
Chapter 5b.The sampling of oral orpharyngeal lesions
isnotecificallyconsideredherebutingeneral m
eitherexcisionalorincisionalbiopsywillbeperformed at
thesesites.Evaluationofregional lymphnodesmay
alsobeindicated,particularlyforsuspectedneoplastic
disease. Oesophageal lesions are most often sampled
byendoscopy.
Although theuseof cytological examinationisnot
discussed inthischapter,oropharyngeal,gastrointes-
tinal(Gl),hepatic orpancreatic lesions may be sam-
pled byimpression smear orfineneedleaspiration.
Therelativemeritsofcytologicalversushistological
assessmentarediscussedelsewhere,butthesensitiv-
ily andspecificityofcytological diagnosisforvarious
sample sites hasbeenrecentlyreported byCohen et
1.0mm
al.(2003) whoreported that of all sample types,cyto-
logicalexaminationwasleastreliablefor diagnosisof
liver lesions.(SeeChapters12and16fortheuseof
faecal cytology as a diagnostic procedure.)
Biopsysamples
From the pathologist'sperspectivemore isbetter'isthe
ruleof thumbforcollection of biopsysamples.lf endo-
scopic biopsy samples are taken,a minimum of 6-8
shouldbecollectedfromeachsite.Thiswillmaximize
the chanceof sampling thelesion,andwillallowforthe
variabilityinqualityoftissueandvariation intissue
orientation during embedding,as discussed below.
Optimally,endoscopic specimens should be routinely
collected fromgastricmucosa(fundicandpyloric),smal
(b)
1.0mm
intestine and colon.Evenif there isno apparent indica-
5.25
Sections from (a) endoscopic and (b)full-
tionforsampling these sites,evaluationof the entireGl
thickness biopsy samples of smallintestine
tract is useful as subclinical lesions may be detected.It
showing therelative levclsof tissuesamplec by these
normal tissue forcomparativepurposes;but if this is
tissuebeneath the level of themucosa.H&Estained
done, these‘control’ samples should be placed into a
secticns.
separate,appropriatelylabelled,formalinpot.
Apathologistisalwaysmorelikelytobeableto
Althoughendoscopyisavaluable andminimally
make a moremeaningful diagnosis with afull-thick-
invasive technique for use in biopsy,it should be
ness biopsy of intestine taken at laparotomy.At
remembered thatthesamplescollectedaresmall and
laparotomy,itisagainoptimaltosamplemultiplelevels
superficial  rarely including tissue below the
of theGltract.Biopsyshouldbeperformedevenif the
62
Chapter5c
Biopsy:handling,processing and interpretation
gut appears grossly normal,as there may still be
portal triadsshouldbeassessed todeterminewhether
histological abnormalities.Full-thickness biopsy sam-
there isportalorperiportal pathology.Therefore,ideally,
plesof intestinal mucosa will tend to curl whenplaced
at least2-3corebiopsy samplesshould be taken to
intoformalin,whichwillmakepreparationof awell
increase thelikelihoodof achievingahistopathological
orientated section difficult. This effect may be pre-
diagnosis.
ventedif thesampleisfirstplaced,serosalsidedown
on toa small pieceofcardbeforeimmersing thecard
Post-mortem samples
andsample informalin.If there isasuggestionof liver
Greater scope for sample collection arises atpost-
orpancreas abnormality,these tissues should also be
mortem examination.Inconductinganecropsy exami-
sampled whilst theopportunitypresents,rather than
nation of a case with Gl disease,samples of grossly
regretting the absence of a key sample later.This is
affected and unaffected tissue(orsamples containing
particularly the case in cats where theremaybe con-
the junction of these typesof tissue)should be col-
current intestinal,hepaticandpancreaticinflammatory
lected.Sample collection should notberestricted toa
disease(triaditis).Where intestinal neopiasia is sus-
singlesite thatmaybe indicatedbyante-mortem
pected,biopsy of the drainingmesentericlymphnode
diagnostic procedures,and samples should be col-
to check for metastaticspread is indicated.
lectedfrommultiple locationstocheckforsubclinical
In thecase of liverbiopsyawedge sample takenat
pathology.Forexample,duringa necropsy examina-
laparotomy is the most likely to be diagnostic(Figure
tionofa dogwithcolitis,samplesmightbecollected
5.26).Needle core biopsy specimens obtained byblind
fromstomach,duodenum,jejunum,ileum,mesenteric
percutaneoussamplingarelessvaluable thanpercuta-
lymphnode,liverandpancreasinadditiontoaffected
neous ultrasound-guided or laparoscopic samples that
colonic tissue.For intestinal samples taken at post-
may targetspecific focal lesions.Evenif acorebiopsy
mortem,anintact4cmsectionof theentire intestine
includespredominantly liver tissue(and percutaneous
maybesampled.Itisbesttofixthissampleunopened,
corebiopsysamplesoftencomprisechieflymuscleor
asa flatportion of intestinewill curl duringprocessing
fat),itgenerallydoesnotpermitassessmentof theentire
as described above for full-thickness biopsy.
hepatic unit. Commonly,a liver core biopsy would not
includeportal areasthatareoften thefocusofhepatic
Processing
disease.It has been suggested that a minimum of 15
Allsamplesforroutinehistopathological examination
shouldbeplaced immediatelyaftercollectionintoan
excess(minimum volume ten times the tissue size)of
10%neutralbuffered formalin.Speedoffixationis
essential forguttissue,particularlyforpost-mortem
samplesasautolyticchange canbepronouncedwithin
20minutes after death.Samples should be submitted
to thelaboratorywithacompleteclinical history.Where
multipleintestinalsitesaresampled,thetissuesshould
besubmittedinseparatepots thatareclearly labelled
with theoriginof thesample.
On submission to the laboratory,samples will be
routinelyprocessed through graded alcoholsin an
automatic tissue processor,and finally embedded in
paraffin wax blocks.Larger tissue samples will be
(a)
1.0mm
examined and‘trimmed’by thepathologisttoa size
slide,and sometimesmultipleareasofalargertissue
samplewill beselected for examination.Endoscopic
pinch biopsy specimens provide a particular challenge
to the histology technician.The uniformly small size of
these samplesoftennecessitates that they arepro-
cessed withinapurpose-designedfine-mesh container
within the standard histolcgical‘cassette'，and after
processingtheyaredifficultifnotimpossible,toorien-
tatecorrectlywithin thewaxblock.The difficulty in
processing these samplesis a furtherreasonfor col-
lectingmultiple specimensfrom each location.It has
been suggested that suchmaterialmight beplaced on
.0mm
fixation.However,inpractice thesesamples arelikely
Sections from (a) a nccdle core and (b)a
cenfres,the biopsy samples are placed on toa purpose
wedgebiopsy of livershowing therelative
amounl of tissue sarnpled by these procedures. The
designed sponge insert fora histologicalcassette and
theentirecassetteplacedintoformalin.Wheremultiple
for assessment.H&E stained sections.
63
Chapter 5e Biopsy:handling,processing and interpretation
site,thesewillgenerallybeblockedtogethertoprepare
asinglemicroscopic section.Needlecorebiopsy speci-
menscanalsobefragile,particularlywhen thetissue
oforigin isfriable,and thesemayalsofragment during
transit.Following embeddinginparaffinwax,a stand
ard 4um section will beprepared and stained by
haematoxylinandeosin(H&E)forstandardhistopatho-
logical examination.
Histopathological examination
Histopathological examinationisa subjectiveproce-
dureinvolvingaspectsofbothscienceandart!Itiswell
documentedthatintestinalbiopsysamplesprovidethe
greatestchallenge to thehistopathologist,particularly
endoscopicspecimenswhere tissue that appearsab-
normal tothe endoscopistmaybehistologicallynor-
mal,andviceversa.Several studieshaveshown that
there is often little agreement between pathologists on
the interpretation of a singlebiopsy specimen.More-
cal criteria that definea specific diagnosis,and the
criteriaandnomenclatureused sometimesvarybe-
tween North America and Europe.There have been
fewattemptstostandardizethecriteriaforhistopatho-
disease.TheWorldSmall Animal VeterinaryAssocia-
tionLiver Working Group(http://www.wsava.org/
Liver.htm) is the first to attempt to produce standard-
ized international nomenclature and criteria,and simi-
(b)
500m
lar approaches to Gl pathology are now in progress.
The pathology report should include a gross descrip-
tionof thesamplesubmitted(mostrelevant forbiopsy
performed at laparotomy orpost-mortem samples),
which can provide a useful cross-checkfor theveter-
inarysurgeon thatwhathasbeensubmitted to the
laboratory has actually been sectioned.Amicroscopic
descriptionof each site sampled should be given,to-
getherwith aninterpretative comment and diagnosis.In
the case of endoscopicor core biopsy,the pathologist
mayseektoprovideanoverviewof themultiplesam-
ples,but highlight any specific localized abnormality
(e.g.the overall appearance of the samples is normal,
but in one of the specimensof fundicmucosa there is
a focus of ulceration and neutrophilic inflammation').
500μm
Particularproblemsfacedbythepathologistwhen inter-
Sections of endoscopic biopsy samples
preting endoscopicpinch biopsy samples(which may
5.27
demonstrating common artefacts seen with this
be mentioned in the report) include:
procedure.(a) Crush arteact with loss of discernibletissue
and cellular structure.(b) Cross-section of isclated villiwhen
Poororientationof thebiopsyforsectioning,such
tissue is not orientated in a perpendicular fashion.
that across-section of individualvilli ispresented
(c)Fragmentationofasmaltissuebioosy.H&Estained scctions.
rather thanalongitudinal section through the
villus-crypt unit
from endoscopicbiopsybetween diagnostichistopa-
Fragmentation of the biopsy with separation of
thologylaboratories,andrelatedthisvariationtothe
theepithelial layer
qualityofsamplesubmittedbytheclinicianratherthan
Crush artefact at thebase of thebiopsy that
the technical process of preparing thebiopsy.
obliterates fine cellular detail(Figure5.27).
In the case of inflammatorylesions,attemptshave
beenmadetogradetheseonseverityand natureof the
Additionally,small fociofsuperficial orperipheral
inflammatoryinfitrate.Thereisno consensusgrading
haemorrhagearecommonartefactswithinendoscopic
scheme but mostpathologists use afour-point scaleof
samples,as isadegreeofseparationof the connective
normal (0),mild (1),moderate(2) orsevere (3) inflam-
tissue of the lamina propria,which must be distin-
mation(Figure 5.28).The natureof inflammation may
guishedfromoedema.A recent studybyWillardet al.
be reported as neutrophilic,granulomatous (macro-
(2001)has documented the variable quality of sections
phage dominated),pyogranulomatous(neutrophils and
64
Chapter5c
an infectious aetiology.The Warthin-Starry silver stain
Score
Criteria
maybeused for the detection of spirochaetebacteria
0
Normal
Theclinicianshould be aware that these special stains
arerelativelyinsensitive,and maybenegativewhere
1
Low number of inflammatory cells in the lamina prcpria
culture orpolymerasechainreaction (PCR) may yield a
without other changes
positive result. However, special stains are generally
2
High numbers of inflammatory cells,together with
performed retrospectively(i.e.onthe sample submitted
separationanddistortionofcryptsandmidvillous
for routine histopathology),whereas culture and PCR
stunting
require fresh tissue.TheGiemsa stainmaybeused to
High numbers of inflammatory cells withmarked
identifyprotozoans(e.g.Leishmania).Where eosinophils
3
separationfryptsibrosisandmarkedvilusstuning
maybedifficult toappreciateinsomeH&Estained
and fusion
sections,special stains such as Siriusred can highlight
theseceiisforassessmentof theirroleinaninflamma-
5.28
Examoleotscoringsystemforinflammatory
tory enteropathy.In the case of neoplastic disease,the
changc cf the small intestinal mucosa(after
most widely used example of the application of special
Baez et al.1999).
stains is the performance of toluidine blue staining in
mast cell neoplasia.
macrophages),eosinophilic,lymphoplasmacytic
Special stainsareperhapsmoreoften indicated in
(lymphocyte and plasma cell dominated)or mixed.
theassessmentof liverbiopsy material.Thepresence
Fibrosis may occur in chronic lesions.In addition,
of intra-hepatocyte granularpigment isa common
abnormalities of mucosal microarchitecture(e.g.villus
finding,andadistinctionshouldbemadebetweeniron
stunting,lacteal dilatation,ulceration,crypt distortion,
(haemosiderin, stained by Perl’s Prussian blue) and
crypt abscesses) will be described.
copper (stained by rubeanic acid) (Figure 5.29). Cop-
Similarly,thereisnoconsensusgradingschemefor
peraccumulationmaybemorecommon thancurrently
neoplasticlesions of the alimentarytract.Thenatureof
appreciated asrubeanic acid staining is not always
widely available.Fouchet's staincanbeused tohigh-
round cell), the histological arrangement (e.g. sheet,
lightbilepigmentaccumulation in cases ofbiliary
acinar,whorled) and cytological features(e.g.pleo-
morphism,nuclear-cytoplasmicratio,nucleoli,chro-
matin,mitoses) should be described. Other basic
parameters,suchasextentof tissuedestruction,nfil-
tration of deep margins(difficult to assess with endo
scopicpinch biopsy) orinvasionof blood orlymphatic
vessels,should also bereported.
Similarbasicprinciplesof interpretation should be
applied to the assessment andreporting of liveror
pancreatic biopsy sampleswith inflammatory or
neoplastic disease.Where possible,assessment of
the entire hepatic unit should be performed,and for
pancreaticsamplesassessment of bothexocrine and
endocrine pancreatic tissue should be made.
(a）
Specialized pathological
examinations
Specialstains
TheexaminationofanH&Estained sectionisthe first
lineofthehistopathological examination and in the
majority ofcasesnofurther assessment isrequired.
However,mosthistopathologylaboratorieswillbe able
to perform a panel of 'special stains'to assessparticu-
larfeaturesofa biopsy sample.These will generallybe
selectedbythepathologiston thebasisof theexami-
nationof theH&Esection,butitcanbehelpful forthe
clinician to suggestwhere these might be indicated
(e.g.'possiblemycobacterial involvement,pleaseper-
form Ziehl-Neelsen stain').
(q)
500m
In the caseofa granulomatousorpyogranulomatous
Sections of liver stainec by(a) Perl's Prussian
inflammatory lesion,it would beroutine toperform a
5.29
blue for haemosicerin and (b) rubeanic acid for
panel of special stains that included Gram stain(for
copper. These stains are to investigale the nature of the
bacteria),periodiacidchiff(PAS,forfungi andZi
cytoplasmic,brown,granularpigmentobservedwitin
Neelsen(ZN,foracid-fast bacteria)toattempt toidentify
hepatocytes on a routine H&E section.
65
Chapter5cBiopsy:handling,processing and interpretation
obstruction.Hepaticfibrosis canbeassessedbyuseof
cal evaluation.In contrast,otherantibodiesmayonly
the HaematoxylinVan Gieson(HVG) stainfor colla-
be usedwithsnap-frozen fresh tissue that hasbeen
gen,andsilver-basedstaining,suchastheGordonand
sectioned with a cryostat.There is a specificprotocol
Sweet method,forreticulin fibres.Hepaticlipid canbe
stainedbyOil redOand glycogenbyPAS,but these
chemistry,and this isusuallynotpossibleina general
stainsmust beperformed on frozen tissuesections.
practice setting.Unless immunohistochemistry isof-
Amyloid deposition can be detectedby Congo red
feredroutinely,itiswisetoconsultwiththelaboratory
stainingandexaminationof thesectionbypolarized
regardingsamplerequirementsforsuchstudies.
light for birefringence.The same range of special
Theprincipleof immunohistochemistryisdepicted
stainsfor infectiousagents canbe applied to liver
inFigure 5.30.Thebindingof antibody to target
tissuewith evidence of inflammatory changesugges-
moleculeisdetectedvialabellingoftheprimaryor
tiveofmicrobialinvolvement.
secondary antibodywith eitherafluorochrome(im-
munofluorescence)oranenzyme(immunoperoxidase).
Electron microscopy
Various enhancement procedures(e.g.avidin-biotin
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is rarely
immunohistochemistry)havebeenappliedtothemeth-
indicatedor available inaroutinediagnosticpathol-
odology.Immunohistochemistry is increasingly avail-
ogy setting.However,TEM can sometimes be useful
ableasmore commercial laboratoriesacquire the
in characterizingmicrobial agentsthat mightnotbe
capacitytoperformautomatedimmunolabelling.Manual
easilyidentified byroutinelightmicroscopy(e.g.en-
immunohistochemistryisatime-consumingandcostly
teropathogenicEscherichia coliorCryptosporidium)
process that isnot widely available.
or characterizing ultrastructural lesions(e.g.lyso-
Immunohistochemistry maybe used to detect spe-
somal storage diseases).TEM can be performed
cificinfectious agentsin tissue and isfarmore sensitive
retrospectively by removing a sample of tissue from
than the special stains described above.Forexample,
the paraffin wax block for further processing.For
detectionofcoronavirus antigen in the serosal lesions
prospectiveTEMexamination,tissue fixed inglutar-
of feline infectiousperitonitis(FiP)wouldbe a useful
aldehydeisoptimaland thelaboratoryshouldbe
adjunct todiagnosis.Immunohistochemistrymayalso
consulted for specificrequirements.
beused to detect amyloid and todistinguishbetween
AA and AL forms of the protein.
Immunohistochemistry
Attheexperimental level,immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistryutilizes anantibody(polyclonal
hasbeenused to characterize theinflammatorycell
or monoclonal) to detecta specific antigenicmolecule
types in intestinal biopsy samplesfromdogs and cats
within a tissue sample.Some antibodies maybe ap-
with inflammatory bowel disease(IBD).The relative
plied to formalin-fixed tissue,making it possible to
proportionsof laminapropria(CD4+αβT cell receptor)
perform retrospective studies using the same biopsy
and intraepithelial Tcells(CD8,8T cell receptor+)
sample thatwasprocessed forroutinehistopathologi-
plasma cells (IgG,IgM,IgA)and antigen-presenting
UVlight
Substrate
Enzyme
Secondary antibody
Primary antibody
Tissue antigen
Immunofluorescence
Immunoperoxidase
5.30
Principle of immunohistcchemistry.Target antigens within tissue are identified by a primary antibody,which is in
turnboundbyasecondary antibody that ischemicallyconjugated tocithcra fluorochromeorcnzyme(typically
peroxicase)The target antigenisvisualizedbyexciting thefluorocnrome with ligh:ofanaopropratewavelength,or
generatinglccal cclourchangefollowing theadditionofsubstrate.
66
Chapter 5c
cells(major histocompatibility complex(MHC)class
I+,MAC387+)have ali beenexamined.It is clear that
suchimmunohistochemicalevaluationofinflammatory
lesionshas diagnosticvalue.In dogs with chronic
diarrhoea histopathological examination of the H&E
sectionmayreveal noapparent abnormality,causing
frustrationforboth clinicianandpathologist.However,
suchmorphologically normal samplesmay still have
an imbalance in theproportions of CD4 and CD8T
cells.At thistime,however,suchimmunohistochemi-
cal methods are notroutinely applied to the diagnosis
of IBD,as in addition to the labelling procedure,the
enumeration of the cell populationsisvery timecon-
suming andtechnically demanding.Similarimmuno-
histochemical characterization hasbeenmade of the
(a)
50m
lesionsof inflammatory liverdiseaseinthedogandcat.
The diagnosis of alimentaryneoplasia may also
benefitfrom theapplicationofimmunohistochemistry.
Themostcommon jndication for this is to make the
distinction betweenlymphocyticIBD and early stage
alimentarylymphoma.Thisisextremelydifficultatthe
histopathologicallevel,and in some casesimmunohis-
tochemistrycanaid indifferentiatingbetween these
diagnoses.In lymphoma,a lymphocytic infiltrate is
clonal,sovirtuallyallof thelymphocytesinthesample
will be ofone phenotype (i.e.Tor B cell),whereas in an
inflammatoryprocess a mixture mightbe expected.
examplesof alimentary lymphoma canbeperformed
(Figure 5.31).Contrary to earlierbelief,not allalimen-
(g)
tary lymphoma is of B cell origin,and in some studies
5.31
Seclionof smallinteslinalvillusfroma dogwith
Tcellymphoma (sometimes epitheliotropic) predomi-
alimentary lymphoma.(a) The H&E stained
nates. There are no clear data to suggest that the
section showsreplacement of normal mucosal structure
phenotype ofalimentary lymphoma affects outcome in
by a ciffuse sheet of neoplastic round cells with mitotic
either the dogor cat.
Other tumour markersmaybeevaluated immuno-
immunohislochemical expression of CD3.
histochemically,oftenusing anti-human antisera that
cross-react with canine orfeline molecules.For exam-
these techniques isthat messengerRNAproduction
ple,Sharpe et al.(2000) diagnosed alimentary haem-
does not necessarily equate to synthesis of the en-
angiosarcoma on the basis of expression of von
Willebrand’sFactor(FactorVlll-relatedantigen),anda
codedprotein.
large panelofepithelial(cytokeratin)and stromalmark-
Recent studiesbyBurnettetal.(2003) have shown
thatitispossibletoevaluate theclonalityofalymphoid
ers are available.
populationwithina biopsy sample and todistinguish
Future techniques
lymphoma from inflammation on thebasis of restricted
genotype. In North America, clonality assays are be-
The future of diagnosis from biopsy tissue is notre-
stricted to the lightmicroscope.Experimental studies
andwillsoonbe availablefortissuesamples.ldeally,
haveshownthatitispossibletoidentifymicrobial DNA
biopsy sampleswill still be screened byroutine his-
orRNA infreshor fixed tissuebyPCRorreverse
transcriptionPCR（RT-PCR)amplification,andtoquan-
thefuturewill begreatlyexpanded.
tifylevelsofexpressionof thesematerialsbyreal-time
RT-PCR.These techniques using tissue are difficult to
establish and control,and maybe some way off be-
References and further reading
comingreadily available.By contrast,PCRformicro-
bial geneticmaterial usingblood samples is already
Baez JL,Hendrick MJ,Walker LM and Washabau RJ (1999)
commerciallyavailable.
Radiographic,ulrasonographic,andendoscopicfindingsnat
with inflammatoryboweldiseaseof the slomach and small
RT-PCRandreal-timeRT-PCRhave alsobeen
intestine:33cases(1990-1997).Joumalofthe American
applied tobiopsy tissue forthedetection(andquan-
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation215,349-354
BoisclairJ,DoreMBeauchampG,ChouinardLandGirardC(2001)
tification) of cytokine genetranscription;it maybethat
Characterizationof theinfiammatory infiltrate incanine chronic
a particular'cytokine profile is associatedwith spe-
hepatitis.VeterinaryPathoiogy38,628-635
cific disease entities (e.g. subtypes of IBD). A range
BurettRC,nauW,odianJF,lvrS,MoorePFandvry
ofotherkeyimmunological moleculescan be indi-
AC (2003) Diagnosis of canine lymphoid neoplasia using clonal
rearrangementsofantigenreceptorgenes.VeterinaryPatiology
rectlyevaluatedbyRT-PCR,butthemainlimitationof
40,32-41
67
Chapter 5c Biopsy: handling. processing and interpretation
Caney SMA, Day MJ, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Helps CR, Hlrst TR and
Sclencas 45, 7-17
Stokcs CR (2002) Expression ol chemokine receplors in the
Harley R. Helps CR, Harbour DA, Gruflydd-Jones TJ and Day MJ
felinereproduclivetractandlargelntestine. JourmalofComparatfve
(1999) Analysis of Intralesional cytokins mRNA expression in
Pathoiogy 126, 289-302
feline chronicgingivostomalitis, Clinicaland DiagnosticLaboratory
Cenler SA (19g9) Chronlc liver disease: current concepts of disease
mmunoiogy 6, 471-478
mechanisms. Journai of Smafl Animaf Practice 40, 106-114
 Sharpe A, Cannon MJ, Lucke VM and Day MJ (20oo) Intestinal
Cohen M, Bohling MW, Wrlght JC, Wells EA and Spano JS (2003)
Evaluationofscnsitivity andspecificity ofcytological examination:
of four cases. Journal of Smal Animal Praclice 41, 411-415
269 cases (1999-2000). Joumal of the American Vetarinary
Waly N, Gruffyid-Jonas TJ, Stokes CR and Day MJ (2001) The
MelicaAssociation222,964-967
distribution of leucocyle subsets in the smallintestine of nommal
Garman AJ, Hall EJ and Day MJ (2001) Characterlzation of immune
cats. Journal of Comparative Pathology 124, 172-182
cell populations within the duodenal mucosa of dogs with
WillardMD,Lovering SL,Cohen NDand Weeks BR(2001) Quallyof
enteropatfhies. Journal of Veternary internal Medicine 15, 14-25
tissue specimens obtained endoscopically from the duodenum of
German AJ, Hall EJ, Kelly DF, Watson AD and Dey MJ (200oa) An
dogs and cats. Journal of the Amarican Veterinary Medical
immunohistochemical study of histiocytic ulcerative colitis in
Ass0cialion 219.474-479
boxer dogs. Joumal of Comparative Pathoiogy 122, 163-175
Zentek J, Hall EJ, German AJ, Haverson K, Balley M, Rolfe V.
Buterwick R and Day MJ (2002) Morphology ard immunopaihology
expression in mucosal biopsies from German shapherd dogs
Aealp oaads-uou ym shop ui ausau ebren pue iews eui o
wih small intestinal enterapathies. Digostive Diseases and
sensilivity. Joumal of Nutrition 132, 1652S--1654S
68
lal
and
redurg
Uot
Robert J.Washabau
Introduction
the lesian.In some animals,however,regurgitation
Dysphagiaandregurgitationare the twomain clinical
clinical signs may be useful in differentiating the site
signs associated with swallowing disorders in dogs
of the lesion (Figure 6.1).
and cats.
Dysphagia is defined as difficulty in swallowing.
Dysphagia
Regurgitation is defined as thepassive evacua-
tionof undigested food fromtheoesophagus.
Clinical features
Differentiationbetween dysphagia andregurgita-
History
tionmayhelptolocalize the anatomicalsiteofthe
Dysphagia is the most important clinical sign associ-
disease, as dysphagia is the most important clinical
atedwithdiseasesof theoral cavityand pharynx.
sign associated with diseases of the oral cavity and
pharynx whilst regurgitation is the most important
Oral dysphagiasareoftencharacterizedby
clinical sign associatedwith diseases of theoesopha-
difficulty intheprehensionof food andwater,
gus.In most swallowing disorders one of these clini-
droppingoffood andwaterfromthemouthand
cal signs (dysphagia or regurgitation) tends to
repeated unproductiveattempts toprehend food
predominate,therebyprovidinga clue to thesiteof
and water.
Clinical sign
Oropharyngeal disease
Oesophageal disease
Gastric disease
Dysphagia
Always present
Sometimes present (with
Absent
oesophagitis or obstructionj
Regurgitation
Absent
Present
Absent
Vomiting
Absent
Absent
Present
Hypersalivation
Usually present
May be present
May bepresent
Gagging
Often present
Usually absent
Absent
Ability to drink
Abnormal
Normal
Normal
Abilty to torm a solid bolus
Abnorma!
Normal
Normal
Dropping of food from the mouth
Present
Absent
Absent
Time of food ejection
Immediate
Delayed, minutes to hours
Delayed, minutes to hours
Character of fod ejected
Undigested
Undigested
Partially digested, bile-stained, acidic p
Odynophagia(pain on swallowing)
Occasionallyseen
Frequent, paricularly wih
Absent
oesophagitis
Number of swallowing attempts
Multiple
Single to mulile
Usuallysingle
Associated signs
Nasal discharge
Dyspnoea,cough
Abdominal pain,retching
Reluctance toeat
Maybe present
Maybepresent
Maybepresent
Muscle atrophy
Maybe present
May be present
Usually absent
Ptosis:lip droop/enophthalmos
May be present
May be present
Usually absent
6.1
Localization of clinical signs for oropharyngeal,cesophageal and gastric diseases.
69
Chapter6 Dysphagia and regurgitation
Pharyngeal dysphagiasarecharacterizedby
oropharyngeal dysphagia andmayhelpindelineating
gagging, drooling saliva,multiple unproductive
foreignbodies,masses,dental disease,temporoman-
dibular disease and distant metastasis.An approach to
and coughingdue tomisdirectionoffoodintothe
thediagnosisoforopharyngeal dysphagiasisoutlinedin
nasopharynx or larynx,respectively.
Figure 6.2. The diagnosis of most oropharyngeal
dysphagias is straightforward and,asidefrom tissue
Both oral and pharyngeal dysphagias may be char-
biopsyorcuture,maynotrequire anyadditional diag-
acterizedbyotherconcurrentclinical signsincluding:
nostic testing.The diagnosis of neuromuscular dis-
excessive salivation; odynophagia (pain felt during
orders ismore difficult and may require theuseof
swallowing);reluctance to eat;and general malaise
videofluoroscopy,muscle biopsy,electrophysiology,
due to aspiration pneumonia (seeFigure 6.1).
cerebrospinalfluid analysisandbrainstemMRl.If these
techniques are not readily available in the private prac-
Physicalexamination
tice setting,cases canbereferred to specialistcentres.
The pathogenesis of many of the oropharyngeal
dysphagiasshouldbefairlyobvious onphysicalexami-
Treatment
nation(e.g.trauma,neoplasia,stricture,inflammation,
The goal of therapy is always toresolve orremove the
foreign body);however,a complete assessment may
underlying cause.Forexample:
requiresedationorgeneral anaesthesiainsomepa-
tients.Animalswithneuromusculardisordersmayhave
Fracturerepair
fewer physicalexamination abnormalities.Focal or
Direct treatment of thermal injury
generalized muscleatrophy and a diminishedor ab-
Removal of foreignbodies
sentgagreflexmaybe the only abnormal findings in
Treatmentofbacterialinfectionwithantibiotics
animalsaffected withneuromusculardisorders.lfaspi-
Treatmentofinflammatoryorimmune-mediated
rationpneumoniaispresent,fever,dehydration,tachy-
diseasewithanti-inflammatoryor
pnoea,coughingandharshlungsoundsmaybeevident
immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids
on the physical examination.
Mass excision.
Diagnosis
Animalswith neuromusculardisordersmaybenefit
Initial laboratorytestingshouldincludehaematology.
from changing the amount, frequency and consistency
biochemistry profile and urinalysis. This database will
of the foodorbyplacementofanoesophagostomyr
be useful in excluding systemic and metabolic
disease,andwillprovideinformationaboutthe animal's
Vigilance for,and treatmentof,aspirationpneumonia
hydration status.Surveyradiography of theoral cavity,
mayprove the differencebetweenearlydemiseand
neckand/orchestshouldbe obtainedinanyanimal with
long-termrecovery.
Inflammation
Trauma
Neoplasia
Non-diagn
osticfindinqs
Stabilize
Symptomatic treatment
Symptomatic trealment
Surveyradiography:
regional,chest
bariurm
No
Rosponse
No
Response
Biopsy or
excision
Biopsy
Biopsy
Foreign
Burns
PhysicE
Anti-nuclea
injury
lenntior
antiboay
Symplemalic
Manometry
PEGoroesophagea
treatment
Fraclurerepair
Removal
Symptomatic
Symptomatic
treatment
treatment
Ana
BrainstemMRI
6.2
Anapproach to the diagnosis of cysphagia associated with orooharyngeal disease.ACTH =adrenoccrticotropic
hormone;CSF=cerebrospinal fluid;MRi =magneticresonance imaging;PEG=percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy.
70
Chapter6
Dysphagiaandregurgitation
Regurgitation
hypoadrenocorticism) disease asa causeof second-
aryoesophageal signs.Twenty-fiveto thirtypercent
Clinical features
of cases of canine adult-onset idiopathicmega-
oesophagusare associated with the development of
History
myasthenia gravis;therefore,assessment of mega-
Regurgitation is the most important clinical sign of
oesophagusshould alwaysincludetesting fornicotinic
oesophageal diseaseandshouldbedifferentiated from
anti-acetylcholinereceptor antibody.
Survey radiography, contrast radiography and
vomiting associated with gastricdisease(see Figure
oesophageal endoscopy are the diagnosticmethods
6.1). The severity of clinical signs with oesophageal
diseaseissomewhatdependentuponthepathogenesis
Chapters3and4).Animals suspectedofhavingoesopha-
of the disease.Forexample,animals with oesophagitis
gealdiseaseshouldhave surveyradiographyoftheneck
mayhave anorexia,dysphagia,odynophagia andsali-
and thorax.Definitive diagnosis or evidence insupport of
vationin conjunctionwithregurgitation.Othersystemic
adiagnosis maybe obtained with surveyradiographsin
signs associated with oesophagitis may include weight
many cases, including gastro-oesophageal intussus-
lossand,ifaspirationpneumoniaispresent,dyspnoea
ception,oesophageal foreignbody,megaoesophagus,
fever,dehydration and/or coughing.Whereas animals
neoplasia andhiatal hernia.Thoracicradiographywill
withidiopathic adult-onsetmegaoesophagusmayhave
alsoidentifysomeof thecomplicationsofoesophageal
severeregurgitation,theirappetite isusually excellent
disease including: aspiration pneumonia;pleural effu-
because of secondary malnutrition.
sion;mediastinitis;and pneumothorax.
Contrastradiographycanbeperformed toidentify
Physical examination
oesophageallesionsortoconfirma tentative diagnosis.
A physical examination is important primarily from the
standpoint of excluding other gastrointestinal or sys-
(e.g.radiolucent foreign body,oesophagobronchial
temic disease.However,weight loss,feverand harsh
fistula,oesophagitis,diverticula and stricture)may
lungsounds are commonphysical examination find-
be morereadilydiagnosed bycontrastradiography.
ings inanimals affectedwith severeregurgitation and
Dynamic contrast studies,i.e.videofluoroscopy,should
aspirationpneumonia.Occasionallya foreign bodyor
be used insteadofstaticbariumradiographywhenever
oesophageal dilatationmaybedetected duringexami-
possible. In addition to structural information,dynamic
nation of the oropharynxand neck.Neurological ex-
studieswill providesome information about oesopha-
aminationshould alwaysbeperformed to evaluate for
geal motility.Contrast studies may be performed using
neuromuscular(e.g.myasthenia gravis) or neurologi-
barium paste (80-100%weight/volume),barium sus-
cal(e.g.afferent neural dysfunction) causes of mega-
pension(30%weight/volume),barium-coated mealsor
oesophagus(see Chapter18).
iodinated contrast agents.The choice ofa specific
contrastagent will depend uponwhich oesophageal
Diagnosis
disease is suspected (see Chapter 3).
An approach to the diagnosis of regurgitation associ-
Oesophageal endoscopy has become a very useful
atedwithoesophageal diseaseisoutlined inFigure
6.3.Initial laboratory testing should includeroutine
disease(see Chapter4).Usuallyperformed aftersurvey
haematology,serum biochemistry profile,urinalysis
radiographic assessment,endoscopy is particularly
and faecal parasitologicalexamination.This database
willbe useful inexcluding systemic(e.g.leadpoison-
tis,intraluminalmasses,foreignbodiesand diverticula.
ing,immune-mediated disease) or metabolic (e.g.
Endoscopymayalsobe used therapeuticallytoremove
Regurgitation→History and physical examination → Oesophageal disease
Neoplasla
Foreign body
Non-diagnostic findings
Aspirationpncumonia
厂
Culachesansishty
IntraluminalExtraluminel
Vascularring
Stricture
Hiatal hernia
intraluminel
Diverticula
Fistula
Megaoesophagus
1
Endasiony
Surgical correction
Surgical orection
Surgial corraction
Endoscopy
ions
Surglical corrntion
'Oesophagitis
6.3
71
Chapter 6  Dysphagia and regurgitation
foreign bodies, dilate oesophageal strictures or to place
Removal of foreign bodies
gastrostomy feeding tubes.
Treatment of oesophagitis with chemical difusion
Uifrasonography may be useful in the diagnosis
barriers (e.g. sucralfate)
of peri-oesophageal masses or other mediastinal
Incisional or excisional (mass) biopsy
 disease. Oesophageal manometry is useful for diag-
 Dilatation of oesophageal strictures
nosing cricopharyngeal achalasia, generalized oeso-
Reduction of gastro-oesophageal
intussusceptlons
sphincter incompetence, but tha technique is currently
performed at only a few referral centres. Nuclear scin-
 Surgical correction of oesophageal diverticula or
tigraphy and oesophageal pH monitoring have also
fistulae.
 been used to diagnose oesophageal motility disorders
Affected patients may also benefit from changing
the amount, frequency and consistency of the food,
Treatment
or by placement of cesophagostomy or PEG
Specific treatments are given in Chapter 18, but the
tubes. Recognition and treatment of aspiration pneu-
primary goal of therapy with oesophageal disorders is
 s  o   io
to resolve the underlying cause. For example:
patients.
72
Acute and chronic vomiting
Kenneth W. Simpson
Introduction
breedandenvironment,withhistoricalandphysical
findingsoftenhelpstofocustheinvestigation.Forexam-
Vomitingisareflexactinitiatedbystimulationof the
ple,dietaryindiscretion,foreignbodyingestion,ntu
vomiting centre in the medulla.
susceptionandinfectiousdiseasesaremorecommonin
younganimals,whereasgastricneoplasiaismuchmore
Thevomitingcentrecanbestimulatedeither di-
frequent in olderanimals.
rectlyorindirectlyvia thechemoreceptortriggerzone
(CRTZ).Disease orirritationofthe gastrointestinal(Gl)
History
tract,abdominal organs or peritoneum can directly
Patienthistory should beused to try todistinguish
stimulate the vomiting centre,as can cerebral dis-
eases.Blood-borne substances (such as toxins or
from regurgitation(seeChapter6) and toobtainaclear
drugs) and neurological input from the vestibular nu-
cleuscause dopaminerelease in the CRTZand indi-
contents,colour,progression,relationship to eating).
rect stimulation of the vomiting centre (Figure 7.1).
Wherevomiting cannotbeadequatelydistinguished
Once thevomiting centre is stimulated a setofreflex
fromregurgitation it isimportant towatch the animal
actions are coordinated to cause the activeexpulsion
eat,observe the'vomiting episodes',and take a tho-
of gastric contents from the mouth.
racic radiograph to detect oesophageal dilatation or
obstruction.Non-productivevomiting(oftendescribed
aspersistentretching)and abdominal distension in
Neurological input
from thevestibular
deep-chested large-breed dogs are frequently associ-
nucleus
Chemoreceptor
ated with gastric dilatation and volvulus(GDV);this
Cerebral diseases
triggerzone
Drugs
requiresrapid diagnosis and treatment.Vomiting of
Disease/riteation of:
Gltract
Uraemia
food>10-12hours after ingestionindicates delayed
Liver
Vomitingcentre
Pancreas
Infections
gastricemptyingandrequiresinvestigation todistin-
Genitourinary
Vomiting
guishgastric outflowobstructionfrom defectivegastric
Peritoneurn
propulsion.Details of the environment(whether in-
door,outdoor,single or multi-animal household),ac-
7.1
Initiation of vomiting.
cess to foreign bodies,toxins or medications,and
vaccinationstatus should beobtained.A thorough
Theclinical importance ofvomiting stems from its
reviewof body systems(including attitude,mentation,
associationwithalargeandvariedgroupofdiseases,
presence of polyuria,polydipsia,weight loss,diar-
rhoea,coughing,sneezing,exercise tolerance)anda
pastmedical historyservestonarrowdown thepoten-
acid-base derangement,aspiration pneumonia and
tialcausesofvomiting.
oesophagitis.
Physical examination
A comprehensive physicalexamination helpstolocal-
Clinical features
izefurther the causeofvomiting and toascertain
Becausevomitingisasignofsomanydiseases(see
Temperaturesof<37.5°Cor>39°C(<99.5For>102°F)
Figure7.2) a systematic approach isessential to deter-
are abnormal.Pulse rate(in dogs:<60 or>180b.p.m.;
mine its cause and significance.This approach initially
incats:<150or>250b.p.m.)andpulsecharactermay
focusesonhistorical andphysical findings,whichoften
be abnormal.Respiratoryrateand character,mucous
sufficewhere vomiting is acute and self-limiting.Clinico-
membranecolour,capillary refilltime（<1 second or>2
pathological testing and diagnostic imaging are used for
patientswith more chronic vomiting orsystemicinvolve-
skin pinch, dryness of mucous membranes etc.) are
ment.Itisimportanttokeepan openmind and to narrow
evaluatedtodeterminethenatureofsystemicinvoive-
downprogressively the list ofpossibilities toachievea
ment.The presence of localizing findings such as
specific diagnosis.Integrationof thepatient's age,sex,
naso-ocular discharge,uveitis,retinal abnormalities,
73
Chapter 7 Acute and chronic vomiting
resolvesonits own,orafter symptomatic therapy.f
abdominal distension,abdominalmasses,abdominal
there is any doubtabouthydration status,a minimum
pain and dermatological abnormalities should be de-
database of tests consisting of a microhaematocrit and
termined.Palpationof the thyroidgland isespecially
totalproteincanbeperformed to evaluatehydration
important inoldercats.Arectalexaminationtoevalu-
status more objectively (see below). In puppies a
ate stool consistency.occult melaena and rectal or
faecal examination todetectendoparasitesmay also
perianal abnormalities(e.g.anal saccarcinoma as a
be performed.
cause ofhypercalcaemia-induced vomiting) should
not be overlooked.
Chronicvomiting or systemically unwell
If the animal issystemicallyunwell,hasbeenvomiting
Problem list
for>5days,orhashaematemesis,bloodydiarrhoeaor
Historical and physical findings are integrated to gen-
localizing signs(such as abdominal pain orjaundice),a
erate a problem list that focuses the diagnostic and
moreaggressiveinvestigationisnecessarytodefinethe
therapeuticplan (see Chapter 1).It is helpful from a
nature of theproblem.The combination of non-produc-
diagnosticand therapeutic standpointtocategorizethe
tivevomiting andabdominaldistensionischaracteristic
patient as systemically well orunwell, and vomiting as
of gastric dilatation or GDV,which are emergency
acute(<5 days)or chronic,mild or severe.
situationsrequiring rapiddiagnosis(viaclinical findings
andabdominalradiography)and interventiontorelieve
gastric distension and provide haemodynamic support.
Differential diagnosis
The diagnostic approach described below and out-
lined inFigure7.3shouldenable thecliniciantodetect
Figure7.2liststhe differential diagnosesforvomiting in
themajority of causes ofvomiting.The emphasis is on
dogs and cats.
efficientlyidentifyingconditionsthatrequire surgicalinter-
vention (e.g.GDVorseptic peritonitis) and ruling out non-
Gl causes of vomiting, before proceeding to more
Type
Causes
specialized orinvasivediagnosticproceduresaimed at
Gastric
Gastriis;ulcerationneoplasia;outfow
detecting primary gastric and intestinal disorders.
obstructionforeibdiesotittna
disorders
Rapid initial tests
Rapid initial tests(a minimum database)are recom-
Intestinal
Inflammatory bowel disease;neoplasia;foreign
mended for vomiting animals that are suspected of
bodies; intussusception;bacterial overgrowth/
being dehydrated.Theserapid tests are:
disorders
Microhaematocrit(packed cell volume,Pcv)
Intra-abdominal
Pancreas:ancratiiancreatils
Measurementof total solids(TS)
non-Gl tract
Liver:chlangpatiisbiliarybtrt,
Measurementof blood glucose
hepatitis,bile duct ruture
Measurementofbloodureaor creatinine
Genitourinaryyometra,nephriis,
Urinalysis (including urine specific gravity).
nephroliiasiurinbstrutinprta
Metabolic!
Uraemia:hypoadrenocorticism;diabetic
Plasma concentrations ofsodiumandpotassium
ketoacidosis:hyperthyroicism;hepatic
should also be determined where possible.These
endocrine
simple tests provide valuable information that helps to
determine cause(e.g.azotaemia and unconcentrated
sbna
Digoxin;erythromycin;chemotherapy;xylazine;
urine suggests renal disease;Nat:K+<27:1 suggests
apomorphine;intravenous medications
hypoadrenocorticism)andguide initial management,
Toxins a
Strychnine; ethylene glycol; lad
pending more definitive testing.An interpretation of the
Dietarya
Suenhagensonlral
results obtained from these rapid tests is given in
Figure7.4.
Neurological
Vestibulardisease;encephalisneoplasia;
raised intracranialpressure
Clinicopathological testing
Infectious
Distem, pvius iusani
Clinicopathologicaltesting is used to detect the causes
leptospirosisflinepanleucopeniafline
and consequencesofvomiting.Itisveryimportantthat
infectious peritonitis;Saimonella
blood and urine samples submittedfor analysis are
obtainedpriorto treatment.
7.2
commcn n younger dogs and cats.
Haematology:Ahaematologicalexaminationmay yield
abnormalities such as anaemia (regenerative, non-
regenerative),eythrocytemicrocytosis,macrocytosisor
Diagnosis
basophilicstippling,andleucocytosis,leucopenia,oi
nophiliaorthrombocytosisthathelptoidentifythecause
Acute vomiting and systemically well
of vomiting.For example,non-regenerativemicrocytic
If vomiting is acute and the animal is systemicallywell
anaemia is relatively common in dogs with bleeding
withnohistorical or physical‘red flags'，further diag-
gastric tumours,whereasparvovirus infection is often
nostictestingisusuallynotwarranted asvomitingoften
associatedwithaleucopenia and neutropenia.
74
Chapter7 Acute and chronic vomiting
Vomiting
Acute;patient systemicallyhealthy
Chronic; patient systemically unwell]
Check hydration status (PCV/TS)
Frequent/severe vomiting
Check for endoparasites
Chronic vamiting>5days
Start symptomatic therapy
Haematemesis
Obtain ownerobservations
Abdominalpain
Abdominal distension
Unresponsive
Frequent/severe diarrhoea
orincreased
History:Drugs,toxins,dietaryindiscretion,infectious disease?
Physical examination:Localizing findings?Surgical condition(e.g.GDV,intussusception)?
Rapidiniti sts:(T,gue,zstixa,uincific gravitydti)
Dehydration,electrolyteimbalance,evidence of renal dysfunction?
Clinicopathological tests:(CBC,biochemistryprofile,urinalysis,faecal examination)
Na*:K+27:1or lack of stress leucogram:ACTH stimulation test
·Haematemesis/melaena:coagulationtest
·Is infectious disease(e.g.parvovirus,FeLv,FlV) a factor?
spanreatitisaosbilty?Masureamyaselipasevl
Hyperthyroidism?Measuretotal T4levels
·Isintestinal disease likely?Measureserumcobalamin and folatelevels
Radiography andultrasonography:
Evidence of Gl or non-Gl disease?
。
Abdominocentestis?
·Ultrasound-guided biopsy?
Detect diseasesrequiring
Detect non-GI causesof
Pursue undefined causes
surgery:
vomiting:
of vomiting:
Gastric dilatation,valvulus
Dietary indiscretion
Endoscopy
Intestinal obstruction
Drug/toxin exposure
Contrast radiography/
Intussusception
Neurological disease
scintigraphy
Splenic torsion orrupture
Metabolic/endocrine
Tests of gastric secretory
Pneumoperitoneum
disorders
function
Septic peritonitis
Intra-abdominal non-Gl
Exploratory laparotormy
Pyometra
disease
Ruptured bladder orbileduct
Diagnostic approach to vomiting.ACTH=adrenocorticotropic hermone:CBC=complete blood count;
7.3
FeLV = feline lcukaemia virus: Fiv = feline immunodeficiency virus; GDV - gastric dilatation anc volvulus;
Gl = gastrointestinal; PCV= packed cellvolume; TLI = trypsin-like immuncreactivity;TS = total solids
Test
Results
Passible interpretation
Azostix
↑Urea(>10mmol)
Azotamia rnalcmmnwiGIdisae),rnal ptrealIbln
Glucostix
Hypoglycaemia:(<2.75mmoll)
Sepsis;severeliver disease:hypoadrenocorticism;hepatoma;insulinoma;insulin overdose
Hyperglycaemia:(>7.0mmol)
diabetes mellitus;stress (paricularly cats)
Urinalysis
Urine SG<1.030 in a
Kidneymust be suspected as a cause of,ora contributor to,the dehydration.lncreased PCVTS,
dehydrated dog or <1.035 in a
high urine SG and pre-renal azotaemia are common in dehydrated patients
dehydrated cat
PCV/TS
PCV
TS
T
↑
Dehydration(commonwithvomiting,diarhoa,gastrcenterits)
Nor↓
Splenic contraction, erythrocytosis;hypoproteinaemia dehydration
N
↑
Anaemiawithdehydration;hyperproteinaemic disorder
Anaemia with dehydration;anaemia withhyperproteinaemia
N
Non-whole blood-loss anaemia
N
Normal; acutehaemorhage;dehydration+anaemia+hypoproteinaemia
Interpretaicn of the rapid initial tests.Gl=gastrcintcstinal;N=normal;:PCV=packed cel volume;
SG = soecifio gravity;TS = total solids.
75
Chapter 7  Acute and chronic vomiting
Blochemistry profile: The serum biochemistry profile
Where radiography is inconclusive, ultrasonogra-
should be evaluated for elevations in creatinine, urea,
phy is employed to achieve a more accurate diagnosis.
calcium, potassium, glucose, liver enzymes, bilirubin,
Ultrasonography is especially useful for detecting and
cholesterol, triglycerides and globulin, and decreases
localizing thickenings of the intestinal tract, lymphad-
enopathy, abdominal masses, radiolucent foreign bod-
with non-Gl causes of vomiting. Panhypoproteinaemia
aui jo Aojuabouoa pue ezis au ui sabueyo pue 'se!
that is not related to blood loss suggests a protein-
pancreas, liver, kidneys or spleen. Ultrasonography
losing enteropathy.
also enables the detecticn of low-volume abdominal
Determination of acid-base status by measure-
 effusions and detailed investigation of the abdamen of
mentof total COzorvenous blood gas analysisenables
patlents with large volume effusions and lack of radio-
the presence of metabolic acidosis or alkalosis to be
graphic abdominal detail. Ultrasound-guided aspira-
 detected. This facilitates cptimal supportive care and
tion is employed for sampling peritoneal fluid or
may also help fo determine the cause of vomiting, e.g.
parenchymal abnormalities. Ultrasound-guided nee-
metabolic alkalosis accompanied by hypochloraemia,
dle biopsy is also useful for non-invasive sampling of
hypokalaemia and an acid urine (so called paradoxical
abdominal organs and parenchymal abnormalities.
upper Gl obstruction. Venous blood gases and plasma
Further investigation of Gl causes of
osmolality are often determined in animals suspected
vomiting
of ethylene glycol ingestion, with the findings of meta-
The above approach, employing a combination of
bolic acidosis and a high osmolal gap (calculated by
patient details, history, physical examination, clinico-
subtracting calculated from measured osmolality) sup-
pathological testing and diagnostic imaging, should
 portive of ingestion.
enable the accurate diagnosis of vomiting patients
requiring urgent surgery and those patients with non-
Urinafysis: Urine should be evaluated for specific
Gl causes of vamiting. The diagnosis of primary gastric
gravity. pH, glucose, casts, crystals and bacteria. The
 or intestinal inflammation, ulceration or neoplasia, de-
finding of white cell casts in the urine may be the
layed gastric emptying, and functional disorders of the
only laboratory evidence that pyelonephritis is the
 stomach and intestines requires further investigation.
cause of vomiting.
Endoscopy and surgery
Additionaf rests: Additional clinicopathological tests
Further investigations usually entail endoscopy or sur-
are required to detect hypoadrenocorticism (adreno-
gery to visualize and take biopsy samples from the
corticotropic hermcne stimulation), liver dysfunction
stomach and intestines. These procedures are dls-
(pre- and postprandial bile acids), hyperthyroidism in
cussed in detail elsewehere (see Chapters 4 and 5)
cats (T4), pancreatitis (amylase, lipase (pancreas-
specific where possible), trypsin-like immunoreactiv-
approach depends on the:
ity)and intestinal disease (serum cobalamin and tolate).
When vomiting is accompanied by haematemesis
 Results of clinicopathological testing and
or melaena, coagulation testing may be indicated to
diagnastic imaging
determine whether coumadin derivatives have been
 Most likely cause of the vomiting
ingested. Coagulation testing is also indicated in patients
Availability of endoscopic or surgical facilities.
with an acute abdomen (e.g. GDV or pancreatitis) to
detect disseminated intravascular coagulation and in
For example, a dog with chronic vomiting and
those patients with chronic vomiting and diarrhoea, or 
normal clinicopathological and imaging results has a
weight loss, to detect vitanin K malabsorption.
high likelihood of having inflammatory bowel disease,
infectious diseases associated with vamiting and
and therefore, would be a good candidate for endo-
diarrhoea require faecal examination (e.g. Giardia,
scopic visualization and biopsy of the stomach and
helminths, Saimonella, Campylobacter), an enzyme-
small intestine. When endoscopy is not available a
linked immunosorbent assay (e.g. parvovirus) or sero-
surgical biopsy could achieve the same result, but with
[ogical testing (e.g. feline leukaemia, feline immuno-
higher morbidity. When the patient is a vomiting cat
deficiency virus) for diagnosis (see Chapter 16).
an enlarged pancreas, then surgical biopsy is the most
Diagnostic imaging
efficient means of determining the nature of disease,
Diagnostic imaging provides information that comple-
e.g. cholangiohepatitis, pancreatitis and inflammatory
ments and extends clinicopathological testing.
The
bowel disease or Gl lymphoma.
primary diagnostic imaging modalities employed to
investigate vomiting are abdominal radiography and
Diagnostic imaging
abdominal ultrasonography (see Chapter 3). Radio-
 graphy is preferred forthe initialevaluation of cases with
obstructive, inflammatory and neoplastic diseases of
vomiting and acute abdomen (abdominal pain), as it 
 the Gl tract has meant that contrast radiographic pro-
provides information on gastric position and contents,
cedures are often restricted to the investigation of
size of the liver, kidneys and spleen, and may identify
delayed gastric emptying associated with defective
foreign bodies, Gl obstruction, intussusception, perito-
propulsion, and functional' intestinal disorders. How-
nitis and changes suggestive of pancreatitis.
ever, if endoscopy and ultrasonography are not
76
Chapter 7  Acute and chronic vomiting
available, contrast radiographic procedures'can pro-
to determine if acid hypersecretion is present.
vide useful information on gastric and intestinal pat-
Antisecretory therapy should be discontinued at least
bupiaad Asdoig leobans ym hooudow pue Aoue
48 hours priar to testing. Measurement of serum
a definitive diagnosls. Procedures used to evaluate
gastrin following the intravenous infusion of calcium
 delayed gastric emptying include barium contrast
Or secretin is used to investigate the possibility of
media (liquid or mixed with food), barium impregnated
exogenous gastrin production by pancreatictumours,
polyethylene spheres (BIPS), nuclear scintigraphy.
'gastrinomas' (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). Provoca-
and the 13C-octanoate breath test. These tests are
tive testing of gastric acid secretion with pentagastrin
probably best used to determine accurately the effi-
or bombesin may be performed to detect achlorhydria
cacy of prokinetic drugs in patients with delayed
in patients with atrophic gastritis, or an elevated
gastric emptying, although in practice improvement of
serum gastrin concentration (but where the gastric
clinical signs is the criterion usualiy employed to
pH>3), and in those patients with idiopathic small
evaluate therapeutic response.
intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
 Gastric secretory testing
Gastric secretory testing is often restricted to patients
Treatmeht
with oesophagitis, Gl ulceration or hypertrophy of the
pyloric outflow tract. In its simplest form it involves the
 For information on the treatment of acute and chronic
 measurement of fasting gastric pH and serum gastrin
vomiting see Chapter 19.
77
Acute diarrhoea
Michael S. Leib
Introduction
Osmotic diarrhoea occurs with many malabsorptive
disorders where nutrienis are not digested and ab-
Diarrhoea is defined as increased faecal fluidity.
sorbed normally, remain within the Gl lumer and osmoti-
usually accompanied by an increased defecation
cally attract water. Retention of nutrients can lead to
frequency and volume of faeces.
bacterial overgrowth and fermentation of carbohydrates,
which further increases the number of osmoticaly active
An abrupt onset of diarrhoea that often lasts <7
particles. Osmotic diarrhoea can also occur due to
days is a common problem in dogs and cats. Most
overeating, abrupt dietary changes and ingestlon of
cases are associated with mild clinical signs, are self-
spoiled foods containing poorly absorbed nutrients.
limiting, and require minimal diagnostic testing and
Excessive stimulation of crypt enterocytes results
therapy. However, diarrhoea may be unpleasant for
in secretion of large volumes of fluid that exceed the
the animal and inconvenient for the owner. The most
absorptive ability of the intestine. This occurs most
common causes of acute diarrhoea are dietary indis-
commonly with infectlous diseases, such as coli-
cretion and gasirointestinal (Gl) parasites. Life-threat-
bacillosis and salmonellosis, but metabolic products
ening causes of diarrhoea, such as parvovirus,
produced during bacterial overgrowth can also stimu-
intussusception and haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
late excessive intestinal secretion.
(HGE), do occur and these require more intensive
Increased mucosal permeabiity causes the loss of
diagnostic evaluation and patient care.
fluids, electrolytes, proteins and red blood cells into the
Because there are numerous causes of acute diar-
 intestinal lumen. Increased mucosal permeability com-
rhoea in dogs and cats a thorough and logical diagnos-
 monly accompanies erosive or ulcerative, inflamma-
tic plan must be folowed in order to obtain an accurate
tory and neoplastic processes, such as inflammatory
diagnosis and to administer appropriate therapy. This 
bowel disease, hookworm infection and alimentary
 chapter reviews the practical clinical approach to the
lymphosarcoma.
problem of acute diarrhoea in dogs and cats.
Abnormal motility is often a secondary problem in
disorders that cause diarrhoea. Decreased segmental
contractions result in transport of ingesta at a rate too
Pathophysiology
rapid for efficient digestion and absorption. Metabolic
products produced during bacterial overgrowth can
 There are four major mechanisms that can result in
aiso cause abnormal motility. Abnorma! motility occurs
diarrhoea:
in cases with inflammatory diseases, feline hyperthy-
roidlsm and following abdominal surgery.
Qsmosis
Mild diarrhoea resulits in few metabolic conse-
Hypersecretion
 quences. However, moderate or profuse diarrhoea
Increased mucosal permeability
may lead to profound dehydration, hypovolaemic shock,
Abnormal intestinal motility.
electrolyte and acid-base disturbances. Hypokalae-
mia, hypochloraemla and hyponatraemia can develop.
 In most diarrhoeal diseases of dogs and cais mul-
Metabolicacidosis develops secondaryto lossof intes-
tiple mechanisms contribute to diarrhoea. Because of
 tinai bicarbonate and dehydration teading to hypovol-
the large daily physiological secretion from the salivary
aemia, anaerobic metabolism and production of lactic
 glands, stomach, small and large intestines, pancreas 
acid. Death associated with many severe diarrhoeal
and liver, a large amount of fluid can be lost in the
disorders is not dueto the primary cause but secondary
faeces when the small and/or large intestine do/does
to fluid imbalance.
not function normally. Fluid loss is increased further
when intestinal hypersecretion or increased mucosal
permeability occurs. Osmotic causes and increased
Clinical features
mucosal permeability are the most common mecha-
 nisms that occur in small animals with diarrhoea.
History
The number of osmotically active solutes retained
The animal's clinical details and history may contain the
within the bowel lumen determines faecal water content.
 information necessary to make a tentative diagnosis
78
Chapter8Acutediarrhoea
orhelprank the differential diagnosis.Young puppies
Clinical sign
and kittens,especially fromrescue centres and pet
Disease
stores, are prone to viral diseases, Gl parasites
Pyrexia
Parvoviruses
and Campylobacter jejuni. The history may detect
Acute pancreatitis
dietaryindiscretion,potentialexposure toforeignma-
Infectious caninehepatitis
terials,chemicalsplants or toxins,administration f
Canine distemper
drugs (especially antibiotics), an incomplete vaccina-
Leptospirosis
tionoraninadequatewormingprogramme,orrecent
Liver diseases
exposure to other animals with diarrhoea. Dietary
Icterus
Leptospirosis
indiscretioncanencompassasuddendietchange,
Acute pancreatitis
ingestionofa lowqualitydiet,tablescrapsandtreats
Liver diseases
or free-roaming behaviour with thepotential for gar-
bage consumption.
Ascites
Liver diseases
Infectious canine hepatitis
Clinical signs
Feline infectious peritonitis
Acute diarrhoeaoftenoriginatesfrom small intestinal
Lymphadenopathy
Infectious canine hepatitis
diseaseor frommixed small and largebowel disease
Salmon poisoning
(see Chapter 1）. On occasion,signs of large bowel
Oliguria/anuria
Acute renal failure
disease only may be present.Signs of small bowel
diarrhoea includemelaena,normal to moderate in-
Leptospirosis
creasedfrequencyof defecation andproductionofa
Ocular and nasal discharge
Canine distemper
large volume of faeces per defecation.Signs of large
Cough
Canine distemper
bowel diarrhoea includehaematochezia,tenesmus,
Infectious canine hepatitis
excess faecal mucus,moderate togreatly increased
frequencyof defecationandareducedvolumeof
Clinical signs associaledwith systemic
faeces per defecation. In many cases vomiting. de-
8.1
diseases that causc acute diarrhoea.
pression,decreased appetite and abdominal discom-
fort may bepresent.
Physical examinationmay detect gas and/or fluid
distendedbowel segments and abdominalpain.In
Self-limiting
somecasesanabdominalmassordilated loopaf bowel
Dietary indiscretion
Diet change arbage, table scra;
maybeidentified,suggesting thepossibilityofaforen
foreign material; chemicals and
body orintussusception.Dehydrationmaybeindicated
toxins;plants
by dry mucousmembranes,a loss of skin turgor,pro-
longed capillary refilltime, enophthalmos or cold ex-
Parasites
Hookworms; roundworms; Giardia,
tremities.Assessment of thedegree ofdehydration is
ccccidia;whipworms
imprecise and shouldbe usedonly asan estimate.An
Coronavirus
animalmustbe atleast5%dehydratedbefore it canbe
clinically detected by mild changes in the physical char-
Drugs
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs; digoxin; antibiotics:
acteristicspreviously listed.Morepronounced altera-
corticosteroids;magnesium antacids;
tionsintheseparametersindicatemoderatedehydration
cancer chemotherapeutics
(7-9%),whileextreme alterationsindicate severe dehy-
dration (10-12%) approaching hypovolaemic shock
Clostridium perfringens
(tachycardia and weakperipheral pulses).
Idiopathic
Otherclinical signsmayberelated toasystemic
cause of diarrhoea and include pyrexia, icterus,
Life-threatening
ascites,lymphadenopathy,oliguria/anuria,hepato-
Severe dietary indiscretion
megaly,ocular and nasal discharge and coughing
(Figure 8.1).
Severe parasitism
Hookworms;whipworms
Intestinal obstruction
Foreign body;intussusception
Differential diagnosis
Parvoviruses
Haemorhagic gastroenteritis
Figure8.2lists the differential diagnoses for acute
diarrhoea in dogs and cats.
Systemic diseases
Acute pancreatisacute liver
diseases(infectious canine hepatitis;
acute renal failure(leptospirosis);
canine distemper,salmon poisoning
Diagnosis
Bacteria
Saimonella; Campylobacter,
The most important initial step in evaluating animals
Clostridium perfringens
with acutediarrhoeaistoclassifythemashavingaself-
limiting or potentially life-threatening problem(Figure
8.2
Differcntial diagnoses for acute diarrnoea.
8.3).This distinction is crucial as it guides thelevel of
79
Chapter 8 Acute diarrhoea
the diarrhoea or contribute toits severity.Faecal cyto-
Acutediarrhoea
logy may show increased numbers of neutrophils,
‘seagull shaped bacteria (Campylobacter),or'safety
pin' shaped spores(Clostridium perfringens) suggest-
Self-limiting
Life-threatening
ing a faecal sample should be submitted for bacterial
culture orenterotoxin analysis.
Faecal flotation
Faecal flotation
Abnormalities detected on the laboratory evalua-
Faecal cytology
Faecal cytology
tion should help to rank the differential diagnosis (Fig-
Faecal culture
CBC
ure8.4).In addition,laboratory testswillhelpassess
TP
Biochemistry profile
PCV
Urinalysis
FaecalparvovirusELISA
Laboratory abnormality
Disease
8.3
Diagnostic approach to acute diarrhoea.
Decreased total protein
Hookworms
CBC = complete blood count; ELISA = enzyme-
Whipworms
linked immuncsorbent assay;PCV=packed cell volume;
Canine parvovirus
TP = total protein.
Haemorhagic gastroentertis(late)
Salmonella
diagnostictesting and therapyneeded andshouldbe
Anaemia
Canine parvovirus
basedona thoroughhistory,carefulphysicalexamina-
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (late)
tion,clinical experience and judgement anda sound
Elevatedhaematocrit
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
understandingofthedifferentialdiagnosisofacute
diarrhoea (see Figure 8.2).Animals should be consid-
Neutrophilia
Acutepancreatitis
ered to have a potentially life-threatening problem if
Liver diseases
Infectious canine hepatitis (late)
someof the following arepresent:moderateto severe
Salmonella(late)
dehydration;abdominal pain;depression;melaena or
Leptospirosis(late)
haematochezia;palpableabdominal massor dilated
Campylobacter
loop of bowel;frequent vomiting:or signs of systemic
Salmon poisoning
diseases(see Figure 8.1).lf the distinction is not clear
Neutropenia
Canine pavovirus
itisbettertobecautious andinitiallyassume theanimal
Feline parvovirus
has a life-threateningproblem.
Leptospirosis
Infectious canine hepatitis
Self-limiting diarrhoea
Saimonella
A minimum database for self-limiting diarrhoea
Salmon poisoning
includesmultiple faecal examinations(with zincsul-
Lymphopenia
Canineparvovirus
Feline parvovirus
phate;see Chapter2),faecal culture,faecal cytology，
Canine distemper
andmeasurementof totalprotein andhaematocrit,
Infectious canine hepatiis
whichwill helpassesshydrationandprovidebaseline
Salmonella
values that can be used for comparison if clinical signs
Eosinophilia
Gastrointestinal parasites
persist or progress. lf dietary indiscretion is present,
Hypoglycaemia
Canine parvovirus
removalof theincriminatingfactorsand/orfeedinga
highlydigestibledietthatislowinfibreandmoderately
Salmonella
lowinfatfor3-5daysoftenresolvesthediarrhoea.lf
Increased alanine
Acute pancreatitis
Glparasitesaredetected,diarrhoeashould improve
aminotransferase and alkaline
Liver diseases
after appropriate anthelmintic treatment in 2-3 days.
phosphatase
Infecticus canine hepatitis
Leptospirosis
Faecalcytologymayidentifymany'safetypin'shaped
Hyperbilirubinaemia
Acute pancreatitis
Liver diseases
Clostridiumperfringensenterotoxicosis(see Chapter
Leptospirosis
16).Ifpresent,a faecal samplecan be submitted for
Increased urea,creatinineand
Acute renal failure
enterotoxinidentification.lfanaetiologyisnotdetected,
phosphorus
Leptospirosis
a diagnosis of acute idiopathic self-limiting diarrhoea
Hypocalcaemia
Acute pancreatitis
maybemade.Symptomatictherapyisoftenfollowed by
resolutionof clinical signswithin1-3days.lf diarrhoea
Increased amylase,lipase,
Acute pancreatitis
persistswrsens,rifadditionalinicasignsdev
trypsin-like immunoreactivity
a life-threatening problemmay exist requiring more
andpancreatic lipase
thorough diagnostic evaluation and intensive therapy.
immunoreactivity
Increased prothrombin and
Infectious canine hepatitis
Life-threatening diarrhoea
partial thromboplastin tirmes
Liver diseases
Felineparvovirus
A diagnosticplan for life-threatening cases includes
multiplefaecalexaminationsfaecalcytology,complete
Proteinuria
Acute renal failure
blood count,biochemistryprofile,urinalysis,abdominal
Infectious canine hepatitis
Leptospirosis
radiographyandafaecalenzyme-linkedimmunosorbent
assay(ELISA)forparvovirus in puppies.Faecal exami-
Laboratory abnormalities associatedwithcause
nationmayidentifyparasitesthatcould be thecauseof
8.4
of life-threatening diarrhoca.
80
Chapter 8  Acute diarrhoea
the severity of dehydration and electrolyte abniormali-
kittens with parvovlrus and dogs with HGE will survive
ag o Adeeyn pml loy ueld jeuoei e mole pue sa
with aggressive care. Survivai of pafients with small
developed. Survey abdominal radiographs may dem-
bowel obstruction due to foreign body ingestion or
onstrale an abdominal mass, dilated loop of bowel,
 intussusception is dependent upon the severity of intes-
intussusception or foreign body obstruction, which
tinal damage, the presence of peritonitis, the severity of
require surgical therapy. ln some cases, additional
secondary metabolic consequences and the timing of
diagnostic tests may be indicated to definitively diag-
 corrective surgery. Bacterial causes are usually associ-
ated with a good prognosis while systemic causes of
diseases, serum titre for leptospirosis) or pursue diag-
acute life-threatening diarrhoea are usually associated
 nosis if a cause for the diarrhoea is not yet evident (e.g.
with a poor prognosis.
 upper Gl barium series, abdominal ultrasonography,
faecal culture).
References and further reading
Hansen Band DeFranccscoT(2002)Relationshipbetweenhydratlon
Treatment and prognosis
eslmate and body weighf change after iluid therapy in critically
ill dogs and cats. Journal of Vaterinary Emergency and Criticai
Care 12,235-243
The treatment for diarrhoea is dependent on the under-
Jergens A(1995) Acute diarrhea In:Kirk's Curent Veterinary Therapy
lying cause; and further information can be found in
Xil, ed. JO Bonagura. Pp. 701-705. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Chapters 16, 20 and 28.
Leib MS and Matz ME(1997)Diseases of ihe intestines.In:Praclical
SmalAnimal internaiMedicine,ed.MS LeibandWEMonroe,pp.
The prognosis for cases of self-limiting diarrhoea is
685-760, WB Saunders. Philadelphia
 excellent. However, the prognosis for those with life-
 Moon H (1978) Mechanisms in the pathogenesis of diarrhea: a
threatening disorders is variable and depends on the
review.Joumai of theAmericanVeterinary MedicatAssociation
172, 443-448
underlying cause, the seventy of fluid and metabolic
 derangement, and the response to initial therapy. Ani-
In dogs. In: Curent Veterinary Therapy Xl, ed. JO Bonagura and
RW Kirk, pPp. 602-604. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
 mals with heavy parasitism and severe dietary indiscre
Whipp SC (1978) Physiology of diarrhea. journaf of the American
tion shouid improve with dligentcare. Most puppies and
Vatsrinary Medical Assoclalion 173, 662-666
81
Chronic diarrh
hoea
Albert E. Jergens
Introduction
Clinical features
Diarrhoeaisthemostcommonclinicalmanifestationof
History
intestinal disease.
The investigationof chronicdiarrhoea shouldalways
startwithhistory-takingandaphysicalexamination
Diarrhoeaisdefinedasincreased frequency,fluidity
(seeChapter 1).Thiswillensure that systemic causes
ofchronicdiarrhoeaarenotmissedand,whereprimary
orvolumeofbowel movements,and ismostoften
diseaseispresent,indicatewhethersmall orlarge
characterized by duration(acute versus chronic)or
intestinal disease exists
aetiology (Figure 9.1).
The history provides important clues fordetermining
thepotential cause(s)of chranic diarrhoea.Key ques-
tionsthatshouldbe addressed include thefollowing:
Osmotic diarrhoea
Abnormal mucosal
permeability
What is theclinical ccurseof the diarrhoea;isit
static, cyclical or progressive?
Whatarethefaecal characteristics;can the
diarrhoeabelocalizedtothesmallor largebowel
Diarrhoea
(Figure 9.2)?
Isthere anassociationwithdiet,suchasrecent
dietary change,a history of dietaryindiscretion or
Abnormal waterand
Deranged motility
possible adversereactions to food?
electrolyte transportation
Is thepatient on anymedications that might
A simplificdconcept of thepathophysiologyof
cause diarrhoeicepisodes?
9.1
diarrhoea.Osmotic causes and altered
Has the animal responded toprevious drug
intestinal permeabilityaremcst clinicallyprevalent incogs
therapies?
and cats
In simple terms,diarrhoearesultsfrom diseases
Symptom
Small bowel
Large bowel
affecting the small intestine, large intestine or the
distal large bowel andrectum.It isnoteworthy that
Dyschezia
Absent
Maybepresent
Faecal frequency
Less than3
More than6
signs of intestinal disease.Animals may present with
(motions per day)
alterations in appetite,ranging frompolyphagia to
Faecal mucus
Rare
Often present
completeanorexia.Weightlossisoftenassociated
withnutrientmalabsorptionasaconsequenceof
Faecalvolume
Increased
Decreased
diffuse mucosal disease.Vomiting occurs with a
Flatus/borborygmi
Present
Absent
variety of upper gastrointestinal (Gl) disorders and
Freshblood
Uncommon
isespeciallyprevalent inanimalswithinflammatory
Common
bowel disease (IBD).Colorectal diseases are often
Melaena
May be present
Rare
associated with tenesmus, dyschezia and large
bowel diarrhoea characterized by the presence of
Steatorrhoea
May be present
Absent
freshblood and mucus on stools.Chronicdiarrhoea
Tenesmus
Absent
Often present
is particularly challenging to the clinician,since
Urgency
Usually none
Often present
most animals will not respond to empirical therapies,
necessitating a well formulated,cost-effective
Vomiting
May be present
May be present
diagnostic plan. Specific treatment is necessary
Weight loss
Common
Rare
and ismostoftenbasedonadefinitivediagnosisor
histopathological characterization subsequent to in-
Differentiation of small versus large bowel
testinal biopsy.
9.2
diarrhoea by clinical signs
82
Chapter 9 Chronic diarrhoea
Is thediarrhoea associatedwithotherGlsigns
Abdominal palpationisperformed forthe detection
such as weight loss,vomiting or anorexia?
of mass lesions(neoplasia,intussusception orforeign
Is there evidencesuggestingasystemiccause
body),thickened small intestinal bowel loops(infiltra-
for the animal's diarrhoea,such as
tivemucosaldisease).pain（bowelinflammation,bowel
hypoadrenocorticism,renal dysfunctionor
distensioncaused bygasorfluid,orischaemia)and/or
hepatobiliarydisease?
mesenteric lymphadenopathy seen with benign or
neoplastic infiltrative mucosal disease.Digital palpa-
Localizing the site of the intestinal dysfunctionto
tionoftherectum isuseful forthedetectionofrectal
eitherthesmallorlargeintestineexpeditesadiagno-
masses,retroperitonealobstruction,and thecollection
sis, since the diagnostic investigation of small and
of faeces forbacterial culture and microscopicexami-
largeboweldiarrhoea aresuitablydifferent.Several
nationforparasites andprotozoans.Exfoliativerectal
diffuse diseases (e.g.IBD,histoplasmosis,lympho-
sarcoma) of the Gltract may produce concurrent small
spores(clostridial infection)or Histoplasmaorganisms
and large bowel signs,and occasionally gastric signs,
suggestiveofa bacterial-mediated diarrhoea;ormay
such as vomiting:may also be present.
showan increase in thenumberof faecaf leucocytes
(neutrophils) or immune cells suggestive of an im-
Physical examination
mune-mediateddiarrhoea.
A thorough physicalexaminationmay reveal important
infomationconcerningtheoriginandseverityofchronic
diarrhoea.Special attention shouldbeplaced on the
Diagnosis
presenceof:
The common causes of chronic diarrhoea and the
Emaciation/malnutrition (suggestive of chronic
malabsorptionoraprotein-losingenteropathy,PLE)
evaluationofsuchpatients areshowninFigure
A dull unthrifty general appearance(indicative of
9.3.Strategies for determining the cause of chronic
nutrient malassimilation)
diarrhoea beginwitha clinical examination and base-
Fever (seen with infectious diseases)
linelaboratorytests,theresultsofwhichmayindicate
Oedema and effusions(secondary to PLE)
that imaging, specialized Gl function tests and/or
Mucousmembranepallor(asaconsequence of
endoscopic examination with mucosal biopsy are
Gl blood loss).
required.
Chronic diarrhoea
Baseline laboratory tests
Small oweldiarrhoea
Systemic disease
(a)
See Figure 9.3(b)
Treat
SeeFigure 9.3(c)
Small bowel diarrhoea
TLI oositive foEPI
SerumTLl,cobalaminand folal
TLI negative forEPI
Treat vitamin deficlency if
Continue investigalion even
oresent
ifresults are normal
Parasitism
Bacterial
1BD
Bacterial
Food
Intestinal
neoplasia
Histaplasmosis
FeLV and FIV
infection
overgrowth
allergy
Faccal smeer
Exclusion
Exfoliative
diagnosis
Imaging
FeLVELISA
therapy
s
Biopsy
Biopsy
Asdo
FIVELISA
(b)
Diagnostic approach to chronic smalland large bowel diarrhoez. ELiSA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent
9.3
assay;EPI = exocrine pancreatic insufficiency:FeLV = fcline leukaemia virus;FIV = feline immunodeficiency
virus;IBD=infiammatcry bowe disease;TLl = trypsin-like immunoreactivity.(continues)
83
Chapter9Chronicdiarrhoea
Large bowel diarhoea
Considersrucobaleminndfoltetevalate
concurent small bowelinvolvementmay cmit if
large bowel disease)
Bacterial
Parasitism
IBD
rriablebowel
Large bowel
Colonic
infection
syndrome
neoplasia
Faecalsmear
orflotaticn
Rectal
Rule out other
Radiograpny
Exfoliative
Anthelminlic
Mucosel biopsy
examination
causes
(c)
therapy
Faecal culfuro
Cytalogy
High tibre diet
MucosalbiopsyMucosal bicpsy
(ccntinued)Diagncstic approach to chronic smalland large bowel diarrhoea.ELiSA= enzyme-linked
9.3
immunosorbent assay;EPl=exocrinepancreatic insuficiency:FeLV=feline leukemia virus;FIV=feline
immunodeficiencyvirus,IBD= inflammatory bowel disease;TLI=trypsin-likc immunoreactivity.
Baselinelaboratorytests
Diagnostic imaging
Baseline laboratory tests should beperformed to deter-
mine whether primary Gl or metabolic/systemic disor-
Surveyabdominalradiography
ders are causing the diarrhoea.Inmost instances this
Survey abdominal radiographs are useful for the de
willinvolveacompletebloodcount (CBC),biochemistry
tectionofintestinalmasslesionsorabnormalfluid-gas
profile,urinalysis,andfaecalexaminationsforparasites
patterns suggestive of mechanical obstruction (foreign
and infectiousagents.Baselinetesting mayaisoinclude
body orintussusception).They may also demonstrate
specializedassaysfor common disordersknown to
gross alterationsin the size,shape orlocation of the
have chronic diarrhoea as a salient sign (e.g. serum
liverandkidney,aswellasdetectabdominaleffusion,
thyroxinelevel inoldercatswithdiarrhoea andweight
abdominal masses and evidence ofpancreatitis.
loss,for exclusion ofhyperthyroidism).Potential key
findings and their cause are summarized inFigure 9.4.
Upper Gl tract contrastradiography
Upper Gl tract contrastradiographyis indicated forthe
evaluation of mucosal abnormalities (irregularity, flling
Key finding
Causes
defects,mural distortion) and the presence of partial
Eosinophilia
Parasitism, eosinophiic enteritis;
and/or completemechanical obstructions.In many in-
hypoadrenocorticism
stances,however,the cause of chronic diarrhoea in-
Neutrophilia
Infiltrativemucosal disease±ulcers or
volves microscopicorfunctional changes in theintestine
erosions
that cannot be critically evaluatedbycontrastradiogra-
Lymphopenia
Intestinal lymphangectasia
phy.Disturbances in Gl motilityare difficult todocument
Anaemia
using eitherliquidbariumcrbariummixedwithfood.
Chronic inf ammation; Gl blood loss;
mainutrition
Abdominalultrasonography
Panhypoproteinaemia
Protein-losing enteropathy
Apothecia
Dehydration; primary renal failure
tarytoradiographyandcandetectabdominalmasses,
mural thickeningsordisorganization and mesenteric
Hyperkalaemia/
Hypoadrenccorticism
hyponatraemia
Iymphadenopathy.Ultrasound-guided percutaneous
aspirationof masses,mural thickenings and enlarged
Hypokalaemia
Glfluid and electrolyte loss; anorexia
lymph nodes is a safe andeffective toolfor the diagno-
Elevated liver
Hepatobiliary disease
sis of Gl neoplasia and IBD(see Chapter3).
enzymes/bile acids
Increased urea/
Dehydration; primary renal failre
Specialized Gl function tests
creatinine
Elevated serum
Feline hyperthyroidism
Exocrine pancreatic function
thyroxine
Exocrinepancreaticinsufficiency(EPl)isareadilytreat-
Positive serology
ConfirmsFLV,FIV,FIP
abledisorder thatshouldberuledoutearly in the
diagnosticinvestigationofpatientswith small bowel
Faecal flotation/smear
Nematode orprotozoanparasites
diarrhoea.EPishouldbeconsideredespeciallyinyoung
Rectal cytology
Spores and'or WBCs with enteropathogenic
GermanShepherdDogs(secondary topancreaticaci-
bacteria;Histoplasmaorganisms;immune
naratrophy)but it maybe diagnosed in othercanine
cells(as seen with IBD)
breeds andincats.The bestmethod fordiagnosis of EPI
Results of diagnosticprocedures and their
isaspecies-specificassay of trypsin-like immunoreac-
9.4
possible aetiology.FeLV=feline leukaemia
tivity (TLl).Assays of faecal proteolytic activity with
virus.FIP= feline infectious peritonitis;FIV= feline
azocaseinhydrolysisare sensitivebutaretoocumber-
immunodeficiency virus;Gl =gastrointestinal;IBD=
some and impractical to recommend in a clinical seting.
inflammatory bowe cisease;WBC=whiteblocd cell.
Microscopicexamination of Sudan-and iodine-stained
84
Chapter 9  Chronic diarrhoea
faecal smears for excessive fat and undigested starch,
infiltrative mucosal disease (e.g. severe IBD, alimen-
respectively, is notoriously unreliable and is actively
tary lymphoma or Gl histoplasmosis), which can in-
discouraged (see Chapter 23).
crease intestinal permeability and result in protein
leakage. The measurement of o-proteinase inhibitor
Serum folate and cobalamin
in the faeces is a sensitive indicator of intestinal prctein
Serum concentrations of folate and cobalamin (vitamin
loss in dogs (see Chapter 2). This assay is a useful
 B12) reflect intestinal absonptive function and help local-
diagnostlc tool to detect enteric protein loss in humans,
 ize the site of dysfunction. Serum folate reflects absorp-
but is not widely used in veterinary clinical medicine
tive function of the proximal small bowel (i.e. jejunum)
because of its limited availability. For this reason as-
while serum cobalamin depends on absorption in the
distal small intestine (i.e. ileum). Therefore, low serum
measuring serum protein levels can assist in determin-
folate levels reflect impaired absorption in the proximal
ing intestinal protein loss.
small intestine and low serum concentrations of cobala-
 min are suggestive of enteropathies causing impaired
Endoscopic examination and intestinal
absorption in the distal small bowel. Diffuse mucosal
biopsy
disorders (lymphoma, IBD) may cause decreased
 Endoscopic examination with mucosal biopsy is re-
serum concentrations of both folate and cobalamin.
quired for definitive diagnosis and to provide prognos-
Reduction in the serum concentration of elther vitamin
tic information for patients with chronic diarrhoea once 
may refiect a deficiency state, and consideration should
 dietary, parasitic, infectious and systemic/metabolic 
causes have been excluded. When performing upper
management.Alterations inserum folate and/orcobala-
Gl endoscopy or colonoscopy, multiple (at least 10)
min concentrations are less reliable indicators of small
mucosal biopsy specimens should always be pro-
intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) or antibiotic-
cured, regardless of mucosal appearance. Further-
responsive diarrhoea (ARD) (see Chapter 20).
more, it is imperative that biopsy tissues be forwarded
to a pathology service skilled in the handling, process-
Intestinal permeability and mucosal functlon
 ing and diagnostic interpretation of such specimens
Changes in mucosal permeability and function as a
(see Chapter 5).
 consequence of diffuse small intestinal disease may
alter absorption of orally administered sugars (see
Upper Gl endoscopy
Chapter 2). Testing involves the administration of a
Upper Gl endoscopy (e.g. duodenoscopy) performed
combination of monosaccharides and disaccharides
with a flexible endoscope allows for: visual assess-
that are then recovered from the patient's urine. In
ment of the duodenum and/or proximal jejunum (in
diseases such as IBD, less surface area is available for
small dogs and all cats); targeted biopsy of the intesti-
monosaccharide permeation while disaccharide per-
nal mucosa for histopathological review; and sampling
meability is increased. Thus, with disease the urine
for exfoliative cytology. The normal duodenal appear-
concentration of monosaccharides is greater than that
ance varies from pale pink to yellow and has a slightly
of disaccharides. If mucosal function testing is abnor-
granular texture. Alterations in mucosal texture (in-
mal, intestinal biopsy is usually required to detemmine
creased granularity), increased friabiity and erosions
the cause for altered intestinal function.
are oftenl seen with infitrative mucosal diseases (see
Chapter 4).
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Colonoscopy
bacterial organisms may cause malabsorption and
 Colonoscopy with a flexible endascope is performed for
chronic diarrhoea. A variety of diverse structural (e.g.
visualization of the colonic lumen, targeted biopsy of the
stasis caused by mechanical obstruction) and functional
colonic mucosa and procurement of exfoliative cytologi-
(e.g. infiltrative disease causing hypomotility) lesions
cal samples. Occasionally, retrograde ileoscopy is per-
involving the small intestine can cause SIBO. EPl is a
formed in some dogs when proximal intestinal biopsy is
well recognized cause of SIBO in dogs. Although quan-
 inadequate and/or exarnination or biopsy of the ileal
titative culture of duodenal fluid has been regarded as
mucosa isneeded. The normal colonic mucosa appears
the gold standard for SIBO, controversy now exists over
 smooth, and pale pink and contains abundant submur-
what constitutes the normal canine and feline small
cosal blood vessels that are readily visualized in the
 intestinal microflora (see Chapter 20). Furthermore, the
 dog. Abnormal mucosal appearances caused by colitis
clinical utility of indirect biochemical marker tests (e.g.
includa increased granularity, increased friability.
serum folate, cobalamin and total unconjugated bile
erosions and masses (see Chapter 4).
acids) for SIBO has not been reliably proven.
Exploratory coeliotomy
Gl protein loss
Exploratory coeliotomy allows visual inspection, pal-
Gl protein loss is a normal daily occurrence. However,
pation and procurement.of muitiple biopsy samples
 the term PLE denotes a spectrum of chronic intestinal
from the abdominal organs. This diagnostic procedure
diseases that cause excessive loss of plasma proteins
is most useful in the retrieval of full-thickness intestinal
into the gut. PLE is most common in the dog and is
usually due to lymphangiectasia (e.g. loss of protein-
deliver a definitive diagnosls (e.g. differentiation of
rich lymph secondary to lymphatic hypertension) or
severe IBD from Gl lymphoma).
85
Chapter 9  Chronic diarrhoea
Guilford et al., pp. 50-76. WB Sauncders, Philadelphia
Treatment
JergensAE (1999)Inflammatory bowel dlse&se: currentperspectives.
For information on the treatment of chronic diarrhoea
Veterinary Cinics of North America: Small Animal Praclice 29,
501-521
see Chapter 28.
Sherding RG and Johnsan SE (2000) Diseases of the intestinos. In:
Saunders Manual of Smaf Animal Praclice, 2 edn, ed. SJ
Birchard and RG Sherding. pp.787-815. WB Saunders,
 References and further reading
Philadelphia
 Zoran D (1999) Pathophysiology and management of canine colonic
Guillord wG (1996) Approach toclinical problemsingastroenterglogy:
diseases.CompendiuronContinuing EducationforthePracticing
In:StrombecksSmalAnimaGasroenterologyadnedWG
Veterinarian 2t, 824-841
1
86
Malabsorption
David A.Williams
Introduction
the luminal surface of the intestinal mucosa.It is
therefore preferable to use the term malabsorption as
Diseases inwhich digestion of food and/or subse-
aglobal one to encompass allaspectsof impaired
quent net absorption of nutrients are defective are
digestion and absorption.
traditionallyclassifiedas eitherprimary failureto
Utilizingthisbroaddefinitionof malabsorption,itis
digest (maldigestion), or primary failure to absorb
useful to categorize diseasesbythesiteof theprimary
(malabsorption). This classification is misleading
abnormality aspremucosal (intraluminal),mucosal or
however,since the digestive and absorptive proc-
postmucosal(haemolymphatic)(Figure10.1).Associ-
esses areinextricably linked and failureof absorption
atedpathophysiological mechanismscan alsobecat-
is an inevitable consequence of defective digestion.
egorized as to whether premucosal,mucosal or
postmucosal phasesof absorption arecompromised
Forexample,mostpatientswithexocrinepancre-
(Figure 10.2). It is important to recognize,however,
aticinsufficiency(EPl)haveassociatedabnormalities
that additionalfactors(such as defective gastrointesti-
ofsmall intestinal function and most diseasesaffect-
nal(Gl) motilityorimmunologicalfunction)mayalsobe
ing the smallintestine (Sl)will inevitably impair the
involved,and that intraluminal,mucosal andhaemo-
terminal processes ofdigestion thattakeplace at
lymphatic abnormalities often coexist.
Locationof primary abnormality
Representative diseases
Premucosal defect (intraluminal defect)
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Smallintestinalbacterialovergrowth(antibiotic-responsivediarrhoea)
Mucosal defect
Inflammatory bowel diseases:
idiopathic
infectiuntropthi（prasit,fglaterilth)
dietary sensitivities
Villous atrophy
Neoplastic infiltration
Intestinalresection(shortbowel syndrome)
Brushborderenzymeorcarrerdeficienciescongenital)
Postmucosal defect(haemolymphatic defect)
Primary (congenital) intestinal lymphangiectasia
Secondary (acquired) intestinal lymphangiectasia
Vasculafailre（cardiacfailreoralyerenion
10.1
Classification of malabsorptive disorcers.
Phase of absorptive process
Pathophysiological mechanism
Examples of disease process
Premucosal (luminal)
Defective substrate hydrolysis:
enzyme deficiency
Exocrine pancreaticinsuficiency
enzyme inactivation
Gastric acid hypersecretion
rapid intestinal transit
Hyperthyroidism
Defective solubilizationof fat:
decreased bile salt secretion
Biliary obstruction
bile salt deconjugation
Bacterial overgrowth
bile salt loss
Resection or disease of terminalileum
impairedreleaseof pancreaticsecretagogue
Severe small intestinal disease
Intrinsicfactordeficiency
Exocrinepancreaticinsufficiency
Bacterial competition for cobalamin
Bacterial overgrowth
10.2
Pathophysiological mechanisms of malabsorption. (cortinues)
?
87
Chapter1oMalabsorption
Phase of absorptive process
Pathophysiological mechanism
Examples of disease process
Mucosal
Brush border enzyme deficiency:
congenital defects
Enteropeptidase; lactase (humans)
acquireddefectsecondarytodifuseenteropathies
Brush border transport deficiency:
selective defects
Inherited selective cobalaminmalabsorption
generalized defects
Inflammatorybovel diseases;villusatrophy
intestinalresection
Enterocyteprocessing defects
Abetalipoproteinaemia(humans)
Disruptionof lamina propria
Postmucosal (haemolymphatic)
Lymphatic cbstruction:
primary lymphangiectasia
secondary (acquired)lymphaticobstruction
Neoplasiainfiltativeinfectiousorinflammatorydisease
Vascularfailure
Intestinal ischaemia intestinal vasculitis;portal
hypertension
10.2
(continuec)Pathophysio ogical mechanisms of malabsorption.
Dependingonthemechanismsinplay,oneormany
Defects of premucosal function
nutrientsmaybe malabsorbedresulting inavarietyof
(intraluminalmalabsorption)
potentialclinicalconsequences(Figure10.3).Withlong
standingdiseasetheremaybeaspectrumofabnormali-
Exocrinepancreaticinsufficiency
ties,includingweightloss,diarrhoea,musclewasting,
coagulopathy,skinand haircoat changes,anaemiaand
Primaryexocrinepancreaticfailure
hypoproteinaemia.While documentedreportsof spe-
Progressive lossofpancreatic acinar cellsultimately
cificnutrient deficiencies arerare,bothvitaminKand
leadstomalabsorptionduetoinadequateproduction
cobalamindeficiencieshavebeenreported.
of digestive enzymes（Figure 10.4).Activity ofpancre-
atic lipasemay alsobe compromisedbygastric acid
hypersecretion and deficiency of bile acids(see be-
Nutrient
Potential clinical
Laboratory
low).The aetiology,pathophysiology,diagnosis and
signs
abnormalities
treatmentof theprimarycausesof EPlarediscussed
Fat
Diarrhoea; weight loss
Steatorrnoea
in detail in Chapter 23.
Protein
Weight loss;muscle
Hypoalbuminaemia
wasting;oedema
Weight loss:
Positivehydrogen breath
Factors
Causes
Carbchydrate
diahoea;flatulence;
test
Decreased synthesis
Pancreatic acinar atrcphy
borborygmi
(reduced functional
Chronic pancreatitis
Cobalamin
Anorexia:subnormal
Subnormal serum
acinar cell mass)
Pancreatic or extrapancreaticneoplasia
serum cobalamin;
cobalamin concentration;
Congenital enzyme deficiency
intestinal dystunction
methymalonic acidaemia
and aciduria
Decreased secreticn
Decreased secretagogue release with
(reduced pancreatic
severe entercpathies
Folate
Diarrhoea,anaemia
Subnomal serum folate
stimulation)
VitaminK
Coagulopathy
Prolonged prothrombin
Decreased zymogen
and/or activated partial
Enteropeptidase(enterokinase)deficiency
activation
(hypothetical in dogs and cats)
thromboplastin times
Decreased enzyme
Bile salt deficiency
VitaminA
Hyperkeratosis;night
cofactors
Co-lipase deficiency
blindness;impaired
immunological
Increased enzyme
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
function
degradation
Vitamin D
Ostecmalacia
Enzyme inactivation or
Gastric acid hypersecretion
VitaminE
Retinal degeneration;
Oxidant-induced
denaturation
myopathy;myelopathy
haemolytic anaemia
Calcium
Tetany(very rare)
Hypocalcaemia
10.4
Factcrs that may decrease pancreatic enzyme
Zinc
Anorexia: zinc
Subnomal serum zinc
activity in the lumen cf the small intestine.
responsivedermatosis
lron
Anaemia
Increased red cell width
Inactivationofpancreaticdigestiveenzymes
distribution:
When hypersecretion of gastric acid is extreme (spe-
hypochromasia;
cificallyinZollinger-Ellisonsyndrome,inwhich thereis
microcytosis
hypergastrinaemia due toa gastrin-secreting tumour,
Cinical and laboratory sequelae to nutrient
seeChapter 19) Sl intraluminalpH canbe sufficiently
10.3
malabsorption.
acidic to inactivateproteasesreversiblyand denature
88
Chapter 10 Malabsorption
pancreatic lipase irreversibly. This results in fat'rmalab-
Bile salt precipitation
sorption. Therapy to inhibit gastric acid secretion will
Some drugs, including neomycin, cause precipitation
normalize pancreatic digestive enzyme activity
of bile salts so that they are ineffective in micelle
formation. Glycine-conjugated bile acids also precipi-
tate out of solution when the pH falls below 5.0. In
Bile salt insufficiency
addition, faty acids are protonated when the pH is less
than 6.0 and have poor solubility in bile salt micelles, an
Deficient bile salt secretion
additional factor contributing to fat malabsorption in 
Nommal digestion and absorptian of dietary fat is
 gastric acid hypersecretory states.
dependent on adequate secretion of bile. Bile acids
participate in the emulsification of fat, in the activation
(with co-lipase) of pancreatic lipase, and in the forma-
Bile salt loss
When there is severe ileal disease or following ileal
tion of micelles that facilitate transfer of the products
of fat digestion to the intestinal mucosa. Absence of
resection, bile acid resorption fails and this results in
bile acid induced diarrhoea; bile acid binding drugs
bile salts does not completely block fat absorption;
other mechanisms facitate as much as approxi-
(such as colestyramine) may help diarrhoea resolve
in these circumstances. However, chronic bile acid
is more dramatic in the absence of pancreatic lipase.
malabsorption may eventually lead to progressive
Nonetheless, sufficient intra-hepatic and extra-he-
depletion of the circulating bile acid pool, an inade-
patic biliary obstruction due to any cause will cause
quate intraluminal concentration of bile acids, and
mild to moderate malabsorption of fat and fat-soluble
fat malabsorption. In these circumstances supple-
vitamins.
mentation with oral bile acids will ameliorate steator-
Complete obstruction of the biliary tract results not 
rhoea and diarrhoea.
also in pale (acholic) faeces because of the lack of bile
Bile salt binding
 pigments in the gut lumen. Faecal colour is due mainly
Cholestyramine is a drug that specifically binds
ta products of bile pigment metabolism. Only small 
bile salts and is used to inhibit bile salt induced
amounts of bile are needed to produce brown faeces
diarrhoea. However, it renders bile salts ineffective
and thus acholic faeces are only produced when the
in fat absorption and, when used in excess, results
bile ducl is totally obstructed (see Chapters 14 and 25).
in steatorrhoea.
While stool colour can provide clues as to the patency
of the biliary tree, it should be noted that faecal colour
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
also varies with diet, intestinal transit time and anti-
SIBO describes the absolute or relative proliferation
biotic therapy.
 of abnormal numbers of one or more species of
Reduced hepatic bile salt secretion may some-
 bacteria in the lumen of the·upper Sl. The abnormal
times occur with hepatocellular liver disease in the
microflora usually include species that are normal
absence of jaundice and can also lead to fat malab-
 inhabitants of that area, but may also include species
sorptian. However, abnormalities in fat absorption are
 not normally present in the upper Sl. The abnormal
usually subtle under these circumstances, more com-
monly manifesting as reduced absorptionof fat-soluble
eral mechanisms including:
vitamins (vitamins K and E) rather than overt steator-
rhoea. In general, patients with liver disease have
many other potentially severe problems (other than
 Direct injurious effects on brush border enzymes
those due to malabsorption) and these are discussed
and carrier proteins
in Chapters 24 and 25.
Secretion of enterotoxins
Deconjugation of bile acids
Hydroxylation of fatty acids
Bile salt deconjugation
Competition for nutrients.
Fat malabsorption may occur in patients with small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth (S)BO). Conjugated bile
acids exist as fully ionized, water-soluble bile salts at
Via a combination of primary intraluminai and
neutral pH. ln this form they participate in micelle
 secondary mucosal mechanisms, SIBO leads ta
formation and remain free in the lumen of the upper Sl,
malabsorption of fat, fat-soluble vitamins, carbohy-
since they are not absorbed across the intestinal mu-
drate and protein. Bacterial competition for some
 cosa unti they contact specific receptors in the ileum.
nutrients (especially cobalamin), decreased brush
Bacteria in the gut lumen, particularly cbligate anaero-
bic bacteria, can deconjugate bile acids to form
teins are probably of major importance in the failure 
protonated (non-ionized, lipid-soluble) free bile acids
of these absorptive processes. Protein-losing enter-
that are readily absorbed by passive means along the
opathy associated with SIBO also contributes to pro-
entire length of the Sl, rendering them relatively inef-
 gressive protein depletion, muscle wasting and
fective or unavailable to participate in micelle forma-
possibly eventual hypoproteinaemia. The pathophysio-
tion. Antibiotic therapy in SIBO will normalize bile salt
logy, diagnosis and treatment of SlBO and antibiotic-
activity. Diagnosis of SIBO is difficult and is discussed 
responsive diarrhoea are discussed extensively in
below and in Chapter 20.
Chapter 20.
89
Chapter 10  Malabsorption
Defects of mucosal function
and parasilic intestinal diseases (see Chapter 16), small
(mucosal malabsorption)
intestinal disease (see Chapter 20) and exocrine pan-
creatic insufficiency (see Chapter 23).
It is important to remember that mucosal disease of the
Sl results in falure of digestion as well as defective
absorption. The mechanisms are multifactorial, but prob-
Defects of postmucosal function
ably most commanly involve reduced synthesis or in-
(postmucosal malabsorption)
and peptidases that normally complete the digestive
Lymphatic obstruction
process, Normal digestion and absorption may also be
Obstruction of the lymphatic system, either as a pri-
compromised by reduced brush border enzymes due to
mary defect ar secondary to pressure changes in the
a decreased villus or microvillus surface area.
vasculature into which the lymphatic vessels drain (as
The most common cause of chronic malabsorption
in heart failure), leads to impairad absorptian of
 In the dog and cat is idiopathic chronic inflammatory
chylomicrons (and hence steatorrhoea), lymphocytes
bowel dlisease. Ina small minority of cases underlying or
and extracellular fluid proteins present in lymph. In
associated dietary sensitivity, orSIBO can be identified.
 same cases, accelerated loss of these proteins can
Occasionally villus atrophy with a minimal inflammatory
overwhelm the limited capacity for compensatory in-
component is seen. Diffuse neoplastic infiltration may
creases in synthesis of albumin and other proteins, and
be seen with intestinal lymphosarcoma. In some geo-
panhypoproteinaemia ensues. Diagnosis and man-
 graphical areas a variety of fungal and other infectious
agement of these lymphatic disorders are discussed
enteropathies, such as histoplasmosis and phyco-
further in Chapter 20.
mycosis, may be encountered, while parasitic entero-
pathies, such as that caused by Giardia, are widely
Vascular diseases
recognized as common causes of malabsorption. Re-
 Chronic portal hypertension secondary to liver disease
section of large lengths of the Sl may lead to significant
(cirrhosis), intestinal vasculitls, thrombosisorneoplastic
nutrient malabsorption (short bowel syndrome).
infiltration may lead to nutrient malabsorption and
Cobalamin deficiency may exacerbate malabsorp-
  sl  d  s
tion because of impaired maturation of the enterocyte
also cause malabsorption. Diagnosis and manage-
during migration to the villus tip: Although specific
ment of these vascular disorders are discussed in
inherited cobalamin malabsorption (reported in the
 relation to protein-losing enteropathy in Chapter 20.
Giant Schnauzer, Beagle and Border Collle) is recog-
nized, acquired cobalamin deficiency (such as may
References and further reading
Laboratory findings andpotential clinical sequelae of
 mucosal malabsorption are summarized in Figure 10.3.
Williams DA (1996) Malabsorption, small intestinal bacterial
 Diagnosis and management of specific causes of mal-
overgrowth, and protein-losing enteropathy. In: Smaf Aninal
Gastroenterology, ed. DR Strombeck et al., pp. 367-380. WB
 absorption are described in the chapters on infectious
 Saunders, Philadelphia
90
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
Michael D. Willard
Gastrointestinal(Gl) haemorrhage maybe signalled
byhaematemesis,melaena,haematochezia,anae
miaorhypovolaemia.
Haematemesis
Haematemesis (vomiting of blood) can be difficult to
recognize.Whilefreshredbloodiseasilyidentifiedby
clients,digested blood is typicallyaparticulate,brown
materialresembling'coffeegrounds'thatisnotappre-
ciatedasblood(Figure11.1).Therefore,notexplaining
the appearance of digested blood is inviting the client
to give an inaccurate history.
11.2
Flecksof partially digested blocd canbe
detectedinvomitcuetodisruptionoimucosal
vesseis.This disruption was caused byrepeated
vigoraus vemit ng.
11.1
Typica appearance of digesled blood that has
beenvomited.Note thecoffee-grounds'-like
appcarance
Haematemesiscanbe dueto:
Lesionsin theoesophagus,stomachor
11.3
Vomited material that contains substantial
duodenum
amountsofredbioodaswellaspartially
Ingestion of blood from themouth,nose or lower
digested blood.Note black maerial in centre.
respiratorytract
Coagulopathy.
evidenceof anaemiaorhypovolaemiarequire atten-
tion(Figure 11.4)
Clinicalfeatures
Historyandphysicalexaminationarethefirststeps.
The first questioniswhetherhaematemesisisclinically
Thepossibility of ingestionofbload should besought
significant.Vomiting is a relativelyviolent act,and
in the history.Coagulopathiesareuncommoncauses
repeated vomiting often ruptures superficial gastric
but potentially catastrophic;the platelet count and
mucosalvessels,resultinginsmallreddishflecksinthe
coagulation times should always be checked.After
vomited material(Figure 11.2).Such haematemesis is
coagulopathy and ingestion ofblood are eliminated,
an effect ofvomiting and nota cause foralarm.Larger
gastroduodenal ulceration/erosion(GUE) is the main
amounts of fresh or digested blood (Figure 11.3)or
consideration.
91
Chapter 11 Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
Basic diagnostic
Haematemesis that ismore than just minor bleeding
11.4
apprcachlothe
secondary to vigorous vomiting or melaena
patiert with haematemesis
and melaena. ACI = aotivated
clotting timc(not evailable in
Shock
Coagulopathy(e.g.
Known causes in the
the UK);ACTH=adreno-
platelet count/estimate
historyandphysical
corticotropic hormone;
and eitherPT/aPTT
examination (NSAIDs,
aPTT=activated partial
Initiatetherapy
orACT)
shock,mast cell tumour,
thromboplastin time;
abdominal mass)
CBC=complete blood count;
NSAID=nor-slercidal anti-
ucausen
inflammatory drug:
Causeknown
orsuspected
PT=protnrombin time.
Remove cause and treat with Hreceptor
Abdominal imaging
antagonists and/or sucralfate± Iv fluids.
(radiography)
Rule out systemic disease:
ultrasonography)
Abdominal imaging
Thoracicradiography
Thoracicradiography
CBCandserum
CBCand serum biochemistry profile±
biochemistry profile±
ACTH stimulation test
ACTH stimulation test
Ifnc
Nocvidence of a
iwibrov7days
en
uyseicnarsion
Gastroduodenoscopy
(stop sucralfate therapy
24 hours prior to
procedure)
No lesion found;perform
bronchoscopy and
examine choanae
No lesion found;
considerabdominal
exploratory surgery
Differential diagnosis
If imaging is unrevealing.then gastroduodenoscopy is
Themost common causesof canine GuEarenon-
usuallythenextdiagnosticstep,beingthemostsensitive
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), shock,
test for GUE,foreignbodies and bleeding tumours.
gastritis,mastcell tumoursandulcerated Gltumours.
Oesophageal foreign bodies, hepatic failure. hypo-
Endoscopy
adrenocorticism,gastrinoma andgastric foreignbod-
Endoscopic examination reveals many gastric lesions
iesarealsopossible.NewerCOX-2NSAIDshaveless
missed duringlaparotomiesand even gastrotomies.
ulcerogenic potential than the older,non-selective
Sucralfate should notbeadministeredwithin24hoursof
NSAIDs,but can still cause GUE.Some steroids（e.g.
endoscopy asit may obscure lesions.The endoscopist
dexamethasone) clearly have ulcerogenic potential
must be skilled;ulcersjust within thepylorus or at the
whileothers(e.g.prednisolone)have much less poten-
cardia are oftenmissed bynovices.
tial.Concurrent administerion of steroidsand NSAIDs
Respiratory tract lesions (e.g. nasal or lung tu-
greatlyincreases theriskof GUE.Catsuncommonly
mours,lung lobe torsion) cancause blood tobe coughed
haveGUEassociatedwithlymphosarcomaorgastritis.
up,swallowedandthenvomited.lfgastroduodenoscopy
failstoreveal alesion thenbronchoscopy and exami-
Diagnosis
nation of the choanae is often a reasonable next step,
The veterinary surgeon should also examine the vomi-
even if there are no respiratory signs.
tus if possible. While using a urine dipstick on appar-
entlyvomitedmaterialmayhelpdeterminewhetheritis
Laparotomy
from vomiting or regurgitation (acidic pHindicating
Ifa laparotomyisperformed the entire alimentarytract
gastric content, the presence of bilirubin indicating
should be examined and palpated,even i there is an
duodenal juice),almost all such material will cause a
obviousgastriclesion.lf nolesions arefound,multiple
positivereactionforblood due to themeatproducts in
biopsy samplesfrom thestomach and intestines are
most diets.Thus,such a reaction isnot accurate for
warranted. Looking for blood in the lumen may help
determining if haematemesis is present.
localize the lesion.
Diagnostic imaging
Treatment
Abdominal ultrasonography is relatively specific but in-
If thepatient ishaemodynamically stable and there is
sensitive for detecting bleeding Gl lesions.Chest radio-
an obvious,potentially treatable cause of GUE e.g.
graphymayrevealoesophagealtumoursorforeignbodies.
NSAID administration,severe shock) it is usually
92
Chapter11Gastrointestinalhaemorrhage
reasonabletoperformminimaldiagnostics(e.g.haem-
11.5
Normal
atologyrumbiochemistryprofilcoagulatinss)
faeces
coveredwitn
and thenmanage thepatient medically.Medical treat-
black digested
mentofGUEconsistsof:
blood(melaena)
Note thcred
Giving a blood transfusion if necessary
colourasthe
Removing thecausewheneverpossible
aecal fluid
Symptomatic therapy with sucralfate and acid
diffusesout from
blockers(Hreceptor antagonists)toenhance
the faeces.
healing.
It is typically futile to treat GUE medically if the
causepersists.Gastricforeignbodiestypicallyprevent
GUEhealing,evenif theydidnot cause the ulceration.
Some clinical improvement is expected within 5-7
days of initiating symptomatic therapy.lf thereisno
rhage ispotentiallylife-threatening,then a more ag-
responsible.lf the haematocrit isrelativelynormaland
gressive approach is indicated. This may include
thereisno signof hypovolaemia,thenhaematochezia
diagnostics and/orsurgicalremovalof the ulcer.When
ulcers are removed surgically,presurgical (or intra-
problem(see Chapter 12).Digital rectalexamination
operative)endoscopyhelps ensure that all are found
mustbedonevenif itrequiresanaesthsia.f that
and removed.
provide a definitive diagnosis.Treatment will depend
on the underlying cause.
Melaena
Melaena (i.e.‘coal-black' stool resembling asphalt)
Anaemia and hypovolaemia
can be due to anything causing bleeding in the upper
GI tractand consequently it canbe difficult todeter-
Somepatients with Gl haemorrhage donothave
mine and resolve the cause.Many things cause stools
haematemesis,melaena orhaematochezia:they are
tobe‘dark,for example eating raw liver can mimic
justanaemicorhypovolaemic.Anaemia causedby Gl
melaena.However,'asphalt-black'stoolsare caused
haemorrhage isusuallyassociatedwithhypoalbumin-
bylarge amountsofdigestedblood oradministration of
aemia. Serum albumin concentrations should always
bismuth compounds.Because large amountsof blood
are required to produce melaena,it is absent inmany
normaltotalserumproteinconcentrationsdespite sub-
animals with substantial Gl bleeding. Ifit is uncertain
stantial blood loss.Microcytosis andhypochromasia
whethera darkstoolismelaenic,afreshsampleof the
(i.e.iron deficiency) are sometimes seen with chronic,
stool should beputonawhitepaper towel.lf the stool
not acute, blood loss. Checking blood smears and
ismelaenic,areddish tintwillbeseenasfluid diffuses
examiningtheredcelldistributionwidthare more
away from the faeces (Figure 11.5).The diagnostic
sensitive thanevaluating themeancorpuscularvol-
approachtomelaenaisthe same asforhaematemesis
ume(MCV)whenlooking formicrocytosis.Total serum
(see Figure 11.4).Treatment will depend on the under-
ironconcentrationandtotalironbindingcapacityare
lying cause.
potentiallydifficult to interpretwhen looking for iron
stores inabonemarrowaspirate isarelativelyeasy
Haematochezia
waytodetermine whetheraniron deficiencyispresent.
If there is apparent Gl blood loss without haemate-
Haematochezia is commonly seen with colitis.proct-
mesis,melaena or haematochezia,the approach is
itis,trichuriasis,rectalpolyps,tumours and anal sac
as for haematemesis (see Figure 11.4). Treatment will
disease.Intussusception or coagulopathy arerarely
depend on the underlying cause.
93
Dyschezia and tenesmus
Albert E. Jergens
Introduction
Clinical features
Dyschezia and tenesmus are clinical signsusually
History
associatedwithcolorectal diseases.
A history pertaining to both theurinary system and the
gastrointestinal(Gl) tract in patients with tenesmus
Dyscheziadescribes difficult orpainful
should always be obtained (see Chapter 1).Besides
defecation,whichismostcommonlyobserved
tenesmus,lower urinary tract disorders(especially
withrecto-anal disorders.
cystitis or urethritis)often result in haematuria and
Tenesmus isa clinical sign characterizing an
pollakiuria, which are readily apparent to most clients.
animal that is straining to defecate (common)
Normal urinary habits aremost suggestive of tenes-
or urinate (less common).
mus caused by colorectal disorders.Tenesmus pre-
cedingdefecationusuallyindicates an obstructive
Tenesmus is usuallydue tolarge bowel disease,
lesion,whereas irritative disorders are often associ-
in particular colitis (Figure 12.1). Straining is evident
atedwithpersistent tenesmusfollowingevacuation.
as ananimalremainspostured todefecatefor an
extended period or time,orrepeated attempts to
Physicalexamination
defecate are observed.Tenesmus isoften associ-
The physical examination provides important locali-
ated withother clinical signs of colonic disease
ing information as to the potential cause(s)of dys-
including large bowel diarrhoea (e.g.increased
chezia and tenesmus.
frequency of defecation, the production of scant
faecalvolumes),haematochezia(freshredbloodon
The perineal region is carefully examined for
the faeces)and/or excessive faecal mucus (see
perinealhernia,perianal fistula,abnormalities to
Chapter21).
the anal sacs (inflammation,rupture,tumour) and
perianal masses.
Abdominalpalpationmaysuggesta large turgid
Colonic disorders
bladder(indicative of urinary obstruction),a
faecalimpactedcolon(indicativeofconstipation)
Constipation
or prostatomegaly.
Colitis
Neoplasia
Rectal examination isperformed torule out
Motilityabnmaliessuchasiritablebowelsydrome(S)
colonic stricture（rare),intraluminal masses
(polyps or malignant tumours),abnormalities of
Perianal/perineal disorders
the anal sacs,prostate orurethra,and caudal
abdominal cavity disorders(mass,pelvic
Perineal hernia
fracture).
Perineal fistula
Anal sac abscess
The penis and vagina are also closely examined
Anal sac neoplasia
by the clinician forevidence of pain,massesor
calculi.
Urogenital disorders
Cystitis and urethritis
Urinary calculi
Diagnosis
Prostatmegalsuchashypepasiaelasiaandacessation
Urogenital neoplasia
Diagnosticprocedures arebasedon localizationof
tenesmus to abnormalities involving the genitourinary
Caudal abdominal disorders
orGl tract.Diagnostictests thatmayberequired torule
Abdominal cavity masses
out non-coloniccausesfor tenesmus include:
Pelvic fraclure
Urinalysis
Major causes of tenesmus and dyschezia
Culturesof urine orprostatic fluid
12.1
(MocifiedfromGuilforc,1996)
Surveyand/orcontrastradiography
94
Chapter12Dyscheziaand tenesmus
Abdominal ultrasonography
facilities.However,accurate interpretation of faecal
Urethroscopy
cultureresultsis confounded bytheisolationofpotential
Biopsy of thegenitourinary tract.
pathogens (Escherichia coli,Campylobacter,Salmon-
ella,Clostridium)inbothdiarrhoeicandhealthyanimals.
However, most patients with tenesmus will have
underlying disturbancesof the colon orrectumneces-
Diagnosticimaging
sitating Gl testing (Figure 12.2).
air-filled enemas and/orultrasonographyis some-
timesutilized foranimalswith colorectal causesfor
Procedure
Clinical use
tenesmus (see Chapter 3). These techniques help
History
Localizes site of tenesmus
to confirm colonicforeignbodies,faecal impaction,
intraluminal masses,ileocolic intussusception and
Physical examination
Localizes site of tenesmus
mesentericlymphadenopathyassociated with both
Perineal inspection
Recto-anal disease
benign(e.g.inflammatoryboweldisease)and malig-
Routine haematology
Eosinophilic colitis;endoparasitism
nant (e.g. lymphoma,adenocarcinoma) infiltrative
mucosal diseases.In animals suspected of having
Faecal flotation
Trichuriasis
genitourinary causes for tenesmus,surveyand con-
Faecal direct smear
Giardia:Entamoeba
trastradiography and ultrasonography are useful in
Bacterial colitis;histoplasmosis;IBD;
detecting prostatomegaly,urinary masses,urinary
Faecal rectal cytology
clostridial spores
obstruction and abdominal masses.
Faecal culture
Enteropathogenic bacteria
Colonoscopy
FeLV;FIV infection
Colonoscopy with mucosal biopsy is indicated in ani-
Serum antibody
antigen tests
mals with chronic colitis (see Chapter 4).In these
instances,mostpatients havefailed routine empirical
Abdominal
Constipation;foreign bodies:
therapiesfortheirGI signs,requiring definitivediagno-
radiography
prostatomegaly:intussusception;colonic
mass
of two endoscopic options:
Pneumocolon
Intussuscepticn,colonicmass
Ultrasonography
Mural thickening:mesenteric
Rigid proctoscopy, which allows evaluation of
lymphadenopathy;intussusception:
only therectum and descendingcolon
prostatomegaly;urinary necplasia
Flexibleendoscopy,which permits detailed
examinationof all colonicregions up to the
Colonoscopy
IBD:colonic neoplasia;polyps;
ileocolicregion.
intussusception
Laparotomy
Abdominal masses;biopsy and correction
Advantages of full colonoscopy include direct visu-
alization of theproximal colonicregions,the ability to
12.2
DiagnosticproceduresforevalLationof
obtain targeted biopsysamplesunderendoscopicguid-
tenesmus.FeLV=feline leukaemiavirus;
ance,and theabilityoftheclinician toperformretro-
FIV=feline rmmunodeficiency virus,IBD=inflammatory
bowel diseasc.(Modified from Guiford,1996)
and interventional procedures(e.g.stricture dilatation,
polypectomy).Biopsy of the colonic mucosa is always
Faecal analysis
performed and facilitates characterization of the dis-
Theexaminationofmultiplefaecal samplesforpara-
sites isrecommended in all cases:somenematode
ommendations maybe made to theclient.
parasiteswith lowfecundity,suchas Trichurisvulpis,
may yield false-negative results on a single faecal
Baselinelaboratorytests
examination.Evaluationofdirectsmearsofsaline-
Baselinelaboratory testsconsisting ofacomplete
admixed freshfaecesforprotozoanparasites,such as
bloodcount(CBC),biochemistry profile andurinalysis
Giardiaor Entamoeba histolytica,mayalsobehelpful.
should be performed in animals having tenesmus
Cytologicalexaminationofa faecalsmear or rectal
associated with systemic signs(e.g.anorexia,weight
scrape(preferred)should beperformedfordetectionof
loss,dehydration).These testsmay also identify inci-
dentalproblemsinothersystemsof thebody,facilitate
supportiveofClostridiumperfringensenterotoxicosis,
choice of fluid therapy,and aid in the identification of
orinflammatory cellsindicative of colitis.Largenum-
other Gl problems such as infectious,parasitic and
bersof faecal leucocytes(neutrophils) may be seen in
eosinophilic colitis.
animals with bacterial causes for colitis. Cytology of
fine needle aspiration samples from rectal and perineal
massesmayallowrapid identification of neoplasms.
Treatment
Faecal culturesare indicated in animalssuspected
ofhavingbacterial-mediateddiarrhoea.Cultureof fae-
Ageneral treatmentstrategyforanimalswithtenes-
ces forSalmonella or Campylobacter is important in
mus and dyschezia is given in Figure 12.3.Further
patients that develop large bowel diarrhoea subse-
information on treatmentcanbefound in Chapters21,
quent tokenneling orprocurement from animal holding
22 and28.
95
Chapter 12 Dyschezia and tenesmus
Tenesmusand dyschezia
Genitourinary disease:
Perineal inspection:
Antibiotics for cystitis
：
Surgery for herniation
Surgery for calculi
Immunosuppressive drugs
Neuterfor prostatic
Colorectal disease
forfistula
hyperplasia
Antibiotics for anal sac
Surgery/chemotherapy
abscess
for neoplasia
Surgery± chemotherapy
Colonic disease
for anal sacneoplasia
Trichurisvuipis
FeLV/FIVinfection
Fareign body
Intussusception
IBD
Colonic neoplasia
Giardiasis
·Constipation
Bacterial colitis
Histopiasma
colitis
Antiviral
therapy
Supportive
Colonoscopy
Surgical
Dietarytherapy
Drug tharapy
therapy
Surgery±
Surgery
correction
Drug therapy
chemotherapy
General treatment strategies foranimals with tenesmus and dyschezia.FeLV= feline leukaemia virus;
12.3
FIV = feline immunodeficiency virus;IBD = inflaminatory bowel disease.
References and furtherreading
Guilford etal,pp.5076.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Sherding RGand Johnson SE(20oo) Diseases of the intestines.In:
SauindersManua!ofSmallAnirnal Practice,2edn,ed.SJ
Guilford WG(1996)Approachtoclinicalproblemsingestroenterology.
In:StromecksmalAnmaGastroneolgydndG
Philadelphia
96
Ascites
Edward J. Hall
Introduction
·Modified transudate
Exudate.
Ascitesisapathological accumulation of freefluid
within theperitoneal cavity (from the Greekaskos=
Inaddition,thetermasciteshasbeenbroadenedto
includefluidaccumulations（Figure13.3)primarilycom-
bag,-ites=like a;syn.hydroperitoneum,dropsy).
posed of:
Strictly,ascilticfluid isserousinnature and isclassi
fied,dependingonitsproteinandcellularcontentcompo-
Bile
sition(Figures 13.1and 13.2),intothe followingcategories:
Blood
Chyle
.Urine.
Transudate
13.1
Gross
appearance
Sterile
Septic
of (a) a transudate and
Transudate
Modified
exudate
medified transudate
transudate
exudate
and (b) sterile and
septic exudates.A
crude distinction can be
made by the clarity cf
an image viewcd
through the fluid.
(a)
(b)
Serous ascitic fluids
Transudate
Modified transudate
Exudate
Clarity
Clear
Slightlycloudy
Often cloudy, serosanguineous
Urine specific gravity
<1.017
1.017-1.025
>1.025
Protein (g/)
<25
25-50
>25
Nucleated cells (per mm²)
<2500
<7000
>7000
Cytology
Mainlymacrophages andmesothelial cells
Reactive mesothelial cells
Septic:neutrophils;macrophages; intracellular bacteria
Non-septic: lymphocytes; macrophages
Carcinomatosis:malignant cells
13.2
Characteristics of serous ascitic fluids.
Non-serous ascitic fluids
Colour and smell
Content
Cytology
Bile
Yellow/brown/green
Biirubin
Variable
Blcod
Red
Haemcglobin
Red blocd cells
Serosanguineous
Blood
Chyle
Cloudy white/cream
Triglyceride > plasma
Lymphccytes
Cream layer on standing
Cholesterol<plasma
Fat globules
Urine
Yellow
Creatinine> plasma
Uriniferous
Urea =plasma
13.3
Characteristics of non-serous ascilic fluids.
97
Chapter 13 Ascites
Pathophysiology
proteincontentreflectsthefactthatthevascular
permeability is naturally high.
Thedifferenttypesof asciticfluidmayaccumulate due
Consequently,with intra-hepaticobstruction to
to:
portalblood flow,theproteincontentofany
asciticfluidvariesdepending on where within the
AnimbalanceinStarling'slawthatgoverns
liverthesiteof theobstructionoccurs.Perihilar/
tissue fluid formation and removal,i.e.
periportal fibrosis is likely to cause a low-protein
二
decreased colloidosmoticpressure inplasma
ascites,whilst centralveinfibrosis orhepaticvein
(transudate)
obstructionproduces a moreprotein-richascites.
increased hydrostaticpressureinvenousand/
or lymphatic drainage（transudate,modified
Inflammation
transudate)
Any inflammatory process (septic or non-septic) wil
increasedvascularpermeability(exudate)
cause increasedvascularpermeabilityand leakageof
Leakage from a vessel (i.e.blood,chyle)
protein-richfluid fromthe capillarybed.Theinflammation
Leakage from a viscus (i.e.bile,urine).
can be caused by infectious or non-infectiousprocesses.
Thus,ascitesisareflectionofone,oracombination
Leakage
of different,pathophysiological mechanisms.
Ageneralized bleedingproblemruptureofa major
blood vessel, or rupture of a highly vascular organ,
Hypoalbuminaemia
such as the liveror spleen,canlead toa haemoperito-
Albumin isthemajorsource ofplasmacolloid osmotic
neum.Leakage from intra-abdominal lymphatics will
cause a chylous effusion and ismostoften associated
leadstoformationofapuretransudateintheextravas-
with primary lymphaticabnormalities(e.g.lymph-
angiectasia,see Chapter 20) or obstruction by tu-
the serum concentration falls below approximately
mours.Traumaticrupture of the extra-hepaticbiliary
15 g/1.The fluid may accumulate in the pleural space
tract and the urinary tract lead to bile peritonitis and
(hydrothorax) or tissues (oedema), as well as in the
uroabdomen,respectively.
peritoneal cavity(ascites).Apure transudate mayform
atoneormoreof thesesitesbutat whichparticularsite
is unpredictable.
Clinical features
Reduction in serum albumin concentration suiffi-
Theclinical signs directlyassociatedwith ascites are:
cient to give rise to ascites is most likely caused by
protein loss,either through the gastrointestinal (Gl)
Abdominal distension(Figure 13.4)
mucosa into the faeces(a protein-losing enteropathy,
Respiratoryembarrassment if massive fluid
PLE;see Chapter20)or through theglomeruli into the
accumulationcompresses thediaphragm
urine (a protein-losing nephropathy.PLN).Failure of
Pleuraleffusionand subcutaneousoedemaif
hepatic albumin synthesismay alsolead to ascites.
hypoalbuminaemic.
Thisissometimesseen withcongenital portosystemic
shunts,but chronic hepatopathies more frequently
causeascitesthroughacombinationofreducedserum
albumin concentration andportal hypertension.
Portal hypertension
Increased venoushydrostaticpressure in the portal
vasculature leads to formation of ascites;there is
accompanying bowelwalloedema andoftendiar-
rhoea.Thesiteoforigin of theportalhypertension
determines thenature of the asciticfluid because the
permeability of bloodvesselsvaries.
Pre-hepaticobstruction toportal blood flow(i.e.
before it reachesthe liver) tends toproducefluid
low inprotein(transudate)because capillaries in
13.4
Grossly ascitic dog with massive abdominal
thesplanchnicbed arerelativelyimpermeableto
enlargement.Asciles was due to a chronic
hepatopathy.
proteins.
Conversely,post-hepatic obstruction to portal
Certain signs in animals with ascites are related to
blood flowcausesaccumulationofprotein-rich
theprimary cause of fluid accumulation:
fluidbecause thesinusoidsand lymphaticswithin
theliverarelinedwithafenestratedendothelium
Diarrhoea and weight lossinPLE
and arepermeableto albumin.Thefluidproduced
Polyuria/polydipsia(PU/PD)inchronicrenaldisease
isusuallycategorizedasamodified transudate
ThromboembolicdiseaseinPLEandPLN
becauseof itsproteincontent,although it canbe
Jaundice in liverfailure orbileperitonitis
argued that it isreally aprotein-rich transudateas
Exerciseintolerance andcollapse inheart failure
it isnotactuallymodified after formation;its
and cardiac tamponade
98
Chapter 13 Ascites
Anuriaanduraemiainuroabdomen
Diagnosis
·Collapseifhaemoperitoneum.
Detection ofascites
The presence of ascites is usually evident on physical
Differential diagnosis
examination.Ballottement(abdominal percussionto
detectfluidand intra-abdominalmasses)transmitsa
The common and uncommon causes of each type of
fluidwaveacrosstheabdomen totheotherhand.
asciticfluid arelisted inFigure13.5.
Ascitesmustbedistinguishedfromothercausesof
Fluid composition
Condition
Common causes
Uncommon causes
Transudate-
Hepatic failure
None
Congenilal PSS (rare)
hypoalbuminaemia
Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE)
Inflammatory bowel disease
Cirrhosis
Alimentary lymphosarcoma
Lymphangiectasia
Protein-losing neuropathy(PLN)
Glomerulonephritis
Amyloidosis
Pre-hepatic hypertension (may be
Following ligation of PSS
Portal vein thrombosis:vascular occlusion
transudate)
from torsions
Vascularocclusionfromstrangulations
(hernias)
Modified transudate-
Intra-hepatic portal hypertension
Chronic hepatitiscirrhosis
Idiopathic hepaticfibrosis
portal hypertension
Hepatic AV fistula: hepatic neoplasia;liver
flukes (notin UK)
Caudal vena cava compression/
None
Veno-ccclusive disease:Budd-Chiari
obstruction
syndrome;kinked”CVC(post-traumatic);
CVC webs and thrombosis;cor triatrum
dexter
Cardiac tamponade
Idiopathicpericardial haemorhage
Heart base tumour
Right atrial haemangiosarcoma
Restrictive pericarditis mesothelioma;
septic pericarditis
Right-sided heart failure
Valvular heart disease
Intra-cardiac neoplasia
Dilated cardiomyopathy
AngiostrongylusDiroflarianin)
Septic(bacterial)
Glperforation
Mesocestoides(not in UK)
Migrating foreign body
Mycotic
Penetrating wound
Nocardia or Actinomyces
Volvulus/infarctionofGltract
Ruptured pyometra
Exudate-
Non-septic
FIP
Steatitis
intlammatory
Feline lymphocyticcholangiohepatis
Diaphragmatic rupture and entrapment
Pancreatitis
Carcinomatosis
Bile-biliary leakage
Traumaticruptureof gallbladder
Necrotizing cholecystitis
Perforated common bile duct (trauma,
choleliths)
Perforatedproximal duodenalulcer
Blood-haemorrhage
Generalized bleeding disorcder
Splenic torsion
Ruptured splenic haematoma or
Liver lobe torsion
haemangioma
Hepatic amyloidosis in cats
Ruptured splenic or hepatic
Hepatic peliosis in cats
haemangiosarcoma
Traumatic splenic orhepatic rupture
Chyle-lymphatic
Cardiomyopathy
Intestinal obstruction
obstruction or leakage
Lymphangiectasia
Neoplasia,especiallyphaeochromocytoma
Urine -rupture of
Ruptured bladder
Ruptured kidney
urinary tract
Ruptured ureter(s)
Causes of ascites classfied according tofluid compositicn and relative incidence of the cause of each fluid
13.5
PSS= portosystemic shunl.
66
Chapter 13 Ascites
abdominalenlargement(Figure13.6).Inparticular,the
pot belly’ due to fat redistribution,hepatomegaly and
weak abdominal musculature in hyperadrenocorticism
isoftenconfusedwithascites,yetitisnotassociated
with peritoneal fluid accumulation.
Abdominal neoplasia
Diabetes mellitus
Hyperadrenocorticism
Obesity
Ovariancyst
Paraprostatic cyst
Pregnancy
Pyometra
Urineretention（urethral obstruction oratonicbladder)
13.6
Causes of abdominal distension thatmaymimic
ascites.
Abdominal radiographs are rarely helpful if there is
significant ascites, beyond confirming the presence of
fluid because thelossofabdominalcontrastobscures all
detail(so-called'groundglass'appearance).Ultrasound
examination isthemoresensitive techniquefordetect-
ingsmallvolumesof fluid,especiallypocketed fluid,as
b
this technique is capable of detecting as little as 5 ml/kg.
13.7
Abdominocentesis.(a) Sterile preparation and
infiltration of the linea alba with lccal
Diagnostic approach
anaesthetic prior to abdominocentesis.(b)Collection of
Freeperitoneal fluid canbeconfirmedbyimaging(see
blood by emergency abdominocenlesis in a cog witn a
above). The overall diagnostic approach to an ascitic
ruoturec spleen and haemoperitoneum.
patient is then:
penetrated musclewill tend to occlude the hole.Diag-
1.Check serum albumin concentration.lf<15 g/
nosticperitoneal lavage is performed if the amount of
theascites is likely tobe a pure transudateand
ascites is too small tobe aspirated evenunder ultra-
thediagnosticeffort shouldbeaimed at
sound guidance (seeBSAVA Manual of Canine and
determining the cause(seeFigure 13.5);
FelineEmergency and Critical Care).
abdominocentesis islikely tobe unhelpful
2.If the serum albumin concentration is>15 g/l
Laboratory examinationof ascites
perform abdominocentesis forfluid collection and
classificationbased on laboratory analysis,
helpful (see Figure 13.1) but laboratory analysis will
cytological examination and culture(seeFigures
determine its exact nature (see Figure 13.2). The
13.2 and 13.3).Following identification of the
serum-ascites-albumingradient(SAAG)is the differ-
natureof theasciticfluid,specificinvestigations
encebetween the albuminconcentration of theserum
areperformed to determine theunderlying cause
and the ascites.If >11g/l,anyasciticfluid hasbeen
(see Figure 13.8).
formed by portal hypertension,whilst SAAG <11 g/l
reflectstransudation due tohypoalbuminaemia.This
Abdominocentesis
testisused inhumanswho have ascitesand maybe of
Ultrasound guidance can be used for aspiration of
value indogs.
small pocketsof ascitesbut if there ispalpable fluid
In catsahighproteinexudate ischaracteristicof
accumulation ultrasound guidance is unnecessary.
lymphocytic cholangitis or,more commonly,efusive
Instead,fluidisreadilyaspiratedblindlyviaaneedleor
feline infectious peritonitis(FIP).InFiP the totalpro-
(preferably)an over-the-needle catheter.For diagnos-
teinconcentrationof theascitesisusually>35g/l
ticpurposes onlya small volume (1-5ml) isrequired.
and consists of more globulin than albumin.An
Thesite shouldbeclipped andpreparedaseptically
albumin:globulinratioof<0.4indicatesFIPisquite
and can be infiltrated with local anaesthetic（Figure
likely,whilst aratio of>0.8rules outFiP as the cause
13.7).Abdominocentesis is usually performed with the
of theeffusion.Identification ofbacteriain the ascitic
patientrestrainedinlateralrecumbencytomovebowel
fluid mayreflectcontamination unless intracellular
loopsawayfrom thewall.Theoreticallytheidealsiteis
organisms are detected.Finding an exudate is an
in themidline,through theavascular linea alba just
indication toperformbacterial culture.
caudal to theumbilicus andbehind thefalciformfat.
However,if there ismassive ascites,continued leak
Furtherinvestigation
agemayoccurwhen the patient stands.In such situa-
The furtherinvestigationsperformed todeterminethe
tionsanoff-midlineapproachmaybebetterasthe
cause of ascites are listed in Figure 13.8.
100
Chapter 13
Ascites
Type of ascitic fluid
Test
Results
Transudate
Haematology
Mild (microcytic) anaemia in PSS
Serum biochemistry
Hypoalbuminaemia (<15 g/)
GlobulinsdecreasedinPLEnormal inN
Liver enzymes increased in liver disease
Bile acids increased withPSS
Urinalysis
Proteinuria in PLN
UPCratio
Increased in PLN
Faecala-PI
Increased in PLE
Abdominal imaging
Liver size
PSS
Portovenography
Portal vein obstruction,PSS
Chest radiography
Hydrothorax
Modified transudate
Haematology
Mild (microcytic)anaemia in liver disease
Inlammatryeucgraminsepticperioniis
Bile acids
Increased in liver disease
Abdominal ultrasonography
Primary hepatic disease
Secondary hepatic congestion
Hepatic AV fistula
Hepatic arteriogram
AV fistula
Exploratory laparotomy
Liver biopsy
Identification of neoplasia
Chest radiography
Cardiac disease
Cardiac ultrasonography
Cardiac tamponade
DCM
Right heart failure
ECG
Cardiac tamponade
Right heart failure
Angiography
CVC abnormalities
Exudate
Haematology
FIP:neurophiia; ymphopenia
Inflammatory leucogram in pancreatitis
Serum globulins
Elevated in FIP>70 g/l
Culture of ascites
Septic peritonitis
Coronavirus serology
Indicatesexposuretocoronavirus(notdiagnosticofFIP)
Pancreatic enzymes: amylase,lipase, TLI, PLI
Pancreatitis
may be increased in serum and ascitic fluid
(Serum PLl is themost specifi blood test.Sensitivity and specificity of
testing ascitic fluid is unknown)
Ultrasonography
Pancreatitis
Exploratorylaparotomy
Identificationandresolutionofcauseofsepticperitonitis
Identificaticnof carcinomatosis
Blood
Coagulatin profileOSPT,PTT,FDPs,
Generalized bleading problem
PIVKAs, d-dimer)
Monitor for shock
Traumatic haemorrhage
Ruptured haemangioma/haemangiosa.rcoma
Abdominal radiography
Splenic orhepatic mass
Thoracic radiography
Metastatic disease
Uitrasonography
Splenic or hepatic mass
Exploratory laparotomy
Traumatic bleeding not responding to luid therapy
Identification and removal of mass
13.8
Further investigations in ascites. aPTT = activated partial thromboplastin time:AV= arteriovenous;
CVC=caudal vena cava;DCM =dilated cardiomyopathy;ECG= echocardiogram;FDP= fibrin degradation
procucts;FIP= teline infectious peritonitis;OSPT= one-stage prothrombin time;PI= prcteinase inhibitor;PIvKA = proteins
induced by vitamin K absence; PLE = protein-losing enteropathy; PLI = pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity;
PLN = protein-losing neohrcpathy.PSS =porosystemic shunt:TLI = trypsin-like immunoreactivity;UPC= urine protein to
creatinine.(continues)
30
Chapter 13
Ascites
Type of ascitic fluid
Test
Results
Bile
Exploratory laparotomy
Identification and repairof site of bile leakage
Chyle
Ascitescholesterol concentration<serum
Identification of chyle
Ascites triglyceride concentration>serum
Identification of chyle
Lymphangiography
Identificationof site of lymphatic leakage or obstruction
Exploratorylaparotomy
Identificationandligationofsiteof lymphaticleakage orremovalof
obstruction
Urine
Ascites creatinine concentration>serum
Identifiation of uroabdomen
(Urea equilibrates across the peritoneal membrane and isless useful)
Intravenous urography
Identificaticn of site of urine leakage
Cystography
Exploratory laparolomy
Identification and repair of siteof urine leakage
(continued) Further investigations in ascites.aPTT =activated partial thromboplastin time;AV=arteriovenous;
13.8
incuced by vitamin Kabsence;PLE=protein-losing enteropathy;PLI =pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity:
PLN=protein-losing nephropathy;PSS=portosystemic shunt;TLI= trypsin-like immunoreactivity:UPC=urine protein
to creatinine.
Treatment
ascitesalbumingradientforthedeterminationofportal
hypertensionin thediagnosisofascites.Hepatogastroenterology
Informationonthetreatmentofascitescanbefound in
48,166-168
HenleyRK,HagerDAandAckermanN(1989)Acomparisonof wo
Chapters 20 and 24.
dimensionalultrasonography andreadiography forthedetection
of small amountsof freeperitoneal fluid in the dog.Veterinary
Radiology30,121-124
Referencesand further reading
KingLand HammondR(1999)BSAVAManua!of Canineand
Feline Emergency and Criticai Care,BSAVA Publications,
DittrichS,YordiLMand deMattosAA(2001）Thevalueof serum
Gloucester
102
Jaundice
Susan E. Bunch
Post-hepatichyperbilirubinaemia:ineffective
Jaundice istheyellowstainingof tissuescausedby
delivery of bilirubin into the duodenum(extra-
excess bilirubin (hyperbilirubinaemia). The terms
hepaticcholestasis)orbileleakageintothe
jaundice and icterus may be used interchangeably.
abdominal cavity (bile peritonitis),leading to
Normal bilirubinformation and disposal
resorption of bilirubin intothe circulation.
Bilirubinisawasteproductof haemproteindegradation.
Pre-hepatichyperbilirubinaemia
The primary sourceofhaem proteins is senescent
erythrocytes;myoglobin and haem-containing enzyme
Haemolysis
systemsinthe liverareadditionalsources.Mononuclear
The most common causesof hyperbilirubinaemia at-
phagocytic cells,primarilyin the bone marrow and
tributable tohaemolysisaresevereintravascular and
spleen,engulf old erythrocytes,afterwhichhaemoxy-
extravascularhaemolyticanaemiaofvarious types,
genase in the phagocyticcellsopens theprotoporphyrin
and incompatible blood transfusion (Figures 14.1 and
ring of haemoglobin, forming biliverdin. Biliverdin is
14.2).Thenormal liverhas alargereserve capacityfor
converted to fat-soluble bilirubin IXa, which is then
released into thecirculationwhereit isboundbyalbu-
14.1
min.Hepatocytes take up thebilirubin andconjugateit
43
withvariouscarbohydrates,makingthebilirubinwater-
（a)Haematccrit
tubesfromacal
soluble.Conjugatedbilirubin is then excreted into the
that hacrccoived
bile canaliculiandtravelsinthebileductswithotherbile
an incampatible
constituentstothegallbladder,where it isstoreduntil it
transfusion.
is expelled into the duodenum.In the intestine conju-
(b)Serum froma
gated bilirubin undergoes bacterial deconjugation and
dog with irnmune-
thenreductiontourobilinogen,whichismostlyresorbed
mediated
intravascular
intotheportal systemandreturned to the liver.Asmall
haemolysis.
fractionofurobilinogenisexcretedintheurine and the
The tube shows
remainderstaysin the intestinal tractwhereit iscon-
hyperbilirubinaema
vertedtostercobilin,whichimpartsnormalfaecalcolour.
and
BilirubinmetabolismisdiscussedfurtherintheBSAVA
haemoglobinaemia.
Manualof CanineandFelineClinicalPathology.
Pathophysiology of
hyperbilirubinaemia
(b)
Inherited defectsofbilirubinmetabolismhavebeen
14.2
described inotherspecies(e.g.rats,sheep,humans)
but havenot been identified in dogs and cats;thus.
Saline agglutinaticn
test demonstrating
hyperbilirubinaemia is consideredanacquired condi-
erythrocyte
tion.Hyperbilirubinaemia (>5μmol/1in catsand
clumping on gross
>10μmol/lindogs)iscausedbyoneormoreof the
inspection.
following mechanisms:
Agglutination was
conirmedby
Pre-hepatic hyperbilirubinaemia(haemolysis):
microsccpic
increased productionof bilirubin;exceedsthe
examination,
normal concentration that theliverisableto take
confirminga
up and process
diagrosis of
Hepatic hyperbilirubinaemia (intra-hepatic
immunc-mediated
cholestasis):reduced eliminationofbilirubinand
haemolytic
anaemia.
otherbileconstituentsdue toimpaired
hepatocellular handling
103
Chapter14 Jaundice
bilirubinprocessing and sohaemolysis alone does not
14.4
cause jaundice;concurrentreduced hepatic ability to
Bile obtainedvia
excrete bilirubin must alsobepresent.Most dogs with
ultrasound-guided
haemolytic anaemia alsohavehypoxic liver injury,
cholecystocentesis
whichfurtherimpairsbilirubin excretion.Rarely,jaun-
frcma cat with
dicecanoccurfollowingresorptionofamajorintramus-
acute (bacterial)
cularhaemorrhage,a largehaematoma(Figure 14.3)
cholangitis.
ormultiple large subcutaneous ecchymoses.Bleeding
intothebodycavitiesdoesnotcausejaundicebecause
erythrocytes are absorbed intact,but if hepatic insuffi-
ciencyispresent jaundice may ensue.Jaundiceis
neverassociated with bleedingintothegastraintestinal
istransformedtootherporphyrinsthatarenotresorbed
biliarytract,can cause hepatocellulardysfunctionand
for recycling intohaemoglobin synthesis.
jaundicewithhigh liverenzyme activities andbileacid
concentrationsresemblingprimaryhepatobiliarydis-
ease,butwith minimal histopathological changes in
theliver.Cytokinesreleasedduringinflammation,such
astumour necrosisfactor (TNFa),injure hepatocyte
membranes,interfering with bilirubin and bile acid
transport.This change isreversible upon successful
treatment ofbacteraemia.
Post-hepatichyperbilirubinaemia
Extra-hepaticcholestasis
Distalobstructionof thebile ductcausingextra-hepatic
cholestasisresults in increased intraluminal biliary
Subcutaneous bruising associated with leakage
tractpressure,nterhepatocellularregurgitationofbile
14.3
froma femoral arterial cathetersite following
constituentsinto the circulation,and jaundice.lf only
surgery to rcpair a congenital portosystemic shunt. The
oneof the hepaticbile ductsexiting the liverisblocked,
orif only the cystic duct exiting the gall bladder is
obstructed,therearebiochemical cluesforlocalized
Hyperthyroidism
cholestasis,suchashignserumalkalinephosphatase
Mildhyperbilirubinaemia mayalsooccurinasmall
(ALP)activity.However,theoverallabilityoftheliverto
numberof hyperthyroid cats.There is nohistological
processbilirubin ispreserved and jaundice doesnot
evidence ofcholestasisatthe lightmicroscopiclevel in
develop.Total obstructiontobileflowleadstoacholic
affected cats,and the hyperbilirubinaemiaresolves
faeces（Figure 14.5)and steatorrhoea secondary to
withreturn toeuthyroidism.Experimental investiga-
thecompleteabsenceof bilepigmentandbileacids,
tionsof thyrotoxicosisin laboratory animalshavedem-
respectively,in the intestine.Mechanical diseases of
onstrated increased production of bilirubin,which is
the extra-hepaticbiliary tract (e.g.traumaticbile duct
believed tobeassociatedwithaccelerateddegrada-
avulsionfrom theduodenum,persistentcompleteex-
tion of hepatichaemproteins.
tra-hepaticbile ductobstruction)arethemostcommon
causes（Figure 14.6)ofacholic faeces incats and
Hepatic hyperbilirubinaemia
dogs.Rarely,incatswithsevere cholangitis,normal
bileflowceases.Thebileconsistsofonlyclear,viscous
Intra-hepatic cholestasis
Intra-hepatic cholestasis in many primary hepatocellu-
mayresult inproductionof acholicfaeces inthe ab-
lar diseases is likelytobe attributabletoa combination
sence of mechanical obstruction.
of the inability to take up,process and excretebilirubin
into the bile canaliculi.Altered red blood cell(RBC)
membranes and consequentRBCdestruction in ani-
malswithhepatobiliarydiseaseoftencontributes toa
high serum bilirubin concentration.Jaundice ismore
likelytobea clinicalfeature of liverdisordersthatinvolve
primarily theperiportal (zone 1) hepatocytes thanif the
lesioninvolvesthecentrilobular(zone3)hepatocytes.
Inflammationandswellingof largerintra-hepaticbiliary
structures (i.e.cholangitis:Figure 14.4) could similarly
delaybileexcretion.ForfurtherdetailsseeChapter24.
Someextra-hepatobiliarydisorderscause chole-
stasis by poorlyunderstood means.Bacterial sepsis in
14.5
Acholic faecesfroma dcgwithsevere intra-
humans and dogs,arisingother than from the liver or
hepatic cholestasis.
104
Chapter14 Jaundice
14.6
Abdominal ecchymosesasscciatedwithbile
14.7
Abdominal fluid fromadogwithlethargy.
duct avulsionfollowing blunt abcominal trauma.
vomiting and abcominal effusion.The gall
Thebleeding tendencywascausedbyvitarminK deficienicy.
bladder had rupturec forunknown reasons,resulting in
bileperitonitis.
Rupture
Traumaticorspontaneous(pathological)ruptureof the
biliarytract(i.e.gallbladder,bileductneartheduodenum)
Differential diagnosis
allowsleakageofbileinto theperitoneal spaceand
absorption of some bile components (Figure 14.7). This
Specificexamplesofhaemolyticandhepatobiliary
resultsinthetotalbilirubinconcentrationinthe abdominal
conditionsthatcouldcausejaundicearelistedinFig-
fluid being greater than that in serum (see Chapter 25).
ure 14.8.
Haemolytic anaemia (Pre-hepatic)
Cholestasis (Hepatic)
Cholestasis (Post-hepalic)
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia:
Chronic hepatic injury:
Bile duct obstruction:
Certain drugs e.g. sulphonamides
Advanced chronic hepatitis, including familial
Pancreatitis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
types (e.g Bedington Terrier, Dobrmann,
Pancreatic carcinoma
Modiffed livevirusvacination
Dalmatian,American andEnglishCocker Spanill
Duodenitis
Idiopathic
drug-associated andidiopathic forms
Duodenal carcinoma
Cirrhosis
Stricture
Secondary immune-mediated injury associated
Cholelithiasis
with lymphomaendocarditisthr
Acute hepatic necrosis
Inspissated bile
Blood ciot
Delayed transfusion reaction
Biliary tract inflammation:
Biiary carcinoma
Acute cholangitis(dogs, cats)
Flukes (cats)
Infectious agents:
Chronic cholangitis (cats)
Babesia gibsoni and B.canis
Bile ductor gallbladderrupture:
Ehrlichia canis
Difuseinfiltrativeneplasia:
Abdominai trauma
Mycoplasma haemofelis
Lymphoma
Diseased,friablebiliary tissus
Mycoplasma canis
Myeloproliferative disease
Idiopathicnecrotizing cholecystis
Cytauxzoon felis
Feline leukaemia virus
Liverinvolvementwithsystemicinfections:
Dirofilaria immitis(dogs)
Histoplasmosis (cats)
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
Chemicals and toxins:
Leptospirosis(dogs)
Hyperthyrcidism(cats)
Acute infectious caninehepatitis
Zinc
Onicns
Hepatic lipidosis (cats)
Methylene blua
Secondary to effects of cytokines elabcrated in
Copper (rare)
associationwithbacterialinfectionselsewherein
Hypophosphataemia
the body
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
Hyperthyroidism（mild,≤40μmol）inabout20%f
Congenital erythrocyte defects b
alffected cats;may be caused by excess
degradation of hepatic haem proteins
Use ofanoxygencarrying fluid suchasbvin
haemoglobin glutamer-200
14.8
105
Chapter14
Jaundice
Diagnosis
If the packed cell volume (PcV) is within or just
below the reference range,the cause cannot be
Althoughhyperbilirubinaemiais definedas>5umol/ in
haemolytic anaemia (Figure 14.10) and hepatobiliary
cats and>10 μmol/l in dogs,the serum concentration
causes （Figure 14.11) are pursued with clinico-
at whichjaundice isdetectable inmucousmembranes
pathological testing and imaging studies (Figure
is only approximately 30-40 μmol/ (Figure 14.9). This
14.12).A suggested step-by-step diagnostic approach
is because the human eye is not as sensitive at
for evaluating a dog or cat with jaundice isprovided
detecting bilirubin against the pink background of mu-
in Figure 14.13.
cous membranes as serumbiochemical testing.Jaun-
diceisusuallyvisibleinthesclerafirstasthebackground
iswhite.Thepredominantformofbilirubinindisorders
causing jaundice is water-soluble conjugated biirubin;
Historical features
this makes measurement of direct-reacting (conju-
Lethargy
gated) and indirect-reacting (unconjugated) bilirubin
Anorexia
by thevan denBerghreaction useless in differentiat-
Weakness
Change incolourf skin,urine or facs
inghaemolysis fromhepatobiliarydisease.Canine
Recent blood transfusionrsefoxygecaryg ld shs
renaltubules,particularlyinmales,havethecapacity
tometabolizefiltered haemoglobintobilirubinand so
bovine haemoglobin glutamer-200
mild bilirubinuria in a concentrated urine specimen is
Ingestionof coins containing zinc
Severe trauma with haematoma formation
not necessarily abnormal in dogs.Furthermore, in-
Breed-associated erythrocyte defects
creasing bilirubinuria in dogs may precede develop-
ment of clinically overt jaundice (see Figure 14.9c).
Physical examination findings
Feline kidneyscannotprocessbilirubin and have a
Pale mucous membranes
highrenal threshold forbilirubin,sobilirubinuria is
Jaundice(if the serum bilrubin level exceeds 40umol)
always abnormal in cats.
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Lymphadenomegaly
Markedevidenceofbleedingintotheskinormuscles
Orange faeces
Fever
Cardiacmurmur if PCV20%
Tachypnoea
14.10
Historical features and physical examination
findings in dogs and cats with haemolysis
causing hyperbifirubinaemia.(Note thatjaundiceonlyoccurs
with haemolysisif lhere ismarkederythrocytelysisand
decreased hepatic elimination.) PCV= packed cell volume.
Historical features
Lethargy
Anerexia
Jaundice,change in urine orfaecal colour
Abcominal enlargement
Alteredmentation
Vomiting
Diarrhoea
Polyuria,polydpsia
Physical examination findings
Weight loss
Jaundice
Altered mentation
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Abdominaleffusion
Cranial abdominal mass
Cranial or generalized abdominal pain
Fever
Melaena or acholic faeces onrectal examination
Ecchymosis
B
14.9
Jauncice can be indicated by (a) a yellow
14.11
Historical features andphysical examination
sciera(b)yellow oral mucous membranes and
findings in cogs and cats with
(c) marked bilrubinuria.
hyperbiirubinaemia caused by cholestasis.
106
Chapter14 Jaundice
Diagnostic test
Haemolysis (Pre-hepatic)
Cholestasis (Hepatic)
Cholestasis (Post-hepatic)
Completeblood count
Moderate to severeregenerative
Normal to mild non-regenerative
Normal tohighWBC;normal tolow
anaemia; RBC parasites;
anaemia with normal to small RBCs
platelet numbers
spherocytes; Heinz bodies:normal
(microcytosis);normal to lowplatelet
to low platelet numbers
numbers; high WBCs with feft shift
(sepsis)
Serum biochemical analyles
Normal to high ALP and ALT
High ALP andALT activity,normal
High ALP and ALT activity;normal
activity, normal to low albumin
tolowalbuminlevels;normal to low
albumin, urea, glucose
levels;phosphate concentration
urea concentration;normal to low
concentrations; normal to high
<0.65 mmoll in animal with
cholesterol levels;normal to low
cho esterol levels; high amylase,
diabetic ketoacidosis; van den
glucose concentrationbieacids
lipaseatvityild
Bergh test ot helpful; bileacids
measurement not necessary
measurement not necessary
measurement not necessary
Urinalysis
Bilirubinuria proteinuna
Bilirubinuria;normal tolow specific
Bilirubinuria
(glomerulonephritis)
gravity
Diagnostic imaging:
Survey radiography
Hepatosplenomegaly:metallic
Not usefulif abdominal effusion
Not useful if abdominal efusion
object in the stomach(zinc toxicosis)
Normal to small toenlarged liver
present
Hepatomegaly,mneralpaciti
theliver
Thoracic for metastasis
Thoracic for metastasis
Thoracic for metastasis
Abdominal ultrasonography
Diffusely hypoechoic liver and/or
Normal to smaliver,normalto
Dilated intra-andextra-hepatic biiary
spleen(lymphoma)
enlarged slen,mulie
structures.lf bile ductobstruction
extra-hepatic shunts
identifycause and site of obstruction
Nodular liver
Hycoechoic pancreas
Dilatedbiliarystructuresncats
Obtain aspirate tissue specimensfor
with cholangitis
cytology before surgery
Fluid analysis
Usually not applicable
Pure to modified transudate
Bile duct obstruction:resultsrelated
abdominalfluid in dogs with
to underlying cause (e.g.carcinoma
cirrhosis
cells, high lipase and amylase
activity)
High protein concentrations in
Bile peritonitis: appearance is
abdominal fluid of cats withFIP and
characteristic: fluid bilirubin
progressive lymphocytic cholangiis
 concentration > serum bilirubin
concentration; bilirubin crystals;
Bacteria seen on Gram staining of
cytology consistent withinflammation
bile (cats)
White bile(severe cholestasis)
Coagulation tests
Normal to markedly prolonged
Nomal to clinicallyiapparent
clotting times (DIC)
prolonged clotting times;markedly
prolonged clotting times (vitamin K
deficiency or DIC)
Microbial culture and
Usually not applicabie
Biood and/or other specimens (e.g.
Peritoneal fuid toruleout septic
sensitivity testing
urine) if pursuing extra-hepatobiliary
peritonitis
sepsis; bile in dogs and cats with
acute cholangitis
Other
Serological testingforinfectious
Apparent focus of infectionleading
Faecal sedimentation testforfluke
causes; Coombs' test (if no
to bacteraemia on the basis of Hx
eggs (predatory cats from tropical
spherocytes); saline agglutination
and PE tindings (sepsis); serum
and subtropical climates)
test; antinuclearantibody test;blod
thyroxine levels (cats); serological
smear or serologicalmolecular
molecular testing for infecticus
testing forparasites
causes;liver biopsy
14.12
Diagncstic tests and useul clues in discrimirating causes of hyperbilirubinaemia.ALP = alkaline phosphatase;
intravascular coagulaticn;FIP= feline nfectious peritonitis;fPLl =feline pancreatic ipase immunorcactivity;Hx= history;
PE= physical examination;RBC=rcc blocd cel;WBC= whie blood cell
107
Chapter14
Jaundice
Jaundice
，
Exclucehaemolyticanaemia
Abdominal efusion?
No
Monitor
Discontinue
Hepatotoxin?
exposure
No
Seplic
No
Cat:FIP?
peritonitis?
Fuid>
Cat:Hyperlhyroid?
Surgery:
ON
flunsgecure
Bile
Acquired
peritonitis
socondaryhepatic
Sepsis?
Yes
liverbiopsy
ON
Pancreatitis?
Pursue
No
CharacterizeLEA
Ghoestati
Abdominal
Pancreatitis
Abdominal
ultrasonography
ultrasonography
Non-diated
Fineneedle
aspiration
Mosharienl
Coagulation
Monitor
profile
liverbiopsy
Fine needle
aspiration
Acquired
primaryparenchymal
disease
Cat
agulation
uedoi
orofile
lipicosis
EHBD
oileculture
biliarytrac
obstructian
liverbiopsy
disease
14.13
Suggcstedaigorithmforevaluationofadogorcatwithjaundice(Mcdified fromHessandBunch,20o0with
permission from Elsevier.)EHBD=extra-hepaticbile duct:FIP=felinc infecticus peritcnitis:LEA=liver
enzyme activity.
Treatment
Referencesandfurtherreading
Forinformationon the treatment of conditionscausing
Hess PRand Bunch SE(20oo) Diagnosticapproach tohepatobilary
jaundice see Chapters24,25and28.
diseese.In:Kirk'sCurrentVetcrinaryTherapyXllSmallAnima!
PracticdDnagurap.964Sandersiladh
ViliersEand BlackwoodL(inpreparation）BSAVAManualofCanine
Gloucester
108
Hepatic encephalopa
Jill E.Maddison
Introduction
The term hepatic encephalopathy refers to a com-
thepresence ofadvanced liverdisease.
In the dog and cat,hepatic encephalopathymost
commonlyresults froma singlecongenitalvascular
shunt from theportal circulation,which bypasses the
hepaticcirculationand allowsmesentericblood to
enterdirectlyeitherthecaudalvenacava ortheazygos
vein.Acquired portosystemic shunting also occursas
a consequence of diseases that induce portal hyper-
15.1
These Maltese dogs are littermates;the one on
tension,includingcirrhosis,arteriovenous(AV)fistula
andhepatoportal fibrosis.
Cats
The clinical presentation of catswith hepaticencepha-
Clinicalfeatures
lopathy differs in several important aspects.In contrast
with dogs,cats areoftenreportedtobewell grown and
Clinical signs are usuallynoticed in dogs and cats<1
ingoodbody condition.Hypersalivation is the most
yearofage butthepatientcan bepresentedatanyage.
frequentlyreportedclinicalabnormalityincatswith
Dogs
Typical clinical signs in the dog include:
ported in dogs.
Seizures also appear tooccur more frequentlyin
Episodiclethargy
Depression,with episodesofdisorientation
occurred in approximately50%ofthefelinecases
Aimless wandering
reported inthe literaturebutarenotaparticularlycom-
Compulsive pacing
mon feature of hepatic encephalopathy in dogs.Inap-
Head pressing against walls
Amaurotic blindness
in cats in contrast with dogs.However,compulsive
Coma.
behaviour(i.e.headpressing,circling,aimless wander-
ing)is observedmorefrequently in dogs than incats.
Occasionally,seizuresmaybethepresentingcom-
Neurological signs such as disorientation,ataxia and
plaint in dogs.Neurological signsmaybe temporally
stupor arefrequentlyobserved inbothspecies.
related toprioringestionof ameal in approximately
Gl abnormalities,suchasvomiting,diarrhoeaand
25%of cases.
anorexia,are reported less frequently in cats than in
Affected dogs have poor growth (Figure 15.1) and
dogs, as are polyuria and polydipsia.
experience episodes of anorexia and gastrointestinal
(GI)signs,suchasvomiting.Otherkeyfeaturesof the
clinical historymayincludedramaticbut temporary
Differential diagnosis
resolutionofclinicalsignswith antimicrobial therapy,
and prolongedrecoveryfromsedation or anaesthesia.
The clinical signsof hepaticencephalopathymayoften
Polyuria andpolydipsia occur in approximately one-
beconfusedwiththoseofprimaryGlorneurological
thirdofdogswithhepaticencephalopathy.Themecha-
disease.However,the concurrence of both Gl and
nism for this has not been elucidated but may be
neurological dysfunction ina youngdog orcatshould
related to central orprimary（psychogenic)neuronal
alert thecliniciantothepossibilityof hepaticencepha-
stimulationof thethirstcentre asamanifestationof
lopathy as a diagnosis.Lead toxicity will also result in
encephalopathy,alterations inportal vein osmorecep
Gl and neurological signs inyoung animals.However,
torsorarenalconcentratingdefect.
in general theneurological dysfunctionassociated with
109
Chapter 15 Hepatoencephalopathy
lead poisoning in dogs is of a more hyperkinetic nature,
The presence of portosystemic shunts is usually
resultinginseizures andhysteria.In contrast,dogsand
confirmedbytechniques suchas hepaticultrasonogra-
cats with hepatic encephalopathy typicallypresent
phy,visualization at surgery or operative mesenteric
depressed,apathetic and disorientated.
venography.Cranial mesenteric angiography. trans-
abdominal splenoportography,coeliacarteriography
Breedpredilection
and quantitative hepatic scintigraphycan alsobe used,
Intra-hepatic shuntsoccur most commonly in large
but arenotsuited togeneralpractice.
breeds of dog such as Dobermann,Labrador Re-
triever,GoldenRetriever,Old EnglishSheepdogand
IrishWolfhound.In contrast,extra-hepatic shunts oc-
Treatment
curinsmallerbreedsofdogs suchasYorkshireTerrier,
Maltese and Miniature Schnauzer.Single extra-he-
Surgical management
patic shunts are also the predominant shunt type in
Both extra-(Figure 15.2)and intra-hepatic(Figure
cats although intra-hepatic shuntshavebeen reported.
15.3) shunts can be ligated successfully by experi-
There appearstobe no breed predilection forcongeni-
enced surgeons.Single extra-hepatic shunts aremore
tal portosystemic shunts in cats.
amenable tosurgical correction,but the difficultywith
surgical correction ofintra-hepatic shunts lies with their
relativeinaccessibility.
Diagnosis
Complete attenuation of the shunt isoftennot
possiblebecause of unacceptableincreases inportal
Non-specificclinicopathological changesfrequently
vein pressure.However,long-term amelioration of
clinical signs isusuallyachieved in85%ofcanine
lopathyincludehypoproteinaemia andmild tomoder-
cases. Clinical experience suggests that good to
ateelevations inserum alanineaminotransferase
excellentclinicalresults canbeexpectedinthemajor-
(ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP).However,
ity of dogs,regardless of whether the shunt is com-
ALTandALPmayoccasionallybe in thereference
pletelyorpartially occluded.In contrast,ina studyof
range. Subnormal plasma urea concentrations are
theresultsofsurgical managementof felineporto-
often detected.Increased liver enzymes and
systemicshunts,all fourcatswhoseshuntswereonly
hypoalbuminaemiaoccurless consistently in cats
partially ligated relapsed clinically several months
with hepaticencephalopathy compared with dogs.A
small proportion of dogs are hypoglycaemic,which
may contribute to clinical signs such as weakness
and seizures.
Themajorityofaffectedanimalswillhavefasting
hyperammonaemiaandallwill exhibit intoleranceto
orallyorrectally administered ammonium chloride.
Fasting or,particularly,postprandial serum bile acids
are invariably increased in dogs but(uncommonly)
may be normal in cats.
Aninterestinghaematologicalfinding inmany dogs
with congenital shunts isthepresence of microcytosis
of erythrocytes,which isnot usually associatedwith
anaemia.Thishaematological abnormalityhas also
beenreported in up to54%of cats.
Approximately50%ofdogswill haveammonium
15.2
An extra-hepatic shunt ina Maltese dog prior to
biurate crystalluria.Occasionally ammonium biurate
ligalion.
calculi willform and cause signs of urinary tract disease
includinghaematuria andrecurrent urethral obstruc-
tion.Theincidence of ammoniumbiurate crystalluria
appears to be less in cats than in dogs.
Plain abdominal radiographs of dogs with hepatic
encephalopathy show microhepatica and often
renomegaly.This combination of radiographic signs
hasbeenreportedlessfrequentlyincats.Theincrease
in the sizeof therenalshadowin dogs isoftenmarked,
being>4 times the lengthof thesecondlumbarverte-
bra.The aetiologyof this enlargement hasnotbeen
determined.Itmayberelated toalteredsplanchnic
bloodflowortoincreasedmetabolicactivityof the
kidney in the presence of hyperammonaemia.The
presence of a smalliver and enlarged kidneys on plain
radiography ofa young dog is highly suggestive of the
15.3
Ar intra-hepaticshuntinanAustralian Cattle
Dog.The vena cava communicales directly with
presenceof aportosystemic shunt.
theportal veinwithin theparenchyma of the liver.
110
Chapter 15  Hepatoencephalopathy
after surgery. Clinical outcome has been reported ta
 needed to control neurological signs; muscle atrophy,
be significantly worse in dogs older than 2 years at the
which may occur with a highly protein restricted diet,
time of surgery.
can reduce the patient's ability to metabolize ammonia.
 Uncommon postsurgical sequelae in both dogs and
Excessive fat intake should be avoided and a good
cats are the development of intractable seizures and
qualily vitamin and mineral supplement (without me-
neurological deficits such as blindness. There are re-
thionine) should be provided.
 ports of successful management of this problem, includ-
Lactulose is a synthetic disaccharide that is nei-
ing use of propofol infusion. However, in many cases
ther hydrolysed nor absorbed by the small intestine.
management is unsuccessful; martality is high and
 Although its mode of action is uncertain, it is believed
 irreversible brain damage common in survivors. The
to act as an osmotic laxative, clearing ammonia-
 pathogenesis of the seizuires has not been determined.
producing bacteria from the colon, as well as acidify-
ing the colon to trap ammonia. Lactulose has been
Medical management
 shown in controlled studies in humans to be beneficial
Medical management of hepatic encephalopathy is
in portosystemic encephalopathy and to reduce am-
worth attempting when surgical correction is not possi-
 monia absorption from the gut. The therapeutic goal
ble due to the nature of the shunt or if appropriate
is to administer a sufficient amount of lactulose solu-
surgical skills are not available or affordable. However,
tion orally to result in the passage of 2 or 3 soft stools
medical management may result in only temporary
per day.
 alleviation of clinical signs.
Oral antibiotics, such as neomycin, ampicillin or
Medical therapy involves use of a restricted or
metronidazole, are initially given concurrently with
modified protein diet, gut-active antimicrobial agents
lactulose and a low protein diet. (Occasional problems
(such as neomycin and metronidazole) and lactulose
have been encountered with the use of neomycin,
syrup. The aim of dietary management in patients with
 including ototaxicity and the development of gut micro-
liver disease is to provide sufficient nutrients and
bial antibiotic resistance.) Once the patient is stable,
 energy to support hepatic tissue repair, reduce the
 the antibiotic treatment is ceased and the low protein
metabolic load on the liver (such as amino acid
diet is withdrawn to determine whether the condition
deamination, glyconeogenesis, lipid metabolism and
can be managed with lactulose alone.
bile secretion) and minimize the potential for encepha-
lopathy to devalop. Diets should contain high quality
protein in moderate amounts and rely on non-protein
References and further reading
sources for most of the kilojoules. Commercially avail-
 able feline ar canine restricted protein diets or home-
Heldmann E, Holt DE, Brockman DJ, Brown DC and Perkowski SZ
(1999) Use of propofol lo manage seizure activily after surgical
prepared diets based on cottage cheese, eggs, rice
treatment of portosystemic shunts.uaurnal of Smalf Animal
and liverare useful., Profein should only be restricted as
Practce 40, 590-594
111
Infectious and
parasitic diseases
Stanley L.Marks
Introduction
Faecalexamination
Afaecalexaminationisintegraltothediagnosticinves-
tigationof dogs and catswithvomiting,diarrhoea and
mostcommonmaladiesfacingthesmallanimalpracti-
weight loss (Figure 16.1).The techniques used most
tioner today,and bacterial,viral andparasitic entero-
commonly include direct saline smear (wet prepara-
pathogensplayanimportant role in manyof these cases.
tion),stained smearand faecal flotation.ABaermann
Dogs and catsharbouring intestinal parasites or even
techniqueisindicatedwhenparasiticlarval stagesare
bacterial pathogens can remain asymptomatic,but may
beingevaluated.
developclinicalsignsranginginseverityfromamild,self-
limitingdarrhoea,toapotentiallyfatalacuthaemorrhagic
Direct smear
diarrhoeal syndrome.Evaluationof the animal'shistory
Fresh faeces(ideally<2hours old) should always be
andphysical examination are integral toformulating an
used topreserve themotility of trophozoites,such as
appropriate list of differential diagnoses ranking the most
Giardia spp.and Tritrichomonas foetus(Figure 16.2).
likelyinfectiousagentsinvolved.Parvovirusenteritisisan
Asmallamountoffaecesisplacedonawarmslide and
importantconsiderationinayoung,unvaccinatedpuppy
adrop of0.9%saline ismixedwith thefaeces.It is
presenting witha history of lethargy,anorexia and vomit-
importantthatthesmearisnottoothick,astrophozoites
ing,whereassalmonellosisisanimportantconsideration
may be missed. A simple rule of thumb is that one
inamiddle-aged orolderimmunocompromisedanimal
shouldbeabletoread thefineprintofanewspaper
thatisfebrile andpresentswithahistoryofhaemorrhagic
through the smear.After application of a coverslip.
diarrhoea.
thesmear isevaluatedformotileorganismsby
Egg sizes
50pm
12×10um
10x15.m
36×30um
37x32um
42x35um
60x40um
70×35μm
72x45um
50m
80×38um
Toxoplasma
Giardia
isospora
Taenia sp.
lsospora
Ancyiostoma
Capilaria
Uncinaria
Trichuris
ipucb
canis
felis
caninum
aarophila
stenocephala
vulpis
75 x65.m
82x70um
87×75um
97x30um
105x63m
45x45.m
2.2mmx34um
Toxccara cati
Toxascaris
Toxocara
Paragonimus
Grain mitegg
Dipylidumcaninum
Strongyloides
leonina
canis
1-63eggsipacket
stercoralis
dentification of protozoan cysts and worm eggs thatmaybe found inthe faeces of dogs and cats.(Courtesy of
16.1
Hoechst-Roussel-Agri Vet Company,USA;permissicnrequested)
112
Chapter 16
Infectious andparasitic diseases
Stained faecal smear showing characteristic
Centrituge with free swinging buckets showing
16.2
16.3
apoearanceofTritrichomonas foetuswith its
a coversl p in place bcfore ccntrifugation.
long undulating membrane.
examining atx10magnification,withconfirmation at
isutilized.It isimportant to appreciate that faecal
x40magnification.
flotationshavelimitationsand shouldnotbeused to
detect heavy ova that donot float(e.g.Paragonimus)
Stained smear
or larvae(e.g.Aelurostrongylus).
Stained smearshave traditionailybeen examined to
Thetypeandspecificgravityof theflotationmedium
evaluate for:thepresenceofendospores associated
used areimportant considerations.The authorrecom-
with Clostridiumperfringens;thepresenceof spiral-
mends zinc sulphate with a specific gravity of 1.18to1.2
shaped,Gram-negative bacteria consistent with
forflotations.This solution andspecific gravity are
Campylobacterspp.;or the presence ofincreased white
optimal for flotation of ova and Giardia cysts, while
blood cells.Unfortunately,the diagnostic utility of in-
maintaining the structural detail of the Giardia cyst.
creasedfaecalendospores isvery limitedassome
healthy,non-diarrhoeic dogscan alsohave increased
Procedureforcentrifugal flotation:
faecal endospores.In addition,there isno correlation
betweenthefindingofincreasedfaecal endospores and
1.
Prepare a faecal emulsion using2-5 g of faeces
the presence of enterotoxin.Thepresence of spiral-
and30ml of saturated saltorzincsulphate solution.
shapedbacterial organisms shouldbe interpretedwith
2.
Straintheemulsionthrougha teastraineror
caution as therearea numberof Campylobacterspp.in
cheeseclothintoa 15ml conical centrifuge tube.
dogs and cats, some of which may be non-pathogenic.
Suspending a funnel over the tube facilitates
Perhaps the best use ofstained faecal smearsis to
filling the tube.
makeadiagnosisofHistoplasmaorPrototheca.The
3.
Fill thetubewithflotationmedium tocreatea
diagnosticyield of stained faecal smears can be in-
positive meniscus.
creasedbyusinga cofton swab introducedinto the
4.
Placeacoverslipontopof the tube.
rectum and gentlyrotated several times.The cotton
Balance the tube in the centrifuge.
swab isrolled onto a glass slide,which is then stained
6.
Centrifuge the tubes for 10 minutes at 400-600
after air-drying.However, this sample is not ideal for
G (approximately 1500 r.p.m).
culture,where a sampleof faecesispreferred.
Carefullyremove thecoverslipsfromthe tubes
by lifting straight upandplace themon a slide.
Faecal flotation
8.
Examine the slidewithin10 minutes.Examine
Faecalflotations areindicated fortherecoveryof cysts,
entirecoverslipatx10.Usex40 toconfirm
oocystsand ova in faeces.Freshfaeces should be
identificationbyvisualizinginternal structures
examinedwheneverpossible,orafreshspecimencan
and measuring the organism.
be refrigerated forup to72hours fordetection of cysts,
oocysts orova viaa concentration technique.Fresh
Modification:lf using a fixed-angle centrifuge that
faecescanalsobeplaced in10%bufferedformalin if
doesnot have freeswingingbuckets,the above tech-
evaluationwillbedelayedmorethan72hours.Speci-
niqueis used butthe centrifugetubeisfilled towithin an
mensfixedinformalin aresuitableforconcentration
inchorsofromthetop,andacoverslipisnataddedfor
techniques,acid-fast stains and immunoassays.Al-
the final spin.When thefinal centrifugation step is
thoughstanding(gravitational) flotationmethodsare
complete,thetube iscarefullysetupright ina test tube
easierandquickertoperformthancentrifugationflota-
rack. A pipette is then used to gently run additional
tion,there is abundant evidence supporting the supe-
flotation solution down the side of the tube while
riorsensitivity(uptoeight-fold)ofcentrifugationflotation
disturbing the contents as little possible.Apositive
(Figure 16.3).Animals with lowparasite burdens could
meniscus is createdand a coverslip set on top.The
have a false-negativeresult if the gravitational method
tubeis allowedto stand for5minutesonly.Thecover-
113
Chapter 16
Infectious andparasiticdiseases
slipisremoved andplaced ontoaslide andexamined
microscope is necessary to perform this test. Enzyme
as described in step 8.
immunoassays arerelatively simple toperform and do
not require morphological identification of the cyst or
Faecalimmunoassays
Themorphological detectionofGiardiacysts(Figure
thebottomof a micro-well isused to detect thepres-
16.4) or Cryptosporidium oocysts (Figure 16.5) via
ence of Giardia-specific antigen(GSA)in thefaeces.
faecalflotationcanbetechnicallydemandingand time-
An in-house Giardia SNAP test(Idexx Laboratories) is
consuming.lmplementation of immunoassays avoids
alsonowcommerciallyavailable.
the necessityformorphologicalidentificationaltogether,
whilerelyingupontheobservationofacolorimetric
reaction in a well. In addition,immunoassays can be
performedonformalinizedorfrozenfaeces.
Direct flucrescent antibody assay showing
16.6
fluorescent Giardia cysts(larger,oval)and
Cryptosporidium oocysts (smaller, round).
16.4
Zinc sulphate fiotation shcwing Giardia cysts.
Treatment:Metronidazole ismoderatelyeffective in
the dog,with a reported efficacy of 67%.The drug
appears tobe effectivein cats,although neurological
adverse effects are occasionallyseen indogs at the
higherrecommended doseof50mg/kgp.o.q24hfor
5-10 days.Metronidazole is administered at 25mg/kg
p.o.q12hfor5daysincats.Albendazole(25mg/kgp.0.
q12h for 5 days for cats) is also effective,but may
causeleucopenia insome animalsand it should notbe
used in early pregnancy.Fenbendazole isnot ap-
proved for use in thecat in the USA but islicensed in
the UK.If is effective inboth dogs and cats when used
for3-5 days at50 mg/kg p.0.q24h.
Vaccination:AvaccineisavailableintheUSA,butas
infection isreadilydiagnosed and treated andmany
16.5
Faecal smear showing a single acid-fast stained
infected dogsare asymptomatic,the merit of vaccina-
Cryptosporidium oocyst in a diarrhoeic cat.
tion against giardiasis has not been convincingly dem-
onstrated.Indeedthevaccinedoesnotpreventinfection
but only reduces shedding of trophozoites or cysts.
Intestinalparasites
Thusroutine vaccination for Giardiais notrecom-
mended in household dogs.The vaccine may have
Protozoa
applicationinbreedingkennelswhere large numbers
of dogs are housed in closeproximity toone another.
Giardia
Direct fluorescent antibody assay (DFA) is often the
Cryptosporidium
standardagainstwhich other testsfor Giardia are
Cryptosporidium can causechronicdiarrhoea incats
measured (seeFigures 16.4and16.6).TheMerifluor
and dogs,although it is usually considered a self-
Cryptosporidium/Giardiaassayusesafluorescein
limitinginfection.Detectionbyfaecalflotationisdifficult
isothiocyanate(FITC)-labelledmonoclonalantibody
as the organism is very small.Acid-fast staining of
directedagainstcell wall antigensofGiardiacysts in
faecal smearsand immunoassaysaid detection.
the stool. A positive result is indicated by apple green
fluorescence of the cyst (Figure 16.6). Morphological
Treatment:Eradication of thisparasite hasproven
identificationisfacilitatedby thefluorescentappear-
difficultandmanyputativelyeffectivedrugs aretoxicin
ance of the cysts or oocysts;however,a fluorescent
cats ordogs.The macrolide,tylosin,isnot effectivefor
114
Chapter16Infectious andparasitic diseases
eradicationofCryptosporidium.Azithromycin isused
Diagnosis:The large ova(approximately 80μm) with
in humans for management of cryptosporidiosis and
a characteristic thickwall are easy to appreciate on
canbe administeredat7-10mg/kgp.0.q12hfor7days
faecal flotation.
in dogs and cats.The aminoglycoside,paramomycin,
is potentially nephrotoxic and ototoxic and should
Treatment:Piperazineandpyrantelaresafe inpup-
preferably notbe used.Nitazoxanide may also be
pies and kittens (see Chapter 28). The treatment
effective(see Chapter28)
should berepeatedat approximately3 weeks.
Fenbendazoleisalsoaneffectiveanthelminticandcan
Toxoplasma
beadministered tonewbornpuppiesat100mg/kgfor
ForinformationonToxoplasmaseeBSAVA Manualof
3daystokillmore than90%ofprenatallarvae.Puppies
Canine andFeline InfectiousDiseases.
should beroutinely treatedevery2weeks,startingat2
weeks of age,until 8weeks.
Tritrichomonasfoetus
Tritrichomonasfoetusisconsideredacauseof mild
Hookworms
colitis in some animals,particularly cats.
Ancylostoma spp.arevoracious blood suckers,where
theworms liveinthesmall intestinal lumen andattach
Nematodes
to the mucosa.Dogs areinfectedwhentheyingestova
or by transcolostral transmission.Puppies and occa-
Whipworms
sionallykittenscanhavelife-threateningblood lossor
Animals acquireTrichurisvulpisinfection(Figure16.7)
iron-deficiency anaemia,melaena,haematochezia
by ingesting ova.The adult worms burrow into the
and failure to thrive.
colonicandcaecal mucosa andmay cause inflamma-
Uncinaria spp.arenot blood suckers,but can cause
tion,haematochezia andintestinal protein loss.Cats
bothprofuse diarrhoea and interdigital dermatitis due
rarelyacquire whipworms.Severe infection may cause
to transdermal larval migration.
hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia,mimickinghypo-
adrenocorticism.
Diagnosis:Faecal flotation should be positive as the
worms produce a large number of eggs.
16.7
Treatment:Fenbendazole,pyrantel andmilbemycin
Faecal flotation
are all effective in the dog.
showing
Trichurisvulpis
ova(darkcr
Enteropathogenic bacteria
appearing
biperculate ova)
Thebacteriamostcommonlyincriminatedincanine
and
and feline diarrhoea include Clostridiumperfringens,
Ancylostoma
Clostridiumdifficile,Campylobacterspp.,Escherichia
caninumova.
coli and Salmonella spp.However,the clinicai signifi-
cance ofisolationof enteropathogenicbacteriaindogs
and catsasacauseofdiarrhoeaiscloudedby the
existence of many of these organisms as normal con-
stituentsof theindigenousintestinal flora.Veterinary
surgeons arefaced witha quandary when attempting
to diagnosesuspected bacterial-associateddiarrhoea
Diagnosis: T.vulpis should always be considered in
in smallanimalsbecausetheisolationratesforputative
dogs with evidence of colonic disease.Afaecal cen-
bacterial enteropathogensare indeed often similar in
trifugation flotation shouldallowrecognition of the
diarrhoeicandnon-diarrhoeicanimals,andbecause
biperculate ova;however,intermittent shedding has
the incidence of bacterial-associated diarrhoea is ex-
been well documented in dogs,and animals with a
tremely variable.The indications for performing faecal
negativefaecal flotationshouldbeempirically treated.
entericpanels arepoorly defined,resulting in indis-
criminatetesting and misinterpretation of results.Fae-
Treatment:Fenbendazole is a broad spectrum an-
cal cultures and toxin analysisshould bereservedfor
thelmintic that is remarkably safe.The drug is admin-
dogs and cats developing diarrhoea after kennelling or
show attendance,in animals with an acute onset of
and the regime is repeated at 3weeks and3 months
bloodydiarrhoea in associationwithevidence ofsep-
followinginitiationof therapy.
sis,and indiarrhoea outbreaks occurring inmore than
onepet ina househald.Screening for Clostridium
Roundworms
difficile,Campylobacterspp.orSalmonellaspp.isalso
Roundworms are common in dogs(Toxocara canis
indicatedwhen zoonotic concernsarepresent be-
and Toxascaris leonina) and cats (Toxocara cati and
causeofan immunocompromised owner.
Toxascaris leonina).In young puppies and kittens
common clinical signs include diarrhoea,failure to
Clostridium perfringens
thrive,a poor haircoat and a‘pot bellied’appearance.
Clostridiumperfringens is ananaerobic,spore-form-
Vomiting is occasionallyobservedwhen theround-
ing,Gram-positivebacillus that hasbeen associated
wormsgain access to the stomach.
with outbreaksof acute,often severediarrhoea in
115
Chapter 16  Infectious and parasitic diseases
humans, horses, dogs and cats. The elaboration of four
studies have reported no significant difference in the
major toxins (α, β, <, and e) is the basis for typing the
isolation of C.dificilefrom diarrhoeicand non-diarrhoeic
organism into five toxigenic phenotypes, A to E. Each
dogs, although animals that are toxin-positive are
type may also express a subset of at least 10 other
invariably culture-positive. Similar to C. perfringens, a
 established toxins, including C. perfringens entero-
strong association was found between the detection of
toxin(CPE), a well characterized virulence factor whose
C. difficile toxin A and the presence of AHDS.
production is supposedly co-regulated with sporula-
tian. Dogs with C. perringens-associated diarrhoea
Treatment
frequently exhibit large bowel diarrhoea characterized
Metronidazole (10 mg/kg p.0. q12h for approximately
by increased frequency of bowel movements with
7 days) administration is the therapy of choice for
tenesmus, faecal mucus and haematochezia; how-
dogs and cats with suspected C. difficile-associated
ever, clinical signs of enterifis or enterocolitis are also
diarrhoea.Although metronidazole-resistant C.dificile
commonly seen. A strong association has also been
Isolates obtained from foals and adult horses have
detected between the CPE (detected via an enzyme-
been reported; a recent study evaluating the suscep-
linked immunosorbent assay, ELlsA) and acute
tibilities of 70 canine C. difficile isolates showed that
haemorrhagic diarrhoeal syndrome (AHDS). CPE was
all were susceptible to <1 μg/ml metronidazole. The
detected in the faeces of 8 of 12 dogs (67%) that had
second drug of choice in humans and occasionally
 clinical signs consistent with AHDS. Of the four dogs
in horses is vancomycin; however, it is used only in
that had peracute symptoms and died as a result of the
cases of non-responsive C. difficile-associated diar-
disease, all had faecal specimens positive for CPE.
rhoea or when metronidazole-resistant strains have
been demonstrated.
Diagnosis
Currently, diagnosis of C. perfringens-associated diar-
Campylobacter
rhoea in the dog is made based on detection of CPE
Campylobacterspecies are small (0.2-0.5x 0.5-5 μm),
in faecal specimens in conjunction with clinical signs
microaerophilic, Gram-negative curved rod-shaped
of disease. The value of quantitative faecal culture
bacteria. Campylobacterspecies that have been impli-
and faecal spore counts have been shown to be of
cated in canine enteric disease include C. jejuni, C.
poor diagnostic value as the organism is isolated from
cofi, C. heiveticus and C. upsaliensis. It has recently
more than 80% of healthy dogs, and there is no
been shown that some selective media can have an
correlation between spore counts and detectian of
inhibitory effect on a number of Campylobacter spp.,
enterotoxin. There is only one commercially available
resulting in more sensitive species, such as
ELISA kit(Techlab Inc.) for detection of CPEin faecal
 C. upsaliensis, or other catalase-negative or weakly
specimens; however, the performance characteris-
 positive species being missed. Faecal shedding of C.
tics of this assay have not been validated in the dog
jejunis significantly greater in dogs <6 months old and
to date.
lence of infection in puppies versus adult dogs may
Treatment
reflect increased exposure of young animals to faecal
Antibiotics that have been recommended for the treat-
excrement and confinement to a limited space. In
ment of canine C. perfringens-associated diarrhoea
addition, the unexposed immune system of puppies
 include oral ampicillin (22 mg/kg p.o. q8h), metronid-
may increase susceptibility to intestinal colonization by
azole (10 mg/kg p.o. q12h) and tylosin (15 mg/kg p.0.
C.jejuni Other enteric pathogens, such as parvovirus,
q12h). Tetracycline use should be avoided due to the
Giardiaor Samonella,may play a synergistic role.The
high incidence of tetracycline resistance.
isolation of Campylobacterspp. from a diarrhoeic ani-
mal does not recessarily implicate Campylobacteras
Clostridium difficile
a cause of the diarrhoea. Indeed a recent study
 Clostridium difficileis a Gram-positive, anaerobic spore-
documented a significantly higher incidence of
forming bacillus and is the major cause of antibiotic-
Campylobacter in healthy. non-diarrhoeic cats (20%)
associated pseudomembranous colitis in human
than in diarrhoeic cats (1 1%).
patients. C. difficile has also been associated with
diarhoea and enterocolitis in foals and adulthorses, as
Diagnosis
well as diarrhoea in dogs. C. difficile-associated diar-
 Campylobacter-ike organisms (CLOs) can be identi-
rhoea is less common in cats and a recent study by the
fied by examining stained smears (Gram stain or
author documented an incidence of 5% in diarrhoeic
 Romanowsky-type stain) of fresh faeces fram the pa-
cats. Two toxins, A and B, are thought to be primarily
tient. The characteristic morphology of the organism
responsible for disease associated with the organism,
(slender, curved rods with an 'S' shape or seagull-
althiough other toxins may also play a role.
shaped appearance) allows it to be identified relatively
easily. The major limitation of direct examinations is
Diagnosis
Current diagnosis of C. difficile-associated diarrhoea is
cies of Campylobacter or between related organisms
primarily made based upon detection of toxin A or toxin
including Helicobacter spp. and Anaerobiospirillum
B in faecal specimens via ELlSA. lsolation of the
spp. In addition, identification of CLOs is not sufficient 
organism alone is not sufficient for diagnosis due to the
to warrant a diagnosis of Campylobacter-associated
presence of non-toxigenic strains. In addition, previous
diarrhoea as many healthy dogs and cats can harbour
116
Chapter 16 Infectious &and parasitic diseases
CLOs in their intestinal tract.
Clinical signs
 For optimal recovery of Campylobacter spp., fae-
Most Saimoneila-infected dogs and cats are asympto-
ces or faecal swabs should be fresh or placed imme-
 matic, although some animals may manifest clinical
diately into anaerobic transport medium before
signs of systemic sepsis. Signs of clinical salmonel-
refrigeration at 4℃C. For isolation, the use of a formu-
losis in dogs include fever, anorexia, diarrhoea (which
jated selective medium containing antimicrobial agents
maybe bloody), vomiting, weightloss, nasal discharge,
(e.g. Campy-CVA containing cefoperazone, vanco-
pelvic limb paresis and abortion.
mycin and amphotericin B) gives better recovery than
other direct-plating selective media. Microaerophilic
Diagnosis
incubation conditions should be maintained and the
 The traditional diagnosis of salmoneliosis is made
 based on isolation of the organism in conjunction with
plates should be incubated at 37°℃, or at 42°℃, when
isolation of C. jejuni and C. coli from faeces is at-
 clinicai signs and assessment of potential risk factors,
such as hospitalization, age, environmental exposure
tempted. Suspect colonies should be Gram-stained
and sub-cultured to 5% sheep blocd agar (SBA).
and antibiotic administration. However, isolation of
Biochemical tests can then be performed to deter-
Saimonellais not necessarily indicative of involvement
mine the species of all CLOs isoiated. The use of 
 in disease as similar isolation rates can be detected in
heaithy non-diarrhoeic animals. Haematological ab-
selectlve medium containing cefoperazone should be
normalities are variabie, and include a non-regenera-
used when attempting to isolate C. upsaliensis, as the
tive anaemia, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia and
organism is more resistant to cefoperazone than to
cephalothin. Characterization of Campylobacter in-
neutropenia with a left shift. Toxic neutrophils are found
fections or mixed infections with Helicobacter and
in animals with systemic disease and endotoxaemia.
 Campyiobacter spp. is best accomplished utilizing
findings similar to those documented with canine
 parvovirus. Fresh faecal specimens should be placed
molecular structure-based diagnostics, employing ge-
 on to one or more selective media, including MacConkey
nus- and species-specific polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), restriction fragment length polymorphism
agar, XLD agar, and brilliant green agar. For enrich-
ment, seleniteF,tetrathionate, orGram-negative broth
(RFLP) analysis and 16S rRNA sequence analysis.
are recommended.
Treatment
Treatment
 Although diarrhoea produced by Campylobacter or-
 Intravenous fluid therapy may be required depending
 ganisms is usually self-liriting, the zoonotic potential
 on the severity of the diarrhoea. Antibiotic therapy is
of.the organism often necessitates medical therapy. It
typically Indicated for animals with concurrent signs of
is now recognized that Campylobacter are a leading
 systemic infection or history of immunosuppression.
cause of enteric disease in people and that diarrhoeic
Antibiotics reported to be effective against Saimonella
.
and non-diarrhoeic dogs can serve as sources of
 include fluoroquinolones, chloramphenicol, trimetho-
infection for humans. The drugs of choice are the
prim-sulphonamide and amoxicilin. Fresh-frozen
macrolides (erythromycin at 10-15 mg/kg p.0. g8h) or
 plasma may be beneficial for dogs with more savere.
quinolones (enrofloxacin at 5 mg/kg p.0. q12h). How-
signs of endotoxaemia.
ever, due to 'the high rate of mutational resistance
Campylobacter organisns have to the quinolones, a
Pathogenic Escherichia coli
resistance that sometimes occurs while animais are
Escherichia cofis a pleomorphic, Gram-negative, non-
being treated, they are not the drug of choice. Erythro-
spore-forming rod that is a member of the family
mycin is the drug of choice, despite the associated
Enterobacteriaceae. Several distinct pathogenic cat-
 gastrointestinal (Gl) side-effects. The duration of ex-
egories (pathotypes) of diarrhoeogenic E. coliare now
cretion in infected dogs and cats can be as long as 4
recognized. Although the virulence determinants of
 months and infected animals should be quararitined
each E. coli pathotype are distinct, they can generally
 away from children during this period.
be categorized as eithercolonization factors(adhesins),
which enable the bacteria to bind closely to the intes-
Saimonella
tinal mucosa and resist removal by peristalsis, or
 Saimonefla species are primarily motile, non-spore-
secretad toxins, which interrere withthe nornal physio.
forming, Gram-negative aerobic bacilli. There are cur-
logical process of host cells. Despite the occurrence of
E. coli as a normal commensai in the canine intestine,
that have been associated with both human and animal
there is increasing evidence that certain E. coli
disease. Saimonella spp.are one of the most common
 pathotypes cause intestinal disease in dogs. The three
causes of human food-borne disease. Clinical salmon-
 pathotypes that have been studied in the dog are
ellosis in dogs and cats is rare, although prevalences
enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), enterohaemorrhagic
are higher in puppies and kennel populations. lsolation
E. coli (EHEC) and enferopathogenic E. coli (EPEC).
of Saimonelaspp.fromadultdogs ranges from O to 2%
Very litle is known about pathogenic E. colin cats,
innon-diarrhoeicanimals, and from 0to 1%indiarhoeic
 although EPEC was isolated from approximately 5% of
dogs. The isolation rates are similar in non-diarrhoeic
 cats with diarrhoea, enteritis'or septicaemia.
and diarrhoeic cats. A recently published study evalu-
ating the prevalence of Saimonella among dogs fed
Enterotoxigenic E. coll
raw food diets, isolated Saimonella spp. from 80% of
 The true incidence of this pathotype in canine diar-
the diet samples and 30% of the stool samples.
rhoea is stil unclear, with reported prevalences among
1.17
Chapter 16 Infectious and parasitic diseases
diarrhoeic dogs ranging from 0 to 31%. The bacteria.
 genes of E. colin faecal specimens from dogs with four
colonize the proximal small intestine, where they pro-
multiplex PCRs. Aithough EPEC and EHEC are asso-
duce heat-stable.(ST) and occasionally heat-labile
ciated with characteristic attaching and effacinglesions,
(LT) enterotoxins. These enterotoxins result in over-
molecular techniques for the detection of genes spe-
production ofcyclicadenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
 cific for each pathatype is more reliable than histologi-
cal examination.
consequent development of a secretory diarrhoea.
Treatment
Enteropathogenic E. coli
The use of antimicrobials is controversial for several
EPEC strains are negative for Shiga-toxin and entero-
reasons. These bacteria have a relatively high inci-
toxin (ST and LT) genes, but carry the chromosomally
dence of inherent resistance to antibiotics because of
located gene, eaeA (E. coli attaching effacing). E. coli
the presence of a Gram-negative cell wall, and be-
isolates from 44 of 122 dogs (36%) dying with diarrhoea
cause of the high incidence of conjugative transter of
were found to have the eaeA gene and E. coli was the
resistance determinants. In addition, antibiotic therapy
sole pathogen identified in 15 of 44 (34%) dogs.
may enhance toxin synthesis or promote its release
 from the bacteria with a consequent increased rate of
Enterohaemorrhagic E. coli
haemorrhagic colitis. Canine patients with only mild
EHEC strains bind tightly to epithelial cells and produce
clinical signs probably do not warrant antibiotic treat-
the same type cf attachment-effacement lesions as
ment, whereas parenteral antibiotics and fluid therapy
seen with EPEC. EHECs are minimally invasive but do
are indicated in severe cases, particularly if the patient
incite an inflammatory response, predominantly in the
is septicaemic. The Enterobacteriaceae are usually
large intestlne. The prototype EHEC, a strain of E. coffi
resistant to chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, ampicillin
of the serotype O157:H7, is a significant food-borne
and sulphonamides. Clinically stable animals can be
 pathogen of human beings. Haemolytic-uraemic syn-
treated with amoxicillin-clavulanate and first- or sec-
drome is the most Important complication of E. coli
ond-generation cephalosporins until susceptibility re-
0157 infection, and is characterized by microangio-
sults are known. Dogs with life-threatening bacteraemia
 pathic haemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia and 
 should be treated with amikacin, a third-generation
acute renal failure in approximately 7% of human
cephalosporin, or enrofloxacin.
cases. To date, only a single report has documented
Orally administered autogenous or recombinant
the isolation of this serotype from a dog's faeces. The
vaccines have been studied extensively in farm ani-
isolated strain was found to be idertical to a strain
mals in an effort to help prevent or treat ETEC-medi-
isolated from an affected child who had contact with the
 ated diarrhoea. An orally administered autogenous
dog. This finding suggests that similar to catle, dogs
vaccine containing heat inactivated E. coli was admin-
 iss o s  se s 
istered to diarrhoeic puppies and adult dogs once daily
EHEC 0157.
for 14 days, and led to a significant decrease in morbid-
ity and mortality. Additional studies are warranted to
Clinical signs
ensure the safety of this therapeutic regimen.
Pathogenic E. coli strains are commonly isolated from
faeces of apparently healthy dogs, and clinical signs
can range from asymptomatic carriage to haemorrhagic
Viral infections
diarrhoea. In addition, clinical signs can be variable
because of the relatively high incidence of concurrent
Canine and feline viral enteritis are usually diagnosed
enteric infections with parvovirus, (
Clostridium
in younger unvaccinated animals. The animai's age,
perfringens and intestinal parasites. The predominant
history, clinical signs and haematological findings are
clinical sign of enterotoxigenic E. col infection is pro-
important in ranking a viral aetiology as a likely cause
fuse watery diarrhoea.
of the animal's diarrhoea.
Diagnosis
Canine parvovirus
Because E. coli is a significant component of the
jo sadsi om ag uooaui o algdaosns ane shog
commensal canine intestinal flora, isolation of the
 parvovirus. Canine parvavirus-1 (CpV-1) is arelatively
 organism is not diagnostic, nor does it allow differentia-
non-pathogenic virus that is occasionally associated
tion between pathogenic and non-pathogenic strains.
with myocarditis, pneumonitis and gastroenteritis in
However, culture enables the application of molecular
very young puppies. Canine parvovirus-2 (CPV-2)
techniques for detection of specific toxin genes among
causes classic parvovirus enteritis 5-12 days after
isolated organisms. Culture of E. coff involves spread-
infection via the faacal-oral route. CPV-2b is a more
 ing fresh faecal specimens on to selective media, such
recently recognized mutated form of CPV-2, which
as MacConkey agar, which will only support the growth
may be more pathogenic in some dogs. Dobermanns,
of Gram-negative organisms. Single lactose-positive
Rottweilers, Pit Bull Terriers and Labrador Retrievers
yonoui paepads pue panno-gns tau ae sauoio
appear more susceptible than cther breeds.
biochemical testing. PCR has become one of the most
The virus replicates in the intestinal crypts and
causes severe villous blunting, diarrhoea, vomiting
pathogenic strains of E. cofi. A recent study showed
and subsequent bacterial translocation. Presenting
that it is possible to detect 11 of the major virulence
complaints can vary from lethargy and anorexia, to
118
Chapter 16  Infectious and parasitic diseases
vomiting with or without blood. Diarrhoea can'be ab-
with a broad spectrum aerobic and anaerobic antibiotic
(e.g. ampicillin plus amikacin). Human granulocyte
24-48 hours after onset of vomiting. The diarrhoea can
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) at 5 μg/kg s.c. or i.v.
often be profuse and haemorrhagic. Protein-losing
q24h has been used to increase neutrophil numbers,
 enteropathy characterized by panhypoproteinaemia
but may not influence patient outcome, whereas some
can be seen in severe cases. Dogs are predisposed to
benefit has been shown for c-interferon. Anti-emetics,
sepsis, secondary to neutropenia associated with viral
such as prochlorperazine, metoclopramide or
damage to bone marrow progenitors, and bacterial
 cndansetron, are indicated if the vomiting is intracta-
transiocation due to intestinal damage. Clinical signs
ble. Metoclopramide is most effective when adminis-
can be exacerbated with concurrent infection with
tered as a constant rate infusion at a dose of 1 mg/kg
distemper virus, coronavirus, Saimonelia, Campylo-
q24h. Gastric protectants, including H2 receptor ant-
bacter, Giardia or other intestinal parasites.
agonists and sucralfate, are indicated if there is evi-
dence of secondary oesophagitis. Broad spectrum
Clinical signs
anthelmintics to treat concurrent intestinal parasites 
 Anorexia,lethargy, fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and dehy-
should be administered when the dog is no longer
dration are common. Hypothermia, icterus and dissemi-
vomiting. Most dogs can be gradually weaned on to a
nated intravascular coagulation (DlC) are typically seen
bland diet of cottage cheese and rice, or a commer-
in severe cases with bacterial sepsis or endotoxaemia.
cially available highly digestible diet; however, the
 presence of intractable vomiting might warrant the
Diagnosis
administration of partial or total parenteral nutrition.
The diagnosis is often made tentatively on the basis of
 clinical details, history and physical examination find-
Vaccination
 ings. A history of sudden onset of vomiting and diar-
Vaccination with a modified live parvovirus is effective
rhoea in a young dog, particularly if the puppy is
at preventing the disease. Vaccines should not be
unvaccinated cr only partially vaccinated, warrants
given before 6 weeks of age because of interference by
consideration. The presence of neutropenia on the
maternally derived antibody. Depending on the vac-
haemogram in association with signs of enteritis is
cine used, an initial course of vaccination is completed
 suggestive of CPV; however, salmonellosis or severe
at 10-12weeks.
infections can also be associated with neutropenia.
The frequency of booster vaccinations is controver-
There are no pathognomonic findings on a serum
sial, and serum antibody concentration, alithough a
laemia, prerenal azotaemia and increased bllirubin or
good correlation between a 'positive' antibody titre and
liver enzymes are commonly found. Abdaminal radia-
protection against canine parvovirus. However, the
 graphy is indicated to help rule out an intestinal foreign
absence of antibody (an obvious decision point in
body; and may reveal intestinal gas, intestinal fluid and
establishing the 'need' to adrminister booster vaccine)
ileus. A faecal ELISA test for CPV-2 should aiways be
does not necessarily correlate with susceptibility. Fur-
 performed on faeces, even if diarrhoea is not present.
thermore, there are no established test standards for
The test is considered sensitive and specific: however,
measuring antibody titres in dogs and cats. One should
the ELisA test resull may be negative if the assay is
expect, for the same serum sample sent to two different
performed too early in the clinical course of the dis-
laboratories, two different reference ranges and two
ease, 0r affer 10-14 days following infection. Other
quite different antibody titres reported. For example,
tests that can be undertaken to confirm the diagnosis
one laboratory will report a 'positive' titre against ca-
of CPV include electron microscopic evaluation of the
nine parvovirus as >1:80, while another laboratory
faeces for the presence of the virus (CPV-1 is indistin-
reporis a value of >1:5 as *positive'. Interpreting test
guishable from CPV-2), haemagglutination inhibition
resulits can be confusing for the clinician and frustrating
for serum IgM, histopathology of intestinal lesions and
for the pet owner.
immunohistochemistry of intestinal bicpsy samples.
Feline parvoviral enteritis
Treatment
Feline parvoviral enteritis (feline panleucopenia) is
Treatment is supportive and similar fo other severe,
caused by a parvovirus distinct from CvP-2b, although
acute infectious enteropathies. Intravenous fluid and
CVP-2b can also infect cats and cause disease. Feline
electrolyte therapy is indicated, with particular atten-
 parvovirus has becorme an uncommon disease because
of routine vaccination; however, outbreaks are occa-
 sionally seen in unvaccinated animals, particularly feral
subcutaneous route is likely to be inadequate. Dex-
populations and catteries. The clinical signs are similar
trose solution (2.5-5%) is added to the intravenous
to those described for dogs with parvoviral enteritis.
fluids if the dog is hypoglycaemic. Plasma or colloids
(dextran 70 or hetastarch) are indicated if the serum
Diagnosis
albumin concentration drops below 20 g/l. Antibiotics
Diagnosis is based on the history, physical examina-
are administered to febrile or severely neutropenic
tion findings, results of a haemogram (neutropenia)
dogs. lf the animal is neutropenic, but afebrile, the
administration of a first-generation cephalosporin is
 canine parvovirus has been reported to cross-react
reasonable. Dogs in septic shock should be treated
with feline parvovirus.
119
Chapter 16  Infectious and parasitic diseases
Treatment
thoracic radiography.to evaluate for pulmonary intersti-
The principles of treatment are virtually identlcal to
tial infiltrates or hilarlymphadenopathy, and abdominal
those described for the dog with parvovirus enteritis.
ultrasonography to evaluate the spleen, liver and me-
 senteric lymph nodes is usually indicated.
Vaccination
Vaccination with a modified live parvovirus is very
Treatment
effective and is given to kittens at 10-12 weeks of age.
tracanazole (5 mg/kg p.o. q12h for 4 days, then q24h
A killed vaccine should be administered to pregnant
thereafter) or amphotericin B (0.25 mg/kg i.v. as test
queens, as transplacental infection of kittens with the
dose, then 0.5 mg/kg i.v. up to three times weekiy) are
vaccine strain can cause cerebellar hypoplasia.
usually effective. The prognosis is extremely variable
The frequency of booster vaccinations is controver-
depending at what stage the disease is diagnosed.
sial and serum antibody concentration, although a
 relatively crude measure of immunity, shows good
Conclusion
 correlation between a 'positive' antibody titre and pro-
tection against feline parvovirus.
Comprehensive faecal exams are pivotal in the diag-
nostic investigation of dogs and cats with diarrhoea or
Canine coronavirus enteritis
Canine coronavirus is closely related to feline enteric
 creased with the examination of fresh faecal speci-
 coronavirus/feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) and trans-
 mens, the utilization of a centrifugation technique with
missible gastroenteritis in pigs. Infection with canine
zinc sulphate solution, and the timely incorporation of
coronavirus is associated with milder clinical signs than
immunoassays for diagnosing Giardia and Crypto-
parvovirus, as the virus destroys mature enterocytes at
sporidium spp. The clinical documentation of entero-
the villus tips while sparing the intestinal crypts. The
pathogenic bacteria causing diarrhoea in dogs is
 bone marrow is typically spared, affording these dogs a
clouded by the presence of many of these organisms
relatively good prognosis with supportive therapy.
existing as normal constituents of the indigenous intes-
Although a canine coronavirus vaccine is available.
tinal flora. The diagnosis of a putative bacterial
there is no scientific evidence that this disease is a
apeuu ag pinoys sieo pue shop u! (s)uaboyiedoaiua
significant problem in household dogs. It is mainly a
 based on a combination of parameters, including clini-
problem when large numbers of dogs are brought 
cal details and predisposing factors, clinical signs,
together under heavy stress (i.e. in dog shows or
serological assays for toxins, faecal culture and PCR.
kennel situations).
Relying on results of faecalculture alone is problematic
because Ciostridium perfringens, Clostridium difficile,
Feline enteric coronavirus
Campylobacter spp., and pathogenic and non-patho-
 Feline enteric coronavirus is related to FlP-producing
genic E. col are commonly isolated from apparently
strains of coronavirus, and invades the enterocytes at
healthy dogs and cats. Faecal cultures may be useful
the tips of the villi. Infected cats may be asymptomatic.
in procuring isolates for the application of molecular
 Or develop mild, transient diarrhoea and fever. Infected
techniques, such as PCF, for detection of specific toxin
 cats can seroconvert and test positive on serological
genes or molecular typing of isolated strains to estab-
testing. in addition, feline enteric coronavirus may
lish clonality in suspected outbreaks. The over simplis-
mutate to FlP virus.
tic attempt to characterize acute bacterial-associated
diarrhoea by anatomical localization of clinical signs
should be discouraged, as most of the above men-
tioned bacteria have been associated with both smal
Intestinal fungal infections
and large intestinal diarrhoea. Accurate diagnosis of
infections may require diagnostic laboratories to incor-
Histopiasma
porate PCR-based assays using genus- and species-
Histoplasma capsulatum may affect the Gl tract, respi-
specific primers to facilifate detection of toxin genes
ratory tract, bones and eyes; infection has not been
and differentiation of species thatappear phenotypically
reported in the UK. Intestinal involvement in dogs is
 and biochemically similar.
characterized by diarrhoea (with or without melaena or
haematochezia) and severe weight loss. Cats are
more commonly presented with puimonary involve-
References and further reading
ment. In dogs, the colon is usually more severely
affected, resulting in clinical signs of tenesmus, mucoid
Alcaino HA and Baker NF Bakcr (1974) Comparison of two flotation
methods for detection of parashe eggs in feces. Joumal of the
stools and haematochezia. Severe disease can be
Anrerican Veterinary Medical Association 164, 620-622
 associated with panhypoproteinaemia.
Aspinall ST, Wareing DR, Hayward PG and Hutchinson DN (1996) A
comparison of a new campylobacler selective medium (CAT)
with membrane filtralion for the isolation of thermophilic
Diagnosis
Identification of the organism via cytology or histology
Baljer G, Hinsch F and Mayr B (19g0) Clinical experienco with
is required. Rectal scrapings should be performed in
kennel-specific E colforal vaccinesin dogs. Tiararztliche Praxis
dogs suspected of having histoplasmosis. A compre-
18, 65-68
Barr SC, Bowman DD and Heller RL (1994) Eficacy of fenbendazole
hensive diagnostic investigation, consisting of a fundo-
against giardiasis in dags. American Jourrat of Veterinary
 scopicexaminationto lookfarevidence ofchoriaretinitis,
Research 55,988-990
120
Chapter 16 Infeclious and parasitic diseases
Barllett JG, Chang TW, Gurwith M, Gorbacn SL and Onderdonk AB
phenotypic characterization of Ciostridium perringens and
(1978) Antibiotic-associated pseudomermbranous colitis due lo
Clostridium difficile in diarrheic and healthy dogs. Journal of
toxin-producing closlridia.NewEnglandJournaiofMcdicine298,
VeterinaryinternalMedicine16,533-540
531-534
Mohr E and Mohr I (1992) Statistical analysis of the incidence of
Bruce D,Zochowski W, Fleming GA(1980) Campyiobacterinfections
positives inthe examinationof parasitological specimens. fourna!
 in cats and dogs. Veterinary Record 107, 200-201
Cave NJ. Marks SL, Kass PH,Meli AC and Brophy MA (2002)
Mead PS, Slutsker L, Dlatz V, MeCaig LF, Bresea JS, Shapiro C,
 Evaluation of a routine diagnostic fecal panel in dogs wilh
Gritin PM and Tauxe RV (1999) Food-related illness and death
diarrhea. Journalofthe American Veterinary Medical Association
in 1he United States. Emerging Infectious Disease 5, 607-625
221,52-59
Moneghan C, Tierney U and Colleran E (1981) Antibiotic resistance
Glickrnan LT, Domanski LM, Patronek GJ and Visintainer F (1985)
 Bread-related rlsk factors for canine parvovlrus enterits. Journal
Antirmicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 19, 266-270
of the AmercanVeterinaryMedical Association187, 58g-594
Pass MA, Odedra R and Balt RM (20o0) Multiplex PCRs for
Hammermueller J, Kruth S, Prescott J and Gyles C (1995) Detecllan
Idantilication of Escherichia colf virulance genes. Journal of
of toxin genes in Escherichia cofisolated from normal dogs and
Clinical Microbiology38,2001-2004
dogs with diarrhea. Canadian Journalof Veterinary Research59,
Torre E and Tello M (i9g3) Faclors Influencing fecal sheuding of
265-270
Campyiobacterjejun/in dogs withoutdiarrhea. Americanyourna!
Hoskins JD, Mirza T and Taylor Hw (1996) Evaluation of a fecal
or Veterinany Research 54, 260-262
antlgen ELISA testforthe dlagnosis ofcanine parvovirus. Jounal
Trevena WB, Hooper .RS, Wray C, wilshaw GA, Cheasty T and
of Veferinary ntcrnaf Medicine 10, 159
Dominguc G (1996) Vero cytotoxin-producing Eschenchia call
Jaife DJ and Scnlesinger DP (2002) Preliminary assessment of the
0157associated with companion animals.Veterinary Record
risk of Samonella infection in dogs fed raw chicken diets.
138,400
CanadianVeterinaryJournai43,441-442
Turk J, Maddox C, Fales W, Ostlund E, Miller M, Johnson G, Pace L,
Marks SL and Kather EJ (2003) Antimicrobial susceptibilies of
Turnquist S and Kreeger J [1998) Examination for heat-labile,
to commonlyuliized anlimicrobialdrugs. VeterinaryMicrobiology
Escherichiacolisolatesobtainedfrondogsdyingwithdiaea:
94,39-45
122 cases (i992-1996). Journal of the American Veterinary
Marks SL. Kather EJ, Kass PH and Mell AC (2002) Genotypic and
Medical Association 212, 1735-1736
121
Disorders of the oral cavii
Linda J. DeBowes
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus andretroviral infections also af-
fect periodontalhealthand maypredisposetogingivitis
Oral diseaseisa commonproblemof dogsandcatsof
and periodontitis.
allages.Anoralexaminationisa veryimportantpartof
every physical examination.Some abnormality of the
Anatomy andphysiologyof the healthy
oral cavityisusuallyfoundwhenadog'sorcat'smouth
periodontium
is examined.
Thetissues involved inperiodontal disease include
Clinical signsoforaldiseasevarydependingonthe
underlyingproblem.Aproblemin theoralcavity should
These tissues include the gingiva,periodontal liga-
besuspected andruledout foranydog orcat showing
ment (PDL),alveolar bone and cementum (Figure
evidenceoforalpain,difficultyeating,nterestinfood
17.1).The gingivaltissues include theattached andthe
butreluctancetoeat,excessivesalivation,facialwll-
freegingiva.The gingival sulcus is the space between
ings or draining fistulas,halitosis orbleeding from the
the tooth and freegingiva.The‘normaldepth of the
oral cavity.
gingival sulcus,inhealthyanimals,isconsidered tobe
<3mm in dogs and <0.5mm in cats. The gingival
epithelium attaches to the tooth surface at,or slightly
Periodontal disease
below,the cementoenameljunction(CEJ).This area of
attachmentisreferredtoasthe junctionalepithelium.
Periodontal diseaseisone of themostcommonprob-
Thesulcular epithelium lines the inside of the gingival
lems in dogs andcats and increases inincidence and
sulcus.The gingiva,especially the junctional epithe-
severitywithadvancing age.
lium, isimportant forproviding a barrierbetween the
Periodontal diseaseisatermthatincludesallstages
oral cavity(gingival sulcus) and the tissues underneath
of inflammation of the structures surrounding the
(PDL,alveolarbone,cementum).
teeth,ranging fromgingivalinflammation(gingivitis)
tosevereperiodontitis,resultinginattachment loss
and eventual tooth loss.
Enamel
Gingivitisisreported tobepresent inatleast70%
Gingival sulcus
of cats anddogsbythe time they aretwoyearsof age.
Gingivitiswill notprogress toperiodontitis inall ani-
Free gingiva
mals.Manyanimals,however,willdevelopperiodonti-
tis(inflammationof the structures supportingtheteeth).
epithelium
Cementoen
periodontitis.The incidence of periodontal disease
junction（CEJ)
increaseswithagein dogsand cats,and decreases
Pulp
with increased size in dogs.Smalland toybreed dogs
Cementum
areespeciallypronetogingivitisandperiodontitis.
Periodortal
Several factorsthat predisposetothedevelopment
ligament(PDL)
ofperiodontal diseaseinclude:
Dentine
Crowding of the teeth
Alveolarbone
Periodontal foreign material(e.g.hair orgrass
between teeth,in gingival sulcus)
Attached gingiva
Eating non-abrasive foods(foodswithno dental
Apical delta
benefits)
。
Malocclusions
。
Specificpiaquebacteria
Rough tooth surfaces
Abnormalhostimmunity.
17.1
Anatomyof thehealthyperiodontium.
。
122
Chapter17Disordersof theoral cavity
The tooth roots are covered by cementum,a non-
plaque isremovedatthisearlystageofperiodontal
vascular,non-innervatedspecializedcalcifiedtissue
disease,theinflammation resolves and the gingiva
that servesto attach theperiodontal ligament fibresto
returnstonormalhealthy tissue.If theplaque isnot
thetoothroot.
removed,it may extend subgingivally where it will
The alveolarbonesurrounding thetoothroot is a
continue toelicitaninflammatoryresponsein the
densecorticalbonetowhichtheperiodontal ligament
gingiva,resulting ingingivitis.Thesubgingival areais
attaches.The periodontal ligament is a highlyvascu-
wherethediseaseisinitialylocatedandwherethe
larized andcellularconnective tissuethatanchorsthe
plaquemustbeeliminated topreventchronicgingivitis
toothto the alveolarbone anddistributestheforcesof
and thepotential of developing periodontitis.
mastication to the surrounding alveolarbone.
Periodontitisispresentwhen the other tissuesof
Leucocytes(mainly neutrophils)migrate from local
the periodontium become involved.The attached epi-
vesselsthrough thejunctionalepithelium intothe
theliumlosesitscoronalattachmentandeventuallythe
gingival sulcusaspart of the normal defence mecha-
PDL,cementumandalveolarbone areaffected.Notall
nism in healthy gingiva.In addition to leucocytes,the
dogs and cats with chronic gingivitis will develop peri-
gingival crevicularfluid(GCF)contains complement,
odontitis.lt is impossible to determine whichpetswill
antibodiesand otherdefencemechanismspreventing
have progressive disease and which will not.Asthe
and contralling local infection.
epithelialattachment is lost therewillbe an increase in
the gingival sulcus depth.When this occurs it is re-
Basicterminology
ferredtoasaperiodontalpocket.Asdiseaseprogresses
The basic terminology used to describe periodontal
apically,and thePDLandalveolarbonearedestroyed
disease is given in Figure 17.2.
thereis anincreasingperiodontal pocketdepth.lfthere
is gingival recession as the attachment loss occurs a
periodontal pocket may not form (Figure 17.3).In this
Term
Definition
case the attachment lossismeasured from the CEJ to
Calculus (tartar)
Calcified plaque
the attached gingiva (bottom of gingival sulcus).
Endodontic
disease
tissues
Gingivitis
Inflammation of the gingiva
Pellicle
A thin filmof salivary glycoproteins that adhere to
the toothsurface
Periodontitis
Inflammation and destruction of the periodontium
(gingiva,PDL,cementum,avolarbone)
Plaque
Asticky yellow/tancolcured bio-film that
accumulates on the teeth.lt contains bacteria,
bacterilbyrodutalivaryrdtr
andothercells.tisresponsible forlocal
inflammation
Pulp
The tissue in the central portion of the tooth,
madeupofloodvesselsnerves andceular
17.3
Gingval recession inacogwiperiodontiis.
elements,including theodontob asts that produce
dentin.
Plaquebacteria and bacterialby-products,suchas
17.2
Basclerminology usedn the description of
lipopolysaccharide(LPS),stimulate thelocalproduc-
periodontal cisease.PDL= periodontal igament.
tion and release of proinflammatory cytokines.As part
of the inflammatoryprocess there is anincreased
Pathogenesis
production ofmatrixmetalloproteinases(MMPs)and
Periodontal disease is theresultofbacterial plaque
prostaglandin E2(PGE2).Proinflammatory cytokines
accumulation and the associated inflammatory re-
stimulateandattractneutrophilstomigrateintothe
sponse.The initial bacteria attach to the tooth surface
GCF,adding to the inflammatory response.With in-
by adhering to thepellicle.Gram-positive bacteria
creasing inflammation thequantityof GCFincreases,
express adhesionmolecules thatbindto salivary
asdoesthe tendencytobleed more easily.Attachment
glycoproteins.These adhesions areimportant forbac-
loss associated withperiodontitisresults from destruc-
terial colonization and growth of supragingival plaque.
tionof thePDLand alveolarbone.TheMMPsdegrade
Gram-negativebacteria bindtotheGram-positivebac-
theconstituentsofunmineralized connective tissues
teriawithindaysofinitialplaqueformation.lfleftonthe
(e.g. collagen). The bone destruction is mediated
tooth surface,the tightly adhered bacterial plaque
through therelease of PGE2
becomesvisibleon the toothsurface adjacent tothe
Chronicinflammationandaltered sulcularepithe-
gingival margin within days. lf not removed, the
liumallowsubgingivalbacteriaandbacterialsubstances
supragingival plaque willincrease,mature,and incite
toenterthe gingival connectivetissues and microcircu-
an inflammatory response in the gingiva.This initial
lation,leading tocontinuedproductionof degradative
gingivitis isreferred to as marginal gingivitis.lf the
products and tissue destruction.
123
Chapter17Disordersof theoral cavity
Earlyin theinflammatory process,neutrophils,fol-
lowed laterbymacrophagesand lymphocytes,migrate
intotheextravascularcompartment,forminganinflam-
matoryinfiltrate.Periodontal pocketformation is asso-
ciated with an inflammatory infiltrate of neutrophils,
Iymphocytesandmonocyte-macrophages.
Periodontitis isgenerallyconsideredanirreversible
processwith aninabilityforregrowthofnormalcemen-
tum,PDLandalveolarbone.Theprogressivenaturef
thisprocess will result in tooth loss if left untreated. In
certain cases it maybepossible to gain attachment or
regrowthofperiodontal supportingstructuresifmore
advanced dental techniques are used (see BSAVA
Manualof Small Animal Dentistry).
a)
Clinical features
Clinical signs of periodontal disease are:
Halitosis
Blood on toothbrush after brushing
Blood onchew toys orfood
Blood-tinged saliva
Discomfort on eating
Nasal discharge(oronasal fistula)
Lethargy and inappetence in severe cases.
Factorspredisposing toperiodontal disease:
Crowdedteeth
Malocclusions
Non-abrasive diet
(b)
Periodontal trauma orforeignbodies
(a) Oronasal fistula(arrowed) secondary to
Genetic predisposition.
17.4
severe periodonlal disease anc loss cf ire
Certain animals and breedsappearpredisposed to
canine tooth.(b)Food and debris(arrcwcd) impac:ed in
more severe periodontal disease.Maltese dogs are
an oronasal fistuia.
commonlyaffectedwithperiodontal diseaseandul-
Periodontitis resulting in severe bone loss may
cerative stomatitis.Chronic ulcerative periodontitis
syndrome(CUPS)ischaracterizedbysevere halitosis,
predispose to mandibular fractures.This is especially
true when significant bone loss occurs around the
oral pain,ulcerative stomatitis andadvancingperi-
mandibularcaninesorfirstmolarsinsmall-breed dogs.
odontitis.Any breed may be affected;Greyhounds are
Fractures in thesedogs may occur easilywhenal-
a breed in which thisproblem is frequentlyseen.
tempting toextract the toothorif there istrauma such
Complicationsofperiodontal disease are:
asfrombiting on a hardobjectorfighting with another
dog(Figure 17.5).
Tooth loss
The infectionand inflammation associatedwith
Oronasalfistulaformation
Mandibularfracture
chronicperiodontal disease canaffecttheanimal's
Periodontal abscess
general health andwell being.This appears especially
Endodontic disease.
truein pets with severe,generalized infection and in-
flammation. Owners may notice improved appetites,
Severeperiodontitis canresult in several local
attitudes,haircoats andactivitylevelsfollowingtreat-
problems and complications.Common manifestations
ment ofchronic severe periodontitis in theirpets.An
of periodontitis include halitosis, gingival recession,
associationbetweentheseverityofperiodontaldisease
tooth mobility and tooth loss.The maxillary canine
andhistologicalchangesinthekidney,myocardiumand
teeth,especiallyinsmallerbreedswithnarrownoses
liver has been found by DeBowes et al.(1996).There is
(e.g.Dachshund,Poodle)frequently have deepperi-
mounting evidence in the humanpopulation that peri-
odontal pockets on their palatal aspect.There is a thin
odontaldiseaseisariskfactorforcardiovasculardis-
layerofbonebetweenthenasal cavityand thecanine
ease,strokerespiratoryproblemsregnancyroblms,
toothroot.Destructionof thebone occurswithsevere
and perhaps other problems as well.However,this
periodontitis,resultinginitiallyinaninapparentoronasal
canine studydoesnotprove acauseandeffectrelation-
fistula.This may not cause clinical signs.On the other
shipbetweenperiodontal disease and diseaseof the
hand,sneezing may bepresent.Inchronic cases with
myocardium,liver orkidneys.Additional studieswill be
increasedinflammationandinfectionanasaldischarge
necessarytodocumentsuchaneffect,ifitdoesindeed
may be seen.Once the canine tooth is lost there is an
exist.Diabetes inpeopleis a riskfactorfor developing
apparentoronasal fistula(Figure17.4)andunless it is
periodontal disease,and the presence of periodontal
very small therewill be clinical signs.
diseasecanaffect theregulationofadiabeticpatient.
124
Chapter 17Disordersof the oral cavity
ManualofSmallAnimalDentistryand theReferences
andfurtherreadingforindepthdetailsonthetreatment
ofperiodontal disease.)
Preventionofperiodontal disease
Toprevent periodontal disease,plaque must not be
allowed toaccumulateontheteethandresultingingi-
vitis andperiodontitis.Predisposing factors should be
eliminated if possible.Regular oral hygiene at home
andregularprofessional care arebothnecessaryfor
optimal oral health.
Oralhome care includes:
Brushing
?
Dental diet
(a)
Treats
Chew toys.
Daily toothbrushing isrecommended tomechani-
callyremove the dental plaque.Itis usuallyonly neces-
sarytobrush thebuccal and labial tooth surfaces.This
is much easierforownersto do than trying to opena
dog's or cat'smouth tobrush thepalatal and lingual
aspects of theteeth.lf the gingivableed when theteeth
arebrushed this indicates thepresence of gingivitis.
The owners should continue to brush the teeth and if
thebleeding doesnot resolve in10-14days there is
problemthatiscausing theongoinginflammation.This
areashouldbecheckedwithanexplorerandpossibly
dental radiography.
(b)
Mechanicalremoval of theplaquewithdailytooth
(a)Trauma from anoter dog resulting in a
brushing isideal.Theadditionof a dental diet to
17.5
ractured rrancible in aYorkshireTerrier with
decreaseplaque and calculus isthe next step in a
severe oericdontal discasc.(b) Radiograph of patient in
home oral hygieneplan.Additional helpful methods to
(a) showing a fracture in the mandible rostral to the
decreaseplaque andcalculus include oral rinsesor
ceurassia octh.
gels(e.g.chlorhexidinerinse),treats with dental bene-
fitsandtoys thatwill helpremoveplaque.
Treatment
Some of thetreat productshave thepotential to
The goals of treatment are toremove all supra-and
cause dentalproblems.Anyhardobjectthatissmall
subgingival plaque and calculus to eliminate the
enough toget between thecarnassial teeth(upper
stimulus for continued inflammationof theperio-
fourthpremolarand lowerfirstmolar)foradogtobite
dontal tissues.Polishing the teeth after scaling is
onhas thepotential of fracturing a tooth.Usuallythis
essential to smooth the enamel surface and de-
isthe upper fourthpremolar.The author suggests
crease the micro-etches in the tooth that make it
onlygivingproducts thataresolarge theycannot
moreplaqueretentive.
passbetween theseteethbutcanonlybegnawed
Periodontitismay result in deep periodontal pock-
upon (e.g.large knuckle bone).lf smaller treats are
ets that may requiremoreadvanced therapy.Peri-
given that the pet can chew on, they should be
odontalpockets deeper than4-5mmcannot be
flexible enough that they canbe bent slightly.Frac-
adequately scaledwithoutexposure of theroot sur-
turedteethfromchewingonhardobjectsareavery
face.Agingival flapcanbecreated toexposetheroot
common problem in dogs, especially those that are
surfaceandallowforadequate scaling.Anothertreat-
aggressive chewers.
ment forperiodontalpockets>4mm is to scale the
Whenevaluatingthe effectivenessof dietsortreats
toothrootwithoutcreatingaflap,andthenplaceaslow-
thathavedentalclaimsitishelpfulto look forthe
release antibiotic (doxycycline) preparation locally.
VeterinaryOral HealthCouncil (VOHC)seal on the
When teethbecome mobile from severe attach-
package. The VOHC evaluates the research behind
mentloss,extractionisoftenthebestoronlytreatment
thevarious dental ciaims.Theseal is awardedto those
option.Guided tissueregeneration(GTR)ispossible,
companies to useon thepackaging ofproducts that
inselectedcases,to allowforreplacementof lostPDL
havepassed the standards for a dental benefit as
and alveolar bone.Referral toa dental specialist is
determined by the VOHC (http://www.vohc.org/). This
issimilarto theAmericanDental Association(ADA)or
treatment needs.(Thereaderisreferred to theBSAVA
GoodHousekeeping seal of approval.
125
Chapter 17  Disorders of the oral cavity
Disorders of the oral cavity
FIV have an increase in mandibular lymph node swell-
ing and gingivitis compared with non-infected cats. The
Chronic gingivostomatitis in cats
role of B. henselae in feline chronic ulcerative stoma-
Chranic gingivostomatitis is a relatively common
titis and faucitis remains an unknown and controversial
and one of the most painful oral conditions in cats. It
issue at this time. The treatment (with azithromycin) of
can also be one of the most frustrating oral problems
a few cats in the author's practice with severe ulcera-
for owners and for the veterinary surgeon trying to
tlve stomatitis and a positive B. henselae titre, has
treat it.
resulted in similar improvements as seen with other
There is inflammation and proliferation of the
antibiotics administered but not a resolution of the
gingiva and oral mucosa. The inflammation ranges
problem itself.
from mild to severe and with increasing chronicity the
inflammation usually increases and the tissues may
 Clinical features
become ulcerated. The affected areas may include
The clinical signs for chronic gingivostomatitis in cats
the gingiva, buccal mucosa, palatal mucosa, pharynx,
include:
mucosa in the back of the mouth in the area lateral to
11
the palatoglossalarch, glossopalatine arch and tongue.
The fauces is the archway between the pharyngeal
Halitosis
and oral cavities, formed by the tongue, anterior
Dysphagia
tonsillar pillars and soft palate. When this area in the
Pawing at the mouth
caudal portion of the oral cavity is involved and there
·
Not eating dry food, eating only soff food
is inflammation, with or without ulceration, it is re-
Not eating anything, anorexic
ferred to as faucitis.
Growling or crying when eating
Weight luss
Aetiology
 Decreased or lack of grooming, unkempt
The underlying aetiology of chronic gingivostomatitis is
appearance
notknown and in fact may be multifactorial or there may
·
Crying when yawning or has stopped yawning
 be multiple syndromes with different aetiologies.
$
Excess drooling
Cats with chronic gingivostomatitis have signifi-
·
Blaod-tinged saliva
cantly higher serum lgG, IgM and igA concentrations,
Change in temperament, may be nasty or
and lower salivary IgA levels compared with healthy
reclusive
cats. The decrease in salivary IgA concentrations may
号
Mandibular lymph node enlargement.
Viral infections have been suggested as potential
It may be difficult to open the mouth of a cat with
causes or contributing factors in the development of
 chronic ulcerative stomatitis and faucitis without anal-
stomatitis and faucitis in cats. Feline calicivirus can
gesia, sedation or generai anaesthesia. However, in
cause acute faucitis and has been isolated from cats
most cases, if gentle, the lips can be pulled back to get
with chronic gingivostomatitis. Cats with chronic gin-
an idea of the inflammation present, and often if the
givostomatitis are more likely to be shedding feline
caliclvirus and feline herpes virus 1 from the oral
be viewed. An oral examination may reveal:
mucosa than cats without chronic gingivostomatitis.
However, feline calicivirus has not been shown to
 Pain on cpening the mouth
cause feline chronic gingivostomatitis. It may be a.
contributing factor to the aetiology or severity of
Gingivitis and stomatitis
+
Faucitis
chronic gingivostomatitis but until additional studies
 Proliferation of tissue with or without
are done we will not know its role, if any, in chronic
ulceration
gingivostomatitis. Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
+
 Oral tissues are friable and bleed easily
may play a role in the development of gingivostoma-
titis in some cases. Low salivary IgA levels in FIV-
鲁
 Fairly symmetrical distribution of inflammation
positive cats may predispose to oral diseases.
on both sides of the mouth.
FIV-associated oral inflammation is more likely in
older cats with very severe chronic oral lesions. Feline
Diagnosis
[eukaemia virus (FeLV) does not appear to be a
The diagnoses of stomatitis and faucitis are made by
significant risk factor for developing chronic orai in-
visual inspection of the oral cavity (Figure 17.6). The
flammatory lesions. The extent to which viral infec-
diagnostic evaluation is focused towards identifying
tions play a role in chronic oral inflammatory lesions
any possible underlying factors or concurrent dis-
has not been determined. In many cases of chronic
eases. Diagnostics should include evaluation of FeLV
 o d   n 
and FlV status. Consideraticn is given to evaluation
than periodontal disease is not identified. It has been
for caliclvirus (virus isolation from oral swab) and
-ul paieiabbexe ue aney sjeo esaui leul peejnoads
B. henselae infection. If there are missing teeth, dental
flammatory response to the bacterial plaque.
radiographs should be made to evaluate for retained
Bartonella henselae infection has been suggested
roots. If there is an area of asymmetrical inflammation 
as a possible factorin the developmentoffeline chronic
and ulceration a biopsy sample should be taken for
gingivostomatitis. Cats positive for B. henselae and
 histopathology to evaluate for neoplasia.
126
Chapter17Disordersof theoral cavity
A few catswill have noresponse andrequire long-
term medical management forbacterial infections
and suppression of the inflammation.Fortunately,
these are theminorityofpatients.Thepoorrespond-
ersmay also be thosepatients that have had long
standing,chronic inflammation thathasbeen treated
with highandrepeated doses of glucocorticoids.The
earliertheteethareextractedthebettertheoutcome
inmost cases.
One of themajorreasons that thefull-mouth extrac-
tionprocedure is lesssuccessful than desired is that
roots maybe retained. If the teeth break during extrac-
tionorhavelost theircrownsleavingrootsbehind,the
rootswill still serveas an area forbacterial accumula-
tion.Thus,it is essential to remove all tooth roots.
Curetting the alveolus toremove any remainingperi-
odontal ligament has also been recommended.Anti-
biotic administration following extractions is recom-
mended tohelpresolvetheoralinfection insevere
(a)
cases.Insomecaseswithslowimprovement it maybe
beneficial totreatwith2weekseach,insuccession,of
clindamycin,amoxicillin-clavulanicacidandmetronida-
zoletoresolve theresidual infection/inflammationand
return catstonormal eatingbehaviour.Analgesia is an
important consideration in these patients.Appropriate
pre-emptive analgesia should be given with the pre-
anaesthesia medications.Postoperative analgesia is
managedverywell withoral(buccal mucosal) adminis-
trationof buprenorphinefor3-5days.
Medicalmanagement:Ownersmaybereluctant to
have multipleextractions doneinitiallyandmaywantto
try medical managementinstead.The goalsof medical
managementare todecrease thebacterialplaque
(b)
accumulation andinhibit theassociated inflammatory
(a) Cat with stomatitis and faucitis.(b) Severe
response.Concurrently with medical management a
17.6
inflammaticnandbleedinginacatwithstomatitis
be done.Any teeth with severeperiodontitis and any
Treatment
retainedrootshouldbeextracted.
Systemic antibioticsmayresult inimprovement in
Extraction:Themost successful long-term treatment
some cases.However,this is usually temporary and
for catswithchronicgingivostomatitisistheextraction
somepatientswillrelapseevenwhileonantibiotic
ofallpremolars andmolarsincluding anyretained root
therapy.Several antibiotics are appropriate including
tips（referred to as a full-mouth extraction).while
amoxicillin-clavulanicacid,clindamycin,metronidazole
medical management (see below) is successful in the
and azithromycin. Topical rinses or gels (i.e. with 1.2%
short-term in some patients,responses areoften tran-
chlorhexidine)may alsobebeneficial insome cats.
sient.Thereason for extracting the premolars and
The most commonly used drugs for suppressing
molars istoremove the site of attachment for the
theinflammatoryandimmuneresponseinthesecats
bacterial plaque.Thisis based on the opinion that
are glucocorticoids.Glucocorticoidadministration will
these cats appear to have an exaggerated inflamma-
result inclinical improvement in a greater number of
toryresponseto theplaquebacteria.Bydecreasingthe
cases thanantibiotictherapyalone.Usuallyantibiotic
plaque the inflammationmaythenresolve.Many cats
therapy and glucocorticoids are used concurrently,
will have anexcellentresponse to thistreatmentrequir-
at least in the initial treatment,and during flare-ups.
ing no chronicmedical treatment.The inflammation
Thelong-termuseof corticosteroidsmayhavedetri-
usuallytakes3-6weekstoresolvefollowing theex-
mental effects and thelowestamount possible should
tractions and during this time supportivemedical man-
be given.Either injectable(methylprednisolone ac-
agementmay be indicated.lInevaluating the response,
etate) or oral route (prednisolone) may be used.
the improved clinical condition should be taken into
Injectable treatment isusualyrecommendedinitially
accountand it isnotnecessary to treatminorresidual
because the cat'smouth is sopainful that orally
inflammationin anasymptomaticcat.Somecatshave
administeredmedicationsmaybe difficultfor the
onlyapartialimprovementandrequirelong-termmedi-
owner togive.The author usuallygives 15-20 mg
cal management.These cats may respond well to low
methylprednisolone acetate s.c.percat.This usually
doses of immunosuppressivedrugs and antibiotics.
improvesthecat'sattitudeand appetitewithin24-48
127
Chapter 17 Disorders of the oral cavity
hours and the effects generally last for 3--6 weeks. In
 Oral eosinophilic ulcers are non-painful, non-
the most severe cases repeat treatment may be
pruritic, firm, red-brown to yellow, ulcerated
required every 3 weeks to maintain the cat's ability to
lesions found on the upper lip. They are usually
eat and be comfortable.
well circumscribed and often fairly symmetrically
Injectable ketoprofen (1-2 mg/kg s.c. once) will
Jocated on each side of the midline.
decrease the inflammation and improve the attitude
Oral eosinophilic granulomas (linear granulomas)
and appetite in most cases. lIf a cat is not eating and is
in cats are found on the tongue, at the base of
in pain the author uses ketoprofen instead of
the tongue, on the lips and gums, or in the
glucocorticoids as a single treatment, prior to a full-
pharynx. They occur as single or multiple lesions
mouth extraction, if the procedure is not going to be
and may be smooth or nodular and are
performed for several days.
sometimes ulcerated.
Ciclosporin A has been recommended as an immu-
nosuppressive therapy for cats with chronic gingivo-
Aetiology
stomatitis. It should be used with caution in cats with
Proposed aetiologies for EGC include allergies (e.g.
flea allergies, atopy), infectious diseases (e.g. bacte-
hepatic or renal disease. The reported responses
indicate that it may help control gingivostomatitis in a
rial, mycotic), trauma from excessive grooming and
certain number cf these cats. There is very litle infor-
reactions to plastic feeding or watering dishes.
matian currently in the veterinary literature document-
ing itstherapeutic effect but it may provide an alternative
Diagnosis
 Definitive diagnosis is based on histological examina
to glucocorticoid therapy. The bioavailability of the two
available forms (Sandimmune?, Neoral@) is different 
tion. Differential diagnoses include neoplasia, mycotic
infections and foreign bady reactions. Allergy testing
and therefore the dose will depend on which form
is used. Recommended doses for Sandimmune?@ are
may be beneficial if allergies are suspected.
4-15 mg/kg/day p.0 divided q12h and for Neoral@ 1-5
Treatment
mg/kg/day p.o. divided q12h. Serum ciclosporin levels
Treatment includes removing any possible underly-
should be monitored within 24-48 hours of beginning
ing cause, such as treating for fleas and trading
therapy, then weekly for a month, then monthly to
plastic bowls for metal cr ceramic ones. Administra-
evaluate serum concentrations and maintain them
tion of glucocorticoids is also recommended and most
within a reported therapeutic range and avoid toxic
leslons willrespond. Injectable methylprednisolone at
[evels. Additional blood tests to evaluate for side-
a dose of 2 mg/kg (minimum 20 mg) every 2 weeks for
effects should be done on a regular basis. The recom-
a total of2-3 treatments is recommended. Intralesional 
mended therapeutic range reported for cats varies
triamcinolone (3 mg weekly) has been successful in
between 250-500 ng/ml and 500-1000 ng/ml. Cats
some cases. Doxycycline may aiso benefit some of
with high blood levels (>1000 ng/ml) may develop
these cats. Other suggested treatments have in-
anorexia. The expenses associated with ciclosporin
cluded hypoallergenic diet, Zyrtec (an antihistamine.
and laboratory testing can be cost prohibitive for some
with anti-eosinophil effects), COg laser therapy and
clients and these should be discussed with the client
surgical removal.
prior to initiating treatment.
Lactoferrin administered topicaly to the oral mu-
Canine eosinophilic granulomas
cosa ororally maybe beneficial in some patients,most
Dogs also get oral eosinophilic granulomas. They may
likely those with mild inflammation. Lactoferrin is nor-
occur in any breed; however, they are most common in
mally found in mucasal surfaces and reutrophil gran-
Siberian Huskies. Lesions typically occur on tha lateral
ules, and it has antibacterial and anti-inflammatory
and ventral surfaces of the tongue and the soft palate.
properties. The topical application of lactoferrin (40
Eosinophilic granulomas are areas of proliferative tis-
I! uses ui esonw jelo eu ot (ybiamapog jo by/bw
sue, with or without superficial ulcerations. Definitive
cats with chronic gingivostomatitis resulted in clinical
diagnosis is made with histopathological examination.
improvement demonstrated by decreased pain and
Recommended treatment is orally administered pred-
salivation, and increased appetite.
nisolone at a dose of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg q12h for 7 days,
Anecdotally, co-enzyme Q10 (30 mg daily) has
followed by a tapering dose over 2-3 weeks.
successfully resolved severe oral inffammation that
persisted following a full-mouth extraction procedure. In 
Ulcerative eosinophilic stomatitis
this cat the response to the co-enzyme Q10 took about
Cavalier King Charies Spaniels have been reported to
3 months to be evident. Currently the author recom-
have a problem with ulcerative eosinophilic stomatitis/
mends 30-100 mg c0-enzyme Q10 for a minimum of
eosinophilic granulomas/eosinophilic pharyngeal ulcers.
4 months for those cats that have not had a completely
Clinical signs include clearing the throat, swallowing
satisfactory response to a full-mouth extraction.
problams, snoring sound during breathing, coughing
during and after meals, reduced appetite and difficulty
Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex
oral lesions
 plaque formation in the oral cavity, usually on the palatal
Oral lesions of the eosinophilic granuloma complex
soft tissue. They may resolve spontaneously. Cortico-
(EGC) seen in cats include eosinophilc ulcers (rodent 
steroid administration has been associated with partial
or indolent lip ulcer) and eosinophilic granulomas (lin-
or complete remission of the lesions. Recommended 
ear granulomas).
therapy is oral prednisolone at 1-2 mg/kg q24h.
128
Chapter 17Disordersof theoral cavity
Resorptive lesions
Resorptivelesions(RLs)areacommonoral problem in
notresult inobvious clinicalsigns and therefore anoral
examination isvery importantto identify lesions or
possible lesions.
The resorption occurs when odontoclasts, derived
fromthebloodvesselsof thePDLandalveolarbone,
areactivated andstimulatedtoresorbtoothstructure.
The odontoclastsfirstresorbcementumand then they
progressto absorb therootorcrown dentin.Arecently
reported study demonstrated that RLs begin anywhere
on the tooth root andnot just at theCEJ as often has
been suggested.
Aetiology
(a)
Proposed aetiopathogenesisfor thedevelopment of
RLshaveincluded diet,inflammation,abnormal dental
forces and infectiousdiseases.Theaetiology of RLs
hasnotbeenidentified and theremaybemore than
one cause for different lesions.Theresults of arecent
study suggest that the chronic excessintake of vitamin
D(in commercial catfoods) may play animportant role
in thedevelopmentof RLsincats.Arecenthistological
studyof cat teeth supported RLs asbeing non-inflam-
matoryreplacementresorption,resulting in ankylosis.
Clinicalfeatures
The clinical signsforresorptivelesionsinclude:
Reluctancetoeatdryfood
。
Painwith eating
(b)
。
Alteredeatingbehaviour
17.8
(a)Hyperplastic gingival tissue covering a
Pain on tooth brushing.
resorptive lesion.(b)Retraction of the gingiva
reveals anunderlyingresorptive lesion.
Thepresence ofresorptive lesions maybe sus-
pectedbased on clinical signs.Anextensive RL result-
Diagnosis
examination(Figure 17.7).Granulation tissue often
covers an RLon the tooth crown.The presence of red,
Diagnosticimaging:Radiographyisindicatedtoevalu-
oftenraised,gingival tissue covering anarea on the
ate for retained rootsif thegingiva is inflamed or
crownis anindication toevaluatethat toothfor an RL
retained roots are suspected(Figure 17.9).Acomplete
(Figure 17.8).A largeRL mayweaken a tooth to the
oral examination,including dental radiography,under
pointwhere thecrownseparatesfromtherootand is
generalanaesthesiaisrequiredto detectallthelesions.
lost.In these instances thegingivaeitherheals overthe
Canine teeth often haveextensiverootresorption with
roots ortherootfragments protrude throughthe gingiva.
minimal ornovisible crown loss.In these teethit is
especiallyimportant topayattentiontogingivalinflam-
mation and small defects under the gingiva. lf any
abnormalitiesaredetectedradiographsshouldbemade
to assessthe toothroots
Radiographyisaisonecessarytodeterminewhether
anRLisaTypeI or Type lllesion.TypeI lesions are
associatedwithinflammation andradiographically the
root and crown density are similar to surrounding
unaffected teethand thereisa distinctPDL space
aroundeach toothroot.Type lllesionsarenot associ-
atedwithinflammationandtherootsbecomereplaced
with bone-cementum-like tissueand thePDLspaceis
not visible on dental radiographs. Tooth roots with
Typell lesions appearradiolucentcompared with
adjacentroots.Toothrootsofaffectedteeth have
histopathological evidence of concurrentresorptive
andreparativeprocessesresultinginrootreplacement
17.7
Resorptive lesionresulting in loss of tooth crown.
in chronic cases.
129
Chapter17Disordersof thecral cavity
Placing restorations in teethwith RLs is not a
recommended treatmentbecauseofthepoor long-
term successof therestorations and theprogressive
nature of thelesions.Extractions and crown amputa-
tionswillbethetreatmentofchoice until othermethods
areproven to give superiorresults.
Trauma
Fallsfrom heights,being hitbya vehicle.being struck
with a hard object,dogfightsand chewing onhard
objects allmayresult in traumatic injuryto the oral
tissues.Oneof the mostcommoninjuriesisafractured
tooth(Figure 17.10a).Untreatedfractured teethwith
pulpexposurewill developvarying degreesof peri-
(a)
apical inflammation andinfection(Figure 17.1ob).Clini-
cal signsmaybeverydifficulttodetect,especiallyearly
in theprocess.Reluctance to cheworbite down on the
toothisa signof discomfortassociatedwithperiapical
disease.Facial swelling,draining fistulas andreluc-
tance to eat hard food are other clinical signs.The
fractured tooth withpulp exposure shouldreceive
endodontictreatment,suchasaroot canal orextrac-
tion.Whenextracting theseteethall therootsmustbe
removed toensure asuccessful outcome.
(b)
17.9
(a) Inflammation associatedwith suspected
retainedrootsinthemandible.otacat
(o) Radiograph of the mancible of the cat in (a)
demonstratingretainedroots.
Arecent studybyDuPont and DeBowes(2002)
reported thatTypeIroots were8.17timesmore likely
tobeassociatedwithperiodontitisthanwereTypell
roots.Cat teeth with RLs and periodontitis had a
significantly higherproportion of Type I compared
withTypell root lesions.This finding suggests that
theremaybe differentaetiologiesforthe twotypesof
RL.Inflammationisassociatedwith theTypeIlesion
and it is suggested that traumatic injury to the perio-
dontal attachment apparatus from abfraction(flexure
of thetooth)maybeassociatedwiththeTypellesion
development.
Treatment
Therecommended treatmentof a toothwithanRL is
usuallyeitheranextractionoracrownamputationwith
intentionalrootretention.AtoothwithaTypeIlesion
shouldbeextracted andnoportionoftherootshouldbe
left in the alveolus.When there is no evidence of
17.10
(a) Fractured toothwith pulp exposure and
associatedperiodontalor endodonticdisease,a tooth
abscess of endodonlic origir.(b)Fractured
withaTypelllesion canbe treatedbyamputating the
uppcrfourthpremclarwithpulp exposure.
tooth crown and leaving theroots.Therootswill con-
tinuewith theprocess of resorptionandrepairing.
Oraltumours
Canine teethwith severerootresorptionmay be
difficult toextract due to theankylosisof theroot.In
Epulides
these instances,if there is noroot pathology associ-
Epulides are themostcommonbenign tumoursinthe
atedwith the RL,thecrown andaportionof theroot
oral cavity of dogs.The two types are:
mayberemovedandthegingivaclosedover the
remaining root.
Peripheralodontogenicfibromas(previously
Retained rootswith associatedgingival inflamma-
termed fibromatousepulis)
tion or signs of pathology,such asradiolucencies.
Acanthomatous ameloblastoma(previously
should be extracted.
termed acanthomatousepulis).
130
Chapter 17  Disorders of the oral cavity
The peripheral odontogenic fibroma may be miner-
often with extensive bone lysis at the time of diagnosis.
alized (previausly termed ossifying epulis). Canserva-
Radiography or CT is necessary to evaluate the extent
tive local excision is usually curative for the peripheral
 of local invasion. Metastases are uncommon with the
odontogenic fibroma. The acanthomatous ameloblas-
exception of canine tonsillar or lingual SCC.
toma is locally a more aggressive tumour and success-
 SCCs occur most frequently in older cats and may
ful excision requires a more extensive surgical
be found anywhere in the oral cavity. The use of certain
 procedure. Radiation treatment has also been used to
flea control products and the high intake of canned
treat these tumours with success.
foods, especlally canned tuna fish, have both been
 associated with an increased risk of oral SCC in cats.
Malignant oral tumours
Hypercalcaemia may be a paraneoplastic sign in cats
Oral tumours are one of the most common cancers
with SCC. Sublingual SCCs at the base of the tongue
seen in veterinary patients. Clinical signs include:
are particularly difficult to deal with. Difficulty eating
Halitosis (may be very severe)
and altered use of the tongue may be an early sign of
 Ptyalism
lingual SCC in cats. These cats may first present with
+
 Blood found on chew toys, in food or water dish
difficulty using their tongue without having any obvious
+
 Blood found in saliva
evidence of a tumour.
+
+
 Decreased food consumption (especiallyhard foods)
The prognosis in cats is very poor with a 1-year
Not chewing on hard treats or chew toys
survival rate of <10% and most have a median survival
 Dysphagia
of 1-2 months. Combination therapy with radiation and 
+
+
Weight loss
mitoxantrone chemotherapy has shown some promise
 Swellings on the face, mandible or in area of 
in cats with a reported median survival of6 months. The
local lymph nodes
best prognosis would be for very small tumaurs with
A visible mass (less common).
minimal local invasion that occur in the rostral part of
the mouth. These may be cured by surgical removal. If
When a dental procedure is done and a loose tooth
found in the back of the mouth, surgical excision is
or inflamed ulcerated area is found in a mouth that is
generally not possible and local recurrence following
ctherwise healthy, oral neoplasia should always be
surgery almost always occurs. Cats do not tolerate
considered. Following extraction of a tooth if the extrac-
extensive oral surgeries as well as dogs. Surgery is
tion site does not heal normally, neoplasia should be
rarely used as a treatment for SCCs, only being done
considered. Always perform a biopsy in these cases
 in cases where the diagnosis has been made very early
and submit the sample for histological examination.
and the tumour is small. Any suspicious area should be
Diagnostic evaluation of patients withsuspected oral
biopsied to confirm a diagnosis as early as possible.
 neoplasia includes histopathological evaluation of the
 Piroxicam and meloxicam have both been suggested
mass, radiographyor computed tomography (CT) of the
for paliative care in oral SCcs in cats.
 region containing the oral mass, fine needle aspiration
The prognosis for dogs with SCC depends on
(FNA) or biopsy of regional lymph node(s), and thoracic
tumour location. Rostral tumours, which account for
radiography (ventrodorsal, and both lateral views). A
most SCCs in dogs, may be cured with surgery or
complete blood count and biochemistry profile are also
radiation therapy. Photodynamic therapy shows prom-
recommended to evaluate for concurrent problems or
m aeo aaeed 'oos ym shop buean oy as!
 paraneoplastic syndromes associated with the tumour.
piroxicam has been suggested.
 Malignant melanoma
Malignant melanomas are the most common malig-
Fibrosarcoma
Fibrosarcomas are the third most common oral malig-
nant tumour in dogs but are rare in cats. The most
 nant tumour in dogs and the second most common in
common site is the gingiva, although they can be found
 cats. The most common sites are the gingiva and palate.
.anywhere in the oral cavity. Amelanotic tumours tend
to occur in younger dogs and melanotic tumours in
They are rapidly growing tumours and extensively in-
  a s s  a
vade the local sof tissue and bone. The recurrence rate
after surgery is high. They have a moderate rate of
and tend to metastasize to the tonsils, regional lymph
distant metastases.
Alelpadse 'pepienb s! sisouboid eul 'shuni pue sepou
Oral fibrosarcomas with a histopathologically low-
for tumours >4 cm in diameter or those that have lymph 
node invoivement or distant metastases. Complete
grade but with a biologically high-grade activity have
surgical removal is the best chance for a cure. lt is
been found in young dogs, with Golden Retrievers
difficulf to achieve adequate margins unless the tu-
being the breed making up the largest numbers. This
has aiso been seen in a number of black Labrador
mour is small and in the rostral aspect of the mouth.
Retrievers. The oral fibrosarcomas in these dogs are
Radiation therapy is generally only an option for pallia-
very aggressive and more likely to metastasize.
tive treatment and not for a cure.
Squamous cell carcinoma
Congenital defects
 Congenital defects of the secondary palate (e.g. hard 
Squamous cell carcinomas (ScCs) are the most com-
mon oral malignant neoplasia in cats, accounting for
and soft palate) are associated with difficulty eating
 approximately 75 % of oral tumours. It is the second
and drinking, nasal discharge, coughing, gagging.
most common malignant oral neoplasia in dogs. These
stunted growth and aspiralion pneumonia. Early diag-
tumours, especiallyin cats, are locally very aggressive,
nosis is important to avoid complications. Multiple
131
Chapter 17Disorders of the oral cavity
surgeriesmayberequired toclose the defects,espe
Glossitisandstomatitismayresult fromtheingestion
cially in young growing dogs.Nutritional supplementa-
orchewingofcertainhouseholdplants suchas dumbcane
tion and treatmentof complicationsmayberequired.
(Dieffenbachiaspp.),philodendron(Philodendronspp.),
Microglossia has been identified in week-old pup-
peace lily(Spathiphylum)and devil'sivy(Epiprenum
pies as well as mature animals. The neonatal puppy
aureum).Associated clinical signs mayinclude profuse
with severe microglossia maynotbeable to nurse
salivationpawingatthemouth,oralainhadshaking
adequately andwill diewithoutnutritional support.
lossofvocalization,and if severe inflammation and
Olderanimals are typicallydescribedasmessyeaters
swelling occurstheremaybebreathing dificuilties.
and they drool excessively.Physical examination will
Lingual ulcers may result from chemical burns, em-
reveala tongue that issmallandshort comparedwith
beddedplantmaterials,electrical cord bites,systemic
anormal tongue(Figure 17.11).
infections,metabolic disorders (e.g.uraemia) and im-
mune-mediated diseases,suchaspemphigus vulgaris.
17.11
Diagnosticevaluationmay include evaluation for
Ccngenital
systemic infections,renal failure andbiopsyforevalu-
ation fortumouror immune-mediated disease.
microglossiain
an adult dog.
Treatment dependson the underlying aetiology.ln
(Courtesyof
many casesof local trauma orirritation,symptomatic
GreggA.
treatment tocontrol pain and support hydrationare all
DuPont)
that is necessary.Topical sucralfate(ssuspension or
slurrymade fromtablet) mayhelpwith the discomfort
associated with ulcerated areas.
References and furtherreading
Bertone ER,Snyder LAand Moore AS(2003) Environmental and
lifestyleriskfactorsfororalsquamouscellcarcinomaindomestic
cals.JournaiofVeterinaryIntena/Medicine17,557-562
Enlarged salivaryglands
BoydellP,PikeR,CrossleyD,sta.(2000)Sialadenosis indogs.Journa/
Sialoceles are large,usually non-painful, swellings
of theAmericanVelerinaryMedicalAssociation216,872-874
associated with accumulation of saliva caused by a
acat.JournalofSmallAnimalPractice41,573-574
salivary duct rupture or obstruction.Depending on
Crossley DA and Penman S(1995)BSAVAManualof Small Animal
Dentistry.BSAVA Publications,Cheltenham
locationtheymaybe associated withdysphagia,gag-
DeBowes LJ(2000)Dentistry:periodontal aspects.In:Textbook of
ging,dyspnoea ornoclinical signs.Diagnosisisbased
edned.SJEtingerandECFeldmn,pp.1127-1134.WB
VeterinaryInternal Medicine:DiseasesoftheDogandCat,5
on cytological evaluation of aspiratedfluid.Complete
Saunders,Philadelphia
surgicalremovalof the affected salivaryducts and
DuPont GA(2002) Slep-By-Step.Crown amputation withintentional
associated gland shouldresult incompleteresolution.
rootretention for dentalresorptive lesions in cats.Journal of
Differential diagnoses for enlarged salivary glands
VeterinaryDentistry19,107-110
DuPant G (2003) Feline dental resorptive lesions -theory of
includesialadenitis,sialadenosis,malignantneoplasms,
etiopathogenesis.In:Proceedings of thegh WorldVeterinary
salivarygland infectionandsalivarygland infarction.
Dentai Congress,pp.189-191.Kyoto,Japan
Sialadenitis is characterized on FNA cytology or
rootreplacementincatteethwithresorptive lesions.Journalof
histopathological examinationby aninflammatoryre-
VeterinaryDentistry19,71-75
sponse with no evidence of infection. Common pre-
Gorrel C and Larsson A (2003)Feline odontoclastic resorptive
lesions-unveiling the early lesion. In:Proceedings of the 8
senting signsnludgagging,couging,apetence
WordVeterinary DentalCongress,p.188.Kyoto,Japan
lethargy,fever and enlargedpainful salivaryglands.
HardyWD,ZuckermanEandCorbishleyJ(2002)Serologicalevidence
Affecteddogsusuallyrespondtoglucocorticoid therapy.
that Barloneila causes gingivitis and stomatitis in cats.In:
Proceedingsof the16AnnualVeterinaryDentalForumpp79
Sialadenosisisanon-painful,afebrileenlargement
82.Savannah,Georgia
of the salivary glands primarily reported in dogs.A cat
HarleyR,Grufydd-JonesTJandDayMJ(2003)Salivaryandserum
immunoglobulin levels in catswith chronic gingivostomatitis.
withsuspected sialadenosisresponding tophenobar-
VeterinaryRecord152,125-129
bital therapy hasbeenreported.Clinical signs include
HarleyRHepsCRHarbourDA,GruffydJonesTJ andDayMJ
(1999)CytokineMRNA expressioninlesionsincatswithchronic
retching,gulping,ptyalismandpoorappetite.Cytologi-
gingivostomatitis.ClinicalandDiagnosticLaboratoryImmunology
cal andhistologicalexaminationof thesalivaryglands
6,471-478
does not reveal any significant changes. Occasionally
Lommer MJ and VerstraeteFJM(2003) Concurrent oral shedding of
theremaybeevidenceofnecrosisoncytological or
feline calicivirus and feline herpesvirus 1in cats with chronic
histopathological examination.lt has been suggested
NelsonAW(2003)Cleft palate.In:TextbookofSmallAnimai Surgery,
that this is a manifestation of limbic epilepsy. Most
3edn,ed.DSlatter.pp.814-823.WBSaunders,Philaelphia
patientsrespondrapidly to treatmentwithphenobar-
hormonesin catswithfeline OdonloclasticResorptive lesions
bital.Inresistant cases,monitoring phenobarbitall
（FORL).In:Proceedings of tha 8Word Veterinary Dental
els to assure a therapeutic range and using potassium
Congress,pp.186-187.Kyolo,Japan
SavaryKCMPriceSandVadenSL(2000)Hypercalcemiaincats:a
bromide maybe necessary for complete control.
retrospectivestudyof71cases(1991-1997).JournalofVeterinary
Interna/Medicine14,164-189
Lingual lesions
StonehewerJMackinAJ,Tasker S,SimpsonJWand MayhewIG
Linguallesionsmayincludetumours,traumaticinjuries
dog:anunusuallormof limbicepilepsy?JournaiofSmallAnimal
(such as lacerations orpuncturewounds),inflamma-
Practice41,416-421
Ward PP(2002)Lactoferrin and host defense.Biochemistry Cell
tory orimmune-mediated lesions,and ulcers.
Biology80,95-102
132
Disorders of
and oesop
phagus
Robert J. Washabau
Pharynx
geal disease, is less frequently reported with the oropha-
ryngeal dysphagias (see Chapter 6).
Anatomy and physiology
Whilst the anatomy and physiology of the canine and
Physical examination
feline pharynx have been reviewed in detail (see Ref-
Findings on physical examination are dependent upon
euo kand e woy (bupeai sauuny pue saouaa
 the pathogenesis and severity of the dysphagia. Many
perspective, the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing
morphological abnormalities (e.g. neoplasia, stricture,
 can be subdivided into three stages.
inflammation, foreign body) are fairly obvious on ex-
amination of the pharynx. Animals with functional
The first or orai stage begins with the prehension
of food with teeth and tongue, and the formation
have few morphological abnormalities. Focal or gener-
of the bolus at the base of the tongue.
alized muscle atrophy and diminished or absent gag
In the second or pharyngeai stage, rostral to
reflex may be the only abnormal findings in animals
caudal pharyngeal contractions propel the bolus
with neuromuscular disease.
from the base of the tongue to the cricopharyngeal
Laboratory tests
The cricopharyngeus relaxes during the third or
An approach to the diagnosis of dysphagia and
cricopharyngeai stage, and the bolus passes into
hypersalivation associated with oropharyngeal dis-
the cranial oesophageal body. The
ease is depicted in Chapter 6. The diagnosis of a
cricopharyngeus subsequently contracts,
pharyngeal muscles relax, and the oropharyngeal
and, except for tissue biopsy or culture, usually does
phase is repeated over and over again.
notrequire anyadditional diagnostic testing (see Chap-
ter 17 for further detais).
 Abnormalities in any of the oropharyngeal stages
can produce oropharyngeal dysphagia, which can be
 Dlagnostic imaging
either functional or morphological in origin. Most func-
 Survey radiography, ultrasonography, computerized
tional disorders consist of failure, spasticity or incoor-
tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRl)
dination of muscular contractions and are due to
may be performed to assess for severity of local
neuromuscular diseases. Morphological disorders that
traumatic injury, or to look for distant metastasis. The
 interfere with the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing
 diagnosis of functional orapharyngeal dysphagias is
include strictures, foreign bodies, and neoplastic, trau-
more difficult and may require the use of video-
matic and inflammatory processes of the oral cavity
fluoroscopy or electrophysialogy. If these technigues
are not readily avaiabie in the private practice setting,
ynx often involve the orai cavity primarily and are
cases can be referred to a university teaching hospital
discussed separately in Chapter 17.
Or other referral centre.
Diagnostic approach
Disorders of the pharynx
History
Oropharyngeal dysphagia
Dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing) and hypersalivatian
are the most important clinical signs with oropharyn-
Aetlology
geal disorders. Pet owners may also describe gagging,
difficulties in drinking water or forming a solid bolus,
characterized in companion animai species:
excessive mandibularorhead motion, persistentforceful
ineffective swallowing efforts, dropping of food from
 Oral stage dysphagias with prehension deficits
the mouth, nasal discharge due to misdirection of food
mainly due to loss of tongue function
into the nasopharynx, excessive salivation, foaming
 Pharyngeal stage dysphagias with transport
Irom the mouth, coughing, failure to thrive and reluc-
deficits mainly due to loss of cranial and caudal
tance to eat. Regurgitation, a common sign of oesopha
pharyngeal constrictor function
133
Chapter t8 Disorders of the pharynx and oesophagus
 Cricopharyngeal stage dysphagias with
muscle biopsy and brainstem MRl. Other oropharyn-
cricopharyngeal opening or closure deficits
geal (e.g. neoplasia, eosinophic granuloma, trauma,
(achalasia or chalasia, respectively), or
inflammation; reviewed in Chapter 17) and oesopha-
incoordination between pharyngeal contraction
 geal pathologies are the major differential diagnoses 
and cricopharyngeal sphincter relaxation.
for the oropharyngeal dysphagias.
Pathogenesis
Treatment
 Neuromusculardisease isthe underlying pathogenetic
 Except for cricopharyngeal achalasia (which is treated
mechanism of oropharyngeal dysphagia, but the pre-
surgically by cricopharyngeal myotomy: see BSAVA
Manualof Canine and Feline Head, Neck and Thoracic
been associated with brainstem disease, peripheral
Surgery) the cropharyngeal dysphagias are all treated
 neuropathy, myasthenia gravis, polymyositis, muscu-
medically. Cricopharyngeal myotomy appears to be of
lar dystrophy and hypothyroidism. A unique form of
no benefit in oral and pharyngeal stage dysphagias;
 oropharyngeal dysphagia bearing some resemblance
pauasiom aq Aew seibeydsap peabuseydoio paapu!
to muscular dystrophy has been described in the
by cricopharyngeal myotomy. The medical therapy for
Bouvier des Flandres breed.
functional oropharyngeal dysphagias is mostly sup-
portive and consists of nutritional support (e.g. gastro-
Dlagnosls
stomy tube feeding; see Chapter 27) on a temporary or
permanent basis. Elevated feedings and different food
Clinical signs: The diagnosis of cropharyngeal dys-
consistencies may be attempted, but these efforts are
phagia is usually made on the basis of clinical signs and
often of little clinical benefit. In early cases of myasthe-
nia gravis, acetyicholinesterase inhibitors (e.g. pyrido-
pathology. Once an oropharyngeal dysphagia is sus-
stigmine) may yield substantial clinical improvement.
pected, it should be further classified into an oral,
Glucocorticoid therapy (prednisolone) will also im-
pharyngeal or cricopharyngeal stage disorder.
prove clinical signs in many myasthenic and poly-
myositis patients, although some cases of canine
Diagnostic imaging: Videofluoroscopy is the diag-
nostic test of choice since it is impossible to further
without immunosuppressive therapy. Thyroid hormone
classify these disorders on the basis of physical exami-
replacement therapy should be attempted in animals
naticn or survey radiography. The videofluoroscopic
with documented hypothyroidism.
Prognosis
tongue-thrust action, retention of contrast medium in
the oropharynx and loss of contrast medium from the
In general, the prognosis for oropharygeal dysphagia
 mouth. Aspiration pneumonia is not a typical finding in
is guarded to poor. Only those associated with myasthe-
oral stage dysphagias.
 nia gravis, polymyositis and hypothyroidism will show
Aspiration pneumania is a typical finding in pharyn-
some clinical improvement with therapy. Bouvier des
 geal stage dysphagias. Videofluoroscopic findings
Flandres dogs may have a better prognosis particularly
i the disorder is confined to the oesophagus instead of
consistent with a pharyngeal stage dysphagia include:
the oropharynx.
1
Incomplete pharyngeal contraction with adequate
Cricopharyngeal achalasia
cricopharyngeal relaxation
 Slow Induction and slow progression of
Aetiopathogenesis: Cricopharyngeal achalasia is a
peristaltic-like contractions from the rostral to the
neuromuscular disorder of young dogs characterized
caudal pharynx
by hypertension of the cranial oesophageal sphincter
 Laryngotracheal aspiration,
and inadequate relaxation of the sphincter with swal-
lowing. Dysfunction of the inhibitory neuron-mediating
In cricopharyngeal stage dysphagia, the crico-
sphincteric relaxation has been postulated, but the
pharyngeus fails to relax (achalasia) or relaxes at an
aetiology. pathogenesis and breed predisposition of
inappropriate time (incoordination) following pharyn-
this disorder are unknown.
geal contraction.
Diagnosis: Affected animals have progressive dys-
Electromyography: This may be useful in distinguish-
Aaul buueem sae unos uonnbintar pue gibeud
typically make repeated, unproductive swallowing at-
achalasia. Fibrillation and positive sharp waves ob-
tempts that cuiminate in regurgitation of undigested
served in oropharyngeai musculature suggest that the
food. Coughingand pulmonary crackles may develop as
disorder involves the structures of the oral cavity and
a consequence of food being aspirated into the airways.
pharynx instead of the cricopharyngeus.
Physical examination is usually unremarkable.
Because of the inability to evaluate the rapid and
Laboratory tests: Other diagnostic tests that may be
complex series of events that occur during swallowing,
warranted after an oropharyngeal dysphagia has been
survey and static barium-contrast radiography are not
particularly useful in dlagnosing the disorder. Definitive
receptor antibody, antinuclear antibody, thyroid func-
diagnosis of cricopharyngeal achalsia requires the
tion testing, serum creatine phosphokinase activity.
134
Chapter18Disordersof thepharynxand oesophagus
Thevideofluoroscopicfindingofmultiple,unproductive
Animportant species differencebetween the dog and
attemptsatswallowingbarium liquidorpasteiscon-
cat is in themusculature of theoesophageal body.The
sistent with a diagnosis of cricopharyngeal achalasia.
full length of thecanineoesophageal bodyis composed
This should be supported by the manometric demon-
of striatedmuscle,whereas thedistal one-third toone-
strationofelevatedbasal pressures and inadequate
halfof the felineoesophageal bodyis composed of
relaxationwithswallowing.lfmanometryisunavailable
smooth muscle.The striated muscle of the cranial
and the diagnosis is still questionable,electromyo-
graphy of the oropharyngeal musculature should be
performedtoexcludethepossibilityofamoreproximal
geal and recurrent laryngeal) of the vagus nerve arising
oropharyngeal dysphagia.
from the brainstemnucleus ambiguus.The smooth
muscleof the oesophageal body and caudal oesopha-
Treatment:lt is difficult togeneralizebased on the
gealsphincterareinnervatedbyautonomicbranches
smallnumberofcasesthathavebeenreported,butthe
(oesophageal) of the vagus nerve, arising from the
disorderisprobablybest treatedwith cricopharyngeal
dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus(Figure 18.1).
myotomy.Most animals experienceimmediaterelief
Thephysiologyof the canine and felineoesopha-
following surgery.Effectivemedical management has
gus has been reviewed in detail(see References and
notbeendescribedforthisdisorder.
further reading).In summary,during fasting,the el-
evatedpressuresof thecranial and caudaloesopha-
Prognosis:The prognosisis guarded topoor without
gealsphincterspreventmovement of foodandchyme
surgery.Untreatedanimalswillsufferfrommalnutrition
intotheoesophagealbodyfromtheoralcavityand
andrecurrent bouts ofaspirationpneumonia.Signifi-
stomach,respectively.When an animal swallows,he
cantandlongstandingimprovementhasbeenreported
cranialoesophageal sphincterrelaxestopermitthe
withcricopharyngeal myotomy.
movementof liquidsand solids into theproximal
oesophageal body.Swallowing also initiates a wave of
peristaltic contractions（primary peristalsis) in the
Oesophagus
oesophagus that transportsfood into the distaloesopha-
Anatomyandphysiology
geal body. Primary peristaltic contractions are re-
The transportof ingested liquids andsolids from the oral
inforcedbyasecondarywaveofcontraction(secondary
cavitytothestomachisthemajorfunctionoftheoesopha-
peristalsis)physiologically mediatedbyintraluminal
gus.Anatomical structures that permit this function are
distension.Thecaudal oesophageal sphincterrelaxes
the striatedmuscleof thecranialoesophageal sphincter
in advance of the propagated pressure wave to permit
(cricopharyngeus),the striated and smooth muscle of
food to empty into the stomach.Once the bolus of food
the oesophageal body,and the smoothmuscle of the
has passed into the stomach,the caudal oesophageal
caudal oesophageal (gastro-oesophageal) sphincter.
sphincterresumes its highresting pressure.
18.1
Neural
regulationof
swallowing in the dog and
Respiratory
Extravagal nuclel
cat. Polential sites of
centre
ocsophageal hypomotility
Brainstem
Swallowing
Nucleus ambiguus
ard megaoesophagus:
Vomiting
centre
Dorsal molor nucleus
afferent senscry neurons,
centre
brainstemswallowing
centre,brainstemnuclei
(corsal motornucleus of
Sensory
the vagus,rucleus
inputs
amoiguus),efferent
mctor neurons and
neuromuscular junction are
also shown.(Redrawn ater
Washabau and Holt
(2003).)
Cranial
Oesophageal
Caudal
Stomach
sphincter
body
sphincter
Cervical ganglia
Thoracic ganglia
Coeliacganglion
135
Chapter18Disordersof thepharynx andoesophagus
Pathophysiology
Regurgitation is the most important clinical sign of
Inflammation(oesophagitis,gastro-oesophagealreflux,
oesophageal disease andshouldbedifferentiated from
oesophageal fistulae),hypomotility (idiopathic mega-
vomiting, gagging and dysphagia (see Chapter 6).Re-
oesophagus,dysautonomia,diverticula) and obstruc-
gurgitationdiffersfromvomitinginthatitischaracterized
tion(stricture,hiatalhenia,neoplasia,intussusception,
by thepassiveretrogradeevacuationof undigested food
foreign bodies,vascularring anomalies)are the major
from the oesophagus.Vomiting is characterized by
pathophysiological processesinvolving the oesopha-
coordinated activities of the gastrointestinal(Gl),mus-
gusofdogs andcats.With mildoesophagitis and
culoskeletal andnervoussystemsculminating inthe
hypomotilitylesions,theoesophagusmayundergoheal-
activeevacuationofdigestedorpartiallydigestedfood
ing without furthercomplication.Inmoreseverecases,
from the Gl tract.Vomiting usually signifies disease
the oesophagusmayrespondwithextensive fibrosis,
caudal to the gastro-oesophageal (caudal) sphincter.
muscularhypertrophy,oesophagealnarrowing,and/or
Theseverityof clinical signswith oesophageal disease
lossofneural regulation(ie.flaccidity).Luminal flowis
issomewhat dependent upon thepathogenesis of the
disease.Animalswithvascularring anomaly,forexam-
radiusso thatevensmalldiminutionsresultinsignificant
ple,mayhave severeregurgitation,but theirappetites
reductions inoesophageal transit.
usuallyexcellentbecauseofsecondary malnutrition.
Animals with inflammatory oesophageal disease (e.g.
Diagnosticapproach
oesophagitis),on the otherhand,mayhave anorexia,
An approach to the diagnosis of regurgitation associ-
dysphagia,odynophagia and salivation without much
ated withoesophageal diseaseisoutlinedinChapter6.
evidence ofregurgitation.The lattergroup clearly
presentsa diagnosticchallengebecauseof thediffering
History
clinicalsigns.Finally,signsreferabletoaspirationpneu
Acarefulhistory isusefulindifferentiating clinical signs
monia,e.g.coughing and dyspnoea,maybethe major
of oesophageal disease from oral, pharyngeal and
presenting complaint in some animals.A good history
gastricdisease,andinplanningdiagnostictestsneeded
willusuallyelicitheothersignsofoesophagealdisease
in the evaluation of thepatient.Signs consistent with
in those patients.
oesophageal disease include regurgitation,odyno-
phagia (painful swallowing),dysphagia,multiple swal-
Physical examination
lowing attempts,excessive salivation(particularly with
Physical examination findings may beminimal in some
inflammatory disorders) and changes in appetite (rav-
animals with primary oesophageal disease.Severe
enous appetitewithmotilitydisordersorreduced appe-
regurgitation and malnutrition mayresult in mild to
tite with inflammatory disorders).Some breeds are at
moderate cachexia.Feverandpulmonary crackles or
increased risk for swallowing disorders(Figure 18.2).
wheezesoccurinassociationwith aspirationpneumo-
nia.Occasionally a cervical foreignbody oroesopha-
geal dilatationmaybe detected during the examination.
Thephysicalexamination isimportant fromthe stand-
Condition
Breed
point of excluding other Gl or systemic disease.
Oral neoplasia
Golden Retiever, Weimaraner;
Boxer, Cocker Spaniel
Laboratory tests
Oropharyngeal dysphagia
Bouvier desFlandres;Golden
Initial laboratorytesting should include routine haema-
Retriever;Labrador Retriever
tology,serumbiochemistryprofile,urinalysisand fae-
Oral eosinophilic granuloma
Siberian Husky
cal parasitological examination.This database will be
Shar Pei; Chow Chow;Bulldog;
useful inexcluding systemic ormetabolicdiseaseasa
Hiatal hermia
French Bulldog
cause of secondary oesophageal signs.In the ab-
Persistent right aortic arch
German Shepherd Dog
aemia(associated with malnutrition)and leucocytosis
Anomalouscoronaryartery
Bulldog
(associated withoesophageal inflammation oraspira-
Congenital megaoesophagus
Miniature SchnauzerFox Terrier
tionpneumonia)aretheonlylaboratoryabnormalities
Irish Setter;Great Dane; German
thataresometimesencountered.Hyponatraemia and
Shepherd Dog;Labrador
hyperkalaemia maybe evident inanimalswithhypo-
Retriever.Shar Pei;Newfoundland
adrenocorticism and secondary megaoesophagus.
Myasthenia gravis-associated
German Shepherd Dog;Golden
megaoesophagus
Retriever:Smcoth FoxTerrier;
Diagnostic imaging
Jack Russeleer;Springer
Surveyradiography,contrast radiography fluoroscopy
Spaniel
andoesophageal endoscopyarethediagnosticmeth-
Gastro-oesophageal
German Shepherd Dog
odscurrentlyavailableinmodemveterinarypractice
intussusception
(Figure 18.3).Survey radiography of the neck and
Oesophageal fistula
CairnTerrier
thoraxshould beperformed in all animalssuspected of
Craniomandibular osteopathy
WestHighlandWhiteTerrier
having oesophageal disease.Definitive diagnosis or
evidenceinsupportofadiagnosismaybeobtainedwith
18.2
Knownbreedprecispositions for diseases of
survey radiographs in many cases,e.g.oesophageal
the oropharynx and oesopnagus.(Data from
foreign body,megaoesophagus,neoplasia,hiatal her-
Washabau and Holt(2003))
136
Chapter 18
Disordersof thepharynxandoesophagus
Oesophageal disorder
Radiographic findings
Endoscopic findings
Oesophageal foreign body
Radiopaque foreignbodiesareusuallydetectedonsurvey
Manyradiopaqueandradiolucentforeignbodiesare
radiography.Contrastradiographymayberequired to
readilyidentfiedandtreatedwithendoscopy
document radiolucent foreign bodies
Oesophageal fistula
Lobar pneumonia is a common finding.The oesophagusmay
Largefislaearuallyvisblemalfisl
not be readily apparent. Fistulae appear as round
has becomelodgednearthe fistula.Contrast radiography
lesions on the oesophagealmucosa withraised
usually demonstratesaonormal communicationbetween
hyperaemicmargins
oesophagus andbronchus,lung or trachea
Vascular ring ancmaly
Narrowing is observednear the base of the heart,
cases.The oesophageal stricture at thebase of the hea is
pulsations of themajor arteries canbe observed in the
usually apparent only with ccntrast radiography
region af oesophageal narrowing
Oesophageal neoplasia
Peri-oesophagealneoplasiaarising fromthelung,thyrcid
Peri-oesophagealneoplasia isnot visible with
heart base orotherstructuresmaybereadly apparenton
endoscopybut oesophagealnarwingmaybe
often required to cocument intraluminal necplasia
neoplasamayappear focalpedunculatedand
polypoidormayappeardiffusewithmucosal
haemorrhage and ulceration
Oesophagitis
Erythemacerationconstrictonbledingvidn
contrast radiography in some cases.Minimal change or no
of reflux
Oesophageal stricture
Surveyradiographyis usuallyunremarkable.Barium contrast
Narrowing of the oesophageal lumen may be
accompaniedbyerythemahaemorhageorulceration
Oesophageal diverticulum
Focalorsemental sacculationsarebseedonsuveyor
Sacculations of the oesophageal wall may be evident
contrastradiography
with endscopyutimaybenecessaryoaspirae
food and fuid from the sacculated segment tovisualize
the defect
Megaoesophagus
Variable degrees of oesophageal dilatation willbe observed
Variable degreesof oesophageal dilatationwill be
with surveyradiography.Contrastradiographywil confirm
apparent at endoscopy.Oesophagitis or obstruction
oesophageal dilataticn aswellas provide some limited
may be observed
informationaboutoesophagealmotility.Endoscopyisnot
needed to make the diagnosis
Hiatal hernia
Survey radiography is usually diagnostic(e.g.caudodorsal
Findingsconsistent with thediagnosis include cranial
gas-filledopacityin the thoraciccavity) incongenital formsf
displacement of the gastro-oesophageal sphincter,a
the disease. Several contrast studiesmay be required to
large oesophageal hiatus and oesophagitis
document the same findings in animals with acquired hiatal
hernias
Gastro-oesophageal reflux
Survey radiography is usually unremarkable.The contrast
Endoscopic findingsmaybe similartocesophagiisor
radiographic findingsof irregularmucosal surface and
mucosa may be normal.Definitive diagnosis may
oesophageal dilataticnare consistentwithoesophagitis
require pH and pressure measurements
reflux of bariummay ormay not be abnormal.Endoscopy
should beperformed
Gastro-oesophageal
Proximal oesophageal dilatation, consolidation ormass effect
intussusception
lumen of theoesophaguss evident.Gastricrugal folds
rugal foldswithin theintrathoracicoesophagus arefindings
may be visible
consistent with the diagnosis of gastro-oesophageal
intussusception
18.3
Radographic and endoscopic fincings inoesophageal disorders of the dog and cat.
radiographywillalsoidentifysomeof the complications
of oesophageal disease,including aspirationpneumo
trast radiography.Dynamic contrast studies,e.g.
nia,pleural effusion,mediastinitis and pneumothorax.
videofluoroscopy,should be used instead of static
Contrast radiography and fluoroscopy can beper-
barium radiography whenever possible.In addition to
formed to identifyoesophageal lesions or toconfirm a
structural information,dynamic studies will provide
tentativediagnosis.Disordersnotreadilydiagnosedby
some information about oesophageal motility.Con-
survey radiography (e.g. radiolucent foreign body,
traststudiesmaybeperformed usingbarium paste
oesophagobronchialfistula,oesophagitis,diverticulum
(80-100%weight/volume),barium suspension(30%
137
Chapter 18  Disorders of the pharynx and oesophagus
weight/volume), barium-coated meals or jodinated
The physical examination is often unremarkable in
contrastagents. The choice of a specific contrast agent 
affected animals, although fever and salivation may
will depend upan which oesophageal disease is sus-
be detected in animals with ulcerative oesophagitis.
pected (see Chapter 3).
 Pulmonary wheezes and coughing occur with aspira-
Oesophageal endoscopy has become a very useful
 tion pneumonia.
jeabeydosao jo juawieel pue sisoubeip eu u! lool
disease (see Chapter4). Usually performed after survey
Laboratory tests: Leucocytosis and neutrophilia
aie Asdoig pue Adoosopua 'juawssasse oydebopes
may be found in animals with severe oesophagitis
particularly useful in diagnosing oesophageal stricture,
or aspiration pneumonia but results of routine haema-
oesophagitis, intraluminal mass, foreign body and diver-
ticula (see Figure 18.3). Endoscopy may also be used
ally unremarkable.
therapeuticallyto remove foreign bodies, dilate oesopha-
geal strictures ar to place gastrostomy feeding tubes.
Diagnostic imaging: The oesophagus often appears
Utrasonography has proved usefulin the diagnosis
normalon survey thoracic radiography. Aspiration pneu-
of peri-oesophageal masses and other mediastinal
 monia may be evident in the dependent portions of the
disease. Oesophageal manometry is useful for diag-
lung. Barium-contrast radiographic findings include
nosing cricopharyngeat achalasia, generalized oeso-
irregular mucosal surface, segmental narrowing,
oesophageal dilatation and diffuse oesophageal hypo-
sphincter incompetence, but the technique is currently
motility. Stricture formation may also be observed in
 only performed at major referral centres and university
chronic undiagnosed or untreated oesophagitis. En-
teaching hospitals. Nuclear scintigraphy and oesopha-
doscopy and biopsy are the most reliable means of
geal pH monitoring have also been used to diagnose
diagnosing this disorder (see Chapter 4). In severe
oesophageal motility disorders and gastro-cesopha-
cases of oesophagitis, the mucosa will appear hyper-
geal reflux, respectively.
aemic and oedematous with areas of ulceratian and
active bleeding. Milder cases of oesophagitis may
Inflammatory diseases of the
cosal biopsy willbe necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
oesophagus
 Oesophagitis will have several important differential
 diagnoses including:
Oesophagitis
Oesophageal foreign body
Aetiology
Qesophageal stricture
Oesophagitis is an acute or chronic inflammatory dis-
Hiatal hernia
Megaoesophagus
involves the underlying submucosa and muscularis. It
，
Oesophageal diverticulum
most often results from chemical injury from swallowed 
Vascular ring anomaly.
substances, oesophageal foreign bodies or gastro-
oesophageal reflux. The oesophageal mucosa has
Each of these disorders can be differentiated by
 several important barrier mechanisms to withstand
caustic substances including: stratified squamous epi-
thelium with tight intracellular junctions; mucous gel;
Treatment
and surface bicarbanate ions. Disruption of these bar-
 Animals with mild cesophagilis may be managed on an
 rier mechanisms results in inflammation, erosion and/
 Cutpatient basis. Oral food intake should be withheld for
Of ulceration of the underlying structures. Clinical signs
2-3 days in cases of mild oesophagitis. Animals with
are related to the type of injury, the severity of inflam-
 more severe oesophagitis (e.g. complete anorexia, de
mation and the invoivement of structures underlying
the cesophageal mucosa, e.g. the muscularis.
zation. Food and water should be withheld in such
 Oesophagitis may occur at any age; however, young
cases, and animals may need additional enteral or
 animals with congenital oesophageal hiatal hernia may
parenteral nutritional support. Oral sucralfate suspen-
be at increased risk for reflux oesophagitis. Cats ap-
sions are the most important and specific therapy for
pear to be particularly susceptible to doxycycline-
oesophagitis. Sucralfate suspensions are more thera-
associated oescphagitis and oesophageal stricture.
peutic than intact sucralfate tablets because the liquid
Anaesthesia, poor patient preparation and poor patient 
suspension will bind more readily to an erosive or
positioning during anaesthesia places other animals at
ulcerative site. Gastric acid secretory inhibitors (e.g.
risk for gastro-cesophageal reflux and cesophagitis.
cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, omeprazole) might be
useful in suspected cases of gastro-oesophageal reflux.
Diagnosis
 Broad spectrum antibiotics should be used in animals
with aspiration pneumonia or severe oesophagitis.
Cllnical signs: Signs characteristic of oesophagitis
include regurgitation, salivation, odynophagia, exten-
Prognosis
 sion of the head and neck during swallowing. and
Animals with mild oesophagitis generally have a fa-
avoidance of food. Coughing may be observed in
vourable prognosis. Ulcerative oesophagitis, on the
 some animals with concurrent aspiration pneumonia.
other hand, warrants a more guarded prognosis. The
138
Chapter 18  Disorders of the pharynx and oesophagus
most important complicationofcesophagitis is cesopha-
Treatment
geai stricture. Animals affected with oesophageal stric-
 Because dietary fat delays gastric emptying and re-
lure develop progressive regurgitation, weight loss and
duces caudal oesophageal sphincter pressure, animals
malnutrition. Oesophagitis and stricture also place
 animals at risk for aspiration pneumonia.
also avoid late night feedings because this would tend to
Buunp ainsseid jaoulyds leebeudoseo lepneo aonpa
Gastro-oesophageal reflux
sleep. In addition to nutritional considerations, rational
medical therapy for this disorder includes diffusion bar-
Aetlology
riers (e.g. sucralfate), gastric acid secretory inhibitors
Gastro-oesophageal reflux is a disorder of the caudal
(e.g. cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, omeprazole) and
oesophageal sphincter permitting reflux of G! fluids or
prokinetic agents (e.g. metoclopramide). Diffusion bar-
 ingesta into the oesophagus. Varying degrees of
riers are perhaps the most important medical fherapy in
Desophagitis result from prolonged contact of gastric
gastro-oesophageal reflux. Sucralfate,for example, pro-
 acid, pepsin, trypsin, bile salts and duodenal bicarbo-
tects against mucosal damage from gastro-oesopha-
nate with the oesophageal mucosa. The frequency of
gealreffux and promcteshealingofexistingoesophagitis.
reflux and composition of the refluxed material deter-
Refractory cases of gastro-oesophageal reflux should
mines the severity of the oesophagitis. Gastric acid
also be medicated with acid secretory inhibitors and/or
alone produces a mild oesophagitis, whereas combj-
 prokinetic agents (see Chapter 28). The H, histamine
nations of gastric acid and pepsin or trypsin, bicarbo-
receptor antagonists, e.g. cimetidine, ranitidine and 
nate,and bile salts produce a severe oesophagitis. The
famotidine, inhibit gastric acid secretion and reduce the
risk of reflux oesophagitis is also greater with muitiple
amount of acid reflux. Omeprazole (a H+,K+ adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase) inhibitor) could also be used to
sure. Gastro-oesophageal reflux has been poorly docu-
 inhibit gastric acid secretion. Metoclopramide and low-
mented in dogs and cats, but it is undoubtedly more 
dose erythromycin may be useful in treating gastro-
common than previously thought. Chronic vomiting.
oesophageal reflux because they increase caudal
disorders of gastric emptying, hiatal hernia and anaes-
 oesophagealsphincter pressure.5-Hydroxyiryptamine4
thesia-induced reductions in caudal oesophageal
(5-HT4) agonists, like cisapride, also increase tone in the
sphincter pressure have been implicated in the
caudal oesophageal sphincter but cisapride has been
pathogenesis of gastro-oesophageal reflux in dogs
withdrawn from severaf intermational markets.
and cats.
Prognasis
Diagnosis
The prognosis for most animals with gastro-oesopha-
 geal refiux is good with medical management.
Clinical signs: The clinical signs of gastro-oesopha-
Oesophageal fistula
 geal reflux are similiar to those of oesophagitis. In
severe cases, animals may develop regurgitation, sali-
Aetiology
vation, odynophagia, extension of the head and neck
 An cesophageal fistula is an abnormal communication
during swallowing, and total avoidance of food. How-
between the cesophagus and adjacent structures. Most
ever, in milder cases, affected animals may have only
an occasional episode of regurgitation, particularly in
tures, e.g. oesophagopulmonary, cesophagobronchial
the early morning hours. The latter cases result from
 or oesophagotracheal fistulae. Occasionally, oesopha-
transient relaxations of the caudal oesophageal sphinc-
geal fistulae expand into the pleural space or cervical
ter during sleep. The physical examination is usually
tissues. Both congenital and acquired fistuiae have
unremarkable, but fever and excessive salivation may
been described. Congenital fistulae are rare and result
be detected in animals with severe concurrent
from incomplete separation of the tracheobronchial tree
oesophagitis.
from the digestive tract, from which it is formed during
embryological developmeni. An increased incidence
Diagnostic imaging: The diagnosis of gastro-0esopha-
of congenital oesophageal fistulae (and oesophageal 
geal reflux may be little more than clinical suspicion.
diverticula) has been reported in the Cairn Terrier.
Survey radiography does not aid in the diagnosis.
Affected animals often have concurrent oesophageal
Videofluaroscopy may demonstrate intermittent gastro-
foreign bodies, presumably because of abnormalities in
oesophageal reflux, but this finding may also be ob-
 oesophageal motility associated with the fistula.
served in animais with normal oesophageal function.
Acquired oesophageal fistulae typically result from
Endoscopy is currently the best method for document-
foreign body ingestion, oesophageal perforation and
ing mucosal inflammation consistent with reflux
extension of inflammation into adjacent tissues. Bones
 oesophagitis (see Chapter 4). Definitive diagnosis of
and grass awns are most commonly incriminated. A
gastro-oesophageal reflux would require continuous
traction diverticulum often also develops because of
measurements cf caudal oesophageal sphincter pres-
 the inflammatory reaction between the oesophagus
sure and 24-hour intraluminal pH, procedures with
and bronchus. Secondary complications that may oc-
which most dogs and cats are not compliant. Hiatal
cur with oesophagobronchial fistula are localized
hernia, oesophagitis ard oesophageal stricture are the
pneumonias, pulmonary abscessation and pleuritis.
most important differential diagnoses for gastro-
The severity of the secondary complications usually
oesophageal reflux.
 depends on the duration and size of the fistula.
139
Chapter 18Disorders of the pharynx and oesophagus
Diagnosis
Treatment
Surgical excision and repair provides the most suc-
Clinical signs:Animals with congenital oesophageal
fistulaeusually developclinical signs shorlyafterwean-
cessful outcome in animalswithoesophagobronchial
fistula.Thefistulaissurgicallyexcised and thedefect
ing.whereasanimalswithacquiredfistulaedevelop
in theoesophagus is closed.Resectionof the affected
signs later in life.Clinical signsinnearlyall cases are
related to the respiratory system and include coughing
lunglobeis alsogenerallywarranted.Apostoperative
course of broad spectrum antibiotics should be pre-
and dyspnoea.Othersignsthat may develop include
scribed in all cases.
regurgitation,lethargy,anorexia,feverandweightloss.
Regurgitation is usually reported in relation to an
Prognosis
oesophageal foreignbody.
The prognosis is guarded if secondary complications,
Diagnosticimaging:Theradiographicmanifestations
such as pneumonia,pulmonary abscesses or large
of oesophagobronchial fistula consist of localized alve-
quantities of pleural fluid,are present.In the absence
olar,bronchialand/orinterstitial lungpatterns.Theright
of such complications the prognosis is generally good.
caudal,rightintermediate andleftcaudallung lobesare
most ofteninvolved.The oesophagus appearsnormal
withradiographyunlessaradiopaque oesophageal
Hypomotility disorders of the
foreignbodyisobserved.Definitivediagnosisofoesopha-
oesophagus
gealfistulaerequirescontrastradiographyor endo-
scopy.Anoesophagramshouldbeperformedwithathin
Idiopathicmegaoesophagus
mixture of bariumsulphatecontrastmedia(30%weight/
volume)to elucidate thefistula.Use of iodinated con-
Aetiology
trast agents should be avoided since they are
Idiopathicmegaoesophagusisthemostcommoncause
hyperosmolar and chemically iritating to the lung, al-
of regurgitation in the dog.Apart from in dysautonomia,
thoughaspirated bariummay also induce lungpatho-
megaoesophagusisararefindinginthedomesticcat.
logy.Endoscopy mayalso be useful in documenting an
Thedisorderischaracterizedbyoesophageal hypo-
oesophagealfistulaalthoughsmallfistulaeareocca-
motility and dilatation,regurgitation andprogressive
sionally missed.Lobar pneumonia is the most important
loss ofbody condition.Several formsof thesyndrome
differentialdiagnosisforoesophagobronchial fistula.
havebeendescribed includingcongenital,acquired
Aspiration,bacterialand foreignbodypneumoniascan
allmimicoesophagobronchial fistula.
(Figure 18.4).
Cause
Investigations
Treatment
Congenital megaoesophagus
Myasthenia gravis
Edrophonuimresponse±electrophysiology
Pyridostigmine (1.0-3.0 mg/kg p.0.q12h)
Neuropathy
Elevated alfequent feedings bthanchl
Hiatal hernia
Survey and contrast chest radiography
Diaphragmaticcruralapposition,esophagopexyand
gastropexy
Glycogen orlipid storage disease
Muscle orlivrbiopsywhitbloodcelor blast
Enzymereplacement therapy?:supportive care;gene
enzyme assays;urine metabolic screening
therapy
Acquired idiopathicmegaoesophagus
Neuropathy
Oesophagealmanometry±electrophysiclogy
Elevatedmfedingsucrafa
Acquired secondarymegaoesophagus
Myasthenia gravis
Nicotinic acetyicholine receptor antibody;edrophonium
Pyridostigmine ±prednislone
response(dificultoass)±electrphysiology
Polymyositis/polymyopathy
Serum creatine phosphokinase;muscle biopsy±
Prednisolone
electrophysiology
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Antinuclear antibcdy
Prednisolone
Hypcadrenocorticism
ACTH stimulation test
Prednisolone;fludrocortisone
Hiatal hernia
Contrastradiography and oesophageal endoscopy
Gastricdilatationandvolvuus
Survey±ccntrast radiography
Reducevolvulus; gastropexy
Lead toxicity
Haematology:blood lead concentration
Chelation with calcium EDTA
18.4
140
Chapter18Disordersof thepharynx andcesophagus
Cause
Investigations
Treatment
Acquired secondarymegaoesophagus (continued)
Organophosphate toxicity
Whole blood cholinesterase activity
Atropine; pralidoxime chloride for acute exposure;
supportive care
Oesophagitis
Oesophageal endoscopy
Sucraifte; cimetidine; omeprazole
Hypothyroidlism?
Thyroid function tests
Levothyroxine
Dermatomyositis
Skin andmuscle biopsy
Prednisolone
Distemper
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
Supporive care
Thymoma
Chest radiography; thymic aspiration and/r resection
Surgical resection
Dysautonomia
Clinical diagnosis
Supportive care
18.4
Congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus is a gener-
Diagnosis
alizedhypomotilityanddilatationof theoesophagus,
causingregurgitationand failuretothriveinpuppies
Clinical signs:Regurgitation is the most frequent
shortlyafterweaning.Anincreased breedincidencehas
clinical signassociated with megaoesophagus.The
beenreported in thelrishStter,GreatDane,German
ShepherdDog,LabradorRetriever,SharPeiandNew-
foundland,and autosomal dominant inheritance has
withmanyotheroesophageal disorders,affected ani-
been demonstratedintheMiniatureSchnauzerand Fox
Terrier.The pathogenesisof the congenital form is
monia.Physicalexaminationoftenrevealsexcessive
incompletelyunderstood,althoughseveralstudieshave
salivation, mild to moderate cachexia, coughing and
pointedtoa defectinthe vagalafferentinnervationofthe
pulmonary cracklesorwheezes.
oesophagus.Congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus
hasbeenreported inseveral cats andin one groupof
Laboratory tests:Routine haematology,serum bio-
cats secondary topyloricdysfunction.
chemistryprofileandurinalysisshouldbeperformedin
Most cases of adult-onset megaoesophagushave
all cases to investigatepossible secondary causes of
megaoesophagus(e.g.hypoadrenocorticism).
idiopathic megaoesophagus.The syndrome occurs
spontaneouslyinadult dogsusuallybetween7and15
Diagnosticimaging:Surveyradiographywillbe diag-
years of age without sexorbreedpredilection.The
nostic formost cases of megaoesophagus(Figure
disorder hasbeencompared erroneously tooesopha-
18.5).Contrast radiography may be necessary in
geal achalasia in humans. Achalasia is a failure of
some cases to confirm the diagnosis,evaluate motil-
relaxationof theloweroesophageal sphincterand inef-
ity,and exclude foreign bcdies or obstruction as the
fectiveperistalsis of theoesophageal body.A similar
cause of themegaoesophagus.Endoscopy will con-
disorderhasneverbeenrigorously documented in the
firm the diagnosis(see Chapter4).It may alsoreveal
dog,although isolated casereports still appear from
oesophagitis,a commonfinding incanine idiopathic
time totime.Several importantdifferencesbetween
megaoesophagus.Riskfactoranalysis suggests that
idiopathicmegaoesophagus inthedogand achalasia in
oesophagitismarkedlyincreasestheriskfor the de-
humanshave been documented.Although aetiologies
velopment of megaoesophagus.It is notyetclear
havenotbeenidentified,somestudieshavesuggested
whether oesophagitis is a cause or consequence of
a defect in the afferentneural response to oesophageal
megaoesophagus.
distension,similartothatofcongenitalmegaoesophagus.
Acquired secondary megaoesophagusmay also
Additional tests:If acquired secondary mega-
developin associationwitha numberofother condi-
oesophagus is suspected (see Figure 18.4)addi-
tions.Myasthenia gravis accounts for 25-30%of the
tional diagnostic tests should be considered,for
secondarycases.Insomecases of myastheniagravis,
example:serologyfornicotinicacetylcholinereceptor
regurgitation andweight lossmaybe the onlypresent-
antibody:adrenocorticotropic hormone(ACTH)
ing signsof the disease,whereas inmostothercases
stimulationtest;and,ifclinicallyindicated,serology
regurgitation is one of many clinical signs,including
for antinuclear antibody,serum creatinephospho-
peripheral muscle weakness.Acquired secondary
kinase activity,electromyography and nerve con-
megaoesophagus has also been associated with hypo-
ductionvelocity,and muscle and nerve biopsy.Such
adrenocorticism,lead poisoning,lupus myositis and
additional medical investigationswill bedependent
severe formsof oesophagitis.Hypothyroidismhas
upon the individual case presentation.A clear asso-
been suggested as a secondary causeof idiopathic
ciation with hypothyroidism has not been proven
megaoesophagus but retrospective risk factor analy-
and thus thyroid function testing should be per-
sis has not identified it as an important cause.
formed only in suspicious cases.
141
Chapter 18Disordersof thepharynx and oesophagus
Pulmonary infectionsshould beidentifiedbycul-
ture and sensitivity,and an appropriate antibiotic se-
lected for the offending organism(s). This may be
accomplished by trans-orendotracheal washor by
bronchoalveolarlavage at thetimeofendoscopy.
Smooth muscleprokinetic(e.g.metoclopramide or
cisapride)therapyhasbeenadvocated forstimulating
oesophageal peristalsis inaffected animals.However,
metoclopramide andcisapridestimulategastro-oesopha-
ofaneffectonthestriatedmuscleofthecanineoesopha-
geal body. Oesophageal 5-HT4 receptors are present in
manyanimal species,but they are apparently absent
incanineoesophageal striated muscle.Bethanechol
18.5
(5-15 mg/dog p.o.q8h) has been shown to stimulate
lciopathic
oesophageal propagating contractions in some affected
megaoesophagus
dogsand is therefore a more appropriateprokinetic
inan8-year-old
agent for the therapy of thisdisorder.Becauseof the
mixed-breed dog.
high incidence of oesophagitis in canine idiopathic
Notethevisible
megaoesophagus,affected animals should also be
oorders of the air-
medicatedwith oral sucralfate suspensions.
filled oesophagus
Surgical cardiomyotomy(myotomyof the caudal
cn both the lateral
and dorsoventral
oesophagealsphincter)hasbeenrecommendedinthe
thoracic
pastasa therapeuticmeasureinthebelief that canine
radiographs.On
megaoesophagus is similar tohuman achalasia.Be-
the lateral
cause most studies havereported normal caudal
radiographthe
oesophageal sphincter tone and appropriaterelaxa-
tracheais
tionwithswallowing,cardiomyotomycannatberecom-
depressed
mended for the treatment of this disorder.Indeed
ventrally,and the
overlying
ocsophageal wall
poorer outcomes than untreated animals.
creates a visib'e
line(the'tracheal
Prognosis
stripe').
Animals withcongenital idiopathicmegaoesophagus
haveafairprognosis.With adequate attentiontocaloric
needs and episodes of aspiration pneumonia,many
animalswill developimprovedoesophagealmotility
Treatment
overseveralmonths.Petownersmustbe committedto
Animals with secondary acquired megaoesophagus
months of physical therapy and nutritional support.
shouldbedifferentiatedfromthosewithotheroesopha-
Themorbidityandmortalityofacquiredidiopathic
geal disorders andtreated appropriately(seeFigure
megaoesophagus remain unacceptably high.Many
18.4).Dogs affected with myasthenia gravis should be
animalseventually succumbto the effectsofchronic
treatedwithpyridostigmine,corticosteroidsorazathio-
malnutritionandrepeatec episodesofaspirationpneu-
prine.Mycophenolatemofetilhasalsobeenusedinthe
monia.A poor prognosis must be given in such cases.
treatment of myasthenia gravis,but it has notbeen
Animalswithacquiredsecondarymegaoesophagus
sufficientlyevaluated atthistimetoberecommended.
haveamorefavourableprognosis if the underlying
Dogsaffectedwithhypothyroidismshouldbetreated
disease canbepromptlyidentified and successfully
with levothyroxine, and dogs affected withpolymyositis
managed.Indeed,onerecentreport suggested that
should be treated with prednisolone.lf secondary
myastheniagravismayspontaneouslyresolvewithin
disease canbe excluded,therapyforthe congenital or
6months of the onset of the disease in 90% of cases.
acquiredidiopathicmegaoesophaguspatient should
Refractory casesresult from chronic oesophageal
bedirectedatnutritionalmanagementand treatmentof
distension,myentericnervedegenerationandmuscle
aspiration pneumonia.
atrophy.
Affectedanimalsshould befed ahighcalorie diet in
small frequent feedings,from an elevated or upright
Dysautonomia
positionto take advantageofgravitydrainage through
ahypomotileoesophagus.Dietary consistencyshould
Aetiology
be formulated to produce the fewest clinical signs.
Dysautonomiaisageneralized autonomicneuropathy
Some animalshandle liquid dieis quite well,while
that was originally reported in cats in the United King-
others dobetterwithsolid meals.Animals thatcannot
dom,but that hasnowbeen documentedindogs and
maintain adequatenutritional balancewith oral intake
cats throughout WesternEurope and theUnitedStates.
should befedbytemporaryorpermanenttubegastro-
Theclinical signsreflectageneralized autonomicdys-
stomy(see Chapter 27).
functionoftheGland urinarytractsbutmegaoesophagus,
142
Chapter 18Disorcers of the pharynx and ocsophagus
oesophagealhypomotilityandregurgitationarefairly
Oesophageal diverticula
consistentfindings.Pathologically,degenerativelesions
Aetiology
arefoundinautonomicganglia,intermediategrey col-
umnsof thespinal cord andsomesympatheticaxons.
Oesophagealdiverticulaarecircumscribed sacculations
Despiteanintensivesearchforgenetic,oxic,nutritional
in thewallof theoesophagusthat interferewithnormal
and infectious aetiological agents,no definitiveaetio-
oesophageal motilitypatterns.Both congenital and ac-
logyhaseverbeenestablished.
quiredformshavebeen described.Thenormalredun-
dancyofthecanineoesophagus,frequentlypronounced
inthebrachycephalicbreeds,should notbeconfused
Diagnosis
Congenitaldiverticulahavebeenattributedtoabnor-
Clinical signs:The most frequentlyreported clinical
malitiesinembryological developmentthatpermit her-
signs are depression,anorexia,constipation and re-
niationof the mucosa through a defect in the muscularis
gurgitation or vomiting. Faecal and urinary inconti-
(Figure 18.6).Acquired diverticula are subdivided into
nencehavebeenreportedlesscommonly.Physical
eithertractionorpulsionforms.Tractiondiverticula tend
examination findings consistentwithdysautonomia
todevelopinthecranialandmid-oesophagealbodyand
includedrymucousmembranes,pupillary dilatation,
result fromperi-oesophageal inflammationandfibrosis.
prolapsed nictitating membranes,reduced orabsent
Adhesions toadjacenttissue(e.g.lung,bronchus,lymph
pupillarylightreflex,bradycardiaintestinaldistension,
node)distort the oesophageal lumenandcreate
urinarybladder distension and areflexic anus.Paresis
sacculations.Abscess development from grass awn
and consciousproprioceptive deficits have beenre-
migrationisacommoncauseof tractiondiverticulainthe
ported ina small numberof animals.
westernUnitedStates.Pulsion diverticula develop in
Aclinicaldiagnosisismadeinmostcasesbasedon
the historical and physical examination findings.Addi-
pressure,abnormalregionaloesophageal motility.or
tionalfindingsconsistentwith the diagnosiswould
whennormal peristalsisisobstructed by a stenotic
include:
lesion.Pulsion diverticula may develop as a conse-
quenceofvascularringanomaliesinthecranialoesopha-
Oesophagealdilatationand hypomotility on
gusorfromforeignbodiesthatbecome lodged inthe
survey and barium contrast radiography
distaloesophagus,inwhichcasetheyarereferredtoas
Delayedgastricemptying onbarium contrast
epiphrenic diverticula.
radiography
Reduced tearproduction inSchirmer tear tests
Atropine-insensitivebradycardia
Bladderandcolonicdistentiononsurvey
radiography.
There arefewdifferential diagnoses toconsiderin
a dog orcat presenting with themyriad manifestations
of the syndrome. Early in the course of the illness,
however,otherdifferentialdiagnosestoconsiderare
colonic or intestinal obstruction,other causes of
megaoesophagus and lower urinary tract disease.
Treatment
Positiveconlrastradiographof anoesophageal
Supportive care(e.g.artificialtears,elevatedfeedings,
diverticulum ina9-month-oldDachshund.
expressing the urinary bladder,antibiotics) is stillthe
Diagnosis
andcatsarereported toshowmildimprovementwith
parasympathomimetic drugs (e.g.bethanechol or
Clinical signs:The clinical signs of oesophageal
metoclopramide).Gastrostomy tube feedings or total
diverticula are typical of mary otheroesophageal dis-
parenteralnutrition may sustain some animals until
orders and include regurgitation,odynophagia and
they regain neurological function.
retching.Signs usuallyresult fromimpaction of food
and/orfluid in the sacculated segment,andif this has
Prognosis
notoccurred diverticula maybe incidental findingsnot
In general,dysautonomia carries a very guarded to
associated with clinicalsigns.Onrareoccasions,weak-
poorprognosis for long-term survival inboth the dog
eningofthemuscularisresults inperforationof the
and the cat.Twenty tofortypercent of affectedcats
diverticulum,leakageof food andfluidintothemedia-
are likely to recover, although cats may take 2-12
stinum and signs of sepsis.
monthstodoso.Recoveryrates arelower still in the
dog.Completerecoveryisuncommonand manycats
Diagnostic imaging:Survey radiography may reveal
and dogs are leff withresidual impairment,e.g.inter-
an air-filled ortissue-densitymass adjacent toor involv
mittentregurgitation,dilated pupils and faecalor
ing theoesophagusbutcontrastradiography isneces-
urinary incontinence.
sarytodifferentiateanoesophageal diverticulumfrom
143
a peri-oesophageal,mediastinal orpulmonary mass.
and intraluminalorextraluminalmasslesions(neopla-
Anepiphrenic diverticulum could also easilybe con-
sia orabscesses).Anaesthesia,poorpatientprepara-
fused with a hiatal hernia orgastro-oesophageal intus-
tion andpoorpatient positioning during anaesthesia
place someanimals atriskforgastro-oesophageal
willdemonstrateafocal dilatedsegment ofoesopha-
reflux,oesophagitis and subsequent stricture forma-
geallumenthatfillspartiallyorcompletelywithcontrast
tion. Cats appear to be particularly susceptible to
media (see Figure 18.6). Videofluoroscopy might also
doxycycline-associatedoesophagitisandoesophageal
demonstrateanunderlyingoesophageal motilitydisor-
stricture.Fibrosisand masscompression arethemost
derassociatedwith thediverticulum.Endoscopywill
important pathogeneticmechanisms involved in stric-
confirm the diagnosis,although it maybe necessaryto
tureformation.
suctionfoodandfluidtovisualize the diverticulum
(Figure 18.7).
Diagnosis
Clinical signs:The clinical signs ofprogressive re-
Endoscopic
gurgitationand dysphagiaarerelatedtotheseverity
viewofan
and extentof the stricture.At the outset,the animals
oescphiageal
appetite isunaffected.Regurgitation occurs shortly
diverticulum
afterfeedingandthe animal may attempt tore-ingest
(*）opening
theregurgitated meal.An important clinical sign is
fromthe
that liquidmealsareoftenbettertoleratedthansolid
oesophageal
meals.Withprogressive oesophagealnarrowing and
lumenina
inflammationaffected animals develop complete
12-manth-old
Dachshund
anorexia,weightlossandmalnutrition.Someanimals
bitch.
also develop aspirationpneumonia.The physical
examination isremarkableforptyalism,cachexia and
malnutrition.Pulmonary signs (wheezes and cough)
maybedetected inanimals affectedwithaspiration
pneumonia.
The differential diagnoses for cranial andmid-
Diagnostic imaging:As with other oesophageal
oesophageal diverticula should include oesophageal
disorders,the diagnosisisbasedonclinicalsigns and
orperi-oesophageal abscess,necrotic tumour and
radiographicandendoscopicfindings.Intraluminal or
pulmonary mass.Hiatal hermia and gastro-oesopha-
extraluminal masslesionsmaybeevidenton survey
geal intussusception are the major differential diag-
radiographyinanimalswithcompressiveoesopha-
noses for epiphrenic diverticula.
geal stricture.Surveyradiographs are usuallyunre-
markable in animalswith benign fibrosing strictures.
Treatment
Segmental or diffuse narrowing observed with barium
Small diverticulamaybemanaged byfeeding liquid or
contrast radiography is usually diagnosticof the dis-
semi-liquiddietstominimize impaction of solidfood in
order.Theremay alsobe some oesophageal dilata-
thediverticulum.Surgicalexcisionandreconstruction
tion proximal to the stricture site.Ultrasonography
hasnotproved useful indiagnosingbenignfibrosing
ticula.Evensmallpulsion diverticula shouldprobably
strictures,but it may be useful in diagnosing those
betreated surgicallysincefoodimpactionmightcause
causedbymass compression.Some mediastinaland
themtoenlarge.
aspirated withultrasound guidance.Endoscopyshould
Prognosis
beperformed inallanimalstoconfirm thesiteand
Most cases warrant a guarded prognosis since seg-
severityof stricture(seeChapter4)andtoexclude the
possibilityof intraluminalmalignancy.Benignfibrosing
surgery.Animals are also at some risk for oesophageal
strictures mustbe differentiated from vascularring
stricture following corrective surgery.In cases of trac-
anomalies,oesophagitis,intraluminal oesophageal
tion diverticula,theprognosiswill alsobe somewhat
massesand extraluminalperi-oesophageal masses.
dependent upon the pathogenesis and resolution of
These disorders can usuallybe differentiated with
the peri-oesophageal inflammation.
thoracicultrasonography.
Oesophageal obstructions
Treatment
Oesophageal stricture
Oral feedings should bewithheld in casesofsevere
stricture oroesophagitis.In such cases,a temporary
Aetiology
gastrostomy tube may be placed at the time of
Oesophageal strictureis an abnormal narrowingofthe
oesophageal dilatation as ameansof providing con-
oesophageallumen.The most important aetiologies of
tinuous nutritional support (see Chapter 27).Liquid
stricturearechemicalinjuryfromswallowed substances,
mealsshouldbeused whenre-instituting oralfeedings.
oesophageal foreign bodies,oesophageal surgery,
Animalsmaybedischargedfromthehospitalafter
144
Chapter 18Disorders of the pharynx and oesophagus
adequate rehydration,dilatation of the affected
Oesophagealneoplasia
oesophageal segment,nutritional intervention and
appropriate therapy for aspiration pneumonia.
Aetiology
Oesophageal strictures are best managed with me-
Oesophagealcanceraccountsfor<0.5%ofallcancers
chanical dilatation.Dilatation maybe achievedwith
balloon dilatation catheters or bougienage tubes.
ofprimary oesophageal,peri-oesophageal or meta
Balloondilatationsaresaferandmoreeffectivein
staticorigin.The most commonprimary oesophageal
applying radial forces to expand the stricture site.A
tumours in the dogare osteosarcomasand fibrosarco-
greater riskof perforationis associated with the useof
mas,particularlyinareaswhereSpirocercalupiinfec-
bougienage tubes due to shearing forces applied by
tion is endemic.Spirocercal oesophageal granulomas
theinstrument.Multipledilatationsat 1-2weekinter-
mayundergometaplasticandneoplastictransforma-
vals maybenecessaryunti the stricture isresoived
tiontofibrosarcomasandosteogenicsarcomas.Squa-
Oesophagealdilatationisbestperformedwithdirect
mous cell carcinomais themost commonprimary
observation at the time of endoscopy,but it can be
oesophageal tumour in the cat.Less commonly re-
performed with videofluoroscopy(Figure 18.8).
portedprimary oesophageal tumours of thedog and
cat includeleiomyo(sarco)mas,scirrhous carcinomas
and adenocarcinomas.Metastaticlesionsappearto be
the most common oesophageal tumours in dogs and
cats and include thyroid,pulmonary and gastriccarci-
nomas.Tumours of theperi-oesophageal structures
(lymph node,thyroid,thymus and heart base)cause
local oesophageal invasion and/or directmechanical
obstruction of the oesophagus.
18.8
Placement of an cesophageal balloon dilataticn
Diagnosis
cathcter at a stricture site.The balloon is
d'stended with aradiopaque contrastagent.
Clinical signs:Theprimary clinical signs of oesopha
Medicaltherapiesaimedattreatingtheinflammatory
geal neoplasia are regurgitation, dysphagia,odyno-
component of this lesion arebest used asadjunctive
phagiaand weight loss.Clinicalsigns develop gradually
therapy to mechanical dilatation. Animals with concur-
and reflect progressive oesophageal obstruction or
rentoesophagitisshouldbetreatedwithoralsucralfate
abnormaloesophageal motility.Animalswithmeta-
suspensions and gastric acid secretory inhibitors (e.g.
staticdisease may havegeneraldebilitation and signs
cimetidine,ranitidine,famotidineoromeprazole).lthas
ofotherorgansysteminvolvement,suchasdyspnoea
alsobeen suggested that anti-inflammatory dosesof
or cough.Physical examination may reveal littlemore
corticosteroids(e.g. prednisolone) have also been ad-
than cachexia,although someperi-oesophageal and
vocated topreventfibrosisandre-strictureduring the
oesophageal tumoursmaybepalpable if they involve
healingphase following oesophageal dilatation.lt has
thecervical oesophagus.
been suggested that intra-lesional steroid injections
(e.g.1mg triamcinolone acetonide)administered at the
Diagnostic imaging:Peri-oesophageal tumours are
timeofstricture dilatationmaybebeneficial inreducing
the risk of recurrence.
racic ultrasonography.Some intraluminal tumours may
Surgical resection of cesophageal strictures has
be diagnosedonsurveyradiographyalone,whileothers
beenreported,butresectionsarecomplicatedbyinad-
equatesurgicalexposure,lengthyresections,tension
andmucosalbiopsy.Themajordifferential diagnoses
on the anastomosis and poor healing properties of the
for intraluminaloesophageafneoplasia arebenign
thoracic oesophagus.Surgical correction by jejunal
fibrosing stricture and foreignbodies.Radiography and
interpositionorbycreationofa tractiondiverticulum
endoscopywill usuallydifferentiate thesedisorders.
hasbeen attempted,but only ina small number of
cases.Recent developmentswith bioresorbablecolla-
Treatment
genorextracellular matrixscaffoldsmay help to facili-
Chemotherapy.surgicalresectionand radiationtherapy
taterepair followingoesophageal resection.
areconventionally accepted methodsfor the treatment
of malignantoesophagealneoplasia.Radiation therapy
Prognosis
may be complicated by acute or chronic injury to adja-
Stricturesassociatedwith foreignbodyingestion or
cent mediastinal structures,while surgical resections
oesophagitis havea guardedtofairprognosis.Multiple
dilatationsareoftenrequired toachieve anadequate
resections,tension on the anastomosis andpoorheal-
oesophageal lumen.Oesophageal perforation is a
ing properties of the thoracic oesophagus.Photo-
potentiallylife-threatening complicationofoesopha-
dynamicandcryotherapy havebeen studiedunder
geal stricture dilatation.Perforations usually occurat
physiological circumstances but have not yet been
the time of oesophageal dilatation,although theyhave
applied in clinical patients.Recent developments with
beenobservedseveral days toweeksafterwards.
bioresorbablecollagenorextracellularmatrixscaffolds
Malignant strictures have a poor prognosis.Surgical
resection is often theonly possible recourse.
section.Lymphosarcomamaybetreatedinsome cases
145
Chapter18Disordersof thepharynxandcesophagus
withchemotherapyorimmunotherapy.Benignoesopha-
confirmed (and removed) during endoscopy.A tenta-
geal neoplasia,e.g.leiomyoma,generallyhave a fa-
tivediagnosisofoesophagealforeignbodymaybe
vourableprognosisfollowingsurgical resection.
made in animalspresentedwithoesophageal signs
following ahistory of foreign body ingestion.
Prognosis
Without a compatiblehistory,themost important
Except for therarebenignlesionor lymphosarcoma,
differential diagnoses wouldinclude oesophagealstric-
the overall prognosis for oesophageal neoplasia is
ture,neoplasia,hiatal hernia and gastro-oesophageal
poorforcure orpalliation.
intussusception.Each of these conditions can be dif-
ferentiated with radiography and/or endoscopy.
Oesophageal foreignbodies
Aetiology
Treatment
Oesophageal foreign bodies are a frequent clinical
Oesophageal foreign bodies should be removed
problemindogs andcats.Themostcommonoesopha-
promptly.Prolonged retention increases thelikelihood
geal foreign bodies found in dogs are bones,bone
of oesophageal mucosal damage,ulcerationand perfo-
fragments,and coins,whereasplay objects aremore
ration.Rigidorflexiblefibreopticendoscopicretrieval
commonly found in cats. Many foreign bodies are
shouldbe the initial approachto treating anoesopha-
regurgitated or transported into thedistalgastrointes-
gealforeignbody,althoughfluoroscopic-guidedretrieval
tinal tract,butothersremainlodgedintheoesophageal
is also possible.A rigid endoscope is most useful in
body.Thosethataretoolargetopass through the
retrieving large foreign bodies,particularly bones or
bone fragments. Large grasping forceps are passed
oesophagus cause mechanical obstruction.The se-
throughtherigidendoscopetoretrieve theforeignbody,
verityofoesophagealdamageisdependentupon
foreignbodysize,angularityorsharppointedness,and
and inmany cases,the foreignbody can be pulled into
the duration of obstruction.
the endoscope forsaferemoval.Largeforeignbodies
thatcannotbesafelyremoved throughthemouthcan
Diagnosis
occasionallybepushed into the stomach andremoved
bygastrotomy.Smallerforeignbodiesarebest man-
Clinical signs:In many cases there is a history of
aged with a flexible fibreoptic endoscope and basket
foreign body ingestion.Some cases go unnoticed,
tripod or snare retrieval forceps.Flexible endoscopes
however,particularly those associatedwithscaveng-
are particularlyuseful inretrieving fishhooks.
ing.The onset of clinical signswill depend upon the
Affectedanimalsshould befastedfor24-48hours
severityofoesophagealobstruction.Animalswithcom-
afterforeignbody removal.Longerperiodsof fasting
plete oesophageal obstruction are oftenpresented
may be required if the oesophagus is necrotic or
withacute signs,whereasanimalswith incomplete
ulcerative.In the latter circumstance,animalsmay
obstructionmaybepresentedwithsignsofdays'to
insteadbefedthroughagastrostomytubeplaced at
weeks’duration.Relevant clinical signs include regur-
the timeofendoscopy.Specific therapyforoesophagi-
gitation,excessivesalivation,odynophagia,anorexia,
tisshould include oral sucralfate suspensions.Sus-
dysphagia,retching and tachypnoea.
pensions of sucralfate aremore therapeuticthan intact
tablets.Anti-inflammatory dosesof glucocorticoids(e.g.
Diagnosticimaging:Boneforeignbodies can occa-
prednisolone) should alsobe considered in those ani-
sionallybepalpatedif theybecome lodged in the
mals at risk for oesophageal stricture.The risk of
cervical oesophagus butdefinitive diagnosis usually
oesophageal strictureisgreatest inanimalswith180
requiresradiography.Radiodense foreignbodies can
degree or greater transmucosal ulceration.Finally,
be detectedwith surveyradiography(Figure18.9)but
broad spectrum antibiotics shouldbe considered in
confirmation ofradiolucent foreign bodies requires
animalswithsevereulceration or small perforations.
administration of contrast agents. Contrast agents
Surgery is indicated if endoscopyfails or if thereis
should be usedwithcautionif oesophagealperforation
evidenceof oesophageal perforation.Gastrotomy is
is suspected.Foreign bodies may subsequently be
preferredtooesophagotomyfordistaloesophageal
foreignbodiesbecause of thepoorerhealingproper-
formation.However,oesophagotomy would certainly
be indicated in those caseswhere the foreign body
could notberemoved throughgastrotomy.Surgeryis
alsoindicated torepairoesophagealperforation.
Prognosis
Theprognosisformostoesophageal foreignbodies is
generallygood,especiallyif theyareremoved mmedi-
ately.A poorer prognosis is associated with foreign
bodies thatarearge,have sharppointsorareretained
foraprolongedperiod of time.lmmediate complications
includecompleteobstructionorlaceration,whereaslate
18.9
Oescphageal foreign body(arrowed)in a
complications include perforation,haemothorax,
6-year-oldmixed-breed cog.
fistulationand diverticulumorstrictureformation.
146
Chapter 18
Disorders of thepharynxand oesophagus
Vascularring anomalies
Aetiology
Vascularring anomalies are congenitalmalformations
of themajorarteriesof theheartthat,becauseofaltered
anatomical relationships,entrap theoesophagus and
trachea.Persistentright aortic arch,persistentrightor
left subclavian arteries,persistent right dorsal aorta,
double aorticarch,leftaorticarchandright ligamentum
arteriosum,and aberrantintercostalarterieshavebeen
described in both dogs and cats.Persistent right aortic
archisthemost commonvascularringanomalyfound
in dogs andcats.Circular compression of the oesopha-
18.10
gusby therightfourth aortic archresults inphysical
Latcra ard
obstructionof the oesophagus and/or trachea.The
dorsoventral
anomalyisconsidered tobea familial diseasewith
positive contrast
evidence of a hereditary basis in Geman Shepherd
radiographs
Dogs.Aberrant subclavianarteries are thesecond most
showing pooling of
contrast media in a
common vascular ring anomaly.The latter anomalies
dilaled
result in significant oesophageal compression from the
ocsophageal
leftsubclavian artery andbrachycephalicartery.
segment cranial to
anarrowing
Diagnosis
caused bya
persislentright
Clinical signs:Affectedpuppiesand kittens arepre-
aorticarch in a
sented at a young age with the major complaints of
3-month-old
Persiankitten.
regurgitation and failure to thrive.Animals usually do
welluntil weaningwhentheychangefromliquidtosolid
foods.Aspiration pneumonia develops in some ani-
mals asaresult f constantregurgitationbut signsf
trachealcompressionareuncommon.Physicalexami-
nationmostoftenrevealsa thin,stunted animal thatis
apparentlymalnourishedbut normal inotherrespects.
Occasionally,a dilated oesophagus can be observed
Treatment
or palpated in the cervical region.
Persistent right aortic arch isbestmanaged surgically
using a left intercostal approach.Persistent right duc-
Laboratory tests:Laboratory findings are usually
tus arteriosus, aberrant right subclavian artery and
normal.Aswithotheroesophageal disorders,regen-
double aortic arch arebest approached by right inter-
erativeneutrophiliamaybeassociatedwithaspiration
costal thoracotomy.Surgicalligationanddivisionofthe
pneumonia, and hypoalbuminaemia may be associ-
ligamentum arteriosum is the recommended therapy in
ated with malnutrition.
cases of persistent right aortic arch.At surgery,areas
ofperi-oesophageal fibrosisshouldbereduced and
Diagnosticimaging:Thediagnosisofavascularring
the strictured site shouldbedilatedwithaballoon
anomalyisbasedupona compatiblehistory,tracheal
dilatationcatheter.Othertechniquestoresect,reduce
narrowing and the barium contrastradiographicfinding
orreplacetheredundantoesophagushavenotproven
ofoesophageal body dilatationcranial to thebase of
beneficial.(SeeBSAVAManualofHead,Neckand
the heart(Figure 18.10);a proximal diverticulum occa-
ThoracicSurgery)
sionally forms with longstanding untreated vascular
Some animals may have persistent oesophageal
ring anomalies. The caudal oesophagus usually ap-
hypomotility and clinical signs following corrective sur-
pears normal but theremight be a mild dilatation with
gery.This ismost likely if treatment is delayed.hese
reduced motility.The most important differential diag-
animalsmaybenefit fromelevated feedings.Unfortu-
nosisforvascularring anomalyisintraluminalstricture
nately,thereareno drugsto improvestriatedmuscle
(see above).Endoscopy can be performed to differen-
contraction in the canine oesophagus.Metoclopramide
tiateintraluminal stricturefromextraluminalcompres-
may be of some benefit in cats with oesophageal
sion.With a vascular ring anomaly,pulsations of the
motilitydisordersbutonlythoseconfinedtothe smooth
majorarteriescanbeobserved intheregionofoesopha-
muscleof thedistal oesophageal body.
geal narrowing.Furthermore,vascularring anomalies
occur at thebaseof theheart,whereas intraluminal
Prognosis
stricturescanoccur inanysegmentofthe oesophageal
Thebestoutcomes areobtainedwith earlydiagnosis
body and are more common in adult animals. Angio-
and earlysurgical intervention.Inundiagnosedcases
graphy is only occasionally performed to clarify com-
progressiveoesophagealdilatationcausesirreversible
plexoratypicalvascularringanomaliesortodetermine
myentericnerve degeneration andoesophageal hypo-
the best surgical approach.
motilitybutrecentstudiessuggestthata0%rgreatr
147
Chapter18Disordersof thepharynxandoesophagus
recoveryrate canbeexpected.Clients should be in-
formed that,althoughsurgicalcorrectionisthepreferred
treatment, clinical signs may persist after surgery.
Hiatal hernia
Aetiology
Two types of hiatal hernia havebeen recognized in the
dog and cat:
Sliding hiatal hernia,inwhich the abdominal
segmentof theoesophagus andpartsof the
stomacharedisplaced craniallythroughthe
oesophageal hiatus
Para-oesophageal hiatal hemia,in which the
abdominal segment of theoesophagus and
caudaloesophageal sphincterremaininafixed
position butaportion of the stomach herniates
into themediastinumalongside the thoracic
oesophagus.
Sliding hiatal hernia is the mostcommon form and
mayoccurasa congenitaloracquiredlesionin the dog
and cat. Congenital sliding hiatal hernias have been
reported in the Shar Pei, Chow Chow, Bulldogs and
French Bulldogs.The hernia results from incomplete
fusionof thediaphragm duringearlyembryonicdevel-
18.11
Corgenital hiatal hernia ina 3-rmonth-old Shar
opment.Affectedanimals developclinical signs shortly
Pei puopy. An unusual gas-filled mass
afterweaning.
orotrucing throughi the line of the diaphragninto the
Acquired hiatal hernia mayoccurin anybreed of
caudal thorax was confirmed bycontrastradiograohy tc
dogorcat.Thepathogenesis of acquired hiatal hernia
bea hiatal hernia.However,inhalation cf barium into the
isincompletelyunderstoodbutmayresultfrom in-
creasesinintra-abdominalpressurewithchronicvomit-
ing disorders,orfrom chronic increases innegative
sessfor intermittent herniation ifahiatal hernia is
intrathoracicpressure in animalswith intermittent air-
suspected but not provenby survey radiography.En-
way obstruction,e.g.laryngeal paralysis.
doscopicfindingsconsistent with the diagnosis include
craniaidisplacement ofthe caudaloesophagealsphinc-
Diagnosis
ter and a large oesophageal hiatus. Because young
animalswithcongenitalhiatal hernia havevarying
Clinical signs:Regurgitation,vomiting and hyper-
degreesofoesophageal dilatation,amisdiagnosisof
salivationare the mostimportant clinical signs incon-
congenitalidiopathicmegaoesophaguscould bemade
genitalhiatalhernia.Regurgitation and hypersalivation
if herniation at the hiatus is not readily apparent.
result from the chemicaleffects of gastricjuice(e.g.H+
Therefore,the finding of oesophageal dilatation in a
and pepsins)ontheoesophagealmucosa,while vomit-
youngSharPei or another susceptiblebreed should
ing mayresultfrom theobstructive effectsof thehernia.
raiseahighindexofsuspicionofanunderlyinghiatal
Dyspnoeaand coughing may alsooccurwithsevere
hernia.Gastro-oesophageal reflux,gastro-oesopha-
herniation oraspiration pneumonia.Findingsonphysi-
geal intussusception,epiphrenic diverticulum and
calexaminationareusuallyunremarkablebutmay
diaphragmatic hernia are the other major differential
include dehydration,pulmonary cracklesorwheezes
diagnoses for hiatal hernia.
and decreasedbodyweight.Clinical findings areusu-
allysimilar,but lesssevere,inanimalswithacquired
Treatment
hiatal hernia;these animalsmayhave inspiratory stri-
Aslidinghiatal hernia isnot alwaysassociatedwith
dorassociatedwithlaryngealparalysis.
clinical signsparticularly the acquired form of the dis-
ease.When animals develop clinical signs,medical
Diagnostic imaging:The survey radiographic finding
s
ofa caudodorsal gas-filled intrathoracic soft-tissue
similar to that for gastro-oesophageal reflux and should
opacityisconsistentwith thediagnosisofhiatal hernia
be directed at reducing gastric acid secretion (e.g. H
(Figure 18.11).Affected animals may alsohave
receptorantagonism,H+,KATPaseinhibition),restor-
oesophageal dilatation and dependent alveolarcon-
ingthehealthoftheoesophageal mucosa(e.g.sucralfate)
solidation consistentwith aspirationpneumonia.Barium
and increasingthetoneofthecaudaloesophageal
contraststudiesmayconfirm the diagnosis andfurther
sphincter(e.g.metoclopramideorerythromycin).Many
acquired slidinghiatal herniaswill respond toconserva-
Videofluoroscopyshould alwaysbeperformed toas-
tivemedical therapy,although laryngeal surgery(e.g.
148
s
partial laryngectomy orlateralizationof thevocal folds)
should be considered if laryngeal paralysishas contrib-
uted to thepathogenesisof thehernia.Congenitalhiatal
herniasoftenrequiresurgicalcorrection.Diaphragmatic
crural apposition,oesophagopexy andgastropexyare
usually sufficient to restore normal hiatus anatomy.
Tube gastrostomy should be considered in those ani-
malswith concurrent severeoesophagitisorulceration.
Fundoplicationprocedures may beperformed but are
generally not necessary.
Prognosis
The prognosis for surgical correction is generallyfa-
18.12
Positive ccntrast radiograph of a gastro-
vourable.Animals havefewif anyclinical signsfollow-
cesophageal intussusceplion ina 12-month-old
ingrestorationof thenormal anatomy.
mixed breed dog.
Gastra-oesophageal intussusception
Treatment
Therecommended therapy is a briefperiod of
Aetiology
stabilizationfollowedbydefinitive endoscopicorsurgi-
Gastro-oesophageal intussusception is arare condi-
cal reduction.Afterreductionof the intussusception,a
tionofyoung dogs(mostyounger than3months of
gastropexyshouldbeperformedtopreventrecur-
age)resulting frominvaginationofthestomachintothe
rence.lf disease of the oesophageal hiatus is involved
oesophagus,with orwithoutotherabdominal organs,
in the pathogenesis of the intussusception,then re-
e.g.spleen,duodenum,pancreas and omentum.The
storative surgery(e.g.diaphragmatic crural apposi-
disorderis more commonindogsthaninbitches,with
tion) should also be performed.
a higherincidence reported in GermanShepherd Dogs.
Many affected animals havepre-existingoesophageal
Prognosis
disease,mostimportantlyidiopathicmegaoesophagus.
The prognosis ispoor unless the disorder is quickly
Therole of idiopathicmegaoesophagus in thepatho-
recognized and treated.Mortality rates have been
genesisof gastro-oesophageal intussusceptionisnot
reported inexcessof95%.
dates the invagination of the stomach through the
References and further reading
diaphragmatichiatus.Gastro-oesophageal intussus-
ceptionisa trueGlemergency thatmayculminate in
Adamama-Moraitou KK,RallisTS,Prassinos NN and GalatosAD
the death of the animal if untreated.
(2002) Benign esophageal stricture in the dog and cat:a
retrospectivestudyof20cascs.CanadianJoumaiofVeterinary
Research66,55-59
Diagnosis
BadylakS,Meurling S,Chen MSpievack A and Simmons-Byrd A
(2000)Resorbable bioscaffold for esophageal repair in a dog
Clinicalsigns:Theinitial clinical signsare vomiting or
model.JournalofPediatricSurgery35,1097-1103
regurgitation,dyspnoea,haematemesis andabdomi-
Berghaus RD,OBrienDP,Johnson GCand Thorne JG (2001)Risk
factorsfordevelopment of dysautonomiaindogs.Journalof the
nal discomfort.lfdiagnosisand therapyaredelayed
AmsricanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation218,1285-1290
theseclinical signsarerapidlyfollowedbymarked
Berry WL(200o)Spirocerca lupiesophageal granulomas in7 dogs:
resolutionaftertreatmentwithdoramectin.JoumalofVeterinary
deteriorationincondition,shock,respiratoryand car-
Interna/Medicine14,609-612
diac arrest,and death.
Brockman Dand Holt D(inpreparation)BSAVA Manual of Canine
and Feline Head,Neck and Thoracic Surgery.BSAVA
Diagnostic imaging:Surveyradiographywill reveal
Publications,Gloucester
CohnLA,StolMR,BrnonKR,RouabushAD,KerlME,angn
proximaloesophageaidilatation,consolidationormass
PF and Johannes CM (2003) Fatal hemothorax following
effectbetweenthecardiacsilhouetteandthediaphragm,
management of an esophageal foreign body.Journal of the
AmcricanAnimal HospitaiAssociation39,251-256
and gastric rugal folds within the intrathoracic oesopha-
CaxMR,FranziSJand MartinCJ (20oo)The effectof fundoplication
gus.Contrastradiographicstudiesusuallyreveal that
onthe motilily of the caninelower oesophageal sphincter.
AustralianandNewZealandJournalofSurgery70,6872
the columnof bariumsulphate contrastmedia traverses
Radiographicfindingsofcaninedysautonomiaintwenty-four
distal oesophagus or stomach(Figure 18.12).Endo-
dogs.VetrinaryRadologyandUresound42,108-112
Frost D,Lasola J and Miettinen M(2003) Gastrointestinal stromal
scopywill confirm anintra-oesophageal mass thatcom-
tumorsandleiomyomasin the dog:a histopathologic
pletely obstructs the lumen of the oesophagus.The
majordifferentialdiagnosesarehiatalhernia,piphrenic
Veterinary Pathology40.42-54
GrahamJP,LipmanAHandNewellSM(2000)Esophageal transitof
diverticulumand diaphragmatichernia.Itissometimes
capsulesinclinicallynormal cats.AmericanJoumalof Veterinary
difficultodistinguishtheseentitiesfromgastro-oesopha-
Research61,655657
HanE,BroussardJandBaerKE(2003)Feline esophagitissecondary
geal intussusception.Sincethe definingcharacteristic
to gastrcesophageal reflux:clinical signs and radiographic,
of a gastro-oesophageal intussusception is the invagi-
endoscopicandhistopathalogicalfindings.JoumaloftheAmerican
nationof the stomachinto theoesophagus,gastricrugal
Animel HospitalAssocialion39,161-167
Harkin KR,Andrews GAand Nietfeld JC (2002) Dysautonomia in
foldsareoftenreadilyidentifiedwithin thelumenof the
dogs:65cases(1993-2000).Joumalof theAmericanVeterinary
Medical Ass0ciation220,633-639
149
Chapter 18 Disorders of thc pharynx and oesophagus
Head Kw, Else AW and Dubielzig RR (2002) Tumors of the afimcntary
Verteporin (benzoporphyrin derivativc monoacid ring A, BPD-
tract. In: Tumors in Domestic An/mals, ed. DJ Meulan, pp. 401-
MA) and 630 nm laser llght in canina esophagus. Lasars in
481. lowe State Press, Armcs
Surgery and Medicine 30, 26-30
Pasricha PJ, HllS, Wadwa KS, Gislason GT, Okolo PI3, Magee CA
affcrent dysfunction in dogs witin congenital idiopathic
 Canto MI, Kuo WH, Baust JG and Kalloo AN (1999) Endoscopic
magaoesaphagus.AutonomicNeuroscience:BasicandClinical
cryotherapy: experimental results and first clinical use.
99,18-23
Gastrointestinaf Endoscopy 49. 627-631
Hotston Moore A (200t) Removal ol pesophageal foreign bodles in 
 Pollard RE, Marks SL, Davidson A and Hornot WJ (2000) Quantitative 
dogs: use of the fluoroscopic method and outcome. Journaf of
videohuoroscopic evalualion of pharyngeal function in the dog.
Smail AnimalPractice42,227-230
Veterinary Radiology and Utrasound 41, 40g-412
Kovacs T, Koves I, Pandi E, Nemeth T and Kralovanszky J (2001)
Pratschke KM, Bellenger CR, McAlister H and Campion D (2001)
 Bursting strength and collagan content changes in esophageal
anastomoses. Comparative experimental sludy in dogs. Annaies
dogs.AmericanJournaiofVeterinaryResearch62,1068-1072
Chirurgiae sl Gynaecologiae 90, 266-270
Leib MS, Dinnal H, Ward DL, Reimer ME, TowellTL and Monroe WE
canine myasthenia gravis:implications for assessing human MG
(2001) Endoscopic balloon dilation of benign esophageal
therapies. Neurology 57. 2139-2141
strictures in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Swann HM and Hot DE (2002) Canine gastric adenocarcinama and
Medicine 15, 547-552
leiomyosarcoma: a ratrcspective sludy of 21 cases (1986-1999)
and literature review. Joumal of the American Animal Hospita!
to doxycycline administration in 4 cats. Feline Practica 28, 10-12
Association 38, 157-164
 Mu L and Sanderg 1 (2o0o) Neuromuscular specializations of the
Washabau RJ (20co) Diseases of the esophagus. In: Textbook of
pharyngcalcilatormusclcs:ll.Comparmentalizaticnofhecaninc
genioglossusmuscle.Anatomics/Record260,308-325
Feldman, pp.1142-1153.WB Saunders, Phlladelphia
Nawrocki MA, Mackin AJ, McLaughlin R and Cantwell HD (2003)
Washabau RJ (2003) Gastroinleslinal motity disorders and G.1.
prokinelictrapien:VetrinarClcs fNorthAmricad
fislula in a dog. journal of he Amcrican Anima! Hospial
MD Wilard, pp. 1007-1028, w日 Saunders, Pailadelghia
Association 39, 257-261
Washabau AJ andHolt DE(2003) Pathophysiology of gastraintestinal
Nites JD, williams M, Sullivan M and Crowsley FE (2001) Resolution
disease.In:Textbookof VeterinarySurgery3edn,edDSlatter:
of dysphagia following cricopnaryngeal rnyectomy in six young
pp.530555.WBSaundersPhiladelhia
dogs. Journal of Small Arimal Practice 42,32-35
WestfallDS,wedtDCSleyPF,OberhuserEBandVanClav
O'Brien DP and Johnsan,GC (2002) Dysautonamia and autonamic
neuropathies. Veterinary Clinics of North America: SmallAnimal
caosules in 30 cats.Journalof Veterinary Internat Medicine15.
Practice 32, 251-265
467-470
Panjehpour M, DeNovg RC, Petersen MG, Overholf BF, Bower R,
http://caltest.vet.ypenn.edu/giphys An interactive clinical case of canlne
150
Diseases of the stomach
Kenneth W. Simpson
Structure and function
gastricglandsandaninnermostlayerofsmoothmuscle,
withfinestructureand functionvaryingdependingonthe
The stomachfunctions asareservoir thatcontrolsthe
region.The mucosa in the cardia andpylorus is thinner
size and rate of passage of ingesta into the small
andlessglandular thanin thefundusandbody.
intestine,andinitiates thedigestion of protein and fat,
Avarietyof neuroendocrine cellsinvolvedwith the
and the absorption of vitamins and minerals.
secretion of gastric acid are interspersed between the
The stomach is made up of fourfunctional regions:
glands.The predominant cells are enterochromaffin-
the cardia,fundus,body and antrum (Figure 19.1).
like(ECL)and somatostatin-producing cells in the
fundus;and gastrin-and somatostatin-producing cells
Thefundus andbodyexpand toaccommodate
in the antrum (Figure 19.1). Localized small aggre-
ingesta.
gatesof lymphoid tissues are observed at thebase of
The antrum is thick and muscularand grindsfood
the gastric glands.Intertwined between thegastric
intosmallparticles thatare triturated into the
glandsisarichnetworkofbloodvessels,lymphatics
duodenum.
andnerves.Beneaththesubmucosaaretwolayersof
Thepyloricsphinctercontrolseffluxintothe
smoothmuscle thatrunperpendicularto each other.
duodenum,andtheloweroesophageal sphincter
The serosa is the outermost layer.
prevents reflux of ingesta into the oesophagus.
Digestion and assimilationofnutrients
Thegastricwall iscomposedofamucosamuscula-
Thestomachhasalimitedroleinthedigestionof
risandserosa.Themucosahasasuperficialepithelium,
protein,fatand micronutrients.
Pylorus
Lower
Duodenum
oesophageal
Incisura
sphincter
angularis
Oesophagus
Antrum
Fundus
InsetA
Body
Cardia
Mucosal celltype
Products
Mucous neck cells
Pepsinogen A; gastric lipase
Parietal cells
Acid:pepsinogenA;intrinsic factor
Chief cells
Pepsinogen A
InsetB
19.1
cellsstained brown.
151
Chapter19Diseasesof the stomach
Pepsin digests proteins and is secreted as
Regulationofacidsecretion
pepsinogeninresponse to acetylcholine and
Acid secretionisregulated bya variety ofneurochemi-
histamine,in tandem with gastric acid.
caland neurohumoral stimuli:
Canine gastric lipase digests fat and is secreted
in response topentagastrin,histamine,
Non-stimulated acidsecretionindogsandcats
prostaglandinEandsecretin,andparallelsthe
is minimal
secretion ofgastricmucus.
Luminal peptides,digestedprotein,acetylcholine
Canine gastric lipase remains active in the small
and gastrin-releasing peptide(GRP) stimulate
intestine andconstitutesupto30%of total lipase
gastrin-secreting G cells and effect histamine
secreted.
release from ECLcells(Figure 19.2)
Gastriclipase and pepsin are not essential for
Acetylcholine and gastrin,andhistamine
theassimilationofdietaryfatandprotein,butthe
released frommastcells,can also directly
entryofpeptides and fatty acidsinto the small
stimulateparietalcells
intestineprobablyhelpstocoordinategastric
Stimulationresultsinarapid increase influid and
emptying and pancreatic secretion.
hydrogen ion secretion,with intra-gastric pH
Intrinsicfactor,which isnecessaryfar cobalamin
rapidly declining toaround pH1
(vitaminB12)absorption,isproducedbyparietal
In the stimulated stateHt:K+-adenosine
cells andcellsatthebaseofantralglands inthe
triphosphatase(ATPase)andpotassium
dog,but not the cat.The importance of gastric
chloride(KCl) transporters areincorporated into
intrinsicfactorsecretionindogsisquestionable
theparietalcellcanalicularmembraneand
as thepancreas isthemajorsite of secretion
hydrogenionsaretransportedinto thegastric
(and the sole site in cats).
lumen inexchange forpotassium ionsby the
Gastricacid aids the peptic digestion of proteins,
H+:K+-ATPase.KCI transporters enableluminal
increases the availabilityof minerals(such as
transfer ofpotassium and chloride.Hydroxyl
ironand calcium),limits theproliferation of
ions（OH-)combinewithCO，catalysed by
transient gastrointestinal(Gl)microflora and
carbonic anhydrase,to form bicarbonate
stimulatespancreaticsecretion.
(HCO),which then diffuses into the blood（this
Peptides
digestedproteins
Luminal acid
Proteinkinase
Gcell
Adeny
cycla
Gastrin
Dcel
H2
Histamine
cytokine
ECLcell
/agus
Fundus
Pylorus
19.2
Regulation of acic secretion.ACh= acetylcholine receptor;ATPase=adenosine riphosphatase;
thepublishers)
152
Chapter 19Diseases of the stomach
isknown as thepostprandial‘alkaline tide').The
migratingmyoelectriccomplex(MMC)in
concentrations of K+ and Cl in gastric juice are
responseto therelease of motilin.
higher than inplasma
Gastricflora
Somatostatin,released whengastricpHfalls
below3,acts to decrease gastrin,histamine and
The concept of the stomachas a sterileplace
acid secretion.
wasdispelledbytheisolationof thebacterium
Helicobacterpylori from humans in1983.
The stomach isprotected fromgastric acid bya
Helicobacterand avarietyofotherbacterial
functional unit known as the gastricmucosal barrier
speciesmayplayarole inthedevelopmentof
(GMB):
gastritis and possibly cancer(see Chronic gastritis).
The stomach of dogs and cats harbours a
Tightlyopposed epithelial cells
diverse spectrum of large,piral,acid-tlerant,
A coating of bicarbonate-richmucus
Helicobacter species(Figure 19.3).Helicobacter
An abundant mucosal blood supply delivering
spp. produce urease that catalyses the formation
bicarbonate,oxygen and nutrients
ofammonia fromurea tobuffergastricacidity.
Local production of prostaglandins (PGE2)
A mixed flora of aerobes and anaerobes
modulating blood flow,bicarbonate secretion and
(approximately 10-10′colony forming units/ml)
epithelial cell renewal
is rapidly established soon after birth in dogs,
Whendamage occurs epithelial cellsrapidly
andcolonizationwithHelicobacterspp.,which
migrateoversuperficial mucosal defects aidedby
are likelyacquired from thedam,hasbeen
the local production of growth factors,suchas
documentedasearlyas6weeksofage.
epidermal growthfactor(EGF).
Bacterial species,such asProteus,
StreptococcusandLactobacillusmay transiently
Gastricmotility
increase after a meal or coprophagia.
Normalgastricmotilityis theresultof the organized
Acid secretion and gastric emptying probably
interactionofsmoothmusclewithneuralandhormo-
regulatmuchof thistransient lorabuactr
nalstimuli.
mayproliferateintheevent ofgastricacid
hyposecretiondue toglandularatrophyor
The rate of gastric emptying is determined by the
pharmacological inhibition.Bacteria,such as
difference in pressure between the stomach and
Escherichia coliandProteus,produceurease
the duodenum,and theresistance toflow across
thatcanoccasionallyleadtoafalse-positivetest
the pylorus.
result for Helicobacterspp.
Liquids are expelled more rapidly than solids and
therateofexpulsion of liquids increaseswith
volume.
Diagnostic approach
Therateofexpulsion of solidsdependson
caloricdensity.In dogs,digestible solids2mm
Gastric disease is usually the result of inflammation,
diameterareemptied intothe duodenum,and
ulceration,neoplasiaorobstruction,andmanifests
gastric emptying is modulated via intestinal
clinicallyasvomiting,haematemesis,melaena,retch-
osmo-and chemoreceptors.
ing,burping,hypersalivation,abdominal distension,
Carbohydrates,amino acids and especiallyfats
abdominal pain or weight loss.The clinical approach is
retard gastric emptying.
simplified by considering gastric diseases as a group of
Large,non-digestible solids are expelled from the
clinicalsyndromesbasedonthecombinationofaetio-
stomachinthefastedstatebyphasellof the
(a)
b
(C
19.3
samoles.(a) Numerous spiral organisms are visible in this Diff-Quik-stained impression smear of gastric juice.
(b)Medifiedteiner-stainedformalin-fixec,raffin-mbeddecbipsy sampl showinglicobacterorganismsstad
darkblue.(c) Lymphoid folliclehyperplasia and lymphocytic gastritis in acat withH.felis-associatedgastritis(H&E slain)
153
Chapter 19Diseasesof the stomach
wherevomiting cannotbeadequately
Clinical syndrome
Predominant features
distinguished fromregurgitation,it is essential
Acute gastitis
Sudden-cnset vomiting
eating.Thoracicradiographs help to detect
Ulceration or erosion
Vomiting;haematemesis; melaena ±
andrule outoesophageal dilatation or
anaemia
obstruction
Gastric dilatation/
Non-productive retching; abdominal
the presence of fresh ordigested blood('coffee
volvulus
distension,tachycardia
groundsnvomitus,withorwithoutmelaena,
Chronic gastritis
Chronic vomiting of food or bile
is suggestive of gastric ulcers or erosions.
Ascertain access toforeignbodies,toxins or
Delayed gastric
Acute to chronic vomiting >8-10 h after
medications andvaccinationstatus
emptying
food
Define the living conditions:e.g.indoor,outdoor,
Neoplasia
Chranic vomiting;weight loss±anaemia
singleormulti-animal household
Screen other body systems:i.e.attitude,
mentation,presence of polyuria/polydipsia
19.4
Diseases of the stomach.
weightloss,diarrhoea,coughing,sneezing,
Clinical features
exercise tolerance.
Manynon-gastricdisorders can cause similar clinical
Physicalexamination
Physical examination isfrequentlynormal inpatients
mine whether gastric disease is the cause.The diag-
with primary gastric disease.
nostic approach initially focuses onhistorical and
physical findings,with clinicopathological testing and
Abdominal distensionisafeatureofgastric
diagnosticimagingemployedinpatientswithsystemic
dilatation/volvulus(GD/GDV)ordelayedgastric
involvement orchronic signs.
The combination of clinical details,history and
emptying.
Abnormal perfusion,hydration status,
physical examination helps to discriminatemany non-
temperature,respiratoryrate,mucosal pallor and
gastric from gastric causes of vomiting.
abdominal pain often accompany diseases,such
Clinical details
as GD/GDV, gastric outflow obstruction,
ulceration andperforation.
ing certain gastric disorders (Figure 19.5).
Historicaland physical findings are integrated to
determinewhether thepatientissystemicallywell or
Clinical detall
Disposition
unwell,and if the clinical signs are acute （<10 days)
chronic,mild or severe(seeFigure19.4and Chapter7).
Age
Young dogs aremore likely to ingest foreign
bodiesorto sufferfromoutlowobstruction
Ifvamitingisacuteandtheanimal issystemically
caused by pyloric stenosis or Pythium
insidiosum
Older dogs and cats are more likely to have
further diagnostic testing is oftenpostponed in
favour of symptomatic therapy.
gastric cancer than younger animals
If the animal issystemicallyunwell,or has
Breed disposition:
significant historical orphysical abnormalities,the
Gastricdilatation/
Giant breedsdogswith deepchsts
emphasis is on efficiently identifying conditions
volvulus
(e.g. Great Dane and Irish Setter)
thatrequire surgical interventionandruling out
Hypertrophic
Drentse Patrijshond;Basenji;
non-Gl causesofvomiting,beforeproceeding to
gastropathy
smallbreed brachycephali dogs e.g
more specializedorinvasive diagnostic
Shih Tzu)
proceduresaimed at detecting primary gastric
Atrophic gastritis
Norwegian Lundehund
disorders (see Chapter 7).
Gastric cancer
Belgian Shepherd Dog:Rough Collie;
StaffordshireBull Terier;Beage:
Non-productivevomiting,retchingandabdominal
distension in deep-chested large-breed dogs
Norwegian Lundehund: Chow Chow
arefrequentlyassociatedwithGD/GDV,
Clinical details that may suggest speciric
whichrequiresrapid diagnosisand treatment.
19.5
gastric diseases.
Vomiting of food>8-10 hours after ingestion
suggests delayed gastric emptying,and
History
requiresinvestigation to distinguish gastric
Vomitingistheprincipalclinical signof gastricdisease.
outflowobstructionfromdefectivegastric
A detailed history helps to:
propulsion.
Weight lossisinfrequentlyassociatedwith
Form a clearpicture of the vomiting episodes:i.e.
gastric disease but can accompany cancer,
duration,frequency,contents,colour,
fungal infections, outflow obstruction and
progression, relation to eating
gastropathies that arepart of a more
Distinguishvomiting from regurgitation:
generalized disease process,e.g.Basenji and
active abdominal effort;presence of bile
Norwegian Lundehund gastrcenteropathy.
154
Chapter 19Diseasesof the stomach
Clinicopathological testing
hydrogen in the distal tubule,promotes an
Clinicopathological testinghelps to differentiatepri-
acidurinepH despite an extracellular
maryGldiseasefromnon-GIdisease,andtoascerain
alkalaemia ('paradoxical aciduria').
themetabolicconsequences of Gl disease.Blood and
Metabolic alkalosisisalsoencounteredindogs
urinesamplesshould beobtainedpriorto treatment.
withparvovirusenteritis,acutepancreatitisand
diseasescharacterized byacidhypersecretion,
Haematology:
such as gastrinoma.
Venousbloodgases and plasmaosmolality are
Rapidevaluationofmicrohaematocrit（packed
oftendetermined inanimalssuspectedofethylene
cellvolume,PCV),total solids（TS)or total
glycol ingestion,withthefindingsof metabolic
protein （TP),blood glucose,blood urea,urine
acidosis and a highosmolal gap(calculated by
specific gravity.glucose,ketones and protein,
subtracting the measured osmolality from the
and plasma concentrationsof sodium and
calculated osmolality)supportive of ingestion.
potassium,helpto detect life-threatening
Elevatedserumurea in the absenceofelevated
diseases,such asrenal failure(azotaemia and
creatinine suggests Gl bleeding.
unconcentrated urine)and hypoadrenocorticism
Hypoalbuminaemia may be detected in Basenjis
(where Na+:K+is<27:1),andguide initial
or NorwegianLundehunds with protein-losing
management pending more definitive testing.
gastroenteropathy,dogs with pythiosis,and dogs
orcatswith gastricneoplasia.
Abnormalitiesin completeblood count(CBC)are
Elevated globulinconcentrationshavebeen
infrequent with primary gastric disease,but the follow-
observed inBasenji gastroenteropathy,Pythium
ing abnormalitiesmaybeseen:
infectionandgastricplasmacytoma.
Elevationsin creatinine,urea,calcium,
Haemoconcentrationfrequentlyaccompanies
potassium,glucose,liver enzymes,bilirubin,
GDV,gastricperforationorgastricobstruction
cholesterol,triglycerides and globulin,and
Thecombinationofahaematocrit>55/anda
decreases in sodium,calcium,urea oralbumin,
normal ordecreasedproteinconcentration is
frequentlyherald non-Gl causesofvomiting.
encountered in dogswith haemorrhagic
gastroenteritis (see Chapter 20)
Anaemia, erythrocyte microcytosis and
Urinalysis:Urine should be evaluated for specific
thrombocytosis(signsof iron deficiency)may be
gravity,H,glucose,casts,crystalsandbacteria.hr
present in dogs with chronic gastric bleeding
ough urinalysisisimportant,e.g.white cellcasts in the
urine maybe the onlyevidence thatpyelonephritis is
Stomatocytosishasbeen described inDrentse
the cause ofvomitingand should notbeoverlooked.
Patrijshonddogs with familial stomatocytosis-
hypertrophic gastritis
Coagulationtesting:Coagulationtestingisindicated
Basophilistipplingof redcellssuggests lead toxicity.
inpatientswithhaematemesisormelaena todetect
Biochemistry:Biochemical abnormalities inprimary
underlying coagulopathies,andinthosepatientswith
gastricdisease are usuallyrestricted to alterations in
acuteabdomentodetectdisseminatedintravascular
electrolyte and acid-base concentrations,pre-renal
coagulation(DiC).Infectious diseasesassociated with
increases in creatinine and urea,and occasionally
vomitinganddiarrhoearequirefaecalexamination(Gia-
hypoproteinaemia.Vomiting of gastric and intestinal
rdia,endoparasites,Salmonella,Campylobacter and
parvovirus (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay,
contents isvariably accompanied byhypochloraemia
hypokalaemia and hyponatraemia.
ELISA))or serological testingfordiagnosis(feline leuk-
Determinationofacid-base statusbymeasure-
aemiavirus,FeLV;felinemmunodeficiencyvirus,FIV)
mentoftotal COorvenousbloodgasanalysisenables
the presence of metabolic acidosis or alkalosis to be
Additional tests:The additional clinicopathological
tests that arerequired arelisted inFigure19.6.
detected.
Metabolicacidosisisgenerallymore common
Disorder
Clinicopathological test
thanmetabolic alkalosis indogswithGl disease.
Where thegastricoutlowtractorproximal
Hypcadrenocorticism
Adrenocorticotropic hommone stimulation
duodenum is obstructed,the lossof chloride may
test
exceed thatof bicarbonate,resulting in
Liver dysfunction
Pre-and postprandial bile acid
hypochloraemia,hypokalaemia and metabolic
Hyperthyroidism in
Thyroxine(T4)
alkalosis.
Metabolic alkalosisisenhanced byHCO
cats
conservation due to volume,andpotassium
Pancreatitis
Amylase;lipase (pancreas-specific(PL)
and chloride depletion.
where possible);trypsin-like
Theneteffect isapreferential conservationof
immunoreactivity(TLI)
extracellularvolume at theexpense of the
Intestinaldisease
Serum cobalamin and folate;biopsy
extracellularpH.
Therenalreabsorptionof almostall filtered
Adjunctive laboratory tests for non-gastric
bicarbonate,and theexchange of sodium for
19.6
causes of vomiting.
155
Chapter19Diseasesof the stomach
Diagnosticimaging
Positive contrastradiographywithbarium
sulphatemedia canprovidefurtherinformation,
Radiography:Abdominal radiography is the test of
and isalsoused toevaluatepatencyof the
choice for the initialevaluationofgastricdisease,
gastric outflow tract(see Figure 19.7).
The combination of fluoroscopy and positive
vide informationongastricposition andcontentsthat
contrastmediaishelpful for evaluatingpyloric
help to diagnose GD/GDV,foreign bodies and gastric
patency and gastric emptying.
outflowobstruction.Theyalsoenable the evaluationof
Contrast radiography can be followed up with
thesize and shapeof theliver,kidneysandspleenand
surgical biopsyto achieve a definitive diagnosis.
detectionof intussusception,peritonitis,pneumoperi-
toneum and changessuggestive ofpancreatitis.Con-
Ultrasonography:Ultrasound examination (Figure
trast radiography may provide furtherinformation when
19.8) canbeused toevaluategastric wall structure and
survey radiography is inconclusive (Figure 19.7).
thickness:gastriccantentsand emptying,but isoften
Thecombinationofultrasonographyandendoscopy
hampered by Gl gas.Its major value is often the
isoftenmoreeffectivefordetecting obstructive,inflam-
detectionofnon-gastriclesions inanimals with signs of
matoryandneoplasticGl disorders thancontrastradi-
Gl disease.
ography. Contrast studies are often restricted to the
Forfurtherinformationon diagnosticimaging see
investigation of delayed gastric emptying associated
Chapter3.
withdefectivepropulsion,orfunctionalintestinal disor-
ders.However,when ultrasonographyandendoscopy
Endoscopy
arenot available,contrast radiography can be used.
Enablesdirectvisualizationandbiopsyof the
Distension of the stomach with air(negative
stomach andduodenum,and is thebestwayof
contrastradiography)mayrevealgastric
diagnosing primary gastric inflammation,
thickening,masses or foreign bodies.
ulceration or neoplasia(Figure 19.8),removing
19.7
Contrast radiographic
evaluation cf a dog prcsented
for invest gation of chronic vomiting.
(a) Survey radiographs shiow a soft
tissuo density in the antrum(arrowed).
(o and c). Left lateral and vantrodorsal
radiographs showretention of liquia
barium contrast,revealing the presence
ofa mass in thepyloric outflow tract
(arrowed).
(a)
RLAT
VD
(b)
t=0min
LLAT
DV
t=25min
156
Chapter19Diseasesofthe slomach
Imaging of the
19.8
stcmachwith
ultrasonography and
cndcscopy provides
complementary information.
The ultrasonogram shows a
massprojecting into the
lumen of the stomach of a
TOM
dogpresented forthe
investigation of vcmiting
and hyperglobulinaemia
(gA).Endoscopy confirmed
the prescncc of a mass and
enabled a biopsy diagnosis
cfgastricplasmacytoma.
small foreignbodies,andevaluatingpatients
Barium contrastmedia(liquidormixedwith
prior toquantification of gastricemptying.
food)
Doesnotprovidegood informationon
Barium impregnated polyethylene spheres
?
submucosallesionsorfunctional diseases.
(BIPS)
Endoscopicbiopsysamplesareoften too
Nuclear scintigraphy
superficial to diagnose thecauseofgastric
13C-octanoate breath test
massesormural thickeningandsurgical biopsy
Ultrasonography.
mayberequired foraccurate diagnosis
Furtherinformationon equipment and techniques
Testsof gastric emptying are used to confirm
can befound in Chapter4.
a suspicionof delayed gastricemptying inpatients
withnormalorequivocal surveyradiographs.They
Evaluating gastric function
are alsousedwheregastricoutflowobstruction and
obvious causesofdefectivepropulsionhavebeen
Gastric emptying
ruled out prior to,and after,prokinetic drugs.The
Proceduresusedtoevaluatedelayed gastricemptying
limitationsandbenefitsof theseapproachesaredis-
(Figure 9.9) include:
cussed below.
Method
D/C
Test meal
Number of
Gastric half emptying time (t)
Reference
animals tested
Nuclear
Dog
Eggs,starch and gluce
27
66 min (median), 45-227 min (95%
Muir,1982
scintigraphy
confi dence interval)
Beef baby food and kibble
6
4.9±1.96 hours (mean ± standard
Brockman et al,1995
deviation,SD)
Liver
4
About2hours
Cryer.2001
Canned dog food and egg
6 (18 tests)
172=17min(mean± standard error,SE)
Murtaugh et al,1993
Canned dog focd and egg
7 (14 tests)
285=34min(mean±SD);294±39min
Richter,2003
(mean±SD)
Canned dog food
6
77min(mean)
Fox et al.,1990
Cat
 Dry cat food
10
2.47±0.71 hours (mean±SD)
Guilford andStrombeck,1996
Liver and cream
6 (15 tests)
163±11min(mean±SE)
Rossi et al,1999
Canned cat food
20
2.69±0.25 hours (mean ±SD)
Lloyd andDebas,1994
Drycat food
20
3.86±0.24hours(mean±SD)
Lloyd andDebas,1994
Eggs
10
330min(median);210-769 min (range)
Sachs,1994
Radiography
Dog
Dry dog food and radic-
10
3.5 hours (median); 1-6 hours (range)
Schifrin and Blum,2002
opaque solids
Canned dog food andegg
6(18 tests)
SmallBIPS:416±81 min (mean=SE)
Murtaugh et al,1993
and barium impregnated
polyethylene spheres(BIPS)
Canned dog food and BIPS
20
Small BIPS:6.05±2.99 hours(mean±SD)
Lindholm et al.1998
Large BIPS:7.11=3.60 hours (mean±SD)
19.9
Areviewof methods for assessment of iherate of gastric ernptying in the dog andca.(data fromWyse etal.,
157
Chapter 19
Diseasesof the stomach
Method
D/C
Testmeal
Numberof
Gastric half emptying time(t/)a
Reference
animals tested
Radiography
Dog
Kibble and BIPS
8
SmallBIPS: 8.29±1.62 hours (70% of
Simpson et al,2000a
continued
dogs±SE)
Large BIPS: 29.21±18.31hours(70%f
dogs±SE)
Kibble and liquid barium
9(27 tests)
Total gastric emptying time:7-15 hours
Simpson,1999
(range)
Kibble and liquid barium
4
Total gastric emptying time: 7.6±1.98
Simpson et al, 2000b
hours (mean±SE)
Cat
Canned cat food and BIPS
10
SmallBIPS:6.43±2.59 hours (mean ±SD)
Slappendel et al,1991
LargeBIPS:7.49±4.09 hours (mean±SD)
Canned cat food and BIPS
6
Small BIPS:7.7 hours (median),3.5-10.9
Solland Berglindh, 1994
hours(range)
Large BIPS:8.1 hours (median),5-19.6
hours (range)
Canned cat food and BIPS
10
Small BIPS:5.36 hours (median)
Sullivan et al,1987
Large BIPS: 6.31 hours (median)
Cat foodand liquidbarium
Gastric emptying time:11.6±0.9hours
van der Gaag,1988
(mean±SD)
Gastric
Cat
Canned cat food
Peak C-excreticn: 56.7±9.8 min (mean
van der Gaag and Happe,
emptying
±SD)
1989
breath test
Dog
Bread,ggandmargane
6(18tests)
3.43±0.50hours（mean±SD)
Mahony et al,1995
(continued) Areview of methods for assessment cf the rate of gastric emplying in the dog and cat(data from
19.9
Wyse et al,2003).Gastricemptying rate is expressed asgastric hafemptying time unlessothorwise stated.
Gastricsecretory testing
。
Renal and hepaticdysfunctionshouldberuled
Gastric secretory testing isprimarilyperformedin
out as these increase concentrations of
patients with oesophagitis,Gl ulceration,mucosal
circulating gastrin
hypertrophyor copious amounts of gastricfluid
Fasting,non-stimulated gastricpH in dogs and
that are suspected of having acidhypersecretion
cats ranges from pH 1-8
(Figure 19.10).
The presence of a gastricpH (i.e.pH<3) in the
In its simplest form,fasting gastric pH and serum
faceofahighserumgastrinconcentrationraises
gastrin aremeasured to determinewhetheracid hypo-
thepossibilityof a gastrinoma(see below)
or hypersecretionis likely:
Dogswithmastcell tumourshavelowserum
gastrin concentrations
Antisecretory therapy should be discontinued for
Dogswithachlorhydriaprobablyhaveahigh
48hours priorto testing
gastrin level but a gastricpH >3.
(a)
(b)
19.10
Hypersecretion oi gastric acid can be caused by decreasec elimination of gastrin in patientswith renal failure,
or the excessive production of histamine from mast cell tumours or gastrin from gestrinomas.Renal failure
enlarged spleen shculd be aspirated for evidence of mast cells.(a)Fineneedle aspirate of a cutaneousmass ona dog
(b) Ultrasonographic detection of splenomegaly in a catwith chronicvomiting enabled fine needle aspiration and
cytalogical diagnosis of mastocytosis.(continucs)
158
Chapter 19Diseases of the stomach
(t)
(d)
19.10
(ccntinued) Hypersecrelion of gastric acid can be
causec by decreased climination cf gastrin in
paticnts with renal failure,o the excessive prcducticn of
histaminefrommast cell tumours orgastrinrom
gastrinomas.Renal failure snould be detected by measuring
the serum creatinine concentraticn and urine specific gravity.
Cutaneous masses and an enlarged spleen shoulc be
aspirated for evidence of mast cells.(c and d) Endosccpic
appearance of (c) the oesophagus and (d) tre pyloric
antrum of a cog with a gastrinoma.Note the srallmultifocal
with oesophagls andmucosal crosion,and artral
hypertrophy in the stomach.(e) Duodenal perloration in a
dog with a pancreatic gaslrinoma.(i) Gastrin-secreting mass
(gastrinoma) found in the pancreas of a dog.
(e)
Measurement of serumgastrin following the intra-
venous infusion ofsecretinor calcium is used to
Cause
Examples
further investigate the possibility ofexogenous gastrin
Dietary indiscretion or
Scavenging: garbage intoxication
production by pancreatic tumours, termed ‘gastrin-
intolerance (non-allergic
omas'(Zollinger-Elison syndrome).However,in-
andallergic)
Foreign bodies
Bones, toys:hairballs
stimulationhas alsobeenreported inBasenjiswith
Drugs and toxins
Non-stercidalanti-inflammatory drugs;
gastroenteropathy and diarrhoeawithoutevidence of
corticosteroids; heavy metals; antibiotics;
gastrinoma. Provocative testing of gastric acid secre-
plants;cleanersbleach
tionwithpentagastrin orbombesinstimulation may
Systemic disease
Uraemia; liver disease;
be performed to detect achlorhydria in patients with
hypoadrenocorticsm
atrophicgastritisorelevated serum gastrin levels
and gastric pH >3, and in those patients with idio-
Parasites
Ollulanus;Physaloptera
pathicsmall intestinal bacterial overgrowth(SIBO or
Bacteria
Bacterial toxins;？Helicbacter
antibiotic-responsive diarrhoea), to determine whether
?Virus
No known examples
achlorhydria is a contributing factor.Pentagastrin-
stimulated acid secretion in dogs reaches a peak of
19.11
Causes of acute gastritis.
28 ml/kg0.75/h, equivalent to 4.1 mmol HCI/kg0.75/h,
after 45minutes.Sedationwithoxymorphone and
acepromazinemaleateisan alternativetoanaesthe-
Inmostpatientsthecauseis inferredfromthe
sia for secretion studies in dogs.In anaesthetized
history,e.g.dietary indiscretion.
cats,acid output （mean ± standard deviation) in
A diagnosis israrely confirmed by biopsy,and
response to pentagastrin (8 μg/kg/h) ranges from
treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
pH 0.9-1.1.with secretion rates of 1.2 (0.6-2.7)
Animalswith acutegastritis associatedwith drug
mmol/ kg0.75/h after 45 minutes.
toxicity,foreignbodyingestionormetabolic
disorders often present with haematemesis,
melaena,concurrent diarrhoea or other signsof
Diseases of the stomach
systemic illness, and need a more thorough
diagnostic approach to determine the cause (as
Acute gastritis
discussed above) and toprovide optimal care.
Acute gastritis is the term applied to the syndrome of
There islittle evidencein the literature tosupport
sudden-onsetvomiting,presumed tobe due to a gas-
aroleofviralinfectins,suchaspavovirus,distem
tric mucosal insult or inflammation(Figure 19.11).
or infectious canine hepatitis,n acute gastritis.
159
Chapter 19Diseasesof the stomach
Clinicalsigns
These agents areprobably saferandmore efficacious
Sudden-onsetvomiting is theprincipal clinical sign.
thanantibioticsormotilitymodifiers in acute gastro-
Haematemesis,melaena and systemic abnormalities
enteritis. Acid-reducing drugs, such as H2 receptor
mayalsobepresent.Thepatienthistorymayreveal
antagonists,can be administered but are usually re
access to,or ingestion of,spoiled food，garbage,
servedfor patientswithsigns of gastric erosion or
toxins,medications orforeign bodies.Signs of toxicity
ulceration(i.e.melaena and haematemesis),orpersist-
may be evident:e.g. jaundice and pallor with zinc
ent gastritis as described below.The author generally
ingestion;ptyalism or defecation with organophos-
avoids anti-emeticsinpatientswith acutegastritis to
phate toxicity;or hypersalivation andoral ulceration
enableresponse to therapy tobe ascertained.Patients
with chemical ingestion.
who continue tovomitrequirefurtherinvestigation.
Diagnosis
Prognosis
A diagnosis of acute gastritis is usually based on
The prognosis for uncomplicated acute gastritis is
clinicalfindings and theresponseto symptomatictreat-
usually completerecovery.
ment.Aspecificdiagnosismaybesoughtif thepatient:
Gastricerosion and ulceration
Has access to foreign objectsor toxins
Gastric erosions and ulcers are associated witha
Issystemicallyunwell
number of primary gastric and non-gastric disorders
Hashaematemesis,melaenaorvomiting that
(Figure 19.12).
failstorespondtosymptomatictherapy
Other signs of more serious disease (see above).
Type of disease
Examples
Laboratory testinginmostanimalswithprimary
Drug-induced
Non-steroidalandsteroidal anti-infiammatory
acutegastritisisoftennotperformed in theabsenceof
sbnp
a suspicion of more serious disease.Abdominal radio-
graphs can be taken to detect foreign objects or Gl
Hypotension
Shock; sepsis
obstruction.Further diagnostic imaging,such as ultra-
Idiopathic
Stressinurcid
sonography and endoscopy,is rarely indicated as
(e.g.sled dogs)
most animalswithsimplegastritisrespond to sympto-
Inflammatory
Gastritis
matic therapy.
Metabolic/endocrine
Hypoadrenocorticism:uraemia; liver
Treatment
disease;mastocytosis; disseminated
Therapy for uncomplicated acute gastritis is symp-
intravascular coagulation hypergastrinaemia
tomatic and supportive,and includes fluid therapy,
and other APUDomas
dietaryrestrictionandmodification,mucosalprotectants
Neoplastic
Leiomyoma;adenocarcinoma;
or adsorbents, and possibly antacids.
lymphosarcoma
Fluid therapy:Smallamountsoforalfluids,givenlittle
Diseases associated with gastric ulceralion and
19.12
andoften,canbe administeredintheface ofvomiting,
ercsion.
withthevolumeoffluid increasing as thevomiting
subsides.Subcutaneous administration of anisotonic
Clinical signs
balancedelectrolytesolutionmaybesufficienttocor-
Clinical signs range in duration and severity,from
rect mild fluid deficits（<5%),but is insufficient for
acute tochronicand frommild to life-threatening.
patientswithmoderatetoseveredehydration.Patients
Vomiting,haematemesis and melaena may be
requiring intravenous fluids should undergo a more
presentinpatients withgastricerosions orulcers.Pale
extensive diagnosticevaluation.
mucous membranes,abdominal pain,weakness,in-
appetence,hypersalivation(potentiallyassociatedwith
Dietaryrestriction andmodification:Wherevomit-
oesophagitis asa consequence of gastric acid hyper-
ingisacute,oralintakeshouldbediscontinuedforat
secretion)andevidenceof circulatorycompromiseare
least 24hours.Small amountsof a liquid dietcan be
morevariablypresent.Access totoxins and drugs,
offered inthefaceofvomiting to maintain Gl barrier
particularlynon-steroidalanti-inflammatorydrugs
functionand to determinewhethervomitinghasre-
(NSAIDs).should be determined.
solved.A bland diet (non-spicy,fat-restricted) either
homemade(e.g.boiled chicken andrice,lowfat cot-
Pathogenesis
tage cheese and rice;given in a 1:3ratio)or commer-
Gastric damage can bebroadly attributed to impair-
cial (usually fat-restricted and rice-based) is then
ment of the GMB (defined above) through direct injury,
introduced(fedlittleandoften)withagradualtransition
interference withgastroprotectiveprostaglandins
backtoa normaldietoveraweekorso.
(PGE2).mucus orbicarbonate,decreased blood flow
and hypersecretion,or gastric acid.
Protectants andadsorbents:Bismuthsubsalicylate,
NSAIDs cause direct mucosal damage and inter-
kaolin-pectin and sucralfate are often employed in
ferewith prostaglandin synthesis(see Figure 19.12)
acutevomitingordiarrhoeatocoat theGlmucosaand
Flunixin meglumine,aspirin and ibuprofen have all
tobind bacteria and their toxins (see Chapter 28).
been associatedwith erosions inhealthy dogs.The
160
Chapter 19Diseasesof the stomach
combinationofanNSAIDand a glucocorticoid,either
presenceofametabolicalkalosis,hypochloraemia,
aloneorincombinationwith intervertebral discdis-
hypokalaemiaand acid urineis consistentwith
ease,isarecipeforGl ulceration.Drugs thatpreferen-
upper Gl obstruction(physical or functional)ora
tiallyblockinducible'cyclooxygenase(COx-2),sparing
hypersecretory state.
COX-1and friendyprostaglandins’likePGE2,suchas
Shouldbeperformed todetectabnormalities in
carprofen,meloxicam,deracoxib and potentially
primary andsecondaryhaemostasis thatmaybe
etodolac,are less ulcerogenic in normal dogs.How-
associatedwithGlbleeding.
ever,evenselectiverugsuchasmloxicam,
Canevaluate serumgastrin,andpotentially
areulcerogenicincombinationwith dexamethasone
histamine,concentrationswhere acid
and theirsafetyinsickanimalsremains tobedeter-
hypersecretion is suspected as a cause of
mined.High doses ofglucocorticoidsalone,e.g.dexa-
ulceration.Dogswith mast celltumours and
methasone and(methyl)prednisolone,have alsobeen
hyperhistaminaemia-induced acidhypersecretion
associated with gastric erosionsbut the mechanisms
have low serum gastrin concentrations. The
by which they induce damage are not clear.Their
combinationofgastricpH<3and a highserum
effects are notameliorated byPGEanalogues,such
gastrinconcentrationpromptsfurther
as misoprostol.
investigation ofgastrinomabysecretin
Hypersecretion ofgastricacid inresponse tohista-
stimulation test,ultrasonography（liver and
minerelease frommastcelltumours,and gastrin from
pancreas) and pentoctreotide scintigraphy.
gastrinomashasbeenclearlyimplicated asa causeof
gastroduodenal ulceration and oesophagitis in dogs
Diagnostic imaging:Plainradiography isnot usually
and cats (see Figure 19.10).Renal failure,hepatic
helpfulin diagnosinggastricerosions orulcersbutmay
failure, hypoadrenocorticism and hypotension are
help torule out other causes of vomiting,e.g.foreign
frequentlyproposedasriskfactorsforgastricerosionor
bodies, peritonitis and gastric perforation. Contrast
ulceration,thoughtherearefewpublisheddetailsonthe
radiographymayrevealfillingdefectsbutdoesnot
pathogenesis,frequency orseverity of gastric damage
allowdetailedmucosal evaluationorsampling.
in these conditions.Racing sled dogs,like human and
Ultrasonographyhelps detect gastric thickening
equine athletes,areprone todevelopgastricerosions
associatedwithulcers and masses,and alsohelpsto
and ulcers;the pathogenesis isnot understood but they
rule outnon-gastriccausesof vomiting.Splenomegaly
areresponsivetoacidsuppression.Erosions andulcers
maybeevident inpatientswithsystemicmastocytosis
are also sequelaeof gastriccancerand gastritis,which
or lymphoma (see Figure 19.9). The information pro-
are discussedelsewherein thischapter.
vided by radiography and ultrasonography is comple-
mentary to endoscopic evaluation,which is the
Diagnosis
diagnostic test of choice.
Clinicopathological testing is directed at identifying
Endoscopy allows the direct evaluation of gastric
diseases associated withgastric erosionsand ulcers
damage and mucosal sampling.
(seeFigure 19.12) and the consequencesof erosion
and ulceration.
NSAID-associatedulcers areoftenfound in the
antrumandarenotusuallyassociatedwith
Haematology:This may reveal anaemia,which is
markedmucosal thickening orirregularedges
initially regenerative,but can progress to become
(Figures 19.13 and 19.14).
microcytic,hypochromicand minimally regenerative.
Ulcerated tumoursfrequentlyhave thickened
Whenaccompaniedbythrombocytosisanddecreased
edges and surrounding mucosa.
ironsaturationorlowerumferitin,thesefindingare
Biopsysamplesshould be takenat theperiphery
characteristicof chronicbleeding and iron deficiency.
of ulcers to avoid perforation.
Lackofa stress leucogram,and lymphocytosisor
Endoscopic biopsy is not ideal for diagnosing
eosinophilia,in dogs is supportive ofhypoadreno-
infiltrative gastric tumours,andseveral samples
corticism.Eosinophilia could alsobeconsistentwith
from thesamesiteareusuallytakentoenable
dietary allergy,eosinophilicgastroenteritis,mastocy-
samplingofdeepertissue.
tosis ora hypereosinophilic syndrome.Examination of
a buffy coat smear may help to detect mastocytosis.A
neutrophilic leucocytosis and a left shift may indicate
inflammation orpossiblegastricperforation.
Biochemistryand urinalysis:
Revealsdehydration(azotaemia and
hypersthenuria), renal failure (e.g. azotaemia and
isosthenuria),hepatic disease(e.g.increased
liver enzymes orbilirubin;decreased cholesterol,
albumin,urea) and hypoadrenocorticism (i.e.
Na+:K+ratio<27:1).
19.13
Gastric ulceratian causedbyibuprofenbefore
。
Identifieselectrolyte and acid-base abnormalities
and after1week's trcatmentwith cimetidine
associatedwithvomitingand Gl ulceration.The
and sucralfate.
161
Chapter19Diseases of the stomach
Colloid solutions(e.g.Hetastarch,Haemaccel) at
10-20 ml/kg i.v.over4-6hourscanbeused to
reduce the amount of crystalloid required.
Plasma,colloids,packedcellsorwholebloodare
occasionallyrequired to treat severe
hypoproteinaemiaoranaemia,whichcan
developinvomitinganimalswithsevere
ulcerationorhaemorrhagicgastroenteritis(HGE).
Centralvenouspressure monitoringandevaluation
of urinary outputare necessaryinpatients with severe
Gl disease,particularly those complicated by third
space losses of fluid into the gut orperitoneal cavity.
Correction of acid-base imbalances:The effect of
19.14
Gastric ulceration associated wth a gastric
vomitingonacid-basebalance ishard topredict,and
carcinoma.Note the mucosal thickening
therapeutic intervention to correct imbalances should
surrounding the ulcer compared with the NSAID-induced
bebased onblood gasdetermination.Wheresevere
ulcer in Figure 19.13.
metabolicacidosis is present(i.e.pH<7.1;HCO-<10
mmol/l)sodiumbicarbonate(1mmol/kg)canbegiven
Endoscopic-guidedfine needle aspiration,using
withcareful monitoringforthe developmentof worsen-
a sheathed needle through the biopsy channel,
inghypokalaemia,hypocalcaemia and cerebrospinal
can alsobeused to sample deeplesions.Even
fluid(CSF) acidosis.Further bicarbonate supplemen-
with thisapproachthediagnosismaybe
tation isbased on repeated blood gas analysis.Meta-
missed,and surgical biopsyrequired fora
bolicalkalosis usuallyresponds toreplacingvolume
definitive diagnosis.
deficit,chloride andpotassium with intravenous0.9%
NaCI plus KCl. Diagnostic investigations should ini-
Thecombinationofmucosalerosionorulceration,
tially centre on ruling out upper Gl obstruction. The
antral mucosalhypertrophy,copious gastric juice,and
administration of antisecretory drugs, such as H2
oesophagitis is highly suggestive of a gastric hyper-
antagonists,may help to limit chloride effluxinto the
secretory state(see Figure 19.10).
gastric juice.
Treatment
Acid secretion(see Figure 19.2) can be blocked by
Treatment of gastric erosions andulcersisdirectedat
antagonists of H（cimetidine,ranitidine,famotidine),
the underlyingcause,ensuring adequate hydration and
gastrin (proglumide)and acetylcholine(atropine
perfusion,including blood transfusion ifneeded,and
pirenzepine)receptors;and drugs that inhibit adenyl
cyclase (PGE analogues) and H+:K+-ATPase
restoring electrolyte and acid-base disturbances.Addi-
tionalsupportisdirectedatshoringupthegastricmucosal
(omeprazole). Long-acting somatostatin analogues,
barrier by enhancing mucosal protection and cyto-
suchasoctreotide,directlydecrease thesecretionof
protection,anddecreasinggastricacid secretion.Where
gastrin and gastric acid.
H2receptor antagonistspromote mucosal healing
fluid loss, discomfort and the risk of oesophagitis.
in dogswithavarietyofexperimentallyinducedulcers
Where acid hypersecretion ispresent,or is sus-
and erosions (see Figure 19.13).Famotidine is an
pectedatendoscopy,itisprobablybestmanagedwith
attractivechoice asit doesnot inhibitP450enzymes
protonpump inhibitors(e.g.omeprazole)
activity ofranitidine or nizatidine(mediated by anti-
Fluid therapy:Therate of fluid administration de-
cholinesterase activity)maymake themgood choices
pends on the presence or absence of shock,the
if thereis delayedgastricemptyingassociatedwith
degreeofdehydrationand thepresenceofdiseases,
defectivepropulsion.
e.g. cardiac or renal, which predispose to volume
H+:K+-ATPase inhibitors,such asomeprazole,are
overload.Mildly dehydrated patients are usuallyre-
usedforgastriculceration thatisrefractorytoHantago-
sponsive to crystalloids(e.g.lactated Ringers solution
nistsand are theinitial choice inpatientswithacid
or0.9%NaCl) at arate that will provide maintenance
hypersecretion secondary tomastcell tumours and
andreplacebothdeficits andongoinglossesovera24-
gastrinoma(Zollinger-Elison syndrome).Omeprazole
hour period.Potassium depletion is oftena conse-
hasbeen shown tohave few long-term side-effects in
quenceofprolongedvomiting or anorexia,and most
dogs.lt shouldbeusedwithcautioninpatientswith liver
polyionicreplacement fluidscontainonlysmallamounts
disease andreviewed forinteractionswith drugs,such
of potassium,hence KCl is added to parenteral fluids
ascisapride.Omeprazolereducedexercise-associated
on thebasis of serum levels.Patients with signs of
gastrichaemorrhage in sled dogs,but wasassociated
shockrequire more aggressive support.
withincreased frequencyof diarrhoea(omeprazole
54%, placebo 21%). The authors suggest further inves-
Thevolumedeficitcanbereplaced withcrystalloids
tigationofdiarrhoeaassociatedwithomeprazoletreat-
ataninitialrateof60-90ml/kg/h,thentailored to
ment before omeprazole can berecommended for
maintain tissueperfusionand hydration.
routineprophylactictreatment intheseanimals.
162
Chapter 19  Diseases of the stomach
Somatostatin analogues, such as octreotide, can
aminoglycoside (effective against Gram-negative aer-
be used to rapidly decrease gastric acid secretion in
obes) when sepsis is present and hydration status is
patients discovered to have large ulcers at endoscopy.
adequate. Enrofloxacin is a suitable alternative to an
and may also help to contro! gastric bleeding. The
aminoglycoside in skeletally mature patients at risk of
combination of the long-acting somatostatin analogue
nephrotoxicity from an aminoglycoside. Analgesia can
octreotide, and omeprazole, effectively reduced vomit-
be initially provided using opioids, such as buprenor-
ing in a dog with gastrinoma.
phine and can be stepped up with complete agonists,
such as pethidine or fentanyl.
 Mucosai protectants: The PGE analogue, misoprc-
stol, protects against NSAID-induced erosions in dogs
Surgery:Surgical managementmay be required when
at doses that do not inhibit acid secretion, and may be
the cause of ulceration is unclear, or to resect large
given to dogs receiving chronic NsAIDs for arthritis.
non-healing ulcers or those about to perforate.
The main side-effects of misoprostol are diarrhoea and
abortion. lt must not be given to pregnant animals.
Prognosis
The mucosal protectant polyaluminium sucrose
 Prognosis depends on the cause of the ulcer.
sulphate (sucralifate) binds to areas denuded of mu-
cosal epithelium regardless of the underlying cause
Gastric dilatation and volvulus
and is useful for treating gastric erosions and ulcers,
GD and GDV arecharacterized bythedramaticdisten-
and oesophagitis. Sucralfate can be given to patients
sion of the stomach with air. With volvulus the stomach
receiving injectable antacids but it may compromise
absorption of other oral medications, and thus is prob-
twists about its axis moving dorsally and left of the
ably best given 2 hours after the acid blockers.
fundus. Both GD and GDV cause caudal vena cava
obstruction and impair venous return to the heart. This
Prophyfaxis: ln contrast to the efficacy of misoprostol
results in hypovolaemicshock thatcan be exacerbated
and Hz antagonists in preventing NSAID-induced ero-
by devitalization of the gastric wall, splenic torsion cr
sions, prophylactic administration of various combina-
 avulsion, congestion of the abdominaiviscera, endotoxic
tions of misoprostol, cimetidine and omeprazole has
shock and DIC.
 not been shown to prevent gastric erosions in dogs.
with or without intervertebral disc disease, receiving
Clinical signs
high-dose glucocorticoids. However, these drugs may
Non-productive retching, sallvation, abdorminal disten.
speed healing of gastric lesions in these patients.
 tion, weakness or collapse raise the possibility of GD or
Sucralfate is probably the drug of choice for treating Gl
GDV, particularly in large-breed and deep-chested
uiceration in patients receiving high doses of
dogs. Usually abdominal distension and tympany.tachy-
corticosteroids as it is not dependent on the premise
cardia and mucosal pallor are present. Hypothermia,
that acid is causing or delaying healing.
depression and coma may be seen when shock is
severe. Cardiac arrhythmias, such as ventricular pre-
Antf-emetics: These drugs can be used where vomit-
mature beats or ventricular tachycardia, may be de-
ing is severe, compromising fluid and electrolyte bal-
tected on the initial examination or develop up to 72
 ance or causing discomfort. The initial agent used in
hours after presentation.
dogs is usually metoclopramide, which antagonizes
D2-dopaminergic and 5HT,-serotonergic receptors, and
Pathogenesis
has cholinergic effects on smooth muscie. Phenothi-
No single cause of GD or GDV has been identified.
azine derivatives, such as chlorpromazine and
Large-breed dogs with deep chests, such as Akitas;
prochlorperazine, are antagonists of α-and oz-adren-
Bloadhounds, Collies, Great Danes, Irish Setters, Irish
ergic, H- and Hg-histaminergic, and Dg-dopaminergic
Wolfhounds, Newfoundlands, Rottwellers, Saint
recaptors in the vomiting centre and chemoreceptor
Bernards, Standard Poodles and weimaraners are at
trigger zone (CRTZ), and are used if metoclopramide
 greater risk. Cumulative incidence of GDV has been
is ineffective and the patient is normotensive. Non-
estimated at 6% for large-breed and giant-breed dogs.
selective cholinergic receptor antagonists (other than
The lifetime risk is influenced by breed, ranging from
the M, specific antagonist, pirenzepine) such as atro-
3.9% for Rottweilers to 39% for Great Danes. In large
pine,scopolamine, aminopentamide and isopropamide
breed and giant dogs factors significantly associated
are best avoided as they may calse ileus, delayed
with an increased risk of GDV include increasing age.
 gastric emptying and dry mouth.
having a first-degree relative with a history of GDV.
having a faster speed of eating, once-daily feeding and
Antibiotics and analgesia: Prophylactic antibiotic
having a raised feeding bowl and aerophagia. The
cover (e.g. cephalosporins, ampicillin) may be war-
personality of the dogs may also have an impact, with
ranted in animals with shock and major Gl barrier
happier dogs having a decreased incidence.
dysfunction. Leucopenia, neutrophilia, fever and bloody
 Analysis of gastric gas supports aerophagia as the
stools are additional indications for prophylactic anti-
cause of distension, with 'dilatation explained by an
biotics in animals with vomiting or diarrhoea. Initial
inability to eructate or empty air into the intestines.
choices include ampicillin or a cephalosporin (effective
Dogs with GDV recovering from gastropexy have ab-
against Gram-positive and some Gram-negative and
normal electrical activity and gastric emptying that may
anaerobic bacteria) which can be combined with an
be related to the development of gastric dilatation. The
163
Chapter19Diseasesof the stomach
interrelationshipofvolvulusandgastricdistensionis
Diagnostic imaging:Radiography is usually performed
unclearbut thelengthof thehepatogastricligament
afterfluid support and decompression,and helps to
mayfacilitatetorsion.
distinguishsimpledilatation,fromdilatationandvolvulus.
Rightand leftlateral recumbentviews are taken.Dilata-
Diagnosis
tion is associated with gas distension,and on a right
lateral position airis present in the fundus (Figure 19.15).
Haematology and biochemistry:Haematological
Withvolvulus thepylorusmovesdorsallyand left,
changes areoftenrestricted to an increase inhaema-
and thestomachiscompartmentalized.Onarightlateral
tocrit.Avarietyofacid-baseandelectrolytedistur-
radiograph thefundus isviewedasalarge ventral
banceshavebeenobserved indogswithGDV:
compartmentwith thesmallergas-filled pyloruslocated
dorsallyandseparatedfromthefundusbyabandofsoft
Metabolic acidosisand hypokalaemia are the
tissue,forming thePopeye’s arm’sign(Figure 19.15).
mostcommon abnormalities.Metabolicacidosis
Lossof abdominalcontrastmay indicateperitonitisor
is likely due to tissue hypoperfusion,anaerobic
bleeding from avulsed splenicvessels.Increased con-
metabolismand theaccumulationof lacticacid
trastpromptsconsiderationof pneumoperitoneum and
Metabolicalkalosismayalsooccurandmaybe
gastricrupture.
relatedto thesequestrationofgastricacid
Respiratory acidosisand alkalosishavebeen
Treatment
variablyobservedandreflecthypoventilationor
Fluid support and gastric decompression are themost
hyperventilation,respectively.
important emergencytreatments.
The variablenature of acid-base and electrolyte
Fluid therapy:Shock dosesof lactated Ringer'ssolu-
abnormalitiesindogswithGDVindicatesthatfluid
tion (60-90 ml/kg/h) may be given via large bore cath-
therapy should be individualized on thebasis of
eters into the cephalic or jugular veins. Experimental
blood gas and electrolyte measurements.Itisimpor-
studies that have compared crystalloids(60 ml/kg,fol-
tanttomonitorand correctacid-base abnormalities
lowed by0.9%NaClat20ml/kg/h) with hypertonic saline
astheymaypredisposetocardiac arrythmias and
(7%NaClin6%dextranat5ml/kg singledose,followed
muscle weakness.
by 0.9%NaCl at 20 ml/kg/h)in dogswith GDV-induced
Coagulation abnormalities areusually consistent
shock,indicate that hypertonic salinemaintainsbetter
with DIC （thrombocytopenia,increased D-dimer or
myocardialperformance,higherheartrateandlower
fibrin degradation products (FDPs),reduced anti-
systemicvascularresistance than the crystalloid.The
thrombinIll(ATlll)or prolongation of the activated
resuscitativedoseofhypertonicsalinewasdeliveredin
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)).
5-10minutesversus an hourfor crystalloids.
Rightlateralview
Left lateralview
Dorsoventral view
R
19.15
Radicgraphicdiagnosis of gastric dilatation(loprow),and diatation andvolvuus(bottomrow).Rightand left
lateral. and dorsoventra radiographs shcwing gastric compartmentalization with the pylorus (*) separated frcm
the fundusby a soft tissue density in thelower row.
164
Chapter 19 Diseases of the stomach
 Fluid therapy should be aggressively monitored
and avulsion ar torsion of the spleen that may require
by frequent measurement of blood pressure, heart
resection or removal (see BSAVA Manual of Canine
rate, PCV and total solids, and urine output. Hypo-
and Feline Abdominal Surgery).
kalaemia is common after fluid therapy and 30-40
mmol KCl/l should be added to fluids after the initial
Prophylaxis: The recurrence rate of GD/GDV has
shock dose. Potassium and bicarbonate are best
been estimated at 11% over3 years in one study, with
administered on the basis of blood gas and electrolyte
median survival of 547 versus 188 days for dogs
measurements.
with a gastropexy compared to those without. Pro-
phylactic gastropexy in Great Danes, Irish Setters,
Gastric decompression: Decompression can be per-
Rottweilers, Standard Poodles and Weimaraners
 formed by orogastric intubation with a wel lubricated
raduced mortality by 2.2-fold in Rottweilers and
stomach tube, or a 16 gauge catheter can be used to
29.6-fold in Great Danes.
trocharize the stomach. Oral decompression can also
be performed after trocharization. Decompression
Prognosis
should be maintained until surgery. Sedation with
Mortality rates for dogs with simple GDV are approxi-
butorphanol or oxymorphone and diazepam may be
mately 15%. Dogs with gastric necrosis, gastric resec-
necessary to pass a stomach tube.
tion or splenectomy have a higher mortality rate (>30%).
The presence of gastric necrosis can be predicted by
Adjunct therapy forendotoxic shockand reperfusion
measuring plasma lactate concentration; a concentra-
injury: Adjunct therapy frequently includes:
tion >6 mmol/l yields a specificity of 88% and a sensi-
tivity of 66% for necrosis.
 Prednisolone sodium succinate (10 mg/kg i.v.) or
Chronic gastritis
dexamethasone sodium phosphate (10 mg/kg
i.v.) for shock
Gastritis is a common finding in dogs, with 35% of dogs
 Broad spectrum antibiotics, such as a
investigated forchronic vomiting and26 48% of asymp-
cephalosporin in combination with a
tomatic dogs affected. The prevalence in cats has not
fluoroquinolone, to circumvent bacterial
been determined. The diagnosis of chronic gastritis is
 translocation and endotoxaemia
based on the histological examination of gastric biopsy
 Some clinicians advocate flunixin meglumine for
samples and it is usually sub-classified according to
endotoxic shock, but the author does not
histopathalogical changes and aetiology.
because it may damage the Gl mucosa and
kidneys, especially if the patient is hypovolaemic
Histopathological features
The administration of agents to decrease lipid
Gastrilis in dogs and cats is usually classified accord-
peroxidation (U70046F) and chelate iron
ing to:
(desferoxamine) has decreased mortality
attributed to reperfusion injury in dogs with
 The predominant cellular infiltrate (eosinophilic,
experimental GDv. These agents are best given
lymphocytic, plasmacytic, granulomatous,
before reperfusion occurs, i.e. prior to untwisting
lymphoid follicular)
a torsion.
 The presence of architectural abnormalities
(atrophy, hypertrophy, fibrosis, oedema,
Specific treatment for cardiac arrhythmias may be
ulceration, metaplasia)
indicated because ventricular premature complexes
Its subjective severity (mild, moderate, severe).
 and ventricular tachycardia are present in approxi-
mately 40% of patients and may have an impact on
A standardized visual grading scheme was pro-
mortality. The arrhythmias can develop up to 72 hours
posed by Happonen etal. (i998) and has been adapted
for pathologists (Figure 19.16). The most common
of electrolyte, acid-base and haemostatic abnormali-
fom of gastritis in dogs and cats is mild to moderate
ties, and reperfusion injury. Indications for specific
superficia! lymphoplasmacytic gastritis with concomi-
treatment are arrhythmias associated with weakness
tant lymphoid follicle hyperplasia (see Figure 19.3).
or syncope, persistent ventricular tachycardia at a rate
of >150, or runs of tachycardia'showing R on T com-
Aetiology
plexes. The arrhythmias are managed by correcting
Despite the high prevalence of gastritis an underlying
underlying acid-base, electrolyte (especially K+, Ca²+,
cause is rarely identified. Thus, in the absence of
Mg?+) and haemostatic disturbances, and administer-
systemic disease, ulcerogenic or irritant drugs, gastric
ing lidocaine either asa bolus or continuously. Procain-
foreign objects, parasites (Physaloptera, Olulanus) or,
amide is used where arrhythmias are persistent.
in rare instances, fungal infections ( Pythium /nsidiosum,
Histop/asma), gastritis is usually attributed to dietary
Surgery: The aims of surgery are to reposition the
allergy or intolerance, occult parasitism, ora reaction to
stomach and spleen, and to perform a gastropexy to
bacterial antigens or unknown pathogens. Treatment
enable shorf-term decompression and prevent recur-
is often empirical but can serve to define the cause of
rence. Surgery can be complicated by the presence of
gastritis, e.g. diet-responsive, antibiotic-responsive,
 gastric necrosis, which requires partial gastrectomy.
steroid-responsive or parasitic.
165
Chapter19Diseasesof the stomach
3
Atrophy
Fibrosis
Cellularinfiltrate
19.16
A standarcized photographic scale for atrophy,fibrosis and cellular infltrate. 0 =normal; 1 =mild; 2=moderate;
Internal Medicine)
Clinical signs
Physical examination is often unremarkable in
Themajorclinicalsignof chronic gastritisis vomitingof
patients with chronic gastritis.Abdominal distension
foodorbile.Decreasedappetite,weightloss,melaena
mayberelatedtodelayedgastricemptyingcausedby
orhaematemesis arevariably encountered.Thecon-
obstructionordefective propulsion.Abdominalmasses,
currentpresenceofdermatologicalandGlsignsraises
lymphadenopathyorocularchangesmaybeencoun-
the likelihood of dietary sensitivity.Access to toxins,
tered in dogswithgastricfungal infections.
medicationsand foreignbodies,and dietarypractices
shouldbethoroughlyreviewed.
Diagnosis
Thepatient detailsshouldnotbe overlookedasit
mayincreasetheprobabilitythatchronicgastritisisthe
Clinicopathological testing:Clinicopathological
causeofvomiting,forexample:
testresultsareoftennormalinpatientswithchronic
gastritis.A biochemical profile,CBC and urinalysis
Hypertrophyof thefundicmucosa isfrequently
should beperformed and thyroxine concentrations
associatedwithasevereenteropathy in
measured (cats) as a basic screen for metabolic,
Basenjis;and stomatocytosis,haemolytic
endocrine,infectious,and other non-Gl causes of
anaemia,icterus andpolyneuropathyin
vomiting,as wellas the acid-base and electrolyte
DrentsePatrijshonds
changes associated withvomiting,outflow obstruc-
Hypertrophyof thepyloricmucosa isobserved in
tion or acid hypersecretion.
small brachycephalic dogs,such as Lhasa
Apsos,andisassociatedwithgastricoutflow
Eosinophiliamayprompt theconsiderationof
obstruction (seebelow)
gastritisassociatedwithdietaryhypersensitivity，
endoparasitesormastcell tumours.
toadenocarcinoma hasbeenreported in
Hyperglobulinaemia andhypoalbuminaemiamay
NorwegianLundehundswithprotein-losing
bepresent inBasenjiswith gastropathy/
gastroenteropathy
enteropathy or dogswith gastricpythiosis.
Young,large-breed,male dogs inthe Gulf States
Panhypoproteinaemia isa feature of
of theUSAmayhavegranulomatousgastritis
gastroenteropathy in Norwegian Lundehunds,
causedbyPythiumspp.withinfectionmore
moderatetoseveregeneralizedinflammatory
prevalent in autumn (fall),winter and spring.
boweldisease,GllymphomaandGlhistoplasmosis.
166
Chapter 19  Diseases of the stomach
 More specific tesis, such as an 
Helicobacter is offen treated with corticosteroids,
adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation test or
whereas mild lymphoplasmacytic gastritis may be
serology for Pythium insidiosum, are performed
treated with a change in diet. As the histopathological
 on the basis af these initial test results.
evaluation of a gastric biopsy has not been standard-
 Determination of food-specific lgE has not been
ized the prudent clinician should carefully review histo-
 shown to be useful in the diagnosis of dietary
logical reports or sections to get a feel for their
sensitivity in dogs or cats.
pathologist's interpretation. Even with cptimum evalua-
The utility of non-invasive tests, such as serum
pepsinogen and gastric pemeability to sucrose
patients with different underlying aetiologies, so wel
used to diagnose gastritis in people, has not 
structured treatment trials offen form the basis of an 
been determined in dogs and cats.
aetiological diagnosis.
Gastric sections should be stained with haematoxy-
lin and eosin (H&E) for evaluation of cellularily and
are frequently normal in dogs and.cats with gastritis but
 architecture, and modified Steiner stain for gastric spiral
may show gastric distension or delayed gastric empty-
bacteria (see Figures 19.3 and 19.16). Further special
 ing (food retained >12 hours after a meal). Contrast 
stains (e.g. Gomori's methenamine silver) are indicated
radiography may reveal ulcers or thickening of the 
to detect fungi if pyogranulomatous inflammation is
 gastric rugae or wall but has been largely superseded
present. Masson's trichrome can be used to highlight
by the combination of ultrasonography (to detect mural
gastric fibrosis, while sirius red and alcian blue help to
abnormalities) and endoscopy (to observe and sample
reveal eosinophils and mast cells, respectively. Immu-
the gastric mucosa).
nohistochemistry can be employed to help distinguish
Endoscopicexamination enables the visualizationof
lymphoma from severe lymphocytic gastritis. Mucin
foreign bodies, erosions, ulceration, haemorrhage, ru-
staining has been performed in Norwegian Lundehunds
gal thickening, lymphoid follicle hyperplasia (evident as
mucosal pock marks), increased mucus or fluid (clear or
of mucus neck cells and pseudopyloric metaplasia.
bile stained), and increased or decreased mucosal
friability. Discrete focal or multifocal mucosal nodules
Treatment
 may be observed with Ollulanus infection. Parasites 
Treatment of chronic gastritis initially centres on the
such as Physaloptera may be observed as 1-4 cm
detection and treatment of underlying metabolic disor-
worms. Gastric phycomycosis can be associated with
ders and the removal of drugs, toxins, foreign bodies,
irregular masses in the pyloric outlow tract and may
parasites and fungal infections.
 prompt serological testing by ELISA, Western blotting
and culture of frash gastric biopsy samples. Large
Bacterial gastritis
amounts of bile-stained fluid are suggestive of
Helicobacter: The importance of unknown pathogens
duodenogastric reflux associated gastritis, whereas lots
in the development of gastritis is best demonstrated by
of clear fluid may indicate hypersecretion of gastric acid.
the gastric bacterium Helicobacter pylor, a Gram-
Gastric fluid can be aspirated for cytology (Helico-
 negative bacterium that chronically infects more than
bacter, parasite ova or larvae) and pH measurement.
half cf all people worldwide. The sustained gastric
Impression smears of gastric biopsy samples are an
inflammatory and immune response to infection ap-
effective way of looking for Helicobacterspp. (5-12 μm
pears to be pivotal for the development of peptic ulcers
spirals) and are more sensitive than the biopsy urease
and gastric cancer in people.
test (Helicobacter spp. produce urease) (see Figure
There is a high prevalence of gastric Helicobacter
19.3). Serum gastrin should be measured where there
infection in dogs (67-100% healthy pet dogs, 74-90%
are unexplained gastric erosions, ulcers, fluid accumu-
vomiting dogs, 100% [aboratory Beagles) and cats
lation or mucosal hypertrophy. Gastroscopic food sen-
(40-100% of both healthy and sick cats). Dogs and
sitivity testing (GFST), the endoscopic procedure of
cats are colonized by a variety of large spiral organisms
dribbling dietary antigens on to the gastric mucosa to
(5--12 μm) (see Figure 19.3). In cats H. heilmann/iis the
ascertain the presence of food allergy, has not been
predominant species, with H. bizzozeroni and H. felis
useful in dogs or cats, GFST is highly subjective,
much less frequent. In dogs H. bizzozeronli and
detects only immediate hypersensitivity, and does not
H. salomonis are most common followed by
correlate with the results of dietary elimination trials.
H. heimanniiand H. felis.: H. biisand Flexispira rappini
have also been described. Cats can also be colonized
Biopsy: A stomach biopsy should be performed even
by H. pylori (2-5 μm) but infection has been limited to
when it looks grossly normal (usualy three samples
a closed colony of laboratory cats. The large
from each region: pylorus, fundus and cardia). Thick-
Helicobacter species found in dogs and cats do not
ened rugae may require multiple biopsy, and a full-
attach to the epithelium but colonize the superficial 
thickness biopsy is offen required to differentiate gastritis
 mucus and gastric glands, particularly of the fundus
from neoplasia or fungal infection, and to diagnose
submucosal or muscular hypertrophy.
Helicobacter infection of dogs and cats is associ-
ated with:
Chapter 5) has important implications for patient care
as biopsy findings are often used to guide treatment,
Degeneration of gastric glands, with vacuolation,
e.g. moderate lymphoplasmacytic gastritis without
 pyknosis and necrosis of parietal cells
167
Chapter 19 
Diseases of the stomach
Mononuclear inflammation ranging from mild to
histological sections for larvae or worms. Gastric lav-
moderate in severity
age and xylazine-induced emesis have been described
 Gastric lymphoid hyperplasia is common and can 
to aid diagnosis. Treatment with fenbendazole at 10
be extensive (particularly when full-thickness
mg/kg p.0. q24h for 2 days may be effective.
gastric biopsy samples are evaluated)
A systemic response characterized by increased
circulating anti-HellcobacterIgG has been detectad
cm long worms, which are sporadically detected in the
in sera from naturally infected dogs and cats.
stomachs of dogs and cats. Physaloptera rara are most
However, Gl ulcers, gastric neoplasia and abnor-
site of coyotes. Diagnosis is difficult as worm burden is
 malities in serum gastrin or acid secretion have not been
often low and the eggs are transparent and dificult to
 associafed with Helicobacter infection in dogs and cats.
see in sugar flotation. Treatment with pyrantel pamcate
Helicobacterspecies alsocarrya potential zoonotic
(5 mg/kg p.o., dogs single dose, cats two doses 14 days
risk. Ownership of dogs and cats has been correlated
apart) may be effective. Control of infection may be
with an increased risk of infection of H. heilmanni in
difficult due to the ingestion of intermediate hosts (such
 people. Case reports have also suggested the trans-
as cockroaches and beetles) and paratenic hosts (such
mission of Helicobacter spp. from pets to humans.
as lizards and hedgehogs). Given the dificulty of diag-
Recent studies clearly confirm that dogs and cats
nosing Ollulanus and Physaloptera empirical therapy
harbour H. helimanni, butthe subtypesof H. heiimannii
with an anthelmintic, such as fenbendazole, may be
present in dogs and cats (types 2 and 4) are of minor
warranted in dogs and cats with unexplained gastritis.
importance (approximately 15% of cases) to humans,
who are predominantly colonized by H. heilmannitype
Other parasites: Gastric infection with Gnathostoma
(cats), Spirocerca(dogs) and Aonchotheca (cats) have
1 (which is the predominant Helicobacterspp. in pigs).
 been associated with gastric nodules that have been
 An uncontrolled treatmenttrial of dogs and cats with
treated by surgical resection of affected gastric tissue.
gastritis and Helicobacterinfection showed that clinical
 signs in 90% of 63 dogs and cats responded to treat-
Fungal gastritis
ment with a combination of metronidazole, amoxicillin
 and famotidine, and that 14 of the 19 animals re-
Gastric pythiosis: The presence oftransmuralthicken-
endoscoped had resolution of gastritis and no evi-
ing of the gastric outflow tract and histology indicating
dence of Helicobacter in the gastric biopsy samples.
pyogranulomataus inflammation raise the possibility of
Controlled clinical trials have been hampered by a
infection with fungi, such as Pythium insidiosum. Spe-
much higher apparent recrudescence or re-infection
cial staining (Gomor's methenamine silver), culture,
rate than the 1-2% a year observed after treatment of
H. pylori-infected people.
fected tissues can be used to help confirm the diagnosis.
Only symptomatic patients with biopsy-confirmed
Treatment consists of aggressive surgical resection
Helicobacterinfection and gastritis shauld be treated.
 combined with itraconazole (10 mg/kg p.o. q24h) and
The combination of amoxicillin (20 mg/kg p.o. q12h),
terbinatine (5-10 mg/kg p.0. q24h) for2-3 months post-
clarithromycin (7.5 mg/kg p.0. q12h) and metronid-
surgery. ELiSA titres of pre- and post-treatment sam-
azole (10 mg/kg p.0. q12h) for 14 days may be effec-
ples may show a marked drop during successful
tive. ldeally eradication should be confirmed by the
treatment and drugs can be stopped. Medical therapy is
evaluation of gastric juice or biopsy 1 month after
continued for another 2-3 months if titres remain ele-
stopping treatment, and non-responsive patients should
vated. Theprognosis ispoorand only <25% ofcases are
be evaluated for resistant infections. Further controlled
cured with medical therapy alone.
trials of antibiotic therapy in symptamatic patients with
Chronic gastritis of unknown cause
gastritis and Helicobacterinfection are required before
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic gastritis of unknown cause is
clear guidelines regarding.the treatment of gastric
common in dogs and cats. lt may be associated with
Helicobacter spp. can be made.
similar infltrates in the intestines, particularly in cats (who
should also be evaluated for the presence of pancreatic
 Parasitic gastritis
severity and it may be accompanied by mucosal atrophy
Ollulanus tricuspis: Olulanus tricuspis is a micro-
scopic worm (0.7-1 mm long, 0.04 mm wide) infecting
or fibrosis, and less commonly hyperplasia.
 the feline stomach. It is transmitted predominantly by
Mild lymphoplasmacytic gastritis: This is initially
cat to cat transmission thraugh ingestion of vomitus,
treated with diet. The diet is usually restricted in anti-
and can also undergo internal autoinfection with worm
gens to which the patient has not been previously
 burdens reaching up to 11,o00 per stomach.
exposed, e.g. a lamb-based diet if the patient has
 Mucosal abnomalities range from. none to rugal
previously been fed chicken and beef, or contains
hyperplasia and nodular (2-3 mm) gastritis. Histologi-
hydrolysed proteins (usually chicken or soy) that may
cal findings include lymphoplasmacytic infltrates, Iym-
be less allergenic than intact proteins. Many of these
phoid folicular hyperplasia, fibrosis and up to 100
diets are also high in carbohydrate and restricted in fat,
which facilitates gastric emptying, and may contain
Ollulanus is not detected by faecal examination
other substances (such as menhaden fish oil or anti-
 but requires evaluation of gastric juice, vomitus or
oxidants) that may alter inflammation.
168
Chapter 19Diseasesof the stomach
The testdietisfedexclusivelyforaperiod af approxi-
proven.The treatment of atrophicgastritis hasreceived
mately2weekswhilevomiting episodes arerecorded.
limitedattentionbutHelicobactereradicationand immu-
Ifvomitingisimproved,achallengewith theoriginaldiet
nosuppression havebeen effective inhumans.
isrequired toconfirma diagnosisofdietarysensitivity.
The introduction of a specific dietary component to the
Hypertrophic gastritis:Hypertrophy of the fundic
testdiet,e.g.beef,isrequiredtoconfim dietarysensi
mucosa (Figure 19.17) is uncommon and is often part
tivity.lfvomiting isunresponsive thepatient may be
placed onadifferent dit foranother 2weeks,usually
the limit ofclienttolerance,orstartedonprednisolone
(1-2mg/kg p.0.q24h,tapered to every otherday at the
lowestdosethatmaintainsremissionover8-12weeks).
Moderatetoseverelymphoplasmacyticgastritis:
This isusuallytreated withacombinationofa testdiet
and prednisolone. lf the patient goes into remission
they should bemaintained on the test diet whilepred-
nisolone is tapered,andpotentially discontinued.Ant-
acidsandmucosalprotectants are addedtothe
therapeuticregimenifulcersorerosionsaredetected
at endoscopy,orif haematemesisor melaena are
(a
noted.lfgastritisisunresponsivetodiet,prednisolone
and antacids,the diagnosis should be re-evaluated
prior to aggressive immunosuppression.
Indogsimmunosuppressionisusuallyincreased with
azathioprine(2mg/kg p.0.q24hfor5 days then q48h,on
alternating days withprednisolone).Chlorambucil is a
safer alternative to administer orally thanazathioprine in
cats and has been successfullyemployed in the manage-
mentofinflammatorybowel diseaseandsmallcell
lymphoma(seebelow).Prokinetic agents (e.g.metoclo-
pramide,cisapride,erythromycin)can be used as an
adjunct wheredelayedgastricemptyingispresent.
b
Diffuse eosinophilic gastritis:Diffuse eosinophilic
gastritis of undefined aetiology is usually approached
ina similarfashion tolymphoplasmacytic gastritis.The
presenceofeosinophilia,dermatological changesand
eosinophilicinfiltratesmaybeevenmore suggestiveof
dietary sensitivity.In catsit should be determined
whetherit ispart of a hypereosinophilic syndrome.
Treatment for occult parasites,dietary trials and
immunosuppression canbecarriedoutasdescribed
above.Focaleosinophilicgranulomascanbeassociated
withparasitesorfungal infection,which should beex
cluded prior toimmunosuppression with corticosteroids.
C
Atrophicgastritis:Atrophicgastritishasbeen infre-
quently described indogs and cats but is often associ-
ated withamarkedcellularinfiltrate(seeFigure19.15).
Atrophy hasalsobeen associatedwith gastricadeno-
carcinoma in Norwegian Lundehunds.There is no
clear evidence that lymphoplasmacytic gastritis
progressestoatrophyandgastriccancerindogsor
cats,andtheroleof Helicobacterorantigastricantibod-
ies in the development of atrophy in dogs and cats
remains tobedetermined.
Dogs and cats with atrophic gastritishavenot been
reported to develop cobalamin deficiency,unlike hu-
(d)
mans.Thisisprobablybecausethepancreas,ratherthan
19.17
thestomach,isthemainsourceof intrinsicfactorinthese
Hypertrophic gastropathy. (a) Diffuse fundic
species.Achlorhydria hasbeen described in dogs and
(c)Endoscopicview of antral mucosal hypertrophy.
mayenabletheproliferationofbacteria in the stomach
(d) Appearance of antral mucosal hyperfrcphy caused by
and upper small intestine, though this has not been
Pythiumspp.inectien,resected atsurgery.
169
Chapter19Diseases of the stomach
ofthebreed-specificgastropathiesorgastroentero
Access to foreignbodies,bones and medications
pathies mentioned above.Concurrent hypergastrin-
isofobviousrelevancetooutflowobstruction
aemia should promptconsiderationofunderlying
Brachycephalic,middle-aged,small-breed dogs
hepatic or renal disease,achlorhydria or gastrin-
(such as the Shih Tzu) seempredisposed to
producingtumours,whichshouldbepursuedappropri-
hypertrophicpylorogastropathy syndrome,where
vomiting is secondary to pyloric outflow
withfastinghypergastrinaemia andexaggerated
secretin-stimulatedgastrin,andanecdotalreportssug-
mucosa (see Figure 19.17)
Gastricneoplasia isusuallydetectedinolder
animals,and weight loss,haematemesis and
(Figure 19.17) causes outflow obstruction and is man-
pallormaybepresent
aged surgically (see below).
Gastric pythiosis ismore prevalent in young
large-breed dogs in the Gulf States of the USA
Delayed gastric emptying andmotility
Large-breed,deep-chested dogs,which may
disorders
have an underlying problem with gastric
Disordersofgastricmotilitycandisrupt the storageand
emptying (see above), are more prone to GDV.
mixing of food and its expulsion into the duodenum.
Delayedgastricemptyingisthemostcommonlyrecog-
A thoroughphysical examination isperformed to
nizedmanifestation of gastricmotility disorders.Rapid
detectcauses of vomiting(such as string foreign bod-
gastric emptying and motility disorders associated with
ies,orintestinalmassesorthickenings),non-Glcauses
retrogradetransitofbileoringesta arelesswellde
including thyroid(cervical nodules incats),liver(jaun-
fined.Delayed gastric emptying is caused by outflow
dice,hepatomegaly)orkidney（renomegaly,lumpyr
obstructionordefectivepropulsion(Figure19.18)and
small) disease and the systemic effects of vomiting
isusuallysuspectedbythevomitingof food>8and
(e.g.dehydration,weakness).
often 10-16 hours after ameal.
Diagnosis
The diagnostic approach is to confirm delayed gastric
Cause
emptying and to detect causes of gastricoutflow ob-
Mechanism
Oufflowobstruction
Congenital stenosis
ingnon-gastric disordesassociatedwithdefective
Foreignbodies
propulsion.Historical ard physical findings are com
Hypertrophy of pyloric mucosa
binedwithclinicopathologicaltesting.plainradiography
Granuloma
and ultrasonography.
Polyps
Neoplasia
Clinicopathological testing: Haematology, serum
Extra-gastricmasses
biochemistry,urinalysis, faecal analysis (e.g.para-
Gastric diltation and volvulus (GDV)
sites,parvovirus)and serology (e.g.FeLV)help to
Pancreatitis
detectnon-Gl causesofvomitingor delayedgastric
Defectivepropulsion
Gastric disorderse.ggastitis,urs,
emptying,and determine the consequencesofvomit-
neoplasia, gastric dilatation/GDV)
ing.Laboratoryfindingsvarydependingontheseverity
Gastroenteritis
ofvomitingandcompletenessofpyloricobstruction,as
Peritonitis
wellasthepresenceofdisordersassociatedwithblood
Pancreatitis
Metabolic hykalamia hycalcam
lossor inflammation.The CBC isoften normal,but
hypcadrenocoricism)
anaemia may accompany gastric ulcers or neoplasia.
Nervous inhibition (irauma, pain, stress?)
Hyperglobulinaemiamaybepresentwheretheoutflow
Dysautonomia
obstruction is secondary to fungal granuloma.The
Surgery
presenceofhypochloraemia,hypokalaemiaandmeta-
Drugs (e.g anticolinergics, nacotis)
bolic alkalosis,with or without aciduria,should in-
Idiopathic
crease suspicion of anupperGlobstructionorpotential
hypersecretion of gastric acid.
19.18
Causes of delayed gastric emptying.
Diagnosticimaging:Radiographyisessentialto con-
firm theretentionof food orfluid in thestomach>8
Clinical signs
hours after a meal and to detect extra-gastric disor-
Vomitingof food some time afteringestion(>8hours)
ders, such as peritonitis. Contrast radiography can be
is the most common sign.Vomiting may be projectile
used to detectmural abnormalities and to confirm a
withpyloric stenosis.Abdominal distension,weight
suspicionofgastric obstruction whenplainradiographs
loss,melaena,abdominaldiscomfort,distension,bloat
are inconclusive(see Figures 19.7and 19.19).
ing and anorexia aremorevariablypresent.
Theclinical details and history maybehelpful in
irregularity of the stomach suggestive of neoplasia,
narrowing downthecause:
granuloma or hypertrophy (see Figure 19.8).Ultra-
soundexaminationmayalsorevealradiolucentforeign
Development of vomiting atweaningraises the
objects and detect non-gastriccausesof delayed emp-
possibility ofpyloric stenosis
tying(e.g.pancreatitis)
170
Chapter 19Diseasesof the stomach
19.20
The use of barium imoregnated polyethylene
sphercs (BIPS) to evaiuate gastric emptying.
19.19
This radiograph snows the accumulation of BiPS in the
gastric body.
Markec retention
of barium in a cat
Scintigraphic techniques are generally considered
withdelayed
gastric emptying
restricted toreferral institutions.Ultrasonographycanbe
associatedwilh
submucosal
useful fordetectinggastricwall abnormalitiesandmeas-
infitrationwith
uring contractileactivity.A testemploying13C-octanoic
neutrophils.
acid hasbeen evaluated in humans and dogs and found
toreflect gastric emptying.he times are slightly greatr
sorbed andmetabolizedbefore13COisliberated.
Treatment
Treatment of gastric emptying disorders is directed
at the underlying cause.Gastriculcers,erosions and
inflammation should be investigated andmanaged
medicaly(asdescribed above).Foreignbodies should
beremoved eitherendoscopicallyorsurgically.Pyloric
Endoscopy isusuallyfavouredoverradiographic
stenosis, polyps, and hypertrophic gastropathy that
procedures for confirming gastric outflow obstruction
isnot associated withhypergastrinaemia,areman
and gastricand duodenalcauses ofdecreased propul-
aged surgically.
sion (e.g.ulcers, gastritis). However, endoscopy is
Whenhypertrophicgastropathy,ulcersorerosions,
hampered by the administration ofbarium contrast
or excessive gastricjuice arevisualized atendoscopy,
media,and so is often performed first. Endoscopic
intravenous H antagonists can be given during the
biopsyislimited tothesuperficialmucosa,andsurgical
endoscopic procedure to try to prevent postoperative
perforation or oesophagitis.Neoplasia,polyps and
diagnosisofgranulomatous,neoplasticorhypertrophic
granulomasmayrequire extensive gastricresection
conditions (see Figure 19.17).
and Billothprocedures(seeBSAVA ManualofCanine
GastricpH and serum gastrin:Measurement of
andFeline Abdominal Surgery).
gastricpH and serumgastrin canhelp to differentiate
Dietarymodification:Dietarymodificationtofacilitate
trophyassociatedwith hypergastrinaemia.
gastricemptying may bebeneficial irrespective of
cause.Small amountsofsemi-liquid,proteinandfat
Additional techniques:More sophisticatedproce-
restricteddiets(e.g.anintestinaldiseasediet'blended
durestoevaluategastricemptyingandmotilitydirectly
withwaterandmixedwith anequalvolumeofboiled
areusuallyemployedtodeterminewhethervomitingis
rice)fed at frequent intervalsmayfacilitate emptying.
due to an undefined gastric motility disorder and to
optimize prokinetic therapy (Figure 19.9).
Prokinetics:Innon-obstructivesituationsgastricemp-
Contrast radiography procedures are readily avail-
tying can be enhanced, and duodenogastric refux
ablebutarehamperedbythewidevariabilityinemp-
inhibited,byprokineticagentssuchasmetoclopramide,
tying times for barium in liquid or meal form.The
cisapride,erythromycin or ranitidine (see Chapter 28).
administrationofbarium impregnatedpolyethylene
There arenocontrolledtrialsindogs andcatsthathave
spheres(BIPS)is asimplifiedcontrast procedure suited
evaluated the efficacy of different prokinetics in differ-
to routine clinical practice as it requires fewer radio-
ent disease states
graphsthanatraditionalbariumseriesandisstandard-
Thechoiceofprokineticdependson whethera
ized intermsof testperformanceand interpretation.
central anti-emetic effect isrequired (e.g.metoclo-
However,theutilityofBiPSinclinicalpatientsremains
pramide),whether a combined antacidprokinetic is
to be determined (Figure 19.20).
indicated (e.g. ranitidine), or whether treatment with
171
Chapter19Diseases of the stomach
oneagenthasbeenineffectiveorcausedadverse
effects(e.g.behaviouralchanges withmetoclopramide).
Tumour
Mostcommon
Median
Reported breed
location
Where trueprokineticactivityisrequiredcisaprideand
age
predisposition
erythromycin appeartobe themostefficacious.Treat-
(years)
ment trialswithprokineticsshouldprobablybestruc-
Adenocarcinoma
Pyloricantrum;
10
Belgian Shepherd
turedtolastbetween5and10daystodetermine
lessercurvature
Dog;Rough Collie
benefit. A diary of clinical signs and the objective
Staffordshire Bull
assessment of gastric emptying,using the tests de-
Terier;Norwegian
Lundehund
treatment.Combination therapy(e.g.erythromycinand
Leiomyoma
Cardia
16
Beagle
cisapride) isnotrecommended dueto thepotential for
Leiomyosarcoma
Not datermned
adverse drug interactions.
7
None
Lymphosarcoma
esna
10
None
Metoclopramidehascentralanti-emetic
properties,inadditionto itsprokinetic activityn
19.21
Characteristics of gastric neoplasia in dogs.
thestomachand upperGl tract,and is frequently
an initial choice inpatients with underlying
metabolicdiseasesassociatedwithvomiting and
Benign tumours
delayed gastric emptying.However,
Caninegastricleiomyoma isa tumourofolddogs
metoclopramidemayonlyfacilitatetheemptying
(medianage 16years)and many are discovered
of liquids and is less effective in promoting
organizedgastroduodenal andintestinalmotility
forGlbleedingandmicrocyticanaemia.Adenomatous
than cisapride.
polyps(Figure19.22)arerare in dogs but have been
Cisapride has no central anti-emetic effects but
reportedasraised,sessileandpedunculated,single
is generallymore potent in promoting the gastric
ormultiple growths inthe stomach.Themost common
emptying of solids than metoclopramide;
site is the terminalpyloricantrum andwhilemost
however,it does have more drug interactions and
are discovered incidentally,they may also cause
itsavailabilityislimited.
signsof Gl upset with vomiting.Benign Gl neoplasia
Erythromycin releases motilin and acts at
in the catoccurs at a much lowerfrequency than in
motilin receptors,and mimics phasellof the
thedog,whereup to36%ofallGlneoplasia is
interdigestive migrating myoelectric complex
reported to be benign.
(MMC)promoting the emptyingof solids.
Nizatidine and ranitidine have prokineticactivity
attributed to an anti-cholinesterase activity.
19.22
A suspected motility disorder,characterized by
Benign gastric
duodenogastric reflux,is thought to account for a
tumours.(a)An
ulcerated gastric
syndromeknown asthebiliousvomiting syndrome.
eiomiyoma
Affected dogsusually vomit early in the morning.
(arrowed)in the
Remission may be achieved by feeding the animal late
carda of a dog.
at night.Prokineticagents mayalsobe employed.
(b) Adenomalous
Theprognosisforpatientswith delayed gastric
oolyp(arrowed)
emptying depends on the cause.
in thepyloric
cutlow tract of a
dog
Gastric neoplasia
a
Gastric neoplasia represents less than 1% of all re-
ported canine and felineneoplasms.Malignanttumours
aremore commonthanbenign tumoursandmost
typesofgastricneoplasmshavebeenreported to
occur more frequently in males,except adenomas;
whichoccurmorefrequentlyinfemales.Gastricmalig-
nanciesreported are:
Adenocarcinoma:diffuse;intestinalor tubular
Leiomyosarcoma
Lymphosarcoma (LSA)
Fibrosarcoma
Rare anaplastic sarcomas
Gastricextramedullary plasmacytoma.
Figure19.21summarizestheprevalence,breedpre-
disposition anddistribution of gastric tumoursin dogs.
172
Chapter 19Diseasesof thestomach
Malignanttumours
localized intheGl tract andcarryingamuchbetter
prognosis than large cell lymphoma. In both dogs and
Adenocarcinoma:Malignantadenocarcinoma is the
cats,lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflammationhasbeen
most common gastric neoplasm in dogs.Gastric ad-
found to precede or coexist with gastricLSA and ithas
enocarcinoma isextremelyrare incats.Thepeak age
beenhypothesized,butnot proven,that it isarecan-
of dogswith gastriccarcinomashasbeenreported to
cerous change in the Gl tract.The development of
befrom11-12years,witharangeof3-13yearsand
gastric LSA in response to chronic antigenic stimula-
an average age of 9-10 years.A breed predilection for
tionand inflammation isexemplifiedbygastricmu-
gastric carcinoma in related Belgian Shepherd Dogs,
cosal-associatedlymphoid tissue(MALT) lymphoma
Rough Collies,Chow Chows and Staffordshire Bull
in humanswith Helicobacter pylori-associated gastri-
Terriers has been suggested.NorwegianLundehunds
tis.Whether a similar situation is present in dogs and
with atrophic gastritis also seem over-represented,
catsremains tobe determined.
tumorigenesis as it does in humans.Gastric carcino-
Leiomyosarcoma:These are slow growing tumours
masof dogsoccurmost commonlyin thelessercurva-
ofsmoothmuscleorigin.Themedianageofaffected
tureandpyloricregionas annularor stenosinglesions,
dogs is>10years.Neitherbreednorsexpredilection
andmetastasisisfrequentwithinvolvementof lymph
has beenreported forgastricleiomyosarcoma.Inva-
nodes, liver and sometimes the lungs (Figure 19.23;
sion of the gastric wall by leiomyosarcomas is often
see Chapter 4).
diffuse.Thesetumoursmaycauseulceration,grossly
Therearethreemorphologicalpatternsofdistribution:
resembling adenocarcinomas,ormay appearas dis-
crete masses.Themedian survival of these dogs was
Diffuselyinfiltrating non-ulceratinglesions
10months (ranging from 1 month to7years).Of the
resembling a“leather bottle
stomach/small intestine group,29% eventually diedof
Localized,raised thickenedplaqueoftenwith an
leiomyosarcoma. Leiomyosarcoma and leiomyoma
elevated excavating central ulcer
havebeenassociatedwithparaneoplastichypogly-
Raised,polypoid sessile lesionprojecting into the
caemia and seizurespresumeddue to theproduction
lumenof the stomach.
of insulin-like growth factors.
Twohistological typesofgastriccarcinoma exist in
Clinicalfindings
humans, the diffuse type and the intestinal or tubular
Themost common clinical signs associated with gas-
type.The diffuse type consists of widespread random
tricneoplasia are chronic vomiting,weight loss,ano-
infiltratesofneoplasticcellsdispersedbetweenstro-
rexia,diarrhoea,andhaematemesis,melaenarpallr
mal elementsof thegastricwall.The intestinal type is
if ulceration ispresent.Some dogs willalso show
characterizedbya tubular,glandularstructure.These
abdominalpainoradistendedabdomen.WithGI LSA
sametwoclassifications havebeenshownto exist in
theonsetofclinicalsignsisofteninsidiousandgradu-
dogs with the diffuse type being more common.
allyincreasesinseverity,becomingrefractorytosymp-
tomatic treatment.
Lymphosarcoma:Thisis themostcommon Glmalig-
nancy in cats and dogs and often involves several
Diagnosis
segmentsof theintestinaltract,including thestomach.
In dogs the gastric tumour can be described as diffuse
Clinicopathological testing:Findings in dogs and
ornodularwith thediffuse infiltratebeing morecom-
cats with gastric cancer include anaemia (which may
mon(see Figure 19.23).Concurrentinvolvementofthe
be microcytic and non-regenerative),hyperglobulin-
liver,regional lymphnodes,mall intestineandbone
aemiaandhypoalbuminaemia.Changes in electrolyte
marrowiscommon.Feline gastricLSAis usuallyFeLV-
and acid-basebalancemaybesecondarytovomiting
negative.Ithasbeen recently categorized aslarge cell
orgastricoutflowobstruction.Metastaticdisease can
or small cell,with small cell lymphoma being more
be accompanied by changes in target organfunction.
(c)
19.23
Malignant gastric tumours.Encosccpic appearance of(a) ciffuse gastric adenocarcinoma(arrcwed),(b) focal
gastricadenocarcinoma（arrowed)and(c)gastric lymphoma with infiltrationof all rugaein thevisual field.
173
Chapter 19  Diseases of the stomach
Gastric LSA in cats may occur along with a variety of
 6 months from recurrent or metastatlc disease. Leiomy-
diseases such as pancreatitis, hepatic disease and
 osarcoma is an exception and carries a good to excel-
 intestinal inffammation.
lent prognosis if the mass is surgically resectable. Even
if gross metastasis is evident at surgery a favourable
Diagnostic imaging: Survey radiography may be
outcome may be achieved because the fumour is slow
completely normal or suggest focal gastric wall thick-
growing. Survival in dogs with stomach, small intestinal,
ening, an abdominal mass, or evidence of peritonitis,
splenic and caecal leiomyosarcama ranges from 0-47
rupture of a viscus, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly or
months after surgery, and the median survival is 12.5
 months. Gl lymphosarcoma has a poor prognosis in
thickeningorirregularitiesthat forewamtheendoscopist
dogs. In cats the prognosis for Gl lymphosarcoma
the lesion may be more submucosal or muscular than
depends on whether the tumour is small or large cell,
Superficial (see Figure 19.8). Lymphadenopathy or
with smallcellymphomas achieving substantial remis-
regional metastasis may be evident. Gastroscopy is
sion when treated with chlorambucil and prednisolone.
able to detect most gastric tumours efficiently and has
Large cellymphoma istreated with combination cyclical
largaly replaced contrast radiography (see Chapter 4).
chemotherapy and carries a much poorer prognosis.
LSA is seen as a diffuse, smooth or cobblestone-
like thickening of the rugae with a mucosa that is
References and further reading
pink or white (see Figure 19.23), and may have
scattered petechial or ecchymotic haemorrhages.
AllenA,FtemstromG,GamerAandKivilaaksoE[1993)Gastroduodenal
Gastric carcinomas tend to be focal dark pink to
mucosal prolection. Physiological Aeviews 73, 823-857
 red masses that may appear slightly
pedunculated. Discoloured purple to black areas
of shori-term concurent administration of meloxicam and
indicate haemorrhage, whereas yellow to brawn
dexamethasoneinhealthydogs.AmcricanJournalofVeterinary
 foci often represent necrotic ulcers. In some
Research 64, 1369-1375
Brockman DJ,Washabau RJ and Drobatz KJ(1995) Canine gastric
 cases, lesions may be submucosal and the
endoscopist may form the impression that
cases [1986-1992).Joumalof the American Veterinary Medicu!
something is indenting the stomach or that the
Association 207, 460-464
Buddington RK (200s) Postnatal changes in bacterial populations in
wall seems less distensible or thickened.
the gastraintestinal tract of dogs.American JournalofVeterinary
 Multiple biopsy specimens should be taken from 
Research 64, 646-651
Couto GC, Autgars HC,Sharding RG and Rojko J (1989)
suspicious areas and masses should be sampled
Gastrointestinal lymphome in 20 dogs: a retrospective study.
several times in the same place to get deeper into
Journal of Veterinary internai Medicine 3, 73-78
CoverT,ergD,BlaseMandMobleyHLT(2001)Hallcobacterpyor
fissue, as gastric tumours may have superficial
pathogenesis.In:Principles of BacterialPaihogenesis,ed.E
necrosis, inflammation and ulceration. Biopsy 
Groisman, Ppp.509-558.Academlc Press, New York
samples should be taken from the periphery rather
than the centre of the ulcer to avoid perforation.
in the stomach and duodenum. Gastroenterology Clinics of North
DavisMS,WllardMD,snSL,MulloughSMMandsage
Am0nca30,877-894
Surgical biopsy should be perfomed where the
Roberts J and Payton ME(2003) Efficacy of omeprazole for the
gross endoscopic appearance does not match the
histological diagnosis, e.g. a large focal gastric 
dogs, Journal of Veterinary internai Medicine 17, 163-166
mass with an endoscopic biopsy result of
lymphoplasrnacytic gastritis.
concenlralion as a predictor af gastric necrosls and survival
1998).Journalof fheAmericanVeterinary MedicalAssaciatian
When endoscopyis notavailable contrast radiogra-
215, 49-52
El-Omar EM, Rabkin CS, Gammon MD,Vaughan TL,Risch HA,
phy may be useful with features of gastric neoplasia,
Schoenberg JB,Stanford JLMayne ST,Goedert J,Blot WJ,
including thickening of the gastric wall filling defects
Fraumenl JF and Chow WH(2003) Increased risk of non-cardia.
and derangement of normal rugal pattern, and delayed
gastric emptying with retention and irregular pooting of
polymorphisms. Gasraenteroiogy 124, 1193-1201
FallerG,tiningerranzleinJMaH,KrauT,nsenJa
barium (see Figure 19.7). Surgery is then performed to
sample the affected area.
Helicobacter pyior infection: implications of histologlcal and
cllnical parameters of gastrilis. Gut41, 619-623
Fox LE, Rosenthal RC, Twedt DC, Dubielzig RR, MacEwen EG and
Treatment
Grauer GF (199o) Plasma histaminc and gastrin concentralions
in 17 dogs with mast cel tumors. Journai of Veterinary Interna!
Except for LSA, surgery is the most common form of
Medicine 4, 242-246
GlickmanLT,Glickman NW,Schellnherg DB,aghavan Mand Lc
are presented ata late stage of disease and the lesions
are often too extensive to resect. Resection may be
Medlcal Association 217, 1492-1499
curative if the affected area is localized or if the tumour
Glickman LT, Glickman NW, Schellenberg DB, Raghavan M and Lee
is benign. If a widespread area is involved, a partial
TL(2000b)Incidence of and breed-ralated risk factorsforgastric
dilatation-volvulus in dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
gastrectomy or antrectomy followed by gastrcduode-
Medica! Association 216, 40-45
nostomy (Billroth I) may be attempted.
Grooters AM (2003) Pythiosis, lagenidiosis, and zygomycosis in
Gastric adenocarcinoma often metastasizes and
small animals. Veterinary Clinics of North Amarica: Smal Anima!
Practice 33, 695-720
regionat lymph nodes and liver should be inspected and
Guiford WG, Jones BR, Markwell PJ, Arthur DG, Collet MG and
biopsied. Even with surgery the prognosis for malignant
Harte JG (2001) Food sensitivily in cals with chronic idiopathic
gastrointestinal problems.JournalofVeterinaryintemai Mcdicine
gastric neoplasia is poor with most patients dying within
15, 7-13
174
Chapter 19  Diseases of the stomach
 Guilford WG and Strombeck GR (1996) Chronic gastrlc dlseasa. In:
and Del Piero F (2001) Histologicai and immunohlstochemical
identificationof different Hclicobacterspecics inthe gastric mucosa
of catsJournalofVetarinaryDiagnosticInvestigalions1312
Hall JA and Washabau RJ (1999) Diagnosis and treatmenl of gastric
motility disorders.Veterinary Clinics of North Amarica: Sma!
and ihe intestinal mucosa. European Journal of Cinicai Nutrlilion
Animal Practice 29, 377-395
56 Supp1 3, S60-S64
Happonen I, Linden J, Saari S, Karjalainen M;, Hanninen ML, Jalava 
Slmpson KW (1999) Gasirinomas. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary
Kand Westermarck E (199B)Detectionandeflects of helicobacters
Therapy Xifl, ed. JD Bonagura, pp. 617-621. WB Saunders.
in healtry dogs and dogs with signs of gastritis. Journaf of the
Philadelphia
AmericanVeterinary MedicaAssociation213,1767-1774
Simpson KW, CenterSA and Birnbaum N (20c0a) Fluid and electrolyte
Kapatkin AS, Mullen HS, Matthiesen DT and Patnaik AK (1992)
disturbances In gastrointestinal, pancreatic and hepatic disease.
Leiomyosarcoma in dogs: 44 cases (1983-1988). Jounai of fthe
In: Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-base Disorders in Smatl Animal
American Veterinary Medical Assaciation 201, 1077-1079
Practice, 2 adn, ed. S DiBartola, pp. 330-374. WB Saunders,
Lamb CR (1999) Recent developments in diagnostic imaging of the
Philadelphia
gastrointestinal tract of the dog and cal. Veterinary Clinics of
 Simpson KW, Neiger R, DeNovo R ang Sherding RG (2000b) ACVIM
NorthAmerica:Small AnimalPraclice29,307-342
Consensus statement: 1he relatlonship of Helicobacter spp. to
Lauwers GY (2003) Defining the pathologic diagnosis of metaplasia,
gastric disease in dogs and cats. Journail of Veterinary internal
atrophy, dysplasia, and gastric adenocarcinoma. Journal of
Medlcine14,223-227
Clinicai Gasiroenterofogy 36, S37-S43
Slappendel RJ, Van der Gaag I. Vannes JJ, Van den Ingh TSGAM
LindholmC,Quiding-JarbrinkM,LonrothH,HamletAandSvennerholm
AM (1998) Localcytokine response in Helicobacter pylor-infected
gestrilis(FSHG),anewlyrecogniseddisease in the dog (Drentse
subjects. Infectiours immunology 66, 5964-5971
Patnjshond). Veterinary Quartery 13, 30-40Soll AH and
Lloyd KKC and Debas HT (1994) Peripheral regulation of gastric acid
Berglindh T (1994) Receptors that regulale gastric acid-
secretion. In: Physiology ofthe Gastrointestinal Tract, 3u edn, cd.
secretory function. ln: Physiologyof the Gastrointestina! Tract,
LR John5on, pp. 1185-1226. Raven Press, New York
3d edn, ed. LR Johnson, pp. 1i39-1169. Raven Press, New
MahnyMMrSottSMnglSJrowandP
York
DG (1995) Alimentary lymphoma in cats: 28 cases (1988-1993).
 Steiner JM, Berridge BR, Wojcieszyn J. and Williams DA (2002)
Joumal or the American Vcterinary Medicat Association 207.
Cellular immunolocalization of gastic and pancreatio lipase in
1593-1598
variouslissuesobtainedfromdogs.AmericanJournalof Veterinary
Muir ww (1982) Acid-base and electrolyte dislurbances in dogs with
Roscaroh 63, 722-727
gastric dilatatian-volvulus. Journal of the American Veterinary
 Straubinger RK, Grelter A, McDonough SP, Gerold A, Scanziani E,
Medical Association 181, 229-231
Soldati S, Dailidiene D, Dailide G, Berg DE and Simpson KW
Murtaugh RJ, Matz ME, Labato MA and Boudrieau RJ (1993) Use of
synthetic prostaglandin-e1 (misoprostol) forprevention of aspirin-
responses in the early slages of Heficobacter pylor infection.
induced gastroduodenal ulceration in arthntic dogs. Journal of
Infectious immunology71, 2693-2703
the American Veterinary Medical Association 202, 251-256
 Neiger R. Gaschen F and Jaggy A (2000) Gastric mucosal lesions in
Helicobacter spp. infeclion in cats: evaluation of the humoral
dogs wlth acute intervertebral dlsc disease: characterization and
immune response and prevalence of gastric Helicobacter spp.
effecls of omeprazole or misoprostol. Journai of Veterinay
Veterinary Microbiology 79, 253-265
Internal Medicine 14, 33-36
Suchodolski JS, Steiner JM, Ruaux CG, Boari A and Williams DA
Neiger R, Seiler G and Schmassmann A (1999) Use ol a urea breath
(2002) Purification and partial characterization of canine
test to evaluate short-tarm treatments for cats naturaly infected
pepsinogen A and B. American Journal of Veterinary Research
with Helcobacter heirmanni. American Journal of Veterinary
63,1585-1590
Research 60, 880-883
Sullivan M, Lee R, Fisher EW, Mash AS, and McCanlish 1AP (1987)
Neiger R and Simpson KW (2000) Helicobacterinfection in dogs and
A study of 31 cases of gastric carcinoma in dogs. Vetcrinary
cats - what do we realy know? Journal of Veterinary internat
Record 120, 79-83
Medicina 14, 125-133
Priestnali SL, Winberg B, Spohr A, Neuhaus B, Kuffer M, Wiedmann
biopsiesinclinically heallhy andvamiting dogs. Canadian Journa!
Mand Simpson KW (2004) Evaluationof'Helicobacter heilmanni
of Veterinary Research 53, 468-472
subtypes in the gastric mucosas of cats and dogs. Jourmal of
van der Gaag I and Happe RP (1989) Follow-up studies by peroral
Clinical Microbiology 42, 2144-2151
gastric biopsies and necropsy invomiting dogs. Canadian Journal
Richter KP (2003) Feline gastrointestinallymphoma. Veleniriary Clinics
of Veterinary Research 53, 468-472
of North America: Small Animal Practice 33(5], 1083-1098
Ward MP, PalronekGJ andGllckman LT (2003) Benefits ofprophylactic
RohreRRCFAxh
and Burrows CF (1999) Eficacy of misoprostol in prevention of
gastric hemorrhage in dogs treatedwlthhigh doses of
Washabau RJ (2003) Gastroinlestinai motility disorders ang
methylprednisolone sodium succinate. American Joumal of
gastrointestinal prokinetic tharapy.
Veterinary Clinics of Norh
Veterinary Research 60, 982-985
America:SmaffAnimalPraclice33,1007-1028
Rossi G, Rossi M, Vilali CG, Forluna D, Burroni D, Pancotto L.
Williams J and Niles J (in preparalion) BSAVA Manual of Canine and
Capecchi S, Sozzi S, Renzoni G, Braca G, Del Gludice G,
Fallne Abdorninai Surgery. BSAVA Publications, Gloucester
RappuoliR, Ghiara P and Taccini E [1999] Aconventional beagle
Wolfe MMLichtenstein DRand SinghG[1999} Gastrointestinal
dog model for acute and chranlc infection wih Helicobacter
toxicity of nonsteroidal anlinflammatory drugs. New Engiand
pyiori. Infectious immunology 67, 3112-3120
Joumnal of Medicine 340, 1888-1899
Sachs G (1994) The gastric H+/K+ -ATPase. In: Physiology of the
Gastrointestinai Tract, 3 edn, ed. LA Johnson, pp. 1119-1138.
PS (2003) A review of methods for asscssmenl of the rate of
Raven Press, New York
gastric emptying in the dog and cat. Joumai of Veterinary interna!
Scanziani E, Slimpson KW, Monestiroli S, Soldati S, Srauss-Ayali D
Medicine 17, 609-621
175
Diseases of the small intestine
Alexander J. German
Introduction
cells involved in the abscrption processes(Figure20.1).
Thebrushborder(ormicrovillusmembrane,MVM)on
Diseasesof thesmallintestine(Sl)arecommon indogs
theluminalsurfaceoftheenterocytescontainsdigestive
and cats,and cause a range of signs including diar-
enzymes,as well as carrier proteins that assist in
rhoea,vomitingandweightloss(orfailure to thrive).The
transport of nutrients.The turnoverof both enterocytes
initialaimofdiagnosticinvestigationsistoexclude
andmicrovillarproteins isinfluenced byluminal factors,
diseasesofotherorgansorbodysystems;more specific
such as pancreatic enzymes,bile salts and bacteria.
diagnostictestscan thenbeused to obtain a definitive
Newenterocytesareproducedinthecryptsof Lieberkuhn
diagnosis.However,given the current limitations in
and mature as theymigrateup thevilli.Those at the top
testingsuchadefinitivediagnosisissometimesdifficult
of thevilli become mature absorptive cells,whilst old
toachieve.In thesecircumstancestreatment trialsmay
enterocytes are sloughed from thevillous tips.The
providemorediagnosticinformation.
wholeprocess lasts3-4days innormal individuals.
Digestion and absorption of food
Structure and function
Proteins
TheSl istheprincipal sitefordigestion and absorptionof
Protein digestion isinitiated in the stomachby the
nutrients,and absorptionofelectrolytesandfluids.The
enzymepepsin,althoughthisisinactivatedonceithas
villi andmicrovilli contributeto thelarge surface area,
passed into theduodenum.Intestinalprotein digestion
which facilitates absorption andassimilation ofnutri-
iscarriedout bypancreatic and MvMenzymes.as
ents.Enterocytes line thevilliandarehighlyspecialized
summarized in Figure 20.2.Oligopeptides,dipeptides,
Microvilli
Villus
Desmosome
O
Lysosomes
Peroxisome
0~
Mitochondrion
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Golgi apparatus
Nucleus
Basal-lateral
Intercellular
Crypt
membrane
space
77777
Laminapropria
11111111
20.1
Schematicdiagram of thevillusstructureof the small intestineand anenterocyte
176
Chapter20Diseases of the small intestine
Bowel lumen
Brush border
Cytosol
C
Peptidase
Oligopeptides
Pepsin
Aming
70
Trypsin
Protein-
Chymotrypsin
Amir
acids
Carboxypeptidase
Peptic
(a)
Amino
Bowel lumen
Brushborder
Cytosol
Triglycericie
Mixedmicelle
Monoglyceride
Free fatty acids
Bile salts
reabsorbed
Bile salt micelle
(b)
Bowellumen
Brush border
Cytosol
口
Maltase
Maltose
口
口
Maltotriose
口
Gluco
口
Starch
*Amylase
品
Glucose
Isomallase
Limit dextrin
口
Fructose
口
Sucrase
Fructose
Sucrose
Glucose
口
Lactase
Glucose
口
Lactose
Galactose
(c)
20.2
=carrier;italics=enzyme,*=pancreatic enzyme.
tripeptidesandfreeaminoacidsareproduced,which
fattyacidsarere-esterified to triglycerides,incorpo-
are absorbed by specific carriers in theMvM before
rated into chylomicrons and then enter the lymphatic
entering theportal circulation.
system.Mediumandshortchain fattyacids were
originallythoughttobeabsorbeddirectlyintotheportal
Lipids
circulationbut recent work has questioned this theory.
The presence of bile acids and pancreatic enzymes
(lipase,phospholipase andcholesterol esterase)are
Carbohydrates
critical inlipiddigestion and absorption in the small
Starchis themajor dietarypolysaccharide and is
intestine(seeFigure20.2).Afterabsorption,longchain
degraded by pancreatic amylase,predominantly to
177
Chapter 20
Diseases of the small intestine
maltose (see Figure 20.2).MVM enzymes digest
Significantfluid and electrolyte absorption also
maltose andotherdietarydisaccharides(lactoseand
occurs in the colon (see Chapter 21),which helps to
sucrose)toconstituentmonosaccharides,whichcan
compensate in small intestinal disease. Diarrhoea,
then be absorbed by specific transporter mecha-
resulting fromsuboptimal small intestinal fluid absorp-
nisms.Subsequent to this,themonosaccharidesare
tionorexcessivefluidsecretion,canonlyoccurwhen
transportedacrossthebasolateralmembraneintothe
thiscolonicreserveisovercome.Further,signsoflarge
portal circulation.
intestinal disease canarisesecondarytosmallintesti-
nal disease, since products of abnormal small intesti-
Fluids and electrolytes
nal function (e.g.hydroxylated fatty acids and
Thenet fluxof fluid andelectrolytesacross thegastro-
deconjugated bile acids) canimpair colonic absorption
intestinal(Gl) tractreflects a balancebetween secre-
or stimulate colonic secretion.
tory and absorptiveprocesses.There isnet secretion
of fluid in theproximal Sl,whilst netresorption occurs
Vitamin andmineralabsorption
in the distal SI.
Vitamins
Intestinal secretion
Lipid-solublevitamins:Lipid-soluble vitamins(A,D,
Fluid issecreted by the enterocyteswithin the crypts,
Eand K)are dissolvedinmixedmicelles andpassively
mediatedbyelectrogenictransportofchlorideacross
absorbed across theMvM into the lymphatic system.
thebasolateralmembraneandsubsequenteffluxthrough
Therefore, any disease process resulting in malassimi-
MVMchloridechannels into theintestinal lumen.
lation of fats may also lead to fat-solublevitamin
deficiencies,especiallyvitamin K.
Absorption and transport processes
Intestinal absorptionof fluid and electrolytes isthe
Water-solublevitamins:Water-solublevitamins,no-
combinedresultofpassive absorption,active absorp-
tablymostBvitamins,are absorbedbypassive diffu-
tion and solvent drag.Therelative importance of all of
sion,facilitated transport or active transport (Figure
these mechanisms is site-dependent and differs along
20.3)into the enterocytesand subsequently theportal
the lengthof theSl.There arealsodifferencesalong
circulation.Theabsorption of vitamin B12(cobalamin)
thevillus-crypt axis.
is complexandisdiscussed laterin thechapter.
Stomach
Stomach
?
?
。
Proximal
[]
Proximal
small
small
Pancreas
intestine
Pancreas
intestine
X
lamin
Noo
Dietaryprotein
Mid-small
Mid-small
R-protein
intestine
intestine
。。。
OX
Intrinsicfactor
。
。
Intrinsicfactor
Folate deconjugase
XM
Distal
Fciatecarriers
Distal
small
X
small
intestine
intestine
X
o
(a)
(b)
20.3
Assimilationo fclate and cobalamin.(a) Dietary folate ispresent in the dietasa conugated form(with glutamate
Tesidues).This conjugate is digestcd by folatc deconjugasc,an enzyme on the microvilarmembrane that
removes al butcneresidue,before uptakevia specific carrerssituated in themid-srall intesline.(b)Following ingestion,
This complex s ccgraded by pancreatc proteases in the smal intestine and cobalamin transfers on tc intrinsic factor (IF).
which is synthesized oy the pancreas. Cobalamin-IF complexes pass along the intestinc until the distal smallintestine,
where cobalamin is transported across themucosa and into theportal circulation.
178
Chapter 20 Diseases of the small intestine
Small intestinal microflora
Pathophysiology disease
The bacterial micoflora increases in both diversity and
mass from the duodenum to colon and is regulated by
Given that optimal small Intestinal function relies upon
various factors including intestinal motility, substrate
the function of other organs and body systems (e.g.
availability, bacteriocidal and bacteriostatic secretions
(e.g. gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions), and the
can be the result of primary intestinal tract disease or
presence of a functional ileocolic valve. Disruption of
secondary to disorders of other body organs. Further,
any of these factors may lead to qualitative or quanti
infectious agents can cause intestinal dystunction
tative bacterial flora abnormalities.
through a variety of mechanisms:
The normal smail intestinal flora is a diverse
mixture of aerobic, anaerobic and facultative anaero-
 Parvovirus destroys dividing crypt cells and
bic bacteria. Common species include Staphylococ-
 causes severe villous atrophy, which affects
Cus spp., Streptococcus spp., Enterobacteriaceae,
absorption, secretion and mucosal barrier
Escherichia coli, Clostridium spp. and Bacteroides
integrity. Clinical consequences are severe
 spp, with a greater proportion of obligate anaerobic
because repair cannot keep pace with ongoing
bacteria being reported in cats than in dogs. The total
damage
upper smal intestinal bacterial counts of healthy cats
Coronavirus only affects villus tips and damage
range from 102-108 coiony-forming units (CFU)/ml,
Is less severe, affecting absorption rather than
and are higher than those reported in humans
crypt regeneration
(<10*-105 CFU/ml). However, there is no clear con-
Bacteria, such as E. coli, may cause little or no
sensus as to what constitutes a 'rormal' Sl population
structural damage but they can stimulate excessive
in healthy dogs, and some studies suggest that healthy
intestinal secretion through endotoxin production.
dogs can harbour up to 109 CFU/ml bacteria in the
proximal Sl. Therefore, the 'cut-off for normal flora in
The most frequent signof smal intestinal disease is
dogs and cats cannot be extrapolated from humans,.
diarrhoea, defined as passage of faeces containing
and descriptions of small intestinal bacterial over-
piny ul sseaiou ue ui buginsau pue jatem ssaoxa
growth (SIBO) in dogs using a cut-off value of 105
volume or frequency of bowel movements. A number of
CFU/ml may be flawed.
 pathophysiological mechanisms may be involved:
The resident bacterialflora influencesdevelopment
Osmotic diarrhoea results from water retention
processes, stimulates the development of the enteric
 secondary to unabsorbed substances in the
immune system and can protect against pathogen
intestinaf lumen, which itself is usually due to 
Invasion. Healthy individuals are immunologically tol-
 maldigestion and malabsorption
erant of this stable flora, and loss of tolerance may
Secretory diarrhoea results from hypersecretion
contribute to the pathogenesis of chronic enteropathies.
of fluids and electrolytes by crypt enterocytes
e.g. inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
and occurs in response to stimulation by
pathogenic bacteriai toxins or hydroxylated
Motility
fatty acids
Intestinal motility results from the coordinated con-
Permeability diarhoea is characterized by
traction of smooth muscle in response to neuro-
increased mucosal permeability, often due to
humoral and neurochemical input from the enteric
mucosal inflammatory or infiltrative disorders.
nervous system. Segmental contractions slow pas-
Motity disorders are usually the result of
decreased segmental motility rather than
sage of intestinal contents to allow mixing of nutrients
and enzymes ensuring good digestion and absorp-
increased peristaltic activity.
tion. Peristaltic contractions are primarily designed to
However, in many cases multiple mechanisms may
propel ingesta aborally. Reduced segmental motility
and peristalsis lead to rapid transit (causing diar-
be involved. For example, inflammatory disorders re-
rhoea) or delayed transit (resulting in ileus) of ingesta,
 sultin production of inflammatory mediators, which can
respectively. intestinal motility is characterized by
lead to diarrhoea through increased secretion, abnor-
three phases:
mal permeability and dysmotility.
Phase 1 - a quiescent phase
Diagnosis
Phase 2 - a phase of minor contractile activity
Phase 3 - the final phase, incorporating the 
migrating myoelectric complex (MMC or
secondary intestinal dlsturbances, the history, physi-
'housekeeper contractians').
cal examination and initial diagnostic investigations
should aim to rule out such.disorders and localize the
The final phase is induced by motilin secretion, and
disease to the small intestine (see Chapter 1 and
 is a short period of intense motor and contractile
Figure 20.4). The extent of further investigations re-
activity that sweeps undigested food and intestinal
quired depends on a number of factors, especially the
contents aborally. Motility in the fed state most closely
duration and severity of the problem. If clinical signs
resembles phase 2 fasting motility.
are acule and there are no systemic signs of illness,
179
Chapter20Diseasesof the small intestine
signalment,history and physical examination(see
Abdominal discomfort
Chapter 1).The diagnostic plan must be flexible and
Anorexia
takeaccountoftheproblemsrecorded forthe indi-
Ascites
Borborygmi
vidualpatient.
Dehydration
Furtherinvestigations
Diarhoea
Flatus
Acutesmall intestinal disease
Melaena
Oedema
The extent of diagnostic investigations depends upon
Polyphagia
the nature and severity of the clinical signs.Most
Vomiting
patientswithacutediarrhoea aresystemicallywelland
Weight loss/failure to thrive
diagnostic investigations arenotrequired.However,
some casesdorequire furtherinvestigations.Possible
20.4
Clinical signs of small inteslinal dsease.
tests include a minimum database ofpacked cell
volume (PCV), total protein, urine specific gravity,
urea,glucose andelectrolytes.Furthermore detailed
detailedinvestigations arerarelyrequired and sympto-
laboratoryevaluationsshould includehaematological
matic therapy is usually sufficient(see below).How-
andserumbiochemicalexamination,urinalysis,faecal
ever,whentheclinicalsignsarechronic(i.e.exceeding
examination,diagnosticimaging(e.g.abdominairadio-
3weeksinduration),systemicsigns arepresentorthe
graphy and ultrasonography) and specific diagnostic
patient does not respond to symptomatic therapy,
procedures(e.g.targetedfine needle aspiration,endo-
detaileddiagnosticinvestigations are justified.
scopy and exploratory coeliotomy).Other testsmay
includemeasurementoftrypsin-likeimmunoreactivity
History and clinical signs
(TLI),faecal enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Theagebreed and gnderassist instablihing t
(ELiSA)forparvovirusand anadrenocorticotropichor-
initial listofdifferential diagnoses.Forexample,young
mone (ACTH) stimulation test.
dogs aremoreprone toinfectiousdisorders,whereas
metabolicand neoplasticdiseases are morecommon
Chronic small intestinal disease
inmiddle-agedtoolderanimals.Further,certainbreeds
Diarrhoeaistermed'chranic'if clinicalsigns havebeen
are prone to different smallintestinal disorders;e.g.
present for more than 3 weeks.Preliminary investiga-
German Shepherd Dogs are prone to antibiotic-
tionsincludehaematologicalanalysis,serumbiochemi-
responsive diarrhoea andSoft Coated WheatenTerri-
cal analysis, urinalysis and taecal analysis (e.g.
ers to protein-losing enteropathy.
bacteriologicalandparasitologicalassessment).Addi-
The frequency,nature,severityand timingof clinical
tional preliminary tests may include assessment of
signs should be determined from the history,and it
serum thyroidhormoneconcentrations,ACTH stimu-
should thenbepossibleto characterizethediarrhoeaas
lation test,and feline leukaemia virus(FeLV),feline
'small intestinal’rather than‘largeintestinal(see Chap-
immunodeficiencyvirus(Fiv) andcoronavirusstatus
ter 1).However, such classification is not clear-cut
in cats.
because smallintestinal disorders can provake second-
Assumingnoabnormalities are detected oninitial
ary large intestinal diarrhoea.Information on environ-
investigations,specifictestsincluding specializedlabo-
ment,pastmedicalhistoryandhealthstatusofin-contat
ratoryinvestigations (TLI, folate and cobalamin),diag-
animals should alsobe determined.A thorough dietary
nostic imaging, biopsy and treatment trials are
history should be takenandincases with weightlossthe
warranted.Theexactapproachandorderof investiga-
amountoffoodfedshouldbeverifiedespeciallyif the
tionswill depend uponmanyfactors including financial
diet hasbeen altered during theproblem.
constraints,patient factors,available equipment and
thewishesof theowner.
Physicalexamination
Aphysical examinationheipstheclinician tolocalize
Clinicopathological findings
the diseaseprocess andenables itsseverity tobe
assessed.Thelatter canbe determinedby thede-
Haematology
meanour,attitude and hydrationstatusof thepatient.
Redbloodcell parameterswill identify and charac-
The SI cannot be directly examined during physical
terizeanyassociated anaemia,which maybe the
examinationbut careful abdominalpalpationcanpro-
resultofintestinal blood loss,secondary to'chronic
videuseful indirectinformation,especiallyincatsand
disease',or secondary to an associated haemato-
small dogs.Rectal examination enables assessment
poieticdisorder.Microcytosis,decreasedmean cor-
of faecalcharacteristics and allows collection ofmate-
puscular haemoglobin concentration (MCHC) and
thrombocytosisare common withiron deficiency
(see Chapters 16 and 22).
anaemiasecondarytochronic Glblood loss associ-
atedwith ulcerative,neoplasticorparasiticdisease.
Formulatinga problem list and diagnostic
Importantdifferential diagnosesformicrocytosisin-
plan
cludecongenital oracquiredportovascular anoma-
Aninitialproblem listandsetofdifferential diagnoses
lies.In cats,hyperthyroidism and FeLVinfectioncan
canbe constructed from informationderived from the
cause macrocytosis.
180
Chapter2o Diseasesof the small intestine
When there isevidenceof Gl haemorrhage(Figure
with hypoglobulinaemia inpratein-losingenteropathies
20.5),a haemostatic profile should be performed.
(PLEs) (Figure 20.6).However,other causes of
Oncehaemostaticdisordershavebeeneliminated,the
hypoalbuminaemia shouldbediscountedincluding he-
siteand aetiologyof thehaemorrhagecanbe deter-
patic disease,protein-losing nephropathies (PLNs),
mined by a combination of diagnostic imaging,endo-
malnutrition and blood loss.Mild tomoderate increases
scopy andexploratory coeliotomy.
in liver enzymes (e.g.alanine aminotransferase,ALT)
canbeseen incatswithhyperthyroidism,and inboth
dogs and catswithintestinal disease.Hypocholesterol-
Origin of blood
Cause
aemia can be seen in malabsorptive diseases,PLEs
Ingestion of blood
Oral; nasal; pharyngeal; haemoptysis
andotherenteropathies,whichshouldbedifferentiated
fromexocrine pancreaticinsufficiency(EPl)and hepatic
Gastrointestinal
Metaboli:uraemia,hepaticdisease
disease.Mild to moderatebile acid elevations can
erosion/ulceration
Inflammatrgastritisentertist
occasionallybeseenwithintestinaldisease,whichmay
encephalopathy,ulceration
be secondary to reactive hepatopathy, or to marked
Neoplasia:smoothmuscle,lymphoma
epithelial cell
elevations in unconjugated bile acids(seebelow).Hy-
Paraneoplasia: mast cell tumours,
poglycaemia can occasionally be seen as a
hypergastrinaemia (gastrinomas,
paraneoplastic effectof Gl smooth muscle tumours.
APUDomas)
Assayof serumTLl isessential inall casessince it will
Vascularareriovenousfistulaaneurms
enableEPI tobeexcluded(see Chapter23).
Ischaemia: hypovolaemia,
hypoadrenocorticism, thrombosis,
infarctionrfusniny
Type
Causes
Foreign bodies
Drug-induced:non-steroidal anti-
Lymphangiectasia
Primary:intestinal, generalied
inflammatory drugs
Secondary:venous hypertension (e.g.right
cardiacfailurehepaticcirhoss)
Haemostatic
Primary:thrombocytopenia,
disorders
thrombocytopathy, vWD
Infectious
Pavovirus; Saimonella
Secondary:factor deficiencies,coumarin
Structural
Intussusception
toxicity
Mixed:disseminated intravascular
Neoplasia
Lymphoma
coagulation
Inflammatory
Inflammatorybowel disease:
Causes of melaena.APUD = amine precursor
lymphoplasmacytic enteritis,eosinophiic
20.5
enteritisgranulomatousenteritis
uptake and decarboxylation;vWD=van
Willebrand's disease.
Endoparasitism
Giardia;(Ancyiostoma)
Eosinophiliamayariseinassociationwithendopara-
Gastraintestinal
Hepatic encephalopathy;neoplasia;ulceration
haemorrhage
sitism,hypersensitivitydisorders,eosinophilic enteritis,
hypoadrenocorticism andhypereosinophilicsyndrome.
However,mild eosinophilia canbeanormal finding in
20.6
Protein-losing enteropathies.
GermanShepherd Dogs.Neutrophilia witha left shift
can be seen in inflammatory disorders,whilst leuco-
Urinalysis
penia (concurrent with acute Gl signs) might suggest
Urinalysisshould alwaysbeperformed inconjunction
canine parvovirus (CPV) infection or sepsis.Lympho-
withserumbiochemicalanalysis.Urinespecificgravity
peniacanindicateconcurrentstress,lymphangiectasia
assistsin assessing hydration status andrenal func-
orimmunodeficiencysyndromes.Atypical lymphocytes
tion,whilstproteinmeasurementeliminatesPLNfrom
can occasionallybe seen in cases of lymphoma.
the differentialsofhypoalbuminaemia.Incaseswith Gl
bleeding.thepresenceof haematuria suggests a sys-
Serum biochemistry
temic haemostatic disorder.Sediment analysis can
Serumbiochemical analysisallowsdiseasesofother
detectammonium biurate orbilirubin crystals,which
body systems to be identified;i.e.renal,hepatic and
may suggest hepatic dysfunction.
endocrine disorders.Further,electrolytemeasurement
and acid-base statuscanidentify metabolic conse-
Serology
quencesof Gldisease.Concurrenthyperkalaemia and
In cats,serological tests for FeLV and FIV should
alwaysbeperformed,whilst coronavirus serologymay
althoughotherdisorders(e.g.Salmonella,whipworms)
be useful in some cases. Parvovirus serology can
can alsodemonstratesuchchanges.lnaddition,some
sometimesbeuseful,althoughisoftencomplicated by
patientswithhypoadrenocorticism can havenormal
titresderivedfromroutinevaccination.
electrolyte concentrations(atypical hypoadrenocorti-
Faecalanalyses
+.
cism),and anACTH stimulation test should always be
performedaspartof thediagnosticinvestigations.
Directmicroscopic examination of a fresh faeces
Serumbiochemical analysiswill alsoidentifyother
sample suspended insaline can detectGiardia
systemic consequences of intestinal disease including
trophozoite and Coccidia oocysts.Examinationof a
hypoalbuminaemia,which usuallyarises in combination
stained faecal smear may demonstrate clostridial
181
Chapter20Diseasesof the small intestine
endospores(suggestive of Clostridiumperfringens
enteritis) although their significance is questionable,
sincerecent studies have suggested no association
between clostridial spores,toxin production and di-
arrhoea.Demonstration of faecalclostridial endo-
toxinmayhavemore value inthediagnosisof
Clostridium-associateddiarrhoea.Faecal flotation
with salt solutionswill screenforparasitic ova of
helminths (ascarids, whipworms and hookworms).
Examination of multiplesamplesbyzincsulphate
flotationisalsorecommended todetect Giardia
cysts.Giardia antigen in faecescan be detected
using commerciallyavailableELiSAs.
(a)
Fordogswithacutegastroenteritis,a faecal ELISA
isavailabletodetectCPVinfection.Routinebacterial
culturewill detectpotential enteropathogenssuch as
Salmonella,Campylobacter and Clostridium spp.As-
says arenowavailable forenteropathogenicE.coli
(EPEC)virulence factors,although again the associa-
tionbetweentheirpresenceandclinical diseasehas
not yet been clearly established.
Given thatmelaena orfresh faecal blood isnot
always seen in caseswith chronic Glblood loss,
assessmentof faecaloccultblood canbe useful.
This test is sensitive butrequires that a meat-free
diet befed for72hoursprior tofaecal collection,to
avoid false-positive results. Certain drugs, such as
(b)
cimetidine andironsupplements,canalsogivefalse-
positiveresults.
Assessment of undigested or unabsorbed fats,
unabsorbedstarch andfaecalproteolyticactivity are
unreliable,althoughmeasurementof faecal elastase
(as a test of EPl) has recently been validated for dogs.
Diagnosticimaging
employed in clinical practice,althoughnuclear medi-
(o)
cinetechniques aresometimes available inresearch
20.7
Radiographic studies on a 10-month-old male
institutions.
Akitawithseverevomiling and diarrhcaa.
(a) Abnormal intestinal loop canreadily be icenlifiedon
Radiography
close examinalion of the plan radiograph(arrcweo).
(b) Contrast radiography highlighted a diated loop of
Survey radiography of the abdomen may enable de-
smal intestine and possible cbstructicn.(c) The intestinal
tection of foreign bodies,mass lesions,obstructive
obstructionwasconfirmedand found tobe caused by a
disorders,free peritoneal gas(e.g.due to Gl perfora-
triangular woocenobject.(Courtesy of AE Kerins and A
tion)and decreased serosal detail(duetoperitonitisor
Stell,Department ofeterinary Clinicai Sciences,
free peritoneal fluid).Thoracic radiography will screen
University cf Liverpool.)
formetastaticspread(whenappropriate),willeliminate
oesophageal disease(whenvomiting cannot be differ-
and associated organs(Figure 20.8).Intestinal mass
entiated fromregurgitation)and willassessforcardiac
lesions,intussusceptions,mesenteric lymphadeno-
disease in caseswith abdominaleffusions.
pathy and ascites can all be detected.The small
Contrast radiography can be used as an adjunct in
the investigation of Gl disease. Barium studies can
whichcanbedisruptedbyfocallesions.Wallthickness
provideinformation onGI transit,obstructivelesions,
canbemeasured and maybe markedly increased in
intestinal mass lesions or disrupted mucosal integrity.
some infiltrativediseases and wheremucosaloedema
However,a combination of good qualityplainradio-
graphy andultrasonographyusuallyprovideasmuch
ityof disease inotherabdominal organs,suchasthe
information (Figure 20.7). On occasion,barium-
liver,pancreas,spleen and urogenital tract,and can
impregnated polyethylene spheres(BIPS)may detect
provide informationas towhether diffuseor focal
partial or complete obstructions,or ileus.
diseaseispresent.fdiffusediseaseispresent,endos
copy is usually most suitable for furtherinvestigation
Ultrasonography
andtissue sample procurement;exploratory coeli-
Abdominalultrasonographyisthe non-invasive imaging
otomyismore applicableforfocal intestinal diseaseor
modality of choicefor the investigationof the Gl tract
whenotherbodyorgansmaybeinvolved.
182
Chapter2oDiseases of the small intestine
0.41cm
0.65cm
LL
rame
AT
BOWELWALL
(a)
(b)
53703
12:01
4
MESENTER
INTES
INALMASS
(c)
(P)
20.8
German Shepherd Dog with chronic darrhoea,demonstrating thenormal appcarance of the intestinal wall.(b)
Ultrasonograph from a 14-year-old reutered male Dcmestio Shorthar cat with alimentary lymphoma. There is increased
thickness of the bowe wall and loss of normal layering. (c) Ultrasonograph from a 10-year-cld neutered male crossbred
dogwith an intestinal haemangiosarcoma(seeFigure20.17);thenormal intcstinal wal isgrossly disrupredbyavariably
echoicmass.(d) Ultrasonograph from the cat in(c) demonstrating a mesanteric lymphadenopathy.(Courtesy of AE Kerins.
Department of VeterinaryClinical Sciences,University of Liverpool.)
In addition,ultrasonography assists in targeting
havebeen described for assessing intestinal transit
finalneedle aspiration of enlarged lymphnodesor
time,absorptive function and bacteriological disrup-
mass lesions,whichmayprovideadefinitivediagnosis
tions.However,techniques remain experimental
without the need for more invasiveinvestigations.
andhaveyettobeproperlystandardizedfordogs
and cats.
Tests of intestinal function
Avarietyof intestinalfunctiontestsareavailable,which
Testsofintestinal absorptionandpermeability
mayeitherconfirm thepresenceofintestinaldiseaseor
The traditional method of assessing absorptivefunc-
identify consequences of the pathological process
tion was to administer a test meal (e.g.xylose or fat)
(e.g.abnormal, permeability,malabsorption,dys-
and then measure the degree of absorption in serial
motilty).Occasionally,these testsprovidea definitive
bloodorurinesamples.However,suchtechniquesare
diagnosis or preclude the need for further investiga-
now rarelyperformed since they are cumbersome,
tions,e.g.intestinal biopsy sample collection.How-
insensitive anddonotprovideadefinitivediagnosis.
ever,mostintestinal functiontestshavebeenadapted
Onelimitationtousinga single-sugarsolution,such
from similar tests inhuman medicine and havenot
as xylose,is that many extra-intestinal factors can
s
affect the amount absorbed.These problems can
largelybe circumvented bytheuse of dual-ormultiple-
Breathhydrogen analysis
sugar solutions.Within the test cocktail, some sugars
Measurement of hydrogen concentrations in breath
areabsorbedvia theparacellularroute,whilstothers
samplescan give an indicationof hydrogenproduc-
are absorbedvia the transcellular route.For sugars
tionbyintestinal bacteria.Bysequentiallydetermin-
absorbedparacellularly,increasedpermeabilitycauses
ing breath hydrogen concentrations aftera test meal,
increasedabsorption,sugars absorbedtranscellularly
information onthe siteandamountofbreathhydro-
aredecreased if the surface area forabsorption
genproductioncanbeinferred.Anumberof protocols
is decreased (e.g.villous atrophy).Therefore,by
183
Chapter2oDiseasesof the smallintestine
combiningsugarswithdifferentcharacteristics,extra
intestinalfactorscanbe excludedsincetheycounter-
Substrate
Increased
Decreased
acteachother.Avarietyofprotocolshavebeen
Cobalamin
Parenteral
lleal disease
describedand somecommercial laboratoriesoffer
supplementation
llealresection
assay of these sugars.The excretion of orally admin-
High dietary intake?
Intestinal bacterial
istered51Cr-EDTA inurinehasalsobeenused to
metabolism
evaluate intestinalpermeabilityin dogsbutthere-
Exocrine pancreatic
quirement for handling such radioactive markers lim-
insutficiency
its thewidespread useof thistest.
Folate
High dietary intake
Proximal to diffuse SI
Coprophagia
disease
Tests of gastrointestinal protein loss
Parenteral
Drugs, e.g. sulfasalazine
Thegoldstandardfordeterminationof intestinalprotein
supplementations
Increased intestinal pH?
loss is faecal excretion of 5iCr-labelled albumin, al-
Intestinal bacterial
Dietary deficiency(rare)
though thistestis limited bythefact that the compound
metabolism
isradioactive.Lowalbumin concentrationsarereason-
Exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency
ably specific forintestinal proteinloss,oncerenal loss,
bloodloss and lackof hepaticproductionhavebeen
excluded.Further, intestinal protein loss ismore liely
20.9
cobalamin and folate.
when hypoglobulinaemia accompanieshypoalbumin-
aemia.However,albumin concentrations are insensi-
tive because concentrations only decline once the
sorption ispresent in tre distalSl,disease conditions
capacityforincreased hepaticproduction isovercome.
affecting thisregion causethemost marked deficien-
More recently,an assay for canine α-proteinase
cies.Anhereditary selectivemalabsorptionofcobala-
inhibitor(o-Pl)hasbeenvalidated.α-PI isa serum
minhasbeenreportedin GiantSchnauzers and Border
proteinwitha similarmolecularweight toalbumin and
Collies,and causes anorexia,failure to thrive,anae
intestinalproteinlosswill,therefore,leadtolossofboth
mia,leucopenia and methyl-malonic aciduria.Shar
proteinsata similarrate.Given thato-Pl isrelatively
Peismayhaveasimilar deficiency，whilstsome cats
resistant to proteolysis,it can be measured in the
anddogswith intestinal disease alsohave severe
faeces.Preliminary work suggests that this is amore
cobalamindeficiency andconcurrentmethyl-malonil
sensitivemarkerforintestinalproteinloss than serum
aciduria.Lowcobalaminconcentrationsarerelatively
albuminconcentrations,althoughtheassayissosen-
commonindogswithdistal small intestinaldisease
sitive that it will also detect a-Pi present because of
(although the deficiency isoftenless severe than in
blood inthestoolorrectal trauma causedbysample
cats) and while there ismethyl-malonic acidaemia,
collection using digitalevacuation.Therequirementfor
indicatingcellularcobalamindeficiency,overtclinical
collection of three freshfaecal samples and for timely
consequenceshave notbeen documented.Low se-
transport toalaboratory locatedoutsidethe UKhasso
rum folate concentrationscan occurincanine and
far limited its use.
feline intestinal disease,although such deficiencies
Serum folateandcobalamin
are uncommon and usuallymild.High folate concen-
trationscanbe theresult of high dietary intake,intes
Measurementof folateand cobalamin concentrations
tinal bacterial metabolism orEPl.
has longbeen used to assess intestinal absorptive
function in dogs,and is now available for cats.Such
Intestinal biopsy
assays are most useful in documenting malabsorption
secondary to intestinal or pancreatic disease.They
Sample collection
can also be used to document secondary SIBO.al-
thoughtheirvalidityfor thisuseisquestionablegiven
Endoscopy:A comprehensive review of endoscopic
thatalterations intheseparametersariseformany
equipment and techniques is giveninChapter4.Endo-
different reasons(Figure 20.9).Circulating concentra-
scopy is most suited to the investigation of difuse
tionsoffolateand cobalaminreflectthebalancebe-
disordersof theSlandisalsotheinitial methodofchoice
tween dietary intake,bacterial metabolism（utilization
inseverelyhypoproteinaemiccases,wherewoundde-
and production),intestinalabsorptionandbodylosses.
hiscence is a concern.Samples that canbe collected
Serumfolateandcobalaminconcentrationsmustbe
duringendoscopyincludetissue samplesforhistopatho-
interpretedwithcaution.Beforeabnormalitiescanbe
logicalexamination,brushcollectionorsquashprepara
attributed tointestinal disease,EPlmustbeexcluded
tion for cytological assessment (Figure 20.10) and
and oral supplementation,parenteral administration
duodenal juicefor quantitativebacteriology.
andchanges in dietary vitamin content must be taken
intoaccount.Somemedications,suchassulfasalazine,
Surgical biopsy:In some cases tissue samples are
can also affectfolatemeasurements,althoughthis is
rarely likely tobeof clinical significance.
coeliotomy or laparoscopy(if available).With this
Lowserum cobalaminconcentrationscanbeob-
method largerfull-thicknesssamplescanbecollected
served in EPlduetoa deficiencyof intrinsicfactor
frommultipleregionsand theremainderof theabdo-
secretion,aswell aswithcertain intestinal diseases.
men can be examined;therefore,the chances of ob-
Given that the carriermechanism forcobalamin ab-
taining an accurate diagnosis are increased.
184
Chapter2oDiseases of the small intestine
Fluid therapy
Thereaderisreferredtospecifictextsformore details
onfluid therapy.Caseswithmild dehydration and no
vomitingcanbe treatedwithoral rehydration therapy,
whichcanbeprovidedasfreewaterorasabalanced
electrolytesolutionif tolerated.However,thesuccess
oforal rehydration shouldbe monitored closely,and
aggressive parenteral therapy provided if problems do
not resolve.
In cases that are dehydrated and vomiting,
parenteral fluid therapyispreferable.The choice of
fluid,andrequirementforpotassiumsupplementation,
dependson the individual case andresultsofprelimi-
25um
nary diagnostictests,although lactated Ringer's solu-
tionisa sensibleempiricalchoice.Theaimistoreplace
Appearance of a ducdenal biopsy sample
existing deficits,supply maintenance fluid require-
20.10
acquired via brush collectionfor cytolcgical
ments and compensate forongoing losses.Theintra-
assessment.Rapid Romanowsky stan(Rapi-Diff l).
venousrouteisusuallybest,buttheintraosseousroute
isa suitable alternative in puppies orkittens.More
Indications for surgical biopsy include:
aggressive fluid therapymayberequired ifthere is
evidenceof decreased tissueperfusionor shock.In
Investigationof focal ratherthediffuseprocess
these circumstances crystalloids or colloids (e.g.
Lackof endoscopicequipment orexpertise
hydroxy-ethyl starch)may be required.Plasma or
?
Failure to achieve an appropriate diagnosis at
colloidsare most suitablewhen hypoproteinaemia is
endoscopy
present(e.g.total protein<40 g/l;albumin<15g/).All
Incaseswhere therapyinaddition todiagnosis
animalsreceivingfluid therapyfordiarrhoea mustbe
may be required.
monitored closely(see Chapter26).
Dietarymodification
Biopsy samples should always be collected,even
Themostappropriate diets forpatientswith intestinal
diseasehavenotbeendetermined scientificallywith
controlled trials and mostcurrentrecommendations
Histopathological interpretation
arebasedoncommonsense'andanecdotalevidence.
Histopathologicalassessmentofintestinal biopsyspeci-
mensremainsthegoldstandardfordiagnosisof intes-
Acute diarrhoea
tinal disease(see Chapter5).Alternate methods by
The conventional wisdomis that acute diarrhoea is
which theintestinal mucosa canbeexamined include:
best treatedwithan initialperiodof intestinalrest
electronmicroscopy;characterization of immune cell
followed by gradual reintroduction of food. In this
populationsby immunohistochemistryorflow cytometry:
regard,theanimal is starved for24-48hours and
subsequently offered an easily digestible diet (e.g.
ase chain reaction(RT-PCR);andassessmentofTcell
boiledchickenandrice)in small frequentmeals for
clonality.However,suchprocedures are largely con-
3-5days.The original diet can then bereintroduced
fined toresearch centres.
overa further3-5daysbygraduallymixing increasing
amountswith the digestible diet.An appropriate digest
ibledietshouldbelowinfatandfibre,andcontaineasily
Treatment
digestible components.Suitable componentsforhome-
prepared diets in dogs include boiled chicken or low fat
Theinitial management of acute and chronic diarrhoea
cottage cheese together with boiled rice. Since cats
is symptomatic and supportive.The treatment em-
have alower tolerance forcomplexcarbohydrates and
ployed is tailored tosuit theindividualcase,based on
a highertolerancefordietaryfat,purepoultry diets are
clinical findings and theinitial laboratory database.
preferable.The diet need not benutritionally complete
Animalswithchronicdiarrhoeahave usuallyfailed to
since it will onlybefed for a short period.
respondtosymptomatictherapy,andemphasisshould
The concept of intestinal rest has been challenged
beplaced on obtaining a definitive diagnosis.Thera-
recentlybecausestudiesinhuman infantshaveshown
peutic optionsinclude:
that“feeding through'diarrhoeapromotesrecovery.
Further,inclusion of‘enterocyte fuels'(e.g.glutamine)
Fluid therapy
maypromoterecovery andreducebacterial transloca-
。
Dietary modification
tion.RecentworkbyMohret al.(2003) in dogswith
Absorbentsandprotectants
parvovirus has suggested that early enteral feeding
Secretionormotilitymodifiers
doeslead toimprovementinsomeclinicalparameters
?
Antibacterials
(e.g.bodyweight measurements),although time tore-
Probiotics and prebiotics
coveryfromsignsofdiarrhoea isnat altered.However
?
Immunosuppressivemedication.
theuse of such dietaryregimes in dogs and cats is
185
Chapter 20  Diseases of the small intestine
difficult when vomiting is a significant clinical sign. More
Protectants and absorbents
work is required before such a strategy can be recom-
Bismuth subsalicylate, kaolin, pectin and activated
 mended for all aetiologies of acute diarrhoea.
charcoal are often administered in cases of acute
diarrhoea. Putative actions include binding bacteria or
Chronic diarrhoea
A highly digestible diet, balanced in micronutrients and
mucosa. Although efficacy has not clearly been dem-
restricted in fat is usually recommended for dogs. Cats
onstrated for most Gl diseases, these products are
may benefit mare from carbahydrate restriction since
 generally safe and thus preferable to other therapies.
their capacity for carbohydrate digestion is small and 
such as anticholinergics or antibacterials. Bismuth
perhaps becomes limiting more readily than in dogs
products should be used with caution in cats as sali-
when there is small intestinal disease. The diet must be
cylate elimination is prolonged, and therapy in dogs
palatable and is best fed in small frequent meals. In
should not exceed 5 days (at 1 ml/5kg p.o. q8h).
some circumstances, it is sensible to restrict protein
intake to a single source, especially if an adverse food
Motility and secretion-modifying agents
reaction is a possibility.
Anticholinergics and opioid analgesics are often used
High digestibility assures that dietary components
for symptomatic management of acute diarrhoea. Anti-
can be readily assimilated in the face of suboptimal
cholinergics can potentiate ileus and are not recom-
digestive functions. Efficient absorption also minimizes
mended. Opioids are thought to act by decreasing 
the substrate that is available to intestinal bacteria, or
intestinal secretion, restoring segmentation and pro-
available for commanding an osmotic potential. Fat
moting absorption, although effects on motility are
restriction has been recommended in dogs since
possible. Loperamide and diphenoxylate can be used
for symptomatic management of acute diarrhoea in
and stimulate electrolyte secretion, although there may
dogs. Their use is contraindicated if infectious diarrhoea.
be a tendency to cause weight loss. However, the
is present.
benefit of fat restriction in cats has been challenged.
Supplementation with omega 3 fatty acids may also be
Antimicrobials
of benefit in treating inflammatory diseases, but there
Antimicrobials should be used only when there is a
is no direct evidence confirming efficacy in intestinal
clear indication:
disorders of companion animals.
Protein should be of high biological value and pref-
Bacterial or protozoal infection is documented
erably restricted to a single protein source. Given the
e.g. Salmoneila, Campylobacter, Clostridium,
possibility of an adverse reaction to food, a novel dietary
enteropathogenic E. colf (EPEC) and Giardia.
protein should be chosen and possibilities include cot-
However, treatment for some of these agents is
明
tage cheese, egg. rabbit, venison, chicken, fish and
controversial (see below)
 Presence of sepsis, bacteraemia and shock 
are based upon chemically treated, low molecularweight
Compromised mucosal barrier, as suggested by
protein derivatives of chicken or soy. In theory, such
increased permeability, haematochezia ormelaena
diets should be less antigenic, but there is no clear
 Evidence of immunosuppression, e.g. neutropenia
evidence to prove that adverse immune responses do
Treatment trial for antibiotic-responsive
not still occur, and adverse reactions caused by food
diarrhoea, once tests have eliminated other
intolerance may anise. Gluten is perceived to be a
possible causes
common food allergen and thus most formulated diets
Adjunctive therapy for IBD.
are now gluten-free. This recommendation is based
upon extrapolation from coeliac disease in humans, and
A four-quadrant approach may berequired in cases
 on a cohort of Irish Setters with a gluten-sensitive
with septicaemia where the cause is unknown and a
enteropathy. Although gluten is a common allergen,
combination of bactericldal intravenous drugs is re-
other allergens may be equally,if not more, common
quired. A suitable combination would be potentiated
and the choice of diet should be tailored to the individual
amoxicillin, combined with metronidazole for anaerobic
patient. If a home-prepared diet is to be used, boiled rice
coverand afluoroquinolone for Gram-negative bacteria.
Alternatives for anaerobic cover include clindamycin,
in dogs. However, cats may not tolerate as much carbo-
penicillin or ampicillin, whilst gentamicin would be a
hydrate in their diet, so carbohydrate is better included
suitable alternative for Gram-negative cover.
based on palatability and response.
Some clinicians recommend home-prepared diets,
Probiotics and prebiotics
whilst others prefer a commercial diet. Hame-prepared
A probiotic is a living organism that, when adminis-
dlets have the advantage that the exact ingredients can
tered orally, exerts health benefits beyond those of
be better controlled. However, it places an additional
inherent basic nutrition. Probiotics can directly an-
burden on the owners and may lead to poor compliance.
tagonize pathogenic bacteria and modulate innate
[n addition, since such diets are not balanced for
(e.g. phagocytic activity) or specific (e.g. secretory
micronutrients they are not suitable for long-term use.
IgA) mucosal immune responses. Traditionally, live
The benefits of commercial diets are in consistency of
yoghurt has been recommended but preparations are
contents, the fact that the diet is properily balanced and
now commercially available for use in dogs and cats,
the ease of use, which should ensure bettercompliance.
Some studies have demonstrated the presence of
186
Chapter 20
 Diseases of the small intestine
probiotic bacteria in the faeces during administration
Disorders of the small intestine
but not after the products are discontinued, suggest-
ing that they do not become part of the stable resident
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
flora. Nevertheless, there is emerging evidence to
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE) is characterized
support their use. Given that such products are un-
by acute haemorrhagic vomiting and diarrhoea ac-
companied by marked haemoconcentration. Although
criminate use of antimicrobials.
the exact aetiology is not known, it may be related
Prebiotics are selective substrates for a limited
to Ciostridium perfringens enterotoxicosis or an aller-
number of "beneficial' species and therefore cause
 gic reaction.
alterations in the luminal microflora. Most are non-
digestible carbohydrates, such as inulin and fructo-
Clinical signs
oligosaccharides. Prebiotics are now incorporated into
 Small-breed dogs, such as Toy and Miniature Poodles
some veterinary diets and have been shown to alter
and Miniature Schnauzers, are most frequently af-
colonic flora, although their effects on small intestinal
 fected. Clinical signs include acute haemorrhagicvomit-
flora are questionable. Prebiotics may assist in the
ing and diarrhoea; signs can be progressive with
treatment of both acute and chronic diarrhoea, but
vomiting preceding diarrhoea. Other signs include de-
more work is required before their use can be justified.
Since probiotics and prebiotlcs can modulate mucosal
rarely seen. After the syndrome develops rapid fluid
 immune responses, they may also be beneficial in
shifts occur from the intravascular compartment, with
chronic enteropathies that involve immune
loss of protein and fluid into the intestinal tract. Thus,
dysreguiation, e.g. IBD and dietary hypersensitivity.
hypovolaemia develops rapidly but the intracellular
However, more work is required.
compartment as a whole is minimally affected, and
therefore signs of dehydration (e.g. decreased skin
Anti-inflammatory and
turgor) may not be evident.,..
immunosuppressive therapy
Anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive therapy is
Diagnosis
indicated for cases of chronic diarrhoea caused by
 In HGE, the PCV is usually greater than 60, which
moderate to severe idlopathic IBD or lymphangiecta-
contrasts with the lower PCV axpected in other similar
sia. The first choice group of drugs are glucocorticoids,
conditions, e.g. parvoviral enteritis. Total protein con-
such as prednisolane. For idiopathic IBD an immuno-
centrations are usually normal or increased, but pro-
suppressive dose is recommended (e.g. 2-4 mg/kg
portionately lower than would be expected trom the
per day in divided doses), which is gradually tapered
corresponding PCV increase (as a consequence of the
(over weeks to manths) once remission is achieved.
intestinal protein loss). There is no leucopenia (In
Therapy can sometimes be discontinued altogether,
contrast to parvovirus infection), whilst radiography
although lifelong therapy may be required. Where
and other clinicopathological tests are μsually unre-
traditional glucocorticoids are poorly tolerated
markable. On faecal analysis C. perfringens spores or
budesonide can be considered, although its efficacy
enterotoxin may be evident, but often neither is de-
has not yet been proven in companion animals and it
tected. Since both spores and endotoxin can be de-
is expensive. It ls an enteric-coated, locally active?
tected in normal dogs, care is needed in interpretation
steroid, 90% of which is removed on first-pass through
of these findings.
the liver. Preliminary studies have shown efficacy
in dogs, although a recent study demonstrated
Treatment
profound effects on the hypothalamic-pituitary-
Treatment should be instlgated prior to performing
 ad renal axis despite the high first-pass metabolism in
detailed diagnostic investigations. Aggressive intrave-
the liver.
nous fluid therapy is essential and, given that marked
 If glucocorticoids alone are ineffectlve, a second
intestinal protein loss may occur, colloidal solutions or
drug can be added. Azathioprine (at 2 mg/kg p.o. q24h
plasma are appropriate to replace the intravascular
jnifially) is most commonly used, although its onset of 
deficits. Crystalloids can then be used to complete the
action may be delayed. Haematological parameters
rehydration process. Rapid improvement is usually
must be monitored regularly whilst on therapy to mini-
noted within a few hours, although clinical signs may
 mize the potential for development of bone marrow
take several days to resolve. Since the mucosal
suppression. Azathioprine is not recommended for
barrier is compromised, antibacterial therapy is justi-
cats, where chlorambucil (at 2-6 mg/m2 p.0. q24h) is a
fied with intravenous bactericidal drugs. Ampicillin is
suitable alternative.
Otherimmunosuppressive drugs include methotrex-
approach' (e.g. covering.against Gram-positive, Gram-
ate, cyclophosphamide and ciclosparin. Methotrexate
negative, aerobic and anaerobic bacteria) may be
is effective in the treatment of human Crohn's disease,
required given the potential for sepsis. Patients that
but it is nat widely used in companion animals. Cyclo-
-ai aq pnoys Adelaul ot Alajenbepe puodsel lou op
phosphamide has few advantages over azathioprine
evaluated for other causes, e.g. parvovirus enteritis,
and is rarely used. Ciclosporin has demonstrated effi-
 intussusception or intestinal obstruction. Cases are
cacy in anal furunculosis, but is expensive and there
initially maintained nil by mouth, but a highly digest-
has been little documentation of its use in companion
ible diet (e.g. boiled chicken and rice) can be intro-
animal IBD,
 duced once vomiting has ceased.
187
Chapter20Diseases cf the small intestine
Prognosis
acutephaseofillnessandforapproximately2weeks
The prognosis is usually good with most cases making
afterwards.CPV-2isstableintheenvironmentandcan
a complete recovery.as long as there isnoconcurrent
remain infectiousforlongperiodsoftime.Given its
hypoproteinaemia or sepsis.However,recurrences
affinityforrapidlydividing cells,CPV-2targetsintesti-
may occur.
nal cryptcells,bonemarrow andsecondary lymphoid
tissues once infectionbecomesestablished.The con-
Acutediarrhoea induced bydiet,drugsor
sequences areintestinal cryptnecrosis,severevomit
toxins
ing,haemorrhagicdiarrhoea,leucopeniaandlymphoid
Diarrhoea induced by diet isthought tobe themost
depletion(Figure 20.11).Clinical signs usually develop
commoncauseofacute,self-limiting diarrhoea insmall
approximately 5 days after exposure.
animals.Potential mechanisms include rapid dietary
change,dietaryindiscretion,dietary intolerance and
foodpoisoning.Acute diarrhoea can alsobe caused by
administration of drugs（e.g.antibacterialsor NSAIDs)
or toxins(e.g.insecticides),although otherclinical signs
mayberecognized.Historical informationmay enable
thecausetobeestablished,butinmostcircumstances
a definitive diagnosis cannot be made.Cases willusu-
allyrespondtowithdrawalof theincitingcauseandtothe
employment ofstandard therapeuticprinciples.
Infectiouscausesofdiarrhoea
Enteric infections are common in animals that are
young,immunocompromisedorimmunologicallynaive.
400um
Animalshoused incolony environments are alsopre-
20.11
Photomicrographof smallintestinal lymphaid tissue
The most commonpotential infectious agents are:
from a cogwithconfirmec cenineparvovirus
infecticn.There is severe disruption of the structure of the
Viral:
patch remains,the number of lympnoid cells is severely
parvovirus
depleted.H&Estain.(CourtesyofRFox,Department of
coronavirus
Veterinary Pathology,University of Liverpocl.)
Bacterial:
Salmonella
Clinical signs:Associated clinical signsvary in severity
Campylobacter
一
and includeanorexia,depression,dehydration,pyrexia
Clostridium spp. (C. perfringens and C. difficile)
vomitinganddiarrhoea(whichisusuallyprofuse and
EnteropathogenicE.coli.
often haemorrhagic).Shock,endotoxaemia(due to
Parasitic:
secondarybacterial septicaemia),hypothermia,jaun-
Helminthinfections
dice and disseminated intravascularcoagulation(DIC)
一
Giardia
mayall develop.Deathisusuallysecondarytodehydra-
Coccidium.
tion,electrolyte imbalancesand endotoxicshockfrom
overwhelmingbacterialinfection through thedamaged
Otherinfectious agents(e.g.fungi) arepossible,but
intestinal mucosal barrier due toleucopenia.The inci-
are notprevalentin theUK.Nevertheless,small animal
dence ishighest inpuppiesbetween weaning and 6
cliniciansshouldbe awareofexoticdiseases andcon-
monthsof age,corresponding toawindowof suscepti-
sultotherreference texts when thereisa historyof
overseas travel.Additionalpotentialinfectious agents
nity (from maternally derived immunoglobulin)and
includeotherviruses(e.g.paramyxoviruses,adenovi-
acquired immunity (from vaccination).Further, certain
rus,FeV,FIV,astroviruses,rotaviruss),bactria(e.g.
dogbreeds areparticularly susceptible(e.g.Rottweiler
Shigella) and opportunist yeast infections.
andDobermann).Other predisposing factors include
In most cases identification of an infectious agent is
environmental factors (e.g. colony environment,over-
easy,butitismoredifficulttodecidewhetherthisreally
crowding,poorsanitaryconditions)andthepresenceof
is the cause of clinicai signs.Whilst treatment of such
concurrent infections(e.g.endoparasites,canine dis-
agentsseems intuitive,thismay lead to the develop-
tempervirus,coronavirus,Salmonella and Campylo-
mentof antibiotic resistance and thus be inappropriate.
bacter).Rarely,parvovirus infection can lead to other
However,given that many agentsmayhavezoonotic
syndromes,such as the development of myocarditis, in
potential,treatment may beprudent.
puppiesas aresult of in utero infection.
Viralenterides
Diagnosis:Clinical signsmaybesuspiciousforCPV-2
infection,although haemorrhagic diarrhoea is not
Canine parvavirus:Canine parvovirustype2(CPV-2)
pathognomonic. Differential diagnoses include acute
is a highlycontagious causeof acute enteritis.Infection
salmonellosis, bacterial sepsis,foreign bodies and
occursvia thefaecal-oralroute,andinfected animals
HGE.Infection shouldbe suspected if acute Gl signs,
shedbillionsofvirusparticlesinfaeces during the
depression andpyrexia arepresent,especiallyif the
188
Chapter 20  Diseases of the small intestine
subject is unvaccinated or has been in contact with
Prognosis: The majority of cases recover if dehydra-
infected dogs. The majority of cases (60%) areseverely
tion and sepsis are treated appropriately. However,
interferon therapy improves the probability of survival
decreasing survival rates. Biochemical abnormalities are
and speed of recovery. Severe leucopenia is associ-
not pathognomonic and include hypokalaemia, hypogly-
ated with higher mortality, whilst other complicating
caemia, pre-renal azotaemia, hyperbilirubinaemia and
factors include hypoglycaemia, hypoproteinaemia,
increased liver enzymes. Diagnostic imaging may help to
anaemia, intussusception and secondary infections.
rule out other differential diagnoses.
Definitive diagnosis relies upon demonstrating the
Feline parvovirus: Feline parvovirus (feline panleu-
presence of CPV-2 virus (or antigen) in the faeces by
copenia) is a severe highly contagious infection In cats.
ELISA, which is offered by many commercial laborato-
Sporadic cases and outbreaks are stil seen, most
ries. Other methods of diagnosis include histopatho-
commonly in young animals, colony environments,
logical assessment of tissues, where inclusion bodies
unvaccinated animals and in teral populations. CPV-2
can be recognized. Some laboratories offer immuno-
can also infect cats and cause a mild clinical disease.
histochemical confirmation of the presence of virus
Transmission and pathogenesis of feline panleucope-
particles, whist serology may provide evidence of
nia infection are similar to that of CPV-2.
exposure to CPV-2 in unvaccinated dogs.
Clinical signs: Kittens have the highest incidence of
 Treatment: Anti-andotoxin therapy has been used in
generalized infectians and the greatest mortality rate.
some studies but efficacy is unproven. In contrast,
Clinical signs include anorexia, pyrexia, depression,
administration of recombinant feline interferon-w is
dehydration, vomiting and haermorrhagic diarrhoea.
proven to improva clinical signs and reduce mortality.
Thickened, painful intestinal loops may be detecfed on 
This agent has antiviral and immunomodulatory prop-
 abdominal palpation. Given the associated neutrope-
erties, but its exact mechanism of action is unclear and
nia, infected animals are prone to sepsis and
 its use may be limited by the cost.
endotoxaemia. Early in utero infections can cause
Supportive therapy includes the use of aggressive
stillbirth, mummification, foetal death and abortion.
intravenous fluid therapy (e.g. lactated Ringer's solu-
Late in utero and perinatal (first 1-2 weeks of life)
tion with supplemented potassium as required). In
infections may lead to cerebellar hypoplasia.
some cases, dextrose should be added to the fluid
infused to a final dose of 2.5 g/100 ml. Colloids, plasma
 Diagnosis: Diagnosis is similar to that for CPV-2 infec-
infusions, whole blood or blood substitutes may be
tion in dogs. Diagnosis is confirmed by documenting
required in some cases. Once the animal is adequately
parvovirus antigen in faeces (ELISA), histopathologi-
hydrated and vomiting has ceased, oral fluid therapy
cal and immunohistochemical evaluation of tissues, or
can be instigated.
serological assessment (in unvaccinated animals).
Antibiotics are important given the associated
leucopenia, and a four-quadrant approach is sensi-
Treatment: Options for treatment are the same as
ble. Initially, affected individuals shouid be main-
described for CPV-2 infection. Racombinant feline 
tained nil by mouth, but a standard dietary protocol
interferon therapy is likely to be useful for treatment,
(as for other acute enteropathies) can be instigated
although no published data yet exist.
cnce vomiting has ceased. However, early micro-
enteral nutrition (e.g. Gl delivery of small amaunts of
Prognosis: Mortality is high in young kittens (50-90%).
water, electrolytes and readily absorbable nutrients,
Prognosis is worst when infection is associated with
such as glucose, amino acids and glutamine) may
hypothermia, secondary bacterial infection, jaundice
and DlC. The disease can be prevented by limiting
Other therapies include anti-emetics, such as
exposure of the virus to susceptible individuals (e.g.
metoclopramide, domperidone or phenothiazines, e.g.
hygiene and disinfection protocols) and by vaccination.
chlorpromazine. Recombinant human granulocyte
Modified lve vaccines can provide a more rapid onset
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) may correct the
of protection than killed vaccines, but cannot be used 
concurrent neutropenia but, whilst neutrophil counts
in pregnant queens and kittens <4 weeks age, since
increase, there is no improvement in survival.
cerebellar hypoplasia results.
Exposure of at risk animals to the virus should be
 minimized, especially in colony situations. This can be 
Canine coronavirus: Canine coronavirus (CcV) may
cause acute gastroenteritis in dogs, especially in
colony situations since high population densities
w/v) at a dilution of 1:30 to 1:32). Appropriate vaccina-
promote spread of large doses of the virus. Transmis-
tion regimes are also critical and most modern inacti-
 sion accurs via the faecai-oral route and most infec-
vated virus vaccines provide excellent protection after
tions are subclinical, although' some cases develop
two doses. Many vaccine manufacturers now claim
severe clinical signs. The virys invades enterocytes at
that adequate protection can be achieved with protocols
the villus tips causing mild villus destruction and
involving the final dose at 12 weeks. Yearly boosters
diarrhoea. Shedding of virus can occur for months 
are still recommended by mostvaccine manufacturers,
after infection in recovered dogs.
although studies to determine the opfimum revacci-
Clinical signs are seen onty in severe cases and
nation interval are ongoing.
include anorexia, depression, vomiting and watery-
189
Chapter 20
JDiseases of the small intestine
to-mucoid diarrhoea. However, in contrast to CPV-2
enteropathogensinclude Campyiobacterspp., Saimon-
infection, pyrexia and leucopenia are unusual. Faecal
ella spp., Shigelia spp. and Yersinia enterocolitica.
electron microscopy can demonstrate the presence
Such organisms might represent a potential zoonotic
of CCV but the significance can be difficult to deter-
risk and attempted eradicationof these organisms may
mine because the viral particles can also be present
be advisable. However, such a strategy may unhelpful
in healthy individuals.
or unnecessary, eading to the development of anti-
 Supportive treatment is usually allthat is required
 biotic resistance or even inducing a carrier state.
in most cases. Recovery is rapid, aithough signs can.
persist for 4 weeks in some dogs. Given that most
Campylobacter: Campyiobacter jejuni and Campylo
detergents readily inactivate the virus, outbreaks
bacter upsafiensis are Gram-negative microaerophilic
are best prevented through appropriate hygiene
bacteria, which may be assoclated with enteric infec-
and disinfection strategies. Although vaccination is
tions in dogs and cats, although their role as a causa-
possible, this is unlikely to be necessary in most
tive agent is controversial. Transmission occurs by the
circumstances.
faecal-oral route. Campylobacter species can be iso-
lated in faeces from animals with clinical signs and from
Fellne enteric coronavirus: Feline enteric coronavirus
up to 50% of normal dogs. Clinically significant disease 
(FECv) is a common enteric virus in cats and has the
is more common in young, immunocompromised indi-
potential to mutate into a feline infectiaus peritonitis
viduals or in colony dogs. Dogs with concurrent enteric
(FIP)-inducing strain. For a detalled discussion of FIP,
 infections, e.g. endoparasitism, and viral diarrhoea are
readers should consult specific texts on the subject.
more severely affected.
FECV infection is usually subclinical, but cats may
shed FECV in their faeces. Transmission is via the
Clinicai signs: Clinical signs may last 5-15 days and
faecal-oral route, and young kittens (4-12 weeks age)
usually include diarrhoea (which may be watery, mu-
are most susceptible.
coid and haemorrhagic), vomiting, tenesmus, low-
 In adults clinical signs are mild; more severe signs
grade pyrexia, anorexia and mild abdominal discomfort.
are seen in kittens, but fatalities are rare. Diarrhoea can
be watery and contain mucus or fresh blood. Other
Diagnosis: The organism can be detected on a direct
signs include vomiting, pyrexia, anorexia and depres-
faecal smear, as a 'seagull-shaped' bacterium. How-
sion. A rising immunoglobulin titre-to FECV is consist-
ever, infection shouid be confirmed by culture of the
ent with exposure. Routine supportive care is
bacterium from faeces and, given the potential for
si Aeaooan linl e joy sisouboid aul pue 'aedoudde
intermittent excretion, multiple samples may be re-
excellent. Hygiene, disinfection and isolation meas-
quired. Because the organism is fragile, false-negative
ures are advisable in cat colonies.
results can occur if transport conditions for the sample
are not optimal. The isolation of Campylobacter may
Feline immunodeficlency virus and fellne leukae-
be incidental or may be associated with underlying
mia virus: Fiv infection is associated with a 10-20%
disease (e.g. 1BD). Therefore, positive results must be
Incidence of chronic enteritis; disease is usually ass0-
interpreted with caution and clinicians should consider
ciated with secondary infections, although occasion-
Jooking for underlying causes.
ally no other aetiological agent is identified. Anorexia,
chronic diarrhoea and emaciation are typical, and
Treatmentand prognosis:Fluoroquinolones anderyth-
histopathological examination occasionally reveals
romycin are most commonly used, although fluoro-
chronic enteritis with transmural granulomatous in-
quinolones are usually favoured given the potential
flammation. FeLV infection may also occasionally cause
for erythromycin to cause vomiting. Treatment for a
1
diarrhoea in cats, and can be associated with fatal
period of 5-10 days is recommended and success of
 peracute enterocolitis, chronic lymphocytic enteritis or
therapy should be confirmed by repeat faecal culture.
 alimentary lymphoma.
In some cases, treatment of any underlying disease
may eliminate the organism without recourse to anti-
Torovirus: A torovirus-like agent has been isolated
biotics. Although a clear zoonotic link has not been
from the faeces of cats with the chronic diarrhoea and
established, owners of affected dogs shouid always
i
protruding nictitating membrane' syndrome. However,
maintain hygiene and, in some circumstances, antibi-
a clear association with clinical signs has not been
otics may be required to eliminate the possibility of
transmission.
cats without diarrhoea.
Salmonella: Salmonella species are Gram-negative
Bacterial enteritides
motile rods, which can cause significant clinical infec-
Most bacterial infections of the Gl tract are associated
tions in dogs and cats. However, Salmonelia species
with acute diarrhoea but, since these organisms can be
are not always associated with clinical disease since
isolated from healthy animals, their significance is not 
organisms can be isolated from healthy dogs and cats.
clear. Host-pathogen interactions are likely to explain
Clinical problems are most common in young, ken-
why some individuals are tolerant of these organisms,
 nelled or immunocompromised animals, and concur-
whilst others develop clinical signs. The incidence of
rent viral infection (e.g. parvovirus) may increase
infection is greatest In young, kennelled animals or
 disease severity. Transmission is via the faecal-oral
immunocompromised patients. Potential bacterial
route, and some species have a zoonotic potential.
190
Chapter 20 Diseases of the small intestine
Clinical signs: Infection with Saimonelia is uncommon
spores is probably more significant if massive numbers
and clinicai signs are even less comman. Acute diar-
are seen or if they are detected in colony dogs with acute
rhoea is most common in severely ill, presumably
clinical signs. The identifcation of endotoxin might be a
immunocormpromised patients. Severity is variable and
better indicator of clinical infection, although this has not
blood may be present. If bacterial translocation from 
been proven definitively.
the intestine occurs, life-threatening septicaemia may
result. If Salmonella is isolated from dogs or cats with
Treatment and prognosis: Acute infections are usually
chronic diarrhoea then the clinician should look for
self-limiting but when treatment is necessary a 7-day
another underlying reason for the diarrhoea.
course of either ampicillin, metronidazole or tylosin js
Diagnosis: Diagnosis is made by isolation cf the organ-
ism from faeces, or blood if the animal is septicaemic.
benefit in treating concurrent fibre-responsive condi-
Given problems with intermittent excretion, three fae.
tions. Empirical use of tylosin (at 10 mg/kg p.o. q8h)
cal cultures are required to confirm a negative result.
may lead to clinical improvement in dogs with chronic
enferopathies, and this effect may be mediated thraugh
Treaiment: lf a Saimonella species is isolated from
healthy animais, or animals with acute diarrhoea that
acute infections is good, although cases of HGE must
are not systemically ill, no treatment is needed since
be treated aggressively.
antibacterial use could promote resistance and a car-
rier state. Treatment is necessary only when there is
Enteropathogenic E. coli: It is controversial whether
evidence of sepsis, severe haemorrhagic diarrhoea.
enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and enterotoxigenic
PLE or neutropenia. The choice of antibacterial should
E. coli (ETEC) are pathogenic in dogs and cats. Attach-
be governed by culture and sensitivity testing, but
ment of ETEC and subsequent release of heat-labile,
 fluoroquinolones are usually suitable, and the faeces
 heat-stable and Shiga-like toxins may cause acute diar-
should be re-cultured toverify eradication. In light ofthe
rhoea. Further, EPEC may atfach to the mucosa causing
zoonotic risk, owners should be advised to take appro-
effacement of microvilli, leading to profound malabsorp-
priate precautions to avoid self-infection.
tion without morphological abnormalities on histopatho-
logical examination. Identification of pathogenic strains
Prognosis: In most cases prognosis is good, but the
requires specialized assays, such as bioassays for toxins
outlook is more guarded in cases with concurrent
Apueboued jo yopeouap! loy soqoid awcueh pue
septicaemia. Negative prognostic indicators inciude
markers. However, because these organisms can be
peracute onset, pyrexia (>40°C) or hypothermla, se-
seen in healthy animals, a positive result does not neces-
vere haemorrhagic diarrhoea, degenerative left shift
sarily prove a role in clinical disease.
and hypoglycaemia.
Miscellaneous bacterlal infections: Yersinia enter
Clostridium: Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium
oliltica, Y. pseudotuberculosis, Bacillus piliformis and
difficileare anaerobic bacilli, which are partofthe normal
Providencia alcalifaciens are all rare causes of diar-
canine and feline intestinal microflora and may cause
rhoea in dogs and cats. The reader is referred to
signs of large intestinal diarrhoea. For C. perfringens, an
specific reference texts for further information.
association between clinical disease and eithersporula-
AMycobacterium spp. cause multisystemic granulo-
tion or endotoxin production has been suggested, al-
matous infections in dogs and cats, occasionally in-
though recent work has not supported such a link. A
volving the Gl tract. Cats may be infected with M. bovis
complex host-pathogen relationship is likely to exist,
by drinking infected cow's milk. Localization to the Gl
which explains why only some individuals are affected.
tract is associated with vomiting, diarrhoea, weight
loss, mesenteric lymphadenopathy and peritonitis. The
Clinical signs: Enterotoxin-producing C. perfringens
diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating the organism
can be associated with infections in hospitals or acute
 in infected tissues by light microscopy (Ziehl-Neelsen-
outbreaks in colony environments (e.g. kennels),. Bath
positive rods), bacterial culture or PCR. During the
acute and chronic syndromes have been reported, and
investigation of any granulomatous disease, a tissue
predisposing factors might include dietary change,
sample should be frozen for culture or PCR if mycobac-
stress or concurrent disease. Acute cases present with
teria are suspected. Treatment protocols have been
large intestinal diarrhoea and signs usually resoive
reported but therapy is controversial because of the
within 5-7 days. C. perfringens has been documented
significant public health risk.
in some cases with concurrent parvovirus infection,
and an association between C. perfringens and HGE
Fungal, algal and oomycete infections
has been reported.
Fungal infections are rare in the UK but given the
increasing popularity of overseas travel such diseases
Diagnosis: Clostridial species can be isolated by bacte-
may be seen more commonly in the future. Examples
rial culture and are often present in normal individuals.
 offungal infections include zygomycoses (fungalinfec-
On a faecal smear C. perfringens spores have a charac-
tions from Zygomycetes class e.g. Basidliobalus spp..
teristic 'safety pin' appearance and more than two
Conidiobolus spp., Absidia spp., Rhizopusspp., Mucor
 spores per high power microscope field suggests, but 
spp. and Mortierelia spp.), histoplasmosis, and oppor-
does not confirm, C. perfringens enteritis since spores
tunistic mycotic infections (candidiasis). The most pre-
can be seen in healthy dogs. However, identification of
dominant oomycete infectian is pythiosis.
191
Chapter20Diseases of the small intestine
Toxicalgal blooms,ingested froma contaminated
ent infections invariably occur in pregnant bitches.A
water source,can cause acute gastroenteritis and
varietyofanthelminticmedicationsareavailablefor
death.Blue-green algae can synthesize an anti-
treatment and prevention of T.canis,T.cati and
cholinesterasethatinducesvomiting,diarrhoea,ataxia
Toxascaris leonina infections in dogs and cats(see
and rapid death of dogs.Prototheca spp.are
Chapter 28).
achlorophyllous algae thatcan occasionallyinfect the
intestine of dogs.Large intestinal disease is more
Hookworms:Themain canine hookworm in theUKis
common(seeChapter21)but fatal disseminated dis-
Uncinaria stenocephala,although occasional infec-
ease involving theSlisreported.
tionswithAncylostomacaninumoccur,usuallyinfest-
ing the large intestine.There have been sporadic
Endoparasiticinfections
reportsofhookworminfectionincats intheUK,prob
ablywith A.tubaeforme.Canine hookworm infesta-
Nematodes:Roundworm infectionsin dogs include
tions can be associated with clinical signs;
ascarids(Toxocara canis and Toxascaris leonina),
U.stenocephala cancause diarrhoea and weightloss,
whipworms(Trichuris vulpis)andhookworms(Ancy-
whilstA.caninum,isablood-suckingparasiteandcan
lostoma spp.,Uncinaria stenocephala)(Figure20.12)
causeanaemia.Inaddition,interdigitaldermatitisand
In cats,nematode infections include ascarids(Toxo-
perianal irritationcan be seen due tomigrationof
cara catiand Toxascarisleonina)andoccasionally
infectedUncinarialarvae.Infectionsaremorecommon
hookworms,although the exact species has notbeen
in dogs inakennelled environment.Infectionis diag-
determined.
nosed fromfaecal analysis forhookworm eggs.Treat-
ment options include fenbendazole or pyrantel for
Ancylostoma spp.,and pyrantel for U. stenocephala.
Helminth
Dogs
Cats
Control of infection in colony situationsrelies onboth
Nematodes
Toxocara canis
Toxocara cati
adequateprophylacticanthelmintic therapyandcon-
Toxascarisleonina
Toxascaris leonina
trol of environmentalexposure(e.g.removal of faeces
Uncinaria stenocephala
Ancylostoma
and effective disinfection).
Ancylastoma caninum
tubaeforme (?)
Trichuris vupis
Cestodes:The tapeworms that affect dogs and cats
Taenia hydatigena
Taenia hydatigena
are listed in Figure 20.12. All tapeworms have an
Cestodes
Taenia pisiformis
Dypylidium caninum
immaturestage thatdevelops inanintermediatehost.
Taenia ovis
Dipylidium caninum isthemost commoncestode in-
Taenia serialis
fectionofdogsandcatsintheUK,and theintermediate
Multiceps muliceps
hostsare fleas and lice.Patentinfections in dogs and
Dypylidium caninum
catsrarely cause clinical signs of intestinal disease.
Echinococcus granulosus
Cestocides arediscussed inChapter28.
granulosus
Echinococcusgranulosus
Protozoal infections
equinus
Echinococcusmulitilocularis
Coccidia: lsospora are the most common coccidian
parasites of dogs (1.canis) and cats (1. felis,I.rivolta).
20.12
Common helminthsof dogs and cats.
Transmissionoccursbyingestionof ova orparatenic
hosts.Sporozoites are liberated in the Sl and then
Ascaridinfections:Infectioncanoccurtransplacentally
entercellsto commence development.Thepre-patent
period ranges from 4-11 days, depending upon the
(Toxocaracanis),viamilkto sucklingneonates(T.canis
species of Isospora. Cryptosporidium spp. can also
and T.cat),by ingesting embryonated ova (all spe-
infectdogsandcats and transmission also occursby
cies),orby ingesting encysted larvae ina paratenic
the faecal-oralroute.
host(allspecies).Afteringestion,larvaemigrate through
body tissues to the lungs, are coughed up and then
Clinicalsigns:Isosporaand Cryptosporidiumarerarely
swallowed.This larvalmigration can cause tissue
associated with clinical disease.Puppies and kittens
damage,especially to the liver and lungs.During a
kept in unhygienic conditions or immunosuppressed
patent infection,adult ematodes in the SI shed ova,
animalsmaydevelopheavyinfestations,whichcanbe
whichthenpassout in thefaeces and canbe detected
associated with (haemorrhagic) diarrhoea.
by faecal flotation.T.canis and,to a lesserextent,
T. catiare of public health importance given the risk of
Diagnosis:Isospora oocysts canbe detected by direct
aberrant larval migration(visceralandocular larval
faecal smear examinationorbyfaecalflotation.Given
migrans) inhumans.
Clinical signs aremost often seen in young animals
thefaeces should bemixedwith formalin(1part38%
and includediarrhoea,failureto thrive andabdominal
formalin to9 parts fluid faeces) prior to faecal analysis.
distension.Alarge wormburdenmayresultinintestinal
obstructionorperforation,whilstbiliary tract obstruc-
Treatmentandprognosis:Isospora infection isoften
tionhas also beenreported.Most adult animals de-
self-limiting although,where treatment iswarranted,
velop strong immunity and can spontaneously clear
sulfadimethoxine(at 50 mg/kg p.o q24h for10 days) or
patentinfections,without clinical signs.However,pat
trimethoprim/sulphonamides(at15-30mg/kgp.0.q24h
192
Chapter 20  Diseases of the small intestine
for 5 days) are most appropriate. Cryptosporidiosis is
Diet-related chronic enteropathies
usually self-limiting in immunocompetent individuals
This group of disorders is most appropriately termed
and, to date, most available drugs are ineffective. Initial
'adverse reactions to food' and can be the result of
raports that paromomycin was effective in cats, have
hypersensitivities or intolerances. Food hypersensitivi-
not been supported by recent data. However,
ties or 'allergies' Involve the immune system through
nitazoxanide has recently been shown to be effective
the generation of an aberrant acquired immune re-
in human cryptosporidiosis, and this may become the
sponse (usually type I or type IV hypersensitivity). Food
future treatment of choice for canine and feline cases
intolerances do not involve the immune system; the
(see Chapter 28). The prognosis forrecovery fram both
reaction instead has a pharmacologicalor toxicological
Isospora and Cryptosporidium are good, except in
basis. Nelther hypersensitivities nor intolerances have 
inmmunocompromised animals.
ol hinop st i! aoejeu pue subis ouowouboued
determine their relative frequencies. However, true
Giardia: Giardia spp. can affect both dogs and cats
food hypersensitivities are thought to be rare. One
and are transmitted by the faecal-oral route. Giardia
classic adverse reaction to food is gluten-sensitive
predominantlyinhabits the duodenum in dogs, whereas
enteropathy (GSE) in Irish Setters but it is unclear
the jejunum and ileum are the predominant sites of
whether this results from an aberrant immune re-
infection in cats. Giardiasis is most prevalent in ken-
sponse to gluten, a direct toxic effect of the gluten or
nelled dogs and may have zoonotic potential, although
both. There is also an ill-defined relationship between
 the strains infecting dogs differfrom human strains with
dietary hypersensitivities and IBD; aberrant immune
a low potential for cross-infection.
responses to food components could provoke the
onset of IBD, whilst food hypersensitivities can arise
Clinical signs: Infections may be asymptomatic, but
 secondary to mucosal inflammation in IBD.
when signs are present they can be acute or chronic
and vary in severity from mild to severe. Chronic
Clinical signs
diarrhoea may be associated with steatorrhoea, intes-
 Clinical signs include chronic diarrhoea, vomiting and
tinal protein loss and weight loss.
weight loss or failure to thrive. Concurrent dermato-
logical signs related to pruritus may also be present.
Diagnosis: Giardia can be diagnosed by documenting
Other small intestinal signs may include borborygmi,
 motile trophozoites on a fresh faecal smear cr oocysts
flatus or abdominal discomfort. The history occasion-
after zinc sulphate flotation. Shedding of cysts is inter-
mittent and repeated faecal analysis may be required
ticular foodstuff.
to confim the diagnosis. An ELiSA has also been
developed that measures a specific Giardia antigen in
Diagnosls
faeces and requires only a single faecal sample. Al-
 The initial aim is to rule out other possible causes of
though Giardia can also be detected in duodenal juice
diarrhoea; faecal analysis is negative, serum bio-
aspirates, the sensitivity of this technique is poor,
chemical examination is unremarkable and
especially in cats considering the predominant site of
haematological analysis is usually normal, although
colonization. PCR-based methods are available for
eosinophilia is sometimes seen. Diagnostic imaging
diagnosis in humans and to document environmental
is unrewarding. Tests for circulating antibodies to
contamination of water supplies, but such techniques
food proteins, intradermal skin testing and gastro-
are not yet available for companion animals.
scopic sensitivity testing are all of limited value in the
diagnosis of adverse food reactions. Endoscopy, bi-
Treatment and prognosis:Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg p.0.
opsy sample. procurement and histopathological
q24h for 3 days) is licensed for treatment of Giardia
assessment will eliminate other aetiologies; most
infection in dogs and is often used as a means to exclude
cases with adverse food reactions have either normal
this differential in cases of chronic diarrhoea in cats.
 histopathology or only mild inflammatory changes.
Studies have reported both safety and efficacy, and the
The gold standard for the diagnosis of an adverse
recommended treatment is 5 days in cats. High-dose
 Teaction to food is respanse to an exclusion diet and
metronidazole is an alternative (e.g. dogs, 25 mg/kg p.o.
q12h for 5 days; cats 10-25 mg/kg p.0. q12h for 5 days)
ever, this technique does not discriminate true food
but is effective in only 60% of cases and may cause
 hypersensitivities from food intolerance.
hypersalivation in cats. Recent studies have also dem-
onstrated that repeated doses of combination wormers
Exclusion diet: The principle of an exclusion diet is
containing febantel are effective. Outbreaks in colony
to feed dietary components to which the animal has
situations can be problematic since the organism is
not previously (or recently) been exposed. Complete
highlyinfectious. In these circumstances treatment of all
owner compliance is essential, and all treats and
animals together with hygiene precautions, e.g. clean-
supplements must be withheld. Some clinicians rec-
ing, disinfection, preventing water pooling (since desic-
ommend horme-prepared diets, because the exact
cation will kill Giardia cysts) and perianal hygiene are
ingredients are better controlled. However, such diets
recommended. A vaccine has also been developed,
are difficult to balance and owner compliance.may be
which may also aid control in colony outbreaks. In mast
poor. These problems are avoided with the use of a
cases prognosis is good but some infections can be
commercial dietbased on either hydrolysed protein or
dificult to eradicate.
a single protein source.
193
Chapter20Diseasesof the smallintestine
A traditional exclusiondiet iscomposedof single
In humans SIBO is diagnosed when upper small
proteinandcarbohydratesources,andtheexactchoice
intestinal bacterial numbers exceed 105 or 104 colony-
shouldbetailored to theindividual.Awiderangeof
diets is commercially available,containing different
bacteria and obligate anaerobes,respectively.Whilst
protein（e.g.chicken,soya,fish,cafish,venison,and
thesevalueswereinitiallyadopted fordogs,anumberf
duck) and carbohydrate(e.g.rice,corn[maize],tapi-
studieshave suggestedalarger'normal'microbialpopu-
oca orpotato)sources.Hydrolysed protein diets are
lation.Smallintestinalbacterialnumbers are alsogreater
usually based either on chicken or soy protein;in
inhealthycats.Therefore,thecurrentdiagnosticcriteria
for SIBO in companion animals are inappropriate and
dietary proteinsby splitting them into smaller compo-
may lead to misdiagnosis in many cases. It is more
nents,i.e.10-70 kDaltons.Although there is no clear
appropriate to definetwo separateconditions.Second-
scientificevidencenanimalstosuppor thissuchdiets
arySIBOisa signofanother underlying intestinal
are currentlythe easiestwaytoguaranteefeedingnovel
disease where genuine increases in bacterial numbers
antigensand maysoonbecome thepreferred approach
occur.Incontrast,idiopathic cases are more appropri-
for an exclusion diet.Preliminary studies have sug-
ately described as idiopathic antibiotic-responsive diar-
gestedbeneficialeffectsbutsuperiorityovertraditional
rhoea(ARD)on thebasisthat theonlyconsistentfinding
single-sourceproteinexclusiondiets hasnotbeendem-
is response to andremission on antibacterial therapy.
onstrated.The optimum durationforanexclusion diet
trial is unknown,and 3-4 weeks has been chosen
SecondarySIBOandidiopathicARD
Numerous diseases can potentially be associated with
mayrequireup to 10 weeks torespond.
secondarySIBO(Figure20.13).lfapartialobstruction
ispresentthe history often involves relapsing small
Challenge:Once remission is achieved,the animal
intestinal diarrhoea,weight loss,and responsetoem-
shouldbechallengedwith theoriginal diet todemon-
pirical antibacterial use.In all such conditions,it is
strate relapse and confirm the diagnosis. However,
logicaltoassume thatanincreaseinbacterial numbers
many clients are not willing to pursue this approach
occurs,although few studies have documented its
particularly ifrelapse islikelytobringrecurrenceof
magnitudeorwhether theovergrowthisresponsible
diarrhoea.lf performed,a series ofprovocation tests
for the clinical signs.Further,whilst diagnostic investi-
will identify the offending food(s). Challenge trials are
gationsmayidentify the presenceof secondary SIBO,
conducted forup to 14daysbutare discontinued
in practice it is better to concentrate the diagnostic
earlierif signsrecuron two consecutive days.Onceall
effort on identifying the underlying process.
offendingfoodshavebeenidentified,theanimalcanbe
maintainedonacommercial dietthatonlyincludes
Type of disease
Examples
non-allergenic components.
Decreased gastric
Treatment and prognosis: Dietary management
Spontaneous (e.g.atrophic gastritis)
should be the only treatment required and the diagno-
acid production
latrogenic (e.g.acid-blocking drugs, surgical
(achlorhydria)
resection)
sis should be re-evaluated if treatment fails.The prog-
nosis is good if the offending foodagents can be
Increased small
Exocrinepancreatic insufficiency
identified andeliminatedfromthediet.
intestinal substrates
Malabsorptive disorders?
Partial obstructive
Chronic intussusception
Small intestinalbacterial overgrowth and
disorders
Stricture
antibiotic-responsivediarrhoea
Neoplasia
Smallintestinalbacterialovergrowth(SIBO)isasignof
Foreign body
anunderlyingintestinal diseaseratherthanadiagno-
Anatomical disorders
Surgical resection of ileocolic valve
sis,andmay arise from abnormalities in any of the
Blind loop ('selfilig type)
mechanisms intended to modulate the flora.Previ-
Motilty disorders
Primary/idiopathic
ously,therehavebeenreports of anidiopathicformof
SIBO in dogs.However,the aetiopathogenesis of this
Secondary:
disease isnotclear and it iscontroversial whether a
Hypothyroidism
genuine idiopathicbacterialovergrowth exists.The
Electrclyte disorders
Intestinal surgery
consequencesofSIBOinclude:
Sepsis
Peritonitis
Interferencewith absorptionofnutrients
(including cobalamin and possibly taurine) and
fluiddue tomicrovillarenzyme dysfunction
Diseasos causing secondary SIBO.
Alteredmucosal permeability
Deconjugation of bile acids
Most cases of idiopathicARDhavebeen seen in
Hydroxylation of fatty acids.
youngGerman ShepherdDogs,althoughotherbreeds
maybeaffected.The exactcause andpredisposing
The pathogenetic processes that underlie the idio-
factors are not clear, but an association with IgA
pathicformhavenotbeenelucidated,butabreakdown
deficiency or dysregulation hasbeensuggested.How-
of tolerancetonormal luminal bacteriaisonepossible
ever,lgAdeficiency hasnotconsistentlybeen identi-
mechanism.
fiedincasesof idiopathicARDand thepathogenesisis
194
Chapter 20
 Diseases of the small intestine
likely to be more complex. Other hypotheses include
numbers have been documented in healthy dogs. Fur-
the presence of an occult intectious agent (e.g. entero-
ther, duodenal juice collection is technically demanding
pathogenic E. coli or clostridial species) ar a break-
and expensive so is rarely performed routinely.
down of immunological tolerance fo normal enteric
Given the limitations of the diagnostic gold stand-
microflora. There is no direct evidence to support any
 ard, indirect tests have been adapted from human
particular hypothesis.
methodology for use in the clinical seting. Hydrogen
concentrations can be measured in exhaled breath,
Clinical signs
either in a fasted state or after administration of a test
Themostcommon signsforbothsyndromes are chronic
meal. However, pratocols have not been universally
smallintestinai diarrhoea and weight loss or failure to
accepted and this remains a research technique. In
dogs, measurement of serum folate and cobaiamin
(anorexia, polyphagia, scavenging and coprophagia),
has been available for many years. Based on the
excessive borborygmi and abdominal discomfort. A
theory that many bacterial specles synthesize folate,
thorough history is important, since this may demon-
whilst others can bind cobalamin, increased numbers
strate an underlying cause (e.g. previous Gl surgery).
of small intestinal bacteria may elevate serum folate
Abdominal palpation may demonstrate a structuralcause
concentrations, decrease serum cobalamin concen-
 of secondary SIBO, e.g. partial intestinal cbstruction,
trations, or both. However, measurements of these
although it is unremarkable in cases of idiopathic ARD.
parameters have poor sensitivity and specificity for
canine SIBO and cannot differentiate dogs with ARD
Diagnosis
from those with other aetiologies. Thus, the use of
Secondary SIBO can be detected by a number of tests
folate and cobalamin measurements for the diagnosis
but it is essentialto discover the underlying cause. EPI
 of SIBO and especially ARD is questionable. Never-
 can be diagnosed by measuring serum TLi concentra-
theless, they are still of value in detecting vitamin
tion, whilst partial obstructions can be detected with
malabsorption (see below),
diagnostic imaging.
Assays for serum unconjugated bile acids (SUBA)
if no localizing findings are obvious, a complete
have recently become available. Bile acids are synthe-
investigation is recommended, e.g. routine haemato-
sized in the liver, conjugated to glycine or taurine and
logy, serum biochemical analysis, urinalysis, faecal
subsequently excreted into the intestine via the biliary
bacteriology and parasitology, diagnostic imaging and
tract. Certain bacterial specles (Clostridium, Bacter-
gastroduodenoscopy. Findings are usually unremark-
oides) deconjugate bile acids, which then are ab-
able or non-specific in cases with idiopathic ARD. At
sorbed by the Sl. While abnormal values do reflect
this stage, a treatment trial with an antibacterial should
changes in intestinal microflora, recent work has sug-
be contemplated. True idiopathic ARD can be diag-
 gested that they are of limited use in the diagnosis of
nosed if the following criteria are established:
idiopathic ARD.
 In summary, none of the diagnostic tests currently
 No other cause can be identified (based on the
available is recommended for diagnosis of either sec-
results of the preliminary diagnostic tests and 
ondary SIBO or idiopathlc 'ARD. Where secondary
histopathological assessment)
SIBO is suspected, it is preferable to look for the
(e.g. resolution of clinical signs, including weight 
underlying cause. Given that neither quantitative bac-
 terial culture nor indirect tests reliably identify cases
gain)
Relapse of clinical signs occurs upon withdrawal
that respond to antibacterials, and given that correla-
tion between all methods is poor, their use in the
of treatment, and remission is achieved when
 antibiotic therapy is recommenced.
diagnosis of idiopathic ARD is not recommended.
However, although response to antibacterials is
Treatment
critical forthe diagnosis, atharough diagnosticevalu-
 Therapy for secondary SIBO is best directed at the
ation must first have been performed to eliminate
underlying disorder if appropriate, e.g. surgical resec-
underlying diseases, especially those that might
tion of lesions causing partial obstruction or pancreatic
cause secondary SIBO.
enzyme supplementation for EPl. Experimental stud-
ies have shown that bacterial numbers in dogs with EPI
Diagnostic tests: Both direct and indirect diagnostic
decline with pancreaticenzyme supplementation alone
tests are available, but none has been properly vali-
 (probably because enzymes are bactericidal and avail-
dated for companion animals and widely accepted
able substrate is reduced), suggesting that the prob-
reference ranges have not been established. There-
lem will resolve of its own accord. However, in some
fore, the results of these tests must be interpreted with
clinical cases concurrent antibacterial therapy is nec-
caution. The main direct test is quantitative bacterial
essary. For idiopathic ARD an appropriate antibacte-
culture of duodenal juice. Indirect tests include hydro-
 rial should be administered for an initial period of 4
 gen breath tests and serum biochemical analyses.
weeks. lf signs relapse, a longer course may be re-
 The current diagnostic gold standard for SIBO
is
quired, and many cases required long-term (or lifelong)
duodenal juice culture and the most commonly quoted
therapy to maintain remission of signs.
figure for the upper limit for small intestinal bactenial
The choice of antibacterial is controversial; most
numbers is 105 CFU/ml. However, the validity of this
cases of idiopathic ARD respond well to oxytetra-
cut-off is questionable because quantitatively larger
cycline at 10--20 mg/kg p.0. q8h and, for long-term
195
Chapter 20 [
 Diseases of the small intestine
therapy, low doses can often maintain clinical remis-
Lymphocytlc-plasmacytic enteritis
sion (10 mg/kg p.0. q24h). Other suitable drugs include
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis (LPE) is character-
tylosin or metronidazole. Interestingly, when oxytetra-
ized by architectural disruption of the intestinal mucosa
cycline is administered bacterial numbers do not
in conjunction with excessive numbers of lymphocytes
decline significantly and resistance soon develops,
and plasma cells. The severity of histopathological
despite resolution of clinical signs. Therefore, the
abnormalities is variable, can affect a variable length of
mechanism of action is not currently known. These
the Sl and can affect other areas (e.g. stomach and
drugs may exert a selection pressure on the intestinal
colon). Moderate to severe cases are often associated
microflora in the same way as a prebiotic. Alternatively.
with: protein-losing enteropathy. A severe form of the
immunomodulatory effects, as reported for some of the
disease has been reported in Basenjis. In cats LPE is
tetracyclines, are possible. In addition, low doses of the
often associated with concurrent disease of the pan-
same antibiotic (e.g. macrolides) may inhibit bacterial
creas and liver (triaditis'), i.e. pancreatitis, cholangitis
adhesion without any bactericidal or bacteriostatic
and hepatic lipidosis.
effects. Oxytetracycline remains first choice for
idiopathic ARD, but its use for secondary SIBO is
 Pathogenesis: The underlying aetiology of small
controversial and other drugs may be more appropri-
animal IBD is unknown and comparisons have been
ate, e.g. tylosin or metronidazole, since their spectrum
made with human IBD. Breakdown of immunological
of activity is better for the organisms thatare likely to be
tolerance to luminal antigens Is thought to be critical.
present in secondary SIBO. Further, Marks (2003) has
In addition, immune dysregulation and disruption
questioned the long-term use of tetracyclines since
of the integrity of the mucosal barrier may also play
organisms resistant to this group rapidly develop.
a part. A role for the immune system in canine LPE
Fluoroquinolones, e.g. ciprofloxacin, are often used in
has been suggested by studies that document in-
humans in order to target Gram-negative organisms
creases in lamina propria T cells (especially CD4+
and might also be indicated.
cells)., lgG+ plasma cells, macrophages and granu-
locytes. Marked increases in mucasal cytakines have
secondary SIBO and idiopathic ARD. This involves the
also been documented in canine LPE, with increased
feeding of a highly digestible, fat-restricted diet,
expression of Th1 (IL-2, IL-12 and IFNy), Th2 (IL-5):
containing prebiotics (e.g. fructo-oligosaccharides).
proinflammatory (TNF-α) and immunoregulatory
Whilst these can modulate colonic microflora the
(TGF-β) cytokine mRNA.
effect on small intestinal bacteria is questionable and
there is limited current evidence for efficacy in clinical
Clinical findings: In dogs, the most common clinical
cases.
 sign is chronic small bowel diarrhoea, which can be
accompanied by weight loss and vomiting. In cats,
Prognosis
vomiting is more common than diarrhoea or weight
The prognosis for secondary SlBO depends upon the
loss, and the vomitus may contain bile and hairballs.
nature of the underlying cause and success of therapy
Other clinical findings include alterations in appetite,
forthe particular condition. The prognosis foridiopathic
excessive borborygml and abdominal discomfort.
If
ARD is guarded; many cases relapse affer therapy is
discontinued and then require prolonged or even life-
taneous oedema may be seen. Concurrent systemic
long treatment. However, other cases require only
immune-mediated disorders and thromboembolism
occasional short courses of antibacterials to maintain
have rarely been reported.
clinical remission. Some cases may improve sponta-
In most cases, no speciflc abnormalities are de-
neously as the animal enters adulthood.
tected on physical examination. However, occasional
findings include thickened small intestinal loops and
Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease
 mesenteric lymphadenopathy. These findings are usu-
The term idiopathic IBD defines a diverse group of Gl
ally easier to detect in cats than dogs.
disorders that are characterized by inflammatory mu-
cosal changes (both architectural abnormalities and
Diagnosis: There are no pathognomonic clinico-
cellular infilitrates) withouta known inciting cause. There-
pathological findings in dogs and cats with LPE;
fore, diagnosis requires that there is histological evi-
panhypoproteinaemia and leucocytosis may be
dence of inflammation and that all potential causes for
seen sporadically. Serum TLl measurerment should
inflammation be excluded, e.g. endoparasites, dietary
eliminate EPl, and faecal analysis endoparasitism
sensitivity and ARD. IBD is usually classified on the
or bacterial pathogens. Abdominal radiography may
basisof the predominant infiltrating celltype: lymphocytes
eliminate other differential diagnoses, and is normal
and plasma cells are most commonly seen, whilst
in most cases of LPE. Abdominal ultrasonography
eosinophilic predominance is noted in some cases.
has a higherdiagnostic yield and may reveal evidence
However, many cases have a generalized increase in
 of intestinal wall thickening, mesenteric lymphaden-
several immune cell subsets and cannot easily be
opathy or abdominal effusion. Where an alternative
classified into one histologicalgroup. Such classification
diagnosis has not been identified, intestinal biopsy
 aul jo uajuido au uodn spuadap pue Aenqe uao s!
 samples should be obtained for histopathological
pathologist concerned. Attempts have been made to
assessment, either via endoscopy or exploratory
standardize histopathological classification but no
laparotomy. Biopsy specimens should be collected
even if there are no gross abnormalities.
196
Chapter2o Diseases of the small intestine
Biopsy specimens areclassified on thepresence
immunosuppressiveproperties(e.g.oxytetracycline,
ofarchitectural abnormalities and thepresenceof
tylosin and metronidazole) ormaymodulate the bacte-
cellularinfiltrates(Figure 20.14).Architectural abnor-
rialflorareducingseverityoftheaberrant immune
malities include villus （atrophy,fusion,increased
response to the endogenous flora.
width),crypt (necrosis,hyperplasia,abscessation),
Immunosuppressivemedicationshouldbeadminis-
tered earlyin the courseof thediseasewhenpatients
lymphocytes) and lamina propria changes(haemor-
aredebilitated,and indeedparenteral therapymaybe
rhage,oedema,fibrosis)(see Chapter5).Onerecent
necessary(e.g.prednisolone by intramuscular injec-
publication suggested poor correlation between the
tion).lf oral medication is employed,the initial starting
interpretationsofintestinalhistopathologyamongst
dose of prednisolone is 1.0 mg/kg p.0.q12h (dogs)and
pathologists.It canbe especially difficult to distin-
1.0-2.0 mg/kg p.o.q12h (cats). The starting dose is
guishmildLPEfrom normal tissues,andto distin-
administeredfor2-3weeksinthefirstinstanceand then
guish severe LPE from intestinal lymphoma.In
addition,inflammationsecondarytootherdisordersis
a thirdevery2-3weeks until altemate daydosing is
alsoindistinguishable from IBD unless a causative
reached (e.g.0.5mg/kg p.o.q48h).
agent (e.g. parasite) is visible in the biopsy specimen.
Additional immunosuppressivemedicationcan be
Therefore,histopathological reports should be inter-
added if clinicalresponse ispoororglucocorticoid side-
pretedcautiouslyin lightof the individual clinical
effects aremarked,e.g.azathioprine for dogs,chloram-
presentation.
bucil for cats.Once remission is achieved,both the
steroidsand the other immunosuppressives canbe
taperedgradually.Whilst onazathioprineorchloram-
bucilhaematological parametersshould be monitored
regularly(e.g.every 14days initially).Some clinicians
includemetronidazolein treatmentregimesbecauseof
itsputativeimmunosuppressiveeffects.However,these
effectshavenotbeen documented clearlyincompanion
animals.Nevertheless,manycliniciansreportempirical
success.Thereis limitedexperience withotherimmuno-
suppressivemedication:forexample,budesonidemay
causefewerside-effects since a large proportionis
metabolizedduring thefirst-pass'throughtheliverafter
absorption. Ciclosporin has been suggested as an alter-
nativetreatment but thereare limiteddataonitsuse.
Prognosis:The prognosis for LPE isvariable and
20.14
Photomicrograpn from the ducderum of an
depends upon disease severity,with some cases re-
8-year-oldneuleredmalecrcssbreddogwith
sponding poorly to therapy.Even when response is
diarrhoea, ascites and severe panhypoprateinaemia
good,casesmayrequireprolonged treatment.Where
(albumin 10 g/, refererice inlerval:25-31 g/; globulins
PLEhasbeenidentified,serumproteinconcentrations
20 g/,reference intcrval:27-40 g/).There is evidence of
should be monitored regularly.When repeatendo-
villous atrophy. epithelial erosions and mild acteal
dilalalion.There is a variable, mixed inflammatory cell
scopyisperformed theremaybenoimprovement in
infiltrate within the mucosa.These findings would be
histological abnormalities,despite clinical improve-
consistentwithamixed inflammatorybowel disease.
ment.The exact reason for this is unclear.Although
H&E stain.(Ccurtesy of R Fox,Department of Veterinary
criteriaforaccuratemonitoringof therapeuticresponse
Pathology University of Liverpool.)
have not been clearly described,the use of an IBD
'activity index'mayprove tobeuseful in thefuture.
Treatment:The treatment of LPE ofteninvolvesa
combinationof therapies including dietary modifica-
Eosinophilicenteritis
tion,antibacterialdrugs and immunosuppressivemedi-
Eosinophilic enteritis(EE)is an idiopathic mucosal
cation.lf thepatient is not too debilitated,treatment
inflammation,involvingmucosal architectural distur-
trialsshouldfirstbeinstigatedwithdietarymodification
bancesandpredominanceof eosinophilswithin the
or with antibacterial drugs. Immunosuppressive medi-
inflammatory infiltrate.The diseasemay be limited to
cationshouldbeusedonlywhenother treatmentsfail.
the Sl ormay include other areas(e.g.stomach and
Inthiswaycases thatare truly idiopathic can be
colon).However,thenumberofeosinophilsisvariable,
discerned from food-responsive andantibiotic-respon-
eveninnormal individuals,and sodifferentiating the
siveconditions.However,there is someoverlapbe-
normal population froman abnormal numbercanbe
tweenconditions,becausedietarysensitivitycanarise
difficult.The criteria fordiagnosis of eosinophilicenteri-
secondary to themucosal inflammation in IBD.Fur-
tisvarybetweenpathologists;some would classifya
ther,theprovisionof a highly digestible,fat-restricted
mixedinflammatorycellinfiltratecontainingeosinophils
diet may provide non-specific benefits. Although
aseosinophilic enteritis,otherpathologists are more
antibacterialswill discriminatecasesofARD,antibac-
strict andwould use the termonlywheneosinophils
terial therapy may also be directly beneficial in IBD
predominate.Increases in eosinophil numbersmay
cases.In thisregard,some antibacterials may have
also arise secondary to otheraetiologies,such as
197
Chapter2oDiseases of the small intestine
consideredAtrnativelytheneutrophilicinfiltratemay
differentialsshouldbeexcludedpriortoimmunosup-
have arisenfrombacterial invasionsecondary tomu-
pressive treatment forEE.
cosalbarrierdisruptionfromerosiveorulcerativele-
sions.Prednisolone is generally not recommended for
Clinical findings:Chronic small intestinal diarrhoea
such cases,unless they fail to respond to all other
accompanied byvomiting or weight lossare themain
therapeuticmodalities.Potential causesofgranuloma-
clinical signs.Melaena is subjectivelymore commonin
tousinflammationincludeYersiniaandMycobacterium
casesof EEthan LPE.
infections,foreignbodyreactions and fungal diseases.
Thelastare uncommonin the UKand special staining
Diagnosis:The diagnosticapproach is similar to that
procedures, serology or culture and PCR of tissue
described forLPE.However,peripheral eosinophilia is
samples isrecommended for diagnosis.lfpossible,
occasionallydocumentedonhaematologicalexamina-
treatment shouldbe directed at the underlying disor-
tion.Differential diagnosesincludemast cellneoplasia
der.However,if no cause is evident,a staged ap-
hypoadrenocorticism and endoparasitism.EEin cats
proachtotherapyisrecommended,withsteroidsused
can occasionallyberelated to hypereosinophilic syn-
as an absolute last resort.The prognosis depends
drome,where infiltrates ofeosinophils maybe seen
upon the underlying cause.
withinthespleen,liver,lymphnodes andbonemarrow.
Other clinicopathological abnormalitiesin EEinclude
Lymphangiectasia
panhypoproteinaemia secondary toconcurrentPLE,or
Intestinal lymphangiectasia is relatively common in
anaemia if Gl haemorrhage issevere.Theprotocol for
dogs,butrareincats.Theconditionischaracterizedby
investigation is similar to that for LPE. At endoscopy,
theabnormal dilatationanddysfunctionof lymphatic
grossfindingsmayincludethepresenceof linearulcers
vesselswithin themucosa and submucosa.lt may be
within the duodenal mucosa(Figure 20.15).A definitive
a primary disorder,e.g.localized or generalized lym-
phatic abnormality.Alternatively,lymphatic obstruc-
examination of intestinal biopsy material.
tion can arise secondary to intestinal (e.g.neoplastic
infiltration,inflammation or fibrosis)orsystemic（e.g.
20.15
right-sided cardiacfailure,cavalobstructionorhepatic
disease) disorders.Lymphaticabnormalitiesare often
Endoscopic
associatedwithlipogranulomatousinflammation,butit
appearanceof
linearmuccsa
is not clearwhether this is theprimary eventorsecond-
ulceration,
ary tothelymphangiectasia.Thelacteal dilatation is
observedinacase
associatedwithexudationofprotein-richlymphand
ofeosinophilic
severe lipid malabsorption.Yorkshire Terriers,
enteritis.
Rottweilers,NorwegianLundehunds andSoftCoated
(Courlesy of
Wheaten Terriers arepredisposed anda genetic
Edward Hall)
association is likely.
Clinicalsigns:Clinicalsignsinclude weight lossand
chronic diarrhoea,and are theresultof intestinal pro-
tein loss.Ascites,subcutaneous oedema and chylo-
thorax can develop if severehypoproteinaemia or
Treatment:A combination of treatmentmodalities
disruptionof lymphatic flow is present.
mayberequiredandprednisoloneshouldbereserved
forthosecasesthatdonotrespondtoothertreatments.
Diagnosis:Cases may present with signs relating to
Given thepossibilityof underlyingendoparasitism or
severe PLE.Clinicopathological findings include
dietarysensitivity,ananti-parasiticidetrialwithfenben-
panhypoproteinaemia,hypocholesterolaemiaandlym-
dazoleand then an exclusiondietshould firstbe
phopenia.Hypocalcaemiaandhypomagnesaemiahave
instigated.However,prednisoloneorotherimmuno
alsobeenreported.Thehypocalcaemia isnot simply
suppressive medication is often required. Cats with
theresultof hypoalbuminaemia because ionized hypo-
calcaemia occurs;therefore,other mechanisms,in-
therapy,even with combinations of immunosuppres-
cludingvitaminD and calciummalabsorption,may be
sive agents, diet and anthelmintics.
involved.Specificinvestigations, such as measure-
mentoffaecal α-proteinaseinhibitorconcentrations,
Prognosis:lf an underlying cause can be detected and
can be used toconfirmPLE.Diagnostic imaging may
treated, the prognosis is good.However, the prognosis
behelpful innarrowing thedifferential diagnosislist
is more guarded if initial response is poor; this is espe-
and identifying secondary consequences:such as
ciallytrueforfelinehypereosinophilicsyndrome.
close assessment of bowel loops but apparent mu-
Otherinflammatoryenteropathies
Someinflammatorydiseasesmaybecharacterized by
oedemaratherthanagenuine infitrative disease.
infiltratesofneutrophilsorbygranulomatous inflam-
Definitive diagnosis requires intestinal biopsy by
mation,although thesepatternsarerare.lf neutrophils
either endoscopyorexploratory coeliotomy.Endo
are evident,anunderlyingbacterialinfectionshouldbe
scopy is less invasive and distended lacteals can often
198
Chapter20 Diseases of the small intestine
be seengrossly asmultiplerice-grainnodules over
and combinations of diuretics are preferred (e.g.furo-
the mucosal surface (Figure 20.16).However,endo-
semide and spironolactone).Administration of plasma
scopicbiopsy can occasionallymissthe characteristic
orcolloidsmay alsobeof short-termbenefit if hypopro-
changes of lymphangiectasia, and full-thickness bi-
teinaemia ismarked,but sustained improvementre-
opsy is preferabie.Nevertheless,the increased risk of
quires correction of the underlying protein leakage.
wounddehiscencemaymean that exploratory
laparotomy is contraindicated.Plasma oncotic pres-
Prognosis:The prognosis is guarded and response is
surecanbesupportedwithcolloidsoraplasmainfu-
usuallypoor,althoughsomedogsdowell.Thereasons
for thisvariation inresponse are not clear.However,
Iymphatics,mesenteric lymphadenopathy and
remissionmaysometimesbemaintained forseveral
lipogranulomata canbeseen.Thelatter areyellow-
years, but many respondent patients eventually
white nodularmasses (1-3 mm diameter) associated
progress to fulminant hypoproteinaemia.
withmesentericandserosal lymphatics and consist of
Miscellaneouscauses ofprotein-losing
accumulations of lipid-laden macrophages.
enteropathies
A recent report has documented PLEs associated with
20.16
intestinal crypt lesions,without evidence of lymph-
Endcscopic
angiectasia orinflammation.Unfortunately the aetio-
appearance of
pathogenesis was not classified and response to
grossly
therapy,with antibacterials and immunosuppressive
distended
medication,was variable.Some dogs with PLE die
lacteals
suddenly fromthromboembolicdisease.
associated with
lymphangiectasia
Intestinal neoplasia
(Courtesyo
The most common malignancies in dogs are lym-
Edward Hall)
phoma,adenocarcinomaandsmoothmuscletumours;
themostcommontumoursincatsarelymphoma,mast
cell neoplasia and adenocarcinoma.However,other
typesofneoplasiacan occurincludingfibrosarcoma,
haemangiosarcoma andplasmacelltumours.
Thehistopathological abnormalities in lymphangi-
Intestinal lymphoma
ectasiaincludemarked lymphaticdilatation inboth the
Lymphoma ischaracterized bymucosal and submu-
mucosa and submucosa.Truelymphangiectasia must
cosal infiltration with neoplasticlymphocytes,which
be distinguishedfromsecondarylacteal dilatationthat
can then lead to clinical sequelae.Diffuse forms affect
can arise secondary toother enteropathies,e.g.IBD.
digestion and absorption, leading to malabsorption
Anassociated inflammatorycell infiltratemaybeseen
andPLE.Incontrast,focal forms cancause complete
in thelaminapropria,although,ifoedemaispresent
orpartialobstructionoftheintestine.lncats,lymphoma
the trce'lercehsmynybg uednnstimatedetisnfene!
may pe rereateu Tofivnmtecnurl,anncbgrnntsrcases
not clear whether such an infiltrate is the cause of the
are negative for serum FeLV antigen at the time of
lymphangiectasia or is secondary to it.
 diagnosis. LPE is hypothesized to progress to lym-
phoma but can also coexist with LPE in adjacent
Treatment: For secondary lymphangiectasia the un-
regions of the Sl.
derlying cause should be identified and treated spe-
cifically, e.g. right-sided cardiac failure. For cases of
Clinical signs: Middle-aged or older dogs and cats are
primary lymphangiectasia treatmentis supportive and
 most commonly affected. Clinical signs include weight 
 symptomatic. This involves decreasing enteric pro-
loss, chronic smallintestinal diarrhoea, anorexia, vomit-
tein loss, resolving associated inflammation and con-
ing and melaena. On physical examination, there may
 trolling cedema oreffusions. Previously, medium-chain
be thickened intestinal loops, mass lesions and me-
triglycerides were recommended, since it was thought
that they bypassed the lymphatics and were ab-
 gest a multicentric form of lymphoma. Clinical signs of
sorbed directly into the portal blood circulalion. How-
hypoproteinaemia may be noted if there is severe
ever, recent studies have contradicted this and use of
concurrent PLE.
these nutrients cannot be recommended. Supple-
mentation with fat-soluble vitamins is advised, and
Diagnosis: Haematological examination may reveal
there are anecdotal reports of improvement with
either normocytic-normochromic or microcytic-
glutamine supplementation.
hypochromic anaemia. Serum biochemical analysis
 Prednisolone, atan initial dose of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg p.0.
may demonstrate panhypoproteinaemia, but hyper-
 q12h may benefit some cases, especially if the disease
globulinaemia can be secn in B cell lymphoma. De-
is secondary to an inflammatory disorder. Adjunctive
creased serum folate or cobalamin concentrations
therapy with metronidazole or tylosin may also be of
may be noted if significant malabsorption is present.
benefit,either by modulation of entericmicroflora or
Diagnostic imaging: and especially abdominal ultra-
through potential immunomodulatory effects. Finally.
 sonography, will enable identification and characteri-
diuretics are indicated in the management of effusions
zation of mass lesions, mesenteric lymphadenopathy
199
Chapter20
Discasesof thesmall intestine
ordiffuse intestinalmural thickening with lossof normal
and ileum aremorecommonlyaffected.Siamesecats
layering (see Figure 20.8). Targeted aspiration of ab-
maybe over-represented.
normal lesions can be performed underultrasound
guidance.Cytologicalsamplescan alsobecollected at
Clinicalfindings:Theconsequencesofadenocarci-
endoscopy,althoughinmanycases,intestinal biopsy
nomaareusuallysecondarytolocal infiltrationand
isrequired fordefinitive diagnosis.Endoscopicbiopsiey
intestinal obstruction.Onabdominal palpation,a fo-
samplesareeasiertoprocurebutsignificantabnor-
cal masslesion maybe evident,whereasblood loss
malitiesmaybemissed,especiallywheretheneoplastic
anaemia and melaena mayarise from associated
infiltrationiswithinthedeepmucosa,submucosaor
mucosalulceration.
muscularis layers;therefore,many clinicians prefer
exploratory coeliotomy.Immunohistochemistry may
Diagnosis:Clinicopathological assessment may
aid indiagnosis andclassification.Flowcytometry and
reveal evidence ofa microcytic-hypochromic(blood
assessmentof TcellclonalitybyPCRmayprove tobe
loss)anaemia.Ultrasonography is thebest way of
more accurate in the future.
identifying,sampling and characterizing these
tumours.Biopsy andhistopathological assessment
Treatmentandprognosis:In dogs,thedisease can
arerequiredfor definitive diagnosis.Given thefocal
be rapidly progressive and most patients respond
nature of disease,exploratory coeliotomy is most
poorlytotherapy,althoughtherearesome exceptions.
appropriate anditmayalsopermitsurgical correction
Catswithalimentarylymphoma mayrespond betterto
if appropriate.
combination chemotherapy.Standard combination
protocols,based onprednisolone,cyclophosphamide
Treatmentandprognosis:Mostadenocarcinomas
and vincristine sulphate may be used.However,for
aremalignant and have alreadymetastasizedby the
some cases,a combination ofprednisolone andchlo
time ofdiagnosis.Surgicalresectionisthe treatmentof
rambucil can give prolonged remission and survival.
choice,but the prognosis is grave for most cases.
Given thatboth drugs areadministered orallyand
easilydiscontinued,thiscombinationissuitablewhen
but survival is usually<12months.Chemotherapy has
histopathological differentiationbetweensevereLPE
beenreported not tobeeffective.
and lymphoma hasnotbeenpossible.
Otherneoplasms
Intestinaladenocarcinoma
Other types ofneoplasia include smooth muscle tu-
Malignantepithelial tumourscanbeseeninmiddle-
mours,fibrosarcoma,haemangiosarcoma (Figure
aged to older dogs and cats.In dogs,theyare most
prevalent in theduodenum,whilst in cats thejejunum
result fromdirect invasion,intestinal blood lossor
(a)
(b)
(C)
d
20.17
Pathological, histopathological and immunohistochemical firdings from a 10-year-o d male crossbred with
resected mass confirmed itasa haemang osarcoma.H&Estain;original magnificalion x100.(c)and
x200(d).(e) Immunohistochemical stain demonstrating that some of the neoplastic cellsareositiveorvimentin;
demonstratingpositivity for factorVll:immunopercxidasemethod.original magnificationx20o.(Courtesy of R.Fox,
Departmentof VelerinaryPatrolcgy,Universilyof Liverpool.)
200
Chapter 20  Diseases of the small intestine
through paraneoplastic phenomena. Diagnosis is
struction signs are less severe and include anorexia
usually made on histopathological assessment cf bi-
and intermittent vomiting of small volumes, cffen with
opsy samples. Paraneoplastic phenomena are most
a foetid smell (the result of secondary bacterial
commonly associated with smooth muscle tumours
overgrowth and putrefaction of intestinal contents).
and include hypoglycaemia and nephrogenic diabetes
However, vomiting is occasionally absent with some
insipidus. The former is the result of release of an
distal obstructions. Partial obstruction can also result
insulin-like substance; the aetiology of the latter is
in intermittent vomiting and diarrhoea. With volvulus
unclear. Mast cell tumours may release histamine,
there is also rapid accumulation of peritoneal fluid as
which through stimulation of gastric acid hypersecre-
strangulated intestinal loops become turgid and per-
tion can cause gastric and duodenal ulceration, and
meable. Subsequent hypoxia leads to disruption of
 hence vomiting, haematemesis and melaena. Gastric
the mucosal barrier, peritonitis and septicaemia.
and duodenal perforation may also occur.
Physical findings are variable and depend upon
Treatment involves resection of the primary intesti-
the severlty of fluid losses and intestinal compromise.
nal mass. Prognosis is variable; fibrosarcomas and
Findings range from mild dehydration to septic shock.
haemangiosarcomas
have usvally already
Shock and abdominal pain (acute abdomen) are the
rmetastasized and recur quickly. However, leiomyosar-
major findings with strangulated obstructions, such
comas are slow growing and slow to metastasize, with
as intestinal volvulus, incarceration and intussuscep-
a median survival time of approximately 2 years, if
tion. A thorough oral examination is indicated, par-
 cases survive the initial postoperative perlod. Surgical
ticularly in cats, since linear foreign objects may be
debulking is recommended even in the face of gross
anchored under the tongue. Localized discomfort
abdominal metastases because prolonged survival
may be evident with foreign objects, volvulus,
can still be achieved.
intussusceptions and tumcurs; palpation may be re-
 Adenomatous polyps can affect the Sl causing
sented or impossible when intestinal inflammation or
vomiting, haematemesis, diarhoea and anaemia.
perforation ls present. Focal increases in intestinal
Cases are best diagnosed with a combination of ab-
thickness suggest tumours, intussusceptions or
dominal ultrasonography and endoscopic evaluation.
-bns s! ssew padeus-abesnes e pue 'sioelgo ubjaioy
Surgery is the treatment of choice and can be curative.
gestive of an intussusception. Mesenteric lymph-
adenopathy is often present in animals with inflam-
Intestinal obstruction
 matory and neoplastic intestinal disease.
Intestinal obstruction can be acute or chronic, partial or
complete, and simple or strangulated. The cause of the
Diagnosis
obstruction can be extraluminal, intramural or intralu-
Historical information can be important in the diagnosis
minal, and a variety of aetiologies are possible. The
and may give clues as to ingestian of foreign bodies or
most common causes include intussusception, neo-
previous signs of diarrhoea. Physical examinafionfind-
 plasia and foreign bodies. Less common causes in-
ings are variable and depend upon the cause, site and
clude intestinal volvulus and obstruction due to
extent of obstruction. A minirmum database and clinico-
incarcerated intestinal loops. Younger animals are
pathoiogical tests help fo chiaracterize the fluid losses
more likely to deveiop intussusception following gas-
and inflammation. Hypochloraemia, hypokalaemia and
troenteritis or intestinal surgery, although an increased
acid-base abnormalities are common in patients with
risk in postparturient queens has also been reported.
upper Gl obstruction.
 Intestinal neoplasia is more frequent in middle-aged to
Aadiographic features of obstruction include obvi-
 older individuals. Common foreign bodies in dogs
ous foreign bodies, intestinal dilatation due to the accu-
Include peach stones and toys, whilst linear foreign
mulation of fluid or gas (see Figure 20.7), and ac-
bodies (e.g. needles with associated thread) are more
cumulationof ingested food (gravelsign). Displacement,
common in cats.
bunching or plication of the intestine may also be evi-
The adverse effects of intestinal cbstruction de-
dent, whilst decreased serosal detail and free
pend upon whether the cbstruction is partial or com-
abdominalgas indicate peritonitis and intestinal perfora-
plete, and relate to the consequences of intestinal fluid
tion, respectively. By quantifying the degree of intestinal
loss, proliferation of intestinal bacteria and secondary
dilatation the likelihood of intestinal obstruction can be
intestinal inflammation. Intestinal perforation is a seri-
detemmined, with obstruction being unlikely when the
ous additional complication and is most common with
widest loop is less than 1.6 x the height of the body of L5.
linear foreign bodies and intestinal neopiasia.
However, survey radiography can be unremarkable in
chronic partial obstructlon and ileo-colic intussuscep-
Clinical findings
tion. Contrast radiography, with liquid contrast media or
The clinical findings depend upon the site, severity
barium-impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPS), can
and cause of obstruction. Net secretion of fluid occurs
-aa ui ajeudoidde eq lou Aew ng sisoubep u! lsisse
in the upper Sl, whilst there is net resorption in the
gency cases, and often does not give more information
lower Si. Further, distal small intestinal obstruction is
than plain radiography. Ultrasonography is an excel-
more likely to result in significant secondary SIBO.
lent means by which non-palpable cbstructive lesions
Therefore, complete upper intestinal cbstruction is
can be identified, and is useful in deterrnining underly-
associated with persistent and severe vomiting of
ing causes of intussusception, such as intestinal neo-
large volumes, together with marked intestinal fluid
plasms. Ultrasound-guided needle aspirates further
and electrolyte loss. With distal small intestinal ob-
help to establish the identity of any lesions identified.
1!
Chapter 20  Diseases of fthe small intestine
Treatment
Short bowel syndrome
The main aim of treatment is to remove or resect the
 Shortbowelsyndromecan develop when a large amount
cause of the obstruction. Fluid therapy should be
(e.g. greater than two-thirds) of the Sl is absent, either
 initiated on the basis of clinical fndings and a minimum
 because of surgical resection or a congenital anomaly.
database. Fluid shifts can be severe and aggressive;
The remaining absorptive capacity is insufficient for
joaunoo pue yoaap oi Aesseoau sl buuouou
adequate absorption of nutrients and electrolytes,
changes in fluid balance (see Chapter 26). Broad
resulting in diarrhoea. The syndrome may be transient
spectrum antibacterial drugs (e.g. ampicillin or a ce-
 affer intestinal resection, because the remaining intes-
phalosporin, often in combination with metronidazole)
 tine can undergo adaptive hyperplasia.
are usually administered prophylactically before sur-
gery. Antibiotics should be given to patients with signs
Clinical signs and diagnosis
of sepsis or intestinal compromise (see above). Fluid
 The predominant clinical signs are small intestinal
 balance and electrolyte abnormalities should be cor-
diarrhoea and weight loss. In acquired cases the his-
 rected as much as possible before surgery.
tory of recent bowel resection and subsequent devel-
 Prognosis: The prognosis depends upon the cause of
opment of clinical signs is usually sufficient to make a
diagnosis. In congenital cases, plain or contrast radio-
fhe obstruction and severityofabnarmalities associated
with it. Simple foreign bodies have an excellent progno-
graphy is required.
sis, whilst the outlook is grave for metastatic neoplasia.
Treatment and prognosis
Adynamic ileus and intestinal pseudo-
Dietary therapy to control the chronic diarrhoea is
obstruction
essential and a highly digestible low fat diet is recom-
Adynamic ileus is a common sequel to parvoviral
 mended. Multivitamin supplementation may also be
enteritis, abdominal surgery, pancreatitis, peritonitis,
necessary. Further,if resection involves removal of
endotoxaemia, hypokalaemia and dysautonomia. In-
the leocaecal valve, secondary SIBO is a possibility
testinalpseudo-obstruction describesaconditionwhere
and antibacterial drugs are required, e.g. metronida-
patients have clinical evidence consistent with an ob-
zole or tylosin. In cases that respond poorly,
struction, but with no mechanical cause. The condition
 antisecretory agents (e.g.loperamide, diphenoxylate)
has been associated with both visceral neuropathies
 and antacids (e.g. ranitidine, famotidine) may be
and myopatnies in humans, and such causes may
required. However, raniticine has prokinetic proper-
 occur in small animals. The majority of canine cases 
ties and may not be helpful. Total or partial parenteral
are associated with idiopathic sclerosing enteropathy,
nutrition may be helpful in severe cases in the short
with fibrosis and a mononuclear cell infitrate of the
term until adaptive hyperplasia occurs. The prognosis
tunica muscularis. A single reported case of feline
depends on the length of functional SI that remains. If
intestinal pseudo-obstruction was secondary to intes-
adaptive hyperplasia is good, patients may respond,
tinal lymphoma.
but ihese animais will always have a limited absorp-
 After eliminating the possibility of mechanical ob-
tive reserve and continued dietary management will
 struction, management of both adynamic ileus and 
usually be necessary. Unfortunately, some cases
intestinal pseudo-obstruction is aimed at identifying any
respond poorly to treatment.
underlying cause andproviding specifictreatment.Symp-
tomatic therapy to stimulate intestinal motity is aiso
References and further reading
 indicated. In dogs and cats, cisapride appears to be the
most effective agent but is no longer marketed. There
Hall EJ and German AJ (in press) Diseases ol the small inlestine. In
 are now few suitabie altermatives; possibilities include
TextbookfetrnarytrnMedicinedJEtingernd
Feldman.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
 certain prokinetic H2 antagonists (e.g. ranitidine,
Keith CL,Radecki SV and Lappin MF (2003) Evaluation of
nizatidine), metoclopramide anderythromycin, although
fenbendazolefortreaimentof Giardiainfeclionincatsconcurrently
beneficial effects have not-been critically assessed.
VeterinaryRescarch64,1027-1029
 Antibacterials may also be appropriate given the prob-
abilityof secondary SIBO, and immunosuppressive medi-
common thanyou think?JournafofVeterinary Inlema/Medicine
17, 5-7
cation may be appropriate if underlying IBD is suspected.
Mohr AJ, Lcisewilz AL, Jacobson LS, Steiner JM, Ruaux CG and
Feeding is of benefit in humans and nutritional support
can be continued indefinitely, although vomiting, consti-
permeabilityntestinalproteinlossandoutcomeindogswih
severaparvoviral enteritis.Journalof Veterinary InternatMeaicine
pation and diarrhoea usually continue. Unfortunately,
17,791-798
 most casesreported in the veterinary literature responded
I-Schwartz RD, Donoghuc AR, Boggs RB, Clark T and Partington C
 poorly to therapy and the prognosis is grave.
(2000) Evaluationof the safetyoffenbendazole incats.American
Journal of Veterinary Rescarch 61, 330-332
202
Diseases of the colon
and rectum
Albert E. Jergens and Debra L.Zoran
Colonic anatomy and physiology
ascending colonis the shortestsegment and is at-
tached to theileum andcaecumatajuncturetermed
The largeintestine servesnumerousphysiological
the ileocolicorifice.The caecum isa diverticulumof
roles:maintenanceof ffuid andelectrolytebalance,
theascendingcolonthatrangesinlengthupto15cm
in dogsand liesmidwaybetween theright flankand
a complexmicrobial ecosystem that performs
median plane and isventral to the duodenum.The
diverse functions.Normal colonicphysiologymay
ileocolicorifice isusuallyabutton-like structure in
dogs but maybe slit-like in cats.lt functions to sepa-
constipation.
rate the small and large intestine but also servesto
preventoral movementof.faeces andbacteria.The
The average length of the colon in dogs and
ascending colonbecamesthe transversesegment at
cats is 60-75 cm,and it is divided into three anatomi-
theright colic(hepatic) flexure where it lies cranial to
cally distinct regions:the ascending,transverse
the duodenum,nearthepyloricregionof the stomach
and descending colonic segments (Figure 21.1). The
and left lobe of the pancreas.The transverse colon
terminatesatthe leftcolicorsplenicflexturein the
cranial abdomen.The descending colon is the long-
estsegment andpasses caudallyin the sublumbar
regionalong themedialventralborderoftheleft
kidney,and thengraduallyinclinestothepelvicregion
where it becomes therectum.Therectumis generally
considered tobeginat thepelvicinlet and continues
through the pelvic canal terminating at the anus.
Therearefourhistologicallydistinctlayersinthe
colon and rectum: the mucosa, submucosa,muscula-
ris andserosa.In contrast to small intestinal mucosa,
the colon hasa more compactmicrostructurewhich
lacksvilli,is composed ofcolumnar epithelial cells
arranged in parallel crypts, and is richly supplied with
mucus secreting goblet cells(Figure 21.2).The mus-
cular layersofthecolonaresimilar tothose inthe
remainderof the gastrointestinal(Gl) tractandconsist
Rightside
Left side
ofan inner circular and outer longitudinal layer.The
of body
ofbody
colonhasa wellknown andimportantroleinconserva-
tionofwater,sodiumandchlorideionsanditisthesit
ofstorageof intestinal wasteproductsuntil they are
expelled asfaeces.
There is increasing evidence that the microbial
population of the colonplaysa unique and important
role in digestionand metabolism in the Gi tract.Fer-
mentationofdietaryfibreandotherpoorlydigestible
carbohydrate(CHO)sources by colonicmicrobespro-
duce short chain fatty acids(SCFAs),carbon dioxide,
water,methane and hydrogen gas,and these by-
productshavemanyeffectson theluminalecosystem
21.1
Anatomyof thecenine colon.a=greatercurvaturc
and colonocytes.Enzymesproduced by the colonic
of the stomacn;b = descanding duodenum;
c=terminal leum;d= caecum;e=ascending colon;
microfloraconvertprimarybile acids into secondary
f = transverse colon; g = segmental contraction;
bile acids,whichareknowncolonicirritantsandtumour
h = cescending colon:i=rectum: j= anus;
promoters andmay contributeto developmentof in-
k=hepaticflexure;1=splenic flexurc.
flammatory bowel disease(IBD) or neoplasia,
203
Chapter21
Diseases of the colon and rectum
as a source of metabolic energy and are a substrate for
cellular lipid synthesis.Furthermore,the production of
SCFAs also serves several otherimportantpurposes:
Theyaretheprimary cationsin the colonic lumen
Theyhelp tomaintainamore acidicpH and are
involved insodium andwater fluxes in thecolon
The acidicluminalpH reduces the ionizationof
longchain fatty acids and bile acids(bothknown
colonic irritants)
Theyincrease theconcentrationofammonium
ionsso that they areremoved in thefaeces.
Thedistalcolonisthemajorsiteoffaecal storage
and isimportant in determining thefinal watercontent
offaeces.Thecolonhasa largecapacityforabsorption
offluid which is dependenton activesodium absorption
coupledwiththe absorptionofSCFAs.Diarrhoea oc-
curswheneither thereservecapacityof thecolon to
absorbwaterandelectrolytesisexceeded,orwhen
there is abnormal colonic function.
Structure of the colonic mucosa.a=crypt
Themotor activity of the colon includes both seg-
21.2
openings;b=lamina propria;C=columnar
mentation and propulsive movements.Segmentation,
epithelial cells; d = crypt; e = gcblet cell.
controlledbythe slow-wave activityofcolonicsmooth
muscle,is responsible for mixing colonic contents
Theproximal colon,whichfunctionally corresponds
which slows the passage of ingesta.Rhythmic seg-
to the ascending and transverse segments of the colon,
mentationwithin thecolonismediated by the intrinsic
istheprimarysiteoffermentationofundigestedCHOs
nervous system.Propulsivemotor activity propelsfae-
andproteinsbythebacterial flora.Dietaryfibre isthe
primary substrateforbacterial fermentationbut notall
stalsis andmassperistalsis.Peristalsis is the aboral
dietary fibres arefermented equally.Fibreshavebeen
movement of ingesta through the colonby toniccon-
categorized(Figure 21.3)basedon their fermentability:
tractions of smooth muscle.These contractions are
stimulatedbyluminal distension.Reverseperistalsis is
Highlyfermentable fibres
uniquetotheproximal colonand ischaracterizedby
Moderatelyfermentable ormixed fibres
contractions thatmove orally,Themotilitypatternin the
Poorly fermentable fibres.
proximal colonisa combinationof both segmentation
andreverseperistalsis,whichservestothoroughlymix
The highly fermentablefibresproduce the largest
foodand allowsfor complete absorption of nutrients.
quantities of SCFAs but the fermentation process aiso
Massperistaisisisresponsible formotility that propels
reducesfaecalbulk.Conversely,thelessfermentablea
the colonic contents caudally.In the distal colon,the
fibreis,themore itretainsitsstructural characteristics
primary motor pattern is segmentation andpropulsion
andfaecal bulkbutalowerconcentrationofSCFAsare
withmassperistalticactivity triggering the actof def-
produced.The production of SCFAs (e.g.acetate,pro-
ecation.Decreased segmentation orpropulsion leads
pionateandespeciallybutyrate)isimportantbecause
to thedevelopmentofdiarrhoeawhileincreasedseg-
theseproducts are utilized by thecolonicepithelial cells
mentation may cause constipation.
Type of fibre
Physiological effect
Highly fermentable ibre sources
Good source of short chainfattyacids
High incidence of diarrhoea and excess gas prcduction
Moderatelyfermentable fibre sources
Good source of short chain fatty acids
increase colonicweight
Increasecolonicabsorptiveurfacearea
Produce colonic hypertrophy
Havea lowincidenceof cryptitisandmucus distension
Non-fermentablefibresources
Reduced short chain fattyacidproduction(invitr)
Increase the drymatter content of the faeces andmay actually exacerbate constipation
May increase retention time
Decrease colonic weight, surface area, crypt depth
May lead to cryptitis and mucus distension
21.3
Summary o theshysiological effects of fiores.
204
Chapter21Diseasesof the colon andrectum
The anorectum
Diagnostic approach
Thestorage andvoluntary evacuation of faeces is
History and clinical signs
underthe controlofthemusclesandnervesservingthe
Mostcolorectal diseases cause overt signs of large
pelvic canal,rectum and anus.The ability to retain
boweldiarrhoea,tenesmus and/ordyschezia(e.g.pain-
faeces,to perceive that the rectum is full and to
ful defecation)(Figure 21.4).Largeboweldiarrhoea is
determineappropriatedefecationistermedfaecalcon-
characterized by frequent (3-6 times normal) urges to
tinence.Abnormalfunctionof thesemusclesornerves
defecate,witheachbowelmovementproducingsmall
results in loss of faecal continence orconstipation but
volumesoffaecesthatcontain excessivemucusand
rarely leads tohaematochezia or mucoid diarrhoea.
sometimes fresh blood (i.e.haematochezia).Urgency
Alternatively,inflammatorydisordersof therectalmu-
may be seen with colonic or rectai diseases while
cosa result in tenesmus,increased faecal mucus,
dyschezia occursmostoftenwithrectaldisorders.Since
haematocheziaorfrequent defecation.Faecalinconti-
thecolonprincipallyfunctionsto absorbwaterand
electrolytes,systemicsigns attributable tonutrient mal-
ure indogswithsevererectal inflammatory disease.
absorption(e.g.voluminous faeces, significant weight
loss)areuncommon.Animalsaregenerallyalert,active
Anatomy and physiology
and wellfleshedwith normal appetitesonpresentation.
The origin of therectum is the pelvic inlet and it ends
Occasionally,dogsmayexhibit abdominal painordis-
at the anal canal.The involuntary smoothmuscle of
comfort with colitis.Furthermore,some diseases (i.e.
theinternal analsphincterandstriatedmuscleof the
IBD,alimentary lymphoma,mycotic enterocolitis)may
voluntary external anal sphinctersurround the anal
cause concurrent small intestinal signs.
canal and determine its function.Paired anal sacs in
Thefollowing historical concerns are of significance
thisregion may become impactedwith secretions
in patients suspected of having colorectal disorders:
leadingtoinfectionorabscessation.Circumanalglands
(non-secretory,subcutaneous sebaceous glands lo-
Is the diarrhoea acute or chronic?Acute,
cated in the anal subcutaneous zone)may grow in
self-limiting largebowel diarrhoea iscommon
intact male dogs throughout life and form adenomas
andrarelyrequiresan in-depth diagnostic
dueto constant androgen exposure.Anal glands are
evaluation
tubular sweat glands located near circumanal glands,
Are clinical signs static,progressive or cyclical?
whichproduceafattysecretionofunknownfunction
Colorectal neoplasia may causeprogressive
(see Chapter 22).
signs while colonic IBD is characterized bya
The innervation of the anorectum consistsof awell
waxing/waning clinical course
defined myenteric and a submucosal plexus.The in-
Is there evidence of dietary,environmental.
nervation to the anusincludesbranchesof thepelvic
parasiticorinfectious causesfor largebowel
nerve that provide parasympathetic fibres,which are
diarrhoea?Dietary and parasitic causes may
excitatoryto therectumand inhibitoryto theinternal
constituteupto50%of clinicalcases
anal sphincter.Sympathetic fibres arise from the hypo-
What type of diet is the patient being fed?Note
gastric nerve and are inhibitory to the rectum (i.e.
recent dietary changes(thismightincriminate
causingrelaxation)andexcitatory to theinternal anal
responsible nutrients),the amount and frequency
sphincter (i.e. causing contraction), thus allowing ap-
of feeding,and theadministrationof medications
propriate storage of faeces.Thefunction of the exter-
(e.g.antibiotics,narcotics,motility modifiers,
nal anal sphincter allows maximum distentionand
laxatives)thatmightaltercolonicfunction
storage of faecesin therectum whilemaintaining anal
Do clinical signsresolve when the animal isfed a
control.Faecal incontinence can develop in animals
hypoallergenic or elimination diet? This might
suggest thepresenceof food hypersensitivityor
ter function is impaired.
intolerance
Colorectal disease
Perineal-perianal disease
Miscellaneous
Constipation
Anal sac neoplasia
Neoplafaadrina
Colits-proctis e.g ntlematorybhowel
Anal sac abscess or impaction
Pregnancy and parturtion
diseasehisoplasmosis,entrotoxiosis,
Perianal fistula.
Prostatic enlargement (benignhyperrophy, paraprostatic cyst,
protothecosis)
Perineal hernia
neoplasia);prostaticinflammation(prostatitis,prostatic abscess)
Rectal stricture
Diverticula
Urinary calculi (cysticorurethral)
Neopiasia or polyps
Cystitis
Foreign material
Pelvic trauma or disease
Ilritable bowel syndrome
Caudal abdominal mass or lymphadenopathy
21.4
Causes cf tenesmus and dyschezia.
205
Chapter 21
IDiseasesof thecolon andrectum
Apositiveresponsetoglucocorticoid therapy
Thisservestoruleoutmetabolicorsystemicdisease
mayindicatethepresenceofinflammatoryor
that mayresult inlargebowel diarrhoea.
immune-mediateddisease,suchasIBDor
perianal fistula
Faecal examination
Does the animal roamfreely?lf so,parasitic,
An adequate faecal examination for intestinal para-
toxic and infectiouscausesfor colorectal
sites is required in all patients. Some parasites (e.g.
diseasesshouldbeconsidered more likely
Trichurisvulpisand Giardia spp.)arenotoriouslydiffi-
Doestheanimal'stravel history suggestan
cult todiagnosenecessitatingperformanceofserial
increasedriskofdiseasewitharegional
faecalflotations.In ordertoidentifyGiardia cysts,a
incidence,such as histoplasmosis(Midwest
zinc sulphate (ZnSO) flotation solution is recom-
USA)orintestinal parasites(Southern USA)?
mended.Directsalinefaecalsmearsareusedtodetect
motiletrophozoitesofGiardiaTrichomonas,Balantid
Physical examination
iumand Entamoeba(seeChapters2and 16).
Thephysical examinationinmost animalswithcolonic
Faecal cytological examinationinvolvesevaluation
diseaseisnormal.Abdominalpalpationisimportantin
of stained rectal/colonic mucosal scrapings under high
assessingforprostatomegaly,genitourinarydisorders,
poweroroil immersion toidentifyaetiological agents
faecalimpactionandintussusception,whichcancause
andinflammatorycells.Aflatconjunctivalspatula(care-
tenesmusordyschezia(seeChapter12).Acarefully
fully advanced digitally)procuresspecimensof excel-
performeddigital examinationof therectumshouldbe
lentquality,whichshouldbeplaced onamicroscope
undertakentosearchforrectalmasses,pain,diverticu-
slide,air-driedandstained withDiff-QuikorWright's
lum(perineal hernia),stricture (rare),increased mu-
stain.Increased numbers of leucocytes indicate a pos-
cosal granularity andperianal disease.Additionally
sibleinflammatoryorinfectiousaetiology.Thepresence
rectalevaluationaffordstheopportunitytocollectfresh
of fungal(Histoplasma)organisms,neoplasticcells,ora
faeces for diagnostic evaluation (e.g.presence of
predominanceofspirochaetes orclostridial spores also
haematochezia,faecal mucus)andprovidesvaluable
suggests apossible causeforlargebowel signs.
exfoliative specimens for cytological review.
Faecal cultures are useful when faecal cytology
showsevidenceofaninflammatorydiarrhoeaorwhen
Diagnostic tests
infectious diarrhoea issuspected.Themajorbacterial
Diagnostic strategies forcolorectal disordersvarycon-
pathogens in dogs and cats includeCampylobacter
siderablydependingontheseverity,chronicityofsigns,
jejuni,Salmonella spp.and Clostridium.Note that
presence of systemic illness andhistorical or likely
faecal specimens for culture must be fresh, of ad-
equatequantity (e.g.smallpea size amount of stool)
biochemistryprofile andurinalysisshould beobtained
and transportedrapidlyforinoculationintoenrichment
from all animals with colorectal diseaseon admission.
media(see Chapter2).
Colorectai disease
History
Laboratory analysis
Completebloodcount
Urinalysis
Perineal disease
Physical
Biochemical profile
Anal disease
examination
Faecal flotation
Salinesmear
Faecal cytology
Minimal disease
Significant disease
Therapeutictrials
Additional diagnostics
Parasite therapy
Faecal cytology
Dietary trial
Faecal culture
Imaging
Colonoscopywithmucosal biopsy
Positiveresponse
Treatment failure
Definitive diagnosis
No diagnosis
Treatformotilitydisturbance
(e.g.iritable bowel syndrome)
21.5
Diagncstic evaluation of colorectal disorders.(Modified framTwedt,1997)
206
Chapter 21   Diseases of the colon and rectum
Diagnostic imaging
Acute colitis which is non-raspansive to dietary
Imaging is infrequently diagnostic in animals with
management may require anti-diarhoeal drugs (see
colorectal disease. However, survey abdominal radio-
Appendix 1). These drugs (e.g. motility modifiers such
graphy may identify radiopaque foreign objects, fae-
as diphenoxylate or loperamide) are generally re-
cal impaction or eaxtraluminal obsfruction (e.g. peivic
served for short-term use of 3-5 days duration. Anti-
biotics should not be routinely administered in cases of
pathy). Pneumocolon can be performed as a simple
acute colitis of undetermined cause because of their
altemative to barium enema to highlightluminal masses
adverse effects on normal intestinal flora and their
or whencolonic displacement (via mass, organomegaly,
tandency to promote resistant strains of bacteria.
adhesions) cannot be determined by survey abdomi-
nal radiography.
Parasitic colitis
Parasitic colitis is a common cause for colitis affecting
Colonoscopy
dogs in parts of Europe and the United States. Trichuris
Colonoscopy with mucosal biopsy often helps provide
vulpis (whipworms) may infest the proximal colon caus-
a definitive diagnosis of colonic mucosal disease.
ing intemittent diarrhoea with blood and mucus at the
Either flexible colonoscopy or rigid proctoscopy may
end of the stool. Eosinophilia, anaernia and hypoalbumin-
be performed. Rigidproctoscopes are inexpensive and
aemia are possible, although uncommon. Diagnosis is
gasy to use but only permit endoscopic evaluation of
made by finding eggs in faeces or parasites during
the distal colon and rectum. Flexible endoscopy is
colonoscopy. The treatment of choice is fenbendazole.
 generaliy preferred as it enables evaluation of the
Due to the prepatent period of Trichuris, therapy should
entirecolon, caecum and potentially the distal ileum via
be repeated at 3 months. -Trichomoniasis caused by
retrograde ileoscopy. Proper patient preparation is
Pentatrichomonas hominis infection may occur in both
critical for successful colonoscopy. It is begun by
dogs and cats. However, diarrhoeic animals with large
numbers of organisms may have other causes for
scopic procedure. In dogs, the administration of two or
dianhoea. Motile trophozoites identified on direct faecal
three doses of a colonic electrolyte lavage solution
 smears should be treated. Metronidazole typically elimi-
(e.g. polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution at a dose
nates the organism, aithough re-infection may occur.
Woming is indicated in cases with mild signs of large
before endoscopy will adequately cleanse the colon.
bowel diarrhoea and when faecal parasite examinations 
This is followed by the administration of a warm-water
are negative.
enema the moming of the procedure to optimize mu-
cosal visualization. Cats are typically prepared for
Infectious disorders
emas (20 ml/kg rectally for each enema procedure).
Bacterial colitis
 although oral lavage soiutions can be given via a naso-
 Enteropathogenic bacteria produce colonic disease by
cesophageal tube using a syringe pump.
invading the epithelium (i.e. enteroinvasive bacteria) or
Abnormal endoscopic observations may include
by attaching to the mucosal surface without invading it
erythema, increased mucosai granularity, increased
and producing enterotoxins (i.e. enterotoxigenic bac-
friability and erosions. Mass lesions (e.g. granuloma-
teria) that are cytotoxic or that promote fluid and
tous, inflammatory or neoplastic) are predominately
electralyte secretion. Enteropathogenicbacteria of most
observed in the descending colon and rectum (see
clinical importance include Salmonella species,
Chapter4). Colonic mucosal biopsy specimens (10-12
Campylobacter jejuni and Clostridium spp.
total from allthree colonicregions) are always obtained
for histopathological interpretation regardless of the 
Saimoneflosis: Saimonela spp. are Gram-negative
endoscopic appearance.
bacilli which are occasionally isolated from the faeces of
normal and diarrhoeic dogs and cats. Clinical salmonel-
losis is quite uncommon indicating a prevalent carrier
Diseases of the colon
state. Infection is transmitted by the faecal-oral route cr
Acute colitis
through ingestion of contaminated faod or water. Rates
Acute large bowel diarrhoea is common and generally
of infection are greatest in young animals and in kennel-
self-limiting. Potential causes include diet, bacteria andl/
ling facilities with overcrowding and poor sanitation.
or their toxins, viral agents and parasites. Rarely is the
 Saimonella enterotoxicosis is characterized by acute,
underlying cause identified, necessitating non-specitic
watery or mucoid diarhoea, vomlting, fever, dehydra-
 symptomatic treatment. Reduced oral intake af a low fat,
tion, anorexia and tenesmus. Most animals recover in
highly digestible diet, fed at frequent intervals is recom-
3-4 weeks, although the shedding of organisms
mended. Either nutritionally balanced home-made ra-
may persist for up to 6 weeks. Rarely, salmonellosis
tions or ready-made commercial Gl diets can be used.
progresses to a fatal bacteraemia or endotoxaemia.
Hypoallergenic diets may be used successfully in some
 Diagnosis of salmonellosis requires an appropriate
 pafients. Fibre supplementation is often prescribed for
large bowel diarrhoea, since it affects large bowel func-
organism and elimination of other causes for entero-
tion by nommalizing motility, by binding colonic irritants,
 colitis. Therapy with antibiotics is controversial. Anti-
esanw puooo au buoaod pue busnou Ag pu
bacterial therapy may alter the local microbial
(e.g. via fermentation of soluble fibre into SCFAs).
ecosystem, which prolongs shedding of Saimonella
207
Chapter 21 Diseases of the colon and rectum
organisms and encourages the development of a car-
Fungal and algal colitis
rier state. Antibiotics are indicated when Sa/monella
 Histoplasmosis is a dimorphic fungus affecting dogs
invasion results in clinical (fever, malaise, bloody diar-
and cats in the USA. Infection occurs after inhaling the
rhoea)'or laboratory (neutropenia, hypoglycaemia)
spores fram the environment. Some infections result in
evidence of bacteraemia and endotoxaemia.
including the Gl tract. Colonic disease is common in
Campylobacteriosis: Campyiobacter jejuni is a
dogs with disseminated disease where the mycotic
Gram-negative, microaerophilic bacteria that is an
infection causes extensive granulomatous tissue reac-
important pathogen in both humans and animals. It is
tion. Signs vary in affected dogs from mild, chronic
probably transmitted via the faecal-oral route including
contaminated food and water. Clinical signs are attrib-
large bowel diarrhoea to severe disease causing ten-
esmus, haematochezia, faecal mucus, feverand weight
uted to mild enterocolitis or enterotoxin-mediated se-
loss. Diagnosis requires identification of the aetiologi-
cretory diarrhoea, which causes watery, mucoid
cal agent in mucosal biopsy specimens or colorectal
diarrhoea that cccasionally contains blood. In some
cytological samples. Special stains (e.g. Periodic
animals, diarrhoea may be chronic or intermittent.
acid-Schiff stain, PAS) may be required to confirm
Apresumptive diagnosis of campylobacteriosismay
 that the organism is present in histological specimens.
be based on signs, housing environment, and the
Therapy usually consists of itraconazole (10 mg/kg
observation of 'seagull shapad' organisms and in-
p.o. q12-24h) alone or in combination with ampho-
creased faecal leucocytes on rectal cytology. Definilive
tericin B (0.25-0.5 mg/kg i.v. q48h, up to a total
diagnosis requires culture of Campylobacter from
 cumulative dose of 5-10 mg/kg in dogs and 4-8 mg/kg
fresh faeces using selective media and growth condi-
tions. Antibiotic therapy is usually curative. First choice
in cats). Prognosis depends on disease dissemination
but is generally good with long-term (4-6 month) anti-
antibiotics are erythromycin (10-15 mg/kg p.o. qsh for
fungal therapy.
7 days) or enroffoxacin (5 mg/kg p.0. q24h). Faecal
 Other mycoses affecting the bowel are relatively
cultures should be repeated one month following anti-
uncommon. Both Pythium spp. (pythiosis) and several
biotic therapy to ensure that infection has been elimi-
nated. Antibiotic therapy may not eradicate the
genera of zygomycetes (zygomycosis) may deeply in-
vade digestive tissues causing severe granulomatous
bacterium and re-infection is likely in kennel situations.
 gastroenteritis. Pythiosis is most common in young,
Ciostridial colitis: Clostridium perfringensis a Gram-
large-breed dogsthat reside in the southern USA.Signs
 Include chronic intractable diarrhoea and vomiting, ano-
positive, obligate anaerobe that is part of the normal
micraflora in dogs and cats. Under ideal conditions,
rexia, depression and weight loss. Physical examination
C. perfringens produces enterotoxins that cause large
often reveals an abdominal mass or marked regional
bowel diarrhoea. Colitis caused by C. perfringens is a
thickening of the bowel. Diagnosis depends on histologi-
major cause of acute, nosocomial and chronic large
cal identification of the organisms in mucosal biopsy
bowel diarhoea, which occurs frequently in dogs. The
samples. Treatment is radical surgical excision of the
diarrhoea is typically soft and may or may not contain
 granulomatous mass since these fungi are resistant to
blood and mucus. Another clostridium, C. difficile, has
 standard antifungal drugs. The prognosis is guarded.
been isolated from both diarrhoeic dogs and cats,
Protheca spp. are ubiquitous unicellular algae that
possibly subsequent to antimicrobial suppression of
may rarely colonize the Gl tract of dogs and cats.
the resident flora, but is a considerably less common
causing severe ulcerating enterocolitis. Dissemina-
cause for bacterial colitis.
tion is common with preferential sites including the
A presumptive diagnosis of C. perfringens infec-
eyes, visceral organs and the central nervous system.
tion is based on identification of increased faecal
Diagnosis requires organism identification in affected
tissues. There is no effective treatment and the prog-
cytology and an assay for faecal enterotoxins using a
nosis is poor.
reversed passive latex "agglutination test. Routine
dosages of amoxicillin, metronidazole or tylosin orally
Chronic colitis (inflammatory bowel disease)
administered for 5-7 days are usually curative. Some
IBD broadly refers to a group of idiopathic chronic Gl
patients also respond to high fibre dlets, which alter
disorders characterized by infiltration of the Gl tracl
the colonic microenvironment making conditions un-
with inflammatory cells. Recent studies involving ani-
favourable for the spores to germinate. Prognosis for
mal models of intestinal inflammation have identified
control is excellent.
 interactions between the mucosal immune system,the 
host genetic susceptibility and environmental factors
Yersiniosis:Yersinia enterocolitica is a motile, Gram
(e.g. normal resident microflora) as potential factors in
negative facultative anaerobic bacteria that is uncom-
disease development. Several pathogenic mechanisms
monly found in dogs. The organism is transmitted to
have been proposed forchronicintestinal inflammation
dogs via the faecal-oral route or ingestion of contami-
 including an abnormal immune response to a luminal 
nated food and water. Yersinia organisms may then
pathogen or abnormal luminal constituent, or an aber-
invade the mucosa and/orproduce enterotoxins, caus-
rant mucosal immune response to a normal luminal
ing acute or chronic diarrhoea. Diagnosis requires
constituent, such as a dietary or microbial antigen.
growing the organism and eliminating other causes.
Clinical signs in affected animals are atributed to the
Tetracycline, trimethoprim/sulphonamide and cephalo-
effects of mucosal cellular infiltrates and inflammatory
sporins are usually effective therapies.
mediators (see Chapter 20).
208
Chapter 21  Diseases of the colon and rectum
 A diagnosis of IBD is one of exclusian and requires
Chronic histiocytic ulcerative colifis: Chronic histio-
ruling out many other dlseases that may cause intestinal
cytic ulcerative colitis (CHUC) is the least frequently
inflammation. Systemic diseases, chronic parasitism,
diagnosed IBD variant. Affected dogs present with
dietary sensitivity, infectious diseases and alimentary
intractable large bowel diarrhoea, haematochezia or
neoplasia are the major diferential diagnoses for IBD.
 tenesmus of variable severity. Lethargy, anorexia and
Histological evaluation of mucosal biopsy specimens is
weight loss are commonly observed. Boxers are pre-
required for a definitive diagnosis. Unfortunately, no
disposed to CHUC and the disease is diagnosed most
standard microscopic grading system for IBD lesions
frequently in male dogs <1 year of age. Histologicaily.
has been established in dogs or cats. Furthemore,
lesions are characterized by a mixed inflammatory
biopsy interpretation is very subjective from one pa-
infiltrate with PAS-positive histiocytes within the mu-
thologistto the next and is further hampered by a variaty
cosa. Colonoscopy usually reveals increased mucosal
of procurement and processing artefacts inherent in
 granularity; friablity and diffuse erosions. The progno-
evaluation of endoscopic specimens. A definitive histo-
sis with this IBD variant is usually very poor. One recent
logical diagnosis of IBD should be based upon micro-
report suggests that clinical signs may resolve with
scopicevidence of mucosalinflammation, which includes:
 suppressive therapy) indicating either an unidentified
Mucosal glandular loss, necrosis or immaturity
infection or a possibie causal role for the resident
 Epithelial erosion or ulceration
microflora in mediating intestinal inflammation of CHUC.
■
Villtous atrophy, fusion or collapse
●
 Fibrosis or oedema in the lamina propria.
Dietary treatment: Dietary therapy, while often not
curative alone, is extremely important in the long-term
An objective histological grading scheme for the
 management of most diseases of the colon or anorectum.
diagnosis of canine and feline IBD has been proposed
Dietary therapy (Figure 21.6) may consist of:
and has proven usefulinnumerous clinical and research
investigations. Using this system, histological severity of
 Feeding a novel protein (hypoallergenic) diet
IBD is determined by the extent of epithelial-glandular
Feeding a highly digestible diet
aiterations rather than subjective evaluation of lamina
Feeding a high fibre diet.
proprial celularity. It is noteworthy that increases in
mucosal immune cell populations may be a reflection of
the narmal immunological responses to diverse dietary
Each of these approaches has merits, depending
on the clinical situation, but there is no specific way to
and microblal stimuli. Changes in mucosal cellularity
alone, without other evidence of inflammation or
ful. A reasonable approach is to feed one of the diets for
enterocyte injury, should be interpreted cautiously and
a period of 3-4 weeks and if no positive response is
are unlikely to be IBD. Nevertheless, veterinary patholo-
gists continue to use standard classification schemes,
observed then try a diet from the other categories. The
based upon the predominant infiltrating cell type to
aoui ae sio pue shop ui aseasi lamog abrel jo
define chronic colitis in dogs and cats (see Chapter 5).
containing increased amounts of dietary fibre. This
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis: Lymphocytic-
strategy is reasonable because dietary fibres, depend-
plasmacytic colitis (LPC) is the most common form of
ing on their fermentability, influence luminal SCFA
chronic colitis in the dog and cat. As in most cases of
production as well as colonic motility, both of which
IBD, affected animals are middle-aged or older, and
may have a positive influence on the health and func-
clinical signs are generally cyclical with tenesmus,
tion of the colon (see abave).
There is ample and increasing evidence that feed-
Abnormalities observed during endoscopy may in-
ing dogs with colitis diets with increased amounts of
clude increased mucosal friability, increased mucosal
dietary fibre is beneficial. The question remains, how-
 granularity. loss of submucosal vascularity and ero-
ever, as to which fibre type is most appropriate.
slons. Absence of these observations does not elimi-
Dietary trials with either a hypoallergenic diet (e.g.
nate LPC so biopsy samples should be callected.
novel protein source) or a highly digestible diet (see
Figure.21.6) are prudent due to the role of dietary
Eosinophilic colitis: Eosinophilic colitis (EC) may
sensitivity or intolerance in the development of intes-
tinal inflammation. However, most dogs or cats with
manifestation to dietary or parasific antigens. The
food hypersensitivity or intolerance have primarily
prevalence of EC is considerabiy less than that for
small bowel signs (e.g. vomiting, anorexia, weight
LPC. As is the case with LPC, middle-aged animals are
loss, and sometimes chronic diarrhcea); thus, signs
affected most frequently. Physical examination, in-
oflarge bowel dlarrhoea alone are less likely to be due
cluding digital examination of rectal mucosa, may
to allergic disease. Feeding patients with colonic
detect a roughened irregular mucosa in dogs and cats
disease highly digestible diets would be expected to
with EC. Mucosal biopsy samples are required for
-be beneficial because less jngesta reaches the colon
definitive diagnosis and yield a diffuse infitration of
resulting in the production'of a smaller faecal mass.
eosinophils (with perhaps lesser numbers of celltypes)
This can be especially important in colonic disorders
within the colonic mucosa. The mucosa will be more
where there is savere mucosal disease, in patients
friable on endoscopic examination and may be ulcer-
with severe constipation or obstipation where motility
ated as compared with LPC.
is altered or absent, or in recto-anal diseases where
209
Chapter 21
Diseasesof the colonandrectum
Diet category
Commercial canine diets
Specifics(protein/carbohydrate/fibre/other)
Hypoallergenic
Hi's Canine d/d (canned&dry)
Hil'scanned:whitefishr lamb&rice,rygg&riceduck&rice
(Novel protein and
salmon&rice
carbohydrate
Eukanuba Response Formula FP,KO (canned & dry)
Eukanubacanneddycatisheringmeal&potatoangaroo&
sources)
IVD Canine Limited Ingredient Diets (canned & dry)
IVD:rabbitvnisonmbwhitfishruk&
Royal Canin WalthamDiets Canine Select Protein
Walthamcanned:lamb&rcedrycatfish&ricecapelin&taioca
(canned&dry)
Purina HA(dy):modified soyprotein&corn starch,A（dry）:
Purina CNM HA Formula/Canine and Purina CNM
salmonmeal,trout&rice
LA Farmula/Canine(cry)
Highly digestible
Hil's Canine i/d (canned &dry)
Hill's canned &dry:soy fibre(soluble fibre)
(Lowfat,low
Eukanuba Low Residue/Canine (dry)(Intestinal
Eukanubaeetpulfibre(mixed fibre)，fructooligosaccharides(FS)
residue)
Formula)
fish oil
IVD Canine Neutral Formula (dry),
IVDNeutral:duck&otatoatranandoathullsfireS
IVD Sensitive Formula（canned&dry)
guarfibre(soluble),FOS:dy:lamb,rice&potato,pea fibre (mixed）
FOS
Royal Canin Waltham Canine LowFat Diet (canned
Walthamcannedfishmeat&ricecelluoseowdrguargumf
&dry)
Purina CNM Canine EN Formula （canned &dry)
Purinaadfricdtaraicdu
triglycerides (MCTs）and fishoil;dryce&com,min.fe
MCTs&fishoil
High dietaryfibre
Hil'sCanine w/d (canned&dry)
Hillswdcanned:cellulosefibreinsublfibre)dyeanuthulls
(Low fat,high
(insolubie fibre)
Hill's Canine r/d (canned&dry)
Hill'srd canned:cellulose (inscluble fibre);dry:peanut hulls
(insoluble fibre)
IVD Canine Hifactor Formula (canned&dry)
IVD canned:ellose,riceflor&guafibremxed fibe)fs
oildryrurcellinllefbf
Royal CaninWaithamCanine HighFibreDiet(dry)
Waltham: wheat bran&cellulose (mixed fibre)
Purina Canine DCO Formula (dry)
Purina DcO drybeep pulp.pea fibre (mixed), fishil
Canine OMFormula (canned & dry)
Purina OMcanned:pea fibre&beet pulp (mixed）;dry:cellulcse,
wheat gluten (mixed)
Diet category
Commercial feline diets
Specifics (protein/carbohydrate/fibre/other)
Hypoallergenic
Hil's Feline d/d (canned)
Hill's canned: lamb&rice
(Novel protein
Eukanuba Response Formula LB (cannec)
Eukanuba:canned:lamb&barley
and carbohydrate
IVD Feline Limited Ingredient Diets (canned & dry)
IVD:duck,rabbitvenison&lamb&green eas
Royal CaninWaithamDietsFeline SelectProtein
Walthamcanned:venison&rice,dry:duck&rice
(canned&dry)
Highly digestible
Hill's Feline i/d (canned & dry)
Hill's canned & dry: soy fibre (soluble fibre)
(Lowfat,low
Eukanuba Low Residue/Feline (canned&dry)
Eukanubabeetpulpfibre（mixedfibre）FOSfishoil
residue)
IVDFeline Neutral Formula(cy),
IVDetraltatuplfeh
Purina Feline EN Formula(softmoist)
Purinafttldf
High dietary fibre
Hils Feline w/d (canned&dry)
Hill's wdcanned&drycellulosefibre(insoluble fbre)
(Low fat,high
Hil'sFeline r/d (canned& dry)
Hill'srdcanned&dry:cellulose finsolublefibre)
fibre)
IVDFeline HifactorFormula (canned & dry)
IVDcanned:cellulse&guafire(mixdfibre）FOS,fishy
poultryrdto&rebtpmixedf
FOS,fishoil
Royal Canin WalthamFeline Calorie Control Diet
Waltham:moist:guargum(soluble),cellulose,dry:cellulose(insoluble
(moist & dry)
fibre)
Feline OMFormula (canned&dry)
Purina OMcanned:peafibre&oatfibre（mixed）;dry:soybean hulls
(insoluble)
21.6
Commercially available prescriplion diets for the management of colonic diseases.This list is not irtended to be
exhaustivebut representative of themany commercial prcductsavailable in Europe and NorthAmerica.
minimal productionoffaecesisdesirable.Since long-
Medicaltreatment:Thereareseveraldrugtreatment
term dietarymanagementmayberequiredinpets
optionsfor themanagement of colitisindogs and cats
withcolonicorrecto-anal disease,use ofacommer-
wherereducing inflammation istheprimarymeansof
cialdiet（rather than a home-made dietor a diet
controlling theclinical disease(seealso Chapter28).
supplemented with fibre) isoften thebest approach.
One approach in dogs is to use non-steroidal anti-
However.adding one or two tablespoonsper25kg
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as sulfasalazine.
bodyweightofpsyllium,pumpkinorothermixedfibres
5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) is the active moiety
(see Appendix 1) to the animal’sregular diet is an-
anditsmechanismofactionisitsanti-leucotriene
otherwayofincreasingthedietaryfibrecontent.
activity and free radicalscavenging ability.Newer
210
Chapter 21
I Diseases of the colon and rectum
aminosalicylic acid drugs (e.g. mesalazine) prepara-
secondary to other disease (e.g. parvovirus enteritis,
tions are available that allow delivery of 5-ASA without
whipworm infestation) but the cause in many cases is
the suiphur moiety, which is believed to be responsible
unknown. Acute intussusception in the dog classicaly
for the numerous adverse effects (e.g. keratoconjunc-
causes scant bloody diarhoea, vomiting and abdominal
tivitis, vomiting) associated with sulfasalazine use.
 pain. Most affected cats do not have diarhoea. Chronic
These newer products include oral delayed release
intussusceptions may cause diarrhoea without mucus,
 preparations of 5-ASA that prevent is absorption in the 
 haematochezia, vomiting or abdominal pain. Abdominai
upper Gl tract, and products that have an azo bond like
palpation may reveal a mass or a markedly thickened
sulfasalazine, but the sulphur component is replaced
loopof bowel. Occasionally, intussusceptions may 'slide"
with another amine (balsalazide) or a second 5-ASA
 in and aut making palpation unreliable. Survey radiogra-
(olsalazine). Sulfasalazine and oisalazine are the most
phy is seldom diagnostic. Ultrasonography will confirm
common products used in dogs with colitis and have 
the presence of the classic 'target' lesion if present in
established dosages (see Appendix 1).
The use of these drugs in cats is not recommended
 Coionoscopy may find the telescoped intestine within
due to their increased sensitivity to NSAIDs and in-
the colonic lumen. Therapy involves either reduction or
Creased potential for toxicity. Therapy of all cats (and
resection of the intussusception.
many dogs) with colitis often requires use of anti-inflam-
matory or immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids.
Irritable bowel syndrome: Irritable bowel syndrome
Long-term (months) and high dose (>2 mg/kg/day)
(IBS) is defined as an uncommon, non-inflammatory
coricosteroid therapy may be associated with side-
large bowel disease associated with abnormal colonic
effects that limit its use or require alternative therapy
myoelectrical function. Clinical signs are characterized
choices. Generally, oral prednisolone or methylpred-
by chronic intermittent large bowel diarrhoea (tenes-
nisolone is the preferred corticosteroid for use in both
mus, faecal mucus and/or haematochezia), which is
dogs and cats rather than dexamethasone, betametha-
most often seen in large-breed dogs. A diagnosis of
sone or triamcinolone. in humans, efforts to reduce the
IBS is one of exclusion, made only by normal colon-
corticosteroid side-effacts include using rectal supposito-
oscopic biopsy results and ruling out other causes such
ries or enermas containing corticosteroids, or use of other
as dietary, parasitic, infectious and chronic (IBD) coli-
newer glucocorticosteroid preparations, which cause fewer
tis. The primary treatment consists of supplementing
systemic side-effects(e.g. budesonide). Budesonide has
dietaryfibre (e.g. psyllium, 1-3 tablespoon per meal) to
been used in limited numbers of dogs and cats with IBD
correct abnormal motility patterns. Patients that fail to
and there are & few reports of effectiveness. However.
uag Aew augje juawebguew Aelep al puodsoi
controlled trials using this drug have not been published.
from motility modifying drugs, such as loperamide.
The addition of immunosuppressive drugs to the medical
Constipation: Constipation denates infrequent or dif-
 tory cases of colitis. The drugs used most commonly are
ficult evacuation of faeces and is commonly observed
azathioprine or chlorambucil, but ciclosporin is also an-
in both dogs and cats. Prolonged and severe faecai
impaction may result in irreversible megacolon which
these drugs can be associated with significant side-
fails to respond to medical management. Constipation
effects. Thus, appropriate monitoring and adjustment af
is particularty common in middle-aged and older cais
the drug dose is recommended. In dogs or cats with
and is associated with diverse aetiologies (Figure
severe colitis, combinationtherapy, usingcorticosteroids,
21.7). It is noteworthy that most cases of feline consti-
irmmunosuppressive drugs, NSAIDs or enemas may be
 pation are atributable to idiopathic megacolon. Diag-
required to achieve adequate control. This has been
nosis of constipation is made on history, abdominal
especially true in Boxer dogs with histiocytic ulcerative
palpation of faecal impaction, and/or radiographic con-
colitis, one of the most severe IBD variants.
firmatian cf colonic distension. Specific therapy de-
Antibiotics effective against anaerobic bacteria
pends on the severityofconstipationanditheunderlying
(amoxicilin, ampicillin, tylosin, clindamycin or metroni-
cause, Animals with miid to moderate constipation are
dazole; see Appendix 1) are often effective in reducing
treated with a combination of water enemas, dietary
bacterial cvergrowth and potential enterotoxin produc-
fibre supplements, laxatives (e.g. dioctyl sodium sulfo-
tion. Resolution of clinical signs usually occurs follow-
succinate (Dss), lactulose) and prokinetic (e.g.
 ing 3-5 days of antibiotic therapy in dogs or cats with
cisapride) agents (see Figure 21.6 and Chapter 28).
acute disease. Alternatively. in animals with chronic
Colectomy should be considered in animals with se-
colitis, long-term therapy wilh metronidazole is re-
vere, refractory constipation or idiopathic megacolon.
quired to maintain clinical remission. The actions of
metronidazole may be attributable to its direct inhibi-
Colonic neoplasia:Both malignant and benign tumours
tion of cell-mediated immunity or its antimicrobial effect 
affect the colon in' dogs and cats. ln dogs, adenocarci-
on phlogistic resident microflora.
 noma is diagnosed most frequently followed by lympho-
sarcoma and leiomyosarcoma. The majority of canine
Disorders affecting colonic motility
large bowel neoplasms are located in the descending
colon and rectum, although leiomyosarcomas often
Intussusception: Both ileocolic and caecocolic
occur in the caecum. Adenocarcinoma and lymphosar-
intussusceptions may occur in dogs and cats, with the
coma are the most common malignant tumours in cats,
former being more common. Lesions may develop
followed by mast cell tumours. Malignant feline tumours
211
Chapter 21
Diseases of the colon and rectum
focaladenocarcinoma andleiomyosarcoma.Diffuse
Aetiology
Cause
coloniclymphosarcomaisbesttreatedwithmultiple
Dietary
Lowresidue diet
drugchemotherapy,suchas theMadison-Wisconsin
Excessfibre
or Uw-25 protocols.The long-term prognosis formost
Ingested foreignmaterial e.g.bones.hair
malignantneoplasms isguarded.Surgicalresection or
accumulation
Environmental
with benign (adenomatous) polyps and carries an
mactivity(obesity,hospitalization)
excellent prognosis.
Change in routine
Unsanitary living conditions
Painful defecation
Dyschezia (see Chapter 6)
Diseasesoftheanorectum
Colonic obstruction
Extraluminal:
Enlarged prostate
SeeChapter22 for information on diseasesof the
Old pelvic fracture
anorectum.
Intraluminal:
Stricture,tumour or foreignbedy
Perinealhernia/rectal diverticulum
Referencesand furtherreading
Neuromuscular
Megacolon
Buddington RKandSunvoldGD(1998)Fermentable fiberand theGI
Lumbosacral spinal cord disease
Nutrition,VledGAReinhart andDPCaeyp44942.
tract ecosystem.In:RecentAdvances in Canine and Feline
Fluid or electrolyte
Dehydration
OrangeFrazierPress,Wilmington
imbalance
Hypokalaemia
DeNovo RC and BrightRM(2000)Recto-anal diseases.In:Textbook
Hypercalcaemia
Feldman,pp.1257-1277.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Drug-induced
Anticholinergics:phenothiazines;opiates
EvansHE(1993)Colonicandrectoanal anatomy.In:Miier'sAnalory
Laxative abuse
of theDog, pp. 385-461. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Anima/Surgery,pp.4i5-450.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Guilford WG(1996)Approach toclinical problemsingastroenterology.
21.7
Aetiology of constipation.
In:StmksmaGg
Guilfordetalpp.5076.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
GuifordWG（1996)Smallandlargeintestine:normal structureand
usuallyarise inthe ileocolic anddescendingcolonic
function.n:Strombeck'sSmallAnimaiGastroenterology,3edn,
regions.Regional metastasisof adenocarcinoma to
ed.WGGuilfordal,p.38350WBSaundrsPhiladphia
JergensAE(1999)Inflammatory boweldisease:currentperspectives.
theperitoneum and mesentericlymph nodesoccurs
Veterinary ClinicsofNorth America:Small AnimalPractice29,
in 50%of cats.
501-521
Most malignant tumours occur inolder dogs and
perspective.Proceedings ofthe AmericanAcademyof Veterinary
cats.Clinical signs are often indistinguishable from
Dermatology andAmericanColiege of Veterinary Dermatology,
othercausesofchronic colitis.Physicalexamination in
14,69
animalswithmalignantcolonictumoursmayreveal
Sherding RGandJohnson SE(200o)Diseasesof the Intestines.In:
Saunder's Manual of SmaNAnimal Practice,2nd edn,cd.SJ
dyschezia,palpable abdominalmass,mesentericlym-
Birchard and RG Sherding.pp.787-815.WB Saunders,
phadenopathy.rectal mass or excessive mucosal
Philadelphia
TwedtDC(1997)Chroniclargeboweldiarrheaindogs.Proceedingsof
granularity on digital examination.Imaging(diagnostic
theAmericanCollegeofVeterinaryInternalMedicinepp.342-345
radiographyandultrasonography)providesimportant
WillardMD(1998)Gastrointestinal drugs.Veterinary Clinicsof North
staging information concerning disease burden.
America28,377-394
Willard MD (2001) Colonoscopy,proctoscopy, and ileoscopy.
Colonoscopywithmucosalbiopsyconfirmsadefinitive
Veterinary Clinics of NorthAmerica:Smal!AnimaiPractice31,
diagnosis.Treatment ofcolonicneoplasia isvariable
657-669
depending on tumour type,location and extent of
ZoranD（1999)Pathophysiologyandmanagementofcaninecolonic
diseases.CompendiumonContinuing EducationforthePracticing
metastasis.Surgical excision is recommended for
Veterinarian2i,824-841
212
Disorders of the perineum
and anus
John M. Williams
Anatomy and physiology
thesuperficial gluteal muscle,mediallybytheexter-
nal anal sphincter levator ani and coccygeusmus-
Perineum
cles,andventrallybytheinternal obturatormuscle
The perineum is made up of the structures which
(Figures 22.1and 22.2).
make up theboundary of the pelvic outlet.Itextends
Themusclesof thepelvic diaphragm arecrucial in
externallyfromthedorsal aspectofthescrotumor
supporting therectum and actnotonly asaphysical
vulvatothebase of the tail;its lateralmargins extend
partitionbutareessentialincounteractingtheeffectsof
tothe skin covering the tubersischi and superficial
raised intra-abdominalpressure.Failure of these mus-
glutealmuscles.Thedeepportionis delineated bythe
cleshas thepotential toallowabdominalviscera to
ischial arch ventrally,the third coccygeal vertebra
herniate through thepelvic.canal,as happens in a
dorsally and,in the dog,by the sacrotuberous liga
perineal hernia (see below).
mentlaterally.Dueto theabsence ofa sacrotuberous
Withintheischiorectalfossaliestheinternalpuden-
ligamentinthecat the lateral margins arelesswell
dal arteryandvein and thepudendal nerve,together
defined.Theperineumessentiallysurroundsthe anal
with fat. The neurovascular structures course
andurogenital canals.Within theperineum themost
caudomediallyfromtheventrolateralaspectofthe
important structures are those which make up the
coccygeus,overtheinternalobturatormuscletowards
pelvic diaphragm; namely levator ani and coccygeal
the clitorisorrootof thepenis.Lymphaticdrainage of
muscles.These muscles act as a division between
theperineum isvia the internal (medial)iliac lymph
thepelviccanal and thewedgeshaped ischiorectal
nodes,while the cutaneous anal area drains via the
fossa,whichisbound laterallyby thecaudalportionof
superficial inguinal lymphnodes.
Sciaticnerve
22.1
Caudal gluteal
Horizontal secticn through the
arteryandvein
perineal area.
Peritoneal
Coccygeus
cavity
muscle
Superficial
glutealmuscle
Levatorani
Branchesof
muscle
caudal rectal
artery andvein
Ischiorectal
fossa
External anal
sphinctermuscle
Internal anal
sphinctermuscle
Anal sac
Anal sacduct
Columnar zone
Cutaneous zone
ofanalcanal
ofanal canal
213
Chapter22Disordersof theperineum and anus
22.2
Schematic drawing
Levator
ofperneal
ani muscle
Coccygeus
anatomy.
muscle
Internalpudendal
arteryandnerve
External anal
sphinctermuscle
Superficial gluteal
muscle
Ischial
Caudal rectal
tuberosity
artery andnerve
Retractor
penismuscle
Caudal gluteal artery
Anus
togetherwiththeanalglandsare alsolinedwithstrati-
The anus,more correctly termed the anal canal,is
fied squamous epithelium.The inner columnarzone,
approximately1 cminlengthandcomprises threezones:
whichislined bymucosa,comprises longitudinal ridges
thatfoldtocreateanumberofpocketsoranalsinuses
Cutaneous zone
(Figure 22.3).
Intermediatezone
The internal anal sphincter muscle,unlike the
Columnarzone.
externalanalsphinctermuscle,iscomposedofsmooth
muscle and is a continuation and thickening of the
The most caudal zone,the cutaneous zone,is
rectal muscularis.It isinnervated by autonomicfibres
divided into internal and external regions.The external
from thepelvic plexus.Sympathetic innervation is
regionisthekeratinized hairless area and containsthe
derived from thehypogastricnerve andparasympa-
circumanal glands (hepatoid or perianal glands). The
theticinnervationfrom thepelvicnerves.Theexternal
‘true'anal glands togetherwith theanal sacs are tobe
analsphincteriscomposedof striatedmuscle,which
found intheinternal region.The analsacs(Figure22.3)
areinvaginationsof the internalregionand liebetween
continence.The caudal rectal branch of thepudendal
the internaland external anal sphinctermuscles.The
nerveprovidesmotorinnervation to the external anal
intermediate zone formsa scalloped foid,which is
sphincter muscle (see Figure 22.1)and the perineal
termed the anocutaneous line and is composed of a
stratified squamous epithelium.The cutaneouszone
thepudendal nervesupply the anal canal.
Schematic drawing
22.3
of the anal canal.
Rectum
Anal sinuses
Anocutaneous
line
Intermediatezone
Inner cutaneous
zoneofanalcanal
Outer cutaneous
zone of anal canal
Analsac
duct opening
214
Chapter22Disordersof theperineum and anus
The sympathetic nerve supply to the internal anal
The ageand sexof thepatient arealsohelpful in
sphinctermuscle is excitatorywhilst the parasym-
formulatingadifferentialdiagnosis:atresiaaniwillbe
pathetic supply is inhibitory.This is in contrast to the
prevalentintheveryyoung;anolderentiremale dog
rectum where the situation is reversed,i.e.sympa-
withaperineal swelling mayhave aperineal hernia;
theticstimulationleadstorelaxationof therectum and
andabitchover 10yearsoldwithaperianal swelling
contractionoftheintemal anal sphincter.
mayhave an anal sac adenocarcinoma.
Theperinealreflexiselicitedvia stimulationof the
perianal area,theresponsebeing contractionof theanus
Physical examination
and flexion of the tail.Thisassesses thepudendal nerve,
Together with the history,a physical examination is
which arisesfromspinal cordsegmentsS1-S3.Loss of
perhapsthemost important diagnostic step inmany
the perineal reflex suggests damage to the spinal cord
at,orcaudal to,thelevelof lumbosacralvertebra5or6.
perineal and anal diseases areverypainful and thata
thoroughphysical examinationof theareamayhave to
'True'anal glands
becarriedoutwith thepatienteithersedatedoranaes-
These are modified tubular sweatglands,which lie
thetized.Inaddition toexamining theperinealregiona
craniolateral tothecircumanalglands andopeninto
thoroughgeneralphysicalexaminationisalsorequired.
the intermediate zone (see Figure 22.3).The secretion
isfatty and their truefunction isunknown.
Palpationanddigitalrectalexamination
Palpationof thearea isessentialandmaygive some
Circumanal(hepatoid orperianal)glands
indication as towhether theswelling hasbeencaused
Circumanalglands are androgen-sensitive glands found
bya hernia ora space-occupying mass.Extemal palpa-
subcutaneouslyup to4cmfrom theanal canal.The
tionshouldbecombinedwithadigitalrectalexamination
glands have a deep non-secretory,non-sebaceous
(Figure 22.4); it is extremely helpful in diagnosing both
portion and a superficial sebaceous portion.Under the
hernias and intrapelvicmassesextendinginto theperi-
influenceof androgensthecircumanalglands continue
neum.lf anintrapelvic massissuspected thencaudal
togrowthroughoutamaledog's life.
abdominalpalpationisalsouseful.Withperineal her-
nias,digital rectal examinationwill usuallyreveal that
Anal sacs(paranal sinuses)
thereissacculationand alackof support fortherectum
Analsacsarepairedstructures,whichareinvaginations
(Figure 22.5).The anal sacs should be palpated per
of the inner area of the cutaneous zone.The sacs are
rectum to assess size and forevidence of anymass,or
positioned at 4 and 8 o'clock relative to the anus; the
to express them (Figure 22.6).
diameterofthefundusisusually-10mmindogs,with
the ducts being 1-2mm wide.In the dog,the duct is
predominantly linedbysebaceousglandswhilst in the
fundus apocrine glandsare more prevalent.The com-
binedsecretion from theseglands,togetherwithbac-
teria and desquamated epithelial cells,creates a
malodorousoily/pastyfluid.Incats there arefewapo-
crine glands,with sebaceous glands being found in
both duct and fundus.
Diagnostic approach
History
Diseasesoftheperineumandanusarelikelytopresent
22.4
Digital rectal exarmination.
with clinical signs that may be easily confused with
colorectaldisease,suchashaematochezia,tenesmus
or dyschezia.It is therefore essential thata good
history is takenand that a thorough physical examina-
tion is carriedout.Haematochezia isoftenseen with
anal furunculosis(perianal fistula)orulcerated circum-
analgland tumours inwhichbloodisadded tofaeces
afterithasbeenpassed.Dyschezia and tenesmusare
very common in conditions such as anal sacculitis,
perinealherniation,analfurunculosis andanaltumours.
Withsomeperinealdisease there maybeconstipation
or obstipation due toan obstruction,as is seen with
atresia aniintrapelvicorperinealmasses,diffuseanal
or perianal tumours,and extensive anal furunculosis.
In cases ofperineal hernia where there has been
herniationandretroflexionof thebladder orwherea
perinealmass may compress theurethra,dysuria or
22.5
Reclal examination snows lack cf lateral
stranguria maybe present.
support in a patient with a perineal nernia.
215
Chapter22Disorders of theperineum and anus
22.6
andright lateralprojectionsof the thoraxforevidence
of possible lung metastases.Positive and negative
Digital per
contrast studiesmaybe helpful in delineating the
rectum
palpation of
urinarytract(pneumocystography,retrogradeurethro-
the anal sacs.
graphy)or to assess the extent of an anal lesion
(barium enema).
Ultrasonography
Wherea perineal massispresent ultrasonography is
invaluable in determining whether it is solid or fluid-
filled (Figure 22.8). Both a retroflexed bladder and
paraprostaticcysts are notuncommonin theischiorec-
tal fossa.Ultrasonography can also beused to evalu-
ate theprostate incaseswhere aparaprostaticcystis
suspected.Ultrasonography also aids in allowingac-
curatefineneedleaspiratestobecarriedouton the
mass or fluid-filled structure.
If ananal orperianal mass ispalpated,it maybe
possibleinsmalldogstopalpatethemedialiliaclymph
node;the superficial inguinal lymphnodesshould also
be palpated.
Diagnosticimaging
Radiography
Radiography can be used to assess the extent of
local lesionsand importantlytocheck,whentumours
are suspected or diagnosed,for evidence ofdistant
22.8
Ultrasound scan cf aperineal prostatic cyst.
spread.Both lateralandventrodorsalplainradio-
graphs of the caudal pelvic area should be taken;
thesemayshowtheextentofamasslesion,evidence
Proctoscopy
of constipation orobstipation,ora herniatedbladder.
Proctoscopyisof limitedvalue in assessing perineal
The clinician should lookforevidenceofmedial iliac
and anal disease,though it is useful to evaluate
lymphnode eniargement(Figure22.7) and take left
possible concurrentcolitisinpatientswith anal furun-
culosis.
Clinical disorders of the perineum
and anus
Lymph node
The clinical disorders of the perineum and anus are
summarized inFigures22.9 and 22.10.
Perineal hemia
Perineal and intrapelvicmasses
Paraprostatic cyst
Perineal trauma
22.7
Raciograph showing an enlarged iliac Iymph
22.9
Perineal disorcers.
node.
216
Chapter22Disordersof the perineumand anus
Anogenital clefts
Atresia ani
With anogenital clefts there is a failure of the
(Pseudocoprostasis)
embryologicalcloacatoseparatesothatthereisdirect
Anogenital cleft
communicationbetween theanus andvagina orure-
thra (Figure 22.12). In males the condition is often
Anal sac disease:
anal sacculitis
associated withhypospadias(incompleteformationof
anal sacimpaclion
the urethra ventrally);both faecal and urinary conti-
anal sac abscess
nence is usuallymaintained.In femalesfaecal inconti-
anal sacadenocarcinoma
nence is commonandmore importantly there is often
Analfurunculosis and perianal fistula
severefaecalcontaminationof theurinarytract,which
Anal stricture
mayresult in pyelonephritis.
Anal prolapse
Circumanal gland adenoma
Perianal trauma
22.10
Anal disorders.
Rectal
mucosa
Atresia ani
Congenital abnormalities of the anal region are to
thought toberare but therecorded incidencemay
not bea true incidenceasmany areeuthanized due
to thepoorprognosisassociated with theseconditions.
Classically atresia aniis classified into four types:
1.
Congenital stenosisof theanus
Il.Persistent anal membrane with a blind-ending
rectal pouchjust cranial to the anus
Ill.Closed anuswith therectum ending more
craniallywithin thepelviccanal (Figure 22.11)
IV.Anus anddistal rectumarenormal;proximal
rectum endsasapouch within thepelvic canal.
22.12
Ancgenital cleft in a male DomesticShort-hair
kitten.
Surgical correction(Figure 22.13) maybe attempted
Gas-filled
in both males and females and can be successful,
rectumand
thoughwounddehiscence andinfectionarecommonly
distal colon
encountered.In themale aswellasreconstructionof
theventral anus,a scrotal urethrostomy may alsobe
required incasesofhypospadiasasthereisoften
insufficient tissuepresent to allowreconstruction.
Faecoliths
22.11
Radiograohof aBoxer puppy with Type lll
atresia ani(Courtesy of FE Crowsley)
Thesecasesusuallypresentin thefirstfewweeks
of life with ahistory of tenesmus and constipation.On
examination theyusuallyhave an imperforate anus
(apartfrom those patientswithTypeIVatresiaan) and
are thin,in poor conditionbut areverypotbellied.
Surgical correction may be attempted but is often
Complications of surgery include recto-anal stricture
formation,faecal incontinence,orconstipation dueto
22.13
Catheterizationof a DomesticShcrt-hairkittenwith
irreversiblemegacolon.
an anogenital cleft priorto surgical reconstruction.
217
Chapter 22 Disorders of the perineum and anus
Pseudocoprostasis
Ringer's solution, or a mild antiseptic solution (e.g.
This is a condition, usually of long-haired animals,
0.05% chlorhexidine). There is some debate as to
where perineal hair and faeces is matted over the anus,
the effectiveness of instilling an antibiotic, an anti-
rasulting in a physical obstruction of the anus. The
biotic plus a corticosteroid, or a corticosteroid alone
condition tends to occur in poorly groomed individuals,
into the sacs after flushing. If there is an infection
especially following diarrhoea. Treatment simply in-
present, a suitably chosen systemic antibiotic is likely
volves clipping the hair away and removing any ano-
to prove more effective because the tissue concentra-
rectal faecoliths.
tion of the antibiotic can be maintained forlonger than
with a single application of a topical antibiotic. The
Anal sac disease
effectiveness,orotherwise,of instillingcorticosteroids
Anal sac problems account for approximately 12% of
has not be proven.
canine clinical presentations, though cats are less
 Anal sac flushing may be required at intervals of
commonly presented for these problems. The classlcal
10-14 days until the problem resolves. In a few
:ee walgoid ses jeue Aue joi sufis buuasaid
ered (see BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Chewing or licking excessively over the tail base
Abdominal Surgery).
or anus
Reluctance or discomfort on sitting
Anal sac abscessation
+
'Scoating' - dragging the anus along the graund 
As with all abscesses it is essential to incise and drain
with: the hind limbs extended
the infected sacs, it is also beneficial to lavage with an
Dyschezia may be noted in extreme cases
isotonic solution or a dilute 0.05% solution of
 Draining tracks in ruptured abscesses.
 chlorhexidine (dilute povidone iodine is of little value as
it is inactivated by organic matter). The incised sacs
It is thought that most disease is related to some
owaisis z uaajb jewe eun pue uado yel eg pinoys
degree of obstruction of the anal sac duct, though the
broad spectrum antibiotic, pending the results of cul-
precise aetiology is not fully understood. Factors that
ture and senslitivity. The most frequently cultured or-
 are believed to initiate and/or perpetuate anal sac
ganisms are Escherichia coli, Streptococcus faecalis
problems include:
and Proteus spp.
 Hecurrent anal sac abscessation is best managed
Stool consistency
by anal sacculectomy. The risks associated with this 
Diet
procedure include faecal incontinence and recurrent
Lack of anal sphincter muscle tone
draining sinuses; the latter being associated with in-
Inactivity
complete excision of the sac lining.
Obesity
 Dogs with generalized seborrhoea
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
Recent oestrus
Anal sac (apocrine) gland adenocarcinoma predomi-
Anal furunculosis and/or perianal fistulae
nantly affects older bitches (over 90% of cases), is
Breed predisposition:
highly malignant and tends to metastasize readily
 Small toy breeds have small ducts
to the medial iliac lymph nodes. The presenting clini-
一
German Shepherd Dogs have very deep anal
cal signs are those typically seen with anal disease
sacs which lie along the rectal wall.
and include dyschezia, tenesmus, flattened (ribbon-
like) stools and a perineal swelling. Very occasionally
Anal sac impaction
a perianal mass is noted during a routine clinical
Anal sac impaction is the most common presentation
examination.
and is straightforward to treat by digital expression of
 Anal sac adenocarcinoma may also present initially
the anal sacs situated at 4 and 8 o'clock. Internal (per
with polydipsiaand polyuria secondary toparaneoplastic
rectum) compression is preferable and more effective
hypercalcaemia related to a parathyroid hormone-
than external compression. External compression is
related peptide produced by the mass.
reserved for only the smallest of dogs or cats where
In all cases of a suspected anal sac mass it is
digital rectal examination is not feasible. The anal sac
important to obtain a full biochemistry profile to assess
secretion is viscous, often grey in colour and putty-like
 the concentrations of calcium and phosphate; it is also
in consistency.
essential to assess renal functlon. In cases with hyper-
 In some cases digital expression may ba required
calcaemia, high rates of physiological (0.9%) saline
at regular intervals and in chronic cases anal
should be administered to diurese calcium. Once
sacculectomy may be considered.
normocaicaemic, furosemide may be administered (2
 mg/kg intravenously) to prevent calcium resorption.
Anal sacculitis
Since metastasis is reportedly seen in over 50% of
In cases of anal sacculitis the anal sacs are often very
cases at presentation, it is essential to assess the
 painful and either sedation or general anaesthesia 
draining lymph nodes and to check for thoracic
 may be required in order to express them. Following
metastases. The medial iliac lymph nodes are occa-
expression of infected anal sacs, they should be
sionally palpable perrectum in small dogs or if the node
cannulated and flushed. The glands can be flushed
is massive. However, it is better to take caudal abdomi-
 with either sterile isotonic solution, such as lactated
nal radiographs or to use abdominal ultrasonography.
218
Chapter 22 Disorders of the perineum and anus
If there areno detectablemetastases and the
the anus.These dogs can show severe faecal tenes
patient isnormocalcaemic,the treatmentofchoice is
mus,dyschezia andpain.Conversely,some dogswith
surgical excision of the mass.The successinremoval
severeanal furunculosislosethe abilitytoclose the
will depend on thesizeof thetumour,which can be
anal sphincter and become faecally incontinent.
between1and 10cm.Potential postoperativeseque-
Successful long-term management is still elusive
laeincludewounddehiscence,infection,faecal incon
butrecent useof immunosuppressive agentsholdsout
tinence and local recurrence (25%of cases).There is
thebest hope.Anumberof agentshave been tried
noreported survival benefit in excising thedraining
includingprednisolone,azathioprine and ciclosporin.
lymph nodes.Recurrence of hypercalcaemiawithout
Of these drugs ciclosporin is the most effective,but a
localtumourrecurrenceisreportedin35-50%ofcases
major disadvantage of this drug is cost;concurrent
duetotheparaneoplasticeffectsfrommetastatictumour
administrationofketoconazolehelps toreduce the
deposits.It is therefore important to assess blood
overalldoserequired.Ketoconazoleandciclosporin
calciumlevelsregularly aswell as tocheckfor local
competefor thecytochromeP-450enzymesystem
regrowthinthesepatients.Post-surgicalsurvivalranges
and thishelps tomaintainhighercirculating levelsof
from2to39months,with theaveragesurvivaltime
ciclosporin.Though ciclosporin isvery effective,usu-
being around 8 manths.
allya6-8weekcourseisrequiredtoreduceand
eliminate thelesions;recurrence once the drughas
Anal furunculosis and/orperianal fistulae
been stopped is still aproblem.A long-term low dose
Thisis anextremelyfrustrating disease encountered
maintenancelevel ofciclosporinhasyet tobeestab-
commonlyin GermanShepherd Dogsand Border
lished.Incaseswhere cost isanissuethenimmuno-
Collies,and is characterized by chronic infection and
suppressivedosesofprednisolonecanbe triednitially
ulcerationof thetissues around the anus(Figure22.14).
at2mg/kgorallyfortwoweeks thenreducing the dose
There areoften deeply infiltrating sinus tractswhich
over 4-6 weeks,although historically success has
can form true fistulaewith therectum.Theunderlying
beenrare.
cause of thisdiseaseremains elusive.There is some
Wherethereisrecurrencepost-immunosuppresion
evidencethatthereisanassociationwithinffammatory
orwhere thelesionsarereducedbut notresolvedwith
bowel disease inboth humans and dogs.
drugtherapy,then surgicalexcision shouldbe consid-
ered(seeBSAVAManualofCanineandFelineWound
Management andReconstruction).
Anal strictures
Stricturesoccursecondaryto trauma,anal furunculo-
sis,neoplasia or surgery.The clinical signs are faecal
tenesmus,dyschezia and haematochezia with flat-
tened stools.Confirmatory diagnosisis by digital rectal
examination butmanypatientsrequire anaesthesia for
this tobe carried out due to thepainful nature of the
condition,
Treatmentcaninvolvebougienage to dilatethe
regularintervals.Inseverecases surgicalexcision can
calsite.Inextreme cases,analresection andarectal
pull-through procedure can be considered.Though a
radicalprocedure thiscangreatlyimprovethepatient's
qualityof life and thedegreeoffaecal incontinenceis
usually mild.
Anal
canal
Anal prolapse
Anal prolapse presents with oedematous,red anal
mucosaprotruding throughtheanal orificeattheend
of defecation（Figure 22.15).The cause is usually
associatedwithfaecal tenesmusand it isessential to
determine and treat the underlying causeof the tenes-
mus aswell as managing the prolapse.
Inmost cases the prolapse canbereduced digit-
22.14
Anal furunculosis.
ally,followinglubrication.Forrecurrent cases a tem-
porarypurse string suture canbeplaced inthe anus
Therangeof clinical signsseenwith anal furuncu-
for 48hours;some authors suggest that the purse
losisvaryimmensely,fromthosepatientswhichshow
string is tiedloosely toallow faecalpassage but
few signs apart from licking the perianal region,to
prevent mucosal prolapse.Insevere cases it may be
advanced caseswheredamage and scarring of the
necessaryto carry outmucosal resection if the tissue
analsphincterandrectumpreventsnormaldilatationof
isdevitalized.
219
Chapter 22
Disordersoftheperineumandanus
22.15
Perineal hernias
Perineal hernias or ruptures aremostly seenin the
Analprolapse
entire male dog,though they arereported inbitches
secondarytoa
and in the cat. The aetiology remains unclear but is
rectal mass.
(Courtesy ot
associatedwith thedegenerativechangesinthe mus-
James Simpson)
clesof the pelvic diaphragm.Many factors(Figure
22.17) have beenimplicated in the aetiopathogenesis
but theyaredifficult tosubstantiate.
Prostatomegaly
Reduced numbers of androgen receptors in the levator ani and
coccygeusmuscles
Rectal sacculation(most likely tobe secondary toherniation)
Colitis and docking
22.17
Factors implcatedn aetiopathogencsis cf
perineal herias.
Trauma
Perianalandperineal trauma maybe theresult of
Thehernia occursbetween thelevator ani and
projectile injuries,bite wounds or severe road traffic
coccygeusmusclesand theexternal anal sphincter
accidents.Themanagement ofsuchwounds maybe
muscle.With the lossof lateral support thereispro-
problematicaseitherfaecal incontinenceorstricture
formationmayresult(seeBSAVAManualof Canine
sacculationwhilstthebilateral disease istermeddila-
andFelineWound ManagementandReconstruction).
tation.Truerectaldiverticula withrectalmucosapro-
truding throughtherectalmusculatureareextremely
Circumanalglandadenomas
rare.Herniasmaybecomplicatedbyinclusionof pelvic
The circumanal gland,hepatoidglandorperianal ad
and peritoneal fat,loops of small intestine and,in
enomais the commonest anal tumourot thedog,with
some 85%being reported in theolder intact male; it is
without theprostategland.
rarelyreportedincats.Circumanal glandadenocarcino-
Thecommonestclinical signisperineal swelling
masareveryrare.Anatomicallytheadenoma are found
eitherbilaterally (Figure22.18)orunilaterally,report-
in the externalregionof the outercutaneouszone,they
edlymorecommonontheright.Defecatorytenesmus
may be single ormultiple onpresentation.They may be
isseenin75-80%ofcases.Dysuria and stranguria are
seen andpalpated asdiscreteswellingsoftenbluish in
seenwithbladderherniation(seen inup to20%of
colour,but can also be large and ulcerated（Figure
cases) indicating urethral obstruction.Diagnosis can
22.16).Many owners donot realize there isaproblem
be confirmed byrectal examinationwheresacculation
untilthereiseitherfreshbloodseenonthe stoolsorthere
andlackoflateralrectal wallsupportisnoted(see
isfrankhaemorrhagefromtheulcerated tumour.
Figure 22.5).Radiography or ultrasonography are of
usetoconfirmaretroflexedbladder.
To avoid futureriskofbladderinvolvement,allperi-
neal hernias should be managed surgically by recon-
structionof thepelvicdiaphragm.In those caseswith
bladderretroflexion,renalandelectrolytestatusshould
beassessed and correctedby fluid therapy,if required,
beforeundertaking surgery.lf urinary catheterization is
22.16
Circumanal gland tumour(perianal adenoma).
(Courlesy cf James Sirmpson)
Asthesetumours areknown torespond toandro-
genic stimulation,castrationof the entiremale is the
treatmentofchoice.Aftercastration the tumour,even
Perine
if ulcerated,will regress. If the tumour is large then
sweling
surgical excision,inaddition to castration,should be
22.18
Perineal sweling associatedwithabilateral
carriedout.
perinealhernia.
220
Chapter22Disordersof theperineum and anus
not possible,relief can be gained by perineal cysto-
Paraprostaticcystsaremanagedbysurgicalexplo-
centesis.Where thereispreoperativebladderretroflex-
ration(Figure22.20),drainageand repairof the pelvic
ion,replacementintotheabdomenandherniorrhaphyis
diaphragm;castration shouldalsobe carried outand in
somecases it isnecessaryo omentalize the intra-
cystopexyorvas deferensopexy.Castration iscarried
abdominalportion of the cyst.
outroutinely in themanagement ofperineal hemiaas
thereisevidenceofreduced incidenceofrecurrence.
Potential complications seen followingrepair include
wounddehiscence,rectaleversionandprolapse,sciati
paralysis(very rare) and recurrence.
Anus
Perineal swelling (intrapelvic masses,
paraprostatic cysts)
Perineal swellings are present as discrete unilateral
bulges in apatientwith a historyof tenesmusand
passing ribbon-like faeces.On examination the peri-
neal swelling is firmand non-reducible and ispalpable
per rectum.It is important to rule out the possibility of
a retroffexed bladderassociatedwithaperineal hernia
at an early stage (see above).
Ultrasonography is invaluable in determining
whetherthemassissofttissueorfluid-filled.Thelatter
mayoccureitherwithabladderorifaparaprostaticcyst
hasherniated through the pelvic diaphragm.A fluid-
filledcystcanalsobedetectedonultrasoundexamina-
Paraprostatic
tion adjacent totheprostate inthecaudal abdomen or
cyst
pelvic inlet.
Intrapelvicmassesmay or maynotextend into the
abdominalcavityandcaudal abdominalandpelvic
radiographs arevaluable in determining the extent of a
22.20
Intraoperaliveviewoaperinealparaprostatic
lesion (Figure 22.19). Intrapelvic masses tend to be of
cyst.
connective tissue originandrange frombenign leiomyo-
mastofibrosarcomas;inviewof thisa minimum data-
Benign intrapelvicmasses may be excised from
basefor anintrapelvicmassshould include incisional
either a perineal approach,or a combined caudal ab-
biopsy, abdominal radiography and ultrasonography to
dominal and pelvic osteotomyapproach.lf a sarcoma is
diagnosedradical surgery,such as hemipelvectomy.
canbeconsidered in orderto achieve surgical margins.
References and furtherreading
Aronson L(2003)Rectum and anus.In:Textbook of SmailAnimal
Surgey，edn,dDSlatte,pp.665682.WBSaundrs
Cyst
Philadelphia
Bellenger CR and Canfield RB(2003)Perincal hernia.In:Textbook
ofSmallAnimal Surgery.3edn,ed.D Slatterpp.487-498.WB
SaundrsPhiladphia
De Novo RC and Bright RM (20o0) Rectoanal disease.in:Textbook
ofVetrinarynadicinednd.JEtingandC
Bladder
Feldman,pp.1257-1271.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
FowlerD andWilliams JM(1999) BSAVA Manuai of Canine and
Feline Wound Managemen!and Reconstruction.BSAVA
Publications,Cheltenham
MathewsKASATaoCAiyMSukinin
C(1997) Cyclosporin treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs.
CanadianVeterinaryJourna/38,39-41
Van Duijkeren(1995)Disease conditions of canine anal sacs.Journal
of Small Aninal Praclice36,12-16
Radiograoh of amineralized prostalic cyst
WilliamsJMandNilesJ(inpreparation)BSAvA Manualof Canine
exterding in:o the perineum.
andFelineAbdominalSurgery,SAVAPublicationsGloucester
221
Diseases of the exocrine
pancreas
David A.Williams
Introduction
individual,variationintheoriginof theglandandthe
pattern of its ductsystem.While theareasofpancreas
Secretion of digestive enzymes is the majorfunction of
derivedfromthetwoprimordiaresembleoneanother
the exocrinepancreas.Pancreatic juice also contains
histologically,thetissuederived from theventral pan-
bicarbonate,which contributesto theneutralizationof
creaticbud，which contributesprimarilytotheright
gastric acid;co-lipase,which facilitates the action of
lobe,contains most of the pancreatic polypeptide-
pancreaticlipase;and intrinsic factorwhich isrequired
producing cells.In contrast,glucagon-secreting cells
forabsorptionofcobalamin.Pancreaticsecretions in-
predominatein the tissue that developsfrom thedorsal
hibit bacterialproliferation in the proximalsmallintestine
bud,which contributes primarily to the left lobe.
(SI),contribute to the normal degradation of exposed
In thedog,bothprimordiausuallypersistand fuse,
brushborderenzymes,and togetherwithbiliarysecre-
and the twooriginal ducts areretained.Theductof the
tions,exerta trophiceffect on the mucosa.Finally,the
ventralprimordium is thepancreaticduct(Wirsung's
pancreas protects itself against autodigestion by sev-
duct) and opens adjacent to thebile duct on themajor
eral mechanisms,including the synthesis ofaspecific
duodenal papilla.The duct of the dorsal primordiumis
trypsin inhibitor that is stored and secreted togetherwith
the accessory pancreatic duct(Santorini's duct) and
the digestive enzymes(Figure 23.1).
openson the minorduodenalpapilla a fewcentimetres
distal to the major duodenalpapilla.Thesetwo duct
systemsusuallyintercommunicatewithinthegland.In
Enzymes secreted as inactive zymogens
Trypsinogen
Trypsin
largerof the two) ispresent and allpancreatic juice
Chymotrypsinogen
Chymolrypsin
enters the duodenum through theminor duodenal
Proelastase
Elastase
papilla.In the majorityofcatsonlythe ductof the
Procarboxypeptidase
Carboxypeptidase
ventral primordium(the pancreaticduct)persists,and
Prophospholipase A2
Phospholipase A2
it fuses with the bile duct before opening on themajor
Coenzyme
duodenal papilla.However,inapproximately20%of
cats the accessory pancreatic duct is also present.
Proco-lipase
Co-lipase
Anatomically the pancreas is closely associated
Enzymes
with the stomach,liver and duodenum （see Figure
23.2).The body liesinthe bendofthecranialpartofthe
α-Amylase
duodenum where it is crossed dorsally by the portal
Classical pancreatic lipase
veinonitswaytotheliver.Eachpancreaticlobule is
Inhibitor
composed primarilyof acinar cells that synthesize
Pancreaticsecretory trypsin inhibitor
ules,and a smallernumberof cells thatmakeup the
branching duct system(intralobular,interlobular and
23.1
Majorsecretoryproteinsof theexocrine
pancreas.(Reproduced from Williams(1995)
mainpancreatic ducts).The cells comprising the initial
withpermissicn from Elsevier)
partof theductsaretermedcentroacinarcellswhere
they linethetubularsegmentsof thegland intowhich
acinar cells secrete.They are the major source of
Anatomy
pancreaticbicarbonate and fluid secretion.Finally.the
pancreascontainsendocrinetissue,theisletsof Langer-
Thepancreas of dogsand catsconsistsprimarily of
hans,accounting for one to two percent of thegland.
rightandleftlobeswitha smallcentralbodywherethe
Thepancreas iswellsupplied withblood by
lobes join together (Figure 23.2).It develops from
branches of thecoeliacand cranial mesentericart-
ventralanddorsalbud-likeprimordiathatarisefromthe
eries.Venous drainage isby vessels thatultimately
embryonicSl,towhichit remainsconnected bysecre-
enter theportal veinleading to the liver.Indogs and
tory ducts. Since the dorsal or ventral primordium or
catsan islet-acinarportal system communicates be-
their associated ducts mayinvoluteduring develop-
tweentheendocrine islettissue andthe exocrine
ment,thereismarkedspecies,and toalesserextent
acinar tissue.Pancreatic intralobular arteries give
222
Chapter23Diseases of the exocrinepancreas
Common bile duct
Pylorus
Majorduodenalpapilla
Minor
Stomach
duodenal
elllded
Spleen
Duodenum
Transverse
colon
Pancreas
RIGHT
Caecum
LEFT
SIDEOF
SIDEOF
ABDOMEN
ABDOMEN
23.2
Anatomical associations of the canine pancreas. There is major variation between individual dogs in the
etal.(1996) with permission from Elsevier)
branchesthatdividetoformcapillaryglomeruliwithin
fluidisdilutedandcarriedalong theductsystembythe
the islets.Numerous efferent vessels (insuloacinar
profuse,watery,bicarbonate-rich secretion of the
portal vessels)emergefrom theglomeruliand enter
centroacinarand duct cells.Thissecretioncontributes
the surrounding exocrine tissue capillarybeds,from
totheneutralizationofgastricacid emptied intothe
which vessels emerge and coalesce into venules.ltis
duodenum.
believedthatessentiallyallof thebloodleavingthe
isletsgoesintoacinarcapillariesbeforeleaving the
Defences against autodigestion
pancreas,and that therefore the acinarcells,particu
Autodigestionof thepancreasby the enzymesit
larlythosesurroundingtheislets,areexposedtohigh
produces isprevented by several mechanisms.Pro-
concentrations ofislethormones,which mayexerta
teolyticandphospholipolyticenzymesare synthe-
regulatoryrole on the exocrinepancreas.
sized,storedandsecreted intheformofcatalytically
While thepancreasisnotsupplied bywell defined
inactivezymogens.These zymogensareactivated
extrinsicnervesit isrichly suppliedwith myelinated
by enzymatic cleavage ofa small peptide,the activa-
and unmyelinated nerve fibres, and nerve trunks.
tion peptide, from the amino-terminal of the polypep-
Intrapancreaticgangliaarescatteredfrequently
tide chain(seeFigure 23.1).Enzymes from several
throughout the tissue.These neurons are either de-
sources,including some lysosomal proteases,are
rived fromthe vagusandsplanchnicnerves andreach
capableof activating pancreaticzymogens,but ordi-
the organ byfollowing branchesof thecoeliacand
cranial mesenteric arteries, or are intrinsic to the
aresecreted into theSl.
gland.In addition to the traditional cholinergic and
Theenzyme enteropeptidase,whichissynthesized
adrenergictransmitters,serotonin,dopamine,and a
and expressed in thebrush border by duodenal
varietyofotherregulatorypeptidesplayarole inthe
enterocytes,is particularlyeffective atcleaving the
regulation ofpancreaticfunction.
activationpeptidefromtrypsinogen andplaysacrucial
role in the activation of digestive enzymes.Active
trypsinsubsequently cleaves the activationpeptide
Physiology and biochemistry
from other digestive zymogens (Figure 23.3).During
Digestive enzymes
Theacinar cells secrete a fluidrich in enzymes that
damaging,cellular enzymes,such as lysosomal en-
degrade proteins,lipids and polysaccharides.This
zymes(Figure 23.4).
223
Chapter23Diseases of the exocrinepancreas
Trypsinogen
Enteropeptidase
Trypsin
Zymogen
Enzyme
Trypsinogen
Trypsin
Chymotrypsinogen
Chymotrypsin
Proelastase
Elastase
Procarboxypeptidase
Carboxypeptidase
Prophospholipase A2
PhospholipaseA2
(Proco-lipase)
(Co-lipase)
23.3
Activation of pancrealicproteases and phospholipase.(Reprocuced fromWilliams(1995) withpermission from
Elsevier)
Should spontaneous intrapancreatic activationof
Zymogen
Lysosomes
trypsinogenoccur,thereareatleasttwomechanisms
granules
that help limit activation of otherzymogens.Firstly,
trypsinisquiteeffective athydrolysingitselfsoactiva
tionof small amountsof trypsinogen tendsnot tobe
catastraphic.Secondly,should significant activation
occur,acinar cells contain a specifictrypsin inhibitor,
Condensing
pancreaticsecretory trypsin inhibitor(PsTl) that is syn-
thesized,segregated,stored andsecreted alongwith
vacuoles
the digestiveenzymes (Figure 23.5).PSTlinhibits trypsin
Golgi
activity should therebe significantactivationof trypsino-
complex
gen within the acinar cell or duct system (Figure 23.6).
Regulation ofpancreaticsecretion
The exocrine pancreas secretes juice into the duode-
numbothinthe absence of food(basalorinterdigestive
secretion)andinresponse toameal.Pancreaticsecre-
RER
Nucleus
tion related tofeedingoccurs as aresponsetocephalic
stimulation(anticipation and smell of food) aswellas
gastric andintestinalstimulationdue tothepresenceof
23.4
Normal intracellular rouling of digestive and
foodin the stomachand Sl.Theresponse to these
lysosomal enzymes by thepancreatic acinar
cell.(Reproduced fron Williams(1995) with permission
stimuli ismediatedbynervousandhormonalmecha-
fromEsevier)
nisms;indogs and cats the endocrine mechanismsare
Inhibitor
Pancreatic secretory trypsin
o-Proteinase inhibitor
α-Macroglobulins
inhibitor (PSTI)
(c-Antitrypsin,c-Pl)
(c-M,and o-M)
Principal locations
Pancreas; pancreatic juice
Plasma intercellular space
Plasma
Approximatemolecular
6000
55000
750000
weignt (daitons)
Specificty
Trypsin only
Broad spectrum (serineproteases)
Broad spectrum (serine and other
proteases)
Inhibition
Temporary (slowly degraded by
Transient(transfers enzyme to
Irreversible(permanent trap for captured
trypsin)
(-macroglobulins)
enzyme)
Function
Inhibits intrapancreatic
Readily difusible inhibitor present in
Trapsproteasesprior to removalby
autoactivation of trypsin
the intercellular space
monocyte-macrophage system
Majorprotease inhibitorsin thepancreas and plasma.(Reproduced fromWilliams(1995) with permissionfrom
23.5
Elsevier)
224
Chapter23Diseasesof the exocrine pancreas
Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
TRYPSINOGEN
TRYPSIN ACTIVATION
PEPTIDE
Pancreatitis
Inflammatorydiseaseof thehumanpancreasisusu-
ENTEROPEPTIDASE
allydivided into acute and chronic typesbased on a
(TRYPSIN)
combination of clinical andpathological criteria,this
classificationmaybe loosely appliedtocatsanddogs
(Figure 23.7).
Acute pancreatitisrefers to inflammation of the
TRYPSIN
PSTI
TRYPSIN-PSTI
pancreaswith asuddenonsetand littleorno
permanent pathological change after recovery.
Chronic pancreatitis is a continuing inflammatory
diseasecharacterizedbyirreversible
READILYREVERSIBLE
morphological change(fibrosis and atrophy)and
itpossiblyleadstopermanent impairmentof
function.
TRYPSIN
α-P1
TRYPSIN-
-PI
Both acute and chronicpancreatitis maybefur-
ther subdivided based on the aetiology,if known,
and the severity.
Complications of both typesofpancreatitismay
include:
SLOWLYREVERSIBLE
Fluid accumulations aroundtheinflamedpancreas
Pseudocyst(a collectionof sterile pancreatic
TRYPSIN
α-M
TRYPSIN-α-M
juiceenclosed byfibrous or granulation tissue)
Localized necrosis
Pancreatic abscess (a circumscribed collection of
pus,usuallyinproximity to thepancreas,
containing little ornopancreaticnecrosis)
Infected necrosis(fromwhichbacteria can be
cultured-veryrare).
IRREVERSIBLE
Classification basedon aetiologyis desirable,but
Diagrammatic-representations of zymogen
this is rarely possible.
23.6
activation (trypsinogen) and the bincing of
Whenexaminedatexploratorylaparotomyor
proteases（trypsin)by majorinhibitors.(Rcprocuced from
necropsy,theaffectedpancreasisoftenoedematous,
Williams (1995) with permission from Elsevier)
swollenandsoft,andtheremaybefibrinousadhesions
toadjacentorgans.Acutefluidcollections(oftenblood-
stainedandcontainingfatdroplets,butlackingawallof
probablyof particularimportance.Secretin and chole-
granulationorfibroustissue)maybeseeninornearthe
cystokininarereleasedintothebloodfromtheproximal
pancreas or throughout the peritoneal cavity,particu-
Slwhenacidandpartlydigestedfoodareemptiedfrom
larly incats.Severelyaffectedareasofpancreas may
thestomach into theduodenum.Thesestimulate the
be liquefiedandpseudocystsmay haveformed.Haem-
secretion of bicarbonate-richandenzyme-richcompo-
orrhagesmaybepresent in theomentum and inthe
nents ofpancreaticjuice,respectively.Traces of pan-
pancreas,and there areoften chalky areas of fat
creaticenzymesleakinto theblood ofnormal healthy
necrosis both adjacent to the pancreas and also in fat
animals and thelowconcentrationspresentmayalso
as far away as the cranial mediastinum(Figure 23.8).
increasetransientlyinthe fewhours afterfeeding.
Histologically there is extensivemultifocal infiltration
Assays for these enzymes in blood are clinicallyuseful
by neutrophils and varying degrees of haemorrhage,
in the diagnosisofpancreatic disease.
necrosis,oedema and vessel thrombosis.
Severity
Acute pancreatitis
Chronic pancreatitis
Mild
No multisystem failure; uncomplicated recovery
Minimalmorphologicalchange;subclinical lossof exocrinefunction
Severe
Multisystmfalcmlicatineudystabss
Severemorphological damage;clinicalexocrine pancreatic
insufficiency ordiabetesmellitus
23.7
Classificationof pancreatitis.(Reprcduced fromWilliams(1995)withpermission fromElsevier)
225
Chapter23
Diseasesof theexocrinepancreas
experimental modelsofpancreatitis,abnormal fusion
of lysosomesand zymogengranules occurs due to
failure of normal secretory processes (Figure 23.10).
Lysosomal proteasesthenactivate trypsinogen since
PSTI is ineffective at the acid pH present in lysosomes.
Subsequent increased capillarypermeability,due to
endothelial cell membrane damage,leads topancre-
atic oedema.Similar changes in duct cell permeability
mayalsotriggerotherpathophysiologicalmechanisms
and therebyexacerbatepancreatitis.
Abnormal vacuoles
Zymogen
23.8
Acute pancreatitis in a cat. The pancreas is
Lysosomes
granules
swollenandoedematous and areas of
haemorrhage and chalky fat necrosis arevisible in the
pancreaticparenchyma andadiacent mesentery.
(Courtesy of Steve Holloway)
If aninitial acute episodeisnotfatal,theremaybe
Condensing
completeresolutionoralternativelytheinflammatory
vacuoles
processmay smoulder continuously butasympto-
matically.Extensive destruction ofpancreatictissue
Golgi
mayreduce theglandtoafewdistortedlobules adja-
complex
cent towhere the ductsenter the duodenum(Figure
23.9) before clinical signs are again evident.
RER
Nucleus
Abnormal intrace lularroutingof digestive
23.10
enzymes destinec for secrctionresults in mixing
of zymogens and lysosomal proteases in abnormal
intracellular vacuoles.Subscquent activation of zymcgens
by lysosomal proteases is currently considered to initiate
deveiopmenl of pancreatitis.(Reproduced fromWilliams
(1995) withpermission from Elsevier)
Once intracellular and intraductal activationof
trypsinogens to trypsins takes place,further activation
ofprogressivelylargeramountsofproteases andphos-
23.9
Chronic pancreatitis observed at necropsy of
pholipase occurs.This is associated with transforma-
an old dog with a history of several bouts of
tionofmildoedematouspancreaticinflammation to
severe acute pancreatitis.Acinarcellswercrestrictcd toa
fewrasicual noduiarareasofrelativelynormal looking
haemorrhagicornecroticpancreatitis withmultisystem
involvement and consumption of plasma protease in-
tissue. The panicreatic pathology was not associated with
any clinical signs at the time of euthanasia, although the
hibitors(Figures 23.11 and 23.12).Once enzyme acti-
serum concenlration cf Irypsin-ike immuncreactivity was
subnormal.
Aetiological factors
Recentreportshavedescribedacute necrotizing pan-
creatitis incatssimilar to thatseenin dogs,aswell asa
histologicallydistinctsuppurativeform.However,chronic
Trypsinogen
Trypsin
Otherproteases
mildinterstitialpancreatitischaracterizedbyinflammation
ofinterstitial tissue,apparentlyassociatedwiththeducts,
is thetypeofpancreaticinflammationmostcommonly
i)Direct tissue damage
reported in cats.This latter typeof pancreatitis is often
ji) Cascade initiation:
accompaniedby cholangiohepatitis,inflammatorybowel
disease ornephritis,any of which may be of greater
Coagulatlon
Fibrinolysis
clinical significance than thepancreatitis.
Complement
Pathophysiology
Kallikrein-kinin
Itisgenerallybelieved thatpancreatitisdevelopswhen
23.11
Local and systemic effects of trypsin in
thereisactivationofdigestiveenzymeswithin the
pancreatitis.(Reproducec from Williams(1995)
gland withresultant pancreaticautodigestion.lnmany
withpermissionfrom Elsevior)
226
Chapter23
Diseasesoftheexocrinepancreas
Enzyme
Pathophysiological action
Trypsin
Activation of other proteases
Coagulation and fibrinolysis (disseminated intravascular coagulation)
Phospholipase Az
Hydrolysis of cell membrane phospholipids
Pulmonary surfactant degradation
Demyelintion (cell necrosis and liberation of toxic substances, such as myocardial depressant factor, leading to respiratory
distress and neurological signs of pancreatic encephalopathy)
Elaslase
Degradationof elastininbloodvessel walls(haemorrhage,oedema,respiratory distress)
Chymotrypsin
Kalikrein
Kinin generation from kininogens
Kinins
Vasodlaatonanreatedmahtension)
Complement
Cel membrane damageaggregationof leucocytes (loalinlammation)
Pancreatic lipase
Fat hydrolysis(local fat necrosis,hypocalcaemia)
23.12
[romElsevier)
vation isinitiated,numerousinflammatorymediators
Nutrition,hypertriglyceridaemiaandhereditaryfac-
and freeradicals arealsoimportantin theprogression
tors:It hasbeensuggested thatpancreatitis ismore
ofpancreatitis.Thesemediatorsare mostlyreleased
prevalent inobese animals andit hasbeenshown that
fromneutrophilsandmacrophages and includetumour
thediseaseislessseverewhen inducedinleandogs.
necrosis factor-α（TNF-α),interleukin-1 （IL-1),IL-2,
Lowprotein,high fat diets mayinduce pancreatitis;
IL-6,IL-8,IL-10,intrferon-（INF-x),INF-,nitricxid
pancreatitisismoreseverewheninduced indogsfeda
(NO) and platelet activating factor(PAF).
highfatdietandlessseverewheninduced inleandogs
Plasma α-macroglobulins andα,-proteinase inhibi-
fed thesamediet.Malnutritionhasalsobeenreportedto
tor(see Figures 23.5 and 23.6) arevital in protecting
cause pancreaticinflammation and atrophy in human
against theotherwisefatal effectsofproteolyticen-
patients andpancreatitishasbeenobserved afterre-
zymes in the vascular space.α-Macroglobulins are
feeding followingaprolonged fast.Feeding the amino
particularly important in this regard.Dogs tolerate
acid analogue ethionine inducespancreatitisinseveral
experimental intravenousinjections of trypsinorchy-
species,including dogs and cats.
motrypsin without showing adverse effects provided
Hypertriglyceridaemia,often grossly apparent,s
thatfreeα-macroglobulinsareavailable tobind the
commonindogswith acutepancreatitisandmay
active proteases.Once α-macroglobulinsare utilized,
developasaresultofabdominalfatnecrosis,ormaybe
eventhough there is freeα-proteinase inhibitor,dogs
a causeof thedisease insomecases.Some familial
dierapidlyfromacutedisseminated intravascularco-
hypertriglyceridaemiasinhumans areassociatedwith
agulation and shockasthefreeproteases activatethe
frequent episodes of pancreatitis that respond to con-
kinin,coagulation,fibrinolytic and complement cas-
trol of serum triglyceride concentrations. It is widely
cade systems(seeFigure 23.11).
believed that thehighprevalenceofpancreatitisob-
Binding of proteasesby α-macroglobulins result in
served in Miniature Schnauzersmayberelated to
a changeinconformationwhich allowsthecomplexto
idiopathichypertriglyceridaemia.Thereis alsoanec
be recognized and rapidly cleared from the plasma by
dotalevidence thatpancreatitisindogsoftendevelops
the monocyte-macrophage system.This removal is
following a fatty meal.
important since α-macroglobulin-boundproteases
Hereditary pancreatitis is well documentedinhuman
retaincatalyticactivity,particularlyagainst lowmole-
beings. Several contributory mutations of the cationic
cularweight substrates(see Figure 23.3) and normal
trypsinogen gene,aswellas some othergenes(PSTI)
functioning of the monocyte-macrophage system is
havebeenidentified.Similarmutationsmaybepresent
animportant factordetermining survival in experi-
indogsand cats,buthavenotyetbeenidentified.
mental pancreatitis.
Drugs,toxinsand hypercalcaemia:More than50
Aetiology
drugs and drug classeshave been implicated asa
The inciting cause ofpancreatitis inthe dog isusually
unknownbut thefollowingpotential causesandrisk
luteproofofa causalrelationshipis oftenlacking.
factors should be considered:
Suspect drugs that are also commonly used inveteri-
nary medicine include L-asparaginase,azathioprine,
Nutrition,hypertriglyceridaemia andhereditary
oestrogen,furosemide,potassiumbromide,salicylates,
factors
sulphonamides,tetracyclines,thiazide diuretics and
Drugs,toxins andhypercalcaemia
vinca alkaloids.Corticosteroidshave recently been
Duct obstruction
removedfrom the listof drugs that mayinducepan-
Duodenal andbiliaryreflux,pancreatictrauma
creatitis in human beings. There is also litle credible
and pancreaticischaemia and reperfusion.
evidence that glucocorticoid administration causes
227
Chapter 23
Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
pancreatitis in dogs, with the possible exception of the
Miscelfaneous: Viral, mycoplasmal and parasitic in-
use of high doses in association with spinal trauma.
fectionsmay be associatcd withpancreatitis,although
Nonetheless, it is probably wise to discontinue the use
this is usually recognized as part of a more generalized
of any drug in patients with pancreatitis of undeter-
disease process. Recently, pancreatitis has been rec-
mined cause unless a specific indication for continued
ognized as a potential complication of babesiosis,
use exists and no altematives are available.
perhaps as a consequence of anaemia and ischaemia.
Administration of cholinesterase inhibitor insecti-
It is unknown whether bacterial infection plays a role in
cides and cholinergic agonists has been associated
the development of pancreatitis in some cases but
with the developmentof pancreatitis, probably by caus-
concomitant bacterial infection does increase the se-
ing hyperstirmuiation. Scorpion stings in human beings
verity of experimental pancreatitis. Pancreatitis may
occur in association with end-stage renal failure; al-
tion of scorpion venom to dogs also elicits pancreatitis.
 though this is rare. It is likely that renal failure second-
Zinc toxicosis has also been reported to cause pan-
ary toacute pancreatitis is encountered more frequently.
creatitis in the dog. Also, both spontaneous and iatro-
Acute pancreatitis has been observed in patients with
genic hypercalcaemia may cause pancreatitis in dogs.
liver disease, perhaps reflecting vascular compromise
secondary to coagulation abnormalities, accumulation
Duct obstruction: Experimental obstruction of the
of toxins (endotoxins, bileacids) secondaryto impaired
pancreatic ducts produces atrophy and fibrosis, al-
liver function, response to a common initial cause, or
though inflammation and cedema may also develop
when pancreatic secretion is stimulated. Clinical con-
hapatic failure. Finaly, autoimmune mechanisms that
ditions that may lead to partial or complete obstruction
of the pancreatic ducts include biliary calculi, sphincter
nated in a small subset of human patients with pancre-
spasm, oedema of the duct or duodenal wall, neoplastic
atic inflammation, and similar mechanisms may play a
conditions, parasites, trauma and surgical interfer-
role in some veterinary patients, particularly in cats.
ence. Biliary calculi are a major cause of pancreatitis in
humans but this has not been reported in dogs. pre-
Diagnosis
sumably because of the low prevalence of biliary
stones in this species and because dogs have an
History and clinical signs:Dogs with acute pancrea-
accessory pancreatic duct that does not communicate
titis are usually presented because of depression,
with the common bile duct and serves as the main
anorexia and vomiting. Severe acute disease may be
pancreatic duct. Congenital anomalies of the pancre-
associated with shock and collapse, while other cases
atic duct system may predispose to pancreatitis in
may have a history of less dramatic signs extending
humans and similar mechanisms may occur in the dog
over several weeks. Signs of pain may be elicited by
and cat but have not been documented.
abdominal palpation. A cranial abdominal mass is
Duodenal and bllaryreflux, pancreatlc trauma and
palpable in some cases and occasionally there is mild
pancreatic ischaemia and reperfusion: Reflux of
ascites. Mostaffected anirmals are mildly to moderately
duodenal juice into the pancreatic ducts secondary to
dehydrated and febrile. Uncommon systemic compli-
surgical creation of a closed duodenal loop causes
cations of pancreatitis that may be apparent on physi-
severe acute pancreatitis. Under normal circumstances
cal examination include jaundice, respiratory distress,
such reflux is unlikely fo occur since the duct opening
bleeding disorders and cardiac arrhythmias. while
-nw yoows joeduoo pezieioeds e Aq pepunouns si
 cosa over the duodenal papilla and is equipped with an
animals are usually middle-aged or older, and some-
independent sphincter muscle. However, this anti-
times obese, and the onset of signs may have followed
reflux mechanism may sometimes fail owing to an
ingestion of a large amount of fatty food. The clinical
abnormally high duodenal pressure, such as may
signs of mild acute pancreatitis and chronic pancreati-
occur during vomiting or affer blunt trauma to the
tis in dogs are poorly documented but are probably
abdominal cavity.
extremely variable and non-specific. The disease may
Surgical manipulation as well as blunt abdominal
not be clinically apparent at all. As a consequence mild
trauma are potential causes of pancreatitis but reports of
 disease probably remains undiagnosed in most cases.
pancreatitis following such insults are rare. Pancreatitis
The history of cats with pancreatitis is extremely
following pancreatic biopsy is extremely rare and is also
variable. Most cats with severe disease present with a
uncommon following resection of pancreaticneoplasms.
history of lethargy and anorexia. Key clinical signs of
Experimental and clinical reparts have indicated
acute pancreatitis in dogs and human beings, vomiting
that ischaemia is important in the pathogenesis of
and abdominal paln, have been reported in only 35%
acute pancreatitis, either as a primary cause or as an
and 25%, respectively, of cats with severe pancreatitis.
exacerbating influence. Pancreatic ischaemia may
Hypothermia, dyspnoea, diarrhaea and ataxia have
develop during shock or severe acute anaemia, or
also been reported. Mild chronic pancreatitis may be
during temporary occlusion of venous outflow, either
subclinical or may cause anorexia and weight loss.
during surgical manipulation in the cranial abdomen or
secondary to hypctension during general anaesthesia.
Diagnostic imaging:Definitive radiographic evidence
This latter mechanism may explain some instances of
of pancreatitis is rarely seen, the most common finding
postoperative pancreatitis when organs remote from
being a somewhat subjective loss of visceral detail
the pancreas have undergone surgery.
Jawopqe je(ueio eun u! (.eouejeedde ssejb punoi6,)
228
Chapter23Diseasesof the exocrinepancreas
(seeChapter3).Classicalabnormalitiesreportedwith
pancreatitisinclude:
Increaseddensityanddiminishedcontrastand
granularity in the right cranial abdomen
Displacementof thestomachtotheleft
Wideningof theanglebetween thepyloric
antrum and theproximal duodenum
Displacement of the descending duodenum to
the right
Presenceofamass medial to the descending
duodenum
Static gas pattern in, or thickened walls of, the
descending duodenum
Static gaspattern in,or caudal displacement of,
the transverse colon
Gastricdistention suggestive ofgastricoutlet
E
obstruction
Delayedpassageof barium through the stomach
andduodenumwithcorrugationof theduodenal
wall indicating abnormal peristalsis.
(a)
(b)
Unfortunately these findings are subjective and de-
23.13
Ultrascundscans of the cranial abcomen in two
finitive radiographic evidence of pancreatitis isusually
dogs.(a) This dog had severe pancreatitis.The
cuodenum can be seen in the.upper right hand corner
not present.However,abdominal radiographymay pro-
(D). The pancreas can be seen as an irregular mixed-
videevidencetoruleinorruleoutalternativediagnoses.
echoic structure(P).The darkarcas within the pancreas
Abdominal ultrasonographyishighly specificfor
represent areas of pancreaticnecrosis.The hyperechoic
pancreatitiswhenstringentcriteriaareapplied,witha
area right below the mixed-echoic structure represents
sensitivity of up to approximately70%in dogs and 30%
perioancreatic fat necros's (F).The hypoechcic area
in cats. Enlargement of the pancreas and/or localized
below theperpancrealic fat suggests peritonea effusicn
(E).The changcs seen here are highly specific far acute
peritoneal effusion arenotsufficientfor a diagnosis.
pancreatitis. (o) This dog had a pancrealic abscess.
Changesinechogenicityare quite useful(Figure23.13).
There is a large uniformly hypccchoic structure (arrowed)
Decreased echogenicity indicates pancreaticnecro-
suggesting aflid-flledmass.Suchafluid-filled mass
sis,whichisoftenassociatedwithhyperechogenicityin
the peripancreatic region. Hyperechogenicity of the
abscess and was diagncsed as a pancreatic abscess in
thispatiert following cytolagical eva uaticn of aspirated
pancreaticparenchymaitselfindicatespancreaticfi-
fluid.(Images courtesy of Dr Sharon Shull)
brosis and canbe seenincasesofchronicpancreatitis.
Pancreaticduct dilatation hasbeen reported incats.
Serialexaminations areparticularly useful foridentifi-
Hyperglycaemia iscommon indogs and catswith
cation and managementofpancreaticcomplications,
necrotizing pancreatitis,probably as a result of
such aspancreaticpseudocystorabscessassociated
hyperglucagonaemia and stress-related increases in
with cysticmasses.
the concentrationsofcatecholaminesandcortisol.Some
patientsdevelopdiabetesmellitus andrequireinsulin
Routine laboratory tests:Leucocytosisisa common
replacement therapy.lncontrast,catswithsuppurative
haematologicalfindinginacutepancreatitis.Thepacked
pancreatitisoften develop hypoglycaemia.
cell volumemaybe increasedasaresult of dehydra-
Hypercholesterolaemia andhypertriglyceridaemia
tion,althoughinmany casesparticularlyincats anae-
areverycommonindogs,andhyperlipaemiaisoften
miais observed following rehydration.
Azotaemia is frequently present and usually re-
gestedformanyhours.Extremehyperlipaemia may
flects dehydration.Sometimestheremaybeacute
preventaccuratedeterminationofotherserumbio-
renal failure secondaryto hypovalaemiaortoother
chemical values.Analysis of plasma lipids has not
mechanisms,suchas circulatingvasotoxic agents and
revealedany clear-cutpattern characteristicof acute
plugging of therenal microvasculatureby either fat
pancreatitis.Hypocalcaemia hasoftenbeenreported
depositsormicrothrombi from the sites of dissemi
but isusually mild tomoderate and associatedwith
nated intravascular coagulation.
hypoalbuminaemia.Lowionizedcalcium incatshas
Liverenzyme activities areoftenincreased,reflect-
beenreported to be a poorprognostic finding.
ing hepatocellular injury as aresult ofeither hepatic
Serumconcentrations ofpancreatic digestive en-
ischaemiaorexposureof the liver tohighconcentra-
zymes(amylase,lipase,phospholipaseAtrypsin-like
tionsof toxicproductsdeliveredfrom thepancreas in
immunoreactivity(TLi) and pancreatic lipase immuno-
portalblood.Insome cases,particularlyincats,there
reactivity(PLi)are often increased in animals with
is hyperbilirubinaemia and sometimes clinically appar-
pancreatitis.Conventionalcatalyticassays andnewer,
entjaundice,whichmayindicateseverehepatocellular
highly specific, immunoassays exist (Figure 23.14)
damage and/or intra-hepatic and extra-hepatic ob-
and it isimportant that a method appropriate foreach
struction to bile flow.
speciesbeutilized.Immunoassaysaregenerally only
229
Chapter23Diseases of the exocrinepancreas
pancreas-specific,amylase,lipaseandphospholipase
Immunological
Catalytic
Aactivities originate from both pancreatic and
assay
assay
extrapancreatic sources including gastric and small
intestinal mucosa,and serum activities of these
extrapancreaticenzymesmayincreaseindogsandcats
with hepatic,intestinal,gastric orneoplasticdisease.
Active site
Active site
Amylaseand lipaseactivities as traditionallyas-
independent
dependent
sayedarenowrecognizedtobeof novaluewhatsoever
in thediagnosisoffelinepancreatitisand increasesof
these markersusuallyreflect non-pancreatic disease.
Lipase activity isa morereliablemarkerforpancreatitis
in dogs than amylase.However,glucocorticoid admin-
23.14
Assay af pancreatic enzymes and zymogens in
serum.Catalyticassays detect degradation of
speciic substrates exposed to the active site of the
five-foldwithouthistological evidence ofpancreatitis.
moleculeand thereforemeasure activity.Immuncassays
Conversely,persistentlynormal activities areseen in
cetect antigenic sites over the surface of the molecule and
some cases of documented pancreatitis.By the time
thereforemeasure enzyme or zymcgen concentration.
someclinicalcasesareinvestigated,depletionofstored
(Reproduced fromWilliams（1995)withpcrmission from
enzymescombinedwithdisruptionofsynthesisof new
Elsevier)
enzymesmayhaveresulted inloweredserumlevels.
Serum fTLI concentration is specific for exocrine
applicabletothespeciesforwhichtheyweredevel-
oped.Atthe time ofwriting,felineTLI (fTLI),felinePLI
pancreaticfunction in the absence of azotaemia,but
(fPLI) and canine PLI(cPLi) assays are only performed
dependingon thestudy thesensitivityof thefTLItestfor
at the author'slaboratory.
felinepancreatitisrangesbetween30and60%.In a
groupofcatswithexperimentallyinducedpancreatitis,
Pancreas-specificlaboratorytests:Circulating con-
bothserumfTLI and fPLI concentrationsincreasedini-
centrations of all pancreatic enzymes,except PLI,
tially,buttheserumfPLIconcentrationstayedelevated
increasesecondarytoreduced clearancefromplasma
much longer than did serumfTLl concentration(Figure
inrenal failure.Asazotaemia is common in acute
23.15).Anotherstudy of catswith spontaneous pancrea-
pancreatitisitmay thereforebedifficult todetermine
titisshowedserumfPLlconcentrationtobebothmore
due topancreaticinflammation orrenal disease.In-
thanserumfTLI concentration or abdominal ultrasono-
creasesmore thanthreetimes theupperlimitof normal
graphy. Similar observations have been made in dogs
areunlikelytoresult fromrenaldysfunctionalone,
and increasingevidenceindicatesthatserumcPLI and
although there are exceptions.Increases more than
fPLI providetests that arebothsensitiveandspecificfor
fivetimestheupper limit ofnormalare likelytoreflect
diagnosingpancreatitisindogs andcats.SerumcTLland
fTLiare somewhat less sensitivebut relatively specific in
profoundelevations.Unfortunately,manypatients with
theabsenceofazotaemia.Marked increasesinserum
bothpancreatitis and non-pancreaticdisease exhibit
lipaseactivitiesarerelativelyspecificandsensitivein
mild tomoderate increases of themostclassical and
dogs,butnotcats,andmildtomoderateincreasesinboth
widely available tests.Unlike TLI and PLl,which are
species arepoorlyspecificforpancreatitis.
23.15
Mean serum fTLi and
1000
120
fPLI concentrations
over time in six cats with
006
108
TL
experimentallyinduced
fPLI
pancreatitis.The pink line shows
800
96
themean serum fTLI
concentration and the black line
700
shows the mean serum fPLI
concentrations over time.The
600
72
brokenline displays the currently
(/6n)
60
recommended cut-off values for
500
fPLI
diagnosis cf pancreatitis of 100
μg/ forfTL|anc12μg/ for fPLI
400-
48
concentration.The elevation of
mean serum fPLI concentration is
300
36
of mean serum fTLI
200
24
concentration. These data
indicate that serum fPLI
100
12
concentration ismcre sensitive
thanserum fTL]concentrationfor
Fo
the diagnosis of feline
0
48
96
192
240
283
336
432
480
pancreatilis.(Dala from Wiliams
etal.,2003)
230
Chapter 23 Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
Trypsin complexed with plasma α,-proteinase in-
 Analgesic therapy: Analgesic therapy (e.g. subcuta-
hibitor and trypsinogen activation peptides (TAPs; see
neous pethidine hydrochloride, transdermal fentanyl.
Figure 23.6) are not normally present in plasma and, in
morphine by constant rate intravenous infusion or, for
human patients, the concentration of these markers
correlates well with the severity and clinical course of
be given to provide relief of pain, even if.signs of pain
the disease. Recent studies have shown that these
are not apparent.
tests have relatively poor sensitivity for diagnosis of
pancreatitis, and technical complexities presently limit
Transfusion: The transfusion of plasma or whole
the usefulness of these assays in veterinary medicine.
blood to replace α-macroglobulins may belife-saving
Increased availability of canine and feline TLl and,
in patients with severe disease and has the additional
 particularly, PLl assays should facilitate more accu-
benefit of maintaining plasma albumin concentra-
rate diagnosis of pancreatitis. In their absence and
tions. Albumin is probably beneficial in pancreatitis
without direct examination of pancreatic tissue, the
because of its oncotic properties that not only help
diagnosis can only be tentative. Nonetheless, evalu-
maintain blood volume and prevent pancreatic isch-
ation of the entire clinical picture, particularly if sup-
aemia, but also limit pancreatic oedema formation.
 ported by pancreatic abnormalities on ultrasound
Low molecular weight dextrans have also been used
examination, will in many instances give a high de-
to expand plasma volume but they may aggravate
gree of confidence in the presumptive diagnosis. If
bleeding tendencies, contain no protease inhibitor
gross or histopathological confirmation of the diagno-
and provide no majoradvantages over plasma admin-
sis is required, or the possibility of other abdominal
istratian. A hypertonic saline-dextran 70 cormbination
disease needs to be eliminated, it is important that
was shown to be effective in maintaining cardiac
attention be given to stabilization of fluid and electro-
function without massive fluid administration, thereby
lyte status prior to general anaesthesia and surgical
 exploration of the abdomen.
can accompany therapy wlith lactated Ringer's solu-
tion alone. Hyperoncotic ultra-high molecular weight
Acute treatment
dextran solutions have recenily been shown to re-
The treatment of acute pancreatitis involves correction
duce trypsinogen activation, prevent acinar necrosis
and maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balances
while the underlying cause, if known, is rectified. The
promoting pancreatic microcirculation.
patient is then supported whilst allowing the pancreas
to recover from the inflammatory episode. Recent
Corticosteroids: These should be given only on a
short-term basis to animals in shock associated with
dom of withholding food to 'rest' the pancreas, how-
 fulminating pancreatitis, and then in concert with fluids
ever, and both parenteral and enteral nutrition have
and plasma, as described above. Longer periods of
been well tolerated by patients with pancreatitis. There
administration may impalr removal of α-macroglobulin-
is also evidence that anteral nutrition may be superior
bound proteases from the plasma by the monocyte-
to parenteral nutrition. Oral intake should probably only
macrophage system, with resultant complications due
be restricted in those patients with incessant vomiting
 to systemic effects of circulating uninhibited enzymes.
and then for as short a period as possible.
 Mild cases of pancreatis are probably self-limiting
Somatostatin and dopamine: Somatostatin and its
and may spontaneously improve after 1 or 2 days of
analogues may reduce complications and improve
basic supportive therapy. Other patients require ag-
survival in human patients but there is not yet sufficient
gressive fluid therapy over several days to treat severe
evidence to recommend their routine use. infusion of
dehydration and ongoing fluid electrolyte loss due to
dopamine at a dose that stimulates both dopaminergic
vomiting and diarrhoea. Most animals become hypo-
and β-adrenergic receptors (i.e. 5 μg/kg/min i.v.) is
kalaemic during such therapy and serum potassium
helpful in reducing severity and progression of some
should be monitored and supplemented parenterally if
feline models of pancreatitis; it is thought that the
required. Serum creatinine or urea levels should also
beneficial effect of dopamine is related to reduction of
be measured to monitor renal function. while meta-
microvascular permeability rather than to promotion of
bolic acidosis is probably common in acute pancreati-
pancreatic blood flow.
tis, this may not always be the case and vomiting
patients may be alkalotic. Care should be taken that
Secretion prevention: Nasogastric suctioning of gas-
bicarbonate administration to rectify acidosis does not
tric secretions and use of antacids or cimetidine have
 precipitate signs of hypocalcaemia in individuals with
been recommended in order to indirectly inhibit pan-
borderline low calcium levels.
creatic secretion. However, none of these methods
has been consistently shown to be effective and their
Antiblotic therapy: In contrast to human beings, cats
value has largely been discounted. Attempts to restthe
and dogs with pancreatitis rarely have infectious com-
pancreas using direct inhikitors of secrefion such as
plications and antibiotic therapy would appear to be of
 atropine, acetazolamide, glucagonand calcitonin have
minimal benefit. However, for cases where there is
not proved to be effective. Secretin, the hormone that
good evidence for pancreatic infection it should be
 naturally stimulates pancreatic secretion, was beneff-
noted that trimethoprim-sulphonamide and enrofloxacin
cial in a rat modei of pancreatitis when given at a high
penetrate well into the exocrine pancreas in dogs.
dose intravenously.
231
Chapter 23
8Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
Enzyme Inhibitors: Administration of a variety of
 Pancreatic pseudocysts can be treated medically
naturally occurring and synthetic enzyme inhibitors
or surgically. Medical management of pancreatic
pseudocysts involves ultrasound-guided percutane-
digestive enzymes, as well as free-radical scavengers
ous aspiration and close monitoring of the size of the
such as selenium, have shown promise in experimen-
pseudocyst. Surgical intervention should be consid-
tal studies but their value remains to be conclusively
ered in cases in which clinical signs persist or when
demonstrated in clinical trials.
the size of the pseudocyst does not decrease signifi-
cantly over time. Surgical correction can involve extir-
Peritoneal dialysis: The use of peritoneal dialysis to
 pation of the pseudocyst, with external or internal
remove toxic material accumulated in the peritoneal
drainage; internal drainage is the preferred method in
cavity is beneficial experimentally and is thought by
human patients.
many ta be useful in human patients. While impracti-
Pancreatic abscess is a less cammon possible
cal in some veterinary practices, peritoneal dialysis
complication of pancreatitis. Bacterial infection is only
may be of value in some cases. Certainly, in those
rarely present. Clinical signs are non-specific but may
patients where acute pancreatitis is confirmed at
include vomiting, depression, abdominal pain, ano-
exploratory laparotomy removal of as much free fluid
rexia, fever, diarrhoea and dehydration. In some patients
as possible followed by abdominal lavage is advis-
a mass in the cranial abdomen can be identified upon
able. Reports of surgical intervention to debride and
abdominal palpation. Associated clinicopathological
drain affected areas are not favourable, although in
findings are similar to those of pancreatitis. Surgical
one report of six dogs with fibrotic obstructive masses,
drainage and aggressive antimicrobial therapy are the
cholecystoduodenostomy was followed by recovery.
treatments of choice in human patients. However, in
Many patients that develop obstructive jaundice in
one report only five of nine dogs survived the immedi-
association with acute pancreatitis recover spontane-
ate postsurgical period. Thus, given the mixed results,
ously over 2-3 weeks with conventional supportive
risks, difficulties and expense associated with anaes-
care alone.
thesia, surgery and postoperative care, surgical inter-
vention may be best avoided unless there is clear
Diet: Small amounts of water should be offered after
evidence of an enlarging mass and/or sepsis in a
the patient has stopped vomiting. If there is no recur-
rence of clinical signs, food may be gradually re-
Antimicrobial therapy is of questionable value unless
introduced. The diet should have a high carbahydrate
an organism is identified upon bacterial culture.
content (rice, pasta, potatoes) since protein and fat are
more potent stimulants of pancreatic secretion and are
Long-term therapy
therefore more likely to promote a relapse. If there is
In many patients with a single episode of pancreatitis,
continued improvement, gradual introduction of a low
 the only long-term therapy recommended is to avoid
fat content maintenance diet should be attempted.
feeding high fat meals. In other patients, repeated
Another period of food deprivation should be instituted
bouts of pancreatitis occur and it may be beneficial to
 if signs of pancreatitis recur. While the prognosis is
feed a fat-restricted diet permanently. In some patients
poor for those patients that repeatedly cannot tolerate
hypertriglyceridaemia may need to be controlled
pharmacologically. Despite all efforts, some animals
sustaining such patients while the digestive system is
experience recu rrent disease.
rested for 7-10 days.
Some reports have indicated that oral pancreatic
enzyme supplements decrease abdominal pain and
 Supportive care: Hyperglycaemia is often mild and
discomfort that accompanies chronic pancreatitis in
transient but in some cases diabetes mellitus may
human beings. It is unknown whether they are of
develop, requiring treatment with insulin. Respiratory
similar value in dogs and cats, but a trial period of
distress, neurological problems, cardiovascular abnor-
enzyme therapy may be warranted in individuals with
malities, bleeding disorders and acute renal failure are
chranic signs of abdominal pain or anorexia.
all poor prognostic indicators. Atempts should be
made to manage these complications by appropriate
Prognosis
supportive measures (see Chapter 26).
Pancreatitis is unpredictable and varies widely in se-
verity; thus, itis difficult to give a prognosis even when
Treatment of complications
 a diagnosis is definitively established. Life-threatening
Use of ultrasound imaging has contributed to in-
signs accompanying acute fulminating pancreatitis are
creased recognition of pancreatic masses in patients
usually followed by death in spite of supportive meas-
with pancreatitis.
ures but some dogs recover fully fallowing an isolated
Pancreatic pseudocysts have been described in
severe episode. In other cases, relatively mild pan-
dogs and cats. Clinical signs are those associated with
pancreatitis. On abdominal ultrasound a cystic struc-
patient dies from an acute, severe exacertbation of the
 disease, or is euthanlzed because of failure to recover
fied. Aspiration of the pseudocyst is relatively safe and
or long-term cost. Most patients with uncomplicated
should be attempted for diagnostic and therapeutic
pancreatitls probably recover spontaneously after a
purposes. Fluid from pancreatic pseudocysts is of low
single episode and do well as long as high fat content
cellularity and is not inflammatory in nature.
foods are avoided.
232
Chapter23
Diseasesof theexocrinepancreas
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
causeof EPlindogs.AnimalswithEPlandcoexistent
Progressivelossofpancreaticacinarcellsultimately
diabetes mellitusprobablyhave chronicpancreatitis,
leads tomalabsorptionduetoinadequateproduction
since pancreatic inflammation is likely to damage
of digestive enzymes.The functional reserve of the
both endocrine and exocrine tissue,in contrastto the
pancreas is considerable, however, and signs of exo-
selective acinar cell damage inPAA.
crine pancreatic insufficiency(EPl) do not occur until
Congenital deficiencies of individual pancreatic
most of the gland has been destroyed.Althoughpan-
digestive enzymesorof intestinal enteropeptidase
creaticenzymesperformessential digestivefunctions,
have notbeen described in dogs or cats.Occasion-
alternativepathwaysof digestion forsome nutrients do
ally:young dogs are seen that have signs of EPl and
exist.Following experimental exclusion ofpancreatic
sometimesdiabetesmellitusfromavery earlyage,
secretionfrom theintestine,dogscanstillabsorbupto
63%of ingested protein and84%of ingested fat.This
be the underlying cause.Smouldering subclinical EPI
residual enzyme activityprobablyoriginatesfrom lin-
is occasionally identified in dogs with immune-medi-
gual and/or gastric lipases and gastric pepsins, from
ated lymphocyticpancreatitis thathasnotprogressed
intestinal mucosalesterasesandpeptidases,and,in
tofrankPAA.
young animals,from bile salt-activated lipase in milk.
Finally,EPlhasbeenreportedasacomplicationof
Nonetheless, when exocrine pancreatic function is
proximal duodenal resection and cholecystoduode-
severelyimpaired,thesealtemativeroutesofdigestion
nostomy in cats. This reflects the absence of dual
are inadequateandclinical signsofmalabsorption
pancreatic ducts in this species,with blockage of
occur.Feline EPI ismuch lesscommon thanEPI in
pancreatic secretion occurring asaresult of damage to
dogs,but developmentofareliabletestforfTLIhas
themajor duodenal papilla.Pancreatectomywillalso
shownthediseasetobe farmoreprevalent than
leadtoEPI.
previouslyrealized.
Pathophysiology
Aetiology
Nutrient malabsorption incanine EPI doesnotarise
Spontaneousdevelopmentofpancreaticacinaratro-
simplyasaconsequenceoffailure of intraluminal
phy(PAA) in previously healthyadult animals appears
digestion. Morphological changes in the Sl of some
tobe unusually common in dogs,in whichitis themost
dogs with EPi have been reported and studies of
common cause of EPI (Figure 23.16).Similar condi-
naturally occurring.and experimental,EPl in several
tions occur sporadically in other species,and the
specieshave revealed abnormalactivities and im-
authorisawareofcasesofahistologicallyidentical
paired function of mucosal enzymes, indicated by
condition in cats.Recent studies have revealed that in
abnormal transport of sugars,amino acids and fatty
German Shepherd Dogs and Rough Collie breeds
acids.Absence of the trophicinfluence ofpancreatic
PAAisprecededby subclinical,possiblyautoimmune,
secretions, true bacterial overgrowth in the Sl and
lymphocyticpancreatitis that leadstoacinar cell de-
endocrineandnutritional factorsmayall contributeto
struction.Since islet cells are spared thesepatients do
this pathology.
notdevelop diabetesmellitus.
While chronic pancreatitis resulting in progressive
Small intestinal mucosa:EPI in several species is
destructionofpancreatictissueisa commoncause of
associatedwithreduceddegradationofexposedbrush
EPI in adult human beings and cats,this is a rare
border proteins,such as maltase and sucrase,as a
itywithin thegutlumen.Jt hasbeensuggestedthat
accumulationofthesebrushborder membranepro-
teinsmayinterferewithnormal absorption.
Smallintestinal microflora:Bacterial overgrowthin
thelumenof theSl iscommon inboth untreated and
treated dogs with EPl.Changes in the intestinal
microflora may arise secondary to lossof theantibac-
terial propertiesofpancreatic juice or as a conse-
quenceof disturbed intestinal immunityormotility.
Thepathological changes associatedwithbacte-
rial overgrowth depend on the type of bacteria in-
volvedand thechronicityof the overgrowth.In those
dogswithincreasesinaerobicandfacultativeanaero-
bicbacteria,activities of brush borderenzymes are
often increased as described above.In contrast,
when the overgrowth includesobligate anaerobic
23.16
The duodenal lirmb of the pancreas of a dog
bacteriathereisoftenadecreaseinmanyenzyme
with pancreatic acinar atrophy.Residual tissue
contains islet (endacrine)cels and lood vessels,so
activities,andperhaps partial villous atrophy(Figure
diabetes mellitus is not a feature of this disease.
23.17). In both circumstances bacteria may impair
(Reproduced framWillians(1992) with permission from
absorption by competing for nutrients and by chang-
Waltham internationalFocus)
ing intraluminal factors.
233
Chapter23Diseasesof the exocrine pancreas
deficiencymight alsoberesponsible forthe anorexia
reported in somepatientswith EPI
Serum tocopherol(vitamin E)concentrations are
often severelysubnormal inEPlanddonot increase in
response to treatment,perhaps because treatment
doesnotreturnfat absorptiontonormalorbecause
bacterial overgrowthpersists.Tocopherol deficiency
cytemembranes,smoothmuscle,thecentralnervous
system,skeletal muscle and the retina.
Subnormal serumconcentrationsof vitaminAhave
also been observed in dogs with EPibut no associated
23.17
Partial villous atrophy inajcjunal biopsy
signs of deficiency have been reported. Vitamin K-
specimen fromadogwithexocrinepancreatic
insufficiency due topancrcatic acinar atropny.Villi are
responsive coagulopathy occursrarely inpatientswith
short andstumpywithabroadenedplateau at the
EPi,but ismore common in affected cats than dogs.
extrusionzone,and there isevidence cf folding orfusion
of vili.(Reproduced from Williams et al. (1987) with
Diagnosis
permissionfrom theJournaloftheAmericanVeierinary
Medical Association)
History:Dogs and cats with EPl usually have a history
ofweight loss but a normal or increased appetite.
Pancreatic regulatory peptides and glucose intol-
Polyphagia is often severe and ownersmay complain
erance:Histopathological examination of the pan-
thatdogsravenouslydevour all foodofferedtothem
creas from dogs with PAA reveals almost total atrophy
and scavenge fromwaste binsbutsome dogshave
of acinartissue but plentiful,albeit highly disorganized,
periods of inappetence. Coprophagia and pica are also
islet tissue containing many insulin-,glucagon-,
common in dogs.Water intake may also increase in
somatostatin-and pancreaticpolypeptide-immuno-
some dogs and in chronicpancreatitis there may be
reactive cells.These morphalogical changes may ac-
polyuria andpolydipsia due to diabetes mellitus.Diar-
countforsubnormalbasalplasmainsulinconcentrations
rhoeaoftenaccompaniesEPl butcanbeveryvariable
that have been reported in dogs with PAA. In patients
in character.Most owners report frequent passage of
withEPl secondarytopancreatitis theremaybefrank
largevolumesof semi-formed faeces,although some
diabetesmellitussecondarytoisletcelldestruction.
patientshave intermittent or continuousexplosive
waterydiarrhoea,whileinotherinstances diarrhoeais
Nutritional status:Manypatientswith EPl havebeen
infrequent and isnot considered a problem.Diarrhoea
suffering frommalabsorptionfora considerableperiod
generallyimproves orresolves inresponse to fasting.
of time before a diagnosis is made.Thus,the clinical
Feedingalowfator lowcarbohydratedietmayalso
andpathophysiologicalfeaturesassociatedwithEPI
decrease oreliminate diarrhoea.
may in some instances be due to malnutrition rather
Theremaybe a historyofvomiting andcommonly
thanEPIperse.Oral and intravenousglucose toler-
thereismarkedborborygmusand flatulencewithsome-
ances are abnormal in untreated dogs with PAA,al-
timesapparentepisodesofabdominaldiscomfort.
thoughdiabetesmellitushasnotbeenreported in
PAAisprevalentinyoung GermanShepherd Dogs and
these dogs.Treatment of PAAisfollowed by normali-
thusEPlisofteninitially suspectedbecauseof theage
zation of intravenous glucose tolerance,although
andbreedof the affecteddog.ltmustbeemphasized,
basal plasma insulin concentrationsremain subnor-
however,thateveninyoung GermanShepherdDogs
mal.It isprobablethat the abnormalities in glucose
Sl disease ismoreprevalent thanEPIand thatPAA
homeostasisarerelated,at leastinpart,tometabolic
may occur in a wide variety of breeds at any age.
changes associated with the catabolic and undernour-
Similarly,mostcatswithpolyphagia,weight lossand
ished stateof many untreateddogswith EPl.Malnutri-
diarrhoea areultimatelydiagnosedashavingSl dis
tion inratsimpairs the capacity tomaintainprotective
ease associatedwithseverecobalamindeficiency;
mucosal mucin content,and acceleratesthe develop-
thesecases are clinicallyindistinguishable from those
mentofbrushborderenzyme deficiencyinintraluminal
with EPI without appropriate diagnostic testing.
bacterial overgrowth.
Mildlyor severely subnormal serum cobalamin
Clinical signs:Mild tomarkedweight lossisusually
concentrationsarecommonlyobservedindogsand
seen in association with EPl. Some dogs are very
cats withEPl.Deficienciesof pancreaticproteases,as
emaciated at presentation withseveremuscle wasting
wellaspancreaticintrinsicfactor,could contribute to
and nopalpablebodyfatand,inextremecases,dogs
cobalaminmalabsorption,andovergrowthofcobala-
maybephysicallyweakasaresult of lossofmuscle
min-binding bacteria in theproximal Sl isa likely
mass.The haircoatis often in poor condition and some
additional contributory factor.Serumcobalamincon-
animalsmay give offa foul odourbecauseof haircoat
centrationsrarelynormalizefollowingtreatmentwith
soiling with fatty faecal material and the passage of
oral pancreaticenzymes.Intestinal dysfunction dueto
excessive flatus.Cats with EPI may exhibit a greasy,
persistentcobalamindeficiencymaybeacontributory
factor in those patients with EPl and a suboptimal
ciallyin theperinealregion,which may inpartreflect
responsetoenzymereplacement therapy.Cobalamin
severecabalamin deficiency(Figure 23.18).
234
Chapter 23
Diseasesof the exocrinepancreas
Unkemptand wet
23.18
appearance of the
40
haircoat of a cat with
exocrine pancreatic
35
insufficiency. This may
(161)
reflect simolcgreasy soiling
(especially around the
30
：
perineal region) anc/or
cti
changes secondary lo the
25
scvere cobalamin deficiency
that iscommonly seen in
affected cals.
uuu!
20
-like
15
trypsin
品
Laboratory tests:The history and clinical signs of EPI
donotdistinguish thecondition from othercausesof
Lun
10
malabsorption(see Chapter 10)and whilereplace-
ment therapywith oral pancreaticenzymesis generally
5
successful,response to treatment isnot a reliable
diagnostic approach.
InPAA,extreme atrophyof thepancreasisreadily
口
CLINICALLY
SMALL
observedongross inspectionat eitherexploratory
EXOCRINE
NORMAL
INTESTINAL
PANCREATIC
laparotomy or laparoscopy.In chronicpancreatitis it
DISEASE
INSUFFICIENCY
may be impossible to gauge accurately the amount of
Serum trypsin-like irnmunoreactivity in 100
residual exocrinepancreatictissuebecauseof severe
healthydogs,50-dogs with smallintestinal
adhesions and fibrosis.These procedures involve un-
disease and 25 cogs with exocrine oancreatic
insuffic ency. (Reproduced from Wiliams and Batt (1988)
fordiagnosticpurposescannotberecommended,given
withpermissicn from theJoumai of theAmerican
theavailabilityofreliablenon-invasivetests.
Veterinary Medicai Association)
Routine laboratory testresultsare generallynot
helpful in establishing the diagnosis of EPl. Serum
toan appropriatelaboratoryforanalysis.lt is important
alanine aminotransferase(ALT) activities are mildly to
toremember that thereisnocross-reactivitybetween
moderatelyincreasedandmayreflecthepatocytedam-
canine andfelineTLI and thatserumfTLivaluesin
agesecondary to increased uptakeof hepatotoxic
normalcats,aswellasincatswithEl,aregreaterthan
substances through an abnormallypermeableSl mu-
those in dogs.As noted above, at the time of writing
cosa.Otherroutine serumbiochemical testresultsare
fTLIassayisavailableonlyfromtheauthor'slaboratory
unremarkable,except that total lipid,cholesterol and
at TexasA&MUniversity.
polyunsaturated fatty acid concentrations are often
Othertests used for diagnosisof EPl include:assay
reduced.Serum protein concentrations are usually
of faecal proteolytic activityusingazoprotein,gelatinor
normaleven whenpatients areseverelymalnourished.
radial enzyme diffusionmethods;specific assay of fae-
Lymphopenia and eosinophilia are notuncommonbut
cal pancreatic elastase in dogs; the bentiromide (BT-
otherabnormalities should be considered asevidence
PABA)test;plasma turbidity afteroralfatadministration;
for additional,or alternative,underlying disorders.
and microscopic examinationof faeces.Many of these
Canine serum amylase,isoamylases,lipase and
tests give significant proportions of false-negative and
phospholipase Aactivitiesare only minimallyreduced
false-positiveresults and theiruseevenascrudescreen-
inEPl,indicating thatnon-pancreaticsourcesof these
ing'tests isnot recommendea.Furthermore,theiravail-
ability islimitedandevenwhenproperlyperformed they
andwidelyusedtestcurrentlyavailableisassayof
are inconvenient and expensive.When EPI is sus-
serum TLi.
pected incats ordogs,serumTLI shouldbe assayed
Trypsinogen is synthesized exclusively by the pan-
creas andmeasurementoftheserum concentrationof
Treatment
thiszymogenbyspecies-specificradioimmunoassay
provides a good indirect index of exocrine pancreatic
Enzyme replacement:Most dogs and cats with EPI
function in the dog.Serum TLI concentration is both
canbesuccessfullymanaged by supplementingeach
highly sensitive and specificforthe diagnosis ofEPl,
mealwithpancreaticenzymespresentincommercially
sinceconcentrations aredramaticallyreducedcom-
availabledriedpancreaticextracts.Numerous formu-
paredwiththose in normalanimals and thosewith
lations of these extracts are available(tablets,cap-
small intestinal disease(Figure 23.19).Marked reduc-
sules,powders.granules) and their enzyme contents
tions in serumTLI (to<2μg/indogsor8μg/ incats)
andbioavailabilitiesvary.Additionofapproximately
may even precede signs of weight loss or diarrhoea.
two teaspoons of powdered pancreatic extract per 20
Utilization of this test is simplein that analysis of a
kgof bodyweighttoeachmealisgenerallyaneffective
singleserumsampleobtainedafterfood hasbeen
starting dose.Extract should be mixed with amainte-
withheld for several hoursis all that isrequired.Serum
nance food immediatelyprior tofeeding.Twomealsa
TLlisverystable and samples can therefore bemailed
dayare usually sufficient topromoteweight gain.Dogs
235
Chapter 23 Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
willgenerallygain0.5-1.0kgperweekanddiarrhoea
sub-optimal weight gain since theyrarely improve after
and other clinical signs,such as polyphagia and co-
eitherincreasing thedoseofenzymesover thatrecom-
prophagia, often resolve within 4-5 days.
mended above or giving cimetidine, suggesting that
Assoonasclinicalimprovement isapparentowners
factorsotherthanenzyme deliverytotheSlareinvolved.
candetermineaminimumeffectivedoseofenzyme
supplement that preventsreturn of clinical signs.
Dietary modification:Fat absorption does not return
.This
variesslightlybetweenbatchesofextractandalsofrom
tonormaldespite appropriateenzymetherapy.Patients
patienttopatient,probablyreflectingindividualvariation
appear to compensate by eating slightly more than
inextrapancreaticdigestivereserve.Most affecteddogs
usualand,aswith anyindividualit icessary
require at least one teaspoonful of enzyme supplement
regulate the amountof food given in order tomaintain
permeal but lowerdosesmaybe adequateincats and
ideal bodyweight. Some types of dietary fibre impair
smalldogs.Onemealperdayissufficient in some dogs
pancreaticenzyme activity invitroanddietscontaining
whileotherscontinuetrequrewo.favailablechoped
large amountsof non-fermentablefibreprobablyshould
weight),obtained fromanimalscertified ashealthyfol-
caloric uptake and should not be fed.In order to
lowing appropriate post-mortem inspection, is an
overcomeresidual digestivedeficits.thefeedingofa
inexpensive alternativetodriedextract.Pancreascan
highly digestible,lownon-fermentable fibre diet may
bestoredfrozen at-20Cforat least3monthswithout
bebeneficial.A non-blinded clinical study found that
significant lossofenzyme activity.
ownersconsidered that theirdogsgenerallydidbetter
(reduced flatulence andborborygmi,decreased faecal
Effectivenessofenzymereplacement:While ad-
volume and frequency of defaecation)when fed a
ministration of pancreatic enzymes with food is gener-
commercial highly digestible diet comparedwith the
ally successful, only a small proportion of the
previously fed home-cooked or regular maintenance
administered enzymes is delivered functionally intact
diets,buttherewasodifferenceinappetite,rinking，
to theSlandfat absorptiondoesnotreturn tonormal.
colour or consistency of faeces,or in coprophagy.
Pancreaticlipase israpidlyinactivatedat the acidpH
Resultsof experimentalstudies toevaluatehighly
encountered in the stomach,while trypsin and some
digestibledietshaveshownconsistentreductionsin
other pancreatic proteases,although relatively acid
faecal weightbut havenot shown consistent benefit
resistant,are susceptible to degradation by gastric
with regard to fat digestibility.Highly digestible diets
pepsins. Efforts to increase the effectiveness of en-
maybeofvalue inpromotingcaloricuptake inthose
zymesupplementationbypre-incubationofenzymes
dogs with EPI that do not regain normal bodyweight.
withfoodpriortofeeding,supplementationwithbile
Thesepatientsmayalsobenefit frombeingfedadiet
salts,neutralization orinhibitionof gastric acid secre-
containing(orsupplementedwith)readilyhydrolysed
tion and use of enteric-coated preparations have gen-
and absorbed medium chain triglycerides.
erally not provedeffective.
Most notably,pre-incubationof foodwith enzyme
Vitamin supplementation:Dogs and cats with EPI
powder for 30 minutes prior to feeding does not im-
mayhave severelysubnormalconcentrationsofserum
prove the effectiveness of oral enzyme treatment in
cobalamin(vitamin B12)and tocopherol(vitamin E).
Serum concentrations of cobalamin in particular usu-
promotingfatabsorption indogswithligatedpancre-
atic ducts.Gastric acid secretion may be reduced by
allydecreasefollowing otherwise effective treatment
administration ofhistamineHreceptorantagonists.
with pancreatic enzymes.Clinical signs associated
Cimetidine administered 30 minutesprior togiving
withdeficienciesof thesevitamins indogs and cats
foodmixedwithpancreaticenzymesdoesimprovefat
havenotbeen well documented butintestinal mucosal
absorption in dogswith ligated pancreatic ducts but
changes,myopathy,myelopathyandotherabnormali-
doesnot decreasefaecal wet or dryweight.Routine
tiesofnervoustissuehavebeenreportedinother
species. Anorexia in dogs and anunkempt wet-looking
useofcimetidineisnotrecommended,however,given
theexpenseofthedrugandthefactthatsomany
haircoat in cats (Figure 23.20) have been documented
patients respond well when treated with enzymes
ingrowing animalswithcobalamindeficiency,but its
alone.Oral antacids,such as sodium bicarbonate,
aluminumormagnesiumhydroxide,areinexpensive
butdonotincreasetheeffectiveness of enzyme therapy.
Enteric-coated preparations have been formulated
toprotectenzymesfromgastricacid but they areactu-
allyoftenlesseffectivethanpowderedpancreaticex-
tract.Thismayreflectselectiveretentionofenteric-coated
particles in the stomach whilst food isemptied orper-
hapsrapid intestinal transit preventing adequate en-
zyme release in the upper Sl.Future enteric-coated
preparationsformulated specifically forcats and dogs
mayproveadvantageous.Similarly,newpreparations
containing acid-resistant fungal or gastric lipases may
23.20
Unkempt and wet aopearance of the hairccat of
prove tobeeffective andeconomical.Suchnewprepara-
a cat withexperimentally-induced cobalamin
deficiency.(Ccurtesy of DrJim Morris)
236
Chapter 23 Diseases of ihe exocrine pancreas
likely that additional non-specific signs occur in older
or subtotal PAA, residual acinar tissue might regener-
animals, including a general failure to thrive. Cats are
ate sufficiently to normalize digestive function. Possi-
particularly susceptible to development of severe co-
ble recoveries from clinically significant enzyme
balamin deficlency.
In the author's experience, supplementation with
treatment will be required for life but, providing owners
large oral doses of tocopherol (5-25 IU/kg bodyweight
are willing to accept the cost of enzyme replacement,
given orally once daily with food for 1 month) is effective
the prognosis is generally good: Some patients may fail
in returning serum concentrations to normal. In contrast,
to regain normal bodyweight but these animals usually
cobalamin must be given parenterally (100-250 μg
have total resolution of diarrhoea and polyphagia and
i.m. or s.c. injection once a week for several weeks)
are quite acceptable as pets. A high prevalence of
to normalize serum concentrations. Long-term monitor-
mesenteric torsion and gastric dilatation and volvulus
ing of serum cobalarmin concentration, especially in
have been reported in German Shepherd Dogs and
cats, is recommended.
Rough Collies with PAA in Finland butthis has not been
Malabsorption of vitamin A has also been demon-
documented elsewhere.
strated in association with EPl, as has vitamin K-
Treatment of patients with diabetes melitus and
responsive coagulopathy. Enzyme supplements do
EPl due to chranic pancreatitis is likely to be trouble-
not correct or prevent these deficiencies. it should be
some and expensive. Diabetes mellitus secondary to
noted that doses of individual vitamins in multivitamin
chronic pancreatitisis potentially more difficult to regu-
preparations may be insufficient to normalize serum
late than simple diabetes in view of probable coexisting
concentrations and that parenteral or very high oral
derangements in the secretion of glucagon and
doses may be required for adequate supplermentation.
somatostatin. Moreover, anorexia and vomiting due to
pancreatitis may further complicate treatmentof dlabe-
Antibiotic therapy: Dogs with EPl commonly have
tes mellitus.
overgrowth of bacteria in the Sl but in most cases this is
Exocrine pancreatic neoplasia
spond very well to treatment with oral enzyme replace-
Pancreatic adenomas are benign tumours, which are
ment alone, even though the overgrowth often persists.
usually singular and can be differentiated from pancre-
Serurn bile acid profiles also suggest altered intestinai
atic nodular hyperplasia by the presence of a capsule.
microflora in cats with EPl. Altered intestinal microflora
 Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is the most common
can cause malabsorption and diarrhoea, however, and
neoplastic condition of the exocrine pancreas in the dog
in those individuals that do not respond to oral enzyme
and cat, but occurs infrequently. Adenocarcinomas usu-
supplementation alone, anibiotic therapy may be of
ally originate from the duct system but can also originate
value. Oral oxytetracycline, metronidazole or tylosin
from acinar tissue. A few cases of pancreatic sarcomas,
may be effective in improving the clinical response in
i.e. spindle cell sarcoma and lymphosarcoma, have
some of these patients. Chronic untreated bacterial
been reported. Whether these tumours are primary
overgrowth may cause mucosal damage that is only
neoplastic lesions of the exocrine pancreas, metastatic
partially reversible following even prolonged antibiotic
lesions from tumours of other organs or a localized
therapy, and this may explain why some animals fail to
lesion of a multicentric neoplasia is open to question.
retum to narmal bodyweight. It is not clear whether a
predisposition to recurrent colonization by an abnormal
Aetiology and pathophysiology
 rmicroflora persists following antibiotic therapy.
The aetiology of neoplastic conditions of the exocrine
pancreas is unknown. Benign neoplastic lesions can
Glucocorticoid therapy: In those few patients that
lead to displacement of cranial abdominal organs. How-
respond poorly to the above treatments, oral pred-
ever, these changes are subclinical in most cases and
nisolone at an initial dosage of 1-2 mg/kg q12h for
 the diagnosis is often made as an incidental finding at
7-14 days is usually beneficial. This may be due to
resolution of coexisting lymphocytic-plasmacytic gas-
growth can obstruct ihe pancreatic duct and cause
troenteritis or other effects of glucocorticoids on the G!
 tract. Long-term glucocorticoid administration is gen-
secondary atrophy of the remaining exocrine pancreas,
leading to EPl. Adenocarcinomas can also cause dis-
erally unnecessary.
placement of cranial abdominal organs and obstruction.
Prognosis
of the pancreatic duct. In addition, adenocarcinomas
The underlying pathological process leading to EPl is
 can be associated with tumour necrosis and resulting
generally irreversible and life-long treatment is re-
 pancreatic inflammation when the tumour outgrows its
quired. it is particularly important to recognize that
vascular supply. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas can also
feline patients often require therapy in addition to
spread to naighbouring or distant organs.
enzyme replacement, most notably cobaiamin sup-
plementation. Given the expense of treatment it is
Diagnasis
reasonable in some cases to either repeat a serum
TLl assay or withdraw enzyme supplement for a trial
Clln/cal signs: The presentation of patients with exo-
period every 6 months or so and observe the patient
crine pancreatic neoplasia is non-specific and clinical 
for recurrence of clinical signs. Pancreatic acinar
 signs observed are often those of chronic pancreatitis,
tissue does have some capacity to regenerate and it
including vomiting, anorexia, diarrhoea orchronic weight
is not inconceivable that following either pancreatitis
foss. Multifocal necrotizing steatitis has been described
237
Chapter 23 Diseases of the exocrinepancrcas
inafewdogs thatwereultimatelydiagnosedwith
cases.In two of threemore cases biopsy of theliver
pancreatic adenocarcinoma.Clinical signsrelated to
revealed metastatic carcinoma.In many cases the
metastatic lesions (e.g. lameness, bone pain, dysp-
diagnosisismadeatexploratorylaparotomyoreven
noea)have alsobeenreported in some cases of
onnecropsyexamination.
pancreatic adenocarcinoma.Recently several cases
ofparaneoplasticalopeciahavebeenreported incats
Laboratory tests:Neutrophilia,anaemia,hypokalae-
withpancreaticadenocarcinoma.The reported alo-
mia,bilirubinaemia,azotaemia,hyperglycaemia and
pecia consistedofgeneralizedalopeciaoftheventrum,
elevations of hepaticenzymes have all beenreported
limbs and face in most cases,and diffuse zones of
in affectedpatients,butresultsofroutine blood tests
alopecia in the remaining cats(Figure 23.21).
may be unremarkable. Elevations of hepatic enzymes
and serumbilirubin concentrationareidentifiedmost
commonly.Hyperglycaemia,whenpresent,isrelated
to concurrent destruction of pancreatic beta cells.
Somedogs with pancreaticadenocarcinoma have
extremelyhighserum lipase activitiesthatreach as
muchas 25timesthe upper limitof the reference range.
Asingledogwithapancreatic adenocarcinoma and
pseudohyperparathyroidism,leadingtohypercalcae-
mia hasbeen described in the literature.
Treatment and prognosis
Pancreaticadenomasarebenignand theoreticallydo
not need to be treated,unless they cause clinical
signs.However,since thefinal diagnosis of pancre-
aticadenocarcinoma isoftenmadeatexploratory
(a)
laparotomy,a partialpancreatectomy shouldbeper-
formed even in cases of suspected pancreatic ad-
23.21
Paraneoplastic alopecia ina cat with pancreatic
enoma.The prognosis in these cases is excellent.
Kennis)
Pancreaticadenocarcinomasoftenpresentata late
stage of the disease;metastatic disease is usually
Diagnostic imaging:Radiography findings are also
presentatthetime of diagnosis.The most common sites
non-specific in most cases.Abnormal findings include:
ofmetastaticdisease are the liver,abdominaland
decreasedcontrastinthecranialabdomen,suggesting
thoracic lymph nodes, mesentery, intestines and the
peritoneal effusion into this area; transposition of the
lungs,but various other siteshavealsobeenrported.
spleen caudally;and shadowing in the pyloric region.In
In those few caseswhen grossmetastaticlesionsare
somecasesabdominalradiographycansuggestthe
notidentifiedatthetimeofdiagnosis,surgicalresection
presence of a mass in the cranial abdomen.In most
of thetumourmaybeattempted,butownersshouldbe
cases asoft tissuemasscanbeidentifiedbyabdominal
forewarned that clean surgical margins are only rarely
ultrasonographyin the regionofthepancreas.However,
achieved.Total pancreatectomy andpancreaticoduo-
inmanyifnotmostcases,pancreaticoriginof themass
denectomy,thoughthoreticallypossible,havenotbeen
cannotbeconclusivelyestablished.Similarly,neoplastic
described indogs or catswith spontaneous disease.
lesions of neighbouring organs maybe falselypre-
Extrapolation from human patients suggests high mor-
sumed tobe of pancreatic origin.Also,patients with
bidilyandmortalityfortheseprocedures.Chemotherapy
severepancreatitismayshow,onultrasoundexamina-
and radiation therapies have shown litle success in
tion,amasseffectinthe area of thepancreas thatcan
humanorveterinarypatients withpancreaticadenocar-
be confused with a pancreatic adenocarcinoma.If
cinomas.Overall,theprognosis fordogs and cats with
peritoneal effusion is identified onabdominalultra-
pancreatic adenocarcinoma isgrave.
sonography,a sample should be aspirated and evalu-
ated cytologically,although neoplastic cells are not
Pancreaticparasites
Eurytremaprocyonis,thepancreaticflukeofthecatan
exfoliate.Fineneedle aspiration or transcutaneous
be found in thepancreatic ductular system of foxes,
biopsy under ultrasound guidance can be attempted
raccoons and cats.Little isknown about the life cycle of
whensuspiciousmassesareidentified,and hasbeen
this parasite. E.procyonis can lead to thickening of the
reported tobe successful in approximately 25%of all
pancreaticduct system and fibrosis.Even though a
cases.Thelow successrate of fine needleaspiration
significant decrease of exocrine pancreatic secretion
is probably due to the lack of exfoliation of pancreatic
has been shown to occur in affected animals,cats
adenocarcinoma cells.Inother casescarcinomacells
presentingwith clinical signsof EPl secondarytoinfes-
can be identified but the origin of the cells cannot be
tationwiththisparasite areextremelyrare.Thediagno-
determined conclusively.Ultrasound-guidedbiopsywith
sis canbemade bydetectionofcharacteristicdicrocoelid
histopathological evaluation of biopsy specimenshas
eggs(average size34 μmx50μm) with a single oper-
beenreportedinfrequentlybutin one studyultrasound-
culum in freshfaeces duringroutine faecal flotation.
guided biopsyof a pancreatic massresulted in a
Fenbendazole at a dose of 30mg/kg orally q24h for6
diagnosisofpancreaticadenocarcinoma inbothof two
consecutive dayshasbeenrecommended for therapy.
238
Chapter 23   Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
The hepatic fluke of the cat, Amphimerus pseudo-
felineus, can also infest the pancreas and lead to pan-
sence of a capsule. Nodular hyperplasia does not
creatitis. Infectior with this parasite has been reported in
lead to functional changes, does not cause any clini-
cats fram llinois, lowa, Louisiana, Maryland, Nebraska,
 cal signs and is usually diagnosed incidentally during
Ohio, Texas and Virginia. The life cycle of this parasite
necropsy examination.
is unknown but it is presumed that similarly to other
Opisthorchidae, molluscs serve as first, and freshwater
fish as second, intermediate hosts. Diagnosis can be
References and further reading
made on faecal examination with formalin-ethyl acetate
Gaskil CL and Cribb AE (2000) Pancrealilis associated with polassium
approximately 16 μm x 31 μm with a single operculum.
Canadian Veterinary Jouma/ 41, 555-558
Eggs are destroyed during routine faecal flotation and
infestation will be missed in those cases. In one report,
a newly recognised potential complication of canine babesiosis.
treatment with praziquantel at 40 mg/kg q24h for 3
JournaloftheSouthAfricanVeterinaryAssociafion71,232-239
Saunders HM, VanWinkle TJ, Drobatz K, Kimmel SE and Washabau
consecutive days was successful in the management of
RJ (2002) Utrasonographic findings in cats with clinical, gross
A. pseudofelineus infestation. Concurrent symptomatic
pathologic, andhlstologlc evldence of aculepancrealic necrosis:
20 cases (1994-2001). Joumal of the American Vaterinary
therapy forpancreatitis, as outlined above, also needs to
MedicalAssociation221.1724-1730
be instituted in these cases. The dose of praziquantel
Stcincr JiM and williams DA (2003) Evaluation of feline pancreatic
recommended is high when compared with the standard
[lpase Immunoreactivity and helical compuled tomography versus
conventional testing for the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis.
dose given for treatment of enteric parasites, but the
Journa! of Veterinary Internal Madicine 17, 411(Abstract)
therapeutic range for praziquantel is wide and the dose
 Strombeck DR, Guilford wG, Center SA, Williams DA and Meyer DJ
(1996) Smail Animal Gastroentarology, 3rd adn. WB Saunders,
suggested is similar to that for treatment of hepatic
Philadelphia
flukes in human beings.
Wiberg ME and Westermarck E (2002) Subclinical exocrina pancreatic
tnsufficiency in dogs. Joumal of the American Veierinary Medica!
Association220,1183-1187
Pancreatic bladder
Wlllams DA (19g2) Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Waitham.
A pancreatic bladder is an abnormal extension of the
ImernafionalFocus 2,9
Williams DA (1995) Exocrine pancreatic dlsease. In: Textbook of
 pancreatic duct. Pancreatic bladders can be congenital
Vetcrinary Intcmat Medicine, 4 edn, ed. SJ Etinger and EC
or acquired and have been described in several cats
Feldman, pp. 1372-1392. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
presented with signs compatible with biliary duct ob-
Williams DA(20oo) Exocrine pancrcatic disease.In: Textbook of
Vaterinary Intarnal Madicine, 5h edn, ed. SJ Etinger and EC
struction. Surgical reconstruction may be of benefit in
Feldman, Pp.1345-1367.WB Saunders, Philadelphia
cases with clinical signs attributable to this abnormality.
o s p s (aih) e n pe aa s
diagnosis of canine exocrine pancreatic insuficiency. Journai of
tho American Veterinary Medical Associalion192, 195-201
 Nodular hyperplasia
Williams DA, BattAM and McLcan L (1 987) Bactenial overgrowth in the
duodenum of dogs with exacrine pancrealic insuficiency. Journa!
 of the American Veterinary Medicat Association 191, 201-206 -
Nodular pancreatlchyperplasia occurs quite frequently
WiliamsDAStinerJMRuauxCGandavrosN23)Increa
in older cats anid dogs. Disseminated small nodules
in serum pancrealic lipase immunoreactivity (PLi) are grcater
can be found throughout the exocrine portion of the
and of longer duration than those of trypsin-like Immunoreactlvity
[TLI) in cals with experimental pancrcatitis. Joumal of Veterinary
pancreas. Pancreatic nodular hyperplasia can be
inferna/ Medicine 17, 445-446 (Abstract)
239
Diseases of the liver
Penny Watson
Anatomy
The liver lies in the cranial abdomen,between the
diaphragmandthestomach,and ismadeupof four
lobes and a gall bladder.The gallbladderis linked to
the duodenumvia a commonbileduct（Figure 24.1),
witha slightlydifferentanatomical arrangement incats
and dogs(see below).The lateral parts of theright and
aheapatgcores
leftliverlobesareseenonlateralabdominalradio-
graphs indogsand cats as the caudoventral edge of
thelivershadowunderthecostalarch(seeChapter3).
Gall bladder
Quadratelobe
Right
Left
medial
medial
lobe
lobe
Hepatocytes form one-cellthick
radiating cords perfused on both
Right
Left
sides with plasma ultrafiltrate.
lateral
ateral
F gure 24.4(a)
lobe
lobe
The hepatic lobule: single cordls
ofhepatocytesradiatinground
thehepaticveinwithportaltriads
at the periphery.
Papillaryprocess
The hepatic acinus: is the
Caudate process
tal triad
ofcaudate lobe
functional unit of theliver
of caudatelobe
comprising a3D collection of
Contral(hcpatic)
hepatocytes supplied by the same
portal vein and hepatic artery.
Cystic duct,whichbecomes the common bile
duct after thefirst hepaticductjoins
(a)
24.1
Ventral viewof thestructure of thecanine liver.
(Roproduccc from Watson(2004a)with
permission fromBlackwell Publishing)
Thelivereffectivelyhastwoafferentbloodsupplies:
The hepatic artery,which brings only 25-30%of
the afferent blood but 50% of the oxygen used by
theliver
The hepaticportal vein,whichcarriesthe
balanceof theblood andoxygenrequirement.
Theportalvein carriesall the blood draining the
Canaliculus
stomach,intestines(except therectum),pancreasand
(b)
spleen to the liver.Thehepaticvein drains the liver.
All of the afferentblood arriving inboth theportal
24.2
Diagrammaticillustralion cf tne structure cf tne
liver.(a)Hepatic lobule.(b) Diagramof the
vein and hepatic artery thenpasses into thehepatic
aratomy of the space of Disse and canaliculi.
sinusoids,mixes and flows in close proximity to the
(Reprocuced fromWatson(2004a)withpermission from
hepatocytes towards the hepatic veins (Figure 24.2).
Blackwell Publishing)
240
Chapter24Diseases of the liver
Most of themetabolicand detoxifying functionsof the
liverisverycloselyrelated,bothstructurallyandfunc-
liveroccurduring passage of blood along the sinusoids.
tionally,to thepancreas and small intestine and that
The hepatocytes are divided into functional'zones'with
diseasesofoneoftheseorgansoftenaffectsthe
zone 1beingnearest to theportaltriad(comprising the
others.These associations are well documented in
hepaticportal vein,hepaticarteryand bileductbranch)
cats,but can also be seen in dogs.Food and drugs or
zone3beingnearest the hepaticvein andzone2 being
toxinstakenorallymayalsohaveaprofoundeffecton
in the middle.Hepatocytes ineachzone are exposed to
the liver since all absorbed substances pass through
the liverintheportal bloodpriorto entering thesys-
lites and other substances,and their functions are
temic circulation.
correspondinglydifferent.They alsovary in theirsensi-
tivity tovarious pathological processes:for example,
Functionalplasticityandregenerative
zone 3hepatocytesare damaged first by hypoxia;
capacity
whereaszone1hepatocytes areusually the first tobe
Theliver has tremendousfunctional and structural
damagedbyhepatotoxinsarriving intheportal blood
from the gut.Bileis made in thehepatocytes inzone3
Thefunctional zoningdescribedabove and illustrated
and flows in the opposite direction toblood(see Chap-
in Figure24.4isflexiblesuch thatif hepatocytesinone
ters14and25formore detailsof bileformation).
zone aredamaged,otherscantakeovertheirfunction.
Such functional adaptation takes time,however, and
therefore acutehepatic failure willresultin clinical
Function
signs afterlossof less livermass than chronichepatic
The liverhas an astounding array of functions.They
disease;with thelatter,thehepatocyteshavetime to
are complexand summarized inFigure24.3;such a
adaptandtakeoverthefunctionsof damagedcellsand
broadview of theserolesis sufficientintheclinical
soclinical signsusuallydonotdevelopuntilat least
setting.Itisparticularlyimportanttorememberthat the
70%of hepatic functionalmass hasbeenlost.
Function
Examples
Metabolism
Glucose and energy metabolism and storage
Fat and cholesterof metabolism and storage
Proteinmetabolimncluding ammonia detoxificationand urea synthesis.
Sythesisfabminprotinsfortriglyeridtranport andallgloulinexetmuglbin
Vitamin and mineral metabolism
Activationhisand stragffaslublevimisA,an
and storage
Synthesis of vitamin C
Activation, synthesis and storage of Bvitamins
Storage of minerals:copper,iron, zinc
Hormonemetabolism
Insulin and glucagon degradation
(remember portal biood drainsthe
Productionof insulin-likegrowthfactorundertheinfluence of growthhormone
pancreas so first-passmetabolism
Degradation of many stercid and polypeptide hormones
of homones from pancreasis
important and some of these
homones are trophic'totheliver)
Coagulation and anti-coagulation
Synthesisof allcoagulation factorsexcept factorVll
factors
Activationofcoagulationfactorsncludingvitamin-Kcependent activation
Synthesis of anti-coagulant factors
Immunclogicalfunctions
function(allportal blood passesthrough liver so thesecellsareexposed to anyblood-borne
bacteriaandantigensfGloriginthathaveescaped thegut-associatedlymphoidtissue)
Complement metabolism and interleukin production
lgAinbile
Haematological functions
result in noticeable hepatomegaly)
Breakdownof senescentredcells and uptake,conjugation and excretionof bilirubin（see Chapter14)
lronhomeostasis(Noteironchelationinliverresuitsinmicrocyticanaemiainmanychronicliverdiseases)
Digestive functions
Synthtnfsift
Detoxification and excretory
Bilirubin conjugation and excretion (see Chapter14)
functions (Note importance of
Ammoniadetoxificationviaureacycle
fiteingallof theportalblood from
Steroid hormone breakdown and excretion
gut and first pass'metabolism of
Copperexcretion
drugs and toxins)
Cholesterol excretion
Xenobiotic(substance foreign to thebody) detoxificationand excretion(e.g.barbituratesmacrolides,
benzodiazepines)
24.3
Summary of functions of theliver.
241
Chapter24 Diseases of theliver
Portal!
Hepatic
Directionof blcc flow
Zone1
Zone2
Zone3
Intermeciate
Low oxygen
Perivonoushepa
oranmonacetoxinca:
via urea cycle.
substances from gut
hepaenosopnel
Zonatonlecldrferlssttytxi
ascaucont
(a)
(b)
24.4
Diagrammatic illustration of the funclion of the liver.(a)Schematiodrawing ofone cord of hepatocytes showing
functional zonation.(b)Schematicdrawing of zonal distribution inhepatic acinus.(Reprocuced from Watson
(2004a) with permissicn fromBlackwellPublishing)
The liveralsohas a tremendous ability toregener-
ate,provided the animalisnotstarved and the damage
Dogs (inapproximate order of frequency)
isnot too severe or ongoing.The cells in thelimiting
Chronic hepatitis(see Figure 24.23)
plate'(thelayerof hepatocytesimmediately surround-
ing the portal triads)are the ones whichregenerate
True copper storage disease:
mostactively,and thereforenecrosisof this area can
BedingonTerriers;Dalmatians;Dobermann
particularlyinhibit regeneration.
Congenial or earlydevelopmental disease:
Vaculadisrdercngenitlrystemihtst
Differences between dogs and cats
hypoplasia and others
Lobulardissecting hepatitisinStandardPoodles andother
Themajorcausesof chronic and acute liverdisease in
breeds
dogsand cats areoutlined inFigures24.5,24.6 and
Non-cirhotic portal hypertension inGerman ShepherdDgs and other
24.7, and discussed at greater length later in the
chapter.Chronicliver disease ismore common than
breeds
acute disease in both dogs and cats.
Chronic cholangitis:less common than in cats;causeunknown,
possibleascending infection?(See Chapter25for further details)
Cats (inxtrf rqinfAli
Chronic progressionofacutehepatopathy:
mostcommon)
Chronictoxicity(including chronicanti-convulsantmedication)
Chronic lymphocytic cholangitis(see Chapter 25)
Idiosyncratic drug reaction
Infectious
Hepatic lipidosis
Ischaemic
Obstructive
Infections:
Particularlyfelineinfectiousperitoniis-associatedhepatitis（major
Chronic viraland bacterial infections arelargelyundocumented.
Organisms often nt visible on biopsy (see Figure 2423), ..
Occasionallytoxoplasmosis
Bartonelalpicallptspirachronicfmsfcaninedenovirun
Liver fluke in parts of USA
partially immune individuals
Vascular disorders:
Chronic fungalinfections:
Congenital portosystemic shunts and others(less common than
Histoplasmosisaspergillosisusuallypartofmoregeneralized
(s6op
disease)
Neoplasia:
Primaryandsecondary,especiallylymphosarcomamaybemore
Neoplasia:
Primary and secondary,especiall lymphoma
acute liver failure)
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Metastases
few reports of primarily hepatic amyloid
Histiocytic
24.5
Causes of chronic livcr disease in cats.
24.6
Causes of chronic liver disease in dogs.
242
Chapter24Diseasesof the liver
Type of disease
Potential cause
Acutemassive hepatocyte
necrosis(severe necrosis with
Retrievers);diazepam incats;mebendazcle(dogs),thiacetarsamide(dogs);mercury,potentiated sulphonamides
signsreferabletoliver dsease)
(sbop)
Infectiou.gcanineadenovirustye1neonatalcanineeresvirusbactrialendotoxamia
Thermal:heat stroke (uncommon)
Acute hepatic necrosis: mild to
Milder fomms of toxicand drug-inducednecrosis
moderate,focal(note clinical
Cholestasis
underlying disease andnot toliver)
Septicaemia:both focal and diffuse
Pancreatitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Infectious causee.g.fline infectiousperitonitis; Salmonella, Leptospira, Clostridum spp.:Ehrlicia;Toxoplasma:
disseminated aspergillosis
Acute loss of hepatocyte function
Hepatic lipidosis in cats
with minimal necrosis (usually
Diffuse tumour infitrate e.g. lymphoma
marked loss of iver function and
signs referable to liver)
Potential causesof acute hepaticnecrosis in dogs anc cats.
There are many importantdifferencesbetween
marked difference in the types ofhepatic diseases
catsand dogsintermsof the structure and functionof
recognizedincatsinNorthAmericacomparedwith
theliverand also in the diseases shown,the liver's
Europe.Primary feline hepatic lipidosis ismore com-
mon in North America but rare in Europe,whereas
and the treatments indicated.The most important
primary biliary tract diseaseiscommon inEuropebut
differencesareoutlinedinFigure24.8andreferredto
relatively uncommon in North America.The differ-
where relevant in the text.Notably,catsrarely de-
ence isintriguing and thereasonunknown,although
velopmarked hepaticfibrosis,cirrhosisoracquired
the pattern of disease seen in North America may be
portosystemic shunts,unlike dogs.Cats therefore
shiftingtowardsthat seeninEurope.Thetypesof liver
tendtohaveabetterprognosiswith chronic liver
diseaseseenindogsare,bycontrast,verysimilarin
disease than dogs.Historically there has been a
both continents.
Category
Cats
Dogs
Significance
Anatomy of pancreatic
Bile duct joinssinglemajor
Most dogs have two pancreaticducts
Concurrent biliary tract disease,
and bile ducts
pancreaticductbeforeentering small
pancreatitis and inflammatory bowel
intestine atmajorduodenalpapilla
of pancreas tominor papillain
disease are possible ineitherspeciesbut
duodenum; and smaller pancreatic
are more common in the cat.Ascending
(20%of cats have a second
duct from left limb to major papilla).
infections of the bile duct also proposed to
accessory pancreatic duct and afew
Neither of these pancreatic ducts join
be more common in cats.
cats have separate major pancreatic
the bile duct but the smaller
duct and common bile duct
pancreatic duct opens next to the
bile duct onmajor duodenal papila
Ability tometabolize
Relative deficiency of glucuronyl
Generally no deficiency of enzymes
Cats more susceptible to certain types of
transferasereduingabilty
but some breed variation,e.g.
drugs and toxins
toxic liver damage than dogs and more
metabolize drugs and toxins
Dobermanns have impaired
sensitivetomanypotentiallyhepatotoxic
detoxificationof potentiated
drugs.
sulphonamides
Somebreed variation in susceptiblity to
toxic liver damage in dogs
Isoenzymes of alkaline
Donot producea steroid-induced
Dogs have a steroid-induced
Steroid treatment orhyperadrenocorticism
phosphatase (ALP)
isoenzymeofALP.Halflife ofALP
isoenzyme of ALP.Half-ife of ALPis
(HAC) are major differentials for raised
also very short incats (6 hours)
longgalifiia
ALPin dogs;however,ALP levels arenot
ALP is 66hours and glucocorticoid
elevatedwith steroid therapy orHAC prior
induced ALPis74 hours
todevelopment of diabetesmellitus) in
cats
24.8
Differencesbetween cats and cogs in terms of liver structure,function and diseasc.(continues)
243
Chapter 24
Diseases of the liver
Category
Cats
Dogs
Significance
Hepatic metabolism of
Constantly high hepatic
Dogs, like humans,make glucoe
Catswillrapidlydevelopprotein-calorie
glucose and protein
 gluconeogenesis from protein, even
from starch, and postprandial insulin
malnutrition and start breaking down their
postprandially, and constantly high
release slops gluconeogenesis and
own body protein if feda protein-restricted
activity cf protein catabolizing
switches to glucose storage.Dogs
diet in liver disease
enzymes in theliver which cannotbe
can cown-regulate hepatic protein
down-regulated
Argininedeficiency can contribute to the
when the diet is low in protein
development of hyperammonaemia in cats
Highdietaryrequirement forarginine
withliverdiseaseifthecatisfedadiet
for the urea cycle
Dogs havea lower arginine
lacking in arginine (such as dairy
requirement than cats. Dogs have no
protein). Taurine, arginine and protein
Taurine is an essential dietary
known dietary taurinerequirement
deficiency can contribute to the
requirement and bile salts all
pathogenesis of hepatic lipidosis in cats
conjugated with taurine
(see below)
Hepaticlipid
Cats areparticularlysusceptibleto
Dogs can develop some secondary
Cats are susceptible to primary hepatic
metabolism and
clinically serious hepatic ipidosis
lipidosis but this is not usually a
lipdiwhihevelnal
mobiization
(either primary or secondary)
clinical problem
problem
Secondaryhepatic lipidosis can developin
either dogs or catswith otherdiseases but
ismorecommonandmore clinically
significant in cats
24.8
(conlinued)Differencesbetween cats and dogs in termsof liver structure,funclion and disease.
Investigating liver disease
heartworm
Hypoxia:
and the questionsraised:
Autoimmunehaemolyticanaemia
Shock
Glucocorticoids:
The animal has clinical signs-could these be
Most significant in dogs. Causes a marked increase in alkaline
due to liver disease?
phosphatase with mild increases in alanine aminotransferase,
aspartate aminotransferase and bile acids
Or
。
Endogenous (hyperadrenocorticism)
。
Exogenous
The animal hasabnormal livertestresultson
Diabetes mellitus
routinebloodbiochemical testingbutnorelated
Hyperlipidaemia e.g. Schnauzers
clinical signs-are the testresults important?Is
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
theliverproblemprimaryorsecondary?Isfurther
(s
testing warranted?
Non-hepatic inflammatory disease:
Toxaemia
Sepsis
Ineithersituationa furtherissueiswhetherornotto
Gl disease
takea liverbiopsy.Theapproachto answering these
Pancreatitis
questions is outlined below.
Drug-induced e.g phenobarbital
Oneimportant question toanswerasearlyin the
Metastaticdisease
investigationaspossibleiswhether thehepatopathyis
24.9
Common causes of secondary hepalcpathies in
diseaseprocess inanotherorgan.Themost common
dogs and cats.
causesof secondary hepatopathies in dogs and cats
are outlined inFigure 24.9.Secondary hepatopathies
areusuallynotclinicallysignificantintheirownright
ing the true disease.This differentiation isusually
and resolve when the underlying cause is treated.
achieved through carefulinterpretationofhistory,clini-
However,inafewcasesasecondaryhepatopathycan
cal examination,clinicopathological testresults and
develop into a more seriousprimary”problemas a
diagnostic imaging.
result ofchronicsecondary stimulation.An example
would be chronic cardiac cirrhosis in dogs, which
Historyand clinical signs
sometimes develops afterchronicpassive congestion
Agoodhistory and thorough clinical examination are
in right-sided heart failure.
particularly importantinpatientswithsuspected liver
It is important to establish whether the hepatopathy
disease.Theywill helpdifferentiateprimaryfromsecond-
issecondaryasearlyaspossibletoavoid unnecessary
aryhepatopathiesandalertthecliniciantoanyconcurrent
hepatic investigations (such as liver biopsy) that might
or underlying disease.Figures24.10and 24.11outline
244
Chapter24Diseasesof the liver
Theliver isoftennotpalpable ineither normal or
Acute onset of:
abnormal dogsandcatsbecauseof itspositionunder
Anorexia
theribcage.Palpable hepatomegalymaybedifficult to
Hepatic encephalopathy:depression progressing to seizures and
distinguish fromsplenomegalywithoutdiagnostic
orcoma
imaging,andboth mayoccurtogether(hepatospleno-
Vomiting
Polydipsia
megaly).In dogs,chronic primary liver disease （other
Dehydration
thanneoplasia)isusuallyassociatedwitha small liver
Jaundice(more marked/earlierif periportal lesion)
that will onlybeappreciated on diagnosticimagingand
Fever
notonclinicalexamination.However,asignificantnumber
Cranial abdominal pain (some but not alcases)
of catswith chronic liver disease(either cholangitis or
Coagulopathy,petechiae±haematemesis/melaena
lipidosis)havepalpablehepatomegaly.Painon cranial
abdominalpalpationiscommon in acute liver disease
common but poor prognostic indicator in humans)
but uncommon in chronic disease in either species,
Renalfailureisa severe complicationinsome cases:both
althoughitmaybeelicitedinsome dogs.Painmightalso
pre-renaland intrinsicrenal components
reflect concurrentpancreatitisorupper Gl disease
Additinalclinicalfindingsreportedinhumansbutnotdocumentedin
The severity of the clinical signs seenin liver
dogs and cats:
diseasedependsonthespeedwithwhichthedisease
Hypotension
develops,the amount of functional liver tissue dam-
Cardiac arrhythmias
aged and thedegreeofportal hypertension that deve
Cerebral cedema (not just due to hypoalbuminaemia)
Primarypulmonary dma (not just de fohpalbuminami)
lops.As discussed above.the liver has tremendous
structural andfunctional reserve.If diseasedevelops
Pancreaticinjury
Increased susceptibility to infectionwithreducedneutrophil
slowly,not only canliver tissueregeneratebutzonal
function
adaptation can alsooccur,limitingclinical signs.How-
ever,if the damage is acute there isno timeforthis
24.10
Typical clinical signs of acute fulminating
adaptationtooccur.Forexample,hyperammonaemia
hepatitis in dogs and cats.
inacutediseasebutmoreslowlyin chronicdisease
(seeFigure24.4).Therefore,animals with veryexten-
(Oftenno clinical signs until>70% loss of hepaticmass)
sivechronic liverdiseasemay showno clinical signs at
Vomiting and/or diarrhoea
all or very subtle signs.These caseswould come into
Occasionally haematemesis and melaena
Inappetence
Weight loss
zymeactivitiesinblood,butno clinical signs.ltremains
Polydipsaolyuriaandpoorlycncentratedi
importantfortheclinician tobealert toevensubtle
Ascites
signs and to investigate apparently normal animals
Jaundice
furtherif liverenzymesarepersistently increased,as
Hepaticencephalopathy:depression;excitement;ptyalism(especially
liverdamagemayalreadybeextensiveinthesecases
and treatmentmaybemoreeffectiveif instigated as
Bleedingdiatheses(uncommonbut serious:suggestslarge loss of
early as possible.
livermass)
Clinicopathological changes in liver
24.11
Typical clinical signsof chronic liver disease in
disease
dogs and cats
Blood tests to assessliver enzymes areusually the
next （and simplest)step in the investigation of the
thetypical clinicalsigns ofacute andchronicliver
suspected hepatic case. Carefully chosen blood tests
disease in dogs and cats.Clinical signs are particularly
shouldalsohelpindifferentiatingprimaryfromsecond-
non-specific in cats and the situation isfurthercompli-
ary diseaseand inassessingliverfunction.A detailed
cated inthisspeciesbythe high incidenceof concurrent
discussion of clinical pathology is beyond the scope of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and'or pancreatitis.
thischapterand thereaderisreferredelsewhere(see
The most'specific'clinical signs forliverdisease in dogs
Chapter2andBSAVAManualofCanineandFeline
and cats are encephalopathy,jaundiceand ascitesbut
Clinica/ Pathology).However,the use of clinical patho-
eventhesesignscould alsopotentiallyhave other
logy in the investigationof the livercase isoutlined
causes (see Chapters 13,14 and 15).
below and in Figures 24.12 and 24.13.
Theclinicianshouldbeparticularly alert toreports
It isimportanttorememberthatclinicalpathologyis
ofsubtlewaxing andwaningneurologicalorgastro-
onlyapartoftheinvestigationof livercases andismost
intestinal (Gl) signs (including melaena,which can
important in guiding further tests(diagnostic imaging
occurwithportal hypertension)and anyevidenceof
and biopsy).Itisneverpossible tomakea diagnosis of
concurrentorunderlying disease(suchas Gl disease
liverdiseaseon thebasis of blood tests alone and it is
oran endocrinopathy).Body condition,mucousmem-
brane colour and abdominal abnormalities(including
secondary hepatopathies,although the pattern of
the presence of ascites) should be carefully assessed.
changes found, combined with the history and clinical
The animal should alsobe checked for evidenceof
findings,often allow this differentiation.It is also a
coagulopathies(petechiae andecchymoses).particu-
mistaketothinkthatliverenzymesareatestof liver
larly in acute disease.
function orthatresultsgiveprognosticinformation;the
245
Chapter24Diseasesof the liver
Enzyme
General
Dog
Cat
Alanine
Hepatocellularenzyme(constant activity in
LongT=40-60 hours so
Short T/=3.5hours
aminotransferase
hepatocytes);increased blood activities represent
remains elevated forseveral
(ALT)
increased leakage from cell
Degreeofelevationdoesnotshowamountorseverity
elevation for weeks to months
of liver damage
implies chronic hepatitis anda
Present incyioplasmonly soleaksrelatively easily
biopsy should be performed
Relatively liver-specific
Remains highin regeneration so rapid retum to normal
may imply severe cirrhosis
Lowlevels are not significant
Aspartate
Hepatocellularenzyme(constant activityin
TV=12hours
TV=1.5hours
aminotransferase
hepatocytes); increased blood activities represent
(AST)
increased leakage from cell
Degree of elevation doesnot showamount orseverityof
liver damage except in comparison with increases inALT
Present in both cytoplasm and mitochondria; compared
toALTisreleased laterand onlywhen there ismore
severe damage than ALT
Also found inmuscle(skeletal and cardiac);use
measurement of other liver andmuscle enzymes
(creatine kinase) to differentiate source
Remainshighinregeneration sorapid return tonormal
mayimply severe cirrhosis
Lowlevels are not significant
Alkaline
Inducedenzyme frombiliary tract;minimalactivityat
T/of bliary isoenzyme =
Tof biliary isoenzyme=
phosphatase
rest
66hours.
6 hours and limited capacity to
(ALP)
ALP predominantly from canaliculi
Steroid-induced isoenzyme
produce it so elevations very
Induced by drugs and cholestasis
(= hyperglycosylated gut
significant and indicate ongoing
isoenzyme withprolonged
problem.
bone andgutGu isoenzymehalf-ifevry short (T
half-ife) common cause of
No sleroid-induced isoenzyme
6minutesin the dog,2minutes in thecat),soot
elevation; T/ = 74 hours and
important. Bone isoenzyme increased from 3-6 times
remains elevated for weeks
Classically very high ALP but
in young dogs. Separating isoenzymes on blood tests
after therapy. May be more
normal GGT in hepatic lipidosis
largely unhelpful
sensitive than GGT in dogs
but rule out other causes
Gamma-glutamyl
Inducedenzyme frombiiary tractepithelium;minimal
Less sensitive than ALP for
May bemore sensitive to biliary
transferase(or
activityat rest
cetectionof biliary stasisin
stasis than ALP in cats
transpeptidase)
GGT predominantly from biliary membranes
Bop aun
(GGT)
 Induced by cholestasis and lessby drugsthan ALP
Classically very high ALP but
normal GGTinhepatic lidosis
24.12
Interpreting changesinserum liverenzymesinliverdisease.
Non-specific tests of liver function
(Notechangesinalltheseparametershavemanyothercauses apart from liverdisease and reductions in liverdiseasemaybemaskedbyconcurent
increaseswithother diseases)
Plasma proteins:
All lasmaproteins,except gammaglobulinsandvonWillebrandsfactoraremadeintheliver
albumin and
Liverhaslargefunctional reserve;canupregulate productionif increasedloss.Blood albumin onlydecreasesif<30%of
globulin
normal liverfunction
Iftotalproteinonlymeasured,thedropinalbumininsevere,chronicliverdiseasemaybemaskedbyaconcurrent risn
globulin(due to antigenic stimulationfromlivernflammation and/orincreased absoptionof bacteria fromthe gut.Therefore,
measure albumin:globulin ratio if possible
Electrophoresistoseparateoutproteinfractionsfuthermaygivesomeprognosticinfomationseetext）
Urea
Most commonly low in animals withcongenital portosystemic shunts(PsSs)where,in addition to the above reasons,less
ammonia isdelivered to theliver for detoxificationby conversion tourea
Glucose
Low blood glucose is particularly seen in:
Fulminant acute hepatic necrosis
Very non-specific asmany other diseasescause reduced blood glucose but very important to recognize it clinically and treat
24.13
Interpretation of function tests in the investigation of liver disease.BSP=bromosulphthalcin;DlC=disseminated
intravascular coagulaticn;MER=Metabolicenergy requirement;PIVKA=Proteins induced by vitamin K
absence.(continues)
246
Chapter24
Diseasesof the liver
Non-specifictestsof liver function continued
Coagulation
Reductionincoagulationfactorscommoninliverdiseaseindogsandcatsbutprolongationofclotingtimesuncommonbig
factors
functional reserve)
Severereductinandsigificantrlongatinfcoagulatinmesmorelnacutefinantfilrewihrapidlssfl
of livermasscatswitconcurentinlammatoryboweldiseaeandrpancreatisreducingviaminKabsortionandanmas
with DIC or thrombi consuming factors
PIVKAmuchmore sensitive to reductionin cloting factors than coagulation times in cats
More specific tests of liver function
Ammonia
Elevated paticulalyincongenitalandacquiredPSSsApostprandil testmeasurinstiulationhours aftefeeding ameal
of 25%of the dailyMERincreases the sensitivity and issafer than the traditional per-oralorper-rectal ammonia tolerance test
Other causesof elevationincludemicrovasculardysplasia;experimentalargininedeficiencyincats;andcongenital rea
cycle defects
Bile acids(see
Elevated in early cholestasis(more sensitive thanbiirubin) and congenital and acquiredPSSs
also Chapter2)
As sensitiveandspecififorPsSsas ammonia andlesslabilein the samplebutnot generallyavailableonpractice analyers
SensitivityinSsincreased bypeforming abile acidstimulationtest,measuring bileacidspreand 2hours post afattymeal.
A stimulation test isnotnecessary if fasting levels are significantly elevated.Postprandial levelswilloccasionallybelower than
(seebelow)
Bileacidelevationsarealsoseeninmicrovasulardysplasiaelevationstend tobelessmarkedthanincongenitalPsSsbut
there is some overlap
the intestinal wallbut less easily taken upbyhepatocytes
Veryefficientnterhepatccirclationmeansthatbileaciddeficiencsntfeaturefevensevereadancedlivrdiseae
Bilirubin(see
Increased incholestasisbutrelativelyinsensitive
Chapter 14)
Need todifferentiatepreepati,paticandost-paticauss
Exogenous
No longer available and superseded by newer tests
clearance tests
(e.g.BSP)
24.13
(continued) Interpretation of funcicn tests in the invesligalion of liver cisease.BSP =bromosulphthalein;
DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation: MER = Metabolic energy requirement; PIVKA = Proteins induced
by vitaminK absence.
degree of elevation of liver enzymes isnotrelated to
s
degreeof liver damageorfunction,and activities of
enzymesorbile acids arenot usuallyhelpful forprog-
be theresult ofbenign nodular hyperplasia(seebe-
nostication.One exception to this is plasma orserum
low).However,raised ALPismuchmore significant in
protein electrophoresis,which can give prognostic
catsbecauseof itsshort half-life and thelackofa
information in animals with liver disease by comparing
steroid-induced isoenzyme in thisspecies.
albumin and acutephaseproteinlevels.
In addition toblood samples,a urine samplepro-
videsuseful informationin the animalwithsuspected
liver diseaseareoutlinedinFigure24.12and the
liverdisease.Animalswith chronicliverdisease often
specific and non-specificfunctiontests areoutlined in
havepoorly concentrated urine.Furthermore,ammo-
Figure24.13.Mildrelativelytransientlevationoflivr
nium urate crystalsor stonesmaybe seen due to
enzymesisnotuncommonasareaction toother
reducedpurine metabolism,particularly in animalswith
diseasesparticularlyindogs;evenIBDand antibiotic-
congenital or acquired portosystemic shunts(PsSs).
responsive enteropathycanresult in elevated liver
If ascitesispresent,asampleof thefluidshouldbe
enzymes.However,persistent significant elevationof
taken and analysed forcell count,protein level and
cytology as this cangiveusefulinformation.Thedetails
enzymes (alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspar-
of analysisof asciticfluid are given inChapter13.
tate aminotransferase （AST) in a dog,and either
hepatocellular or biliary enzymes in a cat,should
Diagnostic imaging
stimulatefurtherinvestigations.The clinicianshouldbe
Thenext investigation after blood tests should be
particularlyalerttoelevated liverenzymes in asympto-
diagnostic imaging(see Chapter3).Ultrasonography
isparticularly helpful althoughradiography isalso
entlyelevated ALTinaDobermannorCockerSpaniel
orelevated alkalinephosphatase(ALP) in an obese,
concurrentdiseases.
anorexiccat.In contrast,persistentmild to moderate
elevation of ALP isnot uncommon in old dogs and,if
ananimal with ascitesbecause the fluid obscuresall
hepatocellular enzymes are normal,these animals
detail.However,ultrasonography is oftenrewarding
should not have a liver biopsy before othercauses are
in thecasesbecausethefluidseparatestheorgans
ruledout.Inmanycases,raisedALPindogsisaresult
and makes them clearly visible.It maybeworth taking
247
Chapter 24 Diseases of the liver
an abdominal radiograph if the animal has a swollen
abdomen but no definite fluid wave on palpation to
establish or refute the presence of ascites, but
diagnosis: such focal changes may equally well repre-
ultrasonographic detection of free abdominal fluid is
sent patchy extramedullary haemopciesis, patchy lipid
more sensitive. It is not uncommon for the pendulous
older dogs. A biopsy is essential to rule these out and
 pear ascitic on clinical examination and the associ-
diagnose neoplasia; an animal should never be
ated elevation in liver enzymes may suggest primary
 euthanized on the basis of the ultrasonographic ap-
liver disease. However, abdominal radiography in
pearance of a lesion alone.
these cases will be highly suggestive of hyperadreno-
Diffuse changes in hepatic echogenicity are com-
corticism with hepatomegaly, a pot bellied appear-
mon and potential causes are outlined in Chapter 3.
ance and no ascites, and this should direct investiga-
There is often a dlffuse increase in echogenicity in
tions in that direction rather than towards primary liver
cirrhosis with a reduction in visualization of vessels. The
disease.
portal hypertension. However, occasionally the liver
Radiography
looks ultrasonographically nomal in advanced cirrho-
In the animal without ascites, abdominal radiography
sls. Lymphoma classically results in a hypoechoic ap-
may give a crude indication of liver size (see Chapter
 pearance to the liver as well as the spleen but may also
3) but radiographs are insensitive to subtle changes.
result in a hyperechoic or normal-appearing liver, so
In general, dogs and cats with acute liver disease
 neither cirrhosis nor hepatic lymphoma can be ruled out
have normal to enlarged livers, dogs with chronic liver
 on the basis of a normal-appearing liver on uitrasound.
disease and PsSs have small livers and cats with
chronic liver disease have enlarged livers. However,
Other modalities
 normal dogs (particularly deep-chested breeds) may
Other imaging modalities used less often in the in-
vestigation of llver disease incfude scintigraphy, com-
dogs with PsSs or chronic liver disease may have an
puted tomography (CT) and magnatic resonance
apparently normal-sized liver on radiographs. Ab-
imaging (MRl). These imaging modalities are rarely
used in clinical cases but are considered further in
enlargement associated with a hepatic tumour or
Chapter 3. Scintigraphy is most useful in the assess-
occasionally due to focal enlargement of the biliary
mentof PSSs and shunting fractions. CT and MRI have
tract in cats. If neoplasia is suspected, right and left
been used extensively in humans, particularly in as-
lateral thoracic radiographs should also be taken to
sessment of biliary tract and vascular disease. Their
check for metastases. Radiography may also indicate
use in small animals is currently very limited, largely
more generalized disease in other organs, for exam-
due to the cost involved, limited access to equipment 
ple there may be concurrent splenamegaly and lymph-
and technical complexities, including the need for
adenopathy in lymphoma, mast cell tumours or
general anaesthesia.
histiocytic neoplasia.
Biopsy
Ultrasonography
The next step in the investigation is a liver biopsy (see
Ultrasonography, in the hands af an experienced op-
Chapter 5). It is impossible to make a definitive diagno-
erator, is an extremely useful tool in the investigation of
sis of disease and to make logical decisions about
liver cases as it allows: assessment of the structure of
management withaut a liver biopsy. For example.
the hepatic parenchyma, biliary tract, portal vein
finding a small, diffusely hyperechoic liver in an animal
branches and other organs; collection of samples of
with ascites may suggest cirrhosis, but it is impossible
abdominal fluid and bile; and biopsy of the liver (see
to be sure withaut a biopsy. The animal may, in fact,
Chapter 3). Laparoscopy and laparotomy allow direct
have non-cirrhotic portal hypertension, which carries a
visualization of the external appearance of the organ
 much better prognosis (see below). It is also impossi-
but ultrasonography is still a useful adjunct to these
ble to assess whether the disease is end-stage, so
investigations as it allows visualization of the internal
steroid therapy is inappropriate (and potentially dan-
structure and lesions within the parenchyma. The liver
gerous), or whether the fibrosis is still relatively early
is relatively straightforward to examine with ultrasono-
graphy and the increasing availability of peripatetic
Even in cats, the clinical, clinicopathological and diag-
ultrasonographers should put this within the reach of
nostic imaging findings will not differentiate acute (neu-
most primary care practices.
trophilic) from chronic (lymphocytic) cholangitis, and
Ultrasonography allows assessment of the size
so again it is impossible to recommend steroid therapy
and structure of the gall bladder, common bile duct and
 safely without a biopsy, or at least a gall bladder
biliary tree. If the common bile duct is grossly dlilated,
aspirate. Without a biopsy, treatment of liverdisease in
the area distal to it (including the pancreas and proxi-
dogs and cats will be at best non-specific, and at worst
mal duodenum) can be carefully examined for any
counter-productive and dangerous. Therefore, some
mass, inflammation or other lesion causing an cbstruc-
kind of biopsy should be obtained wherever possible
tion. The hepatic parenchyma can be examined for
 and certainly steroid, copper-chelating and antifibrotic
focal or diffuse changes inechogenicity. Focal changes
therapies should not be used without biopsy confirma-
may indicate neoplasia but it is important not to over-
tion of disease and stage.
248
Chapter 24 Diseases of the liver
 Platelet counts and coagulation times should be
liver disease in dogs and cats is currently being
checked prior to performing a biopsy. A whole-blood
standardized by the World Small Animal Veterinary
clotting time in a glass tube and buccal mucosal bleed-
Association (WSAVA), which should help in interpre-
ing times are usually adequate clinical tests of coagu-
tation in the future.
lation time. If coagulation times are significantly
 prolonged, vitamin K therapy 12 hours prior to biopsy
can help or intravenous plasma may be indicated to
Pathophysiology of acute and
replenish clotting factors.
chronic liver 'disease
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) cytology is rarely
helpfulin the diagnosis of liver disease. Theresults can
Most acute and chronic liver diseases cause clinical
be misleading and should always be viewed with some
signs as a result of a combination of the following 
suspicion. It is rot helpful with difuse inflammatory
pathophysiological mechanisms:
diseases but it may be diagnostic in focal tumours,
hepatic lymphoma and hepatic lipidosis. Ultrasound-
 Loss of liver function: This may be an acute
guidance is preferable as itallows the FNA to be taken
loss or a chronic, insidious loss. Acute loss of
function results in more severe clinical signs
vessels and the biliary tract. FNA of bile from the gall
than chronic loss as the liver has not had time
bladder is possible if undertaken with care under ultra-
either to regenerate or to adapt functionally by
sound-guidance (see Chapters 5 and 25). FNA is
recruiting hepatocytes in other areas (as
helpful in animals with primary biliary tract disease and
described above). Congenital PSS results in
the fluid obtained should be submitted for culture and
loss of liver function by a different mechanism;
sensitivity as well as cytology.
some portal blood bypasses the liver and the
-punosen japun uayel eg sew sedwes Asdoig
liver atrophies as a result of reduced
 guidance with a Tru-cut needle or at laparotomy or
 oxygenation and reduced delivery of trophic
laparoscopy. Ultrasound-guided transcutaneous Tru-
factors in the portal blood
cut biopsy is less invasive than laparotomy or
Biliary stasis: This may develop in acute or
chronic disease as a result of a number of
factors including prirmary biliary tract disease
at all. However, they are often too small and non-
(more common in cats) and parenchymal
representative. Multiple biopsy samples should be
disease, causing hepatocyte swelling and/or
taken with as large a Tru-cut needle as possible to
fibrosis obstructing the biliary tract. Stones in
maximize the chances of obtaining a diagnostic sam-
the biliary tract are very rare in dogs and cats
ple. The animal should be monitored carefully for
compared with humans. The pathophysiology of
haemorrhage afterwards (preferably hospitalized over-
billiary stasis is discussed in detail in Chapters
night) which, although uncommon, can develop unno-
14 and 25
ticed in these animals and be life-threatening.
 The local and systemic results of the
Laparotomy is much more invasive but allows ex-
 inflammatory process and hepatocyte
amination of other abdominal organs (such as the
damage occurring in the liver: This
pancreas and small intestine), observation of the liver
contributes to the local and systemic release of
and careful biopsy (see Chapter 5). The risk of haem-
cytokines and other proinflammatory mediators
orrhage is also smaller than with Tru-cut biopsy as any
that contribute to pyrexia, anterior abdominal
haemorrhage can be seen and dealt with at the time of
pain, anorexia and cachexia seen with liver
surgery. The biopsy specimens obtained are generally
disease and also potentially the development of
bigger and more diagnostic with the proviso that focal
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
lesions deep in the parenchyma may be missed if
The inflammatory changes are most 
Jed auo f llam se pasn ueaq lou sey Aydejbouosein
pronounced in acute or 'acute-on-chronic
of the liver looks normal and another part abnormal,
hepatitis, i.a. acute exacerbation in a patient
 samples should be taken from both areas as it is not
with chronic hepatitis
uncommon for the apparently 'normal' part to be the
The development of portal hypertension: This
diseased area! Laparoscopy is less invasive than
often occurs in chronic hepatitis in dogs but
[aparotomy but has similar advantages.
rarely in cats. It may also develop in acute
hepatitis in both dogs and cats owing to acute
Histopathological interpretation and treatment
hepatocyte sweling. Portal hypertension reflects
Extrapolation of histopathological findings to formu-
either increasing resistance to flow of blood
late treatment recommendations can be difficult. The
through the liver as a result of fibrasis and 
clinician should have a good understanding of the
contraction of stellate cells in chronic disease
(see below), or hepatocyte swelling or infiltraticn
allow interpretation of the histopathological changes
in acuta disaase. Typical. clinical signs develop
and should not just read the bottom line' (diagnosis).
as portal pressure rises:
An expert pathologist in small animal liver disease
 Ascites develops as hydrostatic pressure
should be used and often the clinician will gain more
rises downstream of the portal vein in the
information by discussing the results on the phone
splanchnic venous bed. The pathophysiology
with the pathologist. The pathological description of
of ascites formation is discussed in Chapter 13.
249
Chapter24Diseases of the liver
Themechanismsbehind theformation of
portal hypertension-associated ascites are
ratherdifferent from themechanismsinvolved
inright-sided heart failure and thus the
treatmentisalsorather different.The ascites in
portal hypertension isworsened by activation
of therenin-angiotensin-aldosteronesystem
(RAAS)as aresultof splanchnicpooling of
bloodreducing systemicbloodpressure.
Hence,aldosterone antagonists are often the
mosteffective diureticsto use in this type of
ascites (seebelow)
Gl wall congestion andoedema followed by
(a)
ulcerationorahigh-riskofulcerationwith any
additional triggerfactor(such as
corticosteroid therapy).Bleeding Gl ulcers
may cause haematemesisandmelaena,and
thebloodlost intothegut mayprecipitateor
worsenhepaticencephalopathy
Development of acquired PSSs.These
typicallydevelopwithchronicliverdisease
in dogs,but are quiterare incats.They
develop with sustained portal hypertension
when portal pressure is consistentlyhigher
than thepressure in the caudal vena cava.
(q)
Multiplevesselsopenup as'escapevalves
between theportal vein and caudal vena
cava.These acquired shunting vessels are
often recognized grossly at surgery as a fine
networkofsmallvesselsneartheright
kidney(Figure 24.14).They perform an
important role.protecting the hepatocytes
andgutwall from theworsteffectsof
sustained portal hypertension,and
attemptsatligationarecompletely
contraindicated.
Finally,inaddition,many of thepathophysio-
logical consequences of chronic liver disease in
dogs occur as a result of progressive,damaging
(C)
and permanent fibrosis.Acute hepatic injury is
24.14
Portosystemic shunts.(a) Diagramatic
potentiallycompletelyreversibleprovided the
representation of a congenital portcsystemic
limitingplate isnot disrupted and thesourceof
shunt.(b) Multiple acquired shunts develop if the pressure
injury is nat ongoing.However,if the injury is
in the portal vein is greater than thepressure in thevena
severe and/or ongoing,the liverwill respond by
cava.(c) Gross appcarance cf acquired portosystemic
shunts joining the caudal vena cava in the region of the
laying down fibrous tissue.Thisrepresentsa
rignt kidney.(Photography by Bryden Stanley.)
final commonpathway'toavariety of insults and
(Reprcduced from Watson(1997)withpermission from /n
is analogous to thewound-healingresponse in
Practice.)
othertissues.
Thehepaticstellatecell(otherwiseknown asan Ito
normalliver.Changes in activation andinhibition of
cellorlipocyte)iscentralinthe developmentof fibrosis.
zinc-dependent matrix metalloproteinases are also
Stellatecellsarelocated in the spaceof Dissebetween
important to thebalancebetweenfibrogenesisand
thesinusoidalendothelialcells and thehepatocytes
hepaticrecovery,and thestellatecellsareintimately
(seeFigure24.2).In thenormalliver,theyarethe major
involved in these changes.Their contractile nature,
storagesite ofvitamin A.Theyalso synthesize extra-
when activated,contributes to the pathogenesis of
cellularmatrixcomponents,matrixmetalloproteinases,
intra-hepaticportal hypertensionby altering sinusoidal
cytokines and growth factors.In chronichepaticinjury
toneandbloodflow.In additionto being activated,
theyundergoa majorphenotypic transformation to
stellatecellsarestimulatedtoproliferateandmigrate to
collagen-secreting,proliferating activated lipocytes,
points of injury.This can be obvious in liver samples
whichlose their usual content ofvitamin A,become
fromdogswithearlychronicliverdiseasewherean
contractile and secrete high-density matrix and colla-
increase inthenumberofstellatecellscanoftenbe
gen into the space of Disse. Cirrhotic liver contains
noted histologically beforeany obvious fibrosis.This is
approximatelysix-timesmoreextracellularmatrixthan
an ominous sign,signallingimpending fibrosis.
250
Chapter 24 Diseases of the liver
In most cases of chronic liver disease in dogs,
triggering of the coagulation cascade and DlC. Addi-
stellate cells are stimulated indirectly via the release of
tional clinically serious complications that can occur with
cytokines from inflammatory cells, particularly neutro-
acute hepatitis in humans are cutlined in Figure 24.10,
phils, lymphocytes, platelets and necrotic hepatocytes.
but these have not been reported to date in dogs or cats.
Kupffer cells are an important source of these inflamma-
tory mediators in humans, but their role in dogs is
Clinicopathological tests
unclear. Some substances can act directly on stellate
Clinicopathological testing in acute hepatitis typically
calls to stimulate fibrosis, but this is very unusual in small
shows an early, marked elevation in hepatocellular
animals (unlike in humans where acetaldehyde, the first
enzymes (ALT and AST) followed by slightly later
metabolite of ethanol, can activate stellate cells directly
elevations in ALP, bilirubin, bile acids and often ammo-
So contributing to the development of alcoholic cirrho-
nia. Hypoglycaemia and hypokalaemia are common,
sis). Oxidant stress and the release of lipid peroxides
and some dogs develop pre-renal or renal azotaemia.
play an important role in the stimulation of cytokine
Coagulopathies with both prolonged clotting times and
release from inflammatory cells and hepatocytes. In
reduced platelet counts are not uncommon.
biliary stasis, damage to mitochondrial membranes by
bile acids contributes to this oxidant stress.
Treatment
'Early' fibrosis in hepatic connective tissue does not
Treatment of acute fulminant hepatitis is largely sup-
disrupt the hepatic architecture. This tends to progress
portive and is outlined in Figure 24.15. It should be
to involve more of the liver, bridging batween the portal
noted that steroid therapy is not indicated in these 
tracts and progressing to cirrhosis, which is defined as
cases; in fact, steroid therapy can potentially worsen
progressive bridging fibrosis, inflammation and nodu-
the disease for the reasons outlined in Figure 24.16.
[ar regeneration. Traditionally, Ithas been believed that
Acute hepatitis results in only temporary disruption of
'early' fibrosis is potentially reversible whereas more
hepatic structure and function. Provided the insult is
chronic, bridging fibrosis and cirrhosis are not revers-
not ongaing and that the limiting plate remains intact
ible. However, recent work in humans has indicated
and destruction of hepatic architecture is not extreme,
that even cirrhosis may be reversible if the underlying
there is the potential for complete recovery. The chal-
cause is removed. Effective reversal of cirrhosis has
lenge is to support the animal through the acute crisis
not yet been achieved in dogs.
while awaiting recovery, which is possibie even if 50%
of the liver is destroyed. However, there is no effective
"liver dialysis', even in humans, so too great a loss of
Acute liver disease
vital hepatic functions results ln death, in spite of
intensive care. It is difficult to predict the outcome as
Acute hepatitis describes a spectrum of disease from
some animals show improvement only to deteriorate
mild to severe, fulminating and ife-threatening. It is a
again. Development of marked portal hypertension
poorly described and investigated condition in small
with ascites and splenomegaly is a poor prognostic
animals and most of the treatment recommendations
Indicator in humans. Some animals go on to complete
are extrapolated from human medicine. Mid forms of
recovery with no permanent histological lesions,
acute hepatitis are relatively common in dogs and cats
whereas others develop chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis
but often unrecognized.
and fibrosis. An experimental study of acute toxic
The causes of acute hepatitis are outlined in Figure
hepatitis in dogs suggested chronic lesions were less
 24.7.Fortunately, most cases of acutehepatitis are focal
likely to develop if the dogs were fed a single-protein
and patchy, resulting in mild or subclinical disease.
milk or soy-bean based diet on recovery than if they
These cases usually do not show clinical signs, except
were fed an ardinary commercial dog food.
those referable to the underlying cause, so the liver
disease is usually unrecognized. Elevated liver enzyme
Acute (suppurative) cholangitis
activities in blood samples may be the only indication
This disease is centred on the biliary tract and is
that the liver is involved. These animals may recover
discussed in Chapter 25.
completely or may developchronic hepatitis. Incontrast,
severe fulrninating acute hepatitis is a serious disease
Hepatitis caused by drug toxicity
with marked clinical signs and a generally poor progno-
Many drugs can result in hepatotoxicity in dogs and
sis. Some animals go on to complete recovery but may
require intensive supportive care. Fortunately, acute
nisms. Most cases of drug toxicity result in acute
fulminant hepatitis is rare in small animals.
hepatitis, although this can progress to chronic hepa-
titis with fibrosis and cirrhosis, particularly when the
Clinical signs
drug is administered chronically, as for example with
The classical clinical signs of severe fulminating hepa-
titis are outlined in Figure 24.10. The most clinlcally
tant potentially hepatotoxic drugs are outlined below.
significant are usually: acute hepatic encephalopathy
However, it is important not.to assume drug toxicity in
due to acute loss of hepatic detoxifying function with
every dog or cat with raisediver enzymes. Surveys in
resultant rapid build-up of blood ammonia and other
humans have' shown that drug reactions are over-
encephalopathic toxins; acute Gl signs, often with
diagnosed resulting in unnecessary withdrawalof thera-
melaena and haematemesis; and coagulopathies as-
peutically important drugs. In cases where there is
sociated with sudden loss of hepatic function and also
doubt, a liver biopsy is important in confirming toxicity.
251
Chapter24Diseases of the liver
Specific treatment of causeifknown:e.g.remove drugs mplicated;N-acetylcysteine forparacetamol toxicity(alsoconsidercimetidine,seebelow)
Nilbymouth3daysthenexclusiondietbasedondaiyproteinroyproteinAdditionalant-oxidantsupportduringrecoverymayalsobehepfl
particularlyfor toxicliver damagewhereglutathionedepletionisvery significant;vitaminEandS-adenosylmethionine(seeChapter28and Appendix1)
Intravenous fluid support given carefully:
hepatic encephalopathyHE).Someanimalsmayalsobe hypophosphataemicsomeasure and supplement asnecessary
permanent brain damage
Generalleaperipheralcatheterandmonitorrateandrenaluputcarefullynsure adequatreversalof dehydrationandurineoutputbutdt
over-infuseormayworsenascitesHumanswithacuehepaticfailrearealsosusceptible tocerebraledemawhichismadeworsewithovr
adequateurineoutputbutnotehigherriskof ascendinginfectionsofurinary tract soonlyuseif necessary.Considerfurosemideboluses and
dopamineif renal shutdownbutcarefullymonitorbloodpotassiumlevels
Onlyjahayoulastattifriteatingdindla
might gounnoticed
Observe strict asepsisaround allcathetersbecauseof increased susceptibilty to infections
Mostdogswithacutehepatitishavemetabolicacidosisandsomehaveconcurrentrespiratoryacidosisinthelaterstagesof thedisease.
HoweveravoidbicarbonatetherapyunlessessentialandcloselymonitoredasalkalosiswillworsenHE
Treat coagulopathy as necessary:
Consider vitaminK therapy (see Appendix1)
Treat acute HE: (see Chapter 15)
Check blood glucose and potassium levels regularly
Considerpropofol infusions.Avcid barbiturates
Consider lactulose enemas
Treat any Gl ulceration:
ConsideHlockersranitidineinmostasescimetidineonlyinselected toxicitisgaracetamoltoxicitywherebeneficialtoinhibithpat
cytochrome P450 system
Consider sucralfate once taking food by mouth
Considermetoclopramideifintractablevomiting
Treat any ascites with spironolactone +furosemide
Antibiotics:
Consideruseeitherinallcasestoprotectagainstinfectiouscomplicationsandtoinhibitgut loratoreduceH）rreserveforcaseswithpyrexiaand
other evidence of infectious complications.
Use brcad spectrum agentssafe foruse in liver disease (seeFigure 24.16)
24.15
Outline of treatment recormencationsfor acute fulminating liver disease in dogs and cats.(Many of these
recommcndations arccxtrapolated from humansand aresupportiveonly:veryfewspecifictreatment
recommendaticns ara knowninsmall animals.)
Drug type
Examples
Drugs requiring hepatic metabolism
Increases halfifeso should lengthen dosing iteal in praclice offen reduce the dose e.g.
metronidazole reduced from 10mg/kg q12h to 7.5 mg/kg q12h)
Drugs stimulating hepatic enzymes
Cimeticdine
Phenobarbital
Drugs inhibiting hepatic enzymes
Macrolides
Lincosamides
Chloramphenicol
Drugs increasing complications of hepatic disease
Corticosteroids increase water retention (ascites) and risk of Gl ulceration in portal hypertension.
Considerrotectivemeasures.usesucralfateifusingsteroidsinportalhyperensin
Drugs potentialy hepatotoxic
Potentiated sulphonamides
Tetracycline
Azathioprine
Diazepam in cats
Primidone
Carprofen
24.16
Typesof drugs which should be avaided orusedwithcare in liver disease.
252
Chapter24Diseases of the liver
Potentiated sulphonamides
pharmacokineticswithlowproteindietsreducing the
Potentiated sulphonamides can cause a variety of
half-life and increasing the ALP level.It is therefore
adversereactionsbyboth dose-related and idiosyn-
important tomonitorbloodconcentrationsregularly dur-
craticmechanisms.Although thesereactions are not
ing therapy and adjust doselevels accordingly and not
common,theyaccountforthe majority ofreactions to
antimicrobials in dogs.Sulphonamide-associated ad-
withphenobarbital haveserumconcentrationsat,or
above,thetopendof the therapeuticrangeandhave
dogs than cats.
beenonthe drugforatleast5months.lfseizuresarenot
Oneof themanifestationsofsulphonamidehyper-
adequatelycontrolled atahighbloodconcentration of
sensitivity is acutehepatopathy.Thisislinkedwith
phenobarbital it is advisable to add inasecond drug
apoorerprognosis than sulphonamide-associated
which doesnotrequire hepaticmetabolism,such as
adverse reactions without associated hepatopathy.
potassium bromide or gabapentin (the latter is not
Itcanoccurafteraslittleas5daysof treatmentand
licensedforuseinanimals)ratherthanto increase the
is an idiosyncratic,not dose-related,phenomenon.
doseofphenobarbitalyetfurther.
Dogs usually present with acute hepatic necrosis,
The idealtreatment forphenobarbitaltoxicitywould
whichmayalsobe associatedwithmarkedcholestasis
betowithdraw the drug,but inmany cases this isnot
ormarked lymphoplasmacyticinflammation.Clinical
possible without a recurrence of seizures.In these
signsand treatment areasforothercasesofacute
cases,areductionin doserate and combinationwith
hepatitisandthedrugmustbewithdrawnimmediately.
another drug as described above is indicated.Reduc-
Inaddition,ithasbeensuggestedthatN-acetylcysteine
tionsinphenobarbitaldoseof between25%and100%
(a glutathione precursor) is helpful.One author also
hasbeenshowntobesufficienttoresolvetoxicityin
suggests intravenous ascorbate in these cases(30
most cases.In addition,S-adenosylmethionine has a
mg/kg i.v.q6h) because it can reducenitrosometa-
particularindication in phenobarbital toxicity where it
bolites of sulphonamides.
appears tobe hepatoprotective asit is aprecursorfor
anti-oxidant and detoxifying systems in the liver(see
Phenobarbital in dogs
Chapter28andAppendix1).
Chronicphenobarbital administrationhasbeen asso-
A different sub-set of dogs with phenobarbital tox-
ciatedwith an acute hepaticnecrosis and alsochronic
icity apparently presenting as superficial necrolytic
hepatitis and cirrhosis ina small number of dogs.
dermatitis (hepatocutaneous syndrome) in the ab-
Toxicityisuncommon buthepaticenzyme induction is
sence ofother signsof hepaticfailure hasbeenre-
very comman,so the challenge in treated dogs isto
ported.Theliverof these dogs appearverydifferent,
differentiatenormalenzymeinductionfrom hepatotox-
both ongross and ultrasound examination,fromthose
icity.The main differences areoutlined inFigure 24.17.
ofdogswithphenobarbital-induced hepatitis.There
Ina normalanimal,phenobarbital induces cyto-
arenodularzonesof normal hepatictissuesurrounded
chromeP450enzymesandcausesenlargementof
byareasofcollapsed parenchyma,visibleas the
hepatocytesbyswellingof theendoplasmicreticu-
'Swisscheese'appearance on ultrasonography that is
lum.Thisinitself isnotpathological.The potential for
also typical in other causes of hepatocutaneous syn-
hepatotoxicitymaybeincreased byconcurrentmedi-
drome.The mechanism for phenobarbital-induced
cationwithotherdrugsrequiring hepaticmetabolism,
superficial necrolyticdermatitisisunknownbut itmay
so this shouldbe avoided if atallpossible.ln addition,
be due to induction ofexcessive amino acid metabo-
Parameter
Changes with uncomplicated
Evidence of potential hepatotoxicity
phenobarbital therapy
Clinical signs
Sedation, ataxia and polphagia normal
side-effects at high doses
ataxia,followedbysignsf acuteorchronicepatiisntllsigs
inall cassanrexia,jandiceaciteagulpahy
Liver size and shape (grossly
Enlargedwithsmoothlyrounded border
Enlarged(acute toxicity)or small(chronictoxicity)oftenwith
and onradiography)
irregularborder
Liver appearance on
As above.No change in echogenicity
As above.May be diffusely increased or normal echogenicity
ultrasonography
Hepatic enzyme changes
Typical of enzyme inductionmild fomcderate
Typicalactrhrniatitiadditnea
increases in alkaline phosphatase and alanine
alkalinephosphatase,alanine amiriotransferase and aspartate
aminotransferase, transient increase n
aminotransferasemay become more markedly increased
gamma-glutamyl transferase
Hepatic function tests
Normal albumin (may be transiently reduced
Most havelwlumncrsesnblirubinandpstprandia
at star of therapy),normal bilirubin and
preprandial bile acids or ammonia
normal bile acids
24.17
Clinical,clinicopathological anddiagnosticinagingfindings,whichhelptc diferentiateuncomplicated
253
Chapter24Diseasesof thelivcr
Diazepam in cats
transportproteins andreduced hepatic
Diazepam has thepotential to cause an acute,fulmi
metabolismof fat.Specificnutrient deficiencies
nant hepatic failure in cats with a high mortality.This is
suggested to be important include arginine,
uncommonbut,becauseofitsseriousness,itsadvis-
methionine,carnitine and taurine.The catis
abletoavoid theuseofdiazepam incatsasmuch as
uniquely susceptible to these deficiencies
possible,particularly chronicuse.All reported cases
because of itsobligate highrestingprotein
hadbeenreceivingdiazepamorallyforat least5days
catabolismandspecificdietaryrequirements
with total daily dosesranging from 1.0-2.5mg.Unlike
phenobarbital,diazepam does not inducehepatic en-
regulation of appetite in affected catsresulting in
zymes innormal animals.Therefore,a key finding in
inappropriate anorexia.This is likely tobe due to
affected catsisa sudden dramaticincreaseinhepatic
disturbances in thecomplexneurohormonal
enzymes,particularlyAT,whichismarkedlyelevated.
control of appetite.
Otherclinicalandclinicopathologicalfindingsaretypi-
cal of acute hepaticfailure.Treatment involves imme-
Catswithseverehepaticlipidosissuffer an acute
diate andcompletewithdrawalof the drugand
lossof hepatocytefunctionduetohepatocyteswelling
aggressive intensive support as outlined inFigure
inasimilarwaytoananimalwith diffusehepatic
24.15.However,the prognosis is very poor.
lymphoma;this acuteloss offunction is serious but
potentiallyreversibleif theconditionistreatedeffectively.
Hepatic lipidosis
Hepatic lipidosis may occur in both cats and dogs but
Clinical signs
is most clinically significant in cats.It may result in
The clinical signs arerelated to the acutelossof
acuteorchronicliverdisease,butidiopathiclipidosisin
hepaticfunctiontogetherwithhepatocyteswellingcaus-
cats usually causes an acute loss of liverfunction that
ing intra-hepatic cholestasis.Affected cats typically
ispotentiallyreversiblewithappropriate therapy.Not
allaccumulationsof lipidinhepatocytesareassociated
cephalopathy(see Chapter 15)usually manifesting as
with significant primary liverdisease and it is important
anorexia andmarkeddepression.Coagulopathiesmay
also develop.
todifferentiate:
Primary(idiopathic)hepaticlipidosis:a disease of
Diagnosis
The diagnosis involves demonstration of hepatocytes
catsseenmost commonlyinNorth America,
although it isrecognized in theUK.Thereisno
swollenwithlipid,togetherwithrulingoutanyunderly-
reported breed or genderpredisposition but indoor
ing cause asfar aspossible(although this shouldnot
cats areparticularlyaffected.Itcauses a high
delaytreatmentof thelipidosis).Fineneedleaspirates
of the liverare oftensufficient fora diagnosis,avoiding
theneedforliverbiopsyinavery sickcat.ltis important
commonlyrecognized inpreviouslyobesecats
todifferentiatemild tomoderate lipidaccumulationin
whichhavebecomeanorexic,andforthisreason
obesecatsshouldbemonitored closely during
hepatocytesfromsevere lipidosisoncytology(Figure
weightloss,andnutritional support givento any
24.18)Bloodresultsreflectmarked hepatocellulardys-
functionandcholestasiswithmarkedelevationofhepa-
cat withsevereanorexiawhatever thecause
Secondary hepatic lipidosis:common in bothcats
anddogsasareactionpattern toanumberof
of hepatic lipidosis in cats is a very high ALP level with
other diseases including diabetes mellitus,
adisproportionatelylowgamma-glutamyltransferase
pancreatitis,IBD and primary hyperlipidaemia.In
(GGT)concentration.Affectedcats usuallyhavemarked
dogs thislipidosis is usuallynot clinically
hepatomegalyonradiography and a characteristic
significant in itself.In severely anorecticcats it can
ultrasonographic appearance to the hepaticparen-
become life-threatening in its own right.In these
chyma(see Chapter3).
cases,intensivemanagementofbothlipidosisand
the underlying(orconcurrent)disease isrequired.
Secondarylipidosis is the commonest form of
felinehepaticlipidosisrecognisedintheUK,and
such cats are often thin.
Pathogenesis
Thepathogenesisofprimaryhepatic lipidosisin cats
remainspoorlyunderstoodbut appearsto involvea
combination of:
Excessiveperipheral lipid mobilization,particularly
during anorexia,illness or stress.Thismay be
mediatedby adrenergic stimulation and other
neuroendocrine responses,but peripheral insulin
24.18
Cytological appearance of severehepatic
resistance doesnot appear toplayaprimaryrole
lipidosis ina cat.Note the great accumulation
Deficiencyof dietaryproteins andothernutrients,
of fat globules in the hepatocytes. Giemsa slain; criginal
resultinginreducedhepaticproductionof lipid
magnifcation x1000.(Courtesy of ElizabethVilliers)
254
Chapter24Diseases of the liver
Treatment
Treatmentof the underlying cause alone in second-
The treatment ofhepatic lipidosisrelies on intensive
ary caseswill not lead toresolution of lipidosisinmost
feeding (Figure 24.19).This is the most significant
patients,andanorexia willpersistunlessactivefeeding
factor inreducingthemortalityin thesecasesand
isinitiated.
should be institutedas soon aspossible.
Intensive treatmentof hepatic lipidosisincats is
worthwhilebecauseitgreatlyincreases the chanceof
successful treatment and,althoughit isapotentially
fatal disease,there arenoreported long-term seque-
laewhencatsrecover.
Chronic liver disease
The causesof chronic liverdisease in dogs andcatsare
outlinedinFigures24.5and24.6.Themost common
cause of chronic liver disease in dogsis chronic hepati-
tis.The pathophysiology of all forms of chronic hepatitis
in dogs is similarin thatmost cases progress to fibrosis
and cirrhosis as anend-stage.However,the underlying
causeof thediseaseisalmost alwaysunknown,which
contrastsmarkedlywith thesituation inhumanswhere
the cause of chronic hepatitis isoftenknown and is
24.19
Cat with hepaticlipidosis andgastrcstomy tube
usually eitherviralor toxic(alcohol).Catsdiffer from
in place.
dogs in that themost common chronic liver diseaseat
least inEurope,is chronic lymphocyticcholangitis(see
Treatanyidentifiable underlying causeas
Chapter25).Hepatic copperaccumulationis common in
effectively as possible.
hepatopathies in some specific breeds of dog. Congeni-
Combine thiswithnutritional supportviaa
tal vasculardisorders,particularlycongenital sSs,are
gastrostomyoroesophagostomytube asfeeding
relatively common in dogs but less so in cats.The liver
will be necessary in most cases for
isalsofrequentlyinvolvedinprimaryorsecondary
4-6weeks(seeChapter27fortubeplacement).
neoplasia in both species.
Anaso-oesophageal tube canbe used for
temporary supportpriortogeneral anaesthesia
Copperstorage disease in Bedlington
for more permanent tube placement.A high-
Terriers
quality diet withunrestricted protein shouldbe
Copper storage hepatopathy in the Bedlington Terrier
given,while attempting to manage signs of
(Figures24.20and24.21) is the most wellunderstood
chronicliver disease in dogs.It is inherited as an
Treatment for more details). This means using a
autosomal recessivetrait and upto60%of Bedlington
dietmanufacturedfornutritionalsupport of
Terriers insomecountrieshavebeen affected inthe
hypermetabolic sickcatsif possible.Some
past,although theincidence isreducing withgenetic
authors add extra nutrients such as taurine,
testing and selectivebreeding.Asfewas11%ofDutch
arginine,Bvitaminsorcarnitine tocommercial
dogs are nowaffected with thedisease.
diets,but there isnoevidence that
Affected dogs showprogressivepathologicalaccu-
supplementation of any of these nutrients is
mulationofcopperin the lysozymesintheirhepatocytes
beneficial.
starting in zone 3(perivenous).It is clearly a primary
Anti-emetics and prokinetic agents,such as
ranitidine andmetoclopramidemaybenecessary
if the cat isvomitingorhas delayedgastric
emptying with reflux of food up the feeding tube
(see Chapter 27).
Affected cats alsoneed intravenousfluid support
intheearlystagesof therapyand careful
monitoring of blood glucose and electrolytes,
particularlypotassium andphosphate,which may
becomelowandrequire supplementation(see
Figure 24.15).There is no evidence that adding
insulin to thefluids isbeneficial,and it should be
avoided since itincreasestheriskof
hypokalaemia and hypophosphataemia.After the
firstfewdays,fluid and electrolytebalancecan
usuallybemaintainedby enteral nutrition alone.
ParenteralvitaminKmayberequiredif there is
24.20
BedlingtonTerrierwithcopper storagc discase.
a coagulopathy.
255
Chapter24Diseasesof the liver
accompanied byan additional stress,they may
develop acutefulminant hepaticnecrosiswithno
previous signs.This is usually seen in young
middle-aged dogs,and isoften accompanied by
acutehaemolyticanaemiaduetotherapid
release ofcopperinto the circulation.The
prognosis ispoor and most animalsdie within a
fewdays.Fortunately,thisisrare
Most dogshaveamore chroniccourse
characterizedby:
Early increases (1-2 years old) in copper in
hepaticlysosomes(visiblewith rhodamine
staining)andpersistent elevationsinALT,but
no structural changes
Later,focaltorandom areasof hepatic
necrosisdevelop,usuallybefore3yearsof
age.Elevations in ALT persist but there are
24.21
Copper granules in the hepatocytes of a
BedinglonTerrier with copper storage disease.
no clinical signs
Giemsa stain;original magnification x10oo.(Courtesy of
Chronichepatitisdevelopswithpiecemeal
ElizabethVilliers)
necrosis,inflammation and bridging fibrosis,
usually before 5 years of age. Elevations in
ALT persist and late in this stage clinical signs
copperstoragedisease and isdistinguished frommost
may develop
other'copper-associated'hepatopathiesinotherbreeds
Chronichepatitisprogressesto cirrhosis,
by the fact that the copper is primary to the disease
usually indogsolderthan3years.
process,as outlined inFigure 24.22.
BedlingtonTerriercopperstoragediseaseiscaused
Notably,heterozygotes mayhave a transient(and
byaspecificdefect in hepaticbiliarycopperexcretion,
clinicallyunimportant) increase inhepaticcopper con-
probablyintransportfrom thehepatocytelysosomesto
centrationspeakingat7-9months old and returning to
the biliary tract,that is an inheritedtrait.This was
normalat9-14months old.This is reflectedindiagnos-
originally thought tobedue toadefect inhepatic
ticrecommendations(seebelow).
metallothionein,but recent work has identified the
geneinvolvedastheMURR1gene.MURR1codesfor
Diagnosis:
aprotein ofunknown function.Whether mutation of
Therearetwogroupsof dogsto considerfordiagnosis:
MURR1istheonlycauseofBedlingtonTerriercopper
storage diseaseremains tobeconfirmedasthereare
Identificationof affectedandcarrierdogsas
someinconsistenciesbetweenthelocalizationofthe
young as possible so that measures can be
previouslyreported microsatellite markerwithinthe
taken toprevent progression of disease,and
gene and reported recombinationevents.
breedingrecommendationscanbemadebefore
The usual course of the disease in homozygous
hepatic damage ensues
Bedlington Terriers depends on their dietary copper
Diagnosisof copper storage disease as the
level and other stresses.It isoutlined below:
cause of clinical signs in an older dog and
formulationofatreatmentplanwith the
Young dogsprogressivelyaccumulate hepatic
knowledge thatseverehepaticdamagemay
copper.If the build-up is marked andrapid,and
alreadybepresent.
Copper toxicosis in the Bedlington Terrier
Copper-associated liver disease inmany other breeds
Copperbulds up progressivelythroughout life
Copperlevelsdonatbuildupprogresivelythroughout life
Theamount of liverdamage isrelated to thedegreof
The amount of liver damage isnot related to the degreeof elevation of hepaticcopper and
elevationofhepaticcopper
Copperbuildsupinzone3(perivenous）andbilecopper
Copperbuildsupinonepriportalandbilecopperlevelsarenormalwhichmay
levelsarelowsuggestingaprimaryproblemwi
transport in to bile
Earlytreamentwihlwcoperditandinor
May uselowcopperdietandzinc.Useofcopperchelatorscontroversial.Probably
chelatorslaterbutmonitorforcopperdticiencyif
chelators used for years
24.22
disease.
256
Chapter 24  Diseases of the liver
Identification of affected dogs as young as possible:
lysosomes to rupture, resulting in structural
Genetic tests are the ideal way of identifying
liver damage. This is always significant and
 affectead dogs as young as possible, and should
 requires institution of copper chelation therapy.
help in preventing affected dogs being bred from
in the first place by careful selection of the parent.
Note that the ideal time to perform a liver biopsy is
around 12 months of age since by this time the copper
Screening for the specific gene defect
will have built up to diagnostic levels in the liver, but the
(MURR1) would be ideal and should be most
dog will not have developed chronic changes. Results
accurate. A test based on reverse
from samples from older animals should be interpreted
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
carefully since, if there is cirrhosis, the copper distribu-
(PCR) of RNA obtained from cheek swabs is
tion becomes uneven with lower concentrations in
now commercially available in the UK.
regenerative nodules. It is also possible to make a
However, there are currently technical
qualitative (but not quantitative) diagnosis using cyto-
problems with the test meaning re-sampling
logy of fine needle aspirates of the liyer. This is less
and retesting are offen necessary.
invasive than liver biopsy so could be useful in a
Screening using a microsatelite marker
CO4107 was until recently the only
ing purposes (see Figure 24.21).
 commercially available genetic test. This
detects not the gene itself but a genetic marker
Treatment
either near or within the gene. In order to avoid 
 Appendix 1 provides details of druig dosages.
a false-positive or false-negative result the test
needs to be interpreted in the light of an
 Preventive in young animal:
'infomative pedigree' with at least one
histologically confirmed case in the pedigree.
 Feed a low copper diet with increased dietary
Histologlcal tests are more invasive but
zinc (see Figure 24.25). This will prevent further
currently more readily available, and are
copper accumulation but will not effectively
required from some cases in the pedigree for
'de-copper' the liver. Clinical diets designed 
correct interpretation of microsatellite marker
for canine liver disease are low in copper and
blood tests (see above).
have increased zinc levels, but they are also
Diagnosis in oider animais with disease:
growth. Avoid tap water in soft water areas with
copper pipes. Avoid high: copper foods,
 If a Bedllngton Terrier has persistent elevated
 particularly shellfish, liver, kidney, hearts,
ALT leveis, even with no clinical signs, this is
cereais, chocolate and legumes
very suspicious and a liver biopsy is advisable.
 Additional anti-oxidants such as S-adenosyl-
Feeding a copper-restricted diet to which zinc
methionine (SAMe) and vitamin E are helpful
supplements are added should be initiated
If copper levels in the liver are high or rising at
(see below)
 diagnosis, consider chelation with penicilamine or
If a Bedlington Terrier shows acute disease and
2,2,2-tetramine, but once successfully chelated,
haemolysis there will be anaemia and
retum to dietary and zinc therapy alone.
haemoglobinuria
Liver biopsy samples (expressed as micrograms
Acute crisis:
of copper per gram of liver, on a dry matter basis)
are interpreted as follows:
 Intensive treatment as for acute hepatitls (see
Figure 24.15). Blood transfusion may be
Copper levels <350 μg/g are normal and
necessary if haemolysis is severe
>1000 μg/g are definitely abnormal.
Consider chelation with 2,2,2-tetramine (or 2,3,2-
If copper levels are >350 μg/g but <2000 μg/g,
tetramine if obtainable) because this can chelate
and there are structural changes, it is
rapidly. Penicillamine is not helpful in an acute
significant. The dog is probably homozygous 
crisis as chelation takes weeks to months
and should be treated with a copper chelator
 On recovery, go on to long-term treatment as 
and dietary management
outlined below.
If copper levels are <2000 μg/g, there are no
structural changes and the dog is <1 year old,
Chronic hepatitis:
itmaybeaheterozygote (almostallheterozygotes
actually have copper levels <800 μg/g).
Copper chelation if levels are high or rising
Therefore, feed a copper-restricted diet and
Fead a low copper diet with added zinc
repeat the biopsy at 14-15 months old. If the
Consider other treatmenits for chronic hepatitis,
copper level is the same or reduced, it is a
including anti-oxidants. Avoid use of antifibrotics,
heterozygote; if it has an increased level, it is a
such as colchicine concurrently with copper
homozygote and administration of a copper
chelators as there are anecdotal reports of drug
chelator should be considered
interactions causing side-effects.
257
Chapter24Diseasesof theliver
Copper isan essential traceelementand small
Theroleofcopperinchronichepatitisinbreedsother
amountsarerequired eveninanimalswithcopper
than the Bedlington Terrier and Dalmatianremains
storage disease.Copperdeficiency characterized by
controversial.The current consensus is that copper
microcyticanaemiaandGlulcerationhavebeenre-
doesnotinitiate the disease,exceptperhapsinsome
ported ina dogwhichwasoverzealouslychelatedfor
WestHighlandWhiteTerriers,and thatcopperaccumu-
yearswith2,2,2-tetramine.Therefore,copper chela-
lationis aresult of the underlying disease.Howmuch it
tionshould beused onlywhenrequired andpatients
contributes toongoing damage onceit is there and
should be monitored carefully.lIt should not be used in
therefore whetherbreedsother thanBedlingtons,Dal-
heterozygotesorotherbreedswithoutwelldefined
matiansandsomeWest HighlandWhiteTerriersshould
copper storage disease.
be given copperchelation therapy is currently unknown.
Canine chronichepatitis
Copperstoragediseaseinotherdogbreeds
The termchronichepatitis'describeshepaticmono-
Veryrecently,a copper-associatedhepatitishasbeen
nuclearormixed inflammatory infiltratewith piecemeal
reported ina numberof young Dalmatians in theUSA
necrosis and varying degrees of fibrosis, combined
andCanada,whichmaysharesomesimilaritieswiththe
BedingtonTerrier disease,and may represent a pri-
with clinical orbiochemicalevidence of hepatocellular
mary metabolicdefect inhepaticcopper metabolism.
dysfunctionwithout improverment for at least4-6
months.Typically,theinflammationinboth human and
TheDalmatiandiseaseisassociatedwithacuteonset,
rapid progression and very high levels of hepatic copper
caninechronichepatitisaffectszone1of the hepatic
acinus (portal area),although this may notalways be
in the absence of significantclinical,clinicopathological
the case.Fibrosis tends toprogress to cirrhosis,but
orhistological evidenceof cholestasis.However,ithas
this is not inevitable. Cirrhosis describes progressive/
notbeenpossibletodefine thezonal distributionof
bridging fibrosis,inflammationand nodularregenera
copper in thecasesreported todatebecauseof the
tion,whichhas classicallybeen considered end-stage
extensivehepaticnecrosis,fibrosisanddisruptedarchi-
tecture.Affected dogs usually present asyoung adults
and irreversible.
withacuteonset of Gl signs andpolyuria/polydipsiaby
Itisveryimportanttorealizethatmorethanone
aetiology can give the same clinical appearance and
Thereismarked elevation in ALT levelsand more
More specifically,infectionswithviruses orbacteria,
modestelevationsinASTandALPlevels.Jaundice
such as Leptospira,can result in a lymphoplasmacytic
developslaterinsomedogs,andalbuminmaybemildly
infiltrateandmanymightbemisinterpretedas
to markedly reduced.The prognosis appears tobe poor,
immune-mediated disease'butclearly thesecases
evenwith treatment.The disease hasbeenrecognized
should not receive immunosuppressive therapy.
in littermatessuggesting that it mightbeinherited
Other‘copper-associated’hepatopathiesreported
Aetiology
inavarietyofbreedssharesomesimilaritieswith
Chronic hepatitis frustratingly usually remains a non-
BedingonTerriercopperstoragepatopathyuta
specific diagnosis in dogs and the cause is generally
have some important differences.Copper-associated
unknown.Thepotentialcauses ofcaninechronichepa-
hepatopathieshavebeenreported inSkye andWest
titis are outlined inFigure 24.23.
HighlandWhiteTerriersbut neitherof these appearsto
Chronichepatitisisrecognized ina wide variety
be a true'storage disease'asseen inBedlingtonTerri-
of dog breeds includingmixed-breed animals.How-
ersbecausecopperdoesnotaccumulatethroughout life
ever,reviews of chronic hepatitis in dogs show con-
and the amount of copper stored is not correlated with
sistently increased incidences in certain specific
theseverityofunderlying disease and'orisnotpresent
breeds as summarized inFigure 24.23.Middle-aged
very early in the disease process(see Figure 24.22).
dogs of a number of breedsare over-represented,
Recentwork suggeststhatcopperaccumulationmaybe
including American and English Cocker Spaniels
a primaryevent inDobermann hepatitis.
(dogsmore than bitches),WestHighland White
Potential cause
Breeds or types of dogs
Notes on diagnosis and histologicalappearance
where it might be seen
Unrecognized bacterial
May cause some cases of chronic hepatitis
May be unrecognized as organisms often not seen.
infections:atypical
inanybreed
Some (but not allBartonellainfections have distinctive histopathology
Leptospira,Bartonella;
similar tohumanpeliosishepatitisPolymerase chainreactionhasbeen
possibly Helicobacter
usedmore recently to help ciagnosis
Unrecognized viral
Canine adenovirus 1(CAV-1)may cause
infections:chronic
chronic hepatitis in partially immune dogs
and progressive fibrosis.Insome surviving dogs,thevirus is cleared and
adenovirus infection in
(causes acute disease if not immune) but
partially immune dogs;
 only shown experimentally
patients with hepattis virus.Canine acidophil cellhepat tis virus reportedly
canine acidophil cell
causesachronichepatitismarked by fibrosis and hepatocytenecrosisbut
virus hepatitis
sparse inflammatory change
24.23
hepatiisremain idiopathic.However,thepotential causesIsted havebeensuggested and demcnstrated tobe
them a litle more carcfully in clinical cases (see Center(1996a) and Walsor(2004b) for more details).(continues)
258
Chapter24Diseasesof the liver
Potential cause
Breeds or types of dogs
Notes on diagnosis and histological appearance
where it might be seen
Potentialgenetic
Chronic hepatifis shows an increased
Breed-associatedchronichepattisinSkyeTerriersproportionofWst
causes of chronic
incidence in a number of breeds. Breed-
hepatitis
associated canine chronic hepatitis
copper-storage disease inBedlingtonTerriers andDalmatians.
mechanisms are unknown. There are likely
Breed-associatedhpatisnCockerpanielsandaproportonofWst
tobe differentmechanisms in different
breeds
copper.CockerSpanielsshowachangeinhepatic-proteinase inhibitr
subtypes but not a true deficiency of o-proteinaseinhibitor
Potential autoimmune
Autoimmune disease is often assumed to
Finding lymphoplasmacyticinflammationonhistopathologyof theliverisnot
forms ofchronic
be the cause of canine chronic hepatitis but
enoughaloneto dianoseprimaryautmmune disease,asa siilar
hepatitis
ithasneverbeen provenand some authors
histological appearance occurs as the final common pathway of many
doubt if it exists at allin dogs.lt may be
diseasesincluding viral and bacterial.Anumberof studies have been
involvedinsomebreed-relateddiseases,
perfomed indogs looking at liver-associatedantibodies andcell-mediated
particularly with increased incidence in
responsesbutnoneanswerthequstionastowhetherthebserved
bitches (such as Dobermanns) but more
research isneeded
phenomenon
24.23
(continued) Potential unrecognized causes of 'idiopathic'chrcnic hepatitis in dogs.Note:most cases of canine
chronichepatitisremain idiopathic.However,the potential causes listedhavebeensuggested and dermonslraled
tobe involvedin somecases.Awarenessoi thesepctential causes should encouragethe clinician to consider them and
lookfcr themalittle more carefullyin clinical cases(seeCenter(1996a) and Watson(2004b) for more details).
Terriers (no apparent sex predisposition), Skye Terri-
Diagnosis
ers (no apparent sex predisposition),Dobermanns
(strongbitchpredisposition)andLabradorRetrievers
Clinicalfindings:Dogswith chronichepatitistypically
(bitchbias).Increased incidenceof chronic hepatitis in
present with mild non-specific clinical signs, such as
certainbreedssuggests a geneticbasisfor their dis-
vomiting,diarrhoea,anorexia andpolyuria/polydipsia
ease.However,studieshavefailed toelucidate spe-
(seeFigure 24.11).Jaundice or ascites may develop,
cific genetic mechanisms. It is often assumed that
especially later in thecourseof the disease.Hepatic
breed-associated chronichepatitisis autoimmune in
encephalopathyisuncommon untilend-stage disease,
aetiologybut,infact,autoimmunehepatitishassofar
when acquiredPSSs are often present.Weight loss is
not been convincingly demonstrated to occur in dogs.
frequently severe,but affected dogs are often surpris-
A geneticpredisposition to chronic hepatitis in a dog
inglybright considering theseverity of their disease.
breedmayhaveoneormoreofavarietyofpotential
causes but none of these hasyet beenproved in dogs.
Clinicopathological findings:The clinicopathologi-
cal findings are outlined in Figures 24.12 and 24.13.
Pathophysiology
Most dogswith chronic hepatitishavepersistenteleva-
Diagnosis of canine chronic hepatitis and therapeutic
tions ofLTand otherliverenzymes,although activi-
decisionsrelyveryheavilyonhistologicaldescriptions
tiesmaybecomenormal inend-stage disease if there
combinedwith a basicunderstanding of the signifi-
isverylittleremaining livertissue.Functiontestsusu-
cance of the changes described and the pathophysio-
allyreflectsevere hepaticdysfunction and serumbile
logyof chronic liverdisease,withoutknowledgeof the
acidsmaybeelevateddueto acquired shunting
underlying cause.As discussed above,clinical signs
appear late in the disease process inchronic hepatitis
Diagnostic imaging:Radiography and ultrasono-
because of the liver'slargereserve capacity.Signs
graphy oftenreveal a smallhyperechoicliver, although
develop as a result of a combination of the patho-
the livermay also looknormal in some cases.There
physiological processes:a gradual loss of liverfunc-
may be ascites, and ultrasonography may reveal mul-
tion;progressive fibrosis;biliary stasis:local and
tiple acquired PsSs.
systemicinflammatoryresponse;thedevelopmentof
While all of these findings are supportive of a
portal hypertension with ascites,Gl oedema and ul-
diagnosis of chronichepatitis none is specific,even
ceration;and hepaticencephalopathy.The typical pro-
takenin combination:for example,elevated liver en-
gression of chronic hepatitis in dogs is a slow,
zymes and bile acids,ascites and asmallivermayall
asymptomatic,progressivedestructionof liver tissue
occurin dogswith idiopathicnon-cirrhoticportal hyper-
culminating in an acute onset of clinical signs due toa
tension (see below).Without hepatic biopsy,these
critical reductionin liver functionorthe developmentof
latter cases may be mistakenly presumptively diag-
portal hypertension or biliary stasis.Clinicopathologi-
nosedashavingcirrhosisandapoorprognosis,whereas
cal abnormalitiesmaybeidentifiedlongbeforethese
idiopathicportal hypertension usuallyhasa better
clinicalsignsdevelopandearlytreatment maydelayor
prognosis.Hepaticbiopsyistherefore stronglyrecom-
halt progression of underlying disease.The develop-
mended so that unexpected findings are not missed.
ment of clinical signs inadogwithchronichepatitis
andattemptscanbemadetostage thedisease and
indicates that severe,generalized liver disease is
select the most appropriate treatment options (see
already present.
Figure 24.24).
259
Chapter24Diseasesof theliver
Treatment
Detailsof therapyareoutlinedina section atthe end of
withzinc,Bvitaminsand anti-oxidantsshould be
this chapter and Appendix 1. It is important to initiate
fed(Figure 24.25).Protein should notbe restricted
therapy asearlyaspossiblein caninechronic hepatitis
unlessessential to control encephalopathy,since
manypatients aremalnourished.Manufactured
histological findings to considerwhen deciding on a
dietsforcanineliverdisease canbe used and
treatment regime areoutlinedinFigure24.24.While
supplementedwith extra highqualityprotein,such
specificandeffectivemeasuresarenotprovenfor
as cottagecheese oregg.Feed little and oftento
canine chronichepatitis,even non-specific and sup-
reduce hepatic work.
portivetreatmentsmaylead tomarkedimprovements
Antifibrotic agentsmay behelpful.
in the quality of life.
Corticosteroidsaremosteffectivebut thestage
Question
Response
Howmuch inflammation is there?
If thereissignificantinflammationwithoutvidenceofinectionorseverefibrosisconsidersterois
How much fibrosis is there?
If thereismarkedfibrosisavoid steroids toolateand alopotentiallyangerousbutconsider
colchicine
How badly is the architecture disrupted?
Ifverybadlydisuptedbyfibrossavoidsteroidstolatandalspotentallydangerousbtconsidr
colchicine
ls there any obvious cause (e.g.copper
If the cause is obvious, treat it
storage diseases;but intepret significance of
copperwithcautioninbreedsotherthan
BedingtonTeriers,Dalmatians and West
Highland White Teriers)?
Is there secondary build-up of iron or copper?
choleretics to encourage bileflow
Is there histological and/or clinical evidence of
lf so,ruleoutcomplete obstruction (rare)and consider choleretics
cholestasis?
Isthere clinical evidenceof portalhypertension
Give symptomatic treatment
±acquired portosystemic shunts?
24.24
Decision-making in themanagement of canine chronichepalilis.
Dietary component
Recommendations for dogs
Recommendations for cats
Protein
Only restrictdietaryproteinifnecesary focontrolhepatic
naflliddiqualtigldi
encephalopathy with congenital or acquired portosystemic
protein.
shunts (PSSs);try athermeasures first (see Chapter 15).
Moderate/normal amount of.
Hepatic lipidosis: feed high protein diet -as high as possible
high quality protein (all essential amino acids inoptimal
without precipitating hepatic encephalopathy.Mayadd extra
amounts)
arginine, taurine and carnitine.Balanced feline diet for critical
care is ideal.
to break down to ammonia)
Protein shouldnotbegiveninexcesssoastorequire
Unlikedogsavoidcottagecheeseasmajrprotensourceas
hepaticmetabolism,resulting in increased blood ammonia.
relatively arginine deficient;big problemin cats with liver
ldealproteintouseiscottagecheese,butiisrelativelyw
disease.Eggs are a good source of arginine.
in arginine.Otherhighqualty proteins are eggs(butalso
high in methionine which contributes to hepatic
Cholangitis: feed high quality,highly digestible protein.No
need forproteinrestriction as encephalopathy veryrare.
metabolized to urates increasing urate urolithiasis in PSSs)
Hypoallergenic/single protein sourcediet maybe indicated as
many cats have concurrent inflammatory bowel disease.
isalsoagood sourceofanti-encephalopathic soluble fibre
(see below).
Congenitsardratstadrnrict
Low levels of aromatic amino acids and high levels of
branched chain amino acids are said to be helpful in
reducing hepatic encephalopathybut evidence for whether
they canalter thebloodratiobyaltering thedietarylvels
lacking.Single protein source diet based on dairy or soya
protein isrecommended afterrecovery from acute hepatitis
24.25
Dietary advice fcrliver disease in dogs and cats.The diet should be fed litle and often (4-6 times a day) and
regeneration and optimal hepatic function.(continues)
260
Chapter24
Diseasesof the liver
Dietary component
Recommendations for dogs
Recommendations for cats
Fat
No special advice in liver disease.Should be fed in normal
The common concurrent incidence of pancreatitis and
amounts andnotrestricted asfatmaldigestionand
inflammatorybowel disease withcholangitisincatsmay
steatorrhoea due tocholestasisand lackof bile saltsvery
promptcosideratinfftrestrictinaltougheventh
rare.Only restrict if clinical steatorrhoea develops.Avoid
casesnormal dietaryfat evelisusuallyweltolerated.Some
hypertension where theymay exacerbate Gl signs.
Optimizingomega3:omega 6mayhelpreduce inflammation
Carbohydrate
The carbohydrateused should behighly digestible asa
Similar comments to dogs. Cats are not adapted to use
primarycalorourcerdungeedfor
snsde
gluconeogenesis from fat and protein.Carbohydrate
toutilizedietarycarbohydrate thandogs.Thisand theriskof
concurrent pancreatis and possiblerelated glucose
cats with chronic liver disease
Fibre
Fermentabie fibre:reduceshepatic encephalopathy.Broken
Cats arenotwelladaptedtodietaryfibreIncreasedsoluble
dow to short chainfattyacids in the colon,which trap
fibreincreasestaurinerequirements.lncreased dietaryfibre
ammonia as ammonium ions. Also beneficial effect on
maybe beneficialin cats with hepatic encephalopathy.n
colonicbateriareasingnitrogenincorpratin
othercaseshighlydigestiblelwresiduedindiatd
bacteria and reducing ammonia production
The exceptionmight becats with concurrent inflammatory
Non-fermentabie fibre aso important as prevents constipation.
boweldisease,wheresome increase in soluble fibremight be
Constipationis predisposingfactorfordevelcpmentof
indicated to encourage beneficialbacteria,althoughmore
encephalopathy since it increases the contact time for
studies are necessary to confirm this
colonic bacteria to act on faeces and produce ammonia
Mixed fibre sourceinmoderate amountsisthereforeuseful
but to much interferes with the digestion and absorption of
nutrients
Minerals:
Zinc
Dogs are proposed to be similar to humans in that zinc
No current specific advice forcatsasboth hepatic
deficiency iscommon with liverdisease(due to reduced
absorption and increased urinary loss) and supplementation
with zincreduces encephalopathy.Zinchas thefollowing
important roles in liver disease:
Used inmanymetallenzymes in the urea cycleand in
musclemetabolism of ammonia
availabity in liver inprimary or secondary copper
storage disease
May stabilize lysosomal membranes.
Supplementing zinc is therefore recommended in any chronic
hata
monitor blood concentrations to avoid toxicity (seeFigure
24.23)
Copper
Copper storage disease not recognized in cats so no specific
on a low copper,high zinc diet.
advice.
Vitamins:
Fat-soluble
Vitamin E supplementationmay becytoprotective
Vitamin E supplementation may be cytoprotective.
especiallyincopertoxicitylneutraliesfreeradicals
VitaminK supplementationis particularlynecessary in
and some authors useit in anycase of chronichepatitis
cats,especially if concurrent inflammatorybowel disease
at a cose rate of 400-600 IU/day for medium-sized dogs.
and'or pancreatitis causing fat malabsorption.
Vitamins A andD should notbe supplemented.Vitamin A
times are prolonged, epecially if considering biopsy.
can cause hepatic damage andvitaminDsupplementaticn
ltappearstoreduce cloting tmesevenincaseswhere
can cause calcification in tissues.
coagulopathy isdue to areduced hepaticproductionof
SOL
(see Figure 24.23).
Vitamins Aand D should nofbe supplemented.Vitamin
A can cause hepatic damage and vitamin D
supplementation can cause calcification in tissues.
24.25
261
Chapter24Diseases of the liver
Dietary component
Recommendations for dogs
Recommendalions for cats
Vitamins:
Water-soluble
Bvitamins should be supplemented as there is
Bvitaminsshould be supplemented as thereisamarkedly
continued
increased lossinpolydipsiapolyuria(PD/PU)associated
increased loss inPD/PU associated withliver disease.
with liverdisease.tisrecommended thatdogswithliver
Catsalsohaveanincreaseddietaryrequirementforsome
disease receive a double dose of Bvitamins.
Bvitamins tosupport theirmetabolism.ltisrecommended
Vitamin C should notbe supplemented as ascorbate can
thatcatswith liverdiseasereceiveadouble doseof
increasethetissue damage associated withcopperand
B vitamins.
iron in liver disease.
VitaminCshculd notbe supplemented asascorbatecan
iron in liver disease.
Other anti-oxidants
Other anti-oxidants inaddition tovitaminEmaybe added to
Otheranti-oxidants inaddiiontovitaminEmaybeaddedto
diet
diet
24.25
(continued)Dietary acvice for livercisease ini dogs and cats.The diet should be fed littlc and often(4-6 times a
day)and needs tobepalatable as dogs and catsmay be anorcxic.Suficient high qualily diet is essential for
hepalic regeneration and optimal hepatic function.
of disease should be assessed priorto use.
Non-cirrhotic portal hypertension,portal
Steroids should not be used in end-stage
vein hypoplasia and non-inflammatory
cirrhosis,non-inflammatoryfibrosisorif thereis
hepaticfibrosis
significantportalhypertension.Colchicine could
There are a number of conditions reported in predomi-
beconsidered instead in animalswithsevere
nantlyyoungdogs,whicharedistinguishedfromchronic
fibrosis,and canbe administeredwith
hepatitis in being non-inflammatory conditions that
corticosteroids in some cases with ongoing
result in portal hypertension with varying amounts of
inflammation and concurrent fibrosis.
hepatic fibrosis.These include:
Ursodeoxycholicacid isprobablybeneficial in
anyanimal withchronichepatitis,particularlyif
Non-cirrhotic portal hypertension
there is associatedbiliary stasis.
Idiopathichepaticfibrosis
Anti-oxidant agents (SAMe and Vitamin E) are
Portal vein hypoplasia.
probablywarranted inall cases.
Considerantibiotics,particularlyif thereisa
It islikelythat thereissomeoverlapbetweenthese
significant neutrophiliccomponent to the
conditions and it has been suggested that they are all
inflammationorthereisanindicationof
caused byintra-hepaticportal vein hypoplasia,but
ascending cholangitis.Choose appropriate
theymayalsorepresentaspectrumofdiseaseor
antibiotics that arenotpotentiallyhepatotoxic
diseasesofdifferentaetiologies.Themostimportant
(seeFigure 24.16).Ampicillin and metronidazole
pointsfor theclinician torecognize are:
areoftenused.
In end-stage disease,give supportive therapy
These conditions are non-inflammatory and so
onlywithdiet,anti-oxidants,ursodeoxycholicacid
donotrequire treatment with anti-inflammatory
and treatments for ascites,Gl ulceration and
drugs(corticosteroids)
hepatic encephalopathy(see end of chapter).Do
Portal hypertension requires symptomatic
not use steroids in these cases.
treatment and avoidance of drugs that may
induceGlulceration
Lobular dissecting hepatitis
The long-term prognosis in these cases is often
Thisisan idiopathicinflammatoryhepatitisrecog-
good(better than chronichepatitis) but these
nizedin young dogs with acharacteristic appearance
cases maybemisdiagnosed as end-stage chronic
ofdistinctivefibroticdissectionoflobularparenchyma
hepatitis on thebasis of clinical,clinicopathological
into individual and small groups of hepatocytes.It
and imaging findings if abiopsy isnot taken.
breeds,including several Standard Poodles and
All these conditions have been reported in both
also in a number of litter-mates.Lobular dissecting
dogs and bitches of a variety of breeds, with ages
hepatitis isprobablyaresponse of thejuvenileliver
ranging from 3 months to 8years,althoughmore than
toavarietyof insultsratherthana diagnosis initself.
75% of animals are <4 years old at diagnosis.Young
Infectious aetiologieshavebeensuggested,although
German Shepherd Dogs have been reported to have
not proved,and the age of onset and histological
anincreased riskofidiopathicfibrosis.Animals usually
appearance bear a striking resemblance to atypical
present with signs of portal hypertension (low protein
leptospiralinfectionindogs.Treatmentrecommen-
ascites),Glsigns(vomitingand diarrhoea)beingmost
dations aresimilar to thoseforcanine chronichepa-
common,andhepaticencephalopathyandpolydipsia
titis (see above).
in some cases.Clinicopathological findings arevery
262
Chapter24Diseasesof the liver
similartoend-stage chronichepatitis cases,withmicro-
cyticred cells and elevated hepatocellular and
Congenital portosystemic
Acquired portosystemic
shunts
cholestatic enzymes.Most cases have low albumin
shunts
Usually single or atmost double
Usually muliple vessels
haveelevated2-hourpostprandialbileacids.Ascites
vessel
and multiple extra-hepatic acquired PsSscan often
Can be intra-hepatic or extra-hepatic
Usually extra-hepatic
bedemonstrated on diagnosticimaging.The most
Usually have normal or reduced
Invariably portal hypertension,
ofsignificantinflammation,whichimmediately distin-
portal pressuresoroascites
soascites common
guishes it from chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis.Portal
unless very low albumin
veinsareoftensmallorabsentwithincreasedarterioles
Usually no underlying liver disease
Usually severe underlying liver
and abnormal lobular architecture.There is some
so not jaundiced or shcwing other
disease so offen jaundice and
fibrosisin some animais,butnot as muchas incirrho-
signs of iver failure
other signs
sis.Thetreatment isoutlined belowand the prognosis
About 75% present<1 year of age
Mostly (but not always) older
is good in about 75% of cases.
sbop
Treatment
24.26
Differentiation of congenital and acquired
Treatment isfocused uponsymptomaticmanagement
portosystemic shunts.
ofportal hypertension,while supplying enough high
azygos vein.Intra-hepatic PsSs may be lef-sided,in
prognosismeans that dietaryand othertherapiesmust
whichcase they arethoughttorepresentapersistence
be capable of sustaining the animal long term:
of the foetal ductus venosus afterbirth (patent ductus
venosus):or they maybe right-sided or centrally lo-
Feed frequentsmall mealsofa highquality
cated inthe liver,inwhichcasethey are thought tobe
digestible diet,and limit protein only if required to
anomalous vessels.
control hepatic encephalopathy (see Figure
24.25).Consider extra anti-oxidants such as
Pathophysiology:Thepathophysiologyof congenital
SAMe orvitamin E
PSSslargelyrelatesto theshuntingof unfiltered blood
Control clinical signs of portal hypertension(see
directly into the systemic circulation,resulting in
below):ascites,any Gl ulceration and hepatic
hyperammonaemia and hepatic encephalopathy.
encephalopathy.Consider other additional
Rarely,bacteraemiamayleadtosecondaryinfections.
means tocontrol encephalopathyrather than
The reduction in hepaticand total body reticulo-
restricting protein;forexample,lactulose,other
endothelial functionmay alsocontribute toincreased
soluble fibre sources, antibiotics,zinc
risk of infection.Additional effectsof portalbloodby-
Consider use of ursodeoxycholicacid,
particularlyif thereisevidenceofbiliarystasis
themetabolic activityof the liver contributing to ineffi-
Consider use of an antifibrotic, such as
cient useof dietarycomponents,poorgrowth and loss
colchicine,if there is significant fibrosis.
of lean body mass.
Hepatic atrophy and changes in hepatic organelle
Congenital vascular disorders
function arepartlydue to changes in hepaticperfusion.
Congenital vascularanomalies are surprisingly com-
The portal blood usually supplies about 50% of the
monin dogs,andmuchmore common thanin humans.
liver'soxygenrequirement,but this is obviously re
They are alsorecognized in cats but muchlessoften
duced in PSSs.Animals with PSSs typically have
than in dogs.
arteriolarhyperplasiainanattempt tomake upforthe
reduced portal flow,but they often stillhave some
Congenital portosystemic shunts
degree of hepatic hypoperfusion. In addition, PSSs
The commonestcongenital vasculardisordersseen
result in reduced deliveryofhepatotrophicfactors
in dogs are congenital PSSs. Congenital PSSs are
suchasinsulin,totheliver,whichcontributestohpatic
distinguished from less common acquired PSSs as
atrophy.However,it should be noted that although
outlined inFigure 24.26.AcquiredPSSsareparticu-
animalswithPsSshavesmall livers,hepaticatrophy
larlyrare in cats.
does not appear to beprogressive throughout life,
Congenital PSSs areabnormalvascularcommuni-
rather,the liver reaches a‘stable’small size and
cationsbetween theportal andsystemiccirculation.
remains at that size.
Theyareusuallysingle,oratmostdouble,vesselsand
may beintra-hepatic or extra-hepaticin location(Fig-
Diagnosis:The typical clinical signs of congenital
ure24.14).Large-breed dogs usuallyhave intra
PSSs are Gl,urinary orneurological inorigin.Animals
hepatic PSSs and small-breed dogs usually have
typically present with a history of waxing and waning
extra-hepaticPsSs,although these associations are
neurological signs typical of hepatic encephalopathy,
not invariable.Catsmay have either type ofPSS.
rather than a sudden acute hepaticencephalopathic
Extra-hepaticPSSsrepresentabnormal communi-
crisis(see Chapter 15).Hepatic encephalopathy is
cations between the portal vein or one of its contribu
oftenmostsevere an hourortwoafterameal,but the
tors（left gastric,splenic,cranial orcaudal mesenteric
association withfeedingisnotobviousinmanycases
orgastroduodenalveins)and the caudal vena cava or
Animalsinacutecrisisoftenpresentcomatose butmay
263
Chapter 24 Diseases of the liver
also have seizures. Drug intolerance is common, par-
albumin concentration is very low (see Chapter 13).
ticularly prolonged recovery from routine anaesthasia
Therefore, although other congenital vascular anoma-
for neuitering. Animals with PSSs may also show inter-
les are rare, it is important to be aware of their exist-
mittent vomiting or diarrhoea. Urinary tract signsinclude
ence as possible alternative causes of high blood bile
haematuria associated with urate calculi and polyuria/
 acids or ammonia and encephalopathy in young dogs.
There is some overlap between some of these condi-
reflect reduced renal concentrating gradient secondary
tions and non-cirrhotic portal hypertension (see above)
to low urea, and increased blood cortisol levels second-
and the clinical findings and treatment recommenda-
ary to reduced hepatic breakdown. Dogs and cats with
tions are very similar for all these disorders. The
congenital PSSs are also often (but not always) poorly
exception is congenital arteriovenous fistulas where
grown compared with their litter-mates and also have a
the most effective treatment is surgical resection of the
higher incidence of concurrent congenital abnormali-
affected liver lobe.
ties, particularly cryptorchidism in male dogs.
The typical clinicopathalogical findings with congeni-
Microvascuiar dysplasia: MVD has been reported as
tal PsSs reflect shunting of blood and reduced liver
 a congenital disorder in a number of breeds, but particu-
function and include low urea and albumin, mild eleva-
larly Cairn Terriers and Yorkshire Terriers. lt can be
tion in liver enzymes and a microcytic anaemia. How-
confused with congenital PsS as these dogs present
ever, these are non-specificchanges and in some cases
with very similar clinical signs and clinicopathological
findings. However, clinical signs of MVD and elevations
preprandial bile acids or ammonia is a more sensitive
in bile acids tend to be less marked than most dogs with
finding. However, definitive diagnosis of a congenital
congenital PSSs. Some dogs with MVD present with no
PSS relies on visualizing the shunting vessel either with
 Overt clinical signs but persistently elevated bile acids
ultrasonography, contrast portography (see Chapter 3)
 and drug intolerance. The shunt fractions on transportal
or at surgery. Portal scintigraphy is a useful technique to
scintigraphy in dogs with MvD are typically much smaller
define shunting fractions (see Chapter 3) but it does not 
than in dogs with congenital PsSs (<15% rather than
 differentiate congenital from acquired PSSs.
80% or more with a PSS). MVD is diagnosed on the
basis of ruling out a gross shunting vessel, and liver
Treatment: The treatment of congenital PSS traditian-
biopsy which show changes very similar to those of liver
ally revolves around partial or total-ligatlon of the
biopsy samples taken from dogs with congenital PSSs.
shunting vessel, which is usually a procedure reserved
eul 1e bununys mous sbop eseul reul pesodoid s! 11
for referral centres. Medical management is described 
 microscopic level, and that this may be a manifestation
elsewhere (see Chapter 15), and it is advisable for a
 of portal vein hypoplasia. Occasionally, dogs'may have
few weeks prior to surgery to stabilize the patient, and
for a couple of months after surgery. Some dogs also
lies in addition to a gross shunting vessel, and in these
do well long term with medical management alone,
 dogs, liver function tests fail to normalize after surgical
particularly if they are older at presentation. Intensive
ligation of the PsS and there may be an increased risk
-ue anosal dt panbal ag Aew suawabeuew jeopau
 of postoperative portal hypertenslon. Management of
mals from hepatic encephalopathy crisisthatare coma-
MVD can only be medical as there is no gross shunting
tose or seizuring. but can be remarkably successful
(see Chapters 15 and 26).
 to do relatively well on medical management. Medical 
management is the same as for congenital PsSs.
Other congenital vascular disorders
A wide variety of other congenital vascular disorders
Hepatic neoplasia
have been reported in dogs, and less frequently in cats,
Primary liver tumours are rare in dogs and cats, and
but all of them are rare compared with congenital
 much less common than they are in humans. They
PSSs. These include:
represent 0.6-1.5% of all tumours in dogs and 1.0-
2.9% of all tumours in cats. This may be because two
Microvascular dysplasia (MVD)
of the predisposing factors for development of liver
Portal vein hypoplasia
+
tumours in humans (hepatitis virus infection and α1-
+
 Congenital arteriovenous fistulas.
proteinase inhibitor deficiency) have not been recog-
nized in small animals. No predisposing factors have
In many cases, these present in a similar way to
been identified in cats and dogs, but it is interesting to
congenital PsSs with signs of shunting, including he-
note that biliary carcinomas are the most common
patic encephalopathy in a young animal. However, a
primary liver tumours seen in cats, which may reflect
clinically very important distinction is that most of these
the high incidence of biliary tract disease in this spe-
disorders result in portal hypertension, whereas most
cies. In contrast, hepatocellular carcinomas are the
dogs with congenital PSSs have normal or reduced
portal pressure unless they have concurrent portal vein
 Malignant primary liver tumours out number benign
hypoplasia. Dogs with other vascular anomalies would
tumours in dogs, whereas in cats benign tumours are
more common. An unusual benign tumour occasion-
tension, such as ascites and gut wall oedema with or
ally found in feline livers is a myelolipidoma, which has
withoutulceration, whereas dogs with congenital PSSs
a suggested association with chronic hypoxia and
do not develop ascites and oedema unless their blood
hepatic involvement in diaphragmatic hernias.
264
Chapter24Diseasesof theliver
Type of tumour
Dogs
Cats
Hepatocellular tumours:
HCC most common primary liver tumour in dogs
Hecognized but less common fthan biliary fumours
hepatocelular carcinoma(HCC)
(>50%).Most are massive，, some are nodular or
hepalocellular adenoma
diffuse.MR 22-61%.
(hepatoblastoma-very rare)
Adenoma uncommon andusually incidental
Bile duct tumours:
Biliary carcinomas 22-41% of malinant liver tumours.
Biliary adenomas are the most common primaryliver
biliary carcinoma (including
Someassivebutmanydifusernduar
tumour in cats (>50%).
cystadenocarcinoma)
56-88%.Adenomas uncommon and gallbladder
Biliary carcinoma most common malignant feline liver
biliary adenoma
tumoursveryrare
tumour
gall bladder tumours
Neuroendocrine tumours:
Verraredifrdlarndawa
Very rare but very aggressive
hepatic carcinoid
aggressive
Primaryhepatic sarcomas:
UncommonMost locally aggressive difuse or
Uncommon.Most localyaggressive andhighMR
haemangiosarcoma,
nodular and high MR
leiomyosarcoma and others
24.27
Primary liver tumours in cogs andcals.Note also thatsecondarymetastasesin the liveraremuchmorecommon
Primarymalignantlivertumours areusuallyseen in
older animals(mean age 10-12years).The types of
primarytumourrecognized in theliverindogs and cats
are outlined inFigure 24.27.There isno obvious sex
predispositionreported exceptforcaninebiliarycarci-
nomas,whicharemorecommoninbitchesinseveral
studies.Canine malignant tumoursmaybemassive,
whichpresentasasolitary,largemassconfinedtoone
lobe;diffusewhichdescribesdiffuseinvolvement of
alliverlobes;ornodularinwhich there ismultifocal
diseasewithinvolvementof several lobes.Thediffuse
with a highermetastaticrate than themassiveforms.
Haemangiosarcomas in the livermaybeprimary or
secondary,andsometimestheoriginisdifficulttoascer
tain if multiple organsare involved,although theright
24.28
Gross post-mortem appearance of liver from a
2-year-old Husky, which had just a 7-day history
Secondarytumoursarecommonlyrecognized inthe
of anorexa,vomiting and asctes withmarked elevationof
liverbecauseof itsexcellent blood andlymphaticsupply
liver enzymes and bile acids.The final histolog cal
and reticuloendothelialfunction.Metastases have been
diagnosis was poorly diffcrentiated sarcoma,which hac
estimated tobe2.5timesmorecommon thanprimary
probably criginated in the spleen.
tumoursinthe liverof dogs.These includeparticularly
Diagnostic imaging, particularly ultrasonography,
haematopoietic tumours(suchas lymphoma)and,less
is veryhelpful in identifying a hepaticmass and also in
commonly,leukaemias,histiocytictumours and mast
celltumoursandmetastasesfromotherorgans,suchas
checking for metastases.Malignanthepatic tumours
commonlymetastasize to theperitoneum andlocal
pancreas,mammary glands and GI tract.
lymphnodes,and less commonly to the lungs.lt is
Diagnosis
importanttotakebothrightandleftlateralthoracic
The presenting clinical signs and laboratory findingsof
radiographsinall animalswith livertumourstocheck
livertumoursareindistinguishablefromthefindingsin
forpulmonary metastases.A thorough abdominal ul-
anyprimary liver disease.About half of affected ani-
trasoundexaminationshouldalsobeundertakento
malsmayhavepalpable hepatomegalyorlivermasses
checkforevidence of metastases(see Chapter 3).
onabdominalpalpationand thesewill beparticularly
obvious in dogs with‘massive’tumours.However,at
veryimportant not tomakeapresumptive diagnosis on
least50%ofcatswithliver tumoursshownoclinical
ultrasonographic appearance alone,as this is non-
signs at all.On clinical pathology,elevation in liver
specific.Insome cases,fineneedle aspiratesmaybe
enzymes and bile acids,and a mild anaemia and
diagnosticbut in others they maybedifficult to inter-
neutrophilia are common but non-specific findings.
pret,particularlywithbenignhepatocellular tumours
Jaundice is uncommon but can occur.Hypoglycaemia
wherethecellsmaylookindistinguishable fromnormal
is a notable findingparticularlyin dogs andespecially
hepatocytes.Ultrasound-guided'core'biopsy is usu-
in those with'massive'tumours.Theblood glucosecan
ally diagnostic,or alternatively biopsy samples may
be lowenoughto causeclinical signsof weakness and
be taken at laparoscopyor laparotomy.In the case
collapse in these cases.
ofan apparently single,massive lesion the clinician
265
Chapter 24 Diseases of the liver
may elect to praceed straight to excisional biopsy.
Treat the underlying cause where possible
Coagulation times and platelet counts should be
Slow the progression of disease where possible
checked prior to any form of biopsy, although it is
Allow hepatic regeneration
unusual for these tobe prolonged with prirmary tumours.
Allaw hepatic *rest' (don't over-work the liver)
However, coagulation times can be very significantly
Manage the clinical signs and complications of
and dangerously prolanged in diffuse hepatic infil-
the disease; particularly hepatic encephalopathy
tration with lymphoma or other diffuse secondary
in congenital and acquired PSSs and
tumours, and a biopsy should not be considered in
gastroduodenal ulceration and ascites in animals
these cases until clotting factors have been replen-
with cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
ished with a plasma transfusion.
 In addition, it is important to remember that· many
Treatment and prognosis
drugs undergo hepatic metabolism or are potentially
Treatment of primary hepatic tumours relies on surgi-
hepatotoxic, so careful consideration should be given
cal removal if they are resectable. This is advisable
to the use of any drug in an animal with liver disease 
even with benign tumours, including biliary adenomas
(see Figure 24.16).
in cats,as there is same limited evidence that thay may
undergo malignant transformation. Treatment of dif-
 Diet and liver disease
fuse, nodular and metastasized tumours is difficult.
When treating any chronic liver disease, it is important
 Primary hepatic tumours generally show a poor re-
to think diet first before drugs. Careful dietary manage-
sponse to chemotherapy, and radiotherapy is not rec-
ment of these animals is essential as the liver is central
Ommended as normal liver tissue is very radiosensitive.
to metabolism. All of the portal blood passes through
 Prognosis therefore depends on how easily resect-
the liver first (unless there is a congenital or acquired
ablethetumouris andhow malignantitis. The single and
 PSS) so the food absorbed has an immediate effect on
massive tumours, which are completely resectable,
the liver. A general consideration of dietary manage-
generally have a good prognosis whereas the diffuse,
ment of liver disease is given in the Figure 24.25.
nodular malignant tumours carry a poor prognosis.
As with drug therapy, the diet should be tailored to
the individual animal rather than simply reaching for a
Hepatic nodular hyperplasia
tin of manufactured diet, considering carefully which
This is a benign condition oi unknown aeticiogy recog-
diet to use and whether to add extra protein (e.g. as
nized in plder dogs. The incidence increases with age
cottage cheese in dogs) or extra carbohydrate. The
and reportedly 70-100% of dogs of 14 years of age or
effectiveness of dietary management from the clinical
alder have some hepatic nodular hyperplasia on post-
fesponse of tne animai (e.g. reduced clinical signs of
mortem examination. Based on gross and ultrasono-
 hepatic encephalopathy, reduced ascites) should be
graphic appearance it can easily be confused with
 monitored and bodyweight and serum total protein and
more serious conditions, particularly hepatic neopla-
albumin measured regularly.
sia and regenerative nodules in cirrhosis (see Chap-
ter 3). Nodular hyperplasia is not always visible cn
Drug therapy in chronic liver disease
ultrasound examination as it may look very similar to
Selection of apprapriate therapy in each case relies on
normal parenchyma.
addressing the aims of treatment in a way which is
Hyperplastic nodules also often cause an increase
tailored to the individual animal and disease. General
in ALP levels, which is usually moderate (2.5-3 times
guidelines for treatment of chronic liver disease are
the upper limit of the reference range) but can be as
outlined below. These are based more on the anecdo-
high as 10-i4 times normal, and can lead to an
tal experience of veterinary hepatologists than on
erroneous suspicion of more severe liver disease or
 published clinical trials, of which there are very few in
hyperadrenocorticism in older dogs. Bile acids and
dogs and cats. (The doses for drugs used in liver
bilirubin are usually normal but there may be a mild
disease are outlined in Chapter 28 and Appendix 1.)
elevation in hepatocellular enzymes, probably due to
cellular regeneration.
Treat the cause of the liver disease
 Nodular hyperplasia is often difficult to diagnose on
The cause of disease should be treated wherever
a core biopsy and a wedge biopsy is preferred. A core
possible. Biopsy may help define the cause but,
unfortunately in many cases of chronic liverdisease in
an endocrinopathy, causing further confusion with hy-
dogs, the cause is unknown. Two examples of treat-
peradrenocorticism in a dog with elevated ALP levels.
ing the cause are the use of copper chelators (peni-
Core biopsy also does not give such a good indication
cillamine or 2,2,2-tetramine) in Bedington Terriers
of hepatic architecture, making differentiation from
with copper storage disease, and antibiotics in cats
hepatomas difficult. No treatment is required for nodu-
with suppurative cholangitis.
lar hyperplasia as the condition is benign.
Attempt to slow the progression of the disease
This is one of the main aims in most cases of chronic
Treatment of chronic liver disease
hepatitis in dogs. lit requires a basic understanding of
the pathophysiology of the disease and a representa-
The basic aims of treatment are similar in any chronic
tive liver biopsy. The treatment used will depend on the
liver disease in dogs or cats and are to:
degree of inflammation and fibrosis present, combined
266
Chapter 24 Diseases of the liver
with the distribution in the liver and type of inflammatory
Coichicine: This is an alkaloid that binds tubulin and
cells present. in dogs with chronic liver disease, the
 has the potential to reverse or slow hepatic fibrosis. It
following drugs could be considered:
improves survival in human cirrhotics and there are
limited but good reports of its use in dogs (but no
Steroids
reponts in cats so it is best avoided in themj. Side-
Immune modulators
effects are uncommon in dogs but include bone mar-
Colchicine
row suppression and anorexia or diarrhoea; it is the
Zinc
latter which often limits its use in clinical cases.
Ursodeoxycholic acid
+
 Anti-oxidants.
Zinc: This has some antifibrotic action in addltion to its
other actions, and it is a useful addition to treatment or
Steroids: These are the most effective antifibrotic
 the diet of dogs with chronic hepatitis.
 agents and are indicated to slow down progression in
many cases of chronic hepatitis, but only if there is an
Ursodeoxychollc acid: Ursodeoxycholic acid is used
inflammatory infiltrate (or at least a pathological accu-
in both dogs and cats in an attempt to modulate the toxic
mulation of stellate cells) and nat if there is end-stage
bile acid pool. It is a hydrophilic bile acid which displaces
fibrosis and cirrhosis, when steroid use is unhelpful and
the toxic hydrophobic bile acids. It is also choleretic s0
can cause severe side-effects. Steroids have anti-
should be avoided in complete biliary obstruction (which 
inflammatory, immune-modulating and antifibrotic ef-
 Is rare in dogs and cats). Itis also immune-modulating (it
fects. They have a potent indirect antifibrotic action via
reduces immunoglobulin and interleukin production and
reducing prostaglandin (PG)/eucotriene producfion, a
expression of majorhistocompatibilty complex (MHC)-1
weak direct antifibrotic action via inhibiting mRNA and
ews ui esn joi pasuao iou si il (sairoojeday uo
enzymes, and an immune-modulating action via re-
shop ui Aiajes pue Aapim pesn uaeg sau l nng siewiue
ducing macrophage activity and lymphocyte antibody
and cats. However, there js only one published case
production. Steroid therapy is not indicated in ad-
report of its use. it is potentially indicated in any case of
vanced, bridging fibrosis or non-inflammatory fibrosis.
hepatitis, particularly if there is associated non-obstruc-
There are particular adverse effects of steroids in
tive biliary stasis. However, its use is not currently
liver disease: they increase protein catabolism; fluld
recommended in feline hepatic lipidosis.
retention; Gl ulceration and risk of infections and actu-
ally decrease survival time in humans with ascites; Gl
Anti-oxidants: These drugs and neutraceuticals, such
ulceration; or encephalopathy. Thus steroids should
as SAMe, sibilin (the active ingredient of silymarin,
be avoided or used with extreme care in animals with
extracted from milk thistle) and vitamin E can slow the
obvious portal hypertension. They may precipitate Gl
progression of disease by reducing oxidant damage.
ulceration, which in turn will precipitate acute encepha-
Metronidazole is also reported to have some anti-
lopathy as a result of blood in the intestinal lumen (a
oxidant activity. SAMe, which increases hepatic and
'high protein meal') and this may result in a downward
red blood cell glutathione levels, is widely available as
spiral from which the animal fails to recover. The dose
a nutraceutical for dogs and cats. The use of these
to use and length of treatment is unclear.
anti-oxidants appears to be safe although in general
Many clinicians recommend the use of immuno-
there is no firm evidence they improve quality of life or
 suppressive doses on the assumption that dogs have
survival. SAMe is particularly helpful in toxic hepat-
autoimmune hepafitis, yet which has not yet been
opathies in humans, such as phenobarbital-induced
shown to exist, whereas it might be more logicai to use
hepatopathy, and recent work suggests it might be
lower anti-inflammatory doses, as in human alcoholic
helpful in chronic and acute liver disease, and steroid 
cirrhosis. There are far too few published data in dogs
hepatopathies in dogs and cats. However, it is worth
to make a firm recommendation of dose. The author
noting that not all anti-oxidants are innocuous; for
usually starts with 1 mg/kg q24h and then gradually
example, it is best to avoid supplementing vitamin C
reduces the dose and frequency of dosing, but others
in liver disease as ascorbate may increase liver dam-
start as high as 2 mg/kg q24h. How long to treat is also
age by copper and iron.
'a problem. In humans, steroid therapy is continued for
6 months beyond remission but this is hard to assess
Treat the signs associated with the liver disease
in dogs because of steroid-induced liver enzymes and
 It is not helpful (and can be dangerous) to treat animals
in addition veterinary patients often have chronic dis-
with end-stage fibrosis and cirrhosis with steroids or
ease. Long-term, low dose, every other day therapy
other antifibrotic medications. However, it is still worth
would seem most logical in many dogs.
treating these animals with supportive symptomatic
therapy for the complications associated with their
Immune modulators: Other immune modulators,
 disease as they can often be maintained with a good
such as azathioprine (dogs only) and ciclosporin,
quality of life for a long period.
have occasionally been used, but in the absence of
 proof of the existence of autoimmune hepatitis in dogs 
 Symptomatic treatment &t Gl ulceratlon
-uaiod pue algeuosanb si aseasip seal u esn sar
associated with liver disease
tially dangerous and so they are best avoided. Aza-
thioprine can significantly inhibit hepatic regeneration
 Sucralfate is the mainstay of treatment of Gi
by inhibiting cell division.
ulceration due to portal hypertension
267
Chapter 24
Diseases of the liver
 Hg blockers may be used in addition (avoiding
References and further reading
cimetidine) although there is some evidence that
gastric pH is normal to increased in liver disease
Bunch SE, Johnson SE and Cullen JM (2001) ldiopathic noncirrhotic
so they may be unnecessary
portal hypertension in dogs: 33 cases (1982-1988). Journal of
the American Vaterinary Medical Association 218, 392-399
Frequent feeding of small, high quality meais will
 promote ulcer healing (these animals should not
hepatopathies,copperstorage hepatopathy, suppuralivehcpatilis,
granuiomatous nepatinls and idiopatnic hepatic librosis. in:
be starved).
StrombecksSmalAnimaGastroenterologyedWGGulford
al., pp 705-765. WB Saunders, Phlladelphla
Symptomatic treatment of ascites associated
Julmlnant hepatic failure. In Sirombeck's Smail Anima!
with liver disease
Gastroentcrofogy, ed. WG Guilford et al., pp. 654-705. WB
Saunders, Phlladelphia
 If blood albumin is low, then increasing dietary
CenterSA (2004) Understanding and treating feline hepatic ipidosis.
Waitham Focus 14, 12-2t
protein levels may be effective in controling
Center SA, Elston TH, Rowiand PH, Rosen DK, Reitz BL, Brunt JE,
 ascites, particularly if the animal does not have
Hadan I, House J, Bank S, Lynch LR, Dring LA and Levy JK
portal hypertension. If albumin levels have to be
ofdiazepamin11cats.JournaloftheAmericanVeteninary
increased quickly (e.g. prior to general
MedicalAssociation209,618-625
anaesthesia or surgery) a plasma transfusion 
Dayrell-Hart B, Steinberg SA, VanWinkle TJ and FarnbachGC (1991)
may be considered.
Journat of the American Vcterinary Medical Association 199,
 If blood albumin levels are normal but there is
1060-1066
concurrent portal hypertension, a staged 
Gillespie TN, Washabau RJ, Goldschmiot MH, Cullen JM, Rogala AR
and Breitschwerdt EB (2003) Detection of Bartonela henselac
approach should be adopted.
and Bartonela claridgeiae DNA in hepatic specimens from two
dogs withhepatic disease,Journat of the AmericanVetcrinary
Spironolactone is used alone initially as it
Medica! Ass0ciation 222, 47-51
Magulra PJ, Fettman MJ, Smith MO, Greco DS, Tumer AS, Walton JA
does not cause hypokalaemia and is
and Ogilvie GK (2000) Elfects of diet on pharmacokinetics of
generally the most effective diuretic to use in
phenobarbitalinhealthydogs.Journalof theAmerican Voterinary
Medica!Association 217,847-B52
liver disease. This is because the
March PA, Hilier A. Weisbrore SE, Mattoon JS, Johnson SE,
pathophysiology of ascites formation in liver
DiBartola SP and Brofman PJ (2004) Superficial necrolytic
disease involves activation of the renin-
dermalitisin1t cogs wilhahislory of phencbarbital administration
angiotensin-aldosterone system. It is not
 MeyerDJ. Thompson MB and SeniprDF (1997) Useofursodeoxychollc
licensed for use in dogs and cats and takes at
acid in a dog with chronic hepattis: cHects on serum hepatic tesis
Jeast 2-3 days to work; it can take weeks.
and endogenous bile acid composition. Journal of Veterinary
Internaf Medicine 11, 195-197
lf after2-3days, the ascites persists,furosemide
can be added but blood potassium levels must 
jo jauen rog uoeauo jaddoo tuiron buoj u paeoosse
copper storage disease in a Bedllngton terrlar. Journal of tha
be carefully monitored to avoid hypokalaemia-
American VeterinaryMedica!Association218,1593-1597
induced hepatic encephalopathy.
Thanm DH (2001) Hepatobiliary tumours. 1n: Sma/f Animal Clinical
Oncology,cdiion,dSJwithrowandEGMacEwen,pp327
Therapeutic paracentesis should be avoided
334.WB Saundars, Philadelphia
and be performed only if the ascites is life-
threatening or causing obvious discomfort
sulfonamidas in the dog. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology
and Therapeulics 27, 129-138
(i.e. the animal is very dyspnoeic due to
Ubbink Gl, Van den Ingh TS, Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V, Teske E. Van de
interference with movement of the diaphragm)
Broek J and RothuizenJ (200o) Population dynamics of inherited
and only then if a concurrent plasma
coppertoxicosisin Dutch Bedingtonlerrers(1977-1997). Journal
ofVeterinary internai Medicine 14,172-176
transfusion is given to maintain albumin
Van deSluisB,Rothuizenj,Pearson PL.Vanoost BAand Wimenga
levels. Otherwise, removal of the ascites may
C (2002) Idientification of a new copper metabolism gene by
result in a precipitous drop in blood albumin 
positional gloninginapurebred dog population. Human Molecuiar
Genetics 11,165-173
leveis followed by rapid refomation of the
Villiers E and Blackwood L (inpreparation) BSAVA Manual of Clinica!
ascites. This is because the diseased liver is
Palhology2dedition,BSAVA Publications,Gloucester
Williams PJ (1997) Decision making in the management of
 unable to make albumin quickly enough to
 portosystemic shunts. in Practice 19, 106-120
replace the loss. If the fall in blood protein
Watson PJ (2004a) The pathophyslolagy of ilyer disease part I:
levels is significant enough, the animal may
normal hatic stnucture and tunction.UKVet92631
develop pulmonary oedema and die.
understanding of the aetiology, progression and treatment.
Vaterinary Journal 167, 228-241
Webb CB, Twedt DC and Meyer DJ (2002) Copper-associated liver
Management of hepatic encephalopathy
disease in Dalmatlans: arevlew of 10 dogs(1998-2001). Journa!
This topic is reviewed in Chapter 15.
of Veterinary tnternat Medicine 16, 665-668
268
Diseases of the biliary system
Jan Rothuizen
Anatomy and physiology of the
duodenal mucosa) produces a gradual release of bile
biliary system
over several hours. However, bile enters the duode-
num only when permitted to do so by periodic relax-
Bile system
 ations of the sphincter of Oddi. Gall bladder emptying
 The liver detoxifies or catabolizes many exogenous
is very variable and almost never complete. An empty
and endogenous compounds, and many are removed
 gall biadder on ultrasonography is definitely an abnor-
fron the body by excretion into the bile. The biliary
mal finding. Morphine-related drugs cause complete
system is a branched structure that transports bile from
each individual liver cell. The hepatocytes lie in cell
plates, which radiate around the central vein and
 der usually an artefact: only dilatation of the larger bile
connect central and portal regions of the liver acinus.
 ducts or the common bile dict indicates an abnormal-
Blood flows from the portai triads to the central region
ity, such as cholangitis or bile duct obstruction.
within the sinusoids, while bile flows in the opposite
direction. The lateral membranes connecting adjacent
Bile flow
liver cells contain a specialized region; the canalicular
Bile flow is driven by constant bile production in the
membrane. The space between canalicular membranes
smaller branches of the biliary tree pushing the fluid
of adjacent cells is sealed by tight junctions and forms
 already formed into the larger ducts and the gall bladder.
the smallest branches of the bile system, the canaliculi.
About half of the bile production depends on the active
This excretory region of the hepatocyte membrane
excretion of bile acids by the hepatocytes into the
encompasses 15% of the cell surface.
canaliculi Bile acids are produced by the liver from
 Bile is excreted by the hepatocytes into the canal-
cholesterol as a major route of cholestercl excretion.
iculi, whlch transport bile to the portal tracts where they
The two acids formed are cholic acid and, to a lesser
enter the canals of Hering. These short connecting
extent, chenodeoxycholic acid (the so-called primary
ducts are lined in part by hepatocytes and in part by.
 bile acids). These bile acids are conjugated with glycine
cuboidal cholangiocytes, and drain into the smallest
 or taurine before excretion, rendering them hydrophilic
branches of the intra-hepatic bile ducts, which. are
and thereby facilitating their retention in the guf lumen, 
completely lined by cholangiocytes. From ihe smallest
where they aid fat digestion and absorption. Active
bile ductules the bile flows to the interlobular ducts, the
 excretion induces a huge concentration gradient with a
septal ducts and via the hilar ducts of each liver lobe
ratio of approximately 2000:1 between the concentra-
into the common bile duct. The common bile duct runs
tions in plasma and those in bile. The resulting osmotic
to the duodenum some 3-6 cm from the pyiorus,
 gradient induces a passive excretion of water into the
depending on the size of the animal. The junction of the
canaliculi. The magnitude of the bile flow is therefore
common bile duct and the duodenum near the head of
 directly related to excretion of bile acids.
fhe pancreas, Vater's papilla, is surrounded by the
Conjugated bile acids in the intestines may be
muscular sphincter of Oddi. While dogs have separate
 transfomed by intraluminal bacteria in two ways: by
openings for the bile and pancreatic ducts, in cats the
deconjugation and by 7o-hydroxylation. In the latter
pancreatic duct and the common bile duct share a
common duct entering the papilla.
 and lithocholate are produced from cholic and cheno-
The gall bladder is connected to the common bile
deoxycholic acid, respectively. Deconjugation renders
duct via the short cystic duct and is the main storage
the bile acids hydrophobic and leads to rapid absorp-
site of bile, where it is concentrated approximately ten-
tion by passive ciffuslon; in contrast conjugates are
fold. Bile is also concentrated in the larger bile ducts. in
actively absorbed only in the ileum. Lithocholic acid,
healthy animals, the completely filled gall bladder con-
whichis hepatotoxicand may induce severe cholestasis,
tains around 1 ml of bile per kilogram of bodyweight.
is poorly absorbed. The small reabsorbed fraction of
Less than half of the bile produced is stored and
lithocholic acid is sulphated (tertiary sulpholithocholic
acid) in the liver, in which form it is not reabsorbable
via the common bile duct and secreted intermittently
 during the next enteric cycie. Reabsorbed bile acids
into the duodenum. Stimulation of the muscular wall of
 are very efficiently cleared by the liver from the portal
the gall bladder to contract by cholecystokinin (from the
blood (>90% in each passage) aithough this is less
269
Chapter 25 Diseases of thc biliary system
efficient for unconjugated bile acids. Aill bile acids are
subsequently re-excreted into the canaliculi, affer
cells die and this always results in backflow of bile into
reconjugation, if required. Bile acids reabsorbed from
the space of Disse and, with the hepatic lymph, back into
the intestine (of which 60% is by active absorption)
the bloodstream. Notably, enzymes released by lepto-
account for 90% of the bile aclds excreted by the liver;
spiral organisms may destroy tight junctions of multiple
therefore, only a small fraction is lost from the
hepatocytes and produce severe intra-hepatic chole-
enterohepatic circulation despite a cycling frequency
stasis, and therefore dogs with leptospirosis nearly
of 10-15 per day. The lost fraction is replenished by de
always become jaundiced. However, this infection does
novo synthesis in the liver.
not lead to hepatocyte death, although the cells do lose
An amount of bile production approximately equal
intercellular contact, thereby stimulating cell division;
to the bile acid dependent fraction also occurs following
cases of leptospirosis are characterized by multiple
active secretion of Na+ into the canaliculi. This secre-
mitotic figures in hepatocytes as a consequence. Intra-
tion ls stimulated by barbiturates and insulin, and
hepatic cholestasis may aiso be caused by diffuse
swelling of hepatocytes, such as in feline hepatic lipid-
and in hypothyroidism. Finally, approximately 30% of
osis. Frequent causes of Intra-hepatic cholestasis are
the bile is produced not by hepatocytes but by the
infiltration by inflammatory cells (e.g. hepattis), tumour
epithelium of the intra-hepatic bile ducts, which se-
cells (e.g. malignant lymphoma) or fibrcus tissue (e.g.
cretes water in combination with bicarbonate and chlo-
chronic liver disease) in or around the portal areas,
ride in response to gastrin and secretin stimulation.
which hinders flow of bile from the canaliculi into the
ductules. All these factors may be present in different
combinations, so that in fact there are very few cases of
Pathophysiology of biliary
 liver disease without intra-hepatic cholestasis.
dysfunction
Extra-hepatic cholestasis
Cholestasis
Obstruction of the extra-hepatic bile ducts is rare in
 Cholestasis is a reduction in.bile flow in the biliary tract
dogs, but less so in cats. In dogs the cause nearly
and can be caused by intra- or extra-hepatic obstruc-
always resides in the distal comman bile duct near the
tion. Most clinical cases have intra-hepatic cholestasis
duodenal papilla. Acute pancreatitis or tumours of the
but, because of the reserve capacity of the liver,
pancreas or the duodenum are the most common
jaundice occurs only when the intra-hepatic disease
cause; gall stones are infrequent. The same causes
involves the entire liver, such as in hepatitis. Therefore,
also occur in cats. However, the most frequent cause
since intra-hepatic cholestasis most often anly partially
in cats is inflammation of the (intra- and extra-hepatic)
reduces bile flow, most cases do not become lcteric. In
bile ducts. In particular chronic lymphocytic cholangitis
contrast, obstruction of the common bile duct (see
may cause decreased bile flow due to increased vis-
below), while less common, is likely to obstruct the
cosity of bile. Hyperplasia of the biliary epithielium,
entire bile flow, often leading to icterus.
which may be caused by progestins, can also cause
Cholestasis leads to accumulation of bile compo-
cholestasis. Cholangiocarcinomas may also obstruct
 nents in the liver, including the toxic bile acids such as
 the bile flow; these tumours tend to spread diffusely
lithocholic acid. The toxic effects of these bile acids are
throughout the biliary tract and produce severe block-
normally not exerted because in healthy animals their
age of bile flow. Rarely the extra-hepatic bile ducts may
concentrations are very low. When they accumulate,
also become incarcerated in a diaphragmatic rupture
however, there may be necrosis of hepatocytes with
Or pericardio-peritoneal diaphragmatic hernia, result-
concurrent inflammatory reaction. Hepatic inflamma-
ing in blockade of the bile flow.
tion is common whenever there is cholestasis.
In extra-hepatic cholestasis the large bile ducts
Liver histology in extra-hepafic cholestasis reveais
 become dilated and tortuous, which is clearly visible on
typical changes in both dogs and cats. Acute extra-
ultrasound examination. However, cats with chronic
hepatic cholestasis is characterized by enlarged portal
lymphocytic cholangitis also have such abnormal bile
areas with oedema and infiltration of neutrophils into
ducts. The difference may become apparent only with
the stroma. The more chronic the cholestasis, the more
 histological examination of a liver biopsy sample. In
proliferation of bile ducts becomes noticeable in the portal
extra-hepatic cholestasis the gall bladder may be dis-
areas. Chronic cases also show portal fibrosis, infiltration
tended but in chronic cases the bile is concentrated,
by macrophages loaded with brown bile pigment, and
leaving a small amount of viscous uncoloured fluid
inflammatory reactionwithlymphocytes and plasmacells.
("white bile') in the gallbladder, which may also be of
Invery chroniccases, characteristicconcentriconion-ring
normal or reduced size.Since drugs, such as morphine
shaped areas of periductal fbrosis are present.
derivatives, cause closure of the sphincter of Oddi, an
'overfilled' gall bladder is usually of no importance
Intra-hepatic cholestasis
when seen during anaesthesia.
The hepatocytes lie in cel plates that separate sinusoj-
 dal blood flow from canalicular bile flow. Intra-hepatic
Jaundice
cholestasis may occur due to leakage of the tight
Bilirubin is the plgment that causes jaundice (see
junctions that separate canaliculi from sinusoids. This 
Chapter 14). It is the normal end product of haem
occurs in all liver diseases in which hepatocytes are
catabolism. In healthy animals the liver has a huge
darmaged for any reason (e.g. toxin, virus or drug
reserve capacity to handle bilirubin; therefore, when
270
Chapter25Diseasesof thebiliary system
there is increased production(haemolysis) jaundice is
Clinical signs
not theimmediateresult.Jaundicedue tohaemolysis
occursonlywhenerythrocytedegradationcausessuch
Thelargerbileductsandgallbladderhavearich
severehypoxia thatthecentrolobular liver cellsbe-
autonomous innervationandwhen damageresults
come necrotic,resulting in intra-hepatic cholestasis.
frominflammation,tumoursorothercauses,orwhen
The combinationof increased bilirubin production and
there isdistension of the biliary tree,this stimulation
cholestasis then causesjaundice,whichlikeallother
typicallyresults innausea.Thus,diseaseof thelarger
forms of icterus iscaused bybothconjugated (direct)
bile ductsorgallbladderoftenleadstoanorexia,which
and unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin.Differentiation of
maybevariable indegreeovertime in chroniccases.
directandindirectbilirubinbythevandenBerghtest
Vomitingisafrequentsigninmanycases,especiallyin
thereforehasno clinical relevance in dogs and cats.
acute biliarydiseases.Anorexia and vomiting cause
weight loss in chronic conditions.Jaundice is not
tiononurine dipsticksinordertodifferentiateicterusof
necessarilypresent,especiallywhenbiliaryobstruc
cholestasis from thatofhaemolysishasbeenused in
tionisincompleteandonlyinthoserarepatientswith
the past,but is of no value.The concentration of
completecommonbileductobstructionwilltherebe
acholicfaeces.Spontaneoushaemorrhagic diathesis
tors, such as intestinal bacteria,hepatic clearance
associatedwithvitaminKdeficiencymostcommonly
developssecondarytofatmalabsorption,particularly
gen inurine isalsorapidlyoxidized tourobilin,which
incats,andissometimesassociatedwithisolatedbile
does not participatein the Ehrlichreaction.Bilirubin
duct obstruction.
itself may alsobe excreted in the urine by healthy male
dogswithoutanycholestasisorhaemolysissincerenal
tubularcells have all the enzymes necessary forpro-
Diagnosis
duction and conjugation of bilirubin.
Abnormally lowamountsofbilirubinand itsblack-
Biochemical investigation of cholestasis
brown breakdown pigments infaecesmay occur as a
Cholestasisischaracterizedbyincreased plasma con
result of cholestasis.Lightly coloured (yellow or grey)
centrations of bile acids,alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
faecesduetoabsenceofpigmentsisseenonlyin very
severe cholestasis (Figure 25.1). Such acholic faeces
meters,theenzymesare specificforboth intra-and
almostinvariably indicatecompleteextra-hepaticbile
extra-hepatic cholestasis;bile acids are increased in
cholestasis,portosystemicshunting and whenthere is
dice.The only intra-hepatic form of cholestasis that may
reduced hepatocyte function foranyreason.Also the
be so severe that it mimics complete extra-hepaticbile
metabolismof bile acids(asreflected by thepostpran-
ductobstruction(sometimes also withacholicfaeces)is
dial concentration)isnotessentiallydifferentbetween
destructive cholangitis,whichis typicallyahypersensi-
cholestaticdiseasesandportosystemic shunting.Se-
tivityreactiontosulphonamides.It shouldbenoted that
rum bile acids,while very sensitive for assessing
the absence ofacholicfaeces doesnotexcludeobstruc-
cholestasis, are therefore not very specific.Of the en-
tionof the common bile duct(ordestructive cholangitis).
zymesGGTisaveryspecificindicator of cholestasis,
Conjugated bilirubin inplasma maybind covalently
but isnotassensitive as the total bileacid concentration.
(irreversibly) to albumin.This biliprotein complex can
ALPis also sensitive but islessspecific since it resides
be clearedfromthecirculationonlywhenalbumin,with
inmany tissuesotherthan thehepatobiliary system.In
a half-life of about 2weeks.is catabolized.lcterus
dogs,ALP from the liver hasa very long half-life in
therefore doesnot alwaysreflect the current ongoing
contrast to isoenzymes from other tissues, except the
state of hepaticfunction,afactorthatshouldbeconsid
skeleton,sothathighALPlevelsindogswithoutskeletal
eredwhen interpreting the testresults during both
diseasescan usuallyberelated tohepatobiliarydis-
diagnosis and treatment.
ease.The steroid-induced isoenzyme ofALP,which is
produced in the liver of dogs inreaction toincreased
Acholic facccs.Pale
25.1
exposuretosteroids,hasanequallylonghalf-lifebutno
faeceslacking bile
relationwith cholestasis.Cats donot producea steroid-
pigments passed bya jaundiced
induced isoenzyme ofALP.However,the feline liver
dog witha completcbile duct
containsmuchlessALP thanthe liverofdogsandithas
obstructicncaused oya parcreatic
carcinoma.(Courtesy of Edward
amuchshorterhalf-life,and thusALPisnotasensitive
Hall)
test in cats.Therefore,for thereasons outlined,when
abnormal ALPisobservedincatsthisisveryspecificfor
thepresence of significant liverdisease.
Diagnostic imaging
Ultrasonography
method to examine thepresenceand natureofbiliary
disorders.Only the larger intra-hepatic ducts and the
extra-hepatic ducts,the common bile duct,the gall
271
Chapter 25 Diseases of the biliary system
bladder and the cystic duct (which connects the gall
Calcification of the wall of bile ducts may occur
bladder with the common bile duct) can be evaluated.
when thereis chronic stasis of bileorinflammation,and
Pure intra-hepatic cholestasis, which is the most com-
is visible both on ultrasonography and routine radio-
 mon form of cholestasis, can only be evaluated bio-
chemically and histologically.
ways localized in the wall of the biliary tree and indicate
Ultrasonography is the first and most important
chronlc biliary disease or congenital cystic lesions
method for differentiating intra-hepatic from extra-
arising from the bile ducts. Gas in the biliary tract is a
hepatic cholestasis (see Chapter 3). The difference is
 clear sign of severe bacterial infection and is immedi-
that with extra-hepatic cholestasis the common bile
ately obvious with ultrasonography and radiography.
duct is dilated, whereas it is not in patients with intra-
hepatic cholestasis. When there is chronic obstruction
Scintigraphy
of the extra-hepatic bile flow, the common bile duct and
Nuclear imaging is available in specialized centres. The
larger intra-hepatic ducts become irregular and tortu-
bile flow, and therefore the degree of cholestasis, can be
ous. Therefore, ultrasonography may give clues to the
 measured by analysing the hepatic uptake and transport
 presence and also the chronicity of extra-hepatic bile
time to the gall bladder of a s9mTc-labelled iminodiace-
duct obstruction. lt may be difficult to distinguish a
tate derivative. For quantitation of the bile flow, the
dilated common bile duct from larger blood vessels,
sphincter of Oddi should be closed by administration of
such as the portal vein, but the difference Is always
methadone so that activity is quantitatively collected and
clear with Doppler examination, which will demon-
measured in the gall bladder. lf patency of the opening
strate the virtual absence of flow in the bile ducts. If all
ofthe common bile ductinto the duodenum is examined,
the bile ducts are distended, the cause of extra-hepatic
the same label can be used without methadone so that
obstruction lies nearly always in the region of Vater's
flow of activity into the duodenum can be visualized.
papilla near the duodenum. Common causes, such as
tumours of the pancreas or the intestinal wall, and gall
Fine needle aspiration
stones, canoften be found with careful ultrasonographic
Sampling of bile can be very informative and is often
 evaluation of this region. Ultrasonography also permits
the only way to diagnose cholecystitis in dogs or
confirmation by fine needle aspiration of such lesions.
 neutrophilic cholangitis in cats. Sampled bifie should
In cats the most common disease of the larger bile
ducts is not extra-hepatic obstruction, but inflamma-
tumour celis or bacteria, and be cultured for growth and
tion. Lymphocytic chalangitis is usually a very chronic
sensitivity testing of bacteria. Anaerobic as well as
disease that leads to distension and irreguiar tortuosity
aerobic culture should also be performed in order not
of the common bile ducts and larger intra-hepatic bile
 to overlook Clostridia or other anaerobes. Some bac-
ducts. This ultrasonographic picture cannot be distin-
teria are very hard or impossible to culture. lf such
guished from thatof extra-hepatic bile duct obstruction.
bacteria (e.g. Helicobacter) are suspected a suitable
The histological changes, however, are very different
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test may reveal their
so that in cats the diagnosis of such disorders is never
presence, and may even be performed semi-quantita-
 complete without histological examination of the liver.
tively in speclalized laboratories.
It should be noted that the gall bladder is often nat
 Centesis from the gall bladder can be done without 
enlarged in cases of extra-hepatic bile duct obstruc-
risk when there is no common bile duct obstruction. A
tion; only dilatation of the common bile duct is relevant.
thin needle (20 or 22 gauge) is required, and puncture
Not all extra-hepatic bile duct or gall bladder dis-
 is performed under ultrasound guidance. There is no
eases are visible with ultrasonography. This is espe-
need to approach the gali biadder through the adjacent
cially true for neutrophilic cholangitis in cats and
liver, as is sometimes advocated, in orderto compress
 cholecystitis in dogs. In these disorders the gall bladder
the gall bladder wall and stop possible bleeding. The
wall may be thicker than normal due to oedema, which
gall bladder can be punctured in the corpus at any
can be seen as a black line in the wall. However, this is
convenient site and several millitres of bile aspirated.
not pathognomonic, because gall bladder oedema can
Sedation or (local) anaesthesia is not needed because
also be present in dogs with hepatitis, and in addition it
the thin needle puncture is tolerated well. Only cats that
is often absert in dogs and cats with chalecystitis or
are resistant to restraint in general may require seda-
cholangitis. The liver histology is not specific in many of
tlon. Whereas puncture with a thin needle is without
these cases with only non-specific reactive hepatitis:
risk, puncture with a thick needle should be avoided.
 cats with neutrophilic cholangitis may histologically show
The gall bladder is richly innervated and trauma with a
neutrophils in the wall and lumen of the portal bile ducts.
thick (e.g. liver biopsy) needle may produce vagotonia
Fine neadle aspiration of bile from the gall bladder with
and shock within 10-15 minutes.
cytological and bacteriological examination may be the
only way to diagnose cholangitis and cholecystitis.
In many healthy dogs and cats the bile does not
Biliary diseases
appear as a completely clear, hypoechoic fluid on
ultrasound examination. It may contain multiple very
Strictly interpreted, intra-hepatic cholestasis is a biliary
small crystals composed of cholesterol and bilirubin,
disorder associated with many hepatic diseases (see
without any significance. This sediment or 'sludge'
Chapter 24) but only diseases of the larger bile ducts
is often readily visible on ultrasonography (but not
and gall bladder are dealt with in this chapter. Destruc-
with radiography).
tive cholangitis is the only strictly intra-hepatic biliary
272
Chapter 25 Diseases of the biliary system
disease discussed since it has apurebiliarypatho-
Verychronicbileductobstructionsmaybeaccom-
genesis,althoughthereareadditional repercussionsin
panied by somuch fibrosis thatfibrous connections
the hepaticparenchyma.
between portalareasoccur.Thisbiliaryfibrosis(strictly
There havebeendifferentnames anddiagnostic
there isnodisruptionof the architectureso that the
criteriatodiagnose anddescribehepatobiliary dis-
termcirrhosis is incorrect)may giverise to portal
eases of dogs and cats.However,under the auspices
hypertension,ascites,portosystemic collateral circu-
of theWorld Small Animal VeterinaryAssociationinter-
lation and hepatic encephalopathy.Biliaryfibrosis is
nationalstandardsforthenomenclatureanddiagnos-
rare and incurable.
tic criteria ofhepatobiliary diseases have been
Diagnosis
usedhere.
Biochemicalinvestigation:Bile ductobstruction
Extra-hepaticbile ductobstruction
causeshyperbilirubinaemia and isusuallycharacter-
Obstructionof thecommonbileductoccursrarely
izedbymarked increasesinserumALPactivityand
in dogs.The site of thelesion isusually atthe junction
hypercholesterolaemia. Milder increases in ALT are
of the common bile duct and the duodenum,near
seen,andreflecthepatocyte damagecaused byaccu-
Vater'spapilla.
mulation of toxicbile salts.
Clinical signs
Ultrasonography:The diameter of the common bile
The extra-hepaticbileductobstruction must becom-
ductisverysmall,sothelesionaccludingitmayalsobe
pleteornearlycompleteforclinical signstodevelop.
verysmall,yetstillcausecompleteblockadeof thebile
Since there isno oralmostnobileflowleft,there is
flow.Therefore it isnot alwayspossible toidentifythe
severe icterus inmost cases.Bile duct dilatation is
underlyinglesion with ultrasonography.
painful andmay cause nausea,soa decreased appe-
titeandvomiting arecommon.Theremayalso be
Treatment
distinct polyuria andpolydipsia.
Medical management: Surgical intervention should
Pathogenesis
be preceded byhaemostasis testing,sincevitamin K
There are many potential causes of common bile duct
deficiencymaylead toa coagulopathy.Thiscan be
obstruction(Figure 25.2).The most frequent causes of
correctedby administeringvitaminK1.
obstructionaretumoursof thepancreasor theduode-
num.Pancreaticcarcinomastendtodisseminatetothe
Surgical management:lt istheoreticallypossible to
livervia theportal system.Bileductcarcinomas are
perform a salvage procedure,cholecystoduodeno-
usually highlymalignant andspreadrapidlyin theliver
stomy.This technique permitsbile toflow to the duode-
via thelymphaticsystemandbiliarytree.
num througha directconnection madebetween the
Cause
Relative frequency
Treatment
Outcome
Extraluminal compression
Pancreatitis
Most frequent
Oftenresolvesspontaneouslysurgeyifpersistent
Relatively good
Pancreatic carcinoma
Frequent
Surgery
Mostlypoor
Duodenal lymphoma
Less frequent
Chemotherapy
Poor
Duodenal fumours (e.g.carcinoma)
Less frequent
None
Poor
Bileduct carcinoma
Infrequent
None
Poor
Diaphragmatic rupture with incarceration
Infrequent
Surgery
Good
of bile duct
Miscellaneous:
Rare
Duodenal foreign body
Surgery
Gocd
Severe duodenitis
Steroids
Guarded
Intraluminal obstruction
Gallstones
Less frequent
Surgery
Good
Mucinous hyperplasia (progestins)
Antibotics;stop progestins
Guarded
Veryinfrequent
Stricture of common bile duct
Secondary to trauma,inflammation
Very infrequent
Surgery
Relativelygood
Congenital atresia
Very infrequent
Surgery
Relativelygood
25.2
Causes of extra-hepatic cholestasis indogs,withrelative frequency andprognosis.
273
Chapter25Diseasesof the biliary system
gall bladderand the duodenum.This approach is quite
Treatment
complexand shouldprobablybereserved fornon-
Treatment is surgical andsuccessful insome cases.
malignantconditions,suchasstrictureof thecommon
Ruptures of the bile duct may be repaired, but in cases
bile duct.Thecomplications aftersurgery arerecurrent
wherethehilarduct hasbeen disrupted it maybeeasier
ascendinginfectionsvia therelativelywide intestinal
toremove the entire lobe.lf spontaneousruptureof the
connection,so that such animals require antibiotic
gallbladderisthecause,cholecystectomyisindicated
therapywitheachnewepisodeofpostoperativecholan-
toachievecompleterecovery.Antibiotictreatmentis
gitis(as indicated by anorexia,nausea,vomiting or
indicated，eitherwithamoxicillinandmetronidazoleor
fever).Inductionof increasedbileflowbymedication
based onresults ofculture and sensitivity testing.
with ursodeoxycholicacid aftersurgery(15mg/kg/day
Cholecystitis
intwo doses)may beheipful toreduce theriskot
Cholecystitis is a relatively rare condition in dogs.
ascendingbacterial infections.Ursodeoxycholic acid
medication is contraindicatedin thepresenceofbile
Clinical signs
duct obstruction.
Cholecystitismaybea verychronicdiseasebutinmost
cases itpresents asan acute diseasewithnausea,
Bile ductrupture
vomiting,abdominalpain,peripheral leucocytosis and
Rupture of the extra-hepaticbile systemmayoccur as
a highneutrophil count.Jaundice is oftenpresent,but
aresultof trauma,orduetoweakeningof thewallof the
not inall cases since the common bileduct is usually
gall bladder(rarely the common bileduct)bynecrotiz-
patent.Thereactionto endotoxinsfrom the gallbladder
ing inflammation or tumour.Inflammationleading to
producesanon-specificreactivehepatitiswith intra
spontaneousrupture isoftenrelated to thechronic
hepatic cholestasis,whichis one cause of jaundice in
presenceofcholeliths.Mucocoeleof thegall bladder
these cases.Chaleliths or inspissated bile may also
may occur in older dogs and lead to rupture in about
cause commonbileductobstruction with icterus.
halfof the cases.Rupture of thebile system can be
causedby trauma at anyage.In most traumatic cases,
Pathogenesis
oneof thehilar ducts(drainingbile from an entire liver
Theexactpathogenesis of cholecystitis is unknown.
lobeintothecommonbileduct)isdisrupted from the
Certainlyobstructionof bileflow,mucocoele andpres-
commonbile duct.
enceof choleliths ortumours are inciting factors,but
these are not present in many cases.After chole-
Clinical signs
cystoduodenostomy,thewidened connection of the
In all cases of bile duct rupture,bile accumulates in
bilesystemwith the duodenum enhances theriskof
theperitoneal cavity.The high concentration of bile
ascending infection.Cholecystitis may be a severe
acidcausesa severe chemical peritonitiswithin a
disease,and necrotizing and emphysematous
inflammations are accompanied by signsof sepsis.
few days.The dogbecomes severely jaundicedbe-
Thesecasesmayeasilydevelopspontaneousrupture
causebilirubin isreabsorbed bytheperitoneum.
Feverand asciteswithdistensionof the abdominal
of the gall bladder and bileperitonitis(see above).
cavity areregular findings.Peritonitis is often com-
Diagnosis
plicatedbybacterial infectioncausedbyClostridium,
The diagnosismaybemadewithultrasonography and
Escherichiacoli,Pseudomonas,Enterobacterorother
cytological orbacteriological evaluation of bile.Any
species of bacteria.
suspicionof anabnormalgallbladderwall atultrasono-
graphy is an indication for fine needle aspiration.How-
Diagnosis
ever,even when ultrasonography shows no abnor-
Diagnosis ofa bile ductrupture is easybecause
malities,cholecystitiscannotbeexcluded.Thepresence
abdominocentesisrevealsfreeabdominalfluid,which
of therelevant signs andleucocytosiswithhighserum
is bile（Figure25.3).After 1or2days,the severe
liverenzymesorbile acidsmay beagoodindication to
inflammatoryreactionwithleucocytesandhaemor-
takea bile sample.Histologyof a liverbiopsysample
rhageresultsina dirty,turbid,brownfluid thatmaybe
mayreveal neutrophilicinflammationof theportal bile
mistaken as indicating intestinal rupture. Culture and
ducts,but the changes may be non-specific.
cytologyare indicatedtodeterminewhether thereis a
Treatment
potential bacterial infection.
The treatment is with antibiotics.The combination of
amoxicillinwithmetronidazoleisthepreferred initial
Bile
treatmentwhilstawaitingcultureandsensitivity test
25.3
peritonitis.
results.If the gall bladder is ruptured,it should be
Obvious bile-ike
removedcompletelyandnotrepaired.Recurrentchole-
fluid obtainedby
cystitis canbestbetreated with cholecystectomy.This
abdominocentesisin
operationhasnofunctional consequences.
a dog 7 days aftcr
abdominal trauma
Cholelithiasis
and gal oladder
Gallstones (Figure 25.4) can easily be recognized with
ruptureinaroad
traff c accidenl.
ultrasonography.Mostdogs and catswithcholelithiasis
(Courtesy of Edward
areasymptomaticand thestonesarerecognized inci-
Hall)
dentally.Canine andfeline choleliths usually contain
274
Chapter25Diseasesof thebiliary system
(15mg/kg/day，dividedover twodoses)may help to
reduce bile epithelial necrosis as much aspossible.
Ursodeoxycholic acid isused toincrease bile flow in
theremaining bileducts,which mayhelp toprevent
accumulationof toxicbileacidsthatwouldaggravate
thedisease.
The prognosis isoftenpoor,butdependsverymuch
onearlyrecognition.After8-12weeksthediseasehas
stabilizedandatthatstagearenewed biopsyrevealsthe
tionof portal tractswith orwithoutabile duct.The injured
bile ducts do not regenerate,and so patients may
require lifelongmedicationwith ursodeoxycholicacid
A lateral radiograph cf a cross-breed cog with a
even though there is not ongoing damage.This unusual
25.4
radiodensechclelith lyingwithin thegall
bladder close to the ventral border of the liver.(Courtesy
reflection of the fact that multipotent stem cells of the
of James Simoson)
liver actuallynormallyreside in the affectedregion.
littlecalcium,butare composed ofbilirubin and choles-
Feline cholangitis
terol.These stones are darkbrown orblack,and soft.
Inflammationof thegallbladderpromotesformationof
rare and trueliver diseases,such as hepatitis,are
stones andviceversa.There is oftenbacterial infection
frequent.Cats are distinctly different because(exclud-
of thegailbladderinsymptomaticcases,sosamplingof
easesof thebileductsratherthanparenchymal hepatic
Symptomatic cases have signs of abdominal pain,
disease.Inflammatoryliverdiseasesincats areinfact
nausea andvomiting.Liverenzymesandbile acids
biliary diseases.Theprimary site of the disease is the
maybeincreased,andthereisoftenleucocytosis.Both
bilesystem and if the liverbecomesinvoivedit isonly
aerobic and anaerobic culture maybepositive.Treat-
secondary andconfined to theportal tract areaas an
mentisonlynecessaryforsymptomaticcases.lIf there
overspill from the portal bile ducts.Therefore,these
is bacterial infection antibiotics should be given (see
inflammatoryprocessesshould be termed cholangitis.
Cholecystitis).Non-calcified stones may resolve in
andnothepatitisorcholangiohepatitis.Therearemany
response tooral medicationwithursodeoxycholicacid
synonymsforthesediseases,butin fact thereareonly
forseveral months;resolution canbe monitoredwith
threeformsoffeline cholangitis and thestandardized
ultrasonography.Unresponsive cases withrecurring
names arenow:
clinical signs should be treated surgically,and it is
advisabletoperformacholecystectomyinsteadof the
。
Neutrophiliccholangitis
。
Lymphocytic cholangitis
moreconservativecholecystotomytoremove the
choleliths.The prognosis is usually very good.
。
Cholangitisdue to liver flukes.
Canine cholangitis
Examplesof theprofusionofadjectivesforthese
threeforms,andused inarbitrarycombinationwith
Destructive cholangitis
cholangitis or cholangiohepatitis,are suppurative,
Destructivecholangitisisa diseaseonlyknown indogs
non-suppurative,mixed (neutrophilic-lymphocytic)
and iscausedbyanidiosyncraticreactiontodrugs(nearly
lymphocytic-plasmacytic,exudative,lymphocytic
always sulphonamides in one form or another).The
chronic or progressive lymphocytic, pericholangio-
reactionsalwaysveracutendusuallyassociatedwith
hepatitis,sclerosingcholangitis,portalhepatitisand
prolonged or repeated medication with trimethoprim-
biliary cirrhosis.
sulpha oranother sulphonamide.Thereis acute necro-
sis of the bile ducts in the smallerportal areas.The
Neutrophiliccholangitis
smallestductsof thebiliarysystemarenotvisiblewith
Neutrophilic cholangitis is most likelydue toan ascend-
ultrasonography and the diagnosisrelies entirely on
ing infection from the intestinal tract.It presents usually
histological evaluationofaliverbiopsy sample.Invery
asanacutedisease withsignsofsepsisandcholestasis.
acutecasesfhechangesmaynothavebecome specific
It causes signs of malaise,inappetence,vomiting
occasionally fever and often jaundice.Neutrophilic
isneededin5-7days.Thecompleteorpartialvanishing
cholangitisisa commondisease incats.
of bile ducts causes very severe (intra-hepatic)
Theneutrophilicinflammationof thebile system is
cholestasis,resultinginsevereicterus.Thereductionof
mostlyreflectedin theresultsof faboraforyexamina-
thebileflowmaybesocompletethatthegallbladderis
tion by the presence of leucocytosis with neutrophilia,
moreorlessempty,which is invariably abnormal.
increasedbileacids,alanine aminotransferase(ALT),
The occurrence of acute diseasewith severe jaun-
GGTandbilirubin.Ultrasonographyusuallyreveals
diceindogstreatedwithanysulphonamideshould
nospecificabnormalities;occasionallyoedema ofthe
prompt immediate discontinuation of this drug.Swift
gall bladderwall maybevisibleasa black line.The
treatment with prednisolone(2mg/kg/day divided
inflammationcausesanon-specificreaction inthe
liver,but inmostcaseshistology of abiopsy sample
275
Chapter25
Diseasesof thebiliarysystem
reveals thepresenceof neutrophilsin the lumen and
The diseaseprimarily affects thelargerbile ducts
epithelium of theportal bile duct walls.In acute cases
andresults inirregulardistensionand thickeningof the
there maybeoedema in theportal tract.Neutrophilic
wall of the larger intra-hepatic and the extra-hepatic
inflammation may spillover into the portal tract and in
bile ducts.The common bile duct,which normally is
severe cases even into the surroundingliverparen-
2mmindiameter,maybecomeaswideas3cm,with
chyma (Figure 25.5).When the processbecomes
narrowerconstrictions and tortuosityin-between.The
morechronic theinflammatorycell type in theportal
bile ducts usuallyremainpatent,although less func-
tracts changes slightly toamixedinfiltrateof
tional.Thewideand irregular appearanceof theducts
neutraphils,lymphocytesandplasma cells.
cases of chronicextra-hepaticcholestasis.Differentia-
tion is onlypossiblewithhistological evaluation ofa
liverbiopsy sample,where the changesseen inob-
structivediseasearedistinctlydifferentfrom thoseof
lymphocytic cholangitis.
Liver histology showsmoderate to severeinfiltra-
tionof theportal tractswith smallymphocytes,which
mayalsobepresentinthelumenandepitheliumof the
bile ducts(Figure 25.6).There is a tendency to fibrosis
andinverychroniccases strandsof fibroustissuemay
connect the different portal areas.The large numbers
of lymphocytes in theportal areasmay often give the
impression of lymphoma;however,lymphoma does
not produce the typical ultrasonograhic appearance of
cholangitis.Most,butnotall,catsdevelopicterus.They
25.5
Sectionof hepalicparenchyma from a
maybecomevery thin,dependingon the stageof the
jaundiced dog,demonstrating obliteration of
disease,but tend to da relatively wellfor long periods.
mostof thenormal liver archilecture,particuarly
Blood examination reveals increased bile acids and
periportally.Amarked inflammatory cell infiltrate is evicent
ALTinmost cases.These values may,however,also
periportally and extending well into parenchyma;
be in the reference range.Nearly all cases have(often
comprising predominantly neutrophils with some
macrophages.The histopatholcgical diagnosis was severe
distinctly)increased giobulins,mainly gamma globulin.
neutrcphilic cholangitis.H&E stain,original magnificalion
The serumproteinspectrumis often asabnormalasin
x500.(Courtesy ofEmma O'Neill)
cats withfelineinfectiousperitonitis(FI),whichthre-
fore is one of the main differential diagnoses.Ultra-
Theprimarysiteof infection is thelumen of the bile
sonography in combination with the typical histologyof
ducts,and the diagnosis isbased onexaminationof bile,
the liver is diagnostic.
sampled underultrasoundguidance,from the gallblad-
der.Cytologyrevealsmany neutrophils and often also
bacteria.Cultureidentifiestheunderlyingbacteria,which
are usuallyEscherichia coli.Histologyof a liverbiopsy
specimen usually confirms the diagnosis,but may be
useful to rule out an underlying lymphocytic cholangitis.
Antibioticsensitivitytesting isneeded,buta good
first choice antibiotic therapyis amoxicillin.Treatment
shouldbegivenforlong enough toeliminatethe
organism;i.e.preferablyover3to4weeks.Theprog-
nosis is good when treatment is started early enough.
Verychroniccasesaremuchharderto treat
500um
Lymphocytic cholangitis
25.6
Hlistolcgical appearance of lymphocytic
Thisformofcholangitisbehavesverydifferentlyfromthe
cholangitis in a middle-aged Domestic Short-
neutrophilicform.There isnoacuteonsetofthedisease
hair cat, showing a lymphocytic infitrate centred on the
andwhencatsfirstpresent with signstheyare already
portal areas.H&E stain.(Courtesy of Michael Day)
in the chronic stage.This is one of the most chronic
diseasesencounteredincats,andmanycasesprogress
Thisisaverydifficultdiseaseto treat.Itisusually
slowlyfor6months to severalyears.Lymphocytic
advisedtogiveprednisolone,butinthe author'sexpe
cholangitisoccursquiteregularlyincats,althoughthere
rience it often has no notaole effect, even with pro-
seemstobea variablerelativefrequencyofoccurrence
longedhighdoses.Therefore,theauthoromitssteroids
in differentcountries.IntheUKthere isa clearpredispo-
completelyforthisdiseaseand uses ursodeoxycholic
sitioninPersians.Catswiththisdiseasehavevariable
acid.Thisbileacid hasseveraleffects thatshould be
signs but generally have a reduced appetite,vomit
beneficial for affectedcats.First,the bile flow is in-
creased,whichmayhelptoavoidthebilebecomingtoo
oftensoslowthat the owneronlyrecognisesproblems
viscous:viscousbile canaggravatecholestasis.Sec-
at anadvanced stage of disease.
ond,it has distinct anti-inflammatory effects,inpart
276
Chapter25Diseasesof thebiliarysystem
explainedbyreductionoflithocholicacidinthebileacid
pool. In the author's experience cats may improve
considerablywith ursodeoxycholic acid,butneedvery
long-term or sometimes lifelong treatment.Extra-
hepaticbile duct obstruction should be excludedbe-
fore giving ursodeoxycholic acid.
There is no known aetiology,but with a specific
PCRHelicobacterhasbeenfoundinmanyof these
cats.However,there isnoproof yet that this is the
causeof thedisease.Catswithotherdiseases,such
as neutrophilic cholangitis,may aiso have anidentical
strain of Helicobacterin theirbile,although thishas
beenreportedlessfrequently.The authorhas treated
25.7
Mucosal surfaceof thegall blacderremoved
three cats in very poor condition from end-stage
frcma10-year-oldSpringerSpanielwilh
lymphocytic cholangitis with intra-biliary injection of
recurrentbacterial cholecyslilis,showinggallbladder
antibiotics(into the gallbladder).Twoof the cats
enlargement,thickening of the walland cysticmucinous
hyperplasia.(Ccurtesy of Edward Hall)
recovered completely,started eating and remained
well,although theirbileductsstillappeared distended
on ultrasonography.This could indicate a bacterial
Cystic disease
pathogenesis,although bacterial culture isroutinely
Cystsintheliverinvariablyarisefromthebileducts and
negative.Clearly,moreresearchintothepathogenesis
arelinedbyasinglelayerof biliaryepithelium.Therecan
isneededbeforebetter treatment becomespossible
belarge solitarycysts andmultiple small cysts.These
for thisunrewarding disease.
cystsarespacesfilledwithwateryfluidormucus,and
vary insizefrom a fewmillimetres to approximately10
Cholangitisdue toliverflukes
cm.Both large andsmall cysts occur in dogsand cats.
Avarietyof liverflukesthroughout theworldmaycause
Caroli's disease is theirregular dilatationwith fibro-
a chronic inflammation of the bile ducts in cats.Cats
sis of the larger intra-hepatic ducts.There is often
can ingestmetacercariaebyeating infectedraw fish.
caicification of bile duct walls.Affecteddogs also have
The migrating larvae invade the bile ductsand cause
cysticrenal lesions that maybecalcified,and involve
chronic inflammation.The bile ductsbecome wide and
thecollecting ducts,whichgives them aradial appear-
tortuous as in lymphocytic cholangitis or bile duct
ance.Another form consists of diffuse small cysts,
obstruction.Histologically,theliverlesionsareslightly
oftenata microscopiclevel,with liver fibrosis and
differentfromthoseoflymphocyticcholangitis.In the
accompaniedbymultiple smallroundcysts of the
portalareasfibrosis and inflammationinside and around
kidneys.The third form has one or a few large solitary
thebileducts isevident,but theinflammatorycell type
cysts in the liver,but no involvement of thekidneys.
is less monotonous.There are not only lymphocytes,
Cysticliverdisease is usually subclinical.However,
butalsosomeplasmacells,neutrophilsandeosinophils.
the cystsmaybecome infectedandcause general signs
Sometimes liver fluke eggs with their typical polar
ofmalaise,vomiting and fever.Single large cysts may
capsulecanbefound histologicallyin thebile ducts.
becomesobigthatdisplacementof the stomachcauses
Thepreferredtreatmentiswithpraziquantel,and the
nausea and vomiting.Persian cats have a high fre-
prognosis isreasonably good.
ease.Thesecatsalsohaveliverfibrosis and(microscopic)
Neoplasia
livercyststhat may notbevisiblewith ultrasonography.
Fibrosisassociatedwithcystic liver maybe sopro-
Mucocele and cysticmucinous hyperplasia
nounced thatit causes severe portal hypertension,
Inolder dogs hyperplasiaof the epitheliumof the gall
portosystemic collateral shunting and ascites. Such
bladderwallmayoccur.Thesamelesion,moreorless
casesmay mimicportal vein hypoplasia or cirrhosis.
pronounced,maybepresentinthecommonbileduct
The diagnosis is made with ultrasonography for the
andcysticduct.There is extreme productionofmucin
largercysts,althoughliverhistologyisneededtoclassify
so thegall bladderbecomes largelydistended and
thesubtype.Renal functiontests and kidneybiopsy are
filledwitha thickgreenorlightbrownmucinouscon-
required to complete the diagnosis,and converselyin
tent.The exact pathogenesis is not clear,but it is
animalswith cystic kidney disease,a liver biopsy is
known that long-termprogestin treatment mayinduce
needed todetermine involvementofthe liver.Biliary
this change.This condition may be subclinical for a
cysticdiseaseis congenitalandmedicalmanagementis
longtime,butsecondaryneutrophiliccholecystitiswith
restricted to treatmentofsecondary infections with
bacterial infection iscommon(Figure25.7).Affected
antibiotics(see Cholecystitis).Singlelarge cystsmaybe
removedsurgically,inwhichcase theprognosisisgood.
tis.Thegall bladderwall may easilyrupturecausing
bileperitonitis.Inrarecaseshyperplasiaofcommon
Carcinoma
bile ductepithelium also causes bile ductobstruction.
Carcinomasof the biliary epitheliumoccur infrequent-
The diagnosis can be madewithultrasonography.
ly.Theymay arise from the extra-orintra-hepaticbile
Treatment is by cholecystectomy in combination with
ductsandreadilymetastasizetotheliverandother
antibiotic therapy.Theprognosis is good.
organs.The multiple metastases throughout the biliary
277
Chapter25Diseasesof thebiliarysystem
system giverisetosigns of cholestasis in mostcases.
CenterSA,ErbHNandJosephSA(1995)Measurementof serumbile
In thecatcarcinomasoccurmoreofteninthelargebile
acids concentrations for diagnosis ofhepatobiliary disease in
cats.Journai of the AmericanVeterinaryMedicaiAssociation
ducts and result in obstruction （Figure 25.8).The
207,1048-1054
disease is rapidly progressive. Bile duct carcinomas
CenterSA,SlaterMR,ManwarenTandPrymakK（1992)Diagosti
may alsoform cysticlesions(cystadenocarcinoma).
efficacy of serum alkaline phosphatase and gamma-
glutamyltransferase in dogswith histologically confirmed
hepatobiliary disease:270 cases(1980-1990).Journal of the
Appearance
25.8
at surgeryof
the biiary lract of a cat
of felineprogressivelymphocyticcholangitis/cholangiohepatitis.
JournalofComparalivePathoiogy119,135-147
with an extra-hepatic
FrimanSadbergGosaeuandSvanik990atbiiary
bile duct obstruction
compensation for the lossof gallbladder function after
caused bya bile duct
cholecystectomy.Anexperimentalstudyinthecat.Scandinavian
carcinoma.(Courtesy of
Journalof Gastroenterology25.307-314
Susan Bunch)
Funch-Jensen P and Sorensen SS (1991) Influence of graded
distensionofthegallblacderonsphincterofOddiactivityindogs.
DigestiveDiseases9,408413
FurukawaNandOkada H(1992)Effectsof selectivevagal stimulation
onthegallbladderandsphinclerofOddiandperipheralvagalroutes
mediating bileevacuativeresponses inducedby hypothalamic
stimulation.JapaneseJournalofPhysiology42,321-334
GagneMmstrngPJWessDJLuEMFenAandKin
VL(1999)Clinicalfeaturesofinflammatoryliverdiseaseincats:
41cases (1983-1993）.Journa/of the American Veterinary
MedicalAssociation15,513-516
Gagne JM,Weiss DJ and Amstrong PJ (1996) Histopethologic
evaluationoffeline inilammatory liverdisease.Veterinary
Pathology96,521-526
Gorlinger S,Rathuizen J, Bunch S and van den Ingh TS (2003)
Thereisoftenwidespread infiltration of the tumour
Congenital dilatation of thebile ducts(Carolisdisease)inyoung
within the liver,whichcausesenlargement of the liver
dogs.JournalofVeterinaryinternalMedicine17,2832
Kirpensteijn J,Fingland RB,UrichT,Sikkema DA and Allen SW
and jaundice.Animalswith these tumoursareunwell,
(1993)Cholelithiasisin dogs:29cases(1980-1990）.Journalof
eatlessand tendtovomit.Thediagnosisismadeby
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation202,1137-1142
histologicalexaminationofaliverbiopsysample,which
LeveilleR,BillerDS andShiromaJT(1996)Sonographic evaluation
of the common bilecuctin cals.Journal ofVeterinaryInternal
should betaken underultrasoundguidanceinordernot
Medicine10,296-299
to miss the disease process. In mostcases no treat-
treatmentof bileperitanitisin24dogsand2cats:arelrospective
ment is possible by the time the tumour becomes
symptomatic; chemotherapy is ineffective.
Mayhew PD.Holt DE,McLear RC and Washabau RJ (2002)
Pathogenesis andoutcome ofextrahepaticbiliary obstructionin
Adenoma
cats.Journalof Small Animal Practice43,247-253
Neer TM (1992)A reviewof disordersof the gallbladder and
Asanincidentalfinding,ultrasonographyorlaparotomy
mayreveal abenigncircumscribed tumour thatis
IntemalMedicine6,186-192
evaluationofbiliarycystadenomasincats.VeterinaryRadiology
cysticlesions.This is the typicalappearance of abile
andUltrasound40,300-306
ductadenoma,which has abenign behaviourand is
OhtaTawaTukikanadHMiyazanT
usually not associated with clinical signs.The diagno-
T(1992)Proliferativeactivityofbileductepitheliumafterbacterial
infectionindogs.ScandinavianJournalofGastroenterology27,
sis can only be made with histological examination of
845-851
abiopsysample collected underguidance.
OhtaT,NagakawaT,Ueda N,Nakamura T,Kayhara M,UenoK,
Miyazaki I,Terada T andNakanumaY（1991)Adenomatous
hyperplasiaofthebileductpitheliumof thecaninelivercaused
Doublegallbladder
bybecterialinfection.ScandinavianJoumalofGastroenierology
In the dog,and moreoften in the cat,there is some-
26,1107-1114
times a double gallbladder.Although the emptying of
ParchmanMBandFlandersJA(1990)Extrahepaticbiliarytractrupture:
evaluationof therelationshipbetween thesiteofruptureandthe
thegallbladderisnotoptimaland thereisalocalstasis
causeof rupturein15dogs.CorneflVeterinarian80,267-272
ofbile,this disorder almost never leads to clinical
fromdogswithpigment gallstones.AmericanJournalofSurgery
problems.Theconditionmaybe detected by abdomi-
171,197-201
nal ultrasonography orat surgery.
RothuizenJ,vanPapendrechtRand VandenBromWE(199o)Post
prandialandcholecystokinin-inducedemptyingofthegallbladder
in dogs.VeterinaryRecord126,505-507
RothuizenJandvandenBromWE(1990)Quantitative hepatobiiary
References and furtherreading
scintigraphy asameasureof bile llowindogswithcholestatic
disease.AmericanJoumalof VeterinaryResearch51,253-256
Abiru H,Sarna SKand Condon RE(1994)Contrectile mechanisms
RothuizenJ,van denBromWEandFeveryJ(1992)Theorigins and
ofgallbladderfiling and emptying in dogs.Gastroenteroiogy
kinetics ofbilirubin indogswithhepatobiiary and haemolytic
106,1652-1661
AdlerRandWilsonDw(1995)Biliarycystadenomaofcats.Veterinary
cliseases.Joumal ofHepatoiogy15,17-24
SavarBatailleKC,nchEaulingAJacsnMWMaa
Pathoiogy32,415418
Jand Slebbins ME(2003)Percutaneous ulrasound-guided
cholecystocentesisinheaithycats.JournalofVeterinaryInterna!
and therapyofhepatobiliarydiseases.VeterinaryClinicsofNorth
Medicine17,298-303
America:SmailAnima/Practice25,503-517
BessoJGWriglyRHGliattMandWbtrRL(2000Itra
cholestasisin the dog and thedifferentiationof extrahepaticand
intrahepaticcholestasis.VeterinaryQuarierly8150-157
mucoceleVelerinaryRadioiogyandUltrasound41261-271
Yokohata K,KimuraH,OgawaY,Naritomi GandTanakaM(1994)
BromelC,BarthezPY,LeveilleRandScrivaniPV(1998）Prevalence
of gallbladder sludge in dogs as assessed byultrasonography.
VeterinaryRadiologyandUltrasound39,206-210
motilinindogs.DigestiveDiseasesandSciences39,1294-1301
278
Critical care 
patients with
.
gastrointestinal disease
Maureen McMichael
Introduction
contains numerous and diverse bacterial populations
and the movement of even small numbers cf bacteria
Recent advances in the monitoring, management and
can have devastating results. Movement of microbes
 pharmacological treatment of critically ill animals with
can occur through several different routes including
.gastrointestinal (Gi) diseases have enhanced the
microscopic defectsinthe Glepithelium andenterocyte
chances of survival. The goals of the intensive care unit 
uptake. Resident microbial flora and the local gut-
(ICU) patient care team are to provide excellent moni-
associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) are key to preven-
toring and nursing care, and to prevent camplications
tion of this abnormal translocation of microbes.
that result from anorexia, inactivity. the presence of
invasive lines (ie. catheters, feeding tubes, chest
first or priming hit causes the immune system to initiate
tubes, eto.) and from the primary disease itself.
 an exaggerated inflammatory response during the sub-
Some of the more common complications that can
sequent second hit. Priming can be caused by many
occur in critically ill Gl patients include:
clinical conditions including hypoperfusion or infection.
Gl tract hypoperfusion may invoke an ischaemic phase
Venous thromboembolism
with subsequent reactive oxygen species (ROS) gen-
 Strass- and drug-related upper Gl bleeding
eration upon reperfusion. Studies suggest that ischae-
Catheter-related infections.
mla reperfusion (IR) injury ofthe mesentery results in the
generation ofROS, whichatract neutrophils Neutrophils
In addition, sepsis (from bacterial translocation, in-
then generate more ROS, creating a vicious cycle that
testinal perforation and immunosuppression), hypogly-
 perpetuates the damage. One hypothesis is that IR
caemia (hepatic failure, sepsis) and pulmonary
injury of the Gl tract primes the immune system allowing
thromboembolism (decreased antithrombin, pancreati-
a relatively low dose of endotoxin to activate a systemic
tis) may adversely affect patient survival. These patients
inflammatory response and MOF.
are predisposed to bacterial translocation because of
Although debate remains about whether bacterial
the use of multiple antiblotics (disruption of the balance
translocation is clinically relevant, maximizing the
of the normal Gl microflora). the use of paranteral
health of the Gl tract (e.g. by enhancing perfusion,
nutrition (decreased delivery of nutrients to the
feeding the enterocytes) should be an early goal of a
enterocytes), the presence of hypotension (decreased
 proactive ICU team.
Gl perfusion) and their generally poor undertying nutri-
tional status (decreased intestinal barrier function).
With optimal monitoring, supportive care and an
General supportive measures
index of suspicion many of these complications can
either be avoided or discovered early and rectified
 Since no single physiological value can convey all
before significant damage ensues.
aspects of an animal's status, several variables are
frequently monitored in an attempt to give a global
picture of the animal's well-being. Monitoring should be
Role of the gut in multiple organ
thought of as supplementing the findings of physical
failure
examination with objective data. There are several
crucial parameters that should be monitored frequently
Death in the ICU is often related to multiple organ failure
in critically ill animals (Figure 26.1).
(MOF). in humans, MOF has a mortality rate from 40%
to 1 00%, proportional to the number of affected organs.
Analgesia,
The Gl tract is believed to be crucial tothe pathogenesis
Assessment of pain is essential, although an optimal
of MoF. Its importance was first proposed in response
pain-scoring system has not,been formulated. Mary
to the observatian of a number of patients dying of MOF
animals will not show 'classic'Signs of pain but still may
with sepsis but no focus of infection. Underiying bacte-
be in severe pain. Generally, if an animal has either a
rial translocation across the Gl tract was suspected,
painful disease or has had a painful procedure it should
referring to the passage of microbes from the Gl lumen
receiveanalgesics.Adequateanalgesiahasbeenshown
to the bloodstream, and then to other sites. The Gl tract
to decrease morbidity and mortality in many diseases.
279
Chapter26Critical careofpatientswithgastrointestinal disease
Clinical parameters
Clinical assessment of perfusion
Heart rate:rhythm: pulse quality
Urine output
Respiratory rate and effort; lung sounds
Peripheral temperature
Body temperature
Pulse quality
Blood pressure and central venous pressure
Mucousmembrane refill time
Oxygenation(pulse oximetry,PaO)
Mentation
Perfusion (urine output, lactate, peripheral tmperature)
Laboratory assessment of perfusion
Laboratory parameters
Blood lactate
Coagulation indices
Oxygen delivery (DO)
Complete blood count
Oxygen uptake (VO)
Serum bicchemical profile
Oxygen extraction(OER)
Acid-base and lactate concentration
Gastric tonometry
Electrolyle status
Haematocril; total protein; azotaemia; glucose
26.2
Perfusion indices in small animals.
26.1
Essential monitoring in critically illanimals.
causeofapparentoliguria isan obstructedurinary
catheter and so every effort shouldbemade to
Several newoptionsforpainmanagement are avail-
troubleshoot the equipment (i.e.flush theurinary cath-
ableincluding transdermalfentanyl,oralmorphine and
eter,replaceifquestionable)beforedeclaringoliguriar
COX-1-sparing non-stercidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
anuria.Since in the absence ofrenal disease urine
Readers are referred to Hansen (2000) for in-depth
output isaroughestimate ofperfusion,decreased urine
coverage of analgesia.
output in theface of adequatevolume suggests de-
creasedperfusiontothekidneysandotherorgans(such
Vital signs
as the GI tract).lf urine output decreases the clinician
Vital signs include:body temperature; heart rate (HR)
shouldruleoutdecreasedbloodvolume(assesscentral
and rhythm;and respiratory rate(RR)andeffort.Gener-
venous pressure(CVP),haematocrit (HCT),total sol-
allybodytemperatureismonitored lessfrequently than
ids),decreased cardiac output (assess with an
HR and RR;usually every 8 hours unless specific
echocardiogram) and the onset of renal failure(assess
concerns exist.TheHR can be assessed continuously
azotaemia,urine specific gravity,presence of casts).
Theperipheraltemperatureorthecore-webgradient
pads placed on the animal. This allows continuous
(i.e. the diference between the core temperature and
monitoringfor dangerous dysrhythmias,such asven-
the temperatureof the extremitiesor the‘web’of the
digits)canbe used togaugeperipheralperfusion along
whichmayneedimmediatecorrection.RRandeffortare
withpulsequality andmucousmembranerefilltime.
CVPisanindicatorofvolume status and can be
used to assess vascular volume if cardiac function is
surecanserveasanindexofcirculatory statusbut isnot
normal.Adequatevolume doesnot necessarily mean
specifisiceicaninrasewithainar,nxit,
that perfusion is adequate,however,since vasocon-
stress and increased intracranial pressure.Hypoten-
strictionanddecreasedcardiacoutputcanbothimpair
sioncanreflecthypovolaemiabutitcanalsoaccompany
perfusion in the face of adequatevolume.
sepsis,late stages of shock and anaphylacticreactions.
Of thelaboratory indicesofperfusion(see Figure
Arterial bloodpressure canbe measured directlyand
26.2),venous lactateismost practical toevaluate since
mostaccuratelybyinsertionofanarterial catheter,or
it snon-invasive,easilyobtained,inexpensive,easily
indirectlybyuseofDoppler-basedoroscillometricde-
interpreted and isa verygoodindexofperfusioninmost
tectors.Whenusing indirect methods the cuff width
circumstances.Whenperfusion isdecreased there is
should be40%of thecircumferenceof thelimb.Cuffs
decreased tissue oxygenation,a shift to anaerobic
thataretoonarrowmaygivefalselyelevatedvalues and
metabolismand increasedlactateproduction.Venous
cuffs that aretoowidefalselylowvalues.
lactate in healthy adult dogs is normally<2.0mmol/.
Measurement of oxygen delivery (DO2),oxygen
Perfusion
uptake(VO2)and oxygen extraction(OER)require the
Perfusion isoneof themostcrucialparametersto
insertionofapulmonaryarterial catheterand arerarely
monitorincriticallyill patients.Evaluationofperfusion
practical options.Gastric tonometry is alsoimpractical
can be done using both clinical and laboratory para-
for technicalreasonsinmostveterinaryhospitals.
meters (Figure 26.2).
Central venouspressure and arterial bloodpres-
Electrolyte status
sureareoftenused to supplementother data in the
Hyponatraemia signifiesrelative water excess and can
determinationof adequate fluidvolume.
occurinanimalswith liverdisease.Rapidinitialcorrection
Urine output is one of the single most important
ofchronichyponatraemia can lead to central pontine
parametersofperfusionfor thecriticallyillanimal.Urine
demyelinosiswithsevereneurological manifestations.
output shouldremainabove1-2ml/kg/h.Acommon
Clinical signsdevelopseveral daysafterrapidcorrection
280
Chapter 26 Crilical care of patients with gastrointestinal disease
of hyponatraemia and include weakness, ataxia,
Specific disorders
hypermetria and paresis. Patients with chronic hypo-
natraemia are oten asymptomatic and acute hyponat-
Gastric dilatation volvulus
raemia is very rare in veterinary medicine. Patients with
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV) is defined as the
symptomatic chronic hyponatraemia (ie. seizures, cer-
progressive dilatation and rotation of the stomach. It is
ebral oedema) should have their sodium increased by
most often seen in large-breed, deep-chested dogs
less than 10-12 mmol/l over 24 hours. Asymptomatic
and the cause is unknown.
patients with hyponatraemia can have their sodium
The rotation and dilatation of the stomach cause
compression of the caudal vena cava and portal vein
hypovolaemic. It should be noted that volume restora-
leading to systemic vascular compromise. Hypovolae-
tion alone can correct the hyponatraemia if the patient is
mia occurs due to a combination of blood loss (short
hypovolaemic since it will eliminate the stimulus for
gastric arteries and splenic vessels often torn during
vasopressin release and allow the animal to excrete free
rotation) and fluid loss into the distended stomach.
water. In animals with oedema and hyponatraemia,
There is decreased perfusion and therefore decreased
diuretics may help rectify the 'water excess'.
oxygen delivery to the Gl tract, which can precipitate
Hypokalaemia is common in critically ill animals and
sepsis from bacterial translocation. Gastric necrosis
can impair renal concentrating mechanisms leading to
may also be seen and if perforation of the stomach
polyuria and polydipsia. Cardiac, smooth and skeletal
occurs this can lead to peritonitis and systemic sepsis.
muscle dysfunction may lead to cardiac dysrhythmias,
 Decreased oxygen delivery to alltissues occurs, lead-
delayed Gl transit and generalized weakness. Treat-
ing to a systemic hypoperfused state, shock and even-
ment usually involves supplementation of intraveneous
tually death if left untreated.
fluids at a rate not to exceed 0.5 mmol/kg/h. Magnesium
is required for potassium transport across cell mem-
Monitoring
branes and the enzyme Na+ K+ adenosine triphos-
HR and rhythm, RR, peripheral pulse quality. mucous
phatase has an absolute requirement for magnesium,
membrane colour and refl time, pulse oximetry and
contributing to excess potassium loss during periods of
blood pressure are recorded as soon as possible.
hypomagnesaemia. In cases of refractory hypokalae-
ldeally a minimum database consisting of HCT, total
mia, magnesium sulphate should be started as a con-
solids, blood glucose, electrolytes, azostix and lactate
stant rate infusion (CRl) at 1 mmol/kg over 24 hours.
is callected. Lactate concentration has been shown to
Disorders of calcium occur commonly in cats with
be prognostic. A lactate concentration of >6 mmol/l
pancreatitis. Hypocalcaemia can result from calcium
was associated with 58% survival while a lactate con-
soap deposition or from derangements in parathyroid
centration of <6 mmal/l was associated with 99%
hormone levels. Hypercalcaemia has also been re-
survival in one study carried out at the University of
ported but is rare.
 Pennsylvania. Lactate concentrations can be meas-
ured easily with an inexpensive handheld monitor,
Infection surveillance
although this machine has not yet been validated in
Critically ill animals are at an increased risk for nosoco-
dogs. Preliminary studies by the author indicate that it
 mial infection due to their immunosuppressed state,
is accurate for following trends. lf possible a complete
inactivity and the presence of numerous invasive lines
blood count, biochemical profile, coagulation profile
(e.g. catheters). In addition, anorexia, vomiting and
and urinalysis are also collected.
diarrhoea all increase the risk of infection. Infection
control measures include: careful monitoring of all cath-
Treatment
eter sites several times daily for signs of warmth, pain or
Initial treatment is focused on maximizing perfusion
swelling; monitoring for pyrexia; and evaluation of fre-
and oxygenation. Intravenous fluids are given via two
quent complete blood counts for evidence of infection.
large bore (14-18 gauge) peripheral catheters. One-
 Any new fever should prompt an immediate search
third to one-half of a shock dose (i.e. 30-45 ml/kg) of
for the cause. lf no cause is apparent, blood should be
isotonic crystalloids is given rapidly and haemody-
collected for bacteriological culture and antibiatic sen-
namic status is re-assessed. If the HR and blood
sitivity testing. Broad spectrum antibiotics are war-
pressure are normalizing, the remainder of the shock
ranted in all critically ill animals with evidence of infection
dose (i.e. 90 m/kg total) is given over the next 1-2
(pyrexia, leucocytosis or leucopenia, swollen catheter
hours. If the initial bolus does not improve the haemo-
site). Ideally samples for bacteriological culture should
dynamic status, the remainder of the shock dose is
be obtained prior to administration of antibiotics.
 given rapidly. Colloids, which remain in the vascula-
The patient should be cleaned and bandages
ture much longer than crystalloids, are added to the
changed as needed. The environment (cages, floors,
crystalloid infusion in cases where the partial crystal-
the entire [CU) must be kept clean and free of contami-
loid bolus fails to improve the haamodynamic status.
nation. At the first sign of infection any questionable
Hetastarch is the colloid used most frequently unless
invasive line (ie. venous catheter, urinary catheter)
 coagulation abnormalities indicate the need for fresh
should be removed and the tip cultured. lf another line is
frozen plasma. When colloids are used the dose of
needed this should be placed aseptically. Infection
crystalloids is decreased by 40%. Improvement is
control is of utmost importance in critically ill animals and 
indicated by normalization of HR, blood pressure,
efforts must be made to recognize and treat impending
increased urine output, improved mentation and a
infection as quickly and effectively as possible.
decreased lactate concentration.
281
Chapter26Critical careof patientswithgastrointestinal disease
Gastric decompression is most easily done by
ionizedmagnesium level isloworborderline low.lf all
trocharization.Trocharization does notrequire seda-
ofthesehavebeenruledout and thedysrhythmiais
tion,israpid andeasy tolearn.An18gaugeover-the-
causing haemodynamic instability, treatment with lido-
needlecatheterisinserted intothegas-filled fundus
caine (aninitial bolus followed by a CRl) is started.
(the area with the loudest ping'), which is often found
It is essential topayattention to anypostoperative
on theright-hand side in dogswith GDV.All gas that
deterioration,particularlybetweendays2and5asthis
canbe is aspirated and the catheterisremoved.After
is thetimewhengastric necrosis and dehiscencemay
initial stabilization,right lateral radiography is used to
occur.Anynew onset of abdominal pain,vomiting or
confirm thediagnosis.Broad spectrumantibioticsare
fever should be investigated and abdominocentesis
given due to the high risk of sepsis in these cases.
withcytology and culture,completeblood countand
SurgicalcorrectionofGDVisdescribedelsewhere
lactateconcentrationshouldbeassessed.
(seeChapter 19andBSAVAManualofCanine and
GDVinvolves complexpathophysiological abnor-
Feline Abdominal Surgery). The postoperative goals
malitiesrequiringintensivepre-andpostoperative moni-
are tomaximize oxygen support and perfusion and to
toringand treatmenttominimizemorbidityand mortality.
provideanalgesia.Oxygensupplementationcanbe
givenat anFiO2of40%for 24hours tooptimize
Small intestinalobstruction
oxygenation.Fluid therapy comprises either crystal-
Insmallanimals,mechanicalobstructionismostcom-
loids aloneora combinationof crystalloids and colloids
monly caused bya foreign body in the Gl tract.Linear
dependingon the haemodynamicstatusof thepatient.
foreignbodiesincats area common causeof mechani-
Instablepatientscrystalloids aloneareoftenenough,
cal obstruction.Mechanical obstruction can also be
while in hypotensiveor hypoperfused patients the
dueto changes in the anatomyof the Gl tractcausing
authoruses a combinationof crystalloid and colloid.
blockage of ingesta. Causes of this type of obstruction
Foranalgesia a combinationof anopicid (fentanylCRI)
includeneoplasia,intussusception,ncarcerationina
combinedwith either lidocaineorketamineisstarted.
hernia,extrinsic compression and a large parasite
If the combination of fentanyl and lidocaineis not
burden.Functional obstructionoccursdue tochanges
sufficient ketamine is added (or vice versa)
in GI transittime. This can be secondary to medications
Cardiacdysrhythmiasandcoagulation abnormali-
(opioids,anticholinergics),inflammation,electrolyte
ties are two of the most common postoperative compli-
abnormalities andpancreatitis.
cations.lf coagulation abnormalities are detected
clinically(i.e.bleeding:oozing from incision)oron the
Monitoring
coagulationpanel(i.e.prolongedactivatedpartialthrom-
ClinicalsignsofGlobstructionncludeanorexiaom
boplastin time(aPTT),lowantithrombin)fresh frozen
iting,lethargy,dehydration and occasionally abdomi-
plasma is the colloid of choice(Figure 26.3).The most
nalpain.Changes seen onbloodwork may include
common dysrhythmiasseenareventricularpremature
hypochloraemicmetabolic alkalosis if the obstruction
contractions andventriculartachycardia.Beforespe-
is in the proximal small intestine,resulting invomiting
cifictreatmentisbegunhypoxaemia,hypovolaemia,
ofacidicgastriccontents.Metabolic acidosiscanalso
hypoperfusion,acid-base and electrolyteimbalances,
occur if the obstruction is more distal,resulting in
anaemia,anxietyandpainare allruledout.Inaddition,
vomiting of bicarbonate.Other abnormalitiesmay in-
ionized magnesiumconcentrations should be assessed
clude hypokalaemia,hyponatraemia and azotaemia.
and magnesiumsulphate shouldbe given by CRlif the
Generally completeobstructionscause more severe
Transtusant
Dose
Rate
Unit size
Comments
Whole blood (fresh)
20mlkg
5-10mlkg/h
Dogs: 450 ml
2.2mlkg will raise packed cellvolume(PCV) by1%
Emergency rate:20-25mlkg/h
Cats:50-60ml
Whole blood (stored)
20 ml/kg
5-10ml/kg/h
Dogs: 450 ml
2.2 mlkg will raise PCV by 1%
Emergency rate:20-25mlkg/h
Cats:50-50ml
Platelets are non-viable
Packed red blood cells
10mlkg
5-10ml/kg/h
Dogs:250-300ml
1 ml/kg will raise PCV by 1%
Cats:25-30ml
May be diluted with plasma or 0.9%NaCl
Fresh frozenplasma
6-10ml/kg
5-10ml/kg/h
Dogs:120 and
Contains: all cagulation ftactors, von Willebrand
240ml
factor(vWF),albumin,immunoglobulins
Cats:25ml
Cryoprecipitate
1unit per
5-10ml.kg/h
60-70ml
~50%factorVl20%fibinogen,and some factr
10kg
XIll,vWF andVIllc
Oxyglobin
Dogs:
Dogs:
60mland120ml
Dose isbased on hal-lite;use higherdoses for
15-30ml/kg
5-10m/.kg/h
increased duration
Cats:
Cats:
5-10ml/kg
1-3ml/kgh
26.3
Blood transfusion guidelines.
282
Chapter 26  Critical care of patients with gastrointestinal disease
clinical signs. A thorough oral examination to check for
Often the insertion of the second needle will cause fluid
a linearforeign body under the tongue is essential in all
to flow from the first needle. Fluid should be collected
animals, particularly cats and young dogs.
into a sterile red top tube, an EDTA tube and into a
 Abdominal radiography may reveal a radiopaque
bacteriological culture tube. A drop of the fluid should
foreign body or a calcified tumour. The presence of
be placed on a slide and stained to check for intracel-
gas-distended loops of small intestine with hair pin
lular bacteria, the hallmark of septic peritonitis. The
turns is suggestive of obstruction. The presence of
fluid can also be assessed for: amylase and lipase
free air in the peritoneal cavity suggests perforation
and peritonitis. A positive contrast (barium) study
glucose and lactate (sepsis). Septic peritonitis is sug-
can be performed if radiography is equivocal (see
gested if the lactate concentration of the abdominal
Chapter 3).
fluid is >5.5 mmol/ or the glucose concentration is <2.8
mmol/l. Laboratory analysis of abdominal fluid is dis-
Treatment
cussed further in Chapter 13.
The treatment for smal intestinal obstruction is surgical
Additional blood work may include a serum bio-
correction of the primary problem. Preoperative
chemical profile, haematocrit and total solids, venous
stabilization includes correction of hypovolaemia, hypo-
blood gas and coagulation studies. Abdominal radio-
tension, acid-base status, electrolyte abnormalities and
 graphs showing free gas are strongly suggestive of
alleviation of pain. Postoperative care includes ad-
periftonitis. Thoracic radiographs should be evaluated
equate analgesia, which often requires a combination of
for evidence of metastatic disease. lndications for
an opioid (e.g. fentanyl CRi) and either a ketamine or
emergency surgery include intracellular bacteria iden-
lidocaine CRl. Monitoring of haemodynamic status and
tified on cytological examination of abdominal fluid.
 oxygenation are also essential postoperatively. In addi-
obvious penetrating abdominal wound, or free air vis-
tion monitoring for postoperative deterioration, particu-
ible on abdominal radiographs.
larly between day 2 and day 5. is essential as this is the
time when intestinal necrosis and dehiscence may
Treatment
occur. Any new onset of abdominal pain, vomiting or
On initial presentation a balanced crystalloid solution
fever should be investigated and abdominocentesis
(30-45 ml/kg) along with a colloid (hetastarch, 5 ml/kg
with cytology and culture, complete blood count and
i.v. by bolus injection in dogs but not cats) should be
lactate concentratian should be assessed.
administered, after which haemodynamic parameters
should be re-assessed: In the author's experience
Peritonitis
rapid and aggressive fluid therapy can temporarily
Peritonitis is defined as inflammation of the peritoneal
improve the haemodynamic status immensely, but
 surfaces. The causes can be both septic and non-septic.
rapid deterioration ensues unless definitive correction
Septic peritonitis is caused by free bacteria in the
of the underlying peritonitis is undertaken in a very
abdominal cavity, most often due to perforating lesions
short time (usually 1-2 hours): Reversible analgesia
of the Gl tract, foreign bodies, or necrosis secondary to
(opiaids) and broad spectrum antibiotics (preferably
 obstruction or intussusception. Non-septic or chemical
affter samples for bacteriological culture and suscepti-
peritonitis can occur secondary to leakage of bile. urine
bility have been collected) are also given.
and pancreatic enzymes. Chemical peritonitis can also
Adequate fluid therapy is of utmost concern in the
 become seplic when the material that has leaked is not 
postoperative period. ldeally a central venous catheter
sterile (e.g. infected urine).
is placed and used to monitor volume status. A CVP of
 As the disease progresses, profound systemic in-
8-10 cm HzOis desirable in postoperative septic shock
flammation, leading to severe hypotension and shock
patients. Up to seven times normal maintenance fluid
 occurs. There is fluid loss into the peritoneal cavity and
requirements may be needed to maintain CVP. In
severe vasodilatation caused by the toxins involved.
addition to crystalloids, colloids are essential to main-
taining perfusion in these critically ill patients. If, de-
Monltorlng
spite adequate fluid therapy (i.e. CVP 8-10 cm HO
Clinical signs include depressed mentatian, tachycar-
with a normal echocardiogram to rule out right heart
dia with weak or bounding pulses, tachypnoea, pale,
dysfunction), the animal remains hypotensive, vaso-
cyanotic or muddy mucous membranes, hyper- or
pressor therapy should be started. The vasopressor of
hypothermia and abdominal pain.
choice in the author's ICU is vasopressin by CRI (0.5
Essential first-line diagnostics include a. complete
mlU/kg per minute). Monitoring parameters include HR
blood count, blood glucose, venous lactate concentra-
and rhythm, RR, oxygenation (pulse oximetry and
 tion and an abdominocentesis. A significant increase
arterial blood gas), urine output, mentation, pulse qual-
or decrease in the white blood cell count, decreased
ity, body temperature and appetite. Laboratory moni-
blood glucose and increased lactate concentration
toring includes haematocrit, total solids, blood glucose
(>2.5 mmoll) are all strongly suggestive of sepsis.
and urea, venous blood gas, lactate concentration,
Abdominocentesis is performed after sterile prepara-
electrolytes, complete blood count, biochemical profile
tion of the caudoventral abdomen. An unattached 20
and coagulation panel.
gauge needle is slowly inserted up to the hub in the
Peritonitis is a complex, multifactorial disease proc-
ventral abdomen just caudal to the umbilicus. If no fluid
 ess that is fatal in the majority of cases. With rapid
is retrieved, another needle is inserted approximately
diagnosis and aggressive treatment the prognosis is
 2 cm from the first needle, leaving the first one in place.
improved significantly but is still guarded at best.
283
Chapter26Critical careofpatientswithgastrointestinal disease
Pancreatitis
Hypocalcaemia is common and,in thoserare cases
Acutepancreatitiscanbea life-threateningcondition in
that are symptomatic(i.e.twitching,tetany),is treated
both dogsand cats.During pancreatitis the premature
by parenteral supplementation (0.5-1 ml/kg of 10%
activationofpancreatic enzymes leads toinflamma-
calcium gluconate i.v.over 30 minutes,with ECG
tion,ROS production and cellular death.Increased
monitoringfordysrhythmias).Bothhypoglycaemia and
vascularpermeabilityleadstofluidsequestrationinto
the pancreas and abdominal cavity.Neutrophilic infil-
perglycaemia and transienthyperglycaemiasecond-
trationperpetuatesthevicious cyclebyreleasingmore
ary tohyperglucagonaemiashould beruled outbefore
ROS,which then contribute to more inflammation,
treating with insulin.
leading to more ROS.
Inexperimental studies,thepancreaticmicrocircu-
lationhasbeenmoreeffectivelymaintainedbyperfusion
Treatment
withcolloids than with crystalloids.Plasmahasbeen
Themainstay of treatment is supportive carewith
the colloid of choiceinpancreatitis foryearsbut its
aggressive replacement of fluid and electrolyte losses
effectiveness has been questioned. Antiproteases
andvigilant monitoring of haemodynamic,renal and
present inplasma neutralize activatedpancreaticen-
respiratory status.Frequent assessments for pain,
zymes and were thought to beprotective.Several
electrolyte abnormalities,perfusion, oxygenation,in-
humanclinical trialshavefailed to show a benefit of
fectionandcoagulationabnormalitiesarerequired
plasmaoveralbumin treatmentinpancreatitis.Oncotic
(Figure 26.4).Treatment includes fluid and electrolyte
supportis essentialinthe treatmentofseverepancrea-
support (including oncotic therapy):analgesia and
titissincemanypatientsalso have hypoalbuminaemia
infection control (see Chapter23).
(from Gl losses andincreased capillary permeability)
Decreased perfusion of the pancreas is thought to
Albuminbinds detergents,lysolecithin,toxins,drugs
playakeyroleinconverting mild tosevere necrotizing
and bilirubin.Although the amount of albumin present
pancreatitis.Carefulattentionmustbe givento assess-
innormal dosesofplasma islow,itisstill theauthor's
mentof fluid andelectrolytestatus,withregardtoboth
oncoticfluidof choice forpancreatitis.Otheroptions
crystalloid and colloid components,both at presenta-
include hetastarch or dextrans.If oxygen-carrying ca-
tion and during the progression of the disease.Bal-
pacity is low(i.e.anaemia) stabilized bovinehaemo-
anced crystalloid fluids are chosen based on the
globin glutamer is a good choice for colloid in dogs.A
electrolyte derangements.Hypokalaemia iscommon
lowdose dopamine infusion(5.0μg/kg/min) was also
becauseofanorexiaandGllosses,and iscorrected by
effective,when given early, in an experimental model
addition of potassium to the fluids,at aratenot to
of feline acute pancreatitis.
exceed0.5mmol/kg/h,baseduponserumpotassium
Analgesia is an essential component of the treat-
concentrations. Other common electrolyte changes in
ment regimen. Fentanyl citrate (2.0-5.0 μg/kg/h by
animalswithpancreatitisincludehyponatraemia and
CRl) is a good option in mild to moderate cases.
hypochloraemia,most likelydue to vomitinglosses.
Animalswithseverediseaseorinseverepainoften
Parameter
Clinical signs and laboratory results
Options for treatment
Pain
Sometimes none; can see tachycardia,
(1.0 mg/kg/h) to opicid
Perlusion
Cold extremities; decreased urine
output; elevated lactate level
inotrcpes(dopamine, dobutamine)orvasopressor(vascpressir)
Sepsis
Hypcglycaemia; sudden change
Maximiz es thraxyenupmentanes
(increase or decrease) in WBCs;
tachycardia;hypotension;poor
perfusion(codextremities,decreased
urine outouthighlactatelevell
Coagulation
DIC (prolonged PT,aPTT,ncread
Fresh frozen plasma administration at 6-10 ml/kg (complete transtusion within 4
FDPsorD-derwplaletslw
hours to minimize bacterial contamination).Consider heparin (75-150 IU/kg s.c.q8h)
antithrombin); clinical evidence of
if hyperccagulability a concern
bleeding
Hypoxia
Pulse oximetry<94%;Pa0<85mmHg
radiography.Consider pulmonary thrombcembolism (PTE;may see no changes on
radiography).Consideranticoagulant therapyif strong suspicionofPTE
Cerebraloedema
Increased blood pressure; bradycardia;
Mannitol(1.0 g/kgi..over20mins),fllwedin15minutesbyfurcsemide
papillcedema; decerebrate posturng
(0.7 mg/kg i.v.). Consider anti-oxidants, N-acetylcysteine (50 mg.kg i.v.over 60mins
q6h) or S-adenosylmethicnine
26.4
Monitoring criticallyillpaientswith pancreatitisor liver disease.aPTT= activated partial thromboplastin time;
CRI = constant rate infusion;CvP=central venous orcssure;DiC=disseminated intravascular coagulation;
FDP -fibrin degradation prcduct: PCV=pecked cel volume;PT = prothrombin time;WBC= white blod cell.
284
Chapter 26
 Critical care of patients with gastrointestinal disease
need additional analgesia. Lidocaine (2.0 mg/kg) and
anaerobes untilresults regarding specific antibiotic sus-
bupivacaine (1.5-3.0 mg/kg) can be mixed with 50 ml
ceptibilities are available.
warm saline and injected into the intraperitoneal space
Enteral nutrition has traditionally been withheld
In dogs, using sterile technique. Addition of sodium
from patients with pancreatitis in order to diminish
bicarbonate (1 part bicarbonate to 9 parts analgesic
pancreatic enzyme secretion. However, enteral feed-
solution) decreases the pain of the injection. This
ing has many benefits including decreasing bacterial
should not be used in animals that have had abdominal
 surgery within 1 week. Since cats are so sensitive to
sis. Despite theoretical considerations that naso-
lidocaine this procedure is not suitable for that species.
jejunostomy feeding tubes or surgically placed
Alternative methods of pain cantrol include a low dose
jejunostomy tubes may be preferable since they by-
of ketamine (0.1-1.0 mg/kg/h) by CRl along with an
pass the pancreas, clinical experience shows that
opioid infusion for both cats and dogs. This combina-
results with oesophagostomy tubes and gastrostomy
tion can be synergistic and provides good pain control.
tubes are good unless vomiting is intractable and non-
Another option, for dogs only, is addition of a low dose
responsive to anti-emetics.
of lidocaine (1.0 mg/kg/h) to this mixture.
Complications that can occur in more severe cases
Hypercoagulability occurs commonly in pancreati-
of pancreatitis include sepsis or endotoxic shock from
tis and anticoagulation using heparin should be consid-
bacterial translocation, thromboembolism (hyper-
ered, especially for those at increased risk (i.e. thase
 coagulability), disseminated intravascular coagulation,
 patients with low antithrombin, short activated partial
hypoxia (pleural effusion, puimonary thromboembo-
thromboplastin time (aPTT) or prothrombin time).
lism), diabetes mellitus, and renal and liver compramise.
Heparin has the additional benefit of activating lipopro-
The patient care team of the criticaly ill dog or cat must
tein lipase and this may help clear lipaemia.
be vigilant in monitoring the patient's status and aggres-
Centrally acting anti-emetics (i.e. metoclopramide
or chlorpromazine) are good options with mild to mod-
 acid-base abnormalities, and hypercoagulability.
erate vomiting. Intractable vomiting should be treated
with one of the serotonin (5HTs) antagonists (i.e.
Liver disease
ondansetron hydrochloride or dolasetron mesylate).
Symptomatic liver disease in dogs and cats is associ-
Intractable vomiting increases the chances of aspira-
ated with several seriaus complications including fluid
tion pneumonia and bacterial translocation, and so
and electrolyte abnormalities, hypoxia, coagulopathy,
should be treated aggressively.
hypoperfusion, portal hypertension, hepatic en-
cephalopathy (HE), cerebral oedema, ascites, renal
Complications
disease and sepsis (see Figure 26.4).
There is growing concern in human medicine regard-
ing potential complications of Hz antagonist antacid
Treatment
therapy. Gastric alkalinization and colonization with
When calculating fluid therapy ini animals with severe
Gram-negative bacilli are thought to play a causal role
in nosocomial pneumonia. Studies show a higher per-
fluid to a third space (i.e. ascites, oederma) and the
centage of nosocomial pneumonia occurs in patients 
albumin level. Mostof these animals have hypoalbumin-
on Hz antagonists than in patients receiving sucralfate.
aemia resulting in an inability to retain fluid in the
Antacid therapy should therefore be withheld unless
vascular space. Sodium retention, and subsequent
other specific indications are present, since pancreati-
water retention, is common in patients with severe liver
tis per se is not a reason for antacid therapy.
disease. Therefore, if ascites or oedema is present the
While it is accepted that infection control is very
sodium load in the crystalloid fluid should be minimized
important in critically ill patients, the use of prophylactic
(i.e. give 0.45% NaCI with 2.5% dextrose). Hypokalae-
antibiotics in patients with pancreatitis is controversial.
 mia, hypophosphataemia and hypoglycaemia are quite
Escherichia coli was shown to migrate from the colon to
common. Acid-base changes include metabolic alka-
the compromised pancreas in a feline model of pancrea-
losis (i.e. from diuretics, vomiting) and respiratory
titis. Also unlike the dog, the cat has a common opening 
alkalosis. The development of lactic acidosis is sug-
at the duodenal papilla, allowing refluxed duodenal
gestive of either hypoperfusion (i.e. anaerobic metaba-
contents to perfuse the pancreatic and biliary systems.
lism) or severely decreased liver function since the liver
Cats also are reported to have a higher small intestinal
metabolizes lactate.
bacterial load predisposing them to pancreatic bacterial
influx. Animals with pancreatitis are at an increased risk
aemia. Colloids are very effective at raising the plasma
of bacterial translocation due to hypotension (decreased
osmotic pressure and can be helpful in mobilizing as-
cites. The colloid of choice in animals with liver disease
risk of micrathrambi to the Gil tract compromising blood
is fresh frozen plasma. This supplements clotting factors
flow) and decreased enteral nutrition (enterocyte starva-
and provides a small amount of albumin and anti-
tion),. Despite these considerations, infectious compli-
thrombin. Of the synthetic colloids hetastarch is thought
cations in canine and feline pancreatitis are very rare,
to be safer than Dextran 70, which is reported to cause
and antibiotic treatment should ideally be restricted to
bleeding tendencies in animals with liver disease that
those patients in which infection has been confirmed by
have normal coagulation profiles prior to surgery. When
bacterlological culture. When used, antibiotic treatment 
colloids are given, the rate of crystalloid administration
should be effective against Gram-negative bacteria and
should be decreased by approximately 40%.
285
Chapter26Critical careofpatientswithgastrointestinal discase
Complications
cites,andif ascitesissevereenoughbothrespiration
Decreased arterialoxygenation hasbeenreported in
andcardiacoutputcan alsobenegativelyaffected.
bothhumans and dogs withsevere liverdisease,and
Increased cardiac output,stroke volume and ven
oxygen supplementation iswarranted if thereis any
tricularejectionhavebeenshown tooccur after the
concern about oxygenation.Haemodynamic changes
removal of abdominal fluid and so it is essential to
thatoccurwithsevereliverdiseasecanmimicthose of
sepsis reflecting a hyperdynamic state.There is in-
ascites,as treatment itself canlead toserious compli-
cation(e.g.electrolyte derangements,dehydration).
resistance （PVR)and hypotension.In one study of
Treatment for ascites includes sodium restriction,
experimental cirrhosis in dogs,the cardiacoutput in
diuretisandnlif thsearetucessfucaf
creasedby20%while thePVRandbloodpressure
removalofaportionof thefluid,butonlyjustenough
decreased.
tomakethe animalmarecomfortable.
Sudden neurological deterioration inapatientwith
liverdiseaseshouldprompt theclinicianto search
Diarrhoea
aggressively for the cause.Generally the two most
Althoughnot uncommon,diarrhoea isoftennot a top
common causes are HEand cerebral oedema.The
Cushing's reflex can occurwith increases inintracra
nial pressure (ICP);the increased ICP causes sys-
vascular,respiratory and infectious complications.Di-
temichypertensionand,via areflexarc.bradycardia
arrhoea,however,canresult in electrolyte and fluid
disturbances,and skin infections,and can interfere
loedema of the ocular fundus arevery suggestive of
withnutritional therapy.In theICU diarrhoea canbe
increased ICP,and mannitol (0.5 g/kg i.v.over 20
iatrogenic(Figure26.5),secondaryto primary underly-
minutes)shouldbeinstitutedimmediately,followedby
ing diseases orcanbeamanifestationofprimary,oftn
furosemide(0.7mg/kg i.v.)15minuteslater.
infectious Gl disease.Oral antibiotics and othermedi-
Interestingly N-acetylcysteine (NAC) decreases
cations(i.e.agents that increase the osmotic load of
cerebral oedema bothexperimentally andinhuman
the gut such asmagnesium-containing antacids or
patients with this complication of liverdisease.lt canbe
lactulose)are the cause of most iatrogeniccasesof
used along withmannitol,and the suggestion istouse
diarrhoea.Enteral feeding, especiall when associ-
the acetaminophen(paracetamol) antidote dosage in
atedwithoralantibioticuse,canalsocausediarrhoea.
dogs and cats (i.e. 140 mg/kg i.v loading dose given
Diarrhoea secondary to underlying disease,can be
over1hour,then70 mg/kg q6h for4-6 more doses).
caused byGl bleeding since blood acts asboth a gut
Thereislessriskof anaphylactoidreaction if NAC is
irritant and an osmotic agent.Sepsis and primary
given over 1 hour. lf HE is the suspected cause of the
neurological deterioration,specific treatment should
critically ill animal.
be directed toward alleviating HE (see Chapter 15). It
isimportanttorememberthathypokalaemia and meta-
bolic alkalosis exacerbate HE and should be aggres-
sively treated whenpresent.Azotaemia also worsens
Antibiotics
HE, since increased blood urea increases urea diffu
Antacids (especially magnesium-containing antacids)
sion into the Gl tract, which leads to further increases
Magnesium and phosphorus supplementation
Lactulose
inammoniaproduction.ltisimportanttoavoidhypogly-
Colchicine
caemia,infections,administration of old bloodprod-
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
ucts,constipationanddrugs,suchasbenzadiazepines,
Cimetidine
whichcan allexacerbateHE.
Misoprostol
Animalswithsevere liverdiseasehavea tendency
Cytotoxic drugs
tobleed due toacombination of processes.There are
oftendecreasesinthecoagulationfactorsthatare
Some mcdications that may be associated with
26.5
produced in theliver(allfactorsexceptfactorVlll,von
development of diarrhoea.
Willebrandfactorandtissuethromboplastin),decreased
vitaminKingestion orabsorption,decreased levelsof
Treatment
activation of thevitaminK-dependent coagulation fac-
torsintheliver(i.e.factorsIl,Vll,IX,X),anddecreased
diarrhoea iscorrectionof fluid andelectrolytebalance.
plateletfunctionrelated to decreased albuminconcen-
Most often sodium, potassium, phosphorus and mag-
tration.Catswith liver disease arepredisposed to
nesium willneedtobereplacedinadditiontocorrecting
Heinzbodyanaemia.Clinical evidence indicates that
the fluid balance.lffluid lossesare severe it is sug-
animalswith liverdiseaseareresponsivetovitaminK1
gestedthatreplacementismonitoredusingCVP.Good
treatment (0.5-1.5 mg/kg s.c.q12h for three treat-
nursingcare,properhygieneandskincare,andcareful
ments,and then once perweek).The best treatment
monitoring are paliative treatments that can decrease
foranaemia in these animalsis freshwhole blood.
fluid losses andprotect against skin infections.
Ascites causes increased abdominal pressure
Infectious causes of diarrhoea (e.g. parvovirus,
which canfurtherincreaseportal venouspressure in
Salmonella,Giardia,Campylobacter,seeChapter16)
liver disease.Protein lossfrom the Gl tract and Gl
mustalsobe considered.lfan infectiouscauseof
tracthaemorrhagecanbothbepotentiated by as
diarrhoea is foundorsuspected thepatient should be
286
Chapter 26 Critical care of patients with gastrointestinal disease
isolated immediately. All drugs suspected of causing
earlier clinical improvement compared to identically
diarrhoea should be discontinued if possible. Enteral
treated puppies that were kept NPO.
feedings should be decreased in volume, diluted or
given by constant rate infusion, but should not be
References and further reading
discontinued since recent evidence suggests that any
enteral nutrition is superior to the standard nothing per
Hansen B (2000) Acute pain management. Veterinrary Clinics of North
os (NPO) treatment. In one clinical study, early enteral
America: Smal/ Animal Practice 30, 899-915
 Wiliams J and Niles J (in preparation) BSAVA Manuai of Canine and
nutrition of puppies with parvovirus enteritis resulted in
 Feline Abdominal Surgcry. BSAVA Publications. Gloucester
287
Feeding
PS
Debra L. Zoran
Introduction
isreasonable.Thesecondruleof thumbistodeter-
mine thefeedingmethod that isbest suited for the
Nutritionisavital aspectof themedical management
patient's situation by asking thefollowing questions:
of many,if not all,patients with gastrointestinal (GI)
disease and forallpetswith critical illnessorsevere
Is thefeeding tube going tobe required long-
trauma.When any animal has anillness that results in
term?
significantweightloss,nabilitytoeatorspecialfeeding
Is therean anaestheticrisk thatmakes tube
needs,nutritional support through alternative feeding
placement an unacceptable hazard?
methods isoften critical to successful medical man-
What types of diet does the patient require?
agement.This chapter is an overview of the approach
(Some foods can't be fed through very small-bore
toproperutilizationandplacement of feeding tubes in
feeding tubes, such as naso-oesophageal or
dogs and cats,including both endoscopic and non-
jejunostomy tubes).
endascopicmethodsforplacementoffeedingtubes.ln
addition,selectionofappropriatfoods,feeding fr
Finally, it is extremely important to include the
quency and feedingvolumewill be reviewed. In gen-
ownerinthe decision-making process,as theymust be
eral, providing enteral nutrition for dogs and cats is
willing andable toprovide thenecessarynutritionif the
approached similarly,butwhere there are differences,
animal is to be able to go home.Many owners can
theywill be discussed.
handle thethreeor fourfeedingsperdaywhichis
However,in animals with jejunostomy tubes,bolus
Selecting a feeding route and
feedingof thedietthreeorfourtimesadaywillikely
setting up a feeding plan
causediarrhoeaduetovolumeand osmoticoverload
of the smallintestine.Jejunostomy tubefeeding isbest
Feeding route
implemented using veryfrequent(e.g.every2-3hours)
Therearemanyenteral feedingmethods available
small mealsorby continuous infusion of food(using a
to thepractisingveterinary surgeonranging from oral
fluidpump),whichmaynotbepracticableinthehome
or force feeding,tonumerous tube-feedingmethods
setting.Thus,choosing the best feeding method re-
including:
quiresnotonlya nutritionalassessmentof thepatient's
needs,butalsoanassessmentof theabilityofthecare-
Naso-oesophageal
giverstoprovidethenutritionappropriately.
Pharyngeal
Oesophageal
Gastrostomy
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG)
Jejunostomy.
Eachfeedingmethodemploysavarietyofdiffer-
ent tubes (Figure 27.1).Each of these different en-
teral nutrition routes has its own pros and cons,as
discussed individuallybelowandsummarized inFig-
ure 27.2.
Thefeedingrouteselectedforaparticularanimal
isbasedon thepremise that itisbest tofeed thegut
ashigh up as it is functional.In other words,if the
dog hasmegaesophagus andafeeding tubeisgoing
tobeplaced toprovidenutritional support,agastros-
tomyorPEGtubeshouldbeused.Whereas,ifthecat
has a severe case of gingivitis or stomatitis and is
Multiple sizes and types of feeding lube
unable(orunwilling) toeat,anoesophagostomy tube
27.1
availablefor use in dogs and cats.
288
Chapter 27 Feeding tubes
Route
Advantages
Disadvantages
Other
Oral or force feeding
No special equipment
Anorectic animals or those in pain wilretuse or
May induce food aversion in
Physiological method cf feeding if
fight feeding
cats
tolerated by patient
Stresstul to both theanimalcare-giver
Difficulto achieve caloric requirements
Naso-cesophageal tube
Rapidly placed
Patient discomfort
Caution shculd be advised in
No need for anaesthesia-only
May be easily dislodged by patient
placing a naso-oesophageal
local anaesthetic (proparacaine,
Must use liquid diets only-thus difficult to use in
tube in any patient with
proxymetacaine)
nasal disease,a cloting
No special equipment needed for
Contraindicated incomatose,recumbentr
disorder or with severe
placement
dysphoric cats or dogs that are at riskof
thrombocytopenia
Excellentforshort-termfeeding
aspiration
(2-3 days) of cats or small dogs
Not tolerated long-term
Oesophagcstomy tube
Placed rapidly (5-10 minutes)
Tube can be removed at any
Onlyrequires short-termorlight
retroflexed into the nasopharynx
time following placement as
anaesthesia
Tube siterequires daily caretoprevent infection
penmanent stoma does not
Can use commercial feeding
Cannot be used incomatose,recumbent r
form and site heals rapidly
tubes and kit or homemade'
dysphoric animals at risk of aspiration
Tube does notinterferewith
materials (e.g.red rubber
Shouldnotbeusedinanimalswith
eating (many cats wilstart
catheter)
oesophagitis cr severe oesophageal dysfunction
eating with the tube in place).
Can use blended canned or liquid
Most common complication is infection at tube site
which may not occur with
foods
naso-oesophageal or
Welltolerated for longperiods
pharyngostomy tubes
(weeks to months)
Gastrostomy including
Can use commercial feeding
Requireslongeranaesthesiaperiod forplacement
Well tolerated by most animals
PEG tube
tubes and kit or homemade'
Requires some special equiment and experise
for long periods
materials (e.g.Pezzer catheter)
Complications from tube placement are more
Easy to access tube for
Can use blenderized canned or
serious (e.g.peritonitis,tube leakage into
feeding
liquid foods
abdomen)
Well toleratedforlongperiods
(weeks to months) and is best
method for prolonged (months to
years) feeding
Canbeplaced with useof
endoscope,an ELD device orat
surgery
Excellent for dogs or catswith
oral or oesophageal disease
Jejunostomytube
Excellent means of providing
Placement requires special equipment,
An important means of
enteralnutritionforhospitalied
endoscopic expertise andor surgical skill
delivering nutrition in special
patients with severe vomiting or
Mustfeedliquiddiets
situations
gastic disease
Best to feed with continuous infusion (pump) to
avoid overioadof intestines with boluses cf food
liquid diets needed
Nasojejunostomy tubes are not tolerated
long-term
27.2
Enteral nutrition routes.
Feeding plan
eatingwellorhavebeen unabletoholdfood down,the
Once thefeedingroutehasbeen decided,a feeding
goalshouldbetoreach theanimal'srestingenergy
plan must be established. There are several steps
requirement(RER)forcalories.Formostcats,theRER
involved insettingupa feedingplan,and thefirstiso
determine how many calories are needed for that
metabolicstress.Dogsmayrequire additional calories
animal initsparticular situation.Secondly,the type of
(e.g.1.25-1.5 xRER) when under severe metabolic
food tobe fed mustbe selected (based on tube type,
stress (e.g.burns), but under most circumstances
foodavailability and thenutritionalneedsofthepa-
meeting their RERismore thanenough tomaintaingut
tient),and finally,thetiming,frequencyandamountf
health,mmune function and basic needs for protein
food tobefedateachmeal mustbedetermined.
and energymetabolism.Theeasiestequationtousein
Thecaloricneedsofanindividualcanbedeter-
a clinical situation is the linear equation:
minedbyanumberofdifferentequations(Figure27.3),
but in general forverysickpatients that havenotbeen
RER=30xBW(kg)+70
289
Chapter 27 Feeding tubes
Theequationforcalculation of RERbymost nutri-
Labs) in the USAand Reanimyl(Virbac)in the UK),are
tionexperts,andonethatismoreaccurateinverysmall
balanced and high-energy (moderate fat, high carbo-
or very large animals,is:
hydrate),and suitable for dogs or cats with normal Gl
function.However,forthoseanimalswith significantGI
RER=70×BW0.75(kg)
disease,or thosethat arefatintolerant orrequire low
carbohydrate in their diet,these diets may notbethe
Once the animal's RERhas been calculated,the
best choice.There are a wide range of products avail-
nextstepistoselect thediet thatmeets theneeds of
able for human enteral nutrition that have varying fat,
the medical circumstance(e.g.highly digestible or
protein and carbohydrate concentrations that can be
high energy/recovery diet;hypoallergenic or hydro-
used for short-term feeding in dogs.Unfortunately,
lysed diet).This is a subject that is of considerable
thesedietswillnotprovideadequateproteinandare
importance,but isbeyond the scope of this chapter
deficient in a number of amino acids (e.g. taurine,
(seeBSAVA Manual of CompanionAnimal Nutrition
arginine and carnitine) and other nutrients (e.g.arachi-
andFeeding).
donicacid,certain Bvitamins)that catsrequire,and
Once thecaloricneedsaredeterminedand diet
thusshould notbefed tocatswithoutsupplementation
selected,thefinal stepistodetermine thebestwayto
of these missing nutrients.
initiatefeedinginthepatient.Withtubesofa10French
Once the amount and type of food is determined,a
or largersize,most canned foods canbe blenderized
planis developed todeliver thenutrientsefficientlybut
intoa gruel or slurry and fed directly throughthe tube.
tominimize vomiting orother complications.In most
Tubesofasmallerdiameter,especiallynaso-oesopha
cats,small,frequentmealsaretoleratedmorereadily
geal orjejunostomy tubes(which areusually5French
than largebolusesof foodbecause thefelinestomach
orsmaller) will require a liquid dietaseven blenderized
isnotasreadilydistensible.Wheninitiatingfeeding in
andstrained foodswillplug the tube.The most widely
eitherdogsorcats,theaimonDay1istoprovide46
availableliquiddietsfordogsand cats(Clinicare(Abbott
meals overthecourse of thedayusinghalf of theRER
as thecaloricgoal.lf that amount of food istolerated
onDay2thefeedings areincreasedbyaquarter,and
Step 1.Calculate resting energy requirement(RER):
soon.SomepatientswithGldisease will notbe able to
toleratethevolumeoffoodrequired tomeetRER;
RER=70xBW075(kg)
however,evenif theanimal is abletotolerateonlyhalf
RER=30×BW(kg）+70
the daily RER,it will minimize the risk of intestinal
Patient RER =
bacterial translocation,immune deficiencyfrom pro-
Step 2.Determine food tobe used and the kcal/ml of the food:
tein deficits and death from sepsis.An outline of a
proposed feeding plan foran animal requiring enteral
Example:Clinicare(Abbot labs） =1.04kcalml,237mlcan
nutritional support isprovidedforillustrationof these
Whatisthetotalvolumeoffoodtobeadministereddayatfull
concepts (Figure 27.3).
RER?
Step 3.Set up a feeding schedule:
Placementoffeeding tubes
Wil feeding be intermittent?
If so, how many feedings/day?
Naso-oesophageal tubes
I feding wll be continuous,-
ml/hr
Naso-oesophageal tubes are an important feeding
Forintmittentrcontiuoufedingstart slowlyanworkt
over 3-4 days:
option forall hospitalized animals thatrequire short-
Day 1:VRER=
termfeeding but areunable orunwilling toeat.These
divided into3-6meals/24hr
tubesareeasilyplaced inmost animalswithout any-
ml focd/meal
thing more than local analgesia (proparacaine or
Day 2:RER=
divided into 3-6meals/24 hr
proxymetacaine ophthalmicdrops) of thenose or mild
=
mlfood/meal
Day 3:RER
sedationforthose animals thatareextremely anxious.
divided into3-6meals/24 hr
The main contraindications to using naso-oesopha-
Day4:TakeRER and divide into3-4meals/day
geal tube feeding are:
ml food/meal
Severe nasal disease ordysphagia,when
Step4.Feeding instructions:
passing thetubemaybedifficult orimpossible
Warm allfood to body temperature
Animals with a coagulopathy (the tube placement
Aspirate tubebeforefeeding (donotfeed if>10ml fluid present)
may cause epistaxis)
Administer gastric oroesophageal meal over15-20minutes,
Severe or uncontrolled vomiting (the tube will not
continuousnfusionisbestforintestinalfeeding
stay inplace)
Flush tube with warmwater to prevent clogging beforerecapping
Patientsthat areunabletoprotect theirairway
Use onlyclenfod bags andadministratinines.eace
(comatose,lateral recumbent animals that are at
continuous administration lines every 24-48 hours
risk of aspiration).
Useliquidmedicationif possible foprevent tubecloging
Thistypeoffeedingisbest usedasaformofbridge
nutrition,asmost animalswillnottolerate thetube in
27.3
Fecding plan.
theirnose formore than 1-3 days.In addition,while
290
Chapter 27 Feeding tubes
naso-oesophageal tubes can be placed in any sized
of time required ismuchshorter than for otherproce-
animal,theyaregenerallyused onlyincats andsmal
dures.For thatreason,andmanyothers,these tubes
dogsbecause the tubesaresosmall that liquid diets
areausefulmethodofproviding enteralnutrition in
the practice setting.That being said,pharyngostomy
dietrequiredtomeetthe energyneedsisvery largeand
tubeshave fallen from favour compared to
is frequently limiting (both in inventory aswell as in
oesophagostomy tubes,as they tend to be associ-
capabilityto administer thatvolume easily)
atedwithmorecomplicationsandarelesswelltoler-
ated,especially for long-term feeding (weeks to
Procedure
months).Theyalsointerfere with epiglotticmovement
Naso-oesophagealtubeplacementisrelativelystraight-
and laryngeal function,and have been associated
forward.Before beginning to pass the tube,the dis-
tancefrom thenose tothelastribismeasuredand.
Many animals arereluctant toresumeeating aslong
movingforward2-3ribspaces,thedistanceismarked
as thepharyngostomytubeisinplace,whichisnota
on the tube.This will ensure that the tube doesnot
problem in animalswithan oesophagostomy tube.
enter the stomach,thus reducing gastric reflux.Lubri-
Forthesereasons,placementofanoesophagostomy
cation of the tubewith lidocaine gel can aid insertion.
tube ispreferred and is themethod described here.
Once the anaesthetic drops (e.g. proxymetacaine) are
ThereaderisreferredtoMarks(1998)forinformation
instilled,the animal'shead isplaced inanormal pose
about placement of pharyngostomy tubes.
(i.e.not too flexed orextended)and the tube directed
The advantages ofoesophagostomy tubesare
downwardasitentersthenosesothat it willpassinto
many(seeFigure27.2) and include easyplacement
the ventral meatus of the nasal cavity(Figure 27.4).
(once the operator is familiar with the technique)
undershort-term general anaesthesia or heavy seda-
tion.Moreimportantly，the only major complication
reported in associationwithoesophagostomy tube
placement is infection at the stoma site.Oesophago-
stomy tubes areespeciallyuseful in catsbecause
they arewell tolerated and allowlong-termfeeding
(months) if needed.Such longfeedingperiodsmaybe
required insome catswithidiopathichepatic lipidosis
or chronicrenal failure.
Procedure
Thereareseveraldifferenttechniquesdescribedfor
placementofoesophagostomy tubes.However,forall
techniques,thefirststeps areplacementof thepatient
in right lateralrecumbency,clipping thehair from the
27.4
Canine head (anatomical model) used to
illustrateproperplacement of a naso-
ing the area （Figure 27.5).The two most common
oesophageal teeding tube in the ventral meatus.
procedures are:
By holding the animal's head in a normal position,
Apercutaneous(14gauge needle)technique
it is easier for the dog orcat to sense thepresence of
A surgical cut-down technique.
the tube in the laryngeal area.As the tube ispassed
andreachesthelarynx the animal will swallow,thus
Thereaderisreferred toMarks(1998),Tams(1999)
makingit more likely thatthe tubewill enterthe oesopha-
andDevitt andSeim(20oo)tolearnothertechniques.
gus and not the trachea.Whilemostanimalswillcough
if the tube does enter the trachea,itisveryimportantto
checkitsposition carefully.lfthetubeisinthe oesopha-
gus,thereshouldbenegativepressurewhensuctionis
placed on the tube.As an additional test,a small
amountof watercanbe instilled in the tubebefore
administeringfood.Finally,alateralradiographshould
alwaysbetakentoensurenotonlythatthetubeisinthe
properlocation,butalso that it isnotkinkedortwisted.
Pharyngostomyandoesophagostomy
tubes
Pharyngostomyandcesophagostomytubesoffersev-
eraladvantagestopractitionersovergastrostomy
tubes because they canbeplacedwithaut having
specialized equipmentorexpertise.In addition,while
27.5
Paticnt inright lateral recumbency,with the
bothpharyngostomy andoesophagostomy tubesre-
neck prepared for placement of an
quire anaesthesia forproperplacement,the amaunt
cesophagostomy tube:
291
Chapter27 Fecding tubes
Oesophagostomy tube placement parts are com-
mercially available(Figure 27.6).The advantage of
the surgical technique is that larger tubes (greater
than 12French)can be placed,which will allow
easier,fasterfeedingofblenderized canned foods.
With smaller tubes(5-10French) only liquids can be
usedwithoutdifficulty.lnthesurgicaltechnique,curved
Carmalt forceps are inserted into the oesophagus
through the mouth and a surgical cut-down is made
over the tip of the forceps （Figure 27.7).The pre-
measured tube is then grasped by the forceps,pulled
intotheoesophagusandadvancedtothedesired
position (Figure 27.8).
27.8
Advancing the oesophagostomy tube down the
cesophagus.
The sizeof tube selected depends onthesizeof the
animal and the type of tubes available,but most cats
easily toleratea 10-14Frenchgauge tube(e.g.red
rubber tube,standard polyurethane feeding tube or
siliconefeeding tube).Largerdogs cantolerate 18-24
French gauge sizes easily.The advantage of using
polyurethane isthat it isstrongerand lastslongerthan
silicone,whichwhile softer and more flexible（and so
(a)
easier tomanoeuvre)islessdurable.Once the tubeis
placedandispositioned in theoesophagus at the
desireddepth,thetubeissecuredbyplacementofa
Chinese finger-trap (friction) suture,with or without a
tapebutterfly’toanchorit,anda purse stringisplaced
around the base of the tube (Figure 27.9).A soft,
padded,loose,neckwrapisplaced tokeeptheremain-
ing tube from being caught on objects or removed by
rearclaws.The stoma sitewill notseal around thetube,
sooozing around the site is common.The key to
preventionof stoma siteinfectionis dailycleaningof the
site,and if oozing ofpurulent liquidsuggestsinfection,
anantibitiinmntsuhassivrufadiazinhu
be applied. The stoma site willclose rapidly once the
tubeisremoved(inadvertentlyorpurposely),soifatube
(a)Introducer withneedle and'peel-away
27.6
calheters.(b) Patient undergoing insertion of
needs tobereplaced it shouldbe done as soon as
van Noort cespnagostomy tube. (Courlesy af Ronald
possible after it is removed (within 48 hours). The
vonNoorl)
stomasitwillhearapidlybygranulatinanddepi
thepotential for oesophageal stricture or fistula forma-
tion,these complications are apparentlyveryrare.
Curved Carmalt forceps inserted intothe
oesophagus and used to make an incision at
the site of the oesophagoslorny tube p acement. These
Securing the cesophagostomy tubewith a
fcrceps are aso used to grasp the tube to oullilinto the
27.9
purse-string stay suture and a Chiniesefinger
oesophagus during placement.
trap (overlapping) sulure lo prevent slidirg
292
Chapter27
Feeding tubes
Gastrostomy tubes
Gastrostomytubesarethebestmethod forfeeding
animals with severe oesophageal disease,animals
stomy tube,oranimalsforwhichlong-termfeeding is
anticipated.The major drawbacksofusing gastro-
stomy tubesare that theirplacement ismore compli-
cated and requires specialized equipment (e.g.
endoscopy or an ELD device),placement requires
more anaesthesia time,and,if they are not placed
surgicallyand the animalisvery active orvomiting,the
tubesite can leakgastriccontents into the abdomen.
The contraindicationstogastrostomy tubefeeding are
similarto thosefor oesophagostomytubes,in that it
27.11
Exampleofa commercially available
should beavoided incomatose animals,animalswith
gastrostomy tubekit.
laryngealparalysis(orinability toprotect theirairway)
and any animal with a gastric outflow obstruction. lf
Procedure
these thingsare takeninto consideration,gastrostomy
PlacementofPEGtubesfordeliveryofenteralnutrition
tubesarean efficientandvery effective meansof
indogs andcatshasbeenusedsince the1980s,and
deliveringnutrition toboth dogsand cats over long
isevenmorewidelyusednowthatendoscopesare
periods (months to years).
increasinglyfound inprivateveterinarypractices.In
Oneofthemanyadvantagesofusingagastros-
tomytubeforenteralnutrition isthat thediameterof
the tubes placed is relatively large (e.g. cats 12-16
tubes;and for most practitioners with some endo-
French, dogs 18-24 French).These sizes of tubes
scopic experience,placement of a PEG tube is rela-
alloweasy useofblenderized cannedfoods instead
tively easy tolearn.
of feeding exclusively liquid enteral diets.lncats,the
The firststepisto determinewhetheraPEG tube is
tubes also alloweasyadministrationof medications,
theproperchoice fortheparticularpatient, andthenselect
whichcanbe difficultif notimpossibleordangerousin
the type of tube toplace Pezzer,standard tube or low-
anorectic cats.The most common tube used for
profile tube)The type of feeding tube selected depends
gastrostomyin the author'shospital,inboth dogs and
on the lengthof time thetubeisexpectedtostayinplace,
cats,is the mushroom-tippedurologicalcatheter(also
the size ofthe animal,and the equipment that the
calleda Pezzercatheter)(Figure 27.10).The tipof the
veterinarysurgeonismostcomfortableusing.However,
catheterisremovedpriortoplacementtoincrease the
somelargedogs,particularlythosewithaconformation
openings to allow food through the end more easily.
in whichthestomach isalmostcompletelyencasedby
However,gastrostomy tube kits （e.g.these are in-
the ribs,arepoorPEG tube candidatesbecause of the
tended for humanusebut workwell indogs and cats)
difficultiesinsecuring thetube tothebodywall inaway
are available (Figure 27.11) and provide a tube with
that avoids leakage around the tube.Insuch dogs the
allof therequired disposable supplies.In the UK,kits
stomachshouldbepexiedtothebodywallatthetimeof
withveterinaryPEG tubeswithswaged-onwireloops
the gastrostomy tubeplacement toreduce theriskof
foreaseof placementareavailable.lt isimportant to
recognize that there areseveral options availablefor
Once the animal isundergeneral anaesthesia and
tubeplacement,butthekeyistobecomeveryfamiliar
placed in right lateral recumbency (this is the opposite
withoneortwoso thattheprocedurebecomes
side down compared to mostendoscopic procedures),
second nature.
anarea extending from thelastribtothe.midabdomen
is clipped and surgically preparedto allow sterile place-
ment of thetube at this site.The endoscopeisinserted
into the stomach and the stomach is insufflated
maximallytomakesure that theexpandedgastricwall
displacesbowel,spleenor liverfrom theinsertionsite.
Inlargerdogs,itmaybenecessarytohaveanassistant
applyexternalpressure to thecervical area toprevent
the escape of air through the oesophagus.The site on
the stomach wall bestsuitedforinsertion of thetubeis
dilated stomach just behind the last rib(Figure 27.12).
The endoscopist helps direct the assistant to the best
locationin thestomachwallbyvisualizingtheindented
mucosa.lngeneral,the goalistoavoidplacing thetube
in the pyloric antrum, the incisura angularis,the lesser
curvature orlowerregions of thegreatercurvature,as
27.10
A Pezzer urological cathcter used for
theseregionsaremoremotileandmorelikelytoleak
gastrostomy tube feeding.
gastriccontentsaround thetubesite.
293
Chapter27Feeding tubes
27.14
Visualizationof the
string passing
tnrough the catheter
in the stomach wall,
which is then
grasoed by grasoing
forceps passed
throughths
endoscopc.
(Courtesy ot James
Simoson)
arecentreviewbyTams(1999)forthespecificdetails
requiredtoplaceacommercialfeedingtubeusingakit.
Whenusing thePezzercatheter,thefirststep is to
cut theopenendof thetubeso thatit istapered tofitinto
Patient inright lateral recumbencyand
aplasticpipette tip or catheter introducer.Then the
27.12
prepared for placement of PEG tube.
suture issecured to the tube by using a needle toplace
severallayers(Figure27.15).Securing the suture tightly
Once the stomach siteis selected andvisually
intothe tube is essential forthe tubetobesuccessfully
agreed upon,thefinal surgicalpreparationof theskin s
retractedthroughtheoesophagus,intothestomachand
completed and the assistant canbeginplacement.The
finallyback through the stomachwall andskin(which
firststepisto insertalarge12-14gaugeover-the-
mayneedtobeincised very slightlytofacilitatepassage
needlecatheterpercutaneouslyintotheinflatedstom-
ofthe tube).Tobe surethetubeisseated securelyonce
ach(Figure27.13).Once insidethestomach,theneedle
itisthroughthestomachwall,theendoscopeisused to
isremoved,leaving the catheterin the stomach(which
followthe tubebackdown theoesophagus,intothe
shouldbeeasilyvisualizedbytheendoscopist)and a
stomachand assess how snug the tipis(Figure 27.16).
piece of long suture is introduced through the catheter
Firmtractionisused topullthetubethroughthestomach
into the stomach.This suture should be long enough to
walland achievea tight fit(Figure27.17).The final step
extendfromthestomach tothemouthwithplentyof
isplacing either a flange(Figure 27.18)or Chinese
lengthtospare.Thesutureisgraspedbytheendoscopist
using a biopsy orforeignbodyretrieval device(Figure
stomachwallandthebodywallclosetogethertoprevent
27.14),and when the suture is secured the endoscope
leakage.Once the tube isinplace,at-shirt,tube gauze
or loose body wrap is placed to protect the remaining
andsuture are slowlyretracted through themouth.
Alternatively,withsome manufacturedPEG tubekits
tubeand preventit frombeinginadvertentlyorpurpose-
(Mila andWilson-Cook),a flexiblewire loop is placed
fullyremoved.Thegastrostomy tubeshouldremain in
and grasped as thePEG tube has a corresponding
placeforatleast10-14daysbeforeitisremoved,sothat
swaged-on loop for a simple interlocking attachment.
the gastric stoma wil form a seal that prevents leakage
At this point,different procedures are required to
butalsoformsanattachmentbetweenthe stomachand
prepare thefeeding tubeforplacement,dependingon
the body wall.lf a gastrostomy tube is accidentally
whetheraPezzercatheteroracommercial feeding
removedbeforeintended,atubecanbereplaced through
tubekitisbeingused.However,readersarereferredto
thesamestomasiteiftheprocedureisperformedrapidly
(e.g.within 24hours of the tube removal).There are
commercialkitsavailablethatallowreplacementof the
tube through the stoma; and in some cases,placing a
human lowprofile tubemaybebeneficial.
27.13
Using anover-the-ncedle catheter to enter thc
27.15
Hlustralion shcwing thesuluresecurely
inflated stomach.Once the catheter is in the
attached tc the feeding tubewith thefecding
stomachand well visualizedby the endoscopist,the
tube altached to apipette tip or other smallplastic
needle isrcmoved and the string tobe used to pull the
introduccrwhich allows the tube tobe pulled thrcugn the
tube through is introduced.
hole in the stomach and body wall.
294
Chapter 27 Feeding tubes
Following
27.16
tho tube
as it is puled back
dowr:the
cesophagus into the
slomach and ready
obe oulled thrcugh
the wall.(Cour.esy of
(a)
Edwarc Hall)
(b)
27.19
An ELD devico showing (a) the entire device
and(b) the extended knife forpuncturing the
body wall and thehole in the endused to hold the suture
in olace as it is returncd into the stomach.
procedureisperformedblind.Thus,thereisnowayto
be sureof thelocationinthestomachwherethetube
isbeinglaced.nadditionitisquiteasy,ifduecare
isnottaken,toperforate thespleen,liverorintestinal
loops during the stabprocedure.Improperlyplaced
tubes may result in leakage of gastric contents into
the abdomen,abnormal gastricfunction,abnormal
reflux of gastric contents into the oesophagus or
The tuoe is pulled carefully, but wth steady
vomiting due to gastric outflow abnormalities. The
27.17
pressure,through the incision in thewall.lf too
procedurehasbeenwelldescribedelsewhereand
muchresistanceis encountered,the incisicn should be
thereader isreferred toMautereret al.(1994) and
wdened slightlybutusing caulionnot tomake thehole
Marks(1998) formoreinformation.
toolarge.
Jejunostomytubes
Thereare some situationswhenenteralfeedingisbest
accomplishedif thefoodisdelivereddirectlyintothe
smallintestine(e.gsomecasesof pancreatitis,gastric
outflowdisruptionoranimalswithotherduodenalor
upperintestinaloutflowproblems).Untilrecently,place-
ment of jejunostomy tubeswasa surgical procedure
performed during an exploratory laparotomy. How-
ever,ajejunostomytube canbeplacedviaendoscopic
procedures as described by Ponsky and Agzodi(1984)
and Tams (1999).
-ult
Procedure
The method usedmostoftenisplacement of ajejuno-
27.18
An external flange isoften used tohelpmaintain
stomy tube throughan existingPEG tube.Thisproce-
cortact betwecn the stomach and the body wall.
dure isrelatively straightforward,butnotnecessarily
easytoaccomplish.First,agastrostomytubeisplaced,
An alternativeprocedure forplacementof gastro-
then the special jejunostomy tube is inserted into the
stomy tubesin dogs andcatswasdeveloped using a
stomachviathe gastrostomy tube,and the endoscope
rigid device (an ELD device) that facilitates gastro-
is used to grasp the end of the jejunostomy tube and
stomy tubeplacementwithout theneed for anendo-
directitinto the duadenum.Oncethejejunostomytube
scope or surgical procedure (Figure 27.19).This
is in the duodenum,the endoscope is carefully re-
procedureiscertainlyusefulinpractice settingswhere
moved(leaving the jejunostomy tubeinplace)and the
an endoscope is unavailable. The procedure is per-
jejunostomytubeispassed furtherdown intothejeju-
formed using theELDdevicetoplacethe suture
num using fluoroscopic guidance to advance it to the
through the stomach wall, using the retractable de-
desired position.The jejunostomy tube has a weighton
vicetomake theincisionout through thegastric and
theend thathelpstopreventitsoradmovement,butit
body walls to grasp the suture.But,there are some
can be difficult to get the jejunostomy tube into the
important drawbacks,theleastofwhichisthatthe
jejunum and then tokeepit there.
295
Chapter 27  Feeding tubes
 An aiternative method for jejunostomy tube place-
by forcefully injecting water into the tube, by using a
ment is the nasojejunostomy tube. To place a
guide wire to dislodge the attached food or by instilling
nasojejunostomy tube the endoscope is firstadvanced
 a small amount of effervescent soda into the tube. In
into the duodenum. A guide wire is then placed into the
most situations, infections at cr around the tube site
duodenum through the biopsy channel and advanced
can be prevented by careful tube-site care. All tube
to the desired level in the jejunum. Once the guide wire
sites should be cleaned daily and topical use of an
is in place, the endoscope is carefully removed, leaving
 antibiotic cream is offen very useful in preventing
the wire so that the nasojejunostomy tube can be
 infection, ulcerafion or other tube-site problerms. Care-
advanced down the wire to the desired location. To
ful placement of bandaging or body covers will reduce
place the guide wire into the nose, a red rubber or other
the risk of the tube being dislodged or inadvertently
feeding tube is passed through the nose (as if it were
removed. If the animal is iritated by the tube, a careful
jaal aui oi (agni jeabeydoseo-oseu e se paoeld bulaa
assessment of the tube should be undertaken as the
of the oropharynx.The tube is pulledinto the mouth and
stoma may be getting infected or there may be some
then this tube is used to transfer the guide wire back up
other problem; most fubes cause the patient no dis-
-se s! ssaooid emue sui lno pue asou aui yonoiu
 comfort. Finaly, if the patient vomits after feeding.
 sisted by using fluoroscopy to assess placement, but
check that the amount (volume) of food being given is
plain radiography can also be used once the tube is in
 not excessive (e.g. feed smaller more frequent meals
-oseu um s paoeld Auadoid s! hi ainsse ol ns
initially), and then prokinetic (e.g、metoctopramide,
oesophageal tubes, nasojejunostomy tubes are not as
cisapride, ranitidine) or anti-emetic (metoclopramide,
well tolerated as jejunostomy tubes placed through the
ondansetron, dolasetron,chlorpromazine) drugsshouid
 gastrostomy tube, and for that reason, are not the 
 be added to the regime. In most cases, the camplicat-
approach most recommended.
ing faciors can be resolved and enteral feeding accom-
 plished successfully if alterations in volume, frequency
or the type ot foad are completed.
Complications of feeding tubes
Major complications of feeding tube placementin dogs 
References and further reading
and cats are uncommon and can usually be avoided
 Bartges JW (2001) 1dentifying and feeding patients that require
with proper technique and careful client. counseling.
Dutijional support. Veterinary Medicine 96, 60-74
The most common complications are:
 Bright RM (1993) Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy. Vetennary
Clinics of North America 23, 531-545
Crowe DT (1986) Clinical use of an indwelling nasogastric tube for
Tube clogging
 Infection at the tube site
American Animal Hospital Association 22, 675-682
Dislodgement of the tube by the animal
Vomiting following feeding.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Guilford WG (199s) Nutrilonal management of gastraintestinal
Other complications include:
diseases.In:Stombeck'sSmallAnimalGastroenteroiogy3dedn,
ed, WG Guilford et al., pp.889-911. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Kally N and WilleJ(1e96) SSAVA Manuaf of Companion Animal
Leakage around the tube site
Nutrition and Feeding. BSAVA Publications, Chellenham
The animal.biting and transecting the tube
 Marks SL. (1998) The principles ang practical application of enteral
nutrition. Veterinary Chnics of North Armerica 28, 677-708
 Abnormal gastric outflow or function
Mauterer JV, Abood SK, Bulington CA and Smeak DD (1994) New
Diarrhoea due to overfeeding the small intestine
technique and managerant guidelines for percutaneous
 Necrosis of the gastric wall
nonendoscopic tube gastrostomy. yourngt of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 205, 574-579
Stricture of the oesophagus at the tube site
Amarican Journat of Gastroenteralogy 79, 113-116
RemiladRL,Amsrong PJand Davenport DJ(20o Assisted
feeding in hospitalized patients: enteral and parenteral nutrition.
Tube clogging can usually. be avoided by carefully
In: Smal Anirmal Clinical Nutrition 4" edn, ed. Du Davenport et al..
flushing the tube with water following each feeding and 
pp. 351-399. Moris ML Publication, Topeka
by using appropriate food forthe size of the tube. If the
jejunostomy tubes. In: Smal Animal Endoscopy, 2w edn, ed. TR
tube does become clogged,it can often be unclogged
Tams, pp. 341-356. Mosoy, St. Louis
296
Therapeutics
Edward J. Hall
Introduction
Sign or disease process
Treatment
Thischapterdeals withlicensed andnon-licenseddrugs
Gastrointestinal disease
available to treat gastrointestinal(Gl) and iver disease,
their modes of action, interactions and potential side-
Bacterial infection
Antibacterials
effects in dogs and cats.Details on dosages are listed in
Constipation
Laxatives;cathartics;enemas
Appendix1.Thereaderisreferred toearlierchapters for
information on diagnosis and recommendations on the
Diarrhoea
Anti-diarrhoeals: protectants, adsorbents
complete therapy of specific conditions,including the
Gastric ulceration
Cytoprotectants;antisecretory agents
critical roles of fluid therapyand nutritionalmodification,
whicharenotcovered in thischapter.
Hypomotlity disorders
Prokinetics
In addition to specific treatment(s) for specific con-
Immune-mediated
Immunosuppressive
ditions, symptomatic therapies are also used (Figure
28.1).However,asmostGIdisturbances are acuteand
Inflammation
Anti-inflammatories
self-limiting the need for some of theseremedies is
Maldigestion
Digestive enzymes
debatable and their efficacy has infrequently been
Neoplasia
Cytotoxics
proven.Ideally, such symptomatic remedies are only
used afferconditions requiring specific treatment have
Parasitic infection
Antiparasiticides
been excluded. lf a definitive diagnosis is not made,
Vomiting
Anti-emetics
then they should only be used for a short period
(maximum of 72hours) so that definitive treatment is
Liver disease
not dangerously delayed.For example, using anti-
Bacterial infection
Antibacterials
emetics to mask the signs of an intestinal obstruction
Cholestasis
Cholagogues, choleretics
only delays surgery and endangers the patient.
Copper accumulation
Decoppering agents
Fibrosis
Antifibrotics
Gastrointestinal disease
Immune-mediated
Immunosuppressive
Antibacterials
Inflammation
Anti-inflammatories; protectants;
It is commonly assumed that antibacterial agents (see
anti-oxidants; hepatotropic agents
also BSAvAManual of Canine andFeline Infectious
Diseases) are harmful because they disturb the normal
Categories of treatment for specific and non-
intestinal microbial ecosystem.In humans,antibiotics
28.1
specificGl problems.
shift the normal colonic flora towards Gram-negative
aerobesreplacingendogenous anaerobessuchas Bacter-
Specificinfections:e.g. Salmonella,
oideswith Pseudomonas,Klebsiella,Clostridium and
Campylobacter(seeChapter16)
yeasts.Fewer pathogenic organisms (e.g. Salmonella)
Haemorrhagic diarrhoea:i.e.risk of sepsis
throughmucosal ulceration(see Chapter20)
penicillins can lead to a fatal pseudomembranous colitis
Antibiotic-responsivediarrhoea(ARD)or small
duetoClostridiumdifficileovergrowth.Yet,pseudomem-
intestinal bacterialovergrowth(SIBO)(see
branous colitisisrarelyreported in dogs,and diarrhoea
Chapter 20)
alone disturbs the flora,reducing anaerobe numbers.
Severe immunosuppression:e.g.chemotherapy-
Whilst oral antibiotics maycause diarrhoea in dogs
associated diarrhoea,parvovirusinfection(see
and cats,the effect istransient;diarrhoeaceaseswhen
Chapter16)
antibiotics are withdrawn.Nevertheless, despite their
Inhalationpneumonia associated with
relative safety, the environmental risks of inducing anti-
oesophageal disease(see Chapter6)
biotic resistance and carrier status are real and thus
Prophylaxis in intestinal surgery (see BSAVA
antibiotic usage should berestricted to times of clear
ManualofCanineandFelineAbdominal
need.They are indicated in the following situations:
Surgery).
297
Chapter 28 Therapeutics
Aminoglycosides
Macrolides
Aminoglycosides are mainly active against Gram-nega-
Macrolides are generally bacteriostatic against
tive bacteria, although some streptococci and entero-
Gram-positive aerobes and cbligate anaerabes and
cocci are susceptible.
 suitable substitutes in penicillin-sensitive patients.
Some may be effective at low doses by inhibiting
Gentamicin: Gentamicin is. effective against Gram-
bacterial adhesion.
 negative anaerobes; it is useful in combination with
 penicilins (see below).ltis potentially nephrotoxic, and
Erythromycin: It can be bactericidal at high doses
factors that increase the risk are:
 and is the drug of choice for Campylobacterinfection,
Renal dysfunction
 but erythromycin is ineffective against Enterobacte-
■
Age (young animals are more susceptible)
riaceae (e.g. Pseudomonas, Escherichia, Kiebsiella).
 Dehydration
Erythromycin is acid-labile and should be adminis-
Fever and sepsis
tered on an empty stomach or as an enteric-coated
+
Concurrent treatment with non-steroidal anti-
formulation. lt trequently causes vomiting because it
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
mimics the Gl hormone motilin. At lower doses it is
prokinetic (see below).
Gentamicin (and other aminoglycosides, é.g.
amikacin, tobramycin) should therefore be used only
Tylosin:Thisdrug isalsoactive against Campyiobacter
after patients have been rehydrated.
although it is only bacteriostatic. Tylosinhas been used
to treat SIBO, ARD and canine idiopathic colitis.It has
Neomycin: Neomycin is nephro- and ototoxic, but is
a bifter taste.
not absorbed so can be given safely orally to reduce Gl
bacteria and ammonia praduction in hepatic encepha-
Spiramycin: It is found in combination with metronid-
lopathy. It is also present in some anti-diarrhoeal
azole in some countries. lts activity against anaercbes
mixiures, but should never be used in haemorrhagic
makes it a suitable choice for periodontal infections.
diarrhoea as it may cross the damaged mucosal barrier
and cause renal damage or deafness.
Ciarithromycin and azithromycin: Clarithromycin
Cephalosporins and cephamycins .
is more acid-stable and more active than erythromy-
cin and has been used as part of triple therapy to treat
Oral cephalosporins are active against Gram-positive
aerobes and some anaerobes, such as Bacteroides
gastric Helicobacter infection (see Chapter 19).
spp. and most Ciostridium spp. However, they have
Azithromycin has a longer tissue haf-life than eryth-
variable activity against Gram-negative aerobes, such
romycin, but again is nat active against the Entero-
as Escherichia spp., due to acquired resistance. They
bacteriaceae.
are rarely used to treat primary Gl infections.
 Parenteral cephalosporins (e.g. cefazolin, cetaman-
Metronidazole
dole, cefotaxime, ceftiofur) combined with aminoglyco-
Metronidazole is bactericidal for many Gram-positive
sides may be used to treat patients with sepsis that
and most Gram-negative obligate anaerobes, but has
developsfromentericbacterial translocation.Cefuroxime,
 no effect on aerobes. It is often used in combination
 ceftazidlime and cefoxitin have broader activity against
with clavulanate-amoxicillin for broad spectrum anti-
anaerobes and may be indicated in patients with intestinal
bacterial cover. It may modulate the immune. system
rupture or undergoing colonic surgery.
and be beneficial in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),.
At high doses it is anti-protozoal, and has been used to
Chloramphenicol
 treat Giardia infection.
Although very effective against all obligate anaerobes
Metronidazole can be used alone to treat clostrldial
and bacteriostatlc for rmost Gram-positive and many
intections, SIBO, ARD and hepatic encephalopathy.
Gram-negative aerobes, chloramphenicol usage is
Secreted in saliva, it is active against anaerobic
restrlcted for public health reasons. Resistance de-
 infections in periodontal disease and is sometimes
velops rapidly, limiting the utility of chloramphenicol in
used in combination with spiramycin. However, met-
the treatmentof humansalmonellosis. Chlorampheni-
ronidazole has a bitter taste and is not welltolerated
col is metabolized by the liver, making it unsuitable for
by some cats.
 hepatic infections, and can cause bone marrow sup-
 Central nervous system (CNS) toxicity is common
 pression, especiaily in cats. Cancurrent administra-
 at high doses or after rapid intraveneous administra-
tion with cimetidine causes impaired metabolism and
 tion, and it may be teratogenic. Cimetidine inhibits its
increased toxicity.
hepatic metabolism, increasing the risk of toxicity.
Lincosamides
Penicillins
Clindamycin and lincomycin are effective against
 Penicillins are generally bactericidal against Gram-
Gram-positive aerobes and many obligate anaerobes.
 positive aerobes and anaerobes. Apart from penicillin
 Both can cause serious diarrhoea in humans, horses
G, they are acid-stable and can be administered orally.
 and rabbits, but are relatively non-toxic in dogs and 
However, food may impair ampicillin and delay
cats. Clindamycin is recommended for treating perio-
 amoxicillin absorption, and so they are best given on an
dontal infection.
empty stomach.
298
Chapter 28 
Therapeutics
Used alone penicillins are rarely effective against
Tetracyclines
Gram-negative aerobes,except for the anti-pseudomonal
Tetracyclines (doxycycline, oxytetracycline, tetra-
penicillins, i.e. ticarcilin, carbenicillin and piperacillin.
cycline) are bacterlostatic agents against many
They may act synergistically with aminoglycosides, al-
aerobes and atypical organisms, such as rickettsias
though they cannot be mixed in the same syringe. These
and haemoplasmas. They are administered orally
anti-pseudomonal penicillins can be potentiated by con-
on an empty stomach for systemic absorption, as
current administration with clavulanic acid, giving en-
food, dairy products and antacids (including sucral-
 hanced activity against Gram-negative pathogens and
fate) impair absorption. This may not be significant
all anaerobes.
when treating intestinal luminal organisms, and inter-
estingly, sucralfate enhances delivery of tetracyclines
to sites of Gl ulcers. Oxytetracycline is concentrated
Quinolones
in the liver and undergoes biliary excretion, and thus
Quinolones are bactericidal agents (e.g. enrofloxacin,
may be effective in cholangitis. In young animals
difloxacin, ibafloxacin, marbofloxacln, orbifloxacin)
tetracyclines cause discolouration of developing
which are distributed in high concentrations in the liver
pue ellg ul paienuaouoo ae Aeui se toell l9 pue
periodontal infection in dental pockets is licensed
undergo enterohepatic recycling. Development of re-
for adult dogs.
sistance is relatively uncommon. Highly effective against
Tetracyclines can cause Gl disturbances, particu-
Pseudomonas, Klebsiella and Gram-negative aerobes
larly in cats, where they may also cause anorexia,
found in the Gl tract, they have some efficacy against
Gram-positive aerobes. They are probably the most
fever and depression. An association between oral
doxycycline administration and oesophageal stricture
effective agent against Saimonela and, therefore, the
formation exists in cats, and it is recommended that 
least likely to induce carrier status. Quinolones are also
tablets are followed by a sip of water or a morsel of
effective against Campylobacter, and although not
food. In dogs, they are mest commonly used to treat
licensed for this use, do not have the emetic side-effect
ARD rather than SIBO. Despite their clear efficacy.
of conventional erythromycin treatment. In combina-
how they can control diarrhoea for years without the
tion with metronidazole, they provide good cover against
development of resistance and why even sub-thera-
most enteric organisms.
peutic doses may be effective is unclear (see Chapter
Quinolones should not be used in skeletally imma-
 20). Tetracyclines do not sterilize the gut but may
ture patients, and should only be used with caution in
exert a pressure on the ecosystem, excluding potential
epileptics. In cats there is concern that enrofloxacin
pathogens, perhaps by inhibiting adherence. Altema-
can cause a dose-dependent retinal blindness.
tively, tetracyclines may be directly anti-intlammatory
Cimetidine can reduce the clearance of fluoroquino-
as they are used in humans to treat various skin
lones, and sucralfate, aluminium-containing antacids,
disorders and arthritis.
calcium carbonate and oral iron supplements can
lones should be given two hours before sucralfate.
Antifungals
The Gi tract suffers few primary fungai Gi infections,
and antifungal therapyis rarely indicated. The readeris
Sulphonamides
referred to standard medical textbooks for further infor-
The sulphonamides (sulfadiazine, sulfamethoxazole,
mation on treating intestinal histoplasmosis and
sulftadimethoxine) are cheap, effective, bacteriostatic
 pythiosis (which do not occur naturally in the UK).
antibacterials, whose activity is potentiated by concur-
Candidiasis may occur secondary to antibacterial
rent administration with trimethoprim, baqulloprim of
therapy. Oral infection can be treated with oral nystatin
 ormetoprim, making them bactericidal. Outside the
 suspension. Protothecosis is actually an algal infec-
UK, they (plus sulfadimidine and sulfamethazine) are
tion, but may respond to amphatericin B.
available without potentiation. Phthalylsulfathiazole is
poorly absorbed from the Gl tract and is present in
Antiparasitics
some combination anti-diarrhoeal products.
 Potentiated sulphonamides are efective against
most aerobes, some anaerobes and protozoa, and are
Anthelmintics
the treatment of choice for coccidiosis. In addition, they
The Gl tract is susceptible fo infection with numerous
 species of helminths (nematodes and cestodes) and a
are frequently used for canine colitis, despite it being
just sulfasalazine that has specific activity in the colon
variety of compounds are available to treat tham (Fig-
ure 28.2). They are used both therapeutically and as
(see below).
 Sulphonamides have a bitter taste and cats will
part of a general health plan to reduce any potential
froth at the mouth if the coated tablet is broken.
zoonotic risk.
Immune-medlated side-effects (e.g. polyarthritis,
thrombocytopenia) are noted, but the most consistent
Benzimidazofes: The benzimidazoles are selectively
side-effect is keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) espe-
toxic against helminths; by inhibiting parasite tubulin in
cially during sulfasalazine treatment of colitis.
mitosis they have a lethal effect on dividing cells.
Sulphonamides have been shown to interfere with
 Metabolism in non-dividing cells is also affected through
the measurement of thyroxine and serum folate
inhibition of fumarate reductase, and non-lethal expul-
concentrations.
sion of parasites may occur.
299
Chapter28 Therapeutics
Roundworms
Hook-
E
Tapeworm
worms
roto
Active ingredient
Class
2
Comment
(C=cats;D=dogs)
nina
oa
is
sno
lamblia
rIs
spp.
ou
rdia
6
exo
Albendazole
Benzimicazole
C,D
Teratgenibonearw supressin
Bunamidine
Cestocice
C,D
Oralirtant
Dichlorophen
Cestocide
C.D
Dichlorvos
Organophosphate
√
Organophosphate foxity
Doramectin
Avermectin
D
Spirocerca
Epsiprantl
Cestocide
C,D
Febantel
Benzimidazcle
C.D
Nct safe in pregnancy
Fenbendazole
Benzimidazcle
C,D
Sate in pregnancy
Flubendazcle
Benzimidazole
D
Ivermectin
Avermectin
Not in sensive dogs (colles)
Levamisole
Imidazothiazole
C,D
Mebendazole
Benzimidazole
C,D
Idicsyncratichepatopatry
Mibemyi oxime
Milbemycin
D
Co-fomulated with lufenuron
Moxidectin
Milbemycin
D
Nicosarmide
Cestocice
C,D
Nitroscanate
Isothiccyanate
D
Oxantel
Tetrahydropyrimidine
Oxibendazole
Benzinidazole
Co-formulated withpraziquante
Piperazine
Hexahydropyrazine
C,D
Praziquar'el
Cestocide
C,D
Co-formulated with febantel and/or praziquantel
Pyrantel
Tetrahydropyrimidine
Selamactin
Avermectin
Tiabendazole
Benziridazole
Actity against strongyloides
28.2
Spectrum of activity of anthemintics in dogs and cats.√= effective:X= not effective
All drugs in thisclass havepoorintestinal absorp-
Tiabendazole(thiabendazole),the first
tion.Concurrent administrationwithafattymeal may
benzimidazolemarketed,isnowrarelyused as it
increase absorption,but anyabsorbed drug ismetabo-
can be hepatotoxic.However,it is active against
lized in the liver and excreted in the faeces(most
larval andadultroundworms,and isuseful in
derivatives)or urine (albendazole).Thus systemic
Strongyloidesinfections.
clearance israpidandrelated tointestinal transit time.
Oxibendazole (not in UK) is effective against
Ashigher doses donot necessarilyrelate to higher
roundworms,hookworms and whipworms;it is
systemicconcentrations,repeated doses(generally
often marketed in combination with praziquantel.
for3-7days)maybeaseffective asasinglehighdose.
Mebendazole,whenadministeredorallydailyfor3
High doses of benzimidazoles may affect the rapidly
days,iseffective against allnematodes and Taenia
dividing cells in the host's GItract and bone marrow, as
spp.Although thelethal doseisvery high,individual
wellasbeingpotentially teratogenic.
dogsmayhave anidiosyncratichepatotoxicity.
300
Chapter 28 Therapeutics
Flubendazole (not in UK) has a spectrum activity
Doramectin isnot licensed forsmall animalsas
similartomebendazole,but withgreateractivity
againstwhipworms.
individuals.lt hasbeenshowntostopmilk
Albendazolehasasimilarspectrumofactivityto
transmission of Toxocara andAncylostoma.It
fenbendazolebutisrarelyusedbecauseof
hasbeen used to treatSpirocercalupiinfections
associatedbonemarrowtoxicityandteratogencity.
causing oesophageal granulomas.
Fenbendazole is effective against:routine
roundworms,hookwormsandwhipworms;
Milbemycins:Theyaresimilar to avermectinsbut
unusual parasites,such as Ollulanus,
have lessCNS toxicity.Originallynoted tobe effective
Physaloptera;respiratory parasites;and
against mites and Dirofilaria, they can also kill
Angiostrongylus. It is also very effective and
endoparasites.
licensedfor treatmentofGiardia infectionat a
dose of 50mg/kg/day p.o. given for 3 days in
Milbemycinoxime cankillToxocara,Trichuris
dogs and 5 days in cats.It is remarkably safe
andAncylostoma,andin theUKis marketed in
and canbeadministered topregnantbitchesto
combination with lufenuron.
prevent transplacental Toxocara transmission.
Moxidectin(notinUK)can stopmilk
Febantel is a pro-benzimidazole,converted to the
transmissionofAncylostoma.Adversereactions
active ingredientsfenbendazoleandoxfendazole,
in some Collies arereported.
witha similarspectrumofactivitytofenbendazole
exceptforAncylostomabrasilienseand
Miscellaneous:Anumberof other agentshave ant-
transplacentallytransmittedToxocaracanis
helmintic properties.Some, suchastolueneand Nbutyl
larvae.lt isoften available incombinationproducts
chloride,are not licensed in the UKbutmaybe avail-
withpyrantel andpraziquantel,whenenhanced
able in over-the-counter preparations.
activity againstAncylostoma andTrichuris occurs.
Piperazine isreadilyavailableover-the-counter.
Nicotinic anthelmintic agents:They selectively block
It paralyseshelminthsbyactingasagamma
thenicotinic acetylcholinereceptorsinparasiteslead-
amino-butyric acid (GABA) agonist, and the
ing toparalysis and expulsion.At high doses,receptor
paralysed wormmust then be expelled.As it
desensitizationmay occur and theparasite recovers.
doesnotactuallykilladultwormsorlarvae
Therefore,repeatedlowerdosesare moreeffective.
repeated dosesareneeded to control infections
Pyrantel embonate is poorly absorbed,
in young animals.Its action is antagonized by
increasing its safety and efficacycomparedwith
pyrantel.It isremarkablysafe,butvomiting,
pyrantel tartrate (pamoate) but may be eliminated
diarrhoea,inappetenceand neurological signs
too quickly if there is diarrhoea.lt is antagonized
may occur.
Dichlorvos is an organophosphate effective
by piperazine.
against helminths; however, signs of
Oxantel (not in UK) is an analogueof pyrantel,
withparticularactivity against whipworms.
organophosphate poisoning can occur as a result
of overdosing or when given in combination with
Levamisole:It iseffective againstroundwormsand
other organophosphates.
hookworms,butnotagainstwhipworms.However,itis
Nitroscanate is effective against ascarids,
rarelyused forintestinal parasitesbecause of itsnar-
hookworms(except Trichuris)and tapeworms.Its
row therapeuticindex andfrequent side-effectsof
general safety is good,but at least 10% of dogs
vomiting,shakingand arrhythmias.
willvomit.Efficacyandsafetyareimproved if it is
given with food.lt should not be used in cats as it
Avermectins:They arepotentanthelminticswithactiv-
will causeomitinginappetenceand
ityagainstintestinalparasites,Dirofilariaandarthropod
disturbances.
parasites.Toxicitytendstooccurinselectedindividuals,
especially Collies,because of a genetic defect in a
Cestocides:Intestinal tapewormsrarely cause dis-
P-glycoprotein expression (multiple drug resistance
ease in dogs andcats.Treatmentisindicatedforpublic
gene,MDR1).which normally pumps such molecules
health concerns (i.e.elimination of Echinococcus),to
out of the neurons.Susceptible dogs show depression.
stop transmissiontofood animalsandforaesthetic
tremors,ataxia,stupor,emesis,salivation andcoma.
reasons.A number of agents are available but
Ivermectin iseffective against Toxocara(but not
praziquantel(seeFigure28.2)isusuallypreferred.
Toxascaris),Ancylostoma,Uncinaria,
Strongyloides and Physaloptera.It isnot licensed
Bunamidinehydrochloride(no longer licensed
for use in dogsbecause of thepotential for
inUK)disruptsthetapewormintegumentand
toxicity,especially inCollies,and canrarelybe
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)production,
justified for treating endoparasites.
destroying proglottids.lt may not kill the scolex,
Selamectinis themostrecentlymarketed
permittingrestrobilation.Bunamidine hydrochloride
avermectin andiseffectiveagainstToxocara as
is irritant to the buccal mucosa if the coating is
a spot-on topical treatment used once a month.
broken,and itcancausevomiting anddiarrhoea.
Evidence of its efficacy againstother
It canbe cardiotoxic,andrare idiosyncratic
endoparasites is still unknown.
hepatoxicity anddeath indogs isrecorded.
30
Chapter 28  Therapeutics
Dichlorophen is litle used, as its efficacy is
Paromomycin: It is an amoebicide and has been
restricted to Taenia spp. lt may fail to kill the
reported to treat Cryptosporidium successfuily. How-
scolex of Dipylidium and Echinococcus. Although
 ever,itcan damage kidneys and is probably too unsafe
it is poorly absorbed, in dogs it may cause
for cats.
vomiting and diarrhoea, and in cats inappetence,
hyperaesthesia, salivation and ataxia are reported.
Quinacrine: lt is active against Coccidia and Giardia,
Niclosamide (net in Uk) is effective against
has a very bitter taste but is no longer available.
Taenia spp. and Dipylidium caninum. It may
cause transient vomiting and diarrhoea.
Suiphonamides:They are considered the treatment
Praziquantel is a highly effective and safe
of choice for Coccidia.Although most efficacy trials
cestocide, and is also effective against
were performed with sulfamethoxine orsulfaguanidine,
they are no longer available. Their substitution by
orally or parenterally. Epsiprantel is available in
 potentiated sulphonamides has largely been extrapo-
some countries and has a similar mode of action,
lated (see above).
although it is only available oraily. Praziquantel is
rapidly taken up by tapeworms, causing
Tylosin:There are anecdotal reports ofefficacy against
contractions due to calcium fluxes and
vacuolation of the integument making the worm
Cryptosporidlum.
susceptible to immune attack. It is absorbed from
the Gl tract (this is enhanced by food) and widely
Anti-emetics
distributed to all tissues. It is rapidly metabolized
 Anti-emetics inhibit vomiting and are indicated for:
and inactive compounds are excreted in urine. It 
has a high margin of safety but can cause
 Prevention of vomiting in predictable
 transient vomiting, drowsiness and staggering.
circumstances, e.g. travel sickness,
 Pain at the site of injection is noted. Its efficacy is
chemotherapy
impaired by concurrent administration of
 Control of vomiting, especially when protracted
corticosteroids.
and profuse, causing water and electrolyte
disturbances and patient distress.
Anti-protozoals
For the treatment of Toxoplasma see BSAVA Manua!
 They are contraindicated in:
of Canine and Feline Infectious Diseases. Pathogenic
enteric parasites include Giardia and isospora and
 Gl obstruction
othercoccidiansincluding Cryptosponiaium. Entamoeba
 Toxin ingestion 
spp., Pantatrichomonas spp., Tritrichomonas foetus
Hypotension.
and Baiantidium coli are potential pathogens.
 Anti-emetics control emesis by either peripheral or
Amprolium: This has been reported to be effective
against Coccidia and relatively safe in both puppies
central actions.
and cats, butis licensed in the UK only for the treatment 
af pigeons. Other poultry coccidiostats should neverbe
Peripherally acting anti-emetics
used in dogs and cats as toxicity has been recorded in
both species.
effecton the Gl tract will.also stop vomiting; protectants
and acld-blockers are discussed below. Prokinetics,
Doxycycline: It is effective against Entamoeba spp.
such as metoclopramide, can physically antagonize
Baiantidium coli, isospora spp. and Toxopiasma spp.
(see above).
tone and gastric emptying (see below).
Fenbendazole: It (and albendazole) is (are) effective
 Anticholinergics: The anticholinergics that cross the
against Giardia spp. (see above).
blood-brain barrier and exert a centrai effect are dis-
cussed below.
Furazofidone: This antibacterialis also effective against
Giardia but has been withdrawn because of concerns
Glycopyrronium bromide, propantheline
of carcinogenicity.
bromide, methscopolamine, isopropamide
 and aminopentamlde do not cross the blood--
Metronidazole: At high doses it is effective against
brain barrier and are anti-emetic because they
Giardia. Reports of resistance may be real but some-
 inhibit efferent vagal stimuli, relieve smooth
times reflect underdosing, as the effective dose is near
muscle spasm and reduce Gl secretions. They
the neurotoxic dose (see above).
are frequently used in practice but often
inappropriately as they cause gastric atony and
N/tazoxanide: This new product, used for the treatment
intestinal ileus, which may potentiate vomiting -
ofcryptosporidiosis and giardiasis inhumans and horses,
and absorption of toxins. They can also cause
Is currently undergoing pilot studies in dogs and cats. It
dry mouth, constipation, tachycardia and urine
is not licensed and cannot yet be recommended.
retention. They are not recommended for cats.
302
Chapter 28 Therapeutics
Centrally acting anti-emetics
Corticosteroids:
Depending on which neurotransmitter they block and
at which site, they have either a broad or narrow
Dexamethasone and methylprednisolone can
spectrum of activity.
also be anti-emetic, by unknown mechanlsms,
 particularly during chemotherapy.
Anticholinergics: Anticholinergics are anti-emetics
blocking muscarinic receptors in higher centres of the
Anti-dopaminerglc agents: Metoclopramide is rec-
brain and the vomiting centre, and so must be able to
ognized as a generally safe anti-emetic; although ani-
cross the blood-brain barrier.
mal studies are limited and most information is
extrapolated from humans. Whilst it is the first choice
 Butylscopolamine (hyoscine) acts centrally but
anti-emetic in dogs, the veterinary licensed product is
still has a peripheral antimuscarinic actlon with
no longer marketed in the UK, although human and
the expected side-effecls (see above). In the UK
generic formulations are stil avaiable. It is active
there is a veterinary licensed combination of
butylscopolamine and a NSAiD, metamizole
against emetics that stimulate the chemoreceptor trig-
pue oibiaujwedop 2a jenueo buiziuobejue Aq auoz leb
(dypyrone).
5HT, serotoninergic receptors. Metoclopramide is
Antihistamines:
potentiated by glucocorticoids or phenothiazines. It
has a number of otherhelpful properties, being prokinetic
Chlorphenamine (chlorpheniramine),
in the upper Gl tract and inhibiing gastro-oesophageal
cyclizine, dimenhydrinate and
reflux (see below).
diphenhydramine are largely ineffective against
Metoclopramide is available as tablets and a light-
most causes of vomiting but control rmotion
sensitive, injectable formulation. It is especially useful
sickness in dogs by blocking H, receptors in the
as a continuous intravenous infusion, particularly in
vestibular apparatus. Such receptors are not
puppies recovering from parvovirus that sufer ileus
involved in motion sickness in cats. Drowsiness
and continue to vomit, but also in other patients sus-
and dry mouth are recognized side-effects.
ceptible to ils CNS side-effects. Like all anti-emetics it
 Meclizineand promethazine have a longer duration 
is contraindicated if there is a Gl obstruction.
 of action and are chosen for vestibular disease.
 In some patients, especially cats, it may cause
 bizarre behavioural changes ranging from sedation to
Phenothiazines:
hyperactivity and tremors, which may be potentiated
 Prochlorperazine, acepromazine maleate,
by phenothiazines and fluoxetine. It may reduce the
chlorpromazine and promazine are broad
amount of propofol needed for induction. It is excreted
spectrum anti-emetics blocking vomiting in the
by the kidneys, and toxicity is more likely in cases of
chemoreceptor trigger zone and possibly the 
renal insufficiency.
vomiting centre. They are hypotensive and so
 should only be used once dehydration is
Anti-5HT, agents: By blocking 5HT, receptors,
resolved. These drugs can all cause drowsiness,
ondansetron is a very potent anti-emetic developed for
but this effect is less with prochlorperazine.
humans receiving chemotherapy. It is more likely to
However, a tranquillizing effect can be helpful if
the vomiting patlent is distressed.
'stop ongoing vomiting, and is effective in postoperative
nausea.
 Phenothiazines can have significant interactions
It appears to be effective in dogs but is very expen-
with organophosphates and CNS depressants (barbitu-
 sive and not licensed; thus it is generally reserved for
rates, narcotics);: anti-diarrhoeals and antacids may
cisplatin toxicity and refractory vomiting. Side-effects
impair absorption; and phenothiazines are incompatible
 are mild but include sedation and head-shaking. Re-
in the syringe with penicillin, chloramphenicol and hy-
lated drugs (e.g. dolasetron, granisetron, tropisetron)
dracortisone. Prochlorperazine is only available in some
are rarely used in veterinary medicine.
countries in a combination product with isopropamide.
Prokinetics
Butyrophenones:
 Prokinetics stimulate motility in part or all of the Gl tract
and are indicated when there is ileus not related to
 Haloperidol and droperidol are potent anti-
eiectrolyte imbalances. They are contraindicated in
dopaminergic anti-emetics but are rarely used in
intestinal obstruction.
veterinary medicine.
Cholinergics
Sedatives:
The use of cholinergics is limited by their tendency to
Barbiturates and benzodiazepines.
cause systemic effects. Pilocarpine, arecoline and
Phenobarbital and a variety of benzodiazepines
carbachol are purgatives causing marked abdominal
have been used to control psychogenic and
cramping and pain.
behavioural vomiting, and limbal epilepsy.
 Phenobarbital is also useful to control
Bethanechol: This acts exclusively on M, muscarinic
hypersialism, sialoadenitis and salivary infarction,
receptors and increases contractions throughout the
 although the mechanism of action is unclear.
Gl tract, but mostly at the lower oesophageal sphincter
303
Chapter 28  Therapeutics
and In the rectum. It has been suggested as a treat-
Erythromycin
ment for megaoesophagus (its efficacy is unproven),
The emetic side-effectaf antibacterial doses of erythro-
reflux oesophagitis, megacolon and dysautonomia. It
is poorly prokinetic in the small intestine but can also
of motilin receptors in the Gl tract, is well known. At
cause abdominal cramps, diarrhoea, salivation and
bradycardia.
lates motility resembling normal migrating motor com-
plexes, and this can be used as a helpful prokinetic
Pyridostigmine: This is an anticholinesterase used to
effect. However, the peristalsis it causes most resem-
treat focal myasthenia gravis of the oesophagus. it has
 bles the interdigestive motility pattem.
prokinetic effects, pctentiating the action of acetylcho-
line at the neuramuscular junction.
Mucosal (cyto)-protectants
Metoclopramide
Protectants aid barrier function when cesophageal or
In addition to its central anti-emetic effect (see above)
gastric ulceration exists, and may act as cytoprotective
metoclopramide acts peripherally as an anti-dopaminer-
agents, chemical diffusion barriers or both. Cytopro-
tective agents enhance the viability of G! epithelial
gic and cholinergic agent. lts activity is abolished by
antimuscarinics, such as atropine. Although its activity
cells, particularly through the effects of beneficial
is confined to the upper Gl tract, it can be useful in
prostaglandins.
preventing gastro-oesophageal reflux and promoting
Prostaglandins
gastric emptying. It is not effective in treating gastric
dilatation or megacolon.
Cytoprotective prostaglandin (PG) Es are crucial to the
health of the gastric mucosal barrier because they:
Domperldone
 Domperidone is a dopamine antagonist with similar
Increase gastric mucosal blood flow
 prokinetic activity to metoclopramide in humans. How-
Increase gastric mucus secretion
ever, it cannot cross the blood-brain barrier so does
 Stabilie histamine-containing enterochromaffin-
+
not have central anti-emetic activity or cause CNS
like cells
side-effects. Its activity in dogs or cats has not been
 Decrease gastric acid secretion.
fully studied.
It is the inhibition of the constitutive cyclo-oxygen-
Cisapride
Cisapride was the most effective prokinetic available
ase enzyme (COX-1) by NSAIDs that leads to a defi-
untilit was withdrawn a couple of years ago because of
ciency of cytoprotective PGE and gastric ulceration.
 Synthetic PGEs, misoprostol and enprostil (E1 and E2,
QT-prolongationand fatal cardiacarrhythmias(torsades
respectively) can protect against such damage whilst
de pointes) in humans. The risk was enhanced when
 the NSAIDs still exert their anti-inflammatory effect
concurrently administered with crugs Inhibiting cyto-
chrome P450. Cisapride stimulates Gl 5HT, receptors,
against the inducible COX-2 enzyme.
Misoprostol has been shown in dogs to protect the
resulting in:
gastric mucosa from aspirin-induced utceration, but it 
Contraction of oesophageal smooth muscle
is not very effective at healing pre-existing ulcers. It is
(most significant in cats)
indicated in dogs that must take NSAIDs for chronic
inflammatory disease but that suffer gastro-erosive
Increased lower oesophageal sphincter tone
Decreased pyloric tone
side-effects. Misoprostol does not have a UK veteri-
Propulsive peristaltic waves in stomach,
nary licance. It is given orally and diarrhoea is a side-
duodenum, jejunum and colon.
effect that is usually self-limiting, and actually lessened
 if NSAIDs are being concurrently administered. Being
Cisapride was indicated for gastro-oesophageal
a prostaglandin, misoprcstol will cause abortions and
reflux and G! motility disorders, including feline idio-
 must not be used in pregnancy.
pathicmegacolon.Asthecanine oesophagusis largely
striated muscle, it was not effective in idiopathic
Antacids
megaoesophagus. Although now withdrawn, stocks
 Compounds, such as aluminium hydroxide, calcium
may still be available. Newer, 5HT, agonist prokinetics,
 carbonate, sodium bicarbonate and magnesium oxide
prucalopride and tegaserod are in the late stages of
and hydroxide, are relatively safe and effective orally
human trials.
administered protectants. As well as neutralizing gas-
tic acid they decrease pepsin activity, bind bile acids,
H, antagonists
 stimulate bicarbonate secretion, and possibly increase
H antagonists, such as ranitidine and nizatidine, are
endogenous PG production.
anti-ulcerdrugs (see below) and also weak prokinetics,
Most available preparations usually contain combi-
and so may be an appropriate choice in gastritis where
 nations of aluminium and magnesium hydroxide to
their acid-blocking activity willcomplement their ability
 maximize the buffering capacity and counter-balance
to stimulate gastric emptying. They cause in vitro
their intestinal side-effects. Calcium and sodium car-
muscle contraction in the lower Gl tract and have been
bonate have the shortest duration of action; magne-
recommended for feline idiopathic megacolon when
sium hydroxide is more proionged; and aluminium
cisapride is not available.
hydroxide has the most persistent effect. Aluminium
304
Chapter 28 Therapeutics
hydroxide is also helpful in the vomiting uraemic patient
 Sucralfate has no UK veterinary licence but its
as it reduces hyperphosphataemia. Antacids are some-
safely is well accapted. Less than 5% is absorbed and
times combined with a local anaesthetic (oxethazine),
excreted unchanged in urine, and constipation is the
only reporied side-effect. The controversy concerning
ing agent (activated dimethicone) ta enhance their
 sucralfate relates to its drug interactions. There is no
utility in gastro-oesophageal disease.
doubt that the aluminium component blocks the ab-
Antacids are not popular in veterinary medicine
sorption of fluoroquinolones, tetracyclines, theophyl-
because oral administratian is problematic in a vomit-
line, aminophyline, digoxin, azithromycin and perhaps
ing patient and a high volume must be administered
cimetidine. It is therefore recommended that these
4-6 times daily.lIf not givenfrequently, their administra-
drugs are administered 2 hours bafore sucralfate.
tion is followed by a rebound secretion of acid, and
However, there is a hypothetical argument that
 gastric pH becomes even lower.
not only does concurrent administration with H2
All antacids can interfere with the absorption of
drugs such as digoxin, tetracyclines and fluoro-
their acid blockade may prevent sucralfate precipita-
quinolones. They may also alkalinize urine, increasing
tion. These arguments appear to have litle basis in
the excretion of weak acids, e.g. NsAIDs and pheno-
fact; interaction with ranitidine has been shown by
barbital. Calcium and sodium carbonate may produce
Millersman et al. (1986) to be insignificant but studies
large volumes of gas (COz). Calcium-containing ant-
in dogs and cats are lacking. Thus, it is still recom-
acids tend to promote constipation, and predispose to
mended that these drugs be given 30-60 minutes
metabolic alkalosis, soft tissue calcification and uro-
lithiasis. Magnesium salts tend to promote diarrhoea
made clear! Antibiotics must be given 2 hours before
through increased bowel motility, whilst aluminium
sucralfate, but it seems sensible to give sucralfate
salts reduce G! motility. They are frequently combined
both before and after feeding (i.e. on an empty stom-
so that these effects counteract each other. Long-term
ach) to coat ulcerated areas, whilst acid-blockers are
use of aluminium compounds may cause hypophos-
 given 30 minutes before food to prevent reflex acid
phataemia and perhaps naurotoxicity.
secretion. By using an acid-blocker that needs to be
given only once daily (e.g. famotidine, omeprazole)
Bismuth salts
problems of concurrent administration occur less
Compounds such as bismuth subcarbonate, bismuth
frequently, and reduced frequency of administration
subnitrate, tripotassium dicitratobismuthate and bis-
improves owner compliance.
 muth subsalicylate have a cytoprotective effect in the
stomach (stimulate bicarbonate and PG production)
Acid blockers (anti-ulcer drugs)
and are antibacterial against Helicobacter spp. They
 Acid blockade is an important part of healing oesopha-
make stool colour darker, which can potentially be
 geal and gastric ulceration, and although effective
mistaken for melaena. They are also used as anti-
drugs have been available for over 25 years, recently
diarrhoeals (see below). Long-term use should be
more potent drugs, needing just once daily administra-
avoided as absorbed bismuth is neurotoxic.
tion, have become available. Reduced acid secretion
may enhance the activity of exogenous pancreatic
Sucralfate
enzyme in exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPl) but
Sucralfate is an orally administered complex of
this effect is rarely clinically apparent. Raising the
sucrose octasulphate and aluminium hydroxide,
 gastric pH can reduce the absorption of metoclopramide,
available in the UK as tablets and suspension. In
digoxin, itraconazole and ketoconazole, which should
 some countries the suspension is not available, but
therefore be given 2 hours prior. Chronic use may
the large 1 g tablets can be crushed and suspended
 predispose to bacterial overgrowth.
in water.
At a basic level, sucralfate aids healing of gastro-
H, antagonists
au oi bupulg Ag uogeleoin pue suoigala leabeydosao
There are no UK licensed veterinary H, receptor ant-
tissue, forming a barrier against gastric acid penetra-
 agonists. Nevertheless, they are effective, reversible
tion. In an acldic gastric environment the sucrose is
campetitive antagonists, blocking histamine-induced
freed from the aluminium hydroxide and cross-poly-
 gastric acid and pepsin secretion. The four available
merizes the proteinaceous exudates over ulcerated
compounds (cimetidine, ranitidine, nizatidine and 
tissue. Whilst this mechanism is important, it known
that sucralfate also:
ics (see below) but no studies have demonstrated
enhanced clinical benefitin gastric ulceration providing
Inactivates pepsin 
equipotent doses are used. Rebound acid hypersecre-
Binds refluxed bile acids
tion, after drug withdrawal, is greatest with cimetidine.
Is cytoprotective through stimulation of
endogenous PG synthesis
 Cimetidine: Aithough not-licensed, cimetidine has
Increases mucosal blood flow
been used for over 25 years in veterinary medicine. ff
 Binds and concentrates epidermal growth factor,
is an effective H, antagonist, blocking histamine-
stimulating Gl epithelial cell proliferation 
induced gastric acid secretion. It may also have
Binds antibiotics, such as tetracyclines, at the
immunomodulatory effects by blocking H, receptors
ulcer site.
on T cells.
305
Chapter 28  Therapeutics
Cimetidine can be given parenterally or orally, with
environment; thus it is formulated as encapsulated
an oral bioavailability of 70%. However, its plasma half-
enteric-coated granules that dissoive in the more
life is only 1 hour (this may be increased in hepatic or
alkaline intestinal pH. The granules must not be
renal disease) and its acid blockade lasts less than 6
crushed. As acid secretion is progressively blocked
hours. Thus it needs to be given four times daily. It 
and gastric pH rises, oral bioavailability increases and
undergoes hepatic metabolism and is excreted in urine
so plasma concentrations increase over the first 5
both changed and unchanged. The dose should be
days. Molecules selectively partition into the acidic
reduced by 50% in renal insufficiency.
environment of the gastric parietal cell and, after
Through its effects on hepatic cytochrome P450
protonation, irreversibly bind the proton pump. The
activity, cimetidine has-significant drug interactions; it
 gradual accumulation in the parietal cell results in a
decreases the breakdown of chloramphenicol, metro-
lag phase of up to 5 days before maximal effect, but
nidazole, lidocaine, procainamide, theophylline, war-
activity continues after the drug is discontinued.
farin, propranolof, diazepam and others, and can
Omeprazole is probably the only PPi needed in
therefore cause unexpected toxicities. lt also decreases
 small animal practice, being available in convenient 10
sex hormone degradation, and gynaecomastia is a
edeid snouanenu ue pue sansdes bu o pue
recognized complication in men. It reduces hepatic
 It is inactive at physiological pH and inhibits ATPase
 blood flow significantly and is nota goodchoice totreat
only in gastric parietal cells. It does inhibit the P450
gastric ulceration in chronic hepatic disease. Ranitidine,
elimination of some drugs, such as warfarin and di-
nizatidine and famotidine do not have the hepatic side-
azepam, but has fewer side-effects than cimetidine.
effects and can be given less frequently, although
However, because of its potency, omeprazole can
studies of their efficacy in clinical cases is lacking for
 cause reflex hypergastrinaemia and therefore hyper-
 dogs and cats.
trophic gastritis, which has been linked to induction of
carcinoid tumours in rodents. A similar consequence
Ranifidine: It has lower oral bioavailability (50%) than
has not been seen in dogs and cats, but gastric acid
cimetidine but is reported to be 5-10 times more
potent. lt has a longer duration of action, only needing
to be given two or three times daily. it does not have the
Second generation PPis:
hepatic side-effects of cimetidine and has the added
borus of mild prokinetic activity (see above). The
Lansoprazole, pantoprazole and rabeprazole
 intraveneous preparation should be administered slowly
appear to have little additional benefit over
as it may cause cardiac arrhythmias.
cmeprazole. Pantoprazole was the first PPi to be
 available for intravenous use, but the data sheet
 Nizatidine: At least ten times more potent than
reports it causes pulmonary oedema in dogs at
cimetidine, nizatidine may require only once daily dos-
high (7 mg/kg) doses.
ing. Oral nizatidine is almost completely absorbed and
Esomeprazole. Omeprazole is a racemic
then excreted in urine, and is a good choice in liver
mixture of two isomers, only one of which is
disease. Italso has a mild prokineticeffect(see above).
active. The active isomer, esomeprazole, is now
available as a pure preparation.
Famotidine: It is 20-50 times more potent than
cimetidine, and although famotidine is poorly absorbed
Anti-diarrhoeals
orally (37% bioavailable), its duration of action neces-
sitates only once daily administration. It is completely
Intestinal protectants and adsorbents
excreted in urina. The intravenous preparation pro-
Anti-diarrhoeal products include kaolin, aluminium hy-
vides rapid onset acid blockade in critical patients,
droxide, aluminium phosphate, calcium carbonate,
although the dose shouid be halved it there is renal
pectin, activated charcoal, magnesium trisilicate and
impairment.
hydrated magnesium-aluminium trisilicate (activated 
attapulgite). Such products have been used for years
Proton. pump inhibitors
 but their efficacy is unproven as most cases of acute
diarrhoea are naturallyself-limiting,andeven microfine
benzimidazoles that irreversibly bind the proton pump.
barium sulphate suspensions, used for radiological
the final step in acid secretion (i.e. H+K-ATPase), and
examination, appear to have an anti-diarrhoeal effect.
so are very potent inhibitors of gastric acid secretion.
The concept that anti-diarrhoeals merely act by
Their advantage over most H, antagonists of greater
coating the mucosa, protecting it from irritation, has
potency and once daily administration, with only mar-
been challenged as most possess both protectant
ginally greater cost, means they are being used more
 and adsorbent properties. Their positive actions prob-
seo jo sbop jo, pesuaoll si auou ybnoue Auanba
ably include:
They are the drug of choice for severe reflux oesopha-
gitis, severe gastritis and gastric ulcers, and rare
 Binding water and making diarrhoea less fluid
conditions such as gastrinomas. .
 A direct antisecretory effect
 Binding toxins and pathogenic bacteria.
Omeprazole: This was the first PPi to be marketed
and is 30 times more potent than cimetidine.
They are al likely to interfere with the absorption of
Omeprazole is a weak base and is unstable in an acid
other orally administered drugs.
306
Chapter 28
Therapeutics
Kaofin and pectin: Kaolin is an aluminium silicate.
Agents used include atropine, homatropine, butyl-
whilst pectins are natural polygalacturonic acids
scopolamine (hyoscine), aminopentamide, dicyclo-
extracted from fruit; their combination suspended
verine hydrochloride (dicyclomine), glycopyrrolate,
in 20 parts of water is a demulcent and adsorbent.
propantheline bromide, and clidinium. They may be
Their efficacy for treating diarrhoea in small animals
justified in the short term for the relief of tenesmus and
is unproven, but their use has stood the test of time.
pain in acute colitis. Butylscopolamine is commonly
They are sometimes combined with antibacterials,
combined with metamizole (dypyrone), an NSAID. A
anticholinergics or morphine but such polyphar-
combination of clidinium and a benzodiazepine (chlor-
macy may be inappropriate (see Neomycin and Anti-
diazepoxide) has been recommended for treating irri-
emetics above).
table bowel syndrome (IBS), although this syndrome is
poorly characterized in small animal medicine. It is
 Montmorillonlte is a trilaminar smectite clay with
believed to occur in stressed working dogs and over-
adsorbent properties superior to those of regular
anxious toy breed dogs. However, this combination
kaolin. It is marketed in combination with simple
product is not available in the UK.
sugars and electrolytes.
Opioids: The ability of opiates to cause constipation is
Acfivated charcoaf: Activated charcoal is an adsorb-
well known, and opioids are effective anti-diarrhoeals.
ent that is primarily used for treating intoxications. Acti-
They increase segmental intestinal ccntractions, delay
vated charcoal possesses more pores and increased
transit and have an antisecretory effect. They are
binding capacity than plain charcoal. Its efficacy in
indicated for temporary, non-specific relief of acute
 treating diarrhoea and odiferous flatulence is unproven.
diarrhoea and may be of benefit in faecal incontinence.
Paregoric (tincture of opium) is used cccasionally, and
Bismuth: As well as their use in treating gastric dis-
a kaolin and morphine combination is available.
ease (see above), insoluble bismuth salts (bismuth
Diphenoxylate and loperamide. As well as
subcarbonate, bismuth subnitrate and bismuth
 their motility-modifying effect these opioids also
subsalicylate) may be beneficial in acute diarrhoea.
increase fluid and water absorption and inhibit
the activity of secretagogues such as
ful in acute inflammation but such compounds should
Escherichia cofi enterotoxin. Diphenoxylate is a
be used cautiously in cats as nearly ail the salicylate is
pethidine (meperidine) derivative marketed in
systemically available.
 combination with atropine to discourage
substance abuse, but at therapeutic doses the
Colestyramine (cholestyramine): Colestyramine is
atropine has no clinical effect.
a basic anion exchange resin which binds bile acids
that may be stimulating intestinal secretion, and thus 
Anti-spasmodics: Painful intestinal spasm in acute
can symptomatically reduce diarrhoea. It should be
Gl disease can be relieved by antimuscarinic agents.
administered with food or water. Nausea and constipa-
Butylscopolamine is used symptomatically (see
tion are possible side-effects.
above). Repeated intestinal spasm (irritable bowel
syndrome') is better treated with dietary modification
Motility modifiers
and perhaps anxiolytics.
Modification of intestinal motility can be a useful symp-
tomatic treatment for acute diarrhoea. Motility is often
 Mebeverine is an antispasmodic, which acts as
inextricably linked with Gl secretion, and many of these
a calcium channel blocker, and is derived from 
motility modifiers are also antisecretory. Thus as well
 peppermint oil. It, and its natural oil source, are 
as delaying transit time, relieving abdominal pain and
Used in humans to treat IBS and flatus, but their.
tenesmus, and reducing the frequency of defecation,
efficacy in dogs is untested.
Immunosuppressive and anti-
diarrhoea. However, they are rarely essential as most
inflammatory agents
acute diarrhoea is self-limiting, and slowing intestinal 
Beneficial effects of NSAIDs may be noted in Gl
transit may actually be deleterious if toxin-producing
inflammaticn and the eficacy of bismuth subsalicylate
bacteria are retained.
and sulfasalazine is recognized in acute inflammatory
intestinal disease. However, the deleterious effects of
Anticholinergics: Antimuscarinics are not recom-
NSAIDs on the Gl tract and kidneys, particularly in
mended in the management of diarrhoea in small
dehydrated patients, predominate and, in general,
animals, although they are frequently included in
NSAIDs should not be used in Gl disease.
combination products. As most diarrhoea is associ-
ated with intestinal hypomotility they are likely to
Corticosteroids
worsen ileus, especially if concurrent hypokalaemia
is present. Since they inhibit only gastric and not
Prednisolone: Prednisalone (and methylpred-
intestinal secretion, and they preferentially decrease
nisolone) is (are) the first chioice immunosuppressive
segmental intestinalcontractions, any propulsive peri-
agent(s) in dogs and cats. Dexamethasone has simi-
stalsis is unimpeded and diarrhoea will occur. They
lar immunosuppressive effects in equipotent doses,
may also have undesirable systemiceffects (see Anti-
but has deleterious effects on brush border enzyme
emetics above).
activity and is not recommended.
307
Chapter 28
Therapeutics
An initial dose of 2-4 mg/kg q24h orally or parenter-
although it has been seen with olsalazine, which con-
ally of prednisolone is used and then tapered (see
tains no sulphonamide (see below).
 Chapter 20). The aim of therapy is always to find the
minimumeffective dose, which hopefullyis eitherzero or
Oisalazine: This is two 5-ASA molecules joined by
at least low dose (0.5 mg/kg) every other day adminis-
a diazo bond and again released by colonic bacteria.
tration. The Cushingoid side-effects of prednisolone are
It was developed in an attempt to reduce the fre-
well known and so if the minimum effective dose still
quency of Kcs, which was considered to be an
causes significant side-effects,adjunctive agents should
attribute of the sulfapyridine in sulfasalazine. It has
be introduced for their steroid-sparing effect.
been used successfully indogs,although occasional
KCS has still been reported. The dose of olsalazine
 Budesonide: An enteric-coated version cf this novel
is haif that of sulfasalazine as it contains twice the
steroid is available. Budesonide is largely metabo-
amount of active ingredient.
lized first-pass through the liver and thus the systemic
Balsalazide: A newer pro-drug (4-aminobenzoyl-
side-effects are minimized. However, steroid hepato-
β-alanine-mesalamine), balsalazide is activated by
pathy has been noted in dogs and fhere is certainly
the same mechanism as sulfasalazine, but its safety
some depression of the adrenal axis. There are aneo-
and efficacy have not been evaluated in small animals.
dotal reports of budesonide's efficacy in canine and
feline IBD, but some studies used the non-enteric-
Mesalazine: Native 5-ASA is termed mesalazine
 coated formulation from asthma inhalers, and in oth-
(mesalamine), and slow-release enteric fomulations
ers the appropriate dosage was unknown. Further
are available for humans. Premature release in the Sl
evaluation in small animals is required before
is likely to cause absorption and nephrotoxicity, but at
budesonide can be recommended.
human intestinal pH the majority of the 5-ASA is
released in the colon. The safety of oral formulations in
Azathioprine
dogs and cats is unclear. Mesalazine enemas and
In humans, this immunosuppressive agent is not effec-
 suppositories are safe but unpopular.
tive unless the patient is already on steroids, takes
2-4 weeks to be fully effective, and its premature
Ciclosporin
withdrawal may result in relapse. Its major use is not as
Ciclosporin (cyclosporine) A (Cs A), one of nine
a first-line agent, but as a steroid-sparing drug.
 ciclosporins isolated from fungi, is a potent immuno-
Bone marrow toxicity (neutropenia, anaemia) is un-
suppressive drug for human transplantatian and
common in dogs, but it will occur within weeks in some
selective (auto)immune diseases. It can be nephro-
individuals. These animals probably lack thiopurine
toxic, and ideaily trough serum concentrations should
methyl transferase (TPMT), the enzyme necessary to
be monitored.
degrade 6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine's active
In veterinary gastroenterology, Cs A has been used
metabolite. TPMT activity is iow in cats, which explains
 as a sole agentto treat anal furunculosis. Its activity can
why the recommended dose for cats is so much lower
be potentiated by concurrent administration with
than for dogs (0.3 versus 2.0 mg/kg/day). As the small-
ketoconazole, which inhibits its hepatic metabolism. ln
 est formulation available in the UK is25 mg, and splitting
preliminary studies the efficacy of ciclosporin in IBD
of this coated cytotoxic is prohibited, azathioprine is not
was variable, and it cannot yet be recommended.
a good choice for cats, In some countries reformulation
is available, but there are still health concems about the
Mycophenolate mofetil
Mycophenolate mofetil is an immunomodulator used to
urinary excretion of this cytotoxic in the home.
prevent transplant rejection, being an anti-metabolite
inhibiting purine synthesis in lymphocytes. lt has been
Other cytotoxics
 In feline IBD other immunosuppressive agents, such
reported by Dewey et al. (2000) to have successfully
as chlorambucil or cyclophosphamide, are better
treated myasthenia gravis, including focal myasthenia
choices if prednisolone alone is not effective.
 gravis of the oesophagus. However, its use is not 
widespread and spontaneous improvement may give a
false impressian of efficacy.
5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-AsA) derivatives
Colitis is common in dogs in some countries, but is also
Tacrolimus
 often secondary to Sl disease or part of generalized
 Tacrolimus is a macrolide antibiotic produced by
IBD. Nevertheless, the use of 5-ASA derivatives with
Streptomyces that inhibits T cell activation and is
 anti-inffammatory activity is appropriate in isolated
used to stop transplant rejection. in dogs it is more
acute and chronic colitis.
toxic than ciclosporin, but has been used topically to
treat anal furunculosis.
Suifasafazine: This is a pro-drug; a dlazo bond, bind-
ing sulifapyridine to 5-ASA, is cleaved by colonic bac-
Novel treatments
teria to release free 5-ASA, which acts locally in high
 Pentoxifylline (oxpentifylline), thromboxane synthesis
concentrations in the colon as an anti-inflammatory.
 inhibitors, leucotriene antagonists, thalidomide and
Hepatotoxicity can occur but fhe major side-effect is
cytokine modulators have all been shown to have
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), and thus regular
 same activity in human IBD. Their efficacy in dogs and
Schirmer tear tests should ba performed. KCS is be-
cats has notyet been studied. Infiximabis a monoclonal
lieved to be a complication of the suphur-moiety.
 antibody against tumour necrosis factor α used to treat
308
Chapter28Therapeutics
humanswithIBD.Noequivalent canineorfelinespe-
anosmotic laxative effectaswell.However,if excess
cificmonoclonal antibodyhasbeenproduced.
isgivendiarrhoeaandbloatingmayoccur.
Laxatives andcathartics
Emollientlaxatives
Bothlaxatives andcatharticspromotedefecationby
Emollient laxatives arelubricants that act unchanged as
faecal softeners.Theyaremild but notreliablyeffective.
andareused totreatconstipation and aid theelimina-
tionof toxins.Laxatives(aperients)promote elimina-
Paraffin:ltis available asapaste oras liquidparaffin
tionofstoolbyincreasingthe hydration andsoftnessof
(mineral oil).The paste isused as a mild treatment for
the faecal mass.Consequent increase in faecal bulk
hairballsandconstipationincats.Bysmearingitonthe
may stimulate intestinal peristalsis.In contrast,
cat'snoseorfeetitwillbe lickedoffandingested.Liquid
cathartics(purgatives)tend toproduce a moreviolent
andmore fluidbowel evacuation.They alterintestinal
is a significant danger of inhalation and lipoid pneumo-
nia.Its use is no longerrecommended.
and stimulate localmyentericreflexes.Excessiveor
constantuseof cathartics canbe deleteriouswith
Docusatesodium:Previouslycalled dioctylsodium
continual diarrhoea,dehydrationand electrolyte dis-
sulfosuccinate (DsS),docusate is an anionic sur-
turbances,with thepotentialtodevelopmegacolon.
factant and detergent thatacts asa faecal softener.It
is sometimes combined with dantron(codanthramer),
Bulklaxatives
an irritant cathartic.
Bulk laxatives are simple substances (e.g.bran,
ispaghula,sterculia and methylcellulose)that are hy-
Osmoticlaxativesandcathartics
drophilic in nature and are not digested.They absorb
Osmoticlaxativesand catharticshave thedesiredeffect
waterand swell.Theresultant increase inbulk stimu-
by drawing water into the stool,making it softer and
latesreflex peristalsis and defecation.Examples of
encouragingexpulsivemovement.Sugaralcohols,such
bulk laxativesare listedinFigure 28.3.Some fibres are
asmannitolandsorbitol,foundnaturallyinfoodhavethis
fermentable andtheresultantvolatilefattyacidsexert
effectbutarerarelyusedintentionallyaslaxatives.
Laxatives
Cathartics
Enemas
Simple bulk laxatives:
Jnitant catharics:
Enemas:
Bran (wheat husk)
Aloe
Bisacodyl
Carboxymethylcellulose scdium
Arachisoil
Glycerol
Bisacodyl
Lactulose
Methylcellulose
Cascara
Olive oil
Prunes
Castoroil
Phosphate (NOT in cats)
Psyllum seeds (Plantago. plantain)
Dantron(in combination with poloxamer,
Polyethyiene glyco
Pumpkin seeds
codanthramer)
Saline (isotonic and hypertonic)
Sterculia
Glycerol
Soapy water
Linseed oil
Sodium lauryl sulphate
Emollient laxatives:
Olive oil
Sorbitol
Docusate sodium (dioctyl sodium
Senna
sulfosuccinate,)
Warmwater
Liquid parafin(mineral oil)
Paraffin paste
Poloxamer(in combination with dantron;
codanthramer)
Osmotic laxatives:
Lactulose
Magnesium salts
Mgcitrate
Mg hydroxide
Mg oxide (milk of magnesia)
Mg sulphate (Epsom salts)
Marnitol
Polyethylene glycol
Na chloride
Na citrate
一
Na lauryl sulphate
Na picosulphate
二
Na phcsphate,Na acid phosphate
Na potassium tartrate (Rochelle's salt)
Na sulphate (Glauber's salt)
Laxatives,cathartics and enemas availablefor dogs and cats.
309
Chapter 28  Therapeutics
Lactulose: It is an indigestible synthetic disaccharide
Lavage (see abave) is more suitable, especiall ifthere
that is fermented in the large intestine to acetate and
is anorectal pain, and can be followed by a'single
lactate, with consequent osmotic laxative effect. In
enema before colanoscopy.
hepatic encephalopathy lactulose helps by eliminating
In medium-sized dogs, at least one litre of warm
fermenting material and acidifying the colon to prevent
water should be used for each enema; the volume is
ammonia absorption. It is a relatively gentle, physio-
doubled for patients weighing more than 30 kg. The
logical laxative but individual response is variable, and
enema tube is well lubricated and gently inserted to the
thus the dose must be titratad so that the individual
level of the last rib. Warm water is instilled either by
 produces 2-3 soft stools per day without diarrhoea.
 gravity from an enema bucket or gently by a Higginson
 pump. Durlng instillation the tube is moved back and
Sallne purgatives: Magnesium and sodium salts that
forth to loosen the faeces. Liquid may escape from the
are not (or incompletely) absorbed are osmotic laxa-
anus during the procedure when the colon is full; more
tives and even large volumes of saline are an effective
fluid should not be forced in, especially if the patient
purgative. A number of salts are listed in Figure 28.3.
vomits. Enemas are repeated until the liquid runs clear
Solutions containing magnesium ions may also stimu-
and contains no particulate matter. In normal-sized
late peristalsis directly as a cathartic. Although they are
cats about 20 ml/kg of warm water is given as an
small in volume to administer, saline purgatives
enema through a soft, flexible urinary catheter at-
frequently cause vomiting, abdominal discomfort and
tached to a large syringe. Instillation should be gradual
dehydration, and sometimes cause hypermagnesae-
or vomiting will occur.
mia. It is imperative that the patient has water to drink
Irritant jaxative enemas: Enemas (see Figure 28.3)
 given to a dehydrated patient.
containing substances such as soap, bisacodyl and
phosphate, should never be used before colonoscopy
Colonic cleansers: Oral lavage solutions are ideal
 in mucosal biopsy samples. They are used to stimulate
laxatives. They are iso-osmotic solutions of polyethylene
 colonic evacuation for other purposes such as radiog-
glycol and electrolytes that produce osmotic diarrhoea.
raphy. Phosphate enemas can cause fatal hyperphos-
to wash out gut contents. A number of products are
phataemia in cats.
available, and the patient is given two to four doses of
25-30 ml/kg. each at least 2 hours apart, and ideally
Nutritional supplements
the last dose is given 12 hours before colonoscopy. As
large volumes must be given a stomach tube is used for
Digestive enzymes
administration to dogs. In cats the solution can be
Freeze-dried pancreatic extracts from pig pancreas
administered via a naso-oesophageal tube as a slow
are used as replacement enzyme therapy in EPl (see
infusion of 20 ml/kg/h for 4 hours. Particular care
Chapter 23). A number of preparations are available,
varying in strength and formulation. Enteric-coated
 gastric emptying to avcid aspiration, as fatal inhalation
preparations are intended to protect the enzyme from
pneumonia has recently been reported.
gastric acid, but studies suggest uncoated powders or
Irritant cathartics
fresh pancreas work best. Premixing food and enzyme
is not beneficial. Acid blockade can reduce the enzyme
Contact or irritant cathartics (see Figure 28.3) stimu-
requirement and improve fat absorption, but this is
late the local myenteric plexus and intestinal secretion
to provoke fluid accumulation and expulsion. Natural
usually neither clinically apparent nor cost-effective.
irritant compounds include aloe, senna and cascara.
Glycerol and bisacodyl have the mildest action, whilst
Medium chain triglycerides
Dletary supplementation with medium chain tri-
a combination of sodium picosulphate and magnesium 
glycerides (MCTs)(C8-C10 fatly acids found naturally
oxide is powerful.
in coconut milk) has been recommended in chylo-
Vegetable oils: Vegetable oils are hydrolysed by
thorax, lymphangiectasia and other causes of fat mal-
pancreatic lipase to iritant fatty acids: castor oil to
absorption. Supplementation can be accomplished
highly irritant ricinoleates; linseed oil to less irritant
with a pharmaceutical preparation (MCT Oil BP). Each
linoleates; and olive oll to mild oliveates.
milire provides approximately 8 kcals and the total
dose should not exceed 20% of the animal's daily
Dantron (danthron): Dantron is a synthetic anthro-
energy intake. Thus a dose of 1-2 ml/kg bodyweight
quinone derivative that is a stimulant. It is often com-
can be used in dogs, although gradual introduction is
blned with a stool softener (e.g. poloxamer (codanthra-
 necessary as it may not be well tolerated initially. A
mer), docusate (codanthrusate)).
more palatable 50% emulsion is available but the
volume given is doubled. Alternatively one commercial
Enemas
diet contains approximately 25% of fat as MCTs.
MCTs are not recommended in cats as they are
Warm water: Repeated warm waterenemas are cheap
unpalatable and may cause anorexia and hapatic
and do not cause histological artefacts if used in
lipidosis. However, in dogs it was incorrectly believed
praparation for colonoscopy but the method is un-
that MCTs were absorbed directly into the portal blood
pleasant and the quality of colonic cleansing is poor.
and thus were an alternative source of lipid. However,
310
Chapter 28  Therapeutics
experiments cannulating the thoracic duct shaw that at
least some MCTs do enter the lymphatics and so the
that, if it does, either the dose is altered accordingly or
efficiency of MCTs is questionable.
 an alternative is substituted. For nutritional manage-
ment of liver disease and hepatic encephalopathy see
Prebiotics
Chapters 15 and 24.
Prebiotics are naturally occurring substances added to
food that, usually through their fermentation to volatile
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDcA)
fatty acids, enhance the growth of potentially beneficial
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is a naturally occurring
bacteria whilst inhibiting potential pathogens. Exam-
bile acid, originally found in the bile of the Chinese
ples are chicory, fructo-oligosaccharides (FOSs), inu-
 black bear. It is a relatively hydrophilic bile acid and is
readily absorbed from the intestine and undergoes
now good evidence that they alter the colonic flora, but
enterohepatic recycling. Very little enters the systemic
there is limited evidence for significant effects in the Sl.
circulation unless there is portosystemic shunting, but
Nevertheless, a clinical beneficial effect on the colon is
at each cycle some is degraded or lost in the faeces.
probably real, and may also explain the benefit of
UDCA is recommended for the treatment of choles-
moderately fermentable dietary fibre, such as ispaghula
terol-containing gall stones and non-obstructive biliary
and beet pulp.
disease (see Chapter 25), although evidence of its
efficacy is lacking in small animals. It may act by a
Probiotics
rumber of mechanisms:
Probiotics are so-called 'beneficial bacteria', such as
Lactobacilus and Enterococcus, given orally in an
 Decreasing intestinal absorption and hepatic
attempt to modulate the intestinal flora. Early products
synthesis of cholesterol
had poor viability and low numbers, so that it was
Displacing harmful hydrophobic bile acids from the
doubtful if any actually passed the gastric acid barrier.
 bile acid pool, protecting the liver from damage
Modern products undoubtedly do and can be cultured
 Stirmulating bile flow (choleresis) by increasing
from the faeces. However, they do not usually colonize
biliary bicarbonate secretion
permanently and can no longer be cultured from faeces
Immunomodulatory effects, decreasing
a few days after stopping oral administration.
irmmunoglobulin production, decreasing cytokine
 Probiotics have been shown to decrease intestinal
lofew jo uoissaidxa buisealoep pue uoonpoid 
permeability in infants with viral gastroenteritis and
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules.
have other effects on epithelial tight junctions and
mucosal immune responses. Some clinical benefits
UDCA is non-toxic in dogs and cats. Aluminium-
 have been demonstrated in humans but not yet clearly
containing antacids and coleslyramine reduce its
in dogs and cats. Further, the products currently avail-
able are not canine or feline in origin, again reducing
absorption.
the likelihood of true colonization.
Antifibrotics
Antifibrotics are used in chronic hepatopathies if
Vitamins
Cobalamin: Vitamin.B12 (cobalamin) deficiency is a
 Prednisolone is used as an anti-inflammatory/immu-
recognized complication of EPl and chronic intestinal
 nosuppressive, but also has antifibrotic activity. Peni-
malabsorption, and may contribute to morbidity and
cillamine (see below) may also be antifibrotic.
failure to respond to treatment (see Chapters 20 and
23). Once established, cobalamin deficiency cannot be
Colchicine
corrected by oral supplementation. Repeated parenteral
Controlled clinical trials are lacking, but anecdotal
doses are givenat weekly intervals until serum concen-
evidence suggests that colchicine may improve liver
trations are normalized. Cats are particularly prone to
function and reverse, or at least slow, hepatic fibrosis.
developing severe cobalamin deficiency.
 Colchicine inhibits the microtubules in collagen-secret-
ing hepatic lipocytes and increases collagenase activ-
Folic acld: Folate deficiency may occur in intestinal
ity. It may also. suppress fibrogenesis by inhibiting
malasorption and is readily supplemented orally.
leucocyte migration and consequent inflammation.
No information is available on the pharmacokin-
Faf-sofuble vitamins (A, D, E and K): Deficiency of
etics of colchicine in dogs. Nausea, vomiting and
vitamins E and K may be clinically significant in EPl and
fat malabsorption. Vitamin E can be supplemented
haemorrhagic diarrhoea. Its use in cats is not recom-
 orally but parenteral vitamin K1 is indicated if there is
 mended. Use withmyelosuppressivedrugs and NSAiDs 
evidence of a coagulopathy.
may enhance bone marrow suppression. Colchicine
formulated with probenecid should be avoided as it is
Liver disease
more likely to cause vomiting.
Many of the drugs used to treat liver disease (e.g.
Decoppering agents
antibiotics, anti-emetics, azathioprine, glucocorticoids)
 Copper accumulation in chronic liver disease may be
are the same as for Gl disease (see above) and are not
an effectof cholestasis ora primary defect ofexcretion,
repeated below. Attention should always be paid to
as in Bedlington Terriers (see Chapter 24). In either
311
Chapter 28 Thcrapeutics
case,the copper is hepatotoxicand decoppering agents
Hepatotropic agents
are used to block intestinal copper uptake and increase
A number of agents have a selective activity on the liver
urinary copper excretion by chelation.
stimulating bileflow,hastening the removal of hepaticfat
and acting as anti-oxidants. Yet currently there is little
Zinc salts
information to confirm ar deny the utility of compounds
 Zinc blocks intestinal copper absorption by induction of
such as choline, methionine, lecithin or selenium.
 metallothionein, which traps the copperintheenterocyie
 and ultimately hepatic copper concentrations fall. Zinc
acetate, sulphate or gluconate can be used, but the
References and further reading
acetate derivative is least irritating to the stomach and
Boothe DM (2001) _Small Animal Clinica! Pharmacoiogy and
least likely to cause vomiting.
Therapeutics. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
D-Penicillamine
alternative. Gastroenterology 118, 1246-1249
D-penicillamine has no antibacterial activity butchelates
DeweyC, Boothe DM, Hinn KL, Coates JR and Burkholder WJ (2000)
Treatmont of a myasthenic dog with mycophenolate mofetil.
heavy metals. It is used in copper hepatotoxicosis (see
Chapler 24)ta bind copperas a water-soluble complex
Hall JA and Washabau RJ (20o0) Gastric prokinelic agents. In:
Current Veterinary Therapy Xif, ed.J Bonagura, op.614617.
that can be excreted in urine. However, it may take
WB Saundcrs,Philadelphia
months to years for hepatic copper concentrations to
LavyE,Arochl,Bark ,MarkovicsA,Aizenberg IazakiTovi
fall significantly although subjective clinical improve-
Hagag A and Harrus S (2002) Evaluation of doramectin for the
treatment of axperimental canine spirocercosis. Veterinary
ment after a few weeks is usually noted, suggesting
Pathplogy 109, 65-73
other beneficial effects. Penicillamine induces
Levelle-Webster C (2000) Ursodeoxycholic acid iherapy. In: Current
metallothionein, which sequesters copper, and may
Veterinary Therapy Xilf, ed. J Bonagura, pp. G91-693. WB
Saunders, Philadeiphia
also have an antifibroticeffect. It is best absorbed on an
Maddison J, Page S and Church D (2002) Small Animal Clinica!
empty stomach, butit frequently causes vomiting. This
Pharmacology.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
can be reduced if the drug is introduced gradually or if
cat due to oral adrministration of tetacyclines. Jovrnai of Smal!
it is given with food, although less drug is absorbed in
Anima! Practice 43, 221-223
the latter case.
Milersman G, Russoll WL and Derendor H (1986) Lack of clinically
sucralfate. Journal of fhePharmaceutica! Society 75, 995-998
Tetramine
Saunders,Philadelphja
The compound 2,2,2-tetramine (trientine) is a copper
Papich MG, Davis CE and Davis LE [1987] Absorption ol salicylale
 chelator with fewer side-effects than penicillamine, but 
fram an antidiarrheal preparation indogs and cats. Journat of the
both take many months to reduce hepatic copper.
AmericanAnimalHospital Association23,221-228
Ramsey I and Tennant B (20ot) BSAVA ManualofCanine and Feline
2,3,2-tetramine is five to ten tirmes more potent than
Infectious Discases, BSAVA Publicalions, Gloucester
trientine and lowers the hepatic copper content more
Roues,allnri
Pineau T (2003) MDR1-deficient genotype in Colla dags
rapidly, but is not available commercially.
hypersensitive to the P-glycoprotein substrate ivermectin.
EuropeanJournai ofPharmacoiogy460,85-91
SalavaggioneE,Kidd L,rondzinskJLSzumlanskiCL,Pankra
Nutritional supplements
VS, Wang LW, Trepanier L and Weinshilboum RM (2002) Canine
red blood cell thiopurine S-methyltransferaso:companion animal
pharmacogenetics. Pharmacogenetics 12, 713-724
Anti-oxidants
Sigalet DL, Winkelaar GB and Smith LJ (1997) Determination of the
Anti-oxidant compounds are purported to reduce the
Aq odiosge ppe Aei ueuo-buol pue unys-wnpa jo ainar
hepatic damage caused by free radicals that are be-
direct measuremcnt in the rat. JournaiofParenterafand Enteral
lieved to perpetuate liver damage in chronic hepatitis.
Nutrifion 21,275-278
 Sirmpson KW, Fyfe J, Cornetta A, Sechs A, Strauss-Ayali D, Lamb SV
and Reimers TJ (2oa1) Subnormal concentrations of serum
cobalamin (viemin B,) in cats with gastrointestinal disease.
Vitamin E: It has been recommended for chronic
JournalofVeterinaryntemaMedicinc15,2632
hepatitis for its anti-oxidant effect.
Stewart A(1997) Theuse ofanovel formulation of budasanide as an
disease. Proceedings of the 15th ACVIM Forum, p. 662
S-Adenosyimethionine(SAMe):Thiscompound acts
Tennant B (2002)BSAVA SnaffAnimalFormuiary,4 edn,BSAVA
as a supply of glutathione, which is important in hepatic
 Publications, Gloucester 
Ward DM, Leib MS, Johnston SA and Marini M (2003) The effect of
detoxification. There are preliminary reparts of a ben-
eficial effect in chronic liver disease.
aspirin-induccd gastric injury. Journat of Veterinary Interna!
Medicine 17,282-290
Washabau RJ and Elie MS (1995) Antiemetic therapy. In: Currant
Syimarin (syn. silymarin; active ingredient sifibin):
Veterinary Tharapy XIl, ed. J Bonagura. pp. 679-684. WB
This is an extract of milk thistle that is reported to have
Saunders, Philadelphia
Williams J and NilesJ fin preparation) SSAVA Manuai of Canine and
anti-oxidant activity in liver disease.
 Feline Abdominaf Surgery, BSAVA Publications, Gloucester
312
ppendix
Drug formulary
Thisappendixliststhedrugsusedmostcommonlyfor
further details,licensinginformation and trade names.
the treatment of gastrointestinal (Gl)problems,ac-
Further informationon drugsused in the supportive
cordingto theirindication.However,thereader should
care of emergency and critical patientsmentioned in
notethatsomedrugshavemore thanoneindication.
Chapter26canbefounding theBSAVAManualof
Furthermore,the dosage regimes statedare those that
CanineandFelineEmergencyandCritical Care.
refertospecific Glindicationsmentionedin thismanual.
andmaynotbeapplicableif the drug isusedto treat
Thepublishers andcontributorscannot takeresponsibilityfor
other organ systems.Themoreimportant contraindi-
informationprovidedon dosages andmethods of application
cationsarenoted,butthereaderisreferredtoChapter
of drugsaslisted inthisAppendix.Detailsof thiskindmust be
28andto theBSAVASmallAnimalFormularyfor
verifiedbyindividualusersfrom.theappropriateliterature.
Dosage
Indications and comments
Antibacterial agents
Amoxicillin
10-20mg/kg p.0.ors.c.q12hfor
Salmonella, Clostridium infection
7-10 days
10-20mg/kg p.0.ors.c.q12hover
Neutrophilic cholangitis:elimination of bacteria(usually
3-4weeks
Escherichia col) from cats
20 mgkg p.0.q12h for 14 days
Helicobacter gastritis: withmetronidazole and an H antagonist or
proton pump inhibitor
Ampicilin
10mg/kgp.0.q8h
Hepatic encephalopathy
10-40mg/kg p.0.ors.c.q8h
Clostrdiumperfringens infection
Cefadroxil
10-30 mg/kg p.0.q12h
Yersiniainfection
Enrofloxacin
2.5-5mg/kg p.0.or s.c.q12-24h(dogs);
SaimonellaEscherichiacoinfections
4mg/kg p.0.or s.c.q24h (cats)
5 mg/kg p.0. q12h (dogs)
Campylobacterinfectionhronchistiocyticulcerativeolits
shopu!
Dose-dependent retinal damage reported in cats
Erythromycin
10-20 mg/kg p.0. q8-12h
Campylobacterinfection
Metronidazole
7.5mg/kg p.o.(or slowi.v.for dogs)q12h
Bilary infections
(see also Antiparasitic agents)
10 mg/kgp.0.q12h for 14days
Helicobactergastritis:withamoxicilin orclarithromycinandan H
antagonist or proton pumpinhibitor
10-15 mg/kg p.0.q8-12h (dcgs)
Clostridiuminfection,idiopathic antibiotic-responsivediarrhoea
inllammatory bowel disease
Avoid in severe hepatic insufficiency as hepaticmetabolism
impaired
Neomycin
5-10mg/kg p.0.q12horas a retention
Hepatic encephalopathy.Systemicabsorption unlikelybutmay
(sho) u-gb wa
occuriGlcerationpresenandmayladtootoand
nephrotoxicity
Oxytetracycline
10-20mg/kg p.0.q8-12h
Small intestinalbacterialovergrowth,antibiotic-responsive
diarrhoea
313
Appendix 1Drug formulary
Drug
Dosage
Indications and comments
Antibacterial agents(continued)
Tetracycline
15-20 mg/kg p.0.q6-8h(dcgs)
YersinCaylbactin
Trimethoprim/sulphonamide
15 mg/kg p.0.q12h
Yersinia,Samnellainfctin
(see also Antiparasitic agents)
Tylosin
7-15 mg/kg p.0.q8-12h(dogs)
Clostriduminectionchroniceneropathieincludinginfmmaory
boweldiseaseandidiopathicantibiotic-responsivediarrhoea
Antidiarrhoeal agents
Bismuth salts
1ml/5kgp.0.q8h
Acutevomitingordiarrhoea:cyloprotectantalsowithaction
Butylscopolamine (hyoscine)
4-10 mg/dayi.v.ori.m (dogs)
Acutedarrhoeaandiritablebowelsyndrome:anticholinergic
antispasmodicusuallyformulatedinacombinaticnproduct with
metamizole
Colestyramine
1-2 g/dogq12h
Bindsluminalbileacidsthatmaystimulateintestinalsecretion
Diphenoxylate
0.05-0.2mg/kg p.o.q8-12h
Acutedarheeecallyincolnidseasemotiltymdifer
used for symptomaticmanagement
Kaolin and pectin
1-2ml/kg p.o.q8h
Acutevomiting ordiarrhoea:used to coat the Glmucosa and to
bind bacteria and their toxins
Loperamide
0.1-0.2mg/kg p.0.q8-12h
Acutediarheaeciallncolnicdsaseotitydier
used for symptomaticmanagement
Anti-emetic agents
Bismuth salts
1 ml/5 kg p.0.qBh
Acute vomiting and diarrhoea:cytoprotectantused tocoat theGl
mucosa
Butylscopolamine(hyoscine)
4-10mg/dayi.v.ori.m (dogs)
Anticholinergcantispasmodicusuallyfomulatednacombinaton
product with metamizole
Chlorphenamine
Maximumrecommended dose0.5mg/kg
Motion sickness
(chlorpheniramine)
p.o.q12h
Chlorpromazine
0.2-0.4mg/kg s.c.q8h
Phenothiazine anti-emetic
Dimenhydrinate
8mg/kgp.o.ori.m.q8h
Motion sickness
Diphenhydramine
2-4 mg/kg p.o. ori.m. q8h
Motion sickness
Metoclopramide
0.2-0.5mg/kgp.0.or s.c.q8h
Central anti-emetic.Bothprokineticandanti-emeticeffectsof
(see also Prokinetic agents)
1 mg/kgi.v.q24h CRI
value in parvovirus infection
Ondansetron
0.5-0.15 mg/kg i.v. qoh
Powerful central anti-emetic
0.5-1.0mg/kg p.0.q12-24h
Prochlorperazine
0.1-0.5mg/kg i.v.,i.m.ors.c.q6-8h
Phenothiazine anti-emetic
0.5-1.0mg/kgp.0.q8-12h
Promethazine
0.2-0.4mg/kgi.v,im.orp.0.q6-8h
Motion sickness
(maximum dose 1 mg/kg)
Antifungal agents
AmphotericinB
0.25 mg/kg i.v.as test dose,then
Histopasmosisfungaloralgalcolitiswithitraconazole
0.25-0.5 mg/kg i.v.up to 3 times weekly.
up to a total cumulative dose of
5-10mg/kg（dogs)or4-8mg/kg (cats)
Itraconazole
5mg/kg p.0.q12h for 4 days,q24h
Histoplasmosis
thereafter
10mg/kg p.0.q24h
Fungal cralgal colitis:alone or with amphotericin B
10mg/kg p.0.q12-24h
Gastripytiosisfolwing surgeryused wth tebinaine for3
months
Terbinafine
5-10 mg/kg p.0.q24h
Gastricpythiosisfollowing surgery:withitraconazolefor 23
months
314
Appendix 1 Drug formulary
Dosage
Drug
Indications and comments
Anti-inflammatoryagents
Ketoprofen
1-2mg/kg s.c.once(cats)
Infammation of gingivaand oralmucosa
Mesalazine
5-10 mg/kg p.0.q8-12h
Colitis
Olsalazine
5-10 mg/kg p.0. q8-12h
Colitis
Suifasalazine
20-40 mg/kg p.0. q24h (dogs);
Colitis. Can causekeratoconjunctivitis sicca
125mg/catq24h
Antiparasitic agents
Albendazole
25mg/kg p. q12h for 5 days (cats)
Giardiasis.Notrecommendedduetopotential bonemarrow
5-10 days（dogs)
suppression
Azithromycin
7-10 mg/kg p.0.q12h for7 days
Cryptosporidiosis
Bunamidine
25-50 mg/kg p.o.once
Cestode infection
Dichlorophen
200mg/kg p.o.once
Taenia infection
Dichlorvos
10 mg/kg p.o.once
Roundworm infection
Doramectin
1mg/kg s.c.
Spircranfectintuncol
Epsiprantel
2.75mg/kg p.o.(cats);5mg/kg p.o(dogs)
Similar to praziquantel
Febantel
10-15 mg mgy/kg p.
Convertedtofenbendazoleandoxfendazolesimilarspectrumof
activity to fenbendazole
Fenbendazole
50mg/kgp.0.q24h
Broad spectrum anthelmintic; Giardia infection (3-5 days);
empirical treatment of eosinophilic enteritis(3 days)
100 mg/kg for 3 days (puppies)
Administered tonewbonpuppiestokillarvae
10 mg/kgp.0.q24h for2 days
Ollulanustricuspisgastritis
30 mg/kgp.0.q24h for6 consecutive days
Eurytrema procyonis infection
Flubendazole
22mg/kg p.o.
Nematode infection,especially whipwom
lvermectin
0.2-0.4mg/kg s.c. or p.0.q7-14d on
Toxocaranylstomacinariainctinotliensedfr
2-4 occasions (cats)
recommended in dogs.MUSTNOT BEUSED IN COLLIES
Levamisole
7.5-10 mg/kg p.0.once
Roundworm,hookworminfection
Mebendazole
22mg/kgp.o.
Nematode, Taenia infection
Metronidazole
25 mg/kg p.0.q12h for 5-10 days (dogs);
Giardiasis
(see also Antibacterial agents)
25 mg/kg p.0.q12h for 5 days (cats)
Mibemycin oxime
0.5mg/kgp.0.q30d
Toxocara,whipworm,hookworminfection
0.003 mg/kg p.o.
Hookworm infection.Do not use in collies
Moxidectin
Niclosamide
100-150mg/kg p.0.
Cestode infection
Nitroscanate
50 mg/kg p.o.(dogs)
Active againstmost common cestodes andnematodes except
whipworm
Oxibendazole
22 mgy/kg p.o.
Often combined with praziquantel
Piperazine
100mg/kg p.o.
Roundworm ingection
Praziquantel
3.5-7.5mg/kgi.m.ors.c.;5mg/kgp.o.
Tapeworm infection
40mg/kg q24h for 3consecutive days
Amphimeruspseudofelineusinfection
Pyrantel pamoate
5mg/kgp.o.
Roundwom,hookwom,whipworminfection
5mg/kg p.o.(dogs single dose: cats two
Physaloptera gastritis
doses 14 days apart)
Selamectin
6mg/kg topical'spot-onmonthly
Roundworm infection
Tiabendazole
50-75 mg/kg p.0. q24h for 3 days:
Roundigdn
125 mg/cat p.0.q2h for 3 days
Sulfadimethoxine
50mg/kgp.0.q24hfor10days
Isospora infection
Trimethoprim/sulphonamide
15-30 mg/kg p.0.q24h for 5 days
Isospora infection
315
Appendix1Drug formulary
Drug
abesoa
Indications and comments
Ant-ulcer agents
Aluminium hydroxide
10-30 mg/kg p.0.q8h (tablets)
Used toneutraliegastricacid.Canblockuptakeofotherdrugs
5-10ml p.0.q8h(gel)
Bismuthcompounds
1ml/kgPepto-Bismol p.0.q4-6h
Gastriccytoprotectantwithactionagainstgastricspiralbacteria
Cimetidine
5-10mg/kgp.0.ori.v.q6-8h
Gastro-oesophagealrefluxandgastriculceralion
Esomeprazole
0.5-1.0 mg/kg p.0.q24h
Gastro-esophagealrefluxandgastriculceration
Famotidine
0.1-0.5mg/kgp.0.oriv.q12h
Gastro-oesophagealrefluxandgastriculceration
Misoprostol
3-5 μgkg p.o.qh for dogs
ProtectsagainstNSAID-induced erosionsindogs
Nizatidine (see also Prokinetic agents)
1-3mg/kg s.c.,i.m.ori.v.q8h
Gastro-oesophageal refluxand gastriculceration
Octreotide
2-20 μg/kg s.c. qah
Largeucers:rapidydecreasesgastricacidsecretionmayhelp
control gastric bleeding
Omeprazole
0.7(0.2-1.0)mg/kg slowi.v.orp.o.
Gastro-oesophagealrefluxandgastriculceration:treatmentf
q24h for dogs
choice faracid hypersecretion
Pantoprazole
0.2-1.0mg/kg p.0.q24h for dogs
Gastro-oescphagealrefluxandgastriculceration
Rabeprazole
0.2-1.0mgkg p.0.q24hfor dogs
Gastro-oesophageal refluxandgastriculceration
Ranitidine
1-2mg/kg p.0.oriv.q8-12h;0.5-2
Gastragexandgstrratnl
(seealsoProkineticagents）
mg/kg p.0.q12h (cats)
liver disease
Sucralfate
Oesophagitisandgastriculceration;canbeused tocoat Gl
250mgcat p.o.qsh
mucosa andbind bacteria and toxins inacute vomiting or
diarrhoea.Oralsuspensionmuchmoreeffectivethanintacttablet
Immunosuppressive agents
Azathioprine
1-2mg/kg p.0.q24 for 5 days then g48h,
Moderate toseverelymphopiasmacylicgastrtisandintammatory
andultimately on alternating dayswith
bowel disease: givenif glucocorticoids are not effective.
predrisclone(dogs);0.3-0.5mg/kgp.0.
Not suitable forcats unless reformulated
q48h (cats)
Budesonide
Suggested dose of 13mg p.0.q8h
Inflammatoryboweldiseasefewersystemicsteroideffectsthan
not verified
prednisolone
Chlorambucil
0.1-0.2 mg/kg (2 mg/m²) p.0. q24-48h
Chronic diarrhoea in cats: altemative to azathioprine; additional
(dogs); 0.25mg/kg(2-6 mg/m²) p.0.
immunosuppressive therapyforlymphoplasmacytic enteritisand
q24-48h(cats)
colitis
Ciclosporin A
1-5mg/kgyiday p.o.q12h
Chronicgingivostomatitisincats;possibleimmunosuppressivefor
dogswithymhplasmacyticentriisoltisanderanafistua
Methylprednisolone
Injectable 2 mg/kg (minimum dose 20 mg)
Feline eosinophilic granuloma complexoral lesions
every 2weeks for a fotal of 2-3 treatments
15-20mg/cal s.c.
Chronic gingivostomatitis in cats
Prednisclone
0.5-1.0mg/kg s.c.orim.q12h
Oesophageal strictures
0.5-1.0mg/kg p.o,s.c.orim.q12hfor
Canineesinophilicgranulmastomatiis
7 days,fllowedbya tapering dose over
2-3weeks
1 mg/kg p.0.q12hfor7-14 days
Exocrinepancreaticnsuficencyifconcurrent
lymphocytoplasmacytic enteritis
1-2mgkgp.0.q24h
Lymphangiectasia:initial dose
1-2 mg/kg p.0., s.c.ori.m.q24h taperd
Liver disease
to 0.5mg/kg q24-48h
2mg/kg p.0.q24hfor 2weeks,reducing
Anal furunculosis orperianalfistula:immunosuppressivedose
over4-6weeks
2mg/kg/day p.o., s.c.ori.m.divided
Vomiting andchrnicdarhacauedbidpathicinammaty
overtwo doses
boweldisease
2-4mg/kg p.0.q24h in divided doses,
Destructive canine cholangitis:withursodeoxycholic acid
tapered to q48h at lowest dose that
maintainsremissionover8-12weeks
Avoidinsuppurativeinflammationportalhypertension,
ascitespotentialGlulceration.Providegastricprotectants
316
Appendix 1 Drug formulary
Drug
Dosage
Indications and comments
Immunosuppressive agents (continued)
Tacrolimus
Topical
Perianal fistula
Triamcinolone acetonide
1mg intralesional injection
Oesophagealstricturedilatation:mayreduceriskofrecurrence
3mg s.c.weekly
Felineeosinophilicgranuloma complexoral lesions
Laxatives
Aloearahiibcdyaa
Toeffect
Iritant cathartics
castor oi glycerol, ineedoil,
olive oil,senna
Bran, prune,methylcellulose,
Toeffect
Bulk laxatives
carboxymethylcellulose,sterculia
Dantron
2.5-5.0mlp.0.q12h
Iritantcathartic often used with docusate (codanthramer)
Docusate sodium
50-200mg p.o.q8-24h
Stool saftener
 Gllavage solutions
20-30ml/kg p.0.for3doses q2h
lsotanicpolythyenelyclsalslutonsforcolnoopyprparaton
Lactulose
0.25-0.5mg/kgp.o.q6-8h
Stool softener
1-15ml p.0.q8h(dogs); 0.25-1mlp.0.
Hepatiencephalopathyvrdosereundaheathefore
q8h(cats)
titratetoeffect
Magnesiumaltcitrathydroxide
Various
Osmotic laxatives
oxide, sulphate
Parafin
1inch of paraffin pasteer cat p.o.
Emollientlaxative.Theuseof liquid paraffin（mineralilisno
q12-24h
longerrecommended dueto theriskof inhalation lipoid
pneumonia
Sodiumsalthliirat
Various
Osmoticlaxatives
sulphatepicosulphate,phosphate
sulphate,potassium tartrate
Prokinetic agents
Bethanechol
5-15 mg p.0.qgh (dogs):1.25-5mg
Maybeof valuinmanagementfmegaoophagus
p.o. q8h (cats)
Cisapride
0.1-0.5 mg/kg p.0.qg8-12h
Promotesgastricemptyingof solidsmore potent than
emetic effects and limited availability
Erythromycin
0.5-1.0mg/kg p.o.q8h for dogs,given
Promotesgastricemptyingofsolidsbymimickingphasellof the
betweenmeals
MMC;maybeuseful inpreventing gastro-oesophageal reflux
Metoclopramide
0.2-0.5 mg/kg p.o.or s.c.q8h
Facltaesgastricemptyingofliquidslesseffectivethancisapride
(see also Anti-emetic agents)
1mg/kg i.v.q24h CRI
in promoting gastroduodenaland intestinalmotilitymaybe useful
in preventing gastro-oesophagealreflux.Both prokinetic and anti-
emeticeffectsof value inparvovirus infection
Nizatidine
0.5-1.0mg/kg p.o.q8h
Facltaesgastricmptyingfliquidandcolonicmotilitycats
(see alsoAnti-ulceragents)
withmegacolon.
Pyridostigmine
1.0-3.0mg/kgp.0.q8-12h
Myasthenia gravis
Ranitidine
0.5-1.0mg/kgp.0.q8h
Falititinlqidcltlyin
(see also Ant-ulceragents)
withmegacolon
Vitamins and dietary supplements
S-Adenosyimethionine (SAMe)
20 mg/kg p.0.q24h or higher (dogs);
ChronichepatisMust be given unbrokenonanempty
20mg/kgor200-400mg totalq24h(cats)
stomach
Mediumchain triglyceride(MCT） oil
0.5-2m/kgpermeal
Exocrineacreaticificcynmatrybwelde,
lymphangiectasia:supplements lipidintake
Pancreatic exiract
2 teaspoons of powderper 20 kg
Enzymereplacement inexocrine pancreaticinsuficiency:
bodyweight
promotesweight gain
Psyllium
1-2 tbspper25kg bodyweigt p.0.
Fibre-responsive diseases associated withtheclon
q8-24h
317
Appendix 1Drug formulary
Drug
Dosage
Indications and comments
Vitaminsanddietarysupplementscontinued
Vitamin B12(cobalamin)
250-1000μg （dogs),100-250μg （cats)
i.m.ors.c.q7d forseveral weeks
or inflammatory bowel disease
Sylmarin (silymarin, siibin)
50-200mg/dog p.0.q24h
Ant-oxidant derived frommilkthistle.Effective dosenat fully
established but highsafetymarginreparted
Vitamin E(tocopherol)
5-25 IU/kgBWp.0.q24h given wih
food for 1 month
400-600IU/dayp.0.formedium-sized
Canine chronic hepatitis
sbop
Vitamin K1
0.5-2.0mg/kg s.c.q12h for 3 treatments
VitaminKdeficiencyinliverdiseaseshouldbegiven12hours
and then q7days
before biopsy andrepeatedevery7-21 days asnecessary.Do
not overdose,as this results in haemolysis
Zinc (acetate or sulphate)
1-20 mg/kg elemental zinc q24h(dogs);
Copper-associatedliver disease:monitor blood every1-2 weeks
7 mg/cat elemental zinc q24h (cats)
Give 1hour before food tominimize vomiting
Miscellaneous agents
Barium sulphate contrast media
5-20 ml/kg p.o.per procedure
Gl contrast studies;has some antidiarrhoeal effect
Calcium gluconate
0.5-1mg/kgof 10%solutioni.v.over
Hypocalcaemia asa result of pancreatitis
30minutes
Chlorhexidine
1% solution used to effect
Mouthwash; anal sacflush following expression
Co-enzyme Q10
30-100mg daily for4months
Oral inflammationfollowing full-mouthextraction
Colchicine
0.03 mg/kg p.0. q24h
Liverdisease.Monitorforbonemarrowsuppression.Gl side
effects; not recommended for cats
Dopamine
5.0 μg/kg/mini.v.low dose infusion
Pancreatitis
Lactoferrin
40 mg/kg daily,topical(cats)
Chronic gingivostomatitis
Mebeverine
2mg/kg p.o.q8h
Iritable bowel syndrome:antispasmodic
Penicillamine
10-15 mg/kg p.0.q12h
Copper-associated liver disease.Vomiting common;immune
mediated disease possible; not recommended for cats
Spironclactone
2-4 mg/kg/day p.0.in divided dcses
Ascitesinliverdiseasegradualnsetfaction
Trientine
10-15 mg/kgp.0.q12h
Copper-associated liver disease in dogs
Ursodeoxycholic acid
4-15 mgkg p.0.tal daily dose,
Liver disease: induces bile flow.Used with prednisolone in
preferably divided q12h
destructive canine cholangitis andpost-surgical extra-hepaticbile
duct obstruction.Avoid in patients with biliary obstruction;not
indicated forpatients with congenital portosystemic shunts
318
ppendix :
Abbreviations used
throughout the text
Abbreviatlon
 Full name
Abbreviation
Full name
αx-PI
α-Proteinase inhibior 
DIC
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
5-ASA
 5-Aminosalicyic acid
DO2
 Oxygen delivery
5-HTa
5-Hydroxytryptamines
DSS
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate
ABT
 Aminopyrine breath test
EC
 Eosinophilic coitls
ACTH
Adrenocorlicotropic hormona
ECL
 Enterochromaffin-ike (cells)
AHDS
Acute haemorrhaglc dlarrhoeal syndrome
EE
 Eosinophilic enteritis
ALP
 Alkallne phosphalase
EGC
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
ALT
 Alanine aminotransferase
EGF
Epidermal growtfactor
APC
Antigen-presenting cell
EHEC
Enterohamorhagic Escherichia coli
Llde
 Activated parial hromboplastin fime
EIA
Enzyme irmmunoassay
ARD
Antibiotic-responsive diarhoea
ELISA
 Enzyme-linked immunosarbent assay
AST
 Aspartate aminotransterase
EPEC
Enteropathogenic Escherichia colf
AT
Anti-thrombin
EPI
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
ATPase
 Adenosine triphosphatase
ETEC
Enterotoxigenlc Escherichia coli
AV
 Arteriovenous
FECV
 Feline enleric coronavirus
BCR
Bcellreceplor
-FeLV
 Feline keukaemia virus
BIPS
Barium mprenatepolyethylne sphers
FIP
Feline iniectious peritonitis
BT-PABA
Benzoyl-tyrosyl para-amino-benzoic acid
FITC
 Fluorescein isothiocyanate
CAMP
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
FIV
 Feline immunodeficiency virus 
CBC
 Complete blood count
FNA
 Fine needle aspiration 
CCK
 Chalecystokinin
FOS
 Fructo-cligosaccharide
CCV
Canine coronavirus
GABA
Gamma amino-butyric acid
CEJ
 Cementoenarmel junction
GALT
Gut-associaled lymphoid tissue
CFU
 Colony-forrning units
GCF
Gingival crevicular fluid
CGMP
Cylic guanosine monophoshate
G-CSF
Granulocytecolony stimulating factor
CHO
Carbohydrale
GD
Gastric dllatation
CHUC
Chronic hisliocytic ulcerative colfis
GDV
Gastric dllatation and volvulus
CLO
Campylobacter-like crganism
GFST
Gastroscopic food sensivity tesling
CMI
 Cell-medialed immunity 
GGT
 Gamma glulamyl transferase
CNS
 Central nervous syslerm
Gl
Gastrointestinal
COX
Cyclooxygenase
GMB
Gastic mucosal barrier 
CPE
Clostridium perringens emeroloxin
GRP
Gastin-releasing peptide
CPV
 Canine panvovirus
GSA
Giardia-specific antigen
CRI
 Consiant rate infusion
GSE
Gluten-sensitive enteropathy
CRTZ
Chemoreceptar trigger zane
GUE
 Gastroduodenal ulceration/erosion 
s0.
Ciclosporin
H&.E
Haematoxylln and eosin (stain)
CSF
Cerebrospinal fluid
HCT
Haematocrit
CT
Computed tomography
HE
Hapatic encephalopalhy
CUPS
 Chronic ulceralive periodontis syndrome
HGE
Haemarhagic gastroenleritis
CVP
Central venous pressure
HR
Heart rate
DFA
Direct fluorescant antibody assay
HVG
Haematoxylin-Van Gieson 
319
Appendix 2  Abbreviations used throughout the text
Abbreviation
Full name
Abbreviation
Full name
IBD
Inflammatory bowel disease
PGE,
Prostaglandin E2
1B5
Irilable bowel syndrome
plgR
Polymeric immunoglobulin recaptor
ICP
Intracranial pressure
PLE
Protein-losing enteropathy
iCU
 Intensive care unit
PL1
Pancreatic ipase immunoreaclvity
IEL
Intraepihelial lymphccyte
PLN
Protein-losing nephropathy
Immunoglobulin 
PPi
Proton pump inhibitor 
[L
Interleukin
PSS
Portosystemic shunl 
IR
 lscha amia reperiusion
PSTI
Pancreatic secreiory trypsin inhibitor
 Potasslum chloride
PU/PD
KCS
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
PVR
Peripheral vascular resistance
LPC
Lymphocyic-plasmacytic colitis
RAAS
Renin-angictensin-aldosterone syslem
LPE
Lymphocylic-plasmacytic enteris
RBC
Red blood cel!
LPS
Lipopolysaccharida
RER
Hesting energy requirement
LSA
Lymphosarcoma
RFLP
Restriction fragment lengin palymorphism 
LSEC
Liver sinusoidal endothelial cell
RL
Resorptiv lesicn
LT
Heal-labile (enterotoxin)
ROS
Reaclive oxygen species
MALT
Mucosal-associated lymphoid tfssue
RR
Respiratory rate
MCHC
 Mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentratlon
RT-PCR
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
MCT
Medium chain triglycerides
SAAG
Serum-ascites-albumin gradient
MCV
Mean corpuscular volume
SAMe
S-adenosyimethionine
MHC
Major hislocompalibity complex
SBA
Sheep blood agar
MMC
Migraling myoeleclric complex
SCC
Squamous cell carcinoma
MMP
Matrix metalloprotleinase
SCFA
Short chain talty acid
MOF
Mulipleorgan failure
S
Small intestine
MOS
 Mannanoligosaccharide
SIBO
Smallitestlnal bacterial overgrowth 
MRi
Magnetic resonance imaging
ST
Heat-stable (enlerotoxln]
MVD
Microvascular dysplasia
SUBA
Serum unconjugated bile acids
MVM
Microvilus membrane
TAP
Trypsinogen activation pepide
NAC
W-acetylcysleine
TCR
T cellreceplor
NK
Natural killer (cell) 
TEM
Transmission lectron micrascopy
NO
Nitic oxide
TGF
Transforming growlh factor
NPO
 Nothing per as
山
T helper (lymphocyte)
NSAID
 Non-steroidal anti-nffammalory drug
Trypsin-like inmmunoreactivity
83°0
Oxygen extraction rate
TNF
Tumour necrosis factor
PAA
 Pancreatic acinar alrophy
TP
Total protelnt
PAF
 Platelet activaling factor
TPMT
 Thiopurine methyl transferase
PAS
 Periodic acld-Schif (stain)
TS
Total solids
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
UDCA
Ursodeoxycholic acid
PCV
Packed cellvolume
VO:
Oxygen upiake
PDL
 Periodonta ligamernt 
VOHC
Veterinary Oral Health Council
PEG
Percutaneous endoscopic gastroslomy (iube)
WSAVA
Worid Small Anirmal Velerinary Association
PG
Prostaglandin 
NZ
Ziehl-Neelsen (slain)
320
Appendix 3
Conversion tables
Biochemistry
Haematology
Slunit
Conversion
Non-SI unit
SIunit
Conversion
Non-Sl unit
Red blood cellccunt
Alaninetransferase
1U/1
X1
IU/1
102/1
x1
10/
Albumin
Haemoglobin
1/6
x0.1
IP/6
g/1
x0.1
p/b
MCH
pg/cell
x1
pg/cell
Alkaline phosohatase
IU/1
x1
IU/1
MCHC
g/1
x0.1
IP/6
Aspartale transaminase
1U/1
X1
IU/1
MCV
x1
uma
Bilirubin
μmol/1
x0.0584
IP;6u
Plateletcount
10F/1
x1
10°/
Calcium
mmol/1
x4
White blood cellccunt
10F/1
x1
109/
Carbon dioxide (total)
mmol/1
x1
mEq/1
Cholestercl
mmol/1
x38.61
Ip/bu
Hypodermic needles
Chloride
mmol/1
x1
mEq/1
Metric
Non-metric
Cortiscl
nmol/1
x0.362
ng!ml
Extemaldiameter
0.8mm
21G
Creaine kirase
IU/1
X1
1U/1
0.6mm
23G
Cretininae
umol/1
X0.0113
0.5mm
25G
Glucose
mmol/1
x18.02
IP/Eu
0.4mm
27G
Insulin
pmol/1
x0.1394
μlU /ml
Needlelength
12mm
',inch
Iron
mel/1
x5.587
4g/d
16mm
5'inch
Magnesium
mmcl/1
x2
mEq/1
25mm
1irch
Phosphorus
mmel/1
x3.1
Ip/6W
30mm
1!yinch
Potassium
mmol/1
x1
mEq/1
40mm
1/ inch
Sodium
mmol/
x1
mEq!1
Total protein
g/1
x0.1
IP/6
Suture material sizes
Thyrcxine(T4)(free)
pmol/1
x0.0775
Ip/Bu
Metric
USP
Thyrcxine（T4)(tota)
nmol/l
x0.0775
10/6
0.1
11/0
Tricdothyronine (T3)
nmol/1
x65.1
ng/cl
0.2
10/0
Triglycerides
mmol/1
x88.5
mg/dl
0.3
9/0
Urea
mmol!
x2.8
mg cf urea nitrogen'd
0.4
8/0
0.5
7/0
Temperature
0.7
6/0
5/0
Slunit
Conversion
Conventional unit
1.5
40
°C
（x9/5)+32
OF
2
3/0
3
2/0
3.5
0
4
1
2
321
ndex
Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations
Ampicillin, 116, 313
Amprolium, 302
Abdominal pain, 4, 5
Amylase, 11, 20, 81
Abdominal palpation, 8
Anaemia, 80, 84
Abdominal radiography, 22-5, 84
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 93
Abdominal ultrasonography, 84
Anal disorders, 217
ascites, 101
diagnosis 215-16
haematemesis,
.92
Anal furunculosis, 219
jaundice,108
Anal glands, 215
Abdominocentesis,
100
Anal prolapse, 219
Abscess
Anal sacculltis, 218
anal sac, 218
Anal sacs, 215
pancreatic, 225,232
abscess, 205,218
Absidia spp., 191
adenocarcinoma, 218-19
Absorbents, 186
impaclion, 205, 218
Abyssinlan cat, alimentary tract disorders, 3
neoplasia, 205
Acapromazine maleate, 48, 303
Anal strictures, 219
Acid-base balance, 161--2
Acid blockers (ant-ulcer drugs), 305-6
Anal tonsil, 52
Anal trauma, 220
H, antagonists, 305-6
Analgesia, 279-80
proton pump inhibltors, 306
Acquired idiopathic megaoesophagus,
colonoscopy, 48
：140
gastric ulceration, 163
Acquired secondary megaoesophagus, 140. 141
pancreatitis, 231, 284-5
ACTH stimulation test, 11
Activated charcoal, 307
postoperative, 127, 283
Acute gastritis, 6, 159-60
Ancyiostoma spp., 192
Adenocarcinoma
Ancylostoma caninum,
112, 115
anal gland, 218-19
Angiography, 101
gastric, 172, 173
Anogenital clefts, 217
intestine, 200
Anorectum, 205
Adenoma, biliary tract 278
Anorexia, 4
S-Adenosylmethionine, 312, 317
Antacids, 304-5
Adsorbents, 159, 298-307
Anthelmintics, 299-302
Anti-5HT, agents, 303
Adynamic ileus, 202
Airedale Terrier, pancreatic tumour, 3
Antlbacteriais, 297-9, 313-14
 Alanine aminotransferase
amlnoglycosides, 298
and diarrhoea, 80
cephalosporins and cephamycins, 298
liver disease, 246,247
chloramphenicol, 298
Albendazole, 114, 300, 301, 315
gastric ulceration, 162
Algal coliis, 208
lincosamides, 298
Algal diarrhoea, 192
macrolides, 298
Alkaline phosphatase
metronidazole, 298
and diarrhoea, 80
pancreatic insufficiency, 237
liver disease, 246, 247
pancreatitis, 231
Aluminium hydroxide 316
penicillins, 298-9
Amikacin, 298
quinolones, 299
Aminoglycosides, 298
 small intestinal disease, 
186
Aminopentamide, 302
sulphonamides, 299
1C-Aminopyrine demethylation blood/breath test, 19
tetracycllines, 299
5-Aminosalicylic acid derivatives, 308
see also individual drugs
Ammonia, 247
Anticholinergics, 302, 303, 307
Amoxicilin, 168, 208, 276, 313
Anti-dlarrhoeals, 306-7, 314
Amphimerus pseudofelineus, 238
intestinal protectants and adsorbents, 306-7
Amphotericin B, 120, 208, 314
motility modifiers, 307
322
Index
Anti-dopaminergic agents, 303
Bile
Anti-emetics, 162, 302-3, 314
characteristics, 97
Antiflbrotics, 311
flow, 269-70
Antifungals, 299,314
investigations, 102
Antigen-presenting cells, 50 
Bile acids, 19
Antihistamines, 303
ascites, 101
Anti-inflammatory drugs, 307-9, 315
Bile duct
small intestinal disease, 187
obstruction，273-4
Anti-oxidants, 267,312
rupture, 274
Antiparasitics, 299-302, 315
tumours, 265
anthelmintics, 299-302
Bile salts
anti-protozoals, 302
binding. 89
Anti-spasmodlcs, 307
deconjugation, 89
Anuria. 79
insufficiency, 89
Anus, anatomy and physiology, 214-15
liver disease, 247
Aonchotheca spp., 168
loss of, 89
Aonchotheca putoni, 14
precipitation, 89
Apothecia,84
Biliary calculi, 228
Appetite.4
Biliary diseases, 272-8
Ascites, 4, 5, 79, 97-102
bile duct rupture, 274
 characteristics, 97
canine cholangitis. 275
clinical features, 98-9
cholecystitis, 274
diagnosis, 99-100
cholelthlasls, 274-5
abdominocentesis, 100
double gallbladder, 278
investigations, 107, 102
extra-hepatic bile duct obstruction, 273-4
laboratory examination, 100
feline cholangitis, 275-7.
differential diagnosls, 99
liver flukes, 276-7
hypoalbuminaemia.98
Iymphocytic cholangitis, 276
inflammation, 98
neoplasia, 277-8
leakage. 98
neutrophilic chclangitis, 275-6
pathophysiology, 98
 Biliary dysfunction
portal hypertension, 98
clinical signs, 271
treatment, 102
diagnosis, 271-2
Aspartate aminotransferase, 246, 247
pathophysiology
Aspirin,160
cholestasis, 270
Atresia ani, 217
 jaundice see Jaundlce
Atrophic gastritis, 169
Biliary reflux, 228
Avermectins, 301
Biiary stasis, 249
Azathioprine, 169, 187,197, 252,308,316
Bllary system, 269-78
Azithromycin, 115, 298, 315
 anatomy and physiclogy, 269-70
Azostix test, 75
Bilirubin 
Azotaemia, 6
formation and disposal, 103 
pancreatitis, 229
liver disease, 247
 see also Jaundice
Babesia canis, 105
Biopsy, 12, 57-61
Babesia gibsoni, 105
duodenal, 47
Bacilus pilifomis, 191
endoscopic,40-1,58
Bacterial colitis, 207-8
gastrointestinal, 57-8
Bacterial diarrhoea, 190-1
guillotine ligature technique, 59
Bacterial gastritis, 167-8
hepatic, 58-60
Bacteriology, 14, 15-16
histopathological examination, 64, 65
Bacteroides spp., 179
intestinal, 184-5
Balantidium spp.,
206
laparoscopic, 60
Ballottement, 99
liver disease, 248-9
Balsalazide, 308
pancreafic,60-1
Barbiturates, 303
percutaneous ultrasound-guided, 58
Bartonelia henselae, 126
post-mortem samples. 63
Basenji
processing. 63-4
enteropathy, 165
sample collection, 62, 63
lymphocytic plasmacytic enteriltis, 3
skin-punch, 59-60
Basidiobolus spp., 191
 specialized examination
Beagle, chronic hepatitis, 3
electron microscopy, 66
Bedlington Terrier, copper hepatotoxicosis, 3, 255-8
immunohistochemistry.
66,67
Behaviour changes, 4
special stains, 65-6'?
Belgian Shepherd Dog, gastric carcinoma, 3
stomach, 44-5
Bengal cat, alimentary tract disorders, 3
surgical, 58, 59
Benzimidazoles, 299-302
 see aiso Fine needle aspiration cytology
Benzodiazepines, 303
Bismuth, 305, 307, 314, 316
Bethanechol, 142,303-4,317
Bladder neoplasia, 205
323
lndex
Blood
Chief cells, 151
characteristics. 97
Chlorambucil, 187, 197, 316
investigations, 102
Chloramphenicol, 298
Blood count, 108
liver disease, 252
Blood transfusion, 282
Chlorphenamine (chlorpheniramine), 303, 314
Borborygmi, 4, 82
Chlorpromazine,
，285,303,314
Boston Terrier, vascular ring anomaly, 3
Cholangitis, 251
Bouvier des Flandres, oropharyngeai dysphagia, 134,
canine, 275
136
feline, 275-7
Boxer
lymphocytic, 276
histiocytic colitis, 3
neutrophilic, 275-6
oral neoplasia, 136
Cholelithiasis, 274-5
Breath hydrogen analysis, 11, 16, 183
Cholestasis, 104
Breed dispositions, 3
biochemical investigation, 271
hepatic encephalopathy. 110
Cholinergics, 303
oropharyngeal disease, 136
Chow Chow
Budesonide, 308, 316
 exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, 3
Bulk laxatives, 309, 317
hiatal herria, 136
Bulldog
Chronic gastritis, 6, 165-70
anomalous coronary artery. 136
Chronic histiocytic ulcerative colitis, 209
hialal hernia, 136
Chronic uicerative periodontitis syndrome, 124
vascular ring anomaly, 3
Chyle, 97
Bunamidine, 300, 301, 315
Chymotrypsin, 227
Bupivacaine, 285
Ciclosporin A, 128,308,316
Buprenorphine, 48, 127, 163
Cimetidine, 138, 252, 305-6, 316
Butylscopolamine (hyoscine), 303, 314
Circumanal glands, 215
Butyrophenones, 303
adenoma, 220
Cirrhosis,29
Cairn Terrier
Cisapride, 142,172, 304, 317
microvascular dysplasia, 3
Clarithromycin, 168,298
oesophageal flstula, 136
Clinical biochemistry, 9-10
portosystemic shunt, 3
ascites, 101
Calcium gluconate, 284, 318
diagnostic tests, 14-15, 17-18, 19, 20-1
Calcium malabsorption, 88
gastric disorders, 155
Calculus (tartar), 123
gastnic ulceration, 160
Campyiobacter spp., 16, 31-2, 79, 113, 116-17, 155,
jaundice,108
182
small intestinal disease, 181
Campylobacter jejuni, 79, 190, 206, 208
Clostridium spp., 179, 182, 206
Campylobacter upsaliensis, 190
Ciostridium difficile, 15, 116, 191
Campylobacteriosis, 208
Ciostridium perringens, 15, 79, 80, 95, 113, 115-16,
Canine cholangitis, 275
182, 191,208
Canine chronlc hepatitis, 258-62
Coagulation factors, 247
aetiology. 258-9
Coagulation tests
diagnosis, 259
gastric disease,
155
pathophysiology, 259
jaundice, 108
treatment, 260-2
Cobalamin, 11, 17-18,311
Canine coronavirus, 189-90
absorption, 178, 184
 Canine coronavirus enteritis, 120
diarrhoea, 85
Canine eosinophilic granulomas,
128
malabsorption, 88
Canine hepatic encephalopathy,
.109
see also Vitamin B12
Canine liver disease, 242, 243
Coccidia, 192-3
Canine liver enzymes, 246
Cocker Spaniel
Canine liver structure, 243-4
chronic hepatitis, 3
Canine parvovirus, 118-19, 188-9
oral neoplasia, 136
Capllaria aerophila, 112
 pharyngeal dysphagia, 3
Carbohydrates
Coeliotomy, 85
digestion and absorption, 177-8
Co-enzyme Q10, 128, 318
malabsorption, 88
Colchicine, 267, 311,318
Carcinoma, biliary tract, 277-8
Colestyramine (cholestyramine), 89, 307, 314
Carprofen,. 252
Colitis,6
Cathartics see Laxatives and cathartics
acute,207
Cats see Feline
bacterial, 207-8
Cefadroxil, 313
chronic see inflammatory bowel disease
Central nervous system trauma/tumours, 4, 6
clostridial, 208
Cephalosporins and cephamycins, 298
eosinophilic, 209
Cestocides, 300
fungal/algal, 208
Cestodes, 192
lymphocytic-plasrmacytic, 209
Challenge trlals, 194
parasitis, 207
Chest X-ray, ascites, 101
Colitis-proctitis, 205
324
Index
Colon
Cystic mucinous hyperplasia, 277
anatomy and physiology, 203-4
Cystilis, 205
biopsy. 58
Cytauxzoon felis, 105
disases of, 203-12
acute colitis, 207
Dantron (danthron), 310,317
bacterial colitis, 207-8
Decoppering agents, 311
constipation,7,205,211
Depression, 4
diagnostic tests, 206-7
Dermatomyositis,
.141
fungal and algal colitis, 208
Dexamethasone,
，164,303
history and clinical signs, 205-6
Diabetes mellitus, 4, 6
Inflammatory bowel disease, 208-11
Diagnosis, 2
intussusception, 6, 211
diagnostic plan, 9-12
irritable bowel syndrome, 205, 211
tests, 10-12
neoplasia,211-12
Diarrhoea, 4. 78-81
parasitic colitis, 207
acute, 185,188
physical examination,·206
antiblotic-responsive, 194-6
immunology. 52
chronic,82-6
mucosa, 204
 baseline laboratory tests, 84
ultrasanography, 27
diagnosis, 83-4
Colonic cleansers, 310
diagnostic imaging, 84
Colonic motility disorders, 2f1-12
dietary modification, 186
Colonoscopy, 47-9,85, 207
endoscopy. 85
dyschezla and tenesmus, 95
 exploratory coeliotomy, 85
findings, 48-9
Gl function tests, 84--5
indicatlons, 47
history, 82-3
preparation, 47-8
physical examination, 83
procedure, 48
clinical slgns, _ 79
Complement, 227
critical care, 286-7
diagnosis, 79,80
Computed tomography, liver, 31-2
Congenital megaoesophagus, 140
differential diagnosis, 79
breed disposition, 136
history, 78-9
Congenitai oral disorders, 131-2
infectious, 188-93
bacterial, 190-1
Congenital vascular disorders, 263-4
Conidiobolus spp., 191
endoparasitic, 192
fungal/algal/oomycete, 191-2
Constipation, 7, 205, 211
protozoal, 192-3
aetiology, 212
Contrast radiography
viral, 188-90
life-threatening, 80-1
doses and medla, 25
pathophysiolcgy. 78, 82
gastrointestinal tract, 23-5.84
prognosis,B1
Copper storage disease in Bedlington Terriers, 255-8
self-limiting, 80
Coprophagia,
4
treatment, 81 
Corcnavirus, 101
Diazepam, 252, 254
canine, 120, 189-90
Dichlorophen, 300,302,315
feline, 120, 190
Dichlorv0s, 300, 301, 315
Corticosteroids, 303, 307-8
Dieffenbachia spp., 132
liver disease, 252
Dietary management
pancreatitis, 231
acute gastritis, 160
C-reactive protein, 18
gastric motity disorders, 171
Craniomandibuiar osteopathy, 136
inflammatory bowel disease, 209-11
Cricopharyngeal achalasla,
134-5
liver disease, 260-2, 266
Critical care, 279-87
 pancreatic insufficiency, 236
analgesia, 279-80
pancreatitis,232
diarrhoea, 286-7
small intestinal disease, 185-6
electrolyte status, 280-1
Diet-related disease
gastric dilatation and volvulus. 281-2
acute gastritis, 159
infection surveillance, 281
enteropathies,193-4
liver disease, 285-6
pancreatitis, 227
mutiple organ failure. 279
 Difuse 9osinophilic gastrifis, 169
pancreatitis, 284-5
Digestion and absorption,
176-8
perfusion, 280
Digestive enzymes, 310
peritonitis，283
Digital rectal examination, 215-16
small intestinal obstruclion, 282-3
Dimenhydrinate, 303,314
vital signs, 280
Diphenhydramine, 303, 314
Cryoprecipitate transfusion, 282
Diphenoxylate, 186, 307, 314
Cryptosporidium spp., 16, 114-15, 192
Dipylidium caninum, 112
Cryptosporidium parvum, 16
Dirofilaria immitis, 105
Cyclizine, 303
Distemper, 141
Cyclooxygenase, 160
Diverticula, 205
Cystic disease of liver, 277
oesophageal 143-43
325
xapui
Dobermann
Eoslnophilic granuloma, 128
chronic hepatitis, 3
Epidermal growth factor.
.153
hepatic encephalopathy, 110
Epiprenum aureum,
132
Docusate sodium, 309, 317
Epsiprantel, 300, 315
Domperidone, 304
Epulides, 130-1
Dopamine, 231, 284,318
Erythromycin, 117, 172, 208, 298, 304, 313, 317
Doppler ultrasonography of liver, 30-1
Escherichia col, 31-2,117-18,153,179
Doramectin, 300, 301, 315
clinical signs of infectian, 118
Double gall btadier, 278
diagnosis, 118
Doxycycline, 302
diarrhoea, 191
Drentse Patrijshond
enterohaemorrhagic, 118
polyneuropathy, 165
enteropathogenic, 118
stomatocytosis, 155
enterotoxigenic, 117-18
Droperldol, 303
treatrment, 118
Drug interactions and Gl disease, 4, 6
Esomeprazole, 306,316
Drug toxicity
Eurytrema procyonis,238
and hepatitis, 251-4
Exclusion diet, 193-4 
and pancreatitis, 227-8
Exocrine pancreas see Pancreas, Pancreatic
Duodenal aspiration and culture, 11, 15
Extra-hepatic bile ducl obstruction, 273-4
Duodenal reflux, 228
Extra-hepatic cholestasis, 104
Duodenum
Exudates, 101
biopsy, 47
ultrasonography, 26-7
 Faecal α,proteinase inhibitor, 18, 101
Dysautonomia, 741,142-3
Faeces,
Dyschezia, .4, 82, 94-6
examination and tests, 10, 206
Dysphagia, 4, 5-6, 69-70, 133-5
culture, 16
dyschezia and tenesmus, 95
Ehrlich reaction, 271
flotation, 14, 16, 84, 113
Ehrichia canis, 105
immunoassays, 114
Elastase, 227
small intestinal disease, 
181-2
Electrocardiogram, ascites, 101
smear, 16,84, 112, 113
Electromyography, 134
frequency. 82
Electron microscopy, 66
mucus, 82
Emolient laxatives, 309-10
occult blood, 18
Endodontic disease, 123
volume, 82
Endoparasitic infections, 192
Famotidine, 138, 168, 306, 316
Endoscopes, 35-9
Fat malabsorption, 88
Endoscopy. 12,34-49
Fatty liver, 29
blopsy. 39-40
Febantel, 300, 301,315
colonoscopy, 47-9
Feeding tubes, 288-96
enteroscopy, 45-7
complications, 296 
gastric disease, 157, 160
feeding plan, 289-90
gastroscopy, 42-5
feeding route, 288-9
haematemesis, 92-3
placement
ileoscopy.47
 gastrostomy tubes, 293-5
oesophagoscopy. 40-2
jejunostomy tubes, 295-6
patient preparation, 40 
naso-0esophageal tubes, 290-1
problems during, 39
pharyngostomy and oesophagostomy tubes,
small intestine, 184
291-2
upper Gl tract, 85
Feline cholangitis, 275-7
Enemas, 309, 310
Felne chronic gingivostomatitis, 5-7, 126-8
Enrofloxacin,117,208,313
Feline enteric coronavirus, 120, 190
Entamoeba spp., 206
Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex, 128
Entamoeba histolytica, 95
Feline hepatic encephalopathy, 109
Enterobacteriaceae, 179
Feline hepatic lipidosis, 3
Enterocytes, 176
Feline immunodeliciency virus, 4, 190
Enteropathogenic bacteria, 115-18
Feline infectious peritonitis, 4
Enteroscopy, 42,45-7
breed disposition, 3
Enzyme inhibitors, 232
Feline leukaemia virus, 4. 190
Enzyme replacement, 235-6
Feline liver disease, 242,243
Enzymes
Feline iver enzymes, 246
digestive, 310
Feline liver structure, 243-4
liver, 246
Feline parvoviral entaritis, 119-20, 189
pancreatic, 222,223
Fenbendaz0le, 114,115,168,193,198,238,300,301,
Eosinophilia, 80, 84,165
302, 315
 small intestinal disease, 181
Fentanyl, 283, 284
Eosinophilic colitis, 209
Fibre, physiological effects, 204
Eosinophilic enteritis, 197-8
Fibreoptic endoscopes, 35
Eosinophilic gastritis, 169
Fibrosarcoma, 131
326
Index
Fine needle aspiration cytology, 249
clinical findings, 173
 billiary disease, 272
diagnosis, 173-4
Flatus, 4, 82
endoscopy. 45
Flexispira rappini, 166
[eiomyosarcoma, 172, 173
Flubendazole, 300, 301, 315
lymphosarcoma, 172, 173
Fluid and electrolyte balance, 178
treatment, 174
critical care, 280-1
Gastric secretory testing, 158-9
Fluid therapy, 160, 162, 164-5, 185, 283, 284, 285,
Gastric ulceration, 6, 160-3
286-7
Gastrin test, 14-15 
 Flunixin meglumine, 160
Gastritis
Fluoroscopy, 11
acute see Acute gastritis
Folate,11,77,311
chronic see Chronic gastritis
absorption, 178, 184
Gastro-oesophageal intussusception, 150
diarrhoea, 85
breed disposition, 136
malabsorption, 88
radiographic findings,
137
Fox Terrier
Gastro-oesophageal reflux, 139
anal tumours, 3
radiographic findings,
137
congenital rnegaoesophagus,
136
Gastrography, 24-5
 French Bulldog, hialal hernia, 136
Gastrointestinal biopsy, 57-8
Fungal colitis, 208 
Gastrointestinal diseases;
Fungal gastritis, 168
 clinical signs, 4
Furazolidone. 302
investigative approach, 1-12
Furosemide, 218
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 91-3
 anaemia and hypovolaemia, 93
Gall bladder
haematemesis, 91-3
disease, 29-30
haematochezia, 93
double, 278
melaena,93
 ultrasound-guided biopsy. 30
Gastrointestinal tract
Gallstones, 274-5
 contrast radiography, 23-5
Gamma-giutamyl transferase, 246
survey abdominal radiagraphy, 22-3
Gastric acid, 152
ultrasonography, 26-7
Gastric decompression, 164
Gastroscopy: 42-5
Gastric dilatation and volvulus, 140
Gastrostomy tube, 289, 293-5
 clinical signs, 163
Gentamicin, 298
criltical care, 281-2
German Shepherd Dog
diagnosis, 164
antibiotic-responsive diarrhoea, 3
pathogenesis, 163
congenital megaoesophagus, 136
prognosis, 165
exocrine pancreaticinsufflciency,3
treatment, 164-5
gastro-oesophageal intussusception, 136
Gastric disorders
inflammatory bowel disease, 3
acute gastritis. 159-60
 myasthenia gravis-associated megacesophagus,
biachemistry, 155
136
chronic gastritis, 165-7
 pancreatic acinar atrophy, 234
clinical signs, 69, 154-7
persistent right aortic arch,
136
coagulation testing, 155
Giardia spp., 16,95. 112, 114, 155, 182, 193, 206
delayed gastric emptying and motility, 170-2
vaccination, 114
diagnostic approach, 153-8
Gingival recession, 123
endoscopy, 157
Gingivitis, 123
erosion and ulceration, 160-3
Glossitis, 132
haematology. 155
Glucocorticoids, 237
history, 154
Glucose, 246
 laboratory tests for, 14-15
Glucostix test, 75
physical examination, 154
Glycogen storage disease, 140
radiography, 156
Glycopyrronium bromide, 302
ultrasonography, 156
Gnathostoma spp., 14, 168
urinalysis, 155
Golden Retriever
 see also individual diseases
hepatic encephalopathy, 110
Gastric emptying, 157-8
inflammatory bowel disease, 3
delayed, 170-2
 myasthenia gravis-associated megaoesophagus,
Gastric emptying breath test, 171
136
Gastric flora, 153
oral neoplasia, 136
Gastric foreign body, 6
oropharyngeal dysphagia,136
Gastric function evaluation, 157-8
Great Dane
Gastric lipase, 152
congenital megaoesophagus, 136
Gastric motillty, 153
gastric volvulus, 3
dlsorders, 170-2
megaoesophagus, 3
Gastric neoplasia, 6
Ground glass appearance, 228
adenocarcinoma, 172,173
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), 51, 53, 279
benign tumours, 172
327
Index
H, antagonists, 304, 305-6
Ibuprofen,160
Haemangiosarcoma, 265
Icterus see Jaundice
Haematemesis, 4, 91-3
Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease, 196-8
Haematochezia, 4, 93, 205
 eosinophilic enteritis, 197-8
Haematology. 9
lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis,
196-7
ascites. 101
ldiopathlc megaoesophagus, 140-2
gastric disorders, 155
lleoscopy. 47
gastric ulceration. 160
lleum, 27
 small intestinal disease, 180-1
Imaging
Haematuria, 94
colonic disease,207
Haemolysis, 103-4
gastrointestinal, 22-7
Haemorhagic gastroenteritis, 3, 187-8
liver, 27-32
Halitosis, 4
pancreas, 32-3
Haloperidol, 303
pancreatitis, 228-9
Harmonic ultrasonography, 31
see aiso individual techniques
Helicobacter bizzozeroni, 167
Immunohistochemistry, 66. 67
Helicobacter felis, 167
Immunology, 50-6
Helicobacter heilmanni, 167, 168
Immunosuppressants, 307-9, 316-17
Helicobacter pylori, 14, 153, 167-8
 small intestinal disease, 187
Helicobacter salomonis, 167
Infection
Hapatic encephalopathy, 109-11
and diarrhoea, 188-93
Hepatic fibrosis 250-1, 262-3
endoparasitic, 192
Hepalic lipidosis, 254-5
monitoring in critical care, 281
clinical signs, 254
see also individual agents
diagnosis, 254
Inflammatory bowel disease, 208-11
differential diagnosis, 29
breed disposition, 3
pathogenesis, 254
dietary treatment, 209-11
treatment, 255
Intestinal adenocarcinoma, 200
Hepatic neoplasia, 264-6
Intestinal biopsy. 184-5
Hepatic nodular hyperplasia, 266
 Intestinal disease, laboratory tests for, 15-19
Hepatitis, 6
Intestinal function tests, 11,
canine chronic, 258-62
absorption and permeability, 183-4
drug-induced, 251-4
 breath hydrogen analysis, 183
Hepatobiliary disease, 19
gastrointestinal protein loss, 184
Hepatocellular tumours, 265
 serum folate and cobalamin,
.184
Hepatotrapic agents, 312
Intestinal fungal infections, 120 
Hiatal hernia, 140, 149-50
Intestinal lymphoma, 199-200
breed disposition, 136
Intestinal mucosal function, 18-19, 85
radiographic findings. 137
Intestinal cbstnuction, 6, 201-2
Histoplasma spp., 95, 113, 164, 206
critical care, 282-3
Histopiasma capsulatum, 120
 Intestinal parasites, 114-15
History, 2-7
Intestinal permeability, 85
Hookworm, 115, 192
Intestinal pseudo-obstruction, 202
Hyperbilirubinaemia see Jaundice
Intra-hepatic cholestasis, 104
Hypercalcaemia, 227-8
Intrinsic factor, 152
Hypercholesterolaemia, 229
Intussusception, 6, 211
Hyperglobulinaemia, 165
Irish Setter
Hyperglycaemia, 229
congenital megaoesophagus, 136
Hyperkalaemia, 84
gastric volvulus, 3
Hyperlipoproteinaemia, 227
gluten sensitivity、3
Hyperparathyroidism, 4
megaoesophagus, 3
Hypersalivation, 69
Irish Wolfhound
Hyperthyroidism, 6, 104
 hepatic encephalopathy, 110
Hypertriglyceridaemia,229
megaoesophagus, 3
Hypertrophic gastritis, 6, 169-70
portosystemic shunt, 3
Hypertrophic gastropathy, 159
Iron malabsorption, 88
Hypoadrenocorticism, 4, 6, 140
Ilritable bowel syndrome, 205, 211
Hypoalbuminaemia, 98, 155
lrrltant cathartics, 310, 317
Hypocalcaemia, 281
Isopropamide, 302
diarrhoea, 81
isospora canis, 112. 192
pancreatiis, 229
Isospora felis, 112, 192
Hypoglycaemia, 80
tsospora rivolta, 192
Hypokalaemia, 84,281
Itraconazole, 120, 168, 208, 314
Hyponatraemia, 84
|vermectin, 300, 301, 315
Hypoparathyroidism, 4
Hypothyroidism, 141
Jack Russell Terrier
Hypovolaemia, 93 
 myasthenia gravis-associated megaoesophagus,
136
salivary gland necrosis, 3
328
Index
Jaundice, 4, 79, 103-9, 270-1
Liver disease, 240-68
biliary tract rupture, 105
acute
diagnosis, 106-8
cholangitis, 251
and diarhoea, 81
clinical signs, 245, 251
differential diagnosis, 105
clinicopathological tests, 251
extra-hepatic cholestasis, 104-5
hepatic lipidosis, 29, 254-5
 intra-hepatic cholestasis, 104
hepatitis of drug toxiclty, 251-4
pathophysiology, 103
treatment, 251, 252
pre-hepatic
chranic
haemolysis, 103-4
canine chronic hepatitis, 258-62
hyperthyroidism, 104
clinical signs, 245
treatment, 109
congenital vascular disorders, 263-4
Jejunostomy tube, 289, 295-6
copper storage disease, 255-8
Jejunum, 27
hepatic neoplasia, 264-6
lobular dissecting hepatitis, 262
Kallikrein, 227
 non-cirrhotic portal hypertension, 262-3
Kaolln and pectin, 307, 314
non-lnflammatory hepatic fibrosis, 262-3
Ketamine, 283, 285
 portal vein hypoplasia, 262-3
Ketoprofen, 128, 315
treatment, 266-8
Kinins, 227
crltical care, 285--6
Kupffer cells, 55
dlfterences between dogs and cats, 242-4
differential diagnosis, 29
Laboratory tests, 13-21
invesligation, 244-9
biapsy, 248-g
choice of, 13
evaluation of results, i3-14
clinicopathological changes, 245-7
exocrine pancreatic dlseases, 19-21
diagnostic imaging, 247-8
gastric disorders, 14-15
history and clinical signs, 244-5
hepatobiliary diseases, 19
radiography, 248
 intestinal diseases, 15-19
ultrasonography, 28,29.248
pathology, 249-50
see aiso individuaf tests
Labradar Retriever
therapeutics, 266-8,311-12
see aiso Hepatic
congenital megaoesophagus, 136
Liver flukes, 277
hepatic encephalopathy, 110
Lobular dissecting hepatitis, 262
oropharyngeal dysphagia, 136
Lactobacilus spp, 153
Loperamide, 186, 307, 314
Lymphadenopathy, 79
Lactoferrin, 128, 318
Lymphangiectasia, 198-9
Lactulose, 310, 317
Lymphatic obstruction, 90
Lansoprazole, 306
Lymphocytic cholangitis, 276
Laparotomy
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis, 209
ascites, 101
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis, 196-7
haematemesis, 93
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic gastritls, 6, 168-9
Large intestine see Colon
Lymphopenla,80, 84
Laxatives and cathartics, 309-10, 317
Lymphosarcoma, 29
Lead toxicity. 140, 155
gastric,172,173
Leather bottle stomach, 173
Leiomyosarcoma
α,-Macroglobulins, 20, 224
gastric,172,173
Macrolides, 298
hepatic,265
liver disease, 252
Leucocytosis, 229
Magnesium sulphate, 281, 317
Levamisole, 300, 301, 315
Magnetic resonance imaging,liver, 31
Lhasa Apso, pyloric stenosis, 3
Malabsorption, 87-90
Lidocaine, 164, 283, 285
Malignant melanoma, 131
Lincosamides, 298
Maltese dog
liver disease, 252
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis,
3
Lipase, 227
hepatic encephalopathy, 110
 and dlarrhoea, 81
lymphangiectasia, 3
Lipid dlgestion and absorption, 177
Manx cat, constipation and faecal incontinence, 3
Lipid storage disease, 140
Masticatory myositis, 4
Liver
Matrix metalloproteinases, 123
anatomy,240-1
MCT oil, 317
arteriogram, 101
Mebendazole, 300, 315
biopsy, 58-60
Mebeverine, 307, 318
enzymes，246
Meclizine, 303
function, 241-2
Megaoesophagus
tests,11
acquired idiopathic,
140
imaging, 27-32
acquired secondary,
140,141
immunology. 55
breed disposition, 3, 136
ultrasound-guided biopsy, 30
congenltal, 140
329
Index
idiopathlc, 140-2
Nitazoxamide, 115, 302
radiographic findings, 137
Nitroscanate, 300, 301, 315
Melaena, 4, 82, 93
Nizatidine, 172,306, 316, 317
Mesalazine, 308, 315
Nodular pancreatic hyperplasia, 239
Metabolic acidosis, 155
Non-cirrhotic portal hypertension, 262-3
Metastatic disease, 4
Non-inflammatoryhepatic fibrosis,262-3
Methscopolamine, 302
Non-steroidal anti-inffammatory drugs, 159-60
Methylprednisolone, 127-8,303,316
Norwegian Lundehund, protein-losing enteropathy
Metoclopramide, 119, 142,172, 285, 303, 304,
and lymphangiectasia, 3
314,317
Nuclear scintigraphy, 170
Metronidazole, 114, 116, 168, 193, 196,298,
Nutritional supplements, 310-11,312
302.313, 315
anti-oxidants, 312
Microglossia, 132
digestive enzymes, 310
Microvascular dysplasia, 264
medium chain triglycerides, 310
Milbemycins, 300, 301, 315
prebiotics, 311
Miniature Schnauzer
probiotics, 311
congenital megaoesophagus,
136
vitamins, 311,312
haemorrhagic gastroentenitis, 3
hepatic encephalopathy, 110
Octreotide, 163,316
pancreatitis,3,227
Qesophageal disease, 69
Misoprostol, 163, 316
Oesophageal diverticulum, 137, 143-4
Montmorillonite, 307
Oesophageal fistula, 136, 137,13940
Mortierella spp. 191
Oesophageal forelgn body, 137, 146.
Motility disorders,
：179
Oesophageal neoplasia,i37,145-6
Motility modifiers, 186, 307
Oesophageal stricture, 137, 144-5
Motion sickness, 4, 6
Oesophagitis, 137,138-9, 141
Moxidectin, 300, 301, 315
Oesophagography. 23-4
Mucocele, 277
Oesophagoscopy, 40-2
Mucosal (cyto)-protectants, 304-5
Oesophagostomy tube, 289,291-2
Mucosal malabsorption, 90
Oesophagus,
Mucous neck cells, 151
 anatomy and physiology, 135
Multiple organ failure, 279
diagnostic approach, 136-8
Myasthenia gravis, 4
hypomotility disorders, 140-4
megaoesophagus,
140
inflammatory diseases, 138-40
breed disposition, 136
obstruction, 144-9
Mycobacterium spp, 191
pathophysiology.
.136
Mycophenolate mofetil, 308
ultrasonography, 27
Mycoplasma canis, 105
Old English Sheepdog,hepatic encephalopathy,
Mycoplasma haemofeis, 105
110
Qliguria, 79
Nasal discharge, 79
Ollutanus spp., 165, 167
Naso-0esophageal tube, 289, 290-1
Ollulanus tricuspis, 14, 168
Nausea, 4
Olsalazlne, 308,315
 see aiso Vomiting
Omeprazole. 138, 162, 306, 316
Nematodes, 115,192
Ondansetron, 303, 314
Neomycin, 298,313
Opioids, 307
Naoplasia
Oral cavity disorders, 122-32
anal, 3
canine eosinophilic granulomas. 128
anal sac, 205
chronic gingivostomatis in cats, 126-8
biliary system,
277-8
congenital defects, 131-2
bladder, 205
enlarged salivary glands,
132
central nervous system, 4, 6
feline eosinophilc granuloma complex oral
colon,211-12
lesions, 128
gastric, 3, 6, 45
lingual lesions, 132
liver, 264-6
periodontal disease, 122-5
oesophageal, 137,145-6
resorptive lesions, 129-30
oral, 130-1, 136
trauma, 130
pancreatic, 3, 237-8
tumours, 130-1
prostate, 205
ulcerative eosinophilic stomatitis, 128
 small lntestine, 199-201
Oral cavity immunology, 50
urethra, 205
Oral eosinophilic granuloma, 136
vagina, 205
Orai neoplasla, 136
Neuroendocrine tumours, 265
Organophosphate toxicity, 141
Neuropathy, 140
Oronasal fistula, 124
Neuiropenia, 80
Oropharyngeal disease, 69
Neutrophilia, 80, 84
Oropharyngeal dysphagia.
Neutrophilic cholangitis, 275-6
133--4
breed disposition,
136
Newfoundland, congenital megaoesophagus, 136
Oropharynx, 27
Nlclosamide, 300, 302,315
Osmotic diarrhoea, 179
330
Index
Oxantel, 300, 301
Pantoprazole, 306, 316
Oxibendazole,300,315
Paraffin, 309, 317
Oxyglobin transfusion, 282
Paragonimus, 112
Oxytetracycline, 313
Parasitic gastrifis, 168 
Parasitology, 14, 16-17
Packed red cell transfusion, 282
Parietal cells, 151
Pancreas,
Paromornycin, 302
anatomy, 222-3
Partial thromboplastin time, 81
biopsy, 60-1
Pellicle,123
defences against autodigestion, 223-4
D-Penicillamine, 312, 318
digestive enzymes see Pancreatic enzymes
Penicillins, 298-9
diseases of
Pentatrichomonas hominis, 207
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 233-7
Pepsin, 152
laboratory tests, 19-21
Pepsinogen, 152
neoplasia, 237-8
Pepsinogen test, 15
nodular hyperplasia, 239
Percutaneous uitrasound-guided biopsy, 58
pancreatic bladder, 239
Perfusion indices, 280
pancreatitis, 225-32
Perianal fistula, 205, 219
parasites, 238
Perianal hernia, 205, 220-1
function, 84-5
Perineal disease, 215-16
imaging, 32-3
Perineal swelling, 221
regulation of secretion, 224-5
Perineal trauma, 220
secretory proteins, 222
Perineum, anatomy and physiology. 213-14
Pancreatic abscess, 225, 232
Periodontal disease, 122-5.
Pancreatic bladder, 239
Periadontai pockats, 124
Pancreatic duct, 222
Periadontitis, 123
 Pancreatic enzymes, 222, 223
Peritonitis, 6
ascites,101
critical care, 283
inactivation of, 88-9
Permeability diarrhoea, 179
in pancreatitis, 227
Persian cat, alimentary tract disease, 3
Pancreatic extract, 235, 317
Peyer's patches, 51
Pancreatic insufficiency, 88-9, 233-7
Pezzer catheter, 293-5
aetiology;233
Pharyngostomy tube, 291-2
diagnosis, 234-5
Pharynx,
clinical signs, 2345
 anatomy and physiology, 133
history, 234
 diagnostic imaging, 133
laboratory tests, 235
disorders,
pathophysiology, 233-4
cricopharyngeal achalasia, 134-5
nuitritional status, 234
oropharyngeal dysphagia, 133-4
pancreatic regulatory peptides and glucose
history, 133
intolerance, 234
laboratory tests, 133
small intestinal microflora, 233
 physical examination, 133
 small intestinal mucosa, 233 
Phenobarbital, 252, 253
prognosis, 237
Phenothiazines, 303
treatment, 235-7
Philodendron spp., 132
 antibiotic therapy, 237
Phospholipase A2,
dietary modification,236
Physaloptera spp., 14, 165, 168
enzyme replacement, 235-6
Physaloptera rara, 168
glucocorticoid therapy, 237
Pica, 4
vitamin supplementation，236
Piperazine, 115, 300, 301, 315
Pancreatic ischaemia, 228
Plaque, 123
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity, 21, 230
Pneumocolonography, 25
Pancreatic pseudocysts, 232
Poisaning. 4, 6
Pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor, 224
Pollakiuria, 94
Pancreatic trauma, 228
Polydipsia, 4
Pancreatilis, 6, 225-32
Polymyositis/polymyopathy: 140
acute treatment, 231-2
Polyphagia, 4
aetiology, 227-8
Polyuria, 4
classification, 225
Poodle, hepatic encephalopathy, 3
complications, 232
Portal hypertension, 98, 249-51
critical care, 284-5
Portal vein hypoplasia, 262-3
diagnosis,
Portosystemic shunts, 250
history and clinical signs, 228
congenital, 263-4
imaging. 228-9
Portovenography, 101
laboratory tests, 229-31
Postmucosal malabsorption, 90
long-term therapy, 232
Praziquantel, 239, 300, 302, 315
pathophysiology, 226-7
Prebiotics, 186-7, 311
prognosis, 232
Prednisolone, 128, 165, 169, 197, 199, 219, 237,275,
Panhypoproteinaemia, 84, 165
307-8,316
331
Index
Primary exocrine pancreatic failure, 88
diagnosis, 129-30
Primidone,hepatotoxicity, 252
treatment, 130
Probiotics, 186-7, 311
 Resting energy requirement, 289-90
Problem list, 9
Rhizopus spp, 191
Problem-solving approach, 1-12
 Rottweiler, alimentary tract diseases, 3
Prochlorperazine, 303,314
Rough Collie
Proctoscopy, 216
sxocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 3
Prokinetics, 171-2, 303-4, 317
gastric tumour, 3
Promazine, 303
pancreatic acinar atrophy, 234
Promethazine, 303, 314
Propantheline bromide, 302
Saline purgatives, 310
Prostaglandins, 304
 Salivary gland enlargement, 132
Prostate
Salivation, 4, 5
benign hypertraphy, 205
Sa/monelia spp. 16, 79,95, 117, 155, 182, 206
neaplasia,205
diarrhoea, 190--1
Prostatitis, 205
Salmonellsis, 207-8
Protectants, 159, 162, 186
Scintigraphy
 Protein digestion and absorption, 176-7
biliary disease, 272
Protein malabsorption, 88
liver, 31-2
α,-Proteinase inhibitor, 224
Scottish Terrier, chronic hepatitis, 3
0,-Proteinase inhibitor-trypsin complexes, 20
Secretory diarrhoea, 179
Protein-losing enteropathy. 85, 181
Selamectin, 300, 301, 315
breed disposition, 3
Serum amylase 11, 20, 81
Proteinuria, 81
Serum globulins, 107
Proteus spp., 153
Serum lipase, 11, 20
Protheca spp., 208
Prothrombin time, 81
Serum unconjugated bile acids, 16
 Proton pump inhibitors, 306
Shar Pei
Prototheca spp, 113
 congenital megaoesophagus, 136
Protozoal cysts, 112
food intolerance, 3
Protozoal infections, 114-15, 192-3
hiatal hernia, 136 
Providencla alcalifaciens, 191
inflammatory bowel disease, 3
Pseudocoprostasis, 218
 Shih Tzu, alimentary tract diseases, 3
Psyllium, 317
Short bowel syndrome, 202
Ptyalism 4, 5
Sialadenitis, 132
Pulp, 123
Sialadenosis, 132
Pyloric stenosis, 6
Sialocele, 132
Pyometra, 4, 6
Siamese cat, alimentary tract disorders, 3
Pyrantel, 115, 168, 300, 301.315
Siberian Husky,oral eosinophilic granuloma,
：136
Pyrexia, 79
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (S/BO), 15-16,
Pyridostigmine, 304, 317
85,89, 159, 179,194-6
Pythiosis, 168,208
 Small intestine
Pythium spp., 166
disease, 176-202
Pythium insidiosum, 165, 167, 168
acute, 180
adynamic ileus and intestinal pseudo-
Quinacrine, 302
obstruction, 202
Quinolones, 299
biochemistry, 181
biopsy, 184-5
Rabeprazole, 306, 316
chronic, 180
Radiography. 11
clinical signs, 180
abdominal
diagnosis, 179-85
contrast, 23-5
diagnostic imaging, 182-3
survey, 22-3
diarrhoea see Diarrhoea
 anal/perineal disease, 216
diet-related enteropathies, 193--4
gastric disorders, 156
faecal analysis, 181-2
gastric motility disorders, 171
haematology, 180-1
gastric ulceration, 160
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, 187-8
liver and liver disease, 27-32, 28, 248
idiopathic infiammatory bowel disease, 196-8
0esophageal dlsorders, 736
 intestinal function tests, 183-4
pancreas, 32
intestinal obstruction, 201-2
resorptive lesions, 129-30
lymphangiectasia, 198-9
 small intestinal disease, 182
neoplasia, 199-201
Ranitidine, 138, 172, 306, 316, 317
pathophysiology, 179
Rectal stricture, 205
physical examination, 180
Regurgitatian, 6, 71-2
problem list and diagnostic plan, 180
Renal failure, 4
serology. 181
Resorptive oral lesions, 129-30
short bowel syndrome, 202
aetiology. 129
treatment, 185-7
clinical features, 129
urinalysis, 181
332
Index
immunology, 51
antiparasilics, 299-302
 structure and function, 176-9
 immunosuppressive and antinflammatory agents,
digestion and absorption of food, 176-8
307-9
fluids and electrolytes, 178
laxatives and cathartics, 309-10
microflora, 179 
liver disease, 311-12
motility, 179
mucosal (cyto)-protectants, 304-5
vitamins and minerals, 178
nutritionai supplements, 310-11
 Smooth Fox Terrier, myasthenia gravis-associated
prokinetics, 303-4
megaoesophagus, 136
Thirst, 4
Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier, pratein-losing
Thymoma, 141
enteropathy. 3
Tiabendazole, 300, 315
Somatostatin, 153, 231
Tobramycin, 298
Space of Disse, 55
Tocopherol see Vitamin E
Spathiphylum, 132
Tongue lesions, 132
Sphinx cat, inflammatory bowel disease, 3
Tooth brushing, 125
Spiramycin, 298
Torovirus, 190
 Spirocerca spp, 168
Total protein, 80
Spirocerca lupi, 14
Toxascaris leonina, 112,115. 192
Spironolactone, 318
Toxocara canis, 112, 115, 192
Springer Spaniel, myasthenia gravis-associated
Toxocara cati, 112, 115,192
megaoesophagus, 136
Toxoplasma gondi, 112
Squamous cell carcinoma, cral 131
Transudate, 101
Staphylococcus spp., 179
Trauma
Steatorrhoea, 82
anal， 220
Steroid hepatopathy diagnosis, 29
central nervous system, 4, 6
Staroids
oral,130
liver disease, 267
pancreatic, 228
 see aiso Coricostercids, Glucocorticoids
Triaditis, 63
Stomach, 151-75
Triamcinolone, 128, 145, 317
biopsy, 44-5
Tnichomonas spp., 206
 digestion and assimilation of nutrients, 151-2
Tnichuris vuipis, 95, 112, 115, 192,206,207
diseases of see Gastric disorders
Trientine, 318
gastric flora,153
Tritrichomonas foetus, 16, 17, 113, 115
gastric motility, 153
Trimethoprim/sulphonamide, 192, 208, 314, 315
immunology, 50, 51
Trypsin, 225, 226, 227
regulation of acid secretion,152-3
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity. 20-1, 230
structure and function, 151-3
Trypsinogen, 225
ultrasonography, 27
Trypsinogen activation peptide, 19-20
see aiso Gastric
Tumours see Neoplasia
Stomatitis, 132
Tylosin, 116, 191, 196, 208, 298, 302, 314
Stomatocytosis, 155
Strepfococcus spp, 153, 179
Ulcerative colitis, 49
Strongyloides stercoralis,
112
Ulcerative eosinophilic stomatitis, 128
Sucralfate, 138, 163, 305, 316
Ulcers, 160-3
Sucrose permeability test, 
15
Ultrasonography, 12
Sulfadimethoxine, 192, 315
abdominal, 84
Sulfasalazine, 308, 315
analperineal disease, 216
Sulphonamides, 299, 302
billiary disease, 271-2
liver dlsease, 252, 253
cardiac, in ascites, 101
Survey radlography. 10
colon, 27
abdomen. 22-3. 84
Doppler, 30-1
liver, 28 
duodenum, 26-7
Sylmarin, 312, 318
 gallbladder disease, 29-30
Systemic diseases, 4
gastric disorders, 156
Systemic lupus erythematosus, 140
gastric ulceration, 160
gastrointestinal tract, 26-7
Tacrolimus, 308, 317
harmonic, 31
Taenia spp., 112
hepatopathy, 28-9
Tapeworms, 192
ileum, 27
Tenesmus, 4, 82, 94-6, 205
jejunum,27
Terbinafine, 168, 314
liver and liver disease, 29-31,248
Tetracycline, 208, 252, 299, 314
oropharyngeal and oesophageal, 26, 27
Tetramine, 312
pancreas,32-3,229
Therapeutics, 297-312
small Intestinal dlsease,182-3
acid blockers (anti-ulcer drugs), 305-6
stomach, 26
antibacterials, 297-9
Uncinaria spp., 115
 anti-diarrhoeals, 306-7
Uncinaria stenocephaia, 112, 192
anti-emetics, 302-3
Uraemia, 6
antifungals. 299
Urea, 246
333
Index
Urethral neoplasla, 205
Vitamin K1, 286, 318
Urgency. 82
Vitamins，311
Urinalysis, 10
pancreatic insufficiency. 236
ascites, 101
Volvulus, 140
gastric disorders, 155
Vomiting, 4, 6, 73-7, 82, 154
gastric ulceration, 160
clinical features, 73, 74
jaundice, 108
diagnosis, 74, 75-7
small intestinal disease, 181
differentfal diagnosis,
Urinary calculil, 205
gastric disorders, 69
Urine
history. 73
characteristics, 97
initiation of.
73
investigations, 102
oesophageal disease, 69
Urine protein immunoreactivity analysis, 101
 oropharyngeal disease, 69
Ursodeoxychalic acid, 267, 275, 311, 318
 physical examlnation, 73-4
treatment, 77
Vaginal neoplasia, 205
Vomitus, microscopic examination, 14
Vascular ring anomaly, 146-7
Weight loss, 4, 82
breed disposition, 3
Weimaraner, oral neoplasia, 136
radiographic findings, 137
West Highland White Terrier
Vegetable oils, 310
chronic hepatopathy, 3
Vestibular disease, 4, 6
craniomandibular osteopathy, 136
Video endoscopes, 35
Whole blood transfusion, 282
Viral diarrhoea, 188-90
Wirsung's duct, 222
Viral infectlons,
canine coronavirus enteritis, 120
Yersinia spp., 16
canine parvovirus, 118-19
Yersinia enterocolitica, 191, 208
feline enteric coronavirus, 120
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, 191
feline parvoviral enteritis, 119-20
Yorkshire Terrier
Vital signs, 280
hepatic encephalopathy. 110
Vitamin A, 311
lymphangiectasia, 3
 malabsorption, 88
portosystemic shunt, 3
Vitamin B12, 152,236, 318
protein-losing enteropathy, 3
(see also Cobalamin)
Zinc
Vitamin D, 311
drugs, 267, 312, 318
malabsorption, 88
malabsorption,88
Vitamin E,236,311,312,318
toxic05is, 228
malabsorption, 88
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 77, 87, 159
Vltamln K, 311
Zygomycosis, 208
malabsorption, 88
Zymogen, 225
334
BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline Gastroenterology
Second edition
EditedbyEdward J.Hall,JamesW.SimpsonandDavid A.Williams
Building on the successof theprevious
edition,theBSAVA Manualof Canine and
Feline Gastroenterology,2ndedition
incorporates not only the new information
available since the original publicationbut
also additional chaptersondiagnostic
techniques and presenting complaints.
Part 1 considers diagnostic techniques,
with chapters on the approach to a
gastrointestinal case,laboratory evaluation,
imaging,endoscopy,immunologyand
biopsy.The completely newchapteronimaging of the gastrointestinal tract,liver andpancreas
coversindetail themodalitiesmostfrequentlyemployedinsmallanimalpractice,namely
Doppler and harmonic ultrasonography, scintigraphy, CT and MRI.
complaints:dysphagia and regurgitation;vomiting;acute and chronic diarrhoea;
and infectious diseases.All follow the same basic format:outlining the clinical features,
ranking the differential diagnoses in order of importance,and providing step-by-step
algorithms for diagnosis.
Themore traditional organ-based systems approach in
Part 3 has been expanded from the previous edition to
include chapters on disorders of the oral cavity,perineum
and anus, and biliary system.Each chapter is presented
in a similarstyle,startingwith a brief description of
tests,and concluding with a discussionof thedisorders
that can be encountered, including their treatment.
The completely new final part contains chapters devoted
to critical care,assisted feeding techniques,and an
overviewof therapeutics.
The chapters,written by a host of international authors,all
experts in their field,are accompanied throughout by full
colour illustrations.
BIBLIOTECAGERAL
CONTENTS
1084936
Approach to the investigation of gastrointestinal diseases;Laboratory
evaluation of gastrointestinal disease;Imaging of the gastrointestinal tract,
liver and pancreas;Gastrointestinal endoscopy;Gastrointestinal
immunology:Biopsy:sample collection;Biopsy:handling,processing and
interpretation;Dysphagiaandregurgitation;Acute andchronicvomiting:
ISBND-905214-73-0
Acute diarrhoea;Chronic diarrhoea;Malabsorption;Gastrointestinal
haemorrhage:Dyschezia and tenesmus;Ascites:Jaundice:Hepatic
encephalopathy;Infectious and parasitic diseases;Disorders of the oral
cavity;Disorders of the pharynx and oesophagus;Diseases of the stomach;
Diseases of the smallintestine;Diseases of the colon and rectum;Disorders
of the perineum and anus;Diseases of the exocrine pancreas;Diseases of
the liver;Diseases of the biliarysystem;Critical care of patientswith
9
780905214733
gastrointestinal disease;Feeding tubes;Therapeutics;Appendices:Index.