HANDBOOKOF
VETERINARY
PHARMACOLOGY
WalterH.Hsu
Blackwell
Publishing
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Handbookof
VeterinaryPharmacology
Handbookof
Veterinary Pharmacology
Walter H. Hsu
Professor of Pharmacology
Department of Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowaState University
Ames, lowa
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
Edition first published 2008
 2008 Wiley-Blackwell
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in february 2007. Blackwell's publishing
program has been merged with Wiley's global Scientic, Technical, and Medical business to form
Wilcy-Blackwell.
Editorial Office
2121 State Avcnuc. Amcs. lowa 50014-8300, USA
for permission to rcusc the copyright material in this look, please sce our wcl)site at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwc:ll.
Authorizaticn to photocopy iteins for intermal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing. provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been
granted a photocopy license by CCC. a separate system of payments has been arranged. The iee codes
for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2837-4/2008.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are oiten claimed as trademarks. All brand
narmes and product natmes used in this look are trade narmes, service marks, tradermarks or registered
trademarks of thcir respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject imatter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is nol engaged in
a compctent professional should he sought.
Library of Congress Catatoguing-in-Publication Data
I lsu, Walter I I.
Hancbook (of veterinary pharmacology / Walter H. Hsu. - 1st ecl.
p. ; cm.
Includes bilbliographical refercnccs and indcx.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2837-4 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8138-2837-6 (alk. paper)
1. Vctcrinary drugs-f landbooks, manuals, ctc. I. ritle.
3. Pharmacology-Handlbooks. SF 917 H873h 2008j
SF917.H78 2008
636.089'51-dc22
2008007204
A catalogue record for this bxook is available frorm the U.s. Library of Congress.
Set in Optima by Aptara
Printed in [country] by [printer] 
Disclaimer
 The contents of this work are intended to further general scientic research, understanding, and cdiscussion
only and are not intended and should not le relicd upon as recommending or promoting a specific
mcthod, diagnosis, or treatment by practitioncrs for any particular patient. lhe puhlishcr and the author
make no representations or warranties witli respect to the accuracy or compleleness of the contents of
this work and specifically disclaim all watrranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of
governmental regulations, and thie constant ilow oi information relating to the use of medicines,
cquipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the
packagc inscrt or instructions for cach medicinc, cquipment, or dcvice for, among other things, any
changes in the instructions or indication oi usage and for added wanings and precautions. Readers
should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to
or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Welbsite may provide or recommendations it
may rmake. Further, readers should Ie aware that lnternet Websites listed in this work rmay have changed
or disappcarcd Ibetwcen when this work was written and whcn it is read. No warranty may bc crcatcd or
extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be
lialble for any damages arising herefrorm.
12008
To the memory of my parents, Han-Po Hsu and Hua-Eng Yuan Hsu, for their discipline
and endless love. They are the ones who taught me: "Never give up, no matter what is
going on.
To my wife, Rou-jean, for her love and putting up with me all these years with my long
working hours.
To my children, Susan, Karen and her husband, Bob, for their love and patience.
To my lovely grandson, Nathan Wei-Ming.
To my brothers, Hong and Tsao, my sisters, Yun and Hui (Michelle) for their love and
support since childhood.
To my old friend, Charles Cheng-Chau Wang, for sharing many thoughts and interests
for more than forty years.
and Dr. Donald C. Dyer, who guided me to do research and teaching in pharmacology.
To my teachers, friends, colleagues, and students for their teaching so I can keep
'ssauey pue aeo ym sjeuue pue aldoad sea pue jashu suaodi
Contents
Contributors  vii
Preface  ix
1
Principles of Drug Absorption, Drug Disposition,
and Drug Action
1
Richard J. Martin and Walter H. Hsu
2
Drugs Affecting Peripheral Nervous System
29
Walter H. Hsu
Autacoids and Their Pharmacological Modulators
59
Anumantha G. Kanthasamy and Walter H. Hsu
4
Drugs Acting on the Central Nervous System
81
Walter H. Hsu and Dean H. Riedesel
Behavior-Modifying Drugs
5
109
Arthi Kanthasamy and Walter H. Hsu
6
Anesthetics
131
Dean H. Riedesel
 Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
7
153
Walter H. Hsu and Arthi Kanthasamy
8
 Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System
171
Wendy A. ware
6
Diuretics
207
Franklin Ahrens
10
Respiratory Pharmacology
221
Dean H. Riedesel
vi  Contents
11
Drugs Acting on the Gastrointestinal Tract
235
Albert E. Jergens and Franklin A. Ahrens
12
Endocrine Pharmacology
261
Walter H. Hsu
13
Topical Dermatology Therapy
295
James O. Noxon
14
Ocular Pharmacology
321
Daniel M. Betts
15
Antimicrobial Drugs
347
Franklin A. Ahrens and Richard J. Martin
16
Antiparasitic Agents
379
Walter H. Hsu and Richard J. Martin
17
Antineoplastic Drugs
417
Leslie E. Fox
18
Fluid and Blood Therapy
437
Walter H. Hsu
19
Drug Interactions and Adverse Drug Reactions
461
Walter H. Hsu and Franklin A. Ahrens
20
Legal Aspects of Medication Usage in
Veterinary Medicine
471
Stephen D. Martin
Appendix I: Withdrawal Time Charts
485
Appendix Il: Dosage Table
489
Index
537
Contributors
Franklin A. Ahrens, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Professor Emeritus of Pharrmacology
 Departiment of Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
 Daniel M. Betts, D.V.M., Diplomate A.C.V.O.
Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Leslie E. Fox, D.V.M., M.S., Diplomate A.C.v.l.M. (Internal Medicine)
Associate Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Walter H. Hsu, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Professor of Pharmacology
Department of Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Albert E. Jergens, D.V.M., Ph.D., Diplomate A.C.V.L.M. (Internal Medicine)
Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Anumantha G. Kanthasamy, M.S., M.Phil., Ph.D.
Professor and Lloyd Chair in Neurotoxicology
Department of Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
vi
vii Contributors
Arthi Kanthasamy, Ph.D.
Assistant Professor
Department of Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Richard J. Martin, B.V.Sc., Ph.D., D.Sc., M.R.C.V.s., Diplomate E.C.V.P.I.
Professor of Pharmacology
Deparlment of Biomedical Sciences
College of Velerinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Stephen D. Martin, Pharm.D., M.B.A.
Chief Staff Pharmacist
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
James O. Noxon, D.V.M., Diplomate A.C.V.l.M. (Internal Medicine)
Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Dean H. Riedesel, D.V.M., Ph.D., Diplomate A.C.V.A.
Professor
Departiment of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Wendy A. Ware, D.V.M., M.S., Diplomate A.C.V.l.M. (Cardiology)
Professor
Departments of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Department of Biomedical Sciences
Staff Cardiologist
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
College of Veterinary Medicine
lowa State University
Ames, lowa
Preface
The Handbook of Veterinary Pharmacology is written in a concise format, which is the
extension of the National Veterinary Medical Series Pharmacology Book (Editor: F. A. Ahrens)
 published in 1996. This book is not intended to provide a lengthy discussion of veterinary
drugs; instead, it is designed as a handbook that contains concise descriptions of pharma-
cological concepts and information for the commonly used veterinary drugs available in
the United States. Every effort has been made to keep the information on basic and clinical
veterinary pharmacology up-to-date and concise. Whenever possible, each class of drugs is
explored under the heading of "general considerations" or *introduction" to convey the basic
concept and information, which is followed by a description of the pharmacology of each
of action, (3) therapeutic uses, (4) administration, (5) pharmacokinetics, and (6) adverse ef-
fects/contraindications.
The ultimate goal of this book is to provide to both the veterinary students and practitioners
 the information on pharmacology that is applicable and easily retrievable. A list of suggested
reading at the end of each chapter is provided for further reading of the subject. In addition,
10-20 study questions and explanations are presented at the end of each chapter.
There are two appendices at the end of the book; one on the withdrawal times for drugs
used in production animals and the other on the drug dosages in various domestic species.
The drug dosages in both generic name and selected trade names are listed according to
chapter, drug class, route of administration, and species. I hope these two appendices will
be useful to veterinary practitioners, particularly when a quick decision is needed on drug
therapy.
To complete the task of writing such a book requires strong commitment of many of my
colleagues. I am most grateful to the 11 contributors who put a great deal of effort in writing
chapters amid their busy schedules and to their acceptance and tolerance of my editing. A
special thanks to Mr. Nasser Syed, one of my graduate students, for providing many of the
illustrations and helping create the index. I would also like to thank Dr. Dai Tan Vo, another
graduate student of mine, for his meticulous efforts in compiling the appendices and some
of the tables for this book. I am grateful to Dr. Kim D. Lanholz and Dr. Alison E. Barmhill
for reviewing some of the chapters. I am indebted to Dr. Donald C. Dyer for his generosity
in allowing us to utilize the infornation and illustrations in the chapters that he wrote for
the Nationaf Veterinary Medical Series Pharmacology Book. The secretarial assistance of Ms.
Hilary Renaud and Ms. Marilee Eischeid in preparing the manuscripts is greatly appreciated.
It is our hope that the Handbook of Veterinary Pharmacoiogy will become a valuable tool
for both veterinary students and practitioners.
appreciated.
Walter Haw Hsu
ix
Principles of Drug Absorption, Drug Disposition, and
Drug Action
Richard J. Martin and Walter H. Hsu
INTRODUCTION. Pharmacology is the sludy of the properties of chemicals used
as drugs for therapeutic purposes. It is divided into the study of pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics. Veterinary pharmacology focuses on drugs that are used in domes-
tic animals. Pharinacokinetics is the study of drug absorption, distribution, biotrans-
formation (metabolism), and cxcretion. Pharmacokinetic processcs affect the route of
administration, doses, dose intervals, and toxicities of drugs given to animals. Pharma-
codynamics is the study of cell/tissue responses and selective receptor effects. In this
chapter, we introduce standard concepts of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
and comment on the nced to he awarc of species variation when considering princi-
ples of veterinary pharmacology.
DRUG ABSORPTION AND DISPOSITION
A.
General principles. An overview of the principles involved in a drug's journey in the
body beginning fron its administration to the pharimacologic response.
How do drugs reach their site of action? It is apparent from Figure 1-1 that a drug
usually crosses several biological imembranes from its locus of adininistration to reach
its sile of action and thereby produce the drug responsc. The manner by which drugs
cross membranes are fundamental processes, which govern their absorption, distribu-
tion, and excretion from the animal.
1. Passive diffusion. Cell membranes have a bimolecular lipoprotein layer, which may
act as a barricr to drug transier across the membranc. Cell membranes also contain
pores. Thus, drugs cross meimbranes based on their ability to dissolve in the lipid
portion of the membrane and on their molecular size, which regulates their filtra-
tion through the pores.
a. Weak acids and weak bases. The majority of drugs are either weak acids or
weak bases. The degree to which these drugs are tat soluble (nonionized, the
form which is able to cross membranes) is regulated by their pK. and the pH of
the medium containing the drug. pK. = pl1 at which 50% of the drug is ionized
and 50% is nonionized.
b. To calculate the percent ionized of a drug or to deterimine the concentration ot
 a drug across a biological meinbrane using the Henderson-Hasselbalch cquation
one needs to know whether a drug is an acid or a base.
If the drug is a weak acid use:
Concentration of nonionized acid
pKa= pH+ log-
 Concentration of ionized acid
If the drug is a weak base use:
Concentration of ionized base 
c. In monogastric animals with a low stomach pH, weak acids such as aspirin
(pK. = 3.5) tend to be beller absorbed from the stomach than weak bases be-
cause of the acidic conditions. In ruminants, the pH varies with feeds and the
pH is oiten not low.
2 Chapter 1 Il A
Routes of administration
N
PO
SC
IP
Inhalation
Dermal
Excretion
Absorption
(Kidneys,
liver,lungs)
Metabolites
Tissuedepots
Biotransformation
1
BounddrugFreedrug
FreedrugDrugboundto
(Liver,kidneys,lungs)
plasmaproteins
Plasma
Siteofaction
Freedrug
Receptor
FIGURE 1-1. This diagram relates what may be expecled to occur to a drug in the aninal iollow-
ing its administration (IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; PO, per os or oral; Il, intraperitoneal; SC)
subcutaneous; inhalation, dermall. (From Figure 1-1, NVMS Pharmacology.)
d. Weak bases are poorly absorbed from the stomach since they exist mostly in the
ionized state (low lipid solubility) because of the acidic conditions. Weak bases
are better absorbed from the small intestine due to the higher environmental pl1.
2. Filtration
a. Some low molecular weight chemicals, water, urea, and so forth, cross mem-
branes better than predicted on the basis of their lipid solubility, suggesting thal
membranes possess pores/channels.
b. The glomerular filtration process in the kidney provides evidence for large 
pores, which permit the passagc of large molecular weight substanccs but sinall
enough to retain albumin (mw ~60,000).
3. Facilitated diffusion
 a. No cellular energy is required and it does not operate against a concentration
gradient.
b. Transfer of drug across the membrane involves attachiment to a carrier (a macro-
molecular molecule).
C.
 Examples: Reabsorption of glucose by the kidney and absorption from the intes-
tine of vitamin Bi2 with intrinsic factor.
d. This is not a rmajor mcchanism for drug transporl.
4. Active transport
a. Requires cellular energy and operates against a concentration gradient.
b. Chemical structure is important in attaching to the carrier molecule.
C. Examples: Penicillins, cephalosporins, furosemide, thiazide diuretics, glucuronide
conjugates, and sulfate conjugates are examples of acidic drugs that are ac-
tively secreted by the proximal renal tubule. Amiloride, procainamide, quater-
nary armmonium compounds, and cimetidine are examples of basic drugs that
are actively secreted by the proximal renal tubule cells. Intestinal absorption of
5-fluorouracil, an anticancer drug, which is transported by the same system used
to transport uracil.
Principles of Drug Absorption, Drug Disposition. anel Drug Action 3
5. Pinocytosis. This is a minor method for drug absorption, but it may be important in
the absorption process for sorme polypcptides, bacterial toxins, antigcns, and food
proteins by the gut.
B.
 Routes of administration. All routes of administration except intravascular (see Figure
1-1) involve an absorption process in which the drug must cross one or more mem-
branes before getting into the blood.
1. Alimentary routes
a. Oral (pcr os, PO)
(1）Advantages
(a) Usually safest, convenient, econoimical, but some animals are difficult to
administer this way.
(b) May require the drug to be mixed in the food to facilitate administration.
(c) Food may stimulate bile secretion, which will help dissolve lipophilic
drugs to increase absorption.
(2) Disadvantages
(a) Acidic cnvironment of slomach and digestive cnzymes rmay destroy thc
drug.
(b) In ruminants the bacterial enzymes may inactivate the drug.
(c) Soine drugs imay irritate thc Gl mucosa.
(d) The prcsence of food imay adverscly alter absorption.
(e) Some drugs arc cxtensively imctabolized by the Gl mucosa and the livcr
before they reach the systemic circulation (e.g., propranolol) and this is
referred to as the first-pass effect.
(f) Antimicrobials may alter the digestive process in ruminants and other
herbivores.
b. Rectal
(1)Advantages
(a) Can be used in the unconscious animal and in those vomiting.
(b) Absorption is slower compared to the intramuscular route.
(c) There are some drugs like diazepam and phenytoin that have an erratic
oral absorption and are better given rectally.
(d) In dogs, influence of the first-pass cffcct is reduced because the
rectal veins bypass the portal circulation and go to the caudal vena
cava.
2. Parenteral routes (circumvents the Gl tract)
a.Examples
(1) Intravenous (IV)
(2) Intramuscular (IM)
(3) Subcutaneous (SC)
(4) Intraperitoneal (IP)
(5) Spinal and subdural. Used for regional anesthesia.
b.Advantages
(1) Rapid onset (IV > IM > SC), may be useful in an unconscious or vomiting
patient, absorption is more uniform and predictablc.
(2) Absorption from IM and SC injection sites is mostly determincd by the
armount of blood flow to that sile. The absorption of local anesthctics is of-
ten purposely slowed by coadministration with epinephrine, which decreases
the blood flow to the injection site.
c. Disadvantages
(1) Asepsis is necessary.
(2) Cause pain.
(3) May penetrate a blood vessel during IM injection.
(4) The speed of onset is so rapid as with IV administration that cardiovascular
responses may occur to drugs, which norimally have minimal effects on this
systeim,
(5) In food animals, discoloration of the meat or abscess formation may occur
to IM injection and thcsc may be cxpectcd to devalue the carcass.
4  Chaplcer 1 II B
3. Other routes
a. Dermal or topical
(1) Dcgrce of absorption is depcndent on the drug's lipid solubility.
(2) Abraded or damaged skin may be expected to absorb more drug than intacl
skin.
(3) Animals with thin skin, like cats, may absorb drugs like corticosteroids read-
ily if they are applied topically than animals with thicker skin.
(4) It is convenient and allows nonskilled opcrators to administer the drugs by
pour-on methods. For example, topical applicalion of anthelmintics that are
lipophilic, like levamisole and macrocyclic lactones, is frequently performed
in this manner.
b. Inhalation
(1) It is used for volatile or gas anesthetics. Examplc: isoflurane.
(2) Response is rapid becausc of the largc surfacc arca of the lungs and largc
blood flow lo the lungs.
(3) It is reversible if the anesthetic is turned off and the animal ventilated.
C.Drug distribution
1. Distribution refers to the reversible transfer of drug from one site in the body to
another site.
2. In much of the body, the junctions between the capillary endothelial cells are not
tight thereby permitting free (unbound to plasma proteins) drug to rapidly reach
equilibrium on both sides of the vessel wall.
3. Distribution of drugs into the ccntral nervous system (CNS) and cercbrospinal fluid
(CSF) is restricted due to the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
a. There are three processes that contribute to keeping drug concentration in the
CNS low:
(1) In much of the CNs (except: area postrema, pineal body, posterior lobe of
hypothalamus), the capillary endothelial junctions are tight and glial cells 
surround the prccapillarics. This reduccs the filtration proccss and requircs
that drugs diffuse across cell membranes to leave the vascular compart-
ment and thereby enter the extracellular fluid or CSF. This ability to cross
cell mermbranes is dependent upon the drug's lipid solubility.
(2) Cerebrospinal fluid production within the ventricles circulates through the
ventricles and over the surface of the brain and spinal cord to flow dircctly
into the venous drainage system of the brain, This process continues to di-
lute out the drug's concentration in the CSF.
(3) Active transport mechanisms are found for organic acids and bases in the
choroid plexus, which transports drug from the CsF into the blood. P-
glycoprotein is one transportcr protcin that is prcsent in thc cndothclial cells
of the choroid plexus (blood-brain barrier) that contributes to drug entry into
and exit from the brain.
Examples: The macrocyclic lactones, ivermectin, and selamectin but less
so with moxidectin, are excluded from the brain via P-glycoprotein. In some
breeds of dog, particularly the Collies, P-glycoprotein is defective and iver-
mectin accumulatcs in the CNs, lcading to toxicity.
Penicillin (a weak acid) concentralions in the CNS are kept low due to an
active organic ion transporter system.
4. Plasma protein binding of drug can affect drug distribution since only the free (un-
bound) drug is able to freely cross cell membranes (see Figure 1-1, li A).
drug + protein (free) = Drug - protein (bound)
Acidic drugs are bound primary to albumin and basic drugs arc bound primarily
to αi-acid glycoprotein. Steroid hormones and thyroid hormones are bound by
specific globulins, respectively, with high affinity.
a. Drug-protein binding reaction is reversible and obeys the laws of mass
 action.
Principles of Drug Absorptian. Drug Dispasition, and Drug Action  5
b. Binding does not prevent a drug from reaching its site of action but retards/slows
the rate at which it reaches a concentration sufficient to produce a pharmaco-
logic cffect.
c. Drug-protein binding limits glomerular filtration as an elimination process since
bound drugs cannot be filtered. Example: sulfa drugs with a high degree of bind-
ing to protcin arc climinatcd morc slowly in urine than thosc sulfa drugs with a
lower binding affinity for plasma proteins.
d. Binding to albumin does not totally prevent the elimination of drugs that are
actively secreted by the kidney or metabolized by the liver, rather it slows the
rales of metabolism and/or secretion, Binding lowers the free drug concentralion
but there is still release from the drug-protein complex for the metabolism or
secretion.
e. Drug interactions may occur when two drugs arc uscd that bind at the same site
on the plasma proteins. Competition for the same site will increase the percent
of drug in the free form, thereby increasing the pharmacologic/toxicological
rcsponsc by the displaccd drug.
 5. Drug redistribution can terminale the drug response.
a. The biologic response to a drug is usually terminated by
metabolism/biotransformation and excretion.
b. Redistribulion of a drug from its sile of action to other tissues will lower its con-
centration at its site of action, thereby terminating the drug response.
C. Drugs exhibiting the redistribution phenomenon are highly lipid soluble.
Thiopcntal is the classic example in dogs wherc rcdistribution froni the brain
lo less vascular area of the body, including the muscle and fal, allows recov-
ery. In sheep and goats, however, liver biotransformation takes place at such a
high rate so that in thcse spccics it is mctabolism, not redistribution that domi-
-span ipiden s! pue sdodi Aaa s! lojodoid eisyisue jo toneinp aun saneu
tributed following IV injection so that in goats and dogs anesthesia is ultrashort.
Interestingly, the redistribution process varies between breeds of dogs due to
thc different lcanncss of the different brecd. Very lcan brecds likc Grcyhounds
with less fat for the lipophilic anesthetics to redistribute to, take longer to
recover.
6. Drug distribution from dam to fetus.
a. Drug transfer across the placenta occurs primarily by simple diffusion.
b. Drugs cross the placenta best if they are lipid soluble (nonionized weak base or
acid).
c. The fetus is exposed to some extent even to drugs with low lipid solubility when
given to the dan.
d. General rule: Drugs with an cffcct on the maternal CNs have the physical-
chemical characteristics lo freely cross the placenta and affecl the felus.
Examples: anesthetics, analgesics, sedatives, tranquilizers, and so forth.
D.
Drug metabolism/biotransformation is the term used to describe the chemical aller-
ation of drugs (xenobiotics) as well as normally found substances in the body.
1. Principles
a. Following filtration at the renal glomerulus most lipophilic drugs are reabsorbed
from the filtrate.
b. Biotransformation of drugs to more water-soluble (polar) chemicals reduces their
ability to be reabsorbed once filtered by the kidney. This enhances their excre-
tion and reduces their volume of distribution.
c. The liver is the most important organ for biotransformation but the lung, kidncy.
and Gl epithelium also play a role.
d. Drug biotransformation frequently reduces the biological activity of the
drug/chemical/toxicant,
e. Drug metabolism/biotransformation is not synonymous with drug inactivation as
the parent chemical may be transformed to a chemical with greater or signifi-
cant biologic activity.
6Chapter 1 Il D
Phasel
PhaseIl
Drug→
Parent drug undergoes
Metabolite(s)→
Conjugation
Conjugated
oxidation,reduction,or
reaction
product
hydrolysis
Product hasfwater
Product hastfwater
solubility andmaybe
solubilityandIbiologic
pharmacologically
activity
inactive,less active,r
moreactive
FIGURE 1-2. Phases cof biotransiormation. (From Figure 1-2, NVMS Pharmacofogy.)
Example:
Acetylsalicylic acid
salicylate
Inactive (aspirin)
active anti-inflammatory
febantel
fenbendazole/oxfendazole
Inactive
active anthelmintic
Primidone
phenobarbital
Inactive
active anticonvulsant
codeine
→
morphine
 active analgesic
more active analgesic
2. Enzymatic. reactions in biotransformation usually occur in two phases (Figure 1-2):
a. Phase I biotransformation enzymes are found in the smooth endoplasmic reticu-
lum of the hepatic cells falso referred to as the microsomal enzymes since they
are found in the microsomal fraction following high-speed centrifugation).
(1) Oxidation is carried out by a family of isozymes termed cylochrome P450s.
(2) The enzyme system is also called a mixed function oxidase since one atom
of oxygen is incorporated in the drug molecule and the other atom of oxy-
gen combines with hydrogen to form water. Nicotinamide adenine dinu-
Cleotide phosphate (NADPH) provides the reducing equivalents. Examples of
microsomal oxidation:
(a) Side chain and aromatic hydroxylation: pentobarbital, phenytoin,
phenylbutazone, propranolol
(b) O-dealkylation: morphine, codeine, diazepam
(c) N-oxidation: acetaminophen, nicotine, phenylbutazone, pentobarbital
(d) S-oxidation: phenothiazines (acepromazine, chlorpromazine), cimetidine
(e)  Deamination or N-dealkylation: lidocaine
(f)  Desulfuration: thiopenlal
(3)  Nonmicrosomal oxidation
A few chemicals are oxidized by cytosol or mitochondrial enzymes.
(a)  Alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase. Example: ethanol,
acetaldehyde, ethylene glycol
(b) Monoamine oxidase. Example: cpinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine,
serolonin
(c) Xanthine oxidase. Example: theophylline
(4) Oxidative metabolism. There are considerable differences among the species
in the activity of the oxidative enzymes. Generally, the difference has been
attributed to differences between the kinetic parameters (Michaelis constants
and Max velocily) of the species enzymes, Oxidation is higher in horses
than caltle, which in turn are higher than dogs, Oxidation is lowest in cats
among domestic. animals. The level of oxidative cnzymes is lower in very
young animals. The duration of pentobarbital anesthesia in horses is much
shorter than in dogs. Young calves are much more sensitive to pentobarbital
and lindane than adult cattle.
Prmciples of Drug Alsorption, Drug Disposition, and Drug Action 7
TABLE 1-1. Drug Conjugation Reactions
Conjugation Reaction
Drug Conjugated
Glucuronidation
Aspirin, morphine, sulfadimethoxinc, digitoxin, stcroids, thy-
 roxine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, chloramphenicol, phenylbu-
tazone
Acetylation
 Sulfonamides, clonazepam, procainamide
Glutathione formation
Ethacrynic acid 
Glycine formation
Salicylic acid, nicotinic acid
Suliate formation
Catecholamines, acetaminophen
Methylation
Catecholamines, histamine
(5) Reduction biotransformation reactions are less frequent than oxidation-type
reactions, Enzymes are located in both microsomal and nonmicrosomal irac-
tions. Examples: chloramphenicol and naloxone.
(6) Hydrolysis reactions occur with either ester (esterases) or amide linked
chemicals (amidases).
(a) Esterases occur primarily in nonmicrosomal systems and are found in the
plasma, liver, and other tissues. Examples of drugs hydrolyzed: acetyl-
choline, succinylcholine, and procaine.
(b) Amidases are nonmicrosomal cnzymes found primarily in the liver.
Examples of drugs hydrolyzed: acetazolamide, lidocaine, procainamide,
sulfacetamide, and sulfadimethoxine.
b. Phase Il biotransformation (conjugation) may occur to a phase I metabolite or
to a parent drug/chemical, This involves the coupling of an endogenous chem-
ical (glucuronic acid, acetate, glutathione, glycine, sulfate, or methyl group to
(he drug). Enzyme systems are present in the microsomes, cylosol, and in the
mitochondria
(1) Products of phase Il biotransformation have greater water solubility and are
more readily excreted via the kidney.
(2)B
 Examples of drugs undergoing phase Il biotransformation (Table 1-1).
(3)9
Species variation in phase Il metabolism. There are considerable species
defects in certain conjugation reaclions:
(a) In the cat, glucuronide synthesis where the target is -OH, -COOH,
-NHz, =NH, -SH is only present at a low rate. Thus, cats often have
longer plasma tiy. for many drugs than other species.
(b) In the dog acetyfation of aromatic-Nfl2 groups is absent and this affects
the metabolism of sulfonamides and other drugs.
(c) In the pig sulfate conjugation of aromatic-Ot, aromatic-Nt2 groups aro
only present at a low extent.
(4) Enterohepatic recirculation
(a)  Drugs biotransformed via the formation of a glucuronic acid metabolite
may be eliminated via the bile.
(b)  Glucuronide metabolites can be hydrolyzed by intestinal or bacterial
β-glucuronidases, thereby releasing free drug, which can then be reab-
sorbed. This process can greatly increase a drug's residence in the body.
This is recognized for etorphine in horses and may give rise to relapse
despite initial reversal with the antagonist diprenorphine.
(5) Biotransformation by Gl microflora. In addition to the liver, metabolism of
drugs can also take place in the rumen and Gl tract by the microflora where
hydrolytic activity and reductive activity may occur, Gut-active sulfonamides
(phthalylsulfathiazole) require hydrolysis for the release of sulfathiazole for
antimicrobial action. Cardiac glycosides are hydrolyzed in the rumen and
become inactive, the chloramphenicol -NO2 group is reduced and the drug
is inactivated.
8| Chapter 1 1 E
FIGURE 1-3. Proximal rcnal tubule.
Only drugs (D) which are free in the
plasma are filtered. Once in the tubular
Drug (D)
lumen the drug may bc passively rc-
urine
Protein-Drug
absorbed. In the proximal renal tubule
active transport mechanisms exist for se-
Passivereabsorption
creting acid and base drugs (D) from the
extracellular fluid into the renal tubule.
E.
Drug excretion refers to the processes by which a drug/drug metabolite is eliminated
from the body. The kidney is the primary organ for drug excretion,
1. Renal excretion. Primary mechanisms.
a. Glomerular filtration. All drugs (D, Figure 1-3) not bound to plasma proteins are
filtered,
b. Active tubular secretion. In the proximal porlion of the renal tubule active
transport mechanisms exist for both acidic and basic drugs. Examples of drugs
actively secreted into the tubule lumen are presented above. Competition among
the acidic drugs or basic drugs can be expected to occur for the secretion pro-
cess {Table 1-2).
c. Passive tubular reabsorption. The lipid nature of the cellular membrane lining
the tubule dictatcs thal only lipophilic drugs will be reabsorbed.
(1) Since most drugs are weak acids or bases the degrce of ionized (water sol-
uble, non-reabsorbable) or nonionized (lipid soluble, reabsorbable) form of
the drug will vary with the pKa of the drug and the pH of the lumen urine.
(2) Urinary pH of carnivore animals is acidic (pH 5.5-7.0).
(3) Urinary pH range of herbivore animals is 7.0-8.0.
(4) Food will influence the urinary pH for both carnivores and herbivores.
(5) Excretion can be enhanced for drugs climinated primarily by the kidney
through altering the pH of the urine. For practical purposes this is limited to
weak acidic or weak basic drugs with a pKa of 5-8.
(6) Quaternary drugs (R4-N+) are polar at all urine pH and can be expected to
be eliminaled rapidly, since they cannot be reabsorhed,
2. Other routes of excretion
a. Biliary secretion. Both the parent drug and glucuronide form of the drug may be
eliminated via the bile.
(1) Glucuronide-drug conjugates eliminated via the bile may be hydrolyzed by
β-glucuronidases from gut bacteria. The free drug then may be reabsorbed
giving rise to "enterohepatic recycling.
(2) Transport processes cxist in the liver for actively transporting acidic, basic,
and neutral drugs into the hile. Since these drugs may cvenlually be re-
absorbed from the gut lumen, biliary elimination processes tend to be less
important than are renal excretion processes.
TABLE 1-2. Exarmples of Drugs Actively Secreted
Acid Drugs
Basic Drugs
Penicillin
Histamine
Ampicillin
Amiloride
Cephalosporins
Cimctidine
Thiazine duretics
Procainamide
Furosemide
Neostigmine 
Probcnecid
Trimcthoprim
Salicylate
Atropine
Ethacrynic acid
Phenylbutazone
(3) Role of P-glycoprotein in drug excretion. P-glycoprotein is a transmembrane
efflux pump that has a role in the "first-pass clearance" of some oral drugs.
P-glycoprotein is also found in the biliary and renal tubular epithelia and
thus plays a role in the "secretion" of some but not all drugs into the gut
and renal tubules. As statcd carlier, this protcin is also found in the BBB
and its effect there is to "expel" the drug from the CNs. Substrates of P-
glycoprotein include azole antifungal agents, corticosteroids, cyclosporine,
digoxin, diltiazem, doxorubicin, opioids, macrocyclic lactones, macrolide
antibiotics, quinidine, and vincristine/vinblastine.
b. Milk. While this is not a major route for drug excretion for the dam, it is impor-
tant since the drugs given to the dam appear in the milk and produce residues
requiring a withdrawal period if the miik is to be used for human consump-
tion. Antimicrobial drugs given to the dam appear in concentrations suficient to
treat mastitis. Milk is acidic relative to plasma. Therefore, weak organic bases
will diffuse from the plasma into the milk where they will become more ion-
ized, thereby preventing passage back to the plasma. This is an example of
ion trapping. Drugs which are basic (tylosin, erythromycin, and lincomycin)
can be expected to be found in milk in higher concentrations than in the
plasma.
C.
ceiving parenteral antimicrobial drugs. Drugs enter the saliva by passive diffu-
sion from the blood, Copious salivation by cattle and sheep and the swallowing
of antimicrobial-drug-laden saliva may upsct the digestivc proccss in the rumen.
d. Expired air. This route of elimination is primarily important for volatile drugs
such as gas anesthetic drugs.
e. Minor routes of excretion: tears and sweat.
F
 Pharmacokinetics is the mathematical description of drug concentrations in the
body. Frequently in pharmacokinetics, the distribution of drugs is depicted as be
ing in a compartment, that is, a one-compartment model or in a two- or three-
compartment model. Since many drugs used in veterinary medicine can be described
by a two-compartment open model this will be the only model described but the
reader should refer to standard textbooks for information on other pharmacokinetic
models.
1. Two-compartment model (Figure 1-4)
a. Mathematically, the log-concentralion-time graph can be depicted as composed
of two straight lines.
(1) The line representing the distribution phase has an intercept "A" and a slope
-α.
ados e pue sa, idaianui we sey aseyd uoeuia aui suuasaidai aull aul (z)
-β; β is used to calculate the elimination half-life, see below.
b. The thcoretical plasma concentration at time zero (Cg) is: C? = A+ B. Units
arc usually μg/ml or μg/L.
c. The apparent volume of distribution (Va) is a proportionality constant relating the
plasma drug concentration to the total amount of drug in the body.
Dose
=以
十
β
G
The apparent volume of distribution gives a measure of how well distributed
the drug is within the body. A high yolume of distribution like 1 L/kg for a drug
implies that the drug is widely distributed throughout the body water.
d. Half-life (t,) of a drug is the time needed for the drug concentration lo be re-
duced by half. This value is determined during the elimination phase of the
drug.
In2
0.693
B
10
Chapter 1Il [
(a)
(q)
100
1
K12
2
IVdose
Central
Peripheral
compartment
compartment
mL)
0
Eliminationphase
K21
/6H
(slope=-β)
Distributionphase
Eliminationfromthebody
只
(slope=
0.1-
Time (hours)
FIGURE 1-4. (a) The plasina-concentration-time graph following IV injection of a drug exhibiting
two-compartment pharmacokinetics. The distribution phase is represcnted by the line with interccpt
A and slope -α. The elimination phasc is represented by the line with intercept B and slope -β3. (b)
A model of a two-compartment open model. The central compartment represents rapid equilibration
and represents fluids such as the blood, interstitial fluid, and highly perfused organs (e.g.. the Iungs).
The peripheral compartment reaches equilibrium more slowly and represents organs such as bone and
fat. Ki2 and k1 = the rate constants of distribution between the central and peripleral compartments.
{From Figure 1-3, NVMS Pharmacofogy.)
(1) fy. is usually limited by the processes of biotransformation and renal excre-
tion; sometimes it is governed by slow release from tissue sites like bone or
fat.
(2) Indicates the time required to atlain 50% of the sleady slale or to lose 50%
of the steady slalc concentration.
(3) Has limited value as an indicator of drug residues or distribution.
e. Total body clearance (Clg) is the volume of blood that is effectively cleared of a
drug in a specified period of time.
0.693 Va
Clp=β,V=
Clearance cxpresses the rate of drug removal from the body thatl is independent
of fy. Disease and infection may alter drug distribution and clearance, but not
necessarily the fy, value. Therefore, the volume of distribution and clearance
can be altered and thus the ty, will be altered. We can rewrite the equation as:
0.693.V
{y,=β.V=
ClB
f. Bioavailability (F) is a term that describes the fraction of drug enlering the sys-
temic. circulation intact from the site of administration; it is the fraction absorbed
or taken up.
By definition the bioavailability of an IV dose = 100% or 1. All other routes
of administration will have a bioavailability of less than one. Knowledge of F
Principles of IDrug Absorplion. Drug IDisposition, and [Drug Action 11
for oral dosage is particularly important. The presence of food may aller the
bioavailability of some drugs.
(AUCynlv . dose'v . β.Iv
(AUC)V . dose"lV . βV
where AUC is the area under the plasma concentration curve; nlV is the non-
intravenous roule of adminislralion; IV is the intravenous route of administration;
and β is the slope of the elimination phase.
g. Determination of dosage
Knowledge of a drug's bioavailability (F), clearance (Clp), and the average
steady state concentration (Cpx) of a drug needed to produce the pharmaco-
logic response permits dosage calculation.
F.dose
= Cpx · Clb
Dosing interval
G.
Species variation. Veterinarians must be aware of differences between species and also
 of differences that can occur among brecds.
1. Examples of species variation
a. It is recognized that xylazine (an α2-adrenergic agonist) is a much more potent
scdativc in cattle than other spccies; the reason thal ruminanls arc more sen-
sitive lo α2-agonists such as xylazine is because the difference is at the phar-
macodynamics level; ruminants have αzp-receptors and nonruminants have
α2A-receptors.
b. It is recognized that morphine (a μ-opoid agonist) is more potent in cats than
dogs. In dogs, the dose is 1 mg/kg where it consistently produces sedation. In
cals, the dose for analgesia is 0.1 mg/kg. Higher doses in cats may produce ex-
citement. The excitement in cats appears to be mediated by central dopamine
receptors and is inhibited by sedatives with dopamine antagonist actions like
droperidol. The detailed explanation for this species difference between dogs
and cats is not known.
c. Certain breeds of dog: Great Dane and Irish Setters are more sensitive to bloat
following xylazine administralion due lo aerophagia.
d. Ivermectin can cause CNS depression in collies at normal doses due to a defect
in the P-glycoprotein transporter which excludes ivermcctin from the brain.
e. Ivermectin should not be used in tortoises or crocodiles because of potential
toxic effects; it is possible that the BBB in these species against ivermectin main-
tained by the P-glycoprotein is not secure.
f. Succinlycholine, a depolarizing muscle relaxant, can be used in horses where
it is broken down rapidly by the plasma esterases, but in ruminants where the
csterase levels are much lower roquire only 0.02 mg/kg, but horscs require
0.1 mg/kg.
ui ssnp Auew jo hi aui neui os aseiajsun juononjg jo laaal mol e aaey sie 8
are conjugated to glucuronide by the liver is much longer. The classic example
is aspirin where the ty. in cats is 25-35 hours compared to 8 hours in dogs and
1 hour in horses.
h. Cl absorption will differ between nonherbivores animals and ruminant herbi-
vores. The Gl transit time in monogastrics animals means thal oral suspensions
are swept out of the intestine within 24 hours. The benzimidazoles are examples
of drugs where the Gl transit time in herbivores is longer than in nonherbivores.
In most cases, benzimidazoles are administered once to herbivores, but to non-
herbivores, in daily doses over a period of 3-5 days.
i. Most lipophilic organic bases, like ivermectin, lincosamide, tulathromycin, ery-
thromycin, tylosin, ketamine, metronidazole, enrofloxacin, theophylline, and
trimethoprim have larger volumes of distribution in ruminants than in mono-
gastrics animals.
12 | Chapter 1 Il G
 2. Drug metabolism. The differences in the rate of elimination for drugs that are me-
tabolized by the liver usually accounts for most of the differences in the tiy, values
between species. There is a wide variation in the ty, of most drugs that are elimi-
naled mainly by hepatic. metabolism.
a. The general trend is that cattle and horses have shorter ty. values than the dog
and cats which often have longer t / values. Cattle and horses oxidize drugs
more efficiently than dogs and cats.
b. Because pharmacokinetic paramelcrs including Iy, values are more available for
humans, it is important to appreciale that human valucs are usually longer than
those of domestic animals (except cats), because the oxidation of drugs by liver
P450 oxidative enzymes in domestic animals is usually faster than in humans.
c. The exceptions include the methylxanthines (e.g., theophylline) in horses and
phenylbutazone in cattle, which have longer t /, values in these animals than in
humans.
d. There are also differences between more closely related species. Cefitofur,
trimethoprim, and sulfamethazine have a shorter fy, value in goats than sheep,
while ty, of phenylbutazone is shorter in donkeys than horses.
c. The ty., of extensively metabolized drugs is shorter in mice, rats, rabbits, and
guinea pigs (lab animals) than in domestic. animals.
f. it is also important to be careful about comparing duration of action between
different species of birds. There is significant variation between ty, values of
chickens, turkeys, and different wild birds which is again related to differences
in metabolism.
g. Although there arc different types of cholinesterase in the tissues and blood, the
overall levels in ruminants are lower than in horses and humans. This means
that sheep, goats, calves, and cattle, are more sensitive to organophosphorous
compounds than horses and humans. Sheep have been suggested as possible
"sentinel" animals for the detection of toxic anticholinesterase (organophosphate
nerve gases) because of their sensitivity.
3. Ionized drugs. There is much less variation in the fiy, values belween the species
for drugs that are more ionized, and have a lower volume of distribution: renal ex-
cretion is the main route of elimination. For example, the ty, of gentamicin for cats
is 82 minutes, for dogs it is very similar, 75 minutes. Penicillins and cephalosporins
also have short t /, values of 30-90 minules in different species. Thus, highly "ion-
ized drugs" are less likely to show species variation.
 4. Cold-blooded animals. Fish and reptiles have longer ty, values compared to mam-
malian species due to the much lower metabolic rates. However, the temperature of
the ambient environment affects the metabolic rate of the animals and this, in turn,
affects the ty. values of the drug. The tiy, value of trimethoprim given IV to carp is
41 hours at 1orC but 20 hours at 24rC. Fish also have a lower renal function and
 more cnterohepatic: rccycling than warm-blooded animals.
 5. Distribution and species variation. Distribution does vary with species, but less so
than fy, values. There is a significant difference between nonruminant and rumi-
nants in the distribution of lipid-soluble organic base drugs. The rumen has a pH
of 5.5-6.5 and is a large volume relative to the whole body water; because of the
large capacity of the rumen, which is up to 25 liters in sheep and up to 220 liters
in cattle, the phenomenon of "ion-trapping" leads to the accumulation of weak
bases in the rumen fluids. This means that xylazine, furosemide, and phenylbu-
tazone have larger volumes of distribution in ruminants so that these compounds
have a greater clearance in ruminants than nonruminants.
H.
 Effect of disease states on pharmacokinetic parameters. We have seen above that the
distribution of drugs (Va) and ty., values are key factors that affect access, concen-
tration, and duration of action of drugs. These parameters are usually determined in
healthy animals. However, veterinarians need to treat sick animals with these drugs, so
how do the pharmacokinetics change in diseased animals?
1. Effects of fever. Endoloxin-induced fevcr can incrcase the exlravascular distri-
bution of ionized drugs like penicillins, cephalosphorins, and aminoglycosides,
Principles of Drug Absorption, Drug Disposition. and Drug Action 13
although withoul much effect on ty, values and renal clearance. Bacterial iniections
induced cxperimentally in pigs can increase the volume of distribulion of penicillin
G, ampicillin, and decrease that of oxytetracyline. The volume of distribution of the
penicillins probably increases because the permeability of the inflamed tissue barri
ers to penicillins incrcases. The distribution of oxyletracyline may decrease because
of binding to inflammatory exudates.
2. Liver disease. Drugs whose ty, values are determined by liver metabolism, that is.
lipophilic drugs in general, and which undergo conjugation to convert them to
more polar drugs can be affected by liver discase. Liver microsomal activity can
be reduced in the presence of moderate or severe liver damage and so the effect
and duration of drugs metabolized by the liver can be increased.
3. Kidney disease. The rales of elimination of drugs that are eliminated mostly via
the kidney are decreased with renal disease. Renal blood flow affects all three re-
nal excretion mechanisms of glomerular filtration, carrier-mediated secretion, and
pH-dependent passive reabsorption.
 Effect of stereoisomers. Many of the drugs that are used for therapeutic purposes have
a chiral carbon so that a number of stereoisomers are possible; they are produced dur-
ing the chemical synthesis of the compounds. Many oi the commonly used therapeu-
tic drugs are produced as a mixlure of racemates. Because of the slereoselective na-
ture of drug receptors, the mixture of racemates will contain the active moiety and the
isomeric ballast (reduced activity racemates).
1. Tetramisole was originally produced by Jansen Pharmaceutical and subsequently the
|-isomer, levamisole, was produced as the active compound and the d-isomer, dex-
amisole, found to be less active but contributed to toxicity of the racemic mixture.
2. Medetomidine is a racemate mixture, whereas dexmedetomidine, the d-isomer, has
much more potent α2-agonistic activity than the I-isomer of medetomidine.
 3. The metabolism of the stereoisomers may also be selective, favoring one isomer
over others. The more polent isomer is referred to as the eutomer and the less po-
tent enantiomer as the distomer. The stereoselective processes involved in the phar-
macokinetic processes can be species-dependent and so concentration-time plots
may vary belween enantiomers and between the different species of animal.
PHARMACODYNAMICS: MECHANISMS OF DRUG-RECEPTOR INTERACTIONS
A.
Drugs and drug receptors
1. Many drug receptors are protein macromolecules present in cell membranes, which
when activated initiate a biochemical change within the cel/tissue that in turn pro-
duces a pharmacologic response.
a. Receptors bind ligands (drugs) and transduce signals (a process referred to as
signal transduction)
b. Drug binding to receptors uses similar chemical bonds as that used for enzyme-
substrate interaction: hydrogcn bonds coordinate covalent bonding and Vander
Waals forces. Examples of covalent bonding involved in drug-receptor interac-
tions are few in number.
c. Drugs have two identifiable properties: affinity for the receptor and intrinsic
activity.
(1) Intrinsic activity is the property of the drug that permits it to initiate post-
receptor processes, which lead to a response.
(a)  Agonists are drugs that have both affinity and intrinsic activity. Exam-
ples: epinephrine, acetylcholine, angiotensin, and prostaglandin F2α-
i. Full agonists versus partial agonists. A full agonist is a drug that
tose jeed y asuodsan ansslao ny aui aonpoud oi alge sieadde
is a drug that provokes a response, but the maximum responsc is less
14Chapter 1 A
R
Agonist
FIGURE 1-5. Ligands imay be classified
as agonists (full, partial, and inverse)
Partialagonist
and antagonists. Both full and partial ag
onists stabilize the active state (R*) and 
thus increase receptor signaling, whereas
inverse agonists stabilize the inactive
Antagonist
state and thus decrease basal receptor
sigraling. Antagonists, which have equal
 affinity for both R* and R and thus do
not afiecl the equilibrium belween the
two states, but will reduce the ability of
full, partial, and invcrse agonists to bind
to) the receptor. (Moxdified fron Leurs R.
Inverse agonist
ct al., Clin. Exp. Allergy, 32:4989-498,
2002.)
Increasing drugconcentration
agonist has much higher affinity for the receptor, but less intrinsic ac-
tivity than a full agonist. Concurrent administration of a partial agonist
can reduce/antagonize the effect of a full agonist (Figure 1-5).
il. Inverse agonists. In the context of receptors which cxerl constitutive
signaling activity, even in the absence of an agonist, inverse agonists
are drugs that bind to the receptor, suppressing the constitutive sig-
naling activity. Recent evidence suggests that propranolol and antihis-
tamines are inverse agonists (Figures 1-5 and 1-6).
(b)  Receptor antagonists are drugs which have an affinity for the receptor
site but which lack intrinsic activity. Antagonists block or reduce the ef-
fects of agonists (Figure 1-5).
Examples:
Antagonists
Agonists
atropine (M-M)
cholinergic agonists
yohimbine (α2)
α-adrenergic agonists
phenoxybenzamine (α)
epinephrine
diphenhydramine (H)
histamine
cimclidine (H)
histamine
naloxone
opioids
naltrexone
carfentanil
ilumazenil
benzodiazepines
 spironolactone
aldosterone
i. Anlagonisls may acl in a competitive (these are reversible on re-
 moval, washout) manner. Example: phentolamine-norepinephrine.
ii. Noncompetitive (these may be reversible or irreversible on removal,
washout) manner. The noncompetitive antagonism may be due to the
antagonist binding to separate site to the agonist or due to covalent
bonding. Examples: phenoxybenzamine blockade of x1-adrenergic
receptors are irreversible due to covalent bonding with the receptor
 protein; picrotoxin antagonisni of GABA receptors is reversible but
noncompelitive because picrotoxin blocks the open Cl- channel pore
 not the GABA binding site.
2. Antagonism
a. Antagonism is the interaction between two drugs such that the response of one
drug (the agonist) is reduced in the presence of the second drug (the antagonist).
Principles of Drug Absorption, Drug Disposition, aned Drug Action 15
Active state
[a)
(q]
FIGURE 1-6. Iwo-state model of the (
protein-coupled receptor. (a) At rest, the
inactive state isomerizes with the active
state, but favors the latter. (b) A full ag-
onist converts the inactive state to active
slate. (e) An inverse agonist converts more
active state to inactive state than during
the resting statc.
(c)
Inverseagonist
There are three types of antagonism in pharmacology: receptor, physiologic, and
chemical.
(1) Receptor antagonism occurs on the same receptor protein such that two
drugs, an agonist and an antagonist, compete and bind to the same receptor
protein. See above for examples.
(2) Physiologic antagonism occurs as the result of activating receptors with op-
posite physiological effecls.
Examples:
acetylcholine →↓  heart rate
cpinephrine
→→ 
heart rale
histamine
bronchoconstriction
epinephrine
→
bronchodilation
histamine
→↑
blood pressure
epinephrine
→→
blood pressure
(3) Chemical antagonism occurs as the result of a drug combining with two or
 more molecules via the formation of chemical bonds. This type of antago-
 nism often does not require animal tissue to be demonstrated, and has been
used to treat heavy metal intoxication.
Examples:
Drug
Metal chelated
Dimercaprol (BAL)
Hg, As
Penicillaminc
Cu, Ph, Hg
16
Chapter 1 lA
Type1
Type2
NH2
Ligandbindingdomain
Extracellular
Intracellular
Channel lining
COOH
Type3
Type4
NH2
COOH
Ligandbindingdomain
Extracellular
Intracellular
COOH
NH2
FIGURE 1-7. General structure of four receplor families
3. Signal transduction. Four general types of receptor mechanism can be described
(Figure 1-7):
a. Ligand-gated ion channels (Type 1 receptor mechanisms) regulate the flow of
ions through the cellular plasma membrane channels.
(1) Response time is very rapid, for example, milliseconds, once the drug/ligand
binds to the receptor.
(2)  Examples of synaptic transmilters which acl via ion channels: acclylcholine
(at nicotinic receptors), gamma-aminobutyric. acid (GABAA receptors),
glycine, and glutamate (ionotropic receptors).
 b. GTP-binding proteins (G proteins, Type 2) couple the binding of the ligand on 
the cell surface receptor to intracellular second messengers. These receplors
are 7-transmembrane (serpentine) receptors, which cross the plasma membrane
seven times. More than 80% of receptors in animals are G protein-coupled re-
ceplors (Figure 1-8),
(1) Agonists (acetylcholine—on muscarinic receptor, catecholamines—on α-
and β-adrenergic receptors, and many others) acting on receptors cause the
displacement of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) from the G protein and its
replacement by guanosine triphosphate (GTP).
(2) The G protein-GTP complex in turn regulalcs the activity of cnzymes (c.g,
adenylyl cyclase, phospholipase C-β) or ion channels (e.g., Na', K', Ca^ ).
17
Agonist
Gprotein
Receptor
SD
GTP
Phospholipase C
Adenylylcyclase
GTP
FIGURE 1-8. G protein-coupled receptor and its cffectors. When an agonist binds to a receptor that is
linked to a G protein-mediated second messenger system, the conformiation of the receptor in the mem-
brane is changcd, cnabling it to cncounter a G protein complex. When the activated reccptor cncoun-
ters the Gi protein, it inrduces the Gi prolein to exchange GDP ior GTP. The presence of GTP causes
the α-subunit to scparate from the G protein and diffuse within the membrane until it cncounters the
effector (e.g., adenylyl cyclase, phosplholipase C) that initiates the second nessenger response. This
responsc may involve rcgulation of cnzymatic activity or opening/closure of ion channels. Hydrolysis
(0f the GTP to GDP on α-subunit returns the G protein to inaclive stale. (From Figure 1-4, NVMS
Pharmacology.)
Hydrolysis of the GTP to GDP stops the activation of enzyme or ion chan-
nels.
(3) The G protein-GTP complex may last 10 seconds whereas the initial
 agonisu/ligand-receptor complex formation may have lasted ior a few mil-
liseconds. This leads to an amplification of the original agonist-receptor
signal.
(4) G proteins may couple stimulatory responses as well as inhibitory re-
sponses. Each cell may have more than one G protein type. In general, therc 
are three G proteins: Gs, Gi/a, and Gq (Figure 1-9).
18 | Chapter 1 Ill A
Epi
ACh
B-R
M-R
ATP
CAMP
PKA
↑Ca2
cellular
effects
PKC
PIP2
DAG
NE
FIGURE 1-9. Signal transdurclion pathiways for Ci prolein-coupled receplors (R). Activatiomn of β-
adrencrgic receptor (β-R) by cpinephrine (Epi involves a stimulatory G (G,), which activates adenylyl
cyclase (AC) to synthesize cyclic AMP (cAMP); cAMP activates protein kinase A (PKA). Acetylcholine
(ACh) binds a muscarinic-2 receptor ((M-R) linked to an inhibitory G (G;), which inhibits AC and hence
PKA. Activation of α-R by norepinephrine (NE) activates another G (Gq), which in turn activates plhos-
pholipase C-β (Pl.C). PlC hydrolyzes PIP2, a inembrane phospholipid to form IP; and diacylglycerol
{DAG). IP; releascs Ca?l from the endoplasmic reticulum, wlhercas DAG activates protein kinase C.
PKA and PkC phosphorylate various cellular constituents that, in concert with elevated cystosolic Ca2+
levels, elicit characteristic changes in the cellular functions. (From Fig. 5.9 of Adams' Veterinary Phar-
macofogy and Therapeutics, 8th cd.)
(a) Gs protein couples to adenylyl cyclase, which increases the formation
of cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP activates protein kinase A, which phospho-
rylates cellular constituents. Examples: glucagon, glucagons-like peptide
1. β-adrenergic agonists, D- and Ds-dopaminergic agonists, 5-HT4 ag-
 onists, gonadotropins, thyrotropin, vasoprcssin V2-agonists, ACTH, and
many other hormones/drugs use this mechanism.
(b) Gi/o protein couples negatively to adenylyl cyclase, thereby decreasing
the formation of cyclic AMP. In addition, Gi/o protcin can close Ca2+
and open K' channels. Examples: α-adrenergic agonists, Mz- and M4-
muscarinic agonists, D2-, D3-, D4-dopaminergic agonists, 5HT1-agonists,
 opioids, GABAg-agonists, somatostatin, neuropeptide Y, and many other
hormones/drugs use this mechanism.
(c) Gq protein couples to phospholipase C-β, which increases the formation
of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 elevates
intracellular Ca²- concentrations by increasing Ca^- release from the
endoplasmic reticulum and Ca2- influx through store-operated calcium
(SOC) channels, DAG activates protein kinase C, which phosphorylales
cellular constituents. Vasopressin V-agonists, oxytocin, muscarinic M-
and Ms-agonists, α1-adrenergic agonists, bradykinin, and many other
hormones/drugs use this mechanism.
C. Kinase-linked receptors (Type 3 receptor mechanism)
(1) Receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. Some hormones (e.g., insulin, cer-
tain growth factors! have tyrosine kinase as a part of the plasna membrane
receptor. The insulin receptor is used as an example to explain how the ty-
rosine kinase receptor works (see Figure 12-5).
Principles csi Drug Absorption. Drug Disposition, and Drug Action 19
(a) The activated insulin receptor (tyrosine kinasc) phosphorylates its sub-
strates [e.g, insulin receptor substrate (IRS) 1-4].
(b)  Activated IRS is thought to phosphorylate a number of cellular con-
stituents including phosphoinositol-3 kinase (Pl3-kinase), which can ac-
tivate other cellular proteins including glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) in
the skeletal muscle cells and adipocytes, leading to increased glucose
transport into these cells.
(2) Cystosolic tyrosine kinase (also see Figure 12-1). Growth hormone, pro-
lactin, leptin, and cytokines also have the plasma membrane receptors. Ac-
tivation of these receptors will lead to the phosphorylation of Janus kinase
(JAK), a form of tyrosine kinase present in the cytosol. Activation of JAk, in
turn, phosphorylates the signal transduction and activation of transcription 
(STAT) proteins. The phosphorylated STATs form dimers, and move into the
nucleus where they act as transcription factors.
(3) Guanylyl cyclase-protein kinase G. Guanylyl cyclase catalyzes cyclic GMP
formation from GTP. The plasma membrane receptors of atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP) and guanylin have guanylyl cyclase activity. In addition, nitric
oxide (NO) can activate cytosolic quanylyl cyclase. Cyclic GMP activates
protein kinase G, which mediates many effects, including closure of Na t
and Ca?+ channcls, and opening of K+ channcls.
d. Intracellular receptors (Type 4 receptor mechanisms) Stcroid hormones (includ-
ing vitaimin D) and thyroid hormone (Ts) bind to these receptor proteins, Corti-
costereoid receptors are in cytosol and the receptors of other steroid hormones
and T3 are in nucleus. Activated receptor proteins form dimer and move to the
promoter region of the DNA, altering transcription processes (and thereby chang-
ing protein synthesis; see Figure 12-3).
B.
 Dose-response relationships
1. Graded dose-response relationships 
 a. The response is measured in an individual animal or tissue. Incrcases in the
dose produce incrcases in the responsc. Exarmple: progrcssive increascs in
cpinephrine dose produce incrcases in cardiac output and vasoconstriction,
which lcad to incrcascs in blood pressure (Figure 1-10).
b. Drug concentration-effect relationships have four inportant charactcristics: po-
tency, slope, maximum efficacy, and individual variation.
(1) Potency refers to the dose (concentration) of a drug necded to produce the
effect. Potency is not an important property of a drug, provided the formu-
lated form of the drug can be conveniently administered. The smaller the
dose to produce the effect, the greater the potency. Assume drug IAl and
drug [Bl have similar pharmacological activity. The fact that drug [Al is
five times more potent than drug [Bl does not automatically make drug [A]
the drug of choice. Strong consideration must also be given to side effects,
FIGURE 1-10. The log dose effect relationship.
showing the four characteristic variables. (Fron
Maximal
effect
Figure 1-5, NVMS Pharmacology.)
effect
Variability
Potency
Concentration
20
Chapter 1Il B
(a)
(b)
100
100
Cumulative
80
80
frequency
distributian
bu
6:0
60
Therapeuticindex
LD50400
40
40
ED50100
4
Indi
Frequency
distribution
20
20
EDs0
10
20
50
100
200
400
800
1,600
Concentration(mg/L)
Dose(mg)
FIGURE 1-11. (a) The effective concentration to produce a quantal response was determined in cach of
100 subjects. The number of subjects who required eacli dose is plotted, giving a log normal frequency
dlistribution (bars with ciagonal lines). The stippled bars demonstrate that the normal frequency distribu-
tion, when sunmated, yields the cunulative irequency dlistribution-a sigmoid curve that is a quantal
concentration-effect curve. (b) Quantal dosc-response curves for the useful action and death action of
a drug. EDs is the dose needed to treat 50% oi the population. L.Do is the dose which will kill 50%
of the population. (From Figure 1-6. NVMS Pharmacology.)
toxicities, cost, duration of action, and so forth, in deciding which of the
two drugs to use.
(2) Slope is of both practical and theoretical importance. Drugs that act on a
common receptor (e.g., norepinephrine and phenylephrine acting on the α1-
adrenoceptor) have dose-response curves with parallel slopes. Drugs (that
have steep slopes for their concentration-response relationship curves are
potentially more difficult to use, since small increases in the dose may pro-
duce toxicity.
(3) Variability in the responsc can be expected from a spccific dose and varia-
tion in dosage may be required to produce a given response.
(4) Maximum effect is the maximum response possible for that effector.
2. Quantal dose-response relationships
a. A quantal response is bascd on an all or none response (dcath, prcgnant, vomit,
and convulsion). The assumption is made that individual animals respond to the
maximum possible or not at all. Thus, dose is not expressed as to the intensity
 of the efect but to the frequency with which any dose produced the all-or-none
response. The frequency distribution curve is shown in Figure 1-11.
b. Quantal dose-response relationships are used to establish the useful drug effect
and the toxic (death) drug effect curves.
(1) Therapeutic index is a ratio used to evaluate the safety of the drug. Using
information available from Figure 1-11 the therapeutic index (Tl) can be cal-
culated:
LD50
TI=
ED50
Theoretically, the larger the Il the safer the drug. Howevcr, if the effective-
 ness and lethality curves are not parallel, the Tl may be misleading.
 Principles of Drug Absorption, Drug Disposition, and Drug Action   21
(2) Standard safety margin is a more conservative measure of a drug's safety
than is Tl and is used to relate the therapeutic effect in all animals with-
out the risk of producing a hazardous effect. The standard safety mar-
gin is the percent by which the EDgg must be increased before an LD is
reached.
Standard safety margin =
ED99
(a) Assume 10 mg/kg of a drug is effective in 99% of the animal popula-
tion and that a dose of 100 mg/kg will cause toxicity in 1% of the same
population.
100 - 10
Standard safety margin = -
·100
10
The dose which is effective in 99% of the population must be increased
by 900% to produce a toxic effect in 1% of the population.
SUGGESTED READING
Foreman JC, Johansen G. 1996. Textbook of Receptor Pharmacology. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Halpert JR. 1995. Structural basis of selective cytochrome P450 inhibition. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol
35:29-53.
Koch-Weser J, Sellers EM. 1976. Binding 0f drugs l0 serum albumin. N Engl J Med 294:311-316.
Leurs R, Church MK, Talialatea M. 2002. Hi-antihistamines: Inverse agonism, anti-inflammatory aclions
and cardiac effecls. Clin Exp Allergy 32:489-498.
 Milligan G, Bond RA, Lee M. 1995. Inverse agonism: Pharmacological curiosily or potential therapeulic
slralegy? Trends Pharmacol Sci 16:10-13.
Riviere J. 2004. Comparative Pharmacokinetics: Principles, Techniques and Application. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing.
22 Chapter 1
StUdY 
QUESTIONS
DIRECTlONS: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completion of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. The same dose of a drug is given by two
(C) a high Tl indicatcs that the EDso far cx-
different routes of administration (A, B) and
cccds thc ID50.
the plasma concentration is followed over
(D) the standard safcty margin is a bet-
time as shown in the drawing.
ter measure of the drug's safely than
is TI.
(E) quantal dose-response curves are used in
uol
the calculation of the Tl.
4. Which of the following statements con-
cerning drug rcccptors is true?
(A) Drug receptors play an important role in
the bioavailability of a drug.
(B) Drugs cannot act unless they are first
relcascd from a drug rcccptor.
Time
(C) A drug can act as an antagonist even if il
is bound to a drug receptor.
(A) Curve A results from intramuscular ad-
(D) Drugs cannot act unless they are first
ministration
bound to a receptor.
(B) Curve B results from intravenous admin-
(E) Most drugs combine with their receptor
istration
by forming covalent bonds.
(C) Curve A results from oral administration
(D) Curvc A results from intravcnous admin-
istration
5. The maximum effecl (Emax) achieved by a
(E) The bioavailabilily of the drug in curve B
drug is a measure of
is the greatest
(A) the drug's potency.
(B) the drug's efficacy (intrinsic activity).
2. The first-pass effect is most apt to occur
(C) the drug's antagonistic magnitude.
after which route of drug administration?
(D) the drug's therapeutic index.
(E) the drug's lipid solubility.
(A) Intravenous
(B)Intramuscular
(C) Subcutancous
6. A drug is climinatcd by first-order pro-
(D) Oral
cesses. Assume 50 mg of the drug is admin-
(E) Inhalation
islered intravenously and at 6 hours, 25 mg
remain in the body. How much drug will
3. All of the following statements about the
remain in the body at 24 hours.
therapeutic index (Tl) are true EXCEPT
(A) 18 mg
(A) a high Tl suggests that the drug is safe to
(B)15 mg
(C) 10 mg
use.
(B) a low Tl suggests that the drug is danger-
(D) 6 mg
ous to use therapeutically.
Bw E ()
Prineiples of Drug Alsorption, Drug Disposition. aned Drug Action 23
7. A 20-kg dog is dosed with 5 mg of drug
12. The mechanism by which prelrealment
X. If the half-life of drug X is 30 minutes,
with phenobarbital for several days decreases
how long will it take for the animal to have
the duration of action of pentobarbital in-
Icss than 1 mg of the drug remaining in the
volves
body?
(A) stimulation by phenobarbital of the syn-
(A) 90 minutes
thesis of microsomal enzymes in the
(B)120 minutes
liver.
(C) 150 minutes
(B) ncutralization by phcnobarbital of natu-
(D) 180 minutes
rally occurring inhibitors.
(E)210 minutes
(C) acceleration of the excretion of pentobar-
bital.
8. You arc prcscnted with a severely dehy-
(ID) competition for receptor sites in the CNS.
drated dog in renal iailure. Its glomerular fil-
(E) increased binding of pentobarbital to
tration rale is one fourth normal. The antibi-
plasma protcins.
otic you want to administer is cleared solely
by glomerular filtration. Assume the drug's
13. The renal clearance of a drug (weak or-
volume of distribution is only in the extracel-
 ganic base) is favored if the drug
lular fluid and that Va is onc half normal. In
a normal animal the antibiotics half-life is 60
(A) has low solubility in water.
minules, what would it be in this animal?
(B) reduces renal blood flow.
(C) has a high degree of binding to plasma
(A) 30 minutes
protein.
(B) 60 minutes
(D) is put in the ionized form by acidifying
(C) 90 minutes
thc urine.
(D) 120 minutes
(E) is put in the nonionized form by alkalin-
(E) 240 minutes
izing the urine.
9. The plasma concentralion of drug X in a
14. Thc major organ for drug cxcretion is the
dairy cow is 5 μg/ml. Assume drug X is a
weak base with a pKa of 8.4, and the milk
(A) brain.
pH is 6.4 and the pH of plasma is 7.4. What
(B) liver.
is the concentration of drug X in the milk?
(C) kidney.
(A) 5 μg/mL
([D) spleen.
(B)30 μg/mL
(E) gastrointestinal tract.
(C)45 μg/mL
(D) 55μg/mL
15. Biotransformation of drugs usually results 
(E)500 μg/mL
in thc
(A) formalion of metaboliles which are usu-
10. The mechanism by which most drugs arc
ally more polar.
absorbed following an intramuscular injeclion
(B) formation of metabolites which are less
is
polar.
(A) simple diffusion.
(C) formation of substances which are more
(B)active transport.
active than the drug itself.
(C)
(D) liver toxicity.
pinocytosis.
(D) facilitated diffusion.
(E) formalion of a carcinogen.
11. Drug X is a wcak acid with a pKa of 4.
16. Which of the following cdrug characteris-
tics will tend to favor a low apparent volume
Approximalely, what percent oi the drug is
ionized in a pH 2 environment?
Of distribution?
(A) 10%
(A) Extensive plasma protein binding
(B) 5%
(B) A largc molecular wcight
(C) 1%
(C) High waler solubility
(D) 0.1%
(D) All of the above are correct
(E) 0.5%
(E) None of the above (A, B, C)
24
Chapter1
17. The two curves below were obtained
(D) It is the drug that has high affinity for the
for drug A and drug B. The ordinate repre-
receptor, but has no intrinsic activity.
sents the percent of animals responding to
the beneficial effect of the drug. Which of the
19. Activation of which of the following G
following statements is most correct?
protein-coupled receptors will mostly likely
cause an increase in Ca2+ release from the
endoplasmic reticulum?
responding
(A) Gs
(B) Gi/o
100
B
(C) Gy
20. Which of the following is a correct state-
50
ment regarding species variation in pharma-
cokinetics/pharmacodynamics?
10301003001,0003.000
(A) In the dog, glucuronidation of drugs is
Drug(mg/kg)
only present at a low ratc.
(B) Xylazine is a much more potent sedative
(A) Drug A is more potent than Drug B.
in horses than cattle.
(B) Drug B is more potent than Drug A.
(C) Horses have higher levels of plasma es-
(C) Drug A is 30 times more potent than
terases than cattle to break down suc-
Drug B.
cinylcholine.
(D) Drug A is 300 times more potent than
(D) Nonherbivores have a more complete
Drug B.
Gl absorption of a benzimidazole an-
(E) Drug B is 30 times more potent than
thelmintic: than herbivores.
(E) Most of lipophilic organic bases havc
Drug A.
smaller volumes of distribution in
18. Which of the following is a correct state-
ruminants than monogastric
ment regarding a partial agonist?
animals.
(A) It is a drug that is able to produce the
21. Acidifying the urine would be
full cell/tissue response.
expected to increase the rate of elimination
(B) It is a drug that induces a response, but
for
the maximum response is less than the
maximum response to a full agonist.
(A) a weak acid with a pKa of 7.
(C) It is a drug that binds to the receptor,
(B) a weak base with a pKa of 6.
suppressing the receptor's basal intrinsic
(C) both (A) and (B) are correct.
activity.
(D) neither (A) nor (B) is correct.
Principles of Drug Ahsorption, Drug Disposition, and Drug Action」 25
ANSWERS
AND
EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is D.
time. Since 25 mg remains at 6 hours, this
There is no absorption phase for IV ad-
indicates that thety, is 6 hours. Using this
ministration. Curve B shows an ascending
reasoning we can determine the following:
(absorption phase) plasma concentration
 50 mg in body at time 0
 phase followed by a descending (elimination
25 mg in body at time 6 hours
phase) plasma concentration phase.
12.5 mg in body at time 12 hours
6.25 mg in body at time 18 hours
2. The answer is D.
3.12 mg in body at time 24 hours (correct
The first-pass effect indicates that a sig-
answer)
nificant amount of drug is lost during the
absorption process and a large quantity of
7. The answer is A.
drug is then not available for distribution.
The dog's body will contain the follow-
Usually, the first-pass effect is evident for
ing amounts of drug at the time indicated:
drugs which are metabolized significantly
30 minutes = 2.5 mg; 60 minutes = 1.25
by the gut epithelium and liver prior to
mg; 90 minutes = 0.62 mg (the correct
distribution via the systemic circulation.
answer).
3. The answer is C.
8. The answer is D.
The formula for determining the thera-
The drug's half-life (ty,) is influenced by
peutic index is:
the volume of distribution (Va) and body
 clearance (Clp) according to the following
LD50 /ED50
formula:
If the ED5o was larger than the LDso the TI
0.693- Vd
would be small.
t1/2 =β.V =
ClB
4. The answer is C.
Since clearance is reduced to 0.25 of normal
Antagonists have a high affinity for the
and volume of distribution is 0.5 of normal,
receptor and therefore occupy the receptor
the ty, is doubled. Thus, in this dog the ex-
sites. The degree of binding and occupancy
pected ty, would be 120 minutes.
of the receptor site is a measure of the drug's
affinity. Answer D is not correct since some
9. The answer is C.
drugs can exert an effect without acting on a
Knowledge of the Henderson-Hasselbalch
receptor system, for example, neutralization
equation is necessary to solve this problem.
of acid as with antacids and drugs acting
Since the drug is a weak base the proper
through chelation.
formula to use is:
5. The answer is B.
pKa = pH + log
Drug efficacy or intrinsic activity is a
ionized base (l)
measure of the drug to produce an effect.
X
nonionized base (U)
It is the U form of the drug which is lipid
6. The answer is E.
Since the drug is eliminated by a first-
soluble and able to cross the biologic mem-
order process, this indicates that a constant
brane. At equilibrium the concentration of
fraction of drug is eliminated per unit of
U will be the same on both sides of the bio-
logic membrane. The drug will dissociate on
26Chapter1
both sides of the membrane based on the pH
of the environmenl.
Membrane
Milk (pH 6.4)
Plasma (pH 7.4)
take the antilog of both sides
take the antilog of both sides
1
1
100 =
10 =
If U =1 drug unit, then / = 100
If U = 1 drug unit, then / = 10
Total drug: U + / = 100 + 1 = 101 drug units
Total drug: U + / = 10 + 1 = 11 drug units
milk
101
= 9.18
plasma ratio
11
If the plasma concentration is 5 μg/mL then
definition, U + / = 100%. Thus 1.01 units of
the milk concentration (X) can be determined
drug = 100%. Thus:
as follows:
0.01 ionized drug
101 drug units
X%
milk
Xμg/mL
1.01 total drug
100%
plasma
11 drug units
5μg/mL
X = 0.99% or approx. 1%
thus, 505 =11x
and X = 45.9 μg/ml in milk.
12. The answer is A.
10. The answer is A.
 Pentobarbital is oxidized by the cy-
 Absorption from an injection site into
tochrome P450 enzyme system present in the
the vascular compartment permits the drug
endoplasmic reticulum (microsomes) of the
to be distributed systematically. Diffusion of
liver. Pretreatmenl with phenobarbital induces
the drug through the capillary membrane
the liver cells to synthesize more cytochrome
or capillary channels (pores) permits its
 P450 enzymes. Thus, animals pretreated with
absorption.
phenobarbital for several days have a greater
capacity to metabolize pentobarbital.
11. The answer is C.
Use the Henderson-Hasselbalch equa-
13. The answer is D.
tion for an acid:
Acidification of the urine increases the
percent of the weak base in the ionized form.
pKa = pH + log
The ionized form of the drug crosses biologic
 nonionized acid (U)
membranes poorly and thus is not able to be
X
jonized acid {l)
passively reabsorbed from the tubule once
filtered. This enhances its elimination. Answer
E is incorrect since in the nonionized form
il is reabsorbed to the greatest extent thus
n
2 =log
decreasing excretion.
1
14. The answer is C.
take the antilog of both sides:
Drugs in the urine are voided along.
U
with' the urine thereby eliminating the drug
100 =
from the body. However, some drugs are
1
excreted into the feces, particularly the ones
If U = 1 unit of drug then / = 0.01 unit of
that are not absorbed when adminislcred
Ag 8nup jo sun to'1 = 1 +n 8nup
orally.
Principles oi Drug Absorption, Drug Disposition, and Drug Action 27
15. The answer is A.
19. The answer is C.
Following phase I and phase Il biotrans-
Activation of Gg-coupled receptors will
formation the chemical is usually more polar
stimulate phospholipase C-β to synthesize IP:
(more water soluble) and has less biological
from PIP2. IPs will bind to its receptors on
aclivity.
the endoplasmic reticulum to release Ca²-
irom this organelle. G, activates adenylyl
16. The answer is D.
cyclase, which increases the synthesis of
A high percent of drug bound to plasma
cyclic AMP. Giyo inhibits adenylyl cyclase.
proteins will keep the majority of the drug
in the vascular compartment as will a drug
20. The answer is C.
with high molecular weight. Drugs with a
Horses have higher levels of plasma
high degree of water solubility generally have
esterases than cattle to break down suc-
low solubility in lipids and therefore would
cinylcholine, this is the reason the dosage
be expecled to cross biologic membranes less
 of succinylcholine is higher than cattle. In
the cat, glucuronidation of drugs is only
well, thereby limiting their distribution.
present at a low rale; this is one reason
17. The answer is C.
that acetaminophen is contraindicated in
the cat because metabolism of this drug
Potency refers to the amount of drug
depends on glucuronidation. Xylazine is a
required to produce a specified effecl or
responsc. Drug A is more potent than drug B.
much more potent sedative in cattle than
horses, since their receptors (αzus) are very
The EDso for drug A is 10 mg/kg, while that 
sensitive to xylazine. Herbivores have a more
for drug B is 300 mg/kg. Drug A is 30 times
more potent than drug B.
Complete Gl absorption of benzimidazoles
than nonherbivores, sincc they have a larger
Gl tract to perform this function. Most of
18. The answer is B.
lipophilic organic bases have larger volumes
A partial agonist is a drug that induces
of distribution in ruminants than monogastric
a response, but the maximum response is
animals.
less than the maximum response to a full
agonist. A full agonist is a drug that is able
21. The answer is B.
to produce the full cell/tissue response. An
Use the Henderson-Hasselbalch equa-
inverse agonist is a drug that binds to the
tions to ascertain the percent of drug in
receptor, suppressing the receptor's basal
ionized form. It is the ionized form which is
intrinsic activity. A receptor antagonist is a
not subject to passive reabsorption following
drug that has high affinity for the receptor,
the filtration process. Assume acidification of
but has no intrinsic activity.
urine to pH 5.
Weak acid
Weakbase
1/
U
1
take the antilog of both sides
take the antilog of both sides
U
1
100 =
10 =
1
U
If U = 1 drug unit, then I = 0.01
If U = 1 drug unit, then / = 10 
1.01 drug unils = 100%
11 drug units = 100%
0.01
X%
10
X%
1.01
100%
11
100%
X = 0.99% ionized (approx. 1%)
X = 90.9% of drug is ionized
Since the base will be ionized the greatest at pH 5 it will be eliminated the fastest.
This page intentionally left blank
Drugs Affecting Peripheral Nervous System
Walter H. Hsu
INTRODUCTION TO THE PERIPHERAL EFFERENT NERVOUS SYSTEM
A.
The somatic nervous system innervates skeletal muscle and controls molor funclions
of the body. Axons originate from the spinal cord and release the ncurotransmitier
acetylcholine (ACh) at the neuromuscular junction. Some drugs can affect both the
somatic and the autonomic nervous systems because ACh is a transmitter in both
systems,
B.
 The autonomic nervous system regulates the activity of the heart, secretory cells, and
smooth muscle. Two neurons are involved in the transmission process. The first neuron
originates in the central nervous system (CNS) and synapses in a ganglion outside the
CNS. A second neuron then innervates the target (effector) tissue.
1. Organization (Figure 2-1)
a. Sympathetic nervous system
(1)  Preganglionic neurons originate from the thoracic and lumbar portions of
the spinal cord and terminate in the para- or post-vertebral ganglia, or they
directly innervate the adrenal medulla. Functionally, the adrenal medulla
responds as if it wcre a ganglion.
(2) Postganglionic neurons originate from the ganglia and inncrvatc the effector
cell.
(1) Preganglionic neurons originate from either the midbrain, the medulla ob-
longata, or the sacral portion of the spinal cord. They terminate on postgan-
glionic neurons. The terminals of the preganglionic neurons and ganglia are
located in or close to the effector cell.
(2) Postganglionic neurons innervate the tissue.
2. Neurotransmitters are chemical substanccs that transmit impulses across junctions
such as synapses (e.g., nerve-lo-nerve, nervc-to-effeclor cell).
a. Sympathetic nervous system
(1) Preganglionic neurons release ACh onto nicotinic receptors of postgan-
glionic neurons or the adrenal medulla.
(2) Postganglionic neurons release norepinephrine (NE) onto adrenergic recep-
tors (adrenoceptors) in the effector tissue.
b. Parasympathetic nervous system
(1) Preganglionic neurons relcase ACh onto nicotinic receptors of postgan-
glionic: neurons.
(2) Postganglionic neurons release ACh onto muscarinic receptors in the effec-
tor cell.
3. Receptors (Table 2-1)
 a. Cholinergic receptors mediate the effects of ACh. They are muscarinic or nico-
sonous rmushrooms and tobacco, respectively.
(1) Muscarinic receptors have five subtypes, M-M;. M rcccptors are found
in neurons to mediate excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP): M2 receptors
are found in the heart (to decrease cxcitability); M3 receptors are found in
smooth musclcs, sphinclcrs, and secrelory glands; M4 receptors are found in
the CNS; and M, receptors are found in the midbrain dopaminergic neurons
[to increase dopamine (DA) release], cerebral arteries and arterioles, possibly
peripheral blood vessels, and lymphocytes. M1, M3, and M, receptors
29
TABLE 2-1. Tissue Receptors and Response to Stimulation
Adrenergic
Cholinergic
Receptor
Response to
Receptor
Responsc to
Effector Organ
Type
Stirnulation
Type
Stimulation
Heart
S-A node
↑Heart rate
M
↓Heart rate
Atria
g<g
↑Contractility
M:
↓Contractility
↑Conduction velocity
A-Vnode
?g<g
↑Autonaticity
My
↓Conduction velocity
↑Conduction velocity
A-V block
Ventricles
β >β2
↑Contractility
M:
↓Contractility
↑Conduction velocity
↑Automaticity
His-Purkinje system β, > β2
↑Conduclion velocily
↑Automaticity
Arteries
Coronary
α1.α!
Constriction
M
Dilation
β2
Dilation
Renal
α1.α
Constriction
Mg
Dilation
Dilation
Skin and mucosa
1.α
Constriction
M
Dilation
Skeletal inuscle
&1
Constriction
M
Dilation
β.
Dilation
Pulmonary
1
Constriction
M3
Dilation
β2
Dilation
Abdoninal viscera
Constriction
M
 Dilation
β
Dilation
Vcins
α1.α)
Constriction
β32
Dilation
Endothelium
M,
↑ NO synthesis
Eye
Iris
Radial muscle
1
Contraction (mydriasis)
Sphincter muscle
一
M3
Contraction (iniosis)
Ciliary muscle
β,
Relaxation (far vision)
M;
Contraction (near vision)
Salivary glands
1
↑Secretion
M3
↑ Secretion
Lung
Tracheal and
132
Relaxation
M;
Contraction
bronchial smooth
muscle
Bronchial glands
2
↓Secretion
M,
↑Secretion
β
↑Secretion
Stomach
Motility and tone
α..β1.β2
Decrease
M;
Incrcase
Sphincters
α1
Contraction
My
Relaxation
Secretion
α
Inhibition
M;
Stimulation
Intestine
Motility and tone
α2、β、β2
Decrease
M,
Increase
Sphincters 
α1
Contraction
M;
Relaxation
Secretion
x
Inhibition
M3
Stinulatior
Gallbladder and 
β
Relaxation
M;
Contraction
sonps
30
TABLE 2-1. (continued)
Adrenergic
Cholinergic
Receptor
Response to
Receptor
Responsc to
Effector Organ
Type
Stirnulation
Type
Stimulation
Kidney
Renin secretion
Decrease
β1
Increasc
Urinary bladder
Detrusor
β2
Relaxation
M;
Contraction
Trigone and
1
Contraction
M
Relaxation
sphincter
Ureter
Motility and tone
α1
Increase
M;
Increase (?)
Uterus
α1.α2
Pregrant, contraction
M,
Contraction
β2
Nonpregnant,
relaxation
Sex organs, male
α1
L.jaculation
M;
frection
Skin
Pilomotor muscles
Contraction
Sweat glands 
C1
↑ Localized secretion
M3
↑Ceneralized secretion
(Adrenergic sweating)
Spleen capsule
α1
Contraction
一
32
Relaxation
Adrenal medulla
Nicotinic:
↑Epi, NE secrelicon
(N)
Skeletal muscle
β2
↑Contractility,
Glycogenolysis.
K'uptakc
Liver
x1.β2
↑Glycogenolysis
Pancreas
Acini
α
M;
Secretion
Islets (β cells)
↓Secretion
M;
Secretion
32
↑Secretion
Fat cells
α1.β-s
↑Lipolysis
(ihermogenesis)
2
↓lipolysis
Salivary glands
α1
↑K+ and HO
Mj
↑K+ and HO secretion
secretion
Nasopharyngeal
M3
↑Secretion
glands
 Pineal glands
↑Melatonin secretion
Posterior pituitary
↓AVP secretion
Autonomic nerve
cndings
Sympathetic
Autoreceptor
（
↓NE release
Heteroreceptor
M2
↓NE release from
syimpathetic nerve
lerminal
Parasympathetic
Autoreccptor
M
↓ACh release
Heteroreceptor
α2
↓ACh release from
myenteric plexus
*These receptors are in enclothelium, which respond to ACh by increasing NO synthesis. NO diuses into muscle
and causes vasodilation.
31
32
Chapter21B
Hypothalamus
Midbrain
Medulla oblongata
Spinal cord
Spinal cord
Spinalcord
>
Sympathetic
ACh
Hexa
etic
ACh
NNreceptor
Epi,NE
Adrenal
medulla
Blood
Epi,NE
ACh
α-Blockers
Phenoxybenzamine
Muscarine
Phentolamine
Methacholine
Bethanechol
Pilocarpine
Atropine
Tropicamide
Glycopyrrolate
andothers
ACh
β-Blockers
Propranolol
Tubocurarine
αa2B，β2
Adrenergicreceptors
Muscarinicreceptors
NMreceptor
Effector
Effector
Skeletal muscle
FIGURE 2-1. Effeclor meurons of the peripheral nervous systeni. Drugs that stimulate ($) ancl block
ww] receptors are also shown. N, ganglionic nicotinic receptor; N, skelctal muscle nico-
tinic: receptor; NE, norepinephrine; Epi, epinephrine; ACh, acetylcholine. (From Figure 2-1, NVMS
Pharmacofogy.!
are coupled to Gy, whereas My and M4 receptors are coupled to Gi/o
(Table 2-2).
(2) Nicotinic receptors have two subtypes, Nm and Nn. Nm receptors are found
in the muscle of neuromuscular junclions, whereas N, receplors are found
in the neurons of the CNS and autonomic ganglia. Nicotinic receptors are
part of the nonselective cation channels; activation of these receptors will
open the channels to permit the passage of Na+, K+, and Ca?+, predomi-
nantly Na-, As a resull, membrane is depolari7ed, which triggers the open-
ing of voltage-dependent Ca?- channels to further increase Ca2+ inilux.
b. Adrenergic receptors mediate the effects of NE and epinephrine (Epi).
(1)α-Receptors:α1.α2
These receptors are found in many tissues (Table 2-1). α2-Receptors are also
found in presynaptic. sile of the adrenergic. neuron. α,-Reccptors are coupled
to Gq, whereas xy-receptors are coupled to Gijo.
Drugs Afecting Periplheral Nervous 5System33
TABLE 2-2. Cholinergic. Receptor Pharmacology—An Overview
Cholinergic Receptors
Nicotinic Receptors
Muscarinic Receptors
NM
NN
M
My
M
Ma
Ms
Agonists
....Acetylchollne.....
Nicotine *.....
 Succinylchollne 
4·.
..Betha
Antagonists
(2) β-Receptors: β1.β2.β3
Both β- and β-receptors are found in many tissues and elicit many dif-
ferent eifects (Table 2-1). β,-Receptors are found mainly in adipocytes and
some in myocardium. All three β-receptor subtypes are coupled to G,,
ADRENERGIC AGONISTS (SYMPATHOMIMETIC AMINES). An overview is pre-
sented in Table 2-3.
A.
 Catecholamines
1. Epi, NE, and DA are endogenous substances that serve as hormones and neuro-
transmiters. They are also used therapeutically as drugs.
a.
 Chemistry and biosynthesis are illustrated in Figure 2-2.
b. Mechanism of action (Figure 2-3)
(1) Epi is a potent agonist of all adrenergic receptors (i.e., α1, α2. β, β2
and β,),
(2) NE is a potent agonist of α-α2-, and β-receptors. It has little effect on β2-
receptors.
(3) Dopamine
(a) DA causes the release of NE from adrenergic neurons, which activates
X -and β,-receptors.
(b) DA activates specific DA receptors.
i. D,-receptors arc present in thc renal, mesenteric, and coronary cir-
culation and are activated by low concentrations of DA. Activation
TABLE 2-3. Adrenergic Receptor Pharmacology—An Overview
Adrenerglc Receptors
'2
3
Agonlsts
4
Isoproterenol
..Xylaine
..Phenylephrine .….<
:▼4...
Dobulamine ..
:T 4
..Terbutallne.
. Yohlmblne
4
34Chapter2l A
NH2
Tyrosine
HO
NH2
Dopa
HO
hydroxylase
decarboxylase
CH2-
-C-COOH
HO
CH2-C-COOH
HO-
CH-CH2-NH
H
H
Tyrosine
edoa
Dopamine
OH
HO
Phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase
HO
CH-CH-NH
HO
CH-CH2-NH2
OH
CH3
OH
Epinephrine
Norepinephrine
FIGURE 2-2. Biosynthesis of dopaminc, norepinephrinc, and cpincphrine. {[rom Figure 2-2, NVMS
Pharmacofogy.)
of these receptors evokes vasodilatation, which is blocked by DA re
ceptor antagonists (e.g., haloperidol), but not by β-adrenergic recep-
tor antagonists. D,-receptors are coupled to G, thereby stimulating
cyclic AMP synthesis (more cyclic AMP, more relaxation of smooth
musc.le).
i. D2-receptors are present in ganglia, adrenal cortex, and certain
areas of the CNS, including the substantia nigra and pituitary
gland. Activation of these receptors inhibits neuroendocrine release.
D2-receptors are coupled to Gi/o, thereby inhibiting cyclic AMP syn-
thesis (less cyclic. AMP, less neurosecretion).
 i. D3-receptors are present in the nucleus accumbens located at the
base of the striatum. D3-receptors are coupled to Gi/o.
iv. Da-receptors are present in the heart and CNS. D4-receptors are cou-
pled to Giyo.
v. Ds-receptors are present in lymphocytes, hippocampus, and nucleus
accumubens. Ds-receplors are coupled to G,.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1)  Absorption
(a) Catecholamines are poorly absorbed following oral administration, partly
because the drugs are rapidly oxidized and conjugated.
(b) They are absorbed from the respiratory tract when nebulized and in-
haled.
(c) SC absorption is slow because of vasoconstriction.
(2) Fate
(a)  Distribution. Catecholamines do not cross the blood-brain barrier read-
ily.
(b) Deactivation (see Figure 2-3)
i. Tissue uptake mechanisms remove the drug from the receptor sile,
thereby decreasing the number of receptors being occupied and de-
creasing the response.
Uptakei is the active uptake of the drug into the presynaptic sympa-
thetic nerve terminal. Cocaine produces a sympathomimetic effect by
blocking uptake1.
Uptakey is the uptake of calccholamines inlo the effector cell. Ef-
fector cell contains monoamine oxidase (MAO) and catechol-()
methyltransferase (COMT), which metabolize catecholamines to in-
active products.
Tyrosine
(fromcirculation)
NE
2
Dopa
3
4
5
→DA
TH
DD
DBH
NE
16
4A
L
MAO
FreeNE
Glycol
Aldehyde
NE
13
Acid
2
Circulation
14
COMT
15
Methylation
FIGURE 2-3. Sitc of action of drugs affecting the sympathctic nervous systcim. Thc figure depicts
the events taking place at the junction of a sympathetic nerve terminal and an end-organ cell.
Tyrosine from the circulation enters the nerve terminal (1) and is converted first (2) via tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) into dopa and thcn (3) via dopa decarboxylase (DD) into dopaminc (DA). DA cn-
ters the vesicle of the nerve terminal (4), where it is converted (5), via DA β-hydroxylase (DBH), int)
norcpincphrinc (NE). which is stored in thc vcsicles. Frce NE in thc axoplasim also cntcrs and lcaves 
the vesicles (4A).
In the process of nerve impulse transmission across the neuroeffector junction, the nerve terminal is
depolarized (6) by action potential. Thc storagc vesicle fuscs with the plasma mcimbranc, and NE is
released into the junction (7) by exocytosis、 Indirect-acling sympathormimetics can also cause NE to
leave the vesicles and cnter the junction (8).
Once released from the neuron, N[ activates the postsynaptic α(α, α), β1, and β reccptors (9, 10,
11) on the effector cell, thereby producing the response. NE also activates presynpatic αz-receptors to
inhibit further NE release (12).
 Several mechanisms terminate the action of NE. Most important is the recntry of NE into the nervc
terminal (a process known as uptake-1) (13). Some of the NE enters the effector cell (uptake-2) (14),
 and some enters the circulation.
Two enzymes play d role in the metabolism of NE. The NE that enters the effector cell is methy-
lated (15) by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) to normetanephrine. The NE in the axoplasn of the
nerve terminal is converted (16) by monoamine oxidasc (MAO) in the ncuron's mitochondria. first to
the aldehyde, ald then to the glycol or to vanillylmandelic acid (VMA). The glycol and the acid are
the major metabolites excreted in the urine. (From Figure 2-3, NVMS Pharmacology.)
35
36
Clapler 2 Il A
ii. The liver and kidneys, which are rich in MAO and COMT, inactivate
circulating catecholamines.
(c)  Excretion. The metabolites are excreted in the urine.
d. Pharmacologic effects. The pharmacologic response to an agonist is a function
of the affinity of the agonist for the receptor, the number of receptors, and the
efficacy of the agonist (see Table 2-1).
(1)Epinephrine
(a) Blood pressure effects
i. Low doses may cause little change in blood pressure. They incrcasc
skeletal muscle blood flow via activation of βz-receptors and increase
heart rate and force of contraction via activation of β,-receptors.
β,-Receptors have a higher affinity than do α-receptors for Epi. pro-
ducing a preferential activation at low doses.
ii. Higher doses. Increasing the dose of Epi leads to the activation of α-
receptors, which causes vasoconstriction and reduces the blood flow
to the skeletal musculature. Because α-receptors predominate in the
cutaneous, mesenteric, and renal vascular beds, the net result is an
increase in blood pressure.
Activation of the α-receptors increases total peripheral resistance and
(counters the β-receptor-mediated vasodilatation. In addition, the
larger dose of Epi activates more β,-receptors in the heart, which in-
crcases cardiac output and contributes to the increase in blood pres-
sure.
As the blood pressure increases, baroreceptors in the aorta arch and
carotid sinus are activated. They, in turn, activate the vagus nerve
and increase vagal tone on the heart to reduce the cardiac output,
lowering the systemic blood pressure.
(b) Vascular effects
1. Skin. Activation of α-receptors causes vasoconstriction, decreasing
blood flow.
il. Skeletal muscle. At low concentrations, β-receptors are activated,
increasing blood flow to skeletal muscle. At higher concentrations,
activation of α-adrenergic receptors reduces blood flow.
ill. Mesentery and kidneys. Activation of x-receptors leads to a de-
creased blood flow.
iv. Lungs. IDecreased blood flow results from vasoconstriction of arteries
and veins.
v. Heart. Blood flow increases, largcly becausc of the metabolic: prod-
ucts created by the increase in cardiac work.
(c) Cardiac effects. β-Receptors prcdominate in the heart, but α1. β2, and
β3-receptors are also present. Epi causes
i. Increased force of contraction (positive inotropic effect).
ii. Increased rate of contraction (positive chronotropic effect).
ii. Increased output.
iv. Increased excitability.
v. Increased automaticity.
vi. Increased potential for arrhythmias.
vi. Decreased efficiency (greater oxygen consumption).
(d) Smooth muscle effects
i. Gastrointestinal (Gl) tract. Epi and NE relax Gl smooth muscle via
activation of α2- and β-receptors, and increase the contraction of
the sphincters by activating α1-receptors. Activation of αz-receptors
in the presynaptic nerve of the parasympathetic ganglia inhibits ACh
release, thereby decreasing parasympathetic tone.
i1. Uterus. Contraction (mediated by α-receptors) or relaxation (medi-
ated by β2-receptors) may (occur, depending on the state of cstrous
cycle, pregnancy, and species.
iml. Urinary bladder. Urinary retention occurs when the fundus relaxes
(as a result of β-receptor stimulation) and the trigone and sphincter
contract (as a result of x-receptor stimulation).
Drugs Aiflecting Peripheral Ner
37
iv. Bronchioles. Relaxalion occurs via activation of βB2-reccplors.
v. Eye. Mydriasis (pupillary dilation) results when α1- receptors in the
radial muscles of the iris are stimulated, intraocular pressure may be
reduced by a local vasoconstriction that decreases the production of
aqueous humor.
vi.
Spleen. Contraclion (mcdialed by α-receptors) incrcases blood ery-
throcyte levels, particularly in dogs.
vil. Pilomotor muscles. Contraction (imediated by α1-receptors) erects the
hairs on the skin, particularly in carnivores during fear or rage reac-
tions.
(e) Metabolic effects
i. Blood concentrations of glucose, free fatty acids, and lactic acid in-
crease when β-receptors in the liver, skeletal muscle, and adipose
tissue are stimulated.
ii. Some of the effects of Epi on plasma glucose concentrations are
secondary (e.g., inhibition of insulin secretion via activation of
α2-receptors and stimulation of glucagon secretion via activation of
3,-adrenergic receptors).
(2) NE elicits most of the efects produced by Epi that are mediated via αi-, α2-,
and β,-receptors, with the following exceptions;
(a) Al similar doses, NE will incrcase the mcan blood pressure more than
Epi because it is not able to relax the skeletal blood vessels via β2-
adrenergic receptors.
(b) Baroreceptor aclivation and vagal reflex will occur al lower doscs for NE
than Epi. This reflex can be strong enough to decrease cardiac output
despite the direct activation of cardiac β,-receptors.
thetic postganglionic nerve terminal by DA contributes to its pharmacologic
effects.
(a) Activation of Di-receptors causes vasodilatation of the renal, mesen-
teric, and coronary vasculature at low rates of infusion. Natriuresis and
diuresis result from the increascd glomerular filtration rate and renal
blood flow.
(b) Activation of D-receptors in the CNS decreases blood pressure and
heart rate in the same manner as activation of α?-adrenergic receptors in
the CNs. It is unlikely that CNS D2-receptors are activated when DA is
infused, because DA does nol cross the blood-brain barrier.
（c）
Activation of βi-receptors, which occurs at somewhat greater concen-
trations, produces a positive inotropic efiect on the heart.
(d) Activation of α-receptors causes vasoconstriction; however, very high
concentrations are necessary to produce this effect.
e. Therapeutic uses. Epi, NE, and DA arc used parenterally or topically
(1)Epinephrine
(a) Epi will reduce bronchospasm.
(b) Epi is used to treat hypersensitivity reactions and anaphylactic shock
that is characterized by bronchospasm and hypotension.
(c) Epi reduces cutaneous blood flow, which makes it useful for prolonging
local anesthetic effects.
(d}
 Applied topically, it can be used to control localized hemorrhage.
（e)B
Epi promotes the outflow of aqueous humor, making il useful for the
treatment of open-angle glaucoma.
(f) Epi is used to restore cardiac activity following cardiac arrest.
(2) NE may be uscd to correct the hypotension induced by spinal anesthesia.
It is not useful for correcting hypotension in most types of shock, because
sympathetic activity is already high and further vasoconstriction may com-
promise the renal and mesenteric circulations.
(3) DA may be used to treat
(a) Cardiogenic shock
(b) Septic shock
(c) Acute heart failure (usually as supporlive thcrapy)
38Chapler 2 II A
f. Adverse effects
(1) Epinephrine
(a) Anxiety, fear, and restlessness
(b)  Palpitations
(c) Cerebral hemorrhage
(d)  Cardiac arrhythmias (especially in hyperthyroid patients)
(2) Norepinephrine. Adverse effects are similar to those of Epi. In addition, ex-
travasations following IV injection may cause necrosis and sloughing at the
site because of intense vasoconstriction.
(3) Dopamine. Adverse effects include those of Epi and NE, but they are short-
lived because DA is rapidly metabolized.
2. Isoproterenol (lsuprel)
a. Mechanism of action. Isoproterenol, a potent nonselective β-receptor agonist,
increases cyclic AMP levels as β- and β2-receptors activate adenylyl cyclase
through coupling to Gs.
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) IV infusion decreases mean blood pressure by reducing peripheral resis-
tance, primarily in skeletal muscle.
(2) Cardiac output increases, owing to increases in cardiac contractility and
heart rate.
(3) Smooth muscle tissucs possessing β-rcccptors (c.g., bronchiolar and Gl
simooth muscle) are relaxed.
C. c. Therapeutic uses
(1) Acute bronchial constriction
(2) Completc atriovcntricular (A-V) block.
d. d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. Isoprotcrcnol is rcadily absorbcd parenterally or as an acrosol.
(2) Fate. It is principally mctabolizcd by COMT and MAO, but MAO is lcss
effective than with Epi and NE.
(3) Excretion. Mctabolites arc cxcrcted in urine.
e. Adverse effects
(1) Tachycardia
(2) Arrhythmias (as a rcsult of gencral stimulation of cardiac tissucs),
B.
Noncatecholamines
1. Phenylephrine (Neo-synephrine)
a. Mechanism of action. Phenylephrine is an αi-receptor agonist (Figure 2-4). It
also has some β-adrenergic stimulatory properties at high doses.
b. Pharmacologic effects. Phenylephrine increases blood pressure (primarily by
vasoconstriction).
C.
Therapeutic uses. It is administered parenterally, orally, or topically.
(1) Phenylephrine has an advantage over Epi as a vasopressor in situations
where cardiac stimulation is undesirable, such as during gas anesthesia.
(2) Phenylephrine is used as a topical nasal decongestant.
(3) It is used in ophthalmology as a mydriatic agent (during examinations), to
reduce posterior synechiae formation, and to relieve the pain associated with
uveitis.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Following IV administration, vasopressor effects begin immediately and per-
sist for ≤20 minutes.
(2) It is metabolized by the liver (to phenolic conjugates mainly after oral inges-
tion, and to m-hydroxymandelic acid after IV administration), and the effects
of the drug are also terminated by uptake into tissues. The biological ty,is
2-3 hours.
e. Adverse effects
(1) Phenylephrine may elicit a reflex bradycardia when administered IV.
Imay occur.
Drugs Aliecting Peripheral Nervous System」39
Indirect-acting drugs
Tyramine
Mixed-acting drugs
NE
Ephedrine
Phenylprapanolamine
Direct-acting drugs
Natural-agonists
a-agonists
B-agonists
Adren
Dopamine
Phenylephrine
Isoproterenol
Epinephrine
Detomidine
Metaproterenol
Norepinephrine
Medetomidine
Terbutaline
Romifidine
Dobutamine
Xylazine
Albuterol
Isoxsuprine
Clenbuterol
Ractopamine
FIGURE 2-4. Comparison of direct-, mixed-, and indirect-acting sympathomimetic drugs. Direct-acting 
drugs are able to clicit a pharmacologic response independently of the sympathetic ncuron. Indirect-
acting drugs produce a response by releasing norepinephrine (NE) from the neuron affer they are trans-
ported into the neuron. Mixed-acting drugs stimulate the adrenergic receptor directly and by inducing
the release of NE irom the neuron.
nasal use.
2. Dobutamine (Dobutrex?, see also Chapter 8)
a. Chemistry. The clinically used formulation of dobutamine is the racemic mixture
of two enantiomeric forms, the negative and positive isomers.
b. Mechanism of action. Dobutamine activates βi-receptors, and activates weakly
β2- and α-receptors as well.
c. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Dobutamine produces an inotropic effect, which is greater than its
chronotropic effect.
(2) It increases cardiac output by increasing cardiac contractility and stroke
volume.
(3)  Increased myocardial contractility may increase myocardial oxygen demand
and coronary blood flow.
d. Therapeutic uses. Dobutamine is used for the short-term treatment of heart
failure.
e. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Dobutamine is administered by IV infusion, Upon IV infusion, the onset of
action generally occurs within 2 minutes and peaks after 10 minutes.
(2) Dobutamine is metabolized rapidly in the liver and other tissues and has a
plasma ty, of 2 minutes in humans. The drug's effects diminish rapidly after
cessation of therapy.
f. Adverse effects
(1) Dobutamine may increase oxygen use; therefore, it should be used with care
after myocardial infarction to avoid increasing infarct size.
(2) Il may induce cardiac arrhythmias.
40
|Chapter 2 11 B
(3) Other adverse eifects may include those described for Epi [see Il A 1 i (1)].
3. Ephedrine (Ephedra)
a. Mechanism of action. Ephedrine is a mixed-acting agent fi.e., it has direct and
indirect actions); however, its primary action is indirect. Thus, a significant por-
tion of its action is indirectly from the NE release. Its direct effect is activation
of α1-adrenergic receptors and β-receptors.
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Ephedrine increases blood pressure by causing peripheral vasoconstriction
and cardiac stimulation.
(2) Il causes bronchodilation by activating β2-adrenergic reccptors.
(3) It causes the urinary bladder sphincter constriction by activating α1-
adrenergic receptors.
C. Therapeutic uses. Ephedrine is a scheduled drug (i.e., additional regulations for
its use are imposed by FDA)
(1) It is used to treat asthma-like conditions.
(2) It is used as a mydriatic.
(3) It can be used to treat primary urinary bladder sphincter incompetence.
However, phenylpropanolamine has been used more commonly than
ephedrine for urinary incontinence.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. Ephedrine is absorbed from the Gl tract and can be adminis
tered orally.
(2) Metabolism. It is resistant to mietabolism by MAO and is not a substrate for
COMT, so it has a prolonged action. It is metabolized very slowly in the
liver and excreted mostly unchanged in the urine. Urine pH may alter ex-
cretion characloristics. In humans: at urine pH of 5, fy. is ~3 hours; at urine
pH of 6.3, fy is ~6 hours.
e. Adverse effects are similar to those of Epi.
(1) Hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias may occur with systemic use.
(2) CNS stimulation may cause nervousness, nausea, and agitation.
(3)  Tachyphylaxis (i.e., diminished response following repeated administration)
may occur. It is thought to be caused by a depletion of NE in the adrenergic
nerve terminals susceptible to ephedrine.
4. Phenylpropanolamine (PPA)
a. Chemistry and mechanism of action. PPA is a mixed-acting agent (i.e., it has
direct and indirect actions); however, its primary action is indirect. Thus, part
of ils action is indirectly from the NE release. Its direct effect is activation of
X-adrenergic receptors.
b. Pharmacologic effects. The effects of PPA are sinilar to those of ephedrine, ex-
cept PPA has little CNS stimulatory activity
C.1
Therapeutic uses. PPA is used primarily for urinary incontinence. Tachyphylaxis
has not been scen when it is used for ihis purpose.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. PPA is absorbed from the Gl tract and can be administered
orally.
(2) PPA is resistant lo metabolism by MAO and is not a substrale for COMT.
(3) The drug is partially metabolized to an active metabolite by the liver, but
 80-90% is excreted unchanged in the urine within 24 hours of dosing.
(4) The plasma ty, is 3-4 hours.
e. Adverse effects are similar to those of ephedrine. In addition, anorexia may oc-
cur.
 5. Terbutaline (Brethine() is an orally effective βz-receptor agonist used as a bron-
chodilalor. It can be administered SC as well. l1 is the bronchodilator of choice for
animals with heart disease, hyperthyroidism, or hypertension; however, it should 
be administered with caution because high doses may stimulate β,-receptors.
Terbutaline can be administered parenterally or orally.
a. Pharmacokinetics
(1) No information is available for dogs and cals. Terhutaline has a high pka
(10.1); as a result, most of terbutaline is in ionized form at physiological
Drugs Affecting Periplieral Nervous System 41
pH. In humans, <5o%, of oral dose is absorbed because of the high pKa
value for this drug; peak bronchodilation occurs within 3 hours and lasts for
≤8 hours. It is well absorbed following SC administration, peak bronchodila-
tion 0ccur within 1 hour, and lasts for ≤4 hours.
(2) In horses, terbutaline should not be administered orally, since <1% is be-
ing absorbed via this route. When administcred IV, bronchodilation lasts for
~30 minutes. Thus, terbutaline should be administered as constant infusion
when given IV.
(3) Terbutaline is excreted mainly as the parent drug in the urine (60%), the rest
 as metabolites (sulfate conjugate).
b. Adverse effects. Tachycardia, tremors, and excitation may be scen, parlicularly
at high doses. Sweating may be seen in horses.
6. Albuterol (Torpex(&)
a. Mechanism of action. Albuterol is a selective β2- agonist, which causes bron-
chodilation,
b. Therapeutic uses. Albuterol is used as an aerosol and oral tablels, mainly in
dogs, cats, and horses as a bronchodilator and for its effects on bronchial
smooth muscle to alleviate bronchospasm or cough.
c.
Pharmacokinetics
(1) Albuterol has a high pKa (9.3), thus most of the compound is in ionized
-o uogdiosge aui tid jesooisyd ie sanss iayo pue poog aui ui oj
lowing oral administration is limiled bccause of the high pKa valuc for this
drug. The absorplion following inhalation is rapid and complete; bronchodi-
lation occurs within 5 minutes of inhalation.
(2) Duration of bronchodilation generally persists for 1-7 hours after inhalation
and ≤12 hours after oral administration.
(3) Albuterol is extensively metabolized in the liver, principally to the inactive
metabolite, albuterol 4' - (sulfale, which is excreted into urine. Plasma Iy,
is 3-5 hours after oral administration.
7. Isoxsuprine (Vasodilan)
a. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Isoxsuprine is a selective
β2-adrenergic agonist, which causes vasodilatation in skeletal muscle. In horses
with navicular disease, isoxsuprine raises distal limb temperatures, Isoxsuprine
also relaxes uterine smooth muscle and may increase heart rale and contractil-
ity. At high doses, isoxsuprine can decrease blood viscosity and reduce platelet
aggregation.
b.
 Therapeutic uses. Isoxsuprine is used to treat navicular disease in horses, and
should be administered IV; the efficacy is disappointing when used orally.
c.
 Pharmacokinetics. Very limited information is available for horses. After oral
administralion of isoxsuprinc, the plasma conccntrations of the drug are highly
variable. The climinalion fy, is ~3 hours in horses.
excitability, nose-rubbing) or sweating, hypotension, and tachycardia.
8. Clenbuterol (Ventipulmin& Syrup)
a.
 Mechanism of action, Clenbuterol is a selective β2-adrenergic agonist.
b. Therapeutic uses. Clenbuterol is uscd in horses as a bronchodilator for airway
obstruction, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It had been misused
as a repartitioning agent before ractopamine became available. It is adminis-
tered orally.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) After oral administration to horses, plasma levels of clenbuterol peak at 2
hours and ty, is ~12 hours.
(2) Urinary concentrations of clenbuterol are 100 times of those found in the
plasma and can persist for 12 days in urine after the last oral dosing.
d. Adverse effects
(1) Muscle tremors, sweating, restlessness, urticaria, and tachycardia may be
noted, particularly early in the course of therapy. Increase in serum creatine
kinase concentrations (an indicator for muscle damage) has been noted in
some horscs and ataxia can occur.
42 (hapier 2 I B
(2) Clenbuterol can induce tachycardia at high doses. Thus, it should not be
used in horses suspected of having cardiovascular impairment.
(3) Clenbulerol can induce uterine relaxation, which may ofset the effects of
Oxytocics, for example, oxytocin and prostaglandin F2x.
9. Ractopamine (Optaflexx, Paylean). This is one of the two approved repartition-
 ing agents for animals. It is used in cattle and swine.
a.
Mechanism of action. Ractopamine is a selective β2-adrenergic agonist.
b. Therapeutic uses. Ractopaimine is used as a feed additive to iimproved rale of
weight gain, feed efficiency, and increase carcass Leanness. Ractopamine in-
Creases lipolysis.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) The pKa of ractopamine is 9.4, thus it is mostly in ionized form when
present in the blood or tissues at the physiological pH of 7.4. As a result,
the Gl absorption of ractopamine is low, and the tissuc concentrations of
the drug are also low following oral administration. No preslaughter with-
drawal period is needed when animals are on ractopamine.
(2) Ractopamine is metabolized in the liver into glucuronide form, and the latter
is excreted mostly into urine. Thus, both liver and kidney have the highest
levels of residues. The residues in liver and kidney decline rapidly, that is,
after a 24-hour withdrawal period, only 45% and 10% of the total residues
present afler a zero-day withdrawal period remained in liver and kidney.
respectively.
d. Adverse effects. Anorexia, bloat, and locomotion disorder have been seen. Per-
sonnel protection is needed when handling ractopamine. Persons with cardio-
vascular disease should exercise special caution to avoid exposure.
10. Zilpaterol (zilmax@). It is a new and sclective β2-agonist that is uscd as a repar-
titioning agent in beef cattle. The pharmacokinelics of zilpaterol are largely un-
known. The preslaughter withdrawal period is 48 hours.
ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS
A.
α-Adrenergic antagonists
1. Phenoxybenzamine (Dibenzyline()
a. Mechanism of action. Phenoxybenzamine differs from most α1-receptor
antagonists in that il binds covalently to the α-receptor. This is a stable
chemical bond that produces a long-lasting and irreversible block of the
receptor.
b.
 Pharmacologic effects
(1) Phenoxybenzamine decreases total peripheral resistance, causing hypoten-
sion.
（2）
Heart rate may be increased via de-activation of the barorcccptor reflex.
(3) Phenoxybenzamine can block pupillary dilation, lid rctraction, and contrac-
tion of the nictitating membrane.
C. Therapeutic uses. It is administered orally.
(1) In dogs and cats, phenoxybenzamine reduces hypertonus at the urethral
sphincter.
(2) In horscs, phcnoxybenzamine has bccn uscd to treat laminitis and secretory
diarrhea.
d. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals. In humans, it is
poorly absorbed from the Cl tracl with a bioavailability of 20-30%. Onset of
action of the drug is slow (several hours) and increases over several days after
regular dosing. Effects persist for 3-4 days after discontinuation of the drug.
Phenoxybenzamine is highly lipid soluble and may store in adipose tissuc. It
is metabolized (dealkylated) and cxcrcted in both the urine and bile. The plasma
ty, is ~24 hours in humans.
[Drugs Afcling Peripheral  Nervous 5ystem 43
e. Adverse effects
(1) Hypotension may be enhanced in hypovolemic animals.
(2) It should not be used in horses with colic.
2. Prazosin (Minipress@)
a. Mechanism of action. Prazosin is a compctitive and sclcctive α}-receptor antag-
onist.
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Prazosin relaxes arterial and venous smooth muscle.
(2) There is a decrease in total peripheral resistance. High doses may cause
hypotension.
C. Therapeutic uses. It is administered orally.
(1) Prazosin is used in the treatment of congestive heart failure. It decreases
artcrial pressurc, which improves cardiac output.
(2)  Prazosin is also uscd in the trcatmcnt of hypertension,
d. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals. In humans, it is vari
ably absorbed afler oral administration. Peak levels occur in 2-3 hours. Il is
widely distributed throughout the body and is ~97% bound to plasma proteins.
It is metabolized in the liver and some metabolites are aclive. Melabolites and
≤10% of unchanged drug are eliminated in feces.
e. Adverse effects include diarrhea, tachycardia, hypotension, and fluid
retention.
3. Phentolamine (Regitine)
a. Mechanism of action. Phentolamine is a competitive α- and α2-receptor antag-
onist.
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Heart rate may be increased by de-activation of the baroreceptor reflex or
by blocking the presynaptic. α2-receptors of the heart.
(2) Blood pressure is lowered by inhibition of α;- and α2-receptors in vascular
smooth muscle.
c. Therapeutic uses. Phcntolaminc is adininistercd IV or IM to trcat hypcrtension
and to control high blood pressure resulting from sympathomimetic amine
overdose.
d. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals. In humans, it is me-
tabolized in the liver and is excreted into the urine mostly as metabolites. The
elimination ty, is ~20 minutes.
e. Adverse effects. Tachycardia is frequently observed
4. Yohimbine (Yobin(, see also Chapter 4).
a. Mechanism of action. Yohimbinc is a compctitive α2-receptor antagonist that
promotes thc formation of cyclic AMP by blocking α2-receplor activation,
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Yohimbine can cause CNS stimulation, increased heart rate, and
increased blood pressure by increasing NE release from the adrenergic
nerve endings.
(3) Yohimbine may incrcasc plasma insulin Icvels, bccausc α2-receptors inhibit
insulin release.
c. Therapeutic uses. Yohimbine is uscd IV and IM in monogastric animals to re-
verse the effects of α2-receptor agonists (i.c., xylazinc, detormidinc, mcdcto-
midine, and romifedinc) and amitraz, a miticide that has α2-agonistic activities.
Yohimbine is marginally effective in ruminants.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Yohimbine is distributed evenly after IV administration. The total body clear-
 ance is 35 ml/min/kg in horses and 30 ml/min/kg in dogs.
(2) The ty, of the drug is 0.5-1.5 hours in horses and 1.5-2 hours in dogs.
e. Adverse effects are primarily CNs stimulation, tachycardia, hypertension, and
increase in Gl motility.
-oeyd all shondanai-ao pue -lo joj sjuoseue aaaduon e s! ll auozeloi g
logic effects are similar to phentolamine,
44Chapter 2 I A
a. Therapeutic uses. It is adininistered IV (slowly) to reverse the pharinacologic
effects of αz-agonists, for cxamplc, xylazinc, particularly in ruminants.
b. Pharmcokinetics. After IV administration in horses, it is widely distributed. It is
concentrated in the liver and kidneys. The plasma ty, in horses is ~60 minutes.
In cattle aftcr an IV dose of 4 mg/kg. thc conccntration of tolazolinc was <10
Hg/kg by 96 hours in tissues and by 48 hours in imilk. On the basis of these
data, it is recommended the preslaughter withdrawal period of 8 days and milk
withdrawal time of 48 hours in cattle.
c. Adverse effects. Tolazoline can cause tachycardia, hypotension, and incrcascd
Gl imotility. Because of hypotension, it should not be adiministered to animals
exhibiting signs of stress, debilitation, cardiac disease, sympathetic blockage.
hypovoleimia, or shock.
6. Atipamezole. It is an α2-antagonist, which is labeled for use as a reversal agent for
medetoimidine. It can reverse the effects of other αz-agonists as well (e.g., amitraz,
xylazine). It is effective in all species, including ruminants. However, it is too ex-
 pensive to be used in food animals.
a.
Pharmacokinetics. It is adininistered IM, IV, or SC, but IM route is preferred.
After IM administration in the dog. peak plasma levels occur in 10 minutes, It is
metabolized in the liver to compounds that are eliminated in the urine. The elimi-
nation ry, is 2-3 hours.
B.β-Adrenergic antagonists
1. Propranolol (lInderal, see also Chapler 8).
a. Mechanism of action. Propranolol is a nonselective β-receptor antagonist that
competitively blocks both β- and β2-receptors. Recent evidence indicates pro-
pranolol is an inverse agonist of β-receptors.
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Propranolol decreases the sinus heart rate and depresses A-V conduction.
(2) It decreases cardiac output.
(3) It decreases myocardial oxygen demand.
(4) It decreases the automaticily of cardiac tissue.
(5) It increases airway resistance.
c. Therapeutic uses. It is adininistered IV, IM, SC, or orally for following condi-
tions:
(1) Propranolol is used lo treat cardiac arrhythmia and hypertension associated
with thyrotoxicosis and pheochromocytoma, respectively.
(2) It is uscd to trcat arrhythmias (c.g., atrial and ventricular prcmaturc com-
 plexes and supraventricular and ventricular tachycardia).
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. Propranolol is well absorbed following oral administralion.
(2) Propranolol is highly lipid soluble and readily crosscs the blood-brain bar-
rier.
(3) The ty, in dogs is 1-2 hours and <2 hours in horses.
(4)  There is a significant first-pass cffect, which reduces the systermic bioavail-
ability. In dogs, only 2-27% of an oral dose reaches the blood. Rapid
metabolism occurs in the liver to form 4-hydroxypropranolol, which is fol-
lowed by conjugalion. More than 99% of propranolol is excreted as melabo-
lites.
e. Adverse effects
(1) Up-regulation of β-receptors (i.e., an increased number of receptors) occurs
with long-term therapy.
(2)  Abrupt cessation of therapy may lead to excessive stimulation of β-receptors,
thercby exacerbating the symptoms.
f. Contraindications
(1) Propranolol may cause bronchospasm and is contraindicated in asthmatic
animals.
Drugs Afecting Peripheral Nervous System 45
(2) Propranolol is contraindicated in animals with heart failure or sinus brady-
cardia.
(3) It is contraindicated in animals with hepatic disease.
2. Atenolol (Tenormin)
a. Mechanism of action, Atenolol is a competitivc β-receptor antagonist.
b. Pharmacologic effects. Atenolol decreases heart rate, cardiac output, and sys-
tolic and diastolic prcssurcs.
c. Therapeutic uses. Atenolol is administered orally to treat supraventricular ar-
rhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in cats, and hypertension.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Atenolol has low lipid solubility and unlike propranolol, only simall amounts
of alenolol are distributed inlo the CNS.
(2) Atenolol is minimally biotransformed in the liver; 40-50% is excreted un-
changed in the urine and the bulk of the remainder is excreted in feces as
the parent compound.
(3) The plasma ty, in dogs is 3.2 hours and in cats, it is 3.7 hours. Duralion of
β-adrenergic blockade in cats is ~12 hours.
e. Adverse effects
(1) Although atenolol is selective for β-receptors, it should be used cautiously
in animals with asthma or a history of bronchospasm, because at high doses
it can block β-receptors as well.
(2) Excessive β,-blockade can greally reduce cardiac oulput,
(3) It is a negative inotrope, so it must be used with caution in patients with
congeslive heart failure, in renal failure patients, and in patients with sinus
node dysfunction.
(4) Atenolol can cause lethargy, hypolension, or diarrhea.
3. Metoprolol (Lopressor)
a. Mechanism of action, Mctoprolol is a sclcctive β1-receptor antagonist. How-
ever, at high doses it blocks βy-receptors as well.
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Cardiovascular effects secondary to metoprolol's negative inotropic and
chronotropic actions include dccrcascd sinus heart ratc, slowcd AV con-
duction, diminished cardiac output, decreased myocardial oxygen demand,
reduced blood pressure, and inhibition of the β-agonist-induced tachycardia.
(2) Metoprolol does nol possess membrane-slabilizing aclivity like propranolol.
c. Therapeutic uses. Metoprolol can be used to treat supraventricular tach-
yarrhythmias, premature ventricular contractions, systemic hypertension, hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy, and thyrotoxicosis in cats. It is adiministered orally
at every 12 hours. Because metoprolol is relatively safe to use in animals with
bronchospastic diseasc, it is often choscn ovcr propranolol.
d. Pharmacokinetics
the Gl tract, but it has a relatively high first-pass effect (50%) so systemic
bioavailability is reduced.
(2) Metoprolol has very low prolein binding characleristics (5-15%) and is dis-
tributed well into most tissues.
(3) Meloprolol crosses the blood-brain barrier, and CSF levels are ~80% of
those found in the plasma.
(4)  Metoprolol is metabolized in the liver; unchanged drug and metabolites are
then principally excreted in the urine. The reported ty, in dogs is 1.6 hours 
and in cats it is 1.3 hours.
e. Adverse effects. They are similar to the adverse effects of propranolol.
4. Esmolol (Brcvibloc@)
a. Mechanism of action. Esmolol is a selective β-receptor antagonist. Not like
propranolol, it has little membrane-stabilizing activity.
b.
Therapeutic uses. Esmolol and propranolol are the first choices for IV use
for tachyarrhythmias and occasionally for acute management of dynamic lefl
46
(hapier 2 Ill B
Choline acetyltransferase
AChE
CH3
Choline+Acetyl-CoA
CH-N-CH2
CH-
Choline+Acetate
CH3
H2O
Acetylcholine
FIGURE 2-5. Synthesis and hydrolysis of acetylcholine (ACh). CoA, coenzyme A; AChE, acetyl-
cholinesterase.
ventricular outflow obstruction in cats. Esmolol, very short-acting (~20 min-
tagonist would be helpful, while not lasting long if it is not.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Esmolol has a plasma ty, of ~10 minutes, The short duration
of action of esmolol is attributable to rapid enzymatic hydrolysis by red blood
cell esterases.
d. Adverse effects. Excessive β,-blockade can greatly reduce cardiac output.
2. Sotalol (Betapace)
a. Mechanism of action. Sotalol is a nonselective β-receptor antagonist, which
can selectively prolong the duration of action potential and refractory period
(see Chapler 8).
b. Therapeutic uses. Sotalol is a class Ill antiarrhythmic drug, which can be used
 orally to treat ventricular tachycardias in dogs.
C.
 Pharmacokinetics. Unlike propranolol, sotalol does not have any appreciable
first-pass effect after oral administration. Food may rcducc the bioavailability
of sotalol by 20% (human data). The drug has relatively low lipid solubility and
virlually no prolein binding. Eliminalion is almost all via the kidney and most of
the drug is excreted unchanged. In dogs, sotalol's elimination ty, is 5 hours.
d. Adverse effects. At high doses, sotalol may show negative inotropic effects
and proarrhythmic effects. Sotalol may cause dyspnea/bronchospasm, fa-
tiguc/dizzincss, and nausca/vomiting.
CHOLINERGIC AGONISTS (Table 2-2)
A.
Acetylcholine (ACh)
1. Chemistry and biosynthesis (Figure 2-5). ACh is a quaternary chemical, synthe-
sized by the cnzyme choline acetyltransferase from choline and acetyl cocnzyme A
(acetyl-CoA).
 2. Mechanism of action. ACh stimulales muscarinic and nicotinic receptors.
3. Pharmacologic effects (see Tables 2-1 and 2-2)
a. Cardiovascular. The actions of ACh on the heart are similar to the effects pro-
duced by vagal stimulation. ACh decreases systemic blood pressure following IV
injection. Possible mcchanisms include ncgative inotropic or chronotropic action
and vasodilatation.
(1)  Vasodilatation in response to nerve-released ACh is of little physiologic im-
portance in the maintenance of blood pressure, because most peripheral
blood vessels are not cholinergically innervated. However, drugs that are
analogs of ACh are capable of producing vasodilatation via activation of
muscarinic. receptors in the blood vessels.
(2)  Vasodilatation is thought to be caused by two processes as follows:
(a) Inhibition of the release of NE from the sympathetic nerve terminal by
activating M2-receptors.
Drugs Afcting Peripheral  Nervous Systcm 47
(b)  Interaction with Ms-receptors on the endothelial cells to release nitric
oxide, which initiates the relaxation of vascular smooth muscle.
b. Smooth muscle and glands
(1) Stimulation of muscarinic Ms-receptors increases Gl motility and secretion.
(2) ACh causes smooth muscle contraction in the uterus, ureters, blad-
der, bronchi, and sphincter muscles of the iris via activation of
M,-rcccptors.
(3) Activation of M,-rcccptors increases salivary and lacrimal gland sccretions.
4. Therapeutic uses. ACh has litle or no use as a therapeutic drug, but it is used topi-
cally to constrict pupil in intraocular surgery.
5. Antagonists. Atropine is a specific antagonist at muscarinic receptors.
B.Carbachol (Carbamylcholine, Carbastat@, etc.)
1. Chemistry. Carbachol has a carbamic acid-ester bond that is not hydrolyzable by
cholinesterase. Like ACh, carbachol is a quaternary nitrogen compound.
2. Mechanism of action. Carbachol activates both muscarinic and nicotinic rcccptors.
3. Therapeutic use. Carbachol is uscd topically to produce miosis in ophthalnol.
ogy. It could be administered SC to treal Gl and uterine alony, but its use in
such cases should be performed with extreme caution to prevent rupture of the
tracts.
4. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals.
Bethanechol
1. Chemistry. Bethanechol chemically resembles carbachol and is a quaternary com-
pound. It is resistant to hydrolysis by cholinesterase.
2. Pharmacologic effect. Bethancchol is an agonist of muscarinic receptors.
3. Therapeutic uses. Bcthancchol is administcred SC to trcat the distention of the uri-
nary bladder by increasing contractility. It could be administered SC to treat Gl and
uterine atony, but its use in such cases should be performed with extreme caution
to prevent rupture of the tracts.
4. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals. Because bethanechol is
a quaternary ammonium compound, the Gl absorption is nil after oral administra-
tion.
D.
Pilocarpine
1. Chemistry. Pilocarpine is a tertiary amine alkaloid.
2. Pharmacologic effects. Pilocarpine resembles carbachol in aclions; however, be-
cause it does not contain a quaternary ammonium, it can cross the biologic mem-
branes.
3. Therapeutic uses. Pilocarpine is primarily used topically to produce miosis and to
lower intraocular pressure in glaucoma.
4. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals.
5. Adverse effects
(1) Pilocarpine can cause local irritation and inflammation of the uveal tract.
(2) With repeated use, pilocarpine may cause systemic effects (vomiting, diarrhea,
and increased salivation).
A.
Mechanism of action. These agents act indirectly by preventing the hydrolysis of ACh
by acetylcholinesterase (AChE). Therefore, at synaptic junctions, rmore cholinergic. re-
ccptors arc occupicd by Ach, causing incrcascd muscarinic and nicotinic responses.
Anticholinesterase (anti-ChE) agents prevenl the hydrolysis of ACh via three following
primary mechanisms:
48Chaplcr 2 V A
1. Reversible AChE inhibition. Thc quaternary nitrogen of the drug revcrsibly binds to
the active center of the enzyme at the anionic site.
2. Carbamylation of AChE. The carbamates are substrates for AChE and occupy the
active site for an extended period of time, thereby increasing the ACh concentration
at synapses.
3. Phosphorylation of AChE. The organophosphates form a stable covalent bond with
the enzyme, and their effects are long-lasting (Figure 2-5).
B.
 Preparations
1. Carbamates
a. Physostigmine (Antilirium?)
(1) Chemistry. Physostigmine is a tertiary amine.
(2) Pharmacologic effects. The pharmacologic effects mimic those of ACh.
(a) Physostigmine produces miosis, salivation, and increased Gl motility.
(b) In large doses, it causes fasciculation followed by paralysis of skeletal
muscle (caused by the accumulation of ACh at the neuromuscular junc-
tion).
(3) Therapeutic uses. Physostigmine can be used topically to treat simple and 
secondary glaucoma, and can be used IM, SC, or orally to counteract intoxi-
cation by atropine and other antimuscarinic drugs.
(4) Pharmacokinetics. Physostigmine is well absorbed from the Gl tract, SC tis-
sues, and mucous membranes. It crosses the blood-brain barrier. It is largely
hydrolyzed at the ester linkage by plasma esterases. Duration of action is
3-6 hours.
b. Neostigmine (Prostigmin@)
(1) Chemistry. Neostigmine contains a quaternary ammonium.
(2) Pharmacologic effects
(a) The pharmacologic. effects of neostigimine mimic. those of ACh, causing
effects siimilar to those of physostigmine.
(b) Neostigmine reverses the neuromuscular block produced by
tubocurarine-like drugs by
i. Inhibition of AChE
ii. Incrcasing the release of ACh from nerve cndings
il. Acting directly on the skelctal neuromuscular junction
(3) Therapeutic uses. It is administercd SC, IM, or IV to treat the following con-
ditions:
(a) Reversal of tubocurarine-like blockade at the skeletal neuromuscular
junction
(b) Paralytic ileus
(c) Atony of the urinary bladder
(d) Myasthenia gravis-like conditions
(4) Pharmacokinetics
(a) Absorption. Typical of quaternary ammoniums, neostigmine is not well
absorbed orally nor does it cross the blood-brain barrier.
(b) Metabolism. Neostigmine is hydrolyzed by plasma esterases.
(c) Excretion. It is excreted in the urine as parent compound. Duration of
action is 0.5-2 hours.
(5) Adverse effects and contraindications. Adverse effects of neostigmine are
cholinergic in nature. It is contraindicated in the presence of Gl or urinary
obstruction.
C. Edrophonium (Tensilon?, etc.)
(1) Pharmacologic effects. Like neostigmine, edrophonium is a quaternary am-
monium compound. Its actions are similar to those of neostigmine.
(2) Therapeutic uses. Edrophonium is used to diagnose myasthenia gravis-like
disease and antagonize tubocurarine-like drugs.
(3) Pharmacokinetics. Edrophonium is adiministered parenterally and has a short
duration of action (10-15 minutcs). Other aspects of pharmacokinctics have
not becn well-described.
Drugs Alfie ting Peripheral Nervous System
6
(4) Adverse effects are generally dose-related and cholinergic in nature. Severe
adverse effects are possible with large overdoses.
d. Pyridostigmine (Mestinon) and demecarium are similar to neostigmine (quater-
nary compounds); howcver, they havc a longcr duration of action of 4-6 hours.
Pyridosligmine is uscd orally to trcat myasthenia gravis, hut should bc givcn par-
enterally to increase effectiveness of the treatment. Demecarium is used topically
to treat glaucoma. Adverse effects are similar to those of neostigmine.
e. Carbaryl and propoxur are carbamate ectoparasiticides. See Chapter 16 for fur-
ther information. The effecis of ovcrdose are similar lo organophosphale poison-
ing and are trealable with altropine.
 2. Organophosphates
a. Preparations
(1) Echothiophate. It is a quaternary organophosphate (OP), and has a long du-
ration of action (>12 hours). It is used topically in the treatment of open
angle glaucoma,
(2) OPs used as ectoparasiticides are discussed in Chapter 16.
b. Adverse effect (see also Chapter 16)
(1) Clinical signs
(a) SLUDD (i.e., salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, and dyspnea)
refers to a constellation of signs that are related to muscarinic stimula-
tion. In addition, miosis and bradycardia may be seen,
(b) Anorexia and vomiting may occur.
(c) Neurologic signs include convulsions and fasciculation of skeletal
muscle. Respiratory failure caused by inhibition of respiratory center,
bronchial spasm and excessive secretions, and weakness of the respira-
tory muscles ultimately leads to death.
(2) Treatment
(a) Detoxification
i. Dermal exposure. The skin should be washed with soap and water
to remove unabsorbed toxin. These chemicals are highly lipid-soluble
and are readily absorbed via the skin; therefore, personnel should
wear protective gear to prevent contact with the toxin.
ii. Oral exposure. Gastric lavage should be considered if the organo-
phosphates have been ingested.
(b)  Stabilization
i. Respiratory assistance may be required.
ii. Anticonvulsants may be administered.
(c)Antidotal therapy
i. Atropine will reduce the muscarinic effects.
ii. Pyridine-2-aldoxime methiodide (2-PAM, pralidoxime) reactivates 
AChE (Figurc 2-6).
Serine
CH,
CH,
Phosphorylated
2-PAM
Reactivated
AChE
AChE
FIGURE 2-6. Pralidoxime (2-PAM) reactivates acetylcholinesterase (AChE). An organophosphate phos-
phorylates AchE by binding to the serine residue of the enzyme. 2-PAM works by binding to the
organophosphatc, which then pulls the compound from ACh, regcnerating the cnzymc.
50
Chapter
r2VA
Vl.
PARASYMPATHETIC ANTAGONISTS (ANTIMUSCARINIC DRUGS)
A.
Atropine sulfate
1. Chemistry. Atropine, a tertiary amine, is the prototype for all antimuscarinic drugs.
Il is an alkaloid obtained from the plant Atropa belladonna (deadly nightshade).
 2. Mechanism of action. Atropine is a competitive and nonselective antagonist of
ACh at muscarinic receptors.
3. Pharmacologic effects
a. Heart
(1) Heart rate. Thc effcct of atropine on thc hcart rate is variablc.
(a) The rate may be slow initially or following a low dose, possibly as a
result of central vagal stimulation.
(b) As the muscarinic rcceptors on the sinoatrial (SA) node are blocked by
higher concentrations of atropine, tachycardia results.
(2) The PR interval is shortened.
b. Vasculature. Because blood vessels are regulated primarily by the sympathetic
nervous system, atropine at therapeutic doses has a small to modest effect on
the systemic blood pressure.
C. CNs. Toxic cdoses of atropine produce excitation, possibly followed by depres-
sion as the toxicity progrcsscs.
d. Smooth muscle
(1) Gl contractions are reduced in amplitude and frequency. Muscle tone is
also reduced.
(2) Biliary tract smooth muscle is relaxed.
(3) Urinary bladder and ureter tone is reduced.
(4) Bronchodilation occurs in the large bronchi.
e.Eye
(1) Mydriasis. Atropine blocks the muscarinic reccptors for ACh on the sphinc-
ter smooth muscle of the iris.
(2) Cycloplegia is the inability to accommodate for near vision. Atropine inhibits
cholinergic control of the ciliary muscle of the lens.
(3) Sweat gland secretions are reduced.
(4) Gastric sccretions are reduccd at high doscs.
4. Therapeutic uses. Il is adminislered IV, IM, SC, or orally.
a. Atropine is used as a preanesthetic agent to reduce salivary and respiratory
Secretions.
b. Antimuscarinic agents are used in ophthalmology to produce cycloplegia and
mydriasis: however, hccauisc atropine has a long duration of action, its useful-
ness in this capacity is limited.
C. It may be used to treat renal and biliary colic when combined with opioids.
d. It is used to counter anti-ChE overdose or toxicity.
e. It may be useful in treating mushroom toxicity if muscarine is the toxic agent.
5. Pharmacokinetics
a. Alropine is rapidly and well absorbed when given orally or parenterally. Afler IV
administration, peak effects in heart rates occur within 3 minutes.
b. Alropine is well distribuled throughoul the body and crosses into the CNS.
c. Atropine is metabolized into noratropine, atropin-n-oxide, and tropic acid by
thc liver and cxcretcd into thc urine. Thirty to fifty percent of a dosc is cxcrcted
unchanged inlo the urine. The ty, of atropine is ~2.5 hours, and most of the
drug is excreted in the urine within the first 12 hours.
6. Adverse effects include tachycardia, photophobia (from mydriasis), xerostomia,
increased body temperature in horses (caused by a decrease in sweating), restless-
ness, disorientation, and CNS stimulation.
7. Treatment of toxicity. An anti-ChE agent (e.g., neostigmine, physostigmine) should
be administered to increase the concentration of Ach at muscarinic. receptor sites.
CNS stimulation may be controlled by benzodiazepines.
Drugs Aifecting Peripheral Nervous System 51
B. Scopolamine (hyoscine) and N-butylscopolammonium (Bucospan?), alkaloids resem-
 ble atropine in chemical structure and pharmacologic properties. Scopolamine can
be used orally to control motion sickness. N-butylscopolammonium is administered
IV in horses as an antispasmodic and antimuscarinic drug lo treal colic and intestinal
impaction. These Iwo drugs may produce excitement or sedation.
C.Propantheline (Pro-Banthine?)
1. Chemistry. Propantheline is a synthctic quaternary ammonium antimuscarinic agent.
2. Therapeutic uses
a. In small animals, propantheline is used orally as an antispasmodic/antisecretory
agent in the treatment of diarrhea, colitis, and acute irritable bowel syndrome.
It is also used orally in the treatment of hyperreflexic detrusor or urge urinary
incontinence and as oral treatment in anticholinergic responsive bradycardias.
However, doubts have been raised with the effectiveness, since Gl absorption of
the drug is rather poor.
b. In horses, propantheline has been administered IV to reduce colonic peristalsis
and to relax the rectum to allow easier rectal examination and perform surgical
procedures to the rectum.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. It is poorly absorbed after oral administration, only <25% of oral
dose is absorbed. After being absorbed, it cannot penetrate the blood-brain barrier.
After oral administration, it is believed to be prevalently metabolized (hydrolyzed)
in the Gl and/or liver; <5% of an oral dose is excreled unchanged in the urine.
The plasma iy. in humans is 1.6 hours and duration of action is 6 hours; no infor-
malion is available for animals.
4. Adverse effects are similar lo those of atropine, excepl propantheline does not ef-
fectively enter the CNs, since it is a quaternary ammonium compound.
D.Glycopyrrolate (RobinulS-V)
1. Chemistry. Glycopyrrolate is a synthetic quaternary ammonium.
2. Therapeutic uses
a. It is used as a preanesthetic drug by parenteral administration (IV, IM, or SC).
b. It can be administered IV or IM to treat sinus bradycardia, S-A arrest, and in-
complete A-V block.
c. It can be administered SC to control hyersalivation in cats.
3. Pharmacokinetics
a. Aftcr parcntcral administration, it docs not cffectivcly cnter the CNS or cye.
b. After IM administration, plasma levels rcach at pcak in 30-45 minutes. Vagal
blocking actions persist for 2-3 hours and antisalivation effect persists up to 7
hours.
C. It is eliminated primarily via the kidney; metabolism plays a small role in its
elimination. The plasma ty, is ~1 hour after IM or IV administration..
E.
Tropicamide, a synthetic tertiary amine antimuscarinic drug, is used topically in oph-
thaimology to induce mydriasis and cycloplegia. It has an advantage over atropine in
that its duration of action is shorter (4-8 hours) (see also Chapter 14).
F.Aminopentamide (Centrine?)
1. Therapeutic uses. It is used orally, IM, or SC in dogs and cats for the treatment of
ated nausea, vomiting, and/or diarrhea, When compared with atropine as an anti-
cholinergic drug, it has a greater effect on reducing colonic contractions and less
mydriatic and salivary effects. Aminopentamidc may reduce gastric acid secretion
as well.
2. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available.
52
|(hapter 2 Vll A
GANGLIONIC NICOTINIC AGONISTS AND ANTAGONISTS.Ganglionic nico-
tinic agonists and antagonists are of limited use in veterinary medicine. Skeletal neuro-
muscular junction nicotinic antagonists (see Vlll) have more therapeutic uses.
A.
Nicotine and nicotine-like antinematodal drugs, for example, levamisole, pyrantel, and
morantel (see also Chapter 16).
1. Mechanism of action (see Figure 2-1; Table 2-2)
a. These compounds activate nicotinic receptors in both the sympathetic and
parasympathetic ganglia, where they stimulate the postganglionic. neuron. They
mimic the actions of ACh in this aspcct.
b. Thcse compounds stimulate the adrenal medulla to rclcasc Epi and NE into the
blood stream.
c. In the somatic nervous system, they stimulate the skeletal neurormuscular junc-
tion at nicotinic receptors.
2. Pharmacologic effects
a. CNs. Stinulation of the motor cortex by nicotine produces tremors.
b. Respiratory. Respiration may be initilly stimulated and then depressed.
c. Cardiovascular. Increases in blood pressure, heart rate, and peripheral resistance
epau qeuaipe ayi pue euea snayedmas jo uoeinus tuon insai
d. Smooth muscle and glands. Stimulation of parasympathetic ganglia may increase
Gl motility and salivary secretion.
 3. Therapeutic uses. Nicotine has no therapeutic use, but nicotine-like compounds are
 available as antiparasitic drugs.
4. Pharmacokinetics
a. Absorption. Nicotine and nicoline-like compounds are well absorbed by all
routes, including the dermal route.
b. Metabolism. They are metabolized by the liver via phase I and Il metabolism.
C.
 compound. The plasma t?, of levamisole is 4-6 hours and of pyrantel tartrate is 
~6 hours.
5. Adverse effects
a. Convulsions may occur with high doses,
b. Vomiting and muscle fasciculation may occur.
c. Depolarizing neuromuscular blockade paralyzes skeletal muscle, parlicularly
respiralory muscle, which can be falal.
B
Hexamethonium, trimethaphan, and mecamylamine are antagonists of post-ganglionic
nicotinic receptors. These drugs have becn used as pharmacological tools to character-
ize nicotinic receptors in the ganglia, but have not been used in velerinary medicine.
The primary disadvantage to their use is that they are not selective (i.e., they block
transmission in both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia).
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING DRUGS
A.
Mechanism of action. These drugs act on nicotinic rcceptors at neuromuscular junc-
tion (Nm receptors) via two different mechanisms to relax skeletal muscle.
1. Depolarizing drugs [c.g., succinyicholine (SuCh, Ancctine?)]. SuCh acts like
ACh to depolarizc the ncurormuscular junction, but it is hydrolyzcd by AChE less
rapidly. Solutions of SuCh should always be kept cold in the field, since it under-
goes sponlaneous hydrolysis.
a. Phase I. The nonselective cation channel associated with the Nm receptor is
opened and the receptor is depolarized. Persistent binding of succinylcholine
to thc Nm receptor transforms the receptor so that it is incapable of transmit-
ting further inpulscs. This phasc is associatcd with muscle fasciculation.
[rugs Affecting  Peripheral  Nervous Svstem
53
TABLE 2-4. Duration of Action of Competitive Nm Blockers When Adiministered IV
Tuborcurarine
 Pancuronium
Atracurium
Vecuronium
Dosc
Duration
Dose
Duration
Dosc
Duration
Dose
Duration
Animal
(mg/kg)
(min)
(mg/kg)
(min)
(mg/kg)
(min)
(mg/kg)
(min)
Horse
0.3
60)
0.06
40
0.15
30
0.1
30
Cow
00.06
30
0.04
40
一
Sheep
0.04
30
0.025
45
0.5
30
0.04
15
Pig
0.4
30
0.1
30
Dog
0.06
30
0.5
40
0.1
25
Cat
0.5
40)
0.1
25
Modified frorn Table 2-4. NVMs Plharmeacofogy
 b. Phase Il. Over tine, the nonseleclive calion channel closes and repolarizalion 
occurs, rendering the neuromuscular junction resistant to depolarization. Flac-
cid paralysis cnsucs.
2. Competitive blocking drugs (e.g., tubocurarine, pancuronium, atracurium,
vecuronium)—nondepolarizing drugs. These drugs occupy the Nm receptor but
do not activate it. By reducing the number of Nm receptors available for ACh, the
 cnd-platc potential is reduced, the threshold required to cxcite the muscle is not
reached, and the muscle relaxes.
B.
Pharmacokinetics
1. Depolarizing drugs
a. Following IV or IM administration (IV is prcferrcd), SuCh has a rapid onset of
aclion. Since there is a species difference in the level of pseudocholinesterase,
the duration of action varies according to species and dosages. Ruminants have
lower levels of this enzyme than other species, that is, horses. For unknown
reasons, dogs may show prolongcd paralysis aftcr SuCh administration.
b. SuCh is hydrolyzed by pseudocholineslerase of liver and plasma. Animals
that have been exposed to an organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitor (e.g..
may experience a prolonged duration of action caused by a reduced rate of
hydrolysis.
2. Competitive blocking drugs. Each drug has a specific duration of action that
varics according to specics following iV administration (Table 2-4).
excreted unchanged in the urine and 50% in the bile. Caution should be taken
not to administer tubocurarine to animals with liver or kidney disease.
b. Pancuronium is metabolized by the liver, but the kidney is the major route for
climination.
c. Atracurium has a unique mechanism for metabolism. It undergoes spontaneous
degradation in the plasma called Hoffman elimination and ester hydrolysis,
which do not involve the liver or kidneys. Thus, in patients with renal or liver
discase, atracurium may be the drug of choice for relaxing skelctal muscle.
d. Vecuronium is eliminated by (the kidney (~15%) and by metabolism and bil-
iary excretion.
Therapeutic uses. Neuromuscular blockers are used to
1. Promote and enhance skeletal muscle relaxation during surgery. This permits less
general anesthetic to be used and enhances safety of the surgery.
2. Facilitates endotracheal intubation.
54|Chapter 2Vl 1)
D. Adverse effects
1. General aspects
animals still feel pain.
b. Prolonged apnea may occur.
c. These drugs should not be used unless facilities are available for administering
artificial respiration.
2. Succinylcholine
 a. Succinylcholine elicits uncoordinated muscle contraction that may last for ~30
seconds and be painful. ACh receptors in autonomic ganglia and muscarinic
receptors may be stimulated by SuCh. This may result in bradycardia and in-
crcases in bronchiolar and salivary sccretion.
b. SuCh may serve as a trigger for malignant hyperthemia in the pig and horse.
3. Tubocurarine may reduce blood pressure by causing histamine release and by
blocking transmission in autonomic ganglia. Dogs and cats are prone to histamine
relcase by tubocurarine, which precludes its use in these specics. Histarmine re-
lease may also cause bronchospasm, bronchial secretion, and salivation.
4. Pancuronium causes a small increase in heart rate.
 5. Atracurium does induce histarmine release but the extent of relcasc is lcss than
that of tubocurarine.
6. Vecuronium does not have other adverse effects.
E. Factors influencing the action of neuromuscular blocking drugs
1. Genetic or ChE inhibitor-induced decreases in plasma. ChE activity will prolong
the duration of action of SuCh.
2. Hepatic disease may prolong the duration of action of SuCh, since the liver syn-
thesizes plasma ChE.
3. Aminoglycoside antibiotics have neuromuscular blocking activities since they in-
hibit ACh release.
4. Inhalant anesthetics, for example, isoflurane, enhance nondepolarizing neuromus-
cular blockade since they stabilize the postjunctional mermbrane,
5. Concomitant administralion of SuCh with inhalation anesthetics may induce in-
creased incidences of bradycardia, arrhythmias, sinus arrest, and apnea (owing to
ganglionic. blockade).
F. Reversal of neuromuscular blockade
1. Competitive neuromuscular blockers can be antagonized by ChE inhibitors such
 as edrophonium and neostigmine.
ery occurs.
SUGGESTED READING
Adams HR. 20o1. "lntroduction to neurohumoral transmission and the autonomic nervous system." In
Veterinary Pharmacofogy and Therapeutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8th ed., pp. 69-90. Ames, IA: lowa
State University Press.
Adams HR. 2001. "Neuromuscular blocking agents." In Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics.
Edited by Adams HR. 8th ed., pp. 137 152. Ames, IA: lowa State University Press.
Atri A, Chang MS, Strichat> GR. 2006. "Cholinergic pharmacology." In Principles of Pharmacofogy: The
Pathophysiofogic Basis of IDrug Therapy. Edited by Colan IDE, Tashjian AH, Jr, Armstrong E]. Arm-
slrong AW. 2nd ed., pp. 109-128. Ballimore, MD: Lippincoll Willianis & Wilkins.
http://www.drugs.com
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
tem." In Goodiman & Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeufics. Edited by Brunton LL,
Lazo JS, Parker KL. 11th ed., Pp. 237-295. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Drugs Affecting Peripheral Nervous System55
StUdy QueStIOnS
DIRECTIONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by complelion of the statement. Selecl the one leltered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. α1-Receptors are associated with which
6. Nicotinic receptor sites are found in all of
one of the following effecis?
the following locations, except
(A)  Cardioacceleralion
(A) parasympathetic ganglia.
(B)Vasodilation
(B) sympathetic. ganglia.
(C)Pupillary dilation
(C)skeletal muscle.
(D）Bronchodilation
(D) bronchial smooth muscle,
(E)  Pupillary conslriction
7. When placcd in the cye, cchothiophate
2. What is the most likely cause of death in
can cause all of the following, except
organophosphate poisoning?
(A) mydriasis.
(A) CI bleeding
(B) ciliary spasm.
(B) Hyperlension
{C)
 reversal of cycloplegia.
(C)  Respiratory failure
(D) reduction in intraocular pressure.
(D) Congestive heart failure
(E)  Cardiac arrhythmia
8. Which of the following autonomic drugs
would be most likely to increase myometrial
3. Which of the following adrenergic agonists 
contractility?
at clinical doses produces dilation of vessels
(A)Atropine
in muscle, constriclion of cutaneous vessels,
(B)Phenoxybenzamine
and positive inotropic and chronotropic ef-
(C)
 Ractopamine
fects on the heart?
(D) Xylazine
(A)Phenylpropanolamine
(B)Isoproterenol
9. Which of the following is the sign of
(C) Isoxsuprine
bethanechol stimulation of muscarinic re-
(D)Epinephrine
ceptors?
(E)Dobutamine
(A) Skelctal muscle (witching
(B)Urination
4. Which of the following drugs produccs
(C) Constipation
pupillary dilation (mydriasis) without causing
(D)Dry mucous membranes
cycloplegia?
(A) Scopolamine
10. Which of the following muscarinic. recep-
(B)Pilocarpine
tor subtype mediates the bethanechol-induced
(C)Isoproterenol
decrease in hearl rate and contractility?
(D)Tropicamide
(E)Phenylephrine
(A) M1
(B)M2
(C) M3
5. Which of the following bronchodilators
(D) M4
is considered the safest for use in an animal
(E)M5
with cardiac disease?
(A) Isoproterenol
11. Which of the following adrenergic
(B)Terbutaline
receptors subtype mediates the
(C) Ephedrine
phenylpropanolamine-induced contraction
(D) Epinephrine
of the trigone and sphincter muscle of the 
56
Chapter 2
urinary bladder? This cffect is useful to trcat
(A) Atracurium
urinary incontinence.
(B) Pancuronium
(C) Succinylcholine
(A) α1
(D) Tubocurarine
(B)α2
(E)Vecuronium
(C) β1
(D)β2
16. Which of the following β2-adrenergic ag-
(E)β3
onists can be used legally as a repartitioning
 agent in cattle and swine and use of it does
12. Metoprolol is used in a cat with hyper-
 not require preslaughter withdrawal?
thyroidism showing cardiac arrhythmia. The
use of metoprolol in this cat will most likely
(A) Albuterol
cause
(B) Clenbuterol
(C) Ractopamine
(A)  hypcrsalivation.
(D) Terbutaline
(B) mydriasis.
(C)  bronchoconstriction.
17. Which of the following β-blockcrs has
(D) hyperglycemia.
the shortest duration of action of 20 minutes?
(E) decreased renin secretion.
Such a drug can be used to test if the treat-
13. Which of the following would be most
ment is beneficial to animals.
likely to increase airway resistance in a dog
(A) Atenolol
with pulmonary obstruction?
(B)Esmolol
(C) Metoprolol
(A) Albuterol
(D) Propranolol
(B) Atenolol
(E) Sotalol
(C) Isoproterenol
(D) Phenoxybenzamine
18. Which of the following is not a pharma-
(E)Propranolol
cological cffcct of yohimbine?
14. In patients with liver or renal disease,
(A) CNS excitation.
which of the following neuromuscular block-
(B) Hyperglycemia.
ers would be the choice for these patients?
(C) Hypertension.
(D) Increased Gl motility.
(A)Atracurium
(E) Tachycardia.
(B)Pancuronium
(C) Succinylcholine
19. Which receptor subtype mediates DA-
(D) Tubocurarine
induced vasodilatation in renal, mesenteric,
(E) Vecuronium
and coronary arteries?
15. Administration of which of the following
(A) D1
neuromuscular blockers will cause transient
(B) D2
and painful skeletal muscle contractions and
(C) D3
an increase in bronchial and salivary secre-
(D) D4
tions?
(E) D5
Irugs Aifecting Peripheral Nervous System
57
ANSWERS ANd EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is C.
5. The answer is B.
Sympathetic stimulation causes the α1-
Terbutaline would be the drug of choice
receptors in the iris to contract, causing
when it is necessary to induce bronchodi-
pupillary dilation (mydriasis). An increased
lation in an aniimal with heart disease. A
heart rate is associated with β,-receptors. Va-
drug with β,-agonistic activity is necessary
sodilation and bronchodilation are associated
 to produce bronchodilation. Although isopro-
with β2-receptors. Miosis (i.e., constriction of
terenol and epinephrine are β2-agonists, they
the pupils) is associated withi stimulation of
are also strong β-agonists and thus would
 muscarinic cholinergic receptors.
be expected to excite the heart. Ephiedrine
increases the release of norepinephrine from
2. The answer is C.
the sympathetic nerve terminal, and also
Organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitors
activates both α- and β-adrenergic receptors.
prcvent the hydrolysis of acetylcholinc (ACh).
Although terbutaline is the drug of choice in
ACh accumulates at cholinergic synapses.
this situation, caution is warranted bccause
All autonomically innervated tissues imay be
at high doses, terbutaline may stimulate β-
affcctcd by thc cxccss ACh; onc of the impor-
receptors as well.
tant effects is to evoke bronchoconstriction
and bronchial secretion. In addition, excess
6. The answer is D.
ACh at the skeletal muscle neuroeffector
Bronchial smooth muscle contains imus-
junction ultimately leads to paralysis of
carinic receptors, not nicotinic receptors.
the respiratory muscles, and inhibition
Both the parasympathetic and sympathetic
of the respiratory center in the medulla.
ganglia contain Nn-nicotinic cholinergic
The primary cause of death is respiratory
receptors, and the skeletal neuromuscular
failure.
junction contains Nm-nicotinic cholinergic
receptors.
3. The answer is D.
Activation of β-receptors, α-receptors,
7. The answer is A.
and β,-receptors produces vasodilation in
Echothiophate, a cholinesterase inhibitor
muscle, constriction of skin vasculature,
that increases the buildup of acetylcholine
and positive inotropic and chronotropic
(ACh) causes miosis, ciliary spasm, reversal of
effects on the heart, respectively. The
cycloplegia, and reduced intraocular pressure.
only drug listed that activates α1-, β1-,
Mydriasis can be induced by blocking
and β2-receptors at clinical doses is
M:-muscarinic reccptors in the sphinctcr
epinephrine. Phenylpropanolamine activates
smooth muscles of the iris or by contracting
predominantly α,-rcccptors. Isoproterenol
the radial muscles of the iris via αi-receptors.
activates both β- and β,-receptors but
not α1-receptors. Isoxsuprine is a selective
8. The answer is D.
β2-agonist, whereas dobutamine is a selective
Myometrial contractility is increased by
β1-agonist.
activation of α-, α2-, and Ms-receptors and
is decreased by activation of β2-receptors.
4. The answer is E.
Xylazine is an α2-agonist, and it can facilitate
Phenylephrine, an α-agonist, constricts
parturition and cause abortion. Atropine is a
the radial muscles of the iris to induce
imuscarinic receptor antagonist, ractopamine
mydriasis. Scopolamine and tropicamide are
is a β2-agonist, and phenoxybenzamine is an
muscarinic antagonists that produce mydriasis
α-blocker. These latter drugs evoke uterine
and cycloplegia. Pilocarpine is a muscarinic
relaxation.
agonist that produces miosis when placed in
the eye. Activation of β-receptors in the eye,
9. The answer is B.
such as that caused by isoproterenol, does
Stimulation of My-muscarinic. receptors
not change pupil size.
causes urination by increasing contractions
58Chapler 2
of the urinary bladder. Bethanechol does
the participation of the liver and kidneys.
not stimulate nicotinic receptors, and thus
Atracurium is the choice for the patients with
it does not cause skeletal muscle twitching.
liver or renal disease. Other neuromuscular
Constipation and dry mucous membranes are
blockers required the participation of liver
due to antagonism of M;-receptors.
 and/or kidney to eliminate the drug.
10. The answer is B.
15. The answer is C.
M2-receptors mediate the decrease in
Succinylcholine (SuCh) is a depolariz-
all aspects of cardiac activities and this effect
ing neuromuscular blocking agent, which
is due to inhibition of norepinephrine release
causes transient but strong muscle contrac-
from the sympathetic nerve endings of the
tions before paralyzing them, which can
heart. M-receptors are found in these nerve
be painful. SuCh can stimulate muscarinic
endings and they are inhibitory receptors,
receptors to increase bronchial and salivary
coupling to Gi/o. Activation of M-receptors
secretions.
inhibits norepenephrine release and thus
decreases cardiac activities.
16. The answer is C.
Ractopamine is the only FDA-approved
11. The answer is A.
repartitioning agent used in cattle and swine.
The α,-receptors are found in sphincter
The pKa of ractopamine is 9.4, thus it is
muscles (except iris sphincter muscle).
 mostly in ionized form when present in
Activation of α1-receptors evokes contractions
the blood or tissues at the physiological
of the trigone and sphincter muscle of the
pH of 7.4. As a result, the Gl absorption of
urinary bladder, and thus αi-agonists can be
ractopamine is low, and the tissue concentra-
used to control urinary incontinence.
tions of the drug are also low following oral
administration. Thus, no preslaughter with-
12. The answer is E.
drawal period is needed after ractopamine
β, -Receptors mediate renin secretion,
administration.
and thus blockade of these receptors will
decrease the secretion. Hypersalivation,
17. The answer is B.
mydriasis, bronchoconstriction, and hyper-
Esmolol is a β,-blocker and has a plasma fyz
glycemia cannot be induced by β,-blockade.
of ~10 minutes. The short duration of action
of esmolol is attributable to rapid enzymatic
13. The answer is E.
hydrolysis by red blood cell esterases. Other
Since β,-receptors mediate bronchodilation,
β,-blockers have longer ty, and thus do not
the blockade of these receptors will increase
airway resistance, which is detrimental to
have the advantages of esmolol.
the animals with pulmonary obstruction.
Propranolol can block β-receptors, and
18. The answer is B.
thus should not be used in these animals.
Yohimbine is an α2-antagonist that ex-
Albuterol and isoproterenol can activate
erts many effects opposite to the ones
β,-receptors to induce bronchodilation.
exerted by α-agonists. α2-Agonists induce
CNS depression, long-lasting hypotension,
Atenolol is a selective β, -blocker and should
not block β2-receptors at the clinical doses.
hyperglycemia, decreased Gl motility, and 
 Phenoxybenzamine is an α-blocker, and it
bradycardia. Yohimbine does not cause
does not cause bronchoconstriction.
hyperglycemia.
14. The answer is A.
19. The answer is A.
Atracurium is spontaneously degraded
 Dopamine activates D-receptors in re-
in the plasma by a process called Hoffman
nal, mesenteric, and coronary arteries to
elimination and ester hydrolysis. Thus, the
induce vasodilatation. D-receptors are
degradation of atracurium does not require
coupled to Gs, just like β-receptors.
1
ter3
Autacoids and Their Pharmacological Modulators
Anumantha G. Kanthasamy and Walter H. Hsu
INTRODUCTION
Definitions
1. Autacoids are chemical mediators that are synthesized and function in a localized
mally do not function as the classical blood-borne hormones. Typically, autacoids
are short-lived and rapidly degraded.
2. Autacoid modulators interfere with the synthesis. inhibit the release or the receptors
upon which they act.
B.Physiologic function
1. Autacoids modulate blood flow in specific tissues.
2. Some autacoids modulate secretory processes, for example, histamine on gastric
acid formation.
3.
Autacoids modulate smootli muscle function.
and certain types of drug reactions (Anaphylaxis).
C.
Major classes. The autacoids to be discussed in this chapter can be clivided into three
categories based on their chemical structure. Not all known autacoids will be dis-
cussed and the reader should consult a standard pharmacology text for information
On vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, substance P. and the cytokines.
1. Biogenic amines: Histamine, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine)
2. Polypeptides: Bradykinin, angiotensin
3. Lipid-derived autacoids
a. Eicosanoids. Prostaglandins, leukotriencs, thromhoxanc
b. Platelet activating factor
BIOGENIC AMINES
A.
Histamine
1. Biosynthesis. IDietary histidine is decarboxylated by I-histidine decarboxylase to
form histamine (Figure 3-1).
 2. Metabolism. Two pathways are involved in the degraclation of histamine. The
major degradation pathway (>50% histamine degradation! involves conver-
sion of histamine to an inactive metabolite 1-methyllhistamine by imidazole-N-
dowr of histamine by diarmine oxidase (histaminase) to form imidazoleacetic acid.
3. Distribution and storage sites. Histamine is widely distributed in tissues and its 
conccntration and rale of synthesis varies greatly irom tissuc to tissue.
a. The primary tissue sites sloring histamine arc the lungs, skin, mucosal layer of
thte: stomach and basophils.
(1) Food and vagal stimulation can release histamine from the stomach mucosal
enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells. The released histamine then initiates gastric
acid secretion (see Chapter 11, Figure 11-2).
59
60
Clhapter3llA
HH
-COOH
-C-NH
H
L-Histidine
HN
HH
HN
decarboxylase
HN
L-Histidine
Histamine
H
0=0-
NH
H
H
HN
HC-
H
Imidazoleacetaldehyde
N-Methylhistamine
H
-OH
CH2-COOH
HN
HC
N
H
Imidazoleaceticacid
N-Methylimidazoleaceticacid
FIGURE 3-1. Synthesis and catabolism of histamine. Note: The conversion of imidazole acetaldehyde
to imidazoleacetic acid is catalyzed by acetaldehyde dehydrogenase.
(2) Allergic responses in the skin and lungs are due in part lo histamine release
from mast cells.
b. Mast cells are the primary cells that store histamine where it exists in a complex
with heparin sulfate and chondroitin sulfate E in storage granules. The rate of
histamine synthesis and turnover in mast cells is low.
Histamine is also found in CNS where it may act as a neurotransmitter.
C.
d. Many venoms and insect stings contain histaminc, as well as other hiologically
active substances.
e. Histamine is found in the digesta where it is formed in large part by bacterial
action. This histamine normally does not reach the systemic circulation since it
is metabolized by enzymes in the gut wall and liver.
4.Release
a. Immune release. When sensitized mast cells or basophils are coupled to IgE
antibodies and then exposed to the proper antigen; the mast cell degranulates,
thereby releasing histamine and other autacoids. This is also referred to type I
IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction.
b.
Drug-induced release. Drugs, usually strong bases (morphine, polymyxin,
tubocurarine, codeine, lidocaine, penicillin), and/or their vehicles are capable
of releasing hislamine but this release does not involve degranulation or masl
cell injury. These drugs displace or compete with histamine for the binding sites
with heparin.
c. Plant and animal stings are capable of releasing histamine, which is an impor-
tant component of the physiologic reaction (erythema, pain, itch) to these stings.
d. Physical injury such as heat, cold, or trauma can disrupt the mast cells thereby
relcasing hislaminc.
Autacoids aned Their Plhearinucological Modulators 
61
TABLE 3-1. Hlistamine Pharmacology—An (Overview
H
H2
Hs
Ha
Agonists
1
Histamine (no clinical use)
Betazole
(A)-α-CH-Histamine
Clobenpropit
Dimapnt
Responses
Gl, bronchial contraction [ I)
Gastric secretions (I)
Histamine, norepinephrine.
Masl cell chemotaxis and
Smallarteries[↓]
Smallarteries(-]
Myocardlal contracllon (t )
serotonin and acetylcholine
leukotriene Ba production (1)
Largearteries（t)
release (↓)
Myocardial contraction ( t}
Coronary blood flow (t)
Heartrate(↑]
Coronarybloodflow（)
Vascular permeability ( ^)
Antlhislamine
+
Pyrllamlne
Cimetidine
Clobenpropll
JNJ7777120 
Tripelennamine
Aanitidine
4
Pramethazine
Famotldine
Chlorpheniramine 
I
+
4
Mecllzlne
Diphenhydramine
4
Dimenhydrinate
+
Ciproheptadin
5. Receptor pharmacology (see Table 3-1 for overview of histamine receptor pharma-
cology).
Four classes of receptors (H, H2, H3, and H4) mediate the action of histamine.
a.
H1-receptors are coupled to Gq protein-phospholipase C and mediate the fol-
lowing effects:
(1) Contraction of smooth muscle and neuronal actions are due to increases in
[Ca²+]; and activation of protein kinase C (see Chapter 1 for detailed infor-
mation).
(2) Relaxation of vascular smooth muscle involves Ca²+-induced formalion of
nitric oxide (NO).
(3) H; -receptors mediate contraction of bronchiolar and intestinal smooth mus-
cle, vasodilation of small arteries and veins, increased capillary permeability
and pruritus. There are considerable species variations in their sensitivity
of bronchial smooth muscle to contraction by histamine. The guinea pig
bronchi are the most sensitive but the bronchi of rabbit, dog, goat, calf,
pig. horse, and human also contract. In contrast, histamine relaxes respira-
(ory smooth muscle in cats (via H and Hz) and sheep (via Hz). The mecha-
nisms by which H, -receptors mediate brochodilation in cats are not known.
H2-receptors mediate bronchodilation via an increase in cAMP levels (see
below). Hi -agonists and H, -antihistamines are listed in Table 3-1.
b. Hz-receptors are coupled to Gs protein-adenylyl cyclase
Stimulation of G,-coupled Hz receptors activale adenylyl cyclase and increase
tissue cAMP levels. This is the mechanism by which vascular smooth muscle
relaxes, and gastric. acid secretion is stimulated.
H2-receptor primarily mediates gastric acid secretion and vasodilatation.
(1) Agonists include 4-methylhistamine and dimaprit.
(2) H2-Antihislaminec include: cimetidine, ranitidine, famolidine, and nizatidine,
Recent evidence suggests, just like H-antihislamines, these drugs are inverse 
agonists. (Table 3-1).
C. H3-receptors are coupled to Giyo protein. Inhibition of the release of histamine
and other neurotransmitters involves inhibition of cAMP synthesis, opening of
K- channels to increase K+ efflux, and closure of Ca2+ channels to block Ca2+
entry into the nerve.
62Chapter 3 II A
H3-receptors are located presynaptically on neurons and inhibit neurotransmitter
release. There are no drugs used in veterinary medicine that specifically activate
or block these receptors.
d. H4-receptors are coupled to Gi/o protein and activate phospholipase C-β by
Gβy (see Chapter 1 for detailed information). These receptors are selectively
cxpressed in mast cells, basophils, and cosinophils. Activation of H4-rcccptors
mediatcs histamine-induccd mast cell chemotaxis and leukotricne B4 production
events of inflammation, edema, and thermal hyperalgesia.
H4-receptor antagonists are being developed as anti-inflammatory drugs that
involve mast cells and eosinophils.
6. Physiologic and pathologic roles
a. Gastric acid secretion. Histamine is the most important regulator of gastric acid
secretion and it stimulates secretion via H2 receptors (see below under pharma-
cological effects).
 b. Allergic reactions and anaphylactic shock. The binding of antigenic. substances
to IgE molecules on mast cells causes the release of histamine. Other biolog-
ically active substances such as prostaglandin D2 and lcukotrincs (LTC4 and
LTD4) are also relcascd.
c. Inflammation. Histamine may be involved in the vasodilation observed in the
inflammatory process.
d. Neurotransmission. Histamine is a neurotransmitter in various brain areas and is
involved in activating sensory nerves resulting in pain and itch sensations.
e.
 Microcirculation. Histamine relaxes arterioles and increases capillary perme-
ability.
7. Pharmacologic effects (summarized in Table 3-1).
a. Cardiovascular system
(1) Histamine dilates arterioles, capillarics, and venules, incrcascs cardiac con-
tractility and heart rate by activating both H1- and Hy-rcccptors. Thc car-
diovascular cffects are complex. There is a decrcase in periphcral resistance
(vasodilatation), resulting in hypotension. The stimulation of cardiac activ-
ity involves a direct action and reflex activation of the sympathetic nervous
system, which is activated by the low blood pressure.
(2) There is an increase in capillary permeability brought about by contracting
the endothelial cells, which exposes the basement membrane. Fluid and
protein pass across the baseiment meimbrane to produce edema.
b. Respiratory system. Respiratory smooth muscle is contracted in rmost species via
H,-rcceptors (scc Il A 5 a). There is also stimulation of glandular secretion and
prostaglandin formation. Asthmatics arc generally more sensitive to histainine
than normal animals.
c.
Glandular tissue. Histamine can stimulate glandular tissues to increase secre-
tion. A most important action of histamine is its ability to increase gastric acid
and pepsin secretion from the gastric mucosa via H2-receptors (see Chapter 11,
Figure 11-2).
(1) Regulation of gastric acid production is quite complex. Acid secretion by
parietal cells is regulated by histamine, acetylcholine (ACh), gastrin, and
prostaglandin Ez (PGE2).
(2) Sight and smell of food activate thc vagus via the CNS to relcase ACh on
parietal cells (M3-muscarinic receptor) and on cnterochromaffin-likc (ECL)
paracrine cells (M -muscarinic receptor).
(3) The presence of food and an increase in antral pl initiate the release of
gastrin. Gastrin acts on CCK receptors of the parietal and ECL cells. His-
tamine is released from ECl cells that are close by, and activate parietal
H2-receptors.
(4) ACh has both a direct and indirect action on gastric acid production. Activa
tion of M,-rcceptors dircctly activatcs the parietal cell, whercas activation of
thc M -rcceptor on the ECL cells relcases histamine which in turn activates
H,-receptors on the parictal cell.
Autacoids and Their Pharmacological Modulators」63
(5) Gastrin has both a direct and indirect action. Gastrin dircctly activates
CCK-receptors on parietal cells to increase gastric acid secretion and in-
dircctly incrcascs gastric. acid secretion by activating the release of histamine
from ECL cells, which again in turn activates Hy-receptors on the parielal
cells. Thus, histamine release is a major factor in the stimulation of acid
production by both ACh and gastrin.
(6) Activation of Hz-rcccptors cnhances thc gastric acid sccrction by ACh and
gastrin on parietal cells. Upon H-receptor slimulation, intracellular cAMP
is increased. Activation of PKA by cAMP translocates H-, K--ATPase in
tuberovesicles to canalicular membrane, which subsequently releases H!
into the lumen. Upon stimulation of M3-rcccptors and gastrin (CCKy) rc-
ceptors, calmodulin kinase is activaled to translocale the H+, K+-ATPase
to canalicular membrane as well. Chloride is released into lumen by K+
and Cl- carrier, evoking next increase in HCl level in the lumen (see
Figurc 11-2).
(7) H-antihistamines inhibit not only HCl secretion by histamine but secre-
tion stimulated by gastrin, ACh (vagus), and food. This explains why H2-
antihistamines are effective therapy for peptic. ulcers. Proton pump inhibitors
(e.g., omeprazole) block the H+, K+-ATPase in canalicular membrane. PGE2
act as a negative regulator of gastric acid secretion as PGE2 activates Gi/o-
coupled EPs, rcccptors on parictal cells.
(8)  Histamine can increase the release of calecholamines from the adrenal
medulla and stimulate salivary secretion
d. Intradermal tissue. Intradermal injection of histamine produces a triple response
(of Lewis). Inscct and plant stings mimic many of thesc responses.
(1) A reddening al the site of injection is due to dilation of the small arterioles.
(2) Dilation of arterioles extends beyond injection site (Flare). The flare involves
an axon reflex since cutting the cholinergic nerves abolishes the reflex.
(3) Swelling (wheal) occurs at the injection site due to scparation of the cn-
dothelial cells and edema caused by the increased capillary permeability,
which is due to H-receptor-mediated contraction of endothelial cells.
(4)  The intradermal injection of histamine causes pain and itching by stimula-
tion of H,-receptors on sensory nerve cndings.
 8. Therapeutic uses of histamine agonists
a. Histamine phosphate can be used for diagnostic purposes for testing of gastric
 acid secretion and pheochromocytoma. However, its profound side effects lirmit
its use.
b. Betazole is an analog of histamine, which is an H-receptor agonist. Betazole
has a 10-fold selectivity for stimulation of gastric acid production over vasodila-
tion. Pcntagastrin is also uscd for this purpose.
B.
 Antihistamines. Therapeutically useful antihistamine drugs are H,-antihistamines and
H-antihistamines. At prcsent there arc no clinically uscful H3 or H4-antihistamines.
1. H-antihistamines were the first type of antihistaminic drugs discovered and are
somelimes referred to as the classical antihistaminics. See Table 3-1 for examples of
drugs in this class.
a. Mechanism of action. Traditionally, it was thought that H1-antihistamines act as
competitive antagonists of histarminc reccptors. However, rccently it has been
demonstrated that most, if not all, of H-antihistamines acl as inverse agonists 
rather than the receptor antagonists. (See Chapter 1 for detailed information on
inverse agonists.)
b. Classification of H,-antihistamines. Histanine can be broadly classificd into two
groups based on usage: (1) first-generation H-antihistamines and (2) second-
generation H1-antihistamines.
Most frequently used first-generation H, -antihislamines are diphenhydramine,
dimenhydrinate, hydroxyzyline, chlorpheniramine, meclizine, promethazine,
and cyproheptadine. These drugs are unionized drugs at physiological pH and
64Chapter3 11 β
TABLE 3-2. H,-Receptor Antagonists
Elimination ty, (Humans)
Class
Side Effects
(hours)
First-generation H, antihistamines
Ethanolamines
 Diplenhydramine
+++,μ
3-9
 Dimenhydrinate
+++.μ
3-9
Ethylenediamines
Pyrilamine
++
？
Tripelennamine
+十
Alkylamines
Chlorpheniramine
+
20
Piperazines
Hydroxyzine
+
20-25
Meclizine
6
Phcnothiazines
Promethazine
++十,
16-19
Trimeprazine
+++,μ
16-19
 Piperidines
Cyproheptadine
1
1-4
Second-generation Hi antihistamines
Piperazines
Cetirizine
8
 Piperidines
Loratatline
8
Fexofenadine
14
Low inciedence of secdalion: I. Sliglht secdalion: I1, Mocderale sedalion: | | I. Strong sedation; u,
Antimuscarinic.
easily cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Therefore, they produce CNS side
effects, in particular, sedation.
Commonly used second-generation drugs are loratadine (Claritin), cetirizine
(Zyrtec?), and fexofenadine (Allegra). This class of drugs is ionized at physio-
logical pH and is difficult to cross BBB. See Table 3-2 for chemical classification
of H; -antihistamines (Table 3-2).
C. Pharmacologic effects of H1 -antihistamines
(1) Relaxation of contracted bronchiolar smoolh muscle.
(2)  Relaxation of contracted intestinal snooth muscle.
(3) Inhibition of histamine-induced vasodilation and increased capillary perme-
ability and thereby blocking formation of edema and wheals.
(4) Inhibition of itch sensation by prevention of stimulation of sensory nerves.
Many H1-antihistamines have a potent local anesthetic action that may con-
tribute to their inhibition of itching and pain.
Note: H,-antihistamines alone are not effective for treatment of systemic
anaphylaxis because large amount of other autacoids are released during
anaphylaxis.
d. Other pharmacologic effects of H-antihistamines (Table 3-2)
(1) Sedation is a common effect of first-generation H,-anlihistamines but se-
dation does not correlate with their potency for inhibiting H,-receptors.
Sedation may be a desirable/undesirable effect and can be expected to be
additive to other CNs depressants.
(2) Antimuscarinic effects are prominent for some H-antihislamines, for exam-
ple, diphenhydramine and promethazine, which decrease secretions and
relax snooth muscles.
(3) Antimotion sickness (antiemetic) effects. This effect is due to the inhibi-
tion of histaminergic signals from the vestibular nucleus to the vomiting
Autacoids and Their Pharmacological Modulators65
center in the medulla. All H-antihistamine have this effecl, but some of
them (diphenhydramine, dimenhydrinale, and meclizine) have more polent
 antimotion sickness effect than others in the group.
e. Therapeutic uses. H,-antihistamines are administered orally, parenterally, or topi
cally for the following conditions.
(1) Treatment of patients with allergic conditions and to reduce or
ameliorate the effects due to histamine. Conditions benefited from
H-antihistamines include:
(a)  Urticaria and pruritus
(b)  Allergic reactions to drugs
(c) Anaphylaxis
(2) Prevention of motion sickness. Diphenhydramine, dimenhydrinate, and
meclizine are more effective in preventing motion sickness than other
H,-antihistamines.
(3) Sedation induction. Promethazine and diphenhydramine are the most potent
for inducing sedation.
f. Pharmacokinetics
(1) The pharmacokinetics of vast majorily of H,-antihistamines have not
been studied in domestic animals. Most information is derived from
humans.
(2) All H1-antihistamines are effectively absorbed following oral administration
and Imax = 1-3 hours.
(3) All H,-anithistamines that have been studied for pharmacokinetics are well
distributed and are bound by plasma proteins (≥60%).
(4) All H;-antihistamines are metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes, and
these metabolites further undergo conjugation.
(5) The first-generation antihistamines are excreted primarily by the kicdneys as
metabolites
(6) The second-generation antihistamines that cause least or no sedation are
excreted more into feces when compared with the first-generation drugs:
cetirizine (70% in urine, 30% in feces); loratadine (40% in urine, 40% in
feces as metabolites); fexofenadine (11% in urine, 80% in feces).
(7) Elimination t /.: See Table 3-2 for information in humans. The ty, information
for animals is mostly not available.
g. Adverse effects (see also Table 3-2)
(1) CNS depression (lethargy, somnolence, ataxia) are the most common but
they may diminish with lime. The periormance of working dogs may be
adversely affected.
(2) Antimuscarinic effects (dry mouth, urinary retention) occur with many H1-
 antihistaqmines. They should be used with caution in patients with angle
closure glaucoma.
(3) In high doses CNS stimulation is possible, for example, pyrilamine in the
horse.
(4) Some individuals could develop allergy to the use of H -antihsitamines.
(5) Drug tolerance. The decrease in efficacy and sedation (also called subsen-
sitivily) can develop during the use of H;-antihistamines for days or weeks.
The mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are not understood.
2. H2-antihistamines. These drugs are inhibitors of gastric acid secretion. They have
litle action on H-receplors.
a. Chemistry. H2-antihistamines contain imidazole ring with uncharged side chains
 and are smaller than H-antihistamines. See Figure 3-2 for an example of drugs
in this class.
b. Pharmacologic effects. H2-antihistamines compelitively inhibits histamine
(H-receptors) in parietal cell and thereby decreases gastric. acid production dur-
ing basal conditions and when stimulated by food, vagal activity, pentagastrin,
gastrin, or histamine. Hz-antihistamines have been reported to act as inverse ag-
onists, but further validation of this observation is needed.
C.
 Therapeutic uses. Hg-antihistamincs are administered orally to treal gaslric,
 abomasal and duodenal ulcers, drug-induced erosive gastritis, duodenal
66Chapter
11B
Cimetidine
CH
-C三N
H
Ranitidine
HC
CH3
HC
CH-NO2
FIGURE 3-2. Chemical structure of two H-antihistamines, cimetidine and ranitidine.
gastric reflux, and esophageal reflux. Cimetidine is least potent among the four
H-antihistamines. Lack of therapeutic eifect of cimetidine has been reported in
dogs.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) All iour drugs are well absorbed when adiministercd orally. Imax is 2-3 hours
for all four drugs. The bioavailability for cimetidine, ranitidine, nizatidinc,
and famotidine is 95%. 81%, >70%, and 40-50%, respectively.
(2) All four drugs are well distributed in the body, with 10-20% bound by
plasma proteins.
(3) Cimetidine, ranitidine, and famotidine are metabolized by cytochrome P450
enzymes. Only <10% of nizatidine is imetabolized by CYP450 enzymes.
(4) All iour drugs are cxcreted by the kidncys as the primary route. The majority
of cimetidine, ranitidine, and famotidine is excreted as metabolites and 30-
50% is excreted as the unchanged drug. A total of ≥60% of nizatidine is
cxcrcted as the unchanged drug.
(5) Plasma ty: of cimetidine, ranitidine, and famotidine are 2-3 hours for all
three drugs. The ty, for cimetidine and ranitidine in dogs are 1.3 hours and
2.2 hours, respectively. Plasma t, of nizatidine is 1-2 hours in humans; no
information is available for animals.
e. Adverse effects are uncommon when recommended dosages are used. Cimeti
dine possesses weak antiandrogenic activity and can cause gynecomastia and
decrcascd libido in humans. The antiandrogenic: cffect is, in parl, due to de-
Creased testosterone synthesis.
Ranitidine, iamotidine, and nizatidine seem to be very well tolerated. Rarely,
agranocytosis has been seen with the use of ranitidine and famotidine.
f. Drug interactions. Cimetidine can inhibit the hepatic cytochrome P450 en-
zymes. It may reduce the metabolism of other drugs, which undergo hep-
atic metabolism, thereby elevating and prolonging their concentration in the
plasma.
3. Inhibitors of histamine release. The one drug in this category. cromolyn sodium,
differs in mechanism of action frorn the H,- and Hz-antihistamines discussed above.
a. Cromolyn sodium inhibits the release of histamine and other autacoids from
masl cclls. l1 does not inhibit H- and H2-receptors, but opens chloride channel
to hypcrpolarize the cells.
(1) It is primarily used to treat pulmonary and nasal allergic reactions.
(2) It is not well absorbed from the gut and has no clinical use when given
orally.
(3) It is used in a prophylactic manner.
(4) It has been used in the horse where it is nebulized and delivered via a face
mask.
(5) The 4% eye drop is used to control allergic conjunctivitis.
epinephrine, phenylephrine, phenylpropanolmaine, and ephedrine (see Chapter 2)
antagonize the actions of histamine by antagonizing histamine's physiological
utacoidsandIheirPhar
67
H
H
NH.
H
FIGURE 3-3. Chemical struclure of serolonirn.
function. These drugs either directly or indirectly activate α- and β-adrenoceptors
to elevate blood pressure and relax the bronchi. This counters the blood pressure
lowering and bronchoconstrictive actions of histamine.
 Epinephrine is the preferred drug to treat the immediate effects of anaphylaxis.
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-1HT)
1. Biosynthesis. 5-HT is present in high concentration in platelets, the enterochro-
maffin cells and myenteric. plexus of the Gl tract and CNs. Its synthesis slarts from
dietary tryptophan, which is acted upon by the enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase to
form 5-hydroxytryptophan, which in turn is acted upon by the enzyme L-aromalic
acid decarhoxylase to form 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin; Figure 3-3).
2. Metabolism, distribution, and function
a. Serotonin is deaminaled by monoamine oxidase (MAO) to iorm 5-
hydroxyindoleacetaldehyde, which is then oxidized to 5-hydroxyindole acetic
acid.
b. Approximately 90% of the body's scrotonin is found in the Gl tract in
cnterochromaifin cells. It is involved in regulating motility.
c. Platelets actively transport serotonin and store it. This keeps the concentration of
free 5-HT low in the blood flow
d. Serotonin is synthesized and stored in the CNS where it acls as a
neurotransmitter.
e.
 Serotonin is also found in venoms and stings. Sensory nerve ends are stimulated
stings.
gcnic. amine. At the prcscnt time there are >14 reccplor subtypes. Some of thesc
have recently been discovered and their function is uncertain. The major categories
of serotonin receptors include: 5-HT,(Gi/o-coupled), 5-HT2(Gq-coupled), 5-HT3(a
ligand-gated ion channel), 5-HTq-7(Gs-coupled) with some categories having morc
than two receptor subtypes.
 4. Functions of serotonin. While none of the following proposed functions are known
for certain, the current cvidence suggcsts that serotonin is involved in regulating gut
motility, body temperature, sleep, aggression, pain, mood, and endocrine function.
5. Pharmacologic effects. Serotonin may produce vasoconstriction or vasodilata-
tion, which is dependent upon the vascular bed, 5-HT reccptor subtypes, and
the species. Many smooth muscles (bronchi, uterus, Gl) contract in response to
serotonin.
6. Therapeutic uses. Serotonin has no therapeutic use.
 Serotonin agonists in nature
D.
ergosine) occur in various combinations and are found in the fungi of the genus
Claviceps. Claviceps purpurea is the common mold that attacks the seed of rye.
oals, whcat, and barley. Another crgot, ergovaline is produrced by the cndophylic:
fungus Acremonium coenophialum and is the major toxicant associated with tall
fescue grass toxicosis.
a. Pharmacologic effects. Ergot alkaloids exhibit a complex pharmacology. They
have the ability to act on both adrenergic and serotonergic receptors either as
68Chapter 31 D
partial agonists or antagonists. They stimulate the smooth muscle of the gut,
uterus, bronchi, and blood vessels.
b. Therapeutic uses. Becausc of complicatcd pharmacologic effects, ergot alkaloids
with serotonin agonistic activity are in general not clinically useful. Ergonovine
is used in obstetrics to stop postpartum hemorrhage and induce uterine involu-
tion (sce Chapter 12 for more information).
with the fungus produces a syndrome referred to as ergotism. In the acute form,
the animal may exhibit nervousness or convulsions and in the chronic form,
gangrene (due lo severe vasoconstriction). When consumed in small amounts
over days or weeks animals may develop gangrene of the extremities (ear, tail
legs). Agalactia, snall litter size, decreased birth weight, decreased rate of gain
and abortion may occur.
(1) Fescue grass toxicity
This is prominent in the southeast quarter of the United States where ~35
million acres of tall fescuc grass arc infccted with cndophytic fungus (Ncoty-
phodium cocnophiafum). Loss of wcight, agalactia, rough hair coat, retaincd
placenta, and dystocia are common symptoms of fescue toxicosis. lt is esti-
mated that the cattle industry loses $7o0 million annually to this infection.
(2) Ergovaline is a major toxicant. It is a polent constriclor of bovine and ovine
uterine, umbilical, placental, and tail arteries. The vasoconstriction is medi-
ated by Cq-coupled 5-HT, receptors and can be blocked by ketanserin, a
5-HT, antagonist.
E.
 Serotonin-receptor modifying drugs. Some serotonin agonists/antagonists in veterinary
mcdicine arc listcd below:
1. Gl prokinetic agents: These drugs increase Gl motility by increasing ACh release
Irom the vagus nerve.
a. Cisapride
(1) Therapeutic uses. It is an agonist for Gs-coupled 5-HT4 receptor, and is used
for gastric/intestinal stasis, reflux esophagitis, and constipation/mcgacolon in
cals.
(2) Pharmacokinetics. Only information in humans is available: Cisapride is
rapidly absorbcd following oral administration with an absolute bioavailabil-
ily of 35-40%. The drug is highly bound to plasma proteins and is exlen-
sively distributed throughout the body. Its elimination ty, is 8-10 hours.
(3) Adverse effects. The prinmary adverse effccts are Gl in origin, including diar-
rhea and colic.
b. Metoclopramide (Reglan)
(1)  Therapeutic uses. It is a Gi/o-couplcd D-rcccptor antagonist/5-HT4 agonist,
and is used for treating vomiting disorders, reflux esophagitis, and gastric
stasis, or hypomotility.
(2) Pharmacokinetics. Metoclopramide is administered PO, SC, and IM.
(a) It is absorbcd well after oral administration. Bioavailability after IM
administralion is 74-96%. After oral dosing, Tmax is ≤2 hours
(b) It is well distributed in the body and enters the CNs. A total of 13-22%
of metoclopramide is bound by plasma protcins.
(c) It is primarily excreted in the urine in humans. The majority of the drug
is metabolized to glucuronidated or sulfated conjugate forms and then
excreted in the urine. Only ~20% of the drug is excreted unchanged in
the urine.
(d) The t7, of metoclopramide in the dog is ~90 minutes.
(3) Adverse effects
(a) In dogs, changes in mental state and behavior (restlessness and hyper-
activity to drowsiness/depression). Cats may exhibit signs of frenzied
behavior or disorientation. Both dogs and cats can develop constipation
while: taking this imedication.
Autaroids and Their Pharmarological Modulators 69
(b) In adult horses, IV metoclopramide administralion has caused alternaling
periods of sedation and cxcitement, behavioral changes, and abdominal
pain.
(c) Other side effects include nausea, diarrhea, transient hypertension, and
increased prolactin secretion,
2. Cyproheptadine (5-HT2 antagonisl and H;-antihistaminc)
a.Therapeutic uses. It is useful in cats as an appetite stimulant. It is useful in the
treatment of feline asthma or pruritus in cats. It also has H-antihistamine activ
ity, and thus is useful in managing hives. In horses, it is for treating photic head
shaking.
b. Pharmacokinetics. Orally administered cyproheptadine is well absorbed from
the gut and is metabolized and excreted in both feces and urine, with <20% of
the total dose is eliminated in feces, with 5.7% of the total dose remaining as
the unchanged parent compound. Over 40% of the dose is eliminated in urine,
predominantly as a quaternary ammonium glucuronide conjugate.
Adverse effects include sedation, anticholinergic activity, anorexia, and lethargy.
C.
Higher doses of cyproheptadine can produce polyphagia.
3. Ketanserin (G.,-coupled 5HT, receptor antagonist)
a. Therapeutic uses. The potential use of ketanserin is to treat ergovaline-induced
severe vasoconstriction. It also has significant α-adrenergic blocking activity and
thus reduces blood pressure. It can be used to reduce intraocular pressure in
glaucoma.
4. Other serotonin modifying drugs used are antidepressants (see Chapter 5 for infor
mation).
PHOSPHOLIPID-DERIVED MEDIATORS
A.
Eicosanoids
1. Chemistry and biosynthesis (Figure 3-4)
a. The eicosanoids include the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), and
leukotrienes (LT). They are derived from polyunsaturated acids and arachidonic
acid, a 20 carbon essential faltty acid with 4 double bonds (20:4) as the primary
substrate. The eicosanoids play key role in inflammatory, cardiovascular, and 
reproductive functions.
b. Arachidonic acid is released from membrane phospholipids primarily by phos
pholipase Az in response to physical, chemical, hormonal, and neurotransmit-
ter slimuli. Another source of arachidonic acid results from the action of phos-
pholipase C on membrane phosphoinositides to yield a diglyceride plus inositol
phosphate. The resulting diglyceride is acted upon by diglyceride lipase to yield
arachidonic acid.
C. Arachidonic acid can be melabolized by thrce pathways.
(1)  The cyclooxygenase pathway leads to prostaglandin, thromboxane, and
 prostacyclin production.
(2）
The 5-lipoxygenase pathway leads to the synthesis of leukotrienes.
(3) The 15-lipoxygenase pathway leads lo the synthesis of hydroperoxyeicosale-
traenoic acid (15-HPETE) and 15(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15-HETE)
as intermediates for many eicosanoids. The function of these eicosanoids is
still under investigation.
2. Nomenclature and structure
a. The Greek work eikosi, meaning "20," serves as the stem word for eicosanoid
Arachidonic acid is 5,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid.
b. The name prostaglandin is a misnomer. It was originally thought thal the origin
of the smooth muscle stimulating and blood pressure lowering substance in hu-
man seminal fluid was the prostate, hence the name prostaglandin for this sub-
stance. Many years later, the substance was shown to originate from the seminal
vesicles but the name prostaglandin remained.
70Clhapter3A
Membranephospholipids
oho
Corticosteroids
15-Lipoxygenase
Arachidonic acid
15-HPETE
Eicosapentanoicacid
Dihomo-r-linoleicacid
15-HETE
Aspirinand
otherNSAIDs
5-HETE
5-HPETE
PGG2
品
LeukotrieneA
PGH
TXA2
PGE2
PGF2α
LeukotrieneB4
Leukotriene C4
PGD2
PGl2
(prostacyclin)
LeukotrieneD4
LeukotrieneE4
FIGURE 3-4. Eicosanoid synthcsis pathway. Various stinuli, including certain hormoncs, activate phos-
pholipase A: to release arachidonic acid from membrane phospholipids. There are three pathways
that arachidonic acid metabolism can follow, which lead to biologically active products. What deter-
mines which pathway is iollowcd appcars to depcnd on thc cnzyime conccntration in cach tissuc and
the local environmental conditions in cach tissue. (1) The cyclooxygenase pathway ultimately leads
to the synthesis of thromboxane (TXA2), prostacyclin (PGly), and three prostaglandins (PGE2, PGF2α)
and PCDz). {2) The 5-lipoxygenase pathway lcads to the formation of the leukotricnes (LTA4, LTB4,
LTC4, LTI)4, and LTEa), (3) The 15-lipoxygenase pathway produces hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid
c. Prostaglandin nomenclature identifies 10 specific molecular groups which are
designated by the letters A through J. Each group is characterized by the sub-
stituent attached to position 9 and 11 of the cyclopentane ring.
d. Prostaglandin can be synthesized from three fatty acids: dihomo-y-linolenic acid
(20:3), arachidonic acid (20:4), and eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5) with 3, 4, and
5 double bonds can lead to the synthesis of proslaglandin E (PGE;), PGE2, and
PGE;, respectively. The subscripl numbers 1, 2, and 3 denole the number of
double bonds in ihe aliphatic. side chains altached to the cyclopentane ring. For
the PGF scries of prostaglandins thc subscript α or β refers to thc configuration
of the hydroxyl group at carbon 9. See Figure 3-5 for nomenclature and struc-
tural characteristics.
Autacoicdsand Tlheir Phatmacological Motlulators71
COOH
HO
OH
PGE2
OH
OOH
OH
OH
PGF2a
FIGURE 3-5. Chemical structure of two prostaglandins, PGE and PGF2x-
3. Prostaglandins (PGs) and thromboxanes (TXs)
a. Synthesis, release, and fate. They arc nol slorcd bul arc synthesizcd de novo
 in response to appropriate stimuli and enter the extracellular space. The PGs
are short-lived molecules and exert their actions in the region where they are
synthesized. Circulating PGis are rapidly catabolized by degrading enzymes in
the lung, kidney, spleen, adipose tissue, and intestine. Lung tissue is particu-
larly effective and can remove about 90% of PGE or PGF2x from blood in one
passage through the lungs. Thromboxane A2 (TXAg) spontaneously hydrolyzes
(ty, = 30 seconds) in blood fluids to the biologically inactive thromboxane B2
(TXB2). Prostacyclin (PCl) is sponlancously hydrolyzed (t, = 3 minutes) in body
fluids to the biologically inactive 6-kcto-PGF1x.
b.Pharmacologic effects
(1) Table 3-3 summarizes the receptor pharmacology of various prostaglandins,
which serves as the basis for the pharmacologic effects of prostaglandins.
(2)
 Smooth muscle
(a) Blood vessels. PGE2 and PCly relax arteriolar smooth muscle and pro-
mote vasodilatation. TXAy and PGF2x are vasoconstrictors with TXA2
being the most potent. TXA also promotes platelet adhesion and aggre-
gation. TXAg receptor signals through Gy-coupled receptor. The ty, of
TXA, is extremely short (10-20 seconds). PGlg (commonly referred as
prostacylin) is synthesized by vascular endothelial cells and acts as phys-
iological anlagonist of TXA,. PGl, functions as vasodilator and inhibits
plalelet aggrcgation. PGl2 reccptor signals through G,-coupled rcccptor.
decrease in PGly synthesis and an increase in TXAz synthesis.
(b) Gut. PGE2 and PGF2α contract longitudinal imuscle, whereas PGl2 and
PGFzx contract circular muscle, but PGE, relaxes it.
(c) Bronchioles. PGE, PGE2, and PCl, relax respiratory smooth muscle,
whereas TXA) and PCF2x cause contraction. PGE2 is an important PG,
produced in many tissues including macrophages and mast cells. De-
pending on the type receptor activation, PGE2 mediates various biologi-
cal functions including vasodilatation, bronchoconstriction, pyrexia, and
mucus production.
72
2Chapter3  A
TABLE 3-3. The Eicosanoid Receptor Signaling
Ligand
Receptor
Receptor Signaling
El,
↑PLC(Gq)
EP2
↑cAMP (G)
PGE2
A, D: ↓ CAMP (G;)
EP3A-D
B, C: ↑ (AMP (G)
D: ↑ PLC (Gq)
EI4
↑CAMP (G,)
PGF2α
FPA.H
↑PLC (Gq)
PGl2
IP
↑cAMP (G)
TXA2
TPx.1b
↑PLC (Gq),
↓cAMP (G), G12/13
BLT1
G,
LTB4
↑PLC: (Gq),
BLT2
↓cAMP (G;)
LTD4
CysLT1
↑PLC(G)
LTC,/LTD4
CysLT2
↑PLC (Gq)
Eifectors of Cit.sinclude N() synthase, Rho. phospholipase D, and Nal/H' exchanger
PLC, phospholipase C-β.
(3) Platelets. As discussed above, PGl2 inhibits aggregation, whereas TXA2
is synthesized by the platelets and strongly promotes aggregation. In hu-
man medicine, small daily doses of aspirin are used to permanently inhibit
platelel cyclooxygenasc and thercby prevent thromboxane Az formation in
cardiovascular disease.
(4) Reproductive system (also see Chapter 12)
(a) Female. PGF2 is the luteolylic hormone produced by the ovaries and
endometrium, which causes ovulation and regression of corpus luteum
(luteolysis) in cycling animals. In the prepartum period, PGF2α initiates
luteolysis, which decrease plasma progesterone levels. PGF2α is a stim-
ulant of myometrium and is involved in parturition. PGFzα receptor is
coupled to Gq. PGF2x-induced luteolysis and myometrial contractions
are use therapeutically to control reproduction.
(b) Male. The role of PGs in the male is uncertain.
(5) Central and peripheral nervous systems
(a) Fever. Administration of PGE or PGE, into the cerebral ventricles in-
creases body temperature. Pyrogen initiates the release of interleukin-1,
which promotes PGE2 formation. The inhibition by aspirin and other
NSAID drugs of PGEz synthesis explains their antipyretic activity (see
also Chapter 7).
(b) Sleep. Infusion of PGD2 into the cerebral ventricles induces sleep. PCD)
receplor is coupled to G,.
(c)  Neurotransmission. PGEs inhibit the release of norepinephrine from
sympathetic neurons via activation of EPs receptors.
(6) Neuroendocrine. PGEs can enhance the secretion of the anlerior pituitary
hormones, growth hormone, prolactin, thyroid-stimulating hormone, corti-
cotropin, follicle-stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone by activating
EP1 and EP4 receptors. This effect may be a direct one and may be an indi-
recl one by stimulating the release of the hypothalamic releasing hormones.
c. Therapeutic uses. Only PGE and PGF2α analogs are used therapeutically in vet-
erinary medicine.
(1) Misoprostol. It is a PGE analog that has two functions which make it
a useful protective agent for the Gl tract. It dircclly inhibils gastric acid
secretion by parietal cells and it facilitates PGE-mediated mucosal defenses
and healing in response to Gl injuries. Misoprostol is used to treat gastric
ulceration when caused or aggravated by NSAIDs. Misoprostol can cause
diawhea, bloat, colic, and abortion.
(2) Dinoprost and cloprostenol. Dinoprost is the drug name for PGF2α and clo-
prostenol is a synthetic PGFzα analog. Thcy arc uscd to inducc lutcolysis for
the control of estrous cycle, to terminate pregnancy. and to induce parturi-
tion. See Chapter 12 for more information.
(3) Precautions to the use of PGFzx drugs:
(a) Animals with respiratory or Gl disorders may be compromised by the
bronchoconstriction and stimulation of the Gl motility by the PGF2x
compounds. Older animals may exhibit exacerbated vasoconstriction-
associated complications.
(b) Women of child-bearing age or who are pregnant, persons with asthma,
 or respiratory disease should use extreme caution in handling these
drugs as they are readily absorbed via the skin. lf contact wih the skin
is made, the skin must he washed immediately with soap and waler.
4. Leukotrienes (LTs)
a. Chemistry (see Figure 3-4)
(1) LTs are synthesized by the 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) in neutrophils, mono-
cytes, macrophages, mast cells, and keratinocytes.
(2) LTs are also synthesized in the lungs, spleen, brain, and heart.
(3) Stimuli for LT production include:
(a)  Phagocylosis and immune complexcs in macrophages.
(b)  Mast cell anti-lgE antibody.
(c) Release of platelet-activating factor (PAF) by basophils and mast cells.
(4) The enzyme 5-LOX reacts with arachidonic acid to form 5-HPETE (an in-
termediate), which is reduced by a dehydrase to LTA4 (the subscript indi-
cates the number of double bonds present). In human leukocyles a sin-
gle cnzyme is responsible for the synthesis of 5-HPETE and LTA4. LTA4 is
either hydrolyzed to LTBx or converted to LTCx in the presence of glu-
tathione and glutathione s-transferase. Removal of the glutamic acid moi-
ety by Y-glutamyltranspeptidase yields LTD4. Removal of the glycine by a
dipeptidase forms LTE4. The slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A)
is now known to be a mixture of LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4,
b. Pharmacologic effects. The LTs (e.g., LTD4) contract most smooth muscle.
LTC4, LTDa, and LTE, are also known as cysteinyl leukotrienes and mediate their
effect by binding to the CysLT type 1 receptor (see Table 3-3 for details). The
cysteinyl leukotrienes are responsible for airway and smooth muscle contractions
during asthma. They also play various other inflammatory processes in vascular
and skin diseases,
(1) LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4
(a) These LTs are potent vasoconstrictors.
(b) They are potent bronchoconstrictors and cause brochospasm. They are
1,000 times more potent than histamine.
(d) They increase mucous secretion and impair mucus clearance by inhibit-
ing ihe movements of cilia on airway cpithelium.
(2) LTB4 is a potent chemotactic chemical for leukocytes, eosinophils, and
monocytes. Other LTs do not possess this action. It promotes adhesion
of neutrophils to the vascular endothelium and their transendothelial
migration.
c. LT antagonists. The produclion of LTs can be blocked by LOX inhibitors (e.g.
zileuton), which inhibits 5-LOX enzyme by chelating the enzyme's nonheme
iron. The clinical use of zileuton is limited in veterinary medicine due to the
cost and adverse effects (e.g., liver toxicity).
The LT receptor antagonists are emerging as effective treatment for asthma
symptoms. Montelukast (Singulaire) and zafirukast (Accolate) are now used
in small animals. Thcse drugs rcduce bronchial spasm and improve pulmonary
funclion.
74|Chapter 3 I A
(1) Therapeutic uses. They are used as adjunctive treatment for atopic dermatitis
in dogs and asthma in cats, However, they are not effective for acute asthma
allacks.
(2) Pharmacokinetics. The information is available for humans only. The phar
macokinetics of LT antagonists has not been studied in domestic animals.
(a)  Zafirukast is rapidly absorbed following oral administration, though the
absolute bioavailability is unknown: zafirukast adiministered with food
shows a reduced bioavailability of 40%. Montelukast is similarly adimin-
istered, and ils bioavailability in humans is 63-73%. Tmax for both drugs
is 2-4 hours.
(b) Both drugs show strong binding to plasma proteins (99%).
(c) Both drugs are extensively metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes to
hydroxylated metabolites.
(d) The metabolites of these two LT antagonists are eliminated in feces
(>80% of dose). Less than 10% is eliminated in the urine.
(e) Plasma fy, of montelukast and zafirukast are 2.7-5.5 hours and 8-16
hours, respectively.
(3) Adverse effects: No adverse effects have been reporled in animals because
 of limited experience with these two drugs. In humans, common adverse ef-
fects include Gl distress, hallucinations, and agitation. More serious, but rare
adverse effects include hepatitis, agranulocytosis, and allergic granulomatous
vasculitis.
 5. Platelet-activating factor (PAF)
a. Chemistry
(1) PAF is 1-()-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerol-3phosphocholine. It is derived from 1-
(alkyl-2-acyl-glycerophosphocholine found in the membrane of many cells.
(2) PAF synthesis involves the action of phospholipase A2 on 1-O-alkyl-2-acyl-
glycerophosphocholine to yield 1-O-alkyl-2-lyso-glycerophosphocholine
(lyso-PAF). Lyso-PAF is acelylaled by acetyl coenzyme A in the presence of
Iyso-PAF acetyltransferase. It is released from many different cells including
neutrophils, activated macrophages, eosinophils, mast cells, and of course
from platelets. The action of PAF is not only limited to platelets but also acts
on many different cells. Even very low concentration (10-10 M, 100 pM).
b. Pharmacologic effects
PAF mediates its effect by binding to PAF receptor, which couples with at leasl
(wo different types of G proteins, Gi/o and Gy. The downstream effecl of the
receptor signaling is mediated nitric. oxide synthesis in the endothelium.
(1) PAF is a potent vasodilator and it lowers blood pressure and total vascular
resistance.
(2) PAF increases vascular permeability and the movement of fluid out of
the vascular compartment. PAF is ~1000x more potent than histamine or
bradykinin.
(3) PAF is a potent promoter of platelet aggrcgation.
(4) PAF stimulates polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes to aggregate.
(5) PAF commonly contracts Gl, uterine, and small bronchiolar smooth muscle.
C. Pathophysiological roles for PAF include:
(1) Stimulation of platelet aggregalion.
(2) Involvement in ovulation, implantation, and parturition.
(3) Promotion of inflammation and allergic responses.
(4) Implication in the toxicological action of beestings and snakebites.
(5) Delineation of the pathophysiologic function of PAF is complicated, since
the activation of phospholipase Az in the synthesis of PAF also releases
arachidonic acid, which in turn can be synthesized to the PGs, TXA, or
LTs, all with significant biological activity.
d. Therapeutic uses. There are no clinical uses of PAF, its synthesis inhibitors or
receptor antagonists. This remains an active research area. PAF receptor antago-
nist lexipafant has rccently been used for management of acute pancreatitis. The
anti-inilammalory property of glucocorticoids is, in part, altribulcd lo inhibition
of PAF synthesis.
Autacoids and Their Pharnacological Modulalors75
Iv.
POLYPEPTIDES (see also Chapter 8)
A.
 Angiotensins are polypcptides that clevate blood pressure by inducing vasoconstriclion.
1. Chemistry (see Figure 8-1).
 a. Angiotensinogen is an α2-globulin synthesized in the liver and is present in the
circulation. It is the precursor for all angiotensins.
b. Renin is an enzyme secreted by juxtaglomerular cells in the renal
arterioles, which metabolizes angiotensinogen to form the decapeptide
angiotensin I.
c. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), an enzyme found in large amounts in
lung capillary cndothelial cells as well as in other vascular beds, mctabolizes
angiotensin I to the biologically active octapeptide angiotensin Il.
d. Angiotensin Il is mctabolized by an arminopeptidasc to angiotensin Im that
has less biologic activity than angiolensin Il, Othcr peptidases mctabolize an-
 giotensin Il to inactive products.
 2. Mechanism of action
a. Iwo receptor subtypes for angiotensin Il have been identified: AT, and AT2. AT
receptors are stimulatory, whereas ATy receptors are inhibitory, which mediate
effects usually are opposite to those of AT1.
b. AT, receptors mediate most of the actions of angiotensin Il.
(1) AT, receptors utilize Gq-coupled signaling (IP,, Ca21) and thereby mediate
the contraction of smooth muscle.
C. AT receptors are G protein-coupled receptors. It is still not known which G
protein is coupled to these receptors. However, NO) synthesis is increased after
activation of AT2 receptors, which stimulates guanylyl cyclase to increase cGMP
formation. In addition, PKC synthesis, particularly PKCα synthesis is inhibited by
activation of ATy receptors.
 3. Pharmacologic effects. Angiotensin Il regulates blood pressure and fluid and elec-
trolyte balance.
a.
Hypcrtensin, cdema, and clectrolyte imbalanccs can occur from overaclivity of
the renin-angiolensin syslerm.
b. Angiotensin il is 40-timcs morc potent as a vasoconstriclor than norepinephrine.
C.
Angiotensin Il proimotes the synthesis and secretion of aldosterone by zona
gloimerulosa of the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone promotes sodium and water re-
tention and potassium loss (see also Chapter 12).
d. Angiotensin Il stimulates the thirst center in the hypothalamus and increases va-
sopressin (antidiuretic hormone) secretion.
e. AT, receptors mediate the above stimulatory effects.
f. AT receptors, in general, mediate the inhibition of the above effects mediated
by AT receptors.
4.
 Therapeutic uses of angiotensin Il. Angiotensin Il has not been used clinically.
 5. Antagonists of the renin-angiotensin system.
a. ACE Inhibitors. These drugs effectively inhibit ACE, resulting in inhibition of
angiotensin ll production and accumulation of angiotensin I and bradykinin. (See
Chapter 8 for detailed information.)
(1) Captopril, enalapril, lisinopril, benazepril, and others inhibit the enzymatic
conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin Il.
Drugs in this class do not block angiolensin Il reccptors nor do they havc
agonist aclivity.
(2) ACE inhibitors produce the following pharmacologic/therapculic cfcts:
(a) Decrcascd retention of sodium and waler by reducing the sccrclion of
aldosterone.
(b) An increase in the levels of bradykinin (a vasodilating polypeptide) since
bradykinin is inactivated by ACE.
(c) A decrcasc in blood pressure and fluid rctcntion in patients with elc
vated angiotensin I blood levels. (See Chapter 8 for detailed information
regarding therapeutic uses of ACE inhibitors.)
76Chapter 3 IV A
b. β1-Adrenergic antagonists. The sympathetic nervous system promotes the release
of renin from juxtaglomerular cells via β,-receptors. Drugs such as propranolol
inhibit activation of β,-receptors and thereby reduce renin release (see Chapter
 2 for information on β-receptors and antagonists).
c. Angiotensin I (AT,) receptor antagonists. Several AT1 receptor antagonists, in-
cluding losartan, candesartan, and valsarlan arc now added to antihypertensive
treatment in human mcdicine. These drugs do not havc the adverse effects as-
sociated with chronic use of ACE inhibitors and appear to have a number of
 ancillary beneficial effects such as anticancer activity and neuroprotective effects
in experiment model systems. The veterinary use of AT blockers is limited due
to the high cost of this class of drugs.
d. Renin receptor inhibitor—aliskiren. The renin receptor inhibitor aliskiren in-
hibits the conversion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin 1. It is for controlling 
hypertension in humans. The use of aliskiren in veterinary medicine is yet to be
established.
B.
The kinins: bradykinin and kallidin are polypeptides that dilate blood vessels.
1. Chemistry
a. Two distincl enzymes (one irom plasma and the other from tissue) called
kallikreins catalyze the formation of two polypeptides: bradykinin, a nonapep-
tidc and kallidin (lysyl-bradykinin), a decapeptide.
b. α2-Globulins servc as the precursor for the synthesis of the two pcptides.
c. Proteases inactivate both bradykinin and kallidin. The major peptidase is ACE.
ACE inhibitors prolong the duration of action of both peptides and this con-
tributes to their blood pressure lowering activity as well as bronchoconstriction.
2. Mechanism of action. Bradykinin acts on bradykinin-1 (BK1) and bradykinin-2 (BK2)
reccptors. Both BK; and BK2 receptors are coupled to Gq. No antagonists are avail-
able for therapeutic uscs.
In addition to their own activity, bradykinin may stimulate the formation of
prostaglandins by activating PLAz, which in turn have pronounced biologic effects.
3. Pharmacologic effects:
a. Kinins are potent vasodilators of resistance arteries. The vasodilating effect is
due to production of NO and prostaglandins that stimulate NO) and cAMP syn-
thesis, respectively.
b. Kinins contract nonvascular smooth muscle such as the bronchial and intestinal
smooth muscles.
c. They cause veins to contract by stimulating BK receptors in the venous smooth
muscle.
d. Kinins increase vascular permeability and edema by contracting endothelial cells
to increase leakage of plasma into interstitial space.
e.
 Kinins increase secretion of fluids in the lungs and Gl tract.
f. Both kinins are potent pain-inducing chemicals.
g. Various venoms and slings from snakes and insccls owe their toxic cffects to the
formation of kinins.
 4. Therapeutic uses of bradykinin and its antagonists. They are not available yet for
clinical use.
SUGGESTED READING
Armstrong AW, Kvedar IC. 2008. "Histamine pharmacology." In Principles of Pharmacology: The Patho-
physiofogic Basis of Drug Therapy. Edited by Golan DE, Tashjian AH, Jr, Armstrong EJ, Armstrong
AW. 2nd cd., pp. 769-779. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
http://www.drugs.com
Leurs R, Church MK, Talialatea M. 2002. H,-antihistainines: Inverse agonism, anti-inflaminatory actions
and cardiac effects. Clin Exp Allergy 32:489-498.
Plumb DC. 2005. Vcterinary Drug Handbook. 5th cd. Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
Smyth EM, Burke A, FitzGerald CA. 2006. "Lipid-derived autacoids: Eicosanoids and platelet-activating
factors." In Goochman & Gihman's The Pharmacologicaf Basis of Therapeurics. Edited by Brunton LL,
Lazo IS, Parker KL. 1lth ed., pp. 653 670. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Autacoids and Tlheir Plarmacological Modulators 77
StUdY QUESTIONS
DIRECTlONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement, Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Which of the following is a major effect of
(C) PGl, inhibits platelet aggregation.
angiotensin Il?
(D) PGl, is spontaneously hydrolyzed into
(A) Stimulation of thirst and vasopressin
inactive 6-keto-PGF1α.
secretion.
(B)  Vasodilation.
6. Which of the following statements regard-
(C) Inhibition of aldostcrone secretion.
ing histaminc Hz-antihistamincs is correct?
(D) Tachycardia.
(A) Nizatidine may cause drug interac-
lions because of its inhibition of the
2. Which of the following is a function of
cytochrome P450 enzyme system.
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)?
(B) Ranitidine is more potent than cimeti-
(A) Converts angiotensinogen to angiotensin
dine.
(C) Ranitidine is a potent CNS depressant.
1,
(B)  Converts bradykinin to inactive metabo-
(D) Famotidine has a plasma half-life much
lites.
longer than that of cimetidine.
(C)  Directly promotes aldosterone secretion.
(D) Converts angiotensin Il to angiotensin Ill.
7. Which of the drugs listed below inhibits
the release of histamine?
3. Which one of the following is the most
(A) Betazole
frequently associated side effect of H-
(B) Cimetidine
antihistamines?
(C) Dimenhydrinate
(A)  Anti-androgenic. activity in males.
(D) Cromolyn sodium
(B) Sedation.
(C) Inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes.
8. Which of thc following slalcmenls regard-
(D) Constipation.
ing serotonergic. receptors is incorrect?
(A) All serotonergic reccptors are G protein-
4. How does diphenhydramine work to re-
coupled receptors, except 5-HT, recep-
lieve the symploms of hypersensitivity?
tors.
(A) It competitively antagonizes the effect of
(B) There are more classes of serotonergic
hislamine at H,-receptors.
receptors than any other receptors of
(B) It stabilizes mast cells to inhibit his-
biogenic amines.
(C) Stimulation of 5-HT, receptors increases
tamine release.
(C) It inhibits the binding of allergens to IgE.
Gl motility.
(D) It promotes the endocytosis of H1-
(D) Stimulation of 5-HT2 receptors evokes
receplors.
severe vasoconstriction, which accounts
(E) It promoles the shifl of active H-
for fescue grass toxicity.
receptors to the inactive state.
9. Which one of the following statements is
5. Which of the following statements is in-
incorrect?
correctly associated with prostacyclin (PGl2)?
(A)  Arachidonic acid is the precursor for the
(A) PGl, is a vasoconstrictor.
synthesis of the leukotrienes.
(B) PGl, is formed from platelet endoperox-
(B)  Aspirin inhibits the formation of
PGF2α·
ides,
78Chapter 3
(C) PGE2 increases body temperature.
11. Why doesn't fexofenadine cause seda-
(D) Leukotrienes are potent relaxants of bron-
tion?
chiolar smooth muscle.
(A) It is a drug that blocks H2 receptors in
the CNS.
10. Which of the following autacoid in-
(B) It is not effective blocking cerebral H1
hibitors/antagonists is a leukotriene (LT) re-
receptors.
ceptor antagonist that blocks LT-induced
(C) It is an excellent substrate for P-
bronchoconstriction?
glycoprotein, which pumps drugs in-
(A) Cetirizine
cluding fexofenadine out of the CNs effi-
(B) Lisinopril
ciently.
(C) Montelukast
(D) It is ionized at pH 7.4 and does not
(D) Zileuton
cross the blood-brain barrier.
Autacoils and Their Pharmacological Modulators 79
ANSWERS ANd EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is A.
muscle and a decrease in platelet aggre-
Angiotensin Il stimulates the thirst cen-
gation. PCl2 is synthesized in endothelial
ter in the hypothalamus, and increases
cells utilizing platelet cndoperoxides, which
vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) secretion
can be inhibited by NSAIDs, aspirin in
from the posterior pituitary gland. Angiotensin
particular.
Il does not cause vasodilation, but is a potent 
vasoconstrictor. Angiotensin Il increases,
6. The answer is B.
but not decreases, aldosterone secretion. It
Ranitidine is more potent than cimeti-
could cause bradycardia, bul nol lachycardia,
dine as an H2-antihistamine. Cimetidine, but
whichi is attributable to baroreceptor reflex in
nol nizatidine, may cause drug interactions,
response to hypertension.
because of its inhibition of the cytochrome
P450 system. Ranitidine at very high doses
2. The answer is B.
may cause CNS disturbances including de-
ACE converls bradykinin to biologically
pression. Famotidine, cimetidine, ranitidine,
inactivc products. This is thc rcason that
and nizatidine have similar plasma half-lives
the feline patients on an ACE inhibitor may
of 2-3 hours.
have bronchoconstriction as a side effect.
ACE converts angiolensin I to angiotension Il,
7. The answer is D.
but does not affect the conversion of other
Cromolyn sodium inhibits histamine
angiotensin-related proteins, nor does ACE
relcasc. This is due to cell membrane hyper-
directly affect aldosterone secretion.
polarization induced by opening of chloride
channels. Dimenhydrinate, betazole, and
3. The answer is B.
cimetidine are H,-antihistamine, Hl2-agonist,
Most of the older (first generations) H-
and H-antihistamine, respectively.
antihistamines possess some sedative
properlies. The newer (second generations)
8. The answer is C.
H,-antihistamines tend to have minimal
Stimulation of 5-HT4 receplors by ag0-
Or no sedative properties. Cimetidine, an
nists such as cisapride, but not stimulation
H2-antihistamine, is a potent inhibitor of
of 5-HT, receptors, increases Gl motility.
cytochrome P450 enzymes, which also
Because 5HT4-receptors are coupled to
inhibits testoslerone synthesis. Many H1-
Gs, which results in an increase in cAMP
antihistamines have antimuscarinic properties,
synthesis and acelylcholine release from the
which will decrease Gl motility, and they
vagus nervc.
cause constipation occasionally
9. The answer is D.
4. The answer is E,
Leukolrienes are potent slimulators of
In the past, the general concept was
the contraction of bronchiolar smooth
that H -antihistamines competitively an-
muscle. The other stateiments are all true.
tagonized H1-receplors. However, recent
evidence indicates that H -antihistamines shift 
10. The answer is C.
the active H,-receptors to the inactive state.
Montelukast is a leukotriene (LT) recep-
These drugs do nol stabilize mast cells to
tor antagonist that blocks LT-induced
inhibit histamine release, nor do they evoke
bronchoconstriction. Because asthma in cats
H,-receptor endocytosis.
may be attributable to increased autacoid
release including histamine and LT, LT re-
5. The answer is A.
ceptor antagonists can be used as adjunctive
PGl is a vasodilalor, but nol a vaso-
therapy. Cetirizine is a second-generation
constrictor. PGl2 receptors are coupled to
Hj-antihistamine; lisinopril is an ACE
Gs, thereby increasing cAMP synthesis and
inhibitor: zileuton is a 5-lioxygcnasc inhibitor,
leading to relaxation of vascular smooth
which inhibits LT synthesis.
80Chapter 3
11. The answer is D.
barrier to cause sedation. Fexofenadine can
The second-generation H1-antihistamines 
block cerebral H-receptors in vitro, but it
including fexofenadine are ionized at
cannot reach the target site in the CNs in
physiological pH and the ionized form of
vivo. P-glycoprotein is not the reason that
the drug does not cross the blood-brain
fexofenadine does not cause sedation.
ter4
Drugs Acting on the Central Nervous System
Walter H. Hsu and Dean H. Riedesel
INTRODUCTION
Function. Drugs can alter the function of the central nervous syslcm (CNS) to provide
1. Anticonvulsant effects
 2. Tranguilization (sedation)
3. Analgesia
B.
Neurotransmitter-receptor relationship. Neurotransmitters released by a presynaptic
neuron combine with receptors on the plasma membrane of a postsynaptic neuron,
altering its membrane potential.
1. Neurotransmitters in the CNS include dopamine, Y-aminobutyric. acid (GABA),
acetylcholine (ACh), norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, histamine, glutamate,
glycine, substance P, and many neuropeptides.
2. Receptors for neurotransmitters are the site of action for exogenous drugs.
a. The neurotransmitter-receptor complex may directly alter the permeability of the
cell membrane by opening or closing specific ion channels.
h. Second messengers. The neurotransmitte-receptor complex may initiate a sc-
qucnce of chemical reactions that alter ion transport across the membrane,
thereby altering the membrane potential. Specific intracellular signal molecules.
or second messengers, may be generated. The second messenger system
sustains and amplifies the cellular response to cdrug-receptor binding (see
receptors (GPCRs).
Blood-brain barrier (BBB). Circulating drugs must cross BBB in orcler to gain access to)
the neurons of the brain.
1. Drugs that are lipid soluble, small in molecular size, poorly hound to protein,
and nonionized at the pll of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) will cross BBB most
readily.
2. The BBB tends to increase in perimeability in the presence of inflamimation or at the
site of tumors.
3. The BBB is poorly developed in neonates; hence, chemicals can easily gain access
to the neonatal brain.
ANTICONVULSANT DRUGS
A.
General features
1. Preparations. Only a few of the anticonvulsant drugs available for human use have
been proven to be clinically useful in dogs and cats.
a. Some of the drugs are too rapidly metabolized in dogs to be effective, even at
high dosages.
b. Clinical expericncc and pharmacokinelic: data are unavailable for many of these
compounds in cats, Cats are generally assumed to metabolize drugs more slowly
and poorly than dogs.
2. Mechanism of action. Anticonvulsant drugs stabilize neuronal membranes.
81
82Chapter 4 Il A
a. They may act directly on ion channels, resulting in hyperpolarization of the neu-
ronal membrane.
b. They activate GABA-gated Cl- channels increasing the frequency of Cl- channel
opening produced by GABA, thereby evoking hyperpolarization of the neurons.
3. Therapeutic uses. Anticonvulsant drugs reduce the incidencc, scvcrity, or duration
of scizures.
4. Administration
a. Plasma concentrations of anticonvulsant drugs should be adequate to ensure an 
effective concentration in the brain. Treatment for at least five half-lives must oc-
cur before stable plasma levels of these drugs are achieved; thus, serum analyses
for drug concentrations are beneficial.
(1) Trough concentrations should be within the therapeutic range.
(2) Peak concentrations should be below toxic levels.
b. Drugs with long-elimination ty, are more convenient to use in veterinary
medicine because owners are usually only able to administer the drug 2-3 times
daily.
5. Adverse effects
a. Withdrawal symptoms, seizures, or status epilepticus may follow rapid cessation
 of administration of these drugs.
b. A lowered seizure threshold, precipitating seizures in an otherwise well-
controlled patient, may follow the administration of other drugs, such as
(1) Phenothiazine tranquilizers (e.g., acepromazine)
(2) Some antiparasitic drugs (e.g., pyrantel, levamisole, pyrethroids, methoxy-
chlor, lindane, and anticholinesterases).
(3)  Metoclopramide, a dopamine receptor antagonist, is used to increase gas-
trointestinal (Gl) motility.
C. Enzyme induction
zymes of the liver. This cnzyme induction may increase the biotransforma-
tion of othcr cndogcnous and cxogcnous chemicals.
(2) Membrane-bound enzymes (e.g., alkaline phosphatase) can also be induced,
leading to increases in serum concentrations that could be mistaken as an
indication of liver injury.
d. Hepatotoxicity is the most common adverse effect of anticonvulsant therapy in
dogs. It develops in 6-15% of dogs treated with primidone alone or in combina-
tion with phenytoin.
(1) The liver should be evaluated every 6-12 months for signs of toxicity, in-
cluding
(a) Elevated serum enzyme concentrations, particularly alanine transaminase
(ALT) and glutamyl transferase activity.
(b) Rising serum phenobarbital concentrations in dogs receiving a constant
dosage.
(c) Decreasing serum albumin concentrations.
(d) Elevated postprandial serum concentration of bile acids.
(2) If hepatotoxicity is detected, the dosage of primidone or phenobarbital
should be decreased and KBr therapy implemented.
6.
Barbiturates
1. Phenobarbital
a.
 Chemistry. Phenobarbital is an oxybarbiturate.
b. Mechanism of action. Barbiturates activate GABA-gated Cl- channels, thereby
evoking hyperpolarization of the neurons.
C. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Phenobarbital limits the spread of action potentials and thus clevates thc
seizure threshold,
(2) Most barbiturates have anticonvulsant effects, but phenobarbital is unique
in that it usually produces this effect at lower doses than those necessary to
cause pronounced CNS depression (sedation).
Drugs Acting on the Central Nervous System 83
d. Therapeutic uses. Phenobarbital is used ior the long-term control of seizures. It
is not useful for terminating an ongoing seizure because the time span from
administration until the onset of effect is too long (~20 minutes).
e. Pharmacokinetics
(1) When given orally, its Gl absorption is practically complete in all animals.
 Peak lcvels occur in 4-8 hours after oral dosing in dogs.
(2) It is widely distributed throughout the body, but because of its lower lipid
solubility. it does not distribute as rapidly as most other barbiturates into the
CNS. The amount of phenobarbital bound to albumin is 40-50%.
(3) The oxybarbiturates are primarily metabolized in the liver. The major
metabolite of phenobarbital is a parahydroxyphenyl derivative that is inac-
tive and excreted in the urine.
(4) Hepatic cytochrome P450 enzyme activity is increased by chronic adminis-
tration of barbiturates, producing increased rates of barbiturate metabolism
 as well as increased metabolism of other drugs.
(5) Hepatic cytochrome P450 enzyme activity is inhibited by certain drugs (e.g..
chloramphenicol; see Chapters 1 and 19), thereby decreasing the elimination
rate of barbiturates.
(6) The elimination ty: dogs, 32-90 hours; cats, 34-43 hours; horses. 13-18
hours.
f. Administration
(1) Phenobarbilal is usually administered orally, but can be injected IV or IM.
(2) A serum drug concentration of 15-45 μg/mL is usually effective in control-
ling seizures: however, because of phenobarbital's long t /, 14 days of ther-
 apy are required to develop a steady serum concentration.
g. Adverse effects
(1) Sedation, polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia are common side effects.
Dogs develop a tolerance to the sedative effects after 1-2 weeks, but cats
 may experience more pronounced sedation with longer duration.
(2) Hepatotoxicity. Chronic administralion lo dogs may result in clevated serum
concentrations of hepatic enzymes, for example, alkaline phosphatase
and alanine tranaminase (ALT) and, in a small percentage of cases, liver
damage.
(3) Patients on phenobarbital may show a small decrease in serum thyroid hor-
mone levels and an increase in plasma thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
levels. The decrease in thyroid hormone levels is attributed to the increase
in liver enzymes that metabolize these hormones.
2. Primidone. It was a commonly used antiepileptic drug in dogs, but it is rarely used
to control seizures.
a. Chemistry. Primidone is a deoxybarbiturate (an analog of phenobarbital).
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Primidone is slowly absorbed after oral administration in dogs, with pcak
levels occurring 2-4 hours after dosing.
(2) In dogs, primidone is rapidly metabolized by the liver to phenylethylmalon-
amide (PEMA) and phenobarbital. Primidone, PEMA, and phenobarbital are
all anticonvulsants, but the fiy of the firsl two are too short for them lo be
effective. The potency of primidone and PEMA is only 1/30 that of phe-
 nobarbital. Thus, ~85% of the anticonvulsant activity of primidone is at-
tributable to phenobarbital.
(3) In cats, the metabolism to phenobarbital is slower and the ty,is very long;
thus, primidone should not be used in this species.
C. Administration. In dogs, an oral dose of 4-5 mg of primidone will produce a
serum phenobarbital concentration thal is equivalent to an oral dose of 1 mg of
phenobarbital.
d. Adverse effects. Prolonged use of primidone in dogs may lead to decreased
serum albumin and elevated serum concentrations of liver enzymes. Occasion-
ally, serious liver damage occurs.
3. Pentobarbital
a. Chemistry. Pentobarbital is an oxybarbiturate.
84| Clapter 4 II B
b. Therapeutic uses. Pentobarbital will terminate seizures at a dose that produces
anesthesia. This dose usually results in significant cardiopulmonary depression
but may be the only way to control status epilepticus, if a benzodiazepine fails
to work. However, there are two following problems associated with pentobarbi-
tal in the treatment of status epilepticus:
(1) IV pcntobarhital (2-6 mg/kg) rcquircs 15-20 minutes to takc cffecl;
≥6 mg/kg can cause cardiopulmonary depression.
(2) IV pentobarbital induces paddling reflex activity during recovery; such activ-
ity may be confused with continued seizure activity.
c. Pharmacokinetics. It has a rapid onset (<1 minute) after IV injection and short
duration of action,
(1) It is distributed rapidly to all body tissues with highest concentrations found
in the liver and brain. It is ~40% bound to albumin.
(2) It is metabolized in the liver mainly by oxidation via cytochrome P450
enzymes. The ty, in dogs is ~8 hours.
d. Administration. Pentobarbital is administered IV.
e. Adverse effects
Pentobarbital is a CNS depressant; close moniloring and respiralory assistance
must be readily available. It may cause excitement during recovery from anes-
thesia. Hypothcrmia may develop in animals recciving penlobarbial, if exposed
to temperatures <27' C. Thc barbiturates can be very irritaling when adminis-
tered perivascularly.
C.Phenytoin
1. Chemistry. Phenytoin is a hydantoin derivative.
2. Mechanism of action. Phenytoin stabilizes neuronal membranes and limits the
development and spread of seizure activity.
a. It reduces Na+ influx during the action potential, reduces Ca2+ influx during
depolarization, and promotes Na+ efflux. The resultant effect is an inhibition of
the spread of seizure activity.
b. K+ movement out of the cell during the action potential may be delayed, pro-
ducing an increased refractory period and a decrease in repetitive depolariza-
tion.
 3. Therapeutic uses
a. Phenytoin is an anticonvulsant drug; however, because of its short ty, in dogs,
use of phenytoin may be impractical,
4. Pharmacokinetics
a. After oral administration, phenytoin is 40% absorbed in dogs. Phenytoin is well
distributed throughout the body and is ~80% bound to albumin in dogs.
b. It is metabolized in the liver and with much of the drug conjugated to a glu-
curonide form and then excreted by the kidneys. Phenytoin induces hepatic cy-
tochrome P450 enzymes, which may enhance the metabolism of itself and other
drugs.
c. The plasma fy, are 3-7 hours in dogs, 8 hours in horses, and 42-108 hours in
cats. Because of the pronounced hepatic. enzyme induction in dogs, phenytoin
metabolisim is increased with shorter ty, within 7-9 days after the beginning
dose.
D.Benzodiazepines (see also IV C)
1. General consideration
a. Diazepam, midazepam, clonazepam, and lorazepam are used as anticonvul-
sants.
b. They are the preferred drugs for the treatment of status cpilepticus (continuous
seizure activity lasting >5 minutes or recurrent seizures between which the
patient does not fully recover) and cluster seizures (≥2 discrete seizure events
within a 24-hour period).
Drugs Acting on the_Central Nervous System85
c. They can be used as a maintenance anticonvulsanl in cats, However, they have
a very limiled use as a maintenance anticonvulsant in dogs, because the devel-
opment of tolerance occurs rapidly in this species due to drug metabolism into
inactive metabolites. In contrast, cats metabolize benzodiazepines poorly and
thus do not have problems with these drugs as dogs do.
2.Diazepam
a. Mechanism of action. Benzodiazepines activate GABA-gated Cl- channels to
potentiate the channel opening activity of CABA, thereby evoking hyperpolariza-
tion of the neurons.
b. Therapeutic uses and administration. Diazepam is used as an anticonvulsant,
muscle relaxant, tranquilizer, and appetite stimulant.
(1) In cats, it is administered orally for seizure control. The longer ty,. and lower
incidence of developing tolerance make diazepam clinically useful for long-
term seizure control in cats.
(2) In dogs, it is administered IV for the control of status epilepticus and cluster
seizures.
(3)  Diazepam is well absorbed after intrarectal administration, and thus can be
used as an at-home treatment of animals with cluster seizures. Other benzo-
diazepines are not well absorbed after this route.
(4) Il is not used orally in dogs as a maintenance anticonvulsant because it has
a short fy, of 2-4 hours and its tendency to develop tolerance in this species
due to drug metabolism.
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. Diazepam is dissolved in propylene glycol and Na benzoate for 
injection.
(a) Because of its poor water solubility, diazepam solution (in propylene
glycol) via the IM route is slowly absorbed.
(b) Diazepam is very lipid soluble and rapidly crosses BBB.
(2)
Distribution. It is highly (>85%) albumin bound.
(3) Metabolism and excretion, Diazepam is metabolized in the liver to several
metabolites, including desmethyldiazepam (nordiazepam), temazepam, and
oxazepam, all of which are pharmacologically active. These metabolites are
conjugated to glucuronide and excreted by the kidneys.
(4) The plasma ty, of diazepam: dogs, 2-4 hours; cats, 5.5 hours; horses, 7-22
hours. The plasma fy of nordiazepam: dogs, ~3 hours; cats, ~24 hours.
d. Adverse effects
(1) Changes in behavior (irritability, depression, and aberrant demeanor) may
occur affer receiving diazepam.
(2) Cats may develop acute fatal hepatic necrosis after receiving oral diazepam
for several days. As a result, some neurologists do not recommend the use of
diazepam as a maintenance anticonvulsant in cats.
(3) Complications related to the propylene glycol carrier include venous throm-
bosis, transient cardiovascular depression, and arrhythmias following rapid
IV injection.
3. Midazolam. It is more potent than diazepam for its anticonvulsant/sedative effects,
but its duration of action is shorter than diazepam.
a. Therapeutic uses. Midazolam is used as an anticonvulsant for status epilepticus,
muscle relaxant, tranquilizer, and appetite stimulant the same way as diazepam.
b. Pharmacokinetics. Midazolam has a shorter elimination Iy. of 77 minutes in
dogs, which is shorter than diazepam (~3 hours).
e ing 'algnios laem si weozepiu '(o't>) saniea Hd mol ny 'uongsia (b)
higher pH values, it is lipid soluble. Thus, in the bottle (pH = 3.5), it is an
aqueous solution, but in the body (pH = 7.4), it is lipid soluble and readily
crosses BBB and cell membranes. A total of 95% of midazolam is bound by
albumin.
(2) Metabolism and excretion, Midazolam is metabolized by cytochrome P450
enzymes. An active metabolite α-hydroxymidazolam has less pharmacologic
effect than the parent drug. The metabolites are conjugated to glucuronide
and excreted by the kidneys.
86Chapler 4 II D
C.
 Administration, It is administercd IM or IV.
d. Adverse effects. Midazolam may cause mild respiratory depression, vomiting,
restless behavior, agitation, and local irritation.
4. Clonazepam
a. Therapeutic uses. The uses are the same as diazepam without distinct advan-
tages over diazepam. It is administered orally or IV. IV administration is for the
treatment of status epilepticus. However, clonazepam injectable is not available
in the United States. It can be used as an adjunctive therapy to be in combina-
tion with phenobarbital in order to reduce the dosage of the latter. Clonazepam
alone has very limited value as a maintenance anticonvulsant because of the
rapid development of drug tolerance.
b. Pharmacokinetics. It is well absorbed from the Gl tract; crosses BBB and pla
centa. A total of 85% of clonazepam is bound by albumin. It is metabolized
in the liver by cytochrome P450 enzymes to several metabolites that are ex-
creted in the urine. Peak plasma levels occur ~3 hours after oral administration.
The t/, ranges from 20 to 40 hours in humans. No information is available for 
animals.
c. Adverse effects. Tolerance to the anticonvulsant effects of clonazepam has been
reported in dogs, which is usually noted after weeks of therapy. Gl disturbances,
including vomiting, hypersalivation, and diarrhea/constipation imay occur.
5. Lorazepam
a. Therapeutic uses
(1) It can be adiministcred orally for a short-term at-home trcatment of dogs hav-
ing cluster scizures.
(2) It is also useful in cats as a maintenance anticonvulsant, and the chances of
developing idiopathic hepatic nccrosis are minimal.
(3) It may be safely used in individuals with compromised liver function and in
 geriatric dogs because it does not produce active metabolites.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) After oral administration, it is rapidly absorbed from the Gl tract in dogs,
is ~2 hours.
(2) Approximately 85% of lorazepam is bound by albumin.
(3) It is primarily metabolized to its glucuronide conjugation in dogs and cats.
-ny on paeduos se soop u! saisey ynw s! aeanfuos ai yo loneuoy a
mans and cats.
(4) It is excreted primarily in the urine and to a lesser extent in the feces of
dogs. In cats, the drug is excreted in equal parts in both feces and urine.
(5) In humans, the mean ty, is ~12 hours, whereas ty, of lorazepam glu-
curonide is ~18 hours. No information is available for animals.
C. Adverse effects. Increased appetite, paradoxical excitation, and anxiety have
been reported to occur early in therapy, although they resolve with continued
use or by decreasing the dose.
Potassium bromide (KBr)
1. Mechanism of action
a. It is hypothesized that Br- enters neurons via Cl- channels, resulting in hyper-
polarization of the neuronal membrane.
b. Barbiturates and benzodiazepines, which enhance Cl- conductance, may act in
synergy with KBr to hyperpolarize neurons, thus raising the seizure threshold.
2. Therapeutic uses 
a. KBr is administered orally to treat refractory seizures in dogs. The use in cats is
 not recommended, since it evokes severe asthma in this species.
b. It is used in combination with phenobarbital to terminate refractory generalized
tonic-clonic convulsions in dogs.
3. Pharmacokinetics
a. Absorption. Br- is quickly absorbed from the Gl tract following oral administra-
tion.
Drugs Acting on tle_Central Mervous System87
b. Metabolism. Br- is neither metabolized nor bound to plasma proteins. It has a
long ty (25 days in dogs and 10 days in cats), and it may take up to 6 months
to achieve stable plasma Br concentrations.
c. Elimination. Br- is eliminated exclusively by the kidneys.
4. Adverse effects
a. Transient sedation at the beginning of therapy may occur.
b. GI effects. Stomach irritation can produce nausea and vomiting. Vomiting.
anorexia, and constipation are indications of toxicity.
C. Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, lethargy, irritability, and aimless walking are
additional adverse effects of Br-.
d. Pancreatitis may be precipitated by Br-.
e. Severe asthma can be seen in Br--treated cats.
F.Valproic acid and sodium valproate
1. Chemistry. Valproic. acid is a derivative of carboxylic acid. It is structurally unre-
lated to other anticonvulsant drugs.
2. Therapeutic uses
a. In dogs, valproic acid is eifective in controlling seizures when given orally, but
its short fy: makes it impractical for long-term use. It is a second to fourth-line
 anticonvulsant that may be useful as an adjunctive treatment in some dogs.
b. Its clinical usefulness in cats has not been evaluated.
3. Pharmacokinetics
 a. Sodium valproale is rapidly converled to valproic acid in the acidic. cnvironment
of the stomach where it is rapidly absorbed from the Gl tract. The bioavailability
via this route in dogs is ~80% and peak levels occur in 1 hour.
b. It is rapidly and well distributed in the extracellular fluid, with 70-80% bound
by albumin in dogs. CSF lovels of valproic acid are ~10% of the plasma levels.
c. It is metabolized in the liver and is conjugated with glucuronide. These metabo-
lites and a small quantity of parent drug are excreted in the urine. The elimina-
tion t /, in dogs is 1.5-3 hours.
4. Adverse effects
a. Gl disturbances and hepatotoxicity. Vomiting, anorexia, and diarrhea may be
seen, which may be diminished by administration with food. Hepatotoxicity.
including liver failure, is a potential adverse effect in dogs.
b. Other potential adverse effects include CNS effects (sedation, ataxia, behav-
ioral changes, etc.), dermatologic. effects (alopecia, rash, etc.), hematologic ef-
fects (thrombocytopenia, reduced platelet aggregation, leukopenia, anenia, etc.),
pancreatitis, and edema.
Gabapentin. It is a synthctic GABA analog that can cross BBB to cxert its anticonvul-
sant effect.
1. Mechanism of action, GABA conlent in neurons is incrcascd by gabapentin admin-
istration. However, the main effect of gabapentin is due to its inhibition of voltage-
dependent Ca?l channels to decrease neuronal Ca²+ levels, thereby inhibiting exci-
tatory neurotransmitter release (e.g., glutamate).
2. Therapeutic uses. Gabapentin may be useful as adjunctive therapy for refractory or
complex partial seizures, or in the treatment of chronic pain in dogs or cats. It is
administered orally.
3. Pharmacokinetics. In dogs, oral bioavailability is ~80%. Peak plasma levels oc-
bul ≤40% of gabapentin is melabolized by the liver to N-methyl-gabapentin.
The elimination tu/, is 3-4 hours in dogs. No tys, information is available for
cats.
4. Adverse effects. Sedation, ataxia, and mild polyphagia are noticeable side effects.
Abrupt discontinuation of gabapentin may cause seizures.
H.
Levetiracetam. It is used orally as an adjunctive therapy for refractory canine cpilepsy.
It is well tolerated in dogs and an initial prospective trial in cats was favorable.
88 Chapter 4 Il H
1. Mechanism of action. Levetiracetam inhibits hypersynchronization oi epileptiform
burst firing and propagalion of seizure activity. The exact mechanism is nol under-
stood. However, recent evidence suggests that it binds synaptic vesicle protein 2A
in the neuron; the interaction with this neuronal vesicular protein may account for
levetiracetam's anticonvulsant cffect.
 2. Pharmacokinetics
a. It is well absorbed after oral administration and has 100% bioavailability. It is
well distributed and minimally (10%) bound by albumin.
b. While not exlensively metabolized, the acelamide group of the drug is hy-
drolyzed to the carboxylic. acid metabolite that is apparently inactive. Both the
parent drug and metabolites are excreted into urine. The elimination ty. in dogs.
~4 hours and in cats, ~8 hours.
3. Adverse effects. It has little side effects, which include changes in behavior, drowsi-
ness, and Gl disturbances (vomiting and anorexia). Withdrawal of this drug should
be slow in order to prevent "withdrawal" seizures.
 Felbamate is a dicarbamate drug and is used orally in dogs to treat refractory epilepsy
as an adjunctive therapy or a sole anticonvulsant agent for patients with focal and gen-
eralized sei7ures. At clinical doses, felbamate does not induce sedation and thus is
particularly useful in the control of obtunded mental status due to brain tumor or
cerebral infarct.
1. Mechanism of action
a. Blockade of NMDA receptor-mediated neuronal excitation.
b. Potentiation of GABA-mediated neuronal inhibition.
c. Inhibition of vollage-dependent Na- and Ca2+ channels.
2. Pharmacokinetics
a. It is readily absorbed from the Gl tract after oral administration, but bioavailabil-
ity in pups is only 30% that of adult dogs.
b. In dogs, ~70% of felbamate is excreted in the urine unchanged; the remainder
undergoes liver metabolism by cytochrome P450 enzymes and conjugation.
C. The elimination tuy, is 5-6 hours in adult dogs and 2.5 hours in pups.
3. Adverse effects. Side effects of felbamate are infrequently seen.
 a. The most noticeable side effect is liver dysfunction. Thus, il should not be given
to dogs with a liver disease. Because of the potential for hepatotoxicity, it is rec-
felbamate (herapy.
b. Reversible bone marrow depression is rarely seen in dogs receiving felbamate.
These dogs may have thrombocytopenia and leucopenia.
c. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca and generalized tremor are rarely seen side effects of
felbamate in dogs.
 Zonisamide is a sulfonamide-based anticonvulsant drug that can be used as a sole an-
ticonvulsant or an adjunctive therapy to control refractory epilepsy in dogs with mini-
mal adverse effects. It is administered orally twice a day. However, the cost could be a
problem for using this drug in dogs. The drug has not been studied sufficiently in cats
to be recommended for this species.
 1. Mechanism of action. Zonisamide inhibits voltage-dependent Na' and Ca?I chan-
nels of neurons to induce hyperpolarization and decreased Ca2+ influx.
2. Pharmacokinetics
a. It is well absorbed from the Gl tracl after oral administratlion to dogs.
b. It is evenly distributed in the body after Gl absorption and has low protein bind-
ing.
c. Most of zonisamide is excreled in the urine, but ~20% is melabolized by
the liver. In humans, it is metabolized to acetylzonisamide, 2-sulfamoylacetyl
phenol, and glucuronide.
d. The elimination tiy. in dogs is ~15 hours.
3. Adverse effects. Zonisamide has high safety margin in dogs. The reported side
effects include sedation, ataxia, and anorexia.
Drugs Arting on the _Central  Vervous System 89
 CNS STImULANTS (ANALEPTICS)
A.
Doxapram is used most frequently in veterinary medicine as a CNs stimulant.
1. Mechanism of action. Doxapram stimulates respiration, which is a result of di-
rect stimulation of the medullary respiratory centers and probably via activation
of carotid and aortic chemorcceptors. Iransient incrcases in respiratory rale and
tidal volume occur. Detailed mechanism by which doxapram stimulates respiratory
center transiently is not known.
2. Therapeutic uses
 a. Doxapram is used to arouse animals from inhalant and parenteral anesthesia or
anesthetic overdose. The depth of anesthesia is reduced, but the effect could be
transient.
b. Doxapram is used for respiratory stimulation in neonates affer assisted birth or
C-section, and in lightly anesthetized adult dogs to evaluate laryngeal function.
Low doses of doxapram increase the respiratory minute volume by stimulating
the carotid bodies.
c. Doxapram is not effective in reviving a severely depressed neonate and is not a
good substitute for endotracheal intubation and ventilation.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. The drug is well distributed into tissues. In dogs, doxapram is
rapidly metabolized by the liver and most is excreted as metabolites in the urine
within 24-48 hours of administration.
4. Administration
 a. IV administration produces an effect for 5-10 minutes.
b. IM administration and topical application to the buccal mucosa are also effective
in neonates.
5. Adverse effects. High doses of doxapram may induce seizures. Hypertension, ar-
rhythmias, seizures, and hyperventilation leading to respiratory alkalosis can hap-
pen. These effecis are most probable with repealed or high doses of doxapram.
Y.
terms are used interchangeably in veterinary medicine to refer the drugs that calm the
animal and promote sleep but do not necessarily induce sleep, even at high doses.
Ataractic means "undisturbed"; neuroleptic means "to take hold of nerves." Tranquil-
ized animals are usually calm and easy to handle, but they may be aroused by and
respond to stimuli in a normal fashion (e.g., biting, scratching, kicking). When used 
 as preanesthetic medications, these drugs enable the use of less general anesthetic.
 Phenothiazine derivatives include acepromazine, promethazine, chlorpromazine,
A.
fluphenazine, prochlorperazine, and trimeprazine.
1. Mechanism of action. Phenothiazine derivatives affect the CNS at the basal gan-
glia, hypothalamus, limbic system, brain stem, and reticular activating system. They
block dopamine, &1-adrenergic and serotonergic receptors.
2. Pharmacologic effects
a. CNS effects
(1) The tranquilizing effects are due to depression of the brain stem and con-
nections to the cerebral cortex (reticular activating system), probably via
 blockade of dopamine and 5-HT receptors.
(2) All phenothiazines decrease spontaneous motor activity. At high doses, ani-
 mals will be immobilized in a fixed posiltion for long periods fextrapyramidal
symptoms).
(3) The phenothiazine-induced tranquilization is not accompanied by analgesia.
b. Cardiovascular effects
(1) Hypotension may develop as a result of α-adrencrgic. reccptor blockade
90|Chaplc
tone from hypovolemia may become profoundly hypotensive iollowing
phcnothiazinc adiministration, owing to epinephrine reversal. Treatmcnt for
this hypotension should include IV fluids and possibly an α1-agonist drug
(e.g., phenylephrine).
(2) Sinus bradycardia and second-degree heart block may uccur with high
doses.
(3) Reflex sinus tachycardia may occur if hypotension develops.
bination of the following could be responsible.
(a)  α-Rcccptor blockade in the myocardium.
(b)  Local anesthetic-like effect on the myocardial cells.
(c) Reduccd systemic blood prcssure.
(5) Inotropic effect. Myocardial contractility is either unaffected or slightly re-
duccd (due to α -rcceptor blockade in thc myocardium).
c. Respiratory effects
(1) Respiratory depression. It is induccd by largc doses of phenothiazine, which
suppresses the respiratory center. Opioids can potentiate this effect of phe-
nothiazinc.
(2) Phenothiazines depress the maximal ventilatory response to an elevated
CO2 partial pressure, although the threshold for this response remains
normal.
d. Gl effects
(1) Motility is inhibited, probably due to activation of β-receptors, resulting in
Gl muscle relaxation. In addition, phenothiazines have weak atropine-like
effccts.
(2) Emesis is suppressed because phenothiazines block dopamine receptors in
the cells of ihe chemoreceptor trigger zone in the area of poslrema of the
medulla oblongata.
e.
Effects on blood. Packed cell volume decreases as a resull of splenic sequeslra-
tion of red blood cells owing to vasodilatation.
f. Metabolic effects
(1) Hypothermia/hyperthermia
(a) Body lemperature tends lo decrease after tranquilizalion because of in-
creased heat loss from vasodilatation and decreased heat production
from a lack of muscular activity.
(b)  Phenothiazine-induced depression of the thermoregulation center in
the hypothalamus may lead to hypothermia/hyperthermia, which de-
 pends on aimbicnt temperature. This effcct is probably due to blockade
 of dopamine and 5-HT receptors.
(2) Hyperglycemia. This is due to increascd epincphrinc rclcase, in responsc
to phenothiazine-induced hypotension. Epinephrine, in turn, promotes liver
glycogenolysis by activating B2-receptors.
(3) Hyperprolactinemia. This is due to increased prolactin secretion from the
anterior pituitary gland. Blockade of D2-rcccptors on thc lactotropcs in-
creases prolactin secretion.
3. Therapeutic uses
a. Phenothiazines are primarily used for tranquilization. They generally do not have
analgesic effccts. They should be used cautiously as a restraining agent in ag-
gressive dogs, as it may make the animal more prone to startle and react to
noises or other sensory inputs. Therc is an individual variability with rcgard to
the sensitivity to phenothiazines.
b. Most of these drugs arc cffcctivc as antiemetics.
c. Administration of a phenothiazine prior to use of inhalant anesthetics can re-
duce the incidence of arrhythmias caused by myocardial sensitization to cate-
cholamines.
d. Promethazine and trimeprazine are used to control allergy, because they block
H,-receptors.
Drugs Acting on the_Central Nervous Systeim 
91
4. Pharmacokinetics
a. In general, these tranquilizers have duration of action of 3-6 hours. They are
well distributed in the circulation and >8o%, of circulating phenothiazincs arc
bound by albumin.
b. They are metabolized by an oxidative process via cytochrome P450 enzymes,
which is followed by conjugation. The metabolites are mostly inactive and arc
excreted by the kidneys along with small quanlily of parenl compounds over
several days. The elimination t ;, is ~3 hours in equine.
c. Acepromazine withdrawal periods in cattle and swine. Since acepromazine
is not approvcd by FDA to bc uscd in thcse two species, the cxtralabel with-
drawal intervals recommended by the Food Animal Residue Avoidance Data-
bank (FARAD) are 7-day preslaughter and 48-hour milk periods.
5. Administration. Phenothiazines can be administered orally, IV, IM, or SC.
6. Adverse effects. There is no reversal agent for this class of drugs.
 a. Accidental intracarotid administration in horses results in the inmediate onset of
seizure activity and, sometimes, death.
jean jo yuou t uym siemiue oi uail aq lou pinous Aaul suuosiod
with an organophosphate compound.
tion of animals prior to allergy testing.
d. Paraphimosis may occur in stallions, which is due to relaxation of retractive
penis muscles via α-reccptor blockadc. Thus, phenothiazines should be used
cautiously or avoided allogether in breeding stallions.
7. Contraindications
a. Anti-ChE poisoning or suspected trcatment with anti-ChE antiparasitic drugs.
b. History of blood loss and hypotension.
c. Avoid in animals with moderate to severe liver dysfunction or portacaval shunt.
B. Benzodiazepine derivatives (see also Il D)
1. Preparations. Diazepam, midazolam, clonazempam, and zolazepam are four drugs
in this group that are used in veterinary medicine.
2. Mechanism of action (See Il D)
3.
 Pharmacokinetics (scc Il D)
4. Pharmacologic effects
a. Cardiovascular effects are minimal.
b. Respiratory effects. Deprcsscd ventilation miay occur in an additive manner
when the benzodiazepines are administered with other respiratory depressants
(e.g., opicids, barbiturates, α2-agonists). These drugs inhibit the respiratory cen-
ters in the medulla.
c. Muscular effects. Relaxalion is mediated by benzodiazepine's inhibitory effects
in the spinal cord.
5. Therapeutic uses
a. General
(1) They are used as anticonvulsant in all the domestic species
(2) Benzodiazepines can be given with ketamine or tiletanine (Telazol) to
provide muscle relaxation. This combination is very convenicnt for short
examinations and surgical procedures.
(3) When used alone, benzodiazepine derivatives are not reliable tranquiliz-
ers in horscs, dogs, or cats, but thcy providc satisfactory tranquilization in 
sheep, goats, and neonatal foals.
b. Diazepam
(1) Diazepam is used orally, rectally, or IV as an anticonvulsant for the control
of seizures and status epilepticus.
-nau joy (joueydiong (oa) spioido ym uoneuiquoo u! Al pasn aq ueo ll (z)
roleptanalgesia or with cyclohexylamines (e.g., ketamine) or barbiturates
(c.g., thiopental) for the induction of general anesthesia.
92Chapter 4 IV B
c. Midazolam
(1) It is used in combination with an opioid (c.g., butorphanol or oxymorphone)
as a neuroleptanalgesic in older or debilitated dogs and cats.
(2) It can be used as part of the drug protocol for induction of anesthesia.
Mixed with ketarmine, it provides muscle relaxation. Midazolam, injected
IV, reduces the total thiobarbiturate dose needed for intubation in dogs and
cats.
d. Zolazepam is used exclusively with tiletarmine (Tilazol) for anesthesia in dogs,
cats, and other domestic and wild animals,
6. Adverse effects (scc also Il D 1 c)
a. Benzodiazepines may produce excitement rather than tranquilization in somc
animals. Animals that are mentally deprcssed or sedatcd prior to the administra-
tion of a benzodiazepine are less likely to become excited.
b. Ataxia, weakness, and muscle fasciculations may occur in horses.
c. Reversal. Flumazenil is a specific competitive antagonist for benzodiazepine
receptors and has minimal agonist activity. Flumazenil is given IV at 0.01-0.02
mg/kg.
C.
thereby causing analgesia, sedation, and skeletal muscle relaxation. These effects of
α2-agonists make them useful as preanesthetics. The dosages of anesthetics usually can
be reduced by ≥70%. Because of their nature in activating α2-adrenergic receptors,
they have many untoward effects, including hypertension, bradycardia, and decreased
Gl motility. flowever, the safety of these drugs can be greatly increased by the use of
α2- antagonists to reverse their effects.
1. Mechanism of action. α2-Agonists activate αz-receptors that are Gi/o-coupled recep-
tors; Gi/o mediates many inhibitory effects on the nervous systems and endocrine
glands (see Chapter 1 for G-proteins and Figure 2-3 of Chapter 2 for xz-receptor
location). figh doses of xylazine, detomidine, and romifidine also activate α-
receptors.
2. Pharmacological effects
a. Analgesia. Centrally aclive xz-agonisls cxert a powerful analgesic aclion ovcr
head, neck, and body, but is minimal in cxtrernitics. Thcse drugs may play a
role imodulating spinal pain processing.
(1) α-Receptors are located on the dorsal horn neurons of the spinal cord,
where they can inhibit the release of nociceptive neurotransmitters, for ex-
ample, substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CCRP).
(2) &2-Adrenergic mechanisms do not work through opioidergic mechanisms,
because cross-tolerance is not usually present. α-Agonist-mediated analge-
sia is not reversed by opioid antagonists.
b. Sedation. α-Agonists induce potent sedation.
(1) The degree of sedation varies among species and compounds. Ruminants are
most scnsitivc to α2-agonists, followcd by cats, dogs, and horscs. Pigs are
Icast sensitive to α-agonists in domcstic animals.
(2) Among availablc α-agonists, following clinical doses, medetomidinc causes
the greatest sedation, which is followed by xylazine. Romitidine and detomi-
dine cause least sedation among the four.
(3) Locus coeruleus is among the structures responsible for the c2-agonist-
induced sedation and the α?-receptors in this structure mediate the sedation.
(4) High doses of α2-agonists may induce CNS excitation, which is attributable
to activation of α-receptors.
c. Skeletal muscle relaxation. α2-Agonists produce skeletal muscle relaxation by
inhibiting intraneuronal transmission of impulses in the CNs. These drugs do not
work al the neuromuscular junclion. At the clinical doscs, romifidine cxerts less
muscle relaxant (head drop) and ataxia than other α2-agonists used in veterinary
medicine, probably because of its additional α -agonistic (excitatory) activity.
d. Emesis. It is induced in carnivores and omnivores, and is commonly seen in the
cat, and less frcquently in the dog. Emesis is induced more ircqucntly by IM
Drugs Acting on the_Central Nervous System93
than IV administration. These drugs activate the α2-receptors in the chemorecep-
tor trigger zone of the area postrema to induce emesis.
e. Gl effects. αy-Agonists reduce both Gl motility and secretions and these effects
make them useful for the treatment of diarrhea. α?-Agonists may cause these Cl
effects by inhibiting the release of acetylcholine from parasympathetic nerves.
f. Cardiovascular effects. Thc IV administration of α2-agonists causes mild hyper-
 The IM administration of α-agonists usually causes only hypotension.
(1) Bradycardia accompanied by sinus arrhythmia and/or second-degree heart
block is usually seen during hypotension and hypertension.
(2) The hypertension is due to activation of the postsynaptic αz-receptors of
vascular smooth muscle.
-ss ai aq aealai auuadauidaou paonpau Aa pasnes si uoisualoday aul (e)
pathetic nerve at the vascular smooth muscle. This is due to the decreased
syimpathetic outflow from the CNS as well as activation of presynaptic α2-
receptors in the sympathetic terminal.
(4) Bradycardia (with or without sinus arrhythmia) is due to decrcascd nore-
pinephrine relcasc to the myocardium, particularly the SA node. An increase
in barorececptor reflex during hypertension may also contribute to bradycar-
dia. Therefore, administration of an anticholinergic agent may change the
α2-agonist-induced bradycardia into tachycardia, while potentiating the αz-
agonist-induced hypertension.
g. Renal effects. α2-Agonists induce diuresis through inhilbiting vasopressin release
and/or inhibiting vasopressin's action on free water reabsorption from the col-
lecting duct of the kidney.
edema) in ruminants, cspecially shcep. This cffcct is not sccn in othcr spccics.
Hypoxemia is most severe after IV administration of the drug. Postural changes
(lateral recumbency) during CNS depression probably contribute to impaired
Oxygenation. The hypoxemia is due to activation of peripheral α2-receptors at
(1) vascular and bronchial smooth muscle, causing bronchospasm and va-
sospasm;
(2) blood platelets, (
causing transient platelet aggregation with pulmonary micro-
embolism; and
(3) pulmonary intravascular macrophage, causing activation followed by cy-
tokine and inflammatory mediator release.
i. Neuroendocrine effects. αz-Agonists inhibit sympathoadrenal outflow and de-
crcasc the relcasc of norcpinephrine and cpinephrine.
(1) αz-Agonists inhibit insulin release; this effect is very pronounced in rumi-
nants, which results in a moderate to severe hyperglycemia lasting up to
24 hours.
(2) α2-Agonists increase growth hormone release by inhibiting somatostatin re-
lease from the hypothalamus and stimulating growth hormone—stimulating
hormone release from the median eminence. The α2-agonist-induced growth
hormone release is not sustained; consecutive daily drug administration can
only maintain incrcascd sccrction for <1 wcck.
3. Therapeutic uses
α2-Agonists arc uscd as a scdativc, analgesic, and immobilizing agcnt. Thcy arc
also uscd to induce cpidural analgesia, as a prcanesthetic, and as a part of the
anesthetic combination. In this regard, xylazine-ketamine is a commonly used, but
not very safe, parenteral anesthetic combination [see 5 c (6)].
4. Antagonism of the effects of α2-agonists. α-Receptor blockers have been used
to reverse the pharmacological and toxicological effects of α2-agonists. They are
administered IV or IM. Yohimbine (0.1 mg/kg) and tolazoline (1-2 mg/kg) are de-
sirable α-blockers for nonruminants and ruminants, respectively. Atipamezole
(0.2 mg/kg) works well in all species. Atropine should not be used to antagonize
the bradycardia and heart block induced by α2-agonists, since it imay cause severc
hypertension, tachycardia, and Gl atony in animals trcated with an α-agonist.
94Clapter 4 IV C
5. Xylazine. It is approved by the FDA for use in the cat, dog, horses, and wildlife, for
example, deer and elk. However, it is also frequently used in other species, particu-
larly the cattle. It is administered IM, IV, or SC.
a. Pharmacokinetics
(1) The distribution fy. of xylazine is 1-6 minules. The fy, of elimination afler
IV administration of xylazine is 50 minutes in the horse, 40 minutes in cat-
tle, 25 minutes in sheep, and 30 minutes in the dog. The pharmacologic.
effects of xylazine may last much longer than its plasma ti/s.
(2) Xylazine is converted in the liver by cytochrome P450 enzymes into hy-
droxyl/methyl/thiourea metabolites. About 7o% of metabolites are excreted
into urine and 30% into feces. Although it is not reported, some forms of
conjugates are expected to be found in the excreta.
(3) In cattle, after IM administration of 0.35 mg/kg, IM, concentrations of xy-
lazine and 2,6-dimethylaniline (a toxic metabolite of xylazine) were below
the limit of quantification (10 μg/kg) by 72 hours in tissues and 12 hours
in milk. Thus, the FARAD recommends a preslaughter withdrawal period of
4 days and milk withdrawal time of 24 hours in cattle.
b. Adverse effects
(1) Because of the Gl stasis associated with xylazine administration, bloat may
be a result.
(2) Xylazine-induced bradycardia with sinus arrhythmia/arrest can be se-
vere, Close monitoring is needed; in very severe cases, the use of an α2-
antagonist may be neccssary to savc the animal.
(3) Xylazine affecis the thermorcgulation center in the hypothalamus, thus it
produces hypothermia when the ambient temperature is low, and hyper-
thermia when the ambient temperature is high. Thus, the use of xylazine
to immobilize wildlife should be performed with caution and the use of
α2-antagonist to control the pharmacological effecls of xylazine (or other
α2-agonists) in wildlife is a must.
c. Contraindications
(1) Cardiac aberrations
(2) Hypotension or shock
(3) Renal insufficiency
(4) Hepalic impairment
(5) Epilepsy (because xylazine may precipitate seizures in susceptible animals).
(6) Use of xylazine in combination with ketamine should be used only in
young healthy animals because this combination synergistically suppresses
cardiopulmonary function of the animal.
(7) Immediate collapse, convulsions, and sudden death can occur in horses 
given xylazine inlo the carolid artery.
(8) A caultious approach should be takcn whenever xylazine is used in trcat-
ment of colic, because xylazine's powerful analgesic effect can mask the
underlying problem and because xylazine can paralyze the Gl tract.
(9) Xylazine should not be given to animals (particularly mares and ruminants)
within the last month of pregnancy, since it may induce abortion.
(10) Xylazine should not be given to dehydrated animals or thosc with urinary
 obstruction because of its potent diuretic effect.
6. Detomidine (Dormosedan?). It is approved by the FDA for use in horses. It is ad-
ministered IM or IV.
a. Pharmacokinetics
(1) The elimination t y, is 1.2 hours for the IV dose and 1.8 hours for the IM
dose,
(2) Metabolism to detomidine carboxylic acid and hydroxydetomidine glu-
curonide and thereafter excretion into the urine seems to be the major
elimination route.
b. Adverse effects
(1) Following the recommended dose, piloerection, sweating, partial penis
prolapse, and salivation, and occasionally, slight muscle tremors may be
secn.
Drugs Acting on tlhe _Central Nervous Systen」 95
(2) Excessive doses of detomidine can induce CNS excitation. The above two
side effects of detomidine are also seen with the administration of other
x2-agonists.
(3) IV sulfonamides should not be used in detomidine-treated horses as poten-
tially fatal dysrhythmias may occur.
(4）[
Detomidinc at 400 μg/kg (10x of rccommendcd dose of 40 μg/kg) daily
for thrce consccutivc days can produce myocardial necrosis in horses.
(5) Other adverse effects seen with xylazine administration may also occur in
animals treated with detomidine.
7. Medetomidine (Dormitor). It is the most potent and selective α)-agonist avail-
able for use in veterinary medicine. It can induce light anesthesia in some individ-
ual animals; short examinations/procedures can be performed in these animals.
a. Pharmacokinetics
(1) After IV or IM administration, onset of effect is rapid (5 minutes for IV;
10-15 minutes for IM). Peak concentration after IM administration in dogs
and cats is seen within 30 minutes. The elimination ty, is 1-1.5 hours.
(2) Medetomidine is metabolized by the liver cytochrome P450 enzymes into
hydroxyl-medetomidine and conjugates. In addition, medelomidine has been
shown to inhibil cylochrome P450 enzymes of the liver.
b. Adverse effects. These are the same as stated in the xylazine section and are
the extension of the pharmacological effects of the α?-agonist. Howevcr, since
medetomidine is a very potent α-agonist, the adverse effects can be very se-
vere. Thus, the use of an α2-antagonist, for example, atipamezole may be
needed to reverse these adverse effects of medetomidine.
8. Romifidine (Sedivet). It is for IV use in horses.
a. Pharmacokinetics. Following IV administration, the climination Iy,. is ~50
minutes. It is melabolized by the liver (cylochrome P450 enzymes) into 4-
hycroxyromifidine and further into glucuronide conjugate, which is cxcreted into
urine.
b. Adverse effects. The adverse effects of romifidine are similar to those of xylazine
and detomidine.
OPIOIDS
A.
General features
1. Terminology
a. The term "opioid" is all-inclusivc, and refers to a drug that binds to all or part
of a subtype of opioid rcceptors. An opioid may hc synthelic, semisynthelic, 0r
naturally occurring. The drug may be an agonist or an antagonist.
b. The term "opiates" applies to drugs derived from the poppy (opium) plant.
c. The term "narcotics" is commonly used to refer to opioid analgesics. In phar
macology, the term refers to drugs that induce sleep, but in the legal arena, it is
used to indicate any drug that causes dependence.
d. The term "partial agonist" is to describe the substance thal aclivales a roceptor,
but only produces a partial physiological response compared to a full agonist
(see Figure 1-5). It produces a partial response because it has high afinity for
the receptor, but has lower intrinsic activity. Thus, it displays both agonistic and
antagonistic effects. Such a substance shows agonistic activity when it is given
alone; however, if it is given after a full agonist, it will antagonize/reduce the
effecl of the full agonist. Example: Butorphanol is a partial agonist for the μ-
receplor (see below).
e. The term "agonist-antagonist" is to describe the substance that has agonistic
effecl on one kind of receptors, but has anlagonistic effecl on another kind of rc-
ceptors. Example: Nalbuphine is an agonist for the K-receptor, and an antagonist
for the μ-receptor (see below).
96
Chapter4VA
TABLE 4-1. Opioid Receptor-Mediated Effects 
Receptor Types
Effects
14
K
Analgesia
Supraspinal
+
+
十
Spinal
1
1
 Sedation
+
+
(
↓Respiration
+
0
()
↓GI transit
0
0
Diuresis
0
+
(
NT Release
↓Acetylcholine
+
0
↓Dopamine
0
Hormone Release
Prolactin
+
0
0
Crowth lhormone
0
+
↓Vasopressin
0
+
0
Euphoria
1
0
0
Dysploria
0
+
0
Miosis (dogs)
+
+
0
Vasodilatation
1
0
0
Bradycardia
+
0
0
Activities of drugs are given at the receptors for which the dlrug
has an effect.
+, receptor mecliates the effect; 0, no) effect. NT. neurotransmitter
2. Receptors. Opioid receptors are naturally occurring sites in the body that respond
to endogenous opioid neuropeptides (i.e., enkephalins, dynorphins, endorphins).
All opioid receptors are Giyo-coupled receptors that mediate the inhibition of
neurotransmission and endocrine secretion (see Chapter 1 for information on
G proteins).
a. The receptors are present in numerous cells/tissues, including the brain, spinal
cord, urinary tract, Gl tract, and vas deferens.
b. Classification. There are at least three receptor subtypes. The following are infor
mation on the location of the receptor and effects mediated by the receptor (see
also Table 4-1),
(1) Mu (μ) receptors are localcd throughout the brain and in laminae I and Il of
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
Activation of μ-receptors causes supraspinal and spinal analgesia, euphoria,
sedation, miosis, respiratory depression, chemical depcndence, and inhibi-
tion of ACh and dopamine release, and decreased Gl motility due to inhibi-
tion of ACh release.
(2) Kappa (k) receptors are found in the cerebral cortex, spinal cord, and other
brain regions, for example, hypothalamus.
Activation of k-receptors results in spinal and supraspinal analgesia, mild
sedation, dysphoria, inhibition of vasopressin release to induce diuresis, and
miosis.
(3) Delta (8) receptors are located in the limbic syslem, cerebral corlex,
and spinal cord. Activation of &-receptors results in spinal and 
supraspinal analgesia, inhibition of dopamine release, and cardiovascular
depression.
C. Drug-receptor relationship. A drug may afiect several receptors in the same
way (as an agonist or an antagonist), or it may be an agonist or partial agonist
for one and an antagonist for another (Table 4-2).
3. General characteristics of opioids
a. Pharmacologic effects
Drugs Acting on the Central Nervous System  97
TABLE 4-2. Actions and Selectivities of Some Opioid Drugs at the Three
Receptor Classes
Receptor Types
Drugs
μ
K
&
Trainadol
+
0
Methadone
+++
0
Morphine
+++
+
0
Etorphine
+++
++
十
+++
Fentanyl
+++
0
Sufentanil
+++
十
+
Butorphanol
P
0
Buprenorphine
0
Nallbuphine
+十
0
Naloxone
Diprenorphine
Arlivities of drugs are given at the receptors ior which ihe agem hns affinity.
ue si sjoquas jo anqunu atl Aue ou ‘o suoap eued a jsoeue '- suone ‘1
indication of potency.
(1) Analgesic effects. Endogenous opioids (e.g., endorphins, enkephalins, dynor-
phins) are releascd by the neuroendocrine cells to activate opioid reccptors.
Exogenous opioids are used to activate or antagonize these receptors.
(a) (Opioid analgesia occurs at the level of the brain (supraspinal), spinal
 cord, and possibly the periphery.
(b)μ-Receplor agonists produce profound analgesia.
(c)  The duration of opioid analgesia is usually shorter than the elimination
I', for reasons that are not understood.
(2) Respiratory effects
(a)μ-Receplor agonisis are respiratory depressants; therefore, they cause an
increase in the arterial COy tension and a decrease in the arlerial O2
tension and pH. The hypercapnia results from a reduced sensitivity of
neurons in the brain stem to CO2.
(b) In dogs, μ-receptor agonists frequently cause panting, which may be a
thermoregulatory response. The opioid resets the dog's hypothalamic
temperature control point; by panting. the dog is trying to cool itself to a
new scl point.
(3) Cardiovascular effects. (Opioids generally spare the cardiovascular system.
(a) The heart rate may decrease in dogs following administration of a μ-
receptor agonist, this is mediated via vagal stimulation.
(b) Hypotension may develop from peripheral vasodilatation, which is also
mediated by μ-receptors.
(4) Gl effects. Antidiarrheal effects and constipation are caused by stimulation
 Of central (i.e., μu) and peripheral (ie., k and μ) receptors.
 b. Therapeutic uses. Opioids are used for 
(1)  Analgesia
(2)  Preanesthetic. medication
(3) Induction and maintenance of anesthesia in dogs and cats. μ-Agonists pro-
duce a dose-dependent decrease in the minimum alveolar concentration
(MAC) of inhalant anesthetic: necessary to produce anesthesia, bul usually
they will not produce anesthesia alone.
B
Opioid agonists
 1. Morphine. It is the prototype opioid agonist to which all others are compared
(Table 4-3).
98
Chapter
4VB
TABLE 4-3. Relative Analgesic. Activities and Elimination Half-Lives of Opioids
Elimination thy, in Humans
Relative Analgesic Activity
Opioids
(hours)
(Morphine = 1)
Tramadol
6.3-8.8
x0.5
Nalbuphinc
5
0.5-1.0
Morphine
3.7
1
Butorphanol
2.1-8.8
4-7
Hydromorphone 
2.6
5
Oxymorphonc
1.3
10
Alfentanil
1.5-2
7.5-25
Buprenorphine
37
30
Fentanyl
4
75-125
Sufentanil
2.5
375-1,250
a. Mechanism of action. Morphine is a μ-agonist and a less polent k-agonisl.
b.
Pharmacologic effects
(1) In dogs, morphine induces vomiting by stimulating the chemoreceptor trigger
zone. The receptors mecliating opioicdl-induced vomiting are thought to be
the dopaminergic D2-receptors.
(2) In dogs, morphine is generally considered to inhibit Gl motility, but imay
initially induce defecation by increasing Gl muscle contractility, which is
due to an increase in Ca?: release from the sarcoplasmic reticuluin.
(3) In dogs and primates, morphine causes miosis, which is mediated by both
mydriasis.
c. Therapeutic uses
(1) Morphine is used for the treatiment of acute pain in dogs, cats, and horses.
(a) In cats, low doses of morphine can be safely used for pain relief.
(b) In horses, the addition of sedatives (e.g., xylazine or diazepam) reduces
aimless walking activity and results in good analgesia for standing proce-
dures.
(2) Morphine may be used as an anesthetic premedication in dogs.
(3) The venodilation that results from morphine administration has been used in
canine heart failure therapy as a means of reducing cardiac preload.
(4) Antilussive cffect in dogs is quite good.
d. Pharmacokinetics. Morphine can be administered parenterally and epidurally.
When given orally, a sustain-release product may be used.
(1) When given orally, bioavailability of morphine is reduced, probably because
of a high first-pass (liver! effect.
(2) It readily crosses the placerta.
. Thus, it can easily narcotize newborns. The
opioid antagonist naloxone can reverse the effects of morphine and other
opioids in both newhorns and dams.
(3) Morphine is mctabolized in the liver by glucuronidation and cxcreted in the
urine. Because cats are deficient in this metabolic pathway, the ty, of most 
opioids including morphine in cats is probably prolonged.
(4) The eliminalion Iy, is 1 hour in dogs and 1.5 hours in horses.
e. Adverse effects
(1) Hyperexcitability may occur in cats, pigs, cattle, and horses following high
doses of μ-agonist adininistration. Low doses, concurrent administration of a
tranquilizer/sedative, or both will eliminate this side cffecl.
(2) Hypotension. IV morphine-induced vasodilatation/hypotension; part of this
effect is due to histamine release. Other opioids, except meperidine, do not
incrcase hislamine release.
(3) Cerebral hemorrhage and edema. Opioids should be used with caution in
dogs with head injuries because if respiration is depressed and arterial CO2
values increase (which induces vasodilatation), the resultant increased cere-
bral blood flow may contribute to further cerebral hemorrhage and edema.
Drugs Acting on the_Central ervous System99
2. Tramadol. It is a synthetic μ-receplor opiate agonist that also inhibits reuptake of
serolonin and norepinephrine. These latter effects of tramadol contribute to the
drug's analgesic efficacy. It is not a controlled drug in the United States, but has
potential for human abuse.
a. Therapeutic uses. It may be useful as an analgesic or antitussive. It is given
Orally.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) In dogs after oral administration, bioavailability is about 65%, but there is
inter-patient variability.
(2) Tramadol is cxtensively melabolized in the liver; one of the metabolites ()-
desmethyltramadol is active, which is 6 times more potent than tramadol as
an analgesic and has 20 times more potency than tramadol in binding to μ-
receptors. For this reason, naloxone only partially antagonizes the analgesic
effects of tramadol.
(3) Tramadol and (Odesmethyltramadol have a plasma fy, of ~2 hours in dogs.
C. Adverse effects. Tramadol appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats. It could
cause a variety of adverse effects similar to morphine.
3. Methadone. It is a synthetic opiale, which is a μ-agonisl that may be used as an
alternative to morphine in dogs and cats. Methadone causes less sedation and vom-
iting than do morphine.
a. Therapeutic uses. It is administered IV, IM, and SC as an alternative opioid pre.
anesthetic or analgesic in dogs or cats.
b. Pharmacokinetics. It is widely distributed and extensively bound to alhumin
(60-90%). Methadone is metabolized in the liver by cytochrome P450 enzymes
into inactive metabolites. The elimination ty. is 2-3 hours in dogs.
c. Adverse effects. These are very similar to tliose of morphine. Methadone tends
to cause less sedation or vomiting than does morphine.
4. Oxymorphone
a.
Chemistry. Oxymorphone is a dihydroxy derivative of morphine.
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Analgesic effects. The analgesic potency of oxymorphone is ten times that of
morphine.
(2) Gl effects. It occasionally causes vomiting.
(3) Cardiovascular effects. When administered IV to dogs, the cardiac output
transiently decreases, while mean arterial pressure and systemic vascular
resistance increase.
c. Therapeutic uses
(1) Analgesia. Oxymorphone is used as an analgesic in dogs and cats. In cats, it
should be used at a low dose or in combination with a tranquilizer.
(2) Preanesthetic medication. In dogs, oxymorphone is used as a preanesthetic
medication,
(3) Neuroleptanalgesia is a slale of scdation and analgesia without losing con-
sciousness, produced by administering a tranquilizer and an opioid. Oxy-
morphone combined with acepromazine is one example of a neuroleptanal-
gesic combination that is frequently used in dogs.
(4) Anesthesia. In swine, it has been used in combination with xylazine and
ketamine for IV anesthesia.
d. Pharmacokinetics. It is administered via IV, IM, SC, and rectal routes. The onset
of analgesic efficacy 0ccurs within 15-30 minutes, depending on the route of
administration. Plasma fy, is 2-3 hours in humans. The fy, information is not
available for animals. Metabolism and elimination of oxymorphone follow the
same way as morphine.
e. Adverse effects are very similar lo those of morphine.
5. Hydromorphone. This is an injectable opioid sedative/restraining agent, analgesic.
and preanesthetic similar to oxymorphone. It is less expensive than oxymorphone,
but has shorter duration of action.
a. Pharmacokinetics. It is administered via IV, IM, SC, and rectal routes. The on-
set of analgesic eficacy occurs within 15-30 minutes, depending on the roule
of administration. Plasma ty is 2-3 hours in humans. The ty, information is
100Chapter 4 V B
not available for animals. Metabolism and elimination of hydromorphone is the
same as morphine,
b. Adverse effects. Thesc arc similar to those of morphine.
6. Fentanyl. A synthetic opioid that is a potent μ-agonist.
saue ue jo ped se seo pue ssop ui pasn aq sew ueiuag 'sasn snnadeayi 'e
thetic induction regimen or a potent analgesic to control postoperative and
chronic pain,
(1) It is difficult to induce anesthesia with fentanyl alone without the addition of
another drug (e.g., midazolam, thiopental, or isoflurane).
(2)  Transdermal fentanyl patches applied topically can produce analgesia of 
<72 hours. Therefore, these patches are used to control chronic pain. Cats
and dogs achieved effective plasma concentrations (for analgesia) 7 and
 24 hours after topical application, respeclively.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Fentanyl has a more rapid onset of analgesia than morphine after IV admin-
istration because it is more lipid soluble.
(2) It has a shorter duration of action than morphine (30-60 minules in dogs
and cats).
(3) Fentanyl is metabolized in the liver by cytochrome P450 enzymes: the
metabolites are excreted into urine.
(4)  The elimination ty. is ~4 hours in dogs.
C. Adverse effects
(1) Auditory stimuli may evoke a motor response from the animal.
(2) Panting, defecation, and flatulence are common.
(3) Bradycardia and hypersalivation may warrant treatment with anticholinergic
drugs (e.g., glycopyrrolate).
7. Alfentanil. It is a derivative of fentanyl, and is four times less potent than fentanyl.
It is a μu-receptor agonist.
a. Therapeutic uses. It is used as an analgesic and sedative, and is used for adjunc-
tive anesthesia, particularly in cats.
b. Pharmacokinetics. It is given IV, IM, or SC, and is rapidly absorbed following
administration. About 90% of the drug is bound to albumin. It is primarily me.
tabolized in the liver by cytochrome P450 enzymes to inactive metabolites that
are excreted in the urine along with 1% of the unchanged drug. The elimination
Iy, in dogs is 20 minutes.
c. Adverse effects. These are very similar to those of fentanyl.
8. Sufentanil. It is a fentanyl derivative, which is 5-10 times more potent than fentanyl
in analgesic activity.
a.
 Pharmacologic effects resemble those of fentanyl.
h. Therapeutic uses. Il is administered IV, IM, SC, or cpidurally in a minutc dosage
(3 μg/kg). It may be useful for adjunctive anesthesia, epidural analgesia, or a
postoperative analgesic.
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1)  The absorption following the parenteral administration is quick (<5 minutes).
Approximalely 90% is bound to albumin. The elimination ty, is ~2.5 hours
in humans. No fy, information is available for animals.
(2) Sufentanil is metabolized primarily in the liver and small intestine via (-
 demethylation and N-dealkylation. The parent drug and these metabolites
are excreted in the urine.
d. Adverse effects. Dose-related CNS and respiratory depression is the principal
adverse effect.
9. Carfentanil. It is ~10,0o0 times more potent than morphine in analgesic activity
a. Therapeutic uses. It is administered IM to immobilize large/wild animals.
(1) Carfentanil is an opioid used to immobilize large exotic animals, mostly
nondomestic ungulates (e.g., elk, giraffe, and zebra) and large carnivores
(e.g., black bear).
(2) It has been used with xylazine to immobilize wild horses, but its effects in
domestic horses (e.g, muscle rigidity, paddling, tachycardia, and hyperten-
sion) are unacceptahle.
Drugs Acting on the _Central Nervous System101
b. Pharmacokinetics 
(1) The fy. of carfentanil is quite variable (2-24 hours). Thus, shorl-acting opi-
oid reversal agents (e.g., naloxone) are eliminated faster than the carfentanil
and their effects will not last as long.
C. Adverse effects. Carfentanil-induced disruption of body temperature regulation
(hypcrthermia/hypothermia) can be fatal in the field. Respiratory and CNS dc-
pression is another concern. Therefore, the use of a reversing agent is a must to
antagonize the pharmacological effects of carfentanil. Naltrexone is usually used
for this purpose, since it has a longer duration of action than naloxone (see E 1
and 2 for information on opioid antagonists).
C
 Opioid partial agonists
1. Butorphanol. It is a partial agonist for μ-receptors, but a full agonist for K-receptors.
a. Pharmacologic effects. Butorphanol-induced analgesia and respiratory depression
are dose-dependent to a certain point; further increases in the dosage do not
produce more analgesia. Indeed, butorphanol can antagonize the effect of a μ-
agonist that was previously administered.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Opioid reversal. Butorphanol can be used to reverse the μ effects of other
opioids (c.g., morphine, oxymorphone). Il allows rcversal of sedation and
respiratory depression, while maintaining some analgesia (k effect).
(2) Analgesic. Butorphanol is used as an analgesic; it has an analgesic potency
4-7 times that of morphine,
(3) Antitussive and antiemetic. In dogs, butorphanol doses lower than thosc
necessary to produce analgesia have antitussive and antiemetic effects. It is
used for the relief of chronic nonproductive cough associated with inflam-
matory conditions of the upper respiratory tract.
(4) When given as a prcanesthetic, the dose of the induction anesthetic can be
owered.
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Bulorphanol is given IV, IM, SC, or orally. It is completely absorbed afler
administration. it is well distributed in the body, and 80% of circulating
butorphanol is bound by plasma proteins.
and these metabolites are mostly excreled into the urine along with 5% of
the parent drug.
(3) The elimination ty: <1 hour in horses and <2 hours in dogs.
(4) Following IV doses in horses, the onset of action is ~3 minutes with a
peak analgesic effect at 15-30 minutes. The duration of action in horses
is <4 hours after a single dose.
d. Adverse effects
(1) In dogs and cats, the effects include sedation, ataxia, anorexia, or
diarrhea,
(2) In horses, those include ataxia, sedation, but excitement has been noted as
well. Butorphanol could decrease gut motility and induce ileus. Very high
doses IV (1-2 mg/kg) can lead to the development of nystagmus, salivation,
seizures, hyperthermia, and decrcased Gl motility. These effects are consid
ered transitory in nature.
 Opioid agonist-antagonist drugs
1. General information
a. Classification. Opioid agonist-antagonists bind to several receptors (usually μ
and k) and affecl each receplor in a different manner. They are subdivided into
two types given as follows:
(1) One type (e.g., nalbuphine) antagonizes μ-receptors but activates K-
receptors,
(2) The other type (e.g., buprenorphinc) is a parlial agonisl for μ-receptors, and
an antagonist for K-receptors.
102
|Chapter 4 V D
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Analgesia. Agonist-antagonist drugs are used to produce analgesia through
activation of the μ- or k-reccptors.
(2) Reversal of respiratory and CNS depression. Agonist-antagonist drugs can
also be used to reverse the respiratory and CNS depression of a pure μ-
rcccptor agonist. Thcsc agcnts havc the advantagc of climinating most of
the respiratory depression without totally eliminating the analgesia.
c. Disadvantages. Agonist-antagonist opioids are more difficult to reverse than
agonists when overdosed because of their high receptor affinity
2. Buprenorphine. It has 30 times the analgesic potency that of morphine.
a. Mechanism of action. Buprenorphine has a strong affinity for μ-receptors, 50
times that of morphine. It is a partial agonist at the μ-receptor and an antago.
nist at the K-receptor.
It is resistant to antagonism by naloxone because of its strong affinity for
μ-receptors
b. Therapeutic uses. It is used as an analgesic in small animals.
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1) It is adiministered IV, IM, or SC.
(2) It is highly bound (96%) to plasma proteins (α- and β-globulins), crossing
the placenta.
(3) It has a longer duration of action than other opioids (up to 8 hours), since it
has high affinity for μ-receptors. The elimination fy, of 37 hours in humans
is the Tongest among opioid analogs (Table 4-3), which is duc to thc binding
to globulins. No ty, information is available for animals.
(4) It is metabolized in the liver by N-dealkylation and glucuronidation. These
metabolites are then eliminated by biliary excretion into the feces (~70%)
and urinary excretion (~27%).
d. Adverse effects. The major side effects are respiratory depression and sedation.
3. Nalbuphine is an agonist-antagonist with potency equal to that of morphine. It is an
antagonist at thc μ-receptor and an agonist at the k-reccptor.
a. Therapeutic uses
(1) It is used to control mild to moderate pain only. The analgesia lasts about
45 minutes in dogs and 2-3 hours in cats.
(2) It is used topically to control pain associated with corneal ulcer. For this
purpose, 1% solution is applied topically four to six times a day.
b. Pharmacokinetics. It is administered IM. It does not bind to plasma proteins.
It undergoes glucuronidation in the liver and the metabolite is excreted in the
yrine. The elimination ty. in humans is 5 hours. No ty, information is available
for animals.
c. Adverse effects. Thcse arc vcry similar to those of morphinc.
E.
Opioid antagonists bind to μ-, K-, and 8- receptors, but do not activate them. They
are pure antagonists with no agonist activity.
1. Naloxone
a. Mechanism of action. Naloxone has a high affinily for μt-receptors and lower
affinity for K- and 8-receptors, which allow it to displace opioid agonists from
these receptors.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Reversal of respiratory depression
(a)  Naloxone is used postoperatively to reverse the respiratory depression
causcd by μ-receptor opioids. Howcver, thc analgesic effccts will also
disappear. The resultant pain may initiate undesirable behavioral and 
physiologic responses (e.g., excitement, tachycardia, and hypertension)
that are difficult to reverse because of the strong affinity the antagonists
have for the receptors.
(b) Naloxone is used to reverse opioid-induced respiratory depression in
nconates following cesarcan delivery.
osjuoseiue oidaooi-ni poos saey (oueydioing pue oujydnqjeu souss (o)
activity. and they are more persistent than naloxone, these two drugs
are probably more useful than naloxone in reversing opioid-induced
respiratory depression.
(2) Treatment of shock. High doses have been beneficial in the treatiment of
septic, hypovolemic, and cardiogenic shock.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) When given IV, it has a rapid onsct of action of 1-2 minutes. When given
IM, it has an onset of action of <5 minutes. It usually persists 45-90 min-
ules, but imay acl for up lo 3 hours.
(2) It is distributed rapidly throughout the body with high levels found in the
brain, kidneys, spleen, skelelal muscle, lung, and hearl. The drug also read-
ily crosses the placenta.
(3) It is melabolized in the liver by cytochrome P450 enzyimes and excreted
into the urine after the metabolite is conjugated to glucuronide. The elimina-
tion tiy, in humans is ~1 hour. No t', information is available for animals.
d. Adverse effects. Naloxonc itsclf has no adverse cffects. Sincc naloxonc's dura-
tion of action may be shorter than that of the opioid being reversed, the signs of
respiratory depression should be closely monitored, as additional doses of nalox-
one and/or ventilatory support may be needed.
 2. Naltrexone. It is a long-lasting opioid receptor antagonist, which can be used to
reverse opioid-induced respiratory depression and can be used to antagonize the
immobilizing effect of a potent opioid (e.g., carfentanil).
a. Mechanism of action, Naltrexone is a long-acting u-, K, and 8-reccptor antago-
nist.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) It is administered IV or IM for reversing opioid-induced immobiliza-
tion/depression parlicularly in wildlife and large animals.
(2) It is given orally to treat behavioral problems in dogs (e.g., constant licking.
lail chasing). The mechanisrms for such use are not known.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Naltrexone circulales throughout the body. Only 20-30% is bound to
plasma protein.
(2) It is metabolized in the liver, and the primary metabolite (6-β-naltrexol) has
opioid-rcccptor blocking activity. Naltrcxonc and its imctabolitcs are cxcrcted
into the urine.
(3) In humans, the plasma t, of naltrexone is ~4 hours and ~13 hours for
6-β-naltrexol. No t , information is available for animals.
d. Adverse effects. Naltrexone is relatively free of adverse effecls in aninals.
SUGGESTED READING
Boothe DM. 2001. "Anticonvulsant drugs and analeptic agents." In Veterinary Pharmacology and Thera-
peutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8th ed., pp. 360-382. Ames, IA: lowa State University Press.
Dewcy CW. 2006. Anticonvulsant therapy in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
36:1107-1127.
Gross M[. 2001. "Tranquilizers, α-adrencrgic agonists, and relatcd agents." In Veterinary Pharmacology
and Therapeutics. Edited by Adanis HR. 8th ed, pp. 534-552. Anes, IA: lowa State University Press.
Gustein HB, Akil H. 2006. "Opioid analgesics." In Goodman & Gilman's The Pharmacofogical Basis of
Therapeutics. Edited by Brunton LL, Lazo JS, Parker KL. 11th ed., pp. 547-590. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Hsu WH. 1981. Xylazine-induced depression and its antagonism by alpha-adrenergic blocking agents. /
Pharmacol Exp Ther 218:188-192.
Hsu WH, Schaffer DD, Hansen CE. 1987. Effects of tolazoline and yohimbine on central nervous de
pression, bradycardia, and tachypnea in sheep. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:323-326
http://www.drugs.com
 Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
104
(hapter 4
STUDY
QUESTIONS
DIRECTlONs: Each of the numbered ilems or incomplele statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Which one of the following drugs will
(D) Sufentanil
reverse the respiratory depression caused by
(E) Butorphanol
previous oxymorphone administration, but
still leave the dog with some analgesia?
5. Compared to morphine, which one of the
following drugs is most potent in terms of
(A)Tramadol
(B)Fcntanyl
analgesic effect?
(C) Naloxone
(A) Oxymorphone
(D) Morphine
(B) Tramadol
(E) Nalbuphine
(C)  Butorphanol
(D) Fentanyl
2. Which one of the following statements
(E) Methadone
concerning buprcnorphine is true?
6. A common side effect of oxymorphone
(A) It is a partial agonist opioid with partial
administration in the dog is
agonist activity at the μ-rcccptor and
agonist activity at the k-receptor.
(A) panting.
(B) It is an agonist-antagonist opioid with
(B)vomiting.
 partial agonist activity at the μ-receptor.
(C) defccation.
(C) it is a very potent μ-agonist used to im-
(D) hypotcnsion.
mobilize nondomestic. ungulates.
(E) tachycardia.
(D) It is an antagonist at μ-, k-, and 8-
7. Which one of the following opioid recep-
receptors.
(E) Il is an α2-adrenoreceptor agonist in the 
tors is correctly matched with its function?
central and peripheral nervous system.
(A) μ-Supraspinal analgesia
 3. Which of thc following is a corrcct statc-
(B) μ-Vasoconstriction
(C)&-Respiratory deprcssion
ment about phenothiazine tranquilizers?
(D) k-Antidiuresis
(A)They also havc potent analgcsic activity.
(E) k-Respiratory depression
(B) They stimulatc α1-adrenergic reccptors to
induce hypertension.
8. Phenobarbital can be used as an oral anti-
(C)They evoke hypoglycemia by increasing
convulsant. What other anticonvulsant drug is
insulin secretion.
metabolized in the livcr and produccs pheno-
(D) Most of them are desirable restraining
barbital as a metabolite?
agcrnts for aggrcssive dogs.
(A) Primidone
(E) Thcy suppress cmesis by block-
(B) Phenyloin
ing dopamine receptors in the
(C) Diazepam
chemoreceptor-trigger zone.
(D) Pentobarbital
4. Which one of the following drugs is an
(E) Potassium bromide.
antagonist at the μ-, K-, and S-receptors?
9. A horse to be tranquilized is given an
(A) Naloxonc
IV injection of xylazine. The horse immedi-
(B) Morphinc
ately falls to the ground and goes into violent
(C) Oxymorphone
seizures. What is the probable cause?
Drugs Acting on the Central Nervous System
105
(A) The horse was prone to seizures, and
(C) phenobarbital.
xylazine lowered the threshold enough
(D) primidone.
for a seizure to occur.
(E) potassium bromide.
(B) The injection was given into the carotid
artery instead of the jugular vein.
13. IV administration of xylazine in the horse
(C)  Extreme hypotension from epinephrine
frequently results in which of the following
reversal led to cerebral hypoxia and
cardiac abnormalities?
seizures.
(D) α2-Adrenoreceptor stimulation decreased
(A) Atrial fibrillation
 activity at the GABA-receptors.
(B) Sinus tachycardia
(E) Increased insulin release by the pan-
(C) Premature atrial contractions
creas secondary to αz-receptor stimula-
(D) Second-degree atrioventricular block
tion caused acute hypoglycemia.
(E) Premature ventricular contractions
10. Which one of the following drugs will
14. Which anticonvulsant is excreted un.
reverse the effects of diazepam in case there
changed by the kidneys and acts by hy-
is an overdose?
perpolarizing the neuronal membrane
after entering the cell through chloride
(A) Butorphanol
(B) Naloxone
channels?
(C) Flumazenil
(A) Valproic acid
(D)Yohimbine
(B)Phenobarbital
(E) Zolazepam
(C) Diazepam
(D) Gabapentin
11. Which of the following statements con-
(E) Potassium bromide
cerning α2-adrenergic agonists is incorrect?
(A) Ruminants are more sensitive to the
15. IV administration of an α2-agonist pro-
sedative properties of these drugs than
duces all of the following pharmacological
nonruminants.
effects, except
(B) IM administration of these drugs induces
(A) bradycardia.
vomiting more frequently than does IV
(B) increased Gl motility.
administration.
(C) transient hypertension.
(C) They induce antidiuresis.
(D) diuresis.
(D) Concurrent administration of ketamine
may synergistically suppress cardiopul-
monary function.
16. The α2-agonist with the most selectivity
and potency for α2-receptors is
12. The drug of choice to treat status epilep-
(A) medetomidine
ticus in dogs is
(B) detomidine
(A) diazepam.
(C) romifidine
(B) acepromazine.
(D) xylazine
106
Chapter4
ANSWERS
AND
EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is E.
less potent than morphine. Butorphanol
is 4-7 times as potent as morphine, and
will reverse the effects of oxymorphone at
oxymorphone is 10 times as potenl as
the μ-receptor while still providing analgesia
morphine.
via stimulation of the K-receptor. Fentanyl,
morphine, and carfentanil are μ-agonists, like
6. The answer is A.
oxymorphone. Naloxone is an antagonist
Administration of oxymorphone to dogs
at all opioid receplors and would reverse
 commonly causes panting and bradycardia.
the analgesia as well as the respiratory
Occasionally, dogs will vomit. Fentanyl
depression.
commonly causes defecation, panling, and
flatulence. Morphine may cause hypotension
2. The answer is B.
because of associated histamine release and
isuoee-isiuole ue s! audouaidng
vasodilatation.
opioid with partial agonist activity at the
μ-receptor. Butorphanol is a partial agonist
7. The answer is A.
for the μ-reccptor and a full agonist for the
μ-Receptor stimulation causes supraspinal
K-receptor. Carfentanil is the very potent
and spinal analgesia,euphoria,respiratory
μ-agonist used to immobilize nondomestic
depression, decreased Gl motility, miosis,
ungulates. Naloxone and naltrexone are
and sedation. k-Receptor stimulation causes
antagonists at μ-, K-, and &-receptors.
supraspinal and spinal analgesia, mild
Xylazine, detomidine, and medetomidine are
sedation, dysphoria, diuresis, and miosis.
&2-adrenoreceptor agonists in the central and 
 S-Receptor stimulation causes supraspinal and
peripheral nervous systems.
spinal analgesia.
3. The answer is E.
8. The answer is A.
The antiemetic effect of phenothiazine 
Primidone is a deoxybarbiturate that
tranquilizers is due to blockade of dopamine
is metabolized by the liver to produce
receptors in the chemoreceptor-trigger zone.
phenylethylmalonamide (PEMA) and phe-
They do not have noticeable analgesic effect.
nobarbital. Primidone and its two active
They also block α-adrenergic receptors
metabolites have anticonvulsant activity.
to induce hypotension. They evoke hyper-
Phenytoin, diazepam, pentobarbital, and
glycemia by promoting cpinephrine relcase
potassium bromide are all anticonvulsants,
from the adrenal medulla, which increases
but none of them is metabolized by the liver
glycogenolysis by activating hepatic β2-
to form phenobarbital.
receptors. Caution must be exercised when
using them as rcstraining agcnts in aggressive
9. The answer is B.
dogs, since the aggressive dogs can bite
Accidental intracarotid injection of xy-
under phenothiazine-induced tranquilization.
lazine is very uncommon, but it can occur in
horses because of the anatomical proximity
4. The answer is A.
of the carotid artery and the jugular vein. The
Naloxone and naltrexone are pure an-
high concentration of xylazine delivered by
tagonists at all three opioid receptors (μ,
the carotid artery to the brain results in con-
K, and S). Morphine and oxymorphone are
vulsions and immediate collapse of the horse.
agonists at μ- and k-receptors. Butorphanol
Most horses survive with supportive therapy.
is a partial agonist at the μ-receptor, but a
Acepromazine gives a similar initial response
full agonist at the K-receplor, Sufentanil is an
when injected in the carotid artery, but many
agonist at all three opioid receptors.
horses do not survive. Xylazine given by the
intravenous route is not normally associated
5. The answer is D.
with seizure activity and has no direct effect
Fentanyl is 75-125 times more potent
 on GABA-receptors. Blood pressure is not
than morphine. Tramadol, which is less than
decreased initially. Xylazine inhibits insulin
0.5 times as potent as morphine, is the least 
release in horses, lcading to hypcrglycemia,
potent opioid analgesic. Methadone is slightly
not hypoglycemia.
Drugs Acting on the _Central Nervous System 107
10. The answer is C.
increase in blood pressure (vasoconstriction),
Flumazenil, a specific benzodiazepine-
leading to an increase in baroreceptor reflex
receptor-blocking drug, will reverse the
to stimulate the vagus nerve that innervates
effects of diazepam. It has high affinity for
the A-V node. The second-degree A-V block
the drug receptor, great specificity, and
usually lasts 5-10 minutes after IV adminis-
very little intrinsic activity. Flumazenil is a
tration of xylazine. Xylazine administration
competitive antagonist. Naloxone is an opioid
can induce sinus arrhythmia (or sinus arrest
antagonist. Yohimbine is an αz-receptor an-
in severe cases), which is due to the decrease
tagonist. Butorphanol is partial agonist opioid.
in the sympathetic tone. Xylazine does
Zolazepam is a benzodiazepine-receptor
not induce sinus tachycardia, premature
agonist (like diazepam).
atrial contractions, or premature ventricular
contractions.
11. The answer is C.
α2-Adrenergic agonists can induce di-
14. The answer is E.
uresis by inhibiting AVP (ADH) secretion.
Potassium bromide is not bound to plasma
Ruminants are most sensitive to α2-adrenergic
proteins and is not metabolized, but is
agonist-induced sedation. Intramuscular
excreted unchanged by the kidneys. Bromide
administration of these drugs induces
and chloride both can enter neurons through
vomiting more frequently than the IV route.
existing chloride channels, for example, those
Concurrent administration of ketamine and
associated with GABA receptors. Because
both ions have a negative charge, their
suppress cardiopulmonary function.
movement into the cell makes the membrane
potential more negative (hyperpolarization).
12. The answer is A.
Apparently, when bromide enters the cell, it
Diazepam, administered IV, is the drug.
causes longer-lasting hyperpolarization than
of choice to treat status epilepticus in dogs.
chloride. Thus, the neuron is less likely to
Acepromazine is a phenothiazine tranquilizer, 
fire on its own or when stimulated, thereby
 not an anticonvulsant, and may actually
preventing seizures.
lower the seizure threshold. Phenobarbital is
too slow in its onset of action to be valuable
15. The answer is B.
in treating status epilepticus. Even with IV
Activation of α2-adrenergic receptors
administration, it may take 20 minutes before
 decreases Gl motility by inhibiting parasym-
phenobarbital exerts a significant anticonvul-
pathetic tone. Bradycardia, transient
sant effect. Primidone and potassium bromide
hyerptension, and diuresis are pharmacologic
are oral anticonvulsants with slow onset of
effects of α2-agonists.
action. Primidone needs to be metabolized
by the liver to produce phenobarbital before
16. The answer is A.
it is effective.
Medetomidine is the selective α2-adrenergic.
agonist used in veterinary medicine. Xy-
13. The answer is D.
lazine, detomidine, and romifidine have
IV administration of xylazine induces
more α1-adrenergic agonistic activity than
second-degree A-V block, which is due to the
 medetomidine.
This page intentionally left blank
Behavior-Modifying Drugs
Arthi Kanthasamy and Walter H. Hsu
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
A.
Biochemical imbalancc in the monoaminergic (5-HT and NE) and GABAergic ncuro-
animals.
B,
Behavioral problems most commonly encountered in animals include fear, anxiety.
 aggression, compulsive disorder. inappropriate elimination behavior, and cognitive dys-
function in geriatric patients.
C.
Oral route of drug administration is routincly used in treating behavioral disorders.
D.
There is potential for adverse effects following long-term use of behavior-modifying
drugs. Before starting a rational drug therapy the animals must undergo complete labo-
ratory analysis, thorough evaluation of background medical histories, and neurological
examination to deterimine the physiological basis of the abnormal behiavior.
 Psychotherapeutic treatment outcomes are most effective when used in combination
上.
with behavioral modification therapy and environmental management.
EPhenothiazines should not be used to treat aggresive behavior because in some cases
they may cause or induce aggressive behavior in animals that have no history of ag-
gressive behavior.
In the present chapter, focus will be on anxiolytic drugs, drugs that modulate
monoaminergic and GABAcergic: ncurotransmission, and progestins.
 Neurotransmitters involved in the actions of antidepressant drugs
1. Monoamine hypothesis of mood
a. According to this theory, monoamines including serotonin (5-HT) and nor-
epinephrine (NE) are proposed to play a central role in the expression of mood.
Therefore, any impairment in the activity of the amines is believed to lead to de-
agents that enhance the actions of these neurotransmitters have proven efficacy
in the management of symptoms related to depression.
b. Monoamines. Monoamines include dopamine, NE, epinephrine, and 5-HT. See
Chapters 2 and 3 for information on synthesis and metabolism of monoamines.
(1) Dopamine (DA)
(a) DA is the major neurotransimitter in the brain. It plays a key role in be-
havioral and drug reinforcement: regulates emesis, prolactin release,
mood states, cognitive, and motor functions.
(b) DA is found in several neuronal tracts inclucding nigrosiriatal, mesolim-
bic, and tuberoinfundibular tracts.
(c) DA exerts inhibitory actions via Gi-protein-coupled receptors that facil-
itate the activation of K' channels. There are at least five DA receptor
subtypes, namely, D1, Dy. D3, D4, and D;、 Activation of D1 and D5
receptors (coupled to G,) increases cAMP levels by stimulating adeny-
lyl cyclase, while activation of D2, D:, and D4 receptors (coupled to
Go) decreases cAMP levels by inhibiting adenylyl cyclase. Notably. D2
tors by inhibiting DA release.
109
110Chapter 51G
(d)  A partial list of drugs that affect dopaminergic neurotransmission include
CNS stimulants (e.g-, amphetamines), and monoamine oxidase-B (MAC)-
B) inhibitors (c.g., selcgilinc).
(2) Norepinephrine (NE)
(a) NE plays a key role in learning, memory, mood, sensory processing.
sleep, and in the regulation of anxiely.
(b) The cell bodies of the noradrenergic neurons are located in the locus
coeruleus or the lateral tegmental area of the reticular formation. Several
brain regions, namely, thalamus, cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and tha-
lamus receive diffuse noradrenergic. input. For example, nor-adrenergic
projections to the limbic. cortex are believed to regulate emotions.
(c) The cxcitatory cffccts arc mcdiatcd via activation of α1- and β-receptors,
which results in a decrcasc in K: conductance. Convcrsely, the in-
hibitory cffccts arc mediated via activation of αz-rcceptors that lcads
to ncuronal hypcrpolarization via increase in K+ conductance. Further-
more, activation oi presynaptic α2-receplors is associated with decrease
in calcium conduclance, hence resulting in decreased presynaptic re-
ease of NE.
(d) Drugs that enhance noradrenergic neurotransmission include CNS stimu-
lants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOIs).
(3) Serotonin (5-HT)
(a) 5-HT has been proposed to play a central role in the regulation of sleep,
body temperature, arousal, emotion, and higher cognitive functions.
Dysfunction in the central serotonergic system is postulated to under-
lie mood disturbances, anxiety, aggression, restlessness, and obsessive
compulsive disorder (OCD).
(b) The cell bodies of the serotonergic neurons are located in the raphe nu-
clei of the brain stem. They send diffuse projections to the entire CNS,
including the spinal cord, cercbellum, and arcas of diencephalon and
telencephalon. Multiple subtypcs of 5-HT reccptors have bccn identi-
fied and to dale the receptors have been calegorized under seven differ-
enl iamilies including, 5-HT1, 5-HT2, 5-HT3, 5-HT4, 5-HTs, 5-HT6, and
5-HT7. All of them are G-protein-coupled receptors with the exception
 of 5-HT; receptor family, which is a ligand-gated ion channel (Chapter 3
I1B3)
(c) 5-HT primarily has an inhibitory role; however, depending on the re-
ceptor subtypc, it can cxhibit both inhibitory and cxcitatory cffects. For
cxample, buspirone's partial agonist effects on 5-HTA receptors (cou-
pled to Gi/o) are related to elevation in K+ conductance and associated
imembrane hyperpolarization.
(d) 5-HT enhancing drugs are effective modulators of behavior. For exam-
ple, TCAs and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRls) enhance
5-HT neurotransmission by elevating synaptic levels of 5-HT.
c. Acetylcholine. (ACh, see Chapter 2 for information on synthesis and metabolism)
(1) Ach is proposed to play a key role in arousal, consciousness, memory con-
solidation, and motor coordination.
(2) ACh is prcscnt in the ncurons of sormatic and visccral motor nuclei prescnt
in the brain and spinal chord that innervates the hippocampus, cerebral cor-
tex, and basal ganglia.
(3) Most CNS responses to ACh are mediated through G-protein-coupled mus-
carinic receptors. At a few sites, ACh elicits its response via activation of
Giyo-coupled M2 receptors that leads to slowing of neuronal discharge by
increasing K? conductance. In addition, activation of My receptors inhibits
adenylyl cyclase, which leads to inhibition of neurotransmitter release.
(4) A few of the undesirable side effecls associaled with TCAs such as dry
mouth, urine relenlion, and decreased Gl motilily have been linked to their
muscarinic blocking effects.
Behavior-Modifying Drugs111
MAJOR DRUG CLASSES
Anxiolytic drugs
1. Benzodiazepines. diazepam(Valium?), clorazepate(Tranxene?), Alprazolam
(Xanax), oxazepam (Serax), lorazepam (Ativan), chlordiazepoxide (Librium?)
2. Buspirone (Buspar)
B
Antidepressants
1. Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs). amitriptyline (Elavil), clomipramine
(Clomicalm&), imipramine (Tofranil), doxepin (Sinequan(&)
2.
Serotonin Selective Reuptake Inhibitors (SsRls). fluoxetine (Prozac), Paroxetine
(Paxil@), sertraline (Zolofte), fluvoxamine (Luvox@)
3. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOls). selegiline (Anipry))
4. Progestins. medroxyprogesterone acetate (Depo-Provera), megestrol acetate
(Ovaban?)
ANXIOLYTIC DRUGS
A.
Benzodiazepines (BZDs) (See Chapter 4: Section Il C and D for more information on
BZDs.)
1. General considerations
a. Mechanism of action. The bchavioral cffccts are attributcd to BZD's actions on
the cerebral corltex, limbic system, and most notably thalamus. BZDs induce
membrane hyperpolarization by facilitating GABA-mediated chloride conduc-
tance (see also Chapter 4).
b. Pharmacological Efects. BZDs cxhibit dosc-depcndent, but minimal CNS
depressant effects. For example, at lower doses, they exhibit mild seda-
tive and anxiolytic effects, whereas at higher doses, they have hypnotic
effects.
c. Therapeutic uses
(1) BZDs are useful in the management of fear, phobia, and anxiely particularly
in situations where rapid onset may be desirable.
(2) BZDs are useful particularly for the management of fears induccd by stimuli
that can be predicted in advance. Examples include clinical management of
inappropriate urination-submissive urination, urine marking behavior, storm
phobia, separation anxiety in dogs; foal rejection in mares; and urine spray-
ing, storm phobia, separation anxicty, and extreme timidity in cats.
(3) Several of ihe long term effects are atributed to intermediale metabolite
functions.
(4) BZDs can be used in combination with other psychotropic drugs such as
TCAs or SSRIs.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) BZDs include a wide array of drugs that differ in their pharmacokinetic
properties.
(2）
 BZDs are rapidly absorbed from the Gl tract and distributed throughout the
body.
(3) BZDs bind avidly to plasma proteins, exhibit high lipophilicity, and readily
cross the blood-brain barrier.
(4) BZDs are mctabolized primarily via the hcpatic microsomal system and
eliminaled in the urine as glucuronide conjugales or oxidized metabo-
lites. However, cats have been reported to exhibit compromised drug
metabolism.
112Chapter 5  A
e. Adverse effects
(1) Withdrawal of BZDs should be gradual because sudden cessation of drug
treatment may result in relapsc of symptoms thal may be more intensc than
that existed before drug treatment.
(2) BZDs have the potential to cause physical addiction.
(3) Adverse effects include ataxia, sedation, muscle relaxation, anxiety, paradox-
ical excitement, hallucinations, and memory deficits.
(4) Owing to its ability to cross placental barrier and entry into milk, it must be
used cautiously in pregnant and lactating animals.
f. Contraindications. The use of BZDs is contraindicated in cases involving aggres-
sion. Although BZlDs reduce aggression, sometimes it may disinhibit behaviors,
hence resulting in increased aggressiveness.
2. Diazepam
 a. Mechanism of action. Diazepam has CNS depressant effects but lacks peripheral
autonomic blocking effects.
aui noi pasn si leyn (iza pazaloeieyo-llam e si wedazeici 'sasn snnadeiaui 'q
treatment of behavioral disorders.
(1) Diazepam reduces signs of fear in dogs. However, il is Iess efective in treat-
ing storm phobia and separation anxiety as compared to alprazolam.
(2) In cats, although initially beneficial in ameliorating urine spraying behavior,
resumption of urine spraying behavior (50-75%) was observed when drug
treatment was discontinued.
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1) It undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism and is metabolized to
desmethyldiazcpam (nordiazepam), temazcpam, and oxazepam. In all
species, the tiy,. of the metabolites are longer than those of the parent com-
pound.
(2) Collectively, because of the large interspecies difference, the pharmacoki-
netic parameters cannot be extrapolated from other species
(3) Alprazolam may be used as a suitable alternative to minimize hepatic toxi-
cosis associated with diazepam.
(4) The plasma protein-binding capacity of diazepam is ~98%.
(5) In cats, the ty, of diazepam is ~6 hours, whereas the fy, of desmethyl-
diazepam is ~21 hours. In dogs, diazepam is rapidly metabolized, t1, is
~3 hours, while the ty, of desmethyldiazcpam averaged 7 hours.
d. Adverse effects
(1) In cats, behavioral changes may manifest as irritability, depression, and
altered demeanor.
(2) Hepatic necrosis is the most serious adverse event reported in cats. It is pos-
tulated that a toxic: intermediate metabolite may be responsible for the hep-
atic toxicosis.
(3) Concurrent administration with other drugs that compele for cytochrome
P450 (CYP450) enzyme system, including the SSRls, may decrease the rate
of metabolism of diazepam.
3. Clorazepate
a. Therapeutic uses. In dogs, it is used in the management of anxiety, especially
when long duration of action is desired, for cxample, separation anxiely.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Clorazepate is one of the most rapidly absorbed BZDs.
(2) Clorazepate is primarily oxidized in the acidic envirorrment of the stomach
to its active metabolite desmethyldiazepam (nordiazepam) before absorption.
(3)  Following oral administration, mean peak levels are reached usually within
98 minutes after a single oral dose and 153 minutes after multiple oral
doses, suggesting improved management when the drug is given twice daily
instead of a single dosc.
(4)  The plasma protein binding capacity of nordiazepam is high (~97%).
(5) The t, is 284-355 minutes and it is the same irrespcctive of the frequency
of dosing.
C. Adverse effects. Diazepam can cross the placental barrier and enter into the
milk. There is an increased risk of teratogenicity when administered during the
Bchavior-Moxdiying Orugs  113
first trimester of prcgnancy. Therciore, it should not be used in pregnant and 
nursing females.
4. Alprazolam
a. Therapeutic uses
(1) Its rapid response makes it a good choice in treating panic disorders in dogs
where a rapid resolution is essential. For example, it is effective when the
drug is administered 30-60 minutes before the storm.
(2) Higher doses of the drug are required to treat panic-like stales such as sepa-
ration anxiety and thunderstorm phobia as compared with generalized anxi-
ety.
(3) In cats, it is used in the treatment of anxiety disorders and inappropriate
urination behaviors.
(4)  The combination of alprazolam and clomipramine has been proven to be
beneficial in the management of storm phobia in dogs.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) The two common metabolites produced by CYP450 include x-hydroxy-
alprazolam and benzophenone, although the latter is an inactive
metabolile.
(2) Interindividual variability in plasma steady state concentration is seen in
humans.
(3)Alprazolam is moderately plasma protein bound (80%).
(4) In humans, it has a rapid onset of action and the ty, is 6-27 hours. No in-
formation is available for animals.
c. Adverse effects. Dogs receiving alprazolam at a moderately high dose to treat
anxiety-related disorders are al risk for developing physical dependencc, with-
drawal anxiety tremors, or seizures. Hence, the drug should be withdrawn grad-
ually over a period of several weeks.
d. Contraindications. Alprazolam should not be given in conjunction with drugs
that impair CYP 450 3A, including ketoconazole and itraconazole.
5. Oxazepam
a. Therapeutic uses
(1) Oxazepam provides longer duration of action as compared to diazepam and
it has been effectively used as an appetile slimulant in cals.
(2) In humans, it is particularly useful in treating elderly patients with com-
promised hepatic function because it does not produce long-acting active
metabolites.
(3) As with other benzodiazepines, oxazepam may be useful in the management
of fears and phobias in cats or dogs
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Oxazcpam does nol gencrate active metabolites. However, in humans
and pigs, the primary metabolite is the inactive glucuronide conjugate of
 oxazepam, which accounts for 95% of the metabolites that are eliminated in
the urine.
(2) Oxazepam has pronounced plasma protein binding (97%).
(3) In humans, the iy, is ~8 hours and peak plasma levels occur at ~3 hours.
No information is available for animals.
c. Adverse effects. On rare occasions, leucopenia and hepalic dysfunclion have
 been reported in humans.
6.Lorazepam
a. Therapeutic uses
(1) It can be orally administered as a suitable alternative to diazepam.
(2) It is also useful in cats because the chances of devcloping idiopathic hepatic
necrosis are minimal.
(3) It is used as an appetite stimulant and in the treatment of compulsive disor-
ders.
(4) It may be safely used in individuals with compromised liver function and in
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) After oral administration, it is rapidly absorbed in dogs, although to a lesser
degree in cats.
114Chapler 51I A
(2) It is primarily mctabolized via glucuronide conjugation The formation of thc
conjugate is much faster in dogs as compared to cats.
(3) It is excreted primarily in the urine and to a lesser extent in the feces in
dogs and pigs. In cats, the drug is excreted in equal parts in both feces and
urine.
(4) Plasma protein-binding capacity of lorazepam is ~85%,
 al sno z~ si suoanuos eseid yead ol a au 'suny ul ()
ty, is ~12 hours, whereas tiy, of lorazepam glucuronide is ~18 hours. No 
information is available for animals.
C. Adverse effects. Increased appetite, paradoxical excitation, and anxiety have
been reported to occur early in therapy, although they resolve with continued
use or by decreasing the dose.
7. Chlordiazepoxide
 a. Mechanism of action. It acts on the limbic. system of the brain, thereby modulat-
ing emotional responses.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) It has appetite stimulant, anti-anxiety, and sedative properties.
(2) Chlordiazepoxide is beneficial in the treatment of aggression and intense 
fear in a number of zoo animals.
c. Pharmacological effects, Chlordiazcpoxide lacks autonomic blocking effects at
imoderatc doscs, hencc it cxcrts minimal cffccts on the blood pressurc or heart
ratc.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Metabolites gcncrated via liver metabolism include desmethyldiazepam,
demoxcpam, desmcthylchlordiazcpoxide, and oxazepam. Thicse metabolites
arc active and have long ty.:
(2) In dogs, plasma levels peak in 7-8 hours.
(3) Chlordiazcpoxide is cxcrcted in thc urinc, only 1-2% is cxcreted in the un-
changed form.
(4) Plasma protcin-binding capacity of chlordiazcpoxide is ~95%.
(5) In dogs, onc of the mctabolites demoxcpam has a t /, of 10-20 hours with
considerable interindividual variability. In cats, plasma levels peak in ~90
minutes when given at a dose of 1.25 mg/kg intraperitoneally (IP).
e. Adverse effects
(1) Side effects include sedation, ataxia, and rage.
(2) Because chlordiazepoxide may induce leucopenia and liver dysfunction,
blood cell counts and chemistry must be monitored on a regular basis, espe-
cially when the drug is administered for an extended period.
 Buspirone. Buspirone is the first nonsedating anxiolytic drug to be developed and mar-
B.
keted.
1. Mechanism of action. Buspirone may elicit its anxiolytic effects partly via its partial
agonistic effects on 5-HTia receptors located in the dorsal raphe nucleus of the
brain. Additionally, it has been reported to exhibit moderate affinity to dopamine
receptors.
 2. Pharmacological effects
a. The CNS depressant effects are minimal.
b. Buspirone is nonsedating and it does not produce psychomotor disturbance, or
disinhibition phenomenon.
c. Therapeutic efficacy is achieved only when the drug is administered for several
weeks.
3. Therapeutic uses
a. In dogs, it can be used for the management of generalized anxiety although, less
successful in treating storm phobia or separation anxiety.
b. In cats, the buspirone can be used for modulating urine spraying behavior and
inappropriate urination.
c. It is used to reduce anxiety in cases involving inter-cat aggression within the
same household.
Beliavior-MolifyingDrugs115
d. It is used as an adjunct to improve the effectiveness of SSRls in the management
of OCD, although with limited success.
e. In dogs, the buspirone and fluoxetine combination therapy has been successfully
used to treat complex behavioral problems involving anxiety, aggression, and
slercotypic: behaviors.
4. Pharmacokinetics. It is primarily mctabolizcd by CYP450 cnzymes to onc active
 metabolite, 1-pyrimidinylpiperazine, and several other inactive metabolites.
a. Buspirone is highly (95%) plasma protein bound.
b. In humans, the ty, is ~2.5 hours. Because of the short ty, the drug must be ad-
ministered al least Iwo to thrce times/day. No such information is available for
animals.
C. Adverse effects
(1) The incidence of side effects is very low, which is an advantage in its use
as a behavior-modifying drug. Sedation does not occur in humans; however,
has been reported in animals. The most common side effects reported in
humans include dizziness, insomnia, nervousness, nausea, headache, and
fatigue.
(2) Unlike BZDs, long-term use of buspirone is not associated with withdrawal
effects or dependence, and the potential for abuse is less likely as compared
to BZDs.
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
A,
General considerations. Four classes of drugs are categorized under the antidepres-
sants category. The list includes TCAs, selective SSRls, monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOls), and progestins. These drugs differ in their mechanism of action (Figure 5-1),
side effect profile (Table 5-1), pharmacokinetic parameters, and relative therapeutic ef-
ficacy in treating certain behavioral disorders. Despite their inherent differences, all of
these drugs except progestins share certain commonalities.
1. They modulale monoamine neurotransmission (mainly NE and 5-HT) and their re-
spective target receptor sites.
2. Antidepressants have anxiolytic effects at clinical doses and are generally well toler-
 ated in animals.
3. The pharmacological effects are elicited within hours or days following the first
dose; however, may require several weeks for the onset of clinical response.
4. The delayed onset of therapeutic effects of antidepressants appears to be related to
clevated levcls of NE and 5-HT together with altered sensitivity of posl- and prcsy-
naptic receptors, including 5-HTiA and α2-adrenergic. reccptors.
 IABLE 5-1. Pharmacological Properties of Anlidepressant Drugs
Sedative
Antinuscarinic
NE-Reuptake
5-HT Reuptake
Drug
Effects
Effects
Inhibition
Inhibition
Amitriptyline
+++
+++
+++
+++
Doxepin
+++
+++
+
+十
Imipranine
—-
Clomipramine
+++
++
十++
+++
Fluoxetine
+
十
+++
Fluvoxamine
+++
Paroxctine
1
Sertraline
+
+
+++
-.none; f. slight; I. moxderale; f·1. high.
116
Chapter 5 IV B
B.
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
1. General considerations
a. The name TCAs refers to a group of compounds that have a three-ring nucleus.
b. The drugs most commonly used in animals include amitriptyline, imipramine,
clomipramine, and doxepin; and to a lesser extent nortriptyline and desipraimine.
C.
 In recent years, TCAs have been mostly replaced by SSRls in human medicine
because of decreased frequency of side effects. Nevertheless, their low cost has
favored the use in veterinary behavioral medicine.
d. Mechanism of action (Figure 5-1)
(1) TCAs block the reuptake (transporter mechanisms) of NE and 5-HT into the
presynaptic terminal at varying magnitudes.
(2) TCAs exert antagonistic effects at x-treceptors, muscarinic, and histaminer-
gic receptors (Table 5-1). In fact, TCAs cause desensitization of presynaptic
of NE. Furthermore, TCA's αy-blocking effects have been linked to drug-
induced orthostatic hypotension.
e. Therapeutic uses
(1) In general, they reduce anxiety and arousal; in some circumstances, they
may cnhance lcarning. Unlike BZDs, they do not produce disinhibition phe-
nomena.
(2) TCAs are used in dogs for the management of mild aggression, compulsive
behavior, and a variety of anxious states.
(3) In cats, they are used for the treatiment of inappropriate urination and spray-
ing behavior, excessive grooming, anxiety states, and control of excessive
vocalization.
(4) Because of the delayed onset of therapeutic. effects, improvement in behav-
ior may not be seen until 3-4 weeks after initiation of drug therapy. Abrupt
cessation of drug treatment should be avoided due to the risk of develop-
ment of withdrawal responses.
Serotonergic
Noradrenergic
neuron
neuron
MAOinhibitors.
Metabolites
MAO
MAO
>Metabolites
5-HT
NE
reuptake
reuptake
一
一
NE
5-HT
receptor
receptor
SSRI
TCA
Postsynaptic
neuron
FIGURE 5-1. Schematic of potential sites of action of antideprcssant drugs. TCA, tricyclic antidepres-
sant; SsRl, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. (Modified from Basic and Clinical Pharmacology, 9th
cd.. by Katzung, McGraw-Hill, 2004.)
Behavior ModifyingDrugs117
f. Pharmacokinetics
(1) TCAs are substrates of CYP45() enzymes.
(2) Concurrent administration of agents that inhibit CYP450 can increase serum
levels of TCAs. For example, SSRls are inhibitors of CYP450 enzymes.
(3) Because of the risk of drug interaclions, caution must be cxercised when
using combination drug therapy, especially drugs that modulate CYP 450
activity.
g. Adverse effects
(1) Adverse effecls are nol a major concern in young healihy animals.
(2) Geriatric. patients and animals with compromised hepatic. function need to
be closely monitored.
(3) Onset of side effects may be immediate or delayed depending on the dura-
tion of treatment.
(4) Most commonly seen side effects include Gl disturbance, mild sedation,
constipation, dry mouth, and urinary retention.
(5) The occurrence of side effecls is parlly attributed to its antagonistic effecls at
the above-mentioned receptors.
(6) TCAs lower seizure threshold and may exacerbate seizures in predisposed
animals.
(7) Occasionally, agranulocylosis is scen.
(8) It is contraindicated in the following:
(a) Narrow-angle glaucoma and keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
(b) Because of its cardiovascular (CV) effects (cardiomyopathies, and ECG
 abnormaliics), ECGs should he cvaluated in dogs that have a predisposi-
tion for CV events.
2. Amitriptyline. It is relatively inexpensive and is popular among veterinarians.
a. Therapeutic uses
(1) It is used as an antianxiety agent and as a pharmacological adjunct to behav-
ioral therapy.
(2) In dogs, it is commonly used for the treatment of aggression, self-induced mu-
tilation, and separation anxiely.
(3) In cats, it is used for the treatiment of psychogenic alopecia and excessive
yocalization. Most commonly, it is used for the management of urine marking
behavior and inappropriate urination.
(4)  Amitriptyline has been used in the treatment of severe recurring idiopathic
interstitial cystitis in cats. The beneficial effects are attributed, in part, to its
analgesic effects and reduction in bladder spasms due to its antimuscarinic
effect.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) It is rapidly absorbed from the Gl tract.
(2) It is metabolized in the liver and excreted in the urine.
(3) It is mctabolized into triptyline, nortriptyline (active), and various other
metabolites.
(4) Amitriptyline is ~95% plasma protein bound.
(5) The climination ty. in dogs is b-8 hours.
C. Adverse effects
(1) The most common side effects in dogs and cats include sedation, mydria-
sis, and urinary retention. Once daily night-time dosing may be adopted to
avoid daytime sedation.
(2) Weight gain, somnolence, and reduced grooming have been reported.
(3) Because it is excreted in the milk and its potential for teratogenicity, it is not
recommended in pregnant or lactating animals.
d. Contraindications
(1) Combination therapy with anticholinergic and CNS depressants may
lead to addilive effects; therefore, concurrenl administration should be
avoided.
(2) Concomitant use with a CYP450 inhibitor such as cimetidine, ketoconazole,
or chloramphenicol may inhibit the metabolism of TCAs, resulting in ele-
vated plasma levels of the drug and toxicity.
118Chapter 5IV B
(3) Concurrent use oi the antilhyroid agent methimazole can increase the polen-
tial risk of agranulocylosis in cals.
3. Clomipramine
a. Mechanism of action. Clomipramine inhibits the reuptake of both NE and 5-HT;
however, it is the most selective 5-HT uptake inhibitor among other commer-
cially available TCAs. Addilionally, rccent cvidences suggest that TCAs may have.
selective MAO-B inhibitory effects in the rat brain.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) In the United States, it is approved by FDA for the treatment of separation
anxiely in dogs when used in combination with behavior-modification ther-
apy.
(2) It can be used in the treatment of canine compulsive disorders, such as tail
chasing, and acral-lick dermatitis.
(3) It is useful in the treatment of dominance-related aggression in dogs.
(4)  Adjunct treatment with alprazolam may be necessary for the effective man-
agement of noise phobia.
(5) In cats, it is usefui for the treatment of urine spraying behavior and psy-
chogenic. alopecia.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) It is highly lipophilic and therefore readily crosses the lipid membrane bar-
rier.
(2)  The major mctabolite is desmethylclomipramine, which subsequently form
conjugates that are eliminated in the urine or through the bile into feces.
(3) In dogs, the plasma concentration of clomipramine to desmethyl-
clomipramine is 3:1. The desmethyl mctabolite is implicated in its antimus-
carinic effects. This may partly explain the lower incidence of side effects
observed in dogs. Alternatively, rapid metabolism may account for fewer
side effects observed in dogs.
(4) The plasma protcin binding of clomipramine is ~96%.
(5) The average ti, in dogs is 5-7 hours afler a single dose and 2-4 hours after
multiple doses.
d. Adverse effects
(1) Side effecis including sedalion, mydriasis, regurgitation, appetite changes,
and urinary retention have been reported.
(2) It should not be administered to pregnant and nursing females.
e. Contraindications
(1) Il should not be used in animals those have demonstraled hypersensitivity lo
clomipramine and other TCAs.
(2) It should not be used in combination with MA(ls within 2 weeks of discon-
tinuation of an MAO inhibitor.
(3) It is contraindicated in patients with a history of epilepsy, cardiac arrhyth-
mias, glaucoma, or urine and stool retention.
4. Imipramine
a. Mechanism of action
(1) It primarily works by blocking 5-HT reuptake at the synapses and to a lesser
degree NE reuplake.
(2) It also exerts MAO inhibitory effects on both A and B isoforms.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Imipramine has been used in the treatment of inappropriate urination (sub-
missive and excilement related) in dogs.
(2) In a certain population of beagles, it has been shown to improve abnormal
withdrawn and depressed behavior.
(3) In dogs and cats, it has been used to treat cataplexy and urinary inconti-
nence. Its antimuscarinic. effect may stabilize smooth muscle of the urinary
bladder and activation of x-adrenergic receptors in the urinary sphincters
also play a role in the treatment of urinary incontinence.
(4) In stallions, it is used for the treatment of ejaculatory dysfunction, It appears 
that clevated cxtrasyaplic levels of NE induced by TCAs may facilitate the
activation of α-adrenergic. receptors that enables ejaculation.
Behavior-ModiyingDrugs119
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1) It is rapidly absorbed from the Gl tract.
(2) The plasma drug levels peak in 1-2 hours after oral administration.
(3) Substantial amounts of the drug are metabolized by hepatic first pass
metabolism, resulting in high blood levels of desipramine, an active metabo-
lite of imipramine.
(4) Imipramine has plasma protcin binding of 60-96%.
(5) In humans, it has an climination fy, of ~12 hours. It has extensive periph-
eral distribution presumably related to its high lipophilicity.
d. Adverse effects
(1) Hlorses and cattle may exhibit generalized weakness and ataxia. Hemolysis
and discolored urine may occur.
(2) Side effects in humans, include sedalion, tachycardia, Gl effects, and urinary
retenlion.
e. Contraindications. Concurrenl use wilth MAOls is not recommended.
5. Doxepin
a. Mechanism of action
(1) Doxepin exerts moderale inhibitory effects at the norcpinephrine transporter
(NET) and wcak inhibitory cffects at the serolonin transportcr (SERT).
(2) Doxepin has potent H and Hg inhibilory elfecls possibly accounting for its 
antipruritic cffects.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Doxcpin is used as an adjunctive therapy for psychogenic derrmatitis;
particularly relatcd to anxiety in small anirmals.
(2) Doxcpin usc is banned in racc horscs because it has bcen used to calm
excited horses.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) In the dog, it is rapidly absorbed following oral administration. The plasma
concentration peaks in 30-60 minutes.
(2)  The drug undergoes extensive hepatic. biotransformation to desmethyldoxepin
and nordoxepin; the former being the active metabolite and it is found to
accumulate in various tissues.
(3) The plasma protein binding for doxepin is ~80%.
(4) In humans, it has an elimination fy of 8-25 hours. No information is avail-
able for animals.
d. Adverse effects
(1) In humans, the most common antimuscarinic. side effects include constipa-
tion and dry imouth. However, urine retention and blurred vision have also
bcen rcporled.
(2) It can cause cardiac. arrhythmias following drug overdose.
e. Contraindications
(1) It is contraindicated in animals with hypersensitivity to TCAs and a history of
urinary retention or glaucoma.
(2) Concomitant administration with MAOls should be avoided.
Serotonin selective reuptake Inhibitors (SsRls)
1. General considerations
a. Mechanism of action (see Figure 5-1). As the name implies, it selectively blocks
the reuptake of 5-HT by the SERT with minimal effects on NE. This leads to
elevated synaptic levels of 5-HT, hence resulting in acute 5-HTiA receptor de-
sensitization. However, with chronic use, it leads to downregulation of 5-HT1A
autoreceptors that may explain the delay in onset (4-6 weeks) of the effects of
antidepressants.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) SsRls are commonly used in domestic animals for the management of
anxiety, affective aggression, certain forms of compulsive disorders, and
urine marking.
(2) It is used in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in humans.
120Chapter 5 IV C
(3) In dogs, SsRls are used for the treatimenl of separalion anxiety, compulsive
disorders, and dominance-type aggression.
(4) In cats, it is beneficial in treating urine spraying, aggression, and compulsive
disorders such as psychogenic alopecia and fabric chewing.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) All SsRls are metabolized in the liver and excreted into the urine.
(2) SSRls are competitive inhibitors of several isoforms of CYP450 liver en-
zymes.
(3) The onsel of therapeulic effecl is slow; at least 3-4 wecks is required
to observe the improvement in behavior following the initiation of drug
therapy.
d. Adverse effects
(1) SSRls have an excellent safety profile. Unlike TCAs, they exhibit lower in-
cidence of cholinergic, histaminergic, and adrenergic side effects (see Table
5-1).
(2) Side effecls in most species include sedation, tremor, constipation, diarrhea,
nausea, anxiety, irritability, agitation, anorexia, seizures, and agitation. How-
ever, inappetence, and mild sedation are the most commonly observed side
effects in dogs and are transient in nature.
(3) Cats, in particular, should be monitored for food intake, and urine and fecal
excretion due to concerns of Gl disturbances.
(4) A phenomenon known as "5-HT syndrome" resulting from excessive levels
of synaptic levels of 5-HT has been reported in rare instances. Alternatively.
it may also result when SsRls arc concurrently taken with other medications
that interfere with 5-HT metabolism, for example, MAO inhibitors. Although
the exact mechanism is unclear, it is generally believed that the excessive
5-HTia reccptor slimulation may contribute to the condilion. In humans,
the symptoms of serotonin syndrome are changes in mental status, including
confusion, anxiety, agitation, ataxia, tremor, and myoclonus; cardiovascular 
changes, including hypertension and sinus tachycardia; Gl effects, including 
 nausea, diarrhea, excessive salivation, and hyperpyrexia.
e. Drug Interactions
(1) Concurrent administration of medications that are metabolized by CYP450
may lead to elevated plasma levels and resulting toxicity.
(2）
 SSRIs produce significant inhibition of CYP2D6 that metabolizes TCAs
including clomipramine, desipramine, imipramine, and nortriptyline. As
a result, concurrenl administration of the above-mentioned drugs may
lead to "5-HT syndrome." Likewise, MAOls should not be given con-
comitantly with SsRls because they may lead to fatal drug interactions
including 5-HT syndrome, diaphoresis, hyperpyrexia, and unreactive
pupils.
2. Fluoxetine (Reconcile&, Prozac)
 a. Therapeutic uses
(1) In dogs, fluoxetine is used for the treatment of dominance-related aggression,
intraspecies aggression, acral lick dermatitis and other compulsive disorders.
(2) In cats, it is used for the treatment of inappropriate urination, urine spraying
behavior, psychogenic alopecia, and aggression.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) It is well absorbed following oral administralion.
(2) It is extensively metabolized in the liver to norfluoxetine, the active metabo-
lite; however, it has less potent 5-HT reuptake inhibitory properties. Both
fluoxetine and noriluoxetine exhibit slow rates of renal elimination.
(3) The plasma prolein binding of fluoxetine is ~95%.
(4) In dogs, the elimination ty, of fluoxetine and norfluoxetine are 24 hours and
 5 days, respectively. Therefore, the drug may be present in the circulation
weeks after discontinuation of drug administration.
C. Adverse effects
(1) In dogs, panting, anxiety, irritability, anorexia, and aggressive behavior in
previously nonaggressive animals have been reported.
Behavior Modlifying Drugs 121
(2) In cats, changes in sleep pattern, inappropriate elimination behavior, and
changes in behavioral pattern (anxiety, irritabilily) have been reporled.
d. Contraindications
(1) It exhibits high plasma protein binding (~95%); therefore, concomitant ad-
ministration with drugs that compete for the protein binding sites may lead
to adverse effects.
(2) Caution should be exercised when administered in patients with diabetes
mellitus because it may cause hypoglycemia by increasing insulin receptor
sensitivily.
3. Paroxetine
 a. Therapeutic uses
(1) It is used in the management of canine aggression and stereotypic behavior
(2) In cats, it may be used for the treatment of inappropriate urination and ag-
gression.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) ll is well absorbed orally and can be given alone or with food,
and the contribution from the metabolites is minimal.
(3) In geriatric patients while initialing therapy, the drug should be adminislered
at the lowest dose and should be titrated gradually upward because plasma
levels of the drug may be elevated in geriatric patients due to decreased
clearance time.
(4) Paroxetine inhibits CYP450 enzyme (CYP2D6); however, the magnitude of
inhibition is less when comparcd with iluoxetine and iluvoxamine.
(5) The ty, of paroxetine in animals is unavailable. In humans, the t : is ~24
hours.
c. Adverse effects
(1) Anorexia is a common side effect in dogs, although typically transient.
(2) It should not be used in patients with narrow angle glaucoma.
(3) Constipation is a common anticholinergic side effect in cats. Therefore, fecal
and urinary excretion should be monitored regularly, cspecially during the
first week of therapy.
4. Sertraline
a. Therapeutic uses. In both cats and dogs, it is used in the treatment of aggres-
sion, OCD and anxiety-related disorders.
b. Pharmacokinetics 
(1) It exhibits a similar pharmacokinetic profile to that of paroxetine in humans.
(2) It is highly plasma protein bound (97%).
(3) Il undergoes cxlensive hepalic first pass metabolism and is primarily metabo-
lized to N-desmethylsertraline.
(4) The 5-HT reuptake inhibitory effects of N-desmethylsertraline are less potent
than those of the parent compound.
(5) The excretion of the unchanged or original form of sertraline in the urine
represents only a minor mode of elimination. Almost 5o% of the metabolites
of sertraline are eliminated in the feces.
(6) Il exerls inhibitory cffects on the liver cnzyme CYP2D6, although to a lesser
extent than that of paroxetine or fluoxetine.
(7) The mean tiy,. of sertraline in humans is 26 hours; no such information is
available for animals.
c. Adverse effects
(1) The side effect profile in dogs include mydriasis, hind limb weakness, hyper-
activily, and anorexia.
(2) In cats, the adverse effects include sedation, anorexia, behavioral changes
(anxiety, irritability, and sleep disturbance), vomiting, and diarrhea.
(3) Sertraline exerts minor inhibitory effects on the liver enzyme CYP2D6. Cau-
tion should be exercised when used with drugs such as TCAs and dex-
tromethorphan, used in the trcatment of kennel cough.
(4) Patients with chronic liver impairment metabolize sertraline more slowly as
compared to patients with normal metabolism. Because of the potential for
122 Chapter 5 IV C
toxicity, it should be used with caution in animals with compromised liver
function.
5. Fluvoxamine
a. Therapeutic uses
It can be used for the treatment of aggression and compulsive disorders in both
cats and dogs. In particular, it can be used to treat maternal aggression.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) It is completely absorbed and only 10% of the dose is excreted in its un-
changed form,
(2) Fluvoxamine is ~80% plasma protein bound.
(3) The ty, of fluvoxamine is ~15 hours in dogs.
c. Adverse effects
(1) In a small percentage of animals it can cause anxiety and changes in ap-
petite pattern, Fluvoxamine should not be concurrently administered with
MAOls. A 2-week washout period should be implemented before initiation
of drug therapy with MAOls.
(2) When fluvoxamine is given concomitantly with BZDs, it may decrease the
clearance of BZDs that are metabolized via hepatic oxidation.
D
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOls)
1. General considerations
a. Mechanism of action
(1) The antidepressant effects of the drugs are attributed primarily to their ac-
tions in the brain.
(2) MAOls are drugs that work by inhibiting both isoforms of MAO, hence re-
sulting in elevated levels of vesicular monoamines (Figure 5-1).
(3) Two isoforms of MAO have been identified, namely, MAO-A and MAO-B.
(a) MAO-A. Catalyzes the oxidative deamination of 5-fIT, catecholamines,
and exogenous amines, especially tyramine derived from a variety of
food sources (wine and checse). Thereforc, MAo inhibilors should
nol be given concurrently with tyramine containing foods because il
may cause an incrcasc in blood prcssure resulting from clevated levels
of NE.
(b) MAO-B. Oxidatively deaminates catecholamines including DA,
epinephrine, NE, phenylethylamine, and to a lesser degree 5-HT.
(c) Species-specific difference in MAO isoforms. MAO)-B is the predomi-
nant isoform found in human platelets, whereas both isoforms are ex-
pressed in dog platelets.
b. MAO-A inhibitors and nonselective MAO inhibitors are seldom used in veteri-
nary behavioral medicine.Therefore, the focus will be on selegiline, a selective 
MAO-B inhibitor.
2. Selegiline
a. Mechanism of action
(1) Selegiline is an irreversible and selective inhibitor of MAO-B.
(2) It inhibils the rcuplakc of NE and 5-HT into presynaplic terminals.
(3) It inhibits the presynaptic D2 reccptors, thercby promoling DA rclcasc.
(4) It acls as a frec radical scavcngcr of DA-derived oxidalive spccies in the
CNS by promoting superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase activity.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Selegiline can be used to manage the emotional behavioral disorders in cats,
including territorial and fear-related aggression, reduced appetite, compulsive
licking, house soiling, and excessive vocalization.
(2) It is useful in treating "rage syndrome" in cocker spaniels.
(3) It is approved by FDA for the treatment of canine cognitive dysfunction
(CCD), a disorder observed in elderly dogs. CCD is characterized by de-
creased social interaction, changes in sleep cycle, confusion, disorientation,
loss of prior house training, and obedience commands. Furthermore, his-
tological lesions reminisccnt of Alzheiincrs' β-ainyloid plaqucs have bcen
Behavior-Modilying Drugs1 23
identied in the postmortem brains of geriatric: dogs that cxhibited behav-
ioral problems before death.
(4) Selegiline appears to exhibit beneficial effects on learning in both young and
geriatric patients,
(5)9
Selegiline is used to treat cognitive dysfunction in geriatric cats.
(6) Selegiline may suppress cataplexy in canine narcolepsy. Aberrant MAO ac-
tivity or an imbalance in 5-HT and other neurotransmitter transmission has
been implicated in the pathogenesis of human cataplexy.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) In dogs, selegiline exhibits rapid absorption from the Gl tract but has low
bioavailability (10%). In humans, it exhibits high plasma protein binding
(~85%). Plasma concentrations peak around 20-30 minutes.
(2) The three major metabolites of selegiline include I-(-) amphetamine, I-(-)
methamphetamine, and N-desmethylselegiline. A few of the sympath-
omimetic effects observed with selegiline might be partly attributed to its
metabolites.
(3) In dogs, the elimination ty. is ~80 minutes.
(4)  Therapeutic responsiveness may require at least 3-4 weeks following initia-
tion of drug therapy.
(5) Most MAOls are uscd for the treatment of progressive irrcversible ncurode-
generation and thcreforc it should not be discontinued in rcsponsive pa-
tients.
(6) In the cvent of treatment failurc, a washout period of 2 wceks is recom-
mendcd after termination of MAOl therapy and initiation of a new antide-
pressant thcrapy.
d. Adverse effects. The occurrence of side cffccts is rare. Howcver, at high doses,
it can cause hyperactivity and stercotypy in dogs. Sincc the lcvcls of phcnylethy
lamine are increased in the CNS of treated dogs, it may produce amphetamine-
like stimulant effects. For example, in dogs, restlessness, agitation, vomiting, dis-
orientation, diarrhea, and decreased hearing have been reported.
e. Contraindications
(1) Severe CNS toxicity can occur when given in combination with TCAs,
namely, aimitriptyline, clomipramine, and SsRls—fluoxetine and paroxetine.
In severe cases, it may lead to 5-HHT syndrome.
(2) Selegiline should not be concurrently administered with potential MAO in-
hibitors such as amitraz, a topical ectoparasiticide.
(3) Use of selegiline, in conjunction with x2-agonists, may lead to large fluc-
tuations in blood pressure. Periodic monitoring of blood pressure is recom-
mended.
Hormonal therapy
E.
1. General considerations. Synthetic progestins have been used for the alleviation of
bchavioral problcms. Howevcr, the low therapcutic efficacy, potentially serious side
cffcct profiles, and availability of morc spccific agents have made synthetic pro-
gestins almost obsolcte. Synthctic progestins are uscd as a last resort only whcn
othcr therapcutic intervcntions and bchavioral thcrapy have failed, and cuthanasia,
abandonmcnt, or relinquishrment is probable. Only the two most frequently uscd
synthetic progcstins in vcterinary bchavioral rmcdicine will be discussed, namcly,
megcstrol acetate (MA) and mcdroxyprogestcronc acetate (MPA).
a. Mechanism of action
(1)  The behavioral improverment mediated by progestins is attrilbuted to both
antiandrogcnic and calming cffect on the limbic system,
(2) Progestins clicit a wide array of actions including inhibition of secrction of
pituitary gonadotropins, inhibition of production of sex steroids, and activa-
tion of GABAA receptors similar to BZDs.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Progestins have been commonly used in the management of sexually dimor-
phic behavior including roaming, dominance aggression in dogs and cats,
124Chapter 5 IV E
urine marking, excessive vocalization, and persistent mounting in neutered
male cats.
(2) MA is FDA approved for the postponement of estrus and the alleviation of
pscudo-prcgnancy in dogs.
-ap pue eioadoje suasouoasd auia, pean oi pasn s! vdn eoiseooo (e)
tis, although tranquilizing agents may be preferable.
(4) In parrots, progestins have been used to treat feather-picking behavior.
c. Adverse effects
(1) MA has profound adrenocortical supprcssing cffccts at thcrapeutic doses,
which is due to the inhibition of ACTH secretion; however, symptoms of
adrenocortical insufficiency are rare (for further information please refer to
Chapter 12). If the animal, however, demonstrates clinical signs of stress
(vomiting, lethargy), exogenous steroid support should be instituted. The
most prevalent side effects include sedation, polyphagia, and polydipsia-
attributed to the glucocorticoid activity of progestins.
(2) Various pathological changes including endometritis, cystic endometrial hy-
perplasia, mammary hypertrophy, and neoplasia have been identified in the
uterus of both dogs and cats depending on the dose and the duration of
drug therapy.
(3) Neuroendocrine problems such as diabetes mellitus and iatrogenic Addison's
syndrome may develop at therapeutic doses. However, they are transient
and have been shown to be resolved within 3 months of discontinuation of
drug therapy.
d. Contraindications
(1) MPA should not bc uscd in prcpubcsccnt cats, cspccially intact females duc
 to increased risk of mammary hypertrophy.
(2) In dogs, it may precipitate underlying endocrine and uterine conditions in-
cluding diabetes and endometrial hyperplasia.
2. Medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA)
 a. Pharmacokinetics. MPA stcrile parcntcral suspension (Dcpo-Provcra) is admin-
istered IM or SC once a month, since in cats, one treatment will have a duration
of action of 30 days. This is because MPA in suspension is absorbed very slowly
from the injection site.
(1) Approximately 90% of the drug is reported to be bound to plasma proteins
(refer to Chapter 12 for more information).
(2) It is extensively metabolized in the liver followed by conjugation and elimi-
nation in the urine (in humans).
3. Megestrol acetate (MA)
a. Pharmacokinetics. MA is administered orally.
(1) MA has a rapid onsct of action.
(2) In dogs, feces (~87%) is the major route of elimination and urine (~9%)
represents the minor mode of elimination.
(3) Almost 90% of the drug is eliminated by the end of 1 week. Information on
plasma protein binding is unavailable.
(4) In humans, thc plasma ty, avcragcd ~35 hours.
SUGGESTED READING
Crowell-Davis S, Murray T. 2006. Veterinary Psychopharmacology. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
http://www.drugs.com
Kalzung BG, Trevor Al, Masters SB. 2005. Katzung and Trevor's Pharmacology. 7th ed. New York:
MeGraw-Hill.
Landsbcrg Gi, Hunthausen W, Ackerman L. 2003. Handbook of Behavior Problems of the Dog and Cat.
2nd cd. (Oxford: Elsevier Saunders.
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Behavior Modiying Drugs125
StUdY  
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONs: Each of the lettered iteims or incoimplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Which one of the following antidepressant
(A) Oxazepaim
drugs is most effective in the treatment of 
(B)Diazepam
psychogenic dermatitis?
(C) Lorazepam
(A) Doxepin
(D) Chlordiazepoxide
(B)Fluoxetine
(E) Both A and C
(C) Imipramine
6. Which of the following drugs is most
(D) Desipramine
likely to produce dis-inhibition phenomenon,
(E) Sertraline
 manifested as increased aggressivencss?
2. Which of the following hchavior-modifying
(A) Imipramine
drugs is most likely to produce pronounccd
(B) Clomipramine
antimuscarinic. side effects and cardiac distur-
(C) Fluoxetine
bances?
(D) Sertraline
(E) Diazepam
(A) Fluoxetine
(B) Sertraline
7. Which of the following behavior-modifying
(C)Alprazolam
(D) Diazepam
drugs may precipitate diabetes mellitus?
(E)Imipramine
(A) MPA
(B)Imipramine
3. Which of the following drugs should not
(C) Selegiline
be concurrently administercd with fluoxcline
(D) Clomipramine
due to the risk of "serotonin syndrome" and
(E)Fluoxetine
Cardiovascular disturbances?
(A) Imipramine
8. Which of thc following drugs is FDA-
 approved for the treatment of separation anxi-
(B) Selegilinc
(C) Clomipramine
ety in dogs?
(D)Amitriptyline
(A) Clomipramine
(E) All of the above
(B)Amitriptylinc
(C)Imipramine
4. Which of the following is the most com-
(D) Doxepin
monly seen adverse effect in cats adminis-
(E)Diazepam
tered diazepam for the treatment of noise
phobia?
9. Which of the following drugs exerts its ac-
(A) Endometrial hyperplasia
tions through selective inhibition of serotonin
(B) Urinary retention
transporler?
(C) Orthostatic hypotension
(A) Fluoxetine
(D) Hepatic necrosis
(B)Imipramine
(E) Blurred vision
(C)Medroxyprogestcronc
(D) Buspirone
5. Which of the following drugs can be used
(E) Doxepin
for the treatment of anxiety-related disorders
in geriatric animals or in patients with im-
10. According to the monoamine theory
paired liver function?
of depression imbalances, which of the
126
Chapter 5
following neurotransmitter(s) play a key role
when used in combination with fluoxetine for
in the disease pathogenesis?
the treatment of aggression and stereotypical
behavior in dogs?
(A) Norepinephrine
(B) Serotonin
(A)Buspirone
(C)  Acetylcholine
(B)Imipramine
(D) GABA
(C)Diazepam
(E) Both A and B
(D)  Medroxyprogesterone
(E)Alprazolam
11. Which of the following drugs is useful in
providing rapid relief from anxiety associated
13. Which of the following drugs is a se-
with noise phobia?
lective irreversible MAO-B inhibitor and is
(A) Amitriptyline
useful in the treatment of canine cognitive
(B)Imipramine
dysfunction (CCD)?
(C)Fluoxetine
(D) Sertraline
(A) Selegiline
(B)  Medroxyprogesterone
(E) Alprazolam
(C) Sertraline
12. Which of the following drugs is a par-
(D) Alprazolam
tial 5-HT1A receptor agonist and is effective
(E)Fluoxetine
Behavior-Modifying IDrugs
127
ANSWERS ANd EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is A.
of 5-hHT which may lead to a fatal condition
Doxepin, which is categorized under
known as "serotonin syndrome," which
TCAs, exhibits moderate inhibitory effects
is characterized by agitation, restlessness,
at the NET and weak inhibitory effects at
confusion, seizures, Gl disturbance, and
the SERT. In addition, doxepin has potent
profound hypertension. In addition, when
H1 -antihistaminic effects which may partially
MAOls are coadninistered with TCAs, they
account for its potent antipruritic effects.
can cause potentially life-threatening severe
This pharmacological aspect has been
hypertensive crisis. Thus, a 2-week washout
particularly useful as an adjunct therapy for
period should be instituted between the
the treatment of psychogenic dermatitis in
discontinuation of MAOl and initiation of
companion animals. However, TCAs such as
drug therapy with an SSRI or TCA.
imipramine and desipramine have moderate
H,-antihistaminic. effect which may account
4. The answer is D.
for its sedative effects observed, especially
Diazcpam differs from other BZDs in
during the first few weeks of drug therapy.
that it can cause idiopathic hepatic necrosis
SSRls such as fluoxctine and scrtraline.
in cats, the most serious adverse event in
however, have very little H -antihistamine
this species. Toxic intermediates play a role
effect. Furthermore, SSRIs produce fewer
in the disease pathogenesis. Therefore, it
adverse effects than do other nonselective
is essential to rule out any underlying liver
antidepressants.
condition; complete blood count and blood
chemistries need to be performed to cnsure
2. The answer is E.
the well-being of the cat. TCAs exert anti-
Unlike SSRls—fluoxetine and sertraline-
muscarinic. effects, which are characterized
TCAs (e.g., imipramine) produce undesirable
by urinary retention and blurred vision,
side effects at therapeutic doses. In addition
tachycardia, dry mouth, and constipation.
to their transporter inhibiting properties, they
In addition, ventricular arrhythmias may be
exhibit potent antimuscarinic effects which
seen in animals that have an underlying
is manifested as dry mouth, constipation,
cardiac conduction abnormality. On the
urinary retention, tachycardia, and blurred
contrary, progestins which are seldoin used
vision. In order to improve tolerability to
in veterinary behavior medicine because
the antimuscarinic effects of TCAs, the
of their unfavorable side effect profile
dosc is normally incrcased with gradual
can cause endometrial hyperplasia and,
increments during the first few weeks of
therefore, should not be used in intact
therapy. However, blurred vision and Gl
females.
disturbancc are among the less common
side effects observed with BZDs such as
 5. The answer is E.
alprazolam and diazepam. SSRls exhibit
Both oxazepam and lorazepaim are par-
little or no affinity for the cholinergic and
ticularly useful in the treatment of anxiety
histaminergic receptors and cxhibit minimal
disorders in geriatric animals and in animals
effects on cardiac conduction. SSRls are well
with compromised liver function because.
tolerated by patients with heart diseases and
unlike diazepam and chlordiazepoxide, they
in geriatric patients who are more susceptible
 do not generate long-acting metabolites.
to orthostatic hypotension and antimuscarinic
effec.ts.
6. The answer is E.
Diazepam, a benzodiazepine, is used
3. The answer is E.
for the treatment of anxiety-related disorder.
Fluoxetine, an SsRl, should not be con-
especially when the stimuli can be predicted
currently administered with MAOls and
in advancc, for cxaimple, storim phobia.
TCAs, because the aforementioned drugs
However, it may cause loss of inhibition,
have the ability to increase synaptic levels
hence resulting in aggressiveness. Thus,
128
Chapter
benzodiazepines should be avoided or used
10. The answer is E.
cautiously in aggressive animals. On the
According to the monoamine theory of
contrary, TCAs such as imipraminc and
depression, impairments in both 5-HT and
clomipramine and SSRls such as fluoxetine
NE neurotransmission have been implicated
and sertraline do not producc disinhibition
in thc discase proccss. Deficicncy of certain
phenomenon, because they have liltle
monoamines such as NE and 5-HT in certain
or no GABA-modulating effects. In fact,
kcy rcgions of the brain may account for
combination therapy involving SSRls and
the depression. Conversely, the theory
BZDs have demonstrated improved clinical
proposes that elevation of the monoamines
oulcome in the treatment of abnormal
may account for the mania. However,
behavior.
the monoamine theory of depression is
considered to be over simplistic, because
7. The answer is A.
it does not provide an explanation as to
Progestins may precipitale an underly-
why the pharmacological effecls occur
ing diabetes mellitus condition, which is due
immediately whereas the clinical therapeutic
to their glucocorticoid activity. Studics in
response requires at least several weeks.
humans have shown that depressed patients
Downregulation of feedback inhibitory
rccciving TCAs may havc decrcascd fasting
reccptors allows incrcased synthesis of the
blood glucose levels. Conversely, SSRls
neurotransimitter and enhanced release of the
may cause an increase in fasting blood
neurolransmitter into the synaptic cleit, resull-
glucose levels in depressed individuals.
ing in increased activation of the postsynaptic.
Thus, blood glucosc levels nceds to be
signaling evenls, which may partially account
monitored in animals placed on TCAs and
for the delayed therapeutic response. The
SSRIs.
undesirable side effecls associated with TCAs
are attributed to antimuscarinic effects.
8. The answer is A.
Clomipramine is approved by the FDA
11. The answer is E.
for the treatment of scparation anxicty in
Unlikc SSRls and TCAs, alprazolam, a
dogs.
fast-acting benzodiazepine, attains maximal
plasma lcvcls within 1-2 hours and thcreforc
9. The answer is A.
has a rapid onset of action. Although it
Fluoxetine, an SSRl that is used in the
causcs CNs depression and the potential
treatment of separation anxiety, obsessive
for physical dependence is quite high, it
compulsive disorder, and dominance type
has proven efficacy in the imanagement of
aggression. Fluoxeline works by selectively
blocking the SERT, hence resulting in elevated 
in advance, for exaimple, noise phobia. SSRls
synaptic levels of 5-HT. This acute increase
and TCAs may be used in combination with
in 5-HT lcads to the activation of 5-HT1A
BZDs to limit the tolerance and dependencc
autoreceptors, thereby resulting in decreased
associated with long-term use of BZDs.
synaptic. release of 5-HT. Conversely.
Furthermorc, both TCAs and SsRls rcquirc
during chronic administralion, it leads to
several weeks to develop an improvement
the downregulation of 5-HTiA receptors,
in bchavior and thcreforc may not bc
thereby facilitaling an increase in 5-HT
suitable to provide acule relier from storm
neurotransmission. This may partly explain
phobia.
the delayed onsel of action of SsRls (4-6
weeks). Buspirone elicits therapeutic effects
12. The answer is A.
via its partial agonistic effccts on 5-HTiA.
Buspirone acls as a full agonist al presynaptic
receptors. In addition, stimulation of feedback
receptors, resulting in a decrease in 5-HT
inhibitory cffect on 5-HT releasc may
biosynthesis and inhibition of ncuronal firing.
account for buspirone's anxiolytic effects.
Additionally. it acts as a partial agonist at 
On thc contrary, the thcrapcutic effccts of
postsynaptic 5-HTiA rcccptors, resulting in
TCAs are attributed to their varying degree of
an increase in 5-HT- mediated cell signaling.
selectivity for the SERT and the NET. All of
Thus, buspironc cxhibits dual cffects on
the above-menlioned drugs share one thing
serotonergic neurotransmission. Unlike
in common, that is, delaycd onsct of action,
BZDs, it does nol cause sedation, cognitive
which may take several weeks to develop an
impairment, or psychomotor disruption. Thus,
improvemcnt in behavior.
it serves as a therapeutic adjunct to either
Behavior-Modifying  Drugs 129
SSRls or benzodiazepines for the treatment of
 failure to adhere to previous house training
behavioral disorders in companion animals.
and obedience commands. SSRls such as
Progestins, such as MPA, should be used only
 fluoxetine and sertraline exhibit selective
as a last resort, especially when the animal
inhibitory effects on the SERT. BZDs enhances
is refractory to other behavior-modification
GABA-mediated chloride conductance,
therapy.
hence resulting in the blockade of neuronal
firing. The behavioral improvement observed
13. The answer is A.
following MPA administration is primarily
Selegiline is a selective reuptake inhibitor of
attributed to its antiandrogenic effects and
DA and an irreversible inhibitor of MAO-B.
modulatory effects on the limbic system.
The neuroprotective effects of the drug have
Unfortunately, the low therapeutic efficacy
been shown to be beneficial in the treatment 
 and potentially serious side effect profile have
of CCD, characterized by decreased social
limited its use in the treatment of behavioral
interaction, confusion, disorientation, and
disorders.
This page intentionally left blank
Anesthetics
Dean H. Riedesel
INTRODUCTION. Anesthesia is a reversible process resulting in the total loss of
sensalion in a body parl or the whole body. Anesthesia may be induccd by a drug or
mal is experiencing unconsciousness, hyporeflexia, analgesia, and has skeletal muscle
relaxation.
Local anesthetics block nerve impulse conduction and render an area or region of the
body insensitive to painful stimuli. These agents do not induce unconsciousness. Local
anesthetics may be administered in the following ways:
1. Topically
2. By injection
a. Into the tissues in the vicinity of peripheral nerve endings that are to be
anesthetized (i.e., infiltration)
h. Around major nerves to desensitize the tissues they innervate
C. Into the epiclural or subarachnoid space to desensitize a large region of the body
bilaterally
d. Into joint spaces
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Introduction
1. Action potentials are changes in the resting membrane potential that convey infor-
mation within the nervous system. The resting membrane potential (approximately
-60 to -90 mV) results from the difference between the intracellular and extracel-
lular concentration of K+ and the selective permeability of the cell membrane to
Na and K+. This concentration difference is maintained by an ion pump within
the cell membrane that is fueled by ATP. The Nat, Kt-ATPase pump transports 
three Na' out of the cell for every two K' transported into the cell.
a. Phases of the action potential
(1)  Threshold. The resting membrane potential must reach a specific tlhreshold
value before aln action potential results.
(a) Small decreases in the membrane potential (toward zcro potential! that
clo nol rcach the threshold value do not lead to the propagation of an
action potential.
(b) Action potentials are an all-or-none response to a stimulus (i.e., they do
not reflect the strength of the stimulus!.
(2) Depolarization results from a rapid transient change in the cell's permeability
to Na!. Positively charged Na' rapidly stream into the cell through Na
channels, altering the membrane potential.
(3) Repolarization. The channels that allow Na! to rmove into the cell close
after a few milliseconds at the peak of the action potential. K  then rapidly
diffuses out of the cell, returning the membrane potential to its resting level.
(4) Return to resting potential. After repolarization, the Na+-K--ATPasce pump 
reestablishes the normal concentration difference of Na+ and K+ across the
membrane of the cell, readying it to fire again.
131
132 |Clhapter G IIl A
b. Propagation of action potentials. Action potentials self-perpetuate along the
length of the nerve fiber.
(1) Unmyelinated nerves develop a flow of current from the depolarized re-
gion into the resting segment. The current flow reduces the mermbrane
potential of the resting segment to a value that exceeds threshold and the
action potential is propagated.
(2) In myelinated nerves, action potentials are generated only at the nodes of
Ranvier. Action potentials appcar to "jump" from node to node. Nervc im-
pulse conduclion velocity is much fastcr in myelinatcd ncrves, as comparcd
with unmyelinated nerves.
2. Classification of nerves. Nerves are classified according to their size, myelination,
and function.
a. Historically. the unmyelinated C fibers and small diameter myelinated A-& fibers
(i.e. pain fibers) have been shown to be easier to block with local anesthetics
than myelinated, large fibers (i.e. sensory and motor fibers).
b. More rccent studies have shown that the small unmyelinaled C (pain) fibers are
the last fibcr type lo be blocked by lidocainc. Thus, controversy exists concern-
ing the susceptibility of the various nerve types to local anesthetics and results
also vary depending on the nerve and lipid solubility of the drug studied.
B.
 Mechanism of action
1. Local anesthetics block the propagation of an action potential by inhibiting the
flux of Na+ through voltage-gated Na+ channels.
2. The exact site of action of local anesthetics is unknown, One popular theory is that
the unchargcd basc form of the local anesthetic molecule diffuscs through the nervc
cell membrane, becomes protonated (i.c. binds with H') inside the cell, and then
binds to the Na' channel and essentially "plugs" the channel.
Chemistry
1. Structure. Local anesthetics have thrcc struclural cormponcnts: an aromatic group.
an intermediate bond, and a tertiary ainine (Figure 6-1).
a. The interimediate bond is a connecting hydrocarbon chain that is either an ester
or an amide.
b. The addition of carbon atoms to the aromatic region or the amine end of the
 molecule increases its lipid solubility and, therefore, its potency.
2. Characteristics
a. Local anesthetic drugs are weak bases; therefore, they are usually water insol-
uble. Commercial products are prepared as hydrochloride salt solutions, which
Aromaticgrou
Tertiaryamine
HC
CH2
Lidocaine
CH
N:
CH2
HC
HC
H3C
CH2
Procaine
FIGURE 6-1. Struclures of lidocaine
CH2
CH2
N:
and procaine. Lidocaine is amide-
CH2
linkcd and procaine is cstcr-linked.
HC
Anesthetics  133
TABLE 6-1. Propcrtics of Local Ancsthetics
Drug
Lipid Solubility
pKa
Relative Potency
Duration
Ester Linked
Procaine.
1
8.9
1
Short
Amide Linked
Lidocaine
3.7
7.86
2
Intermediate
Mepivacaine
1.3
7.7
2
Intermediate
Bupivacaine
tE.
8.1
8
Long
are acidic. The acidity increases the stability and water solubility of the loca
anesthetic. solution.
b. Local anesthetics exist in solution as uncharged and charged molecules.
B + H+ → BH+. where
B is the basic uncharged form of the local anesthetic; BHt is the positively
charged cation form; and H' is the hydrogen ion.
(1) The relative proportions of uncharged and charged molecules depend on
the pH of the solution and the dissociation constant (pKa) of the drug
(Table 6-1).
(a) If the local anesthetic is injected into an acidic environment, the in-
creased [H-] produces more ionized drug (BH+), thus, decreasing the
effectiveness of the local anesthetic.
(b) Conversely, if the local anesthetic is injected into an alkaline environ-
ment, which has low [H+], greater amounts of the drug will exist in the
base form, increasing the effectiveness of the local anesthetic.
(2) The uncharged molecule (B) diffuses more rapidly across the nerve sheath
than the ionized or charged molecule (BH ). The charged molecule, how-
ever, is thought to be the active form of the drug in the axoplasm.
Pharmacokinetics
1. Absorplion and spccd of onscl (Table 6-1)
higher the lipid solubility, the more potent the agent and the longer its duration
of action.
b. The pKa correlates with the spced of onscl.
(1) Drugs with a pK, closest to the body's pH of 7.4 (e.g., 7.6-6.9) have a rapid
onset of action.
(2) Drugs with a high pKa (e.g., 8.1-8.9) have a slower rate of onset.
2. Distribution
a. Protein binding correlates with the duration of action. The binding site
for the local anesthetic within the Na+ channel is thought to be a protein
(receptor).
b. Epinephrine is added to some local anesthetics (c.g., lidocaine) to prolong the
duration of action. The local vasoconstriction induccd by the cpinephrine limils
syslemic absorption of the local anesthetic, maintaining the local tissue con-
centration. When epinephrine is combined with drugs that already have a long
duration of action (e.g., bupivacaine), the effect is less draimatic.
3. Metabolism
a. Ester-linked local anesthetics undergo hydrolysis by cholinesterase in the plasma
and, to a lesser extent, in the liver.
b. Amide-linked local anesthetics are metabolized in the liver which re-
quires conjugation with glucuronic acid. Cats are more likely to develop
toxicity from these drugs because they glucuronidate drugs less than other
species.
134| Chapter 6 I [
E. Therapeutic uses
1. Anesthesia
a. Topical anesthesia. Local anesthctics are used to desensitize thc mucous nicni-
branes of the eye, nose, and larynx,
(1) Lidocaine is commonly used to desensitize the larynx of cats prior to endo.
tracheal intubation.
(2）
Proparacaine is used to desensitize the cornea.
(3) Topical application of lidocaine (2.5%) and prilocaine (2.5%) in a eutectic
mixture can be used to penetrate intact skin. After 45-60 minutes of contact
time thc skin is ancsthetized enough for painless venipuncturc.
(4) Lidocaine (5%) transdermal patches do not desensitize the skin or interfere
abnormally functioning Na' channcls and arc used to treat dermal (c.g..
incision) pain.
b. Infiltrative anesthesia. Local anesthetics are used to desensitize tissues in a lim-
itcd area (c.g.. in order to dcbride and suturc a laceration).
C. Peripheral nerve blocks are used to desensitize larger areas. For example, a
paravertebral nerve block would be used to desensitize the paralumbar fossa of
a cow prior to a laparotony.
d. E
Epidural injection of a local anesthetic desensitizes the spinal cord or cauda
equine and is useful for procedures such as caudal abdoininal, pelvic limb, or
perincal surgery.
e. Neurolytic anesthesia. Ethyl alcohol, which is neurolylic, has been used in vet-
erinary medicine to produce a prolonged nerve blockade in animals. Loss of
nerve function can last as long as l year (i.e., as long as it takes the nerve to
rcgenerate).
 2. Control of arrhythmias. Lidocaine infused or injected IV is used to control prema-
ture ventricular contractions.
3. Constant rate IV infusion of lidocaine produces analgesia which facilitates general
ancsthcsia and may bc part of a multimodal approach to pain control postopera-
tively.
4. IV infusion of lidocaine in the horse may increase intestinal motility and be
useful in trcating somc forms of hypomotility. The mcchanism of action is un-
known but thought to involve anti-inflammatory, analgesia, or altering the sympa-
thetic inhibitory reflexes by suppressing the nerve transmission in afferent sensory
pathways.
F.
 Adverse effects can occur if the plasma concentration of the local anesthetic reaches
their anesthetic potency. For example, bupivacaine is toxic at a lower plasma concen-
tration than lidocaine.
1. Central nervous system (CNS). Skeletal muscle twitches are the first sign of
toxicity, but tonic-clonic seizures are imminent and often the first clinical
sign.
2. Cardiovascular system. Signs of toxicity usually occur at higher plasma con-
centrations than those associated with CNS signs. Plasma concentration of lido.
caine that produccs cardiovascular toxicity may be lower for cats than in other
species.
a. Prolongation of the PR and QRS intervals may result from slowed impulse con-
duction.
b. Hypotension and decreased myocardial strength (i.e., a negalive inotropic effec)
may occur.
 3. Methemoglobinemia may occur following use of prilocaine or benzocaine in cats
and rabbils,
myotoxicity have been reported.
Anesthetics135
 INHALANT ANESTHETICS. The primary site of action of these agents is the brain
and spinal cord. Analgesia and unconsciousness are produced when the concentration
of the anesthetic reaches a specific level in the CNS.
A.
 Mechanism of action. Because the physiologic mechanism of consciousness is un-
known, it is not surprising that the mechanism of action of inhalant anesthetics is also
unknown. The following are two current hypotheses regarding the mechanism of ac-
tion of inhalant anesthetics:
1. Single mechanism. The obscrvation that anesihesia has bcen produced using the
gaseous phase of a wide variety of chemically unrelated compounds has led to the
unitary hypothesis, which holds that all general anesthetics act through one basic
mechanism.
a. The fact that increasing the atmospheric pressure reverses the anesthetic effect of
 all inhalant anesthetics tested seems to support a single mechanism of action.
b. In 1908, Meyer and (Overton observed that anesthetic potency is correlated with
the solubility of the drug in olive oil. This observation has been cited as support 
for a common mechanism of action.
2. Multiple mechanisms. Each anesthetic: may have a unique mechanism of action.
B.
 Pharmacokinetics. Through ventilalion of the lungs, an anesthclic parlial pressure is
established within the alveoli. Increasing either the inspired concentration of anes-
thetic or alveolar ventilation will increase the partial pressure in the alveolus. The
drug diffuses from the alveoli into the blood and is circulated to all parts of the
body. Anesthetic molecules move from areas of high partial prcssure to areas of low
partial pressure. Removal of anesthetic from the alveolus is affected by the solubility
of the anesthetic in blood (i.e., the blood:gas partition coefficient), cardiac output, and
the difference in partial pressure between the alveolus and the venous blood entering
the lung.
1. Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC). The MAC of an inhalant anesthetic is the
 alveolar concentration that prevents gross purposeful movement in 50% of pa-
tients in response to a standardized painful stimulus. The MAC is used as a mea-
sure of potency. MAC values for the most frequently used inhalant anesthetics are
listed in Table 6-2.
TABLE 6-2. Minimum Alveolar Concentration (MAC) for Inhalant Anesthetics
 Anesthetic
Canine (%)
Feline (%)
Equine (%)
Isoflurane
1.28
1.28
1.28
1.30
1.50
1.31
1.31
1.61
1.43
1.391.50
1.90
1.44
2.21
1.64
Sevoflurane
2.10
2.58
2.31
2.36
3.07
2.84
3.41
Desflurane
7.2
9.79
7.02
7.68-8.19
10.27
8.06
10.3
Nitrous oxide
188
255
205
222
297
[ach line represents the results of a publishedl study.
[Data irom E. P. Slcicy and K. R. Mama. Inhalatlion anesthelics. In Lum) ancf kones's Vrteri-
Dery Anesthesia arnd Anaigesia. 4th edl., Cdited by W. 1. Tranquilli. J. C. Thurmon, and K. A.
Crirmm. Blackwell Publishing. Ancs. IA. 2007.
136Chapter 6  B
TABLE 6-3. Inhalant Anesthetics in Decreasing order of Lipid Solubility
Oil/Gas Partition
Blood/Gas Partition
Inhalant Anesthetic
Coefficient
Potency Rank
Coefficient
Isofluranc
91.0
1
1.46
Sevoflurane
47.0
2
0.68
Desflurane
18.7
3
0.42
Nitrous oxide
1.4
4
0.47
(1) The anesthetic dose required to anesthetize 95% of animals is ~1.2-1.4
times the MAC. Surgical anesthesia levels are achieved by obtaining alve-
olar concentrations equal to 1.4-1.8 times the MAC.
(2) If two anesthetics are adminislered simultaneously, the MAC multiples are
additive,
b. Factors affecting MAC values
(1) Hypothermia, severe hypotension, advanced age, pregnancy, severe hy-
poxemia, severe anemia, or the concurrent administration of certain drugs
(e.g, opioids, tranquilizers) may decrease the MAC value for a particular
patienl.
(2) Hyperthermia or hyperthyroidism may increase the MAC value for a particu-
lar patient.
(3) The duration of anesthesia, patient gender, acid-base balance, and hyperten-
sion have no elifect on the MAC valuo.
c. Relationship to lipid solubility. The Meyer-verton Observation states that the
oil:gas partition coefficient correlates inversely with anesthetic potency. The
more lipid soluble the anesthetic, the lower the MAC and the higher the po-
tency. Conversely, the lower the lipid solubility, the higher the MAC and the
lower the potency (Table 6-3)
2. Blood:gas partition coefficient. The solubility of an agent is most commonly ex-
pressed in terms of a blood:gas partition coefficient. Solubility of the agent in
blood correlates with the speed of induction and recovery. Table 6-3 contains the
blood:gas partition coefficients for the inhalant anesthetics.
a e py a p a e sn  d sg  a e
amount of the anesthetic. Therefore, it will take longer to raise the alveolar
partial pressure because the blood will keep absorbing the anesthetic as it is
brought by ventilation to the alveolus.
b. In addition, it takes a long time before the blood is saturated with enough drug
to cause diffusion of an adequate amount into the tissues. Thercfore, induction
and recovery are slow.
3. A plot of the ratio of concentration of anesthetic in the alveolus (FA) to the con-
centration inspired (F;) provides information about the various inhalant anesthetics
(Figure 6-2).
Administration
1. By controlling the anesthetic concentration in the alveolus, the anesthetist is
controlling the anesthetic concentration in the brain. Because the inhalant
anesthetics move in the body by diffusion, it is necessary to administer high con-
centrations to the lungs initially in order to establish the necessary partial pressure
in the brain,
2. Most inhalant anesthetics are liquid at room temperature and require a vaporizer to
form a safe and accurate vapor concentration to be inhaled by the patient.
a. The boiling point indicates what physical state the drug will be in at room tem-
perature, If the boiling point is below room temperature (20 C), then the drug
exists as a gas al room lemperalure (Tablc 6-4).
b. The vapor pressure of a liquid compound indicates how volatile it is and the
maximum concentration that can be achieved (see Table 6-4).
Anestlietics 137
1.0
NiLrous oxide
FIGURE 6-2. The rise in the alveolar
anesthetic concentralion (FA) toward
Deslurane
thc inspired conccntration (Fj). The less
soluble the anesthetic, the faster the
Sevoflurane
rise in the ratio toward 1.0. Nitrous
Isoflurane
oxide has a morc rapid risc than des-
flurane because of its greater inspired
concentration.
0.0
20
30
Minutes
TABLE 6-4. Physic.al-Chemical Properties of the Inhalant Anesthetics
Boiling
Vapor Pressure
Maximum Concentration
Inhalant Anesthetic
Point (°C)
20°℃ (mm Hg)
20°℃ (%)
Isoflurane
48
240
32
Sevoilurane
58.5
160
21
Desflurane
23.5
700
28
Nitrous oxide
-89
100)
(1) The higher the vapor pressure, the easier it is to vaporize the compound.
(2) The maximum concentration that can be achieved is calculated by dividing
the vapor pressure by the atmospheric pressure (760 mm Hg at sea level)
and multiplying by 100.
(3) To determine the volume of gaseous anesthetic that will result from the va-
porizalion of a liquid ancsihetic, the following formula can be used:
(X)(SG)
x 22.400 = V. where
GMW
X is volume of liquid anesthetic (mL); SG is specific gravity (g/mL); GMW
is gram molecular wcight (g/mole); and V is ihe volume of anesthelic gas
produced (mL).
 The resultant volume (V) assumes standard conditions of 1 atm of pres-
sure (760 mm Hg) and 0' C. To convert the volume to room temperature
(20'C) requires Charles's law, which states that if pressure is held constant,
TABLE 6-5. Physical-Chemical Properties of the Liquid Inhalant Anesthetics
 Molecular
Specific Gravity
Vapor (mL) from 1 ml
Inhalant Anesthetic
weight (g)
at 20°℃ (g/ml)
of liquid 20°℃
Isoflurane
185
1.49
195
Sevoflurane
200
1.52
183
Desflurane
168
1.47
210
138
Chapter 6ll C
N
H
F
1
F
Nitrousoxide
Desflurane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
FIGURE 6-3. Chemical structures of the inhalant anesthetics.
volume and temperature will vary directly
V
V
T2
where
T
V is the volume of gas at 0"C (273K); T1 is 273K; V is the volume at
room temperalure: and T2 is the room temperalure (293 K, 20"C),
ume al room lempcrature for some of the common inhalanl anesthelics.
D.
 Preparations. When selecting an anesthetic agent, physical examination and clinical
test results, as well as the underlying condition necessitating anesthesia, are factors that 
 must be considered when selecting an anesthetic agent.
1. Nitrous oxide
a. Chemistry (Figure 6-3). Nitrous oxide is an odorless, nonflammable, inorganic
gas at room temperature. It will support combustion by dissociating into nitrogen
and oxygen.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Induction and recovery from anesthesia are rapid because of nitrous oxide's
extremely low solubility—the body quickly becomes saturated with the in-
haled concentration.
(2) Second gas effect. The physical movement of nitrous oxide out of the alve-
olus into the blood slream tends to concentrale the other components of the
alveolus, enhancing their absorption.
(a) The second gas effect can be advantageous during mask induction, de-
creasing the length of time that the animal may struggle before uncon-
sciousness and relaxation occur.
(b) It may be a liability during recovery when the nitrous oxide in the blood
quickly moves from the blood into the alveolus. This physical movement
of gas dilutes the other components of the alvcolus (e.g., oxygen) and
may lead to diffusion hypoxia. To prevent hypoxemia, 100% oxygen
should be administered to all patients for at least 5 minutes after nitrous
oxide is discontinued.
C. Pharmacologic effects
(1) The cardiopulmonary effects of nitrous oxide are minimal.
(a) Nitrous oxide directly depresses myocardial function. However, because
nitrous oxide also directly stimulates the sympathetic nervous system,
depression of myocardial function is minimal.
(b) Nitrous oxide does not sensitize the myocardium to epinephrine.
(2) Hepatic and renal effects. Liver and kidney function are unaffected by ni-
trous oxide.
(3) Effects during pregnancy and delivery. Nitrous oxide readily crosses the pla-
centa; hypoxemia may develop if a neonate is allowed to breathe room air
immediately after cesarean delivery.
d. Therapeutic uses. Nitrous oxide is not a very potent anesthetic; surgical anes-
thesia is not obtainable in animals with nitrous oxide alone. Concentrations of
Anestlietics 」139
50-66% are commonly used and the remainder of the anesthetic dose is pro-
vided by some other inhalant drug (e.g., isoflurane). The analgesic effect of ni-
trous oxide allows the anesthetist to administer lower concentration of more po-
tent anesthetics, minimizing the cardiopulmonary effects of these agents.
e. Administration, Nitrous oxide is adminislcrcd quantitatively using flowmeters. A
mixlure of oxygen and nitrous oxide is determined by the respective flowmeters
so that the desired percent of nitrous oxide is delivered to the anesthetic circuit.
For example, if the ratio of oxygen to nitrous oxide is 1:1, then the mixture con-
sists of 50% nitrous 0xide and 50% oxygen,
f. Adverse effects
(1) Hypoxemia in anesthetized animals is frequently the result of ventilation-
perfusion (V/Q) mismatch in the lung. A high percentage of inhaled oxy-
gen usually prevents the arterial oxygen from becoming dangerously low,
(a) Large domestic animals frequently develop V/Q mismatch during anes-
thesia/recumbency, and reducing the inhaled oxygen percentage with
typical concentrations of nitrous oxide further predisposes them to
hypoxemia. Therefore, nitrous oxide is seldom used in adult horses
and cattle because it may increase the incidence and severity of
hypoxemia.
(b) Administration of nitrous oxide at concentrations greater than 70% is
discouraged because it places any anesthetized animal at risk of devel-
oping hypoxcmia.
35 times greater than that of nitrogen. Because room air is 79% nitrogen,
nitrous oxide will accumulate in and distend closed, gas-filled spaces (such
as those that occur with pneumothorax or intestinal blockage). Nitrous oxide
is contraindicated in animals with pockets of trapped gas.
(3)  Pernicious anemia and neurologic dysfunction have becn reporled in hu-
mans following chronic exposure to nitrous oxide, which inhibits the activity
of vitamin B12-dependent enzymes in the body.
 2. Isoflurane is a halogenated methyl ethyl ether inhalant anesthetic cleared for veteri-
nary use in dogs and horses.
a. Chemistry
(1) Structure. Isoflurane is halogenated ether (see Figure 6-3).
(2)  Characteristics
(a) A colorless liquid with a characteristic, pungent odor. It is a stable com-
pound that does not require additives to maintain shelf life; however, it
is supplied in a brown bottle.
(b)  The specific gravity and the vapor pressure are similar to those of
halothane, which is rarcly used today.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Induction and recovery. Because of its low blood:gas partition coefficient,
isoflurane rapidly induces anesthesia, patients change levels of anesthesia
quickly, and recovery is rapid.
（2）
Elimination. Metabolism of isoilurane is very low (~0.17% is metabolized);
consequently, it has not been associated with organ toxicity. Thus, isoflurane
can be considered for anesthesia in animals with hepatic or renal disease.
c. Pharmacologic effects with organ toxicity
(1) Cardiovascular effects
(a) Isoflurane depresses cardiovascular function and decreases arterial blood
 pressure in a dose-dependent manner because of a decreased stroke
volume and decreased systemic vascular resistance. However, isoflurane-
anesthetized animals maintain a higher cardiac. output at deeper levels
in stroke volume is counteracted by an increase in heart rate.
(b) Heart rhythm remains relatively normal.
(c) Catecholamine sensitization and resultant cardiac arrhythmias occur with
isofluranc, bul to a lesser cxtcnt than with other inhalanl anesthelics.
140Chapler 6 II D
(2) Ventilatory effects. In rmost species, the respiratory rate and tidal volume
are decreased, leading to an increase in the arterial carbon dioxide partial
pressure. Apnea occurs in most species at around 2.5 MAC.
(3) CNS effects
(a) Isoflurane is a dose-dependent CNS depressant that produces general
anesthesia by an unknown mechanism.
provided.
(c) Cerebral blood flow is unchanged at doses of less than 1.2 MAC. Cere-
bral blood flow increases at high multiples of MAC, but the vessels are
still responsive to carbon dioxide. Thus, controlled ventilation to de-
crease the arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure will counteract the
cerebral vasodilation of deep levels of isoflurane anesthesia.
(4) Muscular effects. Isoflurane potentiates the nondepolarizing muscle relaxant 
drugs (e.g-, atracurium).
(5) Hepatic effects. Hepatic. function is reversibly depressed. No cases of
hepatic nccrosis resulting from the use of isoflurane have becn reported.
(6) Renal effects. Renal function is reversibly deprcssed, causing a dccrcasc in
renal blood flow, glomcrular filtration rate, and urine production.
d. Therapeutic uses. Isoffurane is widely used in dogs, cats, birds, and horses and 
is not contraindicated in any species. It is the current agent of choice for ani-
mals with suspected increases in intracranial pressure.
e. Adverse effects. Because of its inertness, isoflurane has not been associated with
any organ toxicities. Malignant hyperthermia can be triggered by isoflurane.
3. Desflurane is a new inhalant anesthetic agent that is approved for use in humans.
Its use in veterinary medicine has becn vcry limited.
a.
Chemistry (sce Figure 6-3). Desfluranes's fluorinatcd mcthyl cthyl cther structurc
is similar to that of isoflurane.
b. Pharmacokinetics. Induction and recovery are rapid with desflurane, which has
a blood:gas partition coefficient similar to that of nitrous oxide. Compared with
other inhalants that are currently in use, desflurane's potency is low.
C.
Biotransformation in the body is very low in humans at 0.02% metabolized.
d.
 Pharmacologic effects. Cardiovascular effects are similar to those produced by
isoflurane.
e.
Administration. The vapor pressure of desflurane is high; therefore, a sophisti-
cated vaporizer is necessary in order to accurately control the vaporization.
4. Sevoflurane has been approved for veterinary use in the dog.
a. Chemistry. Sevoflurane is polyfluorinated methyl isopropyl ether inhalant anes-
thetic (see Figure 6-3).
(1) Sevoflurane is degraded by many carbon dioxide absorbents (i.e., soda lime)
and the resulting alkene (pentafluoroisopropenyl fluoromethyl ether, or com-
pound A) has been shown to be nephrotoxic in rats. Renal damage related
to clinical sevoflurane usage in dogs has not been reported and safety stud-
ies in this species found no toxicity.
(2) Desiccated soda lime in an anesthetic machine will react with sevoflurane
and result in excessive heat production and formation of carbon monoxide.
Extrcrncly rare cascs of spontancous fire in the brcathing circuit of human
ancsthctic machincs have bccn reported.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Induction and recovery. Sevoflurane has a low blood:gas partition coeffi-
cient; therefore, induction and recovery are rapid.
(2) Elimination. Sevoflurane is primarily exhaled but 2-5% is metabolized by
the liver to fluoride ion and hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP). The HFIP is
rapidly conjugated with glucuronic acid and eliminated by the kidney.
C. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Cardiovascular effects
(a) Cardiac output is dccrcascd due to a decrease in strokc volumc and
depression of myocardial contractility.
Anesthetics  141
(b) Dose-dependent decrease in arterial blood pressure due to the decreased
stroke volume and, in some cases, a decrease in peripheral vascular
resistance.
(c) Renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate decrease in a dose-
depcndent manner. These cffects are rapidly reverscd aflcr anesthesia.
(d) Hepatic blood ilow is decrcased and hepatic clearance of drugs is ro-
duced. All potent inhalant anesthetics have the potential to cause hep-
atocellular damage from reduced oxygen delivery. Hepatotoxicity from
sevoflurane has not been reported.
(2) Ventilation is depressed in a dose-dependent fashion.
(a) At low doses, the tidal volume decreases but the respiralory frequency
remains normal.
(b) At high doses, the respiratory frequency also decreases.
(c) Hypercapnia (increased PaCOz) occurs but the normal increase in
minule ventilation from such a slimulant does not occur with sevoflu
rane anesthesia and ventilation is oflen controlled during anesthesia.
d. Malignant hyperthermia can be triggered by sevoflurane.
INJECTABLE ANESTHETICS
A.
Barbiturates and barbituric acid derivatives
1. General information
a. Chemistry. Barbituric acid is formed by combining urca and malonic acid.
(1) Substitutions at the various carbon and nitrogen atoms produce drugs with
varying characteristics (Figures 6-4 and 6-5).
(a) Oxybarbiturates have an oxygen molecule bound to C2.
(b) Thiobarbiturates have a sulfur molecule bound to C2. Thiobarbiturates
are generally more lipid soluble and more highly prolein bound than the
Oxybarbiturates.
(2) The resulting weak acids are supplied as sodium salts. Solutions consisting of
barbiturate salts dissolved in water are very alkaline (pH 10-11.5).
b. Mechanism of action
(1) Barbiturates bind to y-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-gated Cl- channels and
 increase the frequency that these Cl- channels open resulting in hyperpolar-
ization of the neurons.
Drug
X
R1
R2
R3
Duration of action
Pentobarbital
Ethyl
1-Methylbutyl
H
Short
Phenobarbital
Ethyl
Phenyl
H
Long
Methohexital
Allyl
1-Methyl-2-pentynyl
CH3
Ultrashort
Thiopental
S
Ethyl
1-Methylbutyl
H
Ultrashort
X
H
0
FIGURE 6-4. Barbiturates commonly used in veterinary medicine.
142Chapter 6 IV A
OH
N
CHCH
CHCH=CH
N
CHCHCHCH3
CHC=CCH,CH
CH3
CH3
CH3
Thiopental
Methohexital
H
O
CH2CH3
N
N
CHCHCHCH
N
CHCH2
HO
CH3
HO
Pentobarbital
Phenobarbital
FIGURE 6-5. Chemical struclures of thie injectable anesthetics.
(2) Barhiturates decrcase the excitatory effects of the neurotransmitler
glutamate.
so iae pue en suau q uoissusun sndeuas ssidns aui (e)
and opening K+ channels.
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Distribution depends on the lipid solubility of the agent, protein binding,
and ionization. Only non-protein-bound and nonionized molecules cross the
blood-brain barrier.
(a) Lipid solubility
i. Oxybarbiturates are less lipid soluble and slower to enter the brain
than thiobarbiturates, but their duration of action is longer.
ii. Thiobarbiturales are rapid in onset because of their high lipid solubil-
ity and ultrashort in duration because they redistribute in the body to
muscle tissue (Figure 6-6).
(b)  Protein binding parallels lipid solubility. Barbiturates bind to plasma pro-
teins, Decreased protein binding (e.g., as a result of uremia or hypoalbu-
minemia) will increase the clinical effect of a dose of a thiobarbiturate.
(c) lonization. The degree of jonization in the blood stream depends on
the pKa of the particular drug and the pH of the blood. The nonionized
form of the drug has greater lipid solubility and will penctrate the CNS
quickly.
(2) Metabolism and redistribution (see Figure 6-6) are important in determining
carly rocovery from anesthesia with these drugs.
(a) Initially. metabolism is quite high when plasma levels are elevated and
delivery of the drug to the liver is high, but after plasma levels decrease,
the metabolism of these drugs is quite slow. The fat compartment of the
body slowly accumulates these drugs because of their high lipid solu-
bility; however, blood flow to fat is low and rapid redistribution to this
biturates may result in high drug concentrations in the fat compartment.
When drug administration is stopped, the accumulated stores return to
the blood stream, resulting in a prolonged elevation of plasma drug lev-
els and prolonged recovery from anesthesia.
d. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Cardiovascular effects. IV injection in the normovolemic patient causes tran-
sient hypotension and an increase in heart rate.
Anesthetics143
100
80
60
Viscera
40
20-
8
16
32
128
16
Minutes
FIGURE 6-6. Distribution of a thiopental dose following IV injection. Initially. the drug is primarily
in the central blood pool, but it rapidly redistributes to the viscera, lean tissue (muscle), and adipose
tissue. At the time of recovery (10-15 minutes postinjection), most of the drug is in the lean tissue
comparlmenl.
(2) Ventilatory effects. Transient apnea following the IV injection of these com-
pounds occurs fairly commonly as a result of depression of the respiratory
centers in the brain stem.
(3) CNS effects
(a) Barbituralcs cause a dose-dependent depression of the CNs function.
i. Low doses may cause sedation or excitenent.
ii. Moderate doses cause general anesthesia.
im. High doses lead to profound CNS depression.
iv. Overdoses cause apnea and, eventually, cardiovascular depression
and death.
(b) Barbiturates decrease cerebral blood ilow, cerebral oxygen consumption,
 cercbral blood volume, and intracranial pressuro.
s saeea jo disun eoeld aap pe Auaid np soa (t)
rapid after IV injection.
(5) Analgesic effects. Barbiturates are not analgesic in subanesthetic doses
There is evidence that some barbilurales are hyperalgesic at subanesthelic
doses.
 2. Preparations and therapeutic uses
a. Ultrashort-acting barbiturates are very lipid soluble; therefore, their onset of
action is rapid and their duralion 0f action is short (10-30 minutes).
(1)  Thiopental. Thiopental is administered by IV injection for short duration.
anesthesia in dogs and cats. In large domestic animals (e.g., horses, cattle),
the thiobarbiturates are commonly administered with guaifenesin, a central
acting muscle relaxant (see V ID).
144(Chaplcer 6 IV A
(a) Therapeutic uses
i. Thiobarbiturates are considered one of the drugs of choice for induc-
tion of anesthesia in animals with suspccted incrcascd intracranial
pressure.
ii. The plasma ty, is 3-4 hours.
i. Thesc agcnts can be used for maintenancc of anesthesia; however,
repeat doses may lead to slow recovery because of saturation of the
redistribution sites.
iv. Thiobarbiturates are safe for induction of anesthesia for cesarean 
 section because these drugs redistribute rapidly in the dam and fetus.
By the time the fetus is delivered, the fetal blood levels are quite
low.
(b)  Adverse effects
i. Prolonged recovery. Plasma clearance of these drugs is prolonged in
greyhounds. Thereforc, they cxpericnce a long duration of cffect and
slow recovery. Use of thiobarbiturales in greyhounds and other sight
hounds is not recommended.
ii. Cardiac arrhythmias may occur if a large IV dose of a thiobarbiturale
is administered rapidly. Premature ventricular contractions are most
common. The ventricular arrhythmia is usually short in duration but
 potentially detrimcntal to the patient.
il. Allergic rcactions to these drugs have becn reported but arc cx-
tremely rare.
iv. Local irritation. Perivascular injection may lead to necrosis and
sloughing of substantial amounts of tissue. Use of dilute solutions
(2.5% thiopental), injection of saline into the area, and/or injection
of lidocaine to dilute the drug and alter the pH may help prevent 
tissue irritation.
(2) Methohexital is more rapidly metabolized than the thiobarbiturates and the
othcr oxybarbiturates because of its higher lipid solubility, which results from
the addition of a mcthyl group. It is morc potent than thiopental.
(a) Therapeutic uses
i. Like the thiobarbiturates, methohexital is safe for use during cesarean
section.
i. It is safe for use in greyhounds and other sight hounds. Because of
methohexital's rapid redistribution and metabolism by the liver, recov-
ery is quick.
(b) Adverse effects. Methohexital is more likely than the thiobarbiturates to
cause a period of excitement during induction and recovery.
b. Short-acting barbiturates (e.g., pentobarbital are less lipid soluble and
have a longer duration of action (30-60 minules) than the ultrashorl-acting
agents.
(1) Therapeutic uses
(a) Pentobarbital, which has a very low margin of safety, is the primary in-
gredient of euthanasia agents.
(b) Pentobarbital is occasionally used for IV anesthesia in dogs, cats, pigs,
and small ruminants.
(c) Also uscd for scizure control when a long-acting drug is desircd.
(2) Adverse effects
(a) Low doses administered IV may cause an excilement phase character-
ized by whining, paddling, and incoordination.
(b) Recovery is slow and characterized by paddling of the limbs and inco-
ordination. Sedation, physical assistance, or both may be required to
ensure a smooth recovery.
 C. Long-acting barbiturates (e.g-, phenobarbital) are the least lipid soluble and
the slowest in their onsel of action, but they have a long duration of action
(6-12 hours). Phenobarbital is used primarily as an anticonvulsant at subanes-
thetic doses, not as a general anesthetic (see Chapter 4).
esthieti
145
B.
 Cyclohexylamines
1. Dissociative anesthesia, which is characterized by analgesia and superficial sleep,
is a term used to describe the CNs state produced by these drugs. Different levels
of the CNS seem to become dissociated from one another-the EEG reveals de-
 pression of the thalamoneocortical portion of the brain and enhanced activity in
the limbic system.
a. Many reflexes (e.g., palpebral, laryngeal, pharyngeal) are maintained and the
skeletal muscles of the eyelid are contracted, opening the orbit.
b. Somatic analgesia is good, but visceral analgesia is poor.
C. Muscle relaxation is poor. Animals are described as cataleptic, a state character-
izcd by rigidity and partial cxtcnsion of the limbs.
2. Pharmacologic effects
 a. Cardiovascular effects. Cyclohexylamincs dircctly depress cardiovascular func-
tion: however, in healthy animals, they increase sympathetic tone, masking the
direct cffcct and rcsulting in overall stimulation of cardiovascular function.
(1) The heart rate is maintained or increased.
(2) The blood prcssurc and cardiac output are incrcascd.
b. Ventilatory effects. Ventilation is depressed, causing the arterial O2 tension to
decrease and arterial CO2 tension to incrcase. Cats and many other species de-
velop an apneustic breathing pattern, characterized by an inspiratory hold and a
very short cxpiratory pausc.
c. CNS effects
(1) Cercbral blood flow and intracranial prcssurc are incrcascd by thcsc ancs-
thelic drugs.
(2) Dilation of pupils occurs.
d. Effects during pregnancy and delivery. These drugs rapidly cross the placenla
and affect the fetus.
3. Preparations include ketamine and tiletamine.
a. Ketamine is approved by the FDA for use in cats, but numerous other species
have been safely anesthetized with ketamine. It is a Schedule Ill drug.
(1) Chemistry. Ketamine is commercially available as an aqueous solution with
a pH of 3.5. The solulion contains a racemic mixture of the Iwo isomers of
ketamine.
(2) Mechanism of action. Kctamine inhibits thc polysynaptic actions of thc cx-
citatory neurotransimitters acetylcholine (ACh) and L-glutamate in the spinal
cord, lt is a potenl noncompetitive anlagonist of the N-methyl-p-aspartale
(NMDA) receptor complex.
(3) Pharmacokinetics. Ketamine is melabolized by the cytochrome P450 en-
zymes of the liver, and some of the metabolites (e.g., norketamine) have
anesthetic aclivity. Norkelamine is one-ifth to one-third as polent as ke-
tamine and slowly hydroxylated and then conjugated with glucuronide to
form a water-soluble compound that is cxcrcted by the kidncys. The mctabo-
lites and a small amount of unchanged ketamine are excreted in the urine.
Thc cat may cxcrcte morc unchangcd kctamine in the urine than other
species. The plasma ty, in the cat, calf, and horse is 1-1.5 hours.
(4) Administration
(a) Ketamine can be administered IM or IV to cats, dogs, simall ruminants,
and swine. In adult horscs and cattle, it is only administcrcd IV.
(b) Ketamine combinations. Animals usually receive a tranquilizer (e.g., ace-
promazine, xylazine, diazepam) along with ketaimine in order to provide
muscle relaxalion.
i. Xylazine, guaifenesin, or both are frequently administered to horses
prior to administralion of kelamine. Both xylazine and guaifenesin
provide muscle relaxation.
ii. Diazepam, midazolam, or xylazine are frequently used with ke-
tamine in dogs and cats in order to prevent seizures and provide
146
Chapter 6 IV B
muscle relaxation. When xylazine and ketarmine are administered
togethcr, the dccreased heart rate and cardiac output from xylazine
are partially reversed. But, arterial blood pressure, systemic vascu-
lar resistance, and myocardial oxygen consumption also increase
in these animals. Because of these cardiovascular effects, xylazine-
ketamine combinations should only be used in healthy patients and
not administered to dogs or cats with reduced cardiopuimonary
reserve.
iii. Guaifenesin, diazepam, or xylazine may be used in combination 
with ketamine in pigs, cattle, and goats.
(5) Adverse effects
(a) Seizurcs are common in horses and dogs following administralion of ke-
tamine alone.
(b) Profuse salivation imay occur in cats. Laryngeal and pharyngeal reflexes
are present, but they are not active enough to prevent life-threatening
airway obstruction. Anticholinergic. drugs administered before or along
with ketamine will prevent excessive salivation.
(c) Corneal ulceration. Because the eyes remain open during anesthesia,
the cornea may dry out and ulcerate if not protected by an ophthalmic
ointment.
(d) Intraocular pressure increases due to increases in extraocular muscle
tone, Ketamine should be avoided in cases with cornea injuries and
ulcers.
(e) Cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption increases with ketamine.
Intracranial and cercbral spinal fluid pressures incrcasc. Ketamine should
hc avoided in cases with intracranial hyperlension (c.g., head trauma or
intracranial tumors).
b. Telazol? contains equal amounts of tiletamine, a cyclohexylamine, and
zolazepam, a benzodiazepine tranquilizer. It is a Schedule Il drug.
(1) Therapeutic uses
(a) Telazol is used for anesthesia of short duration in dogs and cats. It 
is very useful in the feral cat or uncooperative dog because it can be
administered IM, has a rapid onset of action, and the volume of injec-
tion is small,
(b) Telazol) is used in many other domestic and cxotic: spcies.
i. It has bcen used for short-term anesthesia in horses following admin-
istration of xylazine and butorphanol.
ii. It is combined with xylazinc and ketamine for use in pigs.
ill. It may be used alone or in combination with xylazine in small
ruminants.
1. Administration. Telazol? can be administered IM, SC, or IV.
2. Adverse effects
(a) Recoveries are slow and smooth in cats, but in dogs, recoveries are
sormetimes accompanied by muscle tremors, paddling, and whining.
 Rough recoveries may occur in dogs because they metabolize the zo-
lazepam more rapidly than the tiletamine.
(c) Tachycardia may occur in dogs.
3. Contraindications
(a) Cyclohexylamincs may incrcase intraocular prcssure by inducing con-
traction of the extraocular muscles; therefore, they are contraindicated in
animals with corneal ulcers or lacerations.
occupying mass in the brain.
Propofol
1. Chemistry. Propoiol, a substitutcd isopropylphenol, is an alkylphenol derivative
that is unrclatcd to any othcr ancsthetic drug currcntly in usc. It is forimulatcd in
Anesthetics147
%s7'7 pue 'ual 8sa %7.l 'jo ueaqlos %ot Buuieuos uoisjnua snoanbe %t e
glycerol.
2.
Mechanism of action. Propofol induces anesthesia by activating GABA, reccptors.
3. Pharmacokinetics
a. Induction. The onset of action is rapid and induction is smooth. Repeated doses
in dogs do not accumulate.
b. Distribution. Propofol is highly protein bound.
C. Metabolism
(1) The duration of anesthesia following a single IV injection is very short
(2-10 minutes) because propofol is rapidly metabolized by glucuronide syn-
thase in the liver. Cats have much less glucuronide synthase with which to
metabolize propofol; therefore, prolonged infusion or consecutive day injec-
tions may not be tolerated.
(2) The lungs have been shown to remove a significant amount of propofol from
the circulating blood and may participate in drug melabolism as well.
(3) The plasma ty, is 1-2 hours.
4. Therapeutic uses
a. The imilky white emulsion is used primarily in dogs and cats for IV induction of
anesthesia for short procedures or prior to inhalant anesthesia.
b. Rapid redistribution and metabolism result in quick recovery of psychomotor
function; therefore, propofol is ideal for outpatient cases.
C. Propofol decreases cerebral blood flow and cerebral oxygen consumption; there.
fore, it is safe for use in animals with head trauma or increased intracranial
pressure.
5. Adverse effects
a. Myoclonic twitching and limb paddling are sometimes seen in dogs following
propofol administration.
b. Direct myocardial depression is due to a decrease in [Ca?-]; and myofilament
sensitivity to Ca²I . Peripheral vasodilation, and venodilation occur, causing.
blood pressure and cardiac output to decrease. Propofol must be used cautiously
in traumatized animals and those with hypovolemia or impaired left ventricular
function.
ses pue ssop s! uowwos s! asop snjoq Al 'pidei e suimolloy eaude juaisuel 3
d. Heinz body formation. Phenolic compounds may cause oxidative damage to
erythrocytes in cats. Daily infusions resulted in the formation of Heinz bodies,
anorexia, and malaise.
e. Septicemia. Propofol's vehicle (soybean oil, egg lecithin, and glycerol) is sup-
portive of bacterial growth; therefore, great care must be taken to avoid contami-
nation of the drug prior to injection or septicemia may result,
Etomidate is a sedative hypnotic nonbarbiturate drug of ultrashort duration. It has a
wide margin of safety, with a therapeutic index of 16 (as compared with thiopental,
which has a therapeutic index of 4-7).
1. Pharmacokinetics. Etomidate undergoes rapid hepatic hydrolysis and does not accu-
mulate, even following repeated doses. The plasma ty, is 3 hours.
2. Pharmacologic effects
a. Etomidate causes minimal depression of cardiovascular and respiratory function.
b. It decreases cerebral blood flow, metabolic rate, and oxygen consumption.
c. Etomidate inhibits adrcnal steroidogcnesis by inhibiting 11β-hydroxylasc, reduc-
ing the normal incrcase in plasma corlisol levels associated with anesthesia and
surgcry for up to 3 hours. The clinical imporlance of this inhibition is unknown
bul has bcen associated with an incrcase in morlality of hurman palients with
septiceimia.
3. Mechanism of action. Etomidate is a short-acting hypnotic, which appears to have
GABA-like cffects. Unlike the barbiturates, ctomidate reduccs subcortical inhibition
at the onsct of hypnosis while inducing neocortical slecp. A part of the action of
etomidate consists of a depression of the activity and reactivity of the brain stem
reticular formation.
148|Chapter(IV D
4. Therapeutic uses. Etomidale is administered IV to dogs and cats for induction of
anesthesia for short procedures or prior to inhalant anesthesia. The commercial
preparation is very hypertonic and may cause pain and hemolysis upon IV injec-
tion.
5. Adverse effects
a. Myoclonus and cxcitement can occur either on induction or rccovery. These
effects can be prevented by adequate preinduction sedation with a tranquilizer
or opioid drug.
 b. Etomidate inhibits myocardial contractility. The direct negative inotropic ef-
fect of clomidate results from a decrease in myocardial Ca?+ levels by inhibiting
Ca²+ inilux.
 PREANESTHETIC MEDICATONS facilitale anesthesia and surgery by improving the
rapidity and smoothness of induction, reducing anxiety, providing analgesia and am-
nesia, and compensating for some of the side effects of anesthesia (e.g., salivation,
bradycardia).
A.
 Opioids (see Chapter 4) are administered to provide analgesia.
B.
O diay pue eisauwe pue uoepas aaeladoaid apiaod (t jaideyo aas) siaznbueil
prcvent or counteract the CNs stimulation causcd by some ancsthetics.
C.Anticholinergic agents (see Chapter 2) prevent profuse salivation and bradycardia.
D.
Central muscle relaxants
1. Guaifenesin is a central acting muscle relaxant that is used IV with thiobarbiturates
and ketamine for induction of anesthesia in horses, cattle, and swine.
a. Chemistry. Guaifenesin is a white powder that is dissolved in water, 0.9% saline,
ls jo uuo np ieu e anpod oi asoxap %s io
b. Mechanism of action. Guaifenesin is a centrally acting muscle relaxant that
un aq ussun osndu sssdp e saai deuod syo
neurons in the spinal cord.
C. Pharmacokinetics. Guaifenesin is metabolized by the liver, and the conjugate
metabolites are excreted by the kidney. The plasima ty, is 60-80 minutes.
d. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Cardiovascular effects. Guaifencsin decrcases arterial blood prcssure in
horses but has minimal effects on cardiac output or heart rate.
(2) Respiratory effects. Diaphragmatic function and respiration are minimally
depressed.
(3) Analgesic effects. Sedation accompanies the muscle relaxation, but analgesia
is minimal.
(4) Effects during pregnancy and delivery. It readily crosses the placenta but
does not adversely affect the fetus.
e. Administration, Guaifenesin is usually mixed with cither a thiobarbiturate or
ketamine. This combination is then rapidly infused into the jugular vein of a
tranquilized horse to induce anesthesia.
f. Adverse effects
(1) Perivascular injection causes acute inflammation, necrosis, and sloughing at
the injection site.
(2) Prolonged infusions will lead to drug accumulation in the body and ex-
tremely long recovery times.
(3) Urticaria is occasionally seen in horses following guaifenesin administration.
This effect is thought to be a drug-induced allergic reaction.
(4) Overdoses can cause bradycardia, hypotension, extensor rigidity, apneustic
breathing. and cardiac arrest.
Anesthetics149
(5) Concentrations exceeding 10% in cattle or 12.5% in horses are associated
with intravascular hemolysis and hemoglobinuria.
2. Methocarbamol. It is a guaifenesin-analog, which bears pharmacologic effects very
similar to guaifenesin.
a. Therapeutic uses. It is usually not used as a preanesthetic; instead, it is used as
an adjunctive therapy for acute inflammatory and traumatic conditions of the
skeletal muscle, for example, to relax muscle in canine intervertebral disk dis-
ease and equine acute rhabdomyolysis, and to reduce muscle spasms, particu-
larly in pyrethroid toxicity.
b. Pharmacokinetics. It is used orally and IV. Limited pharmacokinetics data are
available in animals.
(1) It is well absorbed from the Gl tract when given orally. Tmax in humans is
2 hours.
(2) It is widely distributed in tissues, including CNS. Approximately 50% is
bound by plasma proteins.
(3) It is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes. Methocarbamol
metabolites are excreted mostly in the urine along with a small amount of
parent compound.
(4) The plasma elimination ty, of methocarbamol in humans is 1-2 hours.
c. Adverse effects. The side effects of methocarbamol are very similar to those of
guaifenesin. It is irritating, and thus should avoid extravasation. Other routes of
parenteral administration are prohibited.
SUGGESTED READING
Evers AS, Maze M. 2004. Anesthetic Pharmacology: Physiologic Principles and Clinical Practice.
Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingston.
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Sloelting RK, Hillier SC. 2006. Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic Practice. 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, PA: Lippincolt Williams & Wilkins.
Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. 2007. Lumb and jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Anaigesia.
4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
150
Chapter 6
STUdY 
QUEStIONS
DIRECTlONs: Each of the numbered ilems or incormplete stalements in this seclion is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. What is the first indicator of local anes-
(A) Thiopcntal
thetic toxicity?
(B) Propofol
(A) Skeletal muscle twitching
(C) Etomidatc
(D) Ketamine
(B) Tonic-clonic convulsions 
(C)Hypolension
(E) Guaifenesin
(D) Cardiac arrhythumias
(E) Vomiting
6. Which one of the following drugs inhibits
 steroidogenesis in the adrenal gland for sev-
2. Which inhalant anesthetic has the lowest
eral hours aiter administralion?
vapor pressure?
(A) Thiopental
(A) Isoflurane
[ojodoid (g)
(B) Sevofluranc
(C) Etomidate
(C) Desflurane
(D) Kelamine
(D) Nitrous Oxide
(E) Guaifenesin
(E) Propofol
3. If several dogs are breathing 50% nitrous
7. Which injectable anesthetic is best suited
oxide, they would probably all be responsive
for usc in a simall animal rcquiring an outpd
to a painful stinuli. If the MAC of nitrous ox-
tient procedure?
ide is ~200%, how much isoflurane would
(A) Propofol
havc to be adininistercd to render 50% of
(B) Pentobarbital
these dogs unresponsive to a painful stimu-
(C) Thiopcntal
lus?
(D) Tiletamine-zolazepam
(A) 1.00 MAC isoflurane
(E) Guaifenesin
(B) 0.75 MAC isoflurane
(C) 0.66 MAC isoflurane
8. Which of the following drugs is a highly
(D) 0.50 MAC isoilurane
lipid-soluble oxybarbiturate with an ultrashort
(E) 0.25 MAC isoflurane
duration of aclion?
4. Inhalant anesthetics vary in how quickly
(A) Methohexital
the alveolar concentration (blood concentra-
(B)  Pcntobarbital
tion) will approximate the inspired concentra-
(C) Thiopental
tion. Which one of the following anesthetics
(D)  Phenobarbital
has thc fastcst rate of risc in alvcolar concen-
tration?
 9. Which local anesthetic is used topically
(A) Sevoflurane
on the cornea of animals?
(B)Desflurane
(C) Nitrous oxide
(∧) Lidocaine
(D)Isoflurane
(B)Proparacaine
(C) Bupivacaine
 5. Which one of the following anesthetics is
(D) Procaine
an NmDA receptor antagonist?
(E) Mepivacaine
Anesthetics
151
AnSWERS
 ANdEXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is A.
inhibition through hyperpolarization of the
Skeletal muscle twitching is the first
membrane. Guaifenesin is not an anesthetic
recognizable sign of local anesthetic toxicity.
at all but rather a central acting muscle
Twitching of the skeletal muscles may
relaxant and is thought to disrupt nerve
rapidly progress to tonic-clonic convulsions.
impulse transimission at the level of the
Cardiovascular toxicity (as manifested by hy-
internuncial neurons of the spinal cord.
polension and arrhythmias) usually occurs at
a higher dose than that necessary to produce
6. Answer is C.
neurologic toxicity. Gastrointestinal signs
Etomidate causes a dose-dependent in-
(e.g., vomiting) are nol usually associated
hibition of the conversion of cholesterol to
with local anesthetic toxicily.
cortisol. 11β-Hydroxylase appears to be the
enzyme inhibited by this drug. This may
be important in patients that need an intact
2. The answer is B.
Sevoflurane has a vapor pressure of
cortisol response for survival, such as sepsis.
The other drugs have no inhibitor effect on
160 mmHg. The vapor pressures of isoflurane
and desilurane are 240 and 664 mm Hg,
the adrenal gland.
respectively. Nitrous oxide is a gas at room
temperalure and as such by definition does
7. The answer is A.
not have a vapor pressure. Propofol is an
Propofol is rapidly redistributed and
injectable liquid anesthetic not an inhalant.
mctabolized in the body; therefore, the
recovery time for the return of normal activity
and behavior is very short. Even though
3. The answer is B.
thiopental is classified as an ultrashort-acting
The MAC of nitrous oxide is ~200%. Thus.
barbiturate, there is longer time period
animals breathing 50% nitrous oxide will be
necessary for return of normal activily and
receiving 0.25 MAC (50%/200% = 0.25).
behavior. Pentobarbital and Telazol are
Simultaneously, inhaled anesthetics are
longer-acting drugs. Guaifenesin is primarily
additive; therefore, another 0.75 MAC: would
a muscle relaxant uscd for the induction of
be required to reach a level that would be
ancsthesia in horscs and cattlc.
equivalent to 1.0 MAC. By definition, this
is the MAC that would render 50% of the
8. The answer is A.
 animals unresponsive to painful stimuli.
Most oxybarbituratcs, with thc excep-
tion of methohexital, are less lipid soluble
4. The answer is C.
than thiobarbiturates. A methyl side chain
Nitrous oxide is the least soluble gas in
increases methohexital's lipid solubility
current veterinary use; therefore, the alveolar
and results in an ultrashort duration of
concentration quickly approaches the inspired
aclion. Penlobarbital and phenobarbital are
concentration. In other words, the ratio of the
long-acting oxybarbiturales. Thiopental is
concentration of anesthetic in the alveolus to
ultrashorl-acting thiobarbiturates.
thal inhaled (FA:F) approaches 1.0 quickly.
9. The answer is B.
5. The answer is D.
Proparacaine is a rapidly acting topical
Ketamine is an antagonist at the NMDA
anesthetic used to desensitize the cornea for
receptor and is responsible for most of
measuring intraocular pressure (tonometry) or
this drug's ancsthetic and analgesic effects
relief of corneal pain to facilitate examina-
Thiopental, propofol, and etoimidate bind
tion. The duration of effect is short, around
to the GABA receptor and result in neuron
5-10 minutes.
This page intentionally left blank
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
Walter H. Hsu and Arthi Kanthasamy
GENERAL CONSIDERATION. The nonstcroidal anti-inflammalory drugs (NSAIDs)
discussed in this chapter iall under Iwo classcs, namely. inhibitors of prostaglandin
(PG) synthesis and miscellaneous (locally applied) anti-inflammatory drugs. The PG in-
hibitors induce anti-inflammation and analgesia without affecting consciousness, while
locally applied drugs exert their erfects directly on the local lesions. The PG inhibitors
have been used extensively to alleviate mild to moderate pain, and is also effective in
treating cephalgia, myalgia, arthralgia, and other pain from the integument; although
they do not relieve visceral (except flunixin), or sharp and intense pain.
A
Mechanisms of action of NSAIDs. Most of the NSAIDs act by inhibiting PG biosyn-
thesis and in some instances leukotrienes. Hence, an uhderstanding of PG biosynthesis
and its physiological iunctions is essential to betler comprehend the mechanism of
drug aclion of the various NSAlDs listed below:
1. Prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and their synthesis (see Figure 3-3)
a. Prostaglandins are produced by a widle array of tissues including lungs, Gl tract,
kidney, and liver. They are metabolized primarily at the site of action hence re-
sulting in decreased circulating levels of PGs.
b. Prostaglangdins, prostacyclins, and thromboxanes collectively known as
prostanoids are synthesized from thie same precursor, arachidonic acid (AA).
c. AA is an important component of cell membrane and is released by the action
of phospholipasc Az and other acyl hydrolases, which are subjeci to regula-
tion by hormones and other stimuli. Subsequently, AA undergoes cyclization
01 pue (aemqied (xoo) aseuasaxooloao ayi eja sploueisoid oi uoneuasaxo pue
leukotrienes via the lipooxygenase (LOx) pathway.
d. Majority of the NsAIDs that are currently used elicit their potent anti-
inflammatory, antipyretic, and analgesic effects through differential inhibition
of COx-1 and COx-2 (see below) and to a lesser extent LOX.
2. Cyclooxygenase (COx) pathway. Prostanoids are syhthesized primarily via the COX
pathway; there are two COX isoforms, COX-1 and COX-2. In addition, the recently
identified acetaminophen-inhibitable COx-3 isoform is found to be expressed in the
canine brain. COx-3 participates in the pyresis processes.
a. COx-1 is constitutively expressed in several tissues and is termed "house keep-
ing enzyme" because of its essential role in the maintenance of several homeo-
static process including gastric mucosal cytoprotection, renal function, vascular
homeostasis, platelet aggregation.
b. COx-2 is an inducible form because it is expressed at the site of injury, inflam-
mation and in certain pathological states such as osteoarthritis. Interestingly.
reccnt reports indicate that it may also be constitutively cxpressed in a tissue-
specific manner including, bone, kidney, and brain and may promole delayed
wound healing.
c. Both isoforms share 60% structural homology: yet they are distinct in several
aspects. For example, COx-2 has a flexible and slightly wider active site in com-
parison to COx-1: This has led to the burgeoning interest in developing COX-2
selective inhibitors, but with COx-1 sparing action. Although, adopting such a
strategy has raised great concerns regarding their adverse effects on the heart
and kidneys in recent years.
3. Lipoxygenase (lOx) pathway. AA is convcrted by 5-LOX to 5-
hydroperoxycicosaletracnoic: acid, which is cvenlually converled to leukotriene
B4 (LTB4). LTB4 plays a central role in inflammation, increased microvascular
153
154|Chapter 7 1 A
permeability, and chemotactic properties involving neutrophil-endothelial adhesion,
and neutrophil aggregation and degranulation.
INHIBITORS OF PG SYNTHESIS
All NsAIDs have proven efficacy in reducing pain and inflammalion in animals. It is
particularly useful in treating clinical conditions including osteoarthritis, rheumatoid
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, gout, and dental pain. Aithough NsAIDs provides ef-
fective short-term pain relief, chronic use of nonselective or traditional NsAIDs may
increase the risk of Gl complications.
A.
Pharmacological consideration
1. All of them exert analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic actions by inhibit-
ing PG synthesis via blocking COX. Some NSAIDs also inhibit LTB4 synthesis by
blocking LOX.
 2. Analgesic effects of NSAIDs are related to blockade of PGE2-mediated enhance-
ment of pain sensitization produced by proinilammalory mediators such as
bradykinin and substance P at the nerve endings in the CNS and al the siles of in-
flammation.
3. One should exercise caution when increasing the dose of an NsAID to induce
analgesia in case of intense pain because of the emergence of their toxic effects
al these levels.
4. Unlike, narcotic analgesics, NsAlDs do not produce tolerance or physical depen-
dence with regards to analgesia.
 5. The antipyretic effects or temperature-lowering action works only in the presence
of a fever, because they impair the ability of pyrogens to raise the temperature sel
point of the thermoregulatory centers in the anterior hypothalamus, thereby promot-
ing heat loss by sending signals through the descending system to cause cutaneous
vasodilatation, sweating, and panting. The temperature-lowering action of NsAIDs
do not iniluence normal body temperature.
6. The anti-inflammatory effect of NSAIDs is due to inhibition of PGE2 synthesis, sta-
bilization of lysosomal membranes, inhibition of the complement system, phagocy-
tosis, leukocyte accumulation, and synthesis of mucopolysaccharide and histamine,
antagonism of bradykinin's action, induction of oxygen radical scavenger action
 and uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation to deprive inilammatory tissues of
energy.
7. The COx-1 inhibitors decrease blood clotting by inhibiting platelet aggregation
(they inhibit synthesis of thromhoxane Az(TxA2), which arc proaggregatory). Since
platelets cannot synthesize new COX, the inhibition is irreversible in these cells.
This could result in prolonged bleeding time.
 8. The COx-2 inhibitors at the recommended dosages exhibit minimal Gl damaging
effects, since COx-1 mcdiatos the maintenance of Gl mucosa.
B.Pharmacokinetics consideration
1. As weak acids, NSAlDs usually are readily absorbed following oral administration.
2. Injectable solutions tend to be alkaline and can cause pain and necrosis in cases of
extravasation.
3. Circulating NsAlDs are bound vividly by albumin, which decreases volume of dis-
tribution. Unbound drugs can reach target tissues for actions and metabolism. Dis-
placement from albumin due to competition by other drugs for the albumin bind-
ing sites or hypoalbuminemia can lead to higher plasma levels of unbound drugs,
which can predispose the patient to drug-induced adverse effects.
4. Drug elimination rates of NsAlDs are variable, depending on drugs and species.
Most NsAlDs are eliminated primarily via hepatic phases I and Il metabolisnis.
Conjugate metabolites are then excreted in the urine/feces. However, a small
amount may be excreted in their unchanged form in the urine/feces as well.
Nonsleroidal Anti-inilammalory Drugs155
5. The use of NSAlDs in cats is a great challenge to clinicians, since there are no
FDA-approved drugs available for use in this species, except the injectable meloxi-
cam. In addition, very little pharmacokinetics information is available for cats,
Since cats have ineficient cytochrome P450 and glucuronidation conjugation sys-
teim; the extrapolation of NsAiDs dosages from other species needs to be carefully
validated.
 6. Young and old patients may require smaller doses of NsAIDs due to weak liver and
kidney status, which may result in lower elimination rates.
C.Adverse effects
1. All NsAIDs can cause adverse effects particularly at large doses and when used
for longer periods. The ones that are used most commonly in human medicine
indomethacin, and naproxen. Cats and dogs are more vulnerable to adverse effects
of NSAIDs than humans.
 2. The following are the commonly seen adverse effects of NsAIDs in animals: vom-
iting, diarrhea, Gl ulceration, hepatotoxicity, renal toxicity, CNS depression, and
circulatory disturbances. The Gl ulceration is the imost common and serious adverse
effect of NSAIDs. Underlying nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, or impaired cardiac
conditions may exaggerate the adverse effects associated with NsAIDs.
3. Under normal condifions, PGE2 (activating Gs-coupled EP2 and EP4 receptors) and
PGFz (activating Gq-coupled FP receptors) confer cytoprotective effects on the
gastric mucosa. Blockade of COX results in exccssive sccretion of gastric. acid with
a concomitant dccrease in gastric mucosal cytoprotective substanccs; hencc, result-
ing in Gl hemorrhage, ulceration, and perforation. Impaircd platelct activity may
causc pronounced Gl hemorrhagc. Gastric cotherapy with misoprostol, a synthetic
PGE, analog which activates both EP2 and EP4 rcccptors, may lowcr the risk of Gl
damage in paticnts. Misoprostol also inhibits gastric acid secrction (Figure 11-2).
4. NSAID-induced renal toxicity reflects inhibition of vasodilatory PGs. The
prostanoids PGE, and PGlz play a kcy role in the rcgulation of renal blood flow
and diuresis in the kidncy. These mcchanisms are critical cspecially when the sys-
temic levels of vasoconstrictors, renin, angiotensin, and norepinephrine arc clevated
under strcss. NSAID-mediated inhibition of PGE, and PGl2 biosynthesis may cause
cdcrma, hyperkalcrmia, and acutc rcnal failurc. Patients with compromised renal
function could be seriously affected.
5. NSAID-induced hepatotoxicity. The mechanisms underlying the hepatotoxic effects
of NSAIDs are presently unclear
D.
Drug interactions
1. Concurrent use of glucocorticoids and other NSAlDs should be avoided due to in-
creased risk of Gl adverse effects.
2. Concurrent use of high protein-binding drugs or drugs that share the same
metabolic pathway including anticonvulsant drugs, behavior-modifying drugs, and
warfarin requires careful monitoring.
3. Concurrent use of aminoglycosides warrants careful monitoring, due to increased
risk of nephrotoxicity.
E.
Guidelines for the safe use of NsAIDs
1. Individualized dosing based on the drug's efficacy, age of the animal, and duration
of action.
2.
 Screen patients for underlying renal and hepatic dysfunction by performing routine
diagnostic procedures.
3. Monitor the hydration status of patients. Hypovolemic animals should not be placed
on NSAIDs before improving the hydration status.
4. An adequate wash out period should be allowed prior to administering a new
NSAID.
156Chapter 7
5. Administer the lowest possible effective dose for the shortest period to minimize
risk of injury.
6.
Concurrent use of glucocorticoids and NSAIDs should be avoided due to in-
creased risk of Gl complications.
INDIVIDUAL NSAIDs
A.
Classification of NSAIDs
1. Nonselective COx inhibitors:
a. Enolic acids
Oxicams: Meloxicam
Pyrazolones: Phenylbutazone
b. Carboxylic acid
Nicotinic acid: Flunixin meglumine
Fenamates: Meclofenamic acid
Salicylates: Aspirin
Propionates: Ibuprofen, Naproxen, Ketoprofen, Carprofen
Acctic acid: Elodolac
2. COx-2 selective inhibitors:
Coxibs: Deracoxib, Firocoxib
3. Dual inhibitors: (COX/and 5-LOx):
Propanamide: Tepoxalin
B.
Aspirin (Acetylsalicylate). Aspirin is a prototypical NSAID thal is effective and
inexpensive.
1. Mechanism of action, Aspirin elicits ils effects via acelylation and irreversible in-
hibition of COX; hence, resulting in decreased PG synthesis. Irreversible inhibition
of platelet COX-1 by aspirin is responsible for the blockade of TXA2 production
and its associated anticoagulant effects. In contrast, inhibition produced by other
NSAIDs are reversible.
 2. Therapeutic uses
a. In general, aspirin is useful as an analgesic and an NSAID in dogs and cats,
particularly in the control of osteoarthritis. However, it is not effective in treat-
ing colic. As an analgesic, aspirin is given orally in cals at 10 mg/kg, cvery 48
hours, and the same dose is given every 12 hours in dogs.
b. It can be an adjunct therapy for septic and endotoxic shocks in animals having a
heavy infection.
c. Sulfasalazine, an oral salicylate-sulfonamide, is used to treat chronic inflamma-
tory conditions of bowel, for cxample, ulcerative colitis. After oral administra-
tion, the intestinal flora metabolize it into sulfapyridine and 5-aminosalicylic.
acid; the latter stays in bowel to exerts its anti-inflammatory effect and the for-
mer is absorbed from the intestine (see Chapter 11).
3. Pharmacokinetics
a. Aspirin is readily absorbed from both the stomach and upper inlestine. Gastric
acidity enhances absorption by favoring deionization, while high blood ilow
through the upper intestine compromises the higher ionization of aspirin due to
higher pH.
b. Buffered aspirin. Since the acidity of regular aspirin can irritate stomach, partic-
ularly in dogs and cats, buffered aspirin is preferred for these two species. Al-
though buifered aspirin is more ionized, and thus less rapidly absorbed from the
Gl tract, the total Gl absorption of buffered aspirin is similar to that of regular
aspirin.
c. A total of 70-90% of circulating aspirin is bound by albumin.
d. Aspirin is inactive, but is rapidly metabolized to salicylic acid to elicit its
effects.
Nonsteroiclal Anti-inilainmatory Drugs157
e. In aninals, salicylate metabolism is primarily through glucuronidation; there is
cxtensive spccies variation, plasma iy is 25-45 hours in cats, ~8 hours in dogs,
 5 hours in horses, and 1.5 hours in humans.
f. Cats have very limited glucuronidation (by glucuronide transferase), and thus
are most sensitive to aspirin toxicity. Ater the exhaustion of glucuronidation,
salicylate then form conjugates with glutathione.
4. Adverse effects
a. Aspirin-induced signs of Gl upset including vomiting, anorexia, Gl ulceration,
diarrhea may be seen even at therapeutic doses.
b. Aspirin-induced paradoxical hyperpyrexia is due to an increase in O2 consump-
lion, leading to incrcascd mctabolic rate and incrcascd heal production due to
uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation.
C. In the early phase aspirin-induced acid-base disturbances may be manifested as
respiratory alkalosis due to direct stimulation of the medullary receptor center,
leading to hyperventilation. This may be followed by respiratory acidosis as a
result of CNS depression during the late phase.
Metabolic acidosis may arise from:
(1) Salicylic acid induced release of H+,
(2) Uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation, may lead to build up of pyruvate
and lactate,
(3) An increase in fat metabolism, leading to ketoacidosis,
(4) A depression of renal function, resulting in the accumulation of sulfuric and
phosphoric acid.
d. Dehydration due to vomiting, sweating. and hyperpyrexia, may be life threaten-
ing.
e.
Pulmonary edema is secn in shcep.
f. In animals thal are placed on chronic aspirin therapy, drug treatment must be
discontinued 7 days before surgery to minimize the risk of bleeding during
surgery.
g. Caution must be exercised when placing dogs with joint diseases on long-term
therapy. In particular, aspirin can inhibit PG synthesis by canine chondrocytes
that may result in the aggravation of joint disease.
h. Drug interactions of aspirin happen most often due to salicylate-mediated dis-
placement of other drugs that compete for the same albumin-binding site, for
example, warfarin (in this case the end effect is aggravated due to the additive
anticoagulanl cffecls of both drugs).
i. Treatment of aspirin toxicity
(1) Induce emesis in the case of acute toxicity.
(2) Increase reinoval of thc drug, for cxamplc, gastric. lavagc followed by admin-
istration of activatcd charcoal, and peritoncal dialysis.
(3) Increase urinary cxcretion of aspirin by adininistcring an alkalinizing agcnt
(e.g.. NaHCOs), which may serve to correct the underlying metabolic acido-
sis.
(4) Initiate IV fluid therapy to address dehydration and metabolic acidosis that
accompany drug overdose.
C.
Meclofenamic acid
1. Mechanism of action. It is a derivative of anthranilic acid, which, in turn, is a sal-
icylic acid analog. The huiman product is for extra-label use, since the veterinary
product has become obsolete. Nonselective inhibition of both COx-1 and COX-2
is the primary mechanism of action. Additional effects may include prostaglandin
receptor blockade.
2. Therapeutic uses. It is for oral use in the dog and horse. It is used in treatment
of osteoarthritis in the horse as well as soft tissue inflarmmation, (e.g., laminitis)
that affects the locoimotor system. To a lesser extent, it is also used in dogs to
improve mobility in hip dysplasia. It is effective in the control of anaphylaxis at-
tributed to kinins, PGs, and leukotrienes in particular. For long-term use of the drug.
thc lowest cffcctive dosage that maintains a satisfactory anti-inflainmatory effect
158Chapler 7 Ill C
should be the objctivc. The onscl of aclion is slow, taking from 36 to 96 hours to
develop.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. After oral dosing, plasma level peaks within 1-4 hours. The
elimination ty, in horses is 1-8 hours, It can be detected in urine 96 hours after the
final dose. It is metabolized in the liver primarily by oxidation to an active hydrox-
ymethyl metabolite that may be further oxidized to an inactive carboxyl metabolite
The information for dogs is not available.
4. Adverse effects. In dogs, chronic administration (>48 hours) has been shown to be
associated with increased incidence of Gl events, including hemorrhage and diar-
rhea. Ovcrdosc in horscs may induce buccal erosions, anorcxia, Gl dislurbances,
lower packed cell volume of blood. Therapcutic dose may induce colic and diar-
rhca in horscs heavily infested with Gl parasites. Chronic use of the drug in dogs
can induce vomiting, tarry slools, leukocytosis, low hemoglobin levels, and small
intestinal crosions.
D.
Acetaminophen. This drug is unsafe in small animals.
E.
 Phenylbutazone. The safety and efficacy profile in addition to its affordability makes
it the most commonly used NSAID in the horse.
1. Mechanism of action. Phenylbutazone, which belongs to the enolate class shows
COX-2 inhibitory effects and COx-1 sparing effect in both horses and dogs.
2. Therapeutic uses. It is approved by the FDA for oral and IV administration in
the dog and horse. One should avoid perivascular injection due to the risk of
phlebitis. It is used to treat various forms of lameness as well as osteoarthritis and
other painful conditions of the limbs including soft tissue or nonarticular rheuma-
tism, It reduces nonspecific inflammation in other conditions, for example, throm-
bophlebitis, pericarditis, and pleurisy. Its misuse by unscrupulous individuals
to mask lameness in horses has created serious ethical concerns in the racing
industry.
3. Pharmacokinetics
a. After IV administration of the clinical doses, the plasma tiy,. is 2.5-6 hours in the
dog and horse.
b. The long duration of action (24-72 hours) may be due to the following reasons:
(1) Irreversible binding of the drug to COx. Thus, new enzyme production at
the inflammation site needs to occur before PGs can be synthesized.
(2)  The albumin that binds phenylbutazone may penetrate into inflamed tissues;
consequenlly, the plasma levels of phenylbutazone may be underestimated
in inflamed tissues.
(3) The active metabolite oxyphenbutazone persists in the body.
c.
 Binding of phenylbutazone to albumin in the animals exceeds 99%,
d. Phenyibutazone is almost completely metabolized in the horse, two major
metabolites being oxyphenbutazone and -hydroxyphenylbutazone.
e. In the horse, 25% of phenylbutazone is eliminated via renal excretion over 24
hours.
f. In the dog, oxyphenbutazone persists in urine for ≥48 hours following oral dos.
ing of phenylbutazone, but the unchangcd drug could not be detccled in urine
at the cnd of 36 hours.
g. Phenylbutazone induces the production of hepalic rmicrosomal cnzymes, resull-
ing in progrcssivcly lower plasma levcls during chronic administration of the
drug.
4. Adverse effects
a. The following signs/lesions may be sccn: Anorexia, depression, colic, hypopro-
teinemia, diarrhca, pelcchial hemorrhagcs of mucous membrancs, oral and Gl
tracl crosions and ulcers, renal papillary nccrosis and anuria, and death,
b. Death is attribulable to a protein-losing enleropathy that can result in a decrease
in blood volume, hemoconccntration, hypovolemic. shock, and circulatory col-
lapsc. If Gl tract ulceration is prominent, thc shock syndrome may possibly bc
intensified by a scptic: coimponent.
Nonsteroidal △Anti intlammatory Drugs159
c. Phenylbutazone must nol be administered to animals afflicted with serious car-
diac, renal, hepalic injury, or hematocytologic disorder.
d. Phenylbutazone must not be administered to female dairy cattle ≥20 months of
age. The Food Animal Residue Avoidance Databank (FARAD) discourages the
use of phenylbutazonc in any food animals bccause of its prolonged excretion.
Flunixin meglumine (Banamine, etc.). It is a nicotinic. acid derivative. It has potent 
E.
anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects and is indicated for the treatment of acute and
surgical pain,
1. Mechanism of action. Flunixin shows greater COx-2 inhibitory effects than COx-1
in horses. In dogs, it appears to exhibit preferential COx-1 inhibitory effecis.
2. Therapeutic uses. NsAlDs are effective in alleviating pain that is of somatic and
integumental origin, although less effective in relieving visceral pain. Flunixin is an
exceplion; it alleviates visceral pain related to colic. Furthermore, in horses flunixin
is effective in producing the longest duration of postoperative analgesia (~13 hours)
followed by carprofen (~12 hours) and phenylbutazone (~8 hours). In cattle, it is
and for the control of inflammalion in endoloxemia and mastitis.
3. Pharmacokinetics
a. It is administered IV or IM. When administered IV, it has a plasma tv of 2-4
hours in horses, 3-6 hours in cattle, 4 hours in dogs, and 1-1.5 hours in cats. It
can be detected in plasma for 8 hours and in urine for >48 hours.
b. After parenteral administration, onset of pharmacologic action is ≤2 hours, the
peak effect is seen at 12-16 hours, and the duration of action is 24-36 hours.
Accumulation of the drug at the sites of inflammation may be responsible for the
longer duration of action, despite a shorter ty.. Its anti-inflammatory action after
a single IV dose results in the abolition of PGE, in exudate for 12-24 hours.
c. Renal excretion contributes extensively to elimination of ilunixin from the body
Urine concentration of the drug in both conjugate and free form is ~40 times
higher than that of plasma.
d. Withdrawal periods in cattle. Since flunixin is not approved by FDA for cattle,
the extralabel withdrawal intervals recommended by TARAD are: 4-day pres-
laughter and 72-hour milk periods.
4. Adverse effects
a. Myonecrosis when administered via the IM route.
b. Overdose of flunixin in horses may cause multiple ulcers on the tongue, gin-
 giva, palate, lips, and stomach. CNS depression, listlessness, and anorexia may
also occur. Rare anaphylactic-like reactions may occur particularly after rapid IV
administration.
c. Acute renal failurc and Gl damage have been reported in dogs treated with flu
nixin.
d. Hematochezia and hematuria can be seen in cattle treated for longer than 3
days.
G.
Naproxen. It is a nonselective COX inhibitor
1. Therapeutic uses. It is used orally in horses for soft tissue problems, for example,
myositis. Naproxen can be used to treat inflammatory swelling associated with
lameness. Naproxen is too toxic to be used in small animals.
2. Pharmacokinetics
a. The plasma fy, is 4 hours in horses. It may take 5-7 days to see a beneficial
response after starting treatment.
b. It is metabolized into a glucuronide conjugate and excreted into urine for ≥48
hours.
3. Adverse effects. The following effects are uncommon in horses, which include Gl
ulcers and diarrhea, hypoproteinemia, anemia, nephrotoxicity, and CNS depression.
H.
 Ibuprofen and indomethacin. These two drugs are not routinely used in veterinary
medicine due to its low safety profile.
1.
 Ketoprofen (Ketofen?). It is a propionic acid derivative. Commercially available form
S (+) enantiomer is responsible for majority of the drug's anti-inflammatory effects,
whereas the R (-) enantiomer imparts analgesic: effects with minimal ulcerogenic: po-
tential,
1. Mechanism of action. Kctoprofcn is a nonselective inhibitor of COX. Additionally
it also blocks LTB4 biosynthesis via the LOX pathway, which may broaden its effi-
cacy as an anti-inflammalory agent. It may also promote protcoglycan biosynthesis,
thereby enhancing synovial membrane activity and increasing the viscosity of syn-
ovial fluid. The potent anti-inflammatory effects associated with ketoprofen may be
due 1o its sequestration al the sites of inflammation, for example, inflamed synovial
joint.
2. Therapeutic uses. It is approved for use in horses for the alleviation of inflammation
and pain associated with acute and chronic musculoskeletal disorders.
3. Pharmacokinetics. The drug has excellent bioavailability of 80-100% with a short
elimination t/, of ~1 hour in horses, 1.5 hours in dogs and cats. It is eliminated via
the kidneys. Ketoprofen appears relatively safe to be used in horses and may have a
lower incidence of adverse effects than either phenylbutazone or flunixin.
4. Adverse effects. Upon oral administration, it can cause Gl injury including ulcera-
tion, bleeding, and vomiting. Preoperative use of ketoprofen in animals with hemo-
static disorders warrants caution due to the risk of decreased platelet aggregation.
Careful monitoring is required when used in patients with compromised renal func-
tion including renal insufficiency or failure.
Carprofen (Rimadyl), It is a propionic acid derivative that is related to ketoprofen.
1. Therapeutic uses. Carprofen is approved for use as an analgesic and anti-
inflaimimatory drug in dogs. It can be used in both short-term and long-term pain
management in musculoskeletal conditions. In addition, it provides excellent pain
relief when used as a part of preemptive analgesia.
2. Pharmacokinetics. The pharmacokinetics in dogs and cats are considerably dif-
ferent. The elimination ty, is ~20 hours in cats, whereas 5-9 hours in dogs. Fol-
lowing oral administration in dogs, the Fmax occurs 1-3 hours. The drug is highly
bound to albumin (99%). It is metaboli7ed in the liver via oxidation followed by
glucuronidation. The metabolites undergo extensive enterohepatic recycling. About
70-80% of drug is eliminated in the feces; the remaining 10-20% is cxcrected in the
urine.
3. Adverse effects. The COx-1 sparing efiect may account for lower frcquency oi Gl
ulceration and hemorrhage. The most commonly encountered adverse events in-
clude anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea. It should be used with caution in animals
with an underlying hepatic or renal condition due to increased risk of hepatotoxi-
city and nephrotoxicity. Carprofen is not recommended in animals with hemostatic
disorders; pregnant, lactating, or breeding bitches.
K.Etodolac (EtoGesic). Etodolac is an indole acetic acid derivative. In dogs, it preferen-
tially inhibits COX-2.
1. Therapeutic uses. It is for the control of pain and inflammation associated with os-
teoarthritis in dogs. It may be used as an analgesic and anti-inflaimimatory drug for
many other conditions.
2. Pharmacokinetics. Etodolac is rapidly absorbed following oral administration with
a rapid onsel of action of 30-60 minutes in majority of the cases. The drug is pri-
marily excreted via the bile into the feces as glucuronide conjugates, It undergoes
enterohepatic recycling, which leads to a long plasma t/, (10-14 hours) and allows
once daily dosing.
3. Adverse effects. Like other NSAIDs, etodolac can cause Gl disturbances, CNS de-
pression, hepatotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity, probably at a lower rate than COx-
1 inhibitors (see Il C). Caution must be exercised when using in animals with
hepatic, renal, and hemalological impairment. Etodolac may inducc
Nonstenidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
161
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs; therefore, tear production must be monitored
before and during treatment.
Deracoxib (Deramaxx). It is a diaryl-substituted pyrazole that is chemically related to
Others in the "coxih" class. Deracoxib is a COx-2 inhibitor.
1. Therapeutic uses. It is used in dogs for the trcatment of pain and inflammation as-
sociated with osteoarthritis (1-2 rrig/kg, PO, once a day), and for the managcment
of postoperative pain and inflammation (3-4 mg/kg, PO), once a day. 7 days maxi-
Imuin) associated with orthopedic surgery.
2. Pharmacokinetics. IDeracoxib is administered orally, and postprandial administra-
tion is preferred to protect Gl mucosa. In dogs, following oral administration, the
elimination ty, is 3 hours and Imax is ~2 hours. The drug is highly protein bound
toring. The drug is primarily excreted via the bile into the feces as glucuronide
conjugales. Although a sinall quantity (20%) of the drug may be cxcreted in the
urine.
3. Adverse effects. Like other NSAlDs, the most commonly reported side effects
include Gl disturbances, CNS depression, hepatotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity
(see Il C).
M.
Firocoxib (Previcox?). It is a dimethylfuranone that is chemically relatcd to other
"coxibs." Firocoxib is one of the most selective COx-2 inhibitors used in veterinary
medicine.
1. Therapeutic uses. It is used in dogs for the trcatment of pain and inflarmmation as-
sociated with osteoarthritis (5 mg/kg, P(), once a day).
2. Pharmacokinetics.
a. The oral drug absorption process is highly variable among subjects. Coadimin-
istration with food delays firocoxib absorption (Tmax from 1 to 5 hours) and de-
creases peak concentrations (Cm.x froim 1.3 to 0.9 g/mL). However, food does
nol affecl the overall bioavailability of firocoxib.
b. The absolute bioavailability of firocoxib is ~40% when administered as a 5
Img/kg oral dose to fasted adult dogs. Firocoxib is rapidly cleared from the blood
via hepatic. metabolism and fecal cxcretion.
c. Despite a high level of plasma protein binding (96%), firocoxib exhibits a large
voluime of distribution (V: of total drug = 4.6 L/kg) and a terminal elimination
th: of ~8 hours.
3. Adverse effects. Despite the fact that firocoxib is a highly selective COx-2 inhibitor,
like other NSAIDs, firocoxib still can cause Gl disturhances. Vacuolization without
inflammatory cell infiltrates is seen in the thalamic region of the brain when admin-
istered at 3-5 times the recommended dose.
Z.
Meloxicam (Metacam?). It is an oxicam derivative, which is a preferential COX-2
inhibitor.
1. Therapeutic uses. Meloxican is approved in dogs and cats for the treatment of
chronic pain and inflammation associated with osteoarthritis. Meloxicam is effec-
cormbinatior of meloxicarn with cpidural morphine-mepivacaine.
 2. Administration and pharmacokinetics
a. Meloxicam is absorbed well after oral administration. Food does not alter rates
of absorption. Peak plasma levels occur in ~8 hours after oral administration.
It can be administered SC as a single one-time dose in cats. Repeated use of
meloxicam in cats can evoke acute renal failure and death. Do not follow
meloxicam dose with any other NSAID in cats.
b. A total of 97% of meloxicam is bound to albumin.
 c. It is metabolized in the liver to forim glucuronide conjugates. Majority of these
Imetabolites are eliminated in the feces. The plasma tiy, appears to be species-
specific: 12-24 hours in dogs. 15 hours in cats, and ~3 hours in horses.
3. Adverse effects. Meloxicam is a relalively safe NSAlD in dogs. Gl distress (vom-
iting, anorexia, and diarrhea) is the most commonly reported adverse effect along
162|Chapter 7 1 N
with lethargy and behavioral changes as well as anemia. However, such problems
still occur rarely and are transient in nalure. Caulion is nceded when administering
in hypovolemic animals because decreased renal blood flow may increase the risk
of nephrotoxicity.
When given SC, meloxicam can cause pain in injection sitets).
Meloxicam is not recommended for usc in pregnant, lactating. or in animals that 
are <4 months of age.
4. Drug interactions. Meloxicam may decrease the clinical efficacy of angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitors. For other drug interactions see Il C.
0.
Tepoxalin (Zubrin?). Tepoxalin belongs to the class of dual inhibilors. Il is a nonselec-
tive COX inhibitor with additional pronounced and unique inhibitory effect on LOX.
1. Mechanism of action
a. Tepoxalin is a dual inhibitor of both COX and LOX. By inhibiting both COX-1
and COX-2 and 5-LOX at the approved recommended dosage in dogs it may
have fewer adverse efecls on Gl tract.
b. Tepoxalin reduces the production of PGs associated with pain, hyperpyrexia, and
inflammation.
C. Its inhibition of LOX may reduce leukotrienes synthesis, including LTB4. Since
LTB4contribulcs to incrcased Gl tracl inilammation by increasing cylokine pro-
duction, neutrophil longevity and release of proteases, the reduction of LTB4
will help protect Gl mucosa. Leukotrienes may also contribute to inflammatory
responses seen in osteoarthritis and their inhibition could reduce clinical signs
seen with the disorder.
2. Therapeutic uses. It is used to control the pain and inflammation associated with
Osteoarthritis in dogs. Because it inhibits leukotrienes synthesis, it might benefit al-
lergic conditions in dogs. It is useful to control posloperative pain associaled with
soft tissue surgery.
3. Pharmacokinetics
a. Tepoxalin is readily absorbed after oral administration. Imax is 2-3 hours after
oral administration.
b. It is rapidly metabolized to several metabolites, including one that is active
(tepoxalin pyrazole acid). Tepoxalin and tepoxalin pyrazole acid are highly
bound to albumin (98-99%). Plasma elimination ty. for tepoxalin and tepoxalin
pyrazole acid are 2 hours and 13 hours, respectively. Metabolites are eliminated
in the feces.
4. Adverse effects
a. Gl distress (anorexia, vomiting. diarrhea, ulceration) and CNS depression, hepa-
totoxicity, and nephrotoxcity may occur.
b. Iis efiect in dogs <6 months of age, lactating, and prcgnant dogs has not becn 
determined and therefore not recommended for use.
C. The rise for tepoxalin-induced Gl stress is less than other NSAIDs, since it in-
hibits LOX. For other NSAlLDs, shunting of prostaglandin biosynthesis via the
LOX pathway following COx inhibition may incrcase the production of vasocon-
strictors (LTC and LTD.) and the chemoattractant (LTBa), which might contribute
to the ulcerogenic actions of these NsAIDS.
d. Its wide safety margin is attributed, in part, to its low bioavailability at higher
than recommended doses and its poor water solubility facilitates fecal excretion.
MISCELLANEOUS ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS
A.
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
1. Chemistry. DMsO is a solvent for many aromatic and unsaturated hydrocarbons as
well as organic nitrogen compounds and inorganic salts.
a. DmsO is a clear, colorless to straw-yellow liquid.
Nonsteroidal △nti inflammatory Drugs 163
b. Because of its hygroscopic characteristics, DMSO can absorb >70% of its
weight in water from the air at a temperature of 70*F and 65% relative humidity.
Therefore, the container should be tightly sealed
2. Pharmacologic effects. DMSO possesses anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antimicrobial,
antifungal, anticholinesterase, and diuretic activity. In addition, DMsO is able to
rapidly penetrate the skin (but not nail or tooth enamel) following topical applica-
lion.
 3. Mechanisms of action
a. Anti-inflammatory effect. DMSO) and its metabolite dimethyl sulfide trap free
radicals such as superoxide.
b. Analgesic effect. DMSO produces a thermal effect that may account for its alle-
viation of muscle and joint pain.
c. Skin penetrating effect. DMSO increases the permeability of the skin by altering
the plasma membrane of the epithelial cells. As it rapidly penetrates the mem-
brane barriers, DMSO carries dissolved compounds (e.g., another drug) with it,
regardless of the size and characlerislics of the molecule.
d.
Other effects. DMSO inhibits synthesis of prostaglandins. In addition, DMSO)
has diuretic, anticholinesterase, and weak antibacterial and antifungal effects
(when use topically). The mechanisms by which DMsO) exerts these effects are
not understood.
4. Therapeutic uses
a. DmsO is uscd to reduce acute swelling resulling from musculoskeletal trauma.
b. Other possible indications include:
(1) Acute traumatic conditions of the CNs including cerebral edema and poste-
rior paralysis resulting from spinal cord trauma.
(2) Cystitis associated with urethral obstruclion in the cal.
(3) Superficial burns.
(4) Skin grafts.
(5) Transient ischemic conditions.
(6) Edema of the limbs resulting from fractures.
(7) Swelling and engorgement of the mammary glands in the nursing bitch.
(8) Severe inflammation resulting from the extravascular injection of irritating
drugs or lick granuloma.
(9) while the potential indications for DMsO are numerous, unfortunately,
the lack of well-controlled study design lcave many more questions than
answers regarding this drug.
5. Pharmacokinetics
a.
Ahsorption. DMSO is well absorbed after topical application.
b. Fate
(1) DMSO is extensively and rapidly distributed to every part of the body.
(2) The fiy in horscs is ~9 hours following IV adminislration.
(3) DMSO is rapidly metabolized to dimethyl sulfide, methyl sulfinic acid, and
dimethyl sulfone.
C. Excretion. DMSO and its metabolites are excreted primarily by the kidneys;
some biliary and respiratory excretion also occurs. DMSO and methyl sulfinic
acid are believed to be responsible for the obnoxious oyster-like odor detectable
6. Administration. DMSO is administered topically. Only technical grade, but not in-
dustrial grade, of DMsO should be used in animals. Rubber gloves should be worn
during application, and DMSO should be applied only to clean and dry areas lo
avoid carrying other chemicals into the systemic. circulation.
7. Adverse effects. When used as labeled, DMSO) appears to be a safe drug.
a. Local effects (e.g., a burning sensation, erythema, vesiculation, dry skin, and
allergic reactions) and a garlicky or oyster-like breath odor are the most likely
discontinued.
b. Lenticular changes, which may result in myopia, have been noted when high
doses of DMSO are used chronically (i.e., longer than 14 days in dogs or 30
days in horses).
164Chapter 7 IV A
c. When administered IV, DMSO may cause hemolysis and hemoglobinuria. These
effects can be minimized by slowly administering ≤20% DMSO.
d. Hepatic and renal damages, and pulmonary edema.
e. CNs disturbances, for example, sedation, coma, seizures, and opisthotonus.
8. Contraindications
a. DMsO must not be uscd in animals that are bcing treated concurrently with
anticholinestcrascs.
b. DMsO must be used cautiously in animals with mast cell tumors, since it de-
granulates these cells.
c. DMSO must not be used in animals with severe dehydration and shock; DMSO)-
induced vasodilatation may exacerbate the conditions.
B.Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan (Adequan) (PSGAG)
1. Chemistry. PSCAG belongs to a new class of drugs termed disease-modifying Os-
teoarthritis (OA) drugs (DMOADs). This antiarthritic compound is chemically similar
the bovine trachea, which is then subjected to esterification to be sulfated.
2. Mechanisms of action
a. PSGAG inhibits or delays the progrcssion of thc appearancc of morphological
cartilaginous lesions associatcd with OA
b. PSGAG modulates clinical signs of OA by indirectly promoting chondroprotec-
tive effects while preventing the deleterious effects of proinflammatory mediators
including PGs and cytokines on the articular cartilage.
c. PSGAG through proteolytic enzyme inhibition decreases or reverses the mecha-
nisms that result in the loss of cartilaginous mucopolysaccharides associated with
()A.
d. PSGAG improves joint articular function by enhanc.ing synovial membrane activ-
ity and by increasing the viscosity of synovial fluid.
e. Anti-inflarmmatory cffccts are duc to:
(1) Inhibition of PGE2 biosynthesis that is induced following joint injury.
(2) Inhibition of leukocyte migration and elevated interleukin levels at the site of
inflammed joints,
(3) Elevation of hyaluronate levcls at the joints is belicved to improve joint
function,
 3. Therapeutic uses. PSGAG is used in horses to treat traumatic joint dysfunction and
noninfectious degeneration of the carpal joint and in dogs to treat OA and preven-
tion of hip dysplasia.
4. Pharmacokinetics. No information regarding the pharmacokinetics of PSGAG is
available.
 5. Administration, PSGAG is administcred intra-articularly (IA) or IM. Occasionally, IA
administration may cause joint infcctions. Thus, when administcred intra-articularly,
the joint area must be shavcd, clcansed, and sterilized prior to injection to avoid
complications associated with infection.
6. Adverse effects. When used according to label instructions, PSGAG is safe. How-
ever, a few adverse drug events are associated with PSGAG administration:
a. Rarely, animals show inflammatory joint reactions consisting of joint pain, ef-
flusion, swelling, and lameness (aseptic arthritis). This reaction may result from
hypersensitivity, trauma sustained during injection, overdose or excessively fre-
quent administration, or drug interactions.
b. Septic arthritis may be induced if the sterile injection procedure is not followed.
 7. Contraindications. Intra-articular injections must not be adiministered when the
overlying skin shows lesions of infection, or in cases of septic. arthritis.
Hyaluronate sodium
1. General aspects
a. Hyaluronate sodium (HS), sodium salt of hyaluronic acid (HA), is a prototype of
naturally occurring mucopolysaccharide. It is a nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammalory Drugs 165
consisting of repeating disaccharide units of d-glucuronic acid and N-acetyl-D-
glucosamine.
b. HA is synthesized primarily by the Type B synoviocytes in the synovial mem-
brane. It is also an important component of articular cartilage matrix. HA is
found naturally in the connective tissue of animals. High concentrations of
HA are found in the synovial fluid, vitreous humor of the eye, and umbilical
cord. Surfaces of articular cartilage are covered with a thin layer of a protein-
hyaluronate complex; hyaluronate is also found in the cartilage matrix.
2. Mechanism of action
a. HS has the following effects in joints:
(1) A cushioning effect, elicits a chemotactic response by reducing cell migra-
tion and decreasing cellular influx into the joint.
(2) A lubricating effect on the articular soft tissues.
(3) A scavenging effect, by removing oxygen-derived free radicals and autacoids
from the joint.
b. Exact mechanism of action of Hs is unknown, but:
(1) It is suggested to replenish the depleted or depolymerized endogenous HA
in the synovial fluid.
(2) It is hypothesized that injection of Hs into an inflamed arthritic joint pro-
motes the biosynthesis of higher molecular weight HA.
(3) Hs might decrease PGs biosynthesis and release from macrophages during
phagocytosis.
3. Therapeutic uses. Hs can be administered intra-articularly to dogs and horses to
treat synovitis that is not associated with severe degenerative joint disease. It may
be helpful to treat secondary synovitis in conditions where full thickness cartilage
has been lost. Horses treated with Hs exhibited reduced lameness, thinning of the
articular cartilage, and reduced surface fibrillation as compared to saline injected
joints. However, currently it is unclear whether HS's anti-inflammatory effects
or secondary chondroprotective effects contributes to its beneficial effects in the
 management of clinical signs associated with OA.
4. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available in animals.
5. Adverse effects. These are usually local effects, which are manifested by heat,
swelling and/or effusion in the joint. Effects generally subside within 24-48 hours,
but may continue up to 96 hours for resolution. No treatment for these adverse ef-
flares may actually be higher. Synovial infection can occur if the injection is not
administered under aseptic conditions.
SUGGESTED READING
Boothe DM. 2001. "The analgesic, antipyretic, anti-inflammatory drugs." In Veterinary Pharmacology
and Therapeutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8th ed., pp. 433-451. Ames, IA: lowa State University Press.
Clark TP. 2006. The clinical pharmacology of cyclooxygenase-2 selective and dual inhibitors. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 36:1061-1085.
http://www.cdrugs.com
McCann ME, Andersen DR, Zhang D, Brideau C, Black WC, Hanson PD, Hickey GJ. 2004. In vitro ef-
synovitis. Am / Vet Rcs 65:503-512,
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th cd. Amcs, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Streppa HK. Jones CJ, Budsberg SC. 2002. Cyclooxygenase selectivity of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs in canine blood. An1 J Vet Res 63:91-94.
166
Chapcr7
SIUDY
QUESTIONS
DIRECTlONs: Each of the numbercd items or incomplcte statemcnts in this scctiorn is
followed by answers or by completions of the slatement, Select the one letlered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Which one of the following enzymes in-
(D) Anemia
fluences the ty, of aspirin in domestic ani-
(E) Hepatitis
mals?
6. Meloxicam alleviates all of the following
(A) Glutathione reductase
typcs of pain cxcept.
(B) Cyclooxygenase
(C)N-acctyl transfcrasc
(A) headache.
(D) Glucuronide transferase
(B) muscle pain joint pain.
(E) Cylochrome P450 oxidase
(C) joint pain,
(D) colic.
2. Bioavailability of carprofen can be in-
creased by
7. The antipyretic effect of an NSAID can
result from all of the following except:
(A) increasing urine pH.
(B) using enteric-coated tablets.
(A) inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis in
(C) administering sodium bicarbonate orally.
the central nervous system.
(D) maintaining a low pH in the stomach.
(B) dilation of the peripheral vasculature.
(C) sweating.
3. Most widely used analgesic in racehorses
(D) lowering body temperature in both nor-
in the United Stales is
mal and febrile animals.
(A) aspirin.
 8. Which of the following NSAlDs is ap-
(B) phenylbutazone.
 proved by FDA to be used in cats?
(C) naproxen.
(D) xylazine.
(A) Carprofen
(E) mecloflenamic acid.
(B)Etodolac
(C) Firocoxib
4. Which one of the following anti-
(D) Meloxicam
inflammalory drugs acts through proleolylic
(E) Tepoxalin
enzyme inhibition to reverse the loss of carti-
laginous mucopolysaccharides that occurs in
9. Which of the following NSAlDs is the
arthritis?
most selective in inhibiting COX-2 among
(A) Carprofen
the oncs approved for usc in dogs?
(B) Dimethyl sulfoxide
(A) Carprofen
(C) Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
(B)Etodolac
(D) Phcnylbutazone
(C)Firocoxib
(E) Flunixin mcglumine
(D) Meloxicam
(E)Tepoxalin
5. Which of the following is the most
frequently seen adverse effect of the
10. All of the following concerning the
prostaglandin inhibitors?
pharmacological actions of aspirin are true,
(A) Agranulocytosis
(B) Gastric ulcers
(A) reversible inhibition of COX-1.
(C) Rcnal papillary necrosis
(B) significant drug intcraction with anticoag-
ulanls.
Nonstcroidal Anti-inilammatory Drugs 167
(C) Gl ulceration and hemorrhage.
(D) They do not affect the kidney.
(D) antiplatelet effects.
(E) They cause less gastric ulceration than
other NSAIDs.
11. Which of the following NSAIDs exerts
its actions through dual inhibition of cy-
14. Which of the following is an incorrect
clooxygenase (COx) and 5-lipooxygenase
statement concerning the drug interactions of
(5-LOX)?
NSAID?
(A) Deracoxib
(A) Concurrent use of a glucocorticoid is en-
(B) Carprofen
couraged, since this practice will ensure
(C) Phenylbutazone
better anti-inflammatory activity.
(D) Tepoxalin
(B) Concurrent use of diazepam may in-
Crease the activity of both drugs.
12. Which of the following NSAID(s) is used
(C) Concurrent use of gentamicin can in-
for the alleviation of visceral pain associated
crease nephrotoxicity of NSAID.
with colic in horses?
(D) Concurrent use of two NSAIDs should be
avoided.
(A) Flunixin meglumine
(B) Phenylbutazone
15. Which of the following is a correct state-
(C) Aspirin
ment regarding DMSO?
(D) Carprofen
(E) Meclofenamic acid
(A) It is more useful in the treatment of
chronic inflammatory conditions than
13. Which of the following is the correct
acute ones.
statement concerning COx-2 inhibitors?
(B) It has potent antidiuretic effect.
(C) DMSO traps free radicals and inhibits
(A) They decrease platelet function.
prostaglandin synthesis, which may ac-
(B) They have greater analgesic activity than
count for its anti-inflammatory effects.
Other NSAIDs.
(D) The adverse effects include CNS and
(C) Their anti-inflammatory activity is better
respiratory disturbances, but not hepato-
than that of other NSAIDs.
or nephrotoxicity.
168
Chapler
ANSWERS ANd EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is D.
colic. They usually alleviate pain from the
Glucuronidation is the main biotransfor-
integument, including skeletal muscles and
mation process for aspirin and dictates the
joints.
plasma half-life of the compound. Aspirin is
primarily rnetabolized by glucuronidation.
7. The answer is D.
Because the ability to conjugate glucuronic
Prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors lower
acid varies among species, the plasma t/
the set point of the thermoregulatory center
of aspirin also varies. Aspirin irreversibly
of the hypothalamus in febrile animals (but
binds cyclooxygenase to inhibit the formation
not normal animals), causing vasodilatation
of prostaglandins. When glucuronidation
and panting.
capabilities are exhausted, salicylates form
conjugates with glutathione. N-Acetyl
8. The answer is D.
transferasc and cytochrome P450 cnzymc
 Meloxicam is approved for dogs and
are not involved in the biotransformation of
cats for the treatment of chronic pain and
aspirin.
inflainmation associated with ostcoarthritis.
None of the other NSAIDs are approved for
2. The answer is D.
use in cats.
Carprofen is a weak acid that crosses
 biologic membranes most readily in an
9. The answer is C.
acidic cnvironment and least rcadily in
Firocoxib is one of the most selective
an alkaline environiment. Increasing the
COX-2 inhibitors used in veterinary medicine.
pH of the urine or administering sodium
bicarbonate decreases the bioavailability of
10. The answer is A.
aspirin because these rmeasures induce an
Aspirin exerts its pharmacological ac-
alkaline environment.
tions through acetylation and irreversible
inhibition of COX-1 active site. The COX-1
3. The answer is B.
inhibitory effects may account for the
Phenylbutazone is widely used as an
increased frequency of Gl ulceration and
equine analgesic because it is effective
bleeding.
against many types of lameness and because
of its low cost.
11. The answer is D.
Tepoxalin, the newly introduced NSAID
4. The answer is C.
for the treatment of osteoarthritis, is categ0-
 Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan is chemically
rizcd under dual inhibitors. Dual inhibitors
similar to the mucopolysaccharides of carti-
act by inhibiting both COX and 5-LOX
lage; therefore, it can reverse the mechanisims
pathways. Its inhibitory effects on both
that cause the loss of these mucopolysac-
branches of the arachidonic acid metabolism
charides. DMsO exerts anti-inflammatory
pathway have been shown to produce fewer
cffects mainly by scavenging free radicals.
Gl damages in dogs.
 Phenylbutazone and flunixin meglumine
inhibit prostaglandin synthesis.
12. The answer is A.
It is well established that NSAlDs work
5. The answer is B.
by alleviating pain that is of somatic and 
Gl erosions and ulcers are the most
integument origin; although less effective
frequently seen adverse effects of the
in relieving visceral pain. Flunixin is an
 prostaglandin inhibitors.
exception; it alleviates visceral pain related
to colic in horses. In addition, it provides the
6. The answer is D.
longest duration of postoperative analgesia in
The inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis
coimparison to carprofcn and phcnylbutazonc
do not relieve deep visceral pain, such as
in horses.
Nonsteroidal  Anti-inflammatory Drugs 169
13. The answer is E.
Concurrent use of NSAIDs is discouraged,
COx-2 inhibitors cause less gastric damages
since this practice will increase the free form
than other NSAIDs; this is the reason that
of both drugs in the plasma, increasing the
they are widely used in both veterinary and
pharmacological and toxicological effects of
human medicine. They do not decrease
both drugs.
platelet activity; they do not have greater
Aminoglycoside antibiotics are potentially
 analgesic or anti-inflammatory activity than
nephrotoxic, and thus concurrent use of an
other NSAIDs. Their nephrotoxic effect is not
aminoglycoside with an NSAID will increase
less than other NSAIDs.
the risk of nephrotoxicity.
14. The answer is A.
15. The answer is C.
Concurrent use of a glucocorticoid with
DMSO traps free radical oxidants that
an NSAID should be avoided, since this prac-
evoke inflammatory processes. This is why it
tice will increase the risk of Gl ulceration.
is more useful in treating acute than chronic
Since NSAiDs are bound vividly by plasma
conditions. DMSO has potent diuretic.
protein (albumin), any drugs that are bound
effect. The adverse effects of DMSO are
by albumin will cause drug interactions
many, which include CNS and respiratory
with an NSAID. Many drugs afferting CNS)
disturbances as well as hepatotoxicity and
including diazepam, fall into this category.
nephrotoxicity
This page intentionally left blank
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System
WendyA.Ware
DRUGS USED IN HEART FAILURE THERAPY
Introduction
1. Heart failure occurs when abnormal cardiac function causes inadequate blood
delivery to the tissues or adequate delivery only with elevated cardiac filling pres-
sures. It can involve abnormalities of systolic or diastolic function, or both,
a. Congestive heart failure (CHF) is characterized by high cardiac filling pressure
which leads to venous congestion (behind the affected side of the heart) and tis-
sue fluid accumulation. It is a complex clinical syndrome rather than a specific
etiologic diagnosis. Although poor contractility often underlies CHF, chronic car-
diac overload (volume or pressure) or other injury can also stimulate a cascadle
of neurohormonal and cardiac responses that eventually lead to congestive signs
and further deterioration in function.
(1) Left-sided congestive signs include pulmonary venous congestion and edema
(resulting in cough, tachypnea, dyspnea, orthopnea, pulmonary crackles
varying degrees oi pulmonary hypertension and sometimes, right-sided CHF
sigrns.
(2) Right-sided congestive signs inc:lude systemic vcnous hypertension, with
resuling jugular venous distension, hepatic (and abdominal visccral) con-
gestion, pleural effusion (resulting in dyspnea, orthopnea, cyanosis), ascites,
small pericardial effusions, and sometimes, subcutaneous edema.
b. Forward (low output) failure causes tiring. exertional weakness, syncope. prere-
nal azotemia, and peripheral cyanosis (from poor cutaneous circulation). Cardiac
can occur with either left or right heart disease.
2. Pathophysiology of heart failure
a. Cardiac remodeling involves changes in myocardial size, shape and stifness that
occur in response to various mechanical, biochemical, and molccular signals
induced by the underlying injury or stress.
(1)  Myocardial hypertrophy. Changes include myocardial cell hypertrophy, Car-
diac cell dropout (apoptosis), excess interstitial matrix formation, fibrosis,
and abnormal collagen binding between individual myocytes. Increased me-
chianical forces (ventricular wall stress), as well as various neurohormones
(e.g.. angiotensin Il, norepinephrine, endothelin, aldosterone) and cytokines
(e.g., a tumor necrosis factor-α), are stimuli for cardiat remodeling. Myocar-
dial hypertrophy helps normalize wall stress. Systolic pressure loads mainly
cause "concentrie" hypcrtrophy, with myocardial fiber thickening: volume
loads mainly cause "eccentric" hypertrophy, with myocardial fiber elonga-
tion. I lypertrophy can interfere with diastolic function by making the ventri-
Cle. "stiffer."
(2) Frank-Starling mechanism. Acutely increased filling pressure and end dias-
tolic volume (preload) induce greater force of contraction and help increase
overall cardiac output. Valvular insufficiency, arterial hypertensiorn, and ven-
Iricular outflow obstruction as well as volume retcntion lead to increascd
prcload. Compcnsatory hyperlrophy lessens the importance of the Frank-
Starling mechanism in stable, chronic: heart iailure.
b. Neurohormonal mechanisms. Neurohormonal responses contribute to cardiac
remodeling and have systemic effects. Excessive activation of neurohormonal
"compensatory" Imechanisms leads to the clinical syndrome of CHF.
171
172Cliapter 8| A
(1) Increased sympathetic nervous tone. Short-term effects of increased contrac-
tility, heart rate, and venous return can increasc cardiac output. But ovcr
time, increased afterload stress and myocardial oxygen requirement, con-
cardiac. arrhythmias.
(2) Activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Angiotensin Il stimu-
lates potent vasoconstriction and aldosterone secretion, and has other impor-
tant effects. Aldosterone promotes Nat and Cl- reabsorption in the kidney;
it also contributes to pathologic remodeling and myocardial fibrosis.
(3)  Antidiuretic hormone (vasopression). This hormone dircclly causes vasocon-
striction and also promoles frce water reabsorplion.
(4) Other substanccs. Cylokines (c.g., TNF-α), cndothelins, and other substanccs
also play a role in abnormal myocardial hypertrophy and/or fibrosis in heart
failure.
(5) Endogenous vasodilatory mechanisms. These oppose the vasoconstrictor re-
sponses in heart failure and include natriuretic peptides (atrial NP and brain
NP, nitric oxide, and vasodilatory prostaglandins). Normally, a balance be-
tween vasodilator and vasoconstrictor effects maintains circulatory homeosta-
sis. As heart failure progresses, the influence of the vasoconstrictor mecha-
nisms predominates.
C. Pathophysiologic groups of heart failure. As an aid to choosing therapy, the
causes of heart failure can be viewed according to major underlying pathophys-
iologic mechanism. Nevertheless, sevcral pathophysiologic abnornalities usually
cocxist; both systolic and diastolic function abnormalities are common in ad-
vanccd failure.
(1) Myocardial (systolic pump) failure. Dilated cardiomyopathy is the most com-
mon cause. Valvular insuficiency imay or may not be present initially. but
usually develops as the affected ventricle dilates.
(2) Volume overload. A leaky valve or abnormal systemic-to-pulmonary connec-
tions are common causes. Cardiac pump function is often maintained well
initially, but myocardial contractility deteriorates over time.
(3) Systolic pressure overload. Congenital ventricular outflow obstruction, and
systemic or pulmonary hypertension are common causes. Concentric hyper-
trophy incrcascs ventricular wall thickncss and stiffness, and prcdisposcs to
ischeinia; cventually myocardial contraclilily declines.
(4) Reduced ventricular compliance with impaired filling (diastolic dysfunction).
Examples include hypertrophic and restrictive myocardial disease and peri-
cardial discasc. Contractile ability is usually norimal initially, but elevated
filling pressure leads to congestion and may diminish cardiac output.
B.
Overview of heart failure therapy
1. Treatment strategies are aimed at modifying either the results of neurohormonal
activation (i.c., Na+ and waler retention) or the activation proccss itself (c.g-,
angiotensin-converting cnzyme inhibition). Goals are to control cdema and effu-
sions, improve cardiac output, reduce cardiac workload, support myocardial func-
tion, and manage concurrent arrhythmias. The clinical severity of heart failure in-
fluences the treatments used. Aniimals with heart failure caused by systolic dys-
function (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy or advanced valvular insufficiency) bene-
fit most from arteriolar vasodilation (reduced afterload) and also positive inotropic
support.
a. Acute CHF. Acute ChHF is characterized by severe cardiogenic pulmonary
edema, with or without pleural and/or abdominal effusions or poor cardiac out-
put. Therapy is aimed at rapidly clearing pulmonary edema, improving oxygena-
tion, and optimizing cardiac outpul (sce Table 8-1).
Susnie Aq spaau s,jenpiaipui aui oi paoei si adeiail 'ainy eay ouou g
 dosagcs, adding or substituting drugs, and modifying lifestyle or diet. Pleural
effusion and largc-volume ascites that accunulate despite medical therapy arc
drained to improve respiration. As heart disease progresses, more aggressive
TABLE 8-1. Management of Acute Decompensated Congested Heart Failure*
Avoid stress!
Provide cage rest
●Enlhance oxygenation:
(Clieck airway patency
o Give supplemental Og (avoid >50% ior >24 lhours)
f frothing is evident, suction airways
oIntubate and mechanically ventilate if needed
o Perform thoracocentesis if pleural effusion suspected
● Removc alveolar fluid:
o Initiate diuresis:
then 1-4 mg/kg q6-12 hours, or 0.6-1 mg/kg/h CRl (see cited text for more
informalion); cats: 1-2 (-4) mg/kg IV or IM q1-4 hours until respiratory rate decreases,
then q6-12 hours)
Redistribute blooxd volume:
■Vasodilators (sodium nitroprusside: 0.5-1 mcg/kg/min (initial) CRI in D5W, titrate upward
as needed to) 5-15 mcg/kg/min, monilor arterial pressure (see cited texl for more 
information); or 2% nitroglycerin ointment (+/- with hydralazine): dogs: 1/2-1 1/2 inch
cutaneously q6 hours; cats: 1/a-1/2 inch cutaneously q6 hours.
■(± morphine [dogs only, sce below]]
■(± phlebotomy [6-10 mL/kg])
●Reduce broncloconstriction:
( Aminophylline (dogs: 4-8 mg/kg slow IV, IM, SC. or 6-10 mg/kg PO) q6-8 liours; cats: 4-8
mg/kg IM, SC, PO q8-12 hours) or similar crug
Mild sedation to reduce anxiety:
0Butorphianol (dogs: 0.2-0.3 1mg/kg IM; cats: 0.2-0.25 mg/kg IM); 0r
o Morphine (dogs: 0.025-0.1 mg/kg IV holuses q2-3 minutes to effect, or 0.1-0.5 mg/kg
single IM or SC dose)
Acepromazine (cats: 0.05-0.2 mg/kg SC; or 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM with butorphanol), or
o Diazepam (cats: 2-5 mg IV; dogs: 5-10l mg IV)
●Reduce afterload:
0 Hydralazine: dogs: initial 0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO, repeat in 2-3 hours (until systolic arterial
pressure is 90-110 mm Hg), then q12 hours (avoid niroprusside): or
o Enalapril (0.5 mg/kg PO) q12-24 lours) or (other ACE inlibitor (avoidl nitroprusside); cor
0 Amlodipine (dlogs: 0.1-0.3 mg/kg P0) q12-24 lours)
Increase contraciliy (if myocardial failure present):
cats: 1-5 rmcg/kg/inin CRl; start low).
: Amrinone (1-3 mg/kg IV; 10-100 mcg/kg/min CRl), or milrinone (50 mcg/kg IV over 10
minules initially; 0.375-0.75 mcg/kg/min CRI [human (dosel).
2
Pinobendan (PC), see Appendix ili, (or
e Digoxin (see Appcndix Il for PO maintcnance dosagc);: loading dosc (see cited tcxt for
indications): PO—1 or 2 doses at twicc calculated maintenancc: dog IV: 0.01-(1.02
mg/kg-give /a of this total dose in slow boluscs over 2-4 hours to effect: cat IV: 0.005
mg/kg-give /2 of total, then 1-2 hours later give 1/4 dose bolustes), if needed).
● Monitor and manage abnormalities as possible:
o Respiratory rate, heart rate and rhythm, arterial blood pressure, body weight, urine output,
hydration, aitude, serum bioxchemistry and blood gas analyses, and pulrmonary capillary
wedge pressure (if available).
Diastolic dysfunction (e.g., cats with lypertrophic cardiomyopathy):
0 General recommendations, O, therapy, and furosemide as above.
o +/- Nitroglycerin and mild sedlation.
0 Consider IV csmolol (200-500 mcg/kg IV ovcr 1 minutc. followed by 25-200 mcg/kg CRl)
or diltiazem (0.15-0.25 mg/kg ovcr 2-3 minutes IV).
*Adaplecl from Wencly A. Ware. Cardfiovascular Discase in Small Animal Medirine. 2007. Loncdon. UK. Manson
Publishing, p. 171.
iDilution of 250 mg dobutamine into 500 mL <of fluid yields 500 meg/mL: infusion a1 (0.6 mL/kg/h provicles 5 mcg
dobulamine/kg/min.
Dopamine is clilutecl in saline solution. 5%u dextrose in water. or lactatecl Ringer's solution: 40 mg of dopamine
into 500 ml of fluid provides 80 mcg/mL: infusion at (.75 mL/kg/h provides 1 meg clopamine/kg/min.
173
174Chapter 81[3
therapy is usually needed. Support of myocardial function with pimobendan (or
digoxin) is helpful for many dogs, and some cats.
c. Treatment implications for diastolic dysfunction
(1) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Disease such as HCM, which impairs
ventricular filling, is treated with drugs that slow heart rate (to increase fill-
ing time and reduce ischemia). Improved cardiac relaxation is also a goal.
Diltiazem (Ca2+ blocker), a β-adrenergic blocker and/or an angiotensin con-
verting enzyme inhibitor (ACEl) are most commonly usod.
(2) Cardiac tamponade. Impaired filling caused by cardiac. tamponade or peri-
cardial restriction is treated by pericardiocentesis or pericardiectomy rather
than drugs
 Diuretics. Diuretic therapy is indicated to control edema and effusions that occur in
CHF. Excessive use of diuretics in heart failure exacerbates neurohormonal activation.
Diuretics are discussed in more detail in Chapter 9.
1. Furosemide. This loop-diuretic is used almost exclusively for animals with cardio-
genic edema or effusion.
a. Acute CHF. Although aggressive furosemide therapy is indicated for acute, ful-
minant pulmonary edema, the smallest effective doses are used for chronic heart
failure therapy.
b. Chronic heart failure. Furosemide should not be used as monotherapy for
chronic heart failure management.
c. Adverse effects are usually related to excessive fluid and/or electrolyte losses.
2. Spironolactone. This K+-sparing diuretic may be a useful adjunct therapy for
chronic refractory hcart failure, although it appcars to have little diurctic effect in
normal dogs.
a. Aldosterone release can occur despite ACE inhibitor use. Spironolactone's
antialdosterone effect may mitigate aldosterone-induced cardiovascular
remodeling.
b. Spironolactone must be used cautiously in patienls receiving an ACEl or K- sup-
C. Adverse effects relate to excess K- retention and Gl disturbances. Spironolactone
may decrease digoxin clearance.
3. Thiazide diuretics. Chlorothiazide or hydrochlorothiazide is occasionally used in
combination with furosemide and other therapy for refractory CHF.
a. Thiazide diuretics decrease renal blood ilow and should not be used in the pres
ence of azotemia.
D,
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEls). This is a group of drugs that, by
inhibiting the action of ACE, block the conversion of an inactive precursor peptide
(angiotensin I) into the active angiotensin Il. In this way, the effects of the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone cascade are opposed. ACE also degrades certain vasodilator
kinins, including bradykinin. Most ACEls (oxcept captopril and lisinopril) are prodrugs
which are converted to their active form in the liver. Severe liver cdysfunction can inter-
fere with this conversion.
1. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action
a. The main benefits of ACEls arise from reducing the effects of neurohormonal
activation (Figure 8-1).
b. Arleriolar and venous vasodilation
(1) Inhibition of locally produced ACE within vascular walls may produce a
local vasodlilatory response, even in the absence of high circulating renin
levels.
(2) The vasodilating effects of ACEls may be enhanced by vasodilatory kinins
normally degraded by ACE.
c. Inhibition of angiotensin Il production decreases aldosterone secretion,
a hormone that promotes renal Na' retention. ACEl's diuretic effect is
modest.
d. ACEls may also (potentially) oppose abnormal CV remodeling changes.
Drugs Acting on tle Cardliovascular Systen175
Renalperfusion
Sympathetictone
Sodium tomaculadensa
Reninrelease
4
Angictensinogen
AngiotensinI
AngiotensinII
(Renin substrate)
ACE
Vasodilatorkinins
Active
4
Inactive
Aldosteronerelease
个Vasoconstriction
FIGURE 8-1. Thc rcnin-angiotensin
↑Thirst
cascade and effects of angiotensin Il.
↑Vasopressinrelease
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
↑Norepinephrinerelease
catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin
↑Renalsodiumretention
I to angiotensin Il and degrades va-
Hypertrophy(vessels,heart)
sodilator kinins (e.g, bradykinin). Open
arrows-enzymatic reaction.
2. Therapeutic uses and administration
a. An ACEl is indicated for the chronic management of most causes of chronic
heart failure, especially dilated cardiomyopathy, chronic valvular insufficiency.
and HCM,
 b. An ACEl is considered the first choice agent in the management of systemic
arterial hypertension in dogs. An ACEl may also be useful in cats with hyperten-
sion.
C. An ACEl may help slow progression of chronic renal failure in cats, and possibly
dogs.
3. Adverse effects of ACEls include hypolcnsion, Gl upset, renal funclion deteriora-
tion, and hyperkalcmia tespccially when used with a K*-sparing diuretic or K· sup-
plement).
a. Azotemia. If azotermia develops, the diuretic dosage is decreased first. If neces-
sary, the ACEl dose is reduced or the drug discontinued.
4. ACEI used commonly for CHF management
d.
 Enalapril is the only ACEl licensed for veterinary use.
(1) Enalapril is well absorbed orally: bioavailability is not decreased by food.
(2) Enalapril is hydrolyzed in the liver to its most active form, enalaprilat.
(3) Peak ACE-inhibiting activity occurs within 4-6 hours in dogs. Duration of
action is 12-14 hours; effects are minimal by 24 hours after once daily dos-
ing.
(4) Maximal activity in cats occurs within 2-4 hours after an oral dose; some
ACE inhibition (50% of control) persists for 2-3 days.
(5) Enalapril and its active metabolite are excreted in the urine.
(a) Significant adverse effects on renal function in dogs with advanced mi-
tral regurgitation are generally not a concern.
(b) Renal failure and sevcre CHF prolong the drug's climination, so reduced
dosage or benazcpril arc used in this situation.
176Chapler 8 1 D
b. Benazepril is often chosen in animals with preexisting renal disease. Benazepril
may also slow renal function deterioration and partially mitigate hypertension in
cats with renal disease.
(1) Oral administration is absorbed at rate of ~40%, which is not affected by
feeding.
(2) Benazcpril is metabolized to its active form (benazeprilat) in the liver.
(3) Pcak ACE inhibition occurs within 2 hours of PO administration in dogs and
cats. Complete ACE inhibition occurs in cats at doses of 0.25-0.5 mg/kg.
There is >90% ACE inhibition at 24 hours.
(4) Repeated dosing moderately increases drug plasma concentrations.
(5) Benazepril is eliminated equally in urine and bile in dogs. In cats, ~85% is
excreted in the feces and only 15% in the urine.
C. Other ACEls sometimes used for CHF include captopril, lisinopril, ramipril,
quinipril, fosinopril, and imidapril.
(1) Captopril is well absorbed orally (75%, bioavailable), but feeding decreases
bioavailability by 30-40%
(a) Hemodynamic. effects appear within 1 hour, peak in 1-2 hours, and last
<4 hours in dogs.
(b) Captopril is excretcd in the urine.
(2) Lisinopril is a lysine analog of enalaprilat with direct ACE-inhibiting effects.
(a) Lisinopril is 25-50% bioavailable; absorption is not affected by feeding.
(b) Time to peak effect is 6-8 hours. Once daily dosing appears to be effec-
tive.
 Other vasodilators can further improve cardiac output and reduce edema and effu-
sions in selected heart failure patients. Agents that reduce arteriolar resistance are also
used in the treatment of hypertension. Vasodilators can affect arterioles, venous capaci-
tance vessels, or both ("balanced" vasodilators).
1. Introduction
a. Arteriolar dilators decrease systemic vascular resistance, arterial blood pressure,
and afterload on the heart by relaxing arteriolar smooth muscle. This helps im-
prove forward cardiac output and can reduce (mitral) regurgitant flow, thereby
decreasing left atrial pressure and pulmonary congestion. An arteriolar or mixed
vasodilator drug should be initiated cautiously to avoid hypotension and reflex
tachycardia.
b. Venodilators relax systemic veins, increase venous capacitancc, decrcasc car-
diac filling pressures (preload), and reduce pulmonary congestion. They are used
mainly in treating acute CHF.
2. Hydralazine
a. Preparation and chemistry. Hydralazine (Apresoline(?) is a phthalazine-derivative
vasodilating agent.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Hydralazine directly relaxes
arteriolar smooth muscle with little cffcct on the venous system. Ccrebral, coro-
nary, splanchnic, and renal circulations are affectcd more than skeletal muscle or
skin vasculaturc. Its cffcct is depcndent on intact vascular cndothelium.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Hlydralazine, in combination with
furosemide, is especially useful for dogs with mitral insufficiency and severe
sdiay stll (peoane arueisisan leape sunpai Apidei aq euapa Aeuoind
reduce regurgitant volume and pulmonary venous pressure and increase forward
cardiac output. Hydralazine has also been used in the treatment of myocardial
failure and hypertension.
d. Pharmacokinetics. The drug is rapidly absorbed orally, with onset of action
within 1 hour. Peak effect occurs within 3-5 hours and lasts up to 12 hours in
dogs. There is cxtcnsive first-pass hepatic mctabolism of this drug. Howcvcr,
in dogs, increased doses saturate this mechanism and increase bioavailability.
A small amount of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine. The ty. is 2-4
hours in people. The Cl is about 70 mL/min/kg and Va is 9 L/kg; bioavailability
is decreased by over 60% with food.
[Drugs Acting on the Cardliovascular Systcan
177
e. Adverse effects. Hypotension is most common. Hydralazine causes significant
reflex tachycardia in some animals. The dose should be reduced if this occurs;
sometimes adding digoxin or a β-blocker is also necessary. Hydralazine can cx-
acerbate the increased neurohumoral response in hearl failure, and enhance Na*
and water retention. Gl upset may also occur, especially in cats.
3. Amlodipine
a. Preparation and chemistry. Amlodipine besylate (Norvasc?) is dihydropyridine
Ca?: channel blockcr.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Ca²- channel blockcrs as a
group block Ca²- influx across cardiac and vascular smooth muscle cell mem-
branes. Amlodipine mainly has vasodilating effects, with no appreciable cardiac
effects.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Amlodipine is the drug of first choice for
systemic. arterial hypertension in cats. It can be a useful adjunct therapeutic
agcnt in hypcrtensive dogs, and may be cffcctive as a single agent in some. It
also is uscd as adjunct therapy in dogs with refractory CHF (cspecially from mi-
tral valve disease). It is administered PO.
d. Pharmacokinetics. Plasma ty, of amlodipine is ~30 hours in dogs, and maxi-
mal effects occur 4-7 days after initiating therapy. Oral bioavailability is high
(88% in dogs) and pcak plasma concentrations are reached 3-8 hours after oral
administration; plasma concentrations increase with chronic therapy. The drug
undergoes hepalic metabolism, but there is no extensive first-pass elimination;
caution is warranted in animals with poor liver function. Excretion is through
the urine and feces. Amlodipine's effect on blood pressure lasts ≥24 hours in
cats. Amlodipine generally does not have significant effects on serum creatinine
concentration or body weight in cats with chronic renal failure.
e.
Adverse effects. Hypotension is possible, but less likely than with hydralazine
becausc of the slower onsct of action. Infrcquently, inappctcnce, azotemia,
Icthargy, hypokalcmia, reflex tachycardia, or wcight loss may occur.
4. Nitrates
a. Preparation and chemistry. Commonly used nitrates include sodium nitroprus-
side (for IV infusion), nitroglycerine topical ointment (2%), and oral isosorbide
dinitrate.
 b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Nitrates cause peripheral va-
sodilation,
(1) Nitroprusside is a potent dircct dilator of both arteriolar and venous smooth
muscle; it reduces afterload as well as preload on the heart. The infused
dosage should be titrated to maintain mean arterial pressure above
70 mm Hg.
(2) Nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate act mainly on the venous system and
reduce cardiac filling pressures (preload) by their venodilating cffects. They
are mctabolizcd in vascular smooth muscle to produce nitric oxide, which
indirectly mediates vasodilation via activation of guanylyl cyclase to produce
cyclic GMP, which in turn activates protein kinase G to open K+ channels
and close Na+ channels, thereby inducing hyperpolarization of the muscle.
C. Therapeutic uses and administration
(1) Sodium nitroprusside is mainly administered IV in the treatment of fulminant
CHF; it is sometimes uscd for acute hypcrtensivc crisis. This agent should
only be uscd when arterial blood prcssure and IV infusion rate can be con-
stantly monilored.
(2) Nitroglycerin. The major indication for nitroglycerin is acute cardiogenic
pulmonary edema. Nitroglycerin ointment (2%) is usually applied to the skin
of the groin, axillary area, or ear pinna, although the efficacy of this in heart
failure is unclear. An application paper or glove is used to avoid skin con-
tact by the person applying the drug. Nitroglyccrin ointmcnt or isosorbide
dinitratc are used occasionally in chronic CHF managcmcnt, cithcr com-
bined with slandard therapy for refractory CHF, or with hydralazine or am-
lodipine in animals that cannot tolerate ACEls.
178Chapler 8 1 E
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Sodium nitroprusside's effect on blood pressure last less than 10 minutes, so.
the drug must be given by intravenous infusion, Nitroprusside is metabolized
to a cyanide radical, and then further metabolized in the liver: elimination is
via the urine, feces, and exhaled air.
(2) Other nitrates. Because of extensive first-pass hepatic metabolism after oral
administration, the transcutaneous route is uscd most often in animals for
othcr nitralcs, although nitroglycerine is also wcll absorbcd sublingually.
Nitroglycerine ointment (2%) is applied to the patient's skin (usually the
groin, axillary arca, or car pinna) cvery 4-6 hours using application papcrs
or gloves. Onsct of action is within 1 hour, with variable duralion of effccl
(c.g., 2-12 hours). The ty, in dogs is unclear; it is <5 minules in pcoplc,
bul mctaboliles have some activity. Dosagc and absorption are variable. Thc
self-adhesive, sustained-release preparations may be useful, but have not
been systeimatically evaluated in small animals.
e. Adverse effects. Profound hypotension is the major side effect of sodiuim nitro-
prusside. Cyanide toxicity can result from excess or prolonged use (e.g., over
48 hours). Hypotension may result from excessive or inappropriate use of other
nitrates as well. Chronic high dosages and frequent application or long acting
forimulations are most likcly to be associatcd with the devclopiment of drug toler-
ance.
Positive inotropic drugs
E.
1. Pimobendan (Vetmcdin@)
a. Preparation and chemistry. Pimobendan is a benzimidazole-pyridazinone
derivative, nonsympathomimetic, nonglycoside inotropic drug that also has
vasodilating properties.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. This drug increases myocar-
dial contractility by increasing myofilament sensitivity to Ca²- and by inhibiting
phosphodiesterase Ill (which breaks down cyclic AMP). The latter mechanism is
responsible for pimobendan's vasodilating properties. The drug also appears to
have some anticytokine and antithrombotic properties.
C.
sho u asn ioy paaoidde s! uepuaqouid suogensume pue sasn onadean 
with CHF from dilated cardiomyopathy or chronic mitral valve disease. It is used
in combination with diurclic and other therapy (sometimes including digoxin)
as appropriate for the individual casc. The total daily oral dose (0.5 mg/kg) is
divided (not necessarily equally) and administered BiD using a combination of
whole and half chewable tablets (or capsules where available).
d.
 Pharmacokinetics. Pimobendan is metabolized in the liver to an active metabo-
lite. Excretion is mainly through the feces. There is >90% protein binding of
both drug and active metabolite. The elimination t';, for pimobendan and its
angsp anss apim e s! aah laaadsan 'sinon z pue s'o ae aogeia
and there is a delay from the time of peak plasma concentrations to maximal
cffect on myocardial contractility (dP/dimax). Incrcascd dP/dlmax is obscrvcd for
≥8 hours after dosing. Inotropic effect may be attenuated by concurrent usc of a
β- or Ca2+-blocker.
e. Adverse effects. About a third of patients may experience reduced appetite,
lethargy, diarrhea, and dyspnea, with fewer dogs exhibiting azotemia, weak-
ness and other signs; however, these signs may be due to the underlying Ch1F.
Sporadic mild increase in serurm alkaline phosphatase has occurrcd, and hyper-
activity, hemorrhagc, drooling, constipation, and diabetcs mellitus have been
reported as suspected adverse rcaclions.
2. Digoxin
a. Preparation and chemistry. Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside. Il is csscntially thc
only digitalis glycoside still in clinical use.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action
(1) Positive inotropic effect (Figure 8-2). Digoxin competitively binds to and
inhibits Na-, K+-ATPase at the myocardial cell membrane. Decreased
Drugs Acting on the Carediov
179
2K
>2K+
ADP+Pi
Digitalis -
ATPase
ATP
Na
3Na+
3Na+
Nat
Na
Nat
3Na+
>3Na+
Na+/Ca2+Antiport
90mV
Intracellular
Extracellular
FIGURE 8-2. Digoxin mechanisn of action in myocardiun, Digoxin-induced inhibition of Na+,
K -ATPase leads to an increase in myocardial Na concentration. Througli Na'-Ca?- exchanger, all
incrcase in Ca²+ influx is rcached. The increasc in myocardial Ca2+ concentrations enhances the
muscle contractility.
extracellular NaT transport causes intracellular accumulation, which promotes
Ca²+ entry via the Na+-Ca²- exchange. The drug's modest positive inotropic
effect results from increased Ca'+ available to the contractile proteins.
(2) Antiarrhythmic effects. Digoxin also has some antiarrhythimic effects against
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias which are mediated primarily via incrcased
parasympathetic tone to the sinus and A-V nodes and atria. The drug also
has some direct effects, which further prolong the conduction time and the
reiractory pcriod of the A-V node.
(3) Digoxin also improves arterial baroreceptor sensitivity in heart failure, which
helps counteract excessive neurohormonal activation.
C. Therapeutic uses and administration
(1) Digoxin is uscd for ils modest positive inotropic effecl. Digoxin has gener-
ally been used in the treatment of heart failure caused by or associated with
myocardial failure, such as dilated cardiomyopathy and advanced, chronic
pressure or volume overloads te.g-, aortic insufficiency, long-slanding patent
ductus arteriosus, mitral, or tricuspid insufficiency). However, this use is be-
ing supplanted by pimobendan.
(2) Digoxin is used for its antiarrhythmic effect against supraventricular arrhyth-
mias. It is only moderately effective in slowing the ventricular response rate
in atrial fibrillation and does not cause conversion to sinus rhythm.
(3) Digoxin is usually contraindicated in HCM, where it may worsen existing
ventricular outflow obstruction; although it has been used when clinical
signs of right heart failure develop. Digoxin is generally not useful for pa-
tients with pericardial disease. Digoxin is usually contraindicated when sinus
180Chapter 81 F
or A-V nodal disease is present; it is relatively contraindicated with most
serious ventricular arrhythmias bccause the drug may cxacerbate them.
(4) Factors affecting dosage. Conservativc doses should he used. Thcrapy is al-
most always begun using oral maintenance (rather than IV or loading) doses,
There is only a weak correlation between digoxin dose and serum concen-
tration in dogs with heart failure, indicating that other factors are important
in determining the serum concentrations of this drug.
(a) Renal function. Serum digoxin concentrations are increased in dogs and
cats with renal dysfunction because of reduced total body clearance and
volume of distribution. There appcars to be no correlation bctwccn de-
grce of azotemia and scrum concentration.
(b) Body condition. Since much of the drug is bound to skeletal muscle)
animals with reduced muscle mass or cachexia, as well as those with
compromised renal function can easily become toxic at the usual cal-
culated doses. In addition, because digoxin has poor lipid solubility the
dose should be based on the calculated lean body weight; this is espe-
cially irmportant in obese animals.
(c) Serum concentration measurement. After 1 wcck of therapy (or dosagc
alleration) serum concentrations should be measured.
i The sample is drawn 8-10 hours after the previous dose. If serum
 concentration is <0.8 ng/ml, the digoxin dose can be increased by
≤30%, and the serum concentration measured the following week.
ii If serum concentration cannot be measured and toxicity is suspected,
the drug should be discontinued for 1-2 days, then reinstituted at half
of the original dosc.
(d) Therapeutic serum concentration is considered to be between 0.8 and
2.0 ng/ml. This is reached within 2-4.5 days (with PO dosing every
12 hours) in dogs. In cats, therapeutic serum concentration is achieved
with low doses given every 48 hours; concentrations are ~50% higher
with the alcohol-based (less palatable) elixir than with tablets. In horses,
scrum concentrations of 0.5-2.0 ng/ml arc achicved within 1-2 hours.
Significant enterohepatic rccycling may producc a sccond peak scrum
 concentration in horses.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption is ~60% for the tablet form and 75% for the elixir. Absorption is
decreased by food, kaolin-pectin compounds, antacids, and malabsorption
syndromes. Steady state serum concentrations are achieved in ~7 days for
dogs, in ~10 days for cats, and in 3-5 days for horscs.
(2) Fate. About 27% of the drug in serum is protein bound. Elimination is mainly
renal, There is minimal hepatic metabolism. Digoxin tys is reported to be 23-
39 hours in dogs, 25-78 hours in cats, and 13-23 hours in horses.
e. Adverse effects. Myocardial toxicity is of greater concern than Gl toxicity. Fatal
myocardial toxicity may occur before other signs develop, especially in patients
with myocardial failure. P-R interval prolongation or signs of Gl toxicity should
not be used to guide progressive dosing of digitalis. Scrum conccntration mca-
surcment should be used to guide dosing. Loading doscs should not be uscd in
myocardial failurc.
(1) Myocardial toxicity can cause almost any cardiac rhythm disturbance, in-
cluding ventricular tachyarrhythmias, supraventricular premature complexes
and tachycardia, sinus arrest, Mobitz type I second-degree A-V block, and
junctional rhythms.
(a) Calcium overload. Diastolic: scquestration and systolic relcasc of Ca2+
Ol peal ues asn uixoslg sllao jeipieoou paseasp u! paedui aq Aeu
cellular Ca?- overload and electrical instability.
(b) Toxic levels of digoxin also increase sympathetic tone to thc hcart caus-
ing incrcascd autonaticity. In addition, the parasympathetic: cffects of
slowed conduclion and altered refractory period facilitate the occurrence
of re-entrant arrhythmias.
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System181
(c) Digoxin also can stimulate spontaneous automaticity of myocardial cells
by inducing and potentiating late after-depolarization; this is enhanced
by cellular stretch, calcium overloading, and hypokalemia.
(2) Gl toxicity. Gl upset is the other major toxicity and may occur before signs
of myocardial toxicity develop, especially in patients without myocardial
failure. Its signs include anorexia, depression, vomiting, borborygmus, and
diarrhea. Direct effects of digitalis on chemoreceptors in the area postrema
of the medulla may be the cause of some of the Gl signs (e.g., voimiting).
(3)  Factors predisposing to digoxin toxicity
(a)  Hypokalemia predisposcs to myocardial toxicity by Icaving morc avail-
(b)  Renal dysfunction (see above)
(c) Hypercalcemia and hypernatremia potentiate both the inotropic and
toxic effects of the drug.
(d) Abnormal thyroid hormone levcls can lcad to digitalis toxicity (hyper-
rcduccs its clearance); thcreforc, dosagc reduction may be nccded.
(e)H
Hypoxia sensitizes the myocardium to the toxic effects of digitalis.
(f) Certain drugs incrcasc digoxin serum concentration. Quinidine dis-
places the drug from skeletal muscle binding sites and reducing its
renal clearance. Verapamil and amiodarone also can increase serum
digoxin concentration; other drugs possibly do as well (including dilti-
azem, prazosin, spironolactone, and triamterene). Drugs affecting hepatic
microsomal enzymes may also have effects on digoxin metabolism.
Neomycin and sulfasalazine decrease bioavailability.
(4) Therapy for digitalis toxicity depends on the signs manifested.
(a) Gl signs usually respond to drug withdrawal and correction of fluid or
electrolyte disturbances.
(b) Atrioventricular conduction abnormalities also usually resolve with drug
withdrawal, although sometimes an anticholinergic. agent is needed
(c) Ventricular tachyarrhythmias in dogs arc treated with lidocaine or
phenytoin.
'i Other therapy includes IV K+ supplermcntation (if scrum K+ is <4.0
mEq/L), IV fluid to correct dehydration and maximizc rcnal func-
tion, and in some cascs, propranolol to help control ventricular
tachyarrhythmias (as long as no conduction blocks are present).
 ii Oral adninistration of the steroid-binding resin cholestyramine is
only useful very soon after accidental overdosage of digoxin, since
this drug undergoes minimal enterohepatic circulation. A preparation
of digoxin-specific antigen binding fragments (Digoxin immune Fab;
Digibind?) derived from ovine antidigoxin antibodies have been used
occasionally for digoxin overdose in dogs.
 3. Dobutamine and dopamine (sympathomimetic agents). See Chapter 2 for more
information.
a. Preparation and chemistry. Dopamine (Intropin) is an endogenous cate-
cholaimine that is a precursor to norepinephrine. Dobutamine (Dobutrex?) is
a synthetic. analog of dopamine.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Catecholamines increase
contractility and hcart rate, cspccially at higher doscs. Stimulation of cardiac
β3 -adrenergic rcccptors (coupled to G,) activates adenylyl cyclasc to incrcasc
cyclic AMP synthcsis, which stimulatcs a protcin kinasc A that in turn activatcs
Ca?- channels, leading to increased Ca?+ influx and greater contractility.
(1) Dopamine stimulates β- and α-receptors at higher doses. Peripheral vaso-
constriction occurs at 10-15 mcg/kg/min. At low doses (less than 2-5
mcg/kg/min IV infusion), it also stimulates vasodilator dopaminergic recep-
tors in the renal, mesenteric, coronary, and cerebral circulations.
(2) Dobutamine stimulates β,-receptors, but has only weak action on β2- and
α-receptors; it does not stimulate dopaminergic receptors. The drug increases
182Chapler 8 | F
contractility, with minimal effects on hcart rate and blood prcssure at lowcr
infusion rates (3-7 μg/kg/min),
c. Therapeutic uses and administration
(1) Myocardial failure. Dopamine and dobutamine are used, in conjunction
with other therapy, for short-term inotropic and blood pressure support in
dogs and cats with myocardial failure, Use of catecholamines for heart fail-
ure is limited by the development of β-receptor downregulation. Generally
these drugs are given for no more than 3 days.
(2) Hypotension that is not responsive to fluid loading.
(3) Dopamine is also used to increase renal blood flow in acute oliguric renal
failure.
d. Pharmacokinetics. The very short ty, (less than 2 minutes) and extensive hepatic
metabolism of the catecholamines used clinically makes them suitable only for
IV administration, usually by constant infusion.
e. Adverse effects. At higher doses, dopamine and dobutamine increase heart rate,
myocardial oxygen demand, and the risk of inducing ventricular arrhythmias.
Development of sinus tachycardia or tachyarrhythmias should prompt a decrease
in infusion rate.
(1) Dobutamine is less arrhythmogenic than other catecholamines, but may pre-
cipitate supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias at higher infusion rates
(10-20 mcg/kg/min). Cats are more sensitive to dobutamine than dogs and
may exhibit seizures or other adverse effects at relatively low dosages.
(2) By incrcasing renal blood flow, dopaminc may cnhancc the renal clearance
of other drugs.
4. Amrinone and Milrinone (phosphodiesterasc inhibitors)
a. Preparation and chemistry. Amrinone is also known as inamrinone. Amrinonc
 and milrinonc are bipyridine cardiac inotropic agents.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Thcsc agents inhibit phospho-
diestcrasc Il, an intracellular cnzync that degrades cAMP. Thcy produce vasodi-
lation as well as an incrcasc in myocardial contractility.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Amrinonc and milrinonc arc somctimcs
uscd for short-terrm inotropic support in dogs and cats with sevcre myocardial
failure. The drugs arc available for IV injection. Thcy can be used concurrently
with other types of inotropic agents.
d. Pharmacokinetics. Effects begin within 3 minutes and peak in 10 minutes after
|V bolus injection, but are short-lived in normal dogs (<30 minutes). Constant
infusion is required for sustained effect. Peak effect using constant rate infusion
Occurs in ~45 minutes in dogs.
e. Adverse effects
(1) These agents may exacerbate ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
(2) Higher dosages result in greater vasodilation, with reduction of blood pres-
sure and increases in heart rate.
(3) Other adverse effects could include vomiting/diarrhea, hepatotoxicity, throm-
bocytopenia (with prolonged use).
Drugs used in heart disease causing diastolic function. Agents that increase diastolic
filling time, reduce myocardial O2 requirements, and/or facilitate myocardial relaxation
are used in the treatment of HcM and other causes of severe hypertrophy.
1. β-Blockers such as atenolol (propranolol, metoprolol, and others) are often used to
slow heart rate and reduce myocardial O2 consumption. See Il D and Chapter 2 for
more information.
a. Certain β-blockers (e.g., carvedilol, metoprolol) may also be useful in the long-
term management of dilated cardiomyopathy and chronic valve disease, but fur
ther study is needed.
2. Calcium entry blockers, as a group, cause coronary and systemic vasodilation,
enhanced myocardial relaxation, and sometimes, reduced cardiac contractility.
Diltiazem has been used comimonly in cats with HCM (see Il D for additional in-
formation).
Drugs Acting on the Carlhovetscular System」183
3. ACE inhibitors (e.g., enalapril, benazepril) are being increasingly used in the man-
agement of CHF from HCM (see above and also Chapter 3).
ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS
A.
Introduction
1. Multiple factors underlie the development of cardiac rhythm disturbances.
 a. Both overt and subclinical changes in cardiac structure or function can alter cell
electrophysiologic characteristics in ways that predispose to arrhythmia forma-
tion.
(1) Changes in normal cellular conduction properties or automaticity caused
by cardiac structural or physiologic remodeling can predispose to ar-
rhythmia development. Genelic factors and environmental stresses can
contribute.
(2) Additional triggering (e.g., premature stimulus or abrupt change in heart rate)
and/or modulating factors (e.g., changes in autonomic tone, circulating cat-
echolamines, ischemia, or electrolyte disturbances) also appear necessary to
provoke and sustain rhythm disturbances.
b. Abnormal rhythms, as well as normal sinus node aclivity, are influenccd by the
autonomic nervous system. Many conditions affect prevailing autonomic tone.
2. In general, underlying mechanisms are categorized as disorders of impulse forma-
tion, disorders of impulse conduction, or combinations of both. Identifying the spe-
cific mechanism for an arrhythmia in the individual patient is often difficult.
a. Disorders of impulse conduction can cause bradlyarrhythmias when concluc-
tion fails in the AV node, atria, or SA node, causing asystole or a slow escape
rhythm.
b. Disorders of impulse conduction can also cause tachyarrhythmias when re-entry
(re-entrant excitation, circus movement, reciprocating tachycardia) occurs.
c. Re-entry is a common arrhythmia mechanism.
(1) It involves an area where conduclion is blocked or delayed, but which re-
covers excitability in time to transmit the depolarizing wave back around so
that tissue that had been previously depolarized becomes activated again.
(2) Re-entry can occur within defined anatomic pathways (anatomic re-entry) or
because of functional electrophysiologic changes in adjacent tissues (func-
tional re-entry).
3. The clinical context of the arrhythmia is important.
a. Some arrhythmias are benign and do nol require trcatment.
(1) Ventricular cctopy that develops after thoracic trauma in previously healthy
 animals generally resolves without therapy.
(2) (Occasional ventricular premature contractions (VPCs) have also been identi-
fied in clinically normal animals.
b. While some arrhythmias are of no clinical consequence, others cause weakness,
syncope, or sudden death, cspecially in animals with underlying discase.
c. Arrhythmias that compromise cardiac output, arterial blood pressure, and coro-
nary perfusion can promote myocardial ischemia, deterioration of cardiac pump
function, and, sometimes, sudden death.
(1) These arrhythmias tend to be either very rapid (e.g., sustained ventricular
or supraventricular tachyarrhythmias) or very slow (e.g., advanced AV block
with a slow or unstable ventricular escape rhythm).
(2) Rapid sustained tachycardia of either supraventricular or ventricular origin
reduces cardiac output acutely, and eventually leads to myocardial dysfunc-
tion and CHF (tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy).
4. An arrhythmia may be suspected from the animal's history or identified on physical
examination.
a. An accurate ECG diagnosis is importanl.
184
「Chapter & II B
B.
Overview of cardiac arrhythmia therapy
1. Therapy is indicated for arrhythmias that cause clinical signs of hemodynamic com-
promise, and when the patient has a disease known to be associated with sudden
arrhythmic death.
a. Ideal goals of antiarrhythmic drug therapy might be to totally suppress all abnor-
Imal beats, and prevent further arrhythmias and sudden death. but these are not 
often realistic goals.
b. Successful therapy usually is sufficient reduction in frequency (e.g.. by ≥70-
80%) or repetitive rate of ectopic beats to restore normal hemodynamic status
and eliminate clinical signs.
C.
 Even apparently complete arrhythmia suppression does not remove the risk of a
lethal arrhythmia and sudden death.
2. Antiarrhythmic drugs may slow the rate of tachycardia, terminate a re-entrant ar-
rhythmia, or prevent abnormal impulse formation or conduction.
a.
' These effects can occur through modulation of tissue electrophysiologic proper-
ties and/or auitonomic nervous system effects.
b. The traditional (Vaughan Williams) antiarrhythmic drug classification system con-
sists of four classes based on the drug's predominanl cardiac electrophysiologic
effects (Table 8-2), but this syslem has shortcomings.
(1) Class I agents havc mcmbrane-stabilizing effcts that tend to slow conduc-
tion as well as decrease automaticity and excitability.
TABLE 8-2. Antiarrhythmic. Drug Classification*
Class
Drug
Mechanism and ECG Effects
Decrease fast inward Na' current;
membrane-stabilizing effects (slowed
conduction, decreased excitability and
automaticity)
IA
Quinidine,
Moderately slows conduction, increases
procainamide
aclion potential duration; can prolong QRS
complex and Q-T interval
IR
Lidocaine, mexiletine,
Liule change in conductivity, decreases
phenytoin
action potential duration; QRS cormplex
and Q-T interval unchanged
Flecainide, propafenone
Markedly slows conduction without change
C
in aclion polential duration
Atenolol, propranolol,
β-adrenergic blockade, reduces effects of
esinolol, imetoprolol,
sympathetic stimulation (no direct
carvedilol, others
myocardial effects at clinical doses)
川
Sotalol, amiodarone.
Selectively prolongs action potential
others
duration and reiraclory period;
antiadrenergic. effects; Q-T interval
prolonged
IV
Diltiazem, verapamil 
Decreases slow inward Ca++ current
(greatest efect on SA and AV nodes)
Other agcnts with
Digoxin
Antiarrhythmic action results mainly from
antiarrhythmic
indirect autonomic effects, especially
effects include
increased vagal tone
Atropine and other
Oppose vagal eifects on SA and AV nodes
anticholinergic drugs
*Atlapted from Wencly A. Ware. Carcdiovescular Disease in Smafl Animat Menicine. 2007. L.onclon. UK. Manson
Putblisling, p. 199.
(2) Class Il consisls of β-adrenergic anlagonists, which act by inhibiting cate-
cholamine effects on the heart,
(3) Class Ill drugs prolong the effective refractory period of cardiac action poten-
tials without decreasing conduction velocity.
(4) Class IV contains calcium-cntry blocking drugs. Thcse are most useiul for
supravcntricular tachyarrhythmias; ventricular arrhythmias usually are unre-
sponsive to them.
C. Suggcslcd drug dosages arc listed in Appendix Il.
 3. Therapy for supraventricular tachyarrhythmias
a. Supraventricular premature complexes:
(1) Occasional premature beats do not require antiarrhythmic therapy.
(2)  Predisposing factors should be iminimized as far as possible.
b. Frequent atrial preimature contractions or brief paroxysmal supraventricular
tachycardia (SVT):
(1) Digoxin (Table 8-2) is used first in dogs with heart failure and in cats with
dilated cardiomyopathy.
(2) A β-blocker or the Ca?+ blocker diltiazem can be added if the arrhythimia
is not sufficiently controlled with digoxin (along with an ACE inhibitor and
furosemide for heart failure).
(3) For cats with HCM or hyperthyroidism a β-blocker (e.g., atenolol or pro-
pranolol) is used, although diltiazem could be an alternative.
(4) Recurrent supraventricular tachyarrhythmias that are refractory to these drugs
may respond to amiodarone, sotolol, procainamide, quinidine, or a Class IC
agent.
C. Acute therapy for sustained or persistent paroxysmal SVT:
(1) A vagal maneuver is tried initially for sustained SVT.
(2) When SVT persists, a Ca2+ channel blocker is usually administered
next.
(a) Diltiazeim (IV or PO loading) is preferred.
(b)  Verapamil (IV) is also effective, but is not recommended for dogs with
myocardial dysfunction or heart failure because of its greater negative
inotropic effect.
(3) A β-blocker given slowly IV (propranolol, esmolol) is an alternative, but also
has negative inotropic effects.
(4) IV digoxin is another alternative, but it is generally less effective than Ca*+
channel blockers.
(a) Digoxin is not used in pre-excitation syndrome because it can decrease
the refractory period of the accessory pathway, although it slows AV
conduction,
(5) Lidocaine (IV) can be effective in some cases of SVT caused by an accessory
pathway or ectopic atrial focus, although it is most often used for wide-QRS
tachyarrhythmias.
(6) If Ca'+ channel- or β-blocker or lidocaine therapy does not control persis-
tent SVT, IV procainamide may.
(7) Refractory SVT (AV node-independent) may respond to sotalol or amio-
darone,
(8) Once the rhythm is controlled, PO maintenance digoxin and/or diltiazem or
a β-blocker are used most often for long-term therapy.
(a) Amiodarone or sotalol are alternative agents in cases refractory to con-
ventional drugs.
(b) Procainamide, quinidine, or a Class IC drug have also been used
d. Atrial fibrillation (AF) is usually associated with markcd atrial enlargermcnt, cx-
cepl in largc/giant brccds of dog and in large animal spccies, Bccausc pcrma
nent conversion to sinus rhythm is unlikely in most animals wilh atrial enlarge-
ment, the usual goals of therapy are to slow AV condurction and to manage un-
derlying disease.
(1) If rapid HR reduction is indicated, IV diltiazem is recommended because it
has less negative inotropic cffect than vcrapamil and propranolol.
186Chapter 8 Il B
-u yim sieo puej ssop ui uixogip sapnoun Alensn Adenau (eno wnaj-suon (z)
ocardial failure). But digoxin alone often does not adequately slow the heart
rate animals with heart failure or during exercise. Either a β-blocker or dil-
tiazem can be added to further slow AV conduction; low initial doses are
used and titrated upward to effect.
(3) Amiodarone can be used if additional rate control is needed.
(4) For cats with HCM and AF, diltiazem or a β-blocker is used without digoxin.
(5) When ventricular pre-excitation is present in a patient with AF, AV nodal
blocking drugs (Ca²- blockcrs, digoxin, and possibly β-blockcrs) should not 
bc uscd bccause they can paradoxically incrcasc the ventricular response
rate. Amiodaronc is rccommended in thesc cascs; sotalol or procainamide
can also be used.
e. AF in larger animals without signs of heart disease or failure may convert to si-
nus rhythm, either spontaneously or with drug treatment or electrical cardiover-
sion. Conversion is more likely with AF of recent onset and normal atrial size.
(1) Pharmacologic cardioversion is sometimes achieved with quinidine, but this
is only used where this is no or only mild underlying disease.
(2) Alternatively, high-dose diltiazem alone (PO for 3 days) has sometimes been
effective in dogs, as has amiodarone, propafenone, and sotolol. Acute onset 
4. Therapy for ventricular tachyarrhythmias
a. (Occasional ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) are usually not treated, es-
pecially in an otherwise asymptomatic animal. Moderately frequent, single VPCs
of uniform configuration may also not require antiarrhythmic drug treatment,
especially if underlying heart function is normal.
b. Acute therapy for ventricular tachycardia
(1) Lidocaine (IV) is usually the first-choice drug for controlling scrious ventricu-
lar tachyarrhythmias in dogs.
(2) PO sotalol, or rmcxiletinc, or IV amiodaronc, can be morc effectivc in some
cascs. IV arniodarone must be given cautiously bccause rmarked hypotension
can occur.
(3) Alternatively, procainamide (given IV, IM, or PO) or quinidine (given IM or
PO) can be tried. If a single IM or PO loading dose of either drug is effective
(within 2 hours), lower doses can be given every 4-6 hours IM or PO.
(4) Addition of a β-blocker or other combination therapy is sometimes effective.
(5) Cats with frequent ventricular tachyarrhythmias are usually given a β-blocker
first. Alternatively, low doses of lidocaine can be tried, but cats, are sensitive
to the neurotoxic effects of this drug. Procainaimide or sotolol can also be
used.
c. Chronic oral therapy for ventricular tachyarrhythmias
(1) The same, or similar, drug that was most effective during acute therapy is
often continued PO in cases wherc long-term thcrapy is nccdcd.
(2) Sustaincd-relcasc procainamide or mcxiletine (Class I agents) can be used
alone, or with a β-blocker. β-Blockers may confer some protection against 
ventricular fibrillation.
(3) Sotolol or amiodaronc (Class Il agcnts) may provide grcatcr antifibrillatory
protection.
 5. Therapy for bradyarrhythmias
a. If the arrhythrmia is the result of a drug cffect, discontinuation or dosage reduc-
tion is also used, as appropriate.
b. Symptomatic bradyarrhythimias (e.g., sinus bradycardia, sick sinus syndrome,
atrial standstill, high grade AV block) are initially treated with atropine (or at-
ropine challenge test).
c. lf the arrhythmia is responsive to atropine challenge, oral anticholinergic therapy
may be useful.
d.A
An emergency infusion of dopamine or isoproterenol may increase the ventricu-
lar escape rate in animals with high-grade AV block, although ventricular tach-
yarrhythmias may also be provoked
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular Syslem187
e.
Temporary or permanent artificial pacing is indicated when there is inadequate
increase in hearl rate with imedical thcrapy.
C.Class I agents (membrane stabilizers)
1. Class I agents (local anesthetics) slow conduction and decrease automaticity and
excitability by their membrane stabilizing effects. Most of these agents are depen-
dent on extracellular K+ concentration for their effects.
a. Drugs in Class I have also been subclassified (see Table 8-2).
b. Concurrent usc of a Class I drug and a drug of another class (or cven subclass)
may increase antiarrhythmic cficacy in cascs refraclory lo a single agcnt.
c. Contraindicalions. All these drugs are contraindicaled in the presencc of
complete heart block, and should be uscd only cautiously in patienls with
sinus bradycardia, sick sinus syndrome, and first- or second-degree A-V
blocks.
d. Adverse effects. All antiarrhythmic. drugs may cause exacerbation of arrhythmias
(proarrhythmic effect), especially the Class IC agents.
2.Lidocaine
 a. Preparation and chemistry. Lidocaine HCl is available as an injectable so-
lution of various concentrations. The 2% concentration is most commonly
used.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Lidocaine has little effect on
sinus rate, AV conduction rate, and refractoriness. See Table 8-2, Class IB.
(1) The electrophysiologic effects of lidocaine (and other Class I drugs) are very
dependent on extracellular K+ concentration; hypokalemia may make the
drug ineffective, while hyperkalemia intensifies the drug's depressant effects
on cardiac membranes.
(2) Lidocaine supprcsses automaticity in both normal Purkinjc ibcrs and diseascd
myocardial tissuc, slows conduction, and reduces the supernormal period. It
has grcaler effecis on diseascd and hypoxic cardiac cells.
(3) Lidocaine produces iminimal hemodynamic effects and little to no depression
of contractility at therapeutic doses when given slowly IV. Hypotension can
be associated with toxic. levels.
c.1
Therapeutic uses and administration. Lidocaine is used IV imainly to suppress
frequent ventricular premature contractions and ventricular tachycardia, although
it may convert some cases of SVT.
d.Pharmacokinetics
(1) Because of almost complete first-pass hepatic elimination, lidocaine is ad-
ministered IV, usually as slow boluses followed by constant rate infusion.
Antiarrhythmic effects after an IV bolus occur within 2 minutes and disap-
pear within 10-20 minutes.
(2) Constant rate infusion without a loading dose results in steady state levels in
4-6 hours.
(3) Lidocaine undergoes rapid hepatic metabolism; some metabolites are active.
The f, after IV injection is <1 hour in the dog (similar in the cat).
(4) A Va of 5.7 L/kg and Cl, of 62 ml/min/kg are reporled for thc dog. A V of
1.7 L/kg, Clr of 64.4 mL/min/kg, and a t7, of 3.1 hours are reported for thc
horse.
(5)  Therapeutic plasma concentrations are 2-6 mcg/mL
(6)  Propranolol, cimetidine, and other drugs which decrease liver blood flow.
slow the metabolism of lidocaine. Reduced hepatic blood flow associated
with heart failure can also predispose to toxicity.
e. Adverse effects. Central nervous system (CNS) excitation is the most common
toxic effect. Signs include agitation, disorientation, muscle twitches, nystagmus,
and generalized seizures. Nausea may also occur. Cats are particularly sensitive
to the drug's toxic effects and may suffer respiratory arrest along with seizures.
Horses are also very sensitive to CNS toxic effects. QRS widening can occur.
3. Mexiletine
 a. Preparation and chemistry. Mexiletine HiCl is available as oral capsules.
188Chapter 8 I C
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Mexiletine is similar to lido-
caine in its electrophysiologic, hemodynamic, and antiarrhythmic properties (see
Table 8-2).
C. Therapeutic uses and administration. Mexiletine is used to suppress frequent
ventricular premature contractions and ventricular tachycardia.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1)  Mexiletine appears to have good oral absorption.
(2)  The drug is highly protein bound. It undergoes liver metabolism (influenced
by liver blood flow) and some renal cxcrelion (which is slower with alkaline
urine). The fy, in dogs is 4.5-7 hours (depending to some degree on urine
pH).
(3) Therapeutic serum concentration is thought to be 0.5-2.0 mcg/mL.
e. Adverse effects. Toxic effects are similar to lidocaine. Vomiting, anorexia, tremor,
ataxia, disorientation, sinus bradycardia, and thrombocylopenia have been re-
ported in dogs.
4. Procainamide
 a. Preparation and chemistry. Procainamide HCl is similar in structure to procaine.
It is available as an injectable solution and in tablets or capsules as well as ex-
tended release lablets.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action (scc Tablc 8-2). Procainamide
has both direct (Class IA) and indirect (vagolytic) effects similar to quinidine.
(1) Oral and IM administrations of this drug are not associated with marked
hemodynamic effects; however, rapid IV injection can cause significant hy-
 potension and cardiac depression (but less than with IV quinidine).
c. Therapeutic uses and administration, Procainamide is uscd mainly
for frequent ventricular premature contractions and ventricular tachy-
cardia; it also may be effective against some supraventricular tachy-
arrhythmias.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Procainamide is well absorbed orally in the dog. Procainamide is thought to
be 20% protein bound in the dog. The Va is 1.4-2.1 L/kg in dogs.
(2) Constant IV infusion may be used; steady state is reached in 12-22 hours.
(3) Elimination is by hepatic metabolism as well as renal excretion in propor-
tion to the creatinine clearance. The t ;, is 2.5-4 hours: the sustained release
form has a slightly longer fiy, of 3-6 hours in dogs.
(4) The metabolite N-acetylprocainamide is found in horses, but is not present
to any significant degree in dogs. In the horse, a Va of 2.4 L/kg, Clt of 3.9
mL/min/kg, and a ty, of 3-7 hours are reported.
(5) Therapeutic plasma range in dogs is 4-12 mcg/mL
e. Adverse effects. Procainamide may exaccrbate hypolcnsion or heart failurc.
(1) The toxic efects are similar to thosc of quinidine but usually milder. Gl up-
set and prolongation of the PR, QRS, or Q-T intervals can occur.
(2) Increased ventricular response rate to atrial fibrillation can result when used
without digoxin, βB-blocker, or Ca?- entry blocker.
(3) More serious toxic effects include hypotension, depressed A-V conduction,
and worsening of arrhythmias (may result in syncope or ventricular fibrilla-
tion).
5. Quinidine
a. Preparation and chemistry. Quinidine is an alkaloid derived from quinine or the
cinchona for related) plants. Gluconate, polygalacturonate, and sulfate salts have
been used clinically PO. The gluconate salt is available for injection.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Quinidine is a Class IA agent
(see Table 8-2). The drug's actions result from both direct electrophysiologic and
vagolytic effects.
(1) Its indirect (vagolytic) effects, at low doses, may increase sinus node rate or
the ventricular response rate to atrial fibrillation by antagonizing the drug's
direct effects.
(2) As with other Class I agcnts, hypokalcmia rcduces the anliarrhythmic effec-
tiveness of quinidine.
Drugs Acling on the Cardrovascular System189
(3) Vasodilation (via α-receptor blockade), cardiac depression, and hypotension
result from IV administration. Oral and IM administrations are usually not
associated with adverse hemodynamic effects, but could be in patients with
underlying cardiac. disease.
C. Therapeutic uses and administration. Quinidine is used less commonly than
other antiarrhythmic agcnts now. It can be cffective against frequent ventricular
tachyarrhythmias; it also may be cffectivc against some supravcntricular
tachyarrhythmias.
(1) Quinidine may successfully convert recent-onset atrial fibrillation to sinus
rhythm in horses, cattle, and large dogs with normal heart size and function,
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Quinidine is well absorbed orally with litle first-pass hepatic elimination.
The sulfate salt is more rapidly absorbed than the gluconate. Peak effect is
usually achieved 1-2 hours after oral adiministration.
(2) The drug is highly protein bound in dogs and cats. In the dog, a V of 2.9
L/kg and a Clt of 6 imL/min/kg are reported. In the cat, a V of 2.2 L/kg and
Clt of 14.8 ml/min/kg arc reported.
(3) There is cxtensive hepatic metabolism that is not greatly dependent on liver
blood flow. Quinidine has a ty, of ~6 hours in the dog, and ~2 hours in
the cat. Anticonvulsants and other drugs which induce hepatic microsomal
enzyimes can speed the drug's metabolism.
(4) Therapeutic blood levels (2.5-5 mcg/mL) are usually reached in 12-24 hours
after PO and IM administration.
(5) Slow-release sulfate, gluconate, and polygalacturonate salts prolong the
drug's absorption and elimination. Administration of these q8 hours is prob-
ably adequate for dogs, while standard quinidinc sulfate should bc given q6
hours.
(6) In thc horsc, a V of 2.9-6.3 L/kg, Cl, of 6-16 mL/min/kg, and a fy, of 4-
7 hours are reported. The drug is usually given by nasogastric tube cvery
2 hours for up to 5-6 doses to convert atrial fibrillation, From 10 to 50%
absorption occurs within 2 hours.
(7) A plasma concentration of 2-4 mcg/mL is thought to be therapeutic.
e. Adverse effects. Quinidine may exacerbate hypotension or heart failure. It
should not be administered IV.
(1)  Toxicity occurs as an extension of the drug's electrophysiologic. and hemody-
increases. Marked Q-T prolongation, development of bundle branch block,
or QRS widening greater than 25% of the pretreatment value suggest tox-
icity. All degrees of A-V block and ventricular tachyarrhythmias can also
result.
(2) Lethargy, weakness, and CHF can result from the drug's negative inotropic
 and vasodilatory effects and subsequent hypotension.
(3) Cardiotoxicity and hypotension may be partially reversible by sodium bi-
carbonate therapy. This temporarily decreases serum K- concentration and
increases quinidine's binding to albumin. Because of its extensive protein 
binding, severe hypoalbuminemia can prcdispose to toxicity.
(4) Gl signs (nausca, vomiting, and diarrhca) are cormmon with oral quinidinc
thcrapy. Apprchcnsion, dcprcssion, diarrhca, and anorcxia are common in
horses.
(5) Quinidine can precipitate digoxin toxicity when both drugs are used to-
gether, as it displaces digoxin from skeletal muscle-binding sites and de-
creases digoxin's renal clearance.
6. Phenytoin
a. Preparation and chemistry. Phenytoin Na+ is a hydantoin-derivative available as
an injectable solution in a propylene glycol/alcohol vehicle.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Phenytoin is similar to lido-
caine, but it also has some slow calciuim channel inhibitory and CNS effects that
may contribute to its effectivcness against digitalis-induced arrhythmias.
06
Chupter & Il C
 c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Phenytoin is used in dogs only for the
therapy of digitalis-induced ventricular arrhythmias that are not responsive to
lidocaine; phenytoin is not used in cats.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Oral bioavailability is poor; the drug is administered slowly IV.
(2) The drug is metabolized in the liver and, by stimulating hepatic microsomal
enzymes, may speed its own elimination.
(3) The ty: of phenytoin is only about 3 hours in the dog; the Va is 1.2 L/kg and
the Cif is 4 mL/min/kg. The drug is not used in cats, as the ty. is very long
(>40 hours).
(4) Therapculic plasma range is 10-16 μg/mL.
e. Adverse effects. Thc drug has bccn associalcd with bradycardia, A-V blocks,
ventricular tachycardia, and cardiac arrest.
(1) Rapid IV injection is avoided because the propylene glycol vehicle can de-
press myocardial contractility and cause vasodilation, hypotension, exac-
erbation of arrhythmias, and respiratory arrest. Slow IV infusion and oral
administration do not cause significant hemodynamic disturbances.
(2) (Other toxicity signs include depression, nystagimus, disorientation, and
ataxia.
(3) Even low doses can produce toxic serum concentrations in cats.
 7. Other Class I drugs. Flecainide and propafenone (Class IC) markedly reduce car-
diac conduction velocity: they may depress automaticity in the sinus node and
advcrse cffect of these Class IC agents. Bradycardia, intravcntricular conduction dis-
turbancc, and consistent (although transicnt) hypotension have occurrcd in dogs, as
 dial depression after IV administration can be significant.
D.
Class Il agents (β-blockers) act by inhibiting catecholamine effects on the heart. They
 slow heart rate, reduce myocardial oxygen demand, and increase AV conduction time
and refractoriness.
1. β-blockers are indicated for supraventricular lachyarrhythrmias (including paroxys-
mal atrial tachycardia and frequent atrial premature complexes) and to slow the
ventricular response rate in atrial fibrillation (usually in combination with digoxin).
a. A β-blocker is the drug of first choice in cats for both supra- and ventricular
tachyarrhythmias.
b. In dogs, the combination of a β-blocker with a Class I agent often provides bet-
ter arrhythmia suppression than either alone.
c. β-blockers are also used to decrease heart rate and myocardial O demand in
HCM and other causes of myocardial hypertrophy, as well as in the therapy of
hypertension.
2. The antiarrhythmic effect of β-blockers relates to β, -receptor blockade rather than
direct electrophysiologic effects.
a. Although β-receptor blockers causc little ncgative inotropic effcct in normal an-
imals, in those with severc underlying myocardial discase (and dependent on
incrcascd sympathetic drive to maintain cardiac output) depression of cardiac
contractility, conduction, and heart rate can result.
(1) Because the drug's effects are dependent on the level of syinpathetic activa-
tion, individual response is quite variable.
(2) Initial dosages should be low and titrated upward as needed.
b. β-blockers enhance the depression of A-V conduction produced by digoxin,
Class I antiarrhythmic drugs, and calcium entry blockers.
(1) Using a β-blocker and calcium entry blocker simultaneously is not recom-
mended and can lead lo markcd decrcases in hcarl ratc and myocardial
contractility.
(2) β-blockers can decrease liver blood flow, leading to reduced elimination
 of drugs that are highly dependent on liver blood flow for clearancc (c.g.
lidocainc, phcnytoin).
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System191
c. Toxicity is usually related to excessive β-blockade, and can lead to bradycardia.
heart failure, and hypotension.
(1) Bronchospasm or increased vascular resistance can occur with nonselective
β-blockers (β; and βz).
(2) Lipophilic β-blockers (e.g., propranolol) can cause depression and disorien-
tation via CNS effects.
affinity of reccptors) during chronic β-blockade, abrupt ccssation of thcrapy
could result in serious arrhythmias.
(4) β3-blockers may also prevent the appearance of early signs of acute hypo-
glycemia in diabetics (e.g., tachycardia and blood pressure changes). These
drugs also reduce the release of insulin in response to hyperglycemia.
3. Atenolol
a. Preparation and chemistry. Tablets are used most often; an injectable is avail-
able.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Atenolol has β, -receptor selec-
tivity.
C. Therapeutic uses and administration. See Il D 1, above. Atenolol is the agent
used most often for chronic oral β-blockade.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Oral bioavailability in dogs and cats is about 90%.
(2) Atenolol is excreted in the urine; renal impairment delays clearance. The t/2
of atenolol is slightly over 3 hours in dogs and about 3.5 hours in cats.
(3)  Atenolol's βB-blocking effects are evident for 12 hours but are gone by 24
hours in normal cats.
e. Adverse effects. Wcakncss or cxaccrbation of hcart failurc can be obscrvcd, as
with othcr β-blockers. Adverse CNS effects are unlikely bccause atenolol is hy-
drophilic and does not readily cross the blood-brain barrier.
4. Propranolol
a. Preparation and chemistry. Propranolol HCl is available as an injectable solution
as well as oral tablets and solution.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Propranolol is a nonselective
β-blocker.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Propranolol can be used for acute (IV) or
chronic (oral) β-blockade.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Feeding delays the rate of oral absorption and increases the clearance of an
intravenous dose (by increasing liver blood flow).
(2) Propranolol has extensive first-pass hepatic metabolism; however, chronic
administration and higher doses cause hepatic enzyime saturation and in-
creased bioavailability. Propranolol lowers hepatic blood flow, thereby pro-
longing its own elimination and that of other drugs dependent on liver blood
flow for their metabolism.
(3) The fiy, of propranolol in the dog is only 1.5 hours or less (0.5 to over 4.2
hours in cats), but active metabolites exist. A Va of 3.3-6.5 L/kg and Clt of
34-70 iml/min/kg are reported in the dog. Dosing q8 hours appears to be
adcquate in both dogs and cats.
(4) In the horsc, a Va of 2.3 L/kg, Cl of 12-21 ml/min/kg, and a ty. of 1.2-1.7
hours arc rcported. Bioavailability is low.
e. Adverse effects. Propranolol toxicity is usually related to excessive β-blockade.
Propranolol and other lipophilic β-blockers can cause depressed attitude and
disorientation because of CNS effects.
5. Esmolol
a.
 Preparation and chemistry. Esmolol HCl is used as an IV injection.
 b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Esmolol is an ultra-short acting
agent that sclcctivcly blocks β-adrcncrgic reccptors.
C.
 Therapeutic uses and administration. Esmolol is useful as short-tcrm trcatment
for acute (usually supraventricular) tachyarrhythmias and CHF from hypertrophic
192 Chapter 8 II D
obstructive cardiomyopathy. Esmolol can be used to test whether a β-blocker
would be an effective therapeutic strategy in such cases.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Esmolol is rapidly metabolized by blood esterases, The ty, is less than 10
minutes.
(2) Stcady stalc occurs in 5 minutcs with, or 30 minules without, a loading
dose. Effects dissipate within 10-20 minutes of discontinuing infusion.
e. Adverse effects are minimal because of the drug's brief fy.
6. Metoprolol
a. Preparation and chemistry. Metoprolol tartrate is available as oral tablets
and an injectable. Metoprolol succinate extended release tablets are also
available.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Metoprolol is a β,-sclective
agent.
c.
 Therapeutic uses and administration. Metoprolol (a second-generation β-blocker)
has been used as an antiarrhythmic drug. It may be useful as well for long-term
heart failure therapy in dogs with stable DCM and chronic valvular disease (see
carvedilol, below).
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Metoprolol is well absorbed PO, but bioavailability is reduced by a large
first-pass effect. There is minimal protein-binding.
(2) Thc drug is metabolized in the liver and cxcrcted in the urine. I, is 1.6
hours in dogs and 1.3 hours in cats.
e. Adverse effects. As for other β-blockers, including exacerbation of CHF.
7. Carvedilol
a. Preparation and chemistry. Carvedilol is available in oral tablet form.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Carvedilol blocks β,-, β2-, and
α-adrenergic receptors, but is without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity. It also
has some other effects (including antioxidant activity, some Ca²- blocking effect,
 and also promotcs vasodilation).
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. This third-gcncralion β-blocker has bcen
effective in people with chronic in heart failure in modulating pathologic cardiac
reimodeling and reducing mortality with long-term use. It is hoped that carvedilol
(or metoprolol) might play a similar beneficial role in dogs; studies to evaluate
this are ongoing.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Peak plasma concentrations appear to be quite variable after oral administra-
tion,
(2) The drug is eliminated mainly through hepatic metabolism. The tiy, is short 
(<2 hours) in dogs; but an activc metabolite is thought to account for the
nonselective β-blocking effect which lasts for 12-24 hours.
e. Adverse effects. As for other β-blockers, including exacerbation of CHF.
8. Other β-blockers are available. Their basic effects are similar, although their rela-
E.
Class Ill agents prolong action potential duration and effective refractory period with-
 out decreasing conduction velocity. They act mainly by inhibiting the repolarizing K+
channel Is (delayed rectifier).
1. Sotolol
a. Preparation and chemistry. Sotolol HCl is available as a tablet containing a
racemic mixture of the d- and I- isomers.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Sotalol is a nonselective
β-blocker with Class Ill effects at higher doses. β-Blocking effects (irom the
[-isomer) occur at lower doses and are about 30% of propranolol's potency.
d-Sotalol alone prolongs repolarization but has no β-blocking effect.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Sotolol is used mainly for ventricular
tachyarrhythmias in dogs. Sotalol has also been used in cats with severe
ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular Systein193
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) The oral bioavailability of sotalol is high with ncgligible first-pass effcct, but
absorption is reduced with food.
(2) Sotolol is eliminated unchanged by the kidneys; renal dysfunction prolongs
elimination. The ty, is about 5 hours in dogs.
(3) Sotalol's β-blocking effects last longer than its plasma t /2-
e. Adverse effects. The drug has minimal hemodynamic effects, although it can
cause hypotension.
(1)  Although it has less negative inotropic effect than propranolol, sotolol may
exacerbate myocardial failure in dogs with DCM.
(2) Oiher adversc cffects of sotalol can include hypotension, depression, nausea,
vomiling, diarrhca, and bradycardia.
(3) Slowed sinus rate and first-degrce hcarl block can occur. Sotalol can be
 proarrhythmic. (as can all antiarrhythmic agents).
2.Amiodarone
a. Preparation and chemistry. Amiodarone HCl is an iodinated benzofuran. It is
available as an oral tablet and injectable solution.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Although classified as a
Class Ill agent, it also shares properties with all three other antiarrhythmic drug
classes. Besides prolonging the action potential duration and effective refractory
period in both atrial and ventricular tissues, it has effects on Na+, K+, and Ca2+
channels, and has noncompetitive α1- and β-blocking properties.
(1) Amiodarone's βB-blocking effects occur soon after administration, but maxi-
mal Class Ill effects (and prolongation of the action potential and QT inter-
val) are not achieved for weeks with long-term administration.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Amiodarone is indicated for refractory
lachyarrhythmias of both alrial and ventricular origin.
d. Pharmacokinetics. Amiodarone's pharmacokinetics are complex.
(1) There is a delayed onset of action, and prolonged tine (>10 weeks) to
steady state. With long-term PO use, the drug concentrates in myocardial
and other tissues (especially fat), and an active metabolite (desethylamio-
darone) accumulates.
(2) The drug is metabolized in the liver. The ty, in dogs after a single PO dose
is ~7.5 hours, but increases to 3.2 days with long-term use.
(3) Therapeutic serum concentration is thought to be 1-2.5 mcg/ml.
e. Adverse effects
(1) IV use can cause marked hypotension and bradycardia; hypersensitivity-
type reactions (with acute angioedema formation) and tremors have also
occurred.
(2) Long-term use can be associated with many adverse effects, including de-
pressed appctitc, Gl upsct, pncunonitis leading to pulmonary fibrosis, hep-
atopathy, thyroid dysfunction, positive Coombs test, thrombocytopenia, and
ncutropenia. Other adversc cffccts noted with long-term use in pcople in-
clude corneal microdeposits, photosensitivity, bluish skin discoloration, and
peripheral neuropathy.
(3) Amiodarone can increase the serum concentrations of digoxin, diltiazem,
and possibly, procainamide and quinidine.
FClass IV agents (Ca?+ channel blockers) reduce cellular Ca?- influx (the slow inward
current) by blocking transmembrane L-type Ca2+ channels. As a group they can cause
coronary and systemic vasodilation, as well as reduced myocardial contractility: but in-
dividual agents differ in these effects. Some calcium entry blockers (such as the nondi-
hydropyridine Ca?+ channel blockers diltiazem and verapamil) have antiarrhythmic
effects. These effects involve tissues dependent on the slow inward Ca?+ current. They
cause dose-related slowing of the sinus node rate and A-V conduction. Contraindica-
tions to Ca2+ channel blocker use include sinus bradycardia, AV block, sick sinus syn-
drome, digoxin toxicity, and myocardial failure (for agents with pronounced negative
inotropic effect. They are generally not used with a β-blocker.
194Chapler 8 II F
1. Diltiazem
a. Preparation and chemistry. Diltiazem HCl is a benzothiazepine Ca2+ channel
blocker. It is available as oral tablets and injectable solution, as well as extended
release tablets and capsules.
 b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Diltiazem slows the sinus node
rate, increases AV nodal refractory period, and can block some arrhythmias
caused by abnormal automaticity. triggered mechanisms, and re-entry. Diltiazem
also causcs potent coronary and mild peripheral vasodilation. It has less ncgativc
inotropic effect than verapamil.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Diltiazcm is indicaled for supraventricular
tachyarrhylhmias. It is often combined with digoxin to further slow the ventri-
cular response rate to atrial fibrillation in dogs. Diltiazem is the Ca?+ channel
 blocker recommended in cats with HCM.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Diltiazcm's bioavailability is only about 43% in dogs becausc of cxlensive
firsl-pass cffcct. Bioavailability of conventional diltiazem is grcaler in cats
than in dogs.
(2) Diltiazem is mclabolized in the liver; active metabolites cxisl. Drugs that
inhibit hcpatic microsomal cnzymes (e.g., cimctidine, ketoconazole, chlo-
ramphenicol) reduce diltiazem's metabolism.
auh 'shop ui snoy g isel pue suisop Od lae snoy z usm yead sioae (e)
ty. in dogs is >2 hours, but is longer with chronic PO use because of its
enterohepatic circulation.
(4) The t, in cats is 2-3 hours: plasma concentrations peak within 30-90 min-
utes and effects last for 8 hours.
(5) The therapeutic range is 50-300 ng/mL.
(6)A sustained-release preparation (Cardizem-CD?) produces plasma concentra-
snou tz ioj ohueu smnodeoui aqi u! uieuou pue sunoy 9 u! yead jeui suo 
in cals.
(7) Dilliazcrn XR is another sustained-relcasc prcparation. The 240-mg capsulc
contains four tablets of 60 mg cach. Therc appcars to be much pharma
cokinetic variability among individual cals. Sustained-release diltiazem may
have lesser efficacy in preventing sinus tachycardia compared with atenolol.
Adverse effects may also be more frequent, including anorexia, vomiting,
lethargy, and evidence of hepatopathy in cats.
e. Adverse effects are uncommon at therapeutic. doses, but anorexia, nausea,
bradycardia, and, rarely, other Gl, cardiac, or neurologic. effects may occur.
(1) Cats sporadically dcvelop livcr cnzyine clcvation with anorcxia. Anorcxia
and oiher Gl signs arc morc likcly at higher doses. Anccdotally, some cals
become aggressive or show other personality change when treated with dilti-
azem.
(2) The concurrent use of diltiazem (or verapamil) and a β-blocker can cause a
sudden fall in the sinus rate or complete heart block.
(3) Toxic effects can include reduced myocardial contractility, hypotension, de-
pression, lethargy, bradycardia, and AV block.
2. Other Ca²- blocker drugs
a. Verapamil HCl (a phenylalkylamine) has thc most polent cardiac cffecis of the
clinically used Ca?+ -entry blockers.
(1) Verapamil's t ,. in dogs is ~2.5 hours. It is poorly absorbed and under-
goes first-pass hepatic metabolism, resulting in low oral bioavailability.
The pharnacokinetics in cals are similar to dogs but are reportedly morc
variable.
(2) Veraparmil has markcd ncgative inotropic, and some vasodilalory effcects
which can causc decompensalion, hypotension and cvcn dcath if under
lying myocardial disease is present. Verapamil is nol used in patients with
heart failure.
(3)Toxic effects of verapamil include sinus bradycardia, AV block, hy-
potension, reduced myocardial contractility, and cardiogenic shock. The
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System195
negative inotropic effects of verapamil may be reversed with IV Ca2+ salts,
AV block precipitated by verapamil. Verapamil reduces the rcnal clearance
Of digoxin.
h. Other Ca?- channel blockers (the dihydropyridines) are used for their vasodi-
lating effect in hypertension or chronic heart failure management. Amlodipine
besylate is used most often (see p. 197).
G. Other drugs with antiarrhythmic effects
1. Anticholinergic drugs. Atropine sulfate and glycopyrrolate are anticholinergic agents
that act by antagonism of ACh at muscarinic receptors. They increase sinus rate and
AV conduction when excessive vagal tone is presenl.
a. Parenteral atropine or glycopyrrolate is indicaled for sinus bradycardia or AV
block induced by anesthesia, CNs lesions, and certain other diseases or toxici-
ties. See Chapter 2 for more information. An atropine response test is often used
in dogs and cats presented with a bradyarrhythmia to determine the extent of
vagal influence.
b. Bradyarrhythmias responsive lo parenteral atropine or glycopyrrolate may also
respond to oral anticholinergic agents such as propantheline bromide and
hyoscyamine su lfate.
tricular tachyarrhythmias (as in sick sinus syndrome). Other side effects of anti-
cholinergic therapy include vomiting, diarrhea, dry mouth, keratoconjunctivitis
sicca, and drying of respiralory sccretions.
2. Sympathomimetic drugs (see Chapter 2 for more information)
a. Isoproterenol is a β-receptor agonist that has been used to treat symptomatic AV
block and bradycardia refractory to atropine, although artificial pacing is safer
and more effective. Because of its affinity for βy-receptors, it can cause hypoten-
sion and it is not used for treating either heart failure or cardiac arrest. Isopro-
terenol can be arrhythmogenic, like other catecholamines. Oral administration
is not usually effective because of marked first-pass hepatic metabolisim. Isopro-
terenol can cause serious tachyarrhythmias.
b. Oral terbutaline sulfate, a β-receptor agonist, may have a mild stimulalory ef-
fect on HR.
c. The methylxanthine bronchodilators aminophylline and theophylline can in-
crease heart rate in some dogs with sick sinus syndrome when used at higher
doses.
3. Digoxin is commonly used to treat frequent supraventricular or atrial premature
bcats and tachycardias. It is also used to slow A-V conduction in atrial fibrillalion.
See I F 2 for more information.
I.
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS
A.
Introduction
1. Systemic arterial hypertension is oflen associated with renal disease or hyperadreno-
corticism in dogs; other associated conditions include pheochromocytoma, diabetes
mellitus, hypothyroidism, and liver disease. Renal disease and hyperthyroidism are
is uncommon in dogs and cats.
a. Certain drugs can increase blood pressure, such as glucocorticoids, mineralocor-
ticoids, NSAIDs, phenylpropanolaimine, NaCl, and even topical ocular phenyl-
cphrine.
b.
 High blood pressure can damage capillary beds. The eye, kidney, heart, and
196
Chapilcr 8 Ill A
2. Systemic. arterial hypertension is most often recognized in middle-aged to older
dogs and cals, presumably because of the associated disease conditions.
a. Signs of hypertension relate either to underlying disease or to end-organ damage
caused by the hypertension itself. Ocular signs, especially sudden blindness, are 
the most common presenting complaint.
b. A diagnosis of artcrial hypertension should bc confirmcd by mcasuring BP mul-
tiple times and on different days. Blood pressure measurements are indicated
not only when signs compatible with hypertension are found, but also when a
disease associated with hypertension is diagnosed.
B. Overview of antihypertensive therapy
those with clinical signs prcsumed to be causcd by hypcrtension.
a.
 Measured BP in such animals is generally over 180/120 mm Hg.
b. Some cases are hypertensive emergencies, requiring inmmediate therapy and in-
vatively with oral therapy.
c. Paticnts with high BP that pcrsists aftcr trcatmcnt for thc primary discasc, as well
as those with evidence of end-organ damage, should be treated.
d. The goal of therapy is to reduce BP to below 150/95 mm Hg.
2. Several drugs are used as antihypertensive agents in dogs and cats:
a. Usually one drug is administered al a time, at initially low doses. The animal
is monitored to assess efficacy; two or more weeks may be needed to assess
whether a significant decrease in BP has occurred.
b. The drugs used most often are angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEl).
the Ca?+-blocker amlodipinc, and β-blockers.
(1) An ACEl is recommended as the initial antilhypertensive drug in dogs.
(2) Amlodipine is recommended as the drug of first-choice in cals, unless hyper-
thyroidism is the underlying cause. For hyperthyroid-induced hypertension,
atenolol or another β-blocker is used first.
(3)  Therapy with a single agcnt is effective in some cases.
(4) Combination therapy may be nccded for adcquate BP control in othcrs.
c. Hypolension is a polential adverse effect of antihypertensive drugs.
(1) This usually is evident as periods of lethargy or ataxia.
(2) Reduced appetite can be another adverse effect.
d. Ancillary stratcgics may be helpful, although alone thcy are unlikcly to markedly
reduce BP.
(1) Moderate dietary salt reduction (e.g., ≤0.22-0.25% Na+ on a dry matter
basis) is advised for all cascs. Although not cxpected to normalize BP by
ilself, it may enhance antihypertensive drug effectiveness.
(2) Weight reduction is usually advised for obese animals.
(3) Drugs that can potentiate vasoconstriction (e.g., phenylpropanolamine and
other αi-adrenergic agonists), as well as glucocorticoids and progestins
should also be avoided when possible.
(4) A diuretic may help by reducing blood volume in individuals with volumc
cxpansion,
(a) A diuretic alone is rarely effective.
(b) Diuretics are avoided or used only with caution. in animals with renal
disease.
e. The ability to monitor BP is important when antihypertensive drugs arc used.
Serial mcasurements arc nccded to assess trcatment cfficacy and avoid hypotcn-
sion.
Vasodilator drugs
1. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. ACEl may help control BP by reducing
angiotensin ll formation, vasodilator kinin degradation, and/or aldosterone secretion
(with its effects on vascular volume).
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System197
a. An ACEl is gcncrally the drug of first choice in hypertensive dogs.
b. Hypertension in cats with chronic renal failure is often not responsive to ACEl.
But, an ACEl may help mitigate further hypertensive renal damage by preferen-
tially reducing cffcrent arteriolar constriction and recducing glonerular hypcrten-
sion
c. See I D for more inforimation about ACEl.
2. Calcium-entry blockers
a. Amlodipine besylate is a long-acting dihydropyridine Ca2+-blocker that causes
vasodilation without appreciable cardiac. effects.
(1) Amlodipine is the drug of first choice in most hypertensive cats.
(a)  Oral bioavailability is high and peak plasma concentrations are reached
3-8 hours after administration (in people); plasma concentrations in-
crease with chronic therapy.
metabolism; caution is warranted when liver function is poor.
(c) No specific pharmacokinetic data are available in cats. However, trans-
dermal application produces measurable blood levels and pharmacologic
cffcct, although to a lesscr degrce than with oral dosing. Bioavailability
appears lower than with oral dosing.
(d) Amlodipine's ty, is ~30 hours in dogs: maximal effects occur 4-7 days
after initiating therapy.
(2)  Amlodipine can be used as adjunctive therapy (or alone) in dogs if an AC[]
does not sufficiently control BP.
b. Other agents, such diltiazem (see Il F 1) and nifedipine might be useful in hyper
tensive animals.
 3. Other vasodilators
nitroprusside, hydralazinc).
(1) Nitroprusside can be dosed to effect by constant IV infusion, but arlerial
pressure should be closely monitored to avoid hypotension (see I E 4).
sop oy eiadsa 'aae ue s! Od lo Al tai auizele (z))
(scc I E 2).
b. α-Blockers oppose the vasoconstrictive effecls of these α-receplors. Their main
use is for hypertension caused by pheochromocytoma. After an α-blocker is
administered, adjunctive therapy with a β-blocker can help control reflex tachy-
cardlia or arrhythmias.
(1) Phenoxybenzamine is a noncompetitive α-blocker used most often for
pheochromocytoma-induced hypertension.
(2) Prazosin also has bcen uscd in some dogs.
(3) Phentolamine is used IV when hypertensive crisis is related to pheochromo-
cytoma or other cause of catecholamine excess.
(4)  Addition of a β-blocker can help mitigate phcochromocytoma-induced tach-
yarrhythmias, but it should not be administered alone or before an α-blocker
is given.
D.
 Other drugs used for hypertension
1. β-Blockers may reduce blood pressure by slowing hcart ratc, and decreasing car
diac output and renal renin release (see Il D).
a. Atenolol and propranolol have been used most often.
b. A β-blocker is recommended for cats with hyperthyroid-induced hypertension.
But β-blockers are often ineffective as the sole antihypertensive agent in cats
with renal disease.
c. An IV β-blocker (propranolol, esmolol, or labetolol) can be used for emergency
treatment.
2. Diuretics may reduce blood pressure by promoting Na+ and water excretion.
Furosemide is usually tried, although hydrochlorothiazide may be helpful in non-
azotemic dogs. See Chapter 9 for more information.
198
 Chapter 8 IV A
IV.
DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF THROMBOEMBOLISM
A.
1. Ceneral situations that promote thrombosis include abnormal endothelial struc-
ture or function, slowed or static blood flow, and hypercoagulability (cither irom
increased procoagulant substances or decreased anticoagulant or fibrinolytic sub-
stances).
a. Widespread endothelial injury interferes with endothelial antiplatelet, anticoagu-
lant, and fibrinolytic functions. An increase in coagulability and platelet activa-
tion favor thrombosis.
b. Many common diseases are associated with thromboembolism, including sepsis,
neoplasia, pancreatitis, immune-medited disease, protein-losing nephropathy.
hyperadrenocorticism, shock, severe hepatopathy, and heatstroke.
 2. Systemic arterial thromboembolism in cals is most often associaled with cardiomy-
opathy, although neoplastic and systemic inflammatory disease may sometimes be
the underlying condition.
3. Systemic arterial thromboembolic disease in dogs is relatively uncommon compared
with cats.
a. Thromboembolic disease (systemic as well as pulmonary) is associated with a
numbcr of conditions, including protein-losing nephropathies, hyperadrenocorti-
cism, neoplasia, gastric. dilatation-volvulus, and others.
b. Vegetative endocarditis is the most common cardiac disease associated with sys-
temic thromboembolism.
B. Overview of therapy for thromboembolic disease
1. The goals of therapy are to stabilize the patient by supportive treatment as indi-
cated, prevent extension of the existing thrombus and additional thromboembolic
events, reduce the size of the thromboembolus (if possible) and restore perfusion.
organ function, and to minimize further endothelial damage and blood stasis,
while collateral circulation develops.
b. Treatment for underlying or associated disease conditions is also provided, as
possible.
2. Anticoagulant therapy is used to prevent extension of existing thromboemboli.
3. Although fibrinolytic therapy is used in some cases, dosage uncertainties, the need
for intensive care, and the potential for serious complications limit its use.
4. Antiplatelet therapy is used to reduce platelet aggregation and growth of existing
thrombi.
5. Prophylactic therapy with an antiplatelet or anticoagulant drug is commonly used in
animals thought to be at increascd risk for thromboembolic discasc.
a. The efficacy of thromboembolic prophylaxis is unclear and no strategy consis-
tently prevents thromboembolism (TE).
b. Drugs used for arterial TE prophylaxis include aspirin, clopidogrel, warfarin
(coumadin), and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH).
(1) No survival henefit has been shown for warfarin compared with aspirin in
cats.
(2) Warfarin is associated with greater expense and a higher rate of fatal hemor-
rhage.
(3) Clopidogrel or LMwH prophylaxis may be more efficacious, with less risk of
hemorrhage, but more experience with this therapy is needed.
Anticoagulant drugs
1. Heparin
a. Unfractionated heparin and a number of LMWH products are available.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action
(1) Heparin's main anticoagulant effect is produced through antithrombin activa-
tion, which in turn inhibits factors IX, X, Xl, Xll, and thrombin (factor Il).
Drugs Acting on the Carliovasrular System199
(2) Heparin also stimulates release of tissue factor inhibitors from vascular sites,
which helps reduce (extrinsic) coagulation cascade activation.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Heparin is indicated to limit extension of
existing thrombi and to prevent further thromboembolic episodes.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Heparin must he given parenterally to be effective. It can be initially given
IV, followed by subsequent SC doses.
(2) Anticoagulant activity is immediate after IV injection, but is delayed up to
 an hour after SC injection.
(3) Doses are adjusled to prolong the activated coagulation time to 1.5-2.5
times pretreatment level.
（4）
 There is extensive protein binding. Metabolism is thought to be via the liver
as well as inactivation by the reticuloendothelial system.
(5) The ty, in people is 1-2 hours.
e. Adverse effects
(1) Bleeding and thrombocytopenia are most common.
(2) Hypersensitivity reactions are possible.
(3) Heparin is contraindicated in patienls with severe thrombocytopenia, uncon-
trolled bleeding, or previous hypersensitivity.
2. Low molecular weight heparins (LMwHs)
a. LMwHs are a diverse group of depolymerized heparin.
(1) These agents vary in size, structure, and pharmacokinetics.
(2) The LMWHs have differencces in hiological and clinical cffects and are not
interchangeable.
b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action
(1) The smallor size of LMWH, compared to unfractionaled heparin, prevents
simultaneous binding to thrombin and AT Ill. LMwHs have more effect
against factor Xa through their inactivation of AT Ill.
(2) LMWHs have minimal ability to inhibit thrombin, So are less likely to cause
bleeding.
(a) LMWH do not markedly affect coagulation times, so monitoring aPTT is
generally unnecessary.
(b) LMWH effect can be monitored indirectly by anti-Xa activity. Optimal
anti-Xa activity level in cats is not known; the targel range in people
is reported as 0.5-1.0 U/mL, although 0.3-0.6 U/mL has also been
used.
 C. Therapeutic uses and administration
(1) LMwHs are indicated to limit cxtension of cxisting thrombi and prevent fur-
ther thromboembolic episodes.
(a) They present a safer alternative to unfractionated heparin.
(b) But the most effective dosage for the various LMWHs is not clearly es-
tahlished in dogs and cats.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Dalteparin sodium (Fragmin) and enoxaparin (Lovenox) are used most
often.
(2) LMWHs have greater bioavailability and a longer ty, than unfractionated
heparin when given SC, because of lesser binding to plasma proteins as well
as endothelial cells and macrophages.
(3) The pharmacokinetics are not clear in dogs and cats.
(a)  Doses have been extrapolaled from human use.
(b)  There is evidence that the traditional doses do not produce a (human)
target level of anti-Xa activity in cats.
i It appears that cats should be given somewhat higher doses
al 4-hour intervals for dalteparin, and at 6-hour inlervals for
enoxaparin.
ii The optimal therapeutic range in cats, as well as the most effective
dosage in sick cats, is not yet established.
(c) Oplimal canine dosing guidelines are nol availablc.
e. Adverse effects can include excessive bleeding.
200Chaplcr 8IV （
3. Warfarin
a. Warfarin is a coumadin derivative available in tablet and injeclable forms as a
racemic mixture.
 b. Pharmacologic effects and mechanism of action. Warfarin is an indirect-acting
anticoagulant.
(1) It inhibits the cnzyme (vitamin K cpoxide reductase) responsible for activat-
ing the vilamin K-dependent faclors (ll, Vll, IX, and X).
(2) Its effect can be overcome by sufficient amounts of vitarmin K.
(3) Warfarin causes a transient hypercoagulability, related to the shorter ty, of
anticoagulant proteins compared to most procoagulant factors.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Warfarin has bccn uscd as prophylactic
thcrapy in animals thought to be at incrcascd risk for thrombocmbolic discasc.
There is wide variability in dose response.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Warfarin is rapidly absorbed after oral administration.
(2) It is highly protcin bound, although there is spccics variability in this; con-
current use of othcr protein-bound drugs or change in scrum protcin con-
centralion can markedly alter the anticoagulant effect because only unbound
warfarin is active.
(3) The drug is metabolized in the liver: the metabolites are inactive and are
cxcrcted through the urinc.
(4) The ty, is variable (hours to days).
e. Adverse effects relate mainly to heimorrhage and its consequences.
D.
Fibrinolytic drugs
1. Streptokinase is a nonspecific plasminogen activator that promotes the breakdown
of fibrin as well as fibrinogcn. It also degrades factors V, Vlll, and prothrombin.
a. The ty: is ~30 minutes, but fibrinogen depletion continues for much longer.
b. Because it is a nonspecific plasminogen activator it can cause systemic fibrinoly-
sis, coagulopathy, and bleeding.
c. No survival benefit has been shown for streptokinase compared to "conven-
tional" (aspirin and hcparin) trcatment in cats.
d. Adverse effects include the polential for serious hemorrhage. Acute hyperkalemia
(secondary to thrombolysis and reperfusion injury), metabolic acidosis, bleeding.
and other complications may lead to death. Streptokinase can increase platelet
aggregability and induce platelet dysfunction.
2. Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA)
a. rt-PA is a single-chain polypeptide serine protease with a higher specificity for
fibrin within thrombi and a low affinity for circulating plasminogen.
b. Experience with rt-PA is very limited and the optimal dosage is not known. A
high mortality rate in a small series of cats was thought to be rclated to rcperfu-
sion injury.
C. The t /, of t-PA is 2-3 minutes in dogs, but effects persist longer because of bind-
ing to fibrin.
d. Although the risk of hemorrhage is Iess than with streptokinase, there is potential
for scrious blccding as wcll as othcr side cffects. rt-PA is also potentially anti-
genic in animals because it is a human protein.
E.
Antiplatelet drugs. Aspirin and clopidogrel have low risk for serious hemorrhage, and
rcquire less monitoring, comparcd to warfarin.
1. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is an NSAID.
a. Aspirin irreversibly inhibits cyclooxygenasc, which reduces prostaglandin and
thromboxane A2 synthesis and, thcrefore, subscquent platelct aggrcgation.
b. Aspirin is often used to block platelet activation and aggregation in patients
with, or at risk for, thromboembolic disease. The optimal dose for preventing
thromboembolism is unclear. Aspirin is also used for its analgesic and antipyretic
cffects.
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System 201
c. Aspirin is rapidly absorbed orally. It is partially hydrolyzed to salicylic acid
which is widely distributed. Protein binding is extensive.
d. Salicylate is metabolized in the liver mainly by conjugation with glycine and
glucuronic acid (via glucuronyl transferase). Cats lack this enzyme and there-
fore the ty, is prolonged in this species and less frequent dosing (q2-3 days) is
required compared with dogs.
e. Salicylate and its metabolites are excreted by the kidney.
f. Adverse Gl effects (vomiting, inappetence, ulceration, hematemesis) occur in
some animals. Buffered aspirin formulation or aspirin-Maalox combination prod-
uct may be helpful. The drug can cause serious Gl bleeding.
2. Clopidogrel
a. Clopidogrel (Plavix) is a thienopyridine. These agents inhibit ADP-binding at
platelet receptors and subsequent ADP-mediated platelet aggregation.
b. Clopidogrel appears to have significant antiplatelet effects. Further evaluation of
uouo s! (sop pue) sieo ui sixeydond soqoooun o ieuod sh!
SUGGESTED READING
Alwood AJ, Downend AB, Brooks MB, Slensky KA, Fox JA, Simpson SA, Waddell LS, Baumgardner JE,
Otto CM. 2007. Anticoagulant effects of low-molecular-weight heparins in healthy cats. / Vet Intern
Med 21:378-387.
Littman M, Polzin D, Ross L, Snyder P, Stepien R. 2007. Guidelines for the identification, evaluation,
and managerment of systemic hypertension in dogs and cats. ACVIM Conscnsus Statement.J Vet Intern
Med 21:542-558.
Cote E, Ettinger Sl. 2005. "Electrocardiography and cardiac arrhythmias." In Textbook of Veterinary In-
ternal Medicine. Edited by Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. 6th ed., pp. 1040-1076. Philadelphia, PA: Saun-
ders.
htlp://www.drugs.com
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Ware WA. 2007. Cardiovascular Discase in Small Animal Medicine. London: Manson Publishing.
202
|Chapter8
SIUDY
QUEStIONS
DIRECTIONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplele slatemenls in this seclion is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. A purely venous vasodilator would be
 5. In gcncral, digoxin would hc indicatcd for
most useful in treating which of the following
ym Sop e
conditions?
(A) dilated cardiomyopathy and atrial fibrilla-
(A) Chronic, stablc dilated cardiomyopathy
tion
(B) Aortic regurgitation from endocarditis
(B) hearlworm disease
(C) Cardiac tamponade with ascites
(C) pericardial effusion
(D) Mitral regurgitation with acutc pulmonary
(D)F
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
edema
(E) constrictive pericarditis
(E) Pulmonic stenosis with syncope
6. A dog is being given oral digoxin for heart 
2. A middle-agcd cat is diagnosed with
failure. Which of the following would yield
HCM. Which of the following drugs would
the best absorption?
be most cffcctive for trcating the diastolic
(A) Usc of the tablet form
dysfunction caused by this disease?
(B) Use of the elixir form
(A) Furosemide
(C) Giving the drug with food
(B) Lidocaine
(D) Concurrent kaolin-pectin use
(C)Digoxin
(E) Concurrent antacid usc
(D) Hydralazine
(E) Diltiazem
7. The mechanism of aclion of digoxin's pos-
itive inotropic effect is
 3. All of the following angiotensin converting
(A) direct stimulation of the Na--Ca²+ ex-
enzyme inhibitors are excreted mainly by the
kidncy, EXCEPT:
changer.
(B) competitive inhibition of Na+,
(A) Captopril.
KI-ATPasc.
(B) Enalapril.
(C) activation of G, protein.
(C) Lisinopril.
(D) peripheral and central sympathctic stimu-
(D) Benazcpril.
lation.
(E)  inhibition of phosphodicstcrase
4. Which of the following statements rcgard-
activity.
ing hydralazine is TRUE?
 8. Regarding pimobendan, all the following
(∧) Hydralazine acts to dilate both arterioles
are Irue, EXCEPT:
and veins.
(B) Hydralazine directly dilates arteriolar
(A) Elimination in the dog is primarily via
smooth muscle.
hcpatic mctaholism.
(C)  Vasodilation is more pronounced in
(B) There is an active metabolite.
skelelal muscle and skin with hy-
(C) Thc drug is oftcn called an inodilator.
dralazinc.
(D) The drug has phosphodiesterase Il in-
(D) Hypotension and reflex tachycardia are
hibiting effects.
uncommon side effecls,
(E) The drug substantially increases myocar-
(E) Hydralazine dampens the neurohumoral
dial oxygen requirement while increasing
compensatory response in heart failure.
contractility.
Drugs Acting on the Cardliovascular System2
203
9. All the following predispose to digoxin
(B) It consistently abolishes atrial arrhyth-
toxicily, EXCEPT:
Imias.
(A) Use of loading doses.
(C) It decreases Na- conductance in auto-
Imatic cells.
(B) Hypokalemia.
(D) It has liule to no effecl on sinus node
(C) Renal discase.
pacemaker function.
(D) Quinidine.
(E) it is rapidly mctabolized by hepatic. mi-
(E) Cholestyramine.
crosomal enzymes.
10. A dog is presented in severe heart failure
from dilated cardiomyopathy: you decide
15. The drug generally used for converting
to inslitule therapy with a calecholamine.
alrial fibrillation in horses without hearl fail-
 Regarding dopamine and dobutamine, all the 
ure is
following arc truc, EXCEPT:
(A) procainamidc.
(A) Both agcnts havc a ty. betwecn 10 and
(B) quinidine.
20 minutes.
(C) propranolol.
(B) Both agents have extensive hepatic.
(D)diltiazem.
metabolism.
(E) phenytoin.
(C) Long-term use is limited by βB-receptor
down-regulation.
16. Rcgarding the adversc effects of Class
(D)
 Dopamine, but not dobutamine, stimu-
I antiarrhythmic drugs, which statement is
latcs vasodilatory dopaimincrgic rcccptors.
INCORRECT?
(E) Dopamine is more arrhylhmogenic than
dobutamine.
(A) Central nervous system excilement is the
most common toxic effect of lidocaine.
11. In the same dog as above, you also con-
(B) Cats and horscs are vcry scnsitivc to the
 sider amrinone therapy. All of the following
toxic effects of lidocaine.
are Irue regarding amrinone, EXCEPT:
(C) Exacerbation of arrhythmias is not a
problem with Class IA drugs.
(A) Il acts by inhibiting phosphodieslerase.
(D) Cl upset can occur with quinidine and 
(B) Peak effects occur after 45 minutes of
infusion in dogs.
procainamide.
(E) Marked Q-T interval prolongation can
(C) It can be used orally twice a day.
occur with quinidine.
(D) Vasodilation is also an effect.
(E) It may worsen ventricular arrhythmias.
17. A 9-ycar-old bcaglc has an irregular
heartbeat and lethargy. Radiographs show
12. Drugs which act by blocking β-
moderate cardiomegaly; ECG shows sccond-
adrenergic receptors comprise which class
 of antiarrhythmic agcnts?
degree heart block. Based on the infor-
mation given, appropriate therapy would
(A} Class I
include
{B} Class II
(A) digoxin.
(C) Class III
(B) propranolol.
(D} Class IV
(C) procainamide.
13. Which antiarrhythmic drug is INCOR-
(D) propantheline Bromide.
RECTLY matched with its classificalion?
(E) diltiazcm.
(A) Lidocaine—Class IA
18. Heparin is used in cals after acute throm-
(B) Procainamide—Class IA
boembolism because of its inhibitory effects
(C) Tocainide—Class IB
on coagulation. In combination with an-
(D) Quinidine—Class IA
tithrombin Ill, it neutralizes all the following
{E) Flecainide—Class IC
factors, EXCEPT:
14. When used IV. lidocaine has all of the
(A) XII
following effects, EXCEPT:
(B) XI
(C) X
(A) It usually suppresses premalure ventricu-
(D) IX
lar contractions.
(E) VIII
204
Chapler 8
ANSWERS
AND EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is D (l C 3 a).
ing incrcasc in intraccllular Ca?- leads to a
Cases of acute, fulminanl cardiogenic pul-
positive inotropic effect.
monary edema are most likely to benefit from
preload reduction with a venodilator. In gen-
8. The answer is E (I F 1 b).
eral, a mixed or arteriolar vasodilator is of
The drug sensitizes the contractile filaments
more benefit in most other cases and would
to calcium ion, so can incrcase contractil-
be of benefit here, too. Preload reduction
ity with minimal impact on myocardial O2
would be harmful in cardiac tamponade.
requiremenl.
2. The answer is E (l A 2 c and I E 2).
9. The answer is E (I D 1 e).
Treatment of diastolic dysfunction centers
Cholestyramine will bind digoxin in the gut
on slowing heart rate, decreasing myocardial
and may be helpful immediately affer oral
O2 consumption, and enhancing relaxation.
overdose. All the other conditions predispose
Hydralazine can contribule to increased heart
to toxicity.
rate and possibly worsen any outflow ob-
struction. Digoxin can also do the latter by
10. The answer is A (I D 2).
increasing contractility and increases O2 con-
The ty, of thesc agcnts is less than 2 min-
sumption. Furosemide and captopril may be
utcs; that, as wcll as their rapid hcpatic
indicated but would not address the diastolic
metabolism, mcans they are cffectively given
abnormality.
only by IV infusion.
3. The answer is D (l C 1 c).
11. The answer is C (I D 3).
Bcnazcpril has approximately cqual biliary
Amrinone's shorl ty, necessitates IV admin-
 and renal cxcrction.
istration, usually by constant infusion.
4. The answer is B (I C 2).
12. The answer is B (ll B 2).
Hydralazine is a direct arleriolar dilator. Va-
Beta-blockers are considered Class Il agents
sodilalion is more pronounced in cerebral,
(Vaughn-Williams classification system). Class
coronary, and splanchnic circulations. Hy-
I drugs are the local anesthetics, Class Ill
potension and reflex tachycardia are common
drugs prolong action potcntial duration, Class
side effects. Enhancement of the neurohu-
IV drugs are the Ca?+ entry blockers.
moral response is thought to occur.
13. The answer is A (ll B and Table 8-2).
5. The answer is A (l A 2 d and I D 1 a).
Lidocaine is a Class IB drug, like tocainide.
Digoxin is most often used in the treatment
of myocardial failure, especially when atrial
14. The answer is B (ll B 1 a).
fibrillation cxists. Othcr discascs listcd do not
Lidocaine is generally effective for ventricu-
havc systolic dysfunction.
lar, but not usually for supraventricular (atrial)
tachyarrhythmias. It dccrcascs Na+ conduc-
6. The answer is B (I D 1 d).
tance in automatic cells and does not affect
Absorption is beller with the elixir than the
sinus paccmakcr discharge. It undergoes rapid
tablet form. The olher factors lisled decrease
metabolism by hepatic microsomal cnzymes.
absorption.
15. The answer is B (ll B 1 a).
7. The answer is B (l D 1 b).
Quinidine is often successful in convert-
 Digoxin inhibits Na+, K--ATPase at the my-
ing atrial fibrillation in horses without heart
ocardial cell membrane which allows Na+
failure or significant underlying cardiac dis-
to build up inside the cell; this enhances its
ease. Procainamide is much less effective
cxchangc with extracellular Ca2' . The resull-
for supraventricular arrhythmias. Propranolol
Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System 205
along with digoxin is sometimes used if heart  17. The answer is D (l D 1 a, Il B 1 a,
failure is present; these drugs would be ex-
and Il B 4 a).
pected to slow the ventricular response rate
 Anticholinergic therapy is initially indi-
but not convert the rhythm to sinus rhythm.
cated for symptomatic second-degree heart
Likewise, diltiazem might slow the ventric-
block. The other agents listed are relatively
ular response rate but it is usually not used
or absolutely contraindicated with A-V nodal
clinically. Phenytoin is not used in horses.
disease.
16. The answer is C (ll B 1 e).
18. The answer is E (V A 1).
All antiarrhythmic drugs can have proarrhyth-
The heparin-antithrombin Ill complex neutral-
mic. effects.
izes factors Xll, Xl, X, IX, and Il (thrombin).
This page intentionally left blank
Diuretics
Franklin Ahrens
INTRODUCTION
A_
Diuretics are drugs that incrcasc urinary loss of sodium ions (Na-) and water. By
shrinking cxtracellular fluid (ECF) volume, they mobilize edema fluid irom the intersti-
tial space and restore normal tissue perfusion and organ function. Their primary clini-
cal use in veterinary medicine is in the prevention and treatment of generalized edema
or severe local edema. Causes of generalized edema include congestive heart failure,
liver disease, renal disease, or protein-losing enteropathies. The latter three conditions
are characterized by low levels of plasma albumin because of the impaired synthesis
(liver disease) or excess loss (renal or intestinal disease). The resulting fall in plasma
oncotic pressure results in transudation of fluid from plasma to the interstitial space.
Cerebral, pulmonary, ocular, and udder edema are examples of local edema that 
arises from infection, inflammation, trauma, or poisons.
B.
 All diuretics act directly on renal tubular epitlhelia at specific sites in the nephron (Ta-
ble 9-1). A brief review of ion and water transport in mephron segments is useful in
understanding the action of diuretic: drugs.
1. Proximal convoluted tubule (Figurc 9-1). Sixty-five pcrcent of the filtered sodium
and water is rcabsorbed from this segment. Sodium is absorbed by active trans-
port, coupled transport with glucose and amino acids, and passive diffusion. High
concentrations of carbonic anhydrase (CA) in tubule cells generate hydrogen ions
(CO2 + H2O → H2CO3  H''+ HCO) which exchange for luminal sodium ions
(Na'-H' antiport). Filtered bicarbonate is reabsorbed from the lumen by a rever-
sal of the above reaction (catalyzed by brush border CA) and the diffusion of CO2
into the proxirmal tubule cell. Chloride and potassium are passively reabsorbed.
Absorption is isosmotic since water is reabsorbed with ions. Activation of the renin-
Crcases sodium and waler reabsorption irom this segment.
2. Descending loop of Henle. Sodium and chloride ions are not reabsorbed but be.
come progressively concentrated in luminal fluid as water is osmotically removed
into the hypertonic medullary interstitium.
3. Thick portion of the ascending loop of Henle (Figure 9-2). Twenty-five percent of
the filtered sodium is reabsorbed in this segment. Sodium, potassium, and chlo-
ride are actively transported out of the lumen by a coupled mechanism (Na--K+-
2Cl-symport). The tubule epithelium is impermeable to water. The movement of
ions but not water out of the lumen in this segment is cssential to the countercur-
rent multiplier system of the kicdney which generates the hypertonic-medullary in-
terstitium. Calcium (Ca-+) and magnesium (Mg-+) are passively reabsorbed via the
paracellular pathway. Luminal fluid is hypotonic as it leaves this segment.
4. Early distal convoluted tubule (Figure 9-3). Tern percent of filtered sodiuim is reab-
sorbed in this segiment. Chloride ion is cotransported with sodium. Calcium reab-
sorption is increased by parathyroid hormone (PTH) acting al this segmcnt of the
nephron. The tubule epiihelium is impermeable to waler and thus there is further
cilution of tubular urine.
5. Late distal tubule and collecting duct (Figure 9-4). Four percent of filtered
hydrogen ions are secreted, An increase in the sodium load reaching this seg-
ment tends to increase K and HI secretions as Nal is reabsorbed. Therefore, loop
and thiazide diuretics indirectly increase urinary loss of K! and H’ and tend
207
TABLE 9-1. Site of Actions of Diuretics
Nephron Segment
Diuretic
Proximal convoluted tubule
CA inhibitors (e.g., acetazolamide)
Osmotic agents (c.g., mannitol)
Xanthines (e.g., aninophylline)
Ascending loop of Henle
Loop diuretics (e.g., furosemide)
Osmotic agents
Early distal convoluted tubule
Thiazides (e.g., hydrochlorothiazide)
Late distal tubule and collecting
K' -sparing diuretics (e.g., triamterene or spironolactone)
duct
Lumen
Proximaltubule
Peritubular
capillaries
Na*
→Na+
Na*
Na*
ATP
ase
K+←
K+
Nat
Na+
Na+
H+
H++ HCO3
HCO
+
HCO3
H,CO3
H,CO3
CA
"00+oH
→cO2 + H20
CI-
CI-
FIGURE 9-1. Electrolyte and water transport in the proximal convoluted tubule. Sodium movcs into
the cell down its concentration gradient-maintained by the Na+-K+-ATPase pump on the basolateral
membrane. Sodlium is also absorbed by exchange with H' at the luminal membrane (antiport). Hydro-
gen ion combines with filtered bicarbonale to iorm HzCOs. which is converted to HzO and COy by.
brush border carkonic anhydrase (CA). The reaction is reversed intracellularly. Diuretics that inhibit CA,
such as acctazolamide, increasc cxcretion of Na' and HcO.
208
Diuretics209
Lumen
Peritubular
Thick ascending limb
capillaries
Na
Na
2Cl
CI
FIGURE 9-2. Electrolyle and water
transport in the thick ascending limh
of the loop of Henle. The Na -K'-2Cl-
K
symporter at the luminal membrane 
K
K+
moves these ions into the cell. Part of
the K· diffuses back to the lumen via
CI-
conductance channels to maintain the
lumen-positive transepithelial potential,
(+)
(-)10mv
which provides the driving iorce for the
Ca
paracellular absorption of Ca!! and
Paracellularpathway
Mg--. Inhibition of the symportcr by
Mg
loop diuretics, such as furosemide,
LII
crease excretion of Na , K', Cl-, Ca!!,
and Mg''.
to producc hypokaleimia and imctabolic alkalosis. Aldosteronc acts at this segment
 to incrcasc luminal sodium channcls resulting in increased sodium ahsorption and
potassium excretion. Water is reabsorbed only if antidiuretic. hormone (ADH) is
present.
LOOP (HIGH-CEILING) DIURETICS
A.
Preparations and chemistry. Furoscmide and bumclanide are slructurally relaled (o
sulfonarmides. Ethacrynic acid is a derivation of phcnoxyacetic acid. All arc carboxylic
acids. Furosemide is the most commonly used loop diuretic. in veterinary medicine.
B.
Mechanism of action. Loop diuretics inhibit electrolyte reabsorption in the thick as-
cending limb of the loop of Henle. They act at the luminal face of the epithelial cell 
Lumen
Early distal tubule
Peritubular
capillaries
Na
a
CI
FIGURE 9-3. Absorption of sodium and
chloride in the distal convoluted tubule
is linked by a Na -Cl- symportcr in
the luminal membrane. Thiazide diuret-
ics inhibit the symporler and increase
cxcretion of Na and CI.
210
Chapter 9 1Il B
Lumen
Peritubularcapillaries
Principal cell
Nat
Na*
Na*
K+
K
K
Aldosterone
FIGURE 9-4. Electrcolyte transport in tlie
receptors
distal tubule and collecting duct. In the
principal cell, sodium inoves down its
clectrochemical gradient into the coll
through Na+ charmels in the luminal
membrane. Potassium moves from the
cell into the lumen via K+ charnels in
mRNA
the luminal membrane driven by the 
←
AIP
lumen-negative transepithelial potential.
（+）15mv
(-)
This potential also aids the transport of
H- into the lumen by the H+-ATPasc
pump in the intercalated cell. Potassium-
Intercalated cell
sparing diuretics such as triamterene
and amiloride block luminal sodiun
HCO
HCO
channels to reduce Na'absorption and
K- cexcretion. Aldosterone stimulates
the production of aldosterone-induced
CI
proteins (AlP), which increases lumi-
CA
nal sodium channels to increase Na'
O°H+0
absorption.
to inhibil Na+-K+-2Cl-cotransport into the cell. They have a rapid onset of action
with peak diuresis greater than other classes of diuretics. Calcium and magnesium ion
absorption from the ascending loop of Henle are also inhibited because of the de-
Creased lumen-positive transepithelial potential. Diuretic action is independent of uri-
nary pH. Loop diuretics produce an increase in systemic venous capacitance which
may be due to their ability to stimulate prostaglandin release by the juxtaglomerular
apparatus.
Therapeutic uses
1. Loop diuretics are the drugs of choice for the rapid mobilizalion of edema iluid
arising from congestive heart failure, liver disease, or other causes of generalized
edema, and for pulmonary, cerebral, or udder edema.
2. Furosemide increases urinary calcium excretion and is used in the treatment of hy-
percalcemia and hypercalcuric. nephropathy in dogs and cals.
3. Furosemide may be combined with osmotic diuretics such as mannitol to maintain
urine flow in severe oliguria and acute renal failure.
4. Furosemide is used for the prevention of exercise-induced pulmonary hemorrhage
(EIPH) and epistaxis in racehorses. Its efficacy in this condition may be related to
increased blood vessel capacitance and decreased left atrial pressure.
D
Pharmacokinetics. Furosemide, bumetanide, and ethacrynic acid are well absorbed
orally. They are actively secreted into urine by the organic acid transport system of the
proximal convoluted tubule and thus rapidly reach their site of action in the loop of
Henle. Furosemide is excreted in the urine as unchanged drug (80%) or as the glu-
curonide (20%). The plasma ty,. is 1-2 hours for most species and the duration of di-
uresis is 3-6 hours for a single oral dose. lf administered intravenously, the onset of
diuresis is 2-20 minutes with a duration of 2 hours.
Administration
F
1. For the treatment of edema, furosemide is administered orally or intravenously
three times a day for diuresis in dogs and cats and twice a day in cattle and
Diuretics211
horses. Treatment for udder edema in cattle should not exceed 48 hours
postpartum.
 2. For the treatment of oliguric renal failure, furosemide is administered intravenously
at hourly intervals until diuresis occurs.
3. For the prevention of EIPH, furosemide is administered intravcnously to horses 1-2
hours prior to a racc for EIPH prevention. Rules of use arc govcrned by stalc racing
authorities.
4. For the treatment of hypercalcemia or hypercalcuric nephropathy in dogs and cats,
furosemide is administered in KCl-supplemented saline, intravenously, once or twice
a day.
Adverse effects
1. Fluid and electrolyte imbalances (especially hypokalemia) are the most common ad-
verse effects, High or prolonged doses may produce dehydration, muscle weakness,
CNS depression, volume depletion, and cardiovascular collapse. Cats are more sen-
sitive than dogs to the effects of loop diuretics and lower doses are used in this
species.
 2. Loop diuretics may alter electrolyte balance in the endolymph of the inner ear.
Deafness is a risk if a polentially ototoxic: drug (e.g., an aminoglycoside antibi-
otic) is administered concomitantly. In such circumstances, another class of diuretic
should be employcd.
 3. Transient granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia may occur.
THIAZIDE DIURETICS (BENZOTHIADIAZIDES)
A.
Preparations and chemistry. The thiazides are heterocyclic compounds whose structure
includes a benzene ring with an unsubstituted sulfonamide group (-SONH2).
Chlorothiazide and hydrochlorothiazide are the mosl common thiazides used in
velerinary medicine,
 B. Mechanism of action
1. The thiazide diurelics block Na--Cl- cotransporl in the early parl of distal tubule.
Sodium, chloride, magnesium, and potassium ion excretion are increased. Cal-
cium ion excretion is decrcased becausc thiazides increase Ca+- absorption in the
early distal tubule. Thiazide diuresis tends to be moderate since 90% of the filtered
sodium has been reabsorbed from the nephron by the time it reaches the distal
segment. Urinary excretion of ions tends to be in physiological ratios and thus dis-
tortion of ECF ion balance is minimal.
2. Thiazides are weak inhibitors of CA hul at normal doscs this does not contribute to
their diuretic action.
 3. Paradoxically, thiazides reduce urine output in diabetes insipidus. The mechanism
of this action is unknown but is related to their natriuretic effect.
 4. Thiazides may induce hyperglycemia and glycosuria in diabetic or prediabetic
states by inhibiting the conversion of proinsulin to insulin.
C..
Therapeutic uses
1. Chlorothiazide and hydrochlorothiazide are useful for long-term diuretic therapy
in dogs and cats as adjuncls to cardiac drugs in the treatmenl of congestive heart
failure. Hydrochlorothiazide and trichlormethiazide are used in the treatment of
udder edema in cattle.
2. Thiazide diuretics are effective in reducing urine output in nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus in dogs.
3. Hydrochlorothiazide reduces urinary calcium ion excretion and is used for the
treatment of calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs.
212 |Clhapter 9 I D
D.
Pharmacokinetics. Pharmacokinetics studies of thiazides in animals have not been re-
ported. In man, oral absorption is 10-20% and 65-75% for chlorothiazide and hy-
drochlorothiazide, respectively. Onset of diuresis occurs in 2 hours and peaks in 4-6
hours. Duration of action is 6-12 hours. They are not metabolized and are excreted in
the urine by active tubular secrclion.
E.
Administration
1. For the treatment of cdema in hearl failure, chlorothiazide or hycrochlorothiazide is
administered orally twice a day in dogs and cats. A diuretic response occurs in 2-3
hours and lasts 6-12 hours.
2. For the treatment of recurrent calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs with hypercalcuria.
hydrochlorothiazide is administered orally twice a day.
3. For the treatment of udder edema in catle, hydrochlorothiazide is administered
intravenously or intramuscularly twice a day. Trichlormethiazide is combined with
dexamethasone in a proprietary preparation (Naquasone) administered orally once a
day.
4. For the treatment of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, chlorothiazide or hy-
drochlorothiazide is administered orally twice a day.
F.Adverse effects. The moderate diuresis produced by thiazide results in less distur-
bancc of ECF clectrolyle balance than othcr classes of diuretics. Hypokalcmia and
hypochloremia may develop with high or prolonged doses. Hyperglycemia may oc-
cur and may aggravate preexisting diabetes mellitus.
OSMOTIC DIURETICS
A.
Preparations and chemistry. Mannitol is a six-carbon sugar alcohol prepared as a 20-
25% aqueous solution. It is the most important member in this class of diuretics. Clyc-
erol and urea are used less frequently. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) prepared as a 10%
solution in 5% dextrose has been used to treat edema in horses.
B.
 Mechanism of action
1. Osmotic diuretics are filtered at the glomerulus but are poorly reabsorbed from the
Iumen of the nephron, The presence of these unabsorbed solutes in the proximal
tubule causcs decrcased rcabsorption of walcr, resulting in a large volume of urine.
There is a small increase in Na' and Cl- excretion. Mannitol causes an increase in
renal medullary blood flow via a prostaglandin-mediated mechanism. This reduces
medullary tonicity, decreases extraction of water in the descending loop of Henle.
and thus lowers the concentration of NaCl and the passive reabsorption of NaCl in
the thick ascending loop of Henle.
C.Therapeutic uses
1. For the nonspecific treatment of poisoning in dogs and cats, mannitol is used to
induce forced diuresis which hastens the elimination of poisons excreted by the
kidney.
2. For the treatment of oliguric renal failure in dogs and cats mannitol is used as an
adjunct to furosemide therapy. The osmotic expansion of the plasma increases
glomerular filtration volume and maintains urine flow. Urine output must be moni-
lored.
3. For the treatment of increased intraocular pressure of acute glaucoma in dogs and
cats, osmotic diuretics such as mannitol or glycerin are used to reduce intraocular
pressure.
4. For the treatment of cerebral edema in large and small animals, mannitol is used
 as an adjunct to furosemide to mobilize edema fluid. In addition to its diuretic
Diuretics 213
effect, mannitol may prevent the hypovolemic shock commonly observed in cere-
bral edema.
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. Mannilol is administercd intravcnously for osmolic diuresis since
oral ahsorption is poor. It distributcs to the ECF, is not mclabolizcd, and is excrcted by
renal glomerular filtration. The plasma t', is 1-2 hours.
E.Administration. Mannitol solutions (5-20%) are administered by slow intra-
venous infusions over 15-30 minutes in all species. Doses may be repeated every
6-8 hours.
 Adverse effects. Toxicity is rare but fluid and electrolyte balance and urine output
should be monitored, especially in the treatment of oliguric renal failure. Manni-
tol should not be used in generalized edema or acute pulmonary edema because its
saluretic effect is small and because it produces an initial expansion of the ECF which
may exacerbate the edema and may cause decompensation in patients with congestive
heart failure.
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
A.
 Preparations and chemistry. Acctazolamidc, methazolamidc, and dichlorphenamidc
are sulfonamide derivates.
B.
 Mechanism of action. These agents roversibly inhibit CA cnzyme predominantly in
the proximal convoluled tubules, causing a recuction in hycrogen ions available for
Na'-H! exchange. Carbon dioxide (CO) reabsorption from the glomerular filtrate is
suppressed, and Na+-HCO, excretion is increased, resulting in an alkaline urine. To
maintain ionic balance, Cl- is retained by the kidney, resulting in a hyperchloremic
acidosis. The resulting metabolic acidosis (low plasma HCO) eventually induces a
refraclory slale and decreased diuresis.
High concentrations of CA occur in the ciliary process of the eye and the enzyme
is involved in aqueous humor formation. CA inhibitors reduce intraocular pressure in
glaucoma by decreasing the production of aqueous humor.
C.
Therapeutic uses. The primary use of CA inhibitors is for reducing the rate of aqueous
humor formation in the treatment of glaucoma. They are occasionally used as adjuncts
in the treatment of metabolic alkalosis. Their diuretic action is weak and they are sel-
dom used for this purposc now.
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. Acetazolamide and dichlorphenamide are absorbed orally. dis-
tributed to tissues with high CA concentrations (renal cortex, eye, and erythrocytes),
and excreted by the kidney by active secretion and passive reabsorption. Onset of di-
uretic action is 30 minutes with a duration of 6-12 hours in small animals. In horses,
after IV administration, the distribution fy, is 60 minutes, and the elimination fy, is
~7.5 hours. After oral administration in horses, the time to reach peak plasma level is
~2 hours. Bioavailability of acetazolamide in horses is only ~25%.
Administration. For glaucoma, acetazolamide, methazolamide, ethazolamide, or
E.
dichlorphenamide are given orally 2-3 times daily. In acute cases, a single intravenous
dose of acetazolamide is given followed by an oral dosage regimen,
F.
Adverse effects. Toxicity is rare. Gastrointestinal disturbances, especially vomiting, may
occur with oral administration. CA inhibilors are contraindicated in the prcsence of
liver disease because they may precipitate hepatic coma by diverting ammonia pro-
duced in the kidney from the urine to the systemic circulation as a result of urine alka-
linization.
214
Chapter 9VlA
Vl.
POTASSIUM-SPARING DIURETICS
A.
Preparations and chemistry. Triamterene and amiloride are cyclic amidines and are
organic bases. Spironolactone is a sleroid analog of the mineralocorlicoid aldosterone.
B.
 Mechanism of action, Triamtercnc and amiloride inhibit active Na rcabsorption in the
distal convoluled tubule and collecting ducl. This reduces the net driving force for K-
secretion. They cause a small increase in Na+ and Cl- excretion without increasing K+
excrelion, Their action is independent of aldoslerone.
 Spironolactone is a competitive antagonist of the mineralocorticoid aldosterone
It rcduccs the aldostcronc-mcdiatcd Na' -K! exchange at the late distal convoluted
tubulc, incrcasing Na+ loss while decreasing K+ loss. Spironolactone is most effective
when circulating aldosterone levels are high.
C.
 Therapeutic uses. Triamterene or amiloride is occasionally used in combination with
thiazides or loop diuretics in chronic. edema. The combination augments the natriuretic
effect while attenualing K- loss.
Spironolactone is occasionally used as an adjunct to other diuretics in the treatment
of refractory cdema if exccssive K+ loss is a concern. Spironolactonc is also used to
treal adrenal gland tumors to counler the excess mineralocorticoid effects of aldos-
terone (sodium retention and potassium excretion).
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. Triamterene and amiloride are absorbed orally. Amiloride is ex-
crcted unchangcd by the kidncy. Triamterenc is convertcd by thc liver to an activc
metabolile—hydroxytriamterene. Both drugs are transported by the organic base se-
cretory mechanism in the proximal tubule. Hydroxytriamterene can further form the
sulfate conjugate. Peak onset of diuresis is 6-8 hours with a duration of 12-15 hours.
Spironolaclone is absorbed orally, bound to plasma proleins, and is exlensively me-
tabolized by the liver. The active metabolite, canrenone, has a long half-life (16-20
hours). Diuretic action is prolonged with a duration of 2-3 days.
E,
 Administration. Triamtcrene is administered orally twicc a day in dogs and cats.
Amiloride is administered orally once a day.
 Spironolactone is administered orally twice a day in dogs and cats.
E.
Adverse effects. Hyperkalemia can occur and thus K+ diuretics are not given in com-
bination with one another and are contraindicated in hypcrkalemic paticnts. Hyper-
kalemia is especially likely in the presence of diabetes mellitus, renal disease, or
thromboembolic disease. Gastrointestinal disturbances, including nausea and vomit-
ing, may occur,
Mll.
METHYLXANTHINES
A.
Mechanism of action. The methylxanthines include aminophylline, theophylline, caf-
fcinc, and thcobrominc. Their diuretic cffect is due to increascd rcnal blood flow and
glomerular filtration rale and to inhibition of sodium reabsorplion in the proximal con-
voluted tubule. Diuresis is enhanced by an alkaline urine and thus greater in herbi-
vorcs than carnivorcs. Thcy also produce bronchodilation by inhibition of adcnosinc
receptors and are CNS stimulants.
B.
Therapeutic uses. Methylxanthines are rarely used as diuretics but increased urine out-
put is observed when aminophylline or theophylline is employed as a bronchodilator
in respiralory disease therapy.
Diurctics  215
C.Pharmacokinetics of theophylline
1. Absorption. Theophylline bioavailability after oral administration is ~100% when
nonsustained release products are used, but is 30-75% if sustained release products
are usod.
2. Distribution. Theophylline is distributed throughout the ECF and body tissues. Be
cause of the low volumes of distribution (o.5-1 L/kg) and thcophylline's low lipid
solubility, obese patients should be dosed on a lean body weight basis.
3. Elimination. Thcophylline is mctabolized primarily in the liver (in humans) to 3-
methylxanthine, an active metabolite. Renal clearance contributes only about 10%
to the overall plasma clearance of theophylline. The reported elimination ty, are:
dogs, ~6 hours; cats, ~8 hours, pigs, 11 hours; and horses, 12-17 hours.
D. Adverse effects. Methylxanthine may produce excitement, skeletal muscle fascicula-
tion, vomiting, and cardiovascular toxicity including palpitations and hypotension with
high or prolonged dosage.
Vll.
ACIDIFYING SALTS
A.
 Mechanism of action. Acidifying salts such as ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) lower
the pH of ECF and urine. The liver converts NH4Cl to urea, H+ and CI-. Hydrogen
jon is buffered by HcO3 in plasma and this leads to acidosis. The increased chloride
load to the kidney produces urinary loss of Nat and Cl- and a mild diuresis.
Therapeutic uses. Ammonium chloride is used for urinary acidification to dissolve
uroliths or to prevent their formation. It is also used to enhance the renal excretion of
ionizable drugs or poisons by ion trapping in the urine.
 Administration, Ammonium chloride is administered orally two to three times a day
L
or added to the diet in dogs and cats.
D. Adverse effects. Severe, uncompensated acidosis may result if renal function is im-
paircd. Nausca and gastric irritation may occur with oral dosing. Ammonium chloridc
is contraindicated in the presence of decreased liver function because of the require-
ment for its hepatic conversion to urca described under mechanism of action above.
SUGGESTED READING
http://www.drugs.com
Jackson EK. 2006. "Drugs affecting renal and cardiovascular function." In Goodman & Gilman's The
769. New York: McGraw-Hill.
8th ed., pp. 534-552. Ames, IA: lowa State University Press,
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
216
Chapter 9
STUDY
QUEStIOn S
DIRECTIONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Selccl the one leltered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. In cases of severe generalized edema,
(A) ethacrynic acid.
which of the following fluid compartments
(B)dichlorphenamide.
is increased in volume?
(C)  mannitol.
(D) triamterene.
(A) Intracellular
{B)Interstitial
6. A veterinarian is presented with a dog
(C) Transcellular
(L) Plasma
exhibiting signs of diabetes insipidus which
docs not respond to desmopressin (synthctic
 analog of pituitary ADH). Paradoxically, urine
2. Hypoalbuminemia underlies the edema
output may decrease following treatment with
arising from all of the following EXCEPT
(A) amiloride.
(A) hepatic disease.
(B) aminophylline.
(B) congestive heart failure.
(C) renal discasc.
(C)  chlorothiazide.
(D) acetazolamide.
(D) protein-losing enteropathy.
(E) ammonium chloride.
3. In the presence of renal disease, hyper-
7. The high-ceiling or loop diuretics such as
kalemia may occur after the administration
furosemide, ethacrynic acid, or bumetanide
of
(A) have a slow onset of action since they
(A) mannitol.
are bound to plasma albumin.
{B)  triamterene.
(B)  are the diuretics of choice in acute pul-
(C)furosemide.
monary edema.
(D) chlorothiazide.
(C) are useful in treating aminoglycoside an-
tibiotic toxicity since they increase renal
4. Which of the following statements con-
cxcretion of this class of antimicrobials.
cerning furosemide is nof fruc?
(D) are potentiated by CA inhibitors such
(A) It tends to produce a metabolic alkalosis
as acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide
via urinary loss of hydrogen, potassium,
because they require an alkaline urine
and chloride.
for their diuretic action.
(B) It decreases calcium reabsorption in the
loop of Henle and increascs urinary cal-
8. Excessive sodium retention and potassium
cium loss.
cxcretion resulting from aldoslerone-secreting
(C) It may increase capacitance of pul-
 adrenal gland tumors may be treated with
monary blood vessels and reduce epis-
(A)furosemide.
taxis (nosebleed) in racehorses.
(D) It blocks Na+-K+-2Cl--coupled transport 
(B)chlorothiazide.
(C) triamterene.
in the ascending loop of Henle.
(D) spironolactone.
(E) It is less polent ithan agents which act al
the proximal convoluted tubule.
9. Intravenous mannitol (5%) would be indi-
Caled in all of the following clinical situations
5. An alkaline urine and a decreased rate
 of aqucous humor formation in glaucoma is
EXCEPT
produced by
(A)  oliguria arising from traumatic shock.
Diuretics  217
(B) ingestion of toxic. amounts of cleaning
(B) ethacrynic acid.
 solution containing potassium oxalate.
(C) urea.
(C) generalized edema arising from conges-
(D) spironolactone.
tive heart failure.
(E) triamterene.
(D) cerebral edema resulting from trauma.
(E) increased intraocular pressure of narrow
11. Hyperglycemia via inhibition of the con-
angle glaucoma.
version of proinsulin to insulin may occur
with
10. A diuretic which decreases calcium ex-
cretion via increased absorption in the distal
(A) thiazides.
tubule and is thus used to prevent calcium
(B) loop diuretics.
(C) CA inhibitors.
oxalate bladder stones, is
(D) methylxanthines.
(A) hydrochlorothiazide.
DIRECTIONs: The group of items in this section consists of lettered options followed by a
set of numbered items. For each item, select the one lettered option that is most closely
associated with it. Each lettered option may be selected once, more than once, or not at
all.
Questions 12-15
16. Which of the following is contraindicated
For each of the following diuretic agents,
in patients with liver disease because of the
choose the anatomic site in the renal
danger of precipitating hepatic coma?
nephron where the principal action of the
agent occurs.
(A) Hydrochlorothiazide
(B) Acetazolamide
(A) Glomerulus
(C) Furosemide
(B)Proximal tubule
(D) Spironolactone
(C) Ascending limb of the loop of Henle
(D) Distal tubule—early part
17. Fluid and electrolyte imbalance
(E) Late distal tubule and collecting duct
leading to dehydration, muscle weakness,
hypokalemia, and CNS depression may
12. Acetazolamide
result from high or prolonged dosage
with
13. Spironolactone
(A) chlorothiazide.
14. Furosemide
(B) amiloride.
(C) furosemide.
15. Chlorothiazide
(D) theophylline.
218
Chapter 9
ANSWERS ANd
EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is B.
acid, mannitol, and triamterene do not inhibit
Generalized edema results from accu-
CA.
 mulation of fluid in the interstitial space. In
severe edema, this compartment may nearly
6. The answer is C.
double in volume. Intracellular, transcellular,
The thiazide diuretics decrease urine
and plasma volumes are minimally affected.
volume in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
The mechanism is not completely understood
2. The answer is B.
but sodium depletion, increased Na and 
Renal disease and protein-losing en-
Cl- absorption in the proximal tubule and
teropathy result in loss of plasma proteins
reduced volume delivered to the distal
and plasma protein synthesis by the liver is
nephron, may enhance the action of ADH.
decreased in hepatic disease. These condi-
This effect is not observed with other classes
tions result in hypoalbuminemia, decreased
of diuretics.
plasma oncotic pressure, and transudation
of fluid from blood vessels to the interstitial
7. The answer is B.
 space, Plasma albumin concentrations are not 
Loop diuretics may potentiate the oto-
changed in congestive heart failure.
toxicity of the aminoglycoside antibiotics
and should not be used with this class of
3. The answer is B.
antimicrobials. They have a rapid onset of
Triamterene is a potassium-sparing di-
action and produce peak diuresis which
uretic that inhibits active sodium reabsorption
is greater than other classes of diuretics.
in the distal tubule and collecting duct,
They are useful in the rapid mobilization of
 Potassium retention may produce hyper-
edema fluid in life-threatening conditions
kalemia in the presence of renal disease.
such as pulmonary edema. Their action is
Mannitol, furosemide, and chlorothiazide are
independent of urinary pH.
not potassium-sparing diurctics.
8. The answer is D.
4. The answer is E.
Mineralocorticoid such as aldosterone
Furosemide increases hydrogen, potas-
is secreted in large amounts by adrenal
sium, and chloride ion cxcretion rates which
gland tumors and produce excessive sodium
produces a melabolic alkalosis. Calcium re-
retention and potassium excretion by the
absorption in the loop of Henle is decreased
kidneys. Spironolactone is a competitive
because of the loss of transccllular potential
 antagonist of aldosterone and ameliorates
produced by blockade of Na--K+-2Cl-
the effects of the hormone. Furosemide,
cotransport. Blood vessel capacitance is
chlorothiazide, or triamterene do not affect
increased and this may prevent exercise-
aldosterone actions.
induced pulmonary hemorrhage in horses.
Loop diuretics are more potent than agents
9. The answer is C.
which act at the proximal tubules because
Osmotic diuretics produce an initial in-
compensatory mechanisms for sodium
crease in blood volume which can cause
rcabsorption are limited beyond the loop of
decompensation in patients with congestive
Henle.
heart failure. In addition, they are not
effective in generalized edematous states
5. The answer is B.
because their saluretic action is weak. They
Dichlorphenarmide is a CA inhibilor
are effective in oliguria, forced diuresis in
which reduces Na'-H! cxchange in the
cases of poisoning, cerebral edema, and
proximal convoluted tubule and thus HCO
glaucoma.
ion is excreted and the urine becomes
alkaline. CA activity is required for aqueous
10. The answer is A.
humor formation and thus thc inhibition of
The thiazide diuretics stimulate Ca++
this cnzyime by dichlorphenaimide reduccs
reabsorption in the early distal tubule and
intraocular prcssure in glaucoma. Ethacrynic
reduce urinary calcium concentrations. This
Diurelics  219
action may aid in preventing the formation
of several thiazide diuretics. The thiazides
of calcium oxalate uroliths. Loop diuretics
act primarily on the early part of the distal
increase calcium excretion. Spironolactone,
convoluted tubule to block Na+ and Cl-
triamterene, or urea does not affect calcium
reabsorption.
excretion.
16. The answer is B.
11. The answer is A.
CA inhibitors, such as acetazolamide,
Thiazides may produce hyperglycemia
increase urinary bicarbonate excretion and
by slowing the conversion of proinsulin to
produce an alkaline urine. This eliminates the
insulin. The effect is most prominent in the
driving force for ammonia excretion into the
diabetic or prediabetic state. This effect does 
urine to eliminate H+ by forming NHz which
not occur with loop diuretics, CA inhibitors,
is excreted. The ammonia produced by distal
Or the methylxanthines.
tubules is reabsorbed to the blood instead
of excreted in urine. Ammonia is converted
12-15. The answers are: 12-B, 13-E,
to urea by the liver and if liver function is
14-C, 15-D.
impaired, blood levels of ammonia rise and
Although acetazolamide acts on both
may precipitate hepatic coma.
the proximal and distal convoluted tubules,
its effects on the proximal tubules are
17. The answer is C.
quantitatively most important for its diuretic
The toxic: efects of loop diuretics such
actions because CA concentrations are
as furosemide are an extension of their
highest in this segment. Spironolactone, a
therapeutic effects. Their potent diuretic
K+-sparing diuretic, acts as a competitive
action may deplete the body of water
antagonist of aldosterone. The receptor
and electrolytes and lead to dehydration,
for aldosterone is located in the distal
hypokalemia, muscle weakness, and
convoluted tubule and thus this is the site of
CNS depression if administered in high or
action for spironolactone. Furosemide is a
prolonged dosage. These adverse effects
high-ceiling diuretic and, like ethacrynic acid,
 are less likely to occur with less potent
it inhibits reabsorption in the ascending limb
diuretics such as chlorothiazide, amiloride,
of the loop of Henle. Chlorothiazide is one
or theophylline.
This page intentionally left blank
ter
10
Respiratory Pharmacology
Dean H. Riedesel
INTRODUCTION. The primary function of the respiratory systcm is gas cxchange
bctwcen the inspired air and the pulmonary artery blood. Becausc of the large sur-
face area of the alveoli and exposure to the environment, this organ system is prone
to antigen-allergy responses and infection. The defenses of the respiratory system in-
clude hypersecretion of mucus, sneezing and coughing reflexes, bronchoconstriction,
and macrophage activation and inflammation. Pharmacology of the respiratory system
centers around these defense mechanisms and can be simplified into seven categories:
(11 elimination of excess secretions and membrane congestion, (2) bronchiole dilation
when excessive constriction has occurred, (3) cough suppression when it is nonpro-
ductive and detrimental to the animal, (4) control of infection and inilammation, (5)
 central respiratory center, and (7) exogenous surfactant,
SECRETIONS. A thin layer of mucus coats the surface of all airways from the bron-
chioles to the larynx. This mucus is secreted by Clara cells, goblet cells, and sub-
mucosal bronchial glands located within the respiratory epithelium. Mucus protects
airways by entrapping inhaled particles, humidifying inspired air, and maintaining
mucosal hydration. Cilia, on the apical surface of respiratory epithelial cells, propel
mucus out of simaller airways into the trachea and up to the larynx to be swallowed
Or cxpccloralcd. The mucociliary escalalor is cssential for the removal of airway sc-
cretions, pathogens, cellular debris, and inhaled particulatc matter from the respiratory
Iract. Mucoprotein content of the mucus and transepithelial movement of water and
ions determine the viscosity of normal mucus. Thick mucus can also he due to the
presence of bacterial and neutrophil cellular debris. The cough reflex is very impor-
tant for clearance of viscous mucus. Too much mucus narrows the lumen of bronchi
restricting airflow and stimulates coughing. If coughing does not rid the airway of
mucus, there are several pharimacologic options in addition to treating the underlying
respiratory disease.
Increasing or facilitating the removal of excess, accumulated secretions. By decreas-
ing the viscosity of these bronchial secretions, the normal action of the cilia and
reflex coughing may be more effective.
1. Methods designed to loosen secretions by hydration of the mucus.
a. Nebulizer (aerosol) thcrapy with sterile or bacteriostatie water or saline produces
when inhaled, will acld water to the airway mucus layer.
b. Always use physiotherapy in conjunction with nebulization.
(1) Improve tidal ventilation by mild-forced exercise aiter nebulization.
(2) Manually stimulating a cough reflex via chest wall coupage, vibration. or 
tracheal manipulation.
c. Efficacy is debatablc.
d. Small volume jet or ultrasonic: nebulizers produce particles of 0.5-3 microns,
which are best for dleposition in the lower respiratory tract.
221
222Chapter 10 Il A
e. Large volume aerosol therapy imay be beneficial in lobar pneumonia. Done with
a bland aerosol (sterilc saline) in an encloscd cage with a large ultrasonic nebu-
lizer for 30-45 minutes 2-4 times per day.
2. N-Acetylcysteine (N-acetyl-l-cysteine) is a derivative of I-cysteine and acts as a mu-
colytic drug.
a. N-Acetylcysteine (NAC) breaks the disulide bonds within the mucus molecules
 and decreases the viscosity.
b. NAC will not only alter the viscosity of normal mucus but also the thick
mucus that results from the addition of bacterial and neutrophil cellular
debris.
c. This drug is usually aerosolized and inhaled by the patient, but a powder form
is available and can be formulatcd for oral usc.
d. Proven benefits from NAC have not been demonstrated in veterinary patients
 and aerosolized, it may cause airway irritation and bronchoconstriction.
3. Bromhexine HCl is a frequently prescribed mucolytic.
 a. Enhances the hydrolysis of acid mucopolysaccharides that significantly
contributes to mucus viscosity.
b. Does not alter protein in the mucus, which originates from bacteria or neu-
trophil cellular debris.
C. May increase the concentration of certain antibiotics in the alveoli by altering
the permeability of the alveolar/capillary membranes.
B.
Expectorants theoretically make the bronchiole secretions less viscous but their
 efficacy is questionable.
1. Potassium iodide is an oral saline expectorant, which causes irritation to the
 gastric mucosa that in turn increases bronchiole secretion through a vagal
reflex.
 2. Guaifenesin is a guaiacol (wood tar) derivative that acts as an expectorant and in-
 Creases airway particle clearance in humans.
a. Guaifenesin may slimulate the gastric mucosa and incrcase respiratory tracl se-
cretions via reflex.
b. The volume and viscosily of sccrctions does not appcar to change.
c. This compound is primarily found in over-the-counter human cough prepara-
tions.
 Decongestants shrink the nasal mucosa and allow air to pass more freely. Sinusitis or
.
reverse sneezing are other indications for decongestants.
1. H,-antihistamines are commonly used for allergic-induced symptoms and chronic
rhinitis in people but efficacy in animals is not documented. (See Chapter 3 for the
pharmacology of H, -antihistamines.)
a.
Diphenhydramine
b. Dimenhydrinate
C.
Chlorpheniramine
d.Hydroxyzine
2. Sympathomimctic drugs (α-reccptor agonists) may be given orally or topically as
nasal sprays to avoid iheir syslcmic cffccts. However, nasal sprays are not well
tolerated in animals. Their primary cffcct is to constrict the prccapillary artcrioles,
reduce blood flow, and reduce the extracellular fluid in the nasal mucosa. Nasal
discharge consequently will be reduced and resistance to airflow through the nasal
cavity will decrease. (See Chapter 2 for information on the pharmacology of sympa-
thomimetics.)
a.
 Ephedrine
b. Pseudoephedrine
C.
 Phenylephrine. This drug has been used to relieve anesthesia (recumbency)-
induced nasal congestion and edema in horses. About 30 minutes before anes-
thetic recovery and removal of the endotracheal tube, phenylephrine is sprayed
or squirted into the ventral meatus of each nostril with the external nares ele-
vated.
Respiratory Pharmacology 223
CONTROL OF INFECTION AND INFLAMMATION.Antibioticchoice should
ideally be based on culture and sensitivity or cytology with a Gram's stain.
Antibacterial drugs that have a good spectrum of activity. (See Chapter 15 for informa-
tion on the pharmacology of antibacterial drugs.!
1. Upper airway disease-Gram-positive spectrum is best.
 2. Lower airway disease-Gram-negative spectrum is best.
a. Cephalosporins
b. Potentiated sulfonamides
c. Amoxicillin
d. Amoxicillin/clavulanate
e. Fluoroquinolones
3. Aerosolized antibiotics may be helpful in selected cases of infectious tracheobron-
chitis.
B
Glucocorticoids
1. Corticosteroids are important for the treatment of antigen-induced inflammatory
bronchial disease such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (heaves) in horses
and feline bronchial disease (asthma), as well as chronic bronchitis in dogs. Gluco-
corticoids reduce mucus hypersecretion, bronchial mucosal thickening, and airway
smooth muscle constriction. (See Chapter 12 for more information on glucocorti-
coids.)
a. Oral intermediate-acting steroids are preferred for ease of dosage adjustments.
(1) Prednisolone
(2) Prednisone
b. Fluticasone is an inhaled glucocorticoid that is being used more frequently in
animals.
(1) It is available in a multidose inhaler (MDl) for human inhalalion.
(2) An animal mask and spacer are needed for administration.
(3) It has 18x the affinity of dexamethasone for human glucocorticoid receptors.
(4) Only 30% of the administered dose reaches the airways of the lung.
(5) It may take 1-2 weeks of administralion to see the maximum effects.
c. For other inhaled glucocorticoid aerosol drugs see Table 10-1.
 Leukotriene receptor antagonists are a new type of therapy. Leukotrienes are potent
 bronchoconstric.tors and trigger inilammatory responses such as edema formation.
1. These modulators of inflammation can be used instead of corticosteroids
2. Drugs that antagonizc leukotriene reccptors are zafirlukast, zileulon, and mon-
telukast.
3. Zafirlukast has been tested in cats with experimental asthma and found not to be
beneficial.
4. Whether these drugs are of any use in respiratory therapy is yet to be determined.
D
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are seldom used to treat inflammatory respira-
tory diseases because they tend to inhibit cyclooxygenase more than lipooxygenase en-
zymes. Aspirin has been used in the treatment of thromboembolism in cases of hearl-
worm disease.
E.
Serotonin receptor inhibition may be beneficial for feline "asthma." Cyproheptadine
is the only drug in this category currently thought to be beneficial. (See Chapter 3 for
information on cyproheptadine.)
E. Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressant drug but has been shown to be beneficial in
experimental models of feline bronchial disease "asthma."
G.
Mast cell stabilizers are used in human medicine to treat allergic asthma. These
Cromones, cromoglycate and nedocromil, prevent the release of inflammatory
224Chapter 10 l G
TABLE 10-1. Drugs Available as Metered Dose lnhalers (MDl)
Drug Class
Generic Name
Indication
Comments
Bronchodilator-
Albuterol
Immediate relief
Effect is short lived
β2-agonists
(<4 hours)
Pirbuterol
Immediate relief
No animal data
Salmcterol
Long-term (12-lhour)
Onset of action >1
control
hour
Bitolterol
Immediate relief
No animal data 
Metaproterenol
Immedliate relief
No animal data
Terbutaline
Immediate relier
No animal data
Pirbuterol
Immediate relief
No animal data
Anticholinergic
Ipratropium bromide
Additive
No animal data
agenl
hronchodilation with
β2-agonists 
Anti-inflammatory
Fluticasone
Long-term control of
Takes 10-14 days to)
coiticosteroids
propionate
inflammation
reacli peak effect
Flunisolide
l.ong-term control oi
No animal dala
inflammation
Budesonide
Long-term control of
No animal data
inflamnation
Beclomethasone
Long-term control of
No animal data
dipropionate 
inflanmation
Triamcinolone
Long-term control oi
No animal dala
inflammation
Masl cell
Cromoly sorium
Long-term control oi
No animal data
stabilizer
inflammation
Nedocromil sodium
Long-term control of
No animal data
inflammation
fAAHA 42:165-169, 20U6, Use tof inhaled meclications 1o treat respiratory cliseases in clogs andl cats, by P.
Parlrid.
mediators from mast cells by inhibiting the inilux of calcium. They are administered
by inhalation and efficacy in animals is not documented. (See Chapter 3 for informa-
tion on cromolyn sodium.)
COUGH SUPPRESSION and normalization of other respiratory reflexes. Sneezing
and reverse sneezing, coughing. and airway narrowing reflexes that result in laryn-
gospasim and bronchospasm are reflexes that are part of the normal pulmonary de-
fenses and should not be suppressed unless they are excessive or debilitating.
A.
Coughing is the sudden and loud cjection of air from the lungs. It is a normal prolec-
tive reilex that is necessary in the diseased animal. The sensory receptors for the reflex
cough are subepithelial irritant or stretch receptors that are numerous in large airways
and innervated by the vagus nerve. Foreign bodies or excessive amounts of mucus on
the surface of the airways can mechanically deform a sensory receptor and stimulate
the cough reflex. Inflammation of the airway, for example, a viral infection, may result
in the receptors becoming hyperresponsive. During a cough, the intrapleural pressure
rises dramalically againsl a closed glotlis and as a result the intrathoracic airways are
compressed. Air is expelled with considerable noise through a narrowed airway and
material is dislodged from the walls of large airways. Coughing is usually a good way
for the animal to clear mucus from large bronchi and the trachea, but not from the
smaller distal bronchi and bronchioles. Coughing is frcquently a beneficial reflex and
should not be suppressed unless it is dry (nonproduction) or physically tiring to the
Respir atory  Pharmacology 225
 animal. Initial treatment of (he coughing animal is aimed at eliminating the underlying
cause and not suppressing the cough.
1. Antitussives decreasc thc severily and frequcncy of coughing.
a. Peripherally acting antitussives include anti-inflammatory drugs, mucolytics, and
bronchodilators.
b. Central acting opioid and nonopioid drugs reduce the sensitivity of the cough
center to afferent stimuli. The opioid cough suppressants may cause sedation,
nausea, and constipation. (See Chapter 4 for more information about opioids.)
(1) Codeine-dogs and cats, One of the most effective with an antitussive effect
that is much grcater than its analgesic. effecl.
(2) Hydrocodonecommonly used in the dog. More potent antitussive than
codeine.
(3) Butorphanol—1o0x more effective as an antitussive than codeine. Can be
given orally or parenterally to dogs and cats. It has a shorl duration anal-
gesia but longer sedative effect and minimal respiratory depression with a
half-life of 1.7 hours.
(4) Dextromethorphan is a semisynthetic opioid that is found in many over-the-
counter human cough preparations but its efficacy in animals is not docu-
mented.
BRONCHIAL DILATION is beneficial to dccrcasc resistance to airilow when ex-
cessive constriction is present. The normal bronchi have a small amount of smooth
tone controls airway caliber and establishes a balance between resistance to airflow
ulated by local homeostatic mechanisms, plus neural and humoral control. Equine
airways receive cholinergic, adrenergic, and nonadrenergic-noncholinergic inhibitory
(iNANC) and cxcitatory (eNANC) innervalion. Similar innervalion has been observed
in most domestic. animal species. A variety of stimuli to the airway surface can initiate
the bronchoconstrictive reflex arc, including mechanical (e.g., bronchoscopy, particu-
lates) and chemical-autacoids (e.g., acid, histamine, and secretions) factors, pulmonary
edema, pulmonary embolism, and pneumothorax.
A
Bronchodilators are common trealments for airway disease. The horse benefits the
most from these drugs.
B.
Parasympathetic system—provides innervation to the entire tracheobronchial tree.
These cholinergic nerves arise in the brain stem and course through the vagus nerve
to synapse in local ganglia within the walls of the alveoli. From these ganglia, post-
ganglionic fibers travel to airway smooth muscle and submuscosal glands. Ganglionic
transmission is mediated by acetylcholine via neuronal nicotinic receptors, whereas
smooth muscle contraction is mcdiated by acctylcholine via muscarinic receptors. M3
muscarinic. receptor subtypes mediate airway smooth muscle constriction, plus vasodi-
the normal healthy animal. (See Chapter 2 for more information about anticholinergic
(drugs)
1. Atropine—injectable
2. Glycopyrrolate—injectable
3.1
Ipratropium——aerosol by metered dose inhaler (MDl)
4.1
The parenterally administered anticholinergic drugs have significant side effects, in-
cluding decreased Gl peristalsis, dry mucous membranes, tachycardia, and urinary
bladder relaxation. These side effects limit the chronic use of parenteral anticholin-
ergic drugs and favor the aerosol administration of ipratropium directly to the lungs.
C.
physiology of airway diseases and treatment of bronchoconstriction. This system
226Chapter 1 V C
includes nol only the sympathetic innervation but also the adrenal medulla. Nore-
pinephrine is the principal neurolransmiter of sympathetic nerves and epinephrine
is secreted by the adrenal medulla and functions as a hormone. The sympathetic
innervation of the bronchi is sparse when compared to the parasympathetic sys-
tem. Response to the adrenergic nervous syslem primarily involves the activation of
β2-adrenoreceptors that are distributed throughout the lung in all species. In vitro 
β2-agonists suppress the tone of airway smooth muscle both when the tone is of spon-
taneous origin and when induced by an exogenous spasmogen. Relaxation is mediated
by the intracellular accumulation of cAMP, which inaclivales myosin light chain ki-
nase. There are α1- and α2-adrenergic receptors in the lung of several species. The
α -receptors mediate airway muscle contraction in the guinea pig, rabbit, and dog.
The α2-receptors are inhibitory to cholinergic nerves and are responsible for a de-
crease in acetylcholine release. The selective β2-agonists are used clinically as bron-
chodilators but they are not 100% selective for β2-receptors and concurrently stimulate
some β,-receptors. Since β,- and β2-receptors are distributed throughout the body.
including the heart, overdosing these drugs may cause tachycardia, excitemenl, and
sweating (horses). These drugs may transiently decrease systemic. arterial blood pres-
sure, which increases heart rate via the baroreceptor reflex. The β,-receptor stimula-
tion in the respiratory tracl also increases the ciliary beat frequency and mucociliary
clearance rate. They have some anti-inilammatory aclivity and can decrcase the re-
lease of imediators from imast cells. The use of metered dose inhalers (MDls) in human
medicine has led to more β,-agonist therapy and products available. These products
'ysew pue laoeds e ym sleuue u pasn aq ues
1. Adrenergic agonists
a. Nonselective (α+βi+B2) agents may be used for the acule treatment of bron-
choconstriction.
(1) Epinephrine
(2)Ephedrine
(3)  Isoproterenol
b. β2-Selective agonists produce fewer undesirable α- and β-effects.
(1) Terbutaline—orally or parenterally for severe bronchoconstriction in cats.
(2) Isoetharine-has been aerosolized and used in small animals.
(3) Albuterol-has been aerosolized and used in horses and small animals.
(a) It has a β32/β; selectivity of 4.0.
(b)  Reporled to be beneficial ior the trealment of hypoxemia in anesthetized
horses.
(4)  Clenbuterol
(a) Approved in the United States for use in horses with airway obstruction
such as chronic obslructive pulmonary disease (heaves).
(b) β2/β Selectivity is 4.0.
(c) Administered orally.
(d) The ty, in the horse is ~12 hours and the duration of effect is
6-8 hours.
(e) Also inhibits the release of proinflammatory cytokines IL1β and tumor
necrosis factor from macrophages.
(f) Adverse effects include muscle tremors, sweating, restlessness, urticaria,
and tachycardia.
(5) Use these drugs cautiously in animals with concurrent diabetes, hyperthy-
roidism, hypertension, seizure disorders, or cardiac disease with arrhythmias.
(6) For other selective β2-agonistic aerosol drugs see Table 10-1.
D.
Methylxanthines have been used for many years in veterinary medicine as a bron-
chodilator.
1. Mechanism of action. Methylxanthines are phosphodiesterase inhibitors, which in-
duce bronchodilation by blocking the degradation of cAMP by phosphodiesterase
in airway smooth muscle cells and inhibition of light chain myosin kinase.
The increase of cAMP levels in mast cells inhibits the release of histamine and
 other autacoids, for example, leukotrienes which may reduce ongoing
RespiratoryPhatmacology227
bronchoconstriction. The increase of cAMP levels in the chromaffin cells of the
adrenal mcdulla promotes the relcase of calccholamines which bronchodilate
by stimulating noninnervated β2-receptors in the lung. The other benefits of the
methylxanthines are increased mucociliary clearance, improvement in diaphrag-
matic contractility, decreased pulmonary artery pressure, increased CNS sensitivity
to PaCO, and stabilization of mast cells. In addition, methylxanthines are adeno-
sine receptor antagonists. Adenosine receptors are coupled to Gi/o protein, which
mediate the decrease in cAMP formation by inhibiting adenylyl cyclase. Thus,
adenosine receptor antagonists increase cAMP levels as well. inhibition of adeno-
sine reccptors in the CNs may cause cxcilation, muscle Iremors, and scizures. In-
crcascd cAMP levels in the rmyocardium can induce cardiac arrhyihmias and the
incrcased circulating catccholarmine levcls from the adrenal mcdulla can make thc
cardiac. side effects worse by stimulating α- and β-receptors.
2. Theophylline
a. Therapeutic uses. Theophylline is administered orally. It is used primarily to in-
duce bronchodilation for the treatment of obstructive small airway diseases. It is
advisable to use only theophylline products that are sustain-released and have
suitable pharmacokinetics in animals. It is used often in patients with heart fail-
ure and/or pulmonary edema. Theophylline must be used cautiously because of
its adverse effects (see below).
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) The Gl absorption is ~100% after oral administration of a nonsustained-
release product. The Gl absorption of sustained relcase products yielded
30-80% bioavailability.
(2) Theophylline is distributed widely in the body and penetrates the blood-
brain barrier. The plasina binding activity of theophylline is low (<14%). Be-
cause of low volume of distribution in cats (0.46 L/kg), obese feline patients
should be dosed on a lean body weight basis.
(3) It is metabolized in the liver to 3-methylxanthine and caffeine among other
metabolites. 3-methylxanthine has weak bronchodilatory activity.
(4) Theophylline and its metabolites are excreted via the kidneys; only 10% of a
theophylline dose is excreted unchanged in urine.
(5) The elinination ty,: ~8 hours in cats, ~6 hours in dogs, and 12-17 hours in
horses.
c. Adverse effects
(1) Side effects in dogs and cats include nausca and vomiling, resllessncss,
incrcased gastric acid sccretion, diarrhca, polyphagia, polydipsia, and 
polyuria.
(2) Side cffccts in horscs include ncrvousncss, cxcitability (auditory, tactile, and
visual), tremors, diaphoresis, tachycardia, and ataxia.
d. Seizures or cardiac. arrhythmias may occur in severe cases.
e.E
Beware of other drugs that may inhibit hepatic CYP450 enzymes (e.g., cimeti-
dine and fluoroquinolones) because their concurrent administration may elevate
plasma levels of theophylline.
Aerosol administration of drugs is new to veterinary medicine and their efficacy is yet 
F
1. Optimal particle size for delivery to the trachea is 2-20 microns and to the distal
airways is 0.5-5 microns.
 2. The benefits of aerosol therapy are that of limiting systermic absorption of the drug
and introducing the drug close to the site of the problem.
3. Used primarily to treat chronic obstructive airway disease of horses, lower airway
disease in felines, chronic bronchitis in dogs, and kennel cough complex in young
'ssop
 4. Small aninal and equine specific products for administering these agents using a
facemask and spacer are commercially available.
 5. Bronchodilators, an anticholinergic, corticosteroids, and some antibiotics (e.g..
aminoglycosides) arc the primary drugs administercd by this route.
228Clhapter 10 VI A
Vi.
 Sildenafil decreases pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary artery blood pressure may
clevate due to an increase in vascular resislancc. Pulmonary hypcrlcnsion has bcen re-
most common. The pathophysiologic reasons for pulmonary vascular hypertrophy and
remodeling are not well understood in animals and probably multifactorial. Treatment
of the underlying respiratory disease is important when pulmonary hypertension is dis-
covered, but sildenafil, a phosphodiesterase type V inhibitor, has becn administercd
orally to induce vasodilation and reduce pulmonary hypertension in dogs and humans.
A.
 Mechanism of action. Sildenafil decreases pulmonary arterial pressure by inducing
potent relaxation of arterial smooth muscle. Cyclic GMP is a potent vascular smooth
muscle relaxant; sildenafil increases cyclic GMP levels in vascular smooth muscle
cells, which is due to its inhibition of degradation of cyclic GMP by phosphodiesterase
V.
B.
Pharmacokinetics
1. Gl absorption after oral administration is nearly complete. Tmax is ≤60 minutes.
2. It is well distributed after Gl absorption and 84% of the circulating level is bound
by plasma proleins.
3. It is metabolized by CYP450 to many metabolites, which are excreted in the feces.
4. Its elimination ty, in dogs is ~6 hours.
Adverse effects. These effects are not well defined in dogs. However, systemic hy-
potension can occur, particularly if combined with other medications that lower blood
pressure {e.g., nitrates).
 Doxapram hydrochloride is an analeptic and a centrally acting respiratory stimu-
lant that also increases the sensitivity of the peripheral chemoreceptors located in the
carotid bodies. When injected IV to dogs, the respiratory rate and tidal volume (minute
ventilation) increase.
A.
 Used to aid in the visual evaluation of laryngeal paralysis in the lightly anesthetized
laryngeal muscles. Dogs and cats with laryngeal paralysis, however, have reduced or
no abduclion on inspiration. Evaluation of laryngeal molion requires decp sedation.
cult and frequently incorrect. Injecting doxapram IV while observing the larynx of a
deeply sedated dog significantly enhances laryngeal movement but has no effect on
the paralyzed larynx making evaluation more reliable.
B.
 May slimulate respiratory effort in newborn animals but is not a substitute for endotra-
 cheal intubation and mechanical ventilation for resuscitation.
EXOGENOUS SURFACTANT can be administered directly inlo the respiratory tracl
 of foals or calves that are born prematurely and show signs of respiratory distress.
Surfactant is normally produced by the alveolar type Ill cells and is a complex mix-
ture of phospholipids and protein. Surfactant is necessary in the alveoli to reduce the
surface tension during inspiration and stabilizes alveoli during the resting phase after
expiration. Animals born prematurely may lack surfactant production, and breathing
requires an increase in effort and work. One treatment option is to inject exogenous
surfactant into the lungs. Sevcral products for human usc arc derived from animals.
Respiratory Pharmacology 229
Beractant is lipid extract of bovine lung with synthetic lipids.
B.
Calfactant is a lipid extract of calf lung lavage fluid.
SUGGESTED READING
tics. Edited by Adams HR. 8ih ed., pp. 1105-1119. Ames, IA: lowa Stale University Press.
and Cats. Edited by King LG. pp. 229-252. St. Louis, MD: Saunders.
http://www.drugs.c.om
Padrid P. 2006. Use of inhaled medications to treat respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. J Am Anim
Hosp Ass0c 42:165-169.
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Rozanski EA, Bach JF, Shaw SP. 2007. Advances in respiratory therapy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pracf 37:963-974.
230
Chapter 14)
STUDY
QueStIOn S
DIRECTIONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Selccl the one leltered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Which one of the following drugs would
(A) It stimulates the M; receplor to induce
be eficacious when you wanted to provide
Vasodilatation.
emergency bronchodilation in an "asthmatic"
{B)It blocks the release of interleukin-1β
cat with few detrimental side effects?
and tumor necrosis factor.
(C) It blocks the degradation of cyclic AMP
(A)Terbutaline
in thie smootlh muscle cells.
(B) Flulicasone
(D) It increases the sensitivity of the periph-
(C) Propranolol
(D)Epinephrine
eral chemoreceptors.
(E)  Theophylline
6. Which one of the following drugs
2. Which one of the following drugs is a
would be useful in visually evaluating the
phosphodiesterase type V inhibitor used in
laryngeal motion of the deeply sedated
dogs to decrease the pulmonary artery pres-
dog?
sure?
(A)Doxapram
(A) Nedocromil sodium
(B)Theophylline
(B) Pirbuterol
(C)
Sildenafil
(C)  Metaproterenol
(D) Zafirlukast
(D) Sildenafil
(E)N-acetylcysteine
7. Which expectorant, when nebulized and
inhaled, breaks the disulfide bonds within the
3. Which one of the following drugs is an
tracheal mucus molecules?
anticholinergic agent, which when adminis-
tered with a multidose inhaler, spacer, and
(A) Guaifenesin
mask would cause bronchodilation in a horse
{B)  N-acetylcysteine
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(C)  Potassium iodide
(i.c., heaves)?
(D) Saline
(E)Terbutaline
(A) Clenbuterol
(B) Ipratropium
8. Which one of the following drugs will,
(C) Clycopyrrolate
when injected or sprayed into the ventral
(D)Triamcinolone
meatus of the nose, reduce nasal congestion
(E) Atropine
and cdema in a horse that is recovering from
anesthesia?
4. Which one of the following adrenergic
drugs is a nonselective bronchodilalor (i.e.,
(A)Ipratropium
α + β + β2 agonist) compared to the others
{B)Terbutaline
(which are β,-selective agonists)?
(C) Albuterol
(D) Phenylephrine
(∧)Isoetharine
(E) Fluticasone
(B)  Terbutaline
(C) Clenbuterol
9. Which one of the following opioids has
(D) Albuterol
a strong antitussive effect but is only a mild
(E) Epinephrine
analgesic?
5. Which one of the following describes the
(A)Fentanyl
mechanism of action of theophylline?
(B) Morphine
Respiratory  Pharmacology 231
(C) Codeine
being produced and exhibiting respiratory
(D) Hydromorphonc
distrcss?
(E) Oxymorphone
(A) Doxapram injection IV
10. Which one of the following would
(B) Saline nebulization
(C) Terbutaline aerosol
be the most beneficial in reducing the
work of breathing in a preterim foal that
(D) Theophylline orally
(E) Beractant injected into the trachea
was born without endogenous surfactant
232
ANSWERS ANd EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is A.
by a differcnt mechanism. Glycopyrrolate
Terbutaline is a rapid acting βz-sclectivc
and atropine are anticholinergic agents 
adrenergic agonist that produces bronchodi-
like ipratropium, but these drugs are not 
lation with few side effects. Additionally.
available as an aerosol in a multidose inhaler
lerbulaline allows a choice of roule of
Triamcinolone is available as an aerosol but
administration because it is available as
is a glucocorticoid, not an anticholinergic
an injectable, oral, or aerosol preparation.
agent.
Fluticasone is a glucocorticoid, which imay
be beneficial, but it is too slow in onset to be
4. The answer is E.
used in an emergency situation. Propranolol 
Epinephrine is a nonselective adrener-
is a β-adrenergic blocker and, as such,
gic agonist, which activates hoth α- and
would cause bronchoconstriction rather
β-receptors. All the others are selective
than dilation. Epinephrine would rapidly
β2-adrenergic agonists.
cause bronchodilation but has significant
side effects because of its mixed x and β
cffccts, that is, tachycardia or bradycardia.
5. The answer is C.
vasoconstriction, hypertension, and car-
diac arrhythmias. Epinephrine is used for
Theophylline blocks thc dcgradation of cyclic
life-threatening anaphylactic reactions to
AMP in the smooth muscle, which leads to
bronchodilation. Theophylline may block
evoke bronchodilation and vasoconstriction
adenosine receptors to increase cyclic AMP
to raise blood pressure. However, when
as well. β2-Adrenerigc agonists such as clen-
treating an "asthimatic" cat, the side effects
of epinephrine are too profound and risky.
buterol block the release of interleuken-1 β
and tumor necrosis factor as well as dilating
Theophylline is a methylxanthine bron-
bronchi. Cholinergic agonists stimulale the
chodilator, but it is slower in onset and
less profound in its dilating effect making
M3 receptor on the endothelium lo increase
terbutaline a better choice.
nitric oxide synthesis. Nitric oxide penetrates
into vascular smooth muscle cells to stinu-
2. The answer is D.
late guanylyl cyclase to produce cyclic GMP,
Sildenafil is an inhibitor of phosphodiesterase
thereby resulting in vasodilalion. Doxapram
typc V, which inhibits thc degradation
increases the sensitivity of the peripheral
of cyclic GMP. Cyclic GMP is a potent
chemoreceplors and increases ventilation of
thc lungs by incrcasing the tidal volumc and
vascular smooth muscle relaxanl that lowers
rate of breathing.
pulimonary blood pressure. Pirbuterol and
mctaproterenol arc sclcctivc β2-adrencrgic
agonists used for bronchodilation. Ne-
6. The answer is A.
docromil sodium is a mast cell stabilizer to
Doxapram increases ventilatory effort
prevent the release of inflammalory media-
even when the animal is deeply sedated.
tors, including histamine. N-acetylcysteine
When the dog breathes with a larger tidal
is a mucolytic agent, which when nebulized
volume, the norimal larynx abducts on
and inhaled breaks the disulfide bonds of
inspiration to a greater extent while the
mucus, making it less viscous.
paralyzed larynx does not imove or may even
adduct during inspiration. Theophylline is a
3. The answer is B.
bronchodilator that can be injected IV, but
Ipratropium is an anticholinergic agent,
does not affect laryngeal motion. Sildenafil is
when inhaled, would induce bronchodi-
a phosphodiesterase inhibitor used to dilate
lation in a horse with chronic obstructive
the pulmonary arterioles and reduces hyper-
pulmonary disease. Clenbuterol is a rapid
tension. Zafirlukast is a leukotriene receptor
acting sclectivc βz-adrcncrgic agonist that
anlagonist used to reduce inflammation in the
will cause bronchodilation in the horse but
lung.
Respiratory Pharmacology233
7. The answer is B.
to induce bronchodilation. The onset of
N-acetylcysteine, when inhaled, breaks
glucocorticoid-induced bronchodilation is
the disulfide bonds within the tracheal mucus
slow, probably would take a few days to see
molecules. Guaifenesin is an oral expectorant
the effect.
Aq xaau qelea e saonpui Ajgewnsaid peu
contact with the gastric mucosa. Potassium
9. The answer is C.
jodide is an oral expectorant that stimulates
Codeine is a potent antitussive drug
the respiratory tract glands by reflex to evoke
and is not used as an analgesic. Morphine
a watery secretion. Saline can be nebulized
fentanyl, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone
and inhaled to break up mucus by adding
are strong analgesics, which stimulate the
more water. Terbutaline can be aerosolized
μ-opioid receptor. (See Chapter 4 for detailed
and inhaled. It acts as a bronchodilator
information regarding opioids and their
that may allow better removal of mucus by
receptors.)
coughing, but it does not affect the chemical
nature of the mucus.
10. The answer is E.
Beractant, a bovine lung extract, is used
8. The answer is D.
as an exogenous surfactant. It is injected
 Phenylephrine is an α-adrenergic ago-
directly into the trachea and distributed to
nist, causing vasoconstriction in the mucosa
the bronchi and bronchioles by gravity and
 of the nose to induce decongestion. Terbu-
positive pressure ventilation. Nebulized saline
taline and albuterol are selective β2-agonists
is not a substitute for surfactant. Bronchodila-
that would not affect the vasculature of the
tion from terbutaline or theophylline may be
nasal cavity. Ipratropium is an anticholinergic
slightly beneficial, but is not a substitute for
agent and fluticasone is a glucocorticoid.
surfactant. Doxapram will increase ventilatory
These drugs will not cause acute vasocon-
activity, but without surfactant the lungs will
striction in the nasal cavity, but are used
not want to stay inflated.
This page intentionally left blank
er
11
Drugs Acting on the Gastrointestinal Tract
Albert E. Jergens and Franklin A. Ahrens
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
A.
Gastrointestinal (Gl) disease is a common clinical problem where signs of vomiting.
diarrhca, and anorexia predominate. Rapid diagnosis is esscntial for symptomatic or
specific therapies to be effective. A complete history and physical examination ac-
companied by appropriate laboratory tests aid in determining the etiology, location,
and severity of the disease or disturbance. Endoscopy and mucosal biopsy are fre-
quently required for diagnosis of chronic Gl diseases, such as gastritis, malabsorptive
syndromes, or idiopathic inflamimatory bowel disease (IBD).
B.
Nonspecific therapy
1. Correction of fluid and electrolyte balance. Persistent vomiting or watery small
bowel diarhea produces dehydration, electrolyte loss, and disturbances in acid-
base balance that should be corrected by parenteral fluid therapy. With severe
vomiting, there is variable loss of sodium, chloride, potassium., hydrogen, and bj-
carbonate thiat may cause metabolic acidosis. li tlie pylorus is obstructed, duodenal
bicarbonate is retained while continued loss of gastric chloride, potassium, and
hydrogen in the vomitus leads to metabolic: alkalosis. Oral fluid and electrolyte re-
placement may suiffice in animals having only mild acute diarrhca or ii vomiting is
infrequent or absent.
 2. Resting of the Gl tract. Best practice recommendations suggest that withholding
food for 24-48 hours in acute Gil disturbances is often effective in dogs and cats.
Thereafter, feeding a bland diet often and in small amounts is generally indicated
for 3-5 days at which time the original diet is gradually introduced. Potential bene-
fits of dietary restriction include decreased gastric secretions, decreased amounts of
osmotically active particles in the gut lurmen, and the facilitation of rmucosal healing
(e.g., cnterocyte: regeneration).
3. Dietary modification
a. Bland diet. A bland, casily digested, low-iat diet such as hoiled chicken or white
fish or low-fat cottage cheese with rice should be offered after withholding food
for 24-48 hours. Limiting dietary fat is important because unabsorbed fatty acids
are hydroxylated by colonic bacteria into secretagogues which decrease mucosal
absorption and promote increased fecal water loss.
b. Lactose-free diet. Milk products should be eliminated irom the dicet if there is
lactose intolerance or a loss of mucosal brush border lactase from Gl distur-
bances.
c. Insoluble fiber. Increased fiber absorbs water and normalizes intestinal transit in
constipation and animals with colitis of diverse causes.
d.
Gluten-free diet. Gluten-sensitive enteropathy has been reported to occur in
Irish setter dogs. Clinical improvement is observed when affected animals are
placed on a cereal-free diet.
4. Provision of nutritional support. Calories, proteins, and vitarmins should be supplied
to maintain a positive energy and protein balance. Enteral feeding is preferred over
parenteral routes since this is most physiologic and prevents alrophy of the intesti-
nal tract. Initial nutrient deficiencies are gauged by use of body condition scores
(BCS), and spccific nutricnt requirements may be cstimated by a variety of methods.
5. Symptomatic therapies
a. Protectants and adsorbents. Bismuth-subsalicylate and kaolin-pectin are often
adiministered in acute diarrhea to coat and protect the intestinal mucosa, and
because they may reduce intestinal secretions. See more below.
235
236
|Chapter 11 1 B
TABLE 11-1. Indications for Antibiotic. Use in Gastrointestinal Diseases
Severe Mucosal Injury
- Parvovirus
- hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
- Salmon poisoning disease
Enteropathogenic. Bacteria
-Saimonelfa, Clostridia
Campylobacter jejuni E. coli
Cocci villus adherence
Antibiotic-responsive diarrhea (± small intestinal bacterial overgrowth)
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Note: Antiliotics are unconunonly required in inost cases ur acute or clironic gas-
cvidenced by lsloody dliarrhea. ancl in aninals cliagnosed with spccic: cnteropathogenic:
Iacterial infections or other conditions. Indliscriminate use encourages antibsiotic clrug
resistance and may prolong some lypes of infectious dliarrhea (e.g., salmonelosis!.
b. Motility modifying drugs. Opiates and opioids (loperamide, diphenoxylate) are
used to decrease intestinal motility and secretions associated with acute diar-
rhea. Anticholinergics should be avoided since they can potentiate ileus. See
more below.
c. Antimicrobial therapy. The routine use of antibiotics for treatment of acute or
chronic Gl disease is not recormmended. Animals having severe mucosal injury
(parvoviral enteritis) or infection with specific bacterial pathogens (Campyfobac-
ter jejuni) of the Gl tract should receive antibiotics. Indiscriminate use of antimi-
Crobials promotes bacterial drug resistance (Table 11-1).
d. Probiotics. These are live bacterial cultures, which promote beneficial microbial
health to the host. The mechanism(s) of action are not fully known and their
effects appear to be exquisitely host-specific. Preliminary clinical data supports.
their use as adjunctive therapy for both acute and chronic diarrhea (see below).
e. Analgesics. Indications include alleviation of visceral pain in animals having
diverse causes for Gl disease fequine colic, pancreatilis in companion ani-
nists that inhibit nociceptive reflexes at spinal and supraspinal sites within the
CNS.
(1) Opiates (see Chapter 4 for more information)
(a) Morphine is used in dogs and cats, IM. Its duration of action is 6 hours
in these species, High doses of morphine produce excitement in cats and
horscs and it is adminislcred at 1/10 of the dosc used in dogs (0.05-0.2
mg/kg in cats and horses; 0.5-2 mg/kg in dogs).
(b) Butorphanol is administered IV to horses for the control of colic pain. Butor-
phanol is a partial agonist for μ-receptors and a full agonist for x-receptors.
Its duration of action is 1-2 hours,
(2) Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NsAIDs). (sce Chapter 7 for more infor-
mation) Flunixin meglumine, or phenylbutazone are given IM or IV to horses 
for the control of colic pain. They inhibit prostaglandin synthesis by inhibiting
the enzyme cyclooxygenase. Duration of action is 1-8 hours, depending on the
cause and severity of pain.
(3) Sedatives. Xylazine, detomidine, medelomidine, and romifidine are
colic. Their duration of action is 1-4 hours following IV or IM administration.
(see Chapter 4 (or more information).
(4) Spasmolytics. N-butylscopolammonium bromide (Buscopan(&) is an antispas-
modic and anticholinergic drug used in horses for control of the abdominal
pain of colic.
Drugs Acting on the Gastrontestinal Tract237
(a)  Mechanism of action. Bucospan competitively inhibits parasympathetic
activation of muscarinic receptors on intestinal smooth muscle cells.
(b) Therapeutic uses. Bucospank is administered IV to horses at a dose of
0.3 mg/kg for control of abdominal pain in colic and simple impaclions.
(c) Pharmacokinetics. The plasma Iy, of Bucospan? is 6 hours. It is eliminalcd
equally via urine and feces.
(d)  Adverse effects. Transient tachycardia and decreased borborygmal sounds
may be present for 30 minutes following acdministration. Bucospank:
should not be used in impaction colics associated with ileus or in horses
with glaucoma.
APPETITESTIMULANTS
A.
Inappetence or anorexia is common with Gl disease. Insufficient nutrient intake de-
lays clinical recovery and may exacerbate the underlying disease. Note thal the use of
these drugs should be restricted to animals where nutritional intake is measured be-
cause of ihe inconsislent responsc to thcir usc. Efficacy sludies based on controlled
clinical trials for use of any of the appetite stimulants is lacking. Enteral alimentation
with liquid supplements is quite practical and very useful in small animals.
B.
 Palatable food. Small amounts of palatable food should be offered at frequent inter-
vals, Warming the food may enhance appetite in carnivores. In general, commercial-
derived and nutritionally complete dicts should be fed. Homemade diets are quite ap-
propriate for short-term use where the risk of specific. deficiencies is minimized by the
brief duration of feeding.
C.
Benzodiazepines (see Chapter 4 for more information)
1. Mechanism of action. Benzodiazepines may suppress the satiety center in the hy-
pothalamus via increased y-aminobutyric acid (GABA) activity.
2. Therapeutic uses. Diazepam or oxazepam is used primarily in cats for short-term
stimulation of appetite, although the effect is controversial. They are used less fre-
quently in horses, dogs, and goats. Their effectiveness decreases after 2-3 treat-
ments.
3. Administration
a. Diazepam is administered orally, IV (0.2 mg/kg), or IM once or twice a day.
b. Oxazepam is administered orally once a day at 2.5 mg/kg in cats.
4. Adverse effects
a. Sedation and ataxia are common and may hc scvcrc in wcak or dcbilitated an-
imals. Reduccd dosage should be employcd in thesc cases. Use cauliously in
patients with preexisting renal or hepatic: disease.
D. Cyproheptadine (see Chapter 3 for more information)
1. Mechanism of action. Cyproheptadine is a serotonin antagonist which suppresses
the satiety center in the hypothalamus. It is also a histamine-1 (H) antagonist and
is used as an antiasthmatic in humans.
2. Therapeutic uses. Cyproheptadine stimulates appetite in cats and in humans but not
in dogs. It has been used experimentally in cats as an appetite stimulant.
3. Adverse effects. Sedation and dryness of mucous membranes are the most common
side effects. Paradoxically, CNS excitement and marked aggressive behavior may
occur in 20% of the cats given cyproheptadine.
E.
Glucocorticoids
1. Glucocorticoids are frequently employed as appetite stimulants in sick or debilitated
animals.
238Chapter 11I F
 2. Mechanism of action. The mechanism by which glucocorticoids stinulate appetile
is unknown. It may be due to cuphoria—the increased feeling of well-being pro-
duced by glucocorticoids. This is, in part, a result of their anti-inflammatory action.
 3. Therapeutic uses. Glucocorticoids are used as nonspecific, short-term therapy for
appctite slimulation.
4. Administration
a. Small animals. Prednisolone or prednisone is given once every other day.
b. Large animals. Prednisolone or dexamethasone is given IM once a day.
5. Adverse effects
a. Glucocorticoids are immunosuppressive and may delay recovery from the under
Iying disease.
b. Decreased gastric mucus production occurs following glucocorticoid administra-
tion. Gastric ulcers may develop with high dose or long-term use or in animals
where preexisting gastric mucosal disease is present
ANTIOBESITY DRUGS
General considerations. Obesity is an important medical condition with serious health
A.
implications. Obesity is characterized by the excessive accumulation and storage of fat
in the body. Obesity can be defined as exceeding ideal body weight by 20% or more,
or BCS of 8 or greater on a 9-point scale. Approximately 20-40% of dogs are consid-
cred overweight or obese. The most common cause for ohesity is the overconsumption
of food combined with inadequate exercise.
B.
Dirlotapide (Slentrolc)
1. Mechanism of action. Dirlotapide is a selective microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein (MTP) inhibitor that blocks the assembly and release of lipoprotein particles
into the bloodstream (via the lymphatic system) in dogs. Its unique mechanism of
action provides for potential weight loss by reducing appetite (which accounts for
90% of its clinical efficacy) and by decreasing fat absorption (accounting for about
10% of dirlotapide's activity).
 2. Therapeutic uses. To reduce the obesity in dogs that has been associated with in-
creased risk for development of musculoskeletal disease, hypertension, peripheral
insulin antagonism, osteoarthritis, and cardiopulmonary diseases.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. Dirlotapide acts locally in the gut to reduce appetite, increase fe-
cal fat, and produce weight loss. Following oral administration, the mean serum ty:
is 2.8 hours with bioavailability ranging from 20-40%. There is no clinical effect
following IV administration. The variable response betwcen animals and decreasing
response over time requires that the dose be regularly and individually titrated to
effect. The drug undergoes enterohepatic circulation and is primarily excreted in the
feces, with small amounts cxcreted in the bile and urine.
 4. Administration. Dirlotapide is administered once daily as an oil-based solution for-
mulated at a concentration of 5 mg/mL
 5. Adverse effects. The most commonly reported adverse effects include vomiting.
diarrhea, anorexia, and lethargy.
DRUGS THAT REDUCE ACID SECRETION AND PROVIDE
MUCOSA PROTECTION
General considerations. Inhibitors of acid secretion and mucosal protectants are used
in veterinary medicine to reduce the hydrochloric acid (HCl) content of the stomach
and to promote mucosal healing in animals with ulcers and crosions. The parietal cell
possesses receptors for histamine, gastrin, and acetylcholine (ACh)—each of which
Drugs Arting on the Ciastrointestinal Tract
239
Exogenous
Endogenous
HCI
factors
factors
222
Normal
Mucosaldamage
PGE
FIGURE 11-1. Overview of thc
PGE
etiopathogenesis of gastric. ulceration.
A conumon mechanism of H- back dif-
fusion may occur as a consequence
of either endogenous tinfiltrative mu-
Ischemia
cosal disease, renal or hepatic disease)
or exogenous (NSAID use) clisorders.
Hydrogen ions present within mucosal
tissues promote local vasculitis which
causes ischemia and subsequent gastric
Capillaries
tmucosal cdisruptiol.
stimulates H secretion into the lumen by the H /K'-ATPase pump located on the api-
cal membrane. Disease conditions which disrupt the gastric mucosal barrier can lead
lesion in these instances is the presence of an impaired mucosal barrier which permits
the back diffusion of hydrogen ions which causes mucosal ischemia and subsequent
damage (Figure 11-1).
B.
Gastric secretory inhibitors
1. H2-antihistamines (see Chapter 3 for more information)
a. Mechanism of action. Hz-antihistamines inactivate H-receptors of parietal cells.
Histamine-evoked gastric secretions are decreased; some (e.g., ranitidine) also
have prokinetic activity mediated by their anticholinesterase activity. Ranitidine
or famotidine are firsl-choice agents since they are safe, effective, and have less
hepatic inhibition of microsomal metabolizing enzymes than cimetidine. Rani-
tidine is 3-13 times more potent as cimetidine. Famotidine has greater gastric
inhibilory properlies and can be given once daily.
b. 1
Therapeutic uses
(1) Ranitidine and famotidine are used to treat gastritis, gastric ulcer/erosions,
reflux esophagitis, and gastrinomas (rare) in dogs and cats. Gastric HCl se-
cretion is intermittent in carnivores rather than continuous as in humans;
therefore, lower doscs arc cffeclive. These drugs arc also used to treal gastri-
tis and gastric erosions in horses and foals.
(2) H2-antihistamines are used to prevent acid hydrolysis of replacement pan-
creatic cnzymes in cxocrine pancrcatic discase in dogs and cats.
(3) Cimetidine or ranitidine are used to treat gastritis and gastric. erosions in
horses and foals.
(4) Ranitidine also stimulates gastric and colonic motility by inhibiting acetyl-
cholinesterase activity. See Section V for additional information
c. Pharmacokinetics. Ranitidine and famotidine are well absorbed orally and
widely distributed in body tissues. Only 10-20% of drug is bound to plasma
the drug is metabolized by the liver. Metabolites and the parent drug are ex-
creted by the kidneys.
d.Administration
(1) Ranitidine is administered orally, IM, or IV every 12 hours.
(2) Famotidine is administered orally or IV once daily.
(3) Ranitidine may stimulate gastric and colonic motility via its prokinetic activ-
ity.
e. Adverse effects. Side effects are rare in animals at usual dosages. Use raniti-
dine cautiously in animals with impaired renal function. Liver enzyme alanine
240
Chapter 11 IV IB
Gastrin
ECL
ACh
PGE
ACh
Gastrin
ATP
CAMP
PL
ProteinKinases
-H-A
K
H
FIGURE 11-2. Rcgulation of gastric acid sccretion in parictal cells. Acid sccretion is incrcascd by
acetylchuline (ACh) and gastrin, which is mediated by M,-receptors and cholecystuokinin B (CCKg)
reccptors, rcspectively. Stimulation of both rcceptors incrcascs cytosolic Ca²levels. Histamine, e-
leased from enterochromaifin-like (ECl.) cells, increases acid secretion by activating H-receptors, which1
increases cyclic AMP (cAMP) formation. Prostaglandin E decreases acid secretion by activating EP3
receptors, which inhibits cAMP iormation. Ca2+ and cAMP activale protein kinases, which translocate
H, K'-ATPase to the apical mernbrane of the cell to pump H  into lumen. Also, gastrin and ACh
stimulate histaminc rclcasc from ECL cells by activating CCKg and M;-rcccptors. AC, adenylyl cyclasc;
PlC., phospholipase C.
aminotransferase (ALT) concentrations should be occasionally monilorcd in ani-
mals receiving ranitidine in high doses for greater than 7 days. Some Gl effects
(anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea) noted with famotidine. Famotidine has been 
associated with intravascular hemolysis when given IV to cats.
2. Proton pump inhibitors
 a. Mechanism of action (Figure 11-2). Acid pump inhibitors inhibit the H'/K'-
ATPase on the Iuminal (secretory) membrane of parietal cells and thus reduce
H- secretion. Binding to the enzyme is irreversible and restoration of acid secre-
tion requires de novo synthesis of ATPase by the parietal cell. Omeprazole is the
protypical agent.
b. Therapeutic uses. Omeprazole is used in the treatment of gastritis, ulcer disease,
and esophagitis in dogs, cats, and horses. It is also used in the prevention and
treatment of NsAID-induced gastric erosions.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Omeprazole is absorbed orally and enters gastric parietal
cells where it is protonated and trapped in the acidic intracellular fluid. The
protonated drug is the active form and thus ATPase in nonacid-producing cells
is not affected. Since the drug slowly accumulates in parietal cells with repeated
Drugs Acting on tlhe Gastrointestunal Tract241
doses, pharmacologic action is not correlated with plasma ty. Omeprazole is
metabolized by hepatic microsomal enzymes and excreted by the kidney.
d. Administration. Omeprazole is administered orally once a day.
e. Adverse effects. Omeprazole, like cimetidine, inhibits hepatic microsomal (cy-
ministercd drugs that are metaholized by this system (phasc 1 rcactions) such
as phenytoin or phenobarbital. Use cautiously in animals with preexisting hep-
atopathy.
 Mucosal cytoprotectants
1. Pharmacologic protection of the gastric mucosa can be enhanced by administra-
tion of a prostaglandin E analog (Misoprostol) or by promoting direct cytoprotec-
tion of denuded mucosa (sucralfate).
2. Misoprostol
a. Mechanism of action. Misoprostol has two functions that make it a useful pro-
tective agent. It directly inhibits gastric acid secretion by parietal cells and it fa-
cilitates PGE-mediated mucosal defenses and healing in response to acid-related
injuries.
b. Therapeutic uses. Misoprostol is used to treat gastric ulceration when caused or
aggravaled by NSAIDs drugs.
 c. Pharmacokinetics. Approximately 90% of the drug is readily absorbed from the
Gl tract where a significant amount is metabolized via a first-pass hepatic effect.
The presence of food and antacids will delay drug absorption. Metabolites and
small amounts of parent drug are excreted in urine. The duration of action is
3-6 hours.
d. Administration. Misoprostol is given orally three times daily.
e. Adverse effects. Adverse Gl signs include diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal
pain. It should not be given to pregnant animals as it will promote uterine con-
tractions.
3. Sucralfate
a. Mechanism of action, Sucralfate is a sucrose sulfale-aluminum hydroxide com-
plex which polymerizes lo a viscous gel al pH < 4 and coats ulcer craters. Sul-
fate groups bind to proteins in ulcerated tissue and protect ulcers from acid and
pepsin.
b. Therapeutic uses. Sucralfate provides locally acting treatment for Gl ulceration.
Il also provides cytoproteclion when used as a slurry in animals having mucosal
disruption of the esophagus (esophagilis),.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Only 3-5% of an oral dose of sucraliate is absorbed where it
is then excreted in the urine unchanged. The remainder of the drug is converted
into sucrose sulfate in the gut by reacting with HCl. The duration of action per-
sists for up to 6 hours after oral dosing.
d. Route of administration. Sucralfate is given orally 2-3 times daily depending on
the severity of mucosal disruption.
e. Adverse effects. Sucralfate may impair absorption of other oral medications so it
is advised to stagger administration with other drugs by 2 hours or more.
PROKINETIC DRUGS
A.
General considerations. Gl motility disorders result from diseases that, either directly
or indireclly, alter normal Gl functions (e.g., storage of ingesla, mixing and disper-
sion of food, and timely propulsion of luminal contents aborally). Briefly, the causes
for Gl transit disorders are diverse but include both structural (mechanical obstruc-
tion) and functional (defective propulsion associated with mucosal inflammation)
diseases. Prokinetic drugs act to increase Gl motility by stimulating smooth muscle
contractions.
242Chapter 11VH
B. Specific drugs
1. Cisapride
a. Mechanism of action. Cisapride enhances the release of acetylcholine at the
myenteric plcxus, but does not induce nicotinic or imuscarinic receptor stimula
tion. Cisapride blocks dlopaminergic receptors to a lesser exlent than does melo-
clopramide. This drug is no longer commercially available and must be obtained
from a compounding pharmacy.
b. Therapeutic uses. Cisapride stimulates Gl motility from the lower csophagcal
sphincter (LES) to the descending colon, Proposed uses for cisapride in small 
animals include gastric/intestinal stasis, reflux esophagitis, and constipa-
tion/megacolon in cats.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Information only in humans is available: Cisapride is rapidly
absorbed following oral administration with an absolute bioavailability of 35-
40%. The drug is highly bound to plasma proteins and is extensively distributed
throughout the body. Its elimination ty, is 8-10 hours.
d. Administration. The drug is administered orally at a range of 0.1-0.5 mg/kg PO
q8 hours.
e.
Adverse effects. The adverse efiect profile is ongoing but the primary adverse
effects are Cl in origin, including diarrhea and abdominal pain.
2. Metoclopramide
a. Metoclopramide stimulates motility of the proximal Gl tract, especially the LES
and stomach. See Section IX for more detailed information.
b. Metoclopramide exerts its effects through antagonism of dopaminergic D recep-
tors and agonism of scrotonergic 5-HT4 rcccptors.
c. Clinically useful in cases of reflux esophagilis and gastric stasis or hypomotility.
3. Ranitidine
a. In addition to its antisecretory activity, ranitidine stimulates Gl motility by in-
hibiting acetylcholinesterase activity. See gastric antisecretory drugs for more
detailed information.
b. As a parasympathetic potentiating agent, ranitidine stinulates gastric emptying 
and small intestinal and colonic motility. Its actions appear to be greatest in
stimulating gastric motility.
4. Erythromycin
a. The effect of erythromycin on Gl motility most closely mimics that of the Gl
hormone, motilin. It stimulates motility by means of direct motilin-receptor acti-
vation (cats) and indirect cholinergic and neurokinin activation (in dogs).
b. Sub-antimicrobial doses (0.5-1.0 mg/kg) are orally administered to induce proki-
netic activity in dogs and cats. Gl motility is stimulated most robustly in the
proxinal Gl tract.
c. Erythromycin is used clinically to increase gastric emptying and for the therapy
of reflux esophagitis.
DIGESTANTS
A.
Pancrelipase (Pancreatin)
1. Pancrelipase consists of pancreatic enzymes, including lipase, amylase, and pro-
tease, and is derived froni porcine pancreas
 2. Pancrelipase powder preparations are mixed with food to trcat cxocrine pancrcatic
insuificiency in dogs and cals.
3. Enteric coated tablets have limited efficacy and are not recommended because of
delayed gastric. cnptying of thesc prcparations.
4. The maintenance dosage for the powdered preparation is 1 tsp/meal for dlogs thal
weigh 20-30 kg.
Drugs Acting on the Ciastrointestinal Tract  243
Anoverviewofhepatictherapeuticconsiderations
Glucocorticoids for
Antioxidantstoneutralize
Anticopperagents to
chronichepatitis
freeradicals
reduceoxidativedamage
Ursodeoxycholicacid for
Antifibrotic agents for
Hepaticencephalopathy
cholestasis
cirrhosis
therapy
FIGURE 11-3. Overview of medical therapy for canine and feline hepatopathy. Therapy may be symp-
tomatic and/or specific as dictated by thc histopathologic findings obtained through the performancc
of hepatic biopsy. Note that both dictary and pharmacotherapy arc utilized in dogs and cats to re-
parenchyma.
DRUGS USED FOR TREATMENT OF LIVER DISEASES
A,
General considerations. A varicty of divcrsc and clinically useful medications are uscd
to trcat dogs and cats with livcr discascs. Unfortunately, few controlled clinical trials
exist that provide critical evaluation of their effectiveness. Drug therapy is one impor-
tant arm in treating hepatobiliary diseases along with dietary therapy. Symptomatic. and
spccific therapics for liver diseasc arc diversc but generally include both dictary and
pharmacotherapy lo induce patient remission (Figure 11-3).
B. Glucocorticoids (Prednisone and Prednisolone) (see Chapter 12 for more information)
1. Steroid therapy is the most commonly used therapy for chronic hepatitis in dogs.
Prednisone must be metabolized into prednisolone by the liver so it is best to use
prednisolone in case of liver disease.
2. Prednisolone is the treatment of first choice for idiopathic chronic hepatitis.
3. Corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory effects but also antifibrotic and choleretic
effects. Their principle indication is immunomodulalion.
 4. Glucocorticoids are contraindicated for infectious diseases of the liver and biliary
system.
244  Chapter 11 VlI C
C.Ursodeoxycholic acid
1. Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), ursodiol, is one of the natural bile acids in the en-
cats at a dosage of 15 mg/kg once daily.
 2. UCDA has multiple drug actions including protection of hepatic cells from apop-
tosis, choleresis (induction of bile flow), suppression of hepatic synthesis and se-
cretion of cholesterol, modulation of the immune system to reduce inflammation,
and increasing the production of glutathione and metallothionein, which prevent 
Oxidative damage.
 3. Although generally well tolerated, UCDA is contraindicated in patients having ex-
trahepatic biliary obstruction.
D.
Antioxidants
1. Oxidativc strcss and damage causcd by frce oxygen radicals may be a primary or
contributory cause of liver discasc.
2. The normal host cellular defensc mechanisms against oxidative damagc include
superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase, and glutathione (GSH) peroxidase.
3. The main antioxidants are vitamins C and E, silymarin, and S-adenosyl-t-
methionine (SAMe).
4. SAMe is a normal metabolite in the hepatocytes and is important in the defense
against free radicals. Comimercially, SAMe is available as a "nutraceutical" and is
used as an adjunctive treatment for liver diseases in dogs and cats. Dosage varies
as per species and by body weight but it is given once daily.
 5. Silymarin (silibinin) is the active component extracted from the fruit of milk thistle.
It has several pharmacological actions that may be useful in treating liver disease. It
inhibits lipid peroxidase and beta glucuronidase and the cytotoxic actions of tumor
SOD and may increase hepatic glutathione content and decrease hepatic collagen
formation.
E.Antifibrotic drugs
1. Fibrosis may follow a variety of chronic liver insults and result in cirrhosis and in-
capacity of the liver to regenerate.
the mesenchymal hepatic. stellate cells to produce fibrinogenic. substances and ex-
tracellular collagen matrix.
3. Colchicine is the only drug used specically to stop and reducc ibrosis. It is
thought to act via stimulation of collagenasc activity. Usc of this drug is not
strongly advocatcd since clinical studics have not bcen performed which provc its
efficacy.
F.Anticopper medications
1. Chronic copper accumulation may cause oxidative damage to the liver because of
 the increased intracellular copper concentrations.
 2. Hereditary copper toxicosis occurs in Bedlington terriers, and copper accuimu-
lation may also occur secondary to diseases in which cholestasis is a prominent
feature.
 3. Chelating drugs, such as D-penicillarnine, can activcly bind frec cxtracellular copper
 and facilitate its cxcrction in the urine. D-penicillamine is administered orally twicc
daily with meals.
4.(
incrcascd intracellular copper that causes hepatic damage.
5.
 Zinc gluconate or acetate is another anti-copper medication for oral use (10 mg.
elemental zinc/kg twice daily). In the intestinal tract, zinc induces metallothioneine
in the enterocytes. This protein binds copper which prevents its absorption, and it is
sequestered within senescent enterocytes and shed into the intestinal iumen.
Drugs Acting on the Catstrointestinal Tract245
Cerebrum
Vestibular
apparatus
CRTZ
Vomiting
center
FIGURE 11-4. Simplified schematic. showing
major input pathways into the vomiting cen-
ter. While central (CNS disease) and vestibular
(motion sickness, vestibular disease) causes for
vomiting occur in dogs and cats, they arc rel-
atively uncommon. More common causes ior
vomiting include the stimulation of the CRTZ via
blood-borne toxins (urcmia, hyperbilirubinemia)
Stomach
 Or drugs (digitalis, chemotherapy), and abdomi-
Duodenum
nal parenchymal disorders that promote irritation,
distension, or inflammation of thesc organs.
 Drugs to treat hepatic encephalopathy
1. Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) may occur as a consequence of both congenital and
acquired hepatic diseases. Ammonia and aromatic amino acids are the iwo main
factors contributing to HE.
2. Portosystemic encephalopathy is the most common cause and is treated with both
dietary modification (reduced protein intake of aromatic amino acids) and pharma-
cologic agents.
3. Lactulose and soluble fibers will reduce ammonia metabolism, and thereby reduce
clinical signs. These agents are metabolized by the colonic bacterial flora to pro-
duce acids that reduce the pH of the colonic. contents. Ammonia is then present in
the ionic form that is not absorbed and thus is excreted in the feces.
4. Lactulose is a disaccharide molecule that is metabolized by the resident flora into
many osmotically active particles that attract water into the feces. The best guide-
line for use of lactulose in the management of fE is to give just enough (twice
daily) to produce a soft stool.
5. Mclronidazolc is an antibiotic used as adjuvant therapy in HE. Metronidazole has
efficacy against most obligate anaerobes, some of which are urease-producers,
which may contribute to ammonia production and exacerbation of HE. Metro-
nidazole is administered orally at 10-20 mg/kg twice daily in dogs and cats.
EMETICS
A.
General considerations
-ae saieduas pue qesea Aq paeae s! epaw aui ui auas sumoa al 'l
ents from the Cl tracl, dopaminergic: input from the chemoreceptor trigger zone
(CRTZ), and cholinergic. and histaminergic. afferents from the vestibular apparatus
(Figurc 11-4).
2. The vomiting reflex is developed in carnivores, primates, and swine. Horses,
ruminants, rodents, rabbits, and guinea pigs do not possess this protective
reflex.
246|Chapter 11 Vll A
3. Emetics may be used in conscious dogs and cats for elimination of noncorrosive
poisons or prior to induction of general anesthesia lo minimize gastroesophageal
reflux.
4. Emetics generally remove less than 80% of stomach contents.
B. Central acting emetics
1. Apomorphine HCl
a. Apomorphine is a synthetic. derivative of morphine which stimulates dopamin-
ergic receptors in the CRTZ to induce vomiting in dogs. It is administered par-
enterally because oral absorption is slow. It is conjugated in the liver and ex-
creted in urine.
b. IV administration of a low dose is the preferred route. Onset of vomiting oc-
curs in 1 minute, with a duration of 3-5 minutes. Apomorphine is also effec-
tive IM, SQ, or via conjunctival drops. Apomorphine administration should not
be repeated because the vomiling center is depressed afler the initial CRTZ
stimulation.
c. Apomorphine produces excitement in cats and is not effective in swine.
2. Xylazine (see Chapter 4 for more information)
a. Xylazine is an α-adrenoreceptor agonist, which induces vomiting in cats fol-
lowing IV or IM administration.
b. Onset of vomiting occurs in 2-5 minutes and may be followed by mild seda-
tion for 30-90 minutes.
 Peripheral acting emetics. Peripheral acting emetics stimulate sympathetic and vagal
afferent receptors in pharynx and stomach to induce vomiting. They may be useful as
adminislered orally as a singfe dose that should not be repeated even if vomiting fails
to occur.
a. Sodium chloride is administered as crystals of table salt (1 tsp into pharynx). It is
the most effective household emetic in dogs.
b. Syrup of Ipecac contains emetine alkaloid and is the recommended household
emetic for children. It is less reliable in dogs and cats but may induce vomiting in
15-30 minutes.
C. Copper sulfate (1%), zinc sulfate (1 %), or hydrogen peroxide (3%) solulions may
produce emesis but the response is variable and they are seldomly used now.
ANTIEMETICS
General considerations
1. General causes for vomiting include the following:
a. Stimulation of the vomiting center via vagal and sympathetic afferents from the
Cl tract in response to irritation, distension, or inflanimation. Common clini-
cal examplcs would include vomiting associaled with cnteritis, pancreatitis, or
intestinal foreign body.
b. Stimulation of the vomiting center via vestibular afferents from the eighth cra-
nial nerve in response to labyrinthine disease or motion sickness. This is an
uncommon cause for vomiting but it might be seen in animals with motion
sickness or vestibular diseases.
c. Stimulation of the vomiting center via inflammation, edema, or tumors of the
CNS.
d. Stimulation of the CRTZ by drugs, baclerial endotoxins, or toxic endogenous
metabolites such as urea or bilirubin.
2. Prolonged vomiting may lead to electrolyte and acid-base imbalances and dehy-
dration. Diagnosis and treatment of the primary cause should precede administra-
tion of antiemetic. drugs.
Drugs Acting on the Gastrointestinal Tract 247
3. Specific. indications for use of antiemetic. agents include (1) animals with persistent
vomiting in which fluid and electroloyte balancc cannot bc maintained and (2)
abolishing the vomiting "cycle" such that animals can get sufficient rest to recover
from their illness.
 4. Indiscriminate use of antiemetics in vomiting animals is not recommended since
this may mask the presence of more serious disease.
B.Antidopaminergic agents
1. Phenothiazines (see Chapter 4 for more information)
 a. Mechanism of action. The phenothiazine tranquilizers exert their antiemetic. ac-
tion by blockade of dopamine (D2)-receptors in the CRTZ and, at higher doses.
the vomiting center. Although they are broad-spectrum antiemetics, they tend
to be less effective in vomiting arising from severe inflammation of the Gl tract
or the inner ear. Blockade of α-adrenoreceptors occurs in addition to dopamine
receptor blockade. Phenothiazines also have weak anticholinergic and antilhis-
taminic actions.
b. Pharmacokinetics. Phenothiazines are well absorbed orally although there is
significant first-pass metabolisin, Distribulion is wide. The drugs are mctabo-
lized by the liver primarily to glucuronide or sulfate conjugates and excreted
by the kidney.
C. Administration. Accpromazine, chlorpromazine, promazine, or prochlorpcr-
azine are administered orally or IM every 6 hours to prevent vomiting in dogs
and cats.
d. Adverse effects. Hypotension and bradycardia due to α-adrenergic blockade
are the most serious side effects of the phenothiazines and are more likely to
occur in dehydrated animals. Hypotensive reactions should be treated with
α-adrenergic agonists such as phenylephrine. Epinephrine should not be used
because of the possibility of epinephrine reversal. Sedation may occur but is
usually rmild at the doscs uscd for anliemcsis.
2. Metoclopramide
 a. Mechanism of action. Mcloclopramide has both central and peripheral
antiemetic actions. Its central action is due to blockade of dopainine recep-
tors in the CRTZ and, at higher doses, inhibition of serotonin receptors in the
CRTZ. Its peripheral action is due to stimulation of the motility of the stom-
ach and duodenum via increased smooth muscle sensitivity to acetylcholine.
This prevents the gastric atony required for the vomiting reflex and ejection of
gastric contents.
b. Pharmacokinetics. Oral absorption is rapid with peak plasma levels within two
hours. The bioavailability of oral doses is 50-70% due to first pass metabolism.
Distribution is wide and includes the CNS. Unchanged drug (25%) and conju-
gated metabolites (75%) are excreted in the urine. The plasma t ;, is 90 min-
utes in the dog.
c. Administration. Mctoclopramide (Reglan?) is given orally, SC, or IM cvery 8
hours or by constant rate IV infusion to control sevcre vomiting in dogs and
cats. It is also administered 30 minutes prior to feeding in the treatiment of dis-
orders of gastric imotility and esophageal reflux in dogs, cats, and foals.
d. Adverse effects. Metoclopraimide is contraindicated in animals with gastric. out-
let obstruction since stimulation of gastric motility may predispose to hemor-
rhage or perforation. Behavioral changes including excitement or disorientation
may be observed in dogs and cats, although the incidence is low.
3. Butyrophenones
a. Droperidol and haloperidol are neuroleptic drugs which are also central-acting
antiemetics. They act by blockade of dopaminergic neurons in the CRTZ via
thcir affinily for Dz-receptors. Pharmacokinetic data for animals is lacking. The
elimination ty, in humans is 20-40 hours. They thus have a long duration of
action—2-4 days.
b. Their clinical usc in veterinary medicine has bcen limited but they may bc
uscful in vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy.
248Chapicer 11 IX B
c. Administration. The butyrophenones are given orally or IM every 2-4 days.
d. Adverse effects. Butyrophenones may produce mild sedation and
tranquilization.
C.Antihistaminic agents (see Chapter 3 for more information)
1. Mechanism of action. Antihistaminic agcnts block histamincrgic and cholincrgic
afferents from the vestibular organs to the vomiling center. They are useful in the
prevention of motion sickness in dogs.
 2. Pharmacokinetics. Antihistamines are well absorbed orally. Their physiological
disposition has not been studied in animals
3. Administration. Dimenhydrinate, diphenhydramine, or promethazine are adminis-
tered orally every 8 hours.
4. Adverse effects. Sedation may be observed as a side effect but is much less
prominent in animals than in humans.
D.Anticholinergic agents
1. Mechanism of action. Anticholinergic drugs block cholincrgic affercnts from thc
Gl tract to the vomiting center. Although they are gcncrally less active than other
antiemetics when used alone, they may be effective when combined wilh phe-
nothiazines in the control of emesis arising from severe gastroenteritis. An exam-
ple of this combination is isopropamide + prochlorperazine = Darbazine.? Note
that controlled clinical studies attesting to the clinical efficacy of this product have
not been performed.
2. Administration. Aminopentamide, propantheline, or isopropamide are adminis-
tercd orally, IM, or SC cvcry 8-12 hours for the symptomatic control of vomiting
and diarrhca in dogs and cats.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. Pharmacokinetics of propantheline are stated in Chapter 2 V1
C. Pharmacokinetics of aminopentamide and isopropamide are not available for
animals.
4. Adverse effects. Anticholinergics are contraindicated in patients with glaucoma.
Dryness of the mouth (xerostomia) and/or eyes (xerophthalmia), tachycardia, and
constipation may occur.
E.Antiserotonergic agents ondansetron and dolasetron
1. Mechanism of action. Ondansetron and dolasetron specifically inhibit serotonin
type 3 (5-HT3) reccptors located periphcrally on vagal nerve terminals and cen-
trally in thc CRTZ. Inhibition of 5-HT3 reccptors blocks ncurotransmission by
closing sodium channcls. Antincoplastic drugs and radiation therapy damagc Gl
mucosa which results in the relcasc of serotonin and cmcsis.
 2. Therapeutic uses. Ondansetron or dolasetron are used in dogs undergoing cancer
chemotherapy or radiation therapy to control emesis.
3. Pharmacokinetics. Animal data are not available. In humans, ondansetron is well
absorbed with peak plasma levels in 2 hours and an elimination ty, of 3-4 hours.
Ondansetron is extensively metabolized by the liver. Dolasetron is converted to
its active mctabolite, hydrolasctron, by plasma carbonyl reductasc. Approxirmatcly
two-third is subscquently mctabolized by the liver and one-third is cxcrctcd un-
changed in the urine. The antiemetic effect of both drugs persists afler their disap-
pearance from the circulation suggesting continued binding al the receptor level.
4. Administration. Ondansetron is administered orally or IV once or twice a day.
Dolasetron is administered IV once a day.
 5. Adverse effects. Side effects are rare. Constipation, extrapyramidal symptoms, hy-
 potension, and cardiac. arrhythrmias may occur.
F.Miscellaneous antiemetics
1. Alimentary demulcents/adsorbents such as kaolin, pcctin, or bismuth salts may
reduce vomiting in imild gastritis.
Drugs Acting on the Ciastrointestinal Tract  249
 2. Gastric anlacids such as magnesium hydroxide, magnesium silicate, aluminum
hydroxide, or aluminum silicates may reduce vomiting in cases of gastric hyper-
acidity.
 3. NK, receptor antagonist maropitant (Cerenia)
a. A new antiemetic agent for use in dogs with ongoing emesis is a neurokinin
(NK) rcccplor antagonist which servcs as a ligand ifor substance P (NK,) rc-
ceptors located in the vomiting center. Maropitant blocks neurotransmission of
afferent emetic signals from the Gl tract and other abdominal organs.
b. Maropitant is administered to dogs once daily SC at 1_mg/kg/day for up to 5
days for prevention and treatment of acute vomiting. The oral tablels can be
used to prevent motion sickness at 8 mg/kg/day for up to 2 days.
c. Pilot data suggest that maropitant is clinically superior to metoclopramide in
the control of general emesis in dogs. Additional studies are needed to confirm
these carlier observations.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) The oral bioavailability of maropitant is 37%. Tmax is ~2 hours. The
plasma protein binding of maropitant in dogs is >99%.
(2) Maropitant is metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes in the liver.
(3) Renal clearance is a minor route of elimination with <1% of an 8-mg/kg
 oral dose appearing in the urine as parent drug or metabolite. The data
suggest that Gl is the major route of elimination for maropitant, when
given orally.
(4) The elimination ty: is ~4 hours.
LAXATIVES
A.
General considerations. Laxatives promote evacuation of the bowel through stimu-
lation of fluid and electrolyte transport and increases in propulsive motility. Specific
indications for the use of laxatives in dogs and cats are
1. To relieve severe constipation or obstipation which is causing fecal impaction.
2. To enhance intestinal motility that eliminates poisons from the Gl tract.
 3. To evacuate the large bowel prior to surgery, selecl radiographic: procedures (e.g.
excretory urography), or lower Gl (e.g., Colonoscopy) endoscopic. procedures.
B.
Hyperosmotic laxatives
1. Mechanism of action. Hyperosmotic laxatives are nonabsorbable or poorly ab-
 sorbable salts or polymers which osmotically retain water in the intestinal lumen.
They have a rapid onset of action which begins in the small intestine.
 2. Lactulose is the most effective agent in this group. The organic acids produced
from lactulose fermentation stimulate colonic fluid secretion and propulsive motil-
ity. Lactulose is administered at a dose of 0.5 mL/kg body weight two or three
times daily
3. Polyethylene glycol. Electrolyte solutions (Golytely&., Colyte.) are isotonic mix-
tures of polyethylene glycol, sodium sulfate, sodium bicarbonate, sodium chlo-
ride, and potassium chloride. They are administered orally prior to colonoscopy in
dogs. Anecdotal reporls suggest that they are safe to use in cals.
( jo  i nsi no (es s s n t
are administered orally. They should not be used in the presence of renal disease
since 20% of the magnesium ions are normally absorbed and are excreted by the
kidney. CNS depression may result from elevated levels of plasma magnesium
ions.
 Bulk laxatives
1. Mechanism of action. Bulk laxatives comprise poorly digestible polysaccha-
rides which absorh water and incrcasc fecal hulk which stimulates large bowel
250|Chapter 11 x C
peristalsis, These products also reduce lenesmus associated with large bowel dys-
iunction (e.g., colitis, fiber-responsive diarrhea). Most of these products are di-
etary fiber supplements. Since they act in the large bowel, their onset of action is
slow—normally 1-3 days.
2. Methylcellulose, wheat bran, or psyllium are added to the diet. Dietary fiber is
preferahle hecause it is well tolerated, more effective, and more physiologic than
other laxatives.
 3. Their use is indicated in dogs and cats having mild constipation or as adjunctive
therapy to reduce clinical signs of colitis.
D.
Lubricants and surfactants
1. Mineral oil (liquid petrolatum) and white petrolatum lubricate and soften fecal
mass. These agents should only be given via rectal administration to minimize the
risk of aspiration if given orally.
2. Docusale is an anionic surfactant which hydrates and softens stools by an emulsi-
fying action.
Emollient laxatives
E.
1. Emollient laxatives are anionic detergents that increase the miscibility of water and
lipid in digesta, thus enhancing lipid absorption and impairing water absorption.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate and dioctyl calcium sulfosuccinate are two com-
mon emollients available in oral formulations.
al ui aep auo uaaie aeio s os s! saaexel suallowa yoq lo aesop aui 7
'eo pue sop
not been proven in controlled clinical trials.
Irritant laxatives
E
1. Mechanism of action. Irritant cathartics are derived from plants and are activated
in the Gl tract to release irritant derivatives which activate myenteric neurons and
smooth muscle to increase gut motility. They are used primarily in nonruminant
large animals.
2. Castor oil is cleaved by pancreatic lipases in the small intestine to yield irritant
absorplion, It is used mainly in calves and foals.
 3. Anthraquinone (emodin) laxatives include aloe, senna, and cascara sagrada. These
contain glycosides which are hydrolyzed in the large intestine to yield irritant an-
thraquinones which stimulate myenteric plexuses and increase colonic motility.
mainly in horses.
Xi.
ANTIDIARRHEAL AGENTS
A.
 General considerations (Figure 11-5)
1. Diarrhea is defined as an increase in the frequency, volume, or fluidity of
stools. General causes for diarrhea include (1) increased secretion of iluid and
electrolytes-example is enterotoxigenic E. cofi infection; (2) increased intesti-
nal permeability—example is canine protein-losing enteropathy; (3) osmotic 
diarrhea—example is exocrine pancreatic insuficiency; and (4) alterations in in-
testinal motility—uncommon. Acute diarrhea may respond to symptomatic therapy
with antidiarrheal drugs but chronic diarrhea requires a definitive diagnosis (often
necessitating intestinal mucosal biopsy) and specific therapy.
2. Oral rehydration therapy with glucose-electrolyte solutions represents a signifi-
cant advance in treating secrclory diarrheal disease in the absence of vomiting.
Drugs Acting on the Giastrointestinal Tract
251
Cell wall
Normal
NaCL
Protein (plasma)
Blood cells
Mild
NaCL
Permeability
FIGURE 11-5. Altcred intestinal permcability can lead to
Increase
Protein(plasma
diarrhea. In the healthy intestinal mucosa, selective mu-
Blood cells
cosal permeability leads to minor fluxes of clectrolytes and
water across the intact epithelial barrier. However, with
mucosal inflammation (e.g., infiltrative mucosal diseases
or intestinal ulceration with Gl bleeding), larger molecular
Moderate
NaCL
weight substances (albumin, globulins, red blood cells) are
Permeability
progressively lost into the Gl lurnen as intestinal perrme-
Protein (plasm
Increase
ability increases.
 Blood cells
Severe
NaCL
Permeability
Protein (plasma)
Increase
Blood cells
Sodium—glucose or fructose and sodium—amino acid-linked absorption by the
enterocyte remains intact even in the presence of moderate loss of villus structure.
This provides the driving force for water and electrolyle absorption from the Iu-
men to replace fecal losses. In addition to glucose and/or amino acids, solutions
contain sodium chloride, potassium chloride, sodium bicarbonate, and potassium
phosphale.
B.
 Motility-modifying drugs (opiates) (See Chapter 4, V for information on opiates)
1. Mechanism of action. Opiates increase Gl rhythmic. segmentation and decrease
propulsive motility via reduced acetylcholine release. Thus they slow the transit of
luminal contents and increase water absorption. In addition, they directly stimu-
lalc net absorplion of iluid and clectrolyles via μ-opiale reccptors in the CNs and
the intestinal mucosa.
2. Therapeutic uses. Opiates are effective in the short-term (5-7 days) symptomatic
treatment of acute diarrhea, Opiates are contraindicated in animals with infectious
diarrhca because slowing Gl transit may increasc absorption of bacterial toxins
and enhance bacterial growth in the intestinal lumen.
3. Administration
 a. Paregoric (camphorated tincture of opium) is administered orally two or thrco
times a day to dogs and cats and once a day to calves and foals.
NOTE: The use of antidiarrheal opiates in cats is controversial because of po-
tential excitatory reactions.
b. Diphenoxylate is a synthetic congener of meperidine. It is combined with at-
ropine as a commercial preparation LomotilMand is given orally two to three
times a day to dogs. Atropine is added at low concentrations to reduce the
abuse potential in humans. Pharmacokinetic data for animals are lacking. In
humans, dephenoxylate is well absorbed orally with peak plasma levels in 1-
2 hours. It is rapidly deesterified to its active metabolite, difenoxin, which is
eliminated with a tv, of 12 hours.
C. Loperamide is a synthetic piperidine opioid with action limited to the gut.
 Pharmacokinclic data for animals are nol available. In humans, lopcramide
is absorbed orally with peak plasma levels in 3-5 hours. It undergoes extensive
252 | Clhuapter 11 Xl B
hepatic metabolism with a ty, of 11 hours. Loperamide (Imodium.IM) is given
orally once or twice a day to dogs at a dosage of 0.08 mg/kg.
4. Adverse effects. Constipation, bloat, and sedation are the most common side
effects, Paralytic ileus, toxic megacolon, and pancreatitis are rare but potential
adversc cffecls. Opiatcs should be uscd cautiously in cats hecause of the possibil-
ily of cxcitatory rcactions in this specics.
C.
Anticholinergic agents
1. Mechanism of action. Anticholinergic agents inhibit Gl motility, both propulsive
and nonpropulsive. The rationale for their use as antidiarrheals is questionable
since hypomotility of the gut is common, especially in diarrheal diseases. Inhibi-
tion of cholinergically mediated basal secretions of Gl tract may be beneficial but
 controlled studies are lacking.
 2. Therapeutic uses. Anticholinergic agents are employed as antidiarrheals and GI
antispasmodics.
3. Administration
a. Isopropamide-dogs and cats, orally every 12 hours.
b. Aminopentamide-dogs and cats, orally, IM, or SC every 8-12 hours.
C.
 Propantheline-dogs and cats, orally every 8 hours.
d. Methscopolamine-dogs, orally every 8-12 hours,
4. Adverse effects. Xerostomia, lachycardia, loss of accommodation, urinary rclcn-
tion, and paralytic. ileus may be observed as side effects of anticholinergic drugs.
D.
Protectants and adsorbents
1. Mechanism of action. Protectants and adsorbents adsorb toxins and provide a pro-
tective coating on the inflamed mucosa. They are widely used but their efficacy is
questionable. They may decrease fluidity of feces without decreasing fecal water
oss.
 2. Therapeutic uses. Proteclants and adsorbents are used for the symptomatic therapy
of acute diarrhea.
3. Administration
a. Kaolin/Pectin—Kaolin (hydrated aluminum silicate) 20% is combined with
pectin (polygalacturonic acid carbohydrate polymer) 1% is Kaopectate. It is
administered to dogs, cats, birds, horses, cattle, sheep, and swine orally every
4-6 hours.
b. Bismuth subsalicylate has an antiprostaglandin action in addition to its protec-
tive/adsorbenl properlies. It is also used as a component of "triple therapy" for
treatment of helicobacteriosis. It is given orally to dogs, horses, cattle, swine,
and cats (reduced dosage) every 6-8 hours. Note that cats are sensitive to
salicylates.
4. Adverse effects. Kaolin/pcclin-none; bismuth suhsalicylate may produce dark
slools which should not be confusod with melena. Salicylates should he used cau-
tiously in cats.
X
DRUGS FOR THERAPY OF INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
A.
General considerations. The IBD represent a diverse group of chronic Gl diseases of
unknown cause. Both clinical and basic science studies indicate that IBD results from
complex interactions between the resident gut flora and the intestinal immune system
in a susceptible host. Idiopathic IBD is the most common histologic diagnosis made
in dogs and cats having chronic Gl signs of vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and weight
loss. A diagnosis of IBD is onc of cxclusion and it is only made following, rigorous
diagnostic evaluation to rule out IBD mimics. Treatment of IBD consists of feeding an
 elimination (hypoallergenic) diet and the administration of immunomodulatory drugs
to reduce intestinal inflammation.
Drugs Acting on the Castrointestinal Tract 」253
B.
Sulfasalazine
1. Chemistry. Sulfasalazine consists of sulfapyridine plus 5-aminosalicylic acid (5.
ASA) linked by a diazo bond.
2. Mechanism of action. Sulfasalazine is clcavcd by bacteria in thc large bowel to
release sulfapyridine and salicylate, The anti-inflammatory effects of salicylate (5-
ASA) on the bowel mucosa are considered to be primarily responsible for the ther-
apeutic action of sulfasalazine. Salicylates act by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis
and the cffects of proinflammatory leukotricnes in the colonic mucosa.
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration. Sulfasalazine is administered orally two to
three times a day for chronic IBD involving the colon (e.g., IBD colitis) in dogs
and cats. It is of no thcrapeutic value to animals having small intestinal IBD.
4. Pharmacokinetics. Sulfasalazine is classed as an enteric sulfonamide since oral
absorption is generally <30% for sulfapyridine. Salicylate absorption is <10%.
 5. Adverse effects. Side effects are rare but sulfapyridine toxicity, especially kerato-
conjunctivitis sicca (KCS), may dcvclop with long-term usc. Prophylactic Schirmcr
tear testing should be performed prior to using this medication. Cats should be
C.
Olsalazine
1. Chemistry. Olsalazine consisls of two molecules of 5-aminosalicylate linked by a
diazo bond. Developed for use in humans with IBD where up to 25% may show
adverse reactions to sulfasalzine.
 2. Mechanism of action. After cleavagc of the diazo bond by colonic bacteria, sali-
cylales are released to reduce inflammation in the bowel mucosa by inhibition of
prostaglandin synthesis.
3. Therapeutic uses and administration. Olsalazine is administered orally two to
three times a day for chronic IBD in dogs and cats. Controlled studies in the dog
attesting to the efficacy of this drug have not been performed.
4. Pharmacokinetics. Oral absorption of olsalazine is minimal with over 98% of the
dose reaching the colon.
5. Adverse effects. Olsalazine is less toxic than sulfasalazine since il lacks the sul-
fonamide moiety. Cats should be monitored for signs of salicylate toxicity if ther
apy is prolonged.
D.Tylosin (see Chapter 15, Xl for more information)
1. Chemistry. Tylosin is a macrolide antibiotic structurally related to erythromycin
(see Chapter 15). Macrolides are organic bases which form salts with acids such
as phosphate or tartratc.
 2. Mechanism of action. Tylosin inhibits protein synthesis in susceptible bacteria by
binding to the 5Os ribosome and blocking long-chain peptide synthesis. Its bac-
is thought to possess immunomodulalory actions in IBD patients-possibly re-
lated to its antibacterial properties rather than to suppression of the host immune
response.
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration. Tylosin is administered orally with food two
or thrcc times a day for chronic colitis in dogs and cats.
4. Pharmacokinetics. Tylosin is absorbed from the intestine and widely distributed
except to the CNs. It is eliminated unchanged in bile and urine.
5. Adverse effects. Mild Gl disturbances such as nausca or diarrhea may be ob-
served with tylosin.
E.
Metronidazole
1. Mechanism of action. Metronidazole is an antiprotozoan nitroimidazole
(see Chapter 16) and antibaclerial, especially againsl anaerobes (Chapter 15). It
may also suppress cell-mediated immune responses which are important in IBD.
254|Chapter 11 Xll 「
 2. Therapeutic uses and administration. Metronidazole (Flagy/&) is administered
orally two to three times a day for the treatiment of colitis in dogs.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. Metronidazole is well absorbed orally, widely distributed to a
volume equivalent to total body water. Hepatic metabolites and unchanged drug
are cxcreted in urine and feces. The plasma ly, in dogs is 4-5 hours
 4. Adverse effects. Side effects are infrequent in dogs. High or prolonged doses may
produce neurotoxicity including tremors and ataxia. Metronidazole should not be
used in pregnant animals.
F
FortiFlora
1. FortiFlora is a specific probiotic (Enteroccoccus faecium SF68) which is marketed
for dogs and cats with Gl disorders. This preparation uses a unique microencap-
sulated formula which conserves and protects the biologically active E. faeciun
SF68 so it can withstand handling, processing, and slorage.
2. Probiotics are live bacterial products that affect beneficial health responses to the
host. They have diverse ways in which they evoke these changes including exclu-
sion of bacterial pathogens and enhancement of local immunily.
 3. Preliminary clinical data suggest that FortifloraTM is of potential therapeutic ben-
efit in both acute and chronic Gl diseases, including IBD. While clinical tri
als have not been performed in dogs or cats with IBD, evidence-based data in
human IBD indicate that probiotics are useful in reducing severity of clinical
discase.
RUMEN PHARMACOLOGY
A.
General considerations 
1. Developmenl of rumen function starls at 3-6 weeks and is complele al 9-13
weeks.
2. Normal intraruminal pH range is 5.5-7.
 3. Extrinsic contractions of the ruminoreticulum are controlled by vagal efferents
from the dorsal vagal nucleus in the CNs.
4. Intrinsic. contractions are controlled by intramural plexuses.
 5. Rumen microflora function depends upon a proper nutrient intake and normal
ruminoreticular motor activity.
B.
Agents for closure of esophageal groove
1. Closure of the csophagcal groove is rcquired for oral medication of calves and
lambs in order to bypass the nonfunctioning ruminoreticulum.
 2. When stimulated, buccal and pharyngeal receptors activate a vagal reflex to close
the groove starting in 2-5 soconds and lasting for 60 seconds.
3. Administration
a. Milk—calves and lambs, orally
b. Sodium bicarbonate—10% calves, orally
c.(
Copper sulfate—5% calves, 2% lambs, 0rally
d. NOTE: Water is not an effective stimulus for groove closure.
C
Ruminotorics
1. Bitters are plant-derived compounds containing alkaloids such as nux vomica,
ginger, or capsicum which stimulate salivation. They were components of large
animal tonic mixtures for the treatment of inappetence and depressed rumen func-
tion. Their efficacy is doubtful and they are seldom used now.
2. Cholinergics such as neostigmine or bethanechol (Chapter 2) transiently in-
crease the frequency but not the slrength of contractions in rumen atony.
Since they do not provide the synchronized contractions and relaxations of the
Drugs Aeting on the Gastrointesinal Tract 255
forestomachs, their value for the movement of ingesta is limited. They are admin-
istered SC.
 3. Experimentally, metoclopropamide has been reported to increase ruminoreticular
motility and abomasal contractions. Opiate antagonists such as naloxone stimu-
late extrinsic contractions in endotoxin-induced ruminal stasis when administered
parcnterally.
4. Ruminal fluid transfer. Oral inoculation of viable rumen bacteria and protozoa is
the most effective means of restoring rumen function following correction of the
primary cause of stasis.
D.
Rumen antacids
1. The principal use of antacids in ruminants is in treating mild cases of lactic acido-
sis resulting from carbohydrate engorgement.
2. Administration. Orally every 8-12 hours
a. Magnesium oxide (MgO)
b. Magnesium carbonate
c. Aluminum hydroxide
3. Adverse effects. Systemic alkalosis may occur with overdose, especially with
MgO.
E.
 Rumen acidifiers
1. The principal use of ruminal acidifiers is in treating simple indigestion in which
intraruminal pH rises due to the constant inflow of bicarbonate-rich saliva. They
are also used in the treatment of acute urea poisoning to decrease ammonia ab-
sorption via formation of ammonium ion and to inhibit ureaso activily of the ru-
men microflora.
2. Administration. Vinegar or dilute acetic acid (4-5%) is administered at a dose of
4-8 liters in cattle via stomach tube every 6-8 hours with several liters of cold
waler.
Bloat therapy
F.
1. Ruminal bloat or tympany is the accumulation of excess gas in the rumen as a re-
sult of impaired elimination, not excess production. Ruminal gasses may be in the
free form or, more commonly, entrapped in froth. Passage of a ruminal tube will
alleviate free-gas bloat but viscosity-altering agents are required for the treatment
of frothy bloat.
2. Mechanism of action. Anti-bloat agents alter the surface tension of froth and break
up the bubbles which contain entrapped gases.
3. Administration. Anti-bloat agents are administered via drench or stonach tube.
a. Poloxalene (25-50 g for cattle).
b. Polymerized methyl silicone (3% emulsion; 30-60 mL in cattle; 7-15 mL in
shcep).
c. Vegetable oils (soybean, peanut, or sunflower oil); 60 mL in cattle; 10-15 mL
in sheep.
SUGGESTED READING
Akood SK, McLaughlin MA, Buffington I. 2006. "Enteral mutrition." ln Fluid, Electrofyte, and Acid Base
Disorders inn Small Animal Practicc. [dited by DiBartola SP. 3rd cd., Pp. 584-600. St. Louis, MD:
Saunders.
Boothe DM. 2001. "Drugs affecting gastrointestinal function." In Veterinary Pharnracology and Thera-
pcutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8tlhi cd., pp. 1041-1063. Ames, IA: lowa Statc University Press.
Clarke CR. 2005. "Systemic pharmacotherapcutics of the ruminant digestive system." In The Merck
Ihttp://www.drugs.com
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handboxok. 5th cd. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
256Chapler 11
Steiner A. 2003. Modifiers of gastrointestinal motility of cattle. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
19:647-660.
Tams TR. 2003. Handbook of Small Animal Gastroenterology. 2nd ed. St. Louis, MD: Saunders.
Washabau Rj. 2003. Gastrointestinal motility disorders and gastrointestinal prokinetic therapy. Vet Clin
North Am Small Aniim Pract 33:1007-1028.
Willard MD. 2003. "Disorders of the slomach." In Small Animal internal Medicine. Edited by Nelson
RW, Couto CG. 3rd ed., pp. 418-430. St. Louis, MD: Mosby.
Willard MD. 2003. "Disorders of the intestinal tract." In Sinall Animal Internal Medicine. Edited by
Nelson RW, Couto CG. 3rd ed., pp. 431-465. St. Louis, MD: Mosby.
Drugs Acting on the Gastrointestinal Tract257
StUdY QUEStIONS
DIRECTIONs: Each of the numbercd items or incomplete statements in this section is
followcd by answcrs or by completions of the statement. Selccl the one lellcred answer or
complction that is best in cach casc.
1. You are presented with a 15-year-old cat-
(C) nux vomica.
depressed, uremic, and dehydrated. Treatment 
(D) xylazine.
Imight include alf but one of the following:
(E) bismuth subsalicylate.
(A) Famotidine, oral
5. The antiemetic actions of metoclopraimide
(B) Sucralfate, oral (2 hours prior to or after
(Reglanv) include all but one of the follow-
oral administration of other drugs)
(C) Metoclopramide, oral
ing:
(D) Glucose-electrolyte, IV
(A) Inhibition of H-1  histamine receptors in
(E) Polypropylene glycol, enema
the vomiting center
(B) Stimulation of gastric motility
2. You have stabilized the above animal but
(C) Inhibition of dopamincrgic reccptors in
after 3 days in your hospital the cat is still
thc CRTZ
not eating. Increased appetite via depression
(D) Increased sensitivity of intestinal smooth
 of the satiety center may result from adminis-
muscle to acetylcholine
tration of
(E) Relaxation of pylorus
(A) terpin hydrate.
6. Which of the following laxatives act to re-
(B) scopolamine.
(C) chlorpromazine.
duce blood ammonia concentrations and thus
(D) ranitidine.
is a component of hepatic encephalopathy
(E) oxazepam.
therapy?
(A) Magnesium sulfalc
3. Appetite has returned to the cat after pro-
(B)Lactulose
viding warmed, palatable food, adequate IV
(C) Castor oil
fluid therapy, and the correct drug in Ques-
(D) Bethanechol
tion 2. You are about to discharge the cat to
its owner when it develops diarrhea. An opi-
7. Thc primary reason for addition of glucose
ate analog with an action limited to the gut is
 or fructosc to oral rehydration solutions in
 cautiously administered. The drug is
trcating diarrheal discase is
(A) loperamide.
(A) to correct the severe hypoglycemia and
(B) butorphanol.
weakness.
(C) domperidone.
(B) to stimulate disaccharidase activity in the
(D) meperidine.
mucosal brush border
(E) propantheline.
(C) lo stirmulate sugar-sodium coupled uptake
by cnterocytes.
4. The cat is sent home. After 2 days,
(D) lo provide a hypertonic gradient for wa-
the owner thinks it has a fever and ad
Ier absorption,
ministers two Extra Strength Tylenol?
(acetaminophen) tablets. He has second
8. Increascd scgmcntation, slowed transit,
thoughts about this and calls you 15 minutes
and stimulation of electrolyte absorption by
later. You advise bringing the cat in immedi-
 gut imucosa characterize the antidiarrheal
ately for induction of emesis with
 action of all but one of the following:
(A) apomorphine.
(A) Paregoric
(B) ammonium chloride.
(B)Methscopolamine
258Chapter 11
(C) Diphenoxylate
14. Vomiting arising from motion sickness or
(D)Loperamide
vestibular disease may be reduced by antihis-
(E)Codcine
tamines such as
(A) propantheline,
9. Considering Gl anlacids, and protectives/
B)
mcloclopramide.
adsorbents
(C) chlorpromazine.
(A)  Hepatic microsomal inhibition is less
(D) diphenhydramine.
likely with cimetidine, than famotidine.
15. Chelation therapy in dogs with copper
(B) Kaolin is a hydrated aluminum silicate.
(C)
 Bismuth subsalicylate tends to produce
toxicosis is besl achieved with
an osmotic laxative effect unless dosage
(A) colchicines.
is carefully controlled.
(B)
LD-penicillamine.
(D)  The antidiarrheal action of pectin is due
(C)
 S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe).
to its rapid breakdown to galactose in the
(D) high protein diets.
small intestine.
16. Anaerobic bacteria serve as microbial
10. Inhibitors of gastric acid secretion are
antigens which trigger chronic. inflammation
employed in small animals for treatment of
in canine inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
gastritis, gastric ulcers, and liver disease, A
Bactericidal activity against anaerobes and
drug which inhibits the acid (proton) pump in
suppression of mucosal immune reactions
the parietal cell is
characlerize the action of which of the fol-
lowing drugs in the treatment of IBD?
(A) famotidine,
(B) ranitidine.
(A)Olsalazine
{C})
 omeprazole.
(B) Clindamycin
(D) diazepam.
(C)  Metronidazole
(D)  Aminopentamide
11. Oral administration of vinegar (acetic
acid) in cattle with urea poisoning
17. Retention of urine may be observed as
an adverse effect of
(A) reduces the ketonemia by providing ac-
(A) chlorpromazine.
etate as an energy source.
(B) isopropamide.
(B)S
stimulates bacterial urease to increase
(C) droperidol.
urea breakdown in the rumen.
(D) diphenoxylate,
{C}S
slows rumen fermentation to allow re-
growth of favorable bacteria.
18. Antiprostaglandin activity and protective/
{D) reduces ammonia absorption into the
adsorbent properties characterize the antidiar-
systemic circulation.
rheal action of
12. Which of the following would be ineffec-
(A) kaolin.
tive in producing closure of the esophagcal
(B) sucralfate.
(C) magnesium silicate.
(ruminoreticular) groove in a calf?
(D)  bismuth suhsalicylalc.
(A)Waler
(B)Milk
19. Poloxalene relieves ruminant bloat by
(C) Sodium bicarbonate, 10%
(D) Copper sulfate, 5%
(A) stimulating the eructation reflex.
(B) inhibiting growth of gas-forming bacteria.
13. Synthetic bile acids such as ursodeoxy-
(C) altering the surface tension of froth.
(D) stimulating rumen motility.
cholic acid
(A) increase fal absorption and bile secretion.
20. The elimination of poisons from the Gl
(B)a
 are lipotropic agents useful in preventing
tract requires administration of a cathartic
fatty liver degeneration.
with a rapid onset of action such as
(C) are used mainly as appetite stimulants in
(A) senna.
lactose- intolerant patients.
(D) decrcasc the production of glutamine
(B) methylcellulose.
which promotes oxidative damage to
(C) magnesium sulfalc.
hepatocytes.
(D) docusate.
Irugs Acting on the Gastrointestinal Tract
259
ANSWERS ANd EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is E [ll C 3].
intestinal lumen. Bacterial fermentation pro-
Polypropylene glycol laxative or enema
duces acids that reduce the pH of the colonic
should not be used in this cat because it will
contents. Blood ammonia is then converted
promote fecal water loss and potentiate de-
to the ionic form which is not absorbed
hydration. Inhibition of gastric acid secretion
and thus is eliminated from the body in the
with famotidine, protective coating of pos-
feces.
sible uremia-induced ulcers with sucralfate,
prevention of emesis with metoclopramide,
7. The answer is C IVll A 5].
and restoration of fluid and electrolyte bal-
Glucose or fructose stirmulates sodium ab-
ance are rational therapeutic measures.
sorption via a coupled transport mechanisim
on enterocytes. Sodium uptake then secon-
2. The answer is E [ll C 3].
darily provides the osmotic force for water
Oxazepam may stimulatc appctite by sup-
absorption. Increased glucose absorption may
pression of the satiety center in the hypotha-
bec beneficial but it is not csscntial for rehy-
lamus by increasing GABA and inhibiting
dration. Disaccharidase activity is not altered
scrotonin. Terpin hydratc is an antitussivc.
by monosaccharides.
scopolamine is an anticholinergic, and chlor-
promazine is a phenothiazine tranquilizer
8. The answer is B [Vll B 2; C 1, 2 d],
and central-acting antiemetic. Ranitidine is an
The actions described characterize the ac-
 H-2 roceptor antagonist that inhibits gastric
tions of opiates on the gut, and all except
acid secretion.
B are opiates. Methscopolamine is an anti-
cholinergic that does not increase segmenta-
3. The answer is A [ll B 2 c].
tion.
Loperamide is a synthetic opiate antidiarrheal
with action limited to the gut. Butorphanol
9. The answer is C [Vll D 2].
and meperidine are opiates that have both
Kaolin is a hydrated, aluminum silicate
central and peripheral actions. Domperidone
with protective/adsorbent properties. Cime-
is a peripheral acting antidopaiminergic that
tidine is more likely to produce hepatic
stimulates gastric motility. Propantheline is an
microsomal inhibition than is famotidine 
anticholinergic agent.
Bismuth subsalicylate has antidiarrheal ef-
fects. Pectin is polymerized galacturonic
4. The answer is D [V B 2].
acid that is not readily hydrolyzed in the Gl
 Xylazine is the central acting emetic. of
tract,
choice in cats. Apomorphine should not be
used in cats becausc of the potcntial for CNS
10. The answer is C [ll A 2 b].
excitement. Ammonium chloride, nux vom-
Omcprazole decrcascs gastric acid sccrc-
ica, or bismuth salts are not emetics.
tion by inhibiting hydrogen ion generation by
parietal cell ATPase. Famotidine and raniti-
5. The answer is A [Vl B 3].
dine are histamine-2 receptor antagonists. Di-
The central antidopaminergic actions of
azepam is a benzodiazepine used for short-
metoclopramide do not include blockade of
term stimulation of appetite.
histamine H-1 receptors. It inhibits dopamine
receptors in the CRTZ and stimulates gastric
11. The answer is D [IX E 1, 2].
 and intestinal imotility and gastric eimptying
Acidification of the rumen shifts the equilib-
for its antiemetic effects.
rium from ammonia to ammonium ion which
slows absorption. Urease activity is also de-
6. The answer is B [Vl C 2 b].
creased at lower rumen pH, resulting in a
Lactulose is a disaccharide molecule that is
slowcr ratc of armmonia formation. Ketonc-
metabolized by luminal bacteria into osmot-
mia or excessive rumen fermentation are not
ically active particles that retain water in the
related to urea poisoning.
260  Chapter 11
12. The answer is A [IX B 3 d].
immunity. Olsalazine is a salicylate dimer
Water is not an effective stimulus for
which is cleaved in the large bowel to re-
esophageal groove closure. Milk, sodium bi-
lease two molecules of 5-aminosalicylate
carbonate, or copper sulfates are effective
which inhibit prostaglandin synthesis. Clin-
stimuli.
damycin suppresses anaerobic bacterial
growth but has no effect on colonic mucosal
13. The answer is A [IV B 1, 2].
immune reactions. Aminopentamide is an an-
The bile acids emulsify lipids to enhance
ticholinergic used in the control of vomiting
absorption and stimulate bile flow. Lipotropic
and diarrhea.
agents such as methionine are methyi donors
that stimulate hepatic lipoprotein synthesis.
17. The answer is B [Vll C 2, 1].
Lactose intolerance is treated by eliminating
Anticholinergic agents such as isopropamide
dairy products from the diet. Bile acids in-
may produce urinary retention as a side effect
crease the production of glutathione which
by inhibiting bladder contractility and tone.
prevents oxidative damage.
Chlorpromazine and droperidol are dopamine
antagonists and diphenoxylate is an opiate
14. The answer is D [Vl C 1, 2l.
agonist.
Diphenhydramine prevents vomiting via
blockade of histaminergic afferents originat-
ing in the vestibular organs. Propantheline is
18. The answer is D [Vll D 2 b].
an anticholinergic and metoclopramide and
The antidiarrheal action of bismuth sub-
chlorpromazine are antidopaminergics with
salicylate is due, in part, to the inhibition
little or no antihistaminic action.
of prostaglandins synthesis in gut mucosa.
Kaolin, magnesium silicate, and sucralfate
15. The answer is B [I B 4].
are mucosal protectives with no effect on
prostaglandin synthesis.
disorder in the Bedlington terrier as well as
other canine breeds. A variety of hepatic dis-
19. The answer is C [Ix F 1, 2].
eases which cause cholestasis may predispose
Poloxalene relieves bloat by altering the
to copper accumulation and subsequent ox-
surface tension of ruminal froth to induce
idative damage. Colchicine is an antifibrotic
breakup and release of entrapped gases. It
agent, while SAMe prevents hepatic oxida-
does not alter rumen microflora or rumen
tive damage but is not a chelation agent.
motility. Breakup of froth permits normal
High protein diets should be avoided with
functioning of the eructation reflex.
hepatopathy since they promote ammonia
production. D-penicillamine is the copper
chelation agent of first-choice for use in the
20. The answer is C [Vl B 2, 4].
dog
Osmotic cathartics such as magnesium sul-
fate act in the small intestine and thus have a
16. The answer is C [Vlll D 1l.
rapid onset of action. Senna, methylcellulose,
Metronidazole is bactericidal for anaerobes
and docusate exert their laxative effect in the
and, in addition, it suppresses cell-mediated
large intestine.
12
Endocrine Pharmacology
Walter H. Hsu
ENDOCRINE FUNCTION. Hormones arc natural secretions of endocrine glands that
can exerl powerful cifecls on other cells/lissues. Compounds thal produce hormone-
like effects have important therapeutic uses for the treatment of endocrine hypofunc-
tion. Compounds that inhibit the hormone synthesis or blocking receptors can be used
for the treatment of endocrine hyperfunction.
A.
 Overview of basic information
1. Mechanism of action. Many horimones effect signal transduction through one of
four imajor mechanisms. For detailed information, see Chapter 1, Ill A 3.
a. GTP-binding proteins (G-proteins) in the plasma membrane: Gs, Giyo, and Gq.
b. Tyrosine kinase
(1) Receptors with tyrosine kinase activity.
(2) Cystosolic tyrosine kinase.
C.
Guanylyl cyclase.
d. Intracellular receptors.
2. Pharmacokinetics
a. Polypeptides and proteins
thus they should not be administered via this route. They are well absorbed
from the injection sites.
(2) Fate
(a) Distribution. They are evenly distributed in the body. In general, they do
not penetrate the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
(b) Metabolism. They are usually rapidly metabolized in the liver and kid-
ney by proteases. Despite their short plasma ti, (5-20 minutes), their
biological actions usually last several hours.
(c) Excretion. Very little is excreted in the urine or feces, if any.
b. Glycoproteins
(1) Absorption. Thcy are destroyed in the Gl tract iollowing oral acdministration.
They are well absorbed from the injection sites.
(2)Fate
(a) Distribution. They are evenly distributed in the body. In general, they do
not penetrate the BBB.
(b) Metabolism. They are slowly metabolized by the liver and kidneys. In
general, tlhe more carbohydrates in the clhemical structure, tlhie more
resistant the compoumd is to imetabolism. The plasma tiy, ranges froim 1
to 24 hours.
(c) Excretion. Thcy are usually not detectable in the urine or feces follow-
ing parenteral administration.
C. Steroids and thyroid hormones
(1)  Absorption. They are well absorbed from the gut following oral adminis-
tration. However, because the natural steroids are rapidly metabolized by
the liver following oral administration, only thyroid horimones and synthetic
steroids that are resistant to liver enzymes can be effectively administered
orally.
(2) Fate. At least 90% of the circulating steroids and thyroid hormones are
bound to plasma-binding proteins (albumin and spccific. globulins) and arc
evenly distributed throughout the bocly, includling CNS. Because they arc
261
262Chapter 12 1 A
protected by plasma protcins, thcy havc much longcr ty, (hours to days)
than polypeptide and protein horimones.
(3) Excretion. When steroids and thyroid hormones are metabolized, they are
hydroxylated and then undergo conjugation to form glucuronides and sul-
fates, which are waler-soluble and thus are readily excreted inlo the urine
and feces.
COMMON ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
A.
Anterior pituitary disorders
1.
Hypopituitarism (pituitary dwarfism)
2.
Acquired growth hormone (GH) deficiency
3.
Neoplasia (functional and nonfunctional)
 4. Hypersecretion of pituitary hormones
a. Acromegaly results from excess of GH.
b. Cushing's syndrome (hyperadrenocorticism) results from excess of ACTH.
c. Galactorrhea results from excess of prolactin.
B.
Posterior pituitary disorders. Diabetes insipidus results from vasopressin deficiency or
vasopressin receptor abnormality.
C.Thyroid disorders
1. Hypothyroidism is usually seen in dogs and horses, which can be treated with
thyroid hormones. Overzealous treatment of feline hyperthyroidism can cause this
disorder as well.
 2. Hyperthyroidism is usually seen in cats. Hyperthyroidism in species other
than cats is frequently caused by adenocarcinoma, and the prognosis in these
animals is usually poor. Thus, antithyroid agents are only recommended for
cats.
D.Parathyroid disorders
1. Hypoparathyroidism leads to hypocalcemia, which is characterized by neuromus-
cular dysfunction (tetany and paresis), bradycardia, and convulsions.
2. Hyperparathyrodism causes hypercalcemia, which has renal, skeletal, Gl, and neu-
rological ramifications.
E. Adrenal dysfunction
1.
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) is usually the result of primary insuf-
ficiency, usually due to autoimmune disorder. Secondary insufficiency, due to a
decrease in ACTH secretion, can occur as well.
2.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome) is usually the result of overproduction
of ACTH. The neoplasm of the adrenal cortex can cause this disorder as well.
 3. Pheochromocytoma causes excessive production of catecholamines, resulting in
hypertension.
F.Disorders of endocrine pancreas
1. Hyperglycemia. Diabetes mellitus is the most common cause.
2. Hypoglycemia (hyperinsulinemia) may be caused by insulin overdose or insuli-
noma,
Gonadal dysfunction results in hypogonadism and ovarian cystic disorders (e.g., fol-
G.
licular cysts and luteal cysts).
Fndocrine Pharmacology263
GH
GH
LAK
P
P
Nucleus
FIGURE 12-1. Mechanisin of action of growth hormone (GH). 1he GH receptor has single subunits
that cortain both GH-binding and signaling domains. These receptors are associated with Janus ki-
2 JAKs undergo reciprocal phosphorylation, which furlher altracts signal transduction and activa-
tion of transcriplion-2 (STAT2) proleins. The homodimer of STAT2 binds to DNA and stimulates gene
transcriptio,
A.
Growth hormone is a protein molecule containing 191 amino acids. Because it resem-
bles prolactin and placental lactogen in slruclure, these three proleins may be evolved
 s   g e     o
1. Synthesis and secretion. GH is produced and secreted by somalotrope of the pi-
tuitary gland. Production of GH is under hypothalamic control; it is stimulated by
GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) and ghrelin and inhibited by somatostatin.
2. Preparations. Sometribove [bovine somatotropin (BsT)] is a prolonged-rclcasc in-
jectable formulation of a recombinant DNA-derived BST analog.
 3. Mechanism of action (Figure 12-1). CH activates Janus kinase (JAK2)-signal trans-
duction and activation of transcription (STAT) pathway, which leads to an increase
in transcription and protein synthcsis. GH also stimulates the sccrction of insulin-
like growth factor-1 (IGF-1, somatomedin) from the liver, which in turn participates
in some of the effects of CH (e.g., growth, cartilage, protein metabolism).
4. Pharmacologic effects. GH promotes growth of all tissues of body that are capable
 of growing, inclucling bone, muscle, and mammary gland. GH promotcs thc growth
of epiphyseal pfate, which is essential for long bone growth. The following are ad-
ditional effects of GH:
a. It increases uptake of amino acids into cells and promotes lipolysis.
b. It increases milk production, probably due to proliferation of the pituitary
gland and prolactin-like activities.
5. Therapeutic uses. Sometribove (Posilac<) is used in cattle to promote milk produc-
tion.
264|Chapter 12 1II A
6. Administration. It is injected SC (500 mg) once evcry 2 wceks, beginning at ninth
week affter calving and until the end of lactation period.
7.
Pharmacokinetics. GH is metabolized in the liver and kidney: the unformulated GH
has an elimination ty, of <20 minutes (see I A 2 for general information). However.
Sometribove is in the slow release form, which can last >2 weeks.
8. Adverse effects
a. Injection site irritation, swelling, and larmeness.
b. Anorexia and weight loss.
C. Mastitis and hypogalactia.
d. Reduced pregnancy rate, due to cystic. ovaries and/or uterine disorders, and
abortion.
e. Short gestation periods, decreased birth weights, and increased rates of twinning
 and placental retention.
B.
 Corticotropin, corticosteroids, and inhibitors
1. General considerations
a. The adrenal cortex serves as a homeostatic organ, regulating reactions to stress.
b. Corticosteroid pathway. The release of adrenal corticosteroids is controlled by a
pathway that includes the CNS.
(1) A number of stimuli, including trauma, chemicals, diurnal rhythms, and
stress, can cause the hypothalamus to release corticotrophin-releasing hor-
mone (CRH).
(2) CRH moves down the hypophyseal portal system and stimulates the anterior
pituitary gland to release ACTH. CRH receptors are coupled to Gq·
(3) ACTH stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce corticosteroids.
(a)  Endogenous glucocorticoids include cortisol and corticosterone.
(b)  Endogenous mineralocorticoids
i. Deoxycorticosterone is produced by the adrenal cortex in response to
ACTH stimulation.
ii. Aldosterone sccretion is stimulated by high plasma angiotensin,
ACTH, or K卡 concentrations.
(4) A negative feedback pathway maintains homeostasis. When the levels of
endogenous corticosteroids increase, the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis
is suppressed and the production of CRH and ACTH is decreased.
 2. ACTH is a polypeptide hormone consisting of 39 amino acids.
a. Preparations. Synthetic ACTH [ACTH (1-24)] possesses the biological activity of
ACTH and is identical for all species.
b. Mechanism of action. ACTH rcceptors arc couplcd to thc Gs-adenylyl cyclase
system.
Therapeutic uses. ACTH is used mainly as a diagnostic tool for distinguishing
C.
the two types of adrenal insufficiency.
(1) Primary adrenal insufficiency. IM administration of ACTH produces little 0r
no increase in cortisol secretion because of the underlying adrenal cortical
dysfunction.
(2) Secondary adrenal insufficiency (i.e., anterior pituitary dysfunction).
ACTH adiministration may or may not produce large increase in corti-
sol secretion, depending on the status of the adrenal cortex; if the cortex
is atrophied, ACTH would not evoke a pronounced increase in cortisol
secretion.
d. Pharmacokinetics. See I A 2 for general information.
e. Adverse effects. ACTH (1-24) is safe when used as directed
3. Corticosteroids
a.
b. Physiological and pharmacological effects
(1) Glucocorticoids
(a)  Effects on intermediary metabolism. Glucocorticoids increase liver
glycogen synthesis and storage, gluconeogenesis, and lipolysis and
redistribution of lipids.
EnclocrinePlharmacology  265
FIGURE 12-2. General struclure of corlicosleroids. Certain structural features relevant to activity. Po-
sitions 1 and 2: The presence of a double bond (delta group) prolongs the activity, especially gluco-
corticoid activity (most synthetic glucocorticoids havc this change). Position 3: The presencc of keto
cocorticoid activity. Position 11: The presence of OH increases glucocorticoid activity: the absence of
OH increases mineralocorticoid activity. The presence of the 11-keto group abolishes corticoid activity.
Examples: cortisonc and prednisonc; thus, they nccd to be mctabolizcd to cortisol and prednisolone
by having the 11-OH group, respectively. Pusition 16: The presence of OH or methyl group increases
glucocorticoid activity (many synthetic glucocorticoids havc this change). Position 17: The presence of
OH increascs glucocorticoid activity. The presence of acetonide on position 16 or 17 further enhances
and prolongs glucocorticoid activity (many synthetic glucocorticoids for topical use have this feature).
(From Figure 8-1, NVMS Pharmacofogy.)
i. The increased gluconeogensis can lead to hyperglycemia and liver
glycogen synthesis.
iil. Hyperglycemia should trigger insulin secretion, which would bring
plasma glucose concentrations to the normal range. However, di-
abetic and diabetes-prone patients would not be able to handle
glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycemia.
im. Chronic administration of a glucocorticoid may further damage
β-cells.
 iv. Glucocorticoids do not promote glycogenolysis.
v. Glucocorticoids increase protein breakdown. The amino acids gener-
ated can be used for gluconeogenesis and liver protein synthesis.
(b) CNS effects. Glucocorlicoids may stimulate the CNS, leading to cupho-
ria. CNS depression is associated with the deficiency (hypoadrenocorti-
cism). However, the mechanisms underlying CNS effects of glucocorti-
coids are not well understood.
(c) Cardiovascular effects
i. Glucocorticoids increase vasomotor responses and myocardial con-
tractions.
il. Glucocorticoids increase epinephrine synthesis by increasing the ex-
pression of phenylethanolamine N-methyl transferase activity.
ill. Glucocorticoids increase the expression of x-adrenergic receptors in 
the vascular smooth muscle and β-adrenergic receptors in the my-
ocardium.
 iv. Glucocortioids facilitate the angiotensin system by increasing expres-
sion of angiotensinogen, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), and
angiotensin ll receptors.
V. Glucocorticoids promote breakdown of bradykinin by increasing the
expression of ACE and neutral endopeptidase.
vi. Glucocorticoids decrease capillary permeability (decongestion).
(d) Respiratory effects
i. Glucocorticoids cause bronchodilation by increasing expression of
β,-receptors
266 | Chapter 12 11l B
ii. Glucocorticoids decrease the retention of mast cells in the respira-
tory tract and decrease the expression of autacoids, for cxample, his-
tamine and bradykinin.
ili. Glucocorticoids induce decongestion of the airway (see cardiovascular
effects).
(e) Skeletal muscle effects. Al physiologic doscs, glucocorlicoids main-
tain skeletal muscle function; deficiency causes weakness due to hy-
poglycemia and poor circulation.
Long-term administration of high doses of glucocorticoids may cause
wasting of muscle mass (due to muscle protein breakdown).
(f) Effects on blood cells and lymphoid tissue. Glucocorticoids increase
number of circulatory erythrocytes, neutrophils, monocytes, and
platelets, while decreasing number of circulatory lymphocytes,
eosinophils, and basophils. Glucocorticoids decrease the size of lymph
nodes and thymus.
i. Polycythemia results from decreased phagocytosis of erythrocytes.
ii. Neutrophilia results from increased entry of neutrophils inlo the circu-
lation, combined with decreased removal of cells from the circulation.
The function of neutrophils, however, is suppressed.
ii. Eosinopenia, basophilia, and lymphocytopenia result from redistribu-
tion of these cells to systems other than blood.
iv. Apoptosis of lymphocytes may be induced by glucocorticoids.
V. Production of interleukens (ILs) by macrophages and T-lymphocytes
is inhibited; as a result, proliferation of B-lymphocytes and production
 of immunoglobulins, and activation of I-lymphocytes are suppressed.
Phagocytosis activity of macrophages is also suppressed.
(g) Immunological effects
i. Too little or too much of glucocorticoids can increase susceptibility to
infection.
ii. Glucocorticoids can treat lesions that result from excessive immune
reactions; for example, urticaria (humoral immunity) and rejection of
transplantation (cellular immunity).
ili. Glucocorticoid-induced suppression of immunity may be attributable
to decreased cytokine production, which can have very serious conse-
quences in animals, particularly exotic birds.
iv. Involution of the lymph nodes, thymus, and spleen occurs.
(h)  Anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic effects occur with pharmacologic
 doses. Glucocorticoids suppress inflammatory processes in response
to multiple inciting events. Clucocorticoids do not address underly-
ing cause of the inflammatory disorders. Anti-inflammatory effects of
glucocorticoids are linked to suppression of immune responses. The
glucocorticoid-induced anti-inflammation is of enormous clinical utility.
decreased expression of chemoattractive factors (e.g., IL-8) and adhe-
sion faclors.
 ii. Plasma and lysosomal membranes are stabilized, resulting in de-
fect can lead to decreased capillary permeability. This membrane-
stabilizing effect is attributed to a decrease in phospholipase A2
(PLAy) activity. PLA2 converts phospholipids into arachidonic acid,
which is a precursor of eicosanoids (see Chapter 3 for more informa-
tion).
ill. Synthesis of prostaglandins and leukotriene (eicosanoids) is sup-
pressed as a result of inhibition of PLA.
 iv. Fibroblast activity, collagen synthesis, and tissue repair are reduced
in inflamed areas.
V. The hair and skin growth is inhibited.
(2) Mineralocorticoids. They increase reabsorption of sodium and bicarbonate
in exchange for excretion of potassium, proton, and chloride in the renal 
[ndorrinePharmacology
267
Cellmembrane
Cytokines,NKR,
RAI
COX-2,ET-1,
LC-1,ADR,
PLA2,NOS
Eases,NEP,
RAF
ACE
业
RAP
mRNA
mRNA
FIGURE 12-3. Mechanism of action (of cytosolic corticosteroid receptors. The inactive receptor is sur-
rounded by receptor-associated proteins (RAPs), for example, heat-shock proteins (HSPs). Hormone (H)
binding leads to the dissociation of RAPs, and formation of dimers that pcnetrate into the nucleus and
bind to corticosteroid-response elernent (CRE) of DNA to alter rmRNA synthesis. Synthesis tof certain
mRNAs is incrcased, while that of others is decrcased, particularly in the casc of thc glucocorticoid
receptor. NKR, neurokinin receptor; (COX-2, cyc:looxygemase 2; ET-1, enclothelin-1; PLA2, phospholipase
A2; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; LC-1, lipocortin-1; ADR, adrenergic receptor; NEP, meutral endopepti-
dase; Eases, cndonucleases; AC[, angiotensin-converting enzyme.
tubules and, to a lesser extent, in the Gl tract (see Figure 9-4). The following
events are associated with the changes of these electrolytes:
(a) Hypernatremia increased blood pressure,
(b) Hypokalemia decreases excitability of nerves and skeletal muscle and
smooth muscle.
(c) Hypokalemia increases excitability of cardiac muscle. Hypokalemia
causes a poor exchange with intracellular Na- by Na-, K+-ATPase,
resulting in retention of Na+ in myocardium, Increased myocardial Na+
concentration promotes Ca?+ influx via Na'-Ca? : antiport. Increased
myocardial Ca²
 concentration increases myocardial contractility (see
Figure 8-2).
C. Mechanism of action. Like other steroid hormones, corticosteroids act by alter-
ing mRNA synthesis (Figure 12-3). For example, glucocorticoids increase mRNA
synthesis of adrenergic receptors; enzymes for breaking down bradykinin,
for example, ACE and neutral endopeptidase; enzymes in gluconeogenesis,
while decreasing mRNA synthesis of cytokines and their receptors, PlA2, and
cyclooxygenase (COx).
268
TABLE 12-1. Corticostcroids: Anti-lnflammatory and Sodium-Rctaining Potcncics
(Oral Administration)
Corticosteroid
Anti-lnflammatoryPotency
Sodium-Retaining Potency
Short-acting (≤12 hours)*
Hydrocortisone
1
1
Cartisone
0.8
0.8
Fludrocortisone
10
125
Intermediate-acting (12-36 hours)*
Prednisone
4
0.8
P'rednisolone
5
0.8
Methylprednisolone
5
0.5
Triamcinolone
5
Long-acting (36-72 hours)*
Paramethasone
10
Betamcthasone
25
()
 Dexainethasone
25
0
Flumethasone
30
0
*Biologic half-life
Aldosterone increases the mRNA synthesis of Na+ channels, K+ channels,
and HI-ATPase (in the apical side) and Na', KI-ATPase, and HCO-Cl- an-
tiport in the distal renal tubule (see Figure 9-4), and intestinc.
d. Pharmacokinetics.
(1) Absorption. Corticosteroids are readily absorbed from the Gl tract, imucous
membranes, and skin.
(2) Fate, The majority of corticosteroids are bound by plasma proteins
(corticosteroid-binding globulin and albumin).
(3)  Metabolism
(a) The C; keto group is reduced to an -OH group, which then undergoes
conjugation.
(b) Reduction of the Cii keto group to an -OH group is necessary to
convert cortisone to cortisol (hydrocortisone) and prednisone to pred-
nisolone, these are biologically active forms.
(4) Excretion. The conjugates are excreted by the kidneys.
e. Preparations
(1) Depending on duration of action, corticosteroids can be classified as short-
acling (biological ty, of ≤12 hours), intermedialc-acting (biological ty, 0i
12-36 hours), and long-acting preparations (biological ry, of 36-72 hours).
See Table 12-1.
(2) For injectable preparations, corticoslcroids can be water-soluble or water-
insoluble (suspension). Water-soluble injectables are in phosphate or suc-
cinate form, or dissolved in polyethylene glycol. These preparations can
be administered IV, IM, or SC. Water-insoluble injectables are in acetate,
pivalale, or acclonide form. These prcparations can be administered IM or
SC, but not IV (to avoid embolism). IM or SC administration of suspensions
can attain duration of action of the corticosteroid up to 3 weeks.
f. Therapeutic uses
(1) Glucocorticoids
(a) Short-acting drugs (see Table 12-1) are available without prescrip-
tion for topical use to treat pruritus and inflammation associated with
allergy.
(b) Intermediate-acting drugs (see Table 12-1) are used for long-terim con-
trol of allergy, chronic inflammation (e.g. arthritis), and immunosuppres-
sion. They can be used orally in the manner of alternate-day therapy.
(c) Long-acting drugs (see Table 12-1)
i. Long-acting drugs are used for the immediate relief of hypersensi-
tivity and shock (particularly hemorrhagic and septic shock) and the
Endocrine Pheurmacology
269
long-terim control of allergy in cats. They are used topically to treat
pruritus and inflammation associated with allergy. In addition to
the ones listed in Table 12-1, potent glucocorticoids, for example,
mometasone and flucinolone are also used topically.
ii. They may be used to induce parturition.
li. Isoflupredone is used to treat ketosis in cattle.
(2) Mineralocorticoids
(a) Aldosterone is not available as a pharmacologic agent because of its
short duration of action, particularly when it is administered orally
(b) Deoxycorticosterone and fludrocortisone are used in the replacement
therapy for hypoadrenocorticism. Deoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP.
Percorlen?-v) is used for mineralocorticoid replacement at 2.2 mg/kg,
IM, once every 25 days). Fludrocortisone has high mineralocorticoid
and glucocorticoid potency; thus, it is the preferred drug for the treat-
ment of hypoadrenocorticism. Fludrocortisone acctate is adminislercd
orally at a dose of 0.01 mg/kg, once a day or twice a day as the initial
dose. The subsequent doses should be adjusted according to the need.
g.Administration
(1) Oral. All synthetic corticosteroids can be administered orally. Alternate-day
oral administration of an intermediate-acting drug helps reduce the inhibi-
tion of ACTH secretion, The natural products (hydrocortisone, deoxycor-
ticosterone) should not be administered orally, because they are quickly
metabolized by the liver via enterohepatic circulation.
(2) IV. Water-soluble drugs (e.g., the succinate, phosphate!, and polyethylene
glycol form), may be given IV.
Axop "o'a] uoisuadsns snonbe Apepned 'spioiais yo uonensuwpe wl (e)
corticosterone pivalate, methylprednisolone acetate (DepoMedrol?)], may
be performed at weekly intervals for chronic use.
(4) Topical. Water-insoluble drugs are available in water suspension, cream and
ointment forms.
h. Adverse effects
(1) latrogenic hypoadrenocorticism may follow withdrawal from long-term use
of high doses due to a decrease in ACTH secretion.
(2) Toxic effects following continued use of high doses are extensions of the
pharmacologic effects and include
(a) Decreased wound healing.
(b) Increased susceptibility to infection.
(c) Fluid and electrolyte imbalance.
(d) Myopathy.
(e) Osteoporosis is due to decreased calcium absorption from the Gl
tract and reabsorption from the kidneys. The slight decrease in plasma
Ca²- concentration, sends a signal to the parathyroid gland to increase
parathyroid hormone secretion, which promotes bone resorption. Also.
glucocorticoids inhibit bone formation by decreasing osteoblast activity.
Edema (from increased Na+ retention).
(g) Congestive heart failure in cats.
(h) Thrombosis (due to increase in platelets in the blood).
(i) Hepatotoxicity in dogs, which is manifested by micronodular cirrhosis
and hepatoimegaly.
() Gl ulceration.
(k) Diabetes mellitus, particularly when used chronically in animals that
already have mild diabetes.
(l) Ahortion in late prcgnancy.
(m) Laminitis in horses due to vasoconstriction of venules.
i. Contraindications include uncontrolled infections, diabetes mellitus, corneal
ulcers, cardiac disorders, burns, and pregnancy.
4. Adrenal steroid inhibitors
a. Mitotane (o,p'-DDD)
(1) Chemistry. Mitotane is related to DDT, an insecticide. It is a highly lipophilic
drug.
270 Clhapter 12 I B
(2) Mechanism of action. Its mechanism of action is not understood. Mitotane
is cytotoxic to zonae fasciculata and reticularis of the adrenal cortex, which
secrete all cndogcnous sleroids cxcept aldosteronc. Zona glomerulosa, which
secretes aldosterone, is not affected by mitotane.
(3) Pharmacokinetics
(a) Absorption of mitotane through the Gl tract is variable, since it is a
lipid-soluble drug. The Gl absorption can be enhanced by giving the
drug with food (especially high in oil/fat content) to increase bile secre-
tion, which will help dissolve mitotane to increase absorption. [Distribu-
tion of the drug occurs to virtually all tissues in the body. The drug is
stored in the fat and does not accumulate in the adrenal glands.
(b) Mitotane has a very long plasma ty: (in humans), ranging from 18
to 159 days. The drug is metabolized in the liver and is excreted
as mctabolites in the urine and bile. Approximately 15% of an oral
dose is excreted in the bile, and 10% in the urine within 24 hours of
dosing.
(4) Therapeutic uses include hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome) and
adrenal adenoma and carcinoma.
(5) Administration. Mitotane is adiministered orally (25 mg/kg, twice daily for
10-14 days, followed by 25-50 mg/kg, once per week).
(6) Adverse effects
(a) Animals may show lethargy, ataxia, weakness, anorexia, vomiting, or
diarrhea, attributable to lowered corticosteroid secretion.
(b) Hepatotoxicity (i.c., congestion, centrolobular atrophy, and falty degener-
ation) may be seen.
(c) Mitotane-induced hypoadrenocorticism may occur.
i. In ~5% of dogs trealed with mitotane, fudrocortisone may be necded 
as the replacement therapy.
ii. All animals treated with imitotane should receive glucocorticoid sup-
plementation when undergoing stress.
b. Ketoconazole inhibits adrenal steroidogenesis and is used to treat hypera-
drenocorticism in dogs that is resistant to mitotane. It is also uscd as a pallia-
tive therapy in dogs with large, malignant, or invasive tumors and in whom
surgery is not an option. The recoimmended dose is 15 mg/kg. twice daily for
as long as necessary. The inhibition of steroid synthesis by keloconazole is
reversible.
(1) Mechanism of action. Ketoconazole inhibits cytochrome P450 enzymes that
are involved in steroid synthesis (see also Chapler 15).
(2)  Pharmacokinetics
(a) Since keloconazole has a low pKa of 2.9, oral bioavailability of the
drug in dogs is highly variable, Peak serum concentrations occur be-
tween 1 and 4 hours after dosing. This wide interpatient variation may
have significant clinical implications from both a toxicity and effi-
cacy standpoint, Administration with food may increase Gl absorption,
since gastric acid will be secreted to increase nonionized form of the
drug.
(b) Ketoconazole is >85% bound to plasma proteins. The drug can be
found in bitch's milk.
(c) It is metabolized extensively by hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes into
several inactive metabolites. These mctabolites are cxcreted primarily
into the feces via the bile. About 13% of a given dose is excreted into
the urine and only 2-4% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine
ty in dogs is 1-6 hours (average 2.7 hours).
(3) Adverse effects
(a) Anorexia, vomiting, and/or diarrhea are the most common adverse ef-
fercls sccn with ketoconazole therapy.
(b)  Hepatic toxicity consisting of cholangiohepatitis and increased liver en-
zymes may be scen.
(c) Reproductive disturbances may be seen while the dogs are on ketocona-
zole therapy, since it inhibits the synthesis of all steroids.
Endlocrine Phamacology 271
(d) Ketoconazole can inhibit the metabolism of other drugs that are sub-
jec:led to cytoxchrome P450 enzymes. Drug inleraclion is a very impor-
tant feature of ketoconazole. For example, ketoconazole and mitotane
should not be used concurrently, since the metabolism of mitotane is
inhibited by ketoconazole.
(e) Avoid ketoconazole in cats, since they already have deficiency in phase
I enzymes.
C. Trilostane (Vetory?), Desopan), Modrenal?)
(1) Chemistry. It is a synthetic steroid analog.
(2) Mechanism of action. Trilostane is a competitive inhibitor of 3-β hydroxy-
sleroid dehydrogenase, and thus inhibits corlicosteroid synthesis.
(3) Therapeutic uses. Trilostane is used in dogs for treatment of hyperadrenocor-
ticism. Initial therapy is al 2-10 mg/kg, orally once a day. ll can be oblained
from a compounding pharmacy.
(4)  Pharmacokinetics
(a) In dogs, after oral acministration, trilostane is erratically absorbed (be-
cause of high lipid solubility)! with peak levels occurring within 2 hours.
The presence of food in the gut to stimulate bile flow should increase
absorption.
(b) Trilostane is eliminated from the plasma within 18 hours (of oral admin-
istration (elimination t / = ~1 hour). Inhibition on corticosteroid produc-
tion apparenlly last for ≤20 hours after dosing.
(c) Trilostane is metabolized in the liver to several metabolites including
ketotrilostane, which is active. The hydroxylaled metabolites further un-
dergo conjugation, which will be excreted into urine and feces.
(5) Adverse effects. Lethargy, anorexia, vomiling, elec.trolyte abnormalities, and
diarrhea. Because trilostane inhibits progesterone synthesis, it should not be
used in pregnant animals. Trilostane does not affect the synthesis of estro-
gens or androgens.
d. Selegiline (Anipryl@)
(1) Mechanism of action. Selegiline inhibits ACTH secretion by increasing
dopamine concentration around corticotrope of the anterior pituitary. Se-
legiline increases dopamine concentration by inhibiting the metabolism by
monoamine oxidase B (MOA-B) and decreasing the reuptake of dopamine.
(2) Therapeutic uses. Selegiline is labeled for treatment of ithe pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, which is due to excess of ACTH
secretion. However, a recent study published in the Austrafian Veterinary
Journaf (Vol. 82:272, 2004) showed that selegiline was not effective in the
treatment of this disease. In addition, it is used to treat canine cognitive dys-
function syndrome (see Chapter 5 for more information). It is administered
orally at 1-2 mg/kg/day.
(3)Pharmacokinetics
(a) Selegiline is absorbed rapidly and has an absolute bioavailability of
~10%. Elimination ti, is ~1 hour.
(b) Selegiline is metabolized in the liver into L-desmethylselegiline, metam-
phetamine, and t-amphetamine. Each of these metabolites is active.
While I-desrmethylselegiline does inhibit MAO-B, the others do not, but
are CNS stimulants. The drug is excreted in the urine, primarily as con-
jugated and unconjugated metabolites.
(4) Adverse effects. Adverse effects include vomiting and diarrhea; CNs distur-
bances maniiested by resllessness, repetilive movements, or lethargy: and
salivation and anorexia. Diminished hearing/deafness, pruritus, licking, shiv-
ers/rembles/shakes have also been reporled, Selegiline has the potential (o
be abused by humans.
C
 Gonadotropins are glycoprotein hormones
1. Synthesis, secretion, and actions
a. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) are pro-
duced and secreted by the gonadotrope of the pituitary gland. Production of
272（hapter 12 I（
 FSH and LH is under hypothalamic control; it is stimulated by gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH). GnRH receptors are coupled to Gq and increases
[Ca²1 ].
(1) In male animals, FSH increases the diameter of the seminiferous tubules
and promotes spermatogenesis. LH increases testosterone synthesis
from Leydig cells. Secretion of FSH and LH is rather consistent in male
animals,
(2) In female animals, FSH stimulates graafian follicle development and estro-
gen synthesis. LH evokes ovulation and increases luteinization, leading to
increased progesterone synthesis. Secretion in female animals varies with
the stage of the estrous cycle.
(a) Proestrus (follicular phase). Rising FSH levels are followed by rising
LH Ievels, which rmediate follicular growth and ovulation, respectively.
Production of ovarian cstrogcns increascs. The reproductive tract is hy-
pertrophied and hyperemic.
(b) Estrus (ovulation) is associated with an LH spike.
(c) Metestrus-diestrus (luteal phase) is characterized by proliferation of the
reproductive tract mucosa as a result of increased progesterone produc-
tion fron the corpus luteum (CL). As CL involutes, ovarian steroid levels
decline, causing endometrial degeneration.
b. Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) has LH-like activity. It is secreled (rom
the placenta and extracted from the urine of the pregnant women.
C.
Equine chorionic gonadotropin (ECG, PMSG) has FSH-like activity. It is secreted
 from the placenta and extracted from the serum of pregnant mares.
d. Mechanism of action. All gonadotropin receptors are coupled to Gs, which
activates adenylyl cylase to increase cyclic AMP formation, which activates
protein kinase A. Thus, protein kinase A phosphorylates the cellular con-
stituents for the action.
 2. Preparations and therapeutic uses
a. Gonadorelin is the drug name for GnRH; desorelin is an analog of GnRH. They
are administered IM to induce LH release for treatment of follicular cysts in
cows. They can be used to induce ovulation as well.
b. LH and HCG
(1) In fcrmale animals, LH and HCG are uscd to induce ovulation and to treat
persistent infertility.
(2) in male animals, they can be used to treat cryptorchidism. LH increases
testosterone production, which causes decent of the testicles into the scro-
tum.
c. FSH and ECG
(1) In fcmales, FSH and ECG arc used to stimulate graafian follicle develop-
ment, which leads to estrus and may increase the incidence of multiple
births,
(2) In males, FSH and ECG are used to treat infertility. These horimones may
improve libido and spermatozoa counts.
 3. Pharmacokinetics
a. Plasma fy, of LH, FSH, HCG, and ECG are ~0.5, ~1, ~8, and ~24 hours, re-
spectively.
b. Gonadotropins are metabolizcd in the liver and kidney by protcases. However,
gonadotropins as glycoprotein hormones are much more resistant to break-
down than other protein/peptide hormones. The more carbohydrales are in the
structure, the more resistant these glycoproteins are to breakdown. Carbohy-
drates account for 13-16% of FSH and LH, 31% of HCG and 47% of ECG.
4.
 Adverse effects. Anaphylactic shock may develop after repeated interspecies ad.
ministration of a gonadotropin.
5. GnRH partial agonistleuprolide (LeupronDepot)
a. Chemistry and preparation. Leuprolide is a CnRH analog. The commercial
preparation used in animals is a suspension depot form of leuprolide acetate,
which should be diluted with saline before use. The diluted form of leuprolide is
Endocrine Pharmacology 273
to negate the muscle necrosis problem and to obtain a more accurate dose than
u paois suiaq lane aoe uea oi seadde woy pan al on qeubuo a
the freezer for a ycar.
b. Pharmacologic effects. Leuprolide is a partial agonist of GnRH to inhibit the
hyperactivity of gonadotropin-sex steroid synthesis.
C.
 Therapeutic uses
(1) Leuprolide is used to control adrenocortical disease (ACD) in ferrets that 
were neutered at 1-3 months of age. ACD is a disease due to overproduc-
tion of sex steroids by the adrenal masses. The affected ferrets show aggres-
sive sexual behavior, constant estrus, alopecia, and pruritus. Diluted leupro-
lide suspension (100 μg) is administered IM once a month for this purpose.
It can be used in conjunction with mitotane therapy (see Ill B 4).
(2) Leuprolidc is used to inhibit ovulation for the control of inappropriate egg
laying in captive cockatiels. Il is adminislered IM al the dose of 375 μg/bird,
once a month.
d. Pharmacokinetics. Sec I A 2 a, for gcneral information. No information is avail-
able for animals.
e. Adverse effects. Al the recommended doses, leuprolide appears to be safe. The
drug should not be used in pregnant animals.
D
Sex steroids
1. Estrogens and anti-estrogens
a. Synthesis and secretion of endogenous estrogens. Endogenous estrogens are syn-
thesized and secreted (rom the ovaries, testicles (especially in stallions) adrenal
cortex, and placenta.
b. Preparations
(1) Steroidal estrogens include estradiol, estrone, and estriol. Estradiol is the
most potent endogenous estrogen that is also used therapeutically. Estra-
diol is available as estradiol cypionate injectable or estradiol and estradiol
benzoate ear implants for beef cattle. The estradiol benzoate implant pel-
Icts also contain othcr steroids, for cxample, progesteronc or testosteronc
propionate/trenbolone acetate (androgen).
(2) Nonsteroidal estrogens include zeranol (Ralgro Implants), a mycotoxin
which is used as car implants in cattle and shccp as a growth promotant,
and diethylstilbestrol (DES), which is used mainly in dogs and cats. DES is
difficult to procure.
C. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Estrogens stimulate and maintain the reproductive tract and cause hyper-
emia, hypertrophy, and edema during estrus.
(2) They cause cervical dilation.
(3) They slimulate growth of the mammary glands.
(4) They increase ossification of epiphyseal lines to limit bone growth, particu-
larly in women.
(5)  They increase sexual receplivily.
(6) They have protein anabolic effects (i.e., they stimulate protein synthesis)
(7) They antagonize androgen effects by blocking androgenic receptors.
expression of GH receptors, insulin-like growth factors secretion.
e.
Therapeutic uses
(1)  Treatment of problems associaled with ovariohysterectomy (e.g., urinary
incontinence, vaginitis, dermatitis). Phenylpropanolamine, an α-adrenergic
 agonist, should be used as the primary drug for the treatment of urinary
incontinence.
(2) To relax the cervix and caudal reproductive tract for parturition induction
or abortion.
(3) It is sometimes effective in inducing estrus in anestrous animals.
274(hapicr 12 II )
(4) Treatment of persistent CL in cows. Estrogen therapy is occasionally success-
ful.
(5) Trcatmcnt of pyometra and mummified fetus, howcvcr, prostaglandin F2α is
preferred.
(6)Treatment of prostatic hyperplasia or lumors associated with increased an-
drogenic aclivily. Estrogens can be used as androgen receptor antagonisls.
However, finasteride, an androgen inhibitor, is preferred to estrogens for
this use (see Ill C 3 g).
(7) Mismating therapy in dogs. Estrogen preparations decrease implantation and 
interfere with ovum transport by increasing contraction of the uterotubal
sphincter. However, this is a rare practice, because estrogens can cause bone
marrow depression in dogs and cats. Prostaglandin Fzα and bromocriptine
(8) Growth promotion in ruminants
(a) Estradiol is usually combined with progesterone or an androgen jor
no preslaughter withdrawal time indicated for this use.
(b) Zeranol implantation is used to promote growth in cattle and sheep.
The preslaughter withdrawal period of zeranol is 65 days in cattle and
40 days in shcep.
f. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Estradiol cypionate. Following IM administralion, estradiol cypionate is ab-
sorbed slowly over several days. Il is distributed throughout the body and
accumulates in adipose tissue. Approximately 90% of estradiol is bound by
plasma proteins (i.e., sex steroid-binding globulin and albumin). Estradiol
undergoes hepatic. phase Il metabolism to become estradiol glucuronide and
estradiol sulfate. The estradiol metabolites are excreted into the urine and
the bile and feccs.
(2) Estradiol and cstradiol bcnzoate car implants. The absorption of cstradiol
irom implants is very slow, taking months before it is completely absorbed.
(3) Zeranol. No information about the pharmacokinetics of zeranol implants is
available.
(4) DES is readily absorbed from the Gl tract of monogastric animals. It is
slowly metabolized (primarily to a glucuronide) by the liver, and then it is
excreted into the urine and feces.
g. Adverse effects. Estrogens can cause vaginal and rectal prolapse, abortion, fol-
licular cysts, bone fractures (as a result of excessive ossification), aplastic anemia
and leucopenia (a unique toxic effect of estrogens in dogs and cats caused by
bone marrow suppression), and pyometritis.
h. Contraindications include pregnancy. High estrogen levels may cause fetal geni-
tourinary malformations and may induce abortion.
(1) Therapeutic uses. Tamoxifen is used to treat canine mammary gland tumors
at 10-20 mg orally, once every 12 hours.
（2）
Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for dogs.
(3) Adverse effects. Pyomctra, nausca, and vomiting.
2. Progestins
a. Synthesis and secretion of progesterone. Progesterone is synthesized and se-
creled from the Cl and placenta of mares and ewes and from the adrenal cor-
tex.
b. Pharmacologic effects
(1) Progestins increase glandular growth after priming with estrogens.
(2) Progestins prolong the luteal phase of the estrous cycle.
(3) Progestins desensitize the myometrium to oxytocin (i.e., it prevents uterine
contractions during pregnancy).
(4) Progestins have anabolic effects, probably due to increased appetite and
decreased physical activity.
c. Mechanism of action. See I A 1 d, for general information (also Figure 12-3).
Endocrine Pharmacology275
d. Preparations include progesterone and synthetic. progestins, rmedroxyproges-
lerone (MPA), megestrol (Ovaban), melengestrol (MGA), and alrenogest 
(Regu-Mate?, Matrix:).
e. Therapeutic uses
(1)  Altrenogest is adininistercd orally to marcs (0.044 mg/kg. onc dosc daily
for 15 consccutivc days) to synchronize or suppress estrus and extend the
luteal phase. The estrus appears in 4-5 days after last dose of allrenogest. Il
is also given orally to gilts/sows for 14 days to extend the luteal phase. The
estrus appears in 4-9 days after last dose of the drug. When used in pigs,
there is a preslaughter withdrawal period of 21 days.
(2) Melengestrol is used as a cattle fecd additive (0.28-2.2 mg/kg of body
weight) for 14 days to suppress estrus and exlend the luteal phase. The
estrus appears in 2-6 days after the last dose of melengestrol.
(3) Progestins are used (with limited success) to treat implantation failure and
habitual abortion.
(4) Megestrol acetate (2.2 mg/kg/day orally for 32 days starting in ancstrus) can
be used as a contraceptive in bitches.
(5) Medroxyprogesterone acetate (IM or SC) and oral megestrol acetate are
Chapter 5 for more information.
(6)
Progesterone combined with an estrogen increases sexual receptivity in
bitches and ewes.
(7) Melengestrol and progesterone are used as growth promotants in catle.
(a) Melengestrol is used as a feed additive. A withdrawal period of at
Icast 48 hours should be implemcnted when using mclengestrol in
caltle.
(b) Irogesterone is used as an implant. No preslaughter withdrawal time is
required.
f. Pharmacokinetics
(1)  Progcsterone is rapidly inactivatcd by hcpatic cnzymes (scc bclow) following
 Gl absorption, thus progesterone should not be administered orally. Synthetic
progestins are more resistant to metabolism than progesterone.
(2)
 Approximately 90% of progestins are bound by plasma proteins
(corticosteroid-binding globulin and albumin).
(3) The 3-keto group of a progestin is converted to 3-hydroxy group and hy.
droxyl groups which undergo conjugalion with glucuronide or sulfate and
thus the metabolites become water soluble and are excreted into urine or
feces.
the pharmacokinetics is available for animals. However, the duralion of ac-
tion is at least 30 days when used SC or IM to treat behavior problems in
cats.
(5) Megestrol acetate is well absorbed from the Gl tract of monogastric animals
and is mctabolized in the liver to conjugates. The ty, is 8 days in dogs.
(6) Melengestrol and altrenogest. No information about ihe pharmacokinetics of
 these agents is available.
Adverse effects
(1) Endometrial hyperplasia, endometritis, and pyometra may occur.
(2) The glucocorticoid-like activity of the progestins may inducc diabetes melli-
tus in animals that alrcady havc marginal diabctes.
(3) Inhibition of ACTH is also an adverse effecl associated with the
glucocorticoid-like activity of the progestins, which leads to iatrogenic hy-
3. Androgens
a. Synthesis and secretion of testosterone. Testosterone is secreted by the testis and
adrenal cortex. In target tissues (e.g., Sertoli cells, prostate gland), testosterone
is reduced to 5α-dihydrotestosterone, which has twice the biologic activity of
testosterone.
276Chapter 12 I D
b. Preparations include testosterone eslers, boldenone (Equipoise), and stanozolol
(Winstrelk-V). The latter two are weak androgens and are called anabolic
steroids. Danazol (Danocrine) is an androgen receptor partial agonist.
c. Pharmacologic effects
(1)  Androgens have masculinizing effects.
(a)  Testosterone is responsible for the development of the accessory sex or-
gans, epididymis, vas deferens, prostate, and seminal vesicles, and the
secondary sex characteristics.
(b)  Acting in conjunclion with FSH, testosterone promoles spermatogenesis.
(c) Androgens at the appropriate doses can increase libido.
(2) Androgens have anabolic effects, leading to increased protein synthesis (par-
ticularly in skeletal muscle), retention of potassium and phosphorus, and
increased growth of bone cartilage and other tissues.
(3) Androgens increase erythropoiesis by promoting the secretion of erythro-
poietin. This effect of androgens can be used for the treatment of anemia.
(5) Danazol is a synthetic partial androgen receptor agonist. It can suppress
the pituitary-ovarian axis. Danazol may direcily inhibit sex sleroids synthe-
sis, and binds lo sex steroid receptors in cells/tissues, where il may cxpress
anabolic, weak androgenic, and antiestrogenic effects. Danazol appears to
reduce affinity of antibody with the mononuclear phagocytic system F-
receptor,
d. Therapeutic uses
(1) Testosterone has been used:
(a) To treat impotency and infertility, with variable success,
(b)  To treat urinary incontinence and dermatitis in castrated males.
(c) To produce a teaser animal in cull cows, heifers, and steers.
(2) Stanozolol and boldenone are used for growth promotion, muscle buildup,
-ed 'eiwaue jean oi pue (eixauoes sd'a) uonaldap anssnl jo lesiaaal pue
ticularly due to chronic renal failure, chronic arthritis, and degenerative
myelopathy.
(3) Stanozolol is administered orally on the daily basis, or IM as a suspension
 al the weekly basis. Boldenone in sesame oil is administered IM once every
3 weeks.
(4) Trenbolone and testosterone are used as implants for growth promotion in
cattle. See Ill C 1 e (8).
(5) Danazol is primarily uscd as adjunctive therapy with glucocorticoids
in the treatment of canine immune-mediated thrombocytopenia and
hemolytic anemia, particularly if the patient becomes refractory to glu-
cocorticoids and other immunosuppressants. It is administered orally at 5
mg/kg twice daily: can taper dose oncc paticnt is on low dose alternate day
prednisone/prednisolone (see Il E).
e. Pharmacokinetics
(1) After absorption, androgens are distributed throughout the body and accu-
mulate in adipose tissue. Approximately 90% of androgens are bound by
plasma proteins (i.e., sex steroid-binding globulin and albumin, just like es-
trogens). Androgens undergo hepatic metabolism to become glucuronide
and sulfate conjugales. The metabolites are cxcreled into the urine and the
bile, further into feces.
(2) Testosterone ester suspensions or in oil are administered IM. The duration of
action may persist for 2-4 weeks. The plasma ty, of testosterone cypionate
after IM administration is 8 days.
(3) Boldenone and stanozolol are well absorbed after IM administration;
stanozolol may also be administered orally. When administered IM, the ef-
fects of boldenone in oil persist up to 8 weeks, while those of stanozolol in
suspension persist for >1 weck.
(4) Danazol is absorbed from the Gl tract, but appears to be a rate-limited pro-
cess as increasing the dosage does not yield a corresponding increase in
Enclocrine Plarmacology 277
plasma concentration. It is metabolized in the liver. Other information is not
available.
f. Adverse effects include
(1) Infertility or oligospermia.
(2) Perianal adenomas, perineal hernias, prostatic disorders, and behavioral
changes (following long-term androgen administration).
(3) Masculinization of females and female fetuses.
(4) Hepatotoxicity.
g. Antiandrogens-Finasteride (Proscar)
(1) Pharmacologic effects. Finasteride decreases androgenic activity of the an-
imals by inhibiting the formation of 5α-dihydrotestosterone, which is an
active and potent testosterone metabolite.
(2) Therapeutic uses. Finasteride can be used orally at 0.1-0.5 mg/kg once a
the drug is expensive, and the long duration of therapy is required to see a
response, its usefulness may be limited. For BPH, the recommended therapy
is castration.
(3) Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for dogs.
(4) Adverse effects. No adverse eifects have been seen witlh recommended
 doses, except that finasleride is a teratogen.
Uterine contractants and drugs to induce luteolysis. When used to induce labor, these
agents are called oxytocic. or ccbolic agcnts. When thcy are used to induce abortion,
they are called abortifacients.
1. General uterine physiology
 a. Hormonal influence. Estrogen and progesterone influence uterine activity.
(1) During proestrus and estrus, under the influence of estrogens, the uterus
shows large and slow contractions.
(2) During metestrus-diestrus, under the influence of progesterone, the uterus
shows weak and rapid contractions.
sis of estrogens and prostaglandins, which lead to luteolysis.
(a)  The presence of Cl in prepartum animals inhibits the action of an oxy-
tocic agent; therefore, luteolysis may be needed to induce parturition.
(b) Because prepartum mares do not have a functional Cl, an oxytocic
agent alone can effectively induce foaling.
(c) Oxytocin secretion and the density of oxytocin receptors increase, lead-
ing to large and cffeclive ulerine contraclions that expel the fetuses from
the reproductive tract. Oxytocin receptors are coupled to Gq.
b. Autonomic influence. Adrenergic and cholinergic activities also influence
smooth muscle contraction (see also Chapter 2 for detailed information).
(1) α- and α2-adrenergic receptors mediate excitatory responses, whereas β2-
adrenergic receptors mediate inhibitory responses.
(2) Ms-muscarinic. receptors mediate excitatory responses.
2. Preparations
a. Oxytocin is a nonapeptide hypothalamic hormone stored in and released from
the posterior pituitary. Il is released in response to signals from the genital tract
and mammary gland to the hypothalamus.
(1) Actions. Oxytocin increases uterine contractions and milk ejection and fa-
cilitates the transport of sperm in the female genital tract.
(2)
Therapeutic uses
(a) Oxytocin is used to induce labor and reverse uterine inertia. The cervix
 must be dilated and the fetus must be in normal presentation position.
Oxytocin works poorly when Cl exists.
(b) It is used to treat agalactia through stimulation of milk ejection. How-
 ever, oxytocin is not a galactopoietic agent.
(3) Pharmacokinetics. See I A 2 a.
(4) Adverse effects. Oxytocin may cause uterine dystocia.
278Chapter 12  t
b. Ergonovine is an ergot alkaloid that causes prolonged contraction of smooth
muscle, including the myometrium and blood vessels.
(1) Mechanism of action. Its effect on smooth muscle is mainly through acti-
serotonergic and dopaminergic receptors.
(2) Therapeutic uses
(a) Induction of uterine involution.
(b)Postparturm hemorrhage control.
(c) Expulsion of placenta (particularly in cows and bitches) when oxylocin is
ineffective.
(3) Administration. Ergonovine is administered orally to dogs (0.2 mg) or IM to)
mares (1-3 mg).
(4) Pharmacokinetics. Informalion is nol available for animals; however, after
administration, the duration of action is 2-4 hours.
(5) Adverse effects. Ergonovine is safe when given as direcled; however, over-
dose may cause CNs excitation, muscle weakness, hypertension, and
vomiting (in dogs). It may cause agalactia through inhibition of prolactin
release.
c. Bromocriptine (Parlodel@) and cabergoline (Dostinex@): These drugs are ergol
derivatives, having dopaminergic agonistic activity.
(1) Mechanism of action. The dopaminergic agonistic activity inhibits prolactin
secretion by activating Dz receptors, resulting in luteolysis. (Prolactin is a
luteotropic hormone and it also inhibits gonadotropin release.) Cabergoline
is more potent than bromocriptine in activating D, receptors.
(2) Therapeutic uses
(a)  They are used to treat galactorrhea.
(b)  They have been used to induce luteolysis.
i. Bromocriptine is given orally (10-15 μg/kg) twice daily for 3-5 days
-opnasd pean ol sAep tl-ol joy o slop u Aoueulaid aeuual 01
pregnancy.
il. Cabergoline is given 5 μg/kg, orally, once daily ior 5-10 days to in-
duce estrus or to treat pseudopregnancy.
(3) Pharmacokinetics. The information is not available for animals.
(a) In humans, after oral administration, both drugs are absorbed from the
Gl tract. More than 90% of bromocriptine and 50% of cabergoline are
bound by albumin.
(b) Both of them are metabolized by the liver (hydroxylation) to inactive
metabolites, which are excreted into urine. Bromocriptine has a biphasic
fy: the α-phase is aboul 4 hours and the lerminal β-phase is about 15
hours. Cabergoline has a ty, of 60 hours.
(4) Adverse effects. Both drugs are safe when used as directed. However, they
may cause vomiting, sedation, and hypotension (due to α-adrenergic antago-
nism). They may cause agalactia in lactating animals
d. Prostaglandin F2α (PGF2x
 dinoprost tromethamine, Lutalyse) and an analog
(cloprostenol, Estrumate?)
(1) Pharmacologic effects
(a) PGF2α and analogs cause strong vasoconstriction. The resultant de
creased blood supply causes luteolysis and reduction of progesterone
synthesis.
(b) PGFzα and analogs have a strong oxytocic effect, especially in mares.
(2) Therapeutic uses
(a) Estrous cycle control in cows. PGF2α and analog induce luteolysis of
mature corpora. This method is not used in sows, since PGf2α yields
inconsistent luteolysis in sows,
(b)  Early abortion usually occurs within 7 days of injection as a result of
luteolysis.
(c) Labor induction. Perform the induction 3-15 days bcfore due. In cows
2 days aftcr administration. If milk is prescnt (waxing in mares), labor
can be induced in 30 minutes. Because cows and sows have CL in the
Endocrine Pharmacology279
prepartum period, PCFzα is used mainly to induce luteolysis. Because
mares do not have CL in the prepartum period, PGFzα is mainly to exert 
an oxytocic effexct.
(d) Pyometra. PGFzα can be used to treat pyometra and iacilitate the expul-
sion of mummified fetuses.
(e) Ovarian cysts. Following trcatmcnt with GnRH to cause ovulation,
PGFzx is administered to induce luteolysis.
(f) The dosage of cloprostenol is 1-5% that of dinoprost because clo-
prostenol is more resistant to metabolism than dinoprost.
(3) Pharmacokinetics
(a) PGF2a (dinoprost) is distributed rapidly to tissues after IM administration.
In cattle, the plasma t y, is only a few minutes.
(b)  Cloprostenol is more resistant to metabolism than dinoprost.
(4) Adverse effects include placental retention, dystocia, and acute systemic tox-
icity (i.e., salivation, vomiting, colic, defecation, fever, anxiety, tachycardia,
lachypnea; sweating and transient decreased reclal temperalure are seen in
mares).
e. Long-acting glucocorticoids
(1) Mechanism of action. These agents can mimic the action oi fetal cortisol
surge, thereby inducing parturition. Glucocorticoids increase PGFzα synthe-
sis in the endometrium.
(2) Therapeutic uses and administration. Dexamethasone has been used to
induce parturition in cows and ewes. In prepartum cows, dexamethasone
(20 mg IM) may induce parlurition within 48 hours. If dexamcthasone ad-
ministration is followed in 40 hours by dinoprost (30 mg IM), calving occurs 
within 2-5 hours.
(3) Pharmacokinetics. See Ill B 3 d.
(4) Adverse effects. Placental retention may occur. The adverse effects are usu-
ally nol a problem when glucocorticoids are uscd as oxylocic agents.
F.
 Antidiabetic agents
1. Introduction. Diabetes mellitus is usually seen in adult animals, particularly dogs
and cats >7 years of age. The diabetes mellitus in animals is similar to type 2 dia-
betes in human; however, it is usually in the very late stage of the disease when it
is delecled, and thus β-cells have mostly been destroyed by severe hyperglycemia.
Therefore, Imost of diabetic animals need to be on insulin therapy.
2. Insulin remains the most frequently used antidiabetic agent in veterinary medicine.
a. Synthesis, secretion, and actions
(1) Synthesis. Insulin consists of two peptide chains joined by disulfide linkages
(Figure 12-4),
(a) Pancreatic β-cells synthesize insulin from a single-chain prccursor
proinsulin, which possesses little biologic activity. Inuslin is formed
when C-peptide is cleaved from proinsulin.
(b)  The amino acid sequence of insulin varies among species.
1. Porcine and canine insulin molecules are identical, and are sim-
ilar to human insulin (difference in insulin struclure: B-30 is ala-
nine in porcine and canine insulin, and is threonine in human
insulin!.
ii. Feline and bovine insulin are similar in structure.
(2) Secretion. lnsulin secretion is controlled mainly by blood glucose levels, Gl
hormones, and the autonomic nervous syslem.
(a) Stimulation. Insulin secretion is increased by glucose, amino acids,
fatty acids (especially butyric acid in ruminants), Ca²+, and Gl
hormones le.g., secretin, gastrin, cholecystokinin, glucagon, glucagon-
like polypeptide-1 (GLP-1), gastric inhibitory peptide (GiP), vasoactive
intestinal peptide]. GLP-1 and GIP are most potent insulin secretagogues
among Gl hormones. The reccptors of these Gl hormones are coupled
either to Gs or Gq. Amino acids may stimulate the secretion of Gl hor-
mones.
280
| Chapter 12 1 [
C-peptide
A-chain
B-chain
N-terminal
30
LYS
20
Tyr
20
19
15
FIGURE 12-4. Structure of porcine (canine) proinsulin. (Modified from Fig. 34.1 of Adams’ Veterinary
Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 8th cd.)
(b) Inhibition. insulin secretion is inhibited by somatostatin, galanin,
epinephrine and norepinephrine. The receptors mediating the inhibition
 on insulin release are coupled to Gi/o.
(c) Autonomic influences
i. Epinephrine and norepinephrine inhibit insulin secretion by activating
αy-adrenergic receptors (coupled to Gi/o).
ii. In the presence of α-receptor blockade, epinephrine and nore-
pinephrine stimulate insulin secretion by activating β2-adrenergic re-
ceptors (coupled to G,).
lli. Acetylcholine (ACh) stimulates insulin secretion by activating
My-receplors (coupled to Gq).
(3) Pharmacologic effects
(a) Carbohydrate metabolism. Insulin decreases blood glucose concentra-
tions by increasing glycogen synthesis, decreasing hepatic glycogenoly-
sis, decreasing gluconeogenesis, and increasing glucose transport into
skeletal muscle cells and adipocyles through activation of type 4 glucose
transporters (GLUT4).
(b) Fat metabolism. Insulin increases lipid synthesis and decreases lipolysis.
(c) Protein metabolism. Insulin increases the uptake of amino acids and
protein synthesis.
(d) K+ metabolism. Insulin increases uptake of K- into skeletal muscle
and fat cells by providing ATP to aclivale the Na, K+-ATPase (pump).
Hyperkalemia may be seen in diabetic patients; after an adequate insulin
therapy, hyperkalemia will disappear.
[ndorrinePharmacology 」281
Insulin
P
IRS2
PI3K
PIP
?
G
R
B
Protein synthesis
MAPK
Glycogensynthesis
↑
Mitogenesis
FIGURE 12-5. Mechanism of action of insulin. The insulin reccptor is a tetramer; 2α-subunits
(ligand binding domain) and 2β-subunits (tyrosine kinase domainl. Activation of the receptor by in-
sulin cvokes autoplhosphorylation of tyrosine kinasc, which in turn, activates insulin reccptor substrates
(IRS). Activated IRS binds and activates phosphioinositol 3-kinase (Pl3K), wlhich catalyzes the formation
of pliosplhoinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate (PiP;). PIP; stimulates translocation of glucose transport4 (GLUT4]
t0 plasma membrane, glycogen synthesis, and protein synthesis. Activated IRs can also bind growth
factor receptor-binding protein-2 (GRB-2), which stimulates the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
systerm to promole milogenesis.
b. Mechanism of action. Insulin binds to its receptors and stimulates tyrosine ki-
nase (Figure 12-5).
C.F
Pharmacokinetics. Insulin is metabolized by enzymes in the liver and kidney.
The plasma ty, of insulin is 5-10 minutes, but the biologic ty,. is longer (several
hours).
d. Preparations. Commercial insulin preparations are mostly of human origin and
are produced using a recombinant DNA technique. Only two insulin prepara-
tions are marketed exclusively for animals: Vetsulinand PZl Vet.
(1) Crystalline zinc insulin (regular insulin) is a short-acting, soluble human
insulin that is prepared in a phosphate buffer with zinc at a pH of 3.5.
(a) Pharmacokinetics. Onset of effect occurs within 15 minutes of SC injec-
tion, peaks within 2-4 hours, and lasts 5-7 hours.
(b) Administration. It can be administered SC or IV. Injections must be
given 4-5 times daily, which can be cumbersome.
(c) Therapeutic uses. Crystalline zinc insulin is useful for rapidly resolving
diabetic ketoacidosis. The frequency with which regular insulin must be
administered makes it inconvenient for maintenance of normal plasma
glucose concentrations.
(2) Isophane insulin (NPH) is an intermediate-acting insulin (hat conlains a
small amount of protamine (0.3-0.4 mg/100 U insulin), a basic protein that
slows down the absorption of insulin. The onset of action for NPH insulin
occurs within 2 hours. Peak effect occurs in 8-12 hours and lasts 24 hours.
(3) Lente insulin does not contain protamine. lis insolubility results from the
addition of zinc in an acetate buffer, rather than a phosphate buffer. The
282Chapter 12 Ill F
onset of action for thc Lcnte insulin depends on thc physical statc, thc zinc
concentration, and the pH.
(a) Semilente insulin is a microamorphous form of insulin. Peak effect oc-
curs in 4-8 hours and has duration of action of 12-16 hours.
(b) Ultralente insulin is a large crystalline form of insulin with high zinc
content. Its onset and duration of action are similar to those of pro-
tamine zinc insulin [see (4)].
(c) Lente insulin consists of seven parts ultralente and three parts semilente.
It is quite similar to isophane insulin in its onset and duration of ac-
tion. Lente porcine insulin (Vetsuline) is available for animal use, par-
ticularly in dogs.
(4) Protamine zinc insulin. The addition of protamine to crystalline zinc insulin
causes the formation of large crystals. There is a veterinary product consist-
ing of 90% bovine insulin and 10% porcine insulin (PZl Vet?), which is
for feline patients.
(a) Pharmacokinetics. When injected SC., this formulation serves as a tissue
depot, producing slow absorption into the blood stream. The action of
protamine zinc insulin begins in 4 hours, peaks in 16-18 hours, and
lasts up to 36 hours.
(b) Therapeutic uses. Fine control of hyperglycemia is difficult with
such a long-acting preparation. However, because of its prolonged
action, protamine zinc insulin is convenient for use in veterinary
medicine.
(5) Insulin glargine (Lantus?). This is a recombinant human insulin analog with
a glycine residue al A-chain 21st amino acid residue and 2-arginine residues
at B-chain 31st and 32nd amino acid residues. Insulin glargine is soluble
al pH 4. After administration, at pH 7.4, it forms microprecipitates, which
slow down the absorption from the injection site. After SC administration,
there is no pronounced peak levels of insulin detected, but stable antihy-
perglycemic effect of insulin lasts >24 hours.
e. Adverse effects
(1) Hypoglycemia. Early signs of hypoglycemia (e.g., tachycardia, hunger) re-
glycemia, is characterized by CNS disturbances, including convulsions and
coma. Severe hypoglycemia is besl trealed with IV glucose infusion.
(2) Insulin resistance. Some diabetic. aniimals may experience insulin resistance.
(a) Insulin antibodies may attenuate responses to exogenous insulin. They
insulin preparations.
(b) Stress imay inducc acute insulin resistance by increasing secrction of
epinephrine and corticosleroids.
(c) Insulin receptor desensitization/down-regulation could lead to insulin
resistance.
3. Sulfonylureas (e.g., glipizide, glyburide, and glimepiride) are rarely used in vet-
erinary medicine, since in most of the diabelic animals by the time the diabetes is
diagnosed, they already have lost most, if not all, of the β-cells. Sulfonylureas are
lipid soluble drugs.
a. Mechanism of action. Sulfonylureas stimulate insulin secretion from β-cells
(Figure 12-6).
(1) They block AIP-sensitive K' channels, which decrcasc K+ cxit from β-cells.
(2) Retention of intracellular K+ |eads to depolarization of the plasma mem-
branc, which activatcs the voltage-dependent Ca'- channels (VDCCs).
(3) Opening of vDCCs promotes Ca?: cntry to clevate [Ca21 ]. Ca2l cvokcs
exocytosis, resulting in insulin release.
(4) ATP can block ATP-sensitive K: channels as well. ATP is gcncratcd from
glucose metabolism. (This also explains how glucose stimulates insulin se-
cretion.)
[ndbcrine Pharmacology 283
Glucose
SFU
GLUT2
Insulin
Glucokinase
ATP个
Secretory granules
Ca2+
Ca2+
FIGURE 12-6. Mechanism of action of sulfonylurea (SHU) and glucose on insulin release from pan-
Creatic β-cells. 1. Glucose via glucose transporter 2 {GLUT2) cnters the cell, which is mctabolized by
glucokiriase to form ATP. 2. ATP blocks ATP-sensilive K+ channels to stop K+ efflux, which causes re-
tention of intracellular K!, leading to depolarization. 3. The depolarization opens L-type Ca²1 channels,
thereby increasing Ca2+ influx. Ca2+ promotes insulin cxocytosis. SFU also blocks ATP-sensitive K+
channels to increase insulin exocytosis.
b. Therapeutic uses. Sulfonylureas have been used with some success to treat dia-
betes in cats.
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Glipizide is rapidly and fairly well absorbed after oral administration. Food
will enhance absorption because it stimulates bile ilow to help dissolve sul-
fonylureas. Glipizide is very highly bound to plasma proteins. It is primar-
ily biotransformed in the liver by cytochrome P450 enzymes to inactive
metabolites that are then excreted by the kidneys. Effects on insulin secre-
 tion in cats tend to be short-lived; plasma insulin concentrations peak in
~15 minutes and return to baseline aflcr 60 minules.
(2) No information on glyburide and glimpiride is available for animals.
d. Adverse effects. Sulfonylureas are safe when used as directed. Overdose-induced
hypoglycemia is much milder than that induced by insulin and is usually not 
life-threatening.
4. Metformin. It is an oral antihyperglycemic, but not hypoglycemic drug.
a. Mechanism of action. Metformin cxerts its antihyperglycemic efect by: (1) de-
creasing glucose absorption from Gl tract, (2) decreasing glucose output from
liver, and (3) increasing insulin receptor sensitivity. Metformin does not stimu-
late insulin secretion and thus does not cause hypoglycemia.
b. Therapeutic uses. Metformin has been used orally (given with food) with some
success to treat diabeles in cals, particularly in combination with a sulfonylurea.
C.
 Pharmacokinetics. A total of 35-65% of metformin is absorbed after oral admin-
istration. In cats, elimination ty, is ~12 hours. Metformin is primarily eliminated
via the kidneys. Metformin's pharmacokinetics in cats are similar to that seen in
humans, and that a dosage of 2 mg/kg, twice daily would yield plasma concen-
trations known to be cffective in humans.
d. Adverse effects. Metformin may cause lethargy. anorexia, vomiting and weight
loss in cats. Metformin alone does not cause hypoglycemia.
284 |Chapster 12 l C
G.
 Thyroid hormones and antithyroid agents
1. Thyroid hormones
a. Synthesis
(1) Thyroglobulin (TG), a largc glycoprotein, is synthesized in the thyroid gland
and transported into the follicular lumen (colloid).
(2) The tyrosine residues on TG are iodinated to form monoiodotyrosine (MIT)
and diiodotyrosine (LDIT) (Figure 12-7).
(a) Thyroxine (T4) is formed by the coupling of DITs.
(b) Triodothyronine (T3) is formed from MlT and DIT.
(3) Endocytosis and proteolysis of TG from colloid release T3 and T4 into follic-
ular cells. The hormones are then transported out of the cells through diffu-
sion into the circulation (Figure 12-8).
Nal uptake, oxidation to l2, coupling process, and endocytosis and proteolysis of
iodinated TG.
(1) Other anions, such as nitrate, thiocyanate, and perchlorate, inhibit Nal
uptake by competing with iodide for active transport.
(2) Thioureylene drugs (e.g., methimazole) inhibit oxidation and coupling pro-
cesses.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. T: and T4 are readily absorbed from the Gl tract when given
orally.
(2) Distribution.
(a) Both T: and T4 are bound by plasma proteins thyroxine-binding globulin
(TBG), transthyretin, and albumin. TBG has much higher affinity for T3
and T4 than other plasma proteins. Humans have four times as much of
TBG than dogs.
(b) Cats, rabbits, rodents, and birds do not have detectable TBG level.
High estrogen levels promote synthesis of TBG, leading to increased
total T3 and T4 concentrations in the plasma.
(c)  Plasma protein-binding activities of thyroid hormones differ among
animal species (Figure 12-9), as a result the plasma concentrations
of free hormones are also different among species. Free hormones
are the ones that activate receptors, and subject to metabolism and
elimination.
(3) Metabolism
(a) A total of 30-40% of T4 is converted to T3, thereby increasing biologic
activity in the liver, kidney, and other peripheral tissues.
(b) A total of 15-20% of T4 and ~100% of T; form conjugates with glu-
curonide and sulifate in the liver. These conjugates are then excreted in
the bile. Through enterohepatic. circulation, some T: and T are liberated
and reabsorbed from the Gl tract.
(c) Fifty percent of T4 is converled in peripheral tissues to reverse I3, which
is an inactive metabolite.
(4) Plasma tv, after oral administration
(a) In humans, the plasma ty, of T4 and T3 are 7 days and 1 day, respec-
tively, due to high plasma TBG levels.
(b) In dogs, the plasma tiy, of T4 and Ty are 12-24 hours and ~8 hours,
respectively.
(c) In cats, the plasma ty, of T4 is ~11 hours.
(d)  Factors affecting plasma t/2
i. Conversion rate from Ta to T;, is increased during hypothyroidism and
tempting to overcome the disorder.
jil. Increased TBG levels increase plasma t7-
il. Decreased plasma protein levels decrease plasma ty
iv. Other drugs that compete for albumin-binding sites increase free T3
 and T4 levels, leading to decreased plasma ty.
[ndocrine Pharmacology 」 285
Monoiodotyrosine(MiT)
BO
LEN
CHCHCOOH
Diiodotyrosine (DIT)
NH
CBCBCOOR
thyronine(Tyrosine+Tyrosine)
MB
MIT+DIT
CBCHCOOB
NB:
3,5,3'tniodothyronine(Ts.liothyronine)
NB,
3,3,5'tniodothyronine(rT3)
Lia+LIO
CBCHCOO8
thyroxine (T)
NB:
FIGURE 12-7. Structure of iodinated tyrosines and thyroid hormones.
(6) Excretion. A total of 20-40% of administered T4 is excreted in the feces.
d. Physiologic and pharmacologic effects. T; is 3-5 times as aclive as T4. T4 is the
prothyroid hormone, and T3 is the thyroid hormone.
(1) T; promotes growth and development. These effects of T; are attributable in
part to the Tx-induced increase in GH secretion and action. T3 is important
for ncural growth and maintenance.
286
Chupter12IIlG
Collaid
TPO
TPO-lox
Tg
T
MIT
1--1
H2O2
DIT
100n
Tg-T
eod
membrane
Thyrocyte
Calloid
O
resorption
Tg Proteolysis6
7
MIT
10
ATP
1
Adenylyl
Bilateral
membran
ECF
TSH
FIGURE 12-8. Thyroid hormone synthesis pathway. 1. Inorganic. iodide () is pumped into the follicu-
lar cell from ECF. Activation of TSH receptor stimulates the iodide pump. 2. The iodide is oxidized by
thyroid peroxidase (TPO) into iodine (lax). 3. Iox iodinates tyrosine residues of thyroglobulin iTG) in the
colloid to iorm monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and diodolyrosine (IDIT). 4. The MIT and IDIT residues on T(i
couple to form triodothyronine {Ts) and reverse T3. Two DlT residues couple to form thyroxine (Ta). 5.
The TG containing Ts, rT, and T4 returns to follicular cells. 6. The TG complex undergoes proteolysis
to release T3, rTs, T4, MIT, and DiT. 7. MIT and DIT are deiodinated, allowing recycling oi I. 8. The
newly synthesized T3, rTs, and T4 diffusc into the circulation. (Reprinted From S. J. Etinger. Textbook
of Vetcrinary Internal Medicine,W.B.Saunders.1990.)
(2) Ts increases the basal melabolic rate; therefore, it is calorigenic. In addition,
T; increases heat production by activating uncoupling oxidative phospho-
rylation in brown fat cells. T; exerts this effect by increasing the synthesis
of uncoupling proteins in the mitochondria, and thus inhibits ATP formation
and produces heat.
(3) T; is a cardiovascular stimulanl, since it increases cardiac output and en-
hances the sensitivity of the myocardium to catecholamines. T; increases
the expression of α- and β-adrenergic receptors, x-myosin light chain, Na,
(a)Protein-bound T4
Primates
Rodents,ruminants
Horses
Dogs,birds
(b) Free T4
Birds
Dogs
Rodents,horses,ruminants,primates
FIGURE 12-9. Thyroxine (Ta)-binding activily of plasma proleins by species. (From Figure 8-3, NVMS
Pharmacology.page 166.)
Endlocrine Plharmacology 287
K+-ATPase, and Na+ and Ca'- channels in both myocardial muscle and
vascular smooth muscle (all of these proteins may have contributed to car-
diovascular effects of thyroid hormones).
centrations of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) by increasing the expression of
LDL transport receptors in the liver, thereby increasing utilization of LDL by
the liver.
(5) T; can promote milk production. Many years ago, iodinaled casein was used
as a feed additive for dairy cattle to promote milk production. However, it
was not a profitable practice, since the cattle consumed large amount of
feed and produced large amount of waste after becoming hyperthyroid.
e. Mechanism of action
(1) T; increases mRNA synthesis for a number of proteins that are important for
thyroid hormone functions.
(2) T3 activates its mitochondrial receptors to increase mRNA synthesis in this
Organelle.
(3) Thyroid hormone metabolites may activate G protein-coupled receptors (e.g.
Gq) to mediate its acute and nongenomic effects.
f. Preparations
(1) Levothyroxine is T4.
(2) Liothyronine is the drug name for T3.
g. Administration. Because of different plasma protein-binding activities of the
thyroid hormones in humans and dogs, human dosages should not be used in
dogs. T4 is preferred to T3 in the replacement therapy due to the fact that T4 can
maintain higher thyroid hormone activity in brain than Ty.
(1) Levothyroxine. The initial dose in dogs is 20 μg/kg/day, orally.
(2) Liothyronine. The initial dose in dogs is 5 μg/kg orally, 2-3 times daily.
(3) Doses may need to be adjusted following the initial dose.
h. Adverse effects. Overdose wih thyroid hormones will produce signs of hyper-
thyroidism.
2. Antithyroid agents
a. Thioureylenes (methimazole). Methimazole is a preferred antithyroid medication
for hyperthyroid cals.
(1) Mechanism of action. Methimazole inhibits the synthesis of T; and Tx (see
G 1 b).
(2) Pharmacokinetics
(a) Gl absorption ailer oral administration in cats is rapid and complete with
bioavailability of near 80%.
(b) Methimazole is widely distributed in the body witlh no significant
protein-binding activity.
(c) it is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes, followed by
conjugation with glucuronide in other species than cats. Since cats lend
to have drug metabolism problems, this might explain the wide range of
elimination t /: of methimazole in cats (see below).
(d) No information is available for cats. In humans, only 10% of methima-
zole is cxcreled in urine.
(e) The elimination ty, of methimazole in cats is 2-10 hours (average 6.6
hours).
(f) Because of the high plasma-binding activity of thyroid hormones, plasma
levels of T3 and T4 decline slowly. Significant reduction of signs of hy-
perthyroidism is usually seen in 1-3 weeks.
(3) Adverse effects. Anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, pruritus, hepatopathy, hem-
orrhage, thrombocytopenia, agranulocytosis, leukopenia, eosinophilia, and
Iymphocylosis may occur,
b. Ipodate can be used in cats that cannot tolerate methimazole. It can be obtained
from a compounding pharmacy.
(1) Mechanism of action. Ipodate is an iodine-containing compound that in-
hibits the conversion of T4 into T3 by binding to iodinases. It might also
block T receptors and actions of TSH.
288|Chapter 12 l G
(2) Therapeutic uses. Ipodate is useful in feline hyperthyroidism, who cannot
tolerate the adverse effects of methimazole.
(3) Pharmacokinetics. Ipodate is well absorbed from the Gl tracl aiter oral ad-
ministration (100-200 mg/cat/day). The other information is not available for
animals.
(4) Adverse effects. Cats may become refractory to ipodate treatment after a
relatively short time. Gl distress (nausca, vomiting, diarrhea, Cramping. in-
appetence) may be seen in cats dosed with ipodate. Skin rashes, itching.
dizziness, and headache have been reported by human patients.
C. Radioactive iodide (Na131 1)
(1) Mechanism of action, Nal"lI destroys thyroid follicles. Therefore, it is an al-
lernative to surgical thyroidectomy, which runs a risk for damaging parathy-
roid glands.
(2) Pharmacokinetics. Na131 1 is rapidly incorporated into the thyroid follicles.
It has a tiy of 8 days and emits β-particles and X-ray. Serum T4 and T3 con-
centrations will normalize within 1-2 weeks of administration.
pioy pue sieo u tuspioyady ien on posn s! lteten sasn snnadeuaui (g)
adenocarcinoma in both cats and dogs.
(4) Administration. Na131I is administered SC. at 1-5 mCi in cats; 5% patients
need a second dose.
The treated animals should be hospitalized for 1-4 weeks. The use of
 Na131l is under strict federal regulation. The treated animals and excreta
need to be handled carefully to avoid contamination; the excreta need to
be safely stored until radioactivity is gone.
(5) Adverse effects. Hypothyroidism may result.
(6) Contraindications. Na13il is contraindicated in pregnant and nursing queens.
H.
Agents for the treatment of hypocalcemia
1. Regulation of serum calcium levels
a. Secretion and actions of parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH is secreted irom the
parathyroid gland. Its secretion is increased in response to hypocalcemia and
decreased in response to hypercalcemia. PTH increases calcium and decreases
phosphate levels in the extracellular fluid (ECF)
(1) PTH acts on the bone, small intestine, and kidneys to transfer calcium to the 
ECF.
(2) PTH increases the absorption of calcium from the small intestine. (This is a
vitamin D-dependent process.)
(3) PTH increases the rate of resorption of calcium and phosphate from bone.
(4) PTH incrcases renal tubular rcabsorption of calcium and the cxcretion of
phosphate.
b. Secretion and actions of calcitonin. Calcitonin (CT) is secreted from the parafol.
licular cells of the thyroid gland, Its secretion is increased in response to hyper-
calcemia and decreased in response to hypocalcemia. CT decrcases calcium and
phosphale levels in the ECF.
(1) CT acts on the bone and kidneys to decrease the transfer of calcium and
phosphate to the ECF.
(2) CT decreases the rate of resorption of calcium and phosphate from the bone.
(3) CT decreases distal tubular reabsorption of calcium and phosphate.
c. Synthesis, metabolism, and actions of vitamin D3 
(1) Vitamin D; is synthesized in the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol by sunlight.
(2) Vitamin D3 is metabolized in the liver to 25(OH)D3. which is then metabo-
lized in the kidney to 1,25(OH)D;. 1,25(OH)D; is the most potent vitamin
D metabolite.
(3) Vitamin D; and its metabolites increase serum concentrations of calcium
and phosphate by:
(a) increasing calcium and phosphate absorption from the gut.
(b) increasing calcium and phosphate rcabsorption irom the renal tubules.
(c) increasing bone resorption.
Endlocrine Plharmacology 」 289
 2. Preparations used to treat hypocalcemia
a.
Calcium gluconate, calcium borogluconate, and so forth,
(1)  Pharmacokinetics
(a) Absorption. Calciun is absorbed fron the small intestine.
i. Vitamin D3, PTH, and an acidic pH facilitate absorption.
ii. Dietary fiber, phytates, fatty acids, steatorrhea, and uremia interfere
with absorption.
(b) Fate. After absorption, calcium enters ECF and then is readily incorpo-
rated into bone. Nearly 99% of total body calcium is found in bone.
Of circulating calcium, ~50% is bound to serum proteins or complexes
with anions and the other 50% is in free Ca2+, which is distributed to
all tissues.
(c) Excretion. Both unabsorbed calcium and calcium secreted into the bile
and pancreatic juice are eliminated primarily into the feces. Only a
small amount of calcium is excreted into the urine because most of it
is reabsorbed from the renal tubules.
(2)  Therapeutic uses include hypocalcemia and cardiac. dysrhythmias induced
by hyperkalemia.
(3)
Administration
(a) Calcium gluconate is usually adiministered to effect by slow IV infusion.
(b) IP route may be used as well.
(c) Oral route is rarely used because of limited absorption froni the gut.
(d) Long-term therapy can be accomplished by increasing dietary calcium
and administering vitamin D.
(4) Adverse effects
(a) Hypercalcemia may occur, which is parlicularly detrimental to animals
with cardiac. or renal disease.
(b) Rapid IV injection of calcium gluconate can cause cardiac arrhythmias
and arrest. Treatment should be discontinued in the presence of elevated
ST segments, shortened QT intervals in ECG, or arrhythmias.
(5) Contraindications include ventricular fibrillation, hypercalcemia, renal or
cardiac disease, and concurrent treatment with digitalis.
b. Dihydrotachysterol (DHT)
(1) Chemistry. DHT is a vitamin D, analog-
(2) Therapeutic uses. DHT is used in small animals to treat hypocalcemia sec-
ondary to hypoparathyroidism or severe renal disease.
(3) Pharmacologic effects. See H 1l c (3).
(4) Mechanism of action
(a) Vitamin D and its analogs increase the synthesis of calcium-binding pro-
teins through promoting mRNA synthesis. These calcium-binding pro-
teins facilitate the transport of calcium from the gut mucosa to ECF,
thereby promoting calcium ahsorption from the gut and rcabsorption
in the renal tubules.
(b) Vitamin D metabolites rapidly increase Ca?: influx by activating the Gq-
protein coupled receptors.
(5) Pharmacokinetics
(a) After oral administration, in the presence of food, the Gl absorption is
good; food stimulates bile flow, which helps dissolve DHT.
(b) Like other vitamin D analogs, DHT is bound tightly by vitamin D-
binding globulin.
(c) DHT is hydroxylated in the liver to 25-hydroxy-DHT, which is the active
form of the drug. The drug is not hdyroxylated in the kidney to form
1,25-dihydroxy metabolite.
(d) The ty,. of DHT is 8 days (in humans); as a result, overdose can be a
problem with DHT. The ty, in patienls with renal disease is nol known;
it is likely to be shorter than healthy subjects, since plasma concentra-
tion of vitamin D-binding globulin should be low in patients with renal
disease.
(e) DHT is excreted mostly in the feces.
290|Chapter 12 I H
(6) Adverse effects. Hypercalcemia, nephrocalcinosis, and hyperphosphatemia
are potential coimplications of DHT therapy. Because of its long ty,, DHT
toxicity lasts 17-30 days.
c. Calcitriol (1,25-(OH)2D3). It is the most potent vitamin D3 metabolite that in-
creases plasma calcium and phosphorus concentrations.
(1) Therapeutic uses. Calcitriol is used in small animals to treat hypocalcemia
secondary to hypoparathyroidisin or severe renal disease. It may also be of
benefit in treating primary idiopathic. seborrhea, since it serves as a growth
factor to promote differentiation of skin cells.
(2) Pharmacokinetics
(a)  The Gl absorption after oral administration is similar to that of DHT.
(b)  Calcitriol is bound by yitamin D-binding globulin.
(c) Unlike DHT, calcitriol has a more rapid onset and much shorter ty, of
4-6 hours. The tiy, in patients with renal disease could be shorter than
ulin may be low in patients with renal disease. The duration of action is
1-3 days.
(d) Like other vitainin D analogs, calcitriol is excreted mostly into the feces.
(3) Adverse effects. Hypercalcermia, nephrocalcinosis and hyperphosphatemia
are potential complications of calcitriol therapy, but the duration of these ad-
verse effects of calcitriol is shorter than that of DHT. If the hypercalcemia is
severe, furosemide, calcium-free IV fluids (e.g., normal saline), urine acidi-
fiers, and glucocorticoids rmay be einployed to lower serum calciuim levels.
1.
Human recombinant erythropoietin (EPO, Epoetin Alfa, Epogen). EPO, a naturally
Occurring hormone, is produced in the kidney. EPO promotes erythropoiesis,
1. Chemistry. As a recombinant EPO, Epoetin Alfa has a molecular weight of ~30
kDa.
2. Pharmacologic effects. It promotes erythrocyte production by stimulating the dif-
ferentiation and proliferation of committed red cell precursors. EPO also stimulates
the release of reticulocytes. Recombinant human EPO alfa (r-HuEPO-alpha) serves
as a substitute for endogenous EPO), primarily in patients with renal disease. Vari-
ous uremic toxins imay be responsible for the decreased production of EPo by the
kidney.
 3. Mechanisrm of action. EPO activates EPO receptors and stimulates the Janus kinase
cascade, which is similar to Gfl (see Figure 12-1 for Gh signaling).
4. Therapeutic uses. EPO) has been used in dogs and cats for anemia associated with
chronic renal failure.
 5. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals. Depending on initial
hematocrit and dose, correction of hematocrit may require 2-8 weeks to occur.
 6. Adverse effects. In dogs and cats, EPO therapy may induce antibodies with resul-
tant resistance to further treatment. EPO should be withdrawn if PCV starts to drop
while on therapy. Recombinant canine and feline EPOs are under development to
the development of recoinbinant feline and canine EPOs in veterinary imedicine.
SUGGESTED READING
Behrend EN. 2006. Update on drugs used to treat endocrine diseases in small animals. Vet Clin North
Am Smalf Amim Pract 36:1087-1105.
Braddock JA, Church DB, Robertson ID, Watson AD. 2004. Inefficacy of selegiline in treatment of ca-
nine pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Aust Vet / 82:272-277.
Ferguson DC. 2001. "Thyroid hormones and antithyroid drugs." In Veterinary Pharmacology and Thera-
peutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8th cd., pp. 626-648. Ames, IA: lowa State University Press
http:/www.drugs.com
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
[ndocrinePharmacology 291
StUdy QUEStIOnS
DIRECTIONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Selecl the one leltered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Oxytocin without a preceding
(A) masculinization.
prostaglandin F2 treatment can consistently
(B) diabetes mellitus
induce parturition in
(C)
aplastic anemia.
(D)hepatopathy.
(A) mares.
(B)sows.
(C) cows.
7. All of the following statements concerning
(D) bitches.
 agents for treatment of hypocalcemia are true
cxcepl
2. Which of the following is a preferred drug
for the treatment of postpartum hemorrhage
(A) only a small amount of calcium adminis-
and uterine involution?
tered is excreted in the urine.
(B)calcium gluconate is also used for the 
(A) Oxytocin
treatment of cardiac arrhythmias induced
(B) Bromocriptine
by hyperkalemia.
(C)  Cloprostenol
(C)  dihydrotachysterol (DHT), like parathy-
(D) Dexamethasone
roid hormone (PTH), clevales serum cal-
{E)Ergonovine
cium concentrations and lowers serum
phosphate concentrations.
3. Chronic administration of a glucocorticoid
(D)[
DHT is metabolized in the liver to a
may
25(OH)-metabolite, which is the aclive
form of the drug.
(A) induce anemia.
(B) increase the amount of adipose tissue in
the body by decreasing lipolysis.
8. Use of a glucocorticoid is contraindicated
(C) induce osteoporosis.
in all of the following conditions except
(D) induce lymphocytosis.
(A) diabetes mellitus.
4. Frequent administration of which one of
(B)  corneal ulceration.
the following sex steroids in animals would
[C)
anaphylactic shock.
most likely inhibit growth of the adrenal cor-
(D) infection uncontrolled by antibiotics.
tex and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
(E)burns.
secretion?
9. All of the following statements concerning
(A) Boldenone
antidiabetic agents are true except
{B)Estradiol
(C)  Megestrol
(A) commercial insulin preparations are
(D) Stanozolol
mostly of human origin.
 5. Which of the following steroids is used to
{B) hepatocytes, erythrocytes, leukocytes,
adrenal medullary chromaffin cells, and
treal anemia?
brain cells do not require insulin to trans-
(A)Deoxycorlicosterone
port glucose.
{B)Estradiol
(C)(
dogs are more likely than cats to develop
(C)Medroxyprogesterone
insulin antibodies to porcine or human
(D) Boldenone
insulin preparations.
(D) glipizide, a sulfonylurea, has been used
6. Administralion of mcgestrol acetate in
with some success in treating cats with
queens as an oral contraceptive may cause
moderale diabetes.
292
Chapter 12
10. All of the following progestins are effec-
11. Which of the following drug is the pre-
tive when administered orally to an animal
ferred drug for the treatment of the adrenal
except
cortical disease in ferrets?
(A) progesterone.
(A) Ketoconazole
(B) megestrol.
(B) Trilostane
(C) melengestrol.
(C) Leuprolide
(D) altrenogest.
(D) Mitotane
[ndocrine Pharmacology   293
AnSWErS
AND EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is A.
6. The answer is B.
Thc prcsence of CL may inhibit the ac-
Megestrol, a progestin, may cause diabetes
tion of an oxytocic agent. Bccausc prcpartum
mellitus, particularly in a diabetes-prone
marcs do not havc a functional Cl, oxytocin
animal; this is due to progestin's glucocorti
can effectively induce foaling. All prepartum
 coid activity. Megestrol is not an androgen,
sows, cows, and bitches have corpora
so it does not cause masculinization or
lulea; therefore, luteolysis must occur [or be
hepatopathy. It is not an estrogen, so it does
induced, for example, with prostaglandin Fzx
not cause aplastic anemia.
(PGF2α) before an oxylocic agent can work
effectively.
7. The answer is C.
2. The answer is E.
Dihydrotachysterol (DHT) elevates both
Ergonovine causes prolonged contrac-
serum calcium and phosphate concentrations.
tion of myometrium and uterine blood
Like parathyroid hormone (PTH), DHT
vesscls; thcrcforc, it is a prcfcrred drug for
increases serum calcium concentrations by
thc trcatmcnt of postpartum hemorrhage and
promoting calcium and phosphorus absorp-
tion from the Gl tract and by deccasing
utcrine involution. Oxytocin is a pcptide
hormone that evokes short-lerm uterine
calcium cxcrction from the kidncy. Howcver,
unlike PTH, DHT decrcascs phosphorus
contraclions. Bromocriptine al therapeutic
cxcrction from the kidncy.
doses has an insignificant effecl on smooth
muscle contraction. Cloproslenol is a
prostaglandin F2α (PGF7α) analog that is used
8. The answer is C.
to induce parturition and abortion, to treat
Glucocorticoids are not contraindicated
pyometra, and to expel mummified fetuses.
in anaphylactic shock. They should not be
Dexamethasone is used to induce parturition.
used in animals with corneal ulceration,
diabetes mellitus, infections uncontrollcd by
3. The answer is C.
 antibiotics, or burns.
Glucocorticoids may crcate a negative
calcium balance by inhibiting calcium
 absorption from the gastrointestinal tracl and
9. The answer is C.
reabsorption from the kidney. Glucocorti-
Following administration of a human or
coids induce polycythemia, lipolysis, and
porcine insulin prcparation, cats arc more
Iymphocytopenia.
likely than dogs to develop insulin antibod-
ics. Most commcrcial products are devcloped
4. The answer is C.
using recombinant DNA techniques and are
Progcstins, such as mcgestrol, have
of human origin. Hepatocyles, erythrocyles,
glucocorticoid-like activitics that can inhibit
leukocytes, adrenal medullary chromaffin
adrcnocorticotropic hormonc (ACTH)
cells, and brain cells do not require insulin
secretion, inducing iatrogenic hypoadreno-
for glucose transport. Glipizide, a sulfony-
corlicism. Estrogens (e.g., estradiol) and
lurea, has been used with some success to
androgens (e.g., stanozolol, boldenone) do
treat feline diabetes.
not have significant glucocorticoid activities.
5. The answer is D.
10. The answer is A.
Androgens increase erythropoiesis by
Progesterone is a natural steroid thal is
promoting erythropoietin synthesis. Therefore,
rapidly inaclivated by liver enzymes follow-
androgens such as boldenone can be used to
ing absorption from the Gl tract. Synthetic
lreal anemia. Deoxycorlicosterone, eslradiol,
progestins (e.g., megestrol, melengestrol,
and medroxyprogeslerone are not androgens,
altrenogest) are more resistant to liver
and thus do not promole eryihropoiesis.
enzymes.
294Chapter 12
11. The answer is C.
GnRH evokes hyperadrenocorticism in these
Leuprolide is a partial agonist of GnRH.
animals with a great increase in sex steroids.
The adrenal cortical disease (ACD) of ferrets
Other inhibitors of the corticosteroid synthesis
is due to an increase in GnRH secretion
may be used in conjunction with leuprolide
from the hypothalamus in neutered ferrets.
treatment.
ter 13
Topical Dermatology Therapy
James O. Noxon
INTRODUCTION. Drugs applied to the suriace of the skin have four possible out-
comes. (1) They may remain on the surface, where they may cxcrt their mcdicinal
qualities. (2) They may have local effects on the stratum corneum. (3) They may be
absorbed by the skin and exert deeper effects on the epidermis and dermis. (4) They
may be absorbed and exert systemic effects.
A. Structure and function of the skin
1. Functions of the skin. The skin is considered the largest organ of the body. It has
several key functions in norimal and diseased states, including maintenance of hy-
dration: protection from chemical/mechanical damage, radiation, and infectious
agents; sensation; aiding in motion and shape; metabolism; and communication.
These functions are accomplished in part by the analomical struclure of the skin
and in parl by the physiological aclions of the skin, especially the epidermis. These
same physiological processes are responsible for the behavior of drugs applied to
or on the skin. For example, desquamation is an important part of the physiologic
renewal of the epidermis, Any substances, including drugs, placed on the skin will
naturally be removed by this normal turnover of epithelial cells, thus limiting the
residual effects of topical medication.
2. Structure of the skin. The skin consists of three basic layers, from outside to inside:
the epiderimis, the dermis, and the hypodermis.
a. The epidermis. The cpidermis is the mosl crucial laycr affccting cdrug absorp-
tion and pharmacokinetics. There are four analomic: layers in the skin. From
the deepest layer to the most superficial, these are the stralum basale (basal cell
layer), the stratum spinosum (prickle cell layer), the stratum granulosum (granu-
lar cell layer), and the stratum corneum (horny layer). The germinal layer is the
stratum granulosum and keratinocytes move outward through these layers and
undergo several important physiologic alterations, in a process called cornifi-
cation. This process includes production of various proteins that contribute to
the development of a thick cell envelope and production of intercellular lipids
that contribute to the lipid layer found between keratinocytes. The epidermis is
constantly regenerating in the hasal cell layer and sloughing from the stratum
corneum. The epidermal turnover time in the dog is approximately 21-25 days
(1) Keratinocytes. Keratinocytes undergo several physiologic changes as they
move from the stratum basale to the stratum corneum. The cell envelope be-
comes thick and insoluble; however, the keratinocyte is very liygroscopic
and imay absorb large amounts of water or hydroplilic substances. Ker-
atinocytes imay act as reservoirs of hydrophilic substances, which then dif-
fuse long aiter the topical agent has bccn applied.
(2) Epidermal lipids. The keratinocyles are surrouncded by lipids produccd in
lamellar granules of keratinocytes and sebaceous glands. These lipids in-
clude ceramides, fatty acids, cholesterol, squalene, sterol/wax esters, and
sphingolipids. These lipids form a bipolar layer between the keratinocytes
and play a key role in the barrier functions of the skin and in keratinocyte
cohesion within the epidermis. Obviously. hydrophobic, the lipids retard
passage of hydrophilic substances, such as water through the layer.
B,
 Factors affecting cutaneous pharmacokinetics
1. Routes of drug passage. Drugs may move through the skin by movement through
the epidermis, through the hair follicles, or through apocrine or sebaceous glands.
295
296
Chapter131B
Intercellularroute
Transcellularroute
Cell
cytoplasm
Ceramide
Intracellular
lipid “mortar"
Keratinocyte
"brick"
Intercellular
space
Aqueous
Lipid
Lipid
Fattyacid
Plasma
Triglyceride
membrane
Cholesterol/
cholesterol sulphate
FIGURE 13-1. Two-compartiment model of the skin. Intercellular lipids allow lipophilic substances to
pass thirough the skin more readily than hiydrophilic substances, (Modified frorm Fig. 53.4. of Adarms's
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 8th ed. 2001).
The vasl majority of drug movement occurs through the epidermis; however, the
good drug absorption.
2.
Two-compartment system (Figure 13-1). The structure of the epidermis consisting of
keratinocyles surrounded by a lipid layer has been compared to a brick and mortar
wall, where the keratinocytes are the *bricks" and the lipids produced by the ker-
atinocytes and sebaceous glands surround the keratinocytes like mortar in a brick
wall. This results in a lipophobic (or hydrophilic) structure, the keratinocytes, that 
 are surrounded by a lipohilic (or hydrophobic) layer, the bipolar lipids, In order for
drugs to pass through the cpidermis, they must pass through the lipid layer. Logi
cally, lipid soluble drugs are generally able to accomplish this more readily than
water-soluble drugs.
 3. Reservoir actions of the epidermis. Many drugs, cspecially hydrophilic drugs, may
be concentrated within the keratinocytes or bound to epidermal sites providing a
high concentration and an osmotic gradient for drugs to move passively into the
deeper layers of the epidermis and dermis, even after the drug has been removed
cally active medications, such as patches for pain or motion sickness.
Factors affecting drug disposition
1. Properties of the topical agent
atinocytes, lipid soluble drugs penelrate the epidermis more efficiently. Water-
soluble drugs are more likely to be absorbed by keratinocytes, but have a diffi-
cult time penetrating the epidermis.
(1) Solubility of the drug. The solubility of the drug has a major effect on the
absorption of the drug into the skin. The drug must be soluble enough to be
Topical Dermatology Iherapy297
carried in high concentrations in the vehicle, but it must not be too soluble,
which would tend to hold the drug in the vehicle and not allow it to diffuse
into the keratinocytcs or lipid laycr of the epidermis.
(a)  Partition coefficient. The partition cocfficicnt is the term that describes
the affinity of a drug for the lipid phase of the skin. A higher parlition
coefficient suggests better movement of a drug into the lipid components
of the skin, and thus better topical absorption.
(2) Concentration of the drug. Since drug movement into and through the stra-
tum corneum is a passive process (i.e., diffusion), higher concentrations of
the drug within the vehicle will promote greater movement of the drug into
the keratinocytes or lipid layer.
(3) Molecular weight. Smaller molccular wcight compounds will pass through
remains the case even with hydrophilic compounds, which in general, do
nol pass through the lipid layer readily.
b. Vehicle. The vehicle carries the active drug, in which it is suspended or dis-
solved, and provides a delivery mechanism for active agents. An oil-based vehi-
cle allows for better movement of the drug into the lipid barrier. Vehicles may,
in some cases, have therapeutic. effects by themselves, for exarmple, by function-
ing as occlusivc drcssings which incrcase cutancous hydration.
C.(
Occlusive dressings. Occlusive dressings may include a physical dressing or a
layer of the vehicle that prevents loss of the drug from the surface of the skin
Bandages, even band-aids, act as occlusive dressing by preventing removal of
the drug by mechanical means or evaporation. An oil preparation may also act
as an occlusive dressing when applied after other medications. Bath oil applied
after bathing is an example of the use of an occlusive dressing. The oil slows
down water loss through the skin and from keratinocytes that have absorbed
water in the bathing process.
2. Cutaneous factors affecting drug disposition
a. Thickness of the stratum corneum. Movement of a drug through the skin in-
volves movement through the lipid layer surrounding the stralum corneum, and
in some cases, movement through the keratinocyles. Drug movement is more
difficult as the stratum corneum becomes thicker and is enhanced by application
on areas of the skin, such as the axillary, inguinal, and abdominal regions,
where the epidermis is thinner.
b. Integrity of the stratum corneum. Damage to the stratum corneum, from exco-
riations or abrasions, will reduce the effectiveness of the barrier function and
increase the drug absorplion.
C. Alterations in physiological behavior. Desquamation is an important factor in
epithelial turnover. Inflammatory diseases, metabolic disorders, and familial con-
ditions, such as familial seborrhea, may alter the desquamation of keratinocytes
by increasing or decreasing the turnover of keratinocytes. Loss of keratinocytes
would definitely change disposition of any drugs using the stratum corneum as
a reservoir and would increase the loss of any drug remaining on the surface of
the skin.
d. Temperature. Incrcascd tempcrature of the skin will allow for cnhance absorp-
tion of most drugs by increasing solubility of the drug and increasing vascular
flow to the area.
e. Hydration status of the epidermis. As the epidermis becomes dehydrated, ker-
atinocytes become shrunken and the cell envelope tougher, resulting in less drug
absorption.
D.
described in this chapter may be used for a wide range of dermatological problems.
The most common uses in veterinary dermatology are (1) for control of ectopara-
sites, (2) for control of pruritus, (3) for treatment of cutaneous infections by bacteria,
yeast, and dermatophytes, and (4) as an aid for the management of seborrhea and
other scaling disorders.
298
Chapler 13 Il A
PHARMACOLOGICALAGENTS
A.
Antimicrobial agents
1. Topical antibacterial agents
a. Preparations and chemistry. Topical antibacterial agents fall into one of two
main categories, antibiotics or antiseptic agents. However, keratolytic agents and
other compounds may also exhibit antibacterial properties. Glycotechnology is
the use of simple mono- or polysaccharide sugar moieties to competitively in-
hibit binding of microbes to the skin surface.
(1)  Various antibiotics have been used topically, including neomycin, genta-
micin, chloramphenicol, bacitracin, polymyxin B sulfates, nitrofurazone, and
others. Mupirocin is a highly effective topical antibiotic in an ointment for-
mulation. It is highly effective against staphylococci and many gram-negative
bacteria.
(2) Antiseptics used on the skin include alcohol, acetic acid, propylene glycol,
chlorhexidine, iodophors, phenols (e.g., resorcinol, hexylresorcinol), potas-
sium permanganate, triclosan, and sodium hypochlorite.
(3) Many of the topical keratolytic agents found in shampoos used for anti-
seborrheic therapy also demonstrate potent antimicrobial properties. These
include sulfur, salicylic acid, selenium disulfide, ethyl lactate, and benzoyl
peroxide. Benzoyl peroxide is highly effective as a topical antibacterial agent
used in a shampoo formulation.
(4) Glycotechnology. It is recognized that some monosaccharides or polysac.
charides will bind to lectins found on microbcs. These lectins, or binding
sites, are uscd by the bacteria to attach to keratinocytcs which contain other
sugars on their surface. This compctitive inhibition is incorporated in some
shampoos available commercially, such as Keratolux? (containing salicylic.
acid) and KetoChlor (containing chlorhcxidine and kctoconazolc), and will
likely be found in othcr topical agcnts in the futurc.
b. Mechanism of action, The mcchanism of action of antibiotic varics with thc
class of drug. Antiscptics work through various mcchanisms, including dena-
turing proteins that darmagc cell walls or membrancs, lowering surface tension,
inhibition of cssential cnzymcs, or by acting as rcactive oxidating or alkylating
agcnts. Mono- and polysaccharides bind to lectins on microbes, preventing their
adherence to keratinocytes,
C.
Therapeutic uses. Topical antibacterial therapy in the form of ointments, creams,
and sprays is indicated for focal bacterial infections, such as acute moist der-
matitis and wounds. Generalized bacterial dermatitis, such as folliculitis, is best
managed with shampoos or rinses containing antibacterial agents such as ben-
zoyl peroxide.
d.
 Administration. Topical antibacterial agents are used once or twice daily on af-
fected areas. Shampoos containing residual agents, such as benzoyl peroxide,
are administered once or twice weekly in most cases.
Adverse effects. Any topical antibacterial agent may potentially induce iritation
e.
or result in a contact allergic reaction. Such problems are infrequently reported.
 2. Topical antifungal therapy
a. Topical therapy for yeast (Malassezia pachydermatis)
(1) Preparations and chemistry. Several antibiotics and antiseptics have efficacy
against yeast including azoles (miconazole, clotrimazole, enilconazole, and
ketoconazole), nystatin, iodine, chlorhexidine, selenium sulfide, and lime
sulfur.
(2) Mechanism of action. Antiseptics, such as chlorhexidine and iodine, work
through various mechanisims. The azole compounds inhibit ergosterol syn-
thesis, which disrupts fungal cell membranes.
(3) Therapeutic uses, Anti-ycast medications arc indicated to trcat localized
causcd by M. pachydermatis.
Topical Demmatology Tlherapy299
(4) Administration
(a)  Localized infections. Malassczia are found in arcas of highcr humidity
and temperature, such as lip folds, interdigital areas (both dorsally and
ventrally), axillary and inguinal regions, or any intertriginous area.
i. The goal is to clean and dry the affected area. This may be done us.
ing detergents or commercial products designed with astringents in-
cluded in the formulation.
il. Excellent products for "spot" treatment of focal lesions include
towelettes containing miconazole and chlorhexidine (Malaseb
Joweletts?) or acctic acid plus boric acid (Malcetic Wipese). The
later product is safe around the cyes, making it ideal for trcaling pc-
riocular infections.
(b) Generalized Mafassezia infections. Cieneralized or multifocal yeast in-
fections require wider distribution of medication. Shampoos or rinses are
best suited for this purpose.
i. Active ingredients found in shampoo or rinse formulations that are
effective in controlling Malassezia infections include selenium sulfide,
miconazole, ketoconazole, enilconazole, lime sulfur, acetic acid-boric
acid, and chlorhexidine.
i. Sharnpoos must be applied 2-3 times weekly to effectively control
yeast infections of the skin. Contact time of 10 minutes is important
to achieve the best results from these agents.
(5) Adverse effects. Patients imay rarely dcvclop irritation or hypcrscnsitivily to)
the active agcnt or other ingredients of the products. Clinical signs may in-
clude redness or pruritus following topical application. A patient may rarely
develop urticarial reactions to topical imedications.
b. Topical therapy for dermatophytosis
(1) Preparations and chemistry. Agents found in commercial veterinary formu-
lations with activity against dermatophytes include (in decreasing order of
effectiveness) lime sulfur, enilconazole, chlorhexidine, povidone iodine, and
ketoconazole. The combination of miconazole and chlorhexidine appears to
have superior activity over the use of either agent alone. Antiseptics, includ-
ing sodium hypochlorite, also have some activity against dermatophytes.
(2) Mechanism of action. The agcnts work in various manncrs. The azoles in
hibit crgoslerol synthesis in fungal cell walls (scc Chapler 15 for detailed
information).
(3) Therapeutic uses. Topical antifungal agents are used as adjunctive therapy
for dermatophytes infections in companion animals. Thcy are often used as
the sole treatment in large animals.
(4) Administration.
(a) Formulations. Antifungal agents may be administered in lotions (e.g..
Conofite?), sprays or rinses (e.g., Malaseb Rinse), and shampoos (e.g..
(b) Application. Products are generally applied once or twice weekly as
adjunctive therapy to systemic antifungal therapy.
(5)  Adverse effects. Possible adverse effects include irritation or hypersensitivity
reactions to ingredients of these formulations. Products should be used with
caution around cycs to avoid irrilation.
B.
 Antipruritic agents
1. Preparation and chemistry. Substances present for topical application that reduce
pruritus include glucocorticoids (e.g., hydrocortisone), antihistamines (e.g., diphen-
hydramine), hydrating agents, sulfur, tar, topical anesthetics (e.g., lidocaine, pram-
oxinc), and cooling agcnts (c.g., mcthol, camphor). Any topical therapy that moistu-
rizes the skin tends to reduce pruritus, since dry or dehydrated skin exacerbates
pruritus. This may include bathing and/or the use of occlusive dressings.
2.
Mechanism of action. Thcrc are many mechanisms for induclion of pruritus,
which is thought primarily in dermatology conditions to arise froin irritation
300
 Chapter 13 Il B
of unmyelinated nerves by various cytokines (e.g., leukotriene B., kallikreins,
ators (e.g., kinins, opioids, acetylcholine). As might be expected, there are many
mechanisms of action to disrupt that sensation. Glucocorticoids work by reduc-
ing the inflammation and the production of various cytokines that induce pruritus.
Topical anesthetics are presumed to desensitize the peripheral nerves or receptors
that trigger pruritus. The cooling agents will substitute a cool sensation that func-
tionally may displace the sensation of itch. Cool soaks or dressings work to reduce
the pruritic threshold thorough several mechanisms including desensitizing nerve
receptors.
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration. Topical antipruritic agents may reduce pru-
ritus in allergic, parasilic, scborrheic, ncoplastic, and other skin condilions wherc
treatment for moderate or severe pruritus. It is best used as adjunctive therapy
or for spot treatment of focally pruritic lesions. Hydrating agents works best in al
lergy skin diseases and conditions where the skin is dehydrated (i.e., dry). Spot 
treatment of focal lesions may be applied once or more daily to affected areas in
lotions, creams, ointments, or sprays. Generalized pruritus is best managed with
agents formulation in shampoos.
4. Adverse effects. In general, these topical antipruritic agents are safe. Rarely, a pa-
tient may show focal cutaneous irritation at the site of application. Repeated appli-
cations of topical anesthetics may result in a contact allergic reaction, although is
not considered a problem for products containing pramoxine.
C.
Anti-inflammatory and immunomodulating agents
1. Preparations. Various substances may have anti-inflammatory effects, including cool
water applications, glucocorticoids, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), aloe vera, and oth-
ers.
a. Clucocorticoids vary greatly in their topical potency. The more common top-
ical glucocorticoids for skin and car use are, in order of incrcasing potency,
hydrocorlisone, prednisone and prednisolone, triamcinolone, dexamcthasone,
betamethasone, momelasonc, and flucinolone. The sall used to formulate the
glucocorticoid will affect the pharmacokinetics, especially t'>,. For example, tri-
amcinolone generally has a stronger anti-inflammatory effect on the skin and
ears than dexamethasone, despite their opposite potencies in vivo.
b. Tacrolimus. Tacrolimus is a macrolide produced by Streptomyces tsukubaen-
sis. It is available for topical administration as a 0.03% and 0.1% ointment
(Protopic?), although the higher concentration is primarily used in veterinary
dermatology. Pimecrolimus (Elidel Cream) is a similar drug that is also avail-
able commercially but is not used extensively in veterinary medicine.
c. Imiquimod. Imiquimod is an immune response modifier sold as a 5% cream
(Aldara),
2. Mechanism of action. The mechanisms of action vary in this group.
a. Glucocorticoids, the most commonly used anti-inflammalory drugs, cxcrt their
anti-inflammatory propcrtics by dccrcasing migration of and phagocylosis by
inflammatory cells, decrcascd claboration of C-reactivc protein, suppression of
cytokine production and release from inflammatory cells, and prevention of the
release of lysosomal enzymes that cause tissue damage and generation of leuko-
tactic. substances.
b. Tacrolimus has anti-inflammatory and immunomodulating effects through cal-
cineurin inhibition, which results in inhibition of various cytokines (interleukin-2,
 3, and 4; TNF-α, and interferon) and down-regulation of cytokine expression
in inflammatory cells. Tacrolimus has similar properties as cyclosporine but is
c. Imiquimod actives immune cells by ligating toll-like receptors (TLR7. TLR8), re-
sulting in cytokine production and release (interferon-α), interleukin-6, and tu-
mor necrosis factor-α. In addition, iniqimod may activatc Langcrhans cells to
activate additional immunorcgulatory responses.
Topical Dermatology Therapy301
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration.
a. Topical anti-inflammatory agents are used to reduce the inflammation caused by
various skin disorders. Thcy are used most often for their antipruritic activities.
b. Tacrolimus has becn shown to be efective in the management of perianal fis-
tula, effective in reducing the severity of clinical lesions in atopic dermatitis, and
for management of various autoimmune skin conditions, such as discoid lupus
erythematosus.
-ou snoaueino snoea aleuew o auioipau uewny u! pasn uaag sey pouinbjwl o
plasms (c.g., basal cell carcinoma), precancerous lesions (o.g., Bowen's diseaso),
genital warts, and actinic (i.e., solar) keratosis. In veterinary medicine, the drug
has been shown in limited studies to be effective in managing sarcoids in horses.
Other potential uses, that need additional investigation, include Bowen's disease 
in cats and cutaneous herpes virus infections.
4. Adverse effects
a. All topical glucocorticoids are absorbed and may exert systemic. effects, though
the degree to which they are absorbed varies from agent to agent with the for-
mulation and salt used. For example, mometasone has significantly more po-
tency than betamethasone, but is absorbed much less and therefore is safer for
prolonged topical application. Specific. adverse effects may be iatrogenic hy-
peradrenocorticism, suppression of the hypothalamic-piluilary-adrenal axis, and
cutaneous manifestations of hyperadrenocorticism (e.g., comedone formation,
cutaneous atrophy, alopecia).
b. Tacrolimus is very safe when applied topically, though gloves should be worn by
humans applying the medication. Rarely, mild erythema may be scen al the sile
of application.
c. Imiquimod does induce inflammation, so cutaneous erythema, edema, and pru-
ritus may be seen following topical application. Gloves should be worn by hu-
mans applying this compound.
D,
Astringents
1. Preparations and chemistry. The principal astringents are salts of aluminum, zinc,
iron, and bismuth or salts thal contain these metals (e.g, permanganales). Tan-
nins and other polyphenolic compounds also act as astringents. Commonly used
astringents in veterinary medicine include zinc sulfate and aluminum acetate
(DomeboroWw solution).
2. Mechanism of action. Astringents are substances that precipitate protein, reduce
permeability of the cell membrane, and reduce transcapillary movemenl of plasma
proteins, and thus inflammation, edema, and exudation.
3. Therapeutic uses. Astringenls are used to dry the skin, toughen the skin, and pro-
mote healing. They are also used to coagulate blood (i.e., styptic actions).
4. Administration. These agents are applied topically to dry moist areas. They are
helpful in the topical management of acute moist dermatitis and other moist py-
oderma, for irritant dermatitis (e.g., urine scald), and for drying the ear canal in
suppurative olitis cxlerna and yeast infoctions of the cars.
Overuse may cause excessive drying of the skin, which can result in secondary
infections.
E.
Demulcents
1. Preparation and chemistry. Demulcents may be applied as sticky lotions thal ad-
here to the skin or as powders that mix with fluids excreted from the affected area.
Substances that have demulcent properties include alginates, mucilages, starches,
dextrins, gums, sugars, and polymeric polyhydric glycols. The most common
tions are propylene glycol, polyethylene glycol, and glycerin.
2. Mechanisms of action, Dcmulccnts adhere to the skin to provide physical
protection and to allow prolonged topical exposure of any drug that might be sus-
pended in the preparation used. Some demulcents, such as propylene glycol, have
302
Chapter 13 11 E
bacteriostatic and fungistatic properties. Most demulcents have hydrophilic colloidal
propertics thal allow them to serve as emulsificrs and suspending agcnts ior water-
soluble agents.
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration. Demulcents are protective agents that are
used to relieve irritation and irritation, especially of abraded tissues or mucous
monly used because of its antimicrobial actions and physical properties: nongreasy.
nonstaining, and the ability to spread easily over the surface.
4. Adverse effects. Topical irritation may be scen in some aniimals following rcpcatcd
 application of propylene glycol on the skin or in the ear canal.
F.
Adsorbents
1. Preparations and chemistry. Adsorbents are inert and insoluble substances, gener-
ally fine powders, that may consist of starch, calcium carbonate, boric acid, zinc
oxide, titanium dioxide, or talc.
 2. Mechanism of action. Adsorbents gencrally absorb rmoisturc on the skin and act as
dessicants.
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration.
a. Adsorbents may be used as a vehicle for parasiticides or antimicrobial agents.
b. Powders may be used to absorb moisture on the skin as long as they are not
allowed to form adherent crusts.
4. Adverse effects. If applicd to wet surfaces, adsorbents may iorm crusts of powder
 and liquid. Powders imay promote granulation tissue, especially if used within body
cavities.
G.
Protectives
1. Preparations and chemistry. Mechanical protectives may form an adherent film that
may be flexible or inflexible. Ingredients considered as protectives include lanolin.
Imineral oil, olive oil, zinc stearate, petrolatuim, silicones, and various polyimers.
Scveral products rccently introduccd into vclerinary derimatology contain sugars that
may serve as protectives against microbes.
 2. Mechanism of action. A protective may provide a physical and/or occlusive layer
on the skin. In addition, these materials may also scrvc as a vehicle for mcdica-
tions. These agents may protect from physical (e.g., radiation) or chemical insult to
the skin. The most recent agents released in veterinary medicine in this class are
shampoos containing monosaccharides.
3. Therapeutic uses and administration.
a. Protectives may be applied to wounds or nonhealing ulcers.
b. Petrolatum or other protectives may be applied daily around inguinal region to
protect the skin irom irritation irom urinary or iecal incontinencc.
4. Adverse effects. Protectives may he occlusive and may therefore allow infections to)
spread. They should not be used without the appropriate antimicrobial therapy in
infected skin.
Humectants and moisturizing agents
H.
1. Preparations. Many substances have hygroscopic qualities and will attract water.
including x-hydroxy acids (lactic acid, malic acid, glycolic acid, and others), urea,
colloidal oatmeal, propylene glycol, glycerin, and IDMSO).
2. Mechanism of action. These agents generally attract water molecules, which are
chemically bound to the agent. They are often used in conjunction with an emol-
lient to retain water that has been altracled or bound to the skin
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration. Humectants are indicated whenever the skin
is dry or dehydrated.
4. Adverse effects. Adverse effects are uncommon. Overuse could potentially lead to
cxcessive maccration of the: skin.
Emollients
1. Preparations and chemistry. Emollients are bland fatty substances that are applied
locally to the skin, Numerous animal fats and oils may act as emollients, including
cpicalDerrm
lanolin and lard. Sources found in vegetable oils include olive oil, castor oil, cot-
tonseed oil, corn oil, coconut oil, peanut oil, persic oil, sesame oil, and cocoa but-
ter. Waxes and other hydrocarbons, such as glycerin, isopropyl myrisate, beeswax,
paraffin, and petrolatum also scrve as cmollients. Products containing fatly acids
 and phytosphingosines will also act as emollients when applied topically.
 2. Mechanism of action. Emollients act to increase the tissue moisture content by (1)
preventing moisture loss by acting as an occlusive dressing or protective, (2) in-
creasing the water holding capabilities through the use of humectants, and (3) alter-
ing the desquamation of the stratum corneum.
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration. Emollients are indicated in patients with dry
and scaly skin to incrcase culancous hydratior and sofien the skin. Thcir chief use
is as a vehicle for many lipid-soluble topical medications. Emollients used after
shampoo therapy will increase or reduce evaporative water loss from the skin by
forming an occlusive dressing.
4. Adverse effects. Emollients may rcsult in retention of moislurc that may trap bac-
teria and possibly favor growth of some organisms, including anaerobic bacteria.
Some emollients, such as lanolin, may promote forimation of comedones.
J.Keratolytic and keratoplastic agents (antiseborrheic agents)
1. Preparations. Benzoyl peroxide, urea, salicylic. acid, sulfur, selenium disulfide,
resorcinol, coal tar, various phenols, and sulfur all have keratolytic actions. Tar
(from coal or pine distillation), suliur, salicylic acid, and sulfur have keratoplastic
properties.
2. Mechanism of action.
matior.
b. Keratolytic agents also increase hydration of keratinocytes. Maceration of the
epidermis results from this increased hydration, which also enhances the desqua-
mation process. Suliur, salicylic acid, benzoyl peroxide, colloidal oatmeal, urea,
and coal tar are all used with frequency in vcterinary dermalology to hydratc the
skin and promote desquamation.
c. The term keratoplastic implies normalization of the cornification process by
slowing cpithelial turnover. It is presumed that this process occurs due to al
terations in IDNA synthesis, Coal tar is the most widely used keratoplastic agent
in veterinary medicine. Salicylic acid and selenium sulfide may also have mild
keratoplastic properties.
3. Therapeutic uses and administration
a. Keratolytic agents are used primarily in shampoo therapy for the management 
of scaling skin conditions, including familial scborrhca and ichthyosis, and ior
softening and removal of crusts in parasitic or infectious dermatologic condi-
tions. Topical gels or ointments containing salicylic acid (e.g.. Kerasolv@) are an
excellent adjunctive therapy for nasal hyperkeratosis.
b. Coal tar and other keratoplastic agents are indicated as parl of shampoo therapy
for the management of familial seborrhea and other scaling disorders.
4. Adverse effects. Mild irritation may ensue iollowing topical application of kera-
tolytic or keratoplastic agents. Coal tar may be photosensitizing, irritating, carcino-
 genic, and it may stain hair coats and clothing. Coal tar is not recommended for
use on cats because of its irritant nature in that species.
K.
 Caustic and escharotics
1. Preparations and chemistry. Active ingredients include potassium hydroxide, silver
nitrate, gentian violet, aluminum chloride, alum, glacial acetic acid, trichloroacctic
acid, and salicylic acid.
cpithelium, and thus cause destruction of tissue at the site of application. Agents
that also precipitate protein to form a crust, and eventually a scar, are called an
escharotic.
3.
 Therapeutic uses and administration. These agents may bc applied topically to pro-
liferative lesions. They are not used with much frequency in veterinary medicine.
304Chapter 13 I K
4. Adverse effects. Cutaneous irritation, crust formation, scar formation, and discom-
fort are the primary adverse effects of topical application of caustic agents.
 Rubefacients, irritants, and vesicants
1. Preparations. Rubefacients include volatile aromatic irritants, such as camphor and
menthol. Locally applied heat, from hot packs, heating pads, or heat lamps, also
serves as a rubefacient. Capsicum, coal tar, creosote, iodine, turpentine, alcohols,
and pine tar are some of the better-known irritants uscd in velerinary medicine.
2. Mechanism of action. These agenls work on the skin to induce hyperemia (rubefa-
cients), inflammation and hyperemia (irritants), and vesicles (vesicants) caused by
leakage of fluid from damaged capillaries. Rubefacients may act by increasing cir-
culation to the area.
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration. Rubefacients are often used to increase the
absorption of topical medications, to increase the circulation to an area of the
body, and to induce the feeling of warmth. Some irritants have medicinal qualities
that support their use. For example, menthol will induce the sensation of coolness
and has some antipruritic activity.
4. Adverse effects. Inflammation, hyperemia, vesicles, irritation, discomfort, or pain
are likely adverse efiecls of topical applicalion, since that is the classificalion of
these agents.
VEHICLESANDDELIVERYSYSTEMS
A.
Vehicles (Figure 13-2). Substances used to carry active ingredients in pharmacologica
preparations are called vehicles. These substances do not generally have therapeutic
properties, but they may provide some suppor for the management of skin discases by
acting as occlusive dressings or protectives.
1. Solubilily of the active drug is a key in selection of the vehicle. Insuficient solubil-
ily resulis in poor movement of a drug into the skin and excessive solubility may
result in a drug that fails to move from the vehicle into the skin.
O/W
W/O
Creams
Ointments
Oils
Oil
FIGURE 13-2. Representation of thc
formulations of topical medications.
Topical preparations consist of oil, solids
(powdcrs), or water and various mixturcs
Of these substances.
Topical DermatologyTherapy」 305
2. Emulsifers. Emulsifying agents are used to allow mixing of a lipid (or oil) soluble
substance with a water-soluble substance. Emulsifying agents may be classified as
natural agents (e.g., hydrophilic colloids), synthetic agents (e.g., soaps, sulfates, sul-
fonates), or as finely divided solids (e.g., colloidal clays, metallic hydroxides). Com-
mon cmulsilying agents include cetyl alcohol, glyccryl monoslerate, mcthycellulosc.
slearic acid, stearyf alcohol, DMsO, lanolin, polyethylene glycol, benzalkonium
chloride, and many others.
3. Liposomes. When phospholipids disperse in liquids, they swell, hydrate, and form
multilamellar, concentric layers of aqueous materials separated by the lipid bilayers.
These aggregates, called liposomes, are used as carriers of water, various drugs, and
macromolecules that can be trapped between these layers for dispersal in or on the
skin.
a. Novosomes. Liposome technology was used to incorporate moisturizing agents
into lipid microvesicles that have been incorporated into various veterinary
shampoos (e.g., HydraPearls) and cream rinses. These novosomes bind to hair
and keratinocytes and slowly disperse their contents (moisturizing agents) as the
liposomes break down. Studies have shown that these provide superior moistur-
izing effects on the skin of dogs.
b. Spherulites, These are liposomes that also contain active agents, such as mois-
turizers, stabilizers, fatty acids, chlorhexidine, and more. Spherulites may be
nonionic to allow for deeper penetration into the skin or cationic, which facil-
itates binding to the surface of the skin. These structures release their contents as
the liposome degrades over time.
 B.Dispersants and penetration enhancers
1. Preparations and chemistry. These agents tend to fall into four categorics: (1) azone
and its derivatives, (2) terpenes, (3) urea and derivatives, and (4) aparotic solvents.
DMSO belongs to the latter class and is a common agent used to enhance the pen-
etration of water, antibiotics, glucocorticoids, and other commonly used medica-
tions in veterinary medicine. Dispersants, such as transcutol (i.e., diethyleneglycol
monoethyl ether), are becoming more extensively used in veterinary medicine to
facilitale absorption and diffusion of agents throughout the lipid layer of the skin.
Limited data are available on many because of their proprietary nature.
2. Mechanisms of action. Penetration enhancers, such as DMSO), may alter lipids
in the stratum corneum or induction of a more porous intercellular matrix of
the epidermis. Dispersants act to facilitate the movement of the active chemical
throughoul the lipid layer of the skin. These are commonly employed in veteri-
nary medicine in pour-on products to rapidly disperse the active ingredients, These
agents may also affecl (increase or decreasc) drug solubility and affect the depot
effects of some drugs.
 3. Therapeutic uses and administration.
cluding Frontline and Advantage, These agents allow the active ingredients,
fipronil and imidacloprid, respectively, to dispense throughout the lipid layers of
the cpidermis and provide antiparasilic concentrations of insecticides.
 b. Newer commercial products containing sphingolipids also contain dispersants
to facilitate the distribution of the lipids when applied to only one area of the
body.
is reported to induce the taste of garlic when applied topically to the skin. Gloves
should be worn when applying products containing DMsO. No adverse effects at-
tributed to dispersants have been reported.
C.Liquid preparations
1. Wet dressings
a. Definition. Wet dressings consist of cloth or bandage material soaked in so-
lutions, generally astringents or antimicrobial agents, and applied to localized
areas for treatiment.
306
Chapler 13 Il C.
b. Mechanism of action. Dressings act to physically protect the lesion while deliv-
ering high concentrations of the therapeutic agent directly to the area.
C.
 Therapeutic uses and administration. Wet dressings are helpful to debride
wounds and decubital ulcers.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Dressings should be changed frequently to avoid
ovcrhydration (maceration) and trapping microbes in the treated arca. Many an-
imals will not tolerate a physical dressing and will bite or chew at the applica-
tion to remove it.
2. Soaks
a.
 Definition. Soaks are a form of hydrotherapy containing medications, usually
keratolytic agents. Animals are either allowed to sit in the medicated solution or
the solution is applied with sponges, cotton balls, or other dressings and allowed
to remain for several minutes before drying.
b. Mechanism of action. The soaking process will increase water absorption by
keratinocytes, thus promoting desquamation. Keratolytic agents, such as colloidal
oatmeal, are often added to enhance the process.
c. Therapeutic uses and administration. Soaks are rarcly uscd in vcterinary
medicine. However, colloidal oatmcal is available as vcterinary products and
over-thc-counter (OTC) as fine powders for soaks. Oatmcal soaks may be used
to reduce pruritus in dogs or cats with allergic skin disease. Retention of the wa-
ter in the keratinocytes is increased when an emollient is used as an occlusive
dressing after the soak.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Overhydration of the skin is a potential adverse
effect. Soaking the entire body is difficult since many patients will not sit still in
a soak for 10 minutes.
3. Shampoo therapy
a. Definition. Shampoos are the most common topical formulation uscd in vct-
crinary dermatology. Medicated sharmpoos are used to kill or control cctopar-
asites, reduce inflammation or control pruritus, facilitate the removal of scale
or "normalize" epidermal kinetics, or aid in the control of microbes. Shampoos
may contain detergents or be free of soaps, using various bases and emulsifying
 agents to facilitate distribution of the active ingredients.
b. Mechanism of action. Shampoos provide topical application of various active
ingredients over a large surface of the body. In most cases, the active ingredient
is largely removed as the shampoo is rinsed off the patient.
C.“
 Therapeutic uses and administration.
(1) Rules of shampoo administration.
(a) Shampoos should be applied using water that is of room temperature or
exacerbates pruritus, and animals bathed with hot water, even if an
antipruritic shampoo was used, will be more pruritic after bathing.
(b) Medicated shampoos should have a contact time of 10 minutes. This
allows the active ingredients to work and may allow some absorption of
active agents into the stratum corneum.
(c) Shampoos should be thoroughly rinsed from the hair coat.
(d) Patients treated for pruritus should be towel dried only. Hair drying,
cven with those blowing cool air, tends to dry the skin or cxaccrbate
pruritus.
other day, depending on the dermatologic condition in the patient. The fre-
quency of shampoo therapy of most dermatologic conditions may be re-
duced as the condition is controlled.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Shampoo therapy may be difficult in some an-
imals, such as cats. In addition, it is very difficult to get sufficient contact on
lesions of the head and face. It is best to avoid distributing the shampoo above
the neck arca for that rcason. Other delivery systems (c.g., lotions) are more ef-
fcctive in those arcas. Sone medications and inactive substances found in the
shampoo may be irritating to the eyes or mucous membranes.
Topical DcrmatologyIherapy307
4.Sprays
a. Definition. Sprays are water-based formulations that often contain an emulsifier
to aid in distribution of the active agent. Humcctants and cmollicnts arc com-
mon ingrcdicnts to facilitate moisturizing the trcated arca.
b. Mechanism of action. Sprays deliver the active agent directly to the skin in a
mist using a pump spray botule or aerosol delivery systen.
c. Therapeutic use and administration. Sprays are used to deliver medications for
parasite control, control of infectious agents, medications to reduce pruritus,
hydrating agents and emollients to condition the skin, and medications for the
management of seborrheic. conditions. Sprays are excellent for focal treatment
of dermatologic. conditions, as in treatment of pruritus on the feet or perianal re
pozeiouos io uoueon lods ioy posn oq ueo pue Aldde on Ases die Aoui uois
application.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Sprays of all types (hand pumps or aerosol)
may startle or frighten some patients, such as cats or horses. A dense hair
coat will reduce the effectiveness of sprays, unless the area is thoroughly
soaked.
5. Rinses/dips
 a. Definition. Rinses consist of soluble powders or concentrated liquids mixed with
water applicd by spraying, rinsing, sponging, or pouring on the diluted med-
ication and allowing it to sit for a prescribed period of time, Most rinses are
allowed to dry, or in some cases, they may be rinsed off with more water. The
primary advantage of this delivery system is that the medication is left on the
patient providing significant residual action.
b. Mechanism of action. Rinses are used to directly apply the medication on the
skin. The therapeutic. agent has direct topical effects, and in many cases, will be
absorbed and provide some systemic. effects.
 C. Therapeutic use and administration.
(1) Indications. Rinscs are ar cxccllent trcatmcnt mcthod for gencralizcd discase
requiring aggressive therapy. They are usually used to manage ectoparasitic
infestalions, for example, mange, lice, and fleas.
(2) Administration. Hair of long- or medium-coated dogs and cals should be
removed by clipping to facilitate the contact of the active agent on the skin.
Patients should generally be bathed to remove excess dirt or debris, if it is
sufficient to block access of the rinse to the skin. The rinse is applied by
either pouring the medication onto the animal, by using some type of spray
system, or by using a sponge to wet the animal. The rinse solution is gener-
ally lefl on the patienl to dry.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Adverse effects are largely dependent upon the
therapeutic agent found in the rinse or dip. The application of medication as a
rinse is more tedious than as a shampoo. In addition, active ingredients of many
rinses (e.g, amitraz, lime sulfur) are more odiferous and pose a higher risk to
those applying these agents. Most rinses are best performed by trained personnel
wearing appropriate protective gear (e.g, gloves, respirator) on well-ventilated
arcas.
6.Lotions
a. Definition. Lotions are powders dissolved in water. Some veterinary products use
the term "residuals" for these formulations.
b. Mechanism of action. Lotions are generally liquid to semisolid. The water-based
lotions evaporate leaving the active ingredient and emulsifiers and/or emollients
on the surface of the skin.
c. Therapeutic use and administration. Lotions are used for localized treatment of
skin conditions. They are useful for the management of parasitic. conditions, for
focal control of inflammation, for control of pruritus, and for focal scaling or
hyperplastic skin conditions,
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Lotions may be messy to apply where there is
hair over the lesion. Hair may also reduce the effectiveness by blocking penetra-
tion or coverage of the medication on the skin.
308Clhapter 13 IlI D
D.
Solids or semisolid preparations
1. Powders
a.
 Definition. Powders are pulverizcd solids.
b. Mechanism of action. Powders may contain active medications (e.g., parasiti-
cides), be used as dessicants (substances that absorb moisture), or intended to be
mixed with liquids to form other formulations (e.g, a paste).
c. Therapeutic use and administration. Powder formulations in veterinary medicine
may contain antiparasitic agents, antimicrobials, or anti-inflammatory agents.
 There are intended for spot treatment of localized skin conditions.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Powders tend to be messy and may cause a
"cloud" of medication during the application process. As such, care should be
taken by those applying powders not to inhale any of the material. Powders tend
to form a crust when mixed with water or serum on skin lesions.
2. Ointments
a. Definition. An ointment is a semisolid preparation intended for external appli-
cation. The properties of ointments vary with their inlended use, ease of ap-
plication, and extent of application. Ointments consist of oil-based products,
emulsions of water and oil, and water-soluble bases. The emulsions may be con-
sidered water-in-oil (W/O), meaning a water-soluble agent emulsified into an oil
base, or oil-in-water (O/W), meaning a lipid soluble agent or medication emul-
sified into a water-soluble base. The latter is more esthetically acceptable, as it
tends not to leave as noticeable oily residue at the site of application.
b. Mechanism of action, Ointments provide delivcry of mcdication that is dissolved
in the best vehicle for the medication. For cxample, lipid-soluble mcdications
may be dissolved in lipid vehicle and then formulated as an emulsion to allow
for better esthetics and distribution of the active agent. Water-soluble medica-
tions may be emulsified into an oil base to allow for better penetration into and
through the skin.
C. Therapeutic use and administration. Ointments are applied locally to skin le-
sions. They provide the best delivery syslem to enhance penetration through the
areas once or twice daily.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Most adverse effects of ointments are related to
effects from the active medications contained within. However, the oil base or
emulsfiers used in ointments may cause irritation or hypersensitivity reactions in
some animals. The products are limited by the hair coat of animals. Many pet 
owners do not like the greasy medications and residue that may be left on the
skin (to potenlially stain carpets or clothing).
3. Creams
a. Definition. A cream is a type of ointment with a water-soluble base. Creams
are emulsions of either a water-soluble medication or a lipid-soluble medication
in an aqueous base. Creams have an oil phase typically containing petrolatum
with higher molecular weight alcohols (e.g., stearyl or cetyl alcohol) as emulsi-
fiers. The aqueous phase, which is generally the largest component of the cream,
contains preservatives, emulsifiers, and humectants, such as propylene glycol,
glycerin, or polyethylene glycol.
b. Mechanism of action. Active medications may be dissolved in the oil phase or
aqueous phase of a creaim,
C. Therapeutic use and administration. Creams provide topical delivery of medi-
cations in high concentrations to focal area. In addition, they may hydrate focal
areas, since they often contain humectanls.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Most adverse effects are due to the active in-
 gredients of specific medications. Like ointments, creams are less effective in
patients with a thick hair coat. Likewise, they are not logistically suitable for
treating large surface areas.
4. Pastes
a. Definition. A paste is an ointment or cream containing a large amount of
powder.
Topical Dermatology Therapy」309
b. Mechanism of action. Pastes allow for topical medications to be delivered in
high concentrations to the surface of the skin. They may also act as a protective
and an occlusivc dressing, and as such, cnhance absorption of medications inlo
the skin.
c. Therapeutic use and administration. Pastes may be used in veterinary medicine
planum) or from caustic effects of topical substances (e.g, for urinary inconti-
nence), to facilitate hydration of localized lesions (e.g., hydration of nasal hyper-
keralosis), or lo deliver medication in high concentralions to focal lesions.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Adverse effects and limitations are similar to
those seen with application of ointments.
5. Gels
a. Definition. Gels are semisolid preparations that form a clear, greaseless, and
water-soluble base. There are various types of gels based on their composition,
but they may contain polyvinyl alcohol, methycellulose and similar compounds,
gelatins, or propylene glycol.
b. Mechanism of action. Gels contain active ingredients in solution. After a gel is
distributed onto the skin, the base rapidly evaporales leaving the active agent
with no oily or greasy residue.
c. Therapeutic use and administration. Gels are widely acccpted by pet owners
because they are cosmetically acceptable. Veterinary and medical formulations
tibacterial agents (e.g., benzoyl peroxide, BPO Gel&), glucocorticoids, and anti-
fungal agents. Thesc are applied to affccted skin once or twice daily.
d. Adverse effects and limitations. Adverse affects from topical application of gels
are due to active ingredients or topical sensitization to humectants (e.g., propy-
lene glycol) or other components of the gel. Gels have similar limitations as
ointments and creams by the nature of the hair coat of animals.
CLINICAL APPLICATION OF TOPICAL THERAPY
Antimicrobial therapy
A.
1. Topical antibacterial therapy
lesions and as adjunctive therapy for superficial pyoderma (e.g., folliculitis).
b. Therapeutic options
(1) Topical antibiotics are generally not highly effective hccause of their limiled
ability to penetrate deep into the skin and provide high concentrations of
the active ingredient. One antibiotic, known for its ability to penetrate into
granulation tissue, is mupirocin. Mupirocin is available as an ointment and
may be useful for draining tracts or focal granulomas caused by bacteria
when applied to the affected arca once or Iwice daily. Mupirocin is highly
effective against staphylococci and many gram-negative bacteria.
(2) Shampoo therapy is widely used as adjunctive therapy for generalized py-
oderma. Ingredients with efficacy against staphylococci are preferred and
include benzoyl peroxide, chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate, iodifors, triclosan,
salicylic acid, and sulfur.
(a) Benzoyl peroxide has been shown to be the most effective topical an-
tibacterial agent, providing up to 48 hours of bactericidal activity. It is
found in several veterinary products, sometimes in combination with
salicylic acid and/or sulfur.
(b) Ethyl lactate is available in a veterinary shampoo formulation
(EtiDerm). This agent penetrates the hair folicle and scbaceous glands
where it dissociates into ethyl alcohol and lactic acid, which provide
comdolytic and antibacterial activities, respectively.
310Chapter 13 IV A
c. Administration and clinical use
(1) Antibacterial shampoos are generally administered as baths every 3-7 days
as adjunctive therapy for surface and superficial pyoderma. Discase condi-
tions where shampoo therapy is beneficial includes puppy pyoderma, acute
moist dermatitis, and folliculitis.
(2) Good principles of bathing should bhe followed.
(3) Antibacterial shampoos are not effective for management of deep
pyodermas.
 2. Topical antifungal therapy
a. Topical therapy for yeast (M. pachydermatis)
(1) Indications. Topical therapy is often effective as the sole therapy for local-
ized or generalized Malassezia dermatitis. It is also useful as adjunctive ther-
apy when syslermic management of yeast infections is utilized. Topical ther-
apy is highly effective as the sole treatment of Malassezia infections in otitis
externa.
(2) Therapeutic options. Topical agents that have some activity against
Malassezia spp. yeast include nystatin, azoles (miconazole, clotrima-
zole, ketoconazole, cnilconazole), chlorhexidine, lime sulfur, iodifors, and
acetic acid/boric. acid. The combination of miconazole with chlorhexi-
dine (Malaseb? Shampoo) has shown superior eificacy as a shampoo for
yeast dermatitis, (ther similar combination products (e.g., ketoconazole and
chlorhexidine, KetoChlor@) may have similar efficacy.
(3) Clinical use.
(a) For sole therapy, shampoos should be administered three times weekly
for 2-3 weeks, then twice wcckly for 2-3 weeks, then cvcry 7-10 days
as maintenance therapy.
(b)As adjunctive therapy, shampoos should be administered every 7-10
days.
(c) Good principles of bathing should be followed (e.g.. contact time).
(d) Several areas of the body are difficult to treat using shampoos. These in-
clude the lip folds, facial folds on brachcephalic breeds, and even the
ventral and dorsal interdigital areas. Topical therapy against yeast can be
greatly enhanced using moist towelettes or pledgets containing micona-
zole and chlorhexidine (e.g., Malaseb& towelettes) or boric acid and
acetic: acid (e.g., Malcetic Wipes) to clean the affecled areas once daily.
b. Topical therapy for dermatophytosis
(1) Indications. Topical therapy is not recommended as the sole treatment for
dermatophylosis in companion animals. It may be more cffective in large
 animals. However, topical therapy is not recommended for the sole therapy
of any animal that is in frequent contact with humans.
(2) Therapeutic options.
(a)  Agents with antiungal activity against dermalophytes include the azoles
(miconazole, clotrimazole, ketoconazole, and enilconazole), nystatin,
lime sulfur, terbinafine, and sodium hypochlorite.
(b) These active ingredients may be found in lotions, creams and ointments,
powders, and shampoos, and as concentrates that may be diluted down
and used as a rinse or spray.
(c) Several commercially available veterinary products contain combinations
of active ingredients, such as miconazole and chlorhexidine.
(3)  Administration and clinical use.
nents. Therefore, if used, it is recommended that they should be applied
from the periphery of the lesion and then distributed toward the center
of the lesion.
(b) Shampoo therapy is a highly effective as an adjunct therapy for
dermatophytosis. While it is not rccommended as the sole therapy, rou-
tine bathing with antifungal shampoos has been shown to speed clinical
recovery and may reduce the time period in which the animal is conta-
gious.
Iopical Dermatology  Therapy 311
i. As adjunctive therapy, animals should be bathed once weekly follow-
ing good principles of bathing.
u indiay aq ose Ae seids se snoid jo uoesdde jeidot !
spray that contains both miconazole and chlorhexidine (Malaseb@
spray) is commercially available and can be very effective as an ad-
junctive therapy for dermatophytosis.
B.Topical management of pruritus
1. Indications. Topical agents are very useful to manage generalized pruritic skin con-
dilions, cspecially atopic dermatitis. Thcy may also be helpful, though often not as
cffcctive, in the rmanagement of contact allergy, food allergy, and many other skin
disorders that induce pruritus. Topical therapy can be very useful to facilitate with-
drawal for systemic antipruritic. medications in preparation for allergy testing. In
addition, topical therapy may provide the additional therapy required for "trouble
areas," such as the interdigital areas or the perianal region, in animals with atopic
dermatitis. However, topical therapy is generally not highly effective as the sole
treatment of pruritic skin conditions, especially for extended time periods.
 2. Therapeutic options
a. Shampoos containing keratolytic agents or topical antipruritic agents, such as
colloidal oatmeal or sulfur, will hydrate the skin and reduce the pruritus. The
duration of activity of these products is generally ~24 hours.
 b. A shampoo containing diphenhydramine in a colloidal oatmeal base is available
for adjunctive management of allergic pruritus.
C. A topical anesthetic, pramoxine, is available in shampoos (combined with col-
loidal oatmeal). This agent provides enhanced antipruritic activity over col-
os iea oods do aids e se age s pe ae ieo lol
Relief?).
d. Ointments, creams, and lolions (ic., residuals) containing glucocorticoids may
be useful for focal pruritic skin lesions. Topical glucocorticoids are also con-
sidered a key element in topical manageiment of otitis externa. For generalized
pruritus, shampoos, rinses, or sprays provide dispersion to a greater surface area.
Glucocorticoids, available for topical use in increasing order of potency, include
hydrocortisone, prednisolone, triamcinolone, dexamethasone, betamethasone,
flucinolone, and mometasone. Hydrocortisone is the most commonly used top-
ical glucocorticoid and is available in lotions, shampoos, and sprays. Triamci-
nolone is also available in lotions, creams, ointments, and sprays (e.g., Genesis
Spray).
(1) Glucocorticoids applied topically will be absorbed and may induce systemic.
effects, including suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
Hydrocortisone is a mild glucocorticoid and is the least likely to result in
these adverse effects.
(2) Prolonged application of any glucocorticoid, and even short-term application
of potent glucocorticoids, may result in cutaneous atrophy, comedone for-
mation, and scarring of the skin. The glucocorticoid selected for topical use
should be based on the potency required for the problem. Use of more po-
tent topical glucocorticoids will likely incrcase the incidence of advcrse cf-
fects.
(3) Topical tacrolimus (Protopic-Fujisawa) has been shown to provide some anti-
inflaimmatory and antipruritic effects in dogs with atopic dermatitis.
3. Administration and clinical use
a. For adjunctive management of generalized pruritus accompanying atopic. der-
matitis, shampoos containing hydrocortisone, diphenhydramine, or pramoxine
may be administered once weekly or as needed.
(1)' These agents may be effective as the sole therapy of pruritus in mild atopy
cases.
(2) Good principles of shampoo therapy should be followed, especially contact
time and the use of neutral temperature or cool water for bathing.
312Clapter 13 IV B
b. For managing trouble spots, such as the perianal or interdigital regions, lotions
(residuals), sprays, or crcams/ointiments may be applied to ihe affccted arcas.
(1) Prolonged use of products containing glucocorticoids, other than hydrocorti-
sone, should be avoided.
(2) Products containing pramoxine or diphenhydramine may be used daily or as
needed.
(3) Pentoxyfylline ointment may be applied twice weekly for adjunctive man-
agement of pruritus associated with atopic dermatitis. Humans should wear
gloves when applying this product.
C.
Topical antiseborrheic therapy
1. Indications. Topical antiseborrheic therapy is indicated to reduce scaling associated
with primary seborrhea and to reduce scaling and pruritus associated with other
scaling disorders. These products may be helpful in the management of familial
seborrhea, ichthyosis fi.e., ichthyosis of the golden retriever), sebaceous adenitis,
or any other parasitic or infectious skin disorder that is characterized by exces-
sive scale formation. Farmilial scborrhea is the classical discase condition for which
these producls are used,
 2. Therapeutic options
a. Shampoos arc the most coinmonly cmployed delivcry system for antiscborrheic
agcnts, although rinscs, sprays, and lotions may also be uscd.
b.
 Activc ingredicnts provide somc reduction in scale forination (keratoplastic
agents) or facilitate rermoval of scale (keratolytic agents).
(1) Tar is the most effective keratoplastic ingredient used in topical veterinary
formulations. It also has keratolytic, degreasing, and antipruritic properties.
Tars have been refined to remove many of the more irritating hydrocarbons;
imals. Tars have historically been combined with sulfur to antagonize this
irritant effect,
(2) Sulfur is keratolytic, mildly keratoplastic, antipruritic, antibacterial, antifun-
gal, and antiparasitic, depending on the formulation and concentration. It is
considercd to be mild and is often combincd with tar or salicylic acid.
(3) Salicylic. acid is an active ingredient that may be found as the primary ingre-
dient (e.g., Keratolux@) or combined with sulfur, where there may be syn-
ergistic effects. Salicylic acid is keratoplastic, keratolytic, mildly antipruritic,
and antibacterial. It is considered a mild product making it safe for use on
cats.
(4) Selenium disulfide is a potent degreasing agent that is also keratolytic, an-
tibacterial, and has some anti-yeast activity. It may stain some hair coats and
clothing. Overuse will result is dry skin and pruritus. However, this is an
excellent agent for greasy skin conditions.
(5) Benzoyl peroxide is antibacterial, degreasing, keratolytic, antipruritic, and
is often reported to have the ability to penetrate into the follicles, often call
follicular flushing activity. It has been shown to dry the skin and allow for
incrcascd transcpidermal water loss and decrcasc surface skin lipid concen-
trations. It is the bcst topical antibaclerial agcnt for dogs and is also cffcctivc
to remove excessive oils in greasy skin conditions. Benzoyl peroxide may be
irritating. especially in cats and when concentrations exceed 5%. Benzoyl
peroxide may bleach clothing.
(6)  Recently, a line of topical veterinary products containing phytosphingosines
has been introduced in North America. These lipid-containing products
 may act as emollients and keratoplastic agents and have some antibacterial
and antifungal properties.
3. Administration and clinical use
a. For familial seborrhea, shampoo therapy may be a very effective method to man-
age the disease.
(1) Two shampoos are selected for initial use on the basis of clinical fea-
tures. For animals with a baclcrial component, bcnzoyl pcroxide would bc
313
recommended. Sulfur would be recommended for paticnts with pruritus and
no clinical infections. Animals with yeast dermatitis and greasy skin would
benefit more with initial application of shampoos containing selenium disul-
fide. Clinical judgment is used to select the best two initial shampoos.
(2) Animals are bathed three times weekly for 3 weeks following good princi-
ples of shampoo therapy.
(3) After 3 weeks, the shampoo perceived by the client to work the best is com-
bined with a 1% salicylic acid shampoo or tar shampoo. These are utilized
for their superior keratoplastic properties. Patients are then bathed twice
weekly, alternating use of the one shampoo from the first round that worked
the best and the shampoo added during the recheck examination.
(4) The frequency of shampoos is slowly reduced to allow the best clinical con-
trol of the condition. In general, owners are very capable to determine the
best long-term schedule for shampoos. A tar or 1% salicylic acid shampoo is
recommended as part of the long-term management.
b. For sebaceous adentitis or other scaling conditions, shampoos containing sulfur-
salicylic acid, 1% salicylic acid, or tar will generally provide the best reduction 
of scale formation. The frequency of bathing required varies greatly with the
patient and disease condition.
C.
 Scaling may also be reduced for familial seborrhea and other scaling disorders
through the topical application of products containing phytosphingosines. These
products are available in various formulations, including shampoos, pour-ons,
sprays, and otic formulations. Combinations of shampoos, sprays, and the pour-
on formulation appear to facilitate the reduction of scale in these disease condi-
tions.
D.
Antiparasitic therapy
1. Indications. Topical therapy is an effective method to control parasitic infestations
caused by imites, lice, fleas, and other ectoparasites. However, the development of
several excellent systemic parasiticides has reduced the use of topical antiparasitic
agents over the past several years.
2.
 Therapeutic options
a. Topical antiparasitic agents
(1) Delivery systems. Antiparasitic. agents are commercially available as pow-
ders, sprays, shampoos, foaming agents, pour-ons, and rinses. Some of the
agents are absorbed and have systemic. effects, including distribution to the
skin through lipid secretions (e.g., selamectin).
(a)  Microencapsulation suspends insecticides in microscopic spherules made
 Of various substances. This technology has been used for pyrethrin-
containing products. The insecticide is inactive while contain within the
microspheres, but when released onto the parasite, through diffusion or
breakdown of the sphere, the insecticide is active. Microencapsulation
reduces the toxicity, since the insecticide is inactive in these suspen-
sions. The ability to rapidly kill insects upon exposure, known as knock-
down, may be reduced through this process while the residual activity of
the product is extended.
(2) Active ingredients
(a) Sulfur reimains an excellent parasiticide. It is available in two veteri-
nary formulations (LymDyp?; Sulfurated Lime Dip@) and is effective
against various mites, lice, and chiggers. The imost effective application
is through weekly rinses. The product is very safe for dogs and cats, as
well as puppies and kittens, and may be used on horses. The primary
adverse effects are the foul, rotten-egg odor, and staining of hair coat
and clothing
(b) Pyrethrins are volatile oil extracts of the chrysanthermum flower. They
act as neurotoxins to kill flcas, mites, licc, and flies and may bc uscd on
dogs, and in low conccntrations, on cats. Products containing pyrcthrins
arc very common in OTC products. Thcy have cxccllent knockdown
314Chapter 13 IV D
ability but are rapidly inactivated by UV light. Most products
containing pyrethrins also contain piperonyl butoxide, a micro-
somal enzyme inhibitor, to prevent insects from rapidly inactivating the
insecticide.
(c) Pyrethroids are synthetic insecticides based on the pyrethrin molecule.
In gcncral, thesc agcnts have less knockdown ability than pyrethrin,
but morc rcsidual activity. Permcthrin and other pyrethroids also cx-
hibit some repellent activity and have been labeled as repellents for
mosquitoes (K9 Advantix?). Pyrethroids are, in general, significantly
found pyrethroid in prescription and OTC veterinary formulations, but
there are many pyrethroids available for common use, including etofen-
prox, d-trans allethrin, resmethrin, and others. Pyrethroids are toxic to
cats and should not be used in that species.
thcir use has declined greatly due to the availability of less toxic, effec-
tive antiparasitic agents.
i. Carbamates, such as carbaryl, remain available in powders, sprays,
and rinses.
ii. Organophosphates, once a mainstay in insecticidal products, are
infrequently used due to the development of safer, more effective
agents. In general, these are highly toxic substances, and with the
exception of malathion, should never be used on cats. Examples of
organophosphates include malathion, dichlorvos, diazinon, phosmet,
and coumaphous. Organophosphates are used more often for environ-
mental control than for direct application on pcts.
(e) Amitraz (Mitaban?), an octopamine rcccptor agonist, is availablc as a
rinse for the treatment of canine demodicosis. It has bcen shown to bc
effective and is licensed in other countries for the treatment of sarcoptic
mange. Side effects of amitraz include sedation, bradycardia, hypoten-
sion, pruritus, and hyperglycemia. Most of these side effects are due
to activation of α2-adrenergic receptors and hence are reversible with
yohimbine.
(f) Fipronil is a neurotoxin of the phenylprazole class and is available as
a pour-on product (Frontline) for the treatment of fleas, ticks, and
lice in dogs and cats. This drug distributes throughout the body in the
lipid layer of the skin. It is not significantly absorbed. It is reported to be
rapidly effective (within 24 hours) and persist in therapeutic concentra-
tions for 1 month.
(g) Neonicotinoids are insecticides that act as neurotoxins by serving as
agonists at the insect nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.
i. Imidacloprid is available as a pour-on product (Advantage, Advan-
tage Multi) for the treatment of fleas. Imidacloprid is not systemically
absorbed. It is distributed through the lipid layers of the epidermis.
Like fipronil, imidacloprid is reported to kill greater than 95% of fleas
on an animal within the first 24 hours and duration of activity for 1
month in dogs and 3 weeks in cats. It is also effective against some
lice.
i1. Nitenpyram (Capstar?) is an orally effcctive nconicotinoid insecticide
related'to imidacloprid. It kills fleas within a few hours of oral dosing
in dogs and cats, but has little to no residual activity. It is very safe
and ideal for treating flea-infested pets before admission to hospitals
Or boarding facilities.
iml. Dinotefuran (Vectra 3D?) is a third-generation neonicotinoid with
slightly faster knockdown than imidocloprid while retaining residual
activity against flcas for at least 30 days. It is available in combination
with permcthrin and pyriproxifen for use on dogs and in combination
with pyriproxifen for usc on cats.
Topical DermatologyTherapy315
(h) Macrocyclic lactones. See Chapter 16 for detailed information on 
these drugs.
i. Selamectin (Revolution?) is an avermectin compound that stimulates
glutamate-gated chloride channels to cause hyperpolarization of neu-
rons and muscle, resulting in paralysis and dcath in susceptible par-
asites. It is safe in puppies and kittens grcater than 6 wccks of agc,
in lactating and prcgnant bitches, and is safe in ivcrmectin-scnsitivc
dogs. Selamectin is systemically absorbcd following topical appli-
cation as a pour-on product. The active agent is then redistributed
through lipids secreted by sebaceous glands of the skin. Selamectin is
effective for the treatment of flea infestations and a wide range of mite
infestations, including sarcoptic mange, otoacariasis, and notoedric
mange. It is also an effective heartworm preventative, kills some inter-
nal parasites (e.g., Ancylostoma tubaeforme, Toxocara cat) and kills
some tic.ks (Dermacentor spp.)
ii. Moxidectin is a pentacyclic lactone of the milbemycin class, and is
closcly related to averrmcctins. It is available as a pour-on product for
cattle and in combination with imidacloprid (Advantagc) for use on
dogs and cats. Moxidectin may be effective against a wide range of
mites; however, detailed studies are currently underway to evaluate its
safety and efficacy.
ili. Doramectin is another avermectin that has been used to manage ca-
nine demodicosis outside the United States. Doramectin has shown
efficacy and safety in treating sarcoptic mange in rabbits. At this time,
it is not recommended for use in dogs or cats.
iv. Milbemycin oxime (Interceptor Flavor Tabs) is closely rclated to
avermcctins and is administcred orally for heartworm control. It is
also effective against Sarcoptes canis when administered daily in high
doses (0.5-1.0 mg/kg) for 30-120 days. It is not available as a topical
product but is included in this chapter because it is related to several
topical antiparasitic agents.
(i) Metaflumizone (ProMeris@) is a neurotoxin that works by blocking
sodium influx in nerves of fleas, causing paralysis and death. It is avail-
able as a pour-on product for cat (older than 8 weeks of age) and dogs
not clear at this time. (See Chapter 16 for detailed information on metaf-
lumizone.)
b. Insect growth regulators
(1) Juvenile hormone analogs. These agents interfere with the metabolism, de-
velopment, and reproductions of the various life stages of fleas by mimicking
chermicals that act as growth hormones in the flea. (See Chapter 16 for de-
tailed information on juvenile hormone analogs.)
(a) Methoprene is a juvenile hormone analogue that is available in sprays
(Frontline? Spray Treatiment), rinses, flea collars, and in combination
with fipronil as a pour-on product (Frontline Plus). It is degraded by
exposure to UV light. Methoprene is very safe and may be used on pup-
pics and kittens with a high degrcc of safcty.
(b) Pyriproxifen is available in sprays and has thc advantagc of bcing UV-
stabile. It is widely available in products found OTC in combination
with insccticides,
(2) Chitin inhibitors, such as lufenuron (Program?), are given orally to disrupt
the synthesis and deposition of chitin in the exoskeleton of fleas. It is an oral
product that works through systemic activity. (See Chapter 16 for detailed
information on lufenuron.)
3. Administration and clinical use
a. Flea control
(1) For knockdown (i.c., rapid kill of adult flcas), pyrethrin sprays, rinscs, or
shampoos are effective. Orally administered nitenpyram is an excellent
316Chapter 13 IV D
knockdown producl and provides the faslesl kill of adult fleas available. It is
labeled for use in animals over 4 wecks of age and 2 pounds body weighl.
(2) For rapid kill (less than 24 hours) of adult fleas with excellent residual ef-
fects, monthly application of fipronil, imidacloprid, or selamectin in dogs
and cals or metailumizome in cals.
(3) Integrated flea control is the principle of applying multiple flea control prod-
ucts that work in different manners (e.g., insecticide vs. insect growth regu-
lator! to provide better flea control. Several veterinary products are combi-
nations of insecticides and growih regulalors. Frontline? Plus (fipronil and
methoprene) and Knockout? (permethrin and pyriproxifen) are good exam-
ples of these products.
(a) Combinations of various flea control products can accomplish the same
task. For example, nitenpyram could be adminislered orally once weekly
while a patient is receiving monthly lufenuron as an insect growth regu-
ator.
(b) Producis that have different mechanisms of action may be used in com-
bination therapy. To avoid toxicity drugs of the same class should not be
used together.
b. Control of mite infestations
(1) The selection of a miticidal agent should be based on the safety and toxicity
studies in the species lo be trealed and efficacy studies for the various mites.
(2) For sarcoptic mange of dogs. highly effective products labeled for treating
this condition include selamectin and lime sulfur. Other products showing
cficacy, but not labeled for this infestation include ivermectin, amitraz, mox-
idectin, fipronil sprays, and milbemycin oxime.
(3) For generalized demodicosis of dogs caused by Demodex canis, amitraz
is the only labeled product available in the United States. Other products
showing efficacy include ivermectin (give orally in high doses), moxidectin,
and milbemycin oxime. The extra-label use of these agents in high doses
may result in drug toxicity.
(4) For generalized demodicosis in cats caused by Demodex gatoi, lime sulfur
rinses are the treatment of choice.
(5) For the treatment of notoderic mange in cats caused by Notoedres cati
effective products include ivermectin (orally), selamectin, and lime sulfur
rinses. Other macrocyclic lactones may also be effective.
c. Pediculosis (lice infestations). For pediculosis of dogs and cats, topical applica-
tion of lime sulfur, pyrethrin, pyrethroids (for dogs only), imidacloprid, fipronil
sprays, and cholinesterase inhibitors (both organophosphates and carbamates
for dogs only) have bcen shown lo be cffeclive. The efficacy of newer pour-on
products containing selamectin, moxidectin, or metaflumizone is unclear. In ad-
dition, there may be some variability between species of lice.
d. Tick control. For tick control, several products may be used to kill or remove 
ticks in various life stages from the animals. Powders, rinses, sprays, pour-on
products, and systemic parasiticides may all exhibit some efficacy. Products 
with a proven record for prevention of tick infestation and/or removal of ticks
 from animals include fipronil pour-on or sprays, permethrin pour-on producls
(dogs only), and flea collars containing amitraz (Preventic? Plus Tick and Flea
 poor activity against other canine ticks.
SYSTEMIC THERAPY OF DERMATOLOGIC CONDITIONS
A
Therapeutic uses. Systemic therapy is indicated for the manageiment of most dermatol-
ogy conditions, including allergy, autoimmune disorders, infectious diseases, metabolic
and cndocrine conditions, genetic and congenital skin disorders, and many others.
Systemic therapy is necessary for generalized conditions, conditions manifested below
Topical Dermatology Therapy317
the epidernis (e.g., deep pyoderma), when clients are unable to apply topical medica-
tjons (e.g., due to physical limitations of the owners), when animals are not coopera-
tive in the topical application process, or in some cases, for financial reasons.
B.
 Preparations. The most common systemic medications used in dermatology include
antimicrobial agcnts, anti-inflammatory agcnts (c.g., glucocorticoids), antihistamines.
nutraccuticals (c.g., fatty acid supplemcnts), cytotoxic agents, hormones (e.g., thyroid
supplements), vitamins (e.g., vitamin A), and anliparasitic compounds.
C.Administration. These systemic medications are administered orally, parenterally, or by
absorption of topically applied medications.
D.
Adverse effects. Naturally, the administration of pharmacological agents orally or par-
enterally is more likely to be associated with systermic side effects. Allergic reactions
and other adverse effects, such as retinal damage in cats receiving some fluoro-
quinolone antibiotics in high doses, are a potential problem with any antimicrobial.
Glucocorticoids are well recognized for creating iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
(both cutancous and systcmic) and for suppressing the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis. Antiparasitic compounds may lead to adverse effecls direclly due lo the neuro-
toxic activities. In addition, some animals have increased sensitivity to some antipar-
asitic agents, such as macrocyclic lactones, due to mutations in the multiple drug
resistance-l gcnc.
Vl
SAFETY
A.
Application of medications. Care should always be taken when applying topical med-
ications since direct application of most of these agents can have effects on human
skin or be absorbed systemically in humans. Gloves should be worn by those applying
rinse, crcams, ointrments, or whcn rubbing in sprays or lotions. Medications should bc
applied in well-ventilated areas, especially for medicalions applied as topical sprays, to
avoid inhalalion of aerosolized drugs. Clients with small children should be instructed
to keep animals with recent applications of topical agents away from the children, at
least until the medicine is dry or dissipated. Caution and warning labels should always
be consulted and followed. We gcnerally rccommend that topical applications are not
applicd by childrcn, pcople with dcbilitating or immunosuppressive diseases, or the
elderly.
B.
from small children and from animals that might accidentally ingest or come into
inappropriate contact with the agents. Products should be stored according to label
instructions.
SUGGESTED READING
Block LH. 2000. "Medicated topicals." In Remington: The Science and Practice of Pharmacy. Edited by
Gennaro AR. 20th ed., pp. 837 857. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
 Brunner SR. 2006. Updates in therapeutics in veterinary dermatology. Ver Clin North Arm Smafl Anirm
Pract 36:39-58.
Gortel K. 2006. Update 0n canine demodicosis. Vet Clin North Am Smalf Anim Pract 36:229-241.
Knutson K, Pershing LK. 2ooo. "Topical drugs." In Remington: The Science and Practice of Pharmacy.
Edited by Gennaro AR, 20th ed., pp. 1200-1218. Baltinore, MD: Lippincott Willianis & Wilkins.
        s 3 e   o   1l
174
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug tandbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
318Chapter 13
Pharmacology and Therapeutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8th ed., pp. 1084-1104. Ames, IA: lowa State
University Prcss.
Scott DW, MIller WH, Griffin CE. 2001. "Dermatologic therapy." In Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology. Edited by Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE. 6th ed., pp. 207-273. Philadelphia, PA:
Saunders.
Topical Derimalology Therapy 319
STUDY QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the slaterment. Selecl ihe one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Which one of the following shampoo
(D) An emollient
ingredients would be most suitable for the
(E) An alcohol
treatment of a dog with Malassezia derimati-
tis, where the dog is severely greasy and has
6. In general, shampoos should be applied
4+ yeasls on the skin?
and allowed to sit for what period of time?
(A)A iew moments
(A) Benzoyl peroxide
(B)2-3 minutes
(B)  Sulfur/salicylic: acid
(C) 10 minutes
(C) Tar/sulfur
(1D)30 minutes
(D) Selenium disulfide
(E) The time to sit prior to rinsing is not im-
(E)  Salicylic acid alone
portant.
2. What is the main objective of using an
7. The term used to describe the pharmaco-
cmollient afler shampooing?
logical behavior of the skin is
(A)To prevent secondary bacterial infection
(A) hydrophilic.
(B)To acl as an occlusive dressing to trap
(B) lipophilic.
water and hydrate the skin
(C) two-compartimen1 system.
(C) To activate the active ingredient of the
(ID) complete barrier.
shampoo
(E)completely soluble system.
(D) To remove the active ingredient to pre-
vent irritation
8. Keratolytic agents work primarily by
(E) To suppress pruritus
(A) lysing keratinocytes by destroying sulfur
3. Which shampoo ingredient is used primar-
bonds.
ily for its keratoplastic properly?
(B) acting as soitening agents by hydrating
keratinocytes.
(A)Tar
(C):
 slowing cpidermal turnover.
(B)Sulfur
(D) dissolving the keratinocytes.
(C)  Salicylic acid
{E）
 stopping the produclion of kcratin within
(D) Selenium disulfide
keratinocytes.
(E)）Benzoyl peroxide
9. Which of the following delivery systems
4. Which of the following delivery vehicles
would most likely be the most esthetically
would be the rmost occlusive? In other words.
 acceptable to pet owners?
which would be best used on a dry lesion in
an attempt to treat the lesion and hydrate the
(A) Paste
(B) Water-in-oil ointment
arca?
(C)Poultice
(A) Powder
(ID) Oil-in-water ointment
(B)Rinse
(E) Gel
(C)Lotion
(D) Ointment
10. Phytosphingosines are
(E) Gel
(A) plant extracts used for derimatology ther-
5. Which of the following is used to allow
apy.
mixture of an oil (or lipid) material with an
(B) oils derived from marine mammals.
aqueous (or water! material?
(C) lipids produced by keratinocytes.
[a3 v (V)
(D) emulsions of lipids and aqueous sweat,
(B) An cmulsifier
(E) structures found on keratinocytes that act
(C) A humectant
as drug receptors.
320
Chapter 13
ANSWERS
AND
EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is D.
6. The answer is C.
Selenium disulfide is the best and mosl
In general, 10 minutes is the ideal time
powerful degreasing agent listed as an option.
 to allow a shampoo lo sil on a patient.
It also appears to have some direct anti-yeast 
Shorter times will not allow the active
activily. Benzoyl peroxide is also an excellent
 ingredients to be effective topically or diffuse
degreasing agent, but has no activity on
into the epidermis. Longer times become
yeast. If the patient was greasy and had a
tedious for pet owners and could result in
bacterial infeclion, the answer would have
overhydration of the skin.
been benzoyl peroxide.
7. The answer is C.
2. The answer is B.
The skin is considered a two-compartment 
An cmollient is uscd to act as an occlu-
system because it has lipophobic (hy-
sive dressing. This will trap water to enhance
drophilic) keratinocytes that are surrounded
waler absorption by keratinocytes and slow
by lipohilic (hydrophobic) lipids. Any topical
the evaporation proccss that is inevitable.
agent must be able to transverse these
Emollients allow the skin to stay hydrated for
structures, and to be active topically, must be
a longer time period.
able to be compatible with areas.
3. The answer is A.
8. The answer is B.
Tar has many pharmacological proper-
The term keratolytic is somewhat con-
ties, but its keratoplastic properties are their
fusing. While these agents do cause some
main indication for use. Tar is also mildly
changes in the keralinocytes and desmo-
antipruritic, mildly degreasing, and has 
somes, they primarily allow increased
keratolytic properties, but we use it in der-
hydration and softening of the keratinocytes.
matology for the keratoplastic. effects. Other
These softer cells are then more easily
agents listed also have mild keratoplastic
desquamated or removed.
properties, but they are primarily used for
other qualities.
9. The answer is E.
Gels evaporate leaving little to no residue
4. The answer is D.
behind. Even the oil-in-water ointments
Ointments contain lipids that act as a
leave some residue after absorption. Mosl pet
barrier or occlusive dressing. This will
 owners prefer topical medications that do not
trap medications and water on the skin to
leave such a residue that could stain clothing,
facilitate hydraton. This barrier also serves to
carpets, and furnilure, or be detecled by
slow transepidermal water loss through the
handling the pet.
epidermis.
10. The answer is C.
5. The answer is B.
 Phytosphingosines are produced natu-
Emulsifiers are the agents that allow for
rally by keratinocytes in lamellar bodies.
oil and water-based materials to effective
These lipids then are released into the
disperse and mix. Emulsifiers include sodium
intercellular spaces where the help from the
lauryl suliate, soaps, quaternary ammonium
lipid layer found between epithelial cells.
salts, and polyoxyethylene glycols, fatty acids,
They are a key parl of the barrier produced
and alcohols.
by the epidermis.
12l
er
14
Ocular Pharmacology
Daniel M. Betts
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS. Many drugs that are used for other organs or sys-
tems, ior example, the nervous, cardiovascular, immune, and cndocrine syslems, are
used orally or parenterally for ocular disease conditions. with few exceptions, the
'aa au ioy shnp paaisupe Aeidot art on pau s! nadero s yo uauo
A.
Considerations for drug delivery in topical administration
1. The blood-ocular barriers to drug penetration are complex, protective mechanisms
that complicate drug delivery to the interior of the uninflamed eye. In corneal and 
conjunctival diseases where the epithelium is compromised or removed, resistance
to drug absorption/corneal penetration is reduced or eliminated.
 2. Vascular supply of the eye. The eye is a complex organ with an intricate vascu-
lar supply to nourish highly specialized neuroreceptors and unique tissues that
organ, and a system for secretion, circulation, and absorption of a fluid to nour-
ish and maintain intraocular pressure compatible with the primary function of
vision.
B.
Mechanism of action. Drugs used in ophthalmic practice are generally the same as
those targeted ior other systems in regard to their mechanism of action. The unique-
ness of ocular pharmacology is in the vehicle or formulation appropriate for delivery
of these drugs for absorption and distribution to the targeted tissues or compartments
of the eye at a sufficiently high concentration without creating toxic or physical dam-
age to other ocular tissues.
 Pharmacokinetics. In contrast to the abundance of pharmacokinetic data for systemic
drugs, few data are available for ophthalmic drugs. In imany analyses, the effects of tlhe
drug (change in pupil size, lowered intraocular pressure, change in corneal thickness,
changes in optical transparency, or electrophysiologic or imaging recordings) are the.
basis for determining absorption, distribution, ahd metabolism. Drug concentrations in
tissues or compartments of the eye cannot be dlone without disturbing and impairing
the "system.
OPHTHALMIC DRUG DELIVERY
A.
 Treatment of precorneal tissues and tearfilm, cornea, iris, and ciliary body
1. Topical preparations are preferred as they achieve relatively high local concentra-
tions with only marginal drug exposure of the rest of the body.
a. Preparations are solutions, suspensions, emulsions, and lipid- or oil-based oint-
ments for periodic application to the surface of the eye.
b. Ocular (conjunctival) inserts and impregnated soft contact lenses for slow release
facilitale convenient uniiorm drug delivery.
c.
Suhconjunctival and subtenon's injections may provide a long-lasting slow re-
lease depot of drug for the anterior segment.
d. Systemic delivery of some agents is limited by poor penetration due to the
blood-ocular barriers or the paucity or absence of blood supply (cormea, sclera,
lens!.
321
322Cliapter 14 II B
B.Other local forms of delivery to other tissues or compartments
1. Intracameral injections into the vitreous or aqueous humor.
2. Retrobulbar injections
3. Implantion of yarious drug impregnated, slow-release polymers intravitreally or
suprachoroidally.
C.when a drop is instilled into the conjunctival sac
1. Absorption of an ocular medication from the cul-de-sac begins with mixing of the
drug with tears to give some unknown dilution that is exposed to the entire con-
junctival and corneal surface.
2. Tear volume (in canine) is 8-12 μl; conjunctival sac is about 3-6 μl; delivery vol-
ume is about 50 μl; at most 20 μl can be retained.
3. Exccss spills over the lid margin or gocs down the nasolacrimal duct.
 4. Tcar turnover rate is 0.5-1.0 μl/nin, so the ty, of the initial drug concentration is
3-6 minules
 5. Slower elimination is achieved with ointments.
6. Washout times are shortened with increased lacrimation due to irritation/discomfort
or increased drainage induced by blinking. (Restraint of the dog increases the blink
rate.)
7. The spillover or drained portion may be absorbed by the mucous mermbranes in the
nose or digestive tract and can lead to systemic side effects.
8. The principal route into the eye is through the cornea.
a. Epithelial and endothelial cell membrane and intercellular tight junctions limit
penetration to the lipophilic agents; the stroma is hydrophilic and water-soluble
agents diffuse most readily.
b. Ideally, one should couple lipophilic component to a more hydrophilic drug that
would clcavc or dissociate affer passage through the cornca.
9. Drug binding to protein in tears or to conjunctival pigmenl may reduce bioavail.
ability. Degradation by enzymes within the cornea may destroy the drug enroute,
and binding to protein in aqueous humor may inactivate and hasten elimination
from the anterior chamber.
10. Drug molecules pass between compartments by diffusion and active transport pro-
cesses.
a. Diffusion follows concentration gradient. Related inversely to molecular size and
directly to temperature.
b. Related to chemical structure and stearic configuration.
C. Active transport is affected by competition of other substrates for the transport
system.
11. Binding, diffusion, and transport processes are quite variable between individuals
and spccies, and arc affectcd by pathologic conditions such as inflainmation.
12. Penctration into the cye through ihe conjuncliva is gcnerally not relevant. Con-
junctival cpithelium is similar to corncal cpithelium. The subconjunctiva, cpisclera,
sclera, and choroid are not significant barriers to diffusion.
13. Drugs crossing the conjunctiva and sclera are eliminated by the blood circulation in
the choroid.
14. Once through the cornea, drugs diffuse in the aqueous humor and are taken up
in the iris, base of the ciliary body and the lens. There is little to no flow into the
posterior segiment. Posterior segment diseases cannot be treated effectively with
topical medications.
15. Cornea and lens can absorb drugs, then retain and release them over a prolonged
time, such as corticosteroids in the lens.
16. Drugs are climinated from the cye in (he aqucous humor outflow into the aqucous
veins or by diffusion through the uveal tissues, and washout by the venous blood
circulation. (There are no lymphatics in the eye.)
17. Brcakdown and mctabolism of drugs applicd to the cyc may begin in thc
tears and the conjunctival and corneal epithelium as well as other ocular tis-
sues, although these processes in the eye are somewhat limited. Enzymes for
Qcular Pharmacology」323
oxidizing, reducing, and conjugating are present in ocular tissues (esterases, oxi-
dases, reductases, lysosomal enzymes, peptidases, transferases, catechol-O-methyl
transferase, monoamine oxidase, corticosteroid hydroxylase).
18. Many of the topically applied drugs, particularly antibiotics and corticosteroids, are
not broken down in the cyc, but lcave the cye unchangcd and cnler thc general
circulation.
19. Eyelids and orbital tissue are best treated with systemically administered drugs as
ophthalmic preparations applied to the surface of the eye do not reach these areas.
PRACTICAL TOPICAL DRUG THERAPY
A.
 Eye drops
1. Delivery volume should not exceed 50 μl; 20 μl is ideal for small animals
can be facilitated with subpalpebral lavage or reverse nasolacrimal lavage, espe-
cially in horses.
3. A 5-minute interval between drops reduces irritation and is consistent with the av-
crage washoul period of 3-6 minules.
4. Punctal occlusion prolongs clearance time from tears and reduces systemic side
effects.
B,
 Ointments. Prolonged contact time due to delayed melting, dilution, and breakdown,
and punctual occlusion.
C.
 Suspensions have no advantages; only result from poorly soluble drugs.
D.
 Inactive ingredients
1. They are added to adjust pH, prevent oxidation, and increase absorption. Increased
lipid solubility results from pH buffering with acetic acid, boric acid, hydrochloric
acid or bicarbonale, phosphates, citrates, or borates.
2. Controlling the pH (7.2-7.4) and tonicity (0.9%) of the preparation to match the
tears increases the comfort of the patient.
3. Methyl, hydroxyl, and hydoxypropyl methylcellulose polyvinyl alcohol,
polyvinylpyrrolidone, Dextran 70, polysorbate 80, and PEG400 are viscous sub-
stances used as tear substitutes as well as drug delivery vehicles to increase corneal
contact time (see XV Tear Substitutes).
V.
AUTONOMIC DRUGS
A. Introduction (see Chapter 2 for detailed information)
1. These are drugs that act primarily on the smooth muscles of the iris (sphincler and
dilator) and the ciliary body (muscles of accommodation) and the smooth muscles
of the arteriolar vessels.
 2. Miotic agents constrict the pupil.
3. Mydriatic agents dilate the pupil.
B.
 Miotics: Cholinergic stimulants (parasympathomimetics). There are direct and indirect
acting cholinergic stimulants to constrict the pupil and contract ciliary muscles to facil-
ilale outflow of aqueous humor.
1. Direct acting cholinergic stimulants
a. Mechanism of action. These drugs have the muscarinic effects of acetylcholine
(ACh). In the eye they activate the muscarinic receptors of the iris sphincter and
324Chapter 14 IV B
 ciliary muscles at the postganglionic parasympathetic neuroeffector junction.
They can act on denervated structures.
b. Agents
(1) Pilocarpine (1-8%, solution, 4% ointment)
(a) Chemistry. Pilocarpine is a naturally occurring lipid-soluble alkaloid.
(b) Ocular effects
i. Topical pilocarpine induces slowly increasing contraction of the
peaks in 30 minutes, and slowly decreases over 6 hours.
ii. The effect of ciliary muscle contraction on decreasing outflow re-
sistance in the ciliary cleft is unclear, but intraocular pressure (IOP)
decreases with decreased outflow resistance in the conventional tra-
becular meshwork pathway.
ili. The iris sphincter contraction pulls the peripheral iris from the
drainage angle to minimize obstruction to outflow if the angle is
narrow or closed, but the state of contraction or relaxation of the
iris does not necessarily affect outflow facility.
iv. IOP is reduced 30-40% for up to 6 hours in the beagle dog. This
drug is most useful in open angle glaucoma, but is usually not effec-
tive when used alone. The high IOP and structural changes in closed
angle glaucoma limit the effectiveness of miotic drugs in lowering
IOP in dogs.
v. Other drugs, β-blockers, carbonic. anhydrase inhibitors, and 
prostaglandin analogs are more effective in lowering IOP than pi-
locarpine.
(c) Pharmacokinetics. Pilocarpine is absorbed readily into the eye primar-
ily through the cornea after topical administration. It is dcgraded in the
cornea but the small portion of the administered dose that reaches the
anterior chamber is taken up by uveal tissue. The drug does not enter
the posterior segment of the eye in significant quantities.
(d)  Therapeutic uses. The principal uses for pilocarpine are the treatment
of primary glaucoma, and to stimulate lacrimation through activation
of muscarinic receptors in the lacrimal gland when administered orally
for neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicea. It is also useful for closing the
pupil to keep a luxated lens from obstructing the pupil, to facilitate reso.
lution of hyphema by increasing outilow, and in localization of parasym-
pathetic denervation of the iris sphincter (along with physostigmine).
(e)
Administration. Usually. 1-2% solution four times a day.
(f) Adverse effects include local irritation, salivation, lacrimation, nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Transient breakdown of blood-aqueous barrier
and aqueous flare may occur. Miosis will decrease vision in low light.
Cholinergic agenls decreasc uvcoscleral oulflow (most significant in the
horse), so these agents are less effective in lowering IOP. Pilocarpine
alone is not effective for reducing high IOP.
(2) Carbachol (0.75-3% solution)
(a)  Chemistry. Carbachol is a carbamyl cster of choline that is a combina-
tion of the molecules of ACh and physostigmine, thus it also has some
indirect action by inhibition of cholinesterase. It is not lipid soluble, but
is stable in water solution.
(b) Mechanism of action, Carbachol enhances outflow facility and reduces
IOP the same as pilocarpine. Miosis is maximal in 5 minutes and may
last up to 2 days in a normal canine eye. Carbachol is more potent and
has longer duration of action than pilocarpine.
(c) Pharmacokinetics. This drug is not lipid soluble so it penetrates the
corneal epithelium poorly unless combined with a welting agent such
as benzylalkonium chloride.
(d) Therapeutic uses. When administered intraocularly at the conclusion of
cataract surgery, the induced miosis can prevent postsurgical elevation
of IOP, and may remove iris from the area of the corneal incision and
Ocular Pharmacology 」 325
decrease the potential for peripheral anterior synechia. By constricting
the pupil an implanted prosthetic lens is stabilized.
(e) Administration. It is applied topically 2-4 times a day, or one time in
the anterior chamber at the conclusion of cataract surgery.
(f) Adverse effects are similar to pilocarpine. There is no systemic toxicity
from topical application.
(3) ACh. Topical application is of no value as cholinesterase destroys the drug
before it can penetrate the cornea. The drug is used intraocularly during
2. Indirect acting cholinergic stimulants
a. Introduction. Cholinesterase inhibitors allow ACh to persist at the nerve end-
ing by inhibiting the enzymatic hydrolysis of the neurotransmiter. Therefore,
there will not be any effecl on denervated tissues where there is no production
of ACh.
b.Agents
(1) Demecarium bromide (0.125 and 0.25% solutions)
(a) Chemistry. It is synthesized by connecting (wo neostigmine molecules. It
is water soluble and stable in aqueous solution.
(b) Mechanism of action. It reversibly inhibits cholinesterase. It is potent
and long-acting. Miosis occurs within 2-4 hours and may persist for
several days.
(c) Therapeutic uses. It is uscd in the managcmenl of primary glaucoma.
It is administered prophylactically in the unaffected eye after an acute
primary glaucoma attack in the first eye.
(d) Pharmacokinetics. It is readily absorbed through the cornea and taken
up in the anterior uveal tissues,
(e) Administration. Apply topically once or twice daily.
(f) Adverse effects/contraindications.
i. Do not use a miotic in secondary glaucoma (usually due to uveitis)
as it may increase pupillary block. As with other miotics, it is not 
effeclive for high IOP—first reduce IOP with IV mannitol.
ii. Salivation, vomiting, and diarrhea are common when the drug is first 
administered.
ili. Do not use on animals concurrently treated with antiparasitic prod-
ucts containing cholinesterase inhibitors.
(2) Echothiophate (0.03, 0.125, and 0.25% solution)
(a) Chemistry. It is phospholine iodide, a hygroscopic. powder that is stable
indefinitely but must be tightly capped. It has a short shelf-life in solu-
tion and must be refrigerated. It loses potency within a month; discard
after 2 months.
(b) Mechanism of action. It irreversibly binds cholinesterase permitting ACh
(c) Pharmacokinetics. It readily penetrates the eye through the intact cornea
and the conjunctiva-sclera. Echothiophate has prolonged action with
maximum effect in 4-6 hours and maintained for 24 hours.
(d) Therapeutic uses. It is for control of primary glaucoma. It is seldom used
due to the inconveniences in handling: powder to be dissolved, need to
refrigerate, short shelf-life, and toxicity to people handling it.
(e) Administration. It is applied topically once or twice daily.
(f) Adverse effects. Il is very toxic when ingested. With prolonged topical
use, corneal clouding, iritis, and iris cysts may occur; cataracts nol re-
ported for dogs as in humans.
(3) Physostigmine
(a) It is short acting and reversible.
(b) It may be used as a diagnostic agent in a normotensive eye with unex-
plained mydriasis and normal retinas. See pilocarpinc.
(c) There are no proprietary preparations, but UsP powder is available for
generic compounding.
(d)  Adverse effects are similar to demecarium.
326
Chapter 14 IV B
Note: Pralidoxime (Prolopam) can reverse the cffccts of toxic doses
of anticholinesterase drugs. (Sec Chapter 2 for more information.)
C.
Mydriatics dilate the pupil (parasympatholytics and syinpathominctics)
1. Parasympatholytics (Cholinergic antagonists)
a. Introduction. These drugs compete with ACh to reversibly block cholinergic
receptors of iris sphincter muscle and ciliary muscles (cycloplegia). The pupil
dilates due to tone in the unopposed iris dilator muscle. They also paralyze ac-
commodation but that is of little significance in animals,
b.
Agents
(1) Atropine (0.5-2% solution)
(a)This mydriatic agent has slow onsct, but prolonged aclion. Maximum
dilation 0ccurs in the dog in 60 minutes and may last for 4-5 days; and
10-48 hours to maximum in horse and last up to 14 days.
(b)Therapeutic uses
 i. Atropine is used in acute inflaimmatory conditions of the iris or
cle spasms.
ii. Dilating the pupil will minimize the possibilities of posterior
synechia, pupillary block, and secondary glaucoma.
iii. Pupil dilation facilitates surgery of the lens and posterior segment,
and may improve vision when opacities of the lens or cornea par-
tially obstruct vision.
iv. Because of the large alternative uveoscleral outflow of aqueous hu-
mor in the horse, atropine is beneficial in treating primary glaucoma.
(c) Administration. Topically as needed to achieve effect, up to hourly.
(d)  Adverse effects include salivation due to bitter taste, predisposition to
glaucoma if there is a preexisting narrow angle or inflammatory infil-
trates in the angle. Gl slasis and colic may be induced in horscs. Sys-
temic toxicity with behavior changes may occur in small animals. Less
commonly, diminished tcar produclion may predisposc to dry cycs and
keratoconjunctivilis. Luxatcd lens may fall into artcrior chamber,
(2) Tropicamide (0.5-1% solution)
(a)  Pharmacokinetics. It has a rapid onset, short duration of action. Maxi-
mum dilation in 20 minutes, lasts for 3 hours.
(b) Therapeutic uses. Mostly to dilate pupil to facilitate examination of
lens and posterior segment of the eye. Also, because it reduces blood-
aqueous barrier permeability it is a good choice for intraocular surgery.
(3) Other parasympatholytics that are seldom used include homatropine, scopo-
lamine, and cyclopentolate.
2. Adrenergic agents. Drugs with α2-agonistic activity or β,-blocking activity to de.
crease cAMP levels, which decrease aqueous humor formation.
a.
Adrenergic agonists stimulate adrenergic receptors (αi, α2, β,, β).
(1) Epinephrine (1-2% sol) decreases aqueous production through vasoconstric-
tion in the ciliary body. Incrcascd facility of aqucous outflow is mcdiated
by α2-rcccptors and is corrclaled with incrcascd cAMP production by the
trabecular meshwork.
(2) Dipivalyl epinephrine (0.1% solution). It is a lipophilic prodrug that is me-
tabolized by corneal esterases to two epinephrine molecules.
(3) Phenylephrine (2-10% solution). A direct acting α-agonist with little effect
on β-adrenergic. receptors that is used diagnostically for Horner's syndrome
and therapeutically as an adjunct to atropine. Ten percent phenylephrine will
dilate the dog's pupil in 2 hours and it persists for 12-18 hours. Because of
the time to complete mydriasis, this drug is not useful as a mydriatic when
used alone. It does not dilate the pupil of the cat, horse, or cow. It is used
topically for its local vasoconstrictive effect.
b. Selective α2-agonists
(1) Preparations. Apraclonidine (1 % solution) and brimonidine (0.2% solution).
Ocular Pharmacology327
(2) Therapeutic uses. It is used to treat complicalions relaled to postoperative
IOP spikes and augment olher glaucoma medications. These agenis are not
an important group for veterinary medicine due to their limited effectiveness
and significant side effects of vomiting and bradycardia.
(3) Mechanism of action. Aqucous humor sccretion is decrcascd by:
(a)  Activation of presynaptic α2-receptors, which inhibits norepinephrine
(NE) release, thereby blocking the tonic adrenergic stimulation of the 
secretory ciliary epithelium by endogenous NE,
(b) Stimulation of postsynaptic α)-receplor in the ciliary body suppresses
adenylyl cyclase and thus decreases cAMP synthesis, which results in
decreased aqueous humor formation.
(c)
Constriction of the afferent arterioles of the ciliary body reduces ciliary
body blood ilow that may also account for reduced aqueous secretion.
(d)  Enhanced uveoscleral outflow may also contribute to lowered IOP
(e) In the dog, apraclonidine causes mydriasis through interaction with
inhibilory prejunctional αz-receptors on adrenergic nerves lo the iris
sphincter. In the cat, apraclonidine produces miosis, but the mechanism
is uncertain.
(4) Adverse effects. Apraclonidine may reduce hearl rate and blood pressure so
systemic β-blockers should be used with caution.
c. Indirect-acting adrenergic stimulants stimulate the release of NE. Hydroxyam-
phetamine is used for diagnosis of first-order Horner's syncdrome. It causes pupil-
sa u u ng n aeus uad m sa u  e
with a postganglionic lesion.
d. β-Adrenergic blockers
(1) Mechanism of action
(a)  Nonspecific agents block both β- and β2-receptors in the cpithelium
of the ciliary processes. The subsequent inhibition of cAMP production
the anterior segment is β,
(b) β-Blockers do not affect carbonic anhydrase (CA) nor aqueous humor
outflow.
(2) Therapeutic uses. These agents are useful in combination with other ocu-
treating glaucoma and prophylactically in preglaucomatous eyes in the dog
achieve 50-60% reduction in IOP.
(3) Nonselective β-blockers. Timolol (0.25-0.5% solution), levobunolol (0.25-
0.5% solution), carteolol (1% solution), metipranolol (0.3% solution):
These drugs have significant hypotensive effect for cats at 0.5%, but 4-
8% solution is required for dogs. They have variable hypotensive effects in
different animals possibly due to variations in β-reccptors. Betaxol (0.25-
0.5% sol) is a selective β,-blocker.
(4) Administration. They are used topically, twice daily.
(5) Adverse effects. Bradycardia is the most significant side effect.
ANTIMICROBIALS (for chemistry, mechanism of action, and spectrum of aclivity re-
fer to Chapter 15). Intraocular inflammation accompanying infections reduces or elim-
inates blood-ocular barriers to drug penetration so choices of antibiotics are similar
to selection of antimicrobials for treatment of soft tissue infections.
Antibacterial agents
A
1. General considerations
a. Jopical preparations are intcnded for ocular suriacc infeclions or prophy-
laxis, but there are a limited number of commercially available preparations.
328(hapter 14 V A
Alternative topical formulations may be prepared with injectable antibiotic solu-
tions if indicated.
b. Systemically administered antibiotics are generally ineffective in treating
corneal and conjunctival infections.
c.
 Culture and sensitivily testing are advised bul selection of an antibiotic for initial
 treatment is often an empirical decision or based on cytology.
d. Concern for penetration of the corneal epithelium (to the stroma or intraoc-
ularly) is not relevant in ulcerative keratitis as the epithelial barrier has been
lost. For a stromal abscess in the deep cornea where the surface epithelium is
intact, penctration is a concern. Intraocular inflammation brcaks down blood-
ocular barriers so transport of systcmically administered antibiotics to intraocular
structures is usually not an issue.
 e. Topical antibiotics should be administered frequently as the preparation will
not remain on the ocular surface more than a few minutes. Dilution and
jectable solutions added to proprietary preparations or to methylcellulose (ar-
tificial tcars) cspccially for horscs. Incrcascd frcquency of mcdication rmay be
preferable as high concentrations may be toxic to regenerating cpithelium.
f. Topical antibiotics are combined, that is, ncomycin, polymyxin, and gramicidin,
achieved such as with an aminoglycoside and a cephalosporin. Antagonism be-
tween drugs in combination is uncommon.
 g. Topical antibiotics are typically those not used systemically. Bactericidal and
bacteriostatic antibiotics should not be used concurrently.
h. Adverse effects vary among the different topical antibiotic prcparations, but all
have the potential to be irritating leading to tearing, blepharospasm, conjunctival
hyperemia, or chemosis. Tonicity, pH, and preservatives, or the drug itself may
be the cause (Table 14-1).
2. Antibacterial classes
a. Penicillins. These antibiotics are rarely used topically in veterinary medicine.
 Preparations for intramarmmary infusion in bovinc rmastitis are ofter used topi-
cally for infectious kcratitis (pink cyc), and subconjunctival injections of systemic
injectables may be efficacious for bovine or equine infectious keratitis.
Agents. Any of the natural or synthetic injectable penicillin preparations may
 be compounded for topical use or administered subconjunctivally. They include
natural penicillins C, V, and K; penicillinase-resistant oxacillin, cloxacillin, di-
cloxacillin, nafcillin; and the aminopenicillins and carboxycillins including ampi-
cillin, amoxicillin, carbenicillin, piperacillin, and ticarcillin.
b. Cephalosporins. There are no topical ophthalmic preparations available. Agents
for systemic use are compounded for topical treatment of infected corneal
ulcers. First-generation drugs: cefazolin, cefadroxyl, cephalexin, and cephalothin 
are active against most Gram-positive organisms. Second-generation and third-
generation drugs in this category are rarely used in ophthalmic preparations ex-
cept when sensitivity testing dictates. Compounded fortified cephazolin solution
for infccted corncal ulcers in horses is commonly uscd in combination with for-
tificd amikacin.
 C. Aminoglycosides. Neomycin, gentamicin, and tobramycin are widely available
as topical solutions and ointments. Neomycin is commonly combined with bac-
itracin or gramicidin and polymyxin B (referred to as "triple antibiotic") to in-
crease the spectrum of activity. Topically these drugs do not penetrate the intact
cornea. Amikacin is compounded and used to complement cephazolin for treat-
ment of infected equine corneal ulcers.
(1) Subconjunctival injections of gentamicin and tobramycin readily cnter the
corneal stroma and aqueous humor, and pass through the sclera inlo vitre-
ous of inflamed eyes.
（2）
The low pH of gentamicin parenteral solution is locally irrtating and may
be painful. Neomycin and kanamycin do not penetrate eye from the sub-
conjunctival injection site.
)cular Pharmacology
329
TABLE 14-1. Antibiotic Choices for Ocular Infections
Topical
Topical
Suhconjunctiva
Systemic
 Propriety Prep
Compounded
 1 Injection 
Oral/
Drug
Sol/Ointment
Fortified Solutions
Dose
Parenteral
Amoxicillin
D
Amikacin
10 mg/mL P
25 mg G
G
Ainpicillin
50 mg/ml p
50-250 mg C
P
Bacitracin
500 units/g
Carbamicillin
5 mg/mL P
100 mg G
P
Cephaloridine
32-35 mg/mL P
100 mg G
P
Cephalothin
50-100 mg G
Cefazolin
30-50 mg/ml
100 mg G
P
Clindamycin
50 mg/ml
15 50 mg
P
Chloramphenicol
 5-10 mg/mL G
50-100 mg/ml C
50-100 mg G
Chlortetracycline
10 mg/g G
3-5 mg G
G
Ciprofloxacin
3.5 mg/mL p
10-12 mg/mL P
G
Colistin
5 mg/mL P
10 mg/mL P
15-35 mg G
P
Enrofloxacin
7 mg/mL P
D
Erythromycin
 5 mg/gm G
10 50 mg/mL G
50 100 mg G
D
Gentamicin
3 mg/mL or gm P
8-15mg/mL p
10-20 mg G
Kanamycin
30-50 mg/mL P
30 mg P
P
Lincomycin
150 mg G
G
Methicillin
50 mg/mL P
50-100 mg G
P
Moxalactam
100 mg/mL P
50 mg G
P
Neomycin
3.5-8 mg/mL P
35 mg/mL P
125-25 mg P
Penicillin G
100 300,000 units P 0.5 1 million units G
F
Norfloxacin 
3 mg/inL
G
COfloxacin
3 mg/nL
一
G
Oxacillin
65 mg/mL
Polymyxin B
10,000 units/mL P
100,000 units P
 Streptomycin
50-100 mg
P
Tetracycline
10 mg/g C
2.5-5 mg G
P
Ticarcillin
6mg/mL
100 mg
D
Tobramycin
3 mg/mL or gm P
 5 15 mg/mL P
10 20 mg G
D
Intraocular penetration: good IGl. fair IF), poor (P), no inrorrmation (-).
(3) Parenteral (or oral) administration results in low concentrations in the ante-
rior segment.
(4) Except for neomycin, aminoglycosides should be reserved for use in estab-
lishcd infcctions. Allergic and hypersensitivity reactions are more common
in this group, especially to neomycin.
（5）
All aminoglycosides are toxic to intraocular structures. Amikacin is safer
for intravitreal injections than gentamicin. Gentamicin is used for chemical
ablation of the ciliary body in blind, chronically glaucomatous eyes.
d. Tetracyclines
-don jo suoisuansns o sjuauio laua aie suoeedaid eandoid peidol ()
cal tetracycline or oxytetracycline combined with polymyxin B.
(2)  Doxycycline and minocycline are lipophilic and penetrate the eye well
when givcn systemically to dogs for rickettsia and cats for chlamydial in-
fections, but do nol penetrate aqueous or viltreous of horse to be sufficiently
effective against Leptospira.
(3) Oral doxycycline is more beneficial for chlamydial infcction in cats than
lopical preparations. Subconjunclival oxytetracycline gives therapeutic con-
centrations in tears for treatiment of Moraxella, but not when administered
IM.
330Chapter 14V
(4) Adverse effects. Oxytetracycline is painful when given subconjunctivally,
and causes chemosis and hyperemia.
e. Polypeptides. Polymyxin B, bacitracin, and ointments are used. Vancomycin is
rarely indicated parenterally, but is the drug of choice for intravitreal injcction
etrate the intact cornea or conjunctiva.
f. Fluoroquinolones, Norfloxacin and ofloxacin solutions, and ciprofloxacin solu-
tion and ointiment are the common topical preparations. They are well tolerated
and not toxic topically. Ofloxacin and norfloxacin penetrate the intact cornea
readily; ciprofloxacin does poorly. Levofloxacin. pefloxacin, marbofloxacin, and
enrofloxacin parenterally penetrate to therapeutic levels in aqueous and vitreous
ses ui uonenousop qeuu jsnes Aeu xou toamoy aeo pue sop oun u ouny
even at recommended doses. Toxicily is dose-related and aged cats are more
susceptible.
g. Chloramphenicol. Readily diffuses through the cornca into anterior chamber,
especially if ointment form is used. Through systemic administration, it crosses
the blood-ocular barricrs and cnters the aqucous at the same rate that it cnters
the cerebrospinal fluid. Topical dosing in the cat leads lo systemic absorption.
Chloramphenicol is antagonistic to erythromycin.
h. Lincosamides and macrolides. Erythromycin ointment is the only lopical prepa-
ration in this class. Clindamycin orally is the drug of choice for toxoplasmosis
cndophthalmitis. Azithromycin orally is uscd for Borrelia and Bartonella infcc-
tions.
i. Sulfonamides. Sulfacetamide and sulfisoxazole topicals are rarely used in veteri-
nary mcdicinc. Trimcthoprim-sulfadiazine orally pcnctrates the aqucous and vit-
reous humor readily. Systemic sulfonamides may be toxic to the lacrimal gland
leading to keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
B.Antivirals
1. Pyrimidine nucleoside analogs
a. idoxuridine (2.5% ointment, 0.1% solution compounded) and triflurothymidinc
(1% solution) for topical use.
b. Mechanism of action. Thesc compounds substitutc for thymidinc in DNA syn-
thesis and interfere with viral replication. They are virostalic, and thus competent
mucosal surface immunity is required for efficacy.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Idoxuridine is not absorbed by the conjunctiva nor cornea
unless there is an erosion. Trifluorothymidine is better absorbed.
d. Therapeutic uses. Thcy are for the treatmcnt of feline herpcsvirus-1 conjunctivitis
and keratitis, and punctate keratitis in horses due to equine herpesvirus-2. Triflu-
orothymidine is the drug of choice. However, latent infections are resistant.
e. Adverse effects. Local irritation and hypersensitivily are occasional problems
especially in cats. Trifluorothymidine is the least toxic of nucleic acid analogs.
2. Purine nucleoside analogs
a. Preparations. Adenine arabinoside (or vidarabine 3% ointment, 1% suspension
compounded) for topical use.
b. Mechanism of action. Vidarabinc is a structural analog for adcnosinc that intcr-
feres with viral DNA synthesis. It is virastatic.
c. Pharmacokinetics. They arc not absorbcd by the conjunctiva nor cornca unlcss
there is an epithelial defect due to viral replicalion in the epithelium.
d. Therapeutic uses. They are used to treat feline herpesvirus-1 conjunctivitis and
keratitis and punctate keratitis in horses due to cquine herpesvirus-2.
e. Adverse effects. Local irrilation and hypersensitivily are occasional problems for
Cats.
3. Acyclovir is a guanidine derivative of vidarabine. It is not available commercially as
a topical.
a, Preparation. Five pcrcent ointment; oral and parcntcral preparations arc not cf-
fective for FHV-1.
Ocular Phamtcology331
b. Mechanism of action. Acyclovir is an analog of guanosine with selective affin-
ity for substitution in viral DNA, but not in normal uninfectcd cells. It acts by
selectively inhibiting viral thymidine kinase but not cellular thymidine kinase.
c. Therapeutic uses. Antiherpetic treatment for cats with chronic conjunctivokerati-
tis.
d. Administration. Use topically as oral administration does not achieve plasma
concentrations sufficient to inhibit FHV-1.
e. Adverse effects. There is renal, liver, and bone marrow toxicity potential at ther-
 apeutic levels. It is reserved for severe, unresponsive cases.
4. Gangciclovir, cidofovir, and penciclovir are new compounds, Gangciclovir is re-
lated to acyclovir, cidofovir is cytotoxic and less potent,
5.
Betadine 1:20 dilution of disinfectant in arlificial tear solution is administcrcd one
drop Iwice daily on the cye.
6. Interferons (IFNs)
a. Preparations. Human recombinant IFN-α and feline recombinant IFN-o.
b. Mechanism of action. These are cytokines component of natural defense imecha-
nism.
(1) They are released by host cells in response to viral infection. Attached to the
receptors on adjacent cells, IFNs increase the transcription of host cell DNA
and activate endonuclease in the cell, increasing the resistance of the cell to
virus infection.
(2) They stimulate cell-mediated lysis of virus-infected cells.
(3) Interferons are synergistic with acyclovir.
c. Therapeutic uses. They are for the treatment of FriV-1 conjunctivitis and ker-
atitis. Topical administration is cffcctive only for active infection that is in the
conjunctival and corncal cpithelium. Combinations of IFN and topical antiviral
drugs are synergistic. Parenteral administration prior to exposure does not pre-
vent infection but the symptoms are less severe. Oral dosing within 48 hours
postexposure diminishes the severity of the clinical disease. It is less effective for
established infections and has no effect on latent infection or the carrier state.
d. Administration. It is used topically, one drop, 30 IU/mL (diluted in artificial tear
solution) and orally, 30 IU/day.
e.
 Pharmacokinetics. Direct contact with the epithelial surface is sufficient for ben-
efit of topical administration. Oral administration has been demonstrated to be
beneficial even though the large protein molecule is degraded in the Gl tract.
Beneil is presumed from unknown immunologic mcchanisms.
f. Adverse effects. None reporled al rccommended doses.
7. L-lysine
a. Preparations. USP, tablets or powder, OIC; commercially in flavorcd vchiclc.
b. Mechanism of action. L-lysine interferes with viral replication.
c. Therapeutic uses. It prevents or suppresses feline herpesvirus-1 conjunctivitis and
keratitis.
e.
Administration. It is given orally, 500 mg in food twice daily.
f. Pharmacokinetics. It is readily absorbed from Gl tract and secreted in tears.
 g. Adverse effects. None reported at recommended doses.
C.Antifungals
1. General considerations. Keratomycoses are imost common in horses, especially in
warmer climates, and dogs and cats less frequently. Deep puncture wounds in the
cornea may lead to stromal abscesses beneath an intact surface epithelium. Intraoc-
ular infection with systemic mycotic organisms occurs mostly in dogs.
2. Agents. Polyenes, azoles, 5-fluorocytosine, and iodides
a. Betadine and tincture of iodine
(1) Therapeutic uses. Betadine is an iodine antiseptic and is effective at 1l:10
1:20 dilution in saline or ocular irrigation solution. It is more effective in
an electrolyte solution. Betadine is effective for mycotic and bacterial in-
fection in stromal ulcers, but not for deep stromal abscesses as it does not
penctrate intact cpithelium. Tincturc of iodine is absorhed into the corneal
332Chapter 14 V C
stroma beller than betadine, Each is antibaclerial and antifungal at the same
dilutions. As a presurgical disinfectant for the conjunctiva and cornca, beta-
dine is used at 1:50 dilution to minimize chemosis.
48 hours. Tincture (2 or 7%) is used only once at the time of initial debride-
ment of the wound.
(3) Adverse effects. Betadine causes a local irritation, and chemosis in some
individuals. Tincture of iodine is very irritating and should be preceded with
a topical anesthelic.
b. Silver sulfadiazine. This is a broad spectrum antibacterial and antifungal derma-
tologic cream that is compatible with the cornea and conjunctiva. It is used for
topical application for equine keratomycosis.
c. Azoles (lmidazoles) (see Chapter 15 for detailed information)
(1) Preparations. Itraconazole, miconazole, clotrimazole, ketoconazole, and
fluconazole.
(2) Mechanism of action. They inhibit miltochondrial oxidative enzymes result-
ing in cell death. Damage to the cell wall by interaction with phospholipids
leads to increased permeability.
(3) Pharmacokinetics. Miconazole and ketoconazole penetrate the cornea mod-
crately well; fluconazole penetrates well due lo minimal prolein binding.
Itraconazole penetrates the blood-ocular barriers well.
(4) Therapeutic uses
(a) Imidazoles have a broad spectrum of activity against filamentous and
dimorphic. fungi and yeasls.
(b) Intraocular infections by systemic fungi are treated with oral or IV prepa-
rations; itraconazole is preferred.
(c) Keratomycoscs are trcated using IV preparalions lopically. Oral forms
of miconazole and itraconazole are compounded as ointments for top-
ical use. Itraconazole and fluconazole systemically are effective against
filamentous organisms infecting the deep cornea.
(d) Clotrimazole and miconazole vaginal and dermatologic creams have
been used topically on the eye, but the alcohols in these preparations
are harmful to the corneal epithelium and should not be used on the
eye.
(5) Administration. They can be mixed to a 1% ointment in 30% dimethyl sul-
foxide (DMsO) for topical use for superior penetration deep into the cornea.
Fluconazole solution can be given subconjunctivally and intracamerally.
Topical treatment of keratomycosis requires hourly or every other hour appli-
(6) Adverse effects. Except for vaginal and dermatologic creams, oral and in-
jectable preparations are well tolerated topically. DMsO preparations should
be handled with gloves to minimize skin ahsorption that is enhanced by the
DMSO solvent.
d. Polyene macrolide antibiotics
(1) Preparations
(a) Natamycin (5% suspension) is the only topical antifungal commercially
available.
(b)  Amphotericin B is compounded in 0.3-0.5% colloidal suspension for
topical use.
(c) Nystatin is compounded in isohydric phosphate buffer solution for topi-
cal use.
(2) Mechanism of action. They bind to a sterol moiely in the fungal cell mem-
brane and form a polyene-sterol complex that alters the selective permeabil-
ity of the membrane and results in K+ efflux and oxidative damage, cyto-
 plasmic organelle destruction. It is fungicidal or fungistatic depending on the 
concentration and the susceptibility of the organism,
(3) Therapeutic uses
(a) Amphotericin B has a broad spectrum of activity against systemic fungal
infections. It may be formulated for topical use on fungal keratitis.
cular Plarmacology」333
(b) Natamycin has a broad spectrum of activity against filamentous fungi
and yeasts
(c) Nystatin is effective on some filamentous fungi and yeast (Candida)
(4) Administration. They are applied topically for keratomycosis. Parenteral am-
photericin B is rarely used due to nephrotoxicity and availability of azole
agents.
(5)  Pharmacokinetics
(a) Amphotericin B penetrates the cornea poorly unless the epithelium de-
brided. Amphotericin B penetrates the blood-ocular barrier poorly when
given parenterally.
(b) Natamycin will penetrate in effective concentrations in the corneal
stroma if the cpithelium is debrided.
(6)  Adverse effects
(a) Amphotericin B. At >0.3%, applied topically causes conjunctival
hyperemia, chemosis, and iritis. Corneal epithelial toxicity interferes
with healing of ulcers. It is too irritating to administer
subconjunctivally.
Amphotericin B is toxic to retina if injected into the vitreous. Renal toxi-
city if B given parenterally in small animals.
(b)  Natamycin is not toxic topically but is too irritating to use subconjuncti-
vally or intracamcrally.
(c) Nystatin is well tolerated.
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS
A.
Glucocorticoids (see Chapter 12 for more information)
1. General considerations. Scarring may be inconsequential to healing in most other
tissues, but the need to control and prevent the sequelae of ocular inflammation
to preserve transparency for vision is essential in treating ocular diseases. Anti-
inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids reduce resistance
to infectious organisms. Infectious or allergic causes of inflammation are not elimi-
nated even if signs are reduced. Impaired keratocyte and fibroblast activity is dose-
related.
2. Chemistry/agents/preparations selection
a. Phosphate solutions are water soluble. Acetates and alcohols preparations are
aqueous suspensions of lipophilic glucocorticoids, and are biphasic, facilitating
absorption through the cornea. They deliver higher concentrations than solu-
tions. Lipophilic acetate and alcohol preparations penetrate the cornea up to 20)
times greater than water-soluble phosphate preparations.
b. Agents. Hydrocortisone, dexamethasonc alcohol and sodium phosphate, bc-
tamethasone, triamcinolone, prednisone, prednisolone acetate, and sodium phos-
phate. Progestins (having glucocorticoid activity): fluorometholone, medrysone,
megestrol acetate.
c. Selection of a preparation for topical use
(1) Consider relative potency, corneal penetration, duration of action, retention
of vehicle, and adverse effects of the drug and the vehicle in selecting a
product.
-paid uey luaod aiou saw ot-s aie auoseyawejaq pue auoseyawexatl (z)
nisolone and 20 times more potent than hydrocortisone (see Chapter 12,
Table 12-1). The higher concentration of prednisolone negates the difference
in potency.
(3)  An acctate suspension penetrates into the anterior chamber through the in-
tact corneal epithelium making it the preparation of choice for treating ante-
rior uvcitis.
but it does not pcnetrate the cornea and is inappropriate for intraocular in-
flammation.
334 |Chupter 14 Vl A
(5) Dexamethasone sodium phosphate is more potent, but prednisolone acetate
suspension is better absorbed into the antcrior segment of the eye. Penetra-
tion into the eyelids and posterior segment is poor.
d. Selection of a glucocorticoid preparation for systemic use is not significantly
affected by its ability to cross the blood-ocular barriers as those barriers are bro-
ken in inflammation. Relative potency and duration of action are more important
considerations.
3. Effects on the eye. Glucocorticoids have anti-inflammatory effects. At high doses.
they exert immunosuppressive effects.
se ieinlao pue renssea ssaiddns aaul suonenedaid iesidot jo sasn snnadeaue t
pects of inflammation of the conjunctiva, cornea, sclera, iris, and ciliary body.
must be shaken gently to assure consistent dosing. Subconjurnclival injcction of par-
enteral injectable solutions or suspensions.
6. Pharmacokinetics. Potency and penetration of different glucocorticoid preparations
 is important in the manageiment of an ocular disease.
7. Adverse effects and contraindications
a. Do not use for conjunctivitis in cats unless herpesvirus infection is controlled or
ruled out.
b. Do not use on ulcerated corneas as steroids inhibit healing (mitosis and epithe.
lial cell migration, keratocyte proliferation and collagen deposition), potentiate
matrix metalloproteinases that lead to corneal necrosis.
c. Host immune defenses are impaired by reducing neutrophil and macrophage
 migration, and suppression of cytokine activity.
d. Subconjunctival granuloma frorn injection of rcpository prcparations.
e. Supcrficial calcinication of the cornca with prolonged use of phosphalc prepara-
tions; lipid keratopathy.
f. Rarely. cataracts or glaucoma.
g. Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome.
B.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (see Chapter 7 for detailed informa-
tion).
1. Preparations
a. Topical NSAIDs: flurbiprofen, diclofenac, suprofen, ketolorac.
b. Systemic NsAIDs: flunixin meglumine, carprofen, deracoxib, phenylbutazone
2. Mechanism of action.
a. Topical preparations, like the systemic drugs, are predominately COx-2 inhibitors
but have anti-COx-1 activity as well.
b. NSAIDs prevent prostaglandin production that causes blood-aqueous barrier
breakdown, lowered pain threshold, miosis, photophobia, and decreased aque-
ous humor formation.
c. They also suppress PMN motility and chemotaxis, decrease mast cell degran-
ulation and expression of inflammatory cytokines, and may act as free radical
scavengers
3. Therapeutic uses. NSAIDs suppress ocular inflarmrmation. They dcpress pain and
pholophobia of uvcitis of all causes including postopcrative inflammation. Used
prcoperatively they prevent intraoperative miosis. Control symptoms of allergic con-
junctivitis. NSAIDs avoid the undesirable side effects of glucocorticoids. Systemic.
NSAIDs are used for posterior segment inflammation.
4. Administration. Topicals are applied 2-4 times a day.
Systemic products, oral or injectable should not be given more than twice daily due
to adverse Gl effects.
5. Pharmacokinetics. Oral drugs are readily absorbed by the gastric mucosa (see
Chapter 7 for detailed pharmacokinetics information). Topical drugs are absorbed
by the cornea and into the anterior chamber of the eye, Corneal epithelial compro-
mise or loss leads to much enhanced absorption.
6. Adverse effects. Local irritation and corneal epithelial toxicity, infiltrates, and punc-
tate keratopathy arc rcported. A modest decrcasc in aqucous humor outflow may
(Ocular Pharmacology335
occur. Systemic products commonly predispose to gastrointestinal damages due to
breakdown of prostaglandin-dependent mucosal protective mcchanisms by COX-
1 inhibition. Signs includc anorexia, vomiting, diarrhca, hematcmesis, and gastric.
ulcers. Horses are most vulnerable. Hepalic and renal toxicily occur in the dog
and cat (see Chapter 7 for more informalion). Absorption of topical products rarely
causes systemic effects.
IMMUNOMODULATING DRUGS. Miscellaneous imumunosuppressive agents
have been introduced to veterinary medicine to manage chronic ocular inflam-
matory diseases where long-term glucocorticoids and NSAlDs are inadequate or
inappropriate.
A.Azathioprine (see Chapter 17 for more information)
1. Mechanism of action. Interferes with the synthesis of purine bases, nucleic acid
synthesis. Effect is limited to helper T lymphocytes.
 2. Therapeutic uses. The most common alternative treatment of steroid-resistant uveitis 
and nodular granulomatous cpisclerokcratitis.
3. Administration, It is given orally; there arc no topical formulations.
4.
 Pharmacokinetics. See Chapter 17 jor information.
 5. Adverse effects include vomiting, diarrhea, bone marrow suppression, hepalic
necrosis.
B.
Other cytotoxic immunomodulating agents for inflammatory ocular diseases that are
resistant to conventional doses of glucocorticoids (see Chapter 17 for detailed informa-
tion).
1. Cytosine arabinoside, an antimetabolite, and Procarbazine, an MAO inhibitor, are
used for optic neuritis associated with granulomatous meningioencephalitis.
 2. Chlorambucil, an alkalating agent, is used for refractory immune-mediated uveitis in
dogs.
 3. Mitoxantrone, an antitumor antibiotic, is an alternative for trcatment of optic neuri-
tis.
4. Tetracylcine and niacinamide combined have immunomodulatory and anti-
inflammatory effects used for pyogranulomatous blepharitis and episcleritis.
C.T-lymphocyte Inhibitors (calcineurin inhibitors)
1. Preparations
a. Cyclosporine is available commercially as a 0.2% ointment and an oral solu-
tion that is diluted to 1 or 2% in olive or corn oil. Intravitreal or suprachoroidal
cyclosporine implants for control of cquine recurrent uveitis.
b. Tacrolimus is compounded to 0.03% in olive or corn oil.
 2. Mechanism of action. These compounds inhibit T-lymphocyles by inhibiting cy-
tokine production (IL-2, IFN-y) so helper T cell activation is blocked, inhibiting the
ways of cytokine (IL-2) receptors and inhibits proliferation of T cells.
3. Therapeutic uses
a. In trcatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, corncal and conjunctival inflarmmatory
changes are reverscd. They are lacromirnctic by inhibiting irmmune-mcdiated
inflammation in the lacrimal gland, and has an independent lacrimogenic
effect.
b. Control superficial keratitis (pannus) by inhibiting neovascularization.
c.(
Control eosinophilic keratitis, episcleritis, and superficial punctate keratitis.
d. Prevent corncal graft rejection.
4. Administration. Apply topically twice daily on thc surfacc of the cye.
336Chapter 14 VI （
5. Pharmacokinetics
a. They readily penetrate corneal epithelium, but not endothelium, so they accu-
mulate in the corneal stroma.
b. Thcy penctrate conjunctival cpitheliun and are taken up into thc lacrimal gland.
c. There is minimal penetration inlo the aqueous humor; but systemic absorption is
6. Adverse effects. Ocular and periocular irritation may occur. Local and systemic
immunosuppression may rcsult from systemic absorption,
ANTIALLERGIC, ANTIHISTAMINIC, AND DECONGESTANT DRUGS (See
Chapters 2 and 3 for detailed information).
in the conjunctiva rupture and relcase granules, which contain inflammatory medi-
alors, including histamine, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and eosinophil chemolactic
factors, for example, IL-8. Histamine activates H-receptors on blood vessels causing
vasodilation, incrcased capillary permcability, chenosis and pruritis. Intraocular (iris)
inflanmation may occur.
B.
histamine, leukotricncs, and so forth, by stabilizing cell membrancs, inhibiting thc
pathophysiologic effects, or competing for receptor siles of the mediators.
C.Therapeutic uses. For control of allergic conjunctivitis and blepharitis. Thesc agcnts
are used in place of glucocorticoids with variable results. Their efficacy in animals is
unsubstantiated.
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. These agents are all active on the surface of the mucous mem-
brane (palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva), but do not penetrate the intact corneal
epithelium.
E. Agents
1. H1-antihistamines: levocabastine, emedastine
 2. Mast cell stabilizers: cromolyn sodium, lodoxamide
3. Both mast cell stabilizers and Hi-antihistamines: olopatidine, ketotifen, azelastine,
nedocromil
4. Vasoconstrictors (decongestants): in topical preparations include naphazoline,
tetrahydrozolinc, and phcnylephrine (sce Chapter 2 for morc information).
 5. Antihistamine/decongestant combinations are used in small animals with negli-
gible or variable results which are often due to inaccurate diagnosis: pyrilamine/
phenylephrine, pheneramine/naphazoline, antazoline/naphazoline.
F. Adverse effects/contraindications. Most first-generation antihistamines have a seda.
tive effect. Topical application may cause local irritation.
IX.
PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGS
A.
Agents. Latanoprost (0.005% solution), bimatoprost (0.03% solution), travoprost
(0.004% solution).
1. Chemistry. These are esters of prostaglandin F2α analogs that increase lipid solu-
bility to facilitate uptake through cornea. Hydrolysis during passage through ep-
ithelium releases the active form for distribution to the interior of the eye.
Ocular Phanmacology337
They do not work in cats or horses, probably due to FP receptor problems in
these species.
 a. The increased uveoscleral outflow is the primary mechanism for low-
ering IOP with PGF2x in the dog. There is evidence of the pressure-
dcpcndent conventional outflow incrcasing due to alterations in the trabccular
meshwork.
b. Matrix metalloproteinases are increased and collagen is decreased with evi-
dence of lysis of cxtracellular matrix, widening of intermuscular spaccs con-
current with reduced outflow resistance. Blood vessels dilate in the optic nerve
head and the increased perfusion spares the inner retina.
3. Therapeutic uses. PCFzx analogs lower IOP in primary glaucoma in dogs, but nol
in cats or horses.
4. Administration. Apply topically once or twicc daily.
 5. Pharmacokinetics. Esterified drugs are readily absorbed through the cornea and
taken up in the ciliary body and trabecular meshwork.
6. Adverse effects. Miosis; conjunctival irritation, melanogenesis in the iris.
7. Contraindications
a. Luxated lens where pupil block could result from vitreous entrapment.
b. Ocular inflammation is cxacerbated by prostaglandin analogs.
ANTIFIBRIN AGENTS
A.
Tissue plasminogen activator (TPA)
1. Preparations/mechanism of action. Human recombinant TPA; a protease that con-
verts plasminogen to plasmin which lyscs fibrin; it does not contribute to intraoc-
ular hemorrhage. It is reconstiltuted from human product, alteplase (Activase), to
sonbe jml oo1 u! .oz- pe uazoy pue 7n oot/l 5z
 2. Therapeutic uses. It is injected into the anterior chamber to lyse intraocular fibrin
or blood clot formed from inflammalory disease, intraocular surgery, or ocular
trauma. It prevents posterior synechia, secondary glaucoma, cyclitic membranes,
and corneal blood staining.
3. Administration. Intracameral injection of 25 μg, most commonly into anterior
chamber but may be used intravitreally.
4. Pharmacokinetics. It is not absorbcd through the cornca after topical administra-
tion.
 5. Adverse effects. The TPA doses that are higher than the recommended ones may
reous.
B.Heparin
1. Mechanism of action. It impairs thrombin-mediated formation of fibrin.
2. Therapeutic uses. Heparin is added to intraocular irrigating solutions for use in
intraocular surgery to minimize the formation of fibrin clots.
3. Adverse effects. It may predispose to intraoperative or postoperative hemorrhage.
It docs not lysc fibrin or blood clots alrcady formcd (sec fibrinolytics, TPA).
C.Hirudin
 1. Mechanism of action. Hirudin is thc dircct acting antithrombin agcnt that blocks
formation of fibrin from fibrinogen without affecting platelels.
 3. Administration. Hirudin is added to intraocular irrigating solutions for use during
surgery.
4. Adverse effects. None reported.
338
C:lhuptecr 14 Xl A
XI.
 TOPICAL ANESTHETICS (see Chapter 6 for detailed information).
A.
General considerations. The cornea has a dense sensory innervation, most dense in
the superficial stromal and notably intraepithelial.
 pl e a  e anos pi e jo isios se ae sa a
drophilic amino group, giving the molecule biphasic solubility.
C.
Preparations. Proparacaine, 0.5% solution (best tolerated, fewest adverse effects), also
tetracaine, 0.5-2% ointment or solution, piperocaine, dibucaine, benoxinate.
D.
 Mechanism of action. Thesc agents block Na+ channels, preventing axon depolariza-
tion, progressively decreasing the nerve action potential leading to reversible block of
conduction through nerve fibers.
E.
Therapeutic uses
1. Topical anesthesia of the conjunctiva and cornea facilitate diagnostic., manipula-
tive and minor treatment procedures including tonometry, nasolacrimal duct irriga-
tion, corneal debridement, subconjunctival injections, and elevating and everting
the membrana nictitans to search for foreign bodies. It is sufficient for anterior
chamber ccntesis with small nccdle. These agents are useful preoperatively in
cataract surgery to maintain mydriasis and stabilize the blood-aqueous barrier.
They are not a treatment for painful conditions.
2. Regional (infiltrative) anesthesia (see Chapter 6 for more information) by palpe-
bral. auriculopalpebral, supraorbital nerve blocks and eyelid infiltration for the
horsc and deep orbital injections (Peterson eye block) for cattle are often erm-
ployed using injectable agents such as lidocaine, but general anesthesia is pre-
ferred for the dog and cat.
F.
Administration. One to two drops on the surface of the eye 15 seconds prior to
for debriding corneal epithelium or anterior chamber centesis. The duration of anes-
thesia is up to 45 minutes in the dog. 25 minutes in the cat.
G.
 Pharmacokinetics. These drugs traverse the cornea and nerve membrane readily due
to equilibrium of ionized and nonionized forms that is pH dependent. Bicarbonate
buffering to increase pH facilitates penetration; inflammation lowers the pH of tissue
and diminishes effectiveness. It does not penetrate into aqueous humor.
H.
Adverseeffects
1. Tetracaine causes buming sensation, hyperemia, and chemosis.
 2. All agents induce minor surface irrcgularitics in the corneal cpithelium that may
interfere with examination of the posterior segment.
3. Faint fluorescein uptake may be seen after anesthetic instillation.
4. Repeated application may lead to ulceration of an edematous cornea.
 5. Topical anesthesia reduces tear production.
6. These agents are bactericidal so cultures must be procured prior to instillation.
 7. Topical anesthesia will permit an animal to rub at an eye with clouded vision or
deep pain and damage the cornea without awareness of pain.
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS (CAIS)
A.
 Preparations
1. Systemic preparations. Acetazolamide, dichlorphcnamide, methazolamide, cthox-
zolamide (see Chapter 9 for more information).
2. Topical preparations. Dorzolaimide, brinzolamide.
B.
Chemistry. All clinically active CAls have the same active configuration.
C.
Mechanism of action. CA catalyzes the formation of bicarbonate (HCO) in nonpig-
mented ciliary epithelium. Aqueous humor is crcalcd as sodiuin accompanies and
water follows the transport of bicarbonate into the posterior chamber of the eye due
to the created osmotic gradient. CAls obstruct the enzyme surface and block the cata-
lyst availability for the formation of bicarbonate.
Given systemically, a CAl must block >99% of CA to achieve significant de-
dration of CO2 is sufficient to maintain at least 40% of normal aqueous production.
D.
 Ocular therapeutic uses. Thesc ageris arc Io reduce IOP. They are the only systemic
agents for long-term medical management of glaucoma. Topical CAls are less ef-
fective (<50%) than systemic agents, but lack of side effects makes topical agents
preferable. IOP reduction in dogs is ~ 20%. Topical CAls are used prophylactically
and therapeutically. Both topical and systemic preparations are inadequate for acute
high-pressure, closed-angle glaucoma without first administering an osmotic diuretic
(mannitol). The effects of concomitant use of a topical and a systemic CAl are not
additive and therefore not warranted in glaucoma therapy.
E. Pharmacokinetics. Absorption through cornea is sufficient for topical preparations to
rcach concentrations comparable to systemic administration.
E.Administration. Injectable acetazolamide is for IV administration. Other systemic
preparations are given orally. Topicals are used twice daily for cat and three times
daily for dog and horse
Adverse effects. Systemic CAls create systemic acidosis and compensatory hyperpnea,
Gl disturbances, diuresis, and depression. Hypokalemia is rarely seen.
X
OSMOTIC DIURETICS (see Chapter 9 for more information). IV Mannitol and
oral glycerol are osmotic diuretics that lower lOP by reducing the volume of the
vitreous.
 MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASE (MMP) INHIBITORS
A.
Introduction. MMPs are zinc-dependent endopeptidases categorized according
to their structure and matrix specificity: collagenases (MMP1,8,13), gelatinases
(MMP2,9), stromelysins (MMP 3,10), elastase, and serine proteases of plasmin and
tissue plasminogen activator (TPA).
1. MMPs are present in norimal tissue and are important to maintenance and remod-
eling of damaged corneal cpithelial cells and stromal collagen, bul uprcgulated in
inflammation.
 2. MMPs are present in various cells: invading leukocytes, phagocytes, keratocytes,
and bacteria (Pseudomonas)
3. In the cornea, small amounts of proteinases are liberated in response to trauma to
liquefy and remove damaged collagen, facilitating epithelialization. In excess the
proteinases cleave the stromal collagen and create a rapidly progrcssive, expand-
ing ulcer.
B.
Agents for inhibiting MMPs. Topical sodium EDTA, calcium EDTA; acetylcysteine;
sodium citrate and sodium ascorbate; doxycycline and tetracycline administered sys-
temically accumulate in the cornea; betadine, serum.
340 |Chapter 14 XIV C
C.
Mechanism of action. Most inhibitors act by chelating calcium and/or zinc, which
prevents the activation of the latent MMP. α-2 macroglobulins in serum bind collage-
nasc and have been shown lo promote corncal healing.
D. Therapeutic uses. They are topically applied to inhibit rapidly progressive corneal
stromal necrosis secondary to bacterial or fungal infection of an ulcer.
 Adverse effects. None documented;: use of these agents is empirical and benefits are
inconsistent
TEAR SUBSTITUTES
A.
Introduction. The natural tearfilm is a three-layered mucin, water, lipid film that has
not been duplicated. The most common defect in the tearfilm is lack of the aqueous
portion but there may be a mucin deficiency as well. A chronic tearfilm deficiency
results in metaplastic changes in the corneal and conjunctival epithelium, leading to
scarring and vision loss. Tear replacement products are not pharmacologically active.
B.
Agents. Numerous products of varying viscosity and wetting qualities are available.
1. Methylcellulose, hydroxypropylmethlycellulose, carboxymethylcellulose.
2. Polyvinyl alcohol, polyvinyl pyrrolidone (mucomimetic).
 3. Hyaluronic acid (hyaluronate) for prolonged retention, improved tearfilm stabil-
ity.
4. Mineral oil, white petrolatum, lanolin for maximum retention.
C.Therapeutic advantages
1. Lubricale the surface of the eye for comfort.
2. Duplicate the optical characteristics of the tears.
 3. Better agents are hypotonic as tear tonicity increases with decreased aqueous tear
production.
 D. Adverse effects. None except for the inability to duplicate the trilaminar structure
of the natural tears.Preservatives may be irritating and many products are available
without preservatives.
SUGGESTED READING
Bentley E, Murphy C]. 2004. Topical therapeutic agents that modulate corneal wound healing. Vet Cfin
North Am Small Anim Pract 34:623-638
Brooks DE, COllivier F], 2004. Matrix metalloproteinase inhibition in corneal ulceration. Ver Chin Nort1
Am Small Anim Pract 34:611-622.
Ford MM. 2004. Antifungals and their use in vctcrinary ophthalmology. Vet Clin North Ami Smialf Anim
Pract 34:669-691,
Galle LE. 2004. Antiviral therapy for ocular viral disease. Vet Clin North Am Smaff Anim Pract 34:639-
653.
Giuliano EA. 2004. Nonsteroidal anti-inflamnatory drugs in veterinary ophthalmology. Vet Clin North;
Anr Small Anim Pract 34:707-723.
Grahn BH. Storcy [S. 2004. Lacrimostimulants and lacrimomimetics. Vet Clin North Ami Smaff Anin
Pract 34:739-753.
Holmberg Bl, Maggs Dj. 2004. The use of corticosteroicds to treat ocular inflammation. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 34:693-705.
http://www.drugs.com
Kern T]. 2004. Antibacterial agents for ocular therapeutics. Vet Clin North Am Smaff Anim Pract
34:655-668
Mauger TF, Craig EL. 1994. Haverer's (Ocular Pharrmacology. 6thi ed. St. Louis, MD: Mosby.
Ocular Pharmacology341
Moore CP. 2004. Immunomodulating agcnts. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:725-737.
Plumb DC. 2005. Vetcrinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Amcs, IA: Blackwcll Publishing.
Regnier A, Herring I. 2007. "Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics." In Veterinary Ophthalmology.
Edited by Gelatt KN. 4th ed., Pp. 271-354. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
   n   s   s o   sa 
Pract 34:801-823.
Willis AM. 2004. Ocular hypotensive drugs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:755-776.
342
Chapter14
STUDY
QuEStION S
DIRECTlONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in cach caso.
1. For a through examination of the lens.
(A) glaucoma.
relina, and optic nerve of a dog, which drug
(B) herpesvirus infection of the conjunctiva.
is most appropriate for dilating the pupil?
(C) a fungal keratitis.
{A)Atropine
(D) a chlamydial conjunctivitis.
(B)Pilocarpine
(C)Tropicamide
6. A small terrier dog has presenled with a
(U) Acetylcholine
posterior lens luxation and you have arranged
for referral to an ophthalmologist for removal
2. A dog has presented with classic signs of
of the lens next week. If you can keep the
lens in the posterior of the eye, there is less
glaucoma including a very high intraocular
pressure (IOP) of 65 mm Hg. You administer
chance that it will obstruct the pupil and
iV mannitol to lower the IOP and now must
cause glaucoma. Which of these drugs will
select medications to attempt to keep the
accomplish this?
pressure in a more normal range. Which of
(A)Atropine
these drugs would decrease the secretion of
(B)Dorzolamide
aqueous humor?
(C)
Pilocarpine
(A)Atropine
(D) Timolol
(B) Pilocarpine
(C) Demecarium
7. A horse is presented with a very painfu
(D) Dorzolamide
eye with a 1 cm diameter deep stromal
corneal ulcer with necrotic margins. Exam-
3. Which of these drugs would be most ef-
ination of a scraping from the ulcer reveals
fective in facilitating aqueous humor outflow?
numerous septate hyphae so you submit a
sample for culture, A logical initial topical
(A) Latanoprosl
treatment until cuture results are available
(B) Flurbiprofen
would include
(C) Pilocarpine
(D) Demecarium
(A) Nystatin, calcium EDTA, and atropine.
(B) Neomycin, bacitracin, gramicidin oint-
4. With signs of keratoconjunctivitis and a
ment, and atropine.
low Schirmer tear test bilaterally (2 mm in
(C) Natamycin, acotylcysteine, and atropine.
cach cyo, whero 15-25 mm is normal), what
(D) Itraconazole in DMSO), atropine, and
medication would you choose as your pri-
betadine.
mary agent to reverse the signs and symp-
toms of this problem?
 8. You apply a 2% solution of phenylephrine
to cach eye of a dog with unilateral Horner's
(A) Cyclosporine ointment
(B)Pilocarpine
syndrome (miosis, ptosis, enophthalmos, and 
 elevated nictitating membrane) and no other
(C) Prednisolone acetate
neurologic or oculars signs. The Horner's
(D) A lubricating ointment tear substitute
signs diminish significantly within 10 min-
utes. You correctly conclude that
5. You have adopled a cat from a humane
shelter and they have given you a small bot-
(A) this is a postganglionic. Horner's.
tle of idoxuridine to continue treating the
(B) this is a preganglionic Horner's.
eyes. They do not know what the problem is,
(C) this is a central Horner's.
but you know that this drug is used to treat
(D) this is not Horner's syndrome.
Ocular Pharmacology343
9. A horse with severe recurring anterior
triple antibiotic solution but the owner is dis-
uveitis should be given a systemic nons-
tressed about relieving pain in the cornea.
teroidal anti-inflammatory drug such as flu-
She inquires about using a topical anesthetic
nixin meglumine but other medications are
on the eye for a few days. Your response
equally important to use concurrently to sup-
should be:
press the intraocular inflammation and related
(A) Yes, of course, proparacaine will provide
signs and symptoms. In addition to atropine,
good anesthesia rapidly and for several
which of the following is most appropriate?
hours a day.
(A)  Prednisolone acetate drops and subcon-
(B) Yes, but the proparacaine will anes-
junctival triamcinolone.
thetize the cornea for only 20-30 min-
(B) Hydrocortisone acetate and triple antibi-
utes so it will have to be repeated fre-
otic drops, and dexamethasone subcon-
quently.
junctivally.
(C) We should not use a topical anesthetic
(C)Flurbiprofen drops and dexamethasone
 on a corneal ulcer because the dog may
drops.
rub at it and not feel the pain of further
(D) Dexamethasone drops and subconjuncti-
trauma to the eye and cause a worse
val gentamicin.
wound.
(D) Topical anesthetics will stop mitosis of
10. A dog with a shallow, epithelial erosion
epithelial cells and greatly delay the
of the cornea is to be treated with a topical
healing of the wound.
344
ANSWERS
AND
DEXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is C.
 6. Pilocarpine is a direct acting cholinergic
Tropicamide causes rapid mydriasis that
that will constrict the pupil to a diameter
returns 1o normal in 2-3 hours. Atropine
smaller than the lens thereby keeping it be-
takes too long to dilate a pupil and the my-
hind the iris where it is less likely to obstruct
driasis may last for 2-3 days. Acetylcholine
the circulation of aqueous until the tirme of
is much too short acting and is neutralized
surgery. It will "wear off" rapidly when with-
by esterases in the cornea. Pilocarpine is a
drawn so that the pupil can be dilated at tlhe
miotic.
time of surgery so that the lens can be re-
trieved from the posterior chamber. Atropine
2. The answer is D.
dilates the pupil and the lens may wedge in
Dorzolamide is the topical carbonic
the pupil, obstructing aqucous humor circu-
anhydrase inhibitor. Demecarium and pilo-
lation or permit the lens to enter the anterior
carpine facilitate outflow of aqueous humor.
chamber where it can rub on the interior of
Atropine would prcdispose to obstruction of
the cornea. Timolol, a nonselective β-blocker,
 Outflow when the pupil is dilated.
lowers IOP by reducing aqueous production.
It does cause some miosis though not reli-
3. The answer is A.
ably enough to keep the lens behind the iris.
Latanoprost is the most effective agent
The hypotensive effect may cause the IOP to
for facilitating outflow through increased
go too low as the inflammation secondary to
uveal scleral outflow that is not altered by a
the loose lens may already have decreased
narrow or closed angle. It only needs once 
aqueous production. Dorzolamide is a CAl
a day dosing. Pilocarpine and demecarium
that reduces aqueous production more than
facilitate outflow but pilocarpine must be
timolol.
used 3-4 times a day and often is irritating
to the eye. Demecarium is polent and
long acting, but is toxic (a cholinesterase
7. The answer is C.
inhibitor) and can only be procured from one
Natamycin, acetylcysteine, and atropine.
Natamycin is the only antifungal drug
compounding pharmacy.
approved for use on the eye and the only
4. The answer is A.
one commercially available, although azoles
can be compounded for topical use. This
Cyc:losporine ointment will reverse in-
flammatory changes of the immune-mediated
ulcer has characteristics strongly suggestive of
lacrimal adenitis, the most likely cause for
matrix metalloproteinase overactivity that is
causing corncal "melting" (necrosis). Acetyl-
the loss of tear secretion; it will help reverse
the corneal changes resulting from the lack of
Cysteine may be helpful, although betadine
is MMP inhibiting as well as fungicidal.
tears, and it is lacrimomimetic.
Pilocarpine topically is a poor lac-
Atropine will benefit the secondary iritis
rimominetic but does not affect inflamma-
(sphincter spasm) that accompanies corneal
 trauma. lraconazole is a good choice but
tion on the cornea, conjunctiva, or in the
IMSO is an unnecessary irritant on the
lacrimal gland. Prednisolone will help to di-
Iminish inflaimimatory changes on the cornea
open ulcer.
but will not affect tear production. In the
absence of normal tears there are no antibac-
 8. The answer is A.
terial components such as lysozyime that are
 This is a postganglionic Horner's syn-
 normally present and there imay be oppor-
drome with obvious improvement of signs
tunistic bacterial overgrowth. A lubricating
within a short time—10 minutes—-indicating
ointinent alone is inadequate for all aspects
denervation supersensitivity at the terminal 
of the problem, It would need to be applied
ending of the adrenergic nerve(s).
several times a day.
5. The answer is B.
9. The answer is A.
Conjunctivitis and keratitis caused by
Prednisolone acclate drops topically
herpesvirus. None of the other conditions are
will penetrate the intact cornea effectively
treatable with idoxuridine.
and the subconjunctival triamcinolone fa
Ocular Pharmacology 345
suspension) will provide a slow release
day is seldom achieved, even with lavage
steroid that will be absorbed into the eye
tubes.
for as much as 7-10 days. Dexamethasone
is equal to prednisolone topically but the
10. The answer is D.
subconjunctival depot lasts only 24 hours.
Topical anesthetics must not be used on
Hydrocortisone is insufficiently potent.
corneal wounds as they are toxic to epithelial
Antibiotics are not indicated. Flurbiprofen, a
cells and will inhibit mitosis. It is true that a
topical NSAID, is good but very expensive
dog may rub at an anesthetized cornea and
and must be applied at least 4 times a
further damage the cornea without realizing
day. With horses owner compliance with
the damage being done. Topical anesthetics
treatment schedules more than 2-3 times a
 are for diagnostic purposes, not treatment.
This page intentionally left blank
ter
15
Antimicrobial Drugs
Franklin A. Ahrens and Richard J. Martin
INTRODUCTION
A.
Selection of an antimicrobial drug. Antimicrobial therapy is based upon the selcctivo
toxicity of the drug ior invading organisms rather than mammalian cells. I1 is important
to select an agent to which the organism is sensitive and to maintain the effective tis-
sue concentrations (above the minimal inhibitory concentration or MlC) until the infec-
measured MlC is less than the concentration known as the breakpoint concentration.
Sensitivity tests using either sensitivity disks or sensititer imicro-well plates can be used
to estimate the MlC of specific bacteria and then tables are consulted to see if the MlC
is below the breakpoint. If the MlC is below the breakpoint, it is predicted that the mi-
crohe will he Susceptible (S) to therapy; if it is equal to the breakpoint, it is predicted
that the microbe will be Intermediate (l)-where high therapeutic: doses may work; if
the MIC is above the breakpoint, it is predicted that the microbe will be Resistant (R).
The breakpoint concentrations have been determined by groups like the Clinical and
Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSl) following review of clinical and laboratory data.
The pharimacokinetic data on data labels of more recently introduced antimicrobials
contain breakpoint inforimation. It is pointed out that the sensitivity tests and break-
points are useful indicators for the clinical outcome, but in the whole animal, addi-
tional faciors like cdrug binding, drug distribution, and an active immune system affect
the outcome so that clinical experience is still essential.
 Extra-label use of specific antimicrobial drugs in food animals is prohibited for
reasons of safety or limitation of resistance spread. These drugs include the fluoro-
quinolones, chloramphenicol, nitroimidazoles, furazolidone, nitrofurazone and other
nitrofurans, and sulfonamide drugs in lactating dairy cattle (except approved use of
sufadimethoxine, glycopeptides, and vancomycin).
There are six selection questions that are helpful to use routinely to aid selection:
1. Is an antimicrobial agent required—-is there an infection that will respond to your
treatment? Avoid: "Just in case."
2. Where is the infection (which organ/tissue)what are the access problems to be
overcome?
 3. Which pathogen(s) are usually found at the location of the infection?
4.
Which antimicrobial agent has the necessary pharmacokinetic properties to get to
the location and also will get there at a concentration above the MlC so that the
MIC is below the breakpoint?
 5. What dose and route is necessary to achieve the desired effect?
6. How long should the treatment be for?
There are 4 additional factors to help the selection:
1. A bactericidal compound is preferable to a bacteriostatic compound.
2. Toxicity and cost limit the selection of an antimicrobial drug.
3. In food-producing animals, residues in milk and meat requiring the need for with-
drawal times before slaughter (preslaughter withdrawal times) are very important
and limit the use of specific antimicrobial drugs. Animals must not be slaughtered
for meat or their milk used within the preslaughter period (see appendix for the
withdrawal period for each drug).
 4. It should be appreciated that the plasma concentration governs the dose intervals
on a treatment regimen but it is the tissue residence times that govern the pres-
laughter withdrawal times in production animals.
347
348Chapter 15 I B
B.
 Resistance to antimicrobials
1. Mechanisms by which bacteria manifest resistance:
a. Organisms may produce enzymes, constitutive or induciblc, which inactivate.
the drug.
b. The permeability to or uptake of the drug by organisms may be decreased or
transport out of the cell may be increased.
C.
Alteration of the drug receptor or binding site may result in reduced drug affin-
ity at target loci.
d. The organism may develop alternate metabolic or synthetic pathways to bypass
or repair the effcts of the antimicrobial.
2. Mechanisms by which bacteria develop resistance
a. Mutation. Within a large population of bacteria, chromosomal mutations may
Occur, which confer resistance either slowly, in a step-wise fashion with each
succeeding generation of the mutant more resistant or rapidly, in a single step in
which the bacterium is resistant after the initial mutation. Mutation is a random
cvent, Antirnicrobials do not inducc mutations but may cxert a sclccting out of
resistant strains by suppression of susceptible bacleria.
b. Conjugation. Ceriain Gram(-) bacteria undergo conjugation, a lype of reproduc-
tion in which genetic material is transferred from cell to cell via a pilus that is
chcoded by a resistance transfer factor (RTF) on a plasmid. Resistance factors (R-
factors) from plasmid DNA and/or chromosomal DNA may cncode for resistancc
to multiple drugs and may be rapidly transferrcd to the bacterial population.
This is termed infectious drug resistance or transferable drug resistance and has
been observed clinically in enteric infections with Salmonelfa spp., Shigella spp.,
and Escherichia coli.
c. Transduction. The process of transference of drug resistant genes by bacterio-
phagc is tcrmcd transduction. It may be important in the devclopmcnt of resis-
tant strains of Staphylococcus aurcus.
d. Transformation. Bacteria may incorporate DNA encoding for drug resistance
from their environment after its secretion or release by resistant organisms. Ac-
quisition of resistance by this mechanism is relatively infrequent.
SULFONAMIDES
A.
Chemistry. The sulfonamides are derivatives of p-aminobenzene sulfonic acid (Figure
15-1) and are structurally similar lo p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), an intermediate in
bacterial synthesis of folic acid. They behave as weak organic acids which are poorly
water soluble unless prepared as sodium salts. Concentrated solutions of the sodium
salts of most sulfonamides are very alkaline and may be corrosive. The solubility of a
sulfonamide is not influenced by the prcsence of othcr sulfonamides in the solution.
This is tcrmcd the law of indcpendent solubility and is the primary rcason for the usc
of sulfonamide mixtures in order to increase the combined total sulfonamide concen-
tration to prevent renal precipitation and thus reduce toxicity.
B.
 Mechanism of action. Sulfonamides competitively inhibit dihydropteroate synthase, the
cnzyme which catalyzes the incorporation of PABA into dihydrofolic acid (Figure 15-
2). Folic acid is required for purine and DNA synthesis and thus bacterial growth is
inhibited. Mammalian cells and bacteria thal use preformed folic acid are not affiecled.
Sulfonamides are broad spectrum (including protozoa) and bacteriostatic.
C.
 Therapeutic uses. Sulfonamides were widely used in the prevention and treatment of
local and systemic infections in all species but now resistance is common. Examples of
sulfonamides used in veterinary medicine include the following:
Antimicrohial Drugs 349
(4)
NH2
FIGURE 15-1. General structure of the sulfonamicles. The p-amino group at position
4 must be free for antimicrobial activity to occur. Substitution with a heterocyclic ring
SO2
(e.g, thiazole, pyrimidine, pyridine) at the R position on position 1 distinguishes the 
various sulfonamides. Replacemenl oi the hydrogen with sodium at posilion 1 greally
H-N-R
increases the water solubility of the sulfonamide. (Adapted froin Figure 11-1, NVMS
(1)
Pharmacology. by Ahrens, F. A. 1996.)
1. Sulfamethazine is used in cattle, sheep, and swine. It is slowly excreted and thera-
peutic levels are maintained in plasma for 24 hours with a single dosc.
2.
 Sulfadimethoxine is a long-acting sulfonamide. It is more soluble and less toxic
than sulfamethazine. The plasma ty, is 10-15 hours.
3. Sulfachlorpyridazine is a rapidly absorbed and rapidly excreted sulfonamide used
 orally in calves under 1 month of age and in swine for the treatment of respira-
tory and enteric infections, especially colibacillosis. Peak levels occur in 1-2 hours
in nonruminants and in preruminant calves. The plasma ty, is 1.2 hours.
4. Sulfamethoxazole is used to treat urinary tract infections in small animals. It is
rapidly excreled and very soluble. Thus high concentrations may be allained in
urine with minimal danger of renal crystalluria.
 5. Sulfacetamide is the only sulfonamide that can be prepared as the sodium salt at
neutral pH and thus can be used in ophthalmic preparations.
6.
 Sulfasalazine is an "enteric" sulfonamide employed in the therapy of colitis and
inflammatory bowel disease in dogs and cats. It consists of a molecule of sulfapyri-
dine linked to a molecule of 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) by a diazo bond. This
prevents absorption in the small intestine and allows drug transit to the large bowel
where it is clcaved by gut bacteria to sulfapyridine and 5-ASA. These have antibac-
terial and anti-inflammatory aclions, respectively.
 7. Other sulfonamides used in veterinary medicine are sulfathiazole and sulfaquinoxa-
linc.
Dihydropteroate
DHFA
synthetase
reductase
PABA
Dihydrofolic
Tetrahydrofolic
Purines -
→DNA
←
acid
+
acid
Inhibited by
Inhibited by
sulfonamides
trimethoprim &
ormetoprim
FIGURE 15-2. Mechanism of action of sulfonamides. Sulfonamides block dihydrofolic acid synthe-
sis by competing with p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) for binding sites on dihydropteroatc synthctase.
Dihydroiolic acid is necessary for the synthesis of tetrahydrofolic acid, and ultimately, purines and
DNA. Trimethoprim and ormetoprim inhibit dihydrofolic acid (IDHrA) reductase, which is necessary for
tetrahydrofolic acid synthesis. Therefore, potentiated sulfonamides (ie., those comkined with trimetho-
prim or ormetoprim! block the second step of protein synthesis.
350Chapter 15 I1 C
8. Potentiated sulfonamides are fixed combinations of a sulfonamide with trimetho-
prim or ormetoprim, This results in a synergistic action via sequential blockade of
folate synthesis (Figure 15-2).
a. Trimethoprim and ormetoprim inhibit dihydrofolate reductase in bacteria (but not
mammalian cells) and thus block the formation of tetrahydrofolic acid esscntial
for purine and DNA synthesis.
b. Potentiated sulfonamides have a broader spectrum of action and a reduced rate
of development of bacterial resistance.
c. Preparations include sulfadiazine plus trimethoprim, sulfamethoxazole plus
trimethoprim, and sulfadimethoxine plus ormetoprim. They are used in the treat-
ment of susceptible infections in all species.
d. Trimethoprim and ormetoprim are organic bases in contrast to the organic acid
nature of the sulfonamides. They accumulate by ion-trapping in acidic envi-
ronments and will concentrate differently in the tissues to the sulfonamides.
Trimethoprim plasma tiy, is 2-3 hours in most species.
D.Pharmacokinetics
1. Sulfonamides are well absorbed orally and widely distributed to tissues. Transcellu-
lar fluid concentrations are 80% of plasma concentration. Binding to plasma albu-
min varies with each sulfonamide but is generally 50-75%.
2. Metabolism by acetylation at N4 and glucuronide conjugation occurs in most
species. Acetylation does not occur in the dog. Oxidation of the benzene and het-
extent of metabolism varies with the sulfonamide and the animal species.
 3. Renal cxcretion of unchanged drug and metabolites is via glomerular filtration, ac-
tive secretion, and passive tubular reabsorption. Reabsorption is pH-pKa dependent.
E. Administration. Sulfonamides and potentiated sulfonamides can be administered orally
 or by injection, depending on species. Frequency of dosing varies with the individual
sulfonamides.
F. Bacterial resistance. Bacleria develop resistance by mechanisms, which include in-
creased PABA production, decreased binding of sulfonamide to dihydropteroate syn-
thase, and bacterial metabolism of sulfonamide. Bacteria which are resistant to one
sulfonamide are resistant to all. Resistance to the potentiated sulfonamide does occur
but is less common than to the sulfonamide. The spectrum of action of the potentiated
sulfonamides is broader and the combination is considered bactericidal rather than
bacteriostatic.
G.
Adverse effects
1. Renal crystalluria due to precipitation of sulfonamides in neutral or acidic urine
may occur with large or prolonged doses or inadequate water intake, especially
with the older, less soluble sulfonamides such as sulfathiazole. Therapeutic regi-
mens generally do nol exlend beyond 5 days and renal crystalluria is rare.
 2. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCs) may be observed in dogs treated with sulfon-
amides, such as sulfadiazine, which contain the pyrimidine nucleus. The mecha-
nism of the toxic effect on lacrimal acinar cells is unknown,
3. Hypoprothrombinemia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia occur rarely and are prob-
ably immune-mediated reactions. Sulfonamides should not be used in animals with
preexisting bleeding disorders.
FLUOROQUINOLONES
A
Chemistry. The fluoroquinolones consist of a quinoline ring to which is attached a
carboxyl group, fluorine atom, and piperazine ring. They are weak acids and are
lipophilic. Water-soluble salts are used in parenteral preparations.
Antimicrobial Drugs 351
Cell wall synthesis
DNAgyrase
vancomrycin
bacitracin
s
penicillins
novobiocin
DNAreplication
cephalosporins
metronidazole
monobactams
nitrofurans
carbapenems
Folic acid
THFA
DNA
metabolism
1
trimethoprim
mRNA
DNA-directed
ormetoprim
RNApolmerase
DHFA
Rib
rifampin
Sulfonamides
Proteinsynthesis
(50s inhibitors)
macrolides
chloramphenicol,
florfenicol
lincosamides
tiamulin
streptogramins
PABA
Cell membrane
Proteinsynthesis
polymixins
1 (30s inhibitors)
tetracyclines
aminoglycosides
aminocyclitols
FIGURE 15-3. Mechanisms of action of antibacterial drugs. The five gencral mechanisms are (1) inhibit
protein synthesis, and (5) modify energy metabolism in the cytoplasm (at folate cycle). (Modified irom
Figure 46.2, Hurman Pharmacofogy, 2nd ed., by Brody, I. M., Larner, I., Minneman, K. P., and Neu, H.
C.1994.)
B
 Mechanism of action. The fluoroquinolones inhibit bacterial DNA gyrase, an en-
7yme which controls DNA supercoiling as the replicating strands separate. Inhibilion
of gyrase results in degradation of chromosomal DNA at the replicating fork. Fluoro-
quinolones are broad spectrum and bactericidal. Anaerobes tend to be resistant (Figure
15-3).
Therapeutic uses
1. Enrofloxacin is uscd in the treatment of dermal, respiratory, and urinary tract infec-
tions fincluding prostatitis) in dogs, cats, and birds and in respiratory infections in 
cattle.
 2. Danofloxacin is used for the treatment of bovine respiratory infeclions including
Mannheimia species.
3. Difloxacin is used for treatment of dermal, respiratory, and urinary tract infections
in dogs.
4. Orbifloxacin and Marboiloxacin are used for the treatment of dermal, respiratory,
and urinary tract infections of dogs and cats. Orbifloxacin is used for susceptible
Gram(-) infections in horses.
5. Extralabel use of fluoroquinolones in food animals is prohibited.
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. Oral absorption of the fluoroquinolones is rapid with peak plasma
concentrations at 1 hour in dogs. Distribution is wide and includes the CNS, bone,
metabolites are excreled in urine and bile. Renal tubular active secrelion rcsulls in
pue shop ui sinol se s! uexoona joy vi eseid aul suoeuauos Aeuun yay
FlGURE 15-4. General structure of penicillins.
H
Suhstituents at R distinguish the various peni-
cillins. (1) Thiazolicdone ring. (2) β-Lactam ring
(3) Site of action of β-laclanases (penicilli-
nases). (4) Sitc of amidasc cleavage to yield
6-aminopenicillanic acid (6-APA) nucleus for
semisynthetic penicillins. (5) site of salt forma-
COOH
tion (e.g, sodium. procaine). (Adapted from Fig-
Ure 11-3, NVMS Pharmacology, by Ahrens, F. A,
H
1996).
3
5
6 hours in cats and horscs. The climination ly, for difloxacin and marbofloxacin is 9-
12 hours in dog and cats and for orbifloxacin is 6 hours in dogs and cats and 9 hours
in horses.
E.
Administration. Fluoroquinolines are administered orally or parenterally once or twice
a day in all species. Enrofloxacin is administered SC once a day for treatiment of respi-
ratory infections in cattle.
E.
 Resistance. Development of bacterial resistance is relatively rare. Long periods of sub-
thcrapcutic levcls may allow the growth of mutants in which fluoroquinolones are nol
bound to DNA gyrase.
G
Adverse effects. Toxicity associated with fluoroquinolones is erosion of articular car-
tilage in young dogs and foals, particularly, if they are used at high doses for longer
than 14 days in rapid growth phase. Enrofloxacin has also been reported to produce
seizures in dogs on phenobarbital for cpilepsy; other quinolones cvoke hcadaches in
humans. Retinal degeneration has been reported due to acute and diffuse retinal dam-
age in cats.
PENICILLINS
Chemistry. The structure of penicillins includes a (3-lactam ring and a thiazolidone
ring (Figure 15-4). Cleavage of the β-lactam ring destroys antibiotic activity. Amidase
cleavage of the amide bond side chain yields the 6-amino-penicillanic acid (6-APA)
nucleus used in producing semisynthetic penicillins. The carboxyl group attached to
the thiazolidone ring is the site of salt formation (sodium, potassium, procaine, etc.!
which stabilizes the penicillins and affects solubility and absorption rates.
Mechanism of action. Penicillins bind to and inhibit the transpeptidase involved in the
cross-linking of the bacterial cell wall, the third and final step in cell-wall synthesis
(Figure 15-3). The wcakened cell wall ruptures, resulting in lysis and cell death. Peni-
cillins also inhibit other peptidases (penicillin-binding proteins) involved in cell wall
synthesis and block the inhibition of autolysins. Rapidly growing bacteria are most sus-
ceptible to the bactericidal efiecl of penicillin. The penicillins are prirmarily effective
 are also effective against some Gram(-) pathogens.
Therapeutic uses
1. Natural penicillins
a. Penicillin G (benzylpenicillin) is used in all species for the treatment of infec-
tions caused by Graim(+), nonpenicillinase producing pathogens. It is the most 
potent penicillin for these organisms.
b. Penicillin V now used infrequently for long-term oral therapy of Gram(+) hacte-
rial infections in dogs, cats, and horses.
2. Penicillinase-resistant penicillins include methicillin, oxacillin, and cloxacillin. Their
use is suited for severe staphylococcal infections caused by β-lactamase-producing
AntinicrolialDrugs353
organisms (some bovine imastitis) but they are less effective against Streptococcus
than the natural penic:illins.
 3. Broad-spectrum penicillins
a. Aminopenicillins. Ampicillin and amoxicillin are active against imany Gram(-)
aerobes (E. coli, Proteus, Haermophilus spp.) as well as Gram(+) pathogens. They
are used in all species for the treatment of susceptible infections. They are acid-
stable but are not penicillinase stable. Gl absorption of amoxicillin is better than
ampicillin.
b. Carbenicillin and ticarcillin are carboxypenicillins that have antipseudomonal
actions when used alone or in combination with or gentamicin or tobramycin.
They are useful for ear and skin infections in dogs caused by Pseudomonas
spp.
c. Piperacillin is an ureidopenicillin that has an extended Gram(-) spectrum in-
cluding Pseudoimonas, Enterobacter, and Klebsiefla spp. Cost limits its use to the
trealment of severe Gram(-) bacterial infections in dogs and cals.
4. Potentiated penicillins. Clavulanic. acid has minimal antibacterial action but it in-
hibits many of the β-lactamases produced by penicillin-resistant organisms. It is
combined with amoxicillin or ticarcillin in commercial preparations. Sulbactam has
an action similar to clavulanic acid and is combined with ampicillin, The poten-
tiated penicillins are used in small animals for extended spectrum antimicrobial
action. Tazobactam is another β-lactamase inhibitor.
D.
Pharmacokinetics. Many penicillins are broken down by gastric HCl and are thus
ble penicillins are well absorbed orally. These include penicillin V, ampicillin, amox-
icillin, oxacillin, cloxacillin, and the indanyl salt of carbenicillin. The distributions ot
penicillins are confined mostly to the extracellular spaces occur, but clinically effec-
tive concentrations in most tissues except for the CNs, bones, prostate, and eye. More
than 9o% of an administered dose is excreted unchanged in the urine by gloimerul-
lar filtration and active tubular secretion. The remainder is metabolized by the liver
hypersensitivity.
E.
Administration. Penicillins are generally administered IM. The acid-stable penicillins
are administered orally 2-3 times a day. Procaine penicillin G is slowly absorbed from
IM sites and may provide therapeutic levels for 24 hours with a single dose. Benza-
thine penicillin G is even more slowly absorbed over 48-72 hours but blood levels
atlained are relatively low. Sodium or polassium salts of penicillin G may be adminis-
tered IV or IM every 4-6 hours.
F.
Resistance. Inactivation of penicillins by bacteria-producing penicillinases (β-
lactamases) is the most common mechanisins of resistance. Failure of the drug to bind
G.
Adverse effects. Allergic reactions to penicillin may occur in animals, cspecially cattle.
Signs include skin eruptions, angioedema, and anaphylaxis. Procaine salts of peni-
cillin should not be used in birds, snakes, turtles, guinea pigs, or chinchillas because
these species are sensitive to procaine. Procaine penicillin G should not be used in
race horses 30 days before racing. Release of procaine due to high levels of plasma es-
terases in horses may produce CNS effects. Hyperkalemia and cardiac arrhythimias may
result from IV administration of potassium penicillin in all species.
CEPHALOSPORINS
Chemistry. Cephalosporins are β-lactam antibiotics, which have a 7-amino-
cephalosporanic acid nucleus analogous to the 6-APA nucleus of penicillins. They are
weak acids and are administered as the sodium salt, monohydrate, or free base.
354Chupter 15 V B
B.
 Mechanism of action. Cephalosporins inhibit the third stage of bacterial cell wall
synthesis—the cross-linking of the peptidoglycan chain, by the same mechanism as
the penicillins (Figure 15-3). Cephalosporins are bactericidal.
C.
Therapeutic uses. Cephalosporins may be used in pcnicillin-inlolerant patients, but this 
should be done with caution since cross-rcactivily can occur.
1. First generation cephalosporins include cephalexin (oral), cefadroxil (oral),
cephapirin (parenteral), and cephalothin (parenteral). They are effective against
Gram(+) aerobes. Cephalosporins are frequently employed for antibiotic pro-
phylaxis because of their ability to penetrate tissues. They are a first alter-
nate to penicillins in the treatment of many infections caused by Gram(+)
pathogens.
2.
Second-generation cephalosporins include cefaclor (oral) and cefoxitin (parenteral).
Their antibacterial spectrum is broader than that of first-generation cephalosporins
and includes some Gram(-) pathogens. They are not widely used in veterinary
medicine.
3. Third-generation cephalosporins include ceftiofur, cefoperazone, cefotaxime, ce-
fixime, and cefpodoxime (Simplicers). They have an extended spectrum of action
against Gram(-) organisms, are resistant to β-lactamases cephalosporinases), and
penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Ceftiofur is used in the treatment of respiratory
discase in cattle, horses, shccp, and swine following IM injection and for intramam-
mary treatment of mastitis in cattle. It is also used for treating urinary tract infec-
tions and soft tissue infections in dogs and cats. Cefoperazone is used in dogs to
treat soft tissue infections and Gram(-) bacteremia. Cefotaxime is used in dogs, cats,
and foals to treat Gram(-) sepsis, soft tissue infections meningitis, and CNs infec-
tions. Cefpodoxime proxelil is the prodrug markeled for use in the trcalment of skin
infections in dogs and cats. Cefixime is used in the treatment of urinary tract infec-
tions and respiratory infections in dogs and cats and for bacterial endocarditis in
dogs.
4. Fourth-Generation cephalosporins include cefepime and cefquinone and have
more activity against bacteria, particularly Pseudomonas, showing resistance to
other cephalosporins, Some manufacturers have implied incorrecily that their third-
 generalion cephalosporins are fourth generation.
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. Most cephalosporins are unstable in gastric acid and must be given
parenterally. Cephalexin and cefadroxil, cefachlor, and cefixime are acid stable and
are well absorbed orally. Cephalosporins are distributed in the extracellular fluid
and penetrate body tissues except the CSF. Metabolism is minimal except for a few
ccphalosporins such as ccphalothin, which is dcacclylatced by the livcr. The plasma
fy, for most cephalosporins is 1-2 hours. The ty, for cefixime in dogs is 7 hours. The
fur tissue concentration fall in food animals below tolerance levels in liver and kidney
after 4 days. Renal excretion is by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion like
penicillins.
E.
Administration. The acid-stable cephalosporins (cephalexin, cefadroxil, cefachlor,
and cefixime) are administered orally every 8-12 hours in dogs and cats. Parenta
cephalosporins are administered IM, IV, or SC every 8-12 hours in all species. An ex-
 ception is ceftiofur, which is administered once a day in cattle, horses, sheep, dogs.
and cats.
F.
 Resistance. Bacterial β-lactamase production may confer resistance, although
cephalosporins tend to retain efficacy in contrast to the penicillins.
Adverse effects. Side effects are rare and cephaolsporins are considered to be among
G.
the safest antimicrobials in use. Prolonged treatment or high doses may produce
hemopoietic effects with anemia and bone marrow depression. Hypersensitivity and
allergic reactions may occur.
Antinicrobial Drugs355
Vl.
CARBAPENEMS
A.
Chemistry. Carbapenems are β-lactams with a structure similar to penicillin but the -S-
in the thiazolidine is replaced by a methyl group.
B.
Mechanism of action is similar to other β-lactam antimicrobial drugs hut the car-
bapenems bind to more penicillin-binding proteins so that they have a very broad
spectrum of action, one of the widest spectrum antimicrobials (Figure 15-3).
C.
Therapeutic uses. The carbapenems are used to treat very serious infections like peri-
tonitis associated with ruptured Gl tract or intestinal spillage during surgery. They are
effective againsl Gram(+) and Gram(-) aerobic and anaerobic bacteria including Pscu-
domonas and Enterobacteriaciae.
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. Oral administration is not possible because of acid hydrolysis and
 poor absorption. Imipenem is given IV over a period of 15-30 minutes and elimi-
nation in humans is governed by a ty, of 2 hours where 75% is eliminaled by renal
filtration and metabolism in the renal tubules. No information on fy. is available for
animals. Imipenem undergoes extensive metabolism by the kidney dehydropeptidase
(DHP-1) in the brush border of the proximal tubule. The metabolite is nephrotoxic and
exhibits antimicrobial action in the urine. Imepenem is used with a DHP-1 inhibitor.
cilastatin, to decrease toxicity and increase elimination ty.. Meropenem is a more re-
cent derivative that is more DtiP-1 stable that does not need cilastatin to inhibit kid-
ney mctabolism.
Adverse effects. Side effects may include anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea; CNS tox-
icity including seizures and tremors; and hypersensitivity reactions including pruritis,
fever, and rarely, anaphylaxis.
MONOBACTAMS
A.
Chemistry. Monobactams have a β-lactam ring but the adjacent thiazolidine ring has
been replaced.
B.
 Mechanism of action. Aztreonem binds to penicillin binding proteins present in.
Gram(-) aerobic bacteria and disrupt cell wall synthesis (Figure 15-3). It is stable to
most β-lactamases.
C.
 Therapeutic uses. Aztreonem is used in humans to replace aminoglycosides, which are
more toxic when uscd with macrolides and lincosamides. It may be used as a reserve
antibiotic in veterinary medicine to treat severe Gram(-) infections.
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. When given parenterally, aztreonem has a similar distribution to
penicillin G. Penetration of CSF is good. It is excreted by the kidneys with an elimina-
tion ty, of 1.2 hours in humans. No other information is available for animals.
E.
 Adverse effects. Hypersensitivity reactions may occur but cross-allergy with penicillins
or cephalosporins has not been observed.
AMINOGLYCOSIDES
Chemistry. Aminoglycosides consist of two or three amino sugars joined to a hexose
A.
(aminocyclitol) by glycosidic bonds. Numerous amino groups contribute to their very
polar and basic character. Sulfate salts are water soluble.
356Chaster 15 Vill β
B.
Mechanism of action. The aminoglycosides bind to the 30s ribosomal fragment and
inhibit the rate of protein synthesis and the fidelity of mRNA translation whicl re-
sults in the synthesis of abnormal proteins (Figure 15-3). Their uptake by bacteria 
includes an energy-dependent step (EDP,), which is oxygen linked and is inhibited
against Gram(-) aerobes and are synergistic with β-lactams against many Gram(+)
pathogens.
C.
Therapeutic uses. The aminoglycosides are uscd in the treatment oi Gram(-) infec-
tions in all species.
1. Streptomycin and dihydrostreptomycin are the oldest members of this class of
antibiotics. Their use has declined with the advent of broader spectrum aminogly-
cosides such as gentamicin and amikacin.
2. Neomycin is used orally for the treatment of enteric. infections and topically for
treating skin, ear, and eye infections.
3. Gentamicin and amikacin are expanded spectrum aminoglycosides with activily
against Pseudomonas, Proteus, Sfaphylococcus, antd Corynebacterium spp., as well
infections of the skin, respiratory tract, ear, eye, urinary tract, and septicemia. To-
bramycin is similar to gentamicin but has more potent antipseudomonal activity
and reduced nephrotoxicity.
4. Kanamycin has an antimicrobial spectrum similar to gentamicin except it is not
elftective against Pseudomonas spp. It is currently used in veterinary medicine only
as an oral preparation combined with bismuth subcarbonate and aluminum mag-
nesium silicate for the treatment of bacterial enteritis in dogs and for symptomatic
relief of the associated diarrhea.
D.
Pharmacokinetics. Aminoglycosides are not absorbed from the Gl tract because of
their high polar nature. They are distributed to the extracellular iluid and to transcel-
lular iluids such as pleural and peritoneal fluids. Distribution is limited with penetra-
tion of the CNs or ocular tissue being minimal. Aminoglycosides tend to accumulate
in the renal cortex and otic endolymph, which predisposes these tissues to their tox-
icity. They are excreted unchanged in the urine by glomerular filtration. The plasma
ty. is 1-3 hours for most species. The prolonged residues values in kidney severely
limits the use of aminoglycosides in production animals to label use only.
E,
 Administration. Aminoglycosides are administered IM or SC for systemic: infections.
Because the bactericidal effects of aminoglycosides are concentration-dependent for
systemic infections, some clinicians advocate a high dose once daily (pulse therapy.
rather than twice daily) to allow full clearance to reduce renal and coxhlear toxicity.
E.
Resistance. Inactivation of aminoglycosides by bacterial enzymes is the most com-
mon iorm of resistanrce. The numerous amino and hydroxyl side groups are sites of
attack by acetylases, phosphorylases, and adenylases. Resistance may be plasmid-
mediated and develop quickly. Amikacin is more resistant to enzymatic degradation
than other members oi this class.
G.
Adverse effects
1. The aminoglycosides are relatively more toxic than other classes of antimicro-
bials. Toxicity is reversible if the treatment is stopped early. Dosage regimens must
be adjusted in animals with decreased renal function and they should not be used
2. Ototoxicity is due to progressive damage to cochlear sensory cells and/or vestibu-
lar cells of the inner ear resulting in deafness and ataxia, respectively.
3. Nephrotoxicity is due to the damage of the membranes of proximal tubular cells
resulting in a loss of brush border enzymes, impaired absorption, proteinuria, and 
decreascd glomerular filtration rate.
Antimicrobial Drugs357
4. Neuromuscular blockade is a relatively rare adverse effect of aminoglycosides. It
is caused by prejunctional blockade of acetylcholine (ACh) release and decreased
postsynaptic scnsitivity to ACh. Muscle paralysis and apnea are treated with cal-
cium gluconate.
TETRACYCLINES
Chemistry. The tetracyclines are polycyclic compounds that are amphoteric and that
A.
fluoresce when exposed to ultraviolet light. Most are prepared as the hydrochloride
salt. They form insoluble chelates with cations such as Ca?', Mg2' , Fe3t, and Al31.
They accumulate in growing teeth and bones.
B.
Mechanism of action. Tetracyclines reversibly inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by
binding to the 30S ribosome and preventing attachmenl of aminoacyl tRNA lo the
mRNA-ribosome complex (Figure 15-3). They block the addition of amino acids to
the growing peptide chain. They are bacteriostatic and broad spectrum. Their antimi-
crobial spcctrum includes Gram(+) and Gram(-) acrobes and anaerobes, Rickettsiae,
Spirochctes, Chlamydiac, Mycoplasina, and somc protozoans such as Anaplasma spp.
and Haemobartonella spp.
C.Therapeutic uses
1. Large animals. Tetracyclinc, chlortetracycline, and oxytetracycline arc uscd in thc
treatment of local and systemic bacterial, chlamydial, rickeltsial, and protozoal in-
fections in catle, sheep, horses, and swine and as feed additive/growth promoters
in cattle and swine.
2. Small animals. Doxycycline, minocycline, and tetracycline are used in the treatment 
of respiratory and urinary tract infections in dogs and cats and as specific therapy
for Borrelia (Lyme disease), Brucella, Haemobartonella, and Ehrlichia spp. infec.
tions. They are also effective in the treatment of psittacosis in birds.
D.
 Pharmacokinetics. Oral absorption of tetracyclines ranges from 60-90% of the ad-
ministered dose except for chlorletracycline, which is only 35% absorbed. Divalent
or trivalent cations impair absorption and thus milk, antacids, or iron salts should be
avoided 3 hours before and after oral administration. Distribution is wide and includes
all tissucs cxccpt thosc of thc CNs. Doxycycline and minocycline are more lipid sol-
uble than tetracycline, chlortetracycline, or oxytetracycline and penetrate the CNS,
eye, and prostate at therapeutic concentrations. Mctabolism is iminimal in domestic.
animals, except for minocycline, which is extensively melabolized by the liver. Renal
excretion by glomerular filtration is the major roule of elimination for most letracy-
clines, but srmall amounts are excreted into feces via bile and/or diffusion from the
blood into the intestine. Doxycycline is unique in that intestinal excretion is the major
route of elimination (75%). The plasma ty, ranges from 6-12 hours for most tetracy-
clines. A recent derivative of the glycylcyclines, tigecycline, has been developed that
has an effect against methicillin-resistant S. auureus (MRSA).
 Administration. Tetracyclines arc administered orally or IV cvery 8-12 hours. IM in-
E.
jections produce pain, irritation, and slerile abscesses unless special buffered solutions
are used. Oral therapeutic doses should be avoided in adult ruminants and used with
caution in horses because of the danger of disrupting ruminal or colonic microflora,
respectively.
上
Resistance is now common becausc of widesprcad usc. Resistance may be plasmid-
mediated and is usually due to decreased drug uptake or active transporl of the tetra-
cycline oul of the bacterial cell,
358|Chapter 15 IX C
G.Preslaughter withdrawal of oxytetracycline in food animals
1. The Food Animal Residue Avoidance Databank (FARAD) recommends, in cattle, an
extralabel withdrawal of 28 days for intrauterine treatment. It also recommends test-
ing milk affer intrauterine treatmcnt, as therc is inter-cow variability in the residuc
elimination profiles in milk.
2. FARAD recommends an extralabel preslaughter withdrawal of 28 days in sheep and
goats after IM or SC oxytetracycline administration. A milk withdrawal of 96 hours
is recommended for sheep and goats.
3. For swine, FARAD recommends an extralabel preslaughter period of 14 days fol-
lowing administration of tetracycline product in feed or water to swine.
H.
Adverse effects
1. The tetracyclines (except doxycycline and minocycline) are potentially nephrotoxic
and should be avoided'if renal function is impaired.
2. Permanent staining of unerupted teeth may occur in young animals due to
the formation of a tetracycline-calcium phosphate complex in enamel and
dentine.
3. Suprainfections of fungi, yeast, or resistant bacteria may occur in the Gl tract with
prolonged administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics such as the tetracyclines. Cl
adverse effects are seen frequently in cats. Oral tetracyclines should not be used
with herbivores because of serious effects on ruminant digestion.
4. Antianabolic effects are seen at high doses because of hinding to mitochondrial
ribosomes. This may result in an elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) especially
with preexisting renal disease.
5. Photosensitivity and hepatotoxicity are rare side effects in animals.
CHLORAMPHENICOL GROUP
A.
 Chemistry. Chloramphenicol is an unusual nalural compound because it contains
water insoluble and are administered orally. Chloramphenicol sodium succinate is wa
ler soluble for parenteral use. Florienicol is a fluorinated derivative where the -NO
group has been replaced by -SO,CH; to treat respiratory infections in beef cattle. It
does not leave the toxic residues in meat that chloramphenicol does.
B.
 Mechanism of action. Chloramphenicol and florfenicol bind to the bacterial 50s ri-
hosome unit to inhibit peptide bond formation and protcin synthesis (Figure 15-3).
They are bacteriostatic and broad spectrum and are effective against most anaerobic
bacteria.
C
 Therapeutic uses. Chloramphenicol is not allowed for use in food-producing animals
because the potential danger of residue-induced toxicity in humans (see below). It is
used in dogs, cats, horses, and birds for local and systemic infections, inducing respi-
ratory, CNs, and ocular infections, and infeclions caused by anaerobes and Saimonefla
spp. Florfenicol is approved for use only in catle for the treatment of bovine respi-
ratory disease (BRD) caused by Pasteurella spp. and Haeniophilus sonnus. It is used
in dogs and cats for treating susceptible infections when the myelotoxic potential of
chloramphenicol must be avoided.
D.
Pharmacokinetics
1. Chloramphenicol is rapidly absorbed from the Gl tract and widely distributed to all
Occurs slowly for 75% of the administered drug in cats, but faster to 90% in dogs.
The elimination f,. is 1-1.5 hours for dogs and horses and 4-5 hours in cats.
Antinmirrobial Drugs  359
2. Florfenicol is absorbed orally in dogs and cats and from IM sites in cattle. Il is
widely dislribuled, including the CNS, similar lo chloramphenicol. The serum 1t/
is 18 hours in catle and 4-6 hours in dogs and cats. In cattle, two-thirds of a dosc
is excreted as the parent drug in the urine and one-third is metabolized by the liver.
E.
Administration. Chloramphenicol is administered orally, IM, IV, or SC every 6-8 hours
t0 dogs, birds, or horses and every 12 hours to cats. Florfenicol is administered IM in
cattle and repeated 48 hours later for a total of two doses of the slow-release prepara-
tion. It is administered IM or SC every 8 hours in dogs and every 12 hours in cats.
F
 Resistance. Resistant bacteria inactivate chloramphenicol by production of an acetyl-
transferase and other melabolizing enzymes. Similar inactivation is expecled with flor-
fenicol.
G.
 Adverse effects
1. Anemia, which is dose-related, may occur in animals and humans. Chloram-
phenicol may inhibit the uptake of iron by erythrocytes and their rate of matu-
ration in bone marrow. A second type of anenia may occur in humans treated
with chloramphenicol. It is non-dose-related and rare but the resulting aplastic
 anemia is often fatal and this is the reason for the drug's ban in food-producing
animals.
 2. Anorexia and diarrhea may occur especially in cats with high or prolonged dosage.
3. Florfenicol is not known to produce aplastic anemia and its use is permitted in
beef cattle.
Xl.
MACROLIDES
 Chemistry. The macrolide antibiotics include erythromycin, azithromycin, clar-
ithromycin, tulathromycin, tylosin, and tilmicosin, They are basic, lipid-soluble com-
pounds consisting of a lactone ring to which are attached deoxy sugars. They are pre
pared as sulfate salts or as esterified salts of stearate, tartrate, estolate, or lactobionate.
B,
Mechanism of action. Macrolides are bacleriostatic by inhibiting baclerial prolein
amino acids to the growing peptide chain. Binding sites on the 50s ribosome overlap
with binding sites of chloramphenicol and the lincosamides (especially clindamycin)
and combination therapy should be avoided. Their antimicrobial activity is primarily
against Gram(+) aerobes and anacrohes and Mycoplasma spp. Tylosin and tiamulin
are effective against some Gram(-) pathogens, including Pasteurefla and Haemophilus
spp.
C.
Therapeutic uses
1. Erythromycin is an allernate to penicillin for infections caused by Gram(+) aerobes
and anaerobes in dogs, cats, and horses. It is a drug often chosen for the treatment
of enteritis caused by Canpylobacter jejuni in dogs and foals and for Rhodococcus
equi pneumonia in foals.
2.1
Tylosin is used in catle, sheep, and swine for the treatment of local and systemic
infections caused by Mycoplasma and Gram(+) bacteria. It is also added to feed
as a growth promotant in these species. Tylosin is used in dogs and cats for the
treatment of chronic colitis.
3. Tilmicosin is used in caltle for the treatment of respiratory disease caused by Pas-
teurelfa spp. It has potentially fatal toxic effects in horses and humans.
cus, Streptococcus, and Mycopfasna. It is used as an alternative for erythromycin
for R. cqui pneumonia in foals
360 Chapter 15 Xl C
5. Tulathromycin is used for the treatment of bovine and swine respiratory diseases. Il
is effective againsl Mannheimia, Mycopfasma, and Haemophilus; it is concentrated
in leucocytes and lung tissue.
6. Clarithromycin is used in dogs and cats for the treatment of mycobacterial infec-
tions including canine leproid granuloma, feline lcprosy, and for Heficobacicr spp.
in cats and ferrets, and for R. equi in foals.
 D.Pharmacokinetics. Macrolides are absorbed orally if protected from gastric acid de-
sruction by enteric coated preparalions or administration of the stabie, csterified salls.
They are weak organic bases that are widely distributed to all tissues except those
of the CNs. They are concentrated in acidic environments like the respiratory secre-
tions, milk, and leukocytes. Tilmicosin concentrates in lung tissue at levels 60-fold
higher than serum. Erythromycin is mainly excreted unchanged in bile but a fraclion
is metabolized by N-demethylation in the liver. Tylosin, tilmicosin, and azithromycin
are excreted unchanged in bile and urine. The plasma tiy, for the macrolides are
erythromycin—1-3 hours in most species; azithromycin—20 hours in cats and 35
hours in foals; tilmicosin-1 hour in cattle and 25 hours in pigs; tylosin—1 hour in
dogs and cattle and 4 hours in sheep, pigs, and goats; tulathromycin—90 hours in cat-
tle and pigs. Information is not available for the t ;: of clarithromycin.
E.Administration
1. Erythromycin is administered orally or IM three times a day to dogs, cats, and
foals, and IM once a day in cattle, sheep, and swine.
2. Tylosin is administered IM or orally once or twice a day to swine, calves, lambs,
dogs, and cats.
3.
Tilmicosin is administered SC to cattle every 72 hours.
4. Tulathromycin. A single IM injection is claimcd to be effeclive against bovine and
swine respiratory infections.
 5. Azithromycin is administered orally once a day to dogs, cats, and foals.
6. Clarithromycin is administered orally twice a day to dogs, cats, ferrets, and foals.
FResistance. Bacterial resistance to macrolide antibiotics may be chromosomal or plas-
mid mediated and is due to decreased drug binding by the 50s ribosome. Less fre-
quently, active efflux, or enzymatic inactivation by resistant bacteria may occur.
G.
Adverse effects. Erythromycin, tylosin, azithromycin, clarithromycin, and tulathromycin
have relatively few side effects. Mild Gl upset with oral doses and pain and irritation
at IM injection sites may occur. Erythromycin is recognized to be an agonist of the
motilin (a peptide that stimulales contraction of Gl smooth muscle) receptor and acls
on the stomach, ileum, cecum, and pelvic flexure and can produce abdominal pain
and diarrhea. Edema of the rectal mucosa with mild anal prolapse may be seen in
swine following IM administration of tylosin. Erythromycin should not be administered
orally to adult ruminants or tylosin, orally or parenterally, to adult horses because of
the danger of severe diarrhea. Tilmicosin produces cardiovascular toxicity in species
other than cattle by increasing myocardial Ca?+ concentrations. Side effects are rare
for others in the group.
LINCOSAMIDES
A.
Chemistry. Lincomycin, clindamycin, and pirlimycin are derivatives of a sulfur-
containing octose with an amino acid-like side chain and are highly lipid soluble.
They are prepared as HCl or phosphate salts, which are water soluble, or clindamycin 
palmitate for oral administration.
B.
 Mechanism of action. The lincosamides bind to the bacterial 5oS ribosome to inhibit
Antinicrobial Drugs 361
and the macrolides, combined therapy should be avoided. Lincomycin and clin-
damycin are bactcriostatic and are active against Gram(+) aerobes and obligate anacr-
 ohes, Toxoplasma spp. Neospora canis, and Mycoplasma spp. The antibacterial activity
of clindamycin is greater than that of lincomycin, especially against anaerobes.
C.
 Therapeutic uses. Lincomycin is used in swine for the control and treatment of swine
dysentery, and the treatment of staphylococcal, streptococcal, and mycoplasmal in-
fections. Clindamycin is used in dogs and cats for periodontal disease, osteomyelitis,
dermatitis, and deep soft tissue infections caused by Gram(+) organisms. It is used for
treating toxoplasmosis in dogs and cats and neosporosis in dogs. Pirlimycin is prepared
and used for the treatment of bovine mastitis.
D.
Pharmacokinetics. Oral absorption is 50% for lincomycin and 90% for clindamycin.
Distribution is wide with excellent penetration of bone and soft tissues, including ten-
don sheaths. CNS levels are low unless the meninges are inflamed. Lincosamides are
metabolized by the hepatic microsomal enzymes into sulfoxide and other metabolites
(60%, lincomycin: 90%, clindamycin). Parent drug and metabolites are excreted in
urine, bile, and feces. The elimination f, is 3-5 hours in dogs and cats. No informa-
tion is available for other spcc:ics.
E.
Administration. Lincomycin is administered IM to swine oncc a day or added to the
drinking water. Clindamycin is administered orally or IM twice a day to dogs and cats.
Pirlimycin is given by intramammary infusion.
 Resistance. Altered drug binding by bacterial ribosomes is the usual form of resistance.
Cross-resistance between lincosamides and macrolides is common.
G,
Adverse effects. Lincosamides are contraindicated in horses, rabbits, hamsters, and
guinea pigs because they may produce a severe, often fatal, diarrhea due to altered
Gl flora. Side effects are rare in dogs, cats, cattle, and swine except for neuromuscular
blockade at high doses or when used witlh anesthetics.
 MISCELLANEOUS ANTIBACTERIAL DRUGS
A.
Aminocyclitols
1. Mechanism of action. Spectinomycin and apramycin are chemically related to
the aminoglycosides but are bacteriostatic, not bactericidal, They bind to the
30S ribosome and inhibit protein synthesis (Figure 15-3). They are active primarily
against Graim(-) aerobcs and Mycoplasma infcctions.
2. Therapeutic uses. Spectinomycin is used in dogs, cats, horses, swine, calves, and
poultry for the trcatment of enteric and respiratory infectious diseasc. Apramycin is
used to treat enteric infections, especially colibacillosis in swine and calves.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. The pharmacokinetics of aminocyclitols is similar to that of
the aminoglycosides. Less than 10% is absorbed orally. Parenterally administered
spectinomycin distributes to the ECF and is excreted unchanged by the kidney.
Other information is not available for animals
 4. Administration. Spectinomycin is administered orally or parenterally twice a day
in all species. Apramycin is administered to swine and catle in the drinking water
once a day.
5. Adverse effects. No significant toxicity is associated with clinical use of spectino-
mycin,
B.
Metronidazole
1. Chemistry. The nitroimidazoles include metronidazole, ipronidazole, dimetri
dazole, and ronidazole. They are heterocyc:lic: compounds containing a five-
membered ring similar to the nitrofurans. Only metronidazole is used in veterinary
medicine.
362 |Chapter 15 XlI B
 2. Mechanism of action. Metronidazole is taken up by anaerobic bacteria and pro-
tozoa and reduced to a cytotoxic metabolite, which disrupts DNA (Figure 15-3).
It is bactericidal againsl most obligalc anacrobes and is active against protozoa,
including Giardia and Trichomonas spp.
3. Therapeutic uses. Nitroimidazoles have demonstrated carcinogenicity in labora-
tory animals and their use is banned in food-producing animals, Metronidazole
is used in dogs, cats, and horses for the treatment of severe infeclions caused by
anaerobic pathogens, especially brain abscesses and pelvic, genitourinary tract,
and respiratory infections. Metronidazole is also used to treat protozoal infections
such as giardiasis and trichomoniasis in dogs and cats.
4. Pharmacokinetics. Metronidazole is well absorbed orally and widely distributed
including the CNs. Hepatic metabolism by oxidation and conjugation occurs for
one-third to one-half of administered drug. Metabolites and unchanged drug are
excreted in urine and feces. The elimination ty, in dogs and horses are 3-5 hours.
5. Administration. Metronidazole is adminislered orally lwice a day in dogs, cals,
and horses.
6. Adverse effects. High or prolonged dosage may produce neurotoxicity with signs
that include nystagmus, ataxia, and seizures.
C.Rifampin
1. Mechanism of action. Rifampin inhibits DNA-dependent RNA polymcrase, which
prevents initiation of RNA synthesis (Figure 15-3). It is bactericidal for mycobacte-
ria and Gramf+) pathogens. It is effective against intracellular infections.
2. Therapeutic uses. Rifampin is combined with erythromycin in the treatment of R.
equi infections in foals. Rifampin is also used in combination with other antifungal
agents to treat fungal infections such as aspergillosis or hisloplasmosis in dogs and
cats when infection involves the CNs.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. Rifampin is absorbed orally and rapidly distributed to cells and
tissues. Rifampin is metabolized in the liver to a deacetylated form that also has
antibaclerial aclivity. Both this melabolite and parent drug are excreted primarily
in the bile, but up to 30% may be excreted in the urine. The parent drug is sub-
stantially reabsorbed in the gut, but the metabolite is not. Reported elimination
ty, for various species are 6-8 hours in horses, 8 hours in dogs, and 3-5 hours
in sheep. Because rifampin can induce hepatic microsomal enzymes, eliminalion
rates may increase with repeated doses.
4. Administration. Rifampin is administered orally three times a day in foals, dogs,
and cats.
 5. Adverse effects. Side effects are rare. Hepatotoxicity may occur in animals with
preexisling liver diseasc. Rifampin may produce red-orange colorcd urine, sweat,
and saliva but this is not harmful.
D.
Tiamulin
1. Mechanism of action. Tiamulin binds to the 50S bacterial ribosome to inhibit pro-
lein synthesis (Figure 15-3). Its mcchanism of action and antibaclerial spcctrum
are similar to macrolides such as tylosin. It is active against Gramf+) cocci, My-
coplasma, spirochetes, and some Gram(-) pathogens such as Haemophilus spp.
 2. Therapeutic uses. Tiamulin is administered in medicated feed or water in swine
for the control and trealment of Haemophitus pneumonia and swine dysenlery.
3. Pharmacokinetics. Tiamulin is well absorbed orally, widely distributed, and me-
tabolized by the liver. Elimination of metabolites occurs in feces (70%) and urine
(30%). The t ; is 4-12 hours in pigs.
 4. Adverse effects. Dermatitis with erythema and pruritus may be observed if pigs
are overcrowded and is due to the irritant metabolites in urine.
Vancomycin
1. Mechanism of action. Vancomycin blocks the second step of bacterial cell wall
synthcsis by inhibiling polymer release from the cell membrane (Figure 15-3). It is
baclericidal for Gram(+) organisms.
Antimicrolbial Drugs 363
 2. Therapeutic uses. Vancomycin is a rcserve antibiotic administercd IV ovcr 30-60
minutes every 6-8 hours for methicillin-resistant staphylococcal infections of bone
and soft tissue in dogs and cats. It is administered orally every 6-8 hours in dogs
for the treatment of multidrug-resistant enteric infection.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. Vancomycin is not absorbed orally, It distributes to the ECF and
transcellular fluids and is excreted unchanged by glomerular filtration. It has a
plasma t'y, of 2 hours.
4. Adverse effects. Ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity occur with large or prolonged
dosage.
F.Bacitracin
1. Mechanism of action. Bacitracin inhibits the second step of cell wall synthesis
(Figure 15-3). It is bactericidal for Gram(+) bacteria and Spirochetes.
2. Therapeutic uses. Bacitracin is used in topical ointments and solutions and is fre-
quently combined with polyimixin B and/or neoimycin in these preparations. It 
is also added to swine and poultry rations for the prevention and treatment of
clostridial enteritis and as a growth promotant.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. Bacitracin is not absorbed orally. It is too nephrotoxic for sys-
temic use.
4. Adverse effects, Systeinic toxicity does not occur with topical or oral administra-
tion of bacitracin.
G.Polymyxin B
1. Mechanism of action. Polymyxin B interacts with phospholipids in the bacterial
cell membrane to produce a detergent-like effect and membrane disruption (Figure
15-3). It is rapidly bactericidal to Gram(-) organisms,
 2. Therapeutic uses. Polymyxin B is used topically to treat Gram(-) bacterial infec-
tions of the skin, eye, and ear in all species. It is usually combined with bacitracin
for broad-spectrum antibacterial effects. Polymyxin B is administered orally to cat-
tle and swine for the treatment of Gram(-) enteric infections.
3. Pharmacokinetics. Polymyxin B is not absorbed orally. It is too nephrotoxic for
parenteral use.
4. Adverse effects. Polymyxin B does not produce systemic toxicity when adminis-
tered topically or orally, since it is not absorbed systemically using these routes of
administration.
H.Nitrofurans
1. Mechanism of action. The nitrofurans are reduced by bacteria to reactive interme-
diates that inhibit nucleic. acid synthesis (Figure 15-3). They produce DNA frag-
mentation and may also block mRNA translation. They are broad spectrum and
bacteriostatic
 2. Therapeutic uses. Nitrofurantoin is occasionally used in the treatment of lower
urinary tract infections in dogs and cats. It is administered orally every 6-8
hours and is most effective in acid urine. Nitrofurazone is used topically as
an antibacterial ointment, powder, and water-soluble wound dressings in all
species.
3. Pharmacokinetics. Nitrofurantoin is absorbed orally and rapidly excreted by
glomerular filtration and active secretion. Peak urine levels are achieved less than
1 hour after administration. The plasma ty, is 20 minutes in humans; no informa-
tion is available for animals.
4. Adverse effects. Side effects are rare. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur
in dogs and cats following oral administration. Nitrofurans may not be used in
food-producing animals (include topically) because they have been shown to be
potential carcinogens in laboratory animals.
Novobiocin
1. Chemistry. Novobiocin is a coumarin antibiotic and is acidic.
364Chapter 15 xll 1
2. Mechanism of action. It blocks binding of ATP to DNA gyrase to inhibit super-
coiling of bacterial DNA (Figure 15-3). It is bacteriostatic for Gram(+) cocci, espe-
cially S. aurcus.
 3. Therapeutic uses. Novohiocin is used for wound trcatment and the trealment of
mastitis particularly Staphylococcus infections. It is less potent against Streptococ-
cus infections.
4. Pharmacokinetics. Novobiocin is absorbed orally with peak levels in 2-4 hours,
Tissue penetration is relatively poor. It is excreted primarily into bile and feces.
The plasma tuy, afler oral administration in humans is ~6 hours; no information is
available for animals.
 5. Administration. Novobiocin is given by intramammary infusion usually combined
with procaine penicillin to limit the development of resistance. Novobiocin is
Combined with tetracycline in a proprietary preparation (AlbaPlex) for oral ad.
ministration twice a day in dogs for susceptible infections.
6. Adverse effects. Novobiocin does not produce systemic toxicity when adminis-
tered topically or orally
Streptogramins
1. Chemistry. Virginiamycin is used for poultry and is a mixture of streptogramin B,
a macrolide (virginiamycin M), and streptogramin A, a cyclic hexadepsipeptide
(virginiamycin S). The human preparation Synercid is a mixture of the macrolide,
dalfopristin, and the cyclic. hcxadepsipcptide, quinuprislin.
2. Mechanism of action. Streptogramins bind to the 50s ribosome to inhibit protein
synthesis (Figure 15-3). Virginiamycin is bactericidal against Gram(+) aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria.
 3. Therapeutic uses. Virginiamycin is administered as a medicated feed additive
in broiler chickens and swine as a growth promolant and for the prevention of
necrotic cnterilis in broiler chickens and for the control of swine dysentery in
pigs weighing up to 120 Ibs. It is also used as a feed additive in cattle to increase
feed efficiency and to reduce the incidence of liver abscesses. Synercid? is used 
in humans for the treatment of vancomycin-resistant enterococcal infection and
methicillin-resistant S. aureus.
There is concern that the use of virginiamycin in poultry may lead to transfer-
able resistance to humans and limit the value of Synercid
 4. Pharmacokinetics. Virginiamycin is administered orally. Since it is not absorbed,
its antibacterial effects are limited to the Gl tract.
K.lonophore antibiotics
1. Chemistry. lonophores are polyether antibiotics derived from Streptomyces used
primarily in poultry and swine for fecd cificicncy and anticoccidial activity. Thcy
include monensin, lasalocid, laidlomycin, salinomycin, and narasin.
2. Mechanism of action. lonophores act as alkali metal ionophores. They complex
with Na+ in the cell membrane to produce passive extracellular transport of K-
 and intracellular influx of H+, which kills bacteria and coccidian by lowering
intracellular pH. In the rumen, ionophores selectively affect Gram(+) organisms
resulting in a shift to Gram(-) populations in the rumen microflora. This increases
the production of propionic acid and decreases the production of acetic and bu-
tyric acids by rumen bacteria. This change in volatile acids (VFA) increases feed
efficiency by reducing baclerial energy losses to CO2 and methane, thereby in-
creasing the energy content per unit of feed.
3. Therapeutic uses. Monensin, lasalocid, and laidlomycin are administered as
premixes or medicated feed for growth promotion, feed efficiency, and con-
trol of coccidiosis in cattle and broiler chickens. Salinomycin and narasin are
administered as medicated feed to broiler chickens for prevention of
coccidiosis.
4. Pharmacokinetics. lonophorcs are absorbed orally. Monensin absorption is 50%
in ruminants. They are rapidly and extensively metabolized by the liver and the
numerous metabolites are excreted by bile and eliminated in the feces. Absorption
Antimicrobial Drugs 365
is more complete and metabolism is slower in monogastric animals, especially
5. Adverse effects. Toxicity of jonophores whcn uscd in specics for which they arc
approved is uncommon, unless mixing errors occur. lonophorc toxicily is due
to cellular electrolyte imbalances, increased extracellular K', and intracellular
Na' and Ca?' concentrations, resulting in cellular damage and death. The in-
Creased intracellular Ca?′ concentration is due to the exchange of Na' for Ca?1
by Na' -Ca2: exchanger; this exchange is particularly prominent in cardiac and
skeletal muscles and these are usually the most severely affected. Horses are the
most susceptible species to toxic effects when accidentally exposed to ionophore-
containing feeds.
xiv.
ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS
A
Griscofulvin
1，
 Chemistry. Griseofulvin is a cyclohexane benzofuran antibiotic derived from Peni-
cillium griscofulvin. Il is insoluble in walcr.
2. Mechanism of action. Griscofulvin is actively takcn up by growing dermalophytes
(ringworm). It binds to microtubules to inhibit spindle formation and mitosis. It is
fungistatic for dermatophytes such as Microsporum spp. and Trichophyton spp. Its
action is slow as infected cells are shed and replaced with uninfected cells.
3. Therapeutic uses. Griseofulvin is used in dogs, cats, and horses for multifocal der-
malophyle infections.
 4. Pharmacokinetics. The Gl absorption rate varies from 25-70%. The absorption is
increased by high-fat foods and by preparations consisting of micronized particles.
It distributes to keratin precursor cells of skin, hair shafts, and nails. It is metabo-
lized by the liver by demethylation and glucuronide conjugation and excreted in
urine, Griseofulvin's plasma ty, in dogs is less than 6 hours, but is stored in the
growing keratin cell producing skin, hair, and horn.
5. Administration. Griseofulvin is administered orally twice a day to dogs and cats
and once daily to horses for 4-6 weeks.
6. Adverse effects. Untoward effects are rare. Leucopenia and anemia may occur as
an idiosyncratic. reaction in kittens.
B.
Nystatin and Natamycin
 1. Chemistry. Nystalin and natlamycin arc polyene antibiotics derived from Strepto-
myces spp.
2. Mechanism of action. Nystatin and natamycin are fungicidal to yeast infections
caused by Candida spp. and Malassezia spp. They act by binding to erogsterol of
the protoplast membrane of fungi to alter permeability and allow leakage of cell
conlenls.
3. Therapeutic uses. Nystatin and natamycin are too toxic. for parenteral use. They
are administered topically for yeast infections of the eye, ear, and skin, and ad-
ministered orally for treating mucosal yeast infections of the mouth and Gl tract.
Nystatin is used as a feed additive in poultry to prevent crop mycosis and my-
colic diarrhea. Nystatin is a component of topical proprietary preparations such as
 Panalog?, which also include thiostrepton, a polypeptide antibiotic, and triamci-
nolone, a glucocorticoid.
4. Pharmacokinetics. Nystatin is not absorbed orally and is excreted in the feces
5. Administration. Nystatin is administered orally every 6-8 hours for Candidal in-
fections in dogs and cats. Natamycin is used topically primarily for ocular mycotic
infeclions and is the drug of choice for trealing fungal kcratitis in horses.
6. Adverse effects. Adverse effects are rare since the drugs are not supposed to enter
the systemic circulation. Occasional Gl upset may be observed with high dose.
366Cliapter 15XIv C
C.Azoles
1. Chemistry. Ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole are imidazole antifun-
gals for systemic use. Other imidazoles used only topically for dermatophyte, As-
pergillus or yeast infections include miconazole and clotrinazole.
2. Mechanism of action. The azoles inhibit the synthesis of ergosterol in fungal cyto-
plasmic membranes hy blocking cylochrome P450 cnzymcs and increasing cellu-
lar permeability. At high doscs, mammalian sleroid synthcsis (corticosteroids and
sex steroids) is inhibited. Azolcs are fungistatic for most pathogcnic fungi causing
systemic infections such as Blastomyces, Coccidioides, Cryptococcus, and Histo-
plasma spp. They are also effective against candidiasis and griseofulvin-resistant 
dermatophytes.
3. Therapeutic uses. Ketoconazole is used in dogs, cats, horses, and birds for sys-
temic mycoses and for severe yeast infections. It is also used in dogs and cats at
high dosage for the treatment of hyperadrenocorticisim (see Chapter 12, Il E 4 b).
Fluconazole and itraconazole have replaced ketoconazole in most treatment reg-
imens for the systemic mycoses because of their longer ty., greater activity, and
lower toxicity. Clotrimazole and miconazole are used topically in the treatment of
Candida, Aspergillus, and dermalophyte infcctions.
4. Pharmacokinetics
a. Following oral administration, azoles are wcll absorbed in thc presencc of food
that stimulatcs bile ilow.
b. They are widely distributed, particularly in tissues high in lipid content; how-
ever, minimal amounts are found in cerebrospinal fluid (~10% of other tissue
levels).
C.
They are metabolized by microsomal enzymes of the liver and excreted in bile.
d. The tuy. of ketoconazole in dogs is 1-6 hours. In humans, fluconazole's plasma
ty. is ~30 hours and itraconazole's t /, is 20-60 hours. Because of their long
ty,, these two azoles do not reach steady state plasma levels for 6-14 days
after beginning therapy, unless loading doses are given. Patients with impaired
renal function may have ty, extended significantly and dosage adjustment
may be required.
5. Administration. Ketoconazole is adininistered orally twice a day for 3-6 months
for systemic mycotic infections. Fluconazole and itraconazole are administered
orally or IV once a day to dogs and cats for systemic mycoses for periods of 1-3
months, depending on the type of pathogenic fungi being treated. Clotrimazole
and miconazole are applied topically for the treatment of yeast or dermatophyte
infections or via nasal infusion for treating nasal aspergillosis.
6. Adverse effects. Anorexia, vomiting. and diarrhea may occur, especially in cats,
treated with ketoconazole, Suppression of adrenal or gonadal steroids may also
occur but the effects are transient at doses employed in antifungal therapy. Ad-
verse effects are rare with fluconazole or itraconazole therapy, unless in patients
with impaired renal function.
D.Amphotericin B
1. Chemistry. Amphotericin B is a polyene macrolide that is stabilized with sodium
desoxycholate as a colloidal suspension.
2. Mechanism of action. Amphotericin B binds to ergosterol of fungal cell mem-
brancs to form porcs or channels, which result in leakage of cell conlents. It is
Blastomyccs, Coccidioides, Cryptococcus, and Histoplasma spp.
3. Therapeutic uses. Ainphotericin B is used to treat systeinic. fungal infections in
dogs, cats, horses, and birds. Combined therapy with ketoconazole, fluconazole,
itraconazole (to reduce toxicity), or flucytosine (for CNs, bone, or ocular infec-
tions) is common.
 4. Pharmacokinetics. Amphotericin B is not absorbed from the Gil tract. After IV
administration, it slowly distributes to most tissues except the CNs, eye, and 
bone. Elimination is biphasic with plasma ty, of 24-48 hours and 1-2 weeks.
Antimicrobial Drugs367
Approximately 65% of amphotericin B is excreted unchanged into urine (20%)
and feces (45%).
5. Administration. Amphotericin B is diluted in 5% dextrosc and administered IV.
Treatment frequency and duration vary with the type of infection.
6. Adverse effects. Renal toxicity is a serious side effect. Amphotericin B produces
renal vasoconstriction, decreased GFR, and damage to tubular epithelium. BUN
must be monitored weekly during therapy.
E.
Flucytosine
1. Chemistry. Flucylosine (5-FC) is a iluorinaled pyrimidinethat is deaminaled by
fungi (not mammalian cells) to 5-fluorouracil, a potent antimetabolite.
2. Mechanism of action. Flucytosine inhibits thymidylate synthase and DNA and
RNA synthesis in susceptible fungi. It is fungicidal against Cryptococcus, Candida,
and Aspergillus spp.
3. Therapeutic uses. Flucytosine is combined with amphotericin B for synergistic
action in the treatment of cryptococcosis (especially meningeal cryptococcosis) in
dogs and cats. It is used alone in treating aspergillosis and candidiasis in psittacine
birds.
4. Pharmacokinetics. Flucytosine is well absorbed orally and widely distribuled, in-
cluding the CNs. It is cxcreted unchanged in urine. The plasma Iy, in humans is
3-6 hours. No information is available for animals. The ty, may be prolonged in
patients with compromised renal function.
 5. Administration. Flucytosine is administered orally 3-4 times a day for a minimum
of 4 wecks.
6. Adverse effects. Toxicity is low. Mild Gl disturbances and, more rarely, bone mar-
row suppression have been reported.
F.Terbinafine
1. Chemistry. Terbinafine is an allylamine derivative.
2. Mechanism of action. Terbinafine inhibits the synthesis of ergosterol—a compo-
nent of fungal cell membranes. By blocking the enzyme squalene monooxygenase
(squalene 2,3-epoxidase), terbinafine inhibits the conversion of squalene to sterols
(especially ergosterol) and causes accumulation of squalene. Both these effects
are thought to contribute to its antifungal action. Unlike azoles, terbinafine does
not block cytochrome P450 enzymes. It is fungicidal against dermatophytes and
fungistatic against yeast.
3. Therapeutic uses. When administered orally (30) mg/kg/day) or topically,
terbinafine is useful for treating dermatophytic infections in dogs and cats. It is
also useful for treating birds for systemic mycotic infections such as aspergillosis.
4. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals. In humans, it is read-
ily absorbed (>70%) when given orally. Sincc terhinafine is lipophilic, food may
enhance Gl absorption of the drug by increasing bile secretion. Terbinafine is dis-
tributed to skin and into the sebum. Over 99% of drug in the plasma is bound
to albumin. Drug in the circulation is metabolized in the liver into demethylated,
deaminated, and dealkylated conjugates, which are excreted into urine. The elim-
ination ty, is ~36 hours. The drug may persist in adipose tissue and skin for morc
than 30 days.
5. Adverse effects. Terbinafine appears to be well tolerated by animals.
Xv.
ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
 Amantadine
1. Chemistry. Amantadine is 1-aminoadamantane.
2. Mechanism of action. When iniluenza viruses replicate within the host cell, a vi-
ral membrane protein known as My forms an ion-channel for H·influx from the
368| Chapter 15 XV A
endosome into the virion prior to fusion of the viral membrane with the endosomal
membrane. Amantadine binds to M2 protein and blocks its ion channel activity and
thus inhibits viral uncoating, and replication.
In addition to its antiviral activity, amantadine anlagonizes the N-methyl-1)-
aspartate (NMDA) receptor in the CNs. NMDA receptors are important in pain sen-
sation, especially chronic pain. Amantadine combined with other analgesics such as
opiates or NsAIDs alleviates chronic pain.
3. Therapeutic uses. The primary use of amantadine in veterinary medicine is as an
adjunct lo NsAlDs for the treatmenl of chronic pain in dogs and cats. Il is cffeclive
for treating some, but not all, influenza viruses. Because oral absorption in horses is
variable, it has been used IV to treat equine-2 influenza but its potential for induc.
ing seizures when administered by this route limits its use.
 4. Pharmacokinetics. Civen orally. ~50% of the dose of amantadine is absorbed in 
horses and high levels are attained in secretions. It is excreled unchanged by the
kidneys. The elimination tuy, in horses is ~3.5 hours. The information for dogs and 
cats is not available.
5. Administration. As an adjunct to chronic pain therapy, amantadine is administered
orally once a day to dogs and cats.
6.
Resistance. Develops quite rapidly.
7. Adverse effects. Infrequently, the following signs are seen: agiltation, loosc stools,
flatulence, or diarrhea, particularly early in therapy.
B.
Acyclovir
1. Chemistry. Acyclovir is a guanosine derivative with selectivity for particular herpes
viruses.
2. Mechanism of action. Acyclovir is metabolized to the monophosphate by thymi-
dine kinase, which is more aclive in the virus than in the hosl cell. The host cell
then converts the monophosphale to the triphosphate that inhibits the viral DNA
polymerase, ending the nucleotide chain prematurely.
 3. Therapeutic uses. Acyclovir is used to treat ocular and respiratory infections of her-
pes yirus 1 of cats. Although acyclovir is active against equine herpes virus type-
in vitro, oral absorption is poor in horses and therapeutic levels are not attained
4. Pharmacokinetics. Acyclovir is poorly absorbed (~20%) after oral administralion, It
is widely distributed throughout body tissues and fluids, including the brain, semen,
and CsF. It has low protein binding and crosses the placenta. Acyclovir is primarily
metabolized by the liver and has a t / of ~3 hours in humans. No information is
available for animals.
5. Administration. Acyclovir is adminislcred orally twice a day to cals.
 6. Adverse effects. Lcucopenia and ancmia may occur. Thesc are rcversible if therapy
is discontinued.
c.
Zidovudine (AZT)
1.
 Chemistry. Zidovudine is an analog of thymidine.
2. Mechanism of action. Zidovudine is phosphorylated by hosl cell enzymes to AZT
5'-triphosphate, which competes with host 5'-thymidine, which is essential for
the 5'-triphosphate zidovudine into the viral DNA chain produces the termination
of viral DNA synthesis. Mammalian α-DNA polymerase does not incorporate the 
zidovudine.
 3. Therapeutic uses. Zidovudine may be used in cals to treat FIV infection where itl
produces temporary alleviation of the clinical signs and increase in quality of life
and survival time in most cats, particularly when clinical signs of immunodeficiency
are evident. It does not inhibit the viremia. Clinical improvement occurs 14 days
after the start of treatment. Zidovudine is not effective against feline leukemia virus
at nontoxic. doses
 4. Pharmacokinetics. Zidovudine is well absorbed orally and has a ty of ~2 hours
in cats. It is metabolized in the liver by glucuronide conjugation and excreted in
urine. tiy. may be extended in cats that have low levels of glucuronyl transferase.
Antimicrobial Drugs 369
TABLE 15-1. Websites for Antimicrobial Information
VIN
http://www.vin.com/
FDA—human
htlp://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/drugsatfda
Compendium veterinary product
http://www.bayerdvm.com/
Resources/cvp_main.cfm?CFID=307632&CFTOKEN=61494892
Merck velerinary manual
htlp://www.merckvelmanual.com/
mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/toc_191200.htm
5. Administration. Zidovudine is administered orally 2-3 times a day for a minimum
of 4 weeks.
6. Resistance. Mutation of virus target sites may result rapidly and resistance to zi-
dovudine is expected with long-term use.
7. Adverse effects. Anemia and reduction in hemoglobin are the most common side
effects observed in cats. Diarrhea and weakness may also occur. Reduced dosage
should be employed in cats with renal or hepatic insufficiency.
D.
Cat omega interferon
1. Chemistry. Interferons are cytokines, proteins produced by host cells when they are
 attacked by viruses. Cat omega interferon is produced by genetic engineering and is
a type 1 interferon closely related to alpha interferon. It has a fv, of 1-2 hours in
dogs and cats.
2. Mechanism of action. Interferon's mechanism of action is not a direct attack on the
virus but by altering host cell metabolism to induce proteins that protect against
viral invasion by several methods including destruction of mRNA and blockade of
translational proteins resulting in the inhibition of viral replication.
3. Therapeutic uses. Feline omega interferon can be used to treat cat viral infections,
including calci virus, FeLF, FIV, and other feline viral infections as well as canine
parvovirus.
4. Administration. Interferons may be given SC or by other parenteral routes (depend-
ing on the virus to be treated) once a day.
5. Adverse effects. Transient anorexia and weight loss may occur in cats. Fever,
myelotoxicity, and myalgia may develop with parenteral administration at higher
dosages (Tables 15-1 and 15-2).
TABLE 15-2. Generic and Trade Names for Antimicrobial Drugs
Class
Generic Name
Trade Name
Penicilfins
 Old penicillins
Penicillin G—benzylpenicillin
Many
Penic:illin V—Phenoxymenthyl
Many
Penicillin
Benzathine penicillin G
Many
Procaine penicillin G
Many
Penicillin G potassium
Many
 Penicillinase resistant
Methicillin
Staphcillin
Naicillin 
Nafcilling
Oxacillin
Oxacillin(s;
Cloxacillin
Orbenin<s), Dry-Clox@!
Aminopenicillins
Ampicillin
Polyflexe!
Aimoxicillir
Ainoxi-Tab?, Biomax
Carboxypencillins
Carbenicillin
Geopen, Geocillin(?)
Ticarcillin
Ticart
Ureidopenicillins
Piperacillin
Pipercil
 Potentiated penicillins
Amoxicillin-clavulanatc
Clavanox(;
Ticarcillin-clavulanate
Timentine
Ampicillin-sul bactam
Cephalosporins
 First generation
(ral
Cefadrxil
Cefa-Dropsto
()ral
Cephalexin
Keilex?
Parentcral
Cephaparin
Cefazolin
Ancere, Kefzol@e!
 Second generation
(）ral
C.efachlor
Ceclor?!
Parenteral
Cefoxitin
Third generation
Parenteral
Ceftiofur
Naxce/(k)
Fourth generation
Parenteral
Cefapiine
Maxipime(:
Carbapenems
Imipenem
Primaxin(c
Meropenem
Merrem
Monobactams
Azetreonem
Azactam@
Polypeptids
Bacitracin
Many
Aminoglycosides
Streptomycin
Streptonycin Bulk)
Neomycin
Neomix, Biosol
Kanamycin
Kantrim Amforalk
Aimikacin
Aimiglyde-Vik:
Gentaimicin
Gentaver(s, Gentocin)
370
(confinued)
TABLE 15-2. (Continued)
Class
Generic Name
Trade Name
Aminocyclitols
Spectinomycin
Adspcc(
Apramyc:in
Apralan&)
Tetracyclines
Chlortetracycline
Aurcomycin
Oxytetracycline
Terramycin?
Tetracycline
Panmycink
Doxycycline
Doxyrobeis
Minocyc:line
Minocint
Macrolides
14-molecule ring
[rythromycin
Galimycin, Ery-Tabk.
15-molecule ring
Azithromycin
Zithromax
Tulathromycin
Draxxin
16-molecule ring
Tylosin
Tylang
Tilnicosin
Lincosamides
Lincosamides
Lincosin@
Clindamycin
Antirobe, Clinso]k
 Pirlimycin
Pirsue
Amphenicols
Chloramphenicol
Chloromycetin:
[lorfenicol
NuflorK
Streptogramins
Streptogramin A and B
Virginiamycin M and A
Stafack
Dalfopristin and quinupristin
Polymixins
Polymixin B
Aerosporin@
Polymixin E
Colistin(k.
Mupirocins
Mupirocin
Bactrobang
Sulfonamides
Suliamethoxazole +
Bactrine, Septra(.
trimethoprim
Sulfadiazinc
Sulfadimethoxine
Albon&
Diaminopyridazines
Trimethoprim + sulfadiazine
Tribrissen
Ormcthoprim|
sulfadimethoxine
Methenamine
Methenamine
Hiprex, Mandelamine
Fluoroguinolones
Enrofloxacin
Baytril(R
Sarafloxacin
Saraflox
Difloxacin
Dicura/@
Orbifloxacin
Orbax?
Marbofloxacin
 Zeniquin(k:
Novobiocins
Novobiocin
Allamycin@
Novobiocin  tctracycline
Albaplcx
(continued)
371
TABLE 15-2. (Continued)
Class
Generic Name
Trade Name
Nitroimidazoles
Metronidazole
Flagy/(;
Nitrofurans
Nitrofurantoin
Furadantin
Furazolidonc
Topazonek
Nitrofurazone
Isoniazid
lsoniazid
SPIZep!N
Rifampin
Rifampin
RiFadin
 Pleuromutilins
Tiamulin
Denagardi
Glycopeptides
Vancomycin
Vancocint
lonophores
Monensin
Rumensink.
Lasalocid
Bovatecik
Narasin
Montcban
Salinomycin
Biocoxe
Laidlomycin
Cattlystfor:
Antifungals
Griseofulvin
FulkinC
Flucytosine
5-C,Ancoban
 amphotericin
AmphocinFungizone
Terbinafine
Lamisile
Azoles
Clotrimazole
Lotrimink,Mycelex
Fluconazole
Diflucang
Itraconazole
Sporanox?.
Ketoconazole
Nizoralk:
Miconazole
Many
Topical Antifungals
Nystatin ratarmycin
Natacyn&, Mycostatin
SUGGESTED READING
Booth DM. 2000. "Do's and don'ts of antimicrobial therapy." In Kirk's Current Veterinary Thcrapy.
Edited by Bonagura JD. 13th ed., pp. 33-40. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.
http://www.drugs.com
Plumb DC. 2005. Vetcrinary Drug Handbook. 5th cd. Ames. IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Giguers S, Prescoll, JF, Baggol, JD, Walker RD, Dowling PM, 2006. Antirmicrobiaf Therapy in Veterinary
Medicine. 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
372
Antimicrobial Drugs373
STUDY
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Bacterial resistance due to drug-
(E) an increased inhibition of purine and
inactivating enzymes is important for all of
DNA synthesis in susceptible bacteria.
the following antibiotics except:
(A) Penicillin G
5. The fluoroquinolones, enrofloxacin, and
(B)  Ampicillin
marbofloxacin
(C) Gentamicin
(A) have an antibacterial spectrum, which is
(D) Telracycline
limited to Gram(-) pathogens, especially
(E) Cephalexin
anaerobes.
(B)  are used primarily for enteric infections
 2. Infectious or transferable drug resistance,
since they are not ahsorbed from the gut.
which involves transfer of multiplo-drug resis-
(C) a
are useful for respiratory, skin, and uri-
tant genes via pili, has been observed clini-
nary tract infections in puppies.
cally in Gram(-) infections of the
(D) are bactericidal via inhibition of DNA
(A) urinary tract.
gyrase.
(B) intestinal tract.
(C) respiratory tract.
6. Considering the pharmacology of
the penicillin G and the first-generation
(D)skin.
cephalosporins, all of the following are true
3. The primary reason for using mixtures of
EXCEPT:
sulfonarmides in cattle is
(A) They inhibit peptidoglycan cross-linking
(A) to decrease the likelihood of bacterial
in the third stage of bacterial cell wall 
synthesis.
resistance since most organisms would
be sensitive to one of the sulfonamides in
{B) Bacterial resistance is most commonly
the mixture even if resistant to the others.
due to β-lactamase production.
(B) to decreasc the rale of acctylation sincc
(C) Tissue penetration of cephalosporins is
 superior to penicillin G and thus they
each sulfonamide competes for enzyme.
(C) to provide a broader spectrum of antimi-
are preferred for antibiotic prophylaxis in
surgery.
crobial action.
(D) to reduce renal toxicily based on the law
(D) They are eliminated primarily by hep-
atic metabolism and biliary excretion of
of independent solubility.
(E) to allow the formulation of neutral solu-
conjugated drug.
(E) Nephrotoxicity is more likely to oc-
tions.
cur with high or prolonged dosage of
4. Trimethoprim or ormetoprim combined
cephalosporins.
with a sulfonamide results in all of the fol-
 7. The antibacterial activity of amoxicillin
lowing EXCEPT
 may include penicillinase-producing organ-
(A) a sequential blockade of folate synthesis
isms if it is combined with
 in susceptible bacteria.
(B)a decreased ability of sulfonamides to
(A)  phenethicillin.
(B) enrofloxacin.
produce keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS),
(C) a decrease in thc rate of development of
(C)
 penicilloic acid.
resistant bacteria.
(D)  ampicillin,
(E) clavulanic acid.
(D) an extended antibacterial spectrum.
374Chapter 15
8. Two semisynthetic penicillins that are ef-
(B) is used in equine enteric infections
fective against Pscudomonas spp. are
since il is a poorly absorbed "enteric"
(A) methicillin and ampicillin.
macrolide.
(C) distribution is generally limited to the
(B) ampicillin and amoxicillin.
ECF.
(C)  amoxicillin and ticarcillin.
(D) is frequently effective in staphylococcal
(D) ticarcillin and piperacillin.
(E) ticarcillin and oxacillin.
osteomyelitis.
14. You are presenled with an agcd cat with
9. The aminoglycoside antibiotics such as
Haemobartonella infection but also with im-
 amikacin and gentamicin
paired renal function. A tetracycline that may
(A)are lipid soluble and distribute widely to
be safely administered is
tissues including the CNS.
(A) chlortetracycline.
(B) are not effective against Gram(-) anaer-
(B) doxycycline.
obes because their uptake by bacteria is
(C)oxytetracycline.
oxygen linked,
(D) tetracycline.
(C) are bacteriostatic. at therapeutic. concen-
trations.
15. An antibiotic. that is combined with ery-
(D) are well absorbed orally if they are en-
teric coated to protecl ihem from gastric
thromycin for treating Rhodococcus equi in-
fections in foals is
acid.
(A) spectinomycin.
10. Adverse reactions to the aminoglycoside
(B) vancomycin.
antibiotics include all of the following EX-
(C) riiampin.
CEPT:
(D) tylosin.
(A) neuromuscular blockade.
16. Which of the following therapies is nol
(B) myelosuppression and anemia.
(C) nephrotoxicity.
correct?
(D) ototoxicity—auditory.
(A)  Metronidazole—anaerobic infection of
(E) ototoxicity—vestibular
the pelvis in cats
(B) Lincomycin—swine dysentery
11. Tetracyclines are broad spectrum and
(C)Florfenicol—bovine respiratory disease
bacteriostatic by a mechanism of action that
(D) Tetracycline—psittacosis in birds
involves
(E) Chloramphenicol—mycoplasmal pneu-
(A) binding to the 30s ribosome to inhibit
monia in swine
the addition of amino acids to the grow-
17. Three antibiotic used topically or orally
ing peptide chain.
(B) binding to phospholipids in bacterial cell
but not parenterally (primarily because of
membranes to increase permeability.
nephrotoxicity) are
(C) binding to the 50S ribosome to inhibit
(A) streptomycin, kanamycin, bacitracin.
peptidyl transferasc.
(B) polymixin B, hacitracin, neomycin.
(D) inhibition of DNA gyrase.
(C) bacitracin, tiamulin, polymixin B.
(D) neomycin, gentamicin, rifampin.
12. Tylosin
18. Weckly monitoring of renal funclion (o.g.
(A) inhibits the first step of cell wall synthe-
BUN) is necessary in antifungal therapy with
sis and thus is baclericidal in growing
bacteria.
(A) amphotericin B.
(B) may produce anemia by blocking iron
(B) ketoconazole.
uptake in erythroblasts.
(C) flucylosine.
(C) antibacterial spectrum includes my-
(D) griseofulvin.
coplasma.
(D) is usually effective in organisms resislant
19. All of the following stalements concern-
to erythromycin.
ing griseofulvin are true EXCEPT:
(A) oral absorption is increased by dietary
13. Clindamycin
fats.
(A) is primarily active against Gram(-)
(B) distribution is to keratin precursor cells.
pathogens.
(C) its action is rapid and fungicidal.
Antimicrobial  Drugs 375
(D) it inhibits mitosis in dermatophytes (ring-
(B) it inhibits ergosterol synthesis in both sys-
worm).
temic mycotic infections and candidiasis
(yeast infections).
20. All of the following statements concern-
(C) cortisol and testosterone synthesis
ing ketoconazole are true EXCEPT:
in mammals is inhibited at high
doses.
(A) it is more effective than flucytosine for
(D) it must be administered for 3-6 months
meningeal cryptococcosis since it pene.
in therapy for systemic mycoses.
trates the CNS more completely.
376
Chapter15
AnSWERS And
DEXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is D.
resistant bacteria are similar. Tissue penetra-
Bacterial resistance to tetracyclines is
tion and nephrotoxicity are greater for the
usually due to decreased uptake or active
cephalosporins.
transport of drug out of the bacterial cell.
Resistance to penicillin G, ampicillin, and
7. The answer is E.
cephalexin is due to β-lactamase production.
Clavulanic acid inhibits β-lactamases
Gentamicin is enzymatically inactivated
and prevents inactivation of amoxicillin by
by resistant bacteria, which acetylate,
otherwise resistant organisms. Phenethicillin,
phosphorylate, or adenylate the drug.
enrofloxacin, or ampicillin do not inhibit 
penicillinases. Penicilloic acid is a degrada-
2. The answer is B.
tion product of penicillinase action, which
Infectious or transferable drug resistance
acts as an antigenic determinant in penicillin
may occur in Gram(-) bacteria, which
allergy.
reproduce by conjugation and has been
observed clinically in enteric infections
8. The answer is D.
caused by Salmonella, Shigefla, or E. cofi.
Piperacillin and ticarcillin are antipseu-
domonal penicillins used alone or in
3. The answer is D.
combination with gentamicin, tobramycin,
The renal toxicity of sulfonamides is
or clavulanate in severe infections caused
due to their precipitation in neutral or acid
by this organism. Methicillin and oxacillin
urine. Because of their independent solubility.
 are penicillinase stable and ampicillin and
mixtures of sulfonamides provide greater
amoxicillin are broad spectrum but are not
solubility for a given concentration. Bacterial
effective against Pseudomonas spp.
resistance, mctabolism, spectrum of activily,
or ncutralily of solutions are minimally
9. The answer is B.
affected by mixlurcs.
The uptake of aminoglycosides by bac-
teria includes an energy-dependent step
4. The answer is B.
(EDP), which is oxygen-linked. Since
The ocular toxicity of sulfonamides, es-
anaerobes do not use oxygen, the uptake of
 pecially the sulfapyrimidines, is not reduced 
aminoglycosides is minimal. Aminoglycosides
by combination with trimcthoprin or
 are highly polar and poorly lipid soluble.
ormetoprim. Potentiated sulfonamides have
They are bactericidal and are not absorbed
an extended spectrum and reduced rate of
orally.
development of bacterial resistance via a
sequential blockade of folate, purine, and
10. The answer is B.
DNA synthesis.
Aminoglycosides do nol produce myelosup-
prcssion. Nephrotoxicily and ototoxicity arc
5. The answer is D.
most likcly in patienls with impaired renal
The fluoroquinolones are bactericidal
function. Neuromuscular blockade occurs
by inhibiting bacterial DNA gyrase, which
rarely and is reversed by calcium.
results in degradation of replicating DNA.
They are broad spectrum but anaerobes
11. The answer is A.
tend to be resistant. They are absorbed
Tetracyclines inhibit bacterial protein
Orally. They should not be administered to
synthesis by binding to the 30s ribosome
 puppies because they may produce erosion
of bacteria and preventing attachment of
of articular carlilage in growing dogs.
aminoacyl tRNA to the ribosome and thus
block the addition of amino acids to protein
6. The answer is D.
synthesis. Polymixin B disrupts bacterial cell
Penicillins and cephalosporins arc clim-
membranes and fluoroquinolones inhibit 
inatcd by rcnal mcchanisms of glomerular
DNA gyrase. Chlorarmphenicol binds to
filtration and active tubular sccretion. Thcir
the 50S ribosome and inhibits peptidyl
 mechanism of action and inactivation by
transferase.
AntimicrobialDrugs 377
12. The answer is C.
16. The answer is E.
Tylosin is a macrolide antibiotic effec-
Chloramphenicol used in food-producing.
tive against Gram(+) pathogens and
animals is illegal because of the potential
mycoplasmal infections. It is also active
danger of residue-induced aplastic anemia in
against some Gram(-) bacteria, including
humans.
Pasteurella and Haemophilus spp. It inhibits 
protein synthesis by binding to the 50S
17. The answer is B.
ribosome like other macrolides including ery-
Bacitracin, neomycin, and polymixin B
thromycin and thus cross-resistance would be
 are used topically or as nonabsorbable oral
expected.
antibiotics. They are too nephrotoxic for
systemic use. Bacitracin is bactericidal against
Gram(+) organisms and neomycin and
13. The answer is D.
polymixin B are bactericidal against Gram(-)
Clindamycin is active against Gram(+)
bacteria.
aerobes and anaerobes and has excellent
penetration of soft tissues and bones, which
18. The answer is A.
renders it effective in staphylococcal os-
Amphotericin B is nephrotoxic and re-
teomyelitis. It is contraindicated in horses
nal function must be monitored weekly
because it suppresses colonic flora and
during long-term therapy for systemic
produces a severe, often fatal, diarrhea.
mycoses.
19. The answer is C.
14. The answer is B.
Tetracyclines are effective in treating
Griseofulvin's action is fungistatic and
Haemobartonella infection, but are excreted
its action is slow as it inhibits fungal growth
in keratin precursor cells. Infected cells are
by the kidney and are nephrotoxic if there
slowly shed and replaced with uninfected
is preexisting renal disease. Doxycycline,
cells. Oral absorption is increased by fat. It
however, is excreted primarily by the intes
tine and could be safely administered to this
inhibits mitosis by binding to microtubules to
prevent spindle formation.
patient.
20. The answer is A.
15. The answer is C.
Flucytosine is an antifungal that pene-
Rifampin is bactericidal for mycobacte-
trates the CNS and CSF well. It is used
ria and Gram(+) pathogens. It is combined
with amphotericin B in the treatment of
with erythromycin for R. equi infections.
meningeal cryptococcosis. Ketoconazole does
Spectinomycin is an aminocylitol used for
 not penetrate the CNS well. Ketoconazole
enteric and respiratory diseases. Vancomycin
inhibits ergosterol synthesis in fungi and, at
is a reserve antibiotic for methicillin-resistant
high doses, steroid synthesis in mammals.
staphylococcal infections. Tylosin is a
Long-term therapy is required for mycotic
macrolide similar to erythromycin.
infections.
This page intentionally left blank
nal
ter
16
Antiparasitic Agents
Walter H. Hsu and Richard J. Martin
INTRODUCTION. Antiparasitics are drugs that recduce parasite burdens to a toler
able level by killing parasitces or inhibiting ihcir growth. The ideal antiparasitic has a
wide therapeutic index (i.e., the toxic dose is at least three times the therapeutic dose),
is effective after one dose, is easy to administer, is inexpensive, and does not leave
residues (an important consideration for use in food-producing animals).
Mechanisms of action
A.
1. Paralysis of parasites by mimicking the action of putative neurotransmitters (Table
16-1)
 2. Alteration of metabolic processes 
a. Inhibition of microtubule synthesis
b. Inhibition of folic acid synthesis or metabolism
C.
Inhibition of thiamine utilization
d. Uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation
e. Inhibition of chitin formation in arthropods
f. Simulation of insect juvenile hormones
3. Alteration of parasite reproduction
 a. Inhibition of replication in protozoans
 b. Inhibition of egg production in nematodes
B.
Disadvantages of antiparasitics
1.Expense
2. Development of resistant strains
3. Inhibition of host immunity
C. Characteristics of ideal antiparasitics
1. Effective in removing parasites from bocdy
2. Wide therapeutic index: Toxic dosc > 3× therapeutic. dose
3. Economically justifiable
4.B
Easy to administer, for example, in feed, injections, and pour-on
5.(
One-dose treatment
6. No residue problems, especially in food-producing animals
 7. Effective against immature form of parasites
Current trends include the use of broad-spectrum drugs and combination therapy t0
increase efficacy.
ANTINEMATODAL DRUGS (NEMATOCIDES) may be broad-spectrum or narrow-
spectrum.
Classification of antinematodal drugs
1. Benzimidazoles
 2. Nicotinic agonists: levamisole, pyrantel, morantel
3. Macrocyclic lactones: ivermectin, cloramectin, eprinomectin, sclamectin (aver-
mectins), milhemycin, moxidectin (milbemycins)
 4. Miscellaneous nematocides: dichlorvos, piperazine, emodepside, melarsomine
379
380
|Chapter 16 Il B
TABLE 16-1. Putativc Classical Ncurotransmitters of Various
Parasites.
Parasite
Excitatory
Inhibitory
Nematode
ACh, Glu
Glu, GABA
Cestode!
5-HT
ACh
Trematode
5-HT
ACh, DA, NE
ACh, Glu
Glu, OA, GABA
Ach. acetylcholine: DA. clopamine: CABA, y aminobutyric acid; Gilu, glutamate: NE,
norepinephrine: OA, oclopamine: 5-HT, serolonin.
*Note that nenatccles. cestodles. trematodes, and arthropuds also have a large
range of cxcilalory and inhilbitory ncuropcptidles. Some of ihe sane neuropeptides are
presenl in nenatodes, treinalodes, and arlhropoxls.
B
Benzimidazoles (BZDs) (Figure 16-1)
1.
 Thiabendazole (Figure 16-1) is the prototypical agent. It is approved for use in ru-
 minants and horses.
a.
 Preparations. Thiabendazole is the prototype of BZD, which is much less potent
than other BZDs, and is no longer used as a nematocide. Other BZDs include
albendazole, fenbendazole, oxfendazole, oxibendazole, and febantel (a pro-BZD)
that is converted to fenbendazole and oxfendazole in animals).
b. Chemistry, All of BZDs, cxccpt thiahcndazole, have a side chain al position 5.
which prcvcnts hydroxylation of position 5 of the BZD. Thcrefore, thesc com-
pounds are more potent than thiabendazole as nematocides (Figure 16-2).
C.
 Mechanism of action. BZDs inhibit imicrotubule synthesis in nematode cells by
interfering with polymerization of β-tubulins (Figure 16-3). BZDs do not affect
microtubule synthesis in animal cells, this is why these drugs are relatively safe
in animals. Care should be exercised for some of the BZDs (albendazole) if the
 animal is in the first one-third of pregnancy.
d. Therapeutic uses
(1) Ruminants. Albendazole (Valbazen), fenbendazole (Panacur), clc.), and
oxfendazole (Benzelnin, Synanthic@) are effective against major Gl worms
(in both the adult and larval stages). In addition, they are cffcctive against
lungworms. However, they are ineffective against filariae.
(2) Horses. Fenbendazole, oxfendazole, and oxibendazole (Anthelcide) are
strongyles. They are not very effective against migrating larvae of Strongy-
lus vuigaris and S. edentatis, and thus need elevated, multiple doses to treat
these parasites. They are effective against Oxyuris. Trichostronylus, and
Parascaris. They have limited activity against Strongyfoides, Ffabronema,
and Dictyocaufus; and thus may nced clevated doses to trcat these parasilcs.
They are not effective against Gasterophifus.
(3) Swine. Fenbcndazole is cffeclivc againsl Ascaris, Ocsophagostomum,
Hyostrongylus, Trichuris, Metastrongylus, and Stephanurus. Fenbendazole
usually kills both adults and larvae (Ls, L).
FIGURE 16-1. Chemical structure of thiabcnda-
H
7ole, the protolypical benzimidazole. Metabolism
occurs via hydroxylation at position 5. The other
N
benzimidazoles arc more potcnt than thiaben-
dazole because they have a side chain, which
prevents hydroxylation at position 5. (Reprint from
2
Figure 13-1, NVLS Pharmacofogy, by Ahrens,
1996.)
Antuparastic Agents  381
Compound
Structural formula
H
NH
CH
Albendazole
CH,CH,CH,
CH
Fenbendazole
-COOCH,
Febantel
NH-COOCH,
NH-CO-CHO-CH,
Oxfendazole
CH
Oxibendazole
CH
CH,CHCHO
FIGURE 16-2. Chemical structures of albendazole, fenbendazole, febantel, oxfendazole, and oxiben-
dazole. (Modified from Table 47.1, Veterinary Pharrnacology and Therapeurics, 8th ed., by Adams,
2001).
(4) Dogs and cats, Fenbendazole and fcbantel (in Drontal Plus) are cffective 
against ascarids, hookworms, and whipworms in both adult and larva forms.
(5) BZDs have ovicidal activity on nematodes. In addition, production of eggs
by nematodes is inhibited within 1 hour of BZD administration.
e. Administration. BZDs are administered orally. In general, one single dose in
cattle and horses, and three to five consecutive daily dosages in carnivores and
omnivores.
f. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. Gl absorption of BZDs varies, depending on the water solubility
of the compound; the ones with better water solubility, for example, alben-
dazole and oxibendazole have better Gl absorption than others. Since bile
can help dissolve BZDs, absorption of them will be best in animals with a
full slomach. Herbivores fed fiber rather than concentrates before receiving
 and oral dose of BZDs have an increased area under the curve signifying
better absorption. This is because the BZDs bind to the dietary fiber prevent-
ing them from passing straight through the Gl tract and facilitating absorp-
tion.
382
Tubulin
Tubulin
dimers
Microtubule
dimers
Q
Benzimidazoleblocks
assembly
Depolymerization
Polymerization
FIGURE 16-3. Benzimidazole (BZD)-induccd inhibition of microtubulc synthesis in helminthes. BZD
binds β-tubulin of helminthes, preventing dimerization with α-tubulin and polymerization of tubulin
oligomers into microtubules. (Modified froin Figure 57.2. Human Pharmacology. 3rd ed., by Brody.
Larner, and Minneman. 1998.)
(2) Metabolism. The degree of metabolisim is related to the C5 substitution of
BZD (see Figure 16-i). In general, all BZDs, exccpt thiabendazole, are rcsis-
tant to metabolism (C5-hydroxylation). Albendazole can be converted to its
sulfone or sulfoxide imetabolites; these metabolites are also active.
(3) Excretion. Thc majorily of BZDs (cxcept thiabendazolc and albendazolc) arc
excreted unchanged in feces,
(4) Plasma ty, and drug residues and withdrawal periods
(a) After oral administration, Tmax for BZDs is 10-20 hours; elimination ty
of albendazole in cattle is 9-14 hours: ty: of fenbendazole in horses is
~10 hours, in cattle is 27-36 hours, and in sheep is 14-35 hours. ty、 of
oxfendazole in cattle and sheep is 18 hours.
(b) Drug residues persist for 1-3 weeks. They approach the low limit of de-
tection in 2 days; however, residues in the liver are generally detectable
in 2 weeks.
(c) The preslaughter withdrawal period in cattle is 27 days for albendazole,
8 days for fenbendazole, and 7 days for oxiendazole. Do nol use in lac-
tating dairy cattle (exception, fenbendazole).
(d) The preslaughter withdrawal period in swine following fenbendazole
adiministration is O days.
g. Drug resistance. Cross-resistance occurs among all BZDs.
h. Adverse effects. These agents are generally safe, although albendazole may be
teratogenic and eimbryotoxic. BZDs may be toxic to liver and bone marrow in
dogs, particularly at high doscs.
Nicotinic agonists
1. Levamisole is approved for use in ruminants and pigs.
a. Mechanism of action. Levamisole paralyzes worms by selectively activating ne-
matode nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptors, allowing entry of Na+, Ca?+, for
excessive body muscle contraction, and thus induces paralysis. (Figure 16-4)
Antiparasiie Agents
383
Hypodermis
CI-
GABA-gated CIchannel
Piperazine
CI-
ON
Glutamate-gated
Cl-channel
Macrocyclic
PFZ
↑CGMP
lactones
GC
PLC
K+
LTPreceptor
Emodepside
Nicotinic receptor
④ACh
Levamisole
Pyrantel
Na
Morantel
Ca2+
FIGURE 16-4. Mechanisins of action of antinenatoral (drugs that interfere with parasite nervous
syslem. ITP = lalrophilin; PL.C. = phospholipasec; PFI = SDPNFL.RF-anide; PFZ = SADPNFLRF-amide;
GC = guanylyl cyclase.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Ruminants. Levamisole is effective against most mature Gl worms and lung-
worms, but it has marginal activity against Strongyloides and immature Gl
worrms.
(2) Pigs. It is effective against ascarids, Strongyloides, nodular worms, lung-
worns, and kidney worms.
C. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption is excellent following oral, parenteral, or topical administration;
it can be administered as a pour-on preparation.
(2) In cattle, levamisole is transformed by liver into metabolites (iormed by oxi-
dation of imidazoline ring and opening of thiazolidine ring).
(3) The plasma ty, of levamisole is 4-6 hours, and the drug is eliminated from
the body in 2 days after being absorbed.
(4) More than 90% of levamisole is excreted as mctabolites into urine (90%)
and feces (10%) within 48 hours of administration.
(5) The preslaughter clearance periods in cattle are 48-72 hours (PO), 7 days
aiter oral administration in pigs is 72 hours.
d. Adverse effects. Levamisole is one of the most toxic. anthelmintics. It has a low
cattle of breeding age, since milk withdrawal periods in these animals have not
been determined.
(1) Signs of levamisole poisoning include parasympathetic: stimulation, convul-
sions, CNS depression, and asphyxia, which is primarily the result of respira-
tory muscle paralysis.
(2) Atropine cannot counteract levamisole-induced depolarizing block-
ade of skeletal muscle; therefore, it is not an antidote for levamisole
overdose.
(3) Coadministration of levamisole and pyrantel, another nicotinc-like nemato-
cide, increases toxicity.
384
| Chapter 16 Il C
2. Pyrantel and morantel
a. Chemistry
(1) Pyrantel, which is inactivated in aqueous solution upon exposure to light,
should be stored in tight, light-resistant containers. The drug should be used
soon after the preparation of a drench solution or suspension.
(2) Morantel, the methyl ester of pyrantel, is stable in solution.
b. Preparations
(1) Pyrantel tartrate is approved for horses (Strongid-C) and pigs (Banminth).
(2) Pyrantel pamoate is approved for horses (Strongid-T, Strongid-p() and
dogs (Nemex?, and in Drontal, Hcartgard, clc.), and is used in cats as
well.
(3) Morantel tartrate (Rumatel?) is approvcd for caule.
c. Mechanism of action, Like levamisole, pyrantel, and morantel paralyzc worms
by causing depolarizing neuromuscular blockade (Figure 16-4).
d. Therapeutic uses
(1) Horses. Pyrantel is effective against strongyles, ascarids, and pinworms, but 
not against bots. Pyrantel tartrate is used to prevent nematodes infestation 
and pyrantel pamoate is used to treat nematodes infestation.
(2) Pigs. Pyrantel is effective against ascarids, nodular worms, and stomach
worms.
(3) Dogs and cats. Pyrantel is effective against all Cl nematodes, but it has lim-
ited efficacy against whipworms.
(4) Ruminants. Morantel is used as a feed additive, which is effective against
stomach worms, nodular worms, and other principal intestinal worms.
e. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption
(a) Pyrantel tartrate is water soluble; therefore, Gl absorption is excellent 
following oral administration. Peak plasima concentrations occur 2-3
hours after dosing. Elimination ty, in pigs and horses are ~6 and ~14
hours, respectively.
(b) Pyrantel pamoate is poorly soluble in water, limiting Gl absorption.
Therefore, pyrantel pamoate is good for the treatment of bowel worms
(e.g., pinworms).
(c) Morantel tartrate is absorbed rapidly frorm the abomasun and sinall
intestine. Peak plasma concentrations occur 4-6 hours after dosing.
Plasma ty, of morantel in cattle is not known.
(2) Metabolism and excretion. The absorbcd pyrantel and moranlel arc rapidly
mctabolized (hydroxylation and conjugation) and cxcrcted, inostly via fc-
ces, but also via urine. Prcslaughter withdrawal rcquireincnts are 1 day for
pyrantel tartratc in swine and 14 days for imorantel in cattlc.
f. Adverse effects. At recommended doses, adverse effects are not common. How-
ever, when adverse reactions occur, they are similar to levamisole toxicity.
 g. Contraindications. Because morantel and pyrantel have the same mechanism of
action as levamisole, these agents should not be used concurrently.
h. Resistance. There is a cross-resistance among pyrantel, morantel, and levamisole.
D.
 Macrocyclic lactones (macrolide endectocides). These compounds are antibiotics de-
rived from Streptomyces, with activity against nematodes and arthropods. In addition
(o having broad-spectrum activily, thcy are effectivc at low dosages (μg/kg range).
1. General aspects of macrocylic lactones
a. Chemistry. There are two major groups, the avermectins and milbemycins (Fig-
ures 16-5 and 16-6). Ivermectin, doramectin, eprinomectin, and selamectin be-
long to the avermectin group and have a disaccharide side chain; milbemycin
and moxidectin belong to the milbemycin group and do not have the disaccha-
ride side chain and are more lipophilic (Figures 16-5 and 16-6).
b. Mechanism of action. They activate the glutamate-gated chloride channels, thus
inhibiting neurotransmission in neimatodes (and arthropods) to induce flaccid
paralysis.
Antiparasitic:Agenls385
H,CO
HK
CH
CH
CH,
日
HO
H
OCH,
HO
H
FIGURE 16-5. Structure of 22,23-dihydroavermectin Bia, the major component of ivermectin. Iver-
in the 25 position is isopropyl instead of butyl. (Reprint from Fig. 47.3, Vererinary Pharmacology and 
Therapcutics, 8th cd., by Adams. 2001.)
(1) As part of the result of inhibition of neurotransmission, pharyngeal muscle of
neimatodes is paralyzed, this interferes with feeding; body imovement is also
inhibited as is egg laying.
(2) The exact site of action of the macrocyclic lactones depends on the species
of the parasite and on the specific macrocyclic lactone; it is likely that there
are different subtypes of receptor on the different parasite cells/tissues and
 selectivity for the receptor subtypes varies with the macrocyclic lactone (Fig-
ure 16-4).
CH
HO
FIGURE 16-6. Structure of milbemycin oxime.
(Reprint from Fig. 47.7. Vetcrinary Pharmacology
and Therapcutics, 8th cd. by Adams, 2001.)
A,
Oxime: R = CH,
A
Oxime: R= CHs
386Chapter 16 II D
C. Adverse effects. Macrocyclic lactones have a high safety margin in ruminants,
horses, and swine, and are safe for use in pregnant animals and breeders. Some
of the Collie dogs and Murray cattle show high sensitivity to ivermectin.
(1) Local irritation may occur following SC administration.
(2) CNS depression. At high doses, ivermectin may evoke CNS depression as
cvidenced by listlessncss, mydriasis, ataxia, recumbency, and coma. Al-
though macrocyclic lactoncs activate y-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-gated Cl-
channels in animals, the CABA-receptor antagonist picrotoxin does not work
well as an antidote.
d. Resistance. Resistances to macrocyclic lactones have occurred in mematodes and
arthropods. Cross-resistance among macrocyclic lactones can occur.
2. Ivermectin. It is extracted from Streptomyces avernnitilis. The ivermectin injectable
(lvomec(&) is dissolved in propylene glycol-glycerol formal mixture.
a. Chemistry. Ivermectin is a mixture of ~80% 22,23-dihydroavermectin B1. and
~20% 22,23-dihydroavermectin B1tb,
b. Therapeutic uses and administration
(1) Ruminants. Ivermcctin (lvomcc) is effective against all major Gl worms
and lungworms. It is administercd at 0.2 mg/kg orally or SC, and 0.5 mg/kg
not in goats or sheep because of poor absorption from the skin.
(2) Horses. It is effective against bots, stormach worims, strongyles, pinworms,
 and ascarids. It is administered at 0.2 mg/kg orally or SC.
(3) Pigs. Ivermectin is effective against major Gl worms, lungworms, and kidney
worms. It is not effective against Trichinella during the muscular stage. The
standard dose is 0.3 mg/kg administered SC.
(4) Dogs
(a) Ivcrmectin is cffective against ascarids, hookworms, and whipworms at
0.2 mg/kg orally. However, this dosc may not be safe in some brceds
(e.g., Collies) and some individuals, and is therefore not approved for
dogs. In the dogs, being highly susceptible to ivermectin, they have a
mutation of P-glycoprotein particularly in the endothelial cells of the
blood-brain barrier. P-glycoprotein, an ATP-binding cassette transporter
(or multidrug transporter) found in the apical membrane of endothe-
lial cells, is responsible for drug exit from the brain. The mutation of P-
glycoprotein causes retention of drugs, particularly macrocyclic. lactones,
in' the brain of these dogs.
(b) Both ivermectin and selamectin are potent substrates and inhibitors of
the P-glycoprotein in dogs, but moxidectin is a weak one.
(c) Ivermectin (Heartgard@) and other macrocyclic lactones, that is, se-
[amectin (Revolutions), milbemycin (Interceptor?, Sentinel?), and mox-
idectin (Proheart) are used as heartworm preventives and are adminis-
tered to dogs once a month. For this purpose, ivermectin is administered
at 6-12 μg/kg. Macrocylic lactones eliminate L4 stage of infective larvae
Of Dirofilaria immitis.
(d) It is effective as a microfilaricide (50 μg/kg orally). The use of ivermectin
as a microfilaricide is extra-label. Ivermectin can be diluted with propy-
lene glycol, if needed.
(5) All species. Ivcrmcctin is cffcctivc against all cctoparasites. It is uscd cspc-
cially to control mites.
C.
 Pharmacokinetics
(1) After oral administration, ≤95% of ivermectin is absorbed in monogastric
animals and ~30% is absorbed in ruminants.
(2) In swine, after oral and SC administrations of ivermectin, the peak plasma
level of the drug is reached in 12 and 48 hours, respectively.
(3) Following IV injection, the plasma ty, of ivermectin is 1.6-1.8 days in dogs,
and 2.7-2.8 days in ruminants.
long plasima fy, aftcr SC administration is probably duc to thc solvcnt systcm
Antiparastic: Agents387
(propylene glycol-glycerol formal), which slows down the absorption from
injection site.
(5) Following administration, highest concentrations of ivermectin are found in
liver and bile, and lowest concentration is found in the brain.
(6) Ivermectin is metabolized in liver and fat to polar and nonpolar fatty acid
csters, respcctivcly.
(7) Fccal excrction accounts for 98% of elimination of ivermectin.
(8) Ivermectin remains in tissues with long persistency; one dose is usually ef-
fective for 2-4 weeks. Preslaughter clearance periods: swine: 5 days (PO),
18 days (SC); sheep: 11 days (PO); cattle: 35 days (SC), 49 days (topical).
Ivermectin should not be administered to dairy cows that are >20 months
old.
3. Doramectin (Dectomax@)
a.
Chemistry. Doramectin is an analog of ivermectin (having a cyclohexyl group at
C-25). The solvent for doramectin is 90% sesame oil—10% ethyl oleate, which
slows down absorption from the injection site.
b. Therapeutic uses. Doramectin is used only in cattle at 0.2 mg/kg SC.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Pharmacokinetics of doramcctin in cattle are very similar
to that of ivcrmcctin. Preslaughter withdrawal periods are 35 days (SC) and
45 days (topical). It should not be administered to dairy cows that are >20
months old.
4. Eprinomectin. (Eprinex@)
a. Chemistry. Eprinomectin is an analog of ivermectin (having an epi-acetylamino
group at the 4"-position).
b. Therapeutic uses. Eprinomectin is used topically in cattle (O.5 mg/kg) to control
most Gl nematodes, lungworms, and ectoparasites the same way as ivermectin.
c.
Pharmacokinetics
(1) Eprinomcctin is absorbed after topical administration and reaches peak
plasma level within 2-5 days of application and declines to undetectable
levcl in 4 wccks. The majority of the topical dosc is absorbed in 7-10
days. More than 85% of eprinomectin is excreted into feces as parent
compound.
treatment, since drug residue levels are below legally acceptable limits in
meat and milk after topical administration.
5. Selamectin (Revolution@)
a. Chemistry. The chemical structure of selamectin is closer to doramectin than 
ivermectin. There is one lactone ring short in selamectin structure when com-
pared with those of doramectin and ivermectin.
b. Therapeutic uses. It is applied topically in dogs and cats (≥6 weeks old), 6
mg/kg, once a month 
(1) In cats, selamectin prevents heartworms and kills ascarids, hookworms,
fleas, and ear mites.
(2) In dogs, selamectin prevents heartworms and kills fleas (adults, larvae, and
eggs), sarcoptic. mites, ear mites, and ticks. Failures have been reported for
selamectin as an ectoparasiticide.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Aftcr topical application, there is 4% bioavailability in dogs and 74%
bioavailability in cats. The high bioavailability in cats is attributed to thcir
grooming activity and slow metabolism; as a result, selamectin serves as a
nematocide in cats, but not in dogs.
(2) After topical application, plasma selamectin concentrations reach maximal in
72 hours in dogs and 15 hours in cats. Plasma ty, of selamectin in dogs and
cats are 14 hours and 69 hours, respectively.
(3) After a single topical administration, clinically effective concentrations of
selamcctin as a heartworm preventive persist for >30 days.
(4)  Aftcr topical application, substantial amount of topical selamectin is stored
 in sebaccous glands to providc pcrsistent activity against ectoparasitcs.
388|Chapter 16 I1 1)
(5) Selamectin is mctabolizcd in the liver into dcsmcthyl selamcctin, and its
oxidation product. Selamectin is excreted mostly in the feces as unchanged
compound along with a small amount of metabolites.
d. Adverse effects. Selamectin is safer than ivermectin in dogs; sclamectin is safe in
pregnant animals and ivermectin-sensilive Collies. Selamectin-trealed cals may
show hypersalivation, which is due to the ingestion of isopropyl alcohol, a sol-
vent in the preparation.
6. Milbemycin (Interceptor? and in Sentinel@) is extracled from Streptomyces hygro-
scopicus aureolacrimosus.
a. Chemistry. Commercial milbemycin consists of ~80%, A4 milbemycin and
~20% A3 milbemycin (Figurc 16-6).
b. Therapeutic uses. Milbemycin is approved for use in dogs only and is effective
against the infective larvae of D. immitis, hookworms, whipworms, and ascarids.
Milbemycin at the recommended dose of 0.5 mg/kg, orally, once a month, can
be used in all dog breeds, including Collies, and is safe in pregnant dogs and
breeders (because it is a weak substrale of P-glycoprotein). This dose of milbe-
mycin is effective as a microfilaricide as well.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Following oral administration, ~90% of the dosc passcs
through the Cl tracl unchanged. The remaining ~10% is absorbed. Ii reaches
peak plasma concentration within 2-5 hours after oral administration. It is sub-
sequcntly cxcrcted into the bile: close to 90% of the dosc is climinated in the
feces. The plasma ty, of milbemycin is 1-3 days.
d. Adverse effects. Milbemycin has a high safety margin in dogs. However,
milbemycin-killed microfilaria can cause hypersensitivity manifested by lethargy.
pyrcxia, salivation, cmesis, coughing, tachypnca, and/or shock. These adversc
effecls are also seen when ivermectin is used as a microfilaricide.
 7. Moxidectin. It is manufactured from Streptomyces cyanogriseus moncyanogenus
culture.
a. Chemistry. Unlike other macrocyclic lactones, moxidectin is a single compound,
but not a mixture of two closely related compounds.
b. Therapeutic uses. Moxidectin is used to treat equine and bovine nematodes and
ectoparasites, and as a canine heartworm preventive for once a month use. The
cquinc prcparation (Qucst@) is a 2% oral gel (0.4 mg/kg), the bovine prepara-
tion (Cydectin@) is a topical solution (0.5 mg/kg), and the canine preparation
(Proheart) is in tablets (3 μg/kg, PO). There is a new moxidectin product that
is in combination with a fleacide imidacloprid (Advantage Multi) topical solu-
tionthat is a canine and feline heartworm preventive for once a month use. The
dosage is 2.5 mg/kg in dogs and 1 mg/kg in cats. This product is also effective
against ascarids, hookworms, and whipworms as well as ear mites.
c. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Moxidectin is more lipophilic than ivermectin; as a result, tissue levels per-
sist longer than ivermectin.
moxidectin is present in feces as hydroxylaled metabolites.
(3) Plasma ty, are ~80 hours in horses and 20 days in dogs when given orally.
When applied topically in dogs and cats, Tmax are 9.3 and 1.4 days, and ty
arc 35 and 15 days, respectively. Information is not available for cattle after
lopical administration.
(4) When administered topically in cattle, no preslaughter or milk withdrawal
period is required, since drug residue levels are below legally acceptable
limits in meat and rmilk after topical administration.
d. Adverse effects. Adverse effects of moxidectin are similar to those of ivermectin.
The topical product for dogs and cats should not be administered orally: the
atdversc cffects can be very severe when administercd orally.
E.Miscellaneous antinematodal drugs
1. Dichlorvos (Atgard(&), an organophosphate, is marketed for use in pigs only.
Antiparasiti: Agernts 389
a.
 Mechanism of action. Dichlorvos inhibits ACh breakdown by irreversibly inhibit-
ing ACh esterase (AChE). (See Figure 2-6 for illustration.)
b. Therapeutic uses. Dichlorvos is effective against major Gl worms, for example,
whipworms, nodular worms, Strongyloides, hookworims, and ascarids in pigs. It
has little or no activity against migrating larvae of ascarids and hookworms.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Dichlorvos is a lipophilic. liquid that is incorporated into
polyvinyl chloride resin pellets. As these pellets traverse the Gl tract, dichlor-
vos diffuses into the intestinal fluid, allowing the drug to come into contact with
nematodes. The pellets release ~50% of the drug in 48 hours. When passed
into the feces, the pellets still contain ~50% of the original dosc of dichlor-
vos, cnough to kill fccal fly larvac. Inforrmation rcgarding climination and t?
of dichlorvos is not available.
d. Adverse effects. Accurnulation of ACh by dichlorvos can stimulate cholinergic
rcccptors to induce the SLUDD (salivation, lacrimation, urination, diarrhca, dys-
pnea) syndrome. Acute death may result from respiratory paralysis and cardio-
vascular arrest.
e. Contraindications. Dichlorvos is not to bc given to wcak animals, those cxposed
to other anti-cholinesterase (anti-ChE) agents, or those with Gl disorders.
2. Piperazine
a. Chemistry. Piperazine is available in adipate, citrate, hydrochloride, tartrate, and
phosphate forms. Piperazine is inactivated by moisture, COz, and light; there-
fore, containers should be tightly closed and protected from light.
nematode muscle, causing flaccid paralysis of worms (Figure 16-4).
C. Therapeutic uses. Piperazine has a limited spectrurm of action but is effective
against ascarids and nodular worms in all species; however, its use is limited in
ruminants, because ascarids are not a significant problem in this species.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. Piperazine salts are well absorbed from the Gl tract.
(2) Metabolism and excretion. Some piperazine is metabolized in the liver and
the remainder (30-40%) is excreted in the urine. Urinary excretion of piper-
azine starts as carly as 30 minutes after dosing, and is complcte within 24
hours. The plasma ty, is ~2 hours.
ing, diarrhca, and ataxia. The ataxia is due to a GABA-mimetic effect of pipcr-
azine on CNS neurons and is particularly seen in young animals given high
doses.
3. Emodepside
a. Chemistry. Emodepside is a semisynthetic cyclic depsipeptide.
b. Mechanism of action. Is a selective agonist of the presynaptic latrophilin re-
ceptor, a Gq-coupled receptor, of nermatodes, which increases the release of
inhibitory neuropeptides PF1 and PF2. and opens C+-activated K+ channels,
thereby causing flaccid paralysis of the locomotive and pharyngeal muscles in 
nematodes (Figure 16-4).
c. Therapeutic uses. It is used topically (as a spot-on product) with an anticestodal
drug praziquantel (Profender) for the treatment of nematodes in cats. Emodep-
side is effective against ascarids and hookworims (mature and immature adults as
well as La larvae). Cost of production has prevented the marketing of emodep-
side for large animals.
d. Pharmacokinetics. The drug is absorbed through the skin and enters the circu-
lation. It appears that from the blood the drug gets deposited into adipose tissue
and from these sites leaches back into the blood. The drug is eliminated via the
bile and leaves in the feces mainly as unmodified emodepside. Tmax is 40 hours
and ty, is 8.3 days.
e. Adverse effects. Alopecia may be seen at the application site. Salivation and
vomiting may occur, which is duc to licking the application sitc. Tremors may
show up when cats are overdosed with emodepside. Do not use in kittens under
8 weeks of age. It is safe to be used in pregnant and lactating cats.
390
Chapter 16 1II A
DRUGSFORHEARTWORMPREVENTIONANDTHERAPY
A.
Introduction. Treatment and prevention of heartworim involve three aspects as follows:
1.
 Removal of adult heartworms requires an adulticide.
2. Interruption of the life cycle requires a microfilaricide. Treatment to eliminate mi-
crofilaria should be initiated 3-4 weeks after the adulticide treatment. Some clini-
cians choose not to treat imicrofilaria.
a. Microfilaricidal treatment reduces the incidence of glomerulonephritis, which
may be induced when microfilaria are present in a large number.
b. Microfilaricidal treatment eliminates the source of heartworm infestation (iminor
reason for eliminating microfilaria).
3. Prevention of infection requires a larvicide.
B.
Adulticides eliminate both immature (ls) and adult heartworms. The heartworm adul-
ticide melarsomine is used solely in canine species. Cats should not receive this adul-
ticide treatment because of potential severe reactions occur when heartworms are
killed in this species.
1. Melarsomine (Ilmmiticide?)
a.
 Chemistry. Melarsominc is a trivalent arscnic compound.
b. Administration. Melarsomine is administered into Iumbar muscle.
(1) The regular dose regimen is 2.5 mg/kg once a day for 2 days.
(a) Since melarsomine is highly irritable, the first injection should be into
the right lumbar muscle, and the second into the left lumbar muscle.
(b) The two-dose regimen eliminates all adult heartworms in 60-80% of
treated dogs. The regimen can be repeated in 4 months, which would
increase the efficacy to 98%.
(2) For dogs with severe infestation, a single dose (2.5 mg/kg) is followed by the
full two-dose treatiment 1 month later. The initial single dose would kill 88%
of male and 17% of female worms, hence providing some relief of clinical
signs, while reducing the risk of complication from pulmonary embolism.
This regimen would remove all heartworms in 85% of treated dogs.
c. Mechanism of action. Melarsomine denatures proteins/enzymes by binding to
the sulfhydryl groups of cysteine residues.
d. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption. Following IM injection, melarsomine is completely absorbed in
15 minutes and the blood concentration peaks at 8 minutes. The elimination
ty, is ~3 hours.
(2) Distribution. Melarsomine is found in both plasma and red blood cells. The
drug is widely distributed in the body, but is concentrated in the liver and
kidncys.
(3) Metabolism and excretion. Melarsominc is metabolizcd in the livcr and cx-
creted into bile. Both melarsomine and its mctabolitcs can be found in fcccs
and urine after administration.
e. Adverse effects
(1) Mild localized edema may occur following IM injection.
(2) Overdose may result in distress, restlessness, pawing, salivation, vomit-
ing, tachycardia, tachypnea, dyspnea, abdominal pain, hindlimb weakness,
and recumbency. Severe cases terminate in circulatory collapse, orthopnea,
coma, and death.
(3) Liver toxicity. These animals may show anorexia, persistent vomiting, de-
pression, melena, and jaundice. Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alka-
line phosphatase (AP), and bilirubin concentrations may increase.
(4) Nephrotoxicity. These animals may show albuminuria, renal case and
azotemia with blood urea nitrogen concentration of >100 mg/dl.
(5)  Toxicity can be alleviated by IM administration of 3 mg/kg dimercaprol
(BAL) within 3 hours of the onset of symptoms. However, dimercaprol may
reduce the efficacy of melarsomine.
Antuparasitic Agents 」391
(6) Thromboembolic pneumonia may be seen, which is due to dead worms ac-
cumulation within 3 weeks of treatment. Signs of pneumonia include cough-
ing, dyspnea, hemoptysis, fever, and lethargy. The affected dogs need ab-
solute rest for 2 weeks, and can be treated with anti-inilammatory drugs,
parlicularly glucocorlicoids and antibiolics. Glucocorticoids can he used to
 prevent the adulticide-induced thromboembolic pneumonia.
C.
 Microfilaricides. Some practitioners choose not to use microfilaricide, particularly if
 dogs do not harbor large number of microfilaria.
1. Preparations. Macrocyclic lactones, for example, ivermectin and milbemycin, are
used as microfilaricides and this use is extra-label; however, these are the only
drugs that may be safely and effectively used for this purpose.
2. Administration
a. Ivermectin. Therapy entails one cdose (50 μg/kg) administered orally or SC. This
drug should not be used in Collies as a microfilaricide.
b. Milbemycin. One dose (0.5 mg/kg) is administered orally: the treatment may be
repeated in 2 weeks. This drug can be safely used in Collies.
 3. Adverse effects. Transient weakness, pale membranes, intestinal hyperperistalsis,
and tachypnea may be seen following administration of a microfilaricide, suggest-
ing a mild cardiovascular shock resulting from reactions to dead microfilaria. The
higher the microfilaria count, the greater the chance of encountering noticeable
 adverse effects. These adverse effects can be treated or prevented with glucocorti-
coids.
D.
Larvicides for heartworm prevention. Macrocyclic actones (e.g., ivermcctin, mox-
idectin, milbemycin, and selamectin)
1. Administration. Macrocyclic lactones kill L4 larvae. Ivermectin, moxiclectin, and
milbemycin are administered orally at dosages of 6-12 μg/kg. 3 μg/kg. and 500
μg/kg. respectively, once a month. The first dose is given within 1 month of the
first exposure to mosquitoes. The last dose is given within 1 month following the
last exposure to mosquitoes. Because it takes 2.5 months for L4 larvae to develop
into Ls larvae, the elimination of larvae in the L4 stage once a month is sufficient to
prevent heartworm infestation.
2. See Il D 2, 5-7 for other information on mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics,
and adverse effects of macrocyclic lactones.
ANTICETODAL DRUGS
A.
Introduction
1. These agents kill tapeworms and are called taeniacides, as opposed to arecoline.
an obsolele taeniafuge that only paralyzes them.
2. Worms killed by these drugs may be digested by the host animal; therefore, the
killed worms may not be evident in the feces.
3. Control of intermediate hosts (e.g., fleas for Dipylidium, rodents for Taenia and
Echinococcus, and mites for Anopfocephala and Moniezia.)
B.
Dichlorophene
1. Therapeutics uses. Dichlorophene is used to treat Taenia and Dipylidium infesta-
tions in dogs and cats, Its efficacy against Fchinococcus is variable.
2. Administration. Dichlorophene is besl given orally after an overnight iast.
3. Mechanism of action. Dichlorophene causes uncoupling of oxidative phosphory-
lation to deplete ATP from tapeworms and disrupts the pH difference across the
external tegumental membranes
4. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available.
392
2Cliapter 16 IV B
 5. Adverse effects. Vomiting and diarrhea may be seen after dichlorophene administra-
tion.
Benzimidazoles. Fenbendazole, oxfendazole, and albendazole are cffcctive: against ma-
ture Taenia and Echinococcus in dogs and cats, and Moniezia in ruminanls. They may
kill intermediate hydatid cysts of Taenia in infected cattle and sheep. These agents are
not effective against Dipylidium. (See Il A for basic information regarding benzimida-
zoles.)
D.
Praziquantel (Droncit, Drontal, Drontal Plus, Zimecterin, Equimax,
Quest& Plus)
1. Therapeutic uses. Praziquantel is effective against all species of tapeworms and
kills both adult and juvenile stages of the worms. However, its activity against hy-
datid cysts is erratic. It is also available in combination with pyrantel pamoate, iver-
mectin, and moxidectin to kill nematodes.
2. Mechanism of action, Praziquantel causes paralysis and digestion of tapeworms
as well as irreversible focal vacuolization and disintegration of integument. The
mechanism of action involves the selective binding of praziquantel to the β-subunit
of the voltage-dependent Ca21 channel of the susceptible parasites. The increased 
opening of ihe Ca2+ channels in the parasite mediales an excessive increasc in in-
Iracellular Ca2+ conccntrations and cell aulolysis.
3. Administration
a. Praziquantel is approved for dogs, cats, and horses, and has been used in other
 animals.
b. Praziquantel is administered orally or SC. Fasting before oral administration is
not necessary.
4. Pharmacokinetics
a. Absorption. Praziquantel is completely absorbed within 2 hours of oral adminis-
tration. The information is not available for absorption from the injection site.
b. Distribution. It is distributed throughout the body. inclucding the CNS.
C. Metabolism and excretion. Praziquantel is metabolized to unknown com-
pounds in the liver via cylochrome P450 and is excreted primarily in the urine,
The elimination t?. is ~3 hours in dogs. No information is available for other
species.
5. Adverse effects. Praziquantel is the safest anticestodal drug available.
a. Overdose induces anorexia, vomiting, salivation, diarrhea, and lethargy in <5%
of animals.
b. It cxerts no teralogenic. or cmbryoloxic cffecls.
E.
Epsiprantel (Cestex), a praziquantel analog, is approvcd for use in dogs and cats.
Epsiprantel is administered orally. Unlike praziquantel, epsiprantel is absorbed poorly
after oral administration and most of the drug is eliminated in the feces (<0.1% of the
drug is recovered in the urine after dosing).
F.
 Pyrantel pamoate. It is effective against equine tapeworms Anoplocephaia perfoliata
and is administered al 13.2 mg/kg orally (nemalocide dose: 6.6 mg/kg). It is nol as
effective as praziquantel as an anticestodal drug, but was used frequently when prazi-
quantel was expensive to procure. See ll C 2 for basic information regarding pyrantel
pamoate.
ANTITREMATODALDRUGS
A.
General aspect. Infestation with liver ilukes (Fasciofa hepatica) is the most common
and most economically important trematode disease of domestic animals worldwide.
pue soop ui (snmuoeed) sayn sunl ssuiese sonp soy pauasad si uoeou! jag
cats.
Antiparasitic Agents393
1. Liver fluke disease. This disease is typically chronic and subclinical in nature.
2. Both immature and mature liver flukes cause damages. After metacercaria are
ingested by grazing ruminants, the immature flukes emerge from the cysts, pene-
trate the small intestine wall, traverse the peritoneal cavity, and penetrate into liver
within 4 days of infestation. Thesc immalure flukes will tunnel through liver lissues,
growing rapidly. The cxtensive damages can causc acute clinical signs of fasciolo-
sis, which occur within 6-8 weeks of inoculation. This stage can be fatal. Scar tis-
sues are present after liver is damaged.
3. During the eighth week of infestation, flukes begin to penetrate the bile duct, where
they become mature by 10-12 weeks after infestation. These mature flukes cause
biliary inflammation and progressive occlusion.
4. Antitrematodal drugs are highly lipophilic and most of them are only effective
against mature flukes, but not immature flukes, that reside in the liver.
B.Clorsulon (Curatrem&, Ivomec Plus?). It is a sulfonamide that is effective against both
mature and immature F. hepatica in cattle.
1. Therapeutic uses. Clorsulon is the most effective drug against F. hepatica, killing
both mature and immature ilukes in cattle. However, its activity against F. magna
is fair to poor; it is nol effiective against rumen flukes or lung flukes. Clorsulon is
administered at 7 mg/kg orally, or 2 mg/kg SC (lvomec. Plus). Trealment is done in 
late fall and early spring (in snail seasons).
 2. Mechanism of action. Clorsulon inhibits 3-phosphoglycerate kinase and phospho-
glyceromutase in the glycolytic pathway, depriving the flukes of a metabolic energy
source.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. Clorsulon is lipid soluble. After oral dosing, it is absorbed
rapidly. Peak blood levels occur within 4 hours after oral administration. Biotrans-
formation of clorsulon plays only a minor role in the elimination of this compound.
Thus, clorsulon is eliminated from the body mostly in the unchanged form in both
feces and urine. The preslaughter withdrawal period is 8 days. When used in com-
bination with ivermectin (lvomec Plus?), the preslaughter withdrawal period is 49
days, which reflecls the long persistence of ivermectin. Clorsulon should not be
used in lactating dairy cattle.
4. Adverse effects. When used as directed, adverse effects are rare. Clorsulon is safe
in pregnant and breeding animals.
Albendazole (see Il B) is approved for use against mature liver flukes (e.g., F. hepatica)
C.
in cattle. Albendazole requires a 27-day preslaughter withdrawal period. Because al-
bendazole is a teratogen, it cannot be used in pregnant cattle during the first 45 days
 of gestation or in female dairy caulle of brceding age.
D. Praziquantel (see IV D) is effective against lung flukes in dogs. It is also effective
against liver flukes; however, it is too expensive for use in ruminants.
ANTHELMINTIC RESISTANCE IN LARGE ANIMALS
A.
Definition. When a greater frequency of individuals in a parasite population no longer
responds to the normal clinical dose for treatment.
1. Anthelmintic resistance affects agricuftural incomes and the increase in disease
also poses a threat fo animaf welfare. The absence of alternative methods of worm
control means that we should understand how resistance works and thus predict
successful methods for limiting the development of resistance as much as possible.
B.Mechanisms of resistance
1. A change in the molecular target so that the drug no longer recognizes the target
and is therefore ineffective,
394  Chapter 16 VI B
2. A change in metabolism that removes the drug. for example, up-regulation of the
 P-glycoprotein exporter in the worm.
3. A changc in the distribution of thc drug in the targct organism that prevents thc
drug from getting to its site of action.
4. Amplification of targct gcncs to ovcrcome the drug action.
C.
Resistance is inherited
1. For each chemical class of anthelmintic, resislance to one member usually confers
resistance to others of the same chemical class. It is possible to have muftiple resis-
tances, wherc parasitcs devclop resistancc to scveral anthelmintic classcs.
 2. When a new anthelmintic cheimical class is introduced, the frequency of resistance
alleles is low, and it is assumcd that in the absence of treatment, resistance alle-
les confer a neutral or negative reproductive fitness. Resistance is a consequence
of drug usc, and sclection for rcsistancc will depend on the relative rcproductivc
fitness of the susceptible and resistant alleles at the level of drug used. Thus, the
 devclopment of resistancc is a Darwinian proccss and thc sclcction pressurc is the
anthelmintic.
D.Detecting resistance
1. Most detection of anthelimintic resistance involves the treatment of infected hosts
with a rccommended dose of drug followed by a fecal egg count reduction test
of <95% (based on group arithmetic means) score as clinical resistance.
2. In small ruminants, anthelmintic-resislant nemalodes are now a serious problem.
Resistance has arisen to all of the major families of broad-spectrum anthelmintics
the BZD, levamisole, in addition to the avermectins and milbemycins (AM) (includ-
ing ivermectin, doramectin, and moxidectin).
3. In calle, the situation is currenlly less severe, bul there are calle nemalodes resis-
tant to multiple anthelimintic classes in New Zealand, South America, and now in
the United Stales.
4. In horses, BZD resistance is widespread among the cyathostomes. The AM are still
are used more frequently and selection pressure increases.
E.
Factors affecting the selection of resistance. There are a number of factors that affect
the selection pressure for resistance that are not under management control.
1. Parasite genetics
a. Resistancc alleles might be dominant, as suggcsted for resistance to the avcr-
mectins and/or milbemycins. If heterozygotes are resistant, then clinical re-
sistance will bc apparent at much lower allele frequencics than if resistancc is
recessive
b. The fewer the genes the faster resistance will develop.
c. The high genetic diversity of parasitic helminthes, coupled with their large pop-
ulations, increases the likelihood that resistance alleles will already be present in
a populalion, possibly at relatively high frequency.
d. If resistant worms have enhanced fitness compared to susceptible individuals,
then resistance will spread faster in the population.
2. Parasite biology
a. Parasites fhat have a short generation time and high fecundity increase the
speed of resistance development. Production of many individuals of several gen-
crations in a short time incrcascs thc sprcad of rcsistance alleles through thc
population.
b. Direct life cycles mean that the fitness associated with resistance alleles is not
dissipated by passage through an intermediate host.
c. Parasite populations thal are mobile, especially if the hosts are moved, increase
the spread of resistance.
395
poolofanimalsreleasingresistantL
boolofL
Lonpasture
poolofanimalsinfectedbyL3
pool of animalsreleasing sensitive L3
FIGURE 16-7. Diagram of the different "pools" of nematode larvae being released onto pasture. S rep-
eggs that develop to infective Ly larvae. These larvae infect preferentially young animals that have not
release eggs with genes determined the infecting parasites. The aim of management procedures should 
be to recognize how different management procedures may produce a buildup of rr (resistant recessive)
in the pool of Ly on the pasture thal lead to build up of resistant parasites.
d. There might be low levels of resistance in untreated parasites in refugia. This
slows resistancc. What are refugia? Thcy arc subpopulations of parasitcs that
are not selected by drug treatment. They are important because the higher the
proporlion of the population in refugia, the slower the seleclion for resislance.
Examples of refugia are organisms in the environment (e.g., larvae on pasture) or
inhibited larvac (espccially cncysted cquine cyathostomes) that are not suscepti-
ble to the effects of some drugs (Figure 16-7).
F.Management factors that affect the development of resistance. Drugs should be used
in ways that maintain refugia.
1. Itl is imporlant to avoid under-dosing and insure that treatments are fully efficacious
 2. Treatments should be planned, through timing and management, to reduce the sur-
vival of free-living resistant stages in the environment. Where practical, the access
of free-living stages to the next host should be reduced by measures such as re-
moval of feces and alternate grazing of different hosts.
3. The pharmacokinetics of the drug-it is preferable to use short-acting drugs to pre-
vent worms being exposed to the subtherapeulic concentralions that result from an
extended t'y, of a drug. for example, a macrocyclic lactone.
4. Use of other control methods to complement anthelmintics, or use afternative an-
thelmintics with a different mechanism of action.
 5. The inherent nafure of fhe chemicaf and its ability to select for resistance. It should
be recognized that somc anthelmintics allow resistance to emcrge fastcr than othcrs
(fenbendazole is likely to be faster than ivermectin).
396 Chapter 16, VI G
G. Options available when dealing with anthelmintic resistance
1. There is no evidence for reversion to anthelmintic susceptibility, even where the
drug has been withdrawn, In the short- to medium-term, there are no realistic alter-
natives to the continued use of current chemicals for parasite control.
2. Pasture management can reduce the number of anthelmintic treatments required,
but cannot replace them,
3. Effective vaccines, new cost-effective compounds, and nonchemical mcans of con-
trol are all some distance in the future—so it is vital that we maintain the efficacy
of current treatments for as long as possible.
 4. Reduce practices that encourage the emergence and spread of resistance. Selection
pressure for resistance is largely affecled by the degree of refugia. Experimental and
field studies have suggested that freating selected animals on the basis of infection
pino saisaens yns pue spiaie uonoid uo sioaa aaesau aaey o paau pou on
reduce the selection pressure for resislance by increasing refugia,
H. Management in endemic regions
1. Sustainability of any approach is difficult to determine. Where pathogenic species
such as H. contortus are dominant, parasite control is required and there is less
choice for using nonchemical control,
2. Assuming drug usc is rcquired, therc are several ways lo use them lo reducc the
selection for resistance. Wherever possible, treatment shouid be confined to an-
imals suffering from parasitism, and animals that can tolerate existing infections
should be left untreated, thereby leaving unselected refugia. Such approaches mean
that the host suffers some parasitism, and producers could experience some loss of
productivity. Ideally, treatment on an individual basis requires the identification of
those animals to be treated.
1.  Nonchemical methods
1. When additional pastures or other stock (such as older sheep, cattle, or horses) are
available, worms can be controlled by alternate grazing.
 2. Energy and protein supplements are useful in stimulating immunity.
 3. In hot moist climates, where rapid development occurs all year, rotation of pastures
systems is useful.
4. For horse parasites, breaking the life cycle of the worm is a possibility. Removal of
feces from pastures removes most sources of reinfection including resistant worms.
5. Host selection, through testing for worm immunity or genetic. correlates, one can
improve herd immunity to parasites.
Quarantine
1. Quarantine treatments, using mixtures of anthelmintic classes, are expected to ex-
clude parasites.
 2. They could theoretically select for high levels of resistance, but the alleles will be
present anyway (in worms in untreated hosts).
ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS. This discussion focuses on anticoccidial drugs, drugs
for the treatment of equine protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM), toxoplasmosis, giardia-
sis, babesiosis, and cryptosporidiosis.
A. Aniticoccidial drugs
1. Introduction
a. Financial implications of coccidiosis. Coccidiosis, a prevalent disease in calves.
piglets, and poultry, costs the Us poultry industry >50 million dollars annually,
despite the expenditures of >85 million for anticoccidial drugs. These losses are
Antipaurasituc Agents397
Day2
Day3
oites
Me
Day1
Day4
Day7
Me
Day5
Day6
FIGURE 16-8. Life cycle of avian coccidia and the effects of anticoccidial drugs on the life cycle. All
drugs are effective during the dsexual cycle only, except that diclazuril is also effective during the sex-
caused primarily by impaired feed conversion, slow growth, and the poor quality
of carcasses at processing.
b. Therapeutic approaches
(1) Poultry. Most of the anticoccidial drugs discussed in this section are used in
chickens.
(a) Broilers are not vaccinated against coccidia because latent infection may
relard growth.
(b) Layers are vaccinated against coccidia. Outbreaks are usually treated
with a sulfonamide or diclazuril on an as-needed basis.
(2) Sulfonamides and ormetroprim, diclazuril can be used to treat infected an-
imals, while clopidol, decoquinate, zoalene, amprolium, robenidine, nicar-
bazin, and Na+ jonophores can be used to prevent coccidiosis.
c. Resistance to anticoccidial drugs is minimized by using two or more drugs se-
quentially. (Overemphasized switching may decrease immunity.
d. Life cycle of avian coccidia (Figure 16-8)
2. Anticoccidial agents
a. Decoquinate
(1) Chemistry. Decoguinate is a quinolone and is lipophilic.
(2) Therapeutic uses
(a) Decoquinate is approved for use in cattle, sheep, goats, and broilers for
the prevention of coccidiosis. It is not effective to treat clinical coccidio-
sis. It is usually used as a feed additive.
398|Chapter 16 Vll A
(b) It is effective against all species of coccidia on the sporozoites stage.
Use is limiled because of its tendency lo induce drug resistance (due to
its action on such an early stage of the asexual cycle).
(3) Mechanism of action. It halts the clevelopment of the sporozoites or tropho-
zoites of coccidia by inhibiting the electron transport system within parasite
mitochondria. This action is coccidiostatic. In addition, it may hlock DNA
synthesis by inhibiting DNA gyrase.
(4) Pharmacokinetics. No information is located. No preslaughter withdrawal 
period is required, Do not feed to cows, sheep, and goats producing milk for
food. Do not use in laying chickens.
(5) Adverse effects. No adverse effects are seen when the drug is used as di-
rected.
b. Clopidol (Coyden? 25)
(1) Chemistry. Clopidol is a pyridinol derivative and is lipophilic.
(2) Therapeutic uses
(a) It is used as a feed additive to prevent coccidiosis in broilers and re-
placement chickens.
(b) It is effective against all species of coccidia on the sporozoites slage.
Use is limited because of its tendency to induce drug resistance (due to
its action on such an early stage of the asexual cycle).
(3) Mechanism of action. Clopidol may work similarly to quinolones.
(4) Pharmacokinetics. No information is located. No preslaughter withdrawal
period is required.
(5) Adverse effects. No adverse effects are seen when the drug is used as di-
rected.
C. Zoalene (dinitolmide, Zoamix)
(1) Chemistry. It is a nitrobenzamide.
(2) Therapeutic uses
(a) Zoalene is to be fed continuously as an aid for the prevention and con-
trol of cecal and intestinal coccidiosis in chickens and intestinal coccid-
iosis in turkeys. It is not for use in laying birds.
(b) It is effective against all species of coccidia in chickens on the first
schizont stage and can inhibit sporulation of oocysts. Zoalene is often
used in combination with other coccidiostats.
(3) Mechanism of action. Unknown. It might act like nitroimidazoles; it destroys
DNA of parasites.
(4) Pharmacokinetics. No information is located. No preslaughler withdrawal
period is required.
(5) Adverse effects. No adverse effects are seen when the drug is used as di-
rected.
d. Na+ ionophores
(1) Preparations include monensin, lasalocid, narasin, salinomycin, and 
semduramicin. These antibiotics are used exclusively as anticoccidial
drugs.
(2) Therapeutic uses
(a)  Na- ionophores are effeclive against all coccidia spccies in chickens,
cattle, and goats.
i. Monensin is for use in cattle, goats, and broilers.
ii. Lasalocid is for use in cattle and chickens for prevention of coccidio-
sis.
ili. Narasin, salinomycin, and semduramicin are for use in poultry only
iv. Na+ jonophores attack the first generation of trophozoites and sch-
i70nls.
v. The preslaughter withdrawal is not required. Do not use in veal
calves. Monensin and lasalocid can be used in lactating cows; the
milk from these animals can be safely consumed by humans.
vi. Monensin and lasalocid are also used as growth promoters.
(3) Mechanism of action, Na+ jonophores facilitate the transport of Na
and H' into cells in the rumen, elevating intracellular Na' and H'
Antiparasitic Agents」399
concentrations. As a result, certain imitochondrial functions (e.g., substrate
oxidations) and ATP hydrolysis are inhibitcd. Exccss intraccllular Nat con-
centrations accompanied by water can damage organelles as well.
(4) Pharmacokinetics
(a) Monensin in chickens. Following oral dosing, plasma Tmax is ~0.5 hours
and plasma ty. is ~2 hours. No monensin is detectable in all tissues
within 48 hours of dosing, except for liver, which becomes undetectable
within 72 hours of administration,
(b) Lasalocid in chickens. Following oral administration, ty, of serum, liver,
and muscle are 11, 36, and 41 hours, respectively.
(c) Salinomycin in chickens. Following oral administration, residucs arc
prcsent only at very low concentrations in livcr and muscle that fall bc-
low the limit of decision of the assay within 2 days.
(d) No information is available for narasin and semduramicin.
(e)  No elimination information is available for mammals regarding Na*
ionophores.
(f) In all species, Na+ ionophores are metabolized in the liver by cy-
tochrome P450 enzymes, and are excreted mostly into bile and feces
as parent compound and metabolites.
(5) Adverse effects. These drugs may cause severe cardiovascular and skeletal
muscular side effects.
(a) Increased intracellular Na- concentrations will damage mitochondria
and Golgi body.
(b) In animal cells, intracellular Na+ furthcr cxchangcs for extracellular
Ca²-, thereby increasing intracellular Ca+ concentrations ([Ca+],).
Lasalocid may directly facilitate Ca²+ transport into the cells. Hligh 
[Ca²-]; in cardiac and skeletal muscle cells are responsible for the main
toxic effects of these drugs in animals.
(c) High [Ca²+]; in chromaffin cells increase catecholamine secretion can
further jeopardize the cardiac arrhythmia, Hligh [Ca?+l; in endocrine
cells increase various hormone secretions.
(6) Contraindications. Horses and turkeys are very sensitive to Na+ jonophores.
Accidental consumption by these animals can be fatal.
e. Amprolium
(1) Chemistry. Amprolium is an analog of thiarninc, and is a quaternary com-
pound,
(2) Therapeutic uses, Amprolium is the only anticoccidial agent that can be
used in laying birds and cattle for both the prcvention and trcatmcnt of out-
brcaks.
(a) It is effective against the first generation of trophozoites and schizonts.
(b) Amprolium is rarely used alone, because E. maxima, E. mivati, and other
species are resistant to it; combination with antifolate drugs increases the
efficacy of amprolium against these organisms in chickens.
(3)  Mechanism of action. Amprolium prevents coccidia from utilizing thiamine
by blocking thiamine receptors.
(4)  Pharmacokinetics
(a)  Amproliurm is poorly absorbed after oral administralion.
(b)  No prcslaughter withdrawal period is necessary.
(5) Adverse effects. Amprolium is a safe drug when uscd as dirccted. Neurologi-
cal signs and lesions of thiainine deficiency may occur in the host following
extremely high overdoses.
f. Nicarbazin
(1) Chemistry. Nicarbazin is a mixture of 4,4'-dinitrocarbanilide (DNC) and
2-hydroxy-4,6-dimethylpyrimidine (HCP).
(2) Therapeutic uses. Nicarbazin is approved for use in chickens to prevent coc-
cidiosis outbreaks.
(a) It is effective against all Eimeria species.
(b) Its peak activity is on second-generation trophozoites.
400 Chapler 16 Vll A
(3) Mechanism of action. Nicarbazin's mechanism of action is unknown; how-
ever, it is thought to be via inhibition of succinate-linked NAD reduction
and the cnergy-depcndent transhydrogcnasc, and thc accumulation of Ca21
in thc prescnce of ATP.
(4) Pharmacokinetics
(a) Absorption. DNC and HOP are absorbed separately from the digestive
tract. DNC is absorbed more rapidly but disappears more slowly from
the tissues than HOP.
(b) A 4-day withdrawal period is required before broilers are marketed.
(5) Adverse effects
(a) Nicarbazin may bleach brown-shelled eggs, cause mottled egg yolks and
 poor hatchability, and impair egg production.
g.Robenidine
(1) Therapeutic uses. Robenidine is approved for use in chickens to prevent
outbrcaks of coccidiosis. It is effective against all Fimeria specics.
(2) Mechanism of action. Thc mechanism of action is undctermined, Its pcak
activity is on the first generation schizonts.
(3) Pharmiacokinetics. The pharmacokinetics of robenidine are not well under-
stood.
(4) Adverse effects. Robenidine imparts an unpleasant taste to the flesh of broil-
ers, if therapy is not terminated 5 days before slaughter. The taste is im-
99 ueui jaieais io oi jenba sasesop ie pal aie spuq uaum sssa oi paed
 ppm. The ability of humans to taste robenidine is apparcntly genetically
linkcd.
h. Sulfonamides have the longcst history of usc as anticoccidial drugs. Thesc agcnts
are discussed in detail in Chapter 15.
(1) Preparations. Sulfonamides used most frequently as anticoccidial agents in-
clude sulfadimethoxine, sulfamethazine, and sulfaquinoxaline (long-acting
sulfonamides).
(2) Mechanism of action. See Chapter 15 for information.
ment of coccidiosis outbreaks in all species.
(a) They are more effective against the intestinal than cecal species of coc-
cidia,
(b)  Their peak activity is against the second-generation schizonts.
(c) Use of these drugs does not impair immunity development.
i. Dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors
(1) Preparations include ormetoprim and pyrimethamine. Pyrimethamine is not
 approved for food animal use.
(2)
 Mechanism of action. See Chapter 15 for information.
(3) Therapeutic uses. The anticoccidial effects of ormetoprim and
pyrimethamine are synergistic. with sulfonamides. They are used to treat coc-
cidiosis outbreaks. The preslaughter withdrawal period for sulfadimethoxine-
ormetoprim in poultry is 5 days.
(4) Pharmacokinetics. Aftcr oral administration, thcrapcutic lcvcls of ormcto-
prim are maintained for ≥24 hours. Other information is not available for
animals.
j. Diclazuril (Clinacox?)
(1) Chemistry. It is one of benzeneacetonitriles that have potent anticoccidial
activity. Diclazuril is a slightly yellowish to beige powder, and it is almost
insoluble in water.
(2) Mechanism of action. Diclazuril is effective against schizonts and gametes
by inhibiting nuclear division.
(3) Therapeutic uses. It is used as a feed additive to prevent coccidiosis in broil
ers. Sincc it is cffcctivc against later stages of coccidia, it has potential to be
used for trcating outbreaks of coccidiosis. It could be used in an cxtra-label
manner to treat mammalian coccidiosis, EPM, and toxoplasmosis,
Antiparasitic Agents401
(4) Pharmacokinetics
(a) Following oral administration to chickens, plasma concentrations of di-
clazuril peak at 6 hours. The plasma and tissue ty, are ~50 hours. There
is a rapid equilibrium between plasma and tissue concentrations of the
drug.
(b) The tissue concentrations are 2-10 times lower than the corresponding
plasma conccntrations. The livcr and the kidneys have the highest con-
centrations of the drug.
(c) Diclazuril is cxcreted in the urine mostly as the parent compound.
About 50% of the dosc is cxcrcted within 24 hours, and >95% aftcr
10 days.
(d) There is no preslaughter withdrawal time in broilers, since the tissue 
levels of diclazuril are below minimal limit after oral administration.
Diclazuril is not for use in laying hens.
(5) Adverse effects. Diclazuril is a safe drug when use as directed.
k. Toltrazuril and ponazuril (extra-label use). Ponazuril is toltrazuril sulfone, an 
active metabolite of toltrazuril.
(1) Mechanism of action. Toltrazuril and ponazuril are effective against
schizonts and gametes by inhibiting nuclear division.
(2) Therapeutic uses. Thcse arc very cffcctivc drugs against coccidia, but not yet
approvcd by FDA for such a usc. Ponazuril is approved for usc to control
EPM.
(3) Pharmacokinetics of toltrazuril. After oral administration to piglets and
calves, toltrazuril is absorbed slowly by the gut, which is followed by long-
lasting distribution among the different compartments of the body. The
plasma ty, is 51 hours in piglets. Excretion is mostly into feces. There is
no significant enterohepatic circulation of toltrazuril. Two metabolites of
toltrazuril, both oxidation products, toltrazuril sulfoxide and toltrazuril sul-
fone (ponazuril), are found in the tissues and organs of piglets.
(4) Adverse effects. They include Gl disturbances (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, and
inappetence) and hypersensitivity.
1. Drugs for the control of mammalian coccidiosis. Decoquinate, amprolium,
monensin, lasalocid, sulfonamides with a dihydrofolate reductase inhibitor, di-
clazuril, toltrazuril, and ponazuril can be uscd to prcvent coccidiosis. Sulfon-
armides with a dihydrofolate rcductase inhibitor, diclazuril, toltrazuril, and pon-
azuril can be used to trcat outbreaks of coccidiosis.
B.
 Drugs for the treatment of EPM
1. Introduction. EPM is the most important equine protozoal disease in the United 
States, which is caused by Sarcocystis neurona. Opossum is the definitive host and
simall imammals including cats, skunks, and raccoons arc intermcdiate hosts. Horsc
is considered an abcrrant, dcad-end host for S. ncurona. Horscs arc infcctcd by in-
gcstion of sporocysts in contaminatcd fccd or water. The schizonts of thc ascxual
cycle are found in CNS, which cause cercbral damagcs. The signs of the infcction
are manifested by head tilt, ataxia, muscle weakness and atrophy, urinary inconti-
nence, and constipation.
2. Treatment of EPM
 a. Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine, PO, daily for ≥30 days (see
Chapter 15, for information on these two drugs).
b. Ponazuril (Marquis?), PO, 5 mg/kg/day, 28-56 days.
C。
Diclazuril (Protazil?), PO, 1 mg/kg/day, 28 days.
d. Nitazoxanide (Navigator(e), PO), days 1-5: 25 mg/kg: days 6-28: 50 mg/kg.
e. Anti-inflammatory agents. Flunixin, phenylbutazone, and glucocorticoid can be
used to control inflaimmation.
f. Folic. acid/folinic acid for protecting bone marrow.
g. Physical therapy following chcinothcrapy.
3. Anti-EPM agents
a. Ponazuril (Marquis)
402Chapter 16VIl B
(1) Chemistry. An active metabolite of toltrazuril (sulfone). Toltrazuril is a very
potent anticoccidial drug, but is not approved for use in the United Slates.
Ponazuril is highly lipophilic.
(2) Therapeutic uses. Ponazuril is for the trcatment of EPM, coccidiosis, and
toxoplasmosis. For the trealment of EPM, adminisler the drug orally. 5
mg/kg/day, for ≥4 weeks. Relapse occurs in 5-30% cases.
(3) Mechanism of action. Ponazuril is against schizonts by inhibiting nuclear
division.
(4) Pharmacokinetics. After daily (5 mg/kg) oral administration to horses, pon-
azuril reaches its peak plasma levels in ~18 days and peak CSF levels in
~15 days. Peak CSF levels are 5% of those found in the plasma. Since it is
a lipophilic drug, it is bettcr absorbcd on a full stomach. The drug should
be given immedialely after a grain meal. The elimination t /, of ponazuril is
4.5 days.
(5) Adverse effects. They include blistcrs on the nose and mouth, skin rash,
hives, diarrhea, colic, and seizures. Do not use in sick or debilitated animals
due to other disorders.
b. Diclazuril (Protazil). The therapeutic uses, mechanism of action, and adverse
effects of diclazuril are the same as those of ponzuril in horses.
(1) Pharmacokinetics. Diclazuril is rapidly absorbed afler oral administration,
with peak plasma concentrations occurring at 8-24 hours and a plasma ty,
 of ~43 hours. When 1 mg/kg of diclazuril is administered PO daily for 21
days, mean steady-state levels of 20-70 ng/mL in the CSF is reached. The
proliferation of S. neurona is 95% inhibited by diclazuril ≥1 ng/mL.
C. Nitazoxanide (Navigator@)
(1) Chemistry. It is a nitrothiazolyl-salicylamide derivative, which is a light yel-
low powdcr and is lipophilic.
（2）
Mechanism of action. Nitazoxanide is melabolized inlo a toxic-free radical
from the "nitro" group, which blocks cellular respiration of protozoans.
(3) Therapeutic uses. 32% nitazoxanide pastc is uscd orally for the trcatmcnt of
EPM. During days 1-5, 25 mg/kg; and days 6-28, 50 mg/kg. Nitaz0xanide is
also used in humans to treat cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis.
(4) Pharmacokinetics. Following oral administration in horses, nilazoxanide is
absorbed. Time to peak plasma level is 2 hours. Since it is a lipophilic drug.
it is bettcr absorbed on a full stomach, The drug should bc given immedi-
ately after a grain meal. lt is bound by albumin vividly. The free forim of
nitazoxanide is imetabolizcd into acetyl-nitazoxanide and acetyl-nitazoxanide
glucuronide and eliminaled in 24 hours in the urine, bile, and feces.
(5) Adverse effects. They include Gl disturbances (anorexia, diarrhea, colic.
etc.), enlerocolitis, fever, and anaphylaxis (laminitis, edema, elc.). These
signs constitute the "treatment crisis"; one may need to suspend therapy in
horscs with treatimcnt crisis.
(6) Contraindications. Il should not be administered to horses that are <1 year
 old; sick or debilitated for other reasons including hepatic and renal disor-
ders.
C.
Metronidazole (Flagyl)
1. Chemistry. A nitroimidazole antiprotozoal and antibacterial agent, metronidazole is
lipophilic.
2.
 Mechanism of action. A ferrodoxin-linked melabolile of melronidazole disrupts
DNA synthesis in protozoans and bacteria. See Chapter 15 for more inforimation.
 3. Therapeutic uses. Mctronidazole is a broad-spcctrum antiprotozoal drug that is ef-
fective against giardia, histomonas, babesia, irichomonas, and ameba. li is approved
as a human drug, and has been used largely in small animals.
4. Pharmacokinetics
a. Absorption. The oral bioavailability of metronidazole in animals varies 50-
100%. If given in food, absorption is cnhanced, attributable to incrcased bile
AntiparasiticAgents403
secretion that helps dissolve metronidazole. Peak blood levels occur within 1
hour of administration
b. Distribution. Mctronidazolc is rapidly and widely distributed after oral absorp-
tion, because it is highly lipophilic
c. Metabolism and excretion. Metronidazole undergoes hydroxylation and conju-
gation in the liver. Both mctabolites and parent drug are climinated in the urinc
and feces in 24 hours. The elimination ty, is 4-5 hours in dogs.
 5. Adverse effects. High doses of metronidazole or prolonged administration may in-
duce lethargy, weakness, ataxia, rigidity, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, reversible
lcukopenia, and hcpatotoxicity. Bccausc metronidazole affccts DNA synthesis, it
may have teralogenic and carcinogenic effecls.
 Other drugs for treatment of giardiasis-Albendazole and fenbendazole administcrcd
D,
orally at 25 mg/kg every 12 hours for 2 days. Albendazole may be toxic to liver and
bone marrow and is a teratogen.
E. Drugs for treatment of toxoplasmosis
1. Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine, 15 mg/kg, PO, twice a day ior 4 weeks.
2. Pyrimethamine (0.25-0.5 mg/kg) plus sulfadiazine (30 mg/kg). PO, twice a day for
4 wccks.
3. Clindamycin, 10-20 mg/kg, PO or IM, twice a day for 3-6 weeks
E Drugs for the treatment of cryptosporidiosis
1. Paromomycin (Humatin@), Paromomycin is an aminoglycoside for cxtra-label usc;
il can be very expensive.
a. Administration. It can prevent and treat cryptosporidiosis at 50 mg/kg. PO, twice
a day for 10 days.
b. Pharmacokinetics. No information is available for animals. However, Gl absorp-
tion after oral administration is minimal, since it is an aminoglycoside.
C. Adverse effects. Paromomycin induces vomiting, diarrhea, colic, renal toxicity.
and deafness.
2. Azithromycin (Zithromax?, 15 mg/kg, PO, twice a day for ≥7 days). Il is a
macrolide and inhibits protein synthesis.
 3. Nitazoxanide in used in humans for the treatment of cryptosporidiosis.
G.Drug for treatment of babesiosis in dogs—Imidocarb (Imizol)
1. Chemistry. Imidocarb is a diamidine derivative.
2. Mechanism of action. Inidocarh binds to DNA and interfere with parasite replica-
lion.
3. Therapeutic uses. Imidocarb is effective against Babesia canis when given at a sin-
gle dose of 6.6 mg/kg IM or SC. Repeat the dose in 2 weeks. Imidocarb eliminates
(quinc babcsia (B. cabali) when given 1-2 mg/kg, twice during a 24-hour period.
Although effective against bovine babesiosis, imidocarb should not be given to this
species because the withdrawal tines have not been deternined. Feline babesiosis
is refractory to imidocarb trcatment.
 4. Pharmacokinetics. Imidocarb is readily absorbed from the injection sile. The
elimination ty, is ~3.5 hours. It is excreted mainly into urine and feces as the
unchangcd compound.
 5. Adverse effects
a. Adverse effects commonly seen are pain dluring injection and signs of parasym-
pathctic stimulation such as salivation, nasal drip, or brief episodes of vomiting.
Other effecls seen less frequently are panting, restlessness, diarrhea, and injec-
tion site inflammation lasting one to several days. Atropine sulfate can be used
to control the signs of parasympathctic. stimulation.
b. Imidocarb is a teratogen and carcinogen, since it affecis DNA synthesis. Do nol
use in pregnant animals.
404Chapter 16 VIl A
Vlll.
EXTERNAL ANTIPARASITICS (ECTOPARASITICIDES)
A.
Introduction
1. Clinical uses. Insecticides are used (1) on animals to control mites, fleas, ticks,
and flics, (2) on the premise to control flics and other insecis, and (3) on fecd-
stuffs.
2. Adverse effects. Individual animals vary in response to insecticides.
a. Age. Young animals are most susceptible.
b. Health. HHealthy animals are least likely to experience adverse effects.
c. Stress (e.g., exiremely hot or humid weather) can increase susceptibility to in-
secticide toxicity.
d. Species. Some species are especially sensitive to insecticides.
(1) Horses tend to develop urticaria and hyperemia following application of
insecticides.
(2) Cats are very susceptible to cholinergic stimulants.
(3) Ruminants have less blood ChE than other species; should avoid using anti-
ChE agents in ruminants.
(4) Should avoid applications in extremely hot and humid weather, due to
stress-induced enhancement of insecticide toxicity.
3. Formulations influence the degree of toxicity, the duration of action, and the
convenience of application.
a. Sprays, dips, and shampoos are suitable when conditions are above freezing.
b. Pour-ons and dusts can be used when temperature is below freezing.
c. Oil sprays should be applied to the hair coat but not to the skin, in order to
avoid systemic absorption.
d. Feod additives thal are absorbed are effeclive against bloodsucking, parasites.
Whether they are absorbed or not, they are effective against both the larval
and pupal stages of ectoparasites in the feces.
e. Collars and ear tags are available.
B.
Organophosphates (OPs). Many OPs are still available as insecticides. The with-
drawal of chlorinated hydrocarbons from the market increased the importance of
OPs, since they cause nil residue problems. However, they could cause serious
acute toxicity. The trend to use other safer insecticides is decreasing the use of these
agents.
1. Preparations
a. Thio compounds include coumaphos, fenthion, diazinon, ethion, famphur,
phosmet, and pirimiphos.
b. Oxy compounds include dichlorvos and tetrachlorvinphos.
2. Mechanism of action. The OP insccticides inhibit ACh brcakdown by inhibiling
ChE irreversibly (see Chapter 2). The thio compounds are weak ChE inhibitors and
must be metabolized to oxy compounds in order to inhibit ChE effectively.
3. Pharmacokinetics
a. Absorption, OPs are lipophilic; thus, they are well absorbed through the skin
and Gl tract.
b. Metabolism. Metabolism of OPs occurs mainly in the liver.
(1) Metabolism of OPs may be important for detoxification. Some of the OPs
have alkyl moiety and some of them do not. The most important detoxi-
cation mechanism of OPs is the removal of the nonalkyl esler moiely by
phosphatases or by oxidative reactions. The (Odealkylation of OPs is cat-
alyzed by phosphatases, microsomal oxidases, and alkyl transferase. The
hydroxylated OPs can form conjugates with glucuronide or sulfate.
(2) Metabolism of OPs with thio- moiety into the ones with oxy- moiety will
 activate the compound to inhibit ChE effectively.
b. Excretion. The organophosphates pose no residue problems since the metabo-
lites are usually cxcrelcd into urine.
 4. Administration. OPs are applied to animals topically or administered orally.
AntiparasiticAgents
405
5. Adverse effects
a. Toxicity (see Chapter 2 also)
(1) Clinical signs include SLUDD (salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation,
and dyspnea), fasciculation, ataxia, and convulsions,
(2) Chronic toxicity or delayed toxicity seen with some OPs is associated with
a delayed onsct paralysis due to a progrcssive demylination of motor neu-
rons.
(3)  Treatinent involves decontaimination and administration of atropine sulfate.
Pralidoxime imethiodide (2-PAM, an ChE reactivator) may be adininistered
along with atropine (see Chapter 2, Figure 2-6). 2-PAM should not be used
alone to treat organophosphate overdose, because it cannot relieve the
effects of OPs on the CNS, which contribute to respiratory depression. The 
chronic toxicity, which is manifested by paralysis, cannot be treated.
b. Drug interactions may occur with drugs that aclivate cholinergic rcccptors,
skeletal muscle relaxants, and chlorinated hydrocarbons.
Carbamates
1. Preparations. Frcquently uscd carbamates include carbaryl and propoxur. The car-
bamates are used in the treatinent of ectoparasites in small animals as powder,
shampoo, and collar formulations.
2. Mechanism of action. Carbamates inhibit ChE via carbamylation. Their effccts are
more reversible than those of CPs, since the binding between carbamate and ChE
is noncovalent.
3. Pharmacokinetics. The pharmacokinetics of the carbamate insecticides are not
well understood.
4. Adverse effects include toxicity. Carbamate poisoning is similar to acute OP poi-
soning. Atropine sulfate is an effective antidotc. 2-PAM should nol be uscd to trcal
carbamale poisoning for two rcasons given bclow:
a.
Carbamate binding to ChE is reversible.
b. 2-PAM itself inhibits ChE in a reversible manner.
D.
Chlorinated hydrocarbons
1. Chlorinated ethane derivatives (e.g., DDT, methoxychlor) are very effective syn-
thetic insecticides. However, because of the environmental hazard posed by DDT
residues, DDT has been banned by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
since 1972.
a.
 Mechanism of action. These insecticides increase intracellular [Na+]; and
[Ca?+]; of excitable cells via two mechanisms. High [Na+]; causes depolar-
ization and [Ca+]; will overstimulate neurotransmission, which paralyze the
insects (Figure 16-9).
(1) Thcy prcvent the closurc of Na+ channels, lcading to an incrcasc in intra-
cellular Na' concentrations.
(2) They increase [Ca?l]; by inhibiting the uptake of Ca2+ into the endoplas-
mic reticulum.
b. Therapeutic uses. Methoxychlor, in powders and sprays, is to kill fleas, ticks,
flies, mosquitoes, and gnats.
c.
Pharmacokinetics
(1) Absorption, Both DDT and methoxychlor arc highly lipophilic. Fat in fecd
promotes absorption (and, thereforc, incrcascs toxicity); however, obese
animals are more resistant to insecticide toxicity, because fat adsorbs
lipophilic chemicals.
(2) Metabolism and elimination
(a) DDT is metabolized into DDD and DDE (Figure 16-10).
i. DDD is further metabolized into DDA, which is water soluble and is
excreted in the urine.
ii. DDE is lipid soluble and cannot be further metabolized. DUE is per-
manently stored in the adipose tissue of animals, causing residue
problems.
406
Clapler 16 Vlll D
CI-
GABA-gated chloride channel
Fipronil
Lindane
CI-
Amitraz
Glutamate-gated
Octopamine
chloride channel
receptor
Macrocycliclactones
Methoxychlor①
Pyrethroids
Na*
Nicotinicreceptor
ACh
Dinotefuran
Imidacloprid
Nitenpyram
Na+
Spinosad
Ca2+
FIGURE 16-9. Mechanisms of action of ectoparasiticides that interfere with parasite nervous system.
(b)  Methoxychlor is a biodegradable derivative of DDT that does not
cause the severe residue problems associated with IDIDT,
d. Adverse effects
(1) Toxicity. Acute toxicity in animals is rare; however, overdoses can cause
CNS excitation, which may lead to convulsions. Cardiac arrhythmia may
be induced as well.
(a) Detoxification. Activated charcoal should be administered to remove
the toxicant from the gastrointestinal tract.
(b) Symptomatic therapy
1. Anticonvulsants can be administered for seizures. Phenobarbital,
in addition to controlling seizures, induces microsomal enzymes,
increasing the metabolism of chlorinated hydrocarbons.
ii. Artificial respiration may be needed in cases of asphyxia.
(3) Environmental concerns. DDT and methoxychlor pose little risk of acute
toxicity in animals; however, IDIDT poses a hazard to the environment by
persisting in the food chain, since it disrupts the actions of sex steroids.
(a) Eggshell thinning results from the ability of DDT to block estrogen re-
 ceptors that mediate the deposition of Ca?t into the eggshell.
(b)  Toxicity to aquatic life.
2. Lindane (y-BHC, a hexachlorocyclohexane)
a. Lindane is used primarily to control scrcwworm and car tick infestations in
cattle, horses, swine, sheep, and goats.
b. Mechanism of action. Lindane incrcases cxcitability of excitable cells by block-
ing GABA-gated chloride channels to induce depolarization (Figure 16-9).
c. Pharmacokinetics. The pharmacokinetics of the hexachlorocyclohexanes arc
not clear.
Antiparasitic Agents
407
OCH
CCl
DOT
Hethoxychior
OCH
HCCI
CCl
000
Series of reductive
Series of dechlorination
dechlorination
and oxidation steps 
and oxidation steps
COOH
DDA
Cology: The Basic Science of Poisons, by Casarett and Doull, 1975.)
d. Adverse effects. Lindane is more toxic than DDT. Young animals, especially
calves, and toy breed dogs are cxtremely sensitive to lindane poisoning.
(1) Signs of toxicity are similar to those produced by IDI)T (e.g., tremors,
ataxia, convulsions, prostration, and tachypneay.
(2) Treatment of poisoning is nonspecific.
 Insect development inhibitors (IDIs)
1
1.
Preparations. Diflubenzuron (Dimilin, Equitrol Il) and lufenuron (Program?),
Both of them are highly lipophilic compounds.
2. Mechanism of action. IDls inhibit chitin synthesis in larvae and eggs of insects;
they have no effects on adult insects. Chitin is an important constituent of ex-
oskeleton and eggshell.
3. Therapeutic uses
a. Diflubenzuron is used as a feed additive in horses (0.15 mg/kg/day) to inhibit
developmental stages of flies. It is administered from early spring to fall.
b. Lufenuron is administered orally in dogs (10 mg/kg) and cats (30 mg/kg) once
a month to inhibit developmental stages of fleas. Lufenuron should be ad-
ministered orally after feeding to increase the bile secretion and thus drug
absorption. Lufenuron is also administered SC (10 mg/kg) once every 6 months
in cats to control fleas as well. Both insecticides have no effects on adult
insects.
4. Pharmacokinetics. The Gl absorption of both IDls is incrcascd by bile, since bile
can help dissolve the insecticides. Lufenuron is accumulated readily in adipose
tissucs, and the release of it from fat allows maintenance of effective blood lcvels
of drug for weeks. Following oral dosing, lufenuron reaches therapeutic concen-
trations in 6-12 hours and thcrapeutic blood levels are maintaincd for over a
month. No other information is available.
408Chapler 16 Vlll E
5. Adverse effects. Both preparations are safe. Lufenuron is safe in young animals
(>6 weeks old), in reproducing and lactating dogs and cats and their offspring.
F. Insect growth regulators (IGRs, juvenile hormone analogs)
1. Preparations include cyromazine (Larvadex?), methoprene (in many insecticides,
including Frontline(? Plus), and pyriproxyfen (in many insecticide preparations).
2. Mechanism of action. Insect growth regulators mimic the actions of the juvenile
hormoncs of insccts. Thesc preparations maintain persistently thc larvac in an im-
mature stage and interfere with rcproductive organ differentiation.
3. Therapeutic uses and administration
 a. Fecal maggot control in poultry. Cyromazine is adiministered orally for 4-6
weeks to control fecal maggots in poultry. Cyromazine is also used as a spray
onto surface of manure.
b. Flea control
uo padde pue spioasnoy u! paeids ane uasxoiduad pue auaidouan (l) 
animals to prevent eggs, pupae, and larvae from developing into adult 
fleas. These insecticides are effective for at least 3 months. Both of them
are also available as a flea collar for dogs.
sea npe ly oi spioaiad ym paxiu aie uaaxodad pue auaidoan (z)
4. Pharmacokinetics. The pharmacokinetics of these agents are not well understood.
5. Adverse effects. These products are safe when used as directed.
G.Botanicals
1. Rotenone (Durakyl, Ear Miticide?, etc.)
a.
Chemistry. Rotenone is an alkaloid derived from the root of the derris plant.
b. Mechanism of action. Rotenone inhibits cellular respiratory metabolism by
blocking the electron generation from reduced nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide (NADH). As a result, oxidation of lactate, glutamate, and other sub-
stances is reduced and nerve conduction is inhibited.
C.
 Therapeutic uses
(1) Rotenone is used to kill fleas, licc, ticks, and mites. It has fast "knock-
down" action on all arthropods, with little pcrsistencc.
(2) Rotenone is also used to kill unwanted fish in ponds and lakes.
d. Pharmacokinetics are not well understood. Rotenone undergoes hydroxyla-
tion by hepatic microsomal enzymes, which is followed by conjugation. The
rotenone conjugates are excreted into urine.
e. Adverse effects include local irritation and CNS disturbances (e.g, excitation,
convulsions, depression). Do not use in reptiles.
2. Pyrethroids
a. Preparations include pyrethrins, allethrin, cyfluthrin, cypermethrin, fenvalerate,
lambdacyhalothrin, permethrin, and resmethrin.
b. Chemistry
(1) Pyrethrins arc alkaloids of pyrethrum, which arc among the oldest insecti-
cides ever known.
(2) The other pyrethroids, being synthetic, are more resistant to metabolism
than pyrethrins.
by prolonging the opening of Nar channels, thereby causing arthropod paraly-
sis.
d. Therapeutic uses. Pyrethroids are most commonly used ectoparasiticides due
to their rapid "knockdown" effect with little residual activity and safety. The
"knockdown" effect may or imay not be fatal; therefore, these agents are usu-
ally combined with other insecticides or a synergist le.g., piperonyl butox-
ide or MK264 (N-octyl bicycloheptene dicarboximide)] to increase insectici-
dal activity. Synergists inhibit induction of microsomal enzymes that degrade
pyrethroids.
Antiparastic Agents409
e. Pharmacokinetics. The pharmacokinetics of the pyrethroids is not well under-
stood. In humans, 1-2% of permethrin is absorbed percutaneously. Pyrethroids
are metabolized through hydroxylation and almost entirely excreted in the
urine in free or glucuronide-conjugated forms. In humans, permethrin is elimi-
nated from the body within 96 hours of topical administration. No information
on climination is available for animals.
f. Adverse effects. Pyrethroids arc generally safe, but may causc local irritation,
allergy, hypersalivation, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, cardiac arrhythmia, and
CNS disturbances manifested by muscle rigidity, tremors, ataxia, and convul-
sjons. Cats are particularly susceptible to pyrethroid-induced CNS disturbances;
thus, pyrethroids should not be used in cats. This phenomenon might be due
 to grooming to swallow the insecticide and poor metabolism. Anticonvulsants
and central muscle relaxants such as methocarbamol can be used as antidotes.
g. Resistance. The ectoparasites that are resistant to methoxychlor treatment may
be resistant to pyrethroids.
H.
Macrocyclic lactones (Sce Il D for general information.)
1. Macrocyclic lactones are effective against most ectoparasitesthat include grubs,
mites, lice, ticks, and flies. However, most of thcim do not kill fleas at clinical
doscs, cxccpt selaincctin, which is administered topically to dogs and cats.
 2. Macrocyclic lactones do not kill arthropods promptly, taking hours before ectopar-
asiticidal activity becomes apparent.
3. Macrocyclic lactones not only kill adults and larvae of ectoparasites but also inter-
rupt feeding, molting, and hatching of eggs.
4. For demodicosis, ivermectin may be used in an extra-label manner at 0.4-0.6
mg/kg/day, orally, for 2-3 months to treat this disease. However, such regimen
using large and frequent doses of ivermectin may be risky in some dogs. Watch
for adverse effects of the treatiment!
5. For Sarcoptic mange, ivermectin may be used in an extra-label manner at 0.2
mg/kg: 2 doscs, 2 wccks apart to have an cffective control ovcr this infestation.
I. Other ectoparasiticides
1. Amitraz (Mitaban, Taktic, ProMeris Duo?, etc.) is a formainidine insecticide
for use on dogs, pigs, and cattle.
a. Mechanism of action. Amitraz activates octopamine rcccptors in arthropods,
which inhibits neurotransmission, resulting in flaccid paralysis (Figure 16-9).
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Amitraz is used to eliminate mites, lice, and ticks in dogs, swine, and
cattle. In dog, amitraz is used as an emulsion for topical applica-
tion (Mitaban?), tick collar (Preventic? Collar), and spot-on product
(ProMeris). Amitraz is used as an emulsion spray (in swine and cattle).
No preslaughter withdrawal period is necessary in cattle, and it can be
used on lactating dairy cattle without incurring a withdrawal period for
milk following application.
(2) Thrce to six biwcekly treatments may be used to control demodectic
mange in dogs.
c. Pharmacokinetics. The pharmacokinetics of amitraz are not well understood
d. Adverse effects. In animals, amitraz activates αz-adrenergic receptors. There-
fore, the adverse effects of amitraz are similar to the pharmacological effects of
xylazine (e.g., sedation, bradycardia, hyperglycemia, Gl stasis). α2-Adrenergic
antagonists such as yohimbine can be used as an antidote.
e. Contraindications
(1) Amitraz should not be applied to swine within 3 days of slaughter.
(2) Amitraz may cause fatal colon impaction in horses.
2. Insect nicotinic receptor agonists
a. Preparations. Imidacloprid (Advantage?), dinotefuran (Vectra 3D?), niten-
pyram (Capstar), and spinosad (Comfortis?). All of them, except spinosad,
410Chaplcr 16 VIl
are also called neonicotinoids. Spinosad is derived from the bacterium Saccha
ropotyspora spinosa.
b. Mechanism of action. They activate nicotinic receptors of fleas, leading to
overstimulation of neurons and muscle to cause overstimulation, which is fol-
lowed by paralysis (Figure 16-9). These insecticides have very little activity on
nicotinic receptors of mites, ticks, and animals. Howcvcr, spinosad has dif-
ferent binding sites on insect nicotinic receptors than neonicotinoids. Clinical
implication for this difference is not known.
c. Therapeutic uses. All four insecticides are used to kill adult fleas. They cause
rapid detachment of fleas.
(1) Imidacloprid is uscd topically (5-10 mg/kg) oncc a month as a spot-on
product in dogs and cats thal are ≥4 week old. Nearly 100% of mature
fleas are killed within 12 hours of application, the fleacidal effect is persis-
tent for 30 days, since it is stored in the sebaceous glands of the animals.
It is not washed out by shampooing. Imidacloprid is also available as a
mixture with permethrin (K9 Advantix) to kill more cctoparasites, for cx-
ample, lticks, in dogs and with moxideclin (Advantage? Multi) to prevent 
heartworms, and to kill Gl nematodes, and mites in dogs and cats.
(2) Dinotefuran is a third-generation neonicotinoid with slightly faster knock-
down than imidacloprid (killing 96%, fleas in 6 hours), while retaining
residual activity against fleas for at least 30 days. It is available as a mix-
ture with permethrin (to kill ticks) and pyriproxifen (to kill developing 
stages of fleas) for use on dogs and combined with pyriproxifen for use
on cats.
(3) Nitcnpyram is uscd orally (1 mg/kg) for short-term control of fleas in dogs
and catls. One dose can protect animals for 1-2 days. It is normally used
in combination with an insect growth regulator or lufenuron to provide
continuous flea control.
(4) Spinosad is used orally at 30 mg/kg, once a month.
d, Pharmacokinetics is not well undcrstood for imidacloprid and dinotefuran.
(1) Following oral administration, nitenpyram is absorbed from the Gl tract
rapidly. Nitenpyram undergoes hydroxylation, followed by conjugation.
Nitenpyram conjugates are excreted in the urine; it is not accumulated in
body tissues. The plasma t, of nitenpyram in dogs and cats are 3 and 8
hours, rcspectivcly. The longcr plasma ty. of nitenpyram in cats reflects thc
slow drug metabolism in this species.
(2) Spinosad is readily absorbed from the Gl tract after oral administration. It
is rapidly metabolized and eliminated. Within 48 hours of dosing, 60-80%
of spinosad or its metabolites is elininated via the urine and feces. Dcplc-
tion of spinosad residues from tissues occurs rapidly following cessalion of
exposure. The plasma ty,. in dogs is nol known.
e. Adverse effects. All four insecticides are safe, since they specifically activate
insects' nicotinic receptors, but not animals'. Topical application of imidaclo.
prid and dinotefuran may cause irritation of the skin. Spinosad may induce
vomiting in dogs.
3. Fipronil (Frontline, Frontline Plus)
a. Mechanism of action. Fipronil blocks CABA gated Cl- channels of arthropods
to cause depolarization of the neurons, thereby increasing excitability, followed
by detachment (Figurc 16-9).
b. Therapeutic uses. Fipronil is a safc pesticide against flcas and ticks for topical
use in dogs (≥8 weeks old) and cals (≥12 weeks old); 6.5-13 mg/kg topically.
It is available as a spray and a spot-on product and is applied once every 4
weeks. Fipronil is persistent even in animals subjected to shampooing. The
mixture with methoprene (Frontline Plus) is to kill the developing stages of
fleas.
c. Pharmacokinetics. When used topically, it is stored in sebaceous glands and
follicles of the animal, and is slowly released to kill ectoparasites. No other
information is available for animals.
Antiparasitic Agents411
d. Adverse effects. Fipronil is safe when usc as dirccted; only local irritation and
hypersalivalion have been reporled.
e.
 Drug Resistance. Fipronil may cause cross-resistance with lindane.
4. Metaflumizone (ProMeris, ProMeris Duo)
a. Mechanism of action. Metaflumizone attacks the nervous system of the flea by
blocking neuronal Na+ channels to cause hyperpolarization of the neuronal
membrane, which results in reduced feeding, flaccid paralysis, and death of the
flea.
b. Therapeutic uses. Metaflumizone is a fleacide for topical spot-on use in dogs
and cats that are ≥8 weeks old. It should be applied at the 4-6 week intervals.
In combination with amitraz, ProMeris? Duo can kill both fleas and ticks in
dogs.
c. Pharmacokinetics. Mctaflumizonc is rapidly distributcd throughout thc sur-
facc of the skin. Maximum concentrations in the hair gcnerally rcach 1-2 days
posttrcatment and gradually decline through 56 days posttrcatment. Only very
small amounts of mctaflumizone are absorbcd systcmically from dermal appli
cation.
d. Adverse effects. It is safe when use as directed; only lethargy has been re-
ported when over-dosed.
Resistance to ectoparasiticides
1. Introduction. Somc arthropods arc resistant to the Icthal effccts of cctoparasiti-
cides following continuous exposure to them. This resistance is increasing preva-
lcnt; morc than 500 spccics of arthropods are resistant to onc or morc cctopara-
siticidcs. Approximatcly 2o0 of rcsistant spccics are cither parasitcs of animals or
humans.
 2. Mechanisms of resistance. There arc two classcs of mechanisms, physiological
and behavior mechanisms
a. Behavioral mechanisms. Afler exposing to a parlicular ecloparasilticide, the
pests would develop the behavior to avoid the agent.
b. Physiological mechanisms. These are more important than behavioral mecha-
nisms, which affect selection and effective use of ectoparasiticides.
(1) Decreased penetration into target organism.
(2) Increased metabolism (detoxication) of ectoparasiticides.
(3) Decreased sensitivity of the target site (or receptor).
 3. Strategies to reduce the resistance development to ectoparasiticides. These in-
clude the following:
a. Appropriate selection of ectoparasiticides. Onc should target chemistry that
does not favor a higher level of resislance and/or agenls that are less persislenl
b. Reduction in the number of treatments. It is best achieved by an integrated
approach to parasile management in which chemicals are combined with other
means of controlling parasites.
c. Use of ectoparasiticide rotations and mixtures. Rotation of agents across sev.
eral generations of target ectoparasite may be superior to rotation over single
generations. Mixing of agents usually results in recdundant killing in which
each agent is used alone. On the contrary. mixtures often are variable in their
persistence following application, resulting in a shorter period of redundant 
efficacy.
d. Limited interactions with agronomical pesticides. Increased frequency of ex-
posure of target ectoparasites to agronomical pesticides may accelerate the de
managing agronomical and animal pests to avoid promoting resistance against
currently effeclive agents.
e. Resistance monitoring. It can be useiul in delermining continuing efficacy of
agents or the effecliveness of resistance managemenl program.
412Chapter 16
SUGGESTED READING
Craig TM. 2003. Treatment of external and internal parasites of cattle. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim
Pract 19:661-678.
Hsu WH, Kakuk Tj. 1984. Effecl of amitraz and chlordimeform on heart rale and pupil diameter: Medi-
atcd by α2-adrenoreceplors. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 73:411-415.
Hsu WH, Lu ZX, Hembrough FB. 1986. Effect of amitraz on heart rate and aortic blood pressure in
Conscious dogs: Influence of atropine, prazosin, tolazoline, and yohimbine. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
84:418-422.
dogs and their antagonism by yohimbine: Preliminary study. Drug Chem Toxicol 8:239-253.
Lindsay DS, Blagburn BR. 2001. "Antiprotozoan drugs." In Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics.
Edited by Adams HR. 8th ed., pp. 992-1016. Ames, IA: lowa Stale Universily Press.
Martin Rl. 1997. Modes of action of anthelmintic drugs. Br Vet / 154:11-34.
Martin R], Purcell J, Day T, Robertson AP. 2003. "Neurotransmitters." In Molecular Medica! Parasitof-
s    ate dd  s  s    i o
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
98:169-194.
Reid WM. 1976. Progress in the control of coccidiosis with anticoccidials and planned immunization.
Am J Vet Res 31:593-596.
Reinermeyer CR, Courtney CH. 2001. "Antinematodal drugs." In Veterinary Pharmacology and Thera-
peutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8th ed., pp. 947-979. Ames, IA: lowa State University Press.
Robertson AP, Bjorn H, Martin R]. 1999. Levamisole resistance resolved at the single-channel level.
FASEB J 13:749-760.
uo sisjuoseiue jayno inoj pue auqwios jo sioaa aul 'o6at ia jaddon 'hm nsh 'da laeys 
amitrazinduced depression of shuttle avoidance responscs in dogs. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 104:543-
547.
Wolstcnholme Al, Fairwcathcr I, Pritchard R, von Samson-Himmclstjerna G, Sangster NC. 2004. Drug
resistance in veterinary helminthes. Trends Parasitol 20:469-476.
Antiparasitic Agents413
STUDY
QuEStIOn S
DIRECTlONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completion of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in cach case.
1. Of the following drugs used in heartworm
(A)  Fenbendazole
therapy or prevention, which one has the
(B)Ivermectin
 greatest potential for causing icterus and 
(C) Moxidectin
bilirubinuria?
(D)Pyrantel
(A) Selamectin
6. Clinical signs of a coccidiosis outbreak are
(B)Ivermectin
(C)Milbemycin
detected in a ilock of layers. Which one of
(D）Melarsomine
the following anticoccidial drugs would be
most appropriate?
2. Which one of the following antinematodal
(A)  Sulfadimethoxine
drugs is effective against equine bots (Gas-
(B) Lasalocid
terophilus)?
(C) Decoquinale
(D)Amprolium
(A) Fenbendazole
(B)Ivermedlin
(C) Piperazine
7. Which of the following antinematodal
(D)Pyrantel
drugs is also used in the treatment of giardia-
sis dogs?
 3. Which one of the following ectoparasiti-
(A) Fenbendazole
cides may cause xylazine-like effects in ani-
(B) Ivermectin
mals?
(C) Levamisole
(A) Amitraz
(D)Piperazine
(B) Lindane
(C) Pyrantel
(C)  Methoxychlor
(D)  Permethrin
8. Which of the following antinematodal
(E)Rotenone
drugs used in cats works by increasing the
release of inhibitory neuropeptides?
4. Which one of the following anthelmintics
(A) Piperazine
requires the longest preslaughter withdrawal
(B)Febantel
period when used in beef cattle?
(C) Pyrantel pamoate
(A) Albendazole
(D) Selamectin
(B)Clorsulon
(E) Emodepside
(C)Ivermectin
(D) Levamisole
9. Which one of the following antitrematodal
(E) Morantel
drugs is most effective against immature (i.e.)
less than 14 weeks old) Fasciola hepatica in
5. A 5-year-old Arabian mare is diagnosed
cattle?
with a Strongylus vulgaris infection. Repeated
dosings with oxibendazole have failed to im-
(A) Albendazole
prove the mare's condition that suggests that
(B) Clorsulon
(C)Praziquantel
the worms are resislant to the treatment. The
veterinarian decides to use another nema-
tocide to treat the mare for this condition.
10. Which one of the following antinemato-
Under the circumstances, which one of the
dal drugs does not have significant activity
following drugs should be avoided?
against hookworms in dogs?
414 |Chapter 16
(A) Febantel
antidote in the treatment of overdose of
(B) Fenbendazole
cholinesterase inhibitors as ectoparasiticides.
(C) Milbemycin
However, 2-PAM is not effective in overdose.
(D) Piperazine
(A) dichlorvos
(E) Pyrantel
(B)carbaryl
(C) coumaphos
11. All of the following anticoccidial drugs
(D) fenthion
have shown good results in the control of
(E) phosmet
 mammalian coccidiosis except:
(A) amprolium.
16. Which of the following anticoccidial
(B) decoquinate.
drugs can be legally used in laying chickens?
(C) monensin.
(A)Amprolium
(D) robenidine.
(B) Clopidol
(E) sulfaquinoxaline.
(C) Nicarbazin
(D) Diclazuril
12. All of the following are toxic effects of
(E) Sulfadimethoxine and ormetoprim
metronidazole except:
(A) convulsions.
17. Which of the following fleacides act by
(B) carcinogenicity.
blocking neuronal Nat channels that leads to
(C) cardiac arrhythmia.
flaccid paralysis of the parasites?
(D) diarrhea.
(A)Fipronil
(E) reversible leukopenia.
(B)Imidacloprid
(C) Metaflumizone
13. Which of the following anticestodal
(D) Nitenpyram
drugs has consistent efficacy against Taenia,
(E) Permethrin
Dipylidium, and Echinococcus in dogs?
(A) Dichlorophene
18. Which of the following drugs for the
treatment of equine protozoal myeloen-
(B) Fenbendazole
(C) Praziquantel
cephalitis (EPM) acts by forming a toxic-free
radical in order to block cellular respiration
(D) Pyrantel
of the protozoans?
14. Piperonyl butoxide is a "synergist" that
(A)  Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
is usually found in which of the following
(B) Ponazuril
ectoparasiticide preparations?
(C) Nitazoxanide
(A) Rotenone
19. Which of the following ectoparasiticides
(B) Pyrethrins
(C)Fipronil
is not effective in killing ticks?
(D) Lufenuron
(A) Fipronil
(E) Methoprene
(B) Rotenone
(C) Amitraz
15. Pralidoxime (2-PAM) is an acetylcholines-
(D) Imidacloprid
trase regeneratorthat has been used as an
(E) Permethrin
Antiparasitic Agents415
AnsWers
AND
EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is D.
 Other antinematodal drugs are not effective
Melarsomine is hepatotoxic. Signs of
against Giardia.
toxicity include persistent vomiting, biliru-
binuria, hyperbilirubinemia, icterus, melena,
8. The answer is E.
stupor, and coma. Affected animals may
Emodepside activates the presynaptic
show increased serum concentrations of alka-
latrophilin receptor, which increases the
line phosphatase and alanine transaminase.
release of inhibitory neuropeptides PF1 and
Selamectin, ivermectin, and milbemycin are
 PF2, thereby causing flaccid paralysis of
not hepatotoxic.
muscles in nematodes. Piperazine activates
GABA receptors of nematodes to cause
2. The answer is B.
flaccid paralysis. Selamectin activates
Macrocyclic lactones, such as ivermectin,
glutamate-gated chloride channels, which
are effective against bots. Benzimidazoles,
also causes flaccid paralysis. Febantel is a
piperazine, and pyrantel are not.
pro-benzimidazole, which is metabolized into
fenbendazole and oxfendazole. Benzimida-
3. The answer is A.
zoles inhibit microtubule synthesis. Pyrantel
Like xylazine, amitraz is an α2-adrenergic
pamoate is a nicotine-like nematocide, which
agonist. Therefore, it can cause sedation,
activates nicotinic receptors to increase
bradycardia, and hyperglycemia in animals.
muscle contraction, which is followed by
Other ectoparasiticides do not have this
paralysis.
activity.
4. The answer is C.
9. The answer is B.
 In cattle, the preslaughter withdrawal
Clorsulon has excellent activity against
period for ivermectin (35 days following
both mature and immature F. hepatica.
SC. administration and 49 days following
Albendazole is used to kill mature F. hepafica
topical administration) is longer than that for
only. Praziquantel has not been tested for
albendazole (27 days), clorsulon (8 days),
activity against liver ilukes in cattle for
Ievamisole (2 days, oral; 7 days, SC; 11 days,
economic reasons.
topical), and morantel (14 days).
10. The answer is D.
5. The answer is A.
Piperazine is effective against ascarids
Cross-resistance occurs among all benz-
and nodular worms in all species, but it has 
imidazoles. Thus, if a nematode spccies
no activity against hookworms. Febantel,
becomes resistant to oxibendazole, one
fenbendazole, milbemycin, and pyrantel are
should avoid using another benzimidazole as
cffective against hookworms.
an alternalive nematocide. Ivermectin, mox
idectin, and pyrantel are not benzimidazoles;
11. The answer is D.
thus, cross-resistance with oxibendazole is
Sulfonamides and ormetoprim, ampro-
nol a problem.
lium, decoquinate, and sodium ionophores,
for example, monensin are used as anti-
6. The answer is A.
coccidial drugs in mammals. Robenidine is
Aulfa drug with or without ormetoprim
approved for use in birds only.
is recommended for the treatment of coc-
cidial outbreaks in poultry. Diclazuril, not
mentioned in the question, can also be used
12. The answer is C.
to treat coccidiosis outbreak. Lasalocid,
Cardiac arrhythmia is not an adverse
 amprolium, and decoquinate are used for
effect of metronidazole. However, metronida-
 prevention only.
70le may induce lethargy, weakness, ataxia,
rigidity, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and,
7. The answer is A.
rarely, reversible leukopenia. Metronidazole
Benzimidazoles, for example, fenbenda-
may be hepatotoxic, teratogenic, and
zole, are used for the control of giardiasis.
carcinogenic.
416 Chapter 16
13. The answer is C.
animals. As a result, it is legally used in
Praziquantel is effective against all
laying chickens. All other anticoccidial drugs
three species of tapeworms in the dog.
are absorbed significantly in the gut, and thus
Dichlorophene is effective against Taenia
cannot be used in laying chickens.
and Dipylidium, but not Echinococcus.
Fenbendazole is effective against Taenia
17. The answer is C.
and Echinococcus, but not Dipylidium.
Metaflumizone is a newly developed
Pyrantel at high doses is effective against
fleacide, which causes flaccid paralysis of the
horse tapeworm Anoplocephala perfoliata,
fleas by blocking neuronal Na+ channels.
but there is no evidence that it kills canine
Permethrin prolongs the opening of neuronal
Na+ channels, which causes depolarizing
tapeworms.
neuromuscular blockade of the ectoparasites.
14. The answer is B.
Imidacloprid and nitenpyram overstimulate
Piperonyl butoxide inhibits cytochrome
nicotinic receptors of fleas. Fipronil blocks
P450 enzymes in ectoparasites, which will
GABA-gated Cl- channels to cause depo-
help protect pyrethrins and thus increase the
larization of the neurons that paralyzes the
efficacy of this botanical ectoparasiticide.
fleas.
Piperonyl butoxide is usually found in the
pyrethroid preparations, but not in other
18. The answer is C.
ectoparasiticides.
Nitazoxanide forms a toxic-free radical
from the "nitro" group, which blocks cellular
15. The answer is B.
respiration of protozoans. Trimethoprim-
2-PAM is effective in regenerating.
sulfadiazine inhibits folate synthesis and
cholinesterase that is bound covalently
metabolism. Ponazuril is effective against
by organophosphates. Since carbamates
schizonts and gametes by inhibiting nuclear
such as carbaryl do not form covalent bond
division.
with cholinesterase, it is not effective in
regenerating the enzyme.
19. The answer is D.
Imidacloprid is effective against fleas
16. The answer is A.
but not ticks. All other ectoparasiticides
Amprolium is a quaternary compound
mentioned in the question are effective in
that is minimally absorbed from the gut of
killing both fleas and ticks.
Antineoplastic Drugs
Leslie E. Fox
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY
A.
The goal of trcatment with chemotherapy in veterinary medicine is to increase the
lengih and quality of life of paticnts based on an accurate histologic: diagnosis of the
tumor and the clinical stage or extent of the neoplastic process.
B,
 Chemotherapy is best used as treatment for systemic disease, palliation for metastatic,
or nonresectable disease, large tumor size reduction, making them more amenable to
surgery and/or radiation therapy called neoadjuvant chemotherapy, adjuvant therapy
after surgery and/or radiation therapy to slow metastasis or kill residual tumor cells,
and to incrcase tumor cell sensilivity to the lethal ceffecis of radiation therapy.
C..
The kinetics of chemotherapy drug-induced cell kill is first-order--a constant percent-
age (not a constant number) of cells is killed with each dose, Antineoplastic drugs
are most effective when the tumor is small (microscopic) and is rapidly growing (high
growth fraction).
D,
Because tumor cells undergo a high spontaneous mutation rate, up to 1 in every
10,000 tumor cells may have acquired mutations that can confer resistance at the time
of diagnosis, even in the absence of previous exposure to chemotherapeutic agents.
Thus, multimodality and multiagent therapy administered as early in the course of
disease as is possible, is likely to be the most helpful.
Drug resistance develops in neoplastic cells with mechanisms similar to those observcd
 in antibiotic resistant bacteria. These include the following:
1. Decrcased cell permeability or uptakc, or increascd efflux of drugs
2. Increased production of enzymes which degrade the drug
 3. Increased capacity to repair or bypass the effects of the drug
 4. Decreased binding of drug to receptors or target enzymes
 In general, mulidrug protocols are more efficacious than single drug protocols. They
slow the development of resistance. Addlitionally, the nonoverlapping adverse effects
of each drug decrease overall toxicity to the patient. The drugs are given at the maxi-
mum dose and schedule with acceptable or no adverse effects for optimal tumor cell
kill.
Most drugs are dosed on the basis of body surface area (BSA) in square meters fan
estimate of metabolic rate), because of the narrow therapeutic index of antineoplas-
tic: drugs. The BSA method of dosage calculation ovcrestimales the metabolic rale of
smaller dogs and cats therefore increased toxicity (and perhaps, efficacy) is seen in
smaller animals with some drugs. Doxorubicin is an example of a drug that is morc
toxic to smaller patients (< 10-15 kg body weight) when dosed using BSA than when
calculated on using milligrams per kilogram body weight. Some overweight pets may
need dosage calculation based on their lean body weight.
k × weight (in grams)273
BSA =M²=
104
k = 10.0 for dogs and 10.1 for cats
417
418
Chapter 17 1 1 
FIGURE 17-1. The cell cycle. Mitosis (M) is followed
by thc first growth phasc (C). or by a resting phasc
(CGij). During the S phase, DNA synthesis takes place.
The S phase is followed by a second growth phasc
(G). (From Figure 12-1, NVMS Pharmacology.)
G2
Rapidly multiplying and growing cells are most susceptible to drug effects. These in-
H.
clude the normal cells of the hair follicles, gastrointestinal tract, and bone marrow.
Thus, hair loss, vomiting and diarrhea, and leucopenia and thrombocytopenia are
common side efiects of therapy.
 Minimum baseline assessment consists of a physical cxamination, complete blood
count, serum biochemical panel, and urinalysis. A complete blood count should be
performed before cach subsequent dose. Trealmcnt should be temporarily suspended if
the: neutrophil count falls below 3,000/mm? or platelet count below 100,000/mm- for
 dogs depending on the normal range for each laboratory.
Collie-type breeds and others (long-haired whippet) have a higher risk of toxicity re-
actions from antineoplastic drugs that are actively transported by the p-glycoprotein
membrane pump. Natural products (doxorubicin, vinca alkaloids, actinomycin-D, and
the taxanes) cause increased toxicity when given to dogs with a rmutation of the mul-
tidrug resistance 1 (MDR 1) allele coding for p-glycoprotein, because the mutation
 diminishes the excrelion of drugs dependent on p-glycoprotein.
K.
Chemotherapeutic drugs have the potential to be mutagenic, embryotoxic, teratogenic,
carcinogenic, and cytotoxic. They are skin irritants and can enter the body by absorp-
tion through mucous membranes (oral especially), the eyes (including soft contact
lenses), and the skin, or by inhalation. To prevent accidental exposure, appropriate
handling techniques for hazardous drugs are necessary based on the Occupational
and Safety Health Administration guidelines (found on the United States Department of
Labor website).
THE CELL CYCLE
Knowledge of the cell cycle is essential to the understanding of the action of an-
tineoplastic drugs. Many drugs are cell cycle specific in that they kill tumor cells in
specific. phase of the cell cycle (Figure 17-1).
A.
G1 phase. In the Gi phase there is synthesis of proteins (enzymes) and RNA required
for DNA replication in the S phase. The duration of the G1 phase varies from hours to
days depending on the cell type.
B.S phase. DNA synthesis occurs in the S phase. Its duration usually is 2-4 hours. Many
drugs acl at this phase of the cycle.
G2 phase. The G2 phase is characterized by the synthesis of proteins and RNA re-
snou sie si iensn toenp sll uoisiaip las pue sisou lol painb
D.M phase. Mitosis: its duration is 1 hour.
Antineoplastic Drugs 419
-sisan aie o u sllan suneiajoiduou ayi aseud susan a si aseyd oe ayi aseyd o
1
tant lo the cytotoxic. action of drugs. The duration is variable, hours to wceks depend-
ing on the cell type. Most normal cells are found in this phase.
ALKYLATING AGENTS
A.
 Chemistry. Alkylating agents contain one or more alkyl groups (R-CH,-CH-X) which
are converted to reactive intermediates to form covalent bonds with compounds
containing hydroxyl, amino, phosphate, sulfhydryl, or other nucleophilic groups. The
alkyl radical (R-CH2-CH;) replaces a hydrogen atom on these groups.
B. Mechanism of action
1. Alkylating agents cross-link DNA and inhibit replication.
2. Alkylation labelizes DNA and increases breakdown of the molecule.
3. Alkylalion of proteins and RNA may also occur, These drugs are considered non-
cell cycle specific.
C
 Nitrogen mustards
1. Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan&)
a. Therapeutic uses. Cyclophosphamide is the most commonly used alkylating
agent in veterinary medicine. It is used for immunosuppression and alone or in
combination protocols for lymphoreticular neoplasms, mammary gland and other
carcinomas, soft tissue sarcomas, multiple myelomas, and mast cell tumors.
b. Pharmacokinetics
(1) Cyclophosphamide is inactive until being hydroxylated in the liver by mi-
acrolein, the active metabolites. Thus, it should not be injected directly into
tumors.
(2) Cyclophosphamide is well absorbed orally. widely distributed except to the
CNS, and the parent compound and metabolites are slowly excreted by the
kidneys 0ver 48-72 hours.
(3) After IV injection, the I, of cyclophosphamide is ~4-12 hours.
c. Administration. Cyclophosphamide may be administered orally or IV at inter-
vals which vary with the type of cancer and the protocol employed. A common
regimen is once a day (in the AM, see below) for 4 consecutive days/weeks or
once a week IV. The oral form is coated with a protective layer and should not
be broken or crushed. A CBC is required before administration and periodic uri
nalyses.
d. Adverse effects. Myelosuppression (white hlood cell nadir of 7 days) is most
common. Mild alopecia in susceptible breeds, and sterile hemorrhagic cystitis
are less common side effects, Gl signs (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) are infre-
quent. A rare complication is transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Cys-
titis is most common in dogs and is due to the irritant effects of acrolein and
other metabolites. Concurrent administration of furosemide (IV most effective)
with cyclophosphamide decreases the risk (to <1%) and/or delays the onset of
cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis. Administration of cyclophos-
phamide in the morning, stimulation of water intake and frequent voiding will
reduce the frequency of cystitis. Initial treatment includes discontinuation of di-
uresis (no furosemide or corticosteroids) and cyclophosphamide.
2. Chlorambucil (LeukeranS)
a. Therapeutic uses and administration. Chlorambucil is most commonly used as
an immunosuppressive agent and for treatment of lymphocytic leukemia, gas-
trointestinal lymphoma (cats), multicentric lymphoma (dogs and cats), multiple
myeloma, and polycythemia vera. Chlorambucil is administered orally cvery 2
days. Initially, a CBC is required every 1-2 weeks.
420 Chapslcer 17 IIl C
b. Pharmacokinetics.
(1) Chlorambucil is a slow-acting nitrogen mustard, which is well tolerated fol-
lowing oral administration. The peak plasma concentration reaches maxi-
imum within 1 hour of oral adiministration.
(2) A total of 99%, of circulating chlorambucil is bound by albumin. It is metab
olized by the liver to form active metabolite, phenylacetic acid mustard.
(3) The ty, is 1.5 hours (chlorarmbucil) and 2.4 hours (phenylacetic acid inus-
tard). A total of 15-60% is excreted in urine after 24 hours.
C. Adverse effects. Chlorambucil is very well tolerated. Curmulative myelosuppres-
sion with chronic adininistration is the imost common adverse effect in cats and
dogs. Chlorambucil may be used as a substitute for cyclophosphamide when
heinorrhagic cystitis has developed.
3. Melphalan (Alkeran)
a. Therapeutic uses and administration. Melphalan has been used predoininantly
in the treatment of multiple myeloma and other lymphoreticular neoplasms, as
well as, anal sac adenocarcinoma. Melphalan is administered orally. Initially, a
CBC is required every 7-14 days.
b.
 Pharmacokinetics. Melphalan does not require hepatic metabolism for activation
like cyclophosphaimide. Its oral absorption is variable. It is eliminated imainly by
hydrolysis in the plasma. In humans, terminal ty, is ~90 minutes. In humans,
10% is excreted in the urine.
C.
 Adverse effects. Myelosuppression is the imost cominon adverse effect. It imay be
cumulative when used with other myelosuppressive drugs.
4. Mechlorethamine HCl (Mustargen&)
 a. Therapeutic uses and administration. This drug is most commonly used for treat-
ment of relapsed lymphoreticular neoplasms or given intracavitary for pleural
and peritoneal effusions. Although available in an ointiment, it is highly immuno-
suppressive and topical administration is not recommended. It is most commonly
given IV. Immediate administration is required as mechlorethamine is highly un-
stable. Deactivation of the remaining drug is required after dosing as it is highly
toxic.
b. Pharmacokinetics. It is widely distributed in tissues despite rapid (iminutes) deac-
tivation in tissues.
c. Adverse effects. Bone imarrow depression and Gl toxicity (nausea and vomiting)
are most common in dogs and cats. Hair loss and hepatotoxicity are possible.
Tissue necrosis occurs with extravasation. A CBC is required before each treat-
Iment and periodic seruin biocheimical panel assessiment.
5. Nitrosoureas. Nitrosureas are lipid soluble and cross the blood-brain barrier.
a. Lomustine (CCNU, CeeNU?)
(1) Therapeutic uses and administration. Lomustine is useful in the management
Of CNS neoplasms, relapsed lymphoma, histiocytic sarcoma, mycosis fun-
goides, and mast cell tumors in cats and dogs. Lomustine is well tolerated
when administered orally. A CBC is needed prior to and 7-10 days after ad-
ministration. Assessiment of serurm liver enzyimes should be done before each
treatiment or before alternate treatments (see toxicity).
(2) Pharmacokinetics. Lomustine is readily absorbed following oral administra-
tion and metabolized by the liver into active metabolites. In humans, the
elimination ty, of lomustine is ~20 minutes, whereas the plasma t , of the
metabolites is ~16 hours to 2 days. A total of 60-70% of the total dose is
excreted in the urine in 96 hours. It has high lipid solubility.
(3) Adverse effects. In dogs, lomustine may cause delayed, cumulative dose-
related, chronic, irreversible hepatotoxicity and should not be used in pa-
tients with preexisting hepatic disease. Reversible hepatic enzyme increase is
far more frequent (4 tines elevation in ALT is indication for drug discontinu-
ation). Hepatotoxicity may be delayed, prevented, or treated with S-adenosyl
methionine (anecdotal) or other antioxidants. Hepatic toxicity is infrequent in
cats.
Antineoplastic Drugs 421
Potentially, severe neutropenia may be found in dogs and cats treated with
lomusline. Neutrophil nadirs are variable for dogs (1-4 weeks after administra-
tion, typically 1 week) and cats (1-5 weeks after administration). Thrombocy-
topenia lasting 4-6 wccks is possible with cumulative dosing. Dosc cscalation
based on a nadir neutrophil counl of >2,000 cells/ul (dogs) helps avoid severe
ncutropcnia. Starting dose for dogs (50 mg/m2 increasing to 90 mg/m2 cvcry 3
weeks) and cats (40 mg/m? increasing to 60 mg/m2 every 4 weeks). Gl compli-
calions are rare. Alopecia is seen in susceptible breeds.
b. Carmustine (BiCNU)
(1) Therapeutic uses and administration. Likc lomustinc, carmustine is also usc-
ful for treatment of lymphoma and CNs malignancies (anecdotal in cats).
Carmustine is given iV every 6 weeks for brain tumors or orally for lym-
phoma. Carmustinc crosscs the blood-brain barricr.
(2) Pharmacokinetics. Carmustine is rapidly degraded in plasma into active
metabolites. In humans 60-80% of the total dose is cxcrctcd in urinc. It is
lipophilic and crosses the blood-brain barrier.
(3) Adverse effects. Potentially severe neutropenia (7-day nadir) is the predomi
nant potential toxicity in dogs.
6. Streptozocin (Zanosar?)
a. Mechanism of action. Strcptozocin activity is not well understood, but it is
thought to alkylate and thus, inhibit DNA jormation.
b.1
Therapeutic uses. As streptozocin selectively, typically, and irreversibly destroys
thc pancrcatic β-cells in dogs resulting in diabctes mellitus (species-spccific
characteristic). It is used investigationally for treatment of insulinomas when
complcte surgical cxcision is not possible.
c. Pharmacokinetics. After IV administration, it is distributed to most tissues; con-
lozocin is melabolized, probably in the liver. Both unchanged and metabo-
lized drug are excreted in the urine. After rapid IV injection, unchanged drug
is rapidly clcarcd from thc plasma with t?, of 35 minutes in humans.
d. Administration. IV administration with extensive saline diuresis both before and
after streptozocin administration to decrease the potential for severe renal toxi-
city. Anticmctic therapy is ncccssary both beforc and for 72 hours aftcr strepto-
zocin infusion as severe, prolonged vomiting is possible.
e. Adverse effects—Sce d. Nausea and vomiting and rcnal toxicity may be frcquent
and severe. Like doxorubicin, extravasation causes intense tissue necrosis. Less
common and less serious arc myelosuppression and incrcases in liver cnzymes.
ment, a complete blood count, biochemical panel, and urinalysis is needed. Risk
for renal insufficiency is grealer if the palient is dehydraled or concurrently re-
ceiving other potentially nephrotoxic drugs.
7. Procarbazine (Matulane?)
a. Therapeutic uses and administration. Procarbazine is used in combination with
other drugs for treatment of relapsed and CNS lymphoma as well as granuloma-
lous meningoencephalitis. It is well absorbed orally and is given daily often in
combination with other antineoplastic drugs. Adverse effects in cats and dogs
may ncccssitate cvcry other day dosing (scc toxicity bclow).
b. Pharmacokinetics. Procarbazine is an alkylator that crosses the blood-brain bar-
rier. It is also a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. No information is available for
animals. In humans, procarbazine is well absorbed after oral administralion
and rapidly equilibrates between the CSF and plasma. Peak levels in plasma
reach in 60 minutes; in the CSF, about 30-90 minutcs aftcr administration. It is
metabolized in the liver and kidney. Metabolic products are cytotoxic and ex-
creted in the urine (mostly as N-isopropylterephthalamic acid, less than 5% as 
unchanged). Plasma tiy, is ~10 minutes after IV administration.
c. Adverse effects. Myclosupprcssion (thrombocytopenia, leukopcnia) and gas-
trointestinal effecls (nausea, vomiting, and hemorrhagic gastroenteritis in dogs,
422 Cliapter 17  C
anorexia most cormmon in cats) are the imost comrmon adverse effects. These
signs may be cnhanced when procarbazine used in combination with other
anticancer agents. CNS toxicity may be noted in some dogs. Monitor weekly
CBC and monthly renal and hepatic function.
8. Ifosfamide (lfex)
 a. Therapeutic uses and administration. Ifosfamide use is investigational, but it has
activity against lymphoma and soft tissue sarcoma in dogs and cats. It is admin-
istered IV every 3 weeks.
b. Pharmacokinetics. Ifosfamide is inactive until metabolized by the liver into ac-
tive metabolites via hydroxylation. In humans, ty, is 7-15 hours. A tolal of 70-
90% of mctaboliles and unchanged drug are cxcrcted in the urine.
C. Adverse effects.
(1) Neutropenia (7 days and with repeated dosing, 14-21 days), hypersalivation
(nausea) during infusion, and anorexia after treatment and potential nephro-
toxicity were most common in cats.
(2) Dogs exhibited neutropenia (nadir 7 days) which was dose-limiting and mild
Gl adverse effects.
(3) When given IV to dogs and cats, extensive saline diuresis before and after
drug administration minimizes nephrotoxicosis, while concurrent Mesna (2-
mercaptoethanesulfonate, a free radical scavenger) prevents hemorrhagic
cystitis (caused by irritant metabolites acrolein and 4 hydroxy-ifosfamide) in
dogs and cats.
9. Dacarhazine (DTIC-Dome)
a. Mechanism of action. Exact mechanism is undeterinined, but acts like an alky-
lating agcnt and requires hcpatice aclivation for activity.
b. Therapeutic uses and administration. Dacarbazinc has aclivity in relapscd lym-
phoma, cpithcliotrophic lymphoma in dogs. It is not given to cats, because they
may not have adequate hepatic metabolism. Dacarbazine may be given IV (over
4-6 hours) every 2-4 weeks with preimedication with antiemetics (single dose
dolasetron or ondansetron is ..  effective).
c. Pharmacokinetics. It is metabolized into 5-amino-imidazole-4 carboxamide. In
humans, the distribution t is ~20 minutes and elimination ty, is 5 hours; 40%
is excreted unchanged in urine in 6 hours.
d. Adverse effects. Acule Gl toxicity is cxpecled consisting of vomiting during and
immediately afler administralion. Othcr Gl toxicity includes anorexia and di-
arrhca, Extravasation causcs painful tissue. Ncutropcnia and thrombocylopcnia
(nadir in several weeks after administration) is usually asyinptomatic.
D.
Infrequently used alkylating agents
1. Busulfan is an alkylsulfonate, which is well absorbed orally used for polycythemia
and chronic myelogenous leukemia. Parent drug (25-50%) is eliminated as metabo-
lites in the urine of humans in 48 hours.
2. Hydroxyurea (Hydrea)
a. Therapeutic uses and administration. Hydroxyurca is used for trcatmcnt of
polycythemia vera, chronic myelogenous leukemia, meningioma, feline hyper-
eosinophilic syndrome and mast cell tumor. Daily or alternate day oral adminis-
tration is useful.
b. Pharmacokinetics. Hydroxyurea is well absorbed after oral administration and
crosses the blood-brain barrier. In humans, up to 50% of oral dose is metabo-
lized. In addition, hydroxyurea is degraded by urease by intestinal bacteria. A
total of 40-80% is excreted in urine within 12 hours. Elimination ty, is 3-4.5
hours.
C. Adverse effects. Toenail sloughing (dogs) and myelosuppression are most fre-
quent. Myelosuppression is more problermatic for cats. Renal insufficiency, stom-
atitis, Gl signs, and exacerbation of urate urolithiasis secondary to increased
serum urea are infrequent. Monitor with a CBC every 1-2 weeks initially, then
every 3 months. More frequent monitoring for cats. Renal function is assessed
initially and then every month or two.
Antineoplastic Drugs 423
IV.
PLATINATING AGENTS
A.
General considerations. Like alkylating agents, cisplatin and carboplatin act similarly
since they cross-link DNA and prevent replication of DNA. They are cell cycle non-
specific.
B.
Cisplatin (cis-diaminodichloroplatinum, CDDP, Platinol-AQ&)
1. Mechanism of action. Cisplatin acts likc a bifunctional alkylating agcnt producing
inter- and intrastrand crosslinks in DNA through binding to guanine residues.
 2. Therapeutic uses. In dogs, cisplatin is administered IV alonc or in combination pro-
tocols for carcinoinas and sarcomas.
3. Pharmacokinetics. Cisplatin is not absorbed orally. Following parenteral adininis-
tration, it accumulates in kidneys, liver and the Gl tract. Renal excretion occurs as
free platinum (80% of dose in urine in 48 hours). It has a biphasic elimination pro-
file with a distribution plasma ty. of 20 minutes and a long terrminal phase of 120 
hours in dogs.
4. Administration. No aluminum needles should be used for administration.
a. Dogs. IV saline must be given for 4 hours before and 2 hours after IV cisplatin.
It is given once every three weeks. Slow IV infusion is also required to decrease
nephrotoxicity. It may be given intracavitary along with saline diuresis.
b. Horses. Intratumoral injection of cisplatin in sesame oil once every 2 weeks
is the usual protocol for sarcoids, squamous cell carcinoma/papillomas, and
melanomas.
 5. Adverse effects. Nausca and vomiting is the most common acute toxicity requiring
prc- and postreatment anticmetic therapy. Renal toxicity (due to platinum accumu.
lation but reduced by saline infusions), and myelosuppression (thrombocytopenia
and/or neutropenia) are more common side effects. Rarely, ototoxicity or neurotoxi-
city may occur. Pretreatment CBC, BUN, serum creatinine concentrations, and urine
specific gravity are minimum monitoring parameters.
Note: Cisplatin causes fatal pulmonary toxicity in cats and should not be used.
6. Special formulation. Cisplatin may be delivered locally as a slow release formula-
tion in a biodegradable, impregnated open-cell-polylactic acid polymer (OPLA-PT
sponge), It has improved survival of dogs with ostcosarcoma and nasal adenocarci-
noma. Cisplatin is relcascd for 21 days with no systemic side cffects.
C.Carboplatin (Paraplatin?)
1. Mechanism of action. Acts like a bifunctional alkylating agent causing inter- and
intrastrand crosslinks.
2. Therapeutic uses. Similar to cisplatin (carcinomas, sarcormas), except carboplatin
can be safely administered to cats. When compared with cisplatin, carboplatin may
be less effective against transitional cell carcinoma and more effective against ma-
lignant melanoma.
3. Pharmacokinetics. After IV administration, carboplatin is well distributed through-
 out the body; highcsl concentralions are found in the liver, kidney, skin and tumor
tissue. Less protein bound than cisplatin, its elimination ty, is shorter. The parent
drug is degraded into platinum and platinum-complex compounds that are primarily
eliminated into the urine. In dogs, 50% of the dose is excreted in the urine within
24 hours.
 4. Administration
a. Intravenous. Carboplatin is given by slow IV infusion without saline diuresis ev-
cry 21 days for dogs and cvcry 28 days for cats.
b. Iniralurnor. Carboplatin may be mixed with sterilized sesame oil and given intra-
tumorally cvery 4 wccks to cats with nasal cutancous squamous cell carcinoma.
 5. Adverse effects. When compared with cisplatin, carboplatin is much less ermcto-
gcnic and nephrotoxic. The most common adversc cficcls still include Gl abnor-
imalitics and myclosupprcssion. Ncutrophil nadir is 14 days in dogs and 14-21 days
in cats. Like cisplatin, a CBC with BUN and serum creatinine concentrations and 
424Chapter 17 IV C
urine specific gravily are the minimum monitoring parameters obtained prior lo
cach treatmenl.
ANTIMETABOLITES
A.
General considerations. Antimetabolites are structural analogs of normal cellular
molecules such as folic acid, purines, Or pyrimidines; they impair DNA synthesis and
are primarily S phase specific.
B.
Methotrexate (Rheumatrex Dose Pack)
1. Mechanism of action. Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase and prevents
conversion of dihydrofolic acid (DHFA) to tetrahydrofolic acid (THFA). THFA is es-
sential for purine and pyrimidine synthesis.
 2. Therapeutic uses and administration. Previously, methotrexate has been used in
protocols for lymphomas, carcinomas, and sarcomas. It is more commonly given for
immunosuppressive effects. In dogs and cals, methotrexale is lypically given IV or
orally, alone or in combination with other drugs.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. Methotrexate exhibits dose-dependent oral absorption with vari-
ability in peak concentration and bioavailability. It is widely distributed except to
the CNs. Plasma tuy, is <10 hours; gcnerally 2-4 hours. Almost all is climinated via
renal tubular secretion and glomerular filtration (no hepatic metabolism).
4. Adverse effects. Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea most com-
monly and less frequently, myelosuppression. A pretreatment CBC along with reg-
ular assessment of renal function and hepatic enzymes is recommended. Important
potential adverse drug-methotrexate interactions should be evaluated before treating
a patient with methotrexate.
C.
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU, Adrucil)
1. Mechanism of action. 5-FU is a pyrimidine analog. It is phosphorylated in cells lo
F-dUMP which block thymidylate synthase reactions and thus inhibits DNA synthe.
sis. Also, 5-FU is incorporated into RNA and DNA.
2. Therapeutic uses. 5-FU is used in chemotherapy of carcinoma of the Gl tract,
mamimary gland, liver and lungs, Sarcoids (horses) and cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma (dogs, cats, horses) respond to intralesional 5-FU.
3. Pharmacokinetics. 5-FU is administered parenterally since oral absorption is un-
predictable. Distribution is wide and the drug readily enters CSF. Metabolism by
reduction of the pyrimidine ring occurs primarily in the liver. Plasma fy, after IV
administration in humans is ~20 min. Information in animals is not available.
4.Administration.
a. Intravenous. In dogs and cats, 5-FU is administered IV once a week.
b. Intratumoral. 5-FU'can be injected directly into tumor tissue every 2 weeks for 7
treatments.
 5. Adverse effects. 5-FU cannot be used in cats because it produces severe, poten-
tially irreversible and fatal neurotoxicity. In dogs, diarrhea, other Gl tract mucosal
toxicity, and myelosuppression are common side effects. CNS toxicity may occur in
dogs and is characterized by excitement, ataxia, tremors, and convulsions.
D.
Cytosine arabinoside (Cytarabine, CytosarU)
1. Mechanism of action. Cytosine arabinoside is a pyrimidine analog which is phos-
phorylated in cells to Ara CMP and incorporated into DNA, resulting in labile link-
ages.
2. Therapeutic uses. Cytarabine is used in dogs and cats for lymphoreticular neo-
plasms, myeloproliferative diseasc, granulomalous meningocncephalitis and CNS
lymphoma (crosses the blood-brain barrier).
AntineoplasticDrugs425
3. Pharmacokinetics. Cytosine arabinoside is activated and metabolized by deami-
nasc mainly the liver, but is also convertcd in the kidncys, intestinal mucosa, and
granulocytes into uracil arabinoside (ara-U). Its metabolism is quite rapid (minutes),
requiring continuous infusion over hours. ~80% of a dose is excreted in the urine
within 24 hours (90% as ara-U and 10% as unchanged cytarabine).
 4. Administration. Cytarabine is administered IV (by continuous infusion) or SC once a
day to dogs and cats.
 5. Adverse effects. Myelosuppression is the most common toxicity (neutropenia nadir
at 5-7 days) and anemia and thrombocytopenia may also occur.
E.Gemcitabine (Gemzar?)
1. Mechanism of action. Gemcitabine is metabolized intracellularly to diflurodeoxycy
tidine monophosphate (dFdCMP) that is then converted into diphosphate (dFdCDP)
and triphosphate (dFdCTP). The diphosphate inhibits ribonucleotide reductase. The
triphosphate competitively inhibits incorporation of with deoxycytidine triphosphate
(dTCP) for incorporation into DNA strands.
2. Therapeutic uses. Gemcitabine efficacy is questionable in veterinary medicine and
considered investigational use. It may have activity in hcpatocellular carcinoma and
pancreatic adenocarcinoma in dogs and cats.
3. Pharmacokinetics. Plasma ly, of 1.5 hours is in thc dog after IV bolus injcction.
The drug is excreted into urine (>90% as mctabolitcs).
4. Administration. Gemcitabine is given in a biweekly IV bolus. Slower IV infusion
may improve antitumor activity by prolonging duration of action.
 5. Adverse effects. Cemcitabine may cause myelosuppression particularly neutropenia
and thrombocytopenia. Monitoring consists of a CBC before each treatment along
with periodic assessment of liver and kidney function.
F.
Azathioprine (lmuran)
1. Mechanism of action. Azathioprine is converted to the aclive mctabolile 6-
mercaptopurine (6-MP) in the liver. It interferes with the de novo synthesis of purine
nucleotides.
2. Therapeutic uses and administration. Azathioprine is used primarily as an immuno-
suppressive agent in the treatiment of immune-mediated diseases and perianal fis-
tulas in dogs. Clinical response is typically 3-5 weeks. Azathioprine is given orally
once a day in dogs.
3. Pharmacokinetics. Azathioprine is absorbed from the Gl tract. Conversion of 6-MP
metabolites by thiopurine methyltransferase is essential for azathioprine detoxifica-
tion; however, cats and 10% of dogs have low enzyme activity. In these patients,
low activity should be identified early so that doses are decreased and bone mar-
row toxicity avoided. Azathioprine is rapidly climinatcd fron blood. In hunans, no
azathioprine is detectable in urine afler 8 hours of administration.
4. Adverse effects. Neutropcnia, thrombocytopcnia, and anemia can result from aza-
thioprine. In dogs, Cl toxicity (self-limiting nausea and diarrhea) and hepatotoxicity
are seen. Pancreatitis, possibly exacerbated by concurrent steroid administration,
has been reported. Monitor CBC every one to 2 weeks initially and renal and liver
function monthly.
G.
6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP, Purinethol)
1. Mechanism of action. 6-MP is a purine analog which is phosphorylated in cells. It
inhibits multiple steps of DNA and RNA synthesis.
2. Therapeutic uses and administration. 6-MP is used in dogs and cats for acute lym-
phocytic leukemia, granulocytic leukemia, and lymphosarcoma. 6-MP is adminis-
tered orally once a day.
 3. Pharmacokinetics
Gl absorption after oral dosing is variable and incomplete. Absorbed 6-MP and its
metabolites are widely distributed in the body. The drug crosses the blood-brain 
426Chapter 17 V G
6-MP, via the enzyme xanthine oxidase, is rapidly metabolized in the liver to 6-
thiouric acid, which along with the parent compound and other metabolites are
principally excreted in the urine. In humans, ~50% of 6-MP is excreted in urine
within 24 hours as parent drug and metabolites. Plasma ty, is ~45 minutes in
adults.
4. Adverse effects. Lcukopcnia and thromhocytopenia are the most common sidc ef-
fects.
H.6-Thioguanine (6-TG, Thioguanine Tabloid)
1. Mechanism of action. 6-TG is a purine analog with actions similar lo 6-MP.
 2. Therapeutic uses. 6-TG is used in dogs and cats for acute leukemia. 6-TC is admin-
istered orally once a day.
3. Pharmacokinetics.
a. 6-TG is administered orally, but Gl absorption is variable. In humans, only
~30% of a dose is absorbed.
b. 6-TG is distribuled inlo the DNA and RNA of bone marrow, but several doses
may be necessary for this to occur. It does not apparently enter the CNS.
c. 6-TG is rapidly metabolized primarily in the liver to methylate derivative that
is less active than the parent compound. This and other metabolites are then
eliminated in the urine.
d. The short t of 6-TG of ~2 hours in humans support the notion that it is rapidly
metabolized.
 4. Adverse effects. Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are the most common side ef-
fccls.
MITOTIC SPINDLE INHIBITORS
A.
General Considerations. Vincristine and vinblastine are extracts of the common peri-
winkle plant (vinorelbine is semisynthetic). The taxanes are from the Japanese yew
tree.
 B.Vincristine/Vinblastine
1. Mechanism of action. The vinca alkaloids, vincristine and vinblastine bind to tubu-
lin in the mitotic. spindle to prevent cell division during metaphase. They are active
in the G2 and M phases of the cell cycle.
2. Therapeutic uses
a. Vincristine (Vincasar PFs&). Vincrisline is the most commonly used mitolic in-
hibitor in veterinary medicine. It is employed in the treatment of lymphoreticular
neoplasms, carcinomas, and sarcomas in dogs and cats and transmissible vene-
real tumors (TVT) in dogs.
b. Vinblastine (Velban?). Vinblastine has been used to treat lymphomas and mast
cell tumors in dogs and cats.
C. Vinorelbine (Navelbine&). Vinorelbine has been used to manage pulmonary
carcinomas in dogs and cats.
 3. Pharmacokinetics. The vinca alkaloids are not absorbed orally. After IV adminis.
tration, they are rapidly distributed except to the CNS. ~75% is bound to tissue
proteins. They are metabolized by the liver and mainly excreted in the bile/feces.
Maximum tissue concentration attained in one hour. In dogs, elimination fy. is 75
minutes for vincristine and ~4 hours for vinblastine.
4. Administration. The vinca alkaloids are administered IV every 7-14 days, usually
in combination protocols except for TVT. Note: The vinca alkaloids are severe vesi-
cants if injected perivascularly.
5. Adverse effects
a. The vinca alkaloids, especially vincristine, may produce a peripheral neurotox-
icity, (ncural tissue has a high concentralion of tubulin protein), neuromuscular
weakness, and constipation secondary to autonomic neuropathy.
Antineoplastic Drugs 427
b. Myelosuppression may occur, bul is less severe than that produced by other an-
tineoplastic. drugs. In order of decreasing myelosuppression in dogs are vinorel-
bine, vinblastine, and vincristine.
C. Biliary excretion may be inhibited by cholestasis requiring a dose reduction if
serum bilirubin is >2.0 mg/dl
d. Extravasation results in severe tissue necrosis.
Taxanes
1. Paclitaxel (Taxol)
a. Mechanism of action, Microlubule dissolution (depolymerization) is inhibited.
This stability inhibits the normal dynamic reorganization of the microtubule net-
work that is essential for vital interphase and mitotic cellular functions.
b. Therapeutic uses. Invesligalional use suggesis activity againsl mammary carci-
noma, osteogenic osteosarcoma, and histiocytosis in dogs. Its use is not recom-
mended because of severe adverse effects.
c. Pharmacokinetics. There is no information in animals.
(1) In humans, 89-98% of paclitaxel is bound by plasma proteins following IV
administration. It is also extensively bound by tissues during extravascular
distribution.
(2) Paclitaxel is metabolized prinarily to 6α-hydroxypaclitaxel 3-p-
hydroxypacllilaxel and 6α,-p-dihyroxypaclitaxel by cylochrome P450) en-
zymes in the liver.
(3) The metabolites and unchanged drug are excreted mainly in feces (71%)
and lesser in urine (14%). Following 3- and 24-hour infusions, the t', 0f
paclitaxel is 13-53 hours.
d. Administration. Paclitaxel is given via IV administration every 3 weeks. Premed-
ication with corticosteroids and antihistamines (H1 and H2 blockers) is impera-
tive one hour prior to administration. The calculated dose of paclitaxel is diluted
in 0.9% NaCl at a concentration of 0.6-0.7 mg taxol/ml and administered IV
over 2 hours. Slow infusion if adverse reactions occur.
trointestinal adverse effects (vomiting, anorexia especially). Anaphylactoid reac-
tions (sometimes severe) caused by diluent (Cremphor EL) and somnolence by
(alcohol) are most problematic acutely and may be severe. Some adverse reac-
taxel has been given to few cats. The same (often fatal) reaction to Cremaphor
EL vehicle occurs in cats.
TOPOISOMERASE INHIBITORS OR ANTITUMOR ANTIBIOTICS
A.
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin)
1. Mechanism of action. Doxorubicin is an anthracycline antibiotic that inhibits topoi
somerase Ill, an enzyme is involved in the cleavage, unwinding, and rejoining of
segments of DNA. Il also intercalates DNA (forms a stable complex), inhibits DNA
helicase, and generates oxygen free radicals, leading to oxidative damage to cell
membranes and DNA. It is non-cell cycle specific (inhibits DNA and RNA synthe-
sis) bul is mosl active in the S phase.
2. Therapeutic uses. Doxorubicin is used in the treatment of carcinomas and sarcomas
in dogs and cats, especially lymphoma, thyroid and mammary gland carcinoma and 
osteosarcoma.
3. Pharmacokinetics.
a. Doxorubicin is not absorbed orally. It causes severe tissue necrosis if given SC. or
IM. Following IV administration, it is rapidly and widely distributed throughout
the body except to the CNs. It is highly bound to plasma and tissue proteins.
h. It is metabolizcd by the livcr and other tissues via aldo-keto-reductase
primarily to an active metabolite, doxorubucinol, and other inactive
428(hapter 17 VIl A
metabolites. Doxorubucin and its metabolites are primarily excreted in bile and
feces
c. Doxorubucin is climinated in a triphasic manncr: During the first phase (ty, 0.6
hours) doxorubicin is rapidly metabolized, via the "first-pass" effect followed by
a second phase (ty. 3.3 hours). The third phase has a much slower elimination
t; of ～15 hours for doxorubicin and ～30 hours for metabolites), probably due
to the slow release of the drug from tissue proteins. Less than 5% is excreted in
the urine of dogs. Plasma t, in dogs is ~1 hour.
4. Administration. Doxorubicin is administercd IV cvcry 21 days as part of a mul-
tidrug protocol, Limit total dose to 180-240 mg/m2 or simultaneously treat with
desroxazone) to avoid cardiomyopathy. Dose reductions of 50% required for serum
bilirubin concentrations >2.0 mg/dl in dogs. Do not give to hyperbilirubinemic
Cats.
 5. Adverse effects. Extravasation produces severe tissue necrosis. Complete blood
count and ECG are minimal prctrcatrnent rcquirements.
a. Dogs. In addition to lcucopcnia and thrormbocytopcnia (nadir at 7-10 days)
anaphylactoid reaction, and gastroenterilis (diarrhea, anorexia, hemorrhagic en-
terocolitis 2-5 days after administration), doxorubicin may produce chronic, irre-
versible, dose-dependent cardiomyopathy via free radical myocardial damage.
b. Cats. Nephropathy and renal insufficiency with cumulative doses, leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia, prolonged anorexia, and vomiting arc not unconimon side
effects.
6. Other Formulations. Liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin (Doxil?). Whcn com-
pared with doxorubicin, liposome-encapsulaled (PEG) doxorubicin given IV every
3-4 weeks has increased half-life, less cardiotoxicity, similar leukopenia and throm-
bocytopenia, similar anaphylactoid reactivity, less Gl toxicity, more renal toxicity
and alopecia. A unique toxicity, palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia syndrome (hand-
foot syndrome) occurs, but its onset and severity in dogs may be reduced by ad-
ministering pyridoxine (vitamin B6) concurrently. It has a similar activity spectrun
to native doxorubicin.
B.
Mitoxantrone (Novantrone?)
1. Mechanism of action. By intercalation between base pairs and nonintercalative
clectrostatic intcractions, mitoxantrone inhibits both DNA and RNA synthesis. It
may also function as an inhibitor of topoisomerase Il. Mitoxantrone is not consid-
cred cell-cycle phase spccific, but appcars to be most active during the S phase.
 2. Therapeutic uses and administration. Mitoxantrone indications include lymphoma
(naive and relapsed), squamous cell carcinoma, soft tissue sarcomas, mammary
gland carcinoma, transitional cell carcinoma, other carcinomas/sarcomas. It is given
IV every 3 or 4 weeks in dogs and cats.
3. Pharmacokinetics. In humans, it is rapidly takcn up by tissucs whcn givcn in-
travenously and slowly released from tissues ovcr days. Highest conccntrations
of miloxantrone are found in the liver, heart, thyroid and red blood cells. In
humans,~80% of the drug is bound to plasma proleins. lt is metabolized in the
liver, but the majority of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine. The tiy, of the
drug in humans is ~5 days as a result of the drug being bound by, and then slowly
released from tissues.
4.
Adverse effects. Cardiotoxicity has not been reported in dogs and cats. The most
frcqucntly notcd toxicitics are myelosupprcssion (ncutrophil nadir about 10 days)
and Gl disturbanccs (vomiting, anorcxia, and diarrhca). When compared with dox-
orubicin, extravasation is less damaging lo tissue and anaphylactoid reaction is not
reported. A CBC should be performed prior to each treatmenl. Additional liver and
renal function assays may be needed in nonhealthy patients.
C.Actinomycin D (Dactinomycin, Cosmegen?)
1. Mechanism of action, Actinomycin D intercalates with the DNA helix and blocks
 transcription by RNA polyimerasc. It is not cell cyclc spccific.
Antineoplastic: 1Drugs429
2. Therapeutic uses and administration. In dogs and cats, lymphoma (naive and re-
lapscd), soft tissuc and bone sarcomas, and some carcinomas may be trcated with
actinomycin D. Actinomycin D is administered IV once a weck in dogs and cvery
3-4 weeks in cats.
3. Pharmacokinetics.
 a. Actinomycin D is poorly absorbed when given orally: it must be administered
IV. It is rapidly distributed, but the distribution does not extend to the CNS.
b. It is excreted mostly unchanged in the urine and bile. In humans, only ~30% of 
the drug is excreted within 7 days of administration. The t/, of the drug is ~36
hours. No information is available in animals.
4. Adverse effects. Nausca, vomiting. diarrhca, and lcucopcnia (particularly throm-
bocylopenia) are common side effecls, Extravasation causes tissue necrosis. A CBC
and liver enzyme tests are recommended before each treatmenl.
D.
Etoposide (Topscar?)
1. Mechanism of action. Etoposide is a semisynthetic analog of the natural prod-
uct podophyllotoxins, found in mandrake plants. Although it binds to tubulin 
and inhibits polymerization like mitotic. inhibitors, etoposide is a DNA topoiso-
 merase Il inhibitor that stops the action of topoisomcrasc Il after it creates a nick
in one strand of the DNA. The nicked DNA is unable to unwind and eventually
breaks.
 2. Therapeutic uses and administration. Intravenous etoposide administration is to0
toxic to be given to dogs; however, etoposide for injection can be safely given
orally to dogs.
3. Pharmacokinetics. In humans, etoposide is eliminated by hepatic glucuronidation
and approximately 40 percent of thc drug is cxcreted unchanged in the urine. Oral
absorption occurs, but is variable.
4. Adverse effects. When given orally, adverse hematologic and gastrointestinal effecls
were mild.
HORMONES
A.
Glucocorticoids
1. General considerations. Glucocorticoids cause apoptosis of lymphocytes and thus
are lympholytic. They are cell cycle nonspecific. In dogs and cats, lymphoreticular
neoplasms including lymphomas of CNs and mast cell tumors respond to gluco-
corticoids. They are frequently employed in cancer therapy with other drugs for
their symptomatic improvement of appctitc and well-being. Sce Chaptcr 12 for
more: information.
ENZYMES
A.
L-Asparaginase (Elspar(?)
1. Mechanism of action. L-asparaginasc is an cnzyrnc which hydrolyscs L-asparagine
to deplele circulating levels and thus, inhibit prolein synthesis. Normal cells synthe-
size sufficient L-asparagine for protein synthesis, but certain neoplastic cells require
an exogenous source of this amino acid, and its depletion results in cell death. It is
G1 phase specific.
 2. Therapeutic uses. Acute lymphoblastic leukenia and multicentric lymphoma in
dogs and cats respond to L-asparaginasc. It is used in imultidrug protocols.
430
Chapter 171X A
 3. Pharmacokinetics.
a. In humans, after IM adminislralion, the time lo reach peak plasma concentra-
tions is 14-24 hours. Plasma tiy,. after IM and IV administrations are 39-49 hours
and 8-30 hours, respectively. Half-life in cdogs is 12-40 hours, but asparagine 
plasma concentrations remain depressed for 1-3 weeks after administration. It is
not absorbed orally.
b. The metabolic fate of asparaginase is not known. It is probably metabolized by
proteases in the liver and kidneys. Only trace amounts are found in bile and
urine of dogs.
4. Administration. To decrease the incidence and severity of anaphylactic reaction to
a "foreign" protein, L-asparaginase is administered IM or SC once a week.
 5. Adverse effects. Anti-L-asparaginase antibodies are present in some dogs prior t0
any I-asparaginase administration, anaphylactic reaction is possible to the first dose
of l-asparaginase. Pancreatitis may develop in susceptible dogs and should not be
given to patients with a history of pancreatitis. Myelosuppression occurs if given
with vincristine,
MISCELLANEOUS
A.
Piroxicam (Feldene?)
1. Mechanism of Action. Although not fully determined, the mechanism of action of
piroxicam (a NSAID that inhibits both COX-1 and COX-2) is thought to relate to
inhibition of COx-2 activity expressed on transitional cell carcinoma cells and to
inhibition of tumor angiogenesis.
2. Therapeutic uses. Piroxicam can be used as a single agent or as an adjunclive ther
apy against transitional cell carcinoma (dogs and cats) and oral squamous cell car-
cinoma (dogs), canine mammary gland carcinoma, and canine nasal carcinomas. It
is administered PO.
3. Pharmacokinetics.
a. After oral administration, piroxicam is well absorbed from the gut. The presence
of food will decrease the rate of absorption.
b. Peak levels occur in ~3 hours. [limination ty, is ~12 hours.
C.F
Piroxicam is highly bound to plasma proteins. In humans, piroxicam has a very
long plasma (~50 hours). The drug is mainly excreted as metabolites in the
urine after hepatic biotransformation.
4. Adverse effects. Adverse effect include Gl irritation and nephrotoxicity. These dif-
ficulties may be more severe in cats than dogs. Regular evaluation of PCV, BUN,
creatinine, and urine specific gravity are advised in order to monitor for renal toxic-
ily and Gl blceding.
B.
Mitotane (O,P'-DDD, Lysodren?)
1. Mechanism of action. Mitotane is a chlorinated hydrocarbon which is selectively
cytotoxic to the cells of the adrenal cortex. See Chapter 12 Ill B4, page 269 for
further information.
C.
Bleomycin (Blenoxane)
1. Mechanism of action. Bleomycin is a mixture of glycopeptide antibiotics
which bind to DNA and cause chain scission and fragmentation via genera-
tion of free radicals. Cells accumulate in the Gz phase and the antibiotic is G2
specific.
 2. Therapeutic uses and administration. Bleomycin is rarely used in veterinary
medicine; however, responses have been seen for squamous cell carcinoma and
relapscd lymphoma in dogs and cals. A common protocol is IV or SC administra-
tion of bleomycin daily for 3-4 days, then once a week.
Antineoplastic Drugs 431
3. Pharmacokinetics. Bleomycin is not absorbed orally. Distribution is wide with high
concentrations in skin and lungs, but it does not cross the blood-brain barrier and
is found in low concentrations in bone marrow. It is degraded by tissue hydrolase.
Bleomycin is excreted by the kidneys. In patients with normal renal function, elim-
ination ty, is ~2 hours. in humans, 60-70% of a dose is excreted as intact drug in
the urine.
4. Adverse effects. Myelosuppression is minimal. However, nausea and a delayed pul
monary fibrosis and/or skin ulcers may develop.
SUGGESTED READING
Frimberger AE. 2005. "Principles of chemotherapy." In Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. Edited
by Ettinger S), Feldman EC. 6th ed., pp. 708-712. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.
http://www.drugs.com
Lucroy MD. 2001. Chemotherapy safety in veterinary practices: Hazardous drug preparation. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:860-870.
Lucroy MD. 2002. Chemotherapy safety in veterinary practices: Hazardous drug administration.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 24:140-147.
Moore As. 2005. "Practical chemotherapy." In Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. Edited by
Ettinger S), Feldman EC. 6th ed., pp. 713-720. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.
Plumb DC. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
432
Chapter 17
STUdY
QuEStIOnS
DIRECTIONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the slatement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. Which one of the following statements
(A)  Tends to produce less myelosuppression
about antineoplastic drugs is true?
than other classes of antineoplastics
{A)They kill a constant number of cancer
{B) Is usually injected directly into body cav-
ities or tumor masses
cells with each dose.
(C)  Readily crosses the blood-brain barrier
(B) They are most effective against cells in
the Gu phase of the cell cycle.
(D) Cross-links DNA
{E)Is excreted by the liver
{C)
 They kill malignant cells quickly and thus
resistance seldom develops,
6. Which one of the following drugs is given
(D) The dosage is based on body suriacc
because it inhibits COX-2 and is considered a
area.
(E) They are not carcinogenic, teratogenic,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug?
and genotoxic.
(A)L-asparaginase
(B) Cyclophosphamide
2. Which one of the following is an alkylat-
(C)Lomustine
ing agent used in the treatment of lymphoma
(D) Cyclophosphamide
in cats and dogs?
(L) Piroxicam
(A) 5-Fluorouracil
(B）Methotrexate
7. Which one of the following drugs is a mi-
(C) Vincristine
totic inhibitor which would arrest lymphoma
(D)Doxorubicin
cells in metaphase?
(E) Cyclophosphamide
{A)Vincristine
(B) 6-Mercaptopurine
3. Which one of the following is true about
(C)  Chlorambucil
cytosine arabinoside?
(D)  Doxorubicin 
(A)Stops neoplastic cell division in
(E) Cisplatin
metaphase
(B)  Blocks purine synthesis by inhibiting di-
8. Furosemide may slow the onset and sever-
hydrofolate reductase
ity of hemorrhagic cystitis resulting from
(C) Is used primarily for adrenal tumors
which one of the following drugs?
(D)  Is cell cycle nonspecific
(A) Cyclophosphamide
(E) Is a pyrimidine analog which is phospho-
(B)L-asparaginase
rylated in cells to Ara CMP
(C）Melphalan
4. The high concentration of tubulin protein
(D) Doxorubicin
(E) Methotrexate
in neural tissue may be the basis for neuro-
muscular weakness and constipation observed
9. Two antineoplastic drugs should not
in cancer chemotherapy with:
be used in cats because of severe pul-
(A)   Vincristine
monary toxicity and neurotoxicity respec-
{B)Doxorubicin
tively. Which pair below cannot be given to
(C)  Chlorambucil
cats?
(D)Methotrexale
(A)  Chlorambucil and metholrexate
(E) 5-Fluorouracil
(B) Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil
5. Which one of the following statements is
(C)  Vincristine and bleomycin
true about cycloplosphamide?
(D) Mitotane and 6-thioguanine
Antineoplastic. Drugs 433
10. Cardiomyopathy may accompany myelo-  14. Which one of the following statements
suppression and gastroenteritis in dogs treated  about chlorambucil is true?
with one of the following drugs?
(A) It is a rapid-acting nitrogen mustard.
(A) 6-Mercaptopurine
(B) Its toxicity such as myelosuppression is
(B) Vincristine
potentially milder when compared with
(C)  Doxorubicin
cyclophosphamide.
(D)  Actinomycin D
(C) It is more effective than cyclophos-
(E)Ifosfamide
phamide in rapidly growing tumors.
(D) It is not absorbed orally.
11. IV saline infusions prior to and following
(E) It may be used instead of cyclophos
drug administration are necessary to reduce
phamide in patients who have
renal toxicity of which one of the following
cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic
drugs?
Cystitis.
(A) Melphalan
(B) Vinblastine
15. When given as a single agent, which one
(C) Methotrexate
of the following drugs is least myelotoxic?
(D) Cisplatin
(A) Azathioprine
(E) Chlorambucil
(B) L-asparaginase
(C) Actinomycin-D
12. Phosphorylation in cells to a derivative
(D) Paclitaxel
which blocks thymidylate synthetase charac-
(E）Mitoxantrone
terizes the action of which one of the follow--
ing drugs?
16. Which one of the following drugs is cell-
(A) 5-Fluorouracil
cycle phase specific?
(B)Actinomycin-D
(C) Carmustine
(A) Vincristine
(D) Bleomycin
(B) Lomustine
(E) Cyclophosphamide
(C) Chlorambucil
(D) Doxorubicin
13. An alkylating agent which must be ac-
(E) Cisplatin
tivated in the liver to cytotoxic metabolites
before it can kill tumor cells is which one of
17. Which one of the following drugs does
the following drugs?
not readily cross the blood-brain barrier?
(A) L-asparaginase
(A)  Doxorubicin
(B) Vincristine
(B) Cytosine arabinoside
(C) Lomustine
(C) Corticosteroids
(D) Cyclophosphamide
(D) Lomustine
(E)  Cisplatin
(E) Procarbazine
434Chapter 17
ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is D.
6. The answer is E.
Antincoplastic drugs are dosed based
Piroxicam is a NSAID that inhibits both
on body surface area in most inslances.
COX-1 and COx-2 rcccptors. Its antitumor
Doxorubicin is an exception where smaller
mechanism is thought to relale to inhibition
dogs and also cats, are dosed on a mil-
 of COx-2 activity expressed on transitional
ligram/kilogram basis. Chemotherapeutic
cell carcinoma cells and to inhibition of
drugs have the potential to be mutagenic,
tumor angiogenesis.
embryotoxic, teralogenic, carcinogenic, and
cytotoxic. Most drugs are not effective during 
7. The answer is A.
the Go phase of the cell cycle because the
Vincristine is a mitotic inhibitor which
cells are resting (normal cells are found
arrests cells in metaphase.
in this phase). Drug resistance develops in
neoplastic cells with mechanisms similar to
those observed in antibiotic resistant bacteria.
8. The answer is A.
 Drugs kill a constant percentage of cancer
Cystitis is most common in dogs and is
cells with each dose.
due to the irritant effects of acrolein and
other metabolites. Concurrent administration
2. The answer is E.
of furoscmide (IV most cffcctive) with cy-
The only alkylating agent in the group
clophosphamide decreases the risk (to <1%)
listed is cyclophosphamide. It is also used in
and/or delays the onset of cyclophosphamide
the treatment of immune-medialed disorders
induced hemorrhagic cystitis. Administration
 of cyclophosphamide in the morning,
such as, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
stimulation of watcr intakc and frcqucnt
3. The answer is E.
voiding will reduce the frequency of cystlilis.
Cytosinc arabinoside is a pyrimidine
Initial treatment includes discontinuation of
analog which is phosphorylaled to Ara CMP
diurcsis (no furosemide or corticosteroids)
in cells. It is an antimetabolite which works
and cyclophosphamide.
primarily in the S phasc of the cell cycle. It 
is used in dogs and cats for lymphoreticular
9. The answer is B.
neoplasms, myeloproliferative disease,
Cisplatin causes fatal pulmonary edema
granulomatous meningoencephalitis and CNS
and 5-flourouracil causes intractable seizures.
lymphoma (crosses the blood-brain barrier).
Neither drug should be used systemically in
cats.
4. The answer is A.
The vinca alkaloids, cspccially vincristine,
10. The answer is C.
may produce a peripheral neurotoxicily
(neural tissue has a high concentration of
In dogs, lcucopcnia and thrombocy-
tubulin protein), ncuromuscular wcakness,
lopenia (nadir at 7-10 days), anaphylactoid
reactions, gastroenteritis (diarrhea, anorexia,
and constipation secondary lo aulonomic
hemorrhagic enterocolitis 2-5 days afftcr
neuropathy.
administration of doxorubicin), and chronic,
irreversible, dose-dependent cardiomyopathy
5. The answer is D.
via free radical myocardial damage.
Cyclophosphamide is inactive until bc-
ing hydroxylated in the liver by microsomes
as the first step in conversion to phospho-
11. The answer is D.
ramide mustard and acrolein, thc active
IV saline must be given for 4 hours be-
metabolites. Thus, it should not be injected
fore and 2 hours after IV cisplatin once every
directly into tumors. It cross-links DNA and
three weeks. Slow IV infusion is also required
thus inhibits replication. It is myelosuppres-
to decrease nephrotoxicity. It may be given
sive and does not cross the blood-brain
intracavitary if saline diuresis is adiministered
barrier readily.
concurrenlly
Antineoplastic Drugs435
12. The answer is A.
drugs such as, vincristine. Normal cells
5-FU is a pyrimidine analog that is
synthesize sufficient L-asparagine for protein
phosphorylated in cells to F-dUMP which
synthesis, but certain neoplastic cells require
block thymidylate synthase reactions and thus
 an exogenous source of this amino acid, and
inhibits DNA synthesis.
its depletion results in cell death.
13. The answer is D.
16. The answer is A.
Cyclophosphamide must be converted
Cell-cycle phase specific drugs include
to phosphoramide mustard and acrolein by
those which kill cells predominantly in one
hepatocytes.
phase of the cell cycle. The taxanes and
vinca alkaloids kill in the cell phase when
14. The answer is B.
the mitotic spindle is formed.
Chlorambucil is a slow-acting alkylating
agent that is well absorbed orally. It is less
17. The answer is A.
effective than cyclophosphamide, but is
Doxorubicin does not cross the blood-
less myelosuppressive and does not cause
brain barrier appreciably. Whereas, lomustine
hemorrhagic cystitis.
and procarbazine cross readily thus are usefu
for treating brain tumors. Corticosteroids
15. The answer is B.
and cytosine arabinoside penetrate the
L-asparaginase has no myelosuppressive
brain and are used to treat lymphoma and
effect unless given with myelosuppressive
granulomatous meningoencephalitis.
This page intentionally left blank
ter
18
Fluid and Blood Therapy
Walter H. Hsu
 BIOCHEMICAL BASIS OF FLUID THERAPY
A.
Body water
1. Water content is 55-60% of body weight in mature animals, 70-75% in immature
animals, and 50% in obese animals.
 Intracellular fluid (ICF) represents 40% of the body weight.
 3. Extracellular fluid (ECF) consists of:
a. Plasma water: 5% of the body weight.
b. Interstitial fluid: 14% of the body weight.
c. Transcellular fluid: 1-6% of the body weight.
4. Body water turnover
 a. It is regulated by thirst and drinking control centers and vasopressin (antidli-
uretic hormone [A[DIi]), responding to osmolarity and blood volume changes:
the higher the osmolarity and the lower the blood volume, the more stimula-
tion of the drinking control centers and vasopressin secretion. As a result, large
volume of water is being drunk.
b. Body water turnover is 50-1 30 ml/kg/day. 65 mL/kg/day in mature animals.
c. The role of skin and body surface. Skin is the largest organ of the body. The
smaller the size of an animal, the larger the body surface is; thus, the highcr the
body water turnovcr rale. This is why dehydration has a much grcalcr impacl on
young animals than mature animals.
B.
Concept of milliequivalents (mEq)
1. Most of the electrolyte concentrations are expressed as mEq/l: mEq is calculated
as mg of chemical divided by its equivalent weight. For example, the equivalent
weight of NaCl is 58.5; 1 mEq of NaCl = 58.5 mg.
2. Total concentration of cations in the plasma is equal to thal of anions.
3. Calcium and phosphorus in the plasma are mcasured as mg%, ~50% of plasma
calcium is in the iree ionized form and ~50% is bound by plasma proteins. Plasma
phosphorus is present as HPO. HPO. and PO3-.
Osmosis and osmolarity
1. Role of semipermeable membranes in osmosis. Fluid compartments are separated
by semipermeable membranes, which allow free passage of water but restrict par-
ticles. Water moves to the compartment with the highest number of particles fos-
motic pressure).
2. Osmolarity is to describe properties related to the number of particles in solution
 and is expressed as mOsm/l of body fluid.
3. Calculation of mOsm/L from mM
a. For electrolyte solutions. Sincc NaCl dissociates into two particles, Na+ and
Cl-, 1 mmol/L (1 mmolar or 1 mM) oi NaCl solution yields 2 mOsm/L. A total
of 1 mmol of NaCl contains 58.5 mg since its molecular wcight is 58.5.
b. For nonelectrolyte solutions. Since glucose does not dissociate, 1 mM of glu-
cose solution yields 1 mOsm/L,
4. Osmolarity of an isotonic solution is ~300 mOsm/L. One should be able to deter-
mine if a solution in mM is isotonic depending on whether the chemical can disso-
ciate in the solvent. For example, 150 mM NaCl and 300 mM glucose solutions are
isolonic.
437
438
Chapter 181D
D.Role of the kidney in water and electrolyte regulation
1. A total of 80-90% of water, Na+, Cl-, and so forth, is reabsorbed from the proxi-
mal tubule.
2. Information on renal physiology is prcscnted in Chapter 9, I B (Review of ncphron
ion and water transport).
E.
Acid-base regulation
1. Definition of acid, base, and pH Acid is a proton (H') donor and base is a H!
acceptor. Thus, HCl is an acid, and HCO; is a base, so is NH;s; chloride (Cl-) is
not an acid and Na+ is not a base. pH is -log IH+]. If [H-l = 10-7 M, pH = 7.
 2. Use of Henderson-Hasselbalch equation to calculate the ratio between base and
acid
pKa + log[A-]
pH =
[HA]
Since pKa = 6.1 for the [HCO;] - [HzCO;] pair, and if pH is 7.4:
7.4 = 6.1 + log [HCO; ]/[H2CO;]. the log [HCOF]/[H2CO;]
= 1.3: the antilog of 1.3 is 20
[HCO] _20
Thus.
 at pH 7.4.
[HCO]
1
When this ratio is disturbed, the result is either acidosis or alkalosis.
3. Buffer systems in the body
 a. Intrinsic buffering system. Bicarbonate, hemoglobin, phosphate, and proleins
(amino acids) constitute 53, 35, 5, and 7% of the intrinsic. buffering system, re-
spectively.
b.
The cellular component of the buffering system takes place during the first stage
of the abnormality.
(1) Na+-H+-K+ exchanges (Figure 18-1). Normally, H+ generated during cel-
Iular metabolism is removed via Na+-H+ antiporl, which exports H+ and
imports Na'. The increased [Na'J; will then exchange for [K+J, via Na',
K+-ATPase. Thus, the net result of the reaction is one molecule of H ex-
changes for one molecule of Kour. During acidosis (acidemia), this exchange
process is inhibited by low pH, and thus more H+ stays in the cells and
more K+ slays in the ECF. During alkalosis (alkalemia), this cxchange is ac-
celerated, and thus more H' is lost to the ECF and more K' enters the cells.
(2) Cl--HcO exchange. The plasma membranes of animal cells contain an
anion exchange protein, which exports HCO3 and imports Cl-. The activity
K
H
FIGURE 18-1. The compensalory mechanisms
for acid base disturbances involving intra- and
cxtracellular H', Na', and K' exchanges. As a
result of thesc cxchangcs, acidosis and alkalosis
Can lead to hyperkalemia, and hypokalemia, re-
spectively. By the same token, hyperkalemia and
hypokalemia can lcad to acidosis and alkalosis.
respectively.
Alkalemia（↓[H+])→↑[Na]→↑[K+],↓[K+]
Fluid andBlood  Therapy 439
[Hcos] _
2
Normal pH:
[H,CO,]
Hypoventilation
20
20
(Resp.acidosis)
Respiratory compensation
20-1=
10
10
Metabolic acidosis:
20
1
1-0.5
0.5
 Metabolic compensation
Hyperventilation
：
2
20
20-10
(Resp. alkalosis)
1 -0.5
0.5
Respiratory compensation
Metabolic alkalosis: 20 + 20 = 
40
40
1
1 + 1
FIGURE 18-2. The compensatory mechanisms for simple acid-base disturbances as explained by the
changes in the Henderson-Hasselbalch cquation.
of this protein is stimulated to lower intracellular pH once it rises above 7.0
(normal intracellular pH is <7.0). With alkalosis, ihis exchange process is
active and thus rmore HCO is expelled to keep the cells less alkaline. With
acidosis, this exchange process is inhibited and thus less HCO is expelled,
resulting in the cells being less acidic.
(3) Renal regulation of H- and K-. Renal regulation of H+ and K+ occurs at
the distal renal tubule level, where one molecular of Na+ is reabsorbed
into the tubular cell at the expense of one molecule of H+ or K-. With
 acidosis, more H- than K- is expelled (secreted) into the lumen, resulting
in hyperkalemia as part of the compensatory process. By the same token,
alkalosis would lead to hypokalemia through this same process.
c. Respiratory and metabolic components
Since HzCO3-HCO is the major buffering system in the body, respiratory and
renal control of the blood CO2 and HcO3 concentrations intends to keep body
pH normal. Under normal physiological condition, the ratio of blood [HCO, ] and
[H2CO3] is 20:1, where HCO, is the metabolic component and HzCO; (or dis-
solved CO2) is the respiratory component. This ratio will change by addition or
loss of CO2 and HCO to the system. Figure 18-2 depicts changes in the ratio of
[HCO§| and [HzCO;| that might occur during simple acid-base disturbances
During hypoventilation (respiratory acidosis), retention of COz will lower the
ratio. In order to return the ratio to 20:1, the body must retain more HCO through
metabolic. compensation.
 During metabolic acidosis, loss of HCO will decrease the ratio. In order to re-
turn the ratio to 20:1, body must expel more CO2 lo lower the ratio through respi
ratory compensation.
These changes in [HCO I/IH2CO;| also account for the coimpensatory processes
 4. Acid-base parameters and terminology
[HCO]]
a. At pH 7.4. the ratio of
=20:1
[HCO:]
440Clhapter 181
b. Base deficit/excess is defined as the titratable acid or base, respectively, needed
to titrate the blood to a pH of 7.4 under standard conditions of PCO)2 (40 mm
Hg), temperature (38"C), and complete hemoglobin oxygenation.
C.Acidemia and alkalemia. Acidemia is defined as arterial pt1 of <7.35 and alka-
lemia is defined as arterial ph of >7.45.
d. Anion gap. The diffcrence betwcen the ECF concentralion of Na+ (140 mEq/L)
and the sum of the concentrations of HCO, (25 mEq/L) and Cl- (105 mEq/L).
The normal anion gap varies with the species, but is 13-25 in dogs and cats.
Metabolic acids contribute to the anion gap. Untreated cases of metabolic aci-
dosis may have high anion gaps.
GENERAL CONCEPTS OF FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE THERAPY
A.
 Institution of fluid therapy. Fluid therapy should be instituted for the following con-
ditions: dehydration, acid-base disturbances and/or electrolyte imbalances, nutritional
problems, and loss of body fluids.
1. Basis for institution of fluid therapy
a. Accurate diagnosis based on clinical examination and laboratory data is impor-
tant for fluid therapy.
The clinical signs for detection of dehydration include: loss of skin elastic-
ity, dry buccal mucosa and tongue, and sunken eyeballs should be taken into
account.
b. Signs of vomiling, diarrhea, abnormal respiratory pattern, and CNS depression or
excitation may help with the diagnosis of acid-base disturbances.
C。
 Blood gas and urine analyses are useful for the precise diagnosis of acid-base
 and electrolyte disturbances.
2. Dehydration
 a. General considerations. Dehydration may be considered in three general cate-
gories:
(1) Hypertonic dehydration, which is attributable to loss of pure water or hypo-
tonic fluid.
(2) Isotonic dehydration, which is attributable to loss of isotonic body fluids.
However, isotonic dehydration is only seen in acute cases, since with some
degree of water replacement, isotonic dehydration will become hypotonic
dehydration.
(3) Hypotonic dehydration. The loss of a hypertonic fluid or loss of isotonic
iluid with water replacement results in hypotonic dehydration.
b. Causes
(1) Decreases in water intake usually lead to hypertonic dehydration.
(a) Lack of water source.
(b) Disorders and pain of the buccal cavity and pharynx.
(c) CNS disturbances.
(2) Increases in body fluid excretion usually lead to hypolonic dehydration.
(a) Polyuria. Diabetes, nephrosis, hypoaldosteronism, and diuretics. Dia-
betes insipidus will cause hypertonic dehydration.
(b) Respiratory loss of water during high temperature may lead to hypertonic
dehydration.
(c) Profuse sweating in horses.
(d)  Vomiling/diarrhea.
(e) Third space loss. Body iluid lost to the body cavities and hollow organs.
c. Role of electrolytes on hydration states and acid-base balance:
(1) ↑ [Na+] in ECF → water retention
(2) Changes in [K'] in ECF result in changes in acid-base balance:
(a)↑ [K+] in plasma→↑[K-],↓ [H+] in urine →Acidemia 
(b) ↓ [K+] in plasma→↓ [K-l,↑[H+] in urine → Alkalemia.
[luid and Blood Therapy441
Water and electrolyte REQTS:100 cal
Water 80 cc/100 Cal First 500 cal.
75
.. Second..
Spanie
65
. Therafter
Electrolytes (miliequivalents)
Sodium ion (25 mEq/100 Cal.)
monku
Potassium ion (2.2 .. ...)
Chloride ion (1.8 . . .)
Ter
Cat
Apo
800
1.,000
.200
400
00200
1.600
1.800
2.000
Calories
80160 240 320 400 475
625
875
1.000
1.130
1.250
1,400
1.500
{water (c.c.)
2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
45 0
005
[Sodium (Na*) (MEq)
22 4.46.6 8.8 11.0 13.2
17.6
22.0
26.4
30.6
35
44.0
[Patassium (K*) (MEq)
18 3.6 5.4 7.2 9.0 108
14.4
18.0
21.6
25.2
28.8
32.4
36.0
[Chloride (CI-} (MEq}
The Ideal Maintenance Water anc Electrolyte
The ldeal Maintenance Water and Electrolyte
[To provide maintenance
Solution for Arnrnals iri thus Range is Easily
Salufion for Animals in this Range is Easily
electrolyte and water
Providec by Acding ll.O c.c. Vetrad M Complete*
per Liter ot 5% Glucose in Water.
FIGURE 18-3. Daily water, calorie, and electrolyte requirements for dogs and cats. (Reprinted with
ders/Elsevier, 2006, Figure 14-1. This figure was modified from Harrison J. B., Sussman H. H.,
and Pickering D. E. Fluid and electrolyte therapy in small animals. JAVMA 137:637-645. 1960,
Figure 1.)
d. Role of carbohydrate metabolism on hydration states and acid-base balance:
(1) ↓ Carhohydralc utilizalion → Hypcrglyccmia → Glucosuria→ Polyuria →
 Dehydration
tion → Acidosis.
e. Treatment (amount of fluid to be used) must be based on the body water main-
tenance plus replacement of the deficit and ongoing loss
(1) Amount of body water maintenance
(a) On the basis of body watcr turnover
(b) A lotal of 50-75 mL/kg/day (averagc 65 mL/kg/day)
(e) For more prccise cstimation of waler maintenance doses in dogs and
cats, see Figure 18-3.
(2) Determination of water deficit (dehydration)
(a) Dehydration of 4, 6, 8, and 12% (of body weight), only loss >4% needs
a replacement
(b) A total of 4% dehydration (mild)
i. Animals with 4% dehydration have a history of fluid loss, but without
significant signs of dehydration.
ii. No replacement is needed.
442Chapter 18 I1 A
(c) A total of 6% dehydration (moderate)
i. Animals with 6% dehydration have decrcased skin turgor. In dogs
and cats, when the skin over the lateral thorax is picked into a
tented fold, it will return to normal slowly: in species having tight
skin, pinch the dorsal cyelid to do the test.
ii. A decrease in skin elasticity is also seen in cachexia; thus, one can-
not conduct this test in cachectic animals.
ili. Animals with 6% dehydration have dull haircoat and dry mucous
membranes.
(d) About 8-10% dehydration (severe). The animals with 8-10% dehydra-
tion have the following signs:
i. The skin lacks pliability. In dogs and cats, when the skin is pinched
into a tented fold, it will tent and stay after the pinch is released.
ii. Dry mucous meimbranes and tongue.
ili. Soft eyeballs that are sunken into the orbit.
iv. Cold extremities.
v. Capillary refill time >3 seconds (normal <2 seconds).
(e) About 12% dehydration (extremely severe). The animals with 12% de-
hydration have following signs:
i. All the signs seen with 8-10% dehydration.
ii. Circulatory collapse (shock).
(3) Estimation of water deficit. The replacement volume for the initial deficit is
estimated according to the following equations:
Replacement volume (L) = % dehydration × body weight (kg)
(4) The composition of replacement fluid should be similar to the volume of
fluid lost. For example, if the deficit is due to loss of the electrolyte-rich
Gl fluid, then a balanced salt solution containing Na+, K+, Ca²-, Cl-, and 
HCO (or indirect alkalinizing agents) should be used. See Table 18-1 for
the compositions of commonly used replacement fluids of crystalloid in na-
ture. In contrast, if the deficit is due to loss of pure water, volume can be
replaced with 5% dextrose (glucose in water) over 24-72 hours. An isolonic
solution of 2.5% dextrose and 0.45% NaCl can also be used.
(5) The ongoing loss must be taken into account when estimating the fluid ther-
apy volume, The ongoing loss of iluid via vomiting, diarrhea, and polyuria
must be estimated and replaced.
(6) Additional factors need to be considered
(a)  Dehydration affects young animals much faster than adult animals.
(b) Old animals with chronic diseases require more water than younger
adull animals.
(c) Physical and weather conditions may affect the requirement, particularly
when it is hot and humid.
coids can affect water and electrolyte balances.
male, since it is based on clinical signs to cstimate the body water deficil.
Despite the importance of good data collection and application of prin-
ciples of fluid therapy, the adjustment of volume based on the "reassess"
process is needed for each individual case.
3. Therapy in acid-base disturbances
 a. Metabolic acidosis
(1) Causes
(a) Gain of acid. Severe tissue breakdown, grain overload, kelosis, poor tis-
sue perfusion, hyperkalemia, lactic. acid overproduction, and drug over-
dose, for example, acidic NsAIDs, chemical poisonings, for example,
ethylene glycol (which is metabolized into oxalic acid in the body).
(b) Loss of base. Severe diarrhea, severe salivation, renal insufficiency, and
so forth.
(2) General signs. Hyperpnea, CNS depression.
IABLE 18-1. Composition of Selected Fluid Therapy Soluions
Characteristics
lon Composition (mEq/L)
Alkalinizing
Equivalents
Type
Solution
pH
Osmolarity (mOsm/L)
.EN
K
Ca..
Mg
Glucose (g/L)
(mEq/L)
Replacement
Aridifying B[5
Ringer's
5.4
9
147
4
15.5
4
()
()
Acidlifyunyg BES
Normal satline (0.9%!
5.0
80f
154
0
154
0
0
(1
Alkalimzing BES
Lactated Ringer's
6.f
273
130
15
109
3
(1
28 (lactate)
Alkalinizing BES
Normosol-R
6.6
294
140
86
0
27 [acetate)
23(gluronatc)
Alkalinizing B[S
Plasma-Lyte A
7.1
294
140
5
86
(
27 (acetate)
23(gluconate)
Maintenance
Acidilying
2.5% dextrose/water inn
4.5
280
77
16
77
0
25
0.45% saline plus
potassium aclclition (1(
mLq/L!
Fqual volumes 5%
5.)
60E
65.5
1
55
1.5
25
14 (lactate)
clextrosc/valer antl
larctated Ringer's plus
potassim aclclition (1 t
mEq/L:
Normosol-M with 5%
5.01
36.3
4
13
-10
1
3
50
16 (acetate)
(extrose
Plastma-l yte M with 5"%
5.5
377
1
40
5
3
12 (lactate)
12 [acetate)
Other solutions
3"%, dextrose/water
4.()
252
00
00
(1
(
5
(1
50% dextrose/waler
4.2
2.780
0
50
7.5% saline
2.366
1.283
1.283
0
(
()
8.4"% NaHC();
2000
1,000
1,000
14.9"% KCI
4,000
2.000
2.000
）
Brs, Itilumn ed e es trulyle s,lt'tor.
443
444|Chapter 18 Il A
(3) Laboratory data and pathogenesis. ↑ Blood [H+], ↓[HCO] (Base deficit
>4 mEq/L).
(4)  Therapy. Treatment of the underlying disease and the use of alkalinizing
agents.
(a) Direct alkalinizing agents: NaHCO; and THAM (Tris). NaHCO; is used
commonly in animals, but THAM is not frequently used.
i. Advantage of NaHCO,: It directly works to neutralize excess of
H+.
ii. Disadvantages of NaHCO3:
-It has a short shelf life of 2 years in solution. Discard the solu-
tion when it is cloudy
It cannot be autoclaved, since heat will cause:
2NaHCO; → NaCO + H2O + CO
Oral dosing of NaHCO; decreases gastric acidity, which will in-
terfere with milk clot formation, resulting in poor milk digestion.
(b) Indirect alkalinizing agents. Na lactate, lactated Ringer's, Na gluconate,
Na acetate, acetated polyionic solution, and Na citrate. The most fre-
quently used indirect alkalinizing agents are Na acetate and Na lac-
tate. The onset of alkalinizing action for an indirect agent is ~30 min-
utes.
i. How do they alkalinize? Sce Figure 18-4.
ii. Most of commercial lactate solutions are the mixture of 1)- and t-
forms (racemic form). D-lactate is minimally metabolized, thus is
eliminated mostly via renal excretion.
iii. Other indirect agents do not have the problem with D-form of the
chemical as with Na lactate.
iv. Lactate is metabolized in the liver (Krebs cycle), whereas Na ac-
clale is uscd throughout the bocy, cspecially by the muscle. Thus,
acetate is metabolized to form HCO, more efficiently than lactate.
V.
Acetate can induce vasodilation, which may be detrimental when 
it is administered IV to patients in shock.
vi. Do not use Na laclale in patients with lactic acidosis, who already
have had a problem metabolizing lactate.
vil. Do not use Na acetate in patients with ketoacidosis, since acetate
can form ketone bodies.
vili.s
 Since the acidotic animals usually have K+ deficit, supplement of
alkalinizing agents with K+-containing solutions.
ix.[
Dose of NatiCO; to be administered, if base deficit (BD) is
known: mEq of NaHCO; administered = BW (kg) × 0.3 x BD)
x. The NaHCO; should be administcred via IV infusion for ovcr a
few hours, and the blood gas reevaluated before making a deci-
sion on further therapy.
xi. [
 Dose of NaHCO3, if base deficit is not known: 1-2 mEq/kg in a
balanced electrolyte solution can be administered.
xii. It is rather dlifficult to over-alkalinize the body using an indirect
agent in a patient with normal renal function. Excess NaHCO;
produced can easily be excreted in the urine.
D,L-NaCHsO(NaLactate)→→→→→NaHCO
C3H5O3-+H*
HCHO3
HCHO+3O2
Krebs
3HO+3CO2
Cycle
3HO+3CO2
C.A.
→3HCO→3HCO-+3H
FIGURE 18-4. The metabolism of lactate into bicarbonate by the Krebs cycle.
Fluid and Blood Therapy 445
b. Metabolic alkalosis
(1) Causes. Gain of base, excessive gastric vomiting, Gl stasis or obstruction,
hypokalemia, excess of aldosterone or diuretics, urea poisoning in cattle,
and so forth.
(a) How does Gl stasis lead to metabolic alkalosis? NafiCO; and HiCl
are produccd in the parictal cell of the slomach. Once bcing made,
NaHCO, is diffused into ECF, and HCl is relcascd into thc gastric lu-
men.
HCO, + NaCI → NaHCO; + HCI
HCl will then be absorbed from the small intestine. Gl stasis will pre-
ven/delay the absorption of HCl into the circulation, thercby resulting
in metabolic alkalosis.
(b) How does urea poisoning lead to metabolic alkalosis?
Urca
Cycle
NH; + HCl (strong acid) → NH4CI (weak acid)
 Alkalosis becomes apparent when a largc amount of HCl is converted
into NH,CI.
(2) General signs. Hypopnea, excitation including tetany, tremors, convulsions,
and muscle rigidity may or may not be seen.
(3) Laboratory data. ↓ blood [ti-], ↑ [tiCO] (Base excess >4 mEq/L), alkaluria
 Or paradoxical aciduria (particularly in the prescnce of hyponatremia).
(4) Therapy
(a) Treat etiology
(b) Chloride-responsive alkalosis. NaCl, KCl + NaCl, Ringer's solution,
NHaCl + NaCl. It is best to use solutions containing NaCl and KCl,
since affected animals usually have K+ deficit.
(c) Chloride-resistant alkalosis. This is usually due to hyperaldosteronism,
 and thus the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist spironolactone can
bc uscd to treat Cl--resistant alkalosis. However, this condition is rarely
secn in animals.
(d) Hz-antihistamines or omeprazole, an H+ blocker, to stop the loss of
Hi into the Gl tract. See Chapters 3 and 11 for more information about
these drugs.
(e) Oral KCl in patients with heart failure receiving furosemide, who may
have hypokalemia.
(5) How does NH4Cl acidify the body?
Through urea cycle:
2NH4CI+CO2  CO(NH)+ H2O+2HCI
uredi
(6) How does NaCl acidify the body?
(a) Normal renal function. Reabsorption in distal tubule: Cl- > HCO .
(b) Supplying a large volume of normal saline → More Cl- than HCO is
rcabsorbed irom the distal tubulc →↑ plasma [Cl-], ↓ plasma [HCO]].
c. Respiratory acidosis
(1) Causes. Respiratory distress/pulinonary diseases, CNS depression resulting
in inhibition of the respiratory center (disease or drug overdose), and so
forth.
(2) General signs. Respiratory distress, cyanosis, CNS depression, and tachycar-
dia.
(3) Laboratory data. ↑ Blood [H+], PaCO, (>45 mm Hg)
(4) Therapy. Propcr ventilation, alkalinizing agent is optional and can be used
when ventilation alone will nol correct the condition (e.g., pulmonary ob-
structions).
446Chapter 18 Il A
d. Respiratory alkalosis
(1) Causes. Overheat, fever, hyperventilation (particularly if there is overactive
positive pressure ventilation during anesthesia), central neurologic disease,
CNS stimulant overdose, and salicylate poisoning/overdose.
(2) General signs. Hyperpnea with and without panting, CNS stimulation with
and without tremors/spasms/convulsions.
(3) Laboratory data. ↓ Blood (H'], ↓P,CO), (<35 mm Hg)
eliminated; administration of sedatives may help in cases of CNS excitation;
adiministration of an acidifying agent is optional.
e. Mixed acid-base disturbances occur much more frequently because of the
acid-base disturbance into another; close monitoring is neccssary. At arte-
rial blood pH of <7.2 or >7.6, then steps must be taken to correct the pH
imbalance.
f. In cases of combined metabolic and respiratory acidosis (which is a very se-
vere form of acidosis), one must try to restore ventilation as the top priority;
subsequently, an alkalinizing agent preferably NaHCOs can be administered
to help raise blood pH. In the presence of high PaCO2, NaHCO3 cannot work
effectively as an alkalinizing agent.
 g. In the field situation, if acid-base status is unclear, Ringer's solution should be
second choice.
h.Hypokalemia
(1) Causes. Reduced intake, loss via the Gl tract, kidney, loss of interstitial fluid,
excess of aldosterone or diuretics, and so forth.
(2) General signs. CNS depression and weak muscle contraction are attributable
to hyperpolarization of the cxcitable membrancs, cardiac arrhythmia.
(3) Laboratory data. ↓ Blood [K' J, [H'J,↑[HCO}], ↑Urine[H'], ↓[HCO]].
(4) Electrocardiogram (ECG) findings in hypokalemia-induced cardiac arrhyth-
mia:
(a) ↑ Amplitude of QRS complex and P wave.
(b) Prolongation of QT interval.
(c) Flattened or inverted T waves.
(5) Mechanisms underlying hypokalemia-induced cardiac arrhythmia. Hy-
pokalemia cvokes an incrcasc in myocardial [Na+] via Na+, K+-ATPase
imechanism. High myocardial [Nat] increases Ca?+ influx via the Na+-Ca2+
exchange mechanisim (see Chapter 8, Figure 8-2). Most of the ECG findings
are attributable to the increase in myocardial [Ca2+].
(6) Therapy for hypokalemia
(a) Only for scvcre acutc hypokalcmia (<2.5 mEq/L) or chronic hy-
pokalemia.
(b) KCl or K gluconate, PO, SC, or IV (≤0.5 mEq/kg/h). Parenteral fluids
containing KCl (≤35 mEq/l) can be used safely by the SC route.
(c) Watch out for KCl-induced hyperkalemia by monitoring signs of hyper-
kalemia.
(7) Drug interaction. Severe cardiac arrhythmias may occur in patients with
hypokalemia when given digoxin.
i. Hyperkalemia
(1) Causes. Reduced urinary excretion, acidosis, hypoadrenocorticism, diabetes
mellitus (early phase), excessive cel/tissue damage, increased intake, and 
so forth.
(2) General signs
(a) Increased neuromuscular excitability.
(c) Cardiac disturbances due to decreased resting membrane potential and
a decreased myocardial [Ca?-].
(3) Laboratory data. Similar to metabolic acidosis,
Fluid and Blood Therapy  447
(4)  Therapy for hyperkalemia
(a) Ca gluconate administration to replenish myocardial [Ca2+]
(b) Cation-exchange resin
(c)  Peritoneal dialysis
(d)  Diuretic administration
(e) NaHCO; (1-2 mEq/kg) or dextrose to effect; insulin for diabetes melli-
tus.
B
Route and rate of administration
1. Oral route
a. Advantages
(1) Rapid administration is possible.
(2) Adverse reactions are minimal.
(3) Economical.
(4) Caloric nceds may be casily met.
b. Disadvantages
(1) May be contraindicated if Gl disease is present.
(2) Utilization is slower than by some other roules,
2. Intravenous route
a. Advantages
(1) Rapid dispersion of fluid occurs.
(2) Precisc dosagc is possiblc.
(3) Hyperlonic or hypotonic. solution may be administered.
b. Disadvantages
(1) The procedure may be time-consuming.
(2) A limited number of sites are available.
(3) A greater chance of adverse reactions.
C.F
Rates of intravenous infusion
(1) If the heart, lungs, and kidneys are normal, the maximal rate of administra-
tion is 90 mL/kg/h for an isotonic solution.
(2) Rate of infusion should be high if the fluid loss was rapid and should be low
if the fluid loss was gradual/slow. Infusion rate of 15 mL/kg/h is appropriate
for most cases.
(4) Rate of infusion should be slowed down after the first hour of administration
especially if anuria is present (a catheter should be placed in urinary bladder
in critically ill patients). Every attempt must be made to establish renal func-
tion. After ≥4 hours of infusion without urine flow, the rate of infusion must
be decreased to 2 ml/kg/h.
(5) Watch for adverse reactions due to pulmonary edema and vagal stimula-
tion. Central venous pressure (CvP) monitoring may aid in avoiding a vol-
ume overload (normal CVP is 0-3 cm of water). The infusion rate should
be adjusted for each patient.
3. Subcutaneous route
a.Advantages
(1) It is convenient.
(2) Solution with high K! concentrations, for cxarmple, 35 mEq/L may be givcn
using this route.
-ned 'sieo pue saop ol uoaig sq ueo uonjos wnem e jo souenh oaei (e)
larly to very young or simall size animals (hypodermoclysis).
b. Disadvantages
(1) Limited to isotonic solutions.
(2) Irritating solutions cannot be given.
(3) Absorption imay be poor in patients with edema or shock.
(4) Five percent glucose, SC, is not a good idea, especially in animals in
shock.
4. Intraperitoneal route
a. Advantage. Relatively rapid absorption.
448
Chapter 18I B
b. Disadvantages
(1) May induce peritonitis or injury to viscera.
(2) Limited to isotonic. solutions.
5. Rectal route
a. Advantage. It is convenient, especially in very young or small size animals, for
examplc, birds. It is a viable alternative for fluid resuscitation in hypovolemic
shock. This easy and noninvasive method of fluid replacemenl may be useful
when standard IV access is impossible. Warm the solution to facilitate the ab-
sorption.
b. Disadvantages
(1)  Erratic absorption.
(2) Contraindicated if diarrhea is present.
6. Intramedullary route. This is a rarely uscd route of fluid administration.
a.Advantages
(1) Rapid absorption.
(2) May bc casier than IV route in nconatcs and birds.
b. Disadvantages
(1) May cause osteomyelitis.
(2) The procedure may be painful.
C
Products for fluid therapy
1. Crystalloids (Table 18-1)
a.
Replacement solutions. Ringer's, normal salinc, lactated Ringer's, acetatcd
polyionic solutions (Normosol-Rw; Plasma-Lyte A&).
b. The composition of the replacement fluids should reflect the composition of the
fluid lost. For example, if the loss is due to diarrhea, then a solution containing.
Na-, K+, Cl-, and HCO with concentralions similar lo those of the body fluid
should be administered.
c. Maintenance fluids are needed when a patient does not voluntarily ingest ad-
equate amount of food and waler to keep up with the daily maintenance dose
requirements
d. For the practical purpose, the maintenance fluid can be infused at the dose
of 50-75 ml/kg/24 h for maturc animals and 75-130 ml/kg/24 h for imma-
ture/young animals; the high dose of 130 ml/kg/24 h is reserved for very young
animals.
e. Maintenance solutions (diluted clcctrolytc solutions using dextrosc/water). Thcse
solutions usually contain high K- (13-18 mEq/L) and low Na+ (40-80 m[q/L).
Other factors affecting body water maintenance should be taken into considera-
tion (see Il A2 e (6)],
f. Other solutions: 5% dextrose, 50% dexlrose, 7.5% saline, 8.4% (1 M) NaHCO3,
14.9% (1 M) KCl, 5 M Na lactate, 2 M Na acetate, and so forth.
2. Colloids (plasma expanders)
a. General consideration
(1) The critical distribution of body waler belween plasma and interstitial fluid is
maintained in part by the colloid osmotic pressure (COP) of plasma proteins,
primarily albumin. This force pulls and holds body water into capillarics and
balances the hydrostatic pressure driving waler out. This forms the basis for
IV colloid therapy.
(2) The crystalloids clo not exert COP, and they are minimally retained in the
vascular spacc, since they are small moleculcs. As a result, crystalloids
cause much smaller volume of expansion than colloids.
b. Therapeutic uses
(1) Colloids are usually included in fluid regimens for small-volume resuscita-
tion during shock (see below), management of hemorrhage, and improve-
ment of microcirculatory flow and capillary integrity during systemic inflam-
matory rcsponsc syndromc.
[luid and Blood Thera>y 449
TABLE 18-2. Activity of Colloids on Plasma Expansion
 Plasma Volume
Expansion Duration
Fluid (1 liter)
Expansion (liter)
(hours)
Plasma
1.000
I.. Ringer's
0.194
2
6% Hetastarch
0.710
24-36
6% Dextran 70
0.800
24
10% Dextran 40
1.000
4-6
L. Ringer's. Lactated Ringer's solution.
(2) Colloids must be used in combination with a crystalloid solution to replenish
the interstitial and ICF deficits. In facl, the appropriate use of colloids can
reduce the required amount of crystalloid solution by 40-60%.
(3)  Care must be taken to adjust the amount and rate of all fluids to prevent
overload and edema. COP can be monitored by using a colloid osmometer
(normal being 20-25 mm Hg).
 a. Preparations. Plasma, dextran 40, dextran 70, hetastarch, and polygelatins (Table
18-2).
(1) Dextrans
(a) These are polysaccharides produced by Leuconostoc bacteria, Dextrans
40 and 70 have sizcs of 40 and 70 kDa, respcctively.
(b) Dextrans 40 and 70 have plasma ty, of 1-3 and 2-6 hours, respectively.
(c) Elimination. In normal dogs, 70% of the dextran 40 dose and 40% of
the dexlran 70 dose are cxcreled unchanged within 24 hours. The re-
maining dextrans are metabolized slowly to glucose by hepatic dex-
tranase. Some of the molecules can remain in the body for weeks after
administration.
(2) Hetastarch
(a) It is a synthetic glucose polymer. It is very slowly metabolized by α-
amylase if size is >59 kDa, whereas smaller molecules (<59 kDa) are
-qea Aimois pue saeydoiseu Aq dn uaei io saaupil a Aq paaixa
olized by lysozymes.
(b) In dogs, 24 hours after administration, ~40% of hetastarch remains in
the plasma and ~30% is excreted in the urine.
(3) Polygelatins
(a)' Gelatins arc prepared by degradation of bovine collagcn and arc avail-
able in several forms, oxypolygelatin, succinated gelatin, and urea-linked
gelatin. 5% oxypolygelatin is the only polygelatin available in the United
States for fluid therapy.
(b) The plasma ti, of oxypolygelatin is ~24 hours.
(c) Gelatins are metabolized by proteolytic. enzymes in the liver with ~70
and ~15% of the end products being excreted in the urine and feces,
respectively.
b. Rate of colloid infusion
(1) In acute situations, for example, shock or hemorrhage, 10-40 mL/kg IV bo-
lus to effect, followed by a constant-rate infusion (CRl) to maintain a mean
arterial pressure (MAP) of 80 mm Hg.
(2) In chronic siluations, use CRI to maintain MAP of 80 mm Hg.
(3) Since cats are more likely to show signs of allergic. reactions, especially
when synthetic colloids are infused rapidly, only small volumes are infused
at slower rates (5 mL/kg increments given over 5-10 minutes, repeated to
effect at ≤20 ml/kg).
C.
Adverse effects
(1) Volume expansion may dilute blood constituents.
(2) Rapid volume expansion may be detrimental to patients with acute renal
failure or congestive hcart failure.
450|Clhapter 18 Il C
(3) Dextran 40 may cause acute renal failure.
(4) Colloids may cause antigen-antibody reactions (<0.1% in humans).
(5) Dextrans and hetastarch may interfere with fibrin clot formation by diluting
and reducing clotting factors and interfering with platelet function. Thus,
they should not be used before or during major surgery. However, some
hetastarch preparations have Ca2+ in the medium, which may reduce clot-
ting abnormalities. Gelatins have less anticoagulatory effects than other
colloids.
3. Hypertonic solutions (e.g., 7.5% NaCl)
a. Therapeutic uses. These solulions arc used for the rcsuscitation of animals suf-
fering from shock (plasma volume expansion), and treatment of head injury and
burns.
b.
 Hypertonic solutions are used in combination with colloids; for example, 7%
NaCI-6% dextran 70 (4-8 mL/kg).
C. Other actions. Hypertonic solutions decrease afterload (due to vasodilatation),
increase catecholamine release, and increase oxygen delivery to the heart. Hy-
pertonic solutions could have positive inotropic effects and immunomodulatory
effecls,
d. Adverse effects. Volune overload and edema.
e. Contraindications. Paticnts with hypernatrcmia or coagulation problems should
not receive hypertonic solutions.
Parenteral nutritional therapy. It is used in animals who cannot voluntarily consunc
D,
food because of a Gl, pancreatic, or hepatic disease. This technique is to prevent mal-
nutrition and to treat animals that are malnourished.
1. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Thc IV infusion of glucosc, lipid, armino acids,
trace elements, and vitamins (usually only B-coimplex) in adequate amounts to meet
the nutritional needs.
2. Partial parenteral nutrition. In some cases, enteral nutrition is provided in combi-
with animals not receiving any enteral nutrition.
3. Most companion animals receive parenteral nutrition for short time,
average 3-4 days. Occasionally, parenteral nutrition is administered for prolonged 
periods, but the risk/benefit ratio must be considered for thesc cases.
 4. Two premises for performing TPN because of the administration of hypertonic
solutions (700-1,000 mOsm/L):
a.
Infusion into a large bore vein, that is, the jugular vein.
b. Continuous (24 hours) infusion of the solution.
5. Formulation of parenteral nutrition requirements 
a. Calorie requirements. The determination of daily calorie requirement in each
dog or cat can be performed by using the information in Figure 18-3 or by cal.
culating the resting energy requirement (RER) in Figure 18-5.
2z< sjewjue jo, s-at ains! u uoissaisan seail ayi suisn pioe pinoys auo (t)
kg, since it will overestimate their energy requirement; the exponential re-
gression can cslimale morc prcciscly their caloric nceds than the linear rc-
gression.
(2) Sources for calories: Glucose (dextrose) and lipid are imajor sources for calo-
ries. Glucose and lipid generate 4 and 9 kcal/g, respectively.
(3) The maintenance doses of calories in dogs and cats are presented in Figure
18-3. For example, a 10-kg dog would require 700 kcal for daily mainte-
nance, which can be generated by 175 g of glucose or 78 g of lipid. Glu-
cose is usually used for the supply of calories. However, lipid solution can
provide essential fatty acids.
(4) For the calorie requirements, 50% dextrose instead of 5% should be uscd;
the latter is too diluted to meet the daily maintenance requirement.
(5) The glucose infusion rate should be ≤4 mg/kg/min to avoid hyperglycemia.
In diabctic paticnts, the insulin dosc will require adjustmcnt in order to
maintain normoglycemia.
Fluid and Blood Therapy 451
2,500
2,000
Linear
ent
1,500
y 1,000
Exponential
500
1020304050607080
Weight(kg)
[30 × body weight] + 70] versus an exponential cquation [70 (body wcight)0.75]. Note that the equa-
tions yield similar results for animals weighing between 3 and 25 kg. For animals that weight >25 kg.
Acid-Base Disorders, 3rd ed. Edlited by DiBartola S. P. Saunders/Elsevier, 2006, Figure 25-5.)
6. Amino acid requirements. Animals need a nitrogen source to induce positive nitro-
gen balance and essertial amino acids; these requirements can be met by using an
amino acid solution that is available 3.5-15% (Aminosyn, Travasol(, Noramine,
[reAmine?, and ProcalAmine@) containing all essential amino acids, cxcepl tau-
rine. Most amino acid solutions are available in two formulations: one with elec-
trolytes and one without.
a. Dosages: 40-50 mg amino acids/kcal/day for dogs and 60 mg/kcal/day for cats
(Note: dosage is based on kcal requirement, but not body weight).
b. Animals with large draining wound or hypoproleinemia should use higher quan-
tity of amino acids than heretofore recommended.
C.
 The amino acid dosages should be reduced in patients with protein intolerance,
for example, those with hepatic: encephalopathy or renal failure.
d. Calories must be provided at the same time to prevent the gluconeogenesis
from amino acids.
7. Lipid requirements. Lipid emulsions are occasionally used in TPN as an energy
source and to provide essential fatty acids.
a. Lipid generates 9 kcal/g. The lipid prcparations uscd includo soybean
oil/saflower oil, egg yolk phospholipids, glycerin, and water.
b.5
Since high doses of lipid can cause immunosuppression via granulocyte and
reticuloendothelial cell dysfunction, and inflammation due to increascd forma-
tion of eicosanoids, the doses should be limited to 2 g/kg/day. Patients with
high blood levels of triglyceride should nol receive a lipid cmulsion.
c. Animals have a need for essential fatty acids; dogs need linoleic acid and cats
need arachidonic acid. The fatty acids can be provided by a lipid emulsion.
In parenteral nutrition, iatty acids are usually not required, unless the animals
remain on prolonged nutritional treatment.
8. Other nutritional requirements. Electrolytes, vitamin B-complex, and trace ele-
ments may be added to the parenteral nutrition. Because most animals are on short
duration of parenteral nutrition, fat-soluble vitamins are usually not included in the
 diac patients, protein restriction for encephalopathic patients, and end-stage renal
failure patients.
9. Problems associate with parenteral nutrition inc:lude infection (scpsis), hypcr-
glycemia, and mechanical complications.
452
Chapler 18 IlI A
BLOOD THERAPY
A.
Blood transfusions
1. Major indications for whole blood therapy
a. Hemorrhage or shock: Keep in mind that normal blood volume is ~75 ml/kg
and normal plasma volume is ~50 ml/kg
b.
Anemia
C.
 Coagulation abnormalities
d. Provision of antibodies
2. Donor selection. To find a healthy donor with compatible erythrocytes.
a. Three strong hemagglutinin antigens in dogs: dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA)
1.1, DEA1.2, and DEA7; DEA7 is an isoantibody and is active only below
37 C. The ideal dog blood donor has to be healthy, and should be free of these
strong hemagglutinin antigens.
b. Iwo hemagglutinin antigens in cats
(1) A and B: These are isoantibodies.
n a ui s sa jo e pe si (a )  an ()
States.
(3) Type B (anti-A): Cats with type B blood have strong anti-A antibody: 20%
of pure bred cats are type B. One milliliter of type A blood given to a
type B cat can be fatal, even without prior sensitization. Type A kittens
isoerythrolysis.
(4) Type AB (no antibody): O.1% of cats in thc United States belong to type AB.
c. For horses, male ponies with no previous history of blood transfusion can serve
 as donors, if cross-matching tcchnique is not practical in the ield.
d. Other species also have isoantibodies; one can do cross-matching to determine
agglutination (scc below).
e.
 Cross-matching technique
(1) Major technique: Potential donor's RBCs arc mixed with rccipicnt's scrum to
deterrmine agglutination.
(2) Minor technique: Potential donor's scrurm is mixcd with recipient's RBCs to
determine agglutination.
3. Blood collection and storage
a.
Collection: 20% of blood from a donor at 2-4 weeks intervals.
b. Collection in plastic bags with an anticoagulant solution: CPD (citrate-
phosphate-dextrose) or CPDA-1 (citrate-phosphate-dextrose-adenine). CPDA-1
is the most commonly used anticoagulant in human medicine for the collec-
tion and storage of whole blood. The commercially available canine and fe-
line whole blood products (from Animal Blood Bank, Inc.) are also preserved in
CDPA-1.
C.
CPD or CDPA-1: 14 mL is needed to collect 100 mL of blood.
d. The blood using CPD and CPDA-1 as the anticoagulant can be preserved for 3
and 7 weeks, respectively, at 4 C.
e.
Sterile (autoclaved) 3.5% Na citrate solution can be used as an inexpensive an-
ticoagulant, particularly in large animals (1 part of 3.5% Na citrate to 9 parts of
blood). The blood collected using Na citrate should be utilized as soon as pos-
sible, since it does not have any additives (dextrose, phosphate, or adenosine) to
preserve the blood cells.
f. Sodium citrate may induce vomiting in nonherbivores.
g. Plasma can be separated from blood cells before the bag of blood is
expired.
h.
Heparin should not be used as an anticoagulant to collect blood for transfusion.
Heparin has following problems.
(1) Hcparinizcd blood cannot bc storcd, since heparin is inactivated in 24-48
hours in the blood.
(2) Heparin activates platclets, rendering them nonfunctional.
Fluid andBloodl Therapy 453
4. Administration and dosages
a. Administer when PCV <20%.
b. The blood should be filtered to remove possible blood clots and warmed to
37" C before being transfused into a recipient.
c. One should conduct cross-malching whenevcr possible hefore administralion.
d. Administer IV, IP, or intramcdullary.
e. Dosages: 10-20 ml/kg or using the formula: ml of blood infused = 1 mL/lb x
% PCV change desired.
f. Rate of administration depends on clinical signs and the dose: 60 ml/min (large
animals), 5-10 mL/min (small animals), and 40-50 mL/30 min (cats).
5.Plasma
a. Therapeutic uses. Plasma is used to expand plasma volume, or to increase
plasma proteins, for example, albumin and globulin in patients with hepatic dys-
function, and to provide clotting factors and platelets.
b. Preparations. Plasma is available either as a fresh or frozen preparation.
(1) Fresh plasma contains platelets and clotling faclors, and must be used
within 4 hours of preparation because of the risk of bacterial contamination
 at room temperature.
(2) Fresh frozen plasma contains clotting factors (freeze at <-40"C, good for
1 year: at -20'C, good for 3 months), which are destroyed if the unit has
been thawed for >8 hours, but contains no platelets.
C. Administration
(1) Administer when serum albumin concentration is <1.5 g/dL.
(2) Dosages: 5-10 mL/kg, IV infusion.
6. Adverse effects. Hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, jaundice, thrombocytope-
nia, leucopenia, fever, emesis, incontinence, urticaria and/or weakness, hypocal-
cemic tetany, and circulatory overload. Neonatal animals may develop hemolysis
affter nursing due to the developmenl of antibodies to crythrocyle antigen in the
colostrum.
7.
 Interspecies transfusion is prohibited because of incompatibility.
8. Polymerized bovine hemoglobin (Oxyglobin&)
a. Preparation: 13 g/dL in lactated Ringer's solution.
b. Therapeutic uses. For the treatment of anemia in dogs: 30 mL/kg, IV, at a rate
0f ≤10 ml/kg/h. It is particularly useful in dogs with autoimmune hemolytic
anemia shortly before an immunosuppressant is given.
C.
Elimination ty,: 30-40 hours (90% being eliminated in 5-7 days).
d. Adverse effects. Discoloration/Gl and CV disturbances, pulmonary edema, ana-
phylaxis, and death.
e.
 Contraindications. Do not use this product in patients with a cardiac or renal
disease.
f.Warnings
(1) Do not use this product repeatedly in the same dog. since the repeated use
of this product can cause anaphylaxis.
(2) Must finish the product within 4 days once it is opened; otherwise, it may
form methemoglobin.
IV
SPECIAL TOPICS IN FLUID THERAPY
A,
Horses
1. Cases of severe diarrhea, shock, intestinal obstruction, or esophageal obstruction
may predispose to severe metabolic. acidosis.
2. The respiratory acidosis may be associated with inhalation anesthesia.
3. A severe hyponatremia may be associated with dehydration.
4. A severe hyperkalemia (plasma K- concentrations of ≥7 mEq/L) may be associated
with acidosis in foals.
454Chapcr18IVB
B.
Cattle
1. The metabolic alkalosis may be associated with an abomasal discase.
2. A scvcre metabolic acidosis and dehydration and somctimes scvcre hyperkalemia
may be associated with grain overload and calf diarrhea
3. A severe K+ deficit may be present in anorectic animals.
4. The oral fluid therapy should be administered to treat neonatal diarrhea whenever
possible.
C.
Problems seen in all species
1. Effects of anesthesia and surgery
a. Anesthetic and surgical effects
(1) General anesthetics depress the cardiovascular system and the glomerular
filtration ratc.
(2)  Inhalation ancsthetics cause vasodilatation.
(3) Fluid loss may increase during general anesthesia and surgery.
(4) Third spacing may occur during surgery.
(5) IV fluids cause reduction in plasma protein concentrations and blood cel
counts.
(6) Patients may have volume overload and hypertension during postsurgical
period.
 2. Heat exhaustion and prostration. Excessive heat will cause the loss of a large
amount of NaCl from the ECF. As a result, K! is relcascd from the cells to compen-
sale for the loss of Na+. Renal cxcretion of NaCl diminishes, but watcr cxcrction
continues. The body has a severe deficit of Na-, K-, Cl-, and dehydration. Hy-
perventilation in response to heat may lead to respiratory alkalosis. All measures
are needed to lower the high body temperature. In addition, an electrolyte solution
(e.g., Ringer's, lactated Ringer's, or acetated polyionic. solution) should be admin-
istered. If hypertonic dehydration, maintenancc crystalloid solutions with low Na+
and high K- should be administered.
3. Burns. With burns, more electrolyte than water is lost, which leads to hypotonic
dehydration. Hypertonic solution can be used to treat patients with burns.
D.
Oral fluid therapy in neonatal calf and piglet diarrhea
1. Generation considerations. Oral fluids arc indicatcd for the correction of diarrhca.
associated dehydration in neonatal animals that still retain the suck reflex.
a. In general, neonatal animals that can stand and have a suck reflex are good
candidates for oral fluid therapy. Calves that are weak and have poor suck re-
flex often benefit from oral fluids, but thcy imay have to be administered via the
slomach tube.
b. Recumbent neonatal calves that do not have suck reflex and/or show rapidly
progressing signs of severe dehydration should not be treated with oral fluid;
instead, they should be treated with IV fluids. As a rule of thumb, neonatal an-
imals not clinically improved within 1-2 hours of oral fluid administration arc
likely candidates for IV fluid administration.
c. The effectiveness of oral fluids depends on their composition, the severity of the
condition under treatment, and the aggressiveness of the treatment regimen. Oral
crystalloid solutions containing electrolytes, glucose, glycine, and alkalinizing
agents are highly cfficacious in treating calvcs and piglets with scvere diarrhca.
Table 18-3 shows the composition of four commercially available preparalions.
(1) Utilization of the action of cotransporters (glucose-Na+, amino acid-Na+)
into the gut mucosa. Rehydration depends on Na+ absorption. Numerous
glucose-Na+ and amino acid-Na+ cotransporters are found in the gut nu-
Cosa. These cotransporters are stimulated by glucose and neutral amino
acids, respectively, to facilitate the transport of glucose, amino acids, and
Na+. Clycine is the neutral amino acid most frequently used in oral crystal-
loid solutions.
Glucose
Glycine
Na+
K
Cl-
AlkalinizingAbility
HCO,
Citrate
Acetate
Product
(mmol/L)
(mmol/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
ElectrolytePowcler?
110
0
139
10
101
48
48*
0
Hlectrolyte with Thickener?k
220
25
184
38
16
11]
11)
0)
Ilycdra-Lyte?:
403
16
118
30
45
103
00
4
99
Resorbis
120
1.4
78
17
78
0
'Irtereres wih imilk clortig.
55t
456Chapter 18 IV D
(2) Inclusion of alkalinizing agents. NaHCO; and the indirect alkalinizing
agents Na acetate, Na gluconate, and Na citrate are used in oral fluids. The
addition of alkalinizing agents to the oral fluids has decreased the mortality
in neonatal calves and piglets. Alkalinizing agents are usually added to the
oral fluids at the rate of 40-100 mEq/L
(a) NaHCO; can directly neutralize acid, but it also decreases gas-
tric/abomasal) acidity, which may predispose to bacterial overgrowth in
the small intestine, and may interfere with milk digestion by preventing
its clot formation.
(b)  The advantage of indirect alkalinizing agents is that they will not affect
gut pH. The disadvantage of indirect alkalinizing agents is decreased
utilization in diarrheic animals with severe dehydration.
(3) Inclusion of kCl. In diarrheic neonatal animals, there is a severe K+ deficit.
The addition of KCl to the oral fluids may save the life of neonatal animals.
KCl is usually found in the oral fluids at the rate of 10-40 mEq/L.
(4) Inclusion of gelling agents. These agents are found in some of the commer-
cial preparations (e.g., Electrolyte with Thickener?). They are indigestible
mucopolysaccharides. Despite claims that they can slow down the flow and
elimination of oral fluids, which reduce the severity of diarrhea, no scientific
evidence supports these claims.
(5) Milk consumption. Milk is the most easily digestible food source for neona-
tal animals and should be reintroduced early in the treatment of diarrhea.
It provides the most nutrition of all types; it provides calories, protein, vi-
tamins, minerals, and water. Milk contains 500-600 kcal/L. Studies have
shown that enterocyte repair is increased in diarrheic: calves affer they drank
milk. Frequent milk feedings (1 liter, 2-4 times a day), in addition to oral
fluid therapy, usually facilitates the recovery from calf diarrhea rather well.
(6) Dosages of oral fluids. The diarrheic neonatal calves should be fed with oral
fluids 2-4 times a day with total intake of 4 liters.
SUGGESTED READING
            e   
19:577-597.
DiBarlola SP. 2o06. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Smalff Animal Practice. 3rd ed. St.
Louis, MD: Saunders.
Kochevar DT. 2001. "Drugs affecting renal function and fluid-electrolyte balance." In Veterinary Phar-
macology and Therapeutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8th ed., pp. 501-533. Ames, IA: lowa State Uni-
versity Press.
Naylor JM. 1990. Oral fluid therapy. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 6:51-67.
Tromp AM. 1990. A practitioner's view on fluid therapy in calves. Vet Clin North Aim Food Anim Pract
6:103-110.
[luid and Blood Therapy457
STUDY
QuestIOn S
DIRECTlONs: Each of the numbered items or incomplete statements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in cach case.
1. Which of the following blood transfusion
(D) 60-70 mL/kg.
praclices in cals may pose the most serious
(E) 90-100 ml/kg.
hemagglutination problem?
5. Which of the following statements regard-
(A) The lype A donor donales blood to the
ing hypokalemia is correct?
type B recipient.
(B) The type B donor donates blood to the
(A) It is usually accompanied by acidemia.
type A recipient.
(B) One of the causes is hypoaldosteronism.
(C) The lype A donor donates blood to the
(C) In an acute casc, an animal with plasma
type AB recipient.
K+ concentration of 3.5 mEq/L or less
(D) The type AB donor donates blood to the
requires KCl treatment.
type A recipient.
(D) There is usually an incrcase in the ampli-
tude of QRS and P waves in ECG.
2. Which of the following statements regard-
ing sodium bicarbonate as an alkalinizing 
6. How much of a 50% glucose solution
agent is correct?
would be needed to meet the daily mainte-
(A) It is an indirect alkalinizing agent.
nance requirement of a 10-kg adult dog who
is off feed and recumbent?
(B)It can be autoclaved for sterilization
without losing its alkalinizing ability.
(A) 25 mL
(C) It does not alkalinize well in combined
(B)  45 mL
(C) 90 mL
metabolic and respiratory acidosis.
(D)It does not interfere with milk digestion
(D) 185 mL
in calves when administered orally.
(E) 370 ml
3. Which of the following statements regard-
7. Consider the patient in Question 6. How
ing route of administration for fluid therapy is
much of an 8.5% of amino acids solution
 should be given to this dog on daily basis. if
one decides to perform IPN?
(A) The oral route causes more adverse ef-
fects than most of other routes.
(A)  22 mL
(B) The rectal route may be useful when
(B)55 mL
 standard IV access is inmpossible.
(C) 110 ml
(C) KCl in the concentration of 30 mEq/L is
(LD)2
220 mL
best given IV if parenteral administration
(E) 550 ml
is necessary.
(D) The SC route is versatile in dogs and cats
8. Which of the following statements regard-
ing sodium acetate as an alkalinizing agent is
because it can be used to administer a
large amount of isotonic, hypertonic, or 
false?
hypotonic solution.
(A) Acetale can cause vasodilatation, which is
detrimental to patients in shock.
4. li you decide to perform a blood trans-
(B) Acetate can be metabolized into bicar-
fusion in a dog with severe blood loss, the
bonate throughout the body.
 appropriate dosage should be
(C)Acelale is contraindicated in the treatment
(A} 4-5 mL/kg
of laclic. acidosis.
(B)10-20 mL/kg.
(D) Acetate is more efficient than lactate in
(C) 40-50 ml/kg.
forming sodium bicarbonate.
458|Chapler 18
9. Which of the following sodium acetate
11. Which of the following is a correct state-
solutions is isotonic? The molecular weight of
 ment regarding blood collection and storage?
this chemical is 82.
(A) Heparin is a potent anticoagulant, and
(A) 0.31%
thus is good for blood storage.
(B) 0.62%
(B) Forty percent of blood volume can be
(C)1.23%
safely collected from a healthy donor
(D) 2.46%
every 2-4 weeks.
(E)4.92%
(C) The blood that is collected using CPDA-1
can be stored longer than the one that is
10. Which of the following is a false state-
collected using CPD.
ment with regard to special problems in fluid
(D) The blood that is collected using 3.5%
therapy?
sodium citrate can be stored at 4?C for 3
weeks.
(A) Severe K- deficit is usually seen in
anorectic cattle.
12. Which of the following colloid solutions
(B) Hypertonic dehydration is usually seen in
has the shortest duration of action?
a patient with burns.
(C)  Metabolic acidosis is usually associated
(A) 6% hetastarch
with grain overload in cattle.
(B) 6% dextran 70
(D) Patients may have volume overload and
(C) 10% dextran 40
hypertension during postsurgical period.
(D) 5% oxypolygelatin
Fluid and Blood Therapy459
ANSWERS ANd EXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is B.
there is an incrcase in the amplitude of
Cats with type B blood have strong anti-A
QRS and P wavcs. Hypokalemia is usually
 antibody. One milliliter of type A blood given 
accompanicd by metabolic alkalosis (not
to a type B cat can be fatal, even without
acidosis). One of the causes of hypokalemia
prior sensitization. Type A kittens born to and 
is hypcraldosleronism, which incrcascs the
allowed to nurse from type B queens suffer
cxcretion of K and H+ in the urine. In acute
from neonatal isoerythrolysis. Cats with type
hypokalemia, an animal with plasma Kt
A blood have weak anti-B antibody, which
concentration of ≤2.5 mEg/L (not 3.5 mEg/L)
does not cause a serious hemagglutination
needs to be treated with a K+ solution.
problem. Cats with type AB blood have no
isoantibody against either A or B antigen, and 
6. The answer is D.
thus they do not cause any hemagglutination
According to Figure 18-5, the mainte-
problems when serving as a donor.
nance calorie requirement for a 10-kg dog is
10 × 30+ 70 = 370 kcal. Since each gram
2. The answer is C.
 of glucose can generate 4 kcal, 92.5 g of
Sodium bicarbonate is a direct alkalin-
glucose can generate 370 kcal. A total of
izing agent that neutralizes H-. However, in
50% glucose has 50 g glucose in 100 ml.
combined metabolic and respiratory acidosis,
Thus, 185 ml of 50% glucose has 92.5 g
excess of CO2 and carbonic acid interferes
glucose in the solution.
with the reaction between HCO and H+.
Therefore, for treatment of this situation, one
7. The answer is D.
must treat respiratory acidosis immediately.
The amino acid's requirement in the
Sodium bicarbonate cannot be autoclaved
dog that needs parenteral nutrition is 40-50
for sterilization, since heat will convert this
mg/kcal/day. Since this is a small size dog.
chemical to sodium carbonate and lose
the dog should receive 50 mg/kcal/day. The
ils alkalinizing ability. Sodiurm bicarbonate
calorie requirement for this dog is 370 kcal,
will decrease gastric acidity; the acidity is
and thus 50 mg × 370= 18.500 mgor 18.5
inportant for milk clot formation, which is
g. of amino acids should be administered.
needed for milk digestion.
The 8.5% amino acid's solution contains 8.5
g/100 ml. Thus, 218 mL (~220 mL) of the
3. The answer is B.
8.5% solution will provide 18.5 g of amino
The rectal route may be an alternative
acids.
when IV access is unobtainable, for examplc,
during shock. In fact, the rectal route has
8. The answer is C.
bcen considered as a viable route for treating
Sodium acetate is contraindicated in
hypovolemic shock. Howevcr, one must
the treatiment of ketoacidosis, but not lactic
recognizc the fact that the rcctal roule may
acidosis. Acetate can be used to form ketone
causc crratic absorption, and it cannot be
bodies.
uscd in the prcscnce of diarrhca. The oral
route causes fewer adverse effecis than most
9. The answer is C.
of other roules. KCl at high conccntrations is
Since sodium acetate dissociates into
not safe when given IV. The SC route is not
two particles (Na+ and acetate) in water, 150
versatile and only isotonic solution should bc
mM of sodium acetate solution is isotonic.
administered SC.
A total of 150 mM of sodium acetate = 150
mmol/L = 150 × 82 mg/L = 12,300 mg/L =
4. The answer is B.
12.3 g/l = 1.23 g/100 ml = 1.23%.
The recommended dosage for blood
transfusion is 10-20 ml/kg.
10. The answer is B.
 Palients with burns would have had a
5. The answer is D.
 great deal of loss of hypertonic or isotonic
 In hypokaleimia, bccausc of higher resting po-
body fluid by the time they receive treatment.
tential and myocardial Ca²- concentrations,
As a result of the body fluid loss, they
460 CChapter 18
would have hypotonic, but not hypertonic,
using 3.5% sodium citrate should be used
dehydration.
for transfusion soon after being collected,
because this anticoagulant solution does
not contain phosphate buffer, glucose, or
11. The answer is C.
adenine.
The blood that is collected using CPDA-1
can be stored for 7 weeks, while the one col-
12. The answer is C.
lected using CPD can be stored for 3 weeks.
Dextran 40 solution has a shorter dura-
Heparin is not a good anticoagulant for
tion of action as a plasma expander than
blood collected for storage; it is inactivated
dextran 70, hetastarch, and oxypolygelatin
in the blood within 48 hours, and it activates
solutions. Dextran 40 solution contains
platelets, rendering them nonfunctional.
dextran molecules at 40 kDa, which can
A total of 20% of blood volume can be
leave the vascular space more effectively
safely collected from a healthy donor every
than other colloids by penetrating through the
2-4 weeks. The blood that is collected
Capillaries.
ter 19
Drug Interactions and Adverse Drug Reactions
Walter H. Hsu and Franklin A. Ahrens
DRUG INTERACTIONS
 Introduction
1. Drug interactions are defined as an altered pharmacological response to one drug
paseaoui ag Aeu asuodsau paioadxa aul tnp puosas jo aouasaid ai Ag pasne
or decreased as a result of the interaction.
a. Pharmacokinetic interactions are those in which plasma and/or tissue levels of a
drug are altered by another drug.
b. Pharmacodynamic interactions are those in which the action or effect of one
drug is altered by a second drug.
c. Pharmaccutic: intceractions or drug incompatibilities result from chemical or phys-
ical reactions of drugs mixed in vitro.
B.
Pharmacokinetic interactions
1. Interactions affecting absorption
a. Gastric emptying. Drugs tliat increase gastric motility hasten delivery to the
small intestine and incrcase the rate of intestinal absorption. Conversely, drugs
that delay gastric: cmptying decrcase the rate of intestinal absorption.
For example, metoclopramide and cisapride promote gastric emptying by in-
creasing acetylcholine release from the vagus nerve. Atropine slows down gastric
emptying by blocking muscarinic receptors.
b. Gastric pH. Some drugs reduce gastric acidity and slow the absorption of cer-
tain other drugs. Antacid, Hy-antihistamines, and omeprazole reduce gastric
acidity and thus decrease the absorption of weak acids, for example, tetracy-
cline, salicylates, and ketoconazole.
c. Complex formation. Some drugs form insoluble complexes with divalent cations.
which are poorly absorbed from the Gl tract. For example, tetracycline forms a
complex with Ca²+
 2. Interactions affecting distribution (plasma protein binding of drugs). Many drugs
are highly bound to plasma albumin. Displaceiment of bound drugs may occur
when a second drug with greater binding affinity is added. The resulting increase
in iree drug concentration may produce an exaggerated response. For example.
the anticoagulant effect of coumarins is potentiated by the presence of a NSAID.
The barbiturate-induced anesthesia is prolonged by the presence of a sulfonamide,
NSAID, or doxycycline.
 3. Interactions affecting drug metabolism
a. Inhibition of metabolism
(1)  Drugs that inhibit hepatic microsomal (cytochrome P450) enzymes may pro-
long the action of drugs. which normally are inactivated by microsomal ox-
idation (phase I) reactions. Examples: chlorainphenicol, enrofloxacin, keto-
conazole, cimetidine, ranitidine, prednisolone, and quinidine are enzyme
inhibilors.
(2) Drugs that inhibit other cnzymes than hepatic microsomal cnzymes may
prolong the action of drugs, which normally are inactivated by the specific
en7ymes. For example, imipenem is metabolized by renal dihydropeptidase-
1 (DHP-1) in the proximal tubule. Plasma ty, of imipenem is prolonged by
cilastatin, which is a DHP-1 inhibitor.
(3) Drugs that inhibit enzymes of organisms imay prolong the action of anti-
infective action of the drugs. For example, clavulanate, a β-lactaim, prolongs
461
462Chapter 19| B
 the antibacterial action of aimoxicillin by inhibiting β-lactaimase. Piperonyl
butoxide prolongs the action of a pyrethroid ectoparasiticide by inhibiting
cytochrome P450 enzymes of the ectoparasites.
b. Increased rate of metabolism
Drugs that induce hepatic microsomal enzymes diminish the efficacy and du-
ration of action of drugs metabolized by the cytochrome P450 enzyime sys-
term. Examples include phenobarbital, phenytoin, griseofulvin, phenylbutazone.
rifampin, and chlorinated hydrocarbons (lindane and methoxychlor), which can
induce cytochrome P450 enzymes
4. Interactions affecting renal excretion
a. Decreased active secretion. Acidic and basic drugs are actively secreted into
urine by the renal tubular transporl syslerm. Competilion for active transporl
betwcen drugs rmay slow the rate of cxcrction.
(1) Acidic drugs. Examples: penicillins, cephalosporins, chlorothiazide,
ethacrynic. acid, furosemide, probenecid, and the following NSAIDS: aspirin,
phenylbutazone, meclofenaimic. acid, flunixin, ketoprofen, carprofen, and
etodolac.
(2) Basic drugs. Examples: histamine, serotonin, procainamide, neostigmine,
trimethoprim, and atropine.
izable drugs by ion-trapping and preventing their reabsorption from tubular urine
filtrate. Urinary alkalinizers (e.g,, sodium bicarbonate) increase the excretion of
acidic drugs and urinary acidifiers (e.g., ammonium chloride) increase the excre-
tion of basic drugs.
c. Diurctics incrcase urine flow and hasten the excretion of many drugs by de-
creasing thcir rcabsorption from the ncphron.
C.
 Pharmacodynamic interactions
1. Antagonistic effects. Specific receptor antagonists are available to be used
therapcutically to block or reverse agonist activity. The antagonistic cffects could
be pharmacological or physiological. Examplcs include concurrenl use of the
following:
a. A miotic drug and an H, -antihistamine. Most H, -antihistamines have the side
effect of blocking muscarinic. receptors to evoke mydriasis, which will antago-
nize the effect of a miotic drug (physiological antagonism).
b. An x-adrenergic agonist, for example, epinephrine, phenylephrine or phenyl-
 propanolamine and a phenothiazine tranquilizer, for example, acepromazine
or chlorpromazine. A phenothiazine can block α-adrenergic receptors to an-
tagonize the effects of an x-adrenergic agonist (pharmacological antagonism).
Blockade of the α-adrenergic action of epinephrine may produce hypotension
by unmasking the β-adrenergic action of epinephrine. This effect is known as
epinephrine reversal.
C. Tetracycline and a β-lactam antibiotic. A β-lactam antibiotic works most effec-
tivcly in rapidly growing bacteria. Tetracycline inhibits bacterial growth, thercby
reducing the antibacterial effcct of a β-laclam (physiological antagonism).
2. Additive effects. Drugs that have a similar mechanisin of action may exhibit ad-
ditive effects in combination. The end point of the pharmacological effect is the
algebraic sum of each drug's action. Additive interactions are observed with many
classes of drugs
 3. Synergistic effects. Drug combinations that produce a therapeutic or toxic effect,
which is greater than the sum of each drug's action, are terimed synergistic. Exam-
ples (concurrent use of):
a. A sulfonamide and an inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase (trimethoprim,
 ormetroprim) potentiate the anlibacterial efecl of the sulfonamide.
b. A furosemide and an aminoglycoside antibiotic may potentiate the nephrotoxic:
effect of the aminoglycoside.
C.
A furoscmide and a digitalis may potcntiate the inotropic effcct of the digitalis.
Furoscmide can induce hypokalemia.
Drug Interactions and Adverse Drug Reactions
463
d. An inhalant anesthelic and an aminoglycoside may polentiate the skeletal
muscle-relaxing effect of the inhalant anesthetic. Aminoglycosides can inhibit
acetylcholine release from the somatic nerve.
D.
 Pharmaceutic interactions (drug incompatibilities)
1. General. Physical and/or chemical incompatibility between drugs is common and
may result in inactivation or increascd toxicily. Drugs should never be mixcd in a
syringe or added to parenteral solutions unless the components are known to be
compatible. Visual indicators of incompatibilities such as cloudiness or precipitation
may or may nol be evidenl.
 2. Physical incompatibilities are usually manifested as insolubility. Examples:
a. A macrocyclic lactone diluted in water or aqueous solution will form precipitate
(propylene glycol should be used as a diluent).
b. Amphotericin' B is insoluble in water, but can be dissolved in sodium desoxy-
cholate.
3. Chemical incompatibilities
a.
 pH. The stability of many drugs in solution is pH dependent. Alkaline solutions
(sulfonamides, aminophylline, or barbiturates) are incompatible with acidic. so-
lutions (penicillin G, cephalosporins, xylazine HCl, ketamine HCl, gentamicin
sulfate, etc.) or alkaloid salts such as atropine sulfate.
b. Oxidation-reduction. Redox reactions may result in loss of drug potency. Tetra-
cyclines are oxidizcd by riboflavin; phenothiazine tranquilizcrs are oxidized by
ferric salts.
c. Complex formation. Multivalent cations may form insoluble complexes with an-
ionic drugs. Examples: Ca'+ reacts with NaHCO3, tetracyclines, cephalosporins,
barbiturates, fluoroquinolones, penicillins, furoscmide, and the following
NSAIDs: aspirin, phenylbutazone, mec.lofenamic. acid, flunixin, ketoprofen,
carprofen, and etodolac.
ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS (ADRs)
A.
 General. Three types of adverse drug reactions:
1. Drug toxicity (Type A; reported adverse effects of the drug)
2. Drug allergy (Type B)
a. Immune mediated—previous sensitizing exposure.
b. Reaction occurs in only a fraction of animal population.
c. Minute drug dose may cause reactions.
d. Manifestations differ from pharmacological effects of the drug.
e. Small molecules, such as most drugs, are not immunogenic. Therefore, they or
their metabolites must covalently bind to macromolecules (proteins) and act as
haptens or the drug may alter the structure of a macromolecule.
f. Allergic or hypersensitivity reactions are classified as:
(1) Type 1 or immediate hypersensitivity reactions result from interaction of
the allergen (drug) with IgE antibody on the surface of mast cells and ba-
sophils. The target organs for Type I reactions include skin, airway, Gl tract,
and vasculalure. The resulting release of chemical mediators (autacoids) such
as histamine, kinins, and prostaglandins increases contraction of smooth
muscle and capillary permeability to induce edema. Clinical signs may range
from skin wheals and urticaria, rhinitis, bronchoconstriction, and diarrhea to
life-threatening anaphylactic. shock. Penicillin allergy is the most common
Type 1 reaction observed clinically.
(2)  Type 2 hypersensitivity reactions are complement fixing reactions involv-
ing antibody (lgM, IgG) binding to antigen (drug-macromolecular complex)
followed by deposition on cell surfaces of circulating blood cells result-
ing in lysis. Clinical effects include hemolytic anemia, agranulocytosis,
464 Clhapter 19 II A
 and thrombocytopenic. purpura. Type 2 reactions have been observed with
NSAIDs, phenothaizine tranquilizers, and sulfonamides.
(3)  Type 3 hypersensitivity reactions result from the deposition of antigen-
antibody complex on target tissue cells (e.g., skin, joints, kidneys), acti-
vation of complement, release of lysosomal enzymes and tissue damage.
Clinical signs include fever, arthralgia, skin eruptions, and glomerulonephri-
tis. Type 3 reactions have been observed with cephalosporins, penicillins,
sulfonamides, and erythromycin.
(4)  Jype 4 hypersensitivity reactions are cell-mediated and are delayed allergic
reactions. They result from the direct interaction of an allergen (drug) with
sensitized lymphocytes (T cells). This produces a release of cytokines and
cellular damage. Clinical signs include cczcma and contacl dermalitis, and,
in severe cascs, granocytopenia, hcpatitis, and nephritis. Type 4 reaclions
have been observed with phenytoin, phenobarbital, sulfonamides, NSAIDS,
and many topically applied drugs.
3. Drug idiosyncrasy (Type C). The manifestations of the ADR differ from pharmaco-
logical effects of the drug for unknown reasons.
B.
 Prominent examples of ADRs in small animals based on the summary of FDA-Center
for Veterinary Medicine (CVM) accumulated reports (1987-2005, unless otherwise
indicated) are listed in Table 19-1. In the FDA reporting system, one report can
describe the involvement of many animals.
Most of the ADR signs reported to FDA-CVM belong to the known adverse
effects of the drug: less frequently, drug allergy and idiosyncrasy have also been
reported.
C.
 Drug toxicity in cats. Compared to othcr spccics, cats arc particularly vulncrable 1o
drug toxicity. This is mainly due to the fact that cats have a deficiency in metabolizing
drugs/chemicals.
1. Deficient metabolism in cats as a cause of adverse drug reactions
 a. Phase I metabolism——hepatic microsomal—cytochrome P450 enzymes oxidize,
reduce, or hydrolyze drugs. Cats, in general, have lower activity of phase I me-
labolizing enzymes than other species.
b. Phase Ill metabolism—conjugation of drug with glucuronide, sulfate, glutathione,
or acetyl groups. Cats have a deficiency in glucuronyl transferase. Drugs con-
taining a -OH, -COOH, -NH2, -NH, or -SH group are usually glucuronated,
for example, opioids, NSAIDs, phenols, chloramphenicol, and aromatic. acids
such as benzoic acid.
 Cats tend to have better conjugation activity with acetyl groups than other
species.
2. Other reasons for increased toxicity of certain drugs in cats
a. Active metabolites formation, for example, acetyl-procainamide.
b. Susceptibility of hemoglobin to oxidation (methemoglobinemia).
c. Anaphylactic reactions to IV administration of ionic drugs, for example, iodide
contrast materials in radiology and amphotericin B.
d. Respiratory distress in drug-induccd anaphylaxis.
3. Drugs not to be used in cats
a. Acetaminophen. Cats are deficient in glucuronyl transferase; as a result,
acetaminophen cannot form a conjugate with glucuronide. Acetaminophen
undergoes phase I metabolism to form toxic metabolites that are conju-
gated by glutathione and that overwhelims the glutathione scavenger system.
Methemoglobinemia is the most common indication of toxicity.
b. Methylene blue. Methylene blue is used for treatiment of methemoglobinemia.
However, feline hemoglobin is more susceptible to oxidative denaturation than
other species. Methylene blue is only marginally effective to treat feline methe-
moglobinemia. Ascorbic acid as a reducing agent can be used in cats.
c. Phosphate enemas. Phosphate enemas can induce severe hyperphosphatemia
and hypocalcemia in cats.
DrugIriteretctionsuntl_AdverseDrug Reactiuns
465
TABLE 19-1. Prominent Examples of Adverse Drug Reactions in Small Animals Reported to
the 「DA-Center for Veterinary Medicine {1987-2005)
Drug
Species
Route
Reports
Treated
Reacted
Died
Antiparasitics
Ivermectin
(ats
()ral
62
88
83
16
Cats
Parenteral
42
55
52
17
Dogs
Oral
869
1.084
981
149
Dogs
Parenteral
63
84
75
28
Milbemycin
Logs
Oral
1,675
2,384
2,299
129
Milbemycin-
Lufenuron
Dogs
Oral
914
1,039
971
48
Moxidectin
Dogs
()ral
253
394
356
62
Logs
Parenteral
5,269
6,042
5,473
599
Selamectin
Cats
Topical
3,168
4,578
3,991
292
Dogs
Topical
9,661
9.737
9,345
223
Pyranlel
Cats
Oral
52
79
75
16
Dogs
(ral
217
795
61.3
214
Melarsomine
Dogs
 Parenteral
1,362
1,429
1,409
293
Amitraz
Dogs
Topical
149
161
160
57
Antibacterials
Amoxicillin
Cats
()ral
199
804
344
33
Logs
Oral
291
365
319
62
Enrofloxacin
Cats
Oral
270
310
294
19
Cats
Parenteral
141
154
151
15
58001
()ral
189
235
225
43
Dogs
Parcnteral
44
47
47
13
CNS depressants and antagonists
Medetomidine
Cats
Parenteral
66
181
145
41
Dogs
 Parenteral
774
910
882
165
Atipamezole
Cats
Parenteral
50
58
58
18
Dogs
Parenteral
272
310
290)
75
Ketaminc
Cats
Parenteral
889
9.966
4,746
426
Dogs
Parenteral
1.59
1,159
6.53
62
Tiletamine-
Zolazepam
Cats
Parcnteral
567
5.089
1,476
269
Dogs
Parenleral
372
2,219
983
14.3
Isoilurane
Cals
Inhalation
92
373
311
50
Logs
Inhalation
401
6.36
401
23
NSAIDS
Carprofen
Cats
Oral
404
459
400
11
58001
()ral
12,901
13,607
13,202
2.655
Deracoxib
Cats
Oral
53
53
53
26
Dogs
Oral
3,177
3.278
3,198
740)
[todolac
Dogs
Oral
1,566
1.907
1,760
190
Meloxicam
Cals
()ral
222
228
227
44
Dogs
Oral
686
569
694
75
d. Benzyl-containing products. Benzyl alcohol, benzocaine, benzoic acid (in pet
food preservative) can induce CNS toxicosis in cats, with the following signs:
ataxia, hyperesthesia, fasciculation, coma, convulsions, respiratory failure, and
death. These compounds are poorly melabolized by cats.
e.
Cisplatin. Cisplatin is a platinum complex used as an antineoplastic drug. Cis-
in alveolar capillaries. Carboplatin does not cause this adverse effect in cats.
f. 5-Fluorouracil. 5-Fluorouracil is an antineoplastic drug, and is particularly neu-
rotoxic to cats.
TABLE 19-2. Prominent Examples of Adverse Drug Reactions in Large Animals Reported to
the FDA-Center for Veterinary Medicine (1987-2005)
Drug
Species
Route
Reports
Treated
Reacted
Died
Antiparasilics
Allenla7ole
Calle
[e()
47
13.491
1,9.37
171
Sheep
(e)
26
2.567
29
101
Fenkbcindazole:
Oral
22
2,86.3
1,356
Pigs
Oral
2,06 1
No report
101
Dichlorovos
Piss
ral
6
1,820)
222
1 203
Famphut
Cattle
Topic. al
08
12,268
3.277
217
Dor amectin
Cattle
 Parenteral
54
15,884
6,612
74
Cattle
Topical
402
131,054
49.058
44
Pigs
Parenteral
89
94,362
21.334
395
Pigs
Topical
6
8.880
2.130
70
Ivermectin
Catle
Parenteral
55
2,965
86
58
Cattle
Oral
2.022
21
18
Cattle
Topical
28
23.359
4,793
60
Horses
Cral
117
178
279
53
I'ig5
Cral
27
4.821
916
53
Moxiclectin
Callle:
Toit:al
212
75.002
51,302
Goals
(ral
5
150
32
22
Horsc
(ral
96.5
3.029
1,249
111
Lasalocitl
Calle:
()ral
4
2.049
2,0129
150)
Moncnsin
Cattle
Oral
21.3
50t'66
23,712
3,876
Goats
[PO
75
411
10.3
Horses
513
1,328
251
t1
Shetp
Oral
29
4,160
1.396
615
Pigs
Oral
4,756
1.174
Levamisole
Cattle
Topical
95
14,207
2.531
8G
Cattle
Parenteral
t
1.084
82
Cioats
(ral
63
735
43
32
Pig5
[P)
64
27
3
Sheep
()ral
19
5,726
194
103
Antibacterials
Ceftitofur
Callc:
Parcrlcral
75
7,578
1,591
297
I lorscs
Parenteral
19
(0
24
13
Enrofloxacin
Cattle
Parenteral
12
330
125
29
Cattle
Unknown
y
(50
232
105
Oxytetracycline
Cattle
 Parenteral
219
6,352
1,800
251
Cattle
Unknown
28
1.307
299
Pigs
 Parenteral
6
255
243
27
Procaine
Cattle
 Parenteral
80
5,155
361
122
Penicillin （
Horses
Parenteral
88
237
135
52
Iigs
Parenteral
34
4.693
3,407
225
Speclinomycin
Calle:
Parenleral
8
409
124
120)
Spec:linomyc:in-
tincomycin
Callle.
Parenteral
166
6806
1,725
1,224
Tiarnulin
Pigs.
18
14,505
822
224
Tilmic.osirn
Catlec
Pareltcral
249
15,962
4,017
627
Tylosin
Oral
11
62,019
18,311
758
Cattle
Parenteral
519
67
85
Pigs
Oral
226,286
9.207
484
Pigs
 Parenteral
15
748
510
4200
IDrugs affec.ting nutrition/metalolism
Raclopamine
Calle
(ral
30
98.715
5,209
124
Pigs
[e)
209
No report
143,867
5.015
Iron Dextra
Pigs
Parcrlcral
57
7,912
1,685
618
Calle:
Parcntceral
4
624
37
Selenium-
Calle:
Parcntcral
111
9.356
1,23.3
14[3
Vitamin E
Horses
Parerteral
88
347
209
50
Pigs
 Parerteral
3
130
42
22
Sheep
 Parenteral
19
807
534
198
Edetate
Cattle
 Parenteral
7
2,087
107
104
Sometribove
Cattle
 Parenteral
1.759
179,785
54.196
379
lsoflupredlone
Catlle
Parenteral
22
463
180
162
466
Drug Interaclions and Adverse LDrug Reaclions 467
anticonvulsant. Cats have very limited ability to convert primidone to phenobar-
bital.
h. Synthetic pyrethroids, especially as spot-on products. Cats are very sensitive to
the CNS effects of pyrethroids. Although the exact mechanisms are not known,
this may be due to their deficiency in drug metabolism.
4. Drugs requiring low dosage/increased interval in cats compared to dogs since cats
are more sensitive to these drugs than dogs:
a. Morphine and other opioids
b. Salicylates
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Organophosphates
e. Lidocaine
D.
 Prominent examples of ADRs in large animals based on the summary of FDA-CVM
accumulated reports (1987-2005) are listed in Table 19-2. In the FDA reporting sys-
tem, one report can describe the involvement of many animals. Most of the ADR
signs reported to FDA-CVM belong to the known adverse effects of the drug: less
frequently seen are drug allergy and idiosyncrasy. In general, the number of cases
reported for a specific drug in food animals is lower than in other species, but the
number of animals reported in each case is higher than other species.
SUGGESTED READING
Boothe DM. 1990. Drug therapy in cats: Mechanisms and avoidance of adverse drug reactions. J Am
Vet Med Ass0c 196:1297-1305.
Boothe DM. 1990. Drug therapy in cats: A therapeutic calegory approach. J Am Vet Med AssoC
196:1659-1669.
Boothe DM. 1990. Drug therapy in cats: Recommended dosing regimens. J Am Vet Med Assoc
196:1845-1850.
htlp://www.fda.gov/cvm/index/ade.html
Maddison JE, Page SW. 2008. "Adverse drug reaclions." In Small Animal Clinical Pharmacology. Edited
by Maddison JE, Page S, Church D. 2nd ed., pp. 41-51. Sl. Louis, MD: Saunders.
Naranjo CA, Shear NH, Busto U. 1998. "Special topics in pharmacology." In Principles of Medical
Pharmacology. Ediled by Kalant H, Roschlau WHE. 6th ed., pp. 792-793. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Armstrong EJ, Armstrong AW. 2nd ed., pp. 63-69. Baltimore, MD: Lippincotl Williams & Wilkins.
Vomand KC, Sumano H. 1990. Adverse drug reaclions in catlle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:899-905.
468
Chaptei
STUDY
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONs: Each of the nurmbered items or incormplete stalements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion that is best in each case.
1. A dog that is maintained on phenobarbital
6. Adverse reactions to penicillin in animals
for the control of epilepsy may not respond
 are manifested as clinical signs ranging from
to antifungal therapy with griseoiulvin be-
skin wheals, urticaria, rhinitis, bronchocon-
cause phenobarbital
striction, diarrhca to life-thrcalening anaphy-
lactic shock. These adverse reactions suggest
(A) forms an insoluble complex with griseo-
which type of immune-mediated drug allergy?
fulvin.
(13) blox:ks uptake of griseofulvin by keratin
(A) Type I
precursor cells.
(B)Type IIl
(C) increases renal blood flow, hastening the
(C) Type I!l
excretion of griseofulvin.
(D) Type IV
(D) induces hepatic microsomal enzymes,
incrcasing griscoiulvin rmetabolisrm.
7. Which of the following drug pairs inhibit
hepatic: microsomal enzyimes and thus, imay
2. The efficacy of pilocarpine, a imiotic, imay
prolong the action of other drugs?
be reduced in the presence of
(A)  Phenylbutazone and phenobarbital
(A) phenytoin.
(B) Chloramphenicol and griseofluvin
(C) Ketoconazole and prednisolone
(B)  H,-antihistamines.
(C)glucocorticoids
(D) Cirmetidine and lindane
(D) nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs.
(E) Enrofloxacin and phenytoin
8. All of the following drugs should not be
3. A pharmacodynamic interaction resulting
used in cats, except:
in drug antagonism may be caused by the
concurrent administration of penicillin G and
(A) acetaminophen.
(B) benzocaine.
(A) cephalexin,
(B) gentamicin.
(C) cisplatin.
(D) meloxicam.
(C)
doxycycline.
(E) permethrin.
(D) enrofloxacin.
 9. All of the following drugs should be used
4. IDrugs that inhibit hepatic. microsomal
 in lower dosages/interval than dogs, except:
metabolism (Type I metabolism! include all
of the following, except:
(A) chloramphenicol.
(B) lidocaine.
(A) phenylbutazone.
(C)morphine
(B)ketoconazole.
(D) aspirin.
(C)chloramphenicol.
(E) gentamicin.
(1)) enrofloxacin.
(E)cimetidine.
10. According to FDA ADE reports (1987-
 2005), which of the following drug groups
5. All of the following are examples of com-
cause more adverse drug reactions than other
binations that would result in pharmaceutic
groups?
interaction incompatibilily, exccpt:
(A) Sedatives/analgesics
(A)amphotericin B—sodium desoxycholate.
(B) Cardiovascular drugs
(B) tetracyclinc-riboflavin.
(C) Antiparasitic drugs
(C) ketamine HCl—thiopental sodium.
(D)Antimicrobial drugs
(D) penicillin G—sulfiadimethoxine.
(E) Anti-inflammatory drugs
Drug Interarctions and Adverse Drug Reactions 
469
ANSWERS ANd EXPLAnATIONS
1. The answer is D.
6. The answer is A.
 Phenobarbital is a potent inducer of
The clinical signs of adverse drug reac-
hepatic microsomal enzymes involved in
tions to penicillin, including skin whcals,
the oxidative metabolism of many drugs,
urticaria, rhinitis, asthma, diarrhea, and
including griseofulvin. The resulting rapid
 anaphylactic shock suggest Type I drug
metabolism may reduce or eliminate drug
allergy.
effects on target tissues or organisms. Pheno-
barbital does not alter the uptake, excretion,
7. The answer is C.
or solubility of griseofluvin.
Chloramphenicol, enrofloxacin, ketoconazole,
cimetidine, ranitidine, prednisolone, and
2. The answer is B.
quinidine are inhibitors of cytochrome
H1-anthhistamines have weak antimus-
P450 enzymes, whereas phenylbutazone,
carinic activity that may antagonize the
Phenobarbital, griseofulvin, lindane, and
miotic action of parasyinpathomimetic
phenytoin are inducers of these enzymes.
drugs used in the treatment of glaucoma
(e.g., pilocarpine). This is an example of a
8. The answer is D.
pharmacodynamic drug intcraction.
Mcloxicam, an NsAID, is approvcd for
use in cats. Acetaminophen forms toxic
3. The answer is C.
metabolites in cats, which lead to oxidative
Concurrent administration of a peni
damages, for example, methemoglobine-
cillin and a tetracycline can reduce the
mia. Bezocaine is poorly metabolized in
efficacy of the penicillin. The bactericidal
cats, and can cause serious CNS distur-
action of penicillins is greatest in rapidly
bances. Cisplatin causes sevcre pulmonary
dividing microorganisms. Tetracyclines,
toxicity in cats, which is manifested by
which are bacteriostatic antibiotics, inhibit
vasculitis in alveolar capillaries. Cats are
protein synthesis, slowing bacterial growth.
very sensitive to pyrethroid ectoparasiti-
Cephaloxin, gentamicin, and enrofloxacin are
cides by showing tremors, muscle rigidity.
bacteriocidal.
and seizures (see Chapler 16 ior further
information).
4. The answer is A.
Phenylbutazone induccs cnzymcs of the
9. The answer is E.
cytochrome P450 system (microsomal
Cats have problems metabolizing chlo-
enzymes), thus increasing the rate of
ramphenicol, lidocaine, morphine, aspirin,
metabolism of drugs inactivated by this
and many other drugs, and thus these drugs
pathway. Cimetidine, chloramphenicol,
should be used in lower dosages/interval
ketoconazole, and enrofloxacin inhibit
than dogs. The dosage of gentamicin in
microsomal cnzymes and may prolong the
cats (3 mg/kg, IV, IM, or SC, q8h) is similar
osoyi Ag pozogeou ae jeui sonp jo uooe
to that in dogs, since the elimination of
aminoglycosides does not require drug
enzymes.
metabolism.
5. The answer is A.
Amphotericin B is not incompatible
10. The answer is C.
with sodium desoxycholale. In fact, sodium
According to FDA CVM ADE reports,
desoxycholate is the recommended diluent
antiparasitic drugs cause more adverse
for amphotericin B to form a stable colloidal
reactions than other groups of drugs. This
suspension. Tetracyclines are oxidized by
is attributable to the frequent use of an-
riboflavin. Ketamine HCl and penicillin G.
tiparasitic drugs. In addition, many of the
acidic solutions, form precipitates when ex-
anthelmintics and ectoparasiticides affect
posed to alkaline solutions such as thiopental
neuromuscular function of parasites and
and sulfadimethoxine.
animals.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 20
Legal Aspects of Medication Usage
in Veterinary Medicine
Stephen D. Martin
INTRODUCTION. It is important for the practilioner to be awarc of the rulcs, regu-
lations, and standards that impact how they dispensc, prescribe, or adminisier mcdica-
tions. While the objective of this chapter is to present an overview of these topics, it is
agency should be consulted for further explanation and completeness if necessary.
REGULATORY AGENCIES. There are both state and federal agencies, which govern
how drugs are used in veterinary medicine.
Federal agencies
A.
1. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). An agency of the United States Department 
of Health and Human Services. The 1938 Federal Foods, Drugs and Cosmetics
Act (and subsequent aimendments) gives the FDA the authority and responsibility
for regulating a wide range of products to insure the saiety anid eificacy of foods.
drugs, and cosmetics in the United States.
2.
Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM). A subxdivision of the FDA which is respon-
sible for regulating the crugs, deviccs, and food acditives acministcred to animals.
3. Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA). A division of the United States Department of
Justice which is responsible for the enforcement of the Controlled Substance Act
(CSA) 0f 1970.
B.
State agencies
1. Board of Veterinary Medicine (BVM). It protects the health and safety of the public
and animals through the regulation of the practice of veterinary medicine as ex-
pressed in the state's veterinary practice act. A state's BVM contact information can
be found at www.aavsh.org under "Boarrds and Agencies."
2. Board of Pharmacy (BOP). It regulates the wholesale and the pharmacy distribution
of pharmaceutical products (including veterinary drugs). The BOP also regulates
licensed veterinarians engaged in the prescribing and distribution of controlled sub-
stances used in veterinary practice. A state's BOp contact information can be found
PRESCRIPTION WRITING. Definitions are as follows:
A.
Prescription. An order for a medication (or device) issued by a licensed medical prac-
titioner. The prescription is a legal document.
B.
Prescription blanks. Printed iorms on which the prescription is writlen. Prescription
blanks are oiten preprinted with the name, address, and telcphone numher of the clin-
ician or clinic, Some states require specialized prescription blanks for controlled sub-
stances.
Prescription drug. A drug or device that is required by state or federal law to be
 dispensed on prescription only, or is restricted to use by a practitioner only. Such
471
472Chapter 20 l1 C
products are identified by one of the following statements or legends appearing on
the manufacturer's label.
1. "Rx Only."
2.
"Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing without a prescription."
 3. "Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to use by or on the order of a licensed
velerinarian.
Prescription drugs are sometimes called legend drugs because of these statements. A
D.
prescription, however, can also be writen for nonprescription drugs (over-lhe-counler
or OTC drugs) by the clinician.
E. Required information on a prescription
1. Date
2. Owner's name, address, and animal species or identification
3. Name, strength, and quantity of drug/device prescribed 
4.[
Directions for use
 5. Name, address, and signature of the prescriber
6. DEA number if a controlled drug is ordered
7.F
 Refill information (how many times the prescription can be refilled) is optional,
however, if not indicated the prescription cannot be refilled
F.Medication error prevention. A medication crror, defined by the Amcrican Society of
-dui ol peal io asnes Aeu ieu luaaa alqeiuaaaid Aue, s! 'sisioeueud waishs yea
propriate medication use or patient harm, while the medication is in the control of the
healthcare professional, patient, or consumer. These events can be related to profes-
sional practice, health care products, procedures and systems, including prescribing.
order communication, producl labeling. packaging, nomenclature, compounding. dis
pensing, distribution, education, monitoring, and use." Prescribing and dispensing are
two of the most common sources of a medication error.
G. Prescribing errors can be calegorized as errors of omission or errors of commission.
1. Errors of omission are caused by missing or incomplete information, examples in-
clude:
 a. Failure to specify the quantity to dispense or the duration of therapy.
b. Failure to specify the dose or dosage regimen.
c. Failure to write legibly.
d. Failure to provide all legally required information fexample: DEA number for
controlled substance)
e. Incomplete specification of dosage form or strcngth or thc specification of an
unavailable dosage form or strength.
2. Errors of commission are caused by incorrect information, examples include:
a. Incorrect dose or regimen.
b. Incorrect drug or indication for use.
c. Incorrect dosage form.
d. Incorrect quantity or duration of therapy.
e. Therapeutic. duplication.
f. Incorrect patient name on the prescription.
g. Use of outdated references.
h. Drug interactions or contraindicalions.
H.
omission.
1. Failure to counsel the owner about the medication prescribed.
I Medication error prevention in prescription writing
amount less than a whole unit (i.e., 0.1 mg. not a .1 mg); do not use trailing 
Iegal Aspects of Medlication Usage in Veterinary Medicine473
7eros afler the decinal point for whole numbers (i.e., 1 mg. not 1.0 mg). The use
of a "naked decimal" (.1 mg and 1.0 mg) could cause misinterpretation of the in-
tended amount by a factor of ten (1 mg and 10 mg).
2. Many drug names (brand and generic names) look alike or sound alike; care should
be taken to insure the correct drug is selected fi.e., hydralazine vs. hydroxyzine,
Celebrex( vs. Celexa).
3. The prescription information must be legible; poor or illegible handwriting can be
misinterpreted and be a source of a medication error.
 4. The metric system should be used to express strengths and quantities (i.e., Pheno-
barbital 30 mg); the use of outdaled weight and measures should not be uscd (i.e.,
Phenobarbital /2 grain).
5. Vague directions for use (i.e., "take as directed") should be avoided; the directions
should be concise and include what the medication is used for infection, cough,
and so forth, and for nonmaintenance drugs, the length of the treatment 1 week,
10 days, and so forth.
6. The use of abbreviations should be minimized or eliminated in prescription writing.
Abbreviations can be misinterpreted, especially if penmanship is poor, leading to a
medicalion error. Some abbreviations have been banned from use in human hospi-
tals because they have frequently been the source of medication errors. (For a com-
plete list of hazardous abbreviations and explanations refer to the Error-Prone Ab-
breviation List at the Institute for Safe Medication Practices' website www.ismp.org.)
a. For example, both abbreviations "QOU" (every other day) and "QD" (daily)
have been mistaken for the abbreviation "QID" (four times daily).
b. Veterinarians should avoid using nonstandardized abbreviations when writing
a prescription to be taken to a human pharmacy. The abbreviation "Siu)” tonce
daily) is only used in veterinary medicine veterinarians—it is not used by any
other healthcare profession. As a result, it has been mistaken for "QiD" (four
times daily) and "BID" (twice daily) by community pharmacists.
Issuance of the prescription. The information on a prescription can generally be com-
municated to a pharmacy by any of the three methods: written, oral, or electronic for-
mat.
1. Written format. The prescription information is written on a prescription blank and
then is given to the animal's owner to present to a pharmacy.
a. The prescription should always be written in ink or printed via computer; never
wrilten with a pencil.
h. Alterations and changes should be avoided; rewrite on new prescription blank if
necessary.
2. Oral format. The prescription is telephoned to the pharmacy by the veterinarian or
their agcnt and the information is recorded on a prescription blank by a pharmacist.
 Prescriptions for C-ll drugs (next section) cannot be given over the phone.
3. Electronic format. Requirements and restrictions for this format may vary from state
to state; the veterinarian should check with their state's BOP before using this for-
mal.
a. Facsimile transmission: written information is faxed to the pharmacy and the
information is processed the same as a written or oral prescription.
b. Computer to computer and handheld devices: prescription information is com-
municated electronically to the pharmacy's computer system.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. Controlled substances are drugs flegal and illegal) and
chemicals under the jurisdiction of the iederal Controlled Substance Act (CSA) which
regulates the manufacture, distribution, and dispensing of controlled substances. The
in Title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Parts 1300-end. A Practitioner's Manual
is available on the DEA wcbsite (www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov) under "publications" to
474|Chapter 20 IV A
DrugEnforcementAdministration
Practitioner'sManual
DEPICTIONofPAGE1ofDEAFORM-222
U.S.OFFICIALORDERFORM-SCHEDULESI&II
SeeReverseof PURCHASER'S
NoorderfommaybeissuedforScheduleandllsubstancesunlessa
OMBAPPROVAL
Copyof Instructions
completodalicationfomhasbecnreceived(21CFR1305.04）
No.1117-0010
TO.(Nameof Supplier)
STREETADDRESS
CITYandSTATE
DATE
TOBEFILLEDINBYSUIPPLIER
SUPPLIERSDEAREGISTRATIONNO
TOBEFILLEDINBYPURCHASER
No.af
Sizeof
Name of Item
pobinugeuoen
Packages
Date
Packages
Package
Shipped
Shipped
1
2
E
6
7
8
9
10
LASTLINE
SIGNATUREORPURCHASER
COMPLETED
(MUSTBEI0ORLESS)ORATTORNEYORAGENT
DEARegistration No
Schedules
Registeredasa
No.of thisOrderFom
DEAFom-222
U.S.OFFICIALORDERFORMS-SCHEDULESI&II
(Oct.1992)
DRUGENFORCEMENTADMINISTRATION
SUPPLIER'SCopy1
Note:The graphic illustrated above is not intended to be used as an actual
orderform.
2006Edition
FIGURE 20-1. Depiction of page 1 of D[A [orm-222. U.S. official order form—Schedules I and Il
assist the practitioner in their understanding of the CSA and CFR; the manual summa-
rizes the requirements for prescribing, administering, and prescribing controlled sub-
stances.
4
Registration requirements for controlled substances
1，
 Registration with both the DEA and the state BOP is a requirement for any practi-
tioner that will dispense, administer, or prescribe any controlled drug.
Manual for the registration process.
Iegal Aspects of Medlication Usnge in Veterinary Medlicine475
b. State registration forms are available from the state's BOP. The renewal period
may vary from state to state.
2. Registration certificates must be maintained al the registercd localion in a readily
retrievable manner.
 3. Separate registration is required for each principal business or practice where con-
trolled substances are dispensed, administered or stored; separate registration is not
required for locations where controlled substances are prescribed but not dispensed
administered, or stored
 4. The praclitioner must nolify both the DEA and the state's BOP if there is a change
in their practice or business address.
B.
Schedules of controlled substances. The drugs and chemicals that are considered con-
trolled substances are divided into five schedules based on abuse potential, safety, and
accepted medical use in the United States.
1. Schedule I. These substances have no current accepted medical use in the United
States, have a lack of accepled safety when used, and have a high abuse polential.
Examples: heroin, methamphetamine, LDS, and marijuana.
aw paidaooe ue pue leuaod asnge yi e aaey saueisgns asaui 'll annpauos '7
use in the United States. This schedule includes narcotics, depressants, and stimu-
lants.
a. Examples used in veterinary medicine: morphine, dihydomorphone, fentanyl,
and pentobarbital.
3. Schedule Iml. Thesc substanccs havc an acccpted mcdical use in the Unitcd States
and less abuse potential than Schedule I and Il.
a. Examples used in veterinary medicine: ketamine, boldenone, buprenorphine, and
hydrocodone with homatropine.
4. Schedule IV. These substances have a lower polential for abuse relative to the
Schedule Ill substances.
a. Examples used in veterinary medicine: butorphanol, diazepam, and phenobarbi-
tal.
5. Schedule V. These substances have the lowest abuse potential of the controlled
substances.
a. Examples used in veterinary medicine: phenylpropanolamine.
6. The amount of the controlled substance in a product also may influence into which
schedule it fit; also, the combination of a controlled substance with a noncontrolled
substance may affect the scheduling.
a. Example: codeine 30 mg tablets are Schedule Il, codeine 30 mg/acetaminophen
325 g tablets are Schedule Ill, products with codcine 200 mg or less per 100 ml
or 100 g are Schedule V.
7. The term "class" which is symbolized by the letter "C" is used interchangeably with
"Schedule"; for example, a Schedule Il drug and a C-ll drug represent the same
classification. Manufacturers use the "C" symbol on their label to identify the prod-
uct as a controlled substanco.
C.Controlled substance recordkeeping. The CSA created a closed distribution system
in which all legitimate handlers of controlled substances: researchers, manufacturers,
distributors, practitioners, pharmacies, with the cxception of the ultimale user, must be
registered. Under this distribution system, strict recordkeeping for accountability of all
controlled substance transactions must be maintained.
1. Recordkeeping
a. All controlled substance records must be maintained in a readily retrievable
manner separate from other business records.
b. All controlled substance records must be kept available for inspection for a min-
imum of 2 years. This includes invoices, credil memos, dispensing transactions,
and administration records.
C. All Schedule Il records must be kept separate from Schedule Ill to V records.
d. A practitioner that dispenses or administers controlled substances must take
a beginning controlled substance inventory on the date they initially start to
476|Clapter 20 Iv C
dispense or administer and take a new inventory every 2 years from when the
beginning inventory was taken (a biennial inventory).
e. A perpetual inventory system is recommended for the practitioner to use when
recording a controlled substance that is purchased, dispensed or administered.
f. The practitioner should contact their regional DEA office or their state's BOP
for disposal of controlled substances which are unusable (i.e., damaged, out-
of-datc, and unwanted) if thcy cannot be returned to the manufacturer or dis-
tributor. Copics of all records documcnting the relurn or disposal of controlled
substanccs should be maintained for at least 2 ycars.
D.
Ordering controlled substances for inventory
1. A practitioner can order Schcdule Ill through Schedule V drugs for their clinic by
cither phoning the manufaclurer or distributor or by faxing or mailing them an or-
der.
2. All orders for Schedule Il drugs must be ordered on a special DEA order form
(DEA-222). See example DEA 222 form (Figure 20-1).
3. DEA 222 forms may be ordered online at www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov or by con-
tacting a regional DEA office for assistance.
4. The forms come in packets of seven sequentially numbered forms and should be
used in sequence.
5. The DEA-222 form must be filled out in ink and cannot have any alterations or
erasures.
 6. The forin can only be signed by the registrant whosc namc appears on the forn
unless power of atlorncy has becn grantcd to an authorized individual.
7. The form is in triplicate with copies 1 and 2 going to thc supplicr; copy 3 is kcpt
by the purchaser and when the order is received the date and the quantities re-
invoice copy attached.
be an option if the supplier accepts this format and the practitioner has a CSOS
certificate. More inforimation on CsOS is available at www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov.
E.Prescribing controlled drugs
1. The practitioner's DEA number and practice address is required information for a
prescription for a controlled substance in addition to the information listed under
Required Information on a Prescription section.
2. A written prescription is required for Schedule Il drugs, Schedule Ill, IV, and V pre-
scriptions may be written or phoned. Electronic transmission requirements of Sched-
ule ll-V imay vary from state to state.
3. Refills are not allowed on Schedule Il prescriptions—a new prescription is rcquircd
cach time. Schedule Il-V prcscriptions may he refilled, if authorized on the pre-
scription, up to five times within 6 months for the date the prescription was written.
F.Security measures
2. Keep controlled substance inventory to a minimum level; restrict inventory access
to a miniinal nuimber of employees.
3. Any theft or loss of a controlled substance must be reported to the DEA and the
state's BOP.
4. Keep prescription blanks in a secure place away from public access.
 5. Use tamper-resistant prescription blanks. (Some states require special prescription
blanks for controlled drugs-check with the BOP.)
6. Do not make alterations on the prcscription; write oul the amount prcscribed in
addition to the number quantity, that is, #12 (twelve).
A state's controlled substance rcgulations are often the same as the federal con-
titioner complies with the most stringent set of regulations (federal or state) they
Iegal Aspects of Mecdication Usage in Veterinary Medicine477
will be assured of being in compliance with both sets of regulations federal and
state).
EXTRA-LABEL USE OF MEDICATIONS. Extra-label use (also called "off-label use") of a
medication is defined in 21 CFR, Part 530, as the actual or intended use of a medica-
tion in an animal in a manner that is not in accordance with the approved labeling.
A.
Background on extra-label use. As a result of legislation passed by Congress in 1958
(The Food Additives Amendment to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of
1938), animal drugs were also considered food additives because they could become
a component of meat, milk, or eggs. Since the amendment required FDA approval
of a food additive prior to its inclusion in food, the extra-label use (ELU) of drugs in
animals became illegal, Therefore, unlike the physician, the velerinarian could not pre-
scribe or treat their patients (food animal and nonfood animal) with medications in a
manner other than stated on the manufacturer's label without violating federal law and
placing themselves at risk of regulatory action. In the 1980s, the FDA issued Compli-
ance Policy Guides (CPG) to their personnel as guidance for regulatory action and en-
forcemenl prioritics regarding ELU, cspecially in food animals, in an effort to balancc
the needs of the patient while protecting the public's health. However, the CPG were
for FDA internal guidance only and did not confer or grant any rights or privileges for
ELU to the veterinarian, leaving them still in violation. In 1994, the CPG were codified
in law when Congress passed the Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification Act.
B.Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification Act (AMDUCA) of 1994
1. Implemented in 1996 by the regulations in 21 CFR, Part 530—Extralabel Drug Use
in Animals.
2. AMDUCA and 21 CFR, Parl 530 can be accessed al www.fda.gov/cvm/ amduca
toc.htm; highlights are discussed below.
3. AMDUCA allows veterinarians to treat their patients with approved animal drugs
and approved human drugs in an extra-label manner.
4. ELU is allowed only if a valid veterinarian-client-patient relalionship (VCPR) exisls.
A valid VCPR exists when:
a. A veterinarian has assumed the responsibility for making decisions for the health
and treatment of the animal for which the owner has agreed to follow.
b. The veterinarian is familiar enough with the animal, having recently seen and
examined the animal and is acquainted with ils kecping and carc, to makc a
general diagnosis of the animal's condition.
occurs.
5. ELU is only permitted on the order of a licensed veterinarian within the context of
a valid VCPR; a lay person outside of a valid VCPR is not permitted to use drugs in
an extra-label manner.
 6. ELU is limited to the treatment of an animal when suffering or death may result if
not treated or when the animal's health is threatened.
 7. ELU of drugs is not permitted in or on animal feed; when a residue may be a risk
to the public health; or when ELU results in residues exceeding established safe
levels or concentrations.
 8. Although the emphasis of AMDUCA is ELU in food-producing animals, AMDUCA
also permits ELU in nonfood producing animals if:
a. There is not an approved drug, concentration, or dosage form available.
b. In the veterinarian's judgment, the approved drug is not clinically effective.
c. When the public health is not threatened.
9. ELU is permitted in food-producing animals:
 a. If there is not an approved animal drug available or if the approved drug is not,
in the veterinarian's judgment, an eiffective trcatment.
478(haplcer 20 V B
b. A careful diagnosis is made before prescribing or dispensing a drug to be used
in an ELU manner.
c. A withdrawal intcrval has becn cstablished prior to marketing the cdible prod-
uct.
d.
The identity of the animal is maintained.
e. Measures have been taken to assure compliance with the established withdrawal
time and there is no illegal drug residue from ELU in the treated animal.
f. Additionally, if the drug is an approved human drug or an animal drug not ap-
proved for use in food animals, the following requirements must be met:
(1) The ELU must be in accordance with appropriate medical rationale.
(2) In the absence of scientific information on human food safety from the ELU
usc of a drug, the veterinarian must take appropriate mcasurcs to kccp thc
animal and its food products out of the human food supply.
(3) ELU of an approved human drug is nol permilted if a drug approved for
food animals can be used an extra-labeled manner.
10. ELU record requirements
a. The veterinarian is required to keep records of ELU for at least 2 years unless
Federal or State law requires longer.
risk to public hcalth.
C.
The ELU records should be maintained in an orderly and timely manner, and are
readily retrievable if requested for review or inspection.
d. The ELU record must contain documentalion of:
(1) The animal's identification either as an individual or for food animals by
group (herd, flock, or by client).
（2）
 The established name of the drug and its active ingredient.
(3) The condition being treated.
(4)  The spccics of the animal being trcatced.
(5) The number of animals bcing treatcd.
(6)  The dose administered.
(7) Duration of treatmenl.
(8) The specified withdrawal, withholding, or discard time for meat, milk, eggs
or any food derived from any food animal treated.
11. ELU labeling requirements
a. Human or animal drugs intended for ELU must be labeled properly or accompa-
nied by the labeling information to assure safe and proper use.
b. ELU labeling is required of the veterinarian dispensing the product or the phar-
macist dispensing the product pursuant to an order from a velerinarian.
C. The required labeling information must include:
(1) The name and address of the prescribing/dispensing veterinarian.
(2) If the drug is dispensed by a pharmacy on the order of a veterinarian, the
pharmacy label must include the pharmacy name and address and the pre-
scribing veterinarian's name (the veterinarian's address is optional).
(3) The established name of the drug or established names of each active ingre-
diernt if formulated with more than onc.
(4) Any dircctions spccificd by the vcterinarian including the class/spccies or
animal idenlification or group (herd, flock, pen, and so forth) being trealed,
(5) The dosage, frequency, and duration of treatmenl.
(6) Any cautionary statements.
(7) The veterinarian's specified withdrawal, withholding or discard time for any
food items (meat, milk, eggs, and so forth).
12. Compounded drug preparations are considered ELU drugs
 a. Permitted if there is no approved new animal drug or no approved new human
drug in an available dosage form or concentration that can be uscd.
[ewjue paaoudde ue j! asn qeuue pooj joj papunoduos aq jouues ssnip uewnh q
drug can be used for the compounding.
C.
Compounding from bulk drugs is not permitted.
13. Prohibition of ELU Drugs
Legal Aspccts oi Medication Usage in Velerinary Medic:ine 479
a. The FDA can prohibit ELU in nonfood animals if there is a risk to public
health.
b. The FDA can prohibit ELU in food animals if:
(1) ELU is risk to the public health or
(2) If acceptable analytical methods have not been established or cannot be
established to quantify safe levels and residue levels.
(3) ELU can be prohibited for a specific drug or a class of drugs or the prohibi-
tion can be limited to a species, indication, dosage form or route of admin-
istration or any combination of these conditions in food animals.
(4) Drugs prohibited for ELU in food animals
(a)  Adamantane derivatives (amantadine and rimantadine) and neuraminidase
inhibitors (oseltamivir and zanamivir) in chickens, turkeys, and ducks
(b)  Chloramphenicol
(c) Clenbuterol
(d)  Diethylstilbesterol (DES)
(e) Dimetridazole
(f)Ipronidazole
(g)  Other nitroimidazoles
(h)  Furazolidone, nitrofurazone, other nitrofurans
(i)Fluoroquinolones
(j) Glycopeptides (example: vancomycin)
(k) Phenylbutazone in female dairy cattle 20 months of age or older
(l) Sulfonamide drugs in lactating cattle—except approved use of sul-
fadimethoxine, sulfabromomethazine, and sulfaethoxypridazine
(m)  Estradiol cypionate
(5) Changes to the prohibited list are posted at http://www.fda.gov/cvm website
DRUG RESIDUE. An additional consideration for the veterinarian when treating a
food-animal patient with medications is the potential for the medication to be present
in the edible tissue (meat, milk, eggs) of the animal.
 Drug residue is a subset of the chemical contamination threat to the human food
supply chain-—-a significant food safety issue. In addition to drugs, pesticides, herbi-
cides, industrial and agricultural chemicals, and other environmental contaminants 
also present risks to the food supply. Human exposure to these chemicals and/or their
metabolites as residues in the food supply is a public health concern because of their
potential risk of being carcinogens, mutagens, teratogens, allergens, or contributing to
the developiment of bacterial resistance to antibiotics.
A.
 Safe concentrations (or tolerance levels) of a drug in edible tissue are determined by
the FDA through toxicology testing and estimating an acceptable daily intake of the
edible tissue or milk. When the drug residue concentration is at or below the deter-
mined safe concentration, the food product containing the drug residue is not consid-
ered a public health risk. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) establishes safe
concentrations for pesticides and other chemicals in the edible tissue of food animals,
B.
Withdrawal times are calculated by the FDA from residue studies and pharmacoki-
netic data submitted by the drug sponsor (manufacturer) following FDA guidelines.
Withdrawal time is the period after treatment that is needed to insure that drug con-
centrations in target tissues (tissues with the slowest depletion rate of the residue) reach
a safe concentration; at this point the edible tissues are considered safe for human
consumption. Statistically, withdrawal time is expressed as the point that can be pre-
dicted with a 95% confidence interval that the residue concentration in the target tis-
sue of 99% of the animals have decreased to concentrations below the established safe
concentration. Withdrawal times for drugs approved by the FDA for use in food ani-
mals are specific to species, route of administration, dose, duration of treatment, and
480Chapter 20 VI 3
product formulation submilled by the drug sponsor. The withdrawal time iniormation is
found on the approved food animal producl's label or packaging (also see Appendix I).
After a food animal drug is approved by the FDA and is marketed, the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) and its division, the Food Safety Inspection Service
(FSIS) become the regulatory agencies for insuring the compliance of animal-derived
foods with the cstahlished safe concentrations for drug residues (as well as for pesti-
cides and other chemical residues). The primary cause for noncompliance with the
established safe concentrations is the failure to observe approved withdrawal times.
However, if a drug is used in an extra-label manner, the withdrawal times stated by
os oos vnawv iopun pomoe si osn loqel-enx] xidde ioluo ou sonoejnueu ou
tion IV) if the veterinarian can establish an appropriate withdrawal interval to insure
that the edible tissues are safe for human consumption.
C.
FARAD (food Animal Residue Avoidance Databank) is a dalabase the velerinarian can
use to establish withdrawal intervals to minimize drug residues. (www.farad.org).
The FARAD program was developed by pharmacologists and toxicologists at
the University of California at Davis, North Carolina State University, the Univer-
sity of Florida, and the Universily of lllinois as a repository of residue avoidance
information.
The veterinarian should also take into consideration general condition of the an-
imal since the withdrawal time or withdrawal interval is a pharmacokinetic: value
(celimination half-life) which can be influenced by renal function, hydration status,
and so forth, and therefore miay require a more conservative withdrawal time or in
terval. Once the withdrawal time or interval has been determined the veterinarian
should test the tissue for drug residue levels; if the levels are above the safe concen-
tration, the withdrawal time or interval should be cxlended until they are at the safe
concentration.
erinary drugs (but not human drugs) which are available in other countries and are
unapproved by the FDA for use in the United States can be imported into the United
Slales for companion animal use if permission is obtained from the FDA-CVM.
Permission request. The first step of importation requires the veterinarian to submit a
A
u sn laal aul np aun odui o uoissiad sunsanbai wa-vae aui oi dail
tain the following information:
1. Veterinarian's name, address, and phone number
2. Clinic name and address
3. Client's name and address
4. Patient name and nonfood species
5. Name of drug
6. Drug family or class
7. Name and address of drug supplier
 8. Legal status of the drug in the foreign couniry
 9. Amount of drug to be imported fuli bottles; small quantities allowed-maximum of
a 90-day supply)
10. Disease condition to be treated
11. Reason why an approved human or animal drug will not treal this disease condi-
tion
12. A statement that:
a. The DVM will notify the animal owner that the drug is not approved;
b.
 The drug will not be used in any food animal;
c. The DVM agrees to notify the FDA if there are any adverse reactions.
13. How the DVM learned of the existence of this drug. The letter should be submit-
ted to: Division of Compliance HFV-230, Center for Veterinary Medicine, Food
and Drug Administration, Mctro Park North, 7500 Standish Placc, Rockville, MD
Legal Aspecls of Medicalion Usage in Velerinary Medicine 481
20855. Attn: Mr. Michael Zimmerman or faxed to: 240.276.9241. Additional con-
tact information: ph 240.276.9209; Michael.Zimmerman@fda.hhs.g0v.
B.
 FDA guidelines. The FDA has developed policy guidelines for the personal importation
of unapproved drugs which FDA personnel use in determining whether to allow a drug
to be imported; the guidelines include:
1. The drug is intended for use for a serious condition for which effective treatment is
not available in the United States;
2. There is no known commercialization or promotion of the drug to persons residing
in the United States by those distributing the drug;
3. The drug is not considered to present an unreasonable risk;
4. The individual seeking to import the drug affirms in writing that the drug is for a
specific patient's use (usually not more than a 9o-day supply).
C. FDA permission to import. The approval process takes 2-4 weeks; if the request to im-
port is approved, the FDA will send a permission to import letter to the DVM. A copy
of this letter must be forwarded to the supplier along with the product order. Without
the permission to import letter the drug may be seized by the U.s. Customs Service or
refused entry into the country. If the animal is to continue beyond the 90 days supply,
a new letter requesting permission to import must be sent to the FDA-CVM and the
new FDA-CVM permission letter must accompany the reorder.
SUGGESTED READING
"Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarificalion Act of 1994." January 2007.
htlp://www.fda.gov/cvm/ amducatoc.htm.
Botsoglou N, Fletouris D. 2001. Drug Residues in Foods: Phamracology, Food Safcty, and Analysis.
Ncw York: Marcel Dckker.
Brown SA. 2001. "Dosage forms, drug prescription orders, and vcterinary feed directives." In Veterinary
Pharmacology and Therapcutics. Edited by Adams HR. 8th cd., Pp. 1157-1165. Ames, IA: lowa State
University Press.
Committee on Drug Usc in Food Animals, Comp. 1999. The Use of Drugs in Food Animals Benefits
and Risks. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
"Error Prone Abbreviation List." Institute for Safe Medication Practices. March 2007.
http://www.ismp.org.
"FARAD." May 2007. http://www.farad.org/gen.html.
"Practitioner's Manual." DEA Office of Diversion Control. Department of Justice, April 2007.
hppt://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/pubs/manuals/pract/index.html.
482
Chapter20
STUDY
QuestIon s
DIRECTlONs: Each of the numbered ilems or incomplete stalements in this section is
followed by answers or by completions of the statement. Select the one lettered answer or
completion thal is best in each case.
1. The Drug Enforcement Administration is
6. Which of the following slatements about
the division of the FDA, which is responsi-
controlled substances is true?
ble for the saiely and efficacy of prescription
(A) A practitioncr is rcquircd to havc both
drugs.
state and federal registrations in order
(A)True
to write a prescription for a controlled
(B) Falsc
substance.
(B) Schedule V substances have the highest
2. According to both statc and federal laws,
abusc potential.
over-the-counter medications cannot be or-
(C)  All controlled substances to be dispensed
 dered on a prescription blank.
or administercd to paticnts in a clinic
need to be ordered from the supplier on
(A) True
a spccial DEA order form.
(B) False
7. According to AMDUCA which of the fol-
3. Which of the following is not required
Iowing is false?
information on a veterinary prescription?
(A) Extra-label drug use is permitted only
(A) Owners' name
 if a valid client-patient relalionship
(B)  Number of authorized refills
(C) Directions for using the imedication
exists.
(B) The extra-label use of drugs is permitted
(D) All of the above information is required.
in both food animal and nonfood animal
patients.
4. Which of the following is not considered
(C)  Using an approved drug for beef cattle at
an crror of omission in prescription writing?
a higher duse than the dose on the man-
(A)  The quantily to be dispensed is not speci-
ufacturer's label would not he considered
fied
extra-label use as long as beef cattle are
(B) llegible handwriting
still bcing trcated.
(C) Wrong patient/owner information
(D) None of the above are errors of omission
8. According lo AMDUCA, the FDA can no
(E) All of the above are errors of omission
longer prohibit the veterinarian from using
drugs in an exlra-label manner.
 5. Which of the following measures can pre-
(A)True
vent medicalion errors?
(B)Falsc
(A) Use a "naked decimal" to express a
strength or dosc in order to avoid clut-
9. To cstablish a withdrawal intcrval for a
ter on the prescription.
drug used in an extra-label manner, which of
(B) Make sure handwriting is legible or print
the following would be thc best rcsourcc for
the information on the prescription.
the veterinarian?
(C) Make cerlain the abbreviations "QOD"
(A)FSIS
(every other day), "QD" (daily), and
(B)FDA
"SID" (once a day) are neatly written
(C)EPA
on the prescription.
(D)FARAD
(D) All of the above
Legal Aspecis of Medication Usage in Veterinary Medicine  483
10. Drugs not approved by the FDA for use
(B) The DVM requests permission from the
in the United States may be legally imported
CVM to import the medication.
if:
(C) The animal's owner is informed that the
drug is not approved in the United States.
(A) The drug will not be used in any food
(D) All of the above.
 animal.
484
Chapter20
AnSWERS
ANDEXPLANATIONS
1. The answer is B.
potential. Only Schedule Il drugs for clinic.
Thc Drug Enforceimcnt Administration is
use are required to be ordered on the special
a division of the Department of Justice and is
DEA form 222.
responsible for the enforcement of the CSA.
The FDA is responsible for the safety and
7. The answer is C.
efficacy of prescription drugs.
Using a dose different than what is on
thc manufacturcr's label would be considercd
2. The answer is B.
extra-label use. Using a drug in a manner in-
A clinician may write a prescription for
consistent with the manufacturer's packaging
over-the-counter medications. This is often
or label is extra-label use.
done when special patient instructions are
required or unusual quantities are needed.
8. The answer is B.
Under AMDUCA the FDA can prohibit
3. The answer is B.
extra-label use in both non-food animals
 Refill information is optional information.
and food animals if there is a risk to public
Owner information and the medication
hcalth.
directions is required information.
9. The answer is D.
4. The answer is C.
FARAD (Food Animal Residue Avoid-
Wrong paticnt/owncr information is an
ance Databank) is a comprehensive database
crror of commission; incorrcct information
of residuc avoidance information; it would
was provided. Missing the quantity to
be the most useful to establish a withdrawal
dispense and illegible handwriting are
interval for extra-label use. FSIS (Food Safety
considered errors of omission.
and Inspection Service),is the part of the
USDA responsible for making sure the
5. The answer is B.
coimmercial supply of mcat, poultry, and
Handwriting should be legible or the 
eggs is safe and correctly packaged, but
information neatly printed; the information on 
would not be a resource for withdrawal
the prescription should be clearly understood.
intervals. Although the FDA's responsibilities
Using a "naked decinal" (.1 in place of
include establishing safe concentrations and
0.1 or 1.0 in place of 1) is a source of a
withdrawal tines, it would not be a resource
medication error which could result in the
for extra-label use. The EPA (Environmental
patient receiving an inappropriate dose;
Protection Agency) is responsible for pro-
thc abbreviations "QOD" and "QD" arc
tecting human hcalth and thc cnvironmcnt
considered dangerous and have been banned
by enforcing environmental laws; it would
from use in human hospitals because they
not be a source of information on extra-label
can be mistaken for "QiD" especially if 
drug use.
poorly written. The abbreviation "SiD" is
not uscd outside of veterinary medicinc and
10. The answer is D.
should not be used in prescription writing; it
All of thcm are correct. The importation
has been mistaken for "BID" and "QID."
process of an unapproved drug into the
Unites States begins with a permission to
6. The answer is A.
import letter sent to the FDA-CVM. In the
Both state- and fcdcral-controlled sub-
letter, thc vctcrinarian must include thc
stance registration are required in order for
statements: (1) The drug will not be used in
a clinician to write a prescription for a con-
any food animal. (2) The DVM will notify the
trolled substancc. Schedule il substances havc
animal's owner that the drug is not approved.
the highest abuse potential in descending
(3) The DVM agrees to notify the FDA if
 order down to Schedule V, the lowest abuse 
there are any adverse reactions.
IY
Withdrawal Time Charts
The iollowing, pages contain a reference table listing generic names alphabetically. The docu-
ment summarizes information on withdrawal times for food products (meat and milk) accord-
ing to the species and the route of administration. The withdrawal times listcd correspond 1o
label dosages of the drug and directions. Deviations from label recommendations may lead to
drug residues in food products.
DISCLAlMER: Every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the information
published. However, it remains the responsibility of the readers to familiarize themselves
with the information contained on the product label or package insert. The author (W. H.
from the use of published information.
Route of
Generic name
Species
administration
Meat
Milk
Acepromazine malcate
Cattle
IM, IV
7d
48h
(Recommended by
FARAD)
Sheep
IM, IV
7d
48h
Swine
IM, IV
7d
Goat
IM, IV
7d
48h1
Albendazole
C.attle
Oral
27d
Sheep
Oral
7d
Altrenogest
Swine
Oral
21d
Amitraz
Cattle
0d
Swine
Topical
Pf
Amoxicillin
Cattle
IM, SC
25d
96h
Dairy cattle
IMM
12d
60h
Ampicillin
Cattle
IM
fd
48h
Amprolium
Cattle
idw, oral
24h
Carbaryl
 Poultry
Topical
7d
Ceftiofur hydrochloride
Dairy cattle
IMM
(-3d
0-72h
Ceftiofur sodium
Cattle
IM, SC
(d
Od
Goat
IM
(d
Od
Sheep
IM
0d
Poultry
SC
Ud
Swine
IM
4i
 Cephapirin benzathine
Dairy cattle
IMM
42id
72h
Cephapirin sodium
Dairy cattle
IMM
4r1
96h1
Chlortetracycline
Pouliry
idw
1d
Swine
icdw
5d
C.attle
icdw
24h
Chlortetracycline +
Swine
In the feed
15d
 Penicillin G + Sulfamet-
hazine
Chlortetracycline +
Beef cattle
In the feed
7d
Sulfamethazine
Clorsulon
Cattle
Oral
8d
(continued)
485
(Continued)
Route of
Generic name
Species
administration
Meat
Milk
Cloxacillin benzathine
Dairy cattle
IMM
28d
Cloxacillin sodium
Dairy cattle
IMM
10d
48h1
IMM
POE
Coumaphos
Cattle
PO
PO
Swine
Topical
PO
Dexamethasone
C.attle
IM, IV
Dichlorvos
Swine
In the feed
PO
Callle
Premise
1d
Diclazuril
Chickens
in the feed
P0
Dinoprost
Cattle
IM
PO
P()
Swine
IM
PO
Docusate sodium
Cattle
Oral
3d
961
je0D
[e.l0
3d
96h
Sheep
Oral
3d
96h
Doramectin
(.attle:
IM, SC.
35d
Swine
IM
24d
Enrofloxacin
Beef cattle
SC
28d
Erythromycin
(altle:
IM
14d
72h1
Dairy cattle
IMM
1 4d
36h
Shecp
IM
3d
Swine
IM
7d
Poultry
idw
1d
Fenbendazole
Cattle
Oral
8d
Beef cattle
Oral
11d
C.attle
In the feed
1.3d
P0
Swine
In the feed
PO
Florfenicol
Callle
IM
28d
Cattle
SC.
38d
Flunixin meglumine
Cattle
IV
4d
36h
Swine
IM
1 2d
Furosemide
Cattle
IM, IV
48h
48h1
Gentamicin
Swine
1 4cl
Swine
IM
40d
Swite:
icdw
1 0d
Chickens
SC
35d
Turkeys
SC
63d
Hetacillin potassium
Dairy Calle
IMM
10d
72h1
Isoflupredone acetate
Cattle
IM
7d
Swine
IM
PL
Ivermectin
(altle
48d
Cattle
SC
p5r
Swine
SC
18d
Lasalocid
Caltle
In the feed
Od
Levamisole
Swine
Mp!
72h
Cattle
SC
PL
Lincomycin
Chickens
idw
Od
Swine
idw
Od
Swine
IM
48h
Magnesium hydroxide
Dairy cattle
Oral
12-24h
Oral
1224h
Sheep
[e.l0
12-24h
Magnesium oxide
Dairy cattle
Oral
24h
Melengestrol acetate
(.attle:
in the feed
48l1
Morantel tartrate
Cattle
In the feed
14d
P()
Moxidectin
Caltle
SC
21d
Narasin + Nicarbazin
(.hickens
In the ieed
5d
486
(Continued)
Route of
Generic name
Species
administration
Meat
Milk
Neomycin
Cattle
idw
P1
Cioat
icdw
3d
Sheep
idw
2d
Swinc
iclw
3d
Nicarbazin
Chickens
In the feed
4d
Novobiocin
Dairy cattle
IMM
30d
Oxfendazole
Cattle
IR, SC
PL
Oxytetracycline
Cattle
IM, IV
28d
96h1
Swine
IM
28d
Swine
Mp!
7-14d 
Poultry
idw
7-14d 
Sheep
IM, SC.
28d
96h1
Goat
IM, SC
28d
96h
Oxytetrecycline +
Cattle
Oral
30d
Neomycin
mr
30d
Penicillin G
Cattle
IM
10d
48h
Sheep
IM
P6
Swine
I,M
7d
Penicillin G procaine
Dairy cattle
IMM
3d
60h
Penicillin G + Novo-
Dairy calle
IMM
30d
biocin
 Penicillin G benzathin +
Beef cattle
5C
30d
Penicillin G procaine
Permethrin
Swine
Premise, topical
5d
Cattle
Topical
PO
(d
Gioat
Topical
Od
Od
Sheep
Topical
0d
Phosmet
Cattle
Topical
3d
Swine
Topical
1d
Piperazine
Aunod
idw
14d
Swine
iclw
21d
Pirlimycin HCI
Dairy cattle
IMM
9d
36h
Propylene glycol
Dairy cattle
IR, toral
96h1
Pyrantel tartrate
Swine
In the feed
24h
Robenidine hydrochlo-
Chickcn
Oral
5d
ride
Roxarsone
Poultry
In the feed
5d
Swine
In the feed
5d
Poultry
idw
5d
Swine
idw
5d
Spectinomycin
Cattle
SC
11d
Swine
(ral
21d
Chickens
idw
5d
Streptomycin
Cattle
idlw
P7.
Chickens
idw
4d
Sulfachlorpyridazine
Cattle
idw
PL
Swine
icdw
4d
Sulfadimethoxine
Cattlc
Oral, idw
PZ
60h
Cattle
IV
5d
60h
Poultry
icdw
5d
(continued)
487
(Continued)
Route of
Generic name
Species
administration
Meat
Milk
Sulfamethazine
Cattle
Oral
12d
Sulfaquinoxaline sodium
(altle
icdw
10d
Aunod
idw
10d
Tetrachlorvinphos
Cattle
PO
Poultry
Premise, (
PO
Swine
[eoidol.
P0
Tetracycline
Cattle
idw
5d
Poultry
idw
4d
Swine
idw
4d
Tiamulin
Swine
idw
3-7d
Swine
In the fced
PL-0
Tilmicosin
Swine
In the feed
7d
Cattle
SC
28d
Sheep
SC
28d
Tolazoline (Recom-
(.attle:
IV
8d
48h1
mended by FARAD)
Tripelennanime HCl
Caltle
IM, IV
4d
24h
Tulathromycin
(.altle
SC.
18d
Swine
IM, IV
5d
Tylosin
Cattle
IM
21d
Swine
IM
14d
Xylazine (Recommended
Cattle
IM
4d
24h
by FARAD)
Zeranol
Caltle
Ear irmplant
Od
Sheep
tar implant
40d
Zilpaterol
Cattle
in the iced
48h
Abreviaticns: dl, dayts: h, hourts): idw. in drinking water; IM, intrmuscular: IMM, intramammary; IR, intraruminal;
All withclrawal times are determinedl by tlhe FDA, except those for three drugs that are recommendled by the FARAD.
488
Dosage
Table
DISCLAIMER: Dosages listed in this table are based on best available evidence at the time
 of table preparation; however, the author (W. I1. IIsu) cannot ensure the efficacy of drugs
used according to recommendations in this table. Adverse effects may be possible from
drugs listed, of which author was not aware at the time of table preparation. Veterinarians
using this table are encouraged to check current literature, product label, and the
manufacturer's disclosure for information regarding efficacy and any known adverse effects
or contraindications.
Chapter 2: Drugs Acting on Peripheral Nervous System
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Adrenergic agonists
Catecholamines
Epinephrine (Epinjecre, etc.)
Dog
IV, IM, SC 20 mcg/kg or 0.1-0.5
ml. of 1:1,000)
/V
10-20 mcg/kg
Anaphylaxis
Cat
IV, IM, SC 2
 20 mcg/kg or 0.1-01.5
ml of 1:1.000
Horse
IM, SC
3-5 mL of
1:1,000/450 kg
Foal
IV
0.1 ml/kg of 1:1.000
Resuscitation
IV
10-20 mcg/kg
Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation
Ruminants
SC, IM
0.5-1.0 ml of
Anaphylaxis
1:1,000/45 kg
Swinne
SC, IM
0.5-1.0 ml of
Anaplhylaxis
1:1,000/45 kg
Dopamine (IntropinK)
Dog. cat
IV
 2-10 mcg/kg/min
(prepare 40 mg in
500 ml Lactated
Ringer's solution!
Horse
IV
1-5 mcg/kg/min (200
mg in 500 mL saline
infused at 0.45
mL/kg/h)
Isoproterenol (lsuprel)
Dog
IV
0.04-0.08 mcg/kg/min
IM, SC
0.1-0.2 mg q4h
Cat
IV
0.4 mg in 250 ml
saline drip slowly to
effect
IV
0.2 mg in 100 mL of  Asthma
saline to cffcct q8lh
Horse
IV
0.4 mcg/kg
Short-term
borohchodilation
IV
0.05-1 mcg/kg/min
Resuscitation
(continued)
489
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Norepinephrine (Levophed)
Dog, cat
IV slowly
0.05 0.3 mcg/kg/min,
CRI
Horse
IM
10 mcg/kg
Non-catecholamines
Albuterol
Dog
PO
20-50 mcg/kg q8h
(Proventil,Ventolin(k)
Cal
Inhalation
90-110 mcg/puff
aerosol albuterol
inhaler
Horse
P()
8 mcg/kg q12h
Inhalation
2  3 mcg/kg using a
 specially designed
mask
Clenbuterol (Ventipulmin)
Horse
PO
0.8-3.2 mcg/kg q12h
IV
0.8 mcg/kg q12h
Dobutamine (Dobutrex)
Dog
IV
2.5-20 mcg/kg/min
Cal
IV
2.3-5 mcg/kg/min
Horse.
IV
1 10 mcg/kg/min
Ephedrine (Broncholate)
P()
1-2 mg/kg q8-12h
Cat
PO
2 4 mg/kg q8 12h
Horse
PO
0.7 mg/kg q12h
Phenylephrine
Dog
IV
1-3 mcg/kg/min
(Neo-Synephrinek)
0.9% NaCi
C.at
IV
1-3_rmcg/kg/min 0.9%
NaCl
Horse
IV
0.1-0.2 mcg/kg/min:
total dose noyl over 10
mcg/kg
Phenylpropanolamine
Dog
PO)
1 2 mg/kg q12h
(Propalin, PPA()
Cat
PO
1 mg/kg q12h
Ractopamine (Optaflexx,
Cattle
In feed 
 200 mg/head/d
Paylcan()
Swine
In feed 
 5-20 ppm
Terbutaline (Brethine(K)
Dog
Small
PO), SC
0.625-1.25 mg/dog
q8 12l
Medium PO, SC
1.25-2.5 mg/dog
q8-12h
Large
PO), SC:
2.5-5 mg/dog q8-12h
Cat
PO, SC
0.312-0.625 mg/cat
q12h
Horse
P(), IV or
0.02-0.06 mg/kg q12h
inhalation
Zilpaterol (Zilmax)
Cattle
In feed
60 mg/head/d
Adrenergic antagonists
α-Adrenergic antagonists
Atipamezole (Antisedan()
Dog
IV
35 100 mcg/kg
Reversal of
actions of
v:-agonists,
e.g..
detomidine,
mcdetomidinc,
xylazine, and 
amitraz
490
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
IM
50 200 mcg/kg
Cat
IV
50-150 mcg/kg
IM
150-400 mcg/kg
Horse
IV
50-100 mcg/kg
Phenoxybenzamine
Dog
P()
0.25-0.5 mg/kg q8h
(Dibenzyline(k)
Cat
PO
2.5 7.5 mg/cat
q1 2-24h
Horse
IV
0.71 mg/kg in 500 ml.
saline q6 8h
Phentolarmine (Regitine?)
Dog, cat
IV
0.02 0.1 mg/kg
Prazosin (Minipress&)
Dog
PO
1 mg/15 kg q8-24h
Cat
PO
0.25-0.5 mg/cat
q12 24h
IV
0.03 mg/kg
Tolazoline (Tolazinek)
Horse,
IV slowly
2-4 mg/kg
Reversal of
ruminants
actions of
α-agonists,
t.g..
 detomidine,
romifidine, and
xylazine
Yohimbing (Yobine,
Dog, cat IV slowly
0.1 mg/kg
Reversal of
Antagonil@)
actions of
α-agonists,
c.g..
 detomidine,
medetomidine,
romifidine,
xylazine, and
 amitraz
SC, IM
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
Horse
IV slowly
0.075 mg/kg
β-Adrenergic antagonists
Atcnolol (Tenormin&)
Dog
PO
0.25-1 mg/kg
(q12-24h
Cat
PO
0.5 3 mg/kg q12 24h
Ferrct
PO
6.25 mg (total dose)
q24h
Esmolol
Dog
IV
50-500 mcg/kg bolus
(Brevibloc, Miniblock)
q5min
Cat
IV slowly
200 500 mcg/kg over
1 min; followed by
25-200 mcg/kg/min
Propranolol
Dog
IV
20-60 mcg/kg over
(InderaK)
5 10 min q8h
PO
0.2-1 mg/kg q8h
Cat
P()
0.4-1.2 mg/kg q8-12h
IV slowly
20 mcg/kg q8 12h
Horse
PO
0.38-0.78 mg/kg q8h
IV
0.05-0.16 mg/kg q12h
Ferret
PO, SC
0.5 2 mg/kg q12 24lh
(continued)
491
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Cholinergic agonists
Bethancchol (Myotonachol)
Dog
PO
5-25 mg/dog q8h
Cat
PO
1.25-7.5 mg/cat q8h
Horse
SC
0.025 0.1 mg/kg
q6-h
PO
0.3-0.4 mg/kg q6-8h
Cattle
IV
0.7 mg/kg
Pilocarpine (E-Pilo&)
Dog, cat
Topical
1 drop (2%) into eye
Glaucoma
q8-12h
Anticholinesterase agents
Demecariurm (Humorsol)
Dog. cat
Topical
1 drop (0.125 or
Claucoma,
0.25%) into eye
miosis
q12 48h
Edrophonium (Tensilon,
Doy
IV
0.11-0.22 mg/kg
Enlon)
Cat
IV
0).1 mg/kg
Neostigmine (Prostigminc)
Dog
P()
0.5-1 mg/kg q6-12h
IM
0.04 0.05 mg/kg q6h
Cat
IM
0.04 mg/kg q6h
Horse
SC.
0.004-0.02 mg/kg
Cattle
SC.
0.02 mg/kg
Swine
IM
0.03 mg/kg
Sheep.
SC.
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
1e06
Pyridostigmine (Mestinon)
Dog
[PO
0.5 3 mg/kg q8 12h
Antimyasthenic.
IV
0.02-0.04 mg/kg q2h
 Antimyasthenic
Cal
P()
1-3 mg/kg q8-12h
Echothiophate iodide.
Dog, cat
Topical
1 drop (0.03-0.06%)
Glaucoma,
(Phospholine lodideR)
into eye q12-48h
miosis
induction
Cholinergic antagonists
Aminopentamide (Centine)
Dog
IM, SC,
0.01-0.03 mg/kg
P()
q8 12l
SC, IM
0.1-0.4 mg q8-12h
Antiemctic
Cat
IM, SC
0.02 mg/kg q8-12h
SC., IM
0.1-0.4 Img q8-12h
Anliemelic:
Atropine (Atrojeci, ctc.)
Dog, cat
IM, SC
0.022-0.044 mg/kg
Horse
IV, IM, SC:
0.01-0.1 mg/kg
All
IV, SC, IM 0.2-0.5 mg/kg
Anti-ChE
species
toxicity
Callle
IM
0.06-0.12 mg/kg
 Preanesthelic
Swine
IV, IM, SC
0.01-0.1 mg/kg
Preanesthetic
Sheep,
IM
0.15-0.3 mg/kg
Prcanesthetic
goat
Glycopyrrolate (RobinulK-V)
Dog
IV, IM 
5-10 mcg/kg q8-12h
SC:
10 20 mcg/kg
Cat
IV, IM 
5-10 mcg/kg
SC.
10-20 mcg/kg
Horse
IV
5-10 mcg/kg
492
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Propantheline (Pro-Banthine(K)
Dog
PO
0.25 0.5 mg/kg
q8-12h
Cat
P()
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
q1224h
Horse
IV
0.04 mg/kg
Scopolamine (Hyoscine()
Dog, cat
IM, SC
0.03 mg/kg q6h
Antiemetic.
Tropicamide (Mydriacy(@)
Dog, cat
1 drop (0.5 1%) into
Mydriatic,
cach cye; repeat in 5
 ophthalmic
min
exarmination
Neuromuscular btocking drugs
Atracurium (Tracrium,
Do
IV
0.22-0.5 mg/kg, then
Sitrac?)
0.1-0.25 mg/kg
Cat
IV
0.22 mg/kg
IV
0.11 mg/kg
Intraoperative
osop
Horse
IV
0.055 mg/kg
Intraoperative
asop
Pancuronium (Pavulon()
IDog, cal
IV
0.044-0.11 mg/kg
Swine
IV
0.11 mg/kg
Horse
IV
0.04-0.066 mg/kg
Succinylcholine (Anectineis,
Dog
IV
0.07-0.22 mg/kg
ctc.)
Cat
IV
0.06-0.11 mg/kg
Horse
IV, IM 
0.088-0.11 mg/kg
Vecuronium (Norcurone)
Dog
IV
10-20 incg/kg
Cat
IV
20 40 mcg/kg
Chapter 3: Autacoids and Their Antagonists
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
H antihistamines
Celirizine (Zyrtec@)
Dog
P()
510 mg
Cat
PO
1 mg/kg
IV, IM, IP0) 4 8 mg/kg q8h
Cat
IV, IM, PO 12.5 mg/cat q8h
Diphenhydramine (Benadry|(6)
Dog
IV, IM, SC, 2 5 mg/kg q6 8h
PO
(.at
IM, SC.,
2-5 rmg/kg q6-8l1
PO
Horsc
IV, IM
0.25-1 mg/kg
Cattle
IM, IV
0.5-1ing/kg
[exofenadine (Allegra)
Dog
PO
2-5 mg/kg q24h
Hydroxyzine (Ataraxi,
Dog
PO
0.5 2.2 mg/kg q6 8h
Vistaril?)
Cat
PO
5-10 mg (total dosc)
Horse
P), IM
0.5-1 mg/kg q12h
Loratadine (Claritin@)
Dog
Small
P()
 5 mg q1 2h
Mcdium PO
10 mg q24h
l.arge
PO
10 mg q12h
(continued)
493
(Continued)
Name of drugs
 Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Meclizine (Antivert(?, etc.]
Dog
PO
<10 kg: 12.5 mg
q24h
P()
≥10 kg: 25 mg q24h
Cat
PO
4 mg/kg q24h 
Pyrilamine (Histallk, elc.)
Dog
P()
12.5-25 ng q6h
IM
25 125 mg
Horse
IV, IM, SC
1 mg/kg
Calle
IM
0.5-1.5 g
Sheep
IM
0.25 0.5 g
Swine
IM
0.25-0.5 g
Tripelennamine (Azaron,
Dog, cat
PO, IM
1 mg/kg q12h
[tono)
Horse
IV, IM 
1 mg/kg
Cattle
IV, IM 
1 mg/kg
Swine
IV. IM 
1 mg/kg
H, antihistamines
Cimetidine (Tagameti)
103 800
IV, IM, SC, 5-15 mg/kg q6-12h
PO
IV, PO
2.5-5 mg/kg q12h
Renal failure
patients
Horsc
IV
6.6 mg/kg q4-6h
P()
8-10 mg/kg q8h
Cattle
PO
8 16 mg/kg q8h
Swine
In feed 
300 mg/swinc q12h
Famotidine (Pepcid&)
Dog. cat
IV, SC, PO 0.5-1.1 mg/kg
q12-24h
Horse
[O
3.3 mg/kg q8h
IV
0.35 mg/kg q12h
Nizatidine (AxidC)
Dog, cat
PO
2.5 5 mg/kg q24h
Horse
PO
6.6 mg/kg q8h
Ranitidline (Zantac)
Dog
IV, PO)
2 4 mg/kg q8 12h
Cat
IV
2.5 mg/kg q12h 
PO
3.5 mg/kg q12h
Horse!
P()
6.6 mg/kg q8h
IV, IM
1.5-2 mg/kg q6-8h
Histamine refease inhibitors
Cromolyn sodiurm
[og, cat
Topical
1 drop [4%) q4-6h
(Cromolom, ctc.)
Horsc
Inhalation 
80-300 mg
5-HT agonists and antagonists
Cisapride
[Dog
P()
0.1-0.5 ing/kg q8-12h
Cat
PO
2.5-5 mg q8-12h
Horse
IM
0.1 mg/kg 
P()
0.5-0.8 ing/kg for 7d
Cyproheptadine (Periactin)
Dog
P()
0.3-2 mg/kg q12h
Cat
[PO
1 4 mg/cat q12 24h
Horse
PO
0.5 mg/kg q12h
Metoclopramide (Reglank,
Dog. cat
IM, SC,
0.2 0.4 mg/kg q6 8h
Clopra&)
PO
IV
1-2 mg/kg/d, CRI
IV
0.02 mg/kg/h, CRI
Horsc
IV
0.1-0.25 mg/kg/h, CRI
PO)
0.6 mg/kg q4h
494
(Continued)
Chapter 4: Drugs Acting on the Central Nervous System
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Anticonvuisants
Barbiturates
Pentobarbital (Nembutal,
Dog, cat
IV
25 30 mg/kg
General
ctc.)
anesthesia
IV
5-15 ing/kg to effect
Stalus
epilepticus
IV
1-4 mg/kg
Sedative
Horse
IV
2-20 mg/kg
Phenobarbital (Solfoton, ctc.) Dog
IV slowly
10-20 mg/kg
Status
epilepticus
IV, IM, PO) 2.2 5 mg/kg q12h
Seizure
disorders
PO
2-8 mg/kg q12h
Sedative
Cat
IV slowly
10-20 mg/kg
Status
cpilepticus
PO
1-2 mg/kg q12h
Horse
IV slowly
5-25 mg/kg in 30 rml.
saline
Cattle
PO
5g for 3-4 wk,off
Hydrocarbon
3-4 wk, ther1 repeat
insectic:ide
for 3-4 more wk
toxicity
Primidone (Neurosyn?, etc.)
Dog
PO
8 22 mg/kg q8 12h
Cat
PO
11-22 mg/kg q8h
Horse
PO
1-2 g/foal q6-12h
Benzodiazepines
Clonazepam (Klonopins,
Dog
PO
0.5-1.5 mg/kg q8-12h
Clonax@)
IV
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
Injectable not
available in
United States
PO
0.05-0.25 mg/kg
Anxiolytic
q1224h
Cat
PO
0.5-1.5 mg/kg q8-12h
PO
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
Anxiolytic
q1224h
Diazepam
Dog
IV slowly
0.3-0.5 mg/kg; rcpeat
Status
(Valium,Diastat)
prn
epilepticus
0.6-0.8 mg/kg rectally Status
epilepticus
PO
1 2 mg/kg q8h
Anticonvulsant
IV slowly
0.1-0.5 mg/kg
Preanesthetic
P()
0.25 mg/kg q1 2h
Urethral
hyperreflexia
Cat
IV
0.05-0.15 mg/kg
Appetite
(naximum 5 mg) prn
stimulant
P()
1 2 mg q12 24h
Appetite
stimulant
PO
1.25-7.5 mg q12-24h Urethral
hyperreflexia
(continued)
495
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Horse
IV slowly
0.03 0.5 mg/kg:
repcat in 30 min prm
Cattle,
IV slowly
0.02-0.08 mg/kg
sheep,
1e08
Midazolam (Versed,
Dog, cat
IV, IM
0.1 0.25 mg/kg
Zolamid&)
cpilepticus
IV
0.1-0.3 ing/kg/h, CRI
Horse
IV, IM
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
Miscellaneous anticonvulsants
Gabapentin (Neurontin&)
Dog, cat
PO)
10-30 mg/kg q8h
Levetiracctan (Keppra)
Dog
PO
7-24 mg/kg q8h
Felbamatc (Felbatol)
Dog
PO
15-65 mg/kg q8h
Zonisamide (Zonegran)
Dog
PO
5-10 mg/kg q12h
Phenytoin (Phenytek(k)
Dog
P()
20 35 mg/kg q8l
IV
10 mg/kg
Antiarrhythmic
Cat
P)
2-3 mg/kg q24h
Horse
IV
5-10 mg/kg
Convulsing
foals
IV, IM, PO 1-5 mg/kg for
Imaintenance 4h
PO
10-22 mg/kg q12h
Digoxin-
induccd
arrhythrmias
Potassium bromide
[Dog. cat
P()
15-30 mg/kg q12h
Sodium bromide
Dog
PO
20-60 mg/kg q24h
Valproic acid (Depakene()
Dog
PO
60-200 mg/kg q8h
Cat
PO
60 mg/kg q8h
Benzodiazepine antagonist
Flumazenil (Romazicon()
Dog. cat
IV
10-20 mcg/kg
CNS stimulants
Doxapram (Dopram-V?)
Dog
IV
5 10 mg/kg
SC, IV
1-5 mg
Neonates
IV
5-10 mg/kg
SC, IV
1-5 mg
Neonates
Horse
IV
0.5 1 mg/kg at 5 min
Not over
intervals
2 mg/kg in
foals
Cattle
IV
5 10 mg/kg
Swine
IV
5-10 mg/kg
Phenothiazine derivatives
Acepromazine (Aceprojectoc,
Dog
IV
0.025 0.2 mg/kg:
Restraint,
PromAco)
sw t-. wnx
sedative
IM, SC
0.1-0.25 mg/kg:
Restraint,
Buewnwxew
sedative
PO
0.55-2.2 mg/kg q8h
 Restraint,
sedative
Cat
IV
0.05 0.10 mg/kg;
maximum 1 mg
PO
1.1-2.2 mg/kg q8h
Horse
IM
0.03-0.066 mg/kg
496
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
IV
0.033 0.055 mg/kg
followcd by
0.055-0.066 mg/kg
butorphanol
IV
0.04 mg/kg followed
by 0.6 mg/kg
meperidine
Cattle
IV
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
IM
0.03-0.1 mg/kg
Swine
IV, IM, SC.
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Sheep,
IM
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
1eot
Chlorpromazine (Thorazine)
Dog
IM, SC
0.5 mg/kg q6-8h
Cat
IM, SC
0.5 mg/kg q6-8h
(attle
IV
0.22 1.0 mg/kg
IM
1.0-4.4 mg/kg
Swine
IV
0.55-3.3 mg/kg
IM
2 4 mg/kg
Shccp,
IV
0.55-4.4 mg/kg
goat
IM
2.2-6.6 mg/kg
Prochlorperazine
Dog
IM
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
(Compazine, etc.)
q812h
PO
1 mg/kg q12h 
Cat
IM
0.13 mg/kg q12h
PO
0.5 mg/kg q12h
Promethazine (Plhenergan()
Dog. cal
IV, IM, PC) 0.2-0.4 mg/kg q6-8l
(maximum 1 mg/kg)
Trimeprazine (Panectyl)
Dog, cat
P()
0.5 2 mg/kg q12h
(&-Adrenergic agonists
Dctomidine (Dormoscdang)
Horse
IV, IM
20-40 mcg/kg
Catlle
IV, IM 
30-60 mcg/kg
Medetomidine (Domitor@)
Do%
IV
7-20 mcg/kg
IM, SC:
10 40 mcg/kg
1e.3
IV
10-30 mcg/kg
IM, SC
30-80 mcg
Romifidine (Sedivct)
Horsc
IV
40-120 mcg/kg
Xylazine (Kompun, ctc.)
Dog
IV
1.1 mg/kg
Sedativc
IM, SC
1.1-2.2 mg/kg
Sedlative
IM
0.1 1 mg/kg
Emetic.
Cat
IM
1.1 mg/kg
Sedative
IM, IV
0.44 mg/kg
[metic
IV
0.05 0.1 mg prn
Analgesic.
Horsc
IV
0.2-1.1 mg/kg
IM
2.2 mg/kg
Cattle
IV
0.05-0.15 mg/kg
IM
8y/3w1 220-010
Opioids
Opioid agonists
Alfentanil (Alfenta(, Rapifen)
Dog
IV
2-5 mcg/kg
Analgesic,
preanesthetic
(corntintrerd)
497
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Fentanyl (Sublimaze()
Log
IV, IM, SC
20 40) mcg/kg q2h
Analgesic.
IV, IM, SC
10 mcg/kg (with
Prcanesthetic
acepromazine or
diazepam)
Cat
IV
2-5 mcg/kg/h
Analgesic
Horse
IV
10 incg/kg.
Aralgesic:
Small
IV
5 10 mcg/kg
Analgesic.
ruminants
Hydromorphone
Dog
IV, IM, SC 0.1-0.2 mg/kg prn
(Dilaudid-HP), ctc.)
Cal
IV, IM 
0.02-0.1 mg/kg q6-8h
IV
0.01-0.03 mg/kg/h,
CRI
Methadone (Dolophinel, etc.）Dog
IV
0.1 mg/kg prn
IM
0.11-0.55 mg/kg prn
Cal
IV, IM
0.1-0.5 mg/kg q4-5h
Morphine
Dog
IV, IM, SC 0.05-0.1 mg/kg q2-3
Analgesic,
inirl (or prrl
sedative
IV
0.1 0.5 mg/kg/h, CRI
Analgesic,
sedative
IM, SC:
0.2-0.6 rmg/kg q4h
(Orthopedic:
pain
IM, SC
0.1-0.25 mg/kg q4-6h Pulmonary
edema
Cat
IV, IM, SC
0.1 0.5 mg/kg q3 4h
Analgesic,
sedative
IM, SC.
0.1-0.2 mg/kg q4h
Orthopedic
pain
IM, SC
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q6-8h
Pulmonary
edema
Horse.
IV, IM
0.2 0.6 mg/kg
Swine
IM
0.2-0.9 mg/kg
Sheep,
IM
Up to 10 mg total
goat
dose:
(Oxymorphone (Numorphan?) Dog
IV, IM
0.02 0.1 mg/kg
Sedative
(maximum 3 mg) prn
IM, SC
0.025-0.05 mg/kg
Prcanesthetic
IV, IM, SC:
0.1-0.2 img/kg q2-6h1
Aralgesic:
(60 mg maximuim
(osop
(.iat
IV, IM, SC:
0.02-0.1 mg/kg q2-6h Analgesic:
Horse
IM
0.02 0.03 mg/kg
Suientanil (Sufenta)
Dog, cat
IV
2-5 mcg/kg titrated (o
effect
Tramadol (Ultram)
Dog
PO
1 4 mg/kg q8 12h
Cat
PO
4 mg/kg q1 2h
Opioid partial agonists
Butorphanol (Torbutrol&, etc.) Dog
PO
0.5 1.1 mg/kg q6 12h Antitussive
IV
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Analgesic
IM, SC
0.1-0.4 mg/kg
Analgesic:
IV, IM, SC: 0.2 0.6 mg/kg
Antiermetic.
498
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Cat
IV
0.05 0.2 mg/kg
Analgesic.
IM, SC
0.1-0.3 mg/kg 
Analgesic
Horse
IV, IM
0.01-0.1 mg/kg
Analgesic
Cattle
IV
20-30 rmg
Preanesthetic:
Opioid agonist-antagonist drugs
Buprenorphine (Buprenex(k)
IV, IM, SC 5-30 mcg/kg (q4-8h
Analgesic
C.at
IV, IM, SC
5 10 mcg/kg q4 8h
Analgesic.
Horse
IV
4-6 mcg/kg
Analgesic
Nalbuphine (Nubain()
Dog
IV, IM, SC
0.5 2 mg/kg ql 6h
Analgesic.
prn
Cal
IV, IM, SC
0.5-1.5 mg/kg
Analgesic:
Opioid antagonists.
Dog
IV, IM, SC 0.04 mg/kg prn
Cal
IV, IM, SC 0.05-0.1 mg/kg prn
Horse
IV
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
Naltrexone (ReVia?)
Dog
P()
1 4 mg/kg q1224h
Cat
PO
25 50 mg/cat q24h
Chapter 5: Behavior Modifying Drugs
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Anxiotytics
Alprazolam (Xanax)
80(1
P(）
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q12h
or prn
Cat
PO
0.125-0.25 mg/kg
q12h
Chlordiazepoxide (Librium?),
Dog
PO
2.5-5 mg q12-24h
Mitran(&:)
Cal
PC)
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24h
Dog
PO
0.5-1 mg/kg q8h
Lpilepsy.
Gen-XeneK)
reiractory
Cat
PO
0.2-0.5 mg/kg
Anxiety,
q12-24h
compulsive
behlaviors
Diazepam (Valium@)
Dog
IV slowly
0.3-0.5 mg/kg; repeal Stalus
[rr1
epilepticus
0.6-0.8 mg/kg rcctally
Status
epilepticus
P()
1-2 mg/kg q8h
Anticonvulsant
IV slowly
0.1-0.5 mg/kg
Prcanesthctic
PO
0.25 mg/kg q12h
Urethral
hyperreflexia
C.at
IV
0.05 0.15 mg/kg
Appetite
(maximum 5 mg) prn 
stimulant
P()
1-2 mg q12-24h
Appelilte
stimulant
PO
1.25-7.5 mg q12-24h Urethral
hyperreflexia
Horse
IV slowly
0.03-0.5 mg/kg;
Sedative
repcat in 30 min prn
(cortintrerd)
499
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Cattle
IV slowly
0.02 0.08 mg/kg
Sedative
Shcep,
IV slowly
0.02-0.08 mg/kg
Sedativc
Lorazepam (Ativan)
Dog, cat
PO
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
(3xazepam (Serax@)
Dog
P()
0.2-1 mg/kg q12-24h
Cat
PO
0.2 0.5 mg/kg
q12-24h
Antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants
Amitriptyline (Elavil)
Dog
PO
2.2-4.4 mg/kg
q12-24h
e)
P)
0.5 2.2 mg/kg
q12-24h 
Clomipramine (Clomicalm()
Dog
PO
1-3 mg/kg q12-24h
(not over 200 mg/d)
(at
P()
0.5 mg/kg q24h
Doxepin (Sinequan&)
Dog
PO
1-5 mg/kg q12h
(rnaximum150 mg
q12h)
Cat
PO
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24h.
Up to 25-50 mg/cal
lnipranine (Tofranil, ctc.)
Dog
PO
2.2-4.4 mg/kg
q12-24h
PO
5-20 mg q12h
Urinary
incontinence
Cal
P()
2.5-5 mg q12h
Horse
PO
100-600 mg q12h for Improves
2wk
cjaculation
IM, IV
0.55 mg/kg q8h
PO
1.5 mg/kg q8h
 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluvoxamine il.uvox?:,
Dog
PO
0.5-2 mg/kg q12h
Fevarin()
Cat
PO
0.25-0.5 mg/kg q24h
Fluoxetine (Reconcile&, etce.)
Dug
P()
1 mg/kg q12 24h
Cat
PO
().5-1 mg/kg q24h
Paroxetine (PaxilK)
Dog
PO
1 2 mg/kg q12 24h
Cat
PO
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24h
Sertraline (Zoloftk, Serlain(k)
Dog
PO
1 4 mg/kg q12 24h
for ≥8 wk
Cal
P()
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24h
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Selegiline (Anipryl)
Doy
PO
0.5-1 mg/kg q24h
Novel antidepressants
Buspirone (BuSpar)
Dog, cat
PO
0.5-1 mg/kg q8-12h
Hormones (Progestins)
Medroxyprogesterone acelate
Dog
IM, SC.
10 mg/kg
One dose lasts
(Provera&,Amen)
30d
Cat 
SC
10-20 mg/kg
500
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Megestrol acetate (Ovaban(%)
Dog
PO
1.1 4.4 mg/kg q24h
for 2 wk, then 0.5-1.1
mg/kg q24h ior 2 wk
Cat
PO
2 mg/kg/d for 5d, then
1 mg/kg/d for 5d, then
0.5 mg/kg/d ior 5d
Chapter 6: Anesthetics
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Inhalant anesthetics
Desflurane (Suprane(K)
Dog
Inhalation
MAC 7.2%
Cat
Inhalation
MAC 9.79%
Isoflurane (Aerrane, ctc.)
Dog, cat
Inhalation
 5% for induction
Inhalation
1.5-2.5%for
maintenance
Sevoflurane (SevoFlo?,
Dog
Inhalation
MAC 2.36%
Ultanek)
Cat
Inhalation
MAC 2.58%
Injectable anesthetics
Ultrashort-acting barbiturates
Methohexital (Brevital)
Dog, cat
IV
11 mg/kg. 1/2 thc
dose rapidly and then
titrale to effec!
IV
5.5-6.6 mg/kg.
If prcanesthetic
10-30% is given
posn seM
rapidly IV and then
the remainder titrated
to cffect
Thiopental (Pentothal?)
Dog
IV
10-26 mg/kg
Cat
IV
5-10 mg/kg
Horse
IV
6-12 mg/kg
Cattle
IV
8-15 mg/kg
Swine
IV
5.5-11 mg/kg
Sheep
IV
10 15 mg/kg
Goat
IV
20-22 mg/kg
Short-acting barbiturates
Pentobarbital (Nenbutal,
Dog. cat
IV
25-30 mg/kg (to
etc.)
ellect)
Cattlc
IV
30 mg/kg (to ciicct)
Swine
IV
30 mg/kg ito ctfect)
Sheep,
IV
20-30 mg/kg (to
1e08
cffect)
Cyclohexylamines
Ketamine (Ketasetk, Vetalar,
Dog
IV
10 mg/kg
ctc.)
(+ Diazepam
0.5 mg/kg)
Cat
IM
22 44 mg/kg
IV
2.2-4.4 mg/kg (with
atropine)
(cortintrerd)
501
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Cattle
IV
2 mg/kg, premedicate
with atropinc and
xylazine
Horse
IV
2 mg/kg, premedicate
with xylazinc
{1 mg/kg IV or
2 mg/kg IM)
Swine
IM
11-22 mg/kg
premedicate with
alropine and
acepromazine
Shcep
IM
22 mg/kg.
premedicate with
atropine (0.22 mg/kg)
and accpromazinc
(0.55 mg/kg)
Goat
IM
11 mg/kg,
premedicated with
atropine 0.4 mg/kg.
followecd by xylazine
0.22 mg/kg
Tiletamine + Zolazepam
Dog, cat
IM, SC
3 10 mg/kg
{Telazol(c)
IV
2-5 mg/kg
Horse
IV
1.65-2.2 mg/kg
premedicated with
xylazine (1.1 mg/kg
IV)
Miscellaneous injectable anesthetics
Propofol (Rapinove,
Dog, cat
IV
6-8 mg/kg to effecl
Propofloc)
IV
0.51-0.81 mg/kg/min
CRI for maintenance
[tomidate (Amidate)
Dog. cat
IV
0.5-3 mg/kg
IV
0.5-1 mg/kg when
given with copioids
Central muscle relaxants
Guaifenesin (Guailaxin)
Dug
IV
44  88 mg/kg
Horse
IV
55 110 mg/kg
Cattle
IV
55-110 mg/kg
Swine
IV
44-88 mg/kg
e0
IV
66 132 mg/kg
Dog
PO
15-20 mg/kg, q8h
Intervertebral
disk disease
Methocarbamol (RobaxinV)
Dog, cat
PO
Initially, 132 mg/kg/d,
Moderate
divided q8h-q12h,
conditions
then 61-132 mg/kg.
divided q8h-q12h. If
no response in 5 d,
discontinue
IV
50-220 mg/kg
Strychnine.
pyrethroid
toxicosis,
tetanus; repcat
1/2 dose prn
502
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Horse
PO
30 75 mg/kg
IV slowly
15-25 mg/kg. may
repeat up to 4 times/d
ii needed
Cattle
IV
110 mg/kg
CNS
hyperactivity
Chapter 7: Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Nonselective cap inhibitors
Aspirin 
Dog
PO
10-25 mg/kg q8-12h
Analgesic
PO
20-40 mg/kg q12h
Anti-
inflammatory
PO
5-10 mg/kg q24-48h
Antiplatelet
Cat
PO
10 mg/kg q48h
Analgesic
P()
10 20 mg/kg q48h
Anti-
inflammatory
Horsc
PO
10-100 mg/kg q12h
C.attle.
P()
50-100 mg/kg q12h
Swine
PO
10 mg/kg q4 6h
Carproien (Rimadyl)
Dog
P()
4.4 mg/kg q24h
Osteoarthritis
IV, SC, PO 2.2 mg/kg q12h
Cat
SC
4 mg/kg q24h
Ostcoarthritis
IV, SC
1 2 mg/kg q12h
Analgesic.
Horsc
IV
0.7 mg/kg q24h
PO
10 15 mg/kg q24h
Horse
PO, IV
10-15 mg/kg q24h
 Flunixin meglumine
Dog
IV
0.5 1 mg/kg q12h
(Banamine&, ctc.)
IV, IM
0.5-1 mg/kg q24h for Analgesic
1-3d
Cat
SC
0.25 mg/kg q24h
Analgesic
Horse
PO. IM, IV 0.25-1.1 mg/kg
(8-24h
Cattle
IV slowly
1.1-2.2 mg/kg
Ketoprofen Ketofen
Dog
IV, IM, SC.,
1.1-2 mg/kg q24h for
OruvailK)
PO
5d
Cat
1-2 mg/kg SC q24h
for 3d
Horse
IV, IM
2.2 mg/kg
Mecloienanic: acid
Dog
PO
1.1 2.2 mg/kg q24h
(Mcclomen()
for 5-7d
Horse
PO
2.2 mg/kg q12h for 
5 7d
Meloxican (Metacarmk)
D0g
PO), SC., IV 0.2 mg/kg once; then
0.1 mg/kg q24h
Cat
PO, SC, IV 0.2 mg/kg once; then
0.1 mg/kg q24h × 3d;
then 0.05 mg/kg x
10d: then 0.025
mg/kg q24-48h
(continued)
503
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Naproxen (Naprosyn(k)
Horse
PO, IV 
10 mg/kg q12 24h
Phcnylbutazone
Dog
IV
10-15 mg/kg q12h; not
over 4 doses
PO
10 22 mg/kg q8h;
maximum 800 mg/d
Horse
P(), IV
2-4,4 ing/kg q12h
Cattle
PO
4 8 mg/kg
IV
2-5mg/kg
Swine
PO
4-8 mg/kg
IV
2 5 mg/kg
Cap-2 selective inhibitors
Deracoxib (Deramaxx)
Dog
PO
3-4 mg/kg q24h for
less than 7d
PO
1-2 mg/kg q24h
Chronic use
Firocoxik (Previcox)
Dog
PO
5 mg/kg q24h 
Dual inhibitors
Tepoxalin (Zubrin%)
Dog
PO
20 mg/kg q24h for 1
time; then 10 mg/kg
q24h
Miscellaneous anti-inflammatory drugs
PO
125-300 mg/kg (10%
soln) q24h
SC.
80 mg/kg 3 times/wk
IV
1 g/kg of 10% soln
CNS trauma
over 45 min q6-8h
IV slowly
1.1 g/kg q12h, diluted
Shock therapy
1:4 in 0.9% saline
Cat
IV slowly
550 mg/kg q12h,
Shock therapy
diluted 1:4 in 0.9%
saline
Horsc
IV
0.1-1 g/kg (diluted in
5% dextrose); q8-12h
Hyaluronate sodium (legcnd?, Dog
IV
20 mg/kg prn
(OA
Horse
Topical
punoie sui oz1-07
inflamed tendon 
Intraarticular 20-50 mg
Clycosaminoglycan
Dog, cat
IM
1.1-4.8 mg/kg q 4d
(Cilyco-Flex)
Horse
IM
500 mg q4d
Chapter 8: Drugs Acting on the Cardiovascular System
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Drugs for chronic CHF management
Diuretics
Chlorothiazide (Diuril)
Dog, cat
PO
20-40 mg/kg q12h
Furosemide (lasix, etc.)
Dog
PO
1-3 mg/kg q8-24h; use
smallest effective dose
Cat
IP0)
12 mg/kg q8 12h; use
smallest effective dose
504
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Hydrochlorothiazide (Oretic,
Dog
P()
2-4 mg/kg q12l
Ezide()
Cat
PO
1-2 mg/kg q12h
Spironolactone (Aldactone)
Dog, cat
PO
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24h
ACE inhibitors
Benazepril (Lotensin@)
Dog, cal
P()
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
q1224h
Captopril (Capoten)
Dog
PO
0.5 2.0 mg/kg q8 12h
(low initial dose)
Cat
PO
0.5-1.25 mg/kg
q1224h
Enalapril (Enacard)
Dog
P()
0.5 mg/kg q12-24h
Cat
P()
0.25 0.5 mg/kg
q 1 2-24h
Fosinopril (MonoprilK)
Dog
PO
0.25-0.5 mg/kg q24h
Imidapril (Tanatril&)
Dog
P)
0.25 mg/kg q24h
Lisinopril (PrinivilS, etc.)
Dog
P()
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
q1224h
Cat
PO)
0.25-0.5 mg/kg q24h
Ramipril (Altacc()
Dog
PO
0.125-0.25 mg/kg
(q24h
Other vasodilators
Amlodipine (Norvasc()
Dog
PO
0.05 (initial) to 0.3
(-0.5) mg/kg q12-24h
Cat
P()
0.3125-0.625 mg/cal
q12-24h
Hydralazine (Apresoline]
Dog
PO
0.5 2 mg/kg q12h (to
1 mg/kg initial)
Cat
PO
2.5 (up to 10) mg/cat
q12h
Isosorbide dinitrate (Isorbid@,
Dog
PO
0.5-2 mg/kg q8-12h
etc.)
Isosorbide mononitrate
Dog
P()
0.25 2 mg/kg q12h
(Monoker(&)
Nitroglycerin (2%) (Nitro]@)
Dog
Topical
0.5-4 cm cutaneously
q4 6h
Cat 
Topical
0.5-1 cm cutaneously
q4-6h
Positive inotropic agents
Digoxin iCardoxin
Dog
PO
5-8 mcg/kg q12h:
Lanoxing, eltc.)
<22 kg
Iecrease by 10% for
elixir.
Maximum: 0.5 mg/d
or 0.375 mg/d ior
Doberman Pinchers
Dog
PO
3-5 mcg/kg q12h.
≥22 kg
Decrease by 10% for
elixir.
Maximum: 0.5 mg/d
0or 0.375 mg/d ior
Doberman Pinchers 
Cat
PO
7 mcg/kg q48h
(continued)
505
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Pimobendan (Vetmedin:,
801
P()
0.1-0.3 mg/kg q12h,
Acard)
start low; give at lcast
1h before feeding
Cat
PO
1.25 mg/cat q12h
Drugs for diastolic dysfunction
Atenolol (Tenormin&)
Dog
PO
0.2 1 mg/kg q12 24h
Cat
PO
6.25-12.5 mg/cat
q12-24h
Diltiazem (Cardizem(,
Dog
PO
0.5-2 mg/kg q8h
Tiazac(W)
Cal
P()
1.5-2.5 mg/kg q8h;
sustained release:
dliltiazem (Dilacor),
30 mg/cal q12-24h;
or Cardizetn,
10 mg/kg q24h
Antiarrhythmic drugs
Class I antiarrhythmics
Flecainide (Tambocor)
Dog
PO
1-5 mg/kg q8-12h
Lidocaine
Dog
IV
Initial boluscs of
2 mg/kg sluwly, up to
8 mg/kg; or rapid
infusion at
0.8 mg/kg/min; if
effective, then
25-80 mcg/kg/min
C.RI
IV
initial bolus of
0.25-0.5 (or 1.0)
mg/kg slowly; can
repeat boluses of
0.15-0.25 mg/kg,up
to total of 4 mg/kg: if
effective, 10 40
mcg/kg/min CRI
Mexiletine (Mexitil)
800
P()
4 10 mg/kg q8h
Phenytoin (Phenytek&)
80
IV slowly
10 mg/kg
PO
30 50 mg/kg q8h
Cat
Do not use
Procainamide (Procanbid,
Log
IV
6 1(0) (up to 20) mg/kg
etc.)
ovcr 5-10 min;
10-50 mcg/kg/inir
CRI
IM
6-20 (up to 30) mg/kg
q4-6h
PO
10 25 mg/kg q6 8h
Cat
IV slowly
1-2 mg/kg or
10-20mcg/kg/min
(.RI
IM, PO
7.5-20 mg/kg q6-8h
Propafenone (Rythmol SR)
Dog
PO
3-4 mg/kg q8h
Quinidine
Dog
IM
6-20 mg/kg q6h
(loading dose,
14-2() mg/kg)
506
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
PO
6 16 mg/kg q6h;
sustained action
preparations: 8-20
mg/kg q8h
Cat
IM,P(}
6-16 mg/kg q8lh
Class Il antiarrhythmics 
Atenolol (Tenormin)
Dog
PO
0.2-1.0 mg/kg
(12-24l
Cat
P()
6.25 12.5 mg/cat
q12-24h
Carvedilol (Coreg&)
Dog
IV slowly
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q24h,
up to 0.2-0.3 mg/kg
q12h or as tolerated
Esnolol (Breviblox)
Dog. cal
IV
0.1-0.5 mg/kg cover 1
min (loading dose),
followed by infusion
0f 0.025-0.2
mg/kg/min
Metoprolol (Lopressor)
Dog
P()
initial dose, 0.1-0.2
mg/kg q8 12h, up to
1 mg/kg q8-12h; or
as tolerated
Propranolol (Inderal)
Dog
IV slowly
0.02 mg/kg (up to)
maximun of 0.1
mg/kg;
PO
0.1-0.2 mg/kg q8h,
up to 1 mg/kg q8h
Cat
IV slowly
0.02 mg/kg (up to
maximum of 0.1
mg/kg!
P()
2.5 10 mg/cat q8 12h
Class Ill antiarrhythmics
Amiodarone
(Cordarone, Pacerone()
Dog
IV slowly
 3 5 mg/kg slowly
(over 10-20 min), can
repcat but do not over
10 mg/kg/h
PO
10 mg/kg q12h for
7d, then 8 mg/kg
q24l
Sotalol (Betapace()
Dog
PO
1-3.5 (-5) mg/kg
q12h
Cat
PO
2-4 mg/kg q12h
 Class IV antiarrhythmics
Diltiazem (Cardizem&)
Dog. cat
P()
0.5 mg/kg (up to 2+
mg/kgi q8h or loadling
dose: 0.5 mg/kg
followed by 0.25
mg/kg q1h to a total
0f 1.5 (2.0) mg/kg cor
conversion
(continued)
507
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
IV
0.15 0.25 mg/kg over
 Supraventricular
2-3 min, can repcat
tachvcardia
cvery 15 min until
coriversion or
maximum 0.75 mg/kg;
CRI: 5-15 mg/kg/h
Verapamil (Calan, VerelanC) Dog
PO
0.5-2 mg/kg q8h
IV slowly
0.02-0.05 mg/kg, can
repeat q5min up to a
total of 0.2 mg/kg
Cal
P()
0.5-1 mg/kg q8h
IV slowly
0.025 mg/kg, can
repcat q5imin up to a
total oi 0.2 mg/kg
Anticholinergics
Atropine
Dog. cat
PO
0.04 mg/kg q6-8h
IV, IM, SC 0.02-0.04 mg/kg
Glycopyrrolate (Robinul)
Dog. cat
IV, IM 
0.005-0.01 mg/kg
SC
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
Hyoscyamine (Levsin@)
Dog
PO
3-6 mcg/kg q8h
Propantheline (Pro-Banthinei)
Dog
PO
3.73-7.5 mg q8-12h
β-Adrenergic agonists 
Isoproterenol (suprel)
Dog, cat
IV
0.045 0.09
mcg/kg/min CRI
Terbutaline (BrethineK)
Dog
[PO
2.5 5 mg/dog q8 12h
Cat
PO
1.25 mg/cat q12h
Other agents
Adenosine (Adenocard)
Dog
IV rapidly
up to12 mg
Digoxin
Dog <22PO
5-8 mcg/kg q12h;
kg
Decrease by 10% for
elixir. Maximum: 0.5
mg/d or 0.375 mg/d
for Doberman
Pinchers
Dog ≥22 PO
3 5 mcg/kg q12h.
kg
Decrcasc by 10% for
elixir. Maxinum: 0.5
mg/d or 0.375 mg/d
for Dobcrman
Pinchers
Cat
PO
7 mcg/kg q48h
Edrophoniun (Tensilon
Dog, cat
IV
0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg
Enlon&)
 Phenylephrine
Dog. cat
IV
4 10 mcg/kg
(Nco-Synephrine()
Drugs used to treat hypertension
ACE inhibitors
Benazepril (Lotensin()
Dog. cat
PO
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
q24-12h
508
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Captopril (Capoten()
Dog
PO
0.5 2.0 mg/kg q8 12h
Cat
PO
0.5-1.25 mg/kg
q1 2-24h
[nalapril (Enacard(S)
Dog
PO
0.5 mg/kg q24-12h
Cat
P()
0.25-0.5 mg/kg q24l
Ramipril (Altace)
Dog
P()
0.125-0.25 mg/kg
q24h
Calcium channel blocker
Amlodipine (Norvasc)
Dog
PO
0.1-0.3 mg/kg
q24-12h
Cat
PO
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
q24-1 2h
β-Adrenergic antagonists
Atenolol (Tenormink)
Dog
PO
0.2-1.0 mg/kg
q12-24h (start low)
C.at
P()
6.25 12.5 mg/cat
q1224h
Propranolol (lndera&)
[0g
P()
0.1-1.0 mg/kg q8h
(start low)
Cat
PO
2.5-10 mg/cat q8-12h
α-Adrenergic antagonists
Phenoxybenzamine
Dog
P()
0.2 1.5 mg/kg q8 12h
(Dibenzyline)
Cat
PO
0.2-0.5 mg/kg q12h
Prazosin (Minipress(K)
Dog
PO
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
q8-12h
Diuretics
Furosemide (Lasix, etc.)
Dog
PO
0.5-3 mg/kg q8-24h
Cat
PO
0.5-2 mg/kg q12-24h
Hydrochlorothiazide
Dog
Od
1-4 mg/kg q12-24h
(Naquasone, etc.)
je)
PO
1-2 mg/kg q12-24h
Drugs for hypertensive crisis
Accpromazinc (Aceproject),
Dog, cat
IV
0.05-0.1 mg/kg fup to
etc.)
3 mg total)
[smolol (Brevibloc)
Dog,cat
IV
50-75 mcg/kg/min
CRI
Hydralazine iApresoline)
Dog, cat
PO)
0.5-2.0 mg/kg q12h
(titrate up to effect)
IV, IM
0.2 mg/kg. repcat q2h
prn
Labctolol (Normodyne),
Dog, cat
IV
0.25 mg/kg over 2
Trandate)
min, repcat up to total
dose 0f 3.75 mg/kg,
followed by CRl of 25
mcg/kg/min
Nitroprusside (Nitropress)
Dog, cat
IV
0.5-1 mcg/kg/min CRI
(initial) to 5-15
tncg/kg/min 
(continued)
509
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Phentolarmine (Regitine(K)
Dog, cat
IV
0.02 0.1 mg/kg,
followcd by CRI to
effec!
Propranolol (lnderal()
Dog. cat
IV slowly
0.02 mg/kg (initial) to
0.1 ing/kg
Drugs used for thromboembolic disease
Antiplatelet therapy
Aspirin
H0(]
P()
0.5 mg/kg q12h
Cat
PO
81 mg/cat 2-3
times/wk or 5 mg/cat
q72h
Clopidogrel (Plavix)
Dog
PO
2-4 mg/kg q24h
Cat
PO
18.75 mg/cat q24h
Anticoagulant therapy
Daltcparin ([ragming)
Dog. cat
SC
150 IU/kg q4-12h
Enoxaparin (Lovenox()
Dog, cat
SC
1.5 mg/kg q6-12h
Sodium heparin
Dog, cat
IV
200 250 IU/kg,
followed by 200-300
IU/kg SC. q6-8h ior
2 4d or prn
Thrombolytic therapy
Rt-PA (Recombinant tissue
80(1
IV
1 mg/kg q1h for 10
plasminogen activator!
doses
IV
0.25-1 mg/kg/h (up to
a total oi 1-i0 mg/kg)
Streptokinase (Streptase)
Dog. cat
IV slowly
90.000 IU over 20-30
min, then al 45,000
IU/h for 3h or more
Chapter 9: Diuretics
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Loop (high-ceiling) diuretics
Bumetanide (Bunex)
Dog, cat
IV
0.02-0.1 mg/kg
(q8-24h
Ethacrynic: acid (Edecrin)
[Dog, cat
IV, IM
0.2-0.4 mg/kg q4-12l1
Furosemide (Lasix, ete.)
Dog
IV, IM, SC, 2-6 mg/kg q8-12h
P()
Cat
IV, IM, SC, 1-4 mg/kg q12h
PO
Horse
IV, IM
1 3 mg/kg q12h
Cattle
IV
2.2-4.4 mg/kg q12h
Thiazide diuretics
(benzothiadiazides)
Chlorothiazide (Diuril<k
Dog, cat
P()
20 40 mg/kg q12h
Diurigen()
Cattle
PO
4-8 mg/kg q12-24h
Hydrochlorothiazide (Oretic,
Dog
PO
2-4 mg/kg q12h
Esidrix(&))
Cal
PO)
1-2 mg/kg q12h
Horse.
P()
250 mg/450 kg q24h
Cattle
IV, IM 
125-250 mg q12-24h
510
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Trichlormethiazide
Horse
PO
200 mg/450 kg q24h
Osnotic diuretics
Dimethyl sulfoxide (IDomoso)Dog
IV slowly
1 g/kg of 10% soln
ovcr 45 min q6-8h
Horse
IV slowly
1 g/kg (20% solution),
for 30 min q24h for
pf.
Glycerol
Dog, cat
PO
1-1.5 g/kg initially,
then 500 mg/kg q8h
Horse
IV slowly
0.5-2 g/kg for brain
cdema
 Mannitol
Dog, cat
IV sluowly
1 3 g/kg, over
Glaucoma,
30-60 min
acute
IV slowly
0.25-0.5 g/kg over
 Renal failure
15 60 min q4 6h1
IV slowly
1-3 g/kg over
Cerebral edema
30-60 min
IV slowly
1 g/kg 0ver 30 min;
Diuretice,
repeat q4 6h
osmotic
Horsc
IV
0.25-2.0 g/kg (20%
solution)
Cattle
IV
1 3 g/kg
Swine
IV
1-3 g/kg
Sheep
IV
1-3g/kg
Goat
IV
1 3 g/kg
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Acetazolamide (Diamox, etc.) Dog
P()
5 10 mg/kg q8 12h
Cat
PO
7 mg/kg q8h
Horsc
PO
2.2 mg/kg q12h-6h
Cattle
IV, IM, SC.
6 8 mg/kg
Swine
3y/Bw 8-9 Ds 'WI 'A!
P()
2.2 5 mg/kg q8 12h
Cat
PO
1 mg/kg q8-12h
Horsc
PO
1 mg/kg q12h
[thoxzolamide (Cardrase)
Dog, cat
PO
4-5 mg/kg q8-12h 
Mcthazolamide (GlaucTabs)
Dog, cat
PO
2-6 mg/kg q8-12h
Horse
PO
2-4 mg/kg (8-12h
Potassium-sparing diuretics
Spironolactone (Aldactone()
Dog, cat
PO
1-4 mg/kg q12h
 Triamterene (Dyrenium(?i)
Dog, cat
PO)
1 2 mg/kg q12h
Methylxanthines
Aminophylline (Truphylline?)
Dog
IV slowly
2 5 mg/kg over
30-60 min q12h
IM, PO
10-11 mg/kg q6-8h
Cat
IV slowly
2 5 mg/kg over
30-60 min q12h
P()
5-6 mg/kg q12h
Horse
P()
5 10 mg/kg q12h
Theophylline (lixophyllin()
Dog
IV, IM, PO 5-10 mg/kg q6-8h
Cat
IV, IM, P() 4-4.5 mg/kg q8-12h
Horse
PO
1 mg/kg q6h
[continued)
511
(Continued)
Chapter 10: Respiratory Pharmacology
Name of drugs
 Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Theophylline sustained action 
Dog
PO
20-30 mg/kg q12h
(Slo-bidg, Theo-IDur(@)
(Cat
P()
20-25 mg/kg q12h
Acidifying salts
Ammonium chloride
Dog
PO
100 mg/kg q12h
(Uroeze), etc.)
Cal
P()
800 mg/cat
Removal of hypersecretions
N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyste),
Dog, cat
IV
50 mg/h for 30-60
Mucosil-10@)
min q1 2h by
nebulization
Expectorants
Guaifenesin (Guailaxin)
Horse
PO
3 mg/kg
 Potassium lodide (Pima
Dog
P)
40 mg/kg q8h
syrup(k, ssKk)
Cat
PO
20 mg/kg q12-24h
Horsc
PO
2-20 g q24h
Leukotriene receptor antagonists
Zafirlukast (Accolate(k)
Cat
PO
1-2 mg/kg q12-24h
Serotonin receptor inhibitors
Cyproheptadine (Ciplactin: 
Dog, cat
PO
0.25 1.1 mg/kg
Antihistamine
etc.)
q-12h
C.at
P()
2 mg q8-24h
Appetite
stimulant
PO
2 mg q8-12h
Asthma
Horse
P()
0.5 mg/kg q12h
Immunosuppressants
Cyclosporine (Atopica)
Dog
PO
7.5-15 mg/kg
q12-24h
Cat
PO
7.5 mg/kg q12h
Cough suppression
(odeine
Dog, cat
PO), SC
1 4 mg/kg q6 12h
Analgesic.
PO
1-2 mg/kg q6-12h
Antitussive
Hydrocodone (Hycodan&, etc.) Dog, cat 
P()
0.22 mg/kg q6 12h
Antitussive
Dextromethorphan
Dog, cat
PO
1-2 mg/kg q6-8h 
Antitussive
Bronchodilators
Theophylline (Elixophyllin@)
Dog
PO, IV, IM 5-10 mg/kg q6-8h
(at
PO), IV, IM 4-4.5 mg/kg q8-12h
Drug for pulmonary hypertension control
Sildenafil (Viagra)
80]
P()
0.5-1 mg/kg q24h
Chapter 11: Drugs Acting on the Gastrointestinal Tract
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Control of visceral pain
Buscopan
Horsc
IV
0.3 mg/kg
Control of colic
Butorphanol (Torbutrol)
Horse
IV
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
alonc or in
cotmkbinaticon with
xylazine
512
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Hlunixin meglumine
Horse
IV or IM
1.1 mg/kg q24lh ior
(ontrol of colic:
(Banamine)
up to 5d
Morphine
Dog
IM, SC
0.5 2 mg/kg q6h
Cat
IM, SC
0.05-0.02 mg/kg q6h
Horse
0.05-0.02 1ng/kg
Xylazine (Rompun(, elc.)
Horse
IV
1.1 mg/kg
Control of colic
IM
2.2 mg/kg
Control of colic
Appetite stimulants
Cyprohepladine (Cyheptine's,
Cat
PO
2 mg/cat q12-24h
etc..)
Diazepam (Valium()
Cat
PC), IV, IM 0.2 mg/kg q12-24h
Oxazepam (Serax)
Cat
PO
2.5 mg/kg q24h
Glucocorticoids
Prednisone (Meticorten, etc.) Cat
PO
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
Only ~10%of
 prednisone is
converled to
 prednisolone in
cats for action
Prednisolone (Prelone, ctc.)
Cat
PO
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
Anti-obesity drugs
Dirlotapide (Slentrol@)
Dog
P()
0.05 mg/kg q24h
Gastric secretory inhibitors
H2 antikistannines
Famoxidine (Pepcid, etc.)
Dog. cal
P()
0.5-1.0 mg/kg q24l
Ranitidine (Zantac)
Dog, cat
PO, IV
2 mg/kg q12h
 Proton pump inhibitor
Omeprazole (Prilosec)
Dog, cat
P()
0.7 mg/kg q24h
Gastrogardc)
horsc
PO
4 mg/kg. q24h, for
Gastric ulcer
4 wk rollowed by
2 mg/kg, q24h, for
≥4 wk
Mucosal cytoprotectants
Misoprostol (Cytotec)
Dog
PO
3 5 mcg/kg q8h
Sucralfate (Carafate&)
8001
P()
0.5-1 g q8h
Cat
PO
0.25 0.5 g q12h
Prokinetic drugs
Cisapride
Dog, cal
P()
0.1-0.5 mg/kg q8h
[rythromycin (L-Mycine, eltc.)
Dog, cal
P()
0.5-1.0 mg/kg q8h
Metoclopramide (Reglan:
Dog, cat
PO
0.2-0.4 mg/kg q8h
30 min beforc
Clopra()
meals
Ranitidine (Zantac)
Cat
P()
1-2 mg/kg q12h
Digestants
Pancrelipase (Viokase-V)
Dog
In feed 
1-1.5 tsp
(2.8-3.2 g)/meal
Cat
In ieed
0.5 tsp (1.4 g)/ meal
(continued)
513
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Drugs to treat hepatic encephalopathy
Lactulosc (Cephulac(),
Dog
PO
5-15 mL (3.3-10 g)
Chronulac()
q8h to induce soit
stools
Cat
PO
0.5 mL (0.33 g)/kg
q12h
Metronidazole ([lagyl, ctc.)
Dog, cat
PO
10-20 mg/kg q12h
Emetics
Apomorphine HCl (Apokyn.
Dog
IV, IM
0.03 mg/kg
Apokinon&)
Xylazine (Rompun'S, elc.)
Dog
IM
0.6 mg/kg
Cat
IM
0.44 mg/kg
Antiemetics
Aminopentamide (Centrine)
Dog
IM, SC.,
0.01 0.03 mg q8 12h
PO
Cal
SC.,IM
0.1-0.4 mg
Chlorpromazine (Thorazineik)
Dog, cat
IM, IV, SC 0.5 mg/kg q8h
Diphenhydrarmine (BenadryK,
Dog, cat
PO
2 4 mg/kg q8h 12h
etc.)
Maropitant (Cerenia()
8001
SC:
1 mg/kg/d q24h
Metoclopramide (Reglanc),
Dog
PO, SC,IM 
0.2-0.4 mg/kg q8h
etc.)
IV slowly
1.1-2.2 ing/kg (over
Intractable
24h
vomiting
Cat
PO, SC,
0.2-0.4 mg/kg q8h
IM
IV slowly
1.1-2.2 mg/kg over
Intractable
24h
voniting
Ondansetron (Zoiran)
Dog
PO
0.1-1.0 mg/kg
q24h-q1 2h 
Cat
PO
0.22 mg/kg q8 12 h
Prochlorperazine
Dog. cat
IM
0.1 mg/kg q8h
(Compazine()
Laxative agents
Docusate sodium
Dog
PO
25-50 mg q24h-q12h
Cat
PO
25 mg q24h
Lactulose (Cephulac),
Dog, cat
PO
0.5 ml (0.33 g)/kg
Cholac()
q812h
Polyethylene glycol in
Dog
Castric:
20 rml.
Electrolyte solution
intubation(0.15 g)/kg-dosagc
may be repeated for
colonoscopy
Anti-diarrheal drugs
Bismuth Subsalilate
P()
3.5 mg/kg q8h
(Bismusa(K)
Diphenoxylate + Atropine
Do%
PO
0.05 mg/kg q8h
(Lomotilc)
Loperamide (Imodium)
Dog
PO
0.1 0.2 mg/kg q8 12h
Drugs for therapy of inflammatory bowel disease
Metronidazole (Flagyl&, etc.)
Dog, cat
P()
20 mg/kg q12h
514
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Olsalazine (Dipentum()
Dog
PO
10 20 mg/kg q8h
Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine()
80
P()
20-30 mg/kg q8-12h1
Tylosin (Tylan@)
Dog
PO
10 mg/kg q8h
Chapter 12: Endocrine Pharmacology
Nane of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Growth hormones
Somatotropin
Dog
SC
0.1 IU (0.05 mg)/kg
Sometribove (Posilack)
Bovine
SC
500 mg/2 wk
Gonadotropins
GnRH
Deslorelin (Ovuplant(k)
Horse
SC
implant in the neck
(2.1 mg)
Gonadorclin ([actrel)
Dog
IM
3op/85w 001-05
q24-48h
Cat
IM
25 mcg/cat once
Horse
SC
50 mcg 2.5h
For low libido
prebreeding
IM
40 mcg 6l
Induces
prebreeding 
ovulation
Cattle!
IM, IV
100 mcg/cow
Sheep,
IM
100 mcg/sheep
1eo8
Leuprolide (Lupronte,
Ferrel
100 mcg/month
Adrenocortical
EligardOC)
disease
Bird
375 mcg/month
Inhibits
ovulation
HCG
Dog
IM
500-1000 IU; repeat
 Luteinization of
in 48h
follicular cysts
IM
25 100 IU twice
Induces descent
weekly for 4-6 wk
 of inguinal 
testis
SC
500 IU twice weekly
Male
for 4 wk
hypogonadism
IM
22 IU/kg q24h ior 2d
soonpul
following FSH
ovulation
Cat
IM
100500IU
IM
250 IU, following FSH Induces
or aiter mating
(ovulation
Horse
IV
1,000 5,0001U
Cattle
IV
2,500-5,000 IU
IM
10,000 IU
Sheep,
IV, IM
250 1,000IU
goat
Swine
IM
200 IU
PG600然
PMSG (ECG) (PG600)
Swine
IM
400 IU
Sex steroids
Estrogens
Dicthylstilbestrol (Apstil<, ctc.) Dog, cat
PO
0.1-1 mg q24h
(continted)
515
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Estradiol cypionate (ECPO:,
80(1
IM
0.02-0.04 mg/kg (lotal
Depo-Estradiol)
dosc not over 1 mg)
Cat
IM
0.25 mg/cat
Horse
IM
4 8 mcg/kg q2d
Urinary
incontinence
Cattle
IM
4-20 mg
Zeranol (Ralgro)
Cattle
SC
Ear implant (72 mg)
Sheep
SC.
Ear implant (12 mg)
Anti-estrogens
Tamoxifen (Nolvadexi)
Dog
PO
10-20 mg q12
Progestins
Altrenogest (Regu-Matek,
Horse
PO
0.044 mg/kg q24h for Estrus
Matrix()
13d
 synchronization
PO)
0.044 mg/kg
Prevents
aggression
PO
0.044 mg/kg q24h
Pregnancy
Imaintenance
Swine
PO
15 mg/gilt for 14d 
Estrus
synchronization
Medroxyprogesterone
Dog, cat
IM
1.1-2.2 mg/kg q7d
(Provera, Ament)
IM, SC
11 mg/kg 3 timcs
Aggression
yearly
Megestrol (Oraban(&)
Dog
PO
2.2 mg/kg q24h ior
Contraceptive
32d
Cat
PO
2.5-5 mg/cat for 1 wk
Melengestrol (MGAK)
Cattle
In feed
0.25 0.5 mg/cattle/d
Progesterone (Depo-Provera,
[og, cat
IM
1.1-2.2 mg/kg q7d
Provera(C)
IM, SC
11 mg/kg 3 times
Aggression
yearly
Caltle
Implant
100-200 mg
Horse
IM
150 mg q24h
Suppresses
cstrus
300 mg q24h
Maintains
pregnancy
Androgens
Boldenone (Equipoise@)
Horsc
IM
1 mg/kg repcated at
3 wk intervals
[Danazol (Danocrine()
e)80(1
P()
5-10 mg/kg q12h
Stanozolol (Winstrol-v&)
Dog
PO
1-4 mg/dog q12h
IM
25-50 mg/dog/wk
Cat
PO
1 mg/cat q12h
IM
25 mg/cat/wk
Horse
IM
0.5 mg/kg, up to)
4 doses q1-2 wk
Testosterone aqueous
Horse
SC.
0.1 0.2 mg/kg q48h
Inadequate
for 2 wk
libido
Testosterone cypionate
Dog, cat
IM
1 2 mg/kg q2 4 wk
(Andro-Cypc)
Testosterone propionate
Dog, cat
IM
0.5-1 mg/kg
(Malogenk, Testex)
2 3 times/wk
(Synovex-H(k)
Cattle
IM
200-1,000 mg
Trenbolone (Synovex(R: )
Cattle
SC
Ear implant (20() mg)
516
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Anti-androgens
Finasteride (Proscar()
Dog
PO
0.5-5 mg/kg q24h
Uterine contractants
Cabergoline (Dostinex)
Dog
PO
5 mcg/kg q24h for
Estrus induction
5-10d
Dog, cal
SC.
1.7 mcg/kg q24h for
Abortiacient
6d
PO
5-15 mcg/kg q24h for Abortifacient
5d
Bromocriptine (Parlode|)
Dog
PO
10-100 mcg/kg
Horse
IM
5 mg q12h
Ergonovine (Ergotrate)
Dog
IM, PO
0.2 mg/kg oncc
Horse
IM
1-3 mg
Oxytocin
Do%
IM
5-20 IU/dog q30min
(at
IM
3 5 IU/cat
Horse
IV
2.5-5 IU/450 kg as
bolus q20min 
IV sluwly
80-100 IU in 500 ml.
saline
IM, IV
10-20 IU/450 kg
IV
1-3 IU/450kg
Milk let down
IV
0.5-10 IU/kg
parturition
Calttle
IM
20-60 IU
Swine
IM
20 50 IU
IV
5-10 IU
Sheep,
IM
10-20 IU
1e08
Prostaglandin F2α and analog
Cloprostenol (Estrumate)
Do%
Nol
1-5 mcg/kg q24h
specified
Horse
IM
100 mcg/horse
Cattle
IM
500 mcg/callle
Swine
IM
175 mcg
Sheep
IM
62.5-125 mcg
Goat
IM
62.5-125 mcg
Dinoprost tromethamine
Dog, cat
SC
0.1-0.25 mg/kg q24h
(Lutalyse()
Horse
IM
1 mg/45 kg
Cattle
IM
25 30 mg
Swinc
IM
5-25 mg
Sheep,
IM
2.5-20 ing
1e08
Corticosteroids
Glucocorticoids
Betamethasone (Betasone()
Dog, cat
P()
0.1 0.2 mg/kg q
12-24h
Horse.
IM or P()
0.02-0.1 mg/kg
Iritralesional 4 10 mg
Dexamethasone
Dog, cal
IV, IM, PO 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Anti-
q12-24h
inflammation
IV
2.2-4.4 mg/kg
Shock
(cortinued)
517
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Horse
IV, IM, PO
0.02 0.2 mg/kg q24
IV
0.5-2 mg/kg
Septic shock
IV
100 mg/450 kg q24h
us
for 5d
parturitiorl
Cattle
IV, IM 
1-2 mg/kg q4h 
Insect bites
IM
5-40 mg/cattle for
23d
20-25 mg + 25 mg
Abortion
PGI2α.
Swine
IV, IM
1-10 mg
Fludrocortisone
D0g
P()
0.2-0.8 mg/dog (0.02
(Florinef-Acetate)
mg/kg) q24h
Cat
PO
0.1 mg/cat q24h
Flumethasone (lucort(K)
Dog
IV, IM, SC, PO 0.0625-0.25 mg/dog
q24h
Cat
IV, IM, SC, PO 0.03-0.125 mg/cal
q24h
Horse
PO
2-8 mcg/kg
Hluoroprednisolone
Horse
IM
5 20 mg/450 kg
{lsoflupredone)
Predef2X
Cattlc
IM
10-20 mg
Swine
IM
5 mg/140 kg
Hydrocortisone iCortefte,
Dog, cat PO
1 mg/kg q12h
Replaccment
Hydrocortone&, etc.)
(herapy,
PO
2.5 5 mg/kg q1 2h
Anti-inflammatory
Horse
IV drip
1-4 mg/kg
Calle
IV, SC:
100-600 mg in 1,000
For
ml of 10% dextrose
|hotosensitization
saline
Methylprecdnisolone
Dog
P()
0.22 0.44 mg/kg
(Medrolc)
q12-24h
 Methylprednisolone acetate Dog
IM
1 mg/kg q1-3 wk
(Depo-Medroe)
Cat
IM
10-20 mg q1-3 wk
Horse
IM
0.2 0.7 mg/kg
Methylprednisolone soxliun Dog, cat IV
30 img/kg, repeat at
succinate (Solu-MedroW)
15 mg/kg in 2 6h
Horsc
IV
30 mg/kg, then 5.4
CNS trauma
mg/kg/h ior 23h
Subconjunctival 20 mg up to 100 mg
Intraarticular
Prednisolone
Dog
IV, Im, PO
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24h 
Anti-inilammatory
initially then taper to
q48h
Cat
IV, IM, PO
2.2 mg/kg q12-24h
Anti-inflammatory
initially then taper to
(448h
Dog, cat IV, IM, PO
initially 2.2-6.6 mg/kg Immunosuppressive
then taper to 2-4
mg/kg q 48h
Horse
PO, IM
0.2-4.4 mg/kg
q12-24h
Cattle
IM, IV
0.2-1 mg/kg
IM, IV
1-4 mg/kg
Cerebral edema
518
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Prednisolone sodium
Dog, cat 
IV
15 30 mg/kg then
Shock
succinate
repcat in 4-6 h
IV
15-30 mg/kg then
CNS trauma
taper to 1-2 mg/kg
qi2h
Horse
IV
2-5 mg/kg
Septic shock
Swine
IM, IV
0.2 1 mg/kg
Prednisone
8001
IV, IM, PO)
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24l
Anti-inilainmatory
initially then taper to
q48h
Cal
IV, IM,PO
2.2 mg/kg q12-24h
Anti-inflammatory,
initially then taper to
only ~10% of
4atb
precnisone is
converted to
prednisolone in
cats for action
Dog, cat IV, IM, PO)
2.2-6.6 mg/kg then
Immunosuppressive
taper to 2 4 mg/kg
q48h
Triamcinolone
）80(1
P()
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24
Anti-inflammatory
(Aristocort)
then taper to q48h
Horse
IM
0.02-0.1 mg/kg
Intralesional
1-3 mg/site up to
1 mg total 
Subconjune-
1-2 mg
tival
Triamcinolone acetonide
Dog, cat
IM, SC
0.1-0.2 mg/kg repcat
(Vetalog()
in 710d
Intralesional
1 mg for every
centimeter of tumor
q2wk
Mineralocorticoids
Desoxycorticosterone
Dog, cat
IM, SC
2.2 mg/kg q25d
(Percorten-V(k)
Fludrocortisone
Dog
P()
0.015 0.02 mg/kg
(Florinef-Acetate(k)
q24h
Cat
PO
0.05-0.1 mg/cat q12h
Adrenal steroid inhibitors
Ketoconazole (Nizoralc)
Dog
PO
10-15 mg/kg q12h
Cat
PO
5-10 mg/kg q12h
Horse
PO
30 mg/kg q12 24h
Mitotane (lysodren)
0g
P()
25 mg/kg/d for
Hyperadrenocorticism
10 14d, then 25 50
mg/kg/wk
P()
50-75 mg/kg/d for
Adrenal tumor
10d, then 75 100
mg/kg/wk
Cal
P()
25-50 mg q24h
Sclegiline (Anipryl)
Dog
PO
1-2 mg/kg q24h
Might not work
Trilostane (Vetory/(&)
Dog
P()
2 10 mg/kg q24h
Horse
PO
0.4-1 mg/kg (total
dose 120-240 mgy
q24l1
(continued)
519
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Antidiabetic agents
Insulin (regular)
Dog, cat IM, SC
0.1-0.4 IU/kg q6-8h
Diabctic
ketoacidosis, mild
IV
0.5-1.01U/hor
Diabetic:
0.025-0.05 U/kg
ketoacidosis,
severe
IM
0.2 IU/kg once; then
Diabetic.
0.1 IU/kg hourly until ketoacidosis,
blood glucose is
severe
<250 mg/dl.
Horse
IM, SC
0.5 IU/kg
Insulin (NPH}
Dog
SC
0.5 1 1U0/kg q12 24h
Cat
SC
1-5 IU/cat q12h
Insulin (PZI VetK)
Dog
SC
0.5-1 1U/kg q12-24h
Long-acting
Cat
SC
1-5 IU/cat q12-24h
Horse
IM, SC
0.15 IU/kg
Insulin glargine (l.antus()
Dog
SC
0.25 IU/kg q12h
Lente insulin (Vctsulin)
Dog
SC
0.5-1.0 IU/kg
(q12-24h
1e3
SC
0.5 IU/kg q12 24h
Ultralerte insulin
Dog
SC.
0.5-1 IU/kg q12-24h
(to effect)
Cat
SC
1-5 IU/kg q12-24h 
(to eliecl)
Cattle
SC.
0.25 IU/kg q4 48h
Metiormin (CGlucophage, etc.) Cat
2 5 mg/kg q12
Sulfonylureas
Glimepiride (Amarylg)
Cat
PO
1 2 mg/cat q24h
Clipizide (GlucoroC)
Cat
In food 
2.5 5 mg/cat q8 12h
Clyburide (Micronase?)
Cat
PO)
0.2 mg/kg q24h
Thyroid hormones
Levothyroxine Ilevotabs,
Dog
PO
20 mcg/kg q24h
Soluxine(?, ete.)
Cat
PO
50-100 mcg/cat q24h
Horse
PO
10 mg in 70 mL syrup
q24h
Liothyronine (Cytomel)
Dog
PO
4-6 mcg/kg q8h
Cat
PO
4.4 mcg/kg q8-12h
Antithyroid agents
Methimazole (Tapazole, etc.) Dog 
P()
2.2 mg/kg q8-12h
Cat
PO
2.5 10 mg/cat q8 12h
Na'"
Cat
SC.
1-5 mCi
Anti-hypocalcenia agents
Calcium gluconale
Dog. cal
IV slowly
94-140 mg/kg
25 50 mg/kg q24h
All other
IV slowly
150-250 mg/kg
species
Calcitriol (Rocaltrol)
Dog, cal PO
1-3 ng/kg q12-24h
Dihydrotachystcrol (DHT,
Dog, cat PO
0.02-0.03 mg/kg
Hytakerol()
q24h, maintenance:
0.01 0.02 mg/kg
q24-48h
520
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Human recombinant erythropoietin
EPO (crythropoictin)
Dog, cat
SC
50-100 IU/kg 3
tines/wk
Chapter 15: Antimicrobial Drugs
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Sulfonamides
Sulfachlorpyridazine
Calves
IV
66 99 mg/kg for 1 5d
(Vetisulid)
Sulfadimethoxine (Albon,
Dog. cal
PO), IV, SC. 55 mg/kg initially,
etc.)
then 27.5 mg/kg q24h
Horsc
IV, PO
55 mg/kg initially,
then 27.5 mg/kg q24h
(attle
IV, PO)
55 rng/kg initially,
thcn 27.5 mg/kg q24h
for 5d
Sulfamethazine (Sulmct)
Dog, cat
PO
100 mg/kg once; then
50 mg/kg q12h
Sulfamethoxazole (Gantanol)
Dog, cat
PO
100 mg/kg once; then
50 mg/kg q12h
Sulfaquinoxaline
Chic:ken
icdw
0.04% for 2-3d, then
0.025% for 2d more
Turkey
idw
0.025% for 2-3d
Cattle
idw
0.015% for 3-5d
Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine(k)
Dog
PO
10-30 mg/kg q8-12h
Cat
PO
10-20 mg/kg q12-24h
 Sulfadiazine-trimethoprim
Dog
PO, IV
15-30 mg/kg q12h
(TribrissenS)
Cat
PO, SC
15 30 mg/kg
q1 2h-24h
Horse
P),IV
15-30 1mg/kg q12h
(attle
IM, IV
25 48 mg/kg q24h
Swine
IM
48 mg/kg q24h
Sulfamethoxazone-trimethoprim
Dog
PO, IV
15 30 rng/kg q12h
(Bactrim(k)
Cat
PO, SC
15-30 mg/kg
q1 2h-24h 
Horse:
PO), IV
15-30 mg/kg q12h
Cattlc
IM, IV
25-48 mg/kg q24h
Swine
IM
48 mg/kg q24h
Sultadimethoxine-ormctoprim
Dog
PO
55 mg/kg (combined
(Prinor)
drug) 1st day of
therapy, ther 27.5
mg/kg
Fluoroquinolones
Ciproiloxacin (Cipro)
Dog, cat
Po, IV
10-20 mg/kg q24h
Danofloxacin (A180)
Cattle
SC
6mg/kg
Difloxacin (DicuraC)
Dog
P()
5 10 mg/kg q24h
Enrofloxacin (Baytril)
Dog
IM, IV, PO) 2.5-20 mg/kg
(at
PO), IM
2.5 5 rmg/kg
Horsc
2.5-7.5 mg/kg q12h
Cattle
SC
2.5-5 mg/kg q24h for
3-5d
SC
7.5-12.5 mg/kg once
(continued)
521
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Marbofloxacin (Zeniquin&)
Dog, cat
PO
2.75 5.5 mg/kg q24
Orbifloxacin (Orbax)
e)80(1
P()
2.5-7.5 mg/kg
q12 24h
Horse
PO
2.5 -7.5 mg/kg q24h
Peniciffins
Natural penicillins
Penicillin G benzathine 
Dog, cat
IM
50,000 1U/kg q5d
Cattle
IM, SC
44,000-66,000 1U/kg
q2d
 Penicillin G potassium
Dog. cat
IV, IM
20,000-40,000 IU/kg
q6-8h
Horse
IV, IM 
10,000 50,000 IU/kg
49h
PO)
20,000 1U/kg q6h
Intrauterine 5,000,000 UI
Penicillin Gi procaine
Dug
IM
20,000 40,000 IU/kg
q12-24h
Cat
IM, SC
20,000 1U/kg q12-24h
Horse
IM
20,000-50,000 IU/kg
q812h
Cattle
IM, SC
44,000-66,000 IU/kg
q24h
Swine
IM
40,000 IU/kg q24h
Pernicillin Ci sodium
 801
IV, IM, SC:
20,000-40,000 IU/kg
Horse
IV, IM
10,000-50,000 IU/kg
9h
Penicillin V
Dog. cat
PO
5.5-11 mg/kg q6-8h
Horse
PO)
66,000 110,000 1U/kg
q8h
Penicillinase-resistant penicillins
Cloxacillin(Orbenine,
Dog, cat
PO
20-40 mg/kg q8h
Dry-Clox)
Methicillin (Staphcillin@)
Dug, cat
IV, IM
20 ing/kg q6l
Horse
IM
25 mg/kg q4-6h
Subconjunc-100 mg
[EA!]
Naicillin (Nafcillin&)
Dog, cat
IM
10 mg/kg q6h
Oxacillin (Oxacillin(%)
Dog, cat
PO), IM, IV 22-40 mg/kg q8h
Horse
IM, IV
25-50 mg/kg
Broad-spectrum penicillins 
Aminopenicillins
Amoxicillin (Amoxi-Tab
[Dog, cat
P()
10-22 mg/kg q12h
Biomax)
Horse
PO)
10 30 mg/kg q8h
Cattle
SC, IM
10 -15 mg/kg q24h
Amoxicillin + Clavulanic acid
Dog
P)
10 25 mg/kg
(Clavamox()
Cat
PO
10-20 mg/kg q8h
Horse
IV
15-25 mg/kg q6-8h
Ampicillin (Polyilex), etc.)
Dog, cat
IV, IM, SC
10-30 mg/kg q6-8h
P()
20 40 mg/kg q8l
Horse
IV, IM
10-50 mg/kg
522
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Cattle
IM, PO
4 10) mg/kg q24h
Swinc
SC, IM 
6-8 mg/kg q8h
Ampicillin + Sulbactam
Dog, cat
IV
50 mg/kg (combined)
(Unasyn(&)
q8h
Carboxypenicillins
Carbenicillin disodium
Dog, cat
IV, IM, SC
 40-50 mg/kg q6-8h
(Geocillin?)
 Carbenicillin indanyl sodium 
Dog. cat
PO
10-33 mg/kg q8h
(Geopen&)
Horse.
IV, IM 
4gh 8y/8u1 08-09
Sukconjune-200 mg
tival
Intrauterine 6 g
Ticarcillin (Ticar)
Dog, cat
IM, IV
33-50 mg/kg q4-6h
Horse
IV, IM 
40-80 mg/kg q8h
Intrauterine 6 g
Ticarcillin + Clavulanic acid
Dog
IV, IM 
40 110 mg/kg q6h.
(Timentin&)
Cat
IV
40-50 mg/kg q6-8h
Horse
IV
50 mg/kg q6-8h
Intrauterine 6 g
Ureidopenicillins
Piperacillin (Piperei)
Dog, cat
IV, IM, 5C 2
25-50 mg/kg q8-12h
Cephalosporins
Cefaclor (Ceclor)
Dog, cat
PO
10-20 mg/kg q8h
Cefadroxil (Cefa-Drops)
Dog
PO
22-35 mg/kg q12h
Cat
PO
22-35 mg/kg q24h
Horse
P()
22 mg/kg q12h
Foal
IV
25 mg/kg q4-6h
Cefazolin (Ancer, Kefzol)
Dog, cat
IV, IM, SC
10 30 mg/kg q4 8h
Cefepime (Maxipime)
Dog, cal
IV, IM
40-50 mg/kg q6-8h
Horse
IV
6 mg/kg q8h
Foal
IV
11 mg/kg q8h
Cefixime (Supran(k, Suprax()
Dog
PO
5-12.5 mg/kg
q1 2-24h
Cat
PO
5-12.5 mg/kg q12h
Cefoperazone (Cefobid)
Dog
IV, IM
22 mg/kg q12h for
7-14d
Horsc
IV, IM 
30-50 mg/kg q8-12h
Cefpodoxime (Vantin()
Dog, cat
PO
5 10 mg/kg q12h
Cefotaxime (Claforan&)
Dog, cal
IV, IM
20-80 ing/kg q6h
Horse
IV, IM 
471  gb ay/au 06 51
Cefoxitin (Mefoxin)
Dog, cat
IV, IM, SC
15 30 mg/kg q6 8h
Horsc
IM
30-40 mg/kg q6-8h
IV
20 mg/kg q6h
Ceftiofur (Naxce|)
Dog, cat
SC.
2.2-4.4 mg/kg
q1 2-24h
Horse
IV, IM
1 5 mg/kg q12 24h
Intrautcrine 1 g
Cattle
IM, SC
1.1-2.2 mg/kg q24h
Sheep,
1.1 2.2 mg/kg q24h
for 3-5d
(cortintrerd)
523
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Cephalexin (Keilex(k), etc.)
Log
PO
10 30 mg/kg q6 12h
Cat
PO
20-50 mg/kg q12h
Horse
P()
22-33 mg/kg q6h
Cephalothin (Keilin()
Dog, cat
IV, IM, SC
20-40 mg/kg q4-6h
Horse
IV, IM
20-40 mg/kg q6-8h
Subconjunc-100 mg
tival
Cephapirin (Cefadyl)
Dog. cat
IV, IM 
10-30 mg/kg q4-8h
Horse
IV. IM 
20-30 ng/kg q4-6h
Carbapenems
Imipenem (Primaxin)
Dog. cat
IV, IM, SC 
2.2-10 mg/kg q6-8h
Horse
IV slowly
15 mg/kg over 20 min
q4-6h
Meropenem (Merrem)
Dog
SC.
12 mg/kg q8h
IV
24 40 mg/kg q24h
Cat
SC
12 mg/kg q8h
IV
24-40 mg/kg q24h
Monobactams
Aztrconam (Azactam()
Log
IV, IM
12 25 mg/kg q8 12h
Aminoglycosides
Amikacin (Amiglyde-V)
IV, IM, SC: 15-30 rmg/kg q24h
Cat
IV, IM, SC
10 20 mg/kg q24h
Horse
IM, SC
13-20 mg/kg q24h
Intrauterine 2g
Foal
IV, IM 
1 10 mg/kg q12h
Cattle
IM
10-25 mg/kg q8-12h
Dihycdrostreptomycin
Dog, cat
IM
10-20 mg/kg q12h
Horse
IM, SC
11 mg/kg q12h
Gentamicin (Gentavet,
Dog
IV, IM, SC 
2-4 mg/kg q8-12h or
Gentocinc)
6 mg/kg q24h
Cat
IV, IM, SC
3 mg/kg q8li
Horse
IV, IM, SC
2-4 mg/kg q12h-6h
IV, IM, SC
6.6-8.8 mg/kg q24h
(attle
IM
4.4 6.6 mg/kg/d
Swine
idw
1.1 2.2 mg/kg/d
Kanamycin (Kantrimk)
e:)801
IV, IM, SC:
10 mg/kg q12h or 20
Amioral()
mg/kg q24h
Horsc
IV,IM
7.5 mg/kg q8h
Intrauterine 1 2 g
Neomycin (Neonix,
Dog. cat
PO
10-20 mg/kg q6-12h
Bioso|)
Horse
PO
1 g/horse q6h
PO
2 g/horse q12h
P()
0.5 g/ioal q6h
PO
1.5 g/horse q12h
Cattle
PO
10-20 mg/kg q12h
IM
6.6-19.8 mg/kg q24h
Swine
P()
7 12 mg/kg q12h
Sheep.
PO
0.75-1 g/d q8-12h
1P06
In feed
70 140 g/tor
Streplomycin
Dog, cat
IM
10-20 mg/kg q12h
Horse
IM, SC
11 mg/kg q12h
524
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Tetracyclines
Chlortetracycline
Dog, cat
PO
25 mg/kg q6-8h
(Aurcomycin)
C.attle
IV, IM
6-10 mg/kg
PO
10 20 mg/kg
Swine
IV, IM
6-10 mg/kg
PO)
10-20 ing/kg
Doxycycline (Doxyrobe()
Dog
IV, PO
5-10 mg/kg q12-24h
Ccat
IV, PO)
5ng/kg q12-24h
Horse
PO
3-10 mg/kg q12h
Minocycline (Minocin&)
Dog
P()
12.5 25 mg/kg q12h
IV
12.5 mg/kg q12h
Cat
PO
5-15 mg/kg q12h
Horse
P)
3 mg/kg q12h
Oxytetracycline (Teramycin&)
Dog, cal
PO
20 mg/kg q8h
IV
7.510 mg/kgq8h
Horse
IV
5-20 mg/kg q24h
Catle
IM
5-10 mg/kg q24h
IV
2.5-5 rmg/kg q24h
PO
10-20 mg/kg q12h
Swine,
IV, IM
6-11 mg/kg
sheep,
1e08
PO
10-20 mg/kg q6h
Tetracycline (Panmycin), ctc.) Dog, cat
PO
15-22 mg/kg q6-8h
IV, IM
4.4-11 mg/kg q8-12h
Horse
IV
6.6 11 mg/kg q12h
Cattle,
PO
11 mg/kg
sheep
Swine
PO)
22 mg/kg
Chloramphenicol group
(Amphenicols)
Chlorarnphenicol
Do%
IV, IM, PO 30-50 mg/kg q6-8h
(Chloromycetin()
Cat
IV, IM, PO 30-50 mg/cat q12h
Horsc
PO
25-50 mg/kg q6-8h
Foal
PO
4-10 mg/kg q6-8h
Horse
IV, IM
25 mg/kg q6 8h
Subconjunc-50-100 mg
[PA!
Florfenicol (Nuflor(k)
Dog
IM, SC
25-50 mg/kg q8h
Ciat
IM, SC:
25-50 ng/kg q12h
Cattle
IM
20 mg/kg q48h
Shcep,
IM
20 mg/kg/d for 2d
goal
Macrolides
Azithromycin (Zithromax)
Dog. cat
PO
5-10 mg/kg q24h for
3-5d
Horse
PO
10 mg/kg q24h ior 5d
followed by q48h
Clarithromycin (Biaxin,
Dog. cat
P()
5 10 mg/kg q12h
Adc|@)
Horsc
PO
7.5 mg/kg q12h
(continued)
525
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Erythromycin (Galimycink,
801
P()
10-20 mg/kg q8h
Ery-Tab()
PO
0.5-1 mg/kg q8h
Gl Prokinetic
Cat
PO
10 20 mg/kg q8h
Horsc
PO
25 mg/kg q12h
IV
0.1 mg/kg/ h
Gl Prokinetic
Cattle
IM
4 8 mg/kg q12 24h
Swine
IM
2.2-6.6 mg/kg q24h
Shecp
IM
2.2 mg/kg q24h
Tilmicosin (Micotil&)
Cattle
SC
10 mg/kg q72h
Sheep
5C.
10 mg/kg q72h
Not in lambs
15 kg
Tulathromycin (Draxxin@)
Cattle
SC:
2.5 mg/kg
Swine
IM
2.5 mg/kg
Tylosin (Tylan&, etc.)
Dog, cat
PO
10-40 mg/kg q12h
Horsc
IM
10 mg/kg q12h
Caule
IM, IV
5-10 mg/kg q24h
Nol to exceed
5d
Swine
IM
8.8-12.5 mg/kg q12h
Not to exceed
3d
Sheep,
IM
10 mg/kg
Not to exceed
1e08
5d
Clindamycin (Antirobe,
Dog. cat
IM, IV, SC, 5 11 mg/kg q12h
Clinsol)
PO
Lincomycin (Lincosin@)
Dog. cat
IV, IM, PO 15-25 mg/kg q12h
Swine
IM
11 mg/kg q24h for
3-7d
Miscellaneous antibacterial drugs
Aminocyclitols
Apramycin (Apralan(&)
Swine
idw
20-40) mg/kg q24h
Cattle
idw
20-40 mg/kg q24h
Spectinomycin (Adspeek)
Dog. cat
IM
5-12 mg/kg q1 2h 
PO
22 mg/kg q12h
Horse
IM
20 mg/kg q8h
Cattle
IM,
SC.
15-39.6 mg/kg/d
Swine
IM, PO)
10 mg/kg q12h 
Metronidazole (Flagyl)
Dog, cat
PO
10-15 mg/kg q8-12h
Horse
PO, IV
10-25 mg/kg q6h
Rifampin (RiFadin)
IV, IM, PO 1
10-20 mg/kg q8-12h
(.al
IV, IM, PO) 1
10-20 mg/kg q24h
Horse
PO
10 20 mg/kg q24h
3-5 mg/kg q12h with
erythroinyc:in
Tianulin (Denagard(&)
Swine
idw
7.7 mg/kg q24h ior
5d
idw
23.1 mg/kg q24h for
Haemophilus
5d
pneumonia
Vancomycin (Vancocine)
Dog. cat
IV slowly
15 mg/kg over 30-60
imin q6
Dog
PO
10-20 mg/kg q6h for
5-7d
Horse
IV, PO
20-40 mg/kg q12h-6h
526
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
 Polymixins
Polymyxin B (Aerosporin)
Dog, cat
IM
2 mg/kg q24h
Horse
PO
5,000-10,000 IU/kg
q6h
Polymixin E (Colistin()
Horse
P()
5,000-10,000 IU/kg
q6h
Nintrofurans
Furazolidone (Topazone()
Dog, cal
P()
2.2-4 mg/kg q12h for
710d
Horse
PO
4 mg/kg q8h
Nitrofurantoin (Furadantin)
Dog, cat
PO
4 mg/kg q8h
Horsc
PO
10 mg/kg q24h
IM
3mg/kg q12h
Nitrofurazone (NF7. Pulier)
Dog
PO
4 mg/kg q8-12h x
Coccidia
5 7d
Novobiocins
Novobiocin 1  Tetracycline
Dog
PO
22 mg/kg of cach
(Albaplex&)
antibiotic q12h
Antifungal agents
Amphotericin B (Amphocin<,
Dog
IV slowly
0.1-0.25 mg/kg q48h, Cumulative
Fungizone()
3 times/wk
dose: 8-12
mg/kg.
Cat
IV slowly
0.25-0.5 mg/kg q48h.
Cumulative
3 times/wk
dose: 4-8
mg/kg
Horse
0.05 mg/kg q48h for
1month
Azoles
Clotrimazole (1%) (Lotrimin,
Dog, cat
Intranasal
50-60 ml per side
Mycelex(K:)
over 1h via indwelling
catheter
Horse
Intrauterine 500 mg q24h for 1
wk
Fluconazole (Diflucan)
Dog
PO
2.5-15 mg/kg
q1 2-24h
C.at
P()
50-100 mg/cat
q1 2-24h
Horse
PO
4 mg/kg q24h
Itraconazole (Sporanox()
Dog
PO
5-10 mg/kg q12-24h
Cat
PO)
5-10 mg/kg q12 or 20
mg/kg q24h
Horse
PO
3 mg/kg q12h for up
to 2 months
Ketoconazole (Nizorale)
PO)
10-15 mg/kg q12h
Cat
PO)
5 10 mg/kg q8 12h
Horse
PO
30 mg/kg q12-24h
Flucytosine (5-FC(@,
Dog, cat
P()
50 mg/kg q8h or 75
Ancoban&)
mg/kg q12h combined
with Amphotericin B
(continued)
527
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Griseofulvin (microsize)
80(1
P()
50 mg/kg q24h for
(Fulcin(c)
42-56d (maximum
dose: 110-132
mg/kg/d in divided
doses)
Cat
PO
50-120 mg/kg divided
daily
Horse
PO
10 g/450 kg q24h for
2 wk. then 5 g q24h
ior 7 wk
Swine
PO
20 mg/kg q24h for 6
wk
Griscofulvin (ultramicrosize)
Dog
PO
5-10 mg/kg q24h ior
42d
Cat
P()
10 15 mg/kg q12l
Cattle
PO
10-20 mg/kg q24h for
1-2 wk
Nystatin (Natacyn)
Dog
PO
50,000-150,000 IU
q8h1
Cat
PO
100,000 IU q6h
Horse
Intrauterine 250,000-1,000,000 IU
Terbinafine (Lamisil)
Dog, cat 
PO
30-40 mg/kg q24h
PO
3-10 mg/kg q12h for
Dermatophytosis
28d
PO
3-10 mg/kg x 42-84d Onychomycosis
Antiviral agents
Acyclovir (Zoviraxik,
Cal
10-25 mg/kg q12h
Ciclovira?)
PO
200 mg q6h
PO
1.25-4 mg/kg
q12-24h
Cat
P()
3 mg/kg q24h
Horse
IV
5 mg/kg q4h
Equine-2
influenza
Zidovudine (AZT) (Rctrovirk))
Cat
SC
10 mg/kg q12h for
『IV infcctions
21d
PO
5 20 mg/kg q8h
HIV infections
PO
10-20 mg/kg q12h for FelV
42d
Chapter 16: Antiparasitic Drugs
Name of drugs
 Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Nematocides
Benzimidazoles (BZDs)
Albendazole (Valbazen?,
Dog, cat
PO
25-50 mg/kg q12h for
Albena)
35d
Horse
PO
25-50 mg/kg for 2-5d
PO
4-8 mg/kg for 1
Echinococeus
rmonth
Cattle
PO
7.5-15 mg/kg
Swine
PO
5-10 mg/kg
Sheep,
P()
7.5 15 mg/kg
1e08
528
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Febantel (Rintalk)
Dog, cat
PO
10 mg/kg q24 for 3d
Fenbendazole
Dog, cat
PO
50 mg/kg/d for 3d
(Panacur, Safe-Guard()
Horse.
PO
5mg/kg
P()
10 mg/kg
Parascaris
cquorum
PO
50 mg/kg/d for 3-5d
Verminous
arleritis
PO
50 mg/kg
Strongyloides
westeri
PO
50 mg/kg/d for 5d
Onchocerca
Cattle
PO
5 10 mg/kg
Swinc
PO
5-10 mg/kg for 3d
Sheep,
PO
5 mg/kg for 3d
1e08
(Oxfendazole (Synanthic)
Horse
PO
10) mg/kg
Cattlc
PO
4.5 mg/kg
IR
4.5 mg/kg
Swine
PO
3 4.5 mg/kg
Shccp
PO
5 mg/kg
Goat
PO
7.5 mg/kg
COxibendazole (Anthelcide
Horsc
PO
10-15 mg/kg
E(QC)
Cattle
PO)
10-20 mg/kg
Swine
PO
15 mg/kg
Shccp
PO
10-20 mg/kg
Nicotine-like nematocides
Levamisole (Levasole,
Calttle
P()
5.5-11 mg/kg
Tramisol)
SC
3.3-8 mg/kg
Topical
9mg/kg
Swine
PO
8 mg/kg
Shecp,
PO
8mg/kg
12:08
 Pyrantel panoate (Nemex(,
Dog
etc.) (Strongid-T(C)
<2.5 kg
PO
10 mg/kg
>2.5 kg
PO
5 mg/kg
Cat
PO
20 mg/kg
Horsc
PO
6.6 mg/kg
Pyrantel tartrate (Strongid-C)
Horse
In feed
2.6 mg/kg q24h
(Banminth()
Swinc
In fecd
22 mg/kg
Shcep,
In feed
25 mg/kg
1e08
Morantel (Runatel)
Cattle
In ieed
8.8-9.7 mg/kg
Sheep,
In feerd 
10 mg/kg
goat
Macrocylic lactones
Doramectin (Dectomax,
Dog
SC.
600 mcg/kg qlwk
Demodicosis
Dectomax Pour-On(K)
Cat
SC
200 mcg/kg
Cattle
SC, IM
200 mcg/kg
Topical 
500 mcg/kg
Swinc
IM
300 mcg/kg
(cortinued)
529
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Eprinomectin (Eprinex()
Cattle
Topical
1 mL (5 mg/10 kg
Ivermcctin (lvomec心)
Dog
SC. PO
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
May not be safe
Cat
5C
0.4 mg/kg
Aelurostrongylus
abstrustrs
Horse
PO
0.2 mg/kg
Cattle
5C
0.2 mg/kg
Swine
SC
0.3 mg/kg
Shcep,
SC
0.2 mg/kg
1eos
Milbemycin (lnterceptorc
Dog
PO
0.5-2 mg/kg q24h for
Demodicosis
Sentine/e)
≥3 months
P)
2 mg/kg q7d for 3
Cheyletiellosis,
doscs
scabies
Cal
P()
2 mg/kg q1month
Moxidectin (ProhcartS)
Dog
PO
0.2 mg/kg
(Advantagc Multi(g)
Dog
Topical
2.5 mg/kg
1 Imidacloprid
Cal
Topical
1 mg/kg
(Ques?)
Horsc
PO
0.4 mg/kg
(Cydectin(R)
Cattle
Topical
0.5 mg/kg
Selamectin (Revolutionc)
Dog, cat
Topical
6 mg/kg
 Miscellaneous nematocides
[Dichlorvos (Algard(& C)
Swine
In ieed
11.2-21.6 mg/kg once
Cat
(lrofender(k)
0.5-2.5 kg Toppical
0.35 ml. (7.5 ing/30
mg)
2.5-5 kg
Topical
0.7 mL (15 mg/60 mg)
5-8 kg
1.12 ml. (24 mg/95.8
mg)
Piperazine (Pipa-Tabs&, etc.)
Dog, cat
P)
44 100 mg/kg
Horse
PO
88-110 mg/kg
Swine
PO
110 mg/kg
In feed 
0.2 0.4%
Drugs for Heartworm control
[vermectin (lvonec)
Dg
PO), SC:
50 mcg/kg
(Heartgardk)
PO
6-12 meg/kg, qlmonth  Microfilaricide.
Cat
PO
24 mcg/kg q30 45d
Melarsomine (lmmiticide)
01
L.umbar
2.5 mg/kg twice 24h
Adulticide
musc.le
jede
Milbemycin (Interceptor&)
[0%
P()
0.5 mg/kg q1month
PO
0.5 mg/kg for 2 wk
 Microfilaricide
Cat
PO
2 mg/kg q1month
Moxidectin (Advantage Multic) Dog, cat 
PO
3 mcg/kg qlmonth
Dog
Topical
2.5 mg/kg q1month
1 Imidacloprid
Cal
Topical
1 mg/kg q1month
Selamectin (Revolution&)
Dog, cat
Topical
6 mg/kg q1month
Anticestodal drugs
Albendazole (Valbazen,
Dog, cal
PO
25-50 mg/kg q12h for
Albenza(&)
3-5d
Cattle
PO
7.5-15 mg/kg
Sheep,
PO
7.5-15 mg/kg
goat
530
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Fenbendazole (Panacur<,
D0g
P()
50 mg/kg/d ior 3d
Safc-Guard)
Cat
PO
50 mg/kg/d ior 5d
Cattle!
P)
5-10mg/kg
Sheep,
PO
5 mg/kg for 3d
goat
Oxfendazole (SynanthicC)
Cattle
PO
4.5 mg/kg
Shccp
PO
5 mg/kg
Goal
P()
7.5 mg/kg
Dichlorophene
Dog, cat
PO
100 mg/kg
Epsiprantel (Cestex()
Dog
PO
5.5 mg/kg
Cat
P()
2.75 mg/kg
Praziquantel (Droncits,
Dog
Drontak&)
<6.8 kg
7.5 mg/kg
≥ 6.8kg
PO
5 mg/kg
2.3kg
IM, SC
7.5 mg/kg
2.7
4.5
IM, SC:
6.3 mg/kg
kg
>3kg
IM, SC
5 mg/kg
Cat
<1.8 kg
PO
6.3 mg/kg
21.8kg
PO
5 mg/kg
IM, SC:
5 img/kg
2.5 mg/kg 18h for 2d  Paragonimiasis
Horse
PO
0.5-1mg/kg
Sheep.
10-15 ing/kg
goat
Pyramtel pamoate (Strongid-T, Horse
P()
13.2 mg/kg
etc..)
Drugs for control of liver flukes
Albendazole (Valbazen?,
Cattle
PO
10 mg/kg
Allenza<)
Clorsulon (Curatrem, Ivomec Cattle,
PO
7 mg/kg
Plus<)
sheep
SC
2 mg/kg
1Ivermectin
Antiprotozoal drugs
Anticoccidial agents
Amprolium(Corid,
Dog
PO
100 mg in gelatin
Prophylaxis
Anprovinec)
capsule q24h for
7-12d
Mp!
30 ml of 9.6%
solution/gallon (3.8 L)
In food
1.25 g 0f 20%
powcler
Cat
PO
60-100 mg total dose Prophylaxis
q24h for 7d
Cattle
PO)
10 mg/kg for 5d
Prophylaxis
5 mg/kg for 21d
Swine
PO
25-65 img/kg q12-24h Prophylaxis
for 3-4cl
Shecp,
PO
55 mg/kg q24h ior
Prophylaxis
goat
19d
(continued)
531
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Chic.ken
In feed 
0.012 0.024% for
Prophylaxis
3-5d
Clopidol (Coyden)
Chicken
In feed
0.0125-0.025%
Prophylaxis
Turkey
In feed 
0.0125-0.025%
Decoquinate (Deccox(, ctc.)
Dog
PO
50 mg/kg q24h 
Prophylaxis
Cattle
In feed
0.5 mg/kg/d for ≥ 28d Prophylaxis
Sheep,
In feed
Suunp p/8yaui c0
Prophylaxis
1e06
periods of cxposure
Chicken
In feed
60 g/ton
Prophylaxis
Diclazuril (Clinacox)
Chicken
In feed 
1 ppm
Prophylaxis.
Can also be
ol pasn
treatment
Mammals
PO)
2.5 mg/kg towards the
Can be used
age of 4 wk, to be
for treatment
renewed 15d latcr,
prn
 Ponazuril
Mammals
PO
40-50 mg/kg
Trcatment
Nicarbazin + Narasin 
Chickcn
In feed
27-45 g/ton cach of
Prophylaxis
narasin and nicarbazin 
Pyrimethamine (Daraprim()
600
PO
1 mg/kg q24h for
5d for
14-28d
Neosporum
Cal
P()
0.5-1 mg/kg q24h ior
14-28d
Horse
PO
0.25 mg/kg q12h for
3d then q24h for 27d
Robenidine (Robenz@)
Chicken
In ieed
30 g/on (0.0033%)
Prophylaxis
lonophores
Lasalocid (Bovatecti)
Cattle
In feed 
1 mg/kg/d
Prophylaxis
Avatcc
Chicken
In feed 
0.0075-0.0125%
 Prophylaxis 
Turkeys
Ralbbits
Monensin (Coban( 60)
Chicken
In feed 
90-110 g/lon
Prophylaxis
Rumensin 80
Cattle
In feed 
0.30-0.92 mg/kg/d
Prophylaxis
Goat
In feed 
0.30-2.2 mg/kg/d
Prophylaxis
Narasin (MaxibanW 72)
Chicken
In feed 
 27-45 g/ton
Prophylaxis
Salinomycin (Sacox 60)
Chicken
In feed 
40-60 g/ton
Prophylaxis
Sulfonamides
 Sulfadimethoxine-ormetoprim
Chicken
In feed 
0.0125%
Prophylaxis and
suliadimethoxine +
treatment
0.0075% ormetoprin
(RofenaidW)
Turkey
In fced
0.00625%
suliadimethoxine +
0.00375% ormetoprim
(od)
Mammals PO
55 mg/kg (combined
Treatment of
drug) on dl, then
coccidiosis.
27.5 mg/kg, q24h.
Killens may
need lower
dosage
Sulfamethazine
Chicken
In feed 
128-187 mg/kg/d
Turkcy
In feed
110-273 mg/kg/d
532
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Cattle
In ieed 
237.6 mg/kg (d11,
118.8 mg/kg id2, d3,
d4!
Swine
In ieed
237.6 mg/kg (d1),
118.8 mg/kg (d2, d3,
d4!
 Sulfaquinoxaline
Chicken
Mp!
0.04% for 2-3d then
0.025% for 2d more
Turkey
idw
0.025% for 2d skip
3d- give for 2dskip
3d and give 2d more
Cattle
idw
0.015% for 3 5d
Zoalene (Zoamix()
(hicken
In feed 
0.0083 0.0125%
Turkey
In feed
0.0083-0.0125%
EPM control
Diclazuril (Protazil)
Horse
PO
2.5 mg/kg q12h ≥ oi
21d
Nitazoxanide (Navigator()
Horse.
PO) (d 1-5) 25 mg/kg q24h
PO (d
50 mg/kg q24h
6-281
Ponazuril (Marquis)
Horsc
PO
5 mg/kg q24h for 28d
Giardiasis control
Albendazole (Valbazen,
Dog. cat
PO
25 mg/kg q12h fcor 2d
Albenza)
Fenbendazole (Panacur(k)
Dog, cat
PO
25 mg/kg q12h for 2d
Metronidazole (Flagyl()
Dog
PO)
50 65 mg/kg q24h for
5-7d
Cat
P()
50 mg/kg q24h for 5d
Toxoplasmosis control
Clindamycin (Clincaps()
Dog, cat
PO, IM
10-20 mg/kg q12h for
4 wk
 Pyrimethamine-sulfadiazine
Dog
PO
0.25-0.5 mg/kg of
Pyrimethamine, 30
mg/kg of sulfadiazine
for 28d
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
Dog
PO
15 mg/kg q12h for
(Tribrissen)
28d
Cryptosporidiosis control
Azithromycin (Zithromax)
Dog
PO
15 mg/kg q12h for ≥
p/
Cat
P()
15 mg/kg q12h ior ≥
P
Horse
PO
10 mg/kg q24h
Nitazoxanide (NavigatorC)
Horse
P()
5 mg/kg q24h for 28d
Paromomycin (Humatin(k)
Dog
P()
50 mg/kg q12h for
10d
Cat
PO
50 mg/kg q12h ior
10d
(continued)
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Babesiosis control
Imidocarb (Imizo)
Dog
IM, SC
 5-6.6 mg/kg repeat in 
2 wk
IM, SC
5 mg/kg repeat in
Ehrlichiosis
14-21cd
Cal
IM
5 ing/kg repeat in 14d Cytauxzoon
fefis
Horse.
IM
2.2 mg/kg
Sheep
IM
1.2 mg/kg: repeat in
10-14d
Ectoparasiticides
Insect development inhibitors
Diflulbenzuron (Dimilink,
Horse
In feed 
0.15 mg/kg/d
Equitrol()
Lufenuron (Program)
Dog
PO
10 mg/kg q1month
Cial
PO
30 mg/kg q1month
Insect nicotinic receptor agonists
Imidacloprid (Advantagek)
Dog, cat
Topical
5-10 mg/kg qlmontht
Nitenpyram iCapstart]
Dog, cat
PO
1 mg/kg
Spinosad (Comfortis)
Dog, cat
PO
30 mg/kg qlmonth
Fipronil (Frontline)
Dog, cat
6.5-13 mg/kg
q1month
Chapter 17: Antineoplastic Drugs
Nane of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Alkylating agents
Nitrogcn mustards
Chlorambucil (Leukeran&)
Dg
PO)
2-6 mg/m q24-48l1
PO
20 mg/m² q1-2 wk
1e.)
P()
2-6 mg/m q48l or
200 mg/n′ (2-3 wk
Horse.
PO
20 mg/m² q2wk
(yclophosphamide (Cyloxani)） Dog
PO)
50 mg/m² q48h
PO
500 mg/m^q24h. 4d/wk
IV
100-300 mg/m
repeat in 2d
Cat
PO
200 mg/m- q2-3 wk
Mechlorethanine (Mustargene) Dog
IV, IC
5 mg/m², repeat prn
Cat
IV
3 mg/m
Melphalan (Alkeran)
D%
P()
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q24l1
for 10d; then 2-4
mg/m(48h
Cat
PO
2 img/m q48h
Nitroureas
Busulfan (Mylerank)
Dog, cat
PO
3-4 mg/m (q24l
PO
0.1-0.2 mg/kg q24h
Carmustine (BiCNU)
Dog, cat
50 mg/m² q6wk
Dacarhazine (DTIC-Dome心)
Dog
IV
200-250 mg/m^ q24h
for 5d; repeat cycle
q3wk
IV slowly
 800-1000 mg/m² over
4-6l1 q3wk
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Hydroxyurca (llydrca)
Dog
PO
30-50 mg/kg q24-48h
Cat
PO
25 mg/kg q24-48lh
Ifosfamide (lfexe)
Dog <10
IV
350 mg/m2
kg
Dog >10
IV
375 mg/in²
kg
Cat
IV
350-500 mg/m^
l.omustine
Dog
PO
60-90 mg/m² q.3-4
(CCNU, CeeNU也)
wk
Cat
PO
60 mg/m² q6wk
Procarbazine (Matulanc)
Dog
PO
25-50 mg/m² q24h
Cat
PO)
50 mg/m² q24h
Streptozocin (Zanosary)
Dog
IV
500 mg/m2
Platinating agents
Carboplatin (Paraplatin)
Dg
IV
250-300 1mg/11^ q3-4
wk
Cat
IV
15()-25(0 mg/m² q4wk
Cisplatin (Platinol-AQ)
Dog
IV, IC
50-70 mg/m² q.3-4
wk
ou 0
use in cat
Antimetabolites
Azathioprine (lmuran')
Dog
PO
501 mg/m^ (q12-48h
PO
2 mg/kg q24h initially,
then 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
q48h
Cat
PO
0.3 - 0.5 mg/kg q48h
Horse
P()
2-5 mg/kg 24h
loading dose, then
q48h for maintenance
Cytosine arabinoside
Dog
IV. SC
100 mg/m q24h for
(Cytarabine,Cytosaru
4d:repeat prn
Cat
IV, SC
100 mg/m² q24h for
2d: repeat prn
Horse
IM, SC
200-300 mg/m² q1-2
wk with chlorambucil
or cyclophosphamide
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU,
Dog
IV, IC
150-200 mg/m² (q1wk
Adrucil&)
 Contraindicated in cats in any form
Gencitabine (Gemzar)
Dog
IV
300 mg/m^
administered over
25-30 min q1wk for
3-4 wk, then 1 wk
hreak
Cat
IV
200 mg/m in
maintenance saline
over 20 min
6-Mercaptopurine
Dog
PO
50 mg/m2 q24h to
(Purinetho)
cffcct; thcn q48h or
prn
(continued)
535
(Continued)
Name of drugs
Species
Route
Dose
Notes
Methotrexate iRheumatrex
Dog
PO
2.5 mg/m^ q24h or
Dose Pack(c)
2-3 tirmes/wk
IV
15-20 mg/m² q.3wk
Cat
P()
2.5 mg/m² 2-3
times/wk
6-Thioguanine(Thioguanine
Dog
PO
40 mg/m2 q24h for
Tabloid
4-5d; then 40 ing/m²
(q3d
Cat
P()
25 mg/m² q24h for
1-5d; then repeat
cycle q30d prn
Mitotic spindle inhibitors
Antibiotics
Actinomycin D
Dog, cat
IV
0.7 1 mg/m² q3wk
(Dactinomycin()
Doxorubicin tAdriamycin
B00
RDF,Doxil)
≤10kg
IV
20-25 mg/m² q3wk
≥10kg
IV
30 mg/m² q3wk
Cat
IV
20 25 mg/m² q.3wk
Mitoxantrone
Dog
IV
5 mg/m² q3wk
(Novantrone, Mitoxa)
Cat
IV
5 6.5 mg/m² q3wk
Taxane
Paclitaxel (Taxol)
Dog. cat
IV
5 mg/kg
Vinblastine (Velban&)
Dog
IV
1-3 mg/m² q1wk
Cat
IV
2 mg/m² q1-2 wk
Vincristine (Vincasar PFS)
800]
IV
0.5-1.0 mg/m² q1-2
wk
Cat
IV
0.5 0.75 mg/m² q1wk
Horse
IV
0.01-0.025 mg/kg
qlwk
Enzymes
1-Asparaginase (Elspar)
IM, IP, SC
 400 IU/kg q1wk, for 3
wk or 10,000 11/m2
q1wk for 3 wk
Cat
IM, IP, SC
400 IU/kg q1wk, in
combination with
other protocols
Miscellaneous
Piroxicam (Feldene)
Log
PO
(0.3 mg/kg q24h
Cat
PO
0.3 mg/kg q48h
Mitotane (O,P'-DDD)
Dog
PO)
50 75 mg/kg q24h
Adrenal tumor
(Lysodren)
divided for 10d to
efiect; then 75-100
mg/kg q3 7d prn
Bleomycin (Blenoxane)
Dog, cat
IV, SC
10-15 IU/m² q24h for
3-4d; then 10-15
IU/m² q7d
IP, intraperitoneal; IR, intraruminal; IU, international unit; IV. intravenous; MAC, minimal alveolar concentration; meg.
re narta twhen required:; (q. qual'que teveryi; SC, subcutaneous; tsp, teaspoonisj: wk, weekisi.
536
Note: Page nunbers fallowed by (al denate appenedices, those by f denote figures, those by () denote tables, hose by tq) dencle
sludy questions, and throsc by fe) clenote explanaticons
Adrenal dysfumction. 262
Allergy. 14. 21. 59
Adrenal gland 150q
drig allergy. 46.3. 464. 467
A180. 521a
tumors. 214,216, 218
Allethrin. 314.408
Aburtifacients.277
Adrenal steruid inhibitors, 269 271.
All or none response, 20, 1.31
Ahurtion
519a
Aloe.250.$00
Farly. 279
Adrenergic ogonists. 11 42. 55q
Alpiazulam,111,499
Induced, 277
α-Adreneigic agonists, 14, 18, 92, 103,
o-Bluckers.42, 197.409
Late pregnarey, 270
105,497a
Alternate day theropy.269.277
Ahsorption, drug. 1
Adrenergic antagonists, 42.490a
Altrenogest, 275, 274), 293q. 516a
Acardik
.505a
α-aceneigic antagonists,42,409, 5409a
Altace,505a. 509a
-adrenergic antagonists. 42 46.76,
Altered intestinal permeability. 251
135,491a. 5093
Aluminurn acetate, 301
Accproj,496a.509:
Adrenergic receptors, 14. 16, 29, 32, $3,
Aluninrnlayerxide,249.255
Accprermazine, 6.82. 145. 173t,247,
36.37.40, 55, 57.92
Amantadine.367.368.479.528:
4851. 496a
Adriamycin427.5.36a
Amaryl,520a
Acetaninophen. 6. 7. 27. 158. 464.
Adruci, 424. 5.35a
AmcbiLl 402
468t. 475
Adsorhbents, 235. 248. 252. 258. 259,
Amen500a,516
Acetazolamide.7, 208,213.2164,
.3021
Amforal, 370.524a
217q. 338. 339. 511 a
Adsper(S)
371. 5261
Amidale.502a
Acetylation. 7,156, 350.373q
Advantage,315,409. 534a
Amiglyle-v.370.524a
Acetylcholine,7,13.16.18.29,32,33t,
Advantage Multi0, 514, 588. 5.30a
Amikacin, 328, 329, 356,524a
46i, 61t, 251, 280. 3424. .144, .1801,
Adverse drug experience (ADD), 467 469
Amiloride.2,8.210.214.216q.
461. 46.1
Adverse drug reactions. 46 5 467
2174
Aetylcholinesterose, 46. 47. 49. 2.9.
In small aninals, 4651
Amino acid requirements, 451
242
In large animals, 4661
Aminocyclitol, 55, .h1,371t. 526a
Aretylcysteine, 222.2.30g,.1'39,.144,
Iype A tcdrug toxicity), 46.3
Aminoglycosides, 12.155,227, .55,
512a
Type B tdrug allergy. 463
'$70r. 524a
Acid-hase balance, 1 16, 215
Type C tidiusynerasy). 463
chemistry.155
disturbance,157, 438.440
Acrsal,227,307,490
mechanism, '$56
disurders. 441, 456
Acrespurin, 371.527a
1herapeutic uses. $56
regulation, 4.38
Aerrane@,501a
Aniropentarmide. 51. 248. 492a, 514d
α I-Acid glycopratein, 4
Adulticides, 390, 530a
Aminopenicillins, 328,353, 370t.522a
Acidilying salts. 215. 312a
Age, 1.36, 155
Aininophylline. 173t, 195, 2081. 214.
Acidosis. 215, 438,439,459
Agonists. 1.3-15
216q, 463, 31la
Inelabolic,157.200.213,235,453
Alhamyrin.3711
Anicdarcme, 181, 1841. 186, 507a
respiratary,157.439.45.3.457.459
Albaplex0,364.3717a
cliemistry193
Acquired growll hormome deficiency.
Aimitraz, 43, 314, 413q. 414, 490a.
262
Albendazole,380-382.392,593,403,
4911
Acromegaly. 262
413,4t,485a.50a,531a, 530
Amitriptyline, 111, 115t, 116. 117. 1254.
ACTH tcorticotropin. 18. 124. 262. 264
Albenza,528a,530a,531a,533a
Albon,371.521a
126q.500a
aclverse effect, 276
Amlodlipine, 173t, 177.505a, 509a
fetal, 278
Albunir. 2, 4. 45.5
Ammenium chloricle. 215, 257q. 462.
5ecretion,269-270.2914
Albulerol. 41. 490a
Altcalol delydrogense. 6
5121
Actinmycin D. 418. 428. 429. 4.33,
Amoxieillin,223,328.329t.353.370t,
5.36
Alcactone.505a, 515a
373q.462.465t,485a.522a
Action potential. 35, 84, 131, 184t. 192.
Aldara300
Amoxi-Tab@.370.522a
204.338
Aldehyde. 3.5
Amphetamine.123,272
Activated charroal. 157. 406
Aldehyde dehyclrogenase. 6. 60t
Aldosterone, 14,75,79.172,214,264,
Anphocn,372.27a
Active ransport. 2, 4. 8, 23q. 207. 322.
268, 270
Ainphotericin.332.333,527a
462
metabolic alkalosis. 445
chemistry. 366
Active tubular secretion, 8. 212. 376
respiratory alkalosis.446
neclhanisin, 3f(
Acyclovir, .30, h8. 5280
Alferta, 497a
pharmacokineties, 366
Addison's disease,262
Alientanil, 98t, 100.497a
iherapeutie uses,366
Ainpicillin. 81, 13, 328, 3291. 353, 370t,
Ade.525a
Alkalosis,89,157,209 216.454
373q.485a, 522a. 523a
Adenine arabinoside, 330
metablic,209.216,218,445
Amproliuni, 397. 399. 401, 413q, 414q.
Adenocard,508a
respiratory, 89, 157, 439
4854.531
Adernosine, 214, 508a
Alkeran,420.534:
Amprovine531a
receptors, 214. 227.232
Alkylating agent, 419. 5.34a
Amrinone. 1731, 182. 203q
Adequan,164
bifunctional, 423
Anaerohic bacteria,258, 260.303.355.
A[DH. 209. 216q, 4.37
Alkylsuljonate, 422
358,362, 364.3744
Aclministration, 1-3, 2f
Allegra. 64. 493a
Analgesia. 11.81, 96,101, 149
537
538
Index
Analgesics. 5, 103
Anticonvulsants. 49, 81. 83, 107. 495a,
Asthima, 45. 69. 489a. 512a
N5AID5. 154
Astringents, 301,305
pioids,95
Alaraclics, 89
Anaphylactic shock, 37, 273, 291q. 463.
Anticlepressants.115,116.119,125q
Alarax,493a
hg9t
pharnacological propertics, 1151
Alenolol. 33t, 45, 56q. 491a, 506a,
Anaphylaxis. 59,64, 65
site of action.116f
507a, 509a
Ancer.370, 523d
Antidiabetic agemts, 279-283, 291q.
Atgared, 388, 530d
Anroban)372t. 527a
52a
Atipamezole.33t. 44,465t, 49()a
Antidliarrheal, 250, 259, 260
Ativank 111. 500a
Androgens, 276, 293, 516a. 517a
Anliclole, 383,386,405,409.414
Atopica512a
Anectine, 52, 493a
Aracuriun.531,53.56q.493a
Anenia.87, 136, 139, 166q. 275. 277.
Anticliuretic: hormone tA[DH!. 75, 172 
Alrioventricular bleock, 38, 105q
374q, 452, 453, 463
Antidopaminergic, 247
conduction abnormality. 181
Anesthesia, 131, 495a
Antieinetics, 246, 514d
Atroject,492a
inhalant,147
Antifibrin agents. 337
Atropine. 33t, 47,492a, 502a, 508a,
infilirative. 1.34
Anlifilorotice cdrugs, 244
514a
neurolytic.134
Antifolate. 399
chemistry.50
topical, 134
Antirungal. 298, 299,527a
mechanisin, 50
Anesthetics.131.501a,5020
Antihistamine, 63, 494a, 512a
pharmacologic effects, 50
general, 135-141
Antihypertensive drugs, 195-147
Auc, 11
inhalant, 135.136t, 137f, 139,140.
Anti-inflanumatory. 153, 162. 300, 468q.
Aureomycin.371.525a
150q, 151e
503a,504a.518a,5190
Aulacoids, 59-80
injectable, 141-148
Anlimetalbolites. 424. 535a
Autonomic drugs. 323
local. 131-134 
Antirmicrobial agents, 298, 302
Autonomic nervous system,29
topical, 338
Antimicrolial drugs, 347, 521a 
receptors and response, 30t. 31t
Angiotensin.59
Antinmuscarinic. 50. 125q
Avalcc), 532a
chemistry. 75
Antinemalodal drugs. 379, 413.415
Avermectins,315,379,384
metalbolism.75
Antineoplastic, 248. 417 4.36. 432q,
AV 1bck, 183, 186, 194,195
receptors.75
Axi),494a
therapeutic uses, 75
Anticsbesity.238
Azactan), 370t, 524a
Angiotensin converting enzyne [ACE),
Antioxidants. 244.420
Azaron.494a
75.77q. 175f
Antiparasilic:
Azathioprine.425,535a
Angiotensin converting enzyne (ACE)
agents.52.82.91.305,308,
312-317,325,379,381f,3831
Aziliromycin. 330. 359. 525a, 533a
inhilbitors, 162,172,174,196,
A7ole.9.298.333
bz.07
385f.468q.528a
Antiplatelet, 198. 200. 503a, 510a
AZT,368,528a
ncchanism. 174
Antiprotoal drugs253396412,
A7treonam,5244
therapeutic uses,174
Azulfidine), 515a, 521d
Angiotensin 1. 75
531a
Angiotensin Il. 75, 77q. 175f
Antipruriic. agents. 299. 300. 311
Angiolensinogen. 75. 265
Antipyretic, 72. 153,166
Animal medicinal drug use, 477, 481
Antirobe),371.526a
Anion,438,440
Antiseborheic. 298, 303. 312
Balbesiosis.396,402,403.534a
Anipry1),111,272,500a.519a
AntiseranK, 490a
Antiseptics.298.299
Bocitracin,298,328. 329t, 377
Anorexia, 40. 120. 121. 270
mechanism. 363
Antacids.249.255.258.357
Antihyroid agenls. 262. 287. 288, 520a
Bacteriostatic,221,253.302.328
dcid secretion inhibsitor, 238
Antiremalodal rlrugs. 392, 41.3q
Bactrim,371t, 521a
Antagonil, 491a
Antitussiye. 98, 99, 498a, 512a
Antogonism, 14
Antiveri.494a
Bannint.384.329a
Anlagonist. 14
Antiviral
Barlbiturates. 82 84. 86, 141, 495a.
Anterior pituitary clisorders. 262
drugs.331,367,528.
50la
clysiurnetion. 264
Antreonam, 524a
administration, 8.3
Anthelcile [Q), 380. 529a
Anxiolytic drugs, 109, 111. 495a
aclverse effects. 83
Anthelmintic resistance, 393-396
Aplastic anemia. 274, 291q,293e
mechanism, 82
Anthelmintics, 4. 383. 394. 395. 413q.
Apnea,54,143, 147
pharmacokinetics. 83
69
Apokinon, 514a
Barorecepor reflex, 42. 43, 93. 179,
Anthracycline. 427
Apokyn(). 514a
226
Antliraquinone, 250
Apomorphine,246,257q,514a
Basal imetabolic: rate, 286
Antiandrogcns, 277. 517a
Apparent volume of distribution. 9. 23
Bases, weak, I, 5, 24q
Antiarrlythunic lrugs, 183-195, 506a.
Appetit stimulants.237
Baytril, 521a
507a
Apraclonidino. 326
Behavior noclirying drugs, 109 124,
Antiarrlythmic drug classification, 1 B4t
Apralan?.526a
Phht
Antilbiotics. 298.536a
Apramycin,36l, 371t.526a
Belladonna. 50
Anticestodal. 389, 392, 530a
Apresolin,176,505a.509a
Benadry/,493a. 514a
benzinialazole. 178, 380, 382
Apstil 515a
Benazepril, 75. 175. 176. 505a, 508a
Ara CMP, 424
Benzalkonium chloricle, 305
metronidazole, 253, 258q. 514. 526,
Ara U, 425
Benzalline,353,370t,485a,486a,522a
5.3.3
Arachiclonic acidl, 69, 70. 73, 77q, 451
Benzimiclazoles, 11, 379, 380, 392, 415,
praziquantelDronit,Dronta,
Aristocor,519a
528a
Profender]. 392.5.30a, 531a
Arrhylhmias, 36. 38-40. 190. 191. 194
Benzodiazepines, 84-86. 91, 495a
pyrantel (Strongid), 384,487a,
Arsenic,390
cntagunist, 496a
529a. 5.31a
Arteriolar dlilators. 176
lerivalives, 91
Anticholinergic agents, 148, 252, 260
Ascarids.381.383,384.386,389,415
Benzoxinate, 338
Anlicholinesterasc, 47. 492a
L-Asparaginase. 429. 430, 53Ge
Benzoyl peroxicle, 298
Anticoagulantct,198,461
Aspergillosis,362,366,67
Benzyl, 465
Anticoccidial, 396-402, 413q. 414q,
Aspirin,7t,72.77q.156. 200. 503a,
Benzylpenicillin. 352. 370M
5.31 a
510a
8-Blockers.182.186,190,327
Index539
Betadine. 331. 332, 339, 342q. 3444
C
Celpoxdoxine. 354. 523a
β-Lactan anlibiolics, 352. 353. 461. 462
Ceffiofur, 354,370t, 466t, 485n.
β-Lactamases,352-355,376
Cabergoline. 278.517a
523a
Belamethasone. 2681, 300. 333. 517a
Caffeine.214.227
Ccll cycle. 418
Calan.508a
Central nervous system (CNS)
Betasone, 517a
Calcitonin,92.288
drugs.81-107,203q, 495a
Betazole. 61t, 63. 774
Calcitriol. 290, 520a
Centrine, 51,492a. 514a
Bethanechol, 33t, 47, 492a
Calcium carbonate. 302
Ceplalexin, 328. 354. 3701, 373q, 4684,
Bozocaine. 469
Calc.ium c.harmel, 189, 509a 
524a
Biaxin.525a
Calcium EIDTA. 339, 342
Cephalosporins. 2.223,328.353-355,
BiCNU, 421. 534a
Calcium entry. 182, 185,197
3701,523a
Bile acids. 244, 258
Calcium gluconale. 289. 291q. 357.
Cephalothin,328.329t,354.524a
Bilirubinuria, 4134
520
Cephapirin, 354, 485t, 524a
Bimaloprost. 336
Calcium oxalate. 211. 217. 219
Cephulac, 514a
Bimolerular lipoprotein layer. 1
Calmodulin kinase, 63
Cerebral edenma. 163, 212, 217q. 511a,
Bioavailability tcalculationt, 10
Calorie requirements, 441f. 451f
518a
Biocox,372t
CAMP, 18.61. 63, 72
Cerebrospinal fluid. 4. 81
Biogenic anmmes, 59, 774
Camphor, 299,304
Cerenia(. 249.514a
Biomax(R, 370, 522a
Carncer, 247,417-436. 432q
Cestex,392.531a
Biosolk,524a
Candidliasis.366.367,3754
Cetirizine, 64. 493a
Biotransformalion. 1. 5. 6. 6f
Canrenone,214
Caputen.505a,509a
Charcoal. 157.406
Bisnusa , 514a
Chelating.73,244.340
Bismuth salls, 248
（apsicum.254,304
Chentical artagomsm. 15
Bismuth subsalicylate, 252q. 258q
Capstar;, 314.409,534d
Chenoreceplor Irigger zone, 90. 93. 98,
Bisruth subsalilate, 514a
Caplopril 75.174.176q. 505a, 509n
1041. 245
Billers, 254
Carafate:, 513a
Chlorambucl, 335,419, 420,432q,
Blanrl aerosol, 222
Carhachol, 47.324
43.3q, 534a. 5.35a
Bland diel, 235
Carbamates, 48, 314. 316, 405
Chloramphenicol., 7, 83, 358-360, 371t,
Blenoxane430.536a
Carhamyl. 324
374q,467.468g,479,525a
Bleomycin. 430, 432. 433q, 536a
Carhamylcholine, 47
Chlordliazepoxidle. 111. 114.125q. 499a
plarmacokmetics, 431
Carbapenens, 355,370t, 524a
Chlorhexidine, 298. 299. 309-311
Bloat, xylazine intuced. 11., 94
Carbaryl. 49. 314. 405, 414q. 485a
Chloride channel, 66, 105q. 406. 415
ruminant. 258
Carastat.47
Chlorinated ethane rlerivatives, 405
thterapy. 255
Carbenicillin. 328.353.370, 523a
Chlorinaledl lydrocarbxons. 404, 405,
Blood brain barrier, 4, 64. 81. 432q.
Carbohydrate metabolism, 280
406.462
Carbon dioxide, 140, 213
hyclrocarbon.430
Blood cloiling. 154
Carbonic acid. 459
Chloromycelin,371,525a
Blood gas partition roefficient, 130
Carbonic anhyedrase inhibitors, 213. 338
Clalorotiazide,174,211.212, 216q.
Blooxel ierapy, 452,453
Carbon nroroxicle, 140
217q, 462, 504a, 510a
Blood types in clogs and cat5, 452
Carboplatin, 423. 535a
Chlorpheniramine, G1t. 63. 64t. 222
Blood collction aned storage. 452
Carbuxymethylcellulose, 340
(hlorpromazine, 6,89.247, 257q.
Bolclernone, 276, 291q, 475, 516a
Carcinogens, 363,479
2584, 462, 497a, 5141
Boric acid, 299.302.310.323
Carcinonas, 419,423, 426, 428
Clilortetracycline, 329t, 357. 371t, 3744,
Botanical insectieicdes, 408
Carliac arrhythias, 38. 39. 150y, 446
485a. 525
Bots, 384, 386.413q
(arliomyopathy. 45. 172-175. 178.
Cholac.514d
Bovatec(,372t. 532a
182,192.4334
Cliolesterol, 244, 295
Bovine somalotropin, 26.3
Cardliovascular clrugs, 171-206
Cholestyramine, 181. 203q
Bradycarlia,38,45.54,195.232,247,
Cardizem,506a. 507a
Clioline, 46.326
262, 314. 327.409, 412, 415
Cardlizem-CDR), 194
Cholinergic agonists, 46. 47
Bradlykinin, 18. 59. 76
Cardoxing.505a
antagonists.326.492a
Bretlne 40,490a. 508a
Cardrasek,511a
nerves, 63. 225, 226,
Brevibloc,45.491a.507a,509
Carienlanil, 14.100,106
receptors. 29,331.47,57.326
Brevital, 501a
Carnustine. 421. 433q. 534a
Cholinesterase, 12.47,53, 57
Brimonidine, 326
Carproien, 160,465t, 503a
libitors, 314. 316, 325
Brinzolamidle, 338
(arvcdilol, 182. 1841.192.507a
Chondroitin sulfate. 60
Bromocripline, 274. 278.291q, 517a
Cascara sngrata, 250
Choroid plexus. 4
Bronchoconstriction. 15,56q,73
Castor oil, 250, 257q, 303
Chronulac.514a
Bronchodilator. 40, 224t. 226
Caterholamines, 7t, 33. 34
Cicloviral. 528a
BronclolateR:,490a
Carteolol,327
Cilaslalin.355.461
Bufiering syslens, 438
Catharligs, 250, 260
Cilia. 73.221
Bulk laxatives.249
Catrlysr.372
Cinelidline, 6, 8, 61, 66, 77q, 468q,
Bumetanide, 209. 210, 216q. 510a
Causlic, 303, 304
494a
Bumex), 510a
CCNI,420, 535a
pharmacokinetics. c
Bupivacaine, 133t, 133,150q
Ceclor:, 523a
Ciplactin, 512a
Buprenex, 499a
Ciprofloxacin.329t,330,521
Buprenorplhine, 971. 98t, 101, 104q.
Cefaclor, 354, 3701,523a
Cisapride. 68, 242,494a, 513a
66
Cera-DropsR,523a
Cisplalin. 423, 432q, 433q, 465.468q,
Buscoan,51,237,512a
Celaclroxil, 354. 370, 523a
535a.
Buspar), 111, 500a
Cerady524a
Clatoran, 523a
Buspirone, 111, 114, 115, 125y, 126q.
Ceiazolin, 328. 329. 370t, 523a
Clarithromycin, 359. 525a
(elepine, 354.523a
128e.500a
Clariltin, 64. 493a
Busulfan, 422, 534a
Cefixine, 354. 323a
Ceiobidk,523a
Class I antiarrhythmic drugs. 184-188,
Butorphanol, 91. 97t, 101, 104q. 105q.
Cefopern7one. 354. 523a
190.203q, 506a
17.3,225. 236,257. 497a. 498a.
C.lass Il antiarrhythmic. drugs. 185. 190,
Ceiotaxine, 354.523a
512a
203.204.507a
Butyrophenoncs. 247.248
Cefoxitin.354.523a
540
Indlex
Class Ill antiarrhythmic drugs, 46, 185,
Corticotropin. 72, 264
Denagar, 3721, 526a
186.192.193,203,204,507
CRI1, 264
Deoxycorticosterone, 264. 269. 291q.
Class IV antiarrlyluie drugs. 185. 193.
Cough suppressats, 224
86159867
20.3.204.507a
Coumaphos, 404. 414q. 486a
Depakene,496a
Clavarmox,370.522a
Coumarin, 363
[Depo-Estradio], 516a
Clavulanic: acid, 353, 373q, 522a. 523a
COX,153 162.166 169.503a,504a
Depo-Provera111. 124.516a
flearance
Coyden.398.532a
[epolarization. 53, 84, 131, 282, 283,
locly, 10
Crcams. 298:300. 308-312, 317, 332
405, 410,
renal, 13, 23q
Cromolom, 494
Depolarizing neuronuscular Ilock, 52,
Clenbuterol, 41, 56q. 226, 230q, 490a
Ctomolyn, 66, 77q, 224t, 336, 494a
Clinacox. 400, 532a
5.3
Cross matching. 452
Depo-Medrol. 270. 518a
Clincaps,533a
Cryptococcosis. 367. 375q.377e
[Deracoxib,_161. 4651, 504a
Clinrlamycin. 258q. 329t, 330. 360.
Cryptorchiclism, 272
Deramaxx(),161. 504)
526a,533a
Cryptosporiliosis, 396, 402, 403. 533a
Dermalology therapy, 295-320
Clomicalm,111.500a
Cryslallire zirc: insulir, 281, 282
[ernatophyiosis.299,310,311,528a
Clomipramine. 111. 113, 115t, 116.
C.rystalloid solutions. 454
Desilurane. 135t, 136t, 137, 137t, 140,
118,125q. 500a
Crystalluria, 349, 350
150q, 501a
Clonax@;.495
Curatrem,393.531a
Deslorelin, 272, 5150
Clonazepam. 7. 84, 86, 495d
Cushing's syncrome, 262. 270
Desmopressin. 216q
Clopilogrel, 198. 200. 201, 510a
iatrogenic:334
Desoxycorticosterone, 519a
Clopidej. 397, 398,414q. 332a
Cyanide toxicity, 178
Detergents. 250. 299, 306
Clopra), 494a. 513a
Cyclohexylaumines, 91, 145, 146, 501a
[Detomidine.43.92.94.95,105q,236.
Cloxprosenol, 73. 279. 291q. 517a
Cyclooxygenase, 69.70,153,166q.
490, 4910.497
Clorazepale. 111,112. 499ah
167q
Dexamethasone, 212, 223, 238, 2681,
Clorsulon, 393, 413q.485a, 531a
Cyclopentclate. 326
279. 291q, 343q, 486n. 517a
Clotrinazole, 298, 310, 332. 366. 3721.
Cyclophosphamicle. 419, 420, 432q.
Dexirecletomidine. 13
527a
433q, 534a. 535a
Dextran. 323. 449t, 449. 450. 458q. 466t
Cloting faclors. 453
Cycloplegin. 50,51, 55.326
Dextromethorphan, 121, 225. 512a
Cloxacillin, 328, 352. 370t. 486a.
Cylectin, 388, 530a
[Diab>etes insipicdus. 211. 212. 216q. 262.
522a
Cyclosporine, 9, 223, 300.335. 342q,
440
Coagulopathy. 200
512a
Diabetes insipiclus nephrogenic, 211.
Coal tar 303. 304
Cyfluthrin, 408
212.
Coban60,532
Cyheptine:, 512a
Diabetes mellitus, 262
Corcirliosis, 364, 396 402. 413q, 414q.
Cypermethrin, 408
[Diamicline derivative. 403
Cyproheptadine.63.G4,69,237.494a.
Diamine oxidase. 39
Codcine.6.60, 225,230q, 258q.475.
512a, 51.3a
Diamox, 511a
512a
Cyromazine,408
Diarrhea, 250 253,257q
Colchicine, 244
Cysleine.222,390
Diastal),495
Colibacillosis. 349.361
Cytarabine,424. 425. 535d
Diazepam, 84.85, 91. 104q.105q. 111.
Colic. 236
Cylochrome.6.21,65. 66
112, 495a, 498a, 499a, 501a,513a
Colistin, 3291,371t,527a
Cytomels, 520a
mechanisn, 85
Collagen, 171, 244,266, 337,339.449
Cyosartu,424. 535a
pharmocokinetics, 85
Colloids, 305. 448-450
Cytosine aralinosile, 335. 424. 432q.
therapeutic uses. 85
ColyteiR:
,249
433q. 535a
Diazinon.314,404
Contonis
.409,534a
Cytosolic receptor, 263
Dilbenzyline, 42, 491a, 509a
Compazine.497a.514a
Cytotec@. 513a
Dilucaine, 338
Competition,5
Cytoxan,419,534a
Diclhloropliene. 391. 392, 414q, 416q,
Competive blocking drugs. 53
531a
Conpetitive neuroiruscular blockers, 54
Dichlorphenamicle, 213. 216q, 338,
Compliancc:
 51la
D
owner. 345
Dichlorvos. 314. 379, 388, 389, 404,
regulation, 477
Dacarbazine, 422, 534a
414q,4661, 486a. 530a
ventricular, 172.
Diclazuril, 397, 400. 402, 414q. 532a,
[Daclinomycin, 428. 536a
Conplex formalion. 461. 463
Dalteparin, 199t, 5100.
533a
COMT. 34 36,38.40
Danazol, 2Z6. 277, 516a
Diclofenac.334
Concentration-tine, 9, 10, 13
Danocrine,276. 516d
Dicloxagillin,328
Congestive hear1 iailurc. 55q. 43,45,
Dicura:, 3711, 521a
Danofloxacin. 351, 521a
171, 216q, 217q, 449
Diethylstilbestrol DES), 274, 275. 479
[Daranidc, 51l a
Conjugation, 7, 7t
O.P'-DDD, 270, 292q. 430, 432q, 519a,
Diffusion
bacierial resistance, 348
facilialedl, 2. 23q
Controllecl substances, 473-477
.532
passive, 1, 207
acl. 473
Darbazine&: 248
simple, 5. 23
Schedules. 475
Difloxacin, 351, 352.371t, 521a
DDT. 270.405 407
Copper, 244. 258q
Dilulbenzuron, 407, 534a
Copper sulfate. 246. 254. 258q
DEA form-222, 474
Deainess.211.271. 356.403
[Diflucan, 372t, 527a
Copper toxicosis. 244, 2584
Deccox:,532a
Digestants, 242. 513a
Cordarone), 507a
Digialis. 84, 178, 180. 181, 189,462
[econgeslants, 222, 336
Coreyk, 507a
Decoquinate, 397, 401, 413q. 414q.
Digitoxin. 7
Corid9. 531a
Digoxin, 9,173t,177-181, 179f, 184t,
Cortefk, 518a
Dectomax, 387. 529a
5.32a
186.505a.508a
DT,289.291q,520
（orlirosleroids,223.243,264-271.279.
Dectomtx Pour-OnE:, 529a
517a
Dihydrofolate reduiclase, 350
Dehyrlration, 440
dctivily, 265, 2681
inhibsitors. 400. 401, 432, 462
8-Receptors,102,104q
mechanism, 267f
Dihydropteroate synthcase,348-350
Dennccariun, 49. 325. 342q. 492a
plarnacokinetics, 268
Dihydrostreptomyrin. 356.524.1
Denodlicosis, 314 317, 409. 529a, 530a
strurture. 26.5
Dilydrotachiysterol. 289, 291q, 520a
Demulcents. 248. 301, 302
Index541
Driodotyrosine (DITi. 284, 286
Dry-Clox(), 370, 522a
Encloperoxicles,77y
Dilaled carediomyopalhy. 172. 202q.
D receplors, 33. 34
Endorphins. 96, 97
203g
D rereptors. 34
[nd-plate potential. 53
D; receplors, 34
Enemas, 257q, 464
Diltiazem. 173t, 174, 181, 184t, 185.
D4 recepors, 34
Enilconazole. 298, 299, 310
186, 193. 194, 506a, 507a
D,receptors.34
Enkeplatl ins, 96, 97
chemisiry. 194
Dressing, 297.303, 320
Enlon.492a.508a
therapeuitic uses. 194
Droncit, 392,531a
[noxaparin. 190t. 510a
Dunenlydrinate. 611, 63, 641, 65, 77q,
Drontal, 392, 531a
tnrofloxacin,11,329,330,351.373q.
222,248.493a
Droperidol, 11, 247.258g
4651, 4661, 468q, 486a, 521a
Dimercaprel. 15, 390
Drug allergic reactions. 463-464
[nteric-coated tablets, 16G
Dirnetyl sulfoxide (MS), 162, 16q.
lype 1,463
Enterocolitis, 402, 428
300,332.504a,511a
Type l1, 463 464
Enterohepatic circulation of dlrugs. 7. 8
Dimetridazole.361.479
Type 1l1, 464
Enzymes, 3, (, 7
IDinilin,407. 534a
lype IV, 464
Eosiropenia, 266
Dinoprost.73.278.279.486a.517a
Drug clelivery. 321, 323
Ephecra). 40
Dinotefuran.314.409,410
Drug importation, 480
Epheelrine, 40, 55q, 66, 222, 490a
Dipenlum,515
Drug interactions, 461-46.3
Epidural., 93,100, 131, 134. 161
Diphenhydramine, 14. 61t, 63 65. 77q.
Drug residues. 479
E-Pil, 492a
258q, 311, 493a, 514a
Drug loxicity in cats. 414
Epinephrine. 18,32, 331. 36, 37, 554,
Diphenoxylae, 236,251,258q.514a
DTIC Dome), 422. 534a
489a
Dprenorphune,7, 97
Dynorplhins, 96, 97
aldverse effecls, 38
Dirlotapide.238,513a
IDyrenium, 511a
Disinfectant, 331. 332
vascular efferts, 3G
Epinephrine reversal. 462
Dispersarnts, 305
Epinject, 489a
Distrilbution, clrug. 4
E
[pilepsy. 87, 88, 468q. 499a
Diuretics.174,196, 197. 207-219,
Epistaxis, 210. 216q
504a. 509a, 510a,511a
Eclolic agcnts. 277
efs"8 "gxaud
carbonic anhyrdrase inhibitors. 213
[chothiophate, 49, 55q. 325,492a
Eprinomcctin, 379. 384. 387, 530d
loop. 219
ECp(:. 516a
meliylxantlines. 214
Lpsiprantel, 392. 531al 
Ertoparasites. 297, 306, 313.387
[quilibrium, 4, 10, 14
osmotic, 218. 339
[ctoparasiticides, 404-410
potassiu sparing. 214
Equine bois, 413
mechanisns, 406f
Equine chorionic gonadotropin fECGh.
sile of action, 2081
resistance.410
thiazide, 218. 219
see PMSG.272
Diurigen, 510a
EDsn. 20, 22q. 25
Equine colic, 236
Edecrin&, 510a
Diuri. 504a. 510a
Lquine protozoal myeloencephalitis
Eedeima, 62,75,98.174
{EPM1, 396, 400-412,414q, 533a
Dobutamine, 33t.39,55q.173t.181.
cerebral, 163, 217,511a, 518a
rquipoise,276.516d
490a..
Dolhutrex, 490a
chronic, 214
tquitro/ 407, 534a
pulmonary, 164. 174, 176, 227, 453
Docusate. 250. 258q, 486a. 514a
[rgonovine, 67. 68, 278. 291q. 517a
Edel1e. 466t
Dolophine, 4981
Ergosterol, 298, 299. 36b, 375q
Edroplonium.48.54,492a,508a
Donitor, 497a
ErgcorateR, 517a
EDIA,339.342g
Domoso,504a.511
rgot alkaloids, G7.68, 278
Effective close. 156. 5041
Donperilone, 2574
Ery-Tab),371. 526a
Efficacy.19.22q
Dopa, 35
Eicosanoids. 59,69. 266, 451
[rythromycin, 242, 329t, 359. 360,
Dopamine,6, 11. 33, 35, 38,109, 181,
486a.513a.526a
biosynthesis. 69
489a
Erylhropoiesis, 276, 290. 293q. 295e
cletnistry, 69
Erytropoin(EP1.270,290,293
chemistry. 181
nomenc.lature. 69
pharmarological effects. 181
receptor signaling. 72t
295e. 521
Dopran-.496
Eirmerja,399,400
[scharotics.303
Doramectin, 315. 379, 387, 466t, 486a,
Elavil,111,500n
Esidrix.510a
[lectrical instability, 180
Esmolol. 45,46, 56g, 1731, 1841, 191.
529a.
Donmtor, 95. 497a
491.n.5071.509a
Elcctrocardiogram, 446
Domosedan. 94.497a
[lectric.al cardioversion. 186
Esoplagcal groove. 254, 260
[sophgeal reflux.66,247
Dorzolarmide, 338. 342q
Electrolyle irmbalarnc.e, 217q, 270
Dosage, determination. 11
Elcctrolyie therapy. 440
[sterases. 7.11.24q,46,48
Dosage table, 489 536
[lectrolytes, 219, 250. 441. 451
Estradiol, 273, 291g, 479. 516a,
[stradiol cypionate FCP),516a
Dose-cleperclemt
Eligard,515
CNS clepression, 111. 140
Estriol, 273
Elixophyllin, S11a, 512a
Cardiomyopathy.428,4.34
Estrogens, 272. 273, 515a, 516a
ElsparK, 429, 536a
Dose respconse, 19-21
Istrone. 273
Eimeties. 245, 246. 259, 514a
Dosing interval. 11
Einoxdepside, 379. 389, 413q,415e, 530a
Esiruis. 272-275, 277. 278. 516a, 517a
Dosing, oral, 41. 83
Emorlin, 250
Dostinex, 278. 517a
[thacrynic acid. 209, 210, 216q, 217q.
Emollients, 250. 302, 303
Doxapraun. 89. 228. 230q, 231q, 496a
462. 510a
Emulsions, 308. 319q, 451
Ethanol. (
Doxepin. 1l1, 500a
「MycinS, 513a
Doxil, 428. 536d
Enacard.505a,509a
ethyl. 139, 140
Doxorulbicin, 9,417. 421, 427, 428.434.
[nalapril. 75, 173, 175. 202q. 505a,
halngenaterl. 139
5.36.1
509a
isopropyl,140
Doxycycline, 329. 339. 357, 358, 3744q,
Entectocides.384
Elhion, 404
468q,.461, 525a
Enclocrme iunction, 261
Ethoxzolanide, 338
Doxyrobe). 371,525a
Enclocerine pharmaccology. 261-294
Ethyl aleohol. 134, 309
D-penicillaninc. 244, 258q
Endlngenous glucororticoids, 264
Ethylenc glycol. 6. 442
Dramamine, 493a
Enclogenous mineralocorticoids, 264
[todolac.160. 465t
Draxxin, 371. 526d
ttoGesr, 160.503a
542Index
Etomidlate.147, 148, 150q. 302a
Hluconag0le. 332,366.372t, 527a
Cianlanol, 521a
[tono),4943
lucort.518a
fiases
Eloposide. 429
Flucytosine, 366, 367. 374q, 3754.
entrappedl.255.260e
Ctorphine,7.97t
377e.527a
nerve, 12 
tutlarnasia. 123.144
administration. 367
solulble, 151
Excretion, drug,8
chemistry, 367
Ciastric: acid
[xercise-intluced pulrmonary henorrhage
pharmacokinetics.367
secretion inhilbitors, 238-241
(EII'H), 210
uses. 367
Ciastric: emplying, 242, 259c. 461
[xotic,100.146,266
Fludrorortisone. 268t, 268. 518a, 519a
Castric lavage.49, 157
Expcctorants, 222, 512a
Hluicl anel electrolyte balance. 75, 174,
Gastric pH. 461
[xtended spectrum.353.354
217q. 218e, 440
Giastric ulceration.239
External anliparasitics, 404
[li retention,43.75
Gastroerterilis, 236, 248, 428
[xtra label use of merlic ations. 477 479
Hluial therapy. 157. 235, 257q, 437-456
Ciastrogard, 513a
Exlravgsation, 149. 154, 421, 428, 429
solutions, 44.3t
Gastrointestinal tract (Gli, 30, 512a
Ezide,505a
Hlukes, 53 1a
dislurlances, 213. 214
liver, 392, 393
drugs acting, 235 260
lung. 392, 393
lyinphoma, 419
F
runkn,393
motility. 82, 151e
Flunazenil.14. 92. 105q, 107e, 496a
Gels, 303. 309,320
Faciliated cliffusion, 2. 23q
Hlumethasne. 2681. 3691, 518a
Ciencitabine, 425,535a
Factre, 515a
[lunixin. 153.156.159,166q. 167q.
Genzar), 425, 5350
Famotiline,61t. 61, 66, 77q, 239, 257q.
168e,236,334.486a,503a.513a
Gentamicin. 12, 167q, 298, 328, 329t,
258q. 494a, 513a
「luorescein.338
343q.356.3701.373q.374q.376e,
Famphur. 404. 466t
Fluorine. 350
468q,469e, 486a, 524a
FARAD.91,94,159,481
Fluorometholone, 333
Cien-Xene,111 112. 4990
Fascicola hepalica. 392. 413q
「luoroprednisolone, 5180
Geocillir(, 370,. 5234
fosciolosis. 393
Hluoroquinoloncs.223.227,317, 330,
Geopen,370,523a
Fal metalolism, 157, 280
350,373q. 376e,479, 521a
Geriatric,38. 86,117, 125q, 127e
Telbantel, 380, 381,413q, 414q.529a
chemistry,350
Gentaver370t,524a
Feellack,128
 mer hanisn, 351
Gentocin,3701,524a
negative. 264
resistance,352
CHRH. 263
tellainate.88, 296d
therapeutic uses, 351
Giardiasis, 362. 396. 402, 403, 413q,
[ellatol.496d
[luoxetine, 111. 115, 115t, 120, 125q.
415e, 533a
[eldene,430.53Ga
126q. 127e,128c. 129e, 500a
Ginger, 254
Feline herpesvirus. 330
「lurbiproren.334.342q.343q,345e
Claucoima, 492a, 511d
Feline recombinant I[N o. 331
Hluvoxamine, 1ll, 500a
dcute,212
Feline leukeinia virus, 368
[olic acirl, 348. 379, 401, 424
angle closure, 65
Tenbenda7ole. 6. 380 383, 392, 413q.
Folinic acial, 401
open angle. 37,49
414q. 415e, 416e. 466t, 486d,
Follicle stinulating hormone (FSH), 72.
Glauc [abs, 51la
529a. 533a
272,309
Cilimepiride, 282, 520a
[entanyl, 97t, 98t. 100
Follicular cyss. 262. 272. 274, 515a
Glipizide. 282. 283, 291q. 203e, 520a
aclverse eilects, 100
Formamidine. 409
Fosinopril 176, 505a
Cilomerular filiration, 2. 8, 13
pharniacokinetics. 100
Glucagon, 18, 37.280
iherapeutic uses, 100
[rogmin, 199,510a
Gilucocorlicoids, 223, 237,265-270,
Fenthion,404,414q
Frank-starling mec hanisn. 171
275.293e, 468q. 513a, 517a
Fenvalerate. 408
Free radicals, 163, 165, 1G8, 244, 427.
（iluconeogenesis, 264,265,267, 280.
Ferric salts. 46.3
430 
rontine305.314,315.410.534a
441. 451
Tetus. 5,144, 148, 274.277
Glucose, 19,128e, 257q, 239e, 280.
Fevarin, 500a
rontinePlus,315,316,408,410
282.520a
Fexofenadine. G4. 493a
Fructose. 251, 257q. 259e
albsorption, 283
Fibrin.200, 337,450
Fulein),372, 528a
Iransport. 283
anti, 337
[ungizone.372t.527a
Fibrinogen. 200. 337
Furadlantin,372t, 527a
Glucotrol),520a
Filsrinolysis. 200
Furazolidone, 347. 372t, 479. 527a
Glucuroniclation, 7t, 24q, 27e, 168e
Fibrinolytic
Furoseiride.2.8t, 173t, 174, 185.197.
Cilucuronide. 7. 8. 86
substance. 198
202q,204c, 208t. 209,217q.218c,
Glucuronide transierase, 157, 166q 
(lrugs. 200
219e,419, 462, 486a, 504a, 509a,
Cilutamate, 16. 81, 145, 315. 415c
Fipronit, 305, 314-316, 410,411.414.
510a
Cilutanic acidl.73
416, 534a
Glutainine,258q
Fillralion, 2
Clutathione.7,73, 157.166q.168e.464
Finastericle, 274, 277, 517a
G
Glutathione peroxiclase, 244
[irocoxib), 161. 504a
First-pass eifect, 3, 22q. 25e
Ciluten-free clica, 235
CiABA (Ciamma-aninobutyric: acid!., 14.
Glyburide,282.283.520a
5-FC,367,372.527a
16, 81
Cilycerin.212, 301-303, 308,451
5-Fluorouracil,2.367, 424,432q. 4.33q.
gated C.82,85, 141. 410.415e,
Cilycerol. 147, 212, 339, 511a
465,535a
416e
Glycine,7,16.73,454,4551
CABA reccplors, 14. 105q, 107e,415c
Clyeo flex.504a
5 lipoxygenose 151Ox1, G9. 70,73. 153
Gabapentin. 87,105q, 496d
HIV. 368. 369. 528d
Calactorrhea, 262,279
Cilycolic acirl, 302
Flagy1), 254. 372t, 402. 514a, 526d.
Galimycin),371,526d
Glycopeptides, 347,372t, 479
PE.E.S,
Glycoproleins.261.273
Cietngc ic lovir, 331
Glycopyrrolate.51,100,195,492a,
Flerainicle, 184t, 190, 203q. 506a
fianglion.29.330
[le0s. 313-316, 387, 391, 404-411, 416
Ganglionic nicotinic, 52
508a
Hlorfenicol. 358. 359. 371t. 374q.486a.
Cilycosaminoglyran. 164. 166q, 168e
agonists, 52
Glycosuria. 211
525a
Florinef-aetate, 518a. 519a
antagonists. 52
Cilycosides. 7, 250
post, 52
Golylet;, 249
Indcx543
Gunadotropins, 272
Hinudin, 337
1lypoalbuninermia, 142, 134, 216q.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
Histall, 494a
218e
IGnRHi, 272, 273, 294e, 515a
Iistamine, 7, 14, 15, 59,494a
Hypocalceimia. 262.288,289.464,
Gonadorclin. 272, 515a
bicosynthesis, 59
520a
G-protein coupled, 15-18,24,75,81,
effects.2
tlypochloremia. 212
109.110,287
mctalolism, 59
Hypochlcorite isoclimj. 298. 299
G proteins, 16,17,74, 92, 96.261
pharmacology. 61t, 61
Hypoglyceimia. 104y, 105q. 107e. 121.
Graded dosc-response. 19
release, 60
262.282
Gralm-negative. 223. 298, 309
Histidine. 59
Hypokalemia,177,181.188,203q.209.
Gram-positive.223,328,330
Histomonas, 402
211. 267. 457q, 459e. 462
Gramicidin,328. 342g
Ilmatopine, 326,475
Hyponatrenia, 445,453
Greyhounds,5.144,4b8q.469e.528a
Hormnes, 261
Hypoparathyroidisn.262.289.290
Growth hormone (GHi1, 19, 72, 93. 96t,
I luman chorionic gonadlotropin it ICG!,
Hypopituitarisn, 262
2b2.26.3f. 263
272.515a
Hypoprothrombinenia. 350
Growth hormone-releasing homone
1lumatn), 403, 533a
Hypolension,37,43.58.89,93.94,
(GHRH). 263
Hunnectanis, 302, 303, 307-309, 319q
105.150g, 151e.187,202q.204e,
Guaiacol. 222
Humors),492a
314. 462
Guaifenesin. 143. 145.146. 148.222.
Hyaluronate, 504a
orthostatic.116.125q,127e
230q,233e. 502a, 512a
Hyaluronic acid tHAJ, I64, 340
Hypothalanic-piluitary-adrenal axis.
Guailaxin@), 502a, 512a
301, 311. 317
Ciuanosine. 331. 368
Hycodan@. 512a
Hypothalanus. 4. 75, 89
Guanosine diphosplate (GDP), 1G
Hydantoin. 84, 189
Hypothermia,84.90,94,101,136
Cuanosine triphosphate IGTPJ. 16
Hydralazine, 173t, 174, 177, 202q.
Hypothyroidism, 181. 262,284,288
204e. 505a, 509a
Hypovulemia.44, 90,147
Iydrea,422.535a
Hypoxemia, 93.136.138.139.226
H
Hydrox:hlorothiazide.174,197,208l,
tlypoxia,105,138,181
211,212.217q. 505a, 509a, 510a
Hytakerol 520a
H receplors, 61
Hydroxodone,225, 233c. 475. 512a
H antihistamines, (3. 64t, 77q. 79e
Hylrocortone,5184
H: receplors, 61
Hydrogen peroxide. 246
Hy antihistamines, (5. 6ot, 77q. 79
Hyclrolysis. 7. 17
H: receplors, 61
Hydromorphone. 98t, 99.498a
latrogenic
Hg receptors, 61
Hydroxyanphetanine,327
Addison's syndrome. 124
Habronema. 380
Hydroxyurea,422.535a
Cushing's synedreme. 334
Haemophilus, 353, 358 362, 377.526a
Hydroxylryptamine t5-HTJ, 67, 109, 110,
hypoadrcnocorlicism, 270, 276. 293.
Hali-ie, 9,23q,77q,168e, 214,428,
116. 494a
301. 317
480
Hydroxyzine, 641, 493a
proren, 155. 156. 159
Haloperidel. 34,247
Hyoscine). 51, 493a
lcterus, 413, 415
Halothane, 139
Idiosyncratic reactions. 365
Head drop, 92
Hyoscyamine, 195, 508a
Ilyperadrenocorticism, 195, 198, 262,
doxuridine, 330, 342q. 344e
eartgar,384,386,530a
fex,422.535a
271
Heart iailure herapy, 17118.3
1ypercalcemia. 262, 288, 290
lfostanide, 422, 433q, 535a
Heart rate, 15, 30
Hypercapnia. 97. 141
Imidacloprirl, 305, 314, 315, 388, 409,
Hearlworn discase, 202q. 223. 315.
IHyperemia, 274, 304, 328, 330, 338,
410, 414q, 416e, 530a. 534a
388.413q.530a
Imidapril, 176, 505a
prevention, 390
tut
yperglycemia, 56q, 58e, 90, 93, 106e,
lnidazoline ring. 383
therapy, 390
107e. 262, 265. 269, 447
lnidocarb, 403. 534a
Henoglobin, 158, 369, 438
Hyperinsulineinia. 262
Imipenen, 355. 370, 461, 524a
lemolytic anemaia, 277,434e, 453. 463
Hyperkalemia. 155. 175. 187.281, 289,
Imipramine, 111,115t,118, 119, 125q.
Hemorrhage
438, 442
126q, 127c.128c. 500a
cerehral, 38.98
Hypennatrenia, 181, 267, 450
Imigquimodl, 300, 301
localized, 37
Imizol,403.534a
Hyperphosphalemia. 290. 464
postpartur. 278, 291y, 293c
1lyperplasia, 124.125q,127e. 274.276
Immiticide0,390.530a
pulmonary, 21t)
Hyperpyrcxia, 120, 157,162
Immune, (0, 73. 244, 300, 468
Heimorrlagie cystitis. 419, 422, 432q,
Hypersecretion
lirmunoglobulins, 266
mucus, 221
Immunoimodulation, 243
Heinorrhagic gastroenteritis. 236t, 421
pituitary hormones. 262
linmunosuppressive, 238. 335. 518a,
Henderson-Hasselbach cquation. 1.
Hypersensitivity, 118, 199, 268, 299,
Imoxlium, 252. 514a
519a
25-27,438.439
Heparin, (0. 198 200. 337, 452. 458q,
330, 464
trealing. 37
linplants.273.274.276.335
460e, 510a
Ilypertension. 40, 43.45,55q,56q,79e,
Impromidine. 61
Hepatic coma, 213, 217q. 219e
172.175
lnuran.425.535a
Hepatic encephalopalhy treatment, 245
Hyperthermia. 90. 101. 146
Indera,44.491a,507a.509a.510a
Hepatic necrosis, 85. 86, 125q. 127e.
rmalignant. 140. 141
Indoinethacin, 155. 159
140. 335
Hyperthyroidism. 40, 56q. 181, 262,
Incluction and recovery. 138
Hepatic toxicity. 270, 420
284.287,288
Infiltration, 131. 338
Hepatic loxicosis.112
Ilypertonic dehyclration, 440
Infiltrative
Herpesvirus.330.331,334,342q,344e
soluions, 447, 450, 458q. 4590
anesthesia, 134, 338
Helacillin, 486
IHypertrophic carlionyopathy, 45. 174.
mucosal disease, 239, 251
Hetastarch. 449, 450,458q, 460e
191,202q
Inflanmalory lowel disease, 252
Heterocyclic compounds, 211, 361
ypertrophic gastritis, 51
Inhalant anesthetics, 54, 135, 501a
Hexachlorocycluhexanes, 40,
Hyperventilation. 89, 157. 439.446, 454
Inotropic efiecl, 36. 39, 45. 46
Hexanehoniun, 331. 52
Hypoadrenocorlicisrn, 262, 265, 269,
Insect development inhihitor IDl:, 407,
I ligh-ceiling cliuretics. 209. 216q, 219e,
270.
5.34a
Hliprex), 371t
51Qa
iatrogenic,270.275.2934
Insect gruwth regulator ilGRs!, 315, 408,
mitotane inrluced.270
410
544
Irdex
Inseclicides. 305. 314, 315, 404, 405,
Lavage, 345e
407.408,410
gastric.49,157
Insoluble iber, 235
Juvenile hormone, 379, 408
lung,228
Insulin. 18,19, 37,43,93.105. 280.
analogs.315,408
nosolacrimal, 323
520a
slages.392
subpalpelral, 323
glargine, 282.520a
Laxatives, 249, 258 260, 514n
lente,281.282.520a
Ibulk,249
ineclanis of action, 28l receptor,
K
cnnollicnt, 250
281
 irritant, 250
protamine zinc,282
K9 Advantix, 314. 410
LD, 20, 22q, 25e
resistance, 282
Kalliclin, 76
L.ecithin. 147
synthesis, 280
Kallikreins. 76, 300
Left ventricular, 147
secretion,280
Kananycin, 328. 329, 356. 370. 374,
Legal aspects. 471-480
Interceptor).315.286,388,530a
524
LegenR,504a
Interierons I[Ns!, 331, 369
Kaolirn, 180, 202, 235, 252, 258q, 259e,
Lente insulin, 281, 282. 520a
Interleukin.72, 164, 230,300
260g
1ethal effects. 411,417
Intoxication
Kantrim, 370, 524a
Leukemia,368. 419, 422, 425, 426, 429
imelal, 15 
Kappa is! receptors. 96
Leukeran,419.534a
counteract, 48
Keflex,370, 524a
1eukotrienes 1IT1, 59, 73, 77q, 78q. 79e,
Intracellular receplors, 19
KelinS. 524a
226,253. 336
Intracranial pressure, 140.
Kef7olk, 370. 523a
chemistry. 73
143-147
Keppra, 496a
pllarmacological eifects, 73
Intrananmary iIMM!
Keratoconjunetivitis sicca (KCs, 88, 117.
recepior antagonisis. 73, 223
infusion, 328.361,364
161,342, 373
Leuprolile.272,273.2944
lreatment.354
Keratomyrosis, 331, 332.
Levamiscle. 13,52. 379, 382, 413q.
Intranuscular IMt. 2. 3
Keralolux, 298. 312
415e.466t, 486a
aclrninistration.22q.23y,107e
Keratolytir. 306. 312. 319
Levdsolei, 529
Intraocular pressure, 37, 47. 55q. 57c.
Keratopeathy.334
Levetiracetam, 87, 496a
69,146,151e, 212, 213
Keratoplastic, 303. 312.320
Levolunolol. 327
Intraoxcular inflamnation, 327. 328. 333.
Ketannine, 11, 91. 105. 145. 147, 465t.
Levofloxacin, 330
468q, 469e, 501a
Levophed , 49(a
Intraocular irrgaton, 337
Ketanserin, 68,69
Levotalhs), 520.n
Intrauterine, 522a, 5230. 524a, 527,
Ketasek,501a
Levothyroxine, 287
528a
Kcloacidosis. 157,281.441.459a.520a,
Levsink), 508a
Ircatment. 358
Ketoconazole, 113. 194. 271, 292q, 298,
Libriun, 111, 499a
Intravenous tIVi, 2. 11, 22q, 106e, 447,
468g. 469e, 519a, 527a
Licc. 307, 313,314, 316. 408. 409
Ketofen,160, 503a
Lidocaine. 7. 60,84, 132, 134, 187,
Intrinsic factor, 2
Keloprorcn,156,160,462.503a
202q, 203q, 204e, 467, 468q, 469e.
Intropin.181,489a
Kiclney, 2. 5
506
Intulbation. 53. 89, 92. 514a
lodine, 286.298.331
chenistry.187
disease,13.52
pharmacological effects.187
lorclophors. 298
wornis. 383. 386
therapeutic uses, 187
lodoxanide.3.36
Kinascs. 240
Ligand-gald ionchannels,16,67.110
lonophores, 364, 372, 399, 532a
Kinins. 76,157, 174,463
line surur, 298, 299. 310. 316
lon channels, 16. 17
Klonopin. 495a
Lincoumycin, 329t, 360, 361, 466t, 486a.
lon trapping, 9. 12
K'.16.31.84
lpecac. 246
526
K- clarmels, 18, 19, 61 
1incosamicles,330.355,360,371t
Ipodate,287.288
K--sparing cliurelic. 174. 175. 214. 219e
aclministralion, 361
Ipratropium.224.225,230q.232e,
2.3.3e
Knoxkou,316
chemistry. 3G0
Ipronidozole. 361, 479
mec lanism, 360
therapeutic. uses, 361
Iron.73,301,357,4661
L
LincosinC:, 3711. 526a
blocking. 374
Lindane, 82, 406, 407, 411. 413q. 4684,
Laletolol. 197, 509a
Irritants. 304. 418
469
Ischeia, 172. 174.183.239
L.arrimal, 47. 324, 330, 350
L.ipidl enlsions. 451
Isoctharinc. 226, 230q
Lacriral adenitis,344
Lipoprotein.1.260e
Isoflupredone, 269, 466t, 518a
Lacrimomineties. 340
low dlensity I1.Dl.J. 287
Lacrimostimulants, 340
Liothyronine,287,520a
Isoflurarie, 4, 54, 1351, 136t, 137t, 139,
465t, 5014
Lactatior, 264
Liposomos.305
l.actose.235, 258q.260e
Lipotropic. ogents. 258. 260
Isoniazicl, 372
Isopropannicle, 248,252,258q
free dliet. 235
Lipoxygenase (LOX! pallway. 69. 70,
Lactulose, 245, 249. 257q, 259c. 514a
P09Z
1.5.3
Isopropyl alcohol. 388
Laicllonycin, 372
5-LOX.73
Lantdacylalollrin, 408
Lisinopril, 75,78q,79e. 174. 202q. 505a
Isopropyl ether.140
Isoproterenol. 33t.38,55q,56q.57e.
I aminitis. 42, 157. 269. 402
I iver diseases treatment, 243
580,186. 489a, 508a
Lanisi@, 372t.528a
L-Lysing, 33 1
Lanolin.302.393,305.340
Iodine, 503.
Isorbi,505a
lsosorlbile. 177, 505a
IanoxinW,505a
Lonot.314
lsupre1.38.489.508a
Lantus, 282.520a
Lomustine, 420, 432q, 433q. 4.35e,
ltraconazole. 113. 332, 342q. 344c, 366,
I arvicides. 391
5350
Lasalocid, 364,372t, 398,401, 413q,
527a
Loperanidle, 236, 251. 252. 257q, 2584,
Ivermectin, 4, 11, 315, 379, 384, 38G.
415e,4661, 486n. 5324
Lasix:504a,509a510
259e.514a
465t, 466t, 486a, 530a. 531a
Lorateline, 64t, 493a
L-Asparaginasc. 429, 430,432q. 433q,
IV infusion. 447
Lorazepam, 113, 500a
vomee,386,393,530a.531a
435e.536d
Lopressor,45. 507a
Ivomec. Plus, 393, 531a
Lalanoprosl. 336. 342q. 344c
Inlex545
Lolensin, 505a. 508a
Melatonin, 31
Minimum alveolar concentralion (MAC),
Lotions.299 301.307, 311 317
Melengestrol., 275.292q,293e.516a
97.135
Lotrimin. 372, 527d
Meloxicam.161.4651.503a
Mininmun inlitbitory concentration
Lovenox199.510a
Melphalan. 420,432q.433q.5343
IMICI,-347
Lufenuron, 315, 407,411. 414q,465t,
Menllol, 304
Minillock. 491a
480. 534a
Meningeal cryptococrosis, 367, 375q,
Minipress,43.491a,509a
Luminal,207-210
377e
Minocin(), 371t, 525a
Lungworm5,380,383,386
Meperidine. 98, 251, 257q, 259e.
Minocycline.329,357, 3711, 525a
Lupron 515a
497a
Misoprostol, 72.155.241.513a
Iutalyse(, 279. 517a
Mepivacainc. 1331. 150g,161
Mites, 313-316,386-388,391.404.
Luteal cysts, 262
Mercaptourine :6 MPl. 425. 432q. 433q,
40841
Iuteal phase,272, 275.
5.35
Mitosis, 4183
Luteinizing lhormone (LI1. 272
Meropenem. 524a
Mitcotane. 269-273. 292q. 430. 432q.
Luvox111.500a
Merrein) 370. 524a
519a.536a
Iymphocytopenia.266.293e
Mestinon,49. 492a
Mitoxal.536a
Lynnphoma. 419-422. 424. 4.30
Metacan.161, 503a
Mitoxantrone, 335, 428,433q. 536a
1ymphoreticular neoplasms,419,420,
Metaflummizone,315,316,411.414.416
Mitran.499a
424,426.434
Metalloproteinases, 334, 337
Monensin. 364. 372t. 398. 414q, 415e,
Lynphosarcoma. 425
inhibition, 339. 340
466t, 532a
Lyscxren.519a,536d
overactivity,344
Monoamine oxidase (MAOl, 6, 34. 67,
Metallothionein,244
110
Metaproterenol,224.230q.2320
inhibitors (MAOls), I1l, II6f, 122.
M
Metformmir.283.520
500a
Methadone. 97t, 99.104q. 106e.498a
Monobactams. 355, 370t. 524a
Macrocyclic: laclones. 4. 315. 384-387.
Methozolamide.213.338, 511a
Monocytes, 73.266
't0t
Methemoglolinemia. 134, 464, 469c
Monoiodlglyrosine (MIl!. 284
Macroglolulins. 340
Methenamine, 371t
Monoket(, 505a
Macrolirles, 359. 360, 371t, 377e, 525a
Methicillin, 329t. 352, 353, 370t, 374q.
Monopril@ 505a
Macrolicle enclectoc icles. 384
376e. 377e, 522a
Momtelan.372
Magnesium (Mg: '1, 207
Metlhurazole. 118,284,287,288,520a
Morantel.52. 379. 38441 3q. 415e, 487a.
Magnesumcaronate,255
Methionine. 244.258q.260e, 420
529d
Magnesium hydroxide. 249.486a
Methocarlamol, 149, 502a
Morphino. 97-102,104q.106c,1731,
Magnesium oxirle, 487a
Methohexilal. 144, 150q. 151c, 501a
233e,465,498a,513a
Magnesium silicate, 249, 258q. 356
Methoprene. 315. 316. 408. 410, 414
Moxidectin, 315, 413q, 415e. 4651,
Magnesium suliate, 249, 257q. 258q.
Metlhotrexale. 424, 432q, 433y, 536a
466t.487a,530a
260e
Methoxychlor.82.405.406.409.413q,
Mucolytic drugs, 222, 225, 235q
Malathion, 314
462
Mucomyst, 512a
Malignantmelanoma, 423
Maethscopolamino.252.257q.259c
Mucosil 10 512a
Malogen.516a
Methylcellulose, 250. 258q. 260e, 323,
Multidrug
Marnitol, 208t, 210, 212,216q, 218e,
328.340
Methylene lslue. 464
prol. 417,428.429.
339. 511
Methylprelnisolone, 268t, 269, 518a
resistance.418
Marbofloxacin. 330. 351. 371t. 373q,
Methylxanthines.12.214.217q.219c
Iransporler, 386
522a
226, 511a
Muscarinic receptors, 29, 46, 47. 50.
Margin of stfety. 144. 147
Meticorten. 513a
54-58, 110, 195, 225, 237. 278.
Marcxpilant. 249. 514a
Metipranolol,327
323,324, 461, 462
Marquis). 401,533d
Metocloprannicle, 68. 69, 82. 242. 247.
Muscle relaxant, 11. 85, 148, 151e.
Mast cells, 60, 62
257q. 258g, 259e, 494a, 513a, 514a
232c.405,502a
stabilizers.223
Metoproll,45,56q,182,192,507a
Mushroom toxicity. 50
Mastis, 9. 159. 328. 364
Metronidazole.11, 245,253.254.258q.
Mustargen, 420. 534a
Matrix),275. 516a
260e, 361. 3623721, 374q, 402,
Myeelex. 372.527d
Matrix metalloproteinase inhilbitors. 339
414q. 415e514a, 526a. 533a
Mycobacteria, 362, 377
Matulane,421,535a
chemistry. 402
Mycoplasina, 357, 359, 360. 374q, 377e
Maxilban72.532a
pharmacokinetics, 402
Mycoses,366,375q.377
Maximal efect, 177, 178, 197
therapeutic uses,402
Mydriasis, 30t, 37, 50. 51, 55q. 56q.
Maxipine.370,523a
Mexiletinc. 1841. 186. 187. 188, 506a
57e.58e.98.326
Mecamylaminc. 52
Mexitil, 506d
Mylriatic agent, 38, 40. 232. 493
Mechlorethamine,420.534a
Meyer-Overton, 135. 136
Mydriacy493a
Meclizine, 61. 63-65. 494a
MCA,275.516a
Myelinated, 132
Meclofenanic acid, 156. 157. 167q,
Miconazole, 298, 299, 310, 332, 366.
Myelopaihy,276
462.503a
372.
Myelosuppression, 374q, 376e. 427.
Meclomen(), 50.3a
Micotil,371t,526a
430,433q, 434c, 435e
Medletomiline. 13, 331. 95, 105q. 106e,
Microfilaricide, 386, 388, 390, 391,
Myleran,534a
107e. 465t. 491a, 497a
530a
Myocardial dlysrunclion, 183, 185
Medlicatjon error, 472
Micronase(), 520a
Myocarlial hypertrophy. 171. 172, 190
Merlro, 518a
Microsomal enzymes, 6, 23,189, 241
Myotonachaolg. 492a
Merlroxyprogeslerone. 111. 123. 125q.
Microsomal oxizdaticn, 6, 461
126q. 275,291q,293e, 500a. 516d
Micro5omes.7.26e, 419, 434
Merlrysone, 333
Meroxin.523a
Miclazolan, 85, 92. 145. 496e
N
Milbemycin, 315. 379. 4651. 530a
Megace, 516a
Milliequivalents, 437
N-Acetylcystcine (NAC). 222. 230q,
Megestrol, 111. 123. 124. 275. 291q,
Milrinone. 1731. 182
232e.233e, 512a
292g, 293e,501a, 516d
Mineralbocorticoids, 195, 264. 266. 269.
N-Acctyl transierase, 166q. 168c
Megluuine, 156, 159, 166, 334, 486a.
519
N-Acetylprocainamide, 188
50.3a. 513a
Mineral oil, 250, 302, 340
Na-ionoplores, 397-399
Melarsomine. 370, 390, 413q, 415a,
Mirerals,456
Nafcillin (Nafeillin), 328. 370. 522a
4651, 530a
546
Irclex
Nalbuphine, 95. 97t, 981, 101, 102.
Nirogen mustards. 419, 420, 5.34a
(Orbiloxacin. 351.352. 371t.522a
104q.106e,499a
Nitroglycerin, 177, 178
OreticR), 505a, 510a
Naloxonc. 7.14, 971. 98,102, 104q.
Nitreinida7oles, 25.3,347. 361. 372t,
()rganophosphates, 49. 314. 404. 416e,
105q,106e, 107e,4993
398.402,479
Nitrol,505a
467
Nallrexone, 14. 101. 103. 106e, 499a
()rnnctoprim. 349. 350. 373q. 376e, 400.
Naphazoline.33G
Nitropres509a
521a. 5.32a
Naprosyn,504a
Nitroprussidc. 173. 177. 197. 509a
ruvail）.503a
Naproxen.155.156,159,166q.504a
Nitrosureas, 420]
Osmosis and osmolarity, 437
Naquasone,509a
Nirous 0xirle.135t.136t. 137, 1.38, 139,
()snrotic:
Narasin, 364, 372t, 398, 399, 487a.
150q. 151e
cdiuretics, 212
5.32a
Nizatidline. 611, 61. G6, 77q, 79c, 494a
cathartics.260
Ph6
Nizoral), 372t. 519a, 527a
Osteoanthritis.153.154.156.503a
Nasal sprays, 222
Nociceptive, 92. 236
(steoinyelitis, 361, 374q, 377e, 448
Nalacyn, 3721,
Nodular worms. 383. 384. 389.415e
Osteoporosis,269, 291q
Natamyein, 332. 333, 342q. 344e, 365,
Nolvadex(,275. 516a
steosarcoma,423，427
3721
Noncatecholamines, 38
COtotoxicity. 218, 356, 374q. 376e, 423
Navigator,401.402.533a
Nunimicrosomal
vaban,111.275. 501a
Naxce), 370, 523a
enzymes, 7
(Ovarian rystic discrclers, 262. 279
Necrosis, 38, 85, 95, 112, 113. 125. 127,
fractions,7
Ovulation.72.272.273.515a
oxidaticon, 6
Ovuplant515a
140,144, 148,154,158, 166, 171,
226,230,232,244,273,300
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Oxaeillin. 328, 329t. 353. 374q, 370e.
N[Z Purfer). 372t. 527a
(NSAIDsi. 153-169, 223, 236. 50.3a
522a
Nematocides. 379, 528a, 529a. 530a
Norcuron8.493a
Oxalic acid, 442
Nematodes, 379-394
Norepinephrine, 6, 20. 331, 38. 39, 57.
()xazepam. 85, 111. 113. 125q, 127e.
Nemtutal), 495a, 501a
61t.110,490a
237.257q.259e.500a,5130
Nenex., 384,529a
Norfloxacin.3291, 330
pharmacokinetics. 113
Nornodyne,509a
Neomix),524a
theropeutic uses, 113
Neomycin, 181, 298. 328. 329. 370.
Norvas. 177.505a, 509a
xfenlazule, 6, 380,382, 392,487t,
487a. 524a
Novantrone, 428.536a
529a, 5.31a
Neonates.81,89,496a
Novobioc:in._363. 364. 3711, 487a, 527a
Oxilbendazole,380,381,413q,415e,
Neonicotinoicl, 314, 410
Novosomes,305
529a
Neoplasia, 124, 198, 262
NubainK499a
xiclation. G
Neosporosis.361
Nucleoside. 330
()xidlative phosphorylation, 154, 157.
Neostigmine. 8,48. 4924
Nuclcotide. 6. 368. 425
286.370, 391
Ne-synephrine(). 38, 490a. 508a
Nuflor), 371t. 525a
()xime.315,385
Nunoplan,498a
Oxybarbiturates. 82.83, 141, 144. 150q.
Nephrocalcinosis. 290
Nephrilis, 464
Nutraceuticals. 244. 317
15le!
Nutriticonal,
Oxy comproundls. 404
Nephrogenic diabetes, 211, 212. 218e
Nephrotoxicity.155,159-162
support, 235
(xyinorphone, 92.98t, 49, 104q, 106e.
Nerve blocks.134.338
therapy,450
231q.23.3e.498a
Neurolhorinonal inechanisms, 171 
Nystatin, 298, 310, 332, 342q, 365,
xypolygelatin,449, 458q.460e
372t, 528a
Oxytetracycline.329.330.337.357.
Neuroleptanalgesia, 91, 92, 99
chemisiry. 365
371t, 374q, 466t, 487a, 525a
Neuroleplics, 89
plhatimacokinetics, 365
xytocics.42.277 279.293t
Neurolytic nesthesi.134
Neuroumuscular blocking clrugs. 52
Nux vonica. 254, 257q. 259e
Oxytocin. 18,42.274,277.291q.293e,
Neurontin.496d
517a
Neuropeptides. 81,96. 380. 389.413q,
415
0
Ncurosyn, 495a
P
Ocular pharmacology.321-345
Neurotransmitters, 29, 81, 92. 109. 379.
Ofloxacin, 329t, 330
PABA.348,349,350
1085
(intments.299 301. 307 312.317
Pacerone,507a
Neurotoxins. 31.3.314
Oliguria, 210,216q.218e
Paclitaxel, 427,433q.536a
Neutrophilia, 26G
Oliguric renal failure. 182, 211.212. 213
2-PAM. 49, 405, 414q. 416c
Niacinamide, 3.35
Olive oil. 135, 302, 303
Panacur, 380,529a,531a.533a
Nicarlhazin, 397, 399, 414q, 487a. 532a
(Olsalazine, 253, 258q. 260e, 515a
Pancrcatin, 242
chemislry, .399
therapeutic uses.399
Omeprazole, 63. 240. 241. 258q, 259e.
Pancreatitis., 74. 87,198, 252,425, 430
445. 51.3a
Pancrclipasc. 242. 51.3a
Nicotinamidle, 6, 408
Ondansetron.248.422,514a
Nicotine, 6, 33t. 52, 383, 415q. 5294
Pancuronium. 53t. 53, 54. 56q.493a
Nicolinic acidl, 7, 156, 159
(0.1P'-1D1D, 270, 430, 536a
Panocy, 497a
Nicotinic agonist, 52. 379. 382
Ophthalmic drug delivery, 321
Pannycin, 371,525a
(piates.99.251,255-260
Nicolinic receplors, 32, 331, 409, 410.
Panting, 97, 100,104q, 106e, 120. 154.
Qpioids. 92,05 107.148,225,233,
415.416,534a
168e,403,446
236. 251. 497a-499a
Paralysis, 48. 53, 389
Nifeclipine. 197
ogonists. 17, 98
ParaplatinK,423.535a
Nitazoxanile, 401-403, 414q. 416q,
antagonist drugs, 101. 102
Parasympathetic. 55q. 25
climination half-lives, 981
5.3.3d
partial agonists. 101
antagonists. 50)
Nitenpyram, 314 316, 409, 410, 414q.
relative analgesic activities. 98t
nervous system. 29
416q.534a
Parasyimpatholytics. 326
Nitrates. 177, 178,228
Opioil receptors, 96
Parasympathomimetics, 323, 327
Niric 0xile, 19. 47, 61. 172. 232e
()pim.95, 251
Parathyroid zlisorders. 262
Nitrir oxirle synthase IN(05!, 267
Optailexx). 42, 490a
Parathyroid hormone IPTH!, 207, 288.
Nitrofurans, 347. 363. 3721, 479
(ral Fluicl therapy in neonatals, 454
291q,293
Nitrofurantoin. 363, 372t, 527a
Oral relyclration therapy. 250
Paregoric, 251, 257
Nitrofurazone. 298. 347. 363. 3721, 479.
Orlax)371t.522a
Parenteral routes, 3
527a
Orenin, 370t, 5224
Parenteral nutritional therapy, 450 
Index547
Parlocle.278. 517a
Phenylephrine, 20. 33t, 38. 55q. 57e.
Polyethylene glycol, 249, 268, 270, 301,
Paromonycin, 403. 5334
66,222,230q, 233e.490a, 508a
305.308,514a
Paroxetine, 11l, 500d
Phenylpropanolanine, 40. 490a
clecirolyle solutions, 249
Paroxysnal. 185.190.195
Polytlex, 370. 522a
Partition coeifc ient, 297
Plie1ytoin. 3, 6, 84, 189, 496a, 506a
Polygelatins, 449
Parurilion. 269. 273. 277. 2779, 291q.
chemistry.189
Polylene mar rolidle. 332
mechanisn, 84
Polymixin B, 363. 371t, 374q. 376e.
Passive dliffusion. I
1herapeutic uscs. 84
377c, 527a
Passive tubular reabsorption, 8
Pheochromocytona. 44, 63, 195, 197,
Polynixin E. 371t. 527a
Pastes, 308, 309
262
Polypepticles,75
Pasteurella.358,359,377
Phlebsitis. 1.58
Polyphagia,69.83,87.124.227
Paylean,42,490a
11os1mel, 314, 404, 414, 487a
Polysulfated glycosaninoglycan. 164.
Pavulong, 493a
Phosphate cnema. 464
166q. 168e
Paxil),111,500a
Plhosphodiesterase. 178. 202
Polyuria, 33, 87. 227, 440, 442
Peant oil, 255, 303
inhilbitors. 182, 226, 230, 232
Polyviny alcchol, 309, 323, 340.389
Pectin.252
Phospholine loclicle, 492a
Ponazuril, 401, 402, 414, 416. 533a
penetratior enlancers. 305
Phospholipase, 1b-18. 27e, 61, 69, 72.
Positive inotropice drugs, 178, 505a
Penicillins. 328. 329t, 352. 485a, 487a,
266,267
Posilae, 263,515a
522a
Phospholipicl-clerivecl mecliators, 69
Posterior pititary disrders, 262
chemisiry. 352
Phospholipids, 18, 69. 228. 266,
Potassiun lronide, 36
potentiatedl, 353
305332, 3744, 451
Polassium iodicle, 222, 512a
therapeutic uses, 352
Ihosphorus. 276. 290. 293e, 437
Potassium sparing dliuretics, 214, 218e.
Penirillin G, 352. 353, 466t, 485a. 487d,
Plithalazine. 17G
511a
522a
Phthalysuliathiazole. 7
Polency. 27
Penicillin V, 352. 353, 370t. 522a
Physiologicol antagonism, 71, 462
Potentiated penicillins, 353
Penicillinase, 328, 352, 353, 370, 373q,
Physostignmine. 48, 50, 324, 325
Potentiated sulionamides. 350
376e.522a
chemisty.48
Poultice, 319q
Pentobarbital. 6, 23y, 2Ge, 83. 84, 144,
lterapeutic uses. 48
Poviclone iocline, 299 
150q. 151e, 475. 495a, 501a
PGG00.515a
Powders,308
atlministration, 84
Prc rotoxin, 14. 386
PPA,40.490
chemisiry. 83
Piloc arpine. 47, 55q, 57e, 324, 342q.
Pralicloxine, 49. 326. 414q 
pharmacokinetirs, 84
344e.468g,469e.492a
Prairoxine, 299. 300. 311, 312
ilherapeutic uses, 84
Pima syrup(), 512a
Praziquantcel. 392. 413q. 414g, 415c.
Pentothal,501a
Pinolenclan. 173t. 174. 178, 506d
530a, 531a
Pepcid, 494a. 513a
Pinworms. 384.386
Prazosin, 331, 43, 181, 197, 491a,
Pepsin.62,241
Pinocytosis, 3. 23q
509d
Pepliclyl dlipeptidase, 76
Pipa Tabs. 530a
Preanesthelic: imedlications, 148
Peptidy transierase, 374,376
Piperacillin, 328, 353, 370t, 374q, 376e.
Preder 2x, 518a
Percorten-VR), 519a
523a
Prednisolone, 223, 243, 263t, 342q,
Periactin), 494a
Piperaine.64t,350,379,389,413q,
343q.344c.3450,468g, 4690.
Peripheral efierent nervous syslen.
414y. 415c
513a, 518a. 5194
2954, 32f
Piperci. 370. 523a
Prednisore, 223, 238, 243, 265, 268.
Peripheral neurotoxicity.426.434e
Piperocaine, 338
513a, 519a
Periloneal dialysis, 356, 447
Piperonyl butoxide, 314, 408, 414q.
Preganglionic neurons. 29
Permethrin, 314, 316, 408, 413q, 414q.
4l6c. 462
Pregnan mares, 272
416e, 468e, 487a
Pirtbuterol, 224t, 230q, 232e
Pregnant nare seruin gonedotropin
Pernicious anemia, 139
Piriniplos. 404
(PMSG1, 272, 515a
Persic: oil, 303
Prelone,5133
Pirlimyrin, 360. 361, 371, 487a
Pesticides. 411, 479, 480
Piroxicaum. 430, 432q. 434e, 536a
Prescription crrors. 472
Petrolatumn, 250, 302, 308, 340
Pituilary gland, 34. 79, 264
Prescription writing, 471
PCiF. 70
Pituitary hormones. 72. 262
Pressure overloadl. 172
P-Glycoprotein, 4, 9,11, 80. 386. 388.
Preventic. 316.409
Placental barrier. 112
394, 418
Previcox. 161. 504d
Placental lactogen. 263
Pharmacodynamic interaction. 461. 462,
Priloser(S 513a
Placental retenton, 279
4684. 469e
Plantinating agents, 423
Prinaxin. 370, 524a
Pharmacoclynamics. 1. 13, 24
Plasma concentration curve tAUC!,
Primniclonce, 6t. 82,83, 104q. 105q, 106c,
Plharimacokinetics, 1, 10f
107e,465, 495a
11
Pharmacxology, 1
Plasma protein binding. 4
Primor,52la.532a
Phase I briotransformation, 6. 7, 414
Prinivil, 505a
Plasmin, 337, 339
enzymes, (
Plasminogen activator, 200, 337.339.
Pro-Banthine.51.493a,508a
Phase Il biotransformation, 7, 414
510a
Prolenecid, 8, 462
Phenergan,497a
Platelel aclivating faclor iPAF1, 59. 73
Procainamicle. 2. 184t, 185.188, 203q,
Phenobarbital, 82, 83. 105q. 106e. 144.
204c,462,506a
Platinol-AQ,423. 535a
495。
Plavix. 201. 510a
chemistry, 188
Phenols, 298, 303.464
tlherapeutic uses. 188
PMSG, 272. 515a
Phenothiazine, 82, 89, 90. 104q. 10e.
Poophyllotoxins,429
Procaine, 7, 1.32,13.31
247, 496a
Procaine penicillin G, 353, 364, 370t
pharmucological effects, 89
Poisun. 246
Poisoning
Procanbicl. 506a
iherapeutic: uses,90
Procarbazine, 335,421.422.433q.
alkaloid,G8
Phenoxyben7amine,14,33t,42,55q,
carlamale, 405
56q, 57e, 58e, 491at, 509a
Prochlorperazine, 89. 247, 248, 497d,
Phentolamine,33,43.197.491a.510a
organophosphate, 49, 554
514u
Plhenylbutazone, 6, 8t, 12, 156, 158.
salmon, 236
rea. 255.258q.259e
Procducts for fluid therapy. 448
166q.167q,168c.236.504a
Poloxalene, 255, 258q. 260e
Crystolloids, 443t, 448
mechanism, 158
Polycythemia. 266, 29.3e. 419.422
Colloids,448.449
pharnacokinclics. 158
ProtenterV, 389, 530a
Polydipsia, 83. 87, 124, 227, 311
548Inlex
Progesterone, 271-278. 292q.293e,
Pyriproxifen, 314. 316. 408. 410 
Rt-PA, 199t, 510a
516a
PZI Ve, 281, 282. 520a
Rubefacients.304
Progestins, 111,123.127e.128e.274,
Rumatel,384,529a
275,293e.333,500a
Rumen acidifiers. 255
pharniacological effects, 275
Q
Rmen antacids, 255 
Prokinetic clrugs. 241
Rumen plarmacology, 254-255
Program.315.411,534
(Queantal closc-response, 20. 22q
Rumensin, 372, 532a
Prolheart(. 386.388, 530a
Quaternary ammonium compounds. 47.
Ruminolorics,254
Prolactin.19, 69, 90.96t, 109, 263, 278
48.
Rythnol SRS, 506a
PrcmAceC, 496a
Quesr,388.392,530a
Promazing. 247
Quinidine, 184t, 138, 203q. 204a. 506a
ProMeris, 315. 316.411. 414,416
(Quininc. 188
小
Proimetlhazine, 6lt. 63, 64t. 64, 65, 89.
248, 497a
Sacox, 532a
Propafenone, 134t, 506d
R
Safe Guard.529a, 531a
Propalin, 490a
Salicylates.156.253,461.467
Propantheline.51.195.20.3q, 248.252.
Ractopaunine. 33, 41, 42. 55q. 56q, 57e,
Salicylic acid, 7, 157. 201, 303, 312,
257gq. 258q, 259e, 260e, 493a, 508a
58e.466r.490
319
chemistry. 51
Radaton, 248.295,417
Saline normal, 443
therapeutic uses, 51
Radioactive ioclile, 288
Salincymycin, 364, 372. 398. 399.
Proparacaine.134,150q,151e, 338,343
Ralgro, 273. 516a
532a
Propoflo.502a
Ramipril. 176. 505a. 509a
Salnonella. 236. 348, 356, 378
Propolol, 5, 146, 147. 150q, 151c, 502a
Ranitidine. 61t, 06. 774q, 77e, 239, 242,
Sarailox,371t
administration. 147
257g,258q,494a. 513a
Sararloxacin, 371t,
tlerapeutic uses, 147
Rapifene
.497a
Sarcom1as, 419, 423, 424, 426-429
Propoxur. 49. 405
Sarcopte mange. 314-316.387,409
Propranolol. 3. 44 46, 56q, 58e, 181,
RDr.536a
Scabies, 530
191, 203q. 204e,491a.507a, 509a,
Rebound congestion, 39
Scopolamine. 51. 55, 252, 257q, 259e.
510a
Receptor antagonism. 15
326,493a
chemistry, 191
Rec.eptor itamilies, 16t
Second degree.
Imec:lamsm, 44
Reroncile,120.500a
A-V block, 105q. 107q.180
pharmncokinetics. 44
Regitine, 43. 491a. 510a
heart block, 90, 205e
pharmacokinetics.191
Second gns effect, 138
Reiugia. 395. 396
iherapeutic uses, 44
Second messengers., 16, 81
Reglan;, 247, 257q, 494a, 513a, 514a
Propylene glycol, 85. 190. 463, 487a
Secretory cliarrhca, 42
Regulatory ggencies, 467
Iroscar. 277. 517a
SedlivetF), 95,497a
Regu-Mate,275.516a
Seizures, 82-89.91,101.104
Prostaglantdin analogs. 330
Renin, 31, 56q. 58e, 75,76.172. 207
Prostaglanin D2. 62
Selameciin. 387. 388, 391, 409,413.
Repellents. 314
Prostaglanin [1. 70.241
465t
Repolarization, 53, 131.192
Prostaglandin E2. 62. 71f
Selegiline, 111. 122.123.125q.126q.
Resistance Transier Factor (RTF). 348
Prostaglandin F2. 13. 42, 71f. 274. 279,
Resmethrin, 314, 408
129e, 272,290, 519a
291g.293e.336.517a
Seleniurni, 298. 299. 303, 466t
Resorcinol,298.303
Prostaglandin tPGj inhibitors, 168e
Senna. 250. 258q.260e
Respiratory ariclosis, 157. 4.39. 445, 446,
Prostaglanclins., 153
Sentne,386.388,530d
4574, 439e
Prostate,276.353.357
Sepsis 151,198.354,451
Respiralory alkalosis, 89. 157, 439, 446,
Prostigmink, 48. 492a
Serax:111,500a,51a
Protamine,281, 282
454
Respiratory failure, 49, 55y, 57e, 465
Serlain), 500a
Protaz.401,402. 533a
Respiratory pharmacology, 221-23.3
Sevotlurane, 135t,137t, 140,150.
Protectants and adsorhents, 235, 252
Response time. 1f
151e, 501a
Protectives.258q. 302. 302,304
Restung memtbrane potentiat, 131,446
Serotonin. 109 111, 116. 119, 120.
Procin niclabxolism, 263, 280. 441
Retrovir:. 528a
125-127,223. 237,247, 259, 380.
Prothrombin, 200
Reviaik), 499a
462.500a, 512a
Proton pump inhibitors, 63, 240. 513a 
Serotonin antngonists, 68. 223
Revolution),315.386. 387. 530
mechanism. 240)
Rhabxouyolysis, 149
Sertraline. 111, 500a
therapeutic uses, 240
Sevoflo),501a
Rheumatrex Dose Pack), 424. 536a
Proventil, 490a
Rhodococcus.359,3744
Shampoo therapy. 303, 306. 309-313
Provera. 500a, 516a
Silenafil, 228. 230. 230, 512a 
RifadinR:. 372, 526d
Proxinmal tubule, 8t
Silver sulradiazine, 332
Prurius management, 311
Rifampin, 362, 372t, 3744q, 377e, 526a
Sinequan, 111. 500a
Pseuclocholinesterase. 33
Rinady, 160, 502a
Singulair.73
Pseudomonats, 339, 353-356, 374, 376
Rinses,298,299, 305. 307, 311-316
Silrac, 493a
Psyllim, 250
Rinta,_529a
6-Mercaptoapurinc, 425. 432q, 433q,
Pupillary dlilation, 37, 42. 55q, 57e,
RobaxinV.502
327
Robenicline, 397. 400. 414q, 415e,
6-Thioguanine, 426, 536a
Purine nucleoside analog. 330
Slentro,238.513a
Purine synthiesis, 432
Robenz.532a
Robinul-V, 51. 492a, 508a
Slos-bicl 5 12a
Purinehel, 425,535a
Rocaltrol,520a
Soaks, 300, 306
Pyometra, 274-276. 279. 293c
Rodents.245, 284, 391
Suaps,305,306,320
Iyrantel, 384. 392, 416, 4651, 487a.
Sodiun chloricle, 211, 235. 246. 249.
Rofenaid,532a
329a, 531a
Romazicon. 496d
2.51
Pyrethrins, 313, 408,414g, 416e
Sucliunt citrate, 339. 452, 438q. 460e
Pyrethroids, 314, 408.467
Romifidine. 95, 497a
RompunC, 497a. 513n. 514a
Sodliun hyporhlorite. 298. 299. 310
Pyriedosgmine. 49.492a
Rotenone, 408, 4134q, 4144 
Sulfoton. 495a
Pyrilamine. 61t, 64t. 3.36. 494a
Roules of acliministration. 3
Solids,304.305.308
Pyrimethamine, 400, 403.532a, 533a
Roxarsone, 487a
Soloxin,520a
Pyrinidine nucleosile analog, 330
Solubility. 2.4.7,23q, 304
Index549
Solu-Medrol. 3184
Superoxidle dlismulase (S(0Di, 122, 16.3.
[hianine, 379, 399
Sonalostalin.18,93.263,280
244
Thiazicle diuretics, 211, 216q. 217q.
Somatotropin.263.515a
Ree suonajudns
218e,219e.510a
Sonciribove, 263.264. 466. 515a
Supran, 523a
Thiobarbsilurates, 141. 143. 144. 148,
Sotalol, 46, 184t, 507a
Suprane(k), 501a
151
Spasmolytics. 236
Supraventricular tachycaredia, 44, 1 85,
[hiocyanate,284
Spoclinomycin, 361, 371. 374q, 377c.
Thioguanine Tabloid, 426. 536a
508a
466t,487n.526
lalchyarrhythmia, 45. 183, 185, 204c
I hiostreplon, 365
Spherultes,305
Suprax(.523a
Thiourca, 94
Sphingolipids.295.305
Sulstauce 1, 59. 81, 92, 154, 249
Thioureylene. 284, 287
Spinosad.409,410.534a
Surcinylcholine, 7, 24q, 27e. 33t. 52.
Thorazine,497a.514a
Spironolactone, 14, 174, 214, 2164,
54,56q. 58e, 493
Thrombocytopenia, 87, 88
217gq. 218e. 219e, 505a. 511a
Surfactant.228
Thrcmboembolic, 198-200, 391. 510a
Sprays.2228000711
Symmetrel,528a
Thromboembolism, 198 
404,405
Syinpathetic nervous system. 29, 351
Thromboxanes ITXsi, 69. 71, 153
SSRI, 110112.115,120
Sympalhomimelics. 39f, 222, 326
Thymiclilate. 367, 424, 433q. 435e
Sporanox,372.527a
Thyroglobulin tTCii, 284, 286
SSKI,512
Synovex&, 516a
Thyroicl disorlers. 262
Stanozolol. 276, 277, 291q. 293e, 516d
Synovex-1 (C. 516a
Ihyroid hornones.284
Stapheillin,370.522a
pharmaccokinetics.284.285
Slaphylococcus. 348, 356, 359, 364
Syrup of lpecac, 246
Systeic influmatory response, 448
plasna protein brcng, 284, 286f
Starches, 301
Systolic: pressure loarls. 171
slructures, 285
Status epilepticus. 82, 84, 83. 91, 105.
synthesis,284
I hyroitl stinulaling hormone i1 SH!, 284,
Steady state concentration, 10, 11
286.287
Stealurrhea,289
T
Thyrotropin, 18. 284
Slercotypy. 123
Thyroloxicosis. 44.45
Steroids. 261. 2462
T;.19,284-288
Thyroxine IT41. 284, 286, 287
Streptase(:, 510a
T+,284288
Tachyarrhythmia, 45, 179-186,
binding globulin t1 BGi. 284
Streptororcus. 353, 359, 364
188-195.197,204c
Tianulin. 359, 362, 3721, 374q, 466l,
Streptokinase, 200,510a
488a, 526a
Slreptomyces, 300,364, 365.384.386,
Tachyphylaxis, 40
lacrolimus, 300. 301, 311, 335
liazag,506
388
Ticar, 370, 523a
Streptomycin, 329t. 356, 370t, 374q.
Taeniacides. 391
ticarcillin, 370. 523a
524a
Taeniafuge.391
Ticks, 314-316. 387, 404, 405,
Streptozocin, 421,535a
Tagac,494
408-411.414, 416
SIrongid-c.384.529a
Talc.302
Tanboxcor(,506a
liletanine, 146,502a
Tamoxifen, 275. 516a
Tilmicosin.359, 360, 3711,466l,488a.
Strongyles, 380.384.386
526a
Tanatril 505a
Strongylus vulgaris. 380. 413
Tapazolelk:, 520a
Timentin:
. 370, 52.3a
Strychnine, 502a
Tinolol, 327, 342q, 344q
Taurine, 451
Sublimaze,498a
lissue plasminogen arclivator ( IPAi, 200.
[axang:418,426,427.435.536a
Succinylcholine, 52, 493a
337.339,510
Taxol,427.5.36a
Slcralfate. 241, 2574. 258q. 259e. 260e,
Tears.9.322,323,328,331.340.344e
TNF-α,172.300
5138
lobraniycin. 328, 329, 353, 356. 376c
[ear Substitutes, 340
Suienla.498a
Tocainide, 203q. 204e
Telazol, 91, 146, 151e, 502a
Sufentanil, 97t, 98t.100,498a
lofranil, 111. 500a
[emazepam, 85, 112
Tolazine,43.490a
Sulbactam. 353. 370t. 323t
Tenormin. 491a. 507a
Sulfacetamicle, 7t. 330, 349
lensilon(48,492a.508
Tolazoline. 43. 490a
Sulfachlorpyridlazine. 349, 487a. 521a
Tolfrazuril. 401. 402
Tepoxalin. 162. 504a
Sulfacliazinc. 330, 332, 350, 3711, 401.
Topical anesthesia, 134,338
Teratogenic. 382, 392, 403, 415e.418,
403, 521a. 533a
lupical antibacterial agents, 298, 309.
Sulfaclhmethoxme, 7t. 371t. 371t. 400,
4324. 434c
Terbinafine, 310. 367. 372t. 528a
312
413q.4144.416c,468g,469c.479.
Topical antifungal agents. 299
lerbutaline, 33, 40, 55q. 56q, 57e, 195,
487.521a,532a
Topazone.372,527n
Sulametltazie, 12, 348, 349,485a,
224, 230q. 231q.232e, 233c, 490a.
Topoisomerase inhilbitors, 427
508a
521a. 532a
lerranycin, 371, 525a
Torbutrol, 498a. 512a
Sulfanethoxazone. 521a
Testex(). 516a
Total hody clearance, 10
Sullanehoxazole, 349. 350. 371t. 521a
lestcoslerone, 66, 272-277. 516a
lotal parenteral nutrilion, 450
Sulfapyridine, 156, 253. 349.376e
Telracaine, 338
Toxoplasmosis. 403
Sulfaquinoxaline, 349, 400, 414q. 488a.
Tetrachlcrvinphos, 404, 488a
521a. 533a
lelracycline, 329, 330, 3711, 373q,
Tramadol, 971, 981. 99, 498a
Sulfasalazine. 156.181, 253,349.515a,
374q.376e,377e.525a, 527a
Tramisoly.529a
521 al
Tetracyclines. 357. 525a
TranclateV, 509a
Sulfathiazole. 7. 349. 350
chcmistry. 357
Tranquilizers,89
Sulisoxazole. 330
mechanisn.357
Transimissible venereal tumors, 426
Sulfonanicles, 7.88. 95. 209. 330.
tlherapeutic uses, 357
TranxeneR, 111. 112. 499a
348 350, 371t, 3734, 376e, 400.
Tetrahydrofolir acicl ITHFAJ. 349, 350,
Travoprost. 336
521a, 332a
424
Irenlbolone, 274, 277, 516a
chenistry.348
Ielrahyedrozoline, 336
Triametrene,181. 208, 210, 214, 2164q,
mec hanism, 348
Tetramisole, 13,
217y. 218e. 219e, 511a,
therapeutic uses, 348
Teo-DurR,512a
Iriamicinolone, 2241, 230q, 232c. 300,
Sulfonylureas, 282, 283. 291q, 293e,
Theophylline. 6. 214, 215, 217q. 219e,
311.365, 519a
520a
227,230q,231g.232e,233e.511a
Iribrissen, 371,521a, 533a
Sullur, 298, 299
Therapeutic: index. 20
Trir hinella. 386
Sulmeti, 521a
Thiabendazole. 380, 382
Trichlormethiazide, 211, 511a 
550Index
Trichomoniasis, 362
Vasodilation, 31, 55q. 57e,61, 77g. 79e,
Triflurothymidine, 330
147, 444
Triiodothyronine,284-288
Vasodilators, 76, 173t, 176, 197,505a
Trilostane,271,272.292q, 519a
Vasopressin, 18. 75, 77q, 93. 96t, 437
Xanthines, 208
Trimcprazinc, 64, 89, 497a
Vectra@3D, 314, 409. 410
Xanthine oxidase, 6, 426
Trimethaphan, 52
Vecuronium, 53, 56q. 493a
Xenobiotics, 5
Trimethoprin, 8. 11, 330, 349, 350,371,
Velban. 426, 536a
Xylazine, 11.24q, 27e, 33t, 43, 55q.94,
521a,533a
Vehicles,297,302-304, 319,321,323,
105g,106e,257q,259e,409,413q,
Tripelennamine, 64t, 494a
331,333,427
488a,497a.502a,512a
Tropicamide, 51, 55q.57e, 326, 344,
Venoms, 60,67.76
adverse effects, 94
493a
Ventipulmin?,41, 490a
contraindications, 94
Truphylline, 511a
Ventolin@, 490a
pharmacokinetics, 94
Tubocurarine, 33t, 48. 53.54, 56q. 60
Verapamil. 181.184t, 185, 194, 508a
Tulathromycin, 11, 359, 360, 371
Tumor_cells, 417,418, 433q. 526a
Versed@, 496a
Tylan@, 371, 515a, 526a
Vesicants, 304, 426
Yobine?, 491a
Tylosin, 253, 359, 360, 374q, 377e.
Vetalar?
.501a
466t, 488a.515a, 526a
Vetalog?), 519a
Yohimbine, 14,33t,43,56q.58e, 93,
Tyramine,122
491a
Vetisulid?
521a
Tyrosine kinase, 18, 19. 261, 281
Vetory?,271,519a
Vetsulin@, 282, 520a
Z
U
Viagra?, 512a
Zafirlukast,73,74,223,230q,232e,
Udder edema, 207.210. 211,212
Vinblastine, 9. 426, 433q, 536a
512a
Vincristing, 9,426, 536a
Zanosar, 421, 535a
Ultane, 501a
Vincasar, 536a
Ultralente insulin, 282
Ultram@, 498a
Viregar, 255, 258q
Zeniquin,371, 522a
Unasyn, 523a
Venodilators, 176
Zeranol, 274, 275,516a
Vinkasar PFs?, 426. 536a
Unmyelinaled nerves. 132, 300
Zidovudinc, 368, 369,528a
Viokasc-v?,513a
Urinary bladder, 31t, 36
Zileuton, 73. 78q. 79e, 223
Urine.8, 23q. 24q. 26e, 27e
Virginiamycin, 364, 371t
Zilmax@, 42, 490a
Uroeze@,512a
Vistaril@, 493a
Zilpatcrol, 42, 490a
Ursodeoxycholic acid, 244. 258q
Volume loads, 171
Zimecterin, 392a
Urticaria, 41, 65, 148,404q, 469c
Volume retention, 171
Zinc,244,289
Uterine contractants. 277, 517a
Vomiting reflex, 245, 247
protamine,282
sulfate, 246, 301
Zithromax@,371,403, 525a, 533a
W
V
Zoalene,397,398, 533a
Vagolytic. 188, 195
Warfarin, 155.157,198,200
Zofran, 514a
Valium111, 495a, 499a, 513a
Water deficit estimation, 442
Zolamid@, 496a
Valbazen, 380, 528a, 530a, 531a,
Wet dressings, 305, 306
Zolazepam, 91, 92. 105q, 107e, 146,
Wheat bran, 250
533a
150g, 465t, 502a
Valproic acid,87,105,496a
Whipworms. 381, 384, 386.388,
Zoloft. 111, 500a
Vancocin, 372, 526a
389
Zonegran@, 88,496a
Winstrol-v?,
,276.516a
Vancomycin, 372,526a
Withdrawal
Zonisamide, 88, 496a
Vantin,523a
Zovirax528a
Milk,485-488
Vapor pressure, 136, 137
Preslaughter, 485-488
Vasoactive intestinal peptide, 280
Zubrin, 162, 504a
Wounds,298, 302, 306, 331, 345e
Zyrtec, 64.493a
Vasoconstriclors.71.73,155.162, 336